THE 


^ra^l^j 


OF 

EDWARD   YI. 

COMI'ARKI)    WITH 

THE   SUCCESSIVE    REVISIONS 

OF 

CJ)c  33oofe  of  Common  |JraKer: 

ALSO 

A  CONCORDANCE 

TO    THE 

KUBRICKS  IN  THE  SEVERAL  EUITIOXS. 


(Dxforti  auU  3Lcmti0n: 

JAMES    PARKER    AND    CO. 

1877. 


Digitized  by  tlie  Internet  Arcliive 

in  2007  witli  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


littp://www.arcliive.org/details/firstprayerbookoOOoxfouoft 


PREFACE. 


npHE  object  of  this  work  is  to  exhibit  the  successive  changes 
-^  which  our  Book  of  Common  Prayer  has  undergone,  from 
the  first  issue  in  1549  to  the  last  revision  in  1662 ;  in  other 
words,  to  shew  the  growth  of  our  present  authorized  Prayer- 
Book. 

Although  the  series  of  Books  of  Common  Prayer  printed  by 
the  late  Mr.  Pickering  contain  in  substance  the  greater  part  of 
the  material  here  presented,  still,  from  each  book  being  printed 
entire,  it  is  only  with  a  considerable  amount  of  care  that  the 
alteration  which  any  one  paragraph  has  undergone  can  be 
detected.  Valuable  too,  as  far  as  they  go,  are  the  accurate 
reprints  of  the  First  and  Second  Books  of  Edward  VI.  and 
that  of  EHzabeth,  issued  under  the  auspices  of  the  Parker 
Society ;  and  equally  valuable  the  very  accurate  reprint  of  the 
"Chancery"  Sealed  Book  of  1662,  with  a  collation  of  the 
others,  issued  by  the  Ecclesiastical  Society;  but  in  none  of 
these  is  there  any  attempt  at  exhibiting  the  variations  be- 
tween successive  editions. 

There  are,  however,  other  works  which  more  nearly  ap- 
proach the  character  of  the  present  compilation.  The  earliest  is 
"  The  Alliance  of  the  Divine  Offices,"  by  Haraan  L'Estrange, 
the  first  edition  of  which  was  published  in  1659,  previous  to 
the  last  revision  of  the  Prayer-Book.  A  second  edition  was 
published  in  1690,  and  a  third  in  1699.  In  this  only  the 
more  important  variations  are  noted,  and  in  the  printing  there 
are  frequent  inaccuracies;  moreover,  the  last  revision  of  1662, 
to  lis  the  most  important,  is  not  included. 

Dr.  Cardwell,  in  1838,  edited  for  the  Oxford  University 
Press  "  The  Two  Liturgies  of  Edward  VI,  Compared."  Each 
book  is  printed  for  the  greater  part  entire,  and  in  parallel 
columns,  so  that  although  the  variations  can  be  found  by 
reading,  they  are  not  apparent  at  a  glance,  and  the  work 
includes  only  two  books. 


iv  Preface. 

In  the  year  1841  Mr.  W.  Keatinge  Clay  edited 

"  The.  Book  of  Common  Prayer  Illustrated,  so  as  to  shew  the  various 
modifications,  the  date  of  its  several  parts,  and  the  authority  on  which 
they  rest " 

The  plan  of  the  book  was  to  print  the  last  revision  entire, 
and  by  side  figures,  and  a  free  use  of  asterisks  and  references, 
to  shew,  as  the  title  implies,  the  date  of  the  several  parts. 
The  chief  various  readings  are  given  partly  in  brackets  and 
partly  in  notes,  and  it  is  a  work  of  some  difficulty  to  discover 
the  text  as  it  appeared  in  any  one  of  the  years  at  which  the 
alterations  were  made,  and  several  of  the  minor  variations  are 
also  omitted. 

This  book  was  followed  the  next  year  by  Mr.  William 
Reeling's  Liturgia  Britannicce.  This,  again,  takes  the  edition 
of  1662  as  the  text,  and  by  a  column  for  the  combined  texts 
of  1637  and  1604,  and  by  reference  to  notes  wherever  these 
two  editions  differ,  a  comparison  is  afforded.  On  the  opposite 
page,  the  edition  of  1559  is  taken  as  the  chief  text,  combined 
with  that  of  1552,  (variations  between  these  two  being  shewn 
in  the  notes,)  and  a  final  column  for  the  1549  collation.  By 
this  system,  however,  the  variations  between  the  group  of  1662 
to  1604,  and  those  of  1559  to  1549,  are  not  readily  seen; 
and  by  so  large  a  portion  being  reprinted  where  the  texts  are 
identical,  the  parts  where  they  difier  are  not  so  readily  dis- 
covered. 

The  plan  adopted  in  the  present  work  is  different.  Instead 
of  the  edition  of  1662  being  taken  as  the  text,  and  the  varia- 
tions shewn  as  it  were  backwards  in  point  of  time,  the  1549 
book  is  followed  as  the  text,  and  this  is  printed  entire  at  the 
head  of  the  page,  and  the  subsequent  corrections  shewn  in 
their  right  order  in  double  columns  beneath. 

The  variations  are  shewn  as  fully  and  as  clearly  as  ordinary 
typography  will  permit.  Although  it  has  been  attended  with 
much  trouble,  the  aim  has  been  to  shew  on  each  page-opening, 
beneath  a  given  part  of  the  1549  edition,  the  corresponding 
parts  of  all  the  five  subsequent  editions.    Where  in  any  one 


Preface.  v 

an  addition  of  a  paragraph  has  been  made,  its  place  is  clearly 
marked  by  printing  again  the  line  or  so  before  it ;  where  a  few 
words  only  have  been  added,  the  same  principle  has  been 
followed  by  printing  the  few  preceding  words.  In  order, 
however,  not  to  overburden  the  page,  or  still  further  to  extend 
the  book,  it  has  been  thought  sufficient  to  give  a  large  number 
of  the  less  important  variations,  and  where  they  consist  but  of 
an  altered  word  or  so,  by  means  of  notes.  The  opportunity 
has  been  taken,  in  the  same  notes,  to  add  a  few  of  the  various 
readings  which  are  sometimes  found  in  different  editions  of 
the  Prayer-Books  of  the  same  year. 

It  should  be  added,  that  although  the  1549  edition  has 
been  taken  as  the  basis,  it  was  decided,  since  the  "Order 
of  Holy  Communion"  issued  in  1548  corresponds  so  closely 
to  that  book,  to  give  at  the  foot  of  the  page  this  preliminary 
revision,  as  well  as  the  later  revisions. 

It  has  been  thought  unnecessary  to  adopt  the  old  spelling. 
To  have  been  consistent,  one  would  have  had  to  give  the  va- 
riations of  spelling  throughout,  and  these  would  have  so  far 
outnumbered  the  variations  of  the  words,  that  the  object  of  the 
book  would  have  been  defeated  \  As  a  rule  all  the  spelling 
has  been  modernized,  the  few  exceptions  being  some  proper 
names  and  titles. 

For  the  same  reason,  it  has  been  found  needless  to  follow 
the  use  of  capital  letters  ^  or  stops  of  any  one  edition  '^.  There 
is  no  consistency  whatever  in  this  respect  found  in  the  old 
books. 

One  feature  has  been  adopted  in  this  work,  which  requires 
a  word  of  explanation.     The  rubricks  have  been  numbered 

•  It  is  not  perhaps  generally  known  how  ^  For  instance,  if  we  turn  to  the  "  Bene- 

little  consistency  there  is  in  the  spelling,  dicite"  we  find  in  "  Spealce  good  of  the 

in  hooks  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  Lord"  the  word  "Lord"  in  the  first  six 

centuries.    oFor  instance,  if  we  open  Whit-  verses  is  with  a  capital  L,  but  in  the  next 

church's   Prayer-Book    of  1549,   we    find  two  with  a  small  1  ;  and  so  later,  in  two  or 

at  the  top  of    the  first  page  of  Morning  three  verses   the   small  1   is   used.      The 

Prayer  the  head-line  spelt  mattins  ;    at  words  "  Father,  Sonne,  and  Holy  Ghost," 

the  top  of  the  next  page  it  is  spelt  matins,  are  seldom  with  capital  letters  at  all,  and 

and  on  the  top  of  the  third,  mattyns  ;  and  the  word  "  God"  has  often  a  small  "  g." 

this  is  no  exceptional  case.     Indeed  if  a  =    In   the   present    book    an    exception 

word  is   spelt  one  way  in  one  line,  it  is  was  made  in  printing  the  Introits.     The 

rather  a  reason  than  otherwise  for  spelling  printers  have  followed  the  stops  and  capi- 

it  differently  in  the  next.  tals  of  Whitchurch's  edition. 


vi  Preface. 

consecutively,  according  to  their  appearance  in  the  1549 
edition,  and  the  main  object  has  been  to  afford  a  ready  refer- 
ence to  the  corresponding  rubricks  where  there  are  several 
in  one  page.  But  above  and  beyond  this,  it  has  been  found 
of  great  use  in  giving  cross  references,  and  especially  in  those 
cases  where  the  order  of  a  set  of  rubricks  has  been  re-arranged. 
This  is  so  especially  in  the  Order  for  the  Administration  of 
the  Lord's  Supper.  In  the  Book  itself,  the  rubricks  of  the 
later  editions  have  been  brought  into  correspondence,  as  to 
position,  with  those  of  the  1549  edition,  so  that  any  altera- 
tions in  the  words  (and  there  are  many)  can  be  seen.  It  was, 
therefore,  only  by  intervening  notes  that  it  was  found  possible 
to  shew  the  actual  order  adopted  in  each  successive  revision. 

At  the  same  time,  to  add  completeness  to  the  work,  it  is 
thought  well  to  print  in  a  tabular  form,  as  an  Appendix, 
a  complete  list  of  the  Rubricks  in  their  changed  orders,  so 
that  a  comparison  of  the  structure  of  the  service  under  the 
different  systems  might  be  afforded ;  and  in  this  table  the 
same  consecutive  numbers  are  still  appended  to  the  Rubricks, 
so  that  a  break  in  the  numbers  shews  at  once  a  change  in 
the  order. 

Another  advantage  has  been  gained  by  numbering  the 
rubricks.  At  the  end  of  this  volume  will  be  found  an  Index 
AND  Concordance,  which,  without  this  plan,  could  not  have 
been  compiled.  It  has  often  occurred  to  the  Editor  that  such 
a  Concordance  was  wanted,  but  if  made  simply  to  apply  to 
our  own  book,  it  would  have  been  without  much  of  its  value. 
To  understand  the  exact  meaning  of  a  word,  it  is  always  use- 
ful to  see  in  what  sense  and  in  what  combination  it  occurs 
elsewhere  in  the  same  book ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  Prayer- 
Book  it  is  important  to  know  whether  the  word  occurred  in 
previous  revisions  of  the  same,  and  if  so,  under  what,  circum- 
stances. It  was  impossible  to  draw  any  .line  as  to  what  class 
of  words  should  be  included,  and  what  omitted.  A  word  of 
little  importance  in  itself  receives  a  value  sometimes  from  the 
different  contexts  with  which  it  is  placed,  so  that  several  ap- 
4 


Preface.  vii 

parently  trivial  words  have  been  admitted,  rather  than  omit 
one  which  should  prove  to  be  of  importance. 

It  is  for  example  important  to  observe  the  disuse  of  the 
term  A/far,  and  the  substitution  in  the  later  books  of  the 
temis  Table,  the  Holy  Table,  the  Lord's  Table,  God's  board, 
&c.  The  two  latter  were  not  however  new  terms,  as  it  will 
be  seen  they  occur  in  the  Prayer-Book  of  1549. 

Again,  it  is  not  without  interest  to  mark  the  continuance  or 
disuse  of  customs,  so  far  as  the  Prayer-Book  enjoins  them, 
e.g.  Absolution,  Abstinence,  Anointing,  Antlienis,  Ban>is,  Benedic- 
tion, Breaking  the  bread,  Casting  earth  upon  the  corpse,  bear- 
ing the  Charges  of  the  Communion,  Confession,  Consecration  of 
the  Bread  and  Wine,  Covering  of  the  same,  making  the  C>-oss 
upon  the  forehead,  Daily  Communion,  Daily  Service,  Excom- 
munication, finding  the  Holy  loaf,  Introits,  putting  a  little  Water 
into  the  ]Vi}ie,  and  such  like. 

Or  to  mark  the  omission  or  continuance  of  the  appoint- 
ment of  what  maybe  classed  generally  under  the  term  '■^Orna- 
ments," e.g.  the  Albe,  the  Bell,  the  Chalice,  the  Chrisoni,  the 
Cope,  the  Corporal,  \\\q  Flagons,  the /(V//,  \\\q  Hoods,  \.hQ  Paten, 
the  Boor-men's-box,  the  Pulpit  or  Readitig  Pen',  the  Ring,  the 
Surplice,  the  Tunicle,  the  Vestment,  and  tlie  Wafer-bread. 

Although  occupying  a  considerable  space,  it  has  been 
thought  best  to  give  a  complete  list  of  the  uses  of  the  words 
Priest,  Minister,  and  Presbyter.  Although  a  strenuous  effort 
was  made  by  the  Puritan  party  to  get  rid  of  the  word  Priest 
from  the  Prayer-Book  altogether,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  use 
is  quite  as  frequent  in  1662  as  in  1549. 

Again,  as  said  before,  words  of  little  importance  by  themselves 
may  become  of  value  when  grouped.  A  glance  over  the  Index, 
for  instance,  will  shew  what  was  considered  (so  far  as  the 
rubricks  are  concerned)  to  be  accustomed,  agreeable,  appointed, 
approved,  by  authority,  commanded,  commonly  done,  convenient, 
customably  due,  at  discretion,  as  duties,  enjoined,  exhorted  to, 
referred  to  the  Ordinary,  prescribed,  provided,  shall  suffice,  is 
thought  good,  is  usual,  or  is  used. 


viii  Preface. 

Of  course,  an  additional  series  of  words  from  Injunctions, 
Canons,  &c,  would  be  required  in  order  to  supply  a  complete 
conspectus  of  the  rules,  &c.,  prescribed  by  the  Church  in 
Liturgical  matters ;  but  that  is  far  beyond  the  scope,  if  not 
of  the  present  work,  at  least  of  the  present  volume. 

It  was  intended  to  prefix  to  the  volume  an  Introduction, 
containing  some  account  of  the  several  Revisions,  and  giving 
as  far  as  possible  the  documentary  evidence ;  but  it  was  found 
that  the  insertion  of  the  Concordance  extended  the  book  to 
its  utmost  limits ;  and  the  Introduction,  therefore,  which  was 
to  have  occupied  some  30  or  40  pages,  has  been  allowed  to 
expand  itself  into  300  or  400  pages,  and  consequently  to 
make  a  companion  volume. 

This  unforeseen  extension  has  caused  considerable  delay, 
but  opportunity  has  been  thereby  afforded  to  the  Editor  to 
examine  for  himself  the  materials  on  which  such  history  has 
to  be  wTitten. 

For  the  Revisions  of  1552,  1559,  1604,  and  1637,  we  are 
dependent  upon  a  few  records  preserved  in  Collections  such  as 
Fox,  Strype,  &c.  But  for  the  1661  revision,  we  have  Cosin's 
own  book  (at  Durham),  the  fair  transcript  by  Bancroft  (in  the 
Bodleian  at  Oxford),  the  final  series  of  corrections,  still  in 
Bancroft's  hand-nTiting,  as  agreed  upon  by  the  House  o! 
Convocation  (preserved  in  the  House  of  Lords),  and  finally 
the  copy  which  was  annexed  to  the  Act  of  Uniformity  (pre- 
served in  the  same  place).  It  has  been  a  task  of  some  labour 
to  bring  the  materials  together,  coupled  with  the  historical 
matter  which  can  be  gleaned  from  other  sources ;  but  unless 
any  unforeseen  accident  causes  delay,  it  is  hoped  that  before 
the  close  of  the  year  this  additional  volume  will  be  ready 
for  issue. 

TURL, 

Nov.  6,  1876. 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^  THE  m 

BOOK   OF   THE   COMMON 
PRAYER  AND  ADMI- 
NISTRATION OF 
THE 
SACRAMENTS,    AND   OTHER 
RITES   AND    CEREMONIES   OF 
THE  CHURCH  :    AFTER  THE 
USE   OF   THE   CHURCH 
OF   ENGLAND. 

}tf  Londini  in  Officina 

Rdouardi  Whitchurclie. 

Cum  privilegio  ad  imprimendum  solum. 

Aano  Do.  1549,  Mense  MartiL 


Various  Imprints. 


B  Same  as  above,  except  Anno  Do. 
1549,  Mense  Maii. 

c  Ditto,  Anno  Do.  1549,  Mense  Junii. 

D  Londini  In  Officina  Richardi  Graf- 
toni  Regii  Impressoris.  Cum  Privilegio 
ad  I mjfrinutidum  solunt.     Anno  Domini 


M.D.XLix.  Mense  Martii. 
E  Ditto  (but  a  different  bookV 
F  Ditto  (but  a  different  book). 
G  SSigornis  in  Officina  loannis  OftaoenL 

cutn  privilegio  ad  imprintendunt  solum. 

Anno  Do.  1549,  Mense  Julii. 


Second  Edw.  VI.   1552. 
THE  BOOK  OF 

COMMON   PRAYER,    AND  AD- 
MINISTRATION OF  THE 
SACRAMENTS, 
AND  OTHER 
RITES 
AND  CEREMONIES   IN 
THE   CHURCH  OF 
ENGLAND. 
Londini y  in  Officina  Ed- 

wardi  Whytchurche. 

Cum  privilegio  atr  Im  Pri- 

menlium  Solum. 

Amio  1552. 


Various  Imprints. 

B  Londini  in  Officina  Edovardi  )^Tiyt- 
churche  Cum  privilegio  ad  Im  Primendum 
Solum.    Anno  1552. 

c  Londini  in  Officina  Richardi  Graftoni 
Regii  Impressoris  Cum  privilegio  ad  im- 
primendum Solum.  Anno  1552. 

D  Ditto  (but  a  different  book). 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
THE  BOOK  OF 

COMMON  PRAYER,  AND  AD- 
MINISTRATION OF  THE 
SACRAMENTS, 
AND  OTHER 
RITES 
AND  CEREMONIES  IN 
THE  CHURCH  OF 
ENGLAND. 

Londini,  in  officina  Ri' 

chardi  Graftoni. 

Cum  Privilegio  Regie 

Males  talis. 

Anno  1559. 


Various  Imprint. 
B  Londini,  In  Officina  Richardi  Jugge,  & 
lohannis  Cawode.    Cum  Privilegio  Re^i* 
Majestatis  Anno.  1559. 


Titles. 


James  I,  1604. 

THE 

BOOK  OF 

Common  Prayer,  and 
administration  of  the 
Sacraments, 
and  other  Rites  and  Cere- 
monies of  the  Church  of 
England. 

Imprinted  at  London 
by  Robert  Barker,  Printer 
to  the  Kings  most  Excel- 
lent Majesty. 
Anno  1604. 
Cum  Privilegio. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
THE 

,    BOOK  OF 

COMMON    PRAYER, 

AND 

ADMINISTRATION  OF  THE 

SACRAMENTS. 

And  other  parts  of  divine  Service 

for  the  use  of  the 

CHURCH  OF 

SCOTLAND. 

Edinburgh, 

Printed  by  Robert  Young,  Printer  to 

the  Kings  most  excellent  Majesty, 

M.DC.XXXVII. 

Cum  Privilegio. 


Charles  IL   1662. 
THE  BOOK 

OF 

Common  Prayer 

AND  ADMINISTRATION 
OF  THE 

SACRAMENTS, 

AND  OTHER 

RITES  AND  CEREMONIES 

OF  THE  CHURCH, 

ACCORDING  TO    THE   USE 

OF  THE 

CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND, 

TOGETHER   WITH   THE 

PSALTER  OR  PSALMS 

OF 

DAVID, 

POINTED  AS  THEY  ARE  TO  BE  SUNG 

OR  SAID  IN  CHURCHES  : 

AND  THE 

FORM  OR  MANNER 

OF 

MAKING,    ORDAINING,   AND 

CONSECRATING 

OF 

BISHOPS,  PRIESTS, 

AND 

DEACONS. 

London, 

Printed  by  his  Ma"''  Printers. 

Citm  Privilegio. 

M.DCLXIL 


The  above  title-page  is  an  engraving  by 

Loggan,  the  title  itself  being  represented 
as  an  altar  reredos,  in  the  style  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  with  fluted  columns 
surmounted  by  a  large  ornamental  pedi- 
ment. 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^  THE  CONTENTS  OF  THIS  BOOK.  4%f 


A  Preface. 

A  Table  and  Kalendar  for  Psalms  and  Lessons,  with  necessary  rules 

pertaining  to  the  same. 
The  Order  for  Matins  and  Evensong,  throughout  the  year. 
The   Introits,    Collects,    Epistles  and   Gospels,    to  be  used   at  the 

celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper  and  holy  Communion   through 

the  year,  with  proper  Psalms  and  Lessons,  for  divers  feasts  and 

days. 
The  Supper  of  the   Lord  and  holy  Communion,  commonly  called 

the  Mass. 
The  Litany  and  Suffrages  •. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

THE  CONTENTS  OF  THIS 
BOOK. 

An   Act    for    the    Uniformity   of 
Common  Prayer''. 

L  A  Preface. 

ii.  Of  Ceremonies,  why  some  be  abo- 
lished, and  some  retained. 
iiL  The   order  how  the  Psalter  is  ap- 
pointed to  be  read. 
iv.  The  Table  for  the  order  of  the  Psalms 
to  be  said  at  Morning  and  Evening 
prayer. 
V.  The  order  how  the  rest  of  holy  Scrip- 
ture is  appointed  to  be  read. 
VI.  Proper    Psalms     and     Lessons    at 
Morning  and  Evening  Prayer,  for 
certain  feasts  and  days, 
vii.  An  Almanack. 

viii.  The  Table  and  Kalendar  for  Psalms 
and  Lessons,  with  necessary  Rules 
appertaining  to  the  same. 
Ix.  The  order  for  Morning  prayer  and 
Evening  prayer,  throughout  the 
year. 
X.  The  Litany. 

xi.  The  Collects,  Epistles,  and  Gospels, 

to  be  used  at  the  ministration  of  the 

holy  Communion,  throughout  the 

year. 

xii.  The  order  of  the  ministration  of  the 

holy  Communion, 
xiii.  Baptism  both  public  and  private. 


•  In  one  ed.,  1549,  the  Litany  is  omitted 
here,  and  given  on  a  supplementary  sheet 
inserted  at  the  end  of  the  book,  so  that  the 
numbering  is  thrown  out. 

'•  In  one  edition  only  of  1532,  this  is  in- 


xiv.  Confirmation,  where  also  is  a  Cate- 
chism for  children. 

XV.  Matrimony. 

xvi.  Visitation  of  the  sick. 

xvii.  The  Communion  of  the  sick, 
xviii.  Burial. 

xix.  The  Thanks  giving  of  women  after 
child  birth. 

XX.  A  Commination  against  sinners,  with 
certain  prayers  to  be  used  divers 
times  in  the  year. 

xxi.  The  form  and  manner  of  making  and 
consecrating  of  Bishops,  Priests, 
and  Deacons. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

THE  CONTENTS  OF  THIS  BOOK. 

i.  An  Act  for  the  Uniformity  of  Common 

Prayer, 
ii.  A  Preface. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1552,  except 
the  numbering  of  paragraphs,  to] 

vii.  Proper  Psalms  and  lessons  at  Morning 
and  Evening  Prayer  for  Sundays  and 
certain  feasts  and  days. 

[And  continued  the  same  as  1552,  to] 

xxi to  be  used  divers  times  in  the 

year. 

•  The  form  and  manner  of  m.-iking  and 
consecrating  of  Bishops,  Priests  and 
Deacons. 


serted  as  the  first  in  the  table  of  Contents, 
but  in  that  edition  it  is  actually  printed 
after  the  Calendar. 

<=  Not  noted  in  the  Contents,  but  usually 
printed  at  the  end  of  the  book. 


Contents. 


5 


vii.  Of  Baptism,  both  public  and  private. 

viii.  Of  Confirmation,  where  also  is  a  Catechism  for  children. 

ix.  Of  Matrimony. 

X.  Of  Visitation  of  the  Sick,  and  Communion  of  the  same. 

xi.  Of  Burial. 

xii.  The  purification  of  women, 

xiii.  A  declaration  of  Scripture,  with  certain  prayers  to  be  used  the  first 

day  of  Lent,  commonly  called  Ashwednesday. 

xiv.  Of  Ceremonies  omitted  or  retained ''. 

XV.  Certain  notes  for  the  more  plain  explication  and  decent  ministra- 
tion of  things  contained  in  this  book  *. 


James  I.   1604. 

THE  CONTENTS  OF  THIS  BOOK. 

i.  An  Act  for  the  Uniformity  of  Common 

Prayer '. 
ii.  A  Preface,  &c. 

[Continued  the    same  as   1559  (except 
No.  iv..  The  Table  for  the  Order  of  Psalms, 
is  made  No^  vii.)j  to] 
xxi to  be  used  divers  times  in  the 

year.  

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

THE  CONTENTS  OF  THIS  BOOK. 

1.  A  proclamation  for  the  authorizing  of 

the  Book  of  Common  Prayer. 

2.  A  Preface. 

[And  continued  in  the  same  order  and 
words  as  1552  except] 

6.  Proper  Psalms  and  Lessons  at  Morn- 

ing and  Evening  Prayer  for  Sundays 
and  certain  Feasts  and  days. 

7.  The  Table  for  the  order  of  the  Psalms. 
9.  The  Order  for  Morning  and  Evening 

Prayer  throughout  the  year, 
[and  continued  to] 

21 to  be  used  divers  times  in  the 

year.         

Charles  IL  1662. 

THE  CONTENTS  OF  THIS  BOOK. 

1.  An  Act  for  the  Uniformity  of  Common 

Prayer. 

2.  The  Preface. 

3.  Concerning  the  Service  of  the  Church. 

4.  Concerning  Ceremonies. 

5.  The  Order  how  the  Psalter  is  appointed 

to  be  read. 


The  Order  how  the  rest  of  the  holy 
Scripture  is  appointed  to  be  read. 

A  Table  of  proper  Lessons  and  Psalms. 

Tables  and  Rules  for  the  Feasts  and 
Fasts  through  the  whole  year. 

The  Calendar,  with  the  Table  of 
Lessons. 

The  Order  for  Morning  Prayer. 

The  Orfler  for  Evening  Prayer. 

The  Creed  of  S.  Athanasius, 

The  Litany. 

Prayers  and  Thanksgivings  upon  seve- 
ral Occasions. 

The  Collects,  Epistles,  and  Gospels,  to 
be  used  at  the  Ministration  of  the  holy 
Communion,  throughout  the  Year. 

The  Order  of  the  Ministration  of  the 
holy  Communion. 

The  Order  of  Baptism  both  Publick 
and  Private. 

The  Order  of  Baptism  for  those  of 
Riper  Years. 

The  Catechism,  with  the   Order  for 

Confirmation  of  Children. 
Matrimony. 
Visitation  of  the  Sick,  and  Communion 

of  the  Sick. 
Burial. 

Thanksgiving  for  Women  after  Child- 
bearing. 
A    Commination,    or    denouncing    of 

God's  anger  and  judgments  against 

Sinners. 
The  Psalter. 
The  Order  of  Prayers  to  be  used  at 

Sea. 
A  Form   and   Manner  of   Ordaining 

Bishops,  Priests,  and  Deacons. 


d  In  the  present  edition,  this  treatise  on 
"Ceremonies"  has  been  transposed  to  the 
beginning  of  the  book.    See  p.  14. 

'  In  the  present  edition,  the  "Certain 


Notes,"   &c.,   will  be  found    printed    on 
page  64. 

f  This  is  the  same  as  that  of  Elizabeth, 
but  it  is  followed  by  a  Proclamation. 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


THE  PREFACE. 
There  was  never  any  thing  by  the  wit  of  man  so  well  de- 
vised, or  so  surely  s  established,  which  (in  continuance  of  time) 
hath  not  been  corrupted  :  as  (among  other  things)  it  may 
plainly  appear  by  the  common  prayers  in  the  Church,  com- 
monly called  divine  service :  the  first  original  and  ground 
whereof  if  a  man  would  search  out  by  the  ancient  fathers, 
he  shall  find  that  the  same  was  not  ordained,  but  of  a  good 
purpose,  and  for  a  great  advancement  of  godliness :  for  they 
so  ordered  the  matter,  that  all  the  whole  Bible  (or  the  greatest 
part  thereof)  should  be  read  over  once  in  the  year  ^,  intending 


Second  Edw.  VI.   1552. 
An  Act  for  the  Uniformity 
OF  Common  Prayer,  and  Ad- 
ministration OF  THE  Sacra- 
ments'. 

[Se*  the  Introduction.] 

The  Preface. 
There  was  never,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

An  Act  for  the  Uniformity 
OF  Common  Prayer,  and  Ser- 
vice IN  THE  Church,  and  the  J 
Administration  of  the  Sa- 
craments. 

[Set  The  Introduction.] 

The  Preface. 
There  was  never,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 


«  In  eds.  15521  and  afterwards,  "  sure." 
'■  In    eds.    1596,  &c.,  and   afterwards, 

"  every  year." 
•  In  two  editions  only  is  it  placed  here. 

In  another  edition  it  is  printed  after  the 


James  I.   1604. 

An  Act  for  the  Uniformity 
OF  Common  Prayer,  &.c. 

[The  same  as  that  of  Elizaheth  in  1559.] 

By  the  King. 
A   Proclamation  for  the  Authoriz- 
ing and  Unifonnity  of  the  Book 
of  Common  Prayer  to  be  used 
throughout  the  realm. 

[See  The  Introduction.] 

The  Preface. 
There  was  never,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgfy,  1637. 

A  Proclamation 
For  the  Authorizing  of  the 
Book  of  Common  Prayer  to 

BE     USED      throughout     THE 

realm  of  Scotland. 

[See  The  Introduction.] 

The  Preface''. 
The  Church  of  Christ  hath  in  all 
ages  had  a  prescript  Form  of  Com- 
mon Prayer,  or  Divine  Service ;  as 
appeareth  by  the  ancient  Liturgies 


Calendar,  and  in  another  after  the  Colo- 
phon at  the  end. 
i  In  ed.  1604,  "and  administration." 
*  The   Preface  beginning  "  There  was 
never,"  is  emitted,  and  this  substituted. 


The  Preface. 


thereby,  that  the  Clergy,  and  specially '  such  as  were  Ministers 
of'"  the  congregation,  should  (by  often  reading  and  meditation 
of'"  God's  word)  be  stirred  up  to  godliness  themselves,  and  be 
more  able  also  "  to  exhort  other  by  wholesome  doctrine,  and 
to  confute  them  that  were  adversaries  to  the  truth.  And 
further,  that  the  people  (by  daily  hearing  of  holy  scripture 
read  in  the  Church)  should"  continually  profit  more  and  more 
in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  be  the  more  inflamed  with  the 
love  of  his  true  religion.  But  these  many  years  passed,  this 
godly  and  decent  order  of  the  ancient  fathers  hath  bee[n]  so 
altered,  broken,  and  neglected,  by  planting  in  uncertain  stories, 
Legends,  Responds  i',  Verses,  vain  repetitions.  Commemora- 
tions, and  Synodals,  that  commonly  when  any  book  of  the 
Bible  was  begun,  before ''  three  or  four  chapters  were  read  out, 
all  the  rest  were  ''  unread.  And  in  this  sort,  the  book  of  Esaie  ^ 
was  begun  in  Advent,  and  the  book  of  Genesis  in  Septua- 
gesima :  but  they  were  only  begun,  and  never  read  through  *. 


of  the  Greek  and  Latin  Cluirches. 
This  was  done,  as  for  other  j^reat 
causes,  so  likewise  for  retaining  an 
uniforniity  in  God's  worsiiip  ;  a 
thing  most  beseeming  theni  tliat 
are  of  one  and  the  same  profession. 
Tor  l)y  the  Torm  tliat  is  kept  in  the 
outward  worsliip  of  God,  men  com- 
monly judge  of  Religion.  If  in 
that  there  be  a  diversity,  straight 
they  are  apt  to  conceive  the  religion 
to  be  diverse.  Wherefore  it  were 
to  be  wished,  that  the  whole  Church 
of  Christ  were  one  as  well  in  form 
of  Public  Worship,  as  in  doctrine  : 
and  that  as  it  hath  but  one  Lord, 
and  one  faith,  so  it  had  but  one 
heart,  and  one  mouth.  This  would 
prevent  many  schisms  and  divisions, 
antl  serve  much  to  the  preserving  of 
unity.  But  since  that  cannot  be 
hoped  for  in  the  whole  Catholic 
Christian  Church  ;  yet,  at  least,  in 
the    Churches    that    are    under   iiie 


Charles  H.   1662. 

Ax  Act  for  thk  Uniformity  of 
Common  Pravkr,  and  Service 
in  the  cliukcii,  and  adminis- 
TRATION OF  THE  Sacraments, 

Primo  Elizabcthis. 
[The  same  as  that  of  Elizabeth,  1559.] 

An  Act  for  the  Uniformity  of 

PuELicK  Prayers,  and 
Administration  of  Sacraments,  and 
other  rites  and  ceremonies  :  And 
for     establishing     the     Form     of 
Making,    Ordaining,    and   Conse- 
crating IJishops,  Priests,  and  Dea- 
cons in  the  Church  of  England. 
xiv.  Carol.  IL 
[.S"i't' The  Introduction.] 

COXCERXIXG  THE  SERVICE 
OF  THE  CPIURCH". 
There  was  never,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  in  the  Preface 
of  1549.] 


'  In  eds.  1604  and  i6f2,  "especially." 

■°  In  ed.  1662,  "ministers  in,"  and 
"  meditation  in." 

"  In  one  ed. ,  1559,  "able  to  exhort;" 
and  in  eds.  1627,  and  afterwards,  "  more 
able  to  e.\hort  others." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "  might." 

P  In  ed.  1662,  "and  legends  with  mul- 
titude of  Responds." 

■*  in  ed.  1662,  "after." 


'  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "are;"  afterwards, 
"  \vere." 

"  In  eds.  1552  and  1559,  spelt  "  Esai " 
and  "  Esay  ;"  in  1662,  "  Isaiah." 

'  In  eds.  1549,  "  thorow ;"  in  ed.  1662, 
"  thorough." 

"  This  new  title  is  given  to  the  old 
preface,  and  a  new  preface  written  for  this 
edition  (see  p.  12),  and  printed  before  it. 


8 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


After  a^  like  sort  were  other  books  of  holy  scripture  used. 
And  moreover,  whereas  S.  Paul  would  have  such  language 
spoken  to  the  people  in  the  church,  as  they  might  under- 
stand and  have  profit  by  hearing  the  same ;  the  service  in 
this  Church  of  England  (these  many  years)  hath  been  read 
in  Latin  to  the  people,  which  they  understood  "  not ;  so  that 
they  have  heard  with  their  ears  only ;  and  their  hearts  *,  spirit, 
and  mind,  have  not  been  edified  thereby.  And  furthermore, 
notwithstanding  that  the  ancient  fathers  hady  divided  the 
Psalms  into  seven  portions,  whereof  every  one  was  called 
a  nocturn ;  now  of  late  time  a  few  of  them  have  been  daily 
said  (and  oft  repeated  ^)  and  the  rest  utterly  omitted.  More- 
over, the  number  and  hardness  of  the  rules  called  the  Pie, 
and  the  manifold  changings  of  the  service,  was  the  cause, 
that  to  turn  the  book  only  was  so  hard  and  intricate  a  matter, 
that  many  times  there  was  more  business  to  find  out  what 
should  be  read,  than  to  read  it  when  it  was  found  out. 

These  inconveniences  therefore  considered,  here  is  set  forth 
such  an  order,  whereby  the  same  shall  be  redressed.  And  for 
a  readiness  in  this  matter,  here  is  drawn  out  a  Kalendar  for 
that  purpose,  which  is  plain  and  easy  to  be  understanded  ■ ; 
wherein  (so  much  as  may  be)  the  reading  of  holy  scripture  •• 
is  so  set  forth,  that  all  things  shall  be  done  in  order,  without 
breaking  one  piece  thereof''  from  another.     For  this  cause  be 


1552- 


Second  Edw.  VI. 
After  a  like  sort,  &c 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

After  a  like  sort,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 

James  I.  1604. 

After  a  like  sort,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549O 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Continued.  ] 
protection  of  one  sovereign  Prince 
the  same  ought  to  be  endeavoured. 
It  was  not  the  least  part  of  our 


late  Sovereign  King  yames,  of  bless- 
ed memory,  his  care,  to  work  this 
uniformity  in  all  his .  dominions : 
but,  while  he  was  about  to  do  it, 
it  pleased  God  to  translate  him  to 
a  better  kingdom.  His  Majesty  that 
now  reigneth,  (and  long  may  he 
reign  over  us  in  all  happiness  !)  not 
suffering  his  father's  good  purpose 
to  fall  to  the  ground,  but  treading 
the  same  path,  with  the  like  zeal 
and  pious  affection,  gave  order,  soon 
after  his  coming  to  the  crown,  for 
the  framing  of  a  Book  of  Common 
Prayer,  like  unto  that  which  is  re- 
ceived in  the  Churches  of  England 
and  Ireland,  for  the  use  of  this 
Church.     After  many  lets  and  hin- 


"  In  ed.  1559,  and  afterwards,  "After 
like." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "understand." 
»  In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "  heart." 
T  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "have." 
•  In  1662,  "and  oft  repeated,"  omitted. 


•  In  eds.  1SS2,  &c.,  " understanden ;"  in 
eds.  1559,  &c.,  and  1662,  "understood." 

•>  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "scrip- 
tures." 

«  In  eds.  X5S9,  &a,  and  1662,  "  therfof," 
omitted. 


The  Preface. 


cut  off  Anthems,  Responds,  Invitatories,  and  such  like  things 
as  did  bfeak  the  continual  course  of  the  reading  of  the  scripture. 
Yet  because  there  is  no  remedy,  but  that  of  necessity  there 
must  be  some  rules  :  therefore  certain  rules  are  here  set  forth, 
which  as  they  be  '^  few  in  number,  so  they  be  "^  plain  and  easy 
to  be  understanded  e.  So  that  here  you  have  an  order  for 
prayer  (as  touching  the  reading  of*'  holy  scripture)  much  agree- 
able to  the  mind  and  purpose  of  the  old  fathers,  and  a  great 
deal  more  profitable  and  commodious,  than  that  which  of  late 
was  used.  It  is  more  profitable,  because  here  are  left  out 
many  things,  whereof  some  be  ^  untrue,  some  uncertain,  some 
vain  and  superstitious  :  and  is  ordained  nothing  §  to  be  read, 
but  the  very  pure  word  of  God,  the  holy  scriptures,  or  that 
which  is  evidently  grounded  upon  ^  the  same  ;  and  that  in  such 
a  language  and  order,  as  is  most  easy  and  plain  for  the  under- 
standing, both  of  the  readers  and  hearers.  It  is  also  more 
commodious,  both  for  the  shortness  thereof,  and  for  the  plain- 
ness of  the  order,  and  for  that  the  rules  be  few  and  easy. 
Furthermore,  by  this  order,  the  curates  shall  need  none  other 
books  for  their  public  service,  but  this  book  and  the  Bible  : 
by  the  means  whereof,  the  people  shall  not  be  at  so  great 
charge  ^  for  books,  as  in  time  past  they  have  been. 


drances,  the  same  cometh  now  to 
be  published,  to  the  good  (we  trust) 
of  all  God's  people,  and  the  increase 
of  tme  piety  and  sincere  devotion 
amongst  them. 

But  as  there  is  nothing,  how  good 
and  warrantable  soever  in  itself, 
against  which  some  will  not  except ; 
so  it  may  be,  that  exceptions  will 
be  taken  against  this  good  and  most 
pious  work,  and,  perhaps,  none  more 
pressed  than  that  we  have  followed 
the  Service-Book  of  England.  But 
we  should  desire  them  that  shall 
take  this  exception,  to  consider,  that, 
being  (as  we  are,  by  God's  mercy) 
of  one  true  profession,  and  other- 
wise united  by  many  bonds,  it  had 
not  been  fitting  to  vary  much  from 
theirs,  our  especially  coming  forth 


^  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 

«  In  eds.  1552,  &c.,  " understanden  ;"  in 
1662,  "understood." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "for  prayer,  and  for  the 
reading  of." 


after  theirs ;  seeing  the  disturbers 
of  the  Church,  both  here  and  there, 
should  by  our  differences,  if  they 
had  been  great,  taken  occasion  to 
work  more  trouble.  Therefore  did 
we  think  meet  to  adhere  to  their 
Form,  even  in  the  Festivals,  and 
some  other  rites  not  as  yet  received 
nor  observed  in  our  Church,  rather 
than,  by  omitting  them,  to  give  the 
adversary  to  think  that  we  disliked 
any  part  of  their  Service. 

Charles  II.  1662. 

After  a  like  sort,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  'o] 
.  .  .  the  Rules  be  few  and  easy. 

I  The  paragraph  beginning  "Further- 
more," and  ending  "  they  have  been," 
is  omitted.] 


e  In  eds.  1627,  &c.,  and  1662,  "  nothing 
is  ordained." 

^  In  ed.  1662,  "  that  which  is  agreeable 
to  the  .same." 

'  In  eds.  1572,  1596,  &c.,  "charges." 


lo  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

, J . 

And  where  J  heretofore  there  hath  been  great  diversity  in 
saying  and  singing  in  churches  within  this  realm  :  some  fol- 
lowing Salisbury  use,  some  Hereford  use,  some  the  use  of 
Bangor,  some  of  York,  and  ^  some  of  Lincoln :  Now  from 
henceforth,  all  the  whole  realm  shall  have  but  one  use. 

And  if  any  would '  judge  this  way  more  painful,  because  that 
all  things  must  be  read  upon  the  book,  whereas  before,  by  the 
reason  of  so  often  repetition,  they  could  sa:y  many  things  by 
heart :  if  those  men  will  weigh  their  labour,  with  the  profit  in" 
knowledge,  which  daily  they  shall  obtain  by  reading  upon  the 
book,  they  will  not  refuse  the  pain,  in  consideration  of  the 
great  profit  that  shall  ensue  thereof. 

And  forsomuch  "  as  nothing  can,  almost  °,  be  so  plainly  set 
forth,  but  doubts  may  rise  p  in  the  use  and  practising '  of  the 
same :  to  appease  all  such  diversity  (if  any  arise),  and  for 
the  resolution  of  all  doubts,  concerning  the  manner  how  to 


Second  Edw.  VI,  1552. 

And  where  heretofore,  &c 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
....  contained  in  this  book. 
[There  is  then  added,] 
And  if  the  Bishop  of  the  Diocese 
be  in  any  doubt ',  then  may  he  send 
for  the  resolution  thereof  [un]to  the 
Archbishop. 

Though  it  be  appointed,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549O 
[The    paragraph   beginning,   "  Neither 
that  any  man,"  down  to  "the  congrega- 
tion," is  emitted.    In  its  stead  is  added,] 

And  all  Priests  and  Deacons  shall 
be  bound '  to  say  daily  the  Morning 
and  Evening  prayer,  either  privately 
or  openly,  except  they  be  letted ' 
by  preaching,  studying  of  divinity, 
or  by  some  other  urgent  cause. 

And  the  Curate  that  ministereth 
in  every  Parish  Church  or  Chapel, 
beuig  at  home,  and  not  being  other- 


i  In  ed.  i66a,  "  whereas." 

'  In  eds.  1572,  &c,  "and,"  omitted, 

'  In  eds.  1572,  &c.,  "  will." 

■"  In  eds.  155a,  and  afterwards,  "profit 
and  knowledge." 

°  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "foras- 
much." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  " almost,"  ^muV/a/. 

P  In  ed.  1662,  "arise." 

1  In  ed.  1662,  "practice." 


wise  reasonably  letted  ",  shall  say  the 
same  in  the  Parish  Church  or  Chapel 
where  he  ministereth,  and  shall  toll 
a  bell  thereto*,  a  convenient  time 
before  he  begin,  that  such  as  be 
disposed  ■  may  come  to  hear  God's 
word,  and  [to]  pray  with  him. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

And  where  heretofore,  &c 
[Continued  the  same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

And  where  heretofore,  &c. 
[Continued  the  same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Continued.] 

Our  first  Reformers  were  of  the 

same  mind  with  us,  as  appeareth 

by  the  ordinance  they  made,    that 

in  all  the  parishes  of  this  realm  the 


'  In  ed.  1596,  and  afterwards,  "  in  doubt, 
then  he  may." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "are  to  say." 

'  In  eds.  1572,  &c.,  "let."    In  ed.  166a, 
"  not  being  let  by  sickness,  or  some  other." 
■  In  ed.  1662,  "hindered." 

*  In  ed.  1662,  "cause  a  bell  to  be  tolled 
thereunto." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "that  the  people  may." 


The  Preface. 


II 


understand,  do,  and  execute  the  things  contained  in  this  book, 
the  parties  that  so  doubt,  or  diversely  take  any  thing,  shall 
always  resort  to  the  Bishop  of  the  Diocese,  who  by  his  dis- 
cretion shall  take  order  for  the  quieting  and  appeasing  of  the 
same :  so  that  the  same  order  be  not  contrary  to  any  thing 
contained  in  this  book. 

3D  Though  it  be  appointed  in  the  afore  written  preface^, 
that  all  things  shall  be  read  and  sung  in  the  church,  in  the 
English  tongue,  to  the  end  that  the  congregation  may  be 
thereby  edified :  yet  it  is  not  meant,  but  when  y  men  say 
Matins  and  Evensong  ^  privately,  they  may  say  the  same  in 
any  language  that  they  themselves  do  understand. 

Neither 
that  any  man  shall  be  bound  to  the  saying  of  them,  but  such 
as  from  time  to  time,  in  Cathedral  and  Collegiate  Churches, 
Parish  Churches,  and  Chapels  to  the  same  annexed,  shall 
serve  the  congregation. 


Common  Prayer  should  be  read, 
weekly,  on  Sundays,  and  other  Fes- 
tival Days,  with  the  Lessons  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament,  conform 
to  the  order  of  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  ;  (meaning  that  ol  England : 
for  it  is  known  that  divers  years 
after  we  had  no  other  order  for 
Common  Prayer. )  This  is  recorded 
to  have  been  the  first  head  con- 
cluded in  a  frequent  Council  of  the 
Lords  and  Barons  professing  Christ 
Jesus.     We  keep  the  words  of  the 

t  The  His  History  :  Religion  was 
tory  of  the  ^0^  then  placed  in  rites 
Church     of  and  gestures,    nor  men 

Scotland,  ^^^^  ^th  the  fancy  of 
•^  extemporary     prayers,  t 

Sure,  the  Public  Worship  of  God 
in  his  Church,  being  the  most  so- 
lemn action  of  us  his  poor  creatures 
here  below,  ought  to  be  performed 
by  a  Liturgy  advisedly  set  and 
framed,  and  not  according  to  the 
sudden  and  various  fancies  of  men. 
This  shall  suffice  for  the  present  to 
have  said.  The  God  of  mercy  con- 
firm our  hearts  in  his  truth,  and 
preserve  us  alike  from  profaneness 
and  superstition  !     Amen. 


All  Presbyters  and  Deacons  shall 
be  bound  to  say  Daily  the  Morning 
and  Evening  Prayer,  either  privately 
or  openly,  except  they  be  let  or  hin' 
dered  by  some  urgent  cause.  Of  which 
cause,  if  it  be  frequently  pretended, 
they  are  to  make  the  Bishop  of  the 
Diocese,  or  the  Archbishop  of  the  Pro- 
vince, the  judge  and  allower. 

And  the  Curate  that  ministereth  in 
every  Parish  Church,  ^t'c. 

[Concluded  the  same  as  1552.] 

Charles  II.  1662. 

And  whereas  heretofore,  &c. 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
....  have  but  one  Use. 

[The  paragraph  beginning  "  And  if  any 
would  judge,"  and  ending  "  that  shall  en- 
sue thereof,"  is  otnitted.\ 

And  for  as  much  as  nothing,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
....  contained  in  this  Book. 
And  if  the  Bishop  of  the,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

Though  it  be  appointed,  &c. 
[Sanie  as  1549.] 

And  all  Priests  and  Deacons,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
And  the  Curate  that,  &c. 
[Concluded  the  same  as  1552.] 


"  In  ed.  1662,  the  words  "in  the  afore 
written  Preface  "  are  omitted. 
y  In  ed.  1662,  "  but  that  when  men." 


'  Ineds.  1552,  andafterwards,"Moming 
and  Evening  Prayer." 


12 


Prayer-Book  of  Charles  II.  1662. 


THE   PREFACE. 

It  hath  been  the  wisdom  of  the 
Church  of  England,  ever  since  the 
first  compihng  of  her  Publick  Li- 
turgy, to  keep  the  mean  between 
the  two  extremes,  of  too  much  stiff- 
ness in  refusing,  and  of  too  much 
easiness  in  admitting  any  variation 
from  it.  For,  as  on  the  one  side 
common  experience  sheweth,  that 
where  a  change  hath  been  made 
of  things  advisedly  established  (no 
evident  necessity  so  requiring)  sun- 
dry inconveniences  have  thereupon 
ensued ;  and  those  many  times  more, 
and  greater  than  the  evils,  that  were 
intended  to  be  remedied  by  such 
change :  So  on  the  other  side,  the 
particular  Forms  of  Divine  worship, 
and  the  Rites,  and  Ceremonies  ap- 
pointed to  be  used  therein,  being 
things  in  their  own  nature  indif- 
ferent, and  alterable,  and  so  ac- 
knowledged ;  it  is  but  reasonable, 
that  upon  weighty  and  important 
considerations,  according  to  the  va- 
rious exigency  of  times  and  occa- 
sions, such  changes  and  alterations 
should  be  made  Uierein,  as  to  those 
that  are  in  place  of  Authority  should 
from  time  to  time  seem  either  neces- 
sary or  expedient.  Accordingly  we 
find,  that  in  the  Reigns  of  several 
Princes  of  blessed  memory  since  the 
Reformation,  the  Church  upon  just 
and  weighty  considerations  her  there- 
unto moving,  hath  yielded  to  make 
such  alterations  in  some  particulars, 
as  in  their  respective  times  were 
thought  convenient :  Yet  so,  as  that 
the  main  Body  and  Essentials  of  it 
(as  well  in  the  chiefest  materials,  as 
in  the  frame  and  order  thereof)  have 
still  continued  the  same  unto  this 
day,  and  do  yet  stand  firm  and  un- 
shaken, notwithstanding  all  the  vain 
attempts  and  impetuous  assaults  made 
against  it  by  such  men  as  are  given 
to  change,  and  have  always  dis- 
covered a  greater  regard  to  their  own 
private  fancies  and  interests,  than  to 
that  duty  they  owe  to  the  publick. 

V>y  what  undue  means,  and  for 
what  mischievous  purposes  the  use 
of  the  Liturgy  (though  enjoined  by 


the  Laws  of  the  Land,  and  those 
Laws  never  yet  repealed)  came, 
during  the  late  unhappy  confusions, 
to  be  discontinued,  is  too  well  known 
to  the  World,  and  we  are  not  willing 
here  to  remember.  But  when,  upon 
His  Majesty's  happy  Restoration 
it  seemed  probable,  that,  amongst 
other  things,  the  use  of  the  Liturgy 
also  would  return  of  course  (the 
same  having  never  been  legally  abo- 
lished) unless  some  timely  means 
were  used  to  prevent  it ;  those  men 
who  under  the  late  usurped  powers 
had  made  it  a  great  part  of  their 
business  to  render  the  people  dis- 
affected thereunto,  saw  themselves 
in  point  of  reputation  and  interest 
concerned  (unless  they  would  freely 
acknowledge  themselves  to  have 
erred,  which  such  men  are  very 
hardly  brought  to  do)  with  their 
utmost  endeavours  to  hinder  the 
restitution  thereof.  In  order  where- 
unto  divers  Pamphlets  were  pub- 
lished against  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer,  the  old  Objections  mustered 
up,  with  the  addition  of  some  new 
ones  more  than  formerly  had  been 
made,  to  make  the  number  swell. 
In  fine  great  importunities  were 
used  to  His  Sacred  Majesty,  that 
the  said  Book  might  be  Revised, 
and  such  Alterations  therein,  and 
Additions  thereunto  made,  as  should 
be  thought  requisite  for  the  ease  of 
tender  Consciences  :  whereunto  His 
Majesty  out  of  His  Pious  Inclination 
to  give  satisfaction  (so  far  as  could 
be  reasonably  expected)  to  all  His 
Subjects  of  what  persuasion  soever, 
did  graciously  condescend. 

In  which  Review  we  have  en- 
deavoured to  observe  the  like  Mo- 
deration, as  we  find  to  have  been 
used  in  the  like  case  in  former  times. 
And  therefore  of  the  sundry  Altera- 
tions proposed  unto  us,  we  have  re- 
jected all  such  as  were  either  of 
dangerous  consequence  (as  secretly 
striking  at  some  established  Doc- 
trine, or  laudable  Practice  of  the 
Church  of  England,  or  indeed  of 
the  whole  Catholick  Church  of 
Christ)  or  else  of  no  consequence 


The  Preface. 


13 


at  all,  but  utterly  frivolous  and  vain. 
But  such  Alterations  as  were  ten- 
dered to  us  (by  what  persons,  under 
what  pretences,  or  to  what  purpose 
soever  so  tendered)  as  seemed  to  us 
in  any  degree  requisite  or  expedient, 
we  have  willingly,  and  of  our  own 
accord  assented  unto  ;  Not  enforced 
so  to  do  by  any  strength  of  Argu- 
ment, convincing  us  of  the  necessity 
of  making  the  said  Alterations  :  For 
we  are  fully  persuaded  in  our  judge- 
ments (and  we  here  profess  it  to  the 
World)  that  the  Book,  as  it  stood 
before  established  by  Law,  doth  not 
contain  in  it  any  thing  contrary  to 
the  Word  of  God,  or  to  sound  Doc- 
trine, or  which  a  godly  man  may 
not  with  a  good  Conscience  use  and 
submit  unto,  or  which  is  not  fairly 
defensible  against  any  that  shall  op- 
pose the  same  ;  if  it  shall  be  allowed 
such  just  and  favourable  construction 
as  in  Common  Equity  ought  to  be  al- 
lowed to  all  Humane  Writings,  espe- 
cially such  as  are  set  forth  by  Autho- 
rity, and  even  to  the  very  best  Trans- 
lations of  the  holy  Scripture  itself. 

Our  general  aim  therefore  in  this 
undertaking  was,  not  to  gratify  this 
or  that  party  in  any  their  unreason- 
able demands  ;  but  to  do  that,  which 
to  our  best  understandings  we  con- 
ceived might  most  tend  to  the  pre- 
servation of  Peace  and  Unity  in  the 
Church  ;  the  procuring  of  Rever- 
ence, and  exciting  of  Piety,  and  De- 
votion in  the  publick  Worship  of 
God ;  and  the  cutting  off  occasion 
from  them  that  seek  occasion  of 
cavil,  or  quarrel  against  the  Liturgjy 
of  the  Church.  And  as  to  the  seve- 
ral variations  from  the  former  Book, 
whether  by  Alteration,  Addition,  or 
otherwise,  it  shall  suffice  to  give  this 
general  account,  That  most  of  the 
Alterations  were  made,  either  first, 
for  the  better  direction  of  them  that 
are  to  officiate  in  any  part  of  Divine 
Service  ;  which  is  chiefly  done  in 
the  Calendars  and  Kubricks  :  Or 
secondly,  for  the  more  proper  .ex- 
pressing of  some  words  or  phrases 
of  ancient  usage  in  terms  more  suit- 
able to  the  language  of  the  present 
times,  and  the  clearer  explanation 


of  some  other  words  and  phrases, 
that  were  either  of  doubtful  signi- 
fication, or  otherwise  liable  to  mis- 
construction :  Or  thirdly,  for  a  more 
perfect  rendering  of  such  portions  of 
holy  Scripture,  as  are  inserted  into 
the  Liturgy ;  which,  in  the  Epistles 
and  Gospels  especially,  and  in  sun- 
dry other  places  are  now  ordered 
to  be  read  according  to  the  last 
Translation :  And  that  it  was  thought 
convenient,  that  some  Prayers  and 
Thanksgivings,  fitted  to  special  oc- 
casions, should  be  added  in  their 
due  places  ;  particularly  for  those 
at  Sea,  together  with  an  Office  for 
the  Baptism  of  such  as  are  of  riper 
years  :  which,  although  not  so  ne- 
cessary when  the  former  Book  was 
compiled,  yet  by  the  growth  of  Ana- 
baptism,  through  the  licentiousness 
of  the  late  times  crept  in  amongst 
us,  is  now  become  necessary,  and 
may  be  always  useful  for  the  Bap- 
tizing of  Natives  in  our  Plantations, 
and  others  converted  to  the  Faith. 
If  any  man,  who  shall  desire  a  more 
particular  account  of  the  several 
Alterations  in  any  part  of  the  Li- 
turgy, shall  take  the  pains  to  com- 
pare the  present  Book  with  the 
former ;  we  doubt  not  but  the  rea- 
son of  the  change  may  easily  appear. 
And  having  thus  endeavoured  to 
discharge  our  duties  in  this  weighty 
affair,  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  and 
to  approve  our  sincerity  therein  (so 
far  as  lay  in  us)  to  the  consciences 
of  all  men ;  although  we  know  it 
impossible  (in  such  variety  of  appre- 
hensions, humours,  and  interests,  as 
are  in  the  world)  to  please  all ;  nor 
can  expect  that  men  of  factious,  peev- 
ish, and  perverse  spirits  should  be 
satisfied  with  any  thing  that  can  be 
done  in  this  kind  by  any  other  than 
themselves  :  Yet  we  have  good  hope, 
that  what  is  here  presented,  and  hath 
been  by  the  Convocations  of  both 
Provinces  with  great  diligence  exam- 
ined and  approved,  will  be  also  well 
accepted  and  approved  by  all  sober, 
peaceable,  and  truly  conscientious 
sons  of  the  Church  of  England. 

[Here  follows,  '  Concerning  Service,'  p.  7.] 


14  First  Pratek-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

39  OF  CEREMONIES,  !|^ 

WHY  SOM£  BE  AfiOUSHED,  AKD  SOME  RETAINED. 

[Tlis  tseMBe  is  printed  a  al  eds.  ef  Z549  at  tbe  ^id  of  &e  Ptarer-Book,  I■ec^^K  tix 
CokfihaB.  la 'fte  prcKM  cAmb  k  ios  been  priaaed  here  fcr  the  sake  of  taiBgii^  «idi 
al  dte  facer  e&ioBS.] 

Or  sadb  ceremonies  as  be  used  in  the  Church,  and  have 
had  their  banning  by  the  institution  of  man  :  Some  at  the 
first  were  of  godly  intent  and  purpose  devised,  and  yet  at' 
length  turned  to  vanity  and  superstition :  Some  entered  into 
the  Church  by  undiscreet  devotion,  and  such  a  zeal  as  was 
without  knowledge ;  and  [for]  because  they  were  winked  at 
in  the  beginning,  they  grew  daily  to  more  and  more  abuses, 
which  not  only  for  their  unprofitableness,  but  also  because 
they  have  much  blinded  the  people,  and  obscured  the  gloiy 
of  God,  are  worthy  to  be  cut  away,  and  clean  rejected-  Other 
there  be,  which  altho'ogh  they  have  been  devised  by  man,  yet 
it  is  thought  good  to  resen-e  them  still,  as  well  for  a  decent 
order  in  the  Church  (for  the  which  they  were  first  devised),  as 
because  they  j>ertain  to  edification :  Whereunto  aU  things  done 
in  the  Church  (as  the  Apostle  teacheth)  ought  to  be  referred- 
And  although  the  keeping  or  nmitting  of  a  ceremony  (in  itself 
ooosidered)  is  but  a  small  thing :  Yet  the  wilful  and  contemp- 
tnoQS  transgression,  and  breaking  of  a  common  order,  and 
discipline,  is  no  small  ofiiaice  before  God. 

Let  all  things  be  done  among  you  (saith  Saint  Paul)  in 
a  seemly  and  due  order.  The  appointment  of  [the]  which 
order  pertaineth  not  to  private  men  :  Therefore  no  man  ought 
to  take  in  hand,  nor  ^  presume  to  apf)oint  or  alter  any  public 
or  common  order  in  Christ's  Church,  except  he  be  lawfiilly 
called  and  authorized  thereunto.  And  whereas,  in  this  our 
time,  the  minds  of  men  be  *  so  diverse  *,  that  some  think  it 
a  great  matter  of  conscience  to  depart  from  a  piece  of  the 
least  of  their  Ceremonies  (they  be  so  addicted  to  their  old 
customs),  and  again  on  the  other  side,  some  be  so  new  fangle ' 
that  they  would  innovate  all  thing ',  and  so  do  despise  the  old 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Of  Ce&£mom£S,  &C. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 

EUzabeth,  1559. 
Or  CxMxuoistEs,  kc 

[SaHeasi549.] 


James  L  1604. 
Of  Ckkejcomxs,  &c 

[Same  as  154^] 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
Of  Cexemonies,  &£. 

[Sa«e  »  XM9.  J 


■  la  OMeed.,  S549>  "at  tfae."  *  la  eds.  155X, 

*  la  «ae  edi,  1559,  aad  1559,  "  or ;"  ia  fwigV-cl  " 
te«.aBdidterKMd^*'Bcr.-  '  U  eds. 

*  1m eim.  1558. aad ataeiaaria,  **are."  ^mmg^amA 


Of  Ce&emoxees.  15 


that  nothing  can  like  them,  but  that  is  new :  It  was  thought 
expedient  not  so  much  to  have  req>ect  how  to  please  ^id 
satisfy  either  of  these  parties,  as  how  to  please  God,  and  profit 
them  both.  And  yet  lest  any  man  should  be  offended  (whrnn 
good  reason  might  satisfy),  here  be  certain  causes  r^Klered 
why  some  of  the  accustomed  Ceremonies  be  put  away,  and 
some  be  «  retained  and  kept  stilL 

Some  are  put  away,  beamse  the  great  excess  and  mnltitDde 
of  them  hath  so  increased  in  these  latter  days,  that  the  bmden 
of  them  was  intolerable :  whereof  Saint  Augustine  in  his  time 
complained,  that  they  were  grown  to  such  a  nmnber,  that  die 
state  *  of  Christian  people  was  in  worse  case  (cxMicaning  diat 
matter)  than  were  the  Jews.  And  he  counselled  that  such 
yoke  and  burden  should  be  taken  away,  as  time  would  serve 
quietly  to  do  it 

But  what  would  Saint  Augustine  have  said,  if  he  had  seen 
the  Ceremonies  of  late  daj-s  used  among  us,  whereunto  the 
multitude  used  in  his  time  was  not  to  be  compared?  This 
our  excessive  multitude  of  Ceremonies  was  so  great,  and  many 
of  them  so  dark,  that  they  did  more  confound  amd  daiken, 
than  declare  and  set  forth  Christ's  benefits  unto  us.  And  be- 
sides this,  Christ's  Gospel  is  not  a  Ceremonial  ]aw  (as  much 
of  Moses'  law  was) ;  but  it  is  a  religion  to  serve  God,  not 
in  bondage  of  the  figure  or  shadow,  but  in  the  freedom  of 
spirit',  being  content  only  with  those  cerononies  which  do 
serve  to  a  decent  order  and  godly  discipline,  and  such  as  be 
apt  to  stir  up  the  dull  mind  of  man,  to  die  remembrance  <^ 
his  duty  to  God,  by  some  notable  and  special  signifiration, 
whereb)'  he  might  be  edifiedL 

Furthennore,  the  most  weighty  cause  of  the  abolishmait  of 
certain  Ceremonies  was,  that  th^  were  so  iai  abused,  partly 
by  the  superstitious  blindness  of  the  rude  and  unlearned,  and 
partly  by  the  unsatiable  avarice  of  such  as  sought  more  thor 
own  lucre  than  the  glory  of  God ;  that  the  abus^  could  not 
well  be  taken  away,  the  thing  remaining  stilL  Bat  now  as 
concerning  those  persons,  which  peradvioitare  will  be  (tended 
for  that  some  of  the  old  Ceremonies  are  retained  still :  if  they 
consider,  that  without  some  Ceremonies  it  is  not  possiUe  to 
keep  any  order  or  quiet  discipline  in  the  church,  diey  shall 
easily  perceive  just  cause  to  reform  their  judgments. 

Charles  IL  1662. 
Of  Ce&emonies,  &c 

[SuK«si5«9.] 


i6 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


And  if  they  think  much  that  any  of  the  old  do  remain, 
and  would  rather  have  all  devised  anew :  then  such  men 
(granting  some  Ceremonies  convenient  to  be  had),  surely 
where  the  old  may  be  well  used,  there  they  cannot  reasonably 
reprove  the  old  (only  for  their  age)  without  bewraying  of  their 
own  folly.  For  in  such  a  case  they  ought  rather  to  have 
reverence  unto  them  for  their  antiquity^,  if  they  will  declare 
themselves  to  be  more  studious  of  unity  and  concord,  than  of 
innovations  and  newfangleness,  which  (as  much  as  may  be 
with  the  true ''  setting  forth  of  Christ's  religion)  is  always  to  be 
eschewed.  Furthermore,  such  shall  have  no  just  cause  with 
the  Ceremonies  reserved  to  be  offended  :  for  as  those  be  taken 
away  which  were  most  abused,  and  did  burden  men's  con- 
sciences without  any  cause ;  so  the  other  that  remain  are  re- 
tained for  a  discipline  and  order,  which  (upon  just  causes) 
may  be  altered  and  changed,  and  therefore  are  not  to  be 
esteemed  equal  with  God's  law.  And  moreover  they  be  neither 
dark  nor  dumb  ceremonies,  but  are  so  set  forth  that  every  man 
may  understand  what  they  do  mean,  and  to  what  use  they  do 
serve.  So  that  it  is  not  like  that  they,  in  time  to  come,  should 
be  abused  as  the  other'  have  been.  And  in  these  our™ 
doings  we  condemn  no  other  nations,  nor  prescribe  any  thing, 
but  to  our  own  people  only.  For  we  think  it  convenient  that 
every  country  should  use  such  ceremonies,  as  they  shall  think 
best  to  the  setting  forth  of  God's  honour  and  "  glory,  and  to 
the  reducing  of  the  people  to  a  most  perfect  and  Godly  living, 
without  error  or  superstition ;  and  that  they  should  put  away 
other  things,  which  from  time  to  time  they  perceive"  to  be 
most  abused,  as  in  men's  ordinances  it  often  chanceth  diversely 
in  diverse  countries. 

[Then  follows,  in  the  fint  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  only.^ 

Certain  Notes /or  the  more  plain  explication,  <Sr*r. 

fin  the  present  edition  these,  for  convenience,  are  printed  after  the  Calendar,  and 
immediately  before  the  Order  for  Morning  Prayer.    See  p.  64.] 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
And  if  they  think,  &c 
[Same  as  1549-] 

Elizabeth,  1559. 
And  if  they  think,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549-] 

James  I.  1604. 
And  if  they  think,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.  J 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

And  if  they  think,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Charles  II.   1662. 
And  if  they  think,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

'  In  ed.  i66a,  "  with  true." 

'  In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards,"  as  other.' 

■  In  three  eds. .  r549,  "  these  all  our." 

•  In  eds.  1552,  &c.,  " honour  or  glory." 

•  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "perceived." 


17 


^  THE   TABLE   AND 

KALENDAR,    EXPRESSING    THE    ORDER    OF    THE    PSALMS 
AND     LESSON'S,     TO     1!E     SAID     AT     MATINS     AND     EVENSONG, 
THROUGHOUT    THE    YEAR,    EXCEPT    CERTAIN    PROPER 
FEASTS,    AS    THE    RULES    FOLLOWING 
MORE    PLAINLY    DE- 
CLARE. 


^  THE  ORDER  HOW  THE  PSALTER  IS  APPOINTKD  TO  RE  READ. 

The  Psalter  shall  be  read  tlirough  once  every  month  :  and 
because  that  some  months  be  longer  than  some  other  be,  it 
is  thought  good  to  make  them  even  by  this  means. 

To  everv  month,  as  concerning  this  purpose,  shall  be  ap- 
pointed 1'  just  xxx  days. 

And  because  January  and  March  hatli ''  one  day  above  the 
said  number,  and  I-'ebruary,  wliich  is  jjlaced  between  them 
both,  hath  only  xxviii  da}s,  ]"'ebruary  shall  I'orrow  of  either 
of  the  montlis  of  January  and  March  one  day,  and  so  the 
Psalter  which  shall  be  read  in  February,  must  be  begun  "■  the 
last  day  of  January,  and  ended'  the  hrst  tiay  of  March. 


Second  Edw.  VI.    1552. 

Tin-:     TAIU.F.     AM)     KALENDAR 

cxi)rc>>ing  the 

order  of  tlic  I'sahius  ami  Lessons 

to  be  said  at  the 

Morning  and  Evening  Prayer 

tliroughont  the  year, 

except  certain  proper  feasts  as  the 

Rules  follow  ing  more  plainly 

declare. 

THE    ORDER    HiiW    THE    PSAETER 
IS    ATTOINTED    TO    KE    RI:AD. 

The  Psalter  shall  be  read,  iS;c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,   1559. 
The  Table  and  Calendar,  &c.' 

[Same  as  1552  throughout.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,   1637. 

The  TAia.E  and  Calendar 
Plxj Teasing  the  <  'I'llcr  of  P.-,alni.-,  to  be 
saidal  McHiiingaiid  Evening  Prayer 
throughout  the  \'ear  ;  exce]n  cer- 
tain  i'mper  I'Va-ts,  as  the  Rules 
following  more  plainly  declare. 
The  Psalter  shall  be  read  through 
once  every  month,  save  Fcbntaiy ; 
and    in    that    month    so    far  as    the 
Psalms   are   appointed   for   twenty- 
eiglit,    or  twenty-nine  days   in   the 
Leap- Year. 


James  I.    1604. 
The  Table  and  Calendar,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552  throughout.] 


Charles  IL   1662. 

THE   ORDER    HOW    THE  PSALTER   IS 
APPOINTED  TO  BE  READ. 

The  Psalter  shall  be  read  through 
once  every  Month,  as  it  is  there  ap- 
pointed, both  for  Morning  and  Even- 
ing Prayer.  But  in  February  \\.  shall 
be  read  only  to  the  twenty-eighth, 
or  twenty-ninth  day  of  the  Month. 


P  In  eds.  1552,  1559,   and   1604,   "shall 
be  appointed  as  concerning  this  purpose. " 
1  In  ed.  1604,  "have." 


■■  In  eds.  1552,  &c.,  "must  begin; 
ed.  1625,  "  must  begin  at." 
'  In  eds.  1552,  &.C.,  "end." 


i8 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


And  whereas  May,  July,  August,  October  and  December 
have  xxxi  days  apiece,  it  is  ordered  that  the  same  Psalms 
shall  be  read  the  last  day  of  the  said  month[s],  which  were 
read  the  day  before  :  so  that  the  Psalter  may  be  begun  *  again 
the  first  day  of  the  next  months  "  ensuing. 

Now  to  know  what  Psalms  shall  be  read  every  day,  look  in  the 
Kalendar  the  number  that  is  appointed  for  the  Psalms,  and  then 
find  the  same  number  in  this  Table,  and  upon  that  number  shall 
you  see  what  Psalms  shall  be  said  at  Matins,  and  Evensong '^. 

And  where  the  cxix  Psalm  is  divided  into  xxii  portions, 
and  is  over  long  to  be  read  at  one  time :  it  is  so  ordered,  that 
at  one  time  shall  not  be  read  above  iv  or  v  of  the  said  por- 
tions, as  you  shall  perceive  to  be  noted  in  this  Table  >'. 

And  here  is  also  to  be  noted,  that  in  this  Table,  and  in 
all  other  parts  of  the  service,  where  any  Psalms  are  appointed, 
the  number  is  expressed  after  the  great  English  Bible,  which 
from  the  ixth  Psalm  unto  the  cxlviiith  Psalm  (following  the 
division  of  the  Ebrues)  doth  vary  in  numbers  from  the  com- 
mon Latin  translation. 


Second  Edw.  VI.   1552. 

And  whereas,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549  throughout.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

And  whereas,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549  throughout.] 


James  I.  1604. 

And  whereas,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549  throughout.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

And  whereas  many  months  have 
thirty-one  days  apiece,  it  is  ordered 
that  the  Psalms  shall  be  read  the 
last  day  of  the  said  months  which 
were  read  the  day  before  ;  so  that 
the  Psalter  may  begin  again  the 
first  day  of  the  next  month  ensuhig. 

[Paragraph  beginning,  "  Now  to  know," 
omitted.  ] 

And  where  the  119th,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549  throughout] 


*  In  eds.  1552,  &c.,  "may  begin." 

"  In  eds.  1559,  &c.,  "  month. " 

"  In  eds.  1552,  &c.,  "At  Morning  and 


Charles  II.  1662. 

And  whereas  January,  March, 
May,  July,  August,  October,  and 
December  have  One-and-thirty  days 
apiece  ;  It  is  ordered,  that  the  same 
Psalms  shall  be  read  the  last  day 
of  the  said  months,  which  were  read 
the  day  before  :  so  that  the  Psalter 
may  begin  again  the  first  day  of  the 
next  Month  ensuing. 

And,  whereas  the  119th,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
four  or  five  of  the  said  portions. 

And  at  the  end  of  every  Psalm, 
and  of  every  such  part  of  the  119th 
Psalm,  shall  be  repeated  this  Hymn, 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  ^c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &'c. 

Note,  that  the  Psalter  followeth 
the  Division  of  the  Hebrews,  and 
the  Translation  of  the  great  English 
Bible,  set  forth  and  used  in  the 
time  of  King  Henry  the  Eighth, 
and  Edward  the  Sixth. 


Evening  Prayer." 

y  In  eds.  1552,  &c.,  and  Scotch  ed.  1637, 
"  this  table  following." 


19 


^  A  TABLE  FOR  4f 

THE  Order  of  the  Psalms,  to  be  said 
AT  Matins  and  Evensong. 


VI. 

vii. 
viii. 
ix. 

X. 

xi. 

xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 

XV. 

xvi. 
xvii. 
xviii. 
xix. 

XX. 

xxi. 
xxii. 
xxiii. 
xxiv. 

XXV. 

xxvi. 

xxvii. 

xxviii. 

xxix. 

xxx. 


Matins. 


1,  11,  111,  IV,  V. 

ix,  X,  xi. 

XV,  xvi,  xvii. 

xix,  XX,  xxi. 

xxiv,  XXV,  xxvi. 

xxx,  xxxi. 

XXXV,  xxxvi. 

xxxviii,  xxxix,  xl. 

xiiv,  xlv,  xlvi. 

1,  li,  lii. 

Ivi,  Ivii,  Iviii. 

Ixii,  Ixiii,  Ixiv. 

Ixviii. 

Ixxi,  Ixxii. 

Ixxv,  Ixxvi,  Ixxvii. 

Ixxix,  Ixxx,  Ixxxi. 

Ixxxvi,  Ixxxvii,  Ixxxviii. 

xc,  xci,  xcii. 

xcv,  xcvi,  xcvii. 

cii,  ciii, 

cv. 

cvii. 

ex,  cxi,  cxii,  cxiii. 

cxvi,  cxvii,  cxviii. 

Inde.  v. 

Inde.  V. 

cxx,  cxxi,  cxxii,  cxxiii,  cxxlv, 

cxxv. 
cxxxii,  cxxxiii,  cxxxiv,  cxxxv. 
cxxxix,  cxl,  cxli. 
cxliv,  cxlv,  cxlvi. 


Evensong. 


VI,  Vll,  Vlll. 

xii,  xiii,  xiv. 

xviii. 

xxii,  xxiii. 

xxvii,  xxviii,  xxix. 

xxxii,  xxxiii,  xxxiv. 

xxxvii. 

xii,  xiii,  xliii. 

xlvii,  xlviii,  xlix. 

liii,  liv,  Iv. 

lix,  Ix,  Ixi. 

Ixv,  Ixvi,  Ixvii. 

Ixix,  Ixx. 

Ixxiii,  Ixxiv. 

Ixxviii. 

Ixxxii,  Ixxxiii,  Ixxxiv,  Ixxxv. 

Ixxxix. 

xciii,  xciv. 

xcviii,  xcix,  c,  ci. 

civ. 

cvi. 

cviii,  cix. 

cxiv,  cxv. 

cxix  Inde.  iv. 

Inde.  iv. 

Inde.  iv. 

cxxvi,    cxxvii,    cxxviii,    cxxix, 

cxxx,  cxxxi. 
cxxxvi,  cxxxvii,  cxxxviii. 
cxlii,  cxliii. 
cxlvii,  cxlviii,  cxlix,  cl. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

the  table  for  the  order  of 
the  psalms  to  be  said  at 
morning  and  evening  prayer. 

Morning  Prayer.   I    Evening  Prayer. 


I       

1,  11,  m,  IV,  V.  I     VI,  Vll,  Vlll. 

[Same  as  iS49-] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
The  Table,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
»The  Table,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
»The  Table,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,  except  the  two  titles  are 
Psalms  for  Morning  Prayer,  Psalms  fur 
Evening  Prayer.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

[The  above  table  is  omitted.'] 


»  In  eds.  of  1604  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  this  table  is  printed  after  the  Table  of  Proper 
Lessons  and  Proper  Psalms. 


20 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


j^  THE  ORDER  4f 

HOW    THE    REST    OF    HOLY*    SCRIPTURE 
(beside   THE   psalter)    IS   APPOINT- 
ED  TO    BE   READ. 

77ie  Old  Testajnent^.  The  Old  Testament  is  appointed  for 
the  first  Lessons,  at  Matins  and  Evensong,  and  shall  be  read 
through  every  year  once,  except  certain  books  and  chapters, 
which  be  least  edifying,  and  might  best  be  spared,  and  there- 
fore are  "^  left  unread. 

The  Neiu  Testament'^.  The  New  Testament  is  appointed 
for  the  second  Lessons,  at  Matins  and  Evensong,  and  shall 
be  read  over  orderly  every  year  thrice,  beside^  the  Epistles 
and  Gospels ;  except  the  Apocalypse,  out  of  the  which  there 
be  *  only  certain  Lessons  appointed  upon  divers  proper  feasts. 

Lessons  ^.  And  to  know  what  Lessons  shall  be  read  every 
day :  find  the  day  of  the  month  in  the  Kalendar  following  : 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

THE   ORDER    HOW,    &C. 
[Same  as  1549-] 

The  Old  Testament  is  appointed 
for  the  first  Lessons  at  Morning  and 
Evening  prayer,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549,  except  throughout 

Morning  and  Evening  Prayer 

is  substituted  for  "  Matins  and  Evensong." 

[Also  at  the  end  is  added,] 

And  wheresoever  is  not  expressed 
how  far  shall  be  read,  there  shall 
you  read  to  the  end  of  the  chapter. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
The  Order,   &c. 

[Same  as  1552  throughout.] 


James  I.  1604. 
The  Order,   &c. 

[The  same  as  1552  throughout,  oxcept 
instead  of  paragraph  beginning,  "  This  is 
also  to  be  noted,"  is  substituted,] 


When  the  years  of  our  Lord  may 
be  divided  into  four  even  parts, 
which  is  every  fourth  year,  then 
the  Sunday  Letter  leapeth :  and 
that  year  the  Psalms  and  Lessons 
which  serve  for  the  28th  day  of 
February,  shall  be  read  again  the 
day  following,  except  it  be  Sunday  ; 
which  hath  proper  Lessons  of  the 
Old  Testament  appointed  in  the 
Table  serving  to  that  purpose '. 

Also,  wheresoever,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  with  addition  of  1532-] 

Item,  so  oft  as  the  first  Chapter 
of  Saint  Matthew  is  read  either  for 
Lesson  or  Gospel,  ye  shall  begin 
the  same  at  ("  The  birth  of  Jesus 
Christ  was  on  this  wise, "  Ss'c. )  And 
the  third  chapter  of  Saint  Luke's 
Gospel  shall  be  read  unto  "iSo  that 
he  was  supposed  to  be  the  son  of 
Joseph"  dr'f.K 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
The  Order,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1552  throughout,  except  after] 


•  In  ed.  1604,  "  of  the  Holy." 

■■  These  words  in  italics  are  marginal 
notes  throughout,  and  occur  only  in  1549. 

"  In  eds.  1552,  &c.,  "be  left;"  in  1604, 
"  are." 

^  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  in  i66a,  "be- 
sides." 


•  In  ed.  1662,  "out  of  which  there  are." 
f  In  one  ed.  as  early  as  1561,  the  para- 
graph beginning, "  When  the  year  appears," 
f  In  one  ed.  as  early  as  1561,  this  para- 
graph, with  slight  variation,  first  appears. 
In  Scotch  ed.  the  "&c.,"  omitted^  and 
quotation  in  parenthesis. 


21 


and  there  ye  shall  perceive  the  books  and  chapters,  that  shall 
be  read  for  the  Lessons,  both  at  Matins  and  Evensong. 

Proper  Psalms ''.  And  here  is  to  be  noted,  that  whensoever 
there  be  any  proper  Psalms  or*"  Lessons  appointed  for'  any 
feast,  moveable  ^  or  unmoveable  ;  then  the  Psalms  and  Lessons 
appointed  in  the  Kalendar  shall  be  omitted  for  that  time. 

Ye  must  note  also,  that  the  Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel, 
appointed  for  the  Sunday,  shall  serve  all  the  week  after,  ex- 
cept there  fall  some  feast  that  hath  his  proper. 

The  Leap-year  "J.  This  is  also  to  be  noted,  concerning  the 
leap  years,  that  the  xxvth  day  of  February,  which  in  leap  years  ^ 
is  counted  for  two  days,  shall  in  those  two  days  alter  neither 
Psalm  nor  Lesson  :  but  the  same  Psalms  and  Lessons,  which 
be  said  the  first  day,  shall  serve  also  ^  for  the  second  day. 

Also,  wheresoever  the  beginning  of  any  Lesson,  Epistle, 
or  Gospel  is  not  expressed,  there  ye  must  begin  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  chapter.      <j^         ^ 


some  Feast  that  hath  his  proper 

[is  added] 
Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel ;  as  it 
is  on  Ash-  Wednesday,  and  on  every 
day  in  the  Holy  Week  next  before 
Pasch  or  Easter:  but  on  all  those 
days  the  Psalms  and  Lessons  shall 
be  the  same  which  fall  in  com"se  as 
they  are  in  the  Calendar. 

When  the  years,  &c. 

[Same  as  1604.] 

Also,  wheresoever,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  with  additions  of  1552.] 

Item,  So  often  as  the  first,  &c. 
[Same  as  1604.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

THE    ORDER    HOW    THE    REST     OF 

HOLY  SCRIPTURE  IS  APPOINTED 

TO  BE  READ. 

The  Old  Testament  is  appointed 
for  the  first  Lessons  at  Morning  and 
Evening  Prayer ;  so  as  the  most 
part  thereof  will  be  read  every  year 
once,  as  in  the  Kalendar  is  ap- 
pointed. 


The  New  Testament,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 

And  to  know  what  Lessons  shall 
be  read  every  day,  look  for  the  day 
of  the  Month  in  the  Kalendar  fol- 
lowing, and  there  ye  shall  find  the 
Chapters  that  shall  be  read  for  the 
Lessons  both  at  Morning  and  Even- 
ing Prayer ;  except  only  the  Move- 
able Feasts,  which  are  not  in  the 
Kalendar,  and  the  Immoveable, 
where  there  is  a  blank  left  in  the 
Column  of  Lessons,  the  Proper 
Lessons  for  all  which  days  are  to 
be  found  in  the  Table  of  Proper 
Lessons. 

And  note,  that  whensoever  Pro- 
per Psalms  or  Lessons  are  appointed; 
then  the  Psalms  and  Lessons  of  or- 
dinary course  appointed  in  the  Psal- 
ter and  Calendar  (if  they  be  different) 
shall  be  omitted  for  that  time. 

Note  also,  that  the  Collect,  Epistle, 
and  Gospel,  appointed  for  the  Sun- 
day shall  serve  all  the  week  after, 
where  it  is  not  in  this  Book  other- 
wise ordered. 


I"  In  one  ed.,  iSS*>  "and." 
'  In  eds.  1559,  &c.,  "for  the  Sundays  or 
for  any  feast  moveable."    In  Scotch  ed.. 


1637,  "for  SundajiS  or  any  feast  moveable." 
''  In  eds.  1552,  1559,  &c.,  "year." 
'  In  eds.  1552,  1559,  &c.,  "also  serve." 


2'2 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552. 


[In  the  first  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.,  the  references  to  the  Lessons  proper  for  Sundays 
and  Holydays  will  be  found  under  the  Collects,  Epistles,  and  Gospels.] 


Second  Edw.  VI,  1552. 

[There  is  no  special  table  of  Lessons  for 
the  Sundays,  but  in  the  table  of  "  Les- 
sons for  divers  Feasts  and  Days,"  appear 
the  following  Proper  Lessons  and  Proper 
Psalms,  which  for  convenience  of  com- 
parison have  been  transposed  here.] 


On  Easter  day, 
at  Morning- 
prayer. 


^Psalm  iu 
Psalm  Ivii. 
Psalm  cxL 
The      first 
ExodL  xii. 
The   second 
Ro.  vi 


Lesson. 


Lesson. 


At  Evening 
prayer. 


^  Psalm  cxiiL 
Psalm  cxiv. 
Psalm  cxviii. 
The    second  Lesson. 
Act  iL 


On  Whitsun- 
day, at  Mom-  • 
ing  prayer. 


'Psalm  xlviii. 

Psalm  Ixvii.  "» 

The  second  Lesson. 
AcL  X.  Then  Peter 
opened  his.  &c. 


At  Evening 
prayer. 


Tsalm  civ. 

Psalm  cxlv. 

The  second  Lesson. 
Act.  xix.  It  fortuned 
when  Apollo  went  to 
Corinthum,  &c.  unto 

^  After  these  things. 


^On    Trinity  fThe      ^^\..    Wesson. 
Sundajr,  at)    Gene.  xvin. 
Morning]  The   second   Lesson, 
prayer.  (^  M^th,  JiL 


Elizabeth,  2559. 
IT  PROPER  LESSONS 

TO  BE  READ  FOR  THE  FIRST  LES- 
SONS, AT  MORNING  AND  EVEN- 
ING PRAYER,  ON  THE  SUNDAYS, 
THROUGHOUT  THE  YEAR,  AND 
FOR  SOME  ALSO  THE  SECOND 
LESSONS. 

IT  LESSONS  PROPER  FOR  SUNDAYS. 


MATTINS. 

KVSNSONG. 

Sundays  of 

Advent. 

The  First  .... 

Esa. 

i 

Esa. 

ii 

II 

V  

xxiv 

Ill 

XXV 

xxvt 

IV 

XXX 

xxxu 

Sundays  after 
Christmas. 

The  First 

II 

xxxvii 
xU 

xxxviii 
xliii 

Sundays  after 
the  Epiphany. 

The  First 

II 

Ill 

IV 

V.    

— 

xliv 

li 

Iv 

Ivii 

lix 

— 

xM 

liii 

Ivl 

Iviii 

Ixiv 

Septuage. 

Gen. 

> 

Gen. 

ii 

Sexagesi. 

iii 



vi 

Quinqun. 

ix 



xii 

LENT. 
I.  Sunday  . . 
II 

Exod. 

xix 

xxvii 

xxit 
xxxiv 

Ill 

xxxix| 

xliii 

iiijExod. 

ixl 

xlii 

IV 

V 

xlv 
v 

VI 

X 

■"  In  two  eds.,  1552,  this  is  printed  xlvii.  ; 
in  all  eds.,  1549  (see  Collects,  &c.),  it  is 
Ixvii.,  and  Ps.  cxlv.  is  ^iven  at  Matins  (as 
well  as  at  Evensong)  in  addition  to  Ps. 
IxviL      Id  other  respects,  all  the  Psalms 


and  Lessons  for  the  Sundays  are  the  same 
as  those  appointed  for  1549.  One  or  two 
printer's  errors,  however,  are  not  here 
noted. 


Proper  Psalms  and  Lessons. 


23 


Elizabeth,  1559  {continued). 


Easter^Day. 

1  Lesson , 

2  Lesson , 


Sundays  after 

Easter. 
The  First 
IL    .. 

III.  .. 

IV.  .. 
V.    .. 


Sunday  after 
Ascension  day. 

Wlntsunday. 

1  Lesson 

2  Lesson 


Trinity 
Sunday. 

1  Lesson . . . . 

2  Lesson . . . . 


Sundays  after 

the  Trinity. 
The  First  ... 

II 

Ill 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

IX 

X 

XI 

XII 

XIII 

XIV 

XV 

XVI 

XVII 

XVIII 

XIX 

XX 

XXI 

XXII 

XXIII 

XXIV 

XXV 

XXVI 


Exod. 
Rom. 


Nume.      xvi 

xxiii 

Deut.  iv 


xvu 
Acte.x.  Then 
Peter  opened 
his.  &c 


Gen.       xviii 
Math.         iii 


Josue 
Judic 
I  King 


2  Kyng 

3  King 

4  King 

Jerem. 
Ezech. 


Daniel 
Joel 
Abac. 
Prov. 


xn 
xxii 

xiii 
xviii 

xxi 


EVENSONG. 


Exod. 
Act. 


Nume. 
Deut. 


xxii 

XXV 


-  XVUl 

Acte.  xix.  It 
fortuned  when 
Apollo  went  to 
Corinth.  &c. 
unto  After 
these  things. 
Josue  i 


Josue 
Judic. 
I  King 


Kyng 
3  King 


in 
xiii 

xvi" 
xxi 

xxiv 
xvii 
xix 
xxii 


4  King       ix ' 


Jerem. 
Ezech. 


;  Daniel 
1  Miche 
'Prov. 


XVIU 

xxiii 

xxii 

XX  xvi 

xiv 

xviii 

xxiv 

vi 


XIV 

xvi 
xix 


"  This,  in  one  ed.,  1559,  is  printed  xv. ; 
in  all  Scotch  eds.,  and  1662,  it  is  xvii. 
°  In  both  eds.,  1559,  misprinted xik. 


James  I.  1604. 

PROPER  LESSONS  TO  BE  READ,  &C 
[The  same  as  1559,  except] 

MATTINS.         EVENSOXG. 


Whitsunday. 
I  Lesson Deut.       xvi  Wisdome 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
PROPER  LESSONS  TO  BE  READ, 
[Same  as  1559,  except] 


&C 


MATTINS. 

EVENSONG. 

IVhitsunday. 
I  Lesson 

Deut.       xvi 

Prov.             ii 

2  Lesson 

Acts  X.  from 

Acts  xix.  unto 

Su  ndays  after 
Trinity. 

verse    34    to 
the  end. 

verse  21 

Fifth    

Sixteenth  .... 

I  Sam.    xviiP 
Ezek.          xiii 

Charles  II.  1662, 

PROPER  LESSONS  TO  BE  SAID  AT 
MORNING    AND   EVENING   PRAYER, 
ON  THE  SUNDAYS,  AND  OTHER  HO- 
LIDAYS THROUGHOUT  THE  YEAR. 
[Same  as  1559,  except] 

MATTINS.         EVENSONG. 


Sundays  after 

the  Epijiliany. 

VI.  \added\  .. 

Quinqua- 

gesinia. 

Lent. 

First  Sunday 

Sixth  Sunday 

Second  Lesson 

Easter  Day. 

Second  Lesson 

Sundays  after 

Easter. 

II 

Whitsunday. 
First  Lesson  . . 
Second  Lesson 
Trinity  Sun- 
day. 
First  Lesson  . . 
Second  Lesson 
Sundays  after 
Trinity. 

Fifth   

Sixth 

Sixteenth  .... 
Seventeenth  . . 


Isai  de, 
Gen.  g  to  V.  20 
Gen.1gtov.30 
Matt.  26 


Numb.  23,  24 

Deut.i6tovi8 
Acts  10  V.  34 


Gen. 


Ezek.  14 


Isai  66 


Heh.stov.zi 

Acts  2  V.  83 


Isai  II 
Actsi9/<>zr.2i 


Gen.  18 
I  John  5 


1  Sam.  17 

2  Sam.  19 
Ezek.  13 


P  The  References  to  the  four  books  of 
Kings  are  altered,  in  eds.  1637  and  i66a, 
to  I.  and  II.  Sam.  and  I.  and  II.  Kings. 


24 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552. 


[In  the  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.,  the  references  to  the  Lessons  proper  for 
Holydays  will  be  found  under  the  Collects,  Epistles,  and  Gospels.] 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552.    . 
PROPER  PSALMS  AND 

LESSONS  FOR  DIVERS  FEASTS  AND 

DAYS, 

AT  MORNING  AND  EVENING 

PRAYER. 


/'Psalm  xix. 
Psalm  xlv. 
Psalm  Ixxxv. 
The      first      Lesson. 

Esay.  ix. 
t  The  ii.  Lesson.  Luk. 

ii.  unto 
And  unto  men  a  good 
.  wUL 


On  Christmas 
day  at  Mom  - 
ing  prayer. 


^Psalm  Ixxxix. 
Psalm  ex. 
Psalm  cxxxii. 
The      first      Lesson. 
Esa,  vii. 

God  spake  once  again 
At  Evening   J    to 
Prayer.       |  Achas.  &c,  unit?  the 
end. 
The   second  Lesson. 
Tit.  iii. 
Thekindness  and  love, 

&c. 
^unto  foolish  questions. 

/The   second   Lesson. 

O    S  ■  t  Ste-      ^^^  ^*  ^"^  ^"' 
phenWay,  at  I  Stephen  full  of  faith 
il  o  r  n  1  u  g^j    and  power,  unto  And 
prayer.  when  forty  years  were. 

V.  &c 

rrhe  second  Lesson. 
Acts  viL  And  when 

forty  years  were  ex- 
pired, there  appeared 

unto  Moses.  &c  unto 
Stephen  full  of  the 
holy  ghost. 


At  Evening 
prayer. 


On  Saint  John  ( 

the    Evange-    1  he   second   Lesson, 
list's  day,   at  J    Apocalyps  i. 

M  o  r  n  i  n  g   The  whole  Chapter, 
prayer.  ^  *^ 

At  Evening    f  The   second   Lesson, 
prayer.         (    Apocalyps.  xxii. 

The      first      Lesson. 

Jeremie.  xxxL    unto 

More- 
over I  heard  Ephraim. 
The      first      Lesson. 

Genesis.  xviL 
The   second   Lesson. 

Roma.  IL 
The      first      Lesson. 

DeuL  X.     And  now 

Israel.  &c. 
The   second 

Colos.  iL 

iThe      first 
Esay.  Ix. 
The   second 
Luke  iii.  And  it  for- 
tuned, &c 
/The      first      Lesson. 

Esay.  xlix. 
The    second   Lesson. 
John.ii.  After  this  he 
went  down  to  Caper- 
naum. 


On  the  Inno- 
cents' day,  at_ 
Morning 
prayer. 

On  the  Circum- 
cision day,  at. 
Morning 
prayer. 


At  Evening 
prayer. 


Lesson. 


Lesson. 


Lesson. 


At  Evening 
prayer. 


Elizabeth,   1559. 

LESSONS  PROPER  FOR  HOLY  DAYS. 


MATTINS. 

EVENSONG. 

S.Andrew. 

Prov. 

XX 

Prov.          xxi 

S.  Thomas  the 

Apostle. 



XXUl 

XXIV 

Nativity  of 

Christ. 

I  Lesson 

Esay 

IX 

Esay  7.     God 
spake       once 
again        to 
Achas  &c 

3  Lesson 

Luke  ii, 

unto  Titus  iii.  The 

and  unto  menlkindness  and 

of  good 

will. 

love.  &c. 

1 1n  ed.  IS49  (see  Collects,  &c.),  a  Lesson  at  Matins,  is  Matt.  i. ;  all  the  other  Lessons, 
except  those  noted,  are  the  same. 


Proper  Psalms  and  Lessons. 


25 


Elizabeth,  1559  [continued). 


S.  Stephen. 

1  Lesson 

2  Lesson 


S.  John. 

1  Lesson.. .. 

2  Lesson .... 


I/iKocents. 


Circumcision 
day. 

1  Lesson 

2  Lesson 

Epiphany  day. 

1  Lesson 

2  Lesson 


MATTINS. 


EVENSONG. 


Prov.  xxviii  Eccles. 
Acte  vi  &  vii.  Acta  vii.  And 
Stephen  fulliwhen.xl.years 
of  faith  andlwere  ex- 
power.  &c.,lpired,  there 
7{nto        And  appeared  unto 


when        .xl. 
years.  &c. 


Eccles.  V 
Apoc.  i 

Jerem.  xxxi, 
unto  More- 
over I  heard 
Ephraim. 


Gen. 
Rom. 


Moses.  &c. 
unto  Stephen 
full  of  the 
Holy.  &c. 

Eccles.  vi 
Apoc.        xxii 

Wisd.  i 


vii  Deut.  x.   and 

nowlsrael.&c. 

ii  Coloss.  ii 


Esay  _  Ix 
Luke  iii.  and 
fortuned. 
&c. 


Esay  xlix 
John  ii.  after 
this  he  went 
to  Caper- 
naum. 


James  I.  1604. 

LESSONS  PROPER  FOR  HOLY  DAYS. 
[Same  as  1559,  except] 

MATTINS.         EVENSONG. 


Epiphany. 

First  Lesson  . .  Esai 

Second  Lesson  Luke 

{unto) 


xL 


So 
that  he  was 
supposed  to 
be  the  son  of 
Joseph. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

LESSONS   PROPER  FOR  SOME 

HOLYDAYS. 

[Same  as  1559,  except] 

I     MATTINS.         EVENSONG. 


S.  Andrew. 

Nativity  of 

Christ. 

First  Lesson . . 


Second  Lesson 


.S".  Steven. 
Second  Lesson 


Innocents  day. 

Circumcision 

day. 
First  Lesson . . 

Epiphany. 
Second  Lesson 


otnitted. 


Luke  ii.  unto 
verse  15. 

Acts  yi./rom 
verse  8  to 
cliap. 
verse  30. 
Exod. 


otnitted. 


Esayvii.yrOTW 
verse  10  unto 
the  ind. 
Tit.  iii.  front 
verse  4  unto  9. 

Acts  vn.frovi 
verse  30  unto 
55- 

Jer.xxxi.  unto 
verse  18. 


Deut  ■x.from 
verse  12  unto 
the  end. 
Luke         iii.  I  John  ii.  unio 
unto      verse\verse  12. 
23,  Being  as 
was         sup- 
posed       the 
son  of  Joseph 


Charles  II.  1662. 

[Same  as  1559,  except] 


MATTINS. 

EVENSONG, 

Nativity  of 

Christ. 

First  Lesson . . 

Isaiah    9 

to  Isa.  7  V.  10  to 

v.  8 

V.  17 

Second  Lesson 

Luke     2 

to  Titus  3  V.  4  to 

V.  IS 

V.  9 

.y.  Stephen. 

Second  Lesson 

Acts  6  V. 

8, 'Acts  7  V.  3oto 

&ch.7tov 

30'    V.  55 

Innocents. 

Jerem.  31 
V.  18 

to 

Wisdom        I 

Circumcision. 

First  Lesson . . 

Deut.  ID  V.  12 

Epiphany. 

Second  Lesson 

Luke    3 
V.  23 

to 

John  2  to  V.  12 

Probably  misprint  for  Ix. 


26 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

OnWednesday  ( 
before  Easter,  J  *  The      first      LeSSOn. 
at      Evening  j    Qzee.  xiii.  xiv. 
prayer.  I 

On    Thursday  f 

before  Easter,  J  'The      first      LeSSOD. 
at     Morning  1    Daniel  ix. 


prayer. 

At  Evening     J  "  J 
prayer.         (   J, 


The    first     Lesson, 
eremie.  xxxi. 


On  Good   Fri-  f  <t^ 


day,  at  Mom- 


first      Lesson, 
ing  prayer,      i   Genesis.  xxiL 

At  Evening    f  The      first      Lesson. 
prayer.         (    Esay.  liiL 


'{" 


The     first    Lesson. 
Zachary.  ix. 


On  Easter 
Even.atMom- 
ing  prayer, 

On  Monday  in 
Easter  week, . 
at  Morning 
prayer. 

At  Evening    (The  Second  Lesson. 

prayer.        \    Acts.  iii. 


The   second   Lesson. 
Math,  xxviii. 


On  Tuesday  in 
Easter  week, 
at  Morning 
prayer. 

At  Evening 


The   second   Lesson. 
Luke  xxiv.  un/o  And 
behold  two  of  them. 

I  The   second   Lesson. 


prayer.         \    1  Corin.  XV. 

(Psalm  viii. 
Psalm  XV. 
Psahn  xxL 
The  ii.  Lesson.  John, 
xiv. 


At  Evening 
prayer. 


'Psalm  xxiv. 
Psalm  Ixviii. 
y  Psalm  cviii. 
The  ii.  Lesson. 
iv. 


Ephe. 


Conversion  of  ^e   second   Lesson. 

baint       Paul,         .    ^  ••  ^    --n. 

Morning  j    ^cts.  xxit.  unto  They 
I  heard  him. 


at 
prayer. 

At  Evening 
prayer. 


j  The   second   Lesson. 
\  Acts.  xxvL 


Elizabeth,  1559. 


MATTINS. 

EVENSONG. 

Conversion  of 

S.  Paul. 

I  Lesson 

Wisd. 

V 

Wisd. 

vi 

3  Lesson 

Act. 
unto 

xxii. 
they 

Act. 

xxvi* 

Purification 

heard  him.  ' 

of  the  Virgin 

Mary. 

Wisd. 

ix 

Wisd. 

xii 

S.  Mathie. 

Wisdom  xix|Eccle. 

i 

Annunciation 

of  our  Lady, 

Eccle. 

ii 

iii 

Wednesday 

afore  Easter. 

Osee 

xiiijOsee 

xiv 

Thursday 

be/ore  Easter. 

Dan. 

ix 

Jerem. 

xxxi 

Good  Friday. 

Gen. 

xxii 

Esay 

liii 

Easter  Even. 

Zach. 

ix 

Exod. 

xiii 

Monday  in 

Easter  week. 

I  Lesson 

Exod. 

xvi 

xvii 

a  Lesson 

Math. 

xxviii  Acte 

iii 

Tuesday  in 

Easter*. 

I  Lesson 

Exod. 

XX 

Exod. 

x.\xii 

3  Lesson 

Luke 

xxiv. 

I  Cor. 

XV 

unto  And  be- 

hold 

ii.    of 

them. 

S.Mark. 

Eccle. 

iv 

Eccle. 

V 

Philip  &' 

Jacob. 

vii 

ix 

AscensionDay. 

Deut. 

X 

Deut 

xi 

■  In  ed.  IS49  (see  Collects),  i  Lesson 
Evensong,  is  Lamenta.  i. 

'  In  ed.  1549  (see  Collects),  1  Lesson 
Matins,  is  Lamenta.  ii. 

"  In  ed.  1549  (see  Collects),  1  Lesson 
Evensong,  is  Lamenta,  iii. 


*  In  ed.  1549  (see  Collects),  i  Lesson 
Matins,  is  Lamenta.  iv.,  v. 

T  In  ed.  1545)  (see  Collects),  3rd  Psalm 
Evensong,  CK\y\\\.,butoniyin  some  editions. 

'  In  both  editions,  "week,"  omitted. 

'  In  both  editions  of  1559,  misp.  ii. 


Proper  Psalms  and  Lessons. 


27 


Elizabeth,  1559  (continued). 

MATTINS. 

EVENSONG. 

Monday  in 
Whitsunweek. 

xxxi 

Tuesday  in 
Whitsttnweek. 

xxxiv  •• 

James  I.   1604. 

[Same  as  1559,  except] 

MATTINS.         EVENSONG. 


A  scensionDay, 
First  Lesson . . 

Monday  in 
If^hitsun  Week 
First  Lesson 


Second  Lesson 

Tuesday  in 
Whitsun  Week 
First  Lesson 


Gen.  xi.  (»«- 
to)  These  are 
the  genera- 
tions of  Sem. 
I  Cor. 


I  King  xix. 
David  came 
Samuel 
to  Rama,  &c. 


iv  Kings 


Numb.  xi. 
Gather  unto 
me  70  men, 
&c.,  {junto) 
Moses  and 
the  elders  re- 
turned. 


Deut. 


XXX 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1559,  except] 


MATTINS. 


Conversion  of 

S.  Paul. 
First  Lesson  . .  Wisd. 
Second  Lesson  Acts  xxilunto 

'.Z'erse  22 
Purification  \ 
of  the  Virgin  \ 

Mary.        jWisdom     iv 


Omitted. 
Luke      xxi 


':  S.  Matthias. 

Tuesday  in 


Easter  Week,  \tinto  verse  13 

A  scensionDay. 

Monday  in 
Whitsun  Week 
First  Lesson  . .  Gen.  xi  unto 
\verse  10 

Second  Lesson' I  Cor.        xii 

Tuesday  in    !i  Sam.      xix 

WhitsunWeek  from  ver.  18 

\unto  the  end. 


EVENSONG. 


Wisd. 

Wisdom 
Omitted. 

ii  Kings 


Numbers  xi 
from  vers.  16 
unto  30. 

Deut.         XXX 


Charles  II.  1662. 

[Same  as  1559,  except] 

MATTINS.  EVENSONG. 


Conv.  of 

S.  Paul. 

Second  Lesson 


Wednesday  be- 
fore Easter. 
Second  Lesson 
{added)  .... 

Thursday  be- 
fore Easter. 
Second  Lesson 
{added)  .... 

Good  Friday. 
First  Lesson  . . 

Second  Lesson 

Easter  Even. 
Second  Lesson 

Tuesday  in 
Easter  Week. 
Second  Lesson 

.S".  Philip  and 
S.  Jacob. 

Second  Lesson 
{added)  .... 

A  scension  Day. 

First  Lesson  . . 

Second  Lesson 

{added)  .... 

Monday  in 
WhitsunWeek 
First  Lesson  . . 

Second  Lesson 
{added)  .... 

Tuesday  in 
Whitsun  Week 
First  Lesson  . . 
Second  Lesson 

{added)  .... 


Acts    22    to 
V.  22 


John  II V.  45 


John 


Gen.    22    to 

V.  20 

John  18  I  Pet 


Luke  23  V.  50 


Luke   24    to 
V.  13 


John  i.  V.  43 


Luke  24  V.  44 


Gen.    II    to 
V.  10 

I  Cor. 


Sam.19v.18 

I    Thess.    5 
V.  12  to  V.  24 


Heb. 


Kings         2 

Ephes.    4    to 
V.  17. 


Numb.   II  V. 
16  to  V.  30 

I   Cor.    14  to 
V.  26 


Deut.  30 

I  John   4    to 
V.  14 


•>  In  one  ed.,  15591  xxiv. 


28 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

The  second   Lesson. 
Acts.  xiv. 

The   second    Lesson. 

Acts.  XV.  unto  After 

certain  days. 
The      first      Lesson. 

MalachL  iii. 
The  second   Lesson. 

Math.  iiL 

{The      first      Lesson. 
Malachi.  iv. 
The    second    Lesson. 
Math.  xiv.  »<«/<?  When 
Jesus  heard- 

Saint    Peter's  I  ji,g   second   Lesson. 
day,  at  Mom- -j     ^^^^    ... 
>ng  prayer 


At  Evening 
prayer. 


AH  Saints*  day 
at  Morning' 
prayer. 


At  Evening 
prayer. 


(   Acts,  iii. 

(The   second   Lesson. 

(  Acts.  iv. 

/■The  first  Lesson. 
SajHen.  iii.  unto 
Blessed  is  rather  the 
barren. 

The  second  Lesson. 
Hebr.  xi.  xii.  Saints 
by  faith  subdued 
unto  If  you  endure 

.  chastising, 
rrhe      first      Lesson. 
Sapience,    v.     unto 
His  jealousy  also. 

The  second  Lesson. 
Apocalyps  xix.  unto 

And  I  saw  an  angel 
stand. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

MATTINS.         EVENSONG. 


.9.  Bantabe. 
I  Lesson 


Eccle. 


Eccle.         xii 


MATTINS. 

EVENSONG. 

2  Lesson 

Act. 

xiv 

Act.  XV.  tmio. 

After 

certain 

S.John 

BaptUt. 

I  Lesson 

days. 

Malach.     iii 

Malach.       iv 

3  Lesson 

Math. 

lU 

Math. 

unto, 

Jesus 

XIV. 

When 
heard. 

3'.  Peter. 

I  Lesson 

Eccle. 

XV 

Eccle. 

xix 

2  Lesson 

Act. 

Ul 

Act. 

IV 

.S".  James. 

Eccle. 

xxi 

Eccle. 

xxiii 

S.  Bartho- 

lomew. 



XXV 



XXLX 

S.  Mathew. 

xxxv 



xxxviii 

S.  Michael. 



iucxLy 

xliv 

S.Luke. 



i 

Job 

i 

S.  Simon  &• 

Jude. 

I  Lesson 

Job 

XXIV. 

xlli 

2  I..esson 

XXV  « 

All  Saints. 

I  Lesson 

Wisd. 

Ul. 

Wisd. 

V.  unto 

unto  blessed 

his     jealousy 

is  rather  the 

also. 

barren. 

2Lessoii 

Heb.  xi 

.xii. 

Apoc.xix.tt«/o 

Saints 

by! And  I 

saw  an 

faith  unto  If  angel  stand. 

you    endure 

chastening. 

PROPER   PSALMS   ON  CERTAIN 
DAYS. 


MATTINS. 

EVENSONG. 

Christmas 
day. 

Psal. 

XIX 

xlv 
Ltxxv 
ii 
Ivii 
cxi 
viii 

XV 

xxi 

xlv* 
Ixvii 

Psal. 

Ixxxix 
ex 

Easter  day. 

cxiii 

Ascension  day. 

xxiv 

"W'hit'swtday. 

cviii 

civ 

cxlv 

"  Both  chapters  were  no  doubt  intended 
to  be  assigned  for  the  first  lesson,  as  in  all 
subsequent  editions. 


*  In  IS49  and  1532  Psalm  xlviii.  is  ap- 
pointed,  and  it  is  also  xlviii  in  one  edition 
of  1559. 


Proper  Psalms  and  Lessons. 


29 


James  I.   1604. 

[Same  as  1559,  except] 


MATTJNS.      I     EVENSONG. 


"S.  Jo  I  in 
Baptist. 
Second  LessonlMatt.  [x]iii. 

S.  James.  Ecclus.      xxii 

S.  Sitiwn  and 

IS.  Judc.       'Job       24,  2; 

PROPER    PSAI.MS    ON    CERTAIN 

DAYS. 

[Same  as  1559,  except] 

I     MATTINS.     I     EVENSONG. 


Whitsunday.  I     45'',  47S     | 
[Here  follows  the  Table  of  the  Order  of 
the  Psalms.     See  Ante,  p.  19.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 


[Sam 

c  as  1559,  except] 

MATl'INS. 

EVENSONG. 

S.  Barnabas. 

First  Lesson  .. 

Omitted. 

Omitted. 

Second  Lesson 

Acts  XV.   unto 

S.  John 

■zro-se  36. 

Baptist. 

Second  Lesson 

Matt.  [x]iii.<= 

Matt.           xiv 

^.  Peter. 

unto  V.  13 

First  Lesson  .. 

Omitted. 

Omitted. 

S.  James. 

Omitted. 

Omitted. 

S.  Bartho- 

lomew. 

Ecclus.        V 

Ecclus.       viii 

S.  Matthew. 

Ecclus.      xlix 

S.  Michael. 

Omitted. 

Omitted. 

S.  Lnke. 

Omitted. 

Omitted. 

S.  Simon  and 

S.  Jude. 

Omitted. 

Omitted. 

All  Saints. 

First  Lesson  . . 

Wisd.          iii 

Wisd.  V  unto 

nntoziersei-^, 

verse  17 

W  h  e  r  e  1  0  re 

blessed  is  the 

barren. 

Second  Lesson 

Heb.  xi.  utito 

Apocal.       xix 

chap.          12, 

2into  verse  17. 

cerse  7. 

PROPER    PSALMS    ON    CERTAIN 
DAYS. 

[Same  as  1559,  except] 

I     MATTINS.     I     EVENSONG. 


Whitsiuiday.   I     45  f,  47  B     I 

[Here  follows  the  Table  of  the  Order  of 
the  Psalms.     See  p.  ig.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

[Same  as  1559,  except] 


M.ATTINS. 

EVENSONG. 

.9.  Barnahas. 

Second  Lesson 

.Vets  IS  to 
V.  36 

.9.  John 

Baf'tist. 

Second  Lesson 

Matt.  14  to 
V.  13 

6'.  James. 

Ecclus.         22 

S.  Bartho- 

lomew. 

Ecclus. 

24 

S.  Michael. 

First  Lesson..  Oen. 

Han.  10  V.  5 

Second  Lesson  Acts  12  to 

Jude  V.   6   to 

20 

V.  16 

5".  Simon  and 

S.  Jude. 

Job       24, 

25 

All  Saints. 

First  Lesson  . . 

Wisd.    3 
V.  10 

to 

Wisd.s  to  V.I 7 

Second  Lesson 

Heb.  I IV. 

??. 

Apoc.  ig  to  V. 

and  cap. 

12 

17 

to  V.  7 

PROPER   PSALMS   ON   CERTAIN 

DAYS. 

[Same  as  1539,  except] 


MATTINS. 

EVENSONG. 

Ash  Wednes- 
day 
{added). 

6>  3-)  3^     i°2.  130,  143 

Good  Friday 
{added). 

22,  40,  54 

6g,  88 

Ascension 
Day. 

(?4).  47,  (108) 

Whitsunday. 

48,  68 

"  Lestrange  points  this  out  as  an  error 
which  crept  into  the  First  Book  of  James  I. , 
contrary  to  all  preceding  books,  and  which 
was  copied  by  the  Scotch  Liturgy.     The 


previous  books  all  have  cap.  iii.,  and  cap. 
iii.  is  restored  finally  in  1662. 

'  Possibly  jjtisp.  for  48.  See  note  d. 

8  Probably  mis-^.  for  67. 


30 


Prayer-Book  of  Elizabeth,  1559. 


[None  of  the  following  Tables  appear  in  the  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.] 


Second  Edw.  VI.   1552. 

[None  of  the  following  Tables,  &c, 
appear  in  eds.  1552.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

A   BRIEF   DECLARATION  '' 

WHEN  EVERY  TERM   BEGINNETH 

AND   ENDETH. 

Be  it  known  that  Easter  Term 
beginneth  always,  the  .xviii.  day 
after  Easter,  reckoning  Easter  day 
for  one.  And  endeth  the  Monday 
next  after  the  Ascension  day. 

Trinity  Term  beginneth  alway, 
the  Friday  next  after  Trinity  Sun- 
day, and  endeth  the  .xxviiL  day  of 
June. 

Michaelmas  Term  beginneth  the 
ninth  or  tenth  day  of  October,  and 
endeth  the  .xxviii.  or  .xxix.  day  of 
November. 

Hilary  Term  beginneth  the  .xxiii. 
or  .xxiv.  day  of  January,  and  endeth 
the  .xii.  or  .xiii.  day  of  February. 

In  Easter  Term,  on  the  Ascension 
day.  In  Trinity  Term,  on  the  Na- 
tivity of  Saint  John  Baptist.  In 
Michaelmas  Term,  on  the  feast  of 
All  Saints.  In  Hilary  Term,  on 
the  feast  of  the  Purification  of  our 
Lady.  The  Queen's  Judges  of  West- 
minster do  not  use  to  sit  in  Judg- 
ment, nor  upon  any  Simdays. 


*■  This  declaration  as  to  Terms  appears 
in  onl}'  one  edition  011559.  I"  later  edi- 
tions It  is  printed  just  before  "  Morning 
Prayer."   None  of  the  other  tables  appear. 

'  This  table  is  printed  immediately  after 
the  Calendar,  both  in  the  ed.  of  1604,  and 
in  the  Scotch  book.  To  bring  it  into  con- 
nection with  the  tables  of  the  1559  and  1663 


«  fe 

ix 

■<2    «  H 

viu 

t 

.Sw 

vn 
vi 

^ 

I  t«  s 

f^ 

a 

N 

■i  Vll 

Iviii 

k 

James  I.  1604. 

•SEPTUAGESIMA 

SEXAGESIMA 

QUINQUAGESIMA 

QUADRAGESIMA    , 

ROGATIONS 

WHITSUNDAY 

TRINITY  SUNDAY 

These  to  be  observed  for  Holy-Days, 
and  none  other. 
That  is  to  say  :  All  Sundajrs  in 
the  Year.  The  days  of  the  Feasts 
of  the  Circiuncision  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Of  the  Epiphany''. 
Of  the  Purification  of  the  blessed 
Virgin.  Of  S.  Matthias  the  Apostle. 
Of  the  Annunciation  of  the  blessed 
Viivin.  Of  S.  Mark  the  Evange- 
list'. Of  S.  Philip  and  Jacob  the 
Apostles.  Of  the  Ascension  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ".  Of  the  Nativity 
of  S.  John  Baptist  Of  S.  Peter  the 
Apostle.  Of  S.  James  the  Apostle. 
Of  S.  Bartholomew  the  Apostle. 
Of  S.  Matthew  the  Apostle.  Of 
S.  Michael  the  Archangel.  Of  S. 
Luke  the  Evangelist  Of  S.  Simon 
and  Jude  the"  Apostles.  Of  All- 
Saints.  Of  S.  Andrew  the  Apostle. 
Of  S.  Thomas  the  Apostle.  Of  the 
Nativity  of  our  Lord.  Of  S.  Stephen 
the  Martyr.  Of  S.  John  Evangelist. 
Of  the  holy  Innocents.  Monday  and 
Tuesday  in  Easter  Week.  Monday 
and  Tuesday  in  Whitsun  Week. 

A   BRIEF   DECLARATION,  &C. 
[Same  as  1559.) 


editions,  it  has  been  transposed  here. 
_  *  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Of  the  Conver- 
sion of  S.  Paul,"  is  added. 

'  Ditto,  "  Monday  and  Tuesday  in  Eas- 
ter and  Whitsun  Weeks,"  appears  here 
instead  of  at  the  end. 

■"  Ditto,  "  Of  S.  Bam.ibas,"  is  added. 

■  Ditto,  "  the  "  omititd. 


■'.I 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Advent  Sunday  is  always  the 
nearest  Sunday  (whether  before  or 
after)  to  the  Feast  of  St.  Andrew  ; 
or  that  Sunday  which  falleth  upon 
any  day  from  the  twenty  -  seventh 
of  November  to  the  third  of  De- 
cember inclusively. 

Septuagesima,  &c. 

[Same  as  1604.] 

These  to  be  observed,  &^. 

[Same  as  1604,  the  Table  of  Terms  of  1559 
being  omitted.'^ 


Charles  II.   1662. 
TABLES  AND  RULES 

FOR  THE 

Moveable  and  Immoveable 

FEASTS 

Together  with  the  days  of 

fasting  and  abstinence, 
through  the  whole  year. 

Rules  to  know  when  the 
Moveable  Feasts  and  Holy- 
days  BEGIN. 

Easter-day  (on  which  the  rest  de- 
pend) is  always  the  First  Sunday 
after  the  Full  Moon  which  happens 
next  after  the  one  and  Twentieth 
day  of  March;  and  if  the  Full 
Moon  happens  upon  a  Sunday, 
ILaster-day  is  the  Sunday  after. 

Advent- Sunday  is  always  the 
nearest  Sunday  to  the  Feast  of  Saint 
Andrew,  whether  before  or  after. 


Septuagesima 
Sexagesima 
Quinquagcsima 
Quadragesima 


•S3  f  Nine 
rt  1  Eight 
"fl  1  Seven 
CO  I  Six 


Rogation- 
Sunday 


Five  Weeks 


Ascension- 
Day  !   „  J  Forty  Days 

Whit-Sun-  '  ■" 
day 

Trinity- 
Sunday 


Seven  Weeks 
^ Eight  Weeks' 


A  Table  of  all  the  Feasts 
that  are  to  BE  observed  in 
the  Church  of  England 
through  the  Year. 

All  Sundays  in  the  Year. 


f  The  Circumcision  of  our  Lord 

JESUS  CHRIST. 
The  Epiphany. 
The  Conversion  of  S.  Ta//I. 
The  Purification  of  the  Blessed 

Virgin. 
S.  Matthias  the  Apostle. 
The  Annunciation  of  the  Blessed 

Virgin. 
S.  Mark  the  Evangelist. 
S.  Philip    and    S.  Jacob     the 

Apostles. 
The   Ascension    of  our    Lord 

JESUS  CHRIST. 
S.  Barnabas. 
\  The  Nativity  of  S.>/5m  Baptist. 
S.  Peter  the  Apostle. 
S.  James  the  Apostle. 
S.  Bartholotnew  the  Apostle. 
S.  Matthew  the  Apostle. 
S.  Michael  and  all  Angels. 
S.  Luke  the  Evangelist. 
S.  Simon    and    S.  Jude,     the 

Apostles. 
All  Saints. 

S.  Andrew  the  Apostle. 
S.  Thomas  the  Apostle. 
The  Nativity  of  our  Lord. 
S.  Stephen  the  Martyr. 
S.  John  the  Evangelist. 
The  Holy  Innocents. 


32 


Prayer-Book  of  Charles  II.  1662. 


Charles  II.  1662  {continued). 

Monday  \ 

and      •  in  Easter-  Week. 

Tuesday 

Monday  ] 

and      V  in  WJiitsun-  Week. 
Tuesday] 

A  Table  of  the  Vigils,  Fasts, 
AND  Days  of  Abstinence,  to 

BE  OBSERVED   IN  THE  YeAR. 


''The  Nativity  of  our  Lord. 
The    Purification    of  the 

Blessed  Virgin  Mary. 
The  Annunciation  of  the 

Blessed  Virgin. 
Easter-Day. 
Ascension-Day. 
Pentecost. 
S.  Matthias. 
S.  John  Baptist. 
S.  Peter. 
S.  James. 
S.  Bartholomexo. 
S.  Matthew. 
S.  Simon  and  S.  Jude. 
S.  Andrew. 
S.  Thomas. 
All  Saints. 


The 

Eves 

or  Vigils' 

before 


Note,  that  if  any  of  these  Feast- 
D ays  fall  t4pon  a  Monday,  then  the 
Vigil  or  Fast-Day  shall  be  kept  upon 
the  Saturday,  and  not  upon  the  Sun- 
day next  before  it. 


Days  of  Fasting,  or 
Abstinence. 


I.  The  Forty  days  of ''' 
Lent. 


^The  First 
Sunday 
II.  The  Ember-days  at       j"  Lent, 
the  Four  Seasons,  J  -^  "^  Feast 
being   the   Wed-      ofPente- 
nesday,     Friday,  \    ^°^'-' 
and     Saturday    SepL  14, 
after  (,  ^^*^-  ^^^ 

III.  The  Three  ^^^rt!i'?i3«-(iyj,  being 

the   Monday,  Tuesday,    and 

Wednesday,  before      Holy 

Thursday,   or  the  Ascension 
of  our  Lord. 

IV.  All  the  Fridays  in  the  Year, 

except  Christmas-day. 

Certain  Solemn  Days,  for 

WHICH  particular  SERVICES  ARE 

appointed. 

I.  The  Fifth  day  of  November, 
being  the  day  of  the  Papists' 
Conspiracy. 

II.  The  Thirtieth  day  of  January, 
being  the  day  of  the  Martyr- 
dom of  King  Charles  the 
First. 

III.  The  Nine -and -twentieth  day 
of  May,  being  the  day  of  the 
Birth  and  Return  of  King 
Charles  the  Second. 


[In  ed.  1604,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  the  Table  of  the  Order  of  the  Psahns  (see  p.  19) 
is  printed  here  before  the  Almanack.] 


An  Almanack,  &c. 


33 


[The  following  Table  does  not  appear  in  the  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.] 


Second  Edward  VI.   1552. 
AN  ALMANACK  FOR  NINETEEN  YEARS. 


The  year  of 
our  Lord. 

The  Golden 
Number. 

The  epact. 

The  Cycle  of 
the  sun. 

Dominical 
letter. 

Easter  day. 

1552 

xiv 

iv 

xxi 

C.  B. 

xvii  April. 

1553 

XV 

XV 

xxu 

A. 

ii  April. 

1-554 

XVI 

xxvi 

xxiii 

G. 

XXV  March, 

1555 

xvu 

VU 

XXIV 

F. 

xiv  April. 

1556 

xviii 

xviu 

XXV 

E.  D. 

v  April. 

1557 

XIX 

XXIX 

xxvi 

C. 

xviii  April. 

1558 

1 

XI 

xxvii 

B. 

X  April. 

ISS9 

11 

xxii 

XXVUl 

A. 

xxvi  March. 

1560 

in 

HI 

1 

G.  F. 

xiv  April. 

1561 

IV 

XIV 

11 

E. 

vi  April. 

1562 

V 

XXV 

111 

D. 

"  [22  Mar. 

1563 

VI 

XXVI 

IV 

C. 

II  April. 

1564 

vu 

XVU 

V 

B.  A. 

3  April. 

1565 

VIU 

XXVUl 

VI 

G. 

22  April. 

1566 

IX 

IX 

vii 

F. 

7  April, 

1567 

X 

XX 

Via 

E. 

30  Mar. 

1568 

XI 

1 

IX 

D.  C. 

8  Mar. 

1569 

xu 

Xll 

X 

B. 

10  Ap. 

1570 

xiii 

xxiii 

xi 

A. 

26  Mar.] 

This  continuation  (with  four  errors  in  nine  dates)  appears  only  in  one  ed.,  1552. 


AN 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
ALMANACK  FOR  XXX  YEARS. 


The  years  of 
our  Lord. 

The  Golden 
Number. 

The  Epacta. 

The  Cycle  of 
the  Sun. 

Dominical 
letter. 

Easter  day. 

1559 

ii 

xxii 

xxviii 

A. 

26  March. 

1560 

111 

111 

i 

G.  F. 

14  April. 

1561 

IV 

XIV 

ii 

E. 

6  April. 

1562 

V 

XXV 

111 

D. 

29  March. 

1563 

VI 

VI 

IV 

C. 

II  ApriL 

1564 

vu 

xvu 

V 

B.  A. 

2  April. 

1565 

VIU 

XXVUl 

VI 

G. 

22  April. 

1566 

IX 

IX 

vu 

F. 

14  April. 

1567 

X 

XX 

VIU 

E. 

30  March. 

1568 

XI 

1 

IX 

D.  C. 

18  April. 

1569 

xu 

xu 

X 

B. 

10  April. 

1570 

XUl 

xxui 

XI 

A. 

26  March. 

1571 

xiv 

IV 

Xll 

G. 

15  April. 

1572 

XV 

XV 

XIII 

F.  E. 

6  April. 

1573 

XVI 

XXVI 

Xiv 

D. 

22  March. 

1574 

xvu 

vu 

XV 

C. 

II  April. 

1575 

xviii 

XVlll 

XVI 

B. 

3  April. 

1576 

xix 

CXIX 

XVII 

A.  G. 

22  April. 

»577 

1 

XI 

XVIII 

F. 

7  April. 

[Continued  on  next  page.] 


34 


Prayer-Book  of  Elizabeth,  1559,  &c. 


The  years  of 
our  Lord. 

The  Golden 
Number. 

The  Epacta. 

The  Cycle  of 
the  Sun. 

Dominical 
letter. 

Easter  day. 

1578 

ii 

xxii 

xix 

E. 

30  March. 

1579 

111 

111 

XX 

D. 

29  April. 

1580 

IV 

XIV 

XXl 

C.  B. 

3  April. 

I581 

V 

XXV 

xxn 

A. 

26  March. 

1582 

vi 

VI 

XXIII 

G. 

15  April. 

1583 

Vll 

XVll 

XXIV 

F. 

31  March. 

1584 

VUl 

XXVlll 

XXV 

E.  D. 

19  April. 

1585 

IX 

IX 

XXVI 

C. 

II  ApriL 

1586 

X 

XX 

XXVll 

B. 

3  April. 

1587 

XI 

I 

XXVIU 

A. 

16  April. 

1588 

Xll 

Xll 

1 

G.  F. 

7  ApriL 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
H^  AN  ALMANACK  FOR  XXXIV.   YEARS. 


The  Year 

The 

Domi- 

The first 

of  our 

Golden 

nical 

Day  of 

Pasch-Day. 

Ascen- 

Whit 

Lord. 

Number. 

Letter. 

Lent. 

sion-Day. 

Sunday. 

1637 

iv 

A 

22  Febru. 

9  April 

18  Mali 

28  Maii 

1638 

V 

G 

7 

25  March 

iii 

xiii 

1639 

vi 

F 

27 

14  April 

xxiii 

2  June 

1640 

vii 

ED 

19 

5 

xiv 

24  Maii 

I64I 

viii 

C 

10  March 

25 

3  June 

13  June 

1642 

ix 

B 

23  Febru. 

10 

19  Mail 

29  Maii 

1643 

X 

A 

15 

2 

xi 

xxi 

1644 

xi 

GF 

6  March 

21 

XXX 

9  June 

1645 

xii 

E 

19  Febru. 

6 

XV 

25  Maii 

1646 

xiii 

D 

II 

29  March 

vii 

xvii 

1647 

xiv 

C 

3  March 

18  April 

XX  vii 

6  June 

1648 

XV 

BA 

16  Febru. 

2 

xi 

21  Maii 

1649 

xvi 

G 

7 

25  March 

iii 

xiii 

1650 

xvii 

F 

27 

14  April 

xxiii 

2  June 

I65I 

xviii 

E 

12 

30  March 

viii 

18  Maii 

1652 

xix 

DC 

3  March 

18  April 

xxvii 

6  June 

1653 

i 

B 

23  Febru. 

10 

xix 

29  Maii 

1654 

ii 

A 

8 

26  March 

iv 

xiv 

1655 

iii 

G 

28 

IS  April 

xxiv 

3  June 

1656 

iv 

FE 

20 

6 

XV 

25  Maii 

1657 

V 

D 

II 

29  March 

vii 

xvii 

1658 

vi 

C 

24 

II  April 

XX 

XXX 

1659 

vii 

B 

16 

3 

xii 

xxii 

1660 

viii 

AG 

7  March 

22 

xxxi 

10  June 

1661 

ix 

F 

27  Febru. 

H 

xxiii 

ii 

1662 

X 

E 

12 

30  March 

viii 

18  Maii 

1663 

xi 

D 

4  March 

19  April 

xxviii 

7  June 

1664 

xii 

CB 

24  Febru. 

10 

xix 

29  Maii 

1665 

xiii 

A 

8 

26  March 

iv 

xiv 

1666 

xiv 

G 

28 

15  April 

xxiv 

3  June 

1667 

XV 

F 

20 

7 

xvi 

26  Maii 

1668 

xvi 

ED 

5 

22  March 

30  April 

X 

1669 

xvii 

C 

24 

II  April 

20  Maii 

XXX 

1670 

xviii 

B 

16 

3 

xii 

xxii 

An  Almanack,  &c. 


35 


James  I.   1604. 
^  AN   ALMANACK  FOR  XXXIX  YEARS. 


The 
Golden 
Number 

Sg.3. 

0  re 

3  = 

-<  re 

1603 

viii 

B 

20  Febru. 

9  March 

24  April 

30  ]Mai 

2  Junii 

1604 

ix 

AG 

5 

22  Febru. 

8 

xiiii 

17  Maii 

1605 

X 

F 

27  Janu 

13 

31  March 

vi. 

ix 

1606 

xi 

E 

16  Febr. 

5  March 

20  April 

xxvi 

xxix 

1607 

xii 

D 

I  Febru 

18  Febru 

5- 

xi 

xiiii 

1608 

xiii 

C.  B 

24  Janu 

10 

27  March 

ii 

V 

1609 

xiv 

A 

12  Febru 

I  March 

16  April 

xxii 

XXV. 

I6I0 

XV 

G 

4 

21  Febru 

8 

xiiii 

xvii. 

161 1 

xvi 

F 

20  Janu 

6 

24  March 

29  April 

II. 

I6I2 

xvii 

E.  D 

9  Febru 

25 

12  April 

18  Maii 

xxi 

I6I3 

xviii 

C 

31  Janu 

17 

4 

X 

xiii 

I6I4 

xix 

B 

20  Febru 

9  March 

24 

XXX 

2  Junii 

1615 

i 

A 

5 

22  Febru 

9 

XV 

18  Maii 

I6I6 

II 

G.  F 

28  Janu 

H 

31  March 

vi 

ix 

1617 

iii 

E 

16  Febr. 

7  March 

20  April 

xxvi 

xxix 

I6I8 

iv 

D 

I 

18  Febru 

5 

xi 

xiiii 

I6I9 

V 

C 

24  Janu 

10 

28  March 

iii 

vi 

1620 

vi 

B  A 

13  Febr. 

I  March 

16  April 

xxii 

XXV 

I62I 

vii 

G 

28  Janu 

14  Febru 

I 

vii. 

X 

1622 

viii 

F 

17  Febr 

6  March 

21 

xxvii. 

XXX 

1623 

ix 

E 

9  Febr 

16  Febru 

13 

xix 

xxii 

1624 

X 

DC 

25  Janu 

II 

28  March 

iii  Maii 

vi 

1625 

xi 

B 

13  Febru 

2  March 

17  April 

xxiii 

xxvi 

1626 

xii 

A 

5 

22  Febru 

9 

XV 

xviii. 

1627 

xiii 

G 

21  Janu 

7 

25  March 

30  April 

iii 

1628 

xiv 

F.  E 

10  Febru 

27 

13  April 

19  Maii 

xxii. 

1629 

XV 

D 

I 

18 

5 

xi 

xiiii 

1630 

xvi 

C 

24  Janu 

10 

28  March 

iii 

vi 

I63I 

xvii 

B 

6  Febru 

23 

10  April 

xvi. 

xix 

1632 

xviii 

A.  G 

29  Janu 

20 

I 

vii. 

X 

1633 

xix 

F 

17  Febru 

6  March 

21  April 

xxvii. 

XXX 

1634 

i 

E 

2  Febru 

19  Febru 

6 

xii 

XV. 

1635 

ii 

D 

25  Janu 

II  Febru 

Mar:  29 

iiii 

vii. 

1636 

iii 

C.  B 

14  Febru 

2  March 

Ap.  17 

xxiii 

xxvi 

1637 

iv 

A 

5 

22  Febru 

9 

XV. 

xviii 

1638 

v 

G 

21  Janu 

7 

25  March 

30  April 

iii 

»639 

vi 

F 

10  Febru 

27 

13  P  April 

20  Maii 

xxiii 

1640 

vii 

ED 

2 

19 

5 

xi. 

xiiii 

1641 

viii 

C 

21  Janu 

10  March 

25- 

xxxi. 

3  June 

[Continued  on  next  page.] 

Note,  that  the  Supputation  of  the  year  of  our  Lord  in  the  Church  of 
England,  beginneth  the  xxv  day  of  March,  the  same  day  supposed  to  be 
the  first  day  upon  which  the  world  was  created,  and  the  day  when  Christ 
was  conceived  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  Mary. 

P  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  Ap.  14  {xightly). 


36 

Prayer-Book 

OF  James  I.,  1604,  &c 

Charles  II.  1662. 

James  I.  1604. 

A   TABLE    OF   THE    MOVEABLE 

(continued). 

FEASTS   CALCULATE 
FOURTY  YEARS 

D   FOR 

§^ 

'. 

2? 

^1 

o-°. 

w 
1 

1? 

CO 

1603 
1604 
1605 

12  June 

27  Mail 

xix 

27.  Nov: 
2  Decern 

I 

Ml 

1606 

8  June 
24  Maii 

30  Nov. 
xxix 

^ 

r* 

1607 

1661 

9 

9 

F 

4 

Febr.    lo 

1608 

XV 

xxvii. 

1662 

10 

20 

E 

2 

Jan.      26 

1609 

4  June 

3  Decern 

1663 

II 

I 

D 

5 

Febr.    15 

1610 

27  Maii 

II 

1664 

12 

12 

CB 

4 

7 

1611 

xii. 

I 

1665 

13 

23 

A 

2 

Jan.      22 

1612 

xxxi 

29  Nov: 

1666 

14 

4 

G 

5 

Febr.    II 

1613 

xxiii 

xxviii. 

1667 

15 

15 

F 

3 

3 

1614 

12  June 

xxvii. 

1668 

16 

26 

ED 

I 

Jan.      19 

1615 

28  Maii 

3  Decern 

1669 

17 

7 

C 

4 

Febr.     7 

1616 

xix 

i 

1670 

18 

18 

B 

3 

Jan.      30 

1617 

3  June 

30  Nov: 

1671 

19 

29 

A 

6 

Febr.   19 

1618 

24  Mail 

xxix 

1672 

I 

II 

GF 

4 

4 

1619 

xvi 

xxviii. 

1673 

2 

22 

E 

2 

Jan.      26 

1620 

4  June 

3  Decern 

1674 

3 

3 

D 

5 

Febr.    15 

1621 

20  Maii 

ii 

1675 

4 

14 

C 

3 

Jan.      31 

1622 

9  June 

i 

1676 

5 

25 

BA 

2 

23 

1623 

i 

30  Nov: 

1677 

6 

6 

G 

s 

Febr.    ii 

1624 

16  Maii 

xxviii. 

1678 

7 

17 

F 

2 

Jan.      27 

1625 

5  June 

xxviL 

1679 

8 

28 

E 

5 

Febr.    16 

1626 

28  Maii 

3  Decern 

1680 

9 

9 

DC 

4 

8 

1627 

xiii 

ii 

1681 

10 

20 

B 

3 

Jan.      30 

1628 

I  June 

30  Nov: 

1682 

II 

I 

A 

s 

Febr.   12 

1629 

24  Maii 

xxix 

1683 

12 

12 

G 

4 

4 

1630 

xvi. 

xxviii. 

1684 

n 

23 

FE 

2 

Tan.      27 

1631 

xxix 

xxvii 

1685 

14 

4 

D 

5 

Febr.    15 

1632 

XX 

2  Decern 

1686 

15 

15 

C 

3 

Jan.      31 

1633 

9  June 

i 

1687 

16 

26 

B 

2 

23 

1634 

XXV 

30  Nov. 

1688 

17 

7 

AG 

5 

Febr.    12 

1635 

17  Maii 

xxix 

1689 

18 

18 

F 

2 

Jan.      27 

1636 

5  June 

xxvii 

1690 

19 

29 

E 

5 

Febr.    16 

1637 

28  Maii 

3  Decern 

1691 

I 

II 

D 

4 

8 

1638 

xiii 

ii 

1692 

2 

22 

CB 

2 

Jan.      24 

1639 

2  June 

i 

1693 

3 

3 

A 

s 

Febr.    12 

1640 

24  Maii 

29  Nov. — 

1694 

4 

14 

G 

4 

4 

1641 

13  June 

xxviii. 

1695 

s 

25 

F 

I 

Tan.      20 

1696 

6 

6 

ED 

4 

Febr.     9 

[It  will  be  observed  that,  for  typo- 

1697 

7 

17 

C 

3 

Jan.      31 

graphical  reasons,  it  has  been  neces- 

1698 

8 

28 

B 

6 

Febr.  20 

sary  in  this  instance  to  place  the  1604 

1699 
1700 

9 
10 

9 
20 

A 

4 
3 

Jan.     28 

Calenda 

ir  after  that  of 

1637-] 

GF 

A  Table,  &c. 


37 


Charles  II.   1662. 

A  TABLE  OF  THE  MOVEABLE  FEASTS 

CALCULATED   FOR  FOURTY  YEARS   [continued). 


"2.| 

><  2. 
•  0 

CO- 

^7 

pen 

c 

I'D. 

3  5- 

1661 

Febr.   27 

April  14 

May 

19 

May     23 

June     2 

24 

Dec.     I 

1662 

12 

Mar.    30 

4 

8 

May   18 

26 

Nov.  30 

1663 

March   4 

April  19 

24 

28 

June     7 

23 

29 

1664 

Febr.   24 

10 

15 

19 

May  29 

24 

27 

1665 

8 

Mar.   26 

April 

30 

4 

14 

27 

Dec.     3 

1666 

28 

April  15 

May 

20 

24 

June     3 

24 

2 

1667 

20 

7 

12 

16 

May  26 

25 

I 

1668 

5 

Mar.   22 

April 

26 

April    30 

10 

27 

Nov.  29 

1669 

24 

April  II 

May 

16 

May     20 

30 

24 

28 

1670 

16 

3 

8 

12 

22 

25 

27 

1671 

March   8 

23 

28 

June       I 

June  II 

23 

Dec.     3 

1672 

Febr.   21 

7 

12 

May     16 

May  26 

25 

I 

1673 

12 

Mar.   30 

4 

8 

18 

26 

Nov.  30 

1674 

March    4 

April  19 

24 

28 

June     7 

23 

29 

1675 

Febr.    17 

4 

9 

13 

May  23 

25 

28 

1676 

9 

Mar.   26 

April 

30 

4 

14 

27 

Dec.     3 

1677 

28 

April  15 

May 

20 

24 

June     3 

24 

2 

1678 

13 

Mar.   31 

5 

9 

May   19 

26 

I 

1679 

March   5 

April  20 

25 

29  June     8 

23 

Nov.  30 

1680 

Febr.    25 

II 

16 

20 

May  30 

24 

28 

1681 

16 

3 

8 

12 

22 

25 

27 

1682 

March    i 

16 

21 

25 

June     4 

24 

Dec.     3 

1683 

Febr.   21 

8 

13 

17 

May  27 

25 

2 

1684 

13 

Mar.   30 

4 

8 

18 

26 

Nov.  30 

1685 

March    4 

April  19 

24 

28 

June     7 

23 

29 

1686 

Febr.    1 7 

4 

9 

13 

May  23 

25 

28 

1687 

9 

Mar.   27 

I 

5 

15 

26 

27 

1688 

March    i 

April  15 

20 

24 

June     3 

24 

Dec.     2 

1689 

Febr.    13 

Mar.   31 

5 

9 

May  19 

26 

I 

1690 

March    5 

April  20 

25 

29 

June     8 

23 

Nov.  30 

1691 

Febr.    25 

12 

17 

21 

May  31 

24 

29 

1692 

10 

Mar.   27 

I 

5 

15 

26 

27 

1693 

March    i 

April  16 

21 

25 

June    4 

24 

Dec.     3 

1694 

Febr.   21 

8 

13 

17 

May  27 

25 

2 

1695 

6 

Mar.   24 

April 

28 

2 

12 

27 

I 

1696 

26 

April  12 

May 

17 

21 

31 

24 

Nov.  29 

1697 

17 

4 

9 

13 

23 

25 

28 

1698 

March   9 

24 

29 

June      2 

June  12 

22 

27 

1699 

Febr.   22 

9 

14 

May     18 

May  28 

25 

Dec.     3 

1700 

14  1  Mar.   31 

5 

9 

19 

26 

I 

Note,  that  the  Supputation  of  the  year  of  our  Lord  in  the  Church  of 
England  beginneth  the  Five  and  twentieth  day  of  March. 


38 


Prayer-Book  of  James  I.  1604. 


[The  foUowing  Table  does  not  appear  in  the  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VL] 


Second  Edward  VI.  1552. 
[No  Table  appears.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[No  Table  appears.] 


James  I.  1604. 
TO   FIND   EASTER  FOR  EVER. 


The 
Golden 
Number. 

A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

G 

i 
ii 

April  ix 
Mar.  xxvi 

X 

xxvii 

xi 
XX  viii 

xii 
xxix 

vi 

XXX 

vii 
xxxi 

viii 
April  I 

m 
iv 

V 

April  xvi 
April  ix 
Mar.  xxvi 

xvu 

iii 

xxvii 

XVlll 

iv 
xxviii 

XIX 

V 

xxix 

XX 

vi 
xxiii 

XIV 

vii 
xxiv 

XV 

viii 

XXV 

VI 

vii 
viii 

April  xvi 
April  ii 
April  xxiii 
April  ix 
April  ii 

April  xvi 
April  ix 

XVll 

iii 
xxiv 

XI 

iv 

XXV 

Xll 
V 

xix 

xiu 
vi 

XX 

XIV 

March  3 1 
xxi 

XV 

April  i 
xxii 

IX 
X 

xi 

xii 

X 

iii 
xvii 

X 

XI 

Mar.  28 

xviii 

xi 

xu 
xxix 
xix 

V 

XIU 
XXX 
XX 

vi 

xiv 

xxxi 

xxi 

vii 

VUl 

April  i 
xxii 
viii 

xiii 

Mar.  xxvi 

XXVll 

XXVIII 

xxix 

XXX 

xxxi 

XXV 

XIV 
XV 

April  xvi 
April  ii 

XVll 

iii 

XVIU 

iv 

XIX 
V 

XUl 

vi 

XIV 

vii 

XV 

viii 

XVI 

Mar.  xxvi 

XXVll 

XXVIU 

xxn 

XXIII 

XXIV 

XXV 

xvii 
xviii 
xix 

April  xvi 

April  ii 

April  xxiii 

X 

xxiv 

XI 

iv 
xviii 

xu 

V 

xix 

XIII 

March  30 

XX 

XIV 

xxxi 
xxi 

XV 

April  i 
xxii 

IT  When  ye  have  found  the  Sunday  Letter  in  the  uppermost  line,  guide 
your  eye  downward  from  the  same,  till  ye  come  right  over  against  the 
Prime ;  and  there  is  shewed  both  what  Month,  and  what  Day  of  the 
Month,  Easter  falleth  that  year. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
To  FIND  Easter  for  ever. 

[Same  as  1604.] 

[Note.  In  some  editions,  e.g.  of  1607, 
1627,  and  1631,  a  note  is  introduced  here 
concerning  the  "  Golden  Number."] 


Charles  II.  1662. 
To  FIND  Easter  for  ever. 

[Same  as  1604,  but  to  end  of  note  is  added] 

But  note,  that  the  name  of  the 
Month  is  set  at  the  left  hand,  or 
else  just  with  the  Figure,  and  fol- 
loweth  not,  as  in  other  tables  by 
descent,  but  collateraL 


The  Kalendar. 


39 


[In  the  following  Kalendar  it  has  not  been  thought  necessary  to  print  after  each  month 
the  Tables  of  Lessons.  They  are  given  with  the  First  Book  of  Edward  VI.,  which  is 
copied  exactly  as  to  arrangement  from  the  originals,  except  that  Arabic  numerals  (for 
the  sake  of  the  less  space  they  occupy)  are  used  instead  of  Roman  numerals. 

The  Variations  0/  the  Lessons  in  the  successive  editions  are  noted  at  the  foot  of  each 
month  thus  printed.  On  the  opposite  page  the  variations  of  the  Calendar,  in  each  of 
the  five  editions,  are  given,  except  that  for  the  sake  of  symmetry,  and  because  the  varia- 
tions are  so  slight,  the  editions  of  1552  and  1559  are  combined  in  one  column.  The  few 
additions  made  in  the  latter  of  the  two  are  given  within  brackets. 

It  has  been  found  difficult  in  so  small  a  page,  and  has  not  been  thought  necessary, 
to  repeat  the  full  head-lines  through  the  five  successive  editions  ;  but  an  example  of 
the  variations  for  the  month  of  January  is  here  given.  J 

Second  Edward  VI.   1552,  and  Elizabeth,  1559. 


ii)gianuarg  %^\% 

mi.  Bags. 

1 

Morning  Pr.wer. 

Evening  Prayer. 

i  Lesson. 

ii  Lesson. 

i  Lesson.    ,    ii  Lesson. 

iii 

A  kalend. 
b  iiiii  No. 

Circumcision. 

i 
ii 

Gen.         xvii  Roma.         ii 
Genesis         i  Math.            i 

Deut            X  Coloss.         ii 
Gene.           ii  Roman         i 

James   I.   1604. 
Yi  JANUARY  HATH  XXXI.  DAYS. 


The  Moon  xxix.i 


a" 

Morning  Prayer. 

Evening  Prayer. 

i  Lesson. 

ii  Lesson. 

i  Lesson.        ii  Lesson. 

.  1 

XIX,  1 

viii  2 

A  Kalend.  ■  Circumcision, 
b  Iiiii  No.  | 

i 
ii 

Gen.            i/Rom.            2 
Genesis        i  Matth.          i 

Deut.          10  Col.              2 
Gen.             2  Rom.           i 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
JANUARY  HATH  XXXI.  DAYS. 


The  Moon  xxx. 


/riseth  1             (•  7  min.  12. 
Sun  ■]              \  hour  • 

I  falleth  )            (4  min.  48. 

^3 

5- 

Morning  Prayer. 

Evening  Prayer. 

I  Lesson.        2  Lesson. 

I  Lesson.        2  Lesson. 

xix  I  \  A  Kalend.  Circumcision, 
viii  2  1  b  iiii  No.  | 

ii 

Gen.            17  Rom.            2  Deut.          10  Colos.           2I 
Gen.              I  Mat.              i  Gen.             2  Rom.            i| 

Charles  II.   1662. 
January  hath  xxxi.  days. 

The  Moon  hath  xxx. ' 


Morning  Praysr. 

Evening  Prayer. 

I  Lesson.    |    2  Lesson. 

I  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

2 

I 

2 

A  Kalend.  ^Circumcision      of 
b  4  No.      1               [our  Lord. 

Gen.              iMatth.          i 

Gen.             2 

Rom.            I 

1  This  varies  with  the  months  as  follows  : 
— xxix.  for  January,  February,  March, 
April,  June,  September,  and  November; 
xxx.  for  May,  July,  August,  October,  and 
December. 


■■  This  varies  with  the  months  as  follows : 
— xxix.  for  April,  June,  .September,  and 
November  ;  xxx.  for  January,  February, 
March,  May,  July,  August,  October,  and 
December. 


40 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


JANUARY. 


JANUARY. 

% 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  Z/^j. 

1  Less. 

2  Less. 

A 

Kalend. 

I 

CircumcL 

I 

Gen.  17 

Roma.  2 

Deut  10 

Colics.  2 

b 

4  No. 

2 

2 

Gene,  i 

Math.  I 

Gene.  2 

Roma.  I 

c 

3  No. 

3 

3 

3 

2 

4 

2 

d 

Prid.  No. 

4 

4 

5 

3 

6 

3 

e 

Nonas, 

5 

s 

7 

4 

8 

4 

f 

8  Id. 

6 

Epifhani, 

6 

Esai.  60 

Luke  3 

Esai.  49 

John  2 

g 

7  Id. 

7 

7 

Gen.  9 

Math.  S 

Gen-  II 

Roma.  S 

A 

6  Id. 

8 

8 

12 

6 

13 

6 

b 

Sid. 

9 

9 

14 

7 

IS 

7 

c 

4  Id. 

10 

10 

16 

8 

17 

8 

d 

3  Id. 

II 

II 

18 

9 

19 

9 

e 

Prid.  Id. 

12 

12 

20 

10 

21 

10 

f 

Idus. 

13 

13 

22 

II 

23 

II 

g 

19  kl. 

H 

H 

24 

12 

25 

12 

A 

18  kl. 

IS 

IS 

26 

13 

27 

13 

b 

17  kl. 

16 

16 

28 

14 

29 

14 

c 

16  kL 

17 

17 

30 

IS 

31 

IS 

d 

iSkl. 

18 

18 

32 

16 

33 

16 

e 

14  kl. 

19 

19 

34 

17 

3S 

I  Cor.  I 

f 

13  kl. 

20 

20 

3f 

18 

37 

2 

S 

12  kl. 

21 

21 

38 

19 

39 

3 

A 

11  kl. 

22 

22 

40 

20 

41 

4 

b 

10  kl. 

23 

23 

42 

21 

43 

5 

c 

9kL 

24 

24 

44 

22 

4S 

6 

d 

8kL 

2S 

Con.  Paulu 

2S 

46 

Act  22 

47 

Act.  26 

e 

7kl. 

26 

26 

48 

mat.  23 

49 

I  Cor.  7 

f 

6kl. 

27 

27 

50 

24 

Exod.  I 

8 

g 

5kl. 

28 

28 

Exod.  2 

2S 

3 

9 

A 

4kl. 

29 

29 

4 

26 

5 

10 

b 

3kl. 

30 

30 

6 

27 

7 

II 

c 

Prid.  kl. 

31 

I 

8 

28 

9 

12 

Variation  of  the  Lessons  in  successive  Editions. 


The  eds.  of  1553  and  1559  follow  the  1549 
throughout. 

The  eds.  of  1604,  &c.,  follow  1549  to  the 
7th  day,  when  Gen.  11  is  omitted,  and  on 
the  19th  day,  Gen.  36  is  omitted  ;  but  on 
the  asth.  Proper  Lessons  for  the  Conver- 
sion of  S.Paul  [Wisdom,  caps.  5  and  6] 
are  interpolated,  so  that  the  Lessons  for 
the  36th  day  are  as  before.  The  6th  chap- 
ter of  Exodus  is,  however,  omitted  on  the 
30th,  so  that  the  month  ends  with  Exodus, 
caps.  9  and  10. 

The  Scotch  ed.  of  1637  follows  1549  till 


the  24th,  when  Gen.  26  is  omitted  ;  but  the 
two  Proper  Lessons  for  the  Conversion  of 
S.  Paul  being  interpolated,  the  month 
ends,  Exodus,  caps.  7  and  8. 

The  ed.  of  1662  follows  1604  in  omitting 
Gen.  n  and  a6,  and  insertion  of  Proper 
Lessons  for  Conversion  of  S.  Paul.  A  por- 
tion, however,  of  Exodus,  cap.  6,  is  re- 
tained [i.e.  to  V.  14]  so  that  the  month 
ends  as  in  i540. 

_  The  Second Leisom  are  throughout  the 
six  editions  the  same. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552,  &c.        41 


JANUARY 
Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Elizabeth,  1559. 


HATH   XXXI.    DAYS. 


Ps. 


Kalend. 

Circumcision. 

I 

4  No. 

2 

3  No. 

3 

Prid.  No. 

4 

Nonas. 

5 

8  Id. 

Epiphanie. 

6 

7  Id. 

7 

6  Id. 

8 

Sid. 

9 

4  Id. 

10 

3  Id. 

Sol  in  aqua. 

II 

Prid.  Id. 

12 

Idus. 

13 

19  kl. 

Februarii. 

14 

18  kl. 

IS 

17  kl. 

Term  begin. 

16 

16  kl. 

17 

iskL 

18 

14  kl. 

19 

13  kl- 

20 

12  kl. 

21 

II  kl. 

22 

10  kl. 

23 

9kl. 

24 

8kl. 

Con.  Paul. 

25 

7kl. 

26 

6kl. 

27 

ski. 

28 

4kl. 

29 

3kl. 

30 

Prid.  kl. 

I 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Circumcision. 


I 

A 

Kalend. 

2 

b 

iv     No. 

3 

c 

iii     No. 

4 

d 

prid.  No. 

5 

e 

Nonas. 

6 

f 

viii     Id. 

7 

g 

vii      Id. 

8 

A 

vi       Id. 

9 

b 

V         Id. 

10 

c 

iv       Id. 

II 

d 

iii       Id. 

12 

e 

prid.  Id. 

13 

f 

Idus. 

14 

g 

xix      kl. 

15 

A 

xviii  kl. 

16 

b 

xvii    kl. 

17 

c 

xvi      kl. 

18 

d 

xy       kl. 

19 

e 

xiv     kl. 

20 

f 

xiii     kl. 

21 

g 

xii      kl. 

22 

A 

xi        kl. 

23 

b 

x         kl. 

24 

c 

ix        kl. 

25 

d 

viii     kl. 

26 

e 

vii       kl. 

27 

f 

vi        kl. 

28 

g 

V          kl. 

29 

A 

iv       kl. 

30 

b 

iii       kl. 

31 

c 

prid.  kl. 

Epiphany. 
Lucian. 


David  King. 

Sol  in  Aquario. 

Mango  Bishop. 

Februarii. 


Prisca. 

Fabian. 
Agnes. 
Vincent. 

Fast. 
Convers.  Paul. 


James 

Kalend. 

4  No. 

3  No.   , 
prid. No. 

Nonas. 
8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
Sid. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

prid.  Id. 
Idus. 
19  kl. 
18  kl. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
iSkl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

9kl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

Ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
prid.  kl. 


I.  1604. 

Ps. 

Circumcision. 

I 

2 

3 

4 

S 

Epiphany. 

6 

Lucian. 

7 
8 

9 

10 

Sol.  in  Aquario. 

II 

12 

Hilarii. 

^3    A. 

Februarii. 

14  ? 

IS  " 

16  2 

17  0 

Prisca. 

18    >y 

19    « 

Fabian. 

20.S 

Agnes. 

21     13 

Vincent. 

22  •■3 

^3| 

Convers.  Paul. 

24  ^ 

25^ 

26  0 

„„  M 

27  . 

28  s 

„„  >> 

29  g 

ZO&, 

30    0) 

Ps. 

I 

I 

A 

2 

2 

b 

3 

3 

c 

4 

4 

d 

S 

S 

e 

6 

6 

f 

I 

7 
8 

i 

9 

9 

b 

10 

10 

c 

II 

II 

d 

12 

12 

e 

13 

13 

f 

14 

14 

g 

15 

15 

A 

16 

16 

b 

17 

17 

c 

18 

18 

d 

19 

19 

e 

20 

20 

f 

21 

21 

g 

22 

22 

A 

23 

23 

b 

24 

24 

c 

25 

25 

d 

26 

26 

e 

27 

27 

f 

28 

28 

g 

29 

29 

A 

30 

30 

b 

31 

31 

c 

Charles  II.  1662. 


Kalend. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
Pr.  No. 

Nonce. 
8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
Sid. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

pr.  Id. 
Idus. 
19  kl.  Feb. 
18  kl. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
iSkl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

9kl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

Ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
Prid.  kl. 


Circumcision     of    our 
[Lord.  . 


Epiphany  ofoiir  Lord.  S 
Lucian,  Priest  &  Mart.    o. 

a 

c 
o 

Hilary,  Bish.  &  Confes.  0 

-1 

X! 

H 

Prisca,  Rom.  Virg.  &  M. 

Fabian,  B.  of  Rome,  M. 

Agnes,  Rom.  Virg.  &  M . 

Vincent,     Soan.     Deac. 

[&  M. 

Conversion  of  S.  Paul. 
K.  Charles  Martyr. 


42 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


FEBRUARY. 


FEBRUARY. 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

d 

Kalend. 

I 

2 

Exod.  10 

Mark  I 

Exod.  II 

I  Cor.  13 

e 

4  No. 

2 

Puri.  Ma. 

3 

12 

2 

»3 

H 

f 

3  No. 

3 

4 

14 

3 

15 

15 

g 

Prid.  No. 

4 

s 

16 

4 

17 

16 

A 

Nonas. 

5 

6 

18 

s 

19 

2  Cor.  I 

b 

8  Id. 

6 

7 

20 

6 

21 

2 

c 

7  Id. 

7 

8 

22 

7 

23 

3 

d 

6  Id. 

8 

9 

24 

8 

32 

4 

e 

Sid. 

9 

10 

33 

9 

34 

5 

f 

4  Id. 

10 

II 

35 

10 

40 

6 

g 

3  Id. 

II 

12 

LeuL  18 

II 

Leui.  19 

7 

A 

Prid.  Id. 

12 

13 

20 

12 

Nume.  10 

§ 

b 

Jdus. 

13 

14 

Num.  II 

13 

12 

9 

c 

16  kl. 

H 

15 

13 

14 

14 

10 

d 

15  kL 

IS 

16 

IS 

15 

16 

II 

e 

14  kL 

16 

17 

17 

16 

18 

12 

f 

13  kL 

17 

18 

19 

Luk.di.i. 

20 

13 

g 

12  kL 

18 

»9 

21 

dL  I 

22 

Cralath.  I 

A 

II  kL 

«9 

20 

23 

2 

24 

2 

b 

10  kL 

20 

21 

2S 

3 

26 

3 

c 

9kL 

21 

22 

27 

4 

28 

4 

d 

8kL 

22 

23 

29 

5 

30 

5 

e 

7kL 

23 

24 

3> 

6 

32 

6 

f 

6kL 

24 

Mathias. 

25 

33 

7 

34 

Ephes.  I 

g 

SkL 

25 

20 

35 

8 

36 

2 

A 

4kL 

26 

27 

Deut.  I 

9 

Deut.  2 

3 

b 

3kl. 

27 

2§ 

3 

10 

4 

4 

c 

Pru/.\d. 

28 

29 

5 

II 

6 

5 

Variation  of  the  Lessons  in  successive  Editions. 


The  eds.  of  1552  and  1559  follow  1549 
throughouL 

The  eds.  of  1604  begin  with  Exodus  11 
and  13,  and  interpolate  Wisdom,  caps.  9 
and  12,  for  "  tht  Purification^^  Later  on,  in 
order,  Exodus,  caps.  35  and  40,  are  omitted. 
Then  Leviticus,  cap.  a6,  inserted  ;  then 
Numbers,  caps.  10,  15,  18,  19,  36,  a8,  39, 
33,  and  34,  omitted.  To  make  up  for  the 
excess  [=  oj  of  omission  of  chapters  over 
insertions,  Deuteronomy,  caps.  7,  8,  9,  10, 
II,  13,  and  15  are  added  at  the  end :  and 
Wisdom  19  and  Ecclesiasticus  i  are  inter- 
polated for  5.  Matthias'  Day. 

The  Scotch  ed.  of  1637,  beginning  with 
Exodus,  caps.  9  and  10,  interpolates  Wis- 
dom, caps.  4  and  6,  for  "  the  Purifica- 
tion," and  also  for  the  i3th  day  a  part 
of  Leviticus,  cap,  9  [i.e.  ver.  33  to  ver.  12 
of  cap.  10]  ;  and  for  the  13th,  caps.  12 
and  16.  Later  on,  Leviticus,  caps.  31, 
33,   34,   35   [i.e.   from  ver.   35],   36,   and 


37  ;  also  Numbers,  caps.  5,  6,  8,  and  9, 
are  interpolated.  On  the  other  hand. 
Numbers,  caps.  18,  19,  and  26,  are  omitted  ; 
so  that  on  the  last  day  (the  zSthi  we  have 
Numbers,  caps.  30  and  31. 

The  ed.  of  1663  begins  the  same  as  the 
first  three  Books,  viz.  Exodus,  caps.  10 
and  II.  It  then  leaves  a  space  for  two 
Lessons  for  the  Purification,  and  omits 
Exod.  35  and  40  (so  that  for  the  nth  and 
1 3th  days  the  Lessons  are  the  same  as  in 
1549,  &C.)  It  next  omits  Numbers,  caps. 
IS,  18,  19,  26,  28,  39,  3^,  and  34,  supplying 
the  deficiency  by  adding  Deut.,  caps.  7, 
8,  g,  10,  II,  and  12,  and  leaving  a  space 
for  Proper  Lessons  for  .J.  Matthias  Day. 
For  the  2Qth,  two  extra  Lessons  are  pro- 
vided by  Deut.,  caps.  13  and  14. 

The  Second  Lessons  are  throughout  the 
six  editions  the  same,  but  in  the  ed.  of 
1663,  two  lessons  for  the  39th  are  added, 
vix.  Matt.  7  and  Rom.  13. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552,  &c.       43 


FEBRUARY  HATH  XXVHI.    DAYS. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Elizabeth,  1559. 


d 

Kalend. 

e 

4  No. 

Puri.  Mary. 

f 

3  No. 

g 
A 

Prid.  No. 
Nonas. 

b 

8  Id. 

c 

7  Id. 

d 

6  Id. 

e 

Sid. 

f 

4  Id. 

Sol  in  Pisces. 

g 

3  Id. 

A 

Prid.  Id. 

[Term  ends]. 

b 

Idus. 

c 

16  kl. 

March. 

d 

iSkl. 

e 

14  kl. 

f 

13  kl. 

g 

12  kl. 

A 

II  kl. 

b 

10  kl. 

c 

9kl. 

d 

8kl. 

e 

7W. 

f 

6kl. 

S.  Mathias. 

g 

ski. 

A 

4kl. 

b 

3W. 

c 

Pnd.  kl. 

Ps. 

I 

d 

2 

16 

2 

e 

3 

S 

3 

i 

4 

4 

g 

S 
6 

13 

2 

5 
6 

A 
b 

7 

8 

10 

7 

8 

c 

d 

9 
10 

18 

9 

ID 

e 
f 

11 
12 

7 

II 
12 

g 
A 

13 

IS 

13 

b 

14 
IS 
16 

4 
12 

14 
15 
16 

c 
d 
e 

17 
18 

17 
18 

i 
g 

19 

10 

iq 

A 

20 

20 

b 

21 

17 

21 

c 

22 

6 

22 

d 

23 

23 

e 

24 

14 

24 

t 

25 
26 

3 

25 

26 

i 

27 
28 

6 

27 
28 

b 

c 

89 

29 

James  I.  1604. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 


Fast. 

Puri/.  o/B.  Mary. 

Blasii. 


I 

d 

Kalend.  \ 

2 

e 

iv 

No.  A 

3 

f 

iii 

No. 

4 

g 

prid 

No. 

5 

A 

Nonas.  \ 

6 

b 

viii 

Id. 

■J 

c 

vii 

Id. 

8 

d 

vi 

Id. 

9 

e 

V 

Id. 

10 

f 

iv 

Id. 

II 

g 

iii 

Id. 

12 

A 

prid 

Id. 

13 

b 

Idus.     1 

14 

c 

xvi 

kl. 

IS 

d 

XV 

kl. 

16 

e 

xiv 

kl. 

17 

f 

xiii 

kl. 

18 

g 

xii 

kl. 

19 

A 

xi 

kl. 

20 

b 

X 

kl. 

21 

c 

ix 

kl. 

22 

d 

viii 

kl. 

23 

e 

vii 

kl. 

24 

f 

vi 

kl. 

2S 

g 

v 

kl. 

26 

A 

iv 

kl. 

27 

b 

iii 

kl. 

28 

c 

prid 

kL 

Agathe. 


Sol  in  Piscibus. 


Valentine. 
March. 


Colman. 


Fast. 
.S".  Matthias. 


Kalend. 

4  No. 

3  No. 
prid.  No, 
Nonas. 

8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
sId. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

prid.  Id. 
Idus. 
16  kl. 
15  kl. 
14  kl. 

13  w. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

okl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

SkL 

4kl. 

3kl. 
prid.  kl. 


Fast. 

Puri/.  of  Mary. 

Blasii. 

Agathe. 


Ps. 

2 
3 
4 
S 
6 

7 
8 


Sol  in  Piscibus. 


Valentine. 
March. 


Fast. 
6".  Matthias. 


Ps.\ 

2 

I 

d 

3 

2 

e 

4 

3 

f 

5 

4 

g 

6 

5 

A 

7 

6 

b 

8 

7 

c 

9 

8 

d 

10 

9 

e 

II 

10 

f 

12 

II 

g 

13 

12 

A 

14 

13 

b 

15 

14 

c 

16 

15 

d 

17 

16 

e 

18 

17 

f 

19 

18 

g 

20 

19 

A 

21 

20 

b 

22 

21 

c 

23 

22 

d 

24 

23 

e 

2S 

24 

f 

26 

2S 

g 

27 

26 

A 

28 

^l 

b 

29 

28 
29 

c 

Charles  II.  1662. 


22  6 

23"^ 

24  j< 

25  8 

26  n 

27  u 
-8  ^ 
29(5: 

u 

•s 

•3 


Kalend. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
Pr.  No. 

NoncE. 
8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
Sid. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Pr.  Id. 
Idus. 
16  kl.  Mart, 
iskl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

gkl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
Pr.  kl. 


Fast. 
Ptirification  0/ Mary.  • 
Blasius,    an    Armenian 
(B.  &  M.  . 
Agatha,aSicilianV.&M.  ■ 


Valentine,  Bish.&  Mart.  ' 


Fast. 

.S".    Matthias,     Afost. 

{&'  M. 


44 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


MARCH. 

MARCH. 

1* 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

I  L.ess. 

2  Z<f jj. 

d 

Kalend. 

I 

30 

Deu.  7 

Luk.  12 

Deu.  8 

Ephe.  6 

e 

6  No. 

2 

I 

9 

13 

10 

Philip.  I 

f 

5  No. 

3 

2 

II 

14 

12 

2 

g 

4  No. 

4 

3 

13 

15 

14 

3      • 

A 

3  No. 

5 

4 

15 

16 

16 

4 

b 

Prid.  No. 

6 

17 

17 

18 

Collos.  I 

c 

Nonas. 

7 

6 

19 

18 

20 

2 

d 

8  Id. 

8 

7 

21 

19 

22 

3 

e 

7  Id. 

9 

8 

23 

20 

24 

4 

f 

6  Id, 

10 

9 

25 

21 

26 

I  Thes.  I 

g 

Sid. 

II 

10 

27 

22 

28 

2 

A 

4  Id. 

12 

II 

29 

23 

30 

3 

b 

3  Id. 

13 

12 

31 

24 

32 

4 

c 

Prid.  Id. 

14 

13 

33 

John.  I 

34 

5 

d 

Idus. 

15 

14 

Josue.  I 

2 

Josue.  2 

2  Thes.  I 

e 

17  kl. 

16 

IS 

3 

3 

4 

2 

f 

16  kl. 

17 

16 

5 

4  • 

6 

3 

g 

15  kl. 

18 

17 

7 

5 

8 

I  Timo. 

A 

14  kl. 

19 

18 

9 

6 

10 

2-  3 

b 

13  kl. 

20 

»9 

II 

7 

12 

4 

c 

12  kL 

21 

20 

13 

8 

14 

S 

d 

II  U 

22 

21 

IS 

9 

16 

6 

e 

10  kL 

23 

22 

17 

10 

18 

2  Tim.  I 

f 

9kL 

24 

23 

19 

II 

20 

2 

g 

8kl. 

25 

Annuncia, 

24 

21 

12 

22 

3 

A 

7kl. 

26 

25 

23 

13 

24 

4 

b 

6kl. 

27 

.26 

Judic  I 

14 

Judic  2 

Titus  I 

c 

5kL 

28 

27 

3 

IS 

4 

2.  3 

d 

4kl. 

29 

28 

s 

16 

6 

Phile.  I 

e 

3lcl. 

30 

29 

7 

17 

8 

Hebre.  I 

f 

Prid.  kl. 

31 

30 

9 

18 

10 

2 

Variation  of  the  Lessons 
The  eds.  of  1552  and  1559  follow  1549 
throughout,  except  that  on  the  i6th  and 
five  following  days  the  same  Momine 
Lesson  is  repealed  in  the  evening,  and 
so  on  each  day.  Caps.  10,  11,  13  follow 
rightly,  but  then  the  Lessons  jump  to 
cap.  20,  as  the  Evening  Lesson  for  the 
24th,  so  restoring  uniformity  with  i549- 

The  eds.  of  1&4,  &c.,  begin  with  Deut. 
x6  and  17,  and  continue  to  the  34th  chap- 
ter (as  in  1549).  Of  Joshua,  caps,  t  to  10 
follow,  caps.  II  to  33  are  omitted,  but  caps. 
33  and  34  are  retained.  Chapters  i  to  10 
of  Judges  follow  on  (as  in  1549),  and  to 
supply  the  eleven  remaining  days,  we  have 
Judges,  caps.  11  to  21,  the  four  chapters 
of  Ruth,  the  five  chapters  of  I.  Samuel, 
besides  Ecclesiasticus,  caps.  3  and  3,  in- 
terpolated for  the  Feast  of  the  Amhuh- 
ciatioH. 
The  Scotch  ed.  of  1637  begins  with  three 


in  successive  Editions. 
chapters  of  Numbers  (caps.  33,  35,  and 
36),  and  then  straight  through  the  tnirty- 
four  chapters  of  Deuteronomy,  omitting 
only  cap.  14.  It  then  (as  in  160x4  cd.)  takes 
Joshua,  caps,  i  to  so,  omitting  the  rest, 
except  caps.  14,  so,  32,  33,  and  34.  Then 
follow  nine  chapters  of  Judges  (so  that 
the  Lessons  for  the  last  day  are  Judges 
8  and  9,  instead  of  9  and  10,  as  in  :549l. 

The  ed.  of  1663  begins  with  DeuL  15 
and  16,  and  takes  all  the  remaining  chap- 
ters, except  the  33rd.  Of  Joshua  (as  in 
1604),  caps.  I  to  10  follow,  and  then  all 
the  rest  omitted,  except  caps.  23  and  34. 
Of  Judges,  the  whole  twenty-one,  and  of 
Ruth  the  four  chapters,  follow,  requiring 
four  chapters  of  I.  Samuel  to  complete 
the  month.  A  vacant  place  is  left  for  the 
Lessons  for  the  Annunciation. 

The  Second  Lessons  are  throughout  the 
six  editions  the  same. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552,  &c.       45 


MARCH  HATH  XXXI.  DAYS. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  155a. 
Elizabeth,  1559. 


d 

Kalend. 

e 

6  No. 

f 

sNo. 

g 

4  No. 

A 

3  No. 
PrTd.  No. 

b 

c 

Nonas. 

d 

8  Id. 

e 

7  Id. 

f 

6  Id. 

g 

Sid. 

A 

4  Id. 

b 

aid. 

c 

Prid.  Id. 

d 

Idus. 

e 

17  kl. 

f 

16  kl. 

g 

15  kl. 

A 

14  kl. 

b 

13  kl. 

c 

12  kl. 

d 

II  kl. 

e 

lokl. 

f 

gkl. 

g 

8kl. 

A 

ykl. 

b 

6kl. 

c 

ski. 

d 

4kl. 

e 

3kl. 

f 

Prid.  kl. 

Equinoctium. 
Sot  in  ariete. 


Aprilis. 


A  nnunciation. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 


David. 
Cedde. 


1 

d 

Kalend. 

2 

e 

vi      No. 

3 

f 

V      No. 

4 

g 

iv      No. 

5 

A 

iii     No. 

6 

b 

prid.  No. 

7 

c 

Nonas. 

8 

d 

viii     Id. 

9 

e 

vii      Id. 

10 

f 

vi       Id. 

n 

g 

V        Id. 

12 

A 

iv       Id. 

13 

b 

iii       Id. 

14 

c 

prid.  Id. 

IS 

d 

Idus. 

16 

e 

xvii     kl. 

17 

f 

xvi      kl. 

18 

g 

XV       kl. 

19 

A 

xiv      kl. 

20 

b 

xiii     kl. 

21 

c 

xii      kl. 

22 

d 

xi       kL 

23 

e 

X         kl. 

24 

f 

ix       kl. 

25 

g 

viii      kl. 

26 

A 

vii       kl. 

27 

b 

vi        kl. 

28 

c 

V         kl. 

29 

d 

iv        kl. 

30 

e 

iii       kl. 

31 

f 

prid.  kl. 

Ps. 

30 

ig 

I 

d 

I 

8 

2 

e 

2 

3 

f 

3 

16 

4 

g 

4 

S 

S 

A 

S 

6 

b 

6 

13 

7 

c 

7 

2 

8 

d 

8 

9 

e 

9 

10 

10 

f 

ID 

II 

g 

II 

18 

12 

A 

12 

7 

13 

b 

13 

14 

c 

14 

15 

15 

d 

15 

4 

16 

e 

16 

17 

f 

17 

12 

18 

g 

18 

I 

19 

A 

'9 

20 

b 

20 

9 

21 

c 

21 

22 

d 

22 

17 

23 

e 

23 

6 

24 

f 

24 

25 

g 

25 

14 

26 

A 

26 

3 

27 

b 

27 

28 

c 

28 

II 

29 

d 

29 

30 

e 

30 

19 

31 

f 

Perpetue. 


Const  3.  King. 

Gregory. 
Sol  in  Ariete. 


Aprilis. 

Patrick. 

Cyril  Bishop. 

Cuthbert  Bishop 
Benedict. 


Fast. 
Ann.  of  Mary. 

I  nit.  Reg.  Carol. 


James  I.  1604. 


Ps. 


Kalend. 

David. 

3>3 

6  No. 

Cedde. 

I 

sNo. 

2 

4  No. 

3 

3  No. 

4 

prid.  No. 

5 

Nonas. 

Perpetue. 

6 

8  Id. 

•J 

7  Id. 

g 

6  Id. 

9 

sId. 

10 

4  Id. 

Gregorie. 

II 

3  Id. 

Sol  in  Ariete. 

12  <f> 

prid.  Id. 

13  s 

Idus. 

14  0 

17  kl. 

Aprilis. 

'5  " 

16  kl. 

16  € 

iSkl. 

■   Edward. 

'7^ 

14  kl. 

18  ; 

13  kl. 

19-: 

12  kl. 

Benedict. 

20.5 

II  kl. 

21 -g 

10  kl. 

22  "m 

9kl. 

I  nit  relaco.  Fast 

23^ 

8kl. 

A  nnunjo/Mary. 

24  8 

7kl. 

25  B3 

6kl. 

26   i. 

SkL 

^tI 

4kl. 

28  2 

3kl. 

29  P^ 

prid.  kl. 

30  J 

Ps. 

30 

I 

d 

I 

2 

e 

2 

3 

f 

3 

4 

g 

4 

5 

A 

5 

6 

b 

6 

7 

c 

7 

8 

d 

8 

9 

e 

9 

ID 

f 

10 

II 

g 

II 

12 

A 

12 

13 

b 

13 

14 

c 

14 

15 

d 

IS 

16 

e 

16 

17 

f 

17 

18 

g 

18 

19 

A 

19 

20 

b 

20 

21 

c 

21 

22 

d 

22 

23 

e 

23 

24 

f 

24 

25 

g 

25 

26 

A 

26 

27 

b 

27 

28 

c 

28 

29 

d 

29 

30 

e 

30 

31 

f 

Charles  II.  1663. 

[nevia. 
David,  Archb.  of  JVIe- 
Cedde  or  Chad,  B.  of 
[Litch. 


Kalend. 

6  No. 
sNo. 

4  No. 

3  No. 
Pr.  No. 

Nona. 
8  Id. 

7  Id. 
6  Id. 

5  Id. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Pr.  Id. 
Idus. 
17  kl  April 
16  kl. 
15  kl. 
14  kl. 
13  w. 

12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

gkl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

sw. 

4kl. 

3kl. 

Pr.  kL 


PerpetuaMauritanMart  •£ 


Greg.M.B.  ofRome&C. 


Edw.  K.  of  theWest  Sax. 

Benedict,  Abbot. 

Fast. 
A  nnunciation  of  Ma  ry. 


46 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


APRIL. 


APRIL. 

r 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  Z«j. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

g 

Kalend. 

I 

I 

Judi.  II 

John  19 

Judi.  12 

Hebre.  3 

A 

4  No. 

2 

2 

13 

20 

14 

4 

b 

3  No. 

3 

3 

IS 

21 

16 

S 

c 

Prid.  No. 

4 

4 

17 

Acts  I 

18 

6 

d 

Nonas. 

S 

5 

19 

2 

20 

7 

e 

8  Id. 

6 

6 

21 

3 

Ruth  I 

8 

f 

7  Id. 

7 

7 

Ruth  2 

4 

3 

9 

g 

6  Id. 

8 

8 

4 

5 

iRegumi 

10 

A 

5  Id. 

9 

9 

lRegum2 

6 

3 

II 

b 

4  Id. 

10 

10 

4 

^    7 

S 

12 

c 

3  Id. 

II 

II 

6 

•  8 

7 

13 

d 

Prid.  Id. 

12 

12 

8 

9 

9 

Jacob.  I 

e 

Idus. 

13 

13 

10 

10 

II 

2 

f 

18  kl. 

14 

14 

12 

II 

13 

3 

g 

17  kl. 

IS 

15 

14 

12 

IS 

4 

A 

16  kl. 

16 

16 

16 

13 

17 

s 

b 

IS  kl. 

^l 

^l 

18 

14 

19 

I  Peter.  I 

c 

14  kl. 

18 

18 

20 

IS 

21 

2 

d 

13  kl. 

19 

19 

22 

16 

23 

3 

e 

12  kl. 

20 

20 

24 

17 

25 

4 

f 

II  kl. 

21 

21 

26 

18 

27 

5 

g 

10  kl. 

22 

22 

28 

19 

29 

2  Peter.  I 

A 

9kl.  . 

23 

23 

30 

20 

31 

2 

b 

8kl. 

24 

24 

2  Reg.  I 

21 

2  Reg.  2 

3 

c 

7kl. 

2S 

Mar.  Evan. 

2S 

3 

22 

4 

I  John.  I 

d 

6kl. 

26 

26 

5 

23 

6 

2 

e 

SkL 

27 

27 

7 

24 

8 

3 

f 

4kl. 

28 

28 

9 

2S 

10 

4 

g 
A 

3kl. 

29 

29 

II 

26 

12 

5 

Prid.  kL 

30 

30 

13 

27 

14 

2.  3.  Joh. 

Variation  of  the  Lessons  in  successive  Editions. 


The  eds.  of  issa  and  1559  follow  1549 
throughout. 

The  eds.  of  1604,  &c.i  begin  with  I.  Sam., 
caps.  6  and  7,  and  go  through  the  remain- 
ing 25  chapters  (i.e.  to  the  31st).  So  also 
of  II.  Samuel,  each  of  the  24  chapters  fol- 
low in  order,  and  8  chaptei-s  of  I.  Kings, 
so  that  for  the  30th  day  we  find  I.  Kings, 
caps.  7  and  8.  For  S.  Mark's  Day,  two 
chapters,  Ecclus.  4  and  5,  are  provided. 

The  Scotch  ed.  of  1637  begins  with  Judges 
10  and  II,  and  contains  the  remaining  12 
chapters,  i.e.  to  the  31st.  Then  follow  the 
4  olRuth,  and  the  31  chapters  of  I.  Samuel. 


Next,  eleven  chapters  of  1 1.  Samuel,  which, 
with  the  provision  of  the  two  caps,  of 
Ecclesiasticus  for  S.  Mark's  Day  (as  in 
1604),  complete  the  month. 

The  ed.  of  1662  follows  closely  upon  the 
1604  ed.,  being  throughout  exactly  one 
chapter  behindhand  ;  i.e.  beginning  with 
I.  Samuel,  caps.  5  and  6(insteadof  I.  Sam., 
caps.  6  and  7),  and  ending  with  I.  Kings, 
caps.  6  and  7  (instead  of  1.  Kings,  caps.  7 
and  8).  For  S.  Mark's  Day  also  provision 
is  made. 

The  Second  Lessons  are  throughout  the 
six  editions  the  same. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552,  &c.       47 


APRIL  HATH    XXX   DAYS. 


Second  Edward  VI.  1553. 
Elizabeth,  1559. 


K 

II 

A 

b 

IQ 

c 

8 

d 

16 

e 

S 

f 

K 

IS 

A 

2 

b 

c 

10 

d 

e 

18 

f 

7 

K 

A 

15 

b 

4 

c 

d 

12 

e 

I 

f 

K 

P 

A 

b 

17 

c 

6 

d 

e 

14 

f 

3 

K 

A 

Kalend. 

4  No. 

3  No. 

Prid.  No. 

Nonas. 

8  Id. 

7  Id. 

6  Id. 

5  Id. 

4  Id. 

3  Id. 

Prid.  Id. 

Sol.  in  iauro. 

Idus. 

18  kl. 

Mail. 

17  kl. 

16  kl. 

15  kl. 

14  kl. 

13  kl. 

12  kl. 

II  kl. 

10  kl. 

9kl. 

S.  George. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

Mark  Euan. 

6kl. 

ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 

Prid.  kl. 

viii 

I 

g 

KaUnd. 

xvi 

2 

A 

iv      No. 

V 

3 

b 

iii      No. 

4 

c 

prid.  No. 

xiii 

S 

d 

Nonas. 

ii 

6 

e 

viii     Id. 

7 

f 

vii      Id. 

8 

g 

vi       Id. 

X 

9 

A 

V         Id. 

xviii 

10 

b 

iv       Id. 

vii 

II 

c 

iii       Id. 

12 

d 

prid.  Id. 

XV 

13 

e 

Idus. 

iv 

»4 

f 

xviii   kl. 

IS 

g 

xvii    kl. 

xii 

16 

A 

xvi      kl. 

i 

17 

b 

XV       kl. 

18 

c 

xiv      kl. 

ix 

19 

d 

xiii     kl. 

20 

e 

xii      kl. 

xvii 

21 

f 

xi       kl. 

vi 

22 

g 

X         kl. 

23 

A 

ix       kl. 

xiv 

24 

b 

viii     kl. 

iii 

25 

c 

vii      kl. 

26 

d 

vi        kl. 

xi 

27 

e 

v         kl. 

28 

f 

iv       kl. 

xix 

29 

g 

iii       kl. 

viii 

30 

A 

prid.  kl. 

James 

Ps. 

1 

8 

I 

g 

Kalend. 

2 

16 

2 

A 

4  No. 

3 

S 

3 

b 

3  No. 

4 

4 

c 

prid.  No. 

S 

13 

S 

d 

Nonas. 

6 

2 

6 

e 

8  Id. 

7 

7 

f 

7  Id. 

8 

8 

g 

6  Id. 

9 

10 

9 

A 

5  Id. 

10 

18 

ID 

b 

4  Id. 

II 

7 

II 

c 

3  Id. 

12 

12 

d 

prid.  Id. 

13 

IS 

13 

e 

Idus. 

14 

4 

14 

f 

18  kl. 

15 

IS 

g 

17  kl. 

16 

12 

16 

A 

16  kl. 

17 

I 

17 

b 

15  kl. 

18 

18 

c 

14  kl. 

19 

9 

19 

d 

13  kl. 

20 

20 

e 

12  kl. 

21 

17 

21 

f 

II  kl. 

22 

6 

22 

g 

10  kl. 

23 

23 

A 

9kl. 

24 

14 

24 

b 

8kl. 

25 

3 

2S 

c 

7kl. 

26 

26 

d 

6kl. 

27 

2 

27 

e 

ski. 

28 

28 

f 

4kl. 

29 

19 

29 

g 

3kl. 

30 

8 

30 

A 

prid.  kl. 

Scotch  Liturgry,  1637. 

Gilbert  Bishop. 


Richard. 
Ambrose. 


Sol  in  Tauro. 


MaiL 


Alphege. 
Serf  Bishop. 


S.  George. 
Mark  Evang. 


I.  1604. 


Richard. 
Ambrose. 


Ps. 


Sol.  in  Tauro. 
MaiL 

Alphege. 

S.  George. 
Mark,  Evang. 


13  5 

15  2 

16  J> 

17  5" 

18- 
19.- 
20  t« 


•g 


27  ^ 

28  2 

29  Pk 

30  H 


Ps. 

I 

2 

I 
2 

g 

A 

3 

3 

b 

4 
5 
6 

4 
S 
6 

c 
d 

e 

I 
9 

7 
8 

9 

f 

g 
A 

10 

10 

b 

II 

II 

c 

12 

12 

d 

13 
14 

13 
14 

e 
f 

15 
16 

IS 
16 

g 
A 

17 
18 

17 

18 

b 
c 

19 

19 

d 

20 

20 

e 

21 

21 

1 

22 

22 

g 

23 

23 

A 

24 

24 

b 

25 
26 

25 
26 

c 
d 

27 
28 

28 

e 
f 

29 
30 

29 

30 

i 

Charles  II.  1663. 


Kalend. 

4  No.' 

3  No. 
Pr.  No. 
Nona. 

8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 

5  Id. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Pr.  Id. 
Idus. 
8  kl.  Maij. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
iSkl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

9kl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

Ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
Pr.  kl. 


Richard.B.  ofChichester 
Ambrose  Bish.  of  Milan.  • 


Alphege,Archb.  of  Cant 

S.  George,  Martyr. 

S.  MarkfEvangel.  &'M. 


48 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


MAY. 


MAY. 

^ 
t 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

b 

Kalend, 

I 

PhU.&'Ja. 

I 

2  Re.  IS 

Acts  8 

2  Re.  16 

Judas.  I 

C 

6  No. 

2 

2 

17 

28 

18 

Roma.  I 

d 

5  No. 

3 

3 

19 

Math.  I 

20 

2 

e 

4  No. 

4 

4 

21 

2 

22 

3 

f 

3  No. 

5 

5 

23 

3 

24 

4 

g 

Prid.  No. 

6 

6 

3  Reg.  I 

4 

3  Reg.  2 

5 

A 

Nonas. 

7 

7 

3 

5 

4 

6 

b 

8  Id. 

8 

8 

5 

6 

6 

7 

c 

7  Id. 

9 

9 

7 

7 

8 

8 

d 

6  Id. 

10 

10 

9 

8 

10 

9 

e 

5  Id 

II 

II 

II 

9 

12 

10 

f 

4  Id. 

12 

12 

13 

10 

14 

II 

g 

3ld- 

13 

13 

»5 

II 

16 

12 

A 

Prid.  Id. 

14 

14 

17 

12 

18 

13 

b 

Idus. 

»5 

»5 

19 

13 

20 

14 

c 

17  kL 

16 

16 

21 

14 

22 

15 

d 

16  kl. 

17 

^l 

4  Reg.  I 

15 

4  Re.  2 

16 

e 

iSkl. 

18 

18 

3 

16 

4 

I  Cor.  I 

f 

14  kl. 

19 

19 

5 

17 

6 

2 

i 

13  kl. 

20 

20 

7 

18 

8 

3 

12  kL 

21 

21 

9 

19 

10 

4 

b 

II  kl. 

22 

22 

II 

20 

12 

5 

c 

10  kL 

23 

23 

13 

21 

14 

6 

d 

9kL 

24 

24 

IS 

22 

16 

7 

e 

8kL 

25 

25 

17 

23 

18 

8 

f 

7kL 

26 

26 

19 

24 

20 

9 

g 

6kL 

27 

27 

21 

25 

22 

10 

A 

5kL 

28 

28 

23 

26 

24 

II 

b 

4kL 

29 

29 

25 

27 

I  Esd.  I 

12 

c 

3kL 

30 

30 

lEsd.  2 

28 

3 

»3 

d 

Prid.  kL 

31 

30 

4 

Mark  I 

5 

»4 

Variation  of  the  Lessons  in  successive  Editions. 


The  ed.  of  1552  follows  1549  exactly  as 
far  as  the  29th  day,  when  cap.  25  of 
II.  Kings  is  appointed  for  the  evening, 
as  well  as  for  the  morning,  thus  throwing 
out  the  uniformity  by  one  chapter.  The 
edition  of  1559  corrects  this,  and  is  there- 
fore exactly  uniform  with  1549. 

The  eds.  of  1604,  &c.,  appoint  special 
Lttsons  for  i5.  Philip  and  James'  Day 
(Ecclus.  7  and  9),  and  then  be^nnine  with 
I.  Kings,  caps.  9  and  10,  continue  the  re- 
maining 12  chapters  :  next,  the  35  chapters 
of  II.  Kings.  Of  the  first  book  of  Esdras, 
only  caps.  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  9  are  chosen  ; 
and  of  the  second  book  of  Esdras,  caps. 
I,  a,  4,  5, 6,  8, 9, 10,  13.  The  book  of  Esther, 
caps.  X  to  5,  completes  the  month. 


The  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  after  the  same 
special  Lessons  for  the  first,  begins  II. 
Samuel,  caps.  12  and  13,  and  straight  on 
to  the  24th.  Then  each  of  the  22  chapters 
of  I.  Kings,  and  the  25  chapters  of  II. 
Kings,  complete  the  31  days. 

The  ed.  of  1662,  omitting  the  ist  day, 
beg^ins  with  I.  Kings,  caps.  8  and  9.  com- 
pleting the  22  chapters  of  that  book  and 
the  25  chapters  of  tne  next.  Differing  here 
from  previous  books,  we  find  chosen  Ezra, 
caps.  I,  3,  4,  s,  6,  7,  9  :  of  Nehemiah, 
caps.  I,  2,  4,  5,  6,  8,  9,  10,  13 ;  concluding 
with  Esther,  caps,  i  to  4. 

The  Second  Lessons  are  throughout  the 
six  editions  the  same. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552,  &c.       49 


MAY   HATH  XXXI.   DAYS. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Elizabeth,  1559. 


II 

b 

c 

IQ 

d 

8 

e 

f 

16 

S 

S 

A 

b 

IS 

c 

2 

d 

e 

10 

f 

K 

18 

A 

7 

b 

c 

IS 

d 

4 

e 

f 

12 

K 

I 

A 

b 

Q 

c 

d 

17 

e 

6 

t 

R 

14 

A 

3 

b 

c 

II 

d 

Kalend. 

6  No. 

5  No. 

4  No. 

3  No. 
Prid.  No. 

Nonas. 
Bid. 

7  Id. 

6  Id. 

5  Id. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Prid.  Id. 
Idus. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
15  w. 

14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
lokl. 

gkl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

Ski. 

4kl. 

ski. 
Prid.  kl. 


PkaiJ>  &>  Jac. 


Sol.  in  Gein\r\. 


Junii. 


Ps. 

I 

I 

b 

2 

16 

2 

c 

3 

5 

3 

d 

4 

4 

e 

S 

13 

5 

f 

6 

2 

6 

g 

7 

7 

A 

8 

10 

8 

b 

9 

18 

9 

c 

10 

7 

10 

d 

II 

II 

e 

12  i 

12 

f 

13 

IS 

13 

g 

14 

4 

14 

A 

15 

15 

b 

16 

12 

16 

c 

17 

I 

17 

d 

18 

18 

e 

191 

9 

19 

f 

20 

20 

g 

21 

17 

21 

A 

22 

6 

22 

b 

23 

23 

c 

24 

14 

24 

d 

25 

3 

25 

e 

26 

26 

f 

27 

11 

27 

g 

28' 

28 

A 

29; 

19 

29 

b 

30  t 

8 

30 

c 

301 

16 

31 

d 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Philip  &  Jacob. 
Inv.  of  the  Cross. 

John  Evang. 


Sol.  in  Gemini. 


I 

b 

Kalend. 

xvi 

2 

c 

vi      No. 

V 

3 

d 

V      No. 

4 

e 

iv     No. 

xiii 

S 

f 

iii     No. 

ii 

6 

g 

prid.  No. 

7 

A 

Nonas. 

X 

8 

b 

viii     Id. 

xviii 

9 

c 

vii      Id. 

vii 

10 

d 

vi       Id. 

II 

e 

V        Id. 

12 

f 

iv       Id. 

XV 

13 

g 

iii       Id. 

iv 

14 

A 

prid.  Id. 

IS 

b 

Idus. 

xii 

16 

c 

xvii     kl. 

i 

17 

d 

xvi      kl. 

18 

e 

XV       kl. 

ix 

19 

f 

xiv      kl. 

20 

g 

xiii     kl. 

xvii 

21 

A 

xii       kl. 

vi 

22 

b 

xi        kl. 

23 

c 

X         kl. 

xiv 

24 

d 

ix        kl. 

iii 

2S 

e 

viii      kl. 

26 

f 

vii       kl. 

ii 

27 

g 

vi        kl. 

28 

A 

V         kl. 

xix 

29 

b 

iv        kl. 

viii 

30 

c 

iii        kl. 

xvi 

31 

d 

prid.  kl. 

Junii. 


Duns  tan  e. 


Augustine. 


James  I.  1604. 


Kalend. 

6  No. 
sNo. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
prid.  No. 

Nonas. 
8  Id. 

7  Id. 
6  Id. 
Sid. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

prid.  Id. 
Idus. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
iSkl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

9kl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
prid.  kl. 


Philip  &  Jacob. 
In.  of  the  Cross. 

John  Evang. 


Sol  in  Gemini. 

Junii. 
Dunstane. 

Augustine. 


Ps. 


13  <J> 

14  "I 

15  o 

16  " 
u 

19   g 
20 'H 

21  .3 

22  E 

23  « 
24^ 

25  8 

26  n 

27  ii 

28  >> 

S 

0-, 


29 
30 
30.5 


Ps. 

I 

I 

b 

2  , 

2 

c 

3; 

3 

d 

4 

4 

e 

5 

5 

t 

6 

6 

g 

7 

7 

A 

8 

8 

b 

9 

9 

c 

10 

10 

d 

II 

II 

e 

12 

12 

f 

13 

13 

g 

14 

14 

A 

IS 

15 

b 

16 

16 

c 

17 

17 

d 

18 

18 

e 

19 

19 

f 

20 

20 

g 

21 

21 

A 

22 

22 

b 

23 

23 

c 

24 

24 

d 

25 

25 

e 

26 

26 

f 

27 

27 

g 

28 

28 

A 

29 

29 

b 

30 

30 

c 

31 

31 

d 

Charles  II.  i6&i. 


Kalend. 

6  No. 
sNo. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
Pr.  No. 

Nonce. 
8  Id. 

7  Id. 
6  Id. 
Sid. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Pr.  Id. 
Idus. 
17  kl  Jun. 
16  kl. 
15  kl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

gkl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

sw. 

4kl. 

3kl. 

Pr.  kl. 


S.  Philip  &>  S.  Jacoh, 
lAp.  &'  Mart.  • 
Invention  of  the  Cross. 


S.  John    Evang.    ante 
[port.  Latin.  • 


Dunstan,     Archb.     of 
[Cant. 


[of  Cant. 
Augustin,  first  Archbish. 
Ven.  Bede,  Pr. 

CHARLES  II.  Na.'. 
[&*  Ret. 


so 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


JUNE. 


JUNE. 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

e 

Kalend. 

I 

I 

I  Esd.  6 

Mark  2 

I  Esd.  7 

I  Cor.  IS 

f 

4  No. 

2 

2 

8 

3 

9 

16 

g 

3  No. 

3 

3 

10 

4 

2  Esd.  I 

2  Cor.  I 

A 

Prid.  No. 

4 

4 

2  Esd.  2 

5 

3 

2 

b 

Nonas. 

5 

5 

4 

6 

5 

3 

c 

8  Id. 

6 

6 

6 

7 

7 

4 

d 

7  Id. 

7 

7 

8 

8 

9 

5 

e 

6  Id. 

8 

8 

10 

9 

II 

6 

f 

5  Id. 

9 

9 

12 

lO 

13 

7 

g 

4  Id. 

10 

10 

Hester  i 

II 

Hester  2 

8 

A 

3  Id. 

II 

Bama.  apo. 

II 

3 

Act.  14 

4 

Acts  IS 

b 

Prid.  Id. 

12 

12 

s 

Mar.  12 

6 

2  Cor.  9 

c 

Idus. 

13 

13 

7 

13 

8 

10 

d 

18  kl. 

14 

H 

9 

14 

Job  I 

II 

e 

17  kl. 

IS 

IS 

Job  2 

15 

3 

12 

f 

16  kL 

16 

16 

4 

16 

5 

13 

g 

iSkl. 

17 

17 

6 

Luke  I 

7 

Gala.  I 

A 

14  kl. 

18 

18 

8 

2 

9 

2 

b 

13  kl. 

19 

19 

10 

3 

II 

3 

c 

12  kl. 

20 

20 

12 

4 

13 

4 

d 

II  kl. 

21 

21 

14 

s 

15 

5 

e 

10  kl. 

22 

22 

16 

6 

17.  18 

6 

f 

9kl. 

23 

23 

19 

7 

20 

Ephe.  I 

g 

8kl. 

24 

Na.  Jo.  Ba. 

24 

Mala.  3 

Mat.  3 

Mai.  3  • 

Math.  14 

A 

7kl. 

25 

25 

Job  21 

Lu.  8 

Job  22 

Ephe.  2 

b 

6kL 

26 

26 

23 

9 

24.  25 

3 

c 

5kl. 

27 

27 

26.  27 

10 

28 

4 

d 

4kl. 

28 

28 

29 

II 

30 

5 

e 

3kl. 

29 

S.  Peter. 

29 

31 

Acts  3 

32 

Acts  4 

f 

Prid.  kl. 

30 

30 

33 

Luke  12 

34 

Ephe.  6 

Variation  of  the  Lessons 
The  ed.  of  1552  begins  two  chapters 
behind  1549,  i.e.  Esdr.  4  and  5,  instead  of 
Esdr.  6  and  7.  It  then  repeats  caps.  6, 
7,  and  8,  for  the  evening  as  well  as  morn- 
ing lessons.  On  the  other  hand,  it  omits 
3  Esdr.,  caps.  2,  7,  10,  11,  12,  so  that  on 
the  nth  day  the  lessons  are  again  uniform 
(i.e.  Hest.,  caps,  i  and  2),  and  are  so  con- 
tinued to  the  end. 
The  ed.  of  1559  follows  154^  throughout. 
The  eds.  of  1604,  &c.,  beginning  Esther 
6,  7,  8,  and  9,  follow  on  with  Job,  caps,  i 
to  42  regularly,  giving,  however,  caps. 
17,  18,  as  one  lesson  ;  also  caps.  24,  25, 
and  caps.  26,  27.  The  Proverbs,  caps,  x 
to  16,  follow  regularly.  Proper  lessons, 
however,  for  S.  Barnabas  (Ecclus.  10  and 
12),  and  for  .5". /"f^/rr  (Ecclus.  15  and  ig), 
are  interpolated ;  while  for  .S".  John  Bap- 


in  successive  Editions. 

list,  those  of  Malachi  3  and  4  are  retained, 

as  in  the  three  previous  editions. 

The  Scotch  ed.  of  1637,  beginning  with 
Ezra,  selects  caps,  i,  3,  4,  s,  6.  8,  9,  and  10; 
of  Nehemiah,  caps,  i,  2,4,  5,  6,  8,  g,  10,  13 ; 
of  Esther,  caps,  i  to  10  in  order,  but  9,  loy 
forming  one  lesson.  Then  follows  Job, 
caps.  I  to  32,  in  regular  order,  and  without 
interpolation  for  the  Saints' days.  Malachi, 
caps.  3  and  4  are,  however,  retained  for 
.S".  yohn  Baptist's  Day. 

The  ed.  of  1662  follows  1604  exactly,  but 
one  chapter  behindhand  throughout,  i.e. 
beginning  with  Esther,  caps.  5  and  6,  in- 
stead of  caps.  6  and  7,  ending  with  Pro- 
verbs, caps.  9  and  10,  instead  of  caps.  10 
and  II. 

The  Second  Lessons  are  throughout  the 
six  editions  the  same. 


•  Probably  a  misprint  for  4. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552,  &c.       51 


JUNE   HATH 
Second  Edvsrard  VI.  1553- 
Elizabeth,  1559. 


XXX    DAYS. 


e 

Kalend. 

f 

4  No. 

g 

3  No. 

A 

Prid.  No. 

b 

Nonas. 

c 

8  Id. 

d 

7  Id. 

e 

6  Id. 

f 

sId. 

g 

4  Id. 

A 

aid. 

b 

Prid.  Id. 

c 

Idus. 

d 

18  kl. 

e 

17  kl. 

f 

16  kl. 

g 

15  w. 

A 

14  kl. 

b 

13  kl. 

c 

12  kl. 

d 

II  kl. 

e 

10  kl. 

f 

pkl. 

g 

8kl. 

A 

7kl. 

b 

6kl. 

c 

ski. 

d 

4kl. 

e 

3kl. 

f 

Prid.  kl. 

[Bamabe,  A/.] 

So!,  in  can. 
Julii. 


Term  begin. 


yohn  Baptist. 


S.  Peter  ap. 


James 

Ps. 

I 

I 

e 

Kalend. 

2 

2 

f 

4  No. 

3 

13 

3 

g 

3  No. 

4 

2 

4 

A 

prid.  No. 

S 

5 

b 

Nonas. 

6 

10 

6 

c 

8  Id. 

7 

18 

7 

d 

7  Id. 

8 

7 

8 

e 

6  Id. 

9 

9 

f 

5  Id. 

10 

10 

g 

4  Id. 

II 

IS 

II 

A 

3  Id. 

12 

4 

12 

b 

prid.  Id. 

13 

13 

c 

Idns. 

14 

12 

14 

d 

18  kl. 

15 

I 

15 

e 

17  kl. 

16 

16 

f 

16  kl. 

17 

9 

17 

g 

15  kl. 

18  1 

18 

A 

14  kl. 

191 

17 

19 

b 

13  kl. 

20 

6 

20 

c 

12  kl. 

21 

21 

d 

II  kl. 

22  i 

14 

22 

e 

10  kl. 

23' 

3 

23 

f 

9kl. 

24; 

24 

g 

8kl. 

25  i 

II 

25 

A 

7kl. 

261 

26 

b 

6kl. 

27 

19 

27 

c 

Ski. 

28 

28 

d 

4kl. 

29 

8 

29 

e 

3kl. 

30  i 

6 

30 

f 

prid.  kl. 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 


Nichomede. 
Boniface. 


Columba. 

Bamabe  Apost. 
Sol.  in  Cancro. 
Solstit.  aestivum. 
Julii. 


Coron.  Reg.  Car. 
Edward. 


Fast. 
Johfi.  Baptist. 


Fast, 
.y.  Peter  Apostle. 


I 

e 

Kalend. 

2 

f 

iv     No. 

3 

g 

iii      No. 

4 

A 

prid.  No. 

5 

b 

Nonas. 

6 

c 

viii     Id. 

7 

d 

vii      Id. 

8 

e 

vi       Id. 

9 

f 

V         Id. 

10 

g 

iv       Id. 

II 

A 

iii       Id. 

12 

b 

prid.  Id. 

13 

c 

Idus. 

14 

d 

xvlii   kl. 

15 

e 

xvii     kl. 

16 

f 

xvi      kl. 

17 

g 

XV       kl. 

18 

A 

xiv      kl. 

'9 

b 

xiii     kl. 

20 

c 

xii       kl. 

21 

d 

xi        kl. 

22 

e 

X          kl. 

23 

f 

ix        kl. 

24 

g 

viii     kl. 

25 

A 

vii       kl. 

26 

b 

vi        kl. 

27 

c 

V         kl. 

28 

d 

iv        kl. 

29 

e 

iii        kl. 

30 

f 

prid.  kl. 

1604. 

Nichomede. 

Boniface. 


Bamabe. 

Sol.  in  Cancro. 

Solst.  sestivum. 

JuIiL 


Nati.ofK.  y antes. 
Edward. 


Fast. 
John  Baptist. 


Fast. 
.S".  Peter,  Apost. 


Ps. 


3 

4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 
10 
II 

12  6\ 

13  J 
'4  o 
'5  " 
16 -H 

'7  ^ 

18  a 

19  "H 

20  .53 

21  'I 

22  "3 
23^ 

24  8 
2scq 

26  it 


2Q  "^ 
^  U 

3°  .5 


Ps. 

I 

I 

e 

2 

2 

f 

3 

3 

K 

4 

4 

A 

S 

I 

b 

6 

6 

c 

7 

7 

d 

8 

8 

e 

9 

9 

f 

ID 

10 

g 

II 

II 

A 

12 

12 

b 

13 

13 

c 

14 

14 

d 

IS 

IS 

e 

16 

16 

1 

17 

17 

g 

18 

18 

A 

19 

19 

b 

20 

20 

c 

21 

21 

d 

22 

22 

e 

23 

23 

f 

24 

24 

g 

2-; 

2'i 

A 

26 

26 

b 

27 

27 

c 

28 

28 

d 

29 

29 

e 

30 

30 

i 

Charles  II.  1662. 


Kalend. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
Pr.  No. 
Nona. 

SId. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
Sid. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Pr.  Id. 
Idus. 
8  kl.  Julij. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
iskl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

qkl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

Ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
Pr.  kl. 


NicomedeRom.  Pr.&M. 


Boniface   B.  of  Mentz  • 
[&M. 


S.  Barnabas     Apost. 
i&'M. 


Trans,  of  Ed.  K.  ofW. 

[Sax. 
S.  Alban,  Martyr '. 

Fast. 
NativityqfS.  JohnBapt. 


Fast. 

3".  Peter,     Apostle    &= 

[Mart. 


'  This  (by  error  of  writing  xvii.  for  xxii.)  has  been  placed  in  all  the  Sealed  Books 
against  the  17th  day  of  the  month. 


52 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


JULY. 


JULY. 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  i^JJ. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

g 

Kalend. 

I 

I 

Job  35 

Luk.  13 

Job  36 

Philip.  I 

A 

6  No. 

2 

2 

37 

14 

38 

2 

b 

5  No. 

3 

3 

39 

15 

40 

3 

c 

4  No. 

4 

4 

41 

16 

42 

4 

d 

3  No. 

5 

5 

Proven  I 

17 

Prov.  2 

Collos.  I 

e 

Prid.  No. 

6 

6 

3 

18 

4 

2 

f 

Nonas. 

7 

7 

5 

19 

6 

3 

g 

8  Id. 

8 

8 

7 

20 

8 

4 

A 

7  Id. 

9 

9 

9 

21 

10 

iThes.  I 

b 

6  Id. 

10 

10 

II 

22 

12 

2 

c 

Sid. 

II 

II 

13 

23 

14 

3 

d 

4  Id. 

12 

12 

IS 

24 

16 

4 

e 

3  Id. 

13 

13 

17 

John  I 

18 

5 

f 

Prid.  Id. 

14 

»4 

19 

2 

20 

2Thes.  I 

g 

Idus. 

15 

IS 

21 

3 

22 

2 

A 

17  kl. 

16 

16 

23 

4 

24 

3 

b 

16  kl. 

17 

17 

25 

5 

26 

I  Timo.  I 

c 

15  kl. 

18 

18 

27 

6 

28 

2.  3 

d 

14  kl. 

19 

19 

29 

7 

30 

4 

e 

13  kl. 

20 

20 

31 

8 

Eccles.  I 

5 

f 

12  kl. 

21 

21 

Eccles.  2 

9 

3 

6 

g 

II  kl. 

22 

Magdalen. 

22 

4 

10 

5 

2  Tim.  I 

A 

10  kl. 

23 

23 

6 

II 

7 

2 

b 

9kl. 

24 

24 

8 

12 

9 

3 

c 

8kl. 

25 

Jama  Ap. 

25 

10 

13 

II 

4 

d 

7kL 

26 

26 

12 

14 

Jere  I 

Titus.  I 

e 

6kl. 

27 

27 

Jere.  2 

15 

3 

2.  3 

f 

5kl. 

28 

28 

4 

16 

5 

Phile.  I 

1 

4kl. 

29 

29 

6 

17 

7 

Hebre.  I 

3kl. 

30 

30 

8 

•  18 

9 

2 

b 

Prid.)sL 

31 

30 

lO 

19 

II 

3 

Variation  of  the  Lessons  in  successive  Editions. 


The  eds.  of  1552  and  1559  follow  1549 
throughout. 

The  eds.  of  1604,  &c.,  begin  with  Prov., 
caps.  12  and  13,  and  proceed  regularly, 
omitting  cap.  30,  but  retaining  cap.  31. 
Ecclesiasticus,  caps,  i  to  12,  follow  ;  then 
Jeremiah,  caps,  i  to  29,  but  interrupted 
by  the  interpolation  of  Eccl.,  caps.  21  and 
29,  for  5.  James'  Day. 

The  Scotch  ed.  of  1637  begins  with  Job, 
caps.  33  and  34,  and  complete  the  42 
chapters ;   then   Proverbs,   caps,  i  to  31, 


regularly ;  then  Ecclesiastes,  caps,  i  to  12, 
except  omission  of  cap.  6,  and  interpolation 
of  le.ssons  for  ^.  Ja/nes'  Day.  Isaiah,  caps. 
I  to  8,  conclude  the  month. 

The  ed.  of  1662  again  follows  exactly 
1604,  but  still  one  chapter  behind  through- 
out. Beginning  with  Prov.,  caps.  11  and 
12,  instead  of  caps.  12  and  13,  and  ending 
with  Jeremiah,  caps.  27  and  28,  instead 
of  caps.  28  and  29. 

The  Second  Lessons  are  throughout  the 
six  editions  the  same. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VL  1552,  &c.       53 


JULY   HATH 
Second  Edw.  VI.  1552 
Elizabeth,  1559. 


Term.  end. 
Dog  days. 


XXXI.    DAYS. 


19 

g 

Kalend. 

8 

A 

6  No. 

b 

sNo. 

16 

c 

4  No. 

5 

d 

3  No. 

e 

Prid.  No. 

13 

f 

Nonas. 

2 

g 

8  Id. 

A 

7  Id. 

10 

b 

6  Id. 

c 

5  Id. 

18 

d 

4  Id. 

7 

e 

aid. 

f 

Prid.  Id. 

15 

g 

Idns. 

4 

A 

17  kl. 

b 

16  kl. 

12 

c 

15  w. 

I 

d 

14  kl. 

e 

13  W. 

9 

f 

12  kl. 

g 

II  kl. 

17 

A 

10  kl. 

6 

b 

9kl. 

c 

Ski. 

14 

d 

7kl.- 

3 

e 

6kl. 

f 

Ski. 

II 

g 

4kl. 

A 

ski. 

19 

b 

Prid.  kl. 

Sol  in  Leo. 
Augusti. 


James  apt^st\. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Visit,  of  Mary. 
Martin. 

Palladius. 


Sol  in  Leone. 


V 

I 

g 

Kalend. 

2 

A 

vi     No. 

xiii 

3 

b 

y      No. 

ii 

4 

c 

iv     No. 

5 

d 

iii     No. 

X 

6 

e 

prid.  No. 

xviii 

7 

f 

Nonas. 

vii 

8 

g 

viii     Id. 

9 

A 

vii      Id. 

10 

b 

vi       Id. 

XV 

II 

c 

v        Id. 

iv 

12 

d 

iy       Id. 

13 

e 

iii       Id. 

xi 

14 

f 

prid.  Id. 

15 

g 

Idus. 

X 

16 

A 

xvii    kl. 

17 

b 

xvi      kl. 

18 

c 

XV      kl. 

xvii 

19 

d 

xiv     kl. 

vi 

20 

e 

xiii     kl. 

21 

f 

xii      kl. 

xii 

22 

g 

xi        kl. 

iii 

23 

A 

X         kl. 

24 

b 

ix       kl. 

xi 

25 

c 

viii     kl. 

xix 

26 

d 

vii       kl. 

viii 

27 

e 

vi        kl. 

28 

f 

V         kl. 

xvi 

29 

g 

iv       kl. 

30 

A 

iii       kl. 

V 

31 

b 

prid.  kl. 

James 

Ps. 

S 

I 

g 

Kalend. 

I 

2 

A 

6  No. 

2  1 

13 

3 

b 

sNo. 

3  1 

2 

4 

c 

4  No. 

4  1 

5 

d 

3  No. 

5 
6 

10 

6 

e 

prid.No. 

18 

7 

f 

Nonas. 

7 
g 

7 

8 

g 

8  Id. 

9 

A 

7  Id. 

9 

10 

b 

6  Id. 

10 

IS 

II 

c 

Sid. 

ZI 

12 

3 

12 
13 

d 

e 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

13 

II 

14 

f 

prid.  Id. 

14 
16 

15 

g 

Idus. 

9 

16 
17 

A 

b 

17  kl. 
16  kl. 

17 
18 

18 

c 

iSkl. 

19 
20 

17 

19 

d 

14  kL 

6 

20 
21 

e 
f 

13  kl. 
12  kl. 

21  i 

22  { 

12 

3 

22 

23 

g 
A 

II  kl. 
10  kl. 

23  i 

24! 

24 

b 

9kl. 

II 

25 

c 

8kl. 

25 
26 

19 

26 

d 

7kl. 

8 

27 

e 

6kl. 

27 
28 

28 

f 

ski. 

29 
30 
30 

16 

29 

g 

4kl. 

30 

A 

3kl. 

5 

31 

b 

prid.  kl. 

I.  1604. 

Visit,  of  Mary. 
Martin. 

Dog  dayes. 


Sol  in  Leone. 


Swithune. 

Augusti. 


Margaret. 

Magdalene. 

Fast. 
James,  Apostle. 
AJine. 


Ps. 


3 

4 
5 
6 

7 
3 

9 
10 
II 
12 

13  d> 

14  * 

Ml 
17  ij 

18  5> 

19  a 

21  _s 

22  "I 

23  •« 
24^ 

2S-0 

26  iS 
^7    ' 

28  o 

29  a 

3°a; 

30  „ 


Swithun. 
Augusti. 


Margaret. 

Magdalene. 

Fast. 

James  Apostle. 

Anne. 


Ps.\ 

i! 

I 

g 

2  j 

2 

A 

3 

3 

b 

4 

4 

c 

S 

,S 

d 

6 

6 

e 

7i 

7 

f 

8 

8 

g 

9! 

9 

A 

lO 

10 

b 

II 

II 

c 

12 

12 

d 

13 

13 

e 

14 

14 

t 

^■^l 

IS 

g 

16! 

16 

A 

17 

17 

b 

18 

18 

c 

19' 

19 

d 

201 

20 

e 

21 

21 

i 

22  1 

22 

g 

23 

2^ 

A 

24 

24 

b 

2S 

2S 

c 

26 

26 

d 

27 

27 

e 

28 

28 

i 

29 

29 

g 

301 

30 

A 

31  1 

31 

bi 

Charles  II.  1662. 


Kalend. 
6  No. 
sNo. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
Pr.  No. 

Nonte. 
8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
sId. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

pr.  Id. 
Idus. 
17  kl.  Aug. 
16  kl. 
iSkl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

9kl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
Pr.  kl. 


Visitat.    of  the    BI.  V.  .B 

[Mary,  o 

Transl.  of  S.  Martin  B.   u 


I 

Swithun,    B.    Winch.      « 
[Transl.  ^ 


Margaret,  V.  &M.atAnt. 

S.  Mary  Magdalen  ". 

Fast. 

5.  James,  Apo.  &'Ma  rt . 

S.  Anne,   Moth,  to  the 

[BL  Virg.  Mary. 


"  In  one  edition  (Dublin)  of  the  Sealed  Book  this  is  left  against  the  21st  day ;  in  other 
editions  it  is  corrected. 


54 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


AUGUST. 


AUGUST. 

I 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

C 

Kalend. 

I 

I 

Jere.  12 

John,  20 

Jere.  13 

Hebr.  4 

d 

4  No. 

2 

2 

14 

21 

15 

5 

e 

3  No. 

3 

3 

16 

Acts  I 

17 

6 

f 

Prid.  No. 

4 

4 

18 

2 

19 

7 

g 

Nonas. 

5 

20 

3 

21 

8 

A 

8  Id. 

6 

6 

22 

4 

23 

9 

b 

7  Id. 

7 

7 

24 

5 

25 

10 

c 

6  Id. 

8 

8 

26 

6 

27 

II 

d 

Sid. 

9 

9 

28 

7 

29 

12 

e 

4  Id. 

10 

10 

30 

8 

31 

13 

f 

3  Id. 

II 

II 

32 

9 

33 

Jacob.  I 

g 

Prid.  Id. 

12 

12 

34 

10 

35 

2 

A 

Idus. 

13 

13 

3^ 

II 

37 

3 

b 

19  kl. 

14 

H 

38 

12 

39 

4 

c 

18  kl. 

IS 

15 

40 

13 

41 

5 

d 

17  kL 

16 

16 

42 

14 

43 

Peter.  I 

e 

16  kl. 

17 

17 

44 

IS 

45.  46 

2 

f 

15  kl. 

18 

18 

47 

16 

48 

3 

g 

14  kl. 

19 

19 

49 

^l 

50 

4 

A 

13  kl. 

20 

20 

51 

18 

52 

S 

b 

12  kL 

21 

21 

Lament.  I 

19 

Lamen.  2 

2  Peter.  I 

c 

II  kl. 

22 

22 

3 

20 

4 

2 

d 

10  kl. 

23 

23 

5 

21 

Ezech.  2 

3 

e 

9kl. 

24 

Bart.Apost. 

24 

Ezech. 3 

22 

6 

I  John  I 

f 

8kl. 

25 

25 

7 

23 

13 

2 

g 

7kl. 

26 

26 

14 

24 

18 

3 

A 

6kL 

27 

27 

33 

25 

34 

4 

b 

Ski. 

28 

28 

Dani.  I 

26 

Dani.  2 

5 

c 

4kl. 

29 

29 

3 

27 

4 

2. 3  John. 

d 

3kl. 

30 

30 

5 

28 

6 

Jude  I 

e 

Prid.  kl. 

31 

30 

7 

Math.  I 

8 

Roma.  I 

Variation  of  the  Lessons  in  successive  Editions. 


The  eds.  of  1552  and  1539  follow  1549 
throughout. 

The  eds.  of  1601  hcgin  with  Jeremiah, 
caps.  30  and  31,  and  completes  the  52  chap- 
ters regularly,  except  that  caps.  45  and  46 
serve  for  one  lesson.  Of  Lamentations, 
caps.  I  to  5  follow,  and  then  of  Ezekiel, 
caps.  2,  3,  6,  7,  13,  14,  18,  33,  34,  are  se- 
lected. Of  Daniel,  caps,  i  to  13  (the  latter 
having  the  note  that  it  is  to  be  read  only 
to,  "And  King  Artyages").  For  S.Bar- 
tholotne-w's  Day,  Ecclus.  25  and  29  are  in- 
terpolated ;  and  for  the  first  lesson  at  Even- 
song, on  the  26th  day,  Prov.  30.  On  the 
27th  day,  Hosea,  cap.  i  ;  and  Tor  the  first 
lesson  at  Evensong,  caps.  2  and  3,  and  the 
book  is  continued  to  cap.  12  only,  caps.  5 
and  6  forming  one  lesson. 


The  Scotch  ed.  of  1637  begins  with  Isaiah, 
caps.  9  and  10,  and  is  continued  regularly 
throughout  to  cap.  66,  except  Ecclus.  5 
and  8,  is  interpolated  for  .J.  BartJtolomew's 
Day  ;  and  on  the  last  day  of  the  month, 
Jeremiah  is  commenced,  by  caps,  i  and  2. 

The  ed.  of  i66a  begins  with  Jeremiah 
29  and  30,  which  is  continued  regularly  to 
cap.  52  (except  that  caps.  45  and  46  form 
one  lesson).  Then  follow  the  five  chapters 
of  Lamentations  ;  of  Ezekiel,  caps.  2,  3,  6, 
7,  13,  14,  18,  33,  and  34  are  selected  ;  and 
of  Daniel,  caps,  i  to  12  only.  Hosea,  caps. 
I  to  13  follow,  but  caps.  2  and  3,  as  well  as 
5  and  6,  form  but  one  lesson.  S.  Bartho- 
lontt~!v's  Day  is  left  blank. 

The  Secotui Lessons  are  the  same  through- 
out the  six  editions. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552,  &c.       55 


AUGUST  HATH  XXXI.  DAYS. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  155a. 
Elizabeth,  1559. 


f 

i 

b 
c 
d 

e 
f 

e 

A 
b 
c 
8    d 


Kalend. 

4  No. 

3  No. 
Prid.  No. 

Nonas. 
8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 

5  Id. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Prid.  Id. 
Jdus, 
19  kl. 
18  kl. 
17  kl. 
i6kl. 
15  kl. 
14  kL 
13  kL 
13  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

okl. 

8kl. 

7kL 

6kl. 

5kl. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
Prid.  kl. 


Lammas. 


S.  Laurence. 


Septembris. 
Sol  in  virgo. 


Bartho.  apo. 


Ps. 

I 

13 

I 

c 

2 

2 

2 

d 

3 

3 

e 

4 

10 

4 

f 

S 

18 

5 

g 

6 

7 

6 

A 

7 

7 

b 

8 

8 

c 

9 

IS 

9 

d 

10 

4 

10 

e 

II 

II 

f 

12 

II 

12 

g 

13 

13 

A 

14 

14 

b 

IS 

10 

IS 

c 

16 

16 

d 

17 

17 

17 

e 

18 

6 

18 

f 

19 

19 

g 

20 

13 

20 

A 

21 

3 

21 

b 

22 

22 

c 

23 

II 

23 

d 

24 

19 

24 

e 

25 

8 

2S 

f 

26 

26 

g 

27 

16 

27 

A 

28 

S 

28 

b 

29 

29 

c 

30 

30 

d 

30 

13 

31 

e 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
Lammas. 


Transfigurat. 
Name  of  Jesus. 


Lawrence. 


I 

c 

Kalend.  \ 

2 

d 

iv 

No. 

3 

e 

iii 

No. 

4 

f 

prid 

No. 

5 

g 

Nonas.   \ 

6 

A 

viii 

Id. 

7 

b 

vii 

Id. 

8 

c 

vi 

Id. 

9 

d 

V 

Id. 

10 

e 

iv 

Id. 

II 

f 

'". 

Id. 

12 

g 

prid 

Id. 

13 

A 

Idus.     1 

14 

b 

xix 

kl. 

IS 

c 

xviii 

kl. 

16 

d 

xvii 

kl. 

17 

e 

xvi 

kl. 

18 

f 

XV 

kl. 

19 

g 

xiv 

kl. 

20 

A 

xiii 

kl. 

21 

b 

xii 

kl. 

22 

c 

xi 

kl. 

23 

d 

X 

kl. 

24 

e 

ix 

kl. 

25 

f 

viii 

kl. 

26 

g 

vii 

kl. 

27 

A 

vi 

kl. 

28 

b 

v 

kl. 

29 

c 

iv 

kl. 

30 

d 

iii 

kl. 

31 

e 

prid 

kl. 

Sol  in  Virgine. 
Septembris. 


Fast. 
Bartholotn.  Afo. 


Augustine. 
Behead,  of  John. 


James  I.  1604. 


Kalend. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
prid.  No. 
Nonas. 

8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
Sid. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

pnd.  Id. 
Idus. 
19  kl. 
18  kl. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
15  kl. 
14  kL 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

9kl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
pnd.  kl. 


Lammas. 


Ps. 


Transfigurat. 
Name  of  Jesus. 


Laurence. 
Sol  in  Virgine. 

Septembris. 


Fast. 
Barthol.  A/ost. 


Augustine. 
Behead,  of  Jo. 


12 


13  o< 

14  "n 

16  •" 

18 1 

19  a 

20  "H 
21 .2 

22  S 

23  K 

24  .S 

25  § 

26  n 

27  S 

^8  ^ 

29  (£ 

30  „ 
3o.£ 


Charles  II.  1662. 


Ps. 

I 

I 

<=! 

3 

2 

d 

3 

3 

e 

4 

4 

f 

S 

S 

g 

6 

6 

A 

7 

7 

b 

8 

8 

c 

9 

9 

d 

10 

10 

e 

II 

II 

f 

12 

12 

g 

13 

13 

A 

14 

14 

b 

IS 

15 

c 

16 

16 

d 

17 

17 

e 

18 

18 

f 

19 

19 

g 

20 

20 

A 

21 

21 

b 

22 

22 

c 

23 

23 

d 

24 

24 

e 

25 

25 

f 

26 

26 

g 

27 

27 

A 

28 

28 

b 

29 

29 

c 

30 

30 

d 

31 

31 

e 

Kalend. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
Pr.  No. 

Nome. 
8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
sId. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Pr.  Id. 
Idus. 
19  kl.  Sept. 
18  kl. 
17  kl. 
16  kL 
iskL 
14  kL 
13  kL 
12  kL 
II  kL 
10  kL 

gkL 

8kL 

7kL 

6kL 

skL 

4kL 

3kL 
Pr.  kl. 


Lammas  Day. 


Transfigur.  of  our  Lord. 
Name  of  Jesus. 


S.  Laur.   Archdeac.    of 
[Rome,  &  Mart. 


Fast. 

5".  Bartholomew,    Ap. 
[&'M. 

[C.  D. 
S.  Aug.  Bish.  of  Hippo, 
Beheading  of  S.  John 

[Bapt. 


56 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


SEPTEMBER. 


SEPTEMBER. 

1* 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  Z>jj. 

I  ZfJJ. 

2  Z^'j-j. 

f 

Kalend. 

I 

I 

Dani.  9 

Math.  2 

Dani.  10 

Roma.  2 

g 

4  No. 

2 

2 

II 

3 

12 

3 

A 

3  No. 

3 

3 

n 

4 

14 

4 

b 

Prid.  No. 

4 

4 

Ose.  I 

5 

Ose.  2.  3 

5 

c 

Nonas. 

S 

4 

6 

5-6 

•     6 

d 

8  Id. 

6 

6 

7 

7 

8 

7 

e 

7  Id. 

7 

7 

9 

8 

10 

8 

f 

6  Id. 

8 

8 

II 

9 

12 

9 

g 

5  Id. 

9 

9 

13 

10 

14 

10 

A 

4  Id. 

10 

10 

Joel  I 

II 

Joel  2 

II 

b 

3  Id. 

II 

II 

3 

12 

Amos  I 

12 

c 

Prid.  Id. 

12 

12 

Amos.  2 

13 

3 

13 

d 

Idus. 

13 

13 

4 

14 

S 

14 

e 

18  kl. 

14 

14 

6 

IS 

7 

15 

f 

17  kl. 

IS 

15 

8 

16 

9 

16 

g 

16  kl. 

16 

16 

Abdias.  I 

17 

Jonas.  I 

I  Cor.  I 

A 

15  kl. 

17 

17 

Jon.  2.  3 

18 

4 

2 

b 

14  kl. 

18 

18 

Miche.  I 

19 

Miche.  2 

3 

c 

13  kl. 

19 

19 

3 

20 

4 

4 

d 

12  kl. 

20 

20 

5 

21 

6 

s 

e 

II  kL 

21 

Mathewe. 

21 

7 

22 

Naum.  I 

6 

f 

10  kl. 

22 

22 

Naum.  2 

23 

3 

7 

g 

9kl. 

23 

23 

Abacucl 

24 

Abacu.  2 

8 

A 

8kL 

24 

24 

3 

2S 

Sopho.  I 

9 

b 

7kl. 

25 

25 

Soph.  2 

26 

3 

10 

c 

6kl. 

26 

26 

Agge.  I 

27 

Agge.  2 

II 

d 

Ski. 

27 

27 

Zech,  I 

28 

Zech.  2. 3 

12 

e 

4kl. 

28 

28 

4-  S 

Marke  i 

6 

13 

f 

3kl. 

29 

Michael. 

29 

7 

2 

8 

14 

g 

Prid.  kl. 

30 

30 

9 

3 

10 

15 

Variation  of  the  Lessons  in  successive  Editions, 


The  eds.  of  1552  and  1559  follow  1549 
throughout. 

The  eds.  of  1604,  &c.,  begin  with  Hosea, 
caps.  13  and  14;  then  Joel,  caps,  i  to  3  ; 
Amos,  caps,  i  to  9  ;  Obadiah,  cap.  i  ; 
Jonah,  caps,  i  to  4  (caps.  2  and  3  form- 
ing but  one  lesson)  ;  Micah,  caps,  i  to  7  ; 
Nahum,  caps,  i  to  3  ;  Habakkuk,  caps,  i 
to  3  ;  Zeph.  i  to  3  ;  Haggai,  caps.  1  and  2  ; 
Zechariah,  caps.  1  to  14  (but  caps.  2  and  3, 
as  well  as  4  and  5,  form  but  one  lesson); 
Malachi,  caps,  i  to  4  ;  Tobit,  caps,  i  to  4. 
For  .y.  Matthnu's  and  for  5".  Michaels 
Days  are  interpolated  respectively  Ecclus, 
caps.  35,  38,  and  39,  44. 

The  Scotch  ed.  0(1637  begins  with  Jere- 
miah, caps.  3  and  4,  which  is  continued  to 
cap.  5a.    Lamentations,  i  to  5,  follow,  and 


then  of  Ezekiel,  cap.  3  repeated,  and 
cap.  4.  For  S.  Mattltew's  Day,  Ecclus., 
caps.  35  and  49  is  interpolated,  but  no 
provision  made  for  ^.  Michael's  Day. 

The  ed.  1662  begins  with  Hosea,  cap.  14  ; 
then  Joel,  caps,  i  to  3  ;  Amos,  caps,  i 
to  9 ;  Obadiah  ;  Jonah,  caps,  i  to  4  (caps. 
3  and  3  forming  but  one  lesson)  ;  Mic.ih, 
caps.  I  to  7 ;  Nahum,  caps,  i  to  3  ;  Ha- 
bakkuk, caps.  I  to  3  ;  Zephaniah,  caps,  i 
to  3  ;  Haggai,  caps,  i  and  2  ;  Zechariah, 
caps.  I  to  14  (but  caps.  2  and  3,  as  well  as 
caps.  4  and  5,  forming  but  one  lesson) ; 
Malachi,  caps,  i  to  4  ;  Tobit,  caps,  i  to  6. 
A  blank  is  left  both  for  S.  Matthew  and 
for  6^.  Michael  and  All  A  ngels. 

The  Second LessoHsaxc  the  same  through- 
out the  six  editions. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552,  &c.        57 


SEPTEMBER   HATH  XXX.    DAYS. 


Second  Edward  VI.  1552. 
Elizabeth,  1559. 


16 

f 

s 

K 

A 

13 

b 

2 

c 

d 

10 

e 

f 

18 

K 

7 

A 

b 

^•i 

c 

4 

d 

e 

12 

f 

I 

K 

A 

9 

b 

c 

17 

d 

6 

e 

f 

14 

K 

^ 

A 

b 

II 

c 

d 

IQ 

e 

8 

i 

g 

Kalend. 

4  No. 

3  No. 
Prid.  No. 

Notias. 
8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 

5  Id. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Prid.  Id. 
Idtis. 
iSkl. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
15  kl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

okl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

ski. 

4kl. 

3kl- 
PriJ.  kl. 


Dog  days  end. 


Octobris. 
Sol  in  Libra, 


S.  Matthew. 


S.  Michael\l\. 


James 

Ps. 

I 

2 

I 

f 

Kalend. 

2 

2 

g 

4  No. 

3  ' 

ID 

3 

A 

3  No. 

4 

18 

4 

b 

prid.  No. 

5 

7 

S 

c 

Nonas. 

6 

6 

d 

8  Id. 

7 

7 

e 

7  Id. 

8 

S 

8 

f 

6  Id. 

9 

3 

9 

g 

Sid. 

10 

10 

A 

4  Id. 

II 

12 

II 

b 

3  Id. 

12 

10 

12 

c 

prid.  Id. 

13 

9 

13 

d 

Idus. 

14 

14 

e 

18  kl. 

IS 

IS 

f 

17  kl. 

16 

17 

16 

g 

16  kl. 

17 

6 

17 

A 

iSkl. 

18 

18 

b 

14  kl. 

'9 

14 

19 

c 

13  kl. 

20 

3 

20 

d 

12  kl. 

21  ' 

21 

e 

II  kl. 

22  ' 

II 

22 

f 

10  kl. 

23 

13 

23 

g 

9kl. 

24 

8 

24 

A 

8kl. 

2S 

25 

b 

7kl. 

26! 

26 

c 

6kl. 

27: 

16 

27 

d 

ski. 

28 

5 

28 

e 

4kl. 

29 

13 

29 

f 

3kl. 

30 

3 

30 

g 

prid.  kl. 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
Giles. 


Enurchus  Bish. 
Nativ.  of  Mary. 


Sol  in  Libra. 

Holy  Cross, 
^quinoctium. 

Autumnale. 

Lambert. 

Ninian  Bishop. 

Fast. 
iT.  Matthe%v. 


ii 

I 

f 

Kalend. 

2 

g 

iv      No. 

X 

3 

A 

iii     No. 

xviii 

4 

b 

prid.  No. 

vii 

S 

c 

Nonas. 

6 

d 

viii     Id. 

■J 

e 

vii      Id. 

XV 

8 

f 

vi       Id. 

iv 

9 

g 

V        Id. 

10 

A 

iv       Id. 

xii 

II 

b 

iii       Id. 

i 

12 

c 

prid.  Id. 

ix 

13 

d 

Idus. 

14 

e 

xviii   kl. 

IS 

f 

xvii     kl. 

xvii 

16 

g 

xvi      kl. 

vi 

17 

A 

XV       kl. 

18 

b 

xiv      kl. 

xiv 

19 

c 

xiii     kl. 

iii 

20 

d 

xii       kl. 

21 

e 

xi        kl. 

xi 

22 

f 

X          kl. 

xix 

23 

g 

ix        kl. 

viii 

24 

A 

viii      kl. 

25 

b 

vii       kl. 

26 

c 

vi        kl. 

xvi 

27 

d 

v         kl. 

V 

28 

e 

iv        kl. 

xiii 

29 

f 

iii        kl. 

ii 

30 

g 

prid.  kl. 

Giles. 


Ps. 


Dog  dayes  end. 

Enurchus,  Bish.' 
Nati.  of  Mary. 


Sol  in  Libra. 

Holy  Cros.s. 

Equinoctium. 

Autumnale. 

Lambert. 


Fast. 
5".  Matthew. 


Cyprian. 


5'.  Michael. 
Hierome. 


3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 
10 
II 

12  6\ 

13  lO 

17  ts 

i8  a 

19  "C 

20  J3 

21  ■§ 

22  '3 
23.3 

24  8 

25  M 

26  <i 

u 

27  >< 

28  2 

29  „ 

30.5 


Adaman  Bish. 
Cyprian. 

.S".  Michael. 
Hierome. 


Ps. 

I 

1 

f 

2 

2 

g 

3 

3 

A 

4 

4 

b 

S 

S 

c 

6 

6 

d 

7 

7 

e 

8 

8 

i 

9 

9 

g 

10 

10 

A 

II 

II 

b 

12, 

12 

c 

13 

13 

d 

14 

14 

e 

IS 

IS 

i 

16 

16 

B 

17 

17 

A 

18 

18 

b 

19 

19 

c 

20 

20 

d 

21 

21 

e 

22 

32 

f 

23 

23 

g 

24 

24 

A 

2S 

2S 

b 

26 

26 

c 

27 

27 

d 

28 

28 

e 

29 

29 

t 

30 

30 

g 

Charles  II.  1662. 


S.  Cyprian,  Archbish.  of 
[Carth.  &  M. 
iA  ngels. 
S.  Michael   &>    All 
S.  Jerom.  Pr.  Conf.  &Doct. 

'  This  erroneous  reading  of  "Evurtius"  is  found  repeated  in  all  subsequent  editions, 
even  to  this  day. 


Kalend. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
Pr.  No. 
Nonce. 

8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
sId. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Pr.  Id. 
Idus. 
18  kl.  Oct. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
iskl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

gkl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
Pr.  kl. 


Giles,  Abbot  &  Confess. 


[leans.  S 
Enurchus,  Bish.  of  Or-  ^g 
NativJtyoftheBl.V.  M.  a 

V 

§ 


Holy-Cross  day. 


Landbert,  Bish.&  Mart. 


Fast. 

S.Matthew,  Ap.  Eva. 

l&'M. 


58 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


OCTOBER. 


OCTOBER. 

P 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

I  Less. 

2  ZrJj. 

A 

Kalend. 

I 

I 

Zacha.  1 1 

Mark  4 

Zacha.  12 

I  Cor.  16 

b 

6  No. 

2 

2 

13 

5 

14 

2  Cor.  I 

c 

5  No. 

3 

3 

Mala.  I 

6 

Mala.  2 

2 

d 

4  No. 

4 

4 

3 

7 

4 

3 

e 

3  No. 

5 

5 

Toby.  I 

8 

Toby.  2 

4 

f 

Prid.  No. 

6 

6 

3 

9 

4 

S 

g 

Nonas. 

7 

7 

5 

10 

6 

6 

A 

8  Id. 

8 

8 

7 

II 

8 

7 

b 

7  Id. 

9 

9 

9 

12 

10 

8 

c 

6  Id. 

ID 

10 

II 

13 

12 

9 

d 

Sid. 

II 

II 

13 

14 

14 

10 

e 

4  Id. 

12 

12 

Judith  I 

IS 

Judit.  2 

II 

f 

3  Id. 

13 

13 

3 

16 

4 

12 

g 

Prid.  Id. 

14 

14 

5 

Lu.  di.  I 

6 

13 

A 

Idus. 

15 

IS 

7 

di.  I 

8 

Gala.  I 

b 

17  kL 

16 

16 

9 

2 

10 

2 

c 

16  kl. 

17 

17 

II 

3 

12 

3 

d 

iSkL 

18 

Luc.  Evan. 

18 

13 

4 

14 

4 

e 

14  kl. 

19 

19 

15 

5 

16 

5 

f. 

13  kl. 

20 

20 

Sap.  I 

6 

Sapi.  2 

6 

i 

12  kl. 

21 

21 

3 

7 

4 

Ephe.  I 

II  kl. 

22 

22 

5 

8 

6 

2 

b 

lokl. 

23 

23 

7 

9 

8 

3 

c 

9kl. 

24 

24 

9 

ID 

10 

4 

d 

8kL 

25 

25 

II 

II 

12 

5 

e 

7kl. 

26 

26 

13 

12 

14 

6 

f 

6kl. 

27 

27 

15 

13 

16 

Philip.  I 

g 

5kl. 

28 

Sy.&'Ju. 

28 

17 

14 

iS 

2 

A 

4kl. 

29 

29 

19 

IS 

Eccls.  I 

3 

b 

3kl. 

30 

30 

Eccls.  2 

16 

3 

4 

c 

Prid.\l. 

31 

30 

4 

17 

5 

CoUos,  I 

Variation  of  the  Lessons  in  successive  Editions. 


The  eds.  of  1552  and  1559  follow  1549 
throughout. 

The  eds.  of  1604,  &c.,  begin  with  Exodus 
6  and  Joshua  20,  the  former  being  read 
only  to  the  14th  verse.  Then  Tobit,  cap. 
7,  and  at  Evensong,  Joshua  22.  Then 
Tobit,  caps.  9  to  14  ;  Judith,  i  to  16 ; 
Wisdom,  I  to  19  ;  Ecclus.  8  to  13  ;  Ecclus. 
51,  and  Job  i,  being  interpolated  for  S. 
Lukt^s  Day,  and  Job,  caps.  24,  25,  and 
42,  for  5".  Simon  and  S.  yude ;  caps.  24 
and  25,  forming  one  lesson. 

The  Scotch  ed.  of  1637  begins  with  Ere- 
kiel  5  and  6,  and  completes  the  25  chap- 


ters, only  omitting  cap.  10,  and  then  con- 
tinues with  caps.  34  to  37  ;  Daniel,  caps. 
I  to  12 ;  Hosea,  i  to  14  ;  Joel,  i  to  3  ; 
Amos,  I  to  7,  ending  with  Prov.  11  and  12. 
S.  Luke's,  and  S. Simon  and  S.  Jude's  Day, 
take  the  ordinary  lessons. 

The  ed.  1662  begins  with  Tobit  7  and  8, 
and  continues  regularly  to  the  14th  chap- 
ter ;  and  then  follows  1604,  only  being  two 
chapters  in  front  all  the  while,  and  leaving 
a  space  opposite  .y.ZK^f'j,  vciA.  S.Simon 
«nd  5'.  yudes  Day. 

The  Second L  essons  are  the  same  through- 
out the  six  editions. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI .  1552,  &c. 


59 


OCTOBER  HATH  XXXI.  DAYS. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  155a. 

Elizabeth,  1559. 

Ps. 

I 

Kalend. 

6  No. 

2 

5  No. 

3 

4  No. 

4 

3  No. 

5 

Prid.  No. 

6 

Nonas. 

7 

8  Id. 

8 

7  Id. 

Tenne  begin. 

9 

6  Id. 

10 

5  Id. 

II 

4  Id. 

12 

3  Id. 

13 

Prid.  Id. 

Sol  in  scor. 

14 

Idus. 

15 

17  kl. 

Nouembris. 

16 

16  kl. 

17 

15  kl. 

Luke  Euan. 

18 

14  kl. 

19 

13  kl. 

20 

12  kl. 

21 

II  kl. 

22 

10  kl. 

23 

pkl. 

24 

8kl. 

25 

7kl. 

26 

6kl. 

27 

ski. 

Simon.  &'  Ju. 

28 

4kl. 

29 

3kl. 

30 

Prid.  kl. 

30 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
Remig. 


Faith. 


X 

A 

Kalend. 

3 

b 

vi     No. 

3 

c 

V       No. 

4 

d 

iv     No. 

5 

e 

iii     No. 

6 

f 

prid.  No. 

7 

g 

Nonas. 

8 

A 

viii     Id. 

9 

b 

vii      Id. 

10 

c 

vi       Id. 

II 

d 

v        Id. 

12 

e 

iv       Id. 

13 

f 

iii       Id. 

14 

g 

prid.  Id. 

IS 

A 

IdllS. 

16 

b 

xvii     kl. 

17 

c 

xvi     kl. 

18 

d 

XV       kl. 

19 

e 

xiv     kl. 

20 

f 

xiii     kl. 

21 

g 

xii      kl. 

22 

A 

xi        kl. 

23 

b 

X          kl. 

24 

c 

ix        kl. 

2S 

d 

viii     kl. 

26 

e 

vii       kl. 

27 

f 

vi        kl. 

28 

g 

v         kl. 

29 

A 

iv       kl. 

30 

b 

iii       kl. 

31 

c 

prid.  kl. 

Denis. 


Sol  in  Scorpio. 
Edward. 


Novembris. 
Etheklrede. 
Luke  Evang. 


Crispine. 

Fast. 
Simon  <5f»  Jude. 


Fast. 


James  I.  1604. 

Kalend.  Remig. 

6  No. 
sNo. 

4  No. 

3  No. 
prid. No. 
Nonas. 

8  Id. 

7  Id. 
6  Id. 

5  Id. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

prid.  Id. 
Idus. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
iSkl. 
14  kl. 

13  W- 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

pkl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
prid.  kl. 


Ps. 


Faith. 


Denis. 


Sol  in  Scorp. 
Edward. 


Novembris. 

Etheldrede. 

Luke,  Evang. 


Chrispine. 

Fast. 
Simon  &"  Jude. 


Fast. 


Ps. 

X 

I 

A 

2 

2 

b 

3 

3 

c 

4 

4 

d 

5 

S 

e 

6 

6 

f 

7 

7 

g 

8 

8 

A 

9 

9 

b 

10 

ID 

c 

II 

II 

d 

12 

12 

e 

13 

13 

f 

14 

14 

g 

15 

15 

A 

16 

16 

b 

17 

17 

c 

18 

18 

d 

19 

19 

e 

20 

20 

f 

21 

21 

g 

22 

22 

A 

23 

23 

b 

24 

24 

c 

25 

25 

d 

26 

26 

e 

27 

27 

f 

28 

28 

g 

29 

29 

A 

30 

30 

b 

31 

31 

c 

Charles  II.  1662. 

Kalend. 

Remigius,     Bish.     of 

6  No. 

[Rhemes. 

sNo. 

4  No. 

3  No. 

Pr.  No. 

Faith,  Virg.  &  Mart. 

Nona. 

8  Id. 

7  Id. 

S.  Denys,  Areop.  B.  &  M. 

6  Id. 

5  Id. 

4  Id. 

3  Id. 

Transl.  of  K.  Edw.  Conf. 

pr.  Id. 

Idus. 

17  kl.  Nov. 

16  kl. 

Etheldred,  Virg. 

iskl. 

vS".  Luke,  Evangelist. 

14  kl. 

13  kl. 

12  kl. 

II  kl. 

10  kl. 

9kl. 

8kl. 

Crispin,  Mart. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

Fast. 

ski. 

.S".  Sitn.  &=  S.  Jude,  A. 

4kl. 

i&'M. 

3kl. 

Pr.  kl. 

Fast 

6o 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


NOVEMBER. 


NOVEMBER. 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

I  Less. 

2  Z«j. 

d 

Kalend. 

I 

All  Saints. 

I 

Sap.  3 

He.11. 12. 

Sap.  s 

Apoc.  19 

e 

4  No. 

2 

2 

Eccle.  6 

Lu.  18 

Eccle.  7 

Colics.  2 

f 

3  No. 

3 

3 

8 

19 

9 

3 

g 

Prid. 

4 

4 

10 

20 

II 

4 

A 

Nonas. 

5 

5 

12 

21 

13 

I  Thes.  I 

b 

8  Id. 

6 

6 

14 

22 

15 

2 

c 

7  Id. 

7 

7 

16 

23 

17 

3 

d 

6  Id. 

8 

8 

18 

24 

19 

4 

e 

Sid. 

9 

9 

20 

John  I 

21 

5 

f 

4  Id. 

10 

10 

22 

2 

23 

2  Thes.  I 

g 

3ld- 

II 

II 

24 

3 

25 

2 

A 

Prid.  Id. 

12 

12 

26 

4 

27 

3 

b 

Idus. 

13 

»3 

28 

5 

29 

I  Timo.  I 

c 

18  kl. 

14 

14 

30 

6 

31 

2.3 

d 

17  kl. 

15 

15 

32 

7 

33 

4 

e 

16  kL 

16 

16 

34 

8 

35 

f 

iSkl. 

17 

17 

36 

9 

37 

6 

g 

14  kl. 

18 

18 

38 

10 

39 

2  Tim.  I 

A 

13  kl. 

19 

19 

40 

II 

41 

2 

b 

12  kl. 

20 

20 

42 

12 

43 

3 

c 

iikL 

21 

21 

44 

13 

45 

4 

d 

10  kL 

22 

22 

46 

14 

47 

Titus  I 

e 

9kL 

23 

23 

48 

IS 

49 

2-3 

f 

8kL 

24 

24 

50 

16 

51 

Phile.  I 

g 

7kl. 

25 

25 

Baruc.  I 

17 

Baruc.  2 

Hebre.  I 

A 

6kl. 

26 

26 

3 

18 

4 

2 

b 

SkL 

27 

27 

5 

19 

6 

3 

c 

4kL 

28 

28 

Esay.  I 

20 

Esay.  2 

4 

d 

3kl. 

29 

29 

3 

21 

4 

5 

e 

Prid.  kl. 

30 

Andre.  Apo. 

30 

5 

Acts  I 

6 

6 

Variation  of  the  Lessons 

The  eds.  of  1552  and  1559  follow  1549 
throughout. 

The  ed.  of  1604  begins  with  Wisdom, 
caps.  3  and  5,  as  the  proper  lessons  for 
All  Saints'  Day  ;  then  continues  with 
Ecclus.,  caps.  14  to  51,  caps.  35  and  to 
the  words,  "  But  where  one  is,'  &c.,  of 
cap.  26,  being  read  as  one  lesson,  and  the 
rest  of  cap.  26  being  omitted  ;  and  of  the 
46th,  only  to  the  words,  "  After  this  he 
told,"  is  to  be  read.  Then  Baruch,  i  to  6  ; 
Isaiah  i  to  13 ;  and  ends  with  Proverbs 
20  and  21,  as  the  proper  lessons  for  S.An- 
dretv's  Day. 

The  Scotch  ed.  of  1637  begins  with  the 
Proper  Lessons  for  Alt  Saints'  Day, 
namely,  Wisdom  3  and  5  ;  then  Amos  8 
and  9,  Obadiah,  Jonah  i  to  4,  Micah  i 
to  7,  Nahum  i  and  2,  Habakkuk  i  to  3, 


in  successive  Editions. 

Zephaniah  i  to  3,  Haggai  i  and  2,  Zecha- 
riali  I  to  14,  Malacht  i  to  4,  x  Chronicles 
10  to  22,  cap.  II  being  read  only  to  v.  26, 
and  12  omitted ;  then  caps.  28  and  29, 
and  2  Chronicles  i  and  2,  the  latter  being 
the  lessons  for  i'.  Andretv's  Day. 

The  ed.  1662  begins  with  Ecclus  16  and 
17,  and  completes  51  chapters,  cap.  25 
being  read  only  to  verse  13,  and  cap.  30 
only  to  verse  18,  and  cap.  46  only  to  verse 
so;  then  Baruch  i  to  6,  History  of  Su- 
sannah, Bel  and  the  Dragon,  Isaiah  _i  to 
13,  a  space  being  left  opposite  the  Saints' 
days. 

The  Second  Lessons  are  the  same 
throughout  the  six  editions,  except  in  ed. 
1662  a  space  is  left  opposite  Ail  Saints' 
Day  for  second  lessons  as  well  as  for  the 
first. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552,  &c.       61 


NOVEMBER   HATH   XXX.    DAYS. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1553. 
Elizabeth,  1559. 

All  Sainctes. 


d 

Kaletid. 

13 

e 

4  No. 

2 

f 

3  No. 

g 

Prid.  No. 

10 

A 

Nonas. 

b 

8  Id. 

18 

c 

7  Id. 

7 

d 

6  Id. 

e 

5  Id. 

IS 

f 

4  Id. 

4 

g 

3  Id. 

A 

Pnd.  Id. 

12 

b 

Jdus. 

I 

c 

18  kl. 

d 

17  kL 

9 

e 

16  kl. 

i 

15  kL 

17 

g 

14  kl. 

6 

A 

13  kL 

b 

12  kL 

14 

c 

11  kL 

3 

d 

10  kL 

e 

gkL 

u 

i 

8kL 

S 

7kl. 

19 

A 

6kL 

8 

b 

ski. 

c 

4kL 

16 

d 

3kL 

S 

e 

Prid.  kL 

Sol  in  Sag. 
December. 


S.  Clement. 


Tertne  ende. 
A  ndrevj  apo. 


Ps. 

I 

10 

I 

d 

2 

2 

e 

3 

18 

3 

f 

4 

7 

4 

g 

5 

S 

A 

6 

IS 

6 

b 

7 

4 

7 

c 

8 

8 

d 

9 

12 

9 

e 

10 

I 

10 

f 

II 

9 

II 

g 

12 

12 

A 

13 

13 

b 

14 

17 

14 

c 

IS 

6 

15 

d 

16 

16 

e 

17 

14 

17 

f 

18 

3 

18 

g 

19 

19 

A 

20 

II 

20 

b 

21 

19 

21 

c 

22 

8 

22 

d 

23 

23 

e 

24 

24 

f 

25 

16 

25 

g 

26 

S 

26 

A 

27 

27 

b 

28 

13 

28 

c 

29 

2 

29 

d 

30 

10 

30 

e 

James  I.  1604. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

All  Saints. 


X 

I 

d 

Kal 

ind.  \ 

2 

e 

iv 

No. 

xviii 

3 

f 

iii 

No.  1 

vii 

4 

g 

prid 

No.  1 

S 

A 

Nonas.   \ 

XV 

6 

b 

viii 

Id. 

iv 

7 

c 

vii 

Id. 

8 

d 

vi 

Id. 

xii 

9 

e 

V 

Id. 

X 

10 

f 

iv 

Id. 

i 

II 

g 

iii 

Id. 

12 

A 

prid 

Id. 

13 

b 

Idus.     1 

xvii 

14 

c 

xviii 

kl. 

vi 

15 

d 

xvii 

kL 

16 

e 

xvi 

kl. 

xiv 

17 

f 

XV 

kl. 

iii 

18 

g 

xiv 

kl. 

19 

A 

xiii 

kl. 

xi 

20 

b 

xii 

kL 

xix 

21 

c 

xi 

kl. 

viii 

22 

d 

x 

kl. 

23 

e 

ix  _ 

kL 

24 

f 

viii 

kl. 

xvi 

25 

g 

vii 

kl. 

V 

26 

A 

vi 

kl. 

27 

b 

V 

kL 

xiii 

28 

c 

iv 

kL 

ii 

29 

d 

iii 

kl. 

i 

30 

e 

prid 

kl. 

Powder-treason. 
Leonard. 


S.  Martin. 
Sol  in  Sagit. 

Brice. 

D;cembris. 

Machute. 

Margaret  Q. 

Hugh  Bishop. 

Nat.  ofk.  Cliarles. 
Edmund  King. 


Cicilie. 
Clement. 

Katherine. 
Ode  Virgin. 

Fast. 
Andrevi  Apost. 


Kaletid. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
prid.  No. 
Nonas. 

8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
Sid. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

prid:  Id. 

Idus. 

18  kl. 

17  kL 

16  kl. 

15  kL 

14  kL 

13  kL 

12  kL 

II  kL 

10  kL 

gkL 

8kL 

7kL 

6kL 

SkL 

4kL 

^kL 

pnd.  Id. 


All  Saints. 


Leonard. 


Ps. 


S.  Martine. 

Sol  in  Sagit. 

Brice. 

Decembris. 

Machute. 

Hugh,  bishop. 


Edmund,  King. 

Cicilie. 
Clement. 

Katherine. 


Fast. 
A  ndreWyApost. 


II 

12  o> 

13  s 

Ho 
15  " 
16^ 


20  JS 

2i'a' 

22  '3 
23.3 

24  § 

25  03 

26  i 
U 

27  >, 

28  2 

29  0^ 

30^ 


Charles  II.  1663. 


Ps. 

I 

I 

d 

2 

2 

e 

3 

3 

f 

4 

4 

g 

5 

S 

A 

6 

6 

b 

7 

7 

c 

8 

8 

d 

9 

9 

e 

10 

10 

f 

II 

II 

g 

12 

12 

A 

13 

13 

b 

14 

14 

c 

IS 

IS 

d 

16 

16 

e 

17 

17 

f 

18 

18 

g 

19 

19 

A 

20 

20 

b 

21 

21 

c 

22 

22 

d 

23 

23 

e 

24 

24 

f 

25 

25 

g 

26 

26 

A 

27 

27 

b 

28 

28 

c 

29 

29 

d 

30 

30 

e 

Kalend. 
4  No. 
3  No. 
Pr.  No. 
Nona. 
8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
Sid. 
4  Id. 
3  Id. 
Pr.  Id. 
Idiis. 
18  kl.  Dec. 
17  kL 
16  kL 
iskL 
14  kl. 
13  kL 
12  kL 
II  kL 
10  kL 

gkL 

8kL 

7kL 

6kl. 

SkL 

4kL 

3kL 
Pr.  kl. 


All  Saints  Day 


Papists'  Conspiracy. 
Leonard,  Confessor. 


S.   Martin,    Bish.    & 

[Confess. 
Britius,  Bishop. 

Machutus,  Bishop. 

Hugh,BishopofLincoln. 


Edmund,  King  &  Mar- 
[tyr. 

Cecilia,  Virg.  &  Mart. 
S.  Clement,  I.  B.  of  R. 

r&M. 

Catherine,    Virgin    & 
[Mart. 


Fast. 
S.A  ndrtw,  Apost.  &'M. 


62 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


DECEMBER. 


DECEMBER. 

^3 

MATINS. 

EVENSONG. 

I  Less. 

2  Less. 

I  Zf^TJ. 

2  Z<?jj. 

f 

Kalend. 

I 

I 

Esai.  7 

Actes  2 

Esai.  8 

Hebr.  7 

g 

4  No. 

2 

2 

9 

3 

10 

8 

A 

3  No. 

3 

3 

II 

4 

12 

9 

b 

Prid.  No. 

4 

4 

13 

5 

14 

10 

c 

Nonas. 

5 

5 

IS 

6 

16 

II 

d 

8  Id. 

6 

6 

17 

di.  7 

18 

12 

e 

7  Id. 

7 

7 

19 

di.  7 

20.  21 

13 

f 

6  Id. 

8 

8 

22 

8 

23 

Jacob.  I 

g 

Sid. 

9 

9 

24 

9 

25 

2 

A 

4  Id. 

10 

10 

26 

10 

27 

3 

b 

3  Id. 

II 

II 

28 

II 

29 

4 

c 

Prid.  Id. 

12 

12 

30 

12 

31 

5 

d 

Idus. 

13 

13 

32 

13 

33 

I  Peter,  i 

e 

19  kl. 

14 

14 

34 

14 

35 

2 

f 

18  kl. 

15 

15 

36 

15 

37 

3 

g 

17  kl. 

16 

16 

38 

16 

39 

4 

A 

16  kl. 

17 

17 

40 

17 

41 

5 

b 

15  kl. 

18 

18 

42 

18 

43 

2  Peter.  I 

c 

14  kl. 

19 

19 

44 

19 

45 

2 

d 

13  kl. 

20 

20 

46 

20 

47 

3 

e 

12  kl. 

21 

Tho.  Apost. 

21 

48 

21 

49 

I  John  1 

f 

II  kl. 

22 

22 

SO 

22 

51 

2 

g 

10  kl. 

23 

23 

52 

23 

53 

3 

A 

9kl. 

24 

\ni. 

24 

54 

24 

55 

4 

b 

8kl. 

25 

Nati.Domi- 

25 

Esay.  9 

Math.  I 

Esay.  7 

Tit.  3 

c 

7kl. 

26 

Stephan. 

26 

S6 

Act  6.  7 

57 

Actes  7 

d 

6kL 

27 

John  Evan. 

27 

58 

Apoc.  I 

S9 

Apo.  22 

e 

5kL 

28 

Innocen. 

28 

Jer.  31 

Acte  25 

Esay,  60 

I  John  5 

f 

4kl. 

29 

29 

Esay.  61 

26 

62 

2  John  I 

g 

3kl. 

30 

30 

63 

27 

64 

3  John  I 

A 

Prid.  kl. 

31 

30 

65 

28 

66 

Jude  I 

Variation  of  the  Lessons  in  successive  Editions. 


The  eds.  of  1552  and  1559  follow  1549 
throughout. 

The  ed.  of  1604  begins  with  Isaiah  14 
and  15,  and  completes  66  chapters,  caps. 
20  and  21  forming  one  lesson,  which  are 
interpolated  by  the  Proper  Lessons  for 
S.  Thomas's  Day,  Proverbs  23  and  24  ; 
Christmas  Day,  Isaiah  9  and  7 ;  S.  Ste- 
phen's Day,  Proverbs  28  and  Ecclesiastes 
4 ;  6".  John's  Day,  Ecclesiastes  5  and  6 ; 
and  Innocents'  Day,  Jeremiah  31  and 
Wisdom  I. 

The  Scotch  ed.  of  1637  begins  with  2 
Chronicles,  caps.  5  and  6,  which  is  con- 
tinued to  cap.  36;  Isaiah  47  to  66;  the 


Proper  Lessons  for  the  Saints'  Days  are 
the  same  as  1604,  except  for  InmKents' 
Day  it  is  Exodus  i,  Jeremiah  31,  instead 
of  Jeremiah  31  and  Wisdom  i. 

The  ed.  of  1662  is  exactly  the  same  as 
1604,  but  there  is  a  blank  space  left  for 
the  Proper  Lessons. 

The  Second  Lessons  are  the  same  in  all 
six  eds.  ;  but  on  Christmas  Day,  eds.  1552 
and  1559  have  Luke  22  instead  ot  Matthew 
I,  while  eds.  1604  and  1637  have  Luke  2. 
In  1662,  a  blank  space  is  left  for  the 
Second  Lessons  on  Christmas  Day,  .S.  Ste- 
phen's and  .?.  John's  Day. 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552,  &c.       63 


DECEMBER  HATH  XXXI.  DAYS. 


f 

IT 

K 

2 

A 

10 

b 

c 

18 

d 

7 

e 

f 

IS 

B 

4 

A 

b 

12 

c 

I 

d 

e 

9 

f 

g 

J7 

A 

6 

b 

c 

14 

d 

S 

e 

f 

II 

B 

A 

iQ 

b 

8 

c 

d 

16 

e 

5 

f 

R 

13 

A 

Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Elizabeth,  1559. 


Kalend. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
Prld.  No. 

Nonas. 
8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
Sid. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Prid.  Id. 
Idiis. 
19  kl. 
18  kl. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
iskl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

9kl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

Ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
PHd.  kl. 


Sol.  in  CaJ>[r\. 
Januarii. 


Thomas  Ap. 


Christmas. 

S.  Stephen. 

S.  Jhon  evan. 

Innoceiites. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 


Drostane. 
Nicholas.  Bish. 
Cone,  of  Marie. 


Sol.  in  Capric. 

Lucy  Virgin. 

Janitarii. 


I 

f 

Kalend.  | 

xviii 

2 

g 

iv 

No. 

vii 

3 

A 

iii 

No. 

4 

b 

prid 

No. 

XV 

5 

c 

Nonas.   \ 

iv 

6 

d 

viii 

Id. 

7 

e 

vii 

Id. 

xii 

8 

f 

vi 

Id. 

i 

9 

g 

V 

Id. 

10 

A 

iv 

Id. 

ix 

II 

b 

iii 

Id. 

12 

c 

prid 

Id. 

xvii 

13 

d 

Idus.     \ 

14 

e 

xix 

kl. 

vi 

15 

f 

xviii 

kl. 

xiii 

16 

g 

xvii 

kl. 

iii 

17 

A 

xvi 

kl. 

18 

b 

XV 

kl. 

xi 

19 

c 

xiv 

kl. 

xix 

20 

d 

xiii 

kl. 

21 

e 

xii 

kl. 

viii 

22 

f 

xi 

kl. 

23 

g 

x 

kl. 

xvi 

24 

A 

ix 

kl. 

V 

25 

b 

viii 

kl. 

26 

c 

vii 

kl. 

xiii 

27 

d 

vi 

kl. 

ii 

28 

e 

v 

kl. 

29 

f 

iv 

kl. 

X 

30 

g 

iii 

kl. 

31 

A 

prid. 

kl. 

Ps. 

I 

I 

f 

2 

18 

2 

g 

3 

7 

3 

A 

4 

4 

b 

5 

15 

5 

c 

6 

4 

6 

d 

7 

7 

e 

8 

12 

8 

f 

9 

I 

9 

g 

10 

10 

A 

II 

9 

II 

b 

12 

12 

c 

13 

17 

13 

d 

14 

14 

e 

15 

6 

15 

f 

16 

13 

16 

g 

17 

3 

17 

A 

18 

18 

b 

19 

II 

19 

c 

20 

19 

20 

d 

21 

21 

e 

22 

8 

22 

f 

23 

23 

g 

24 

16 

24 

A 

25 

5 

25 

b 

26 

26 

c 

27 

13 

27 

d 

28 

2 

28 

e 

29 

29 

f 

30 

10 

30 

g 

30 

31 

A 

James  I.  1604. 


Kalend. 

4  No. 

3  No. 
pnd.  No. 

Nonas. 
8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 

5  Id. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

prid.  Id. 
Idus. 
19  kl. 
18  kl. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
iSkl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
II  kl. 
10  kl. 

9U 

8kL 

7kl. 

6kl. 

ski. 

4kl. 

3kl. 
pnd.  kl. 


Ps. 


Nicolas,  bish. 
Cone,  of  Mary. 


Sol.  inCapricor. 

Lucie  virgine. 

Januarii. 

O  Sapientia. 


Fast. 
Thomas, Apost. 


Fast. 

Christmas. 

S.  Steven. 

S.  John. 

Innocents, 


Silvester,  bish. 


II 


15    0\ 

14  >o 

15  o 

16  - 

ill 

19  a 

20  ,, 

21  .-3 

22  S 
23-3! 

24  .S 

25  § 

26  a 

27  % 

28  ^ 

29  £ 

3° -2 


O  sapientia. 


Fast. 
Thomas  Apostle. 


Fast. 

Christinas. 

S.  Steven. 

S.  John. 

Innocents. 


Silvest.  bish. 


Ps. 

I 

I 

f 

2 

2 

g 

3 

3 

A 

4 

4 

b 

5 

S 

e 

6 

6 

d 

7 

7 

e 

8 

8 

f 

9 

9 

g 

10 

10 

A 

II 

II 

b 

12 

12 

c 

13 

13 

d 

14 

14 

e 

15 

15 

f 

16 

16 

g 

17 

17 

A 

18 

18 

b 

19 

19 

c 

20 

20 

d 

21 

21 

e 

22 

22 

f 

23 

23 

g 

24 

24 

A 

25 

25 

b 

26 

26 

e 

27 

27 

d 

28 

28 

e 

29 

29 

f 

30 

30 

g 

31 

31 

A 

Charles  II.  1663. 


Kalend. 
4  No. 

3  No. 
Pr.  No. 

Non<£. 

8  Id. 
.7  Id. 

6  Id. 

Sid. 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 

Pr.  Id. 
Idus. 

19  kl.  Jan. 
18  kl. 
17  kl. 
16  kl. 
iSkl. 
14  kl. 
13  kl. 
12  kl. 
iikl. 
10  kl. 

9kl. 

8kl. 

7kl. 

6kl. 

sw. 

4kl. 

3kl. 

Pr.  kl. 


S 

Nicolas,  B.  of  Myra  in  ^ 
[Lycia.  -5 

Concept,  of  the  B.  V.  ^ 
[Mary.  " 


Lucy,  Virgin  &  Martyr. 
O  Sapientia. 


Fast. 
.S".  Thomas,  Apostle  &' 

w. 

Fast. 
Christinas  Day. 
S.  Steph.  the  first  Martyr. 
S.  John,Apostle  &'  Evang. 
Innocents'  Day. 


Silvester,  B.  of  Rome. 


64 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Certain  Notes  for  the  more  plain  explication 

and  decent  ministration  of  things 

contained  in  this  book  y, 

§  2,  /«  the  saying  or  singing  of  Matins  and  Evensong,  Bap- 
tizing and  Burying,  the  minister,  in  parish  churches  and 
chapels  annexed  to  the  same,  shall  *  use  a  Surplice.  And  in  all 
Cathedral  churches  and  Colleges,  the  Archdeacons,  Deans,  Pro- 
vosts, Masters,  Prebendaries,  and  Fello7vs,  being  graduates,  may 
use  in  the  quire,  beside  their  Surplices,  such  hood  as  pcrtaineth  to 
their  sei<eral  degrees,  which  they  have  taken  in  any  university 
within  this  realm.  But  in  all  other  places,  ez>ery  minister  shall 
be  at  liberty  to  use  any  surplice  or  no.  It  is  also  seemly  tha* 
graduates,  when  they  do  preach,  shall  use  such  hoods  as  pertaineth 
to  their  several  degrees. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
THE   ORDER   WHERE 

MORNING  AND   EVENING   PRAYER 
SHALL  BE  USED  AND  SAID. 

§  I.  The  morning  and  evening 
prayer  shall  he  used  in  siuh  place 
of  the  Church,  Chapd  or  Chancel, 
and  the  Minister  shcdl  so  turn  him, 
as  the  people  may  best  hear.  And 
if  there  be  any  controversy  there- 
in, the  matter  shall  be  referred  to 
the  ordinary,  and  he  or  his  deputy 
shall  appoint  the  place,  and  the 
chancels  shcdl  remain,  as  they  have 
done  in  times  past. 

§§  2,  3.  And  here  is  to  be  noted,  that 
the  Minister  at  the  time  of  the 
communion,  and  at  cdl  other  times 
in  his  ministration,  shall  use  nei- 
ther Alb,  Vestment,  nor  Cope :  but 
being  Archbishop,  or  Bishop,  he 
shall  have  and  wear  a  rochet :  and 
being  a  priest  or  Deacon,  he  shall 
have  and  wear  a  surplice  only. 


y  In  all  the  Editions  of  the  First  Prayer- 
book  of  Edward  VI.  this  appears  as  a  note 
at  the  end  of  the  book,  and  just  preceding 
the  Colophon.  It  has  been  thought  ad- 
visable to  transpose  it  to  this  place,  to 
bring  it  into  harmony  with  all  the  other 
Prayer-books. 

•  In  two  eds.  1549,  "should." 

•  AAer  "  \}ie  Contents"  in  this  edition  is 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
THE  ORDER   WHERE 

MORNING  AND  EVENING   PRAYER 
SHALL  BR  U.SED  AND  SAID. 

8  I.  The  Morning  and  Evening 
prayer  shcdl  be  used  in  the  accus- 
tomed place  of  the  church,  chapel 
or  chaned,  except  it  shall  be  other- 
wise determined  by  the  Ordinary 
of  the  place,  and  the  chancels  shall 
remain  as  they  have  done  in  times 
past. 

%  2.  And  here  is  to  be  nt>ted  tliat 
the  Minister  at  the  time  of  the 
Communion,  and  at  all  other  times 
in  his  ministration,  shall  use  mch 
ornaments  in  the  church,  as  were 
in  use  by  authority  of  parliament 
in  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of 
king  Edward  the  VI.  according 
to  the  Act  of  Parliament  set  in  the 
beginning  of  this  book  *. 


printed,  "  An  Act  for  Uniformity  of  Com- 
mon Prayer  and  Service  in  the  Church," 
&c.,  &c.,  and  commencing  "  'Where  atthe 
death  of  our  late  Sovereign  Lord  King 
Edward  the  sixt,  there  remained."  &c., 
&c.  This  Act  is  reprinted  in  the  Book  of 
James  I.,  1604.  In  the  present  edition  it 
will  be  found  (in  abstract)  in  the  Intro- 
duction. 


Matins. 


65 


§  3.  And  %vhensoever  the  Bishop  shall  celebrate  the  holy  com- 
munion in  the  churchy  or  exetiite  any  other  public  minisiratioti, 
he  shall  have  upon  him,  beside  his  rochette,  a  Surplice  or  albe,  and 
a  cope  or  vestment,  and  also  his  pastoral  staff  in  his  hand,  or  else 
borne  or  holden  by  his  chaplain. 

§  4.  As  touching  kneeling,  crossing,  holding  up  of  hands,  knock- 
ing upon  the  breast,  and  other  gestures,  they  may  be  used  or  left, 
as  every  man's  devotion  serveth,  \j.vithout  blame\. 

§  5.  Also  upon  Christfnas  day,  Easter  day,  the  Ascension 
Day,  Whit-Sunday,  a?id  the  feast  of  the  Trinity,  may  be  used 
■  any  part  of  holy  scripture  hereafter  to  be  certainly  limited  and 
appointed,  in  the  stead  ^  of  the  Litany. 

^  6.  If  there  be  a  sermon,  or  for  other  great  cause,  the  Curate 
by  his  discretion  may  leave  out  the  Litany,  Gloria  in  Excelsis, 
the  Creed,  [the]  Homily,  and  the  Exhortation  to  the  Communion. 

[After  this  follows  the  word  "  Finis"  and  then  the  "Colophon."] 


James  I.   1604. 
4D  THE  ORDER  WHERE 

MORNING  AND   EVENING   PRAYER 
SHALL  BE   USED  AND   SAID. 

§  I.  The  Morning  and  Evening,  &"€. 
§2.  And  here  is  to  be  noted,  o'c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1559.]  ° 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
id)  THE  ORDER 

WHERE  AND  HOW  MORNING 

AND  EVENING  PRAYER  SHALL 

BE  SAID  OR  SUNG. 

I..  The  Morning  and  Evening 
Prayer  shall  be  used  in  the  acats- 
tomed  place  of  the  Church,  Chapel, 
or  Chancel,  except  it  be  otheiivise 
determined  by  the  Ordiitary  of  the 
place :  and  the  Chances  shall  re- 
main as  they  have  done  in  times 
past. 

i  2.  And  here  is  to  be  noted,  that 
the  Presbyter  or  Minister  at  the 
time  of  the  Communion,  and  at 
other  times  in  his  Ministration, 


shall  use  such  Ornaments  in  the 
Church  as  are  prescribed,  or  shall 
be  by  his  Majesty,  or  his  Successors, 
according  to  the  act  of  Parliament 
provided  in  that  behalf. 


Charles   II.  1662. 

THE  ORDER   FOR 

MORNING  AND  EVENING 
PRAYER 

DAILY  TO  BE  SAID  AND  USED 
THROUGHOUT  THE  YEAR. 

§  I.  The  Morning  and  Evening 
Prayer  shcdl  be,  dfc. 

[Same  as  1559] 

§  2.  A7id  here  is  to  be  noted,  that 
such  Ornatnents  of  the  Church  and 
of  the  Ministas  thereof  at  all  times 
of  their  Ministration,  shall  be  re- 
tained and  be  in  use,  as  were  in 
this  Church  of  England,  by  the 
Authority  of  Parliament,  in  the 
second  year  of  the  Reign  of  King 
Edward  the  Sixth. 


^  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "instead."  "  In  one  copy  of  ed.  1604,  the  word  "all"  is  acci- 

dentally omitted  before  "  other  times  in  his  ministration." 


66 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


H^  AN  ORDER  ^ 

FOR  MATINS,   DAILY  THROUGH 
THE   YEAR. 


^ 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
AN  ORDER  FOR  MORNING 

PRAYER  DAILY  THROUGHOUT 
THE  YEAR. 

§  7.  Ai  the  beginning  both  of  Mom- 
I'ti^    ing  Prayer.,  and  likewise  of  Evening 
\    Prayer,    the  Minister  shall  read 
-J   with  a  loud  voice  some  one  of  these 
sentences  of  the  Scriptures  that  fol- 
low.    And  then  he  shall  say  that, 
which   is  written  after  the   said 
^  sentences.  

At  what  time  soever  a  sinner 
doth  repent  him  of  his  sin  from  the 
bottom  of  his  heart  :  I  will  put  all 
his  wickedness  out  of  my  remem- 
brance, saith  the  Lord.     Ezech.  i8. 

I  do  know  mine  own  wickedness, 
and  my  sin  is  alway*  against  me. 
Psalm  51. 

Turn  thy  face  away  from  our 
sins  (O  Lord)  and  blot  out  all  our 
offences.     Psal.  51. 

A  sorrowful  spirit  is  a  sacrifice  to 
God  :  despise  not  (O  Lord)  humble 
and  contrite  hearts.     Psal.  51. 

Rent '  your  hearts,  and  not  your 
garments,  and  turn  to  the  Lord 
your  God  :  because  he  is  gentle 
and  merciful,  he  is  patient  and  of 
much  mercy,  and  such  a  one  that 
is  sorry  for  your  afflictions.     Joel  2. 

To  thee,  O  Lord  God,  belong- 
eth  mercy  and  forgiveness  :  for  we 
have  gone  away  from  thee,  and 
have  not  hearkened  to  thy  voice, 
whereby  we  might  walk  in  thy 
laws,  which  thou '  hast  appointed 
for  us.     Dan.  9. 

Correct  us,  O  Lord,  and  yet  in 


thy  judgment,  not  in  thy  fury,  lest 
we  should  be  consumed  and  brought 
to  nothing.     Jerem.  2. 

Amend  your  lives,  for  the  king- 
dom of  God  is  at  hand.     Matt.  3 . 

I  will  go  to  my  father  and  say  to 
him  :  Father,  I  have  sinned  against 
heaven,  and  against  thee,  I  am  no 
more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son. 
Luke  15. 

Enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy 
servants,  O  Lord,  for  no  flesh  is 
righteous  in  thy  sight.     Psal.  142. « 

If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we 
deceive  ourselves,  and  there  is  no 
truth  in  us.     i  John  i."* 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

AN   ORDER   FOR,    &C. 
[The  same  throughout  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

AN  ORDER  FOR,    &C 
[The  same  throughout  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

AN   ORDER 

FOR  MORNING  PRAYER 

DAILY    THROUGHOUT    THE    YEAR. 

§  7.  At  the  beginning  both  of  Morn- 
ing Prayer  and  likewise  of  Evening 
Prayer,  the  Presbyter  or  Minister 
shall  read  with  a  loud  voice  some 
one  of  these  Sentences  of  the  Scrip- 
tures that  follow.  And  iJun  he 
shall  say  that  which  is  written 
after  the  said  sentences. 
Cast   away   from   you   all  your 

transgressions    whereby    ye    have 


•  Inoneed.,  1552,  and  1559,  "always." 
f  Inoneed.,iS52,andeds.  1559, "Rend." 
■  In  one  ed.,  1553,  misp.  clxii. 


'■  These  references,  throughout  all  the 
editions  (1663  included),  are  printed  in  the 
margin. 


Matins. 


67 


transgressed,  and  make  you  a  new 
heart  and  a  new  spirit ;  for  why 
will  ye  die  ?  For  I  have  no  plea- 
sure in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth 
saith  the  Lord  God  :  wherefore  turn 
yourselves  and  live.  Ezek.  18.  31, 
32. 

Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and 
blot  out  all  mine  iniquities,  Psal. 
51.  9. 

The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken 
spirit  :  a  broken  and  a  contrite 
heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not  de- 
spise.    Psal.  51.  17. 

Rent  your  heart,  and  not  your 
garments,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord 
your  God  :  for  he  is  gracious  and 
merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and  of 
great  kindness,  and  repenteth  him 
of  the  evil.     Joel  2.  13. 

To  the  Lord  our  God  belong  mer- 
cies and  forgivenesses,  though  we 
have  rebelled  against  him  :  Neither 
have  we  obeyed  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  our  God,  to  walk  in  his  laws 
which  he  set  before  us  by  his  ser- 
vants the  prophets '.    Dan.  9.  9,  10. 

He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall 
not  prosper,  but  he  that  confesseth 
and  forsakeththem  shall  have  mercy. 
Prov.  28.  13. 

O  Lord  correct  me  but  with  judge- 
ment ;  not  in  thine  anger  lest  thou 
bring  me  to  nothing.     Jer.  10.  24,' 

Enter  not  into  judgement  with  thy 
servant,  for  in  thy  sight  shall  no 
man  living  be  justified.   Psal.  143. 2. 

If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin  we 
deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is 
not  in  us,     i  John  i.  S.*" 


Charles  IL  1662. 

THE 

ORDER  FOR  MORNING 
PRAYER, 

DAILY  THROUGHOUT  THE  YEAR, 

§  7.  At  the  beginning  of  Morning 
Prayer  the  Minister  shall,  «&-v, 

[Same  as  1552.] 
When  the  wicked  man  tumeth 
away  from  his  wickedness,  that 
he  hath  committed,  and  doth  that 
which  is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall 
save  his  soul  alive.     Ezek.  18.  27. 

I  acknowledge  my  transgressions, 
and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me.     Psal, 

51-  3- 

Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and 
blot  o\xV  mine  iniquities.  Psal.  51.9. 

The  Sacrifices  of  God,  &c. 

Rent  your  hearts '',  and,  &c 

To  the  Lord  our  God,  &c. 

0  Lord  correct  me',  &c. 
[Each  of  these  the  same  as  1637.] 

Repent  ye  ;  for  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven  is  at  hand.     S.  Mat.  3.  2. 

1  will  arise  and  go  to  my  Father, 
and  will  say  unto  him  ;  Father,  I 
have  sinned  against  Heaven,  and 
before  thee,  and  am  no  more  worthy 
to  be  called  thy  son,  S.  Luke  15. 
18,  19. 

Enter  not  into  judgement  with 
thy  servant,  O  Lord,  for  in  thy 
sight  shall  no  man  living  be  justi- 
fied.    Psal.  143.  2. 

If  we  say,  that  we  have  no  sin, 
we  deceive  our  selves,  and  the  truth 
is  not  in  us.  But,  if  we  confess 
our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to 
forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse 
us  from  all  unrighteousness,  i  !S. 
John  I.  8,  9''. 


'  In  ed.  1662,  the  words,  "by  his  ser- 
vants the  prophets,"  are  omitted. 

J  In  nearly  all  the  Sealed  Books  of  1662, 
the  word  "all"  is  marked  through  with 
a  pen. 


*  In  most  Sealed  Books  the  "s"  is 
added  after  "  heart"  with  a  pen. 

'  In  most  of  the  Sealed  Books  the  refer- 
ence, Ps.  6.  I,  has  been  added  with  a  pen 
after  Jer.  10.  24. 


63 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

Dearly  beloved  brethren,  the 
scripture  moveth  us  in  sundry  places, 
to  acknowledjje  and  confess  our 
manifold  sins  and  wickedness,  and 
that  we  should  not  dissemble  nor 
cloke  them  before  the  face  of  Al- 
mighty God  our  heavenly  Father, 
but  confess  them  with  an  humble, 
lowly,  penitent  and  obedient  heart : 
to  the  end  that  we  may  obtain  for- 
giveness of  the  same  by  his  infinite 
goodness  and  mercy.  And  although 
we  ought  at  all  times  humbly  to 
knowledge "  our  sins  before  God  : 
yet  ought  we  most  chiefly  so  to  do, 
when  we  assemble  and  meet  toge- 
ther, to  render  thanks  for  the  great 
benefits  that  we  have  received  at 
his  hands,  to  set  forth  his  most 
worthy  praise,  to  hear  his  most  holy 
word,  and  to  ask  those  things  which 
be  °  requisite  and  necessary,  as  well 
for  the  body  as  the  soul.  Where- 
fore I  pray  and  beseech  you,  as 
many  as  be"  here  present,  to  ac- 
company me  with  a  pure  heart  and 
humble  voice,  unto  the  throne  of 
the  heavenly  grace,  saying  after  me. 

§  8.  ^  general  confession,  to  be  said 

of  the  whole  congregation  after  the 

minister,  ktueling. 

Almighty   and    most   merciful 

Father,  we  have  erred  and  strayed 

from  thy  ways,  like  lost  sheep.    We 

have  followed  too  much  the  devices 

and  desires  of  our  own  hearts.    We 

have  oftended  against  thy  holy  laws. 

We  have  left  undone  those  things 

which  we  ought  to  have  done,  and 


we  have  done  those  things  which 
we  ought  not  to  have  done,  and 
there  is  no  health  in  us  :  but  thou, 
O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us  miser- 
able offenders.  Spare  thou  them, 
O  God,  which  confess  their  faults. 
Restore  thou  them  that  be"  peni- 
tent, according  to  thy  promises  de- 
clared unto  mankind,  in  Christ  Jesu 
our  Lord.  And  grant,  O  most  mer- 
ciful Father,  for  his  sake,  that  we 
may  hereafter  live  a  godly,  righte- 
ous, and  sober  life,  to  the  glory  of 
thy  holy  name.     Amen. 

§  9.  TTie  absolution  to  be  pronounced 
by  the  minister  alone. 
Almighty  God,  the  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which"  de- 
sireth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but 
rather  that  he  may  turn  from  his 
wickedness  and  live :  and  hath 
given  power  and  commandment  to 
his  ministers,  to  declare  and  pro- 
nounce to  his  people,  being  peni- 
tent, the  absolution  '  and  remission 
of  their  sins  :  he  pardoneth  and  ab- 
solveth  P  all  them  which  *>  truly  re- 
pent, and  unfeignedly  believe  his 
holy  Gospel.  '  Wherefore  we  be- 
seech him  to  grant  us  true  repent- 
ance and  his  holy  spirit,  that  those 
things  may  please  him,  which  we 
do  at  this  present,  and  that  the  rest 
of  our  life  hereafter  may  be  pure 
and  holy :  so  that  at  the  last  we 
may  come  to  his  eternal  joy,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  *. 

§  10.    The  people  shall  atiswer. 
Amen. 


"  In  cds.  157a,  and  af.  .rwards,  "  ac- 
knowledge. " 

°  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 

"  In  eds.  1637  and  1662,  "who." 

P  In  one  ed.,  155a,  "obsolution"  and 
"obsolveth." 


<»  In  ed.  1663,  "  that." 

'  In  ed.  i66a,  "Wherefore  lei  us  beseech 
him." 

■  In  one  ed.  i559.  and  1596,  "Amen" 
is  added  here  as  well  as  in  the  rubric. 


Matins. 


69 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Dearly  beloved,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1552  throughout.] 


^  c.'-    '\   James  I.  1604. 

• —  Dearly  beloved,  &c.    , 

[The  same  as  1552  throughout.] 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
Dearly  beloved,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1352,  to] 

§  8.  ^  general  confession  to  be  said 
by  all  that  are  present  after  or  with 
the  Deacon  or  Presbyter,  all  humbly 
kneeling. 

Almighty  and  most  merciful .  . . 

[continued  the  same  as  1552,  to] 

and  sober  life,  to  the  glory  of  thy 
holy  Name,  and  the  salvation  of 
our  own  souls.     Amen. 

§  9.  The  Absolution  or  Remission  of 
sins  to  be  pronounced  by  the  Pres- 
byter alone,  he  standing  up  and 
Utming  himself  to  the  people,  but 
they  still  remaining  humbly  upon 
their  knees. 

Almighty  GOD,  the  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  desireth 
not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather 
that  he  may  turn  from  his  wickedness 
and  live  ;  and  who  hath  given  power 
and  commandment  to  the  Presbyters 
of  his  Church  the  ministers  of  his 


gospel  to  declare  and  pronounce  to 
his  people,  being  penitent,  the  Ab- 
solution and  Remission  of  their  sins : 
The  same  Almighty  God  pardoneth 
and  absolveth  all  them  which  truly 
repent,  and  unfeignedly  believe  his 
holy  Gospel.  Wherefore  we  be- 
seech him  to  grant  us  true  repent- 
ance, and  his  holy  spirit,  that  we 
may  receive  from  him  absolution 
from  all  our  sins,  that  those  things 

[continued  the  same  as  1552,  to] 

§  10.    The  people  shall  answer. 
Amen. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Dearly  beloved,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1552.] 

%^.  A  general  Confession  to  be  saii 
of  the  whole  congregation  after  the 
Minister,  all  kneeling. 

Almighty  and  most,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1552.] 

§  9.  The  Absolution  or  Remission  of 
sins  to  be  pronounced  by  the  Priest 
alone,  standing ;  the  people  still 
kneeling. 

Almighty  God,  the  Father,  &c. 

[continued  same  as  1532,  to] 

§10.  The  people  shall  ansiver  here, 
and  at  the  end  of  all  other  prayers. 
Amen. 


»  There   is  an   ornamental   rule  intro- 
duced here  in  the  Scotch  edition,  as  if  to 


divide  off  the  introductory  part  from  the 
rest  of  the  Service. 


70 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§11. 


The  Priest  being  in  the  quire,  shall  begin  with  a  loud  voice  the 
Lord's  Prayer,  called  the  Pater  noster. 


Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in  earth  as  it  is  in 
heaven.  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread.  And  forgive  us 
our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation.  But  deliver  us  from  eviL 
Amen. 

§  12.    TJien  likewise  he  shall  say^ 

O  Lord,  open  thou  my  lips. 

Answer, 
And  my  mouth  shall  shew  forth  thy  praise. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  II.  Then  shall  the  Minister  begin 
the  Lord's  Prayer  with  a  loud 
voice. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven, 
hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy  king- 
dom come.  Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us 
this  day  our  daily  bread.  And  for- 
give us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive 
them  that  trespass  against  us.  And 
lead  us  not  into  temptation.  But 
deliver  us  from  eviL     Amen. 

§12.   Tlien  likewise  he  shall  say. 

O  Lord,  open  thou  our  lips. 

Answer. 
And  our  mouth  shall  shew  forth 
thy  praise. 

Priest. 
O  God,  make  speed  to  save  us. 

Ansiver. 
O  Lord,  make  haste  to  help  us. 

Priest. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
tlie  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 


"  In  all  eds.  of  1549  as  well  as  of  155a,  the 
Gloria  Patri  is  in  some  places  abbreviated 
and  in  others  printed  in  full,  as  it  would 


As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
M'ithout  end.     Amen". 

Praise  ye  the  Lord. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  II.    Then  shall  tlu  Minister,  &V. 
[The  same  as  1553  throughout.] 


James  I.  1604. 

§  II.    Then  shall  the  Minister,  &>c. 
[The  same  as  1553  throughout.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§11.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter  or 
Minister  begin  the  Lord's  pray.-r 
with  a  loud  voice.  And  in  this 
and  in  all  other  places  of  the  liturgy 
where  the  last  words,  for  Thine  is 
the  kingdom,  &c  are  expressed, 
the  presbyter  shall  read  them.  But 
in  all  places  rvhere  they  are  not  ex- 
pressed he  shall  end  at  these  7oordf, 
But  deliver  us  from  eviL    Amen. 


appear,  simply  according  to  the  printer's 
convenience  ;  no  notice  of  such  variation 
is  therefore  taken. 


Matins. 


7;- 


Priest. 
O  God,  make  speed  *  to  save  me. 
Answer. 
O  Lord,  make  haste  to  help  me. 
Priest. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be  world 
without  end.     Amen. 
Praise  ye  the  Lord. 

And  from  Easter  to  Trinity  Sunday. 
Alleluia. 


Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven, 
hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy  king- 
dom come.  Thy  will  be  done  on 
earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us 
this  day  our  daily  bread.  And  for- 
give us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive 
them  that  trespass  against  us.  And 
lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but 
deliver  us  from  evil.  ' '  For  thine 
is  the  kingdom,  the  power  and  the 
glory,  for  ever  and  ever."    Amen. 

§  1 2.    Then  liketvise  he  shall  say, 

O  Lord,  open  thou  our  lips. 

Answer. 
And  our  mouth  shall  shew  forth 
thy  praise. 

Presbyter. 
O  God,  make  speed  to  save  us. 

Answer. 
O  Lord,  make  haste  to  help  us. 

§  13.    Then  all  0/ them  standing  up, 
the  Presbyter  shall  say  or  sing, 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
Answer. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,    and    ever  shall   be    :   world 
without  end.     Amen. 

Praise  ye  the  Lord. 

Afiswer. 

The  Lord's  Name  be  praised. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  1 1.  Then  the  Minister  shall  kneel, 
and  say  the  Lord's  Prayer  with  an 
audible  voice;  the  people  also  kneel- 
ing, and  repeating  it  with  him, 
both  here,  and  wheresoever  else  it  is 
used  in  Divine  Service. 

Our  Father,  which  art,  &c 

[continued  to] 

....  For  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 

§  12.    Then  likewise,  &'c. 

[continued  the  same  as  1552,  to] 
O  Lord,  make  haste  to  help  us. 

§  13.  Here  all  standing  up,  the 
Priest  shall  say. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
Answer. 
As  it  was   in  the  beginning,   is 
now,    and    ever   shall   be    :   world 
without  end.     Amen. 
Priest. 
Praise  ye  the  Lord. 
Anszuer. 
The  Lord's  Name  be  praised. 


»  In  one  ed.,  1549,   "good  speed;"    and  in  some  copies  of  1559,  "make  haste  to 
speed  us." 


72 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  14.    Then  shall  be  said  or  sung  without  any  Invitatory  this  Psalm. 
Venite,  exultemus,  &>€.  in  English,  as Jolloweth : 

Psalm  xcv. 

O  COME  let  us  sing  unto  the  Lord  :  let  us  heartily  rejoice  in 
the  strength  of  our  salvation. 

Let  us  come  before  his  presence  with  thanksgiving  :  and 
shew  ourselves  glad  in  him  with  Psalms. 

For  the  Lord  is  a  great  God  :  and  a  great  King,  above  all 
gods  : 

In  his  hand  are  all  the  corners  of  the  earth  :  and  the 
strength  of  the  hills  is  his  also. 

The  sea  is  his,  and  he  made  it  :  and,  his  hands  prepared 
the  dry  land. 

O  come,  let  us  worship  and  fall  down  :  and  kneel  before 
the  Lord  our  maker. 

For  he  is  (the  Lord)  our  God  :  and  we  are  the  people  of  his 
pasture,  and  the  sheep  of  his  hands  ^ 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  14.   Then  shall  be  said  or  sung 
this  Psalm  following. 

O  COME  let  us  sing,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 
Then  shall  follow  certain 
Psalms,  &v. 
[Same  as  1549O 


§15. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  14.    Then  shall  be  said  or  sung 

this  Psalm  following. 
O  COME  let  us  sing,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  15.    77/,'«  shall  follo70,  &=€. 
[Same  as  i549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

§  14.   Then  shall  be  said  or  sung 

this  Psalm  following. 

Venite  exultemtis  Domino'*, 

O  COME  let  us  sing,  &c. 

[The  same  as  i549.] 

§  15.   Then  shall  follow,  dfc. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  14-    Then  shall  be  said  or  sung 

this  Psalm  following. 

Ps.  xcv. 

O  COME,  let  us  sing  unto  the 
Lord  :  let  us  make  a  joyful  noise 
to  the  rock  of  our  salvation. 

Let  us  come  before  his  presence 
with  thanksgiving  :  and  make  a  joy- 
ful noise  unto  him  with  Psalms. 

For  the  Lord  is  a  great  God  :  and 
a  great  King  above  all  gods. 

In  his  hand  are  all  the  deep  places 
of  the  earth  :  the  strength  of  the  hills 
is  his  also. 

The  sea  is  his,  and  he  made  it  : 
and  his  hands  formetl  the  dry  land. 

O  come,  let  us  bow  do\vn  :  let 
us  kneel  before  the  Lord  our  Maker. 

For  he  is  our  God  :  and  we  are 
tlie  people  of  his  pasture,  and  tlie 
sheep  of  his  hand. 

To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice, 
harden  not  your  heart  :  as  in  the 
provocation,  and  as  in  the  day  of 
temptation  in  the  wilJcmess  ; 

When  your  fathers  tempted  me  : 
proved  me,  and  saw  my  work. 

Forty  years  long  was  I  grieved 


J  In  ed.  i66a,  "hand." 

■  In  two  eds.,  1559,  and  in  most  eds. 


afterwards,  Venite  exultemHi  Domine  is 
priuled  in  the  margin. 


Matins. 


73 


To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts  :  as 
in  the  provocation,  and  as  in  the  day  of  temptation  in  the 
wilderness. 

When  your  fathers  tempted  me  :  proved  me,  and  saw  my 
works. 

Forty  year  long  was  I  grieved  with  this  generation,  and 
said  :  it  is  a  people  that  do  err  in  their  hearts  :  for  they  have 
not  known  my  ways. 

^,  Unto  whom  I  sware  in  my  wrath  :  that  they  should  not 
enfe=4nto  my  rest. 

Glory'^Tye  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son  :  and  to  the  holy 
ghost.  As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be  : 
world  without  end.     Amen  ^. 

§  15.  Then  shall  follow  certain  Psalms  in  order  as  they  be^  appointed  in 
a  table  made  for  thaf-  purpose,  except  there  be  proper  Psalms  appointed  for 
that  day.  And  at  the  end  of  every  Psalm  throughout  the  year,  and  like- 
%uise  in  the  end  of  Benedictus,  Benedicite,  Magnificat,  and  Nunc  Di- 
mittis,  shall  be  repeated. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  &c. 


with  this  generation,  and  said  :  It 
is  a  people  that  do  err  in  their  heart, 
and  they  have  not  known  my  ways. 

Unto  whom  I  sware  in  my  wrath  : 
that  they  should  not  enter  into  my 
rest. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As   it   was   in  the  beginning,    is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world  with- 
out end.     Amen. 
§  15.    Then  shall  follow,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

And  as  at  the  end  of  the  Venite, 
so  also  at  the  end  of  evety  Psalm 
throughout  the  year,  and  likciutse  in 
the  end  of  Benedictus,  Magnificat, 
and  Nunc  dimittis,  shall  be  repeated. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 
And  the  People  shall  answer. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without 
end.     Amen. 
Every  one  standing  up  at  the  same  ^. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  14.  Then  shall  be  said,  or  sung 
this  Psalm  follozvlng :  Except  on 
Easter  day,  upon  which  another 
Anthem  is  appointed:  and  on  the 
Nineteenth  day  of  every  month  it 
is  not  to  be  read  here,  but  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  the  Psalms. 

Venite,  exultemus  Domino.   Psal.  95. 
O  COME  let  us  sing,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 

§15.  Then  shall  follorv  the  Psalms 
in  order  as  they  be  appointed.  And 
at  the  end  of  every  Psalm  through- 
out the  year,  and  likewise  in  the 
end  of  Benedicite,  Benedictus, 
Magnificat,  and  Nunc  dimittis, 
shall  be  repeated. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 

the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
Ansiuer. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,   is 

now,    and   ever    shall  be    :    world 

without  end.     Amen. 


*  In  1552,  and  afterwards,  the  Gloria 
Patri  is  divided  into  two  verses. 

^  In  eds.  of  1552  and  1559,  as  well  as 
1549,  sometimes  "  been"  is  printed. 


"=  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "the." 

^  Only  in  one  of  the  Scotch  editions  do 
the  words,  '  'Every  one  standing  up  at  tlie 
sa?ne,"  appear. 


74 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  16.  Then  shall  be  read  two  lessons  distiiutly  with  a  loud  voice,  that  the 
people  may  hear.  The  first  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  second  of  the  Neiv  ; 
like  as  they  be  appointed  by  *  the  Kalendar,  except  there  be  proper  lessons 
assigned  for  that  day :  the  minister  that  readeth  the  lesson,  standing  and 
tuf  ning  him  so  as  he  may  best  be  heard  of  all  such  as  be  present.  A  ml 
before  every  lesson,  the  minister  shall  say  thus.  T/ie  first,  second,  third  or 
fourth  chapter  of  Genesis  or  Exodus,  Matthew,  Afarh*,  or  other  like  as  is 
appointed  in  the  Kalendar.  And  in  the  aid  of  every  Chapter,  he  shall  say. 
Here  endeth  such  a  chapter  of  such  a  book. 
And  {to  the  end  the  people  may  the  better  hear)  in  snch  places  where  they  do 
sing,  there  shall  the  lessons  be  sting  in  a  plain  tune  after  the  manner  of 
distinct  reading:  and  likewise  the  Epistle  and  Gospel. 
§  17.  After  the  first  lesson  shall  follow  Te  Deum  laudamus,  in  English, 
daily  throughout  the  year,  except  in  Lent,  all  the  ruhich  time  in  the  place 
ofte  Deum  shall  be  used  Benedicite  omnia  Opera  Domini  Domino,  in 
English  asfollmveth : 

Te  Deum  [Laudamus.]  s 
We  praise  thee,  O  God,  we  knowledge  ^  thee  to  be  the  Lord. 
All  the  earth  doth  worship  thee,  the  Father  everlasting. 
To  thee  all  Angels  cry  aloud,  the  heavens  and  all  [the] 
powers  therein. 

To  thee  Cherubim,  and  Seraphim  continually  do  cry, 
Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth, 
Heaven  and  earth  are  full  of»  the  majesty  of  thy  glory. 
The  glorious  company  of  the  Apostles,  praise  thee. 
The  goodly  fellowship  of  the  Prophets,  praise  thee. 
The  noble  army  of  Martyrs  praise  thee. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  16.    7 hen  shall  be  read,  ^'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  17.  Afier  the  first  Lesson  shall  fol- 
loio  T?  deum  Laudamus,  in  Eng- 
lish, daily  through^  the  whole  year. 

Te  Deum. 
We  praise  thee,  O  God,  &c. 
[The  same  as  i549.] 


§16. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

Then  shall  be  read,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§  1 7.  After  the  first  lesson,  dfc. 
[Same  as. 1552.] 

We  praise  thee,  O  God,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 


§16. 


James  I.  1604. 

Then  shall  be  read,  dfc. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§17.  After  the  first  lesson,  dT'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
We  praise  thee,  O  God,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  16.    Then  shall  be  read,  er-v. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
the  Presbyter  or  Af mister  that  read- 
eth the  Lesson  standing  and  turn- 
ing him  so  that  he  may  best  be 
heard  of  all  such  as  be  present. 
And  before  every  Lesson  the  Pres- 
byter or  Minister  shall  say  .  .  . 
[continued  the  same  as  1549.] 


•  In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "in." 
'  In  Scotch  ed.  1637,  "  Saint  Matthew 
and  Saint  Mark." 

8  In  two  eds.,  IS49>  'he  title  runs,  "The 
Praise  of  God  the  t  ather  ;  the  Son  ;  and 
the  Holy  Ghost."    In  one  ed.,  1549,  the 


TV  Deum  is  omitted  from  its  place,  and 

printed  on  another  leaf, 
i"  In    Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  ed.   1662, 

"acknowledge." 
'  In  two  eds.,  1549,  "replenished  with." 
j  In  eds.  1596, 1604,  &c.,  "throughout." 


Matins. 


75 


The  holy  church  throughout  all  the  world  doth  knowledge  ^ 
tiiee. 

The  Father  of  an  infinite  majesty. 

Thy  1  honourable,  true,  and  only  Son, 

Also  the  Holy  Ghost  ™  the  Comforter. 

Thou  art  the  King  of  Glory,  O  Christ. 

Thou  art  the  everlasting  Son  of  the  Father. 

When  thou  tookest  upon  thee  to  deliver  man,  thou  didst 
not  abhor  the  virgin's  womb. 

When  thou  hadst  overcome  ^  the  sharpness  of  death,  thou 
didst  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers. 

Thou  sittest  on  °  the  right  hand  of  God,  in  the  Glory  of  the 
Father. 

We  believe  that  thou  shalt  come  to  be  our  judge. 

We  therefore  pray  thee,  help  thy  servants,  whom  thou  hast 
redeemed  with  thy  precious  blood. 

Make  them  to  be  numbered  with  thy  saints,  in  glory 
everlasting. 

O  Lord,  save  thy  people  :  and  bless  thine  heritage. 

Govern  them  and  lift  them  up  for  ever. 

Day  by  day  we  magnify  thee. 

And  we  worship  thy  name  ever  world  without  end. 

Vouchsafe,  O  Lord,  to  keep  us  this  day  without  sin. 

O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us  :  have  mercy  upon  us. 

O  Lord,  let  thy  mercy  lighten  upon  us  :  as  our  trust  is 
in  thee. 

O  Lord,  in  thee  have  I  trusted  :  let  me  never  be 
confounded. 


§  1 7.  AJier  the  first  lesson,  shall  be 
said  or  sung  Te  Deum  laudamus 
in  English,  daily  throughout  the 
whole  year. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
16.  T^en  shall  be  read  distinctly 
with  an  audible  voice  the  First 
Lesson,  taken  out  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, as  ts  appointed  in  theKalen- 
dar,  (except  there  be  proper  Les- 
sons assigned  for  that  day:)  He, 
that  readeth,  so  standing,  and 
turning  himself,  as  he  may  best 
be  heard  of  all  such  as  are  present. 


^  In  eds.  1637,  &c.,  "acknowledge." 
■  In  ed.  1596,  1637,  and  1662,  "thine." 
■"  In  two  eds.,  1549,  "The  Holy  Ghost 


§  17.  And  after  that,  shall  be  said, 
or  sung  in  English  the  Hymn, 
called  Te  Deum  Laudamus,  daily 
throughout  the  year. 

1 6.  Note  that  befo7-e  every  Lesson  the 
Minister  shall  say.  Here  begin- 
neth  such  a  Chapter,  or  Verse  of 
such  a  Chapter,  of  such  a  Book  : 
And  after  every  Lesson,  Here 
endeth  the  First,  or  the  Second 
Lesson. 

Te  Deum  Laudamus. 
We  praise  thee,  O  God,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 


also  being  the  Comforter." 

"  In  two  eds.,  1549,  "overcomed." 

o  In  one  ed.  1596,  1637,  and  1662,  "at."' 


1(> 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Benedicite,  omnia  opera  Domini  Domino  p. 

O  ALL  ye  9  works  of  the  Lord,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  : 
praise  him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  Angels  of  the  Lord,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise 
him  ',  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  heavens,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and  set 
him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  waters  that  be  above  the  firmament,  speak  good  of  the 
Lord  :  praise  him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  all  ye  powers  of  the  Lord,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  : 
praise  him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  Sun,  and  Moon,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him, 
and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  stars  of  heaven,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him, 
and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  showers,  and  dew,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise 
him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  winds  of  God,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him, 
and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  fire  and  heat,  praise  ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and 
set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  winter  and  summer,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise 
him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  dews  and  frosts,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him, 
and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  frost  and  cold,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him, 
and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  ice  and  snow,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and 
set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  nights  and  days,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him, 
and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  light  and  darkness,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise 
him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  lightnings  and  clouds,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise 
him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  18.   Or  this  Canticle,  Benedicite 
omnia  opera  Domini  Domino. 
O  ALL   ye  works   of  the  Lord, 
bless  ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 


[And  continued  the  same  as  1549,  except 

bless  ye  the  I>ord  :  praise  him  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 

is  used  throughout  instead  of  "  Speak  good 
of  the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and  set  him  up 
for  ever."] 


P  Ineds.^  iSS9i  "&c."  instead  of  Domini 
Domino;  in  eds.  1662,  "  &c"  fmii/cii. 


1  In  one  ed.,  1359,  "the." 

'  In  two  eds.,  1559,  "  praise  ye  liim." 


Matins.  77 

O  let  the  earth  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  yea,  let  it  praise 
him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  mountains  and  hills,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  : 
praise  him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  all  ye  green  things  upon  the  earth,  speak  good  of  the 
Lord  :  praise  him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  wells,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and  set  him 
up  for  ever. 

O  ye  seas,  and  floods,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him, 
and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  whales,  and  all  that  move  in  the  waters,  speak  good  of 
the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  all  ye  fowls  of  the  air,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise 
him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  all  ye  beasts,  and  cattle,  speak  ye  good  of  the  Lord  : 
praise  him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  children  of  men,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him, 
and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  let  Israel  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and  set 
him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  priests  of  the  Lord,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise 
him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  servants  of  the  Lord,  speak  good  of  the  Lord  :  praise 
him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  spirits  and  souls  of  the  righteous,  speak  good  of  the 
Lord  :  praise  him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  ye  holy  and  humble  men  of  heart,  speak  ye  good  of 
the  Lord  :  praise  ye  *  him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

O  Ananias,  Azarias,  and  Misael,  speak  ye  good  of  the  Lord  : 
praise  ye  ^  him,  and  set  him  up  for  ever. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son :  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  18.    Or  this  Canticle,  o^c. 
[The  same  as  1552. 


James  I.  1604. 

§  18.    Or  this  Canticle,  &•€. 
[The  same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§18.    Or  this  Psalm. 

Dominus  regit  me.     Psal.  xxiii. 

The  Lord  is  my  shepherd,  &c. 

[The  Psalm  is  printed  entire '.] 

Charles  II.  1662. 

§  18.   Or  this  Canticle,  &^c. 
[The  same  as  1552.] 


•  In  eds.  1352,  and  afterwards,  "praise  '  It  will  be  found  printed  in  the  pre- 

tim."  sent  book  as  the  Introit  for  Septuagesima. 


78 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  19.  And  after  the  Second  Lesson,  throughout  the  whole  year,  shall  be  used 
Benedictus  Dominus  Deus  Israel,  ^j'c.  in  English^  \as  jblloweth ;] 

£enedictus\     \mc.  i. 

Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  :  for  he  hath  visited  and 
redeemed  his  people ; 

And  hath  lifted  up  an  horn  of  salvation  to  us''  :  in  the 
house  of  his  servant  David  ; 

As  he  spake  by  the  mouth  of  his  holy  Prophets  :  which  have  y 
been  since  the  world  began  ; 

That  we  should  be  saved  from  our  enemies  :  and  from  the 
hands '  of  all  that  hate  us ; 

To  perform  the  *  mercy  promised  to  our  fathers  ^  :  and  to 
remember  his  holy  covenant ; 

To  perform  the  oath  which  he  sware  to  our  father''  Abra- 
ham :  that  he  would  give  '•  us ; 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  19.  And  after  the  second  Lesson 
shall  be  used  and  said,  Benedictus, 
in  English  as/olloweth. 

Benedictus. 
Blessed  be  the  Lord,  &a 

[The  same  as  1549.] 

§  2a    O  the  c  Psalm.    Jubilate  *. 
[Not  printed  in  this  edition.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  19.  And  after  the  second  lesson  shall 
be  used  and  said  Benedictus  in 
English  cts  followeth. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


"  In  two  eds.,  1549,  the  title  runs,  "The 
SongofZachary ;  Benedictus:  and  Thanks- 
giving for  the  performance  of  God's  pro- 
mises." 

In  one  ed.  also,  1549,  The  Benedictus  is 
not  printed  in  its  place,  but  on  a  separate 
sheet. 

«  In  eds.  1552,  1559,  and  afterwards, 
"And  hath  raised  up  a  mighty  salva- 
tion for  us."  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "And 
hath  raised  up  an  horn  of  ssdvation 
for  us." 


§  20.   Or  the  c  Psalm.  Jubilate. 

O  BE  joyful  in  the  Lord  (all  ye 
lands)  :  serve  the  Lord  with  glad- 
ness, and  come  before  his  presence 
with  a  song. 

Be  ye  sure,  that  the  Lord  he  is 
God  :  it  is  he  that  hath  made  us, 
and  not  we  our  selves,  we  are  his 
people,  and  the  sheep  of  his  pas- 
ture. 

O  go  your  way  into  his  gates  with 
thanksgiving,  and  into  his  courts 
with  praise  :  be  thankful  unto  him, 
and  speak  good  of  his  Name. 

For  the  Lord  is  gracious,  his 
mercy  is  everlasting  :  and  his  truth 
endureth  from  generation  to  gene- 
ration. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


1  In  two  eds.,  1349,  "hath  been." 

•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "hand." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "thy"  instead  of 
"the." 

•"  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards  (except 
Scotch  ed.),  "forefathers." 

•  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards  (except 
Scotch  ed.  I,  "  forefather." 

''  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "grant  unto  us." 

•  In  two  eds.,  1552,  and  one  1559,  the 
title  is,  "Or  Jubilate  Deo,  Psalm  c."  In 
one  ed.,  1559,  "  Or  else  this  Psalm." 


Mai  INS. 


79 


That  we  being  delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  our  enemies  : 
might  serve  him  without  fear ; 

In  holiness  and  righteousness  before  him  :  all  the  days  of 
our  life. 

And  thou,  Child,  shalt  be  called  the  Prophet  of  the  Highest  : 
for  thou  shalt  go  before  the  face  of  the  Lord,  to  prepare  his 
ways ; 

To  give  knowledge  of  salvation  unto  his  people  :  for^  the 
remission  of  their  sins, 

Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God  :  whereby  the  day- 
spring  from  an  s  high  hath  visited  us  ; 

To  give  light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness,  and  in  the  shadow 
of  death  :  and  to  guide  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever,  &c. 


James  I.   1604. 

§  19.  And  after  the  second  lesson  shall 
be  used  and  said  Benedictus  in 
English  as /olloweth. 

[The  same  as  1552.] 
§  20.    Or  the  c  Psalm.  Jubilate. 

[The  same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637, 

§  19.  And  after  the  second  lesson  shall 
be  said  or  sung^  Benedictus  Donii- 
nus  Deus  Israel  in  English  as /ol- 
loweth. 

Benedictus.     Luke  i.  68. 
Blessed  be  the  Lord,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 
§  20.  Or  this  c  Psalm.  Jubilate  Deo. 

Make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the 
Lord,  all  ye  lands. 

Serve  the  Lord  with  gladness  : 
come  before  his  presence  with 
singing. 

Know  ye  that  the  Lord  he  is 
God,  it  is  he  that  hath  made  us, 
and  not  we  our  selves ;  we  are  his 
people  and  the  sheep  of  his  pasture. 


Enter  into  his  gates  with  thanks- 
giving and  into  his  courts  with 
praise  :  be  thankful  unto  him  and 
bless  his  Name. 

For  the  Lord  is  good  ;  his  mercy 
is  everlasting  :  and  his  tmth  en- 
dureth  to  all  generations. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  &c. 

Charles  IL   1662. 

§  19.  Then  shall  be  read  in  like 
manner  the  Second  Lesson,  taken 
out  of  the  New  Testament.  And 
after  that,  the  Hymn  following ; 
except  when  that  shall  happen  to 
be  read  in  the  Cha-bter  for  the  day, 
or  for  the  Gospel  on  St.  John  Bap- 
tist's day. 

Benedictus.     S.  Luke  i.  68. 
Blessed  be  the  Lord,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 
§  20.    Or  this  Psalm.  Jubilate  Deo. 
O  be  joyful,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1559.] 


'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "by." 
B  In  three  eds.,  1552,  "an."   In  one  ed., 
1552,  "on."    In  one  ed.,  1559,  and  after- 


wards, "on." 

•■  In  one  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "used  and 


8o 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


121.  Tlun  shall  be  said  daily  through  the  year,  th^se\  prayers  following,  as 
well  at  Evensong  as  at  Matins,  all  devoutly  kneeling '. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us.     Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us ''. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

§§  22,  23.    The7i  the  Minister  shall  say  the  Creed  and  the  Lord's  Prayer 

in  English,  with  a  loud  voice,  &=€, 
Answer.    But  deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen. 
Priest.    O  Lord,  shew  thy  mercy  upon  us. 
Answer.    And  grant  us  thy  salvation. 
Priest\   O  Lord,  save  the  king"*. 
Answer.   And  mercifully  hear  us  when  we  call  upon  thee. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  22.  Then  shall  be  said  the  Creed, 
by  the  Minister  and  t/ie  people, 
standing. 

I  BELIEVE  in  God  the  Father 
almighty,  maker  of  heaven  and 
earth.  And  in  Jesus  Christ  his  only 
Son  our  Lord,  which  °  was  conceived 
by  the  holy  Ghost,  bom  of  the 
virgin  Mary  :  suffered  under  Ponce 
Pilate",  was  crucified,  dead  and 
buried,  he  descended  into  hell.  The 
third  day  he  rose'  again  from  the 
dead.  He  ascended  into  heaven, 
and  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of 
God  the  Father  almighty.  From 
thence  shall  he  •>  come  to  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead.  I  believe  in 
the  Holy  Ghost.  The  holy  Catholic 
Church.  The  communion  of  saints. 
The  forgiveness  of  sins.  The  resur- 
rection of  the  body.  And  the  life 
everlasting.    Amen. 

§  21.  And  after  that,  these  prayers 
follmuing,  as  well  at  evening 
prayer  as  at  morning  prayer :  all 
devoutly  kneeling.  The  Minister 
first  pronouncing  with  a  loud 
voice. 


*  In  one  ed.,  T549,  the  Rubric,  "Then 
shall  be  said  daily,"  which  in  other  edi- 
tions follows  the  Benedictus,  is  erroneously 
placed  before  it. 

k  In  eds.  1604  and  i66a,  the  second  line 
is  in  a  different  tj-pe  to  the  rtst,  signifying 
that  it  K  to  be  said  by  the  people,  and  not 
by  the  Priest. 

'  In  eds.  i?78,  &c.,  the  word  "  Priest "  is 
altered  to  "  \Iinister,"  and  so  on  throush- 
out;    but  restored  in  1604  and  in    most 


The  Lord  be  with  you. 

Afisu'er, 
And  with  thy  spirit. 

The^  Minister. 
Let  us  pray. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
§  23.    Then  the  Minister,  Clerks  and 
people,  shall  say  the  Lord^s  prayer 
in  English,  with  a  loud  voice. 
Our  Father  which  art,  &c. 
§  24,    Then  the  Ministet  standing 

up  shall  say. 
O  Lord,  shew  thy  mercy  upon  us. 

Answer. 
And  grant  us  thy  salvation. 
[Continued  same  as  1549  to] 
Answer. 
And   take    not   thy  holy  Spirit 
from  us. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
22.    Then  shall  be  said,  ^c. 
[The  same  throughout  as  1552.] 

James  L  1604. 

22.    Then  sliall  be  said,  &>c. 
[The  same  throughout  as  1552.] 


books  after. 

■"  In  ed.  1559,  &c.,  "the  queen;"  and 
in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "our  king." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "who  was." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "Pontius  Pilate." 

P  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "arose." 

■)  In  one  ed.,  1552  ;  in  eds.  1596,  and 
afterwards,  "  he  shall." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1559,  and  in  eds.  1604  and 
afterwards,  "The"  emitted. 


Matins. 


8i 


Priest.  Endue  thy  ministers  *  with  righteousness. 
Answer.  And  make  thy  chosen  people  joyful. 
Priest.  O  Lord,  save  thy  people. 
Answer.  And  bless  thine  inheritance. 
Priest.  Give  peace  in  our  time,  O  Lord. 
Answer.  Because  there  is  none  other  that  fighteth  for  us, 
but  only  thou,  O  God. 

Priest.  O  God,  make  clean  our  hearts  within  us. 
Answer.  And  take  not  thine '  holy  Spirit  from  us. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  22.  Then  shall  be  said  or  sung  the 
Creed  by  the  Presbyter  or  Minister 
and  the  people  standing. 

I  BELIEVE  in  God,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1552.] 

§  21.  And  after  that  these  prayers 
following  as  well  at  Evening 
prayer  as  at  Morning  prayer,  all 
devoutly  kneeling,  the  Presbyter  or 
Minister  first  pronouncing  with 
a  loud  voice. 
The  Lord  be  with  you. 

Ansi.ver. 
And  with  thy  spirit. 

Presbyter. 
Let  us  Pray. 
Lord  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord  have  mercy  upon  us. 

§  23.  Then  the  Presbyter,  Clerks, 
and  people  shall  say  the  Lord^s 
p7-ayer  in  English  with  a  loud 
voice. 

Our  Father,  &c. 

[Printed  in  full  to] 
for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. 

§  24.  Then  the  Presbyter  standing  up 

shall  say, 

O  Lord,  shew  thy  mercy,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  except] 

Presbyter. 
[throughout  instead  of  Priest,  down  to] 


Answer. 
And    take    not    thy  holy  spirit 
from  us. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  22.  Then  shall  be  sung,  or  said  the 
Apostles''  Creed  by  the  Minister; 
and  the  people  standing.  Except 
only  such  days  as  the  Creed  of  St. 
Athanasius  is  appointed  to  be  read. 
I  believe  in  God,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1552.] 

§  21.  And  after  that,  these  Prayers 
following,  all  devoutly  kneeling, 
the  Minister  first  pronouncing 
with  a  loud  voice. 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 

[Continued  same  as  1552.] 

§  23.    Then  the  Minister,  Cle7-ks,  and 
people  shall  say  the  Lord's  Prayer 
with  a  loud  voice. 
Our  Father,  which  art,  &c. 
[Printed  in  full  to] 

....  deliver  us  from  evil.    Amen. 

§  24.    The?t  the  Priest  stattditig  up 
shall  say, 
O  Lord,  shew  thy  mercy  upon  us. 

Answer, 
And  grant  us  thy  salvation. 
[Continued  same  as  1549,  to] 
AnsTtier. 
And  take   not  thy   Holy  Spirit 
from  us. 


•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "thy  Presbyters 
and  Ministers." 


'  In  most  eds.,  1552  and  1559,  "thine;" 
afterwards,  "thy." 


82 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549, 


Priest.  The  Lord  be  with  you. 
Answer.  And  with  thy  spirit 

§  25.  T/ien  shall  daily  follow  three  Collects.  The  first  of  the  day,  which 
shall  be  the  same  t/tat  is  appoittted  at  the  Communion.  The  second  for 
peace.  The  third  for  grace  to  livewfll.  And  the  tivo  last  Collects  siiall 
never  alter,  but  daily  be  said  at  Matins  throughout  all  the  year,  as  follow- 
eth  :  the  Priest  standing  up,  and  saying. 

Let  us  pray. 

Then  the  Collect  of  the  day. 

§  26.   The  second  Collect :  for  peace. 

O  God,  which  art  author  of  peace,  and  lover  of  concord, 
in  knowledge  of  whom  standeth  our  eternal  life,  whose  service 
is  perfect  freedom :  defend  us,  thy  humble  servants,  in  all 
assaults  of  our  enemies,  that  we,  siurely  trusting  in  thy  defence. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  25,  Then  shall  follow  three  Col- 
lects. Tlie  first  of  the  day,  which 
shall  be  the  same  that  is  appointed 
at  the  Communion.  The  second 
for  peace.  T/ie  third  for  Grace  to 
live  well.  And  the  two  last  Col- 
lects shall  never  alter,  but  daily  be 
said  at  morning  prayer,  through- 
out all  the  year  asfolloweth. 

§  26.    The  second  Collect  for  Peace. 

O  God,  which  art  author,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  27.    The  third  Collect  for  Grace. 

O   Lord  our  heavenly   Father, 

almighty  and  everlasting  God,  &c 

[CoDtinued  the  same  as  1549O 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  25.    Tlien  shall  follow,  &'c. 
[The  same  as  1552  throughout.] 

James  I.  1604. 
§  25.   Tlien  shall  follow,  dr'c. 
[The  same  as  1553  throughout.] 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  25,   Then  shall  follow  three  Col- 
■    lects,  ^-c. 

[The  same  as  1553  throughout] 


[At  the  end  is  the  following  Rubric] 
§  29.  After  this  collect  ended  follow- 
eih  the  Litany,  and  if  the  Litany 
be  not  appointed  to  be  said  or  sun^ 
that  morning,  then  shall  next  be 
said  the  prayer  for  the  King's  Ma- 
jisty,  with  the  rest  of  the  prayers 
following,  at  the  end  oftlie  Litany, 
and  the  Benediction. 


§25. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
Then  shall  follo^o,  &^. 
[Same  as  1552,  to] 
....  asfollowdh  ;  all  kneeling. 

§  26.    The  second  Collect  for  Peace. 

O  God,  who  art  the  author,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  27.    TJie  third  Collect  for  Grace. 
O   Lord  our  heavenly  Father, 
Almighty  and  everlasting  Gotl,  who 
hast  safely  brought  us,  &a 

[Same  as  1349.] 
§  2S.  In   Quires  and  Places  where 
they     sing,     here   followeth     the 
Anthem. 

§  29.  Then  these  five  Prayers  follow- 
ing are  to  be  read  here,  except  when 
t/u  Litany  is  read;  and  then  only 
the  two  last  are  to  be  read,  as  they 
are  there  placed. 


Matins.  83 

may  not  fear  the  power  of  any  adversaries  :  through  the  might 
of  Jesu  ^  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  27,  The  third  Collect :  for  grace. 
O  Lord,  our  heavenly  Father,  almighty  and  everliving  God, 
which  hast  safely  brought  us  to  the  beginning  of  this  day  :  de- 
fend us  in  the  same  with  thy  mighty  power ;  and  grant  that 
this  day  we  fall  into  no  sin,  neither  run  into  any  kind  of 
danger,  but  that  all  our  doings  may  be  ordered  by  thy  govern- 
ance, to  do  always  that  is  righteous  in  thy  sight :  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


A  Prayer  for  the  Kitig's  Majesty^. 

O  Lord  our  heavenly  Father, 
high  and  mighty,  King  of  kings, 
Lord  of  lords,  the  only  Ruler  of 
princes,  who  dost  from  thy  throne 
behold  all  the  dwellers  upon  earth  ; 
most  heartily  we '  beseech  thee  with 
thy  favour  to  behold  our  most  gracious 
Sovereign  Lord  King  CHARLES, 
and  so  replenish  him  with  the  grace 
of  thy  holy  Spirit,  that  he  may 
alway  incline  to  thy  will,  and  walk 
in  thy  way  :  Endue  him  plenteously 
with  heavenly  gifts,  grant  him  in 
health  and  wealth  long  to  live, 
strengthen  him  that  he  may  van- 
quish and  overcome  all  his  enemies  ; 
and  finally  after  this  life,  he  may 
attain  everlasting  joy  and  felicity, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

A  Prayer  for  [the  Royal  Family  t.'\ 

Almighty  God,  the  fountain  of 
all  goodness,  we  humbly  beseech 
thee  to  bless  [our  gracious  Queen 
Catherine,  Mary  the  Queen-Mo- 
ther, James  Duke  of  York,  and  all 
the  Royal  Family y;]  Endue  them 
with  thy  holy  Spirit ;  enrich  them 
with  thy  heavenly  grace  ;  prosper 
them  with  all  happiness  ;  and  bring 
them  to  thine  everlasting  kingdom, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


A  Prayer  for  the  Clergy  and  People. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who  alone  workest  great  mar- 
vels ;  send  down  upon  our  Bishops, 
and  Curates,  and  all  Congregations 
committed  to  their  charge,  the 
healthful  Spirit  of  thy  grace  ;  and 
that  they  may  truly  please  thee, 
pour  upon  them  the  continual  dew 
of  thy  blessing.  Grant  this,  O  Lord, 
for  the  honour  of  our  Advocate  and 
Mediator,  Jesus  Christ.     Amen. 

A  Prayer  of  Saint  Chrysostom. 

Almighty  God,  who  hast  given 
us  grace  at  this  time  with  one  ac- 
cord to  make  our  common  suppli- 
cations unto  thee,  and  dost  promise, 
that  when  two  or  three  are  gathered 
together  in  thy  Name,  thou  wilt 
grant  their  requests ;  Fulfil  now, 
O  Lord,  the  desires  and  petitions 
of  thy  servants,  as  may  be  most  ex- 
pedient for  them ;  granting  us  in 
this  world  knowledge  of  thy  truth, 
and  in  the  world  to  come  life  ever- 
lasting.   Amen. 

2  Cor.  xiii. 
The  grace   of   our  Lord    Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and 
the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
be  with  us  all  evermore.     Amen. 

§  30.  Here  endeth  the  Order  of 
Morning  Prayer  throughout  the 
year. 


"  In  eds.  1552,  &c.,  "Jesus." 

"  This  and  the  Prayers  following,  pre- 
vious to  1662,  were  printed  at  the  end  of 
the  Litany.    [See  p.  276.] 


y  The  words  between  bracT<ets  are  erased 
in  some  copies  of  the  Sealed  books,  with 
the  intention,  no  doubt,  of  their  being 
changed  as  circumstances  required. 


84 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


AN  ORDER 

FOR  EVENSONG 
THROUGH-OUT  THE   YEAR. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

AN  ORDER  FOR  EVENING 

PRAYER  THROUGHOUT  THE 

YEAR. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

An  Order 

for  evening  prayer 

throughout  the  year. 


James  I.  1604. 

An  Order 

for  evening  prayer 

throughout  the  year- 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

An  Order  for  Evening  Prayer 

throughout  the  year. 


Charles  II.  i66a. 

THE 

ORDER 


Evening  Prayer 

Daily  throughout  the  Year. 

i  31  *.  At  the  beginning  of  Evening 
Prayer  the  Minister  shall  read 
with  a  loud  voice  some  one,  or  more 
of  these  Sentences  of  the  Scriptures, 


that  follaru).  And  then  he  shall 
say  that  which  is  written  after  the 
said  Sentences. 

When  the  wicked  man  tumeth 
away  from  his  wickedness,  that  he 
hath  committed,  and  doth  that  which 
is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall  save  his 
soul  alive.  Ezek.  l8.  27. 

I  acknowledge  my  transgressions, 
and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me.  Psal. 

51-  3- 

Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and 
blot  out  mine  iniquities.  Psal.  51.  9. 

The  Sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken 
spirit :  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart, 
O  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise.  PsaL 
SI.  17. 

Rent  your  hearts,  and  not  your 
garments,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord 
your  God  ;  for  he  is  gracious  and 
merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great 
kindness,  and  repenteth  him  of  the 
evil.  Joel  2.  13. 

To  the  Lord  our  God  belong  mer- 
cies and  foi^venesses,  though  we 
have  rebelled  against  him  :  neither 
have  we  obeyed  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  our  God,  to  walk  in  his  laws 
which  he  set  before  us.  Dan.  9. 
9,  10. 

0  Lord  correct  me,  but  with 
judgement ;  not  in  thine  anger,  lest 
thou  bring  me  to  nothing.  Jer.  10. 
24.     Psal.  6.  I. 

Repent  ye :  for  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven  is  at  hand.     S.  Mat.  3.  2. 

1  will  arise  and  go  to  my  Father, 
and  will  say  unto  him  ;  Father,  I 
have  sinned  against  Heaven,  and 
before  thee,  and  am  no  more  worthy 
to  be  called  thy  son.  S.  Luke  15. 
18,  19. 


*  In  none  of  the  four  previous  editions 
do  we  find  printed  either  the  Sentences, 
the  Exhortation,  the  Confession,  or  the 


Absolution.  Practically,  the  words  in 
Rubric  S  7  of  the  Morning  I*rayer  rendered 
repetition  here  needless. 


Evensong. 


85 


Enter  not  into  judgement  with 
thy  servant,  O  Lord ;  for  in  thy 
sight  shall  no  man  living  be  justi- 
fied.    Psal.  143.  2. 

If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we 
deceive  our  selves,  and  the  truth  is 
not  in  us.  But  if  we  confess  our 
sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  for- 
give us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us 
from  all  unrighteousness,  i  S.  John 
I.  8,  9. 

Dearly  beloved  brethren,  the 
Scripture  moveth  us  in  sundry  places 
to  acknowledge  and  confess  our 
manifold  sins  and  wicjcedness,  and 
that  we  should  not  dissemble  nor 
cloke  them  before  the  face  of  Al- 
mighty God  our  heavenly  Father, 
but  confess  them  with  an  humble, 
lowly,  penitent,  and  obedient  heart, 
to  the  end  that  we  may  obtain  for- 
giveness of  the  same  by  his  infinite 
goodness  and  mercy.  And  although 
we  ought  at  all  times  humbly  to  ac- 
knowledge our  sins  before  God,  yet 
ought  we  most  chiefly  so  to  do, 
when  we  assemble  and  meet  toge- 
ther, to  render  thanks  for  the  great 
benefits  that  we  have  received  at  his 
hands,  to  set  forth  his  most  worthy 
praise,  to  hear  his  most  holy  Word, 
and  to  ask  those  things  which  are 
requisite  and  necessary,  as  well  for 
the  body  as  the  soul.  Wherefore  I 
pray  and  beseech  you,  as  many  as 
are  here  present,  to  accompany  me 
with  a  pure  heart  and  humble  voice 
unto  the  throne  of  the  Heavenly 
Grace,  saying  after  me. 

§  32.  A  general  Confession,  to  be  said 
of  ike  whole  Congregation  after  the 
Minister,  all  kneeling. 

Almighty  and  most  merciful 
Father,  we  have  erred  and  strayed 


from  thy  ways  like  lost  sheep.  We 
have  followed  too  much  the  devices 
and  desires  of  our  own  hearts.  We 
have  ofiended  against  thy  holy  laws. 
We  have  left  undone  those  things 
which  we  ought  to  have  done  ;  And 
we  have  done  those  things  which 
we  ought  not  to  have  done;  And 
there  is  no  health  in  us.  But  Thou, 
O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  miser- 
able offenders.  Spare  thou  them, 
O  God,  which  confess  their  faults. 
Restore  thou  them  that  are  peni- 
tent ;  According  to  thy  promises  de- 
clared unto  mankind  in  Christ  Jesu 
our  Lord.  And  grant,  O  most  mer- 
ciful Father,  for  his  sake ;  That  we 
may  hereafter  live  a  godly,  righte- 
ous, and  sober  life.  To  the  glory 
of  thy  holy  name.     Amen. 

§  33.  The  Absolution  or  Remission 
of  sins  to  be  pronounced  by  the 
Priest  alone,  standing  ;  the  people 
still  kneeling. 

Almighty  God,  the  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  desireth 
not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather 
that  he  may  turn  from  his  wicked- 
ness, and  live,  and  hath  given  power 
and  commandment  to  his  ministers 
to  declare  and  pronounce  to  His 
people,  being  penitent,  the  absolu- 
tion and  remission  of  their  sins  : 
he  pardoneth  and  absolveth  all 
them,  that  truly  repent,  and  un- 
feignedly  believe  his  holy  Gospel. 
Wherefore  beseech  we  him  to 
grant  us  true  repentance  and  his 
Holy  Spirit ;  that  those  things  may 
please  him  which  we  do  at  this  pre- 
sent, and  that  the  rest  of  our  life 
hereafter  may  be  pure  and  holy,  so 
that  at  the  last  we  may  come  to  his 
eternal  joy,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 


86 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  34,   Ttu  Priest^  shall  say. 

Our  Father,  &c. 

§  35.   77im  likrunse  he  shall  say. 
O  God,  make  speed  to  save  me. 
Afiswer. 
O  Lord ',  make  haste  to  help  me. 

Priest. 
Glory  be  ^  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be  : 
world  without  end.     Amen. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  34.    The  Priest  shall  say. 
Our  Father  which,  &c. 

§  35'    T'/i^w  likewise  he  shall  say. 
O  Lord,  open  thou  our  lips. 

Answer. 
And  our  mouth  shall  shew  forth 
tliy  praise. 

Priest. 
O  God,  make  speed  to  save  us. 

Answer. 
Lord,  make  haste  to  help  us. 

Priest. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost 

As  it  was  in  the  b%inning,  is 
now,    and   ever  shall  be   :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 
Praise  ye  the  Lord. 

§  38.  Then  «  Psalms  in  order  as  they 
be  appointed  in  the  Table  for 
Psalms,  except  there  be  proper 
Psalms  appointed  for  that  day. 
Tfun  a  Lesson  of  the  old  Testa- 
ment as  is '  appointed  likewise  in 
the  /Calendar,  except  there  be  pro- 
per lessons  appointed  for  that  day. 
After  that.  Magnificat*  in  Eng- 
lish asfolloweth. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


••  In  ed.  of  1578,  "The  Minister  shall 
say,"  and  so  on  throughout,  "  Minister" 
instead  of ' '  Priest. " 

"  In  ed.  of  1506,  "  O  Lord." 

^  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "Glory  to  the 
Father." 


James  1.   1604. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637, 

§§31 — 34-  After  the  sentences,  exhor' 
tation,  confession,  and  absolution,  as 
is  appointed  at  morning  prayer, 
the  Presbyter  shall  say  or  sing. 

Our  Father,  Which  art  in  hea- 
ven, hallowed  be  thy  name.  Thy 
kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done 
in  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.  Give 
us  this  day  our  daily  bread.  And 
forgive  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  for- 
give them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation; 
but  deliver  us  from  evil :  for  thine 
is  the  kingdom,  the  power,  and  the 
glory,  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

§  35.   Then  likewise  he  shall  say 
or  sing. 

O  Lord,  open  thou  our  lips. 

Answer. 
And  our  mouth  shall  shew  forth 
thy  praise. 


•  In  ed.  1604,  "Then  the  Psalms." 
'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "as  it  is." 
«r  In   Scotch  ed.,  1637,   "the  Miif^ni- 
ficat." 


Evensong. 


87 


Praise  ye  the  Lord. 

§  36.  And  from  Easter  to  Trinity  Sunday, 

Alleluia. 

As  before  is  appointed  at  Matins. 

§  38.  Then  ^  Psalms  in  order  as  they  be  appointed  in  the  Table  for  Psalms, 
except  there  be  proper  Psalms  appointed  for  that  day.  Then  a  Lesson  of 
the  Old  Testament,  as  it'^  is  appointed  likewise  in  the  Calendar,  except 
there  be  proper  Lessons  appointed  for  that  day.  After  that,  (Magnificat 
anima  mea  Dominum)  in  English,  \as  followethl. 


Presbyter. 
O  God,  make  speed  to  save  us. 

Ansiver. 
O  Lord,  make  haste  to  help  us. 

Presbyter. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

All  standing  up,  as  often  as  it 
is  repeated. 

Presbyter. 
Praise  ye  the  Lord. 
Answer. 
The  Lord's  name  be  praised. 

g  38.  Then  the  Psalms  in  order  as 
they  be  appointed  in  the  table  for 
Psalms,  except  there  be  proper 
Psalms  appointed  for  that  day. 
Then  a  lesson  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, as  it  is  appointed  likewise  in 
the  /Calender,  except  there  be  pro- 
per lessons  appointed  for  that  day. 
After  that  the  Magnificat  in  Eng- 
lish, as  followeth. 


Charles  IL  1662. 
§  34.  Then  the  Minister  shall  kneel, 
and  say  the  Lord's  Prayer ;   the 
People  also  kneeling,  and  repeating 
it  with  him. 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven. 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy  king- 
dom come.     Thy  will  be  done  in 


earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give 
us  this  day  our  daily  bread.  And 
forgive  us  our  trespasses,  As  we  for- 
give them,  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation ; 
But  deliver  us  from  evil :  For  thine 
is  the  kingdom,  the  power,  and  the 
glory,  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 

§  35.  Then  likewise  he  shall  say, 
O  Lord,  open  thou  our  lips. 
Aiiswer. 
And  our  mouth  shall  shew  forth 
thy  praise. 

Priest. 
O  God,  make  speed  to  save  us. 

Answer. 
O  Lord,  make  haste  to  help  us. 

§  37.  Here  all  standing  np,  the 

Priest  shall  say. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
Anstver. 
As  it   was  in   the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world  with- 
out end.     Amen. 

Priest. 
Praise  ye  the  Lord. 
Answer. 
The  Lord's  Name  be  praised. 

§  38.  Then  shall  be  said  or  sung  the 
Psalms  ifi  order  as  they  be  ap- 
pointed. Then  a  Lesson  of  the 
Old  Testament,  as  is  appointed: 
And  after  that.  Magnificat  {or  the 
Song  of  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary) 
in  English  as  followeth. 


"^  In  ed.  of  1596,  "Then  the  Psalms." 
*  In  three  eds.,  1549,  "as  is  appointed,"  instead  of  "as  it  is  appointed." 


88 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Magnificat''.  [Luc.  i.] 

My  soul  doth  magnify  the  Lord. 

And  my  spirit  [hath]  rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour. 

For  he  hath  regarded  the  lowHness '  of  his  handmaiden. 

For  behold,  from  henceforth  all  generations  shall  call  me 
blessed. 

For  he  that  is  mighty  hath  magnified  me  ™  :  and  holy  is 
his  name. 

And  his  mercy  is  on  them  that  fear  him  :  throughout  all 
generations  °. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Magnificat  [Luke.  L] 
My  soul  doth  magnify,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 

§  39-   Or  the  xcviii.  Psalm. 
Cantate  Domino  cantictim  novum". 

O  SING  unto  the  Lord  a  new- 
song  :  for  he  hath  done  marvellous 
things. 

With  his  own  right  hand,  and 
with  his  holy  arm  :  hath  he  gotten 
himself  [the]  victory. 

The  Lord  declared  his  salvation  : 
his  righteousness  hath  he  openly 
shewed  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen. 

He  hath  remembered  his  mercy 
and  truth  toward  the  house  of  Israel  : 
and  all  the  ends  of  the  world  have 
seen  the  salvation  of  our  God. 

Shew  your  selves  joyful  unto  the 
Lord  all  ye  lands  :  sing,  rejoice  and 
give  thanks. 

Praise  the  Lord  upon  the  harp  : 
sing  to  the  harp  with  a  psalm  of 
thanksgiving. 

With  trumpets  also  and  shawms  : 
O  shew  your  selves  joyful  before  the 
Lord  the  King. 

Let  the  sea  make  a  noise,  and  all 


k  In  twoeds.,  1549,  "The  Song  of  Mary 
rejoicing  and  praising  God,"  instead  of 
"  Magnificat,"  and  printed  on  a  separate 
sheet  at  the  close  of  the  volume. 

•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  low  es- 
tate of." 

">  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "hath  done  me 
great  things." 

"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "from  generation 
to  generation." 


that  therein  is  :  the  round  world,  and 
they  that  dwell  therein. 

Let  the  floods  clap  their  hands, 
and  let  the  hills  be  joyful  together 
before  the  Lord  :  for  he  is  come' 
to  judge  the  earth. 

With  righteousness  shall  he  judge 
the  world  :  and  the  people  with 
equity. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Magnificat,  Luke.  i.  *> 
My  soul  doth,  &c 

[The  same  as  1549.] 

39.   Or  the  xcviii.  Psalm,  Cantate 

domino  canticum  novum. 
O  SING  unto  the  Lord,  &c 
[The  same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
Magnificat,  Luke  i. 
My  soul  doth,  &c 

[The  same  as  i549-] 


•  In  one  ed.,  I5S*.  "Or  else  this  Psalm, 
Cantate  Domino,  Psalm  xcviii.  ;"  in  three 
eds.,  1555,  and  m  one  ed.,  155a,  the  words 
"quia  mirabilia  fecit "  are  added,  but  the 
words  of  the  Psalm  are  omitted. 
P  In  ed.  i66a,  "for  he  cometh." 
1  In  one  ed.  of  1559,  "  Magnificat,  Luke 
X,"  omitted. 


Evensong. 


89 


He  hath  shewed  strength  with  his  arm  :  he  hath  scattered 
the  proud  in  the  imagination  of  their  hearts. 

He  hath  put  down  the  mighty  from  their  seat  :  and  hath 
exalted  the  humble  and  meek '. 

He  hath  filled  the  hungry  with  good  things  :  and  the  rich  he 
hath  seirt  empty  away. 

He  remembering  his  mercy,  hath  holpen  his  servant  Israel  : 
as  he  promised  to  our  fathers*,  Abraham  and  his  seed,  for 
ever '. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


§  39.    Or  else  this  Psalm. 
Cantate  domino,  Ps.  98. 
O  SING  unto  the  Lord,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1552'] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
Magnificat,  Luke  i.  46. 
My  soul  doth  magnify,  &c 
[The  same  as  1549.  ] 

§  39.   Or  else  this  Psalm. 
Cantate  Domino.  Psal.  98. 

O  SING  unto  the  Lord  a  new 
song,  for  he  hath  done  marvellous 
things  :  his  right  hand,  and  his  holy 
arm  hath  gotten  him  the  victory. 

The  Lord  hath  made  known  his 
salvation  :  his  righteousness  hath 
he  openly  shewed  in  the  sight  of  the 
heathen. 

He  hath  remembered  his  mercy 
and  truth  toward  the  house  of  Israel : 
and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  have 
seen  the  salvation  of  our  God. 

Make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the 
Lord,  all  the  earth  :  make  a  loud 
noise,  and  rejoice,  and  sing  praise. 

Sing  unto  the  Lord  with  the  harp  : 
with  the  harp  the  voice  of  a  psalm. 


'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "and  exalted  them 
of  low  degree. " 

•  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "fore- 
fathers. " 


With  trumpets  and  sound  of  cor- 
net :  make  a  joyful  noise  before  the 
Lord  the  King. 

Let  the  sea  roar  and  the  fulness 
thereof  :  the  world,  and  they  that 
dwell  therein. 

Let  the  floods  clap  their  hands  : 
let  the  hills  be  joyful  together, 

Before  the  Lord ;  for  he  cometh 
to  judge  the  earth  :  with  righteous- 
ness shall  he  judge  the  world,  and 
the  people  with  equity. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Magnificat.   S.  Luke  I. 

My  sotil  doth  magnify,  &c 

[The  same  as  iS49-] 

§  39.  Or  else  this  Psalm  ;  Except  it 
be  on  the  nineteenth  day  of  the 
month,  when  it  is  read  in  the  or- 
dinary course  of  the  Psalms. 

Cantate  Domino.     Psal.  98. 
O  SING  unto  the  Lord,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1552.] 


•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "He  hath  holpen 
his  servant  Israel,  in  remembrance  of  his 
mercy,  as  he  spake  to  our  fathers,  to 
Abraham  and  to  his  seed  for  ever." 


9° 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  40.   Then  a  Lesson  of  the  New  Testament.     And  after  that  (Nunc  dimittis 
servum  tuum) "  in  English  \a.s  followeth\ 

Nunc  Dimittis*.  [Luc  ii.] 
Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace  :  accord- 
ing to  thy  word. 

For  mine  eyes  have  seen  :  thy  salvation. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  40.  Then  a  Lesson  of  the  new 
Testament.  And  after  that  Nunc 
dimittis  in  English,  as  followeth. 

Lord  now  lettest,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.1 

§  41.   Or  this  Psalm  ">,  Deus  mise- 
reatur  nostri,  iri  English. 

§§  42 — ^46.  Then  shall  follow  the 
Creed,  with  other  prayers  as  is 
before  appointed  at  morning  prayer 
after  Benedictus.  And  with  three^ 
Collects :  First  of  the  Day :  the 
second  of  ^  Peace :  Third for^  Aid 
against  all  perils,  as  hereafter  fol- 
lonveth:  which  two  last  Collects 
shall  be  daily  said  at  evening  prayer 
without  alteration. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  40.   Then  a  lesson,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  41.  Or  this  Psalm  ^,  '  Deus  mise- 
reatur  nostri,'  in  English. 

God  be  merciful  unto  us,  and 
bless  us  :  and  shew  us  the  light  of 
his  countenance,  and  be  merciful 
unto  us. 

That  thy  way  may  be  known  upon 
earth  :  thy  saving  health  among  all 
nations. 


"  In  eds.  ISS2,  iSS9i  and  afterwards,  the 
words  "servum  tuum"  are  omitted. 

»  In  two  eds.,  iS49.  "  The  Song  of 
Symeon  the  Just,"  instead  o/"Nunc  di- 
mittis," and  printed  on  a  separate  slteei. 

y  In  two  eds.,  1552,  and  in  three  eds., 
1559.  "  Or  else  this  Psalm,  Deus  mise- 
reatur,  [Ps.  Ixvii.  ] ;"  but  the  words  of  the 
Ps.alm  are  not  printed  in  any  of  the  1552 
editions. 


Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O 
God  :  yea,  let  all  the  people  praise 
thee. 

O  let  the  nations  rejoice  and  be 
glad  :  for  thou  shalt  judge  the  ■■  folk 
righteously,  and  govern  the  nations 
upon  earth. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O 
God  :  yea  **  let  all  the  people  praise 
thee. 

Then  shall  the  earth  bring  forth 
her  increase  :  and  God,  even  our 
own  God,  shall  give  us  his  blessing. 

God  shall  bless  us  :  and  all  the 
ends  of  the  world  shall  fear  '  him. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

§  42.  Then  shall  follo7v  the  Creed,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  L  1604. 

§  40.   Then  a  lesson,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  41,   Or  else  this  Psalm,  Deus 

Misereatur,  Ps.  67. 
GOD  be  merciful,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1559.] 

I  42.   Then  shall  follow  the 

Creed,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,] 


■  In  one  ed.  of  1559,  "and  with  the 
Collects." 

»  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  afterwattis, 
"for  peace." 

I"  In  one  ed.  of  1559,  "third,  the,  for 
aid  ;"  and  in  eds.  of  1596,  1604,  and  after- 
wards, "The  third  for  aid." 

•^  In  one  ed.  of  1559,  "thy  folk." 

*  In  ed.  1604,  " yea" omitted. 

•  In  one  ed.,  1559  (according  to  Picker- 
ing's reprint j,  "praise  him." 


Evensong. 


QT 


Which  thou  hast  prepared  :  before  the  face  of  all '  people ; 

To  be  s  a  light  ^  to  lighten  the  Gentiles  :  and  to  be  ^  the 
glory  of  thy  people  Israel. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

§§  43 — 46.  T^en  the  suffrages  before  assigned  at  Matins,  the  clerks  kneeling 
likewise,  with  three  Collects.  First  of  the  day:  Second  of  fence:  Third 
for  aid  against  all  perils,  as  here  followeth.  Which  two  last  Collects  shall 
be  daily  said  at  Evensong  without  alteration. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  40.    Then  a  Lesson  of  the  New 
Testament.    And  after  that.  Nunc 
dimittis,  in  English,  as  follaiveth. 

Nunc  dimittis.  Luke  ii.  29. 
Lord,  now  lettest,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 

§  41.   Or  else  this  Psalm,  Deus 
misereatur.  Psalm  67. 

God  be  meiciful  unto  us,  and 
bless  us  :  and  cause  his  face  to  shine 
upon  us.   Selah. 

That  thy  way  may  be  known  upon 
earth  :  thy  saving  health  among  all 
nations. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O 
God  :  yea,  let  all  the  people  praise 
thee. 

O  let  the  nations  be  glad  and  sing 
for  joy  :  for  thou  shalt  judge  the 
people  righteously,  and  govern  the 
nations  upon  earth.   Selah. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O 
God  :  let  all  the  people  praise  thee. 

Then  shall  the  earth  yield  her 
increase  :  and  God,  even  our  own 
God,  shall  bless  us. 

God  shall  bless  us  :  and  all  the 
ends  of  the  earth  shall  fear  him. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

§  42.    Then  shall  follow  the 
Creed,  &^c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  40.    Then  a  Lesson  of  the  Nav 

Testament,  as  it  is  a f pointed:  And 

after  that.  Nunc  dimittis  (or  the 

Song  of  Simeon)  in  English,  as 

followeth. 

Nunc  Dimittis.  S.  Luke  2.  29. 
Lord,  now  lettest,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§41.  Or  else  this  Psalm  ;  Except  ii 
be  071  the  Twelfth  day  of  the  month. 

Deus  J^isereatur.   Psal.  67. 
God  be  merciful,  &c. 
[Same  as  1559.] 

§  42.  Then  shall  be  said  or  sting  the 
Apostles  C7-eed  by  the  Minister  and 
the  people  standing. 

I  BELIEVE  in  God,  &c. 

[Printed  in  full,  the  same  as  at  Morning 
Prayer,  p.  80.] 

§  43.  And  after  that,  these  Prayers 
following,   all   devoutly  kneelin^-; 
the  Minister  first  pronouncing  with 
a  loud  voice. 
The  Lord  be  with  you. 

Ans^ver. 
And  with  thy  spirit 
Afinister. 
Let  us  pray. 
Lord  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ  have  mercy  upon  ns. 
Lord  have  mercy  upon  us. 


'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "all  thy;"   and  in 
another,  "of  thy." 
i  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "A  light  to." 


•"  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "for  to  lighten." 
'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "and  the  gloi-y." 


92  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549, 

§  47.  The  second  Collect  at  Evetisong. 
O  God,  from  whom  all  holy  desires,  all  good  counsels,  and 
all  just  works  do  proceed  :  Give  unto  thy  servants  that  peace, 
which  the  world  cannot  give ;  that  both  our  hearts  may  be  set 
to  obey  thy  commandments,  and  also  that  by  thee  we  being 
defended  from  the  fear  of  our  enemies,  may  pass  our  time  in 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

i  47.   The  second  Collect  at  Evening 
prayer. 
O  God,  from  whom,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 

§  48.    The  third  Collect,  for  aid 

against  all  perils. 
Lighten  out  darkness,  &c. 

[The  same  as  iS49-] 


§47 


Elizabeth,  155*!  «) 

The  Second  Collect  at  Evening 
Prayer. 
O  God,  from  whom,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 

§48.   The  Third  Collect,  ^c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

§  47.   The  Second  Collect  at  Evening 

Prayer. 

O  God,  from  whom,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 

§  48.    The  Third  Collect,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  47.    The  Second  Collect  at  Evening 

Prayer. 

O  God,  from  whom,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 

§  48.   The  Third  Collect,  Sec 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§  50.   T7ien  shall  follow  the  prayer 
for  the  King's  Majesty,  with  the 
rest  oftJu  Prayers  at  the  end  of  the 
Utany,  to  the  Benediction. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  44.  Then  the  Minister,  Clerks^ 
and  people  shall  say  the  Lord's 
Prayer  with  a  loud  voice. 

Our  Father,  &c 

[Printed  in  full  to] 
deliver  us  from  eviL     Amen. 

§  45.   Then  the  Priest  standing  up 
shall  say, 

O  Lord,  shew  thy  mercy  upon 
us. 

ATtswer. 
And  grant  us  thy  salvation. 

Priest. 
O  Lord,  save  the  King. 

Ans7oer. 
And  mercifully  hear  us  when  we 
call  upon  thee. 

Priest. 
Endue  thy  ministers  with  right- 
eousness. 

Answer. 
And    make    thy  chosen    people 
joyfuL 

Priest. 
O  Lord,  save  thy  people. 

Answer. 
And  bless  thine  inheritance. 

Priest. 
Give  peace  in  our  time,  O  Lord. 

Atts7ver. 
Because  there  is  none  other  that 
fighteth  for  us,  but  only  thou,  O 
God. 

Priest. 
O  God,  make  clean  our  hearts 
within  us. 

Answer. 
And  take  not  thy  Holy   Spirit 
from  us. 


Evensong. 


^3 


rest  and  quietness :   through  the  merits  of  Jesu  ^  Christ  our 
Saviour.     Amen, 

§  48.    The  third  Collect  for  aid  against  all  perils. 
Lighten  our  darkness,  we  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  and  by  thy 
great  mercy,  defend  us  from  all  perils  and  dangers  of  this  night, 
for  the  love  of  thy  only  Son,  our  Saviour  Jesus "'  Christ.    Amen. 


§  46.    Then  shall  follow  three   Col- 
lects ;  The  first  of  the  day ;  The 
second  for  Peace;    The  third  for 
aid  against  all  perils,  as  hereafter 
folloiveth  ;   Which  two  last  Collects 
shall  be    daily   said  at  Evening 
Prayer  without  alteration. 
%  47.    The  second  Collect,  &c. 
§  48.    The  third  Collect,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§  49.  In   Quires  and  Places  where 
they  sing,  here  followeth  the  An- 
them. 
§  50.  A  Prayer  for  the  King's 

Majesty. 
O  Lord  our  heavenly  Father, 
high  and  mighty.  King  of  kings, 
Lord  of  lords,  the  only  Ruler  of 
princes,  who  dost  from  thy  throne 
behold  all  the  dwellers  upon  earth  ; 
most  heartily  we  beseech  thee  with 
thy  favour  to  behold  our  most 
gracious  Sovereign  Lord  King 
Charles,  and  so  replenish  him 
with  the  grace  of  thy  Holy  Spirit, 
that  he  may  alway  incline  to  thy 
will,  and  walk  in  thy  way :  Endue 
him  plenteously  with  heavenly  gifts, 
grant  him  in  health  and  wealth  long 
to  live,  strengthen  him  that  he  may 
vanquish  and  overcome  all  his  ene- 
mies ;  and  finally  after  this  life,  he 
may  attain  everlasting  joy  and  feli- 
city, through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

§  51.  A  Prayer  for  [the  Royal 

Family']. 

Almighty  God,  the  fountain  of 

all  goodness,   we  humbly  beseech 

thee  to  bless  [our  gracious  Queen 

Catherine,  Mary  the  Queen-Mo- 


ther, James  Duke  of  York,  and  all 
the  Royal  Family ;]  Endue  them 
with  thy  Holy  Spirit ;  enrich  them 
with  thy  heavenly  grace ;  prosper 
them  with  all  happiness  ;  and  bring 
them  to  thine  everlasting  kingdom, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

§  52.  ^  Prayer  for  the  Clergy 
and  People. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who  alone  workest  great  marvels ; 
send  do^vn  upon  our  Bishops,  and 
Curates,  and  all  Congregations  com- 
mitted to  their  charge,  the  healthful 
Spirit  of  thy  grace  ;  and  that  they 
may  truly  please  thee,  pour  upon 
them  the  continual  dew  of  thy  bless- 
ing. Grant  this,  O  Lord,  for  the 
honour  of  our  Advocate  and  Me- 
diator, Jesus  Christ.  Amen. 
§53.  A  Prayer  of  Saint  Chrysostom. 

Almighty  God,  who  hast  given 
us  grace  at  this  time  with  one  accord 
to  make  our  common  supplications 
unto  thee,  and  dost  promise,  that 
when  two  or  three  are  gathered  to- 
gether in  thy  Name,  thou  wilt  grant 
their  requests  :  Fulfil  now,  O  Lord, 
the  desires  and  petitions  of  thy  ser- 
vants, as  may  be  most  expedient  for 
them ;  grantingus  in  this  world  know- 
ledge of  thy  truth,  and  in  the  world 
to  come  life  everlasting.  Amen. 
2  Cor.  xiii. 

The  grace    of   our   Lord  Jesus 
Christ,   and  the  love  of  God,  and 
the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost  be 
with  us  all  evermore.     Amen. 
§  54.  Hereendeth  the  Order  of  Even- 

ing  Prayer  throughout  the  year. 


^  In  eds.  of  1552,  and  subsequently,  at 
end  of  2nd  Collect,  "  of  Jesus  Christ  our 


Saviour ;"  and  end  of  3rd  Collect,  "  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 


94 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  55.  In  the  feasts  of  Christmas,  the  Epiphany,  Easter,  the  Ascension, 
Pentecost,  and  upon  Trinity  Sunday,  shall  be  sung  or  said  immediately 
after  Benedictus  this  Confession  of  our  Christian  Faith. 

Quicunqtu  vult,  ^'c,  *■ 

Whosoever  will  be  saved  :  before  all  things  it  is  necessary 
that  he  hold  the  Catholic  faith. 

Wliich  faith  except  every  one  do  keep  ^  holy  and  undefiled  : 
without  doubt  he  shall  perish  everlastingly. 

And  the  Catholic  faith  is  this  :  That  we  worship  one  God 
in  Trinity,  and  Trinity  in  Unity ; 

Neither  confounding  the  persons  :  nor  dividing  the  substance. 

For  there  is  one  person  of  the  Father,  another  of  the  Son  : 
and  another  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

But  the  Godhead  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  is  all  one  :  the  glory  equal,  the  majesty  co-etemal. 

Such  as  the  Father  is,  such  is  the  Son  :  and  such  is  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

The  Father  uncreate,  the  Son  uncreate  :  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  uncreate. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

55.  In  the  feasts  of  Christmas,  the 
Epiphany,  Saint  "=  Mathie,  Easter, 
the  Ascension,  Pentecost,  Saint' 
John  Baptist,  Saint  ydmes.  Saint 
Bartholomew,  Saint  Mathew, 
Saint  Symon  and  fude.  Saint 
Andrew,  and  Trinity  Sunday  : 
shall  be  sung  or  said  iminediately 
after  Benedictus,  this  Confession 
of  our  Christian  Faith. 

[Quicunque  vult*.} 

Whosoever  will  be  saved,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 


»  In  two  eds.,  1552,  and  in  one  of  1559, 
the  words  "  Quicunque  vult"  omitted. 

<>  In  Scotdi  ed.,  1637,  and  ed.  16C3, 
"whole." 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

In  the  feasts,  ^f'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

Whosoever  will  be  saved,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

In  the  feasts,  6:'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

Whosoever  will  be  saved,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 


•  In  ed.  1559,  the  word  "Sauit*'  is  ab- 
breviated throughout  the  Rubric  thus, 
S.  Mauhie,  S.  John  Baptist,  &c 


Evensong. 


95 


The  Father  incomprehensible,  the  Son  incomprehensible  : 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  incomprehensible. 

The  Father  eternal,  the  Son  eternal  :  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
eternal. 

And  yet  they  are  not  three  eternals  :  but  one  eternal. 

As  also  there  be''  not  three  incomprehensibles,  nor  three 
uncreated  :  but  one  uncreated,  and  one  incomprehensible. 

So  likewise  the  Father  is  almighty,  the  Son  almighty  :  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  almighty. 

And  yet  they  are  not^  three  almighties  :  but  one  almighty. 

So  the  Father  is  God,  the  Son  ^  God  :  and  the  Holy  Ghost  f 
God. 

And  yet  are  they  not  s  three  Gods  :  but  one  God. 

So  likewise  the  Father  is  Lord,  the  Son  Lord  :  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  Lord. 

And  yet  not  three  Lords  :  but  one  Lord. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Qiiicunque  vuli^K 
§55.  In  the  Feasts  of  Christmas, 
the  Epiphany,  Saint  Matthias, 
Pasch  or  Easter,  the  Ascension, 
Pentecost,  S.  yohn  Baptist,  Saint 
James,  Saint  Bartholomew,  Saint 
Matthew,  Saint  Simon  and  Jude, 
Saint  Andrew,  and  Trinity  Sun- 
day, shall  be  suttg  or  said,  imme- 
diately after  Benedictus,  this  Con- 
fession of  our  Christian  faith, 
the  Presbyter  and  all  the  people 
standing: 

Whosoever  will  be,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

AT  MORNING  PRAYER. 
55.  Upon  these  Feasts ;  Christmas- 
day,  the  Epiphany,  Saint  Mat- 
thias, Easter-^ay,  Ascension-</aj', 
Whitsun-flfey,  Saittt  John  Baptist, 
Saint  James,  Saint  Bartholomew, 
Saint  Matthew,  Saint  Simon  and 
Saint  Jude,  Saint  Andrew,  and 
upon  Trinity  Sunday  shall  be  sung 
or  said  at  Morning  Prayer,  in- 
stead of  the  Apostles  Creed,  this 
Confession  of  our  Christian  Faith, 
commonly  called  The  Creed  of 
Saint  Athanasius,  by  the  Minis- 
ter attd  People  standing. 

Quicunque  vuli. 
Whosoever  will  be,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 


*  In  ed.  1662,  "  are." 

'  In  two  eds.  1552,  "  And  yet  iJiey  are 
not  three  Almighties  ;"  and  in  one  ed., 
"and  yet  are  Dtere  not."  In  one  ed., 
15.S9.  "  are  not  there,"  and  in  ed.  of  1596, 
"are  they  not  ;"  and  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 
and  ed.  1662,  "and  yet  they  are  not." 


'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "Son  is 
God,"  "  Holy  Ghost  is  God.'' 

e  In  ed.  1596,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and 
ed.  1662,  "  and  yet  they  are  not." 

•>  In  the  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  a  strong  orna- 
mental line  separates  the  preceding  service 
from  the  Quicunque  ■melt. 


96  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

For  like  as  we  be»  compelled  by  the  Christian  verity  J  :  to 
acknowledge  every  person  by  himself  to  be  God  and  Lord  : 

So  are  we  forbidden  by  the  Catholic  religion  :  to  say  there 
be  three  Gods,  or  th[r]ee  Lords. 

The  Father  is  made  of  none  :  neither  created  nor  begotten. 

The  Son  is  of  the  Father  alone  :  not  made  nor  created,  but 
begotten. 

The  Holy  Ghost  is  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  :  neither 
made  nor  created,  nor  begotten,  but  proceeding. 

So  there  is  one  Father,  not  three  Fathers ;  one  Son,  not 
three  Sons  :  one  Holy  Ghost,  not  three  Holy  Ghosts. 

And  in  this  Trinity  none  is  afore  or''  after  other  :  none  is 
greater  nor  less  than  other  •. 

But  the  whole  three  persons  :  be  ™  co-eternal  together  and 
co-equal. 

So  that  in  all  things,  as  is  "  aforesaid  :  the  Unity  in  Trinity, 
and  the  Trinity  in  Unity  is  to  be  worshipped. 

He  therefore  that  will  be  °  saved  :  must  thus  p  think  of  the 
Trinity. 

Furthermore,  it  is  necessary  to  everlasting  salvation  :  that 
he  also  believe  rightly  ini  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ 

For  the  right  faith  is  that  we  believe  and  confess  :  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  is  God  and  man ; 

God  of  the  Substance  of  the  Father,  begotten  before  the 
worlds  :  and  man  of  the  substance  of  his  mother,  bom  in  the 
world. 

Perfect  God,  and  perfect  man  :  of  a  reasonable  soul,  and 
human  flesh  subsisting. 

Equal  to  the  Father  as  touching  his  Godhead  :  and  inferior 
to  the  Father'  touching  his  manhood. 

Who  although  he  be  God  and  man  :  yet  he  is  not  two,  but 
one  Christ 


»  Ined.  i66a,  "are."  "In    Scotch   ed.,   1637,   "that   would 

J  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  Christian  unity."  be." 

•■  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  nor."  p  In  Scot-rh  ed.,  1637,  "  let  him  thus." 

'  In  one  ed.,  154^,  "nor  less  than  other,"  q  In  Scotched.,  i637,and  i66a,  "rightly 

and  in  1596,  and  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  the." 

ed.  1662,  "or  less  than  another."  '  In  one  ed.,  1549,  and  ia  x66a,  "as 

■"  In  ed.  1 66a,  "are."  touching." 

■  In  two  eds.,  1549,  "as  it  is," 


Evensong.  07 

One,  not  by  conversion  of  the  Godhead  into  flesh  :  but  by- 
taking  of  the  manhood  into  God  ; 

One  altogether,  not  by  confusion  of  substance  :  but  by 
unity  of  person. 

For  as  the  reasonable  soul  and  flesh  is  one  ^  man  :  so  God  ^ 
and  man  is  one  ^  Christ. 

Who  suffered  for  our  salvation  :  descended  into  hell,  rose 
again  the  third  day  from  the  dead. 

He  ascended  into  heaven,  he  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of 
the  Father,  God  Almighty  :  from  whence  he  shall  come  to 
judge  the  quick  and"  dead. 

At  whose  coming  all  men  shall  rise  again  with  their 
bodies  :  and  shall  give  account  of"  their  own  works. 

And  they  that  have  done  good,  shall  go  into  life  everlasting  : 
and  they  that  have  done  evil,  into  everlasting  fire. 

This  is  the  Catholic  faith  :  which  except  a  man  believe 
faithfully,  he  cannot  be  saved. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be  : 
world  without  end.     Amen. 

§  56.    T/ins  enddh  the  Ordei-  of  Matins  and  Evensong  through  ^ 
the  whole  Year. 

[Here  follows,  in  eds.  1532  and  in  all  editions  afterwards.  The  LfTANY,  together  with 
th<;  Occasional  Prayers.  This,  with  the  prayers,  will  be  found  printed  hereafter  in 
the  place  where  they  occur  in  the  1549  edition,  namely,  at  the  end  of  the  "  Holy  Com- 
munion."    Seep.  267. ] 


"  In  one   ed.,  1552,  and  one  ed.,  1559,  the  dead." 

"  but  one  man,"  and  "  but  one  Christ."  ^  In   eds.    1552,  and    afterwards,    "for 

'  In   Scotch  ed.,   1637,  "so  he  who   is  their." 

God."  ^  In    ed.    1596,    and   Scotch    ed.    1637, 

"  In  eds.    1552,  and  afterwards,    "and  "  throughout  the  whole  year." 


[In  the  following  pages,  containing  the  Introits,  Epistles,  and  Gospels,  these  few 
general  observations  should  be  borne  in  mind.  The  Epistles  and  Gospels  are  printed 
entire  in  nearly  all  the  editions  of  the  Prayer-Book,  but  it  has  not  been  thought  neces- 
sary to  print  them  so  here. 

In  the  eds.  1662,  and  afterwards,  "Amen"  is  added  to  the  end  of  «//  the  Collects. 

In  the  eds  of  1549,  155^,  1559,  the  reference  to  the  chapter  only  is  given  for  the 
Epistle  and  Gospel;  of  1604,  1637,  1662,  the  reference  is  given  both  to  chapter  ana 
verse  at  which  the  portion  appointed  commences. 

The- Epistles  and  Gospels  in  the  first  four  books,  viz.  1549,  1532,  1539,  and  1604,  all 
follow  the  older  version  of  the  Bible,  and  the  opening  and  closing  catch-words  are  given 
under  the  year  1349. 

The  Epistles  and  Gospels  of  the  Scotch,  1637,  and  the  English,  1662  book,  follow  the 
newer  version,  and  for  convenience  the  catch-words  are  given  beneath  the  latter.] 

H 


98 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


At  the  Communion. 
THE'  INTROITSi 

COLLECTS,   EPISTLES,   AND   GOSPELS,   TO   BE  USED   AT  THE 

CELEBRATION    OF   THE   LORD's   SUPPER   AND    HOLY 

COMMUNION,   THROUGH   THE   YEAR  : 

WITH    PROPER   PSALMS   AND    LESSONS    FOR    DIVERS    FEASTS 

AND    DAYS. 

§  58.  The  first  Sunday  in  Advent. 
Beatus  vir.     Psalm  L 

Blessed  is  that  man  that  hath  not  walked  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly, 
nor  stand  in  the  way  of  sinners  :  and  hath  not  sit  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful. 

But  his  delight  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  :  and  in  his  law  will  he  exercise 
himself  day  and  night. 

And  he  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  water-side  :  that  will  bring 
forth  his  fruit  in  due  season. 

His  leaf  also  shall  not  wither  :  and  look,  whatsoever  be  doth,  it  shall 
prosper. 

As  for  the  ungodly,  it  is  not  so  with  them  :  but  they  are  like  the  chaff, 
which  the  wind  scattereth  away  (from  the  face  of  the  earth). 

Therefore  the  ungodly  shall  not  be  able  to  stand  in  the  judgement  : 
neither  the  sinners  in  the  congr^ation  of  the  righteous. 

But  the  Lord  knoweth  the  way  of  the  righteous  :  and  the  way  of  the 
ungodly  shall  perish. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

THE  COLLECTS,  EPISTLES 

AND  GOSPELS, 

TO  BE  USED  AT  THE  CELEBRATION 

OF  THE  lord's  SUPPER  AND 

HOLY  COMMUNION  THROUGH'' 

THE  YEAR. 

H  Tfu first  Suttday  of  Advent''. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  give  us,  &c 

[Same  as  1549O 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


•  In  ed.  of  1578,  the  title  is,  "The  Col- 
lects with  the  Order  how  to  find  the  begin- 
niriK  and  end  of  the  Epistles  and  Gospels 
in  the  New  Testament,  by  the  chapter  and 
the  verse,  as  it  is  appointed  in  the  book  of 
Common  Prayer." 


Elizabeth,  1559*. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
The  Collects,  &c 

[  Same  as  1552,  to  the  end  of  the 
Epistle ;  then] 

§  61.  When  the  presbyter  or  minis- 
ter readeth  the  gospel  the  people 
shall  stand  up  ;  and  the  presbyter, 
before  he  beginneth  to  read  the 
gospel,  shall  say  thus :  "  The  gos- 
pel of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  written  in  such  a  chapter 


•>  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  afterwards, 
"throughout" 

°  In  one  ed.  of  i559i  in  1604,  and  all 
.iftcrwards,  "  First  Sunday  in  Advent," 
and  so  "  Second  Sunday  in,"  Sec,  &c. 


At  the  Communion. 


99 


Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  and  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world  with- 
out end.     Amen. 

§  60.  And  so  must  every  Iniroit  be  ended. 

Let  us  pray. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  give  us  grace  that  we  may  cast  away  the 

works  of  darkness,  and  put  upon  us  the  armour  of  light,  now 

in  the  time  of  this  mortal  life,  (in  the  which  thy  Son  Jesus 

Christ  came  to  visit  us  in  great  humility  :)  that  in  the  last  day, 

when  he  shall  come  again  in  his  glorious  majesty,  to  judge 

both  the  quick  and  the  dead,  we  may  rise  to  the  life  immortal, 

through  him,  who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee  and  the  Holy 

Ghost,  now  and  ever.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
Rom.  xiii.  Owe  nothing  to  any  man  but  this 


[i.e.  Rom.  xiii.  verse  8  to  the  end.] 

for  the  flesh  to  fulfil  the  lusts  of  it. 

The  Gospel. 
Matt,  xxi.'i  And  when  they  drew  nigh 

[i.e.  Matt.  xxi.  verse  i  to  the  end.] 

have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves. 


of  such  an  evangelist,  beginning 

at  such  a  verse."     And  the  people 

shall  answer,  "Gloiy  be  to  God." 

[Same  as  1552,  to  end  of  the  Gospel ;  then] 

§  62.  When  the  gospel  is  ended  the 
presbyter  or  minister  shall  say, 
Here  endeth  the  gospel ;  and  the 
people  shall  answer,  Thanks  be 
to  thee,  O  Lord. 

And  thus  at  the  beginning  a72d  end- 
ing of  the  gospel  every  Sunday  and 
holy  day  in  the  year  ;  or  when  else 
soever  the  gospel  is  read. 


Charles  IL  1662. 

THE 

COLLECTS,   EPISTLES,  AND 
GOSPELS 

TO  BE  USED  THROUGHOUT 
THE  YEAR. 

§  57-  ^ote,  that  the  Collect  appointed 


for  every  Sunday,  or  for  any  Holi- 
day that,  hath  a  Vigil  or  Eve,  shall 
be  said  at  the  Eveiiing  Service  next 
before. 

The  First  Sunday  in  Advent. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  give  us  grace,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  59.    This  Collect  is  to  he  repeated 

every  day  with  the  other  Collects 

in  Advent,  until  Christmas-Eve. 

The  Epistle. 
Rom.  xiii.  ver.  8. 

Owe  no  man  anything  .... 
to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xxi.  ver.  I. 
When  they  drew  nigh  .... 
to  made  it  a  den  of  thieves. 


*  In  one  ed.,  1549,  Matt.  xx.  misp./or-Kxi. 


lOO 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


The  second  Sunday. 
Ad  Dominum  cum  tribularer^.     Psalm  cxx. 

When  I  was  in  trouble  I  called  upon  the  Lord  :  and  he  heard  me. 

Deliver  my  soul,  O  Lord,  from  lying  lips  :  and  from  a  deceitful  tongue. 

What  reward  shall  be  given  or  done  unto  thee,  thou  false  tongue  :  even 
mighty  and  sharp  arrows,  with  hot  burning  coals. 

Wo  is  me,  that  I  am  constrained  to  dwell  with  Mesech  :  and  to  have 
mine  habitation  among  the  tents  of  Cedar. 

My  soul  hath  long  dwelt  among  them  :  that  be  enemies  unto  peace. 

I  labour  for  peace,  but  when  I  speak  unto  them  thereof  :  they  make 
them  to  battle. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c.     Amen. 

The  Collect. 

Blessed  Lord,  which  hast  caused  all  holy  scriptures  to  be 
written  for  our  learning :  grant  us  *  that  we  may  in  such  wise 
hear  them,  read,  mark,  learn,  and  inwardly  digest  them,  that 
by  patience  and  comfort  of  thy  holy  word,  we  may  embrace 
and  ever  hold  fast  the  blessed  hope  of  everlasting  life,  which 
thou  hast  given  us  in  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  ^ 

The  Epistle. 
Roma.  XV.  e  Whatsoever  things  are  written  aforetime .      .     . 

[i.e.  Rom.  xv.  verse  4  to  verse  14^.] 


through  the  power  of  the  Holy  GhosL 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  xxi.  There  shall  be  signs  in  the  sun 

[i.e.  Luke  xxi.  verse  25  to  verse  34.] 

but  my  words  shall  not  pass. 


Second  Edw,  VL  1552. 

IT  The  second  Sunday  [in  Advent]. 
The  Collect. 
Blessed  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

IT  The  third  Sunday  [in  Advent."] 

The  Collect. 
Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  155a.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


•  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "cum  tribularar" 
tnis^./or  "  tribularer." 

'In  one  ed.,  155a,  and  in  most  of  1559, 
and  in  all  afterwards,  "  Amen  "  added  to 
end  of  the  Collects  tor  the  second,  third, 
and  fourth  Sundays  in  Advent 


*  In  ed.  i66a,  "grant  that." 
f  In  one  ed.,  1549,  mix/.  Rom.  xx. 
^  In  this  and  throughout  similar  notes 
the  portion  appointed  is  exclusive  of  the 
last  verse  named,  i.e.  to  verse  14  means 
to  end  of  verse  13. 


At  the  Communion. 


lOI 


^  The  third  Sunday. 
Cum  invocarem.     Psalm  iv. 
Hear  me  when  I  call,  O  God  of  my  righteousness  :  thou  hast  set  me  at 
liberty  when  I  was  in  trouble  :  have  mercy  upon  me,  and  hearken  unto 
my  prayer. 

0  ye  sons  of  men,  how  long  will  ye  blaspheme  mine  honour  :  and  have 
such  pleasure  in  vanity,  and  seek  after  leasing  ? 

Know  this  also,  that  the  Lord  hath  chosen  to  himself  the  man  that  is 
godly  :  when  I  call  upon  the  Lord,  he  will  hear  me. 

Stand  in  awe,  and  sin  not  :  common  with  your  own  heart,  and  in  your 
chamber,  and  be  still. 

Offer  the  sacrifice  of  righteousness  :  and  put  your  trust  in  the  Lord. 

There  be  many  that  will  say  :  who  will  shew  us  any  good  ? 

Lord,  lift  thou  up  :  the  light  of  thy  countenance  upon  us. 

Thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my  heart :  since  the  time  that  their  com,  and 
wine  (and  oil),  increased. 

1  will  lay  me  down  in  peace,  and  take  my  rest  :  for  it  is  thou,  Lord, 
only,  that  makest  me  to  dwell  in  safety. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  give  ear  to  our  prayers,  and  by  thy 
gracious  visitation  lighten  the  darkness  of  our  heart,  by  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  ^. 

The  Epistle. 
I  Cori.  iv.  Let  a  man  this  wise  esteem  us 

[i.e.  I  Cor.  iv.  verse  i  to  verse  6.] 

every  man  have  praise  of  God. 

The  Gospel. 
Math.  xi.  When  John  being  in  prison 

[i.e.  Mat.  xi.  verse  2  to  verse  11.] 

which  shall  prepare  thy  way  before  thee. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
The  Second  Sunday  in  Advent. 

The  Collect. 
Blessed  Lord,  who  hast,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
The  Epistle. 
Rom.  XV.  ver.  4. 
Whatsoever  things  were     .     . 
to  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xxi.  ver.  25. 
And  there  shall  be  signs    .     .     . 
to  my  words  shall  not  pass  away. 

The  Third  Sunday  in  Advent, 

The  Collect. 
O  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  who  at  thy 
first  coming  didst  send  thy  messen- 
ger to  prepare  thy  way  before  thee  j 


Grant  that  the  ministers  and  stewards 
of  thy  mysteries,  may  likewise  so 
prepare  and  make  ready  thy  way, 
by  turning  the  hearts  of  the  disobe- 
dient to  the  wisdom  of  the  just,  that 
at  thy  second  coming  to  judge  the 
world,  we  may  be  found  an  accept- 
able people  in  thy  sight,  who  livest 
and  reignest  with  the  Father  and  the 
Holy  Spirit,  ever  one  God,  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
I  Cor.  iv.  ver.  I. 
Let  a  man  so  account  of  us    .     . 
to  have  praise  of  God. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xi.  ver.  2. 
Now  when  John  had  heard    .     . 
to  thy  way  before  thee. 


I02  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

^  The  fourth  Sunday. 
Verba  mm  auribus.     Psalm  v. 

Ponder  my  words,  O  Lord  :  consider  my  meditation. 

O  hearken  thou  unto  the  voice  of  my  calling,  my  King,  and  my  God  : 
for  vmto  thee  will  I  make  my  prayer. 

My  voice  shalt  thou  hear  betimes,  O  Lord  :  early  in  the  morning  will 
I  direct  my  prayer  unto  thee,  and  will  look  up. 

For  thou  art  the  God  that  hast  no  pleasure  in  wickedness  :  neither  shall 
any  evil  dwell  with  thee. 

Such  as  be  foolish  shall  not  stand  in  thy  sight  :  for  thou  hatest  all  them 
that  work  vanity. 

Thou  shalt  destroy  them  that  speak  leasing  :  the  Lord  will  abhor  both 
the  blood  thirsty  and  deceitful  man. 

But  as  for  me,  I  will  come  into  thy  house,  even  upon  the  multitude  of 
thy  mercy  :  and  in  thy  fear  I  will  worship  to\vard  thy  holy  temple. 

Lead  me,  O  Lord,  in  thy  righteousness,  because  of  mine  enemies  :  make 
thy  way  plain  before  my  face. 

For  there  is  no  faithfulness  in  his  mouth  :  their  inward  parts  are  very 
wickedness. 

Their  throat  is  an  open  sepulchre  :  they  flatter  with  their  tongue. 

Destroy  thou  them,  O  God,  let  them  perish  through  their  own  imagina- 
tions :  cast  them  out  in  the  multitude  of  their  ungodliness,  for  they  have 
rebelled  against  thee. 

And  let  all  them  that  put  their  trust  in  thee  rejoice  :  they  shall  ever  be 
giving  of  thanks,  because  thou  defendest  them,  they  that  love  thy  name 
shall  be  joyful  in  thee. 

For  thou,  Lord,  wilt  give  thy  blessing  unto  the  righteous  :  and  with  thy 
favoui-able  kindness  wilt  thou  defend  him  as  his  shield. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &a 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Lord,  raise  up  (we  pray  thee)  thy  power,  and  come  among 
us,  and  with  great  might  succour  us,  that  whereas  through  our 
sins  and  wickedness '  we  be  sore  let  and  hindered,  thy  bounti- 
ful grace  and  mercy,  through  the  satisfaction  of  thy  Son  our 
Lord  •,  may  speedily  deliver  us ;  to  whom  with  thee  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  be  honour  and  glory  world  without  end  J. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 
IT  The  fourth  Sunday  \in  Advent. '^ 
The  Collect. 
Lord,  raise  up  (we  pray  thee),  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  155a.] 


'  In  eds.  of  1552  and  i$59>  the  words,       of  thy  Son  our  Lord,"  are  in  parenthesis, 
"through  our  sins  and  wickedness,"  and  J  In   some  eds.,    1552,  1559.  &c.,    and 

also  the  words,  "through  the  satisfaction       afterwards,  "Amen." 


At  the  Communion. 


103 


The  Epistle. 
Philip,  iv.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway  . 

[i.e.  Phil.  iv.  verse  4  to  verse  8.] 

and  minds,  through  Christ  Jesu. 

The  Gospel. 
John  i.  This  is  the  record  of  John  .     . 

[i.e.  John  i.  verse  19  to  verse  29.] 

where  John  did  baptize. 


Proper  Psalms  and  Lessons  on  Christmas  day. 

H  At  Matins. 
Psalms  xix.  xlv.  Ixxxv. 

The  first  lesson,  Esai.  ix.  unto  the  end. 

The  second  lesson,  Math,  [i.]  unto  the  end. 

II  At  the  first  Communion. 

Cantate  Domino.     Psalm  xcviii. 

O  SING  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song  :  for  he  hath  done  marvellous  things. 

With  his  own  right  hand,  and  with  his  holy  arm  :  hath  he  gotten  himself 
victory. 

The  Lord  declared  his  salvation  :  his  righteousness  hath  he  openly 
shewed  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen. 

He  hath  remembered  his  mercy  and  truth  toward  the  house  of  Israel  : 
and  all  the  ends  of  the  world  have  seen  the  salvation  of  our  God. 

Shew  yourselves  joyful  unto  the  Lord,  all  ye  lands  :  sing,  rejoice,  and 
give  thanks. 

Praise  the  Lord  upon  the  harp  :  sing  to  the  harp  with  a  psalm  of  thanks- 
giving. 

With  trumpets  also  and  shawms  :  O  shew  yourselves  joyful  before  the 
Lord  the  king. 

Let  the  sea  make  a  noise,  and  all  that  therein  is  :  the  round  world,  and 
they  that  dwell  therein. 

Let  the  floods  clap  their  hands,  and  let  the  hills  be  joyful  together  before 
the  Lord  :  for  he  is  come  to  judge  the  earth. 

With  righteousness  shall  he  judge  the  world  :  and  the  people  with  equity. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Fourth  Sunday  in  Advent. 

The  Collect. 
O  Lord,  raise  up  (we  pray  thee), 
&c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

hindered  in  running  the  race  that 
is  set  before  us,  thy  bountiful  grace 
and  mercy  may  speedily  help  and 
deliver   us,    through    the    satisfac- 


tion   of   thy   Son   our    Lord  ;    to 
whom,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 
Phil.  iv.  ver.  4. 
Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway    .     . 
to  through  Christ  Jesus. 
Tlie  Gospel. 
S.  John  i.  ver.  19. 
This  is  the  record  of  John      .     . 
to  where  John  was  baptizing. 


I04 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[Christmas  Day  coHtinued.] 
The  Collect. 
God,  which  makest  us  glad  with  the  yearly  remembrance 
of  the  birth  of  thy  only  Son  Jesus  Christ :  grant  that  as  we 
joyfully  receive  him  for  our  Redeemer,  so  we  may  with  sure 
confidence  behold  him,  when  he  shall  come  to  be  our  Judge, 
who  liveth  and  reigneth.  &c. 

The  Epistle. 
Tit  ii.''  The  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation  .     .    .    . 

[i.e.  Tit.  ii.  verse  ii  to  the  end.J 

see  that  no  man  despise  thee. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc  ii.''  And  it  chanced  in  those  days 

[i.e.  Luke  iL  to  verse  15.] 

and  unto  men  a  good  will. 


I 


^  At  the  second  Communum. 
Domine  Dominus  noster.     Psalm  viii. 

O  Lord  our  govemour,  how  excellent  is  thy  name  in  all  the  world  : 
thou  that  hast  set  thy  glory  above  the  heavens  ! 

Out  of  the  mouth  of  very  babes  and  sucklings  hast  thou  ordained 
strength,  because  of  thine  enemies  :  that  thou  mightest  still  the  enemy  and 
the  avenger. 

For  I  will  consider  thy  heavens,  even  the  works  of  thy  fingers  :  the  moon 
and  the  stars,  which  thou  hast  ordained. 

What  is  man,  that  thou  art  so  mindful  of  him  :  and  the  son  of  man,  that 
thou  visitest  him  ? 

Thou  madest  him  lower  than  the  angels  :  to  crown  him  with  glory  and 
worship. 

Thou  makest  him  to  have  dominion  of  the  works  of  thy  hands  :  and 
thou  hast  put  all  things  in  subjection  under  his  feet ; 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

f  [0«]  Christmas  Day. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  which  hast,  &c. 

[Same  as  the  Collect  at  the  Second 

Communion,  i549>  t°] 

who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee 

and  the  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever. 

Amen. 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  155a.] 


James  I.  1604. 
[Same  a*  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


k  One  ed.,  1549,  Luc.  ii.  and  Tit  iL  misplaced. 


At  the  Communion. 


105 


[Christmas  Day  coniinued.'] 

All  sheep  and  oxen  :  yea,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  ; 
The  fowls  of  the  air,  and  the  fishes  of  the  sea  :  and  whatsoever  walketh 
through  the  paths  of  the  seas. 

Lord  our  governour  :  how  excellent  is  thy  name  in  all  tibe  world ! 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c 

7^e  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  hast  given  us  thy  only-begotten  Son 
to  take  our  nature  upon  him,  and  this  day*  to  be  bom  of 
a  pure  virgin ;  Grant  that  we  being  regenerate,  and  made  thy 
children  by  adoption  and  grace,  may  daily  be  renewed  by 
thy  holy  Spirit,  through  the  same  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
liveth  and  reigneth,  &c. 

TAe  Epistle. 

Hebre.  i.  God  in  times  past  diversely  and  many  wa)rs     .    . 

[i.e.  Heb.  i.  verse  i  to  verse  13.] 

thy  years  shall  not  fail 

TTie  Gospel. 
John  i.  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word 

[i.e.  John  i.  verse  i  to  verse  15.] 

full  of  grace  and  truth. 


Proper  Psalms  and  lessons  at  Evensong.     Psalms  Ixxxix,  ex.  cxxxii. 

The  first  lesson,  EsaL  vii.  "  God  spake  once  again  to  Achas,"  &c.     .     . 
unto  the  end. 

The  second  lesson,  Tit.  iii.  "The  kindness  and  love  of  our  Saviour,"  &c. 
unto  "foolish  questions." 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Tlie  Nativity  of  our  Lord,   or  the 

Birth- day  of  Christ,    commonly 

called  Christmas-day. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who  hast,  &c 

[Same  as  Collect  at  the  Second  Com- 
munion, 1549,  to] 

who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee, 
and  the  same  Spirit,  ever  one  God, 
world  without  end.     Amen. 


The  Epistle. 

Heb.  i.  ver.  i. 

God,  who  at  sundry  times 
to  thy  years  shall  not  fail. 

The  Gospel. 

S.  John  i.  ver.  i. 

In  the  beginning  was  the  Word 
to  full  of  grace  and  truth. 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "and  as  at  this  time" 


io6 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^  Saint  Stephiris  Day  ™ 

IT  At  Matins. 

The  second  lesson.  Acts  vL  vii.  "  Stephin  full  of  faith  and  power," 

unto,  "And  when  forty  years." 

At  tht  Communion. 
Quid  gloriaris  in  malicia  ?    Psalm  lii. 

Why  boastest  thou  thyself,  thou  tyrant :  that  thou  canst  do  mischief; 

Whereas  the  goodness  of  God  :  endureth  yet  daily  ? 

Thy  tongue  imagineth  wickedness  :  and  with  lies  thou  cuttest  like 
a  sharp  razor. 

Thou  hast  loved  ungraciousness  more  than  goodness  :  and  to  talk  of  lies 
more  than  righteousness. 

Thou  hast  loved  to  speak  all  words  that  may  do  hurt  :  O  thou  false 
tongue. 

Therefore  shall  God  destroy  thee  for  ever  :  he  shall  take  thee,  and 
pluck  thee  out  of  thy  dwelling,  and  root  thee  out  of  the  land  of  the  living. 

The  righteous  also  shall  see  this,  and  fear  :  and  shall  laugh  him  to 
scorn  ; 

Lo,  this  is  the  man  that  took  not  God  for  his  strength  :  but  trusted  unto 
the  multitude  of  his  riches,  and  strengthed  himself  in  his  wickedness. 

As  for  me,  I  am  like  a  green  ohve-tree  in  the  house  of  God  :  my  trust  is 
in  the  tender  mercy  of  God  for  ever  and  ever. 

I  will  alway  give  thanks  unto  thee  for  that  thou  hast  done  :  and  I  will 
hope  in  thy  name,  for  thy  saints  like  it  well. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  was  in  the  b^[inning,  &c. 

Tfu  Collect. 
Grant  us,  O  Lord,  to  learn  to  love  our  enemies  by  the 
example  of  thy  martyr  Saint  Stephin  >>,  who  prayed  to  thee  for 
his  persecutors  «• :  which  livest  and  reignest,  &c 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

U  Saint  Stephin's  day. 
The  Collect. 
Grant  us,  O  Lord,  to  learn,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
63.    Then  shall  follow  thef  Collect 
of  the  Nativity,    which  shall  be 
said  continually  unto  "i  new  yearns 
day. 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  I.  1604. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552,  except] 

63.  Then  shall  follow  the  Collect 
of  the  Nativity,  which  shall  be  said 
continually  unto  New- Year's  day  ; 
but  instead  of  these  words  "and 
this  day  to  be  bom,"  the  presbyter 
shall  say,  "as  this  time  to  be 
bom." 


"  In  eds.  1559,  "  S.  Stephen's  day ;"  in 
ed.  J604,  "  S.  Steven's  day." 

■  In  ed.  1604,  and  some  others,  "S. 
Stephen." 

o  In  all  eds.,  1553,  1559,  &c.i  >»  Collect 


for  S.  Stephen's  day,  "  who  prayed  for 
his  persecutors  :  to  thee,  which  livest  and 
reignest,"  &c. 

P  In  three  eds.,  1552,  "  a  collect." 

'  In  ed.  1578,  "imiil." 


At  the  Communion. 


107 


§  63.    Then  shall  follow  a '  collect  of  the  Nativity. 

The  Epistle. 
Acts  vii.  And  Stephen  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  .     . 

[i.e.  Acts  vii.  verse  55  to  the  end.] 

he  had  thus  spoken,  he  fell  asleep. 

The  Gospel. 
Math,  xxiii.  Behold,  I  send  unto  you  prophets  .... 

[i.e.  Matt,  xxiii.  verse  34  to  the  end.] 

that  Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

The  second  Lesson  at  Evensong. 

Acts  vii.  ^  ' '  And  when  forty  years  were  expired,  there  appeared  unto 
Moses,"  unto  "  Stephin  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  &c. 


IT  Saint  John  Evangelisfs  Day. 

At  Matins. 
T  The  second  lesson,  Apoca.  i.  unto  the  end. 
At  the  Communion. 
In  Domino  confido.     Psalm  xi. 

In  the  Lord  put  I  my  trust  :  how  say  ye  then  to  my  soul,  that  she  should 
fly  as  a  bird  to  the  hill  ? 

For  lo,  the  ungodly  bend  their  bow,  and  make  ready  their  arrows  within 
the  quiver  :  that  they  may  privily  shoot  at  them  which  are  true  of  heart. 

For  the  foundations  will  be  cast  down  :  and  what  hath  the  righteous 
done? 


Charles  II.  1662. 

S.  Stephen's  Day. 

The  Collect. 

Grant,  O  Lord,  that  in  all  our 

sufferings  here  upon  earth,  for  the 

testimony  of  thy  truth,  we  may  sted- 

fastly  look  up  to  heaven,  and  by 

faith  behold  the  glory  that  shall  be 

revealed  ;  and  being  filled  with  the 

Holy  Ghost,  may  learn  to  love  and 

bless  our  persecuters  by  the  example 

of  thy  first  Martyr  Saint  Stephen, 

who  prayed  for  his  murtherers  to 

thee,  O  blessed  Jesus,  who  stand- 

est  at  the  right  hand  of  God  to  suc- 


cour all  those  that  suffer  for  thee, 
our  only  Mediator  and  Advocate. 
Amen. 

§  63.  Then  shall  follow  the  Collect 
of  the  Nativity,  which  shall  be 
said  continually  unto  New-year's 
Eve. 

For  the  Epistle. 

Acts  vii.  ver.  55. 
Stephen,  being  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  to  he  fell  asleep. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xxiii.  ver.  34. 
Behold,  I  send  unto  you  prophets, 
to  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 


'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  in  eds.  1559,  and  afterwards,  "The  Collect." 


io8         First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[S.  John  the  Evangelist's  Day  coHtinueJ.I 

The  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple  :  the  Lord's  seat  is  in  heaven. 

His  eyes  consider  the  poor  :  and  his  eye-lids  trieth  the  children  of  men. 

The  Lord  alloweth  the  righteous  :  but  the  ungodly,  and  him  that  de- 
lighteth  in  wickedness  doth  his  soul  abhor. 

Upon  the  ungodly  he  shall  rain  snares,  fire  and  brimstone,  storm  and 
tempest  :  this  shall  be  their  portion  to  drink. 

For  the  righteous  Lord  loveth  righteousness  :  his  countenance  will  be- 
hold the  thing  that  is  just 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  b^^inning,  &c. 

T/tg  Collect. 

Merciful  Lord,  we  beseech  thee  to  cast  thy  bright  beams 
of  light  upon  thy  Church  :  that  it  being  lightened  by  the  doc- 
trine of  thy  blessed  Apostle  and  Evangelist  *  John  may  attain 
to  thy  everlasting  gifts :  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord '. 

The  Epistle. 
1  John  i.  That  which  was  from  the  beginning 

[i.e.  I  John  i.  vetse  i  to  the  end.] 

and  his  word  is  not  in  us. 


The  Gospel. 
John  xxi.  Jesus  said  unto  Peter 

[Le.  John  xxi.  verse  19  to  the  end.] 

the  books  that  should  be  written. 

H  At  Evensong. 
T  The  second  lesson,  Apoca.  xxii.  unto  the  end. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

II  Saint  yohn  Evangelist^ s  Day. 
The  Collect. 

Merciful    Lord,    we    beseech 
thee,  &C. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospd. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  155a.] 


James  L  1604. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  1663,  "evan-  '  In  one  ed.,  1553,  1559,  and  in  Scotch 

gelist  Saint  John."  ed.,  1637,  "  Amen^  is  added. 


At  the  Communion. 


109 


^  The""  Innocents'  Day. 

H  At  Matins. 

IT  The  first  lesson,  Hiere.  xxxi.  unto,  "  Moreover  I  heard  Ephraim." 

Deus,  venerunt  gentes.     Psalm  Ixxix. 

O  God,  the  heathen  are  come  into  thine  inheritance  :  thy  holy  temple 
have  they  defiled,  and  made  Jerusalem  an  heap  of  stones. 

The  dead  bodies  of  thy  servants  have  they  given  to  be  meat  unto  the 
fowls  of  the  air  :  and  the  flesh  of  thy  saints  unto  the  beasts  of  the  land. 

Their  blood  have  they  shed  like  water  on  every  side  of  Jerusalem  :  and 
there  was  no  man  to  bury  them. 

We  are  become  an  open  shame  to  our  enemies  :  a  very  scorn  and  derision 
unto  them  that  are  round  about  us. 

Lord,  how  long  wilt  thou  be  angry  :  shall  thy  jealousy  bum  like  fire  for 
ever? 

Pour  out  thine  indignation  upon  the  heathen  that  have  not  known  thee  : 
and  upon  the  kingdoms  that  have  not  called  upon  thy  name. 

For  they  have  devoured  Jacob  :  and  laid  waste  his  dwelling-place. 

O  remember  not  our  old  sins,  but  have  mercy  upon  us,  and  that  soon  : 
for  we  are  conle  to  great  misery. 

Help  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  for  the  glory  of  thy  name  :  O  deliver 
us,  and  be  merciful  unto  our  sins,  for  thy  name's  sake. 

Wherefore  do  the  Heathen  say  :  Where  is  now  their  God? 

O  let  the  vengeance  of  thy  servants'  blood  that  is  shed  :  be  openly  shewed 
upon  the  Heathen  in  our  sight. 

O  let  the  sorrowful  sighing  of  the  prisoners  come  before  thee  :  according 
to  the  greatness  of  thy  power,  preserve  thou  those  that  are  appointed  to  die. 

And  as  for  the  blasphemy  (wherewith  our  neighbours  have  blasphemed 
thee)  :  reward  thou  them,  O  Lord,  seven-fold  into  their  bosom. 

So  we,  that  be  thy  people,  and  sheep  of  thy  pasture,  shall  give  thee 
thanks  for  ever  :  and  will  alway  be  shewing  forth  thy  praise  from  gene- 
ration to  generation. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  IL  1662. 

S.  John  the  Evangelist's  Day. 
The  Collect. 

Merciful  Lord,  we  beseech  thee 
to  cast  thy  bright  beams  of  light 
upon  thy  church,  that  it  being  en- 
lightned  by  the  doctrine  of  thy 
blessed  Apostle  and  Evangelist 
Saint  John,  may  so  walk  in  the 
light  of  thy  truth,  that  it  may  at 


length  attain  to  the  light  of  ever- 
lasting Hfe,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
I  S. John  L 

That  which  was  from  the  be- 
ginning, to  his  word  is  not  in  us. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  John  xxi.  ver.  19. 
Jesus   said   unto   Peter,    Follow 
me,  to  contain  the  books  that  should 
be  written. 


In  eds.  1596,  1604,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Innocents'  day." 


no         First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI,  1549. 

[Innocents'  Day  continued.'^ 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  whose  praise  this  day  the  young  innocents 
thy  witnesses  hath  ^  confessed,  and  shewed  forth,  not  in  speak- 
ing, but  in  dying :  mortify  and  kill  all  vices  in  us,  that  in  our 
conversation,  our  life  may  express  thy  faith,  which  with  our 
tongues  we  do  confess  :  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  *. 

The  Epistle. 
Apoca.  xiv.  I  looked,  and  lo  a  lamb 


[i.e.  Apoc.  xiv.  vetse  i  to  verse  6.] 

before  the  throne  of  God. 

The  Gospel. 
Math.  ii.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared     . 

[i.e.  Matt.  ii.  verse  13  to  verse  19.] 

would  not  be  comforted,  because  they  were  not. 


\  TJu  Sunday  after  Christmas  Day. 

Levavi  oailos.     Psalm  cxxi. 

I  WILL  lift  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  hills  :  from  whence  cometh  my  help. 

My  help  cometh  even  from  the  Lord  :  which  hath  made  heaven  and 
earth. 

He  will  not  suffer  thy  foot  to  be  moved  :  and  he  that  keepeth  thee  will 
not  sleep. 

Behold,  he  that  keepeth  Israel :  shall  neither  slumber  nor  sleep. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

^   The  Innocents'  day. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  whose  praise,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

Tlu  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

IT   The  Sunday  after  Christmas  day. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty    God,    which    hast 
given  us,  &c     As  upon  Christmas 
dayi. 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


*  In  one  ed.|  1559,  and  ed.  1596,  and 
afterwards,  "have." 
»  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen"  is  added. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
The  Sunday  after  Christmas  day. 

Almighty  God,  which  hast  given 
us,  &c.     As  upon  Christmas  day  '. 

Tlie  Episth.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.   1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


r  In  one  ed.,  1553,  and  in  one  ed.,  1559, 
the  Collect  is  printed  entire,  as  on  p.  105. 


At  the  Communion. 


Ill 


The  loid  himself  is  thy  keeper  :  the  lord  is  thy  defence  upon  thy  right 
hand; 

So  that  the  Sun  shall  not  bum  thee  by  day  :  neither  the  Moon  by  night. 

The  lord  shall  preserve  thee  from  all  evil  :  yea,  it  is  even  he  that  shall 
keep  thy  soul. 

The  lord  shall  preserve  thy  going  out,  and  thy  coming  in  :  from  this  time 
forth  for  evermore. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  hast  given  us,  &c.,  as  upon  Christmas 
Day"". 

The  Epistle. 

Gala.  iv.  And  I  say,  that  the  heir 

[i.e.  Gal.  iv.  verse  i  to  verse  8.] 

also  an  heir  of  God  through  Christ. 
The  Gospel. 
Math.  i.  This  is  the  book  of  the  generation 

[i.e.  Matt.  i.  verse  i  to  the  end.] 

called  his  name  Jesus. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Innocents'  Day. 

The  Collect. 

0  Almighty  God,  vi^ho  out  of 
the  mouths  of  babes  and  sucklings 
hast  ordained  strength,  and  madest 
infants  to  glorify  thee  by  their 
deaths ;  mortify  and  kill  all  vices 
in  us,  and  so  strengthen  us  by  thy 
grace,  that  by  the  innocency  of  our 
lives,  and  constancy  of  our  faith 
even  unto  death,  we  may  glorify 
thy  holy  Name,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 

For  the  Epistle. 
Rev.  xiv.  ver,  I. 

1  LOOKED,  and,  lo,  a  Lamb  .  , 
to  before  the  throne  of  God. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  ii.  ver.  13. 
The  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared, 
to  because  they  are  not. 


The  Sunday  after  Christmas-day. 
The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who  hast  given 
us  thy  only  begotten  Son  to  take 
our  nature  upon  him,  and  as  at  this 
time  to  be  born  of  a  pure  Virgin  ; 
Grant  that  we  being  regenerate,  and 
made  thy  chiklren  by  adoption  and 
grace,  may  daily  be  renewed  by  thy 
Holy  Spirit,  through  the  same  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  liveth  and 
reigneth  with  thee  and  the  same 
Spirit  ever  one  God,  world  without 
end.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
Gal.  iv.  ver.  i. 
Now  I  say.  That  the  heir  .     .     . 
to  heir  of  God  through  Christ. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  i.  ver.  18. 
The  birth  of  Jesus  Christ  was  on 
this  wise,  to  called  his  name  Jesus. 


'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  one  ed.,  1559,  the  Collect  for  the  Sunday  after  Christmas  Day 
is  printed  entire. 


112  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^  The  Circumcision  of  Christ. 

At  Afatins. 
The  first  lesson,  Gene.  xvii.  unto  the  end. 
The  second  lesson,  Rom.  ii.  unto  the  emi. 

At  the  Communion. 
Ltrtatus  sum.     'Psalm  cxxiL 

I  WAS  glad  when  they  said  unto  me  :  We  will  go  into  the  house  of 
the  lord. 

Our  feet  shall  stand  in  thy  gates  :  O  Jerusalem. 

Jerusalem  is  builded  as  a  city  :  that  is  at  unity  in  itself. 

For  thither  the  tribes  go  up,  even  the  tribes  of  the  Lord  :  to  testify  imto 
Israel,  to  give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

For  there  is  the  seat  of  judgement  :  even  the  seat  of  the  house  of  David. 

O  pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem  :  they  shall  prosper  that  love  thee. 

Peace  be  within  thy  walls  :  and  plenteousness  within  thy  palaces. 

For  my  brethren  and  companions'  sakes  :  I  wish  thee  prosperity. 

Yea,  because  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  our  God  :  I  will  seek  to  do  thee 
good. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

77u  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  madest  thy  blessed  Son  to  be  cir- 
cumcised and  obedient  to  the  law  for  man :  grant  us  the  true 
circumcision  of  thy  •>  Spirit :  that  our  hearts,  and  all  our  «= 
members,  being  mortified  from  all  worldly  and  carnal  lusts, 
may  in  all  things  obey  thy  blessed  will,  through  the  same  thy 
Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  \ 

The  Epistle. 
Rom.  iv.  Blessed  is  that «  man  to  whom 


1 


[i.e.  Rom.  iv.  verse  8  to  verse  15,] 


the  promise  of  none  effect 


&c. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

H   77u  Circumcision  of  Christ. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  madest. 


[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


64.  If  there  be  a  Sunday  hetioeen 
the  Epiphany,  and  the  Circum- 
cision, then  shall  be  used  the  same 
Collect,  Epistle  and  Gospel,  at  the 
Communion,  which  7vas  used  upon 
the  day  of  Circumcision. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


»  In  on«  ed.,  1549,  '""/•  Psal.  ciL  *  In  some  eds.,   155:,  1559,  and  after- 

•>  In  eds.   155a,  and  sul  after,  "of  the  wards,  "  Amen "  is  added. 

Spirit."  *  In  eds.  1604,  and  1637,  "the man." 
<:  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "all  members.' 


At  the  Communion. 


"3 


The  Gospel. 
Luc.  ii.  And  it  fortuned,  as  soon  as 

[i.e.  Luke  ii.  verse  15  to  verse  22.] 

conceived  in  the  womb. 

IT  At  Evensong. 

The  first  lesson,  Deute.  x.  "And  now  Israel,"  unto  the  end. 

The  second  lesson,  Coloss.  ii.  unto  the  end. 


\   The  Epiphany. 

At  Matins. 
The  first  lesson,  Esai.  Ix.  itnto  the  end. 
The  second  lesson,  Luke  iii.  "And  it  fortuned,"  unto  the  end, 
[At  the  Communwn.l 
[Cantate  Domino.']     Psalm  xcvi. 
O  SING  unto  the  lord  a  new  song  :  sing  unto  the  lord,  all  the  whole  earth. 
Sing  unto  the  Lord,  and  praise  his  name  :  be  telling  of  his  salvation 
from  day  to  day. 

Declare  his  honour  unto  the  heathen  :  and  his  wonders  unto  all  people. 
For  the  lord  is  great,  and  cannot  worthily  be  praised  :  he  is  more  to  be 
feared  than  all  Gods. 

As  for  all  the  Gods  of  the  heathen,  they  be  but  idols  :  but  it  is  the  lord 
that  made  the  heavens. 

Glory  and  worship  are  before  him  :  power  and  honour  are  in  his 
sanctuary. 

Ascribe  unto  the  lord,  (O  ye  kindreds  of  the  people)  :  ascribe  unto  the 
lord  worship  and  power. 

Ascribe  unto  the  lord  the  honour  due  unto  his  name  :  bring  presents,  and 
come  into  his  courts. 

O  worship  the  lord  in  the  beauty  of  holiness  :  let  the  whole  earth  stand 
in  awe  of  him. 

Tell  it  out  among  the  heathen  that  the  lord  is  king  :  and  that  it  is  be 
which  hath  made  the  round  world  so  fast  that  it  cannot  be  moved ;  and 
how  that  he  shall  judge  the  people  righteously. 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552,  except] 
;  64.  If  there  be  a?iy  Sunday  between 
the  Epiphany  and  the  Circum- 
cision :  then  shall  be  used  the  same 
Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel  at  the 
Communion,  which  was  used  tipon 
the  day  of  the  Circumcision  ;  and 
so  likezvise  upon  every  other  day 
from  the  time  of  the  Circumcision 
to  the  Epiphany. 

Charles  II.  1662. 
The  Circumcision  of  Christ. 


The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  who  madest,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
The  Epistle. 
Rom.  iv.  ver.  8. 
Blessed  is  the  man      .... 
to  promise  made  of  none  effect. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  ii.  ver.  15. 
And  it  came  to  pass     .... 
to  conceived  in  the  womb. 

§64.  The  same  Collect,  Epistle  and 
Gospel  shall  serve  for  every  day 
after  unto  the  Epiphany. 


114 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[The  Epiphany  coHtinued.'] 

Let  the  heavens  rejoice,  and  let  the  earth  be  glad  :  let  the  sea  make 
a  noise,  and  all  that  therein  is. 

Let  the  field  be  joyful,  and  all  that  is  in  it :  then  shall  all  the  trees  of  the 
wood  rejoice  before  the  Lord. 

For  he  cometh,  for  he  cometh  to  judge  the  earth  :  and  with  righteousness 
to  judge  the  world,  and  the  people  with  his  truth. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

T/u  Collect. 
[O]  God,  which  by  the  leading  of  a  star  didst  manifest  thy 
only-begotten  Son  to  the  Gentiles ;  Mercifully  grant,  that  we, 
which  know  thee  now  by  faith,  may  after  this  life  have  the 
fruition  of  thy  glorious  Godhead ;  through  Christ  our  Lord  ^. 


The  Epistle. 

Ephe.  iii.  For  this  cause  I  Paul  . 


(Le.  Eph.  iii.  verse  i  to  verse  13.] 

which  is  by  the  faith  of  him. 

The  Gospel. 
Matt  ii.8  When  Jesus  was  bom     .  

[i.e.  Matt.  ii.  verse  i  to  verse  13.] 

their  own  country  another  way. 

At  Evensong. 

The  first  lesson,  Esai.  xlix.  unto  the  end. 

The  second  lesson,  John  iu  "  After  this  he  went  down  to  Capernaum,' 

unto  the  end. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

H   The  Epiphany. 

The  Collect. 

O  God,  which  by  the  leading,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

H  The  first  Sunday  after  the 
Epiphany. 

The  Collect. 
Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 


fulfil  the  same,  through  Jesus  Christ     I 
our  Lord-     [Amen.]'  1 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  155a.] 


James  L  1604. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


'  In  one  ed.,  1559,  and  eds.  1596,  1604,  and  16^7,  " 
I  In  one  ed.,  1549,  mtJr/.  Matt.  iii. 


Amen." 


I 


At  the  Communion. 


"5 


The  first  Sunday  after  the  Epiphany. 
Usquequo  Domine?    Psalm  xiii. 

How  long  wilt  thou  forget  me,  O  Lord,  for  ever  :  how  long  wilt  thou 
hide  thy  face  from  me  ? 

How  long  shall  I  seek  counsel  in  my  soul,  and  be  so  vexed  in  my 
heart :  how  long  shall  mine  enemy  triumph  over  me  ? 

Consider,  and  hear  me,  O  lord  my  God  :  lighten  mine  eyes,  that 
I  sleep  not  in  death. 

Lest  mine  enemy  say,  I  have  prevailed  against  him  :  for  if  I  be  cast 
down,  they  that  trouble  me  will  rejoice  at  it. 

But  my  trust  is  in  thy  mercy  :  and  my  heart  is  joyful  in  thy  salvation. 

I  will  sing  of  the  lord,  because  he  hath  dealt  so  lovingly  with  me  :  (yea, 
I  will  praise  the  Name  of  the  Lord  the  most  Highest). 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  mercifully  to  receive  the  prayers 
of  thy  people  which  call  upon  thee  :  and  grant  that  they  may 
both  perceive  and  know  what  things  they  ought  to  do,  and 
also  have  ^  grace  and  power  faithfully  to  fulfil  the  same. 

The  Epistle. 

Roma  xii.  I  beseech  you  therefore  brethren 

[i.e.  Rom.  xii.  verse  i  to  verse  6.] 

ourselves  one  another's  members. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  ii.  The  father  and  mother  of  Jesus 

[i.e.  Luke  ii.  verse  41  to  the  end.] 

in  favour  with  God  and  men. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Epiphany,  or  the  manifestation 

of  Christ  to  the  Gentiles. 

The  Collect. 

O  God,  who  by  the  leading,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

through  Jesus    Christ    our    Lord. 

Amea. 

The  Epistle. 
Ephes.  iii.  ver.  I. 
For  this  cause  I  Paul   .... 
to  confidence  by  the  faith  of  him. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  ii.  ver.  i. 
When  Jesus  was  born  .... 
U)  country  another  way. 


The  First  Stcnday  after  the 
Epiphany. 

The  Collect. 

0  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
fulfil  the  same,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
Rom.  xii.  ver.  i. 

1  BESEECH  you  therefore    . 
to  members  one  of  another. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  ii.  ver.  41. 
Now  his  parents  went  .... 
to  in  favour  with  God  and  man. 


••  In  ed.  1662,  "may  have.' 


ii6  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

%   The  second  Sunday. 
Dixit  insipietis.     Psalm  xiiiL 

The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart  :  there  is  no  god. 

They  are  corrupt,  and  become  abominable  in  their  doings  :  there  is  not 
one  that  doeth  good,  (no  not  one). 

The  lord  looked  down  from  heaven  upon  the  children  of  men  :  to  see  if 
there  were  any  that  would  understand,  and  seek  after  God. 

But  they  are  all  gone  out  of  the  way,  they  are  altogether  become  abomin- 
able :  there  is  none  that  doth  good,  (no  not  one). 

Their  throat  is  an  open  sepulchre,  with  their  tongues  they  have  de- 
ceived :  the  poison  of  Asps  is  under  their  lips. 

Their  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and  bitterness  :  their  feet  are  swift  to  shed 
blood. 

Destruction  and  unhappiness  is  in  their  ways,  and  the  way  of  peace  have 
they  not  known  :  there  is  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes. 

Have  they  no  knowledge,  that  they  are  all  such  workers  of  mischief : 
eating  up  my  people  as  it  were  bread,  and  call  not  upon  the  Lord  ? 

There  were  they  brought  in  great  fear,  (even  where  no  fear  was)  :  for 
god  is  in  the  generation  of  the  righteous. 

As  for  you,  ye  have  made  a  mock  at  the  counsel  of  the  poor  :  because 
he  putteth  his  trust  in  the  lord. 

Who  shall  give  salvation  unto  Israel  out  of  Sion?  When  the  lord 
tumeth  the  captivity  of  his  people  :  then  shall  Jacob  rejoice,  and  Israel 
be  glad. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  which  dost  govern  all  things 
in  heaven  and  earth  :  mercifully  hear  the  supplications  of  thy 
people,  and  grant  us  thy  peace '  all  the  days  of  our  life.  ^ 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

The  second  Sunday  after  the 
Epiphany. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
which  dost,  &c 

[Same  as  iS49'] 

The  Epistle.      T/u  Gospel. 

I  Same  as  1549.] 

The  third  Sunday '. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
mercifully,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  t549-] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
[Same  as  1553. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


I  In  ed-  1604,  •'  thy  grace."  i  In  ed.  1596,  "  after  the  Epiphany' 

*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "through  Jesus       added. 
Christ  our  Lord"  is  added. 


At  the  Communion. 


117 


The  Epistle. 
Rom.  xii.  Seeing  that  we  have  divers  gifts 

[i.e.  Rom.  xii.  verse  6  to  verse  16.] 

them  of  the  lower  sort. 

The  Gospel. 
John  ii.  "1  And  the  third  day  was  there     . 

[i.e.  John  ii.  verse  i  to  verse  12.] 

his  disciples  believed  on  him. 


^   The  third  Sunday. 

Domine,  quis  habitabit?    Psalm  xv. 

Lord,  who  shall  dwell  in  thy  tabernacle  :  who  shall  rest  upon  thy 
holy  hill  ? 

Even  he,  that  leadeth  an  uncomipt  life  :  and  doth  the  thing  which  is 
right,  and  speaketh  the  truth  from  his  heart. 

He  that  hath  used  no  deceit  in  his  tongue,  nor  done  evil  to  his  neigh- 
l)our  :  and  hath  not, slandered  his  neighbours. 

He  that  setteth  not  by  himself,  but  is  lowly  in  his  own  eyes  :  and 
maketh  much  of  them  that  fear  the  Lord. 

He  that  sweareth  unto  his  neighbour,  and  disappointeth  him  not :  though 
it  were  to  his  own  hindrance. 

He  that  hath  not  given  his  money  unto  usury  :  nor  taken  reward  against 
the  innocent.     Whoso  doth  these  things  :  shall  never  fall. 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  mercifully  look  upon  our 
infirmities,  and  in  all  our  dangers  and  necessities,  stretch 
forth  thy  right  hand  to  help  and  defend  us,  through  Christ 
our  Lord  °. 


Charles  II.   1662. 

The  Second  Stcnday  after  the 
Epiphany. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who  dost,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

The  Epistle. 
Rom.  xii.  ver.  6. 
Having  then  gifts  differing    .     . 
to  men  of  low  estate. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  ii.  ver.  I. 

And  the  third  day 

io  his  disciples  believed  on  him. 


The  Third  Sunday  after 
the  Epiphany. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
mercifully,  &c. 

[Same  as  iS49,  to] 
through    Jesus    Christ    our    Lord. 
Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
Rom.  xii.  ver.  16. 
Be  not  wise  in  your  own  conceits, 
to  overcome  evil  with  good. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  viii.  ver.  I. 
When  He  was  come  down    . 
to  in  the  selfsame  hour. 


In  one  ed.,  1552,  misp.  John  iii. 


In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


ii8  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[Third  Sunday  after  Epiphany  continued.l 

The  Epistle, 

Rom.  xii.  *>  Be  not  wise  in  your  own  opinions    .... 

[Le.  Rom.  xiL  verse  i6  to  the  end.] 

overcome  evil  with  goodness. 

The  Gospel. 
Math.  viiL  When  he  was  come  down 

[i.e.  Matt.  viii.  verse  i  to  verse  14.] 

healed  in  the  selfsame  hour. 

^  The  fourth  Sunday. 

Quare  fremuerunt  gentes  ?    Psalm  ii. 

Why  do  the  heathen  so  furiously  rage  together  :  and  why  do  the  people 
imagine  a  vain  thing  ? 

The  kings  of  the  earth  stand  up,  and  the  rulers  take  counsel  tc^ether : 
against  the  lord,  and  against  his  anointed. 

Let  us  break  their  bonds  a  sunder  :  and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us. 

He  that  dwelleth  in  heaven  shall  laugh  them  to  scorn  :  the  lord  shall 
have  them  in  derision. 

Then  shall  he  speak  unto  them  in  his  wrath  :  and  vex  them  in  his  sore 
displeasure. 

Yet  have  I  set  my  king  :  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Sion. 

I  will  preach  the  law,  whereof  the  Lord  hath  said  imto  me  :  Thou  art 
my  son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee. 

Desire  of  me,  and  I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance 
and  the  utmost  parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  possession. 

Thou  shall  bruise  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  :  and  break  them  in  pieces  like 
a  potter's  vessel. 

Be  wise  now  therefore,  O  ye  kings  :  be  learned,  ye  that  are  judges  of 
the  earth. 

Serve  the  lord  in  fear  and  rejoice  (imto  him)  with  reverence. 

Kiss  the  son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  so  ye  perish  from  the  right  way  :  if 
his  wrath  be  kindled,  (yea,  but  a  little,)  blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their 
trust  in  him. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

IT  The  fourth  Sunday^. 

The  Collect. 

God,  which  knowest  us,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


o  In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp,  Rom.  xiii.        p  In  ed.  1596,  "  after  the  Epiphany"  is  added. 


At  the  Communion, 


119 


The  Collect. 
God,  which  knowest  us  to  be  set  in  the  midst  of  so  many 
and  great  dangers,  that  for  man's  frailness  we  cannot  always 
stand  uprightly  :   Grant  to  us  the  health  of  body  and  soul, 
that  all  those  things  which  we  suffer  for  sin,  by  thy  help  we 
may  well  pass  and  overcome,  through  Christ  our  Lord  \ 
The  Epistle. 
Rom.  xiii.  Let  every  soul  submit  himself 

[i.e.  Rom.  xiii.  verse  i  to  verse  8.] 

honour  to  whom  honour  pertaineth. 
The  Gospel. 
Math.  viii.  And  when  he  entered  into  a  ship 

[i.e.  Matt.  viii.  verse  23  to  the  end.] 

depart  out  of  their  coasts. 


^  The  fifth  Sunday. 
Exmidiat  te  Dominus^.     Psalm  xx. 

The  Lord  hear  thee  in  the  day  of  trouble  :  the  name  of  the  God  of 
Jacob  defend  thee ; 

Send  thee  help  from  the  Sanctuary  :  and  strength  thee  out  of  Sion ; 

Remember  all  thy  offerings  :  and  accept  thy  brent-sacrifice  ; 

Grant  thee  thy  heart's  desire  :  and  fulfil  all  thy  mind. 

We  will  rejoice  in  thy  salvation,  and  triumph  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
our  God  :  the  Lord  perform  all  thy  petitions. 

Now  know  I,  that  the  Lord  helpeth  his  anointed,  and  will  hear  him 
from  his  holy  heaven  :  even  with  the  wholesome  strength  of  his  right  hand. 

Some  put  their  trust  in  Chariots,  and  some  in  horses  :  but  we  will  re- 
member the  name  of  the  lord  our  God. 

They  are  brought  down,  and  fallen  :  but  we  are  risen,  and  stand  upright. 

Save,  lord,  and  hear  us,  O  king  of  heaven  :  when  we  call  upon  thee. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Fourth  Sunday  after 
the  Epiphany. 
The  Collect. 
O  God,  who  knowest  us  to  be 
set  in  the  midst  of  so  many  and 
great  dangers,  that  by  reason  of  the 
Irailty  of  our  nature  we  cannot  al- 
ways stand  upright ;    Grant  to  us 
such    strength    and    protection,    as 
may  support  us  in  all  dangers,  and 


carry  us  through  all  temptations, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
Rom.  xiii.  ver.  i. 
Let  every  soul  be  subject .     .     • 
to  honour  to  whom  honour. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  viii.  ver.  23. 
And  when  he  was  entered      .     . 
to  depart  out  of  their  coasts. 


">  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen."  ne,  Ps.  vi.,  misp.  for  title  (but  Psalm  xx. 

'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "Deus"  instead  of       given  correctly). 
"Dominus;"   and  in  eds.  1549,   Domine 


I20  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

[The  Fiftli  Sunday  after  Epiphany  conttHtteiLI 
The  Collect. 

Lord,  we  beseech  thee  to  keep  thy  church  and  household 
continually  in  thy  true  religion  :  that  they  which  •  do  lean  only 
upon  hope  *  of  thy  heavenly  grace,  may  evermore  be  defended 
l^  thy  mighty  power ;  through  Christ  our  Lord  ". 

The  Epistle. 
Coloss.  iii.  ^  Put  upon  you  as  the  elect  of  God 

[Lc  Coloss.  iii.  Terse  13  to  Terse  18.] 

to  God  the  Father  by  him. 

The  Gospel. 
Math.  xiii.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like 

[Le.  Matt.  xiii.  rerse  24  to  verse  31.] 

but  gather  the  wheat  into  my  bam. 

§  65.    The  sixth  Sunday  {if  there  be  so  many)  shall  have  the  same  Psalm^ 
Collat,  Epistle,  and  Gospel,  that  was  upon  the  fifth. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

\   The  fifth  Sunday  y. 

The  Collect. 

Lx>RD,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  6$.  The  vL  Sunday  [if  there  be  so 
many)  shall  have  the  same  *  Collect, 
Epistle,  and  Gospel,  that  was  upon 
the  fifth  Sunday. 

?  The  Sunday  called  Septuagesima. 

The  Collect 

O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee.  Sec 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospd. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  X559. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1553-] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637, 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Fifth  Sunday  after 

the  Epiphany. 

The  Collect. 

O  LoKD,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

throogfa   Jesus    Christ    our    Lord. 

Amen. 

TheEfnstle. 
Coloss.  iiL  ver.  12. 
Pitt  on  therefore,  as  the  elect     . 
to  and  the  Father  by  him. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xiiL  ver.  24. 
The  kingdom  of  heaven    .     .     . 
to  gather  the  wheat  into  my  bam. 


•  In  ed.  i66»,  "who." 
t  In  ed.  1663,  "  upoa  die  hope." 
■  In  eds.  1596, 1604,  and  1637,  "  throagh 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.   Amen." 
>  In  one  ed.,  1553,  mitf.  PhiL  iL 


T  In  ed.  1596,  "after  the  Epiphany"  is 
added. 

■  Inoneed.,  1552.  "«A<i//jL(»r<ArM«rr 
Pmitm,  Collect,  EpittU'  ice 


At  the  Communion. 


121 


^  The  Sunday  called  Septuagesima. 

Dominus  regit.     Psalm  xxiii. 

The  Lord  is  my  shepherd  :  therefore  can  I  lack  nothing. 

He  shall  feed  me  in  a  green  pasture  :  and  lead  me  forth  beside  the  waters 
of  comfort. 

He  shall  convert  my  soul  :  and  bring  me  forth  in  the  paths  of  righteous- 
ness, for  his  name's  sake. 

Yea,  though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will 
fear  no  evil  :  for  thou  art  with  me  ;  thy  rod  and  thy  staff  comfort  me. 

Thou  shalt  prepare  a  table  before  me  against  them  that  trouble  me  :  thou 
hast  anointed  my  head  with  oil,  and  my  cup  shall  be  full. 

But  thy  loving-kindness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me  all  the  days  of  my 
life  :  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  lord  for  ever. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee  favourably  to  hear  the  prayers 
of  thy  people ;  that  we,  which  *  are  justly  punished  for  our 
offences,  may  be  mercifully  delivered  by  thy  goodness,  for 
the  glory  of  thy  name ;  through  Jesu  ^  Christ  our  Saviour, 
who  liveth  and  reigneth,  &c.<' 


The  Sixth  Sunday  afier 
the  Epiphany. 

The  Collect. 
O  God,  whose  blessed  Son  was 
manifested,  that  he  might  destroy 
the  works  of  the  devil,  and  make 
us  the  sons  of  God  and  heirs  of 
eternal  life  ;  Grant  us,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  having  this  hope,  we 
may  purify  our  selves,  even  as  he 
is  pure  ;  that  when  he  shall  appear 
again  with  power  and  great  glory, 
we  may  be  made  like  unto  him  in 
his  eternal  and  glorious  kingdom, 
where  with  thee,  O  Father,  and 
thee,  O  Holy  Ghost,  he  liveth  and 
reigneth  ever  one  God  world  with- 
out end.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
I  S.  John  iii.  ver.  i. 
Behold,  what  manner  of  love    . 
to  the  works  of  the  devil. 


The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xxiv.  ver.  23. 
Then  if  any  man  shall  say     .     . 
to  one  end  of  heaven  to  the  other. 

The  Sunday  called  Septuagesima,  or 
the  Third  Sunday  before  Lent. 

The  Collect. 
O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour, 
who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  ever  one  God, 
world  without  end.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
I  Cor.  ix.  ver.  24. 
Know  ye  not  that  they  which, 
to  I  myself  should  be  a  cast-away. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  XX.  ver.  I. 
The  kingdom  of  heaven     .     .     . 
to  but  few  chosen. 


•  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 

i"  In  eds.  1552, 1559,  1596,  &c.,  "Jesus." 

«  In  two  eds.,  1552,  and  two  eds.,  1559, 


after  "  reigneth"  the  words  "  world  without 
end "  are  added  ;  in  ed.  1596,  and  1637, 
the  word  "Amen"  also  added. 


122  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

[Septuagesima  Sunday  continued.'^ 
The  Epistle. 
I  Cor.  ix.  Perceive  ye  not,  how  that  they  which     .... 

p.e.  I  Cor.  ix.  verse  24  to  the  end.] 

myself  should  be  a  castaway. 

The  Gospel. 

Math.  XX.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like 

[Le.  Matt.  xx.  verse  i  to  verse  17.] 

be  called,  but  few  be  chosen. 

•|  T7u  Sunday  called  Sexagesima. 

IT  [At  the  Communum  *.] 

Domini  est  terra.     Psalm  xxiiiL 

The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  all  that  therein  is  :  the  compass  of  the 
world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein. 

For  he  hath  founded  it  upon  the  seas  :  and  prepared  it  upon  the  floods. 

Who  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord  :  or  who  shall  rise  up  in 
his  holy  place  ? 

Even  he  that  hath  clean  hands,  and  a  pure  heart  :  and  that  hath  not  lift 
up  his  mind  imto  vanity,  nor  sworn  to  deceive  his  neighbour. 

He  shall  receive  the  blessing  from  the  Lord  :  and  righteousness  from  the 
God  of  his  salvation. 

This  is  the  generation  of  them  that  seek  him  :  even  of  them  that  seek  thy 
face,  O  Jacob. 

Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates,  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors  : 
and  the  king  of  glory  shall  come  in. 

Who  is  the  king  of  glory :  it  is  the  Lord  strong  and  mighty,  even  the 
Lord  mighty  in  battle. 

Lift  up  your  heads,  (O  ye  gates,)  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors  : 
and  the  king  of  glory  shall  come  in. 

Who  is  this  king  of  glory  :  even  the  lord  of  hosts,  he  is  the  king  of 
glory. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  vras  in  the  beginning,  &c 

The  Collect. 

Lord  God,  which  seest  that  we  put  not  •  our  trust  in  any 
thing  that  we  do :  mercifully  grant  that  by  thy  power  we 
may  be  defended  against  all  adversity,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  '^■ 


Second  Edw.  VL  155a. 

T  The  Sunday  called  Sexagesima. 

The  Collect. 

Lord  God,  which  seest  that,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[The  same  as  1553.] 


James  L   1604. 
[The  same  as  1553.] 


*  These  words  occur  only  in  one  edition  •  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  not"  omitted, 

of  1549.  '  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


At  the  Communion.  123 


The  Epistle. 
2  Cor.  xi.  s  Ye  suffer  fools  gladly    .     .     .     . 

[i.e.  2  Cor.  xi.  verse  ig  to  verse  32.] 

knoweth  that  I  lie  not. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  viii.  When  much  people  were  gathered 

[i.e.  Luke  viii.  verse  4  to  ver.se  i6.] 

fruit,  through  patience. 


\  The  Sunday  called  Quinquagesima  *. 

yudica  me  Domine.    Psalm  xxvi. ' 

Be  thou  my  judge,  O  lord,  for  I  have  walked  imiocently  :  my  trust  hath 
been  also  in  the  lord,  therefore  shall  I  not  fall. 

Examine  me,  O  Lord,  and  prove  me  :  try  out  my  reins  and  my  heart 

For  thy  loving-kindness  is  before  mine  eyes  :  and  I  will  walk  in  thy  truth. 

I  have  not  dwelt  with  vain  persons  :  neither  will  I  have  fellowship  with 
the  deceitful. 

I  have  hated  the  congregation  of  the  wicked  :  and  will  not  sit  among  the 
ungodly. 

I  will  wash  my  hands  in  innocency,  O  lord  :  and  so  will  I  go  to  thine 
altar ; 

That  I  may  shew  the  voice  of  thanksgiving  :  and  tell  of  all  thy  wondrous 
works. 

Lord,  I  have  loved  the  habitation  of  thy  house  :  and  the  place  where 
thine  honour  dwelleth. 

O  shut  not  up  my  soul  with  the  sinners  :  nor  my  life  with  the  blood- 
thirsty ; 

In  whose  hands  is  wickedness  :  and  their  right  hand  is  full  of  gifts. 

But  as  for  me,  I  will  walk  innocently  :  O  lord  deliver  me,  and  be  mer- 
ciful unto  me. 

My  foot  standeth  right  :  I  will  praise  the  Lord  in  the  congregations. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  IL  1662. 

The  Sunday  called  Sexagesima,  or 
the  Second  Sunday  before  Lent. 

The  Collect. 
O  Lord  God,  who  seest,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle. 
2  Cor.  xi.  ver.  19. 
Ye  suffer  fools  gladly    .... 
to  knoweth  that  I  lie  not. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  viii.  ver.  4. 
When  much  people  weregathered, 
to  fruit  with  patience. 


8  In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp.  2  Cor.  iii.  i"  In  one  ed.,  1549,  Quadragesima. 

'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp.  Ps.  cxxvi. 


124 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[Quinquagesima  Sunday  continued.'] 
■The  Collect. 

0  Lord,  which  dost  teach  us,  that  all  our  doings  without 
charity  are  nothing  worth :  send  thy  Holy  Ghost,  and  pour 
into'^  our  hearts  that  most  excellent  gift  of  charity,  the  very 
bond  of  peace  and  all  virtues,  %vithout  the  which ',  whosoever 
liveth  is  counted  dead  before  thee  :  Grant  this,  for  thy  ^  only 
Son  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 

TX^  Epistle. 

1  Cor.  xiii.  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues  "  of  men    .     . 

[Le.  I  Cor.  xiiL  verse  i  to  the  end.] 

the  chief  of  these  is  love. 

77te  Gospd. 
Luc.  xviii.  **  Jesus  took  unto  him  the  twelve 

[Le.  Luke  xviiL  verse  31  to  the  end.] 

gave  praise  unto  God. 


^  The  first  day  of  Lent,  commonly  called  Ashwedne^ay. 
Domine  ne.     Psalm  vi.  ' 
O  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in  thine  indignation  :  neither  chasten  me  in  thy 
displeasure. 

Have  mercy  upon  me,  O  Lord,  for  I  am  weak  :  O  lord,  heal  me,  my 
bones  are  vexed. 

My  soul  also  is  sore  troubled  :  but.  Lord,  how  long  wilt  thou  punish  me  ? 
Turn  thee,  O  Lord,  and  deliver  my  soul :  O  save  me  for  thy  mercy's  sake. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

Tke  Sunday  called  Quinquagesima. 

The  Collect. 

O  Lord,  which  dost  teach  us,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 

Tlie  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

H  The  first  day  0/ Lent. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everlasting,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


*  In  eds.  of  155a,  and  two  eds.  of  1559, 
"pour  in." 

'In  ed.  1662,  "and  of  all  veitues,  without 
which." 

"  In  ed.  1596,  "thine," 

"  Ineds.  1553,  i559,&c.,  "wiihtongues." 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 

James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1553.] 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552,  to] 
Tlu first  day  of  T^it  commonly 
called  Ash  Wednesday. 
(Same  as  1549-] 
The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
66.  From  Ash   Wednesday  to  the 
first  Sunday  in  Lent  shall  be  used 
the  same  collect,  epistle,  and  gospd 
which   were  used  on  Ash    Wed- 
nesday. 


"  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  in  one  ed.,  1559, 
misp.  Luke  xviL 

V  In  one  ed.,  1549,  Exatidiat  it  Deus. 
Ps.  XX.  tnisp.  for  title,  but  Domtmt  ne. 
Ps.  vi.,  given  correctly. 


At  the  Commuxion. 


12!; 


For  in  death  no  man  rcmembereth  tlicc  :  and  who  will  give  thee  thanks 
in  the  pit  ? 

I  am  weary  of  my  groaning  ;  every  night  ^\'ash  I  my  bed  :  and  water  my 
couch  with  my  tears. 

iSIy  beauty  is  gone  for  very  trouble  :  and  worn  away  because  of  all  mine 
enemies. 

Away  from  me,  all  ye  that  work  vanity  :  for  the  lord  hath  heard  the 
voice  of  my  weeding. 

The  Lord  hath  heard  my  petition  :  tlie  Lord  will  receive  my  praver. 

All  mine  enemies  shall  be  confounded,  and  sore  vexed  :  tliey  shall  be 
turned  back,  and  put  to  >hame  suddenly. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  i.\;c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  Gotl,  which  hatest  nothing  that 
thou  hast  made,  and  dost  forgive  the  sins  of  all  them  that  be 'i 
penitent :  Create  and  make  in  us  new  and  contrite  hearts, 
that  we  worthily  lamenting  our  sins,  and  knowledging^  our 
wretchedness,  may  obtain  of  thee,  the  God  of  all  mercy,  per- 
fect remission  and  forgiveness,  through  Jesus  Christ*. 
The  Epistle. 

Joel  ii.  Turn  you  unto  me  with  all  your  hearts 

(i.e.  Juel  ii.  verse  12,  to  verse  17.] 

Where  is  now  their  God. 

7he  Gospel. 
Math.  vi.  When  ye  fast  be  not  sad 

[i.e.  ^tatt.  vi.  verse  16  to  verse  22.] 

there  will  vour  hearts  be  also. 


Charles  IL   1662. 

The  Smuliiy  caileJ  Quiiiqua;::;esima 
or  the  next  Sunday  before  Lent, 

The  Collect. 
O  Lord,  who  hast  taught  us,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 
I  Cor.  xiii.  ver.  I. 
TuofGH  I  speak  with  the  tongues, 
to  greatest  of  these  is  charity. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xviii.  ver.  31. 
Then  Jesus  took  unto  him 
to  gave  praise  unto  God. 


^  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 
■■  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  In  eds.  1662, 
"acknowledging." 
'  In  Scotched.,  1637,  "Amen." 


The  first  day  of  Lejit,  commonly 
called  Ash-oednesday. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who  hatest,  lVc. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

through    Jesus    Christ    our    Lord. 
A  men. 

§  66.  This  Collect  is  to  he  read  e^erv 
day  in  Lent,  after  the  Collect  ap- 
pointed J'or  the  day. 

For  the  Epistle. 
Joel  ii.  ver.  12. 
Tl'RX  ye  even  to  me      .... 
to  where  is  their  God. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  j\Latth.  vi.  ver.  16. 
When  ye  fast  be  not     .... 
to  there  will  your  heart  be  aLo. 


126  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

^  The  first  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Beati  quorum.     Psalm  xxxiL 

Blessed  is  lie  whose  unrighteousness  is  forgiven  :  and  whose  sin  is 
covered. 

Blessed  is  the  man  unto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  no  sin  :  and  in  whose 
spirit  there  is  no  guile. 

For  while  I  held  my  tongue  :  my  bones  consumed  away  through  my 
daily  complaining. 

For  thy  hand  is  heavy  upon  me  day  and  night  :  and  my  moisture  is  like 
the  drought  in  summer. 

I  will  acknowledge  my  sin  unto  thee  :  and  mine  unrighteousness  have 
I  not  hid. 

I  said,  I  will  confess  my  sins  unto  the  lord  :  and  so  thou  forgavest  the 
wickedness  of  my  sin. 

For  this  shall  every  one  that  is  Godly  make  his  prayer  unto  thee,  in 
a  time  when  thou  mayest  be  found  :  but  in  the  great  water-floods  they  shall 
not  come  nigh  him. 

Thou  art  a  place  to  hide  me  in,  thou  shalt  preserve  me  from  trouble  : 
thou  shalt  compass  me  about  with  songs  of  deliverance. 

I  will  inform  thee,  and  teach  thee  in  the  way  wherein  thou  shalt  go  :  and 
I  will  guide  thee  with  mine  eye. 

Be  ye  not  like  horse  and  Mule,  which  have  no  understanding  :  whose 
mouths  must  be  held  with  bit  and  bridle,  lest  they  fall  upon  thee. 

Great  plagues  remain  for  the  ungodly  :  but  whoso  putteth  his  trust  in  the 
Lord,  mercy  embraceth  him  on  ever)'  side. 

Be  glad,  O  ye  righteous,  and  rejoice  in  the  Lord  :  and  be  joyful,  all  ye 
that  are  true  of  heart. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  b^inning,  &c, 

TJu  Collect. 
O  Lord,  which  for  our  sake  didst  fast  forty  days  and  forty 
nights  :  Give  us  grace  to  use  such  abstinence,  that,  our  flesh 
being  subdued  to  the  Spirit,  we  may  ever  obey  thy  godly 
motions*,  in  righteousness  and  true  hoUness,  to  thy  honour 
and  glory,  which  Hvest  and  reignest,  &c. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  155a. 

H  The  first  Sunday  in  Lent, 

The  Collect. 

O  Lord,  which  for  our  sake,  &c- 

[Same  as  1549-] 

The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

%  The  second  Sunday  \in  Letit\ 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  dost,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


*  In  two  eds.,  1552,  and  in  one  ed.,  1549,  "  monidons"  Mwtow/*/" motions." 


At  the  Communion. 


127 


The  Epistle. 
2  Cor.  vi.  We  as  helpers  exhort  you    . 

[i.e.  2  Cor.  vi.  verse  i  to  verse  11.] 

and  yet  possessing  all  things. 

The  Gospel. 
Math.  iv.  Then  was  Jesus  led  away 

[i.e.  Math.  iv.  verse  i  to  verse  12.] 

and  ministered  unto  him. 


^  TTie  second  Sunday. 

De  profundis.     Psalm  cxxx. 
Out  of  the  deep  have  I  called  unto  thee,   O  Lord  :  Lord,  hear  my 
voice. 

0  let  thine  ears  consider  well  :  the  voice  of  my  complaint. 

If  thou,  Lord,  wilt  be  extreme  to  mark  what  is  done  amiss  :  O  Lord, 
who  may  abide  it  ? 

For  there  is  mercy  with  thee  :  therefore  shalt  thou  be  feared. 

1  look  for  the  Lord  ;  my  soul  doth  wait  for  him  :  in  his  word  is  my  trust. 
My  soul  flieth  unto  the  Lord  :  before  the  morning  watch,  I  say,  before 

the  morning  watch. 

O  Israel,  trust  in  the  Lord,  for  with  the  Lord  there  is  mercy  :  and  with 
him  is  plenteous  redemption. 

And  he  shall  redeem  Israel  :  from  all  his  sins. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  dost  see  that  we  have  no  power  of 
ourselves  to  help  ourselves  :  keep  thou  "  us  both  outwardly  in 
our  bodies,  and  inwardly  in  our  souls,  that  we  may  be  de- 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  First  Sunday  in  Lent. 

The  Collect. 

O  Lord,  who  for  our  sake,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

who  livest  and  reignest  with  the 

Father  and  the   Holy  Ghost,   one 

God,  world  without  end.    Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
2  Cor.  vi.  ver.  I. 
We  then,  as  workers     .... 
to  yet  possessing  all  things. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  iv.  ver.  I. 
Then  was  Jesus  led  up     .     .     . 
to  ministered  unto  him. 


The  Second  Sunday  in  Lent. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who  seest,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
through    Jesus    Christ    our    Lord. 
Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
I  Thess.  iv.  ver.  i. 
We  beseech  you,  brethren      .     . 
to  given  unto  us  his  Holy  Spirit. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  XV.  ver.  2i. 

Jesus  went  thence 

to  from  that  very  hour. 


"  In  ed.  1662,  "  keep  us." 


128  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

[The  Second  Sunday  in  Lent  continued.] 

fended  from  all  adversities  which  may  happen  to  the  body, 
and  from  all  evil  thoughts  which  may  assault  and  hurt  the 
soul;  through  Jesus  Christ,  &c.     [Amen.] 

T/ie  Epistle. 
I  Tess.  iv. "  We  beseech  you  brethren 

[i.e.  I  Thess.  iv.  verse  i  to  verse  9.] 

his  holy  Spirit  among  you. 

The  Gospel. 
Math.  XV.  *  Jesus  went  thence 

[i.e.  Matth.  xv.  verse  ax  to  verse  29.] 

was  made  whole  even  [at]  the  same  time. 

^  TTie  third  Sunday. 
Jiidica  me  \Deus\.     Psalm  xliii. 

Give  sentence  with  me,  (O  God,)  and  defend  my  cause  against  the 
ungodly  people  :  O  deliver  me  from  the  deceitful  and  wicked  man. 

For  thou  art  the  God  of  my  strength,  why  hast  thou  put  me  from  thee  : 
and  why  go  I  so  heavily,  while  the  enemy  oppresseth  me  ? 

O  send  out  thy  light  and  thy  truth,  that  they  may  lead  me  :  and  bring 
me  unto  thy  holy  hill,  and  to  thy  dwelling. 

And  that  I  may  go  unto  the  altar  of  God,  even  unto  the  God  of  my  joy 
and  gladness  :  and  upon  the  harp  will  I  give  thanks  unto  thee,  (O  God, ) 
my  God. 

Why  art  thou  so  heavy,  (O  my  soul)  :  and  why  art  thou  so  disquieted 
within  me? 

O  put  thy  trust  in  God  :  for  I  will  yet  give  him  thanks,  which  is  the 
help  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
H  The  third  Sunday  \in  Zem]y. 

The  Collect. 
We  beseech  thee,  almighty  God, 

&C. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  rssa.) 


'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp.  i  Tess.  iii.  >  In  eds.  of  1552  and  1506,  the  word., 

»  In  one  ed.,  1549,  mis/>.  Mark  xv. ;  and  "in  Lent,"  are  generally  added  ai'ter  the 

in    one    cd.,    1549,   reference    to    Gospel  Second  Sunday,  the  Third  Sunday,  &c., 

omitted.  tu  the  end. 


At  the  Communion. 


129 


The  Collect. 
We  beseech   thee,   almighty  God,   look  upon  the  hearty 
desire[s]  of  thy  humble  servants  :  and  stretch  forth  the  right 
hand  of  thy  majesty,  to  be  our  defence  against  all  our  enemies : 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

The  Epistle. 
Ephe,  V.   Be  you  *  the  followers  of  God 

[i.e.  Ephes.  v.  verse  i  to  verse  15.] 

Christ  shall  give  thee  light 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  xi.   Jesus  was  casting  out  a  devil 

I  i.e.  Luke  xi.  verse  14  to  verse  26.] 

hear  the  word  of  God  and  keep  it. 


^  TJie  fourth  Sunday. 

Deus  nosier  \refugium\.     Psalm  xlvi. 

God  is  our  hope  and  strength  :  a  very  present  help  in  trouble. 

Therefore  will  not  we  fear,  though  the  earth  be  moved  :  and  though  the 
liills  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  sea. 

Though  the  waters  thereof  rage  and  swell  :  and  though  the  mountains 
shake  at  the  tempest  of  the  same. 

The  rivers  of  the  flood  thereof  shall  make  glad  the  city  of  God  :  the 
holy  place  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  most  Highest. 

God  is  in  the  midst  of  her,  therefore  shall  she  not  be  removed  :  God 
shall  help  her,  and  that  right  early. 

The  heathen  make  much  ado,  and  the  kingdoms  are  moved  :  but  God 
hath  shewed  his  voice,  and  the  earth  shall  melt  away. 

The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us  :  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  refuge. 

O  come  hither,  and  behold  the  works  of  the  Lord  :  what  destrvfction  he 
liath  brought  upon  the  earth. 

He  maketh  wars  to  cease  in  all  the  world  :  he  breaketh  the  bow,  and 
knappeth  the  spear  in  sunder,  and  bumeth  the  chariots  in  the  fire. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Third  Sunday  in  Lent. 

The  Collect. 

We  beseech  thee,  Almighty,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle. 
Ephes.  V.  ver.  I. 
Be  ye  therefore  followers  of  God, 
to  Christ  shall  give  thee  light. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xi.  ver.  14. 
Jesus  was  casting  out  a  devil .     . 
to  word  of  God  and  keep  it. 


In  ed.  1552,  and  some  others,  "  Be  ye." 
K 


130  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

[The  Fourth  Sunday  in  Lent  continued.'] 

Be  still  then,  and  know  that  I  am  God  :  I  will  be  exalted  among  the 
heathen,  and  I  will  be  exalted  in  the  earth. 

The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us  :  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  defence. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  almighty  God,  that  we,  which 
for  our  evil  deeds  are  worthily '  punished :   by  the  comtort 
of  thy  grace  may  mercifully  be  relieved,  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

The  Epistle. 
Gala.  iv.   Tell  me,  (ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the  law)    .     . 

[i.e.  Gal.  iv.  verse  21  to  the  end.] 

but  of  the  free  woman. 

77ie  Gospel. 
John  vi.   Jesus  departed  over  the  sea  of  Galilee      .... 

[i.e.  John  vi.  verse  1  to  verse  15.] 

that  should  come  into  the  world. 


^  The  fifth  Sunday. 

Deus,  in  nomine  \tu6\.     Psalm  liv. 

Save  me,  (O  God,)  for  thy  Name's  sake  :  and  avenge  me  in  thy 
strength. 

Hear  my  prayer,  (O  God)  :  and  hearken  unto  the  words  of  my  mouth. 

For  strangers  are  risen  up  against  me  :  and  tyrants,  (which  have  not  God 
before  their  eyes,)  seek  after  my  soul. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
%  The  fourth  Sunday  [in  Lent]. 

The  Collect. 
Grant  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Th£  Epistle.     TJie  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

IT  The  fifth  Sunday  [in  Lent\ 

The  Collect. 

We  beseech  thee,  almighty,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.I 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


In  ed.  1662,  "  that  we  who  for  our  evil  deeds  do  worthily  deserve  to  be." 


At  the  Communion. 


131 


Behold,  God  is  my  helper  :  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  uphold  my  soul. 

He  shall  reward  evil  unto  mine  enemies  :  destroy  thou  them  in  thy  truth. 

An  offering  of  a  free  heart  will  I  give  thee,  and  praise  thy  Name, 
(O  Lord)  :  because  it  is  so  comfortable. 

For  he  hath  delivered  me  out  of  all  my  trouble  :  and  mine  eye  hath  seen 
his  desire  upon  mine  enemies. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Colled. 

We  beseech  thee,  almighty  God,  mercifully  to  look  upon 
thy  people  :  that  by  thy  great  goodness,  they  may  be  governed 
and  preserved  evermore,  both  in  body  and  soul :  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

The  Epistle. 
Hebrues  ix.  ^   Christ  being  an  high-priest 


[i.e.  Heb.  ix.  verse  11  to  verse  16.] 

promise  of  eternal  inheritance. 

The  Gospel. 
John  viii.  '^  Which  of  you  can  rebuke  me  of  sin 

[i.e.  John  viii.  verse  46  to  the  end.] 


and  went  out  of  the  temple. 


Charles  IL  1662. 

The  Fourth  Sunday  in  Lent. 

The  Collect. 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

through  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

Gal.  iv.  ver.  21. 

Tell  me,  ye  that  desire    .     .     . 
to  the  bondwoman,  but  of  the  free. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  vi.  ver.  I. 
Jesus  went  over  the  sea    .     .     . 
to  come  into  the  world. 


The  Fifth  Sunday  in  Lent. 

The  Collect. 

We  beseech  thee,  Almighty,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 

Heb.  ix.  ver.  11. 

Christ    being   come    an  High 

Priest 

to  promise  of  eternal  inheritance. 

The  Gospel. 

S.  John  viii.  ver.  46. 

Jesus   said,   which  of  you   con- 

vinceth  me  of  sin 

to  went  out  of  the  temple. 


•>  In  one  ed.,  1549,  tnisp,  Heb.  xi. 


In  one  ed.,  1549,  ntisp.  John  i.\. 


132  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

^  The  Sunday  next  before  Easter. 

Exaudi  deus  \deprecationem\.     Psalm  IxL 
Hear  my  crying,  O  God  :  give  ear  unto  my  prayer. 
From  the  ends  of  the  earth  will  I  call  unto  thee  :  when  my  heart  is  in 
heaviness. 

0  set  me  up  upon  the  rock  that  is  higher  than  I  :  for  thou  hast  been  my 
hope,  and  a  strong  tower  for  me  against  the  enemy. 

1  will  dwell  in  thy  tabernacle  for  ever  :  and  my  trust  shall  be  under  the 
covering  of  thy  wings. 

For  thou,  O  Lord,  hast  heard  my  desires  :  and  hast  given  an  heritage 
unto  those  that  fear  thy  name. 

Thou  shalt  grant  the  king  a  long  life  :  that  his  years  may  endure 
throughout  all  generations. 

He  shall  dwell  before  God  for  ever  :  O  prepare  thy  loving  mercy  and 
faithfulness,  that  they  may  preserve  him. 

So  will  I  alway  sing  praise  unto  thy  name  :  that  I  may  daily  perform 
my  vows. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  which  of  thy  tender  love 
toward  ^  man,  has  sent  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  to  take  upon 
him  our  flesh,  and  to  suffer  death  upon  the  cross,  that  all 
mankind  should  follow  the  example  of  his  great  humility: 
mercifully  grant,  that  we^  both  follow  the  example  of  his 
patience,  and  be  ^  made  partakers  of  his  resurrection  :  through 
the  same  Jesu[s]  Christ  our  Lord  s. 

The  Epistle. 
Philip,  ii.  ^  Let  the  same  mind  be  in  you 

[i.e.  Phil.  ii.  verse  s  to  verse  ii.] 

unto  the  praise  of  God  the  Father. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
H  The  Sunday  next  before  Easter. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 

&C. 

[Same  as  iS49-] 

T/ie  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  "1549.  J 

IT  Monday  before  Easter. 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


II  Tuesday  before  Easter. 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


<•  In  eds.  1552,  and  in  one  ed.,  1559,  and  s  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "Amen. 

1637,  "towards."  '"  In  one  ed.,   1552,  misp.  Col.  iiL  (see 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  may  both  follow."  the  Epistle  for  fifth   Sunday  after  Epi- 

'  In  ed.  i66a,  "and  also  be."  phany,  p.  xao). 


At  the  Communion. 


133 


The  Gospel. 
Math.  xxvi.  and  xxvii.  And  it  came  to  pass  when 

[i.e.  Matt.  xxvi.  verse  i  to  chap,  xxvii.  verse  57.] 

and  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children. 

^  Monday  before  Easter. 

The  Epistle. 
Esai.  Ixiii.i  What  is  he  this  that  cometh  .     .     . 

[i.e.  Esai.  Ixiii.  verse  i  to  the  end.] 

they  have  not  called  upon  thy  name. 
The  Gospel. 
Mar.  xiv.''  After  two  days  was  Easter  .... 

[i.e.  Mark  xiv.  verse  i  to  the  end.] 

and  he  began  to  weep. 


\  Tuesday  before  Easter. 
The  Epistle. 
Esai.  1.  The  Lord  God  hath  opened  mine  ear 

[i.e.  Esai.  1.  verse  5  to  the  end.] 

that  ye  shall  sleep  in  sorrow. 

The  Gospel. 
Mar.  XV. ^  And  anon  in  the  dawninsf    .     .     . 

[i.e.  Mark  xv.  verse  i  to  the  end.] 

and  Mary  Joses  beheld  where  he  was  laid. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
The  Sunday  next  before  Easter. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who   of  thy  tender    love    towards 
mankind,    hast  sent  thy   Son,   our 
Saviour,  &c. 

[Same  as  iS49-] 

The  Epistle. 
Phil.  ii.  ver.  5. 
Let  this  mind  be  in  you    .     .     . 
to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xxvii.  ver.  i. 
When  the  morning  was  come     . 
to  truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God. 


Monday  before  Easter. 
For  the  Epistle. 
Isa.  liii.  ver.  i. 
Who  is  this  that  cometh   .     .     . 
to  called  by  thy  name. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Mark  xiv.  ver.  i. 
After  two  days  was  the  feast    . 
to  he  wept. 

Tuesday  before  Easter. 
For  the  Epistle. 
Isa.  1.  ver.  5. 
The  Lord  God  hath  opened  .     . 
to  lie  down  in  sorrow. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Mark  xv.  ver.  l. 
And  straightway  in  the  morning, 
to  this  man  was  the  Son  of  God. 


'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp.  Esai.  xliii 
*  In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp.  Mar.  xiii. 


'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  ntisp.  Mat.  xxvii. ; 
in  another,  and  in  two  eds.,  1552,  Math.  xv. 


134  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

^  Wednesday  before  Easter. 
IT  \_At  the  Communion.^ 
The  Epistle. 
Hebr.  ix.  Whereas  is  a  testament 

li.e.  Hebr.  ix.  verse  i6  to  the  end.) 

without  sin  unto  salvation. 

The  Gospel. 

Luc.  xxii.  The  feast  of  sweet  bread 

[i.e.  Luke  xxii.  verse  i  to  the  end.] 

have  heard  of  his  own  mouth. 

IT  At  Evensong. 
The  first  lesson,  Lamenta.  i.  unto  the  end. 


\  Thursday  ™  before  Easter. 

IT  At  Matins. 
The  first  lesson,  Lamenta.  ii.  unto  the  end. 

The  Epistle. 
I  Cor.  xi.  This  I  warn  you  of 

[i.e.  I  Cor.  xi.  rerse  17  to  the  end.] 

set  in  order  when  I  come. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

%  Wednesday  before  Easter. 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

IF  Thursday  before  Easter. 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

IT  On  Good  Friday. 
The  Collects. 
Almighty  God,  we  beseech,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

Almighty  and  everlastmg  God, 
&c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Merciful  God,  who  hast,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1532] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


»•  In  one  ed.,  1559,  next  before. 


At  the  Communion". 


135 


The  Gospel. 

Luc.  xxiii.'i  The  whole  multitude  of  them  arose     .     .     .     . 

[i.e.  Luke  .\xiii.  ver.  i.  to  the  end.] 

according  to  the  commandment. 

At  Evensong. 
The  first  lesson,  Lamenta.  iii.  unto  the  end. 

On  Good  Friday. 

At  Matins. 

The  first  lesson,  Gen.  x.xii.  nnto  the  end. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  we  beseech  thee  graciously  to  behold  this 
thy  family  :  for  the  °  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  con- 
tented to  be  betrayed,  and  given  up  into  the  hands  of  wicked 
men,  and  to  suffer  death  upon  the  cross  :  who  liveth  and 
reignethP,  &:c. 

At  the  Communion. 
Deus,  deus  \jneus\     Psahii  xxii. 
My  God,  my  God,   (look  upon  me  ;)  wliy  hast  thou  forsal;en  me  :  and 
art  so  far  from  my  heahh,  and  from  the  words  of  my  complaint  ? 

O  my  God,  I  cry  in  the  day-lime,  but  thou  hcarest  not  :  and  in  the 
ni^ht-season  also  I  take  no  rest. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Wednesday  before  Easter. 

The  Epistle. 

Hebr.  ix.  ver.  16. 

Where  a  testament  is  .     .     . 

to  without  sin  unto  salvation. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xxii.  ver.  i. 
Now  the  feast  of  unleavened  . 
to  have  heard  of  his  own  mouth. 

Thursday  before  Easter. 

The  Epistle. 

I  Cor.  xi.  ver.  17. 

In  this  that  I  declare  unto  you 

to  set  in  order  when  I  come. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xxiii.  ver.  i. 
The  whole  multitude  of  them 
to  beholding  these  things. 


Good  Friday. 
The  Collects. 
Almighty  God,  we  beseech,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

who  now  liveth  and  reigneth  witli 

thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  ever  one 

God,  world  without  end.     Amen. 

Almighty  and  everlasting,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
through  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ.     Amen. 

O  MERCIFUL  God,  who  ha.st,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee 
and  the  Holy  Spirit,  one  God,  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
Hcb.  x.  ver.  i. 
The  law  having  a  shadow  of  . 
to  the  day  approaching. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  John  xix.  ver.  i. 
Pilate  therefore  took  Jesus  .     . 
to  him  whom  they  pierced. 


"  In  two  eds.,  1549,  and  in  one  ed.,  1559,  inisp.  Luc.  xxii.      <>  In  ed.  1662,  "for  wliich.' 
1'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  in  one  ed.,  1559,  "with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever.' 


136  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

[Good  Friday  continued^ 

And  thou  continuest  holy  :  O  thou  worship  of  Israel. 

Our  fathers  hoped  in  thee  :  they  trusted  in  thee,  and  thou  didst  deliver 
them. 

They  called  upon  thee,  and  were  helped  :  they  put  their  trust  in  thee, 
and  were  not  confounded. 

But  as  for  me,  I  am  a  worm,  and  no  man  :  a  very  scorn  of  men,  and  the 
out-cast  of  the  people. 

All  they  that  see  me  laugh  me  to  scorn  :  they  shoot  out  their  lips,  and 
shake  the  head,  saying, 

He  trusted  in  God,  that  he  would  deliver  him  :  let  him  deliver  him,  if 
he  will  have  him. 

But  thou  art  he  that  took  me  out  of  my  mother's  womb  :  thou  wast  my 
hope,  when  I  hanged  yet  upon  my  mother's  breasts. 

I  have  been  left  unto  thee  ever  since  I  was  bom  :  thou  art  my  God  even 
from  my  mother's  womb. 

0  go  not  from  me,  for  trouble  is  here  at  hand  :  and  there  is  none  to 
help  me. 

Many  Oxen  are  come  about  me  :  fat  Bulls  of  Basan  close  me  in  on 
every  side. 

They  gape  upon  me  with  their  mouths  :  as  it  Avere  a  ramping  and 
roaring  Lion. 

1  am  poured  out  like  water,  and  all  my  bones  are  out  of  joint  :  my  heart 
also  in  the  midst  of  my  body  is  even  like  melting  wax. 

My  strength  is  dried  up  like  a  potsherd,  and  my  tongue  cleaveth  to  my 
gums  :  and  thou  shalt  bring  me  into  the  dust  of  death. 

For  many  dogs  are  come  about  me  :  and  the  council  of  the  wicked  lay 
siege  against  me. 

They  pierced  my  hands  and  my  feet ;  I  may  tell  all  my  bones  :  they 
stand  staring  and  looking  upon  me. 

They  part  my  garaients  among  them  :  and  cast  lots  upon  my  vesture. 

But  be  not  tliou  far  from  me,  O  Lord  :  thou  art  my  succour,  haste  thee 
to  help  me. 

Deliver  my  soul  from  the  sword  :  my  darling  from  the  power  of  the  dog. 

Save  me  from  the  Lion's  mouth  :  thou  hast  heard  me  also  from  among 
the  horns  of  Unicorns. 

I  will  declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren  :  in  the  midst  of  the  congrega- 
tion will  I  praise  thee. 

O  praise  the  Lord,  ye  that  fear  him  :  magnify  him,  all  ye  of  the  seed  of 
Jacob,  and  fear  him,  all  ye  seed  of  Israel ; 

For  he  hath  not  despised,  nor  abhorred,  the  low  estate  of  the  poor  :  he 
hath  not  hid  his  face  from  him,  but  when  he  called  unto  him  he  heard  him. 

My  praise  is  of  thee  in  the  great  congregation  :  my  vows  will  I  perform 
in  the  sight  of  them  that  fear  him. 

The  poor  shall  eat,  and  be  satisfied  :  they  that  seek  after  the  Lord  shall 
praise  him  ;  your  heart  shall  live  for  ever. 

All  the  ends  of  the  world  shall  remember  themselves,  .and  be  turned 
unto  the  Lord  :  and  all  the  kindreds  of  the  nations  shall  worship  before 
him. 

For  the  kingdom  is  the  Lord's  :  and  he  is  the  govemour  among  the 
people. 

All  such  as  be  fat  upon  earth  :  have  eaten,  and  worshipped. 

All  they  that  go  do^vn  into  the  dust  shall  kneel  before  him  :  and  no  man 
hath  quickened  his  own  souL 


At  the  Communion.  137 

[Good  Friday  coniifiued.] 

My  seed  shall  serve  him  :  they  shall  be  counted  unto  the  Lord  for 
a  generation. 

They  shall  come,  and  the  heavens  shall  declare  his  righteousness  :  unto 
a  people  that  be  born,  whom  the  Lord  hath  made. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

If  After  the  two  Collects  at  the  Communion,  shall  be  said  these 
two  Collects  following. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  by  whose  Spirit  the  whole 
body  of  the  Church  is  governed  and  sanctified  :  receive  our 
supplications  and  prayers,  which  we  ofifer  before  thee  for  all 
estates  of  men  in  thy  holy  congregation  1,  that  every  member 
of  the  same,  in  his  vocation  and  ministry,  may  truly  and  godly 
serve  thee  :  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Merciful  God,  who  hast  made  all  men,  and  hatest  nothing 
that  thou  hast  made,  nor  wouldest  the  death  of  a  sinner,  bu'c 
rather  that  he  should  be  converted  and  live  :  Have  mercy 
upon  all  Jews,  Turks,  Infidels,  and  Heretics,  and  take  from 
them  all  ignorance,  hardness  of  heart,  and  contempt  of  thy 
word  :  and  so  fetch  them  home,  blessed  Lord,  to  thy  flock, 
that  they  may  be  saved  among  the  remnant  of  the  true  Israel- 
ites, and  be  made  one  fold  under  one  shepherd,  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  :  who  liveth  and  reigneth,  &c. 

The  Epistle. 
Heb.  X.  The  law  which  hath  but  a  shadow ; 

[i.e.  Heb.  x.  verse  i  unto  verse  26.] 

the  day  draweth  nigh. 

The  Gospel. 
John  xviii.  When  Jesus  had  spoken  these  words    .... 

[i.e.  John  xviii.  verse  i  to  end  of  chap,  xix.] 

for  the  sepulchre  was  nigh  at  hand. 

At  Evensong. 
TT  The  first  lesson,  Esai.  liii.  unto  the  end. 


Second  Edw,  VL  1552. 

\See  previous  page.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[&*  previous  page.] 


James  I.  1604. 

{See  previous  page.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
\_See  previous  page.] 
Charles  IL  1662. 
\See  previous  page.] 

1  In  ed.  1662,  "  holy  Church." 


138  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Easter  Even. 

At  Matins. 

%  The  first  lesson.  Lamenta.  iv.  v.  unto  the  end. 

At  the  Communion. 

Domine  deus  \salutis\  Psal.  Ixxxviii. 

0  Lord  God  of  my  salvation,  I  have  cried  day  and  night  before  thee  : 

0  let  my  prayer  enter  into  thy  presence,  incline  thine  ear  unto  my  calling. 
For  my  soul  is  full  of  trouble  :  and  my  life  draweth  nigh  unto  hell. 

1  am  counted  as  one  of  them  that  go  down  mito  the  pit :  and  I  have  been 
even  as  a  man  that  hath  no  strength. 

Free  among  the  dead,  like  unto  them  that  be  wounded,  and  lie  in  the 
grave  :  which  be  out  of  remembrance,  and  are  cut  away  from  thy  hand. 

Thou  hast  laid  me  in  the  lowest  pit  :  in  a  place  of  daikness,  and  in 
the  deep. 

Thine  indignation  lieth  hard  upon  me  :  and  thou  hast  vexed  me  with  all 
thy  storms. 

Thou  hast  put  away  mine  acquaintance  far  from  me  :  and  made  me  to 
be  abhoned  of  them. 

I  am  so  fast  in  prison  :  that  I  cannot  get  forth. 

My  sight  faileth  for  very  trouble  :  Lord,  I  have  called  daily  upon  thee 

1  have  stretched  out  my  hands  mito  thee. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

%  Easter  Even. 

The  Epistle.     Tlie  Gospel. 

[Same  as  X549-] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  I.  1604. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1553.] 

Easter  Even. 
The  Collect. 
O  MOST  gracious  God,  look  upon 
us  in  mercy,  and  grant  that  as  we 
are  baptized  into  the  death  of  thy 
Son  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  so 
by  our  true  and  hearty  repentance 
all  our  sins  may  be  buried  with 
him,  and  we  not  fear  the  grave  : 
that  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from 
the  dead  by  the  glory  of  thee  O 
Father,  so  we  also  may  walk  in 
newness  of  life,  but  our  sins  never 
be  able  to  rise  in  judgment  against 
us  ;  and  that  for  the  merit  of  Jesus 
Christ  that  died,  was  buried,  and 
rose  again  for  us.     Amen. 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


At  the  Communion. 


139 


Dost  thou  shew  wonders  among  the  dead  :  or  shall  the  dead  rise  up 
again,  and  praise  thee  ? 

Shall  thy  loving-kindness  be  shewed  in  the  grave  :  or  thy  faithfulness 
in  destruction  ? 

Shall  thy  wondrous  works  be  known  in  the  dark  :  and  thy  righteousness 
in  the  land  where  all  things  are  forgotten  ? 

Unto  thee  have  I  cried,  O  Lord  :  and  early  shall  my  prayer  come  be- 
fore thee. 

Lord,  why  abhorrest  thou  my  soul :  and  hidest  thou  thy  face  from  me  ? 

I  am  in  misery,  and  like  unto  him  that  is  at  the  point  to  die  :  (even  from 
my  youth  up)  thy  terrors  have  I  suftered  with  a  troubled  mind. 

Thy  wrathful  displeasure  goeth  over  me  :  and  the  fear  of  thee  hath 
undone  me. 

They  came  roimd  about  me  daily  like  water  :  and  compassed  me  together 
on  every  side. 

My  lovers  and  friends  hast  thou  put  away  from  me  :  and  hid  mine  ac- 
quaintance out  of  my  sight. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Epistle. 
I  Pet.  iii.  It  is  better  (if  the  will  of  God  be  so)      .... 

[i.e.  I  Pet.  iii.  verse  17  to  the  end.] 

and  might,  subdued  unto  him. 


The  Gospel. 
Mat.  xxvii.  When  the  even  was  come  .     . 

[i.e.  Matt,  xxvii.  verse  57  to  the  end.] 

and  sealed  the  stone. 


Charles  IL  1662. 

Easter  Even. 
The  Colled. 
Grant,  O  Lord,  that  as  we  are 
baptized  into  the  death  of  thy  blessed 
Son  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  so 
by  continual  mortifying  our  corrupt 
affections,  we  may  be  buried  with 
him,  and  that  through  the  grave, 
and  gate  of  death  we  may  pass  to 
our  joyful  resurrection,  for  his  merits, 
who  died,  and  was  buried,  and  rose 


again  for  us,  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
I  S.  Pet.  iii.  ver.  17. 
It  is  better,  if  the  will  of  God 

be  so 

to  being  made  subject  unto  him. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth,  xxvii.  ver.  57. 
When  the  even  was  come 
to  setting  a  watch. 


I40 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


%  Easter  day. 

§  67,  In  the  morning^  afore  Matins,  the  people  being  assembled  in  the 
church  :  these  Anthems  shall  be  first  solemnly  sung  [or  saiif]. 

Christ  rising  again  from  the  dead,  now  dieth  not.  Death 
from  henceforth  hath  no  power  upon  him.  For  in  that  he 
died,  he  died  but  once  to  put  away  sin  :  but  in  that  he 
liveth,  he  liveth  unto  God.  And  so  Hkewise,  count  1  your- 
selves dead  unto  sin,  but  Hving  unto  God  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord.     Alleluia,  Alleluia'. 

Christ  is  risen  again,  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  sleep  :  for 
seeing  that  by  man  came  death,  by  man  also  cometh  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead.  For  as  by  Adam  all  men  do  die, 
so  by  Christ  all  men  shall  be  restored  to  life.     Alleluia  ■■. 

The  Priest. 
Shew  forth  to  all  nations  the  glory  of  God. 

The  Answer. 

And  among  all  people  his  wonderful  works. 

Ld  us  pray. 
O  God,  who  for  our  redemption  didst  give  thine  only 
begotten  Son  to  the  death  of  the  cross  :  and  by  his  glorious 
resurrection  hast  delivered  us  from  the  power  of  our  enemy . 
Grant  us  so  to  die  daily  from  sin,  that  we  may  evermore  live 
with  him  in  the  joy  of  his  resurrection  :  through  the  same 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

IT  Easter  day. 
§  67.  At  Morning  prayer,  instead  of 
the  Psalm^  O  come  let   us.    &c. 
TJiese  Anthems  shall  be  sung  or 
said. 

Christ    rising   again  from   the 
dead,  now,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 
Christ  is  risen  again  the  first- 
fruits  of  them,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549,  as  far  as] 
shall  be  restored  to  life. 


p  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "before." 

1  In  one  ed.,  1553,  and  one  ed.,  1559, 
"account." 

'  In  all  eds.j  1552,  and  afterwards,  the 
words  "Alleluia,  Alleluia,"  at  end  of  first 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
[Same  as  1352.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552- 1 


anthem,  and  the  word  "Alleluia,"  at  end 
of  second  anthem,  are  omitted  ;  and  in 
one  ed.,  1559,  ''^  word  "Amen"  is  added 
at  end  of  the  first  anthem. 


At  the  Communion. 


141 


IT  Proper  Psalms  and  Lessons. 

At  Matins. 

Psalms  ii.  Ivii.  cxi. 

The  first  lesson,  Exo.  xii.  unto  the  end. 

The  second  lesson,  Roma.  vi.  unto  the  end. 

At  the  first  Communion, 

Conserva  me  \domine\.     Psalm  xvi. 
Preserve  me,  O  God  :  for  in  thee  have  I  put  my  trust. 

0  my  soul,  thou  hast  said  unto  the  Lord  :  thou  art  my  God,  my  goods 
are  nothing  unto  thee. 

All  my  delight  is  upon  the  Saints,  that  are  in  the  earth  :  and  upon  such 
as  excel  in  virtue. 

But  they  that  run  after  another  god  :  shall  have  great  trouble. 

Their  drink-offerings  of  blood  will  not  I  offer  :  neither  make  mention 
of  their  names  with  my  lips. 

The  Lord  himself  is  the  portion  of  mine  inheritance,  and  of  my  Cup  : 
thou  shalt  maintain  my  lot. 

The  lot  is  fallen  unto  me  in  a  fair  ground  :  yea,  I  have  a  goodly  heritage. 

1  will  thank  the  Lord  for  giving  me  warning  :  my  reins  also  chasten  me 
in  the  night-season. 

I  have  set  God  always  before  me  :  for  he  is  on  my  right  hand,  therefore 
I  shall  not  fall. 

Wherefore  my  heart  was  glad,  and  my  glory  rejoiced  :  my  flesh  also 
shall  rest  in  hope. 

For  why  ?  thou  shalt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell  :  neither  shalt  thou  suffer 
thy  holy  one  to  see  corruption. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
Easter-day. 
§  67.  At  Morning  Prayer,   instead 
of  the  Psahn,  O  come,  let  us,  &c. 
these  Anthems   shall  be  sung  or 
said, 

Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificed 
for  us  :  therefore  let  us  keep  the 
feast. 

Not  with  the  old  leaven  nor  with 
the  leaven  of  malice  and  wicked- 
ness :  but  with  the  unleavened  bread 
of  sincerity  and  truth,     i  Cor.  v.  7. 

Christ  being  raised  from  the 
dead  dieth  no  more  :  death  hath  no 
more  dominion  over  him. 

For  in  that  he  died,  he  died  unto 
sin  once  :  but  in  that  he  liveth,  he 
liveth  unto  God. 


Likewise  reckon  ye  also  your 
selves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin  : 
but  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.   Rom.  vi.  9. 

Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead  : 
and  become  the  first-fruits  of  them 
that  slept. 

For  since  by  man  came  death  : 
by  man  came  also  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead. 

For  as  in  Adam  all  die  :  even  so 
in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive. 
I  Cor.  XV.  20. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Answer. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without 
end.     Amen. 


142  First  Prayer-book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

[Eastek  Day  coHtinued.\ 

Thou  shalt  shew  me  the  path  of  life  ;  in  thy  presence  is  the  fuhiess  of 
joy  :  and  at  thy  right  hand  there  is  pleasure  for  evermore. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  begiiming,  &c. 

The  Collxt. 

Almighty  God,  which  through  thy  only  begotten  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  hast  overcome  death,  and  opened  unto  us  the  gate  of 
everlasting  life :  we  humbly  beseech  thee,  that  as  by  thy 
special  grace,  preventing  us,  thou  dost  put  in  our  minds  good 
desires ;  so  by  thy  continual  help,  we  may  bring  the  same  to 
good  effect,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord:  who  liveth  and 
reigneth,  &c.     [Amen.] 

TJu  Eputlc. 
Coloss.  iii.  If  ye  be  risen  again  with  Christ        

[Le.  CoL  iii.  verse  i  to  verse  8.] 

when  ye  lived  in  them. 

The  Gospel. 
John  XX.  The  first  day  of  the  Sabbaths     ....;.. 

[Le.  John  xx.  verse  i  to  verse  xi.] 

their  own  home. 

Ai  the  [second]  Communion. 
Domine  quid  \multiplicati\  ?     Psalm  iiL 

Lord,  how  are  they  increased  that  trouble  me  :  many  are  they  that 
rise  against  me. 

Many  one  there  be  that  say  of  my  soul  :  there  is  no  help  for  him  in 
his  God. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Then  tlu  Collect. 
[The  Versicles  and  Prayer  being  omitted 
in  this  and  in  subsequent  editions.] 

Almighty  God,  which  through 
thy  only,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  iss^-l 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


At  the  Communion. 


[Easter  Day  continued.'\ 

But  thou,  O  Lord,  art  my  defender  :  thou  art  my  worship,  and  the 
lifter  up  of  my  head. 

I  did  call  upon  the  Lord  with  my  voice  :  and  he  heard  me  out  of  his 
holy  hill. 

I  laid  me  down  and  slept,  and  rose  up  again  :  for  the  lord  sustained  me. 

I  will  not  be  afraid  for  ten  thousands  of  the  people  :  that  have  set 
themselves  against  me  round  about. 

Up,  Lord,  and  help  me,  O  my  God  :  for  thou  smitest  all  mine  enemies 
upon  the  cheek-bone  ;  thou  hast  broken  the  teeth  of  the  ungodly. 

Salvation  belongeth  unto  the  Lord  :  and  thy  blessing  is  upon  the  people. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

7^1?  Collect. 
Almighty  Father,  which  hast  given  thy  only  Son  to  die  for 
our  sins,  and  to  rise  again  for  our  justification :  Grant  us  so  to 
put  away  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness,  that  we  may 
alway  serve  thee  in  pureness  of  living  and  truth,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord. 

The  Epistle. 
I  Cor.  V.  Know  ye  not  that  a  Httle  leaven 


[i.e.  I  Cor.  v.  verse  6  to  verse  9.] 

of  pureness  and  truth. 

The  Gospel. 
Mar.  xvi.  When  the  Sabbath  was  past      .     . 

[i.e.  Mark  xvi.  to  verse  6.] 

for  they  were  afraid. 

At  Evensong. 

IT  Proper  Psalms  and  Lessons. 

Psalms  cxiii.  cxiv.  cxviii. 

The  second  lesson.  Act  ii.  unto  the  end. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  who  through,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  ever  one  God, 
world  without  end.     Amen. 

§  68.   This  Collect  se7-ves  for  Monday 
and  Tuesday  in  Easter-weck. 


The  Epistle. 
Col.  iii.  ver.  i. 

If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ 
to  lived  in  them. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  XX.  ver.  I. 

The  first  day  of  the  week  . 
to  again  unto  their  own  home. 


144 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^  Monday  in  Easter  Week. 

At  Matins. 

The  second  lesson,  Mat.  xxviii.  *  unto  tJu  end. 

At  the  Communion. 
Nonne  deo  \subjectd\  ?    Psalm  IxiL ' 

My  soul  truly  waiteth  still  upon  God  :  for  of  him  cometh  my  salvation. 

He  verily  is  my  strength  and  my  salvation  :  he  is  my  defence,  so  that 
I  shall  not  greatly  fall. 

How  long  will  ye  imagine  mischief  against  every  man  :  ye  shall  be  slain 
all  the  sort  of  you  ;  yea,  as  a  tottering  wall  shall  ye  be,  and  like  a  broken 
hedge. 

Their  device  is  only  how  to  put  him  out  whom  God  will  exalt  :  their 
delight  is  in  lies ;  they  give  good  words  with  their  mouth,  but  curse  vrith 
their  heart 

Nevertheless,  my  soul,  wait  thou  still  upon  God  :  for  my  hope  is  in 
him. 

He  truly  is  my  strength  and  my  salvation  :  he  is  my  defence,  so  that 
I  shall  not  fall. 

In  God  is  my  health,  and  my  glory  :  the  rock  of  my  might,  and  in  God 
is  my  trust. 

O  put  your  trust  in  him  alway,  ye  people  :  pour  out  your  hearts  before 
him,  for  God  is  our  hope. 

As  for  the  children  of  men,  they  are  but  vain  :  the  children  of  men 
are  dece'/tful  upon  the  weights,  they  are  altogether  lighter  than  vanity 
itself. 

O  trust  not  in  wrong  and  robbery,  give  not  yourselves  unto  vanity  :  if 
riches  increase,  set  not  your  heart  upon  them. 

God  spake  once,  and  twice  I  have  also  heard  the  same  :  that  power 
belongeth  unto  God ; 

And  that  thou,  Lord,  art  merciful  :  for  thou  rewardest  every  man 
according  to  his  work. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  5:c. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
T  Monday  in  Easter  Week. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  which  through 
thy  only  b^otten  Son,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1532.] 


*  In  one  ed.,  1549,  tnUp.  Mat.  xviiL 


'  In  two  eds.,  1549,  tidsp.  Ps.  Ixviii. 


At  the  Communion. 


145 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  which  through  thy  only  begotten  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  hasf^  overcome  death,  and  opened  unto  us  the  gate 
of  everlasting  life :  we  humbly  beseech  thee,  that  as  by  thy 
[ejspecial  grace,  preventing  us,  thou  dost  put  in''  our  minds 
good  desire[s] ;  so  by  thy  continual  help,  we  may  bring  the 
same  to  good  effect,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord:  who 
liveth  and  reigneth,  [&c.] 

The  Epistle. 

Acts  X.  Peter  opened  his  mouth  and  said 

[i.e.  Acts  X.  verse  34  to  verse  44.] 

shall  receive  remission  of  sins. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  xxiv.  Behold  two  of  the  disciples  went 

[i.e.  Luke  xxiv.  verse  13  to  verse  36.] 

knew  him  in  breaking  of  [the]  bread. 


At  Evensong. 
TI"  The  second  lesson,  Acts  iii.  unto  the  end. 

^  Tuesday  in  Easter  Week. 

At  Matins. 
The  second  lesson,  Luke  xxiv.  unto  "And  behold  two  [of  them]." 

At  the  Communion. 
Laudate  pueri.     Psalm  cxiii. 

Praise  the  Lord,  (ye  servants)  :  O  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord  :  from  this  time  forth  for  evermore. 

The  Lord's  name  is  praised  :  from  the  rising  up  of  the  sun  unto  the  going 
down  of  the  same. 

The  Lord  is  high  above  all  heathen  :  and  his  glory  above  the  heavens. 

Who  is  like  unto  the  Lord  our  God,  that  hath  his  dwelling  so  high  : 
and  yet  humbleth  himsejf  to  behold  the  things  that  are  in  heaven  and  earth? 

He  taketh  up  the  simple  out  of  the  dust  :  and  lifteth  the  poor  out  of  the 
mire ; 

That  he  may  set  him  with  the  princes  :  even  with  the  princes  of  his 
people. 


Charles   II.   1662. 

Monday  in  Easter  Week. 
[Collect  not  printed  again.    See  \  1 
For  the  Epistle. 
Acts  X.  ver.  34. 
Peter  opened  his  mouth  . 
to  receive  remission  of  sins. 


The  Gospel. 

S.  Luke  xxiv.  ver.  13. 

Behold,   two    of  his    disciples 
went  that  same  day  to  a  village  . 
to  in  breaking  of  bread. 


'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  and  in  two  eds.,  1559,  "hath  overcome." 
»  In  ed.  1662,  "put  into." 


146 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[Tuesday  in  Easter  Week  continued.'] 
He  maketh  the  barren  woman  to  keep  house  :  and  to  be  a  joyful  mother 
of  children. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &a 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  Father,  which  hast  given  thy  y  only  Son  to  die  for 
our  sins,  and  to  rise  again  for  our  justification  :  Grant  us  so  to 
put  away  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness,  that  we  may 
alway  serve  thee  in  pureuess  of  living  and  truth,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  J^ord  ==. 

7^e  Epistle. 
Acts  xiii.  Ye  men  and  brethren 

[Le.  Acts  xiiL  verse  26  to  verse  42.] 

declare  it  [un]to  you. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  xxiv.*  Jesus  stood  in  the  midst  of    .     .     .     .   • .    .     . 

[Le.  Luke  xxiv.  verse  36  to  verse  49.] 

ye  are  witnesses  of  these  things. 

At  Evensong. 
The  second  lesson,  i  Cor.  xv.  unto  the  end, 

^  TJie  first  Sunday  after  Easter. 
Beatus  vir.     Psalm ''  cxii. 

Blessed  is  the  man  that  feareth  the  lord  :  he  hath  great  delight  in  his 
commandments.  ■ 

His  seed  shall  be  mighty  upon  earth  :  the  generation  of  the  faithful  shall 
be  blessed. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

IT  Tuesday  in  Easter  Week, 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  Father,  which  hast 

given  thy  only  Son,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

IT  The  first  Sunday  after  Easter. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  &c. 

As  at  the  Communion  on  Easter  day. 

The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


J  In  eds.  1604  and  1637,  "thine  only." 
•  In  Scotched.,  1637,  "Amen." 


■  In  one  ed.,  1559,  mmj/.  Luk.  xxiiL 
^  In  one  ed.,  1549,  mUp.  Ps.  cxxii. 


At  the  Communion. 


147 


Riches  and  plenteousness  shall  be  in  his  house  :  And  his  righteousness 
endureth  for  ever. 

Unto  the  Godly  there  ariseth  up  light  in  the  darkness  :  he  is  merciful, 
loving,  and  righteous. 

A  good  man  is  merciful,  and  lendeth  :  and  will  guide  his  words  with 
discretion. 

For  he  shall  never  be  moved  :  and  the  righteous  shall  be  had  in  ever- 
lasting remembrance. 

He  will  not  be  afraid  for  any  evil  tidings  :  For  his  heart  standetli 
fast,  and  believeth  in  the  Lord. 

His  heart  is  stablished,  and  will  not  shrink  :  until  he  see  his  desire  upon 
his  enemies. 

He  hath  sparsed  abroad,  and  given  to  the  poor  :  and  his  righteousness 
remaineth  for  ever  ;  his  horn  shall  be  exalted  with  honour. 

The  ungodly  shall  see  it,  and  it  shall  grieve  him  :  he  shall  gnash  with 
his  teeth,  and  consume  away  ;  the  desire  of  the  ungodly  shall  perish. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  Father,  &c.     As  at  the  second  'Communion  on 
Easter  day ". 

The  Epistle. 
I  John  V.  All  that  is  born  of  God 

[i.e.  I  John  v.  verse  4  to  verse  13.] 

that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  life. 

The  Gospel. 

John  XX,  The  same  day  at  night 

[i.e.  John  xx.  verse  19  to  verse  24.] 

ye  retain,  they  are  retained. 


Charles  II.   1662, 

Tuesday  in  Easter  Week, 

[Collect  not  printed  again.    See  \  68.] 

For  the  Epistle. 
Acts  xiii.  ver.  26. 

Men  and  brethren 

to  declare  it  unto  you. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xxiv.  ver.  36. 
Jesus  himself  stood  in  the  midst . 
to  witnesses  of  these  things. 

The  First  Sunday  after  Easter. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty    Father,    who    hast 
given  thine  only  Son  to  die  for  our 


sins,  and  to  rise  again  for  our  justi- 
fication ;  Grant  us  so  to  put  away 
the  leaven  of  malice  and  wicked- 
ness, that  we  may  alway  serve  thee 
in  pureness  of  living  and  truth, 
througli  the  merits  of  the  same  thy 
Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
I  S.  John  V.  ver.  4. 
Whatsoever  is  born  of  God ,    . 
to  hath  not  life. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  XX.  ver.  19, 
The  same  day  at  evening  .     .     . 
to  they  are  retained. 


In  ed.  157S,  "As  upon  Easter  Day,' 


148 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^  The  second  Sunday  after  Easter  \ 
Deus  in  adjutorium.     Psalm  Ixx. 

Haste  thee,  O  God,  to  deliver  me  :  Make  haste  to  help  me,  O  Lord. 

Let  them  be  ashamed  and  confounded  that  seek  after  my  soul :  let  them 
be  turned  backward  and  put  to  confusion  that  wish  me  evil. 

Let  them  (for  their  reward)  be  soon  brought  to  shame  :  that  cry  over  me, 
there,  there. 

But  let  all  those  that  seek  thee  be  joyful  and  glad  in  thee  :  and  let  all 
such  as  deliglit  in  thy  salvation  say  alway,  the  Lord  be  praised. 

As  for  me,  I  am  poor  and  in  misery  :  Haste  thee  unto  me,  (O  God). 

Thou  art  my  help,  and  my  redeemer  :  O  Lord,  make  no  long  tarrying. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  which  hast  given  thy«  holy  Son  to  be  unto 
us,  both  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  also  an  example^  of  Godly 
life  :  Give  us  the  *  grace  that  we  may  always  most  thankfully 
receive  that  his  inestimable  benefit,  and  also  daily  endeavour 
ourselves  to  follow  the  blessed  steps  of  his  most  holy  life\ 

The  Epistle. 
1  Peter  ii.  This  is  thankworthy 

[i.e.  I  Pet.  ii.  verse  19  to  the  end.] 

and  Bishop  of  your  souls. 

The  Gospel. 

John  X.  Christ  said  to  his  disciples ',  I  am  the  good  shepherd 

[i.e.  John  x.  verse  11  to  verse  17.] 


one  fold,  and  one  shepherd. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
%  The  second  Sunday  [after  Easter]. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  hast,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

IT  The  third  Sunday. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.]       


*  In  some  editions,  1559,  and  in  ed.  1596, 
the  words,  "after  Easter,"  are  added  to 
the  Second  Sunday,  the  Third  Sunday,  &c. 

•  In  ed.  1596  and  1604,  "thine  only." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1559,  and  in  ed.  1596,  and 
ed.  1662,  "ensample." 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  L   1604. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


K  In  ed.  1662,  "us  grace." 

I"  In  Scotch  ed. ,  1637,  the  words  "through 
the  same  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen" 
are  added. 

'  In  ed.  1604,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 
"  Christ  said,  I  am  the." 


At  the  Communion. 


U9 


^  TJie  third  Sunday  ^. 

Confitebimur.     Psalm  Ixxv. 

Unto  thee,  (O  God,)  do  we  give  thanks  :  yea,  unto  thee  do  we  give 
thanks. 

Thy  name  also  is  so  nigh  :  and  that  do  thy  wondrous  works  declare. 

When  I  receive  the  congregation  :  I  shall  judge  according  unto  right. 

The  earth  is  weak,  and  all  the  inhabiters  thereof  :  I  bear  up  the  pillars 
of  it. 

I  said  unto  the  fools,  deal  not  so  madly  :  and  to  the  ungodly,  set  not  up 
your  horn. 

Set  not  up  your  horn  on  high  :  and  speak  not  with  a  stiff  neck. 

For  promotion  cometh  neither  from  the  East,  nor  from  the  west  :  nor 
yet  from  the  south. 

And  why?  GOD  is  the  judge  :  he  putteth  down  one,  and  setteth  up 
another. 

For  in  the  hand  of  the  lord  there  is  a  cup,  and  the  wine  is  red  :  It  is  full 
mixed,  and  he  poureth  out  of  the  same. 

As  for  the  dregs  thereof  :  all  the  ungodly  of  the  earth  shall  drink  them, 
and  suck  them  out. 

But  I  will  talk  of  the  GOD  of  Jacob  :  and  praise  him  for  ever. 

All  the  horns  of  the  ungodly  also  will  I  break  :  and  the  horns  of  the 
righteous  shall  be  exalted. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  which  shewest''  to  all  men  that  be  in 
error  the  light  of  thy  truth,  to  the  intent  that  they  may  return 
into  the  way  of  righteousness  :  Grant  unto  all  them  that  be ' 
admitted  into  the  fellowship  of  Christ's  religion,  that  they  may 
eschew  those  things  that  be  ^  contrary  to  their  profession,  and 
follow  all  such  things  as  be  ^  agreeable  to  the  same  :  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ™. 


Charles  II.   1662. 
The  Second  Sunday  after  Easter. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  who  hast,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
holy  life,   through  the   same  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 
The  Epistle. 
I  S.  Pet.  ii.  ver.  19. 
This  is  thankworthy     ,     .     .     . 
to  bishop  of  your  souls. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  John  X.  ver.  I  r. 
Jesus  said,  I  am  the  good      .     . 
to  one  fold  and  one  shepherd. 


The  Third  Sunday  after  Easter. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  who  shewest  to 
them  that  be,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 
I  S.  Pet.  ii.  ver.  11. 
Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you, 
to  honour  the  king. 

The  Gospel. 
S.John  xvi.  ver.  16. 
Jesus   said   to   his    disciples,    A 
little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  me, 
to  no  man  taketh  from  you. 


^  In  two  eds.  1559,  "which  sheweth."  '  In  ed.  1662,  "are.' 

"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


150  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549, 

[The  Third  Sunday  after  Easter  continued.] 
The  Epistle. 
I  Peter  ii.  Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you 

[i.e.  I  Pet.  ii.  verse  ii  to  verse  i8.] 

Fear  God,  honour  the  King, 

The  Gospel. 
John  xvi.  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples 

[i.e.  John  xvL  verse  6  to  verse  23.] 

shall  no  man  take  from  you. 

f  Tlie  fourth  Sunday. 

Deus  stetit  in  synagoga.     Psalm  Ixxxiii ". 

God  standeth  in  the  congregation  of  princes  :  he  is  a  judge  among  Gods. 

How  long  will  ye  give  wrong  judgement  :  and  accept  the  persons  of  the 
ungodly  ? 

Defend  the  poor  and  fatherless  :  see  that  such  as  be  in  need  and 
necessity  have  right. 

Deliver  the  out-cast  and  poor  :  Save  them  from  the  hand  of  the  ungodly. 

They  will  not  be  learned  nor  understand,  but  walk  on  still  in  darkness  : 
ell  the  foundations  of  the  earth  be  out  of  course. 

I  have  said,  ye  are  Gods  :  and  ye  are  all  the  children  of  the  most  highest. 

But  ye  shall  die  like  men  :  and  fall  like  one  of  the  princes. 

Arise,  O  God,  and  judge  thou  the  earth  :  For  thou  shalt  take  all  heathen 
to  thine  inheritance. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  which  dost  make  the  minds  of  all  faithful 
men  to  be  of  one  will :  grant  unto  thy  people,  that  they  may 
love  the  thing,  which  thou  commandest,  and  desire  that 
which  thou  dost  promise,  that  among  the  sundry  and  mani- 
fold changes  of  the  world,  our  hearts  may  surely  there  be 
fixed,  where  as  true  joys  are  to  be  found :  through  Christ  our 
Lord  °. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

H  The  fourth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  dost,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


In  two  eds.,  1549,  mis^.  Ps.  Ixxxii.  "  In  Scotdi  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


At  the  Communion. 


i!;i 


The  Epistle. 
James  i.  Every  good  gift 

[i.e.  James  i.  verse  17  to  verse  22. J 

able  to  save  your  souls. 

The  Gospel. 

John  xvi.  Jesus  said  unto  his  disciples     . 

[i.e.  John  xvi.  verse  5  to  verse  13.] 

and  shew  unto  you. 


^  The  fifth  Sunday. 

Qiiatn  dilecta  tabernacula.     Psalm  Ix.xxiv  p. 

O  HOW  amiable  are  thy  dwellings  :  thou  Lord  of  Hosts. 

My  soul  hath  a  desire  and  longing  to  enter  into  the  courts  of  the  Lord  : 
My  heart  and  my  flesh  rejoice  in  the  living  God. 

Yea,  the  Sparrow  hath  found  her  an  house,  and  the  Swallow  a  nest 
where  she  may  lay  her  young  :  Even  thy  altars,  O  Lord  of  Hosts,  my  king, 
and  my  God. 

Blessed  are  they  that  dwell  in  thy  house  :  they  will  be  alway  praising 
thee. 

Blessed  is  the  man  whose  strength  is  in  thee  :  In  whose  heart  are  thy 
ways. 

Which  going  through  the  vale  of  misery  use  it  for  a  well  :  and  the  pools 
are  filled  with  water. 

They  will  go  from  strength  to  strength  :  and  unto  the  God  of  Gods  ap- 
peareth  every  one  of  them  in  Sion. 

0  Lord  God  of  Hosts,  hear  my  prayer  :  Hearken,  O  God  of  Jacob. 
Behold,  O  God  our  defender  :  and  look  upon  the  face  of  thine  anointed. 
For  one  day  in  thy  courts  :  is  better  than  a  thousand. 

1  had  rather  be  a  door-keeper  in  the  house  of  my  God  :  than  to  dwell  in 
the  tents  of  ungodliness. 

For  the  Lord  God  is  a  light  and  defence  :  the  Lord  will  give  grace 
and  worship,  and  no  good  thing  shall  he  withhold  from  them  that  live 
a  godly  life. 

O  Lord  God  of  hosts  :  blessed  is  the  man  that  putteth  his  trust  in  thee. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Charles  IL  1662. 

The  Eourth  Sunday  after  Easter. 

The  Collect. 
O  Almighty  God,  who  alone 
canst  order  the  unruly  wills  and  af- 
fections of  sinful  men ;  Grant  unto 
thy  people,  that,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
through    Jesus    Christ    our    Lord. 
Amen. 


The  Epistle. 
S.  James  i.  ver.  1 7. 

Every  good  gift 

to  able  to  save  your  souls. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  xvi.  ver.  5. 
Jesus  said  unto  his  disciples.  Now 
I  go  my  way  to  him  that  sent  me, 
to  shall  shew  it  imto  you. 


P  In  one  ed.,  1549,  Misp.  Ps.  xxxiv. 


152  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

[The  Fifth  Sunday  after  Easter  coniinued.] 

The  Collect. 

Lord,  from  whom  all  good  things  do  come ;  grant  us  thy 

humble  servants,  that  by  thy  holy  inspiration  we  may  think 

those  things  that  be  good,  and  by  thy  merciful  guiding  may 

perform  the  same  ' ;  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  '^, 

The  Epistle. 
James  i.  See  that  ye  be  doers  of  the  word 

p.e.  James  i.  verse  22  to  the  end.] 

keep  himself  unspotted  of  the  world. 

The  Gospel. 
John  xvi.  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you 

[i.e.  John  xvi  verse  23  to  the  end.] 

overcome  the  world. 

\  The  Ascension  Day. 

%  Proper  Psalms  and  Lessons. 

At  Matins. 

Psalms  viii.  xv.  xxi. 

The  second  lesson,  John  xiv.  unto  the  end, 

IT  At  the  Communion. 
Omncs  gentes  plauditc.     Psalm  xlvii. 
O  CLAP  your  hands  together,  (all  ye  people)  :  O  sing  unto  God  with 
the  voice  of  melody. 

For  the  Lord  is  high,  and  to  be  feared  :  he  is  the  great  king  upon  all 
the  earth. 

He  shall  subdue  the  people  under  us  :  And  the  nations  under  our  feet. 
He  shall  choose  out  an  heritage  for  us  :  even  the  worship  of  Jacob, 
whom  he  loved. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

IT  The  fifth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Lord,  from  whom  all  good  things 
do  come,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

[The']  Ascension  day. 

The  Collect. 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637, 

[Same  as  1552.] 


1  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  the  same,"  omitted.  '  In  one  ed.,  1559,  and  in  Scotch 

ed.,  1637,  "Amen."  ■  In  one  ed.,  1539,  "Ascension  day." 


At  the  Communion. 


153 


God  is  gone  up  with  a  merry  noise  :  And  the  Lord  with  the  sound  of 
the  trump. 

O  sing  praises,  sing  praises  unto  our  God  :  O  sing  praises,  sing  praises 
unto  our  king. 

For  God  is  the  king  of  all  the  earth  :  sing  ye  praises  with  understanding. 

God  reigneth  over  the  heathen  :  God  sitteth  upon  his  holy  seat. 

The  princes  of  the  people  are  joined  to  the  people  of  the  God  of 
Abraham  ;  for  God,  (which  is  very  high  exalted,)  doth  defend  the  earth, 
as  it  were  with  a  shield. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  almighty  God,  that  like  as  we  do 
believe  thy  only  begotten  Son  our  Lord '  to  have  ascended  into 
the  heavens  :  so  we  may  also  in  heart  and  mind  thither  ascend, 
and  with  him  continually  dwell ". 

The  Epistle. 
Acts  i.  In  the  former  treatise 

[i.e.  Acts  i.  verse  i  to  verse  12.] 

ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven. 

The  Gospel. 
Mar.  xvi.'^  Jesus  appeared  unto  the  eleven 

[i.e.  Mark  xvi.  verse  14  to  the  end.] 

the  word  with  miracles  following. 

IT  Proper  Psalms  and  Lessons  at  Evensong, 

Psalms  xxiv.  Ixviii,  cxlviii.  3^ 
The  second  lesson,  Ephe.  iv.  unto  the  end. 


Charles  II.   1662. 
The  Fifth  Sunday  after  Easter, 

The  Collect, 
O  Lord,  from  whom  all  good,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549-] 

The  Epistle, 
S.  James  i.  ver.  22. 
Be  ye  doers  of  the  word     .     .     . 
to  unspotted  from  the  world. 

The  Gospel, 
S.  John  xvi.  ver.  23. 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
to  I  have  overcome  the  world. 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  who  liveth  and 

reigneth,  with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 

one  God,  world  without  end." 


The  Ascension  Day, 

The  Collect. 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
continually  dwell :  who  liveth  and 
reigneth  with  thee,   and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  one  God,  world  without  end. 
Amen. 

For  the  Epistle. 
Acts  i.  ver.  I. 

The  former  treatise 

to  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Mark  xvi.  ver.  14. 
Jesus  appeared  unto  the  eleven  . 
to  with  signs  following. 


'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  misp.  Mar.  xvii. 
1  In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp.  Ps.  cviii. ;  and 
in  another  ed.,  1549,  Ps.  dxviii. 


154  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

%  Tfie  Sunday  after  the  Ascmsion. 
Dominus  reptavit.     Psalm  xciii. 

The  lord  is  king,  and  hath  put  on  glorious  apparel  :  the  lord  hath  put 
on  his  apparel,  and  girded  himself  with  strength. 

He  hath  made  the  round  world  so  sure  :  that  it  cannot  be  moved. 

Ever  since  the  world  began  hath  thy  seat  been  prepared  :  thou  art  from 
everlasting. 

The  floods  are  risen,  O  Lord,  the  floods  have  lift  up  their  voice  :  the 
floods  lift  up  their  waves. 

The  waves  of  the  sea  are  mighty,  and  rage  horribly  :  but  yet  the  Lord, 
that  dwelleth  on  high,  is  mightier. 

Thy  testimonies,  O  Lord,  are  very  sure  :  holiness  becometh  thine  house 
for  ever. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

0  God,  the  King  of  glory,  which  hast  exalted  thine  only 
Son  Jesus  Christ,  with  great  triumph  unto*  thy  kingdom  in 
heaven :  we  beseech  thee  leave  us  not  comfortless,  but  send 
to  us  thine "  Holy  Ghost  to  comfort  us,  and  exalt  us  unto ''  the 
same  place,  whither  our  Saviour  Christ  is  gone  before ;  who 
liveth  and  reigneth,  &c. 

The  Epistle. 

1  Peter  iv.  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand 

[i.e.  I  Pet.  iv.  verse  7  to  verse  12.] 

and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 

The  Gospel. 
John  xv„  John  xvi.  When  the  Comforter  is  come       .     .     . 

[i.e.  John  xv.  verse  26,  and  chap.  xvi.  to  end  of  verse  4.] 

I  was  present  with  you. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

\  77ie  Sunday  after  tht  Ascension 
day. 

The  Colled. 
O  God,  the  King  of  glory,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle, 
[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Gospd. 

John  XV. 

When  the  comforter  is  come 

[i.e.  V.  26,  and  ch.  xvi.  ending  in  v.  4.] 

remember  then  that  I  told  you. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "into  thy  kingdom."  •  In  ed.  1662,  "thy." 

•■  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  one  ed.,  1559." to-" 


At  the  Communion. 


%  Whit-Sunday. 

\  Proper  Psalms  and  Lessons  at  Matins. 

Psalms  xlviii.  Ixvii.  cxlv. 

The  second  lesson,  Act.  x.  "  Then  Peter  opened  his  mouth,"  unto  the  end, 

^  At  the  Communion. 
Exultate  justi  in  Domino,     Psalm,  xxxiii. 

Rejoice  in  the  Lord,  O  ye  righteous  :  for  it  becometh  well  the  just  to 
be  thankful. 

Praise  the  Lord  with  harp  :  sing  Psalms  unto  him  with  the  lute,  and 
instrument  of  ten  strings. 

Sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song  :  sing  praises  lustily  (unto  him)  with 
a  good  courage. 

For  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  true  :  and  all  his  works  are  faithful. 

He  loveth  righteousness  and  judgement  :  the  earth  is  full  of  the  good- 
ness of  the  Lord. 

By  the  word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made  :  and  all  the  hosts  of 
them  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth. 

He  gathereth  the  waters  of  the  sea  together,  as  it  were  upon  a  heap  : 
and  layeth  up  the  deep,  as  it  were  in  a  treasure-house. 

Let  all  the  earth  fear  the  Lord  :  stand  in  awe  of  him,  all  ye  that  dwell 
in  the  world. 

For  he  spake,  and  it  was  done  :  he  commanded,  and  it  stood  fast. 

The  Lord  bringeth  the  counsel  of  the  heathen  to  nought  :  and  mr.keth 
the  devices  of  the  people  to  be  of  none  effect,  (and  casteth  out  the  counsels 
of  princes.) 

The  counsel  of  the  Lord  shall  endure  for  ever  :  and  the  thoughts  of  his 
heart  from  generation  to  generation. 

Blessed  are  the  people,  whose  God  is  the  Lord  Jehovah  :  and  blessed 
are  the  folk,  that  have  chosen  him  to  be  their  inheritance. 

The  Lord  looked  down  from  heaven,  and  beheld  all  the  children  of 
men  :  from  the  habitation  of  his  dwelling  he  considereth  all  them  that 
dwell  in  the  earth. 

He  fashioneth  all  the  hearts  of  them  :  and  understandeth  all  their  works. 

There  is  no  king  that  can  be  saved  by  the  multitude  of  an  host  :  neither 
is  any  mighty  man  delivered  by  much  strength. 

A  horse  is  counted  but  a  vain  thing  to  save  a  man  :  neither  shall  he 
deliver  any  man  by  his  great  strength. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  IL   1662. 

Sunday  after  Ascension  Day. 
The  Collect. 
O  God  the  King  of  glory,  who 
hast,  &c. 

[Same  as  iS49,  to] 
who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee. 


and    the    Holy   Ghost,    one    God, 
world  without  end.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
I  S.  Pet.  iv.  ver.  7. 
The  end  of  all  things   .... 
to  dominion  foreverand  ever.  Amen. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  XV.  ver.  26. 
When  the  Comforter  is  come     . 
to  that  I  told  you  of  them. 


156 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[Whit-Sunday  coniinued.] 

Behold,  the  eye  of  the  Lord  is  upon  them  that  fear  him  :  and  upon  them 
that  put  their  trust  in  his  mercy  ; 

To  deliver  their  souls  from  death  :  and  to  feed  them  in  the  time  of 
dearth. 

Our  soul  hath  patiently  tarried  for  the  Lord  :  for  he  is  our  help,  and 
our  shield. 

For  our  heart  shall  rejoice  in  him  :  because  we  have  hoped  in  his  holy 
name. 

Let  thy  merciM  kindness,  O  Lord,  be  upon  us  :  like  as  we  do  put  our 
trust  in  thee. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

Tk^  Collect. 

God,  which  as  upon  this  day  hast  taught  the  hearts  of  thy 
faithful  people,  by  the  sending  to  them  the  light  of  thy  Holy 
Spirit :  Grant  us  by  •=  the  same  Spirit  to  have  a  right  judgment 
in  all  things,  and  evermore  to  rejoice  in  his  holy  comfort, 
through  the  merits  of  Christ  Jesus  *i  our  Saviour,  who  liveth 
and  reigneth  with  thee  in  the  unity  of  the  same  Spirit  one 
God,  world  ^nthout  end  *. 

The  Epistle. 

Acts  ii.  ^Vhen  the  fifty  days  were  come  to  an  end       .     .     . 

[i.e.  Acts  iL  verse  i  to  verse  12.] 

the  great  works  of  God. 

The  Gospd. 
John  xiv.^  Jesus  said  unto  his  disciples 

[Le.  John  xiv.  verse  15  to  verse  22. J 

will  shew  mine  own  self  unto  him. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

Whitsunday, 

The  Collect. 

God,  which  as  upon  this  day',  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

TheGcspd. 
John  xiv.  V.  15  to  v.  32. 

Jesus  said  unto  his  disciples  .     . 
to  commandment  even  so  do  I. 


=  In  one  ed.,  1559,  ""s  the  same." 

••  In  ed.  1604,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 
"Christ  Jesu." 

•  In  one  ed.,  1549,  *°d  "»  eds-  '597 
and  1604,  "Amen." 

*■  In  ed.  1559,  misp.  John  xiii. 

s  In  one  ed.,   1552,  and  also  of  1559, 


\  Monday  in  Whitsun  week. 
The  Collect. 
T  God,   which.   &c.     (As  upon 
Whitsunday. ) 

The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  L  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


"  God  which  has  given,  &c  As  upon  Whit- 
sunday ;"  but  in  1596  (correctly),  "God 
which  as  upon  this  day  hast  taught  the 
hearts  of  thy  faithful,'  &c.  The  same 
variation  occurs  for  the  Tuesday  after 
Whitsunday. 


At  the  Communion. 


157 


%  Prober  Psalms  and  Lessons  at  Evensong. 

Psalms  civ.  cxlv. 

The  second  lesson,  Acts  xix.   "  It  fortuned  when  Apollo  went  to 
Corinthum,"  tcnto  "After  these  things." 

^  Monday  in  Whitsun-week. 
Jubilate  Deo.     Psalm  c. 

O  BE  joyful  in  the  Lord,  (all  ye  lands)  :  serve  the  Lord  with  gladness, 
and  come  before  his  presence  with  a  song. 

Be  ye  sure  that  the  Lord  he  is  God  :  it  is  he  that  hath  made  us,  and  not 
we  ourselves  ;  we  are  his  people,  and  the  sheep  of  his  pasture. 

O  go  your  way  into  his  gates  with  thanksgiving,  and  into  his  courts  with 
praise  :  be  thankful  unto  him,  and  speak  good  of  his  name. 

For  the  Lord  is  gracious,  his  mercy  is  everlasting  :  and  his  truth  endureth 
from  generation  to  generation. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
^  God,  which,  &c.,  as  upon  Whit-Sunday. 

The  Epistle. 
Act.  x.^  Then  Peter  opened  his  mouth 

[Le.  Acts  X.  verse  34  to  the  end.] 

to  tarry  a  few  days. 

The  Gospel. 
John  iii.  So  God  loved  the  world     . 

[i.e.  John  iii.  verse  16  to  verse  22.] 

they  are  Avrought  in  God. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Whitsunday. 
The  Collect. 
God,  who  as  at  this  time  didst 
teach  the  hearts,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  69.    This  Collect  serves  for  Monday 
and  Tuesday  in  Whitsun  Week. 

For  the  Epistle. 
Acts  ii.  ver.  I. 
When  the  day  of  Pentecost  .     . 
to  wonderful  works  of  God. 


The  Gospel. 
S.  John  xiv.  ver.  15. 
Jesus  said  unto  his  disciples,  If 

ye  love  me 

to  even  so  do  I. 

Monday  in  Whitsun  Week. 
For  the  Epistle. 
Acts  X.  ver.  34. 
Then  Peter  opened  his  mouth    . 
to  tarry  certain  days. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  iii.  ver.  16. 
God  so  loved  the  world     . 
to  they  are  wrought  in  God. 


•>  In  one  ed.,  1552,  niisp.  Acts  iv. 


158  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

^  Tuesday'^. 

\  [At  the  Communion.'] 
Misericordiam.     Psalm  cL '' 
My  song  shall  be  of  mercy  and  judgement  :  unto  thee,  (O  Lord,)  will 
I  sing. 

0  let  me  have  imderstanding  :  in  the  way  of  godliness. 

When  wilt  thou  come  imto  me  :  I  wiU  walk  in  my  house  with  a  perfect 
heart 

1  will  take  no  wicked  thing  in  hand ;  I  hate  the  sins  of  mifaithfulness  : 
there  shall  no  such  cleave  unto  me. 

A  froward  heart  shall  depart  from  me  :  I  will  not  know  a  wicked  person. 

Whoso  privily  slandereth  his  neighbour  :  him  will  I  destroy. 

Whoso  hath  also  a  proud  look  and  an  high  stomach :  I  will  not  suffer 
him. 

Mine  eyes  look  unto  such  as  J)e  faithful  in  the  land  :  that  they  may 
dwell  with  me. 

Whoso  leadeth  a  godly  life  :  he  shall  be  my  servant 

There  shall  no  deceitful  person  dwell  in  my  house  :  he  that  telleth  lies 
shall  not  tarry  in  my  sight. 

I  shall  soon  destroy  all  the  ungodly  that  are  in  the  land  :  that  I  may  root 
out  all  wicked  doers  from  the  city  of  the  Lord. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
God,  which,  &c.,  as  upon  Whit-Sunday. 

The  Epistle. 

Acts  viii.  When  the  Apostles  which  were  at  Jerasalcm    .     . 

[i.e.  Acts  viii.  verse  14  to  verse  18.] 

they  received  the  Holy  Ghost 

The  Gospel. 
John  X.  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you 

[i.e.  John  x.  verse  i  to  verse  11.] 

might  have  it  more  abundantly. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

\  The  Tuesday  after  Whitsunday. 
The  Collect. 
God,  which.  &c.  {As  upon  Whit- 
sunday. ) 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospd. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

\  Trinity  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 

&C. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


TJu  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  L  1604*. 

[Same  as  1552-] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


'  In  ed.  1596,  "  Tuesday  in  Whitsun-week."        *  In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp.  Ps.  d.  for  ci. 


At  the  Communion. 


159 


^  Trinity  Sunday. 

^  At  Matins. 

The  first  lesson,  Gene,  xviii.  unto  the  end. 

The  second  lesson,  Math.  iii.  unto  the  end. 

^  At  the  Communion. 
Deus  misereatur^.     Psalm  Ixvii. " 

God  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  bless  us  :  and  shew  us  the  light  of  his 
countenance,  and  be  merciful  unto  us  ; 

That  thy  way  may  be  known  upon  earth  :  thy  saving  health  among  all 
nations. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O  God  :  yea,  let  all  the  people  praise  thee. 

O  let  the  nations  rejoice  and  be  glad  :  for  thou  shalt  judge  the  folk 
righteously,  and  govern  the  nations  upon  earth. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O  God  :  let  all  the  people  praise  thee. 

Then  shall  the  earth  bring  forth  her  increase  :  and  God,  even  our  own 
God,  shall  give  us  his  blessing. 

God  shall  bless  us  :  and  all  the  ends  of  the  world  shall  fear  him. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  which  hast  given  unto  us 
thy  servants  grace  by  the  confession  of  [a]  true  faith  to  acknow- 
ledge the  glory  of  the  eternal  Trinity,  and  in  the  power  of  the 
divine  majesty  to  worship"  the  Unity:  We  beseech  thee  that 
through  the  steadfastness  of  this  faith,  we  may  evermore  be 
defended  from  all  adversity :  which  °  livest  and  reignest,  one 
God,  world  without  end.     [Amen.] 

The  Epistle. 
Apoca,  iv.  After  this  I  looked,  and  behold 

[i.e.  Apoc.  iv.  verse  i  to  the  end.] 

they  are  and  were  created. 


Charles  IL  1662. 

Tuesday  in  Whitsun  Week. 

For  the  Epistle. 

Acts  viii.  ver.  14. 

When  the  apostles       .     .     . 

to  received  the  Holy  Ghost. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  X.  ver.  i. 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you 
to  might  have  it  more  abundantly. 


THnity  Sunday. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty,  and  everlasting  God, 
who,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

For  the  Epistle. 
Rev.  iv.  ver.  i. 
After  this  I  looked  and  behold, 
to  they  are  and  were  created. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  iii.  ver.  i. 
There  was  a  man  of  the  Pharisees, 
to  have  eternal  life. 


1  In  one  ed.,  1549,  viisp.  "Miseriatur."  "  In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp.  Ps.  Ixviii. 

°  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "to  worship  thee  in  unity."  "  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 


i6o  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[Trinity  Sundat  continued.'^ 
TheGospd. 
John  iii.  There  was  a  man  of  the  Pharisees 

[i.e.  John  iii.  verse  i  to  verse  i6.] 

but  have  everlasting  life. 


^  TJie  first  Sunday  after  Trinity  Sunday. 

Beati  immacidati.     Ps.  cxix.  [v.  I — 8.] 

Blessed  are  those  that  be  undefiled  in  the  way  :  and  walk  in  the  law 
of  the  Lord. 

Blessed  are  they  that  keep  his  testimonies  :  and  seek  him  with  their 
whole  heart 

For  they  which  do  no  wickedness  :  walk  in  his  ways, 

{Thou  hast  charged  :  that  we  shall  diligently  keep  thy  commandments.  1 
O  that  my  ways  were  made  so  direct  :  that  I  might  keep  thy  statutes  !  j 
So  shall  I  not  be  confounded  :  while  I  have  respect  unto  all  thy  com- 
mandments. 

I  will  thank  thee  with  an  unfeigned  heart :  when  I  shall  have  learned 
the  judgements  of  thy  righteousness. 

I  will  keep  thy  ceremonies  :  O  forsake  me  not  utterly. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect, 

God,  the  strength  of  all  them  that  trust  in  thee,  mercifully 
accept  our  prayers ;  and  because  the  weakness  of  our  mortal 
nature  can  do  no  good  thing  without  thee,  grant  us  the  help 
of  thy  grace,  that  in  keeping  of  thy  commandments,  we  may 
please  thee  both  in  will  and  deed ;  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  P. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

T  The  first  Sunday  after  Trinity 
Sunday. 

The  Collect. 

God  the  strength  of  all  them,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

735^  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  issa.] 


James  I.  1604. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


»  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Ameu.' 


At  the  Communion". 


i6l 


The  Epistle. 
I  John  iv.  Dearly  beloved,  let  us  love  one  another     . 

[i.e.  I  John  iv.  verse  7  to  the  end.] 

should  love  his  brother  also. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  xvi.  There  was  a  certain  rich  man 

[i.e.  Luke  xvi.  verse  19  to  the  end.] 

though  one  rose  ^  from  death  again. 


•([  The  Second^  Sunday*. 

In  quo  corriget^.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  9 — 16.] 

Wherewithal  shall  a  young  man  cleanse  his  way  :  even  by  ruling 
himself  after  thy  word. 

With  my  whole  heart  have  I  sought  thee  :  O  let  me  not  go  wrong  out 
of  thy  commandments. 

Thy  words  have  I  hid  within  my  heart  :  that  I  should  not  sin  against 
thee. 

Blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord  :  O  teach  me  thy  statutes. 

With  my  lips  have  I  been  telling  :  of  all  the  judgements  of  thy  mouth. 

I  have  had  as  great  delight  in  the  way  of  thy  testimonies  :  as  in  all 
manner  of  riches. 

I  will  talk  of  thy  commandments  :  and  have  respect  unto  thy  ways. 

My  delight  shall  be  in  thy  statutes  :  and  I  will  not  forget  thy  word. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.   1662. 

The  First  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  Collect. 

O  God,  the  strength  of  all  them 
that  put  their  trust  in  thee,  merci- 
fully accept  our  prayers ;  and  be- 
cause through  the  weakness  of  our 


mortal  nature  we  can  do  no  good 
thing  without  thee,  gi-ant  us,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 
I  S.  John  iv.  ver.  7. 
Beloved,  let  us  love  one  another, 
to  love  his  brother  also. 

The  Gospel. 

S.  Luke  xvi.  ver.  ig. 
There  was  a  certain  rich  man    . 
to  though  one  rose  from  the  dead. 


1  In  ed.  1604,  "though  one  arise." 
'In  one  ed.,  1549,  »2i>/.  "The  Seventh 
Sunday." 
•'  In  ed.  1596,  the  words  "after  Trinity" 


are    added   to    the    Second  Sunday,  the 
Third  Sunday,  and  so  on  throughout. 
'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  In  quo  corrigit." 


1 62 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[The  Second  Sunday  after  Trinity  continued.'] 
The  Collect. 
Lord,  make  us  to  have  a  perpetual  fear  and  love  of  thy  holy 
name :  for  thou  never  failest  to  help  and  govern  them  whom 
thou  dost  bring  up  in  thy  steadfast  love.     Grant  this,  &c. 
The  Epistle. 
I  John  iii.  Marvel  not,  my  brethren 

[i.e.  I  John  iii.  verse  13  to  the  end.] 

by  the  Spirit  which  he  hath  given  us. 
The  Gospel. 
Luke  xiv.  A  certain  man  ordained 


shall  taste  of  my  supper. 


[Le.  Luke  xiv.  verse  16  to  verse  33.] 


\  TJu  third  Sunday. 

Reiribtu^  servo  tiio.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  17 — 24.] 

0  DO  well  unto  thy  servant :  that  I  may  live,  and  keep  thy  word. 
Open  thou  mine  eyes  :  that  I  may  see  the  wondrous  things  of  thy  law. 

1  am  a  stranger  upon  earth  :  O  hide  not  thy  commandments  from  me. 
My  soul  breaketh  out  for  the  very  fervent  desire  :  that  it  hath  alway 

unto  thy  judgements. 

Thou  hast  rebuked  the  proud  :  and  cursed  are  they  that  do  err  from 
thy  commandments. 

O  turn  from  me  shame  and  rebuke  :  for  I  have  kept  thy  testimonies. 

Princes  also  did  sit  and  speak  against  me  :  but  thy  servant  is  occupied 
in  thy  statutes. 

For  thy  testimonies  are  my  delight  :  and  my  counsellors. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  was  in  the  banning,  &c 


Second  Bdw.  VI.  1552. 

*i  The  second  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Lord,  make  us  to  have  a  per- 
petual fear,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

7  TJie  third  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Lord,  we  beseech  thee  merci- 
fullv  to  hear  us,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  L  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637, 

Lord,  we  beseech  thee  merci- 
fully to  hear  us,  and  as  thou  hast 
given  us  an  hearty  desire  to  pray, 
so  grant  that  by  thy  mighty  aid  we 
may  be  defended  :  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


"  Inoneed.,  1549,  "Retribuo." 


At  the  Communion 


163 


The  Collect. 

Lord,  we  beseech  thee  mercifully  to  hear  us,  and  unto 
whom  thou  hast  given  an  ^  hearty  desire  to  pray,  grant  that  by 
thy  mighty  aid  we  may  be  defended  :  through  Jesu[s]  Christ 
our  Lord  y. 

The  Epistle. 

I  Peter  v.^  Submit  yourselves  every  man 

[1  Peter  v.  verse  5  to  verse  12.] 

dominion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. 


The  Gospel. 
Luc.  XV.  Then  resorted  unto  him 


[i.e.  Luke  xv.  verse  i  to  verse  11.] 

over  one  sinner  that  repenteth. 

^  The  fourth  Sunday. 
^  \At  the  Communion.'^ 
Adhesit pavimento  [anima  med\.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  25 — 32.] 
My  soul  cleaveth  to  the  dust  :  O  quicken  thou  me,  according  to  thy 
word. 

I  have  knowledged  my  ways,  and  thou  heardest  me  :  O  teach  me  thy 
statutes. 

Make  me  to  understand  the  way  of  thy  commandments  :  and  so  shall 
I  talk  of  thy  wondrous  works. 


Charles  II.   1662. 

The  Second  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 
O   Lord,   who  never  failest  to 
help  and  govern  them  whom  thou 
dost  bring  up  in  thy  stedfast   fear 
and   love ;    Keep   us,    we    beseech 
thee,  under  the  protection  of  thy 
good  providence,  and  make  us  to 
have  a  perpetual  fear  and  love  of 
thy    holy    Name,    through    Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.    Atnen. 
The  Epistle. 
I  S.  John  iii.  ver.  13. 
Marvel  not,  my  brethren      .     . 
to  which  he  hath  given  us. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xiv.  ver.  16. 
A  CERTAIN  man  made  .... 
to  shall  taste  of  my  supper. 


The  Third  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  Collect. 

O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee  merci- 
fully to  hear  us  ;  and  grant  that  we, 
to  whom  thou  hast  given  an  hearty 
desire  to  pray,  may  by  thy  mighty 
aid  be  defended  and  comforted  in 
all  dangers  and  adversities,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
I  S.  Pet.  V.  ver.  5. 
All  of  you  be  subject  .... 
to  dominion  for  everand  ever.  Amen. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  XV.  ver.  i. 
Then  drew  near  unto  him      .     . 
to  one  sinner  that  repenteth. 


'  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "given  hearty  desire 
to  pray." 
"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


'  In  one  ed.,   1S52,    and    1559,    misp. 
Rom.  viii. 


i64 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[The  Fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity  continued.'^ 

My  soul  melteth  away  for  very  heaviness  :  comfort  thou  me  according 
unto  thy  word. 

Take  from  me  the  way  of  lying  :  and  cause  thou  me  to  make  much  of 
thy  law. 

I  have  chosen  the  way  of  truth  :  and  thy  judgements  have  I  laid  be- 
fore me. 

I  have  sticken  unto  thy  testimonies  :  O  Lord,  confound  me  not 

I  will  run  the  way  of  thy  commandments  :  when  thou  hast  set  my  heart 
at  liberty. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  6kc. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
God,  the  Protector  of  all  that  trust  in  thee,  without  whom 
nothing  is  strong,  nothing  is  holy:  increase  and  multiply 
upon  us  thy  mercy,  that  thou  being  our  ruler  and  guide,  we 
may  so  pass  through  things  temporal,  that  we  finally  lose  not 
the  things  eternal :  Grant  this,  heavenly  Father ',  for  Jesu[s] 
Christ's  sake  our  Lord ''. 

The  Epistle. 

Roma.  viii.  I  suppose  that  the  afflictions 

[i.e.  Rom.  viii.  verse  i8  to  verse  34.] 

the  deliverance  of  our  bodies. 


The  Gospel. 
Luc.  vi.  Be  ye  merciful,  as  your  Father 

[i.e.  Luke  vi.  verse  36  to  verse  43. 


that  is  in  thy  brother's  eye. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
T  TJie  fourth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
God,  the  Protector  of  all  that 
trust  in  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

IT  The  fifth  Sunday. 

The  Collect, 

Grant,  Lord,  we  beseech,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 


The  Epistle.     Tlu  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549-] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1551.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


»  In  ed.  1662,  "O  heavenly  Father." 


^  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Am;xu" 


At  the  Communion, 


165 


^  Thejifth  Sunday. 
Legem  pone.     Psalm  cxix.*  [v.  33 — 40.] 

Teach  me,  O  Lord,  the  way  of  thy  statutes  :  and  I  shall  keep  it  unto 
the  end. 

Give  me  understanding,  and  I  shall  keep  thy  law  :  yea,  I  shall  keep  it 
with  my  whole  heart. 

Make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of  thy  commandments  :  for  therein  is  my 
desire. 

Incline  my  heart  unto  thy  testimonies  :  and  not  to  covetousness. 

O  turn  away  mine  eyes,  lest  they  behold  vanity  :  and  quicken  thou  me 
in  thy  way. 

O  stablish  thy  word  in  thy  servant :  that  I  may  fear  thee. 

Take  away  the  rebuke  that  I  am  afraid  of :  for  thy  judgements  are  good. 

Behold,  my  delight  is  in  thy  comjnandments  :  O  quicken  me  in  thy 
righteousness. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Grant  Lord,  we  beseech   thee,  that  the   course   of  this 
world  may  be  so  peaceably  ordered  by  thy  governance :  that 
thy  congregation^  may  joyfully  serve  thee  in  all  godly  quiet- 
ness :  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord^ 
The  Epistle. 
I  Peter  iii.  Be  you  all  of  one  mind  and  of  one  heart  .     .     . 

[i.e.  I  Peter  iii.  verse  8  to  verse  16.] 

the  Lord  God  in  you[r]  hearts. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  v.^  It  came  to  pass  that 

[i.e.  Luke  v.  verse  i  to  verse  12.] 

forsook  all  and  followed  him. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 

0  God,  the  protector  of  all,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 
Rom.  viii.  ver.  18. 

1  RECKON  that  the  sufferings  . 
to  the  redemption  of  our  body. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  vi.  ver.  36. 
Be  ye  therefore  merciful    .     . 
to  that'  is  in  thy  brother's  eye. 


"=  In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp.  Psal.  cxx. 
^  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "thy  people  ;"  in 
cd.  1662,  "thy  Church." 


The  Fifth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 
Grant,  O  Lord,  we  beseech,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
The  Epistle. 
I  S.  Pet.  iii.  ver.  8. 
Be  ye  all  of  one  mind  .     .     .     . 
to  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  v.  ver.  I. 

It  came  to  pass 

to  forsook  all  and  followed  him. 


'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 
f  In  one  ed.,  1559,  misp.  Luke  i. 


i66 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^   The  sixth  Sunday. 

Et  veniat  super  [me].     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  41 — 48.] 
Let  thy  loving  mercy  come  also  unto  me,  O  Lord  :  even  thy  salvation, 

according  unto  thy  word. 

So  shall  I  make  answer  unto  my  blasphemers  :  for  my  trust  is  in  thy 

word. 

0  take  not  the  word  of  truth  utterly  out  of  my  mouth  :  for  my  hope  is 
in  thy  judgements. 

So  shall  I  alway  keep  thy  law  :  yea,  for  ever  and  ever. 
And  I  will  walk  at  liberty  :  for  I  seek  thy  commandments. 

1  will  speak  of  thy  testimonies  also,  even  before  kings  :  and  will  not 
be  ashamed. 

And  my  delight  shall  be  in  thy  commandments  :  which  I  have  loved. 
My  hands  also  will  I  lift  up  unto  thy  commandments,  which  I  have 
loved  :  and  my  study  shall  be  in  thy  statutes. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 
As  it  was  in  the  b^inning,  &c 

Tke  Collect. 
God,  which  hast  prepared  to  them  that  love  thee,  such  good 
things  as  pass  all  b  man's  understanding :  Pour  into  our  hearts 
such  love  toward  thee,  that  we  loving  ^  thee  in »  all  thing^s,  may 
obtain  thy  promises,  which  exceed  all  that  we  can  desire; 
Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord''. 

Tke  Epistle. 

Roma.  vi.  Know  ye  not,  that  all  we 

[i.e.  Rom.  vi.  verse  3  to  verse  12.] 

through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

The  Gospel. 

Mat  V.  Jesus  said  unto  his  disciples 

[i.e.  Mat.  v.  verse  ao  to  verse  27.] 

paid  the  uttermost  farthing. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

IT  The  Sixth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
God,    which   hast   prepared    to 
them,  &C. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

The  seventh  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Lord  of  all  power  and  might, 
which  art,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "  as  pass  man's  understanding.' 
all  things."  '  In  ed.  166a,  "above." 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
[Same  as  1552. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637'. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


•'  In  one  ed.,  iS49.  "living  in 
*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Ainen." 


At  the  Communion. 


i67 


^  The  seventh  Sunday. 

Mentor  esto.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  49 — 56.] 

0  THINK  upon  thy  servant,  as  concerning  thy  word  :  wherein  thou  hast 
caused  me  to  put  my  trast. 

The  same  is  my  comfort  in  my  trouble  :  for  thy  word  hath  quick- 
ened me. 

The  proud  have  had  me  exceedingly  in  derision  :  yet  have  I  not  shrinked 
from  thy  law. 

For  I  remembered  thine  everlasting  judgements,  O  Lord  :  and  received 
comfort. 

1  am  horribly  afraid  :  for  the  ungodly  that  forsake  thy  law. 

Thy  statutes  have  been  my  songs  :  in  the  house  of  my  pilgrimage. 
I  have  thought  upon  thy  name,  O  Lord,  in  the  night-season  :  and  have 
kept  thy  law. 

This  I  had  :  because  I  kept  thy  commandments. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Lord  of  all  power  and  might,  which  art  the  author  and 
giver  of  all  good  things  :  graff  ^  in  our  hearts  the  love  of  thy 
name,  increase  in  us  true  religion,  nourish  us  with  all  good- 
ness, and  of  thy  great  mercy  keep  us  in  the  same :  Through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ^. 

The  Epistle. 
Roma.  vi.  I  speak  grossly,  because 

[i.e.  Rom.  vi.  verse  19  to  the  end.] 

through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

The  Gospel. 
Mar.  viii,  "^   In  those  days,  when  there  was  a  very  great 
company 

[i.e.  Mark  viii.  verse  i  to  verse  10.] 

and  he  sent  them  away. 


Charles  IL  1662. 

The  Sixth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 
O  God,  who  hast  prepared  for 
them,  &c. 

[Same  as  1349.] 

TJie  Epistle. 
Rom.  vi.  ver.  3. 
Know  ye  not,  that  so  many  . 
to  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  v.  ver.  20. 
Jesus  said  unto  his  disciples  .    . 
to  paid  the  uttermost  farthing. 


The  Seventh  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  Collect. 
Lord  of  all  power  and  might, 
who  art,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 
Rom.  vi.  ver.  19. 
I  SPEAK  after  the  manner  .     .     . 
to  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Mark  viii.  ver.  i. 
In  those  days  the  multitude    .     . 
to  sent  them  away. 


'  III  ed.  1C02,  "  Graft  in  our  hearts." 


In  one  ed.,  1349,  and  1539,  vtisp.  Mat.  viii. 


i68  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

^  The  eighth  Sunday. 

T  \_At  the  Communion.  ] 

Portia  mea  [Domine.'\     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  57 — 64-] 

Thou  art  my  portion,  O  Lord  :  I  have  promised  to  keep  thy  law. 

I  made  mine  humble  petition  in  thy  presence  with  my  whole  heart : 
O  be  merciful  unto  me,  according  unto  thy  word. 

I  call  mine  own  ways  to  remembrance  :  and  turn  my  feet  into  thy 
testimonies. 

I  made  haste,  and  prolonged  not  the  time  :  to  keep  thy  commandments. 

The  congregations  of  the  ungodly  have  robbed  me  :  but  I  have  not  for- 
gotten thy  law. 

At  midnight  will  I  rise  to  give  thanks  unto  thee  :  because  of  thy  righteous 
judgements. 

I  am  a  companion  of  all  them  that  fear  thee  :  and  keep  thy  com- 
mandments. 

The  earth,  O  Lord,  is  full  of  thy  mercy  :  O  teach  me  thy  statutes. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

T/ie  Colled. 
God,  who.^e  providence  is  never  deceived,  we  humbly  be- 
seech thee,  that  thou  wilt  put  away  from  us  all  hurtful  things, 
and  give  "  those  things  which  be  profitable  for  us  :  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  °. 

The  Epistle. 

Roma.  viii.  p  Brethren,  we  are  debtors 

[i.e.  Rom.  viii.  verse  12  to  verse  18.] 

be  also  glorified  together  with  him. 
The  Gospel. 

Mat.  vii.  Beware  of  false  prophets 

[i.e.  Matt.  vii.  verse  15  to  verse  aa.] 

enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

IT   The  eighth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
God,  whose  providence  is  never 
deceived,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

If  The  ninth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Grant  to  us.  Lord,  we  beseech 
thee,  the  spirit,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle,     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


"  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "give  to  us  those."  P  In    one    ed.,   iS52>    and   1559,   misfi. 

»  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen."  i  Pet.  v.    (See  ante.) 


At  the  Communion. 


169 


The  ninth  Sunday. 


Psalm  cxix.  [v.  65 — 72.] 
Traciouily  with  thy  servant  :  according 


for  I  have  believed  tliy 
ept  thy  \vord. 


Bonitati'in 
O  Lord,  thou  hast  dealt 
thy  word. 

0  learn  me  true  understanding  and  knowledge 
commandments. 

Before  I  was  troul)Icd,  I  went  wrong  :  but  now  I  have 
Thou  art  good  and  gracious  :  O  teach  me  thy  statutes. 
The  proud  have  imagined  a  lie  against  me  :  but  I  will  keep  thy  com- 
mandments with  my  whole  heart. 

Their  heart  is  as  fat  as  brawn  :  but  my  delight  hatii  been  in  thy  law. 
It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  in  trouble  :  that  I  may  learn  thy  statutes. 
The  law  of  thy  mouth  is  dearer  unto  me  :  than  thousands  of  gold  and  silver. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Grant  to  its'!,  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  the  spirit  to  think 
and  do  always  such  things  as  be  rightful :  tliat  we,  which 
cannot  be  without  thee,  may  by  thee  be  able'-'  to  live  ac- 
cording to  thy  will :  Through  Jesus  *  Christ  our  Lord. 

The  Epistle. 

1  Cor.  X.'  Brethren,  I  would  not  that  .     .  .... 

[i.e.  I  Cor.  x.  verse  i  to  verse  14.] 

may  be  able  to  bear  it. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  xvi.  Jesus  said  unto"  his  disciples 

[i.e.  Luke  .xvi.  verse  i  to  verse  lo.] 

receive  you  into  everlasting  habitations. 


Charles  II.    1662. 

The  Ei^'hlh  Sunday  after  Trmity. 

The  Collect. 
O  God,  whose  never-failing  pro- 
vidence ordereth  all  things  both  in 
heaven  and  earth  ;  We  humbly  be- 
seech thee  to  put  away  from  us  all 
hurtful  things,  and  to  give  us  those 
things,  &c. 

[Same  as  1349.] 
The  Epistle. 
Rom.  viii.  ver.  12. 
Brehren,  we  are  debtors  . 
to  glorified  together. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Math.  vii.  ver.  15. 
Beware  of  false  prophets  .     .     . 
to  which  is  in  heaven. 


Tlie  Ni)ith  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 

Gr.\.\t  to  us.  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

that   we  who  cannot  do  any  thinj 

that  is  good  without  thee,  may,  A;c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 
I  Cor.  X.  ver.  I. 
Brethren,  I  would  not  .     .     . 
to  be  able  to  bear  it. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xvi.  ver.  i. 
Jesus  said  unto  his  disciples  . 
to  everlasting  habitations. 


1  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Grant  us,  Lord." 

■■  In  ed.  1662,  "enabled." 

"  In   two   eds.,  1552,    "Jesu;"   and  in 


Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Amen"  adifed. 
'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  i  Cor.  x.  oiniiicd. 
"  In  eds.  1552,  "to." 


I70  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1 549. 

TTie  tenth  Sunday. 
Manus  tua.     Psalm  cxix.  »  [v.  73 — 80.] 

Thy  hands  have  made  me  and  fashioned  me  :  O  give  me  understanding, 
that  I  may  learn  thy  commandments. 

They  that  fear  thee  will  be  glad  when  they  see  me  :  because  I  have  put 
my  trust  in  thy  word. 

I  know,  O  Lord,  that  thy  judgements  are  right :  and  tliat  thou  of  very 
faithfulness  hast  caused  me  to  be  troubled. 

O  let  thy  merciful  kindness  be  my  comfort :  according  to  thy  word  unto 
thy  servant. 

O  let  thy  loving  mercies  come  unto  me,  that  I  may  live  :  for  thy  law 
is  my  delight 

Let  the  proud  be  confounded,  for  they  go  wickedly  about  to  destroy  me  : 
but  I  will  be  occupied  in  thy  commandments. 

Let  such  as  fear  thee,  and  have  known  thy  testimonies  :  be  turned 
unto  me. 

O  let  my  heart  be  sound  in  thy  statutes  :  that  I  be  not  asliamed. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

Tke  Collect. 
Let  thy  merciful  ears,  O  Lord,  be   open  to  the   prayers 
of  thy   humble   servants  :   and   that  they   may   obtain  their 
petitions,  make  them  to  ask  such  things  as  shall  please  thee  : 
Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  *. 

77ie  Epislle. 
I  Cor.  xii.  Concerning  spiritual  things 

[Le.  I  Cor.  xii.  verse  i  to  verse  12.] 

a  several  gift  even  as  he  will. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc  xix.  y  And  when  he  was  come  near 

[i.e.  Luke  xix.  verse  41  to  verse  47.] 

and  he  taught  daily  in  the  temple. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 
IT  The  tenth  Sunday. 
TJie  Collect. 
Let  thy  merciful  ears,  O  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  eleventh  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
God,  which  declarest,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


7 he  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1352-] 


In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp.  Ps.  cix.  »  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen.' 

3  In  two  eds.,  1549,  mu'f.  Luc.  xviii. 


At  the  Communion. 


171 


The  eleventh  Sunday. 

Deficit.     Psalm  cxix.  [v,  81—88.] 

My  soul  hath  longed  for  thy  salvation  :  and  I  have  a  good  hope  because 
of  thy  word. 

Mine  eyes  long  sore  for  thy  word  :  saying,  O  when  wilt  thou  comfort  me  ? 

For  I  am  become  like  a  bottle  in  the  smoke  :  yet  do  I  not  forget  thy 
statutes. 

How  many  are  the  days  of  thy  servant  :  when  wilt  thou  be  avenged 
of  them  that  persecute  me  ? 

The  proud  have  digged  pits  for  me  :  which  are  not  after  thy  law. 

All  thy  commandments  are  true  :  they  persecute  me  falsly ;  O  be  thou 
my  help. 

They  had  almost  made  an  end  of  me  upon  earth  :  but  I  forsook  not  thy 
commandments. 

O  quicken  me  after  thy  loving-kindness  :  and  so  shall  I  keep  the  testi- 
monies of  thy  mouth. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect, 

God,  which  declarest  ^  thy  almighty  power,  most  chiefly  in 
shewing  mercy  and  pity :  Give  unto  us  abundantly  thy  grace, 
that  we  running  to  thy  promises,  may  be  made  ^  partakers  of 
thy  heavenly  treasure  :  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ^. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
7'he  Tenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 
Let  thy  merciful  ears,  O  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
The  Epistle. 
I  Cor.  xii.  ver.  i. 
Concerning  spiritual  gifts    .     . 
to  severally  as  he  will. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xix.  ver.  41. 
And  when  he  was  come  near . 
to  daily  in  the  temple. 

JTie  Eleventh  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  Collect. 
O  God,   who   declarest  thy  al- 


mighty power,  most  chiefly  in  shew- 
ing mercy  and  pity ;  Mercifully 
giant  unto  us  such  a  measure  of 
thy  grace,  that  we  running  the  way 
of  thy  commandments,  may  obtain 
thy  gracious  promises,  and  be  made 
partakers  of  thy  heavenly  treasure, 
through    Jesus    Christ    our    Lord. 


Amen. 


The  Epistle. 


I  Cor.  XV.  ver.  i. 
Brethren,  I  declare  unto 
to  so  ye  believed. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xviii.  ver.  9. 
Jesus  spake  this  parable    . 
to  shall  be  exalted. 


»  la  one  ed.,  1552,  "declared." 


In  two  eds.,  1559,  "maybe  partakers." 


172  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

[The  Eleventh  Sunday  after  Trinity  continued.'^ 
The  Epistle. 
I  Cor.  XV.  Brethren,  as  pertaining''  to  the  Gospel 

[i.e.  1  Cor.  XV.  verse  i  to  verse  12.] 

and  so  ye  have  beheved. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  xviii."  Christ  told  this  parable 

[i.e.  Luke  xviii.  verse  9  to  verse  15.] 

himself  shall  be  exalted. 


The  twelfth  Sunday. 

In  eternum  Domine.     Psal.  cxix.  [v.  89 — 96.] 

0  Lord,  thy  word  :  endureth  for  ever  in  heaven. 

Thy  truth  also  remaineth  from  one  generation  to  another  :  thou  hast  laid 
the  foundation  of  the  earth,  and  it  abideth. 

They  continue  this  day  according  to  thine  ordinance  :  for  all  things 
serve  thee. 

If  my  delight  had  not  been  in  thy  law  :  I  should  have  perished  in  my 
trouble. 

1  will  never  forget  thy  commandments  :  for  with  them  thou  hast 
quickened  me. 

I  am  thine,  O  save  me  :  for  I  have  sought  thy  commandments. 

The  ungodly  laid  wait  for  me  to  destroy  me  :  but  I  will  consider  thy 
testimonies. 

I  see  that  all  things  come  to  an  end  :  but  thy  commandments  are  ex- 
ceeding broad. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  which  art  always  more 
ready  to  hear  than  we  to  pray ;   and  art  wont  to  give  more 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
The  twelfth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
which  art  always,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  issa-] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


^  In  ed.  1604,  "as  appertaining."  '  In  two  eds.,  iS49i  '«"/•  Luc.  xvii. 


At  the  Communion. 


173 


than  either  we  desire  or  deserve  :  Pour  down  upon  us  the 
abundance  of  thy  mercy,  forgiving  us  those  things  whereof 
our  conscience  is  afraid,  and  giving  unto  us  that  that  our 
prayer  dare  not  presume  to  ask ;  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  d. 

The  Epistle. 

2  Cor.  iii.  Such  trust  have  we  through  Christ 

[i.e.  2  Cor.  iii.  verse  4  to  verse  10.] 

the  ministration  of  righteousness  exceed  in  glory. 
The  Gospel. 
Mar.  vii,^  Jesus  departed  from  the  coasts 

[i.e.  Mark  vii.  verse  31  to  the  end.] 

and  the  dumb  to  speak. 


The  thirteenth  Sunday. 

Quomodo  dilexi.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  97 — 104.] 

Lord,  what  love  have  I  unto  thy  law  :  all  the  day  long  is  my  study  in  it. 

Thou  through  thy  commandments  hast  made  me  wiser  than  mine 
enemies  :  for  they  are  ever  with  me. 

I  have  more  understanding  than  my  teachers  :  for  thy  testimonies  are 
my  study. 

I  am  wiser  than  the  aged  :  because  I  kept  thy  commandments. 

I  have  refrained  my  feet  from  every  evil  way  :  that  I  may  keep  thy  word. 

I  have  not  shrinked  from  thy  judgements  :  for  thou  teachest  me. 

O  how  sweet  are  thy  words  imto  my  throat :  yea,  sweeter  than  honey  unto 
my  mouth. 

Through  thy  commandments  I  get  understanding  :  therefore  I  hate  all 
wicked  ways. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Twelfth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
Tlu  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who  art  always,  &c. 

[Same  as  iS49.  to] 
and  giving  us  those  good  things 
which  we  are  not  worthy  to  ask, 
but  through  the  merits  and  medi- 
ation of  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son  our 
Lord,     Amen. 


The  Epistle. 

2  Cor.  iii.  ver.  4. 

Such  trust  have  we.     .     . 
to  righteousness  exceed  in  glory. 

The  Gospel. 

S.  Mark  vii.  ver.  31. 

Jesus  departing  from  the  coasts 
to  the  dumb  to  speak. 


^  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


In  two  eds.,  1549,  niisp.  Math.  vii. 


174 


FiRST  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[The  Thirteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity  coniintted.'\ 
The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  merciful  God,  of  whose  only  gift  it  cometh, 
that  thy  faithful  people  do  unto  thee  true  and  laudable  service  : 
grant,  we  beseech  thee,  that  we  may  so  run  to  thy  heavenly 
promises,  that  we  fail  not  finally  to  attain  the  same :  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord '. 

The  Epistle. 

Gala.  iii.  To  Abraham  and  his  seed     ...,,... 

[i.e.  GaL  iii.  verse  16  to  verse  23.] 

unto  them  that  believe. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  X.  Happy  are  the  eyes  which  see 


[i.e.  Luke  x.  verse  23  to  verse  38.] 


go  and  do  thou  likewise. 


77ie  fourteenth  Sunday. 
Lucema pedibus  tneis.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  105 — 112.] 

Thy  word  is  a  lantern  unto  my  feet :  and  a  light  unto  my  paths. 

I  have  sworn,  and  am  stedfastly  purposed  :  to  keep  thy  righteous 
judgements. 

I  £.m  troubled  above  measure  :  quicken  me,  O  Lord,  according  unto 
thy  word. 

Let  the  free-will  offerings  of  my  mouth  please  thee,  O  Lord  :  and  teach 
me  thy  judgements. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
The  thirteenth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
ALMIGHTY  and  merciful  God,  of 
whose  only  gift,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

The  fourteenth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
give  unto  us,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.I 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637 
[Same  as  1553.] 


In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen.' 


At  the  Communion. 


175 


My  soul  is  alway  in  my  hand  :  yet  do  I  not  forget  thy  law. 

The  ungodly  have  laid  a  snare  for  me  :  but  yet  swerved  not  I  from  thy 
commandments. 

Thy  testimonies  have  I  claimed  as  mine  heritage  for  ever  :  and  why? 
they  are  the  very  joy  of  my  heart. 

I  have  applied  my  heart  to  fulfil  thy  statutes  alway  :  even  unto  the  end. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  Szc. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  give  unto  us  the  increase 
of  faith,  hope,  and  charity  :    and,  that  we  may  obtain  that 
which  thou  dost  promise,  make  us  to  love  that  which  thou 
dost  command,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  s. 


The  Epistle. 
Gala.  V.  I  say  walk  in  the  Spirit 


[i.e.  Gal.  V.  verse  i6  to  verse  25.] 

the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  xvii.  And  it  chanced  as  Jesus  went  to  Jerusalem 

[i.e.  Luke  xvii.  verse  ii  to  verse  20.] 

thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Thhieenth  Sunday  after 
Trinity. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  merciful  God,  of 
whose  only  gift,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

that  we  may  so  faithfully  serve  thee 
in  this  life,  that  we  fail  not  finally 
to  attain  thy  heavenly  promises, 
through  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
Gal.  iii.  ver.  16. 
To  Abraham  and  his  seed      .     . 
to  them  that  believe. 


The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  X.  ver,  23. 
Blessed  are  the  eyes   .... 
to  do  thou  likewise. 

The  Fourteenth  Sunday  after 
Trinity, 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
The  Epistle. 
Gal.  V.  ver.  16. 
I  SAY  then,  Walk  in  the  Spirit    . 
to  affections  and  lusts. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xvii.  ver.  11. 
And  it  came  to  pass     .... 
to  hath  made  thee  whole. 


?  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  in  one  ed.,  1559, 
ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


'  through  Jesu  Christ  our  Lord  ;"  in  Scotch 


i/S  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

TJie  fifteenth  Sunday. 

Iniqttos  odio  \habui\     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  113 — 120.] 

1  HATE  them  that  imagine  evil  things  :  but  thy  law  do  I  love. 

Thou  art  my  defence  and  shield  :  and  my  trust  is  in  thy  word. 

Away  from  me,  ye  wicked  :  I  will  keep  the  commandments  of  my  God. 

O  stablish  me  according  unto  thy  word,  that  I  may  live  :  and  let  me  not 
be  disappointed  of  my  hope. 

Hold  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe  :  yea,  my  delight  shall  ever  be  in 
thy  statutes. 

Thou  hast  trodden  down  all  them  that  depart  from  thy  statutes  :  for  they 
imagine  but  deceit 

Thou  puttest  away  all  the  ungodly  of  the  earth  like  dross  :  therefore 
I  love  thy  testimonies. 

My  flesh  trembleth  for  fear  of  thee  :  and  I  am  afraid  of  thy  judgements. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  b^inning,  &c 

The  Collect. 
Keep,  we  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  thy  church  with  thy  per- 
petual mercy,  and,  because  the  frailty  of  man  without  thee 
cannot  but  fall,  keep  us  ever  by  thy  help*",  and  lead  us  to 
all  things  profitable  to  our  salvation:  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  •. 

The  Epistle. 
Gala.  vi.  Ye  see  how  large  a  letter 

[i.e.  Gal.  vi.  verse  11  to  the  end] 

be  with  your  spirit.    Amen. 

The  Gospel. 
Matt.  vi.  No  man  can  serve  two  masters       

[i.e.  Matt.  vL  verse  24  to  the  end.] 

sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  travail  thereof. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

The  fifteenth  Sunday. 

The  Collect. 
Keep,  we  beseech  thee,  O  Lord, 
thy  Church,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel, 
[Same  as  1549.] 

The  sixteenth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  let  thy 
contmual  pity,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  i54S>-] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  L  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


|>  In  eds.  i66a,  "by  thy  help  from  sdl  '  In    all  eds.,  1553,  and  in  Scotch  ed.^ 

tilings  hurtful,  and  lead."  1637,  "Amen." 


At  the  Communion.  177 

The  sixteenth  Sunday. 

T  \At  the  Communion.'] 
Feci  Judicium.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  121 — 128.] 
I  DEAL  with  the  thing  that  is  lawful  and  right :  O  give  me  not  over  unto 
mine  oppressors. 

Make  thou  thy  servant  to  delight  in  that  which  is  good  :  that  the  proud 
do  me  no  wrong. 

Mine  eyes  are  wasted  away  with  looking  for  thy  health  :  and  for  the 
word  of  thy  righteousness. 

0  deal  with  thy  servant  according  unto  thy  loving  mercy  :  and  teach  me 
thy  statutes. 

1  am  thy  servant,  O  grant  me  understanding  :  that  I  may  know  thy 
testimonies. 

It  is  time  for  thee.  Lord,  to  lay  to  thine  hand  :  for  they  have  destroyed 
thy  law. 

For  I  love  thy  commandments  :  above  gold  and  precious  stone. 

Therefore  hold  I  straight  all  thy  commandments  :  and  all  false  ways 
I  utterly  abhor. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  let  thy  continual  pity  cleanse  and 
defend  thy  congregation '' :  and  because  it  cannot  continue  in 
safety  without  thy  succour,  preserve  it  evermore  by  thy  help 
and  goodness;  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord'. 
The  Epistle. 

Ephes.  iii.  I  desire  that  you  faint  not       

[i.e.  Ephes.  iii.  verse  13  to  the  end.] 

throughout  all  generations  from  time  to  time.    Amen. 
The  Gospel. 
Luc.  vii.  And  it  fortuned  that  Jesus 

[i.e.  Luke  vii.  verse  11  to  verse  18.] 

all  the  regions  which  lie  round  about. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 
Keep,  we  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
The  Epistle. 
Gal.  vi.  ver.  11. 
Ye  see  how  large  a  letter  I  have 

written 

to  be  with  your  Spirit.  Amen, 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Matt.  vi.  ver.  24, 
No  man  can  serve  two  masters    . 
to  is  the  evil  thereof. 


The  Sixteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 

0  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  let 
thy  continual  pity  cleanse  and  de- 
fend thy  Church  ;  and  because,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 

Ephes.  iii.  ver.  13. 

1  DESIRE  that  ye  faint  not  .  . 
to  world  without  end.  Amen. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  vii.  ver.  1 1. 
And  it  came  to  pass     .... 
to  the  region  round  about. 


^  la  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  ed.  1662,  "  thy  Church."  '  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 

N 


J78  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

^  The  seventeenth  Sunday. 

Mirabilia.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  129 — 136.] 

Thy  testimonies  are  wonderfiil  :  therefore  doth  my  soul  keep  them. 

When  thy  word  goeth  forth  :  it  giveth  light  and  understanding  even  unto 
the  simple. 

I  opened  my  mouth,  and  drew  in  my  breath  :  for  my  delight  was  in  thy 
commandments. 

O  look  thou  upon  me,  and  be  mercifiil  unto  me  :  as  thou  usest  to  do 
unto  those  that  love  thy  Name. 

Order  my  steps  in  thy  word  :  and  so  shall  no  wickedness  have  dominion 
over  me.  » 

O  deliver  me  from  the  wrongful  dealings  of  men  :  and  so  shall  I  keep 
thy  commandments. 

Shew  the  light  of  thy  countenance  upon  thy  servant  :  and  teach  me  thy 
statutes. 

Mine  eyes  gush  out  with  water  :  because  men  keep  not  thy  law. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Lord,  we  pray  thee  that  thy  grace  may  always  prevent 
and  follow  us,  and  make  us  continually  to  be  given  to  all  good 
works ;  through  Jesus  Christ "  our  Lord  ". 
The  Epistle. 
Ephes.  iv.  I  (which  am  a  prisoner  of  the  Lord's)    .... 

[Le.  Ephes.  iv.  verse  i  to  verse  7.] 

through  all  and  in  you  alL 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  xiv.  It  chanced  that  Jesus  went        

[i.e.  Luke  xiv.  verse  1  to  verse  la.] 

himself  shall  be  exalted. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

\  T/ie  seventeettth  Sunday. 

The  Collect. 
Lord,   we    pray  thee    that    thy 
grace  may  always,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549-] 
H  The  eighteenth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Lord,  we  beseech   thee,   grant 
thy  people,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.} 


The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 
.  [Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1553.J 


In  two  eds.,  1553,  andine<ls.  1559,  "Jesu  Christ"       ■  In  Scotched.,  1637,  "Amen. 


At  the  Communion. 


179 


^  The  eighteenth  Sunday. 
Justus  es  domine.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  137 — 144.] 

Righteous  art  thou,  O  Lord  :  and  true  is  thy  judgement. 

The  testimonies  that  thou  hast  commanded  :  are  exceeding  righteous 
and  true. 

My  zeal  hath  even  consumed  me  :  because  mine  enemies  have  forgotten 
thy  words. 

Thy  word  is  tried  to  the  uttermost  :  and  thy  servant  loveth  it. 

I  am  small,  and  of  no  reputation  :  yet  do  not  I  forget  thy  command- 
ments. 

Thy  righteousness  is  an  everlasting  righteousness  :  and  thy  law  is  the 
truth. 

Trouble  and  heaviness  have  taken  hold  upon  me  :  yet  is  my  delight  in 
thy  commandments. 

The  righteousness  of  thy  testimonies  is  everlasting  :  O  grant  me  under- 
standing, and  I  shall  live. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Colled. 
Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  grant  thy  people  grace  to  avoid  the 
infections  of  the  devil,  and  with  pure  heart  and  mind  to  follow 
thee,  the  only  God :  Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  °. 
The  Epistle. 
I  Cor.  i.  I  thank  my  God  always 

[i.e.  I  Cor.  i.  verse  4  to  verse  9.] 

of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 

The  Gospel. 
Math.  xxii.P  When  the  Pharisees  had  heard 

[i.e.  Matt.  xxii.  verse  34  to  the  end.] 

ask  him  any  more  questions. 


Charles  II.   1662. 

The  Seventeenth  Sunday  after 
Trinity. 

The  Collect. 
Lord,   we  pray   thee,   that  thy 


grace,  &c. 


[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle. 
Ephes.  iv.  ver.  i. 
I  THEREFORE,  the  prisoner    . 
to  through  ail  and  in  you  all. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xiv.  ver.  i. 
•  It  came  to  pass  as  Jesus  went 
to  himself,  shall  be  exalted. 


The  Eighteenth  Sunday  after 

Trinity. 

The  Collect. 

Lord,   we  beseech   thee,   grant 

thy  people  grace  to  withstand  the 

temptations  of  the  world,  the  flesh, 

and  the  devil,  and  with  pure  hearts 

and  minds  to  follow  thee  the  only 

God,    through    Jesus    Christ    our 

Lord.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
1  Cor.  i.  ver.  4. 
I  THANK  my  God  always  .     .     . 
to  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xxii.  ver.  34. 
When  the  Pharisees  had  heard  . 
to  ask  him  any  more  questions. 


°  In  Scotched.,  1637,  "Amen." 


P  In  one  ed.,  1559,  misp.  Matt.  xxi. 


i8o  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

^  TJie  nineteenth  Sunday. 
Clamavi.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  145 — 152.] 

I  CALL  with  my  whole  heart  :  hear  me,  O  Lord,  I  will  keep  thy 
statutes. 

Yea,  even  upon  thee  do  I  call  :  help  me,  and  I  shall  keep  thy  testimonies. 

Early  in  the  morning  do  I  cry  unto  thee  :  for  in  thy  word  is  my  trust. 

Mine  eyes  prevent  the  night-watches  :  that  I  might  be  occupied  in  thy 
words. 

Hear  my  voice,  (O  Lord,)  according  unto  thy  loving-kindness  :  quicken 
m^,  according  as  thou  art  wont 

They  draw  nigh  that  of  malice  persecute  me  :  and  are  far  from  thy  law. 

Be  thou  nigh  at  hand,  O  Lord  :  for  all  thy  commandments  are  true. 

As  concerning  thy  testimonies,  I  have  known  long  since  :  that  thou  hast 
grounded  them  for  ever. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

O  God,  forasmuch  as  without  thee  we  are  not  able  to  please 
thee  :  Grant  that  the  working  of  thy  mercy  ^  may  in  all  things 
direct  and  rule  our  hearts :  Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  '. 

The  Epistle. 
Ephe.  iv.  This  I  say  and  testify  through  the  Lord      .     .     . 

[i.e.  Ephes.  iv.  verse  17  to  the  end.] 

for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  you. 
The  Gospel. 
Mat.  ix.  Jesus  entered  into  a  ship 

[i.e.  Matt.  ix.  verse  t  to  verse  9.] 

such  power  unto  men. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 
\  The  Nineteenth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
O   God,   forasmuch   as   without 
thee  we  are  not,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
IT  The  twentieth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  merciful  God,  of 
thy  boui^iful,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


1  In  ed.  x66a,  "  Mercifully  grant  that  thy  Holy  Spirit  may. 
'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


At  the  Communion. 


i8i 


T7ie  twentieth  Sunday . 

Vide  humilitateni  meant.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  153 — 160.] 

O  CONSIDER  mine  adversity,  and  deliver  me  :  for  I  do  not  forget  thy  law. 

Avenge  thou  my  cause,  and  deliver  me  :  quicken  me,  according  unto 
thy  word. 

Health  is  far  from  the  ungodly  :  for  they  regard  not  thy  statutes. 

Great  is  thy  mercy,  O  Lord  :  quicken  me,  as  thou  art  wont. 

Many  there  are  that  trouble  me,  and  persecute  me  :  yet  do  not  I  swerve 
from  thy  testimonies. 

It  grieveth  me  when  I  see  the  transgressors  :  because  they  keep  not 
thy  law. 

Consider,  O  Lord,  how  I  love  thy  commandments  :  O  quicken  me, 
according  to  thy  loving-kindness.  , 

Thy  word  is  true  from  everlasting  :  all  the  judgements  of  thy  righteous- 
ness endure  for  evermore. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  merciful  God,  of  thy  bountiful  goodness, 
keep  us  from '  all  things  that  may  hurt  us :  that  we  being 
ready  both  in  body  and  soul,  may  with  free  hearts  accom- 
plish* those  things,  that  thou  wouldest  have  done;  through 
Jesus  Christ  [our  Lord]  ^ 

The  Epistle. 

Ephe.  V.  Take  heed  therefore  how  ye  walk 

[i.e.  Ephes.  v.  verse  15  to  verse  22.] 

in  the  fear  of  God. 

The  Gospel. 
Math.  xxii.  Jesus  said'^  to  his  disciplesy,the  kingdom  of  heaven 

[i.e.  Matt.  xxii.  verse  i  to  verse  15.] 

for  many  be  called  but  few  are  chosen. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Nineteenth  Sunday  after 

Trinity. 

The  Collect. 

O  God,  for  as  much  as,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 

Ephes.  iv.  ver.  17. 

This  I  say  therefore     .     .     . 

to  hath  forgiven  you. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  ix.  ver,  I. 
Jesus  entered  into  a  ship  .     . 
to  such  power  unto  men. 


The  Twentieth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 
O  Almighty  and  most  merciful, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 
Ephes.  V.  ver.  15. 
See  then  that  ye  walk  .     .     .     . 
to  fear  of  God. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xxii.  ver.  r. 
Jesus  said.  The  Kingdom      .     . 
to  but  few  are  chosen. 


"  In  ed.  1662,  "keep  us  we  beseech 
thee  from." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "may  chearfuUy  accom- 
plish." 

"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


»  In  ed.  1604,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 
the  words  "Jesus  said"  are  in  a  different 
type,  and  the  words  "to  his  disciples" 
omitted. 

y  In  ed.  1662,  "  to  his  disciples"  omitted. 


1 82 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^  The  twenty-first  Sunday. 
Principes persecuti.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  i6l — 168.] 

Princes  have  persecuted  me  without  cause  :  but  my  heart  standeth  in 
awe  of  thy  words, 

I  am  as  glad  of  thy  word  :  as  one  that  findeth  great  spoils. 

As  for  lies,  I  hate  and  abhor  them  :  but  thy  law  do  I  love. 

Seven  times  a  day  do  I  praise  thee  :  because  of  thy  righteous  judge- 
ments. 

Great  is  the  peace  that  they  have  which  love  thy  law  :  and  they  are  not 
offended  at  it. 

Lord,  I  have  looked  for  thy  saving  health  :  and  done  after  thy  com- 
mandments. 

My  soul  hath  kept  thy  testimonies  :  and  loved  them  exceedingly. 

I  have  kept  thy  commandments  and  testimonies  :  for  all  my  ways  are 
before  thee. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  merciful   Lord,  to  thy  faithful 
people,  pardon  and  peace ;  that  they  may  be  cleansed  from 
all  their  sins,  and  serve  thee  ^vith  a  quiet  mind:   Through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ^ 

The  Epistle. 
Ephe.  vi.  My  brethren,  be  strong 

[i.e.  Eph.  vi.  verse  lo  to  verse  21.] 

as  I  ought  to  speak. 

The  Gospel. 
John  iv.  There  was  a  certain  ruler 

[i.e.  John  iv.  verse  46  to  the  end.] 


out  of  Jewry  into  Galilee. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  155a. 

IT  The  twenty-first  Sunday. 

The  Collect. 
Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  mer- 
ciful Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

IT  T^  twenty-second  Sunday. 

The  Collect. 
Lord,  we  beseech  thee  to  keep 
thy  household,  &c. 

[S.-ime  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospd. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  \.  1604. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen," 


I 


At  the  Communion. 


183 


^   The  twenty-second  Sunday. 

Appropinquit  deprecatio.     Psalm  cxix.  [v.  169 — 176.] 
Let  my  complaint  come  before  thee,  O  Lord  :  give  me  understanding, 
according  unto  thy  word. 

0  let  my  supplication  come  before  thee  :  deliver  me,  according  to  thy  word. 
My  lips  shall  speak  of  thy  praise   :   when  thou  hast  taught  me  thy 

statutes. 

Yea,  my  tongue  shall  sing  of  thy  word  :  for  all  thy  commandments  are 
righteous. 

Let  thine  hand  help  me  :  for  I  have  chosen  thy  commandments. 

1  have  longed  for  thy  saving  health,  O  Lord  :  and  in  thy  law  is  my 
delight. 

0  let  my  soul  live,  and  it  shall  praise  thee  :  and  thy  judgements  shall 
help  me. 

1  have  gone  astray  like  a  sheep  that  is  lost :  O  seek  thy  servant,  for  I  do 
not  forget  thy  commandments. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Lord,  we  beseech  thee  to  keep  thy  household  the  church 
in  continual  godliness  :  that  through  thy  protection,  it  may  be 
free  from  all  adversities,  and  devoutly  given  to  serve  thee  in 
good  works,  to  the  glory  of  thy  name :  Through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  *. 

The  Epistle. 

Phil.  i.     I  thank  my  God  with  all  remembrance  of  you   .     . 

[i.e.  Phil.  i.  verse  3  to  verse  12.] 

the  glory  and  praise  of  God. 

The  Gospel. 
Math,  xviii.  ^  Peter  said  unto  Jesus 

[i.e.  Matt,  xviii.  verse  21  to  the  end.] 

his  brother  their  trespasses. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  One  and  Twentieth  Sunday 
after  Trinity, 
The  Collect. 
Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
The  Epistle. 
Ephes.  vi.  ver.  10. 
Mv  brethren,  be  strong      .     , 
to  as  I  ought  to  speak. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  John  iv.  ver.  46. 
There  was  a  certain  nobleman 
to  of  Judaea  into  Galilee. 


The  Two  and  Twentieth  Sunday 
after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 

Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 

Phil.  i.  ver.  3. 

I  thank  my  God 

to  glory  and  praise  of  God. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xviii.  ver.  21. 
Peter  said  unto  Jesus  .     .     . 
to  his  brother,  their  trespasses. 


•  In  one  ed.,  1559,  and  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen.' 
•>  In  one  ed.,  1549,  misp.  Math,  xxviii. 


i84 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^   The  twenty-third  Sunday. 

Nisi  quia  dominus.     Psalm  cxxiv. 
If  the  Lord  himself  had  not  been  on  our  side,  (now  may  Israel  say  :) 
if  the  Lord  himself  had  not  been  on  our  side,  when  men  rose  up  against  us ; 
They  had  swallowed  us  up  quick  :  when  they  were  so  wrathfully  dis- 
pleased at  us. 

Yea,  the  waters  had  drowned  us  :  and  the  stream  had  gone  over  our 
soul. 
The  deep  waters  of  the  proud  :  had  gone  even  over  our  soul. 
But  praised  be  the  Lord  :  which  hath  not  given  us  over  for  a  prey  unto 
their  teeth. 

Our  soul  is  escaped  even  as  a  bird  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowler  :  the 
snare  is  broken,  and  we  are  delivered. 

Our  help  standeth  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  :  which  hath  made  heaven 
and  earth. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
God  our  refuge  and  strength,  which  art  the  author  of  all 
godliness,   be   ready  *^   to   hear  the  devout   prayers   of  thy^ 
church :  and  grant  that  those  things  which  we  ask  faithfully, 
we  may  obtain  effectually :  through  Jesu  ^  Christ  our  Lord  ^ 
The  Epistle. 
Phil.  iii.  Brethren,  be  followers  together 

[i.e.  PhiL  iiL  verse  17  to  the  end.] 

all  things  unto  himself. 

The  Gospel. 
Math.  xxii.  Then  the  Pharisees  went  out  and  took  counsel  . 

[i.e.  Matt.  xxii.  verse  15  to  verse  23.] 


and  left  him  and  went  their  way. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

II  The  twenty-third  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
God   our   refuge    and   strength, 
which  art,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

IT  The  twenty-fourth  Sunday. 

Tlie  Collect. 
Lord,   we  beseech  thee,  assoil 
thy  people,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


•  In  ed.  1662,  "be  ready  we  beseech 
thee,  to  hear." 

<■  In  two  eds.,  1552,  "of  the  church;" 
but  in  1596,  "  thy"  restored. 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


•  In  one  ed.,  1540,  and  in  ed.  1596,  and 
afterwards,  "Jesus.  * 

f  In  one  ed.,  1559,  as  well  as  in  Scotch 
ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


At  the  Communion. 


i8s 


^  The  twenty-fourth  Sunday. 

Qui  confidtmt.     Psalm  cxxv.  « 

They  that  put  their  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  even  as  the  mount  Sion  ; 
which  may  not  be  removed,  but  standeth  fast  for  ever. 

The  hills  stand  about  Jerusalem  :  even  so  standeth  the  Lord  round  about 
his  people,  from  this  time  forth  for  evermore. 

For  the  rod  of  the  ungodly  cometh  not  into  the  lot  of  the  righteous  :  lest 
the  righteous  put  their  hand  unto  wickedness. 

Do  well,  (O  Lord)  :  unto  those  that  are  good  and  true  of  heart. 

As  for  such  as  turn  back  unto  their  own  wickedness  :  the  Lord  shall  lead 
them  forth  with  the  evil-doers ;  but  peace  shall  be  upon  Israel. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  assoil  thy  people  from  their  offences  : 
that  through  thy  bountiful  goodness,  we  may  be  delivered  from 
the  bands  of  all^  those  sins,  which  by  our  frailty  we  have 
committed  :  Grant  this,  &c.  * 

The  Epistle. 

Coloss.  i.  We  give  thanks  to  God 

[i.e.  Colos.  i.  verse  3  to  verse  13.] 

of  the  inheritance  of  Saints  ^  in  light. 

The  Gospel. 

Math.  ix.  While  ^  Jesus  spake  unto  the  people 

[i.e.  Matt.  ix.  verse  18  to  verse  27.] 

abroad  into  "  all  that  land. 


Charles   IL   1662. 

The  Three  attd  Twentieth  Sunday 
after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 
O  God,  our  refuge  and  strength, 
who  art,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 
Phil.  iii.  ver.  17. 
Brethren,   be    followers   toge- 
ther of  me 

to  all  things  unto  himself. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xxii.  ver.  15. 
Then  went  the  Pharisees  .     .     . 
to  went  their  way. 


%  In  one  ed.,  1549,  tnisp.  Ps.  xxv. 
^  In  ed.  1662,    "  may  all  be  delivered 
from  the  bands  of  those." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  iSS9,  "Amen." 


The  Four  and  Twentieth  Sunday 
after  Trinity. 

The  Collect. 
O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  absolve 
thy  people,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Grant  this,  O  heavenly  Father,  for 
Jesus  Christ's  sake,  our  blessed  Lord 
and  Saviour.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
Coloss.  i.  ver.  3. 
We  give  thanks  to  God     .     .     . 
to  the  saints  in  light. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  ix.  ver.  18. 
While  Jesus  spake  these  things 

unto  them 

to  into  all  that  land. 


"^  Ineds.  1532,  ISS9,  &c.,  "of the  Saints." 
'  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "Whilst." 
'"  In  ed.  1552,  1559,  and  1604,  "abroad 
in  all  that  land." 


1 86 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^  The  twenty-fifth  Sunday. 

Nisi  dominus.     Psalm  cxxvii. 

Except  the  Lord  build  the  house  :  their  labour  is  but  lost  that  build  it 

Except  the  Lord  keep  the  city  :  the  watchman  waketh  but  in  vain. 

It  is  but  lost  labour  that  ye  haste  to  rise  up  early,  and  so  late  take  rest, 
and  eat  the  bread  of  carefulness  :  for  so  he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep. 

Lo,  children  and  the  fruit  of  the  womb  :  are  an  heritage  and  gift  that 
Cometh  of  the  Lord. 

Like  as  the  arrows  in  the  hand  of  the  giant  :  even  so  are  the  young 
children. 

Happy  is  the  man  that  hath  his  quiver  full  of  them  :  they  shall  not  be 
ashamed  when  they  speak  with  their  enemies  in  the  gate. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c 

The  Collect. 

Stir  up,  we  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  the  wills  of  thy  faithful 
people,  that  they  plenteously  bringing  forth  the  fruit  of  good 
works,  may  of  thee  be  plenteously  rewarded :  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  °. 

The  Epistle. 

Jere.  xxiii.  Behold,  the  time  cometh 

[Le.  Jer.  xxiii.  verse  5  to  verse  9.] 

in  their  own  land  again. 

The  Gospel. 

John  vi.  When  Jesus  lift  up  his  eyes 

[i.e.  John  vi.  verse  5  to  verse  15.] 

should  come  into  the  world. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

IT  The  twenty-fifth  Sunday. 
The  Collect. 
Stir   up,   we    beseech  thee,    O 
Lord,  the  wills,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  70.    If  there  be  any  more  Sun- 
days   before   Advent  Sunday,   to 


supply  the  same  shall  be  taken  the 
service"  of  some  of  those  Sundays 
that  were  omitted  between  the  Epi- 
phany  and  Septuagesima. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  L  1604. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


■■  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  in  eds.,  1559, 
1596, 1604,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


»  In  ed.  1378,  "shall  be  taken  the  Col- 
lect, Epistle  and  Gospel  of  some,"  &c 


At  the  Communion. 


187 


Saint  Andrew's  Day. 

At  the  Communion. 
Sepe  expttgnaverunt.     Psalm  cxxix. 

Many  a  time  have  they  fought  against  me  from  my  youth  up  :  may 
Israel  now  say. 

Yea,  many  a  time  have  they  vexed  me  from  my  youth  up  :  but  they  have 
not  prevailed  against  me. 

The  plowers  plowed  upon  my  back  :  and  made  long  furrows. 

But  the  righteous  Lord  :  hath  hewn  the  snares  of  the  ungodly  in  pieces. 

Let  them  be  confounded  and  turned  backward  :  as  many  as  have  evil 
will  at  Sion, 

Let  them  be  even  as  the  grass  growing  upon  the  house-tops  :  which 
withereth  afore  it  be  plucked  up ; 

Whereof  the  mower  fiUeth  not  his  hand  :  neither  he  that  bindeth  up  the 
sheaves  his  bosom. 

So  that  they  which  go  by  say  not  so  much  as,  The  Lord  prosper  you  : 
we  wish  you  good  luck  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

The  Twenty-fifth  Sunday  after 

Trinity. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 

§  70.  If  there  be  any  more  Sun- 
days before  Advent  Sunday,  to 
supply  the  same,  shall  be  taken  the 
Service  of  some  of  those  Sundays 
that  were  omitted  between  the  Epi- 
phany and  Septuagesima.  But 
the  same  shall  follow  the  xxiiii. 
Sunday  after  Trinity.  And  if 
there  be  fewer  Sundays  than  xxv. 
before  Advent,  then  shall  the  xxiii. 
or  xxiiii.,  or  both,  be  omitted ;  so 
that  the  five  and  twentieth  shall 
never  either  alter  or  be  left  out,  but 
be  always  used  immediately  before 
Advent  Sunday,  to  the  which  the 
Epistle  and  Gospel  of  that  do  ex- 
pressly relate. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Twenty-fifth  Sunday  after 
Trinity. 

The  Collect. 
Stir  up,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
For  the  Epistle. 
Jer.  xxiii.  ver.  5. 
Behold,  the  days  come    .     .     . 
to  dwell  in  their  own  land. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  vi.  ver.  5. 
When  Jesus  then  lift  up  his  eyes 
to  come  into  the  world. 

§  70.  If  there  be  any  more  Sundays 
before  Advent-Sunday,  the  service 
of  some  of  those  Sundays  that  were 
omitted  after  the  Epiphany,  shall 
be  taken  in  to  supply  so  many  as 
are  here  wanting.  And  if  there 
be  fewer,  the  overplus  may  be 
omitted:  Provided  that  this  last 
Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel  shall 
ahvays  be  used  upon  the  Sunday 
next  before  Advent. 


t8S 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[S.  Andrew's  Day  continued.] 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  hast  given  such  grace  to  thy  Apostle 
saint  Andrewe,  that  he  counted  the  sharp  and  painful  death 
of  the  cross  to  be  an  high  honour,  and  a  great  glory :  Grant 
us  to  take  and  esteem  all  troubles  and  adversities  which  shall 
come  unto  us  for  thy  sake,  as  things  profitable  for  us  toward 
the  obtaining  of  everlasting  life  :  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  p. 

The  Epistle. 

Roma.  X.  If  thou  knowledge  '  with  thy  moutli 

[i.e.  Rom.  x.  verse  9  to  the  end.] 

but  speaketh  against  me. 

The  Gosfel. 

Math.  iv.  As  Jesus  walked  by  the  sea  of  Galilee    .... 

[Le.  Matt.  iv.  verse  18  to  verse  23.] 

left  the  ship  and  their  father,  and  followed  him. 

Saint  Thomas  tJu  Apostle. 

[At  the  Communion.'] 
Beati  omnes.     Psalm  cxxviii. 
Blessed  are  all  they  that  fear  the  Lord  :  and  walk  in  his  ways. 
For  thou  shalt  eat  the  labours  of  thine  hands  :  O  well  is  thee,  and  happy 
shall  thou  be. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
IT  Saint  Andrevfs  Day. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  didst  give 
such  grace  unto   thy  holy  apostle 
Saint    Andrew,    that     he     readily 
obeyed  the  calling  of  thy  Son  Jesus 
Christ,   and  followed   him  without 
delay :   Grant  unto  us  all,  that  we 
being  called  by  thy  holy  word,  may 
forthwith  give  over  ourselves,  obe- 
diently to    follow  thy   holy    com- 
mandments :  through  the  same  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord. 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  X549.] 


IT  Saint  Thomas  the  Apostle. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  everliving  God,  which 
for  the  more,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     T/u  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  iSS'-] 


James  L  1604. 

[Same  as  1532.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  15^2. 


t  In  one  ed.,  1559,  and  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen. 
1  In  ed.  1604,  "  If  thou  acknowledge." 


At  the  Communion. 


189 


Thy  wife  shall  be  as  the  fruitful  vine  :  upon  the  walls  of  thine  house. 
Thy  children  like  the  olive-branches  :  round  about  thy  table. 
Lo,  thus  shall  the  man  be  blessed  :  that  feareth  the  Lord. 
The  Lord  from  out  of  Sion  shall  so  bless  thee  :  that  thou  shalt  see 
Jerusalem  in  prosperity  all  thy  life  long. 

Yea,  that  thou  shalt  see  thy  children's  children  :  and  peace  upon  Israel. 
GI017  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

TTie  Collect. 
Almighty  everliving'"  God,  which  for  the  more  confirmation 
of  the  faith,  didst  suffer  thy  holy  apostle  ^  Thomas  to  be  doubt- 
ful in  thy  Son's  resurrection  :  Grant  us  so  perfectly,  and  with- 
out all  doubt,  to  believe  in  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  that  our 
faith  in  thy  sight  never  *  be  reproved :  hear  us,  O  Lord, 
through  the  same  Jesus  Christ ;  to  whom  with  thee  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  be  all  honour,  &c. 


The  Eputk. 
Ephes.  ii.  Now  ye  are  not  strangers     .     . 

[i.e.  Ephes.  ii.  verse  19  to  the  end.] 

through  the  Holy  Ghost. 

The  Gospel. 
John  XX.  Thomas  one  of  the  twelve  which 

[i.e.  John  xx.  verse  24  to  the  end.] 

have  life  through  his  name. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Saint  Andrriv's  Day. 

The  Colled. 
Almighty  God,  who  didst  give 
such  grace  unto  thy  holy  Apostle 
Saint  Andrew,  that  he  readily  obeyed 
the  calling  of  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ, 
and  followed  him  without  delay  ; 
Grant  unto  us  all,  that  we  being 
called  by  thy  holy  Word,  may  forth- 
with give  up  our  selves  obediently 
to  fulfil  thy  holy  commandments, 
through  the  same  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
Rom.  X.  ver.  9. 
If   thou   shalt   confess   with  thy 

mouth  the  Lord  Jesus 

to  gainsaying  people. 


The  Gospel. 
S.  IVIath.  iv.  ver.  18. 
Jesus,  walking  by  the  sea.     . 
to  and  followed  him. 

Saint  Thomas  the  Apostle. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everliving  God, 
who  for,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

be  all  honour  and  glory  now  and 

for  evermore.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

Ephes.  ii.  ver.  19. 

Now  therefore  ye  are  no  more 

strangers 

to  God  through  the  SjDirit. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  John  XX.  ver.  24. 
Thomas,  one  of  the  twelve    . 
to  life  through  his  Name. 


'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "Almighty  everlast- 
ing God,"  instead  of  "Almighty  everliv- 
ing;" and  in  eds.  1596,  1604,  and  after- 


wards, "Almighty  and  everliving  God." 
»  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Saint  Thomas." 
'  In  eds.  1596  and  1662,  "  may  never  be." 


190  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

•[[  The  Conversion  of  Saint  Paul. 

At  Matins. 

The  second  lesson,  Acts  xxiL  unto,  "They  heard  him." 

Confitebor  tibi.     Psahn  cxxxviiu 

I  WILL  give  thanks  imto  thee,  O  Lord,  with  my  whole  heart  :  even 
before  the  gods  will  I  sing  praise  unto  thee. 

I  will  worship  toward  thy  holy  temple,  and  praise  thy  name,  because 
of  thy  loving-kindness  and  truth  :  for  thou  hast  magnified  thy  name,  and 
thy  word,  above  all  things. 

When  I  called  upon  thee,  thou  heardest  me  :  and  enduedst  my  soul  with 
much  strength. 

All  the  kings  of  the  earth  shall  praise  thee,  O  Lord  :  for  they  have  heard 
the  words  of  thy  mouth. 

Yea,  they  shall  sing  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord  :  that  great  is  the  glory 
of  the  Lord. 

For  though  the  Lord  be  high,  yet  hath  he  respect  unto  the  lowly  :  as 
for  the  proud,  he  beholdeth  them  afar  oflf. 

Though  I  walk  in  the  midst  of  trouble,  yet  shalt  thou  refresh  me  :  thou 
shalt  stretch  forth  thine  hand  upon  the  furiousness  of  mine  enemies,  and 
thy  right  hand  shall  save  me. 

The  Lord  shall  make  good  his  loving-kindness  toward  me  :  yea,  thy 
mercy,  O  Lord,  endureth  for  ever ;  despise  not  then  the  works  of  thine 
own  hands. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c 

The  Collect. 

God,  which  hast  taught  all  the  world,  through  the  preach- 
ing of  thy  blessed  Apostle  Saint  Paul :  grant  we  beseech  thee, 
that  we  which  have  his  wonderful  conversion  in  remembrance, 
may  follow  and  fulfil  the  holy  doctrine  that  he  taught :  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ". 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

IT  The  Conversion  of  Saint  Paul. 
The  Collect. 

God,  which  hast  taught  all  the 
world,  through,  &c 

[Same  as  i549.] 

77^1*  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549] 


Elizabeth,  1559 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  \.  1604. 

[Same  as  1532.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


"  In  one  ed.,  155a,  1559,  and  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


At  the  Communion. 


191 


Tlie  Epistle. 
Acts  ix.  *  And  Saul  yet  breathing  out  .     . 

[i.e.  Acts  ix.  verse  i  to  verse  23.] 

affirming  that  this  was  very  Christ. 

The  Gospel. 
Math.  xix.  Peter  answered  and  said     .     . 

[i.e.  Matt.  xix.  verse  27  to  the  end.] 

and  the  last  shall  be  first. 


IT  At  Evensong. 
IT  The  second  lesson,  Acts  xxvi.  unto  the  end, 

^  The  Purification  of  Saint  Mary  the  virgin. 

Ecce  nunc  benedicite.     Psalm  cxxxiv. 

Behold  (now),  praise  the  Lord  :  all  ye  servants  of  the  Lord  ; 
Ye  that  by  night  stand  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  :  (even  in  the  courts  of 
the  house  of  our  God). 

Lift  up  your  hands  in  the  sanctuary  :  and  praise  the  Lord. 

The  Lord  that  made  heaven  and  earth  :  give  thee  blessing  out  of  Sion. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Conversion  of  Saint  Paul. 
The  Collect. 

O  God,  who  through  the  preach- 
ing of  the  blessed  Apostle  Saint 
Paul  hast  caused  the  light  of  the 
Gospel  to  shine  throughout  the 
world ;  Grant,  we  beseech  thee, 
that  we  having  his  wonderful  con- 
version in  remembrance,  may  shew 
forth  our  thankfulness  unto  thee  for 


the  same,  by  following  the  holy  doc- 
trine which  he  taught,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

For  the  Epistle. 
Acts  X.  ver.  i. 
And  Saul,  yet  breathing  out  .     . 
to  this  is  very  Christ. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Math.  xix.  ver.  27, 
Peter  answered  and  said  .     .     . 
to  the  last  shall  be  first. 


In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  in  one  ed.,  1559,  Acts  i.  tnisp.  for  ix. 


192 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[The  Purification  of  S.  Mary  coHtinu4d.'\ 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  we  humbly  beseech  thy 
Majesty,  that  as  thy  only  begotten  Son  was  this  day  pre- 
sented in  the  Temple,  in  the  substance  y  of  our  flesh  :  so  grant 
that  we  may  be  presented   unto  thee  with  pure  and  clear 
minds :  By  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ^ 
The  Epistle. 
T/te  same  that  is  appointed  for  the  Sunday  ■. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  ii.  When  the  time  of  their  purification  ...;.. 

[i.e.  Li'.ke  iL  verse  22  to  verse  28.] 

and  he  came  by  inspiration  into  the  temple. 


\  Saint  Mathies  day. 
Eripe  me.     Psalm  cxL 

Deliver  me,  O  Lord,  from  the  evil  man  :  and  preserve  me  from  the 
wicked  man. 

Which  imagine  mischief  in  their  hearts  :  and  stir  up  strife  all  the  day  long. 

They  have  sharpened  their  tongues  like  a  serpent  :  adder's  poison  is 
xmder  their  lips. 

Keep  me,  O  Lord,  from  the  hands  of  the  ungodly  :  preserve  me  from ' 
the  wicked  men,  which  are  purposed  to  overthrow  my  goings. 

The  proud  have  laid  a  snare  for  me,  and  spread  a  net  abroad  with 
cords  :  yea,  and  set  traps  in  my  way. 

I  said  unto  the  Lord,  thou  art  my  God  :  hear  the  voice  of  my  prayers, 
OLord. 

O  Lord  God,  thou  strength  of  my  health  :  thou  hast  covered  my  head  in 
the  day  of  battle. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

IT  The  Purification  of  Saint  Alary 
the  virgin. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
we  humbly,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549J 
The  Epistle. 

IT  The  same  that  is  appointed  for 
the  Sunday. 

The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Saint  Mathies  day. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  in  the 
place  of  the  traitor,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549-] 

s-  The  Epistle.      The  Gospti. 
iSame  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,   1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.) 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


1  In  eds.  1552,  1559,   1604,  and  1662,  •  In  ed.  1578,  "The  same  Epistle  ap- 

"in  substance."  pointed  the  Sunday  before." 

•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


At  the  Communion. 


193 


Let  not  the  ungodly  have  his  desire,  O  Lord  :  let  not  his  mischievous 
imagination  prosper,  lest  they  be  too  proud. 

Let  the  mischief  of  their  own  lips  fall  upon  the  head  of  them  :  that 
compass  me  about. 

Let  hot  burning  coals  fall  upon  them  :  let  them  be  cast  into  the  fire, 
and  into  the  pit,  that  they  never  rise  up  again. 

A  man  full  of  words  shall  not  prosper  upon  the  earth  :  evil  shall  hunt 
the  wicked  person  to  overthrow  him. 

Sure  I  am  that  the  Lord  will  avenge  the  poor  :  and  maintain  the  cause 
of  the  helpless. 

The  righteous  also  shall  give  thanks  unto  thy  name  :  and  the  just  shall 
continue  in  thy  sight. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &C. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  which  in  the  place  of  the  traitor  Judas, 
didst  choose  thy  faithful  servant  Mathie  ^  to  be  of  the  number 
of  thy "  twelve  Apostles  :  Grant  that  thy  church  being  alway 
preserved  from  false  Apostles,  may  ^  be  ordered  and  guided  by 
faithful  and  true  pastors  :  Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord*. 


The  Epistle. 
Acts  i.  In  those  days  Peter  stood  up 


[i.e.  Acts  i.  verse  15  to  the  end.] 

was  counted  with  the  eleven  apostles. 

The  Gospel. ' 
Math.  xi.  f  In  that  time  Jesus  answered   , 

[i.e.  Matt.  xi.  verse  25  to  the  end.] 

and  my  burden  is  light. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Presentation  of  Christ  in  the 
temple,  commonly  called.  The  Puri- 
fication of  Saint  Mary  the  Virgin. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  and  everliving  God, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
so  we  may  be  presented  unto  thee 
with  pure  and  clean  hearts,  by  the 
same  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

For  the  Epistle, 
Mai.  iii.  ver.  I. 
Behold,  I  will  send    .... 
to  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 


The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  ii.  ver,  22. 
And  when  the  days  of  her      ,     . 
to  was  upon  him. 

Saint  Matthias'  Day. 
The  Collect. 
O  Almighty  God,  who  into,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

For  the  Epistle. 
Acts  i.  ver.  15. 
In  those  days  Peter  stood  up 
to  with  the  eleven  Apostles. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Math.  xi.  ver.  25. 
At  that  time  Jesus  answered  . 
to  my  burden  is  light. 


the. 


•>  In  ed.  1662,  "  Matthias." 
In  Scotch  ed.,   1637,  and  1662,  "of 


•i  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "and  may." 
'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 
'  In  one  ed.,  1559,  Matt.  x.  tnisj>.  for  xi. 


194 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Thc^  Annunciation  of  the  virgin  Mary. 
IT  \At  the  Communion.^ 
Domitte,  non  est  exal.     Psalm  cxxxi. 
Lord,  I  am  not  high-minded  :  I  have  no  proud  looks. 
I  do  not  exercise  myself  in  great  matters  :  which  are  too  high  for  me. 
But  I  refrain  my  soul,  and  keep  it  low,  like  as  a  child  that  is  weaned 
from  his  mother  :  yea,  my  soul  is  even  as  a  weaned  child. 

O  Israel,  trust  in  the  Lord  :  from  this  time  forth  for  evermore. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
We  beseech  thee,  Lord,  pour  thy  grace  into  our  hearts,  that 
as  we  have  known  Christ  thy  Son's  incarnation  ^,  by  the  mes- 
sage of  an  Angel ;  so  by  his  cross  and  passion,  we  may  be 
brought  unto  the  glory  of  his  resurrection :  Through  the  same 
Christ  our  Lord '. 

The  Epistle. 

EsaL  viL     God  spake  once  again  unto  Ahaz 

[i.e.  Isai.  viL  verse  lo  to  vetse  x6.] 

refuse  the  evil  and  choose  the  good. 

The  Gospel. 

Luc.  i.  And  in  the  sixth  month  the  angel  Gabriel       .     .     . 

[i.e.  Luke  L  verse  26  to  verse  39.I 

and  the  angel  departed  from  her. 

IT  Sqint  Mark's  Day. 
Domine  clanurvi.     Psalm  cxli. '' 
Lord,  I  call  upon  thee,  haste  thee  unto  me  :  and  consider  my  voice 
when  I  cry  unto  thee. 

Let  my  prayer  be  set  forth  in  thy  sight  as  the  incense  :  and  let  the  lifting 
up  of  my  hands  be  an  evening  sacrifice. 

Set  a  watch,  O  Lord,  before  my  mouth  :  and  keep  the  door  of  my  lips. 
O  let  not  mine  heart  be  inclined  to  any  evil  thing  :  let  me  not  be  occu- 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

The  Annunciation  of  the  virgin 

Mary. 

The  Collect. 

We  beseech  thee.  Lord,  pour,  && 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

IT  Saint  Mark's  Day. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  hast,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


*  In  ed.  1506  and  1604,  "Annunciation 
of  the  Virgin  Alary  ;"  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 
"  Annunciation  o<  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary. " 

''  In  ed.  1663,  "known  the  incarnation 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

James  I.   1604. 

[Same  as  1553,  to] 

Saint  Mark's  Day. 

Almighty  God,  which  hast,  &c 

....  give  us  grace  that  we  be  not 

like    children,    carried    away  with 

every  blast   of  vain  doctrine,  but 

firmly  to  be  established  in  the  truth 

of  thy  holy  Gospel,  through  Jesus 

Christ  our  Lord. 


of  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ" 
'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 
^  In  one  ed.,  1549,  Ps.  cxl.  mis^.  for 

Ps.  czlL 


At  the  Communion. 


195 


pied  in  ungodly  works  with  the  men  that  work  wickedness,  lest  I  eat  of 
such  things  as  please  them. 

Let  the  righteous  rather  smite  me  friendly  :  and  reprove  me. 

But  let  not  their  precious  balms  break  my  head  :  yea,  I  will  pray  yet 
against  their  wickedness. 

Let  their  judges  be  overthrown  in  stony  places  :  that  they  may  hear  my 
words,  for  they  are  sweet. 

Our  bones  lie  scattered  before  the  pit  :  like  as  when  one  breaketh  and 
heweth  wood  upon  the  earth. 

But  mine  eyes  look  unto  thee,  O  Lord  God  :  in  thee  is  my  trust,  O  cast 
not  out  my  soul. 

Keep  me  from  the  snare  which  they  have  laid  for  me  :  and  from  the  traps 
of  the  wicked  doers. 

Let  the  ungodly  fall  into  their  own  nets  together  :  and  let  me  ever  escape 
them. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  which  hast  instructed  thy  holy  Church  with 
the  heavenly  doctrine  of  thy  Evangelist  Saint  Mark  :  give  us 
grace '"so  to  be  established  by  thy  holy  gospel,  that  we  be  not, 
like  children,  carried  away  with  every  blast  of  vain  doctrine  : 
Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ™. 

The  Epistle. 

Ephes.  iv.  Unto  every  one  of  us  is  given  grace      .... 

[i.e.  Eph.  iv.  verse  7  to  verse  17.] 

edifying  of  itself  through  love. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 

Saint  Mark's  Day. 

[Same  as  1604,  except] 

....  but  that  we  may  be  firmly 
established,  .  .  ,  &c. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Annunciation  of  the  blessed 
Vif^n  Mary. 

The  Collect. 

We  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

For  the  Epistle. 
Isa.  vii.  ver.  lo. 
Moreover  the  Lord  spake    . 
to  choose  the  good. 


The  Gospel. 

S.  Luke  i.  ver.  26. 

And  in  the  sixth  month    .     .     . 

to  the  angel  departed  from  her. 

Saint  Mark's  Day. 

The  Collect. 

0  Almighty  God,  who  hast,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Give  us  grace,  that  being  not  like 
children  carried  away  with  every 
blast  of  vain  doctrine,  we  may  be 
established  in  the  truth  of  thy  holy 
Gospel,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
Ephes.  iv.  ver.  7. 
Unto  every  one  of  us  is  given     . 
to  of  itself  in  love. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  XV.  ver.  i. 

1  AM  the  true  vine 

to  joy  might  be  full. 


I  In  eds.  1578,  1596,  and  in  one  edition  probably  earlier  still  (without  date),  the  end  of 
this  Collect  was  altered  to  the  tbrm  adopted  in  ed.  1604.        ""  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


196  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

[S.  Mark's  Day  coHtimud.l 
The  Gospel. 
John  XV.  I  am  the  true  vine        .     , 

[i.e.  John  xv.  verse  i  to  verse  12.] 

that  your  joy  might  be  full. 

^  Saint  Philip  and  James  \ 

IT  At  Matins. 

The  second  lesson,  Acts  viii.  unto,  "  When  the  apostles." 

^  At  the  Communion. 

Ecce  quam  bonum  I     Psalm  cxxxiiL 

Behold,  how  good  and  jojrful  a  thing  it  is  :  brethren,  to  dwell  together 

in  unity ! 

It  is  like  the  precious  ointment  upon  the  head,  that  ran  down  unto  the 
beard  :  even  unto  Aaron's  beard,  and  went  down  to  the  skirls  of  his 
clothing. 

Like  the  dew  of  Hermon  :  which  fell  upon  the  hill  of  Sion, 
For  there  the  Lord  promised  his  blessing  :  and  life  for  evermore. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  whom  truly  to  know  is  everlasting  life : 
Grant  us  perfectly  to  know  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  the 
way,  the  truth,  and  the  life,  as  thou  hast  taught  Saint  Philip, 
and  other  the  Apostles :  Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord*". 
77ie  Epistle. 
James  L  James  the  servant  of  God 

[i.e.  James  i.  verse  i  to  verse  13.] 

hath  promised  to  them  that  love  him. 

The  Gospel. 
John  xiv.     And  Jesus  said  unto  his  disciples 

[i.e.  John  xiv.  verse  i  to  verse  15.] 

in  my  name  I  will  do  it. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Saint  Philip  and  James. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  whom  truly  to 
know,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
H  Scant  Bamabe  Apostle. 
The  Collect. 
Lord  almighty,  which  hast  en- 
dued thy  holy  Apostle,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Tlu  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  155a.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1532.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


"  In  eds.  1596,  1604,  and  afterwards,  "  Saint  Philip  and  James  day. 
•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen. 


At  the  Communion. 


197 


Saint  Barnabe  Apostle. 

At  Matins. 

^  The  second  lesson,  Acts  xiv.  unto  the  end. 

IT  At  the  Communion. 

Voce  mea  ad  Dominum.     Psalm  cxlii. 

I  CRIED  unto  the  Lord  with  my  voice  :  yea,  even  unto  the  Lord  did  I 

make  my  suppHcation. 

I  poured  out  my  complaints  before  him  :  and  shewed  him  of  my  trouble. 
When  my  spirit  was  in  heaviness  thou  knewest  my  path  :  in  the  way 
wherein  I  walked  have  they  privily  laid  a  snare  for  me. 

I  looked  also  upon  my  right  hand  :  and  see  there  was  no   man  that 
would  know  me. 

I  had  no  place  to  fly  unto  :  and  no  man  cared  for  my  soul. 
I  cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  and  said  :  thou  art  my  hope,  and  my  portion 
in  the  land  of  the  living. 

Consider  my  complaint  :  for  I  am  brought  very  low. 
O  deliver  me  from  my  persecutors  :  for  they  are  too  strong  for  me. 
Bring  my  soul  out  of  prison,  that  I  may  give  thanks  unto  thy  name  : 
which  thing  if  thou  wilt  grant  me,  then  shall  the  righteous  resort  unto  my 
company. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Lord  Almighty,  which  hast  endued  thy  holy  Apostle  Barna- 
bas P  with  singular  gifts  of  thy  1  Holy  Ghost :  let  us  not  be 
destitute'  of  thy  manifold  gifts,  nor  yet  of  grace  to  use  them 
alway  to  thy  honour  and  glory :  Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  *. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
Saint  Philip  and  Saint  yarned  Day. 

The  Collect. 
O  Almighty  God,  whom  truly, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

the  life,  that  following  the  steps  of 
thy  holy  Apostles,  Saint  Philip  and 
Saint  James,  we  may  stedfastly  walk 
in  the  way  that  leadeth  to  eternal 
life,  through  the  same  thy  Son 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
S.  James  i.  ver.  i, 
James,  a  servant  of  God    .     .     . 
to  them  that  love  him. 


The  Gospel. 
S.  John  xiv.  ver.  i 
And  Jesus  said  unto  his  disciples, 
to  I  will  do  it. 

Saint  Barnabas  the  Apostle. 

The  Collect. 
O   Lord    God    Almighty,    who 
didst  endue  thy  holy  Apostle,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
For  the  Epistle. 
Acts  xi.  ver.  22. 
Tidings  of  these  things    .     .     . 
to  the  hands  of  Barnabas  and  Saul. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  XV.  ver.  12, 
This  is  my  commandment     .     . 
to  he  may  give  it  you. 


P  In  Scotched.,  1637,  "Saint  Barnabas." 
«  In  eds.  1596,  1604,  and  1662,  "gifts  of 
the  Holy  Ghost." 


"■  In  ed.  1662,  "  leave  us  not,  we  beseech 
thee,  destitute." 
■  la  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


198  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549, 

[S.  Barnabas  Day  continued.] 
The  Epistle. 
Act  xi.  Tidings  of  these  things  came  unto  the  ears  of    .     . 

[i.e.  Acts  xi.  verse  22  to  the  end.] 

by  the  hands  of  Barnabas  and  SauL 
The  Gospd. 
John  XV.  This  is  my  commandment  that  ye  love  together    . 

[Lc,  John  XV.  verse  12  to  verse  17.] 

in  my  name  he  may  give  it  you. 

IT  At  Evensong. 
\  The  second  lesson.  Acts  xv.  unto,  "  After  certain  days." 

^  Saint  John  Baptist. 

T  Proper  Lessons  at  Matins. 

The  first  lesson,  Malach.  iii.  unto  the  end. 

The  second  lesson,  Mat.  iii.  unto  the  end. 

At  the  Communion. 

Domiru  exaudi.     Psalm  cxliii.  • 

Hear  my  prayer,  O  Lord,  and  consider  my  desire  :  hearken  unto  me  for 

thy  truth  and  righteousness'  sake. 

And  enter  not  into  judgement  with  thy  servant  :  for  in  thy  sight  shall  no 
man  living  be  justified. 

For  the  enemy  hath  persecuted  my  soul ;  he  hath  smitten  my  life  down 
to  the  ground  :  he  hath  laid  me  in  the  darkness,  as  the  men  that  have  been 
long  dead. 

Therefore  is  my  spirit  vexed  within  me  :  and  my  heart  within  me  is 
desolate. 

Yet  do  I  remember  the  time  past ;  I  muse  upon  all  thy  works  :  yea,  I 
exercise  myself  in  the  works  of  thy  hands. 

I  stretch  forth  my  hands  imto  thee  :  my  soul  gaspeth  unto  thee  as 
a  thirsty  land. 

Hear  me,  O  Lord,  and  that  soon,  for  my  spirit  waxeth  faint  :  hide  not 
thy  face  from  me,  lest  I  be  like  unto  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

H  Saint  John  Baptist. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  by  whose  pro- 
vidence, &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospd. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.   1604. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


»  lu  one  ed.,  1549,  Ps.  cxliv.  misp.  for  cxIiiL 


At  the  Communion. 


199 


O  let  me  hear  thy  loving-kindness  betimes  in  the  morning,  for  in  thee  is 
my  trust  :  shew  thou  me  the  way  that  I  should  walk  in,  for  I  lift  up  my 
soul  unto  thee. 

Deliver  me,  O  Lord,  from  mine  enemies  :  for  I  fly  unto  thee  to  hide  me. 

Teach  me  to  do  the  thing  that  pleaseth  thee,  for  thou  art  my  God  :  let 
thy  loving  Spirit  lead  me  forth  into  the  land  of  lighteousness. 

Quicken  me,  O  Lord,  for  thy  name's  sake  :  and  for  thy  righteousness' 
sake  bring  my  soul  out  of  trouble. 

And  of  thy  goodness  slay  mine  enemies  :  and  destroy  all  them  that  vex 
my  soul ;  for  I  am  thy  servant. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  by  whose  providence  thy  servant  John 
Baptist  "^  was  wonderfully  bom,  and  sent  to  prepare  the  way 
of  thy  Son  our  Saviour  by  preaching  of  penance  ^  :  make  us  so 
to  follow  his  doctrine  and  holy  life,  that  we  may  truly  repent 
according  to  his  preaching,  and  after  his  example  constantly  y 
speak  the  truth,  boldly  rebuke  vice,  and  patiently  suffer  for  the 
truth's  sake  :  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ^. 

The  Epistle. 
Esai.  xl.  Be  of  good  cheer  my  people       

[i.e.  Isai.  xl.  verse  1  to  verse  12.] 

entreat  those  that  bear  young. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  i.  Elizabeth's  time  came 

[i.e.  Luke  i.  verse  57  to  the  end.] 

should  shew  himself  unto  the  Israelites. 


Proper  Lessons  at  Evensong. 

The  first  lesson,  Malach.  iv.  ■  unto  the  end. 

The  second  lesson.  Mat.  xiv.  unto,  "When  Jesus  heard." 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Saint  John  Baptist's  Day. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  by  whose,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 


"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Saint  John 
Baptist." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "preaching  of  repent- 
ance." 

y  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1559,  "  constantly 


For  the  Epistle. 
Isa.  xl.  ver.  f. 
Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  . 
to  that  are  with  young. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  i.  ver.  57. 
Elizabeth's  full  time  came 
to  his  shewing  unto  Israel. 


to  speak." 
»  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 
»  In  two  eds.,  1549,  MaL  iiL  misp.  for 

MaL  iv. 


200  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

^  Saint  Peter's  Day. 

At  Matins. 

The  second  lesson,  Acts  ili.  unto  the  end. 

At  The  Communion. 

Benedictus  dominus.     Psalm  cxliv.  •* 

Blessed  be  the  Lord  my  strength  :  which  teacheth  my  hands  to  war, 
and  my  fingers  to  fight ; 

My  hope  and  my  fortress,  my  castle  and  deliverer,  my  defender  in  whom 
I  trust :  which  subdueth  my  people  that  is  imder  me. 

Lord,  what  is  man,  that  thou  hast  such  respect  uito  him  :  or  the  son 
of  man,  that  thou  so  regardest  him  ? 

Man  is  like  a  thing  of  nought :  his  time  passeth  away  like  a  shadow. 

Bow  thy  heavens,  O  Lord,  and  come  down  :  touch  the  mountains,  and 
they  shall  smoke. 

Cast  forth  the  lightning,  and  tear  them  :  shoot  out  thine  arrows,  and 
consume  them. 

Send  down  thine  hand  from  above  :  deliver  me,  and  take  me  out  of  the 
great  waters,  from  the  hand  of  strange  children  ; 

Whose  mouth  talketh  of  vanity  :  and  their  right  hand  is  a  right  hand 
of  wickedness. 

I  will  sing  a  new  song  unto  thee,  O  God  :  and  sing  praises  unto  thee 
upon  a  ten-stringed  lute. 

Thou  hast  given  victory  unto  kings  :  and  hast  delivered  David  thy 
servant  from  the  peril  of  the  sword. 

Save  me,  and  deliver  me  from  the  hand  of  strange  children  :  whose 
mouth  talketh  of  vanity,  and  their  right  hand  is  a  right  hand  of  iniquity. 

That  our  sons  may  grow  up  as  the  young  plants  :  and  that  our  daughters 
may  be  as  the  polished  comers  of  the  temple. 

That  our  gamers  may  be  full  and  plenteous  with  all  manner  of  store  : 
that  our  sheep  may  bring  forth  thousands  and  ten  thousands  in  our  streets. 

That  our  oxen  may  be  strong  to  labour,  that  there  be  no  decay  :  no 
leading  into  captivity,  and  no  complaining  in  our  streets. 

Happy  are  the  people  that  be  in  such  a  case  :  yea,  blessed  are  tlie 
people  who  have  the  Lord  for  their  God. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
IT  Saint  Peter's  Day. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  by  thy 
Son  Jesus  Christ,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  iS5»-] 


James  L  1604. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


■>  la  two  eds.,  1549,  Ps.  cxllii.  mitf.  for  cxliv. 


At  the  Communion.  201 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  which  by  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ  hast  given 
to  thy  Apostle  Saint  Peter  many  excellent  gifts,  and  com- 
mandedst  •=  him  earnestly  to  feed  thy  flock ;  make,  we  beseech 
thee,  all  bishops  and  pastors  ^  diligently  ^  to  preach  thy  holy 
word,  and  the  people  obediently  to  follow  the  same,  that  they 
may  receive  the  crown  of  everlasting  Glory,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  ^. 

The  Epistle. 

Acts  xii.  At  the  same  time,  Herod  the  King 

[i.e.  Acts  xii.  verse  i  to  vers*  12.] 

waiting  for  of  s  the  people  of  the  Jews. 
The  Gospel. 
Mat  xvi.  ^  When  Jesus  came  into  the  coasts 

[i.e.  Matt.  xvi.  verse  13  to  verse  20.] 

loosest  in  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven. 
At  Evensong. 

The  second  lesson,  Acts  iv. '  unto  the  end. 

• 

^  Saint  Mary  Magdalene. 
Laiida  anima  mea.     Psalm  cxlvi. 

Praise  the  Lord,  O  my  soul ;  while  I  live  will  I  praise  the  Lord  :  yea, 
as  long  as  I  have  any  being,  I  will  sing  praises  unto  my  God. 

O  put  not  your  trust  in  princes,  nor  in  any  child  of  man  :  for  there  is  no 
help  in  them. 

For  when  the  breath  of  man  goeth  forth  he  shall  turn  again  to  his  earth  : 
and  then  all  his  thoughts  perish. 

Blessed  is  he  that  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his  help  :  and  whose  hope 
is  in  the  Lord  his  God. 

Which  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  therein  is  :  which 
keepeth  his  promise  for  ever  ; 

Which  helpeth  them  to  right  that  suffer  wrong  :  which  feedeth  the 
hungry. 

The  Lord  looseth  men  out  of  prison  :  the  Lord  giveth  sight  to  the  blind. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Saint  Peter's  Day. 

The  Collect. 

O  Almighty  God,  who  by  thy 
Son  Jesus  Christ  didst  give,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


For  the  Epistle. 
Acts  xii.  ver.  i. 
About  that  time  Herod  the  King 
to  expectation  of  the  people  of  the 
Jews. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xvi.  ver.  13. 

When  Jesus  came 

to  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven. 


•In   two   eds.,   1552,   "  commandest ; "  '  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 

in  one  ed.,  1559,  in  1604,  and  afterwards,  g  Sic  in  ed.  1549  ;  but  in  eds.  1552, 1550, 

commandedst."  &c.,  "  waiting  of  the." 

""In  Scotch    ed.,   1637,   "all  Bishops,  ^  In  one  ed.,  1559,  Matt.  xv.  misp.  for 

Presbyters,  and  Ministers."  xvi. 

In    one   ed.,   1549,   the  word    "dill-  •  In  one  ed.,  1549,   Acts  iii.   misi,  for 

gently    is  omitted.  Acts  iv. 


202  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

[S.  Mary  Magdalen's  Day  continued.^ 

The  Lord  helpeth  them  that  are  fallen  :  the  Lord  careth  for  the  righteous. 

The  Lord  careth  for  the  strangers ;  he  defendeth  the  fatherless  and 
widow  :  as  for  the  way  of  the  ungodly,  he  tumeth  it  upside  down. 

The  Lord  thy  God,  O  Sion,  shall  be  king  for  evermore  :  and  throughout 
all  generations. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  b^iiming,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Merciful  Father,  give  us  grace,  that  we  never  presume  to 
sin  through  the  example  of  any  creature,  but  if'  it  shall 
chance  us  at  any  time  to  offend  thy  divine  majesty,  that  then 
we  may  truly  repent,  and  lament  the  same,  after  the  example 
of  Mary  Magdalene,  and  by  lively  faith  obtain  remission  of 
all  our  sins :  through  the  only  merits  of  thy  Son  our  Saviour 
Christ. 

77u  Epistle. 
Prov.  xxxi.  Whosoever  findeth  an  honest  faithful  woman 

[i.e.  Prov.  xxxi.  verse  lo  to  the  end.] 

and  let  her  own  works  praise  her  in  the  gates. 
The  Gospel. 
Luc.  viL  And  one  of  the  Pharisees  desired  Jesus  .... 

[Le.  Luke  viL  verse  36  to  the  end.] 

thy  faith  hath  saved  thee ;  go  in  peace. 

^  Saint  James  the  Apostle. 

Laudate  Dominum  de  cdis.     Psalm  cxlviiL  ' 
O  PRAISE  the  Lord  of  heaven  :  praise  him  in  the  height. 
Praise  him,  all  ye  angels  of  his  :  praise  him,  all  his  host 
Praise  him,  sun  and  moon  :  praise  him,  all  ye  stars  and  light 
Praise  him,  all  ye  heavens  :  and  ye  waters  that  be  above  the  heavens. 
Let  them  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord  :  for  (he  spake  the  word,  and  they 
were  made ;)  he  commanded,  and  they  were  created. 


«  Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

(The  Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel  for 
S.  Mary  Magdalen  is  omitted  in  this  edi- 
tion, nor  was  it  afterwards  replaced.] 

H  Saint  James  the  Apostle. 
The  Collect. 
Grant,  O  merciful  God,  that  as 
thy  holy  Apostle,  &c. 

(Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549-] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  L  1604, 
[Same  as  ijSa-] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


k  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "but  and  if."  '  In  one  ed.,  15491  Ps-  xlviii-  mitf.  for  advilL 


At  the  Communion.  203 

He  hath  made  them  fast  for  ever  and  ever  :  he  hath  given  them  a  law 
which  shall  not  be  broken. 

Praise  the  Lord  upon  earth  :  ye  dragons,  and  all  deeps  ; 

Fire  and  hail,  snow  and  vapours  :  wind  and  storm,  fulfilling  his  word ; 

Mountains  and  all  hills  :  fruitful  trees  and  all  cedars ; 

Beasts  and  all  cattle  :  worms  and  feathered  fowls  ; 

Kings  of  the  earth  and  all  people  :  princes  and  all  the  judges  of  the 
world ; 

Young  men  and  maidens,  old  men  and  children,  praise  the  name  of 
the  Lord  :  for  his  name  only  is  excellent,  and  his  praise  above  heaven 
and  earth. 

He  shall  exalt  the  horn  of  his  people ;  all  his  saints  shall  praise  him  : 
even  the  children  of  Israel,  even  the  people  that  serveth  him. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Grant,  O  merciful  God,  that  as  thine  holy  Apostle  James  ™ 
leaving  his  father  and  all  that  he  had,  without  delay,  was 
obedient  unto  the  calling  of  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  fol- 
lowed him :  So  we  forsaking  all  worldly  °  and  carnal  affec- 
tions, may  be  evermore  °  ready  to  follow  thy  commandments  p  : 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  X 

The  Epistle. 
Act  xi.  Acts  xii.   In  those  days  came  prophets  from  the  city 

[i.e.  Acts  xi.  verse  27  to  verse  3  of  chap.  xiL] 

he  proceeded  further  and  took  Peter  also. 
The  Gospel. 
Math.  XX.   Then  came  to  him   the   mother  of  Zebedee's 
children 

[i.e.  Matt  xx.  verse  20  to  verse  29.] 

his  life  a  redemption  for  many. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
Saint  James  the  Apostle. 

The  Collect. 
Grant,  O  merciful  God,  that,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Por  the  Epistle. 

Acts  xi.  ver.  27. 

In  those  days  came  prophets . 

to  further  to  take  Peter  also. 

7^1?  Gospel. 

S.  Matth.  XX.  ver.  20. 

Then  came  to  him  the  mother 

to  life  a  ransom  for  many. 


"I"  In  two  eds.,  1552,  "  Thy  holy  Jlpostle  "  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "all  the  worldly." 

Saint  James;"  and  in  one  ed.,  "thy  holy  "  In  one  ed.,   1552,  and  in  ed.   1559, 

Apostle  James."     In  one  ed.,  1559,  "thy  "  may  evermore  be. " 
holy  Apostle  Saint  James;"  in  on\j  ed.,  P  In    ed.   1662,   "thy   holy   command- 

1596,  and  in  1604,   "thine  holy  Apostle  ments." 

James."    In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "thine  holy  1  In    all    eds.,    1552,    "through   Jesii 

Apostle  S.  James ;"  and  in  ed.  1662,  "thine  Christ  our  Lord;"  and  in  eds.  1559  and 

holy  Apostle  Saint  James."  1637,  "Amen"  added. 


204  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

Saint  Bartholomewe  ■■. 
Non  nobis  domine.     Psalm  cxv. 

Not  unto  us,  (O  Lord, )  not  unto  us,  but  \mto  thy  name  give  the  praise  : 
for  thy  loving  mercy,  and  for  thy  truth's  sake. 

Wherefore  shall  the  heathen  say  :  Where  is  now  their  God  ? 

As  for  our  God,  he  is  in  heaven  :  he  hath  done  whatsoever  pleased  him. 

Their  idols  are  silver  and  gold  :  even  the  work  of  men's  hands. 

They  have  mouths,  and  speak  not  :  eyes  have  they,  and  see  not. 

They  have  ears,  and  hear  not :  noses  have  they,  and  smell  not. 

They  have  hands,  and  handle  not ;  feet  have  they,  and  walk  not  :  neither 
speak  they  through  their  throat 

They  that  make  them  are  like  unto  them  :  and  so  are  all  such  as  put 
their  trust  in  them. 

But  the  house  of  Israel,  trust  fhou  in  the  Lord  :  he  is  their  succour  and 
defence. 

Ye  house  of  Aaron,  put  your  trust  in  the  Lord  :  he  is  their  helper  and 
defender. 

Ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  trust  ye  in  the  Lord  :  he  is  their  helper  and 
defender. 

The  Lord  hath  been  mindful  of  us,  and  he  shall  bless  us  :  even  he  shall 
bless  the  house  of  Israel,  he  shall  bless  the  house  of  Aaron. 

lie  shall  bless  them  that  fear  the  Lord  :  both  small  and  great. 

The  Lord  shall  increase  you  more  and  more  :  you  and  your  children. 

Ye  are  the  blessed  of  the  Lord  :  which  made  heaven  and  earth. 

All  the  whole  heavens  are  the  Lord's  :  the  earth  hath  he  given  unto  the 
children  of  men. 

The  dead  praise  not  thee,  (O  Lord  :)  neither  all  they  that  go  down  into 
the  silence. 

But  we  will  praise  the  Lord  :  from  this  time  forth  for  evermore. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 

O  Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  which  hast  given  grace 
to  thy  *  apostle '  Bartholomewe  truly  to  believe  and  to  preach 
thy  word :  grant,  we  beseech  thee,  unto  thy  church,  both  to 
love  that  he  believed,  and  to  preach  that  he  taught :  through 
Christ  our  Lord ". 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

Saint  Bartholomew. 

The  Collect. 

O  Almighty  and  everlasting,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

.  IT  Saint  Mathru). 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  which  by  thy,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  155a.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


'In  ed.  1506,  1604,  &c.,  "Saint  Bartho-  '  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Saint  Bartho* 

lomew  Apostle."  lomcw." 

•  In  one  ed.,  1559,  1506,  1604,  and  after-  "  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 
wards,  "  thine  Apostle. 


At  the  Communion. 


205 


The  Epistle. 
Acts  V.  By  the  hands  of  the  Apostles  .     .     .     , 

[i.e.  Acts  V.  verse  12  to  verse  17.] 

they  were  healed  every  one. 

The  Gospel. 
Luc.  xxii.  *  And  there  was  a  strife  among  them . 

[i.e.  Luke  xxii.  verse  24  to  verse  31.] 

judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 


\  Saint  Mathewe^. 

Laudate  Dominum  omnes  gentes.     Psalm  cxvii. 
O  PRAISE  the  Lord,  all  ye  heathen  :  praise  him,  all  ye  nations. 
For  his  merciful  kindness  is  ever  more  and  more  towards  us  :  and  the 
truth  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  by  thy  blessed  Son  didst  call 
Mathewe  ^  from  the  receipt  of  custom  to  be  an  Apostle  and 
Evangelist :  Grant  us  grace  to  forsake  all  covetous  desires 
and  inordinate  love  of  riches,  and  to  follow  thy  said  Son 
Jesus  Christ :  who  liveth  and  reigneth,  &c. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
Saint  Bartholomew  the  Apostle. 

The  Collect. 
O    Almighty    and    everlasting 
God,  who  didst  give  to  thine  Apo- 
stle   Bartholomew    grace   truly  to 
believe  and  to  preach  thy  Word  ; 
Grant,  we  beseech  thee,   unto  thy 
Church  to  love   that  Word  which 
he    believed,   and  both   to   preach 
and  receive  the  same,  through  Je- 
sus Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 
For  the  Epistle. 
Acts  V.  ver.  12. 
By  the  hands  of  the  apostles  .     . 
to  were  healed  every  one. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  xxii.  ver.  24. 
And  there  was  also  a  strife     . 
to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 


Saint  Matthew  the  Apostle. 
The  Collect. 

O  Almighty  God,  who  by  thy, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

follow  the  same  thy  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  who  liveth  and  reigneth 
with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  one 
God,  world  without  end.     Amen. 

The  Epistle. 
2  Cor.  iv.  ver.  i. 
Therefore  seeing  we  have  .    . 
to  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  ix.  ver.  9. 
And  as  Jesus  passed  forth      .     . 
to  sinners  to  repentance. 


'  In  two  eds.,  1549,  Luc.  xx.  misp.  for  xxii.  y  In  ed.  1596,  1604,  S:c.,  "Saint 

Matthew  Apostle."         •  In  Scotch  ed'.,  1637,  "S.  Matthew;"  in  ed.  1662,  "Matthew." 


2o6  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

[S.  Matthew's  Hay  continued. 1 

The  Epistle. 
2  Cor.  iv.  Seeing  that  we  have  such  an  office 

[i.e.  2  Cor.  iv.  verse  i  to  verse  7.] 

in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ 

The  Gospel. 
Math.  ix.»  And  as  Jesus  passed  forth 

[i.e.  Matt  ix.  verse  9  to  verse  14.] 

to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance. 

^  Saint  Michael  and  all  Angels. 

IT  At  the  Communion. 

Laudate  pueru     FsaL  cxiii. 

Praise  the  Lord,  (ye  servants)  :  O  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord  :  from  this  time  forth  for  evermore. 

The  Lord's  name  is  praised  :  from  the  rising  up  of  the  sun  vmto  the 
going  down  of  the  same. 

The  Lord  is  high  above  all  heathen  :  and  his  glory  above  the  heavens. 

Who  is  like  unto  the  Lord  our  God,  that  hath  his  dwelling  so  high  : 
and  yet  humbleth  himself  to  behold  the  things  that  are  in  heaven  and 
earth? 

He  taketh  up  the  simple  out  of  the  dust  :  and  lifteth  the  poor  out  of 
the  mire ; 

That  he  may  set  him  with  the  princes  :  even  with  the  princes  of  his 
people. 

He  maketh  the  barren  woman  to  keep  house  :  and  to  be  a  joyful  mother 
of  children. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

The  Collect. 
EvERiASTiNG  God,  which  hast  ordained  and  constituted  the 
services  of  all  Angels  and  men  in  a  wonderful  order :  merci- 
fully grant,  that  they  which  alway  do  thee  service  in  heaven, 
may  by  thy  appointment  succour  and  defend  us  in  earth : 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  &c.'> 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

"i  Saint  Michael  and  All  Angels. 
The  Collect. 
Everlasting  God,  which  hast 
ordained,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.      The  Gospel. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[Same  as  issi.] 


•  In  one  cd.,  »S49,  Luc.  xix.  misp.  for  i"  In  one  ed.,  1559,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 

Math.  ix.  "Amen." 


At  the  Communion. 


207 


The  Epistle. 
Apoca.  xii.  There  was  a  great  battle  in  heaven 

[i.e.  Apoc.  xii.  verse  7  to  verse  13.] 

he  hath  but  a  short  time. 

The  Gospel. 

Math,  xviii.  At  the  same  time  came  the  disciples  .... 

[i.e.  Matt  xviiL  verse  i  to  verse  11.] 

my  father  which  is  in  heaven. 

^  Saint  Luke  Evangelist. 

Super  flumina.     Psalm  cxxxvii.  = 

By  the  waters  of  Babylon  we  sat  down  and  wept :  when  we  remembered 
(thee,  O)  Sion. 

As  for  our  harps,  we  hanged  them  up  :  upon  the  trees  that  are  therein. 

For  they  that  led  us  away  captive  required  of  us  then  a  song,  and  melody, 
in  our  heaviness  :  Sing  us  one  of  the  songs  of  Sion. 

How  shall  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  :  in  a  strange  land  ? 

If  I  forget  thee,  O  Jerusalem  :  let  my  right  hand  forget  her  cunning. 

If  I  do  not  remember  thee,  let  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my 
mouth  :  yea,  if  I  prefer  not  Jerusalem  in  my  mirth. 

Remember  the  children  of  Edom,  O  Lord,  in  the  day  of  Jerusalem  : 
how  they  said,  Down  vrith  it,  down  with  it,  even  to  the  ground. 

O  daughter  of  Babylon,  wasted  with  misery  :  yea,  happy  shall  he  be 
that  rewardeth  thee,  as  thou  hast  served  us. 

Blessed  shall  he  be  that  taketh  thy  children  :  and  throweth  them  against 
the  stones. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Saint  Michael  and  All  Angels. 
The  Collect. 

O  EVERLASTING  God,  Who  hast 
ordained  and  constituted  the  ser- 
vices of  Angels  and  men  in  a  won- 
derful order  ;  Mercifully  grant,  that 
as  thy  holy  Angels  alway  do  thee 
service  in  heaven  ;  so  by  thy  ap- 
pointment they  may  succour   and 


defend  us  on  earth,  through  Jesu 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 
For  the  Epistle. 
Rev.  xii.  ver.  7. 
There  was  war  in  heaven      .     . 
to  hath  but  a  short  time. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  xviii.  ver.  r. 
At  the  same  time  came     .     .     . 
to  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 


In  two  eds.,  1549,  Psalm  cxxxii.  misp.lox  cxxxviL 


2o8 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


[S.  Luke's  Day  continued^] 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  calledst  *  Luke  the  physician,  whose 
praise  is  in  the  gospel,  to  be  a  physician  of  the  soul :  it  may 
please  thee  by  the  wholesome  medicines  of  his  doctrine,  to 
heal  all  the  diseases  of  our  souls :  through  thy  Son  Jesus  ® 
Christ  our  Lord  ^. 

The  Epistle. 
2  Tim.  iv.B  Watch  thou  in  all  things 

[i.e.  2  Tim.  iv.  verse  5  to  verse  16.] 

hath  greatly  withstand  ^  our  words. 
The  Gospel. 
Luc.  X.  The  Lord  appointed  other  seventy 

[i.e.  Luke  x.  verse  i  to  verse  7.  J 

is.  worthy  of  his  reward. 

^  Symon  and /tide  Apostles. 

Laudate  dominum.     Psalm  cl. 

O  PRAISE  God  in  his  holiness  :  praise  him  in  the  firmament  of  his  power. 

Praise  him  in  his  noble  acts  :  praise  him  according  to  his  excellent 
greatness. 

Praise  him  in  the  sound  of  the  trumpet :  praise  him  upon  the  lute  and  harp. 

Praise  him  in  the  cymbals  and  dance  :  praise  him  upon  the  strings 
and  pipe. 

Praise  him  upon  the  well-tuned  cymbals  :  praise  him  upon  the  loud 
cymbals. 

Let  every  thing  that  hath  breath  :  praise  the  Lord. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Second  Edw.  VL  1552. 

%  Saint  Luke  the  Evangelist. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  calledst 
Luke  the  physician,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

^  Simon  and  Jiide  Apostles. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty    God,    which    hast 
builded,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Saint  Luke." 

•  In   eds.   1552,  and   ed.    1596,   "  Jesu 
Christ." 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552-] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Saint  Luke  the  Evangelist. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

grant  we  beseech  thee,  that  by  the 
wholesome  medicines  of  his  doc- 
trine all  the  diseases  of  our  souls  may 
be  healed,  through  thy  Son  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


%  In  one  ed.,  1552.  i  Tim.  iv.,  and  in 
one  ed.,  1559, 2  Tim.  iii.  mUf'.  for  2  Tim.iv. 

i"  In  eds.  1559,  1604,  and  afterwards, 
"  withstood  our  words." 


At  the  Communion. 


209 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  which  hast  builded  the  ^  congregation  upon 
the  foundation  of  the  Apostles  and  prophets,  JesuJ  Christ 
himself  being  the  head  corner-stone  :  grant  us  so  to  be  joined 
together  in  unity  of  spirit  by  their  doctrine,  that  we  may  be 
made  an  holy  temple  acceptable  to''  thee:  through  JesuJ 
Christ  our  Lord  ^. 

The  Epistle. 

Jude  I.  Judas  the  servant  of  Jesus™  Christ 

[i.e.  Jude  verse  1  to  verse  9.] 

speak  evil  of  them  that  are  in  authority. 


The  Gospel. 
John  XV.  This  command  I  you   .     .     .     . 

[i.e.  John  xv.  verse  17  to  the  end.] 

been  with  me  from  the  beginning. 


Charles  II.   1662, 

Saiiit  Luke  the  Evangelist. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who  calledst 
Luke  the  Physician,  whose  praise 
is  in  the  Gospel,  to  be  an  Evan- 
gelist, and  Physician  of  the  soul ; 
May  it  please  thee,  that  by  the 
wholesome  medicines  of  the  doc- 
trine delivered  by  him,  all  the  dis- 
eases of  our  souls  may  be  healed, 
through  the  merits  of  thy  Son  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


The  Epistle. 
2  Tim.  iv.  ver.  5.- 

Watch  thou  in  all  things 
to  withstood  our  words. 


*  In  eds.  1552,  1559,  and  1604,  "thy 
congregation;"  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "thy 
church." 

J  In  ed.  1596,  1604,  and  after,  "Jesus." 


The  Gospel. 
S.  Luke  X.  ver.  i. 
The  Lord  appointed  other  seventy 

also 

to  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire. 

Saint  Simon  and  Saint  jFude, 
Apostles. 
The  Collect. 
O  Almighty    God,   who    hast 
built  thy  Church  upon  the  founda- 
tion, &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle. 
S.  Jude,  ver.  i. 
Jude,  the  servant  of  Jesus      .     . 
to  speak  evil  of  dignities. 

The  Gospel. 
S.  John  XV.  ver.  17. 
These  things  I  command  you     . 
to  with  me  from  the  beginning. 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "unto." 
'  In  one  ed ,  1552,  and  1559,  and  in 
Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Amen." 
™  In  ed.  IS59,  "servant  of  Jesu  Christ." 


2IO  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

^  All  Saints. 

Proper  Lessons  at  Matins. 

The  first  lesson,  Sapi.  iii.  unto,  "  Blessed  is  rather  the  Barren." 

The  second  lesson,  Hebre.  xi.  xii.  "  Saints  by  faith  subdued,"  wt^, 

"  If  ye  endure  chastising." 

At  the  Communion. 
Cantate  Domino.     Psalm  cxlix.  " 

O  SING  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song  :  let  the   congregation  of  saints 
praise  him. 

Let  Israel  rejoice  in  him  that  made  him  :  and  let  the  children  of  Sion 
be  joyful  in  their  king. 

Let  them  praise  his  name  in  the  dance  :  let  them  sing  praises  unto  him 
\s-ith  tabret  and  harp. 

For  the  Lord  hath  pleasure  in  his  people  :  and  helpeth  the  meek-hearted. 

Let  the  saints  be  joyful  with  glory  :  let  them  rejoice  in  their  beds. 

Let  the  praises  of  God  be  in  their  mouth  :  and  a  two-edged  sword  in 
their  hands ; 

To  be  avenged  of  the  heathen  :  and  to  rebuke  the  people. 

To  bind  their  kings  in  chains  :  and  their  nobles  with  links  of  iron. 

That  they  may  be  avenged  of  them,  as  it  is  written  :  Such  honour  have 
all  his  saints. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

T/ie  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  hast  knit  together  thy"  elect  in  one 
communion  and  fellowship  in  the  mystical  body  of  thy  Son 
Christ  our  Lord  ;  grant  us  grace  so  to  follow  thy  holy  p  Saints 
in  all  virtues,  and  ^  godly  living,  that  we  may  come  to  those 
unspeakable '  joys,  which  thou  hast  prepared  for  all  *  them 
that  unfeignedly  love  thee ;  through  Jesus  Christ  *. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

IT  All  Saints. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  which  hast  knit 
together  thy  elect,  &a 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Epistle.     The  Gospel. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[Same  as  1552.J 


"  In  one  ed.,  1549,  Psalm  xlix.  uiisp.  for  ''  In  one  ed.,  1549,  and  1559,  "inspeak- 

Fs.  cxlix.  able." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "thine  elect."  •  In  eds.   1532,   1559,  and   afterwards, 

.  P  In  ed.  1662,  "thy  blessed  Saints."  "  for  them  that" 

1  In  eds.  1596,   1604,   and    afterwards,  '  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "through 

"  in  all  virtuous  and  godly  living. "  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.    Amen. " 


At  the  Communion', 


211 


The  Epistle. 

Apoca.  vii.  Behold,  I  John  saw  another  angel 

[i.e.  Apoc.  vii.  verse  2  to  verse  13.] 

be  unto  our  God  for  evermore.     Amen. 


Tlie  Gospel. 

Math.  V.  Jesus  seeing  the  people 


[i.e.  Matt.  v.  verse  i  to  verse  13.] 

the  prophets  which  were  before  you, 

^  Proper  Lessons  at  Evensong. 
The  first  lesson,  Sapi.  v.  unto,  "His  jealousy  also." 
■    The  second  lesson,  Apoc,  xix.  unto,  "And  I  saw  an  angel  stand.'' 


Charles  II.   1662. 

All  Saints'  Day. 

The  Collect. 
O  Almighty  God,  who  hast,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


For  the  Epistle. 
Rev.  vii.  ver.  2. 
And  I  saw  another  angel  . 
to  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 
The  Gospel. 
S.  Matth.  V.  ver.  i. 
Jesus,  seeing  the  multitudes,  went 

up  into  a  mountain 

to  which  were  before  you. 


212 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


THE 
SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD, 

AND  ' 

THE   HOLY   COMMUNION, 

COMMONLY  CALLED  THE  MASS. 

§  71.  IT  SO  many  as  intend^  to  be  partakers  of  the  holy  Communion,  shall 
signify  their  names  to  the  Curate^  aver  night,  or  else  in  the  morning, 
a/ore  the  beginning  0/ Matins  *,  or  immediatdy  after. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

THE 

OKDER  FOR  THE  ADMINISTRATION 

OF  THE 

LORD'S  SUPPER, 

OR 

HOLY  COMMUNION. 
§  71.  SO  many  as  intend,  dr'c. 


8  72- 
§73- 


And  if  any  of  those,  &'c. 
%  The  same  order  shall,  ^c. 
[Same  throughout  as  i549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

THE    ORDER    FOR    THE    ADMINIS- 
TRATION   OF   THE    lord's    SUP- 
PER,  OR  HOLY  COMMUNION. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
§  71.  SO  many  as  intend,  &'c, 
§  72.  And  if  any  of  those,  &'c. 
§  73.    The  same  order  shall,  dfc. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


•  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  as  do  intend." 
''  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter 
or  Curate." 


James  I.  1604. 

THE  ORDER  FOR  THE  ADMINIS- 
TRATION OF  THE  lord's  SUP- 
PER,  OR   HOLY   COMMUNION. 

§  71.  SO  many  as  intend,  dfc. 
§  72.  And  if  any  of  those,  &'c. 
§  73.    The  same  order  shall,  <Sr=4.-. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637- 

THE  ORDER  OF  THE  ADMINISTRA- 
TION OF  THE  lord's  SUPPER, 
OR   HOLY  COMMUNION. 

[Same  351552.] 

§  71.  SO  many  as  intend,  &*c. 
§  72.  And  if  any  of  those,  &*e. 
§  73.    The  same  order  shall,  &*c, 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


•  In  ed.  1552,  and  all  editions  after, 
"Morning  Prayer"  instead  of  "Matins;" 
in  one  ed.,  1549,  "of  the  Matins." 


The  Communion. 


21' 


k 


§  72.  IT  And  if  any  of  those  be  an  open  and  notoriotis  evil  liver,  so  that  the 
congregation  ■*  by  him  is  offended,  or  have  done  any  wrong  to  his  neigh- 
bours by  word  or  deed:  The  Curate'  shall^  call  him,  and  advertise  him, 
in  any  wise  not  to «  presume  to  ^  the  Lord's  table,  until  he  have  openly 
declared  himself  to  have  tridy  repented,  and  amended  his  former  naughty 
life:  that  the  congregation'^  may  thereby  be  satisfied,  which  afore  were^ 
offended:  and  that  he  have  recompensed  the  parties,  whom  he  hath  done 
wrong  unto,  or  at  the  least  be '  in  full  purpose  so  to  do,  as  soon  as  he 
conveniently  may. 

§  73.  H  The  same  order  shall  the  Curate  *  use,  witli  those  betwixt  whom  he 
perceiveth  malice  and  hatred  to  reign,  not  suffering  them  to  be  partakers 
of  the  Lord's  table,  until  he  know  them  to  be  reconciled.  And  if  one  of 
the  parties  so  at  variance  be  content  to  forgive  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart 
all  that  the  other  hath  trespassed  against  him,  and  to  make  amends  for  that 
he  himself  hath  offended :  and  the  other  party  will  not  be  persuaded  to 
a  godly  unity,  but  remain  still  in  his  frotvardness  and  malice :  The  Minis- 
ter'^ in  that  case  ought  to  admit  the  penitent  person  to  the  holy  Communion, 
a?id  not  him  that  is  obstinate. 


Charles  II.   1662. 
THE  ORDER 

FOR  THE 

Administration  of  the  Lord's 
Supper, 

OR 

HOLY  COMMUNION. 

§  71.  ^  So  many  as  intend  to  be  par- 
takers of  the  holy  Communion  shall 
signify  their  names  to  the  Curate 
at  least  some  time  the  day  before. 

§  72.  ^  And  if  any  of  those  be  an 
open  and  notorious  evil  liver,  or 
have  done  any  wrong  to  his  neigh- 
bours by  word  or  deed,  so  that  the 
Congregation  be  thereby  offended ; 
the  Curate  having  knowledge  there- 
of, shall  call  him  and  adveriise 
hi?n,  that  in  any  wise  he  presume 
not  to  come  to  the  Lord's  table, 
until  he  hath  openly  declared  him- 


self to  have  truly  repented  and 
amended  his  former  naughty  life, 
that  the  Congregation  may  thereby 
be  satisfied,  which  before  were  of- 
fended;  and  that  he  hath  recom- 
pensed the  parties  to  whom  he  hctth 
done  wrong,  or  at  least  declare 
himself  to  be  in  full  purpose  so  to 
do,  as  soon  as  he  conveniently  may. 

§  73.   ^  The  same  order  shall  the 
Curate  use,  ^'c. 

[Same  as  1549,  with  the  folloflnng  addition.] 

Provided  that  every  Minister  so  re- 
pelling any,  as  is  specified  in  this, 
or  the  next  precedent  Paragraph  of 
this  Kubrick,  shall  be  obliged  to 
give  an  account  of  the  same  to  tJie 
Ordifiary  within  fourteen  days 
after  at  the  farthest.  And  the 
Ordinary  shall  proceed  against 
the  offending  person  according  to 
the  Canon. 


*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Church." 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter 
or  Curate." 

'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "having 
knowledge  thereof  shall." 

«  In  three  eds.,  1549,  "to"  omitted. 

^  In    Scotch    ed.,   1637,   "presume    to 


come  to." 
'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Church." 
*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "was." 
'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  at  the 

least  declare  himself  to  be." 
""  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter 

or  Minister." 


!I4 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  74.  IT  Upon  the  day,  and  at  the  time  appointed  for  the  ministration  of  the 
holy  Commtinion,  the  Priest  that  shall  execute  the  [holy'\  ministry,  shall 
put  upon  him  the  vesture  appointed  for  that  ministration,  that  is  to  say : 
a  white  Albe  plain,  with  a  vestment  or  Cope.  And  where  there  be  many 
Priests  or  Deacons,  there  so  many  shall  be  ready  to  help  the  Priest,  in  the 
ministration,  as  shall  be  requisite:  And  shall  have  upon  them  likewise 
the  vestures  appointed  for  their  ministry,  that  is  to  say,  Albes  with  tunicles. 
Then  shall  the  Clerks  sing  in  English  for  the  office,  or  Introit,  {as  they 
call  it, )  a  Psalm  appointed  for  that  day. 

§  76.    The  priest  standing  humbly  afore  the  midst  of  the  Altar,  shall  say 
the  Lord^s  prayer,  with  this  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  unto  whom  all  hearts  be  open,  and"  all 
desires  known,  and  from  whom  no  secrets  are  hid  :  cleanse 
the  thoughts  of  our  hearts,  by  the  inspiration  of  thy  Holy 
Spirit :  that  we  may  perfectly  love  thee,  and  worthily  magnify 
thy  holy  name  :  through  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

tin  this  and  subsequent  editions,  the 
rubric  }  74  beginning  "Upon  the  day" 
is  omitted,  and  in  its  stead  is  ordered  the 
following.] 

§  75.  %  The  Table  having  at  the 
Communion  time  a  fair  white  linen 
cloth  upon  it,  shall  stand  in  the 
body  of  the  Church,  or  in  the 
chancel,  where  Morning  prayer 
and  Evening  prayer'*  be  appointed 
to  be  said. 

§76.   And  the  Priest 
standing  at  the  north  side^  of  the 
Table,  shall  say  the  Lord's  prayer, 
with  this  Collect  following. 
Almighty  God,  unto  whom,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
....  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 
[Here  follows 
1 79.  Then  shall  the  Priest  rehearse. 
See  p.  316.] 
§  78.    Then  shall  be  said  or  sung\ 

Glory  be  to  God  on  high  :  And 
in  earth  peace,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
God  the  Father.     Amen. 


"  In  ed.  issa.  »nd  afterwards,  "and" 
omitted. 

"In  ed.  1662,  "where  morning  and 
evening  prayer  are." 

V  lu  one  ed.,  1559,  "northside"  printed 


[Here  follows 

\  128.  Then  the  Priest  or  the  Bishop,  Sv. 

See  p.  258.] 

Elizabeth,  1559. 

§§  75»  76-    The  Table  having,  <&»r. 
[Same  as  1553.] 

Almighty  God,  unto  whom,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
[Here  follows  }  79.     See  p.  217.] 

§  78.    Then  shall  be  said  or  sung. 

Glory  be  to  God  on  high,  &c 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
God  the  Father.    Amen. 

[Here  follows  \  128.     See  p.  359.] 


James  I.  1604. 

§§  75i  76-    The  Table  having,  ^'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

Almighty  God,  unto  whom,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 
[Here  follows  J  79.     See  p.  216.] 

§  78.    Then  shall  be  said  or  sung. 

Glory  be  to  God  on  high,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
God  the  Father.    Amen. 

[Here  follows  i  128.     See  p,  359.] 


as  one  word." 

4  This  hymn,  m  eds.  1553  and  subse- 
quent editions,  is  inserted  towards  the 
end  of  the  Order,  after  §  137.    Sec  p.  256. 


The  Communion. 


215 


§  77.    Then  shall  he  say  a  Psalm  appointed  for  the  introit:  which  Psalm 
.    ended,  the  Priest  shall  say,  or  else  the  Clerks  shall  sing, 

iii.  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us. 
iii.  Christ  have  mercy  upon  us. 
iii.  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us. 
§  78.    Then  the  Priest  standing  at  God's  board  shall  begin. 
Glory  be  to  God  on  high. 

The  Clerks'^.  And  in  earth  peace,  good  will  towards  men. 
We  praise  thee,  we  bless  thee,  we  worship  thee,  we  glorify 
thee,  we  give  thanks  to  thee  for  thy  great  glory,  O  Lord  GOD, 
heavenly  King,  God  the  Father  Almighty. 

[O]  Lord  the  only  begotten  Son  Jesu  Christ,  O  Lord  GOD, 
Lamb  of  GOD,  Son  of  the  Father,  that  takest  away  the  sins 
of  the  world,  have  mercy  upon  us ' :  thou  that  takest  away  the 
sins  of  the  world,  receive  our  prayer. 

Thou  that  sittest  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father,  have 
mercy  upon  us :  For  thou  only  art  holy,  thou  only  art  the 
Lord.  Thou  only,  O  Christ,  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  most 
high  in  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.     Amen. 

§  79-    Then  the  priest  shall  turn  him  to  the  people  and  say. 
The  Lord  be  with  you. 
The  Ansxver.  And  with  thy  spirit. 
\The\  Priest.  Let  us  pray. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  75.  The  holy  Table  having  at  the 
Com?minion  -  time  a  carpet  and 
a  fair  white  linen  cloth  upon  it, 
with  other  decent  furniture,  meet 
for  the  high  mysteries  there  to  be 
celebrated,  shall  stand  at  the  upper- 
most part  of  the  chancel,  or  church, 
§  76,  where  the  Presbyter  standing 
at  the  north  side  or  end  tliereof 
shall  say  the  Lord's  prayer,  with 
this  collect  following  for  due  pre- 
paration. 
Our  Father  which  art,  &c. 

(printed  entire  to] 
.  .  .  deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen. 

Almighty  God,  unto  whom,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
[Here  follows  5  79.     Seep.  217.] 
§  78.    Then  shall  be  said  or  sung, 
Gloria  in  Excelsis,  in  English  as 
followeih. 


Glory  be  to  God  on  high,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
God  the  Father.    Amen. 

[Here  follows  }  128.     See  p.  258.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§§  75,  76.  1"  The  Table  at  the  Com- 
munion-time having  a  fair,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 
with    the    Collect  following,    the 
people  kneeling. 

Our  Father  which  art,  &c. 
[printed  entire  to] 
deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen. 
The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  unto  whom,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
[Here  follows  {  79.     See  p.  217.] 

§  78.    Then  shall  be  said  or  sung. 

Glory  be  to  God  on  high. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
God  the  Father.    Amen. 

[Here  follows  \  128.     See  p.  259.] 


»  In    ed.    1552,   and  afterwards,   "  The 
Clerks  "  omitted. 
•  In  eds.  1552,  and  aiterwards,  the  words 


"Thou  that  takest  away  the  sins  of  the 
world,  have  mercy  upon  us,"  are  here 
inserted. 


2i6        Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552. 


Second  Edw,  VI.  1552. 

§  79.  H  Then  shall  the  Priest  re- 
hearse distinctly  all  the  Ten  Com- 
mandments :  and  the  people  kneel- 
ing, shall  after  every  Command- 
ment ask  Goa's  mercy  for  their 
transgression  of  the  same,  after 
this  sort '. 

Afinister\ 
God  spake  these  words,  and  said  : 
1  am   the  Lord  thy  God.     Thou 
shalt  have  none  other  Gods  but  me. 
People. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and 
incline  our  hearts  to  keep  this  law. 
Minister. 
Thou  shalt  not  make  to  thyself* 
any  graven  image,  nor  the  likeness  ' 
of  any  thing  that  is  in  heaven  above, 
or  in  *  the  earth  beneath,  or  ■  in  the 
water  under  the  earth.     Thou  shalt 
not  ••  bow  down  '  to  them,  nor  wor- 
ship '  them  :  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God 
am  a  jealous  God,  and  visit  the  sin  • 
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children, 
unto  the  third  and  fourth  genera- 
tion of  them  that  hate  me,  and  shew ' 
mercy  unto  thousands  in  «  them  that 
love  me  and  keep  my  command- 
ments. 

People. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and 
incline  our  hearts  to  keep  this  law ''. 


'  This,  in  eds.  1553  and  all  after,  follows 
immediately  after  the  Prayer,  {  76.  "Al- 
mighty God,  unto  « hum  all  hearts  be 
open.'     Seep.  314. 

"  In  ed.  1604,  The  Minister,"  and  so 
throughout 

•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "unto  thee." 

x  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  or  any  like- 
ness." 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "or  that  is  in." 

•  in  two  eds.,  isja,  "nor;"  in  Scotch 
ed.,  1637,  "or  that  is  in." 

•i  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "not  now  bow." 
'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  down  thyselt" 
'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  serve  them."_ 

•  In  Scotched.,  1637,  "visiting  the  in- 
iquity of;"  in  ed.  1662,  "and  visit  the 
cms  of." 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "shewing." 


Minister. 
Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of 
the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain  :  for  the 
Lord  will   not  hold   him  guiltless 
that  taketh  his  name  in  A'ain. 

People. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and 
incline  our.  &c. 

Minister. 
Remember  that  thou  keep  holy 
the  Sabbath «  day  ^.  VL  days '  shalt 
thou  labour  and  do  all  that  thou 
hast  to  do  "j  but  the  seventh  "  day  is 
the  sabbath '  of  the  Lord  thy  God. 
In  it  thou  shalt  do  no  manner  of 
work  ",  thou  and  '  thy  son  and  ••  thy 
daughter,  thy  man  servant,  and  p  thy 
maid-servant,  »thy  cattle,  and  the 
stranger  ^  that  is  within  thy  gates : 
for  in  six  days  the  Lord  made  hea- 
ven and  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that 
in  them  is,  and  rested  the  seventh 
day.  Wherefore  the  Lord  blessed 
the  seventh  day ',  and  hallowed  it 

People. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and 
incline  our.  &c 

Minister. 
Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother, 
that  thy  days  may  be  long  in  •  the 
land  which  the  Lord  thy  Giod  giveth 
thee. 


F  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "of." 

^  In  Scotch  cd.,  1637,  this  response  is 
abbreviated  like  the  others.  In  ed.  1663, 
the  responses  are  printed  in  full  through- 
out. 

'  In  one  ed.,  xss9.  "  Sabboth." 

'In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Remember the 
Sabbath-day  to  keep  it  holy." 

'In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "Six 
days." 

"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "all  thy  work." 

■  In  eds.  15.S9,  "VII.  day." 

°  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "shalt  not  do 
any  work." 

I"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  nor." 

1  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "nor  thy  cattle, 
nor  thy  stranger." 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Sabbath  day." 

•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "upon." 


The  Communion. 


217 


People. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and 
incline  our.  &c. 

Minister. 
Thou  shalt  do  no  murder '. 

People. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and 
incline  [our].  &c. 

Minister. 
Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery. 

People. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and 
incline  our.  &c. 

Minister. 
Thou  shalt  not  steal. 

People. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  [and 
incline  our].  &c. 

Minister. 
Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness 
against  thy  neighbour. 

People. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and 
incline  our  hearts  to  keep  this  law. 

Minister. 

Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neigh- 
bour's house.  Thou  shalt  not  covet 
thy  neighbour's  wife,  nor  his  ser- 
vant, nor  his  maid",  nor  his  ox, 
nor  his  ass,  nor  any  thing  that  is 
his^ 

People. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and 
write  all  these  thy  laws  in  our  hearts 
we  beseech  thee. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  79.    Then   shall  the  Priest^ 
hearse,  &=€. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


'  In  one  ed.,  isS2i  and  one  ed.,  1559, 
"shalt  not  do  murder;"  in  Scotch  ed., 
1637,  "shalt  not  kill ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "  shalt 
do  no  murther." 

"  In   Scotch  ed.,   1037,   "nor  his  man- 


Minister. 
God  spake  these  words,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  L  1604. 

§  79.  Then  shall  the  Priest  rehearse, 

[Same  as  1552.] 
The  Minister. 
God  spake  these  words,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  79.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter,  turn- 
ing to  the  People,  rehearse  distinctly 
all  the  TEN  COMMAND- 
MENTS :  the  People  all  the  while 
kneeling  and  asking  God^s  mercy 
for  the  transgression  of  every  duty 
therein,  either  according  to  the  let- 
ter, or  to  the  mystical  importance 
of  the  said  Commandment. 

God  spake  these  words,  &c. 

[Same  as  1532,  except  "  Presbyter"  instead 
of  "  Minister"  throughout.] 


Charles  IL  1662. 

j79.  IT  Then  shall  the  Priest,  turning 
to  the  people,  rehearse  distinctly  all 
the  TEN  COMMANDMENTS; 
and  the  people  still  kneeling,  shall 
afler  every  Commandment  ask  God 
mercy  for  their  transgression  there- 
of for  the  time  past,  and  grace  to 
keep  the  same  for  the  time  to  come, 
as  followeth. 

Minister. 

GOD  spake  these  words,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


servant,  nor  his  maid-servant-" 

»  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,   "is  thj-  neigh- 
bour's." 

1  In  ed.  1578,  "Minister." 


2l8 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  80.    llien  shall  follow  the  Collect  of  the  day,  with  one  of  these  two 
Collects  following,  for  the  King '. 

Priest.     Let  us  pray '. 

Almighty  God,  whose  kingdom  is  everlasting,  and  power 
infinite,  have  mercy  upon  the  whole  congregation,  and  so  rule 
the  heart  of  thy  chosen  servant  Edward  the  sixth,  our  king  and 
governor,  that  he  (knowing  whose  minister  he  is)  may  above 
all  things,  seek  thy  honour  and  glory,  and  that  we**  his  subjects 
(duly  considering  whose  authority  he  hath)  may  faithfully 
serve,  honour,  and  humbly  obey  him,  in  thee,  and  for  thee, 
according  to  thy  blessed  word  and  ordinance :  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord,  who  with  thee,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  liveth 
and  reigneth,  ever  one  God,  world  without  end.     Amen. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  80.  Then  shall  follow  the  Collect 
oj  the  day,  with  one  of  these  tioo 
Collects  foil ffioing  for  tlu  king :  the 
Triest '  standing  up  and  saying, 

H  Let  us  pray. 
Priest'. 
Almighty  God,  whose  kingdom 
is  everlasting,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
we  be  taught,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  Si.  T  Immediately  after  the  Col- 
lects, the  Priest*  shall  read  the 
Epistle,  beginning  thus. 

%  The  Epistle  written  in  the 
Chapter  of. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  So.   Then  shall  follow  the  Collect  of 
the  day,  with  one  of  these  two  Col- 
lects J  ollowing  for  the  Queen  ;  drv. 
[Same  as  t55a.J 

Almighty  God,  whose  kingdom, 
&c.  .  .  .  thy  chosen  servant  Eliza- 


beth, our  Queen  and  govemour,  that 
she,  &c. 

[Same as  1540, except  "she"  for"he,"an<i 
"her*'  for  "his"  and  "him"  throughout.] 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
&c.  .  .  .  the  heart  of  Elizabeth  thy 
servant,  our  Queen  and  govemour, 
that  in  all  her,  &c. 

[Same  as  1 549,  except  "  she"  for  "  he," 
and  "  her"  lor  "him."] 

§  81.  Immediately  after  the 
Collects,  6fc. 
[Same  as  iss^-l 


James  I.  1604. 

§  80.    Then  shall  follow,  <Sr»r. 
[Same  as  1553.] 

Almighty  God,  whose  kingdom, 
&c.  .  .  .  tliy  chosen  servant  James, 

&C. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
&c.  .  .  .  heart  of  James  thy  servant, 
&c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  81.  Immediaidy  after  the  Collects, 

&'C. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


■  In  cd.  1559,  "  the  Queen." 
•  In   one   cd.,   X549,   " Prittt,    Let  us 
pray"  omitted. 


•■  In  cd.  i66a,  "  we  and  all  his." 
«  lu  ed.  1578,  "Minister." 


The  Communion. 


219 


Almighty  and  everlasting  GOD,  we  be  taught  by  thy  holy 
word,  that  the  hearts  of  Kings  ''  are  in  thy  rule  and  governance, 
and  that  thou  dost  dispose,  and  turn  them  as  it  seemeth  best 
to  thy  godly  wisdom  :  We  humbly  beseech  thee  so^  to  dispose 
and  govern  the  heart  of  Edward  the  sixth,  thy  servant,  our 
King  and  governor,  that  in  all  his  thoughts,  words,  and  works, 
he  may  ever  seek  thy  honour  and  glory,  and  study  to  preserve 
thy  people  committed  to  his  charge,  in  wealth,  peace,  and 
godliness :  Grant  this,  O  merciful  Father,  for  thy  dear  Son's 
sake,  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  Si.    The  Collects  ended,  the  priest,  or  he  that  is  appointed,  shall  read  the 
Epistle,  in  a  place  assigned  for  the  piu-pose,  saying. 

The  Episde  of  Saint  Paul,  written  in  the         Chapter  of 
to  the 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  80.  Then  sitall  follow  one  of  these 
two  Collects  for  the  King,  and 
the  Collect  cf  the  day,  the  Pres- 
byter standing  np  and  saying, 

Let  us  Pray. 

Almighty  God,  -wliose  kingdom 
is  everlasting,  and  power  infinite, 
have  mercy  upon  thy  holy  Catholic 
Church  :  and  in  this  particular 
Church  in  which  we  live  so  rule 
the  heart  of  thy  chosen  servant 
Charles,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
we  be    taught   by,   &c.   .   .   .    heart 
of  Charles  tliy  servant,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 

§  81.  Immediately  after  the  Collects, 
the  Presbyter  shall  read  the  epistle, 
saying  thus.  "The  epistle  [is] 
written  in  the  chapter  of 
at  the  verse."  And  when  he 
hath  done,  he  shall  say,  "  Here 
endeth  the  epistle." 


Charles  IL  1662. 

§  80.  T[  Then  shall  follow  one  of 
these  two  Collects  Jor  the  King, 
the  Priest  standing  as  before,  and 
saying. 

Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  God,  whose  kingdom 

is  everlasting,   and  power  infinite  ; 

have  mercy  upon  the  whole  Church, 

and  so  rule  the  heart  of  thy  chosen 

servant  Charles,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
IF   Or, 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 

we  are  taught  by,  &c.  .  .  .  the  heart 

of  Charles  thy  servant,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

%  Then  shall  be  said  the  Collect  of 
the  day. 

§  81.  And  im}?tediately  after  the 
CoUect  the  Priest  shall  read  the 
Epistle,  saying.  The  Epistle  [or. 
The  portion  of  Scripture  appomted 
for  the  Epistle]  is  written  in  the 
Chapter  of ■  begin- 
ning at  the verse. 


<>  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  Princes." 
E  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "so"  omitted. 


220  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  82.   TJie  Minister  then  shall  read  the  Epistle.    Immediately  after  the  Epistle 
ended,  the  priest,  or  one  appointed  to  read  the  Gospel,  shall  say^ 

The  holy  Gospel,  written  in  the        Chapter  of 

§  83.    The  Clerks  and  people  shall  answer^, 

Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Lord. 

§  84.    The  Priest  or  Deacon  then  shall  read  the  Gospel:  After  the  Gospel 
ended,  the  Priest  shall  begin, 

I  BELIEVE  in  one  God. 

The  Clerks  shall  sing  the  rest. 
The  Father  almighty,  maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  of  all 
things  visible,  and  invisible :  And  in  one  Lord  Jesu  s  Christ, 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  82.  And  the  Epistle  ended,  he  shall 
say  the  Gospel,  beginning  thus. 
The  Gospel,  written  in  the 
Chapter  of. 

§  84.    And  the  Epistle  and  Gospel 
being  ended,  :hall  be  said  the  Creed. 
I  BELIEVE  in  one  God,  the  Father 
almighty,  maker  of  heaven,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  86.  After  the  Creed,  if  there  be  no 
sermon,  shall  follow  one  of  the  ho- 
milies already  set  forth,  or  here- 
after to  be  set  forth  by  common 
authority. 

[Here  fqllows, 

I  93-  ^/ter  such  Sermon,  Homily,  6v. 

Let  your  light  so  shine,  &c. 

See  page  23a.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  82.  And  the  Epistle  ended,  dfe. 
§  84.  And  the  Epistle  and,  •St'c. 
I  BELIEVE  in  one  God,  the  Father 
Almighty,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  86.  A^/ler  the  Creed,  if  there,  Qfc. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

[Here  follows  { 93.     See  p.  232.] 

James  I.  1604. 
§  82.  And  the  Epistle  ended,  &*c. 
§  84.  And  the  Epistle  and,  &'c. 


I  BELIEVE  in  one  God,  the  Father 
Almighty,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  86.  After  the  Creed,  if  there,  &*(. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

[Here  follows  i  93.     See  p.  232.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  82.  And  the  epistle  ended, 
the  gospel  shall  be  read,  the  Pres- 
byter saying,  "The  holy  gospel 
is  written  in  the  chapter  of 
at  the  verse,"  and  then  the 
People  all  standing  up  shall  say, 
"Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Lord." 
At  the  end  of  the  gospel  the  Pres- 
byter shall  say,  "  So  endeth  the 
holy  gospel."  And  the  People 
shall  answer,  "Thanks  be  to 
thee,  O  Lord." 

§  84.  And  the  epistle 
and  gospel  being   ended,  shall  be 
said  or  sung  this  Creed,  all  still 
reverently  standing  up. 
I  BELIEVE  in  one  God,  the  Father 

Almighty,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-1 

§  86.  After  the  Creed,  if  there  be  no 
sermon,   shall  follow  one  of  the 
homilies  which  shall  htreafier  be 
set  forth  by  common  authority. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
[Here  follows  \  93.     See  p.  23a.] 


f  This  rubric  was  omitted  in  the  eds. 
1552,  and  never  restored,  except  in  the 
Scotch  ed.,  1637.  Still  in  practice  it  is 
followed  to   this   day  in  nearly  all   the 


churches  of  the  kingdom.  (See  also  {61.) 
(  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  in  ed.  1(62, 
"Jesus." 


The  Communion. 


221 


the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  begotten  of  his  Father  before  all 
worlds,  God  of  GOD '',  light  of  hght,  very  God  of  very  God, 
begotten ',  not  made,  being  of  one  substance  with  the  Father, 
by  whom  all  things  were  made,  who  for  us  men,  and  for  our 
salvation,  came  down  from  heaven,  and  was  incarnate  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  was  made  man,  and  was 
crucified  also  for  us  under  Pontius''  Pilate,  he  suffered  and  was 
buried,  and  the  third  day  he  arose  ^  again  according  to  the 
scriptures,  and  ascended  into  heaven,  and  sitteth  at ""  the  right 
hand  of  the  Father :  and  he  shall  come  again  with  glory,  to 
judge  both  the  quick  and  the  dead". 

And  I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Lord  and  giver  of 
life,  who  proceedeth  from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  who  with 
the  Father  and  the  Son  together,  is  worshipped  and  glorified, 
who  spake  by  the  prophets.  And  I  believe  one  Catholic  and 
Apostolic  Church.  I  acknowledge  one  Baptism,  for  the  re- 
mission of  sins.  And  I  look  for  the  resurrection  of  the  dead : 
and  the  life  of  the  world  to  come.     Amen. 

§  86.  ^  After  the  Creed  ended,  shall  follow  the  Sermon  or  Hoviily,  or  some 
portion  of  one  of  the  HOtnilies,  as  they  shall  be  hereafter  divided :  wherein 
if  the  people  be  not  exhorted  to  the  worthy  receiving  of  the  holy  Sacrament 
of  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  [continued  on  next  page.] 


Charles  II.   1662. 

§  82.  And  the  Epistle  ended,  he  shall 
sav.  Here  endeth  the  Epistle. 
Then  shall  he  read  the  Gospel  (the 
people  all  standing  up)  sayi?ig,  The 
holy  Gospel  is  written  in  the 
Chapter  of  begin- 
ning at  the verse. 

§  84.  And  the  Gospel  ended,  shall  be 
sung  or  said  the  Creed  following, 
the  people  still  standing,  as  before. 

I  BELIEVE  in  one  God  the  Father 

Almighty,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  85.  1  Then  the  Curate  shall  declare 
unto  the  people  what  holy -days,  or 
fasting-days  are  in  the  week  fol- 
lowing to  be  observed.     And  then 


also  (if  occasion  be)  shall  notice  be 
given  of  the  Communion  ;  and  the 
banns  of  Matrimony  published ; 
and  Briefs,  Citations  and  Excom- 
munications read.  And  nothing 
shall  be  proclaimed  or  published  in 
the  Church,  during  the  time  of 
Divine  Service,  but  by  the  Minis- 
ter: Nor  by  him  any  thing,  but 
what  is  prescribed  in  the  Rules  of 
this  Book,  or  enjoined  by  the  King, 
or  by  the  Ordinary  of  the  place" . 

%  86.  IT  Then  shall  follow  the  Ser- 
mon, or  one  of  the  Homilies  al- 
ready set  forth,  or  hereafter  to  be 
set  forth  by  Authority, 

[Then  follows 
\  93.   Then  shall  the  Priest,  &*€. 
Let  your  light  so  shine,  &c« 
See  p.  233.] 


I"  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "God  of  Gods." 
'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1590,  "gotten." 
^  In  eds.  IS59,  "Poncius.' 
'  In  eds.  1559,  and  aiterwards,  "rose." 
™  In  Scotched.,  1637,  and  ed.  1662,  "on." 
"  In  eds.  1552  and  1559  is  added,  "  whose 


kingdom  shall  have  none  end;"   in  ed. 
1662,  "  have  no  end." 

"  This  rubric,  introduced  here  in  1662, 
is  represented  by  the  first  part  of  {  93,  ot' 
eds.  1552,  and  the  others.     See  page  232. 


222 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1349. 


§  88,  then  shall  the  Curate  give  this  exhortation,  to  those  that  be  minded  to 
receive  the  same. 

Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  ye  that  mind  to  come  to  the 
holy  Communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ, 
must  consider  what  St.  Paul  writeth  to  "  the  Corinthians,  how 
he  ^  exhorteth  all  persons  diligently  to  try  and  examine  them- 
selves, before  they  presume  to  eat  of  that  bread  and  drink 
of  that  cup  : 

for  as  the  benefit  is  great,  if  with  a  truly ""  peni- 
tent heart,  and  lively  faith,  we  receive  that  •  holy  Sacrament ; 


O.  H.  C.  Edw.  VI.  1548. 

...  §  88,  and  turn  to  them  that 
are  disposed  to  be  partakers  oftlu 
Communion,  and  shall  thus  ex- 
hort them  as  followeth '. 

Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord, 
ye  coming  to  this  holy  communion, 
must  consider  what  S.  Paul  writeth 
to  the  Corinthians,  how  he  exhort- 
eth all  persons  diligently  to  try  and 
examine  themselves,  or  ever  they 
presume  to  eat  of  this  bread  or" 
drink  of  this  cup,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
sundry  kinds  of  death. 

[The  paragraph  beginning,  "Therefore 
if  any  here,"  down  to  "  both  of  body  and 
soul,"  is  omitted  in  this  place,  and  appears 
as  a  separate  exhortation  at  the  end.J 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  88.  Then  shall  t/ie  Priesf  say  this 
exhortation  *. 


Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549,  'ol 
Therefore,  if  any  of  you  be  a  blas- 
phemer of  God,  an  hinderer  or 
slanderer  of  his  word,  an  adulterer, 
or  be  in  malice  or  envy,  or  in  any 
other  grievous  crime,  bewail  your 
sins,  and  come  not  to  this'  holy 
Table,  lest  after  the  taking  of  that 
holy  Sacrament,  the  devil  enter  into 
you,  as  he  entered  into  Judas,  and 
fill  you  full  of  all  iniquities,  and 
bring  you  to  destruction,  both  of 
body  and  soul  *. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  88.    Then  shall  the  Priest  scty  this 
exhortation. 

Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549,  to] 
Therefore  if  any  of  you,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 
both  of  body  and  souL 


P  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1559,  "unto." 

9  In  ed.  1662,  "must  consider  how 
Saint  Paul  exhorteth." 

'  In  one  ed.  O.  H.  C.  1548,  and  in  ed. 
1662,  "  true." 

•  InO.  H.  C.  1548,  "  this." 

»  The  first  rubric  in  O.  H.  C  1548,  is 
\  92,  "  First  the  Parson,  Vicar,  or  Curate," 
&c.  See  p.  228.  The  rubric,  of  which  this 
forms  part,  is  the  second  rubric  in  that 
book,  and  is  printed  as  i  98,  p.  236. 

"  In  one  ed.,  1548,  "  and.' 


'  In  ed.  1578,  "the  Minister." 

»  This  exhortation,  in  1552,  and  subse- 
quent editions,  follows  the  two  Exharta- 
tions,  which  are  here  placed  after  it,  viz., 
J91.  "We  be  come  together,  "J  92.  "Dearly 
beloved,  forasmuch  as  our,"  see  pp.  231 
and  227. 

y  In  ed.  1662,  "  Repent  you  of  your 
sins,  or  else  come  not  to  that  Holy  Table." 

■  This,  in  ed.  1662,  is  transposed  from 
this  exhortation,  and  placed  in  the  midst 
of  exhortation,  i  93.     see  p.  231. 


The  Communion. 


223 


(for  then  we  spiritually  eat  *  the  flesh  of  Christ,  and  drink  his 
blood,  then  we  dwell  in  Christ  and  Christ  in  us,  we  be  made  '' 
one  with  Christ,  and  Christ  with  us  ;)  so  is  the  danger  great, 
if  we  receive  the  same  unworthily ;  for  then  we  become  '^  guilty 
of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  our  Saviour,  we  eat  and  drink 
our  own  damnation,  not  considering  the  Lord's  body'^.  We 
kindle  God's  wrath  over*^  us,  we  provoke  him  to  plague  us 
with  divers  diseases,  and  sundry  kinds  of  death. 

Therefore  if  any  here  be  a  blasphemer,  advouterer  ^,  or  be 
in  malice,  or  envy,  or  in  any  other  grievous  crime  (except  he 
be  truly  sorry  therefore,  and  earnestly  minded  to  leave  the 
same  vices,  and  do  trust  himself  to  be  reconciled  to  Almighty 
God,  and  in  charity  with  all  the  world),  let  him  bewail  his 
sins,  and  not  come  to  that  holy  table ;  lest  after  the  taking 
of  that  most  blessed  bread,  the  devil  enter  into  him,  as  he 
did  into  Judas,  to  fill  him  full  of  all  iniquity,  and  bring  him 
to  destruction,  both  of  body  and  soul. 


James  I.   1604. 

§  88.    T/ien  shall  the  Priest  say  this 
exhortation. 
Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549,  to] 
Therefore  if  any  of  you,  &c. 
[Same  as  1532,  toj 
botli  of  bodv  and  soul. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  88.    Then  shall  the  Presbyter  say 
this  exhortation. 

Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549,  to] 
Therefore,  if  any  of  you,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552,  toJ 
both  of  body  and  soul. 


Charles  IL  1662. 

§  87.  ^  At  the  time  of  the  Celeb7'ation 
of  the  Communion  the  Communi- 
cants being  conveniently  placed  for 
the  receiving  of  the  holy  Sacra- 
ment i, 

§  88,  the  Priest  shall  say 
this  exhortation ''. 

Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
sundry  kinds  of  death. 

[The  paragraph  beginning  "Therefore 
if  any  here  be  a  blasphemer,"  down  to 
"destruction  both  of  body  and  soul,"  is 
here  omitted,  and  the  substance  trans- 
posed to  t  92,  p.  231.] 


»  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "eat  of." 

ii  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  we  be 
one  ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "  we  are  one." 

■:  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  we 
be  ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "we  are." 

<i  In  O.  H.  C  1548,  "  because  we  malie 
no  difference  of  the  Lord's  body." 

e  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "against. 

f  In  all  later  editions,  "  adulterer." 


g  This  part  of  the  rubric  is  to  be  com- 
pared with  ■{  97  of  1549.     See  p.  236. 

^  This  rubric,  in  1662,  follows  imme- 
diately after  \  91,  "  Dearly  beloved  bre- 
thren, on I  intend,  by  God's  grace" 

(see  p.  227) ;  and  that  in  ed.  1662,  follows 

after  \  92,  "  Dearly  beloved,  on day 

next,  I  purpose"  (see  p.  229). 


224 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Judge  therefore  yourselves  (brethren)  that  ye  be  not  judged 
of  the  Lord.  Let  your  mind[s]  be  without  desire  to  sin',  re- 
pent you  truly  for  your  sins  past,  have  an  earnest  and  lively 
faith  in  Christ  our  Saviour,  be  in  perfect  charity  with  all 
men  :  so  shall  ye  be  meet  partakers  of  those  ^  holy  mysteries. 
And '  above  all  things  :  ye "  must  give  most  humble  and 
hearty  thanks  to  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  for  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  the  death  and 
passion  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  both  God  and  man,  who  did 
humble  himself  even  to  the  death  upon  the  cross,  for  us  miser- 
able sinners,  which  lay"  in  darkness  and"  shadow  of  death, 
that  he  might  make  us  the  children  of  God,  and  exalt  us  to 
everlasting  Ufe. 


O.  H.  C.  Edw.  VI.  1548. 

Judge  therefore  yourselves,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549  to  the  end.] 

§  89.  TAm  the  Priest  shall  say  to 
them  which  be  ready  to  take  the 
Sacrament  p. 

If  any  man  here  be  an  open 
blasphemer,  [an]  advouterer,  in  ma- 
lice, or  envy,  or  any  other  notable 
crime,  and  be  not  truly  sorry  there- 
fore, and  earnestly  minded  to  leave 
the  same  vices,  or  that  doth  not 
trust  himself  to  be  reconciled  to 
Almighty  God,  and  in  charity  with 
all  the  world,  let  him  yet  a  while 
bewail  his  sins,  and  not  come  to 
this  holy  table,  lest  after  the  taking 
of  this  most  ble-sed  bread  the  Devil 
enter  into  him  as  he  did  into  Judas, 
to  fulfil  in  him  all  iniquity,  and  to 
bring  him  to  destruction,  both  of 
body  and  soul. 

[Here  follows 

I  zio.  Here  the  Priest  shall  pause. 

See  p.  248.] 


'Inoneed.  O.H.C  1548,  "desire  of  sin." 
k  InO.  H.  C.  1548.  "these." 
>  In  O.  H.  C.  1548,  "  But  above." 
">  In  O.  H.  C.  1548,  "  you." 
■>  In  O.  H.  C.  1S48,  "lying  in ;"  in  ed. 
1C62,  "  who  lay  in.' 
"  In  O.  H.  C.    1548,  and  in  ed.    1662, 


Second  Edw.  VI.   1552. 

Judge  therefore  yourselves  (bre- 
thren) that  ye  be  not  judged  of  the 
Lord.  Repent  you  truly  for  your 
sins  past,  have  a  lively  and  stead- 
fast faith  in  Christ  our  Saviour, 
amend  your  lives,  and  be  in  per- 
fect charity,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1349,  to] 

he  hath  instituted  and  ordained  holy 
mysteries,  as  pledges  of  his  love, 
and  '•  continual  remembrance  of  his 
death,  to  our  great  and  endless 
comfort. 

To  him  therefore,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
all  the  days  of  our  life.     Amen. 

[Here  follows 
?iii.    Then  shall  the  priest  say  to  them 
that  come,  &^. 

You  that  do  truly  and  earnestly  repent,  &c. 
See  p.  248.] 


"  and  the  shadow." 

p  1 1  will  be  seen  that  this  separate  ex- 
hortation, {  89,  is  in  substance  the  same 
as  the  Paragraph  which  altcrwards  was 
inserted  in  the  midst  of  the  previous  ex- 
hortation, }  88 

«  In  cd.  1662,  "and  for  a.' 


The  Communion. 


225 


And  to  the  end  that  we  should  alway 
remember  the  exceeding  love ''  of  our  Master,  and  only  Saviour 
Jesu'  Christ,  thus  dying^for  us,  and  the  innumerable  benefits, 
which  (by  his  precious  blood-shedding)  he  hath  obtained  to 
us,  he  hath  left  in  those  holy  mysteries,  as  a  pledge  of  his 
love,  and  a  continual  remembrance"  of  the  same,  his  own 
blessed  body,  and  precious  blood,  for  us  to  feed  upon  spiri- 
tually^, to  our  endless  comfort  and  consolation. 

To  him 
therefore,  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  let  us  give  (as 
we  are  most  bounden)  continual  thanks,  submitting  ourselves 
wholly  to  his  holy  will  and  pleasure,  and  studying  to  serve 
him  in  true  holiness  and  righteousness,  all  the  days  of  our 
life.     Amen. 

§  90.  %  In  Cathedral  churches  or  other  places,  where  there  is  daily  Coni' 
miinion,  it  shall  be  sufficient  to  read  this  exhortatioft  above  written,  onct 
in  a  month.  ■  And  in  parish  churches,  upon  the  zveek  days  it  may  be  left 
unsaid. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Judge  therefore  yourselves,  &c. 

[Same  as  1532,  to] 
.  .  all  the  days  of  our  life.   Amen. 

[Here  follows  \  iii,  see  p.  248.] 


James  I.  1604, 
Judge  therefore  yourselves,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
.  .  all  the  days  of  our  life.    Amen. 

[Here  follows  5  m,  see  p.  248.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Judge  therefore  yourselves,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 
.  .  all  the  days  of  our  life.    Amen. 

[Here  follows  \  in,  see  p.  249.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Judge  therefore  yourselves,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1552,  to] 
.  .  all  the  days  of  our  life.    Amen. 

[Here  follows  5  iii,  see  p.  249.] 


'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "exceed- 
ing great  love." 

•  In  ed.  O.  H.  C.  1548,  and  Scotch  ed., 
1637,  and  ed.  1662,  "Jesus." 


*  In  one  ed.  O.H.  C.  1548,  "doying;" 
in  the  other,  "  doing." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  the  words  "and  for  a." 
»  In  O.H.C.  1548,  "spiritually  to  feed.'' 


226         Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552. 


Second  Edw.  VI.   1552. 

§  91.  Then  shall  follow  this  exhor- 
tation at  certain  times  when  the 
Curate  shall  see  the  people  negli- 
gent to  come  to  the  holy  Commu- 
nion \ 

We  be  come  together  at  this  time, 
dearly  beloved  brethren,  to  feed  at 
the  Lord's  supper,  unto  the  which 
in  God's  behalf  I  bid  you  all  that 
be  here  present,  and  beseech  you 
for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake, 
that  ye  will  not  refuse  to  come 
thereto,  being  so  lovingly  called 
and  bidden  of  God  himself. 

Ye 
know  how  grievous  and  unkind  a 
thing  it  is,  when  a  man  hath  pre- 
pared a  rich  feast,  decked  his  table 
with  all  kind  of  provision,  so  that 
there  lacketh  nothing  but  the  guests 
to  sit  down  :  and  yet  they  which  be  * 
called,  without  any  cause  most  un- 
thankfully  refuse  to  come.  Which 
of  you,  in  such  a  case,  would  not 
be  moved?  Who  would  not  think 
a  great  injury  and  wrong  done  unto 
him?  Wherefore,  most  dearly  be- 
loved in  Christ,  take  ye  good  heed, 
lest  ye  withdrawing  yourselves  from 
this  holy  supper,  provoke  God's  in- 
dignation against  you.  It  is  an  easy 
matter  for  a  man  to  say,  I  will  not 
comnunicate,  because  I  am  other- 
wise letted  ■  with  worldly  business  : 
but  such  excuses  be  *•  not  so  easily 
accepted  and  allowed  before  God 
If  any  man  say,  I  am  a  grievous  sin- 
ner, and  therefore  am  afraid  to  come : 
wherefore  then  do  you  *  not  repent 
and  amend  ?  When  God  calleth  you, 
be  you*"  not  ashamed  to  say  you* 
will  not  come  ?   When  you  «  should 


"  This,  in  1552  eds.,  and  afterwards, 
follows  on  after  the  prayer  for  the  Church 
I.filitant.     See  p.  342. 

}  In  ed,  1662,  "  bidden  by." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "who  are  called." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "hindered." 

*•  In  e4. 1662,  "are." 

«  Ined.  1552, and someafterwards,  "ye." 

"  Id  ed.  1662,  "are  ye." 


return  to  God,  will  you  *=  excuse  your- 
self'  and  say  that  you  be '  not  ready  ? 
Consider  earnestly  with  yourselves 
how  little  such  feigned  excuses  shall 
avail  before  God.  Tiiey  that  re- 
fused the  feast  in  the  gospel,  be- 
cause they  had  bought  a  mrm,  or 
would  try  their  yokes  of  oxen,  or 
because  they  were  married,  were 
not  so  excused,  but  counted  un- 
worthy of  the  heavenly  feast.  I  for 
my  part  am  here  present  f,  and 
according  [un]to  mine  office,  I  bid 
you  in  the  name  of  God,  I  call  you 
in  Christ's  behalf,  I  exhort  you,  as 
you  love  your  own  salvation,  th.it 
ye  will  be  partakers  of  this  holy 
Communion. 

And  as  the  Son  of 
God  did  vouchsafe  to  yield  up  his 
soul  by  death  upon  the  Cross  for 
your  health  :  even  so  it  is  your  duty 
to  receive  the  Communion  together 
in  the  remembrance  of  his  death, 
as  he  himself  commanded.  Now  if 
you  will  in  no  wise  thus  do,  con- 
sider with  yourselves  how  great  in- 
jury you ''  do  unto  God,  and  how 
sore  punishment  hangeth  over  your 
heads  for  the  same.  And  whereas 
ye '  offend  God  so  sore ''  in  refusing 
this  holy  Banquet,  I  admonish,  ex- 
hort, and  beseech  you,  that  unto 
this  unkindness  ye '  will  not  add  any 
more.  Which  thing  ye'  shall  do, 
if  ye  stand  by  as  gazers  and  lookers 
on '  them  that  do  communicate,  and 
be  no  "  partakers  of  the  same  your- 
selves. For  what  thing  can  this  be 
accounted  else,  than  a  further  con- 
tempt and  unkindness  unto  God. 
Truly  it  is  a  great  unthankfulness 
to  say  nay  when  ye  be  called :  but 
the  fault  is  much  greater  when  men 


•  In  ed.  1662,  "yourselves." 
'  In  ed.  1662,  "ye  are  not." 

t  In  ed.  1662,  "shall  be  ready." 
■>  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1559,  "  ye." 
'  In    ed.  1552,    and    some    afterwards, 
'  you." 

*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "grievously." 
'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1550,  "of." 

"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "not." 


The  Communion. 


227 


stand  by,  and  yet  will  neither  eat 
nor  drink  this  holy  Communion 
with  other.  I  pray  you  what  can 
this  be  else,  but  even  to  have  the 
mysteries  of  Christ  in  derision?  It 
is  said  unto  all :  Take  ye  and  eat. 
Take  and  drink  ye  all  of  this  :  do 
this  in  remembrance  of  me.  With 
what  face  then,  or  with  what  coun- 
tenance shall  ye  hear  these  words  ? 
What  will  this  be  else  but  a  neg- 
lecting, a  despising,  and  mocking 
of  the  Testament  of  Christ  ?  Where- 
fore, rather  than  you  ™  should  so  do, 
depart  you  hence  and  give  place  to 
them  that  be  godly  disposed  °.  But 
when  you  depart,  I  beseech  you, 
ponder  with  yourselves  from  whom 
you "  depart :  ye  depart  from  the 
Lord's  table,  ye  depart  from  your 
brethren,  and  from  the  banquet  of 
most  heavenly  food.  These  things 
if  ye  earnestly  consider,  ye  shall  by 
God's  grace  return  to  a  better  mind, 
for  the  obtaining  whereof,  we  shall 
make  our  humble  petitions  while  we 
shall  receive  the  holy  Communion. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  91.    Then  shall  foll<nv,  dr'c. 
We  be  come  together,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1552.  ] 


James  I.  1604. 

§  91.   Then  shall  follmo,  ^c. 

We  be  come  together,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§91.  Then  shall  follow  this  exhor- 
tation at  certain  times,  when  the 
Presbyter  or  Curate,  &^c. 

We  be  come  together,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552,  to] 
and  as  the  Son  of  God  did  vouch- 
safe to  offer  up  himself  by  death 


upon  the  Cross  for  our  salvation ; 
even  so  it  is  our  duty  to  celebrate 
and  receive  the  Holy  Communion 
together  in  the  remembrance  of  his 
death  and  sacrifice  as  he  himself 
commanded.     Now  .  .  . 

[Same  as  1552  to  end.] 

Charles  II.  1662. 
§  91.  Or  in  case  he  shall  see  the 
people  negligent  to  come  to  the  holy 
Communion,  instead  of  the  for- 
mer, he  shall  use  this  exhoiiation  ", 
Dearly   beloved    brethren,    on 

I  intend,    by  God's  grace, 

to  celebrate  the  Lord's  Supper : 
unto  which  in  God's  behalf  I  bid 
you  all  that  are  here  present,  and 
beseech  you  for  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ's  sake,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 

partakers  of  this  holy 
Communion. 

.  And  as  the  Son  of 
God  did  vouchsafe  to  yield  up  his 
soul  by  death  upon  the  Cross  for 
your  salvation :  so  it  is  your  duty 
to  receive  the  Communion,  in  re^ 
membrance  of  the  sacrifice  of  his 
death,  as  he  himself  hath  com- 
manded :  Which  if  ye  shall  neglect 
to  do,  consider  with  your  selves 
how  great  injury  ye  do  unto  God, 
and  how  sore  punishment  hangeth 
over  your  heads  for  the  same ;  when 
ye  wilfully  abstain  from  the  Lord's 
Table,  and  separate  from  your  bre- 
thrSn,  who  come  to  feed  on  the 
banquet  of  that  most  heavenly  food. 
These  things  if  ye  earnestly  con- 
sider, ye  will  by  God's  grace  return 
to  a  better  mind  :  for  the  obtaining 
whereof  we  shall  not  cease  to  make 
our  humble  petitions  unto  Almighty 
God  our  heavenly  Father. 
[Here  lollows, 
§  88.  Attlietime,  &'c. 
Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  ye  that 
mind,  &c. 

See  ante,  p.  223.] 


"In  one  ed.,  1332,  and  some  afterwards, 

"  ye." 

"  Tlie  paragraph,  "Which  thing  ye 
shall  do  ...  be  godly  disposea,"  in  erted 
in  1552   and  continued   to  16^7.   mav  be 


compared  with  the  last  part  of  5  97  in 
ed.  1549. 

"  In  ed.  1662,  this  follows  on  after  I  53, 
Sec  p.  23 1. 


228 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  92.  IT  And  if  upon  the  Sunday  or  holvday,  the  people  be  negligent  to  come 
to  the  Communion  :  Then  shall  the  Priest  earnestly  exhort  his  parishioners, 
to  dispose  themselves  to  the  receiving  oj  the  holy  communion  more  diligently, 
saying  these  or  like  words  unto  them. 

Dear  friends,  and  you  especially  upon  whose  souls  I  have 
cure  and  charge,  on  p  next,  I  do  intend  by  God's  grace, 

to  offer  to  all  such  as  shall  be  ^  godly  disposed,  the  most  com- 
fortable Sacrament  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  to  be 
taken  of  them  in  the  remembrance  of  his  most  fruitful  and 
glorious  Passion  :  by  the  which  passion  we  have  obtained  re- 
mission of  our  sins,  and  be  made  partakers  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  whereof  ■■  we  be  assured  and  ascertained,  if  we  come 
to  the  said  Sacrament  with  hearty  repentance  for '  our  offences, 
stedfast  faith  in  God's  mercy,  and  earnest  mind  to  obey  God's 
will,  and  to  offend  no  more. 


O.H.C.  Edw.  VI.  1548. 

THE  ORDER  OF  THE  COMMUNION. 

[This  is  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the 
book.) 

§  92.  First  the  Parson,  Vicar,  or 
Curate,  the  next  Sunday  or  holy 
day,  or  at  the  least,  one  day  before 
he  shall  minister  the  Communion, 
shall  give  warning  to  his  Parish- 
ioners, or  those  which  be  present, 
that  they  prepare  themselves  there- 
to, saying  to  them  openly  and 
plainly  as  hereafter  followelh,  or 
such  like. 

Dear  friends,  and  you,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1553. 
§  92.  IT  And  sometime  shall  be  said 

this  also,  at  the  discretion  of  the 

Curate  *. 

Dearly  beloved,  forasmuch  as 
our  duty  is  to  render  to  Almighty 
God  our  heavenly  Father  most 
hearty  thanks,  for  that  he  hath 
given  his  Son  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  not  only  to  die  for  us,  but 
also  to  be  our  spiritual  food  and 
sustenance,  as  it  is  declared  unto 


»  In  O.H.C.  1548,  "upon        day  next." 
«  In  O.H.C.  1548,  "  be  thereto.'' 
'  In  one  ed.  O.U.C.  1548,  and  one  ed., 
1549,  "wherefore." 

•  Id  one  ed.,  1548,  "  of." 


us,  as  well  by  God's  word  as  by 
the  holy  Sacraments  ■  of  his  blessed 
body  and  blood, 

the  which  beinjj 
so  comfortable  a  thing  to  them 
which  receive  it  worthily,  and  so 
dangerous  to  them  that  will  pre- 
sume to  receive  it  unworthily:  My 
duty  is  to  exhort  you  ^  to  consider 
the  dignity  of  the*  holy  mystery-, 
and  the  great  peril  of  the  unworthy 
receiving  thereof,  and  so  to  search 
and  examine  your  own  consciences, 
as  you  should  come  holy  and  cleaji 
to  a  most  Godly  and  heavenly  feast : 
so  that  in  no  wise  you  come  but  in 
the  marriage  garment,  required  of 
God  in  holy  scripture  ;  and  so  come 
and  be  received,  as  worthy  partakers 
of  such  a  heavenly  table. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  92.  And  some  time  shall  be,  &*e. 
Dearly  beloved,  forasmuch,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

92.  And  some  time  shall  be,  dr*f. 
Dearly  beloved,  forasmuch,  &<:• 
[Same  as  1552.] 


«  In  ed.  1637,  " Prcubyier  or  CuTOte." 
"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Sacrament." 

*  In  ed.   i66a,  "  you  in  the  mean  sea- 
son to." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "  that" 


The  Communion. 


229 


Wherefore  our  duty  is  to  come 
to  these  holy  mysteries,  with  most  hearty  thanks  to  be  given 
to  Ahnighty  GOD  for  his  infinite  mercy  and  benefits  given  and 
bestowed  upon  us  his  unworthy  servants,  for  whom  he  hath 
not  only  given  his  body  to  death,  and  shed  his  blood,  but  also 
doth  vouchsafe  in  a  Sacrament  and  mystery  to  give  us  his  said 
body  and  blood  to  feed  upon  spiritually  y. 

The  which  Sacra- 
ment being  so  divine  and  holy  a  thing,  and  so  comfortable  to 
them  which  receive  it  worthily,  and  so  dangerous  to  them  that 
will  presume  to  take  the  same  unworthily  :  My  duty  is  to 
exhort  you  in  the  mean  season,  to  consider  the  greatness  of 
the  thing,  and  to  search  and  examine  your  own  consciences, 
and  that  not  lightly  nor  after  the  manner  of  dissimulers  with 
GOD  :  but  as  they  which  should  come  to  a  most  Godly  and 
heavenly  banquet,  not  to  come  but  in  the  marriage  garment 
required  of  God  in  scripture ;  that  you  may  (so  much  as 
lieth^  in  you)   be  found  worthy  to   come  to  such  a  table. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  92.  And  sometime  this  shall  be  said 
also,  at  the  discretion  of  the  Pres- 
byter or  Curate. 

Dearly  beloved,  forasmuch,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.   1662. 

§  92.  When  the  Minister  girjeth  warn- 
ing for  the  celebration  of  the  holy 
Communion,  (which  he  shall  dl- 
ways  do  upon  the  Sunday  or  some 
holy -day  immediately  preceding) 
After  the  Sermon,  or  Homily 
ended,  he  shall  read  this  exhor- 
tation following  " . 

Dearly  beloved,   on  day 

next  I  purpose,  through  God's  as- 
sistance to  administer  to  all  such 
as  shall  be  religiously  and  devoutly 
disposed,  the  most  comfortable  Sa- 
crament of  the  Body  and  Blood  of 
Christ,  to  be  by  them  received  in 


remembrance  of  his  meritorious 
cross  and  passion,  whereby  alone 
we  obtain  remission  of  our  sins, 
and  are  made  partakers  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven. 

Wherefore  it  is 
our  duty  to  render  most  humble 
and  hearty  thanks  to  Almighty  God 
our  heavenly  Father,  for  that  he 
hath  given  his  Son  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  not  only  to  die  for 
us,  but  also  to  be  our  spiritual  food 
and  sustenance  in  that  holy  Sacra- 
ment. 

Which  being  so  divine  and 
comfortable  a  thing  to  them  who 
receive  it,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 

j   examine  your  own  consciences,  (and 

that  not  lightly,  and  after  the  manner 

of  dissemblers  with  God  ;    but  so) 

I   that  ye  may  come  holy  and  clean 

i   to  such  a  heavenly  feast,  in  the  mar- 

1   riage-garment   required  by  God  in 

holy  Scripture,  and  be  received  as 

I  worthy  partakers  of  that  holy  Table. 


y  In  O.  H.  C.  1548,  "  to  give  us  his  said  body  and  blood  spiritually :  to  feed  and 
drink  upon."  •  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "a  iieth."  "  This,  in  ed.  1662,  follows  oa 

after  \  105,  "  Prayer  for  the  Church  Militant."    See  p.  243. 


230 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


The  ways  and  means  thereto  is, 

First,  that  you  be  truly  repentant  ^  of  your  former  evil  life, 
and  that  you  confess  with  an  unfeigned  heart  to  Almighty 
God  your  sins  and  unkindness  towards  his  Majesty  committed, 
either  by  will,  word,  or  deed,  infirmity  or  ignorance  :  and  that 
with  inward  sorrow  and  tears  you  bewail  your  offences,  and 
require  of  Almighty  God  mercy  and  pardon,  promising  to  him 
(from  the  bottom  of  your  hearts)  the  amendment  of  your 
former  life.  And  among[st]  all  others,  1  am  commanded  of 
God,  especially  to  move  and  exhort  you  to  reconcile  your- 
selves to  your  neighbour[s],  whom  you  have  offended,  or  who 
hath  offended  you,  putting  out  of  your  hearts  all  hatred  and 
malice  against  them,  and  to  be  in  love  and  charity  with  ah 
the  world,  and  to  forgive  other  as  you  would  that  God  should 
forgive  you.  And  if  any  man  have  done  wrong  to  any  other, 
let  him  make  satisfaction,  and  due  restitution  of  all  lands  and 
goods,  wrongfully  taken  away  or  withholden,  before  he  come 
to  God's  board,  or  at  the  least  be  in  full  mind  and  purpose  so 
to  do,  as  soon  as  he  is  able ;  or  else  let  him  not  come  to  this 
holy  table,  thinking   to   deceive  God,  who   seeth  all  men's 


O.  H.  C.  Edw.  VI.   1548. 
The  way  and  means  thereto,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549  'o  ad,  except  paragraph 

beginning,      And  if  any  man  have,"  to 

"  increase  their  damnation,"  is  tmti/i^d.] 

[Here  follows, 

J  98.  Tke  time  of  the  Communion,  A'c 

Seie  p.  236.] 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

The  way 
and  means  thereto  is :  First  to  ex- 
iimine  your  lives  and  conversation 
by  the  rule  of  God's  commandments, 
and  whereinsoever  ye  shall  perceive 
yourselves  to  have  offended,  either 
by  will,  word,  or  deed,  there  be- 
wail =  your  own  sinful  lives '',  confess 
yourselves  to  almighty  God  with 
full  purpose  of  amendment  of  life. 
And  if  ye  shall  perceive  your  of- 
fences to  be  such,  as  be*  not  only 
against  God,  but  also  against  your 


neighbours  :  then  ye  shall  reconcile 
yourselves  imto  them,  ready '  to  make 
restitution  and  satisfaction,  accord- 
ing to  the  uttermost  of  your  powers, 
for  all  injuries  and  wrongs  done  by 
you  to  any  other :  and  likewise 
being  *  ready  to  forgive  other ''  that 
have  offended  you,  as  you'  would 
have  forgiveness  of  your  offences  at 
God's  hand :  for  otherwise  the  re- 
ceiving of  the  holy  Communion  doth 
nothing  else,  but  increase  your  dam- 
nation. 

And  because  it  is  requisite 
that  no  man  should  come  to  the 
holy  Communion  but  with  a  full 
trust  in  God's  mercy,  and  with  a 
quiet  conscience  :  therefore  if  there 
be  any  of  you  which  by  the ''  means 
afore  said '  cannot  quiet  his  ovim  con- 
science ■",  but  requireth  further  com- 
fort or  counsel ;  then  °  let  him  come 
to  me,  or  some"  other  discreet  and 


k  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "rej>entance." 
«  In  ed.  1662,  "  to  bewail." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "sinfulness  and  to." 

•  In  ed.  166a,  "are." 

•  In  ed.  1663,  "  beine  ready." 

»  Ined.  1662/*  being  likewise." — '•  "others.'' 


'  In  ed.  166a,  "  ye." 

^  In  ed.  1662,  "  who  by  this." 

'  In  ed.  i66a,  "  nfoTCSiwd"  omitted. 

"■  In  ed.  1662,  "conscience  hercia." 

°  In  ed.  1662,  "ihea"  omitteii. 

•  In  ed.  i66a,  "to! 


The  Communion. 


231 


hearts.  For  neither  the  absolution  of  the  priest  can  any  thing 
avail  them,  nor  the  receiving  of  this  holy  sacrament  doth  any 
thing  but  increase  their  damnation. 

And  if  there  be  any  of 
you,  whose  conscience  is  troubled  and  grieved  in  any  thing, 
lacking  comfort  or  counsel,  let  him  come  to  me,  or  to  some 
other  discreet  and  learned  priest,  taught  in  the  law  of  God, 
and  confess  and  open  his  sin  and  grief  secretly,  that  he  may 
receive  such  ghostly  counsel,  advice,  and  comfort,  that  his 
conscience  may  be  relieved,  and  that  of  us  (as  of  the  ministers 
of  GOD  P  and  of  the  church)  he  may  receive  comfort  and 
absolution,  to  the  satisfaction  of  his  mind,  and  avoiding  of  all 
scruple  and  doubtfulness : 

requiring  such  as  shall  be  satisfied 
with  a  general  confession,  not  to  be  offended  with  them  that 
doi  use,  to  their  further  satisfying,  the  auricular  and  secret 
confession  to  the  priest ;  nor  those  also  which  think  needful 
or  convenient,  for  the  quietness  of  their  own  consciences, 
particularly  to  open  their  sins  to  the  priest,  to  be  offended 
with  them  that  are  satisfied  with  their  humble  confession  to 
GOD,  and  the  general  confession  to  the  church.  But  in  all' 
things  to  follow  and  keep  the  rule  of  charity,  and  every  man 
to  be  satisfied  with  his  own  conscience,  not  judging  other 
men's  minds  or  consciences;  where  as  he  hath  no  warrant 
of  God's  word  to  the  same. 


learned  minister'  of  God's  word, 
and  open  his  grief,  that '  he  may  re- 
ceive such  ghostly  counsel,  advice, 
and  comfort,  as  his  conscience  may 
be  relieved  ;  and  that '  by  the  mi- 
nistery  of  God's  word  "  he  may  re- 
ceive comfort  and  the  benefit  of  ab- 
solution^, to  the  quieting  of  his  con- 
science, and  avoiding  of  all  scniple 
and  doubtfulness. 

[Here  follows, 

I  S3.  TAen  shall  the  Priest  say,  &'c. 

Dearly  beloved.     See  p.  222.] 

Elizabeth,  1559. 

James  I.  1604. 

The  way  and  means  thereto  is,  &c. 
[Both  same  as  1552.] 
[Here  follows  \  88.     See  p.  223.] 


P  In  O.H.C.  "as  a  minister  of  God." 
".  In  O.H.C.  1548,  "doth." 
'  In  O.H.C.  1548,  "all  these  things." 
■  In  Scotched.,  "Presbyter  or  Minister." 
•  In  ed.  1662,  paragraph,  "he  may  re- 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

The  v/ay  and  means  thereto  is,  &c. 
[Same  as  1532.] 
[Here  follows  }  88.     See  p.  223.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  way  and  means  thereto,  &c 
[Same  as  1552,  to] 
increase  your  damnation. 
Therefore  if  any  of  you,  &c. 

[The  same  as  paragraph  in  the  previous 
Exhortation,  \  88,  of  ed.  1552.  See  p.  223,  to] 

destruction  both  of  body  and  soul. 

And  because  it  is  requisite,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1552,  to] 

of  all  scruple  and  doubtfulness. 

[Here  follows  ?  91.     See  p.  227.] 


ceive  such  .  .  .  and  that,"  ojnitted, 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "  holy  word." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "receive  the  benefit  of 
absolution,  together  with  ghostly  counsel 
and  advice. " 


232  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  93-  ^  Then  shall  follcrw  for  the  Offertory  one  or  more  of  these  Sentences 
of  holy  scripture,  to  be  sung  whiles  the  people  do  offer,  or  else  one  of  them  to 
be  said  by  the  minister,  immediately  afore  the  offering. 

Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your 
good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 
Mat.  V. 

Lay  not  up  for  *  yourselves  treasure  upon  the  earth,  where 
the  rust  and  moth^  doth  corrupt,  and  where  thieves  break 
through  and  steal :  But  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  *  in 
heaven,  where  neither  rust  nor  moth  doth  corrupt,  and  where 
thieves  do  not  break  through  nor»  steal.     Mai.  vi. 

Whatsoever  you  •*  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  even 
so  do  you  *=  unto  them  :  for  this  is  the  law  and  the  Prophets. 
Math,  vii 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

93.  After  siuh  sermon,  homily, 
or  exhortation,  the  Curate  shall 
declare  unto  the  people  whether 
there  be  any  holy  days  or  fasting 
days  the  week  following:  and  earn- 
estly exhort  them  to  remember  the 
poor,  saying  one  or  more  of  these 
Sentences  folloiving,  as  he  thinketh 
most  convenient  by  his  discretion  **. 
Let  your  light,  &c. 

[The  same  throughout  as  I549-] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  93-   ■'^f^r  such  Sermon,  &k. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
Let  your  light,  &c 

[The  same  throughout  as  1549.] 

James  I.  1604. 

§  93.   After  such  Sermon,  &*e. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
Let  your  light,  &c. 

[The  same  throughout  as  1549-] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
93.  After  such  Sermon,   Homily, 
or  exhortation,   the  Presbyter  or 


»  Inoneed.,  1559,  "lor"  omitted. 
y  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "treasures  upon 
earth,  where  moth  and  rust." 
»  Infoureds.,  1549,  "treasure." 
•  In  eds.  1552,  and  ed.  1662,  "  and  steal." 
^  In  ed.  1596,  and  afterwards,  "  ye." 


Curate  shall  declare  unto  the  people 
whether  there  be  any  Holy  days 
or  Fasting  days  the  week  follow- 
ing; and  earnestly  exhort  them  to 
remember  the  poor,   saying   (for 
the  offertory)  one  or  more  of  these 
Sentences  following,  as  he  thinketh 
most  convenient  by  his  discretion, 
according  to  the  length  or  shortness 
of  time  that  the  people  are  offering. 
And  in  process  of  time  it  came  to 
pass,  that  Cain  brought  of  the  fruit 
of  the  ground  an  offering  unto  the 
Lord ;  and  Abel,  he  also  brought 
of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock,  and  of 
the  fat  thereof:  and  the  Lord  had 
respect  unto  Abel  and  to  his  offering ; 
but  unto  Cain  and  to  his  offering 
he  had  not  respect.   Gen.  4.  3,  4,  5  *. 
Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel, 
that  they  bring  me  an  offering  :  of 
every  man  that  giveth  it  willingly 
with  his  heart,  ye  shall  take  my 
offering.     Exod.  25.  2. 

Ye  shall  not  appear  before  the 
Lord  empty :  every  man  shall  give 
as  he  is  able,  according  to  the  bless- 
ing of  the  Lord  your  God  which  he 
hath  given  you.     Deut.  16.  16. 


you 


«  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards, 
omitted. 

*  This,  in  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  fol- 
lows on  immediately  after  \  S6.    See  p.  220. 

•  In  ed.  1637,  references  to  the  verses, 
as  well  as  chapters,  are  given  throqghouL 


The  Communion 


233 


Not  every  one  that  saith  unto*  me,  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  he  that  doeth^  the  will  of  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven.     Mat.  vii. 

Zachee  §  stood  forth,  and  said  unto  the  Lord,  Behold,  Lord, 
the  half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor,  and  if  I  have  done 
any  wrong  to  any  man,  I  restore  fourfold.     Luc.  xix. 

Who  goeth  a  warfare  at  any  time  at  ^  his  own  cost  ?  Who 
planteth  a  vineyard,  and  eateth  not  of  the  fruit  thereof?  Or 
who  feedeth  a  flock,  and  eateth  not  of  the  milk  of  the  flock  ? 
I  Cor.  ix. 

If  we  have  sown  unto  you  spiritual  things,  is  it  a  great 
matter  if  we  shall  reap  your  worldly  things  ?     1  Cor.  ix. 


David  blessed  the  Lord  before  all 
the  congregation  ;  and  said,  Blessed 
be  thou,  O  Lord  God,  for  ever  and 
ever  :  Thine,  O  Lord,  is  the  great- 
ness, and  the  glory,  and  the  victory, 
and  the  majesty :  for  all  that  is  in 
the  heaven  and  in  the  earth  is  thine  : 
thine  is  the  kingdom,  O  Lord,  and 
thou  art  exalted  as  head  above  all. 
Both  riches  and  honour  come  of 
thee,  and  of  thine  own  do  we  give 
unto  thee.  I  know  also,  my  God, 
that  thou  triest  the  heart,  and  hast 
pleasure  in  uprightness.  As  for 
me,  in  the  uprightness  of  my  heart 
I  have  willingly  offered  all  these 
things  :  and  now  have  I  seen  with 
joy  thy  people  which  are  present 
here  to  offer  willingly  unto  thee. 
I  Chron.  29.  10,  &c. 

Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory 
due  unto  his  name  :  bring  an  offer- 
ing and  come  into  his  courts.  Fs. 
96.8. 

Lay  not  up  for  yourselves,  &c. 
Matth.  vi.  19.  20. 

Not  every  one  that  saith,  &c. 
Matth.  vii.  12. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

Jesus  sat  over  against  the  trea- 
sury, and  beheld  how  the  people 
cast  money  into  it ;  and  many  that 


were  rich  cast  in  much.  And  there 
came  a  certain  poor  widow,  and  she 
threw  in  two  mites,  which  make 
a  farthing ;  and  he  called  unto  him 
his  disciples,  and  saith  unto  them. 
Verily  1  say  unto  you,  that  this 
poor  widow  hath  cast  more  in  than 
all  they  which  have  cast  into  the 
treasury  ;  for  all  they  did  cast  in  of 
their  abundance,  but  she  of  her 
want  did  cast  in  all  that  she  had, 
even  all  her  living.  Mar.  12.  41. 
42.  43.  44. 

Who  goeth  a  warfare,  &c.  i  Cor. 
ix.  7. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

If  we  have  sown  unto  you  spiri« 
tual  things,  is  it  a  great  thing  if 
we  shall  reap  your  carnal  things? 
I  Cor.  ix.  7. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

93.  %  Then  shall  the  Priest  return 
to  the  Lord's  Table,  and  begin  the 
Offertory,  saying  one  or  more  of 
these  Seittejtces  following,  as  he 
thinketh  most  convenient  in  his 
discretion. 

Let  your  light,  &c. 
[The  same  throughout  as  1549.] 


^  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  ed.  1662,  "doth."  8  In  ed.  1662,  "Zaccheus." 

*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "at  his  own  charges  ;"  and  ed.  1662,  "  of  his  own  cost." 


234  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Do  ye  not  know,  that  they  which*  minister  about  holy 
things,  live  of  the  sacrifice?  They"^  which  wait  of  the  altar 
are  partakers  with  the  altar?  Even  so  hath  the  Lord  also 
ordained  :  that  they  which  ^  preach  the  Gospel,  should  live  of 
the  Gospel,     i  Cor.  ix. 

He  which  ^  soweth  little,  shall  reap  little,  and  he  that 
soweth  plenteously,  shall  reap  plenteously.  Let  every  man 
do  according  as  he  is  disposed  in  his  heart ;  not  grudgingly  ™ 
or  of  necessity ;  for  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver.     2  Cor.  ix. 

Let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  word,  minister  unto  him  that 
teacheth,  in  all  good  things.  Be  not  deceived ;  GOD  is  not 
mocked.  For  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  reap. 
Gala.  vi. 

While  we  have  time,  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men,  and 
specially  unto  them,  which"  are  of  the  household  of  faith. 
Gala.  vi. 

Godliness  is  great  riches,  if  a  man  be  contented  *»  with  that 
he  hath :  For  we  brought  nothing  into  the  world,  neither 
may  p  we  carry  any  thing  out.     i  Titno.  vi. 

Charge  them  which'  are  rich  in  this  world,  that  they  be 
ready  to  give,  and  glad  to  distribute,  laying  up  in  stored  for 


Second  Edw.  VI. 
Do  ye  not  know,  &c 


1552. 


[Continued  same  as  1549,  to] 
.  time  of  trouble.     Ps.  xlL 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Do  ye  not  know,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1549,  to] 
.  .  .  time  of  trouble.    Ps.  xlL 


James  I.  1604. 
Do  ye  not  know,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1549,  to] 
.  .  .  time  of  trouble.    Ps.  xlL 


Scotch  Liturgfy,  1637. 
Do  ye  not  know  that  they  which 
minister  about  holy  things  live  of 


the  things  of  the  temple  ?  and  they 
which  wait  at  the  altar,  are  partakers 
with  the  altar?  Even  so  hath  the 
Lord  ordained,  that  they  which 
preach  the  Gospel,  should  live  of 
the  Gospel.     I  Cor.  9.  13,  14. 

He  which  soweth  sparingly,  shall 
reap  sparingly  :  and  he  which  sow- 
eth bountifully,  shall  reap  boun- 
tifully. Every  man  according  as 
he  purposeth  in  his  heart,  so  let 
him  give,  not  grudgingly,  or  of  ne- 
cessity :  for  God  loveth  a  cheerful 
giver.     2  Cor.  9.  6.  7. 

Let  him  that  is  taught  in  the 
word,  communicate  unto  him  that 
teacheth,  in  all  good  things.  Be 
not  deceived,  God  is  not  mocked : 
for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that 
shall  he  also  reap.     Gal.  6.  6.  7. 

Chaise  them  that  are  rich  in  this 
world,  that  they  be  not  high-minded. 


'  In  ed.  1663,  "who." 

I*  In  ed.  1596,  "  And  they ;"  in  ed.  166a, 
"And  they  who  wait  at  the  altar." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  that  soweth. " 

"  In  three  eds.,  1552,  and  two  cds., 
»559.  "grudging." 


°  In  ed.  1662,  "that." 
»  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1596,  and  ed. 
1662,  "content." 
P  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "can." 
«  In  three  eds.,  1549,  "  >"  store"  ttmitttd. 


The  Communion. 


235 


themselves  a  good  foundation,  against  the  time  to  come,  that 
they  may  attain  eternal  life,     i  limo.  vi. 

GOD  is  not  unrighteous,  that  he"^  will  forget  your  works 
and  labour,  that  proceedeth  of  love,  which  love  ye  have 
shewed  for  his  name's  sake,  which '  have  ministered  unto  * 
the  saints,  and  yet  do  minister,     Hebre.  vi. 

To  do  good,  and  to  distribute,  forget  not,  for  with  such 
sacrifices  God  is  pleased.     Hebre.  xiii. 

Whoso  hath  this  world's  good,  and  seeth  his  brother  have 
need,  and  shutteth  up  his  compassion  from  him,  how  dwelleth 
the  love  of  God  in  him  ?     i  John  iii. 

Give  alms  "  of  thy  goods,  and  turn  never  ^  thy  face  from  any 
poor  man,  and  then  the  face  of  the  Lord  shall  not  be  turned 
away  from  thee.     Toby  iv. 

Be  merciful  after  thy  power :  if  thou  hast  much,  give  plen- 
teously ;  if  thou  hast  little,  do  thy  diligence  gladly  to  give  of 
that  little :  for  so  gatherest  thou  thyself  a  good  reward  in  the 
day  of  necessity.     Toby  iv. 

He  that  hath  pity  upon  the  poor  lendeth  unto  the  Lord; 
and  look,  what  he  layeth  out,  it  shall  be  paid  him  again. 
frov.  xix.  y 

Blessed  be  the  man  that  provideth  for  the  sick  and  needy; 
the  Lord  shall  deliver  him,  in  the  time  of  trouble.    Psalm  xli.  y 

§  94.  Where  there  be  Clerks,  they  shall  sing  one,  or  many  of  the  sentences 
above  written,  according  to  the  length  and  shortness  of  the  time,  that  the 
people  be  offering. 


nor  trust  in  uncertain  riches,  but  in 
the  living  God,  who  giveth  us  richly 
all  things  to  enjoy ;  that  they  do 
good,  that  they  be  rich  in  good 
works,  ready  to  distribute,  willing 
to  communicate  :  laying  up  in  store 
for  themselves  a  good  foundation 
against  the  time  to  come,  that  they 
maj"-  lay  hold  of  eternal  life.  I  Tim. 
6.  17.  18.  19. 

God  is  not  imrighteous,  to  forget 
your  work  and  labour,  of  love,  which 
ye  have  shewed  toward  his  name, 
in  that  ye  have  ministered  to  the 


In  one  ed.,  1549,  "ye." 
In  ed.  1662,     who." 


'  In  three  eds.,  1549,  "to  the  saints;" 
in  eds.  1552  and  1539,  "unto  saints." 
"  In  eds.  1539,  "almose. ' 


saints,  and  yet  do  minister.     Heb. 
6.  10. 

To  do  good,  and  to  communi- 
cate, forget  not :  for  with  such  sa- 
crifices God  is  well  pleased.  Heb. 
13.  16.  »■ 


Charles  II.   1662. 
Do  ye  not  know,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1349,  to] 
.  .  .  time  of  trouble.     Psalm  xli. 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "never  turn." 

1  In  one  ed.,  1349,  the  two  referenc- 

by  a  printer's  error,  are  transposed.      1 

cd.  1396,  niisp.  Ps.  Ixi. 


236  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  95-  I^  ^^^  mean  time,  whiles  the  Clerks  do  sing  the  Offertory,  so  many  as 
are  disposed'^,  shall  offer  \tin'\to  the  poor  metis  box  every  one  according  to 
his  ability  and  charitable  mind. 

§  96.  And  at  the  offering  days  appointed, 
every  man  and  woman  shall  pay  to  the  Curate  the  due  and  accustomed 
offerings  ■. 

§  97.  Then  so  many  as  shall  be  partakers  of  the  holy  Communion,  shall 
tarry  still  in  the  quire,  or  in  some  convenient  place  nigh  the  quire,  the  men 
on  the  one  side,  and  the  women  on  t)u  other  side.  All  other  (that  mind 
not  to  receive  the  said  holy  Communion)  shall  depart  out  of  the  quire, 
except  the  ministers  and  Clerks  *. 

§  98.  Then  shall  the  minister  take  so  much  Bread  and  Wine,  as  shall  suffice 
for  the  persons  appointed  to  recdve  the  holy  Communion,  laying  the  bread 
upon  the  corporas  or  else  in  the  paten,  or  in  some  other  comely  thing  pre- 
pared  for  that  purpose:  And  putting  the  wine  into  the  Chalice,  or  else 
in  some  fair  or  convenient  cup,  prepared  for  that  use  (if  the  chalice  will 
not  serve),  putting  thereto  a  little  pure  and  clean  water :  And  setting 
both  the  bread  and  wine  upon  the  Altar  '  : 


O.H.C.  Edw.  VI.  1548. 
§  98.  The  time  of  the  communion 
shall  be  immediately  after  that  the 
Priest  himself  hath  received  the 
sacrament,  without  the  varying 
of  any  other  rite  or  ceremony  in 
the  Mass  (until  other  order  shall 
be  provided),  but  as  heretofore  usu- 
ally the  Priest  hath  done  with  the 
sacrament  of  the  body,  to  prepare, 
bless  and  consecrate  so  much  as 
will  serve  the  people :  so  it  shall^ 
contintu  still  after  the  same  man- 
ner and  form,  save  that  he  shall 
bless  and  cottsecrate  the  biggest 
chalice  or  some  fair  and  conve- 
nient cup  or  cups  full  of  wine  with 
some  water  put  unto  it;  and  that 
day, , not  drink  it  up  all  himself, 
but  taking  one  only  sup  or  draught, 
leave  the  rest  upon  the  altar  co- 
vered', .... 
[Continued  as  \  88.     See  p.  333.] 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

i  95 .  Then  shall  the  Church  wardens, 
or  some  other  by  them  appointed. 


gather  the  devotion  of  the  people, 
and  put  the  same  into  the  poor 
men's  box:  §  96.  and  upon  the 
offering  days  appointed,  every  man 
and  woman  shall  pay  to  the  Curate 
the  due  and  accustomed  offerings : 
[Continued  as 
J  104.  . . .  after  which  done  the  Priest  shall 
say.  Let  us  pray  for  the  whole  state,  &u 
See  p.  340.] 

§  99-   IF  After  the  which,  the  Priest 

shall  proceed,  saying  t. 

Lift  up  your  hearts. 

Answer.  We  lift  them  up,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


•  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "be." 

•  This  rubric  is  represented  by  the  latter 
part  of  J 149  of  1552,  and  after.  Sec  p.  364. 

^  This  rubric  is  partly  represented  by 
t  87  of  1663.  See  p.  33^.  See  also  para- 
graph beginning  "  Which  thing,"  col.  3, 
p.  326,  in  eds.  1553  to  1637. 

e  This   rubric   of   1549,   much  altered 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  95.    Theti  shall  the  Church- 
wardens, ^T'C. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
[Here  follows  ?  104.    See  p.  340.] 

§  99.  Afler  the  which  the  Priest 

shall  proceed,  saying. 
Lift  up  your  hearts. 
Answer.  We  lift  them  up,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

from  {  98  of  1548,  is  partially  represented 
by  ?  98  of  1637  and  i66a. 

*  In  one  ed.,  1548,  "shall  yet." 

*  In  O.H.C,   this   follows   after  \  93, 
p.  230. 

''  This,  in  1552,  and  subsequent  editions, 
follows  after  i  114.    See  p.  350. 


The  Communion. 


237 


§  99.  then  the  Priest  shall  say. 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 

Answer.  And  with  thy  spirit.     ' 

Priest.  iJft  up  your  hearts. 

Answer.  We  Hft  them  up  unto  the  Lord. 

Priest.  Let  us  give  thanks  to^  our  Lord  God. 

Answer.  It  is  meet  and  right  so  to  do. 

Priest^.  It  is  very  meet,  right,  and  our  bounden  duty, 
that  we  should  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  give  thanks  to  « 
thee,  O  Lord,  holy  Father,  almighty  everlasting  God. 


James  I.   1604. 

§  95.    Then  shall  the,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

[Here  follows  }  104.    See  p.  240.] 

§99.  After  the  which,  &=c. 

Lift  up  your  hearts. 

Answer.   We  lift  them  up,  &c. 

■  [Same  as  iS49-] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  95.  While  the  presbyter  distinctly 
pronounces  some  or  all  of  these 
sentences  for  the  offertory,  the  dea- 
C071  or  (if  no  stich  be  present)  one 
of  the  churchwardens  shall  receive 
the  devotions  of  the  people  there  pre- 
sent, in  a  bason  provided  for  that 
purpose.  And  when  all  have  of- 
fered, he  shall  reverently  bring  the 
said  bason,  with  the  oblations 
therein,  and  deliver  it  to  the  pres- 
byter, who  shall  humbly  present 
it  before  the  Lord,  and  set  it  upon 
the  holy  table. 

§  98.  And  the  presbyter 
shall  then  offer  up,  and  place  the 
bread  and  wine  prepared  for  the 
Sacrament  upon  the  Lord's  table, 
that  it  may  be  ready  for  that  ser- 
vice, 
[Here  follows  \  104.     See  p.  241.] 

§  99.  After  the  which  the  Presbyter 
shall  proceed,  saying. 
Lift  up  your  hearts. 
Answer.  We  lift  them  up,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  except  Presbyter  for  Priest 
in  both  instances.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  95-  IT  Whilst  these  Sentences  art 
in  reading,  the  Deacons,  Church- 
wardens, or  other  fit  person  ap- 
pointed for  that  purpose,  shall  re- 
ceive the  alms  for  the  poor,  and 
other  devotions  of  the  people,  in 
a  decent  basin,  to  be  provided  by 
the  Parish  for  that  purpose ;  and 
reverently  bring  it  to  the  Priest, 
who  shall  humbly  present  and 
place  it  upon  the  holy  Table. 

§  98.  ^  And  when  there  is  a  Com- 
munion,  the  Priest  shall  then  place 
upon  the  Table  so  much  Bread 
and  Wine,  as  he  shall  think  suf- 
ficient; 

[Continued  as  \  104.  .  .  .  after  which 
done.     See  p.  241.] 

§  99.   H  After  which  the  Priest  shall 

proceed,  saying. 

Lift  up  your  hearts. 

Answer.  We  lift  them  up,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

right  so  to  do. 

§  100.   1  Then  shall  the  Priest  turn 
to  the  Lord's  Table,  and  say, 

It  is  very  meet,  right,   and  our 
bounden  duty,  that  we  should  at  all 

times,    and    in    all  „, 

,               -.■,■>  1  Hese     words 

places  give  thanks  [Holy     Father] 

unto  thee,  O  Lord,  must  be  omitted 

holy     Father,     Al-  ^  Trinity  Sun- 

mighty,    everlasting  "-*'* 
God. 


»  In  most  eds.  1552,  1559.  and  all  afterwards,  "unto." 
*>  In  three  eds.,  1549,  "  Tlie  Priest.''' 


238  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

§  101.  Here  shall  follow  the  proper  preface^  according  to  the  time  {if  there 

be  any  specially  appointed, )  or  else  immediately  shall  follow, 

Therefore  with  angels,  [&c.] 

PROPER    PREFACES. 

•[f  Upon  Christmas  Day. 
Because  thou  didst  give  Jesus  Christ,  thine  only  Son,  to 
be  born  as  this  day "'  for  us,  who  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  made  very  man,  of  the  substance  of  the  Virgin ' 
Mary  his  mother,  and  that  without  spot  of  sin,  to  make  us 
clean  from  all  sin.     Therefore  &c.  " 

^  Upon  Easter  Day. 
But  chiefly  are  we  bound  to  praise  thee,  for  the  glorious 
resurrection  of  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord ;  for  he  is  the 
very  Paschal  Lamb,  which  was  offered  for  us,  and  hath  taken, 
away  the  sin  of  the  world,  who  by  his  death  hath  destroyed 
death,  and  by  his  rising  to  life  again  hath  restored  to  us 
everlasting  life.     Therefore  &c. 

%   Upon  the  »  Ascension  Day. 
Through  thy  most  dear  beloved    Son,  Jesus  Christ   our 
Lord,   who   after   his   most  glorious   resurrection  manifestly 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§101.  Here  shall  follow  the 

proper  Preface,  dr'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

PROPER  PREFACES. 

%  Upon  Christmas  day,  and  seven 
days  after. 

Because  thou  didst  give,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

\  Upon  Easter  day,  and  seven 
days  after. 

But  chiefly  are  we  bound,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

%  Upon  t/ie^  Ascension  day,  and 
seven  days  after. 

Through    thy    most    dear   be- 
loved, &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 


^  Upon  Whitsunday,  and  six 

days  after. 
Through  Jesus  Christ,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
IT  Upon  t/u  feast  of  Trinity  only. 
It  is  very  meet,  right.  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
inequality.     Therefore  with.  &c. 

Elizabeth,  1559. 

§101.  Here  shall  follow,  ^c. 

[Same  as  i549.] 

PROPER  PREFACES,  &c 

[Same  Prefaces  as  1549,  with  tlie 

rubrics  of  1553.] 

inequality.     Therefore  with.  &c 

James  I.  1604. 

§  loi.  Here  shall  ffillow,  <Srv. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

PROPER  PREFACES,  &c. 
[Same  Prefaces  as  is49,  ^'''^  rubrics 
of  issa-J 
inequality.     Therefore  with.  &c. 


•  In  one  ed.,  1549,  and  1552,  "  Prefaces." 
^  in  ed.  1662,  "  ^s  at  this  time." 
'  In    Scotch    ed.    1637,    "  the    blessed 
Virgin  Mary." 


°<  In  some  eds.,  1553,  and  in  all,  1559, 
1604,  1662,  "Therefore  with  Angels,"  jLc, 
throughout. 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "  the"  omitted. 


The  Communion. 


239 


appeared  to  all  his  disciples  °,  and  in  their  sight  ascended 
up  into  heaven,  to  prepare  a  place  for  us,  that  where  he  is, 
thither  might  we  ^  also  ascend,  and  reign  with  him  in  glory. 
Therefore  &c. 

^    U/>on  Whitsimday. 

Through  Jesus  1  Christ  our  Lord,  according  to  whose  most 
true  promise,  the  Holy  Ghost  came  down  this  day""  from 
heaven,  with  a  sudden  great  sound,  as  it  had  been  a  mighty 
wind,  in  the  likeness  of  fiery  tongues,  lighting  upon  the  Apo- 
stles, to  teach  them,  and  to  lead  them  to  all  truth,  givnig 
them  both  the  gift  of  divers  languages,  and  also  boldness 
with  fervent  zeal,  constantly  to  preach  the  Gospel  unto  all 
nations,  whereby  we  are '  brought  out  of  darkness  and  error, 
into  the  clear  light  and  true  knowledge  of  thee,  and  of  thy 
Son  Jesus  Christ,     'therefore  &c. 

•j  Upon  tiie  feast  of  tJic  Trinity. 
It  is  very  meet,  right,  and  our  bounden  duty,  that  we 
should  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  give  thanks  to  thee, 
O  Lord  almighty,  ^  everlasting  God,  which  "  art  one  God,  one 
Lord,  not  one  only  person,  but  three  persons  in  one  substance  : 
For  that  which  we  believe  of  the  glory  of  the  Father,  the  same 
we  believe  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  without  any 
difterence,  or  inetjuality :  whom  the  angels  (S:c. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  ici.   Here  shall  follow,  c;-V. 

[Same  as  1S49O 

FROI'ER   PREFxVCES. 

[Same  Prefaces  as  1549,  with  rubrics 
of  1552,  to] 
inequality.     Therefore  with.  <^c. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  loi.  H  Here  shall foiloii)  the  Frofer 
Frejace,  lisr'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

Therefore  with  Angels  and 
Archangels  and  with  all  the  com- 
pany of  heaven  we  laud  and  mag- 
nify thy  glorious  Name,    evermore 


praising  thee,  and  saying,  Holy, 
holy,  holy,  Lord  God  of  hosts, 
Heaven  and  earth  are  full  of  thy 
glory.  Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Lord 
most  High.     Aincii. 

IT  PROPER  PREFACES,  &c. 

[The  same  Prefaces  as  1549,  with 
tlie  rubrics  of  1552,  toj 

•^  Upon  the  feast  of  Ttinity  only. 
Who  art  one  God,  one  Lord  ; 
not  one  only  person,  but  three  per- 
sons in  one  substance :  For  that 
which  we  believe  of  the  glory  of 
the  Father,  the  same  we  believe 
of  the  Son,  and  of  the  holy  Ghost, 
without  any  difference  or  inequality. 
Therefore  with  Anq-els,  &c. 


"  In  eds.  1552, and  afterwards,  "Apost'es. 
I'  In  ed.  1662,  "we  might." 
'i   In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1559,  "  Jcsu." 
'  In  ed.  1662,  "  as  at  this  time  from." 


^  In  ed.  1662,  "have  been." 
'  In  eds.    1542,  and   afterwards,    "and 
everlasting." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "  wlio." 


240 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


1 


§  102.  After  -which  preface  shall  follow  immediately. 
Therefore  with  Angels  and  Archangels,  and  with  all  the 
holy  company  of  heaven,  we  laud  and  magnify  thy  glorious 
name,  evermore  praising  thee,  and  saying, 

^  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  of  Hosts :  heaven  and  earth 
are  full  of  thy  glory :  Osannah  in  the  highest.  Blessed  is  he 
that  Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  :  Glory  to  thee,  O  Lord, 
in  the  highest. 

§  103.    This  the  Clerks  shall  also  sing. 

§  104.  H  When  the  Clerks  have  done  singing,  then  shall  the  Priest,  or  Deacon, 

turn  him  to  the  people,  and  say. 

Let  US  pray  for  the  whole  state  of  Christ's  church. 

§  105.  %  Then  the  Priest,  turtting  him  to  the  Altar,  shall  say  or  sing,  plainly 
and  distinctly,  this  prayer  following  : 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552, 

§  102.  After    which   preface,   shall 

follow  immediately. 

%  Therefore  with  Angels  and 
Archangels,  and  with  all  the  com- 
pany of  heaven,  we  laud  and  mag- 
nify thy  glorious  name,  evermore 
praising  thee,  and  saying  : 

Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  of 
hosts :  heaven  and  earth  are  full 
of  thy  glory :  glory  be  to  thee,  O 
Lord  most  high. 

[Here  follows  }  iij,  and  the  prayer, 
"We  do  not  presume, '  &c     See  p.  253.) 

§§  104,  5.  .  .  .  After  which  done  the 
Priest  *  shall  say  "f. 

Let  us  pray  for  the  whole  state  * 
of  Christ's  Church  militant  here  in 
earth. 

Almighty  and  everliving  God, 
which  by  thy  holy  Apostle  hast 
taught  us  to  make  prayers  and  sup- 
plications, and  to  give  thanks  for  all 
If  there   be 


men :  we  humbly 
beseech  thee  most 
mercifully  to  accept 
our  •alms'',  and  to 
receive     these     our 


none  *  alms  given 
unto  the  poor, 
then  shall  the 
words  of  accept- 
ing our  alms  be 
lelt  out  unsaid. 


prayers. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
•  .  unity  and  godly  love. 


»  In  ed.  1578,  "Minister." 
J  This,  ineds.  1553,  issq,  1604,  and  after- 
wards, is  a  continuation  of  k  95,  p.  236. 
•  Ineds.  i552,andoneed.,  t5S9,"estate." 


We  beseech  thee  also  to  save  and 
defend  all  Christian  Kings,  Princes, 
and  governors,  and  specially  thy  ser- 
vant, Edward  our  King,  that  under 
him  we  may  be  godly  and  quietly 
governed  : 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
true  religion  and  virtue. 

Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  102.  After  which  Preface,  &>€. 
[Same  as  155a.] 
[Here  follows  {  115.     See  p.  353.] 

§§  104,  5.  .  .  .  After  which  done  the 

Priest  shall  say. 

Let  us  pray  for  the  whole,  &c. 

(Same  as  1553,  except] 

and  specially  thy  servant  Elizabeth 

our  Queen, 

[and  "  her,"  for  "him,"  and  "  his."] 

James  L  1604. 

§  102.  After  which  Preface,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1553.] 

[Here  follows  }  iis-     See  p.  333] 

§§  104,  5.  .  .  .  After  which  done  the 

Priest  shall  say. 

Let  us  pray  for  the  whole,  &c. 
[Same  as  1553,  except] 
and  specially  thy  servant  James  our 
King, 


•  In  one  cd.,  issa.  »5S9t  and  all  after- 
wards, "  no  alms." 
••  In  eds.  1559,  "almose." 


The  Communion. 


241 


Almighty  and  everliving  God,  which  by  thy  holy  apostle 
hast  taught  us  to  make  prayers  and  suppHcations,  and  to  give 
thanks  for  all  men  :  We  humbly  beseech  thee 

most  mercifully 
to  receive  these  our  prayers,  which  we  offer  unto  thy  divine 
Majesty,  beseeching  thee  to  inspire  continually  the  universal 
church  with  the  spirit  of  truth,  unity,  and  concord  :  And 
grant  that  all  they  that  do  confess  thy  holy  name,  may  agree 
in  the  truth  of  thy  holy  word,  and  live  in  unity  and  godly  love. 

Specially  we  beseech  thee  to  save  and  defend  thy  servant 
Edward  our  King,  that  under  him  we  may  be  Godly  and 
quietly  governed.  And  grant  unto  his  whole  council,  and  to 
all  that  be  "^  put  in  authority  under  him,  that  they  may  truly 
and  indifferently  minister  justice,  to  the  punishment  of  wicked- 
ness and  vice,  and  to  the  maintenance  of  God's  ^  true  religion 
and  virtue. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  102.  After  which  Prefaces,  shall 
follow  immediately  this  Doxology. 

Therefore  with  Angels,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
[Here  follows  }  106.     See  p.  244.] 

§  104.  And  then  he  shall  say'. 

Let  us  pray  for  the  whole,  &c. 
[Same  as  1553,  except] 

and  specially  thy  servant  Charles 
our  King, 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§§  102,  3.  II  After  each  of  which 
Prefaces,  shall  immediately  be  sung 
or  said, 

Therefore  with  Angels  and 
Archangels,  and  with  all  the  com- 
pany of  heaven,  we  laud  and  mag- 
nify thy  glorious  Name,  evermore 
praising  thee,  and  saying,  Holy, 
holy,  holy,  Lord  God  of  hosts,  hea- 
ven and  earth  are  full  of  thy  glory. 


Glory  be  to  thee,    O   Lord,  most 
high.     Amen. 

[Here  follows,  J  115.     See  p.  253.] 

§§  104,  5.  After  which  done,  the 
Priest  shall  say  ^, 

Let  us  pray  for  the  whole  state 
of  Christ's  Church  militant  here 
in  earth. 

Almighty  and  everliving  God, 
who  by  thy,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  except  following  insertion.] 
most  mercifully  \to  j^  ^j,^^^  ^^  „^ 
accept  our  alms  and  alms  or  oblations, 
oblations,  an(f\  to  then  shall  the 
receive  these  our  words  [o/accf/i-- 
,  .  ,  tnz  our  alms  and 

prayers,    which  we    oblations\\>^\t.i\. 
offer  unto  thy  divine    out  unsaid. 
Majesty,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
We  beseech  thee  also  to,  &c 
[Same  as  1552,  to] 
and  specially  thy  servant  Charles 
our  King, 

[continued  to] 

true  religion  and  virtue. 


°  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 

*  In  ed.  1662,  "thy  true." 


•  This  rubric,  in  eds.  1637  and  x66a,  i& 
a  continuation  of  \  98,  p.  237. 


242 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Giv^e  grace  (O  heavenly  Father)  to  all  Bishops, 
Pastors',  and  Curates,  that  they  may  both  by  their  life  and 
doctrine  set  forth  thy  true  and  e  lively  word,  and  rightly  and 
duly  administer  thy  holy  Sacraments :  and  to  all  thy  people 
give  thy  heavenly  grace,  that  with  meek  heart  and  due  reve- 
rence they  may  hear  and  receive  thy  holy  word,  truly  serv- 
ing thee  in  holiness  and  righteousness  all  the  days  of  their 
life. 

And  we  most  humbly  beseech  thee  of  thy  goodness  (O  Lord) 
to  comfort  and  succour  all  them,  which  in  this  transitory  life 
be  in  trouble,  sorrow,  need,  sickness,  or  any  other  adversity. 

And 
especially  we  commend  unto  thy  merciful  goodness  this 
congregation  which  is  here  assembled  in  thy  name,  to  cele- 
brate the  commemoration  of  the  most  glorious  death  of  thy 
Son :  And  here  we  do  give  unto  thee  most  high  praise,  and 
hearty  thanks,  for  the  wonderful  grace  and  virtue,  declared  in 
all  thy  saints,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world :  And  chiefly 
in  the  glorious  and  most  blessed  virgin  Mary,  mother  of  thy 
Son  Jesu  Christ  our  Lord  and  God,  and  in  the  holy  Patriarchs, 
Prophets,  Apostles  and  Martyrs,  whose  examples  (O  Lord) 


Second  Edw.  VI,  1552, 

Give  grace  (O  heavenly  Father) 
to  all  Bishops,  Pastors  S  and  Cu- 
rates, &C. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
heavenly  grace,  and  especially  to 
this  congregation  here  present,  that 
with  meek  heart  and  due  reverence 
they  may  hear  and  receive  thy  holy 
word,  truly  serving  thee  in  holiness 
and  righteousness  all  the  days  of 
their  life. 

And  we  most  humbly  beseech 
thee  of  thy  goodness  (O  Lord)  to 
comfort  and  succour  all  them,  which ' 
in  this  transitory  life  be  J  in  sorrow, 
need,  sickness,  or  any-  other  ad- 
versity. 

Grant  this,  O  Father,  for 
Jesus  Christ's  sake,  our  only  me- 
diator and  advocate.     Amen. 


'  In  ed.  i66a,  "  Pastors"  omitted. 
I  In  one  ed.,   1552,  and   1559,   "and' 
emitted. 


[Here  follows, 

\  91.    TAen    shall  follmv    this   exhorta^ 

tioH,  &'c. 

Seep.  3a6.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

Give  grace  (O  heavenly  Father), 
&c. 

[Same  as  1553,  to] 
Mediator  and  Advocate.    Amen. 
[Here  follows  I  91.     See  p.  227.] 


James  I.  1604. 

Give  grace  (O  heavenly  Father), 
&c. 

[Same  as  1553,  to] 

Mediator  and  Advocate.    Amen. 
[Here  follows  I  91.     See  p.  237.] 


*  In  ed.  1662,  "Pastors"  etHitted^ 

'  In  ed.  i66a,  "  who." 

)  In  ed.  1663,  "  are  in  trouble,  sorrow.' 


The  Communion. 


243 


and  stedfastness  in  thy  faith,  and  keeping  thy  holy  command- 
ments, grant  us  to  follow.  We  commend  unto  thy  mercy 
(O  Lord)  all  other  thy  servants,  which  are  departed  hence 
from  us,  with  the  sign  of  faith,  and  now  do  rest  in  the  sleep 
of  peace  :  Grant  unto  them,  we  beseech  thee,  thy  mercy,  and 
everlasting  peace,  and  that,  at  the  day  of  the  general  resur- 
rection, we  and  all  they  which  be  of  the  mystical  body  of  thy 
Son,  may  altogether  be  set  on  his  right  hand,  and  hear  that 
his  most  joyful  voice :  Come  unto  me,  O  ye  that  be  blessed 
of  my  Father,  and  possess  the  kingdom,  which  is  prepared 
for  you  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  : 

grant  this,  O  Father, 
for  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  our  only  Mediator  and  Advocate. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Give  grace  ,0  heavenly  Father  to 
all  Bishops  Presbyters  and  Curates, 
that  they,  &c. 

[continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
all  the  days  of  their  life. 

[And  we  commend  especially 
unto  thy  merciful  goodness  the  con- 
gregation which  is  here  assembled 
in  thy  Name  to 
celebrate  the  com-  „7comtnio"^ 
memoration  of  the  these  words  thus 
most  precious  death  enclosed  are  to 
and  sacrifice  of  thy  ^  '^^'  °"'- 
Son  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ] 

And  we  most  humbly  beseech 
thee,  &c. 

[continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
any  other  adversity. 

And  we  also 
bless  thy  holy  Name  for  all  those 
thy  servants,  who,  having  finished 
their  course  in  faith,  do  now  rest 
from  their  labours.  And  we  yield 
unto  thee  most  high  praise  and 
hearty  thanks,  for  the  wonderful 
grace  and  virtue  declared  in  all  thy 
saints,  who  have  been  the  choice 
vessels  of  thy  grace,  and  the  lights 
of  the  world  in  their  several  gene- 
rations ;  most  humbly  beseeching 
thee,  that  we  may  have  grace  to 
follow  the  example  of  their  sted- 
fastness in  thy  laith,  and  obedience 


to  thy  holy  commandments :  that 
at  the  day  of  the  general  resurrec- 
tion we,  and  all  they  which  are  of 
the  mystical  body  of  thy  Son,  may 
be  set  on  his  right  hand,  and  hear 
that  his  most  joyful  voice.  Come  ye 
blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the 
kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world. 

Grant  this, 
O  Father,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake, 
our  only  mediator  and  advocate. 
Avun. 

[Here  follows  \  91.     See  p.  227.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Give  grace  O  heavenly  Father,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552,  to] 
or  any  other  adversity. 

[Instead  of  the  paragraph  of  ed.  1549 
beginning,  "  And  especially  we  commend," 
is  substituted  the  following.] 

And  we  also  bless  thy  holy  Name, 
for  all  thy  servants  departed  this 
life  in  thy  faith  and  fear ;  beseech- 
ing thee  to  give  us  grace  so  to  fol- 
low their  good  examples,  that  with 
them  we  may  be  partakers  of  thy 
heavenly  kingdom. 

Grant  this, 
O  Father,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake 
our  only  Mediator  and  Advocate. 
Amen. 

[Here  follows  \  92.    When  the  Minister 
giveth  warning,  &»€.     See  p.  229.] 


244 


First  Prayer-book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


O  God  heavenly  Father,  which  of  thy  tender  mercy  didst 
give  thine  ^  only  Son  Jesu^  Christ,  to  suffer  death  upon  the 
cross  for  our  redemption,  who  made  there  (by  his  one ""  obla- 
tion", once  offered)  a  full,  perfect,  and  sufficient  sacrifice, 
oblation,  and  satisfaction,  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world, 
and  did"  institute,  and  in  his  holy  Gospel  command  us  to 
celebrate  p,  a  perpetual  memory  of  that  his  precious  death  % 
until  his  coming  again : 

Hear  us  (O  merciful  Father)  we 
beseech  thee;  and  with  thy  holy  Spirit  and  word  vouchsafe 
to  bl»i«ess  and  sanc+tify  these  thy  gifts,  and  creatures  of  bread 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  107.    TTiM  the  Priest  standing  up 
shall  say,  as/olloweth'. 
Almighty   God    our    heavenly 
Father,  which  of  thy,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
Hear  us,    O  merciful   Father,    we 
beseech  thee :   and  grant  that  we 
receiving    these    thy    creatures    of 
bread  and  wine,  according  to  thy 
Son  our  Saviour  Jesu  Christ's  holy 
institution,  in  remembrance  of  his 
death  and    passion,    may  be    par- 
takers of  his  most  blessed  body  and 
blood  :  who,  in  the  same  night  that 
he  was  betrayed,  took  bread,  and 
when   he    had    given    thanks,    he 
brake  it,  and  gave  it  to  his  disci- 
ples saying : 
[Same  as  1549,  (but  with  the  side-notes 
omitted),  to] 
in  remembrance  of  me. 
[Here  follows 
)  116.  Then  shall  the  M inister  Jint,  **c. 
See  p.  353.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  107.  TTien  the  Priest  standing,  &*c. 

Almighty    God    our    heavenly 

Father,  which  of  thy,  &c 

[The  same  as  «552-] 

[Here  follows  J  n6.     See  p.  as'-l 


^  In  Scotch  ed.,  1657,  "thy." 
'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  ui  all  eds.,  1553,  and 
afterwards,  "Jesus." 

■  In  ed.  of  1597,  "one"  is  printed 
"  own."  _  In  the  first  edition  of  1549,  it  is 
spelt  "  his  awne  oblacion." 

■  In  eds.  1552,  and  all  afterwards,  "ob- 
ation  of  himself." 

•  In  one  ed,,  1552,  and  1559,  "diddest" 


James  I.  1604. 
§  107.  Then  the  Priest  standing,  &'c. 

Almighty   God    our    heavenly 
Father,  which  of  thy,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1553.] 
[Here  follows  i  116.     See  p.  353.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  107.  Then  the  presbyter,  standing 
up,  shall  say  the  prayer  of  Conse- 
cration, as/olloweth, 

§  106.  but  then, 
during  the  time  of  consecration, 
he  shall  stand  at  such  a  pari  of 
the  holy  table  where  he  may  with 
the  more  ease  and  decency  use  both 
his  hands  * ; 

Almighty   God    our   heavenly 
Father,  which  of  thy,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Hear  us,  O  merciful  Father,  we 
most  humbly  beseech  thee,  and  of 
thy  almighty  goodness  vouchsafe  so 
to  bless  and  sanctify,  with  thy  word 
and  Holy  Spirit,  these  thy  gifts 
and  creatures  of  bread  and  wine, 
that  they  may  be  unto  us  the  body 
and  blood  of  thy  most  dearly  be- 


r  In  eds.  1553,  and  all  afterwards,  "  con- 
tinue." 

4  In  Scoth  ed.,  1637,  "  death  and  sa- 
crifice. " 

'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  this  fol- 
lows on  after  I  115,  p.  252. 

•  This,  in  the  Scotch  Liturgy,  follows 
immediately  after  the  Prefaces,  I  lo*. 
See  p.  341. 


The  Communion. 


245 


and  wine,  that  they  may  be  unto  us  the  body  and  blood  of 
thy  most  dearly  beloved   Son   Jesus  Christ.      Who,  in   the 

same  night  that  he  was  betrayed,  took  bread, 
musY^  take  "tife  and  whcn  he  had  blessed,  and  given  thanks,  he 
hands  '"'°   ^'^  brake  it,  and  gave  it  to  his  disciples,  saying  : 

Take,  eat,  this  is  my  body  which  is  given  for 
you  :  do  this  in  remembrance  of  me. 

Likewise  after  supper  he  took  the  cup,  and  when  he  had 
'Here  the  Priest  S^ven  thanks,  he  gave  it  to  them,  saying:  Drink 
shall  take  the  cup  ye  all  of  this,  for  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new 
into  his  hands.  Testamcut,  which  is  shed  for  you  and  for  many, 
for  remission  of  sins  :  Do  this  as  oft  as  you  ^  shall  drink  it, 
in  remembrance  of  me. 


loved   Son,   so   that  we,    receiving 

them  according  to  thy  Son  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ's  holy  insti- 
tution,   in    remem- 

brance  of  his  death  f,,^r'wTtt 

and      passion     may  Presbyter      that 

be  partakers  of  the  officiates    is    to 

same  his  most  bless-  f^H?  the  Paten 

J  1-    J           J  ui      J  11  his  hand, 
ed  body  and  blood 

—who  in  the  night  ,,  ^t  these  words 

,          ,                     P  Uook  the  C7ip\  he 

that    he    was    be-  is    to    take   the 

trayed    took    bread  chalice    in     his 

and   when  he  had  hand  and  lay  his 

ii,      I         i,«  hand     upon     so 

given     thanks     he  „„^h,  be   it  in 

brake  it  and  gave  chaliceorflagons, 

it    to    his    disciples  as  he  intends  to 

saying  :  consecrate. 

[Continued  same  as  1549,  except 
variation  in  side-notes.] 

Charles  II.  1662. 
§  106.  \  Whm  the  Priest,  standing 
before  the  Table,  hath  so  ordered 
the  Bread  and  IVine,  that  he  may 
with  the  viore  readiness  and  de- 
cency break  the  Bread  before  the 
people,  and  take  the  Cup  into  his 
hands, 

§  107,  he  shall  say  the 
Prayer  of  Consecration,  as  fol- 
loweth . 

Almighty  God,    our   heavenly 
Father,  who  of  thy,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
.  .  .   Hear  us,  O  merciful  Father, 


we  most  humbly  beseech  thee,  and 
grant  that  we  receiving  these  thy 
creatures  of  bread  and  wine,  ac- 
cording to  thy  Son  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ's  holy  institution,  in 
remembrance  of  his  death  and 
passion,  may  be  partakers  of  his 
most  blessed  body  and  blood  : 
Who   in   the  same      („)  Here   the 

night    that    he    was     Priest  is  to  take 
betrayed    (a)    took    'he    Patea    into 
bread,  and  when  he    h.s  hands: 
had  given    thanks     triaklheS: 
(o)  he  brake  it,  and 
gave    it  to    his    disciples,    saying. 
Take,   eat,    (f)  this       ,^)  And  here  to 
is  my  body  which  is    lay  his  hand  upon 
given    for    you,    do    all  the  bread, 
this  in  remembrance  of  me.     Like- 

rJ'!    ^^^^^    .^"PP^''        (^  Here  he  is 

(</)  he  took  the  cup,  to  take  the  cup 

and   when    he  had  into  his  hand : 
given  thanks,  he  gave  it  to  them, 
saying.  Drink  ye  all 

of  this,  for  this  (e)  ,  W  And  here  to 

Vi      J      r  ii.  lay  his  hand  upon 

IS   my  blood  of  the  every  vessel  (be 

New   Testament,  it  Chalice  or  Fla- 

which  is   shed    for  g on)  in  which 

you  and  for  many    J.^t^Vo-Jratd. 

for  the  remission  01 

sins :    Do  this,  as   oft  as  ye  shall 

drink  it,   in  remembrance   of  me. 

Amen. 

[Here  follows  }  1 16.     See  p.  253.] 


'   In  eds.  1552,  1559,  and  1604,  these  two  side-notes  are  omitted. 
"  In  eds.  1552,  and  atterwards,  "  ye." 


246 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  loS.    These  words  before  rehearsed  are  to  be  said,  turning  still  to  the  Altar, 
without  any  elevation,  or  shewing  the  Sacrament  to  the  people. 

Wherefore,  O  Lord  and  heavenly  Father,  according  to 
the  Institution  of  thy  dearly  beloved  Son,  our  Saviour  Jesu* 
Christ,  we  thy  humble  servants  do  celebrate,  and  make  here 
before  thy  divine  Majesty,  with  these  thy  holy  gifts,  the  memo- 
rial which  thy  Son  hath  willed  us  to  make  :  having  in  remem- 
brance his  blessed  passion,  mighty  resurrection,  and  glorious 
ascension,  rendering  unto  thee  most  hearty  thanks,  for  the 
innumerable  benefits  procured  unto  us  by  the  same,  en- 
tirely desiring?  thy  fatherly  goodness,  mercifully  to 

accept 
this  our  Sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanksgiving :  most  humbly 
beseeching  thee  to  grant,  that  by  the  merits  and  death  of 
thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  through  faith  in  his  blood,  we 
and  all  thy  whole  church  may  obtain  remission  of  our  sins, 
and  all  other  benefits  of  his  passion.  And  here  we  offer  and 
present  unto  thee  (O  Lord)  ourself ',  our  souls,  and  bodies, 
to  be  a  reasonable,  holy,  and  lively  sacrifice  unto  thee  : 


Second  Edw.  VI.  155a. 

{  108.  T  ^ft"'  shall  be  said  as 
follorweth  •. 

O  Lord  and  heavenly  Father, 
we,  thy  humble  servants,  entirely 
desire  thy  fatherly  goodness,  mer- 
cifully to,  &C. 

[Continued  same  as  1549,  to] 

humbly  beseeching  thee,  that  all  we 
which  be"*  partakere  of  this  holy 
Communion,  may  be  fulfilled  witn 
thy  grace  and  heavenly  benedic- 
tion. And  although  we  be  unwor- 
thy (through  our  manifold  sins)  to 
offer  unto  thee  any  sacrifice,  Yet 
we  beseech  thee  to  accept  this  our 
bounden  duty  and  service,  not 
weighing  our  merits,  but  pardoning 
our  offences,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  ;  by  whom,  and  with 
whom,  in  the  Unity  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,   all   honour   and  glory    be 


»  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Jesus." 
y  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "and  we  entirely 
desire." 
•  In  ed.   1559,  and   afterwards,   "our- 


unto    thee,    O    Father    almighty, 
world  without  end.     Amen. 

[Here  follows, 
1   137.    Or  this.     Almighty  and  ever- 
living,  &C. 

See  p.  956.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  108.  .  .  After  shall  be  said  as 

followeth, 
O  Lord  and  heavenly,  &c. 

[Same  as  1553,  to] 
.  .  world  without  end.     Amen. 
[Here  follows  J  137.    Sec  p.  256.] 


James  L  1604. 

§  108.  .  .  After  shall  be  said  as 

followeth. 
O  Lord  and  heavenly,  &c. 

[Same  as  1553,  to] 

.  .  world  without  aid.     Amen. 

[Here  follows  )  137.     See  p.  356.] 


selves. " 

*  In   eds.  1553,   and  in  all  afterwards 
this  follows  on  after  1 136.     See  p.  336. 

k  In  ed.  1663,  "  who  are." 


The  Communion. 


247 


humbly 
beseeching  thee,  that  whosoever  shall  be  partakers  ^  of  this 
holy  Communion,  may  worthily  receive  the  most  precious 
body  and  blood  of  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  be  fulfilled  with 
thy  grace  and  heavenly  benediction,  and  made  one  body 
with  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ '',  that  he  may  dwell  in  them,  and 
they  in  him. 

And  although  we  be  unworthy  (through  our 
manifold  sins)  to  offer  unto  thee  any  Sacrifice  :  Yet  we  be- 
seech thee  to  accept  this  our  bounden  duty  and  service, 

and 
command  these  our  prayers  and  supplications,  by  the  ministry 
of  thy  holy  Angels,  to  be  brought  up  into  thy  holy  Tabernacle 
before   the   sight   of  thy   divine   Majesty; 

not  weighing  our 
merits,  but  pardoning  our  offences,  through  ^  Christ  our  Lord ; 
by  whom,  and  with  whom,  in  the  unity  of  the  Holy  Chost, 
all  honour  and  glory  be  unto  thee,  O  Father  Almighty,  worlcl 
without  end.     Amen. 

Let  us  pray. 

As  our  Saviour  Christ  hath  commanded  and  taught  us,  we 
are  bold  to  say.  Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed 
be  thy  name.  Thy  Kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass 
against  us.     And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. 

T/ic  Ans7i'er.  But  deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen  f. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  108.  Immediately  after  shall  be  said 
this  Memorial  or  Prayer  of  Obla- 
tion, as  follozveth. 

Wherefore,  O  Lord,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549  throughout,  except 
paragraph,  "  and  comniand  these  our 
prayers  to  thy  divine  M.ijesty,"  is  omitted."^ 

§  109.    The7i  shall  the  presbyter  say, 

As  our  Saviour  Christ  hath  com- 
manded and  taught  us,  we  are  bold 
to  say,  Our  Father,  Which  art  in 
heaven,  &c.     Amen. 


[Here  follows, 

}  115.    Ttii'n  shall  the  Fresbyter,  kneeli7ig 

down  at  God^s  boarii,  &^<r. 

See  p.  253.] 

Charles  IL   1662. 

§  108.   ^  After  shall  be  said,  as 

followeth. 
O  Lord   and   heavenly  Father, 
we  tliy  humble  servants  entirely  de- 
sire thy  Fatherly  goodness,  merci- 
fully to,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
humbly  beseeching  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 
world  without  end.     Amen. 
[Here  follows  \  127.     See  p.  257.] 


'  In  one  ed.,  IS49.  "partaker." 
^  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "one  body  with 
him  that." 


*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Jesus  Christ." 
'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  Amen"  omitted. 


248 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  109.    Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 

The  peace  of  the  Lord  be  alway  with  you. 

The  Clerks.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

The  Priest.  Christ  our  paschal  Lamb  is  offered  up  for  us, 
once  for  all,  when  he  bare  our  sins  on  his  body  upon  the 
cross  j  for  he  is  the  very  Ijamb  of  God,  that  taketh  away  the 
sins  of  the  world  :  wherefore  let  us  keep  a  joyful  and  holy 
feast  with  the  Lord. 

§111.  Here  the  Priest  shall  turn  him  toward  those  that  come  to  the 
holy  Communion,  and  shall  say. 

You  that  do  truly  and  earnestly  repent  you  of  your  sins  to 
Almighty  God  «,  and  be  ^  in  love  and  charity  with  your  neigh- 


O.H.C.  Edw.  VI.,  1548. 
§  no.  Here  the  Priest  shall  pame 
a  ivhile,  to  see  if  any  man  will 
•withdraw  himself:  and  if  he  per- 
ceive any  so  to  do,  then  let  him 
commune  with  him  privily  at  con- 
venient leisure,  and  see  whether  he 
can  with  good  exhortation  bring 
him  to  grace^ : 

§   III,  and  after 
a  little  pause,  the  Priest  shall  say. 

You  that  do  truly  and  earnestly 
repent  you  of  your  sins  and  offences 
committed  to  Almighty  God,  and 
be  in  love  and  charity  with  your 
neighbours,  and  intend  to  lead  a 
new  life,  and  heartily  to  follow  the 
commandments  of  God,  and  to  walk 
from  henceforth,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  112.    Then  shall  a  general  Con- 
fession be  made,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

Almighty  God,  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  III.  IT  Then  sJiall  the  Priest^  say 
to  them  that  come  to  receive  the 
holy  Communion '. 


»  In  cds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "to  Al- 
mighty God    omitted. 

^  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 

'  This  rubric,  which  in  1548  follows  on 
after  i  89,  see  p.  324,  does  not  appear  in 
ed.  1549,  but   It  may  be  compared  with 


You  that  do  truly  and  earnestly 
repent  you  of  your  sins,  and  be,  &c 

[The  same  as  1549,  to] 
to  almighty  God  before  this  con- 
gregation here  gathered  together  in 
his  holy   name,    meekly   kneeling 
upon  your  knees. 

§  II 2.   Then  shall  this  general 

confession,  &'c. 
Almighty  God,  Father  of,  &c 

[The  same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  1 1 1,  Then  shall  the  Priest  say,  &'c. 

You  that  do  truly,  &c 
[The  same  as  1553.] 

§  1 1 2.   Then  shall  this  general 

confession,  &>c. 
Almighty  God,  Father  of,  &c 

[The  same  as  1549- J 


James  I.  1604. 

§  III.  Then  shall  the  Priest  say,  (SrV. 

You  that  do  truly,  &c 
[The  same  as  1552.] 

§  1 1 2.    Then  shall  this  general 

confession,  &'c. 
Almighty  God,  Father  of,  &c 

[The  same  as  1549.] 


{  97.    See  p.  236. 
'  In  ed.  1578,  "the  Minister." 
'  This,  in  155a  and  subsequent  editions, 

follows  on  after  the  exhortation,  1 88.    See 

p.  224. 


The  Communion. 


249 


hours,  and  intend  to  lead  a  new  life,  following  the  command- 
ments of  God,  and  walking  from  henceforth  in  his  holy  ways : 
draw  near  and  take  this  holy  Sacrament  to  your  comfort, 
make  ^  your  humble  confession  to  Almighty  God,  and  to  his 
holy  church  here  gathered  together  in  his  name,  meekly 
kneeling  upon  your  knees. 

§  1 1 2.  TAen  shall  this  general  Confession  be  made,  in  the  name  of  all  those 
that  are  minded  to  receive  the^  holy  Communion,  either  by  one  of  them,  or 
else  by  otie  of  the  ministers  °,  or  by  the  Priest  himself,  all  kneeling  humbly 
upon  their  knees. 

Almighty  GOD,  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  maker 
of  all  things,  judge  of  all  men,  we  knowledge?  and  bewail  our 
manifold  sins  and  wickedness,  which  we  from  time  to  time, 
most  grievously  have  committed,  by  thought,  word  and  deed, 
against  thy  divine  majesty,  provoking  most  justly  thy  wrath 
and  indignation  against  us  :  we  do  earnestly  repent,  and  be  ^ 
heartily  sOrry  for  these  our  misdoings :  the  remembrance  of 
them  is  grievous  unto  us,  the  burden  of  them  is  intolerable : 
have  mercy  upon  us,  have  mercy  upon  us,  most  merciful 
Father,  for  thy  Son  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  forgive  us 
all  that  is  past,  and  grant  that  we  may  ever  hereafter  serve 
and  please  thee  in  newness  of  life,  to  the  honour  and  glory  of 
thy  name  :  Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord'. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  III.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter  say 
to  them  that  come  to  receive  the  holy 
Communion  this  invitation. 

You  that  do  truly,  &c. 
[The  same  as  iSS^-] 

§  112.  Then  shall  this  general  Con- 
fession be  made,  in  the  name  of  all 
those  that  are  minded  to  receive  the 
holy  Communion,  by  the  presbyter 
himself,  or  the  deacon,  both  he  and 
all  the  people  kneeling  humbly 
upon  their  knees. 

Almighty  God,  Father  of,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 
§  III.   ^   Then  shall  the  Priest  say 
to  them  that  come  to  receive  the 
holy  Communion. 
Ye  that  do  truly,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Draw  near   with  faith,    and    take 
this  holy  Sacrament   to  your  com- 
fort ;   and  make  your  humble  con- 
fession to  Almighty  God,  meekly 
kneeling  upon  your  knees. 
§112.    IT    Then   shall  this  general 
Confession  be  made,  in  the  name 
of  all  those  that  are  minded  to  re- 
ceive the  holy  Comfnunion,  by  one 
of  the  Ministers,  both  he  and  all 
the  people  kneeling  humbly  upon 
their  knees,  and  saying. 
Almighty  God,  Father  of,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1349.] 


self." 


'  In  one  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "and  make." 
In  one  ed.,  1559,  "this." 
In  ed.  1578,   "by  the  minister  him- 


P  In  one  ed.,  1552,  in  1637,  and  1662, 
"acknowledge." 

1  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "Amen"  added. 


250 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  1 13.    T}ien  shall  the  Priest  •  stand  up,  arid  turning  himself  to  the 
people,  say*  thus, 

Almighty  GOD,  our  heavenly  Father,  who  of  his  great 
mercy,  hath  promised  forgiveness  of  sins  to  all  them,  which " 
with  hearty  repentance  and  true  faith  turn  unto  ^  him :  have 
mercy  upon  you,  pardon  and  deliver  you  from  all  your  sins, 
confirm  and  strengthen  y  you  in  all  goodness,  and  bring  you 
to  everlasting  life :  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  1 14.    TTien  shall  the  Priest  also  say, 

Hear  what  comfortable  words  our  Saviour  Christ  saith,  to  * 
all  ■  that  truly  turn  to  him. 


O.H.C.  Edw.  VI.  1548. 
§  113.    Then  shall  the  Priest  stand 

up,  and  turning  him  to  the  people, 

say  thus. 

Our  blessed  Lord,  who  hath  left 
power  to  his  church,  to  absolve  pe- 
nitent sinners  from  their  sins,  and 
to  restore  to  the  grace  of  the  hea- 
venly Father  such  as  truly  believe 
in  Christ,  have  mercy  upon  you, 
pardon  and  deliver  you  from  all 
sins,  confirm  and  strength  you  in 
all  goodness,  and  bring  you  to  ever- 
lasting life. 

§  1 14.  Then  shall  the  Priest  stand 
up,  and  turning  him  toward  the 
people,  say  thus. 

Hear  what  comfortable  words,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  1 13.   Then  shall  the  Priest  *  or  the 
Bishop  (being  present)  stand  up, 
and  turning  himself  to  the  people, 
say  '  thus. 


•  In  eds.  155a,  and  all  after,  the  words 
'or  the  Bishop  (being  present)"  are  added, 

•  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "shall  say." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "  that." 

»  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1559,  "  to." 

>  In  two  eds.,  1549,  and  one  ed.,  1553, 


Almighty  God,  ourheavenly,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 

§114.    Then  shall  the  Priest'*' 
also  say. 
Hear  what  comfortable  words,  &c 
[Same  as  T549.] 

[Here  follows, 

\  99.  After  the  •which  the  Priest,  *¥. 

Lift  up  your  hearts. 

See  p.  336.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  1 13.    Then  shall  the  Priest,  &v. 
Almighty  God,  ourheavenly,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  1 14.    Theft  shall  the  Priest,  &'c. 

Hear  what  comfortable  words,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

[Here  follows  i  99.    See  p.  336.] 


and  1550,  "strength." 

■  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  166a,  "unto. 

•  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  all  them." 

^  In  eds.  1578,  "  the  Minister." 

«  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  shall  say  thus." 


The  Communion. 


251 


Come  unto  me  all  that  travail,  and  be  ^  heavy  laden  ^,  and 
I  shall  f  refresh  you  s.  So  God  loved  the  world  that  he  gave 
his  only-begotten  Son,  to  the  end  that  all  that  believe  in  him, 
should  not  perish,  but  have  life  everlasting  *». 

Hear  also  what  Saint  Paul  sayeth  ^ 

This  is  a  true  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  men  to  be  received'', 
that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  this  ^  world  to  save  sinners  ™. 

Hear  also  what  Saint  John  sayeth '. 

If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus 
Christ  the  righteous,  and  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins  \ 


James  I.  1604. 
§  1 13.   TAen  shall  the  Priest,  &=€. 
Almighty  God,  our  heavenly,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552-] 
§  1 14.    Then  shall  the  Priest,  &'c. 

Hear  what  comfortable  words,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549-] 
[Here  follows  5  99.     See  p.  236.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  113.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter,  or 
the  bishop,  beifig  present,  stand 
up,  and  turning  himself  to  the  peo- 
ple, pronounce  the  Absolution  as 
followeth. 

Almighty  God,  our  heavenly,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.I 

§  114.    Then  shall  the  Presbyter 
also  say. 

Hear  what  comfortable  words  our 
Saviour  Christ  saith  unto  all  that 
truly  turn  to  him  : 

Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  labour, 
and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give 
you  rest.    Matt.  xi.  28. 


^  In  ed.  1662,  "  are." 

•  InO.H.C.  1548,  "loden." 

f  In  ed.  1596,  and  1662,  "  will." 

i  In  ed.  1662,  "  S.  Matt.  xi.  28"  added. 

•^  In  ed.   1662,    "have  everlasting  life. 

S.John  iii.  16." 
'  In    1559,   and   most    later    editions, 

"saith." 


So  God  loved  the  world  that  he 
gave  his  only -begotten  Son,  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  him,  should 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life. 
John  iii.  16. 

Hear  also  what  Saint  Paul  saith. 

This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  wor- 
thy of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ 
Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save 
sinners.   I  Tim.  i.  15. 

Hear  also  what  S.John  saith. 

If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  ad- 
vocate with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ 
the  righteous,  and  he  is  the  pro- 
pitiation for  our  sins,   i  John  ii.  i,  2. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
[Here  follows  \  99.     See  p.  237.] 


Charles  II.   1662. 

§113.  IT  Then  shall  the  Priest  {or 
the  Bishop  being  present)  stand  tip, 
and  turning  himself  to  the  people, 
pronounce  this  Absolution. 

Almighty  God,  our  heavenly,  &c. 
§  1 14.   \  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 

Hear  what  comfortable  words,  &c. 
[Same  as  iS49-] 
[Here  follows  \  99.    See  p.  237.] 


''  In  O.  H.  C.  1548,  "embraced  and 
received." 

'  In  eds.  1552,  and  all  afterwards,  "the 
world." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "  I  Tim.  i.  T5"  added. 

°  In  O.H.C.  1548,  "he  it  is  that  ob- 
tained grace  for  our  sins  ;"  in  ed.  1663 
same  as  1549,  but  "  I.  John  II.  i"  added. 


252 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  115.  Then  shall  the  Priest,  turning  him  to  God's  board,  kneel  down,  and 
say  in  the  name  of  all  them,  that  shall  receive  the  Communion,  this 
prayer  following. 

We  do  not  presume  to  come  *»  to  this  thy  table  (0  merciftil 
Lord)  trusting  in  our  own  righteousness,  but  in  thy  manifold 
and  great  mercies :  we  be  p  not  worthy  so  much  as  to  gather 
up  1  the  crumbs  under  thy  table  :  but  thou  art  the  same  Lord 
whose  property  is  always  to  have  mercy :  Grant  us  therefore 


O.H.C.  Edw.  VI.  1548. 

§  115.  Then  shall  the  Priest  kneel 
down  and  say,  in  the  name  of  all 
them  that  shall  receive  the  com-, 
munion,  tJus  prayer  following. 

We  do  not  presume  to  come,  &c 
[Same  as  1549-] 

§  116.  Then  shall  the  Priest  rise, 
the  people  still  reverently  kneeling, 
and  the  Priest  shall  deliver  the 
Communion,  first  to  the  Ministers, 
if  any  be  there  p>resent,  that  they 
may  be  ready  to  help  the  Priest, 
and  after  to  the  other. 

§117.  And 
when  he  doth  deliver  the  sacrament 
of  the  body  of  Christ  he  shall  say 
to  every  one  these  words  following. 

The  body  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  which  was  given  for  thee, 
preserve  thy  body  unto  everlast- 
ing life. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1553. 

§  IIS-   Then  shall  the  Priest^,  kneel- 
ing down  at  God's  board,  say*,  &^c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
We  do  not  presume,  &c 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
drink   his  blood,   that    our    sinful 
bodies  may  be  made  clean  by  his 
body,  and  our  souls  washed  through 
his  most  precious  blood,  and  that 


0  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "presume  to  this." 
p  In  ed.  1662,     are." 

1  Intwoeds.,  isS9i  "gather  the  crumbs." 
'  In  ed.  1578,  "Minister." 

•  This,  in  eds.  1552,  and  all  afterwards, 
follows  on  after  { 103.     See  p.  240. 


we   may  evermore  dwell  in  him, 
and  he  in  us.     Amen '. 

[Here  follows 

i  106.  TAeit  the  Priest,  standing  up,  &*e. 

Almighty  God,  our  heavenly  Father,  &c. 

See  p.  244.] 

§  1 16.  IT  Then  shall  the  minister  first 
receive   the   Communion    in   both 
kinds  himself,  and  next  deliver  it 
to  other  ministers,  if  any  be  there 
present  (that  they  may  help  the 
chief  minister),  and  after  to  the 
people  in  their  hands  kneeling  ". 
§   117.    And  when   lit  ddivereth 
the  bread,  he  shall  say. 
Take  and  eat  this,   in    remem- 
brance that  Christ   died   for   thee, 
and  feed  on  him  in  thy  heart  by 
faith,  with  thanksgiving. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  115.  Then  shall  the  Priest,  &*€. 
We  do  not  presume  to  come,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 
[Here  follows  {  106.     See  p.  244.] 

§  1 16.  Then  shall  the  minister,  dr'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
The  body  of  our  Lord  Jesus* 
Christ  which  was  given  for  thee, 
preserve  thy  body  and  soul  into 
everlasting  life :  a»d'  take  and  eat 
this  in  remembrance  that  Christ 
died  for  thee,  and  ^  feed  on  him  in 
thine  heart  by  faith,  with  thanks- 
giving. 


«  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "Amen"  omitted. 
»  This,  in  eds.  1552,  and  all  afterwards, 
follows  after  }  io6.    See  p.  244. 
«  In  one  ed.,  IS59.  "  Jesu." 
7  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  and"  omdttttL 


The  Communion. 


253 


(gracious  Lord)  so  to  eat  the  flesh  of  thy  dear  Son  Jesus'' 
Christ,  and  to  drink  his  blood  in  these  holy  Mysteries,  that 
we  may  continually  dwell  in  him,  and  he  in  us,  that  our  sinful 
bodies  may  be  made  clean  by  his  body,  and  our  souls  washed 
through  his  most  precious  blood.     Amen  \ 

§  116.  H  Then  shaHtAe  Priest  first  receive  the  Communion  in  both  kinds 
himself,  and  next  deliver  it  to  other  Alinisters,  if  any  be  there  present, 
[that  they  may  be  ready  to  help  the  chief  Minister, )  and  after  to  the  people. 

§  117,  ^  And  when  he  delivereth  the  Sacrament  of  the  body  of  Christ,  he 
shall  say  to  every  one  these  words  : 

The  body  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  which  was  given  for 
thee,  preserve  thy  body  and  soul  unto  everlasting  life. 


James  I.  1604. 
§  115.  Then  shall  the  Priest,  ^c. 
We  do  not  presume,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
[Here  follows  \  io6.     See  p.  244.] 
§  116.   Then  shall  the  minister,  &^c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
The  body  of  our  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1559-] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  115.  Thm  shall  the  Presbyter,  hieel- 
ing  down  at  God's  board,  say,  in 
the  name  of  all  them  that  shall 
communicate,  this  collect  of  humble 
access  to  the  holy  Cofnmttnion,  as 
followeth. 

We  do  not  presume,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  116.  Then  shall  the  bishop,  if  he 
be  present,  or  else  the  presbyter  that 
celebrateth,  first  receive  the  Com- 
munion hi  both  kinds  himself,  and 
next  deliver  it  to  other  bishops,  pres- 
byters, and  deacons,  {if  any  be  there 
present,)  that  they  may  help  him 
that  celebrateth,  atid  after  to  the 
people  in  due  order,  all  humbly 
kneeling. 

§117.  And  when  he  receiveth  him- 
self, or  delivereth  the  bread  to  others, 
he  shall  say  this  benediction. 


The   body   of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  which  was  given»  for  thee, 
preserve   thy  body   and  soul   unto 
everlasting  life. 
§  1 18.  Here  the  party  receiving  shall 

say  Amen. 

Charles  II.  1662. 
§  115.  Then  shall  the  Priest  kneeling 
down  at  the  Lord's  Table  say,  Q^c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

We  do  not  presume  to  come,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
[Here  follows 
?  106,  When  the  Priest  standing  before 
the  Table,  &"c.     Almighty  God  our  hea- 
venly Father,  &c.     See  p.  245.] 

§116.  H  Then  shall  the  Minister 
first  receive  the  Communion  in 
both  kinds  himself,  and  then  pro- 
ceed to  deliver  the  same  to  the 
Bishops,  Priests,  and  Deacons  in 
like  manner  {if  any  be  present) 
and  after  that  to  the  people  also  in 
order,  into  their  hands,  all  meekly 
kneeling. 

§  117.  And  when  he 
delivereth  the  bread  to  any  one, 
he  shall  say. 

The  body  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  which  was  given  for  thee, 
preserve  thy  body  and  soul  unto 
everlasting  life.  Take  and  eat  this 
in  remembrance  that  Christ  died  for 
thee,  and  feed  on  him  in  thy  heart 
by  faith  with  thanksgiving. 


•  In  one  ed.,  iS49,  "  Jesu.' 


»  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1559,  "Amen"  omitted. 


254 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  119.  And  the  Minister  delivering  the  Sacrament  of  the  blood,  and  giving 
every  one  to  drink  once  and  no  more,  shall  say. 

The  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  which  was  shed  for 
thee,  preserve  thy  body  and  soul  unto  everlasting  life. 

§  121,  If  there  be  a  Deacon  or  other  Priest,  then  shall  he  follow  with  the 
Chalice:  and  as  the  Priest  ministereth  the  Sacrament  of  the  body,  so 
shall  he  {for  more  expedition)  minister  the  Sacrament  of  the  blood,  in 
form  before  written. 

§  122.  In  the  communion  time  the  Clerks  shall  sing, 
ii.  O  Lamb  of  God,  that  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world : 
have  mercy  upon  us. 

O  Lamb  of  God,  that  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world : 
grant  us  thy  peace. 

Beginning  so  soon  as  the  Priest  doth  receive  the  holy  Communion,  and  when 

the  Coi^munion  is  ended,  then  shall  the  Clerks  sing  the  post-Communion. 

§  123.  T  Sentences  of  holy  scripture,  to  be  said  or  sung  every  day  one, 

after  the  holy  Communion,  called  the  post-Communion. 

If  any  man  will  follow  me,  let  him  forsake  himself,  and 
take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me.    [Math,  xvi.]     • 

Whosoever  shall  endure  unto  the  end,  he  shall  be  saved. 
[Mar.  xiii.] 

Praised  be  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  for  he  hath  visited  and 
redeemed  his  people  :  therefore  let  us  serve  him  all  the  days 


O.H.C.  Edw.  VI.  1548. 

§  119.  And  the  Priest  delivering,  6f^c. 

[Same  as  1549.  ] 

Thk  blood  of  our    Lord  Jesus 

Christ,    which  was  shed  for   thee, 

preserve  thy  soul  to  everlasting  life. 

§  121.  If  there  be  a  Deacon  or  other 
Priest,  then  shall  he  follotv  with 
the  Chalice,  and  as  the  Priest  min- 
istereth the  bread,  so  shall  he  for 
more  expedition  minister  the  Wiiu, 
inform  before  written. 
[Here  follows 
?  128.   Then  shall  the  Priest,  &'c.    The 

Peace  of  God,  &c.     See  p.  258.] 


Second  Edw.  VI.   1552. 

§  119.  1[  And  the  minister  that  de- 
livereth  the  cup,  shall  say. 
Drink  this  in  remembrance  that 


Christ's  blood  was  shed  for  thee 
and  be  thankful. 

[Here  immediately  follows  {  126,  "  Then 
shall  the  Priest,"  &>£.     See  p.  256.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  119.  And  the  minister  that  deliver- 

eth  the  cup,  shall  say. 

The  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus'* 
Christ,  which  was  shed  for  thee, 
preserve  thy  body  and  soul  into 
everlasting  life :  and  drink  this  in 
remembrance  that  Christ's  blood 
was  shed  for  thee,  and  be  thank- 
ful 

[Here  follows  {  126.    See  p.  356.] 

James  I.   1604. 

§  119.  And  the  minister  that,  &v. 
[Same  as  1599-] 
[Here  follows  \  126.    See  p.  256.] 


*  Inoneed.,  1559,  "Jesa" 


The  Communion. 


255 


of  our  life,  in  holiness  and  righteousness  accepted  before  him. 
Luc.  i. 

Happy  are  those  servants,  whom  the  Lord  (when  he  cometh) 
shall  find  waking.     Luc.  xii. 

Be  ye  ready,  for  the  Son  of  man  will  come  at  an  hour 
when  ye  think  not.     Luc.  xii. 

The  servant  that  knoweth  his  master's  will,  and  hath  not 
prepared  himself,  neither  hath  done  according  to  his  will, 
shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes.     Luc.  xii. 

The  hour  cometh,  and  now  it  is,  when  true  worshippers 
shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  truth.    John  iv. 

Behold,  thou  art  made  whole,  sin  no  more,  lest  any  worse 
thing  happen  unto  thee.    JoJm  v. 

If  ye  shall  continue  in  my  word,  then  are  ye  my  very  dis- 
ciples, and  ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make 
you  free.    Joh?i  viii. 

While  ye  have  light,  believe  on  the  light,  that  ye  may  be 
the  children  of  light.    John  xii. 

He  that  hath  my  commandments,  and  keepeth  them,  the 
same  is  he  that  loveth  me.    John  xiv. 

If  any  m.an  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  word,  and  my  Father 
will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto  him,  and  dwell  with 
him.    John  xiv. 

If  ye  shall  bide  in  me,  and  my  word  shall  abide  in  you, 
ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  to  you. 
John  XV. 

Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit,  and 
become  my  disciples.    John  xv. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  119.  And  the  presbyter  or  minister 

that  receiveth  the  cup  himself,  or 

dclivereth   it  to  others,  shall  say 

this  benediction. 

The  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  which  was  shed  for  thee, 
preserve  thy  body  and  soul  unto 
everlasting  life. 

§  120.  Here  the  party  receiving  shall 
say  Amen. 

[Here  follows  ?  125,  p.  257.] 


Charles  II.   1662. 
119.  'H  And  the  Minister  that  de- 
livereth  the  cup  to  any  one,  shall 
say, 


The  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  which  was  shed  for  thee, 
presei-ve  thy  body  and  soul  unto 
everlasting  life.  Drink  this  in  re- 
membrance that  Christ's  blood  was 
shed  for  thee,  and  be  thankful. 

§124.  ^  If  the  consecrated  bread  or 
•wine  be  all  spent  before  all  have 
communicated ;  the  Priest  is  to 
consecrate  more  according  to  the 
form  before  prescribed:  Beginning 
at  [Our  Saviour  Christ  in  the 
same  night,  &c.]/^r  the  blessing 
of  the  bread ;  and  at  [Likewise 
after  Supper,  &c.]  /^r  the  blessing 
of  the  cup. 

[Here  follows  \  122.     See  p.  257.] 


256 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


This  is  my  commandment,  that  you  love  together,  as  I  have 
loved  you.    John  xv. 

If  God  be  on  our  side,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  which  did 
not  spare  his  own  Son,  but  gave  him  for  us  all.     Roma.  viiL 

Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  chosen  ? 
it  is  GOD  that  justifieth ;  who  is  [he]  that  can  condemn  ? 
Roma.  viii. 

The  night  is  past,  and  the  day  is  at  hand ;  let  us  therefore 
cast  away  the  deeds  of  darkness,  and  put  on  the  armour  of 
light.     Rom.  xiii. 

Christ  Jesus  is  made  of  GOD,  unto  us,  wisdom,  and  right- 
eousness, and  sanctifying,  and  redemption,  that  (according  as 
it  is  written)  He  which  rejoiceth  should  rejoice  in  the  Lord. 
I  Corin.  i. 

Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  GOD,  and  that  the 
Spirit  of  GOD  dwelleth  in  you  ?  If  any  man  defile  the  temple 
of  GOD,  him  shall  God  destroy,     i  Corin.  iii. 

Ye  are  dearly  bought ;  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  bodies, 
and  in  your  spirits,  for  they  belong  to  God.     i  Cor.  vi. 

Be  you  followers  of  God  as  dear  children,  and  walk  in  love, 
even  as  Christ  loved  us,  and  gave  himself  for  us  an  offering 
and  a  Sacrifice  of  a  sweet  savour  to  God.     Ephes.  v. « 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  126.  T  Then  shall  the  Priest  *  say 
the  Lord^s  prayer,  the  people  re- 
peaiing  after  him  every  petition. 

[Here  follows 

\  108.  After  shall  be  said,  <&v.  O  LoKD 

and  heavenly  Father,  &c. 

See  p.  346.] 

§  127.   IF  Or  this*. 

Almighty  and  everliving  God, 
we  most  heartily  thank  thee,  for 
that  thou  dost  vouchsafe  to  feed  us, 
which  have  duly  received  these  holy 
mysteries,  with  the  spiritual  food  of 
the  most  precious  body  and  blood 
of  thy  Son  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
and  dost  assure  us  thereby  of  thy 
favour,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

world  without  end.     Amen. 


[Here  follows 
{  78.  TAfH  shall  be  said  or  sung. 
Glory  be  to  God  on  high. 
See  p.  214.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  126.    Then  shall  the  Priest,  <Srv. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

[Here  follows  i  108.    See  p.  246.] 

§  127.    Or  this. 

Almighty  and  everliving,  &c 

[The  same  as  1552.] 
[Here  follows  \  78.    See  p.  214.] 


§  126 


James  I.  1604. 

Then  shall  the  Priest,  &=€. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
[Here  follows  1 108.     See  p.  246.] 

§  127.    Or  this. 

Almighty  and  everliving,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1552.] 

[Here  follows  }  78.    See  p.  214.] 


•  In  three  eds.,  1549,  misp.  Eph.  vL 

*  In  ed.  1578.  "  the  Minister.* 


*  This  follows,  in  eds.  1553,  and  in  all 
afterwards,  \  108.    See  p.  346. 


The  Communion. 


257 


§  127.    Then  the  Priest  shall  give  thanks  to  God,  in  the  name  of  all  them  that 
have  communicated,  turning  him  first  to  the  people,  and  saying. 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 

The  Answer.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

The  Priest  Let  us  pray. 

Almighty  and  everliving^  GOD,  we  most  heartily  thank 
thee,  for  that  thou  hast  vouchsafed  to  feed  us  in  these  holy 
Mysteries,  with  the  spiritual  food  of  the  most  precious  body 
and  blood  of  thy  Son  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  and  hast  as- 
sured us  (duly  receiving  the  same)  of  thy  favour  and  goodness 
toward  us,  and  that  we  be  s  very  members  incorporate  in  thy 
mystical  body  ^,  which  is  the  blessed  company  of  all  faithful 
people,  and  heirs '  through  hope  of  thy  everlasting  kingdom, 
by  the  merits  of  the  most  precious  death  and  passion  of  thy 
dear  Son.  We  therefore  ^  most  humbly  beseech  thee,  O  hea- 
venly Father,  so  to  assist  us  with  thy  grace,  that  we  may  con- 
tinue in  that  holy  fellowship,  and  do  all  such  good  works,  as 
thou  hast  prepared  for  us  to  walk  in  :  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord,  to  whom,  with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  all 
honour  and  glory,  world  without  end  ^ 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  125.  IVhen  all  have  communicated, 
he  that  celebrates  shall  go  to  the 
Lord's  table,  and  cover  with  a  fair 
linen  cloth,  or  corporal,  that  which 
remaineth  of  the  consecrated  ele- 
ments. 

§  127.  And  then  say  this  collect  of 
than/isgiving,  as  followeth : 
Almighty  and  everliving,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1552.] 
[Here  follows  }  78.     See  p.  215.] 


Charles  II.   1662. 

125.  IT  When  all  have  communi- 
cated, the  Minister  shall  return  to 
the  Lord's  Table,  and  revei-ently 
place  upon  it  what  remaineth  of 
the  consecrated  Elements,  covering 
the  same  with  a  fair  linen  cloth. 


'  In  two  eds.  1549,  and  one  ed.  1559, 
"everlasting." 

8  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 

*>  In  ed.  1662,  "the  mystical  body  of 
thy  Son,  which." 

'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "and  be 


§  126.   Tf  Then  shall  the  Priest  say 
the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  people  re- 
peating after  him  every  Petition. 
Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven, 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.    Thy  king- 
dom come.      Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven.     Give  us 
this  day  our  daily  bread.     And  for- 
give us  our  trespasses,  As  we  for- 
give them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation : 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.    For  thine 
is  the  kingdom,  The  power  and  the 
glory,  For  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 
[Here  follows  \  108.     See  p.  247. 

§  127.    ^   Or  this. 
Almighty  and  everliving,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552,  to] 
world  without  end.     Atnen. 

[Here  follows  \  78.     See  p.  215.] 


also  heirs;"  in  ed.  1662,  "and  are  also 
heirs." 

''  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "We  now 
most ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "And  we  most." 

'  In  eds.  1552,  and  all  afterwards, 
"Amen"  added. 


2r8 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  128.  TJien  the  Priest  turning  him  to  the  people,  shall  let  them  depart 
with  this  blessing: 

The  peace  of  GOD  (which  passeth  all  understanding)  keep 
your  hearts  and  minds  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  GOD, 
and  of™  his  Son  Jesus"  Christ  our  Lord :  And  the  blessing  of 
God  Almighty,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
be  amongst  °  you  and  remain  with  you  alway. 

Then  the  people  shall  answer. 
Amen. 

§  129.    Where  there  are  no  clerks,  there  the  Priest  shall  say  all  things 
appointed  here  for  them  to  sing. 
§  130.    Whefi  the  holy  Communion  is  celebrate  on  the  workday,  or  in  private 
houses  :    Then  may  be  omitted,  [the]   Gloria  in  excelsis,  the  Creed,   the 
Homily,  and  the  exhortation,  beginning. 

Dearly  beloved,  &c. 

§  132.   *\  Collects  to  be  said  after  the  Offertory,  when  there  is  no  Communion, 
every  such  day  one. 

Assist  us  mercifully,  O  Lord,  in  these  our  supplications 
and  prayers,  and  dispose  the  way  of  thy  servants  toward  p  the 
attainment  of  everlasting  salvation  :  that  among  all  the  changes 
and  chances  of  this  mortal  life,  they  may  ever  be  defended  by 


O.H.C.  Edw.  VI.  1548. 

§  1 28.  Then  shall  the  Priest,  turning 
him  to  the  people,  let  the  people  de- 
part with  this  blessing'^. 

The  peace  of  God,  which,  &c 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

To  the  which  the  people  shall  answer. 

Amen. 

[Here  follows  {  141.     See  p.  262.] 


Second  Edward  VI.  1552. 

§  128.  Then  the  Priest^  or  tJu  Bi- 
shop, if  he  be  present,  shall  let 
them  depart  with  this  blessing*. 


"  In  one  ed.  O.H.C  1548,  "and  in." 

■■  In  eds.  1552,  and  1559,  "Jesu  ;"  but  in 
eds.  1637  and  1662,  "  Je.sus." 

"In  one  ed.  1552,  and  1559,  "among." 

P  In  ed.  1662,  "towards." 

«  This,  in  O.H.C.,  follows  on  after 
1 119.     Seep.  254, 


The  peace  of  God,  which,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
remain  with  you  alway.    Amen. 

§  132.  Collects  to  be  said  after  the 
Offertory,  when  there  is  no  Com- 
fuuniott,  every  such  day  one*: 
And  the  same  may  be  said  also 
as  often  as  occasion  shall  serve, 
after  the  Collects,  either  of  Morn- 
ing and^  Evening  prayer.  Com- 
munion, or  Litany,  by  the  dis- 
cretion of  the  minister*. 

Assist  us  mercifully,  O  Lord,  &c. 
O  Almighty  Lord,  &c 
Gr.'vnt,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549  throughout.] 


'  In  ed.  1578,  "Minister." 

*  This,  in  eds.  1553,  and  in  all  after* 
wards,  follows  on  after  5  78.    See  page  214. 

'  In  eds.  1637,  and  1662,  "one  or  more." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  '■  or." 

«  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  the  Presbyter 
or  minister." 


The  Communion. 


259 


thy  most  gracious  and  ready  help ;  through  Christ '  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

O  Almighty  Lord  and  everliving^  GOD,  vouchsafe,  we 
beseech  thee,  to  direct,  sanctify,  and  govern,  both  our  hearts 
and  bodies,  in  the  ways  of  thy  laws,  and  in  the  works  of  thy 
commandnnents  :  that  through  thy  most  mighty  protection, 
both  here  and  ever,  we  may  be  preserved  in  body  and  soul : 
Through  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.     Amen. 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  Almighty  God,  that  the  words 
which  we  have  heard  this  day  with  our  outward  ears,  may 
through  thy  grace  be  so  grafted  ^  inwardly  in  our  hearts,  that 
they  may  bring  forth  in  us  the  fruit  of  good  living,  to  the 
honour  and  praise  of  thy  name  :  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  128.    TAen  the  Priest,  ^'c. 
The  Peace  of  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  132.    Collects  to  be  said,  &=€. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

Assist  us  mercifully,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549  throughout.] 


James  I.  1604. 

§  128.    Then  the  Priest,  ^'c. 

The  Peace  of  God,  &c. 

[Same  as  ISS2-] 

§  132.    Collects  to  be  said,  &=€, 

[Same  as  1552.] 

Assist  us  mercifully,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549  throughout.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  128.  Then  the  Presbyter  or  Bishop 
if  he  be  present,  shall  let  them  de- 
part with  this  blessing. 

The  Peace  of  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1349,  to] 
remain  with  you  always.    Amen. 


§  131.  After  the  divine  service  aid- 
ed, that  which  was  offered  shall 
be  divided  in  the  presence  of  the 
presbyter  and  the  churchzvardais, 
whereof  otie  half  shall  be  to  the  use 
of  the  presbyter,  to  prcaiide  him 
books  of  holy  divinity  ;  the  other 
half  shall  be  faithfidly  kept  and 
employed  on  some  pious  or  charit- 
able use,  for  the  decent  furnishing 
of  that  church,  or  the  public  relief 
of  their  poor,  at  the  discretion  of 
the  presbyter  and  churchwardens  *. 

§  132.   ^  Collects  to  be  said,  ^c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

Assist  us  mercifully,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549  throughout.] 

Charles  II.   1662. 

§  128.  *\[  Thai  the  Priest  {or  Bishop 
if  he  be  present')  shall  let  them  de- 
fart  with  this  blessing. 
The  peace  of  God  which,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

with  you  always.     Amen, 

§132.    Collects  to  be  said,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

Assist  us  mercifully,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549  throughout] 


y  In  ed.  1662,  "Jesus  Christ." 
»  In   Scotch  ed.,   1637,  and    ed.   1662, 
'  everlasting  God." 


»  In  two  eds.,  1549,  and  in  eds.  1556, 
"so  graft." 


26o 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Prevent  us,  O  Lord,  in  all  our  doings,  with  thy  most  gra- 
cious favour,  and  further  us  with  thy  continual  help,  that  in 
all  our  works  begun,  continued,  and  ended  in  thee,  we  may 
glorify  thy  holy  name,  and  finally  by  thy  mercy  obtain  ever- 
lasting life :  Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Ainen''. 

Almighty  God,  the  fountain  of  all  \visdom,  which  ^  knowest 
oiu*  necessities  before  we  ask,  and  our  ignorance  in  asking : 
we  beseech  thee  to  have  compassion  upon  our  infirmities,  and 
those  things,  which  for  our  unworthiness  we  dare  not,  and  for 
our  blindness  we  cannot  ask,  vouchsafe  to  give  us  for  the 
worthiness  of  thy  Son  Jesu  "^  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

Almighty  God,  which  *^  hast  promised  to  hear  the  petitions 
of  them  that  ask  in  thy  Son's  name,  we  beseech  thee  merci- 
fully to  incline  thine  ears  to  us  that  have  made  now  our 
prayers  and  supplications  unto  thee :  and  grant  that  those 
things  which  we  have*  faithfully  asked  according  to  thy  will, 
may  effectually  be  obtained  to  the  relief  of  our  necessity,  and 
to  the  setting  forth  of  thy  glory :  Through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord'. 

%  For  rain  ». 

O  God  heavenly  Father,  which  by  thy  Son  Jesu  Christ 
hast  promised  to  all  them  that  seek  thy  kingdom,  and  the 
righteousness  thereof,  all  things  necessary  to  the  bodily  sus- 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Trevent  us,  O  Lord,  &c. 
Almighty  God,  the  fountain,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

[The  prayers  For  Rain  and  For  Fair 
Weather  are  here  omitted,  as  also  {  133 ; 
and  instead  of  {  134] 

§  135.  \  Upon  the  holy  days,  if 
there  be  no  Communion,  shall  be 
said  all  that  is  appointed  at  the 
Communion,  until  the  end  of  the 
Homily,  concluding  with  the  gene- 
ral prayer,  '  for  the  whole  state '' 
of  Christ's  Church  militant  here 
in  earth :'  and  otte  or  more  of 
these  Collects  before  rehearsed,  as 
occasion  shall  serve. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Prevent  us,  O  Lord,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 
[The  prayers  For  Rain   and  For  Fair 
Weather  are  here  omitted,  as  also  J  133 ; 
and  instead  of)  134] 

§  135.  Upon  the  holy  Days,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
Prevent  us,  O  Lord,  Sec 

[Same  as  1549.] 
[The  prayers   For  Rain  and  For   Fair 
Weatlicr  are  here  omitted,  as  also  I  133 ; 
and  instead  of}  134] 

§  135.  Upon  tlie  holy  Days,  6^ 
[Same  as  1552.] 


■•  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "Through,  &&" 

*  In  ed.  i66a,  "who." 

*  In  ed.  1662,  "Jesus." 

*  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  have"  omitted. 

'  In  eds.  155a  and  afterwards,  "Amen* 
added. 


s  These  two  prayers,  in  eds.  1552  and 
all  editions  afterwards,  are  transposed  to 
the  Prayers  at  the  end  of  the  Litany. 
See  p.  278. 

i"  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1559,  and  some 
afterwards,  "estate," 


The  Communion. 


261 


tenance  :  send  us,  we  beseech  thee,  in  this  our  necessity,  such 
moderate  rain  and  showers,  that  we  may  receive  the  fruits  of 
the  earth,  to  our  comfort  and  to  thy  honour ;  Through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord. 

For  fair  weather  P. 
O  Lord  God,  which  for  the  sin  of  man,  didst  once  drown 
all  the  world,  except  eight  persons,  and  afterward  of  thy  great 
mercy,  didst  promise  never  to  destroy  it  so  again  :  We  humbly 
beseech  thee,  that  although  we  for  our  iniquities  have  worthily 
deserved  this  plague  of  rain  and  waters,  yet,  upon  our  true 
repentance,  thou  wilt  send  us  such  weather  whereby  we  may 
receive  the  fruits  of  the  earth  in  due  season,  and  learn  both 
by  thy  ^  punishment  to  amend  our  lives,  and  by  the  granting 
of  our  petition  to  give  thee  praise  and  glory  :  Through  Jesu 
Christ  our  Lord. 

S  133-  IT  Upon  Wediiesdays  and  Fridays,  the  English  Litany  shall  he  said 
or  stmg  in  all  places,  after  such  form  as  is  appointed  by  the  king's  majesty's 
Injunctions :    Or  as  is  or  shall  be  otherwise  appointed- by  his  highness^. 

§  134.  And  though  there  be  none  to  communicate  with  the  Priest,  yet  these 
days  {after  the  Litany  ended)  the  Priest  shall  put  upon  him  a  plain  Albe 
or  surplice,  with  a  cope,  and  say  all  things  at  the  Altar  {appointed  to  be 
said  at  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's  supper, )  until  after  the  oj^ertory.  And 
then  shall  add  one  or  two  of  the  Collects  aforeiuritten,  as  occasion  shall 
serve,  by  his  discretion.  And  then  turning  him  to  the  people  shall  let 
them  depart  with  the  accztstomed  blessing. 

§  136.  And  the  same  order  shall  be  used  all  other  days,  whensoever  the  people 
be  customably  assembled  to  pray  in  the  church,  and  none  disposed  to  com- 
municate with  the  Priest. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
Prevent  us,  O  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

[The  prayers  For  Rain  and  For  Fair 
Weather  are  omitted  here,  as  also  \  133  ; 
and  instead  of  \  134] 

§  135-  IF  upon  the  holy  days,  dr'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  IL,  1662. 
Prevent  us,  O  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  thy"  omitted. 

*  In  one  ed.,  1549,  the  words  "or  as  is 
or  shall  be  otherwise  appointed  by  his 
highness"  are  omitted. 

'  In  most  of  the  Sealed  Books  the  words 
"whole  estate  of  Christ's  Church  militant 


[The  prayers  For  Rain  and  For  Fair 
Weather  are  omitted  here,  as  also  \  133 ; 
and  instead  of}  134] 

§  135.  IT  Upon  the  Sundays  and  other 
holy  days  {if  there  be  no  Commu- 
nion) shall  be  said  all  that  is  ap- 
pointed at  the  Communiojt,  until 
the  end  of  the  general  Prayer  [For 
the  whole  state  of  Christ's  Church 
militant  here  in  earth']  together 
with  one  or  more  of  these  Collects 
last  before  rehearsed,  concluding 
2uith  the  Blessinz. 


here  in  earth,"  are  written  in  over  an  era- 
sure. In  one  or  two  books,  where  the 
erasure  is  not  perfect,  the  words  appear 
to  have  been  printed,  "  For  the  good  estate 
of  the  Catholic  Church  of  Christ." 


262 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  137.  Likeivise  in  Chapels  annexed,  and  all  other  places,  there  shall  be  no 
celebration  of  the  Lord's  supper,  except  there  be  some  to  communicate  with 
the  Priest. 

§  138.  And  in  such  Chapels  amiexed  where  the  people  hath 
not  been  accustotned  to  pay  any  holy  bread,  there  they  must  either  make 
some  charitable  provision  for  the  bearing  of  the  charges  of  the  Communion, 
or  else  (for  receiving  of  the  same)  resort  to  their  parish  church. 


O.H.C.  Edw.  VI.  1548. 

§  141.  Note,  that  the  Bread  that 
ifiall  be  consecrated  shall  be  such 
as  heretofore  hath  beat  accustomed. 
And  eveiy  of  the  said  consecrated 
Breads  shall  be  broken  in  two 
pieces,  at  the  least,  or  more  by 
the  discretion  of  the  Minister,  and 
so  distributed.  And  men  must 
not  think  less  to  be  received  in  part, 
than  in  the  whole,  but  in  each  of 
them  the  7vhole  body  of  aur  Saviour 
fesu  Christ. 

§  143.  Note,  that  if  it  doth  so  chance, 
that  the  7vine  hallowed  and  conse- 
crate doth  not  suffice  or  be  enough 
for  them  that  do  take  the  Commu- 
nion, the  Priest,  after  the  first 
Cup  or  Chalice  be  emptied,  may 
go  again  to  the  altar,  and  reve- 
rently, and  devoutly,  prepare,  and 
consecrate  another,  and  so  the  third, 
or  more,  likcivise  beginning  at  these 
words,  Simili  modo  postquam  coe- 
natum  est,  and  ending  at  these 
words,  qui  pro  vobis  et  pro  mul- 
tis  effundetur  in  remissionem  pec- 
catonim,  and  without  any  levation 
or  lifting  [«/j. 

[Here  follows  the  Colophon 
"Imprinted  at  London,"  &c.] 


Second  Edw,  VI.  1552. 

137.  ^  And  there  shall  be  no  cele- 
bration "  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  ex- 
cept there  be  a  good  number^  to 
communicate  7vith  the  Priest",  ac- 
cording to  his  discretion. 

139.  \  And  if  there  be  not  above 
hventy  persons  in  the  Parish,  of 
discretion  to  receive  the  Commu- 
nion :  yet  there  shall  be  no  Com- 
munion, except  four,  or  three  at  the 
least  communicate  with  the  Priest ". 
§  140.  And  in  Cathedral  and^ 
Collegiate  churches '*,  where  be* 
many  Priests  *  and  Deacons,  they 
shall  all  receive  the  Communion 
with  the  minister^  eveiy  Sunday 
at  the  least,  except  they  have  a 
reasonable  cause  to  the  contrary. 

141.  ^  And  to  take  away  the  SU'  > 
perstition,  which  any  person  hath,  \ 
or  might  have  in  the  bread  and 
■  wine,  it  shall  suffice  that  the  bread 
be  such,  as  is  usual  to  be  eaten  at 
the  table  with  other  meats,  but  the 
best  and  purest  wheat  bread,  tliat 
convenietitly  may  be  gotten. 

§142. 
And  if  any  of  the  bread  or  wine 
remain,  the  Curate  shall  have  it 
to  his  own  use. 


™  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "public  cele- 
bration." 

"  In  ed.  1578,  "a  gn'cat  number;"  this 
alteration  appears  first  in  a  quarto  of  1576, 
but  it  crept  into  some  of  the  later  folios, 
e.g.  1617.  In  ed.  1662,  "a  convenient 
number. 

o  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Presbyter;" 
in  ed.  1578,  "minister." 


P  In  ed.  1578,  "or." 
1  In  ed.  1662,  "and  Colleges " rt/jyjwi 
'  In  ed.  1662,  "there  are  many." 
■  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "many  Presby- 
ters and  Deacons;"  in  ed.  1578,  "minis- 
ters and  deacons." 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter 
that  celebrates  ;"  in  ed.  i66a,  "the  Priest." 


The  Communion. 


263 


§141.  For  avoiding"^  of  all  matters  and  occasion  of  dissension,  it  is  meet 
that  the  bread  prepared  for  the  Communion  be  fnade,  through  all  this 
realm,  after  one  sort  and  fashioji :  that  is  to  say,  unleavened,  and  round, 
as  it  was  afore,  but  without  all'^  mariner  of  print,  and  something  more 
larger  and  thicker  than  it  loas,  so  that  it  may  be  aptly  divided  in  divers 
pieces :  and  evoy  one  shall  be  divided  in  tivo  pieces,  at  tlie  least,  or  more, 
by  the  discretion  of  the  minister,  and  so  distributed.  And  men  ^  must  not 
think  less  to  be  received  in  part  than  in  the  whole,  but  in  each  of  them,  th-e 
whole  body  of  our  Saviour  jfesu  Christ. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  137.  And  there  shall  be,  ^^c. 
%  139.  And  if  there  be,  ^-'c. 
§  140.  And  in  Cathedral,  cr-"r. 
§  141.  And  to  take  azi'ay,  i^c. 
§  142.  A  7ul  if  any  of  the  bread,  C-'c. 
[Same  as  1552  throughout.] 


James  I.   1604. 
§  137.  And  there  shall  be,  e-v. 
§  139.  And  if  there  be,  cr-r. 
§  140.  And  in  Cathedral,  ^c. 
§  141.  And  to  take  away,  cr-v. 
§  142.  And  if  any  of  the  bread,  c 
[Same  as  1552  throughout.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

137.  And  there  shall  be  no  public 
celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
except  there  be  a  sufficient  number  to 
communicate,  with  the  Presbyter, 
according  to  his  discretion. 

139.  And  if  there  be  7iot  above,  iSr-'c. 

140.  And  in  Cathedral  and,  d^r. 

[Same  as  1532.] 

141.  And  to  take  away  the  stiper- 
stition  which  any  person  hath  or 
may  have  in  the  bread  and  zuine, 
though  it  be  lawful  to  have  wafer 
bread,  it  shall  sufjlce  that  the  bread 
be  such  as  is  usual :  yet  the  best 
and  purest  Wheat  Bread  that  con- 
veniently may  be  gotten. 

§  142.  And  if 
any  of  the  bread  and  wine  remain 
which   is  consecrated,    it  shall  be 


reverently  eaten  and  drunk  by  suck 
of  the  communicants  only  as  the 
presbyter -which  celebrates  shall  take 
unto  him,  but  it  shall  not  be  car- 
ried out  of  the  church.  And  to 
the  end  there  may  be  little  left, 
he  that  officiates  is  required  to  con- 
secrate with  the  least,  and  then  if 
there  be  want,  the  words  of  con- 
secration may  be  repeated  again, 
over  fnore,  either  bread  or  wine, 
the  presbyter  beginning  at  these 
words  in  the  prayer  of  Consecra- 
tion, '  Our  Saviour,  in  the  night 
that  he  was  betrayed,'  &c. 

Charles  II.  1662. 

§  137.  'H  And  there  shall  be,  ^'c. 

§  139.  *i  And  if  there  be  7iof,  &^c. 

§  140.  1i  And  in  Cathedral  and,  qt'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  141.  ^  And  to  take  away  all  occa- 
sion of  dissension,  and  superstition, 
which  any  Person  hath  or  might 
have  concerning  the  Bread  and 
Wine,  it  shall  suffice  that  tlie 
Bread  be  such  as  is  usual  to  be 
eaten  ;  but  the  best  and  purest 
Wheat  Bread  that  conveniently 
may  be  gotten. 

§  142.  ^  Andif  any  of  the  Bread  and 
Wine  remain  unconsecrated,  the 
Curate  shall  have  it  to  his  vivn 
use:  but  if  any  remain  of  that 
which  was  consecrated,  it  shall 
not  be  carried  out  of  the  Church, 
but  the  Priest  and  siich  other  of 
the  Communicants  as  he  shall  then 
call  tinto  him,  shall  immediately 
after  the  Blessing,  reverently  eat 
and  drink  the  same. 


In  two  eds.,  1549,  "advoidin^."  »  In  three  eds.,  1549,  "any  manner." 

y  In  one  ed.,  1549,  the  word  "  men  "  omiitcd. 


264 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  144.  And  forsomuch  as  the  Pastors  and  Curates  within  this  realm  shall 
continually  find  at  their  costs  and  charges  in  their  ctires  sufficient  bread 
and  wine  for  the  holy  Communion  (rtj  oft  as  their  Parishioners  shall  be 
disposed  for  their  spiritual  comfort  to  receive  the  same)  it  is  therefore 
ordered,  that  hi  recompence  of  such  costs  and  charges,  the  Parishioners 
of  every  Parish  shall  offer  rjesy  Sunday,  at  the  time  of  the  Offertory,  the 
just  valour'^  and  price  of  the  holy  loaf  {with  all  such  money  and  other 
things  as  were  wont  to  be  offered  with  the  same)  to  the  use  of  their  Pastors 
and  Curates,  attd  that  in  such  order  and  course,  as  they  were  wont  to  find 
and  pay  the  said  holy  loaf. 

§  145.  Also  that  the  receiving  of  the  Satrament  of  the  blessed  body  and  blood 
of  Christ,  may  be  most  agreeable  to  the  institution  thereof,  and  to  the  usage 
of  the  primitive  Church:  In  all*  Cathedral  attd  Collegiate  churches,  there 
shall  always  some  communicate  with  the  Priest  tJiat  ministereth.  And 
that  the  same  may  be  also  observed  every  where  abroad  in  the  country : 
Some  one  at  the  least  of  that  house  in  every  parish,  to  whom  by  course, 
after  the  ordinance  herein  made,  it  appertaineth  to  offer  for  the  charges 
of  the  Comvtunioft,  or  some  other  whom  they  shall  provide  to  offer  for 
them,  shall  receive  the  holy  Communion  ivith  the  priest:  the  which  may 
be  the  better  done,  for  that  they  knoro  before,  when  their  course  ^  cometh, 
and  may  therefore  dispose  themselves  to  the  worthy  receiving  of  the  Sacra- 
ment. And  with  him  or  them  who  doth  so  offer  the  charges  of  the  Com- 
munion,  all  other,  who  be  then  Godly  disposed  thereunto,  shall  likewise 
receive  the  Communion.  And  by  this  means  the  Minister  having  ahttays 
some  to  communicate  with  him,  may  accordingly  solemnise  so  high  and 
holy  mysteries,  with  all  the  suffrages  and  due  order  appointed  for  the  same. 
And  the  Priest  on  the  week  day  shall  forbear  to  celebrate  the  Communion, 
except  he  have  some  tJiat  will  communicate  with  him. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

*  §  144.  If  The  bread  and  wine  for 
the  Communion  shall  be  provided 
by  the  Curate,  and  the  church- 
wardens, at  the  charges  of  the 
Parish,  and  the  Parish  shall  be 
discharged  of  such  sums  of  money, 
or  other  duties,  which  hitherto 
they  have  paid  for  the  same,  by 
order  of  their  houses  evety  Sunday, 

[The  rubrics  \  14s,  \  146,  1 147,  }  1^8,  are 
omitted  in  1553  and  subsequent  editions.] 

§  149.  IT  ^«^  note,  that  every  Parish- 
ioner shall  communicate,  at  the 
least  three  times  in  the  year:  of 
which,  Easter  to  be  one :  and  shall 
also  receive  the  Sacraments,  and 
other  rites,  accordittg  to  the  order 


*  Thus  in  all  the  eds.  of  1549. 

•  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "all"  omitted. 
'  In  two  eds,,  1552,  "  courses." 


in '  th  is  book  appointed.  A  nd yearly 
at  Easter,  every  Parishioner  shall 
reckon  with  his  Parson,  Vicar,  or 
Curate,  or  his,  or  their  deputy  or 
deputies,  and  pay  to  them  or  him 
all  ecclesiastical  duties,  accustom- 
ably  due,  then  and  at  that  time  to 
be  paid  "*. 


Elizabeth,  1559 

§  144.    The  bread  and  wine,  &"€. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  149.  And  note  that  every,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1552.} 


'  In  one  ed.,  1^32.  and  1539.  "order  of." 
<•  This  rubric  is  represented  by  {  95  of 
1549.    See  p.  336. 


The  Communion. 


265 


8  146.  Furthermore,  every  man  and  woman  to  be  bound  to  hear  and  be  at 
the  divine  service,  in  the  Parish  church  where  they  be  resident,  and  there 
with  devout  prayer,  or  Godly  silence  and  meditation,  to  occupy  themselves. 
There  to  pay  their  duties,  to  communicate  once  in  the  year  at  the  least,  and 
there  to  receive  and  take  all  other  Sacraments  and  rites,  in  this  book  ap- 
pointed. §  147.  And  whosoever  willingly,  upon  no  just  cause,  doth  absent 
themselves,  or  doth  ungodly  in  the  Parish  church  occupy  themselves :  upon 
proof  thereof ,  by  the  Ecclesiastical  laxvs  of  the  Realm,  to  be  excovimunicate, 
or  suffer  other  punishment,  as  shall  to  the  Ecclesiastical  Judge  {according 
to  his  discretion)  seem  convenient. 

§  148.  And  although  it  be  read  in  ancient  writers,  that  the  people,  many 
years  past,  received  at  the  Priest'' s  hands  the  Sacrament  of  the  body  of 
Christ  in  their  o^vn  hands,  and  no  commandment  of  Christ  to  the  contrary: 
Yet  forasmuch  as  they  many  times  conveyed  the  same  secretly  away,  kept  it 
ruith  them,  and  diversely  abused  it  to  superstition  and  wickedness :  lest  any 
such  thing  hereafter  shotdd  be  attempted,  and  that  an  tiniformity  might  be 
used  throughout  the  whole  Realm,  it  is  thought  convenient  the  people  com- 
monly receive  the  Sacra?nent  of  Christ^s  body  in  their  mouths,  at  the 
Priest's  hand. 


James  I.   1604. 

§  144.    The  Bread  and  Wine,  d^c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  149.  And  note  that  every,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  144.  The  Bread  and  Wine  for  the 
Communion  shall  be  provided  by 
the  Curate  and  the  Churchwardens, 
at  the  charges  of  the  Parish. 

§  149.  And  note,  that  every  parish- 
ioner shall  cotnmunicate  at  the 
least  three  times  in  the  year,  of 
which  Pasch  or  Easter  shall  be 
one  ;  and  shall  also  receive  the  Sa- 
craments, and  observe  other  rites, 
according  to  the  order  in  this  book 
appointed. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  144.  1"  The  Bread  and  Wine  for 
the  Communion  shall  be  provided 
by  the  Curate  and  the  Church- 
wardens, at  the  charges  of  the 
Parish. 

§  149.  H  Attd  note,  that  every  Parish- 
ioner shall  communicate  at  the  least 
three  times  in  the  year,  of  which 
Easter  to  be  one.  And  yearly  at 
Easter  every  Parishioiter  shall 
reckon  with  the  Parson,  Vicar,  or 
Curate ;  or  his  or  their  Deputy, 
or  Deputies,  and  pay  to  them  or 
him  all  Ecclesiastical  duties,  ac- 
customably  dice,  then  and  at  that 
time  to  be  paid  ^ 

§  150.  U  After  the  Divine  Service 
ended,  the  money  given  at  the  Of- 
fertory shall  be  disposed  of  to  such 
pious  and  chatitable  uses,  as  the 
Minister  and  Church-wardensshall 
think  ft.  Wherein  if  they  dis- 
agree, it  shall  be  disposed  of  as  the 
Ordinary  shall  appoint. 


'  See  rubrics  in  Scotch  ed.,  ante,  p.  47. 


266        Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

151.  ^Although  no  order  can  be  so 
perfectly  devised,  but  it  may  be  of 
some,  either  for  their  ignorance 
and  ittfirmity,  or  else  of  malice 
and  obstinacy,  misconstrued,  de- 
praved, and  interpreted  in  a  wrong 
part:  And  yet  because  brotherly 
charity  willeth,  that  so  much  as 
conveniently  may  be,  offences  should 
be  taken  away :  therefore  we  will- 
ing to  do  the  same.  Whereas  it  is 
ordained  in  the  book  of  common 
prayer,  in  the  administration  of 
the  Lord's  Supper,  that  the  Com- 
municants kneeling  should  receive 
the  holy  Communion :  zuhich  thing 
being  well  meant,  for  a  significa- 
tion of  the  humble  and  grateful 
(uknowledging  of  the  bejtefits  of 
Christ,  given  unto  the  worthy  re- 
ceiver, and  to  avoid  the  profanation 
and  disorder,  which  about  the  holy 
Communion  might  else  ensue:  lest 
yet  the  same  kneeling  might  be 
thought  or  taken  otherwise,  we  do 
declare  that  it  is  not  meant  there- 
by, that  any  adoration  is  done,  or 
ought  to  be  done,  either  nnto  the 
sacramental  bread  or  wine  there 
bodily  received,  or  to  any  real  and 
essential  presence  there  being  of 
Christ's  natural  flesh  and  blood. 
For  as  concaning  the  sacramental 
bread  and  wine,  they  retnain  still 
in  their  veiy  jiatiiral  substances, 
and  therefore  may  not  be  adored, 
for  that  were  Idolatry  to  be  ab- 
horred  of  all  fait hfU  Christians. 
And  as  concerning  the  natural 
body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour 
Christ,  they  are  in  heaven  and 
not  here.  For  it  is  against  the 
tinith  of  Christ's  true  natural 
body,  to  be  in  moi-e  places  than 
in  one  at  one  time. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[The  above  rubric  is  omitted.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[The  above  rubric  is  omitted.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
[The  above  rubric  is  omitted.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

151.  Whereas  it  is  ordained  in 
this  Office  for  the  Administration 
of  the  Lord's  Supper,  that  the  Com- 
municants should  receive  the  same 
Kneeling ;  {which  Order  is  well 
meant,  for  a  signification  of  our 
humble  and  grateful  acknowledge- 
ment of  the  benefits  of  Christ  therein 
given  to  all  worthy  Receivers,  and 
for  the  avoiding  of  such  profana- 
tion, and  disorder  in  the  holy  Com' 
munion,  as  might  otherwise  ensue) 
Yet,  lest  the  same  Kneeling  should 
by  any  persons,  either  out  of  igno- 
rance and  infirmity,  or  out  of 
malice  and  obstinacy,  be  miscon- 
strued and  depraved ;  It  is  here 
declared,  that  thereby  no  Adoration 
is  intended,  or  ought  to  be  done, 
either  unto  the  Sacramental  bread 
or  wine,  there  bodily  recdved,  or 
unto  any  Corporal  Presence  of 
Christ's  natural  Flesh,  and  Blood. 
For  the  Sacramental  bread  and 
wine  remain  still  in  their  very 
Natural  Substances,  and  there- 
fore may  not  be  adored,  {for  that 
were  Idolatry,  to  be  abhorred  of 
all  faithful  Christians)  And  the 
Natural  body  and  blood  of  our 
Saviour  Christ  are  in  Heaven, 
and  not  here;  it  being  against 
the  truth  of  Christ's  Natural  body, 
to  be  at  one  time  in  more  places 
than  one. 


'  In  one  cd.,  1552,  this  paragraph  is 
fourth  in  order.  It  is  printed  on  a  sepa- 
rate leaf  in  other  copies,  and,  as  is  evi- 


dent from  the  signatures,  was  added  after- 
wards. Several  copies  are  without  it  al- 
together. 


THE 
LITANY. 


[In  eds.  1532,  and  afterwards,  The  Litany  is  printed  immediately  after  the 
Order  for  Morning  Prayer.     See  p.  97.] 


[A  Litany  was  printed,  appended  to  a  Psalter,  in  1S48,  but  it  was  an  exact  reprint  of 
that  of  1544  (Henry  VIIL)  Also  early  in  Elizabeth's  reign  [c.  15581  a  Litany  was  issued 
entitled,  "  The  Litany  and  Suffrages ;"  and  again  a  second  one  at  the  beginning  of 
1559,  entitled,  "The  Letanye  used  in  the  Quenes  Majesties  Chappel,  according  to  the 
tenor  of  the  Proclamation,  Anno  Christi  1559."  The  variations  between  these  and  the 
copies  printed  in  the  Authorized  Prayer-Book  are  very  slight.] 


268 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


THE 
LITANY  AND   SUFFRAGES". 

O  God  the  Father  of  heaven  :  have  mercy  upon  us 
miserable  sinners. 

O  God  the  Father  of  heaven  :  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable 
sinners  ^. 

O  God  the  Son,  Redeemer  of  the  world  :  have  mercy  upon 
us  miserable  sinners. 

O  God  the  Son,  Redeemer  of  the  world :  have  mercy  upon  us 
miserable  sinners  ^. 

O  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  proceeding  from  the  Father  and 
the  Son  :  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners. 

O  God^  the  Holy  Ghost^  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the 
Son  :  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners  ^. 

O  holy,  blessed,  and  glorious  Trinity,  three  Persons  and 
one  God  :  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners. 

O  holy,  blessed,  and  glorious  Trinity,  three  persons  arid  one 
God :  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners  ^. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

[In  the  Second  Book  of  Edward  VI., 
and  in  all  editions  afterwards,  the_  Litany 
IS  printed  immediately  after  Morning  and 
Kvening  Prayer.     See  p.  97.] 

k\  152.)  HERE  FOLLOWETH  THE 

LITANY 

TO  BB  USED 

UPON   SUNDAYS,    WEDNES- 
DAYS,  AND   FRIDAYS, 

AND   AT  OTHER    TIMES,   WHEN    IT 

SHALL   BE  COMMANDED   BY 

THE   ORDINARY. 

O  God  the  Father  of  heaven,  &c. 
[The  same  as  1549.] 


•  In  the  two  earlier  editions  of  the  1549 
book,  the  Litany  appears  printed  on  a 
leparate  sheet,  and  added  at  the  end. 
I'he  rubric,  respecting  the  saying  of  the 
I  .itany,  in  editions  of  1549,  will  be  found 
\  133.     See  page  261. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
0 152)    Here  followeth  the 
Litany,  to  be  used  upon,  &c. 

[Same  as  1553.] 

O  God  the  Father,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604, 
(}  152.)    Here  followeth  the 
Litany,  to  be  used  upon,  &c 

[Same  as  1552.] 
O  God  the  Father,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


_ ''  In  one  ed.,  1549,  the  words  "miserable 
sinners  "  are  omitted  in  the  four  responses, 
and  "&c"  put  in  their  stead  ;  in  one  ed., 
1552,  and  in  some  eds.  of  1559,  and  after- 
wards, the  responses  are  still  further  ab- 
breviated. 


The  Litany  and  Suffrages. 


269 


Remember  not,  LorJ,  our  offences,  nor  the  offences  of  our 
forefathers,  neither  take  thou  vengeance  oC  our  sins  :  spare  us, 
good  Lord,  spare  thy  people,  whom  tliou  hast  redecmeii  with 
thy  most  precious  blood,  and  be  not  angry  with  us  for  ever. 
Spare  71s,  good  Lord. 

From  all  evil  and  mischief,  from  sin,  from  the  cr.^fis  and 
assaults  of  the  devil,  from  thy  wrath,  and  from  everlasting 
damnation : 

Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

From  blindness '^  of  heart,  from  i^ride,  vainglory,  and  hyjto- 
crisy,  from  envy,  hatred,  and  malice,  and  all  uncharitableness  : 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
From  fornication,  and  all  other''  deadly  sin,  and  from  all 
the  deceits  of  the  world,  the  flcsli,  and  the  devil  : 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

From  lightning  and  tempest"',  from  plague,  pestilence,  and 
famine,  from  battle  and  murther,  and  from  sudden  death  : 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

From  all  sedition  and  jirivy  conspirac}- '', 

From  the  tyranny  of  the  bishop  of  Rome  and  a'd  his  de- 
testable enormities  ^', 

From  all  false  doctrine  and  h.eresy'',  from  hardness  of  heart, 
and  contempt  of  thy  word  and  commandment  : 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

152.)  Here  folhnvdh  the  Litany,  to 
be  ttsCit  after  the  Third  Collect  at 
iMoruiiig  rrayer,  called  the  Col- 
lect for  Grace,  upon  Sundays, 
Wednesdays,  and  Fridays,  and 
at  other  times  'idien  it  shall  be 
commanded  by  the  Ordinary,  and 
without  omission  of  any  part  vf 
the  other  daily  serznce  of  the  Church 
on  those  days. 
O  God  the  Father,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  i552. 
THE    LITANY. 

152.  1  Here  folloiveth  the  Litany 
or  General  Supplication  to  be  snng 
or  said  after  JSPoriiing Prayer  upon 
Sundays,  Wedneidays,  and  Fri- 
days, and  at  other  times,  ivhen  it 
shall  be  commanded  by  the  Or  di- 
mity. 

O  God  the  Fathei-,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


•  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,   "from 
all  blindness." 

''  In  one  ed.,  1549,  the  word  "other" 
is  omitted. 

p  In  eds.  1552,  and  one  ed.,  1559,  "  light- 
nings and  tempests." 

'  In    ed.    1662,    "sedition,   privy -con- 


spiracy and  rebellion." 

8  The  words,  "from  the  tyranny  of  the 
bishop  of  Rome  and  all  his  detestable 
enormities,"  are  retained  in  ed.  1552,  but 
are  omitted  in  ed.  1559,  and  all  afterwards. 

'•  In  cd.  1662,  "false  doctrine,  heresy 
and  schism." 


270 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


By  the  mystery  of  thy  holy  incarnation,  by  thy  holy  nativity 
and  Circumcision,  by  thy  Baptism,  fasting,  and  temptation : 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
By  thine  agony  and  bloody  sweat,  by  thy  cross  and  passion, 
by  thy  precious  death  and  burial,  by  thy  glorious  resurrection 
and  ascension,  by '  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost  : 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
In  all  time  of  our  ^  tribulation,  in  all  time  of  our  wealth  \ 
in  the  hour  of  death,  in  "*  the  day  of  judgment  : 
Good  Lord,  deliver  tis. 
We  sinners  do  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  (0  Lord  God)  and 
that  it  may  please  thee  to  rule  and  govern  thy  holy  Church 
universal  °  in  the  right  way  : 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That   it   may  please  thee  to  keep  Edward  the  vi.°,  thy 
servant  our  king  and  governor  : 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  rule  his  heart  in  thy  faith,  fear, 
and  love,  p  that  he  "^  may  always '  have  affiance  in  thee,  and 
ever  seek  thy  honour  and  glory  : 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  be  his'  defender  and  keeper, 
giving  him '  the  victory  over  all  his  ^  enemies  : 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
By  the  mystery  of,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
By  the  mystery  of,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1349.] 

James  I.  1604. 
By  the  mystery  of,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549  to  end  of  paragraph. 


'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  and  by. " 

''  In  eds.  IS59,  "  In  all  our  time  of." 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "iuall  time  of  our 

adversity,  in  all  time  of  our  prosperity. "  _^ 

™  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "and  in." 

"  In  eds.  1552,  1559,   and  1604,  "holy 

Church  universally  ;"  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 

"  holy  Catholic  Church  universally  ;"   in 

ed.  1662,  the  same  as  1549. 

">  In  ed.  1558  list  Elizabeth),  "That  it 
may  please  thee  to  keep  Elizabeth  thy 
servant,  our  Queen  and  governor ;"  in 
eds.  1559,  "That  it  may  please  thee  to 
keep  and  strengthen  in  the  true  worship- 
ping of  thee,  in  Righteousness  and  holi- 


"That  it  may  please  thee  to  be  her  de- 
fender and  keeper,"  &c.] 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  bless 

and  preserve  our  gracious  Queen 

Anne,  Prince  Henry,  and  the  rest  of 

the  King  and  Queen's  Royal  issue  : 

^Ve  beseech  thee,  &-'c. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  illu- 
minate all  Bishops,  Pastors,  &c 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 


ness  of  life,  thy  ser^'ant  Elizabeth  our 
most  gracious  Queen  and  govemour." 

In  eds.  1604,  "  That  it  may  please  thee 
to  keep  and  strengthen,  &c.  .  .  .  thy  ser- 
vant James  our  most  gracious  King  and 
governour." 

In  Scotched.,  1637,  anded.  1662,  "That 
it  may  please  thee  to  keep  and  strengthen, 
&c.  .  .  .  thy  servant  Charles  our  most 
gracious  Kmg  and  governour." 

P  In  eds.  I5S9,  and  after,  "and  that." 

1  In  ed.  1559,  "her  heart  in  thy  faith, 
fear,  and  love,  [and]  that  she." 

'  In  ed.  i66a,  "evermore." 

•  Ined.  1559,  "her." 


The  Litany  and  Suffrages. 


271 


That  it  may  please  thee  to  illuminate  all  Bishops,  pastors  ^ 
and  ministers  of  the  Church,  with  true  knowledge  and  under- 
standing of  thy  word,  and  that  both  by  their  preaching  and 
living  they  may  set  it  forth,  and  shew  it  accordingly  : 
IVe  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  endue  the  Lords  of  the  conncil, 
and  all  the  nobility,  with  grace,  wisdom,  and  understanding : 
IVe  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  bless  and  keep  the  magistrates, 
giving  them  grace  to  execute  justice,  and  to  maintain  truth : 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  bless  and  keep  all  thy  people  : 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  tis,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  give  to  all  nations  unity,  peace, 
and  concord : 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  give  us  an  heart  to  love  and 
dread  thee,  and  diligently  to  live  after  thy  commandments : 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  ^ood  Lard. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  give  all '  thy  people,  increase  of 
grace,  to  hear  meekly  thy  word,  and  to  receive  it  with  pure 
atfection,  and  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit : 
We  beseech  the«  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  bring  into  the  way  of  truth  all 
such  as  have  erred  and  are^  deceived. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  strengthen  such  as  do  stand,  and 
to  comfort  and  help  the  weak -hearted,  and  to  raise  up  them  ^ 
that  fall,  and  finally  to  beat  down  Satan  ^  under  our  feet : 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lo?-d. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

By  the  mystery  of,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549  to  end  of  paragraph, 
"That  it  may  please  thee  to  be  her  de- 
fender and  keeper,"  &c.] 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  bless 
and  preserve  our  gracious  Queen 
Mary,  Prince  Charles,  and  the  rest 
of  the  royal  issue  ; 

We  beseech  thee,  S^c. 

[Continued  same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

By  the  mystery  of,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549  to  end  of  paragraph, 
"That  it  may  please  thee  to  be  her  de- 
fender and  keeper,"  &c.] 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  bless 
and  preserve  our  gracious  Queen 
Catherine,  Mary  the  Queen-Mo- 
ther, James  Duke  of  York,  and  all 
the  Royal  Family  J" ; 

We  beseech  thee,  &^c. 

[Continued  same  as  1S49.] 


•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Bishops,  pas- 
tors, presbyters  and  ministers  ;"  in  ed. 
1662,  "  Bishops,  Priests,  and  Deacons." 

•  In  ed.  1596,  and  afterwards,  "  to  all." 
"  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  be  deceived." 


'■  In  eds.  1532,  1559,  "them  up;"   but 

1596,  "up  them"  restored. 
»  In  one  ed.,  1332,  "Sathan." 
y  In  Sealed   Book  the    last   seventeen 

words  are  struck  through  with  a  pen. 


2-: 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


That  it  may  please  thee  to  succour,  help,  and  comfort  all 
that  be  ^  in  danger,  necessity,  and  tribulation  : 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  preserve  all  that  travel  by  land 
or  by  water,  all  women  labouring  of  child,  all  sick  persons, 
and  young  children,  and  to  shew  thy  pity  upon  all  prisoners 
and  captives : 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  defend  and  provide  for  the  fatherless 
children  and  widows,  and  all  that  be  ^  desolate  and  oppressed  : 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  have  mercy  upon  all  men  ; 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  forgive  our  enemies,  persecutors, 
and  slanderers,  and  to  turn  their  hearts : 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  give  and  preserve  to  our  use  the 
kindly  fruits  of  the  earth,  so  as  in  due  time  we  may  enjoy  them  : 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  JLord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  give  us  true  repentance ;   to 
forgive  us  all  our  sins,  negligences,  and  ignorances,  and  to 
endue  us  with  the  grace  of  thy  holy  Spirit  to  amend  our  lives 
according  to  thy  holy  word  : 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

That  it  may  please  thee,  &c 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Lord,  Jiave  mercy  upon  us. 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven, 
&c. 

And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. 

But  deliver  us  from  evil  ■. 

The  Versicle.    O  Lord,  deal  not 
with  us  after  our  sins. 

The  Annuer.  Neither  reward  us 
after  our  iniquities. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

That  it  may  please  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

That  it  may  please  thee,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgfy,  1637. 

That  it  may  please  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy 
Kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done 
in  earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give 
us  this  day  our  daily  bread.  And 
forgive  us  our  trespasses,  As  we  for- 
give them,  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation ; 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.  Amen. 
Presbyter. 

O  Lord,  deal  not  with  us  after 
our  sins. 

Answer. 

Neither  reward  us  after  our  ini- 
quities. 


In  ed.  1662,  "are."  •  In  one  ed.,  1552,  1559,  and  after,  " Atnen"  addtd. 


The  Litany  and  Suffrages. 


273 


Son  of  God  :  we  beseech  thee  to  hear  us. 
Son  of  God :  we  beseech  thee  to  hear  us. 

O  Lamb  of  God,  that  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world  : 
Grant  us  thy  peace. 

O  Lamb  of  God,  that  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world  : 
Have  mercy  upofi  us. 

O  Christ,  hear  us. 

O  Christ,  hear  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  fnercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven.      With  the  residue  of  the 
Paternoster. 

And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. 

But  deliver  us  from  evil^. 
TJie  Versicle.     O  Lord,  deal  not  with  us  after  our  sins. 
The  Answer.     Neither  reward  us  after  our  itiiquiiies. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

That  it  may  please  thee,  &c 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

§  153.  IT  Then  shall  the  Priest,  and 
the  people  with  him,  say  the  Lord's 
Prayer. 


Our  Father,  which  art,  &c. 
[Printed  entire,  as  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637.] 

Priest. 
O  Lord,  deal  not  with  us  after 
our  sins. 

Answer. 
Neither  reward  us  after  our  ini- 
quities. 


*  Tn  one  ed.  1349,  in  one  ed.  1552,  and  in  one  ed.  1559,  and  most  eds.  afterwards, 
"Amen  "  is  added. 


274 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Let  us  pray. 

O  God  merciful  Father,  that  despisest  not  the  sighing  of 
a  contrite  heart,  nor  the  desire  of  such  as  be  sorrowful,  merci- 
fully assist  our  prayers,  that  we  make  before  thee  in  all  our 
troubles  and  adversities,  whensoever  they  oppress  us :  And 
graciously  hear  us,  that  those  evils,  which  the  craft  and 
subtilty  of  the  devil  or  man  worketh  against  us,  be  brought 
to  nought,  and  by  the  providence  of  thy  goodness  they  may 
be  dispersed,  that  we  thy  servants,  being  hurt  by  no  perse- 
cutions, may  evermore  give  thanks  unto'=  thee,  in  thy  holy 
Church  :  through  Jesu  *•  Christ  our  Lord. 

O  Lord,  arise,  help  us,  and  deliver  us  for  thy  namis  sake. 

O  God,  we  have  heard  with  our  ears,  and  our  fathers  have 
declared  unto  us,  the  noble  works  that  thou  didst  in  their 
days,  and  in  the  old  time  before  them, 

O  Lord,  arise,  help  us,  and  deliver  us  for  thy  ^  honour. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  the  Son  ^,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost  ^ : 
as  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be  world 
without  end.     Amen ''. 

From  our  enemies  defend  us,  O  Christ. 
Graciously  look  upon  our  afflictions. 

Pitifully  behold  the  sorrows  of  our  heart  \ 
Mercifully  forgive  the  sins  of  thy  "^  people. 

Favourably  with  mercy  hear  our  prayers. 


1552- 


Second  Edw.  VI. 

[Same  as  iS49-] 

Let  US  pray. 

O  God  merciful  Father,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

[Here  follows  \  i6o.     See  p.  278.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

Let  us  pray,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

[Here  follows, 

}  154.  A  prayer  of  tlu  Queen's  Majesty. 

See  next  page.] 


James  I.   1604. 

Let  us  pray,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

[Here  follows, 

}  154.  A  Prayer  for  tlu  King's  Majesty. 

See  next  page.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
Let  us  pray,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amett. 

[Here  follows, 

\  154.  A  Prayer  for  tlie  King's  Majesty. 

See  next  page.] 


"=  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1559,  "to." 

^  In  two  eds.,  1549,  and  one  ed.,  1552, 
and  most  eds.  afterwards,  "Jesus." 

•  In  eds.  1552,  and  most  afterwards, 
"  thine." 

'  In  eds.  1352,  and  all  afterwards,  "  and 
to  the  Son." 


s  In  one  ed.,  1549,  and  again  in  1604, 
and  afterwards,  the  doxology  is  printed  as 
two  verses. 

^  \x\  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  " Xmtn" omitted. 

'  In  ed.  1596,  1604,  and  after,  "hearts  ;" 
in  first  Eliz.  (i5s8(,  "dolour  of  our  heart." 

^  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "the  people." 


The  Litany  and  Suffrages. 


275 


O  Sofi  of  David,  have  mercy  up07i  us. 
Both  now  and  ever  vouchsafe  to  hear  us  \  Christ 
Graciously  hear  us,  O  Christ. 
Graciously  hear  us,  O  Lord  Christ. 
The  Versicle  ™.     O  Lord,  let  thy  mercy  be  shewed  upon  us. 
The  Answer^.     As  we  do  put  our  trust  in  thee. 

Let  us  pray. 
We  humbly  beseech  thee,  O  Father,  mercifully  to  look 
upon  our  infirmities,  and  for  the  glory  of  thy  name's  sake  °, 
turn  from  us  all  those  evils  that  we  most  righteously  p  have 
deserved ;  and  grant  that  in  all  our  troubles  we  may  put  our 
whole  trust  and  confidence  in  thy  mercy,  and  evermore  serve 
thee  in  "^  pureness  of  living,  to  thy  honour  and  glory :  through 
our  only  mediator  and  advocate  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.   Amen. 

[Here  follows  this  Prayer,  afterwards  called,  (?  iS^.)  "the  Prayer  of  S.  Chrysostom''."] 

Almighty  God,  which  hast  given  us  grace  at  this  time 
with  one  accord  to  make  our  common  supplications  unto 
thee,  and  dost  promise,  that  when  two  or  three  be  ^  gathered 
in  thy  name,  thou  wilt  grant  their  requests :  fulfil  now,  O 
Lord,  the  desires  and  petitions  of  thy'  servants,  as  may  be 
most  expedient  for  them  ^,  granting  us  in  this  world  knowledge 
of  thy  truth,  and  in  the  world  to  come,  life  everlasting. 
Amen. 


Charles  II.  i6G2. 
[Same  as  iS49-] 
TT  Let  us  pray. 
O  God,  merciful  Father,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
AnsT.ver. 
As  it  was   in   the  beginning,   is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world  with- 
out end.     Amen. 

From  our  enemies,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Atneit. 


'  In  eds.  1552,  and  all  afterwards,  "  O 
Christ." 

"'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Presbyter;"  in 
ed.  1662,  "Priest." 

"  In  ed.  1O04,  and  afterwards,  "An- 
swer." 

°  In  ed.  1662,  "  of  thy  name,  turn." 

r  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  most  justly." 

1  In  eds.  1552  and  all  after,  "  in  holi- 
ness and  pureness." 

■■  This  Prayer  of  Saint  Chrysostom  oc- 


[Here  immediately  follows, 

§  156.   A  Prayer  of  Saint 
Chrysostom. 

Almighty  God,  who  hast,  &c. 

Same  as  1549.] 

2  Corinthians  xiii. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and 
the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
be  with  us  all  evermore.     Amen. 

§157.  Here  endelh  the  Litany. 


curs  in  ed.  1552,  after  {  165  (see  p.  280) ; 
in  eds.  1559  and  1604,  after  [§  155]  (see 
pp.  276,  277) ;  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  alter 
§  159  (see  p.  277) ;  and  in  ed.  1662,  imme- 
diately after  the  Prayer,  "  We  humbly 
beseech  thee,"  as  in  1549. 

•  In  all  eds.,  1559,  except  one,  and  in 
eds.  afterwards,  "  be  gathered  together  ;" 
in  ed.  1662,  "  are  gathered  together." 
«  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "of  us  thy." 
"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "for  us." 


276         Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI,  1552. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

[The  two  following  Prayers  do  not  occur 
in  any  edition  of  1552.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[After  the  Prayer  beginning,  "We humbly 
beseech  thee,"  follows ',] 

§  154  ^.  A  Prayer  o/^  the  Queen^s 
Majesty. 

O  Lord  our  heavenly  Father, 
high  and  mighty.  King  of  kings, 
Lord  of  lords,  the  only  Ruler  of 
princes,  which  *  dost  from  thy  throne 
behold  all  the  dwellers  upon  the 
earth '',  most  heartily  we  beseech 
thee  with  thy  favour  to  behold  our 
most  gracious  sovereign  Lady  Queen 
Elizabeth,  and  so  replenish  her  with 
the  grace  of  thy  holy  Spirit,  that 
she  may  alway  incline  to  thy  will, 
and  walk  in  thy  way,  endue  her 
plentifully  *  with  heavenly  gifts, 
grant  her  in  health  and  wealth  long 
to  live,  strength  "*  her,  that  she  may 
vanquish  and  overcome  all  her  ene- 
mies, and  finally  after  this  life  she 
may  attain  everlasting  joy  and  fe- 
licity, through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen. 

[§i55''-] 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
which  *  only  workest  great  marvels, 
send  down  upon  our  bishops  and 
curates,  and  all  congregations  com- 
mitted to  their  charge,  the  healthful 
spirit  of  thy  grace,  and  that  they 


"  The  arrangement  of  the  Prayers  here 
loUowed  is  that  of  all  editions  of  Elizabeth 
extant  except  one.  That  one  simply  fol- 
lows the  arrangement  of  1552,  and  is  there- 
fore supposed  to  be  the  earliest  printed. 
The  Prayers,  \  154  and  \  155,  do  not  ap- 
pear in  it. 

y  These  prayers  (5 154,  \  155,  and  \  156) 
were,  in  ed.  1662,  inserted  in  the  Order  for 
Morning  and  Evening  Prayer  (see  pp.  83 
and  93);  for  convenience  of  reference  they 
are  here  repeated,  and  the  variations  noted. 


may  truly  please  thee,  pour  upon 
them  the  continual  dew  of  thy  bless- 
ing :  grant  this,  O  Lord,  for  the 
honour  of  our  Advocate  and  Me- 
diator Jesus  Christ.     Amen. 

§  156^.  A  Prayer  of  Chrysostom. 
Almighty  God,  which  hast  given 
us  grace,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.    See  p.  275.] 
The  grace  of  our  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  in  ed.  1662.     See  p.  275.] 


James  I.   1604, 

[After  the  Prayer  beginning,  "  We  humbly 
beseech  thee,"  follows] 

§  154,  A  Prayer  for  the  King's 

Majesty. 
O   Lord  our  heavenly  Father, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1559,  except] 

.  .  Sovereign  Lord  King  James  .  . 

[and  "he,"  "him,"  and  "his"  throughout 
instead  of  "she"  and  "her."] 

§158.  A  prayer  for  the  Queen  and 
Prince,  and  other  the  King  and 
Queen! s  children. 

Almighty  God  which  hast  pro- 
mised to  be  a  father  of  thine  elect 
and  of  their  seed,  we  humbly  be- 
seech thee  to  bless  our  gracious 
Queen  Anne,  Prince  Henry,  and  all 
the  King  and  Queen's  Royal  Pro- 
geny :  endue  them  with  thy  holy 
spirit,   enrich   them  with  thy  hea- 


It  will  be  observed  that  the  Prayer  [{ 155] 
has  the  title  of  "  Prayer  for  the  Clergy 
and  People,"  and  follows  on  after  §  157. 

'  In  ed.  1596,  and  afterwards,  "for 
the." 

»  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 

^  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  in  ed.  1662, 
"upon  earth." 

<^  In  ed.  1596,  and  afterwards,  "plen- 
teously." 

■'  In  ed.  1596,  and  afterwards,  "strength- 


Tpie  Litany. 


VI 


venly  grace  ;  prosper  them  with  all 
iiappiness,  and  bring  them  to  thine 
everlasting  Kingdom,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

[§  I5S-] 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
^vhich  only  workest,  &c. 
[Same  as  I559d 
§  156.   A  Fra)'L'r  of  C/irysostoin. 
Almighty    God,    -which    hast 
given,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.     See  p.  275.] 

2  Corinth  :  1 3. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  in  ed.  1662.     See  p.  275.] 

[Here,  after  an  ornamental  rule,  follows, 

§  160.   "  For  Rain,  it  the  time  rejteire." 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[After  the  Prayer  beginning,  "  We  humbly 
beseech  thee,"  follows] 

§  154.  A  p)-aycr  for  the  King's 
Majesty. 

O  Lord  our  heavenly  Father,  &c. 
[Same  as  1559,  except] 
vSovereign  Lord  King  Charles. 

[and  "  he,"  "him, "and  "  his"  throughout, 
instead  of  "slie"and  "lier."] 

§  15S.  ^  Prayer  for  the  Queen,  Prince 

Charles,  and  the  rest  of  the  royal 

progeny. 

Almighty  God,  the  fountain  of 
all  goodness,  we  humbly  beseech 
thee  to  bless  our  gracious  Queen 
Mary,  Prince  Charles,  with  the  rest 
of  the  royal  progeny.  Endue  them 
with  thy  Holy  Spirit,  &c. 
[Same  as  1604.] 
§  155.  A  Prayer  for  the  holy  Clergy. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who  only  workest  great  and  mar- 
vellous things.     Send   down  upon 


our    Bishops,    Presbyters,    and    Cu- 
rates, and  all  congregations,  &c. 
[Same  as  1559.] 

§  159.  A  Prayer  to  be  said  in  the 
Einbei--'ti<eeks,  for  those  lokich  are 
then  to  be  admitted  into  Holy  Or- 
ders ;  a7id  is  to  be  read  every  day  of 
the  week,  beginning  on  the  Sunday 
be/ore  the  day  of  Oj'dination  '^. 

Almighty  God,  the  giver  of  all 
good  gilts,  who  of  lliy  divine  pro- 
vidence hast  appointed  divers  orders 
in  thy  Church,  give  thy  grace  we 
humbly  beseech  thee  to  all  those 
which  are  to  be  called  to  any  office 
and  administration  in  the  same ; 
and  so  replenish  them  with  the  truth 
of  thy  doctrine  and  ^  innocency  of 
life,  that  they  may  faithfully  serve 
before  thee,  to  the  glory  of  thy  great 
Name,  and  the  benefit  of  tiiy  IvAy 
Church,  tlirough  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen. 


&c. 


§  156.  ^  Prayer  of  Chrysostom. 
Almighty  God  which  hast  given, 


[.Same  as  1549.     See  p.  275.] 


2  Cor.  xin.  13. 
The  grace  of  our  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  in  ed.  1662.     See  p.  273.] 
[Here  follows  a  line  of  division.] 


Charles  IL  1662. 

[The  Prayer,  §  134,  "  for  the  King's  ^^a- 
jesty, "  §  157,  "  for  the  Royal  Family,"  and 
§155,  for  "the  Clergy  and  people,"  to- 
gether with  §  156,  "a  Prayer  of  S.  Chryso- 
stom," are  not  printed  here,  but  appear 
at  the  end  of  the  Morning  and  Evening 
Prayer  (see  pp.  83  and  93). 


«  This  Prayer,  inserted  here  for  the  first  time,  is  given  in  ed.  1662  as  the  alternative 
prayer  for  §  i56.     See  p.  281.  '  In  ed.  1662,  "  and  endue  them  with." 


278 


Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI,  1552. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

[After  the  Prayer  beginning,  "We  humbly 
beseech  theeB,"  follows] 

§  1 60.  For  rain,  if  the  time  require  N 
O  God,  heavenly  Father,  which 
by  thy  Son  Jesu'  Christ  hast  pro- 
mised to  all  them  that  seek  thy 
kingdom  and  the  righteousness 
thereof,  all  things  necessary  to  their 
bodily  sustenance  : 

send  us,  we  be- 
seech thee,  in  this  our  necessity, 
such  moderate  rain  and  showers, 
that  we  may  receive  the  fruits  of 
the  earth  to  our  comfort,  and  to 
thy  honour :  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  161.  ^  For  fair  weather^. 
O  Lord  God,  which  for  the  sin 
of  man  didst  once  drown  all  the 
world,  except  eight  persons,  and 
afterward  of  thy  great  mercy  didst 
promise  never  to  destroy  it  so  again  : 
we  humbly  beseech  thee,  that  al- 
though we  for  our  iniquities  have 
worthily  deserved  this''  plague  of 
rain  and  waters,  yet  upon  our  true 
repentance  thou  wilt  send  us  such 
weather  whereby'  we  may  receive 
the  fruits  of  the  earth  in  due  season, 
and  learn  both  by  thy  punishment 
to  amend  our  lives,  and  for  thy 
clemency  to  give  thee  praise  and 
glory  :  through  Jesus "  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen. 

§  162.  ^  In  the  time  of  dearth  and 
famine. 
O  God  heavenly  Father,  whose 
gift  it  is  that  the  rain  doth  fall,  the 


8  See  ante,  p.  274. 

*■  These  two  prayers,  \  i6o  and  {  161, 
will  be  found  printed  in  ed.  1559,  at  end 
of  the  "  Holy  Communion."    See  p.  260. 

*  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  most  afterwards, 
"Jesus." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "a  plague." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "as  that  we." 

"  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  Jesu." 

"  In  eds.  1596, 1637, 1662,  &c.,  "Jesus  " 

0  In  one  ed.,   1552,  "&c.  Amen;"   in 


earth  is  fruitful,  beasts  increase,  and 
fishes  do  multiply : 

behold,  we  be- 
seech thee,  the  afflictions  of  thy  peo- 
ple, and  grant  that  the  scarcity  and 
dearth  (which  we  do  now  most 
justly  suffer  for  our  iniquity)  may 
through  thy  goodness  be  mercifully 
turned  into  cheapness  and  plenty, 
for  the  love  of  Jesu"  Christ  our 
Lord :  to  whom  with  thee  and  the 
Holy  Ghost.  &c.  " 

§  163.  U  Or  thus. 

O  God  merciful  Father,  which, 
in  the  time  of  Heliseus  the  Prophet, 
didst  suddenly  turn  in  Samaria  great 
scarcity  and  dearth  into  plenty  and 
cheapness,  and  extreme  famine  into 
abundance  of  victual :  Have  pity 
upon  us,  that  now  be  punished  for 
our  sins  with  like  adversity,  increase 
the  fruits  of  the  earth  by  thy  hea- 
venly benediction  :  And  grant,  that 
we  receiving  thy  bountiful  liberality, 
may  use  the  same  to  tliy  glory,  our 
comfort,  and  relief  of  our  needy 
neighbours  :  through  Jesu  p  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  160.  For  Rain  if  the  time  require. 

§161.  For  fair  weather. 

§  162.  Jn  the  time  of  dearth  and 
famine. 

[§163.   Orth7is'i-:'\ 
[Same  as  1552.] 


some  eds.,  1559,  "be  praise  for  ever. 
Amen;"  but  in  eds.  1596  and  1662,  "be 
all  honour  and  glory,  now  and  for  ever. 
Amen;"  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "be  all 
honour  and  glory,  world  without  end. 
Amen." 

P  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "Jesus." 

1  It  is  only  in  the  one  early  edition  of 
1559  that  this  alternative  prayer  is  giveu. 
In  all  the  others  it  is  omitted. 


The  Litany. 


279 


James  I.   1604. 

[After  an  ornamental  rule] 

§  160.  For  Rain  if  the  time  require. 

§  161.  For  fair  weather. 

§  162.  In  the  time  of  dearth  or 

famine. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

[Here  follows  §  i6^,"  In  the  time  of  War." 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[After  an  ornamental  rule] 
§  160.  For  rain  if  the  time  7-cquire. 
O  God  heavenly  Father,  whose 
gift  it  is  that  the  rain  doth  fall,  the 
earth  is  fruitful,  beasts  increase,  and 
fishes  do  multiply ; 

send  us,  we  be- 
seech thee,  in  this  our  necessity, 
sucn  moderate  rain  and  showers, 
that  we  may  receive  the  fruits  of 
the  earth,  to  our  comfort,  and  to 
thy  honour,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen''. 

§  161.  For  fair  weather. 
O    Lord   God,   which    for    the 
sin,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  162.  In  the  time  of  Dearth  and 
Famine. 

O  God  heavenly  Father,  which 
by  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  hast  pro- 
mised to  them  that  seek  thy  king- 
dom and  thy  righteousness  all  things 
necessary  to  their  bodily  sustenance. 
Behold,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  15S2,  to] 
the  Holy  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and 
glory,  world  without  end.     Atnen  ». 
[Here  follows  §  164,  "In  the  time  o/lVar. " 


Charles  II.  1662. 

PRAYERS   AND   THANKS- 
GIVINGS 

UPON 

SEVERAL  OCCASIONS, 

To  be  used  before  the  two  final 
Prayers  of  the  Litany,  or  of  Morn- 
ing and  Evening  Prayer. 

PRAYERS. 
§  160.  t  For  Fain. 
O   God    heavenly  Father,    who 
by,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  161.  TT  For  fair  weather. 

O  Almighty  Lord  God,  who 
for  the  sin  of  man,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  162.  T  In  the  time  of  dearth  and 
famine. 

O  God  heavenly  Father,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  163.  f  Or  this. 
O  God  merciful  Father,  who  in 
the  time  of  Elisha  the  prophet  didst 
suddenly  in  Samaria  turn  great  scar- 
city and  dearth  into  plenty  and 
cheapness ;  Have  mercy  upon  us, 
that  we  who  are  now  for  our  sins 
punished  with  like  adversity,  may 
likewise  find  a  seasonable  relief: 
Increase  the  fruits  of  the  earth  by 
thy  heavenly  benediction  ;  and  grant 
that  we,  receiving  thy  bountiful  li- 
berality, may  use  the  same  to  thy 
glory,  the  relief  of  those  that  are 
needy,  and  our  own  comfort,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


'  This  prayer,  it  will  be  seen,  consists 
of  the  first  part  of  the  Prayer  in  time  of 
dearth  and  famine,  i.e.  \  162,  and  the  last 
part  of  §  160  of  previous  editions. 


•  The  first  part  of  this  prayer  is  taken 
from  that,  "  For  rain,  if  the  time  requires," 
}  160,  in  ed.  of  1552. 


28o         Second  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1552. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

%  164.  In  the  time  of  War. 

O  Almighty  God,  king  of  all 
kings,  and  governor  of  all  things, 
whose  power  no  creature  is  able  to 
resist,  to  whom  it  belongeth  justly 
to  punish  sinners,  and  to  be  merci- 
ful to '  them  that  truly  repent :  save 
and  deliver  us  (we  humbly  beseech 
thee)  from  the  hands  of  our  ene- 
mies :  abate  their  pride,  assuage 
their  malice,  and  confound"  their 
devices,  that  we  being  armed  with 
thy  defence,  may  be  preserved  ever- 
more from  all  perils  to  glorify  thee, 
which  *  art  the  only  giver  of  all  vic- 
tory, through  the  merits  of  thy  only 
Son  Jesu  t  Christ  our  Lord '. 

§  165.  T  In  the  time  of  any  common 
plague  or  sickness. 

O  Almighty  God,  which  in  thy 
wrath,  in  the  time  of  king  David, 
didst  slay  with  the  plague  of  pesti- 
lence Ix  •  and  ten  thousand,  and  yet 
remembering  thy  mercy  didst  save 
the  rest :  have  pity  upon  us  miser- 
able sinners,  that  now  are  visited 
with  great  sickness  and  mortality, 
that  like  as  thou  didst  then  com- 
mand thy  *•  angel  to  cease  from  pun- 
ishing, so  it  may  now  please  thee 
to  withdraw  from  us  this  plague 
and  grievous  sickness,  through  Jesu  ' 
Christ  our  Lord  *. 

§  156.  If  And  the  Litany  shall  ever 
end  with  this  Collect  following : 

[Same  as  i  156  in  ed.  1549.     See  p.  275.  ] 

Almighty  God,  which  hast  given 
us  grace,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.    See  p.  275.] 


*  In  eds.  1559  and  1637,  "  unto." 
"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "defeat." 

*  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 

J  In  later  eds.,  1559,  and  most  eds.  after- 
wards, "  Jesus," 

»  In  one  ed.,  iS52)  and  in  most  eds. 
afterwards,  "  Amen." 

»  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  several  after- 
wards, "three  score;"  in  first  ed.,  iS59. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  164.  In  the  time  of  War. 

§  165.  In  the  time  of  any  Common 

plague  or  sichuss. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
[Here  follows  \  167  ».] 
O  God,  whose  nature  and  pro- 
perty is  ever  to  have  mercy,  and  to 
forgive,  receive  our  humble  peti- 
tions ;  and  though  we  be  tied  and 
bound  \vith  the  chain  of  our  sins, 
yet  let  the  pitifulness  of  thy  great 
mercy  loose  us,  for  the  honour  of 
Jesus  Christ's  sake"*  our  Mediator 
and  Advocate.     Amen. 

[Here  follow  the  Collects,  Epistles, 
and  Gospels.     See  p.  98.] 


James  L  1604. 

§  164.  Itt  the  time  of  war. 

§  165.  In  the  time  of  any  common 

plague  or  sichiess. 

[Same  as  1559.] 

[Here  follows  }  167 '.] 

O  God,  whose  nature  and,  &c. 

[Same  as  1559.] 

[Here  follows  an  ornamental  rule, 
and  then  §171.     See  p.  282.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  164.  In  the  time  of  War. 
O  Almighty  God,  King  of,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  165.  In  the  time  of  any  Common 

plague  or  sickness. 

Almighty  God,  which  in,  &c. 

[Same  as  1352.] 

[Here  follows  {  167  =.] 

O  God  whose  nature  and,  &c. 

[Same  as  1559.] 

[Here  follows  an  ornamental  rule, 

and  then  §  171.     See  p.  282.] 


"  sixty." 

^  In  one  ed.,  1352,  and  afterwards, 
"  thine." 

«  It  will  be  observed  that  this  prayer, 
in  ed.  1662,  has  for  a  title,  "  A  Prayer 
that  may  be  said  after  any  of  the  former." 

<*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "for  Jesus  Christ, 
his  sake  ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "for  the  honour  of 
Jesus  Christ  our  Mediator  and  Advocate." 


The  Litany. 


281 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  164.  ^  In  the  time  of  war  and 

tumults. 
O  Almighty  God,  King  of  all 
kings,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  165.  T  In  the  time  of  any  common 
plague  or  sickness. 
O  Almighty  God,  who  in  thy 
wrath  didst  send  a  plague  upon 
thine  own  people  in  the  wilderness 
for  their  obstinate  rebellion  against 
Moses  and  Aaron,  and  also  in  the 
time  of  king  David  didst  slay  with 
the  plague  of  pestilence  three-score 
and  ten  thousand,  and  yet  remem- 
bering thy  mercy  didst  save  the 
rest ;  Have  pity  upon  us  miserable 
sinners,  who  now  are  visited  with 
great  sickness  and  mortality,  that 
like  as  thou  didst  then  accept  of  an 
atonement,  and  didst  command  the 
destroying  Angel  to  cease  from  pun- 
ishing ;  so  it  may  now  please  thee 
to  withdraw  from  us  this  plague 
and  grievous  sickness,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord,     Amen. 

§  166.  ^  In  the  Ember  weeks  to  be 
said  every  day,  for  those  that  are 
to  be  admitted  into  holy  Orders. 

Almighty  God  our  heavenly 
Father,  who  hast  purchased  to  thy 
self  an  universal  Church,  by  the 
precious  blood  of  thy  dear  Son  ; 
mercifully  look  upon  the  same,  and 
at  this  time  so  guide  and  govern  the 
minds  of  thy  servants  the  Bishops 
and  Pastors  of  thy  flock,  that  they 
may  lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man, 
but  faithfully  and  wisely  make  choice 
of  fit  persons  to  serve  in  the  sacred 
ministery  of  thy  Church.  And  to 
those  which  shall  be  Ordained  to 
any  holy  function,   give  thy  grace 


and  heavenly  benediction,  that  both 
by  their  life  and  doctrine  they  may 
set  forth  thy  glory,  and  set  forward 
the  salvation  of  all  men,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,     Amen. 


§  159.   IT  Or  this. 

Almighty  God,  the  giver  of  all 
good  gifts,  .  ,  ,  and  indue  them,  &c. 

(.Same  as  }  159  in  ed.  1637.     See  p.  277.] 

§  167.  *^  A  Prayer  that  may  be  said 
after  any  of  the  former. 

O  God,  whose  nature  and  pro- 
perty, &c. 

[Same  as  1559.] 

%\(i%.\  A  Prayer  for  the  High 
Court  of  Parliament,  to  be  read 
durijig  their  Session. 

Most  gracious  God,  we  humbly 
beseech  thee,  as  for  this  Kingdom 
in  general,  so  especially  for  the 
High  Court  of  Parliament,  under 
our  most  religious  and  gracious  King 
at  this  time  assembled  :  That  thon 
wouldest  be  pleased  to  direct  and 
prosper  all  their  consultations  to  the 
advancement  of  thy  glory,  the  good 
of  thy  Church,  the  safety,  honour, 
and  welfare  of  our  Sovereign,  and 
his  Kingdoms ;  that  all  things  may 
be  so  ordered  and  settled  by  their 
endeavours  upon  the  best  and  surest 
foundations,  that  peace  and  happi- 
ness, truth  and  justice,  religion  and 
piety  may  be  established  among  us 
for  all  generations.  These  and  all 
other  necessaries  for  them,  for  us, 
and  thy  whole  Church  we  humbly 
beg  in  the  Name  and  mediation  of 
Jesus  Christ  our  most  blessed  Lord 
and  Saviour,     Amen. 


282 


Prayer-Book  of  James  I.  1604. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

Elizabeth,  1559. 

[In  neither  of  these  editions  do  the  fol- 
lowing prayers  appear.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[Here,  after  an  ornamental  rule,  follows] 
§  171.  A  thanksgiving  for  Rain. 
O  God  our  heavenly  Father,  who 
by  thy  gracious  providence  dost 
cause  the  former  and  the  latter  rain 
to  descend  upon  the  earth,  that  it 
may  bring  forth  fruit  for  the  use  of 
man,  we  give  thee  humble  thanks 
that  it  hath  pleased  thee  in  our 
greatest  *  necessity,  to  send  us  at  the 
last  a  joyful  rain  upon  thine  in- 
heritance, and  to  refresh  it  when  it 
was  dry,  to  the  great  comfort  of  us 
thy  unworthy  servants,  and  to  the 
glory  of  thy  holy  Name,  through 
thy  mercies  in  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen. 

§  172.  A  thanksgiving  for  fair 
weather. 

O  Lord  God,  who  hast  justly 
humbled  us  by  thy  late  Plague '  of 
immoderate  Rain  and  waters,  and  in 
thy  mercy  hast  relieved  and  com- 
forted our  souls  by  this  seasonable 
and  blessed  change  of  weather ;  we 
praise  and  glorify  thy  holy  Name 
for  this  thy  mercy,  and  will  always 
declare  thy  loving  kindness  from 
generation  to  generation,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  173.  A  thanksgiving  for  plenty. 
O  MOST  merciful  P'ather,  which 
of  thy  gracious  goodness  hast  heard 
the  devout  prayers  of  thy  Church, 
and  turned  our  dearth  and  scarcity 
into  cheapness  and  plenty,  we  give 


thee  humble  thanks  for  this  thy 
special  bounty,  beseeching  thee  to 
continue  this»  thy  loving  kindness 
unto  us,  that  our  land  may  yield  us 
her  fruits  of  increase,  to  thy  glory 
and  our  comfort,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  1 74.  A  thanksgiving  for  Peace 
and  victory. 

O  Almighty  God,  which  art 
a  strong  tower  of  defence  unto  thy 
servants  against  the  face  of  their 
enemies,  we  yield  thee  praise  and 
thanksgiving  for  our  deliverance 
from  those  great  and  apparent  dan- 
gers wherewith  we  were  compassed  : 
We  acknowledge  it  thy  goodness, 
that  we  were  not  delivered  over  as 
a  prey  unto  them,  beseeching  thee 
still  to  continue  such  thy  mercies 
towards  us,  that  all  the  world  may 
know  that  thou  art  our  Saviour  and 
Mighty  deliverer,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[After  a  line  of  division,  follows] 
§171.   A  TJianksgiving  for  rain. 
O  God  our  heavenly  Father,  &c. 
[Same  as  1604.] 

§  172.   A  Thanksgiving  for  fair 
weather. 

O  Lord  God  who  hast  justly,  &c. 
[Same  as  1604.] 

§  173,  ^  Thanksgiving  for  Plenty. 
O  most  merciful  Father,  which, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1604.] 

§  174.  .(4  Thanksgiving  for  Peace 
and  Victory. 

O  Almighty  God,  which,  &c 

[Same  as  1604.] 


•  In  ed.  1662,  "great."  '  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "by  thy  punishment  of." 

e  In  ed.  1662,  "this"  omitted. 


The  Litany. 


283 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  169.  ^  A  Collect  or  Prayer  for  all 
conditions  of  men,  to  be  used  at 
such  times  when  the  Litany  is  not 
appointed  to  be  said. 
O  God  the  Creator  and  Preserver 
of  all  mankind,  we  humbly  beseech 
thee  for  all  sorts  and  conditions  of 
men,  that  thou  wouldest  be  pleased 
to  make  thy  ways  known  unto  them  ; 
thy  saving  health  unto  all  nations. 
More  especially  we  pray  for  the 
good  estate  of  the  Catholick  Church  ; 
that  it  may  be  so  guided  and  go- 
verned by  thy  good  Spirit,  that  all 
who  profess  and  call  themselves 
Christians,  may  be  led  into  the  way 
of  truth,  and  hold  the  faith  in  unity 
of  spirit,  in  the  bond  of  peace,  and 
in  righteousness  of  life.  Finally 
we  commend  to  thy  fatherly  good- 
ness all  those  who  are  any  ways  af- 
flicted, or  distressed  in  mind,  body 
or  estate,  I* especially  *  This  to  be  said 
those  for  -whom  our  when  any  desire 
prayers  are  desired\  the  prayers  of  the 
that  it  may  please  congregation, 
thee  to  comfort  and  relieve  them 
according  to  their  several  necessi- 
ties, giving  them  patience  under 
their  sufferings,  and  a  happy  issue 
out  of  all  their  afflictions.  And  this 
we  beg  for  Jesus  Christ  His  sake. 
Amen. 

THANKSGIVINGS. 
§  170.  IT  ^  General  Thanksgiving. 
Almighty  God,  Father  of  all 
mercies,  we  thine  unworthy  ser- 
vants do  give  thee  most  humble 
and  hearty  thanks  for  all  thy  good- 
ness and  loving  kindness  to  us,  and 

to  all  men  \  parti-  ,„, .  ,  ,       . , 

7      ,     ^     ^,'--'        ,  •  I  his  to  be  said 

cularly  to  those  who  when  any  that 

desire    now    to    offer  have  been  prayed 

Up  their  praises  arid  ^°^>  desire  to  le- 

thanksgrvings/orthy  '"™  P"^^^" 


late  mercies  vouchsafed  unto  them.'\ 
We  bless  thee  for  our  creation,  pre- 
servation, and  all  the  blessings  of 
this  life,  but  above  all  for  thine  in- 
estimable love  in  the  redemption  of 
the  world  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
for  the  means  of  grace,  and  for  the 
hope  of  gloiy.  And,  we  beseech 
thee  give  us  that  due  sense  of  all 
thy  mercies,  that  our  hearts  may  be 
unfeignedly  thankful,  and  that  we  ■* 
shewTorth  thy  praise,  not  only  with 
our  lips,  but  in  our  lives,  by  giving 
up  our  selves  to  thy  service,  and  by 
walking  before  thee  in  holiness  and 
righteousness  all  our  days,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  to  whom  with 
thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost  be  all  ho- 
nour and  glory,  world  without  end. 
Amen. 

§  171.  IT  For  Rain. 

O   God    our    heavenly    Father, 
who,  &c. 

[Same  as  1604.] 


§  172.  '^  For  fair  weather. 
O  Lord  God,  who  hast  justly,  &c. 
[Same  as  1604.] 

§  173.  '^  For  Plenty. 

O  most  merciful  Father  who,  &c. 
[Same  as  1604.] 

§  174.  For  peace  and  deliverance 
from  our  enemies, 

O  Almighty  God,  who  art,  &c 

[Same  as  1604.] 


*  In  Sealed  Book  "  may"  is  printed,  but  struck  through  with  a  pen. 


284 


Prayer-Book  of  James  I.  1604, 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552, 
Elizabeth,  1559. 

[In  neither  of  these  editions  do  the  fol- 
lowing prayers  appear.] 


James  I.  1604. 

§  176.  A  thanksgiving  for  deliver- 
ance from  the  Plague. 
O  Lord  God,  which  hast  wound- 
ed us  for  our  sins,  and  consumed  us 
for  our  transgressions,  by  thy  late 
heavy  and  dreadful  visitation,  and 
now  in  the  midst  of  Judgment  re- 
membering Mercy,  hast  redeemed 
our  souls  from  the  jaws  of  death  ; 
we  ofter  unto  thy  fatherly  goodness 
ourselves,  our  souls,  and  bodies, 
which  thou  hast  delivered,  to  be 
a  living  sacrifice  unto  thee,  always 
praising  and  magnifying  thy  mercies 
in  the  midst  of  the  Congregation  ', 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

§  177.  Or  this. 
We  humbly  acknowledge  before 
thee,  O  most  merciful  Father,  that 
allJ  punishments  which  are  threat- 
ened in  thy  Law,  might  justly  have 
fallen  upon  us,  by  reason  of  our 
manifold  transgressions  and  hard- 
ness of  heart :  yet  seeing  it  hath 
pleased  thee  of  thy  tender  mercy, 
upon  our  weak  and  unworthy  hu- 
miliation, to  assuage  the  noisome 
pestilence''  wherewith  we  lately  have 
been  sore  afflicted,  and  to  restore 
the  voice  of  joy  and  health  into  our 
dwellings  ;  We  offer  unto  thy  divine 
Majesty  the  sacrifice  of  Praise  and 
Thanksgiving,  lauding  and  magnify- 
ing thy  glorious  Name  for  such  thy 
preservation  and  providence  over 
us,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

[Here  follow 

The  Collects,  Epistles,  and  Gospels, 

&c.     See  p.  98.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  176.  A  Thanksgiving  for  deliver- 
ance fr  0711  the  Plague. 

O  Lord  God,  which  hast,  &c. 
[Same  as  1604.] 
§  177.  Or  this. 

We  humbly  acknowledge,  &c. 

[Same  as  1604.] 

[Here  follow 

The  Collects,  Epistles,  and  Gospels, 

&c    See  p.  98.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  175-  \  For  restoring  publick  pecue 
at  home. 

O  ETERNAL  God  our  heavenly 
Father,  who  alone  makest  men  to 
be  of  one  mind  in  a  house,  and 
stillest  the  outrage  of  a  violent  and 
unruly  people ;  We  bless  thy  holy 
Name  that  it  hath  pleased  thee  to 
appease  the  seditious  tumults  which 
have  been  lately  raised  up  amongst 
us ;  most  humbly  beseeching  thee 
to  grant  to  all  of  us  grace,  that  we 
may  henceforth  obediently  walk  in 
thy  holy  commandments,  and  lead- 
ing a  quiet  and  peaceable  life  in  all 
godliness  and  honesty,  may  con- 
tinually ofier  unto  thee  our  sacrifice 
of  praise  and  thanksgiving,  for  these 
thy  mercies  towards  us,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  1 76.  II  For  deliverance  from  the 
Plague,  or  other  common  sickness. 

O  Lord  God,  who  hast  wounded, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1604.] 

§  177.  1  Or  Mat. 
We  humbly  acknowledge  before, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

[Here  follow 

The  Collects,  Epistles,  and  Gospels, 

&c.    See  p.  98.] 


'  Jn  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  in  ed.  1662,  "of  thy  church."  J  In  ed.  1662,  "all  the 

unishments."  ^  Jn  ed.  1662,  "the  contagious  sickness." 


Public  Baptism. 


285 


OF  THE 


ADMINISTRATION    OF   PUBLIC   BAPTISM 


TO   BE   USED   IN   THE   CHURCH. 


§  1 78.  ' //  appeardh  by  ancient  'ivriters,  that  the  Sacraincnt  of  Baptism 
ill  the  old  time  ivas  not  cofitmonly  ministered  but  at  two  times  in  the 
year,  at  Easter  and  Whitsuntide,  at  which  times  ™  it  was  openly  minis- 
tered in  the  presence  of  all  the  congregation  :  Which  custom  [noiu  being 
grown  out  of  tise)  although  it  cannot  for  inany  considerations  be  well 
restored  again,  yet "  it  is  thought  good  to  follow  the  same  as  near  as  con- 
veniently may  be : 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

THE 
MINISTRATION  of  BAPTISM 

TO  BE  USED  IX  THE  CHURCH. 

§  178.    //  appearefh  by  ancient 
zoriiers,  >^c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

THE    MINISTRATION    OF   BAPTISM 
TO  BE  USED  IN  THE  CHURCH. 

§  1 78.   //  appeareth  by  ancient 
-writers,  or'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

THE    MINISTRATION   OF  BAPTISM 
TO  BE  USED  IN  THE  CHURCH. 


§  17S.   //  appeareth  by  ancient 
wntei's,  Q^c, 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,   1637. 

THE   MINISTRATION    OF  BAPTISM 
TO  BE  USED  IN  THE  CHURCH. 

§  178.   It  appeaivth  by  ancient 
writers,  &-=c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.   i652. 

THE  MINISTRATION  OF 

Public    Baptism    of   Infants, 

TO  BE  USED  IN  THE  CHURCH. 

[The  first  portion  of  the  Rubric,  §  178,  is 
entirely  omit  ted.] 


'  In  ed.  1378,  the  rubric  is  entirely  otniitfd.  ""  In  one  ed.  1559,  "  w'lich  time." 

"  In  eds.  1604  and  1637,  "yet"  omitted. 


>86 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


....    Wherefore  the  people  are  to  be 
admonished,    that  it  is   most  convenient  that  Baptism 
should  not  be  ministered"  but  upott  Sundays  and  other 
holy  days,  when  the  most  number  of  people  may^ 
come  together.  As  well  for  that  the  congregation 
there  present  may  testify  the  receiving  of 
them,  that  be  newly  baptized,  into  tlie 
number  of  Christ's  Church,  as  also 
because  in  the  Baptism  of  In- 
fants, every  tnan  present  may 
be pmt  in  remembrance  of 
his  own  profession  made 
to    God  in   his 
Baptism.  For 
which 
cause  also,  it  is  expedieftt  that  Baptism  be  minis- 
tered in  the  English  tongice.     Neverthe- 
less {if  necessity  so  require)  children 
ought  at  all  times  to  be  bap- 
tized,   either  at  the 
chtirch  or  else  at 
hotne. 


Second  Edw,  VI.  1552. 
....    Wherefore  the  people,  &"€. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Nevertheless  {if  necessity  so  re- 
quire) children  may  at 
all  times  be  bap- 
tized at  home. 


180.  T  When  there  are  children  to 
be  baptized  upon  the  Sunday  or 
holy  day,  the  parents  shall  give 
knowledge  overnight,  Qs^c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

must  be  ready  at  the  Font,  either 
immediately  after  the  last  lesson 
at  Morning  prayer,  or  else  imme- 
diately after  the  last  lesson  at  Even- 
ing prayer,  as  the  Curate  by  his 
discretion  shall  appoint. 

181.    Attd  then,   standing  there, 

CJ^C. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
....   Wherefore  the  people,  ^c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1552.] 

§  180.    When   there  are  children  to 
be  baptized,  &^c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  l8i.  And  then,  standing  there,  dfc. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

James  I.  1604. 

....    Wherefore  the  people,  &'c. 

§  180.    When  there  are  children  to 
be  baptized,  ^t^c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1352.] 

§  181.  And  then,  standing  there,  dr'f. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

.  .  .    Wherefore  the  people,  ^'c. 

§  180.    When  there  are  children  to 
be  baptized,  (s'c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1552.] 

§  181.  And  then,  standing  there,  ^c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


o  In  ed.  i66i,  "administered." 


I"  In  ed.  1662,  "  may  "  omitted. 


Public  Baptism. 


287 


q  PUBLIC  BAPTISM. 


180.  When  there  are  children  to  be  baptized  upoft  the  Sunday  or  holy  day, 
the  parents  shall  give  knowledge  over  night  or  in  the  morninq,  afore '  the 
beginning  of  Matins  ',  to  the  curate '.  And  then  the  Godfathers,  God- 
mothers, and  people"^,  with  the  children,  must  be  ready  at  the  church  door^, 
either  immediately  afore  the  last  Canticle  at  Matins,  or  else  immediately 
afore  the  last  Canticle  at  Evensong,  as  the  Curate '  by  his  discretion  shall 
appoint. 

§  181.  And  then,  standing  there,  the  Priest '^  shall  ask  whether 
the  children  be  baptized  or  no.  If  they  answer.  No,  then  shall  the  Priest  ^ 
say  thits. 


Charles  II.   1662. 

§  178.  H  The  people  are  to  be  ad- 
monished, that  it  is  7?iost  conve- 
nient that  Baptism  shotdd  ttot  be 
administered  but  upon  Sundays 
and  other  holy-days,  when  the 
most  number  of  people  come  to- 
gether.    As  well,  ^'c. 

[Same  as  1549^  to] 

expedient  that  Baptism  be  minis- 
tered in  the  vulgar  tongue. 
Nevertheless    {if  necessity   so    re- 
quire)   Children  may  be  baptized 
upon  any  other  day. 

§  179.  H  A7td  note,  that  there  shall 
be  for  every  Male  Child  to  be  bap- 


tized two  Godfathei-s  and  one  God- 
mother :  and  for  every  Female,  one 
Godfather  and  two  Godmothers. 


180.  ^  When  there  are  children 
to  be  baptized,  the  Pa}-ents  shall 
give  kjiowledge  thereof  overnight, 

i&^C. 


[Same  as  1552.] 


§  181.  And  the  Priest  coming  to  the 
Font,  (which  is  then  to  be  filled 
with  pure  Water,)  and  standing 
there  shall  say, 

Hath   this   child  been  already 
baptized,  or  no  ? 


1  The  title  "  Public  Baptism,"  is  retained 
in  1552  and  in  one  ed.  only  of  1559,  but 
omitted  in  all  editions  afterwards.  In 
these  latter  the  rubric,  \  i8o,  follows  on 
immediately  after  §  178  (and  in  1662,  after 
}  179). 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "before." 

"  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  J\Iom- 
ing  Prayer." 


'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "•  Presbyter  or 
Curate." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "and  godmothers, and  the 
people." 

»  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "at  the 
font." 

y  Ined.  1578,  "the  Minister;"  ia  Scotch 
ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter." 


288  First»Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

Dear^  beloved,  forasmuch  as  all  men  be  conceived  and 
bom  in  sin,  and  that  no  man  born  in  sin  ■  can  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  God  (except  he  be  regenerate  and  born  anew  of 
water  and*"  the  Holy  Ghost;)  I  beseech  you  to  call  upon 
God  the  Father  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  of  his 
bounteous  mercy  he  will  grant  to  these  children  that  thing 
which  by  nature  they  cannot  have,  that  is  to  say  '^,  they  may 
be  baptized  with  ^  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  received  into  Christ's 
holy  church,  and  be  made  lively  members  of  the  same. 

§  182.  Then  the  Priest «  shall  say. 
Let  us  pray. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  which  of  thy  justice  didst 
destroy  by  floods  of  water  the  whole  world  for  sin,  except 
eight  persons,  whom  of  thy  mercy  (the  same  time)  thou  didst 
save  in  the  Ark :  And  when  thou  didst  drown  in  the  Red  Sea 
wicked  King  Pharao,  with  all  his  army,  yet  (at  the  same  time) 
thou  didst  lead  thy  people  the  children  of  Israel  safely  through 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Dearly  beloved,  forasmuch  as 
all  men  be  conceived  and  born  in 
sin,  and  that  our  Saviour  Christ 
saith,  none  can  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  God,  except,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  182.    Then  the  Priest  shall  say. 

Tf  Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
which  of  thy  great  mercy  didst  save 
Noe '  and  his  family  in  the  Ark, 
from  perishing  by  water  :  and  also 
didst  safely  lead  the  children  of 
Israel,  thy  people,  through  the  Red 
Sea,  figuring  thereby  thy  holy  Bap- 
tism; 

and  by  the  Baptism  of  thy 
wellbeloved  Son  Jesus  Christ,  didst 
sanctify  the  flood  Jordan,  and  all 
other  waters,  to  the  mystical  wash- 


•  In  one  ed.,  1540,  and  in  eds.  1552,  and 
afterwards,  "  Dearly." 

•  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "and 
that  our  Saviour  Christ  saith  none  can 
enter." 

I"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  ed.  1662, 
"of  the." 

•=  In  eds.  1532,  and  afterwards,  "can- 
not have,  that  Uiey  may  be." 


ing  away  of  sin  : 

We  beseech  thee 
for  thyK  infinite  mercies,  that  thou 
wilt  mercifully  look  upon  these 
children,  sanctify  them  and  wash 
them  with  thy  Holy  Ghost,  that 
they  being  delivered  from  thy 
wrath,  may  be  received  into  the 
Ark  of  Christ's  Church,  and  being 
stedfast  in  faith,  joyful  through 
hope,  and  rooted  in  charity,  may 
so  pass  the  waves  of  this  trouble- 
some world,  that  finally  they  "^  may 
come  to  the  land  of  everlasting  life, 
there  to  reign  with  thee,  world 
without  end  :  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord-     Amen. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Dearly  beloved,  forasmuch,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 


^  In  eds.  1352,  and  afterwards,  "with 
water  and  the. " 

•  In  ed.  1578,  "the  Minister  ;"  in  Scotch 
ed.,  1637,  "  the  Presbyter." 

f  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  ed.  1662, 
"Noah." 

«  In  one  ed.,  1559,  and  afterwards, 
"thine," 

•>  In  ed.  1662,  " he" 


Public  Baptism. 


289 


the  midst  thereof:  whereby  thou  didst  figure  the  washing  of 
thy  holy  baptism  :  and  by  the  baptism  of  thy  wellbeloved  Son 
Jesus  Christ,  thou  didst  sanctify  the  flood  Jordan,  and  all 
other  waters  to  this  mystical  washing  away  of  sin  : 

we  beseech 
thee  (for  thy  infinite  mercies)  that  thou  wilt  mercifully  look 
upon  these  children,  and  sanctify  them  with  thy  Holy  Ghost, 
that  by  this  wholesome  laver  of  regeneration,  whatsoever  sin 
is  in  them,  may  be  washed  clean  away ;  that  they,  being  de- 
livered from  thy  wrath,  maybe  received  into  the  ark  of  Christ's 
Church,  and  so  saved  from  perishing :  and  being  fervent  in 
spirit,  steadfast  in  faith,  joyful  through  hope,  rooted  in  cha- 
rity, may  ever  serve  thee :  And  finally  attain  to  everlasting 
life,  with  all  thy  holy  and  chosen  people.  This  grant  us,  we 
beseech  thee,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake  our  Lord.     Amen. 


§  182.   Then  the  Priest  shall  say. 

Let  us  pray,  &c. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
Dearly  beloved,  forasmuch,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
§  182.    Then  the  Priest  shall  say. 
Let  us  pray,  &c. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
Dearly  beloved,  forasmuch,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
§  1 82.    Then  shall  the  Presbyter  say, 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1552,  to! 
washing     away     of       *  The  water  in 

sin.    [Sanctify  this    '^^  ^°'''  ^^?"  ^« 
r        .'-.       ri        ■•  changed  twice  in 

fountain  of  baptism,  the  month  at 
thou  which  art  the  least  :  and  be- 
sanctifier  of  all 
things*  ]  And  fur- 
ther, we  beseech 
thee  for  thine  in- 
finite mercies,  that 
thou,  &c. 


fore  any  child  be 
baptized  in  the 
waterso  changed, 
the  presbyter  or 
minister  shall  say 
at  the  font  the 
words  thus  in- 
closed, [  ]  •■ 


[Continued  the  same  as  1552] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

H  If  they  answer, "^o:  then  shall  the 
Priest  proceed  as  followeth. 
Dearly  beloved,  forasmuch  as 
all  men  are  conceived  and,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 
will  grant  to  this  child  that  thing 
which  by  nature  he  cannot  have, 
that  he  may  be  baptized  with  Water 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  received 
into  Christ's  holy  Church,  and  be 
made  a  lively  member  of  the  same. 

§  182.  IF  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 
Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who  of  thy,  &c. 

[Same  as  issz,  to] 
and  by  the  baptism  of  thy  well- 
beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ  in  the 
river  Jordan,  didst  sanctify  water 
to  the  mystical  washing  away  of 
sin ; 

We  beseech  thee,  for  thine 
infinite  mercies,  that  thou  wilt  mer- 
cifully look  upon  this  child,  wash 
him  and  sanctify  him  with  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  that  he,  being  delivered 
from  thy  wrath,  may  be  received 
into  the  ark  of  Christ's  Church, 
and  being,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


'  To  be  compared  with  ed.  1549,  {  230. 
U 


290 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  183.  *ll  Here  shall  the  Priest  ask  what  shall  be  the  name  of  the  child,  and 
■wlien  the  Godfathers  and  Godmothers  have  told  the  name,  then  he  shall* 
make  a  cross  upon  the  child's  forehead  and  breast,  saying, 

%  JV.  Receive  the  sign  of  the  holy  Cross,  both  in  thy 
forehead,  and  in  thy  breast,  in  token  that  thou  shalt  not  be 
ashamed  to  confess  thy  faith  in  Christ  crucified,  and  manfully 
to  fight  under  his  banner  against  sin,  the  world,  and  the  devil, 
and  to  continue  his  faithful  soldier  and  servant  unto  thy  life's 
end.     Amen. 

§  184.  And  this  he  shall  do  and  say  to  as  many  children  as  be  present 
to  be  baptized,  one  after  another. 

Let  US  pray. 
Almighty  and  immortal  God,  the  aid  of  all  that  need,  the 
helper  of  all  that  flee  "^  to  thee  for  succour,  the  life  of  them 
that  believe,  and  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  :  we  call  upon 
thee  for  these  infants  \  that  they  ™  coming  to  thy  holy  baptism, 
may  receive  remission  of  their  "  sins,  by  spiritual  regeneration. 
Receive  them »  (O  Lord)  as  thou  hast  promised  by  thy  well 
beloved  Son,  saying :  Ask,  and  you  p  shall  have :  seek,  and 
you  P  shall  find  :  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you. 
So  give  now  unto  us  that  ask :  let  us  that  seek  find  :  open 
thy 9  gate  unto  us  that  knock:  that  these  infants ^  may  enjoy 
the  everlasting  benediction  of  thy  heavenly  washing,  and  may 
come  to  the  eternal  kingdom  which  thou  hast  promised  by 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

[The  Rubric,  ?  183,  Here  shall  the  Priest 
ask,  &'c.,  and  what  follows,  is  otnitled  in 
this  and  subsequent  editions.  ] 

Almighty  and  immortal,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1549.] 

[Rubric,  \  185,  and  what  follows,  is 
omitted  in  this  and  subsequent  editions.] 

§  186.  H  Then  shall  the  Priest '  say : 
Hear  the  words  of  the  Gospel,  writ- 
ten by  Saint  Mark  in  tJie  tejith 
Chapter. 

At  a  certain  time  they,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


'  In  two  eds.,  1549,  "  shall  he." 
k  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  fly." 
'  In  ed.  1662,  "  this  in/nnt." 
'"  In  ed.  1662,  "lie." 
"  Ined.  1662,  "his." 
'  In  ed.  1662,  "him," 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Almighty  and  immortal,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  186.  Then  shall  the  Priest,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
At  a  certain  time  they,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

Almighty  and  immortal,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  186.    Then  shall  the  Priest,  ^'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
At  a  certain  time  they,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


P  In  ed.  1662,  "  ye. " 

1  In  three  eds.,  1552,  and  in  ed.  1596,  and 
afterwards,  "open  the  gate." 

'  In  ed.  1578,  "the  Minister;"  and  in 
Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Presbyter." 


Public  Baptism. 


291 


§  185.  Then  let  the  Priest  looking  upon  the  children,  say, 

I  COMMAND  thee,  unclean  spirit,  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  thou  come  out,  and 
depart  from  these  infants,  whom  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath 
vouchsafed  to  call  to  his  holy  Baptism,  to  be  made  members  of 
his  body,  and  of  his  holy  congregation.  Therefore,  thou  cursed 
spirit,  remember  thy  sentence,  remember  thy  judgment »,  re- 
member the  day  to  be  at  hand  wherein  thou  shalt  burn  in  fire 
everlasting,  prepared  for  thee  and  thy  Angels.  And  presume 
not  hereafter  to  exercise  any  tyranny  toward  these  infants, 
whom  Christ  hath  bought  with  his  precious  blood,  and  by  this 
his  holy  Baptism  calleth  *  to  be  of  his  flock. 
§  186.  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 

The  People.    And  with  thy  spirit. 

The  Minister.   ^  Hear  now  the  Gospel  written  by  St.  Mark. 

At  a  certain  time  they  brought  children  to  Christ  that  he 
should  touch  them,  and  his  disciples  rebuked 
those  that  brought  them.  But  when  Jesus  saw 
it,  he  was^  displeased,  and  said  unto  them:  Suffer y  httle 
children  to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not ;  (for  to  such 
belongeth  ^  the  kingdom  of  God).  Verily  I  say  unto  you  :  who- 
soever doth "  not  receive  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  a  Httle  child, 
he  shall  not  enter  therein.  And  when  he  had  taken  ^  them  up 
in  his  arms,  he  •=  put  his  hands  upon  them,  and  blessed  them. 


Mark  x. " 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Almighty  and  immortal  God, 
the  aid,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  186.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter  say, 

Hear  the  words  of  the  Gospel 
written  by  Saint  Mark  in  the  tenth 
chapter. 

At  a  certain  time  they  brought 
young  children  to  Christ,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


*  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "judgements." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "called." 

"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  in  ed.  1662, 
the  marginal  reference  is  "  Mark  x.  13." 

"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  ed.  1662, 
"was  much  displeased." 

1  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  the  little  ;"  in 
Sealed  Books,  ed.  1662,  the  word  "the" 
marked  through  with  a  pen. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Almighty  and  immortal  God, 

the  aid,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  186.  ^  Then  shall  the  people  stand 
tip,  and  the  Priest  shall  say, 

Hear  the  words  of  the  Gospel,  writ- 
ten by  Saint  Mark,  in  the  tenth 
chapter,  at  the  thirteenth  verse. 
They  brought  young  children  to 

Christ,  &c. 


[Same  as  1549.] 


1662, 
1662, 


^  In   Scotch   ed.,    1637,   and    ed. 
"  for  of  such  is  the." 

»  In   Scotch    ed.,   1637,  and  ed. 
"shall." 

^  In   Scotch   ed.,    1637,   and   ed.    1662, 
"  And  he  took  them." 

•   In   Scotch  ed.,   1637,   and  ed.   1662, 
"he"  omitted. 


292 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  187.  After  the  Gospel  is  read,  the  Minister  shall  make  this  brief  exhortation 
upon  tlie  words  of  the  Gospel. 

Friends,  you  ^  hear  in  this  Gospel  the  words  of  our  Saviour 
Christ,  that  he  commanded  the  children  to  be  brought  unto 
him :  how  he  blamed  those  that  would  have  kept  them  from 
him  :  how  he  exhorteth  ^  all  men  to  follow  their  innocency. 
Ye^  perceive  how  by  his  outward  gesture  and  deed  he  de- 
clared his  good  will  toward  them.  For  he  embraced  them  in 
his  arms,  he  laid  his  hands  upon  them,  and  blessed  them. 
Doubt  ye  not s  therefore,  but  earnestly'*  believe,  that  he  will 
likewise  favourably  receive  these  present  infants',  that  he 
will  embrace  them  ^  with  the  arms  of  his  mercy,  that  he  will 
give  unto  them  ^  the  blessing  of  eternal  life,  and  make  them 
partakers'  of  his  everlasting  kingdom.  Wherefore  we  being 
thus  persuaded  of  the  good  will  of  our  heavenly  Father  to- 
ward™ these  infants",  declared  by  his  Son  Jesus  Christ;  and 
nothing  doubting  but  that  he  favourably  alloweth  this  charit- 
able work  of  ours,  in  bringing  these  children  "^  to  his  holy 
baptism  :  let  us  faithfully  and  devoutly  give  thanks  unto  him ; 
and  say 

the  prayer  which  the  Lord  himself  taught  And  in 
declaration  of  our  faith,  let  us  also  recite  the  articles  con- 
tained in  our  Creed. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  187.  IT  After  the  Gospel  is  read,  &>€. 
Friends,  you  hear,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
give  thanks  unto  him  and  say. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 


&c 


[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  187.  After  the  Gospel,  i^c. 
Friends,  you  hear,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  toj 
unto  him  and  say, 


"•  In  one  eA,  1549,  and  1532,  and  some 
eds.  afterwards,  ' '  ye. " 

*  In  one  ed.,  1549,  and  1552,  and  in 
Scotch  ed.  1637,  "e.\horted  ;"  but  in  most 
others,  "exhorteth." 

'In  some  eds.,  1552,  "you." 

*  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1559,  "doubt 
not  you;"  in  eds.  1559,  "doubt  i^t  ye;" 
in  most  afterwards,  "  Doubt  ye  not." 


Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
[Same  as  1549-] 


James  I.  1604. 

§  187.  After  the  Gospel,  &'e. 
Friends,  you  hear,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
unto  him  and  say. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 

&C. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


^  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "stedfastly." 
'  In  ed.  1662,  "M«  present /■«/&«»/." 
^  In  ed.  1662,  "him." 
'  In  ed.  1663,  "  him  partaker." 
■»  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  most  after,  "to- 
wards. " 

■  In  ed.  1604,  "the  children  ;"  in  ed. 
X662,  "  this  infant." 


Public  Baptis^l 


293 


§  1S8.   Here  the  Minister,   tvilh  the  Godfathers",    CoJinothcrs,   and  feople 
present,  shall  say, 

^  Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy 
name,  &c. 

§  189.  And  then  shall'P  say  openly. 

I  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty,  &c. 

§  190.   The  Priest  shall  add  also  this  prayer. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  heavenly  Father,  we  give 
thee  humble  thanks,  that  thou  hast  vouchsafed^'  to  call  us  to 
knowledge  ^  of  thy  grace,  and  faith  in  thee  :  increase  ^  and 
confirm  this  faith  in  us  evermore  :  Give  thy  Holy  Spirit  to 
these  infants*,  that  they"  maybe  born  again,  and  be  made 
heirs  ^  of  everlasting  salvation,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : 
who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  now 
and  for  ever.     Amen. 

§  191.  Then  let  the  Priest  take  one  of  the  children  by  the  ri<^ht  hand,  the 
other  being  brought  after  him.  And  corning  i)iio  the  chii.7xh  toward 
the  font,  say, 

The  Lord  vouchsafe  to  receive  you  into  his  holy  house- 
hold, and  to  keep  and  govern  you  ahvay  in  the  same,  that 
you  may  have  everlasting  life.     Amen. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  187.   After  the  Gospel  is  read,  tJie 
Presbyter  or  Rlinister,  &'c. 

Friends,  your  hear,  &:c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
unto  him  and  say. 

.A.LMIGHTY  and  everlasting  God, 
&:c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


I  Charles  II.   i652. 

§  187.  After  the  Gospel  is  read,  zs^c. 

Beloved,  ye  hear  in  this  Gospel, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

unto  him,  and  say, 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


•>  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "Godfathers  and." 

V  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "shall  he  say." 

1  In  one  ed.,  1552,   "vouchsafe;"  and 

one  ed.,  1559,  "  vouchedsafe. " 

'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "to  the 

knowledge." 


=  In    eds.   1552,   and    afterwards,    "in- 
crease this  knowledge  and." 
'   In  ed.  1662,  "this  infant." 
"   In  ed.  1662,  "lie." 
'  In  ed.  1662,  "a«  heir." 


294 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  192.  Then  standing  at  the  font  the  Priest  shall  speak  tof  the  Godfathers 
and  Godmothers  on  this  wise. 

Wellbeloved  friends,  ye  have  brought  these  children  here 
to  be  baptized ;  ye  have  prayed  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
would  vouchsafe  to  receive  them,  to  lay  his  hands  upon 
them,  to  bless  them%  to  release  them  of  their"  sins'",  to  give 
them  •=  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  everlasting  life.  Ye  have 
heard  also  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  promised  in  his 
gospel,  to  grant  all  these  things  that  ye  have  prayed  for : 
which  promise  he  for  his  part  will  most  surely  keep  and 
perform.  Wherefore,  after  this  promise  made  by  Christ,  these 
infants^  must  also  faithfully  for  their'  part  promise  by  you 
that  be^  their*  sureties,  that  they'  will  forsake s  the  devil  and 
all  his  works,  and  constantly  believe  God's  holy  word,  and 
obediently  keep  his  commandments. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  192.  IT    Then    the   Priest^  shall 
speak  unto   the    Godfathers    and 
Godmothers,  on  this  wise. 
Wellbeloved  friends,  ye  have,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  193.  1"  Then  shall  the  Priest^  de- 
mand of  the  Godfathers  and  God' 
mothers  these  questions  following^. 
Dost  thou  forsake  the  de^^l  and 
all  his  works,  the  vain  pomp  and 
glory  of  the  world,  with  all  ^  covet- 
ous desires  of  the  same,  the '  carnal 
desires  of  the  flesh,  so  that  thou  wilt 
not  follow,  nor  be  led  by  them  ? 
Answer.  I  forsake  ""  them  all. 
Minister^.    Dost  thou  believe  in 
God  the  Father  almighty,  maker 
of  heaven  and  earth  ?  and  in  Jesus 
Christ,  &C. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
the  quick  and  the  dead  ? 


y  In  ed.  iss*!  "  unto." 

•  In  cd.  1662,  the  words,  "to  lay  his 
hands  upon  them,  to  bless  them,"  are 
omitted. 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "his." 

^  In  ed.  1662,  the  words,  "to  sanctify 
kim  with  the  Holy  Ghost,"  arc  here  in- 
serted. 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "him." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "  this  infant." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  sureties,  (untO  ht  come 


And  dost  thou  believe  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  holy  Catholic  Church, 
the  Communion  of  Saints,  the  re- 
mission of  sins,  the  resurrection  of 
the  flesh,  and  everlasting  life  after 
death? 

Answer.  All  this  I  steadfastly 
believe. 

Minister.  Wilt  thou  be  baptized 
in  this  faith  ? 

Answer.  That  is  my  desire. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  192.  Then  the  Priest  shall,  &'c. 
Wellbeloved  friends,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.I 
§  193.  Then  shall  the  Priest^,  &'c. 
Dost  thou  forsake,  &c. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


of   age  to  take  it   upon  himself)  that 

he." 

S  In  ed.  1662,  "renounce." 

^  In  ed.  1578,  "Minister." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  one  ed.,  1559,  the 
word  "  following  "  omitted. 

*  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  one  ed.,  1559, 
"all  the." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  one  ed.,  1559, 
and  1662,  "and  the  carnal." 

■"  In  ed.  1662,  "renounce." 

■  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "The  minister.* 


Public  Baptism. 


295 


§  193,    Then  shall  the  Priest  demand  of  the  child  (which  shall  be  first  bap- 
tized) these  questions  following :  first  naming  the  child,  and  saying, 

N.  Dost  thou  forsake  the  devil  and  all  his  works  ? 

Answer.  I  forsake  them. 

Minister.  Dost  thou  forsake  the  vain  pomp  and  glory  of 
the  world,  with  all  the  covetous  desires  of  the  same  ? 

Ansiver.  I  forsake  them. 

Minister.  Dost  thou  forsake  the  carnal  desires  of  the  flesh, 
so  that  thou  wilt  not  follow  nor  be  led  by  them? 

Answer.  I  forsake  them. 

Minister.  Dost  thou  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty, 
Maker  of  heaven  and  earth  ? 

Answer.  I  believe. 

Minister.  Dost  thou  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  his  only  begotten 
Son  our  Lord,  and  that  he  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
born  of  the  virgin  Mary,  that  he  suffered  under  Poncius  Pilate, 
was  crucified,  dead,  and  buried;  that  he  went  down  into  hell, 
and  also  did  rise  again  the  third  day ;  that  he  ascended  into 
heaven,  and  sitteth  on^  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father  Al- 
mighty :  And  from  thence  shall  p  come  again  at  the  end  of  the 
world,  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  :  Dost  thou  believe  this  ? 

Answer.  I  believe. 

Minister.  Dost  thou  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  holy 
Catholic  Church,  the  Communion  of  Saints,  Remission  of  Sins, 
Resurrection  of  the  flesh  and  everlasting  life  after  death  ? 

Answer.  I  believe. 

Minister.  What  dost  thou  desire  ? — Answer.  Baptism. 

Minister.  Wilt  thou  be  baptized  ? — Answer.  I  will. 


James  I.  1604. 

192.  Then  the  Priest  shall,  &'c. 

Wellbeloved  friends,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

193.  Then  shall  the  Priest,  &=€. 
Dost  thou  forsake,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637, 
}  192.  Then  the  Presbyter  shall,  &=€. 
Wellbeloved  friends,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 
}  193.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter,  ^'c. 
Dost  thou  forsake,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,  except  "Presbyter"  for 
"Minister"  throughout.] 


Charles  II.   1662, 

§  192.  IT  Then  shall  the  Priest  speak 
unto    the    Godfathers    and   God- 
mothers on  this  wise. 
Dearly  beloved,  ye  have  brought 
this  child  here,  &c. 

[Same  as  1349- 1 
(§  193. )  I  demand  therefore, 
Dost  thou  in  the  name  of  this 
child  renounce  the  devil,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552,  to] 
That  is  my  desire. 
Minister.    Wilt   thou    then   obe- 
diently  keep  God's   holy  will  and 
commandments,    and   walk   in  the 
same  all  the  days  of  thy  life  ? 
Answer.  I  will. 


°  In  ed.  1559,  "at." 


p  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  he  shall." 


296 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  ^95-  IT  Then  the  Priest  shall  take  the  child  in  his  hands,  and  ask  the 
name.  And  naming  the  child,  shall  dip  it  in  the  water  thrice.  First 
dipping  the  right  side:  Second,  the  left  side:  The  third  time^dipping  the 
face  toivard  the  font :  so  it  be  discreetly  and  warily  done,  saying, 

^  N.  1  baptize  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Amen. 

§  I97'  IT  ^«<^  if  the  child  be  weak,  it  shall  suffice  to  pour  water  upon  it, 
saying  the  foresaid  words.     N.   I  baptize  thee,  &'c. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  194'.  Then  shall  the  Priest "  say. 

O  MERCIFUL  God,  grant  that  the 
old  Adam  in  these  children'  may 
be  so  buried,  that  the  new  man 
may  be  raised  up  in  them  ".    Amen. 

Grant  that  all  carnal  affections 
may  die  in  them ",  and  that  all 
things  belonging  to  the  Spirit  may 
live  and  grow  in  them  ".     Amen. 

Grant  that  they  *  may  have  power 
and  strength  to  have  victory  and  to 
triumph  against  the  devil,  the  world 
and  the  flesh.     Amen. 

Grant  that  whosoever  is  here  dedi- 
cated to  thee  by  our  office  and  min- 
istry, may  also  be  endued  with  hea- 
venly virtues,  and  everlastingly  re- 
warded through  thy  mercy,  O  blessed 
Lord  God,  who  dost  live  and  govern 
all  things  world  without  end.  Amen. 

Almighty  everliving  God,  whose 
most  dearly  beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ, 
for  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins,  did 
shed  out  of  y  his  most  precious  side 
both  water  and  blood,  and  gave 
commandment  to  his  disciples  that 
they  should  go  teach  all  nations,  and 
baptize  them  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  » the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost : 

Regard,  we  beseech  thee, 
the  supplications  of  thy  congrega- 
tion, and  grant  that  all  thy  ser- 
vants which  shall  be  baptized  in 


">  Inoneed.,i54g,andis59,"Thirdtime." 

'  These  prayers  in  substance  appear  in 
ed.  1549,  as  \  230,  at  the  end  of  "  Private 
Baptism."    (See  p.  312.) 

•  In  ed.  1578,  "  the  Minister." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  this  child." 


this  water,  may  receive  the  fiilness 
of  thy  grace,  and  ever  remain  in 
the  number  of  thy  faithful  and  elect 
children,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen ». 

§  195-1  TJien  the  Priest*  shall  take 
the  child  in  his  hands,  and  ask 
the  natne ;  and  naming  the  child, 
shall  dip  it  in  the  water,  so  it  be 
discreetly  and  warily  done,  saying. 
•|f  A''.  I  baptize  thee  in,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  197.  And  if  the  child  be  weak,  it 
shall  suffice  to  pour  water  upon  it, 
saying  the  foresaid  words. 

N.  I  baptize  thee  in  the  name  of 
the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Amen. 

[Rubric,  \  198,  and  what  follows,  is 
omitted  in  this  and  subsequent  editions.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  194.  Then  shall  the  Priest  say,  ^c. 
O  MERCIFUL  God,  grant,  &c. 
Almighty  everliving  God,  &c 

[Same  as  1552.] 
§195.  Thenthe Priest* shall take,&'c. 
N.  I  baptize  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  197.  And  if  the  child  be  weak,  &'c. 
N.  I  baptize  thee,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 


"  In  ed.  1662,  "  him." 
»  In  ed.  1662,  "he." 
y  In  one  ed.  1559,  "out  his." 
»  In  one  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "of  the  ;"  in 
ed.  1662,  "and  of  the." 
•  Intwoeds.,  1559,  "  Amca"  omitted. 


Public  Baptism. 


297 


§  198.  Then  the  Godfathers  and  Godmothers  shall  take  and  lay  their  hands 
upon  the  child,  and  the  minister  shall  put  upon  him  his  white  vesture, 
commonly  called  the  Chrisom  ;  and  say. 

Take  this  white  vesture  for  a  token  of  the  innocency,  which 
by  God's  grace  in  this  holy  sacrament  of  baptism  is  given  unto 
thee ;  and  for  a  sign  whereby  thou  art  admonished,  so  long  as 
thou  livest,  to  give  thyself  to  innocency  of  living,  that,  after 
this  transitory  life,  thou  mayest  be  partaker  of  the  life  ever- 
lasting.    Amen. 


James  I.  1604. 
§  194.  Then  shall  the  Priest  say,  &'c. 

O  MERCIFUL  God,  grant,  &c. 
Almighty  everliving  God,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1552.] 

§  195.  Then  the  Priest  shall  take,  Ss^c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
N.  I  baptize  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  197.  And  if  the  child  be  weak,  &'c, 

A'.  I  baptize  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  194.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter  say. 
O  MERCIFUL  God,  &C. 

Almighty  everliving  God,  &c 

[Same  throughout  as  1S52.  to] 
.  .  .  Regard,  we  beseech  thee,  the 
suppHcations  of  thy  Church,  and 
grant  that  all  thy  servants  which 
shall  be  baptized  in  this  water  (which 
we  here  bless  and  dedicate  in  thy 
name  to  this  spiritual  washing),  may 
receive,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1552.] 

§  195.  Then  the  Presbyter  shall  take, 
&'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

N.  I  baptize  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549-] 
§  197.  And  if  the  child  be  weak,  dfc. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
§  194.  IT  Then  shall  the  Priest  sayi 

O  merciful  God,  &c. 

Almighty  everliving  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552,  to] 

.  ,  .  Regard,  we  beseech  thee,  the 
supplications  of  thy  congregation  : 
sanctify  this  Water  to  the  mys- 
tical washing  away  of  sin :  and 
grant  that  this  child  now  to  be  bap- 
tized therein,  may  receive  the  ful- 
ness of  thy  grace,  and  ever  remain 
in  the  number  of  thy  faithful  and 
elect  children,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Ameji. 

§  195.  1  Thejt  the  Priest  shall  take 
the  Child  into  his  hands,  and  shall 
say  to  the  Godfathers  and  God- 
mothers. 

Name  this  child. 

§  196.  And  then  navmig  it  after  them 
(if  they  shall  certify  him  that  the 
Child  may  well  endure  it)  he  shall 
dip  it  in  the  Water  discreetly  and 
warily,  saying, 

N.  I  baptize  thee  in  the  Name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Amen. 

§  197.  IF  But  if  they  certify,  that  the 
Child  is  weak,  it  shall  suffice  to 
pour  WcUer  upon  it,  saying  the 
foresaid  words, 

N.  I  baptize  thee  in  the  Name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Amen. 


298 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  199.   Then  the  Priest  shall  anoint  the  infant  upon  the  head,  saying. 

Almighty  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
hath  regenerate  thee  by  water  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  hath 
given  unto  thee  remission  of  all  thy  sins:   he  vouchsafe  to 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  200.  Then  the  Priest'*'  shall  make 
a  cross  upon  the  chUd's  forehead, 
saying. 

We  receive  this  child  into  the 
congregation  of  Christ's  flock,  and 
do  sign  him  with  the  sign  of  the 
cross,  in  token  that  hereafter  he 
shall  not  be  ashamed  to  confess  the 
faith  of  Christ  crucified,  and  man- 
fully to  fight  under  his  banner  a- 
gainst  sin,  the  world,  and  the  devil, 
and  to  continue  Christ's  faithful 
soldier  and  servant  unto  his  life's 
end.     Amen. 

§  201.  Then  shall  the  Priest^  say. 
Seeing  now,  dearly  beloved 
brethren,  that  these  children  be 
regenerate  and  grafted  ■=  into  the 
bcSy  of  Christ's  congregation  "• :  let 
us  give  thanks  unto  God  for  these 
benefits,  and  with  one  accord  make 
our  prayers  unto  almighty  God, 
that  they  may  lead  the  rest  of  their 
life  according  to  this  beginning. 

§  202.   Then  shall  be  said. 
IT  Our    Father    which    art    in 
heavea  &c. 

§  203.   Then  shall  the  Priest^  say. 

We  yield  thee  hearty  thanks, 
most  merciful  Father,  that  it  hath 
pleased  thee  to  regenerate  this  in- 
fant with  thy  Holy  Spirit,  to  re- 


ceive him  for  thy*  own  child  by 
adoption,  and  to  incorporate  him 
into  thy  holy  congregation '.  And 
humbly  we  beseech  thee  to  grant 
that  he,  being  dead  unto  sin,  and 
living  imto  righteousness,  and  being 
buried  with  Christ  in  his  death, 
may  crucify  the  old  man,  and  ut- 
terly abolish  the  whole  body  of 
sin  :  that  *  as  he  is  made  partaker 
of  the  death  of  thy  Son,  so  he  may 
be  ^  partaker  of  his  resurrection  :  so 
that  finally,  with  the  residue  of  thy 
holy  congregation ',  he  may  be ' 
inheritor  of  thine  everlasting  king- 
dom :  through  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  200.   Then  the  Priest  shall  make. 

We  receive  this  child,  &c. 
[Same  as  issa-l 

§201.    T/ien  shall  the  Priest  say. 

Seeing  now,  dearly,  &c 
[Same  as  1553.] 

§  202.   Then  shall  be  said. 
Our  Father,  which  art,  &c. 

§  203.    Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 

We  yield  thee  hearty  thanks,  &c 
[Same  as  155a.] 


^  In  ed.  1578,  "  the  Minister." 
«  In  one  ed.,  15S9.  "graffed." 
^  In  Scotched., 1637,  "Christ's Church." 
*  In    one   ed.,   155a,    and    afterwards, 
"  thine  own." 


'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  ed.  i66a, 
"  thy  holy  Church." 

»  In  ed.  1662,  "and  that." 

*>  In  ed.  1663,  "  he  may  also  be  par- 
taker." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "an  inheritor." 


Public  Baptism. 


299 


anoint  thee  with  the  unction  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  and  bring  thee 
to  the  inheritance  of  everlasting  life.     Amen. 

§  204.  When  there  are  many  to  be  baptized,  this  order  of  demanding,  bap- 
tizing,  putting  on  the  Chrisotn,  and  anointing,  shall  be  used  severally  with 
every  child:  those  that  be  first  baptized  departing  from  the  font,  and  re- 
maining in  some  convenient  place  within  the  Church  until  all  be  baptized. 


James  I.  1604. 

§  200.  Then  the  Priest  shall  make, 
d^c. 

We  receive  this  child,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  201.    Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 
Seeing  now,  dearly,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
§  202.    Thett  shall  be  said, 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, &c. 

§  203.    Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 
We  yield  thee  hearty  thanks,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  200.  Then  the  Presbyter  shall  make. 

We  receive  this  child  into  the 
Church  of  Christ,  and  do  sign  him 
with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  in  token 
that  hereafter  he  shall  not  be  ashamed 
to  confess  the  faith  of  Christ  cruci- 
fied, and  stoutly  to  resist  sin,  the 
world,  and  the  devil,  and  to  con- 
tinue Christ's  faithful  soldier  and 
servant  unto  his  life's  end.    Amen. 

§  201.    Then  shall  the  Presbyter  say. 

Seeing  now,  dearly,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552-] 

§  202.    Then  shall  be  said. 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, &c. 


§  203.   Then  shall  the  Presbyter  say. 
We  yield  thee  hearty  thanks,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 


t  Here  the  Priest 
shall    make 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  200.  IT  Then  the  Priest  shall  say. 
We  receive  this   child  into  the 
congregation    of 
Christ's  flock,  +  and 
do    sign    him    with    Cross    upon    the 
the  sign  of  the  Cross,    C'^"'^'*  forehead. 
in  token  that,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  201.  f  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 
Seeing  now,  dearly  beloved 
brethren,  that  this  child  is  regene- 
rate and  grafted  into  the  body  of 
Christ's  Church,  let  us  give  thanks 
unto  Almighty  God  for  these  bene- 
fits, and  with  one  accord  make  OMr 
prayers  unto  him,  that  this  child 
may  lead  the  rest  of  his  life  accord- 
ing to  this  beginning. 

§  202.   ^  Then  shall  be  said,  all 
kneeling. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven  ; 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy  king- 
dom come.  Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us 
this  day  our  daily  bread.  And  for- 
give us  our  trespasses.  As  we  for- 
give them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation ; 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.   Amen. 

§  203.   II  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 
We  yield  thee  hearty,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


300 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  205.  At  the  last  end,  the  Priest,  calling  the  Godfathers  and  Godmothers 
togetlier,  shall  say  this  s/iort  Exhortation  ^following: 

Forasmuch  as  these  children  have  promised  by  you  to 
forsake  the  devil  and  all  his  works,  to  believe  in  God,  and 
to  serve  him ;  you '  must  remember,  that  it  is  your  parts  and 
duty "  to  see  that  these  infants  °  be  taught,  so  soon  as  they  "^ 
shall  be  able  to  learn,  what  a  solemn  vow,  promise,  and  pro- 
fession they  have  p  made  by  you.  And  that  they  °  may  know 
these  things  the  better,  ye  shall  call  upon  them  ^  to  hear  ser- 
mons ;  and  chiefly  you  ^  shall  provide  that  they "  may  learn 
the  Creed,  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  the  Ten  Commandments, 
in  the  English'  tongue,  and  all  other  things  which  a  Christian 
man  ought  to  know  and  believe  to  his  soul's  health  :  and  that 
these  children "  may  be  virtuously  brought  up  to  lead  a  godly 
and  *  Christian  life ;  remembering  always  ^  that  baptism  doth 
represent  unto  us  our  profession,  which  is,  to  follow  the  ex- 
ample of  our  Saviour  Christ,  and  to  be  made  like  unto  him ; 


Second  Bdw.  VI.  1552. 

§  205.  IT  At  the  last  end,  the  Priest 
calling,  ^'c. 

li'ORASMUCHas  these  children,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549-] 
§207.  If  The  Minister  shall  command 
that  the  children  be  brought  to  the 
Bishop  to  be  confirmed,  S'c. 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
according  as  it  is  there  expressed. 

[Rubrics  { 206,  \  308  and  \  209  are  omitted 
in  this  and  following  editions.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  205.  At  the  last  end. 
Forasmuch  as  these  children,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


§  207.  ^  TTu  Minister  shall  command 
that  the  children  be  brought  to  the 
Bishop,  Gr'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


J^mes  I.  1604. 

§  205.  At  the  last  end. 
Forasmuch  as  these  children,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  207.  *  The  Minister  shall  command 
that  tlu  children  be  brought  to  ike 
Bishop,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


*  In  eds.  1578,  and  1596,  and  afterwards, 
"this  exhortation." 

'  In  most  eds.,  iSSa»  and  most  after- 
wards, "  ye." 

"  In  eds.  1553,  and  afterwards,  "duties." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "  t/tii  in/ant." 

°  In  ed.  1662,  "he." 

P  In  ed.  1662,  "  he  hath  here." 

«  In  cd.  1662,  "  him." 


'  In  ed.  i66a,  "vulgar  tongue." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "  this  child.  ' 

'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  in  most  eds.,  1559, 
and  afterwards,  "and  a  Christian." 

"  In  two  eds.,  1552,  and  1559,  "  alway ;" 
but  in  most  afterwards,  "always," 

»  In  ed.  1578,  this  rubric  is  wholly 
omitted. 


Public  Baptism. 


301 


that  as  he  died  and  rose  again  for  us,  so  should  we  (which  y  are 
baptized)  die  from  sin,  and  rise  again  unto  righteousness,  con- 
tinually mortifying  all  our  evil  and  corrupt  affections,  and  daily 
proceeding  in  all  virtue  and  godliness  of  living. 

§  206.  IT  TTie  Minister  shall  command  that  the  Chrisoms  be  brought  to  the 
church,  and  delivered  to  the  Priests  afcer  the  accustomed  manner,  at  the 
furijication  of  the  mother  of  every  child  ; 

§  207.  And  that  the  children 
be  brought  to  the  Bishop  to  be  confirmed  of  him,  so  soon  as  they  can  say 
in  their  vulgar  tongue  the  Articles  of  the  Faith,  the  Lord''s  Prayer,  and 
the  Ten  Commandments,  and  be  further  itutructed  in  the  Catechism,  set 
forth  '^  for  that  purpose,  accordingly  as  it  is  there  expressed. 

§  208.  And  so  let  the  congregation  depart  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

§  209.  \  Note,  that  if  the  number  of  children  to  be  baptized,  and  multitude 
of  people  present,  be  so  great  that  they  cannot  conveniently  stand  at  the 
church  door ;  then  let  thevi  stand  withiti  the  church,  in  some  convenient 
place,  nigh  unto  the  church  door ;  and  there  all  things  be  said  and  done, 
appointed  to  be  said  and  done  at  the  church  door. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  205.  At  the  last  end  the  Pres- 
byter, ^'C. 
Forasmuch  as  these  children,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

207.    The  Presbyter   or    Minister 
shall  command  that  the  children 
be  brought  to  the  Bishop,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.   1662. 

§  205.  %  Then  all  standing  up,  the 
Priest  shall  say  to  the  Godfathers 
and  Godmothers  this  Exhortation 
following. 

Forasmuch  as  this  child  hath 
promised  by  you  his  sureties  to  re- 
nounce the  devil  and  all,  &c. 
[Continued  same  as  1549.] 


§  207.   %  Then  shall  he  add  and  say. 

Ye  are  to  take  care  that  this 
child  be  brought  to  the  Bishop  to 
be  confirmed  by  him,  so  soon  as 
he  can  say  the  Creed,  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  and  the  ten  Commandments 
in  the  vulgar  tongue,  and  be  further 
instructed  in  the  Church-Catechism 
set  forth  for  that  purpose. 

§  210.  It  is  certain  by  God's  Word, 
that  Children  which  are  baptized, 
dying  before  they  commit  actual 
sin,  are  undoubtedly  saved  *. 

§211.  To  take  away  all  scruple  con- 
cerning the  use  of  the  sign  of  the 
Cross  in  Baptism ;  the  true  ex- 
plication thereof,  and  the  just  rea- 
sons for  the  retaining  of  it  may 
be  seen  in  the  xxxth  Canon,  first 
published  in  the  Year  MD  CIV. 


J  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 
'In  Scotch  ed. ,  1637,  "  which  is  set  forth 
in  this  book  for  that  purpose,  according 


as  it  is  there  expressed." 

»  This  rubric  is  to  be  compared  with 
?  253  of  ed.  1549.   (See  p.  319.) 


302 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


OF  THEM  THAT  BE 

BAPTIZED  IN  PRIVATE  HOUSES 

IN  TIME  OF  NECESSITY  »>. 

212.  H  The  Pastors  and  Curates  shall  oft"  admonish  the  people,  that  they 
defer  not  the  baptism  of  infants  any  longer  than  the  Sunday,  or  other  holy 
day  next  after  the  child  be  born,  unless  upon  a  great  and  reasonable  cause 
declared  to  the  Curate  and  by  him  approved. 

213.  And  also  they  shall  warn  them,  that  without  great  cause,  and  necessity 
they  baptize  not  children  at  home  in  their  houses.  And  when  great  need 
shall  compel  them  so  to  do,  that  then  they  minister  it^  on  this  fashion. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

OF  THEM  THAT  BE 

BAPTIZED   IN   PRIVATE 
HOUSES, 

IN  TIME  OF  NECESSITY. 

§  212. 1"  The  Pastors  and  Curates, 

§  213.  And  also  they  shall,  &^c. 
§  214.  First,  let  them  that  be,  &'c. 
^  iV.  I  baptize  thee,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

OF  THEM  THAT  BE,   &C 
[Same  as  1549-] 
§  212.  The  Pastors  and  Curates,  &'c. 
§  213.  And  also  they  shall,  &^c, 
§  214.  First  let  them  that,  S^c. 
N.  I  baptize  thee,  &c 

[Same  throughout  as  i549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

OF  THEM    THAT   ARE   TO   BE   BAP- 
TIZED   IN    PRIVATE    HOUSES    IN 


TIME  OF  NECESSITY,  BY  THE 
MINISTER  OF  THE  PARISH,  OR 
ANY  OTHER  LAWFUL  MINISTER 
THAT  CAN   BE  PROCURED. 

§212.  The  pastors  and  curates,  dfc. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  213.  And  also  they  shall  warn  them 
that,  without  great  cause  and  ne- 
cessity,  they  procure  not  their  chil- 
dren to  be  baptized  at  home  in  their 
houses.  A  nd  when  great  need  shall 
compel  them  so  to  do,  then  bap- 
tism shall  be  administered  on  this 
fashion. 

§  214.  First  let  the  lawful  minister 
and  them  that  be  present  call  upon 
God  for  his  grace,  and  say  the 
Lord's  Prayer,  if  time  will  suf- 
fer. And  then  the  child  being 
named  by  some  one  that  is  present, 
the  said  lawful  minister  shall  dip 
it  in  water,  or  pour  water  upon  it, 
saying  these  words : 

N.  I  baptize  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


i>  In  ed.  1578,  the  whole  of  this  office  is 
omitted. 


°  In  eds.  1596,  and  afterwards,  "often." 
^  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "it"  omitted. 


Private  Baptism. 


303 


§  214.  IT  First  let  them  that  be  present  call  upon  God  for  his  grace,  and  say 
the  Lord's  prayer,  if  the  time  will  suffer.  And  then  one  of  them  shall 
name  the  child,  and  dip  him  in  the  water,  or  pour  water  upon  him,  saying 
these  words : — 

\  N.  \  baptize  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Amen. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

OF  THEM  THAT  ARE  TO  BE  BAP- 
TIZED IN  PRIVATE  HOUSES  IN 
TIME  OF  NECESSITY,  BY  THE 
PRESBYTER  OR  MINISTER  OF 
THE  PARISH,  OR  ANY  OTHER 
LAWFUL  PRESBYTER  OR  MINIS- 
TER THAT  CAN   BE   PROCURED. 

§212.  The  Pastors  and  Curates,  S^c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  213.  And  also  they  shall  warn 
them,  ^s'c. 

[Same  as  1604.] 

§  214.  First  let  the  lawful  Presbyter 
or  Minister,  and  them  that,  &'c.  . 
....  the  said  lawful  Presbyter  or 
Minister  shall,  Qt'c. 

[Same  as  1604.] 
N.  I  baptize  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.   1662. 

THE  MINISTRATION  OF 

Private  Baptism  of  Children 

IN  HOUSES. 

§  212.  Tf  The  Curates  of  every  Parish 
shall  often  admonish  the  people, 
that  they  defer  not  the  Baptism  of 
their  Children  longer  than  the  first 
or  second  Sunday  next  after  their 
birth,  or  other  Holy-day  falling 
between,  unless  upon  a  great  and 
reasonable  cause,  to  be  approved  by 
the  Curate. 

\Z\1.^  And  also  they  shall  warn 
them,  that  without  like  great  cause 


and  necessity  they  procure  not  their 
children  to  be  baptized  at  home  in 
their  houses.  But  when  need  shall 
compel  them  so  to  do,  their  bap- 
tism shall  be  administered  on  this 
fashion. 

[Same  as  1604.] 

§  214.  ^  First  let  the  Minister  of  the 
Parish  {or  in  his  absence,  any  other 
lawful  Minister  that  can  be  pro- 
cured) with  them  that  are  present 
call  upon  God,  and  say  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  and  so  many  of  the  Col- 
lects appointed  to  be  said  before  in 
the  Form  of  Publick  Baptism,  as 
the  time  and  presettt  exigence  will 
suffer.  And  then,  the  Child  being 
named  by  some  one  that  is  present, 
the  Minister  shall  pour  Water  upon 
it,  saying  these  words  ; 

N.  I  baptize  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  215.  IT  Then  all  kneeling  down,  the 
Minister  shall  give  thanks  unto 
God,  and  say. 

We  yield  thee  hearty  thanks,  most 
merciful  Father,  that  it  hath  pleased 
thee  to  regenerate  this  infant  with 
thy  Holy  Spirit ;  to  receive  him  for 
thine  own  child  by  adoption,  and 
to  incorporate  hii7t  into  thy  holy 
Church.  And  we  humbly  beseech 
thee  to  grant,  that  as  he  is  now 
made  partaker  of  the  death  of  thy 
Son,  so  he  may  be  also  of  his  resur- 
rection :  and  that  finally  with  the 
residue  of  thy  Saints  he  may  inherit 
thine  everlasting  kingdom,  through 
the  same  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen. 


304 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549, 


§  216.  And  let  them  not  doubt,  but  that"  the  child  so  baptized  is  lawfully 
and  sufficiently  baptized,  and  might  not  to  he  baptized  again,  in  the  Church '. 
But  yd  neva-theless,  if  the  child  which  is  after  this  sort  baptized  do  after- 
ward live,  it  is  expedient  that  he  *  be  brought  into  the  Church, 

to  the  intent 
the  Priest  may  examine  and  try  whether  the  child  be  lawfully  baptized 
or  no.  And  if  those  that  bring  any  child  to  the  church  do  answer  that  he 
is  already  baptized:  Then  shall  the  Priest  examine  them  further. 

•j[  By  whom  the  child  was  baptized  ? 

Who  was  present  when  the  child  was  baptized  ? 

Whether  they  called  upon  God  for  grace  and  succour  in 
that  necessity  ? 

With  what  thing,  or  what  matter,  they  did  baptize  the  child  ? 

With  what  words  the  child  was  baptized  ? 

WTiether  they  think  the  child  to  be  lawfully  and  perfectly 
baptized  ? 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  216.  And  let  them  not  doubt,  &>c. 

%  By  whom  the  child,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

§  218.  And  if  the  Minister  shall 

prove,  (^c. 

I  CERTIFY  you,  that,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
is  now  by  the  laver  of  regeneration 
in  Baptism  received  into  the  num- 
ber of  the  children  of  God,  and 
heirs  of  everlasting  life :  for  our 
Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549O 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  216.  And  let  them  tiot,  dfc. 

By  whom  the  child,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549-] 
§  218.  And  if  the  Minister,  &=€. 

I  CERTIFY  you,  that,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
§  216.  And  let  them  f tot  doubt,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
to  the  intent,  that  if  the  priest  or 
minister  of  the  same  parish   did 
himself  baptize  that  child,  the  con- 
gregation  may  be  certified  of  the 
true  form  oj  baptism  by  him  pri- 
vately before  used.     §  217.   Or  if 


the  child  were  baptized  by  any  other 
lawful  minister,  thai  thett  the  min- 
ister of  the  parish  where  the  child 
was  bom  or  christened  shall  ex- 
amine and  try  whether  the  child  be 
lawfully  baptized  or  tw.  In  which 
case  if  those  that  bring  any  child 
to  the  church,  do  answer  that  the 
same  child  is  already  baptized,  then 
shall  the  minister  examine  them 
farther,  saying, 

By  whom  was  the  child  baptized  ? 

Who  was  present  when  the  child 
was  baptized  ? 

And  because  some  things  essen- 
tial to  this  Sacrament  may  happen 
to  be  omitted,  through  fear  or  haste, 
in  such  times  of  extremity,  therefore 
I  demand  further  of  you. 

With  what  matter  was  the  child 
baptized  ? 

With  what  words  was  the  child 
baptized  ? 

Whether  think  you  the  child  to 
be  lawfully  and  perfectly  baptized  ? 

§  218.  Atui  if  the  minister  shall  find 
by  the  answers  of  such  as  bring  the 
child,  that  all  things,  ^'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
I  CERTIFY  you,  that  in  this  case 
all  is  well  done,  and  according,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 


•  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "but  the  child." 
'  In  ed.  1604,  anci  afterwards,  the  words 
"in  the  Church "  omitted. 


e  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "they  be;"  in  ed. 
1604,  and  afterwards,  "it  be." 


Private  Baptism. 


30s 


§  218.  And  if  the  minister^  shall  prove  by  the  answers  of  such  as  brought 
the  child,  that  all  things  were  done,  as  they  ought  to  be:  Then  shall  not 
he  christen  the  child  again,  but  shall  receive  him,  as  one  of  the  flock  of 
the^  true  christian  people,  saying  thus. 

I  CERTIFY  you,  that  in  this  case  ye  have  done  well,  and 
according  unto  due  order  concerning  the  baptizing  of  this 
child,  which  ^  being  born  in  original  sin,  and  in  the  wrath  of 
God,  is  now  by  the  laver  of  regeneration  in  Baptism  made 
the  child  of  God,  and  heir  of  everlasting  life :  for  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  doth  not  deny  his  grace  and  mercy  unto  such 
infants,  but  most  lovingly  doth  call  them  unto  him  :  as  the 
holy  gospel  doth  witness  to  our  comfort  on  this  wise. 


Scotch  Liturgfy,  1637. 

§§  2 1 6,  2 1 7.  And  let  them  not  doubt, 
^c. 

[Same  as  1604,  except] 

.  ...  if  the  Presbyter  or  Minister 
.  .  .  .  lawful  Presbyter  or  Minister 
....  then  the  Presbyter  of  the  Pa- 
rish ....  then  shall  the  Presbyter 
or  Minister .... 

By  whom  was  the  child,  &c. 
[Same  as  1604  throughout] 

§  218.  And  if  the  Presbyter  or  Mi- 
nister shall,  &'c. 

I  CERTIFY  you,  that,  &c 
[Same  as  1604.I 


Charles  II.  1662. 

,  216.  %  And  let  them  not  doubt,  but 
that  the  Child  so  baptized  is  law- 
fully and  sufficiently  baptized,  and 
ought  not  to  be  baptized  again.  Yet 
nevertheless,  if  the  Child  which  is 
after  this  sort  baptized,  do  after- 
ward live,  it  is  expedient  that  it  be 
brought  into  the  Church, 

to  the  in- 
tent that  if  the  Minister  of  the  same 
Parish  did  himself  baptize  that 
Child,   the  Congregation  may  be 


certified  of  the  true  Form  of  Bap- 
tism, by  him  privately  before  used: 
in  which  case  he  shall  say  thus, 

I  CERTIFY  you,  that  according  to 
the  due  and  prescribed  Order  of  the 
Church,  at  such  a  time,  and  at  such 
a  place,  before  divers  witnesses  I 
baptized  this  child. 

§  217.  IT  B»t  if  the  Child  were  bap- 
tized by  any  other  lawful  Minister : 
then  the  Minister  of  the  Parish 
where  the  Child  was,  ^c. 
[Same  as  1604.] 

By  whom  was  this  child,  &c. 

Who  was  present  when  this  child 
was  baptized  ? 

Because  some  things  essential  to 
this  Sacrament  may  happen  to  be 
omitted  through  fear  or  haste,  in 
such  times  of  extremity ;  therefore 
I  demand  further  of  you, 

With  what  matter  was  this  child 
baptized? 

With  what  words  was  this  child 
baptized  ? 

§  218.  IT  And  if  the  Minister  shall 
find,  &'c. 

I  CERTIFY  you,  that,  &c 
[Same  as  1604.] 


la  one  ed.,  1549,  "ministers."  '  In  one  ed.,  1549,  and  1662,  "of  true  christian.' 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  who." 


3o6 


First  Prayer-book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


At'  a  certain  time  they  brought  children  unto  Christ  that 
he  should  touch  them,  and  his  disciples  rebuked  ^^j^  ^  „ 
those  that  brought  them.  But  when  Jesus  saw  it, 
he  was  displeased,  and  said  unto  them  :  Suffer  little  children 
to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not,  for  to  such  belongeth 
the  kingdom  of  God.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  whosoever  doth 
not  receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child,  he  shall  not 
enter  therein.  And  when  he  had  taken  them  up  in  his  arms, 
he  put  his  hands  upon  them  and  blessed  them. 

§  219.  After  the  Gospel  is  read:  the  minister  shall  make  this  exhortation  " 
upon  the  words  of  the  gospel. 

Friends,  ye  °  hear  in  this  gospel  the  words  of  our  Saviour 
Christ,  that  he  commanded  the  children  to  be  brought  unto 
him,  how  he  blamed  those  that  would  have  kept  them  from 
him,  how  he  exhorted  all  men  to  follow  their  innocency :  ye 
perceive  how  by  his  outward  gesture  and  p  deed  he  declared 
his  good  will  toward  them ;  for  he  embraced  them  in  his  arms, 
he  laid  his  hands  upon  them,  and  blessed  them.  Doubt  you 
not^  therefore,  but  earnestly'  believe,  that  he  hath  likewise 
favourably  received  this  present  infant,  that  he  hath  embraced 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

At  a  certain  time  they  brought 
children  unto  Christ,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  2 1 9.  %  After  the  Gospel  is  read,  &>€. 
Friends,  you  hear,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  220.  T  J7ere  the  Minister  with 
the  Godfathers  and  Godmothers 
shall  say. 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven. &C. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

At  a  certain  time  they  brought 
children  unto  Christ,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


§  219.  After  the  Gospel  is  read,  iS^c. 
Friends,  you  hear,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  220.  Ifere  the  Minister^  &*c 
[Same  as  1553.] 

Our  Father,  which,  &c. 


James  I.  1604. 
At  a  certain  time  they  brought 
children  unto  Christ,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
§  219.  After  the  Gospel  is  reaa,  &"£. 
Friends,  you  hear,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  22a  Ifere  the  Minister,  &v. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
Our  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, &c. 


'_  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  iS59i  a  heading, 
"  TAe  Gospel,"  appears  ;  in  most  editions 
the  space  is  blank.  In  Sealed  Books,  1662, 
the  words  are  struck  through  with  a  pen. 

">  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  ed.  1662, 
the  marginal  reference  is  "  Mark  x.  13." 

■  In  eds.  1559,  and  afterwards  (except 
*596).  "  tliis  bnef  exhortation. " 


"  In  most  eds.,  1552,  and  in  all  eds., 
1559,  except  one,  "you  hear." 

P  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  indeed." 

4  In  some  eds.,  1552,  and  most  after- 
wards, "doubt  ye  not;"  in  one  ed., 
155a,  "  doubt  not  you." 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "stedfastly." 


Private  Baptism. 


307 


him  with  the  arms  of  his  mercy,  that  he  hath  given  unto  him  • 
the  blessing  of  eternal  life,  and  made*  him  partaker  of  his 
everlasting  kingdom.  Wherefore  we  being  thus  persuaded 
of  the  good  will  of  our  heavenly  Father,  declared  by  his  Son 
Jesus  Christ  towards  ^  this  infant :  Let  us  faithfully  and  de- 
voutly give  thanks  unto  him,  and  say  the  prayer  which  the 
Lord  himself  taught ;  and  in  declaration  of  our  faith,  let  us 
also  ^  recite  the  articles  contained  in  our  Creed. 

§  220.  Here  the  minister  with  the  Godfathers  and  Godmothers  shall  say. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name : 
Thy  y  kingdom  come,  &c. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

At  a  certain  time,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  219.  After  the  Gospel  is  read,  the 

Presbyter  or  Minister  shall,  dr'c. 

Friends,  you  hear,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.) 
§  220.  Here  the  Presbyter  or  Minis- 
ter, with,  &=€. 

[Same  as  iss^-l 
Our  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, &c.      

Charles  II.  1662. 

They  brought  young  children  to 
Christ,  that  he  should  e  m  k 
touch  them  ;  and  his  "  ^^  ^'  '* 
disciples  rebuked  those  that  brought 
them.  But  when  Jesus  saw  it,  he 
was  much  displeased,  and  said  unto 
tliem,  Suffer  the  little  children  to 
come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not ; 
for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Verily  I  say  unto  you.  Whosoever 
shall  not  receive  the  kingdom  of 
God  as  a  little  child,  he  shall  not 
enter  therein.  And  he  took  them 
up  in  his  arms,  put  his  hands  upon 
them,  and  blessed  them. 
§219.   IT  After  the  Gospel  is  read, 

the  Mitiister  shall  make  this  brief 

Exhortation   upon    the  words  of 

the  Gospel. 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "  mercy,  and  (as  he  has 
promised  in  his  holy  word)  will  give  unto 
him." 
'  In  ed.  1662,  "make." 
"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "toward." 
'  In  eds.  1532,  and  afterwards,  "also" 
oniiiied. 


Beloved,  ye  hear  in  this  Gos- 
pel the  words,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
and  say  the  Prayer  which  the  Lord 
himself  taught  us.    §  220, 

Our  Father  which  art  in  hea- 
ven ;  Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy 
Kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done 
on^  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give 
us  this  day  our  daily  bread.  And 
forgive  us  our  trespasses.  As  we  for- 
give them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation ; 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.  Amen. 
[The  following  appears  only  in  1662.] 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
heavenly  Father,  we  give  thee  hum- 
ble thanks,  that  thou  hast  vouch- 
safed to  call  us  to  the  knowledge  of 
thy  grace  and  faith  in  thee ;  In- 
crease this  knowledge,  and  con- 
firm this  faith  in  us  evermore.  Give 
thy  Holy  Spirit  to  this  infant,  that 
he  being  bom  again,  and  being 
made  an  heir  of  everlasting  salva- 
tion, through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
may  continue  thy  servant,  and  at- 
tain thy  promise,  through  the  same 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son, 
who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee 
and  the  Holy  Spirit,  now  and  for 
ever.     Amen. 


J  In  one  ed. ,  1549,  "let  thy  kingdom  ;" 
while  in  the  other  editions,  and  all  eds. 
afterwards,  the  paragraph  ends  with 
"  name,  &c." 

'In  the  Sealed  Books  it  is  printed  "in," 
but  an  "  o''  is  written  over  the  "  i." 


3o8 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  221.   Hun  shall  thty  say  the  Creed, 

§  222.  and  then  the  Priest  shall 
demand  the  name  of  the  child,  which  being  by  the  Godfathers  and  God- 
mothers pronounced,  the  minister  shall  say, 

IF  N.  Dost  thou  forsake  the  devil  and  all  his  works  ? 

Answer.  I  forsake  them. 

Minister.  Dost  thou  forsake  the  vain  pomp  and  glory  of  the 
world,  with  all  the  covetous  desires  of  the  same  ? 

Answer.  I  forsake  them. 

Minister.  Dost  thou  forsake  the  carnal  desires  of  the  flesh, 
so  that  thou  wilt  not  follow  and '  be  led  by  them? 

Answer.  I  forsake  them. 

Minister.  Dost  thou  believe  in  God  the  Father  almight}-, 
maker  of  heaven  and  earth  ? 

Ansiver.  I  believe. 

Minister,  Dost  thou  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  his  only- 
begotten  Son  our  Lord,  and  that  he  was  conceived  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  virgin  Mary,  that  he  suffered  under 
Pontius  ^  Pilate,  was  crucified,  dead,  and  buried,  that  he  went 
down  into  hell,  and  also  did  arise  *^  again  the  third  day,  that 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§222.    t    Then   shall    the*'  Priest 

demand  the  name  of  the  child, 

which  being  by  the  Godjathers  and 

Godmothers pronounc^,  theMinis- 

ter  shall  say. 

Dost  thou  in  the  name  of  this 
diild  forsake  the  Devil  and  all  his 
works,  the  vain  pomp  and  gloiy 
of  the  world,  with  all  the  covetous 
desires  of  the  same,  the  carnal  de- 
sires of  the  flesh,  and*  not  to  fol- 
low, and  be  led  by  them  ? 

Answer.   I  forsake  them  all. 

Minister '.  Dost  thou  in  the  name 
of  this  child  profess  this  faith,  to 
believe  in  God  the  Father  almighty, 
maker  of  heaven  and  earth :  And 
in  Jesus  Christ,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
the  quick  and  the  dead  ? 

And  do  you  in  his  name  believe 
in  the  Holy  Ghost     The  holy  Ca- 


tholic Church.  The  Communion 
of  saints.  The  remission  of  sins. 
Resurrection*,  and  everlasting  life 
after  death? 

Answer.  All  this  I  stedfastly  be- 
lieve. 

Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  222.    Then  shall  the  Priest,  &'e. 
Dost  thou  in  the  name  of,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
§  222.    Then  shall  the  Priest,  dfc. 
Dost  thou  in  the  name  of,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  222.    Then  shall  the  Presbyter  de- 
mand, Qfc. 

Dost  thou  in  the  name,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


»  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "nor  be  led." 
I"  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  Ponce." 
'  In  one  ed.,  1^49,  and  in  most  eds. 
afterwards,  "  did  nse." 
^  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "the  Priest  .shall." 
•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "so  that  thou 


wilt  not  follow  nor  be  led  by  them." 

f  In  one  ed.,  1559.  "the  Minister;"  in 
Scotched.,  1637,  "Presbyter." 

s  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "resurrection  of  the 
flesh  ;"  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  the  Resur- 
rection of  the  body." 


Private  Baptism. 


309 


he  ascended  into  heaven,  and  sitteth  on''  the  right  hand  of 
God  the  Father  almighty,  and  from  thence  shall  come  again 
at  the  end  of  the  world  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  : 
dost  thou  beheve  thus  ? 

Ansii'cr.  I  believe. 

Minister.  Dost  thou  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  holy 
catholic  Church,  the  Communion  of  Saints,  Remission  of  sins, 
Resurrection  of  the  flesh,  and  everlasting  life  after  death  ? 

Afiswer.  I  believe. 

§  223.    Then  the  minister  shall  put  the  white  vesttn-e,  commotily  called  the 
Chrisom,  upon  the  child,  saying, 

Take  this  white  vesture  for  a  token  of  the  innocency, 
which  by  God's  grace  in  the '  holy  sacrament  of  Baptism  is 
given  unto  thee,  and  for  a  sign  whereby  thou  art  admonished 
so  long  as  thou  shalt  live*"  to  give  thyself  to  innocency  of 
living,  that  after  this  transitory  Hfe  thou  mayest  be  partaker 
of  the  life  everlasting.     Amen. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  222.  II  Then  shall  the  Priest,  ^'c. 
LSame  as  1552.] 
Dost  thou  in  the  name  of  this 
child   renounce    the   devil    and    all 
his  works,  the  vain  pomp  and  glory 
of  this  world,  with  all  covetous  de- 
sires of  the  same,   and  the   carnal 
desires   of  the    flesh,   so    that   thou 
wilt  not  follow  nor  be  led  by  them  ? 
A  ns'cver. 
I  renounce  them  all. 
jMinister. 
Dost  thou   l)elieve   in  God   the 
Father   Almighty,    Maker  of  hea- 
ven and  earth  ? 
And  in  Jesus  Christ,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
the  quick  and  the  dead  ? 

And  dost  thou  believe  in  the 
Holy  Ghost ;  the  holy  Catholick 
Church,  the  Communion  of  Saints  ; 
the  Remission  of  sins  ;  the  Resur- 
rection of  the  flesh ;  and  everlasting 
life  after  death  ? 

A  nswer. 
All  this  I  stedfastly  believe. 

Minister. 
Wilt  thou  then  obediently  keep 


God's  holy  will  and  commandments, 
and  walk  in  the  same  all  the  days 
of  thy  life  ? 

Atiswer. 
I  will. 

§  224.  H  Then  the  Priest  shall  say. 
We  receive  this  child  into  the 
congregation  of  Christ's  flock,  and 
do  t  sign  hitn  with  +  The  Priest 
thesignoftheCross,  shall  make  a 
in  token  that  here-  Cross  upon  the 
after  he  shall  not  Child's  forehead, 
be  ashamed  to  confess  the  faith  of 
Christ  crucified,  and  manfully  to 
fight  under  his  banner  against  sin, 
the  world,  and  the  devil;  and  to 
continue  Christ's  faithful  soldier  and 
servant  unto  his  life's  end.     Amen. 

§225.  %  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 
Seeing  now,  dearly  beloved 
brethren,  that  this  child  is  by  Bap- 
tism regenerate  and  grafted  into  the 
body  of  Christ's  Church,  let  us  give 
thanks  unto  Almighty  God  for  these 
benefits,  and  with  one  accord  make 
our  prayers  unto  him,  that  he  may 
lead  the  rest  of  his  life  according 
to  this  beginning. 


■^  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "at." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1549, 


'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  in  this  holy." 
"  thou  livest." 


3IO 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^  Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  heavenly  Father,  we  give 
thee  humble  thanks  that  ^  thou  hast  vouchsafed  ™  to  call  us  to 
the  knowledge  of  thy  grace,  and  faith  in  thee  :  Increase "  and 
confirm  this  faith  in  us  evermore :  Give  thy  Holy  Spirit  to 
this  infant,  that  he  being  bom  again,  and  being  made  heir  of 
everlasting  salvation  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  may  con- 
tinue thy  servant,  and  attain  thy  promises  °,  through  the  same 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son :  who  liveth  and  reigneth  with 
thee  in  p  unity  of  the  same  Holy  Spirit  everlastingly  9.   Amen. 

§  227.   Then  shall  the  minister  make  this  exhortation  to  the  Godfathers  and 
Godtfwthers. 

Forasmuch  as  this  child  hath  promised  by  you  to  forsake 
the  devil  and  all  his  works,  to  believe  in  God,  and  to  serve 


Second  Edw.  VI.   1552. 

IT  Let  us  pray. 

Almighty  and  everlasting,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 

§  227.  Then  shall  the  Minister,  ^c. 

Forasmuch  as  this  child,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
godliness  of  living. 

§  228.  T  And  so  forth,  as  in  Public 

Baptism. 
§  229.  •|f  But  if  they  which  bring,  &'c. 

If  thou  be  not  baptized,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

Let  us  pray. 

Almighty  and  everlasting,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  227.  Then  shall  the  Minister,  &v. 

Forasmuch  as  this  child,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  228.  As  in  Public  Baptism. 

§  229.  But  if  they  which  bring,  &'c. 

If  thou  be  not  baptized,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

James  I.  1604. 

Let  us  pray,  &a 

Almighty  and  everlasting,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


§  227.  Then  shall  the  minister,  &'c. 
Forasmuch  as  this  child,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
godliness  of  living. 
§  228.  And  so  forth,  as  in  Public 
Baptism. 
§  229.  But  if  they  which  bring  the 
infants  •*  to  the  church,  do  make 
such    uncertain    answers    to    the 
priesfs^  questions,  as  that  it  can- 
not appear  that  the  child  was  bap- 
tized with  water,  in  the  Name  of 
the  Father,   and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  (which  are  es- 
sential parts  of  baptism,)  then  let 
the  priest^  baptise  it  inform,  jSrv. 

If  thou  be  not  already.  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Let  us  pray. 

Almighty  and  everlasting,  &a 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  227.  Then  shall  tlie  Presbyter  or 
Afinister  make,  &'c. 
Forasmuch  as  this  child,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

godliness  of  living. 

§  228.  And  so  forth,  as  in  Public 

Baptism. 

%  229.  Bui  if  they  which  bring,  drV. 

(Same  as  1604.] 

If  thou  be  not  already,  &c 

[Same  as  1549-] 


'  In  eds.  1553,  and  after,  "for  that  thou." 
■"  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "vouchsafe;"  and 
in  one  ed.,  1559,  "vouchedsafed." 

"  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,   "  in- 
crease this  knowledge  and." 


°  In  one  ed.,  1549,  and  in  ed.  1552,  and 
afterwards,  "promise." 
P  In  eds.  1552,  and  after,  "  in  the  unity." 
s  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  everl.isting." 
'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Presbyter." 


Private  Baptism. 


311 


him,  you*  must  remember  that  it  is  your  parts  and  duty'  to 
see  that  this  infant  be  taught,  so  soon  as  he  shall  be  able 
to  learn,  what  a  solemn  vow,  promise,  and  profession  he  hath 
made  by  you :  and  that  he  may  know  these  things  the  better, 
ye  shall  call  upon  him  to  hear  sermons  :  and  chiefly  ye  "  shall 
provide  that  he  may  learn  the  Creed,  the  Lord's  prayer,  and 
the  ten  commandments  in  the  English'^  tongue,  and  all  other 
things  which  a  christian  man  y  ought  to  know  and  believe  to 
his  soul's  health,  and  that  this  child  may  be  virtuously  brought 
up  to  lead  a  godly  and  a  christian  life :  remembering  alway 
that  Baptism  doth  represent  unto  us  our  profession,  which  is  to 
follow  the  example  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  and  to  be  made  like 
unto  him,  that  as  he  died  and  rose  again  for  us,  so  should  we, 
which  ^  are  baptized,  die  from  sin,  and  rise  again  unto  right- 
eousness, continually  mortifying  all  our  evil  and  corrupt  affec- 
tions, and  daily  proceeding  in  all  virtue  and  godliness  of  living  *. 
§  228,  &c.  As  in  Public  Baptism. 

§  229.  ^  But  if  they  which  bring  the  in/ants  ^  to,  the  church,  do  make  an 
uncertain  answer  to  the  priest's  questiotts,  and  say  that  they  cannot  tell 
what  they  thought,  did,  or  said,  in  that  great  fear  and  trouble  of  mind  (as 
oftentimes  it  chanceth) :  Then  let  the  priest  baptize  him  in  form  above 
written,  conce7'ning  public  Baptism  ',  saving  that  at  the  dipping  of  the 
child  in  the  font  he  shall  use  this  form  of  words. 

If  thou  be  not  baptized  already,  N.  I  baptize  thee  in  the  name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.   Amen. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
§  226.  %  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 

We  yield  thee  most  hearty  thanks, 
most  merciful  Father,  that  it  hath 
pleased  thee  to  regenerate  this  in- 
fant with  thy  Holy  Spirit,  to  re- 
ceive him  for  thine  own  child  by 
adoption,  and  to  incorporate  him 
into  thy  holy  Church.  And  humbly 
we  beseech  thee  to  gi"ant,  that  he 
being  dead  unto  sin,  and  living  unto 
righteousness,  and  being  buried  with 
Christ  in  his  death,  may  crucify  the 
old  man,  and  utterly  abolish  the 
whole  body  of  sin,  and  that  as  he  is 
made  partaker  of  the  death  of  thy 
Son,   he  may  also  be  partaker  of 


his  resurrection  ;  so  that  finally 
with  the  residue  of  thy  holy  Church, 
he  may  be  an  inheritor  of  thine 
everlasting  kingdom,  through  Jesus 

Christ  our  Lord.     Amen, 

% 

§  227.  %  Then  all  standing  up,  the 
Minister  shall  make  this,  dr'c. 

Forasmuch  as  this  child  hath 
promised  by  you  his  sureties,  to  re- 
nounce the  devil,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  229.  \  But  if  they  which  bring,  Qfc. 
[Same  as  1604.] 

If  thou  art  not  already,  &c. 
[Same  as  I549.1 


•  In  ed.  1662,  "ye." 
'  In  eds.  1552,  and   afterwards,   "part 
and  duty;"  ined.  1662,  "parts  and  duties." 
"  In  ed.  1604,  "  you." 
'  In  ed.  1662,  "  vulgar  tongue." 
>  In  ed.  1662,  "man"  omitted. 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "  who." 

•  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  &c."  is  inserted 
here,  instead  of  "  3&  in  Public  Baptism." 

''  In  ed.  1662,  "the  infant." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "in  the  form  before  ap- 
pointed for  Public  Baptism  of  Iniants." 


312  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

§  230.  *  TTie  -water  in  the  font  shall  be  changed  every  month  once  at  the  least, 
and  afore  any  child  be  baptized  in  the  water  so  changed,  the  Priest  sJiall 
say  at  the  font  these  prayers  following. 

O  MOST  merciful  God  our  Saviour  Jesu  Christ,  who  hast 
ordained  the  element  of  water  for  the  regeneration  of  thy 
faithful  people,  upon  whom,  being  baptized  in  the  river  of 
Jordan,  the  Holy  Ghost  came  down  in  ^  likeness  of  a  dove : 
Send  down,  we  beseech  thee,  the  same  thy  Holy  Spirit  to 
assist  us,  and  to  be  present  at  this  our  invocation  of  tWy  holy 
name :  Sanctify  ^  this  fountain  of  baptism,  thou  that  art  the 
sanctifier  of  all  things,  that  by  the  power  of  thy  word  all  those 
that  shall  be  baptized  therein  may  be  spiritually  regenerated, 
and  made  the  children  of  everlasting  adoption.     Amen. 

O  MERCIFUL  God,  grant  that  the  old  Adam,  in  them  that 
shall  be  baptized  in  this  fountain,  may  be  so  ^  buried,  that  the 
new  man  may  be  raised  up  again.     Amen. 

Grant  that  all  carnal  affections  may  die  in  them ;  and  that 
all  things,  belonging  to  the  Spirit,  may  live  and  grow  in  them. 
Amen. 

Grant  to  all  them  which  at  this  fountain  forsake  the  devil 
and  all  his  works :  that  they  may  have  power  and  strengtli 
to  have  victory  and  to  triumph  against  him,  the  world,  and 
the  flesh.     Amen. 

Whosoever  shall  confess  thee,  O  Lord  :  recognise  him  also 
in  thy  kingdom.     Amen. 

Grant  that  all  sin  and  vice  here  may  be  so  extinct :  that 
they  never  have  power  to  reign  in  thy  servants.     Amen. 

Grant  that  whosoever  here  shall  begin  to  be  of  thy  flock : 
may  evermore  continue  in  the  same.     Amen. 

Grant  that  all  they  which  for  thy  sake  in  this  life  do  deny 
and  forsake  themselves :  may  win  and  purchase  thee,  O  Lord, 
which  art  everlasting  treasure.     Amen. 

Grant  that  whosoever  is  here  dedicated  to  thee  by  our 
office  and  ministry  :  may  also  be  endued  with  heavenly  virtues, 
and  everlastingly  rewarded  through  thy  mercy,  O  blessed  Lord 
God,  who  dost  live  and  govern  all  things  world  without  end. 
Amen. 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 
j4ns7ver.  And  with  thy  spirit 

*  This  rubric,   with   part   of   the   first  the  Public  Baptism  of  Infants,  eds.  1552 

prayer,  is  followed  only  in  the  Scotch  ed.,  and  after,  as  §  194.    See  p.  206. 

1637,  after  §  181,  but  the  remainder  of  the  •  In  three  eds.,  iS49i  "  in  the  likeness." 

Prayers  (in  substance)  will  be  found  in  '  In  three  eds.,  1549,  "may  so  be." 


Private  Baptism. 


313 


Almighty  everliving  s  God,  whose  most  dearly  beloved  Son 
Jesus  Christ  for  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  did  shed  out  of  his 
most  precious  side  both  water  and  blood,  and  gave  command- 
ment to  his  disciples  that  they  should  go  ^  teach  all  nations, 
and  baptize  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost :  Regard,  we  beseech  thee,  the  supplications  of 
thy  congregation,  and  grant  that  all  thy  servants  which  shall 
be  baptized  in  this  water,  prepared  for  the  ministration  of  thy 
holy  sacrament,  may  receive  the  fulness  of  thy  grace,  and 
ever  remain  in  the  number  of  thy  faithful  and  elect  children, 
through  Jesus  ^  Christ  our  Lord. 


[The  following  appears  only  in  ed.  i66z.] 
Charles  II.  1662. 

THE   MINISTRATION   OF 

BAPTISM  TO  SUCH  AS  ARE  OF  RIPER  YEARS, 

AND  ABLE  TO  ANSWER  FOR  THEMSELVES. 


231.  T  When  any  such  persons  as 
are  of  riper  years  are  to  be  bap- 
tized, timely  notice  shall  be  given 
to  the  Bishop,  or  ■whom  he  shall 
appoint  for  that  purpose,  a  week 
before  at  the  least,  by  the  Parents, 
or  some  other  discreet  persons; 
that  so  due  care  may  be  taken  for 
their  Examination,  whether  they 
be  sufficiently  instructed  in  the 
Principles  of  the  Christian  Reli- 
gion ;  and  that  they  may  be  ex- 
horted to  prepare  themselves  with 
Prayers  and  Fastiiig  for  the  re- 
ceiving of  this  holy  Sacrament. 

!  232.  ^  And  if  they  shall  be  found 
fit,  then  the  Godfathers  and  God- 
mothers {the  people  being  assembled 
upon  tJie  Sunday  or  Holy-day  ap- 
pointed) shall  be  ready  to  present 
them  at  the  Font  immediately  after 
the  second  Lesson,  either  at  Morn- 
ing or  Evening  Prayer,  as  the 
Curate  in  his  discretion  shall 
think  fit. 


§  233.  IT  And  standing  there,  the 
Priest  shall  ask  whether  any  of 
the  persons  here  presented  be  bap- 
tized or  no  :  If  they  shall  answer. 
No  :  then  shall  the  Priest  say 
thus. 

Dearly  beloved  ;  Forasmuch  as 
all  men  are  conceived  and  bom  in 
sin,  (and  that  which  is  born  of  the 
flesh  is  flesh,)  and  they  that  are  in 
the  flesh  cannot  please  God,  but 
live  in  sin,  committing  many  actual 
transgressions  ;  and  that  our  Saviour 
Christ  saith.  None  can  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God,  except  he  be 
regenerate  and  bom  anew  of  Water 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  I  beseech 
you  to  call  upon  God  the  Father, 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that 
of  his  bounteous  goodness  he  will 
grant  to  these  persons  that  which  by 
nature  they  cannot  have,  that  they 
may  be  baptized  with  water  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  received  into 
Christ's  holy  Church,  and  be  made 
lively  members  of  the  same. 


t  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "everlasting."  ••  In  one  ed.,  iS49,  "go  and  teach." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  Jesu." 


314 


Prayer-book  of  Charles  II.  1662. 


§  234.  IT  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 
Let  us  pray. 

§  235.  (H  And  here  all  the  Congre- 
gation shall  kneel. ) 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who  of  thy  great  mercy  didst  save 
Noah  and  his  family  in  the  ark  from 
perishing  by  water,  and  also  didst 
safely  lead  the  children  of  Israel 
thy  people  through  the  Red  Sea, 
figuring  thereby  thy  holy  Baptism  ; 
and  by  the  Baptism  of  thy  well- 
beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ  in  the 
river  Jordan  didst  sanctify  the  ele- 
ment of  water  to  the  mystical  wash- 
ing away  of  sin  ;  We  beseech  thee 
for  thine  infinite  mercies,  that  thou 
wilt  mercifully  look  upon  these  thy 
servants ;  wash  them,  and  sanctify 
them  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  the)' 
being  delivered  from  thy  wrath  may 
be  received  into  the  ark  of  Christ's 
Church  ;  and  being  stedfast  in  faith, 
joyful  through  hope,  and  rooted  in 
charity,  may  so  pass  the  waves  of 
this  troublesome  world,  that  finally 
they  may  come  to  the  land  of  ever- 
lasting life,  there  to  reign  with  thee 
world  without  end,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

Almighty  and  immortal  God, 
the  Aid  of  all  that  need,  the  Helper 
of  all  that  flee  to  thee  for  succour, 
the  Life  of  them  that  believe,  and 
the  Resurrection  of  the  dead ;  We 
call  upon  thee  for  these  persons,  that 
they  coming  to  thy  holy  Baptism, 
may  receive  remission  of  their  sins 
by  spiritual  regeneration.  Receive 
thetn,  O  Lord,  and  as  thou  hast  pro- 
mised by  thy  well -beloved  Son, 
saying,  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive  ; 
seek,  and  ye  shall  find  ;  knock,  and 
it  shall  be  opened  unto  you  ;  So 
give  now  unto  us  that  ask  ;  let  us 
that  seek  find ;  open  the  gate  unto 
us  that  knock ;  that  these  persons 
may  enjoy  the  everlasting  benedic- 
tion of  thy  heavenly  washing,  and 
may  come  to  the  eternal  kingdom 
which  thou  hast  promised  by  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 


§  236.  IT  Then  shall  the  people  stand 
up,  and  the  Pnest  shall  say. 

Hear  the  words  of  the  Gospel  writ- 
ten by  Saint  yohn,  in  the  third 
chapter  beginning  at  the  first 
verse. 

There  was  a  man  of  the  Pha- 
risees, named  Nicodemus,  a  ruler 
of  the  Jews.  The  same  came  to 
Jesus  by  night,  and  said  unto  him, 
Rabbi,  we  know  that  thou  art  a 
teacher  come  from  God  ;  for  no 
man  can  do  these  miracles  that  thou 
doest,  except  God  be  with  him. 
Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him. 
Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee.  Ex- 
cept a  man  be  born  again,  he  can- 
not see  the  kingdom  of  God.  Nico- 
demus saith  unto  him.  How  can  a 
man  be  bom  when  he  is  old  ?  Can 
he  enter  the  second  time  into  his 
mother's  womb,  and  be  bom  ?  Jesus 
answered.  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto 
thee.  Except  a  man  be  bom  of 
water  and  of  the  Spirit  he  cannot 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 
That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is 
flesh  ;  and  that  which  is  born  of  the 
Spirit  is  spirit.  Marvel  not  that  I 
said  unto  thee,  Ye  must  be  bom 
again.  The  wind  bloweth  where  it 
listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound 
thereof;  but  canst  not  tell  whence 
it  Cometh,  and  whither  it  goeth  : 
so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the 
Spirit. 

§  237.  IF  After  wMeh  he  shall  say 
this  Exhortation  following. 

Beloved,  ye  hear  in  this  Gospel 
the  express  words  of  our  Saviour 
Christ,  that  except  a  man  be  bom 
of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  can- 
not enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Whereby  ye  may  perceive  the  great 
necessity  of  this  Sacrament,  where 
it  may  be  had.  Likewise  imme- 
diately before  his  ascension  into 
heaven  (as  we  read  in  the  last  chap- 
ter of  Saint  Mark's  Gospel,)  he  gave 
command  to  his  disciples,  saying, 
Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach 
the  Gospel  to  eveiy  creature.     He 


Baptism  of  such  as  are  of  Riper  Years. 


315 


that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall 
be  saved  ;  but  he  that  believeth  not 
shall  be  damned.  Which  also  shew-, 
eth  unto  us  the  great  benefit  we 
reap  thereby.  For  which  cause 
Saint  Peter  the  Apostle,  when  upon 
his  first  preaching  of  the  Gospel 
many  were  pricked  at  the  heart, 
and  said  to  him  and  the  rest  of 
the  Apostles,  Men  and  brethren, 
what  shall  we  do  ?  replied  and  said 
unto  them,  Repent  and  be  baptized 
every  one  of  you  for  the  remission 
of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  For  the  pro- 
mise is  to  you  and  your  children, 
and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as 
many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall 
call.  And  with  many  other  words 
exhorted  he  them,  saying,  Save 
your  selves  from  this  untoward  gene- 
ration. For  (as  the  same  Apostle 
testifieth  in  another  place)  even  Bap- 
tism doth  also  now  save  us,  (not  the 
putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh, 
but  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience 
towards  God)  by  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Doubt  ye  not  there- 
fore, but  earnestly  believe  that  he 
will  favourably  receive  these  present 
persons,  truly  repenting  and  coming 
unto  him  by  faith,  that  he  will  grant 
them  remission  of  their  sins,  and  be- 
stow upon  them  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
that  he  will  give  them  the  blessing 
of  eternal  life,  and  make  them  par- 
takers of  his  everlasting  kingdom. 

Wherefore  we  being  thus  per- 
suaded of  the  good  will  of  our  hea- 
venly Father  towards  these  persons, 
declared  by  his  Son  Jesus  Christ ; 
let  us  faithfully  and  devoutly  give 
thanks  to  him  and  say. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
heavenly  Father,  we  give  thee  hum- 
ble thanks,  for  that  thou  hast  vouch- 
safed to  call  us  to  the  knowledge  of 
thy  grace  and  faith  in  thee :  In- 
crease this  knowledge,  and  confirm 
this  faith  in  us  evermore  :  Give  thy 
Holy  Spirit  to  these  persons,  that 
they  may  be  bom  again  and  be 
made  heirs  of  everlasting  salvation. 


through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee  and 
the  Holy  Spirit,  now  and  for  ever. 
Amen. 

§  238.  ^  Then  the  Priest  shall  speak 
to  the  persons  to  be  baptized  on 
this  wise. 

Well-beloved,  who  are  come 
hither  desiring  to  receive  holy  Bap- 
tism, ye  have  heard  how  the  con- 
gregation hath  prayed  that  our  Lord 
Jesus  Clirist  would  vouchsafe  to  re- 
ceive you  and  bless  you,  to  release 
you  of  your  sins,  to  give  you  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  and  everlasting 
life.  Ye  have  heard  also  tliat  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  promised  in 
his  holy  Word  to  grant  all  those 
things  that  we  have  prayed  for ; 
which  promise  he  for  his  part  will 
most  surely  keep  and  perform. 

Wherefore  after  this  promise  made 
by  Christ,  ye  must  also  faithfully  for 
your  part  promise  in  the  presence  of 
these  your  witnesses,  and  this  whole 
congregation,  that  ye  will  renounce 
the  devil  and  all  his  works,  and 
constantly  believe  God's  holy  Word, 
and  obediently  keep  his  command- 
ments. 

§  239.  ^  Then  shall  the  Priest  de- 
mand of  each  of  the  persons  to  be 
baptized  severally  these  questions 
following. 

Question. 
Dost  thou  renounce  the  devil 
and  all  his  works,  the  vain  pomp 
and  glory  of  the  world,  with  all 
covetous  desires  of  the  same,  and 
the  carnal  desires  of  the  flesh,  so 
that  thou  wilt  not  follow,  nor  be 
led  by  them  ? 

Answer. 
I  renounce  them  all. 
Question. 
Dost  thou  believe  in  God  the 
Father  Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven 
and  earth? 

And  in  Jesus  Christ  his  only  be- 
gotten Son  our  Lord  ?   And  that  he 


3i6 


Prayer-Book  of  Charles  II.  1662. 


was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
bom  of  the  Virgin  Mary  ;  that  he 
suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  was 
crucified,  dead,  and  buried ;  that 
he  went  down  into  hell,  and  also 
did  rise  again  the  third  day ;  that 
he  ascended  into  heaven,  and  sitteth 
at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father 
Almighty ;  and  from  thence  shall 
come  again  at  the  end  of  the  world 
to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  ? 

And  dost  thou  believe  in  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  the  holy  Catholick  Church  ; 
the  Communion  of  Saints  ;  the  Re- 
mission of  sins;  the  Resurrection 
of  the  flesh ;  and  everlasting  life 
after  death  ? 

Answer. 

All  this  I  stedfastly  believe. 
Question. 

Wilt  thou  be  baptized  in  this 
faith? 

Answer, 

That  is  my  desire. 

Question. 
Wilt  thou  then  obediently  keep 
God's  holy  will  and  commandments, 
and  walk  in  the  same  all  the  days 
of  thy  life? 

Answer. 
I  will  endeavour  so  to  do,  God 
being  my  helper. 

§  240.  T  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 

O  MERCIFUL  God,  grant  that  the 
old  Adam  in  these  persons  may  be 
so  buried,  that  the  new  man  may 
be  raised  up  in  them.     Amen. 

Grant  that  all  carnal  affections 
may  die  in  thetn,  and  that  all  things 
belonging  to  the  Spirit,  may  live 
and  grow  in  thetn.     Amen. 

Grant  that  they  may  have  power 
and  strength  to  have  victory,  and 
to  triumph  against  the  devil,  the 
world,  and  the  flesh.     Amen. 

Grant  that  they  being  here  dedi- 
cated to  thee  by  our  office  and  min- 
istry, may  also  be  endued  with 
heavenly  virtues,  and  everlastingly 
rewarded  through  thy  mercy,  O 
blessed  Lord  God,   who  dost   live 


and  govern  all  things,  world  with- 
out end.     Amen. 

Almighty  everliving  God,  whose 
most  dearly  beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ, 
for  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  did 
shed  out  of  his  most  precious  side 
both  water  and  blood,  and  gave 
commandment  to  his  disciples,  that 
they  should  go  teach  all  nations, 
and  baptize  them  In  the  Name  of 
the  Father  1,  the  Son,  andJ  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  Regard,  we  beseech  thee, 
the  supplications  of  this  congrega- 
tion ;  sanctify  this  Water  to  the  mys- 
tical washing  away  of  sin  :  and  grant 
that  the  persons  now  to  be  baptized 
therein,  may  receive  the  fulness  of 
thy  grace,  and  ever  remain  in  the 
number  of  thy  faithful  and  elect 
children,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen. 

§  241.  1  Then  shall  the  Priest  take 
each  person  to  be  baptized  by  the 
right  hand,  and  placing  him  con- 
veniently by  the  Font,  according 
to  his  discretion,  shall  ask  the  God- 
fathers and  Godmothers  the  N'ame: 
and  then  shall  dip  him  in  the  water, 
or  pour  water  upon  him,  saying, 

N.  I  baptize  thee  In  the  Name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost     Amen. 

§  242.  IT  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 
We  receive  this  person  into  the 
tHerethe  Priest  congregation  of 
shall  make  aCross  Christ  s  flock,  and  T 
upon  the  person's  do  sign  him  with 
forehead.  ^^^  ^j^^  ^^^^it  Cross, 

in  token  that  hereafter  he  shall  not 
be  ashamed  to  confess  the  faith  of 
Christ  crucified,  and  manfully  to 
fight  under  his  banner  against  sin, 
the  world,  and  the  devil;  and  to 
continue  Christ's  faithful  soldier 
and  servant  unto  his  lives  end. 
Amen. 

§  243.   T  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 

Seeing  now,  dearly  beloved 
brethren,  that  these  persons  are  re- 


)  la  Sealed  Book,  "  of"  is  printed,  but  struck  through  with  a  pen. 


Baptism  of  such  as  are  of  Riper  Years. 


317 


generate  and  grafted  into  the  body 
of  Christ's  Church,  let  us  give 
thanks  unto  Almiglity  God  for  these 
benefits,  and  with  one  accord  malce 
our  prayers  unto  him,  that  they  may 
lead  the  rest  of  their  life  according 
to  this  beginning. 

§  244.    ^  Thejt  shall  be  said  the 
Lord''s  Prayer,  all  kneeling. 

Our  Fatlier  which  art  in  heaven  ; 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy  liing- 
dom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us 
this  day  our  daily  bread.  And  for- 
give us  our  trespasses,  As  we  for- 
give them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation  ; 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen. 

We  yield  thee  humble  thanks, 
O  heavenly  Father,  that  thou  hast 
vouchsafed  to  call  us  to  the  know- 
ledge of  thy  grace  and  faith  in 
thee  ;  Increase  this  knowledge,  and 
confirm  this  faith  in  us  evermore. 
Give  thy  Holy  Spirit  to  these  per- 
sons, that  being  now  bom  again, 
and  made  heirs  of  everlasting  salva- 
tion through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
they  may  continue  thy  servants,  and 
attain  thy  promises,  through  the 
same  Lord  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son, 
who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee 
in  the  unity  of  the  same  Holy  Spirit 
everlastingly.     Amen. 

§  245.  1[  Then  all  standing  jtp,  the 
Priest  shall  use  this  Exhortation 
following ;  speaking  to  the  God- 
fathers and  Godmothers  first. 

Forasmuch  as  these  persons  have 
promised  in  your  presence  to  re- 
nounce the  devil  and  all  his  works, 
to  believe  in  God,  and  to  serve  him ; 
ye  must  remember  that  it  is  your 
part  and  duty  to  put  thef}i  in  mind 
what  a  solemn  vow,  promise  and 
profession  they  have  now  made  be- 
fore this  congregation,    and   espe- 


cially before  you  their  chosen  wit- 
nesses. And  ye  are  also  to  call 
upon  them  to  use  all  diligence  to 
be  rightly  instructed  in  God's  holy 
Word,  that  so  they  may  grow  in 
grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  live  godly, 
righteously  and  soberly  in  this  pre- 
sent world. 

§  246.  (^  And  then,  speaking  to  the 
new  baptized  persons,  he  shall 
proceed,  and  say, ) 

And  as  for  you,  who  have  now 
by  Baptism  put  on  Christ,  it  is 
your  part  and  duty  also,  being  made 
the  children  of  God,  and  of  the 
light  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  to 
■walk  answerably  to  your  Christian 
calling,  and  as  becometh  the  chil- 
dren of  light :  remembering  always 
that  Baptism  representeth  unto  us 
our  profession  ;  which  is,  to  follow 
the  example  of  our  Saviour  Christ, 
and  to  be  made  like  unto  him  ;  that 
as  he  died,  and  rose  again  for  us  ; 
so  should  we  who  are  baptized,  die 
from  sin,  and  rise  again  unto  right- 
eousness, continually  mortifying  all 
our  evil  and  corrupt  affections,  and 
daily  proceeding  in  all  virtue  and 
godliness  of  living. 

§  247.  U  It  is  expedient  that  every 
person  thus  baptized  should  be  con- 
firmed by  the  Bishop  so  soon  after 
his  Baptism  as  conveniently  may 
be ;  that  so  he  may  be  admitted 
to  the  holy  Cofnmunion. 

§  248.  ^  If  any  persons  not  bap- 
tized in  their  i^ifancy  shall  be 
b)vtight  to  be  baptized  before  they 
come  to  years  of  discretion  to  an- 
swer for  themselves  ;  it  may  stiffice 
to  use  the  Office  for  Publick  Bap- 
tism of  Infants,  or  {in  case  of  ex- 
treme danger)  the  Office  for  Pri- 
vate Baptism,  only  changijtg  the 
word  [Infant]  for  [Child  or  Per- 
son] as  occasion  requireth. 


3i8 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


CONFIRMATION, 
WHEREIN  IS  CONTAINED  A  CATECHISM  FOR  CHILDREN. 

§  250.  To  the  end  that  confirmation  may  be  ministered  to  the  mx)re  edifying 
0/  such  as  shall  receive  it  {according  to  •'  St.  PauVs  doctrine,  who  teacheth 
that  all  things  should  be  done  in  the  church  to  the  edification  of  the  same) 
it  is  thought  good  that  none  hereafter  shall  be  confirmed,  but  such  as  can 
say  in  their  mother  tongue  the  articles  of  the  faiih,  the  Lord's  prayer,  and 
the  ten  commandments ;  and  can  also  answer  to  such  questions  of  this 
short  Catechism,  as  the  Bishop  (or  such  as  he  sliall  appoint)  shall  by  his 
discretion  appose  them '  in.  And  this  order  is  most  convenient  to  be  ob- 
served for  divers  considerations. 

§  251.  \  First,  because  that  when  children  come  to  the  years  of  discretion, 
and  have  learned  what  their  Godfathers  and  Godmothers  promised  for 
them  in  Baptism,  they  may  then  themselves  with  their  own  mouth,  and 
with  their  awn  consent,  openly  before  the  church,  ratify  and  confess  ■"  the 
same,  and  also  promise  that  by  the  grcue  of  God  they  will "  evermore  en- 
deavour themselves  faithfully  to  observe  and  keep  such  things,  as  they  by 
their  own  mouth  and  confession  have  assented  unto. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
CONFIRMATION, 

WHEREIN  IS  CONTAINED  A  CATE- 
CHISM FOR  CHILDREN. 

§  250.   To  the  end  that  Confinna- 

tion,  Sr'c. 
§  251.  First,  because  that,  &'c. 
§  252.  Secondly,  forasmuch  as,  &"€. 
§253.    Thirdly,  for  that,  df'c. 
[Same  as  1549  throughout.] 

§  254.  And  that  no  man  shall,  &'c. 

[Same  as  15491  ^°\ 
being  baptized,  have  all  things  neces- 
sary for  their  salvation,  and  be  un- 
doubtedly saved. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
CONFIRMATION, 

WHEREIN  IS  CONTAINED  A  CATE- 
CHISM FOR  CHILDREN. 
§  250.   To  the  end  that  Confirma- 
tion, &'c. 
§  251.  First,  because  that,  &'c. 
§  252.  Secondly,  forasmuch  as,  &*€. 
§253.    Thirdly,  for  that,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1549  throughout.] 
§  254.  And  that  no  man  shall,  dfc. 
[Same  as  X552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

THE  ORDER  OF  CONFIR- 
MATION, 
Or  Laying  on  of  Hands  upon  Chil- 
dren Baptized,  and  able  to  render 
an  account  oi  their  faith  cucording 
to  the  Catechism  following. 
§  250.    To  the  end  that  Confirma- 
tion, 6^c. 
§251.  First,  because  that,  &"£. 
§  252.  Secondly,  forasmuch  as,  &'c. 
§253.    Thirdly,  for  that,  Sfc. 
[Same  as  1549  throughout.] 
§  254.  And  that  no  man  shall,  iSfc. 
[Same  as  1552.I 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
THE  ORDER  OF  CONFIR- 
MATION, 
Or  Laying  on  of  Hands  upon  Chil- 
dren Baptized,  and  able  to  render 
an  account  of  their  Faith,  accord- 
ing to  the  Catechism  following. 

§  250.    To  the  end  that  Confirma- 
tion, ^c. 
§  251.  First,  because  that,  Sfc. 
§  252.  Secondly,  forasmtuh  as,  &*c. 


*  In  most  eds.,  1552,  "according  unto.' 
'  In  ed.  1604,  "hira." 


■"  In  eds.  1552,  and  all  after,  "confirm." 
■  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "shall." 


Confirmation. 


319 


§  252.  •([  Secondly,  forasmuch  as  confirmation  is  ministered  to  them  that  be 
baptized,  that  by  imposition  of  hands  and  prayer  they  may  receive  strength 
and  defence  against  all  temptations  to  sin,  and  the  assault  of  the  world, 
and  the  devil:  it  is  most  meet  to  be  ministered,  when  children  come  to  that 
age,  that  partly  by  the  frailty  of  their  own  fiesh,  partly  by  the  assaults  of 
the  world  and  the  devil,  they  begin  to  be  in  danger  to  fall  into  sin  ". 

§  253.  U  Thirdly,  for  that  it  is  agreeable  with  the  usage  of  the  church  in 
times  past,  whereby  p  it  was  ordained,  that  Confirmation  should  be  minis- 
tered to  them  that  were  of  perfect  age,  that  they  being  instructed  in  Christ'' s 
religion,  should  openly  profess  their  own  faith,  arid  promise  to  be  obedient 
unto  the  will  of  God. 

§  254.  ^  And  that  no  man  shall  think  that  any  detriment  shall  come  to 
children  by  deferring  of  their  confirmation  :  he  shall  know  for  truth,  that 
it  is  certain  by  God's  word,  that  children  being  baptized  {if  they  depart  out 
of  this  life  in  their  infancy)  are  undoubtedly  saved'^. 


§253.    Thirdly,  for  that,  ^'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  254-  And  that  no  man,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

'THE  ORDER  OF 

CONFIRMATION, 

OR  LAYING  ON  OF  HANDS  UPON 
THOSE  THAT  ARE  BAPTIZED  AND 
COME  TO  YEARS  OF  DISCRETION. 

§  249.  If  Upon  the  day  appointed 
all  that  are  to  be  then  confirmed, 
being  placed,  and  standing  in  order 
before  the  Bishop;  he  {or  some 
other  Minister  appointed  by  him) 
shall  read  this  Preface  following. 

§§  250,  25 1.  To  the  end  that  Con- 
firmation may  be  ministered  to  the 
more  edifying  of  such  as  shall  re- 


"  In  eds.  1552,  and  after,  "into  sundry- 
kinds  of  sin." 

p  In  oneed.,  1549,  "where." 

1  In  ed.  1578,  the  whole  of  these  five 
introductory  rubrics,  \\  250 — 254,  are 
omitted.  In  ed.  1662,  it  will  be  seen  that 
W  250,  251,  are  retained  in  substance  in 


ceive  it,  the  Church  hath  thought 
good  to  order,  That  none  hereafter 
shall  be  Confirmed,  but  such  as  can 
say  the  Creed,  the  Lord's  Prayer, 
and  the  ten  Commandments ;  and 
can  also  answer  to  such  other  ques- 
tions, as  in  the  short  Catechism 
are  contained  :  which  order  is  very 
convenient  to  be  observed, 

to  the 
end,  that  children  being  now  come 
to  the  years  of  discretion,  and  hav- 
ing learned  what  their  Godfathers 
and  Godmothers  promised  for  them 
in  Baptism,  they  may  themselves 
with  their  own  mouth  and  consent 
openly  before  the  Church  ratify  and 
confirm  the  same ;  and  also  pro- 
mise that  by  the  grace  of  God  they 
will  evermore  endeavour  themselves 
faithfully  to  observe  such  things  as 
they  by  their  own  confession  have 
assented  unto. 

[The  Order  of  Confirmation  is  continued 
on  p.  329.] 


the  Preface,  at  the  commencement  of  the 
Order.  Rubrics,  \\  252—254,  are  omitted, 
but  the  last  is  partly  represented  by  rubric, 
}  2IO.   (See  p.  301.) 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "The  Catechism"  pre- 
cedes these  introductory  Rubrics  to  Con- 
firmation. (See  pp.  321—327.) 


320 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


A    CATECHISM, 

THAT  IS  TO  SAY, 

AN  INSTRUCTION  TO  BE  LEARNED  OF  EVERY  CHILD, 

BEFORE  HE  BE  BROUGHT  TO  BE  CONFIRMED 

OF  THE  BISHOP'. 

Question.  What  is  your  name  ? 

Answer.  N.  or  M. 

Question.  Who  gave  you  this  name  ? 

Answer.  My  Godfathers  and  Godmothers  in  my  Baptism, 
wherein  I  was  made  a  member  of  Christ,  the  child  of  God, 
and  an  *  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

Question.  What  did  your  Godfathers  and  Godmothers  then 
for  you  ? 

Answer.  They  did  promise  and  vow  three  things  in  my 
name.  First,  that  I  should  forsake"  the  devil  and  all  his 
works  and  pomps  ^,  the  vanities  of  the  wicked  world,  and  all 
the  sinful  lusts  of  the  flesh.  Secondly,  that  I  should  believe 
all  the  articles  of  the  Christian  faith.  And  thirdly,  that  I 
should  keep  God's  holy  ^vill  and  commandments*,  and  walk 
in  the  same  all  the  days  of  my  life. 

Question.  Dost  thou  not  think  that  thou  art  bound  to  be- 
lieve, and  to  do  as  they  have  promised  for  thee  ? 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
A   CATECHISM, 

THAT  IS  TO  SAY, 

AN  INSTRUCTION  TO  BE  LEARNED 
OF  EVERY  CHILD,  BEFORE  HE 
BE  BROUGHT  TO  BE  CONFIRMED 
OF  THE  BISHOP. 


&C 


Question.  "What  is  your  name? 


[Same  throughout  as  1549. J 


•  In  ed.  1578,  "  be  confirmed,  or  ad- 
mitted to  receave  the  Holy  Communion  :" 
in  ed.  1604,  "  be  confirmed  by  the  Bishop." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  and  inheritor." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "renotince." 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
A  CATECHISM, 

that  is  to  SAY,  &C. 
[Same  as  i549'] 

Question.  What  is  your  name  ?  &c 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 
A    CATECHISM, 

THAT  IS  TO  SAY,  &C 

[Same  as  1549-] 

Question.  What  is  your  name  ?  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549-] 


»  In  Scotch  ed.,  16^7,  "all  his  works, 
the  pomps  and  vanities  of  the  wicked 
world  ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "  all  his  works,  the 
pomps  and  vanity  of  this  wicked  world." 


Confirmation. 


321 


Ayiswer.  Yes  verily.  And  by  God's  help  so  I  will.  And 
I  heartily  thank  our  heavenly  Father,  that  he  hath  called  me 
to  this  state  of  salvation,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. 
And  I  pray  y  God  to  give  me  his '  grace,  that  I  may  continue 
in  the  same  unto  my  life's  end  ». 

Question  '\  Rehearse  the  articles  of  thy  belief. 

Answer.  I  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty,  maker  of 
heaven  and  ^  earth.  And  in  Jesus  Christ  his  only  Son  our 
Lord.  Which  '^  was  conceived  by  "^  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of 
the  virgin  Mary.  Suffered  under  Ponce*  Pilate,  was  crucified, 
dead,  and  buried,  he  descended  into  hell.  The  third  day  he 
rose  again  from  the  dead.  He  ascended  into  heaven,  and 
sitteth  on  s  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father  almighty.  From 
thence  shall  he^'  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  I  be- 
lieve in  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  holy  catholic  church.  The 
communion  of  saints.  The  forgiveness  of  sins.  The  resur- 
rection of  the  body.     And  the  life  everlasting.     Amen, 

Question.  What  dost  thou  chiefly  learn  in  these  articles  of 
thy  belief? 

Answer.  First,  I  learn  to  believe  in  God  the  Father,  who 
hath  made  me  and  all  the  world. 

Secondly,  in  God  the  Son,  who  hath  redeemed  me  and  all 
mankind. 

Thirdly,  in  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  sanctifieth  me  and 
all  the  elect  people  of  God. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
A  CATECHISM, 

THAT  IS  TO  SAY, 
AN  INSTRUCTION  TO  BE  LEARNED 
OF  EVERY  CHILD,  BEFORE  HE 
BE  BROUGHT  TO  BE  CONFIRMED 
BY  THE  BISHOP  :  AND  TO  BE 
USED  THROUGHOUT  THE  WHOLE 
CHURCH   OF   SCOTLAND. 


&C. 


Question.  What  is  your  name? 


[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


y  In  ed.  1662,  "unto  God." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  the  grace." 

■  In  all  the  editions  printed  "  lives  end." 

■^  In  ed.  1662,  '   Catecliist." 

^  In  eds.  1552  and  1559,  "and  of  earth." 

^   In  ed.  1662,  "  who." 

«  In  eds.  1552  and  1559,  "of  the." 


Charles  II.  1662. 
A    CATECHISM, 

THAT    IS   TO    SAY, 

AN  INSTRUCTION  TO  BE  LEARNED 
OF  EVERY  PERSON,  BEFORE  HE 
BE  BROUGHT  TO  BE  CONFIRMED 
BY   THE    BISHOP. 

Question. 

What  is  your  name  ?  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  ed.  1662, 
"Pontius." 

8  In  eds.  1552,  and  most  afterwards, 
"at." 

''  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  he 
shall." 


322 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Question.  You  said  that  your  Godfathers  and  Godmothers 
did  promise  for  you  that  ye'  should  keep  God's  command- 
ments.    Tell  me  how  many  there  be. 

Ansxver.  Ten. 

Question.  Which  be  they  ? 

Answer.  Thou  shalt  have  none  other  Gods  but  me. 

II.  Thou  shalt  not  make  to  thyself  any  graven  image,  nor 
the  likeness  of  any  thing  that  is  in  heaven  above,  or  in  the 
earth  beneath,  nor  ^  in  the  water  under  the  earth  :  thou  shalt 
not  bow  down  to  them,  nor  worship  them. 

III.  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
in  vain. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

Question.  You  said  that  your,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Question.  Which  be  they  ? 

Ansiver.  The  same  wiiich  God 
spake  in  the  xx.  Chapter  of  Exo- 
dus, saying :  I  am  the  Lord  thy 
God  which  have '  brought  thee  out 
of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the 
house  of  bondage. 

I.  Thou  shalt  have  none  other 
gods  but  me. 

II.  Thou  shalt  not  make  to  thy- 
self any  graven  image  nor  the  like- 
ness of  any  thing  that  is  in  heaven 
above,  or  in  the  earth  beneath,  nor '' 
in  the  water  under  the  earth  ;  thou 
shalt  not  bow  down  to  them,  nor 
worship  them.  For  I  the  Lord  thy 
God  am  a  jealous  God,  and  visit 
the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the 
children,  unto  the  third  and  fourth 
generation  of  them  that  hate  me, 
and  shew  mercy  unto  thousands  in 
them  that  love  me,  and  keep  my 
commandments. 

III.  Thou  shalt  not  take  the 
name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain  : 
for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him 
guiltless  that  taketh  his  name  in 
vain. 

IV.  Remember  thou  °  keep  holy 


'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "you." 
^  In  ed.  1662,  "  or." 
'  In  ed.  i66z,  "  who  brought." 
™  In    one    ed.,  1559,   and   afterwards, 
"that  thoti." 
»  In  Scotch  ed.,  "  Sabbath  day." 


the  Sabbath  day.  Six  days  shalt 
thou  labour  and  do  all  that  thou 
hast  to  do :  but  the  seventh  day 
is  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy 
God.  In  it  thou  shalt  do  no  man- 
ner of  work,  thou,  and  thy  son  and 
thy  daughter,  thy  man  servant,  and 
thy  maid  servant,  thy  cattle,  and 
the  stranger  that  is  within  thy  gates  : 
for  in  six  days  the  Lord  made  hea- 
ven and  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that 
in  them  is,  and  rested  the  seventh 
day.  Wherefore  the  Lord  blessed 
the  seventh  °  day,  and  hallowed  it. 

V.  Honour  thy  father  and  thy 
mother,  that  thy  days  may  be  long 
in"  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy 
God  giveth  thee. 

VI.  Thou  shalt  do  no  murther  p. 

VII.  Thou  shalt  not  commit 
adultery. 

VIII.  Thou  shalt  not  steal. 

IX.  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false 
witness  against  thy  neighbour. 

X.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy 
neighbour's  house,  thou  shalt  not 
covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,  nor  his 
servant,  nor  his  maidi,  nor  his  ox, 
nor  his  ass,  nor  any  thing  that  is 
his'. 

Question.  What  dost  thou,  &c 

[Continued  same  as  1549.] 


°  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "upon." 
P  In  Scotch  ed.,  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill." 
1  In  Scotch  ed.,  "  nor  his  man  servant, 
nor  his  maid  servant." 

'  In   Scotch  ed.,   "  that  is  thy  neigh- 
bour's." 


Confirmation. 


323 


IV.  Remember  that  thou  keep  holy  the  Sabbath  day. 

V.  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother. 

VI.  Thou  shaft  do  no  murder. 

VII.  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery. 

VIII.  Thou  shalt  not  steal. 

IX.  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbour. 

X.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,  nor  his 
servant,  nor  his  maid,  nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  any  thing 
that  is  his. 

Question.  What  dost  thou  chiefly  learn  by  these  command- 
ments ? 

Answer.  I  learn  two  things  :  my  duty  towards  God,  and 
my  duty  towards '  my  neighbour. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Question.  You  said  that,  &c. 

[Sanie  as  1549,  to] 
Question.  Which  be  they  ? 
Answer.  The  same  which,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1552.] 

Question.  What  dost  thou,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 
Question.  You  said  that,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Question.  Which  be  they  ? 
Answer.  The  same  which,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1552.] 

Question.  What  dost  thou,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
Question.  You  said  that,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Question.  Wliich  be  they  ? 
Ans^ver.  The  same  which,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 
II.  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto 
thee  any  graven  image,  or  any  lilce- 
ness  of  any  thing  that  is  in  heaven 
above,  or  that  is  in  the  eartli  be- 
neath, or  that  is  in  tlie  water  under 
the  earth.  Thou  shalt  not  bow 
down  thy  self  to  them,   nor  serve 


them,  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am 
a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity 
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children, 
unto  the  third  and  fourth  genera- 
tion of  them  that  hate  me,  and 
shewing  mercy  unto  thousands  of 
them  that  love  me  and  keep  my 
commandments. 

III.  Thou  shalt  not  take,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

IV.  Remember  the  Sabbath  day, 
to  keep  it  holy.  Six  days  shalt 
thou  labour,  and  do  all  thy  work. 
But  the  seventh  day  is  the  Sabbath 
of  the  Lord  thy  God :  in  it  thou 
shalt  not  do  any  work,  thou,  nor 
thy  son,  nor  thy  daughter,  thy  man- 
servant nor  thy  maid-servant,  nor 
thy  cattle,  nor  thy  stranger  that 
is  within  thy  gates.     For  in,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1552,  to] 
anything  that  is  thy  neighbour's. 
Question.  What  dost  thou,  &c. 
[Continued  same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Question.  You  said  that,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Questio7i.  Which  be  they  ? 
Answer.  The  same  which,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1552.] 
Question.  What  dost  thou,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1549.] 


In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  toward." 


324 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edwarb  VI.  1549. 


Question.  What  is  thy  duty  towards  God  ? 

Answer.  My  duty  towards  God  is,  to  believe  in  him.  To 
fear  him.  And  to  love  him  with  all  my  heart,  with  all  my 
mind,  with  all  my  soul,  and  *  with  all  my  strength.  To  wor- 
ship him.  To  give  him  thanks.  To  put  my  whole  trust  in  him. 
To  call  upon  him.  To  honour  his  holy  name  and  his  word, 
and  to  serve  him  truly  all  the  days  of  my  life. 

Question.  What  is  thy  duty  towards  ^  thy  neighbour  ? 

Answer.  My  duty  towards  °  my  neighbour  is,  to  love  him 
as  myself.  And  to  do  to  all  men  as  I  would  they  should  do 
to  *  me.  To  love,  honour,  and  succour  my  father  and  mother. 
To  honour  and  obey  the  king?  and  his  ministers ^  To  submit 
myself  to  all  my  governors,  teachers,  spiritual  pastors,  and 
masters.  To  order  myself  lowly  and  reverently  to  all  my 
betters.  To  hurt  no  body  by  word  nor »  deed.  To  be  true 
and  just  in  all  my  dealing.  To  bear  no  malice  nor  hatred 
in  my  heart  To  keep  my  hands  from  picking  and  stealing, 
and  my  tongue  from  evil  speaking,  lying,  and  slandering.  To 
keep  my  body  in  temperance,  soberness,  and  chastity.  Not 
to  covet  nor  desire  other  men's  goods.  But  learn  ^  and  labour 
truly  to  get  my "  own  living,  and  to  do  my  duty  in  that  state 
of  life,  unto  which  ^  it  shall  please  God  to  call  me. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

Question.  What  is  thy  duty,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549,  to] 

Amen.     So  be  it 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Question.  What  is  thy  duty,  &c 
[Same  throughout  as  1549,  to] 
Amen.     So  be  it 


James  I.  1604. 

Question.  What  is  thy  duty,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549,  to] 
Amen.     So  be  it. 

Question. 
How     many     Sacraments    hath 
Christ  ordained  in  his  Church  ? 


Answer. 
Two  only,  as  generally  necessary 
to  salvation,  that  is  to  say,  Baptism, 
and  the  Supper  of  the  Lord. 
Question. 
What  meanest  thou  by  this  word 
Sacrament  ? 

Answer. 
I  mean  an  outward  and  visible 
sign  of  an  inward  and  spiritual 
grace,  given  unto  us,  ordained  by 
Christ  himself,  as  a  means  whereby 
we  receive  the  same,  and  a  pledge 
to  assure  us  thereof. 

Question. 
How  many  parts  be*   there  in 
a  Sacrament  ? 

Ans7uer. 
Two :  the  outward  visible  sign, 
and  the  inward  spiritual  grace. 


*  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  and"  ontitied. 
"  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  toward." 

*  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "unto." 
7  In  eds.  1559,  this  remains  unaltered. 

■  In  ed.  1662,  "  King,  and  all  that  are 
put  in  authority  under  him. " 


•  In    ed.   1604.   "or;"   and    in    Sealed 
Book,  1663,  "  n  "  added  with  a  pen. 

i"  In  ed   1604,  and  after,  "  to  learn." 
«  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  mine." 
^  In  eds.  1604,  and  1637,  "  the  which," 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "  are." 


Confirmation. 


325 


Question.  My  good  son  ^,  know  this,  that  thou  art  not  able 
to  do  these  things  of  thyself,  nor  to  walk  in  the  command- 
ments of  God  and  to  serve  him,  without  his  special  grace, 
which  thou  must  learn  at  all  times  to  call  for  by  diligent 
prayer.  Let  me  hear  therefore  if  thou  canst  say  the  Lord's 
prayer. 

Answer.  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy 
name.  Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in  earth  as 
it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread.  And 
forgive  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass 
against  us.  And  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us 
from  evil.    Amen. 

Question.  What  desirest  thou  of  God  in  this  prayer  ? 

Answer.  I  desire  my  Lord  God  our  heavenly  Father,  who 
is  the  giver  of  all  goodness,  to  send  his  grace  unto  me,  and 
to  all  people,  that  we  may  worship  him,  serve  him,  and  obey 
him,  as  we  ought  to  do.  And  I  pray  unto  God,  that  he  will 
send  us  all  things  that  be  needful  both  for  our  souls  and 
bodies :  And  that  he  will  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  forgive  us 
our  sins :  And  that  it  will  please  hirn  to  save  and  defend 
us  in  all  dangers  ghostly  and  bodily:  And  that  he  will  keep 
us  from  all  sin  and  wickedness,  and  from  our  ghostly  enemy, 
and  from  everlasting  death.  And  this  s  I  trust  he  will  do  of 
his  mercy  and  goodness,  through  our  Lord  Jesu**  Christ. 
And  therefore  I  say.  Amen.     So  be  it. 


Question. 
What  is  the  outward  visible  sign 
or  form  in  Baptism  ? 

Answer. 
Water ;   wherein  the   person   is 
baptized,  In  the  Name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,   and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

Question. 

What  is  the  inward  and  spiritual 
grace? 

Answer. 

A  death  unto  sin,  and  a  new 
birth  unto  righteousness  :  for  being 
by  nature  bom  in  sin,  and  the  chil- 
dren of  wrath,  we  are  hereby  made 
the  children  of  grace. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Question.  What  is  thy  duty,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549,  to] 
Amen.     So  be  it. 

Question.  How  many  Sacraments, 
&c. 

[Same  as  ed.  1604,  to] 
the  children  of  grace. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Catechist. 
My  good  child,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Amen.     So  be  it. 

Question. 
How  many  Sacraments,  &c. 
[Same  as  ed.  1604,  to] 

the  children  of  grace. 


'  In  eds.   1552,  and  afterwards,   "  My 
good  child." 


B  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  iSS9i  "thus." 
''  In  ed.  1596,  and  afterwards,  "Jesus." 


326 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  257.  So  soon  as  the  children,  &'e. 

§  259.  %  And  the  Bishop  shall,  ^c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  257.  .Si?  soon  as  children,  dr'c. 

§  259.  And  the  Bishop  shall,  &*c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

Question. 
What  is  required  of  persons  to 
be  baptized  ? 

Answer. 
Repentance,  whereby  they  for- 
sake sin  ;  and  Faith,  whereby  they 
stedfastly  believe  the  promises  of 
God,  made  to  them  in  that  Sacra- 
ment. 

Question. 
Why  then  are  infants  baptized, 
when  by  reason  of  their  tender  age 
they  cannot  perform  them  ? 
Answer. 
Yes :   they  do  perform  them  by 
their  sureties :    who    promise    and 
vow  them    both    in    their    names, 
which    when    they    come    to    age, 
themselves  are  bound  to  perform. 
Question. 
Why  was  the  Sacrament  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  ordained  ? 
Answer. 
For  the  continual  remembrance 
of  the    sacrifice    of  the    death    of 
Christ,  and'  the  benefits  which  we 
receive  thereby. 


Question. 
What  is  the  outward  part  or  sign 
of  the  Lord's  Supper? 

Answer. 
Bread  and  Wine,  which  the  Lord 
hath  commanded  to  be  received. 

Question. 
What  is  the  inward  part,  or  thing 
signified  ? 

Answer. 
The  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ, 
which  are  verily  and  indeed  taken 
and  received  of''  the  faithful  in  the 
Lord's  Supper. 

Question. 
What  are  the  benefits  whereof  we 
are  partakers  thereby  ? 

Attswer. 
The  strengthening  and  refreshing 
of  our  souls  by  the  Body  and  Blood 
of  Christ,  as  our  bodies  are  by  the 
Bread  and  Wine. 

Qtustion. 
What  is  required  of  them  which* 
come  to  the  Lord's  Supper? 

Answer. 
To  examine  themselves,  whether 
they  repent  them  truly  of  their  for- 
mer sins,  stedfastly  purposing  to 
lead  a  new  life  ;  have  a  lively  faith 
in  God's  mercy  through  Christ,  with 
athankful  remembranceof  his  death; 
and  be  in  charity  with  all  men. 

§§  257,  259.  So  soon  as  the  children, 
^c.  ...   And  the  Bishop  shall, 

[Same  as  1549.] 


'  In  ed.  i66a,  "and  of  the."  '  In  ed.  x66a, 

•  lu  ed.  1662,  "who." 


■by." 


Confirmation. 


327 


257.  %  So  soon  as  the  children  can  say  in  their  mother  tongue  the  articles 
of  the  faith,  the  Loid's  prayer,  the^  ten  commandments,  and  also  can 
answer  to  such  questions  "  of  this  short  Catechism  as  the  Bishop  (or  such 
as  he  shall  appoint)  shall  by  his  discretion  appose  them  in :  then  shall  they 
be  brought  to  the  Bishop  by  one  that  shall  be  his  Godfather  or  Godmother, 
that  every  child  may  have  a  witness  of  his  Confirmation, 

§  259.  T  And  the  Bishop  shall  confirm  them  on  this  wise. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Question. 
What  is  required,  &c. 

[Same  as  ed.  1604,  to] 
be  in  charity  with  all  men. 

§§  257,  259.  So  soon  as  children 
can,  (Sr'c.  .  .  .  And  the  Bishop 
shall,  &'c'. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

Charles  II.  1662. 
Question. 
What  is  required,  &c. 
[Same  as  1604,  to] 

Answer, 
Because  they  promise  them  both 
by  their  sureties  :   which  promise, 
when  they  come  to  age,  themselves 
are  bound  to  perform. 

Question. 
Why  was  the  Sacrament,  &c. 
[Same  as  ed.  1604,  to] 
be  in  charity  with  all  men. 

§255°-  T  TheCurateof  every  Parish 
shall  diligently  upon  Sundays  and 
Holydays,  after  the  second  Lesson 
at  Evening  Prayer  openly  in  the 
Church  instruct  and  examine  so 
many  Children  of  his  Parish  sent 
unto  him,  as  he  shall  think  con- 
venient, in  some  part  of  this  Cate- 
chism, 


§  256°.  '.r  And  all  Fathers,  Mothers, 
Masters  and  Dames,  shall  cause 
their  Children,  Servants,  and  Ap- 
prentices (which  have  net  learned 
their  Catechism)  to  come  to  the 
Church  at  the  time  appointed,  and 
obediently  to  hear,  and  be  ordered 
by  the  Curate,  until  such  time  as 
they  have  learned  all  that  is  here 
appointed  for  them  to  learn. 

§  257.  IT  So  soon  as  Children  are 
come  to  a  competent  age,  and  can 
say  in  their  Mother  Tongue  the 
Creed,  the  Lord^s  Prayer,  and  the 
Ten  Commandments ;  and  also 
can  answer  to  the  other  Questions 
of  this  short  Catechism  ;  they  shall 
be  brought  to  the  Bishop.  And 
every  one  shall  have  a  Godfather, 
or  a  Godmother,  as  a  witness  of' 
their  Confirmation, 

§  258  **.  ir  And  whensoever  the  Bishop 
shall  give  knoivledge  for  Children 
to  be  brotight  unto  him  for  their 
Confirmation,  the  Curate  of  every 
Parish  shall  either  bring,  or  send 
in  writing,  with  his  hand  sub- 
scribed thereunto,  the  names  of  all 
such  persons  within  his  Parish,  as 
he  shall  think  fit  to  be  presented  to 
the  Bishop  to  be  confirmed.  §  259. 
And,  if  the  Bishop  approve  oj 
them,  he  shall  confirm  them  in 
manner  following. 

[Here  follows  in  ed.  1662,  The  Order  of 
Confirmation.    See  p,  319.] 


"  In  two  eds.,  1559,  and  most  eds.  after- 
wards, "and  the." 

"  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "question." 

"  Rubrics,  }  255,  }  256,  and  }  258,  are 


the  rubrics,  §  266,  §  267,  and  }  268  of  eds. 
1549 — 1637,  but  transposed  to  this  place 
in  1662.    (See  pp.  330 — 332.) 


328 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


^  CONFIRMATION. 

Our  help  is  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

Answer.  Which  hath  made  both  p  heaven  and  earth. 

Minister.  Blessed  is  ^  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

Answer.  Henceforth  world  without  end. 

Minister.  The  Lord  be  with  you. 

Answer.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

Let  us  pray. 

Almighty  and  everliving  God,  who  hast  vouchsafed'^  to 
regenerate  these  thy  servants  of'  water  and  the  Holy  Ghost : 
And  hast  given  unto  them  forgiveness  of  all  their  sins  :  Send 
doAvn  from  heaven,  we  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  upon  them  thy 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

IT  CONFIRMATION. 
Our  help  is  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord. 
Answer.  Which  *  hath,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Answer.  Henceforth  world  with- 
out end. 

Minister.  Lord,  hear  our  prayer  °. 
Answer.  And  let   our  cry  come 
to  *  thee. 

Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  and  everliving,  &a 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
of  all  their  sins  :  strengthen  them, 
•we  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  wth  the 
Holy  Ghost  the  Comforter,  and 
daily  increase  in  them  thy  mani- 
fold gifts,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1549,  to] 
thy  holy  fear.     Amen. 

§  260.  Then  the  Bishop  shall  lay 
his  hand  upon  every  child  seve- 
rally, saying. 

Defend,  O  Lord,  this  child  with 
thy  heavenly  grace,  that  he  may 
continue  thine  for  ever,  and  daily 
increase  in   thy  Holy  Spirit  more 


P  In  eds.  1596,  1604,  and  afterwards, 
the  word  "  both"  omitted. 

■>  In  ed.  1596,  1604,  and  afterwards, 
"  Blessed  bc.''^ 

'  In  eds.  1551,  "which  vouchsafed;" 
and   one   ed.,   1552,    and   1559,    "  which 


and  more,  until  he  come  unto  thy 
everlasting  kingdom.     Amen. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
CONFIRMATION. 
Our  help,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

Almighty  and  everliving,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  260.    Then  the  Bishop,  &>c. 
Defend,  O  Lord,  &c 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
CONFIRMATION. 
Our  help,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.I 

Almighty  and  everliving,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
§  260.    Then  the  Bishop,  &»c. 

Defend,  O  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


hast  vouchedsafe ;"  in  ed.  1604,  1637,  and 
1662,  "  who  hast  vouchsafed." 

•  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  by." 

*  In  ed.  1662,  ".who." 

"  I  lied.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "prayers." 
'  In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "  unto." 


Confirmation. 


329 


Holy  Ghost  the  Comforter,  with  the  manifold  gifts  of  grace, 
the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding ;  the  spirit  of  counsel 
and  ghostly  strength ;  the  spirit  of  knowledge  and  true  godli- 
ness, and  fulfil  them,  O  Lord,  with  the  spirit  of  thy  holy  fear. 

Answer.  Amen. 

Minister.  Sign  them,  O  Lord,  and  mark  them  to  be  thine 
for  ever,  by  the  virtue  of  thy  holy  cross  and  passion.  Confirm 
and  strength  them  with  the  inward  unction  of  thy  Holy  Ghost, 
mercifully  unto  everlasting  life.    Amen. 

§  260.    T7ien  the  Bishop  shall  cross  them  in  the  forehead,  and  lay  his  hand 
upon  their  head^,  saying, 

N.  I  sign  thee  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  lay  my  hand 
upon  thee  :  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Amen. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

CONFIRMATION,    OR   LAVING   ON 
OF   HANDS. 

The  Bishop  shall  say, 

Our  help  is  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord. 

Answer.  Which '  hath  made  hea- 
ven and  earth. 

Bishop.  Blessed  be  the  name  of 
the  Lord. 

Answer.  Henceforth  world  with- 
out end. 

Bishop.  Lord,  hear  our  prayers. 

Answer.  And  let  our  cry  come 
imto  thee. 

Let  us  pray. 

Almighty  and  everliving,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
§  260.    Then  the  Bishop,  ^-c. 
Defend,  O  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

[The  title  and  first  Rubrics  of  the  Order 
for  Confirmation  in  this  edition  will  be 
found  already  printed,  p.  319.] 

§  259-  IT  Then  shall  the  Bishop  say. 

Do  ye  here  in  the   presence  of 

God  and  this  congregation  renew 


the  solemn  promise  and  vow  that 
was  made  in  your  name  at  your 
Baptism  ;  ratifying  and  confirming 
the  same  in  your  own  persons,  and 
acknowledging  your  selves  bound 
to  believe  and  to  do  all  those 
things,  which  your  Godfathers  and 
Godmothers  then  undertook  for 
you? 

*^  And  every  one  shall  audibly 

answer, 

I  do. 

The  Bishop. 
Our  help  is  in  the  Name,  &c. 

[Same  as  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  to] 
Bishop.  Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  and  everliving,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 
true  godliness ;    and  fill   them,   O 
Lord,  with  the  spirit  of  thy  holy 
fear,  now  and  for  ever.     Amen. 

§  260.  \  Then  all  of  them  in  order 
kneeling  before  the  Bishop,  he  shall 
lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of 
every  one  severally,  saying. 

Defend,  O  Lord,  this  thy  child 
[or  this  thy  servant']  with,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 
everlasting  kingdom.     Amen. 


X  In  two  eds.,  1549,  "heads." 


In  ed.  1662,  "who.' 


330 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  261.  And  thus  shall  he  do  to  every  child  one  after  another.     And  when 
he  hath  laid  his  hand  upon  every  child,  then  shall  he  say. 

The  peace  of  the  Lord  abide  with  you. 
Answer.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

§  262.    Then  shall  the  Bishop  say  \ 

^  Let  US  pray. 

Almighty  everliving''  God,  which  makest  us  both  to  will 
and  to  do  those  things  that  be  good  and  acceptable  unto  thy  * 
majesty :  we  make  our  humble  supplications  unto  thee  for 
these  children  ^,  upon  whom  (after  the  example  of  thy  •=  holy 
apostles)  we  have  ^  laid  our  hands,  to  certify  them  (by  this 
sign)  of  thy  favour  and  gracious  goodness  toward  e  them  :  let 
thy  fatherly  hand  (we  beseech  thee)  ever  be  over  them,  let 
thy  Holy  Spirit  ever  be  with  them,  and  so  lead  them  in  the 
knowledge  and  obedience  of  thy  word,  that  in  the  end  they 


Second  Edw.  VI,   1552, 

§  262.    Then  shall  the  Bishop  say. 

Almighty  everliving  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  265.    Then  the  Bishop  shall  bless 
the  children,  thus  saying. 

The  blessing  of  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  266.    The  Curate  of  every  Parish, 

or  some  other  at  his  appointment, 

shall    diligently    upon    Sundays, 

and  holy  days  half  an  hour,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  262.    Then  shall  the  Bishop  say, 
Almighty  and  everliving  God, 

[Same  as  1549.] 


&C. 


*  _  In  one  ed.,  1549,  this  Rubric  is 
emitted ;m  one  ed.,  155^,  and  1596,  "  Let 
us  pray"  is  added;  but  m  the  others,  and 
in  all  afterwards,  these  words  are  omitted. 

^  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "everlasting." 


§  265.   Then  the  Bishop  shall  bless. 

The  blessing  of  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  266.   T%e  Curate  of  every,  &'c. 
[Same  as  issz.] 


James  I.  1604. 
§  262.    Then  shall  the  Bishop  say. 
Almighty  and  everliving  God, 


&c. 


[Same  as  1549.] 


§  265.   Then  the  Bishop  shall  bless. 

The  blessing  of  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  266.    The  Curate  of  every,  &'c. 
[Same  as  iss^l 


"  In  ed.  1662,  "thy  divine  Majesty." 
''  In  ed.  1662,  "  these  thy  servants," 

•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  have  now  laid." 

*  In  ed.  1662,  "  towards." 


Confirmation. 


33X 


may  obtain  the  life  everlasting '>,  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost  livelh  and  reign- 
eth  one '  God  world  without  end.     Amen. 

§  265.    Theit  shall  the  Bishop  bless  the  children,  thus  saying. 
The  blessing  of  God  Almighty,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,  be  upon  you,  and  remain  with  you  for  ever. 
Amen. 

§  266  ■'.  The  Curate  of  every  parish  once  in  six  weeks  at  the  hast,  upon  warn- 
ing by  him  given,  shall  upon  some  Sunday  or  holy  day,  half  an  hour  before 
evensong^,  openly  in  the  church  instruct  and  examine  so  many  children  of 
his  parish  sent  unto  him,  as  the  time  will  serve,  and  as  he  shall  think  con- 
venient, in  some  part  of  this  Catechism. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  262.    Then  shall  the  Bishop  say. 
Almighty  and  everliving  God, 


&c. 


[Same  as  1549.] 


265.  Then  the  Bishop  shall  bless 
the  children,  saying  thus. 

The  Blessing  of  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

266.  The  Presbyter  or  Curate  of 
every,  S^c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 
§  262.  IT  Then  shall  the  Bishop  say, 
The  Lord  be  with  you. 

Anszver, 
And  with  thy  spirit. 

§  263.  T  And  [all  kneeling  down) 
the  Bishop  shall  add, 

Let  us  pray. 
Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven, 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy  king- 


''  In  eds.  1352,  and  afterwards,  "the 
everlasting  life  ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "  everlasting 
liie." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  ever  one." 

^  In  ed.  1662,  this  rubric,  with  consider- 


dom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us 
this  day  our  daily  bread.  And  for- 
give us  our  trespasses,  As  we  for- 
give them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation  : 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen. 

§264,  %  And  this  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everliving  God, 
who  makest,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.  ] 

O  Almighty  Lord,  and  ever- 
lasting God,  vouchsafe,  we  beseech 
thee,  to  direct,  sanctify  and  govern 
both  our  hearts  and  bodies  in  the 
ways  of  thy  laws,  and  in  the  works 
of  thy  commandments,  that  through 
thy  most  mighty  protection,  both 
here  and  ever,  we  may  be  preserved 
in  body  and  soul,  through  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.    Amen. 

%  265.  IT  Then  the  Bishop  shall  bless 
them,  saying  thus. 

The  blessing  of  God,  &a 
[Same  as  1549.] 


able  variations,  is  transposed  to  the  end 
of  the  Catechism.     See  }  255,  p.  327. 

'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  in  one  ed.,  1550,  in 
ed.  1578,  and  in  ed.  1662,  "  Evening 
prayer,"  (all  the  others  "  Evensong.") 


332 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§267.  ™  And  all  fathers,  mothers^, 
masters,  and  dames",  shall  cause  their  childrat,  servants,  and  prentices 
{7vhick  are  not  yet  confirmed^),  to  come  to  the  church  at  the  day'i  appointed, 
and  obediently  hear'  and  be  ordered  by  the  Curate*,  until  such  time  as 
they  have  learned  all  that  is  here  appointed  for  them  to  learn. 

268".  IT  And  whensoever  the  Bishop  shall  give  knowledge  for  children  to  be 
brought  afore^  him  to  any  convenient  place,  for  their  confirmation :  Tliett 
shall  the  Curate »  of  every  parish  eit/ier  bring,  or  send  in  -writing,  the 
names  of  all  those^  children  of  his  parish  which  can  say  the  articles  of 
their^  faith,  the  Lord's  prayer,  and  the  ten  commandments.  And  also 
how  many  of  them  can  answer  to  the  other  questions  contained  in  this 
Catechism. 

i  269.  ^  And  there  shall  none  be  admitted  to  the  holy  communion,  until 
such  time  as  he  be  confirmed. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

267.  And  all  Fathers,  Mothers, 
Gfc. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

268.  And  whensoever  the  Bishop, 

&'c. 

[Same  as  154^.] 

j  269.  And  there  shall  none  be  ad- 
mitted to  the  holy  Communion, 
until  such  time  as  lu  can  say  the 
Catechism,  and  be  confirmed. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
i  267.  A  nd  all  Fathers  and  Mothers, 

&'c. 
J  268.  And  whensoever  the  Bishop, 

&'C. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

j  269.  And  there  shall  none  be  ad- 
mitted,  iSr'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
1267.  And  all  fathers,  mothers,  &'c. 


■"  In  ed.  1662,  this  rubric  and  the  next, 
each  with  some  variations,  are  transposed 
to  the  end  of  the  Catechism.     (See  '{}  256, 
258,  page  327.) 
"  In  two  eds.,  1559,  "and  mothers." 
»  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  mistresses." 
P  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  which 
have  not  learned  their  Catechism." 
4  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  time." 


§  268.  And  whensoever  the  Bishop, 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  269.  And  there  shall  twne  be  ad 
mitted,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1352.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  267.   And  all  fathers,  and  mothers, 

&^c. 

§  268.  And  whensoever  the  Bishop, 
dj^c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  269.  And  there  shall  none  be  ad' 
mitted,  d^c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

[For  }  267  and  §  268,  see  p.  327.] 

§  269.  If  And  there  shall  none  be 
admitted  to  the  holy  Communion, 
until  such  time  as  he  be  confirmed, 
or  be  ready  and  desirous  to  be  con- 
firmed. 


I 


'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afkerwards,  "to 
hear." 

•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  the  Presbyter 
or  Curate." 

'  In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "before 
him;"  in  ed.  1662,  "  unto  him." 

"In  two  eds.,  1549,  "  all  the  children." 

»  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  the  Faith." 


Of  Matrimony. 


333 


THE  FORM  OF 
SOLEMNIZATION   OF   MATRIMONY. 

§  270.  ^  First  the  banns  must  be  asked  three  several  Sundays  or  holy  days, 
in  the  service  time  y,  the  people  being  present,  after  the  accustomed  manner. 

§  271.  And  if  the  persons  that  would  be  married  dwell  in  divers  parishes, 
the  banns  must  be  asked  in  both  parishes,  and  the^  Curate  of  the  one 
parish  shall  not  solemnize  matritnony  betwixt  thefn,  without  a  certificate 
of  the  banns  being  thrice  asked,  frotn  the  Curate'^  of  the  other  parish. 

§  272.  At  the  day  appointed  for  Solemnization  of  Matrimony,  the  persons  to 
be  married  shall  come  into  the  body  of  the  Chtirch,  with  their  friends  and 
neighbours.     And  there  the  priest  ■  shall  thus  say ''. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
THE  FORM  OF 
SOLEMNIZATION  OF  MA- 
TRIMONY. 
§  270.  First  the  banns  must,  &'c. 
§271.  And  if  the  persons  that  would 

be  married,  S^c. 
%  272.  At  the  day  appointed,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

THE   FORM   OF  SOLEMNIZATION 
OF   MATRIMONY. 

§  270.  First  the  banns,  &^c. 

§271.  And  if  the  persons  that  would 

be  married,  ^'c. 
§  272.  At  the  day  appointed,  &=£. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604, 

THE  FORM   OF  SOLEMNIZATION 
OF  MATRIMONY. 
§  270.  First  the  banns,  dr^c. 

§271.  And  if  the  persons  that  should 
be  married,  &^c. 

%  272.  At  the  day  appointed,  ^c. 
[Same  as  i549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

THE  FORM   OF   SOLEMNIZATION 
OF  MATRIMONY. 
§  270.  First  the  banns,  ^fc. 


J  In  most  editions,  1552,  and  all  after- 
wards, "in  the  time  ot  service." 

»  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter 
or  Curate." 


§271.  And  ifthepersons  that  should 

be  married,  &'c. 
§  272.  At  the  day  appointed,  ^'c. 
[Same  as  1349-] 


Charles  XL  1662. 

THE   FORM   OF  SOLEMNIZATION 
OF    MATRIMONY. 

§  270.  T  First  the  Banns  of  all  that 
are  to  be  married  together,  must 
be  published  in  the  Church  thj-ee 
several  Sundays  or  Holydays,  in 
the  time  of  Divine  Service,  imnie' 
diately  before  the  sentences  for  the 
Offertory  ;  the  Curate  saying  ajter 
the  accustomed  manner, 
I  PUBLISH  the  Banns  of  marriage 

between  M.  of and  N.  of . 

If  any  of  you  know  cause  or  just 
impediment,  why  these  two  per- 
sons should  not  be  joined  together 
in  holy  Matrimony,  ye  are  to  de- 
clare it  :  this  is  the  first  \second,  or 
third\  time  of  asking. 

§  271.  H  And  if  the  persons  that  are 
to  be  married,  &'c, 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  272.  %  At  the  day  and  time  ap' 
pointed  for  solemnization  of  Ma- 
trimony, the  persons  to  be  married 
shall  come  into  the  body  of  the 
Church  with  their  friends  and 
neighbours:  and  thei-e  standing 
together,  the  Man  on  the  right 
hand,  and  the  Woman  on  the 
left,  the  Priest  shall  say. 


»  Ined.  1578,  "the  Minister ;"  in  Scotch 
ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter." 

''  In  ed.  1604,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 
"shall  say  thus." 


334 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Dearly  beloved  friends,  we  are  gathered  together  here  in 
the  sight  of  God,  and  in  the  face  of  his  congregation  '^,  to  join 
together  this  man  and  this  woman  in  holy  matrimony,  which 
is  an  honourable  estate  ■*,  instituted  of  God  in  paradise  *,  in  the 
time  of  man's  innocency,  signifying  unto  us  the  mystical  union 
that  is  betwixt  Christ  and  his  church  :  which  holy  estate  "^ 
Christ  adorned  and  beautified  with  his  presence,  and  first 
miracle  that  he  wrought,  in  Cana  of  Galilee,  and  is  com- 
mended of  Saint  Paul  to  be  honourable  among  all  men ;  and 
therefore  is  not  ^  to  be  enterprised,  nor  taken  in  hand  unad- 
visedly, lightly,  or  wantonly,  to  satisfy  men's  carnal  lusts  and 
appetites,  like  brute  beasts  that  have  no  understanding :  but 
reverently,  discreetly,  advisedly,  soberly,  and  in  the  fear  of 
God  :  duly  considering  the  causes  for  the  ^  which  matrimony 
was  ordained.  One  cause  was  **  the  procreation  of  children,  to 
be  brought  up  in  the  fear  and  nurture  of  the  Lord,  and  praise 
of  God  '.  Secondly  it  was  ordained  for  a  remedy  against  sin, 
and  to  avoid  fornication,  that  such  persons  as  be  married, 
might  live  chastely  in  matrimony'',  and  keep  themselves  un- 
defiled  members  of  Christ's  body.  Thirdly'  for  the  mutual 
society,  help,  and  comfort,  that  the  one  ought  to  have  of  the 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Dearly  beloved  friends,  we,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

273.  And  also  speaking,  Sr*c. 
I  REQUIRE  and  charge  you,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  274,  275.  At  which  day  of,  &>c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Elizabeth,  1559. 
Dearly  beloved  friends,  we,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


«  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "his  Church;" 
in  ed.  1662,  "this  congregation." 

«>  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "state." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  the  words,  "in  Paradise," 
emitted. 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  not  by  any." 

f  In  most  editions,  1552  and  1559,  and 
all  afterwards,  "  for  which." 

*"  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,   "One 


§  273.  And  a/so  speaking,  &*c. 
I  REQUIRE  and  charge  you,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§§  274,  275.  At  -which  day  of,  Sf^. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 
Dearly  beloved  friends,  we,  <S:c. 

[Same  as  I549-1 
§  273.  And  also  speaking,  Sfc, 
I  REQUIRE  and  charge  you,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549. 1 

§§  274,  275.  At  which  day  of,  (S-v. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


was  ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "  First  it  was  ordained 
for." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "and  to  the  praise  of  his 
holy  Name." 

*  In  eds.  1552,  and  all  afterwards,  "  that 
such  persons  as  have  not  the  gift  of  con- 
tinence might  marry,  and  keep,"  &c. 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  Thirdly  it  was  ordained 
for." 


Of  Matrimony. 


335 


other,  both  in  prosperity  and  adversity.  Into  the*"  which 
holy  estate  ^  these  two  persons  present  come  now  to  be  joined. 
Therefore  if  any  man  can  shew  any  just  cause  why  they  may 
not  lawfully  be  joined  so"^  together:  Let  him  now  speak,  or 
else  hereafter  for  ever  hold  his  peace. 

§  273.  And  also  speaking  to  "  the  persons  that  shall  be  married, 
he  shall  say. 

I  REQUIRE  and  charge  you  (as  you  will?  answer  at  the 
dreadful  day  of  judgment,  when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall 
be  disclosed)  that  if  either  of  you  do^  know  any  impedi- 
ment, why  ye'  may  not  be  lawfully  joined  together  in  matri- 
mony, that  ye'  confess  it.  For  be  ye  well  assured,  that  so 
many  as  be*  coupled  together  otherwise  than  God's  word 
doth  allow,  are  not  joined  of"  God,  neither  is  their  matri- 
mony lawful, 

§  274.  At  which  day  of  marriage  if  any  man  do  allege^  any  impediment 
why  they  may  not  be  coupled  together  in  matrimony  f  ;  and  will  be  bound, 
and  sureties '  with  him,  to  the  parties,  or  else  put  in  a  caution  to  the  full 
value  of  such  charges  as  the  persons  to  be  married  do  *  sustain,  to  prove 
his  allegation :  then  the  Solemnization  must  be  deferred,  unto  **  such  time 
as  the  truth  be  tried.  §  275.  If  no  impediment  be  alleged,  then  shall  the 
Curate '  say  unto  the  man. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Dearly  beloved  Friends,  we,  &c, 
[Same  as  1549O 

§273.  And  also  Speaking  to,  &'c. 
I  REQUIRE  and  charge  you,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549-] 

§§  274,  275.  At  which  day  of,  Qfc. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Dearly  beloved,  we  are,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.J 

§  273.  T  And  also  speaking,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

I  REQUIRE  and  charge,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§  274.   If   At  which  day  of  Mar- 
riage, &^c. 

§  275.  '^  Ifno  impediment  be,  ^c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


"  In  ed.  1662,  "  into  which." 

°  In  eds.  1552,  and  all  afterwards,  "so" 
otiiitted. 

"  In  Sealed  Book,  "  un"  added  with  pea 

P  In  ed.  1662,  "  you  both  as  ye  wiU." 

•J  In  ed.  1662,  "  do"  omitted. 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637.  "  you." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "matrimony,  ye  do  now 
confess  it." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 

"  In  eds.  1532,  and  afterwards,  "joined 
together  by  God." 


»  In  eds.  1532,  and  afterwards,  "  alledge 
and  declare." 

1  In  eds.  1332,  and  afterwards,  "  ia 
matrimony  by  God's  law,  or  the  laws  of 
this  realm." 

'  In  eds.  1332,  and  afterwards,  "suf- 
ficient sureties." 

»  In  two  eds.,  1532,  and  one  ed.,  1539, 
"doth  sustain  ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "do  thereby 
sustain." 

'■  In  ed.  1662,  "until." 

=  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Presbyter  or 
Curate. " 


336 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


JV.  Wilt  thou  have  this  woman  to  thy  wedded  wife,  to 
live  together  after  God's  ordinance  in  the  holy  estate  of  matri- 
mony? Wilt  thou  love  her,  comfort  her,  honour,  and  keep 
her  in  sickness  and  in  health?  and  forsaking  all  other  keep 
thee  only  to^  her,  so  long  as  you  *  both  shall  live  ? 

§  276.    The  man  shall  answer, 

I  will 

§  277.  Then  shall  the  Priest*  say  to '  the  woman. 
N.  Wilt  thou  have  this  man  to  thy  wedded  husband,  to 
live  together  after  God's  ordinance,  in  the  holy  estate  of 
matrimony?  Wilt  thou  obey  him,  and  serve  him,  love, 
honour,  and  keep  him  in  sickness  and  in  health?  and  for- 
saking all  other  keep  thee  only  to  s  him,  so  long  as  you  ^  both 
shall  live  ? 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
N.  Wilt  thou  liave,  &c. 
i  276.    The  man  shall,  d^'c. 
§  277.  Then  shall  the  Priest,  6^. 
N.  Wilt  thou  have,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

!  278.  The  woman  shall,  <S^r. 
§  279.  Then  shall  the  Minister  say. 
Who  giveth  this  woman,  &c. 

5  281.   And  the  Minister  receiving 
the  woman,  &'c. 
I  2^,  take  thee,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

}  282.  Then  shall  they  loose,  &"€. 
I  N.  take  thee,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

iV.  Will  you  have,  &c. 

276.  The  man  shall  answer,  Qr'C. 

277.  T/ien  s/iall  the  Priest,  ^r^c. 
N.  Wilt  thou  have,  &c 


*  In  ed.  1662,  "ye." 

•  In  ed.  1578,  "  the  Minister :"  in  Scotch 
ed.,  1637,  "  Presbyter  or  Minister." 

'  In  one  ed..   1549,   and    iu  ed.    1662, 


§  278.    The  woman  shall,  Sr'e. 

§  279.  Then  shall  the  Minister  say. 

Who  giveth  this  woman,  &c. 
§  281.    And  the  Minister  receiving 

the  woman,  iSr'c. 

I  N.  take  thee  TV.  to,  &c. 

§  282.  Theft  shall  they  loose,  dfc, 

I  iV.  take  thee  iV.  to,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

.A''.  Wilt  thou  have,  &c. 
§  276.    The  man  shall  anszuer,  £r»f. 
§  277.   Then  shall  the  Priest,  qt'c. 

N.  Wilt  thou  have,  &c. 
§  278.  The  woman  shall,  &'c. 
§  279.  Then  shall  the  Minister  say. 

Who  giveth  this  woman,  &c. 
§  281.  And  the  Minister  receiving 

the  woman,  &'c. 

I  J^.  take  thee  iV.  to,  &c. 

§  282.  Theft  shall  they  loose,  &>€. 

I  N.  take  thee  N.  to,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


"  unto." 

Kin  most  eds.,  1552  and  1559,  and  after- 
wards, "  unto." 

■»  In  ed.  1662,  "  ye." 


Of  Matrimony. 


337 


§  278.  The  woman  shall  answer, 

I  will. 

§  279.  Then  shall  the  Minister '  say. 

Who  giveth  this  woman  to  be  married  to  *  this  man  ? 

§  281.  And  the  minister'^  receiving  the  woman  at  her  father^  or  friend'' s 
hands,  shall  cause  the  man  to  take  the  woman  by  the  right  hand,  and  so 
either  to  give  their  troth  to  other:  The  man  first  saying, 

I  N.  take  thee  N.  to  my  wedded  wife,  to  have  and  to  hold 
from  this  day  forward,  for  better,  for  worse,  for  richer,  for 
poorer,  in  sickness,  and  in  health,  to  love,  and  to  cherish,  till 
death  us  depart  ^  :  according  to  God's  holy  ordinance :  And 
thereto  I  plight  thee  my  troth. 

§  282.  Then  shall  they  loose  their  hands,  and  the  woman  taking  again  the 
man  by  the  right  liand  shall  say, 

I  N.  take  .thee  N.  to  my  wedded  husband,  to  have  and  to 
hold  from  this  day  forward,  for  better,  for  worse,  for  richer, 
for  poorer,  in  sickness,  and  in  health,  to  love,  cherish,  and  to 
obey,  till  death  us  depart^:  according  to  God's  holy  ordi- 
nance :  And  thereto  I  give  thee  my  troth. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

N.  Wilt  thou  have,  &c. 
§  276.  ^  The  Man  shall  answer,  &'c. 
§  277.  Then  shall  the  Fresbyter,  q;'c. 

N.  Wilt  thou  have,  &c. 
§  278.  The  woman  shall,  &'c. 

§  279.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter  or 
Minister  say. 
Who  giveth  this  woman,  &c 

§  281.  And  the  Presbyter  or  Minister 
receiving  the  woman,  dr=r. 

I  N.  take  thee  N.  to,  &c. 
§  282.  Then  shall  they  loose,  dr^r. 
I  N.  take  thee  N.  to,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

N.  Wilt  thou  have,  &c. 
§  276.   The  man  shall  answer,  dfc. 


§  277. 1  Then  shall  the  Priest,  &'c. 

N.  Wilt  thou  have,  &c. 
§  278.  IT  The  Woman  shall,  &=€. 
§  279.  H  Then  shall  the  Minister  say. 

Who  giveth  this  woman,  &c. 

§  280.  ^  Then  shall  they  give  their 
troth  to  each  other  in  this  manner. 

§  281.  •]'  The  Minister  receiving  the 
Woman  at  her  father's  or  friend's 
hands,  shall  cause  the  Man  with 
his  right  hand  to  take  the  Woman 
by  her  right  hand,  and  to  say  after 
him  as  follffweth. 

I  N.  take  thee  N.,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  282.  H  Then  shall  they  loose  their 
hands,  and  the  Woman  with  her 
right  hand  taking  the  Man  by  his 
right  hand,  shall  likewise  say  after 
the  Minister  ; 
I  N.  take  thee  N,,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549. 1 


'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter 
or  Minister." 
''  In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards  "  father's." 


'  lu  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "death  do  us  de- 
part ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "death  us  do  part." 


338 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  283.  TTun  shall  they  again  loose  their  hands,  and  the  man  shall  give  unto 
the  woman  a  ring,  and  other  tokens  of  spousage,  as  gold  or  silver,  laying 
the  same  upon  the  book.  And  the  Priest "  taking  the  ring  shall  deliver  it 
unto  the  man,  to  put  it  upon  the  fourth  finger  of  the  womar^s  left  hand. 
And  the  man  taught  by  the  priest,  shall  say, 

T[  With  this  ring  I  thee  wed :  This  gold  and  silver  I  thee 
give  :  with  my  body  I  thee  worship  :  and  with  all  my  worldly 
goods  I  thee  endow :  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost     Amen. 

§  284.  Then  the  man  leaving  the  ring  upon  the  fourth  finger  of  tkewoman^s 
left  hand,  the  minister  °  shall  say, 

^  Let  us  pray  °. 
O  ETERNAL  God,  Creator  and  preserver  of  all  mankind, 
giver  of  all   spiritual   grace,  the  author  of  everlasting  life  : 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  283.  Then  shall  they  again  loose 
their  hands,  and  the  man  shall 
give  unto  the  woman  a  ring,  lay- 
ing  the  same  upon  the  book  with 
the  accustomed  duty  to  the  Priest '^ 
and  Clerk.  And  the  Priesf^  tak- 
ing the  ring,  shall  deliver  it  unto 
the  man  to  put  it  upon  the  fourth 
finger  of  the  woman^s  left  hard. 
And  the  man  taught  by  the  Priest  % 
shall  say. 

With  this  ring  I  thee  wed :  with 
my  body  I  thee  worship  :  and  with 
all  my  worldly  goods  I  thee  endow. 
In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of 
the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Amen. 

§  284.  Then  the  man  leaving,  &*c. 

[Same  as  1549O 

%  Let  us  pray. 

O  ETERNAL  Gk)d,  creator,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  285.   Then  shall  the  Priest  join,  <Sr'c. 
Those  whom  God  hath,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  2S6.  Then  shall  the  Minister  speak, 
&'c. 

Forasmuch  as  N.  and  //.,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  283.   Then  shall  they  again,  &=c. 

With  this  ring,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  284.  Then  the  man  leaving,  &'c. 
Let  us  pray '. 
O  ETERNAL  God,  Creator,  «S:c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§285.  T/ten  shall  the  Priest  Join,  <^c. 
Those  whom  God  hath,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§   286.     Then    shall    the   Minister 
speak,  <Sr»f . 
Forasmuch  as  N.  and  N.,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

James  I.  1604. 

§  283.  Then  shall  they  again,  &'c. 

With  this  ring,  &c. 

[Same  as  1553.] 

§  284.  Theft  the  man  leaving,  &'c. 
Let  us  pray. 
O  ETERNAL  God,  Creator,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§285.  Then  shall  the  Priest  join,  (^c. 

Those  whom  God  hath,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§   286.      Then    shall    the  'Minister 
speak,  6fc. 
Forasmuch  as  iV.  and  ^V.,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


""  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter." 
■  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter 
or  Minister." 


•  In  two  eds.,  1559,  the  words,  "  Let  us 
pray,"  otnitud. 


Of  Matrimony, 


339 


send  thy  blessing  upon  these  thy  servants,  this  man  and 
this  woman,  whom  we  bless  in  thy  name,  that  as  Isaac  and 
Rebecca  (after  bracelets  and  jewels  of  gold  given  of  the  one 
to  the  other  for  tokens  of  their  matrimony  p)  lived  faithfully 
together ;  so  these  persons  may  surely  perform  and  keep  the 
vow  and  covenant  betwixt  them  made,  whereof  this  ring  given 
and  received  is  a  token  and  pledge  :  and  may  ever  remain  in 
perfect  love  and  peace  together  ;  and  live  according  to  ^  thy 
laws ;  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  285.    Then  shall  the  Priest^  join  their  right  hands  ■  together,  and  say, 
\  Those  whom  God  hath  joined  together,  let  no  man  put 
asunder. 

§  286.  Then  shall  the  minister '  speak  unto  the  people. 
Forasmuch  as  N,  and  N.  have  consented  together  in  holy 
wedlock,  and  have  witnessed  the  same  here^  before  God  and 
this  company.;  and  thereto  have  given  and  pledged  their  troth 
either  to  other,  and  have  declared  the  same  by  giving  and  re- 
ceiving gold  and  silver",  and  by  joining  of  hands:  I  pro- 
nounce that  they  be  man  and  wife  together  :  In  the  name  of 
the  Father,  of*  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Amen. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  283.  That  shall  they  again,  &'c. 
With  this  ring,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  284.  Then  the  man  leaving,  ^c. 

Let  us  pray. 

O  ETERNAL  God,  Creator,  <S:c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  285.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter  join. 

Those  whom  God  hath,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  286.    Th^t  shall  the  Presbyter  or 
Minister  speak,  &"€. 

Forasmuch  as  N.  and  N.,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  IL  1662. 

§  283.  Then  shall  they  again,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
With  this  ring  I  thee  wed,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  284.  ^  Then  the  man  leaving  the 
ring  upon  the  fourth  jinger  of  the 
IVoman's  left  hand,  they  shall  both 
kneel  down,  and  the  Minister  s/iall 
say. 

Let  us  pray. 

O  ETERNAL  God,  Creator,  &c. 

[Same  as  iS49-] 

§  285.  IT  Then  shall  the  Priest,  cr'c. 

Those  whom  God  hath,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  286.  IT   Then  shall  the  Minister 
speak,  dr=f . 
Forasmuch  as  N.  and  N.,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


P  In  eds.  1552,  and  in  all  afterwards, 
the  words,  "  after  bracelets  and  jewels  of 
gold  given  of  the  one  to  the  other  for 
tokens  of  their  matrimony,"  are  omitted. 

1  In  most  eds.,  1552,  "unto." 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Presbyter." 

•  In  ed.  1596,  " t/ieir  /lands." 


'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "here," 
omitted. 

"  In  eds.  1552,  and  all  afterwards,  "re- 
ceiving of  a  ring." 

'  In  two  eds.,  1559,  and  afterwards, 
"and  of." 


340 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  287.  And  the  minister  shall  add  this  blessing. 

^  God  the  Father  bless  you.  ^  God  the  Son  keep  you  : 
God  the  Holy  Ghost  lighten  your  understanding :  The  Lord 
mercifully  with  his  favour  look  upon  you,  and  so  fill  you  with 
all  spiritual  benediction,  and  grace,  that  you  may  have  re- 
mission of  your  sins  in  this  life,  and  in  the  world  to  come  life 
everlasting.     Amen. 

§  288.   Then  shall  they  go  into  thi  quire,  and  the  ministers  or  clerks 
shall  say  or  sing  this  Psalm  follanving. 

Blessed  are  all  they  that  fear  the  Lord  :  and  BeaUi 
walk  in  his  ways. 

For  thou  shalt  eat  the  labour  of  thy'  hands  :  O  well  is 
thee,  and  happy  shalt  thou  be. 

Thy  wife  shall  be  as  the  fruitful  vine  :  upon  the  walls  of 
thy  house. 


I  otnnes. 
cxxviii. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  287.  And  the  Minister  shall  add 
this  blessing. 
God  the  Father,  God  the  Son, 
God  the  Holy  Ghost,  bless,  pre- 
serve, and  keep  you :  the  Lord 
mercifully  with  his  favour  look  upon 
you,  and  so  fill  you  with  all  spiri- 
tual benediction  and  grace,  that 
you  may  so  live  together  in  this 
life,  that  in  the  world  to  come  you  * 
may  have  life  everlasting.    Amen. 

§  288.  Then  the  Ministers  or  Clerks, 
going  to  the  Lord^s  table,  shall  say 
or  sing  this  Psalm  following. 

Blessed  are  all  they,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 
§289.  Or  else  this  Psalm  followingK 

God  be  merciful  unto,  &c 
^  [Same  as  1549-] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  287.  And  the  Minister  shall,  ^*c. 
God  the  Father,  God,  &c 
[Same  as  1553.] 


§  288.    Then  the  Ministers,  or,  ^c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

Blessed  are  all  they,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  289.   Or  else  this  Psalm,  &'c. 
God  be  merciful,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.I 


James  I.   1604. 

§  2S7.  And  tJu  Minister  shall,  &^c. 

God  the  Father,  God,  &c. 

[Same  as  155a.] 

§  288.    Then  the  Ministers,  or,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

Blessed  are  all  they,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 
§  289.   Or  else  this  Psalm,  ^c. 
God  be  merciful,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
i  287.  And  the  Presbyter  or  Minis- 
ter shall,  &'c. 
God  the  Father,  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


J  la  ed.  i<62,  "  thine."  ■  In  Scotch  ecL,  1637,  and  ed.  166a,  "ye.' 

*  In  ed.  1596,  "  Or  this  Psalm." 


Of  Matrimony. 


341 


Thy  children  like  the  olive  branches  :  round  about  thy 
table. 

Lo,  thus  shall  the  man  be  blessed  :  that  feareth  the  I^ord. 

The  Lord  from  out  of  Sion  shall  ^  bless  thee  :  that  thou 
shalt  see  Hierusalem "  in  prosperity  all  thy  life  long. 

Yea,  that  thou  shalt  see  thy  children's  children  :  and  peace 
upon  Israel. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c.  * 

§  289.   Or  else  this  PsaJm  follnving. 

God  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  bless  us  :  and  ^^^^  mUerea- 
shew  us  the   light   of  his   countenance,   and  be     tumostri". 

•  r  1  i  Psalralxvii.' 

merciful  unto  us. 

That  thy  way  may  be  known  upon  the  ^  earth  :  thy  saving 
health  among  all  nations. 


§  288.  Then  the  Presbyter,  Minister, 
or  Clerks  going  to  the  Lord's  Table, 
shall  say  or  sing  this  Psalm  fol- 
lowing, 

Bi-ESSED  is  every  one  Beati 
that  feareth  the  Lord  :  omnes. 
that  walketh  in  his  ways.      Ps.  128. 

For  thou  shalt  eat  the  labour  of 
thine  hands  :  happy  shalt  thou  be, 
and  it  shall  be  well  with  thee. 

Thy  wife  shall  be  as  a  fruitful 
vine  by  the  sides  of  thine  house  : 
thy  children  like  olive  plants,  round 
about  thy  table. 

Behold,  that  thus  shall  the  man 
be  blessed,  that  feareth  the  Lord. 

The  Lord  shall  bless  thee  out 
of  Zion  :  and  thou  shalt  see  the 
good  of  Jerusalem,  all  the  days  of 
thy  life. 

Yea,  thou  shalt  see  thy  children's 
children,  and  peace  upon  Israel. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be :  world  with- 
out end.     Amen. 


§  289.   Or  else  this  Psalm. 

God  be  merciful  unto  Deusmise- 
us,  and  bless  us   :   and     reatur. 
cause  his  face  to  shine    P*^'-  ^7- 
upon  us.  Selah. 

That  thy  way  may  be  known  upon 
earth  :  thy  saving  health  among  all 
nations.        

Charles  II.,  1662. 
§  287.    'H  And  the  Minister  shall 
add  this  Blessing. 

God  the  Father,  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  288.   IT  Then  the  Minister  or,  &=€. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

Blessed  are  all  they  that,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.  to] 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Ameru 

§  289.  IT  Or  this  Psalm. 

God  be  merciful  unto,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


^  In  ed.  13961  1604,  and  1662,  "shall  so 
bless." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "Jerusalem." 

^In.  ed.  1604,  the  Doxology  is  printed 
entire. 


"  In  one  ed.,  1549,  in  eds.  1552,  and 
afterwards,  "  nosiri"  omiiied. 
f  In  one  ed.,  1559,  mispt.  "IL" 
8  In  ed.  1662,  "upon  earth." 


34a 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O  God  :  yea,  let  all  the  people 
praise  thee, 

O  let  the  nations  rejoice  and  be  glad  :  for  thou  shalt  judge 
the  flock  ^  righteously,  and  govern  the  nations  upon  the  *  earth. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O  God  :  let""  all  the  people 
praise  thee. 

Then  shall  the  earth  bring  forth  her  increase  :  and  God, 
even  our^  God,  shall  .give  us  his  blessing. 

God  shall  bless  us,  and  all  the  ends  of  the  world  shall 
fear  him. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c 

As  it  was  in  the,  &c. 

§  290.  TAi  Psalm  ended,  and  the  man  and  woman  kneeling  afore  the 
altar,  the  priest  standing  at  the  altar,  and  turning  his  face  toward 
them,  shall  say. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Answer.  Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Minister'^.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
^  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  &c 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. 
Answer.  But  deliver  us  from  evil     Amen. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Let  the  people  praise  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
290.  T  The  Psalm  ended,  and  the 
man  and thewomah kneeling af or e'^ 
the  Lord's  table :  the  Priest  °  stand- 
ing at  the  table,  and  turning  his 
face  toward  them,  shall  say. 
Lord,  have  mercy,  Ac.- 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

The  Minister. 
O  God  of  Abraham,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
.  .  and  bless  them. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


i>  In  one  ed  ,  1552, 1550,  and  in  all  after, 
'folk." 
'  In  ed.  i66a,  "upon  earth." 
^  In  ed.  1663,  "  yea"  added  with  a  pen. 
'  In  eds.  1596  and  1663,  "our  own. 


290.   The  Psalm  ended,  &'e. 

[Same  as  1553.] 
Lord,  have  mercy,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 
The  Minister. 
O  God  of  Abraham,  &a 

[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 
Let  the  people  praise  thee,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 
29a   The  Psalm  ended,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1553.] 
Lord,  have  mercy,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549-] 

The  Minister. 
O  God  of  Abraham,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 


"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Presbyter." 
■  In  ed.  1663,  "before." 
"  In  ed.  JS78,  "  Minister;"  and  in  Scotch 
ed.,  1637,  "Presbyter." 


Of  Matrimony. 


343 


Minister^.  .0  Lord,  save  thy  servant,  and  thy  handmaid. 

Answer.  Which  put  their  trust  in  thee. 

Minister  i,  O  Lord,  send  them  help  from  thy  holy  place. 

Answer.  And  evermore  defend  them. 

Minister  i.  Be  unto  them  a  tower  of  strength  '. 

Answer.  From  the  face  of  their  enemy. 

Minister"^.  O  Lord,  hear  my  •  prayer. 

Answer.  And  let  my '  cry  come  unto  thee. 

The  Mhiister^.    Let  us  pray'*. 

O  God  of  Abraham,  God  of  Isaac,  God  of  Jacob,  bless 
these  thy  servants,  and  sow  the  seed  of  eternal  life  in  their 
minds",  that  whatsoever  in  thy  holy  word  they  shall  profit- 
ably learn,  they  may  in  deed  fulfil  the  same.  Look,  O  Lord, 
mercifully  upon  them  from  heaven,  and  bless  them : 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O 
God  :  yea,  let  all  the  people  praise 
thee. 

O  let  the  nations  be  glad  and  sing 
for  joy  :  for  thou  shalt  judge  the 
people  righteously,  and  govern  the 
nations  upon  earth.    Selah. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O 
God  :  let  all  the  people  praise  thee. 

Then  shall  the  earth  yield  her 
increase  :  and  God,  even  our  own 
God,  shall  bless  us. 

God  shall  bless  us  :  and  all  the 
ends  of  the  earth  shall  fear  him. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world  with- 
out end.     Amen. 

§  290.  The  Psalm  ended,  ^c. 
[Same  as  1552-] 

LoEX),  have  mercy,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Presbyter. 
O  God  of  Abraham,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  IL  1662. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

§  290.  IT  The  Psalm  ended,  &=c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
Lord,  have  mercy,  &c. 
[Same  as  1349,  toj 
Our  Father  Which  art  in  heaven, 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.    Thy  king- 
dom come.     Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven.     Give  us 
this  day  our  daily  bread.     And  for- 
give us  our  trespasses.  As  we  for- 
give them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation  : 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen. 

Minister.  O  Lord,  save  thy  ser- 
vant, and  thy  handmaid. 
Answer.  Who  put,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
Minister. 
O  God  of  Abraham,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


1  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Presbyter." 
'  In  one  ed.,   1549,   "a  tower  of  de- 
fence. " 

•  In  eds.  ISS2,   and  in  all  afterwards, 
"our." 


•  In  ed.  1596,  and  after,  "Minister." 

"  In    eds.    1552,    and    afterwards,    the 
words,  "Let  us  pray,"  otnitted, 

*  In  ed.  1662,  "hearts." 


344 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


And  as 
thou  didst  send  thy  Angel  Raphael  to  Thobie  and  Sara,  the 
daughter  of  Raguel,  to  their  great  comfort ;  so  vouchsafe  to 
send  thy  blessing  upon  these  thy  servants,  that  they  obeying 
thy  will,  and  alway  being  in  safety  under  thy  protection,  may 
abide  in  thy  love  unto  their  lives'  end :  through  Jesu  *  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  29 1 .    This  prayer  following  shall  he  omitted  whtre  the  woman 
is  past  child-birth. 

O  MERCIFUL  Lord,  and  heavenly  Father,  by  whose  gracious 
gift  mankind  is  increased :  We  beseech  thee,  assist  with  thy 
blessing  these  two  persons,  that  they  may  both  be  fruitful  in 
procreation  of  children;  and  also  live  together  so  long  in 
godly  love  and  honesty,  that  they  may  see  their  childer's" 
children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation,  unto  tliy  *  praise 
and  honour :  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

O  God,  which  by  thy  mighty  power  hast  made  all  things 
of  nought,  which  also  after  other  things  set  in  order  didst 
appoint  that  out  of  man  (created  after  thine  own  image  and 
simihtude)  woman  should  take  her  beginning:   and,  knitting 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

And  as  thou  didst  send  thy  blessing 
upon  Abraham  and  Sara  to  their 
great  comfort :  so,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 

§  291.    This  prayer  next  following 

shall  be,  &'c, 

O  MERCIFUL  Lord  and,  &c 

O  God,  which  by  thy,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§  292.  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 

Almighty  God,  which  at,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

And  as  thou  didst  send,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  291.    This  prayer  next  following, 

O  MERCIFUL  Lord  and  heavenly, 
&c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


O  God,  which  by  thy,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

292.  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 
Almighty  God,  which  at,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  2604. 

And  as  thou  didst  send,  &c 
[Same  as  1553.] 

§  291.    This  prayer  next  following, 
O  MERCIFUL  Lord  and  heavenly, 

&C. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

O  GOD,  which  by  thy,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  292.  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 
Almighty  God,  which  at,  &c, 

[Same  as  1549.] 


»  In  ed.  1596,  and  afterwards,  "Jesus." 
7  In  most  eds.,  issa,  and  1559,  and  all 


afterwards,  "children's  children." 
■  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "»mto  the  praise." 


Of  Matrimony. 


345 


them  together,  didst  teach,  that  it  should  never  be  lawful  to 
put  asunder  those,  whom  thou  by  matrimony  hadst  made  one : 
O  God,  which"  hast  consecrated  the  state  of  matrimony  to 
such  an  excellent  mystery,  that  in  it  is  signified  and  repre- 
sented the  spiritual  marriage  and  unity  betwixt  Christ  and  his 
church:  Look  mercifully  upon  these  thy  servants,  that  both 
this  man  may  love  his  wife,  according  to  thy  word,  (as  Christ 
did  love  his  spouse  the  church,  who  gave  himself  for  it,  loving 
and  cherishing  it  even  as  his  own  flesh ;)  and  also  that  this 
woman  may  be  loving  and  amiable  to  her  husband  as  Rachael, 
wise  as  Rebecca,  faithful  and  obedient  as  Sara;  and  in  all 
quietness,  sobriety,  and  peace,  be  a  follower''  of  holy  and 
godly  matrons.  O  Lord,  bless  them  both,  and  grant  them 
to  inherit  thy"=  everlasting  kingdom,  through  Jesus  ^  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 

^  §  292.  TTien  shall  the  Priest '  bless  the  man  and  the  woman,  saying. 

Almighty  God,  which  at  the  beginning  did  create  our  first 
parents  Adam  and  Eve,  and  did  sanctify  and  join  them  to- 
gether in  marriage :  Pour  upon  you  the  riches  of  his  grace, 
sanctify  and  ►{•^  bless  you,  that  ye  may  please  him  both  in 
body  and  soul,  and  live  together  in  holy  love  unto  your  lives' 
end.     Amen. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

And  as  thou  didst  send,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

291.  This  prayer  next  following, 

O  MERCIFUL  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

O  God,  which  by  thy,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.  J 

292.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter  say, 
Almighty  God,  which  at,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

And  as  thou  didst  send,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
291.  IT  This  Prayer  next  following 
shall  be,  &'c. 


*  In  ed.  1662,  "  who." 

''  In  one  ed.,  1559,  w/j/.  "flower." 
"  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "the  everlasting.' 

*  la  one  ed.,  1549,  "  Jesu." 


O  MERCIFUL  Lord  and,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
that  they  may  see  their  children 
christianly  and  virtuously  brought 
up,  to  thy  praise  and  honour, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

O  God,  who  by  thy  mighty 
power  hast  made  all  things  of  no- 
thing.    Who  also,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
may  be  loving  and  amiable,  faithful 
and  obedient  to  her  husband,  and 
in  all  quietness,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1549.] 

§  292.  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 
Almighty  God  who  at,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


•  In  ed.  1578,  "  the  Minister ;"  in  Scotch 
ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter." 

'  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "the  •{•" 
omitted. 


346 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  294.  Then  shall  be  said  after  the  gospel  a  sermon,  wherein  ordinarily  (so 
oft  as  there  is  any  marriage)  the  office  of*  man  and  -wife  shall  be  declared 
according  to  holy  scripture.  Or  if  there  be  no  sermon,  the  minister^  shall 
read  this  that  followeth. 

All  ye  which  be  married,  or  which  intend  to  take  the  holy- 
estate  of  matrimony  upon  you :  hear  what  *  holy  scripture  doth 
say,  as  touching  the  duty  of  husbands  toward  their  wives,  and 
wives  toward  their  husbands. 

Saint  Paul  (in  his  Epistle  to  the  E[Jhesians  the  fifth  chapter) 
doth  give  this  commandment  to  all  married  men. 

Ye  husbands,  love  your  wives,  even  as  Christ  loved  the 
church,  and  hath  given  himself  for  it,  to  sanctify  it,  purging 
it  in  the  fountain  of  water,  through  the ''  word,  that  he  might 
make  it  unto  himself  a  glorious  congregation,  not  having  spot, 
or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing ;  but  that  it  should  be  holy  and 
blameless.     So  men  are  bound  to  love  their  own  wives  as 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  293.  Then  shall  begin  the  Commu- 
nion, §  294.  and  after  the  Gospel 
shall  be  said  a  sermon,  wherein, 

[Continued  same  as  1549-1 

All  ye  which  be  married,  &c 
[The  same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  293.  Then  shall  begin  the  Commu- 
nion, §  294.  and  after  the  Gospel 
shall  be  said  a  sermon,  wherein, 
6fc. 

[Same  as  1549.1 

All  ye  which  be,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

§  293.  Then  shall  begin  the  Commu- 
nioHy  §  294.  and  after  the  Gospel 


«  In  eds.  1552  and  1539,  "  of  a  man  ;"  in 
Scotch  cd.,  1637,  "of  a  husband  and  wife." 

''  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter 
or  Minister." 


shall  be  said  a  sermon,  wherein, 

[Same  as  i549.] 

All  ye  which   be  married,   or 
which  intend  to  take,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  293.  Then  shall  begin  the  Commu- 
nion, §  294.  and  after  the  Gospel 
shall  be  said  a  sermon,  wherein. 

All  ye  which  be  married,  or  which 
intend  to  take  the  holy  estate  of 
Matrimony  upon  you,  hear  what 
the  holy  Scripture  doth  say  as  touch- 
ing the  duty  of  husbands  towards 
their  wives,  and  wives  towards  their 
husbands. 

Saint  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians,   the    fifth 
chapter,     doth    give     ^ph.  5.  25. 
this  commandment  to  all  married 


'  In  ed.  i66a,  "the  holy." 
^  In  most  eds.,   1553,  and  1559,  "thy 
word." 


Of  Matrimony. 


347 


their  own  bodies  :  he  that  loveth  his  own  wife,  loveth  himself. 
For  never  did  any  man  hate  his  own  flesh,  but  nourisheth  and 
cherisheth  it,  even  as  the  Lord  doth  the  congregation  ;  for  we 
are  members  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones.  For 
this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  father  and  mother,  and  shall  be 
joined  unto  his  wife,  and  they  two  shall  be  one  flesh.  This 
mystery  is  great,  but  I  speak  of  Christ  and  of  the  congre- 
gation. Nevertheless,  let  every  one  of  you  so  love  his  own 
wife,  even  as  himself. 

Likewise  the  same  Saint  Paul  (writing  to  the  Colossians) 
speaketh  thus  to  all  men  that  be  married  :  Ye     coioss.  m ' 
men,  love  your  wives  and  be  not  bitter  unto  them. 

Hear  also  what  saint  Peter  the  apostle  of  Christ,  (which 
was  himself  a  married  man.)  saith  unto  all  men       _  ,  ... 

"'  .  I  Pet.  111. 

that  are  marned.     Ye  husbands,  dwell  with  your 
wives  according  to  knowledge  :  giving  honour  unto  the  wife, 
a«  unto  the  weaker  vessel,  and  as  heirs  together  of  the  grace 
of  life,  so  that  your  prayers  be  not  hindered. 


Husbands,  love  your  wives,  even 
as  Christ  also  loved  the  Church, 
and  gave  himself  for  it,  that  he 
might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with 
the  washing  of  water,  by  the  Word  ; 
that  he  might  present  it  to  himself 
a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot 
or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing  ;  but 
that  it  should  be  holy  and  without 
blemish.  So  ought  men  to  love 
their  wives  as  their  own  bodies  :  he 
that  loveth  his  wife,  loveth  himself. 
For  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own 
flesh,  but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth 
it,  even  as  the  Lord  the  Cbvu-ch : 
For  we  are  members  of  his  body, 
of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones.  For 
this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his 
father  and  mother,  and  shall  be 
joined  unto  his  vdfe,  and  they  two 
shall  be  one  flesh.  This  is  a  great 
mystery ;  but  I  speak  concerning 
Christ  and  the  Church.  Neverthe- 
less, let  every  one  of  you  in  par- 
ticular, so  love  his  wife,  even  as 
himselJC 


Likewise  the   same    Saint  Paul 
writing  to  the  Colos-      „  . 
sians,    speaketh   thus 
to  all  men  that  be "  married,  Hus- 
bands, love  your  wives,  and  be  not 
bitter  against  them. 

Hear  also  what  Saint  Peter  the 
Apostle  of  Christ,  ^  p^t, 
who  was  himself  a 
married  man,  saith  unto  all  men  ° 
that  are  married.  Ye  husbands,  dwell 
with  your  wives  according  to  know- 
ledge, giving  honour  unto  the  wife,  as 
unto  the  weaker  vessel,  and  as  being 
heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life, 
that  your  prayers  be  not  hindered. 

Charles  IL  1662. 
§  294.  IT  A/ier  which,  if  there  be  no 

Sermon    declaring    the   duties    of 

Man  and  Wife,  the  Minister  shall 

read  as  followetk. 

All  ye  that  are  married,  or  that 
intend  to  take,  &c. 

[Same  as  1637,  except  marginal  references 
are  omitted.] 


•  In  eds.  1552,  and  oneed.,  1559,  tnispr.  "Coioss.  iv." 
Ined,  1662,  "are."  "  In  ed.  1662,  "them." 


348 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Hitherto  ye  have  heard  the  duty  of  the  husband  toward 
he  wife. 

Now  hkewise,  ye  wives,  hear  and  learn  your  duty"  to- 
ward P  your  husbands,  even  as  it  is  plainly  set  forth  in  holy 
scripture  ?. 

Saint  Paul  (in  the  forenamed  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians') 
teacheth  you  thus :  Ye  women  submit  yourselves     ^ 
unto  your  own  husbands  as  unto  the  Lord :   for      ^  ^'  ^' 
the  husband  is  the  wife's  head,  even  as  Christ  is  the  head  of 
the  church :  And  he  also  is »  the  Saviour  of  the  whole  body. 
Therefore  as  the  church,  or  congregation,  is   subject  unto 
Christ :  so  likewise  let  the  wives  also  be  in  subjection  unto 
their  own  husbands  in  all  things.     And  again  he  saith  :  Let 
the  wife  reverence   her  husband.      And    in   his       j^^  ...  ^ 
Epistle  to  the  Colossians  Saint  Paul  giveth  you 
this  short  lesson :  Ye  wives,  submit  yourselves  unto  your  own 
husbands,  as  it  is  convenient  in  the  Lord. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Hitherto  ye  have  heard,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549  to  end.] 

§  295.  TAe  fiew  married  persons,  &"€. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Hitherto  ye  have  heard,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

i  295.  7/4^  new  married  persons,  &"€. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 
Hitherto  ye  have  heard,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

i  295.  The  new  married  persons,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Hitherto  ye  have  heard  the  duty 
of  the  husband  towards "  the  wife. 
Now  likewise,  ye  wives,  hear  and 
learn  your  duties  towards  your  hus- 
bands, even  as  it  is  plainly  set  forth 
in  holy  Scripture. 

Saint  Paul  in  the  aforenamed 
Epistle  to  the  Ephe-  j.^  ^^ 
sians,  teacheth  you 
thus ;  Ye'  wives,  submit  your  selves 
unto  your  own  husbands,  as  unto 
the  Lord.  For  the  husband  is  the 
head  of  the  wife,  even  as  Christ  is 
the  head  of  the  Church :  and  he 
is  the  Saviour  of  the  body.  There- 
fore as  the  Church  is  subject  unto 
Christ,  so  let  the  wives  be  to  their 
own  husbands  in  every  thing.  And 
again  he  saith,  Let  the  wife*  reve- 
rence her  husband. 


"  In  ed.  1604,  "  duties." 

f  In  most  eds.,  1552,  and  afterwards, 
"towards." 

1  The  two  paragraphs  beginning,  "Hi- 
therto ye  have  heard,"  "  Now  likewise, 
ye  wives,"  are  in  some  eds.  of  155a  and 
I5S9  printed  in  a  smaller  type,  the  same 
as  that  of  the  rubrics. 


'  In  ed.  1553,  and  in  most  eds.,  1559, 
the  words,  "fifth  chapter,"  are  inserted. 

•  In  eds.  iss^.  ^nd  after,  "  he  is  also." 

*  In  some  eds.,   1552,  and  in  one  ed., 
I5S9.  fnispr.  "  Coloss.  iv." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "toward." 

"In  ed.  1662,  "  ye"  ontttted. 

>  In  ed.  1662,  "  wife  see  that  she." 


Of  Matrimony. 


349 


Saint  Peter  also  doth  instruct  you  very  godly,  thus  saying : 
Let?  wives  be  subject  to  their  own  husbands,  so  ^p^^  ...  , 
that  if  any  obey  not  the  word,  they  may  be  won 
without  the  word,  by  the  conversation  of  the  wives;  while 
they  behold  your  chaste  conversation,  coupled  with  fear : 
whose  apparel  let  it  not  be  outward,  with  broided  *  hair,  and 
trimming  about  with  gold,  either  in  putting  on  of  gorgeous  ap- 
parel :  But  let  the  hid  man,  which  is  in  the  heart,  be  without 
all  corruption,  so  that  the  spirit  be  mild  and  quiet,  which  is 
a  precious  thing  in  the  sight  of  God.  For  after  this  manner 
(in  the  old  time)  did  the  holy  women,  which  trusted  in  God, 
apparel  themselves,  being  subject  to  their  own  husbands :  as 
Sara  obeyed  Abraham  calling  him  lord,  whose  daughters  ye 
are  made,  doing  well  and  being  not  dismayed  with  any  fear. 

§  295.   The  new  married  persons  {the  same  day  of  their  marriage)  must 
receive  the  holy  communion. 


And  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Colos- 
sians,  Saint  Paul  giv- 
eth  you  this  short  les-  ^' 

son.  Wives,  submit  your  selves  unto 
your  own  husbands,  as  it  is  fit  in 
the  Lord. 

Saint  Peter  also  doth  instruct  you 
very  godly  *",  thus  say- 
ing,  Ye  wives,  be  in  ^  ^  •  3-  i- 
subjection  to  your  own  husbands ; 
that  if  any  obey  not  the  Word,  they 
also  may  without  the  Word  be  won 
by  the  conversation  of  the  wives ; 
while  they  behold  your  chaste  con- 
versation coupled  with  fear.  Whose 
adorning  let  it  not  be  that  outward 
adorning  of  plaiting  the  hair,  and 
of  wearing  of  gold,  or  of  putting  on 
of  apparel  J  but  let  it  be  the  hidden 
man  of  the  heart,  in  that  which  is 
not  corruptible,  even  the  ornament 
of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  is 
in  the  sight  of  God  of  great  price. 
For  after  this  manner  in  the  old 


time,  the  holy  women  also  who 
trusted  in  God,  adorned  themselves, 
being  in  subjection  unto  their  o\vn 
husbands ;  even  as  Sarah  obeyed 
Abraham,  calling  him  Lord  ;  whose 
daughters  ye  are  as  long  as  ye  do 
well,  and  are  not  afraid  with  any 
amazement. 

§  295.  The  new  married  persons,  dfc. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.   1662. 

Hitherto  ye  have  heard,  &c. 
[Same  as  1637.] 

§  295.  IT  .^'f  w  convenient  that  the 
new-ma7~ried  persons  should  re- 
ceive the  holy  Communion  at  the 
time  of  their  marriage,  or  at  the 
first  opportunity  after  their  mar- 
riage. 


y  In  one  ed.,  1349,  "Let  the  wives."  •  In  one  ed.,  1552,  mispr.  "  i  Pet.  iv." 

»  Ib  most  eds.,  1552,  and  afterwards,  "braided."        >>  In  ed.  1662,  "  very  well." 


35°  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


THE  ORDER  FOR  THE 

VISITATION   OF  THE  SICK, 

AND  THE  COMMUNION   OF  THE   SAME. 

§  297.  *|F  The  Priest  "^  eniaing  into  the  sick  person^ s  house,  shall  say^ 

Peace  be  in  this  house,  and  to  all  that  dwell  in  it. 

§  298.    When  he  cometh  into  the  sick  man^ s  presence,  he  shall  say  this  Psalm. 

Hear  my  prayer,  (O  Lord,)  and  consider  my  Domine 
desire  :  hearken  unto  me  for  thy  truth  and  right-  exaudi. 
eousness' sake.  PsaimcxiHi. 

And  enter  not  into  judgement  with  thy  servant  :  for  in  thy 
sight  shall  no  man  living  be  justified. 

For  the  enemy  hath  persecuted  my  soul ;  he  hath  sfnitten 
my  life  down  to  the  ground  :  he  hath  laid  me  in  the  darkness, 
as  the  men  that  have  been  long  dead. 

Therefore  is  my  spirit  vexed  within  me  :  and  my  heart 
within  me  is  desolate. 


Second  Edward  VI.  1552. 

THE  order  for  THE 

VISITATION  OF  THE  SICK. 

§  297.  T  The  Priest  entering,  dfc. 
Peace  Ije  in  this  house,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  298.    When  he  cometh  into  the  sick 
man's pyresence,  §  299.  he  shall  say 
kneeling  dmvn. 
Remember  not,  Lord,  &c 

[Same  as  i549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

THE  ORDER  FOR  THE 

VISITATION  OF  THE  SICIC 
§  297.   The  Priest  entering,  &'c. 
Peace  be  in  this  house,  &c, 
[Same  as  1549.] 


§  298.  When  he  cometh  into  the  sick 
man's  presence,  %  299.  he  shall 
say  kneeling  down. 

Remember  not.  Lord,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

THE  ORDER   FOR  THE 

VISITATION  OF  THE  SICK. 

§  297.    The  Priest  entering,  ^c. 
Peace  be  in  this  house,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  298.  When  he  cometh  into  the  sick 
man's  presence,  §  299.  he  shall  say 
kneeling  down, 

Remember  not.  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


«  In  ed.  1578,  "  Minister." 


The  Visitation  of  the  Sick. 


351 


Yet  do  I  remember  the  time  past;  I  muse  upon  all  thy 
works  :  yea,  I  exercise  myself  in  the  works  of  thy  hands. 

I  stretch  forth  mine  hands  unto  thee  :  my  soul  gaspeth  unto 
thee  as  a  thirsty  land. 

Hear  me,  (O  lord,)  and  that  soon,  for  my  spirit  waxeth 
faint  :  hide  not  thy  face  from  me,  lest  I  be  like  unto  them 
that  go  down  into  the  pit. 

O  let  me  hear  thy  loving-kindness  betimes  in  the  morning, 
for  in  thee  is  my  trust  :  shew  thou  me  the  way  that  I  should 
walk  in,  for  I  lift  up  my  soul  unto  thee. 

Dehver  me,  (O  lord,)  from  mine  enemies  :  for  I  fly  unto 
thee  to  hide  me. 

Teach  me  to  do  the  thing  that  pleaseth  thee,  for  thou  art 
my  god,  let  thy  loving  spirit  lead  me  forth  unto  the  land  of 
righteousness. 

Quicken  me,  (O  lord,)  for  thy  name's  sake,  and  for  thy 
righteousness'  sake  bring  my  soul  out  of  trouble. 

And  of  thy  goodness  slay  mine  enemies  :  and  destroy  all 
them  that  vex  my  soul ;  for  I  am  thy  servant. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the  son,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

§  299.  IT  With  this  anthem. 

Remember  not,  Lord,  our  iniquities,  nor  the  iniquities  of 
our  forefathers.  Spare  us,  good  Lord,  spare  thy  people,  whom 
thou  hast  redeemed  with  thy  most  precious  blood,  and  be  not 
angry  with  us  for  ever. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

THE  ORDER   FOR  THE 

VISITATION  OF  THE  SICK. 
§  297.    The  Presbyter  entering  into. 

Peace  be  to  this  house,  &c. 

§  298.  IVhen  he  cometh  into  the  sick 
man's  presence,  §  299.  he  shall  say 
kneeling  down. 

Remember  not,  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 
THE  ORDER 

FOR   THE 

VISITATION  OF  THE  SICK. 
§  296.   H  When  any  person  is  sick, 

notice  shall  be  given  thereof  to  the 

Minister  of  the  Parish;    §  297. 

who  coming  into  the  sick  person's 

house,  shall  say, 

Peace  be  to  this  house,  and  to 
all  that  dwell  in  it. 
§  298.   "IT  When  he  cometh  into  the 

sick  mart's  presence,  §  299.  he  shall 

say,  kneeling  doT.vn, 

Remember  not,  Lord,  &c 
[Same  as  1549,  toj 
with  us  for  ever. 

Answer. 

Spare  us,  good  Lord. 


352- 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us  \ 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven,  &c. 

And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. 

Answer.  But  deliver  us  from  evil  ^     Amen. 

The  Minister^.     O  Lord,  save  thy  servant. 

Answer.  Which  putteth  his  6  trust  in  thee. 

Minister^.  Send  him  help  from  thy  holy  place. 

Answer.  And  evermore  mightily  defend  him  s. 

Minister  \  Let  the  enemy  have  none  ^  advantage  of  him. 

Answer.  Nor  the  wicked  approach  to  hurt  him. 

Minister '.  Be  unto  him,  O  Lord,  a  strong  tower. 

Atiswer.  From  the  face  of  his  enemy. 

Minister  ^.  Lord ',  hear  my  prayer  •■. 

Answer.  And  let  my '  cry  come  unto  thee. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  i549.] 

Minister. 
O  Lord,  look  down,  &c 
Hear  as,  almighty  and,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  &c 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

The  Minister. 
O  Lord,  look  down,  &c. 

Hear  us,  Almighty  and,  kc. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


*  In  cd.  i66a,  this  line  is  printed  in 
smaller  type,  as  a  response. 

•  In  the  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  the  words, 
"  for  thine  is  the  kingdom,  the  power 
and  the  glory,  for  ever  and  ever,"  are 
added. 

f  In    Scotch   ed.,    1637,    "Presbyter" 
throughout. 
(  In  ed.  1663,    the  words  "his"  and 


James  L  1604. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  &c 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

The  Minister. 
O  Lord,  look  down,  &c. 

Hear  us.  Almighty  and,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,   1637. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

Presbyter. 
O  Lord,  look  down,  &c 
Hear  us.  Almighty  and,  <Scc. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


"him"  are  printed  in  italics,  and  so 
throughout  the  Order." 

''  In  ed.  1662,  "no." 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  in  ed.  1663, 
"O  Lord." 

*  In  ed.  iss',  and  in  all  afterwards, 
"our  prayers.' 

'  In  eds.  1552,  and  in  idl  afterwards, 
"our." 


The  Visitation  of  the  Sick. 


353 


Minister "".  Let  us  pray. 

O  Lord,  look  down  from  heaven,  behold,  visit,  and  relieve 
this  thy  servant :  Look  upon  him  with  the  eyes  of  thy  mercy, 
give  him  comfort,  and  sure  confidence  in  thee :  Defend  him 
from  the  danger  of  the  enemy,  and  keep  him  in  perpetual 
peace,  and  safety  :  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

Hear  us.  Almighty  and  most  merciful  God  and  Saviour : 
extend  thy  accustomed  goodness  to  this  thy  servant,  which 
is  grieved  with  sickness :  Visit  him,  O  Lord,  as  thou  didst 
visit  Peter's  wife's  mother  and  the  Captain's  servant.  And  as 
thou  preservedst  Thobie  and  Sara  by  thy  Angel  from  danger  ° : 
So  restore  °  unto  ^  this  sick  person  his  former  health,  (if  it  be 
thy  will,)  or  else  give  him  grace  so  to  take  thy  correction  \ 
that  after  this  painful  life  ended,  he  may  dwell  with  thee  in 
life  everlasting.     Amen''. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  300.  •][  Then  the  Minister  shall 
say. 

Let  us  pray. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven, 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy  king- 
dom come.  Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us 
this  day  our  daily  bread.  And  for- 
give us  our  trespasses,  As  we  for- 
give them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation : 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen. 

Minister.  O  Lord,  save  thy  ser- 
vant ; 

Answer.  Which  putteth  his,  &c. 
[Same  as  IS49,  to] 

.  .  .  cry  come  unto  Thee. 


Minister. 
O  Lord,  look  down,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

.  .  .  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

Hear  us,  Almighty  and  most 
merciful  God  and  Saviour ;  extend 
thy  accustomed  goodness  to  this 
thy  servant  who  is  grieved  with 
sickness.  Sanctify,  we  beseech  thee, 
this  thy  fatherly  correction  to  him  ; 
that  the  sense  of  his  weakness  may 
add  strength  to  his  faith,  and  se- 
riousness to  his  repentance.  That 
if  it  shall  be  thy  good  pleasure  to 
restore  him  to  his  former  health, 
he  may  lead  the  residue  of  his  life 
in  thy  fear,  and  to  thy  glory  :  or 
else  give  him  grace  so  to  take  thy 
visitation,  that  after  this  painful  life 
ended  he  may  dwell  with  thee  in 
life  everlasting,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 


"  In  most  eds.,  iS59,  "  the  Minister ;" 
in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Presbyter." 

"  In  eds.  1352,  and  in  all  afterwards,  the 
words,  "  and  as  thou  preservedst  Thobie 
and  Sara  by  thy  angel  from  danger,"  are 
omitted. 

'  In   eds.  1532,  and  in  all  afterwards 


until  1662,  "  So  visit  and  restore." 
p  In  ed.  1604,   and   Scotch  ed.,  1637, 

"  to  this." 
1  In  eds.  1532,  and  in  all  afterwards, 

"  thy  visitation." 
'  In  ed.  1604,  "  Amen  "  omitted. 


Aa 


354 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549- 


§  301.    Then  shall  the  Minister  exhort  the  sick  person  after  this  form, 
or  other  like. 

Dearly  beloved,  know  this,  that  Almighty  God  is  the  Lord 
over  *  life,  and  death,  and  over  *  all  things  to  them  pertaining, 
as  youth,  strength,  health,  age,  weakness,  and  sickness.  Where- 
fore, whatsoever  your  sickness  is,  know  you  certainly,  that  it 
is  God's  visitation.  And  for  what  cause  soever  this  sickness 
is  sent  unto  you ;  whether  it  be  to  try  your  patience  for  the 
example  of  other  %  and  that  your  faith  may  be  found,  in  the 
day  of  the  Lord,  laudable,  glorious,  and  honourable,  to  the 
increase  of  glory,  and  endless  felicity  :  or  else  it  be  sent  unto 
you  to  correct  and  amend  in  you,  whatsoever  doth  offend 
the  eyes  of  our  *  heavenly  Father :  know  you  certainly,  that 
if  you  truly  repent  you  of  your  sins,  and  bear  your  sickness 
patiently,  trusting  in  God's  mercy,  for  his  dear  Son  Jesus 
Christ's  sake,  and  render  unto  him  humble  thanks  for  his 
fatherly  visitation,  submitting  yourself  wholly  to  ^  his  will ; 
it  shall  turn  to  your  profit,  and  help  you  forward  in  the  right 
way  that  leadeth  unto  everlasting  life  *. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  301.   Then  shall  the  Minister,  &'c. 
Dearly  beloved,  know  this,  && 
[Same  as  1549-] 
§  302.  If  the  person  visited  be  very 
sick,  then  the  Curate  •  may  end  his 
exhortation  in  this  place. 
S  Take  therefore  in  good  worth, 

[The  same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  301.    Then  shall  the  Minister,  &'c. 
Dearly  beloved,  know  this,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  302.  If  the  person  visited,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1553.] 
Take  therefore  in  good  worth,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

i  301.    Then  shall  the  Minister,  Sr'c. 
Dearly  beloved,  know  this,  <tc. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
i  302.  If  the  person  visited,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1553.] 
Take  therefore  in  good  worth,  &a 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

301.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter  or 
Minister,  Sr*c. 

Dearly  beloved,  know  this,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

302.  If  the  person  visited,  &'c. 

[Same  as  issa-l 
Take  therefore  iagood  worth,  &c 
[Same  as  15490 


•  In  eds.  1553,  and  afterwards,  "  of." 
'  In  ed.  i66a,  "  of." 

■  In  ed.  166a,  "of  others." 

*  In  eds.  1596,  1604,  and  afterwards, 
'  your." 


f  In  Scotch  ed.,  X637,  and  ed.  1663, 

"unto." 
•  In  ed.  1604,  "  unto  life  everlasting." 
'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  the  Presbyter 

or  Curate," 


The  Visitation  of  the  Sick. 


335 


Take  therefore  in  good  worth  the  chastement''  of  the 
Lord :  for  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chastiseth. 
Yea,  (as  Saint  Paul  saith,)  he  scourgeth  every  visited  be  very 
son,  which  he  receiveth  :  if  you "  endure  chas-  curate'may  end 
tisement,  he  ofifereth  himself  unto  you  as  unto  his  exhortation 
his  own  children.  What  son  is  he  that  the  father  ^'  '  '^  ^  ^'^^' 
chastiseth  not?  If  ye  be  not  under  correction  (whereof  all 
the  ^  true  children  are  partakers),  then  are  ye  bastards,  and 
not  children. 

Therefore  seeing  that  when  our  carnal  fathers  do  correct 
us,  we  reverently  obey  them,  shall  we  not  now  much  rather 
be  obedient  to  our  spiritual  Father,  and  so  live  ?  And  they 
for  a  few  days  do  chastise  s  us  after  their  own  pleasure :  but 
he  doth  chastise  us  for  our  profit,  to  the  intent  he  may  make 
us  partakers  of  his  holiness.  These  words,  good  brother,  are 
God's  words,  and  written  in  holy  scripture  for  our  comfort  and 
instruction,  that  we  should  patiently  and  with  thanksgiving 
bear  our  heavenly  Father's  correction,  whensoever  by  any 
manner  of  adversity  it  shall  please  his  gracious  goodness  to 
visit  us. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  301.  %  Then  shall  the  Minister 
exhort,  ^c. 

Dearly  beloved,  know  this,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  302.  H  If  the  person  visited  be  very 
sick,  then  the  Curate  may  end  his 
exhortation  in  this  place,  or  else 
proceed. 

Take  therefore  in  good  part  the 
chastisement  of  the  Lord  :  For  (as 
Saint  Paul  saith  in  the  twelfth  Chap- 
ter to  the  Hebrews)  whom  the  Lord 
loveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scourgetli 
every  son  whom  he  receiveth.  If 
ye  endure  chastening,  God  dealeth 
with  you  as  with  sons ;  for  what 
son  is  he  whom  the  father  chasten- 


eth not  ?  But  if  ye  be  without  chas- 
tisement, whereof  all  are  partakers, 
then  are  ye  bastards,  and  not  sons. 
Furthermore,  we  have  had  fathers- 
of  our  flesh,  which  corrected  us,  and 
we  gave  them  reverence  :  shall  we 
not  much  rather  be  in  subjection 
unto  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  live  ? 
For  they  verily  for  a  few  days  chas- 
tened us  after  their  own  pleasure  ; 
but  he  for  our  profit,  that  we  might 
be  partakers  of  his  holiness.  These 
words,  good  brother,  are  written  in 
holy  Scripture  for  our  comfort  and 
instruction,  that  we  should  patiently, 
and  with  thanksgiving  bear  our  hea- 
venly Father's  correction,  whenso- 
ever by  any  manner  of  adversity  it 
shall  please  his  gracious  goodness 
to  visit  us. 


^  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "chastisement." 
"  In  one  ed.,  1549,  this  note  omitted; 
in  most  eds.   1552,   and  1559,  and  in  all 
afterwards,    it    appears    as    an    ordinary 
rubric, 
■i  In  eds.  1552,  "in  this  place." 


'In  ed.  1604,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 
"ye." 

f  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  all 
true." 

i  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1559,  "chasten." 


356 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


And  there  should  ^  be  no  greater  comfort  to  christian  per- 
sons, than  to  be  made  Hke  unto  Christ,  by  suffering  pati- 
ently adversities,  troubles,  and  sicknesses.  For  he  himself 
went  not  up  to  joy,  but  first  he  suffered  pain  :  he  entered  not 
into  his  glory,  before  he  was  crucified.  So  truly  our  way  to 
eternal  joy  is  to  suflfer  here  with  Christ,  and  our  door  to  enter 
into  eternal  life  is  gladly  to  die  with  Christ,  that  we  may  rise 
again  from  death,  and  dwell  with  him  in  everlasting  life. 
Now  therefore  taking  your  sickness,  which  is  thus  profitable 
for  you,  patiently :  I  exhort  you  in  the  name  of  God,  to  re- 
member the  profession  which  you  made  unto  God  in  your 
Baptism.  And  forasmuch  as  after  this  life  there  is  account' 
to  be  given  unto  the  righteous  Judge,  of'  whom  all  must  be 
judged  without  respect  of  persons :  I  require  you  to  examine 
yourself  and  your  state',  both  toward  God  and  man,  so  that 
accusing  and  condemning  yourself  for  your  o^vn  faults,  you 
may  find  mercy  at  our  heavenly  Father's  hand,  for  Christ's 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

And  there  should  be,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§  303.  IF  Here  the  Minister  shall,  ^c. 

Dost  thou  believe  in  God  the 
Father  Almighty  ? 

§  304.  ^  And  so  forth,  as  it  is  in 
Baptism. 

%  306. 1  Then  shall  the  Minister  ex- 
amine, &>€. 

[Same  as  i549'] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
And  there  should  be,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§  303.  Here  the  Minister  shall,  6fe. 
Dost  thou  believe  in  God  the 
Father  Almighty  ? 
§  304.    And  so  forth,  as  it  is  in 

Baptism. 
§  306.  Then  sJiall  the  Minister  ex- 
amine, &=€. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

And  there  should  be,  &c. 
§  303.  Here  the  Minister  shall,  &'c. 

Dost  thou  believe  in  God  the 
Father  Almighty,  &c 

§  304.  As  it  is  in  Baptism. 

§  306.  Then  shall  the  Minister  ex- 
amine, &=€. 

[Same  as  iS49l 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
And  there  should  be,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  303.  Here  the  Presbyter  or  Minister 
shall,  &'c. 
Dost  thou  believe  in  God  the 

Father  Almighty  ? 

§  304.  {And  so  forth  as  it  is  in  Bap- 
tism). 

§  306.  TTten  shall  the  Presbyter  or 
Minister  examine,  &'c, 
[Same  as  1549.] 


^  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "would." 
'  In  most  eds.,  1559,  in  ed.  1604,  and 
Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  a  count ;"  but  in  one 


ed.,  1559,  and  in  ed.  1662,  "an  •ccotint." 
*  In  ed.  i66a,  "  by  whom." 
I  In  ed.  1663,  "  estate." 


The  Visitation  of  the  Sick. 


357 


sake,  and  not  be"  accused  and  condemned  in  that  fearful 
judgment.  Therefore  I  shall  shortly  rehearse  the  articles  of 
our  faith,  that  ye°  may  know  whether  you  do  believe  as 
a  christian  man  should  believe  °  or  no. 

§  303.  Here  the  minister  shall  rehearse  the  articles  of  the  faith,  saying  thus. 

Dost  thou  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty  ? 

§  304.  And  so  forth,  as  it  is  in  Baptism, 

§  306.  Theti  shall  the  minister  examine  whether  he  be  in  charity  with  all  the 
world :  Exhorting  him  to  forgive  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart  all  persons 
that  have  offended  him  :  and  if  he  have  offended  other  p  to  ask  them  for- 
giveness :  and  where  he  hath  done  injury  or  wrong  to  any  man,  that  he 
make  amends  to  his  uttermost powerX 

And  if  he  have  not  afore  disposed 
his  goods,  let  him  then  make  his  will'.  (But  men  must  be  oft  admonished 
that  they  set  an  order  for  their "  temporal  goods  and  lands  when  they  be 
in  health. )     ■ 


Charles  II.  1662. 
And  there  should  be,  &c. 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
Therefore  I  shall  rehearse  to  you 
the  Articles  of  our  Faith,  that  you 
may  know  whether  you  do  believe 
as  a  Christian  man  should,  or  no. 

§  303.  IF  Here  the  Minister  shall  re- 
hearse the  Articles  of  the  Faith, 
saying  thus. 

Dost  thou  believe  in  God  the 
Father  Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven 
and  earth? 

And  in  Jesus  Christ  his  only  be- 
gotten Son  our  Lord?  and  that  he 
was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
bom  of  the  Virgin  Mary ;  that  he 
suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  was 
crucified,  dead  and  buried ;  that  he 
went  down  into  hell,  and  also  did 
rise  again  the  third  day ;  that  he 
ascended  into  heaven,  and  sitteth 
at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father 


Almighty,  and  from  thence  shall 
come  again  at  the  end  of  the  world 
to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  ? 

And  dost  thou  believe  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  holy  Catholick 
Church,  the  Communion  of  Saints, 
the  Remission  of  sins,  the  Resur- 
rection of  the  flesh,  and  everlasting 
life  after  death  ? 

§  305.  TF  The  sick  person  shall 
answer. 
All  this  I  stedfastly  believe. 

§  306.  H  Then  shall  the  Minister  ex- 
amine whether  he  repent  him  trtdy 
of  his  sins,  and  be  in  charity  with 
all  the  world  ;  exhorting  him,  ^'c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
make  amends  to  the  uttermost  of 
his  power. 

And  if  he  hath  not  be- 
fore disposed  of  his  goods,  let  him 
then  be  admonished  to  make  his 
Will,       [Continued  on  p.  359.] 


■"  In  ed.  1604,  "not  to  be." 

"  In  ed.  1596,  "you." 

"  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "be- 
lieve "  omitted. 

V  Ined.  1662,  "hath  offended  any  other." 

1  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "to  the 
uttermost  of  his  power." 


■■  In  eds.  1S78, 1604,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 
this  paragraph  runs  on,  "make  his  will, 
and  also  declare  his  debts  what  he  oweth," 
&c.,  down  to  "  quietness  of  his  executors  ;" 
and  then  follows  the  paragraph,  "  But  men 
must  be,"  &c. 

•  In  two  eds.,  1549,  mispr.  "they." 


3?8 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


And  also  *  This  may  be 
to  •  declare  his  debts,  zuhat  he  oweth,  and  what  is  owing  ^°?^.  l>efore  the 
unto  "  him :  /or^  discharging  of  his  conscience,  and  quiet-  "j^  payers,  as^e 
ness  of  his  executors  *.  shall  see  cause  1. 

§  308.  The  minister  may  not  forget  nor  omit  to  move  the  sick  person  (and 
that  most  earnestly)  to  liberality  toward  the  poor. 

§  309-  IT  ^ere  shall  the  sick  person  make  a  special  confession,  if  he  feel  his 
conscience  troubled  with  any  weighty  matter.  After  which  confession,  the 
Priest*  shall  absolve  him  after  this  form  • . 

and  the  same  form  of  absolution 
shall  be  used  in  all  private  confessions  ••. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  left  power  to  his  Church 
to  absolve  all  sinners,  which"  truly  repent  and  believe  in 
him,  of  his  great  mercy  forgive  thee  ^  thine  offences :  and  by 
his  authority  committed  to  me,  I  absolve  thee  from  all  thy 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

And  also  to  declare,  &^c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

i307-  IT  These  words  before  rehearsed, 
may  be  said  before  the  Minister  *  be- 
gin his  prayer,  as  he  shall  see  cause*. 

i  308.  %  The  Minister  may  not,  &'c. 

i  309.  \  Here  shall  the  sick,  iSr'c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
absolve  him  after  this  sort. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 
i  310.  T  -^nd  then  the  Priest,  &'c. 
%  Let  us  pray. 
O  MOST  merciful  God,  &c 
[The  same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
And  also  to  declare,  &*c. 
i  307.  These  words  before,  S^'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
1  308.  The  Afinister  may  not,  &'c, 

i  309.  J/ere  shall  the  sick  person,  &'c. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


'  In  cds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "to" 
omitted. 

"  In  one  ed.,  1549.  "to." 

»  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  for"  omitted. 

y  In  most  eds.,  1352,  and  1559,  this 
note  omitted,  and  the  substance  appears 
as  a  rubric. 

"  In  eds.  1578,  "  the  Minister ;"  in 
Scotched..  1637,  "the  Presbyter." 

*  In  eds.  1552,  and  in  all  afterwards, 
"  this  sort." 

*>  In  eds.  1553,  and  in  all  afterwards, 
the  words,  "And  the  same  form  of  abso- 


i  310.  And  then  the  Priest,  ^'c. 

Let  us  pray. 

O  MOST  merciful  God,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

James  I.  1604. 

And  also  to  declare,  &>€. 
i  307.  T/iese  words  before,  dfc. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
i  308.  T^  Minister  may  not,  &'e. 
1309.  Here  shall  the  sick  person,  &'c. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 
i  31a  And  then  the  Priest,  &'c. 
Let  us  pray. 
O  MOST  merciful  God,  Ac 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
And  also  to  declare,  &'c. 

307.  These  Toords  before,  &*c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

308.  7^    Presbyter  or    Minister 
may  not,  &'c. 


lution  shall  be  used  in  all  private  con- 
fessions," are  omitted. 
«  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 

*  In  one  ed.,  1552,  the  word  "thee" 
omitted. 

*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter 
or  Minister." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  in  one  ed.,  1559, 
the  form  of  ed.  1549,  beginning  "This 
may  be  done,"  &c.,  is  followed,  and  the 
words  appear  printed  in  the  margin  in- 
stead of  as  a  distinct  rubric 


The  Visitation  of  the  Sick. 


359 


sins,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.     Amen  s, 

§  310.  And  then  the  Priest^  shall  say  the^  Collect  following. 
Let  us  pray. 
O  MOST  merciful  God,  which  ^  according  to  the  multitude  of 
thy  mercies  dost  so  put  away  the  sins  of  those  which ''  truly 
repent,  that  thou  rememberest  them  no  more  :  open  thy  ^  eye 
of  mercy  upon  this  thy  servant,  who  most  earnestly  desireth 
pardon  and  forgiveness  :  Renew  in  him,  most  loving  Father, 
whatsoever  hath  been  decayed  by  the  fraud  "*  and  malice  of 
the  devil,  or  by  his  own  carnal  will,  and  frailness :  preserve 
and  continue  this  sick  member  in  the  unity  of  thy  °  Church, 
consider  his  contrition,  accept  his  tears,  assuage  his  pain,  as 
shall  be  seen°  to  thee  most  expedient  for  him.  And  foras- 
much as  he  putteth  his  full  trust  only  in  thy  mercy  :  Impute 
not  unto 

him  his  former  sins,  but  take  him  unto  p  thy  favour : 
through  the  merits  of  thy  most  dearly  beloved  Son  Jesus 
Christ.     Amen. 


§  309.  Here  shall  the  sick  person,  &'c. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§  310.  And  then  the  Presbyter,  &^c. 
Let  us  pray. 
O  MOST  merciful  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  IS49.  to] 
him  his  former  sins,  but  when  the 
hour  of  his    dissolution   is    come, 
take  him  unto  thy  favour,  through 
the  merits  of  thy  most  dearly  be- 
loved Son  Jesus  Christ.     Amen. 

Charles  II.  1662. 

and  to  declare  his  Debts, 
what  he  oweth,  and  what  is  owing 
unto  him,  for  the  better  discharg- 
ing of  his  co7tscience,  and  the  quiet- 
ness of  his  Executors.  But  men 
should  often  be  put  in  remembrance 
to  take  order  for  the  settling  of  their 
temporal  estates,  whilst  they  are  in 
health. 
§  307.  ir  Thesewords  before  rehearsed, 

^fiC. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


§  308.  IT  The  Minister  should  not 
omit  earnestly  to  move  such  sick 
persons  as  are  of  ability,  to  be  libe- 
ral to  the  poor. 
§  309-  IT  Here  shall  the  sick  person 
be  moved  to  make  a  special  Con- 
fession of  his  sins,  if  he  feel  his  con- 
science troubled  with  any  weighty 
matter.  After  which  Confession, 
the  Priest  shall  absolve  him  (if  he 
humbly  and  heartily  desire  it)  after 
this  sort. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§  310.  IF  And  then  the  Priest,  &>c. 
Let  us  pray. 
O  MOST  merciful  God,  who,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to]. 
him  his  former  sins  ;  but  strengthen 
him  with  thy  blessed  Spirit,    and 
when  thou  art  pleased  to  take  him 
hence,  take  him  unto  thy  favour, 
through    the    merits    of  thy  most 
dearly  beloved   Son    Jesus   Christ 
our  Lord.    Amen. 


ft  In  two  eds.,  iS49,  also  in  1552,  the 
ending  is  abbreviated,  and  "&c."  inserted. 

h  In  ed.  1578,  "  t/ie Minister;"  in  Scotch 
ed-,  1637,  *  the  Presbyter." 

'  In  Scotched.,  1637,  "this." 

^  In  ed.  1662,  "  who." 


1  In  Scotched.,  1637,  ed.  1662,  "thine." 
■"  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "defraud." 
"  In  eds.   1578,  1596,  1604,  and  after- 
wards, "  the." 
"  In  ed.  1662,  "shall  seem." 
P  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  1559,  "to." 


360  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


In  U  Do. 

mine  spt~ 

ravi. 
Psal.  71 '. 


§311.    Then  the  Minister  shall  say  this  Psalm. 

In  thee  "J,  O  Lord,  have  I  put  my  trust,  let  me 
never  be  put  to  confusion  :  but  rid  me,  and  deliver 
me,  into*  thy  righteousness ;  incline  thine  ear  unto 
me,  and  save  me. 

Be  thou  my  strong  hold,  (whereunto  I  may  alway  resort) 
thou  hast  promised  to  help  me,  for  thou  art  my  house  of  de- 
fence, and  my  castle. 

Deliver  me  (O  my  God)  out  of  the  hand  of  the  ungodly  : 
out  of  the  hand  of  the  unrighteous  and  cruel  man. 

For  thou  (O  Lord  God)  art  the  thing  that  I  long  for  :  thou 
art  my  hope,  even  from  my  youth. 

Through  thee  have  I  been  holden  up  ever  since  I  was 
bom,  thou  art  he  that  took  me  out  of  my  mother's  womb ; 
my  praise  shall  be  always  of  thee. 

I  am  become  as  it  were  a  monster  unto  many  :  but  my  sure 
trust  is  in  thee. 

O  let  my  mouth  be  filled  with  thy  praise  (that  I  may  sing 
of  thy  glory)  and  honour  all  the  day  long. 

Cast  me  not  away  in  the  time  of  age,  forsake  me  not  when 
my  strength  faileth  me. 

For  mine  enemies  speak  against  me  :  and  they  that  lay  wait 
for  my  soul  take  their  counsel  together,  saying  :  God  hath 
forsaken  him  j  persecute  him,  and  take  him,  for  there  is  none 
to  deliver  him. 

Go  not  far  from  me,  O  God  :  my  God,  haste  thee  to 
help  me. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  311.   Theft  the  Minister  shall  say 
this  Psalm. 

In  thee,  O  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

i  3 1 1 .   Then  the  Minister  shall,  &'c. 

In  thee,  O  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 
§  31 1.    Then  shall  the  Minister,  dfc. 

In  thee,  O  Lord,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


^  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  '"  *^^  Lord." 
'_  In  one  ed.,   1549,  mis/rin/eii  Psalm 
xxi.    The  right  Psalm  Ls  given,  but  the 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  311.    Then  shall  the  Presbyter  cr 
Minister  say. 

In  thee,  O  Lord,     /«  te  Domin* 

do  I  put  my  trust,  iperavi. 

let  me  never  be  put        Psalm  7'- 
to  confusion.     Deliver  me,   in  thy 
righteousness,  and  cause  me  to  es- 
cape :  incline  thine  ear  unto  me, 
and  save  me. 

Be  thou  my  strong  habitation, 
whereunto  I  may  continually  re- 
sort :  thou  hast  given  commandment 
to  save  me,  for  thou  art  my  rock 
and  my  fortress. 


misprint  is  repeated,  throughout  all   the 
editions  of  1552  and  1559. 
•  In  ed.  i66a,  "  in. 


The  Visitation  of  the  Sick. 


36r 


Let  them  be  confounded  and  perish  that  are  against  my 
soul  :  let  them  be  covered  with  shame  and  dishonour  that 
seek  to  do  me  evil. 

As  for  me,  I  will  patiently  abide  alway  :  and  will  praise 
thee  more  and  more. 

My  mouth  shall  daily  speak  of  thy  righteousness  and  salva- 
tion :  for  I  know  no  end  thereof. 

I  will  go  forth  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God  ;  and  will 
make  mention  of  thy  righteousness  only. 

Thou  (O  God)  hast  taught  me  from  my  youth  up  until  now  : 
therefore  will  I  tell  of  thy  wondrous  works. 

Forsake  me  not  (O  God)  in  mine  old  age,  when  I  am  gray- 
headed,  until  I  have  shewed  thy  strength  unto  this  genera- 
tion, and  thy  power  to  all  them  that  are  yet  for  to  come. 

Thy  righteousness  (O  God)  is  very  high  :  and  great  things 
are  they  that  thou  hast  done  ;  O  God,  who  is  like  unto  thee  ? 


Deliver  me,  O  my  God,  out  of  the 
hand  of  the  wicked,  out  of  tlie  hand 
of  the  unrighteous  and  cruel  man. 

For  thou  art  my  hope,  O  Lord 
God,  thou  art  my  trust  from  my 
youth. 

By  thee  liave  I  been  holden  up 
from  the  womb  :  thou  art  he  that 
took  me  out  of  my  mother's  bowels, 
my  praise  shall  bo  continually  of 
thee. 

I  am  as  a  wonder  unto  many  ;  but 
thou  art  my  strong  refuge. 

Let  my  mouth  be  filled  with  thy 
praise  :  and  with  thy  honour  all 
the  day. 

Cast  me  not  off  in  the  time  of 
old  age,  forsake  me  not  wlien  my 
strength  faileth. 

For  mine  enemies  speak  against 
me  :  and  they  that  lay  wait  for  my 
soul  take  their  counsel  together. 

Saying,  God  hath  forsaken  him  : 
persecute  him,  and  take  him,  for 
there  is  none  to  deliver  him. 

O  God,  be  not  far  from  me  : 
O  my  God,  make  haste  for  my  help. 

Let  them  be  confounded  and  con- 
sumed that  are  adversaries  to  my 
soul  :  let  them  be  covered  with 
reproach  and  dishonour  that  seek 
my  hurt. 


But  I  will  hope  continually  : 
and  will  yet  praise  thee  more  and 
more. 

My  mouth  shall  shew  forth  thy 
righteousness  and  thy  salvation  all 
the  day  :  for  I  know  not  the  num- 
bers thereof. 

I  will  go  in  the  strength  of  the 
Lord  God  :  I  will  make  mention 
of  thy  righteousness  even  of  thine 
only. 

O  God,  thou  hast  taught  me  from 
my  youth  :  and  hitherto  have  I  de- 
clared thy  wondrous  works. 

Now  also  when  I  am  old  and 
gray-headed,  O  God,  forsake  me 
not  :  until  I  have  shewed  thy 
strength  unto  this  generation,  and 
thy  power  to  every  one  that  is  to 
come. 

Thy  righteousness  also,  O  God, 
is  very  high,  who  hast  done  great 
things  :  O  God,  who  is  like  unto 
thee? 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§311.   %  Then   shall  the  Minister 

say  this  Psalm. 

In  thee,  O  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
who  is  like  unto  thee  ? 


362 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


O  what  great  troubles  and  adversities  hast  thou  shewed 
me  !  and  yet  didst  thou  turn  and  refresh  me  :  yea,  and 
broughtest  me  from  the  deep  of  the  earth  again. 

Thou  hast  brought  me  to  great  honour  :  and  comforted  me 
on  every  side. 

Therefore  will  I  praise  thee  and  thy  faithfulness  (O  God) 
playing  upon  an  instrument  of  musick,  unto  thee  will  I  sing 
upon  the  harp,  O  thou  holy  one  of  Israel. 

My  lips  will  be  fain  when  I  sing  unto  thee  :  and  so  will  my 
soul  whom  thou  hast  delivered. 

My  tongue  also  shall  talk  of  thy  righteousness  all  the  day 
long,  for  they  are  confounded  and  brought  unto  shame  that 
seek  to  do  me  evil. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

O  what  great  troubles,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  312.  f  Adding  this. 

O  Saviour  of  the  world,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  313.    Then  shall  the  Minister  say. 

The  Almighty  Lord,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1349,  to] 

the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Amen. 

[In  eds.  1553  the  Order  ends  here.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

O  what  great  troubles,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  312.  Adding  this. 
O  Saviour  of  the  world,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  313.    Then  shall  the  Minister,  &'c. 
The  Almighty  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

[In  eds.  1559  the  Order  ends  here.] 


James  I.  1604. 
O  what  great  troubles,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


§  312.   ^  Adding  this. 
O  Saviour  of  the  world,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.I 
§313.    Then  shall  the  Minister,  A'c. 

The  Almighty  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  15491  to] 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

[In  eds.  1604  the  Order  ends  here.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Thou  who  hast  shewed  me  great 
and  sore  troubles  shalt  quicken  me 
again,  and  shalt  bring  me  up  again 
from  the  depths  of  the  earth. 

Thou  shalt  increase  my  great- 
ness, and  comfort  me  on  every  side. 

I  will  also  praise  thee  with  the 
Psaltery,  even  thy  truth,  O  my 
God  :  unto  thee  will  I  sing  with  the 
harp,  O  thou  Holy  One  of  Israel. 

My  lips  shall  greatly  rejoice  when 
I  sing  unto  thee  :  and  my  soul 
which  thou  hast  redeemed. 

My  tongue  also  shall  talk  of  thy 
righteousness  all  the  day  long  :  for 
they  are  confounded,  for  they  are 
brought  vmto  shame  that  seek  my 
hurt. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.    Amen. 


The  Visitation  of  the  Sick. 


363 


§  312.  Adding  this  Anthem. 

O  Saviour  of  the  world,  save  us,  which  by  thy  cross  and 
precious  blood  hast  redeemed  us,  help  us  we  beseech  thee, 
OGod. 

§  313.   T^en  shall  the  minister  say. 

The  Almighty  Lord,  which  is  a  most  strong  tower  to  all 
them  that  put  their  trust  in  him,  to  whom  all  things  in  heaven, 
in  earth,  and  under '  earth,  do  bow  and  obey  :  be  now  and 
evermore  thy  defence,  and  make  thee  know  and  feel,  that 
there  is  no  *  other  name  under  heaven  given  to  man,  in  whom 
and  through  whom  thou  mayest  receive  health  and  salvation, 
but  only  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     Amen. 


§312.  Adding  this. 
O  Saviour  of  the  world,  &c. 

[Same  as  iS49-] 

§  313.   Then  shall  the  Presbyter  or 

Minister  say. 

The  Almighty  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

.  .  .  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  'Amen. 

[In  the  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  the  Order 
ends  here.] 


Charles  II.   1662. 

[Verses  18 — 22  omitted.'\ 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
[Same  as  1637.] 
§312.   ^Adding this. 
O  Saviour  of  the  world,  who 
by  thy  Cross  and   precious  Blood 
hast   redeemed   us,    Save    us    and 
help  us,  we  humbly  beseech  thee, 
OLord. 

§  313.  IT   Then  shall  the  Minister 

say. 

The  Almighty  Lord,  who  is,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     Amen. 

§  314.  \  And  after  that  shall  say. 
Unto  God's  gracious  mercy  and 
protection  we  commit  thee.     The 


Lord  bless  thee  and  keep  thee. 
The  Lord  make  his  face  to  shine 
upon  thee,  and  be  gracious  mito 
tliee.  The  Lord  lift  up  his  counte- 
nance upon  thee,  and  give  thee 
peace,  both  now  and  evermore. 
Amen. 

§  315.  A  Prayer  for  a  sick  Child. 

O  Almighty  God  and  merciful 
Father,  to  whom  alone  belong  the 
issues  of  life  and  death  ;  Look  down 
from  heaven,  we  humbly  beseech 
thee,  with  the  eyes  of  mercy  upon 
this  child  now  lying  upon  the  bed 
of  sickness  :  Visit  him,  O  Lord, 
with  thy  salvation ;  deliver  him  in 
thy  good  appointed  time  from  his 
bodily  pain,  and  save  his  soul  for 
thy  mercies'  sake.  That  if  it  shall 
be  thy  pleasure  to  prolong  his  days 
here  on  earth,  he  may  live  to  thee, 
and  be  an  instrument  of  thy  glory, 
by  serving  thee  faithfully,  and  doing 
good  in  his  generation  ;  or  else  re- 
ceive him  into  those  heavenly  habi- 
tations, where  the  souls  of  them  that 
sleep  in  the  Lord  Jesus  enjoy  per- 
petual rest  and  felicity.  Grant  this, 
O  Lord,  for  thy  mercies'  sake,  in 
the  same  thy  Son  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  liveth  and  reigneth  with 
thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  ever  one 
God,  world  without  end.     Amen. 


•  In  one  ed.  1549,  and  1552,  and  1559, 
and  afterwards,  "  under  the  earth." 


'  In   Scotch  ed.,  1637,   and  ed.  1662, 
"none." 


3^4 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  319.  IT  If  the  sick  person  desire  to  be  anointed,  then  shall  the  Priest  anoint  him 
upon  the  forehead  or  breast  only,  making  the  sign  of  the  cross,  saying  thus. 

As  with  this  visible  oil  thy  body  outwardly  is  anointed  : 
so  our  heavenly  Father,  Almighty  God,  grant  of  his  infinite 
goodness,  that  thy  soul  inwardly  may  be  anointed  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  who  is  the  Spirit  of  all  strength,  comfort,  relief, 
and  gladness :  and  vouchsafe  for  his  great  mercy  (if  it  be 
his  blessed  will)  to  restore  unto  thee  thy  bodily  health,  and 
strength,  to  serve  him ;  and  send  thee  release  of  all  thy  pains, 
troubles,  and  diseases,  both  in  body  and  mind.  And  how- 
soever his  goodness  (by  his  divine  and  unsearchable  provi- 
dence) shall  dispose  of  thee  :  we,  his  unworthy  ministers  and 
servants,  humbly  beseech  the  eternal  majesty  to  do  with  thee 
according  to  the  multitude  of  his  innumerable  mercies,  and 
to  pardon  thee  all  thy  sins  and  offences,  committed  by  all 
thy  bodily  senses,  passions,  and  carnal  affections :  who  also 
vouchsafe  mercifully  to  grant  unto  thee  ghostly  strength,  by 
his  Holy  Spirit,  to  withstand  and  overcome  all  temptations 
and  assaults  of  thine  adversary,  that  in  no  wise  he  prevail 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552,  and  in 
all  eds.  afterwards. 

[Rubric  {  319  with  Prayer  and  Psalm 
wholly  omitted.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 
§  316.  A  Prayer  for  a  sick  Person, 

when  there  appeareth  small  hope 

of  recovery. 

O  Father  of  mercies,  and  God 
of  all  comfort,  our  only  help  in  time 
of  need  ;  We  fly  unto  thee  for  suc- 
cour in  behalf  of  this  thy  servant, 
here  lying  under  thy  hand  in  great 
weakness  of  body.  Look  graciously 
upon  him,  O  Lord;  and  the  more 
the  outward  man  decayeth,  strength- 
en him,  we  beseech  thee,  so  much 
the  more  continually  with  thy  grace 
and  Holy  Spirit  in  the  inner  man. 
Give  him  unfeigned  repentance  for 
all  the  errors  of  his  life  past,  and 
stedfast  faith  in  thy  Son  Jesus,  that 
his  sins  may  be  done  away  by  thy 
mercy,  and  his  pardon  sealed  in 
heaven,  before  he  go  hence,  and 
be  no  more  seen.  We  know,  O 
Lord,  that  there  is  no  word  im- 
possible with    thee ;    and    that  if 


thou  wilt,  thou  canst  even  yet  raise 
him  up,  and  grant  him  a  longer 
continuance  amongst  us.  Yet,  for- 
asmuch as  in  all  appearance  the 
time  of  his  dissolution  draweth 
near,  so  fit  and  prepare  him,  we 
beseech  thee,  against  the  hour  of 
death,  that  after  his  departure  hence 
in  peace  and  in  thy  favour,  his  soul 
may  be  received  into  thine  everlast- 
ing kingdom,  through  the  merits 
and  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ  thine 
only  Son,  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 
Amen. 

§317.  A  commendatory  Prayer  for 
a  sick  person  at  the  point  of  de- 
parture. 

O  Almighty  God,  with  whom 
do  live  the  spirits  of  just  men  made 
perfect,  after  they  are  delivered  from 
their  earthly  prisons ;  We  humbly 
commend  the  soul  of  this  thy  ser- 
vant, our  dear  brother,  into  thy 
hands,  as  into  the  hands  of  a  faith- 
ful Creator,  and  most  merciful  Sa- 
viour ;  most  humbly  beseeching  thee 
that  it  may  be  precious  in  thy  sight. 
Wash  it,  we  pray  thee,  in  the  blood 
of  that  immaculate  Lamb  that  was 


The  Visitation  of  the  Sick, 


365 


against  thee,  but  that  thou  mayest  have  perfect  victory  and 
triumph  against  the  devil,  sin,  and  death,  through  Christ  our 
Lord  :  Who  by  his  death  hath  overcomed "  the  prince  of 
death,  and  with  the  P'ather  and  the  Holy  Ghost  evermore 
liveth  and  reigneth  God,  world  without  end.     Amen. 

How  long  wilt  thou  forget  me,  (O  Lord,)  for  ever  :  how 
long  wilt  thou  hide  thy  face  from  me?     How  long     „ 

o  ^      J  ^  <j  U  SQJIC  Q7(0. 

shall  I  seek  counsel  in  my  soul,  and  be  so  vexed  in  Dominej 
mine  heart  :  how  long  shall  mine  enemy  triumph  P'^''"-^'"- 
over  me  ?  Consider,  and  hear  me,  (O  lord  my  God)  :  lighten 
mine  eyes,  that  I  sleep  not  in  death.  Lest  mine  enemy  say, 
I  have  prevailed  against  him  :  for  if  I  be  cast  down,  they  that 
trouble  me  will  rejoice  at  it.  But  my  trust  is  in  thy  mercy  : 
and  my  heart  is  joyful  in  thy  salvation.  I  will  sing  of  the 
lord,  because  he  hath  dealt  so  lovingly  with  me  :  yea,  I  will 
praise  the  Name  of  the  Lord  the  most  Highest.  Glory  be  to 
the,  &c.     As  it  was  in  the,  &c. 

[Here  follows  immediately  The  Communion  of  the  Sick.] 


slain  to  take  away  the  sins  of  the 
world  ;  that  whatsoever  defilements 
it  may  have  contracted  in  the  midst 
of  this  miserable  and  naughty  world, 
through  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  or  the 
wiles  of  Satan,  being  purged  and 
done  away,  it  may  be  presented 
pure  and  without  spot  before  thee. 
And  teach  us  who  survive,  in  this 
and  other  like  daily  spectacles  of 
mortality,  to  see  how  frail  and  un- 
certain our  own  condition  is,  and 
so  to  number  our  days,  that  we  may 
seriously  apply  our  hearts  to  that 
holy  and  heavenly  wisdom,  whilst 
we  live  here,  which  may  in  the  end 
bring  us  to  life  everlasting,  through 
the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ  thine 
only  Son  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  318.  A  Prayer  for  pen-sons  troubled 
in  mind  or  in  conscience. 

O  BLESSED  Lord,  the  Father  of 
mercies,  and  the  God  of  all  com- 
forts, we  beseech  thee  look  down 
in  pity  and  compassion  upon  this 
thy  afflicted  servant.     Thou  writest 


bitter  things  against  kitn,  and  mak- 
est  him  to  possess  his  former  ini- 
quities ;  thy  wrath  lieth  hard  upon 
ki/n,  and  his  soul  is  full  of  trouble  : 
But,  O  merciful  God,  who  hast 
written  thy  holy  Word  for  our  learn- 
ing, that  we  through  patience  and 
comfort  of  thy  holy  Scriptures  might 
have  hope ;  give  hit?i  a  right  un- 
derstanding of  himself,  and  of  thy 
threats  and  promises,  that  he  may 
neither  cast  away  his  confidence  in 
thee,  nor  place  it  any  where  but 
in  thee.  Give  him  strength  against 
all  his  temptations,  and  heal  all  his 
distempers.  Break  not  the  bruised 
reed,  nor  quench  the  smoking  flax. 
Shut  not  up  thy  tender  mercies  in 
displeasure  ;  but  make  him  to  hear 
of  joy  and  gladness,  that  the  bones 
which  thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice. 
Deliver  hi>?i  from  fear  of  the  enemy, 
and  lift  up  the  light  of  thy  counte- 
nance upon  hitn,  and  give  him  peace, 
through  the  merits  and  mediation 
of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     A?nen. 

[Here  follows  immediately  The  Com- 
munion OF  THE  Sick.] 


"  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "overcome." 


366 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


THE 


COMMUNION  OF  THE  SICK. 


§  320.  Forasmuch  as  all  mortal  men  be  subject  to  many  sudden  perils,  dis' 
eases,  and  sicknesses  *,  and  ever  uncertain  what  tinu  they  shall  depart  out 
of  this  life :  Therefore  to  the  intent  they  may  be  always  in  a  readiness  to 
die,  whensoever  it  shall  please  Almighty  God  to  call  them,  the  curates ' 
shiill  diligently  from  tinu  to  time,  but  specially  in  the  plague  time*, 
exhort  their  parishioners 

to  the  oft  receiving  {in  the  church)  ■  of  the  holy 
Communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ :  which  if  they 
do,  they  shall  have  no  cause,  in  their  sudden  -visitation,  to  be  unquieted  ^ 
for  lack  of  the  same.  But  if  the  sick  person  be  not  able  to  come  to  the 
church,  and  yet  is  desirous  to  receive  the  Communion  in  his  house,  then 
he  *  must  give  knowledge  over  night,  or  else  early  in  the  morning  to  the 
curate^,  signifying  also  how  many  be  appointed  to  communicate  with  him. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1553. 

THE 

COMMUNION  OF  THE  SICK- 

§  320.  Forasmuch  as  all  mortal 
men,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
appointed  to  communicatewiih  him. 
[In  eds.  1553,  and  all  after,  {  331,  &C., 
omitted.} 

§322.  And  having  a  convenient  place 
in  the  sick  man^s  house,  where  the 
Curate  "*  may  reverently  minister, 
and  a  good  number  *  to  receive  the 
communion  with  the  sick  person, 
with  all  things  necessary  for  the 
same,  he  shall  there  minister  the 
holy  communion. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

THE  COMMUNION  OF  THE  SICK. 

§  320.   Forasmuch    as   all   mortal 
men,  6fc. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  322.  And/tavinga  convenient,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


James  I.  1604. 

THE  COMMUNION  OF  THE  SICK, 

§  320.   Forasmuch    as   all    mortal 
men,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§322.  And  having  a  convenient,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


»  In  two  eds,,  1549,  "sickness," 
y  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  the  Presbyters 
or  Curates. " 

•  In  ed.  1663,  "but  especially  in  the 
time  of  pestilence  or  other  infectious  sick- 
ness." 

•  In  ed.  1663,  "(in the  Church)'' MW(V//</. 


*>  In  ed.  1604,  and  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 
"unquiet" 

«  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "ye  must," 

*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "the  Presbyter 
or  Curate." 

'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "and  a  sufficient 
number,  at  least  two  or  three,  to  receive." 


The  Communion  of  the  Sick'. 


367 


§  321.  And  if  the  same  day  there  be  a  celebration  of  the  holy  Communion  in 
the  church,  then  shall  the  Priest  reserve  {at  the  open  Communion)  so  much 
of  the  sacrament  of  the  body  and  blood,  as  shall  serve  the  sick  person,  and 
so  many  as  shall  communicate  with  him  {if  there  be  any) ;  and  so  soon 
as  he  conveniently  may,  after  the  open  Communion  ended  in  the  church, 
shall  go  and  minister  the  same,  first  to  those  that  are  appointed  to  com- 
municate with  the  sick  {if  there  be  any),  and  last  of  all  to  the  sick  person 
himself.  But  before  the  curate  distribute  the  holy  Communion,  the  ap- 
pointed general  confession  must  be  made  in  the  name  of  the  communi- 
cants, the  curate  adding  the  absolution  with  the  comfortable  sentences 
of  scripture  following  in  the  open  Communion :  and  after  the  communion 
ended,  the  Collect*. 

Almighty  and  everliving  God,  we  most  heartily  thank 
thee,  &c. " 

§  322.  IT  But  if  the  day  be  not  appointed  for  the  open  communion  in  the 
church,  then  {upon  convenient  warning  given)  the  curate  shall  come  and 
visit  the  sick  person  afore  noon. 

And  having  a  convenient  place  in  the 
sick  man's  house  {where  he  may  reverently  celebrate)  with  all  things  neces- 
sary for  the  same,  and  not  being  otherwise  letted  with  the  public  service  or 
any  other  just  impediment;  he  shall  there  celebrate  the  holy  communion 
after  such  form  and  sort  as  hereafter  is  appointed. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

THE   COMMUNION   OF  THE   SICK. 

§  320.    Forasmuch    as    all    mortal 
men,  &^c. 

[Same  as  1349.] 
§  322.  And  having  a  convenient,  ^c. 

[Same  as  1532.! 


Charles  II.  1662. 

THE  COMMUNION  OF  THE  SICK. 

§  320.   IT  Forasmuch  as  all  mortal 
men,  Ss^c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
to  the  often  teceiving  of  the  holy 
Communion    of  the    Body    and 
Blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  when 


it  shall  be  publickly  administered 
in  the  Church;  that  so  doing, 
they  may  in  case  of  sudden  visita- 
tion, have  the  less  cause  to  be  dis- 
quieted for  lack  of  the  same.  But 
if  the  sick  person  be  not  able  to 
come  to  the  Church,  and  yet  is 
desirous  to  receive  the  Communion 
in  his  house ;  then  he  must  give 
timely  notice  to  the  Curate,  sig- 
nifying also  how  many  there  are 
to  communicate  with  him  {which 
shall  be  three,  or  two  at  the  least) 
(§  322)  and  having  a  convenient 
place  in  the  sick  man's  house,  with 
all  things  necessary  so  prepared, 
that  the  Curate  may  reverently  mi- 
nister, he  shall  there  celebrate  the 
holy  Communion,  beginning  with 
the  Collect,  Epistle  and  Gospel 
here  following. 


*  The  head-line  in  the  sealed  book  (ed. 
1662)  is  printed,  "The  Communion,  &c.", 
but  the  "&c."  is  altered  with  a  pen  to 
"  of  the  Sick." 

8  In  ed.  1578,  the  whole  of  these  rubrics 
are  omitted. 


^  This  thanksgiving  will  be  found,  §  127, 
p.  257,  but  no  direct  reference  is  given. 
The  Collect,  with  the  preceding  rubric, 
is  wholly  omitted  in  eds.  1552,  and  all 
eds.  afterwards. 


36S 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Without  anj 
more  repetition. 


§323.  THE  CELEBRATION 
•ftit  Htfy  Cmmmuamm  ftr  tJu  Ski. 

O  PRAISE  the  Lord,  all  ye  nations,  laud  him,  all  ye  people  : 
for  his  merciful  kindness  is  confinned  toward  us,  and  the  truth 
of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever. 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  &c 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

7^£  Priest.  The  Lord  be  with  you. 
Answer.  And  with  thy  spirit 

Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  everliving  God,  maker  of  mankind,  which '  dost 
correct  those  whom  thou  dost  love,  and  chastisest '  every  one 
whom  thou  dost  receive :  we  beseech  thee  to  have  mercy  upon 
this  thy  serv-ant  visited  with  thy '  hand,  and  to  grant  that  he 
may  take  his  sickness  patiently,  and  recover  his  bodily  health 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

[)  3*3  and  wiiat  fellows  b  omined  in  ed. 
1553,  and  in  all  aftetwaids.] 

§324.    TkeCeUect 

Almighty  everliving  God,  &c. 

[Saate  as  1549.] 
§525.    TTuEpisdt. 
My  son,  despise  not,  &c. 
§326.   TTuGtafd. 
Vkmly,  verily  I  say,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.  to] 
.  .  .  from  death  unto  life. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

8324.   TluCcUtcU. 

Almighty  everlivii^  God,  &c. 

[Same  as  issa.] 
§325.    TheEfistU. 
My  son,  despise  not,  &c 


§326.   TkeG*^^ 
VuuLY,  verily  I  say,  ft& 

[Saae  as  1549,  to) 
. .  from  death  onto  life. 


James  L  1604. 

§324.   TheCtUect 
Almighty  everiiving  God,  Ac. 

[SMMMtssa.] 

§325.   TkeEfisOe. 

My  sod,  desiMse  not,  Ac. 

§326c   TitGci^ 

Vkmly,  verily  I  say,  Ac 
[Same  as  1549^  to] 

.  .  from  death  onto  lifis. 


•laed.  t66a."who.'*  ^UtA.rtl6»,' 

'  In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "  thiae.'* 


The  CoMuuNioN  of  the  Sick. 


369 


(if  it  be  thy  graoovs  will),  and  wbensoever  his  soul  sSufl  de- 
pait  fron  the*  bodf,  it  maj  vitiioat  spot  be  *  presented  aMto 
tbee :  tiircwgh  Jesus  Quist  our  Lord.     Amen  *. 

§325.    7%eEfidU\ 

M  T  900,  despise  not  tlie  oocvectxm  of  the  Lotd,  neidMr 
fakoit  vlfeen  tbou  ait  rebvked  of  Imn :   for  vliom      ^^  _ 
the  Loid  lov«th,  him  he  conecteth,  yea  and  be 
soouigetii  ev«ty  son,  whom  he  receivedi. 

f  3261.   7%r  GospeL 
Verily,  veriJy  I  say  xinto  youi.  He  that  heareth  my  irocd, 
and  belie^^etli  00  ham  ti&at  semt  me,  hath  e^erlast-       EdM«. 
ing  liic,  and  shall  not  oome  nmfto  damiiatioD,  bat 
he  piassetfi  %Bam.  death  «ato  life. 

§327.    ThePrefaee. 

The  Lord  be  vith  ]po«. 
JLnswer,     Awl  with  t^  spirk. 
If  lift  <i^  yw  heostsi,  <&!c. 

%yA.  ViOotbeemicftlK  Cofum. 


1324.    Tke-Cafiw^ 

^■meas  xs49-!l 
1525.    TkeE^^jOt. 
llT  son,  tdeniae  okc  than  the 
fitowtiifiinne;  «lf  A«       -^  ^  , 

titih ;  anl  «oeaiS(lib  «««ry  MA  whoB 

TteiLT,  «nitf  I  say  anOe  7««, 

Ue  ibia  wBSMsh  si^ 

««»&,  «dl  !«&!«» 

'(S&i  4M  Uhi  ilialt  MSft  me, 

I'lulhiflintBfe:, 

tett  IS  pasBei 
>Bfe. 


%.y»mn.m^ 


I  324.    TheOiiUcL 
AiUCTG«Tr  <?i»n!ll%iiiig  God,  Ac. 

Mt  soak,  4e^nse  w*  dwi^  Xic. 


ffmttd  according  tc  ike  farm  ie- 
J9n  prtacribed  far  the  iafy  Cfm- 


i;ri6^.     Ins  tiocv. 
and  in  aL  a&iii  wrtrw 


Bh 


370 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  330.  IT  At  the  time  of  the  distribution  of  the  holy  sacrament,  the  priest 
shall  first  receive  the  Communion  himself,  and  after  minister  to  them  that 
be  appointed  to  communicate  with  the  sick  {if  there  be  any),  and  then  to  the 
sick  person.  And  the  sick  person  shall  always  desire  sonu,  either  of  his 
own  house,  or  else  of  his  neighbours,  to  receive  the  holy  Communion  with 
him  ;  for  that  shall  be  to  him  a  singular  great  comfort,  and  of  their  part 
a  great  token  of  charity, 

§  331.  IT  And  if  there  be  more  siek  persons  to  be  znsited  the  same  day  that  the 
curate  doth  celebrate  in  any  sick  matCs  house :  then  shall  the  curate  (there) 
reserve  so  much  of  the  sacrament  of  the  body  i  and  blood,  as  shall  serve  the 
other  sick  persons,  and  such  as  be  appointed  to  communicate  with  them, 
(if  there  be  any);  and  shall  immediately  carry  it,  and  minister  it  unto 
them. 

%  332.  T  But  if  any  man  either  by  reason  of  extremity  of  sickness,  or  for 
lack^  of  warning  given  in  due  titne  to  the  curate',  or  by  any  other  just 
impediment, 

do  not  receive  the  sacrament  of  Chris fs  body  and  blood ;  then^ 
the  curate  •  shall  instruct  him,  that  if  he  do  truly  repettt  him  of  his  sins, 
and  stedfastly  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  haih  suffered  death  upon  the  cross 
for  him,  and  shed  his  blood  for  his  redemption,  earnestly  remembering  the 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  330.  f  At  the  time  of  the  distri- 
bution of  the  holy  Sacrament,  the 
Priest^ shall  first  receive  the  com- 
munion himself,  and  after  minis- 
ter unto  them  that  be  appointed 
to  communicate  with  the  sick. 

[Id  ed.  1552,  and  all  after,  \  331  omitted.] 

§  3^2.  T  But  if  any  man,  either  by 
reason  of  extremity  of  sickness,  or 
for  lack'  of  warning  in  due  time 
to  the  Curate,  or  for  lack  of  com- 
pany to  receive  with  him,  or  by 
any  other  Just  impediment,  &*c. 
[Continued  same  as  1549.] 

§  333  '•  T  When  the  sick  person  is 
visited,  and  receiveth  the  holy  com- 
munion all  at  one  time,  then  the 
priest  *■  for  more  expedition,  shall 
cut  off  the  form  of  the  visitation 
at  the  Psalm,  In  thee,  O  Lord, 
have ''  I  put  my  trust,  and  go 
straight  to  the  communion, 

§  337'  T  ^t  the  time   of  plague. 


sweat,  or  such  other  like  conta- 
gious times  of  sicknesses  or  dis- 
eases, when  none  of  the  parish  or 
neighbours  can  be  gotten  to  com- 
municate with  the  sick  in  their 
houses,  for  fear  of  the  infection, 
upon  special  request  of  the  diseased, 
the  minister^  may  alonely  com- 
municate with  him. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  330.  At  the  time  of  the,  &'c. 

§  332.  But  if  any  man,  dfc. 

§  333'    W^ft  f^  ^^  person,  &'c. 

§  337-  •^'*  t^  '""'  (fpl'^S^'t  ^c, 
[Same  as  1553.] 


James  I.  1604. 
§  330.  At  the  tinu  of  the,  <5-v. 
§  332.  But  if  any  man,  iSfc. 
§  333-    t^hen  the  sick  person,  6fe. 
i  337-  ^^  t^  '""'  of  pi<'^S**f^  &*(' 

[Same  as  1552.] 


1  In  one  cd.,  1549,  "  of  Christ's  body." 
'  In  ed.  1604,   and  afterwards,  "waQt 
of." 

•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Presbyter  or 
Curate. " 

*  In  ed.  1669,  "  tYica"  emitttd. 

"  In  Scotch  ©d.,  1637,  "  Presbyter." 


'  In  ed.  1578,  this  rubric  only  appears. 
The  rubrics  \\  330,  331,  33a,  and  334  beinf 
omitted. 

«  In  ed.  1578,  "  Minister :"  in  Scotch 
ed.,  1637,  "Presbyter." 

J  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "do  I." 

■  In  ed.  1637,  "  Presbyter  or  Minister." 


The  Communion  of  the  Sick. 


371 


benefits  he  hath  thereby,  and  giving  him  hearty  thanks  therefore;  he  doth 
eat  and  drink  spiritually  "  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ, 
profitably  •>  to  his  soul's  health,  although  he  do  not  receive  the  sacrament 
with  his  mouth. 
§  333-  T  When  the  sick  person  is  visited  and  receiveth  the  holy  Communion 
all  at  one  time :  then  the  priest  for  more  expedition  shall  use  this  order  at 
the  visitation. 

§  334.  The  Anthem. 
Remember  not,  Lord,  &c. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

IT  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  &c. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. 
Answer.  But  deliver  us  from  evil     Amen. 

Let  us  pray. 
O  Lord ',  look  down  from  heaven,  &c.  ^ 

§  335.    With  the  first  part  of  the  exhortation  and  all  other  things 
unto  the  Psalm, 

In  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I  put  my  trust,  &c. 

§  336.  And  if  the  sick  desire  to  be  attainted,  then  shall  the  priest  use 
the  appointed  prayer  without  any  Psalm. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  330.  At  the  time  of  the,  Sr'c 

§  332.  But  if  any  man,  ^'c. 

§  333'    When  the  sick  person,  ^c. 

§  337-  -^'*  ^^^  ^^^^  <ff'^'^g**^i  &*(• 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  330.  T  At  the  time  of  the  dis- 
tribution of  the  holy  Sacrament, 
the  Priest  shall  first  receive  the 
Communion  himself,  and  after 
minister  unto  them  that  are  ap- 
pointed to  communicate  with  the 
sick,  and  last  of  all  to  the  sick 
person. 


'  In  eds.  1552,   and  in  all  afterwards, 
the  word  "  spiritually"  is  omitted. 
I"  la  one  ed.,  1552,  "profiuble." 


[  332.  T  But  if  a  man,  either  by 
reason,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

333.  T  When  the  sick  person  is 
visited,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

i  337-  T  /«  the  time  of  the  Plague, 
Sweat,  or  such  other  like  conta- 
gious times  of  sickness  or  diseases, 
when  none  of  the  Parish  or  neigh- 
bours can  be  gotten  to  communicate 
with  the  sick  in  their  houses,  for 
fear  of  the  injection,  upon  special 
request  of  the  diseased,  the  Mi- 
nister may  only  communicate 
with  him. 


*  In  two  eds.,  1549,  the  word  "Lord" 
omitted. 
^  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  &c."  omitted. 


372 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


1 


THE  ORDER  FOR  THE 


BURIAL    OF    THE    DEAD. 


§  339-  Th'  priest*  meeting  the  corpse  at  the  church  stile,  shall  say :  Or  dst 
the  priests '  and  clerks  shall  sing,  and  so  go  either  into  f  the  church,  or 
towards  ^  the  grave. 

I  AM  the  resurrection  and  the  life  (saith  the  Lord) :   he 
that  beheveth  in  me,  yea'  though  he  were  dead, 
yet  shall  he  live.     And  whosoever  liveth  and  be-  "" 

lieveth  in  me,  shall  not  die  for  ever '. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

THE  ORDER  FOR  THE 

BURIAL  OF  THE  DEAD. 

§  339-  "^^^  Priest  meeting  the  corpse, 

I  AM  the  resurrection,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

THE  ORDER  FOR  THE  BURIAL  OF 
THE  DEAD. 

§  339-  7^  Priest  meeting,  &'c. 
1  AM  the  resurrection,  &c 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

THE  ORDER  FOR  THE  BURIAL  OF 
THE   DEAD. 

§  339-  ^^^  Priest  meeting,  dr'c. 
I  AM  the  resurrection,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

THE  ORDER  FOR  THE  BURIAL  OF 
THE  DEAD. 

§  339'  2T4^  Presbyter  mtding,  &'c, 
I  AM  the  resurrection,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

I  KNOW  that  my  Redeemer  liveth, 
and  that  he  shall  stand     .  . 
at  the  latter  day  upon  ^" 

the  earth.  And  though  after  my 
skin  worms  destroy  this  body  ;  yec 
in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God  :  Whom 
I  shall  see  for  my  self,  and  mine 
eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  another. 

We  brought   nothing   into    this 
world,  and  it  is  cer- 
tain  we  can  carry  no-     '  \^{  ^'  ^' 
thing  out.    The  Lord 
gave,    and    the    Lord    hath    taken 
away  ;  blessed  be  the  Name  of  the 
Lord. 


•  In  ed.  1578,    "  Tk*    Minister ;"  in 
Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  The  Presbyter." 

'  In  ed.  1578,  "  TMe  Ministers  and ;"  in 
Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  The  Presbyter  and." 

*  In  eds.  1552  and  1559,  "unto;"  but  in 
eds.  1604,  1637,  and  i66a,  again  "into." 


*  In  one  ed.    1549,  "toward." 
'  In  Scoth  ed.,  1637,  and  in  ed.   1662, 
"yea"  omitted. 
•■  In   Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  ed.   1662, 


'John  xi.  25,  26." 
>  In  ed.  1663,  "  shall 


never  die.' 


At  the  Burial". 


373 


Job  xix. 


I  KNOW  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  I  shall  rise  out 
of  the  earth  in  the  last  day,  and  shall  be  covered 
again  with  my  skin,  and  shall  see  God  in  my 
llesh :  yea  and  I  myself  shall  behold  him,  not  with  other  but 
with  these  °  same  eyes. 

We  brought  nothing  into  this  world,  neither  may  we  carry 
any  thing  out  of  this  world.     The  Lord  giveth,     i  Tim.  vi. 
and  the  Lord  taketh  away.     Even  as  it  pleasethP      Jobi.i 
the  Lord,  so  cometh  things  to  pass :  blessed  be  the  name  of 
the  Lord. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

THE  ORDER  FOR  THE    BURIAL  OF 
THE   DEAD. 

§  338.  1  Here  is  to  be  noted,  that  the 
Office  ensiii7tg  is  not  to  be  used  for 
any  that  die  unbaptized,  or  ex- 
communicate, or  have  laid  violent 
hands  upon  themselves. 

§  339-  IF  ^^  Priest  and  Clerks  meet- 
i7ig  the  Corpse  at  the  entrance  of 
the  Church-yard,  and  going  before 
it,  either  into  the  Church,  or  to- 
wards the  Grave,  shall  say,  or  sing, 

I  AM  the  resurrection  and,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
I  KNOW  that  my,  &c. 

[Same  as  Scotch  ed.,  1637.] 
We  brought  nothing,  &c. 

[Same  as  Scotch  ed.,  1637.] 

§  340.  Tf  After  they  are  come  into  the 
Church,  shall  be  read  one  or  both 
of  these  Psalms  following. 

I  SAID,  I  will  take      „ .  . 
,       ,     ^    '  Dixi,  custo- 

heed    to   my  ways  :  d,-^w^. 

that   I  offend  not  in     Psal.  xxxix. 
my  tongue. 

I  will  keep  my  mouth  as  it  were 
with  a  bridle  :  while  the  ungodly  is 
in  my  sight. 

I  held  my  tongue,  and  spake  no- 
thing :  I  kept  silence,  yea  even  from 
good  words ;  but  it  was  pain  and 
grief  to  me. 


My  heart  was  hot  within  me,  and 
while  I  was  thus  musing,  the  fire 
kindled  :  and  at  the  last  I  spake 
with  my  tongue. 

Lord,  let  me  know  mine'  end, 
and  the  number  of  my  days  :  that 
I  may  be  certified  how  long  I  have 
to  live. 

Behold,  thou  hast  made  my  days 
as  it  were  a  span  long  :  and  mine 
age  is  even  as  nothing  in  respect  of 
thee,  and  verily  every  man  living 
is  altogether  vanity. 

For  man  walketh  in  a  vain  sha- 
dow, and  disquieteth  himself  in 
vain  :  he  heapeth  up  riches,  and 
cannot  tell  who  shall  gather  them. 

And  now.  Lord,  what  is  my  hope  : 
truly  my  hope  is  even  in  thee. 

Deliver  me  from  all  mine  of- 
fences :  and  make  me  not  a  rebuke 
unto  the  foolish. 

I  became  dumb  and  opened  not 
my  mouth  :  for  it  was  thy  doing. 

Take  thy  plague  away  from  me  : 
I  am  even  consumed  by  means  of 
thy  heavy  hand. 

When  thou  with  rebukes  dost 
chasten  man  for  sin,  thou  makest 
his  beauty  to  consume  away,  like 
as  it  were  a  moth  fretting  a  gar- 
ment :  every  man  therefore  is  but 
vanity. 

[Continued  on  p.  374.] 


"^  In  Sealed  Book,  1662,  the  head-line  is 
printed  "  Burial  of  the  Dead,"  and  the 
words  "at  the"  prefixed  by  a  pen. 

"  In  one  ed.,  1549,  mispr.  John  xix. 

"  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  the." 

P  In  eds.  1552,  "as  it  hath  pleased." 


q  In  ed.  1662,  the  references  in  the  side- 
notes  are  S.  John  xL  25,  26  ;  Job  xix.  25, 
26,  27 ;  I  Tim.  vi.  7  ;  and  Job  i.  21,  re- 
spectively. 

•  Printed  in  Sealed  Book  "my,"  but 
altered  with  a  pen  to  "  mine." 


374 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  342.  listen  they  come  at  •  the  grave,  whiles  the  corpse  is  made  ready  to  be 
laid  into  the  earth,  the  pi  iest '  shali  say,  or  else  the  priest "  and  clerks 
shall  sing. 

Man  that  is  born  of  a  woman,  hath  but  a  short  time  to 
live,  and  is  full  of  misery :  he  cometh  up  and  is 
cut  down  like  a  flower ;  he  flieth  as  it  were  a  sha- 
dow, and  never  continueth  in  one  stay. 


Jobix.« 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  342.   When  they  come  to  the  grave, 

whiles  the  corpse,  iSfc. 

Man  that  is  bom,  &c. 

In  the  midst  of  life,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549O 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  342.  Wlien  they  come  to  the  grave, 
whiles  the  corpse,  &'c. 
Man  that  is  bom,  &c 
In  the  midst  of  life,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

§  342.   When  they  come  to  the  grave, 
while  the  corpse,  &'c. 
Man  that  is  bom,  &c 
In  the  midst  of  life,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  342.   When  they  come  to  the  grave, 
while  the  corpse,  ir'c. 

Man  that  is  bom  of  a  woman  is 
of  few  days,  and  full 
of  trouble.     He  com-    J«>'> '4- '.  »• 
eth  forth  like  a  flower,  and  is  cut 
down  :  he  fleeth  also  as  a  shadow, 
and  continueth  not 

In  the  midst  of  life,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


*  In  one  ed.,  155a,  and  one  ed.,  1559, 
and  in  all  afterwards,  "to  the." 

*  In  ed.  1578,  '*  ike  Minister;"  in 
Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  the  Presbyter." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1559,  and  in  eds.  1604  and 
i66a,  "or  the  priest;"  in  one  ed.,  1559, 
"or  the  priests;"  in  ed.    1578,   "or  the 


Charles  II.  1662. 

[Psalm  xxxix.  continued.] 

Hear  my  prayer,  O  Lord,  and 
with  thine  ears  consider  my  calling  : 
hold  not  thy  peace  at  my  tears. 

For  I  am  a  stranger  with  thee  : 
and  a  sojourner  as  all  my  fathers 
were. 

O  spare  me  a  little,  that  I  may 
recover  my  strength  :  before  I  go 
hence,  and  be  no  more  seen. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 


Lord,    thou    hast 
been  our  refuge  :  from      Demme. 

.•  *"    .  refurium. 

one  generation  to  an-      f^jj  j^,. 
other. 

Before  the  mountains  were  brought 
forth,  or  ever  the  earth  and  the  world 
were  made  :  thou  art  God  from  ever- 
lasting, and  world  without  end. 

Thou  tumest  man  to  destruction  : 
again  thou  sayest,  Come  again,  ye 
children  of  men. 

For  a  thousand  years  in  thy  sight 
are  but  as  yesterday  :  seeing  that  is 
past  as  a  watch  in  the  night. 

As  soon  as  thou  scatterest  them, 
they  are  even  as  a  sleep  :  and  fade 
away  suddenly  like  the  grass. 


ministers."    In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "or  the 
Presbyter" 

•  Thus  in  all  eds.,  1549  and  1559,  and 
in  all  eds.,  1552,  except  one,  where  it  is 
(rightly)  Job  xix. ;  the  text  is  the  same 
throughout. 


At  the  Burial. 


375 


^  In  the  midst  of  life  we  be  y  in  death :  of  whom  may  we 
seek  for  succour,  but  of  thee,  O  Lord,  which  ^  for  our  sins 
justly  art  moved'?  Yet,  O  Lord**  God  most  holy,  O  Lord 
most  mighty,  O  holy  and  most  merciful  Saviour,  deliver  us 
not  into  the  bitter  pains  of  eternal  death.  Thou  knowest, 
Lord,  the  secrets  of  our  hearts  :  shut  not  up  thy  merciful  eyes 
to  our  prayers  "^ :  But  spare  us.  Lord  most  holy,  O  God  most 
mighty,  O  holy  and  merciful^  Saviour,  thou  most  worthy 
Judge  eternal,  suffer  us  not  at  our  last  hour  for  any  pains 
of  death  to  fall  from  thee. 


In  the  morning  it  is  green,  and 
groweth  up  :  but  in  the  evening  it 
is  cut  down,  dried  up,  and  withered. 

For  we  consume  away  in  thy 
displeasure  :  and  are  afraid  at  thy 
wrathful  indignation. 

Thou  hast  set  our  misdeeds  be- 
fore thee  :  and  our  secret  sins  in  the 
light  of  thy  countenance. 

For  when  thou  art  angry  all  our 
days  are  gone  :  we  bring  our  years 
to  an  end,  as  it  were  a  tale  that 
is  told. 

The  days  of  our  age  are  three- 
score years  and  ten,  and  though 
men  be  so  strong  that  they  come 
to  fourscore  years  :  yet  is  their 
strength  then  but  labour  and  sor- 
row ;  so  soon  passeth  it  away,  and 
we  are  gone. 

But  who  regardeth  the  power  of 
thy  wrath  :  for  even  thereafter  as 
a  man  feareth,  so  is  thy  displeasure. 

O  *  teach  us  to  number  our  days  ; 
that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto 
wisdom. 

Turn  thee  again,  O  Lord,  at  the 
last  :  and  be  gracious  unto  thy  ser- 
vants. 

O  satisfy  us  with  thy  mercy,  and 
that  soon  :  so  shall  we  rejoice  and 
be  glad  all  the  days  of  our  life. 

Comfort  us  again,  now  after  the 
time  that  thou  hast  plagued  us  :  and 


T  In  ed.  1662,  "  we  are." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 

•  In  eds.  1552  and  1604,  "justly  art  dis- 
pleased ;"  in  Scotch  ed.,  and  1662,  "  art 
justly  displeased." 

*>  In  one  ed.,  1549,  the  line,  "  which  for 


for  the  years  wherein  we  have  suf- 
fered adversity. 

Shew  thy  servants  thy  work  :  and 
their  children  thy  glory. 

And  the  glorious  Majesty  of  the 
Lord  our  God  be  upon  us  :  pros- 
per thou  the  work  of  our  hands 
upon  us,  O  prosper  thou  our  handy 
work. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now  and  ever  shall  be  :  world  with- 
out  end.     Amen. 

§  343-  IT  TAen  shall  follow  the  La- 
son  taken  out  of  the  fifteenth  chap' 
ter  of  the  former  Epistle  of  Saint 
Paul  to  the  Corinthians. 

Now  is  Christ  risen  from  the 
dead,  and  become  the 
first-fruits  of  them 
that  slept.  For  since  by  man  came 
death,  by  man  came  also  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead.  For  as  in  Adam 
all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all 
be  made  alive.  But  every  man  in 
his  own  order  :  Christ  the  first- 
fruits  ;  afterward  they  that  are 
Christ's,  at  his  coming.  Then  com- 
eth  the  end,  when  he  shall  have 
delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God, 
even  the  Father  ;  when  he  shall 
[Continued  on  page  376.] 


1  Cor.  XV.  20. 


our  sins  justly  art  moved?   Vet,  O  Lord," 
is  accidentally  omitted. 

"=  In  ed.   1662,  "  shut  not  thy  merciiul 
ears  to  our  prayer." 

*  In  Scotch  ed.,  "most  merciiul." 

•  In  Sealed    Book    apparently  altered 
from  "  So  "  with  a  pen. 


376 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  344.    Then  the  priest  casting  earth  upon  the  corpse,  shall  say, 

I  COMMEND  thy  soul  to  God  the  Father  Almighty,  and  thy 

body  to  the  ground,  earth  to  earth,  ashes  to  ashes,  dust  to 

dust,  in  sure  and  certain  hope  of  resurrection  to '  eternal  life, 

through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  change  our  vile 


Second  Edw.  VI.  X552. 
§  344.    Then  while  the  earth  sJiall  be 
cast  upon  the  body,  by  some  stand- 
ing by,  the  Priest  ^  shall  say. 
Forasmuch  as  it  hath  pleased 
almighty  God  of  his  great  mercy 
to  take  unto  himself  the  soul  of 
our  dear  brother  here  departed  :  we 
therefore  commit  his  body  to  the 
ground,  earth  to  earth,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  345*  '  Then  shall  be  said  or  sung. 
I  HEARD  a  voice  from  heaven, 
saying  unto  me,  Write  :  from  hence- 
forth, blessed  are  the  dead  which 
die  in  the  Lord.  Even  so  saith 
the  Spirit,  that  they  rest  from  their 
labours. 

Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  344-    Then  while  the  earth,  &'c. 
Forasmuch  as  it  hath,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
§  345.   Then  shall  be  said  or  sung. 
I  HEARD  a  voice,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
§  344.    Then  while  the  earth,  &'c. 
Forasmuch  as  it  hath,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.} 

§  34$.   Then  shall  be  said  or  sung. 

I  HEARD  a  voice,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  344.    Then  while  the  earth,  iSr'c. 
Forasmuch  as  it  hath,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 
§  345.    Then  shall  be  said  or  sung. 
I  HEARD  a  voice,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 
have  put  down  all  rule,  and  all  au- 
thority, and  power.  For  he  must 
reign,  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies 
under  his  feet.  The  last  enemy 
that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death. 
For  he  hath  put  all  things  under  his 
feet  But  when  he  saith,  all  things 
are  put  under  him,  it  is  manifest 
that  he  is  excepted,  which  did  put 
all  things  under  him.  And  when 
all  things  shall  be  subdued  unto 
him,  then  shall  the  Son  also  him- 
self be  subject  unto  him  that  put 
all  things  under  him,  that  God  may 
be  all  in  alL  Else  what  shall  they 
do  which  are  baptized  for  the  dead, 
if  the  dead  rise  not  at  all  ?  Why  are 
they  then  baptized  for  the  dead? 
and  why  stand  we  in  jeopardy  every 
hour  ?  I  protest  by  your  rejoicing, 
which  I  have  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord,  I  die  daily.  If  after  the  man- 
ner of  men  I  have  fought  with 
beasts  at  Ephesus,  what  advantag- 
eth  it  me,  if  the  dead  rise  not  ?  Let 
us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we 
die.  Be  not  deceived :  evil  com- 
munications corrupt  good  manners. 
Awake  to  righteousness,  and  sin 
not ;  for  some  have  not  the  know- 
ledge of  God.  I  speak  this  to  your 
shame.  But  some  man  will  say. 
How  are  the  dead  raised  up  ?  and 
with  what  body  do  they  come  ? 
Thou  fool,  that  which  thou  sowest 
is  not  quickened,  except  it  die. 
And  that  which  thou  sowest,  thou 
sowest  not  that  body  that  shall  be, 
but  bare  grain,  it  may  ch.ance  of 
wheat,  or  of  some  other  grain  :  But 
God  giveth  it  a  body,  as  it  hath 
pleased  him,  and  to  every  seed  his 
own  body.  All  flesh  is  not  the  same 


*■  In  ed.  1662,  "  of  the  resurrection." 


s  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Pre&byter.' 


At  the  Burial. 


377 


body,  that  it  may  be  like  to  ^  his  glorious  body,  according  to 
the  mighty  working  whereby  he  is  able  to  subdue  all  things 
to  himself. 

§  345.    TAen  shall  be  said  or  sung, 

I  HEARD  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying  unto  me :  Write,  blessed 
are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord.     Even  so     .        .   . 

ApoCi  XIV.  * 

saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  rest  from  their  labours. 


flesh ;  but  there  is  one  kind  of  flesh 
of  men,  another  flesh  of  beasts,  an- 
other of  fishes,  and  another  of  birds. 
There  are  also  celestial  bodies,  and 
bodies  terrestrial ;  but  the  glory  of 
the  celestial  is  one,  and  the  glory  of 
the  terrestrial  is  another.  There  is 
one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another 
glory  of  the  moon,  and  another 
glory  of  the  stars  ;  for  one  star  dif- 
iereth  from  another  star  in  gloiy. 
So  also  is  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead  :  It  is  sown  in  corruption  ;  it 
is  raised  in  incorruption  :  It  is  sown 
in  dishonour ;  it  is  raised  in  glory  : 
It  is  sown  in  weakness  ;  it  is  raised 
in  power  :  It  is  sown  a  natural 
body  ;  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body. 
There  is  a  natural  body,  and  there 
is  a  spiritual  body.  And  so  it  is 
written.  The  first  man  Adam  was 
made  a  living  soul ;  the  last  Adam 
was  made  a  quickening  spirit.  How- 
beit,  that  was  not  first  which  isJ 
spiritual,  but  that  which  is  natural ; 
and  afterward  that  which  is  spiri- 
tual. The  first  man  is  of  the  earth, 
earthy  :  the  second  man  is  the  Lord 
from  heaven.  As  is  the  earthy, 
such  are  they  that  are  earthy  :  and 
as  is  the  heavenly,  such  are  they 
also  that  are  heavenly.  And  as  we 
have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthy, 
we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the 
heavenly.  Now  this  I  say,  brethren, 
that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit 
the  kingdom  of  God  ;  neither  doth 
corruption  inherit  incorruption.  Be- 
hold, I  shew  you  a  mystery :  We 
shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all 


be  changed,  in  a  moment,  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last 
trump,  (for  the  trumpet  shall  sound, 
and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incor- 
ruptible, and  we  shall  be  changed.) 
For  this  corruptible  must  put  on 
incori-uption,  and  this  mortal  must 
put  on  immortality.  So  when  this 
corruptible  shall  have  put  on  incor- 
ruption, and  this  mortal  shall  have 
put  on  immortality ;  then  shall  be 
brought  to  pass  the  saying  that  is 
written.  Death  is  swallowed  up  in 
victory.  O  death,  where  is  thy 
sting  ?  O  grave,  where  is  thy  vic- 
tory? The  sting  of  death  is  sin, 
and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law. 
But  thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth 
us  the  victory  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Therefore,  my  be- 
loved brethren,  be  ye  stedfast,  un- 
moveable,  always  abounding  in  the 
work  of  the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  ye 
know  that  your  labour  is  not  in 
vain  in  the  Lord. 

§  342.    T   When   they  come   to   the 
Grave,  while  the  Corpse,  ^'c. 
Man  that  is  born,  &c. 
In  the  midst  of  life,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

§  344.  If  Then  while  the  earth,  &^c. 
Forasmuch  as  it  hath,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

§  345-   IT  Then  shall  be  said  or 
sung, 

I  HEARD  a  voice,  &c. 
[Same  as  1637,  to] 

for  they  rest  from  their  labours. 


■•  In  eds.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "  unto." 
'  In  eds.  1552,  the  reference  is  omitted; 
ir.  eds.  1637  and  1662,  Rev.  14.  13. 


J  In  the  Sealed   Book   (1662)  "is"   i 
printed,  but  altered  with  a  pen  to  "was." 


378  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

§  346.  Let  us  pray. 

We  commend  into  thy  hands  of  mercy,  most  merciful 
Father,  the  soul  of  this  our  brother  departed,  N.  And  his 
body  we  commit  to  the  earth,  beseeching  thine  infinite  good- 
ness, to  give  us  grace  to  live  in  thy  fear  and  love,  and  to  die 
in  thy  favour :  that  when  the  judgment  shall  come  which  thou 
hast  committed  to  thy  well  beloved  Son,  both  this  our  brother, 
and  we,  may  be  found  acceptable  in  thy  sight,  and  receive 
that  blessing,  which  thy  well  beloved  Son  shall  then  pro- 
nounce to  all  that  love  and  fear  thee,  saying,  Come,  ye 
blessed  children  of  my  Father :  Receive  the  kingdom  pre- 
pared for  you  before  the  beginning  of  the  world.  Grant 
this,  merciful  Father,  for  the  honour  of  Jesu  Christ  our  only 
Saviour,  Mediator,  and  Advocate.     Amen. 

%  ^.  This  prayer  shall  also  be  added. 

Almighty  God,  we  give  thee  hearty  thanks  for  this  thy 
servant,  whom  thou  hast  delivered  from  the  miseries  of  this 
wretched  world,  from  the  body  of  death  and  all  temptation ; 
and,  as  we  trust,  hast  brought  his  soul,  which  he  committed 
into  thy  holy  hands,  into  sure  consolation  and  rest :  Grant, 
we  beseech  thee,  that  at  the  day  of  judgment  his  soul  and  all 
the  souls  of  thy  elect,  departed  out  of  this  life,  may  with  us, 
and  we  with  them,  fully  receive  thy  promises,  and  be  made 
perfit  altogether,  thorough  the  glorious  resurrection  of  thy  Son 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

§  348.    These  psalms  with  other  suffrages  following  are  to  be  said  in  the 
church,  either  be/ore  or  after  the  burial  of  the  corpse. 

I  AM  well  pleased  that  the  Lord  hath  heard  the  voice  of 
my  prayer.  DiUxi,  quo- 

That  he  hath  inclined  his  ear  unto  me,  there-  psJ^'^'vik, 
fore  will  I  call  upon  him  as  long  as  I  live. 

The  snares  of  death  compassed  me  round  about,  and  the 
pains  of  hell  gat  hold  upon  me  :  I  shall  find  trouble  and 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

[The  Prayers  {}  346,  347  and  the  Psalms 
following,  are  omitted  in  this  and  in  all 
subsequent  editions,  but  the  latter  part  of 
the  first  prayer  will  be  found  incorporated 
in  the  prayer  at  the  end  of  the  Office, 
see  $  3sa,  p.  386.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
[The  above  Prayers,  &c.,  are  omitted.] 


James  I.  1604. 
[The  above  Prayers,  &c.,  are  omitted.] 


*  In  one  ed.,  1549,  mitpr.  Psalm  clxxvi. 


At  the  Burial.  379 


heaviness,  and  I  shall  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord, 
(0  Lord),  I  beseech  thee  deliver  my  soul. 

Gracious  is  the  Lord,  and  righteous,  yea,  our  God  is  mer- 
ciful. 

The  Lord  preserveth  the  simple  :  I  was  in  misery,  and 
he  helped  me. 

Turn  again  then  unto  thy  rest,  O  my  soul,  for  the  Lord  hath 
rewarded  thee. 

And  why]  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  death,  mine 
eyes  from  tears,  and  my  feet  from  falling. 

I  will  walk  before  the  Lord,  in  the  land  of  the  living. 

I  believed,  and  therefore  will  I  speak  :  but  I  was  sore  trou- 
bled.    I  said  in  my  haste  :  all  men  are  liars. 

What  reward  shall  I  give  unto  the  Lord  for  all  the  benefits 
that  he  hath  done  unto  me  1 

I  will  receive  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  call  upon  the  Name 
of  the  Lord. 

I  will  pay  my  vows  now  in  the  presence  of  all  his  people  : 
right  dear  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  his  Saints. 

Behold  (O  Lord)  how  that  I  am  thy  servant  :  I  am  thy  ser- 
vant, and  the  son  of  thy  handmaid,  thou  hast  broken  my  bonds 
in  sunder. 

I  will  offer  to  thee  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving,  and  will 
call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord. 

I  will  pay  my  vows  unto  the  Lord,  in  the  sight  of  all  his  peo- 
ple, in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house,  even  in  the  midst  of 
thee,  O  Hierusalem. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

Praise  the  Lord,  (O  my  soul),  while  I  live  will  I  praise 
the  Lord  :  yea,  as  long  as  I  have  any  being,  I  ^^„^^  ^^.^ 
will  sing  praises  unto  my  God.  »/«,  mea. 

O  put  not  your  trust  in  princes,  nor  in  any  child  ^-^Vj/l^/ia/ 
of  man,  for  there  is  no  help  in  them.  this  Psaim  is  to 

For  when  the  breath  of  man  goeth  forth,  he  shall  othTr  ^hat  ^  fou 
turn  again  to  his  earth,  and  then  all  his  thoughts  loweth'. 
perish. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637.  I  Charles  II.  1662. 

[The  above  Prayers,  &c,  are  omitted.]       |       [The  above  Prayers,  Ac,  are  omitted.] 


'  This  appears  thus  in  three  eds.,  1549  :  'i  o°e  ed.  the  order  is  given  correctly. 


Flssr  TuammrBoax.  of  Eitwakd  VL  1549. 


is  lie  diai  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  fcr  his  help  : 
hope  is  iM  Ac  LAd  his  God. 
le  hexvcB  and  eaidi,  tihesei,  jmd  all  that  tihcxcin 
IS  :  vlaLh  kft|>t.lli  his  pnMne  fcr  crex. 
Whick  ke^Klh  diem  to  ^^  Cbat  sdEEer  vio^  idodi  fieedcA 

The  Lad  looseA  aea  oat  of  pnson,  the  Lord  givedi  s^gjhl 
tolhehfiiBd. 

Tlie  Laid  he^peth  tihem  iq)  ^lat  are  £dleii,  the  Lord  caxedi 
fcrdiei^^lWMS. 

The  Lord  caocdi  fcr  dbe  uuw^i  ii^,  he  ddiaidedi  dbe  &ther- 
less  aad  vidov  :  is  iv  the  w^  of  the  v^odly;  he  tKoeth  it 


The  lAd  Aj  God,  O  Skm,  shall  be  King  for  evermore, 
sad  flwoiiglioat  all  genentions. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  begamiatLicc 


O  Ijomn,  liam.  hast  searched  me  out,  and  Imova 
.  Thoa  kaowest  n^  down-sitting,  and  mine  np-         ^j_^ 
•noDg  :  ^kam  idnpsfaiidest   mj  thoughts   long  rBbrrmr. 
before. 

Thoa  art  about  mj  path,  and  about  wj  bed,  and  spiest  oat 
zQ  my  ways. 

For  lo,  there  is  not  a  wofd  in  my  tongue,  bat  thoa  (O  Lord) 
Lnowest  it  altc^ether. 

Thoa  hast  fashionrd  me,  b^ind  and  before,  and  laid  thine 
hand  iq>oa  iM^ 

Soch  kaosledge  is  too  wonderful  and  excellent  for  me  : 
I  cannot  attw  «Bto  iL 

Whither  shaE  I  go  then  from  thy  Spirit !  or  whither  shall 
I  go  then  from  thy  presence  I 

If  I  dimb  np  into  heaven,  thou  art  there  :  if  I  go  down 
to  hell,  thoQ  art  there  also- 


Second  Edw.  VL  issa. 

tTWfMadiacPMhM  cf  ike  zs«9e£- 
fld.  zjsa,  ami  aAae- 
TW  aest  nAoc  wick  tbe 
li^iiMriil  1yifcrt345. 


ElizabetSb,  155^ 


rrbe 


James  L   1604. 
(IW  ak««e  Pull  are  oBtted-l 


At  the  Bltual.  381 


If  I  take  the  wings  of  the  moroing,  and  remain  in  the  utter- 
most parts  of  the  sea ; 

Even  there  also  shall  thj  hand  lead  me,  and  thy  right  hand 
shall  hold  me. 

If  I  say  :  peradventare  die  daikness  shall  cover  me,  then 
diall  my  night  be  turned  to  day- 
Yea,  the  darkness  is  no  darkness  with  thee  :  bat  the  n^t 
is  all  dear  as  the  day,  the  darkness  and  lig^  to  thee  are  both 
alike. 

For  my  reins  are  thine,  thon  hast  covered  me  in  my  mothei^s 
womb  :  I  will  give  thanks  unto  thee,  for  I  am  fearfuMy  and 
wonderfully  made  :  marvellous  are  thy  works,  and  that  my 
soul  knoweth  right  welL 

My  bones  are  not  hid  from  thee,  though  I  be  made  seciedy, 
and  fashioned  beneath  in  the  earth. 

Thine  eyes  did  see  my  substance,  yet  being  miperfect  : 
and  in  thy  book  were  all  my  members  written  ; 

Which  day  by  day  were  fashioned,  when  as  yet  there  was 
none  of  them. 

How  dear  are  thy  counsels  mito  me,  O  God  I  O  how  great 
is  the  sum  of  them  I 

If  I  tell  them,  they  are  more  in  number  than  the  sand  : 
when  I  wake  up,  I  am  present  with  thee. 

W^lt  thou  not  slay  the  wicked,  O  God  I  depart  from  me, 
ye  blood-thirsty  men- 

For  they  speak  unrighteously  against  thee  :  and  thine  ene- 
mies take  thy  Name  in  vain. 

Do  not  I  hate  them,  O  I^rd,  that  hate  thee  :  and  am 
not  I  grieved  with  those  that  rise  up  against  thee  I 

Yea,  I  hate  them  right  sore !  even  as  though  they  were  mine 
enemies. 

Tiy  me,  O  God,  and  seek  the  ground  of  mine  heart  :  prove 
me,  and  examine  my  thoughts. 

Look  well  if  there  be  any  way  (^  wickedness  in  me,  and  lead 
me  in  the  way  eveiiasting. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1537-             I                Charies  II.  i6Ga. 
rihe  above  PsaOms  ax  fiiHf  li  1  |  Ilfce  aibowe  Pi  >!■ mMIiiiiIII 


382 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


1  Cor.  15. 


§  349.    Then  shall  follow  this  lesson,  taken  out  of  the  fifteenth  chapter 
to  the  Corinihians,  the  first  Epistle. 

Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first- 
fruits  of  them  that  slept ".  For  by  a  man  came 
death,  and  by  a  man  came  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead.  For  as  by  Adam  all  die,  even  so  by  Christ  shall  all 
be  made  alive,  but  every  man  in  his  own  order:  The  first 
is  Christ ;  then  they  that  are  Christ's,  at  his  coming.  Then 
Cometh  the  end,  when  he  hath  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to 
God  the  Father,  when  he  hath  put  down  all  rule  and  all 
authority  and  power.  For  he  must  reign  till  he  have  put 
all"  his  enemies  under  his  feet.  The  last  enemy  that  shall 
be  destroyed  is  death.  For  he  hath  put  all  things  under  his 
feet.  But  when  he  saith  all  things  are  put  under  him,  it  is 
manifest  that  he  is  excepted  which  did  put  all  things  under 
him.  When  all  things  are  subdued  unto  him,  then  shall  the 
Son  also  himself  be  subject  unto  him  that  put  all  things  under 
him,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all.  Else  what  do  they  which 
are  baptized  over  the  dead,  if  the  dead  rise  not  at  all  ?  Why 
are  they  then  baptized  over  them?  yea  and  why  stand  we 
alway  then  in  jeopardy  ?  By  our  rejoicing,  which  I  have  in 
Christ  Jesu  our  Lord,  I  die  daily.  That  I  have  fought  with  beasts 
at  Ephesus  after  the  manner  of  men,  what  advantageth  it  me, 
if  the  dead  rise  not  again  ?  Let  us  eat,  and  drink,  for  to- 
morrow we  shall  die.  Be  not  ye  deceived ;  evil  words  cor- 
rupt good  manners.  Awake  truly  out  of  sleep,  and  sin  not. 
For  some  have  not  the  knowledge  of  God.  I  speak  this  to 
your  shame.  But  some  man  will  say :  How  arise  the  dead  ? 
with  what  body  shall  they  come  ?  Thou  fool,  that  which  thou 
sowest  is  not  quickened,  except  it  die.  And  what  sowest 
thou  1  Thou  sowest  not  that  body  that  shall  be ;  but  bare 
com  as  of  wheat,  or  of  some  other  :  but  God  giveth  it  a  body, 
at  his  pleasure,  to  every  seed  his  own  body.  All  flesh  is 
not  one  manner  of  flesh,  but  there  is  one  manner  of  flesh 
of  men,  another"  manner  of  flesh  of  beasts,  another"  of  fishes, 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

349.   Then  shall  follow  this  lesson, 
taken  out  of  the,  &'c, 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  349.    Then  shall  follow,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

James  I.  1604. 
§  349.   Then  shall  follow,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1549] 


■•  In  one  ed.,  1559,  and  in  ed.  Z604, 
'•Ieq>." 


■  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "all"  emitted. 

"  In  eds.  1559,  "  *°<^  other  manner  of." 


At  the  Burial.  383 


another  of  birds.  There  are  also  celestial  bodies,  and  there 
are  bodies  terrestrial.  But  the  glory  of  the  celestial  is  one, 
and  the  glory  of  the  terrestrial  is  another.  There  is  one 
manner  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another  glory  of  the  moon,  and 
another  glory  of  the  stars.  For  one  star  diftereth  from  an- 
other in  glory.  So  is  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  It  is 
sown  in  corruption,  it  riseth  again  in  incorruption.  It  is 
sown  in  dishonour,  it  riseth  again  in  honour.  It  is  sown  in 
weakness,  it  riseth  again  in  power.  It  is  sown  a  natural  body, 
it  riseth  again  a  spiritual  body.  There  is  a  natural  body,  and 
there  is  a  spiritual  body :  and  as  it  is  also  written  :  The  first 
man  Adam  was  made  a  living  soul,  and  the  last  Adam  was 
made  a  quickening  Spirit.  Howbeit,  that  is  not  first  which 
is  spiritual :  but  that  which  is  natural,  and  then  that  which  is 
spiritual.  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy  :  the  second 
man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven  (heavenly).  As  is  the  earthy, 
such  are  they  that  are  earthy.  And  as  is  the  heavenly,  such 
are  they  that  are  heavenly.  And  as  we  have  borne  the  image 
of  the  earthy,  so  shall  we  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly. 
This  say  I,  brethren,  that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit 
the  kingdom  of  God  ;  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  uncor- 
ruption.  Behold,  I  shew  you  a  mystery.  We  shall  not  all 
sleep  :  but  we  shall  all  be  changed  and  that  in  a  moment, 
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  by  the  last  trump.  For  the  trump 
shall  blow,  and  the  dead  shall  rise  incorruptible,  and  we  shall 
be  changed.  For  this  corruptible  must  put  on  incorruption  : 
and  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality.  When  this  cor- 
ruptible hath  put  on  incorruption  p,  and  this  mortal  hath  put 
on  immortality  :  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying 
that  is  written  :  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory  :  Death, 
where  is  thy  sting?  Hell,  where  is  thy  victory?  The  sting 
of  death  is  sin  :  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law.  But 
thanks  be  unto  God  which  hath  given  us  victory,  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Therefore,  my  dear  brethren,  be  ye 
stedfast,  and  unmoveable,  always  rich  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord,  forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain 
in  the  Lord. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  345.    Then  shall  follow,  iS^c 

[Same  rubric  as  1552,  but  the  version  fol- 
lows that  printed  at  p.  375,  under  ed.  1G62.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 


[This   Lesson  is  hgre   omitted,   having 
already  been  read,  see  \  331,  p.  375.] 


P  In  most  eds.  1539,  "  uncorruption." 


384 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI,  1549. 


§  350.   TTu  lesson  ended,  then  shall  the  Priest '  say^ 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

^  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  &c. 

And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. 

Atis7ver.  But  deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen. 
Priest.  Enter  not  (O  Lord)  into  judgment  with  thy  servant. 
Answer.    For  in    thy   sight    no  living   creature    shall    be 
justified. 

Priest.  From  the  gates  of  hell. 

Answer.  Deliver  their  souls,  O  Lord. 

Priest.  I  believe  to  see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord. 

Answer.  In  the  land  of  the  living. 

Priest.  O  Lord,  graciously  hear  my  prayer. 

Answer.  And  let  my  cry  come  unto  thee. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  350.    The  lesson  ended,  &'c. 
Lord,  have  mercy,  &c 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
.  .  .  deliver  us  from  eviL    Amen. 

§351.  ThePriestX 
Almighty  God,  with  whom  do 
live  the  spirits  of  them  that  depart 
hence  in  the  Lord,  and  in  whom 
the  souls  of  them  that  be  elected, 
after  they  be  delivered  from  the 
burden  of  the  flesh,  be  in  joy  and 
felicity :  We  give  thee  hearty  thanks, 
for  that  it  hath  pleased  thee  to  de- 
liver this  N.  our  brother  out  of  the 
miseries  of  this  sinful  world  :  be- 
seeching thee,  that  it  may  please 
thee  of  thy  gracious  goodness,  short- 
ly to  accomplish  the  number  of 
thine  elect,  and  to  haste '  thy  king- 
dom, that  we  with  this  our  brother, 
and  all  other  departed  in  the  true 
faith  of  thy  holy  name,  may  have 
our  perfect  consummation  and  bliss, 


both  in  body  and  soul,  in  thy  eter- 
nal and  everlasting  glory.    Amen. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
350.    The  lesson  ended,  the  Priest 
shall  say. 

Lord,  have  mercy,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

.  .  deliver  us  from  evil.    Amen. 

(§351.)   The  Priest. 
Almighty  God,  with  whom,  &c. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


James  L  1604. 

350.    The  lesson  ended,  the  Priest 
shall  say. 

Lord,  have  mercy,  &c 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
.  .  deliver  us  from  evil.    Amen. 

(§351.)    The  Priest. 
Almighty  God,  with  whom,  &c. 

[Same  as  1553.] 


1  In  ed.  1378,  "  Minuter'"  and  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  tht  Pre^jrter." 
'  In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "hasten." 


At  the  Burial. 


3S: 


(§351.)  Let  us  pray. 

O  Lord,  with  whom  do  live  the  spirits  of  them  that  be 
dead :  and  in  whom  the  souls  of  them  that  be  elected,  after 
they  be  delivered  from  the  burden  of  the  flesh,  be  in  joy  and 
felicity  :  Grant  unto  this  thy  servant,  that  the  sins  which  he 
committed  in  this  world  be  not  imputed  unto  him,  but  that 
he,  escaping  the  gates  of  hell,  and  pains  of  eternal  darkness, 
may  ever  dwell  in  the  region  of  light,  with  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  in  the  place  where  is  no  weeping,  sorrow,  nor 
heaviness ;  and  when  that  dreadful  day  of  the  genejal  resur- 
rection shall  come,  make  him  to  rise  also  Avith  the  just  and 
righteous,  and  receive  this  body  again  to  glory,  then  made 
pure  and  incorruptible  :  set  him  on  the  right  hand  of  thy 
Son  Jesus  Christ,  among  thy  holy  and  elect,  that  then  he 
may  hear  with  them  these  most  sweet  and  comfortable  words : 
Come  to  me,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  possess  the  kingdom 
which  hath  been  prepared  for  you  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  :  Grant  this,  we  beseech  thee,  O  merciful  Father,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Mediator  and  Redeemer.     Amen. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  350.    The  Lesson  ended,  the  Pres- 
byter shall  say. 
Lord,  have  mercy,  &c 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

.  .  .  deliver  us  from  evil.    Amen. 

§  351.  Presbyter. 
Almighty  God,  virith  whom,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  IL  1662. 
§  350.  ^  Then  the  Priest  shall  say, 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven, 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy.  king- 
dom come.  Thy  wiil  be  done  in 
earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us 
this  day  our  daily  bread.  And  for- 
give us  our  trespasses.    As  we  for- 


give them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation : 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.    Amen. 

§  351.  Priest. 
Almighty  God,  with  whom  do 
live  the  spirits  of  them  that  depart 
hence  in  the  Lord,  and  with  whom 
the  souls  of  the  faithful,  after  they 
are  delivered  from  the  burden  of 
the  flesh,  are  in  joy  and  felicity  ; 
We  give  thee  hearty  thanks,  for 
that  it  hath  pleased  thee  to  deliver 
this  our  brother  out  of  the  miseries 
of  this  sinful  world ;  beseeching 
thee  that  it  may  please  thee  of  thy 
gracious  goodness,  shortly  to  ac- 
complish the  number  of  thine  elect, 
and  to  hasten  thy  kingdom,  that 
we,  with  all  those  that  are  departed 
in  the  true  faith  of  thy  holy  Name, 
may  have  our  perfect  consummation 
and  bliss,  both  in  body  and  soul, 
in  thy  eternal  and  everlasting  glory, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen, 


CC 


386 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  352.   The  Collect. 

O  MERCIFUL  God,  the  Father 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is 
the  resurrection  and  the  hfe,  in 
whom  whosoever  believeth,  shall 
live  though  he  die  ;  and  whosoever 
liveth  and  believeth  in  him,  shall 
not  die  eternally  :  who  also  taught  • 
us  (by  his  holy  apostle '  Paul)  not 
to  be  sorry,  as  men  without  hope, 
for  them  that  sleep  in  him  :  We 
meekly  beseech  thee  (O  Father)  to 
raise  us  from  the  death  of  sin  unto 
the  life  of  righteousness,  that  when 
we  shall  depart  this  life,  we  may 
rest  in  him,  as  our  hope  is  this  our 
brother  doth ;  and  that  at  the  general 
resurrection  in  the  last  day,  we  may 
be  found  acceptable  in  thy  sight, 
and  receive  that  blessing  which  thy 
wellbeloved  Son  shall  then  pro- 
nounce to  all  that  love  and  fear 
thee,  saying :  Come,  ye  blessed 
children  of  my  Father,  receive  the 
kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world.  Grant  this 
we  beseech  thee,  O  merciful  Father, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Mediator 
and  Redeemer.     Amen. 

[The  Office  ends  here.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  352.    The  Collect. 
O  MERCIFUL  God,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 
§  352.    The  Collect. 
O  MERCIFUL  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  352.    The  Collect. 
O  MERCIFUL  God,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  352.    The  Collect. 

O  MERCIFUL  God,  the  Father, 
&c 

[Same  as  1552,  to] 

Mediator  and  Redeemer.  Amen. 
[In  ed.  1662  only  is  added  the  following.l 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and 
the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
be  with  us  all  evermore.    Amen. 


•  In  ed.  i66a,  "hath  taught." 
*  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Apostle  S.  Paul ;"  and  ed.  1662,  "Apostle  Saint  PauL" 


At  the  Burial.  3S7 


§353.    THE   CELEBRATION 
of  the  holy  communion  when  there  is  a  burial  of  the  dead. 

Like  as  the  hart  desireth  the  water-brooks,  Quemadmodum 
so  longeth  my  soul  after  thee,  O  God.  i^saim  xui. 

My  soul  is  athirst  for  God,  yea,  even  for  the  living  God  : 
when  shall  I  come  to  appear  before  the  presence  of  God  ? 

My  tears  have  been  my  meat  day  and  night,  while  they 
daily  say  unto  me,  Where  is  now  thy  God  ? 

Now  when  I  think  thereupon,  I  pour  out  my  heart  by 
myself  :  for  I  went  with  the  multitude,  and  brought  them 
forth  unto  the  house  of  God,  in  the  voice  of  praise  and 
thanksgiving,  among  such  as  keep  holy-day. 

Why  art  thou  so  full  of  heaviness,  (O  my  soul)  :  and  why 
art  thou  so  unquiet  within  me  ? 

Put  thy  trust  in  God,  for  I  will  yet  give  him  thanks  for  the 
help  of  his  countenance. 

My  God,  my  soul  is  vexed  within  me  :  therefore  will  I 
remember  thee  concerning  the  land  of  Jordan,  and  the  little 
hill  of  Hermonim. 

One  deep  calleth  another,  because  of  thy  noise  of  thy 
water-pipes,  all  thy  waves  and  storms  are  gone  over  me. 

The  Lord  hath  granted  his  loving-kindness  on  the  day- 
time, and  in  the  night-season  did  I  sing  of  him,  and  made 
my  prayer  unto  the  God  of  my  life. 

I  w  ill  say  unto  the  God  of  my  strength,  why  hast  thou  for- 
gotten me?  why  go  I  thus  heavily,  while  the  enemy  op- 
presseth  me  ? 

My  bones  are  smitten  asunder,  while  mine  enemies  (that 
trouble  me)  cast  me  in  the  teeth,  namely,  while  they  say 
daily  unto  me  :  where  is  now  thy  God  ? 

Why  art  thou  so  vexed,  (O  my  soul)  and  why  art  thou  so 
disquieted  within  me  ? 

O  put  thy  trust  in  God,  for  I  will  yet  thank  him  which  is 
the  help  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God. 

Glory  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c. 

["  The  Celebration  of  the  Holy  Communion  when  there  is  a  Burial  of  the  Dead,"  ap- 
pears only  in  the  eds.  1549.     In  all  after  it  is  omitted.] 


388  First  Prayer-Boo^  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

1 ■ 

§354.  ^he  Collect''. 

0  MERCIFUL  God  the  Fatler  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  who 
is  the  resurrection  and  the  life :  In  whom  whosoever  beheveth 
shall  live,  though  he  die  :  and  whosoever  liveth,  and  believeth 
in  him,  shall  not  die  eternally :  who  also  hath  taught  us  (by 
his  holy  apostle  Paul)  not  to  be  sorry  as  men  without  hope 
for  them  that  sleep  in  him  :  We  meekly  beseech  thee  (O 
Father)  to  raise  us  from  the  death  of  sin  unto  the  life  of 
righteousness,  that  when  we  shall  depart  this  life,  we  may 
sleep  in  him  (as  our  hope  is  this  our  brother  doth),  and  at 
the  general  resurrection  in  the  last  day  both  we  and  this  our 
brother  departed,  receiving  again  our  bodies,  and  rising  again 
in  thy  most  gracious  favour,  may  with  all  thine  elect  Saints 
obtain  eternal  joy.  Grant  this,  O  Lord  God,  by  the  means 
of  our  Advocate  Jesus  Christ :  which  with  thee  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  liveth  and  reigneth  one  God  for  ever.     Amen. 

§  355.    The  Epistle. 

1  WOULD  not,  brethren,  that  ye  should  be  ignorant  concern- 
ing them  which  are  asleep,  that  ye  sorrow  not,     j^hess  iv 
even  as  other  do,  which  have  no  hope.     For  if  we 

believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again;  even  so  them  also 
which  sleep  by  Jesus,  will  God  bring  again  with  him.  For  this 
say  we  unto  you  in  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we  which 
shall  live,  and  shall  remain  in  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  shall 
not  come  ere  they  which  sleep.  For  the  Lord  himself  shall  de- 
scend from  heaven  with  a  shout,  and  the  voice  of  the  arch- 
angel, and  trump  of  God :  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise 
first :  Then  we  which  shall  live  (even  we  shall  remain)  shall 
be  caught  up  with  them  also  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the 
Lord  in  the  air :  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord. 
Wherefore  comfort  yourselves  one  another  with  these  words. 
§  356.  IF  The  Gospel. 

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples  and  to  the  Jews,  All  that  the 
Father  giveth  me  shall  come  to  me  ;  and  he  that  ,^^  ^ 
cometh  to  me  I  shall  not  cast  away.  For  I  came 
down  from  heaven;  not  to  do  that  I  will,  but  that  he  will 
which  hath  sent  me.  And  this  is  tlae  Father's  will  which 
hath  sent  me,  that  of  all  which  he  hath  given  me,  I  shall  lose 
nothing ;  but  raise  them  up  again  at  the  last  day. 

And  this  is  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me  :  that  every  one 
which  seeth  the  son  and  believeth  on  him,  have  everlasting 
life,  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day. 

»  In  two  eds.,  1549,  "  Collect." 


Purification. 


389 


THE  ORDER  OF  THE 
PURIFICATION    OF  WOMEN\ 

§  357-  "^'^^  woman  shall  come  into  the  church,  and  there  shall  kneel  down 
in  some  convenient  place,  nigh  unto  the  quire  door:  and  the  Priest  stand- 
ing by  her  shall  say  these  words,  or  such  like,  as  the  case  shall  require. 

Forasmuch  as  it  hath  pleased  Almighty  ^  God  of  his  good- 
ness to  give  you  safe  deliverance,  and  your  child  baptism', 
and  hath  preserved  you  in  the  great  danger  of  childbirth :  ye 
shall  therefore  give  hearty  thanks  unto  God,  and  pray. 


Second  Edw.  VI,  1552. 

THE   THANKSGIVING  OF  WOMEN 
AFTER  CKtILD   BIRTH, 

COMMONLY  CALLED 

THE  CHURCHING  OF 
WOMEN. 

§  357.  The  woman  shall  come  into 
the  church,  and  there  shall  kneel 
down  in  some  convenient  place, 
nigh  unto  the  place  where  the  table 
standeth  :  and  the  Priest »  standing 
by  her,  shall  say  these  words,  or 
such  like  as  the  case  shall  require. 

Forasmuch  as  it  hath  pleased 
almighty^  God  of  his  goodness  to 
give  you  safe  deliverance,  and  hath 
preserved  you  in  the  great  danger 
of  child  birth :  ye ''  shall  therefore 
give  hearty  thanks  luito  God,  and 
pray-=. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

THE  THANKS  GIVING  OF 
WOMEN,   &C. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  357-  The  woman  shall  come,  &'c. 
Forasmuch  as  it  hath,  &c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


»  In  ed.  1578,  the  Service  omitted  al- 
together, 
y  In  one  ed.,  1539,  "the  Almighty." 
'  In  eds.   1552,  the  words,  "and  your 
child  baptism,"  are  oviitted. 


James  I.  1604. 

THE  THANKSGIVING  OF 
WOMEN,   &C. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  357-  The  woman  shall  come,  ^c. 
Forasmuch  as  it  hath,  &c 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

THE  THANKSGIVING  OF 
WOMEN,  &C. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  357-  The  woman  shall  come,  &'c. 
Forasmuch  as  it  hath,  &c 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

the  THANKSGIVING  OF 
WOMEN,  &C. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
§  357-  ^  The  Woman  at  the  usual 
time  after  her  Delivery,  shall  come 
into   the   Church    decently  appa- 
relled, and  there  shall  kneel  down 
in  some  convenient  place,  as  hath 
been  accustomed,  or  as  the  Ordi- 
nary shall  direct:  And  then  the 
Priest  shall  say  unto  her. 
Forasmuch  as  it  hath,  &c 

[Same  as  1552.] 


*  In    Scotch    ed.,    1637,    "  the    Lord's 
Table  standeth  :  and  the  Presbyter. " 
^  In  ed.  1662,  "you." 
"  In  ed.  1662,  "and  say." 


390 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  358.  Then  shall  the  Priest  say  this  Psalm. 

I  HAVE  lifted'^  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  hills,  from  whence 
Cometh  my  help  ?  Levavi  ocuios. 

My  help  cometh  even  from  the  Lord,  which  Psaimcxxi.« 
hath  made  heaven  and  earth. 

He  will   not   suffer  thy  foot  to   be  moved,  and   he   that 
keepeth  thee  will  not  sleep. 

Behold,  he  that  keepeth  Israel,  shall  neither  slumber  nor, 
sleep. 

The  Lord  himself  is  thy  keeper,  the  Lord  is  thy  defence 
upon  thy  right  hand. 

So  that  the  sun  shall  not  bum  thee  by  day,  neither  the 
moon  by  night 

The  Lord  shall  preserve  tliee  from  all  evil,  yea,  it  is  even 
he  that  shall  keep  thy  soul. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

358.  That  shall  the  Priest  say  this 

Psalm, 

Psalm  cxxi. 

I  HAVE  lifted  up,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
358.  Then  shall  the  Priest,  (Sr-c 

I  HAVE  lifted  up,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
Lord,  have  mercy,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  X549.] 


James  I.  1604. 
358.  Then  shall  the  Priest,  A'c. 

I  HAVE  lifted  up,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
Lord,  have  mercy,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549,  to] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
358.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter  say 
this  Psalm  following. 
Or  else  Psalm  the  27. 


I  will  lift   up    mine  eyes  unto 

the  hills  from  whence  „    , 

.1  1     I  Fsalm  cxxi. 

cometh  my  help. 

My  help  cometh  from  the  Lord, 
which  made  heaven  and  earth. 

He  will  not  suffer  thy  foot  to 
be  moved  :  he  that  keepeth  thee 
will  not  slumber. 

Behold,  he  that  keepeth  Israel 
shall  neither  slumber  nor  sleep. 

The  Lord  is  thy  keeper  :  the 
Lord  is  thy  shade  upon  thy  right 
hand. 

The  sun  shall  not  smite  thee  by 
day  ;  nor  the  moon  by  night. 

The  Lord  shall  preserve  thee 
from  all  evil  :  he  shall  preserve 
thy  soul. 

The  Lord  shall  preserve  thy 
going  out,  and  thy  coming  in,  from 
this  time  forth  and  even  for  ever- 
more. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

Lord,  have  mercy,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


<i  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "have  lift." 


*  In  one  ed.,  1549^  mUf.  Psalm  xxi. 


Purification. 


391 


The  Lord  shall  preserve  thy  going  out,  and  thy  coming  in, 
from  this  time  forth  for  evermore. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  and  to,  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever,  &c. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  358.  %  Then  shall  the  Priest  say 

the  cxvi. '  Psalm. 

I  AM  well  pleased  :    Dilexi,  quo- 
that    the     Lord    hath        niatn. 
heard  the  voice  of  my     ^^^^'  '^^'• 
prayer. 

That  he  hath  inclined  his  ear 
unto  me  :  therefore  will  I  call  upon 
him  as  long  as  I  live. 

The  snares  of  death  compassed 
me  roimd  about  :  and  the  pains  of 
hell  gat  hold  upon  me. 

I  found  trouble  and  heaviness, 
and  I  called  upon  the  Name  of  the 
Lord  :  O  Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  de- 
liver my  soul. 

Gracious  is  the  Lord,  and  right- 
eous :  yea,  our  God  is  merciful. 

The  Lord  preserveth  the  simple  : 
I  was  in  misery,  and  he  helped  me. 

Turn  again  then  unto  thy  rest, 

0  my  soul  :  for  the  Lord  hath  re- 
warded thee. 

And  why?  thou  hast  delivered 
my  soul  from  death  :  mine  eyes 
from  tears,  and  my  feet  from  fall- 
ing. 

I  will  walk  before  the  Lord  :  in 
the  land  of  the  living. 

I  believed,  and  therefore  will  I 
speak,   but   I   was  sore  troubled  : 

1  said  in  my  haste,   All  men  are 
liars. 

What  reward  shall  I  give  unto 
the  Lord  :  for  all  the  benefits  that 
he  hath  done  unto  me  ? 

I  will  receive  the  cup  of  salva- 
tion :  and  call  upon  the  Name  of 
the  Lord. 

I  will  pay  my  vows  now  in  the 


presence  of  all  his  people  :  in  the 
courts  of  the  Lord  s  house,  even 
in  the  midst  of  thee,  O  Jerusalem. 
Praise  the  Lord. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

§  359-  Or  Psal.  cxxvii.  p 

Except  the  Lord  build        Nisi 
the  house  :  their  labour  ^^"^^^^ 
is  but  lost  that  build  it 

Except  the  Lord  keep  the  city  : 
the  watchman  waketh  but  in  vain. 

It  is  but  lost  labour  that  ye  haste 
to  rise  up  early,  and  so  late  take 
rest,  and  eat  the  bread  of  careful- 
ness :  for  so  he  giveth  his  beloved 
sleep. 

Lo,  children  and  the  fruit  of  the 
womb  :  are  an  heritage  and  gift 
that  Cometh  of  the  Lord. 

Like  as  the  arrows  in  the  hand 
of  the  giant :  even  so  are  the  young 
children. 

Happy  is  the  man  that  hath  his 
quiver  full  of  them  :  they  shall  not 
be  ashamed  when  they  speak  with 
their  enemies  in  the  gate. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

§  360.  If  Then  the  Priest  shall  say^ 
Let  us  pray. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 


'  In  the  Sealed  Book,  1662,  ''  cxvi. 
Psalm"  is  altered  with  a  pen  from  "  this 
p»alni." 


B  In  the  Sealed  Book,  1662,  "  Psalm 
cxxvii."  is  altered  with  a  pen  from  "  this 
psalm." 


392 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


•J  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  &c. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. 
Answer.  But  deHver  us  from  evil.     Amen  ". 
Friest'\    O  Lord,  save  this  woman  thy  servant. 
Answer.   Which  ^  putteth  her  trust  in  thee. 
Priest^.    Be  thou  to  her  a  strong  tower. 
Answer.    From  the  face  of  her  enemy. 
Priest^.    Lord',  hear  our  prayer. 
Answer.   And  let  our  "  cry  come  to  °  thee. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Our  Father  which  art,  &c 
[Same  as  I549-] 

(§  361.)  Priest. 
\  Let  us  pray. 
O  Almighty  God,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

362.  The  woman  that  cometh  to 
give  her  thanks,  must  offer  accus- 
tomed offerings:  and  if  there  be 
a  Communion,  it  is  coitvettient 
that  she  receive  the  holy  Commu- 
nion. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

Our  Father  which  art,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  361.  Priest. 
Let  us  pray. 

O  Almighty  God,  which,  &c. 

362.  The  woman  that  conuth,  ^c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 


James  I.  1604. 

Our  Father  which  art,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  361,  Priest. 

Let  us  pray. 

O  Almighty  God,  which,  &c 

362.  7^  woman  thai  cometh,  dfc. 
[Same  as  1553.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
Our  Father  which  art,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  361.  Presbyter. 

Let  us  pray. 

O  Almighty  God,  which,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

362.  The  woman  that  cometh  to 
give  her  thanks:  it  is  convenient 
that  she  receive  the  holy  Commu' 
nion  if  there  be  any  at  that  time. 


•"In  ed.  1604,  "Amen"  ontiUed. 
•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Presbyter;"  in 
ed.  1662,  "  Minister." 
'  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 


■  In  two  eds.,  1549,  and  in  Scotch  ed., 
1637,  "O  Lord." 
"  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "my  cry." 
■■  In  eds.  1553,  and  afterwards,  "  unto." 


Purification". 


393 


(§  361.)  Priest.    \  Let  us  pray. 

O  Almighty  God,  which  hast  deUvered  this  woman  thy 
sen'ant  from  the  great  pain  and  peril  of  childbirth  :  Grant, 
we  beseech  thee  (most  merciful  Father),  that  she  through  thy 
help  may  both  faithfully  live,  and  walk  in  her  vocation  ac- 
cording to  thy  will  in  this  life  present ;  and  also  may  be  par- 
taker of  everlasting  glory  in  the  life  to  come  :  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  362.  TTie  woman  that  is  purified,  must  offer  her  chrisom,  and  other  accus- 
tomed offerings.  And  if  there  be  a  Communion,  it  is  convenient  that  she 
receive  the  holy  Communion. 


Charles   II.  1662. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven ; 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy  king- 
dom come.  Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us 
this  day  our  daily  bread.  And  for- 
give us  our  trespasses,  As  we  for- 
give them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation  : 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.  For  thine 
is  the  kingdom  p,  the  power,  and  the 
glory,  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

Minister.  O  Lord,  save  this 
woman  thy  servant ; 

Answer.  Who  putteth  her  trust 
in  thee. 

Minister.  Be  thou  to  her  a  strong 
tower ; 

Answer.  From  the  face  of  her 
enemy. 


Minister.  Lord,  hear  our  prayer. 
Answer.    And  let  our  cry  come 
unto  thee. 

(§361.)  Minister. 
Let  us  pray. 
O  Almighty  God,  we  give  thee 
humble  thanks  for  that  thou  hast 
vouchsafed  to  deliver  this  woman 
thy  servant  from  the  great  pain  and 
peril  of  child-birth ;  Grant,  we  be- 
seech thee,  most  merciful  Father, 
that  she  through  thy  help  may  both 
faithfully  live,  and  walk  according 
to  thy  will  in  this  life  present,  and 
also  may  be  partaker  of  everlasting 
glory  in  the  life  to  come,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  362.  ^  The  Woman  that  cometh 
to  give,  &>€. 

[Same  as  1532.] 


°  In  the  Sealed  Book  throughout  the 
heading  is  altered  with  a  pen  to  "  The 
Churching  of  Women,"  written  above  the 


words  "  The  Thanksgiving." 

P  In  the  Sealed  Book  "and"  is  here 
printed,  but  marked  through  with  a  pen. 


394  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


THE   FIRST   DAY   OF    LENT 

COMMONLY  CALLED 

ASH-WEDNESDAY. 

363.  IT  After  Matins  ended,  the  people  being  called  together  by  the  ringing 
of  a  bell,  and  assembled  in  the  church,  the  English  Litany  shall  be  said 
after  the  accttstomed  viannerf :  which  ended,  the  Priest^  shall  go  into  the 
ptilpit,  and  say  thus : 

Brethren,  in  the  primitive  church  there  was  a  godly 
discipline,  that  at  the  beginning  of  Lent  such  persons  as 
were  notorious  sinners'!,  were  put  to  open  penance',  and 
punished  in  this  world*,  that  their  souls  might  be  saved  in 
the  day  of  the  Lord ;  and  that  other'  admonished  by  their 
example,  might  be  more "  afraid  to  offend.  In  the  stead  '^ 
whereof,   until   the   said   discipline   may  be   restored   again, 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

A 

COMMINATION   AGAINST 
SINNERS, 

WITH  CERTAIN 

PRAYERS  TO  BE  USED  DIVERS 
TIMES  IN  THE  YEAR. 

§  363.  If  After  Morning  prayer,  the 
people,  Sfc. 

Brethren,     in    the    primitive 
church,  &c. 

Cursed  is  the  man,  &c, 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  364.   And  the  people  shall  answer 
and  say. 

Amen. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

A  COMMINATION   AGAINST 
SINNERS,  &C. 
§  363.  After  Morning  Prayer,  ^'c. 
Brethren,  in  the  Primitive,  &c 
Cursed  is  the  man,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  364.  And  the  people  shall  answer 
and  say. 

Amen. 


James  I.  1604. 
a  commination  against 
sinners,  &C 
§  363.  After  Morning  Prayer,  ^c. 
Brethren,  in  the  primitive,  &c. 
Cursed  is  the  man,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§  364.  And  the  people  shall  answer 
and  say. 

Amen. 


P  In  one  ed,,  1549,  "shall  be  said  in 
such  wise  as  in  the  end  of  this  book  is 
set  forth,  and  in  the  accustomed  places 
appointed  by  the  King's  injunctions." 

1  In  ed.  1662,  "persons  as  stood  con- 
victed of  notorious  sin." 

■■  In  one  ed.,  1540,  the  words,  "put  to 
open  penance,  and,'  are  omitted. 


•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "and  did  humWy 
submit  themselves  to  undergo  punishment 
in  this  world." 

'  In   most  eds.,  1552,  and  afterwards, 
"others." 
"  In  eds.  1604,  and  after   ''the  more." 

•  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "Presbyter." 
»  In  ed.  1662,  "instead." 


The  First  Day  of  Lent. 


395 


(which  things  is  much  to  be  wished,)  it  is  thought  good,  that 
at  this  time  (in  your  presence ')  should  be  read  the  general 
sentences  of  God's  cursing  against  impenitent  sinners,  gathered 
out  of  the  xxviith '  chapter  of  Deuteronomy,  and  other  places 
of  scripture:  and  that  ye  should  answer  to  every  sentence, 
Amen.  To  the  intent  that  you ''  being  admonished  of  the 
great  indignation  of  God  against  sinners,  may  the  rather  be 
called "  to  earnest  and  true  repentance,  and  may  walk  more 
warily  in  these  dangerous  days,  fleeing^  from  such  vices,  for 
the  ^  which  ye  affirm  with  yoiu:  own  mouths  the  curse  of  God 
to  be  due. 

^  Cursed  is  the  man  that  maketh  any  carved  or  molten 
image,  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,  the  work  of  the  hands 
of  the  craftsman,  and  putteth  it  in  a  secret  place  to  worship  it. 

§364.  And  the  people  shall  answer,  and  say. 
Amen. 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

A  COMMINATION  AGAINST  SIN- 
NERS, WITH  CERTAIN  PRAYERS 
TO  BE  USED  DIVERS  TIMES  IN 
THE  YEAR.  AND  ESPECIALLY 
ON  THE  FIRST  DAY  OF  LENT, 
COMMONLY  CALLED  ASH- WED- 
NESDAY. 

§  363.  AJter  Morning  Prayer,  ^c, 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

....  and  say  thus,  the  people  sit- 
ting and  attending  with  reverence. 

Brethren,  in  the  Primitive,  &c. 
Cursed  is  the  man,  &c. 

fSame  throughout  as  1549,  except  that 
it  has  the  marginal  reference.] 


Deut.  27.  15. 


ship  it 


place  to  wor- 


§  364.  And  the  people  shall  ansnver 
and  say. 

Amen. 


Charles  IL  1662. 
A   COMMINATION, 

OR 

DENOUNCING  OF  GOD'S  ANGER 

AND  JUDGEMENTS  AGAINST 

SINNERS, 

With  certain  Prayers  to  be  used 
on  the  first  day  of  Lent,  and  at 
other  times,  as  the  Ordinary  shall 
appoint. 

§  363-  IT  After  Morning  Prayer,  the 
Litany  ended  according  to  the  ac- 
customed manner,  the  Priest  shall 
in  the  reading  Pew  or  Pulpit,  say. 
Brethren,  in  the  Primitive,  &c. 

[Same  as  iS49-] 
Cursed  is  the  man  that  maketh 

any  carved  or    molten    image,    to 

worship  it. 

§  364.  \  And  the  people  shall  answer 
and  say. 

Amen. 


T  In  ed.  1662,  "thing"  omiUed. 

«  In  ed.  1662,  "  in  the  presence  of  you 
all." 

»  In  ed.  1552,  "  xxvii.  ;"  in  eds.  1662, 
"the  seven  and  twentieth." 

i"  In  ed.  1662,  "you"  omitted. 


"  In  ed.  1662,  "ye  may  the  rather  be 
moved  to  earnest." 

^  In  two  eds.,  1549,  and  one  ed.,  1552, 
"flying." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "for  which." 


396.         First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


Minister.   Cursed  is  he  that  curseth  his  father,  and  ^  mother. 

Answer.   Amen. 

Minister.  Cursed  is  he  that  removeth  away  the  mark  of 
his  neighbour's  land  s. 

Answer.   Amen. 

Minister.  Cursed  is  he  that  maketh  the  blind  to  go  out 
of  his  way. 

Answer.   Amen. 

Minister.  Cursed  is  he  that  letteth  in  judgment  the  right 
of  the  stranger,  of  them  that  be  fatherless,  and  of  widows. 

Answer.    Amen. 

Minister.   Cursed  is  he  that  smiteth  his  neighbour  secretly. 

Ansiver.    Amen. 

Minister.    Cursed  is  he  that  lieth  with  his  neighbour's  wife. 

Answer.    Amen. 

Minister.  Cursed  is  he  that  taketh  reward  to  slay  the  soul 
of  innocent  blood  '^. 

Answer.   Amen. 

Minister.  Cursed  is  he  that  putteth  his  trust  in  man,  and 
taketh  man  for  his  defence,  and  in  his  heart  goeth  from 
the  Lord. 

Answer.   Amen. 

Minister.  Cursed  are  the  unmerciful,  the  fornicators  and 
advouterers ',  the  covetous  persons,  the  worshippers  of  images, 
slanderers,  drunkards,  and  extortioners. 

Answer.   Amen. 

The  Minister^.     Now  seeing  that  all  they  be'  accursed  (as 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

Minister.    Cursed  is  he  that,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

TheMinister.  Now  seeing  that,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Elizabeth,  1559. 
Minister.    Cursed  is  he  that,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 
TheMinister.  Now  seeing  that,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

James  I.  1604. 

Minister.    Cursed  is  he  that,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


Minister.    Now  seeing  that,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Minister. 
Cursed  is  he,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  except  that  it  has  the  fol- 
lowing series  o<  marginal  references.] 

Deut :  27. 16 his  father  and 

Prov :  20.  20.    mother. 

^*"'"    ....  his  neighbour's  land. 
27. 17.  ° 

'^^''^    ....  to  CO  out  of  his  way. 
27.  18.  *»  ■' 


'  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "or." 
t  \\\  ed.   1662,   "removeth   his  neigh- 
bour's land-mark." 
^  In  ed.  1662,  "  to  slay  the  innocent." 
'  la  eds.  1552,  and  after,  "  adulterers." 


k  In  one  ed.,  1550,  and  1596,  and  after- 
wards, "  Minister-,  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637, 
"Presbyter.'" 

1  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 


The  First  Day  ov  Lent. 


397 


the  prophet  David  beareth  witness)  which™  do  err  and  go 
astray  from  the  commandments  of  God,  let  us  (re- 
membering the  dreadful  judgment  hanging  over  our   ,  ^^ '  '^^^'"' 
heads,  and  being  always  °  at  hand^)  return  unto  our  Lord 
God,  with  all  contrition  and  meekness  of  heart,  bewailing  and 
lamenting  our  sinful  life,    knowledging  "^  and  confessing  our 
offences,  and  seeking  to  bring  forth  worthy  fruits  of  penance. 
For  even  ^  now  is  the  axe  put  unto  the  root  of  the 
trees,  so  that  every  tree  which '  bringeth  not  forth 
good  fruit,  is  hewn  down  and  cast  into  the  fire.    It  is  a  fearful 
thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  :  he 
shall  pour  down  rain  upon  the  sinners ',  snares,  fire 
and  brimstone,  storm  and  tempest*^,  this  shall  be 
their  portion  to  drink  \     For  lo,  the  Lord  is  com- 
ing y  out   of  his  place,  to  visit  the   wickedness   of  such  as 
dwell  upon  the  earth.     But  who  may  abide  the  day      Mai.  iii.« 
of  his  coming  ?     Who  shall  be  able  to  endure  when     Mat.  iii. 
he  appeareth  ?     His  fan  is  in  his  hand,  and  he  will  purge  his 
floor,  and  gather  his  wheat  into  the  barn,  but  he  will  burn  the 
chaff  with  unquenchable  fire 


Mat.  iii. 


Hebru.  x. 

Psal.  X. 
Esai.  xxvi. 


Cursed  is  he  that  in  judgment 
Deut:  hindereth,  stoppeth,  or  per- 
27.19.  verteth  the  right  of  the 
stranger,  of  them  that  be  father- 
less, and  of  widows. 

^"'  ■         .  .  neighbour  secretly. 


his  neighbour's  wife, 
soul  of  innocent  blood, 
goeth  from  the  Lord. 


27.  24. 
Lev  : 
20.  10. 
Deut : 
27.  25. 
Jer: 

17.  5-     *  *  ■  ■ 
Matt.  25.  41. 
I  Cor.  6.  9.  10. 
Gal.  5. 19. 20. 21 
Psalm  15.  3. 


....  drunkards  and 
extortioners. 


Presbyter.   Now,  seeing  that,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


"■  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 

»  In  one  ed.,  1549,  'fnispr.  Ps.  cxvil. 

"  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  alway." 

P  In  ed.  1662,  "and  always  ready  to  fall 
upon  us." 

1  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  in  ed.  1662, 
"  acknowledging." 

'  In  ed.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  For 
now." 

•  In  ed.  1604  and  1662,  "  that." 


Charles  IL   1662. 

Minister.  Cursed  is  he  that,  &c. ... 

[Same  as  1549,  and  so  throughout,  ex- 
cept where  paragraph  is  printed.] 

Minister.  Cursed  is  he  that,  &c 

Minister.  Cursed  is  he  that,  &c 

Minister.  Cursed  is  he  that  per- 
verteth  the  judgement  of  the  stran- 
ger, the  fatherless,  and  widow. 

Answer.    Amen. 

Minister.  Cursed  is  he  that,  &c. ... 
[Same  throughout  as  1549,  to] 

Minister.  Cursed  are  tlie  unmer- 
ciful, fornicators,  and  adulterers, 
covetous  persons,  idolaters,  slan- 
derers, drunkards,  and  extortioners. 

Answer.     Amen. 

Minister.  Now  seeing  that,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


'  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  for  upon  the 
wicked  he  shall  rain  snares. " 

"  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  brimstone  and 
an  horrible  tempest." 

»  In  Scotched.,  1637,  "  the  portion  of 
their  cup." 

y  In  eds.  1559,  "comen  ;"  in  three  eds., 
1549,  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  and  in  ed.  1662, 
"  is  come." 

»  In  one  ed.,  1549,  tnispr.  MaL  xxv. 


398  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

The  day  of  the  Lord  cometh  as 

a  thief  upon  ^  the  night ;  and  when  men  shall  say  ^  r^^^^  ^ . 
peace,  and  all  things  are  safe,  then  shall  sudden  *= 
destruction  come  upon  them,  as  sorrow  cometh  upon  a  woman 
travailing  with  child,  and  they  shall  not  escape  :  then  shall  ap- 
pear the  wrath  of  God  in  the  day  of  vengeance,  which  obsti- 
nate sinners,  through  the  stubbornness  of  their  heart,  have 
heaped  unto  themself^,  which  despised  the  good- 
ness, patience  and  and  long-sufferance  of  God,  when        °"^  "* 
he  called  *  them  continually  to  repentance.     Then 
shall  they  call  upon  me  (saith  the  Lord),  but  I  will 
not  hear :  they  shall  seek  me  early,  but  they  shall  not  find  me, 
and  that  because  they  hated  knowledge,  and  received  not  the 
fear  of  the  Lord,  but  abhorred  my  counsel  and  despised  my 
correction  :  then  shall  it  be  too  late  to  knock,  when  the  door 
shall  be  shut,  and  too  late  to  cry  for  mercy,  when  it  is  the  time 
of  justice.     O  terrible  voice  of  most  just  judgment,  which 
shall  be  pronounced  upon  them,  when  it  shall  be 
said  unto  them.  Go  ye  cursed  into  the  fire  everlast-      *'  '  "^' 
ing,  which  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.     There- 
fore, brethren,  take  we  heed  betime  ^,  while  the  day 
of  salvation  lasteth,  for  the  night  cometh  when  none     "   °'^'  "' 
can  work  :    but  let   us,  while  we   have   the   light,      J"*^  '''• 
believe  in  the  light,  and  walk  as  the  ■*  children  of  the  light, 
that  we  be  not  cast  into  the '  utter  darkness,  where  is  weeping 
and  gnashing  of  teeth.     Let  us  not  abuse  the  good- 
ness of  God,  which  ^  calleth  us  mercifully  to  amend-       ^''  "^" 
ment,  and  of  his  endless  pity  promiseth '  us  forgiveness  of  that 
which  is  past,  if  (with "  a  whole  mind  and  a  °  true  heart)  we 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

The  day  of  the  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
.  .  The  day  of  the  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 

James  1.  1604. 

.  .  The  day  of  the  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


*  In  one  ed.,  1549,  reference  0miV/f</.  '  In   Scotch  ed.,   1637,  and  ed.   1663, 
•>  In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "  in  the."  "into  utter." 

*  In  eds.  1552  and  1559,  "suddenly."  '  In  ed.  1663,  "who." 

"^  In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "them-  _'  In  one    ed.,    1552,  and    1559,   "pro- 
selves."  mised." 

*  In  ed.  1662,  "calleth."  "  In  Scotched.,  1637,  "  and  true  heart  :" 
'  In  two  eds.,  1552,  and  one  ed-,  1559,  in  ed.  1662,  "if  with  a  perfect  and  true 

"by  time."  heart." 

«  In  one  ed.,  1549,  inispr.  i  Cor.  vi.  »  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  true 

*  la  ed.  1662,  "  as  children."  heart." 


The  First  Day  of  Lent.  399 

return  unto  him  :    for  though  our   sins  be   red  °  as   scarlet, 
they  shall  be  as  white p  as  snow;  andi  though  they  .  . 

be  like  purple,  yet  shall  they  be  as  white  p  as  wool. 
Turn   you   clean '  (saith  the   Lord)  from  all  your  j.<,g^j^^^;;;_, 
wickedness,  and  your  sin  shall  not  be  your  destruc- 
tion.    Cast  away  from  you  all  your  ungodliness  that  ye  have 
done,  make  you  new  hearts,  and  a  new  spirit :  wherefore  will 
ye  die,  O  ye  house  of  Israel,  seeing'  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  him  that  dieth  ?   saith  the  Lord  God.     Turn  you " 
hen,  and  you  shall  live.     Although  we  have  sinned,  yet  have 
we  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous,   and  he    it  is  that  obtaineth  grace''  for 
our  sins  ;  for  he  was  wounded  for  our  offences,  and  smitten 
for  our   wickedness  :   let  us    therefore   return  unto     „   .  .... 

.  .  .  r       n  •  Esai.  liu. 

hmi,  who  is  the  merciful  receiver  ot  all  true  peni- 
tent sinners,  assuring  ourself  "^  that  he  is  ready  to  receive  us, 
and  most  willing  to  pardon  us,  if  we  come  to  him  with  faithful 
repentance  :  if  we  will"  submit  ourselves  unto  him,  and  from 
henceforth  walk  in  his  ways  :  if  we  will  take  his  easy 
yoke  and  light  burden  upon  us  to  follow  him  in  low- 
liness, patience,  and  charity,  and  be  ordered  by  the  govern- 
ance of  his  holy  Spirit,  seeking  always  his  glory,  and  serving 
him  duly  in  our  vocation  with  thanksgiving.     This  if  we  do, 
Christ  will  deliver  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  and  from  the 
extreme  malediction  which  shall  light  upon  them  that  shall 
be  set  on  the  left  hand :  and  he  will  set  us  on  his  right  hand, 
and  give  us  the  blessed  ^  benediction  of  his  Father, 
commanding  us  to  take  possession  of  his  glorious 
kingdom  ;  unto  the  '^  which  he  vouchsafe  to  bring  us  all,  for 
his  infinite  mercy.     Amen.'' 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
The  day  of  the  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  IL,  1662. 

The  day  of  the  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


"In  one  ed. ,   1549,  and  in  Scotched.,  1662,  "  Turn  ye  then  and  ye  shall." 
1637,  and  in  ed.  1662,  "as  red  as."  '  In  ed.   1662,   "he  is  the  propitiation 

p  In   ed.    1662,    "they   shall   be    made  for." 
white."  y  Inonecd.,  1559,  reference  ow?zV/^rf. 

1  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  and"  owiVto/.  ^  In   ed.  1604,    and  afterwards,    "  our- 

"■  In    ed.    1662,    "  Turn    ye    (saith    the  selves." 
Lord)  from  all."                                          _  *    In    Sealed    Book,     1662,    the    word 

•  In  two  eds.,  iS49,  mispr.  Ezech.  xvii.  ;  "will  "  is  marked  through  with  a  pen. 
and  in  one  ed.,  1559,  mispr.  xxviii.  i"  In  ed.  1662,  "  gracious  benediction." 

'  In  ed.  1604,  and  afterwards,  "Seeing  '  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "xiii." 

that  I."  ^  In  ed.  1662,  "  unto  which." 

"  In  ed.  1604,  and  in  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  '"  one  ed.,  1559,  and  1604,  "Amen" 

"  Turn  you  then  and  ye  shall ;"    in  ed.  omitied. 


400 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


§  3^5-  '^  Then  shall  they  all  kneel  upon  their  knees :  and  the  Priest '  ana 
clerks  kneeling  {where*  they  are  accustomed  to  say  the  Litany)  shall  say 
this  psalm  •*. 

Have  mercy  upon  me,  (O  God,)  after  thy  great  goodness  : 
according  to  the  multitude  of  thy  mercies,  do  away  i^i^^rere 
mine  offences.  Deus\ 

Wash  me  throughly  from  my  wickedness,  and     ^*^'™''- 
cleanse  me  from  my  sin. 

For  I  knowledge ''  my  faults,  and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me. 

Against  thee  only  have  I  sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  thy 
sight  :  that  thou  mightest  be  justified  in  thy  saying,  and  clear 
when  thou  art  judged. 

Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  wickedness,  and  in  sin  hath  my 
mother  conceived  me. 

But  lo,  thou  requirest  truth  in  the  inward '  parts,  and  shalt 
make  me  to  understand  wisdom  secretly. 

Thou  shalt  purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean  : 
thou  shalt  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow. 

Thou  shalt  make  me  hear  of  joy  and  gladness,  that  the 
bones  which  thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
365.    Tlun  shall  they  all,  ^c. 

[Same  as  i549.] 
Have  mercy  upon  me,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549O 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
365.    Then  shall  they  all,  ^c. 

Have  mercy  upon  me,  &c. 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 


James  I.   1604. 
365.   Then  shall  they  all,  &'c. 

Have  mercy  upon  me,  &c. 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549-] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  365.    Then  shall  they  all,  ^'c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Miserere  met,  Deiis.     Ps.  51. 
Have  mercy  upon  me,  O  God, 
according  to  thy  loving-kindness   : 


according  unto  the  multitude  of  thy 
tender  mercies  blot  out  my  trans« 
gressions. 

Wash  me  throughly  from  mine  in- 
iquity, and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin. 

For  I  acknowledge  my  trans- 
gressions :  and  my  sin  is  ever  be- 
fore me. 

Against  thee,  thee  only  have  I  sin- 
ned, and  done  this  evil  in  thy  sight  : 
that  thou  mightest  be  justified  when 
thou  speakest,  and  be  clear  when 
thou  judgest 

Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity  : 
and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive 
me. 

Behold,  thou  desirest  truth  in  the 
inward  parts  :  and  in  the  hidden 
part  thou  shalt  make  me  to  know 
wisdom. 

Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I 
]  shall  be  clean  :  wash  me,  and  I 
I   shall  be  whiter  than  snow. 


'  In  eds.    1552    and   1559,   "Priests-" 
in  ed.  1578,  "Minister ;"  in  Scotch  ed., 
1637,  "the  Presbyter." 
K  In  ed.  1662,  "  in  the  place  where." 
I"  In  eds.  1559  and  1604,    "  this  psalm 
miserere  tnei  Deus." 


'  In  ed.  1559,  the  reference  is  simply 
"Psalm  li." 

*  In  one  ed.,  ISS9,  and  afterwards, 
"acknowledge." 

'  In  ed.  1559,  "  In  inward  farts." 


The  First  Day  of  Lent. 


401 


Turn  thy  face™  from  my  sins,  and  put  out  all  ray  mis- 
deeds. 

Make  me  a  clean  heart,  (O  God)  and  renew  a  right  spirit 
within  me. 

Cast  me  not  away  from  thy  presence,  and  take  not  thy 
holy  Spirit  from  me. 

O  give  me  the  comfort  of  thy  help  again,  and  stabHsh  me 
with  thy  free  spirit. 

Then  shall  I  teach  thy  ways  unto  the  wicked,  and  sinners 
shall  be  converted  unto  thee. 

Deliver  me  from  blood-guiltiness,  (O  God,)  thou  that  art  the 
God  of  my  health  :  and  my  tongue  shall  sing  of  thy  righte- 
ousness. 

Thou  shalt  open  my  lips,  (O  Lord)  and  my  mouth  shall 
shew  thy  praise. 

For  thou  desirest  no  sacrifice,  else  would  I  give  it  thee  : 
but  thou  delightest  not  in  burnt- offering  ^. 


Make  me  hear  joy  and  gladness  : 
i/iat  ■  the  bones  which  thou  hast 
broken  may  rejoice. 

Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins  ;  and 
blot  out  all  mine  iniquities. 

Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O 
God ;  and  renew  a  right  spirit 
within  me. 

Cast  me  not  away  from  thy  pre- 
sence ;  and  take  not  thy  holy  spirit 
from  me. 

Restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  thy 
salvation  :  and  uphold  me  -with  thy 
free  spirit. 

Then  will  I  teach  transgressors 
thy  ways,  and  sinners  shall  be  con- 
verted unto  thee. 

Deliver  me  from  blood-guiltiness, 
O  God,  thou  God  of  my  salvation  : 
and  my  tongue  shall  sing  aloud  of 
thy  righteousness. 

O  Lord  open  thou  my  lips,  and 


my  mouth   shall    shew  forth    thy 
praise. 

For  thou  desirest  not  sacrifice, 
else  would  I  give  it  :  thou  delightest 
not  in  burnt-offering. 


Charles  IL  1662. 

§  365.  Then  shall  they  all  kfteel  upon 
their  knees,  and  the  Priest  and 
Clerks  kneeling  {in  the  place  where 
they  are  accustomed  to  say  the 
Litany)  shall  say  this  Psalm. 

Have  mercy  upon  Miserere  met 

me,  O  God,  after  thy  Deus. 

great  goodness   :  ac-  ^^al.  li. 
cording,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 


"■  In  Sealed  Book,  1662,  "  away  "  added  with  a  pen. 
"  In  ed.  1662,  "burnt-offerings." 

Dd 


402 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


The  sacrifice  of  God  is  a  troubled  spirit,  a  broken  and  con- 
trite heart,  (O  God,)  shalt  thou  not  despise. 

O  be  favourable  and  gracious  unto  Sion,  build  thou  tlie 
walls  of  Jerusalem. 

Then  shalt  thou  be  pleased  with  the  sacrifice  of  righteous- 
ness, with  the  burnt-offerings  and  oblations  :  then  shall  they 
offer  young  bullocks  upon  thine  altar. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c, 

^  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
^  Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
^  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  &c. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. 


Answer.  But  deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen. 
Minister^.  O  Lord  save  thy  servants. 
Answer.  Wliich  °  put  their  trust  in  thee. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
The  sacrifice  of  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Lord,  have  mercy,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Let  us  pray. 

O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

The  sacrifice  of  God,  S;c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Lord,  have  mercy,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 

Let  us  Pray. 
O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549] 


James  L  1604. 

The  sacrifice  of  God,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 
Lord,  have  mercy,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

Let  us  Pray. 
O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a 
broken  spirit  :  a  broken  and  a  con- 
trite heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not 
despise. 

Do  good  in  thy  good  pleasure 
unto  Sion  :  build  thou  the  walls  of 
Jerusalem. 

Then  shalt  thou  be  pleased 
with  the  sacrifices  of  righteous- 
ness, with  burnt-offering  and  whole 


■  In  Scotch  ed.,  1637,  "  Presbyter"  throughout. 


In  ed.  1662,  "  that." 


The  First  Day  of  Lent. 


403 


Minister.  Send  unto  them  help  from  above. 
Answer.  And  evermore  mightily  defend  them. 
Minister.  Help  us,  O  God  our  Saviour. 
Answer.  And  for  the  glory  of  thy  name's  sake  p  deliver  us, 
be  merciful  unto  ^  us  sinners  for  thy  name's  sake. 
Minister.  O  Lord,  hear  my"'  prayer. 
Answer.  And  let  my '  cry  come  to  thee. 


Let  us  pray. 

O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee  mercifully  hear  our  prayers,  and 
spare  all  those  which  *  confess  their  sins  to  "  thee,  that  they 
whose  consciences  by  sin  are  accused,  by  thy  merciful  pardon 
may  be  absolved,  through  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


burnt-offering  :  then  shall  they  offer 
bullocks  upon  thine  altar. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world  with- 
out end.    Amen. 

Lord,  have  mercy,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

Let  us  Pray. 
O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  <S:c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  IL  1662. 

The  sacrifice  of  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 


Answe}-. 
As  it  was   in  the  beginning,    is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world  with- 
out end.    Amen. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upoti  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven. 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy 
kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done 
in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give 
us  this  day  our  daily  bread.  And 
forgive  us  our  trespasses.  As  we 
forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation  : 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen. 

Minister.  O  Lord,  save,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

Minister.  Let  us  pray. 

O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


p  In  ed.  1662,  "  of  thy  name." 

1  In  ed.  1662,  "  to." 

'  In  eds.  1552,  "  our  prayers  ;"  in  some 
eds.,  1559,  "our  prayers,"  in  others, 
"  my  prayers ;"  in  ed.  1604,  and  after- 
vards,  "  bear  our  prayer." 


"  In  eds.  1552,  "  our  cry  ;"  in  some 
eds.,  1559,  "my  cry,"  in  others,  "our 
cry ;"  in  ed.  1604,  and  all  after,  "  our 
cry." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 

"  in  Scotch  ed.,  and  ed.  1662,  "  unto." 


404 


First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 


O  MOST  mighty  God  and  merciful  Father,  which '  hast  com- 
passion of  all  men,  and  hatest  nothing  that  thou  hast  made  : 
which  •  wouldest  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  that  he  should 
rather  turn  from  '^  sin  and  be  saved :  mercifully  forgive  us  our 
trespasses,  receive*  and  comfort  us,  which  bey  grieved  and 
wearied  with  the  burden  of  our  sin*.  Thy  property  is*  to 
have  mercy,  to  thee  only  it  appertaineth  to  forgive  sins  :  spare 
us  therefore,  good  Lord,  spare  thy  people  whom  thou  hast 
redeemed.  Enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy  servants,  which 
be  y  vile  earth,  and  miserable  sinners :  But  so  turn  thy  *"  ire 
from  us,  which'  meekly  knowledge*  our  vileness,  and  truly 
repent  us  of  our  faults  :  so  ^  make  haste  to  *  help  us  in  this 
world,  that  we  may  ever  live  with  thee  in  the  world  to  come  : 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

O  MOST  mighty  God,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 

§  366.   TA^n  shall  the  people  say  this 
that  followeth,  after  the  Minister. 

Turn  thou  us,  O  good  Lord,  &c 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

O  MOST  mighty  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  366.   Then  shall  the  people,  &'c. 
[Same  as  1552.] 
Turn  thou  us,  O  good  Lord,'&c. 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 


James  I.  1604. 

O  MOST  mighty  God,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


•  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 
"   In  ed.  1662,  "upon." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "his  sin."  _ 

»  In  one  ed.,  1559,  "  receive  "  omitted. 

>  In  ed.  1662,  "who  are." 

■  In  ed.  1662,  "sins." 

•  In  cd.  1662,  "is  always  to." 


§366.    Then  shall  the  p€opU,  Sfc. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

Turn  thou  us,  O  good  Lord,  &c 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
O  MOST  mighty  God,  &c 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Enter  not  into  judgement  with  thy 
servants,  but  turn  thine  anger  from 
us,  and  so  make  haste,  &c. 

[Concluded  the  same  as  1549.] 

§  366.  77un  shall  the  people  say  this 
Hiat  followeth  after  the  Presbyter 
or  Minister. 

Turn  thou  us,   O  good  Lord, 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

.  .  .  look  upon  tis. 

Finis. 

[All  afterwards  is  omitted  in  the  Scotch 
edition  of  1637.] 


•>  In  one  ed.,  iSS'..  *nd  »5S9.  "thine 
ire  ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "  thine  anger." 

«  In  ed.  1662,  "acknowledge." 

*  In  ed.  i6(>2,  "  and  so." 

■  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "make  haste  help 
ns." 


I 


The  First  Day  of  Lext. 


405 


§  366.    Then  shall  this  aiithern  be  said  or  sting. 

Turn  thou  us,  good  Lord,  and  so  shall  we  be  turned  :  be 
favourable  (O  Lord)  be  favourable  to  thy  people,  which  ^  turn 
to  thee  in  weeping,  fasting  and  praying  :  for  thou  art  a  mer- 
ciful God,  full  of  compassion,  long  suffering,  and  of  a  great 
pity^:  Thou  sparest  when  we  deserve  punishment,  and  in  thy 
wrath  thinkest  upon  mercy.  Spare  thy  people,  good  Lord, 
spare  them,  and  let  not  thine "  heritage  be  brought  to  con- 
fusion :  Hear  us  (O  Lord)  for  thy  mercy  is  great,  and  after 
the  multitude  of  thy  mercies  look  upon  us. 

OF    CEREMONIES 

V/IIY    SOME    BE   ABOLISHED   AND    SOME    RETAINED. 

Of  such  Ceremonies  as  be  used  in  the  Church,  &c. 

[This  has  been  already  printed,  and  will  be  found  at 
p.  14  of  the  present  work,  down  to] 

....  diversity  in  diverse  countries. 

Coiain  Notes  for  the  more  plain  explication  atid  decent  ministration 
0/  things  contained  in  the  book. 

In  the  saying  or  singing  of  Matins,  &c. 

[These  Notes  have  been  already  printed,  and  will  be  found  at 
p.  64  of  the  present  work,  down  to] 

....  the  exhortation  to  the  Communion. 

FINIS. 
[Here  follows  the  Colophon.     See  next  page.] 


Charles  II.   1662. 

O  MOST  mighty  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§366.   ^  Then  shall  the  people,  d~^r. 
[Same  as  1552.] 

Turn  thou   us,   O   good   Lord, 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

....  mercies  look  upon  us,  Through 
the    merits   and    mediation    of  thy 


blessed  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

§  367.    Then  the  Minister  alone  shall 
say. 

The  Lord  bless  us,  and  keep  us  ; 
the  Lord  lift  up  the  light  of  his 
countenance  upon  us,  and  give  us 
peace  now  and  for  evermore.  Amen. 

[In  the  Sealed  Book  of  1662  here  follow 
"  The  Psalms."] 


^  In  two  eds.,  1549,  "of  a  great  piety  ;"  k  In  one  ed.,  1549,  '"  ^d.  1552,  and  some 

in  ed.  1662,  "  of  great  pity."  afterwards,  "  thy  lieritage.' 


4o6  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.  1549. 

Imprinted  at  London  in 

Fletestrete,  at  the  signe  of  the  Sunne  ouer  against 

the  conduyte,  by  EdVVarde  VVhitchurche. 

The  seventh  daye  of  Marche,  the 

yeare  of  our  Lorde, 

1549- 

There  are  also  copies  of  books  printed  by  Whitchurch,  bearing  date 

The  fourth  daye  of  Maye. 

The  xvi.  daye  of  June. 

The  Colophons  in  the  books  printed  by  Grafton  are — 

Imprinted  at  London  the 

viii.  daye  of  Marche  in  the  third  yere 

of  the  reyne  of  our  Sovereigne  Lord  Kyng 

Edward  the  VI.  by  Richard  Grafton, 

printer  to  his  most  royal  majestic. 

Or,  as  in  some  of  the  later  books — 

Excursum  Londini  in  aedibus 

RiCHARDI    GrAFTONI 

Regii  Impressoris 
Mense  Junii  M.D.LIX. 

In  the  more  perfect  copies  a  list  of  prices  is  found  inserted  at  the  end, 
which  varies  according  to  the  different  impressions. 

'The  Kinges  Maiestie,  by 
the  aduyse  of  his  moste  deare  uncle  the  Lord  Pro- 
tector and  other  his  highnes  Counsell,  streightly 
chargeth  and  commaundeth,  that  no  maner 
of  person  do ''  sell  this  present  booke  un- 
bounde,  aboue  the  price  of  ii.  shyl- 
lynges  &  ii.'  pence  the  piece".  And 
the  same  bounde  in  paste  or 
in  boordes ",  not  aboue  the 
price  of  three"  shyl- 
lynges  and  viii. 
pence  the 
piece. 
GOD  SAUE  THE  KING. 


'  In  one  ed.,  1549,  this  is  placed  before  "•  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "  the  pitce'^ ^rnit/ed. 

the  colophon.  "In  one  ed.,  1549,  "covered  with  calves' 

■i  In  one  ed.,  1549,  "shall"  le.nther;"  in  another,  "in  calves' leather." 

'  Inoneed.,  1549,  "six."  «  In  most  eds.,  1549,  "four  shillings." 


Sfxond  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.,  &c. 


407 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

[Here  follows,  with  a  fresh  title, 
which  is  surrounded  by  an  orna- 
mental border,  "The  Form  and 
Manner  of  Making  and  Conse- 
crating," &c.     See  page  417.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

[Some  impressions  of  the  eds.  of 

1559  end  here,  and  have  on  the 

back  of  the  leaf.] 

This  boke  of  praiers  is  to  be 
solde  as  followeth,  and  not  above. 

In  Queers  vnbounde  lis.  iiiii/. 

In  parchement  bounde  iiis. 

In  paste,  or  Borde  bounde  iii^. 
viii^. 

[Other  impressions  have  a  Psalter  at- 
tached, and  this  is  followed  by] 

GODLY   PRAYERS. 

CERTAIN   GODLY  PRAYERS  TO  BE 
USED   FOR  SUNDRY   PURPOSES. 

A  general  Confession  oj  sins  to  be 
said  every  morning. 
O  Almighty  God,  our  heavenly 
Father,  &c.p 

[In  other  impressions  here  follows  "The 
Form  and  Manner  of  making  and  Conse- 
crating," &c.     See  page  417.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[The  editions  issued  during  this  reign 
vary.  Some  end  here,  and  have  only  an 
ornamental  rule,  thus 


Some  have  the  Psalms,  and  end  after- 
wards with  the  word  Finis.  Others  have 
extra  Prayers  attached,  as  in  the  Prayer- 
Book  of  Elizabeth's  reign.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[The  Scotch  editions  appear  to  end  here, 
with  the  word  Finis  added,  but  editions 
of  the  Psalter  were  printed  for  binding 
up  with  the  books.     See  next  page.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

[Here  follows  immediately  "The  Psalms 
of  David,"  &c.    See  next  page.] 


P  It  has  not  been  thought  right  to  print 
these  prayers  here.  Though  they  occur 
frequently  in  the  Prayer-Books,  and  parts 
of  the  Prayer-Book,  in  Elizabeth's  reign. 


there  is  no  evidence  that  they  had  any 
authority  whatever  so  as  to  be  considered 
as  part  of  the  Prayer-Book. 


4o8 


The  Psalter. 


[The  Psalter  or  Psalms  of  David  was  printed  separately,  or  with  Litanies,  &c., 
and  not  as  part  of  the  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI.] 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

[The  Psalter  does  not  appear  in  any  of 
the  folio  editions  of  1552,  but  a  Psalter 
was  printed  uniform  with  the  small  4to. 
editions  by  Whitchurch,  and  is  always 
found  bound  up  with  them. 

Elizabeth,  1559. 

[The  Psalter  does  not  appear  in  any  of 
the  editions  of  1559,  as  if  printed  as  part 
of  the  Prayer-Book,  but  together  with 
"  Godly  Prayers,"  which  are  ol'ten  bound 
up  with  the  booki.] 


James  I.  1604. 

[The  Psalter  was  usually  printed  sepa- 
rately in  the  eaily  part  of  this  reign,  but 
sometimes  bound  up  with  the  Prayer-Book. 
Later  in  the  reign  it  was  printed  as  an 
integral  part  of  the  Prayer-Book,  and  paged 
with  it'.] 

Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[The  Psalter  was  printed  separately  from 
the  Scotch  edition  ot  the  Prayer-Book.but 
copies  were  trequently  bound  up  with  it'.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

_  [After  the  end  of  the  Commlnatioii  Ser- 
vice follows  Immediately '] 

THE 

PSALMS  OF  DAVID. 


THE  FIRST  PSALM. 


Thej 

DAY 

Morning 

Prayer. 


BLESSED  is  the 
man  that  hath 
not  walked  in  the 
counsel  of  the  un- 
godly, nor  stood  in  the  way  of 
sinners  :  and  hath  not  sat  in  the 
seat  of  the  scornful. 

2.  But  his  delight  is  in,  &c. 

\And  continued  according  to  the  Version 
in  our  present  Book  of  Common  Praj/er.] 


9  In  the  folio  edition  of  the  Geneva 
Bible  of  1578,  as  well  as  in  the  folio  edi- 
tions of  the  Bishops'  Bible  both  of  1568  and 
1572,  the  two  versions  appear  side  by  side, 
in  parallel  columns,  the  one  "  TAe  Trans- 
lation according  to  the  Ebre-we  ;"  and  the 
other,  "  The  Translation  used  in  Common 
Prayer."  The  latter,  also,  is  duly  divided 
into  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer. 

In  the  Prayer-Books  issued  during  this 
reign,  the  Psalter  or  Prose  version  of  the 
Psalms  does  not  appear.  At  the  end 
of  some,  however,  as  early  as  1585  and 
1586,  is  found  printed  the  metrical  ver- 
sion by  Stemhold  and  Hopkins. 

'  In  one  4to.  edition  ol  1604  occur  the 
"Psalms  after  the  translation  of  the  great 
Bible,  pointed  to  be  sung  in  Churches  ;" 
but  it  was  not  commonly  the  case.  In 
later  editions  they  occur  also. 
_  •  There  appear  to  have  been  two  edi- 
tions of  the  Psalter  printed  for  the  u.se  of 
Scotland  in  the  year  1636.    The  one  has 


for  a  title,  "The  Psalter  or  Psalmes  of 
David  :  according  To  the  last  Translation 
in  A7«^  James  his  time.  As  they  shall  be 
said  or  sung  throughout  all  the  Churches 
of  Scotland."  The  other  has  for  a  title, 
"  The  Psalter  or  Ps?lms  of  David  :  after 
the  Translation  set  forth  by  Authority  in 
King  James  his  time  of  blessed  memory. 
As  it  shall  be  said  or  sung  throughout  all 
the  Churches  of  Scotland."  They  both 
have  the  same  imprint,  "  Edinburgh. 
Printed  by  Robert  Young,  Printer  to  the 
King's  most  excellent  Majestic.  Anno 
M.DC.xxxvL     Cum  privilegio." 

'  In  the  Sealed  Book  the  separate  title- 
page  to  the  Psalter  is  marked  through.  It 
stands  thus  in  the  printing.  "  The  Psalter 
or  Psalms  of  David  After  the  Translation 
of  the  Great  Bible.  Pointed  as  they  are 
to  be  Sung  or  Said  iit  Churches.  London, 
Printed  by  the  Printers  to  the  King's 
most  Excellent  Majesty  mdclxii.  Cum 
privilegio." 


Forms  of  Prayer  to  be  Used  at  Sea.  40^ 


FORMS    OF     PRAYER 

TO    BE 

USED  AT  SEA. 


[These  Forms  were  first  added  to  the  Prayer-Book  of  Charles  II. 
T662,  and  in  the  Sealed  Book  follow  on  immediately  after  the 
Psalms.     They  commence  on  page  551  of  that  book.] 


410 


Prayer-Book  of  Charles  II.  1662. 


FORMS  OF  PRAYER 
TO  BE 

USED  AT  SEA. 

§368.  ^  The  Morning  and  Evening 
Service  to  be  used  daily  at  Sea, 
shall  be  the  same  which  is  ap- 
pointed in  the  book  of  Common 
Prayer. 

§369.  ^  These  two  following  Prayers 
are  to  be  also  ttsed  in  His  Ma- 
jesty's Navy  every  day. 

O  ETERNAL  Lord  God,  who  alone 
spreadest  out  the  heavens,  and  rulest 
the  raging  of  the  sea  ;  who  hast 
compassed  the  waters  with  bounds 
until  day  and  night  come  to  an  end  ; 
Be  pleased  to  receive  into  thy  Al- 
mighty and  most  gracious  protection 
the  persons  of  us  thy  servants,  and 
the  Fleet  in  which  we  serve.  Pre- 
serve us  from  the  dangers  of  the 
sea,  and  from  the  violence  of  the 
enemy  ;  that  we  may  be  a  safe- 
guard unto  our  most  gracious  sove- 
reign lord  Klin^  Charles,  and  his 
Kingdoms,  and  a  security  for  such 
as  pass  on  the  seas  upon  their  law- 
ful occasions  ;  that  the  inhabitants 
of  our  Island  may  in  peace  and 
quietness  serve  thee  our  God,  and 
that  we  may  return  in  safety  to  en- 
joy the  blessings  of  the  land,  with 
the  fruits  of  our  labours,  and  with 
a  thankful  remembrance  of  thy  mer- 
cies to  praise  and  glorify  thy  holy 
Name,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen. 

§370.   The  Collect. 

Prevent  us,  O  Lord,  in  all  our 
doings,  with  thy  most  gracious  fa- 
vour, and  further  us  with  thy  con- 
tinual help ;  that  in  all  our  works 
begun,  continued,  and  ended  in 
thee,  we  may  glorify  thy  holy 
Name,  and  finally  by  thy  mercy 
obtain  everlasting  life  ;  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


§  371.  Prayers  to  be  used  in  Storms 
at  Sea. 
O  MOST  powerful  and  glorious 
Lord  God,  at  whose  command  the 
winds  blow,  and  lift  up  the  waves 
of  the  sea,  and  who  stillest  the  rage 
thereof ;  We  thy  creatures,  but  mi- 
serable sinners,  do  in  this  our  great 
distress  cry  unto  thee  for  help  : 
Save,  Lord,  or  else  we  perish.  We 
confess,  when  we  have  been  safe, 
and  seen  all  things  quiet  about  us, 
we  have  forgot  thee  our  God,  and 
refused  to  hearken  to  the  still  voice 
of  thy  word,  and  to  obey  thy  com- 
mandments :  But  now  we  see,  how 
terrible  thou  art  in  all  thy  works  of 
wonder  ;  the  great  God  to  be  feared 
above  all  :  And  therefore  we  adore 
thy  Divine  Majesty,  acknowledging 
thy  power,  and  imploring  thy  good- 
ness. Help,  Lord,  and  save  us  for 
thy  mercy's  sake  in  Jesus  Christ  thy 
Son,  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  372.   Or  this. 

O  MOST  glorious  and  gracious 
Lord  God,  who  dwellest  in  heaven, 
but  beholdest  all  things  below ; 
Look  down,  we  beseech  thee,  and 
hear  us,  calling  out  of  the  depth 
of  misery,  and  out  of  the  jaws  of 
death,  which  is  ready  now  to  swal- 
low us  up  :  Save,  Lord,  or  else  we 
perish.  The  living,  the  living,  shall 
praise  thee.  O  send  thy  word  of 
command  to  rebuke  the  raging 
winds,  and  the  roaring  sea ;  that  we, 
being  delivered  from  this  distress, 
may  live  to  serve  thee,  and  to  glo- 
rify thy  Name  all  the  days  of  our 
life.  Hear,  Lord,  and  save  us,  for 
the  infinite  merits  of  our  blessed 
Saviour,  thy  Son,  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ     Amen. 

§  373-  If  1^^  Prayer  to  be  said  be- 
fore a  Fight  at  Sea  against  any 
Enemy, 

O  MOST  powerful  and  glorious 
Lord  God,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  that 
rulest  and  commandest  all  things  ; 
Thou  sittest  in  the  throne  judging 


Forms  of  Prayer  to  be  Used  at  Sea. 


411 


right,  and  therefore  we  make  our 
address  to  thy  Divine  Majesty  in 
this  our  necessity,  that  thou  would- 
est  take  the  cause  into  thine  own 
hand,  and  judge  between  us  and 
our  enemies.  Stir  up  thy  strength, 
O  Lord,  and  come  and  help  us  ;  for 
thou  givest  not  alway  the  battle  to 
the  strong,  but  canst  save  by  many 
or  by  few.  O  let  not  our  sins  now 
cry  against  us  for  vengeance  ;  but 
hear  us  thy  poor  servants  begging 
mercy,  and  imploring  thy  help,  and 
that  thou  wouldest  be  a  defence  unto 
us  against  the  face  of  the  enemy. 
Make  it  appear  that  thou  art  our  Sa- 
viour and  mighty  Deliverer,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  374.  Short  Prayers  for  single  per- 
sons, that  cannot  meet  to  join  in 
Prayer  -with  others,  by  reason  of 
the  Fight,  or  Storm. 

General  Prayers. 
Lord,  be  merciful  to  us  sinners, 
and  save  us  for  thy  mercy's  sake. 

Thou  art  the  great  God,  that  hast 
made  and  rulest  all  things  :  O  de- 
liver us  for  thy  Name's  sake. 

Thou  art  the  great  God  to  be 
feared  above  all :  O  save  us,  that 
we  may  praise  thee. 

§  375-  Special  Prayeis  with  respect 
to  the  Enemy. 

Thou,  O  Lord,  art  just  and 
powerful  :  O  defend  our  cause 
against  the  face  of  the  enemy. 

O  God,  thou  art  a  strong  tower 
of  defence  to  all  that  flee  unto  thee  : 
O  save  us  from  the  violence  of  the 
enemy. 

O  Lord  of  hosts,  fight  for  us,  that 
we  may  glorify  thee. 

O  suffer  us  not  to  sink  under  the 
weight  of  our  sins,  or  the  violence 
of  the  enemy. 

O  Lord,  arise,  help  us,  and  de- 
liver us  for  thy  Name's  sake. 

§  376.  Short  Prayers  in  respect  of 
a  Storm. 
Thou,  O  Lord,  that  stillest  the 
raging  of  the  sea,  hear,  hear  us,  and 
save  us,  that  we  perish  not. 


O  blessed  Saviour,  that  didst  save 
thy  disciples  ready  to  perish  in 
a  storm,  hear  us,  and  save  us,  we 
beseech  thee. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

O  Lord,  hear  us. 

O  Christ,  hear  us. 

God  the  Father,  God  the  Son, 
God  the  Holy  Ghost,  have  mercy 
upon  us,  save  us  now  and  evermore. 
Amen. 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven. Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy 
kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done 
in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give 
us  this  day  our  daily  bread.  And 
forgive  us  our  trespasses.  As  we 
forgive  them  that  trespass  against 
us.  And  lead  us  not  into  tempta- 
tion ;  But  deliver  us  from  evil  : 
For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  The 
power,  and  the  glory,  For  ever  and 
ever.     Amen. 

^§377.  When  there  shall  be  imminent 
danger,  as  many  as  can  be  spared 
frovt  necessary  service  in  the  Ship 
shall  be  called  together,  and  make 
an  humble  Confession  of  their  sins 
to  God :  In  which  ez'ery  one  onght 
seriously  to  reflect  upon  those  par- 
ticular sins  of  which  his  conscience 
shall  acctise  him  ;  saying  as  foU 
loweth, 

§  378.  The  Confession. 
Almighty  God,  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Maker  of  all 
things,  Judge  of  all  men  ;  We  ac- 
knowledge and  bewail  our  manifold 
sins  and  wickedness.  Which  we, 
from  time  to  time,  most  grievously 
have  committed.  By  thought,  word, 
and  deed,  Against  thy  Divine  Ma- 
jesty, Provoking  most  justly  thy 
wrath  and  indignation  against  us. 
We  do  earnestly  repent.  And  be 
heartily  sorry  for  these  our  mis- 
doings ;  The  remembrance  of  them 
is  grievous  unto  us  ;  The  burden  of 
them  is  intolerable.  Have  mercy 
upon  us,  Have  mercy  upon  us,  most 
merciful  Father ;  For  thy  Son  our 


412 


Prayer-Book  of  Charles  II.  1662. 


Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  Forgive  us 
all  that  is  past  ;  And  grant  that  we 
may  ever  hereafter  Serve  and  please 
thee  In  newness  of  life,  To  the 
honour  and  glory  of  thy  Name ; 
Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen, 

§  379.  IT  Then  shall  the  Priest,  if 
there  be  any  in  the  Ship,  pronounce 
this  Absolution. 

Almighty  God,  our  heavenly 
Father,  who  of  his  great  mercy  hath 
promised  forgiveness  of  sins  to  all 
them  which  with  hearty  repentance 
and  true  faith  turn  unto  him  ;  Have 
mercy  upon  you ;  pardon  and  deli- 
ver you  from  all  your  sins ;  confirm 
and  strengthen  you  in  all  good- 
ness, and  bring  you  to  everlasting 
life  ;  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

§  380.  Thanksgiving  after  a  Storm, 
yubilate  Deo.     Psalm  Ixvi. 

O  BE  joyful  in  God,  all  ye  lands  : 
sing  praises  unto  the  honour  of 
his  Name,  make  his  praise  to  be 
glorious. 

Say  unto  God,  O  how  wonderful 
art  thou  in  thy  works  :  through  the 
greatness  of  thy  power  shall  thine 
enemies  be  found  liars  unto  thee. 

For  all  the  world  shall  worship 
thee  :  sing  of  thee,  and  praise  thy 
Name. 

O  come  hither,  and  behold  the 
works  of  God  :  how  wonderful  he 
is  in  his  doing  toward  the  children 
of  men. 

He  turned  the  sea  into  dry  land  : 
so  that  they  went  through  the 
water  on  foot ;  there  did  we  rejoice 
thereof. 

He  ruleth  with  his  power  for 
ever ;  his  eyes  behold  the  people  : 
and  such  as  will  not  believe  shall 
not  be  able  to  exalt  themselves. 

O  praise  our  God,  ye  people  : 
and  make  the  voice  of  his  praise  to 
be  heard  ; 

Who  holdeth  our  soul  in  life  : 
and  suffereth  not  our  feet  to  slip. 


For  thou,  O  God,  hast  proved 
us  :  thou  also  hast  tried  us,  like 
as  silver  is  tried. 

Thou  broughtest  us  into  the 
snare  :  and  laidest  trouble  upon 
our  loins. 

Thou  sufTeredst  men  to  ride  over 
our  heads  :  we  went  through  fire 
and  water,  and  thou  broughtest  us 
out  into  a  wealthy  place. 

I  will  go  into  thy  house  with 
burnt-offerings :  and  will  pay  thee 
my  vows,  which  I  promised  with 
my  lips,  and  spake  with  my  mouth, 
when  I  was  in  trouble. 

I  will  offer  unto  thee  fat  burnt- 
sacrifices,  with  the  incense  of  rams  : 
I  will  offer  bullocks  and  goats. 

0  come  hither,  and  hearken,  all 
ye  that  fear  God  :  and  I  will  tell 
you  what  he  hath  done  for  my  soul. 

1  called  unto  him  with  mine" 
mouth  :  and  gave  him  praises  with 
my  tongue. 

If  1  incline  unto  wickedness  with 
my  heart  :  the  Lord  will  not  hear 
me. 

But  God  hath  heard  me  :  and 
considered  the  voice  of  my  prayer. 

Praised  be  God  who  hath  not  cast 
out  my  prayer  :  nor  turned  his  mercy 
from  me. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world  with- 
out end-     Amen. 

Confitemini  Domino.     Psalm  cviL 

O  GIVE  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  for 
he  is  gracious  :  and  his  mercy  en- 
dureth  for  ever. 

Let  them  give  thanks  whom  the 
Lord  hath  redeemed  :  and  delivered 
from  the  hand  of  the  enemy  ; 

And  gathered  them  out  of  the 
lands,  from  the  east,  and  from  the 
west  :  from  the  north,  and  from 
the  south. 

They  went  astray  in  the  wilder- 
ness out  of  the  way  :  and  found  no 
city  to  dweU  in  ; 


In  Sealed  Book  printed  "  my,''  and  altered  with  a  pen  to  "mine." 


Forms  of  Prayer  to  be  Used  at  Sea. 


413 


Hungry  and  thirsty  :  their  soul 
fainted  in  them. 

So  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in 
their  trouble  :  and  he  delivered 
them  from  their  distress. 

He  led  them  forth  by  the  right 
way  :  that  they  might  go  to  the 
city  where  they  dwelt. 

O  that  men  would  therefore  praise 
the  Lord  for  his  goodness  :  and 
declare  the  wonders  that  he  doth 
for  the  children  of  men. 

For  he  satisfieth  the  empty  soul  : 
and  filleth  the  hungry  soul  with 
goodness. 

Such  as  sit  in  darkness,  and  in 
the  shadow  of  death  :  being  fast 
bound  in  miseiy  and  iron  ; 

Because  they  rebelled  against 
the  words  of  the  Lord  :  and  lightly 
regarded  the  counsel  of  the  most 
High-; 

He  also  brought  down  their  heart 
through  heaviness  :  they  fell  down, 
and  there  was  none  to  help  them. 

So  when  they  cried  unto  the 
Lord  in  their  trouble  :  he  delivered 
them  out  of  their  distress. 

For  he  brought  them  out  of  dark- 
ness, and  out  of  the  shadow  of  death  : 
and  brake  their  bonds  in  sunder. 

O  that  men  would  therefore  praise 
the  Lord  for  his  goodness  :  and 
declare  the  wonders  that  he  doth 
for  the  children  of  men. 

For  he  hath  broken  the  'gates  of 
brass  :  and  smitten  the  bars  of  iron 
in  sunder. 

Foolish  men  are  plagued  for 
their  offence  :  and  because  of  their 
wickedness. 

Their  soul  abhorred  all  manner 
of  meat  :  and  they  .were  even  hard 
at  death's  door. 

So  when  they  cried  unto  the 
Lord  in  their  trouble  :  he  deli- 
vered them  out  of  their  distress. 

He  sent  his  word,  and  healed 
them  :  and  they  were  saved  from 
their  destruction. 

O  that  men  would  therefore  praise 
the   Lord  for  his  goodness   :   and 


declare  the  wonders  that  he  doth 
for  the  children  of  men  ; 

That  they  would  offer  unto  him 
the  sacrifice  of  tlianksgiving  :  and 
tell  out  his  works  with  gladness  ! 

They  that  go  down  to  the  sea  in 
ships  :  and  occupy  their  business 
in  great  waters ; 

These  men  see  the  works  of  the 
Lord  :  and  his  wonders  in  the 
deep. 

For  at  his  word  the  stormy  wind 
ariseth  :  which  lifteth  up  the  waves 
thereof. 

They  are  carried  up  to  the  hea- 
ven, and  down  again  to  the  deep  : 
their  soul  melteth  away  because  of 
the  trouble. 

They  reel  to  and  fro,  and  stagger 
like  a  drunken  man  :  and  are  at 
their  wit's  end. 

So  when  they  cry  unto  the  Lord 
in  their  trouble  :  he  deliveretli 
them  out  of  their  distress. 

For  he  maketh  the  storm  to 
cease  :  so  that  the  waves  thereof 
are  still. 

Then  are  they  glad,  because  they 
are  at  rest  :  and  so  he  bringeth 
them  unto  the  haven  where  they 
would  be. 

O  that  men  would  therefore  praise 
the  Lord  for  his  goodness  :  and 
declare  the  wonders  that  he  doeth 
for  the  children  of  men  ; 

That  they  would  exalt  him  also 
in  the  congregation  of  the  people  : 
and  praise  him  in  the  seat  of  the 
elders  ; 

"Who  tumeth  the  floods  into 
a  wilderness  :  and  drieth  up  the 
water-springs. 

A  fruitful  land  maketh  he  bar- 
ren :  for  the  wickedness  of  them 
that  dwell  therein. 

Again  he  maketh  the  wilderness 
a  standing  water  :  and  water- springs 
of  a  dry  ground. 

And  there  he  setteth  the  hungry  : 
that  they  may  build  them  a  city  to 
dwell  in ; 

That  they  may  sow  their  land, 


*  Id  Sealed  Book,  "  est "  has  been  erased,  and  a  semicolon  added  with  a  pen. 


414 


Prayer-Book  of  Charles  II.  1662. 


1 


and  plant  vineyards  :  to  yield  them 
fruits  of  increase. 

He  blesseth  them,  so  that  they 
multiply  exceedingly  :  and  suffer- 
eth  not  their  cattle  to  decrease. 

And  again,  when  they  are  mi- 
nished,  and  brought  low  :  through 
oppression,  through  any  plague,  or 
trouble ; 

Though  he  suffer  them  to  be 
evil  entreated  through  tyrants  :  and 
let  them  wander  out  of  the  way  in 
the  wilderness ; 

Yet  helpeth  he  the  poor  out  of 
misery  :  and  maketh  him  hous- 
holds  like  a  flock  of  sheep. 

The  righteous  will  consider  this, 
and  rejoice  :  and  the  mouth  of  all 
wickedness  shall  be  stopped. 

Whoso  is  wise  will  ponder  these 
things  :  and  they  shall  understand 
the  loving  kindness  of  the  Lord. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

§  381.   Collects  of  Thanksgiving. 

O  MOST  blessed  and  glorious 
Lord  God,  who  art  of  infinite  good- 
ness and  mercy  ;  We  thy  poor  crea- 
tures, whom  thou  hast  made  and 
preserved,  holding  our  souls  in  life, 
and  now  rescuing  us  out  of  the  jaws 
of  death,  humbly  present  ourselves 
again  before  thy  Divine  Majesty,  to 
offer  a  sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanks- 
giving, for  for  that  thou  heardest  us 
when  we  called  in  our  trouble,  and 
didst  not  cast  out  our  prayer,  which 
we  made  before  thee  in  our  great 
distress  :  Even  when  we  gave  all 
for  lost,  our  ship,  our  goods,  our 
lives,  then  didst  thou  mercifully 
look  upon  us,  and  wonderfully  com- 
mand a  deliverance  ;  for  which  we, 
now  being  in  safety,  do  give  all 
praise  and  glory  to  thy  holy  Name  ; 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

§  382.   Or  this : 

O    MOST    mighty  and    gracious 


good  God,  thy  mercy  is  over  all 
thy  works,  but  in  special  manner 
hath  been  extended  toward  us, 
whom  thou  hast  so  powerfully  and 
wonderfully  defended.  Thou  hast 
shewed  us  terrible  things,  and  won- 
ders in  the  deep,  that  we  might 
see  how  powerful  and  gracious 
a  God  thou  art ;  how  able  and 
ready  to  help  them  that  trust  in 
thee.  Thou  hast  shewed  us  how 
both  winds  and  seas  obey  thy  com- 
mand ;  that  we  may  learn,  even 
from  them,  hereafter  to  obey  thy 
voice,  and  to  do  thy  will.  We 
therefore  bless  and  glorify  thy 
Name,  for  this  thy  mercy  in  saving 
us,  when  we  were  ready  to  perish. 
And,  we  beseech  thee,  make  us  as 
truly  sensible  now  of  thy  mercy,  as 
we  were  then  of  the  danger :  And 
give  us  hearts  always  ready  to  ex- 
press our  thankfulness,  not  only  by 
words,  but  also  by  our  lives,  in 
being  more  obedient  to  thy  holy 
commandments.  Continue,  we  be- 
seech thee,  this  thy  goodness  to  us  ; 
that  we,  whom  thou  hast  saved, 
may  serve  thee  in  holiness  and 
righteousness  all  the  days  of  our 
life  ;  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
and  Saviour.     Amen. 

§  383.  A  Hymn  of  Praise  and 
Thanksgiving  after  a  dangerous 
Tempest. 

O  COME,  let  us  give  thanks  unto 
the  Lord,  for  he  is  gracious  :  and 
his  mercy  endureth  for  ever. 

Great  is  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to 
be  praised  ;  let  the  redeemed  of 
the  Lord  say  so  :  whom  he  hath 
delivered  from  the  merciless  rage 
of  the  sea. 

The  Lord  is  gracious  and  full  of 
compassion  :  slow  to  anger,  and  of 
great  mercy. 

He  hath  not  dealt  with  us  accord- 
ing to  our  sins  :  neither  rewarded 
us  according  to  our  iniquities. 

But  as  the  heaven  is  high  above 
the  earth  :  so  great  hath  been  his 
mercy  towards  us. 


Forms  of  Prayer  to  be  Used  at  Sea. 


415 


We  found  trouble  and  heaviness  : 
we  were  even  at  death's  door. 

The  waters  of  the  sea  had  well- 
nigh  covered  us  :  the  proud  waters 
had  well-nigh  gone  over  our  soul. 

The  sea  roared  :  and  the  stormy 
wind  lifted  up  the  waves  thereof. 

We  were  carried  up  as  it  were  to 
heaven,  and  then  down  again  into 
the  deep  :  our  soul  melted  within 
us,  because  of  trouble  ; 

Then  cried  we  unto  thee,  O  Lord  : 
and  thou  didst  deliver  us  out  of  our 
distress. 

Blessed  be  thy  Name,  who  didst 
not  despise  the  prayer  of  thy  ser- 
vants :  but  didst  hear  our  cry,  and 
hast  saved  us. 

Thou  didst  send  forth  thy  com- 
mandment :  and  the  windy  storm 
ceased,  and  was  turned  into  a  calm. 

O  let  us  therefore  praise  the  Lord 
for  his  goodness  :  and  declare  the 
wonders  that  he  hath  done,  and  still 
doeth  for  the  children  of  men. 

Praised  be  the  Lord  daily  :  even 
the  Lord  that  helpeth  us,  and  pour- 
eth  his  benefits  upon  us. 

He  is  our  God,  even  the  God  of 
whom  Cometh  salvation  :  God  is 
the  Lord  by  whom  we  have  es- 
caped death. 

Thou,  Lord,  hast  made  us  glad 
through  the  operation  of  thy  hands  : 
and  we  will  triumph  in  thy  praise. 

Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  :  even 
the  Lord  God,  who  only  doeth 
wondrous  things  ; 

And  blessed  be  the  Name  of  his 
Majesty  for  ever  :  and  let  every  one 
of  us  say,  Amen,  Amen. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost  ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

2  Cor.  xiii. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and 


the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
be  with  us  all  y  evermore.     Amen. 

§  384.  After  Victory  or  Deliverance 
from  an  Enemy. 

§  385.  A  Psalm  or  Hymn  of  Praise 
and  Thanksgiving  after  Victory. 

If  the  Lord  had  not  been  on  our 
side,  now  may  we  say  :  if  the  Lord 
himself  had  not  been  on  our  side, 
when  men  rose  up  against  us  ; 

They  had  swallowed  us  up  quick  : 
when  they  were  so  wrathfully  dis- 
pleased at  us. 

Yea,  the  waters  had  drowned  us, 
and  the  stream  had  gone  over  our 
soul  :  the  deep  waters  of  the  proud 
had  gone  over  our  soul. 

But  praised  be«the  Lord  :  who 
hath  not  given  us  over  as  a  prey 
unto  them. 

The  Lord  hath  wrought :  a  mighty 
salvation  for  us. 

We  gat  not  this  by  our  own  sword, 
neither  was  it  our  own  arm  that 
saved  us  :  but  thy  right  hand,  and 
thine  arm,  and  the  light  of  thy  coun- 
tenance, because  thou  hadst  a  fa- 
vour unto  us. 

The  Lord  hath  appeared  for  us  : 
the  Lord  hath  covered  our  heads, 
and  made  us  to  stand  in  the  day 
of  battle. 

The  Lord  hath  appeared  for  us  : 
the  Lord  hath  overthrown  our  ene- 
mies, and  dashed  in  pieces  those 
that  rose  up  against  us. 

Therefore  not  unto  us,  O  Lord, 
not  unto  us  :  but  imto  thy  Name  be 
given  the  glory. 

The  Lord  hath  done  great  things 
for  us  :  the  Lord  hath  done  great 
things  for  us,  for  which  we  rejoice. 

Our  help  standeth  in  the  Name 
of  the  Lord  :  who  hath  made  hea- 
ven and  earth. 

Blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord  : 
from  this  time  forth  for  evermore. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 


y  In  Sealed  Book,    the  words   "now  and    for"  are  here  printed,   but  are  struck 
through  with  a  pen. 


4i6 


Prayer-Book  of  Charles  II.  1662. 


As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without 
end-     Amen. 

§  386.   IT  After  this  Hymn  may  be 
sung  the  Te  Deum. 

§  387.  H  Then  this  Collect. 

O  ALMIGHTY  God,  the  Sovereign 
Conunander  of  all  the  world,  in 
whose  hand  is  power  and  might 
which  none  is  able  to  withstand  ; 
We  bless  and  magnify  thy  great 
and  glorious  Name  for  this  happy 
Victory,  the  whole  glory  whereof 
we  do  ascribe  to  thee,  who  art  the 
only  giver  of  Victory.  And,  we 
beseech  thee,  give  us  grace  to  im- 
prove this  great  mercy  to  thy  glory, 
the  advancement  of  thy  Gospel,  the 
honour  of  our  Sovereign,  and,  as 
much  as  in  us  lieth,  to  the  good  of 
all  mankind.  And,  we  beseech 
thee,  give  us  such  a  sense  of  this 
great  mercy,  as  may  engage  us  to 
a  true  thankfulness,  such  as  may 
appear  in  our  lives  by  an  humble, 
holy,  and  obedient  walking  before 
thee  all  our  days,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord ;  to  whom  with 
thee*  and  the  Holy  Spirit/  as  for  all 


thy  mercies,  so  in  particular  for 
this  Victory  and  Deliverance,  be 
all  glory  and  honour,  world  with- 
out end.     Amen. 

2  Cor.  xiiL 
The  grace   of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,   and  the  love  of  God,  and 
the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
be  with  us  all  evermore.     Amen. 

§  388.  At  the  Burial  of  thoY  Dead 
at  Sea. 

§  389.  f  The  Office  in  the  Common 
Prayer-book  may  be  used ;  only 
instead  of  these  words  [We  there- 
fore commit  his  body  to  the 
groimd,  earth  to  earth,  &c.]  say. 

We  therefore  commit  his  body 
to  the  Deep,  to  be  turned  into  cor- 
ruption, looking  for  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body,  (when  the  Sea 
shall  give  up  her  dead,)  and  the 
life  of  the  world  to  come,  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  who  at  his 
coming  shall  change  our  vile  body, 
that  it  may  be  like  his  glorious 
body,  according  to  the  mighty  work- 
ing, whereby  he  is  able  to  subdue 
all  things  to  himself. 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons. 


417 


^S^ije  Uxmt 

mti  maner  of  maltgng 

antj  coneecratgng  of 

arcijefitstoppes 

i^is^oppes 

anti 
ISeacons 


Second  Edw,  VI.  1552. 

^Ije  fourme 

anU  maner  of  mafennge 

and  consecratynge,  Bis- 

sl)oppe»,  ^ricatts, 

and  Deacons. 

\_Anno  a  salutifero  Virginh 
partu  ^ 

1552. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

THE  FORM 

AND  MANER  OF  MAKING 

AND  CONSECRATING 

BISHOPS,  PRIESTS,  AND 
DEACONS 

Anno "  a  salutifero 
Virginis  partu. 

1559. 


James  I.  1604. 

[The  Form  of  Making  and  Consecrating 
Bishops,  Priests,  and  Deacons,  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  specially  set  forth 
in  1604,  but  that  of  Elizabeth  to  have 
continued  in  use.] 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

[There  seems  to  have  been  no  Form  of 
Making  and  Consecrating  Bishops,  Pres- 
byters, and  Deacons,  specially  set  forth 
for  the  Scotch  edition  of  1637.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

THE 

FORM  AND  MANNER 

OF  MAKING,  ORDAINING,  AND 

CONSECRATING 

OF 

BISHOPS,  PRIESTS,  AND 
DEACONS, 

ACCORDING   TO   THE   ORDER   OF 

aEJje  ffibttwt)  of  lEnglairti. 

London : 

Printed  by  the  Printers  to  the  King's 

most  excellent  Majesty. 


I 


•  This  Ordinal  was  not  printed  as  part 
of  the  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI., 
but  was  issued  separately.  It  is,  how- 
ever, printed  here  for  the  sake  of  com- 
parison with  that  which  is  found  printed 


at  the  end  of  several  copies  of  the  Second 
Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI. 

•>  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "Anno  Domini 
M.D.L.II." 

'  In  one  ed.,  "Anno  domini  1559." 


E  e 


4i8 


The  Form  and  Manner,  &c.  1550. 


THE   PREFACE. 

It  is  evident  unto  all  men,  diligently  reading  holy  scripture, 
and  ancient  authors,  that  from  the  Apostles'  time  there  hath"* 
been  these  orders  of  Ministers  in  Christ's  church :  Bishops, 
Priests,  and  Deacons :  which  Offices  ^  were  evermore  had  in 
such  reverent  estimation,  that  no  man  by  his  own  private 
authority  ^  might  presume  to  execute  any  of  them,  except  he 
were  first  called,  tried,  examined,  and  known  to  have  such 
qualities  as  were  s  requisite  for  the  same  ;  and  also,  by  public 
prayer,  with  imposition  of  hands,  approved  •*  and  admitted 
thereunto'.  And  therefore,  to  the  intent  these  orders  should'' 
be  continued,  and  reverently  used,  and  esteemed  in  this' 
Church  of  England,  it  is  requisite,  that  "^  no  man  (not  being  at 
this  present  Bishop,  Priest,  nor  Deacon)  shall  °  execute  any  of 
them  °,  except  he  be  called,  tried,  examined,  and  admitted  p, 
according  to  the  form  hereafter  following  \  And  none  shall 
be  admitted  a  Deacon,  except  he  be  twenty-one  years  of  age 
at  the  least'.  And  every  man  which  is  to  be  admitted 
a  Priest,  shall  be  full  twenty-four  years  old '.  And  every  man, 
which  is  to  be  consecrated  a  Bishop',  shall  be  fully  thirty 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
The  Preface. 

It  is  evident  unto  all  men,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
as  hereafter  followeth. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
The  Preface. 

It  is  evident  unto  all  men,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  toj 
as  hereafter  followeth. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Preface. 

It  is  evident  unto  all  men,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

....  may  at  the  times  appointed 
in  the  Canon,  or  else  on  "  urgent 
occasion,  upon  some  other  Sunday 
or  Holy-day,  in  the  face  of  the 
Church,  admit  him  a  Deacon,  in 
such  manner  and  form  as  hereafter 
followeth. 


*  Ined.  1662,  "have," 

«  In  ed.  IS59.  tnispr.  "officers." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  the  words  "by  his  own 
private  authority"  omitted. 

K  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 

I"  In  ed.  1662,  "  were  approved." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "admitted  thereunto  by 
lawful  authority." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  intent  that  these  orders 
may. " 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  the." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  the  words  "  it  is  requisite 
that "  omitted. 

"  In  cd.  1662,  "no  man  shall  be  ac- 
counted or  taken  to  be  a  lawful  bishop, 
priest,  or  deacon  in  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land, or  suffered  to  execute." 


"  In  ed.  i66a,  "the  said  functions." 

P  In  ed.  1662,  "admitted  thereunto." 

1  Ined.  1662,  "following,  or  hath  had 
formerly  episcopal  consecration  or  ordi- 
nation." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "except  he  be  twenty- 
three  years  of  age,  unless  he  have  a 
faculty." 

•  In  ed.  166a,  "  four-and-twenty  years 
old." 

»  In  ed.  1662^  "  to  be  ordained  or  con- 
secrated Bishop." 

"In  Sealed  Book  printed  "  upon,"  but 
"  up "  struck  through  with  a  pen ;  and 
in  the  next  word  but  two,  it  is  printed 
"  on,"  and  the  "  up  "  added  with  a  pen. 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons. 


419 


years  of  age.  And  the  Bishop  knowing,  either  by  himself,  or 
by  suiScient  testimony,  any  person  to  be  a  man  of  virtuous 
conversation,  and  without  crime,  and  after  examination  and 
trial,  finding  him  learned  in  the  Latin  tongue,  and  sufficiently 
instructed  in  holy  scripture, 

may,  upon  a  Sunday  or  holyday, 
in  the  face  of  the  church,  admit  him  a  Deacon,  in  such  manner 
and  form,  as  hereafter  followetli. 

the 

FORM  AND  MANNER 

OF 

ORDERING    OF    DEACONS. 

§  390-  IF  First,  "when  the  day  appointed  by  the  Bishop  is  come,  there  shall  he 
an  exhortation,  declaring  the  duty  and  o//ice  of  such  as  come  to  be  admitted 
JMinisters,  hoiv  necessary  such  orders  are  in  the  church  of  Christ,  and  also, 
haii)  the  people  ought  to  esteem  them  in  their  vocation. 

§  391'  ^  After  the  exhortation  ended,  the  Archdeacon,  or  his  deputy,  shall 
present  such  as  come  to  be  admitted,  to  the  Bishop  "  ;  rjery  one  of  them,  that 
are  presejited,  having  upon  him  a  plain  Albe :  and  the  Archdeacon,  or  his 
deputy,  shall  say  these  'vords. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

THE 
FORM  AND  MANNER 

OF 

ORDERING  OF  DEACONS. 

§  390.   First  zuhen  the  day,  cr-V. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  391.  ^  After  the  Exhortation  end- 
ed, the  Afrhdeacon,  or  his  deputy, 
shall  present  such  as  come  to  the 
Bishop  to  be  admitted,  saying  these 
words. 

Elizabeth,  1559. 

THE 
FORM  AND  MANNER 

OF 

ORDERING  DEACONS. 

§  390.   First,  when  the  day,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§39'-  After  the  Exiiortation,  t2r-V. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

THE 
FORM  AND  MANNER 


MAKING  OF  DEACONS. 

§  390.  ■[  When  the  day  appoi7ited  by 
the  Bishop  is  come,  after  ]\Iorning 
Prayer  is  ended,  there  shall  be 
a  Sermon  or  Exhortation,  declar- 
ing the  Duty  and  Office  of  such  as 
come  to  be  admitted  Deacons  ;  hoiv 
necessary  that  Order  is  in  the 
Church  of  Christ,  and  also,  how 
the  people  ought  to  esteem  them  in 
their  Office. 

§391-  ^\  First  the  Archdeacon,  or 
his  Deputy,  shall  present  unto  the 
Bishop  (sitting  in  his  chair  near 
to  the  holy  Table)  such  as  desire 
to  be  ordained  Deacons,  (each  of 
them  being  decently  habited,)  say- 
ing these  'cuoi'ds, 


In  eds.  1552  and  1559,  "as  come  to  the  Bishop  to  be  admitted.' 


420 


The  Form  and  Manner,  &c.  1550. 


Reverend  Father  in  GOD,  I  present  unto  you  these  per- 
sons present,  to  be  admitted  Deacons. 

^  The  Bishop.  Take  heed  that  the  persons  whom  ye  pre- 
sent unto  us,  be  apt  and  meet,  for  their  learning,  and  Godly 
conversation,  to  exercise  their  ministry  duly,  to  the  honour  of 
God,  and  ^  edifying  of  his  Church. 

§  392.   The  Archdeacon  shall  ansTver. 
I  have   enquired  of  them,  and  also  examined  them,  and 
think  them  so  to  be. 

§  393-  IT  And  then  the  Bishop  shall  say  unto  the  people. 
Brethren,  if  there  be  any  of  you,  who  knoweth  any  im- 
pediment, or  notable  crime,  in  any  of  these  persons  presented 
to  be  ordered  Deacons,  for  the  which  he  ought  not  to  be 
admitted  to  the  same  ^,  let  him  come  forth,  in  the  name  of 
God,  and  shew  what  the  crime,  or  impediment  is. 

§  394.  IT  And  if  any  great  crime  or  impediment  be  objected,  the  Bishop  shall 

surcease  from  ordering  that  person,  until  such  time  as  the  party  accused 

shall  try  himself  clear  »  of  that  crime. 
§  395.    Then  the  Bishop,  commending  such  as  shall  be  found  meet  to  be 

ordered,  to  the  prayers  of  the  congregation,  with  the  Clerks,  and  people 

present,  shall  say  or  sing  the  Litany  as  followeth. 

The  Litany  and  Suj^rages. 

O  God  the  Father  of  heaven  :  have  mercy  upon  us  miser- 
able sinners. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
Reverend  Father  in  God,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  392.    The  Archdeacon,  ^c. 

I  have  inquired,  &c 
§  393.   ^  And  then  the  Bishop,  ^c. 

Brethren,  if  there  be,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  i549.] 
§394.  %  And  if  any  great  crime,  &'c. 
§  395-     IF  Then  the   Bishop,    com- 
mending, <&-»f. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Litany  cufollo7veth  -with  the  prayers. 

THE  LITANY  AND  SUF- 
FRAGES. 

O  God  the  Father,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Reverend  Father  in  God,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  392.   The  Archdeacon,  S^c. 

I  have  inquired,  &c. 
§  393-  lAnd  then  the  Bishop,  &^. 

Brethren,  if  there  be,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549-] 
§  394.  And  if  any  great  crime,  &'c. 
§  395-   f   Then    the    Bishop,    com- 
mending,  &^c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Litany  as  followeth  with  the  prayers. 

THE  LITANY  AND  SUF- 
FRAGES. 

O  God  the  Father,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


7  In  ed.  i66a,  "the  edifying."  •  In  ed.  1662,  "to  that  office.*' 

*  In  ed.  1663,  "shall be  found  dear." 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons.  421 

O  God  the  Father  of  heaven^  :  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable 
sinners. 

O  God  the  Son,  Redeemer  of  the  world  :  have  mercy  upon 
us  miserable  sinners. 

O  God  the  Son,  Redeemer  of  the  world  :  have  mercy  upon  us 
miserable  sinners. 

O  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  proceeding  from  the  Father  and 
the  Son  :  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners. 

O  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the 
Son  :  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners. 

O  holy,  blessed,  and  glorious  Trinity,  three  persons  and 
one  God  :  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners. 

O  holy,  blessed,  and  glorious  Trinity,  three  persons  and  one 
God  :  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners. 

Remember  not,  Lord,  our  offences,  nor  the  offences  of  our 
forefathers,  neither  take  thou  vengeance  of  our  sins  :  spare  us, 
good  Lord,  spare  thy  people,  whom  thou  hast  redeemed  with 
thy  most  precious  blood,  and  be  not  angry  with  us  for  ever. 
Spare  us,  good  Lord. 

From  all  evil  and  mischief,  from  sin,  from  the  crafts  and 
assaults  of  the  devil,  from  thy  wrath,  and  from  everlasting 
damnation, 

Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

From''  blindness  of  heart,  from  pride,  vainglory,  and  hypocrisy, 
from  envy,  hatred,  and  malice,  and  all  uncharitableness, 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

From  fornication,  and  all  *  deadly  sin  ;  and  from  all  the 
deceits  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil. 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
From  Lightning  and  Tempest  e,  from  Plague,  Pestilence,  and 
Famine,  from  Battle  and  murther^,  and  from  sudden  death. 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
Reverend  Father  in  God,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  392.  IF  The  Archdeacon  shall,  ^'c. 

I  have  enquired,  &c. 
§  393-  1"  Then  the  Bishop,  &'c. 

Brethren,  if  there  be,  &c. 

§394.  \  And  if  any  great  Crinte,^c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


§  395-   1  Then  the  Bishop,  dfc. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

shall,  with  the  Clergy  and  people 
present,  sing  or  say  the  Litany, 
with  the  prayers  as/olloweth. 

The  Litany  and  Suffrages. 
O  God,  the  Father  of  heaven,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


"  In  one  ed.,  1559,  this  and  the  three  fol-  "•  In  ed.  1552,  and  after,  "  all  other." 

lowing  responses  are  abridged.  '  Ined.  1552,  "  Lightnings  &  Tempests." 

"  Ined.  1552,  and  after,  "  all  blindness."  '  Ined.  1662,  "murder." 


422 


The  Form  and  Manner,  &c.  1550. 


From  all  sedition  and  privy  conspiracy,  from  the  tyranny  of 
the  Bishop  of  Rome,  and  all  his  detestable  enormities,  from 
all  false   doctrine  and  heresy,  from  hardness  of  heart,  and 
contempt  of  thy  word  and  commandment. 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
By  the  mystery  of  thy  holy  incarnation,  by  thy  holy  nativity 
and  Circumcision,  by  thy  baptism,  fasting,  and  temptation. 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
By  thine  agony  and  bloody  sweat,  by  thy  Cross  and  pas- 
sion, by  thy  precious  death  and  burial,  by  thy  glorious  resur- 
rection and  ascension «,  by  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
In  all  time  of  our  tribulation,  in  all  time  of  our  wealth,  in 
the  hour  of  death'',  in  the  day  of  judgment. 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
We  sinners  do  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  (O  Lord  God),  and 
that  it  may  please  thee  to  rule  and  govern  thy  holy  church 
universal '  in  the  right  way. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  keep  EDWARD  the  VI.  thy 
servant,  our  King  and  governor. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  rule  his  ^  heart  in  thy  faith,  fear 
and  love,  that  he'  may  always"  have  affiance  in  thee,  and 
ever  seek  thy  honour  and  glory. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

From  all  sedition  and,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  keep 
Edward  the  Sixth,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 

Elizabeth,  1559. 
From  all  sedition  and  privy  con- 
spiracy ;  from  all  false  doctrine  and 
heresy,  from  hardness  of  heart,  and 
contempt  of  thy  word  and  com- 
mandment :  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 


«  In  eds.  1552,  and  after,  "and  by." 
5"  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "and  in." 
'  In  eds.  1552  and  1559,  "  universally  ;" 
but  in  ed.  1662,  again     universal." 


That  it  may  please  thee,  to  keep 
and  strengthen  in  the  true  worship- 
ping of  thee,  in  righteousness  and 
holiness  of  life,  thy  servant  Eliza- 
beth, our  most  gracious  Queen  and 
Govemour, 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good 
Lord. 

That  it  may  please  thee,  to  rule 
her  heart,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
.  .  .  shew  it  accordingly. 

[The  next  petition,  "  That  it  may  please 
thee,  to  bless  these  men,"  &c.  is  omitted, 
and  the  one  after  is  repeated  twice.] 


'  In  ed.  1559,  "  her." 
'  In  ed.  I5S9,  "she  ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "and 
that  he." 
"■  In  ed.  1662,  "  evermore." 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons. 


423 


That  it  may  please  thee,  to  be  his  "  defender  and  keeper, 
giving  him  "  the  victory  over  all  his  "  enemies. 

IVe  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  illuminate  all  Bishops,  Pastors, 
and  ministers  of  the  church,  with  true  knowledge,  and  under- 
standing of  thy  word,  and  that  both  by  their  preaching  and 
living  they  may  set  it  forth,  and  shew  it  accordingly. 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  bless  these  men,  and  send  thy 
grace  upon  them,  that  they  may  duly  execute  the  office,  now 
to  be  committed  unto  them,  to  the  edifying  of  thy  Church, 
and  to  thy  honour,  praise,  and  glory. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  endue  the  lords  of  the  council, 
and  all  the  nobility,  with  grace,  wisdom,  and  understanding. 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  bless  and  keep  the  INIagistrates, 
giving  them  grace  to  execute  justice,  and  to  maintain  truth. 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  bless  and  keep  all  thy  people. 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

From  all  sedition,  privy  con- 
spiracy, and  rebellion  ;  from  all 
false  doctrine,  schism  and  heresy  ", 
from  hardness  of  heart,  and  con- 
tempt of  thy  Word  and  command- 
ment, &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  keep 
and  strengthen  in  the  true  wor- 
shipping of  thee,  in  righteousness 
and  holiness  of  life,  thy  Servant 
CHARLES,  our  most  gracious 
King  and  Governour  ; 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good 
Lord. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  rule 
his  heart,  &c. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  be 
his  defender,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1559,  to] 


That  it  may  please  tiiee  to  bless 
and  preserve?  [our  gracious  Queen 
Catherine,  Mary  the  Queen  Mother, 
James,  Duke  of  York,  and  all  the 
royal  family,  ] 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good 
Lord. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  illu- 
minate all  Bishops,  Priests,  and 
Deacons,  with  true  knowledge  and 
understanding,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  bless 
these  thy  servants,  now  to  be  ad- 
mitted to  the  order  of  Deacons  [or 
Fr tests, 1  and  to  pour  thy  grace  upon 
them  ;  that  they  may  duly  execute 
their  Office,  to  the  edifying  of  thy 
Church,  and  the  glory  of  thy  holy 
Name  ; 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good 
Lord. 


"  In  ed.  1559,  "her." 

"  In  Sealed  Book,  1662,  printed  "  heresy 
and  schism,"  hut  altered  with  a  pen  to 
"  schism  and  heresy." 


P  The  words  printed  here  within  brackets 
are  all  struck  through  with  a  pen  in  the 
Sealed  Book  of  1662,  but  no  others  are 
added  in  their  place. 


424  The  Form  and  ]VIanner,  &c.  1550. 

That  it  may  please  thee,  to  give  to  all  nations,  unity,  peace, 
and  concord. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  give  us  an  heart,  to  love  and 
dread  thee,  and  diligently  to  live  after  thy  commandments. 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  give  all '  thy  people  increase  of 
grace,  to  hear  meekly  thy  word,  and  to  receive  it  with  pure 
affection,  and  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit. 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  bring  into  the  way  of  truth  all 
such  as  have  erred  and  are '  deceived. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  strengthen  such  as  do  stand,  and 
to  comfort  and  help  the  weak-hearted,  and  to  raise  them  up ' 
that  fall,  and  finally  to  beat  down  Sathan  *  under  our  feet 
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  succour,  help  and  comfort,  all 
that  be  "^  in  danger,  necessity  and  tribulation. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  preserve  all  that  travel  by  land, 
or  by  water,  all  women  labouring  of  child,  all  sick  persons, 
and  young  children,  and  to  shew  thy  pity  upon  all  prisoners 
and  captives. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  defend  and  provide  for  the 
fatherless  children  and  widows,  and  all  that  be  °  desolate  and 
oppressed. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  have  mercy  upon  all  men. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  forgive  our  enemies,  persecutors, 
and  slanderers,  and  to  turn  their  hearts. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

That  it  may  please  thee,  &c. 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549,  to] 
^  Our  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, &c. 

And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. 
But  deliver  us  from  evil. 
TAe  Verside.  O  Lord,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.]       


Elizabeth,  1559. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  &c 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 
Our  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, &C. 

And  lead  us  not  into  temptation, 
But  deliver  us  from  evil. 
TAe  Verside.  O  Lord,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


<  In  ed.  1662,  "  to  all."  '  In  ed.  1662,  "  Satan." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  be."  »  In  Sealed  Book,  1662,  "are"  altered 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "raise  up  them."  with  a  pen  to  "  be." 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons. 


425 


That  it  may  please  thee,  to  give  and  preserve  to  our  use 
the  kindly  fruits  of  the  earth,  so  as  in  due  time  we  may  enjoy 
them. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  m,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  to  give  us  true  repentance,  to  for- 
give  us   all  our   sins,  negligences,   and   ignorances,  and  to 
endue  us  with  the  grace  of  thy  holy  Spirit  to  amend  our  lives, 
according  to  thy  holy  word. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
Son  of  GOD  :  we  beseech  thee  to  hear  us. 

Son  of  God :  we  beseech  thee  to  hear  us 
O  Lamb  of  God,  that  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world. 

Grant  us  thy  peace. 
O  Lamb  of  God,  that  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world. 

Have  mercy  upon  us. 
O  Christ,  hear  us. 

O  Christ,  hear  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Lord^  have  mercy  upon  us. 

(§  396.) 
Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven, 

With  the  residue  of  the  Pater  Noster'. 

And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. 

But  deliver  us  from  evil. 
TJie  Versicle.  O  Lord,  deal  not  with  us  after  our  sins. 
The  Ajiswer.  Neither  reward  us  after  our  iniquities. 


Charles  II.   1662. 

That  it  may  please  thee,  &c. 
[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 

§396.  II  Then  shall  the  Priest,  and 
the  people  with  him,  say  the  Lord's 
Prayer. 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven,  . 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy  king- 


'  In  eds.  1552  and  1539,  "&c."  is  placed 
after  the  words,  "  art  in  heaven,"  and  the 


dom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us 
this  day  our  daily  bread.  And  for- 
give us  our  trespasses,  As  we  for- 
give them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation; 
But  deliver  us  from  evil.     Amen, 

Priest.  O  Lord,  &c. 

Answer.  Neither  reward,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


words,    "with  the  residue  of  the  Pater 
Noster,"  are  omitted. 


426 


The  Form  and  Manner,  &c.  1550. 


(§397.)  Let  us  pray. 

O  God  merciful  Father,  that  despisest  not  the  sighing  of 
a  contrite  heart,  nor  the  desire  of  such  as  be  sorrowful,  merci- 
fully assist  our  prayers  that  we  make  before  thee,  in  all  our 
troubles  and  adversities,  whensoever  they  oppress  us  :  and 
graciously  hear  us,  that  those  evils,  which  the  craft  and  sub- 
tilty  of  the  Devil,  or  man,  worketh  against  us,  be  ^  brought 
to  nought,  and  by  the  providence  of  thy  goodness  they  may 
be  dispersed,  that  we  thy  servants,  being  hurt  by  no  persecu- 
tions, may  evermore  give  thanks  untoy  thee,  in  thy  holy 
Church  :  Through  Jesu '  Christ  our  Lord. 

O  Lord,  arise,  help  us,  and  deliver  us,  for  thy  natnis  sake. 

O  God,  we  have  heard  with  our  ears,  and  our  fathers  have 
declared  unto  us,  the  noble  works,  that  thou  didst  in  their 
days,  and  in  the  old  time  before  them. 

O  Lord,  arise,  help  us,  and  deliver  us,  for  thine*'  honour. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  the  ^  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost  : 
as  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be,  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

From  our  enemies  defend  us,  O  Christ, 

Graciously  look  upon  our  afflictions. 

Pitifully  behold  the  dolor  •=  of  our  heart. 

Mercifully  forgive  the  sins  of  thy  people. 

Favourably  with  mercy  hear  our  prayers. 

O  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Both  now  and  ever  vouchsafe  to  hear  us,  O  Christ 

Graciously  hear  us,  O  Christ. 

Graciously  hear  us,  O  Lord  Christ. 


Second  Edw.  VI,  1552. 
(§397-).  Let  us  pray. 
O  God  merciful  Father,  &c. 
0  Lord,  arise,  help  us,  &'c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549-] 
(§  398.)  Let  US  pray. 
We  humbly  beseech  thee,  &c. 
Almighty  God,  which  hast,  &c. 

[Same  as  J549.] 
399.    Then  shall  be  said  also  this 
that  folloiveth. 
Almighty  God,  which  by,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

(§  397-)  Let  us  pray. 
O  God  merciful  Father,  &c 
O  Lord,  arise,  help  us,  Sr^- 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

(§  398. )  Let  us  pray. 
We  humbly  beseech  thee,  &c. 
Almighty  God,  which  hast,  &c 

§  399'    Then  shall  be  said  also  this 
that  followeth. 
Almighty  God,  which  by,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


»  In  the  Sealed  Book,  "  may  "  inserted 
vith  a  pen  before  "  be." 

y  In  one  ed  ,  1552,  "  to  thee." 

'  In  one  ed.,  1552,  and  in  1662,  "Jesus." 

•  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "thy,"  in  the  other. 


and  eds.  issg^nd  1662,  "thine  honour." 
••  In  ed.  1552,  and  after,  "  and  to  the." 
'  In  eds.  1552  and  1559,    "  the  sorrows 

of  our  heart ;"  in  ed.  1662,  "  the  sorrows 

of  our  hearts." 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons. 


427 


%  The  Verside.  O  Lord,  let  thy  mercy  be  shewed  upon  us. 
The  Aiiswer.  As  we  do  put  our  trust  in  thee. 

(§398.)  t  Let  us  pray  <i. 
We  humbly  beseech  thee,  O  Father,  mercifully  to  look 
upon  our  infirmities,  and  for  the  glory  of  thy  name's  sake  *, 
turn  from  us  all  those  evils,  that  we  most  righteously  have 
deserved :  And  grant  that  in  all  our  troubles  we  may  put  our 
whole  trust  and  confidence  in  thy  mercy,  and  evermore  serve 
thee,  in  ^  pureness  of  living,  to  thy  honour  and  glory,  through 
our  only  mediator  and  advocate  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 

Almighty  God,  which  hast  given  us  grace  at  this  time  with 
one  accord  to  make  our  supplications  s  unto  thee,  and  dost 
promise,  that  when  two  or  three  be  gathered  in  thy  name, 
thou  wilt  grant  their  requests :  fulfil  now,  O  Lord,  the  desires 
and  petitions  of  thy  servants,  as  may  be  most  expedient  for 
them,  granting  us  in  this  world  knowledge  of  thy  truth,  and  in 
the  world  to  come  life  everlasting.     Amen. 

(§399-) 
Almighty  God,  which  by  thy  ^  divine  providence  hast  ap- 
pointed diverse '  Orders  of  ministers  in  the  J  church,  and  didst 
inspire  thine  holy''  Apostles  to  choose  unto  this'  Order  of 
Deacons  thy"*  first  Martyr  saint  Stephin,  with  other"  :  merci- 
fully behold  these  thy  servants,  now  called  to  the  like  Office 

[Continued  on  next  page.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

(§  397- )  Let  us  pray. 
O  God,  merciful  Father,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
0  Lord,  arise,  help  us,  &>c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost ; 

Ans^ver.  As  it  was  in  the  begin- 
ning, is  now,  and  ever  shall  be  : 
world  without  end.     Amen. 

From  our  enemies  defend,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

Priest,  O  Lord,  let  thy  mercy 
be  shewed  upon  us  ; 


^  In  the  Sealed  Book,  1662,  the  words, 
"  Let  us  pray,"  are  written  in  with  a  pen. 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "  thy  name." 

'  In  ed.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "in  holi- 
ness and  pureness  ot  living." 

K  In  eds.  1552  and  1559,  "our  common 
supplications." 


Answer.  As  we  do  put  our  trust 
in  thee. 

(§  398.)  Let  us  pray. 
We  humbly  beseech  thee,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

[The  prayer,  "Almighty  God,  which  hast 

given,"  is  omitted  in  this  edition.] 

§  399-  T  Then  shall  be  sung  or  said 
the  Service  for  the  Covumotion, 
with  the  Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gos- 
pel, as  followeth. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  who  by  thy  Di- 
vine Providence,  &c, 

[Same  as  1549.] 


^  In  ed.  1559,  inispr.  "the." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  divers." 

J  In  ed.  1662,  "thy." 

I*  In  ed.  1662,  "  thine  Apostles." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "into  the  Order." 

""  In  eds.  1552,  and  after,  "the  furst." 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "others." 


428 


The  Form  and  Manner,  &c.  1550. 


and  ministration  ° ;  replenish  them  so  with  the  truth  of  thy 
doctrine,  and  p  innocency  of  life,  that,  both  by  word  and  good 
example,  they  may  faithfully  serve  thee  in  this  Office,  to  the 
glory  of  thy  name,  and  profit  of  the  congregation  **,  through 
the  merits  of  our  Saviour  Jesu''  Christ,  who  liveth  and  reign- 
eth  with  thee,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  *  ever.    Amen. 

§  400.    Then  shall  be  sung  or  said,  the  Communwn  of  the  day,  saving  the 
Epistle  shall  be  read  out  of  Timothy,  as  followcth. 

Likewise  must  the  ministers  be  honest,  not  double- 
tongued,  nor  given  unto  much  wine,  neither  greedy  of  filthy 
lucre,  but  holding  the  mystery  of  the  faith  with  a  pure 
conscience.  And  let  them  first  be  proved ;  and  then  let 
them  minister  so  that  no  man  be  able  to  reprove  them. 
Even  so  must  their  wives  be  honest,  not  evil  speakers,  but 
sober,  and  faithfiil  in  all  things.  Let  the  Deacons  be  the 
husbands  of  one  wife,  and  such  as  rule  their  children  well, 
and  their  own  households.  For  they  that  minister  well  get 
themselves  a  good  degree,  and  a  great  liberty  in  the  faith 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesu.  These  things  write  I  unto  thee  trust- 
ing to  come  shortly  unto  thee ;  but,  and  if  I  tarry  long,  that 
then  thou  mayest  yet  have  knowledge  how  thou  oughtest  to 
behave  thyself  in  the  house  of  God,  which  is  the  congregation 
of  the  living  God,  the  pillar  and  ground  of  truth.  And  with- 
out doubt  great  is  that  mystery  of  godliness.  God  was  shewed 
in  the  flesh,  was  justified  in  the  spirit,  was  seen  among  the 
angels,  was  preached  unto  the  Gentiles,  was  believed  on  in 
the  world,  and  received  up  in  glory. 

§  401.   Or  else  this,  out  of  the  sixth  of  the  Acts. 

Then  the  twelve  called  the  multitude  of  the  disciples  toge- 
ther, and  said,  It  is  not  meet  that  we  should  leave  the  Word 
of  God,  and  serve  tables.     Wherefore,  brethren,  look  ye  out 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  400.    Thett  shall  be  sung  or  said, 

cr'c. 

Likewise  must  the  ministers,  &c 

§  401.   Or  else  this,  out  of,  St'c. 

Then  the  twelve  called,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549] 

§  402.  And  before  the  Gospel,  Ss'c. 
[Same  as  1549O 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  400.    Then  shall  be  sung  or  saiii. 

Likewise  must  the  ministers,  &c. 
§  401.   Or  else  this,  out  of,  t^c. 

Then  the  twelve  called,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 
§  402.  And  before  the  Gospel,  &*c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


°  In  eds.  1552,  and  afterwards,  "  admi- 
nistration." 

p  In  ed.  1662,  "adorn  them  with  in- 
nocency." 


4  In  ed.  1663,  "  and  the  edification  of 
thy  church." 

■■  In  ed   1662,  "Jesus." 
•  Ined.  1662,  "for  ever." 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons. 


429 


among  you  seven  men  of  honest  report,  and  full  of  the  holy- 
Ghost  and  wisdom,  to  whom  we  may  commit  this  business. 
But  we  will  give  ourselves  continually  to  prayer,  and  to  the 
administration  of  the  Word.  And  that  saying  pleased  the 
whole  multitude.  And  they  chose  Stephen,  a  man  full  of 
faith,  and  full  of  the  holy  Ghost,  and  Philip,  and  Prochorus, 
and  Nicanor,  and  Timon,  and  Permenas,  and  Nicolas  a  con- 
vert of  Antioch  ;  these  they  set  before  the  Apostles ;  and, 
when  they  had  prayed,  they  laid  their  hands  on  them.  And 
the  Word  of  God  increased,  and  the  number  of  the  disciples 
multiplied  in  Jerusalem  greatly,  and  a  great  company  of  the 
Priests  were  obedient  unto  the  faith. 

§  402.  "IF  And  before  the  Gospel,  the  Bishop  sitting  in  a  Chair,  shall  cause 
the  Oath  of  the  King's^  Supremacy,  and^  against  the  usurped  power 
and  authority  of  the  Bishop  ofRome^,  to  be  ministered  unto  every  of  them, 
that  are  to  be  ordered. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Epistle. 

Likewise  must  the  Deacons  be 
...        grave,    not    double 

iTim.m.8.  tojjgued,  not  given 
to  much  wine,  not  greedy  of  filthy 
lucre,  holding  the  mystery  of  the 
faith  in  a  pure  conscience.  And 
let  these  also  first  be  proved  ;  then 
let  them  use  the  Office  of  a  Deacon, 
being  found  blameless.  Even  so 
must  their  wives  be  grave,  not 
slanderers,  sober,  faithful  in  all 
things.  Let  the  Deacons  be  ^  hus- 
bands of  one  wife,  ruling  their  chil- 
dren and  their  own  houses  well. 
For  they  that  have  used  the  Office 
of  a  Deacon  well,  purchase  to  them- 
selves a  good  degree,  and  great 
boldness  in  the  faith  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus. 

§  401.   Or  else  this,  out  of  the  sixth 
of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
Then  the  twelve  called  the  mul- 
titude   of   the   disci- 
ples unto  them,  and 
said,    It    is    not    reason    that  we 
should  leave  the  Word  of  God,  and 


Acts  vi.  a. 


serve  tables.  Wherefore,  brethren, 
look  ye  out  among  you  seven  men 
of  honest  report,  full  of  the  holy 
Ghost  and  wisdom,  whom  we  may 
appoint  over  this  business.  But  we 
will  give  ourselves  continually  to 
prayer,  and  to  the  ministry  of  the 
Word.  And  the  saying  pleased  the 
whole  multitude.  And  they  chose 
Steven,  a  man  full  of  faith,  and  of 
the  holy  Ghost,  and  Philip,  and 
Prochorus,  and  Nicanor,  and  Timon, 
and  Parmenas,  and  Nicolas  a  pro- 
selyte of  Antioch  ;  whom  they  set 
before  the  Apostles  ;  and,  when 
they  had  prayed,  they  laid  their 
hands  on  them.  And  the  Word  of 
God  increased,  and  the  number  of 
the  disciples  multiplied  in  Jeru- 
salem greatly,  and  a  great  company 
of  the  Priests  were  obedient  to  the 
faith. 

§  402.  ^  And  before  the  Gospel,  the 
Bishop,  sitting  in  his  chair,  shall 
cause  the  Oath  of  the  JCittg's  Su- 
premacy, and  against  the  power 
and  authority  of  all  foreign  Po- 
tentates, to  be  ministred  unto  every 
one  of  them  that  are  to  be  Ordered. 


'  In  ed.  1559,  "Queen's." 

>■  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  and"  ojnitied. 

'  In  ed.  i$S9> ' '  <^<^  against  the  power  and 


authority  of  all  foreign  potentates  to  be." 
y  In    the   Sealed    Book,    1662,    "the" 
marked  through  with  a  pen. 


43° 


The  Form  and  Manner,  &c.  1550. 


§  403.  ^  The  Oath  of  the  King's  Supremacy. 

I  FROM  henceforth  shall  utterly  renounce,  refuse,  relinquish, 
and  forsake  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  and  his  authority,  power, 
and  jurisdiction.  And  I  shall  never  consent  nor  agree,  that 
the  bishop  of  Rome  shall  practise,  exercise,  or  have,  any  man- 
ner of  authority,  jurisdiction,  or  power  within  this  realm,  or 
any  other  the  king's  dominions,  but  shall  resist  the  same  at  all 
times,  to  the  uttermost  of  my  power.  And  I  from  henceforth 
will  accept,  repute,  and  take  the  King's  Majesty  to  be  the 
only  supreme  head  in  earth,  of  the  church  of  England  :  And 
to  my  cunning,  wit,  and  uttermost  of  my  power,  without 
guile,  fraud,  or  other  undue  mean,  I  will  observe,  keep,  main- 
tain and  defend,  the  whole  effects  and  contents  of  all  and 
singular  acts  and  statutes  made,  and  to  be  made  within  this 
realm,  in  derogation,  extirpation,  and  extinguishment  of  the 
Bishop'  of  Rome,  and  his  authority,  and  all  other  acts  and 
statutes,  made  or  to  be  made,  in  reformation "  and  corrobora- 
tion of  the  King's  power,  of  the  supreme  head  in  earth,  of  the 


1 


Second  Edw,  VI.   1552. 

§  403.  IT  The  Oath  of  the  King's 

Supremacy. 

I  FROM  henceforth,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

as  vain  and  annihilate  :  so  help  me 
God  through  Jesus  Christ 

§  404.    Then  shall  the  Bishop,  Sfe. 
Do  you  trust  that,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549-] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  403.     The  Oath  of  the  Queen's 
Sovereignty. 

I,  A.  B.  do  utterly  testify  and 
declare  in  my  conscience,  that  the 
Queen's''  highness  is  the  only  su- 
preme governor  of  this  realm,  and 
of  all  other  her'  highness's  domi- 
nions and  countries,  as  well  in  all 
spiritual  or  ecclesiastical  things  or 
causes,  as  temporal  :  and  that  no 
foreign  prince,  person,  prelate,  state, 


or  potentate,  hath  or  ought  to  have 
any  jurisdiction,  power,  superiority, 
preeminence,  or  authority,  eccle- 
siastical or  spiritual,  within  this 
realm.  And  therefore  I  do  utterly 
renounce  and  forsake  all  foreign 
jurisdictions,  powers,  superiorities, 
and  authorities  ;  and  do  promise 
that  from  henceforth  I  shall  bear 
faith  and  true  allegiance  to  the 
Queen's  ••  highness,  her  *  heirs,  and 
lawful  successors,  and  to  my  power 
shall  assist  and  defend  all  jurisdic- 
tions, privileges,  preeminences,  and 
authorities  granted  or  belonging  to 
the  Queen's ''  highness,  her*  heirs 
and  successors,  or  united  and  an- 
nexed to  the  imperial  crown  of  this 
realm  ;  so  help  me  God,  and  the 
contents  of  this  book. 

§  404.  Then  shall  the  Bishop  examine. 

Do  you  trust  that  you,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


•  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  B.  of  Rome." 

•  In  eds.  1552,  "  in  confirmation." 


•>  In  ed.  1662,  "  King's." 
■^  In  ed.  1662,  "his." 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons. 


431 


church  of  England  :  and  this  I  will  do  ^  against  all  manner  of 
persons,  of  what  estate,  dignity  or  degree,  or  condition  they 
be,  and  in  no  wise  do  nor  attempt,  nor  to  my  power  suffer  to 
be  done  or  attempted,  directly,  or  indirectly,  any  thing  or 
things,  privily  or  apertly,  to  the  let,  hinderance,  damage,  or  de- 
rogation thereof,  or  any  part  thereof,  by  any  manner  of  means, 
or  for  any  manner  of  pretence.  And  in  case  any  other «  be 
made,  or  hath  been  made,  by  me,  to  any  person  or  persons, 
in  maintenance,  defence,  or  favour  of  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  or 
his  authority,  jurisdiction,  or  power,  I  repute  the  same  as 
vain  and  annihilate,  so  help  me  GOD,  all  saints  and  the 
holy  Evangelist. 

§  404.    Then  shall  the  Bishop  examine  every  one  of  them,  that  are  to  be 
ordered,  in  the  presettce  of  the  people,  after  this  manner  follozuing. 

Do  you  trust  that  you  are  inwardly  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  take  upon  you  this  Office  and  ministration,  to  serve 
GOD,  for  the  promoting  of  his  glory,  and  the  edifying  of  his 
people  ? 

Answer.  I  trust  so. 

The  Bishop.  Do  ye  think,  that  ye  truly  be  '  called,  accord- 
ing to  the  will  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  due  order  of 
this  realm  to  the  ministry  of  the  church  ? 

Answer.    1  think  so. 

The  Bishop.  Do  ye  s  unfeignedly  believe  all  the  Canonical 
scriptures,  of  the  old  and  new  Testament  ? 

Answer.    I  do  believe  ^. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  diligently  read  the  same  unto  the 
people  assembled  in  the  church  where  you  shall  be  appointed 
to  serve  ? 

Answer.    I  will. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
§  403.    The  Oath  of  the  King's  Sove- 
reignty. 

I  A.  B.  do  utterly,  &c. 
[Same  as  1559.] 


§  404.     IT  Then  shall  the  Bishop, 

Do  you  trust  that  you,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


^  In  one  ed.,  iss'z,  "will  I  do." 

»  In  eds.  1552  and  1559,  "  oath"  (othe). 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  Do  you  think  that  you 


are  truly  called." 
s  In  ed.  1662,  "you." 
•"  In  ed.  1662,  "  believe  them.' 


432 


The  Form  and  Manner,  &c.  1550. 


The  Bishop.  It  pertaineth  to  the  office  of  a  Deacon  *  to 
assist  the  Priest  in  divine  service,  and  specially  when  he  mi- 
nistereth  the  holy  Communion,  and  help  hira  in  the  distribu- 
tion thereof,  and  to  read  holy  scriptures  and  Homilies  in  the 
congregation,  and  instruct''  the  youth  in  the  Catechism,  and 
also  to  baptize  and  preach  if  he  be  commanded  by  the 
Bishop  I 

And  furthermore,  it  is  his  office  "*  to  search  for  the  sick, 
poor,  and  impotent  people  of  the  parish,  and"  to  intimate 
their  estates,  names,  and  places  where  they  dwell  to  °  the 
Curate,  that  by  his  exhortation  they  may  be  relieved  by  the 
parish  or  other  convenient  alms  p  :  will  you  do  this  gladly  and 
willingly  ? 

Answer.   I  will  so  do  by  the  help  of  God. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  apply  all  your  diligence  to  frame 
and  fashion  your  own  lives,  and  the  lives  of  all  your  family  \ 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

The  Bishop.  It  pertaineth  to  the 
office  of  a  Deacon  in  the  Church 
where  he  shall  be  appointed,  to 
assist  the  Priest  in  divine  service, 
and  specially  when  he  ministereth 
the  holy  Communion,  and  to  help 
him  in  distribution  thereof,  and  to 
read  holy  scriptures  and  Homilies 
in  the  congregation,  and  to  instruct 
the  youth  in  the  Catechism,  to  bap- 
tize and  to  preach  if  he  be  admitted 
thereto  by  the  Bishop.  And  fur- 
thermore, it  is  his  office,  where  pro- 
vision is  so  made,  to  search  for  the 
sick,  poor,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1549.] 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  apply,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  iS49-l 

§  405.    Then  the  Bishop  laying  his 


'  In  ed.  1559,  "Deacon,  In  the  church 
where  he  shall  be  appointed,  to  assist." 

*  In  ed.  ISS9,  "to  instruct." 

'  In  ed.  I5S9,  "  to  Baptize,  and  to 
preach  if  he  be  admitted  thereto  by  the 
Bishop." 


Take  thou  authority,  &c 
[Same  as  1549-] 

§  406.    Then  shall  the  Bishop  de- 
liver, Sr'c. 

Take  thou  authority,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

The  Bishop.  It  pertaineth  to  the 
office,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  apply,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  i549'] 

§  405.    Then  the  Bishop,  ^'c. 
%  406,    Then  shall  the  Bishop,  &=€. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


•"  In  ed.  1559.  "office,  where  provision 
is  so  made." 

»  In  ed.  1662,  "and"  omitted. 

"  In  ed.  1662,  "unto." 

P  In  ed.  1662,  "  reheved  with  the  alms 
of  the  Parishioners,  or  others." 

1  In  ed.  1663,  "  lives  of  your  families." 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons, 


433 


according  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  to  make  both  your- 
selves and  them,  as  much  as  in  you  lieth,  wholesome  examples 
of  the  flock  of  Christ  ? 

Answer.    I  will  so  do,  the  Lord  being  my  helper. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  reverently  obey  your  ordinary  and 
other  chief  Ministers  of  the  Church,  and  them  to  whom  the 
government  and  charge  is  committed  over  you"",  folloAving 
with  a  glad  mind  and  will  their  godly  admonitions  ? 

Answer.  I  will  thus^  endeavour  myself,  the  Lord  being 
my  helper. 

§  405.   IT  Then  the  Bishop  laying  his  hands  severally  upon  the  head  of  every 
one '  of  them,  shall  say. 

Take  thou  authority  to  execute  the  office  of  a  Deacon  in 
the  Church  of  God  committed  unto  thee :  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  '^.     Amen. 

§  406.    Then  shall  the  Bishop  deliver  to  every  one  of  them  the  new  Testament, 

saying. 

Take  thou  authority  to  read  the  Gospel  in  the  Church  of 
God,  and  to  preach  the  same,  if  thou  be  thereunto  ordinarily 
commanded. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
The  Bishop. 
It  appertaineth  to  the  Office  of 
a  Deacon,  in  the  Church  where  he 
shall  be  appointed  to  serve,  to 
assist  the  Priest  in  Divine  Service, 
and  specially  when  he  ministereth 
the  holy  Communion,  and  to  help 
him  in  the  distribution  thereof,  and 
to  read  holy  Scriptures  and  Homi- 
lies in  the  Church  ;  and  to  instruct 
the  youth  in  the  Catechism  ;  in  the 
absence  of  the  Priest  to  baptize  in- 
fants, and  to  preach,  if  he  be  ad- 
mitted thereto  by  the  Bishop.  And 
furthermore,  it  is  his  Office,  where 
provision  is  so  made,  to  search  for 
the  sick,  poor,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1549.] 


The  Bishop.  Will  you  apply,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

§  405.  IF  Then  the  Bishop  laying  his 
Hands  severally  upon  the  Head  of 
every  one  of  them,  humbly  kneel- 
ing  before  him,  shall  say. 

Take  thou  Authority,  &c.- 

§406.  \  Then  shall  the  Bishop,  Qf'c. 

Take  thou  Authority,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

if  thou  be  thereto  licensed  by  the 
Bishop  himself. 


'  In  ed.   1662,   "to  whom   the    charge 
and  government  over  you  is  committed." 
•  In  ed.  1662,  "  thus"  omitted. 


'  Ineds.  I552andis59,  "every  of  them." 
"  In  ed.  1662,  "and  of  the  Son,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost." 


Ff 


434 


The  Form  and  Manner,  &c.  1550. 


§  407.  TJien  one  of  them,  appointed  by  the  Bishop,  putting  on  a  tunicle,  shall 
read  the  Gospel  of  that  day. 

§  408.  Then  shall  the  Bishop  proceed  to  the  Communion,  and  all  that  be"*- 
ordered,  shall  tarry  and  receive  the  holy  communion  the  same  day  with  the 
Bishop. 

§  409.  TVie  Communion  ended,  after  the  last  collect  and  immediately  before 
the  benediction,  shall  be  said  this  Collect  folloming. 

Almighty  God,  giver  of  all  good  things,  which  y  of  thy 
great  goodness  hast  vouchsafed  to  accept  and  take  these  thy 
servants  unto  the  office  of  Deacons  in  thy  church  :  make 
them,  we  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  to  be  modest,  humble,  and 
constant  in  their  ministration,  and '  to  have  a  ready  will  to 
observe  all  spiritual  discipline,  that  they  having  always  the 
testimony  of  a  good  conscience,  and  continuing  ever  stable 
and  strong  in  thy  Son  Christ,  may  so  well  use  ■  themselves 
in  this  inferior  office,  that  they  may  be  found  worthy  to  be 
called  unto  the  higher  ministries  in  thy  Church,  through  the 
same  thy  Son  our  Saviour  Christ'',  to  whom  be  glory  and 
honour  world  without  end.     Amen. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

I  407.  Then  one  of  them  appointed 
by  the  Bishop,  shall  read  the  Gos- 
pel of  that  day. 

i  408.  Then  shall  the  Bishop  pro- 
ceed, &'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

i  409.    The  Communion  ended,  &'c. 

Almighty  God,  giver  of,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

1410.  T  And  here  it  must  be  shewed, 
6fc. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

i  407.   Then  one  of  them,  ^c, 
[Same  as  1553.] 


§  408.    Then  shall  tJu  Bishop,  d-r. 

§  409.   The  Communion  ended,  ^c. 

Almighty  God,  giver  of,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 

§  410.  And  here  it  must  be  shewed^ 
6r>c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§407.  %  Then  one  of  them,  appointed 
by  the  Bishop,  shall  read 

The  Gospel. 

„.  T  t     "        Let    your    loins   be 

St.  Luke  xu.  SS-      •  J    J        1       .  1 

"    girded     about,     and 

your  lights  burning ;  and  ye  your- 
selves like  unto  men  that  wait  for 
their  Lord,   when   he  will  return 


■  In  e4  i66a,  "  are." 
y  In  ed.  1662,  "  who." 

■  In  eds.  1552,   and  all  after. 


'and' 


omitted. 
•  In  ed.  1662,  "behave." 
I"  In  ed.  1662,  "  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ' 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons, 


435 


i  410.  H  And  here  it  must  be  shewed  unto  the  Deacon,  that  he  must  continue 
in  that  office  of  a  Deacon  the  space  of  a"^  whole  year  at  the  least  (except  Jor 
reasonable  causes  it  be  otherwise  seen  to  his  ordinary)  to  the  intent  he  mnv 
be  perfect,  and  ivell  expert  in  the  things  appertaining  to  the  Ecclesiastical 
administratio7i,  in  executing-  whereof  if  he  be  found  faithful  and  diligent, 
he  may  be  admitted  by  his  diocesan  to  the  order  of  Priesthood. 


from  the  wedding  ;  that,  «hen  he 
Cometh  and  knocketli,  they  may 
open  unto  him  immediately.  Blessed 
are  those  servants,  whom  the  Lord 
when  he  cometh  shall  find  watch- 
ing. Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  he 
shall  gird  himself,  and  make  them 
to  sit  down  to  meat,  and  will  come 
forth  and  serve  them.  And  if  he 
shall  come  in  the  second  watch,  or 
come  in  the  third  watch,  and  find 
them  so,  blessed  are  those  servants. 

§  408.   ^  The7i  shall  the  Bishop  pro- 
ceed in  the  Communion,  tc^c. 
[Same  as  1549. 1 

§  409.  %  The  Communion  ended, 
after  the  last  Colled,  and  imme- 
diately before  the  benediction,  shall 
be  said  these  Collects  following. 

Almighty  God,  giver,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549. J 

Prevext  us,  O  Lord,  in  all  our 
doings  with  thy  most  gracious  fa- 
vour, and  further  us  with  thy  con- 
tinual help  ;  that  in  all  our  works 
begun,  continued,  and  ended  in 
thee,  we  may  glorify  thy  holy  Name, 
and  finally  by  thy  mercy  obtain  ever- 


lasting  life ;    through  Jesus   Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 

The  peace  of  God,  which  pass- 
eth  all  understanding,  keep  your 
hearts  and  minds  in  the  knowledge 
and  love  of  God,  and  of  his  Son 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  :  And  the 
Blessing  of  God  Almighty,  the  P\a- 
ther,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
be  amongst  you,  and  remain  with 
you  always.     Amen. 

§  410.  ^  And  here  it  must  be  declared 
unto  the  Deacon,  that  he  must 
continue  in  that  Office  of  a  Deacon 
the  space  of  a  whole  year  (except 
for  7-easonable  causes  it  shall  other- 
wise seem  good  unto  the  Bishop)  to 
the  intent  he  may  be  perfect,  and 
well  expert  in  the  things  apper- 
taining to  the  Ecclesiastical  Ad- 
ministration. In  executing  where- 
of if  he  be  found  faithful  and  dili- 
gent, he  may  be  admitted  by  his 
Dio'esan  to  the  Order  of  Priest- 
hood, at  the  times  appoittted  in  the 
Canon ;  or  else,  on  urgent  occa- 
sion, upon  some  other  Sunday,  or 
Holy-day,  in  theface  of  the  Church, 
in  such  matiner  aitdfortn  as  here- 
after followet  A. 


In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  an  whole." 


436 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c  1550. 


THE  FORM 
OF 

ORDERING    OF    PRIESTS. 

§  41 1.    When  the  exhortation  is  ended,  then  shall  be  sung,  for  the  Introit  to 

the  Communion,  this  Psalm. 

Expectans  expectavi  Dominum.     Psalm  xl. 

§  412.   Or  else  this  Psalm. 
Memento  Domine  David.     Psalm  cxxxii. 

§  413.   Or  else  this  Psalm. 

Laudate  nomen  Domini.     Psalm  cxxxv. 

§  414.    Then  shall  be  read  for  the  Epistle  this  out  oftlie  xx.  Chapter  of  the 

Acts  of  the  Apostles. 

From  Mileto  Paul  sent  messengers  to  Ephesus,  and  called 
the  elders  of  the  congregation,  which  when  they  were  come  to 
him,  he  said  unto  them,  Ye  know,  that  from  the  first  day  that 
I  came  into  Asia,  after  what  manner  I  have  been  with  you  at 
all  seasons,  serving  the  Lord  with  all  humbleness  of  mind, 
and  with  many  tears  and  temptations  which  happened  unto 
me  by  the  layings  await  of  the  Jews ;  because  I  would  keep 
back  nothing  that  was  profitable  unto  you,  but  to  shew  you, 
and  teach  you  openly  throughout  every  house  :  witnessing 
both  to  the  Jews,  and  also  to  the  Greeks,  the  repentance  that 
is  towards  God,  and  the  faith  which  is  toward  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  And  now  behold,  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit  unto  Jeru- 
salem, not  knowing  the  things  that  shall  come  on  me  there  ; 
but  that  the  Holy  Ghost  witnesseth  in  every  city,  saying,  that 
bonds  and  trouble  abide  me.  But  none  of  these  things  move 
me,  neither  is  my  life  dear  unto  myself,  that  I  might  fulfil  my 
course  with  joy,  and  the  ministration  of  the  word  which  I  have 


Second  Edw,  VI.  1552. 
If  THE  FORM 

OF 

ORDERING  PRIESTS. 

J  4 1 1 .  When  the  exhortation  is  ended, 

then  shall  follow  the  Communion. 

1 414.  And  for  the  Epistle  shall  be 
read  out  of  the  twentieth  chapter  of 
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  as  fol- 
loweth. 

From  Mileto  Paul,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

1415.  Or  elsethis  third  Chapter,  Sfc. 
This  is  a  true  saying,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.  J 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

THE  FORM   OF   ORDERING  PRIESTS. 
§§  411,  414-    When  the  exhortation, 

[Same  as  1532.] 
From  Mileto  Paul  sent,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  415.    Or  else  this  third  chapter,  ^^c. 
This  is  a  true  saying,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  i66a. 

[In  ed.  1662,  "The  Communion"  (see 
p.  442)  follows  after  the  "Presentation," 
with  which  the  Form  begins,  (see  p.  441. 1] 


The  Ordering  of  Priests.  437 

received  of  the  Lord  Jesu,  to  testify  the  Gospel  of  the  grace  of 
God.  And  now  behold,  I  am  sure  that  henceforth  ye  all, 
through  whom  I  have  gone  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God, 
shall  see  my  face  no  more.  Wherefore  I  take  you  to  record 
this  day,  that  I  am  pure  from  the  blood  of  all  men.  For 
I  have  spared  no  labour,  but  have  shewed  you  all  the  counsel 
of  God.  Take  heed  therefore  unto  yourselves,  and  to  all  the 
flock  amongst  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  you  Over- 
seers, to  rule  the  congregation  of  God,  which  he  hath  pur- 
chased with  his  blood.  For  I  am  sure  of  this,  that  after  my 
departing  shall  grievous  wolves  enter  in  among  you,  not 
sparing  the  flock.  Moreover  of  your  own  selves  shall  men 
arise  speaking  perverse  things,  to  draw  disciples  after  them. 
Therefore  awake  and  remember,  that  by  the  space  of  three 
years,  I  ceased  not  to  warn  every  one  of  you  night  and  day 
with  tears.  And  now,  brethren,  I  commend  you  to  God,  and 
to  the  word  of  his  grace,  which  is  able  to  build  further,  and  to 
give  you  an  inheritance  among  all  them  which  are  sanctified. 
I  have  desired  no  man's  silver,  gold,  or  vesture;  Yea,  you 
know  yourselves,  that  these  hands  have  ministered  unto  my 
necessities,  and  to  them  that  were  with  me.  I  have  shewed 
you  all  things,  how  that  so  labouring  ye  ought  to  receive  the 
weak  ;  and  to  remember  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesu,  how 
that  he  said,  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive. 

§  415.  Or  else  this  third  Chapter  of  the  first  Epistle  to  Timothy. 

This  is  a  true  saying.  If  any  man  desire  the  Office  of 
a  Bishop,  he  desireth  an  honest  work.  A  Bishop  therefore 
must  be  blameless,  the  husband  of  one  wife,  vigilant,  sober, 
discreet,  a  keeper  of  hospitality,  apt  to  teach ;  not  given  to 
overmuch  wine,  no  fighter,  not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre,  but 
gentle,  abhorring  fighting,  abhorring  covetousness ;  one  that 
ruleth  well  his  own  house,  one  that  hath  children  in  subjection 
with  all  reverence.  (For  if  a  man  cannot  rule  his  own  house, 
how  shall  he  care  for  the  congregation  of  God  ?)  He  may  not 
be  a  young  scholar,  lest  he  swell  and  fall  into  the  judgement  of 
the  evil  speaker.  He  must  also  have  a  good  report  of  them 
which  are  without ;  lest  he  fall  into  rebuke  and  snare  of  the 
evil  speaker. 

Likewise  must  the  ministers  be  honest,  not  double-tongued, 
not  given  unto  much  wine,  neither  greedy  of  filthy  lucre  ; 
but  holding  the  mystery  of  the  faith  with  a  pure  conscience ; 
and  let  them  first  be  proved,  and  then  let  them  minister  so 
that  no  man  be  able  to  reprove  them. 


438 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


Even  so  must  their  wives  be  honest ;  not  evil-speakers,  but 
sober  and  faithful  in  all  things.  Let  the  deacons  be  the  hus- 
bands of  one  wife,  and  such  as  rule  their  children  well  and 
their  own  households,  for  they  that  minister  well  get  them- 
selves a  good  degree  and  great  liberty  in  the  faith  which  is 
in  Christ  Jesu. 

These  things  write  I  unto  thee,  trusting  to  come  shortly  unto 
thee,  but,  and  if  I  tarry  long,  that  then  thou  mayest  have  yet 
knowledge  how  thou  oughtest  to  behave  thy  self  in  the  house 
of  God,  which  is  the  congregation  of  the  living  God,  the  Pillar 
and  ground  of  truth.  And  without  doubt,  great  is  that  mystery 
of  Godliness.  God  was  shewed  in  the  flesh,  was  Justified  in 
the  Spirit,  was  seen  among  the  Angels,  was  preached  unto 
the  Gentiles,  was  believed  on  in  the  world,  and  received  up 
in  glory. 

§  416.  After  this  shall  be  read  for  the  Gospel  a  piece  of  the  last  Chapter 
of  Matthew,  as  followeth. 

Jesus  came  and  spake  unto  them,  sajring :  All  power  is  given 
unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Go  ye  therefore  and  teach 
all  nations,  baptizing  them  In  the  name  of  the  father,  and  of 
the  son,  and  of  the  holy  ghost.  Teaching  them  to  observe  all 
tilings,  whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you.  And  lo,  I  am 
with  you  alway,  even  until  the  end  of  the  world. 

§  417.   Or  else  this  that  followeth,  of  the  x.  Chapter  of  John. 

Verilv,  verily  I  say  unto  you.  He  that  entereth  not  in  by  the 
door  into  the  sheep-fold,  but  climbeth  up  some  other  way,  the 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  416.  After  this  shall  be  read,  &'c. 
Jesus  came  and  spake,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§417.  %  Or  else  this  that  follcnveih, 
of  the  X.  Chapter  of  fohn. 

Vkrily,  verily  I  say,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  418.    Or  else  this,  of  the,  dr'c. 
The  same  day  at  night,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  418.  AJler  this  shall  be  read,  d^c. 
Jesus  came  and  spake,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  4 1 7.    Or  else  this  thatfo/lorveth,  ottt 
of  the  tenth  chapter  of  John. 

Verily,  verily  I  say,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  420.   Or  else  this  of  the,  &'c. 
The  same  day  at  night,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


The  Ordering  of  Priests.  439 

same  is  a  thief  and  a  murtherer.  But  he  that  entereth  in  by 
the  door  is  the  Shepherd  of  the  sheep.  To  him  the  porter 
openeth,  and  the  sheep  heareth  his  voice,  and  he  calleth  his 
own  sheep  by  name,  and  leadeth  them  out.  And  when  he 
hath  sent  forth  his  own  sheep  he  goeth  before  them,  and  the 
sheep  follow  him,  for  they  know  his  voice.  A  stranger  will 
they  not  follow,  but  will  flee  from  him ;  for  they  know  not  the 
voice  of  strangers.  This  Proverb  spake  Jesus  unto  them,  but 
they  understood  not  what  things  they  were  which  he  spake 
unto  them.  Then  said  Jesus  unto  them  again,  Verily,  verily 
I  say  unto  you,  I  am  the  door  of  the  sheep.  All  (even  as 
many  as  come  before  me)  are  thieves  and  murtherers :  but  the 
sheep  did  not  hear  them.  I  am  the  door,  by  me  if  any  man 
enter  in,  he  shall  be  safe,  and  go  in  and  out,  and  find  pasture. 
A  thief  cometh  not  but  for  to  steal,  kill,  and  to  destroy.  I  am 
come  that  they  might  have  life,  and  that  they  might  have  it 
more  abundantly.  I  am  the  good  Shepherd  :  a  good  Shepherd 
giveth  his  life  for  the  sheep.  An  hired  servant,  and  he  which 
is  not  the  Shepherd  (neither  the  sheep  are  his  own)  seeth 
the  wolf  coming,  and  leaveth  the  sheep,  and  fleeth,  and  the 
wolf  catcheth  and  scattereth  the  sheep.  The  hired  servant 
fleeth,  because  he  is  an  hired  servant,  and  careth  not  for  the 
sheep.  I  am  the  good  Shepherd  and  know  my  sheep,  and  am 
known  of  mine.  As  my  Father  knoweth  me,  even  so  know 
I  also  my  Father.  And  I  give  my  life  for  the  sheep.  And 
other  sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold.  Them  also 
must  I  bring,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice,  and  there  shall  be 
one  fold,  and  one  Shepherd. 

§418.    07-  else  this,  of  the  xx.  chapter  of  John. 

The  same  day  at  night,  which  was  the  first  day  of  the  Sab- 
boths,  when  the  doors  were  shut  (where  the  disciples  were  as- 
sembled together  for  fear  of  the  Jews)  came  Jesus  and  stood 
in  the  midst,  and  saith  unto  them,  Peace  be  unto  you.  And 
when  he  had  so  said,  he  shewed  unto  them  his  hands  and  his 
side.  Then  were  the  disciples  glad,  when  they  saw  the  Lord. 
Then  said  Jesus  unto  them  again.  Peace  be  unto  you.  As  my 
Father  sent  me,  even  so  send  I  you  also.  And  when  he  had 
said  these  words,  he  breathed  on  them,  and  said  unto  them, 
Receive  ye  the  holy  ghost :  whosesoever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are 
remitted  unto  them  :  and  whosesoever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are 
retained. 


440 


The  Form  and  Manner  of;  &c.  1550. 


§  419.    When  the  Gospel  is  ended,  then  shall  be  said  or  sung. 

Come  Holy  Ghost  eternal  God,  proceeding  from  above, 
Both  from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  the  God  of  peace  and  love  : 
Visit  our  minds,  and  into  us  thy  heavenly  grace  inspire, 
That  in  all  truth  and  Godliness  we  may  have  true  desire. 

Thou  art  the  very  comforter,  in  all  woe  and  distress, 

The  heavenly  gift  of  God  most  high,  which  no  tongue  can 

express. 
The  fountain  and  the  lively  spring  of  joy  celestial, 
The  fire  so  bright,  the  love  so  clear,  and  unction  spiritual. 

Thou  in  thy  gifts  art  manifold,  whereby  Christ's  Church  doth 

stand, 
In  faithful  hearts  writing  thy  ^  law,  the  finger  of  God's  hand  : 
According  to  thy  promise  made,  thou  givest  speech  of  grace. 
That  through  thy  help,  the  praise  of  God  may  sound  in  every 

place. 

O  Holy  Ghost,  into  our  wits  send  down  thy  heavenly  light, 
Kindle  our  hearts  with  fer\'ent  love,  to  serve  God  day  and 

night. 
Strength  and  stablish  all  our  weakness,  so  feeble  and  so  frail, 
That  neither  flesh,  the  world,  nor  devil,  against  us  do  prevail. 

Put  back  our  enemy  far  from  us,  and  grant  us  to  obtain 
Peace  in  our  hearts  with  God  and  man,  without  grudge  or 

disdain. 
And  grant,  O  Lord,  that  thou  being  our  leader  and  our  guide, 
We  may  eschew  the  snares  of  sin,  and  from  thee  never  slide. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

( 419.    When  the  Gospel  is  ended, 
then  shall  be  said  or  sung. 
Come  Holy  Ghost,  eternal,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
i  421.  And  then  the  Archdeacon 
shall  present  unto  the  Bishop  all 
them  that  shall  receive  the  order  of 
Priesthood  that  day.  The  Arch- 
deacon saying. 
Reverend  father  in  God,  &c. 

LSame  as  1549.  ] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  4 1 9.    When  the  Gospel  is  ended,  ^c. 

Come  Holy  Ghost  eternal,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  421,    And  then  the  Archdeacon, 
^c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 

Reverend  Father  in  God,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


■*  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  the  law." 


The  Ordering  of  Priests. 


441 


To  us  such  plenty  Of  thy  grace,  good  Lord,  grant,  we  thee 
pray, 

That  thou  Lord  mayest  be  our  comfort  *,  at  the  last  dreadful 
day. 

Of  all  strife  and  dissension,  O  Lord,  dissolve  the  bands. 

And  make  the  knots  of  peace  and  love  throughout  all  Chris- 
tian lands. 

Grant  us,  O  Lord,  through  thee  to  know  the  Father  most  of 

might, 
That  of  his  dear  beloved  Son  we  may  attain  the  sight : 
And  that  with  perfit  faith  also  we  may  acknowledge  thee, 
The  Spirit  of  them  both,  alway  one  God  in  persons  three. 

Laud  and  praise  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son  equal, 
And  to  the  Holy  Spirit  also,  one  God  coeternal : 
And  pray  we  that  the  only  Son  vouchsafe  his  Spirit  to  send 
To  all  that  do  profess  his  name,  unto  the  world's  end.    Amen. 

§  421.  And  then  the  Archdeacon  shall  present  unto  the  Bishop  all  them  that 
shall  receive  the  order  of  Priesthood  that  day,  every  ofthejn  having  upon 
him  a  plain  Albe:  The  Archdeacon  saying. 

Reverend  father  in  God,  I  present  unto  you  these  persons 
present,  to  be  admitted  to  the  Order  of  Priesthood,  cum  inter- 
rogatione  et  responsione,  ui  in  Ordine  Diaconatus. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

THE 
FORM  AND  MANNER 

OF 

ORDERING  OF  PRIESTS. 

420.  T  When  the  day  appointed  by 
the  Bishop  is  come,  after  Morning 
Prayer  is  ended,  there  shall  be 
a  Sermon  or  Exhortation,  declar- 
ing the  Duty  and  Office  ofstich  as 
come  to  be  admitted  Priests  ;  how 
necessary  that  Order  is  in  the 
Church  of  Christ,  and  also  how 


the  people  ought  to  esteem  them  in 
their  Office. 

§421.  1  First,  the  Archdeacon,  or, 
in  his  absence,  one  appointed  tn 
his  stead,  shall  present  unto  the 
Bishop  {sitting  in  his  chair  near 
to  the  holy  Table)  all  them  tliat 
shall  receive  the  Order  of  Priest- 
hood that  day  (each  of  them  being 
decently  habited, )  and  say. 

Reverend  Father  in  God,  I  pre- 
sent unto  you  these  persons  present, 
to  be  admitted  to  the  Order  of  the 
Priesthood. 


In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  That  thou  mayest  be  our  comforter." 


442 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  Sec.  1550. 


§  423.  And  then  the  Bishop  shall  say  to  the  people. 

Good  people,  these  be'  they  whom  we  purpose,  God  willing, 
to  receive  this  day  unto  the  holy  office  of  Priesthood.  For 
after  due  examination,  we  find  not  the  s  contrary,  but  that 
they  be  lawfully  called  to  their  function  and  ministry,  and 
that  they  be  persons  meet  for  the  same.  But  yet  if  there 
be  any  of  you,  which  •*  knoweth  any  impediment,  or  notable 
crime  in  any  of  them,  for  the  which  he  ought  not  to  be  re- 
ceived to '  this  holy  ministry,  now  in  the  name  of  God  de- 
clare the  same. 


Second  Bdw.  VI.  1552. 
i  423.  And  then  the  Bishop  shall. 

Good  people,  these  be  they,  &c. 

[Same  as  i549>] 
1424.  And  if  any  great  crime,  ^c. 
Almighty  God,  giver,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  423.   And  then  the  Bishop  shall, 
<5r'e. 

Good  people,  these  be  they,  &c 
[Same  as  i549'] 
§424.  And  if  any  great  crime,  dr'c. 
Almighty  God,  giver,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 
§422.    The  Bishop. 

Take  heed  that  the  persons, 
whom  ye  present  unto  us,  be  apt 
and  meet,  for  their  learning  and 
godly  conversation,  to  exercise  their 
Ministry  duly,  to  the  honour  of  God, 
and  the  edifying  of  his  Church. 

\  The  Archdeacon  shall  answer. 

I  HAVE  enquired  of  them,  and 
also  examined  them,  and  think  them 
so  to  be. 


§  423.  *i  Then  the  Bishop  shall  say 
unto  the  people  ; 

Good  people,  these  are  they,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
holy  Ministry,  let  him  come  forth 
in  the  Name  of  God,  and  shew  what 
the  Crime  or  Impediment  is. 
§  424.    %,  And  if  any  great  Crime 
or  Impediment  be  objected,  the  Bi- 
shop shall  surcease  from  Ordering 
that  person,  until  such  time  as  the 
party  accused  shall  be  found  clear 
of  that  Crime. 
§425.  IT  Then  the  Bishop  (commend- 
ing such  as  shall  be  found  meet  to 
be  Ordered  to  the  Prayers  of  the 
congregation)  shall,  with  the  Clergy 
and  people  present,   sing  or  say 
the  Litany,  with  the  Prayers,  as 
is  before  appointed  in  the  Form, 
of  Ordering  Deacons ;  save  only, 
that,  in  the  proper  Suffrage  there 
added,  the  word  [Deacons]  shall 
be  omitted,  and  the  w^^n/ [Priests] 
inserted  instead  of  it. 
§  426.  1"  Then  shall  be  sung  or  said 
the  Service  for  the   Communion, 
with  the  Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gos- 
pel, as  followeth. 

The  Collect. 
Almighty  God,  giver  of,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
world  without  end.     Amen. 


f  In  ed.  1662,  "are." 
E  In  ed.  1662,  "  to  the." 


i"  In  ed.  i66a,  "who." 

'  In  ed.  1553,  and  afterwards,  "into." 


The  OrderinCt  of  Priests. 


443 


§  424.    H  And  if  any  great  crime  or  impediment  be  objected,  &^c.  ut  supra  in 
Ordine  Diaconatus  usque  ad  finem  Litanise  cum  hac  Collecta. 

Almighty  God,  giver  of  all  good  things,  which'*  by  thy 
Holy  Spirit  hast  appointed  diverse  J  orders  of  Ministers  in  thy 
church  :  mercifully  behold  these  thy  servants,  now  called  to 
the  Office  of  Priesthood,  and  replenish  them  so  with  the  truth 
of  thy  doctrine,  and"^  innocency  of  life,  that  both  by  word 
and  good  example  they  may  faithfully  serve  thee  in  this  office, 
to  the  glory  of  thy  name,  and  profit  of  the  congregation  \ 
through  the  merits  of  our  Saviour  Jesu  Christ,  who  liveth 
and  reigneth,  with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  world  without 
end.     Amen. 


The  Epistle.  Ephes.  iv.  7. 
Unto  every  one  of  us  is  given 
grace,  according  to  the  measure  of 
the  gift  of  Christ.  Wherefore  he 
saith,  When  he  ascended  up  on 
high,  he  led  captivity  captive,  and 
gave  gifts  unto  men.  (Now  that 
he  ascended,  what  is  it  tjut  that  he 
also  descended  first  into  the  lower 
parts  of  the  earth  ?  He  that  de- 
scended, is  the  same  also  that  as- 
cended up  far  above  all  heavens, 
that  he  might  fill  all  things. )  And 
he  gave  some  Apostles,  and  some 
Prophets,  and  some  Evangelists, 
and  some  Pastors  and  Teachers  ; 
for  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints,  for 
the  work  of  the  Ministry,  for  the 
edifying  of  the  Body  of  Christ  ;  till 
we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the 
faith,  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Son  of  God,  unto  a  perfect  man, 
unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of 
the  fulness  of  Christ. 

§  427,  Tf  After  this  shall  be  read 
for  the  Gospel  part  of  the  ninth 
Chapter  of  Saint  Matthew,  as 
followeth. 

St.  Matth.  ix.  36. 
When  Jesus  saw  the  multitudes, 
he  was  moved  with  compassion  on 
them,    because    they  fainted,    and 


were  scattered  abroad  as  sheep  hav- 
ing no  shepherd.  Then  saith  he 
unto  his  disciples.  The  harvest  truly 
is  plenteous,  but  the  labourers  are 
few.  Pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord 
(if  the  harvest,  that  he  will  send 
forth  labourers  into  his  harvest. 

§  428.  T  Or  else  this  that  followeth, 
out  of  the  tenth  Chapter  of  Saint 
John™, 

St.  John  X.  I. 
Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you, 
He  that  entreth  not  by  the  door 
into  the  sheep-fold,  but  climbeth 
up  some  other  way,  the  same  is 
a  thief  and  a  robber.  But  he  that 
entereth  in  by  the  door  is  the  Shep- 
herd of  the  sheep.  To  him  the 
porter  openeth,  and  the  sheep  hear 
his  voice  ;  and  he  calleth  his  own 
sheep  by  name,  and  leadeth  them 
out.  And  when  he  putteth  forth 
his  own  sheep  he  goeth  before  them, 
and  the  sheep  follow  him  ;  for  they 
know  his  voice.  And  a  stranger 
will  they  not  follow,  but  will  flee 
from  him  ;  for  they  know  not  the 
voice  of  strangers.  This  parable 
spake  Jesus  unto  them,  but  they 
understood  not  what  things  they 
were  which  he  spake  unto  them. 
Then  said  Jesus  unto  them  again. 
Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  1  am 


i  In  ed.  1662,  "  divers  orders  of  Minis- 
ters in  the." 

k  In  ed.  1662,  "and  adorn  them 
with." 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "and  the  edification  of 
thy  church." 

"■  This  is  given  in  the  previous  editions 
as  one  of  the  Gospels  in  the  Communion 
Service. 


444 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


§  429.  IT  Then  the  Bishop  shall  minister  unto  every  of  them  the  oath,  concern- 
ing the  King's^  Supretnacy,  as  it  is  set  out  in  the  Order  of  Dtacons, 
(§  430- )  -(^w?  that  done,  he  shall  say  utito  them,  which  are  appointed  to 
receive  the  said  Office,  as  hereajter  follarweth. 

You  have  heard,  brethren,  as  well  in  your  private  ex- 
amination, as  in  the  exhortation,  and  in  the  holy  lessons 
taken  out  of  the  Gospel,  and  of  the  writings  of  the  Apostles, 
of  what  dignity,  and  of  how  great  importance  this  office  is, 
(whereunto  ye  be  called).  And  now  we  exhort  you,  in  the 
name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  have  in  remembrance, 
into  how  high  a  dignity,  and  to  how  chargeable  an  office  ye 
be  called,  that  is  to  say,  to  be  the  Messengers,  the  Watchmen, 
the  Pastors,  and  the  Stewards  of  the  Lord,  to  teach,  to  pre- 
monish,  to  feed,  and  provide  for  the  Lord's  family:  to  seek 
for  Christ's  Sheep,  that  be  dispersed  abroad,  and  for  his 
children,  which  be  in  the  midst  of  this  naughty  world,  to 
be  saved  through  Christ  for  ever.  Have  always  therefore 
printed  in  your  remembrance,  how  great  a  treasure  is  com- 
mitted to  your  charge  :  for  they  be  the  Sheep  of  Christ, 
which  he  bought  with  his  death,  and  for  whom  he  shed  his 
blood.     The  Church  and  congregation,  whom  you  must  ser\e, 


Second  Edward  VI.  1552. 
§  429.    Then  the  Bishop  shall  mi- 
nister, &*c. 

You  have  heard,  brethren,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  429.    Then  tlu   Bishop  shall  mi- 
nister, &'c. 

You  have  heard,  Brethren,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

[Continued  from  previous  page.] 
the  door  of  the  sheep.  All  that 
ever  came  before  me  are  thieves 
and  robbers  ;  but  the  sheep  did  not 
hear  them.  I  am  the  door  ;  by  me 
if  any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be 
saved,  and  shall  go  in  and  out,  and 
find  pasture.     The  thief  cometh  not 


but  for  to  steal,  and  to  kill,  and  to 
destroy  :  I  am  come  that  they  might 
have  life,  and  that  they  might  have 
it  more  abundantly.  I  am  the  good 
Shepherd  :  the  good  Shepherd  giv- 
eth  his  life  for  the  sheep.  But  he 
that  is  an  hireling,  and  not  the 
Shepherd,  whose  own  the  sheep 
are  not,  seeth  the  wolf  coming,  and 
leaveth  the  sheep,  and  fleeth  ;  and 
the  wolf  catcheth  them,  and  scat- 
tereth  the  sheep.  The  hireling 
fleeth,  because  he  is  an  hireling, 
and  careth  not  for  the  sheep.  1  am 
the  good  Shepherd,  and  know  my 
sheep,  and  am  known  of  mine.  As 
the  Father  knoweth  me,  even  so 
know  I  the  Father  ;  and  I  lay  down 
my  life  for  the  sheep.  And  other 
sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  this 
fold  :  them  also  I  must  bring,  and 
they  shall  hear  my  voice  ;  and  there 
shall  be  one  fold,  and  one  Shep- 
herd. 


■  In  cd.  X559,  "Queen's." 


The  Ordering  of  Priests. 


445 


is  his  spouse  and  his  body.  And  if  it  shall  chance  the  same 
Church,  or  any  member  thereof,  to  take  any  hurt  or  hinder- 
ance  by  reason  of  your  negligence,  ye  know  the  greatness 
of  the  fault,  and  also  of  the  horrible  punishment  which  will 
ensue.  Wherefore,  consider  witli  yourselves  the  end  of  your 
ministry,  towards  the  children  of  God,  toward  the  spouse 
and  body  of  Christ,  and  see  that  ye  never  cease  your 
labour,  your  care  and  diligence,  until  you  have  done  all  that 
lieth  in  you,  according  to  your  bounden  duty,  to  bring  all 
such  as  are,  or  shall  be  committed  to  your  charge,  unto 
that  agreement  in  faith,  and  knowledge  of  God,  and  to  that 
ripeness,  and  perfectness  of  age  in  Christ,  that  there  be  no 
place  left  among  them",  either  for  error  in  religion,  or  for 
viciousness  in  life. 


§  429.  H  Then  the  Bishop,  sitting 
in  his  chair,  shall  minister  unto 
every  one  of  them  the  Oath  con- 
cerning the  King's  Supremacy, 
as  it  is  before  set  forth  in  the  Form 
for  the  Ordering  of  Deacons. 

§430.  ^  And  that  dofle,  he  shall 
say  unto  them  as  hereafter  fol- 
loweth. 

You  have  heard,  Brethren,  as 
well  in  your  private  examination, 
as  in  the  exhortation  which  was 
now  made  to  you,  and  in  the  holy 
Lessons  taken  out  of  the  Gospel, 
and  the  writings  of  the  Apostles, 
of  what  dignity,  and  of  how  great 
importance  this  Office  is,  where- 
unto  ye  are  called.  And  now  again 
we  exhort  you,  in  the  Name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  you  have 
in  remembrance,  into  how  high 
a  Dignity,  and  to  how  weighty  an 
Office  and  Charge  ye  are  called  ; 
that  is  to  say,  to  be  Messengers, 
Watchmen,  and  Stewards  of  the 
Lord  ;  to  teach,  and  to  premonish, 
to  feed  and  provide  for  the  Lord's 
family ;  to  seek  for  Christ's  sheep 
that  are  dispersed  abroad,  and  for 
his  children  who  are  in  the  midst 
of  this   naughty  world,    that   they 


may  be  saved  through  Christ  for 
ever. 

Have  always  therefore  printed  in 
your  remembrance  how  great  a  trea- 
sure is  committed  to  your  charge. 
For  they  are  the  sheep  of  Christ, 
which  he  bought  with  his  death,  and 
for  whom  he  shed  his  blood.  The 
Church  and  Congregation  whom 
you  must  serve,  is  his  Spouse,  and 
his  Body.  And  if  it  shall  happen 
the  same  Church,  or  any  Member 
thereof,  to  take  any  hurt  or  hind- 
rance by  reason  of  your  negligence, 
ye  know  the  greatness  of  the  fault, 
and  also  the  horrible  punishment 
that  will  ensue.  Wherefore  con- 
sider with  yourselves  the  end  of 
your  Ministry  towards  the  children 
of  God,  towards  the  Spouse  and 
Body  of  Christ ;  and  see  that  you 
never  cease  your  labour,  your  care 
and  diligence,  until  you  have  done 
all  that  lieth  in  you,  according  to 
your  bounden  duty,  to  bring  all 
such  as  are  or  shall  be  committed 
to  your  charge,  unto  that  agree- 
ment in  the  faith  and  knowledge  of 
God,  and  to  that  ripeness  and  per- 
fectness of  age  in  Christ,  that  there 
be  no  place  left  among  you,  either 
for  error  in  religion,  or  for  vicious- 
ness in  life. 


In  ed.  1559,  and  1662,  "  among  you." 


446 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


Then  forasmuch  as  your  office  is  both  of  so  great  ex- 
cellency, and  of  so  great  difficulty,  ye  see  with  how  great 
care  and  study  ye  ought  to  apply  yourselves,  as  well  that 
you  P  may  shew  yourselves  kind  ^  to  that  Lord,  who  hath 
placed  you  in  so  high  a  dignity,  as  also  to  beware,  that  nei- 
ther you  yourselves  offend,  neither'  be  occasion  that  other 
offend.  Howbeit  ye  cannot  have  a  mind  and  a »  will  thereto 
of  yourselves,  for  that  power*  and  ability  is  given  of  God 
alone.  Therefore  ye  see  how  ye"  ought  and  have  need, 
earnestly  to  pray  *  for  his  Holy  Spirit.  And  seeing  that  ye  y 
cannot,  by  any  other  means,  compass  the  doing  of  so  weighty 
a  work,  pertaining  to  the  salvation  of  man,  but  with  doctrine 
and  exhortation,  taken  out  of  holy  Scripture  '^  and  with  a  life 
agreeable  unto  ■  the  same,  ye  perceive ''  how  studious  ye  ought 
to  be  in  reading  and"=  learning  the  holy**  scriptures,  and  in 
framing  the  manners,  both  of  yourselves,  and  of  them  that 
specially  pertain  unto  you,  according  to  the  rule  of  the  same 
scriptures.  And  for  this  selfsame  cause,  ye  see  how  you  * 
ought  to  forsake  and  set  aside  (as  much  as  you  may)  all 
worldly  cares  and  studies. 

We  have  a^  good  hope,  that  you  have  well  weighed  and 
pondered  these  things  with  yourselves,  long  before  this  time, 
and  that  you  have  clearly  determined,  by  God's  grace,  to 
give  yourselves  wholly  to  this  vocation  ^,  whereunto  it  hath 
pleased  God  to  call  you,  so  that  (as  much  as  lieth  in  you)  you 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

Then  forasmuch  as,  &c. 

We  have  a  good  hope,  &c. 

And    that  you  will    continually 
pray,  &c. 

And  that  this  present  congrega- 
tion, &c. 

Do  you  think  in  your  heart,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


*  In  ed.  i66a,  "ye." 

4  In  ed.   1663,   "dutiful  and  thankful 
unto." 

'  In  ed.  166a,  "nor." 

*  In  ed.  1662,  "and  will  thereto." 
«  In  ed.  1662,  "will." 

■  In  ed.  i66a,  "Therefore  ye  ought." 

»  In  ed.  i66a,  "  to  pray  earnestly." 

1  In  eds.  1552,  and  in  all  after,  "  you." 

*  In  ed.  i66a,  "  the  holy  Scriptures." 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

Then  forasmuch  as  your,  &c. 

We  have  a  good  hope,  &c. 

And    that    you  will  continually 
pray,  &c. 

And  that  this  present  congrega- 
tion, &c. 

Do  you  think  in  your  heart,  &c. 
[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


•  In  ed.  1662,  "to  the." 

i>  In  ed.  1662,  "the  same,  consider 
how." 

•=  In  eds.  1552,  and  1559,  "and  in  learn- 
ing." 

"  In  ed.  i66a,  "holy"  omitted. 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "selfsame  cause  how  ye.'* 
'  In   eds.  1559,  and  1662,  "have  good 

hope." 
«  Ined.  i66a  "OflSce." 


The  Ordering  of  Priests. 


447 


apply  ^  yourselves  wholly  to  this  one  thing,  and  draw  all  your 
cares  and  studies  this  way,  and  to  this  end '. 

And  that  you 
^vill  continually  pray  for  the  heavenly  assistance  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  from  God  the  Father,  by  the  mediation ''  of  our  only 
Mediator  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  that  by  daily  reading 
and  weighing  of  the  scriptures  ye  may  wax  riper  and  stronger 
in  your  Ministry  :  and  that  ye '  may  so  endeavour  your- 
selves, from  time  to  time,  to  sanctify  the  lives  of  you  and 
yours,  and  to  fashion  them,  after  the  rule  and  doctrine  of 
Christ,  and  that  ye  may  be  wholesome  and  godly  examples 
and  patterns,  for  the  rest  of  the  congregation  to  follow  : 

and 
that  this  present  congregation  of  Christ,  here  assembled, 
may  also  understand  your  minds  and  wills,  in  these  things. 
^  ™  And  that  this  your  promise  shall  more  move  you  to  do 
your  duties,  ye  shall  answer  plainly  to  these  things,  which 
we  in  the  name  of  the  Congregation  shall  demand  of  you, 
touching  the  same. 

Do  you  think  in  your  heart,  that  you  be  truly  called, 
according  to  the  will  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  order 
of  this  Church  of  England,  to  the  °  ministry  of  Priesthood  ? 

Answer.  I  think  it. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
Forasmuch  then  as  your  Office 
is  both  of  so  great  excellency,  and 
of  so  great  difficulty,  ye  see  with 
how  great  care  and,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
and  that  you  will  continually  pray 
to  God  the  Father,  by  the  Media- 
tion of  our  only  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
for  the  heavenly  assistance  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  ;  that  by  daily  read- 
ing and  weighing  of  the  Scriptures, 
ye  may  wax  riper  and  stronger 
in  your  ministry,  and  that  ye 
may  so  endeavour  yourselves,  from 
time  to  time,  to  sanctify  the  lives 
of  you  and  yours,  and  to  fashion 


•i  In  ed.  1662,  "you  will  apply." 
'  In  ed.  1662,  the  words   "and  to  this 
end  "  omitted. 
^  In  ed.  1559,  >«/j;>r. "  meditation." 
•  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  you." 
■»  In  eds.  1552,  and  1559,  there  is  no 


them  after  the  rule  and  doctrine 
of  Christ,  that  ye  may  be  whole- 
some and  godly  examples  and  pat- 
terns, for  the  people  to  follow. 

And  now,  that  this  present  Con- 
gregation of  Christ  here  assembled 
may  also  understand  your  minds 
and  wills  in  these  things,  and  that 
this  your  promise  may  the  more 
move  you  to  do  your  duties,  ye 
shall  answer  plainly  to  these  things, 
which  we,  in  the  Name  of  God,  and 
of  his  Church,  shall  demand  of  you 
touching  the  same. 


Do 


you  think  in  your  heart,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


fresh  paragraph  ;  in  ed.  1662,  the  para- 
graph begins,  "And  now  that  this  pre- 
sent," &c. 

_"  In  ed.  1662,   "to  the  order  and  mi- 
nistry of." 


448 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550, 


The  Bishop.  Be  you  persuaded  that  the  holy  scriptures  con- 
tain sufficiently  all  doctrine,  required  of  necessity  for  eternal 
salvation,  through  faith  in  Jesu  °  Christ  ?  And  are  you  deter- 
mined withP  the  said  scriptures  to  instruct  the  people  com- 
mitted to  your  charge,  and  to  teach  nothing,  as  required  of 
necessity  to  eternal  salvation,  but  that  ^  you  shall  be  per- 
suaded, may  be  concluded,  and  proved  by  the  scripture  ? 

Ans7ver.  I  am  so  persuaded,  and  have  so  determined  by 
God's  grace. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  then  give  your  faithful  diligence 
always,  so  to  minister  the  doctrine,  and  Sacraments,  and  the 
discipline  of  Christ,  as  the  Lord  hath  commanded,  and  as  this 
realm'  hath  received  the  same,  according  to  the  command- 
ments of  God,  so  that  ye  *  may  teach  the  people  committed 
to  your  cure  and  charge  with  all  diligence  to  keep  and  ob- 
serve the  same  ? 

Answer.  I  will  so  do,  by  the  help  of  the  Lord. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  be  ready  with  all  faithful  diligence 
to  banish  and  drive  away  all  erroneous  and  strange  doctrines 
contrary  to  God's  word,  and  to  use  both  public  and  private 
monitions  and  exhortations,  as  well  to   the  sick   as  to  the 


&c. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

The  Bishop.    Be  you  persuaded, 


&c. 


The  Bishop.  Will  you  then  give, 


The  Bishop.  Will  you  be  ready, 
&c. 

The  Bishop.    Will  you  be  dili- 
gent, &c. 

The  Bishop.    Will  you  be  dili- 
gent, &c. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  maintain, 
&c. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  reverently 
obey,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


°  In  ed.  1662,  "Jesus." 

«"  In  ed.  1662,  "  out  of  the." 

'  Ined.  1662,  "that  which." 


&C. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
The  Bishop.   Be  you  persuaded. 


&c. 


The  Bishop.  Will  you  then  give, 


The  Bishop.  Will  you  be  ready, 
&c. 

The  Bishop.    Will  you   be  dili- 
gent, &c. 

The  Bishop.    Will  you  be  dili- 
gent, &c 

The  Bishop.   Will  you  maintain, 
&c. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  reverently 
obey,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1549.] 


'   In  ed.   1662,   "as  this   Church    and 
realm." 

•  In  eds.  issa,  »nd  after,  "  you." 


The  Ordering  of  Priests. 


449 


whole,  within  your  cures,  as  need  shall  require  and  occasion 
be  *  given  ? 

Answer.  I  will,  the  Lord  being  my  helper. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  be  diligent  in  prayers  and  in  read- 
ing of  the  holy  scriptures,  and  in  such  studies  as  help  to 
the  knowledge  of  the  same,  laying  aside  the  study  of  the 
world  and  the  flesh  ? 

Answer.  I  will  endeavour  myself  so  to  do,  the  Lord  being 
my  helper. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  be  diligent  to  frame  and  fashion 
your  own  selves  and  your  families  "  according  to  the  doctrine 
of  Christ,  and  to  make  both  yourselves'^  and  them  (as  much 
as  in  you  lieth)  wholesome  examples  and  spectacles  ^  to  the 
flock  of  Christ  ? 

Answer.  I  will  so  apply  myself  %  the  Lord  being  my 
helper. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  maintain  and  set  forwards  (as  much 
as  lieth  in  you)  quietness,  peace,  and  love  amongst'  all  Chris- 
tian people,  and  specially  amongst » them  that  are  or  shall  be 
committed  to  your  charge  ? 

Answer.  I  will  so  do,  the  Lord  being  my  helper. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  reverently  obey  your  ordinary,  and 
other  chief  ministers,  unto  whom  the  government  and  charge 
is  committed  over  you  **,  following  with  a  glad  mind  and  will 
their  godly  admonition,  and  submitting  yourselves  to  their 
godly  judgments  ? 

Atiswer.  I  will  so  do,  the  Lord  being  my  helper. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

The  Bishop.  Are  you  persu«ided 
that,  &c. 


&c. 


The  Bishop.  Will  you  then  give, 


&c. 


The  Bishop.  Will  you  be  ready, 


The  Bishop.    Will  you  be  dili- 
gent,  &c. 

The  Bishop.    Will  you  be   dili- 
gent, &c. 

TheBishop.  Will  you  maintain,&c. 

The  Bishop.  Will  you  reverently 

obey,  &c. 

[Same  throughout  as  1349. 1 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "shall  be  given." 
°  In  ed.  1559,  "your  own  self  and  your 
family." 

'  In  ed.  1559,  "yourself." 
I  In  ed.  1662,  "  patterns." 
•  In  ed.  1559,  "  1  will  apply  myself ;"  in 


ed.  1662,  "I  will  apply  myself  thereto." 
*   In    one  ed.,    1552,  and    afterwards, 

"among." 
i"  In  ed.    1662,   "  unto   whom  is  com; 

mitted  the  charge  and  government  over 

you." 


Gg 


450 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


§  431.  T  Then  shall  the  Bishop  j«y, 

Almighty  God,  who  hath  given  you  this  will  to  do  all 
these  things,  grant  also  unto  you  strength  and  power  to  per- 
form the  same,  that  he  may  accomplish  his  work 


Second  Edw.  VI.  155a. 
§  431.    Then  shall  the  Bishop  say. 

Almighty  Gk>d,  who  hath  given, 
&c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  432.    After  this,  the  congregation 
shall  be,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§431.    Tien  shall  the  Bishop  say. 
Almighty  God,  who  hath,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  432.   A/ier  this  the  congregation, 
&*c, 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  431.  H  Then  shall  the  Bishop, 
standing  up,  say. 

Almighty  God,  who  hath,  &c 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

which  hehath  begun  in  you;  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  432.  A^er  this,  the  Congregation 
shall  be  desired,  secretly  in  their 
Prayers,   to   make   their   humble 


supplications  to  God  for  all  these 
things :  for  the  which  Prayers 
there  shall  be  silence  kept  for  a 
space. 

§  433-  IF  After  which  shall  be  sung 
or  said  by  the  Bishop  (the  persons 
to  be  Ordained  Priests  all  kneeling) 
Veni,  Creator  Spiritus ;  the  Bishop 
beginning,  and  the  Priests,  and 
others  that  are  present,  answering 
by  verses,  as  followeth. 

Come,  Holy  Ghost,  our  souls  in- 
spire, 

And  lighten  with  celestial  fire. 

Thou  the  anointing  Spirit  art. 

Who  dost  thy  seven-fold  gifts  im' 
part. 

Thy  blessed  Unction  from  above. 
Is  comfort,  life,  and  fire  of  love. 
Enable  with  perpetual  light 
The  dulness  of  our  blinded  sight. 

Anoint  and  cheer  our  soiled  face 
With  the  abundance  of  thy  grace. 
Keep  far  our   foes,   give  peace  at 

home  : 
Where  thou  art  guide,  no  HI  can 

come. 

Teach    us    to    know   the    Father, 

Son, 
And  thee,  of  both,  to  be  but  One. 
That,  through  the  ages  all  along, 
This  may  be  our  endless  song  ; 

Praise  to  thy  eternal  merit, 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit. 


The  Ordering  of  Priests. 


451 


which  he 
hath  begun  in  you,  until  the  time  he  shall  come  at  the  latter 
day  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 

§  432.  ^  After  this  the  con.:;re^ation  shall  be  desired  secretly  in  their  prayers 
to  make  humble  supplications  to  God  for  the  foresaid  things,  Jor  the  which 
prayers  there  shall  be  a  certain  space  kept  in  silence. 


§  434.    Or  this  : 

Come,  Holy  Ghost,  eternal  God, 

Proceedinj^  from  above, 
Both  from  the  Father  and  the  Son, 

The  God  of  peace  and  love  ; 

Visit  our  minds,  into  our  hearts 
Thy  heavenly  grace  inspire  ; 

That  truth  and  godliness  ive  may 
Pursue  with  full  desire. 

Thou  art  the  very  Comforter 
In  grief  and  all  distress  ; 

The  heavenly  gift  of  Gcd  most  high. 
No  tont^ue  can  it  exptess  ; 

The  fountain  and  the  living  spring 

Of  joy  celestial  ; 
The  f  re  so  bright,  the  love  so  sweet, 

The  Unction  spiritual. 

Thou  in  thy  gifts  art  manifold. 
By  them   Christ's   Church   doth 
stand  : 
In  faithful  hearts  thou  writ'st  thy 
law, 
The  finger  of  God's  hand. 

According  to  thy  promise,  Lord, 
Thou  givest  speech  with  grace  ; 

That  through  thy  help  God's  praise: 
may 
Resound  in  every  plcue. 

O  Holy  Ghost,  into  our  minds 
Send  down  thy  heav'nly  light ; 

Kindle  our  hearts  with  fervent  zeal. 
To  serve  God  day  and  flight. 

Our  weakness  strengthen  and  con- 
firm, 

(For,  Lord,  thou  know'st  us  frail ;) 
That  neither  devil,  ivo7-ld,  nor  flesh, 

Against  us  may  prevail. 


Put  back  our  enemy  far  from  us, 

And  help  us  to  obtain 
Peace  in  our  hearts  with   God  and 
man, 

(  The  best,  the  truest  gain  ;) 

And  grant  that  thou  being,  O  Lord, 
Our  leader  and  our  guide, 

IVe  may  escape  the  snares  of  sin. 
And  never  from  thee  slide. 

Such  measures  of  thy  powerful  grace 
Grant,  Lord,  to  us,  we  pray  ; 

That  thou  mavst  be  our  Comforter 
At  the  last  dreadful  day. 

Of  strife  and  of  dissention 
Dissolve,  O  Lord,  the  bands. 

And  knit  the  k>iots  op' peace  and  love 
Throughout  all  Christian  lands. 

Grant  us   the  grace   that  we  may 
know 
The  Father  of  all  might. 

That  we  of  his  beloved  Son 
May  gain  the  blissjul  sight ; 

And  that  we  may  with  perfect  faith 

Ever  acknowledge  thee. 
The  Spirit  of  Father,  and  of  Son, 

One  God  in  Persons  Thi-ee. 

To  God  the  Father  laud  and  praise. 

And  to  his  blessed  Son, 
And  to  the  Holy  Spirit  of  grace, 

Co-equal  Three  in  One. 

And  pray  we,  that  our  only  Lord 
Would  please  his  >pirit  to  send 

On  all  that  shall  profess  his  Name, 
From  hence  to  the  world's  end. 
Amen. 


4S^ 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


§  435.    That  done,  the  Bishop  shall  fray  in  this  wise. 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 
Answer.  And  with  thy  spirit 

IT  Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  God  and  heavenly  Father,  which  of  thy*  infinite 
love  and  goodness  towards  us,  hast  given  to  us  thy  only  and 
most  dear"*  beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  our  redeemer  and 
author*  of  everlasting  life  :  who  after  he  had  made  perfect 
our  redemption  by  his  death,  and  was  ascended  into  heaven, 
sent  abroad  into  the  world  his  Apostles,  Prophets,  Evange- 
lists, Doctors,  and  Pastors,  by  whose  labour  and  ministry  he 
gathered  together  a  great  flock  in  all  the  parts  of  the  world, 
to  set  forth  the  eternal  praise  of  thy  holy  name  :  For  these  so 
great  benefits  of  thy  eternal  goodness,  and  for  that  thou  hast 
vouchsafed  to  call  these  thy  servants  here  present  to  the  same 
office  and  ministry  of  ^  the  salvation  of  mankind,  we  render 
unto  thee  most  hearty  thanks,  we  worship  and  praise  thee  ?, 
and  we  humbly  beseech  thee  by  the  same  thy  Son '',  to  grant 
unto  all  us'  which  either  here  or  elsewhere  call  upon  thy 
name'',  that  we  may'  shew  ourselves  thankful  to"  thee  for 


Second  Edw.  VI.  155a. 

§  435.    That  done,  the  Bishop  shall 
pray  in  this  wise. 

IT  Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  God  and  heavenly,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  436.    If  When  this  prayer  is  done, 

RECEfVE  the  Holy  Ghost,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  437.   IT    The  Bishop  shall  deliver 
to  every  one  of  them  the  Bible  in 
his  hand,  saying. 
Take  thou  authority  to  preach 
the  word  of  God,  and  to  minister 
the  holy  Sacraments  in  this  congre- 
gation, where  thou  shalt  be  so  ap- 
pointed. 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  435.  That  done,  the  Bishop  shall 
pray  in  this  wise. 

Let  us  Pray. 

Almighty  God  and  heavenly, 
&c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  436.    When  this  prayer  is  done, 
S'c. 

Receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  &c 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§   437.    The  Bishop   shall   deliver. 

Take  thou  authority  to  preach, 
&c 

[Same  as  1553.] 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "  who  of  thine. " 

*  In  ed.  1662,  "dearly." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  the  author." 

^  In  ed.  1662,  "  ministry  appointed  for 
the." 

■  In  ed.  1663.  "  we  praise  and  worship 
thee." 


•■  In  ed.  1663,  "  thy  blessed  Son." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  " -as"  omitted. 

*  In  ed.  1662,  "  thy  holy  Name." 

'  In  ed.  1662,  "  may  continue  to  shew." 

"  In  ed.  1663,  "  unto." 


The  Ordering  of  Priests. 


453 


these  and  all  other  thy  °  benefits,  and  that  we  ay  daily  in- 
crease and  go  forwards  in  the  knowledge  and  faith  of  thee, 
and  thy  Son,  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

So  that  as  well  by  these 
thy  ministers,  as  by  them  to  whom  they  shall  be  appointed 
ministers,  thy  holy  name  may  be  always  glorified,  and  thy 
blessed  kingdom  enlarged  :  through  the  same  thy  Son  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee  in  the 
unity  of  the  same  Holy  Spirit  world  without  end.     Amen, 

§  436.  IT  When  this  prayer  is  done,  the  Bishop  -with  the  Priests  present 
shall  lay  their  hands  severally  upon  the  head  of  every  one  that  receiveth 
orders  °,  The  receivers  humbly  kneeling  upon  their  knees,  and  the  Bishop 
saying: 

Receive  the  Holy  Ghost:  whose  sins  thou  dost  forgive, 
they  are  forgiven :  and  whose  sins  thou  dost  retain,  they  are 
retained  :  and  be  thou  a  faithful  dispenser  of  the  word  of 
God,  and  of  his  holy  sacraments.  In  the  name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Amen. 

§  437.  The  Bishop  shall  deliver  to  every  one  of  them  the  Bible  in  the  one 
hand,  and  the  Chalice  or  cup  with  the  bread,  in  the  other  hand,  and  say. 

Take  thou  authority  to  preach  the  word  of  God,  and  to 
minister  the  holy  Sacraments  in  this  Congregation. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  435.    f  That   done,   the   Bishop 
shall  pray  in  this  wise,  and  say. 

Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  God,  and,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

So  that  as  well  by  these  thy  Min- 
isters, as  by  them  over  whom  they 
shall  be  appointed  thy  Ministers, 
thy  holy  Name  may  be  for  ever 
glorified,  and  thy  blessed  kingdom 
enlarged ;  through  the  same  thy 
Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  who 
liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee  in  the 
unity  of  the  same  Holy  Spirit,  world 
without  end.     Amen. 


§  436.  Tf  When  this  Prayer  is  done, 
&'c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 

Receive  the  holy  Ghost  for  the 
Office  and  Work  of  a  Priest  in  the 
Church  of  God,  now  committed 
unto  thee  by  the  Imposition  of  our 
hands.  Whose  sins  thou  dost  for- 
give, &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 

§  437.  Then  the  Bishop  shall  deliver 
to  every  one  of  them  kneeling,  the 
Bible  into  his  hand,  saying. 

Take  thou  Authority  to  preach 
the  Word  of  God,  and  to  minister 
the  holy  Sacraments  in  the  Congre- 
gation, where  thou  shalt  be  lawfully 
appointed  thereunto. 


In  one  ed.,  1552,  "the  benefits." 


In  ed.  1662,  "the  order  of  Priesthood.'' 


454 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


§  438.  %  When  this  is  done,  the  Congregation  shall  sing  the  Creed,  and  also 
they  shall  go  to  the  Communion,  which  all  they  that  receive  orders  shall 
take  together,  and  retnain  in  the  same  place  where  the  hands  were  laid 
upon  them,  until  such  time  as  they  have  received  the  Communion. 

§  439-  IF  The  Communion  being  done,  after  the  last  Collect,  and  immediately 
before  the  benediction,  shall  be  said  this  Collect : 

Most  merciful  Father,  we  beseech  thee,  so  p  to  send  upon 
these  thy  Servants  thy  heavenly  blessing,  that  they  may  be 
clad  about  with  all  justice'',  and  that  thy  word  spoken  by 
their  mouths  may  have  such  success,  that  it  may  never  be 
spoken  in  vain.  Grant  also  that  we  may  have  grace  to  hear 
and  receive  the  same  as  thy  most  holy  word  and  the  mean 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  438.   IT   When  this  is  done,  6^c. 

§  439-  ^  The  Communion  being 
done,  Qr*c. 

Most  merciful  Father,  we,  &c. 

§  440.  And  if  the  Orders  of  Dea- 
con and  Priesthood,  be  given  both 
upon  one  day  :  then  shall  all 
things  at  the  holy  Communion  be 
used  as  they  are  appointed  at  the 
ordering  of  Priests.  Saving  that 
Jor  the  Epistle,  the  whole  third 
Chapter,  dfc. 

[Continued  the  same  as  I549.1 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  438.    When  this  is  done,  ^*c. 
§  439.   The  Communion  being  done, 

S'C. 

Most  merciful  Father,  we,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  440.  And  if  the  Orders  of  Deacon, 
6r'c. 

[Same  as  1552.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  438.  f  When  this  is  done,  the 
Nicene  Creed  shall  be  sung  or 
said ;  and  the  Bishop  shall  after 
that  go  on  in  the  Service  of  the 
Communion,  which  all  they  that 
receive  Orders  shall  take  together, 
and  remain  in  the  same  place 
where  Hands  were  laid  upon  them, 
until  such  time  as  they  have  re- 
ceived  the  Communion. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 

§  439-  T  The  Communion  being 
done,  after  the  last  Collect,  and  im- 
mediately before  the  Benediction, 
shall  be  said  these  Collects. 

Most  merciful  Father,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 

grace  to  hear  and  receive  what  they 
shall  deliver  out  of  thy  most  holy 
Word,  or  agreeable  to  the  same,  as 
the  means  of  our  salvation  ;  that  in 
all  our  words  and  deeds  we  may 
seek  thy  glory,  and  the  increase  of 
thy  kingdom  ;  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 

Prevent  us,  O  Lord,  in  all  our 
doings,  with  thy  most  gracious  fa- 


P  In  ed.  i66a,  "  thee  to  send." 


«  In  ed.  i66a,  "clothed  with  righteousness," 


The  Ordering  of  Priests. 


455 


of  our  salvation,  that  in  all  our  words  and  deeds  we  may  seek 
thy  glory  and  the  increase  of  thy  kingdom,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  440.  TT  If  the  orders  of  Deacon  and  Priesthood  be  given  both  upon  one  day, 
then  shall  the  Psalm  for  the  Introit  and  other  things  at  the  holy  Commu' 
nion  be  used  as  they  are  appointed  at  the  ordering  of  Priests.  Saving  that 
for  the  Epistle,  the  zvhole  Hi.  chapter  of  the  first  to  Timothy  shall  be  read, 
as  it  is  set  out  before  in  the  order  of  Priests.  And  immediately  after  the 
Epistle,  the  Deacons  shall  be  ordered.  And  it  shall  suffice  the  Litany  to 
be  said  once. 


vour,  and  further  us  with  thy  con- 
tinual help  ;  that  in  all  our  works 
begun,  continued,  and  ended  in 
thee,  we  may  glorify  thy  holy 
Name,  and  finally  by  thy  mercy  ob- 
tain everlasting  life  ;  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth 
all  understanding,  keep  your  hearts 
and  minds  in  the  knowledge  and 
love  of  God,  and  of  his  Son  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  :  And  the  bless- 
ing of  God  Almighty,  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  be 
amongst  you,  and  remain  with  you 
always.     Amen. 

§  440.  II  And  if  on  the  same  day  the 
Order  of  Deacons  be  given  to  some, 
and  the  Order  of  Priesthood  to 
others;  the  Deacons  shall  be  first 


presented,  and  then  the  Priests ; 
and  it  shall  suffice  that  the  Litany 
be  once  said  for  both.  The  Col- 
lects shall  both  be  used ;  first,  that 
for  Deacons,  then  that  for  Priests. 
The  Epistle  shall  be  Ephes.  iv. 
7 — 13,  as  before  in  this  Office. 
Immediately  after  which,  they  that 
are  to  be  made  Deacons  shall 
take  the  Oath  of  Supremacy,  be 
examined  and  Ordained,  as  is 
above  prescribed.  Then  one  of 
them  having  read  the  Gospel  (which 
shall  be  either  out  of  St.  Matth. 
ix.  36 — 38,  as  before  in  this  Office; 
or  else  St.  Luke  xii.  35 — 38,  as  be- 
fore in  the  Form  for  the  Ordering 
of  Deacons),  they  that  are  to  be 
made  Priests  shall  likewise  take 
the  Oath  of  Supremacy,  be  ex- 
amined, and  Ordained,  as  is  in 
this  Office  before  appointed. 


4S6 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


THE  FORM  OF  CONSECRATING 

OF  AN 

ARCHBISHOP   OR  BISHOP. 

§  441.    The  FscUmfor  the  Introit  at  the  Communion,  as  at  the 
Ordering  of  Priests. 
§442.    The  Epistle. 
This  is  a  true  saying,  If  a  man  desire  the  office  of  a  Bishop, 
he  desireth  an  honest  work.   A  Bishop  therefore 
must  be  blameless,  the  husband  of  one  wife, 
diligent,  sober,  discreet,  a  keeper  of  hospitality,  apt  to  teach, 
not  given  to  overmuch  wine,  no  fighter,  not  greedy  of  filthy 


I  Tim.  iii. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

FORM  OF  CONSECRATING 

OF  AN 

ARCHBISHOP   OR  BISHOP. 

§  441.   T  At  the  Communion '. 
§442.    The  Epistle. 

This  is  a  true  saying,       ~. 
-.,  ,    .       „■'''»     I  Tun.  m. 

Ii  a  maa  desire,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

The  form  of  Conse- 

CILA.TING  OF  AN  Archbishop 

OR  Bishop. 

§  442.    The  Epistle  at  the  Commu- 
nion, &'€. 
This  is  a  true  saying,  &c, 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

the  form  of 

ORDAINING  OR  CONSECRATING 

OF  AN 

ARCHBISHOP,  OR  BISHOP  ; 

WHICH    IS    ALWAYS    TO    BE   PERFORMED 
UPON  SOME  SUNDAY  OR   HOLY-DAY. 

§  441.  H  When  all  things  are  duly 
prepared  in  the  Church,  and  set 
in  order,  after  Morning  Prayer 
is  ended,  the  Archbishop  {or  some 


other  Bishop  appointed)  shall  begin 

the  Communion  Service ;  in  which 

this  shall  be 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who  by  thy  Son 
Jesus  Christ  didst  give  to  thy  holy 
Apostles  many  excellent  gifts,  and 
didst  charge  them  to  feed  thy  flock  ; 
Give  grace,  we  beseech  thee,  to  all 
Bishops,  the  Pastors  of  thy  Church, 
that  they  may  diligently  preach  thy 
Word,  and  duly  administer  the 
godly  Discipline  thereof ;  and  grant 
to  the  people,  that  they  may  obe- 
diently follow  the  same  ;  that  all 
may  receive  the  crown  of  everlast- 
ing glory ;  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  442.  1"  And  another  Bishop  shall 

read  the  Epistle. 

This  is  a  true  sapng,  If  a  man 
desire  the  Office  of  ^  ^^  y.  ^ 
a  Bishop,  he  desireth 
a  good  work.  A  Bishop  then  must  be 
blameless,  the  husband  of  one  wife, 
vigilant,  sober,  of  good  behaviour, 
given  to  hospitality,  apt  to  teach  ; 
not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not 
greedy  of  filthy  lucre,  but  patient, 
not  a  brawler,  not  covetous  ;  one 
that  ruleth  well  his  own  house, 
having  his  children  in  subjection 
with  all  gravity ;  (For  if  a  man 
know  not    how  to  rule  his   own 


»  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "  The  Epistle  at  the  Communion." 
•  In  one  ed.,  1552,  reference  omitted. 


Consecration  of  Bishops. 


457 


lucre,  but  gentle,  abhorring  fighting,  abhorring  covetousness, 
one  that  ruleth  well  his  own  house ;  one  that  hath  children  in 
subjection  with  all  reverence.  For  if  a  man  cannot  rule  his 
own  house,  how  shall  he  care  for  the  congregation  of  God  ? 
he  may  not  be  a  young  scholar,  lest  he  swell,  and  fall  into  the 
judgment  of  the  evil  speaker.  He  must  also  have  a  good 
report  of  them  which  are  without,  lest  he  fall  into  rebuke  and 
snare  of  the  evil  speaker. 


house,  how  shall  he  take  care  of 
the  Church  of  God  ?)  Not  a  novice, 
lest  being  lifted  up  with  pride  he 
fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the 
devil.  Moreover,  he  must  have 
a  good  report  of  them  which  are 
without ;  lest  he  fall  into  reproach, 
and  the  siiare  of  the  devil. 

§443.    Or  this. 

For  the  Epistle. 
From  Miletus  Paul  sent  to  Ephe- 
sus,  and  called  the  . 
elders  of  the  Church.  '^  ^  ^^'  '^' 
And  when  they  were  come  to  him, 
he  said  unto  them,  Ye  know,  from 
the  first  day  that  I  came  into  Asia, 
after  what  manner  I  have  been 
with  you  at  all  seasons,  serving  the 
Lord  with  all  humility  of  mind, 
and  with  many  tears  and  tempta- 
tions which  befel  me  by  the  lying 
in  wait  of  the  Jews  :  And  how 
I  kept  back  nothing  that  was  profit- 
able unto  you,  but  have  shewed 
you,  and  have  taught  you  publickly, 
and  from  house  to  house,  testifying 
both  to  the  Jews,  and  also  to  the 
Greeks,  repentance  toward  God, 
and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  And  now  behold,  I  go 
bound  in  the  spirit  unto  Jerusa- 
lem, not  knowing  the  things  that 
shall  befal  me  there  ;  save  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  witnesseth  in  eveiy 
city,  saying.  That  bonds  and  afflic- 
tions abide  me.  But  none  of  these 
things  move  me,  neither  count  I  my 
life  dear  unto  myself,  so  that  I 
might  finish  my  course  with  joy, 
and  the  ministry  which  I  have  re- 


ceived of  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  testify 
the  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God. 
And  now  behold,  I  know  that  ye 
all,  among  whom  I  have  gone 
preaching  the  kingdom  of  God, 
shall  see  my  face  no  more.  Where- 
fore I  take  you  to  record  this  day, 
that  I  am  pure  from  the  blood  of 
all  men.  For  I  have  not  shunned 
to  declare  unto  you  all  the  counsel 
of  God.  Take  heed  therefore  unto 
yourselves,  and  to  all  the  flock  over 
the  which  the  Holy  Ghost  hath 
made  you  Overseers,  to  feed  the 
Church  of  God,  which  he  hath  pur- 
chased with  his  own  blood.  For 
I  know  this,  that  after  my  depart- 
ing shall  grievous  wolves  enter  in 
among  you,  not  sparing  the  flock. 
Also  of  your  own  selves  shall  men 
arise  speaking  perverse  things,  to 
draw  away  disciples  after  them. 
Therefore  watch,  and  remember, 
that  by  the  space  of  three  years, 
I  ceased  not  to  warn  every  one  night 
and  day  with  tears.  And  now, 
brethren,  I  commend  you  to  God, 
and  to  the  word  of  his  grace,  which 
is  able  to  build  you  up,  and  to  give 
you  an  inheritance  among  all  them 
which  are  sanctified.  I  have  coveted 
no  man's  silver,  or  gold,  or  ap- 
parel ;  yea,  yourselves  know,  that 
these  hands  have  ministered  unto 
my  necessities,  and  to  them  that 
were  with  me.  I  have  shewed 
you  all  things,  how  that  so  labour- 
ing ye  ought  to  support  the  weak  ; 
and  to  remember  the  words  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  how  he  said,  It  is  more 
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive '. 


'  It  will  be  observed  that  in  eds.  1549,  1352.  and  1559.  this  served  for  one  of  the 
Epistles  in  the  "  Ordering  of  Priests."    (See  p.  436.) 


458 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


(§444.)  The  Gospel 
Jesus  said  to  Simon  Peter,  Simon  Johanna,  lovest  thou  me 
more   than  these  ?      He  said  unto   him.  Yea,         ^  j^  ^^. 
Lord,  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee.     He  said 
unto  him.  Feed  my  lambs.     He  said  to  him  again  the  second 
time :  Simon  Johanna,  lovest  thou  me  ?     He  said  unto  him. 
Yea,  Lord,  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee.     He  said  unto 
him,  Feed  my  sheep.     He   said  unto  him   the  third  time, 
Simon  Johanna,  lovest  thou  me?     Peter  was  sorry  because 
he  said  unto  him  the  third  time,  Lovest  thou  me?  and  he 
said  unto  him  :  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things,  thou  knowest 
that  I  love  thee.     Jesus  said  unto  him.  Feed  my  sheep. 

§  445.  IT  Or  else  out  of  the  x.  Chapter  of  John,  as  before  in  the 
order  of  Priests. 


John  iiij. ' 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  444.    The  Gospel. 
Jesus  said  to  Simon 
Peter,   Simon  Johanna, 
love^,  &c, 

§  445.  IT  Or  else  out  of  the  tenth 
Chapter,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  447.  T  After  the  gospel  and  Credo 
ended,  first  the  elected  Bishop  shall 
be  presented  by  two  Bishops  unto 
the  Archbishop  of  that  Province, 
or  to  some  other  Bishop  appointed 
by  his  commission:  The  Bishops 
that  present  him,  saying. 
Most  reverend  father  in  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  448.  T[  Then  shall  the  Archbishop 
demand  the  king's  mandate  for 
the  consecration,  and  cause  it  to  be 
read.  And  the  oath  touching  the 
knoxvled^e  of  the  King's  supre- 
macy, Sr'c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  444.    The  Gospel. 

Jesus  said  to  Simon  Peter,  &c, 

[Same  as  1549.] 


§  445.    Or  else  out  of  the  tenth  chap- 
ter,  dfc. 

[Same  as  1549,  and  immediately  fol- 
lowed but  without  a  break  by  §  447,  ac- 
cording to  ed.  1552.] 

Most  reverend  father  in  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
§  448.  Then  shall  the  Archbishop 
demand  the  Queen's  mandate,  yi?/* 
the  consecration,  and  cause  it  to 
be  read.  And  the  oath  touching 
the  knowledge  of  the  Queen's  su- 
premacy,  &"€. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  444.  IT  Then  another  Bishop  shall 
read  the  Gospel. 
Jesus  saith  to  Simon  Peter,  Si- 
mon,   son  of  Jonas, 
lovest  thou  me  more   St  Johnxxi. 
than  these  ?    He  saith 
unto  him,  Yea,  Lord,  thou  knowest 
that   I  love  thee.     He   saith  unto 
him.    Feed  my  lambs.     He   saith 
to  him  again  the  second  time,  Simon, 
son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me?     He 
saith   unto   him,   Yea,  Lord,  thou 
knowest  that  I  love  thee.    He  saith 
unto   him,    Feed   my  sheep.      He 
said  ^  unto  him  the  third  time,  Simon, 
son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me  ?    Peter 


"  In  one  ed.,  155a,  misj>r.  tor  xx\.         »  In  Sealed  Book  "th"  altered  to  "d"  with  a  pen. 


Consecration  of  Bishops. 


459 


§  447.  IF  After  the  Gospel  and  Credo  ended,  first  the  elected  Bishop,  having 
tipon  him  a  surplice  and  a  cope,  shall  be  presented  by  two  Bishops  [being 
also  in  surplices  and  copes,  and  having  their  pastoral  staves  in  their  hands) 
unto  the  Archbishop  of  the  Province,  or  to  some  other  Bishop  appointed  by 
his  commission :  the  Bishops  that  present,  saying: 

Most  reverend  Father  in  God,  we  present  unto  you  this 
godly  and  well  learned  man  to  be  consecrated  Bishop. 

§448.  H  Attd  then  the  King's  mandate  to  the  Ajxhbishop  for  the  consecra- 
tion shall  be  read.  And  the  oath  touching  the  kno'wledging  of  the  King's 
supremacy  shall  be  ministered  to  the  pcrsott  elected,  as  it  is  set  out  in  the 
order  of  Deacons.  And  then  shall  be  ministered  also  the  Oath  of  due  obe- 
dience unto  the  Archbishop  as  follo7vsth. 


^vas  grieved  because  he  said  unto 
him  the  third  time,  Lovest  thou 
me  ?  And  he  said  unto  him,  Lord, 
thou  knowest  all  things ;  thou 
knowest  that  I  love  thee.  Jesus 
saith  unto  him.  Feed  my  sheep. 
§  445.  Or  else^  this. 
The  same  day  at  evening,  being 
the    first    day    of  the  „    -,  , 

1  \.        \^\.       ^  ot.  John  XX. 

week,  when  the  doors  j. 
were  shut  where  the 
disciples  were  assembled  for  fear  of 
the  Jews,  came  Jesus,  and  stood  in 
the  midst,  and  saith  unto  them, 
Peace  be  unto  you.  And  when  he 
had  so  said,  he  shewed  unto  them 
his  hands  and  his  side.  Then  were 
the  disciples  glad,  when  they  saw 
the  Lord.  Then  said  Jesus  to  them 
again,  Peace  be  unto  you  :  as  my 
Pather  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send 
I  you.  And  when  he  had  said  this, 
he  breathed  on  them,  and  saith  unto 
them,  Receive  ye  the  holy  Ghost. 
Whosesoever  sins  ye  remit,  they 
are  remitted  unto  them  ;  and  whose- 
soever sins  ye  retain,  they  are  re- 
tained''. 

§  446.    Or  this. 
Jesus  came  and  spake  unto  them, 
saying,   All  power  is 
given  unto  me  in  hea-      St.  Matt, 
ven  and  earth  \     Go     '''''""•  '^• 
ye  therefore  and  teach  all  nations. 


baptizing  them  In  the  Name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost;  teaching  them  to  ob- 
serve all  things  whatsoever  I  have 
commanded  you :  and  lo,  I  am 
with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end 
of  the  world  ". 

§  447.  ^  After  the  Gospel,  and  the 
Nicene  Creed,  and  the  Sermon  are 
ended,  the  Elected  Bishop  (vested 
with  his  Rote het)  shall  be  presented 
by  two  Bishops  unto  the  Arch- 
bishop of  that  province  (.or  to  some 
other  Bishop  appointed  by  la%vful 
comtnission')  the  Archbishop  sitting 
in  his  chair  near  the  holy  Table, 
and  the  Bishops  that  present  hi7n 
saying, 

Most  Reverend  Father,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
to   be   Ordained   and   Consecrated 
Bishop. 

§  448.  \  Then  shall  the  Archbishop 
demand  the  Kings  Mandate  for 
the  Consecration,  a7td  catise  it  to 
be  read.  And  the  Oath  touching 
the  ackttowledgtnent  of  the  King's 
Supremacy,  shall  be  ministered  to 
the  persons  elected,  as  it  is  set  doiun 
before  in  the  Form  for  the  Order- 
ing of  Deacons.  And  then  shall 
also  be  ministered  unto  them  the 
Oath  of  due  Obedience  to  the  Arch- 
bishop, as  followeth, 


"  In  the  Sealed  Book,  1662,  the  word 
"else"  is  inserted  with  a  pen. 

y  This  will  be  found  in  eds.  1549,  1552, 
and  1559,  to  serve  for  the  last  of  the  Gos- 
pels in  the  Ordering  of  Priests.  (See  p.  439.) 


»  In  the  Sealed  Book,  1662,  printed 
"in  earth"  but  "in"  marked  through 
with  a  pen. 

»  This  for  the  first  of  the  Gospels.  (See 
p.  438.) 


460 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


§449.   %  THE  OATH  OF  DUE  OBE- 
dience  to  the  A  rchbishop. 

In  the  name  of  GOD,  Amen.  I,  N.  chosen  Bishop  of  the 
church  and  see  oi  N.  do  profess  and  promise  all  due  reve- 
rence and  obedience  to  the  Archbishop  and  to  the  Metro- 
political  church  of  N.  and  to  their  successors,  so  help  me 
God  and  his  holy  Gospel. 

§451.  ^  Then  the  Archbishop  shall  mcme  the  congregation  present  to  pray, 
saying  thus  to  them. 

Brethren,  it  is  written  in  the  Gospel  of  Saint  Luke,  that 
our  Saviour  Christ  continued  the  whole  night  in  prayer  or  ever 
that*"  he  did  choose  and  send  forth  his  xii."  Apostles.  It  is 
written  also  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  that  the  disciples 
which  ^  were  at  Antioch  did  fast  and  pray  or  ever  they  laid 
hands  upon  or  sent  forth  Paul  and  Barnabas  *.     Let  us  there- 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

I  449.  f  THE  OA  TH  OF  DUE  OBE- 
dience  to  the  Archbishop. 

In  the  name  of  God,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

SO  help    me  God,   through  Jesus 
Christ. 

§450.  ^  This  oath  shall  not  be  made 
at  the  consecration  of  an  Arch- 
bishop. 

§  45 1.  IT  Then  the  Archbishop  shall 
move,  &'c. 

[Same  as  1549.I 

Brethren,  it  is  written  in,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 
§  452.  %  And  then  shall  be  said,  6r'c. 

That  it  may  please  thee,  &c. 
Answer.  We  beseech  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  453-    ^  Concluding  the  Litany  in 
the  end,  with  this  prayer. 


Almighty  God,  giver  of,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  449.   The  Othe  of  due  Obe- 
dience TO  THE  Archbishop. 

In  the  name  of  God,  &c 
[Same  as  1552.] 

§  450.  This  oath  shall  not  be  made 
at  the  Consecration  of  an  Arch- 
bishop. 

%  451.  Then  the  Archbishop  shall, 
dr'c. 

Brethren,  it  is  written  in,  &c. 

§  452.  And  then  shall  be  said,  &'c. 
That  it  may  please  thee,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 

§  453.   Concluding  the  Litany  in 
the  end,  with  this  prayer. 

Almighty  God,  giver  of,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


'  Ined.  1662,  "before  he  did." 

•  In  eds.  1552,  and  after,  "his  twelve.' 

'Ined.  1662,  "who." 


•  In  ed.  1662,  "  before  they  laid  hands 
on  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  sent  them 
forth." 


Consecration  of  Bishops. 


461 


fore,  following  the  example  of  our  Saviour  Christ  and  his 
Apostles,  first  fall  to  prayer  or  that  ^  we  admit  and  send  forth 
this  person  presented  unto  us,  to  the  work  whereunto  we  trust 
the  Holy  Ghost  hath  called  him. 

§  452.  'S  And  then  shall  be  said  tJie  Litany  as  afore  in  tJie  order  of  Deacons. 
And  after  this  place:  That  it  may  please  thee  to  illuminate  all  Bishops, 
&'c.,  he  shall  say. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  bless  this  our  brother  elected, 
and  to  send  thy  grace  upon  him,  that  he  may  duly  execute  the 
oftice  whereunto  he  is  called,  to  the  edifying  of  thy  church, 
and  to  the  honour,  praise  and  glory  of  thy  name. 

Answer.  We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

§  453.  Concluding  the  Litany  in  the  end  with  this  prayer  : 
Almighty  God,  giver  of  all  good  things,  which  ^  by  thy 
Holy  Spirit  hast  appointed  divers  orders  of  Ministers  in  thy 
Church  :  mercifully  behold  this  thy  servant  now  called  to  the 
work  and  ministry  of  a  Bishop,  and  replenish  him  so  with 
the  truth  of  thy  doctrine  and  •'  innocency  of  life,  that  both  by 
word  and  deed  he  may  faithfully  serve  thee  in  this  office,  to 
the  glory  of  thy  name,  and  profit  of  thy  congregation ' :  through 
the  merits  of  our  Saviour  Jesu  ^  Christ,  who  liveth  and 
reigneth  with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  world  without  end. 
Amen. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  449.    The  Oath  of  due  Obedience  to 
the  Archbishop. 

In  the  Name  of  God,  &c. 
[Same  as  iS49,  to] 
So  help  me   God,   through  Jesus 
Christ. 

§  450.  ^  This  Oath  shall  not  be 
made  at  the  Consecration  of  an 
Archbishop. 

§451.  \  Thenthe  Archbishop  shall, 
h'c. 

Brethren,  it  is  written,  &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "before  we." 
i  In  ed.  1662,  "who." 
^  In   ed.  1662,   "and  adorn  him  with 
innocency  of  life." 


§  452.  ^  And  then  shall  be  said  the 
Litany  as  before  in  the  Form  of 
Ordering  Deacons,  save  only,  that 
after  this  place  That  it  may  please 
thee  to  illuminate  all  Bishops, 
is'c,  the  proper  Suffrage  there  fol- 
lowing shall  be  omitted,  and  this 
inserted  instead  of  it ; 

That  it  may  please  thee,  &c. 

Answer.    We  beseech  thee,  &-'c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  453.    T   Then  shall  be  said  this 
Prayer  following. 

Almighty  God,  giver  of,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549-] 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "  Name,  and  the  edifying 
and  well  governing  of  thy  church." 
''  In  ed.  1662,  "Jesus." 


462 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


§  454.    Then  the  Archbishop  sitting  in  a  '  chair,  shall  say  this'^  to  him  that 
is  to  be  consecrated. 

Brother,  forasmuch  as  holy  Scripture  and  the  old  Canons 
commandeth  that  we  should  not  be  hasty  in  laying  on  hands 
and  admitting  of  any  person  to  the  government  of  the  con- 
gregation of  Christ,  which  he  hath  purchased  with  no  less 
price  than  the  effusion  of  his  own  blood,  afore  that  °  I  admit 
you  to  this  administration  whereunto  ye  are  called  °,  I  will 
examine  you  in  certain  articles,  to  the  end  p  the  Congregation 
present  may  have  a  trial  and  bear  witness  how  ye  ^  be  minded 
to  behave  yourself  in  the  church  of  God. 

Are  you  persuaded  that  you  be  truly  called  to  this  minis- 
tration according  to  the  will  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and 
the  order  of  this  realm. 

Answer.  1  am  so  persuaded. 

The  Archbishop.  Are  you  persuaded  that  the  holy  Scrip- 
tures contain  sufficiently  all  doctrine  required  of  necessity  for 
eternal  salvation  through  the  faith  in  Jesu  Christ'?  And  are 
you  determined  with  *  the  same  holy  Scriptures  to  instruct  the 
people  committed  to  your  charge,  and  to  teach  or  maintain 
nothing,  as  required  of  necessity  to  eternal  salvation,  but 
that  *  you  shall  be  persuaded  may  be  concluded  and  proved 
by  the  same  ? 

Answer.  I  am  so  persuaded  and  determined  by  God's  grace. 

The  Archbishop.  Will  you  then  faithfully  exercise  yourself 
in  the  said  "  holy  Scriptures,  and  call  upon  God  by  prayer  for 
the  true  understanding  of  the  same,  so  as  ye  may  be  able 
by  them  to  teach  and  exhort  with  wholesome  doctrine,  and  to 
withstand  and  convince  the  gainsayers  ? 

Answer.  I  will  so  do,  by  the  help  of  God. 

The  Archbishop.  Be  you  ^  ready  with  all  faithful  diligence 
to  banish  and  drive  away  all  erroneous  and  strange  doctrine 
contrary  to  God's  word,  and  both  privately  and  openly  to  call 
upon  and  encourage  other  "  to  the  same  ? 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
i  454.   \  Then  the  Archbishop,  dr*c. 
Brother,  forasmuch  as,  &c. 

[The  same  throughout  as  1549.  J 


Elizabeth,  1559. 

§  454.    Then  the  Archbishop,  ^c. 

Brother,  forasmuch  as,  &c. 
[The  same  throughout  as  1549.  ] 


'  In  ed.  1662,  "  in  his  chair." 
■"  In  ed.  1662,  "  this"  omitted. 
■  In  ed.  1662,  "  before  I." 
*  In  ed.  1662,  "whereunto  ye  are  called" 
omitted. 
p  In  ed.  1662,  "the  end  that." 
«  In  ed.  1662,  "you." 
'  In  ed.  1662,  "  necessity  to  eternal  sal- 


vation, through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "out  ol." 

'In  ed.  1662,  "  that  which  you." 

•  In  ed.  1662,  "  the  same." 

"  In  Sealed  Book,  1662,  printed  "Are 
you,"  but  altered  with  a  pen  to  "  Be  you." 
"  In  ed.  1662,  "others." 


Consecration  of  Bishops. 


463 


Answer.  I  am  ready,  the  Lord  being  my  helper. 

The  Archbishop.  Will  you  deny  all  ungodliness,  and  worldly 
lusts,  and  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  Godly  in  this  world  ^, 
that  you  may  shew  yourself  in  all  things  an  example  of  good 
works  unto  other  y,  that  the  adversary  may  be  ashamed,  having 
nothing  to  lay  ^  against  you. 

Answer.  I  will  so  do,  the  Lord  being  my  helper. 

The  Archbishop.  Will  you  maintain  and  set  forward  (as 
much  as  shall  lie  in  you)  quietness,  peace,  and  love  *,  among 
all  men?  And  such  as  be  unquiet,  disobedient,  and  criminous 
within  your  diocese,  correct  and  punish,  according  to  such 
authority,  as  ye  ^  have  by  God's  word,  and  as  to  you  shall  be 
committed,  by  the  ordinance  of  this  realm  ? 

Answer.  I  will  so  do,  by  the  help  of  God. 

The  Archbishop.  Will  you  shew  yourself  gentle,  and  be 
merciful  for  Christ's  sake,  to  poor  and  needy  people,  and  to 
all  strangers  destitute  of  help  ? 

Answer.  I  will  so  shew  myself  by  God's  grace". 

The  Archbishop.  Almighty  God  our  heavenly  Father,  who 
hath  given  you  a  good  will  to  do  all  these  things,  grant  also 
unto  you  strength  and  power,  to  perform  the  same,  that  he 
accomplishing  in  you  the  good  work  which  he  hath  begun, 
ye**  may  be  found  perfect,  and  irreprehensible  at  the  latter 
day,  through  Jesu  ^  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
§  454.  ^  Then  the  Archbishop,  6fc. 
Brother,  forasmuch  as  the  holy 
Scripture  and  the  ancient  Canons 
command,  that  we  should  not  be 
hasty  in  laying  on  hands,  and  ad- 
mitting any  person  to  Government 
in  the  Church  of  Christ,  which  he 
hath  purchased,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.3 
Are  you  persuaded,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549.] 
The  Archbishop. 
•   Are  you  persuaded  that  the,  &c. 
Will  you  then  faithfully,  &c. 
Are  you  ready,  with  all,  &c. 
WlLLyoudeny  all  ungodliness,  &c. 


*  In  ed.  1662,  "this  present  world." 

y   In  ed.  1662,  "others." 

»  In  ed.  1662,  "say." 

»  In  ed.  1662,  "  love  and  peace." 


Will  you  maintain  and  set,  &c. 

[The  same  throughout  as  1549,  toj 
The  Archbishop. 
Will  you  be  faithful  in  Ordain- 
ing, sending,  or  laying  hands  upon 
others  ? 

Answer.  I  will  so  be,  by  the  help 
of  God. 

The  Archbishop. 
Will  you  shew  yourself  gentle,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
Answer.  I  will  so  shew  myself, 
by  God's  help. 

§455.  \  Then  the  Archbishop  stand- 
ing up  shall  say. 
Almighty  God,  our  heavenly, 
&c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


'■  In  ed.  1662,  "  you." 

"  In  ed.  1552,  and  after,  "help." 

*  In  ed.  X662,  "Jesus." 


464 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


§  456.    Then  shall  be  sung  or  said,  Come  Holy  Ghost,  &"€.,  as  it  is  set  out 
in  the  Order  of  Priests. 

§  458.    That  ended,  the  Archbishop  shall  say. 
The  Lord  be  with  you. 
Answer.  And  with  thy  spirit. 

^  Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  God  and  most  merciful  Father,  which  of  thy 
infinite  goodness,  hast  given  to  us  thy  only  and  most  dear 
beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  our  redeemer  and  author «  of 
everlasting  life,  who  after  that  he  had  made  perfect  our  re- 
demption by  his  death,  and  was  ascended  into  heaven,  poured 
down  his  gifts  abundantly '  upon  men,  making  some  Apostles, 
some  Prophets,  some  Evangelists,  some  Pastors  and  Doctors, 
to  the  edifying  and  making  perfect  of  his  congregation;  Grant, 
we  beseech  thee,  to  this  thy  servant  such  grace,  that  he  may 
be  evermore «  ready  to  spread  abroad  thy  Gospel,  and  glad 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§  456.    Then  shall  be  sung  or  said. 

§  458.    That  ended,  the  Archbishop 
shall  say. 
Lord,  hear  our  prayer. 
Answer.    And  let  our  cry  come 
unto  thee. 

IT  Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  God  and  most  mer- 
ciful, &c. 

[Same  as  iS49-] 

§  459.     Then    the  Archbishop    and 
Bishops,  &'c. 
Take  the  Holy  Ghost,  and,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.]     ■ 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
§  456.    Then  shall  be  sung  or  said, 
^c. 

§  458.    Tliat  ended,  the  Archbishop, 

^c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 

Lord,  hear  our  prayer. 

Ans7uer.    And  let  our  cry  come 
unto  thee. 


•  In  ed.  1662,  "  the  Author." 

'  In  the  Sealed  Book,  1662,  printed, 
"  poured  down  abundantly  his  gifts,"  but 
altered  with  a  pen  so  as  to  bring  it  ia 


Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  God  and  most  mer- 
ciful, &c 

[Same  as  1549.] 

§  459.     Then    the  Archbishop    and 
Bishops,  &'c. 
Take  the  Holy  Ghost,  and,  &c. 

[Same  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  456.  f  Then  shall  the  Bishop  elect 
put  on  the  rest  of  the  Episcopal 
habit ;  and  kneeling  down,  Veni, 
Creator  Spiritus,  shall  be  sung  or 
said  over  him,  the  Archbishop  be- 
ginning, and  the  Bishops,  with 
others  that  are  present,  answering 
by  verses,  as  followeth. 

Come,  Holy  Ghost,  our  souls  in- 
spire. 

And  lighten  with  celestial  fire. 

Thou  the  anointing  Spirit  art, 

Who  dost  thy  seven-fold  gifts  impart. 

Thy  blessed  Unction  from  above. 
Is  comfort,  life,  and  fire  of  love. 
Enable  with  perpetual  light 
The  dulness  of  our  blinded  sight. 


accordance  with  the  earlier  editions. 

er  In  eds.  1552,  and  after,  "that  he  may 
evermore  be." 


Consecration  of  Bishops. 


465 


tidings  of  reconcilement  to  God,  and  to  use  the  authority 
given  unto  him,  not  to  destroy,  but  to  save,  not  to  hurt,  but 
to  help,  so  that  he  as  a  faithful  and  a  wise  servant  ^,  giving  to 
thy  family  meat  in  due  season,  may  at  the  last  day  be  received 
into  joy,  through  Jesu  Christ  our  Lord,  who  with  thee  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  liveth  and  reigneth  one  God,  world  without 
end.     Amen. 

§  459-    T'/iefi  the  Archbishop  and  Bishops  present  shall  lay  their  hands 
upon  the  head  of  the  elect^  Bishop,  the  Archbishop  saying. 

Take  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  remember  that  thou  stir  up 
the  grace  of  God,  which  is  in  thee,  by  imposition  of  hands : 
for  God  hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of  fear,  but  of  power, 
and  love,  and  of  soberness. 


Anoint  and  cheer  our  soiled  face 
With  the  abundance  of  thy  grace. 
Keep  far  our'  foes,   give  peace  at 

home  : 
Where  thou  art  guide,   no  ill  can 

come. 

Teach  us  to  know  the  Father,  Son, 
And  thee,  of  both,  to  be  but  One. 
That,  through  the  ages  all  along, 
This  may  be  our  endless  song ; 

Praise  to  thy  eternal  merit, 
Father,  Soft,  and  Holy  Spirit. 

§457.   Or  this: 
Come,  Holy  Ghost,  eternal  God, 
&c. 

As  before  in  the  For fn  for  Ordering 
Priests ''. 

§  458.  IT  That  ended,  the  Archbishop 
shall  say. 
Lord,  hear  our  prayer. 
Answer.    And  let  our  cry  come 
unto  thee. 

Let  us  pray. 
Almighty  God,  and  most  mer- 
ciful Father,  who  of  thine  infinite 
goodness  hast  given  thy  only  and 
dearly  beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ, 
&c. 

[Same  as  iS49,  to] 
to  the  edifying  and  making  perfect 


his  Church ;  Grant,  we  beseech 
thee,  to  this  thy  servant  such  grace, 
that  he  may  evermore  be  ready  to 
spread  abroad  thy  Gospel,  the  glad 
tidings  of  reconciliation  with  thee  ; 
and  use  the  authority  given  him, 
not  to  destruction,  but  to  salvation  ; 
not  to  hurt,  but  to  help  :  so  that 
as  a  wise  and  faithful  servant,  giv- 
ing to  thy  family  their  portion  in 
due  season,  he  may  at  last  be  re- 
ceived into  everlasting  joy;  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  who,  with 
thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost  liveth 
and  reigneth,  one  God,  world  with- 
out end.     Amen. 

§  459-   ^  Then  the  Archbishop  and 

Bishops   present    shall   lay    their 

hands  upon  the  head  of  the  elected 

Bishop  kneeling  before  them  upon 

his  knees,  the  Archbishop  saying. 

Receive  the  holy  Ghost,  for  the 

Olilice  and  Work  of  a  Bishop  in  the 

Church   of  God,    now  committed 

unto  thee  by  the  Imposition  of  our 

hands  ;  In  the  Name  of  the  Father, 

and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 

Ghost.  Amen.    And  remember  that 

thou  stir  up  the  grace  of  God  which 

is  given  thee  by  this  Imposition  of 

our  hands  :  for  God  hath  not  given 

us  the  spirit  of  fear,  but  of  power, 

and  love,  and  soberness. 


•■  In  eds.  1552  and  1539,  "  as  a  wise  and  *  In  the    Sealed   Book,   the  whole    is 

a  faithful  servant."  printed  entire,  but  marked  out  with  a  pen, 

'  la  eds.  1552,  and  after,  "  elected."  and  these  words  written  in. 

Hh 


466 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


§  460.    Then  the  Archbishop  shall  lay  the  Bible  upon  his  neck,  saying. 

Give  heed  unto  reading,  exhortation  and  doctrine,  think 
upon  those'  things  contained  in  this  book,  be  diligent  in 
them,  that  the  increase""  coming  thereby  may  be  manifest 
unto  all  men.  Take  heed  unto  thyself,  and  unto  teaching", 
and  be  diligent  in  doing  them, 

for  by  doing  this  thou  shalt 
save  thyself  and  them  that  hear  thee,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord. 

§  461.    T/ien  shall  the  Archbishop  put  into  his  hand  the 
pastoral  staff,  saying: 

Be  to  the  flock  of  Christ  a  shepherd,  not  a  wolf,  feed  them, 
devour  them  not,  hold  up  the  weak,  heal  the  sick,  bind  to- 
gether o  the  broken,  bring  again  the  outcasts,  seek  the  lost : 
Be  so  merciful,  that  you  p  be  not  too  remiss,  so  minister  disci- 
pline, that  ye  ^  forget  not  mercy,  that 

when  the  chief  Shepherd 
shall  come,  ye  may  receive  the  immarcessible  Crown  of 
glory,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 


Second  Edw.  VI,  1552. 

§  460.  IF  Then  the  Archbishop  shall 
deliver  him  the  Bible,  saying. 

Give  heed  unto  reading,  exhorta- 
tion, &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 

for  by  doing  this,  thou  shalt  save 
thyself,  and  them  that  hear  thee  : 
be  to  the  flock  of  Christ  a  shep- 
herd, not  a  wolf,  &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  the  next  para- 
graph, omitting  rubric  }  471,  and  without 
any  break,  down  to] 

immarcessible  crown  of  glory, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


§  462.    Then  the  Archbishop  shall 
proceed  to,  &'c. 


'  In  ed.  1552,   "  these ;"   in  ed.  1662, 
•the." 
"•  In  one  ed.,  1552,  "increasing." 
■  In  ed.  1663,  "  and  to  doctrine." 


Most  merciful  Father,  we  be- 
seech, &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  world  without 
end.     Amen. 


Elizabeth,  1559 

§  460.     Then  the  Archbishop  shall, 
■    &'c. 

Give  heed  unto  reading,  exhorta- 
tion, &c. 

[Continued  the  same  as  1552.] 

§  462.    Then   the  Archbishop    shall 

proceed,  dr'c. 

Most  merciful   Father,  we  be- 
seech, &c. 

[Same  as  1549,  to] 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  world  without 
end.     Amen. 


■>  In  ed.  1662,  "  bind  up.' 
P  In  ed.  1662,  "  ye." 
«  In  ed.  1662,  "  you." 


Consecration  of  Bishops. 


467 


§462.  ^  Then  the  Archbishop  shall  proceed  to  the  Communion,  with  whom 
the  new  consecrated  Bishop  ^  shall  also  communicate.  (§  463. )  And  after 
the  last  Collect,  immediately  afore*  the  benediction,  shall  be  said  this 
prayer : 

Most  merciful  Father,  we  beseech  thee  to  send  down  upon 
this  thy  Servant  thy  heavenly  blessing,  and  so  endue  him  with 
thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  he  preaching  thy  word,  may  not  only  be 
earnest  to  reprove,  beseech,  and  rebuke  with  all  patience  and 
Doctrine,  but  also  may  be  to  such  as  believe  an  *  wholesome 
example  in  word,  in  conversation,  in  love,  in  faith,  in  chastity, 
and  purity",  that  faithfully  fulfilling  his  course,  at  the  latter 
day  he  may  receive  the  crown  of  righteousness,  laid  up  by 
the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  who  liveth  and  reigneth,  one 
God  with  the  Father  and  Holy  Ghost,  world  without  end. 
Amen. 


Charles  II.  1662. 
§  460.  11  Then  the  Archbishop  shall 
deliver  him  the  Bible,  saying. 
Give  heed  unto  reading,  &c. 

[Same  as  IS49,  to] 
for  by  so  doing  thou  shall  both  save 
thyself  and  them   that  hear  thee. 
Be  to  the  flock  of  Christ  a  shep- 
herd, not  a  wolf,  &c. 

[Continued  same  as  1549,  to] 
when  the  chief  Shepherd  shall  ap- 
pear, you'  may  receive  the  never- 
fading   crown   of  glory ;    through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 

§  462.  T[  Then  the  Archbishop  shall 
proceed  in  the  Communion- Ser- 
vice; with  whom  the  new  Con- 
secrated Bishop  {wiih  others)  shall 
also  communicate. 

§463.  IT  And  for  the  last  Collect, 
immediately  before  the  Benediction, 
shall  be  said  these  Prayers. 


Most  merciful  Father,  we,  &c. 
[Same  as  1549,  to] 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  world  without 
end.    Amen. 

Pre\'ent  us,  O  Lord,  in  all  our 
doings,  with  thy  most  gracious  fa- 
vour, and  further  us  with  thy  con- 
tinual help ;  that  in  all  our  works 
begun,  continued,  and  ended  in 
thee,  we  may  glorify  thy  holy 
Name,  and  finally  by  thy  mercy 
obtain  everlasting  life  ;  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth 
all  understanding,  keep  your  hearts 
and  minds  in  the  knowledge  and 
love  of  God,  and  of  his  Son  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord :  And  the  bless- 
ing of  God  Almighty,  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  be 
amongst  you,  and  remain  with  you 
always.    Amen. 


'  In  eds.  1552  and  1559.  "  Bishop  with 
other shaU." 

•  In  eds.  1552  and  1559,  "before." 

*  I    ed.  1662,  "a  wholesome." 


»  In  ed.  1662,  "  and  in  purity." 
♦  In  Sealed  Book  altered  to  "  ye"  with 
a  pen. 


468 


The  Form  and  Manner  of,  &c.  1550. 


RICHARDVS   GRAFTON 
typographus  Regius  excudebat. 

Mense  Mar  tit 

A.M.D.XLIX 

Cum  priuilegio  ad  imprimendum  solum. 

^  ^Ijis  &00k^  is  tru^lg 

^  Wi^t  prices  tijereot 

^(J5  Imprinter  to  sell  tl)ts  Boofee  m  C^ueres  far  t&jo  sTiiI* 
Igngcs  antJ  siie  pence,  antj  not  a&oue,  feounlr  in  Parcl)cment, 
or  farell,  for  tfiree  sfjillgnges  anli  vixi.  pence  anli  not  afioue :  ^ntj 
iwuntie  in  Eerfjer,  in  $apcr  Boorlies  or  Claspes,  for  fourc  gfjiU 
Ignges,  antj  not  aboue.  ^nti  at  t1[)e  next  impression,  tlje  imprinter 
leaugng  out  tf)e  fanrme  of  mafegi^S  ^"^  conseaatgng  of  ^rdjie^ 
6is!)oppc3,  Bislioppes,  Priestcs,  aniJ  Deacons,  sfjal  sel  tf)e  saietJ 
ijoofee  in  qnercs,  for  ttooo  sfjillgngcs  ant  not  aboue,  anti  fiounlie 
10  forelle  for  tinoo  sj^illgnges  anU  eigj^t  pence,  antj  not  aboue. 
^ntJ  bountje  in  letljer,  iv.  paste  bortjes  or  claspes,  for  t^rec  sljiU 
Ignges  anlJ  foure  pence,  antj  not  aboue. 


^' 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

I  IMPRINTED  A  T  LONDON 

in  Flete-strete  at  the  signe 

of  the  Sunne  ouer  agaynste 

the  Conduite  by  Edz/z/arde 

Whitchurche. 

M.D.LII. 

Cum  pri/uUegio  ad  imprimendum 

solum  \ 


Elizabeth,  1559. 
Imprinuo  at  Xonlron  in  ^otolta 

®^urc^e  parte 

by  Richard  Jugge  and  John  Cawood, 

Printers  to  the  Queetu's  Majestie. 

Anno  M.D.LIX. 
Cum  privilegio  Regia  Maiestatis  ^ 

Charles  II.  1662. 
FINIS.  * 


»  Here  follows  a  page  of  errata,  and 
beneath  it  the  foliowing  notice :  "  This 
boke  is  to  be  sold  by  the  Imprinter  in 
queres  for  ij.  shillings  &  vi.  pence,  and  not 
aboue.  Bound  in  parchemente  or  forell 
for  .  iij.  shillings  .  iiij.  pence.  And  bound 
in  leather,  in  paper  hordes,  or  claspes,  for 
.  iiij.  shillinges  and  not  aboue.  And  at  the 
nexte  impression,  the  imprinter  leauyng 
out  the  fourme  of  makynge  and  conse- 
cratynge  of  Archebisshops,  Bisshops, 
Priestes,  and  Deacons,  shal  sell  the  sayd 
boke  in  queres  (or  .  ij.  shillinges  and  not 
aboue.  And  bound  in  forell,  for  .  ii.  shil- 
linges viii.  pence,  and  not  aboue.  And 
bounde  in  leather,  in  paste  boordes,  or 
claspes,  for  .  iij.  shillinges  .  iiy.  pence,  and 
not  aboue. 


y  Another  edition  of  1559  (i.e.  Grafton's) 
had  a  large  printer's  device  on  the  last 
page,  and  beneath  it, 

RICHARDUS  GRAF- 
tonus,    Typography  Regius 
excudebat. 
Anno  Domini,  ISS9- 
Cu}n  Privilegio  ad  Imprimen- 
dum Solum. 

•  In  the  Sealed  Book,  1662,  there  is 
added  in  writing  after  the  word  FiNts, 
"  The  Forms  of  Prayer  for  the  v.  0/ 
Novetnber,  the  xxx.  of  January,  dt^/or 
the  xxix.  0/  May,  are  to  be  printed  at 
the  end  o/this  book." 


A 

CONCORDANCE 


AND 


INDEX  TO  THE  RUBRICS,  &c. 


OBSERVANDA. 

1.  In  the  following  Index  the  chie/y/ords  only  are  included. 

2.  The  references  to  the  numbered  rubrics  are  marked  thus — §  151, 
§147- 

3.  The  references  to  Titles,  &c.,  and  unnumha-ed  rubrics  are  naarked 
thus — p.  14,  p.  32. 

4.  The  letters,  O.H.C.,  refer  to  the  "Order  of  Holy  Communion 
1548, "  which  will  be  found  pp.  222 — 262. 

5.  The  asterisks  in  the  columns  at  the  end  of  the  lines  shew  in  what 
editions  the  words  of  the  rubric  are  found. 

6.  When  a  word  is  within  brackets,  it  signifies  that  it  is  not  constant 
throughout  all  the  editions  to  which  the  asterisks  refer;  and  when  an 
alternate  word  is  given,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  some  use  the  one 
word,  and  some  the  other.  In  the  case  of  "Priest  [Pbr.],"  the  word 
"Priest"  is  used  in  all  the  editions  marked,  except  in  the  Scotch  ed. 
of  1637,  where  "  Presbyter"  is  used  instead. 

7.  When  two  references  are  given  (neither  being  within  brackets),  then 
the  words  occur  und^r  both  numbers  throughout  all  the  editions  marked 
by  the  asterisk.  Where  a  second  reference  is  given  within  brackets,  it  is 
to  be  understood  that  the  words  occur  in  some  of  the  editions  under 
one  of  the  numbers,  in  other  editions  under  the  other  number. 


INDEX  TO  THE   RUBRICS,  &c. 


abhorred,  Idolatry  to  be — of  all  faithful  Christians  §  151 
abolished,  OF  Ceremonies,  why  some  be —  .  p,  14 
absent,  whosoever... doth — themselves  .  .  .  §  147 
Absolution,  The — to  be  pronounced  by  the  Minister  §  9 
or  Remission  of  sins  to  be  pronounced    §§  9,  [33] 


after  the  Sentences... Confession,  and — 

pronounce  the  [this] — 

form  of — ...in  all  private  confessions 

■ the  curate  adding  the —  . 

• shall  the  Priest... pronounce  this —   . 

absolve,  after  which  confession  the  Priest  [Pbr.  ]  shall 
Abstinence,  A  Table  of  the... Days  of — 

Days  of  Fasting,  or — 

accustomably,  all  ecclesiastical  duties — due  . 
accustomed,  the  people  hath  not  been — to  pay 

such  as  heretofore  hath  been —        §  141 

in  some  convenient  place  as  hath  been — 

in  the  place  where  they  are 


accustomed  blessing,  let  them  depart  with  the — 
accustomed  duty,  with  the — to  the  Priest  [Pbr.  ] 
accustomed  manner,  Chrisoms  be  brought  after  the 

• banns  must  be  asked... after  the — 

tlie  Curate  saying  after  the —     . 

—  the  English  Litany  said  after  the 

— the  Litany  ended,  according  to  the — 

accustomed  offerings,  pay  to  the  Curate  the — 

must  offer  her  Chrisom  and  other — 

■ must  offer  her — 


§  34 
§113 
§309 
§321 
§379 
§309 
p.  32 
P-  32 
§  149 
§138 
O.H.C. 

§357 
§365 
§134 
§283 
§  206 
§270 
§270 
§363 

§  96 
§362 


§362 
accustomed  place  of  the  Church,  Chapel,  or  Chancel  §      I 


acknowledging  [-ment]  of  the  benefits  of  Christ 
acknowledgment,  the — of  the  King's  supremacy 
administered.  Baptism  should  not  be — 

baptism  shall  be — on  this  fashion 

when  it  shall  be  publicly — in  the  church 

administration,  in  the — of  the  Lord's  Supper 

Office  for  the — of  the  Lord's  Supper 

Of  the — of  Public  Baptism   . 


§151 

§448 
§178 
§213 
§320 
§151 
§  151 
p.  285 
p.  212 


Administration  of  the  Lord's  Supper 

[See  also  "Ministration."] 

admitted,  which  are  to  be — into  Holy  Orders   §§  159,  166 

he  may  be — to  the  Holy  Communion  .  §  247 

none  be — to  the  Holy  Communion  .  .  §  269 

as  come  to  be — Ministers  [Deacons]  .  §  390 

• as  come  to  be — to  the  Bishop  ,         .  •  §  39i 

• be — ...to  the  Order  of  Priesthood     .  .  §410 

such  as  come  to  be — Priests     .         .  .  §  420 


01 
10 

M 

• 
• 

♦ 
♦ 

• 

♦ 
* 

» 
« 

• 

• 

• 
« 

» 

• 

• 
« 

« 
» 

10 

• 
* 

* 

• 

» 
» 

• 
* 

* 
* 
« 
* 
• 

* 

• 

• 
« 
« 
• 

in 

lO 

M 

_ 

• 
* 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

* 

• 
• 

• 

• 

♦ 
♦ 
« 
« 

♦ 
• 

• 
» 

• 

• 

• 

» 

* 

• 
• 

• 
* 

• 
» 

CO 
« 

M 

» 

» 
• 
♦ 

• 

* 

• 
» 
* 
• 

» 
• 

• 
* 

• 
• 
• 

M 

• 
• 

• 
* 

* 

* 
* 

» 

» 
• 

• 

• 
» 

• 
• 
• 
• 
* 
* 
• 

* 

• 

♦ 
* 
* 
» 

* 
* 

472 


A  Concordance  and 


adoration,  not  meant  thereby  that  any — is  done    .  §  151 

that  thereby  no — is  intended     .         .         .  §  151 

cflfcr^aT,  and  therefore  may  not  be —      .         .         .  §  151 

age,  when  children  come  to  that —        .         .         .  §  252 

should  be  ministered  to  them... of  perfect —  §  253 

agreeable,  may  be  most — to  the  institution  thereof  §  145 

that  it  is — with  the  usage  of  the  Church    .  §  253 

§       2 

§  3 
§  74 
§134 


albe,  shall  use  neither — vestment  nor  cope 

shall  have  upon  him  a  surplice  or — 

that  is  to  say,  a  white — plain    . 

shall  put  upon  him  a  plain — or  surplice 

having  upon  him  a  plain —        .         .    §§  391,  421 

<3!/(5<'j,  shall  have  upon  them... — with  tunicles        .     §    74 
alledge,  if  any  man  do — and  declare  any  impediment  §  274 

§275 
P-  33 


/,  if  no  impediment  be — 

Almanack,  An — for  Nineteen  Years  [1552 — 1570] 

An — for  XXX.  years  [1559 — 1588]     . 

An — for  xxxix.  years  [1603 — 1641] . 

An — for  xxxiv.  years  [1637 — 1670] . 

[See  also  "Table  of  the  Moveable  Feasts."] 


alms,  shall  receive  the — for  the  poor  .  .  •  §  95 
alms  or  oblaiions,  if  there  he  no —  .  .  .  p.  241 
alonely,  the  Minister  may — communicate  with  him  §  337 
Altar,  leave  the  rest  upon  the — covered         §  98  O.  H.  C. 

setting  both  the  bread  and  wine  upon  the — 

standing  humbly  afore  the  midst  of  the — 

•  then  the  Priest  turning  him  to  the — 

are  to  be  said,  turning  still  to  the — . 

and  say  all  things  at  the — 

the  Priest. ..may  go  again  to  the —   §  143  O.H.C. 

the  man  and  woman  kneeling  afore  the —      §  290 

the  Priest  standing  at  the — 

[See  also  "  Lord's  Table,"  "  Holy  Table,"  "  Table."] 
Amen,  The  people  shall  answer — 

here,  and  at  the  end  of  all  other  prayers — 

amends,  make — to  [the]  uttermost  [of]  his  power 


§  76 
§  loS 
§  108 

§134 


§  290 


ancient  writers,  although  it  be  read  in — 

it  appeareth  by — 

anoint,  then  the  Priest  shall — the  infant 

then  shall  the  Priest — him 

anointed,  if  the  sick  person  desire  to  be — 
anointing,  putting  on  the  Chrisom  and — 
Anthem,  except  on  Easter  day... another— 

here  followeth  the — 

with  this —       .... 

adding  this —  .... 

the— 

then  shall  this — be  said  or  sung 

Anthems,  These — shall  be  sung  or  said 
apptrtaineth,  it — to  offer  for  the  cha,rges 


§  10 
§  10 
§306 
§148 
§178 
§  199 
§319 
§§  319,  336 
§204 

§  14 
§  28,  49 
§299 
§312 
§334 
§366 
§  67 
§145 


9 

M 

« 

» 

* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
» 

» 
* 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 
» 
» 
« 
« 
» 

* 

« 
« 

« 

M 

♦ 

* 
» 

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 

» 

» 
» 
» 

01 

to 
m 

M 

* 
* 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 
« 
* 

* 

0 
VO 

M 

♦ 
* 

« 
* 

» 
* 
» 

» 

«o 

» 
♦ 

♦ 

* 
* 

» 

* 

* 
* 
* 

* 

M 

VO 

«o 

M 

» 

♦ 
* 

• 
* 

* 
* 

* 
* 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


473 


appoint,  he  or  his  deputy  shall — the  place    .         .  §      I 

appoint,  as  the  Ordinary  shall —  .         .         .         •  §  I5° 

as  the  Curate  by  his  discretion  shall —       .  §  i8o 

to  the  Bishop,  or  whom  he  shall —   .         .  §  231 

the  Bishop,  or  such  as  he  shall —      .          .  §  250 

as  the  Bishop,  or  such  as  he  shall —          .  §  257 

appointed,  the  Churchwardens  or  other  by  them —  §    95 

or  other  fit  person — for  that  purpose           .  §    95 

suffice  for  the  persons — to  receive      .         ■  §    98 

■ how  many  be — to  communicate  with  him  §  320 

first  to  those  that  are — to  communicate      .  §  321 

■ •  to  them  that  be  [are]— to  communicate     .  §  330 

and  such  as  be — to  communicate       .         •  §  33^ 

of  them — by  the  Bishop  putting  on  a  tunicle  §  407 

one  of  them — by  the  Bishop  shall  read      .  §  407 

the  Archdeacon,  or  one — in  his  stead        .  §  421 

which  are — to  receive  the  said  office .         .  §  430 

the  Archbishop  or  some  other  Bishop —    .  §  441 

other  Bishop — by  his  [lawful]  commission  §  447 

appoifited,  upon  the  Sunday  or  Holyday —    .         .  §  232 

upon  the  day — all  that  are  to  be        .         .  §  249 

to  come  to  the  church  at  the  time —           .  §  256 

to  come  to  the  church  at  the  day  [time] —  §  267 

at  the  day — for  solemnization    .          .         .  §  272 

• •  at  the  day  and  time —       .          .          •         •  §  272 

■ day  be  not — for  the  open  Communion       .  §  322 

when  the  day — by  the  Bishop  .         .    §§  390,  [420 

:.t  the  tiiiijs — in  the  Canon       .         .         .  §  410 

appointed,  for  which  particular  Services  are —       .  p.  32 

how  the  Psalter  is — to  be  read       .         .  p.  17 

•  Psalms  in  order  as  they  be —    .         .        §§  IS,  38 

proper  Psalms- — for  that  day      .         .         §§  15,  38 


Lessons  as  [they  be] — by  [in]  the  Kalendar  §§  1 6, 38 


■  the  same  that  is — at  the  Communion 

•  if  there  be  any  specially — 

•  shall  be  said  all  that  is— 

■  suffrages,  and  due  order — for  the  same 

•  sacraments  and  rites  in  this  book —  . 

■  according  to  the  order  in  this  book — 

•  when  the  Litany  is  not — 

■  to  be  said  and  done  at  the  church  door 

■  and  so  many  of  the  Collects— 

•  all  that  is  here — for  them  to  learn     . 
all  that  is  here — for  them  to  learn     . 

■  the — general  confession  must  be  made 

■  after  such  form  and  sort  as  hereafter  is — 

■  then  shall  the  Priest  use  the — prayer 

■  which  is — in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer 

■  with  the  prayers  as  is  before — 

as  they  are — at  the  Ordering  of  Priests 
[See  also  supplementary  list,  p.  541.] 


§  25 
§  lOI 
§135 
§145 
§146 

§  149 
§169 
§  209 
§214 
§256 
§267 
§321 
§322 
§336 
§368 
§425 
§440 


01 

IT) 
IT) 

M 

CO 
M 

M 

♦ 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

» 

» 

* 

» 

* 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

« 

♦ 

# 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

» 

» 

» 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

• 

* 

» 

» 

* 

* 

» 

♦ 

* 

» 

♦ 

« 

» 

'  * 

» 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

<  * 

* 

« 

» 

« 

* 

» 

* 

♦ 

» 

» 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

« 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

« 

• 
♦ 

474 


A  Concordance  and 


appointment — or  some  other  at  his —    . 
appose,  such  questions... as  he... shall — them  in 

shall  by  his  discretion — them  in 

apprentices,  their  children,  servants  and —     . 
approve,  and  if  the  Bishop  shall — 
approved,  declared  to  the  Curate,  and  by  him — 
to  be — by  the  Curate 


§266 
§250 

§257 
§256 
§259 
§  212 
§212 
§141 
§  3 
-441 


aptly,  so  that  it  may  be — divided  in  divers  pieces 
Archbishop,  being — or  Bishop 

• the — or  some  other  Bishop  appointed 

. presented... unto  the — of  the  [that]  province  §  447 

the— sitting  in  his  chair  near  the  Holy  Table   §  447 

[The  word  "  Archbishop"  occurs  also  elsewhere  throughout  the 
Ordinal,  e.g.  §§  448,  450,  451,  456,  and  458.] 


Archdeacon,  and  the — or  his  deputy,  shall  say 

the — or  his  deputy  shall  present 

— the — shall  answer     . 

the — saying     .... 

the — shall  present  unto  the  Bishop 

Archdeacons,  The — Deans,  Provosts,  &c. 
Articles  of  the  Faith,  as  they  can  say. ..the— 

• but  such  as  can  say... the — 

■ the  children  can  say... the — 

which  can  say  the — . 

■ the[Pbr.  or]  Minister  shall  rehearse  th< 

Ash  Wednesday,  commonly  called —    . 
asked,  banns  must  be — three  several  Sundays 

certificate  of  the  banns  being  thrice — 

assembled,  the  people  being — upon  the  Sunday 

called  together... and — in  the  church 

the  people  be  customably — 

assigned,  proper  lessons — for  that  day  . 

suffrages  before — at  matins 

audibly,  and  every  one  shall — answer  . 
authority.  Homilies  set  forth  by  [common] — 

against  the... — of  the  Bishop  of  Rome 

power  and — of  all  foreign  potentates 

avoid,  and  to — the  profanation  and  disorder 
avoiding,  for — of  all  matters... of  dissension  . 
and  for  the — of  such  profanation 

banns,  first  the — must  be  asked    . 

first  the — ...must  be  published  . 

the — must  be  asked  in  both  parishes 

certificate  of  the— being  thrice  asked 

Baptism,  Of  the  Administration  of  Public— 

The  Ministration  of — 

TheMiNiSTRATiONOFPuBLic— of  Infants 


§391 
§391 
§392 
§421 
§421 
§       2 

§207 
§250 

§257 
§268 

-§303 

P-  394 
§270 
§271 
§232 
§363 
§136 
§    16 

§  43 
§259 
§  86 
§402 
§402 
§151 
§141 
§151 

§270 
§270 
§271 
§271 
p.  285 
p.  2S5 
p.  285 


be  ministered  in  the  English  [vulgar]  tongue    §  1 78 


M 

• 
• 

« 
• 

« 

» 
• 
• 
« 
• 

* 
« 

* 
• 
• 
« 
• 
1  ♦ 
* 

* 

i   * 
• 
* 

* 

• 

* 

• 
• 

• 

« 

m 

M 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
♦ 

• 
• 
• 
» 

• 
* 
* 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 
» 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

m 
10 

M 

• 
« 
« 

* 
* 

• 
• 
» 
« 

♦ 
• 
* 
• 
• 

» 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

♦ 

0 

to 

• 
• 
» 

» 

* 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
« 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
« 

• 

* 

to 
10 

M 

• 
• 
* 

♦ 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

* 

* 

• 

« 

• 
• 

• 

• 

10 
10 

M 

* 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

» 
• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

» 
• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


475 


Baptism,  that — should  not  be  ministered 

because  in  the — of  infants 

in  the  old  time  was  not... ministered 

profession  made  to  God  in  his — 

use  of  the  sign  of  the  Cross  in — 

that  they  defer  not  the — of  infants 

then — shall  be  administered  on  this  fashion 

may  be  certified  of  the  true  form  of — 

■ — — —  which  are  essential  parts  of —  . 

so  soon  after  his — as  conveniently     . 

what  their  godfathers  promised  for  them  in- 

[and  so  forth]  as  it  is  in — 

baptize,  they — not  children  at  home  in  their  houses 
did  himself — that  child     . 


baptized,  of  them  that  be  newly — 

at  all  times  to  be — . 

may  be — upon  any  other  day 

for  every  male  child  to  be — 

where  there  are  children  to  be — 

whether  the  child  be — or  no 

— — —  as  be  present  to  be — 

- — - —  when  there  are  many  to  be — 

■ — those  that  be  first — departing 

— until  all  be —  , 

■ if  the  number  of  children  to  be — 

dying  before  they  commit  actual  sin . 

of  them  that  be  —in  private  houses   . 

they  procure  not  their  children  to  be — 

answer  that  he  [the  same]  is  already —  §§  [2 

the  child  which  is  after  this  sort 

whether  the  child  be  lawfully —  §§  [2 

so — is  lawfully  and  sufficiently — 

and  ought  not  to  be — again 

cannot  appear  that  the  child  was — 

afore  any  child  is — in  the  water 

of  riper  years  are  to  be — 

whether  any... be — or  no  . 

speak  to  the  persons  to  be — 

of  the  persons  to  be — 

take  each  person  to  be — 

— if  any  persons  not — in  their  infancy  . 

■ shall  be  brought  to  be —  . 

confirmation  is  ministered  to  them  that  be 

it  is  certain... that  children  being —   . 

baptizing,  in — the  Minister... shall  use  a  surplice 

this  order  of  demanding, — , ... 

bason,  in  a — provided  for  that  purpose 

shall  reverently  bring  the  sa^d — 

in  a  decent — provided  by  the  parish 

before,  when  the  priest  standing — the  Table 
and  woman  kneeling — the  Lord's  Table 


§178 
§178 
§178 
§178 
§211 
§212 

§213 
§216 
§  229 

§247 
§251 

§304 
§213 
§216 
§178 
§178 
§178 
§179 
§180 
§181 
§184 
§204 
§204 
§204 
§  209 
§  210 
p.  302 
§213 

16,217] 
§216 

16,  217] 
§216 

§2l6 

§229 
§230 
§231 
§233 
§238 
§239 
§241 
§248 
§248 
§252 

§254 
§     2 


§204 
§  95 
§  95 
§  95 
§  106 
§  290 


irtl  in  o    CO  >o 
iO{  10  10  V  vo 


476 


A  Concordance  and 


before,  break  the  bread — the  people 

he  shall  humbly  present  it — the  Lord 


§lo6 

§    95 

§363 

§    29 

.     §119 

.     §117 

.     §    50 

§§  40c,  439 

.     §463 

§151 


bell,  called  together  by  the  ringing  of  a —     . 
Benediction,  with  the  rest  of  the  Prayers... and  th 

shall  say  this —         .... 

he  shall  say  this — 

at  the  end  of  the  Litany  to  the — 

immediately  before  the — 

immediately  afore  [before]  the — 

benefits,  acknowledging  of  the — of  Christ 

acknowledgment  of  the — of  Christ  therein     §  151 

earnestly  remembering  the — he  hath  thereby  §  332 

best  and  purest  wheat  bread  that... may  be  gotten  .     §  141 
Bible,  shall  deliver  to  every  one  of  them  the —      .     §  437 

the  Archbishop  shall  lay  the — upon  his  neck   §  460 

the  Archbishop  shall  deliver  him  the —     .     §  460 

biggest,  he  shall  bless... the — chalice  .  §  98  O.H.C 
birth,  the  second  Sunday  next  after  their —  .  .  §  212 
Bishop,  whensoever  the — shall  celebrate       .         •     §      3 

being  Archbishop  or —     .         .         .         •     §      3 

shall  the  Priest  [Pbr.]  or — ^being  present  .     §  113 

then  shall  the — or  else  the  Presbyter         .     §116 

then  the  Priest  or — ^if  he  be  present  .         .     §  128 

be  brought  to  the — to  be  confirmed  .         .     §  207 

timely  notice  shall  be  given  to  the —         .     §  231 

should  be  confirmed  by  the —  .         .         .     §  247 

standing  in  order  before  the —  .         .         .     §  249 

the — or  such  as  he  shall  appoint        .   §§  250,  257 

shall  be  brought  to  the —  .         .         .     §  257 

• fit  to  be  presented  to  the —       .        .        .     §  258 

and  if  the — approve  ....     §  259 

the — shall  cross  them  in  the  forehead        .     §  260 

the — shall  confirm  them  .         ...     §  259 

whensoever  the — shall  give  knowledge  §§  268  [258] 

the — shall  lay  his  hand  upon    .        .         .     §  260 

in  order  kneeling  before  the —  .         .     §  260 

then  the — shall  say  ...         .     §  262 

the — shall  add §  263 

shall  the — bless  [the  children]  .         .     §  264 

day  appointed  by  the —    .         .  §§  [  390]  420 

such  as  come  to  be  admitted  to  the —        .     §  391 

unto  the — sitting  in  his  chair    .         .    §§  391,  421 

the — shall  say  unto  the  people  .         .    §§  393,  423 

the — shall  surcease  from  ordering     .    §§  394,  424 

the — commending  such  as  be  found      §§  395,  425 

the — sitting  in  a  [his]  chair       .         .         .     §  402 

shall  the — examine  every  one  .         .         .     §  404 

shall  the — deliver  to  every  one  .    §§  406,  437 

one  of  them  appointed  by  the —        .         .     §  407 

receive  the  Holy  Communion. ..with  the —     §  408 


0\ 

to 

M 

• 

» 
« 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

» 
* 

» 
* 
» 

♦ 

* 
• 
• 

• 
* 
* 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

« 
10 
«o 

H 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
* 
» 

* 

• 
* 

* 
• 

♦ 
* 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

* 
• 
• 
• 
♦ 
• 
* 
• 

01 

to 
10 

M 

• 

• 
» 

• 
* 

• 

* 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

» 
• 
« 

• 
• 
* 
• 
• 
« 
• 
♦ 

1 

• 

• 
* 

* 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 

CD 

• 
* 
• 

* 
» 

• 
* 

• 
♦ 
♦ 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 

M 

to 
vo 

• 

• 
• 

• 
♦ 
• 
* 

• 

• 

» 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
* 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


477 


Bishop,  shall  the — proceed  to  the  Communion      .     §  408 

the  Archdeacon  shall  present  unto  the —  .     §  421 

the — [sitting  in  his  chair]  shall  minister   .     §  429 

shall  the — [standing  up]  say     .         .         .     §  431 

shall  be  sung  or  said  by  the —  .         .         .     §  433 

the — shall  pray  in  this  wise       .         .        .     §  435 

■ and  the — saying §  436 

the — with  the  Priests  present   .         .         .     §  436 

the  Archbishop  or  other — appointed  .     §  441 

— another — shall  read  the  Epistle         .         .     §  442 

another — shall  read  the  Gospel  .         .     §  444 

other — appointed  by  his  [lawful]  commission  §  447 

the — laying  his  hands  severally  .         .     §  405 

elect  put  on  the  rest  of  the  episcopal  habit     §  456 

the  elected — vested  with  his  rochet  .         .     §  477 

[The  word  "  Bishop"  occurs  also  elsewhere  throughout  the  Ordinal, 
c-g-  l§4iOj  422,  447,  452,  and  456,  and  at  pp.  329,  431,  and  448.] 

Bishop  of  Rome,  against  the... authority  of  the —   .     §  402 
Bishops,  deliver  it  to  other — Presbyters,  &c.  .     §  116 

deliver  the  same  to  the — Priests,  &c.         .     §  116 

bless,  to  prepare, — and  consecrate  .         .        §  98  O.H.C. 

he  shall — and  consecrate    .         .        §98  O.H.C. 

shall  the  Bishop — the  children  [them]       .     §  265 

shall  the  Priest — the  man  and  woman        .     §  292 

Blessing,  with  this  [the  accustomed]— [§  134],  §  128  O.  H.  C. 
concluding  with  the —      ....     §  135 


immediately  after  the- 
the  Minister  shall  add  this- 


§142 
§287 

blessing  of  the  bread,  for  the —  .  .  .  .  §  124 
blessing  of  the  cup,  for  the —  .         .         .         .     §  124 

Blood,  shed  his — for  his  redemption  .  .  .  §  332 
bodily,  sacramental  bread  and  wine  there — received  §  151 
Body,  the  whole — of  our  Saviour   .         .     §  141  O.  H.  C. 

sacrament  of  the  blessed —        .         .         .     §  145 

the  Sacrament  of  the — of  Christ        .         .     §  148 

the  Sacrament  of  Christ's —      .         .         .     §  148 

the  natural — and  Blood     .         .         .         .     §  151 

receiving...  of  the — and  Blood    .         .         .     §320 

the  sacrament  of  the — and  Blood       .         .     §321 

so  much  of  the  Sacrament  of  the — andBlood    §  331 

eat  and  drink  [spiritually]  the — andBlood     §  332 

. Sacrament  of  the — and  Blood  of  our  Saviour  §    86 

body  of  the  Church,  The  Table  shall  stand  in  the —  §    75 


shall  come  into  the — 


book,  ministration  of  things  contained  in  this — 

laying  the  same  upon  the — 

Book  of  Common  Prayer,  appointed  in  the — 
books,  to  provide  him — of  holy  divinity 
borne,  pastoral  staff — by  his  chaplain    . 
bound,  every  man  and  woman  to  be — 


§272 
p.  64 
§283 
§368 
§131 
§  3 
§146 


to 

M 

* 
« 

» 
» 

♦ 
♦ 

* 

• 
* 

* 

* 

» 
* 

* 

• 

* 
* 
* 
• 

* 

• 

« 

* 
• 
• 

* 
♦ 

N 
\rt 
10 

H 
» 

« 

» 
* 

» 

• 

♦ 
♦ 

« 

« 
• 

* 
* 

10 
10 

M 

* 
* 

♦ 

» 

• 
» 

* 

* 

• 
* 

• 

* 

• 

* 
* 

* 

♦ 
* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

« 

CO 
10 

M 

* 

♦ 

• 
* 

• 

* 

* 
» 
* 

N 
(O 
VO 

M 

• 
• 
* 
♦ 
• 
• 
* 
• 
• 
* 

* 
» 
♦ 
* 
» 
* 

* 

• 

• 
* 
* 
• 
* 
* 
» 
• 

» 
• 

• 

• 
• 

478 


A  Concordance  and 


bound,  and  will  be — and  sureties  with  him   . 
Bread,  laying  the — upon  the  corporas  . 

break  the — before  the  people    . 

here  to  break  the — 

here  the  Priest  must  take  the — 

• here  to  lay  his  hand  upon  all  the —  . 

■ when  he  delivereth  the — 

and  as  the  Priest  ministereth  the —  §  121 

for  the  blessing  of  the —  . 

if  the  consecrated — or  wine  be  all  spent 

the — that  shall  be  consecrated  §  141 

the — prepared  for  the  Communion   . 

best  and  purest  wheat —  . 

adoration  is  done... to  the  Sacramental — 

deliver  the  chalice. ..with  the — 

Bread  and  wine,  shall  then  place... so  much — 

take  so  much — 

setting  both  the — upon  the  altar 

hath  so  ordered  the — 


§274 

§    98 

§106 

p.  245 

p.  245 

P-  245 

§  "7 

O.H.C. 

§124 
§124 
O.H.C. 

§  141 
§  141 
§151 
§437 
§    98 


§  106 
§141 


—  might  have  in  [concerning]  the — 

—  if  any  of  the — remain  [unconsecrated]    §  142 
place  the — prepared  for  the  Sacrament  §    98 

§  144 
§  144 
§151 
§151 
§151 
§142 


■ shall  find... sufficient — 

• for  the  Communion — 

• as  concerning  the  Sacramental — 

for  the  Sacramental — remain 

Bread  or  wine.  Sacramental — there  bodily  received 
over  more,  either- 


Breads,  every  of  the  said  consecrated —       §  141  O.H.C 
break  the  bread  before  the  people  .         .         .     §  106 
and  here  to — the  bread     . 


breast,  a  cross  upon  the  child's  forehead  and — 

anoint  him  upon  the  forehead  or —   . 

briefs,  citations,  and  excommunications 
bring,  of  such  as — [brought]  the  child 

they  which — the  infants  to  the  Church 


P-  245 
§183 
§319 
§    85 

§2lS 
§  229 


—  the  Curate... shall  either — or  send  in  writing  §  258 


either — or  send  in  writing 
broken,  shall  be — in  two  pieces  . 
brought,  the  other  being — after  him 

that  the  Chrisoms  be — to  the  Church 

that  he  fit]  be — into  the  Church 

shall  be — to  the  Bishop    . 

Burial  of  the  dead,  the  Order  for  the  . 

where  there  is  a — of  the  dead    . 

burial,  said  either  before  or  after  the — of  the  corps 

—  at  the — of  their  dead  at  Sea      . 

burying,  in — ,  the  minister... shall  use  a  surplice 

call,  shall — ^upon  God  [for  his  grace]   . 
shall  please  Almighty  God  to — them 


§268 
§  141  O.H.C. 

§191 
§206 
§216 
§257 
P-  372 
§353 
§348 
§388 
§  2 

§214 
§320 


10 

<    * 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

* 

* 

• 

• 
• 
♦ 
• 
• 
* 

* 

• 
• 

« 

«o 

M 

« 

• 

♦ 
* 

• 
» 

• 
• 

» 
» 

• 

• 

• 
• 

10 

• 

• 
• 

» 
• 

• 
• 

♦ 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

2- 

M 

♦ 

« 

♦ 
• 

• 

» 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

« 

♦ 

• 
• 

• 
* 

• 
• 

♦ 
• 

• 

« 
♦ 
• 

• 
• 

VO 

M 

* 

• 
• 

♦ 
• 

» 
» 

» 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

« 
• 

• 
• 
* 

♦ 
» 
• 

• 

* 
• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


479 


called  together,  the  people  being    . 

calling  the  godfathers  and  godmothers  together 

Canon,  may  be  seen  in  the  30th — 

proceed... according  to  the — 

•  unto  the  end  of  the — 

at  the  times  appointed  in  the- 

canticle,  or  this — "  Benedicite  omnia" 

afore  the  last — at  matins  . 

afore  the  last — at  evensong 

carpet.  The  table  having  a — 

carried,  not  be — out  of  the  Church 

carry,  shall  immediately — it 

case,  as  the—  shall  require    . 

cast,  the  earth  shall  be— upon  the  body 

casting  earth  upon  the  corpse 

Catechism,  and  be  further  instructed  in  the- 

such  questions  of  this  short — 

in  some  part  of  this — 

which  have  not  learned  their —  g^  25 

questions  of  this  short —  . 

■ in  some  part  of  this — 

— questions  contained  in  this— 

— as  he  can  say  the — and  be  confirmed 

— wherein  is  contained  a — for  children 

— ■ their  faith  according  to  the —    . 

Catechism  A — ,  that  is  to  say  an  instruction 
Cathedral,  in  all — Churches  and  Colleges     . 

in — churches... where  is  daily  communion 

in — and  Collegiate  Churches     . 

■ in  all— and  Collegiate  Churches 

cause,  shall — their  children  ...  §§  [: 

willingly  upon  no  just —  . 

for  which — also  it  is  expedient 

— upon  a  great  and  reasonable — 

without  great — and  necessity    . 

as  he  shall  see —      .... 

which  if  they  do,  they  shall  have  no — 

shall  have  the  less — to  be  disquieted 

celebrate,  whensoever  the  Bishop  shall — 
f^/if^rfl/^,  shall  there — the  Holy  Communion 

in  any  sick  man's  house    . 

forbear  to — the  Communion 

(where  he  may  reverently — )    . 

celebrate,    when  the  Holy  Communion  is — 
celebrates,  he  that — shall  go  to  the  Lord's  Table 

the  Presbyter  which — 

celehrateth,  or  else  the  presbyter  that — 
celebration,  at  the — of  the  Lord's  Supper 

at  the  time  of  the — of  the  Communion 

for  the — of  the  Holy  Communion     . 

■  appointed  to  be  said  at  the —   . 


o^ 

« 

o\ 

■<1- 

f> 

r) 

■^ 

Lo  10  0  cn  «;> 

LO 

m  lo 

W  VO  lO 

Ht 

HI 

§363 

» 

* 

* 

* 

— 



§205 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

§  211 

♦ 

§  73 

* 

§328 

* 

§410 

* 

§  18 

# 

^ 

* 

» 

§  180 

* 

§  180 

* 

§  75 

* 

§142 

» 

* 

§331 

* 

§357 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

* 

§344 

» 

* 

* 

» 

* 

§344 

» 

§207 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 

§250 

* 

» 

» 

* 

* 

§255 

» 

6,  [267J 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 

•  §257 

* 

» 

♦ 

* 

* 

» 

§266 

» 

§268 

» 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

* 

§269 

* 

* 

» 

* 

p.  318 

♦ 

* 

* 

P-  319 

» 

♦ 

p.  320 

» 

* 

* 

*  * 

* 

§   2 

♦ 

§  90 

♦ 

§  140 

« 

* 

♦  •» 

* 

§  145 

» 

56,  267] 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

» 

§  147 

♦ 

§178 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

■» 

» 

* 

.  §212 

» 

^ 

* 

*  * 

» 

§213 

* 

» 

* 

*  * 

» 

§307 

» 

» 

* 

*  » 

* 

•  §320 

» 

* 

* 

♦ 

« 

§  320 

♦ 

§   3 

* 

§322 

» 

* 

§331 

* 

§  145 

§322 

» 

§  130 

• 

§125 

* 

§  142 

• 

§  116 

« 

p.  98 

* 

« 

* 

» 

* 

§  87 

* 

§  92 

* 

§134 

» 

48o 


A  Concordance  and 


celebration,  shall  be  no — of  the  Lord's  Supper 

shall  be  no  public — of  the  Lord's  Supper 

if...therebea— of  the  Holy  Communion 

The — of  the  Holy  Communion  for  the  Sick 

The — of  the when  there  is  a  burial 


§137 
§137 
§321 
§323 
§353 
p.  14 


Ceremonies,  Of — why  some  be  abolished  . 

ceremony,  any  other  rite  or — in  the  Mass       §  98  O.  H.  C 

certain,  it  is — by  God's  word,  that  children  being      §  254 

it  is — ^by  God's  word,  that  children  which 

certificate,  without  a — of  the  banns  being 


certify,  if  they  shall — him  that  the  child 
if  they — that  the  child  is  weak 


§210 
§271 
§196 

§197 

chair,  imto  the  Bishop  sitting  in  his —  .         .     §  391 

the  [Arch]  Bishop  sitting  in  a  This] —   §§  402,  454 

sitting  in  his — near  the  Holy  Table       §§  421,  447 

Chalice,  consecrate  the  biggest —  .         .         §  98  O.  H.  C. 

putting  the  wine  into  the —       .         .         •     §    98 

if  the — will  not  serve        .         .         .         .     §    98 

be  it  in — or  flagons p.  245 

he  is  to  take  the — in  his  hand  .         .         .p.  245 

upon  every  vessel  (be  it — or  flagon)  .         .  p.  245 

shall  he  follow  with  the—        .        §  121  O.H.C. 

after  the  first  cup  or — be  emptied    §  143  O.  H.  C, 


shall  deliver  the — or  cup 
Chancel,  such  place  of  the — 

• accustomed  place  of  the — 

the  Table... shall  stand... or  in  the — . 

at  the  uppermost  part  of  the — or  church 

Chancels,  the — shall  remain  as  they  have  done 
changed,  the  water  in  the  font  shall  be — 
changing,  only — the  word  Infant 
chapel,  such  place  of  the —  .... 

accustomed  place  of  the — 

chapels,  in — annexed  to  Parish  Churches 

in — annexed  and  all  other  places 

in  such — annexed    .... 

Chaplain,  pastoral  staff"  borne  or  holden  by  his — 
chapter,  the  first,  second,  third... - 

such  a — or  verse  of  such  a 

here  endeth  such  a — 

charges,  for  the  bearing  of  the — of  the  Communion 

at  the — of  the  parish 

find  at  their  costs  and —  . 

to  offer  for  the —      .... 

so  offer  the — of  the  Communion 

charity,  because  brotherly — willeth 

[he]  be  in — with  all  the  world 

a  great  token  of —   .... 

child,  what  shall  be  the  name  of  the — 

certify  him  that  the — may  well  endure  it 

• first  naming  the — and  saying    . 


§437 
§  I 
§  I 
§  75 
§  75 
§  I 
§230 
§248 
§  I 
§  I 
§  2 
§137 
§138 
§  3 
§  16 
§  16 
§  16 
§138 
§  144 
§144 
§145 
§145 
§151 
§306 

§330 

§»83 
§196 

§193 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


481 


child,  and  if  the — be  weak  . 

if  they  certify  that  the — is  weak 

shall. ..lay  their  hands  upon  the — 

be  used  severally  with  every — 

holyday  next  after  the — is  bom 

one  of  them  shall  name  the —  . 

the — being  named  by  some  one 

doubt  not  but  that  the —  , 

whether  the — be  lawfully  baptized 


§197 
§  197 
§198 
§204 
§212 
§214 
§214 
§216 
§§[216,217] 


if  the — which  is  after  this  sort  baptized     .     §216 
those  that  bring  any — to  the  Church  §§  216  [217] 


if  the — were  baptized  by  any  other  .  .  §  217 

the  parish  where  the — was  bom        .  .  §217 

of  such  as  brought  [bring]  the —      .  .  §  218 

shall  not  he  christen  the — again        .  .  §  218 

shall  put  the... Chrisom  upon  the — .  .  §223 

saving  that  at  the  dipping  of  the —  .  .  §  229 

afore  any — is  baptized  in  the  water  .  .  §  230 

appear  that  the — was  baptized          .  .  §  229 

changing  the  word  infant  for —         .  .  §  248 

that  every — may  have  a  witness        .  .  §  257 

lay  his  hand  upon  every — severally  .  .  §  260 

shall  he  do  to  every — one  after  another  .  §  261 

laid  his  hand  upon  every —       .         .  .  §  261 

child-birth,  when  the  woman  is  past —          .  .  §  291 
Thanksgiving  of  women  after —  p.  389 


child^s forehead,  make  a  cross  upon  the- 
make  a  cross  upon  the- 


pp.  299,  309 
§§  183,  [200] 
§178 


children  ought  at  all  times  to  be  baptized 

may  at  all  times  be  baptized     .         .         .  §  178 

may  be  baptized  upon  any  other  day         .  §  178 

when  there  are — to  be  baptized         ,         .  §  180 

with  the — must  be  ready  .         .         .         .  §  180 

say  to  as  many — as  be  present .         .         .  §  184 

let  the  Priest,  looking  upon  the —    .         .  §  185 

let  the  Priest  take  one  of  the —         .         .  §  191 

— ■■ that  the- — be  brought  to  the  Bishop  .         .  §  207 

if  the  number  of — to  be  baptized      .         .  §  209 

which  are  baptized,  dying  before  they       .  §  210 

they  defer  not  the  baptism  of  their —         ,  §  212 

baptize  not — at  home  in  their  houses         .  §213 

to  be  baptized  at  home  in  their  houses      .  §  213 

when — come  to  the  years  of  discretion      .  §  25 1 

when — come  to  that  age  ...         .  §  252 

that  any  detriment  shall  come  to —  .         ,  §  254 

being  baptized,  if  they  depart  before          .  §254 

examine  so  many — of  his  parish        .  §§  [255,  266] 

shall  cause  their — servants,  &c.         .  §§  [256,  267] 

so  soon  as — are  come  to  a  competent  age  §  257 

so  soon  as  the — can  say    ....  §  257 

I  i 


01 
10 

M 
* 

♦ 
* 

* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
» 

* 
* 

» 
* 
* 

* 
* 

* 

* 
* 

» 
• 
» 

* 
» 

♦ 
« 

* 

M 

10 

M 

M 

CO 

10 

* 

* 
* 

* 

* 
* 
* 

* 

« 

* 

* 
* 

* 

♦ 
« 

« 

* 

* 
• 
* 

* 

• 

« 

* 
* 

» 
« 

« 

* 
* 

* 

* 

♦ 

• 
* 

* 

» 

* 
» 
* 

« 

* 
* 

» 

* 

• 

* 
* 

* 

* 

« 
* 

* 
■» 

* 

« 
» 

* 

* 

* 
» 

* 
« 
» 
« 

» 
* 

* 

» 
* 

* 

* 

» 

» 
* 

» 

» 

* 

* 
* 

* 

» 

» 
* 

» 
» 

» 
« 
• 

* 

» 

* 
* 
* 
* 

♦ 
* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 

* 
* 
* 

♦ 

« 

* 
• 

482 


A  Concordance  and 


children,  for — to  be  brought  unto  [before]  him  §  [258]  §  268 


then  shall  the  Bishop  bless  the 
the  names  of  all  those 


choirs  [See  Quires.] 

chrisom,  his  white  vesture,  commonly  called  the— 

this  order  of... putting  on  the — 

the  white  vesture,  commonly  called  the — 

must  offer  her — and  other... offerings 

chrisoms,  that  the — be  brought  to  the  Church 
christen,  then  shall  not  he — the  child  again  . 
christened,  where  the  child  was  bom  or —     . 
Christ's  Church,  into  the  number  of — 
Christ's  Religion,  that  they  being  instructed  in — 
Christian  people,  as  of  the  flock  of  [the]  true — 
Christian  Religion,  in  the  principles  of  the — 
Christians,  to  be  abhorred  of  all  faithfiil —  . 
Christian  Faith,  this  confession  of  our — 
Church  of  Christ,  such  orders  are  in  the —  . 

necessary  that  order  is  in  the —      §§ 


Church  of  Scotland,  used  throughout  the — 
church,  such  place  of  the — 

accustomed  place  of  the — 

shall  use  such  ornaments  in  [of]  the — 

as  were  in  this — of  England 

the  Bishop  shall  celebrate... in  the — 

so  that  the — by  him  is  offended 

for  the  decent  furnishing  of  that —    . 

customably  assembled  to  pray  in  the — 

it  shall  not  be  carried  out  of  the —    . 

part  of  the  other  daily  service  of  the — 

either  at  the — or  else  at' home  . 

coming  into  the —    .... 

those  that  bring  any  child  to  the —     §§  2 

that  he  [it]  be  brought  into  the —     . 

some  convenient  place  within  the — 

that  the  chrisoms  be  brought  to  the — 

let  them  stand  ^vithin  the — 

• bring  the  infants  to  the — 

again  baptized  in  the—    . 

should  be  done  in  the —  . 

■ they  may... openly  before  the — 

agreeable  with  the  usage  of  the- 

openly  in  the — 

• to  come  to  the —      ...  §§  [2 

shall  come  into  the  body  of  the — 

must  be  published  in  the — 

■ to  the  oft  receiving  (in  the — )   . 

be  not  able  to  come  to  the —    . 

publicly  administered  in  the — 

• celebration  of  the  Holy  Communion  in  the —  §  321 


§265 
§268 

§198 
§204 
§223 
§362 
§  206 
§218 
§217 
§178 
§253 
§218 
§231 
§151 
§  55 
§390 

90,  420 
p.  321 
§  I 
§  I 
§  2 
§  2 
§  3 
§  72 
§131 
§136 
§141 
§152 
§178 
§191 

6,  [217] 
§216 
§204 
§206 
§209 
§229 
§216 
§250 
§251 
§253 
§266 

56,  267] 
§272 
§270 
§320 
§320 
'  320 


10 

M 

01 
M 

t 

M 

CO 
VO 

M 

M 

• 

• 
* 

• 
• 
* 
• 
• 

• 
* 
• 

» 

• 
» 

• 
« 
» 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
♦ 
• 
* 
* 
♦ 
« 

• 
» 

• 

• 
• 
• 

* 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
« 
• 
• 

• 
♦ 

• 
♦ 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

« 
• 

• 

* 
• 

• 
• 
• 
« 
» 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

* 
* 
♦ 

• 
♦ 
• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
» 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

* 
♦ 
• 

• 
« 
• 
* 
• 

• 

• 

♦ 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
* 
• 
« 
• 
• 

• 
• 

* 

• 
« 
• 

* 
♦ 
* 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

* 

* 
• 
• 

• 
• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  S:c. 


4S3 


church,  the  open  Communion  ended  in  the — 

for  the  open  Communion  in  the — 

go  [going]  either  into  [unto]  the — 

after  they  are  come  into  the — 

are  to  be  said  in  the — 

the  woman  shall  come  into  the — 

assembled  in  the —  . 

in  the  face  of  the —  . 

things  are  duly  prepared  in  the — 

clun-ch  door,  must  be  ready  at  the — 

cannot  conveniently  stand  at  the — 

appointed  to  be... done  at  the^ 

convenient  place  nigh  unto  the — ■ 

Churching  ok  Wo.men,  commonly  called  the 
church  stile,  meeting  the  corpse  at  the — 
church-Li'drdens,  then  shall  the — gather  the  devotion 

one  of  the — shall  receive  . 

the  Deacons, — or  other  fit  person 

in  the  presence  of  the  Presbyter  and  the 

at  the  discretion  of  the... and — 

provided  by  the  Curate  and —  . 

as  the  Minister  and — shall  think  fit 

churchyard,  meeting... at  the  entrance  of  the — 
citations,  briefs,  and  excommunications  to  be  read 
clergy,  a  prayer  for  the  holy — 

the  Bishop. ..shall  with  the — ...sing  or  say 

shall  with  the — and  people  present 

clerks  and  people  shall  say  the  Lord's  Prayer 

the — kneeling  likewise 

then  the  Minister, — ,and  people 

the — shall  sing  in  English 

- — —  or  the — shall  sing     . 

the — and  people  shall  answer   . 

the — shall  sing  the  rest 

where  there  be — 

while  the — do  sing  the  offertory 

except  the  Ministers  and — 

this  the — shall  also  sing    . 

when  the — have  done  singing  . 

in  the  Communion-time  the — shall  sing 

shall  the— sing  the  post-Communion 

where  there  are  no — then  the  Priest 

the  Minister  or — going  to  the  Lord's  Tabl 

■ ministers  or — shall  say  or  sing  . 

or  else  the  Priests  [Pbr.]  and — shall  sing 

the  priest  and — meeting  the  coq^se  . 

• or  [else]  the  Priest  [Pbr.]  and — shall  sing 

and  the  Priest  [Pbr.]  and — kneeling 

the  Bishop... with  the — and  people     §§  39 

cloth,  a  fair  white  linen — on  the  table  . 

[In  ed.  1637,  "  A  carpet  and  a  fair  white,"  &c.] 


01 

0 

en  «3 

m 

VO 

m 

VO 

lO  U3 

M 

■^ 

§321 

♦ 

§322 

* 

§339 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

§340 

* 

§  34^ 

* 

§357 

* 

* 

» 

« 

» 

» 

^l^l 

* 

* 

♦ 

« 

» 

§410 

* 

§441 

♦ 

§iSo 

» 

§209 

* 

§  209 

# 

§  209 

» 

P-  3S9 

» 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

§339 

« 

» 

* 

« 

§  95 

♦ 

* 

» 

§  95 

* 

§  95 

* 

§  131 

4t 

§131 

* 

§  144 

« 

« 

« 

♦ 

* 

§  150 

* 

§339 

* 

§  «5 

* 

§  155 

* 

§395 

* 

§425 

* 

§  21 

♦ 

* 

» 

« 

* 

§  43. 

» 

§  44 

* 

§  74 

» 

§  77 

« 

§  83 

» 

§  «4 

* 

§  94 

« 

§  95 

* 

§  97 

* 

§  103 

* 

§  104 

* 

§  122 

♦ 

§  122 

* 

§  129 

« 

§288 

» 

« 

* 

» 

» 

§288 

* 

§339 

* 

* 

« 

* 

♦ 

§339 

* 

§342 

« 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

8  3&5 

» 

• 

* 

* 

• 

♦ 

,[4251 

♦ 

* 

* 

» 

§  75 

« 

* 

* 

* 

« 

484 


A  Concordance  and 


[The  word  "  Collect"  is  used  frequently  in  the  Rubrics 
throughout  the  Prayer-Book.] 

Collects,  The — ...to  be  used  at  the  celebration     p.  98 
THE— ...to  be  used  throughout  the  year  p.  98 

[In  1549,  The  Introits,  &c,] 

collects,  the  two  last — shall  never  alter           .         .  §    25 

then  shall  follow  three —  .         .         .         •  §    25 

with  three — §    46 

two  last — shall  be  said  daily    .         .        .  §    46 

to  be  said  after  the  offertory     .         .         .  §  132 

after  the — of  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer  §  132 

one  or  more  [two]  of  these —   .         .   §§  I34>  135 


and  so  many  of  the — appointed         .         .  §214 

colleges,  in  all  Cathedral  Churched  and —      .         .  §      2 

collegiate,  in  Cathedral  and — Churches          .         .  §  140 

in  all  Cathedral  and — Churches         .         .  §  145 

comely,  or  in  some  other — thing  prepared      .         •  §    90 

Cometh,  when  he — into  the  sick  man's  presence     .  §  298 

comfort,  shall  be  to  him  a  singular  great —  .         .  §  330 

comfortable,  the  absolution,  with  the — sentences   .  §  321 

command  that  the  Chrisoms  be  brought        .         .  §  206 

that  the  children  be  brought     .         .         .  §  207 

commanded,  it  shall  be — by  the  Ordinary     .         .  §  152 

commandment,  and  no — of  Christ  to  the  contrary  §  148 

commendatory,  a — prayer  for  a  sick  person  .  ,  §  317 
commending,  the  Bishop  — such  as  .shall  .  §§  395,  425 
COMMINATION,  A— against  sinners      .         .         .p.  394 

A — or  denouncing  of  God's  anger     .         .  p.  394 

commission,  other  Bishop  appointed  by  his  [lawful] —  §  447 

commit,  dying  before  they — actual  sin  .         .         .  §  210 

commonly,  was  not— ministered             .         .         ,  §  178 

the  people — receive  the  Sacrament   .         .  §  148 

Common  Prayer,  appointed  in  the  Book  of —        .  §  368 

the  office  in  the — book       .         .         .  §  389 

ordained  in  the  book  of —          .         .  §151 

communicants,  the — being  conveniently  placed     .  §    87 

eaten  and  drunk  by  such  of  the — only       .  §  142 

the  Priest  and  such  other  of  the —    .         .  §  142 

that  the— kneeling  should  receive     .         .  §151 

should  receive  the  same  kneeling       .        .  §  151 

in  the  name  of  the —         ....  §321 

<r(?ww««/i:a&,  them  that  shall —    .         .         ,         .  §  115 

except  there  be  some  to —         .         .         •  §  137 

except  there  be  a  good  number  to —         .  §  137 

except  there  be  a  sufficient  number  to —  .  §  137 

except  four  or  three  at  the  least —     ,         .  §  139 

except  there  be  a  convenient  number  to —  §  137 

though  there  be  none  to — with  the  Priest .  §  134 

none  disposed  to — with  the  Priest     .         .  §  136 

every  Parishioner  shall —         .        .        .  §  149 


m  o    m  vo 

10  10   (O   o 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &:c. 


485 


communuate,  always  some — with  the  Priest 

having  always  some  to — with  him     . 

some  that  will — with  him 

to — once  in  the  year  at  the  least 

shall — at  the  least  three  times  in  the  year 

how  many  be  appointed  to —   . 

so  many  as  shall — with  him 


be  [are]  appointed  to — with  the  sick   §§  [321],  330 


as  be  appointed  to — with  them 

can  be  gotten  to — with  the  sick 

the  Minister  may  alonely  [only] —   . 

the  new  consecrated  Bishop  shall  also- 

comviunicated,  before  all  have —  . 

in  the  name  of  all  them  that  have — 

when  all  have —       .... 

Cojnmunion,  at  the  time  of  the — 

at  the— The  Introits    . 

shall  be  used  the  same  Collect  at  the — 

the  table  [having]  at  the — time 

shall  notice  be  given  of  the — 

celebration  of  the — 

partakers  of  the —    . 

where  there  is  daily — 

before  he  shall  minister  the  — 

the  time  of  the— shall  be 

and  where  there  is  a —     . 

where  there  is  no — 

that  shall  receive  the —    . 

the — in  both  kinds  . 

the  Priest  shall  deliver  the — 

In  the — time  the  clerks  shall  sing 

• and  when  the — is  ended  . 

[the  same]  all  that  is  appointed  at  the — 

after  the  collects  either  of.., — or  Litany 

where  there  is  no — 

upon  the  holydays,  if  there  be  no  — 

for  the  bearing  of  the  charges  of  the — 

yet  there  shall  be  no —     , 

of  discretion  to  receive  the — 

they  shall  all  receive  the — 

the  bread  prepared  for  the — 

that  do  take  the —   . 

bread  and  wine  for  the  — 

to  offer  for  the  charges  of  the— 

so  offer  the  charges  of  the — 

shall  likewise  receive  the — 

shall  forbear  to  celebrate  the — 

then  shall  begin  the — 

Communion,  The— of  the  Sick  . 

and  yet  is  desirous  to  receive  the — 


§145 
§  145 
§145 
§146 

§149 
§320 

§321 


§331 
§337 
§337 
§462 

§  124 
§  127 

§125 


§  64 
§  75 
i  85 
§  87 
§88  0.H.C. 

.  §  98 
§92  0.H.C. 
§q8  0.H.C. 


§"5 
§116 


143 


P-  243 
O.H.C. 
§116 
O.H.C. 

§  122 
§  122 

[25]  135 
§132 
§  132 
§135 
§138 
§  139 
§139 
§  140 
§141 

O.H.C. 

§  144 
§145 
§145 
§145 
§145 
§293 
p.  366 
§320 


«  (  en  j  Tt 


486 


A  Concordance  and 


Communion,  shall  the  Priest  reserve  (at  the  open — ) 

after  the  open — ended  in  the  church 

sentences... following  in  the  open —  . 

after  the — ended,  the  Collect   . 

be  not  appointed  for  the  open — 

receive  the — with  the  sick  person 

the  Priest  [Pbr.]  shall  first  receive  the- 

and  go  straight  to  the —  . 

and  if  there  be  a —  .... 

shall  be  sung  or  said  the  service  for  th 

shall  be  sung  or  said  the — of  the  day 

shall  the  Bishop  proceed  to  the — 

the— ended,  after  the  last  collect 

for  the  Introit  to  the — this  Psalm 

then  shall  follow  the —     . 

the  service  for  the — 

also  they  shall  go  to  the — 


until  such  time  as  they  have  received  the —   §  438 


shall  go  on  in  the  service  of  the — 

the — being  done 

the  Psalm  for  the  introit  at  the — 

at  the— 

sliall  begin  the — service   . 

LSee  also  "  Holy  Communion.'T 
company,  for  lack  of — to  receive 
compel,  when  great  need  shall — them   . 
competent  age,  as  children  are  come  to  a — 
conditions,  prayer  for  all — of  men 
confess,  before  the  church,  ratify  and — 
Confession,  a  general — to  be  said 

of  our  Christian  Faith 

then  shall  [a]  this  general — be  made  §  112 

by  their  own  mouth  and — 

shall  the  sick  person  make  a  special — 

moved  to  make  a  special — of  his  sins 

after  which — the  Priest  shall  absolve 

the  appointed  general — must  be  made 

• make  a  humble — of  their  sin    . 

confessions,  shall  be  used  in  all  private — 
coiyirm,  before  the  church  ratify  and — 

and  the  Bishop  shall — them  on  this  wise 

shall — them  in  the  manner  following 

Confirmation,  wherein  is  contained,  &c. 
Confirmation  [The  Order  of] 

or  laying  on  of  hands 

that — may  be  ministered  . 

forasmuch  as — is  ministered 

that — should  be  ministered 

deferring  of  their — 

as  a  witness  of  their — 


§321 
§321 
§321 
§321 
§322 
§322 
§330 
§333 
§362 

§399 
§400 
§408 
§409 
§4" 
§4" 
§426 
§438 


§438 
§439 
§441 
§441 
§441 

§332 
§213 
§257 
§169 
§251 
i8,  32 
§  55 
O.H.C. 

§251 
§309 
§309 
§309 
§321 
§377 
§309 
§251 
§259 
§259 
p.  318 

pp.  318,  328 
pp.  318,  329 
§250 
§252 
§253 
§254 
§257 


10 

HI 

M 

t 

to 

M 

« 

* 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

» 

» 

* 

* 

♦ 

• 

• 

» 

* 

• 

* 

* 

• 

• 

« 

* 

• 

» 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

« 

• 

• 

* 

« 

* 

» 

» 

• 

• 

» 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

« 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

« 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

♦ 

* 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

» 

* 

« 

• 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

« 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

« 

♦ 

• 

• 

* 

* 

• 

• 

• 

* 

♦ 

« 

• 

« 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


487 


confirmation,  be  brought  unto  him  for  their — 

may  have  a  witness  of  his— 

any  convenient  place  for  their — 

coftfirmed,  that  none  hereafter  shall  be — 

presented  to  the  Bishop  to  be — 

be  brought  to  the  Bishop  to  be — 

should  be — by  the  Bishop 

all  that  are  to  be  then —  . 

be  brought  to  be — by  the  Bishop 

which  are  not  yet — 

until  such  time  as  he  be — 

can  say  the  Catechism  and  be — 

be  ready  and  desirous  to  be — 

congregation,  so  that  the — ...is  [be]  offenrkd 

that  the — may  thereby  be  satisfied 

to  be  said  of  the  whole — 

that  the— there  present     . 

in  the  presence  of  all  the — 

so  let  the — depart    . 

here  all  the— shall  kneel 

to  the  prayers  of  the — 

to  the  prayers  of  the — 

the — shall  be  desired 

the — shall  sing  the  Creed 

conscience,  troubled  in  mind  or  in — 

for  [the  better]  discharging  of  his- 

conscience,  sins  of  which  his — shall  accuse 

—  if  he  feel  his— troubled     . 

consecrate,  he  shall  bless  and —    . 

prepare,  bless,  and — 

as  he  intends  to —    . 

the  Priest  is  to — more 

required  to — with  the  least 

—  devoutly  prepare  and —    . 

consecrated,  there  is  any  wine  to  be — 

if  the — bread  or  wine  be  all  spent 

what  remaineth  of  the — elements 

the  bread  that  shall  be — 

every  of  the  said — breads 

if  any...  remain  which  is  [ofthat  which  was] 

say  this  to  him  that  is  to  be —  . 

consecration,  shall  say  the  prayer  of —  . 

during  the  time  of — 

the  words  of — 

these  words  in  the  prayer  of— 

the  King's  mandate  for  the —  . 

at  the— of  an  archbishop 


§258 

§257 
§268 
§250 
§258 
§207 
§247 
§249 
p.  320 
§267 
§269 
§269 
§269 
§  72 
§  72 
§  8 
§178 
§178 
§208 

§235 
§395 
§425 
§432 
§438 
§318 
§306 
§377 
§309 

§98  0.H.C. 

§98  0.H.C. 

•  P-  245 
.        .     §124 

.  §142 
§  143  O.H.C. 

•  P-  245 
.     §  124 

•  §  125 
§  141  O.H.C. 
§  141  O.H.C. 

§142 


.  §454 

.  §  107 

.  §106 

.  §142 

•  §142 
.  §448 

•  §450 
consecrate,  the  wme  hallowed  and —  .  §  143  O.H.C. 
co7isideratians,  cannot  for  many — be  well  restored  §  178 
most  convenient  to  be  observed  lor  divers —  §  250 


0\ 

M 

M 

10 

M 

0 
to 

M 

<o 

« 

* 

* 

« 

» 

* 

♦ 

» 

* 

* 

« 

» 

* 

* 

• 

* 

» 

» 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

♦ 

• 

♦ 

» 

» 

* 

« 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

« 

♦ 

* 

•k 

• 

♦ 

• 

♦ 

» 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

» 

« 

» 

» 

« 

» 

« 

* 

♦ 

* 

« 

» 

* 

» 
* 

* 
♦ 

« 

» 

* 

» 
♦ 

» 
» 

« 

♦ 

* 
* 

* 

♦ 

» 

* 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

* 

» 

» 

A  Concordance  and 


contagious,  or  such  other  like — times  of  sicknesses  §  337 
Contents,  The — of  this  book  .  .  .  pp.  4,  5 
continue,  it  shall — after  the  same  manner  §  98  O.H.C. 
convenient,  as  he  thinketh  most —         .         .         •     §    93 

except  there  be  a — number  to  communicate  §  137 

according  to  his  discretion  seem —    .        .     §  147 

it  is  thought — §  148 

that  it  is  most — §  178 

as  he  shall  think—  .         .         .  §§  [255,  266] 

it  is — that  the  new-married  persons 

then  upon — warning 

it  is — that  she  receive 

fair  and — cup  [or  cups]     . 

let  him  commune... at — leisure 


ccmveniently,  the  communicants  being — placed  for 

that — may  be  gotten 

that  so  much  as — may  be 

as  near  as — may  be  . 

cannot — stand  at  the  church  door     . 

placing  him — by  the  font 

so  soon  after  his  baptism  as — may  be 

soon  as  he — may      .        .        .         .    §§ 

convenient  place,  remaining  in  some —  . 


§295 

.     §322 

•     §362 

O.H.C. 

§  no  O.H.C. 


to  any — §  268 

having  a — §  322 

in  some — as  hath  been  accustomed     .     §  357 

nigh  unto  the  Quire  door  .         .         •     §  357 

nigh  unto  the  place  where  .         •     §  357 

cope,  use  neither  alb,  vestment,  nor —  .         .         .     §      2 

the  Bishop... shall  have  upon  him... a —     .     §      3 

a  white  albe,  plain,  with  a  vestment  or —      §    74 

a  plain  albe  or  surplice  with  a —       .         .     §  134 

having  upon  him  a  surplice  and  a —  .     §  447 

copes,  (being  also  in  surplices  and — )  .  .  .  §  447 
corporal,  cover  with  a  fair  linen  cloth  or —  .  .  §  125 
corporal  presence,  or  nvAo  z.x\y —  .  .  .  .  §  151 
corporas,  laying  the  bread  upon  the —  . 
corpse.  Priest  [Pbr.]  meeting  the — at  the  church  stile  §  339 

while  the — is  made  ready 

the  Priest  casting  earth  upon  the —  . 

costs,  shall  continually  find  at  their — and  charges 

in  recompense  of  such — and  charges 

coupled,  why  they  may  not  be — together 
course,  in  the  ordinary — of  the  Psalms 

in  every  parish  to  whom  by —  . 

know  before  when  their — cometh 


cover  with  a  fair  linen  cloth  or  corporal 
covered,  leave  the  rest  upon  the  altar — 
covering  the  same  with  a  fair  linen  cloth 
Credo,  after  the  Gospel  and — ended     . 


§9S 


§342 
§344 
§  144 
§  144 
§274 
§  14 
§145 
§145 

§125 

H.C. 
§125 
§447 


01 
10 

* 

• 
• 
» 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
♦ 
• 
• 
« 

• 

♦ 
♦ 
• 
• 
* 

• 
« 
♦ 
♦ 
• 
♦ 
• 

• 
• 

• 

M 

• 
• 

* 

• 
« 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

to 

M 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

» 

• 
• 

• 

« 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
* 

0 
to 

0 

♦ 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

* 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

* 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
* 

• 

* 
• 

♦ 

• 

* 
• 

• 

• 

* 
• 

• 
• 

• 
» 
• 

* 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
» 

• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


489 


Creed,  may  leave  out  the — 

then  the  Minister  shall  say  the — 

then  shall  be  said  the —   . 

then  shall  be  said  or  sung  the — 

then  shall  be  sung  or  said  the  Aposl 

■ such  days  as  the — of  S.  Athanasius 

shall  follow  the —     . 

said  or  sung  the  Apostles' — 

sung  or  said  instead  of  the  Apostles' 

the — of  St.  Athanasius 

shall  be  sung... the  [this] — [following 

may  be  omitted... the —    . 

then  shall  they  say  the — 

• say  in  their  mother  tongue  the — 

tlie  congregation  shall  sing  the — 

after  the  Gospel  and  the  Nicene — 

cross,  make  a — upon  the  child's  forehead 

make  a — upon  the  child's  forehead 

make  a — upon  the  person's  forehead 

the  sign  of  the — in  baptism 

shall — them  in  the  forehead     . 

making  the  sign  of  the —  , 

hath  suffered  death  upon  the — 

crossing,  as  touching — ,  kneeling,  &c.  . 
ctip,  fair  and  convenient — or  cups 

fair  or  convenient — prepared     . 

take  the— into  his  hands  . 

here  he  is  to  take  the —    . 

here  the  Priest  shall  take  the — 


§ 


§ 


6 

22 
22 
22 
22 
22 
42 
42 
55 
55 
84 
§  130 
§  221 
§257 
§438 
§  447 
§§  [183],  200 
pp.  299,  309 
p.  316 
§211 
§260 
§319 
§332 
§  4 
O.H.C. 


9S 


cup,  the  Minister  that  delivereth  the — 

for  the  blessing  of  the —   . 

first — or  chalice  be  emptied       .        §  143 

shall  deliver  the  chalice  or —     . 

Presbyter  or  Minister  that  receiveth  tlie 

Curate,  the — may  by  his  discretion  leave  out 

to  signify  their  names  to  the — 

the— shall  call  him  and  advertise  him 

the  same  order  shall  the — use  . 

the — shall  declare  what  holydays 

thelPbr.  or] — shall  see  the  people  negligent 

shall  the — give  this  exhortation 

at  the  discretion  of  the  [Pbr,  or] —    . 

first  the  Parson,  Vicar,  or —     .  §  92 

the — shall  declare  unto  the  people    . 

shall  pay  to  the — the... offerings 

shall  be  provided  by  the —        .         . 

the — shall  have  it  to  his  own  use 

reckon  with  his  [the]  Parson,  Vicar,  or — 

give  knowledge  to  the —  . 

as  the — by  his  discretion  shall  appoint 


§  106 

P-  245 

P-  245 

§119 

§124 

O.H.C. 

§437 
§  119 


6 
§  71 
§  72 
§  73 
§  86 
§  91 
§  88 
§  92 
O.H.C. 

§  93 
§  96 
§  144 
§  142 
§  149 
§180 
§  180 


01 

in 

0\ 

10 

M 

■<1- 
0 
10 

M 

Hr 

* 

» 

« 

* 

» 

* 

« 

-N- 

* 

* 
* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

« 

* 

» 

* 

» 

♦ 

• 

* 

* 

* 
* 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 

« 

» 

* 

» 

» 

♦ 

* 

* 
* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

« 

* 

* 

» 

» 

« 

« 

* 

* 

* 

* 

# 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

« 

« 

* 

» 

* 

» 

* 

» 

» 

« 

* 

« 

» 

♦ 

* 

• 

* 

« 

* 

* 

« 

• 

* 

» 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

» 

« 

» 

* 

* 

* 

490 


A  Concordance  and 


Curate,  reasonable  cause  declared  to  the —  .        .  §  212 

to  be  approved  by  the —  .        .        .        .  §  212 

as  the — in  his  discretion  .         ...  §  232 

the — of  every  parish  .         .         .    §§  255,  258 

be  ordered  by  the —  .         .  §§  [256,  267] 

the — of  every  parish  or  some  other   .        .  §  266 

the — of  every  parish  once  in  six  weeks      .  §  266 

shall  the — of  every  parish         .        .         .  §  268 

the — saying  after  the  accustomed  manner  §  270 

the — of  the  one  parish      .         .         .         .  §  271 

— ■■ from  the — of  the  other  parish  .         .         .  §271 

shall  the  [Pbr.  or] — say  unto  the  man       .  §  275 

the — ^may  end  his  exhortation  .         .         .  §  302 

give  knowledge... to  the  [Pbr.  or] —  .        .  §  320 

must  give  timely  notice  to  the —        .         .  §  320 

before  the — distribute  the  Holy  Communion  §  321 

the — adding  the  Absolution      .         .         .  §  321 

the — shall  come  and  visit  the  sick  person  §  322 

where  the  [Pbr.  or] — may  reverently  minister  §  322 

the — doth  celfebrate  in  any  sick  man's  house  §  331 

then  shall  the — (there)  reserve  .        .        •  §  331 

warning  given  in  due  time  to  the  [Pbr.  or] —  §  332 

the  [Pbr.  or] — shall  instruct  him       .         .  §  332 

Curates,   forsomuch  as  the  Pastors  and —     .         .  §  144 

to  the  use  of  their  Pastors  and —       .         .  §  144 

the  Pastors  and — shall  oft  admonish          .  §  212 

the — of  every  parish         .        .        .        .  §  212 

the  [Pbrs.  and] — shall  diligently  from  time  §  320 

cures,  find. ..in  their — sufficient  bread  and  wine  .  §  144 
custom,  which — now  being  grown  out  of  use  .  §  178 
customably,  all  ecclesiastical  duties — due  .  .  §  149 
whensoever  the  people  be — assembled      .  §  136 


daily.  The  Order  for  Morning  and  E.  ...Prayer — 

"  Te  Deum  Laudamus"  in  english — 

be  said — through  the  year  these  prayers 

then  shall — follow  three  Collects 

never  alter  but — be  said  . 

said  at  [Evensong]  Evening  Prayer  . 

to  be  used — at  sea    .... 

daily  service,  any  part  of  the  other —  . 
daily  Communion,  where  there  is —  . 
danger,  where  there  shall  be  imminent — 

they  begin  to  be  in — to  fall  into  sin  . 

Deacon,  being  a  Priest  or — he  shall  have  and  wear 

with  the — or  Presbyter     . 

the  Priest  or — 'then  shall  read  the  Gospel 

the — ...shall  receive  the  devotions    . 

shall  the  Priest  or — turn  him    . 

by  the  Presbyter  himself  or  the — 


P-65 
§  17 
§  21 
§  25 
§  25 
§  46 
§368 
§152 
§  90 
§377 
§252 

§  3 
§  8 
§  84 
§  95 
§  104 
§  112 


01 
to 

10 

M 

10 

M 

0 

CO 

to 

M 





— 





• 

• 

♦ 

« 

* 

• 

• 

• 

» 

« 

* 

• 

* 

» 

« 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

«- 

« 

• 

* 

» 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

» 

• 

• 

» 

« 

* 

• 

• 

* 

« 

♦ 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

♦ 

» 

• 

• 

* 

» 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

« 

• 

• 

« 

» 

» 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

» 

♦ 
« 

• 

• 

♦ 

« 

• 

• 

• 

» 

• 

• 

* 

* 

• 

• 

* 
• 

* 

• 

• 
• 

» 

♦ 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


491 


Deacon,  if  there  be  a— or  other  Priest  .       §  121  O.H.C.    » 


must  continue  in  that  office  of  a — 

it  must  be  shewed  [declared]  unto  the — 

if  the  orders  of — and  Priesthood 

Deacons,  where  there  be  many  Priests  or — 

churchwardens,  or  other  fit  person   . 

the  same  to  the  Bishops,  Priests,  and — 

deliver  it  to  other... Presbyters — 

where  be  many  Priests  and —  . 

where  be  many  Presbyters  and — 

of  such  as  come  to  be  admitted —     . 

such  as  desire  to  be  ordained — 

the  Form  and  Manner  of  Making  of — 

the  Form  and  Manner  of  Ordering  of — 

appointed  in  the  form  of  ordering — 

set  forth  in  the  form  for  ordering — 

if  on  the  same  day  the  order  of — 

the — shall  be  first  presented 

[The  word  occurs  also  §§  440  (3),  448  (2),  452  (2).] 
Deans,  the  Archdeacons, — Provosts     . 
dearth,  and  [or]  famine,  in  the  time  of — 
decency,  with  more  [ease]  readiness  and —     . 
decent.  Notes  for  the — ministration  of  things 

with  other — furniture  meet  for 

in  a — basin  provided  for  that  purpose 

for  the — furnishing  of  that  church     . 

decently  apparelled,  come  into  the  church —  . 
decently  habited,  each  of  them  being — . 
declare,  the  curate  shall — unto  the  people     . 

we  do — that  it  is  not  meant 

declared,  it  is  here —    ..... 

reasonable  cause — to  the  Curate 

'■ —  office  of  man  [husband]  and  wife  shall  be — 

declaring,  sermon — the  duties  of  man  and  wife 

an  exhortation — the  duty  and  office  . 

the  duty  and  office  of  such  as  come 


§410 
§410 
§440 
§  74 
§  95 
§116 
§116 

§  140 
§140 
§390 
§391 
p.  419 
p.  419 
§425 
§429 
§440 
§440 

§  2 
§  162 
§  ro6 
p.  64 
§  75 
§  95 
§131 
§357 
91,  421 

§  93 
§  151 
§151 
§212 

§294 
§294 
§390 
§420 


degrees,  hood  as  pertaineth  to  their  several —      (bis)  § 
«t/iz/^,  he  shall... — it  to  the  Presbyter  .         •     §    95 

the  Priest  shall — the  Communion    §  1 16  O.H.C. 

and  next — it  to  other  Ministers  [Bishops]       §  116 

and  then  proceed  to — the  same         .         .     §116 

when  he  doth — the  Sacrament         §  117  O.H.C. 

the  Priest  [Pbr.]  taking  the  ring  shall— it       §  283 

to  every  one  of  them  the  New  Testament 

the  Bishop  shall — to  every  one 


deliverance  from  our  enemies,  for  Peace  and — 

from  the  Plague       .... 

delivered,  the  Chrisoms...to  be — to  the  Priest 
aelivereih,  and  when  he — the  bread 
the  Minister  that... — the  cup   . 


§406 
§437 
§174 
§176 
§  206 
§117 
§119 


to 

in 

M 

0 

M 

IN 

CO 

M 

s 

» 

• 

♦ 

» 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

« 

♦ 

• 

» 

» 

* 

• 

» 
* 

• 

* 

• 

* 

* 
• 
» 

« 

♦ 

♦ 

» 

* 

» 
» 
» 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

* 
* 

» 

• 

« 
* 

* 
• 

* 
♦ 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

* 

» 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

* 

« 

• 

* 

» 

« 

« 

« 

• 
♦ 

« 

* 

* 

♦ 

• 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

« 

• 

* 

* 

* 

« 

• 

» 

* 

* 

» 

• 

« 

• 

» 

» 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

* 

• 

* 

492 


A  Concord AKCE  and 


delivering,  and  the  Priest — the  Sacrament  §1190.  H.  C. 

and  the  Minister — the  Sacrament     .         .     §  119 

demand,  then  shall  the  Priest  [Pbr.] —     §§  193,  222  [239] 
Archbishop — the  King's  [Queen's]  mandate    §  448 


demanding,  this  order  of — ,  baptizing,  &c, 
depart,  shall — out  of  the  choir 

let  them— with  [this]  blessing  §§  128  O.  H 

they  shall — out  of  this  life        .         . 

in  the  name  of  the  Lord  . 

if  they — out  of  this  life  in  their  infancy 

departing,  those  that  be  first  baptized — 

departure,  at  the  point  of — 

depraved,  misconstrued — and  interpreted 

be  misconstrued  and — 

deputy,  to  the  ordinary,  and  he  or  his — 

Vicar,  or  Curate,  or  his  or  their —    . 

the  Archdeacon  or  his —  .         . 

and  the  Archdeacon  or  his —    . 

desire,  if  the  sick  [person] — to  be  anointed  .    §§ 

the  sick  person  shall  always — some  . 

present... such  as — to  be  ordained 


desirous,  ready  and — to  be  confirmed 

and  yet  is — to  receive 

detriment,  no  man  shall  think  that  any- 

devil,  against... the  assault  of  the  world  and  the — 

by  the  assaults  of  the  world  and  the — 

devised,  no  order  can  be  so  perfectly — 
devotion,  as  every  man's — serveth 

gather  the — of  the  people 

devotions,  shall  receive  the  alms... and  other — 

receive  the — of  the  people 

diligent,  if  he  be  found  faithful  and —  . 
diligently,  receiving  of  the  Holy  Communion  more- 

the  Curate  of  every  parish  shall —     . 

shall — upon  Sundays  and  Holydays 

the  Curate  shall — from  time  to  time 

aiocesan,  may  be  admitted  by  his — 
dip,  naming  the  child  shall — it     . 

shall — it  in  the  water  discreetly 

and — him  in  the  water     . 

shall — it  in  water  or  pour 

then  shall — him  in  the  water 

dipping,  at  the — of  the  child         . 

first — the  right  side  . 

disagree,  wherein  if  they —  . 
discharged,  and  the  parish  shall  be— of  such  sums 
discharging,  for  [the  better] — ol  his  conscience 
discreet,  parents  or  some  other — persons 
discreetly,  so  it  be — and  warily  done     . 
shall  dip  in  the  water — and  warily   . 


§204 
§  97 
[134] 
§320 
§208 

§254 
§204 

§317 
§151 
§151 
§  I 
§  149 
§391 
§391 
319,  336 
§330 
§391 
§269 
§320 

§254 
§252 
§252 
§151 
§  4 
§  95 
§  95 
§  95 
§410 

§  92 
§255 
§266 
§320 
§410 

§195 
§196 
§214 
§214 
§241 
§  229 
§195 
§150 
§  144 
§306 
§231 
§195 
§196 


01 

to 

M 

10 

CO 

M 

VO 
M 

» 

* 

« 

* 

* 

* 

» 

» 

» 

* 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

« 

■» 

« 

• 

• 

* 

• 

» 

* 

• 

* 

* 

* 

* 

« 

♦ 

• 

» 

♦ 
* 

* 
• 

• 

• 

« 

• 

-» 

* 

• 

-» 

« 

• 

• 

• 
* 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

■* 

» 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

« 

■» 

« 

» 

» 

« 

♦ 

« 

• 

• 

* 

• 

« 

» 

* 

* 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

* 

» 

• 

• 

* 

» 

• 

« 

* 

• 

* 

• 

• 

* 

• 

« 

• 

» 

» 

« 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

» 

« 

• 

* 

• 

•» 

• 

• 

« 

• 

« 

• 

» 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c 


493 


discretion,  at  the — of  the  [Pbr.  or]  Curate 
most  convenient,  by  [in]  his 


at  the — of  the  Presbyter  and  Churchwardens  §  131 


§141 


or  Litany  by  the — of  the  Minister 

above  twenty  persons... of — 

broken... by  the — of  the  Minister 

divided... at  the — of  the  Minister 

the... judge  according  to  his —  . 

as  the  Curate  by  his — shall  appoint . 

in  his — shall  think  fit       .         .         . 

according  to  his —   .         .         .         •  §§  J 

before  they  come  to  years  of — 

when  children  come  to  the  years  of — 

shall  [serve]  by  his —       .     ,     .  §§  [134], 

come  to  years  of —  . 

diseases,  sudden  perils, — ,  and  sicknesses 
times  of  sicknesses  or —   . 


§ 


§132 
§139 
H.C. 

§141 
§147 
§180 
§232 

37  [241] 
§248 
§251 

250,  257 

P-  319 
§320 

§337 

§§  92,  145 

§88  0.H.C. 

95 


dispose  themselves  to  the  [worthy]  receiving 
disposed  to  be  partakers  of  the  Communion 

so  many  as  are — shall  offer 

and  none — to  communicate      .         .         .  §  136 

as  oft  as  their  parishioners  shall  be —        .  §  144 

who  be  then  godly — thereunto          .         .  §  145 

and  if  he  have  not  afore — his  goods .         .  §  306 

if  he  hath  not  before — of  his  goods  .         .  §  306 

disposed  of,  as  the  Ordinary  shall  appoint     .         .  §  150 

to  such  pious... uses          ....  §150 

disquieted,  have  the  less  cause  to  be —           .         .  §  320 

dissension,  to  take  away  all  occasion  of —     ,         .  §  141 

for  avoiding  of  all  matters... of —       .         .  §141 

distinct  reading,  after  the  manner  of —          .         .  §    16 

distribute,  before  the  Curate — the  Holy  Communion  §  321 

distributed,  divided  in  two  pieces. ..and  so —         .  §  141 

distribution,  at  the  time  of  the —  ....  §  330 

diversely,  kept  it  with  them  and — abused  it .         .  §  148 

divided  in  the  presence  of  the  Presbyter        .         •  §  131 

may  aptly  be — in  divers  pieces          .         .  §  141 

Divine  Service,  wheresoever  else  it  is  used  in —    .  §    1 1 

during  the  time  of —          .         .         •  §    85 

after  the — tended       .         ,         .         •  §  131 

. to  hear  and  be  at  the —     .         .         .  §  146 

after  the — ended        .     ■    .         .         .  §  150 

in  the  time  of —         ....  §  270 

doctriru,  according  to  St.  Paul's —       .         .         .  §  250 

doubt,  let  them  not — §  216 

Doxology,  shall  follow  immediately  this —    .         .  §  102 
drink,  not — it  up  all  himself        .         .          §  98  O.H.C. 

§  119  O.H.C. 
§  142 
§    96 


giving  every  one  to — once         .        §  119  ( 
drunk,  reverently  be  eaten  and — [eat  and  drink] 
due  and  accustomed  offerings       .        .        .         . 


to 

M 

• 
• 
« 

» 
• 

• 

• 

* 

« 
• 
♦ 

» 

» 
• 
• 
* 

• 

* 

• 
• 

• 
* 

« 

10 

M 

* 
» 

« 
• 

* 

• 

« 
» 

♦ 
* 

• 

» 
• 

* 
• 

* 

iO 

•o 

M 

1 

to 

(« 
0 

M 

» 
» 

» 
• 

• 

» 

• 
* 

* 
» 

* 

• 
* 

• 
• 

» 
♦ 

* 

* 
* 

• 

• 
* 

• 

» 
• 

• 
» 

• 

* 
• 
« 
* 

» 

» 

• 
• 

« 
• 

• 

» 
* 

» 

• 
» 

• 

« 

• 

* 

» 

• 
• 
• 
* 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

♦ 

♦ 
♦ 

• 
* 

• 
* 

494 


A  Concordance  and 


due  obedience,  the  oath  of — §  448 


duly,  when  all  things  are — prepared 
duties,  such  siuns  of  money  or  other — 

to  pay  their — ,  to  communicate,  &a 

pay  to  them... all  ecclesiastical — 

duty,  with  the  accustomed — to  the  Priest  [Pbr.]  . 
duty  and  office,  an  exhortation  declaring  the — 

of  such  as  come  to  be  admitted 

</«/!?//,  the  persons... — in  divers  parishes 
dying  before  they  commit  actual  sin     . 

earnestly  exhort  them  to  remember 

to  move  the  sick  person,  and  that  most — 

to  move  such  sick  persons 

ease,  where  he  may  with  more — and  decency 
Easter,  of  which — to  be  one        .... 

of  which  Pasch  or — shall  be  one       . 

eat  and  drink,  reverently — the  same 

he  doth — the  Body  and  Blood  . 

he  doth — spiritually  the  Body  and  Blood 

eaten,  it  shall  reverently  be — and  drunk 
ecclesiastical  administration,  appertaining  to  the — 
ecclesiastical  duties,  and  pay  to  them... all —  . 
ecclesiastical  laws,  by  the — of  the  realm 
ecclesiastical  judge,  as  shall  to  the — . . .  seem  convenient 
edification,  should  be  done  in  the  church  to  the — 
edifying,  may  be  ministered  to  the  more —   .         . 
Edward  VI. ,  in  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of — 
elected,  first  the — Bishop       .... 

the — Bishop  (vested  with  his  rochet) 

upon  the  head  of  the — Bishop  . 

elevation,  without  any — or  shewing 
Ember-weeks,  prayer  to  be  said  in  the — 
in  the — to  be  said  every  day 


efnployed,  shall  be  faithfully  kept  and — 
emptied,  the  first  cup  or  chalice  be —     .        §  143 
endeavour,  will  evermore — themselves 
endure,  the  child  may  well — 
enemy,  deliverance  from  an — 

fight  at  sea  against  any — 

special  prayers  with  respect  to  the — 

english,  "  Venite  exultemus,"  &c.,  in — as  followeth 

"  Te  Deum  Laudamus"  in — 

the  Lord's  Prayer  in —     . 

"Benedictus  Dominus"  in — 

"  Magnificat"  in —  . 

"  Nunc  dimittis"  in — 

"Deus  misereatur"  in —  . 

english  Litany,  the — shall  be  said 
etiglish  tongiu,  be  ministered  in  the— 


§441 
§  144 
§146 

§  149 
§283 
§390 
§420 
§271 
§210 

§    93 

§308 
§308 
§106 
§  149 
§  149 
§142 
§332 
§332 
§142 
§410 

§  149 
§147 
§147 
§250 
§250 
§  2 
§447 
§447 
§459 
§108 

§159 
§166 

§131 
.H.C. 

§251 
§196 
§384 
§373 
§375 
§  14 
§  17 
§  23 
§  19 
§  38 
§  40 
§  41 
§363 
§178 


• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

« 

• 
• 
♦ 
• 

• 

• 
• 

♦ 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

« 

m 
«n 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

* 

• 
» 

• 

• 

* 

• 
« 

• 

* 

* 

• 
* 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

10 

• 

• 

• 
♦ 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

* 
• 

• 
♦ 
• 
♦ 

• 

• 

» 
» 
• 
* 
• 
• 
* 
• 

10 

M 

• 

« 
• 

« 

* 
• 

» 

♦ 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

« 
» 
• 
• 
* 

• 
• 

P5 
10 

M 

* 

• 

« 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

« 
• 

* 
• 
* 

• 
« 
• 
• 
• 

• 

C4 

10 
13 

M 

* 
• 

• 
* 
* 
• 
* 
* 

• 

• 

* 
« 

• 
• 

• 

• 
* 

• 

» 
• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


495 


^;{;'(?/«f(/ by  the  king  or  hy  the  ordinary 
ensue,  as  might  otherwise —  .         .         .         • 

which  about  the  Holy  Communion  might — 


§  85 
§151 
§151 
§456 
§    i6 


episcopal  habit,  put  on  the  rest  of  the — 
epistle  and  gospel,  shall  be  sung...  likewise  the — 
[The  title  "  Epistle"  occurs  ■sX^o  passim  throughout  the  Collects, 
pp.  98 — III,  also  at  pp.  387,  429,  &c.] 

essential,  or  to  any  real  and — presence 
which  are — parts  of  baptism 


estates,  for  the  settling  of  their  temporal —    . 
esteem,  ought  to — them  in  their  [office]  vocation 

ought  to — them  in  their  office  . 

roe,  holiday  that  hath  a  vigil  or — 
evening  prayer,  at  the  beginning. ..of — 

at — as  at  Morning  Prayer 

at  the  beginning  of — 

^  said  daily  at — without  alteration 

the... collect  at — 

here  endeth  the  order  of — 

after  the  last  [second]  lesson  at —    §§  i 

evening  service,  shall  be  said  at  the —   . 
evensong,  as  well  at — as  at  matins 

said  daily  at — without  alteration 

the  second  collect  at — 

thus  endeth  the  order  of  matins  and — 

afore  the  last  Canticle  at — 

half  an  hour  before — 

examination,  due  care  may  be  taken  for  their — 
examine,  the  Priest  may — and  try 

then  shall  the  Priest — them  further  . 

shall — and  try  whether  the  child 

then  shall  the  Minister — them  further 

: —  openly  in  the  church  instruct  and —  . 

whether  he  be  in  charity  . 

shall  the  Bishop — every  one  of  them 

excommunicate,  Vi^oxy^xoQi..Xo\i& —    . 

any  that  die  unbaptized  or —    . 

excommttnications  [to  be]  read      .         ,         , 

execute,  shall — the  holy  ministry  . 

or — any  other  public  ministration     . 


executors,  and  quietness  of  his —  . 
exhort,  shall  thus — them  as  folio weth  . 

the  priest  shall  earnestly — 

them  to  remember  the  poor 

shall  the  Minister — the  sick  person 

shall... — their  parishioners 

exhortation,  may  leave  out  the — to  the  Communion 

after  the  Sentences, — ,  Confession 

shall  the  Curate  give  this — 

shall  the  Priest  say  this — 

shall  the  Presbyter  say  this —  . 


§  151 
§229 
§306 
§390 
§420 

§  57 
§  7 
§    21 

§  31 
§  46 
§  47 
§  54 
80  [255] 

57 


§  21 
§  43 
§  47 
§  56 
§180 
§266 
§231 
§216 

§2l6 

§217 
§217 

§255 
§306 
§404 
§147 
§338 
§  85 
§  74 
§  3 
§306 
O.H.C. 
§  92 
§  93 
§301 
§320 
§     6 


0 
m 

M 

0 
VO 

M 

CO 

10 

M 

♦ 
• 

• 
• 

« 
« 

* 

* 

• 
* 

* 

• 

• 
* 
• 

• 
* 

M 

* 

* 

• 
• 
« 
♦ 
» 
* 

» 
* 

♦ 

« 

« 
• 
• 

* 

« 

• 
• 

« 

• 
• 

• 

* 

• 
♦ 

* 
* 

• 

* 

• 
* 

* 

* 

• 

« 
• 

* 

• 

* 

» 
• 

« 

« 

• 

« 

* 
♦ 

* 

« 

♦ 
* 
« 

♦ 

» 
« 

• 
* 

• 
* 

• 

» 

» 
* 

* 

• 
« 
« 

* 

♦ 
« 

• 

* 
* 
* 

• 
♦ 

• 
• 
• 
* 
* 
» 

* 

* 
• 
* 
* 

» 
* 

* 

• 
♦ 

* 

496 


A  Concordance  and 


exhortation,  shall  be  sufficient  to  read  this — 

then  shall  follow  this — [shall  use  thi"; — ] 

he  shall  read  this —  .         .         . 

after  such  sermon,  homily,  or — 

whether  he  can  with  good —    .        §  i  lo 

the — beginning,  Dearly  beloved,  &c. 

the  Minister  shall  make  this  brief — 

shall  say  this  [short] — following 

shall  say  to  the  godfathers. .  .this — followin 

shall  make  this  [brief] — 

make  this — to  the  godfathers,  &c 

he  shall  say  this — following 

the  Priest  shall  use  this — 

may  end  his — at  [in]  this  place 

the  first  part  of  the — 

there  shall  be  a  sermon  or —    . 

an — declaring  the  duty  and  office 

after  the — ended 

when  the — is  ended  .         .  §§411 

exhorted,  may  be — to  prepare 
exhorting  him  to  forgive      .... 
exigence,  as  the  time  and  present — will  suffer 
expedient,  for  which  cause  also  it  is —  . 

it  is — that  he  [it]  be  brought    . 

it  is — that  every  person    . 

expedition,  so  shall  he  for  more —         .        §  I2I 

the  Priest  [Pbr.]  for  more — shall 

expert,  he  may  be  perfect  and  well —  . 
explication,  plain — and  decent  ministration  . 

the  true — thereof     .... 

expressed,  accordingly  as  is  there — 
extreme  or  in  case  of — danger      .         , 
extremity,  by  reason  of —of  sickness     . 

face,  the  third  time  dipping  the —         . 

turning  his — toward  them 

fair  or  convenient  cup  prepared  . 

and  convenient  cup  or  cups        .         §  98 

fair  linen  cloth,  cover  with  a — or  corporal    . 

covering  the  same  with  a — 

fair  -weather,  for —       ..... 

[a  thanksgiving]  for — 

faith,  openly  profess  their  own — 

able  to  render  an  account  of  their — 

faithful,  if  he  be  found — and  diligent  .         . 
fashion,  the  bread. ..be  made. ..after  one  sort  and- 

they  minister  it  on  this — 

shall  be  administered  on  this — 

fasting,  Days  of — or  Abstinence  . 

■■    holydays  or — days  .... 


0>    TJ- 

10  0 

CO 

Ul 

v. 

m  >o 

(O 

0 

M 

1 

M 

M 

.  §  90 

• 

~ 



.  §  91 

• 

• 

« 

• 

• 

.  §  92 

• 

•     §    93 

• 

• 

• 

« 

O.H.C. 

.     §130 

* 

•     §187 

« 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

.     §205 

« 

• 

« 

» 

* 

ig    §205 

• 

•     §219 

♦ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

.     §227 

• 

• 

» 

• 

• 

•     §237 

• 

•     §245 

• 

•     §302 

• 

« 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•     §335 

• 

390,  420 

» 

•     §390 

• 

• 

• 

•    §391 

• 

• 

• 

II,  [414] 

« 

• 

• 

.     §231 

• 

.     §306 

• 

» 

• 

• 

• 

• 

.     §214 

• 

.     §178 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

.     §216 

• 

• 

♦ 

» 

• 

» 

•     §247 

• 

O.H.C. 

♦ 

•     §333 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

♦ 

.    §410 

• 

• 

• 

• 

.     p.  64 

♦ 

.     §211 

• 

•     §207 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

.     §248 

• 

.     §332 

• 

• 

* 

• 

■• 

» 

.     §195 

• 

.     §290 

• 

• 

• 

« 

• 

• 

.     §    98 

• 

O.H,C. 

.     §125 

• 

.     §125 

• 

.     §  161 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

.     §172 

• 

« 

» 

•     §253 

• 

• 

• 

♦ 

♦ 

p.  318 

• 

• 

.     §410 

• 

• 

• 

• 

-    §  141 

• 

•     §213 

• 

• 

• 

•     §213 

• 

• 

• 

.     P-  32 

• 

.     §    85 

• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


497 


fasting,  whether  there  be  any — ...days           .         •  §    93 

with  prayers  and —          ."        .         .         .  §  231 

/rtj/j-,  a  Table  of  the  Vigils, —    .        .        .        .  p.  32 

/atker's  hand,  the  woman  at  her —        .         .          .  §  281 
fathers,  and  all — mothers,  masters        .          §§  [256,  267] 

Jeasts,  moveable  and  immoveable —      .         .          .  p.  31 

that  are  to  be  observed     .          .         .          .  p.  31 

in  the  [upon  these] — of    .         •         .         •  §    55 

feel,  if  he — his  conscience  troubled        .         .         .  §  3^9 

felloivs,  the  Archdeacons,  Deans... — ,  &c.     .         .  §      2 

yJ'Wrt/t',  and  for  every — one  godfather    .          .         •  §  179 

fight  at  sea,  prayers  to  be  said  before  a —      .          •  §  373 

fight  or  stortn,  by  reason  of  the —           .          .         .  §  374 

filled,  to  be — with  pure  water       .         .         .         .  §  181 

find,  continually — as  they  were  wont  to — and  pay  §  144 

if  the  ]\Iinister  shall —      ....  §218 

First  Day  of  Lent. ..[called  Ash-Wednesday]  p.  394 
fit,  [in  his  discretion]  shall  think —      .          .     g§  150,  232 

if  they  shall  be  found —    ... 

flagon,  upon  every  vessel  (be  it  chalice  or) —         .  p.  245 

flagons,  upon  so  much  (be  it  in  chalice  or — )         .  p.  245 

Flesh  and  Blood,  being  of  Christ's  natural —          .  §  151 

Corporal  Presence  of  Christ's  natural —  S  151 

flock,  one  of  the — of  the §218 

fo7it,  must  be  ready  at  the — 

the  Priest  coming  to  the — 

into  the  church  toward  the — • 

standing  at  the — 

dipping  the  face  toward  the — 

departing  from  the — 

dipping  of  the  child  in  the — 

water  in  the — shall  be  changed 

shall  say  at  the —     . 

ready  to  present  them  at  the — 

placing  him  conveniently  by  the —    .         .  §  241 

forbear,  the  Priest. ..shall — to  celebrate         .         .  §  145 

forehead,  a  cross  upon  the  child's — and  breast       .  §  183 

shall  make  a  cross  upon  the  child's — saying  §  200 

shall  make  a  cross  upon  the  child's —   pp.  299,  309 

shall  make  a  cross  upon  the  person's —      .  p.  316 

shall  cross  them  in  the —           .         .          .  §  260 

anoint  him  upon  the — or  breast  only          .  §  319 

§402 


§  181 
§191 
§  192 

§195 
§204 

§  229; 
[p.  289],  §  230  I 

[p.  2S9J,  §  230  : 


foreign  potentates,  authority  of  all 
forget,  the  Minister  may  not — nor  omit 
forgive,  exhorting  him  to — 
forgiveness,  to  ask  them —    . 
form,  in — before  written 

according  to  the — before  prescribed 

in  the — of  Public  Baptism 

certified  of  the  true — of  Baptism 

shall  continue  still  after  the  same. .  .— 

Kk 


§  121 


§306 

§  306 

O.H.C. 

§  124 
§214 
§  216 
§98  O.H.C. 


0 

10 

CO 

M 

U3 

♦ 

* 

» 

* 

» 

» 

» 

* 

* 

* 

» 

» 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 

» 

» 

# 

* 

» 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 
* 
* 

« 

♦ 

» 

* 

« 

» 

* 

* 

» 

» 

* 

# 

♦ 

» 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

» 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 

« 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

» 

* 

* 

» 

» 

» 

» 

* 

» 

♦ 

» 

* 

» 

» 

» 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

« 

» 

» 

498 


A  Concordance  and 


_/^w,  shall  use  this — of  words 

baptize  him  [it]  in — above  writteh    . 

baptize  it  in  the — before  appointed  . 

shall  absolve  him  after  this —    . 

the — of  Solemnization  of  Matrimony 

the  sick  person  after  this — 

■ and  the  same — of  absolution     . 

[and  sort],  after  such — as  is...  appointed  §§ 

according  to  the — before  prescribed 

cut  off  the — of  the  Visitation    . 

the — and  Manner  of  Ordering  of  Deacons 

the — and  manner  of  making  of  Deacons 

iu  the — of  ordering  Deacons     . 

in  the — for  ordering  Deacons  .  §§  429, 

Form,  the — [of  J  Ordering  of  Priests 

THE — and  Manner  of  Ordering  of  Priests 

of  Ordering  of  Deacons   . 

THE — of  Consecrating  of  an  Archbishop 

of  Ordaining  or  Consecrating     . 

Forms  of  Prayer  to  be  used  at  Sea  . 
found  clear  of  that  crime      .... 

be — clear  of  that  crime     . 

fourth  finger,  to  put  it  upon  the — 

leaving  the  ring  upon  the — 

frailty,  by  the — of  their  own  flesh 
frie7id's  hands,  at  her  father's  or —       .         . 
furnishing,  the  decent — of  that  church 
furniture,  with  other  decent —     .        .        . 

gather  the  devotion  of  the  people 

general  confession,  the  appointed — must  be  made 

general  prayer,  concluding  with  the— for 

the  end  of  the — for    . 

gestures,  as  touching  crossing... and  other —  . 
given,  the  orders  of  Deacon. ..be — ...one  day 
Gloria  in  excelsis,  may  leave  out  the — . 

then  may  be  omitted  the — 

Glory  be  to  God,  the  people  shall  answer —   . 
Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Lord,  standing  up,  shall  say — 
Glory  be  to  the  Father... z.t  the  end  of  every  Psalm 
God^s  board,  turning  him  to — kneel  down 
kneeling  down  at — say 


the  Priest  standing  at — 

God's  word,  it  is  certain  by — 

■ that  it  is  certain  by — 

godfather,  for  every  female  one — 

by  one  that  shall  be  his — 

godfather  or  godmother,  and  every  one  shall  have  a- 
godfathers,  two — and  one  godmother    . 
and  the — ,  godmoSiers,  and  people  . 


«|0 

? 

CO 

«o 

to 

m 

«o 

«o 

M 

M 

" 

"* 

.  §229 

• 

• 

• 

• 

T 

• 

.  §229 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

.   §229 

♦ 

.  §309 

• 

.  P-  333 

« 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

.  §301 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

• 

.  §309 

• 

133.322 

• 

.  §329 

• 

.  §333 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

p.  419 

« 

• 

• 

.  p.  419 

• 

.  §425 

• 

9.  [440] 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•  p.  436 

« 

• 

• 

p.  441 

» 

§448 

♦ 

p.  456 

• 

• 

• 

•  P-  456 

• 

.  p.  410 

« 

•  §424 

• 

•  §394 

• 

.  §283 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

♦ 

.  §284 

* 

• 

• 

• 

« 

» 

.  §252 

» 

• 

• 

• 

« 

.  §281 

• 

* 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

.  §131 

* 

.  §  75 

♦ 

•  §  95 

» 

• 

* 

§321 

• 

•  §135 

• 

* 

• 

• 

•  §135 

♦ 

•  §  4 

• 

.  §440 

• 

• 

» 

.  §  6 

• 

.  §130 

• 

.  §  61 

• 

§  82 

• 

§  15 

• 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

.  §115 

• 

.  §"5 

» 

• 

• 

• 

§  78 

• 

.  §210 

• 

■  §254 

♦ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

§179 

• 

•  §257 

» 

• 

• 

• 

• 

-§257 

• 

§179 

• 

.  §180 

• 

♦ 

• 

» 

• 

» 

f 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


499 


godfathers  and  godmothers,  ask  the — the  name      .  §  241 

■ and  when  the — have  told  the  name    .  §  183 

■ with  the— and  people  present    .         .  §188 

shall  speak  to  the —           .         .         .  §  192 

demand  of  the —        .         .         .         •  §  I93 

the — shall  take  and  lay  their  hands    .  §  198 

shall  say  to  the —      ....  §  205 

calling  the — together          .         .         .  §  205 

the  Minister  with  the —     .         .         .  §220 

by  the — pronounced           .         .         .  §  222 

■ •  exhortation  to  the —  ....  §  227 

the — ...shall  be  ready  to  present  them  §  232 

speaking  to  the — first         .         .         .  §  245 

what  their — promised         .   ,      .         .§251 

godmother,  two  godfathers  and  one —  .         .         •  §  I79 

god/nothers,  one  godfather  and  two —   .         .         .  §  179 

the  godfathers, — and  people     .         .         .  §  180 

[See  also  "  Godfathers  and  Godmothers."] 

good  number,  except  there  be  a — to  communicate  §  137 

and  a — to  receive  the  Communion     .  §  322 

Gospel,  after  the — is  read §  187 

the  words  of  the — §187 

on  the  words  of  the—       .        .        .        .  §  219 

after  the — is  read §  219 

after  the — [shall  be  said]  a  sermon    .         .  §  294 


[The  title  "  The  Gospel"  occurs  also  passim  throughout  the 
Collects,  &C.     See  pp.  98 — 211,  also  pp.  388,  434,  A:c.] 

grace,  whether  he  can. ..bring  him  to —        §110  O. H.C. 


call  upon  God  for  his — 


graduates  may  use  in  the  quire... such  hood  . 

when  they  do  preach  shall  use  such  hoods 

grateful,  humble  and — acknowledging 

■ humble  and — acknowledgment 

grave,  when  they  come  at  [to]  the —     . 

or  towards  the —      ..... 

grown,  custom  now  being — out  of  use  .         . 


§214 
§  2 
§  2 
§151 
§151 
§342 
§339 
§178 


.  §456 
.    §§  391,  421 

.  §  266 
§  143  O.H.C. 
3 


habit,  put  on  the  rest  of  the  episcopal — 
habited,  each  of  them  being  decently — 
halj-an-hour  before  evensong 
haciowed,  if... the  wine — and  consecrate 
hand,  shall  have  his  pastoral  staff  in  his- 

is  to  take  the  paten  in  his — chalice  in  his —  p.  245 

■ and  lay  his— upon  so  much       .         .         .p.  245 

■ lay  his — upon  all  the  bread       .         .         .p.  245 

■ take  the  cup  into  his —     .         .         ,         .p.  245 

to  lay  his — upon  every  vessel    .         ,         .p.  245 

with  his — subscribed  thereunto  .         .     §  258 

the  fourth  finger  of  the  woman's  left —    §§  283,  284 


m 

M 

* 
* 
» 

* 

» 

♦ 
* 

* 

* 
• 

» 
« 

» 
« 

» 
« 

• 

* 
* 
* 

» 
* 

« 

N 
10 

\n 

• 
• 

* 
« 

* 
* 

« 

* 

• 
* 
• 
» 
« 

« 

« 

* 

• 
» 

« 

m 
»o 

M 

• 
* 

« 
* 

» 
» 

« 

« 

« 

* 
» 

♦ 
• 

« 

♦ 
• 

• 
* 

0 
vo 

M 

« 
* 

» 

♦ 
♦ 

• 

* 

♦ 
« 

» 

» 

« 
* 

« 

* 

* 

CO 

10 

M 

» 
• 

» 
* 

* 
• 
• 

* 
* 
* 
* 
» 

« 

* 
* 

» 

• 
» 

* 

«o 

M 

T 

• 

* 

* 
* 
» 
» 
« 

* 
• 

* 
* 
« 

» 
» 
* 

* 
• 

* 
• 
* 

500 


A  Concordance  and 


hand,  lay  his — upon  [the]  head  [of  every  one]      .     §  260 

lay  his — upon  every  child  severally  .         .     §  260 

when  he  hath  laid  his — upon  every  child        §  261 

deliver... the  Bible  in  the  one —         .         .     §  437 

and  the  chalice  or  cup... in  the  other —      .     §437 

— deliver... the  Bible  in[to]  his —  .         .     §437 

put  into  his — the  pastoral  staff  .         .     §  461 

[See  also  "right  hand."] 
hands,  must  take  the  bread  into  his —  ,         .         .p.  245 

shall  take  the  cup  into  his —     .         .         .p.  245 

is  to  take  the  paten  into  his —  .         .         .p.  245 

with  more  ease  and  decency  use  both  his —     §  106 

after  to  the  people  in[to]  their —       .         .     §  116 

received  at  the  Priest's — the  Sacrament     .     §  148 

Body  of  Christ  in  their  own —  .         .     §  148 

the  Sacrament... at  the  Priest's —      .         .     §  148 

take  the  child  in  his — and  ask  the  name   .     §  195 

the  godfathers... shall  take  and  lay  their —     §  198 

by  imposition  of — and  prayer   .         .         .     §  252 

at  her  father's  or  friend's —        .         .         .     §  281 

they  shall  loose  their —    ...         .     §  282 

then  shall  they  again  loose  their —    .         .     §  283 

where  [the] — were  laid  upon  them   .         .     §  438 

shall  lay  their — upon  the  head  [severally]  §§436,459 

head,  anoint  the  infant  upon  the —       .         .         .     §  199 

lay  his  hand  upon  their —         .         .         ,     §  260 

upon  the — of  every  one    .         .         §§  [260],  405 

severally  on  the —    .         .         .         .         .     §  436 

health,  when  they  be  in — while  they  are  in —        .     §  306 

profitably  to  his  soul's —  .         ...     §  332 

hear,  obediently  [to] — and  be  ordered  by  the  Curate    §  256 
obediently  to — and  be  ordered  by  the  Curate  §  267 


to  to 


heaven,  they  are  in — and  not  here 

high  court  of  parliament,  a  Prayer  for  the 

holden,  pastoral  staff — by  his  chaplain 

holding  up  of  hands,  as  touching  crossing... — ,  &c. 

holy  bread,  accustomed  to  pay  any —    . 

Holy  Communion,  the  Bishop  shall  celebrate  the 

■ Celebration. ..Lord's  Supper  and- 

• partakers  of  the — 

■ to  admit  to  the — 

the  ministration  of  the —   . 

negligent  to  come  to  the — 

receiving  of  the — 

celebration  of  the —  . 

be  partakers  of  the — 

not  to  receive  the  said —    . 

—  to  receive  the — 

those  that  come  to  the —  . 

that  come  to  receive  the — 


§151 
§168 


.  § 

3 

c.  § 

4 

.  § 

i.3« 

-  § 

.3 

-   p 

98 

.  § 

71 

.  § 

73 

.  § 

74 

.  § 

91 

.  § 

92 

.  § 

92 

.  § 

97 

.  § 

97 

.  § 

98 

.  8 

III 

.  § 

[II 

I 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


SOI 


Holy  Communion,  to  receive  the —      .        §  112  O.H.C. 

humble  access  to  the —      .        .         •  §  ii5 

Priest  doth  receive  the —  .         .  §  122 

sentences... after  the —       .         .         .  §  123 

when  the — is  celebrate       .         .         .  §  130 

bread  and  wine  for  the —  .         .         .  §  144 

receive  the — with  the  Priest       .         .  §  145 

kneeling,  should  receive  the —  .         .  §  15^ 

disorder... about  the — might  else  ensue    §  151 

disorder  in  the — as  might... ensue       .  §151 

THE  Supper  of  the  Lord  and  the —  p.  212 

OF  the  Lord's  Supper  or —  .        .  p.  212 

he  may  be  admitted  to  the —     .         .  §  247 

be  admitted  to  the —          .         .         .  §  269 

the  new  married  persons. .  .receive  the —  §  295 

new  married  persons... receive  the —  .  §  295 

to  the  oft[en]  receiving  [...]  of  the —  §  320 

if  there  be  a  celebration  of  the —        .  §  321 

before  the  Curate  distribute  the —      .  §  321 

• shall  there  celebrate  [minister]  the — .  §  322 

■ CELEBRATION  of  the — for  the  sick     .  §  323 

to  receive  the — with  him  .         .         .  §  330 

form  before  prescribed  for  the —         .  §  329 

receive  the— all  at  one  time        .         .  §  333 

celebration  of  the —  .         .         .         •  §  353 

that  she  receive  the —        .         .         .  §  362 

tarry  and  receive  the —      .         .         .  §  408 

then  shall  all  things  at  the— be  used  .  §  440 

and  other  things  at  the — be  used        .  §  440 

[See  also  "  Communion,"  "  Lord's  Supper,"  &c.] 
Holyday,  Sunday  or — next  before         .         §  92  O.  H.  C. 

upon  the  [next]  Sunday  or  [some] —  §  92  O.H.C. 

longer  than  the  Sunday  or  [other] — 

be  baptized  upon  the  Sunday  or —   . 

HoLYDAYS,  these  to  be  observed  for — 

[In  ed.  1662,  "  Moveable  and  Immoveable  Feasts."] 

upon  Sundays  and  other — 

shall  declare  what — or  fasting  days  . 

declare  whether  there  be  any 


8  212 
§180 
p.  30 

§178 
§  S5 
93 


holy  loaf,  they  were  wont  to  find  and  pay  the  said —  §  144 

shall  offer.. .and  price  of  the —  .         .  §  144 

Holy  Mysteries,  solemnize  so  high  and —      .         .  §  145 

Holy  Orders,  to  be  admitted  into—      .         .         •  §  159 

• that  are  to  be  admitted  into —  ,         .  §  166 

Holy  Sacrament  of  the  Body  and  Blood        ,         .  §    86 

receiving  of  the —      .         .         .         •  §    87 

the  distribution  of  the —    .         .         .  §  330 

Holy  Scripture,  the  rest  of  [the] — is  appointed      .  p.  20 

• any  part  of—. . .  in  the  stead  of  the  Litany  §      5 

Sentences  of — to  be  [said  or]  sung  §§  93,  123 

office. .  .shall  be  declared  according  to —  §  294 


M  I  0»i  '4-!  t^i  N 
«0  >0  O    ro'lO 

m  >o  10  !to  :io 


502 


A  Concordance  and 


Holy  Table,  The — at  the  Communion-time  . 

humbly  present  and  place  it  upon  the — 
•  and  set  it  upon  the — 
shall  stand  at  such  a  part  of  the — 
in  his  chair  near  [to]  the —     §§391 


home,  at  the  church  or  else  at — 

may  at  all  times  be  baptized  at — 

■ at — in  their  houses  . 

homilies,  or  some  portion  of  one  of  the — 

one  of  the — already  set  forth    . 

which  shall  hereafter  be  set  forth 

already  set  forth,  or  hereafter  to  be 

homily,  may  leave  out  the — 

shall  follow  the  sermon  or —    . 

after  sermon  or —     . 

after  such  sermon — or  exhortation 

then  may  be  omitted. ..the —     . 

until  the  end  of  the — 


421, 


hood,  being  graduates,  may  use  such — 
hoods,  when  they  do  preach  shall  use  such — 
hope  of  recovery,  when  there  appeareth  small — 
house,  some  one  at  the  least  of  that — 

entering  [coming]  into  the  sick  person's — 

the  Communion  in  his — 

having  a  convenient  place  in  the  sick  man's— 

shall  always  desire  some,  either  of  his  own — 

doth  celebrate  in  any  sick  man's —   . 

houses,  by  order  of  their — every  Sunday 

to  communicate  with  the  sick  in  their — 

at  home  in  their —    .... 

humble  [and  grateful]  acknowledg[ment] 
humbly,  absolve  him  (if  he — and  heartily  desire  it) 
hymn,  after  that  the — following  . 

a — of  praise  and  thanksgiving  . 

a  psalm  or — of  praise  and  thanksgiving 

after  this — may  be  sung  the  "  Te  Deum  " 


idolatry,  for  that  were — to  be  abhorred         . 
ignorance,  either  for  their — or  infirmity 

either  out  of — or  infirmity 

impediment,  if  any  man  do  allege  any — 

if  no — be  alleged     .... 

with... any  other  just —     . 

or  by  any  other  just — 

any  great  crime  or — be  objected 

imposition,  that  by — of  hands,  and  prayer     . 
infancy,  any  persons  not  baptized  in  their — 

depart  out  of  this  life  in  their — 

infant,  the  Priest  shall  anoint  the —     . 
changing  the  word — for  child  . 


§§ 


75 

95 

95 

106 

447 
178 
178 
213 
86 
86 
86 
86 
6 
86 
92 

93 
130 

135 

2 

2 

316 

145 
297 
320 
322 
330 
331 
144 

337 
213 

151 

309 
19 
383 
385 
386 


§151 
§151 
§151 
§274 
§275 
§322 

§332 
394.  424 
§252 
§248 
§254 
§  199 
§248 


01 

• 

» 
* 

* 

* 

♦ 

» 
» 

• 
» 
* 
« 
♦ 

♦ 

» 
« 
* 
* 
» 
* 

• 
• 

« 

«o 

H 

• 
♦ 

• 

• 
» 

• 
* 

» 

• 
* 

• 

« 
• 

» 
* 

* 

* 
« 

• 

01 
xn 
10 

M 

• 
« 

• 

• 
« 

• 
* 
• 

• 
• 

• 
« 

• 
• 
» 

• 

10 

M 

» 
* 

* 

• 
• 

• 
* 
* 

* 
• 
♦ 

• 
• 

• 

« 

» 

ro 
10 

M 

* 

« 
♦ 

« 
• 

• 
• 

• 
» 
• 

» 
» 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
♦ 

• 
» 

» 
• 
* 

• 
• 
• 
♦ 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

» 
* 
• 

» 
» 

• 
• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


503 


infants,  because  in  the  Baptism  of —    . 

that  they  defer  not  the  baptism  of — 

they  which  bring  the — to  the  church 

the  Office  for  Public  Baptism  of — 


Injunctions,  appointed  by  the  King's  Majesty's — 
injury,  and  where  he  hath  done — or  wrong 
histitution,  may  be  most  agreeable  to  the — thereof    §  145 
instruct,  o\>&v\y  in  the  church — and  examine   §§  [255,  266] 


§178 
§  212 
§229 
§248 

§133 

§306 


[then]  the  [Pbr.  or]  Curate  shall- — him 
instructed,  and  be  further — in  the  Catechism 

being—  in  Christ's  religion 

whether  they  be  sufficiently —  . 

instruction,  that  is  to  say  an — to  be  learned 
intended,  that  thereby  no  adoration  is — 
intends,  as  he — to  consecrate 
intent,  to  the— the  Priest  may  examine 

to  the — he  may  be  perfect 

to  the — they  may  be  always  in  a  readiness 


§332 
§207 

§253 

§231 

p.  320 

§151 
p.  245 
§216 
§410 
§  320 


/«/t7/rt'/t'rt',  misconstrued... and — in  a  wrong  meaning  §151 


introit,  and  so  must  every — be  ended 

■ the  clerks  shall  sing  for  the  office  or — 

a  Psalm  appointed  for  the —     . 

■ sung  for  the — to  the  Communion 

shall  the  Psalm  for  the — 

■ Psalm  for  the — at  the  Communion    . 

INTROITS,  The — 

invitation,  shall  the  Presbyter  say... this —    . 
iftvitatory,  without  any—     .... 


60 
§    74 

§  77 
§4" 
§440 
§  441 
p.  98 

§  III 

§    14 


join  in  prayer,  that  cannot  meet  to —   .         .         •  §  374 

judge,  to  the  ecclesiastical — seem  convenient         .  §  147 

KALENDAR,  The  ....  [pp.  40— 63] 

The  Table  and — ...of  the  Psalms,  &c.       .  p.  17 

as  they  be  appointed  by  [in]  the —   .  (bis)  §    16 

as  "it]  is  appointed  likewise  in  the —         .  §    38 

keep,  observe  and — such  things     .         .         ,         .  §  251 

/^^//,  the  other  half  shall  be  faithfully —         .         .  §131 

it  with  them  and  diversely  abused  it           •  §  148 

king,  what  is  enjoined  by  the — or  by  the  Ordinary  §    85 

and  queen's  children,  a  prayer  for  the —    .  §  158 

king's  nia?idate,  ihQ — to  the  ArchbLshop...     .         .  §448 

shall  the  Archbishop  demand  the—    .  §  448 

king's  [Queen's]  supremacy,  the  Oath  concerning —  §  429 

king's  supremacy,  [ac]knowledge[ment]  of  the —    .  §  448 

kneel,  and  here  all  the  congregation  shall —  .         .  §  235 

they  shall  both — down      .          ...  §  284 

there  shall— down     .         .         .         .         •  §  357 

shall  they  all— upon  their  knees        .         .  §  365 

kneeling,  as  touching  crossing, — ,  &c.  .         .         .  §      4 


* 

« 
* 
» 
* 

« 

» 

* 
* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

» 
* 
» 
* 
* 

* 

» 

♦ 
» 

» 
* 

1* 

lO 
lO 

♦ 
♦ 

» 

« 

« 
♦ 

• 
» 

♦ 

* 
» 
* 
* 

# 
* 
* 
* 
» 

« 
» 

♦ 

IT) 
VO 
M 

* 
• 
♦ 

» 
* 

* 
* 
* 

# 
* 
* 
* 

* 

* 

* 
* 

* 
* 

HI 

♦ 
* 

* 
» 
* 

* 
* 

* 

» 
» 

• 

* 

» 

* 

cn 
10 

M 

* 
♦ 
* 

* 

* 

* 
» 

» 
* 

* 

* 
* 
* 

« 

• 
« 

«3 
VO 
M 

♦ 
* 

* 
* 

» 
♦ 

* 

» 

» 
* 

» 

♦ 
* 

* 
* 
• 

504 


A  Concordance  and 


kneeling,  the  whole  congregation... —  .         .  , 

that  are  present... all  humbly —          .  .     §      8 

the  whole  congregation,  all —           .  .     §      8 

the  people  still — §      9 

the  people  also —     .         .         .         .  §§  li,  34 

all  devoutly —          .         .         .         .  §§  21,  [43] 

a  general  confession  to  be  said. ..all —  .     §    32 


§  112 


§116 


the  Absolution... the  people  still 

the  clerks — likewise 

all  [the  people] — humbly 

down  at  God's  board 

down  at  the  Lord's  Table 

people  still  reverently — 

to  the  people  (in  their  hands) — 

in  due  order,  all  humbly — 

also  in  order,  all  meekly — 

• should  receive  the  same — 

the  same— should... be  misconstrued 

the  communicants — should  receive   . 

lest  the  same — might  be  thought 

then  shall  be  said,  all —  . 

then  all — down        .... 

be  said  the  Lord's  prayer,  all — 

in  order — before  the  Bishop 

and  all — down  .... 

afore  the  altar  .... 

[afore]  before  the  Lord's  Table 

he  shall  say — down 

where  they  are  accustomed 

humbly — before  him 

the  persons  to  be  ordained  Priests,  all 

the  receivers  humbly —    . 

and — down,  "Veni  Creator"  shall  be  sun: 

knees,  remaining  humbly  upon  their — 

kneeling  humbly  upon  their — 

before  them  upon  his —    . 

knocking  upon  the  breast,  as  touching  crossing... - 
knowledge,  parents  shall  give — thereof  overnight 


§  112 


he  must  give — overnight  . 

■ [ing]  the  oath  touching  the —  . 

lack,  to  be  unquieted  [unquiet  J  for — of 

or  for — of  warning  [given]  in  due  time 

or  for — of  company  to  receive  with  him 

laid,  ready  to  be— into  the  earth 

where  [the]  hands  were — upon  them 

laid  violent  hands,  have — upon  themselves    . 

lands,  temporal  goods  and — 

larger,  something  more — and  thicker   . 

last  of  all  to  the  sick  person        .         .  §§  3- 

law/ul,  though  it  be — to  have  wafer  bread  . 


§320 
§448 
§330 
§332 
§332 
§342 
§438 
§338 
§306 

§141 
[330J 
§141 


\n 

M 

• 

» 
• 

» 
• 
» 

• 

• 
• 
* 

« 

« 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
» 

N 

>n 
\rt 

M 

• 

• 

• 
* 

• 

• 
♦ 

* 
» 
• 

« 

• 

« 
• 
* 
• 
• 
» 
» 
• 

• 

lO 

m 

' 

* 

• 

• 
« 

• 

• 
» 
* 

* 

* 

* 
♦ 
* 
» 
• 
* 
» 
• 
* 

« 

'J- 

vo 

M 

* 

* 

* 
• 

« 

* 
* 

• 

• 
« 
* 

» 

• 
• 

• 

U3 

M 

• 

« 

« 
• 

• 

• 
» 
* 

» 
• 

» 
* 

: 

» 
• 

♦ 

10 

M 

• 
* 
» 
* 
* 
• 

• 

• 
» 
» 

• 
• 
* 
• 
» 

• 
» 
• 
* 

* 
* 
• 

• 
» 

» 
* 

» 
♦ 

• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


505 


lawful,  first  let  thePbr.  or — ...the  [said] — minister  §  214 

any  other — Minister         .         .         .         .     §  214 

baptized  by  any  other — Minister       .         .     §217 

lawfully,  is — and  sufficiently  baptized  .         .         .     §  216 

whether  the  child  be — baptized  §§  [216,  217] 

laws,  by  the  ecclesiastical — of  the  realm       .         .     §  147 
lay,  to — his  hand  upon  all  the  bread    .         .         .p.  245 

and — his  hand  upon  so  much    .         .         ,  p.  245 

his  hand  upon  every  vessel        .         .         .p.  245 

shall — their  hands  severally  upon  the  head    §  436 

shall — their  hands  upon  the  head  of  .     §  459 

shall  take  and — their  hands  upon  the  child    §  198 

[shall] — his  hand  upon  the  [their]  head  .     §  260 

learned,  and  have — what  their  godfathers     .         .     §  251 

which  have  not — their  Catechism     .         .     §  256 

•  such  time  as  they  have —  .  §§  [256,  267] 


leave  the  rest  upon  the  altar  covered     . 

leaving,  the  man — the  ring  . 

left,  to  the  end  that  there  may  be  little — 

the  woman  on  the — 

• finger  of  the  woman's — hand    . 

• [dipping]... second  [time]  the — side 


Lent,  except  in — 

lesson,  the  first — of  the  Old  Testament 

the  first — taken  out  of  the  Old  Testament 

the  second — of  the  New  Testament 

the  Minister  that  readeth  the — 

he  that  readeth  the — 

here  endeth  the  first  or  second — 

after  the  first — 

■ after  the  second —    . 

• shall  be  read  the  second — 

a — of  the  Old  Testament 

a — of  the  New  Testament 

after  the  last — at  Morning  Prayer 

after  the  last — at  Evening  Prayer 

immediately  after  the  second — 

after  the  second — at  Evening  Prayer 

■ then  shall  follow  the — 

then  shall  follow  this — 

the — ended,  then  shall  the  Priest  [Pbr.]  say  §  350 

lessons,  expressing  the  order  of  the  Psalms  and —       p.  1 7 

• then  shall  be  read  two —  .         .         .         .     §    16 

the — shall  be  sung  in  a  plain  tune     .         .     §    16 

except  there  be  proper — assigned      ,         .     §    16 

except  there  be  proper — appointed  .         .     §    38 

letted,  not  being  otherwise —         ...  .     §  322 

levation,  without  any— or  lifting  up  ,  §  I43  O.H.  C. 
liberal,  to  be — to  the  poor  .....§  308 
liberality,  to  move  the  sick  person. ..to —  .  .  §  308 
lifting  up,  without  any  levation  or —     .        §  143  O.H.C. 


§98  0.H.C 
§284 
§142 
§272 
283,  284 
§195 


§§ 


§  17 
§  16 
§  16 
§  16 
§  16 
§  16 
§  16 
§  17 
§  19 
§  19 
§  38 
§  40 
§  180 
§180 
§232 
§255 
§343 
§349 


M 

VT) 

0\ 

m 

M 

* 

CO 

to 

M 

♦ 

VO 

to 

M 

» 

* 

» 

* 

* 

• 

• 

» 

* 

* 

* 

« 

♦ 

• 

♦ 

* 

• 

♦ 

• 
» 

« 

« 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

» 

« 

♦ 

» 

* 

• 

* 

• 

* 

* 

» 

* 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

« 

* 

♦ 

* 

♦ 
* 

• 
• 

« 

• 

* 

» 

* 

« 

• 

* 

« 

• 

« 

« 

♦ 

♦ 

» 

« 

• 

♦ 

» 

♦ 

• 

• 

♦ 

« 

* 

« 

• 

• 

• 

• 

« 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

« 

» 

• 

» 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

* 

• 

• 

« 

• 

» 

• 

• 

* 

* 

« 
• 
« 
* 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

* 

« 

♦ 

* 

» 

• 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

* 

» 

* 

* 

« 

* 

♦ 

» 

» 

» 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

* 

* 

♦ 

» 

« 

♦ 

» 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

• 

5o6 


A  Concordance  and 


Litany,  The — and  Suffrages 

to  be  used  upon  Sundays,  &c.  . 

may  be  used... in  the  stead  of  the — 

may  leave  out  the — 

after  this... followeth  the — 

if  the — be  not  appointed  . 

except  when  the — is  read 

at  the  end  of  the —  . 

shall  serve  after  the  collects. ..or — 

here  followeth  the —         .         .        .         .„._,_ 

the — shall  ever  end  with  this  Collect  (p,  280)  §156 

Here  endeth  the — §  I57 

when  the — is  not  appointed      .         .         .     §  169 

the  English— shall  be  said         .  §§  [133],  363 

the — ended  according  to  the  accustomed  .     §  363 

where  they  are  accustomed  to  say  the —    .     §  365 

the — and  Suffrages §  395 

shall  say  or  sing  the—     .         .  §§  395,  [425] 


.  p.  268 
.  p.  268 
.  §  5 
.  §  6 
.  §  29 
.  §  29 
•  §  29 
§§  29,  50 
.  §132 
§152 


suffice  [that]  the — [to]  be  said  once 

then  shall  be  said  the —    . 

concluding  the — ...with  the  prayer  . 

Liturgy,  in  all  other  places  of  the — 
linen  cloth,  a  fair  white — upon  it . 

and  cover  with  a  fair — or  corporal 

covering  the  same  with  a  fair — 


§440 
§452 
§453 
§  II 
§  75 
§125 
§125 


Z(7r(/'j /"rrtj/irr,  the  Priest  being... shall  begin  the —    §    11 

shall  the  Minister  begin  the —   .         .     §    li 

the  Presbyter  or  Minister  begin  the —     §    11 

the  Minister  shall  kneel  and  say  the —  §§  1 1, 34 


the — in  English  with  a  loud  voice 

the — with  a  loud  voice 

the  Minister,  Clerks... shall  say  the— 

the  Priest  shall  say  the — 

shall  the  Priest  say  the — 

but  such  as  can  say...the- 


—  shall  the  Priest. ..say  the 

—  as  soon  as  they  can  say... the 

—  say  the — [if  time  will  suffer] 

—  shall  be  said  the —    . 

—  as  the  children  can  say  the — 

—  which  can  say... the — 
■  people  with  him  say  the — 


Lord's  Supper,  orderforthe  administration  of  the 

be  no  [public]  celebration  of  the — 

in  the  administration  of  the —    , 

office  for  the  administration  of  the — 

" to  be  said  at  the  celebration  ofthe— 

Lord's  Table,  not  to  presume  [to  come]  to  the — 

partakers  of  the —     . 

place  the  bread  and  wine... upon  the- 


§ 


23 
§  23 
§  44 
§  76 
§  126 
§250 

§153 
§207 

§214 
§244 
§257 
§268 

§396 
—  p.  212 

§137 
§  151 
§151 
§134 
§  72 
§  73 
§  98 


CO  VO 

to  ilO 


fi 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


507 


Lord's  Table,  shall  the  Priest  return  to  the —        .  §    93 

shall  the  Priest  turn  to  the —     .        .  §  icx) 

kneeling  down  at  the — say         .         .  §  1 15 

he  that  celebrates  shall  go  to  the —    .  §  1 25 

the  Minister  shall  return  to  the —        .  §  125 

the  Ministers  or  Clerks  going  to  the —  §  288 

kneeling  [afore]  the —        .         .        .  §  290 

the  place  where  the — standeth   .         .  §  357 

[See  also  "  Holy  Table"  and  "Table."] 


majesty,  as  shall  be  prescribed  by  his — 

a  Prayer  of  the  Queen's  [King's] — 

majesty's  navy,  to  be  used  in  his — every  day 
male  child,  there  shall  be  for  every-^  . 
malice,  or  [else]  out  of — and  obstinacy 
manner,  after  the  same — and  form 

troth  to  each  other  in  this — 

confirm  them  in  the — following 

[in  such] — [as  hereafter  followeth] 


marriage,  so  oft  as  there  is  any 

at  which  day  of —    .....§  274 

the  same  day  of  their —    .         ...     §  295 

at  the  time  of  their —        .         ...     §  295 

or  at  the  first  opportunity  after  their —      .     §  295 

married,  the  banns  of  all  that  are  to  be — •     .         .     §  270 

if  the  persons  that  [would]  be —       .         .     §  271 

persons  that  shall  be —     .         .         .         •     §  273 

as  the  persons  to  be — do  sustain       .        .     §  274 

the  new — persons  must... [should]  receive .     §  295 

Mass,  Holy  Communion,  commonly  called  the —    p.  212 
other  rite  or  ceremony  in  the —  §  98  O.  H.  C. 


.      §       2 

.  §154 
.  §369 
.  §179 
.  §  151 
598O.H.C. 
.    §280 

.    §259 
§§404,  \i,\6\ 

.     §294 


masters,  the  Archdeacons,  Deans... — ,  &c. 
all  fathers,  mothers, — ,  and  dames 


matins,  as  well  at  evensong  as  at 

shall  be  said  daily  at —     . 

as  before  is  appointed  at — 

the  Suffrages  before  assigned  at —     . 

thus  endeth  the  order  of — and  evensong 

signify  their  names  afore — 

afore  the  last  canticle  at — 

afore  the  beginning  of —  .         . 

after — ended,  the  people  . 


§§  [256,  267] 
§    21 


§  25 
§  36 
§  43 
§  56 
§  71 
§180 
§  180 

.  -  §363 

Matins  and  Evenso7tg,  in  the  saying  or  singing  of —    §      2 

[Afterwards  altered  to  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer,  except 
in  the  Table  of  Proper  Lessons,  where  the  headings,  Mattins 
and  Evensong,  were  restored  in  1559,  and  retained  throughout 
all  editions  afterwards.] 

matrimony,  banns  of — published  .         .         •     §    85 

solemnize — betwixt  them  ,         .         .     §  271 

day  appointed  for  solemnization  of —        .     §  272 


10 

M 

♦ 

» 
* 
» 

* 

* 
* 
« 
* 

* 
* 
* 

* 
» 
» 

* 
« 

* 

* 

« 

M 

• 
» 

» 

♦ 

» 
* 
♦ 

« 
» 

* 

« 

« 
* 

01 
10 
10 

• 
* 

« 

» 

♦ 

♦ 

* 
* 

* 
* 

* 

to 

HI 

* 
* 

♦ 
* 
* 

« 
* 
* 

* 

* 
♦ 

to 

lO 

M 

• 

• 
* 
* 

• 
« 

* 
• 
* 

* 

« 
* 

• 

« 
* 

IS 

♦ 
» 
* 

* 
• 

* 

» 

• 
» 

» 

» 
» 

* 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
* 

5o8 


A  Concordance  and 


matrimony,  be  coupled  together  in —  . 

the  Form  of  Solemnization  of — 

means,  and  by  this — the  Minister 

meant,  it  is  not — thereby  that  any  adoration 

being  well — for  a  signification 

which  order  is  well — 

meditation,  godly  silence  and —    . 
meet,  that  cannot — to  join  in  prayer 

such  as  shall  be  found —  . 

as  shall  be  found — to  be  ordered 

meeting,  the  Priest  [Pbr.] — the  corpse  at  the 

the  Priest  and  clerks — the  corpse 

memorial,  after  shall  be  said  this — 

midst  of  the  altar,  standing  humbly  afore  the —     .     § 

mind  not,  that — to  receive  ... 

Mmister,  the — shall  so  turn  him 

the — in  parish  churches  and  chapels 

every — shall  be  at  liberty  to  use  any  surplice  § 

■ the  [Pbr.  or] — at  the  time  of  the  Communion   § 

the  [Pbr.  or] — shall  read  with  a  loud  voice     § 

confession  to  be  said... after  the —     .         .     § 

. to  be  pronounced  by  the — alone       .         .     § 

• shall  the  [Pbr.  or] — begin  the  Lord's  Prayer    § 

then  the — shall  kneel        .         .         •         •     § 

the  [Pbr.  or] — that  readeth  the  lesson       .     § 

the  [Pbr.  or] — first  pronouncing  with  a  loud    § 

then  the — shall  say  the  Creed  .         .         .     § 

said  [or  sung]  the  Creed  by  the  [Pbr.  or] —  § 

the — clerks,  and  people    . 

• then  the — standing  up,  shall  say 

the — shall  read  with  a  loud  voice 

a  general  confession  to  be  said. ..after  the — 

the — shall  kneel  and  say  . 

Apostles'  Creed  by  the — and  the  people 

• the — first  pronouncing 

the — clerks,  and  people   . 

• by  the — and  people  standing    . 

— the  [Pbr.  or] — ought  to  admit 

provided  that  every — so  repelling  any       .     § 

the — shall  then  read  the  Epistle 

nothing  to  be  proclaimed... but  by  the — 

when  the — giveth  warning 

one  of  these  sentences... to  be  said  by  th( 

shall  the — take  so  much  bread . 

• then  shall  the — first  receive 

may  help  the  chief — 

the- — delivering  the  Sacrament 

the — that  delivereth  the  cup 

the  Presbyter  or — that  receiveth  the  cup  ,     § 

the — shall  return  to  the  Lord's  Table 


Ot 

t 

P5 

(4 

U3 

ifl 

«r 

m 

<o 

VO 

VO 

M 

M 

*H 

M 

" 

274 

* 

• 

* 

• 

♦ 

• 

333 

• 

• 

» 

• 

• 

* 

145 

• 

151 

* 

151 

• 

iSi 

* 

146 

• 

374 

• 

395 

« 

• 

• 

• 

425 

* 

« 

» 

• 

339 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

339 

♦ 

108 

» 

76 

♦ 

97 

• 

I 

• 

2 

• 

2 

• 

2 

• 

• 

» 

* 

7 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

8 

• 

• 

» 

• 

9 

♦ 

• 

» 

II 

• 

• 

• 

* 

II 

• 

16 

« 

» 

♦ 

• 

« 

21 

• 

» 

• 

• 

• 

22 

» 

22 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

23 

« 

• 

• 

* 

24 

• 

» 

• 

31 

• 

32 

* 

34 

• 

42 

* 

43 

* 

44 

• 

55 

• 

73 

» 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

73 

• 

82 

• 

85 

• 

92 

• 

93 

» 

98 

• 

116 

• 

• 

• 

• 

116 

• 

• 

• 

• 

119 

♦ 

119 

• 

• 

• 

• 

119 

• 

125 

• 

( 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


509 


Minister,  by  the  discretion  of  the — [Pbr.  or]  .     §  132 

with  the — every  Sunday   .         .         .         .     §  140 

broken...by  the  discretion  of  the —   §141  O.H.C. 

■ divided... by  the  discretion  of  the —  .         .     §  141 

the — having  always  some  to  communicate      §  145 

as  the — and  churchwardens       .         .         .     §  1 50 

the  [Pbr.  orl — shall  make  this  brief  .     §  187 

here  the — with  the  godfathers  .         .         .§188 

the — shall  put  upon  him  .         .         .         .     §  198 

the — shall  command  the  Chrisoms    .         .     §  206 

the  [Pbr.  or] — shall  command  the  children    §  207 

BY  THE  [Pbr.  or] — of  the  parish        .         .  p.  302 

OR  ANY  OTHER  lawful  [Pbr.  or] — that  can    p.  302 

first  let  the  lawful  [  Pbr.  or]-^  .         .     §214 

first  let  the — of  the  parish         .         .         .     §  214 

the  said  lawful  [Pbr.  or] — shall  dip  .     §  214 


or. .  .any  other  lawful — that  can  be  procured    §  214 


the — shall  pour  water  upon  it 

the — shall  give  thanks      .... 

the  [Priest  [Pbr.]  or]— of  the  same  parish 

baptized  by  any  other  lawful  [  Pbr.  or] 

then  shall  the  [Pbr.  or] — examine    . 

then  the — of  the  parish     .... 

and  if  the  [Pbr.  or] — shall  prove  [find] 

the[Pbr.or] — shallmake  this  exhortation  §§219,227 

here  the  [  Pbr.  or] — with  the  godfathers    .     §  220 

[shall]  the  [Pbr.  or] — shall  say      §§  222,  279,  284 

the — shall  put  the  white  vesture  upon  the      §  223 

the  [Pbr.] — or  clerks  going  to  the 

he  [the  Bishop]  or  some  other — 

the  [Pbr.  or] — receiving  the  woman 

likewise  say  after  the —    . 

then  shall  the  [Pbr.  or] — speak 

and  the  [Pbr.  or] — shall  add  this     . 

the  [Pbr.  or] — shall  read  this  that  followeth 

the — shall  read  as  followeth 

notice  shall  be  given  thereof  to  th^ 

then  the — shall  say  ... 

shall  the  [Pbr.  or] — exhort  the  sick  person    §  301 

the  [Pbr.  or] — shall  rehearse  the  articles       §  303 

then  shall  the  [Pbr.  or] — examine    . 

may  be  done  before  the — begin 

■  before  the  [Pbr.  or] — begin  his  prayer 

the — should  not  omit 

the  [Pbr.  or] — may  not  forget 

then  [shall]  the  [Pbr.  or]— say  this  [Psalm]    §311 

then  shall  the  [Pbr.  or] — say  .         .         •     §  313 

the  r  Pbr.  or  1 — may  alonely  [only]    .         .     §337 

say  this  that  followeth,  after  the  [Pbr.  or] —  §  366 

then  shall  the— alone  say  this  .        .        .     §  367 


§214 
§215 
§216 
§217 
§217 
§217 
§218 


§288 

§249 
§281 
§282 
§286 
§287 
§294 
§294 
§296 

§300 


§306 
§306 

§307 
§308 
§308 


M 

* 
* 

* 
» 

* 

» 

» 
» 

» 
» 

« 

» 
» 
* 

» 

« 

* 
* 

* 

10 

M 



* 
« 

* 

• 

* 
* 
» 
» 

» 

* 

* 

* 
* 
» 

* 

* 
• 

« 
* 
* 

0\ 
U-) 
10 

M 

» 
* 

» 

« 

* 
* 
• 

* 

« 
* 
* 

* 
* 
» 

* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

« 

* 

* 

* 
* 
* 
* 

* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 

* 
* 
* 

« 
* 

» 

* 
* 
» 

* 

CO 

to 

M 
* 

* 

* 
* 
* 
* 

* 

* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 

* 

* 

« 

♦ 
♦ 
* 

* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

VO 
VO 
M 

» 

» 
* 

» 

» 
* 

» 
* 

* 
* 

♦ 
» 
* 
♦ 

» 
* 

» 
* 

* 
» 
* 
* 

* 
* 

* 

* 

• 
» 
♦ 
♦ 
<• 

510 


A  Concordance  and 


minister,  before  he  shall — the  Communion    §  92  O.H.C. 
he  for  more  expedition — the  wine     §  121  O.  H.C. 


so  shall  he — the  Sacrament  of  the  Blood 

they — it  on  this  fashion    .... 

shall  go  and — the  same    ... 

where  [that]  the  Curate  may  reverently — 

there — the  Holy  Communion   . 

and  after — [un]to  them     .         .         .         , 

carry  it  and — it  unto  them 

the  Bishop  [sitting  in  his  chair]  shall — 

[And  in  other  places  apart  from  the  above-noted  rvibrics,  e.g. 
pp.  80,  91,  216,  291,  29s,  308,  328,  343,  353,  393,  396,  403.] 


§  121 
§213 
§321 
§322 
§322 
§330 
§331 
§429 


ministered,  it  was  openly — ,  was  not  commonly— 

• be — in  the  English  [vulgar]  tongue  . 

■ should  not  be — except  on  Sundays   . 

• confirmation  may  be —     . 

to  be — when  children  come 

Confirmation  should  be— to  them     . 

the  oath... to  be — unto  every  of  the  . 

the  oath... shall  be — to  the  person  elected 

shall  be — also  the  oath  of  due  obedience 

viinistereth,  and  as  the  Priest — the  Sacrament 

with  the  Priest  that — 

Ministers,  ornaments  of  the — thereof  . 

except  the — and  clerks 

• by  one  of  the — [or  by  the  Priest] 

the  Holy  Communion  to  the — 

next  deliver  it  to  other — . 

and  the — or  clerks  shall  say  or  sing 

the — or  clerks,  going 

of  such  as  come  to  be  admitted — 

ministration,  decent — of  things    . 

at  all  other  times  in  his — 

at  all  times  of  their — 

any  other  public —  . 

for  the — of  the  Holy  Communion 

vesture  appointed  for  that —     . 

to  help  the  Priest  in  the — 

The — OF  Baptism,  to  be  used,  &c. 

• the — OF  Public  Baptism  of  Infants 

the — OF  Private  Baptism  of  Children 

the — OF  Baptism  to  such  as  are,  &c, 

ministry,  shall  execute  the  holy — 
misconstrued,  depraved,  and  interpreted 

■ be — and  depraved    . 

money,  with  all  such — and  other  things 

discharged  of  such  sums  of —    . 

the — given  at  the  offertory        .         .         .§150 

mojitk,  be  changed  every — twice  in  the —     [p.  289],  §  230 
morning,  in  the— afore  the  beginning  of  [Matins]      §  180 


§178 
§178 
§178 
§250 
§252 

§253 
§402 

§448 
§448 
§121 

§145 
§   2 

§  97 
§  1X2  O.H.C. 
§  116  O.H.C. 

§116 

§288 

§288 

§390 

p.  64 

§   2 

§   2 

§  3 

§  74 

§  74 

§  74 

p.  285 

p.  285 

P-  303 

P-  313 

§  74 

§151 

§151 

§  144 

§  144 


M 

0 

>o 

M 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

• 

* 

• 

* 

• 

* 

* 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

« 

• 

* 

• 

* 

» 

« 

« 

» 

* 

* 

• 

» 

* 

♦ 

* 

« 

* 

* 

» 

« 

» 

« 

* 

* 

• 

« 

♦ 

• 

♦ 

* 

» 

» 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

• 

» 

* 

* 

• 

♦ 

* 

* 

» 

* 

» 

• 

* 

» 

♦ 

» 

* 

« 

* 

» 

» 

• 

* 

♦ 

» 

* 

« 

« 

* 

* 

« 

• 

• 

* 

» 

* 

* 

• 

• 

« 

• 
* 

» 

♦ 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

* 

* 

* 

* 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c 


5" 


Morning  and  Evening  Prayer,  shall  be  used  in —  §      i 

where — are  appointed        .         .         •  §    75 

after  the  collects  of  either — or —        .  §132 

either  at — or —          ....  §  232 

Morning  and  Evening  Service  to  be  said  daily  at  sea  §  368 

Morning  Prayer,  An  [the]  Order  for — daily     .  p.  66 

• at  the  beginning  both  of —         .         •  §      7 

• at  Evening  Prayer  as  at —          .         .  §    21 

shall  daily  be  said  at — throughout  all  §    25 

here  endeth  the  order  for —        .         .  §    30 


as  [is  before]  appointed  at — 


at — instead  of  the  Apostles'  Creed 

signify  their  names  afore — 

the  last  lesson  at —    . 

afore  the  beginning  of —    . 

■ ?ifter — the  people  being  called  together 

after — is  ended,  there  shall  be  . 

• after — is  ended,  the  Archbishop 

mortal  men,  forasmuch  as  all —    . 
mother,  at  the  purification  of  the 


§§  [34].  42 


§  55 
§  71 
§180 
§180 
§363 
§§  390.  420 
§441 
§320 
of  every  child       §  206 


mothers,  and  all  fathers, — ,  masters,  &c.       .    §§  256,  267 
mother  tongue,  can  say  in  their —  .  §§  [250,  257] 

mouth,  receive  the  Sacrament  with  his —      ,  .  §  332 

by  their  own — and  confession  .         .  ..§251 

with  their  own —     .         .         ,         .  .§251 

mouths,  receive  the  Sacrament... in  their —  .  .  §  148 

move,  to — the  sick  person... to  liberality        .  .  §  308 

to — such  sick  persons  as  are  of  ability  .  §  308 

the  Archbishop  shall — the  congregation   .  §  451 

multitude,  and — of  the  people      .         .         .  .  §  209 

name,  ask  what  shall  be  the —     .         .         .  .  §  183 

-when  the  godfathers... have  told  the —  .  §183 

■ and  ask  the —  .         .         .         .  .  §  195 

■ one  of  them  shall — the  child    .         .  .  §  214 

■ demand  the — of  the  child  .         .  .  §  222 

ask  the  godfathers... the —         .         .  .  §  241 

in  the — of  the  Communicants  .  .  §  321 

depart  in  the — of  the  Lord        .         .  .  §  208 

in  the — of  the  Father,  &c.         .         .  .  §  229 

names,  the — of  all  such  persons   ....  §  258 

the — of  all  those  children  .         .  .  §  268 

naming,  first — the  child,  and  saying    .         .  •  §  193 

and — the  child  shall  dip  it        .         .  •  §  I95 

and  then — it  after  them    .         ,         .  .  §  196 

Ka/«ra/,  concerning  the — ^Body  and  Blood    .  .  §151 

• still  in  their  very — substances  .         .  .  §  151 

Christ's  [true] — Body        ,         ,         .  .  §  151 

Christ's— Flesh  and  Blood  .         ,  .  §  151 

■ and  the— Body  and  Blood         .        •  .  §  151 


'<■ 

« 
* 
* 

* 
» 

» 

* 

» 
* 

* 
» 

* 

• 

» 

* 

• 
» 
* 

* 
• 
• 

* 
* 
* 
« 

♦ 

« 

* 

* 

• 
« 
• 
* 

* 

♦ 
* 

• 
* 
« 

» 

* 

* 
« 
• 

m 
to 

w 

* 

« 
« 

• 
« 
« 

* 

* 

* 
* 

* 
* 

♦ 
* 
« 
* 
« 
* 

* 
* 
• 

• 
« 

I 

♦ 
* 
» 

• 
♦ 

* 

« 

♦ 
* 

* 

• 

* 
♦ 
« 

» 

* 
• 

* 
* 

m 
\o 

M 

• 
* 

* 
* 
* 
• 

• 
* 

* 
* 

• 

* 
* 

* 
* 
* 

• 

• 
• 

• 
» 

1 

* 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
» 

♦ 
• 

• 

» 
• 

» 

• 

• 
♦ 

* 
♦ 

• 

• 
• 

» 

* 
• 

512 


A  Concordance  and 


necessity,  without  great  cause  and — 

in  time  of —     ..... 

if — so  require 

neck,  lay  the  Bible  upon  his — 
need,  when  great — shall  compel   . 
negligent  to  come  to  the  Holy  Communion  . 

to  come  to  the  Communion 

neighbours,  their  friends  and — 

either  of  his  own  house,  or  else  of  his — 

none  of  the... — can  be  gotten   . 

new  baptized,  speaking  to  the — persons 
New  Testament,  to  every  one  of  them  the — 
Nicene  Creed,  the — shall  be  sung  or  said 
north  side,  at — of  the  table  .... 

standing  at  the— or  end  thereof 

noon,  visit  the  sick  person  afore — 

Notes,  Certain — for  the  more  plain  explication 

notice,  timely — shall  be  given 

shall  be  given  thereof 

give  timely — to  the  Curate 

number,  if  the — of  children  .... 
when  the  most — of  people  may  come 

oath,  shall  cause  the — of  the  King's  [Queen's] 

the — of  the  King's  supremacy 

the — of  the  King's  [Queen's]  sovereignty 

the — concerning  the  King's  [Queen's] 

and  the — touching  the  knowledge[ing] 

take  the — of  supremacy   . 

THE — of  due  obedience . . .  Archbishop    §§ 

this — shall  not  be  made  at 

obedient,  to  be — unto  the  will  of  God    . 
obediently,  and — to  hear  and  be  ordered 

and — hear  and  be  ordered 

objected,  crime  or  impediment  be —       .         .    §§ 
oblation,  memorial,  or  prayer  of — 
oblations,  the  said  bason  with  the — 

if  there  be  no  alms  or —    . 

observe,  endeavour  themselves  faithfully  to — 
observed,  that  the  same  may  be  also —  . 

this  order  is  most  convenient  to  be — 

obstinacy,  or  else  of  malice  and — 

or  out  of  malice  and —     ... 

occasion,  as — shall  serve       .         .         .    §§§  132,  134, 

for  avoiding  of  all  matters  and — of  dissension  § 

■ to  take  away  all — of  dissension         .         .     § 

as — requireth   ......     \ 

occupy,  with... meditation  to — themselves      .         .     § 
in  the  parish  church — themselves      .         .     § 


01  •*(  t^i« 

O     CO  lO 
10  to  VO  o 


§213 
p.  302 

§178 
§460 

§213 
§  91 
§  92 
§272 
§330 

§3371 
§246 
§406 
§438 
§  76 
§  76 
§322 
p.  64 

§2311 
§2961 
§320 1 
§209 
§178 


402 

403 
403 
429 
448 
440 

449 
450 
253 
250 
267 
424 
108 

95 
241 

251 

145 
250 

151 
151 
135 
141 
141 
248 
146 
147 


§ 
§ 

448, 
§ 
§ 


394, 


I 


I 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


513 


offences,  ^zX... — should  be  taken  away         .         .  §151 

offended,  persons  that  have — him,  and  if  he  have —  §  306 

offer,  whiles  the  people  do —        .         .         .         •  §    93 

shall — unto  the  poor  men's  box         .         •  §    95 

the  Presbyter  shall  then — up... the  bread  \ 

shall — every  Sunday         ....  §  144 

it  appertaineth  to — for  the  charges    .         .  §  145 

shall  provide  to — for  them        .         .         .  §  145 

with  him  or  them  who  doth  so —      .         .  §  145 

offered,  when  all  have — §    95 

things  as  were  wont  to  be —     .         .         .  §  144 

that  which  was —     ,         .         .         .         .  §  131 

offering,  immediately  afore  the —  .         .         •  §    93 

shortness  of  time  that  the  people  arc —      .  §    93 

shortness  of  the  time  that  the  people  be —  §    94 

at  [upop]  the — days  appointed  .         •  §    96 

offerings,  the  due  and  accustomed —     .         .         •  §    96 

her  chrisom  and  other  accustomed —         ,  §  362 

must  offer  her  accustomed —     .         ,         .  §  362 

offertory,  then  shall  follow  for  the —     .         .         •  §    93 

and  begin  the — [saying  for  the]         .         .  §    93 


[the]  clerks  do  sing  the  [sentences  for  the] — §    95 


collects  to  be  said  after  the — 

• until  after  the — 

at  the  time  of  the — 

the  money  given  at  the — 

the  sentences  for  the — 

office,  shall  sing  for  the — or  introit 

this — for  the  administration  of  the 

to  use  the — for  Private  Baptism 

the — for  Public  Baptism  of  Infants 

the — of  [a]  [husband]  man  and  wife 

the — ensuing  is  not  to  be  used 

the — in  the  Common  Prayer-book 

to  esteem  them  in  their — 

he  must  continue  in  that — of  a  Deacon 

appointed  to  receive  the  said — 


officiates,  he  that — 

the  Presbyter  that- 


-is  to  take 


old  time,  in  the — was  not  commonly  ministered 
omission,  without — of  any  part     . 
omit,  may  not  forget  nor —  .... 
omitted,  this  prayer  [next]  following  shall  be — 
only,  the  Minister  may — communicate 
[See  also  "alonely."'] 
Open  Communion,  shall  the  Priest  reserve  at  the — 

after  the — ended        .... 

following  in  the —      .... 

if  the  day  be  not  ap])ointed  for  th 


§132 
§  134 
§  144 
§150 
§270 

§  74 
§  oi 
§248 
§248 
§294 
§338 
§389 
§§  390,  420 
§410 
§430 
§142 
P-  245 
§178 


§  152 
§308 
§291 
§337 

§321 
§321 
§321 
§  '.22 


openly,  saying  to  them — and  plainly 


§92  O.H.C. 


'if 
10 

M 

Hi 

M 

0 

M 

CO 

* 

1 

* 

* 

« 

* 

*   » 

» 

♦ 

» 

♦ 

# 

* 

« 

♦ 

• 

» 

♦ 

* 

* 

• 

* 

* 

» 

♦ 

« 

» 

• 

* 

« 

» 

* 

« 

* 

« 

• 

« 

* 

♦ 

» 

* 

* 

* 

• 

• 

« 

« 

* 

« 

* 
* 
« 

» 

♦ 

» 

♦ 

• 

♦ 

• 
» 

» 

» 

» 

» 

• 

« 

* 

* 
» 

» 

« 

* 

» 

» 

♦ 

* 

• 

« 

» 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

» 

4f 

• 
» 

♦ 

♦ 

» 

* 

Ll 


SH 


A  Concordance  and 


openly,  it  was — ministered  in  the  presence  of        .     §  178 

and  then  shall  say —         .         .         .         .     §  189 

they  may... — before  the  church         .         .     §  251 

• should — profess  their  own  faith         ,         .     §  253 

the  Curate... shall... — in  the  church      §§  255,  266 

opportunity,  or  at  the  first — after  .         .         •     §  295 

ordained,  whereas  it  is — in  the  Book  of  Common       §  151 

whereas  it  is — in  this  office 

whereby  it  was — that  Confirmation  . 

such  as  desire  to  be — Deacons  . 

the  persons  to  be — Priests 

Order,  the — how  the  Psalter  is  appointed      pp, 
THE — how  the  rest  of  [the]  Holy     .      pp. 


§  151 

§253 

§391 

§433 

17,  18 

20,  21 

■  THE — where[. .  .]Momingand  Evening  Prayer  p.  64 

-       -  --       -  g^ 

66 
66 
67 
30 
54 
56 
84 
84 
84 


THE — for  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer 

AN — FOR  MATINS   DAILY 

AN — FOR   MORNING   PRAYER   DAILY 

THE — FOR   MORNING   PRAYER   DAILY 

—  here  endeth  the — of  Morning  Prayer 

—  here  endeth  the — of  Evening  Prayer 

—  thus  endeth  the — of  Matins  and  Evensong 

—  AN — for  Evensong  throughout  the  year     . 

—  AN — for  Evening  Prayer  .... 

—  THE — for  Evening  Prayer         .         .         . 

—  for  the  Administration  of  the  Lord's  Supper  p.  212 

—  until  other — shall  be  provided  .         §  98  O.  H.C. 

—  the  same — shall  be  used  all  other  days      .  §  136 

—  and  that  in  such — and  course   .         .         .  §  144 

—  by — of  their  houses  .         .         .         .         .  §  144 

—  all  the  suffrages  and  due —        .         .         .  §  145 

—  according  to  the — in  this  book          .         .  §  149 

—  although  no — can  be  so    .         .         .         .  §  151 

—  which — is  well  meant       .         .         .         .§151 

—  this — of  demanding,  baptizing,  &c.  .         .  §  204 

—  THE — of  Confirmation      .         .         .         .  p.  318 

—  and  this — is  most  convenient     .         .         ,  §  250 

—  then  all  of  them  in — kneeling  before  the   .  §  260 

—  THE — for  the  Visitation  of  the  Sick  .         .  p.  350 

—  to  take — for  the  settling  of       .         .         .  §  306 

—  that  they  set  an — for  their        .         .         .  §  306 

—  for  more  expedition,  shall  use  this—          .  §  333 

—  THE — for  the  Burial  of  the  Dead       .         .  p.  372 

—  THE — of  the  Purification  of  Women           .  p.  389 

—  that — is  in  the  Church  of  Christ        .         .  §  390 

—  admitted... to  the — of  Priesthood       .         .  §410 

—  necessary  that— is  in  the  Church       .         .  §420 

—  that  shall  receive  the — of  Priesthood          .  §  421 

—  on  the  same  day  the — of  Deacons     .         .  §  440 

—  and  the— of  priesthood  to  others       .         .  §  440 

—  as  [afore]  before... — of  Priests  [Deacons]  §§445,452 

—  as  is  set  out  in  the — of  Priests  [Deacons]  §§448,456 


HI 

M 

10 
m 

0 

VO 
M 

CO 

10 

M 

* 

♦ 

» 

» 

* 

• 

* 

♦ 

• 

» 

• 

* 

» 

* 

« 

» 

♦ 

• 
* 

* 

« 

* 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

• 

• 

• 

» 

♦ 

« 

* 

♦ 

« 

♦ 

* 

» 

♦ 

» 

» 

* 

« 

» 

* 

« 

« 

» 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 

» 

• 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

» 

« 

1r 

♦ 

• 

♦ 

* 

• 

« 

» 

» 

♦ 

» 

» 

* 

♦ 

» 

» 

» 

» 

« 

« 

* 

• 

• 

« 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

* 

• 

« 

♦ 

» 

* 

* 

♦ 

• 

« 

# 

• 

» 

♦ 

» 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


515 


ordered,  hath  so — the  bread  and  wine  . 

• it  is  therefore — that  in  recompense 

to  hear  and  be — by  the  Curate 

hear  and  be — by  the  Curate 

found  meet  to  be —  . 

every  of  them  that  are  to  be — 

every  one  of  them  that  are  to  be — 

and  all  that  be  —  shall  tarry 

as  shall  be  found  meet  to  be — 

the  Deacons  shall  be —     . 

ordering,  shall  surcease  from — that  person 

■ in  the  form  for  the — of  Deacons 

■ —  appointed  at  the — of  Priests 

— as  at  the — of  Priests 

in  the  form  for — of  Deacons        §§§ 

orders,  how  necessary  such — are  . 

— every  one  that  receiveth — 

they  that  receive — shall  take     . 

if  the — of  Deacon  and  Priesthood 


106 
144 
256 
267 

395 
402 
404 


01   M    oi  ■<«-   r^  M 

tT    >0    "^    O     CO  lO 
lO    10    lO  «3    U3    10 


§§  394, 


425 
440 
424 
429 
440 
441 

440,  448,  452 
390 
436 

43^ 
440 

145 
294 


ordinance,  after  the — herein  made 

ordinivily ,  wherein — so  oft  as  there  is  any  marriage 

Ordinary,  the  matter  shall  be  referred  to  the —     .     § 

— ■ otherwise  determined  by  the — 

shall. ..give  account  to  the — 

• —  the — shall  proceed  against  the  offending    .     § 

enjoined  by  the  king  or  by  the — of  the  place  § 

■ as  the — shall  appoint 

■ shall  be  commanded  by  the —  . 

as  the — shall  direct  . 

it  be  otherwise  seen  to  his — 

ordination,  the  Sunday  before  the  day  of — 
ornaments,  shall  use  such — in  the  church 
■ such — of  the  church 


overnight,  parents  shall  give  knowledge — 

• he  must  give  knowledge — 

owelh,   [to]  declare  his  debts,  what  he — 
oujing,  and  what  is — unto  him 


paid,  hitherto  they  have — for  the  same 

then  and  at  that  time  to  be —    , 

paragraph,  the  next  precedent — of  this  rubrick 
parents,  the — shall  give  knowledge 

notice  shall  be  given... by  the — 

parish,  basin  to  be  provided  by  the — 

above  twenty  persons  in  the — 

and  the— shall  be  discharged  of  such  sums 

parishioners  of  every — shall  offer 

at  the  charges  ol  the — 


I 

73 

73 

«5 

150 

152 

357 
410 

159 
2 

2! 
180 
320 
306 
306 


§  144 
§  149 
§  73 
§  180 
§  231 
§  95 
§  139 
§  144 
§  144 
§  144 


»  »  I  * 

* 

» 
» 
» 
» 

* 

» 

»  »  » 

«  *  * 

»  «  * 

♦ 

»  »  * 

*  *  » 

*  «•  * 

*  *  « 
»  »  » 

»  » 

*  * 

»  *  » 

»■  *  » 

»  *  « 


Si6 


A  Concordance  and 


parish,  of  that  house  in  every — to  whom... it 

the  Curates  of  every — 

let  the  Minister  of  the —  . 

if  the  Priest  or  Minister  of  the  same — 

the  [Pbr.  ]  or  Minister  of  the  [same] —  §§  [i 

if  the  Minister  of  the  same —    . 

the  Curate  of  every — 

■ so  many  children  of  his — 

all  such  persons  within  his —    . 

so  many  children  of  his — 

the  Curate  of  every — once  in  six  weeks 

the  Curate  of  every — or  some  other  . 

all  those  children  of  his — 

then  shall  the  Curate  of  every —        . 

the  Curate  of  the  one —    . 

the  Curate  of  the  other — 

notice  shall  be  given. .  .to  the  Minister  of  the- 

— none  of  the — or  neighbours 

parish  church,  the  Divine  Service  in  the —   • 

resort  to  their — 

ungodly  in  the — occupy  themselves 

parish  churches,  [the  Minister]  in — 
parishioner,  and  note  that  every — shall 

every — shall  reckon  with  his  [the]  parson 

parishioners,  the  Priest  shall  exhort  his — 

■ shall  give  warning  to  his —        .         §  92 

as  their — shall  be  diposed 

• the — of  every  parish  shall  offer 

shall. ..exhort  their— 

Parliament,  by  [the]  authority  of — 

according  to  the  Act  of — 

a  Prayer  for  the  High  Court  of — 

Parson,  first  the — Vicar,  or  Curate      .  §  92 

reckon  with  his  [the] — Vicar,  or  Curate 

part,  at  such  a — of  the  Holy  Table 

partakers,  disposed  to  be — of  the  Communion  §  88  1 

as  shall  be — of  the  Holy  Communion 

so  many  as  intend  to  be —        .         . 

suffering  them  to  be — 

parts,  which  are  essential— of  Baptism 
party,  here  the— receiving  shall  say 
Pasch,  of  which — or  Easter  shall  be  one 
pastoral  staff,  the  Bishop  shall. ..have. ..his — 

put  into  his  hand  the — 

pastoral  staves,  having  their — in  their  hands 
Pastors,  forsomuch  as  the — and  Curates 

to  the  use  of  their — and  Curates 

the — and  Curates  shall     .         .         . 

paten,  upon  the  corporas,  or  else  in  the —     . 
llie  Priest  [Pbr. ...]  is  to  take  the—  . 


OM« 

5r  lo 

«o  »o 

0  *0  (O  'O 

1 

M   IH   i^   M 

.    §  145  ~ 

.   §  212 

• 

•   §214 

• 

.   §216 

• 

216],  217 

• 

.   §216 

• 

.   §255 

» 

.   §255 

• 

•   §258 

* 

.   §266  • 

.   §266  . 

.   §  266     • 

»   •   « 

.   §  268  •  • 

»   »   • 

.   §268  «  ♦ 

»  *!• 

.   §  271  «  • 

»  *  1  •  ♦ 

.   §  271  •  • 

»  •  *  1 » 

e—  §  296 

• 

.  §337   • 

»  •  •  • 

.  §  146  ♦ 

.  §  138  • 

•  §147  ♦ 

•  §390  * 

.  §  149   • 

»  ♦  «  ;  • 

§  149    *    ^ 

t   *       * 

•      §  92  * 

O.H.C. 

.  §144  ♦ 

.  §144  « 

.  §  320  •  ♦  < 

t   *   *  * 

.  §   2 

"■  *   1  * 

.  §   2 

K   •   * 

.  §  168 

• 

O.H.C. 

.  §  149   •   * 

►   •      • 

■     §  106 

• 

O.H.C. 

.  §  97  ♦ 

.  §  71  •  ♦  « 

«  •   » 

•  §  73  ♦  •  * 

•   •   » 

.  §229 

•   •   • 

.  §  120 

• 

.  §149 

• 

.  §  3  ♦ 

.  §461  • 

•  §447  * 

.  §  144  * 

.  §  144  • 

.  §  212  •  *  • 

•   • 

.  §  98  ♦ 

•  P-  245 

•N 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


517 


Paternoster,  the  Lord's  Prayer  called  the —  .     §11 

with  the  residue  of  the — .  .         .         .     §  396 

pause,  here  the  Priest  shall — awhile      .        §110  O.  H.C. 

after  a  little— the  Priest  shall  say     §  1 1 1  O.  H.C. 

pay,  as  they  were  wont  to... —     ... 

shall— to  the  Curate  the... offerings  . 

■ hath  not  been  accustomed  to — 

to — their  duties,  to  communicate,  &c. 

and — to  them... all  ecclesiastical  duties 

feace,  a  thanksgiving  for — and  victory  . 

for — and  deliverance  from  our  enemies 

• for  restoring  public — at  home  . 

pirceive,  if  he — any  so  to  do        .  .  .     §  no 

perfect,  to  the  intent  he  may  be — 

ministered  to  them  that  were  of — age 

perfectly,  no  order  can  be  so — devised  . 
person,  changing  the  word  infant  for  child  or— 
person^ s,  a  cross  upon  the — forehead     . 
persons,  such — as  are  of  riper  years 

[And  throughout  the  Order  of  Baptism.] 

and  if  the — that  [would]  be  married  .         .     §  271 

[And  throughout  the  Form  of  Matrimoay.] 
pieces,  broken  in  two — at  the  least        .        §  141  O.H.C. 


.   §  144 

.  §  96 

.  §138 

.  §146 

.    §  149 

.  §174 

.  §174 

.   §175 

O.H.C. 

.     §410 

•     §253 

.     §151 

.     §248 

.  p.  316 

.     §231 

be  divided  in  divers — 

be  divided  in  two — at  the  least 


place,  determined  by  the  Ordinary  of  the —  . 

such — ...as  the  people  maybest  hear 

acustomed — of  the  church 

he  or  his  deputy  shall  appoint  the — 

■ in  a — assigned  for  the  purpose 

some  convenient — nigh  the  quire 


§141 
§141 
§  I 
§  I 
§  I 
§  31 
§    81 

97 


in  some  convenient — [within  the  church]  §§  204,  209 


nigh  unto  the — where  the  [Lord's]  table 
place,  who  shall  humbly  present  and — it 

the  Presbyter  shall  then... — the  bread 

the  Priest  shall  then — upon  the  table 


§357 
§  95 
§  98 
§  98 
§249 
2 


placed,  being — and  standing  in  order 

places,  in  all  other — every  Minister  shall  be  at  liberty  § 

in  all  other — of  the  Liturgy      .         .         .§11 

such — where  they  do  sing         .         .         .  §    16 

in  quires  and — where  they  sing         .         .  §    28 

other — where  there  is  daily  Communion   .  §    90 

the. ..litany  shall  be  said  or  sung  in  all —  §  133 

in  chapels  annexed  and  all  other —  .         .  §  137 

to  be  in  more — than  [in]  one    .         .         .  §  151 

plainly,  saying  to  them  openly  and —  .  §  92  O.H.C, 

say  or  sing — and  distinctly       .         .         .  §  105 

plain  tune,  shall  the  lessons  be  sung  in  a —  .         .  §    16 

plenty,  a  thanksgiving  for —         .         .         .         .  §  i73 

poor,  liberality  toward  the —        .         •         .         .  §  308 


M 

0\ 

M 

M 

CO 

w 

* 

* 

« 

• 
* 

VO 
VO 

* 
* 

* 
* 

* 
* 

* 
* 

• 
* 
« 

* 

* 

* 
* 
• 

« 

# 

« 

« 
* 

* 

« 
* 

« 

» 

* 

« 

* 

* 
* 

* 
« 

* 
* 

* 

» 
* 

* 

» 
* 

* 
« 

* 
* 
* 

* 

» 
* 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

« 

» 

» 
♦ 
* 

5i8 


A  Concordance  and 


poor-ma^ s  box,  shall  offer  unto  the —  .        .        .     §    95 

put  the  same  into  the —     .         .         •     §    95 

post- Communion,  then  shall  the  clerks  sing  the —      §  122 

after  the  Holy  Communion,  called  the —  §  123 

potentates,  authority  of  all  foreign —  .  .  ,  §  402 
pour,  it  shall  suffice  to — water     ...         .     §  197 

or — water  upon  him  [it]  .         .  §§  [214],  241 

power,  to  [the]  uttermost  [of]  his —  .  .  .  §  306 
Praise  and  Thanksgiving,  a  Hymn  of —  .  .  §  383 
pray,  the  Bishop  shall — in  this  wise     .         .         .     §  435 

customably  assembled  to — in  the  church  .     §  136 

Prayer,  a — for  the  King's  Majesty       .         .        §§  29,  50 

a — for  the  Royal  Family  .         .         .        §§  29,  5 1 

a — for  the  Clergy  and  People  .         .        §§  29,  52 

a — of  Saint  Chrysostom   .         .         .         •     §    53 

shall  say  the — of  consecration  .         .         .     §107 

memorial  or — of  oblation  .         .         .     §  108 

with  devout — or  godly  silence  .         .         .     §  146 

the  Priest  shall  add  also  this —  .         .     §  190 

by  imposition  of  hands  and —  .         .         .     §  252 

before  the  [Pbr.  or]  Minister  begin  his —       §  307 

a — for  a  sick  child  [person]      .         .    §§315,316 

a  commendatory — for  a  sick  person.  .     §317 

a — for  persons  troubled  in  mind        .    §§  318,  319 

then  shall  the  Priest  use  the  appointed —  .     §  336 

prayers,  at  the  end  of  all  other —  .         .         .     §    10 

then  these  five — following        .         .         .     §    29 

these — following      .         .         .        §§  21,  [29,  43] 

shall  follow  the  creed  with  other —  .         ,     §    42 

with  the  rest  of  the — at  the  end  of  the  Litany    §    50 

to  prepare  themselves  with — and  fasting  .     §  23 1 

Prayers  and  Thanksgivings  upon  several  .  p.  279 
preach,  when  they  do — shall  use  .  .  .  .  §  2 
Prebendaries,  the  Archdeacons,  Deans... — ,  &c.  .     §      2 

Preface,  the — pp.  6 — 11 

THE — PP-  12,  13 

[In  ed.  1662,  the  former  Preface  is  retained  under  the  title, 
"  Concerning  the  Service  of  the  Church."] 

after  which — shall  follow  immediately       .     §  102 

shall  read  this — following         .         .         .     §  249 

The — §  327 

THE— p.  418 

prefaces,  after  [each  of]  which — shall  follow  .     §  102 

[See  also  "  Proper  Prei'ace."] 
prentices,  cause  their  children,  servants,  and —      ,     §  267 
/rif/ard-,  that  they— themselves    .         .  §92  0.H.C. 

to — bless  and  consecrate  so  much      §  98  O.  H.C. 

reverently  and  devoutly — and  .        §  143  O.H.C. 

" themselves  with  prayers  and  fasting  .         .     §  231 

prepared,  the  bread — for  the  Communion  .  .  §  141 
bread  and  wine — lor  the  Sacrament .         .     §    98 


01 

M 

• 

* 
• 

* 
• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

« 

* 
• 

• 
» 
• 

* 

• 
* 

• 
• 

« 

10 

M 

• 

» 
• 
• 

* 

» 
• 

• 
• 

• 

» 
• 

• 

«o 
«o 

* 

• 
• 
* 

• 

• 
• 

• 

♦ 

* 

• 
• 
• 

0 

VO 
M 

• 

» 
* 
* 

• 
• 

» 
♦ 

* 

• 
• 

M 

• 
« 
* 

» 

• 
• 

• 
« 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 
♦ 

• 
• 

• 

(« 

to 

VO 

• 
• 
• 

» 
• 

• 

• 
* 

• 
» 
• 
♦ 

• 
» 
» 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &a 


5^9 


Fresiyi^,  the — or  Minister  at  the... Communion  .     §      2 

the — or  Minister  shall  read       ,         .         •     §      7 

with  the  Deacon  or — 

shall  the — or  Minister  begin. .  .Lord's  Prayer   j    1 1 

standing  up,  the — shall  say  or  sing   .         •     §    13 

the — or  Minister  that  readeth  the  lesson    .     §    16 

before  every  lesson  the — ...shall  say  .     §    16 

the — or  Minister  first  pronouncing    .         .     §    2i 

the  Creed  by  the — or  Minister  .         .     §    22 

the — ,  clerks  and  people  .         .         .         •     §    23 

the — and  all  the  people  standing      .         •     §    55 

when  the — or  Minister  readeth  .         .     §    61 

the — shall  say,  ["At  this  time,"  &c.]      §§  62,  63 

names  to  the — or  Curate  overnight  .         .     §    71 

the — or  Curate  shall  call  him   .         .         .     §    72 

same  order  shall  the — or  Curate  use  .     §    73 

the — or  Minister. . .  ought  to  admit  the  penitent  §    73 

the — saying... the — shall  say      .         .         .     §    82 

at  the  discretion  of  the^or  Curate   .         .     §    92 

• while  the — distinctly  pronounces       .         •     §    95 

he  shall  deliver  it  to  the —        .         .         •     §    95 

■ the — shall  then  offer  up    . 

then  the — [standing  up],  shall  say 

the— that  officiates  is  to  take  the  paten 

by  the — himself  or  the  Deacon 

or  else  the— that  celebrateth     . 

the — or  Minister  that  receiveth 

at  the  discretion  of  the — 

one  half  shall  be  to  the  use  of  the — 

shall  be  divided  in  the  presence  of  the- 

the — beginning  at  these  words 

as  the— which  celebrates  . 

• give  knowledge  to  the — or  Curate 

the — or  Minister  shall  make     . 

the — or  Minister  shall  command 

the  said  lawful — or  Minister 

first  let  the  lawful — or  Minister 

baptized  by  any  other  lawful— or  Minister 

shall  the — or  Minister  examine  them 

if  the— or  Minister  shall  find     . 

the — or  Minister  shall  make     . 

here  the— or  Minister,  with  the  godfathers 

the — or  Minister  shall  say 

shall  the — or  Minister  make 

the — or  Curate  of  every  parish 

ordered  by  the— or  Curate 

the — or  Curate  of  the  one  parish 

the— or  Curate  of  the  other  parish    . 

shall  the— or  Curate  say  unto  the  man 

then  shall  the — or  Minister  say 


107,  109 
p.  245 
§112 
§116 
§119 
§131 
§  131 
§131 
§142 
§142 
§180 
§187 
§  207 
§214 
§214 
§217 
§217 
§218 
§219 
§  220 
§  222 
§  227 

266,  268 
§267 
§271 
§271 
§27? 
§279 


520 


A  Concordance  and 


Presbyter,  the — or  Minister  receiving  the  woman  §  281 

then  shall  the — or  Minister  speak     ,         •  §  286 

the — or  Minister  shall  add  this          .         .  §  287 

then  the — ,  Minister,  or  Clerks         .         ,  §  288 

then  shall  the  — or  Minister  exhort    .         .  §  301 

the — or  Minister  shall  rehearse          .         .  §  303 

then  shall  the — or  Minister  examine           .  §  306 

the — or  Minister  may  not  forget        .         .  §  308 

then  shall  the— or  Minister  say  .    §§311,313 

give  knowledge  to  the — or  Curate    .         .  §  320 

where  the — or  Curate  may  reverently        .  §  322 

in  due  time  to  the — or  Curate  .        .         .  §  332 

the — or  Minister  may  alonely  communicate  §  337 

say... after  the — or  Minister      .         .         .  §366 

the — shall  read  them        .         .         .         .§11 

and  the — before  he  beginneth  .         .         .  §    61 

the — or  Minister  shall  say,  "  Here  endeth"  §    62 

when  the — or  Curate  shall  see          .         •  §    91 

the — or  Curate  shall  declare  unto  the  people  §    93 

may  be  said. ..by  the  discretion  of  the —    .  §  132 

Presbyters,  deliver  it  to  other  Bishops — and  Deacons  §116 

where  be  many — and  Deacons           .         .  §  140 

or  Curates  shall  diligently  from  time  to  time  §  320 


[See  also  under  the  word  "  Priest,"  where  [Pbr.]  is  given  in 
all  those  cases  where  the  word  "Presbyter,"  in  the  Scotch 
Liturgy,  has  been  substituted  for  "  Priest."  These  references 
will  be  found  to  be  supplementary  to  those  given  above. 

The  word  is  also  frequently  repeated  independently  of  num- 
bered rubrics,  e.g.  pp.  71,  86,  217,  237,  392,  &c.] 

prescribed,  ornaments  as  are— or  shall  be 

but  what  is — in  the  rales  of  this  book 

to  the  form  before — [above]         §§§ 


—  124, 
Presence,  or  unto  any  corporal — 

to  any  real  and  essential — 

presence,  openly  ministered  in  the — of  the 

Cometh  into  the  sick  man's —   . 

shall  examine... them... in  the — of  the 

be  divided  in  the — of  the  Presbyter 

present,  shall  humbly — it  before  the  Lord 

who  shall  humbly — and  place  it 

• be  ready  to— them  at  the  font  . 

shall — unto  the  Bishop     .         .         •  §§  [, 

shall — such  as  come  to  be  admitted 

the  Bishops  that — him  saying  . 

presented,  any  of  the  persons  here — 

fit  to  be — to  the  Bishop    , 

every  one  of  them  that  are —    , 

the  Deacons  shall  be  first — 

shall  be — by  two  Bishops 

presume,  shall  not— [to  come]  to  the  Lord's  Table 


S  »5 
9.  440 
§151 
§151 
§178 
§298 
§404 
§131 
§  95 
§  95 
§232 
91],  421 
§391 
§447 
§233 
§258 

§391 
§440 
§447 
§    72 


• 

HI 

0 
10 

CO 
VO 

M 

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 
• 

» 
• 
• 
• 
« 
• 
• 
» 

• 
» 
• 

• 
* 

VO 
VO 

♦ 
» 
» 

• 

* 

» 

* 

« 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

» 

* 

• 

* 

• 

» 
* 

♦ 

» 

» 

» 

• 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 
« 
* 

♦ 

• 

• 

» 

• 

♦ 

* 

» 

•1 

• 

• 

« 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


521 


§ 


§ 


§ 


Priest,  being  a — or  Deacon,  he  shall  have  and  wear  § 

—  to  be  pronounced  by  the — [Pbr.]  alone      .     § 

the — ...shall  begin  the. ..Paternoster.         .     § 

here  all  standing  up  the — [Pbr.]  shall  say      § 

then  the — [Pbr.]  standing  up,  shall  say     .     § 

the — standing  up,  and  saying  .         .         .     § 

•  Absolution  to  be  pronounced  by  the — alone   § 

the — [Pbr.  ]  shall  say  [or  sing]' .         .         .     § 

all  standing  up  the — shall  say  .         .         .     § 

then  the — standing  up,  shall  say 

the — that  shall  execute     .... 

to  help  the — in  the  ministration 

the — standing  humbly  afore  the  midst 

the — [Pbr.]  standing  at  the  north  side 

the — shall  say,  or  else  the  clerks  shall  sing 

the — standing  at  God's  board  shall  begin 

the — shall  turn  him  to  the  people 

shall  the — rehearse  distinctly    . 

shall  the — [Pbr.]  turning  to  the  people 

the — [Pbr.]  standing  up,  and  saying 

the — standing  as  before,  and  saying  .     § 

the — or  he  that  is  appointed  shall  read      .     § 

the— [Pbr.]  shall  read  the  Epistle    .         .     § 

the — or  one  appointed  to  read  the  Gospel      § 

•  the — or  Deacon  then  shall  read  the  Gospel    § 

— after  the  Gospel  ended  the — shall  begin 

the — shall  say  to  them  which  be        §  89  O.  H.  C 

shall  the — [Pbr.  ]  say  this  exhortation         ,     §    88 

then  shall  the — return  to  .         .         .         •     §    93 

— and  reverently  bring  it  to  the —        .         •     §    95 

— immediately  after  the  —himself  hath   §  9S  O.  H.  C. 

but  as  heretofore  usually  the —  §  98  O.H.  C. 

the — shall  tlien  place  upon  the  table 

then  the — shall  say 

the — [  Pbr.  ]  shall  proceed,  saying     , 

then  shall  the — turn  to  the  Lord's  table 

shall  the — or  deacon  turn  him 

after  which  done,  the — shall  say 

then  the — turning  him  to  the  altar    . 

then  the — [Pbr.]  standing  up,  shall  say 

when  the — standing  before  the  table 

the — shall  take  the  cup     .         .         . 

the — must  take  the  bread 

the — is  to  take  the  paten  . 

then  shall  the — say  .... 

here  the — shall  pause  awhile    .        §  1 10  O.  H.C. 

after  a  little  pause  the — shall  say     §  i n  O. H.C. 

here  the — shall  turn  him  towards  those    .     §111 

then  shall  the — (  Pbr.  J  say  to  them  .         .     §111 

by  one  of  the  ministers  or  by  the —  §  112  O.H, C. 


§    84 


•  8  yo 
.  §  99 

.  §  99 

•  §  100 

.  §  104 

•  §  104 

.  §  105 

.  §  107 

.  §  106 

•  P-  245 

.  P-  245 

•  P-  245 

•  §  109 

0\ 

m 
10 

M 
* 

0\ 

M 

0 

M 

CO 
VO 

♦ 

M 

to 
to 

M 

* 

* 
* 

* 

» 

♦ 

* 

* 

« 

» 

* 

« 

♦ 

» 

* 

» 

♦ 

* 

• 

* 

* 

* 

* 

« 

* 

» 

» 

♦ 

» 

» 

» 

♦ 

» 

* 

• 

• 

• 

* 

* 

* 

» 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 
* 
* 

* 

» 

* 

-X- 

* 

* 

* 

« 

* 

* 

* 

• 

♦ 

« 

* 

* 

• 

• 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

* 

• 

• 

* 

* 

» 

* 

« 

* 

» 

$i2 


A  Concordance  and 


Priest,  then  shall  the— [Pbr.]  [. . .]  stand  np   §  1 1 3  O.  H.  C. 

then  shall  the— stand  up.         .        §II40.H.C. 

shall  the —  [Pbr.  1  also  say         .         .         .§114 

then  shall  the— kneel  down      .        §  115  O.H.C. 

then  shall  the — turning  him  to  God's  board    §115 

[Pbr.]  kneeling  down  [at  God's  board]      .     §  115 

then  shall  the — first  receive      .         .         .     §  116 

then  shall  the— rise  .         .         §  116  O.H.C. 

they  may  be  ready  to  help  the —      §  116  O.H.C. 

deliver  the  same  to  the — and  Deacons       .     §  1 16 

the — shall  deliver  the  Communion  §  116  O.H.C. 

and  the — delivering  the  Sacrament  §  119  O.H.C. 

if  there  be  a  deacon  or  other —         §  121  O  H.C. 

and  as  the — ministereth  the  bread    §  121  O.H.C. 


and  as  the — ministereth  the  Sacrament 

so  soon  as  the — doth  receive     .         . 

the — is  to  consecrate 

then  the — shall  give  thanks  to  God  . 

then  shall  the — say  the  Lord's  Prayer 

then  the — turning  him  to  the  people  §  128  O.H 

then  the — [Pbr.]  or  Bishop,  if  he  be  present  § 

■when  there  are  no  clerks,  then  the —         .  § 

-  the — shall  put  upon  him  a  plain  albe         .  § 

-  [disposed]  to  communicate  with  the —  §§  134, 

-  to  communicate  with  the — [Pbr.]      .         .  § 

■  to  communicate  with  the — [  Pbr.  ]     .         .  § 

-  the — and  such  other  of  the  communicants  § 

-  the— after  the  first  cup. ..be  emptied  §  143  O.H 

-  receive  the  Holy  Communion  with  the—  § 

-  the — on  the  week-day  shall  forbear  .         .  § 

-  communicate  with  the— that  ministereth   .  § 

-  received  at  the — 's  hands  the  Sacrament    .  § 

-  in  their  mouths  at  the — 's  hand         .         .  § 

-  shall  the — and  the  people         ,         .         .  § 

-  then  standing  there  the — [Pbr.]  shall  ask  § 

-  if  they  answer.  No,  then  shall  the — [Pbr.]  § 

-  and  the — coming  to  the  font     .         ,         .  § 

-  shall  the— proceed  as  foUoweth        .         .  § 
-then[shall]  the— [Pbr.]  shall  say     .         .  § 

-  shall  the — ask  what  shall  be  the  name       .  § 

-  let  the — looking  upon  the  children  .         .  § 

-  then  shall  the — [Pbr.]  say        .         .         .  § 

-  the  people  stand  up,  and  the— shall  say    .  § 

■  the— shall  add  also  this  prayer  .         .  § 

-  let  the — take  one  of  the  children       .         .  § 

-  the — [  Pbr.  ]  shall  speak  unto  the  godfathers  § 

-  then  standing  at  the  font,  the —        .         .  § 

-  shall  the — demand  of  the  child  .         .  § 

-  shall  the — i^Pbr.  ]  demand  of  the  godfathers  § 

-  then  shall  the — [Pbr.  j  say       .        .        .  § 


5; 

M 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
* 
• 

• 
» 
• 
» 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
» 

m 

M 

♦ 
• 

• 

• 
• 

♦ 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

o» 
>o 

M 

» 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

0 

M 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

CO 
10 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

* 
• 

10 

M 

• 

» 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 
* 

• 
• 

• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


523 


Priest,  the— [Pbr.]  shall  take  the  child         .         .  § 

then  the — shall  anoint  the  infant       .         .  § 

the — [Pbr.  ]  shall  make  a  cross          .         .  § 

the — shall  make  a  cross  .         .  pp,  299,  309, 

then  the — shall  say  .         .         .         .         .  § 

thenshall  the— [Pbr.]  say        .         .         .  § 

then  shall  the— [Pbr.  J  say        .         .         .  § 

the — shall  say  to  the  godfathers,  &c.          .  § 

the — [Pbr.]  calling  thegodfathers... together  § 

chrisoms...to  be  delivered  to  the —  •         .  § 

to  the  intent  the — may  examine         .         .  § 

then  shall  the — examine  them  further        .  § 

that  if  the — [Pbr.]  or  Minister  of  the  same  § 

[shall]  the — [Pbr.]  shall  demand  the  name  § 

then  the — shall  say  .....§ 

then  shall  the — say  .         .         .         .         .  § 

then  shall  the — say  .....§ 

make. ..answer  to  the — 's  [Pbr.'s]  questions  § 

then  let  the— [Pbr.  ]  baptize  it  [him J         .  § 

the — shall  say  at  the  font 

then  shall  the  — say  thus   . 

and  standing  there  the — shall  ask 

then  shall  the — say  .         . 

and  the — shall  say    . 

then  the — shall  speak  to  the  persons 

then  shall  the — demand    . 

then  shall  the — say  . 

then  shall  the — take  each  person 

then  shall  the — say  . 

then  shall  the — say  . 

the — shall  use  this  exhortation 

there  the — [Pbr.]  shall  thus  say 

the — shall  say  ... 

then  shall  the — [Pbr.]  say  to  the  woman  .  § 

with  the  accustomed  duty  to  the — [Pbr.]  .  § 

the — [Pbr.]  taking  the  ring,  shall  deliver  it  § 

and  the  man  taught  by  the — [Pbr.]  shall  say  § 

shall  the — [Pbr.]  join  their  right  hands     .  § 

the— [Pbr.]  standing  at  the  table      .         .  § 

the — standing  at  the  altar  and  turning  § 

then  shall  the — bless  the  man  and  the  woman  § 

then  shall  the— [Pbr.]  say         .         .         .  § 

the — [Pbr.]  entering  into  the  sick  person's  § 

after  which  confession  the — [Pbr.]  shall    .  § 

then  the— [Pb.-.  ]  shall  say  the  [this]  collect  § 

then  shall  the — anoint  him        .         .         .  § 

then  shall  the — reserve     .         .         .         .  § 

after  which  the — shall  proceed          .         .  § 

the — [Pbr.  ]  shall  first  receive  the       .         .  § 

the — L^br.  J  for  more  expedition  shall       .  § 


195 
199 
200 
316 
200 
201 
203 
205 
205 
206 
216 
216 
216 
222 
224 
225 
226 
229 
229 
230 
233 
233 
234 
236 
238 

239 
240 
241 
242 
243 
245 
272 
272 
277 
283 
283 
283 
285 
290 
290 
292 
292 
297 

309 
310 

319 
321 

329 
330 

333 


Ot 

M 

* 
* 

• 
• 
♦ 

• 

• 

» 
• 
* 

* 

• 

* 
* 

• 

• 
* 

• 
» 
* 

• 
• 

• 
:  * 

« 

* 
* 

• 
« 

• 

* 
• 

• 

• 
• 

« 

» 
* 
« 
* 

• 
• 

« 
* 
• 
» 

• 
• 

o» 
m 

M 

* 

» 

* 
* 

• 

• 
« 

* 

« 
* 

• 

* 
» 
♦ 
• 
* 
• 

• 
• 

• 

vS 

M 

* 

« 

• 
• 

• 

♦ 
« 

• 
♦ 

• 

« 
♦ 
* 
» 

• 
• 

« 
» 

* 
« 

* 
» 

CO 

<o 

M 

» 

• 

• 
* 

* 
» 

• 

• 

• 
* 
* 
* 

• 
* 

• 
• 
* 
• 

• 
• 

U3 

M 

♦ 

♦ 
• 
• 
* 
» 

» 
• 
* 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
* 
* 
• 
* 
* 
• 
• 

• 

» 
• 
* 
• 
» 
• 
* 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

524 


A  Concordance  and 


Priest,  then  shall  the — use  the  appointed  prayer 

the — [Pbr.  ]  meeting  the  corpse  at  the 

the — and  clerks  meeting  the  corpse 

the— [Pbr.]  shall  say         .         ,         . 

or  [else]  the — [Pbr.]  and  clerks  shall  sing 

then  the — casting  earth  upon  the  corpse 

the— [Pbr.]  shall  say 

[shall]  the— [Pbr.]  shall  say      . 

[the]— [Pbr.]    .         . 

the — [Pbr.]  standing  by  her,  shall  say 

and  then  the — shall  say  unto  her 

then  shall  the — [Pbr.]  say  this  Psalm 

then  the — shall  say  .... 


—  [Pbr.] 

—  the — [Pbr.]  shall  go  into  the  pulpit  . 

—  the — shall  in  the  reading  pew  or  pulpit 

—  the — [Pbr.]  and  clerks  kneeling 

—  then  shall  the — if  there  be  any  in  the  ship 

—  shall  the — and  the  people  with  him 


§336 
§339 
§339 
§342 
§342 
§344 
§344 
§350 
§351 
§357 
§357 
§358 
§360 
§361 
§363 
§363 
§365 
§379 
§396 


[The  word  "Priest"  is  also  frequently  repeated  indepen- 
dently of  numbered  rubrics,  e.g.  pp.  71,  76,  80,  215,  237,  248, 
257.  368,  384,  392,  &c.] 

friesthood,  admitted. ..to  the  order  of —       *  .         .  §  410 

- — - —  all  them  that  shall  receive  the  order  of —  .  §  421 

if  the  order  of  deacon  and — [to  others]      .  §  440 

Priests,  where  there  be  many —    .         .         .         •  §    74 

where  be  many — [Pbrs.]  and  Deacons       .  §  140 

or  else  the — [Pbr.]  and  clerks  shall  sing    .  §  339 

of  such  as  come  to  be  admitted —      .         .  §  420 

the — and  others  that  are  present       .         .  §  433 

the  persons  to  be  ordained — all  kneeling  .  §  433 

the  Bishops,  with  the — present          .         .  §  436 

as  they  are  appointed  at  the  ordering  of —  §  440 

the  collects... then  that  for —     .         .         .  §440 

shall  be  first  presented,  and  then  the —     .  §  440 

as  at  the  ordering  of —     .      [Also  445,  456.]  §  441 

primitive  Church,  the  usage  of  the —    .         .         .  §  145 

prince,  a  prayer  for  the  Queen  and —  .         .         •  §  158 

principles,  instructed  in  the — of  the  Christian        .  §  231 

print,  without  all  manner  of —     ....  §  141 

private.  Holy  Communion  is  celebrate... in — houses  §  130 

the  ofi&ce  for — baptism     .         ...  §  248 

shall  be  used  in  all — confessions        .         .  §  309 

/m/fl/if/j/,  form  of  baptism — before  used        .         .  §216 
privily,  let  him  commune  with  him —          §  no  O.  H.C. 

proceed,  the  Priest  [Pbr.]  shall — ,  saying      .         .  §    99 

at  this  place,  or  else —      ....  §  302 

shall  the  Bishop — to  the  Communion        .  §  408 

the  Archbishop  shall — to  the  Communion  §  462 


1- 

M 

M 

0\ 

0 
10 

M 

to 

* 
* 

* 
» 
• 

» 
• 
♦ 

» 

• 
* 

• 

♦ 
* 

• 
* 

* 

• 
• 

• 
♦ 

« 
• 

» 

• 
• 

* 

• 
» 

* 
• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
» 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
» 
» 

• 
• 

• 
• 

♦ 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

» 

• 
* 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

» 
• 

• 
• 
♦ 
• 

• 

• 
• 

* 

• 
* 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
* 

» 
• 
» 

• 
• 
• 
» 

• 
♦ 
• 

• 

» 
♦ 
• 
• 

• 
* 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


525 


proceed,  and  then — to  deliver  the  same 

then  shall  the  Priest — as  followeth   . 

after  which,  the  Priest  shall —  . 

promise,  ratify  and  confess  the  same,  and  also — 

■ and — to  be  obedient 

promised,  what  their  godfathers... — for  them 
proof,  upon — thereof  by  the  ecclesiastical  laws 
Proper  Lessons  to  be  read        .         .         •    PP 
proper  lessons,  except  there  be — assigned 
[See  also  "  Lessons."] 

Proper  Prefaces  .... 
Proper  Preface,  here  shall  follow  the — 
Proper  Psalms  on  Certain  Days 

except  there  be — appointed      i 

Proper  Psalms,  with — and  Lessons  . 
proper  suffrage,  in  the — then  added 
prove,  the  Minister  shall — by  the  answers 

to — his  allegation    . 

provide,  to — him  books  of  holy  divinity 

whom  they  shall — to  offer  for  them 

provided,  Act  of  Parliament — in  that  behalf 

in  a  decent  basin  to  be — by  the  parish 

(until  other  Order  shall  be—)    .         §  98 

and  wine  for  the  Communion  shall  be — 

Provosts,  the  Archdeacons,  Deans, — &c. 
Psalm,  be  said  or  sung... this — in  English    . 

be  said  or  sung  this — following 

and  at  the  end  of  every —         .         . 

or  this — "  Dominus  regit  me"  . 

or  else  this —  .         .         .         .         •     §^ 

shall  he  say  a — appointed  for  the  introit 

shall  sing  for  the  introit  [as  they  call  it]  a- 

shall  say  or  sing  this — following 

or  [else]  this — [following] 

the — ended      ..... 

he  shall  say  this —   .... 

then  the  Minister  [shall]  say  this—  . 

cut  off  the  form  of  the  visitatation  at  the- 

and  all  other  things  unto  the — 

the  appointed  prayer  without  any — 

then  shall  the  Priest  [Pbr.]  say  this — • 

shall  say  this —        .... 

a — or  hymn  of  praise  and  thanksgiving 

then  shall  the — for  the  introit  . 

the — for  the  introit .... 

Psalms,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  the — 

except  there  be  proper — appointed  . 

then  shall  follow  certain —        .         , 

then  shall  follow  the — in  order 

expressing  the  ordei  01  the —   . 

in  order  as  they  be  appointed  .        . 


01 
■si- 

C3^ 

0 

CO 

10 

U-) 

V, 

*o 

w 

lO 

M 

M 

M 

M 

M 

M 

.  §116 

♦ 

.  §181 

* 

.  §329 

• 

•  §251 

♦ 

• 

« 

• 

* 

.  §253 

» 

• 

• 

* 

* 

.  §251 

♦ 

* 

« 

* 

* 

•   §147 

* 

.  22 — 29 

• 

» 

• 

» 

.   §  16 

* 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

.  p.  238 

» 

« 

* 

» 

♦ 

* 

.  §  loi 

» 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

« 

♦ 

•   p.  29 

• 

* 

» 

• 

.  §  IS 

* 

• 

* 

* 

« 

.  p.  98 

• 

.  §425 

» 

.  §218 

* 

» 

* 

.  §274 

» 

* 

« 

* 

• 

* 

.  §131 

* 

.  §145 

* 

.  §  2 

« 

.  §  95 

* 

O.H.C. 

•  §144 

♦ 

* 

* 

« 

* 

.  §   2 

* 

.  §  14 

• 

.  §  14 

» 

* 

* 

« 

* 

.  §  15 

« 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

.  §  18 

• 

[39].  41 

* 

« 

* 

• 

* 

•  §  77 

* 

-  §  74 

* 

.  §288 

* 

* 

* 

• 

• 

* 

.  §289 

* 

» 

* 

* 

• 

« 

.  §290 

* 

» 

» 

• 

* 

• 

.  §298 

* 

.  §3" 

* 

» 

• 

* 

* 

-  §333 

♦ 

* 

» 

« 

» 

•  §335 

* 

•  §336 

» 

.  §358 

• 

« 

« 

* 

» 

* 

•  §365 

« 

» 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

.  §385 

* 

•  §440 

* 

•  §441 

♦ 

.  §  14 

» 

.  §  15 

« 

• 

• 

• 

» 

.  §  15 

• 

• 

• 

« 

• 

.  §  IS 

♦ 

.  P-  17 

• 

• 

• 

* 

» 

.  §  38 

♦ 

• 

» 

« 

» 

• 

526 


A  Concordance  and 


TVa/wj,  except  there  be  proper— appointed           •  §    38 

in  the  Table  for— §    38 

read  in  the  ordinary  course  of  the —          .  §    39 

shall  be  read  one  or  both  of  these — .         .  §  340 

these — with  other  suffrages  following         .  §  348 

Psalms  of  David,  The — p.  408 

[See  also  "  Proper  Psalms."] 

Psalter^  how  the — is  appointed  to  be  read    .      pp.  17,  18 

Public  Baptism,  in  the  Form  of —        .         .         .  §  214 

[and  so  forth]  as  in —         .         .         .  §  228 

form  above  written  concerning —        .  §  229 

• before  appointed  for — of  infants          .  §  229 

suffice  to  use  the  office  for —      .        .  §  248 

Public  Baptism p.  287 

publicly,  when  it  shall  be — administered       .         ,  §  320 

public  service,  otherwise  letted  with  the —     .         .  §  322 

published,  nothing  shall  be... — in  the  church         .  §    85 

in  the  thirtieth  Canon  first —    .         .         ,  §  211 

must  be — in  the  church    .         .        .         .  §  270 

pulpit,  the  Priest  [Pbr.  ]  shall  go  into  the —           .  §  363 

the  reading-pew  or —        ....  §  363 

punishment,  or  to  suffer  other —  ...         .  §  147 

pure  and  clean,  2^\\X.'CiQ — water     .         .         .         .  §    98 

pure  water,  to  be  filled  with —     .         .         .         .  §  181 
Purification,  The  Order  of  the —    .        .        .p.  389 

[Afterwards,  "The  Churching  of  Women."] 

purification,  at  the — of  the  mother       .         .         .  §  206 

purpose,  in  a  table  made  for  that —      .         .         .  §    15 

Catechism  set  forth  for  that —  .         .         .  §  207 

shall  appoint  for  that —    ....  §  231 

putting  the  wine  into  the  chalice  .         .         .         •  §    98 

thereto  a  little  pure  clean  water        .         .  §    98 

^«/^/«^  <?»,  this  order  of .. . — the  chrisom       .         .  §204 


Queen,  a  prayer  for  the — and  Prince    .        .  .  §  158 

a  Prayer  for  the — Prince  Charles,  &c.  .  §  158 

questions,  demand  of  the  child  these —           .  •  §  '93 

uncertain  answers  to  the  Priest's — [Pbr.'s]  §  229 

severally  these — following        .         .  .  §  239 

— —  and  can  also  answer  to  such —           .  ,  §  250 

such  other — of  this  short  Catechism  ,  §  257 

other — contained  in  this  Catechism  .  .  §  268 

quire,  graduates  may  use  in  the — such  hoods  .  §      2 

the  Priest  being  in  the — shall  begin  .  §    il 

tarry  in  the — or... place  nigh  the —   .  •  §    97 

• shall  depart  out  of  the —  .         .         .  •  §    97 

tnen  shall  they  go  into  the —    .         .  .  §  288 

place  nigh  unto  the — door        .         .  •  §  357 

quires  and  places,  in — where  they  sing          ,  §§  28,  49 


0 

M 

« 
• 

« 

* 
i 
• 
* 

• 

• 

* 
• 

• 

• 

• 
« 

• 

« 
• 

« 
• 
• 

• 
♦ 
• 
• 
♦ 
• 

M 
10 
lO 

•H 



♦ 

• 

« 

* 
» 

• 
* 

* 
« 

• 

• 
« 

« 

to 

M 

0 

CO 

M 

* 
« 

* 

• 
• 

• 
• 

» 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
♦ 

♦ 

• 
• 

• 

• 
* 

» 

• 

« 
• 
• 

* 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

» 
• 

* 

• 

« 
• 
• 

• 
* 

• 

* 
» 

• 

» 

» 
* 
• 

-• 
• 

♦ 
• 

» 
• 

* 
* 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


527 


rain,  for — [if  the  time  require]     ....  §  160 

[a  Thanksgiving]  for —     .         .         .         •  §  I7^ 

readiness,  he  may  with  the  more —       .         .         .  §  106 

may  be  always  in  a — to  die       .         .         .  §  320 

reading,  whilst  these  sentences  are  in —        .         •  §    95 

reading-pew,  shall  in — or  pulpit  ....  §  363 
ready,  be — to  take  the  Sacrament         .          §  89  O.H.C, 

be — and  desirous  to  be  confirmed     .         .  §  269 

real,  any — and  essential  presence          .         .         .  §  151 

realm,  the  bread. ..be  made  through  all  this —      .  §  141 

Pastors  and  Curates  within  this —     .         .  §  144 

the  ecclesiastical  laws  of  the —          .         .  §  147 

be  used  throughout  the  whole —        .         .  §  148 

reasonable,  except  they  have  a — cause  ..         .         .  §  140 

upon  a  great  and — cause  .         .         .         .  §  212 

reasonable  causes,  except  for — it  shall  otherwise    .  §  410 

except  for — it  be  otherwise         .         .  §  410 

reasons,  \}cie.)\xsX — for  retaining     .         ,         .         .  §211 

receive,  those  that  be  minded  to — the  same  .         .  §    88 

shall — the  alms  for  the  poor  [the  devotions]  §    95 

that  mind  not  to — the  said  Holy  Communion  §    97 

them  that  come  to — the  Holy  Communion  §111 

to — the  Holy  Communion        .        §  112  O.H.C. 

them  that  shall — the  Communion     §  115  O.H.C. 

shall  the  Priest  first — the  Communion       .  §  116 

shall  the  Minister  first — the  Communion  .  §  116 

then  shall  the  Bishop... first —  .         .         .  §  116 

so  soon  as  the  Priest  doth —     .         .         .  |  122 

they  shall  all — the  Communion         .         »  §  140 

shall  likewise — the  Communion        .         .  §  145 

and  there  to — and  take  all  other  Sacraments  §  146 

the  people  commonly — the  Sacrament      .  §  148 

shall  also — the  Sacraments       .         .         ,  §  149 

• the  communicants  kneeling  should —         .  §  151 

communicants  should — the  same  kneeling  §  151 

shall — him  as  one  of  the  flock  .         .         .  §  218 

to  the  more  edifying  of  such  as  shall —      .  §  250 

they  may — strength  and  defence        .        .  §  252 

must — the  Holy  Communion   .         .         .  §  295 

should — the  Holy  Communion          .         .  §  295 

• and  a  good  number  to— the      .         .         .  §  322 

the  Priest  [Pbr.]  shall  first— the  Communion  §  330 

his  neighbours  to — the  Holy  Communion  §  330 

do  not — the  Sacrament     .         ...  §  332 

although  he  do  not — the  Sacrament          .  §  332 

persons  appointed  to — the  holy  Communion  §    98 

■ of  discretion  to — the  Communion     .         .  §139 

disposed  to — the  same     .         .         .         .  §  144 

shall — the  holy  Communion     .         .         .  §  145 

convenient  that  she — the  holy  Communion  §  362 


01 
'I- 
10 

* 

» 
* 

♦ 
• 

♦ 

♦ 

* 
* 

♦ 
* 
* 

♦ 
* 
* 
* 

* 
» 
* 
» 

* 

* 

10 
* 

• 

* 

« 
* 

* 

* 
* 

* 

« 

• 
* 

* 
* 
« 

* 

« 

» 

» 
* 

* 

* 

10 

>o 

M 
» 

* 
• 

* 

* 

* 
* 

* 
* 

» 

* 
» 
* 
* 

• 
• 

* 

• 

« 

M 

• 
* 

» 

• 

* 
* 
» 

« 

» 

• 
» 
• 
♦ 

♦ 
» 

• 
* 

• 

CO 

10 

w 

• 
♦ 

» 

* 
♦ 

* 

* 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

* 
• 

» 

• 
* 

* 
* 

10 

M 

• 

» 
» 
• 
♦ 

• 

* 
♦ 

• 

» 

» 

• 
• 
* 

» 

♦ 

• 
* 

» 

-^ 


528 


A  Concordance  and 


receive,  for  lack  of  company  to — with  him 

tarry  and — the  Holy  Communion 

shall — the  order  of  Priesthood 

appointed  to — the  said  office     . 

all  they  that — orders 


received,  after  the  Priest  himself  hath — 

must  not  think  less  to  be — in  part 

at  the  Priest's  hands  the  Sacrament 

sacramental  bread  or  wine  there  bodily — 

until  such  time  as  they  have — 

receivers,  given  to  all  worthy —    . 

the — humbly  kneeling  upon  their  knees 

receiveth,  when  he — himself 

and — the  Holy  Communion 

of  every  one  that — [orders] 

receiving,  worthy — of  the  Holy  Sacrament    . 

conveniently  placed  for  the —  . 

to  the — of  the  Holy  Communion 

here  the  party — shall  say  .         .         .    §§ 

that  the — of  the  Sacrament       . 

may  testify  the — of  them  . 

for  the — of  this  holy  Sacrament 

the  [Pbr.  or]  Minister — the  woman  . 

to  the  oft — (in  the  church) 

to  the  often — of  the  Holy  Communion 

reckon,  shall — with  his  [the]  Parson 


§332 
§408 
§421 
§430 
•     §438 
§  q8  O.H.C. 
§  141  O.H.C. 
§148 


recovery,  when  there  appeareth  small  hope  of — 

redemption,  and  shed  his  blood  for  his — 

reflect,  ought  seriously  to — upon  those  particular  sins  §  377 

rehearse  distinctly  all  the  ten  Commandments 

. shall — the  articles  of  the  faith  . 


rehearsed,  these  words  before — are  to  be  said 

these  collects  before — 

these  words  before — 

remain,  chancels  shall — as... in  times  p.ist    . 

if  any — of  that  which  was  consecrated 

if  any  of  the  bread  and  wine — 

they — still  in  their  very  natural  substances 

for  the  Sacramental  bread  and  wine — 

and — in  the  same  place    . 

remaineth,  that  which  [what] — of  the  consecrated 
remaining,  they  still — humbly  upon  their  knees 

and — in  some  convenient  place 

remembrance,  be  put  in — of  his  own  profession 

• men  should  often  be  put  in —  . 

Remission,  Absolution  or — of  sins 
repent,  whether  he — him  truly  of  his  sins 

if  he  do  truly — him  of  his  sins  . 

require,  nevertheless  (if  necessity  so — )  . 

requisite,  so  many  shall  be  ready. ..as.., —     . 


§  151 
§438 
§151 
§436 
§117 
§333 
§436 
§  86 
§  87 
§  92 
18,  120 

§145 
§178 
§231 
§281 
§320 
§320 
§  149 
§316 
§332 


01  «  I  oi  »*•  r^  M 
*  lO  voi  O  MO 
to    <0    lf5  >0    VO    O 


^    79 

§303 
§108 

§135 

§307 
§  I 
§142 
§142 
§151 
§  151 
§438 
§125 

§      9 

§204 
§178 
§306 

9.  [33] 
§3c6 
2 


178 
74 


» , » 


i 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


539 


§980 

ell— 


143 


require,  or  such  like  as  the  case  shall — 
reserve,  shall  the  Priest — ...so  much  of  the 

(there) — so  much  of  the  Sacrament 

resident,  parish  church  where  they  be — 

residue,  with  the — of  the  Pater  Noster 

resort  to  their  parish  church 

rest,  leave  the — upon  the  altar 

restored  again,  for  many  considerations  be  w 

retained,  why  some  be  abolished  and  some — 

shall  be — and  be  in  use     . 

retaining,  the  just  reasons  for — of  it 
return,  shall — to  the  Lord's  table 
rojerently,  he  shall — bring  the  said  bason 

and — place  upon  it  what  remaineth 

shall  be — eaten  and  drunk 

eat  and  drink  the  same 

and  devoutly  prepare  and 

where  he  may — celebrate 

the  [Pbr.  or]  Curate  may — minister 

right  hand,  take  one  of  the  children  by  the — 

take  each  person  to  be  baptized  by  the 

the  man  on  the —     .... 

cause  the  man  with  his — 

to  take  the  woman  by  the  [her] — 

■ taking  again  the  man  by  the — 

— — —  woman  with  her — taking  the  man  by  his — 
right  hands,  then  shall  the  Priest  [Pbr.]  join  their — 
right  side,  first  dipping  the —  .... 
ring,  the  Priest  [Pbr.  j  taking  the — shall  deliver  it 

shall  give  unto  the  woman  a — 

leaving  the— upon  the  fourth  finger  . 

ringing,  called  tr>gether  by  the — of  a  bell 
riper  years,  any  such  persons  as  are  of — 
rite,  any  other — or  ceremony  in  the  mass       §  98 
rites,  all  other  sacraments  and —  . 

receive  the  Sacraments  and  other —  . 

receive  the  Sacraments  and  observe  other- 

rochet,  Bishop  shall  have  and  wear  a — 

have  upon  him  besides  his —     . 

the  elected  Bishop  vested  with  his — 


O. 


§357 

§331 
§  146 
§  396 
§138 
H.C. 
§178 
p.  14 
§  2 
§  211 
§  125 
§  95 
§  125 
§  142 
§  142 
H.C. 
§  322 
§  322 
§191 
§241 
§  272 
§281 
§281 
§282 
§  282 
§285 

§  195 

§283 
§283 
§284 

§363 
§231 
H.C. 

§  146 
§  149 
§  149 


§447 
§402 

§  141 
§  73 
§    85 


Home,  authority  of  the  Bishop  of- 
round,  unleavened  and — as  it  was  afore 
rtibrick,  preceding  paragraph  of  this — 
rules,  prescribed  in  the — of  this  book  , 

Sacrament,  be  ready  to  take  the —        .  §  89  O.H.C. 

Priest  himself  hath  received  the—  §  98  O.H.C. 

hath  done  with  the— of  the  Body  §  98  O.  H.  C. 

shewing  the — to  the  people       .  .          .     §  108 

the— of  the  Body  of  Christ        .  §  1 1 7  O.  H.  C. 

bread  and  wine  prepared  for  the —  .         .     §  198 

M  m 


M 

CO 

»    *    * 

* 

* 

» 

# 

« 

» 

* 

* 

* 

4 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 

♦ 

« 

* 

# 

# 

* 

» 

» 

» 

« 

* 
* 
* 

» 

* 

* 

*         * 

* 

* 

* 

* 

*         * 

*■ 

* 

* 

« 

»         * 

* 

* 

* 

*      » 

»         * 

* 

* 

«      * 

* 

* 

* 

* 

*      * 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

» 

» 

* 

* 

* 

^ 

* 

* 

♦ 

» 

•H- 

* 

* 

* 

1 

# 

530 


A  Concordance  and 


Sacrament,  delivering  the — of  the  Blood      §  119  O.H.C. 

minister  the — of  the  Blood        .         .  .  §  121 

ministereth  the — of  the  Body    .         .  .  §  I2I 

the— of  the  blessed  Body  and  Blood  .  §  145 

the  worthy  receiving  of  the —  .         .  .  §  145 

receive  the — of  Christ's  Body  .         .  .  §  148 

■ the— of  the  Body  of  Christ        .         .  .  §  148 

that  the— of  Baptism        .         .         .  .  §  178 

for  the  receiving  of  this  Holy —        •  .  §  231 

the — of  the  Body  and  Blood     .         .  .  §  321 

shall  reserve  so  much  of  the —           .  .  §331 

do  not  receive  the — of  Christ's  Body  .  §  332 

he  do  not  receive  the — with  his  mouth  .  §  332 

[See  also  "  Holy  Sacrament."] 
Sacramental,  concerning  the — bread  and  wine 

any  adoration  is  done  to  the — bread 

unto  the — bread  or  wine  . 

the — bread  and  wine  remain     . 


Sacrametits,  to  receive  and  take  all  other — 
shall  also  receive  the —    . 


§151 
§151 
§151 
§151 
§146 

§  149 

saidandused,  Momingand  Evening  Prayer  daily  tobe —  p.6s 
ja»V/ <7r  J««^,  then  shall  be — this  Psalm         .         .     §    14 

after  the  second  lesson  shall  be —       .     §    19 

[then]  shall  be— the  Creed         .       §§  22,  84 

if  the  Litany  be  not  appointed  to  be —    §    29 

then  shall  be — the  Apostles'  Creed    , 

and  how  M.  and  E.  Prayer  shall  be — 

then  shall  be — "  Glory  be  to  God" 

sentences  of  Holy  Scripture  to  be — 

the  English  Litany  shall  be —    . 

then  shall  be — 

then  shall  this  anthem  be — 

then  shall  be—"  Come,  Holy  Ghost" 


§  42 
P-  65 
§  78 
§123 
§133 
§345 
§366 
§419 


saved,  that  children. ..are  undoubtedly —         §§  [210,  254] 
saving  that  at  the  dipping  of  the  child  .         .     §  229 

say.  Priest  shall — or  the  clerks  shall  sing      .         •     §    77 

1 —  Priest  [Pbr.]  shall — or  else  the... shall  sing    §  342 

saying  or  singing,  in  the — of  Matins  and  Evensong   §      2 


say  or  sing,  the  Presbyter  shall — 

• ■  the  Presbyter  shall — 

then  likewise  shall  he —    . 

plainly  and  distinctly — 

■ shall — this  Psalm  following 

the  clerks  and  people  shall- 

Scripture,  some  one  of  these  sentences  of  the — 

scruple,  all — concerning  the  use  of 

secretly  in  their  prayers 

send  in  writing,  either  bring  or — 

sentences,  shall  read  some  one  [or  more]  of  these —    § 


§    13 

§  34 
§  35 
§105 
§288 

§395 
§  7 
§211 

§432 
§268 

§     7 
that  which  is  written  after  the  said —      §§  7,  [31] 


M 

m 
to 

M 

M 

,•<*■ 
'  0 

«3 

M 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

» 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

p) 
to 

M 

• 

« 
• 

» 

» 
• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

♦ 

♦ 
• 
• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

VO 

VO 

» 
• 
» 
• 
• 
• 

« 

* 
* 
• 
» 

• 
♦ 

« 
• 
• 

• 
♦ 
• 
♦ 

* 
* 

• 
• 
• 

» 
♦ 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

* 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

* 

« 
• 

• 
• 

* 

* 
♦ 
• 

♦ 

• 
« 

* 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

» 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

* 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


531 


§  31 

§  34 
.[94] 
§  95 
§  95 
§123 
§270 
§  6 
§  86 
§  86 
§  92 
§  93 
§294 
§294 
§294 


sentences,  some  one  or  more  of  these — 

after  the — ,  exhortation,  confession,  &c. 

one  or  more  of  these —     .         .         •     §§  93 

some  or  all  of  these — for  the  offertory 

whilst  these — are  in  reading 

of  Holy  Scripture  to  be  said  or  sung 

immediately  before  the — for  the  offertory 

sermon,  if  there  be  a —         .         . 

if  there  be  no — shall  follow 

the — or  [one  of  the]  homilies  shall  follow 

after  the — or  homily 

after  such — ,  homily,  or  exhortation 

then  shall  be  said  after  the  Gospel  a — 

or  if  there  be  no —  .         .         .  '      . 

after  which,  if  there  be  no — 

there  shall  be  a — or  exhortation        .    §§  390,  420 

after  the  Gospel  and  the — are  ended  .     §  447 

j^rz'aw/j,  shall  cause  their  children, — and  apprentices  §  256 

■ shall  cause  their  children, — and  prentices      §  267 

serve,  if  the  chalice  will  not —     .         .         .         .     §    98 

so  much  as  will — the  people    .  §  98  O.H.C. 

as  the  time  will —    .         .         .         .         .     §  266 

as  shall — the  [other]  sick  persons     .    §§  321,  331 

serves,  the  collect — [shall  serve]  .  .  §§§  64,  68,  69 
service,  the — of  some  of  those  Sundays         .        •     §    70 

in  the — time §  270 

shall  be  sung  or  said  the — for  the      .    §§  399,  426 

on  in  the — of  the  Communion  .         .         .     §  438 

[See  also  "Divine  Service."] 
service  of  the  Church,  Qo^CK^'^l'i^G  \\i^ —    .      pp.6 — il 
services,  days  for  which  particular — are  appointed      p.  32 
session,  to  be  read  during  their —  .         .         .     §  168 

set,  and — it  upon  the  Holy  Table  .  .  •  §  95 
set  down,  as  it  is — before  .....§  448 
set  forth,  as  it  is — in  the  form  for  ordering  Deacons  §  429 
set  in  order,  all  things  are  duly  prepared... and —  §  441 
set  out,  as  it  is— in  the  order  of  Deacons  §§§429,  440, 448 

as  it  is — in  the  order  of  Priests  .         .     §  456 

setting,  and — both  the  bread  and  wine  upon  the  altar  §  98 
settling,  for  the — of  their  temporal  estates  .  .  §  306 
severally,  shall  be  used — with  every  child     .         .     §  204 

lay  his  hand  upon  every  child —       .         .     §  260 

upon  the  head  of  every  one —  .         .         .     §  260 

laying  his  hands — upon  the  head      .         .     §  405 

shewing,  any  elevation  or — the  sacrament  .  .  §  108 
ship,  spared  from  necessary  service  in  the —  .     §  377 

• the  Priest,  if  there  be  any  in  the —   .         .     §  379 

sick,  when  any  person  is —  ...         .     §  296 

entering  [coming]  into  the — person's  house    §  297 

• if  the  person  visited  be  very —  P-  355     §  3°^ 


10 

M 

in 
10 

M 

10 
to 

1 

M 

to 
10 

M 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

« 

* 

• 
• 

« 

« 

* 

* 

» 

« 

♦ 

« 

» 

• 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

♦ 

» 

» 

» 

» 

♦ 

* 

« 

♦ 

» 

» 

♦ 

* 

« 

« 

» 

* 

» 

* 

♦ 

« 

» 

* 

• 

* 
• 

♦ 

» 

* 

* 

« 

« 

« 

* 

• 

» 

» 

♦ 

« 

* 

♦ 

» 

* 

» 

* 

« 

» 

» 

* 

• 

• 

* 

532 


A  Concordance  and 


sick,  the — person  shall  answer      ....  §  305 

Celebration...  Holy  Communion  for  the —  §  323 

sickness,  by  reason  of  extremity  of —    .         .         .  §  332 

other  like  contagious  times  of —         .         .  §  337 

plague  or  other  common —        .         .         .  §  176 

sicknesses,  sudden  perils,  diseases,  and —      .         .  §  320 

side,  men  on  the  one — and  the  women  on  the  other  §    97 

signification,  for  a — of  the  humble... acknowledging  §  151 

for  a — of  our... acknowledgments       .         .  §15' 

signifying  also  how  many  be  appointed         ,         .  §  320 

also  how  many  there  are            .         .         .  §  320 

sign  of  the  cross,  vis&  oith& —        .         .         .         ,  §  211 

making  the — §  319 

silence,  with  devout  prayer  or  godly —           .         .  §  146 

a  certain  space  kept  in —          .         .         .  §  432 

there  shall  be — kept  for  a  space        .         .  §  432 

simili  modo  postquatn,  beginning... words —  §  143  O.H.C. 

sing,  the  clerks  shall — the  rest  [of  the  Creed]        .  §    84 

they  shall — one  or  many  of  the  sentences  §    94 

while  the  clerks  do — the  offertory     .         •  §    95 

this  the  clerks  shall  also —        .         .         .  §  103 

then  shall  the  clerks — the  post-Communion  §  122 

all  things  appointed  here  for  them  to —  §  129 

in  the  Communion  time  the  clerks  shall —  §  122 

the  congregation  shall — the  Creed    .         .  §  438 

singing,  when  the  clerks  have  done —  .         .         ,  §  104 

sing  or  say,  going... or  toward  the  grave  shall —    .  §  339 

with  the  clergy  and  people  present —  §  425 

[See  also  "  say  or  sing."] 

singular,  shall  be  to  him  a — great  comfort    .         .  §  330 

six  weeks,  the  Curate  of  every  parish  once  in —      .  §  266 

solemn  days,  certain — for  which    .         .         .         ,  p.  32 

solemnization,  then  the — must  be  deferred    .         .  §  274 

day  appointed  for —          ...         .  §  272 

Solemnization  of  Matrimony,  the  Form  of —         .  p.  333 

solemnize,  accordingly — so  high  and  holy  mysteries  §  145 

shall  not — matrimony  betwixt  them  .         .  §  271 

sort,  the  bread. ..be  made. ..after  one — and  fashion  §  141 

child  which  is  after  this — baptized    .         .  §  216 

shall  absolve  him... after  this — .         .         .  §309 

space,  for  the — of  a  whole  year     .         .         .         .  §  410 

shall  be  a  certain — kept  in  silence     •         .  §  432 

shall  be  silence  kept  for  a —     .         ,         .  §  432 

spared,  as  can  be — from  necessary  service     .         .  §  377 

speak,  shall — to  the  godfathers  and  godmothers     .  §  192 

the  Priest  shall — to  the  persons         .         .  §  238 

then  shall  the  Minister — unto  the  people  .  §  286 

speaking  to  the  godfathers  and  godmothers  first     .  §  245 

then — to  the  new  baptized        .         .         .  §  246 

and  also — to  the  persons  .        .        .         .  §  273 


'«• 

10 

M 

» 
• 

• 
• 

♦ 

* 
• 
» 

» 
« 
• 
• 
• 
• 
* 
• 
• 

• 

♦ 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

♦ 
• 

• 

« 

10 

M 

• 
* 

• 

» 

• 

« 

* 
• 

« 
» 
* 

• 

• 
• 
• 
» 

• 
• 

• 

10 
M 

• 
» 

» 
• 

• 

• 
* 

* 
» 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

•<*■ 
0 
10 
M 

» 
• 

* 

• 
* 
• 

♦ 

• 
• 

• 

• 

to 

♦ 
• 

• 
• 

• 

* 

• 

* 
• 

• 
* 

• 

M 

(U 

vo 

» 

• 
* 
• 
♦ 

» 

• 
♦ 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
* 
• 

• 

• 
♦ 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

I 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


533 


special  request,  upon — of  the  diseased   . 

spent,  if  the  consecrated  bread  or  wine  be  all —    . 

spiritual  comfort,  disposed  for  their — to  receive     . 

spiritually,  he  doth  eat  and  drink — 

spousage,  a  ring  and  other  tokens  of — 

stand,  he  shall — at  such  a  part  of  the  Holy  Table 

cannot  conveniently — at  the  church  door  . 

let  them — within  the  church 

standeth,  nigh  unto  the  place  where  the  Table- 
standin^,  the  Priest  alone — 

that  readeth,  [so] — and  turning 


§337 
§124 

§  144 

§332 

§283 

§  106 

§209 

§  209 

.     §357 

§§  9,  33 

§    16 

the  [Pbr.]  Minister  and  [all]  the  people —  §§  22,  [55] 

-      -        -  -        -  -       -         §    76 

§  76 
§  106 
§181 
§  181 
§  192 
§233 
§249 
§272 
§290 
§  290 
§  9 
§  13 
§  13 
§  15 
§  24 
§  24 
§  25 
§  37 
35 


Priest — humbly  afore  the  midet  of  the  altar 

the  Priest  [Pbr.  ] — at  the  north  side 

when  the  Priest — before  the  table 

and  then — there  the  Priest  [Pbr.  ] 

and — there  shall  say 

then — at  the  font 

and — there  the  Priest  shall  ask 

and — in  order  before  the  Bishop 

and  there — together,  the  man  on  the  right 

the  Priest — at  the  altar  and  turning  his  face 

. the  Priest  [Pbr.]— at  the  table 

standing  up,  the  Presbyter  alone,  he — 

here  all — the  Priest  . 

then  all  of  them — the  Presbyter 

every  one — at  the  same 

• then  the  Minister — shall  say 

then  the  Priest  [Pbr.] — shall  say 

the  Priest — and  saying 

here  all — the  Priest  shall  say 

all — as  often  as  it  [the  "  Gloria"]  is 


the  Priest  [Presbyter] — shall  say  §§  106,  [107] 


this  creed,  all  still  reverently — 

■ then  all — the  Priest  . 

then  all —  .... 

then  shall  the  Bishop —     . 

then  the  Archbishop — 

stand  up,  readeth  the  Gospel  the  people  shall — 

then  shall  the  people —     .         .    §§ 

storm,  short  prayers  in  respect  of  a —  . 

thanksgiving  after  a — 

storms  at  sea.  Prayers  to  be  used  in —  . 
stile,  meeting  the  corpse  at  the  church — 
subscribed,  with  his  hand — thereunto    . 
substances,  remain  still  in  their  very  natural — 
sudden  perils,  men  be  subject  to  many — 
suffer,  or  to — other  punishment    . 

if  the  time  will —      .... 

as  the  time  and  present  exigence  will — 


§  84 
§205 

§245 
§431 
§455 
§  61 
86,  236 
§376 
§380 
§371 
§339 
§258 

§151 
§320 

§147 
§214 
§214 


01 
10 

M 

10 

01 

3- 

M 











. 

» 

• 

* 

* 

♦ 

« 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

» 

* 

« 

♦ 

« 

• 

» 

* 

« 

♦ 

» 

* 

* 

* 

• 

* 

« 

# 

» 

* 

♦ 

It 

* 

» 

« 

* 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

« 

* 
» 

* 

« 

» 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 
« 

* 

* 
♦ 

* 

* 

* 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

» 

♦ 

* 

* 

« 
* 

• 
♦ 
* 

* 

* 
# 

• 

* 

• 
» 

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 

* 

♦ 

It 

♦ 

» 

« 

♦ 

» 

* 

• 

» 

« 

* 

534 


A  Concordance  and 


suffice,  if  the  wine  hallowed... doth  not —     §  143  O.H.C. 

as  shall — for  the  persons  .         .         •     §    98 

it  shall — that  the  bread  be  such         .         .     §  141 

it  shall — to  pour  water     .         ...     §  197 

it  may — to  use  the  Office  for  Public  Baptism   §  248 

it  shall — [that]  the  Litany  [to]  be  said  once    §  440 

sufficient,  it  shall  be — to  read  this  exhortation       .     §    90 

so  much  bread  and  wine  as  he  shall  think —  §    98 

number,  at  least  two  or  three 

sufficiently,  is  lawfully  and — baptized 
whether  they  be — instructed 


§322 
§216 
§231 
§425 
§452 
§  43 
§145 
§348 

§395 
Sunday,  or  some  holyday  immediately  preceding       §    92 


suffrage,  in  the  proper — there  added    . 

the  proper — ...shall  be  omitted 

suffrages,  then  the — before  assigned     . 

with  all  the — and  due  order 

these  Psalms  with  other — following 

the  Litany  and — 


the  [next] — or  holyday 


§92  O.H.C. 

with  the  Minister  every — at  the  least         .  §  140 

by  order  of  their  houses  every —        .         .  §  144 

beginning  on  the — before          .         .         •  §  ^59 

upon  the — or  holyday       .         .         ,         .  §  180 

• longer  than  the — or  other  holyday    .         .  §212 

longer  than  the  first  or  second —       .         .  §  212 

upon  the — or  holyday  appointed       .         .  §  232 

shall  upon  some — or  holyday  .         .         .  §  266 

upon  some  other — or  holyday  ,         .         .  §  410 

to  be  performed  on  some — or  holyday       .  p.  456 

Sundays,  if  there  be  any  more — before  Advent     .  §    70 

but  upon — and  other  holydayss          .         .  §  178 

shall  diligently  upon — and  holydays          .  §  255 

shall  diligently  upon — and  holydays          .  §  266 

asked  three  several — or  holydays      .         .  §  270 

be  published  three  several — or  holydays    .  §  270 

sung,  the  lessons  shall  be — in  a  plain  tune    .         .  §    16 

sentences  of  Holy  Scripture  to  be —           .  §    93 

after  the  hymn  may  be — the  "  Te  Deum"  §  386 

then  shall  be — for  the  introit    .         .         .  §411 

sung  or  said,  [then  shall  be] — the  Creed        .     §§  22,  [84] 

shall  be — this  Confession  of,  &c.        .  §    55 

these  anthems  shall  be —  .         .         •  §    b? 

alter  each  of  which  prefaces  shall  be —  §  102 

■ then  shall  be — the  service .         .         .  §  399 

then  shall  be — the  Communion           .  §  400 

• then  shall  be — the  service  for     .         .  §  426 

after  which  shall  be —        .         .         .  §  433 

then  shall  be— "Come,  Holy  Ghost"  §  456 

"  Veni  Creator"  shall  be — over  to  him  §  456 

[See  also  "  said  or  sung."] 


10 

M 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

« 

• 
♦ 

• 

♦ 

« 

• 
* 
* 

» 
• 

>o 

HI 

» 
* 

• 
* 

« 

• 
« 

» 
• 

* 
* 

♦ 
• 

• 

* 
* 

• 

• 

vn 
10 

M 

» 
• 

• 
• 

» 

• 
♦ 

» 
• 

• 
• 

• 
» 

• 

• 
• 

• 

♦ 

M 

» 

» 

» 
• 

* 
• 

» 
• 

• 
♦ 

• 

• 
• 

to 
VO 
w 

» 

* 

« 

• 

• 
* 
• 

• 
• 

• 
» 

• 

• 
» 

vo 

M 

♦ 
• 
• 

« 

* 
» 
* 
* 

• 
• 

• 

» 
• 

* 
• 
• 
* 
* 

♦ 

» 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

I 


i 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


535 


supersiiiion,  and  to  take  away  the —     .         ,         .  §  141 

to  take  away  all  occasion  of... —        .          .  §  141 

abused  it  to — and  wickedness  .          .          .  §  148 

sup  or  draught,  taking  one — only         .  §980.  H.  C. 

Supper  of  the  Lord,  The — and  the  Holy         .  p.  212 

[See  also  "  Lord's  Supper."] 

supplication,  Litany  or  general —           .         .          .  §  152 

secretly... to  make  humble — to  God  .          .  §  432 

supremacy,  the  Oath  of  the  King's  [Queen's] —     .  §  402 

surcease,  the  Bishop  shall — from  ordering  that       .  §  394 

the  Bishop  shall — from  ordering  that  person  §  424 

sureties,  will  be  bound  and  [sufficient] — with  him  §  274 

JM^^/J/Zci?,  Minister  in  parish  churches... shall  use  a —  §      2 

being  graduates,  may  use... besides  their —  §      2 

at  liberty  to  use  any — or  no       .          .          .  §      2 

Priest  or  Deacon  shall  have  and  wear  a — only  §      2 

the  Bishop. ..shall  have  upon  him  a — oralbe  §      3 

put  upon  him  a  plain  albe  or —          .          .  §  134 

having  upon  him  a— and  a  cope         .          .  §  447 

surplices,  being  also  in — and  copes        .          .          .  §  447 

sustain,  as  the  persons  to  be  married  do —    .          .  §  274 

siveat,  in  the  time  of  the  plague — or  such  other     .  §  337 

T.\BLE,  The — and  Calendar  expressing  the      pp.  17 — 19 

Table,  A — of  the  Moveable  Feasts  for  forty  years  p.  36 

table  [of  Psalms]  made  for  that  purpose         .          •  §     '5 

in  the — for  Psalms             .          .          .         ■  §    38 

Table,  x\\& — ...at  the  Communion  time... shall  stand  §    75 

at  the  north  side  of  the —          .          .          •  §    76 

the  Priest  shall  place  upon  the —       .          •  §    98 

when  the  Priest  standing  before  the —        .  §  106 

•  to  be  eaten  at  the — with  other  meats          .  §  141 

the  Priest  [Pbr.]  standing  at  the —    .          .  §  290 

unto  the  place  where  the — standeth  .         .  §  357 

Tables  and  Rules  for  the  Moveable. ..Feasts     .  p.  31 

take,  the  godfathers... shall — and  lay  their  hands  .  §  198 

which  all  they... shall — together         .          .  §438 

taking  owQ  only  sup  or  draught     .         .  §  98  O.H.C. 

tarry,  partakers... shall — still  in  the  quire      .          •  §    97 

and  all  that  be  ordered  shall — and  receive  §  408 

taught,  and  the  man — by  the  Priest  [Pbr.]  shall  say  §  283 

ttacheth,  according  to  St.  Paul's  doctrine,  who —  .  §  250 

tempest,  a  hymn  of  praise... after  a  dangerous —      .  §  3S3 

tei7iporal,  for  the  settling  of  their — estates     .          .  §  306 

set  an  order  for  their — goods     .         .          .  §  306 

temptations,  defence  against  all — to  sin           .          .  §  252 

Ten  Command?nents,  rehearse  distinctly  all  the —  §    79 

as  soon  as  they  can  say... the —            .  §  207 


can  say  the — ■ 

which  cau  say... the — 


§§  [250],  257 
.     §268 


in 

M 

to 

0\ 
IT) 

0 

CO 
VO 
M 

0 
0 

* 

* 

* 

» 

:* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

» 

'    -ii- 

* 

« 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

*        * 

* 

» 

» 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 

ii- 

♦ 

* 

* 

* 

* 

*  » 

* 

» 

* '  * 

* 

* 

*    ■■ 

» 

^ 

*                 '^ 

* 

* 

♦ 

;  * 

1  * 

« 

* 

* 

^t 

« 

* 

*     -t 

» 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

•if 

* 

* 

* 

» 

* 

* 

* 

-* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

» 

* 

* 

* 

* 

♦ 

* 

« 

* 

« 

» 

-. 

♦ 

* 

* 

♦ 

« 

♦ 

* 

* 

♦ 

» 

* 

*i 

* 

*   1 

*    1 

*l 

536 


A  Concordance  and 


testify,  m&y — the  receiving  of  them       .         .         .  §  178 

thanks,  and  giving  him  hearty — therefore     .         . .  §  332 

the  woman  that  cometh  to  give  her —        .  §  362 

thanksgiving  after  a  storm   .....§  380 

Collects  of— §  381 

a  hymn  of  praise  and-  -     .         .         .         .  §  383 

a  psalm  or  hymn  of  praise  and —       .         .  §  385 

the — of  Women  after  Childbirth        .         .  p.  389 

thicker,  something  more  larger  and — than  it  was  .  §  141 

thought  good,  yet  it  is — to  follow  the  same    .         .  §  178 

it  is — that  none  hereafter   ,         .         .  §  250 

three,  which  shall  be — or  two  at  the  least      .         .  §  320 

thrice,  shall  dip  it  in  the  water —          .         .         •  §  I9S 

times  past,  chancels  shall  remain  as... in —     .         .  §      I 

times,  at  all — of  their  ministration         .         .         .  §      2 

at  all  other — in  his  ministration        .         .  §      2 

and  at  other — when  it  shall  be  commanded  §  152 

children  ought  [may]  at  all — [to]  be  baptized  §178 

times,  but  at  two — in  the  year      .         .         .         .  §  1 78 

at  which — it  was  openly  ministered  .         .  §  1 78 

usage  of  the  Church  in — past    .         .         .  §  253 

token,  and  of  their  part  a  great — of  charity  .         .  §  330 

tokens,  a  ring  and  other — of  spousage  .         .         .  §  283 

troth,  then  shall  they  give  their — to  each  other     .  §  280 

and  so  either  to  give  their — to  other          .  §  281 

troubled  in  mind,  a  prayer  for  persons —       .         .  §  318 
true,  Christ's — natural  Body         .         .         .         ,§151 

truth,  against  the— of  Christ's  [true]  natural  Body  §  151 

he  shall  know  for — that  it  is  certain           .  §  254 

unto  such  time  as  the — be  tried         .         .  §  274 

try,  the  party  accused  shall — himself  clear  of        .  §  394 

tunicle,  putting  on  a — ,  shall  read  the  Gospel        .  §  407 

tunicles,  shall  have  upon  them  albes  with —           .  §    74 

turn,  shall  the  Priest  or  Deacon — him  to  the  people  §  104 

shall — him  towards  those  that  come          .  §  1 1 1 

then  shall  the  Priest — to  the  Lord's  table  §  i<x) 

turning,  that  readeth  [so]  standing  and — him        .  §    16 

then  the  Priest — ^him  to  the  altar      .         .  §  105 

still  to  the  altar §  108 

himself  to  the  people,  say  thus    §§  [9],  1 13  O.H.C. 

him  toward  the  people    .         .        §  114  O.H.C. 

him  to  God's  board,  kneel  down       .         .  §  115 

him  first  to  the  people,  and  saying    .         .  §  127 

then  the  Priest— him  to  the  people    §  128  O.  H.  C. 

then — him  to  the  people  .         .         .         .  §  134 

standing  at  the  table,  and — his  face  .         .  §  290 

and — his  face  toward  them       .         .         .  §  290 

twelfth  day,  except  it  be  on  the — of  the  month      .  §    41 

two  or  three,  sufficient  number,  at  least —     .        .  §  322 


» 

« 
* 
» 

« 

* 
* 
* 
» 
* 
* 

* 

* 
• 

* 
* 

» 

« 

* 

• 

• 
* 
» 

• 

» 

* 
» 

♦ 

* 

* 
* 

• 
» 

« 

♦ 

* 

* 
♦ 
♦ 
* 
* 

* 

• 

» 

10 

lO 

M 

» 

• 

* 

♦ 

• 

• 
• 
» 
• 
« 
♦ 

* 

• 
♦ 
* 

• 

• 

0 
10 

♦ 
« 
* 

« 
* 

• 

* 
« 
♦ 
* 

* 
» 

• 

• 

* 

» 

to 
10 

M 

* 
♦ 
* 

» 

« 
• 

• 

» 
» 

* 
* 

• 
* 

« 

♦ 

• 
» 

M 

* 
• 
* 
* 
* 
» 
* 
* 

* 

» 
» 

♦ 

♦ 
• 
• 

» 
* 

• 
• 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


537 


unbaptized,  is  not  to  be  used  for  any  that  die — 
uncertain,  do  make  such — answers 

and  ever — what  time  they  shall  depart 

undoubtedly,  that  children  which... are — saved 

that  children  being  baptized... are — saved 

unconsecrated,  if  any... Bread  and  Wine  remain — 
uniformity,  that  an — might  be  used  throughout 
unity,  will  not  be  persuaded  to  a  godly —    . 
university,  degrees  taken  in  any — 
unleavened,  [the  bread. ..be  made...] — and  round 
7inquiet\ed\  to  be — for  lack  of  the  same 
unsaid,  upon  the  week  days  it  may  be  left — 
urgent,  on — occasion  upon  some  other  Sunday 
usage,  agreeable  to. ..the — of  the  primitive  Church 

agreeable  with  the — of  the  Church  . 

use,  shall — a  surplice  ..... 

may — in  the  choir  besides  their  surplices 

be  at  liberty  to — any  surplices  or  no 

• when  they  preach  shall — such  hood 

• shall — neither  alb,  vestment,  nor  cope 

shall — such  ornaments  in  the  church 

■ he  shall — this  exhortation 

with  more  ease... — both  his  hands    . 

use,  as  were  in — by  authority  of  Parliament . 

• shall  be  retained  and  be  in —   . 

or  convenient  cup  prepared  for  that — 

shall  have  it  to  his  own — 

to  the — of  their  Pastors  and  Curates 

the — of  the  sign  of  the  Cross    . 

used.  Order  where  M.  and  E.  Prayer  shall  be — 

Morning  and  Evening  Prayer  shall  be — 

shall  be — in  such  place  of  the  church 

■ shall  be — in  the  accustomed  place    . 

• gestures,  they  may  be — or  left 

• may  be — any  part  of  Holy  Scripture 

wheresoever  else  it  is — in  Divine  Service 

after  the  second  lesson... shall  be —  . 

after  the  second  lesson  shall  be — and  said 

shall  be — the  same  collect. ..which  was — 

Epistle  and  Gospel  which  were —     . 

the  same  order  shall  be — all  other  days     , 

that  an  uniformity  might  be — throughout . 

• this  Order... shall  be — severally 

is  not  to  be — for  any  that  die  unbaptized  . 

these  two  prayers  to  be — ...every  day 

the  Collects  shall  both  be — 

Holy  Communion  be — as  they  are  appointed 

in  the  Common  Prayer-Book  may  be —    . 

uses,  to  [such]  pious  and  charitable —  .         .    §§  13 
ustuU,  that  the  bread  be  such  as  is —    . 


10 

0\   ^ 
10    0 

CO  vo 

10 

10 

10  «o 

10 

vo 

" 

M 

M 

§  .138 

• 

§229 

♦ 

• 

» 

* 

* 

§320 

» 

• 

• 

• 

« 

• 

§  210 

* 

§254 

* 

♦ 

♦ 

* 

« 

§142 

» 

§I4« 

* 

§    73 

* 

8     2 

« 

§  141 

• 

§320 

♦ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

§    90 

• 

§410 

* 

§14."; 

* 

' 

§253 

• 

* 

« 

• 

• 

§      2 

« 

§      2 

« 

§      2 

* 

§      2 

* 

§      2 

» 

8     2 

• 

* 

* 

§  91 

• 

§106 

• 

§     2 

• 

• 

§     2 

» 

§   98 

♦ 

§142 

* 

* 

♦ 

» 

§  144 

« 

§211 

♦ 

P-65 

* 

• 

• 

8     I 

* 

* 

• 

« 

» 

8     I 

• 

8     I 

» 

» 

* 

* 

8     4 

« 

8     5 

• 

8   II 

• 

8   19 

* 

8   19 

* 

• 

* 

8  64 

» 

« 

« 

« 

§    66 

♦ 

8136 

* 

§148 

» 

§204 

« 

§  .338 

* 

§369 

* 

§440 

§440 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

§389 

* 

I,  150 

«  » 

8  141 

» 

• 

♦ 

* 

• 

A  Concordance  and 


usual,  the  woman  at  the — time  after  her  delivery  §  357 
usually,  as  heretofore — the  Priest  hath  done  §  98  O.H.C. 
usurped,  the — power... of  the  Bishop  of  Rome  .  §  402 
ut  supra  in  Ordine  Diaconatus,  &c.      .         .         .     §  424 

7'«/(7«r,  shall  offer... the  just — and  price  .  .  §144 
value,  a  caution  to  the  full — of  such  charges  .     §  274 

varying,  without — any  other  rite  in  the  Mass  §  98  O.  H.  C. 
verses,  answering  by—         •         •         •  §§  [433].  45^ 

Versicle,  The — pp.  273,  275 

vessel,  upon  every — (be  it  chalice  or  flagon) .  .  p.  245 
vested,  the  elected  Bishop — with  his  rochet  .  .  §  447 
vestment,  shall  use  neither  alb, — ,nor  cope   .         .     §      2 

shall  have  upon  him  a  cope  or —       .         •     §      3 

a  white  alb  plain  with  a — or  cope     ,         .     §    74 

vesture,  shall  put  upon  him  the — appointed  .     §    74 

his  white — ,  commonly  called  the  chrisom     §  198 

the  Minister  shall  put  the  white —    ,         .     §  223 

vestures,  upon  them  likewise  the — appointed         .     §    74 


Vicar,  first  the  Parson, — ,  or  Curate 
reckon  with  his  [the]  Parson,- 


§92  O.H.C 

-,or  Curate     §  149 


victory,  after — ,  or  deliverance  from  an  enemy  .  §  384 

a  Psalm  or  Hymn  of  Praise... after  a —  .  §  385 

vigil  or  eve,  for  any  holiday  that  hath  a —     .  •  §    57 
Vigifs,  Table  of  the — Fasts  and  Days  of  Abstinence  p.  32 

visitation,  no  cause  in  their  sudden —  .         .  ,  §  320 

in  case  of  sudden —           .         .         .  .  §  320 

cut  off  the  form  of  the — at  the  Psalm  .  §  333 

shall  use  this  order  at  the —      .         .  .  §  333 

Visitation  of  the  Sick,  The  Order  for  the —  .  p.  350 

visited,  if  the  person — be  very  sick        .         .  .  §  302 

more  sick  persons  to  be —         ,         .  •  §  331 

when  the  sick  person  is —         .         .  .  §  333 

vocation,  ought  to  esteem  them  in  their —     .  .  §  390 

voice,  shall  read  with  a  loud —      .         .         .  •  §      7 

shall  begin  with  a  loud —          .         .  .§11 

say  the  Lord's  Prayer  with  an  audible—  .  §11 

read  two  lessons  distinctly  with  a  loud —  .  §    16 

read  distinctly  with  an  audible —      .  .  §    i6 

pronouncing  with  a  loud —       .         .  .  §    21 

say  the  Lord's  Prayer... with  a  loud —  .  §    23 

shall  read  with  a  loud —  .         .         .  •  §    31 

say  the  Lord's  Prayer  with  a  loud —  .  §    44 

z/«/^ar /o«^/^,  be  ministered  in  the —  .         .  .  §  178 
can  say  in  their —      .         ...  §  207 

wafer-bread,  though  it  be  lawful  to  have —  .  .  §  141 

want,  if  there  be — the  words  of  consecration  .  §  142 

or  for — of  warning  in  due  time          .  .  §  332 

war,  in  the  time  of — [and  tumults]       .         .  .  §  164 


M 

« 

* 
• 

* 

• 
♦ 

* 
* 

* 
• 

• 

• 
» 

• 
• 
• 
• 

* 

• 

• 

>o 
in 

M 

» 

• 
• 
* 

* 

♦ 
« 

* 

• 

♦ 

• 
* 
» 

♦ 

» 
♦ 

* 

10 

M 

• 
• 

• 

* 

* 

* 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

» 

♦ 
• 

• 
• 

0 
U3 

M 

• 
» 

» 

» 
» 

• 

» 
* 

• 

» 
• 

• 

* 
• 

CO 

M 

« 

• 

» 
• 

• 

• 
• 

» 
• 

• 

» 
* 

10 

M 

* 

♦ 

• 
* 

» 
» 
* 

* 

» 
• 

• 
» 

• 

* 
> 

* 
• 
• 
» 

• 
• 

1 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


539 


warily,  so  it  be  discreetly  and — done  . 

dip  it  in  the  water  discreetly  and —  . 

warn,  and  also  they  shall — them 

warning,  shall  give — to  his  parishioners         §  92 

when  the  Minister  giveth — 

upon — by  him  given 

then  upon  convenient — given    . 

for  lack  [want]  of— given  in  due  time 

water,  a  little  pure  and  clean —    ... 

• wine  with  some — put  into  it     .  §  98 

shall  dip  it  in  the — thrice 

shall  dip  it  in  the — ,  so  it  be  discreetly 

shall  dip  it  in  the — discreetly   . 

it  shall  suffice  to  pour —  . 

then  to  be  filled  with  pure —    . 

shall  dip  [it]  in  the — or  pour — 

the  Minister  shall  pour — upon  it 

that  the  child  was  baptized  with —   . 

the — in  the  font  shall  be  changed     [p.  289],  §  230 

in  the — so  changed  .         .       [p.  289],  §  230 

dip  him  in  the — or  pour — 

weak,  and  if  the  child  be —  .... 

if  they  certify  that  the  child  is — 

wear,  shall  have  and — a  surplice  only  . 

shall  have  and — a  rochet 

week,  a — before  at  the  least 
week-days,  upon  the— it  may  be  left  unsaid  . 
weighty  matter,  his  conscience  troubled  with  any — 
white  vesture,  shall  put  upon  him  his — 

the  Minister  shall  put  the — 

wickedness,  abused  it  to  superstition  and —   . 
will,  let  him  then  make  his — 

be  admonished  to  make  his —  . 

willing,  therefore  we — to  do  the  same 
willingly,  whosoever — upon  no  just  cause    . 
wine,  putting  the — into  the  chalice 

cup  or  cups  full  of —         .         .  §98  0.H.C. 

for  more  expedition  minister  the —  §  121  O.  H.  C. 

consecrated  bread  or — be  all  spent    .         .     §  124 

if... the— hallowed  and  consecrate     §  143  O.H.C. 

in  which  there  is  any — to  be  consecrated      p.  245 

[See  also  "  Bread  and  Wine."] 
wif^,  shall  speak... on  this —  ....     §192 

speak  to  the  persons... on  this —        .         .     §238 

shall  confirm  them  on  this —    .         .         .     §  259 

withdraw,  to  see  if  any  man  will— himself  §  1 10  O.H.C. 
witness,  that  every  child  may  have  a —         .         .     §  257 

as  a— of  their  confirmation        ,         .         .     §257 

wont,  as  they  were — to  find  and  pay    .         .         .     §  144 
worthy  receiver,  given  w:\io  ih.Q —  .         .         .     §  151 


at 
1- 
10 

M 
» 

* 
* 
* 
» 

» 

* 

* 
» 

* 

* 
* 
» 

« 
* 

» 

» 

* 
* 

* 

1  N 
ID 

>o 

M 
* 

« 

* 

* 
« 

» 
♦ 
* 

* 
* 

* 
» 

» 

1   » 

10 

M 
* 

» 

« 
* 

« 

« 

• 

» 
* 
* 

1 

« 
* 

« 

» 
* 
* 
* 

» 

• 
» 
« 

n 

1 
* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

• 

• 
* 
* 

* 

* 

* 
* 
* 

10 

M 
* 
* 

* 

* 

♦ 
* 

* 
* 

» 
* 

* 
* 

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 

540 


A  Concordance  &c. 


worthy  receiving,  dispose  themselves  to  the —  .  §  145 
writing,  bring  or  send  in — [with  his  hand]  §§  [258,  268] 
written,  he  shall  say  that  which  is — after      .         •     §      7 

read  this  exhortation  above —  .         .         •     §    90 

wrong,  hath  done  injury  or — to  any  man  .  .  §  306 
«/r(7«j' />ar/,  interpreted  in  a —     .         .         .         .     §  151 


year,  in  the  second — of  the  reign  of  King  Edward 

daily  through[out]  the  [whole] —     . 

■ throughout  the  whole       .         .         .        §; 

■ daily  through  the — 

throughout  all  the — 

Morning  Prayer  throughout  the —    . 

Evening  Prayer  throughout  the —     . 

of  every  Psalm  throughout  the — 

every  Sunday  and  Holyday  in  the — 

to  communicate  once  in  the —  . 

at  the  least  three  times  in  the — 

at  two  times  in  the — 

■ first  published  in  the — 1604 

for  the  space  of  a  whole — 

a  whole — at  the  least 

yearly,  at  Easter,  every  parishioner  shall  reckon — 

years,  that  the  people  many — past 

before  they  come  to — of  discretion    . 


§  2 
§  17 
19,  56 
§  21 

§  25 

§  30 

§  54 
§  15 
§  62 
§146 
§149 
§178 
§211 
§410 
§410 

§  149 
§148 
§248 


• 
* 

* 
« 

« 
« 

• 
• 
• 

« 
* 

VO 

10 

M 

« 
» 

• 
* 

» 

« 

• 

« 
» 

« 
♦ 

10 

lO 
M 

♦ 
• 

« 
• 

« 

» 

• 
* 

• 
« 

1 

• 
♦ 

• 

• 
* 

• 

• 

• 
♦ 

• 

CO 

10 

M 

• 
• 

* 

• 

• 
* 

• 

«3 
VO 

M 

* 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
» 

» 

• 

I 


ADDENDA. 


[The  following  additional  words  (and,  in  a  few  cases,  additional  refer- 
ences to  words  already  given  in  the  Concordance)  were  noted  during 
a  second  reading  through  of  the  rubrics  for  the  sake  of  verifying  the 
figures.  It  was  found  that  while  all  the  more  important  words,  or  words 
likely  to  suggest  themselves  for  reference  to  particular  rubrics,  had  been 
given  in  the  pages  already  printed,  there  were  included  several  words  of 
minor  importance  ;  and  it  has  been  thought  well,  for  the  sake  of  con- 
sistency, to  print  a  supplemental  list  of  similar  words,  and  in  one  or  two 
cases  to  complete  the  references  to  those  words  to  which  only  the  more 
important  references  had  already  been  given. 

The  list  even  now  is  perhaps  not  exhaustive,  but  it  is  hoped  no  word 
or  reference  likely  to  be  required,  or  be  of  any  value,  has  been  omitted.] 


ability,  eveiy  one  according  to  his —    .         .         .     § 

■ such  sick  persons  as  are  of —     .         .  .     § 

absence,  or  in  his — any  other  lawful  Minister  .     § 

or  in  his— one  appointed  in  his  stead         .     § 

c^z/j^a^  it  to  superstition  and  wickedness         .  .     § 

access,  collect  of  humble — to  the  Holy  Communion    § 
accuse,  of  which  his  conscience  shall — him    .  .     § 

accused,  until  such  time  as  the  party —  .    §§  394, 

Act  of  Parlianicni,  according  to  the —  .  .         .     § 

admonish,  shall  oft — the  people   .  .  .         .     § 

admonished,  wherefore  the  people  are  to  be —       .     § 

must  be  oft — that  they  set  an  order  . 

let  him  then  be — to  make  his  will 

advertise,  shall  call  him  and — him 
afore,  humbly — the  midst  of  the  Altar 

woman  kneeling — the  Altar     .         . 

[See  befo7e.'\ 
alter,  the  two  last  collects  shall  never — 
alteration,  at  Evensong  [Evening  Prayer]  without— 
annexed,  parish  churches,  and  chapels — to  the  same 

in  chapels — and  all  other  places 

and  in  such  chapels — 

apparelled,  come  into  the  church  decently— 
afpeareth,  it — by  ancient  writers  . 

when  there — small  hope  of  recovery 

appertaining  to  the  ecclesiastical  administration 
appointed,  part  of  holy  Scripture  hereafter  to  be...- 
— — —  upon  which  another  anthem  is — - 

or  other  like  as  is — in  the  Kalendar  . 

■ the  Creed  of  S.  Athanasius — to  be  read 

if  the  Litany  be  not — 

as  is — at  Morning  Prayer 

a  lesson  of  the  New  Testament,  as  it  is — 

with  other  prayers,  as  is  beiore — 

the  Collect — for  every  Sunday  . 

the  vesture — for  that  ministration 


01 

« 

o> 

■'f 

t^ 

«\ 

rf   \r,  \n 

0 

en  vo 

IT)  lo  m 

10 

VO  VO 

t-l   M 

M 

M 

M  1  M 

95 

*  ' 

308 

* 

214 

'  * 

421 

* 

148 

* 

1 

115 

* 

377 

'  * 

424 

* 

♦ 

« 

1  * 

2 

» 

♦ 

» 

212 

* 

* 

* 

»   4f   * 

178 

♦ 

* 

* 

»   *   * 

306 

* 

* 

* 

»  ;  * 

306 

* 

72 

» 

* 

* 

*  '  » 

* 

76 

» 

290 

♦ 

# 

* 

» 

* 

25 

» 

* 

» 

♦ 

* 

♦ 

46 

♦ 

♦ 

« 

* 

* 

» 

2 

* 

137 

* 

138 

« 

357 

* 

178 

» 

» 

* 

♦ 

* 

316 

* 

410 

♦ 

« 

» 

* 

5 

* 

14 

♦ 

16 

« 

* 

• 

* 

* 

22 

* 

29 

* 

34 

•K- 

40 

* 

42 

» 

» 

» 

* 

57 

* 

74 

* 

542 


A  Concordance  and 


§  74 
§  74 
§  96 
§133 
§133 
§134 
§440 
§447 
§251 
§148 
§363 
§  II 
§  16 
§      2 


§      4 
§344 


appointed,  vestures — for  their  ministry  .        . 

at  the  time — for  the  ministration       . 

at  the  offering  days —       .... 

after  such  form  as  is —     .... 

shall  be  otherwise — by  his  highness  . 

all  things... — to  be  said  at  the  celebration 

as  is  in  this  office  before — 

some  other  Bishop — by  lawful  commission 

assented,  by  their  own... confession  have — unto 
attempted,  any  such  thing  hereafter  should  be —   . 
attending,  the  people  sitting  and — 
audible,  and  say  the  Lord's  Prayer  with  an — voice 

read  distinctly  with  an — voice 

authority,  in  use  by — of  Parliament 

in  this  church. ..by  the — of  Parliament 

blame,  as  every  man's  devotion  serveth  without — 
body,  while  the  earth  shall  be  cast  upon  the — 

care,  so  that  due — may  be  taken  .        .        .        .  §  231 

fa«jif,  shall — the  oath... to  be  ministered       .         .  §402 

and — it  to  be  read   .         .         .         .         .  §  448 

caution,  or  else  put  in  a — §  274 

celebrated,  for  the  high  mysteries  there  to  be —      .  §    75 

certified,  the  congregation  may  be — of  the  true  form  §  216 

charitable,  according  to  his  ability  and — mind       .  §    95 

on  some  pious  and — use  .         .         .         •  §  131 

• disposed  of  to  such  pious  and — uses           .  §  150 

clerk,  accustomed  duty  to  the  Priest  [Pbr.  j  and —  ^  283 
commune,  let  him — with  him  privily    .        §110  O.  H.C. 

.  §251 

•  §410 
.  §  I 
.  §148 

■  §394 
i  394,  424 
.     §424 

•  §333 


consent,  they  may... with  their  own — 
continue,  he  must — in  that  office  . 
controversy,  and  if  there  be  any — therein 
conveyed,  they  many  times — the  same  secretly 
crime,  shall  try  himself  [be  found]  clear  of  that- 

any  great — or  impediment  be  objected  ^ 

found  clear  of  that — 

cut  off,  shall — the  form  of  the  Visitation       . 


dames,  fathers,  mothers,  masters,  and —  §§  [256,  267] 
dangerous,  after  a — tempest  .         .         .         •     §  377 

debts,  and  [also]  [to]  declare  his —  .  .  .  §  306 
Declaration,  A  brief — where  every  Term  .  .  p.  30 
defer,  that  they — not  the  baptism  .         .         .     §  212 

deferred,  the  solemnization  must  be —  .  .  .  §  ^74 
deferring,  that  any  detriment  shall  come  by —  .  §  254 
determined,  except  it  be  otherwise — by  the  Ordinary  §  i 
devoutly,  may  reverently  and — prepare  §  143  O.H.C. 
direct,  as  the  Ordinary  shall —  .  .  .  •  §  357 
</M<;ra'«r,  to  avoid  the  profanation  and—      .        .    §151 


• 
• 
« 
* 
« 
« 

* 
• 

• 

• 
» 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
* 

• 

• 

• 
• 

PI 

10 

• 
• 

• 

• 
» 
• 

» 

• 
• 
• 

• 
* 

• 

• 

* 

• 
• 
• 

• 

10 

M 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

» 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

0 
10 

M 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

CO 
(O 

M 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 
* 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

CI 

10 
M 

* 
» 

• 
» 

» 

* 

• 
• 
• 
♦ 

• 
* 

* 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
* 

• 

* 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


543 


disorder,  of  such  profanation  and —      .         , 
distinctly,  shall  be  read  [two  lessons] — 

while  the  Presbyter — pronounces 

divinity,  to  provide  him  with  books  of  holy — 

earth,  the  priest  casting — upon  the  corpse    . 

while  the — shall  be  cast  upon  the  body 

elect,  then  shall  the  Bishop — put  on 

elected,  shall  be  ministered  to  the  person[s] — 

examined,  be — and  ordained 

executing,  in — whereof  if  he  be  found  faithful 

faithfully,  the  other  half  shall  be — kept 
friends,  with  their — and  neighbours 


'  or  silver^  tokens  of  spousage  as — 
goods,  he  hath  not  before  disposed  of  his —  . 
■ he  have  not  afore  disposed  his — 

hear,  turn  him  as  the  people  may  best — 

that  the  people  may — 

to  the  end  that  the  people  may  the  better- 

heard,  [so]  as  he  [they]  may  best  be — 

imminent,  when  there  shall  be — danger 
infection,  for  fear  of  the —   .... 
infirmity,  either  for  their  ignorance  and —   . 

either  out  of  ignorance  or — 

inserted,  the  word  [Priests] — instead  of  it      . 

and  this- — instead  of  it      . 

intend,  so  many  as — to  be  partakers     .         . 


King's  Majesty,  Prayer  for  the — 

■ Prayer  for  the^- 

as  is  appointed  by  the- 


-'s  Injunctions 


layi7ig  his  hand  severally  upon  the  head 
learn,  all  that  is  here  appointed  for  them  to — 

■ here  appointed  for  them  to—    . 

liberty,  shall  be  at — to  use  any  surplice 

life,  depart  out  of  this — in  their  intancy 

litnited,  part  of  holy  Scripture  hereafter  to  be.. 

live,  if  the  child... baptized  do  afterward —   . 

liver,  an  open  and  notorious  evil — 

loose,  they  shall — their  hands        .         .         . 

shall  they  again — their  hands   •         . 


minded,  to  those  that  be- 
all  those  that  are- 


-to  receive  the  same 
-to  receive    .        §  H2 


mistresses,  all  fathers,  mothers,  masters,  and — 


§151 
§  16 

§  95 
§131 

§344 
§344 
§456 
§448 
§440 
§410 

§131 
§272 

§283 
§306 
§306 

§  I 

§  16 

§  16 

§  16 

§377 
§337 
§  151 
§  151 
§425 
§452 
§  71 

§  29 
§  50 
§133 

§405 
§256 
§267 
§  2 
§254 
§  5 
§216 

§  72 
§282 
§283 


O.H.C. 

§267 


en 
■V 
m 

M 

* 

• 

* 

» 

• 
• 
» 

• 
♦ 
* 

* 

* 
* 

♦ 

* 
* 
• 
* 
• 

* 

<s 
m 

« 

♦ 
* 
» 

« 

• 

• 
» 
« 
• 

• 
• 

» 

* 
» 
• 

* 

» 
* 

* 

» 

>o 
10 

M 

• 

« 
» 
• 

» 

• 
• 

♦ 

* 

• 

• 

« 
* 
» 
• 

• 

S" 

to 

HI 
» 

• 

♦ 

♦ 

• 
» 
• 

• 
* 

« 

• 

* 
• 
• 
• 

« 

CO 
M 

« 
* 

* 

• 
• 

« 

« 
* 
• 

• 

* 

» 
• 

• 

• 

* 
* 
* 

♦ 

* 
* 

N 

to 

VO 

M 

• 
• 

» 
* 

* 
* 

» 

« 

• 
» 

* 
* 
* 
• 

* 
• 

» 

♦ 
* 
• 
• 

544 


A  Concordance  and 


viysteries,  for  the  high — there  to  be  celebrated      .  §    75 

mystical,  or  to  the — importance  of  the  said  .         .  §    79 

necessary,  with  all  things — for  the  same        .         .  §  322 

all  things — so  prepared    ....  §  322 

as  can  be  spared  from — service          .         .  §  377 

how — such  orders  are       .         ...  §  390 

how — that  order  is  .         .         .         .         .  §  390 

neighbours,  done  any  wrong  to  his —  .  .  •  §  7^ 
nineteenth  day,  on  the — of  every  month  .  .  §  14 
except  it  be  on  the — of  the  month     .  §    39 

obstinate,  and  not  him  that  is —  .  .  .  •  §  73 
order,  the  same — shall  the  Curate  use  .  .  •  §  73 
after  [that]  to  the  people  [also]  in  [due] —  §  116 

parishes,  the  banns  must  be  asked  in  both —         .  §  271 

dwell  in  divers —     ,         .         .         .         .  §  271 

particular,  to  reflect  upon  those — sins           .         .  §  377 

^ar/?Vj,  and  will  be  bound... to  the —    .         .         .  §274 

penitent,  ought  to  admit  the — person    .         .         •  §    73 

pertaineth,  such  hoods  as — to  their  several  degrees  §      2 

pestilence,  especially  in  the  time  of —    .         .         .  §  320 

petition,  the  people  repeating  after  him  every —    .  §  126 

piece,  ^ — of  the  last  chapter  of  Matthew        .         .  §416 

/>ii7Mj,  on  some — or  charitable, use         .         .         .  §  131 

to  such — and  charitable  uses     .         .         .  §  150 

plague,  in  the  time  of  any  common — or  sickness  .  §  165 

deliverance  from  the —     .         .         .         .  §  176 

but  specially  in  the — time         .         .         .  §  320 

the  time  of — ,  sweat,  or  such  other  .         .  §  337 

point,  at  the — of  departure  .         .         .         .         •  §  317 

prepared,  when  all  things  are  duly — in  the  church  §  441 

present,  to  be  said  by  all  that  are —      .         .         .  §      8 

those  which  be —     .         .         .  §  92  O.  H.  C. 

may  best  be  heard  of  all  such  as  be  [are] —  §    16 

the  Priest  [Pbr.]  or  the  Bishop  (being — )  §  113 

[other]  Ministers,  if  any  be  there —  §  116  O.H.C. 

to  other  Bishops... (if  any  be  there — )        .  §  116 

to  the  Bishops... in  like  manner  (if  any  be — )  §  I16 

then  the  Priest  [Pbr.]  or  Bishop,  if  he  be —  §  128 

every  man — may  be  put  in  remembrance  .  §  178 

that  the  congregation  there —  .          .         •  §  178 

— — ■ —  say  to  as  many  children  as  be —        .         .  §  184 

godmothers  and  people —         .         .         .  §  i 

multitude  of  people —       .          ...  §  209 

let  [...with]  them  that  be —     .         .         .  §  214 

named  by  some  one  that  is —    .         .         .  §  214 

the  people  being —  .         .         ...  §  270 

the  clerks  [clergyj  and  people —      .         .  §  395 


'd- 
m 

» 

» 

« 
« 

♦ 
» 

* 

* 
« 

* 

» 

» 

» 

» 
» 
• 
• 
» 

• 
• 

10 

M 

• 
• 

• 

* 

♦ 
» 

♦ 

* 

• 

« 
» 

» 
♦ 

« 
• 
• 

» 

• 
• 

>o 
10 

M 

* 

* 
« 

« 
• 

* 

» 

• 

* 

* 

» 

• 
• 

• 
« 
» 

• 
* 
* 

• 

1 

« 

« 

• 
* 

« 
« 

• 
* 

« 

* 

« 
• 
♦ 

» 
* 

* 
♦ 

* 

* 

* 
• 

0 

M 

* 
• 

• 
* 
* 

« 
» 

« 

♦ 

• 

• 
• 
« 

* 

• 
« 

• 

• 
« 
* 

♦ 
• 

VO 
^O 

M 

* 
• 
» 
* 

» 
» 

* 

* 

» 
» 

* 

* 
» 

* 
» 

• 

• 
• 
• 

» 
• 

» 
• 
* 
• 

» 

• 

• 

{ 


Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


545 


present,  the  priests  and  others  that  are — 

the  Bishops  with  the  Priests — 

move  the  congregation — to  pray 

with  others  that  are — 

proclaimed,  nothing  shall  be — or  published  in  the 
procure,  they — not  their  children  to  be  baptized 
proctired,  lawful  minister  that  can  be — 
profanation,  and  to  avoid  the — and  disorder 

for  the  avoiding  of  such — 

profess,  should  openly — their  own  faith 
profession,  remembrance  of  his  own —  . 
profitably  to  his  soul's  health 
progeny,  the  rest  of  the  royal —    . 
pronounce,  and  turning  himself  to  the  people — 

shall  the  Priest — this  absolution 

pronounced,  to  be — by  the  minister  alone 

to  be — by  the  [Pbr.  J  Priest  alone     . 

• to  be — by  the  Priest  alone 

■ by  the  godfathers  and  godmothers    . 

pronounces,  while  the  presbyter  distinctly — 
pronouncing,  the  [  Pbr.  or]  Minister  first —  . 
province,  presented... unto  the  Archbishop  of  the- 
provision,  make  some  charitable — 
purified,  the  woman  that  is —       .         .         . 


§433 
§436 
§451 
§456 
§  85 
§214 
§214 
§  151 
§151 
§253 
§178 
§332 
§158 
§  "3 
§379 
§  9 
§  9 
§  33 
§  222 

§  95 
§    21 

§447 
§138 
§362 


quietness,  and  [the] — of  his  executors  . 
Qui  pro  vobis,  ending  at  these  words — 


.     §  306 
§  143  O.H.C. 


ratify,  may... openly,  before  the  whole  church- 
read,  the  [Pbr,  or]  Minister  shall — with  a  loud 

the  Presbyter  shall — them 

[Pbr.  or]  Minister  shall — [this]  as  followeth 

another  Bishop  shall — the  Epistle 

read,  is  not  to  be — here 

■ then  shall  be — [two  lessons]     . 

■ when  else  soever  the  Gospel  is — 

although  it  be — in  ancient  writers 

after  the  Gospel  is — 

• after  the  Gospel  is — 

after  this  shall  be — for  the  Gospel 

then  shall  be — for  the  Epistle  . 

shall  be — out  of  the  twentieth  chapt( 

shall  be — for  the  Gospel . 

the  whole  third  chapter. ..shall  be- 

one  of  them  having — the  Gospel 

the  King's  mandate... shall  be — 

and  cause  it  to  be — 

readeth,  the  [Pbr.  or]  Minister  that— the  lessons 
■  he  that — so  standing 


§251 
§  7 
§    II 

§294 
§441 
§  14 
§  16 
§  62 
§148 
§187 
§219 
§416 
§414 
§414 
§427 
§440 
§■140 
§448 
§448 
§  16 
§    16 


^^ 
lO 

M 

• 

• 
» 
« 

* 

* 

* 

• 

* 

* 

» 
* 

« 

» 

* 

10 

* 
* 

« 
* 

« 

* 

» 

« 
» 

» 

• 
• 

* 

* 

* 
• 

* 

• 

♦ 

10 
10 

M 

« 
« 

» 
• 

• 

• 
♦ 
* 

• 

• 
* 

* 

• 

♦ 
« 
• 

« 

* 

« 
* 

I 

M 

• 

♦ 
* 
• 

* 

• 
* 

• 

• 
• 

» 

* 

« 
* 

* 

to 

CO 
VO 

M 

• 

* 
♦ 
* 
• 
• 

♦ 

• 
• 

* 

» 
• 
» 

* 
• 

• 
» 

* 

VO 

«o 

M 

• 
• 
» 
• 
* 
• 
• 

• 

* 

* 
• 

* 

* 

• 

* 
* 

• 
» 
• 
« 

« 
• 

• 
• 

546 


A  Concordance  and 


realm,  in  any  tiniversity  within  this —  .        . 
reason,  by — of  extremity  of  sickness     . 

by — of  the  fight  or  storm 

receive,  and  yet  is  desirous  to — the  communion 
reconciled,  until  he  know  them  to  be — 
r-elief,  or  the  public — of  their  poor 
religion,  being  instructed  in  Christ's — 
remembering  earnestly  the  benefits  he  hath  thereby 
repeated,  shall  be — Glory  be  to  the  Father  . 

this  Collect  is  to  be — every  day 

the  words  of  consecration  may  be — again 

repeating,  the  people... — it  with  him    . 

the  people — after  him  every  petition 

rest,  put  on  the — of  the  episcopal  habit 
restoring  public  peace  at  home     . 
r^z/^r^«f^,  the  people... attending  with — 

Scripture,  the  comfortable  sentences  of — ^following 

secretly,  conveyed  the  same — away 

seemly,  it  is  also — that  graduates  where  they  do 

sentences,  with  the  comfortable — of  Scripture 

seriously,  ought — to  reflect  . 

serveth,  as  every  man's  devotion — 

service,  it  may  be  ready  for  that — 

as  can  be  spared  from  necessaiy — 

signify,  shall — their  name  to  the  Curate 
sing,  in  such  places  where  they  do —   . 

shall  the  Clerks — ...for  the  office 

sitting,  the  people — and  attending 

sovereignty,  the  oath  of  the  [Queen's]  [King's] — 

special,  the  sick  person  shall  make  a — confession 

be  moved  to  make  a — confession 

prayers  with  respect  to  the  enemy 

specially,  but — in  the  plague-time 
specified,  as  is — ...in  this  Rubrick 
subject,  men  be — to  many  sudden  perils 
successors,  prescribed... by  his  Majesty  or  his 
supremacy,  the  oath  of  the  King's —     . 

concerning  the  King's  [Queen's]- 

shall  take  the  oath  of —   . 

likewise  take  the  oath  of — 

taken,  might  be  thought  or— otherwise 
taken  away,  offences  should  be — 
thought,  might  be — or  taken  otherwise 
tim4  of  the  Communion  shall  be  . 

during  the — of  consecration 

in  the  Communion —        .         , 

then  and  at  that — to  be  paid    . 

as  the — and  present  exigence  will  suffer 


§  2 

§332 
§374 
§320 
§  73 
§131 
§253 
§332 
§  IS 
§  59 
§142 
§  II 
§  126 
§456 
§175 
§363 

§321 
§148 
§  2 
§321 
§377 
§  4 
§  98 
§377 
§  71 
§  16 

§  74 
§363 
§403 
§309 
§309 
§375 
§320 

§  73 
§320 
§  2 
§403 
§429 
§440 
§440 

§151 

§151 

§151 

.H.C. 

§  106 
§  122 

§  149 
§214 


10 

10 

t 

VO 

CO 

10 

* 
» 

* 

» 

* 
• 

« 
» 
• 
• 

• 

» 

• 

• 
♦ 

» 

• 

• 

» 

* 

» 

• 
* 
« 

* 

• 
• 

♦ 

* 

• 

» 
• 

» 
• 
• 

• 

• 

• 
» 

« 
♦ 
* 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

« 

» 
» 
• 

» 

« 
• 

• 

• 
* 

• 

• 
♦ 

* 

* 
» 
* 
* 

« 

* 

« 

* 

• 

• 
« 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 
» 

• 
• 

• 
» 
» 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

» 
♦ 

Index  to  the  Rubrics,  &c. 


547 


time,  as  the — will  serve §  266 

at  the — of  their  marriage  .         .         .  §  295 

ever  uncertain  what — they  shall  depart     .  §  320 

receiveth  the  Holy  Communion  all  at  one —  §  333 

turn,  the  minister  shall  so — him  .         .         .  §      i 

ungodly,  or  doth — in  the  parish  church        .        .  §  147 

use,  the  same  order  shall  the  curate —  .         .         •  §    73 

then  shall  the  Priest — the  appointed  prayer  §  336 

use,  one  half  shall  be  to  the — of  the  Presbyter      .  §  131 

(now  being  grown  out  of — )      .         .         .  §  1 78 

used,  the  same... shall  be — in  all  private  confessions  §  309 
to  be — daily  at  sea §  368 


01 
to 

* 

* 
» 

» 
» 

« 

» 
* 

N 
10 
V% 

M 

« 

» 
• 

• 

01 

»o 

M 

* 
» 

* 
« 

« 

If 
0 

VO 

* 
* 

• 

• 
* 

to 

♦ 

* 

« 

« 
* 
» 

va 

* 
♦ 
* 

• 
» 

APPENDIX. 

♦ 

THE  VARIATION   OF  THE   ORDER   OF 
THE  RUBRICKS   IN 

THE    HOLY   COMMUNION, 

SHEWN   IN  A  TABULAR   FORM. 


In  consequence  of  the  extensive  changes  made  in  the  arrangement  of  the 
Order  for  the  Administration  of  the  Lord's  Supper  in  1552,  and  again  in 
1662,  it  has  been  thought  convenient  to  exhibit  here,  in  a  tabular  form, 
the  rubricks  of  each  book,  so  that  the  structure  of  the  Order  might  be 
clearly  exhibited. 

The  opportunity  has  also  been  taken  to  shew  some  of  the  chief  points 
of  difference  in  the  words  of  the  rubricks  themselves,  which  points, 
although  they  are  found  in  the  preceding  pages,  could  not  be  shewn 
so  clearly  as  they  are  seen  here  when  the  rubricks  are  brought  more 
closely  together,  and  are  in  their  consecutive  order. 

The  numbers  (corresponding  with  those  throughout  the  work)  are  put 
to  each  rubrick,  so  that  an  easy  reference  is  made  to  the  complete  words 
of  any  rubrick,  of  which  an  abstract  only  is  here  given. 


550 


Appendix. 


First  Edw.  VI.  1549. 

[71.  So  many  as  intend  to  be  par- 
takers ....  shall  signify  their 
names  .  .  . 

I  72.  And  if  any  .  .  .  be  an  open 
and  notorious  evil  liver  .  .  .  thf 
Curate  shall  call  him. 

\  73.  The  same  order  shall  the  Curate 
use,  where  he  perceiveth  malice. 

Vestment  Rubrick. 
74-  Upon  the  day  .  .  .  appointed 
for  the  ministration  . .  .  the  Priest 
shall  put  on  him  the  vesture  ap- 
pointed. .  .  .  Then  shall  the  Clerks 
sing  the  introit. 

76.  The  Priest  standing .  .  .  afore 
the  midst  of  the  altar  shall  say  tlie 
Lord's  Prayer  and  this  Collect. 

Collect  for  Purity. 

Almighty  God,  unto  whom  all ... 
i  77.    Then  shall  he  say  for  the  in- 
troit, or  the  Clerks  shall  sing. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

78.  Then  the  Priest  shall  begin. 
Gloria  in  Excelsis. 

Glory  be  to  God  on  high. 
I  79.   Then  the  Priest  shall  turn  to 

the  people  and  say. 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 
i  80.    Then  .  .  .  the   Collect  of  the 

day  with  one  of  the  Collects  for 

the  King. 

Almighty  God,  whose  kingdom. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God. 
i  81.  The  Collects  ended .  .  .  he  shall 

read  the  Epistle. 
\  82.  Immediately  after  the  Epistle 

.  .  ,  to  read  the  Gospel. 
i  83.  The  Clerks  shall  answer. 

Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Lord. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 
§§  71,  72,  73 

[The  same  throughout  as  1549.] 


§  74.  ...  .  [Omitted,  and  instead] 
The  Table  Rubrick. 

§  75-  "^^^  Table  having  at  the  Com- 
munion-time a  fair  white  linen 
floth  shall  stand  in  the  body  of 
the  church,  or  in  tlu  chancel. 

§  76.  ...  and  the  Priest  standing  at 
the  north  side  shall  say  the  Lord's 
Prayer  with  this  Collect. 
Collect  for  Purity. 
Almighty  God,  unto  whom  all... 

§  77 

[Omitted.] 


§78. 


[Omitted.] 

§  79.  Then  shall  the  Priest  rehearse 
The  Ten  Commandments. 

§  80.    Then  .  ...  the  Collect  of  the 

day  with  one  of  the  Collects  for 

the  King. 

Almighty  God,  whose  kingdom. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God. 
§  81.  Immediately  after  the  Collects 

the  Priest  shall  read  the  Epistle. 
§  82.   Tlu  Epistle  ended,  he  s/mII  say 

tlu  Gospel. 

§  83 

[Omitted.] 


I 


Appendix. 


551 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1037. 
§§  71,  72,  73 

[The  same  throughout  as  1549.] 


Charles  II.  1602. 
§§  71,  72,  73 

[The  same  in  substance  throughout  as 
1549,  with  addition  of,J 

Provided  that  every  Minister   so 
repelling  any  .  .  , 


The  Table  Rubrick. 

§  75"  ^^"^  ^i'^fy  Tabic  having  at  the 
Comimmion-tiine  a  ca^-pet  and  a 
fair  li'Jiitc  linen  cloth  shall  stand 
at  the  zipperiiiost  part  of  the  chan- 
cel or  church, 

§  76.  .  .  .  where  the  Presbyter  stand- 
ing at  the  tiorth  side  or  end  thereof, 
shall  say  the  Lord's  prayer  with 
this  Collect. 

Collect  for  Purity. 
Almighty  God,  unto  whom  all... 


The  Table  Rubrick. 
§  75-    '^^''^  Table  at  the  Coinmtmion- 
time  having  a  fair  white  linen- 
cloth    shall  stand  in  the  body  of 
t/ie  church,  or  in  the  chancel. 

%  76.  .  .  .  and  the  Priest  standing 
at  the  north  side  shall  say  the 
Lord's  Prayer  with  this  Collect. 

Collect  for  Purity. 
Almighty  God  unto  whom  all... 


§  79.    T/ien  shall  the  Presbyter,  turn- 
it  tg  to  the  people,  rehearse 
The  Ten  Commandments. 

§  80.    Then  shall  follow  one  of  these 
two  Collects  for  the  King,  and  the 
Collect  of  the  day. 
Almighty  God,  whose  kingdom. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God. 

§  81.  Lmntediately  after  the  Collects 
the  Presbyter  shall  read  the  Epistle. 

§  82.    The  Epistle  ended,  the  Gospel 
shall  be  read. 

§  83.  .  .  .  then  the  people  all  stand- 
ing up  shall  say. 
Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Lord. 


§  79.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter,  turn- 
ing to  the peopde,  rehearse 
The  Ten  Commandments. 
§  80.    Then  shall  folloza  one  of  these 

two  Collects  for  the  ICing. 

Almighty  God,  whose  kingdom. 

Almiglity  and  everlasting  God. 

Then  shall  be  said  the  Collect  of 
the  day. 
§  8i.   Lmmediately  after  the  Collect 

the  Priest  shall  read  the  Epistle. 
§  82.    The  Epistle  ended,   he  shall 

say.  Here  endeth  the  Epistle.  .  .  . 
Then  shall  he  read  the  Gospel. 

§  S3 

[Omitted.] 


552 


Appendix. 


First  Edw.  VI.  1549. 

§  84.  The  Priest  or  Deacon  then 
shall  read  the  Gospel ....  the 
Gospel  ended  the  Priest  shall  begin 

The  Nicene  Creed. 
I  believe  in  one  God. 
The  Clerks  shall  sing  the  rest, 

§  86.  After  the  Creed  shall  follow 
the  Sermon  or  Homily,  wherein 
if  the  people  be  not  exhorted. 

§  88 the  Curate  shall  give 

this  exhortation  to  them  that  be 

minded  to  receive. 

Exhortation  to  those  minded  to 
receive. 

Dearly  Beloved  in  the  Lord  .  .  , 
ye  that  mind  to  come  .  .  . 

Therefore  if  any  here  be  a  blas- 
phemer .  .  . 

§  89.  .  .  . 

[Appears  in  O.H.C.  only. 

§  90.  In  Cathedrals  where  is  daily 
Communion,  it  shall  be  sufficient 
to  read  this  exhortation  once  in  a 
month,  and  in  Parish  Churches  on 
week-days  it  may  be  left  unsaid. 

§  92.  If  upon  the  Sunday  the  people 
be  negligent  to  come,  the  Priest  shall 
thus  exhort  his  parishioners. 

Exhortation  to  the  Negligent,  1549. 
Dear  friends  and  you  especially 

...  on  —  day  next  I  do  intend  to 

offer  to  all  such  as. 

§  93.  Then  shall  follow  for  the  offer- 
tory one  or  more  of  these  sentences, 
to  be  sung  whiles  the  people  do  offer. 


The  Offertory. 
Let  your  light  so  shine  .  .  . 
§  94.  Where  there  be  Clerks  they  shall 
sing  one  or  more  of  the  sentences. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  84.  The  Epistle  and  Gospel  being 
ended  shall  be  said  the  Creed. 

The  Nicene  Creed. 
I  believe  in  one  God,  the  Father 

Almighty,  maker .  .  .  &c. 

§  86.  Afier  the  Creed,  if  there  be  no 
Sermon,  shall  follow  one  of  the 
homilies. 


§  93.  A^er  such  Sermon,  Homily, 
or  exhortation,  the  Curate  shall 
declare  to  the  people  whether  there 
be  any  holy  days ;  and  eanustly 
exhort  them  to  remember  the  poor^ 
saying  one  or  more  of  these  sen- 
tences. 

The  Offertory. 

Let  your  light  so  shine. 

§  94 

[Omitted.] 


I 


Appendix. 


553 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

84.  The  Epistle  and  Gospel  being 
ended,  shall  be  sung  or  said  the 
Creed. 

The  Nicene  Creed. 


86.  After  the  Creed,  if  there  be  no 
Sermon,  shall  follow  one  of  the 
homilies. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  84.  The  Gospel  ended,  shall  be  sung 

or  said  the  Creed,  the  people  stand' 

ing. 

The  Nicene  Creed. 
§  85.   TTie  Curate  shall  declare  what 

holy  days  or  fasting  days  .... 

briefs,  citations,  &fc, 
§  86.   Then  shall  follow  the  Sermon^ 

or  one  of  the  Homilies, 


%  93.  After  such  Sermon,  Homily,      §  93.  Then  shall  the  Priest  return 


or  exhortation,  the  Presbyter  shall 

declare  to  the  people  whether  there 

be  any  holy  days ;  and  earnestly 

exhort  them  to  remember  the  poor, 

saying  one  or  more  of  these  sen- 

tences. 

The  Offertory. 

And  in  process  of  time. 


to  the  Lord's  table  and  begin  the 
offertory,  saying  one  or  more  of 
these  sentences. 


The  Offertory. 
I.et  your  light  so  shine. 


554 


Appendix. 


First  Edw.  VI.  1549. 

§  95.  Whiles  the  Clerks  do  sing  the 
offertory,  so  many  as  are  disposed 
shall  offer  to  the  poor-man' s  box. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  95.  7^n  shall  the  Churchwardens 
gather  the  devotions  of  the  people 
and  put  them  into  the  poor-matCs 
box. 


96.  .  .  .  and  at  the  offering  days 
every  one  shall  pay  the  due  and 
accustomed  offerings. 

97.  Then  so  many  as  shall  be  par- 
takers shall  tarry  still  in  the  Quire. 
All  other  shall  depart  out  of  the 
Quire. 

98.  Then  shall  the  Minister  take 
so  much  bread  and  wine  as  shall 
suffice,  setting  both  the  bread  and 
wine  upon  the  Altar. 

Sursum  Corda. 

99.  Then  the  Priest  shall  say. 
The  Lord  be  with  you. 

Lift  up  your  hearts. 

100.  Priest.  It  is  very  meet,  right 
loi.  Here  shall  follow  the  Proper 
Preface. 

Proper  Prefaces. 
Because  thou  didst. 

102.  After  which  preface  shall 
follow 

The  Ter  Sanctus. 
Therefore  with  angels. 

103.  This  the  Clerks  shall  also 
sing. 

104.  W/ien  the  Clerks  have  done 
singing,  the  Priest  shall  turn  him 
and  say 

The  General  Prayer. 
Let  us  pray  for  the  whole  state. 

105.  Then  the  Priest  turning  him 
to  the  Altar  shall  say  or  sing. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God. 


§  96.  .  .  .  and  upon  the  offering  days 
appointed  every  one  shall  pay  the 
due  and  accustomed  offerings. 

§  104-5.  After  which  done  the  Min- 
ister shall  say 

The  General  Prayer. 

Let  us  pray  for  the  whole  state. 
§91.    Then  shall  follow  this  exhorta- 
tion when  the  Curate  shall  see  tlie 

people  negligent  to  come. 
Exhortation  to  the  Negligent,  1553. 

We  be  come  together  ...  I  bid 
you  all  that  be  here  present. 
§  92.  And  sometimes  shall  this  be 

said  also  at  tJu  discretion  of  tJie 

Curate. 
Exhortation  to  the  Negligent,  1549. 

Dearly  beloved ;  forasmuch  as 
our  duty  .  .  .  that  he  hath  given 
his  Son  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ... 

The  which  being  so  divine  and 
comfortable  a  thing  .  . . 


§  88.    Tlien  shall  the  Priest  say  this 

exhortation. 
Exhortation  to  those  that  receive. 

Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord.    Ye 
that  mind  to  come. 

Therefore  if  any  of  you   be  a 
blasphemer. 


Appendix. 


555 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

§  95-  While  the  Presbyter pronoicnces 
these  sentences,  the  deacon,  or  one 
of  thefu,  shall  receive  the  devotions 
of  the  people,  and  deliver  them  in 
a  bason  to  the  Presbyter,  who  shall 
present  it  before  the  Lord,  and  set 
it  upon  the  holy  Table. 

%  98.  The  Presbyter  shall  then  offer 
up  and  place  the  bread  and  wine 
prepared  upon  the  Lord's  Table. 

§  104-5.  And  then  he  shall  say 


The  General  Prayer. 

Let  us  pray  for  the  whole  state. 
§  9 1.    Then  shall  follow  this  exhorta- 
tion, when  the  Curate  shall  see  the 

people  negligent  to  come. 
Exhortation  to  the  Negligent,  1552. 
We  be  come  together  ...  I  bid  you 

all  that  be  here  present. 
§  92.  And  sometimes  this  shall  be 

said  also  at  the  discretion  of  the 

Presbyter. 
Exhortation  to  the  Negligent,  1549. 

Dearly  beloved  ;  forasmuch  as 
our  duty  .  .  .  that  he  hath  given 
his  Son  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ . . . 
The  which  being  so  divine  and 
comfortable  a  thing  .  .  . 


§  88.   Then  shall  the  Presbyter  say 

this  exhortation. 
Exhortation  to  those  that  receive. 

Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord ;  ye 
that  mind  to  come  .  .  . 

Therefore  if  any  of  you  be    a 
blasphemer. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

95.  Whilst  these  sentences  are  in 
reading  the  Deacons  or  Church- 
wardens shall  receive  the  alms  of 
the  poor,  and  the  Priest  shall  place 
them  upon  the  holy  Table. 


§  98.  When  there  is  a  Communion, 
the  Priest  shall  then  place  upon 
the  Table  so  miich  bread  and  wint 
as  he  shall  thiitk  sufficient. 

§  104-5.  After  which  done,  the  Priest 
shall  say 

The  General  Prayer. 
Let  us  pray  for  the  whole  state. 

§  92.  When  the  Minister  givelh 
warning  on  the  Sunday  previous^ 
he  shall  say  this  exhortation. 

Exhortation  to  the  Negligent,  1549. 
Dearly  beloved,  on day  next 

I  purpose  ...  to  administer  to  all 

such  .  .  .  that  he  hath   given  his 

Son  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  .  .  . 

Which  being  so  divine  and  com- 
fortable a  thing  .  .  . 

Therefore  if  any  of  you   be   a 

blasphemer. 

§  91.  Or  in  case  he  shall  see  the 
people  negligent  to  come,  he  shall 
use  this  exhortation. 

Exhortation  to  the  Negligent,  1552. 
Dearly  beloved  brethren,  I  bid 

you  all  that  are  here  present. 

§  87.  At  the  time  of  the  celebration, 
the  communicants  being  conve- 
niently placed, 

§  88.  .  .  .  The  Priest  shall  say  this 

exhortation. 
Exhortation  to  those  that  receive. 
Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  ye 

that  mind  to  come. 


556 


Appendix. 


First  Edw.  VI.  1549.  Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

Prayer  of  Consecration. 

O   God,   heavenly  Father  .  .  . 
Hear  us  (O  merciful  Father)  we 
beseech  thee. 
§  108.    These  words  are  to  be  said 

still  turning  to  the  altar,  withottt 

any  elevation  or  shewing  the  Sa- 

crament  to  the  people. 
§  109.   Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 

The  peace  of  the  Lord  be  alway 
with  you. 
§  III.  Here  the  Priest  shall  turn 

him  toward  those  that  come,  and 

shall  say 

The  Invitatory. 

You  that  do  truly. 
§  1 12.   Then  shall  this  general  Con- 
fession be  made. 

The  General  Confession. 

Almighty  God,  Father  of. 
§  113.   Then  shall  the  Priest  stand 

up,  and  turning  himself  to  the 

people  say 

The  Absolution. 

Almighty  God,  our  heavenly 

Father. 

§  114.  Then  shall  the  Priest  also      §  114.   Then  shall  the  Priest  say 
say  The  Comfortable  Words. 

Hear  what  comfortable  words. 


§  III.   TTien  shall  the  Priest  say  to 
them  that  come  to  receive, 

.    The  Invitatory. 
You  that  do  truly  repent 

§  112.   TTten  shall  this  general  Con- 
fession  be  made. 

The  General  Confession. 
Almighty  God,  Father  of. 
§  113.    Then  shall  the  Priest  say 
thus, 

The  Absolution. 
Almighty    God,    our   heavenly 
Father. 


The  Comfortable  Words. 
Hear  what  comfortable  words. 


99.  After  which  done  the  Priest 
shall  proceed,  saying, 

Sursum  Corda. 
Lift  up  your  hearts. 

100.  Then  shall  the  Priest  turn 
to  the  Lord's  Table  and  say.  It 
is  very  meet,  right. 

loi.  Here  shall  follow  the  proper 
Preface. 


Appendix, 


557 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 


Charles  II.  1662. 


§  1 1 1.   Uien  shall  the  Presbyter  say 
to  them  that  come  to  receive. 

The  Invitatory. 
You  that  do  truly. 

§112.   Then  shall  this  general  Con- 
fession be  made. 

The  General  Confession. 
Almighty  God,  Father  of. 
§  1 13.    Then  shall  the  Presbyter prO' 
nounce  the  Absolution  asfolloweth. 

The  Absolution. 
Ahnighty    God,    our    heavenly 
Father. 


§  1 1 1.   Then  shall  the  Priest  say  to 
them  that  come  to  receive. 

The  Invitatory. 
Ye  that  do  truly. 

§  112.   Then  shall  this  general  Con' 
fession  be  made. 

The  General  Confession. 
Almighty  God,  Father  of. 
§  113.   Then  shall  the  Priest  pro- 
nounce this  absolution. 

The  Absolution. 
Almighty    God,    our   heavenly 
Father. 


1 14.   Then  shall  the  Presbyter  also 
say. 

The  Comfortable  Words, 
Hear  what  comfortable  words. 

99.  After  which  the  Presbyter  shall 
proceed,  saying, 

Sursum  Corda. 
Lift  up  your  hearts. 

100.  Presbyter.    It  is  very  meet, 
right, 


§  1 14.    Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 
The  Comfortable  Words. 
Here  what  comfortable  words. 

§  99.  After  which  the  Priest  shall 
proceed,  saying, 

Sursum  Corda. 
Lift  up  your  hearts. 

§  100.  Priest.  It  is  very  meet,  right ; 


loi.   Then  shall  follow  the  Proper      §  loi.  Here  shall  follow  the  proper 
Preface.  Preface. 


558 


Appendix. 


First  Edw.  VI.  1549. 


§  115.    TTien  shall  the  Priest  say  in 
the  name  of  all  that  shall  receive. 
The  Collect  of  humble  access. 
We  do  not  presume  to  come. 


§  116.    Then  shall  the  Priest  first 

receive,  and  next  deliver  it  to  other 

Ministers,  and  after  to  the  people. 
§  117.  And  when  he  delivereth  the 

Sacrament  of  the  body  of  Christ 

he  shall  say. 

The  Form  of  Delivery. 

The  body  of  our  Lord. 

§  118 

[See  Scotch  Liturgry,  1637.] 
§  119.  And  the  Minister  delivering 

the  Sacrament  of  the  blood  shall 

say, 
§  120.  .  .  . 

[See  Scotch  Lituigy,  1637.] 
§  121.  If  there  be  a  Deacon  or  other 

Priest,  then  shall  he  follow  with 

the  chalice. 
§  122.  In  the  Communion-time  the 

Clerks  shall  sing, 

O  Lamb  of  God,  that  takest. 
And  when  the  Communion  is  ended, 

shall   the   Clerke   say   the  post- 
communion. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

Proper  Prefaces. 
Because  thou  didst  give. 
§  102.  After  which  Prefaces  sliall 
follow 

The  Ter  Sanctus. 
Therefore  with  angels. 

§  115,  Then  shall  the  Priest  say 
in  the  name  of  all  them  that  shall 
receive. 

The  Collect  of  humble  access. 
We  do  not  presume  to  come. 

§  107.  Then  the  Priest  standing  up 
shall  say  as  followeth. 

Prayer  of  Consecration. 
Almighty    God,    our    heavenly 

Father. 

§  1 16.  Then  shall  the  Minister  first 
receive,  and  next  deliver  to  the 
Minister,  and  after  to  the  people. 

§  117.  And  when  he  delivereth  the 
bread  he  shall  say. 

The  Form  of  Delivery. 
The  Body  of  our  Lord  .  .  . 


§  119.   And  the  minister  that  de- 
livereth the  cup  shall  say. 
The  Blood  of  our  Lord. 


Appendix. 


559 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

Proper  Prefaces. 
Because  thou  didst  give. 
§  102.  After  which  Prefaces,   shall 
follow  this  Doxology. 

The  Ter  Sanctus. 
Therefore  with  angels. 


§  107.  Then  the  Presbyter  standing 
up  shall  say  the  Prayer  of  Conse- 
cration as  followeth. 

§  106.   But  during  the  consecration, 
he  shall  stand  where  he  may  with 
more  ease  use  both  his  hands. 
Prayer  of  Consecration. 
Almighty    God,    our    heavenly 

Father. 

§  108.  Immediately  after  shall  be 
said  this  Memorial  or  Prayer  of 
Oblation  as  followeth. 

Prayer  of  Oblation. 
Wherefore,  O  Lord. 

§  109.   Then  shall  the  Presbyter  say. 
As  our  Saviour  Christ  hath  com- 
manded .  .  . 

Our  Father,  which  art,  &c. 

§  1 15.    Then  shall  the  Presbyter  .  .  . 
say  this  Collect  of  humble  access  to 
the  Holy  Communion. 
The  Collect  of  humble  access. 
We  do  not  presume. 

§  1 16.  Then  shall  the  Presbyter  first 
receive  the  Communion  himself, 
and  then  deliver  it  to  others,  and 
after  to  the  people. 

§117.  And  when  he  receiveth  him- 
self, or  delivereth  it  to  others,  he 
shall  say  this  Benediction, 
The  Body  of  our  Lord. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

Proper  Prefaces. 
Because  thou  didst  give. 
§  102-3.    Afi^  ec^ch  of  which  Pre- 
faces shall  immediately  be  sung  or 

said. 

The  Ter  Sanctus. 

Therefore  with  angels. 

§  115.    Then  shall  the  Priest  say  in 
the  name  of  all  that  receive. 
The  Collect  of  humble  access. 
We  do  not  presume  to  come. 

§  106.  When  the  Priest,  standing 
before  the  Table,  hath  ordered  the 
bread  and  wine, 

§  107.  He  shall  say  the  Prayer  of 
Consecration  as  followeth. 

Prayer  of  Consecration. 
Almighty    God,    our   heavenly 

Father. 

§116.  TJien  shall  the  Minister  first 
receive,  and  then  deliver  to  the 
Bishops,  Priests,  and  Deacons, 
and  after  that  to  the  people. 

§  1 1 7.  When  he  delivereth  the  bread, 
he  shall  say. 

The  Form  of  Delivery. 
The  Body  of  our  Lord. 

§  119.  And  the  Minister  that  de- 
livereth the  cup,  shall  say. 
The  Blood  of  our  Lord. 


56o 


Appendix. 


First  Edw.  VI.  1549. 

§  123.  Sentences  of  Scripture  to  be 
said  after  the  Communion,  called 
the  post-communion. 
If  any  man  will  follow  me. 

§§  124-125 

[See  ed.  1662.] 

§  126 

[See  ed.  1552.] 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 


§  127.   Then  the  Priest  shall  give 

thanks  in  the  name  of  all  that 

have  communicated. 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 
The  Thanksgiving. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
we  most  heartily  thank  thee. 


126.  Tlien  shall  the  Priest  say 
the  Lord's  Prayer. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
Our  Father,  which  art 
108.  After  shall  be  said  as  fol- 
loweth. 

The  Prayer  of  Oblation. 

O  Lord,  our  heavenly  Father. 

And  here  we  offer  and  present 

Or  this. 

The  Thanksgiving. 

127.  Almighty  and  everliving 
God,  we  most  heartily  thank 
thee. 

78.   Then  shall  be  said  or  sung, 

Gloria  in  Excelsis. 
Glory  be  to  God. 


§  128.  Then  the  Priest  shall  Id 
them  depart  with  the  blessing. 

The  Benediction. 
The  peace  of  God,  which. 

§  129.  Where  there  are  no  Clerks^ 
the  Priest  shall  say  all  things  ap- 
pointed  for  them  to  sing. 

§  130.  When  the  Holy  Communion 
is  celebrated  on  the  work-day,  or 
in  private  houses,  there  may  be 
omitted  the  Gloria  in  Excelsis, 
the  Creed,  and  the  Exhortation 
beginning.  Dearly  beloved, 

§  131 

[See  cd.  i66a.] 


§  128.  Then  the  Priest  shall  let  them 
depart  with  this  blessing. 
The  Benediction. 
Ihe  peace  of  God,  which .  .  . 


Appendix. 


561 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

118.  Here  the  party  receiving  shall 
say  Amen. 

119.  And  the  Presbyter  that  re- 
cekieth  the  Cup,  or  delivereth  it, 
shall  say  this  Benediction. 

The  Blood  of  our  Lord. 

1 20.  Here  the  party  receiving  shall 
say  Amen. 

125.  When  all  have  communicated, 
he  shall  caver  with  a  fair  linen- 
cloth,  or  corporal,  that  which  re- 
maineth  of  the  consecrated  elements. 
127.  Then  this  Collect  of  Thanks- 
giving as  followeth. 

The  Thanksgiving. 
Almighty  and  everlasting  God. 


78.    Then   shall  be  said  or  sung 
Gloria  in  Excelsis  in  English. 

Gloria  in  Excelsis. 
Glory  be  to  God,  &c. 

128.    Then  the  Presbyter  shall  let 
them  depart  with  this  blessing. 

The  Benediction. 
The  peace  of  God,  &c. 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§124.  If  the  consecrated  Bread  and 
Wine  be  all  spent  before  all  have 
communicated,  the  Priest  is  to 
consecrate  more,  beginning  at  Our 
Saviour  Christ. 

§  125.  When  all  have  communi- 
cated, the  Minister  shall  place 
upon  the  Table  what  remaineth, 
covering  the  same  with  a  fair 
linen  cloth. 

§  126.  Then  shall  the  Priest  say  the 
Lord^s  Prayer. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
Our  Father,  which  art. 

§  108.  Afier  which  shall  be  said  as 
followeth. 

Prayer  of  Oblation. 
O  Lord  and  heavenly  Father. 
And  here  we  offer  and  present 

§127.  Or  this. 

Almighty  and  everliving  God. 

§  78.    Then  shall  be  said  or  sung, 
Gloria  in  Excelsis. 
Glory  be  to  God. 

§  128.  Then  the  Priest  shall  let 
them  depart  with  this  blessing. 

The  Benediction. 
The  peace  of  God. 


1 1 3 1 .  After  the  Divine  Service  ended, 
that  which  was  offered  shall  be  di- 
vided, one  part  for  the  Presbyter 
to  provide  him  with  books,  the 
other  for  pious  uses,  furnishing 
the  Church,  or  relief  of  the  poor. 


O  O 


562 


Appendix. 


First  Edw.  VI.  1549. 

§  132.    Collects  to  be  said  after  the 
offertory  when  there  is  no  Com- 
munion. 
Assist  us  mercifully. 

§  133.  Upon  Wedfiesdays  and  Fri- 
days the  English  Litany  shall  be 
said. 

§  134.  And  though  there  be  none  to 
communicate  on  these  days,  the 
Priest  shall  say  all  things  at  the 
Altar  until  after  the  Offertory, 
and  shall  add  one  or  two  of  the 
Collects  after  written,  and  shall 
let  the  people  depart  with  the 
Blessing. 

§  135 

[See  ed.  1552.] 

§  136.  The  same  order  shall  be  used 
otJier  days  when  none  are  disposed 
to  communicate. 

§  137.  Likeivise  in  chapels  annexed 
there  shall  be  no  celebration  unless 
some  communicate  with  the  Priest. 

§  138.  And  in  such  chapels  zvhere  the 

people  hath  not  been  accustomed  to 

pay  any  holy  Bread,   they  must 

•  make  some  charitable  provision  for 

the  charges. 

§§  139-140.  .  .  . 

[See  ed.  1552.] 


141.  For  avoiding  matters  of  dis- 
sension, it  is  convenient  that  the 
Bread  be  made  after  one  sort,  round 
and  without  any  manner  of  print. 
And  men  must  not  think  less  to  be 
received  in  part  than  in  whole. 


Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§  132.    Collects  to  be  said  after  thi 
Offertory  where  there  is  no  com- 
munion. 
Assist  us  mercifully. 


§  135-    Upon  the  Holy  days  if  tJiere 

be  no  Communion,  shall  be  said 

all  that  is  appointed  until  the  end 

of  the  Homily,   concluding  with 

the  prayer  for  tlie  whole  estate  of 

Chrisfs  Church.  * 

§  136 

[Omitted.] 

§  137.  There  shall  be  no  celebration 
except  there  be  a  good  number  to 
communicate. 

§  138 

[Omitted.] 

§  139.  If  there  be  not  above  twenty 
persons  in  the  parish,  yet  no  com- 
munion except  four  or  three,  at 
the  least,  communicate. 

§  140.  In  Cathedrals,  where  be  many 
Priests,  they  shall  receive  every 
Sunday. 

§  141.  And  to  take  away  the  su- 
perstition, it  shall  suffice  that  the 
Bread  be  such  as  is  usual  to  be 
eaten. 


i 


Appendix. 


563 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 
§  132.    Collects  to  be  said  after  the 
Offertory. 
Assist  us  mercifully. 


§§  133-134. 


[Omitted.] 


Charles  II.  1662. 

132.    Collects  to  be  said  after  the 
Offertory  when  there  is  no  Com- 


§  135.  Upon  the  Holy  days 
[Same  as  i552.] 


§  135.  Upon  the  Sunday,  if  there  be 
no  Communion,  shall  be  said  unto 
the  general  Prayer,  '^for  the  whole 
state  of  Christ's  Church. " 


137.  There  shall  be  no  public  cele- 
bration, except  there  be  a  sufficient 
number. 


§  137.  And  there  shall  be  no  celc' 
bration  except  there  be  a  convenient 
number  to  communicate. 


§  139.  If  there  be  not  above  , 
[Sam£  as  i552.] 


140.  And  in  Cathedrals  .  .  , 

[Same  as  1552.] 

141.  And  to  take  away  supersti- 
tion, though  it  be  lawful  to  have 
wafer  Bread,  it  shall  suffice  that 
the  bread  be  such  as  is  usual. 


§  140.  And  in  Cathedral  Churches, 
all  Priests  shall  receive  the  Com- 
munion every  Sunday. 

§  141.  And  to  take  away  all  dissen- 
sension  concerning  the  Bread,  it 
shall  suffice  that  the  Bread  be  such 
as  is  usual  to  be  eaten. 


564                                     Appendix. 

First  Edw.  VI.  1549. 

Second  Edw.  VI.  1552. 

§142.... 

§142.  If  any  bread  or  wine  remain. 

[See  ed.  1552.] 

the  Curate  shall  have  it  to  his 

§  143 

LSeeO.H.C] 

own  use. 

§  X44.  Forasmuch  as  the  pastors  con- 

§ 144.     The  Bread  and  wine  shall 

tinually  find  at  their  costs  suffi- 

be provided  at  the  charges  of  the 

cient  Bread,  &'c.  the  Parishioners 

Parish,  and  the  Parish  shall  be 

shall  offer  at  the  time  of  the  offer- 

discharged by  order  of  their  houses 

tory  the  just  price  and  value  of  the 

every  Sunday. 

holy  loaf. 

-m 

§  145.    In  all  Cathedrals  shall  al- 

§§ 145-148.                                                       J 

ways  some  communicate  with  the 

[All  omitted.]                           M 

Priest.      And  in   every  Parish, 

■»J 

that  some,  to  whom  it  appertain- 

eth  to  offer,  shall  receive  with  the 

Priest. 

§  146.  Every  man  or  woman  shall  be 

bound  to  attend  the  parish  Church 

and  pay  t/uir  duties,  and  commu- 

nicate once  in  the  year  at  least. 

§  147.    Whosoever  doth  willingly  ab- 

sent themselves,  shall  upon  proof. 

according  to  Ecclesiastical  Law, 

§149.  Every  parishioner  shall  com- 

be excommunicate. 

municate  three  times  a  year.    And 

§  148.  Although  in  years  past  people 

yearly  at  Easter  shall  pay  all  ec- 

received at  the  Priest's  hands,  it  is 

clesiastical  Duties. 

thought  convenient  that  they  re- 

ceive in  their  mouths. 

§  150 

§  149 

[See  ed.  i66a.] 

[See  ed.  1552.] 

§  ISO 

[See  ed.  1662.] 

Declaration  on  kneeling. 

§151 

[See  ed.  1552.] 

§  151.  Although  no  order  can  be.  .  . 

Whereas  it  is  ordained  that  the 

communicants  kneeling  should  re- 

ceive, b'c,  .  .  , 

i 

Appendix. 


565 


Scotch  Liturgy,  1637. 

142.  If  any  bread  and  ivine  re- 
main tiihich  is  consecrated,  it  shall 
be  reverently  eaten  and  drunk, 
and  not  be  carried  out  of  the 
church.  He  that  officiates  is  to 
consecrate  with  the  hast,  theti  if 
there  be  want  the  words  of  con- 
secration  to  be  repeated,  beginning. 
Our  Saviour  in  the  night. 
144.  The  Bread  and  wine  shall  be 
provided  at  the  cliarges  of  the 
Parish, 


Charles  II.  1662. 

§  142.  And  if  any  of  the  Bread  and 
Wine  remain  unconsecrated,  the 
Curate  shall  have  it  for  his  07vn 
use.  But  if  any  remain  conse- 
crated, the  Priest  and  other  com- 
municants shall  reverently  eat 
and  drink  the  same. 


§  Izl4.  The  Bread  and  Wine  shall 
be  provided  at  the  charges  of  the 
parish. 


§§  145—1^ 


[All  omitted.] 


§§  145—1^ 


[All  omitted.] 


§  149.  Every  parishioner  shall  com- 
mu7iicate  three  times  a  year,  of 
which  Pasche  or  Easter  shall  be 
one,  and  observe  other  rites  as  in 
this  book  appointed. 

§  150 

[See  ed.  1662.] 


§151- 


[Omitted.] 


§  149.  Every  Parishioner  shall  com- 
fnunicate  at  least  three  times  in 
the  year,  of  ivhich  Easter  to  be 
one,  and  yearly  at  Easter  to  pay 
all  Ecclesiastical  duties. 

§  150.  After  Divine  service,  the 
money  given  at  the  offertory  shall 
be  disposed  of  to  stick  pious  and 
charitable  uses  as  the  Minister 
and  Churchwardens  shall  think 
fit. 

§  151.  Whereas  it  is  ordained  that 
the  co7nmunicants  should  receive 
the  same  kneeling  .  .  . 


ERRATA. 

*^       p.  7>  note  ',  for  1642  read  1662. 

ly       p.  66,  add  this  note  to  rubric  §  7  after  words,  ^^  some  one  of  these  sen- 
tences :" 

In  ed.  1662,  "  some  one  or  more  of  these  sentences." 

•^      p.  69,  under  James  I,  1604,  add 

%  9.    TAe  Absolution  or  Remission  of  Sins  to  be  pronounced 

by  the  Minister  alone. 

Almighty  God,  the  Father,  &c. 

[The  same  as  1552.] 

P«  97»  §  56,  add  this  note  : 

In  eds.  1552,  and  after,  "Morning  and  Evening  Prayer," 
instead  of  "  Matins  and  Evensong." 

p.  157,  second  col,,  sSiex  Monday  in  Whitsun  Week,  add 
The  Collect. 
[Printed  entire.] 

p.  159,  first  col.,  after  Tuesday  in  Whitsun  Week,  add 

The  Collect. 
[Printed  entire.] 

p.  271,  in  note  ',  dele  "pastors." 
p.  278,  in  note  ^,  for  1559  read  1549. 

p.  325,  col.  I,  for  "wherein  the  person  is  baptized,"  read  "baptized  is 
dipped  or  sprinkled  with  it,"  and  add  as  a  note  to  the  same, 
In  ed.  1662,  altered  to  "wherein  the  person  is  baptized." 

p.  328,  col.  2,  under  James  \.,for  Confirmation  r^oaf  Confirmation 

OR  LAYING  ON  OF  HANDS, 

p.  383.>''§345''^<2^§349- 
..     fo^  §  331  ^ead  %  343. 


^ 


; 


Oniversity  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  Limited 


