The  Leonard  Library 

Wptlittt  College 

Toronto 


Shelf  No.  &X5/4S* 

R77 


Register  No.  ..J 

?.  .....  19616. 


isd^ruztna/ 


THE    ENGLISH    RITE 

VOLUME    I 


THE  ENGLISH  RITE 

BEING   A   SYNOPSIS 

OF    THE    SOURCES   AND    REVISIONS 
OF  THE   BOOK  OF  COMMON   PRAYER 

WITH  AN    INTRODUCTION   AND   AN   APPENDIX 


BY 


F.    E.    BRIG  HTM  AN,    M.  A. 

HON.  D.D.,  DURHAM;  HON.  D.PHIL.,  LOUVAIN 

FELLOW  AND  TUTOR  OF  S.  MARY  MAGDALEN  COLLEGE,  OXFORD 

PREBENDARY  OF  LINCOLN 
EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TO  THE  BISHOP  OF  OXFORD 


VOLUME   I 


RIVINGTONS 

34  KING  STREET,   CO  VENT  GARDEN 

LONDON 

1915 


FIAT  PAX   IN  VIRTUTE  TUA 


4-5307563 


j 


PREFACE 

I  HAVE  here  added  another  to  the  series  of  attempts  which 
have  been  made,  by  a  variety  of  methods,  to  exhibit  distinctly 
the  exact  relations  in  which  the  chief  recensions  of  the  Book 
of  Common  Prayer  stand  to  one  another.1  In  form  it  approxi 
mates  most  nearly  to  Edw.  Cardwell's  Two  Books  of  Common 
Prayer  and  W.  Reeling's  Liturgiae  britannicae.2  But  the  former 
of  these  covers  only  the  books  of  1549  and  1552  ;  while  the 
latter,  though  in  one  direction  larger  in  scope  than  my  own 
attempt,  has  seemed  to  me  capable  of  being  improved  upon 
in  several  ways.  In  order  to  describe  the  aim  and  character 
of  the  present  Synopsis  it  will  be  convenient  to  compare  it 
with  Liturgiae  britannicae. 

I.  The  latter  shares  with  most  synopses  of  nearly  related 
texts  that  one  meets  with  the  defect  that  the  columns  do  not 
correspond  in  detail,  but  each  column  pursues  its  own  course 
continuously  and  independently  ;  with  the  result  that  an 
omission  or  an  addition  in  any  column  throws  the  scheme  out 
of  gear,  and,  in  order  to  grasp  the  relation  of  the  several 
columns  to  one  another,  the  eye  or  the  finger  or  the  pen  has 
to  follow  a  devious  path  across  the  pages.  I  have  endeavoured 

1  W.  Nicholls  A  Comment  on  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  etc.,  London 
1710;  E.  Card  well  The  two  Books  of  Common  Prayer  .  .  .  in  the  reign  of 
Ed-ward  the  Sixth  compared  with  each  other,  Oxford  1838,  2nd  ed.  1841  ;  W.  K. 
Clay  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer  illustrated  so  as  to  shew  the  various 
modifications,  etc.,  London  1841  ;  W.  Keeling  Liturg  iae  britannicae  or  the  several 
editions  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  .  .  .  arranged  to  shew  their  respective 
variations,  London  1842,  2nd  ed.  1851  ;  J.  Parker  The  First  Prayer  Book  of 
Edward  VI  compared  with  the  successive  revisions  of  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer,  Oxford  1877. 

8  This  form  is  also  that  of  the  incomplete  synopsis  of  1549,  1604,  and  1637 
in  Hamon  L'Estrange's  Alliance  of  the  Divine  Offices,  1659. 

*  «V 


iv  THE  ENGLISH  RITE 

to  avoid  this  and  to  secure  that  the  columns,  as  far  as  possible, 
correspond  word  for  word  ;  so  that,  when  the  text  of  the  three 
columns  is  identical,  each  line  shall  begin  and  end  in  one 
column  with  the  same  words  as  in  the  others,  and  where  the 
text  of  one  column  is  longer  than  that  of  the  others,  the  other 
columns  shall  show  a  corresponding  gap. 

2.  Whereas  Liturgiae  britannicae  exhibits  modernised  texts 
throughout,  I  have  endeavoured  here  to  reproduce  verbatim, 
litteratim  and  punctatim,  and  even  with  their  misprints,  the 
texts  of  Whitchurche  issues  of  the  books  of  1549  and  1552,  and 
the  text  of  the  Book  Annexed  of  1661,  omitting  only  the  Psalter, 
which  then  became  part  of  the  book.     Since  the  several  issues 
of  the  books  of  1549  and  1552  are  not  uniform  but  exhibit 
textual  variants,  it  would  have  added  to  completeness  if  the 
variants  had  been  given  in  the  margin  of  the  respective  col 
umns.     But  this  would  have  added  much  to  a  task  which 
has  been  in  some  ways  troublesome  ;   while  a  large,  perhaps 
a  complete,  collection  of  the  variants  is  given  in  Mr.  Jas. 
Parker's  First  Prayer  Book  of  Edward  VI  and  in  the  margin 
of  his  small  reprint  of  the  Second  Book. 

3.  Where  the  text  is  identical  in  the  several  recensions,  in 
Liturgiae  britannicae  the  columns  are  abandoned  and  the 
text  is  printed  only  twice,  i.e.  once  right  across  each  of  the 
opposite  pages.     I  am  not  quite  sure  whether  this  is  in  itself 
the  better  course  ;    but  in  any  case  in  the  present  Synopsis 
it  was  impossible,  since  each  column  reproduces  exactly  an 
individual  text,  each  with  its  own  peculiarities  of  spelling,  etc. 

4.  In  Liturgiae  britannicae  all  the  columns  are  printed  in 
the  same  two  types,  one  for  rubrics,  the  other  for  text.     Here, 
on  the  other  hand,  four  types  are  used,  each  in  two  sizes  for 
text  and  rubrics  respectively.     Thus,  matter  produced  in 
dependently  and  afterwards  incorporated  in  the   Book  of 
Common  Prayer  is  in  one  type  ;   matter  of  1549  in  another  ; 
matter  of  1552  in  a  third  ;   and  matter  later  than  1552  in  a 
fourth  :  so  that  in  each  column  the  origin  of  each  word  is  so 
far  patent  to  the  eye. 


PREFACE  v 

5.  The  matter  marked  by  the  fourth  type  took  a  hundred 
years  to  complete,  being  contributed  by  intermediate  recen 
sions  of  the  book,  or  suggested  in  various  quarters,  and  ac 
cepted  and  adopted  in  the  revision  of  1661.     In  order  to 
distinguish  these  contributions  and  suggestions,  I  have  used 
a  series  of  index-numbers  in  the  text  of  the  last  column, 
indicating   the   sources   of    all   that  was   not,   so  far  as   is 
known,  spontaneously  produced  in  the  revising  Committees 
and  in  the  Convocation  of  the  second  half  of  1661.     Liturgiae 
britannicae  has  four  columns,  containing  respectively  the  text 
of  1662,  that  of  1604  and  the  Scottish  book  of  1637,  that  of 
1559  and  1552,  and  that  of  1549,  further  variants  of  the  second 
and  third  columns  being  marked  in  footnotes  ;    so  that  by 
means  of  text  and  footnotes  all  six  recensions  can  be  read 
through.     In  the  present  Synopsis,  on  the  other  hand,  there 
are  only  three  columns  ;    so  that  the  intermediate  texts  of 
JSSQj  1604,  and  1637,  cannot  be  read  continuously,  but  only 
so  much  of  them  as  was  perpetuated  in  the  revision  of  1661, 
their  several  contributions  being  distinguished  by  the  indices. 

6.  Lastly,  whereas  in  Liturgiae  britannicae  only  the  incipit 
and   explicit  of  lessons   from   Holy  Scripture  are  given,    I 
have  thought  it  better  to  print  the  lessons  at  length,  both  in 
pursuance  of  the  plan  of  printing  each  book  complete,  and 
in  order  to  make  clear  to  the  eye  the  changes  that  have  been 
made  in  the  length  of  the  passages. 

So  far  for  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  columns  of  the 
text.  The  first  column  exhibits  the  sources,  Latin,  Greek, 
and  German,  from  which  the  English  formulae  are  derived 
by  translation  or  paraphrase.  In  the  Introduction  some 
further  sources  are  added  in  the  NOTES  :  some  overlooked 
in  the  text  ;  some  for  which  there  was  no  room  ;  others  only 
noticed  since  the  text  was  printed.  In  general  only  so 
much  of  the  text  of  the  sources  is  printed  as  is  represented  in 
the  English  ;  so  that,  while  the  positive  relation  of  the  latter 
to  the  former  is  exhibited,  in  order  to  study  the  negative 
relations,  how  much,  that  is,  has  been  omitted,  recourse 


vi  THE  ENGLISH  RITE 

must  be  had  to  the  complete  original  documents.  In  some 
cases,  when  the  first  column  would  otherwise  have  been 
blank,  I  have  set  down  in  square  brackets,  not  as  the  source 
of  the  English,  but  only  for  comparison  with  it,  the  text  of 
the  corresponding  place  in  the  Latin  books. 

The  Introduction  is  not  an  attempt  to  write  once  again  the 
history  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.  Primarily  and  for 
the  most  part  it  is  concerned  with  sources,  as  a  key  and 
a  supplement  to  the  first  column  of  the  Synopsis.  Conse 
quently,  I  have  endeavoured,  as  shortly  as  may  be,  to  indicate 
the  ritual  situation  in  which  the  English  book  originated,  and 
those  in  which  it  was  further  modified  and  developed ;  to 
make  sufficiently  distinct  the  relations  in  which  the  English 
book  stands  to  its  predecessors  ;  and  to  describe  the  mani 
fold  influences,  documentary  and  personal,  which  affected  it 
from  time  to  time,  and  to  put  them  into  their  historical  con 
text.  I  have  avoided,  I  hope,  for  the  most  part,  both  here 
and  in  the  first  column  of  the  Synopsis,  mere  illustration, 
abundance  of  which  is  to  be  found  in  current  commentaries, 
from  Hamon  L'  Estrange  onwards,  and  have  aimed  at  con 
fining  quotation  to  what  has  certainly,  probably,  or  pos 
sibly,  influenced  the  text  directly  ;  to  what,  originating  under 
the  same  conditions  and  in  the  same  period,  indicates  what 
was  *  in  the  air '  ;  and  to  what,  as  traditional,  and  in  every 
body's  mind,  explains  what  might  otherwise  be  obscure.  Of 
the  latter  two  sorts,  it  is  likely  that  there  is  a  good  deal  still 
to  be  gleaned  from  medieval  and  contemporary  sources, 
which  would  throw  light  on  the  work  of  an  absorbent  mind 
like  Cranmer's. 

In  the  Appendix,  which,  it  will  be  obvious,  is  something  of 
an  afterthought,  I  have  attempted  to  deal  with  two  subjects, 
which,  though  fairly  included  under  the  title,  lie  outside  of 
the  scope  of  the  rest  of  the  book.  And  the  treatment  of  them 
is  somewhat  different  from  that  of  other  topics,  in  that  the 
history  of  them  is  carried  down  to  a  much  later  date  than 
1 66 1,  and  the  first  of  them  is  dealt  with  on  a  scale  dispro- 


PREFACE 


7'tt 


portionate  to  that  of  the  treatment  of  the  topics  referred 
to  in  the  Introduction.  For  this  latter  I  would  plead  two 
reasons  :  first,  that  I  do  not  know  where  else  to  find  even 
so  inadequate  a  treatment  of  it  as  I  have  been  able  to  give  ; 
and  secondly,  that  I  should  like  to  call  special  attention  to 
the  Bidding  of  the  Bedes,  and  to  the  Prone  generally,  of 
which  it  forms  a  part. 

It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  where,  as  with  us,  everything  is  in 
the  vernacular,  there  is  no  longer  the  same  need  or  room  for 
the  Prone  as  there  once  was,  and  still  is  elsewhere.  But,  as 
I  have  tried  to  point  out  in  this  Appendix,  for  large  and 
venerable  communities  the  Prone,  detached  from  its  tradi 
tional  setting,  has  suggested  or  supplied  the  form  and  the 
staple  of  their  ordinary  public  devotions.  And  it  may  be 
worth  while  for  us  to  recognise  this  and  to  consider  whether 
it  would  not  be  well  to  claim  for  our  own  use  a  traditional 
form  of  devotion,  which,  left  to  the  free  handling  of  the 
preacher  in  the  pulpit,  might  be  a  valuable  supplement  to 
the  liturgical  system,  and  supply  some  needs  better  than 
they  are  or  can  be  supplied  by  any  adaptations  of  the  Divine 
Service.  We  often  hear  that  '  elasticity  '  is  needed  ;  only  it 
generally  turns  out  that  the  '  elasticity '  contemplated  is  only 
a  choice  of  rigidities,  and  this,  affecting  the  Divine  Service, 
which  by  the  nature  of  its  avowed  constructive  principle 
scarcely  admits  of  '  elasticity/  Whereas  the  Prone,  I  imagine, 
as  originally  conceived,  was  essentially  elastic  and  flexible. 
And  it  would  not  be  without  its  satisfactions,  assuredly,  to 
clear  up  old  scores,  and  to  find  ourselves  reconciled  to  a 
form  of  public  devotion,  and  recognising  its  Catholic  rights, 
which,  when  it  was  aggressive  and  recalcitrant,  and  was 
presented  as  the  rival,  and  not  as  the  supplement,  of  the  litur 
gical  system,  necessitated  the  relative  polemic  of  Whitgift 
and  Hooker.  As  to  the  Bidding  of  the  Bedes  in  particular, 
though  it,  and,  what  is  of  more  importance,  its  method,  have 
fallen  into  too  general  disuse,  there  are  signs  of  revival.  Used 
in  its  original  shape,  with  due  space  left  for  our  exhortations 


viii  THE  ENGLISH  RITE 

to  be  acted  upon,  it  enables  us,  untrammelled,  to  suggest  to 
the  faithful  the  detailed  needs  of  the  moment,  and  to  enable 
them  to  make  these  needs  their  own  and  to  pray  for  them  in 
their  own  sense.  Happily  the  method  is  recognised  in  the 
official  '  Form  of  Intercession  '  for  the  present  disastrous 
situation ;  only  the  provision  is  quite  inadequate  (what  of 
our  Allies,  prisoners  of  war,  our  enemies  ?)  ;  a  fixed  formula 
is  enjoined,  instead  of  suggestions  being  made,  to  be  freely 
handled  ;  and,  in  the  Mass,  it  is  directed  to  be  inserted  quite 
in  the  wrong  place. 

The  requirements  of  completeness  might  seem  to  demand 
that  I  should  further  extend  the  Appendix,  and  add  some 
detailed  treatment  of  the  '  State  Services,'  of  the  Consecration 
of  Churches,  and  of  the  Coronation  of  Kings.  But  the  first, 
besides  being  mostly  obsolete,  are  of  no  special  interest 
and  are  perhaps  sufficiently  dealt  with  in  the  single  note  I 
have  given  to  them  ;  and  the  second  has  been  treated  of 
with  great  fulness  by  Dr.  J.  Wickham  Legg  in  English  Orders 
for  the  Consecration  of  Churches  in  the  seventeenth  century 
(H.B.S.,  London  1911)  ;  while  of  Coronations,  for  the  present, 
perhaps  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  has  been  written  in 
the  last  fifteen  years. 

I  hope  that  in  the  references  of  the  Introduction  I  have 
sufficiently  acknowledged  my  obligations  to  other  writers  ;  but 
I  would  further  emphasise  my  debt  to  the  late  Bishop  of  Edin 
burgh's  Workmanship  of  the  Prayer  Book  and  Further  Studies  in 
the  Prayer  Book,  where,  besides  much  else,  many  of  the  points 
touched  upon  in  my  NOTES  will  be  found  further  developed. 
I  have  to  return  my  thanks  to  Keble  College  for  the  loan  of 
copies  of  the  books  of  1549  and  1552  bequeathed  to  it  by 
Dr.  Liddon  ;  to  the  Pusey  House  for  the  loan  of  the  copy 
of  the  Sarum  Missal,  1534,  also  bequeathed  by  Dr.  Liddon, 
and  of  the  facsimile  of  the  Book  Annexed  ;  to  the  Syndics  of 
the  Cambridge  University  Press  and  Messrs.  Eyre  and  Spottis- 
woode  for  permission  to  print  the  text  of  the  Book  Annexed 
from  the  facsimile  published  by  and  belonging  to  them  ;  to 


PREFACE  ix 

Dr.  J.  Wickham  Legg  for  the  proofs  of  his,  as  yet  unpublished, 
edition  of  Cranmer's  experiments  on  the  Breviary,  and  per 
mission  to  use  them  ;  to  my  colleague,  Mr.  H.  A.  Wilson, 
for  reading  the  proofs  of  the  Introduction  and  some  of  those 
of  the  text ;  and  to  several  librarians  and  others,  who  have 
answered  my  questions,  and  will,  I  hope,  accept  this  general 
grateful  acknowledgment.  And,  most  of  all,  I  would  return 
my  thanks  to  the  Printers  for  the  extreme  care  and  skill 
with  which  they  have  carried  out  what  must  have  been  a 
troublesome  task;  and  to  Messrs.  Rivington  for  the  patient 
endurance  with  which  they  have  borne  with  delays  and 
corrections  in  proof. 

F.  E.  BRIGHTMAN. 

S.  MARY  MAGDALEN  COLLEGE,  OXFORD, 
Feb.  10,  1915. 


CONTENTS 

PAGB 

EXPLANATION   OF   TYPES  AND    SIGNS   USED 

IN   THE   SYNOPSIS        ...                        .  i 

INTRODUCTION v 

I.  DIFFUSION  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  ROMAN  RITE  .  v 

II.  THE  ROMAN  RITE  IN  ENGLAND    .           .  xiii 

III.  THE  GALLICAN  AND  THE  EASTERN  RITES          .           .  xviii 

IV.  REFORM  IN  THE  WEST        .....  xxiii 
V.  LUTHERAN  LITURGICAL  REFORM  ....  xxx 

VI.  FIRST  MEASURES  IN  ENGLAND,  AND  THE  LITANY        .  xlix 

VII.  FURTHER  MEASURES,  AND  THE  ORDER  OF  COMMUNION  Ixviii 

VIII.  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER  .           .           .  Ixxviii 

IX.  THE  ORDINATIONS  OF  1550           ....  cxxx 

X.  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER           .           .  cxlii 

XI.  THE  '  ELIZABETHAN  SETTLEMENT  '  clxv 

XII.  VERSIONS  OF  THE  BIBLE,  AND  CATECHISMS       .           .  clxxiv 

XIII.  THE  BOOK  OF  1604  ......  clxxix 

XIV.  FROM  1604  TO  1660  ......  clxxxii 

XV.  THE  LAST  REVISION            ..-..-.           .           .           .  cxciii 

ADDENDA  AND  CORRIGENDA     .....  ccxxvii 

A    SYNOPSIS    OF    THE    SOURCES   AND    REVISIONS 

OF  THE  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER  i 

APPENDIX— 

I.  THE  BIDDING  OF  THE  BEDES        ....  1020 

II.  THE  ROGATION         .                     ....  1045 


INDEX  .  ...        1059 


EXPLANATION    OF    TYPES    AND    SIGNS 
USED    IN    THE    SYNOPSIS 


I.   COLUMN  i. 


1.  The  text  of  Latin  sources  is  printed  in  2  sizes  of  this  (Dryden)  type. 
The  particular  sources  are  indicated  by  gothic  letters  in  the  margin, 
where 

<£  =  Exeter  (Liber  pontificate  of  Edmund  Lacey  bishop  of 

Exeter,  ed.  Barnes). 
fH  =  Mozarabic  (see  p.  xx  below). 
<©  =  Quinones  (see  p.  xxvii  below). 
3&  =  Roman. 

&  =  Sarum  (see  pp.  4,  6  below). 
CK  =  Westminster    (Missale  ad  usum  ecclesie   Westmonas- 

teriensis,  ed.  Legg,  H.B.S.). 
|9  =  York  (see  p.  xvi  below). 

The  letter  refers  to  all  the  following  text  till  the  language  changes,  or 
another  letter  is  set  in  the  margin.  When  consecutive  paragraphs 
or  sections  are  each  marked  with  the  same  letter,  it  is  meant  that 
the  order  of  the  paragraphs  or  sections  has  been  changed  in  the 
English  books  as  compared  with  the  Latin. 

When  the  Latin  text  occurs  ad  loc.,  i.e.  in  the  place  in  the  Latin  books 
corresponding  to  that  in  the  English,  no  reference  is  given  (except 
once  for  all  on  pp.  4,  6).  When  the  Latin  text  occurs  elsewhere, 
a  reference  is  given. 

To  the  more  ancient  Latin  texts  is  added  a  reference  to  the  earliest 
document  where  they  occur  :  thus 

Gel.    =•  Sacramentarium   Gelasianum   (referred   to  by  book 

and  section). 
Greg.  =  Sacramentarium  Gregorianum  (referred  to  by  columns 

of  Muratori  Lit.  Rom.  vet.  i). 
Leon.  —  Sacramentarium  Leonianum  (referred  to  by  columns 

of  Muratori  ii). 
Men.  =the  loth  cent.  Gregorianum  in  Menard  D.  Gregorii 

Liber  Sacramentorum,  Paris  1642  (referred  to  by 

its  pages). 
a 


ii  EXPLANATION  OF  TYPES  AND  SIGNS 

[  ],  where  their  meaning  is  not  otherwise  obvious,  indicate  (i)  that  the 
text  so  enclosed  occurs  at  the  corresponding  place  in  the  Latin 
books,  but  is  only  quoted  for  comparison  with  the  new  English 
text,  not  as  the  source  of  it ;  or  (2)  an  incidental  reference  for  an 
interpolation  in  the  English,  interrupting  the  passage  referred  to 
in  the  margin. 
2.  The  text  of  German  sources  is  printed  in  2  sizes  of  this  (O.S.  Ant.) 

type. 

The  particular  sources  are  indicated  by  letters  of  the  same  type  in  the 
margin,  where 

A-S  =  Albertine- Saxony  Gemeiner  bericht  der  msitatoren  (see 

p.  xl  below). 

B   =  Brunswick  Christlike  ordeninge  (p.  xliii). 
Br  =  Brandenburg  Kirchenordnung  (p.  xli). 
Bu  =  Bucer  de  Ordinatione  legitima  (pp.  cxxxi  sqq.). 
C  =  Calenberg-Gottingen  Kirchenordnung  (p.  xliii). 
H  =  Hermann  of  Cologne  Einfaltigs  bedenken  (Simplex  ac 

pia  deliberatid)  (pp.  xlv  sqq.). 
L   =  Luther  (pp.  xxx  sqq.). 
P  =  Pfalz-Neuburg  Kirchenordnung  (p.  xliv). 
S   =  Saxon  Agenda  das  ist  kirchenordnung  (p.  xl). 
When  the  text  occurs  ad  loc.  no  reference  is  given  ;  otherwise,  a 
reference  is  added  or  is  to  be  found  in  the  corresponding  *  NOTE  ' 
in  the  Introduction. 

II.   COLUMNS  2-4. 

1.  Matter  (other  than  translation  of  biblical  texts),  produced  in  the  16th 

cent,  which  existed  independently  and  was  only  afterwards  incor 
porated  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  is  printed  in  2  sizes  of  this 
(sans,  ital.)  type. 

2.  Matter  of  1549  is  printed  in  2  sizes  of  this  (O.S.)  type. 

3.  Matter  0/1552  is  printed  in  2  sizes  of  this  (O.S.  itaL)  type. 

4.  Matter  (other  than  biblical  translation)  of  a  date  later  than  1552  is 

printed  in  this  (Ant.)  type. 

All  of  this  matter  was  originated  or  first  adopted  in  the  revision  of 
1661,  except  so  much  of  it  as  is  marked  by  any  of  the  index- 
numbers  1-6.    This  latter  had  already  appeared  in  the  intermediate 
recensions  of  the  book,  as  indicated  by  the  number  :  thus— 
!  =  the  book  of  1559  (see  pp.  clxix  sq.  below) 
la=the  issue  of  Jugge  and  Cawood 
lb  =  the  issue  of  Grafton. 

2  =  the  Kalendar  of  1561  (p.  clxxiii). 

3  =  new  readings  in  later  editions  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth 

(p.  clxx). 

4  =  the  book  of  1604  (pp.  clxxx  sq.). 

°  =  new  readings  of  later  editions  down  to  1636  (p.  clxxxii). 


EXPLANATION  OF  TYPES  AND  SIGNS  iii 

The  index-numbers  6~9  indicate  the  sources  from  which  the  matter 
marked  with  them  was  derived  at  the  last  revision  :  thus — 

6  =  the  Scottish  book  of  1637  (see  p.  clxxxvii  below). 

7  =  John  Cosin 

"iA  =  A  collection  of  private  devotions  1627  (see  p.  clxxxv 

below) 

7b  =  Particulars  to  be  considered  (p.  cxci). 
8=  Mat.  Wren's  suggestions  (pp.  cxci  sq.). 
9  =  Exceptions  of  the    ministers    at    the   Savoy   Conference 
(p.  cxciv). 

When  necessary  the  end  of  the  words  affected  by  the  index  is  marked 
by  an  asterisk  ;  otherwise  the  index  covers  all  the  words  in  thick 
type  in  the  immediately  following  context.  When  only  the  end 
of  a  word  is  affected,  the  index  follows  the  word  and  refers  only 
to  what  immediately  precedes  it.  When  an  index  is  attached  to 
a  word  not  in  thick  type,  it  means  that  a  reading  of  1549  (to  be 
found  in  the  2nd  column)  was  restored  at  the  date  indicated. 
When  an  index  with  an  asterisk  occurs  in  a  gap,  it  means  that 
the  omission  was  made  at  the  date  indicated. 

5.  Marginal  matter  of  the  original  books  is  here  indented  into  the  text 
with  a  square  bracket  on  the  inner  side  (see  Corrigenda  to  pp. 
193,  195,  663,  685). 

{ }  enclosing  a  passage  indicate  that  the  passage  is  set  out  of  its  place 
for  convenience  of  comparison  with  the  other  columns  :  at  its  true 
place  it  is  represented  only  by  its  title,  incipit,  and  explicit.  (In 
the  Tables  in  the  Introduction  these  brackets  indicate  texts  which 
vary  with  the  season  or  with  the  occasion.) 

When  a  hyphen  occurs  at  the  end  of  a  paragraph,  and  another  at  the 
beginning  of  the  next,  it  is  meant  that  the  text  properly  runs  on 
and  is  here  divided  only  in  order  to  correspond  with  the  other 
columns. 


Ex  singulis  ergo  quibusque  ecclesiis,  quae  pia,  quae  religiosa, 
quae  recta  sunt  elige,  et  ha.ec  quasi  in  fasciculum  coUecta, 
apud  Anglorum  mentes  in  consuetudinem  depone, 

S.  GREG.  M.  ap.  BAEDAE  H.E.  i  27 


INTRODUCTION 

I 

AT  the  beginning  of  the  i6th  cent.,  except  at  some  points  to 
be  noted  later,  the  Roman  rite  prevailed  throughout  the 
West. 

I.  The  Roman  rite  is  obscure  in  its  origin  and  in  its 
early  history  ;  but,  by  the  beginning  of  the  5th  cent,  at 
least,  the  Roman  Church  had  a  rite  of  its  own,  which  was 
not  observed  universally  even  in  Italy,1  and  outside  of  Italy 
was  not  observed  at  all  ;  and  the  two  most  important 
features  of  the  liturgical  history  of  the  earlier  middle  ages 
in  the  West  are,  on  the  one  hand,  the  diffusion  of  the  Roman 
rite,  not  only  by  means  of  the  extension  of  the  Western 
Church  as  the  result  of  missions  and  the  incorporation  of 
new  peoples,  but  also  by  the  gradual  adoption  of  it  in  areas 
where  a  non-Roman  rite  had  hitherto  been  in  use  ;  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  internal  development  of  the  rite  itself. 

(i)  In  the  6th  cent,  the  Roman  rite  was  adopted  for  a 
time  in  the  Church  of  the  Suevic  kingdom  in  Spain,2  though 
it  was  afterwards  abandoned.  It  influenced  Milan,  perhaps 
in  the  7th  cent.,  and  largely  assimilated  the  local  rite  to 
itself.3  It  filtered  into  Gaul  in  the  7th  and  8th  cents,  and 
seriously  affected  the  Gallican  books  and  practice  * ;  and  at 
the  end  of  the  8th  cent,  it  was  formally  adopted,  and  dis 
placed  for  the  most  part  the  Gallican  rite,  throughout  the 
Prankish  dominions.5  It  had  penetrated  into  Ireland  by  the 

1  S.  Innocent  I  Ep.  xxv  ad  Deccntiuin  Eu^ubinuin  (Migne  P. I.,  xx  551  sqq.). 

2  Vigilius  (537-558)  Ep.  ad  Profuturum  Kracarcnsem  fMansi  Concilia  ix  32) ; 
Cone.  Bracar.  i  (561)  can.  4,  5  (Brims  Canones  ii  p.  34). 

3  Duchesne  Origincs  du  cuttc  chrctien  p.  84. 

4  JbieL  pp.  95  sqq.,  127  sq.,  143  sqq.,  150.  *  Ibid.  pp.  96  sqq. 


vi  THE  DIFFUSION  OF  THE  ROMAN  RITE 

8th  cent,  and  affected  the  Irish  books  x  ;  and  in  the  I3th 
cent,  it  finally  displaced  what  remained  there  of  the  non- 
Roman  observance  2  ;  and  a  like  change  was  effected  at  some 
time  in  Wales  and  by  the  end  of  the  I2th  cent,  in  Scotland.3 
In  Spain  the  Roman  rite  was  largely  adopted  in  the  Christian 
kingdoms  during  the  second  half  of  the  nth  cent.,  and  it 
won  its  way  so  effectively  in  the  following  centuries  that 
by  the  time  the  reconquest  was  completed  at  the  end  of 
the  1 5th  cent,  the  old  Spanish  rite  had  almost  completely 
disappeared.4 

(2)  Meanwhile  the  area  of  the  observance  of  the  Roman 
rite  had  been  further  enlarged  as  the  result  of  missions  to 
non-Christian  peoples.  It  came  to  England  with  S.  Augustine 
and  his  companions  in  597 5 ;  and  thence  it  reacted  on  the 
continent  through  the  mission  of  S.  Boniface  in  central  and 
southern  Germany.6  At  the  end  of  the  8th  cent,  it  was  ex 
tended  to  the  Saxons,  and  with  Ebbo  of  Rheims  and  S.  Anskar 
in  the  early  9th  cent,  it  began  the  conquest  of  Scandinavia, 
which  was  completed  in  the  loth  and  nth  cents,  and  included 
Iceland  and  Greenland  in  its  scope.  The  conversion  of  the 
western  Slavs  between  the  9th  and  the  I2th  cent,  extended 
the  rite  to  Moravia,  Bohemia,  Poland,  and  Pomerania ;  and 
that  of  the  Magyars  in  the  loth  and  nth  cents,  added 
Hungary  to  its  dominions.  The  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  and 
the  other  Latin  principalities  which  resulted  from  the  Crusades 
secured  for  it  a  wide  prevalence  for  a  time  in  the  near  East  ; 
and  during  most  of  the  I3th  cent.  Constantinople  itself  was 
officially  Roman  in  rite.  In  the  I3th  and  I4th  cents,  it  was 
carried  by  Franciscan  missionaries  to  Central  Asia  and 
China.  At  the  end  of  the  I5th  cent,  it  won  a  footing  in  the 

1  Duchesne  Origines  dit  culte  chrflicn  p.  148. 

2  Synod  of  Cashel  c.  7  in  Wilkins  Concilia  i  p.  473. 

3  There  seems  to  be  no  evidence  as  to  the  details  of  the  penetration  of 
the  Roman  rite  into  Wales  and  Scotland.      Some  survivals  in  Scotland  were 
extinguished  (1067-1093)  through  the  influence  of  S.  Margaret  (Turgot   Vita 
Margaretae  ii  13-16). 

4  See  below  p.  xix.  r>  Below  p.  xiii.  (i  Duchesne  Origines  p.  95. 


THE  ROMAN  BOOKS  vii 

New  World  in  the  wake  of  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese 
occupations.  In  the  i6th  cent,  the  Portuguese  carried  it  to 
India  ;  and  the  mission  of  S.  Francis  Xavier  enlarged  its  area 
in  India  and  carried  it  further  afield  to  the  Malay  peninsula. 
In  the  year  of  the  first  English  Book  of  Common  Prayer 
S.  Francis  set  out  with  it  to  Japan  and  in  the  year  of  the 
second  Book  he  died  on  his  way  to  extend  it  to  China. 

For  these  missions  see  the  summary  accounts  in  Hardwick  A  History 
of  the  Christian  Church  :  Middle  Age  chaps,  i,  v,  ix,  xiii ;  Reformation  ch.  x 
(ed.  Stubbs  1883,  1877),  and  references  there. 

2.  It  has  already  been  noted  that  the  Roman  rite  was 
formally  adopted  in  the  Prankish  dominions  at  the  end  of 
the  8th  cent.  It  was  the  Carlovingian  policy  to  cultivate  the 
closest  possible  relations  with  the  Apostolic  See,  and  the 
adoption  of  the  rite  was  an  element  in  the  general  policy. 
The  liturgical  reform  was  initiated  by  Pepin  and  completed 
by  Charles  the  Great. 

For  details  and  authorities  see  F.  Cabrol  '  Charlemagne  et  la  liturgie ' 
in  Diet,  d'archeologie  chr'etienne  et  de  liturgie  iii  cc.  807  sqq. 

At  this  period  the  rite  was  contained  in  two  groups  of 
books,  the  one  appertaining  to  the  Divine  Service  of  the 
canonical  hours,  the  other  to  the  administration  of  the  Sacra 
ments,  Consecrations,  Benedictions,  and  so  on.  The  first 
group  consisted  of  the  Psalterium,  containing  the  Psalms  and 
Canticles  of  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments ;  the  Anti- 
phonarius  and  the  Responsoriale,  containing  respectively  the 
antiphons  and  the  responds  ;  and  the  Lesson-books,  viz. 
the  Bible,  and  the  Homiliarius  of  patristic  sermons.  The 
second  group  consisted  of  the  Liber  Sacrament  or  um  or  Sacra- 
mentarium  containing  the  prayers  of  the  Mass  throughout  the 
year  and  those  of  the  administration  of  the  Sacraments  and 
other  rites  ;  the  Cantatorium  or  Graduate  providing  the  parts 
of  the  Mass  to  be  sung  by  the  choir  ;  and  the  Lectionarius  or 
Comes  and  the  Evangelium,  used  respectively  for  the  Lessons 
and  the  Gospels  of  the  Mass.  These  two  groups  were 
linked  together  by  a  further  book,  the  Ordo  Romanus,  which 


viii  THE  GREGORIAN  SACRAMENTARY 

described  the  manner  of  the  execution  of  the  rites  and  sup 
plied  in  a  measure  what  was  later  contained  in  rubrics. 

For  these  names  see  the  passages  quoted  in  Diet,  d'archlologie  as  above; 
and  Amalarius,  esp.  de  ecclesiastico  Officio  iii.  The  Prankish  Antiphonarius 
combined  the  Roman  Cantatorium,  Responsoriale  and  Antiphonarius  in  a 
single  volume  (Amalar.  de  ordine  Antiphonarii  prolog.).  Missale  (Amalar. 
de  ecd.  Off.  iii  40,  etc.)  is  either  a  synonym  for  Sacramentarium,  or  it 
possibly  may  denote  a  book  containing  only  those  parts  of  the  Sacra- 
mentary  which  concern  the  Mass.  For  a  fragment  of  a  Missal,  perhaps 
of  the  7th  or  8th  cent.,  containing,  besides  the  prayers,  the  Epistles  and 
Gospels,  see  Dom  Wilmart  Un  Missel  gregoritn  ancien  in  Revue  Benedictine 
xxvii  3. 

These  books  then  were  now  adopted,  either  as  they  stood, 
or  corrected,  improved,  or  supplemented,  as  the  case  might 
be,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  books  hitherto  in  use.  For  the 
present  purpose  it  is  necessary  to  refer  particularly  only  to 
one  of  them. 

(a)  In  response  to  a  request  of  Charles  the  Great,  at  some 
date  between  784  and  791,  the  Pope,  Hadrian  I  (772-795), 
sent  him  an  authentic  copy  of  the  Sacramentarium  then  in  use 
in  the  Roman  Church.  This  form  of  the  book  is  described 
in  Hadrian's  covering  letter  as  '  arranged  by  my  holy  pre 
decessor,  the  inspired  pope  Gregory  '  ;  that  is  to  say,  the 
Sacramentary  as  it  then  stood  was  regarded — whether  rightly 
or  wrongly  is  a  question  still  discussed — as  the  outcome  of  a 
revision  and  reorganisation  of  the  rite,  effected  by  S.  Gregory 
the  Great  (590-604).  But  the  Sacramentary  so  received  was 
found  to  be  insufficient  for  the  purposes  of  the  Prankish 
Church  ;  it  did  not  cover  all  the  ground  of  Prankish  observ 
ance.  Accordingly  a  supplement,  compiled,  probably  by 
Alcuin,  out  of  material  derived  partly  from  the  Sacramentary 
itself,  partly  from  other  sources,  with  an  explanatory  preface 
(Hucusque)  prefixed,  was  appended  to  Hadrian's  text  ;  and  it 
was  the  whole  so  formed  that  became  known  as  the  Sacra 
mentarium  Gregorianum.  Later  on,  the  preface  was  omitted, 
and  the  two  parts  of  the  book  were  finally  intermixed  and 
fused  ;  and  the  resulting  arrangement  became  the  generally 


THE  GELASIAN  SACRAMENTARY  ix 

accepted  arrangement,  which,  by  the  nth  cent,  at  least,  had 
been  adopted  by  the  Roman  Church  itself. 

For  the  '  Gregorian '  text  see  Muratori  Liturgia  romana  vctus  ii  (where 
Hadrian's  text  occupies  cols.  1-138,  241-272,  357-361  ;  the  supplement, 
cols.  139-240,  and  perhaps  cols.  273-356,  362-380;  and  the  preface 
Hueusquc>  col.  271  note).  On  its  character  and  history  see  Duchesne 
Origines du culte chretien  pp.  114  sqq.,  corrected  by  E.  Bishop  'The  earliest 
Roman  mass-book'  in  Dublin  Review  Oct.  1894  and  separately,  and 
'Liturgical  note'  in  Kuypers  The  Book  of  Cerm,  Cambridge  1904,  pp. 
237  sq.  ;  A.  Ebner  Quellen  u.  Forschungcn  zur  Gesch.  d.  Missale  Rom. 
pp.  380  sqq.  If  the  fragments  published  by  Dom  Wilmart  (p.  viii  above) 
are  rightly  dated  as  of  the  7th  cent.,  part  at  least  of  the  supplement  was 
in  existence  a  century  earlier  than  the  Carlovingian  Sacramentary. 

(b)  At  the  time  when  Hadrian's  book  was  received,  a  Roman 
Sacramentary  of  an  older  type  was  already  known  and  was 
in  partial  use  in  the  Prankish  dominions ;  and  it  was  from  it 
that  a  great  part  of  the  material  of  Alcuin's  supplement  was 
derived.  This  type  of  Sacramentary  was  known  among  the 
Prankish  writers  of  the  9th  cent,  as  '  Gelasian  '  ;  that  is  to 
say,  it  was  supposed,  rightly  or  wrongly,  to  be  the  work  of 
S.  Gregory's  predecessor  in  the  chair  of  Peter,  S.  Gelasius  I 
(492-496).  The  book  as  we  know  it  makes  no  claim  to  be 
Gelasian  ;  much  of  its  contents  is  certainly  later  than  the 
time  of  Gelasius  ;  and  there  is  no  independent  tradition  that 
Gelasius  compiled  a  Sacramentary.  But  in  the  Liber  Ponti- 
ficalis,  the  papal  history  compiled  in  the  6th  or  the  yth  cent., 
Gelasius  is  the  only  pontiff  between  S.  Leo  and  S.  Gregory 
the  Great  to  whom  any  liturgical  work  is  attributed  :  '  he 
made  prefaces  and  prayers  of  the  sacraments.'  *  It  has  been 
argued  that  the  Franks  interpreted  this  to  mean  that  he  was 
the  author  or  reviser  of  the  Sacramentary,  and  that  they 
inferred  that  the  book  which  had  long  been  current  in  Gaul 
represented  the  work  of  Gelasius.  On  the  other  hand  it  has 
been  argued  with  some  considerable  force  that  the  title 
Gelasianum  represents  with  substantial  accuracy  the  truth 
of  the  matter.  In  any  case  the  Gelasianum  as  we  have  it 
is  not  a  pure  Roman  book,  but  is  marked  by  a  '  Gallican  ' 

1  Lib.  pontif.^  ed.  Duchesne,  i  pp.  255,  257. 


x  THE  LEONINE  SACRAMENTARY 

admixture  ;  nor  is  the  text  uniform  in  the  remaining  docu 
ments  which  contain  it,  the  later  MSS  showing  some  approxi 
mation  to  the  Gregorian  type. 

For  the  Gelasianum  see  Muratori  Liturgia  romana  vetus  i ;  H.  A. 
Wilson  The  Gelasian  Sacramentary.  On  its  character  and  history,  Duchesne 
Origines  pp.  119  sqq. ;  S.  Baumer  Das  sogenanntt  Sacramentarium 
Gelasianum  in  Hist.Jahrb.  d.  Gorres-Gesellsch.  xiv  (1893)  pp.  241  sqq.; 
Wilson  op.  cit.  introd. ;  Ebner  Quellen  pp.  374  sqq. 

(c)  A  stage  in  the  history  of  the  Sacramentary  earlier  than 
the  Gelasianum  is,  incompletely,  represented  by  the  so-called 
Sacramentarium  Leonianum.  This,  a  pure  Roman  book 
without  '  Gallican  '  admixture,  is  a  collection  of  masses,  now 
mutilated  at  the  beginning  and  covering  the  year  only  from 
April  to  December,  together  with  Ordinations,  the  Veiling 
of  Virgins,  and  the  Marriage  rite,  compiled  in  the  5th  or  6th 
cent,  and  found  only  in  a  single  MS  (Chapter  Library  of 
Verona,  cod.  Ixxxv)  written  in  the  7th  cent.  While  it  con 
tains  much  official  matter,  some  of  which  recurs  in  the  later 
Gelasian  and  Gregorian  books,  regarded  as  a  whole  it  appears 
to  be  a  private  collection  rather  than  an  official  service-book. 

For  the  text  see  Muratori  Lit.  rom.  vet.  i  ;  C.  L.  Feltoe  Sacramentarium. 
Leonianum.  For  its  character  and  history  see  Duchesne  Origines  pp.  128 
sqq.;  M.  Rule  'The  Leonian  Sacramentary'  in  Journ.  of  Theol.  Studies 
ixpp.  51 5  sqq.;  x  pp.  54  sqq. 

3.  The  following  points  may  be  noticed  in  the  history  of 
the  Roman  rite  from  the  gth  to  the  i6th  century. 

(i)  Some  new  books  emerge,  containing  either  (a)  parts 
of  the  larger  books  extracted  for  the  sake  of  convenience,  like 
the  Collectarius  giving  the  collects  for  the  several  days,  for 
use  in  Divine  Service,  extracted  from  the  Sacramentary ;  or 
(b)  new  features  added  to  the  rite,  like  the  Troperium  contain 
ing  the  musical  developments  of  syllables  within  the  formulae 
of  the  Graduale  and  the  words  that  were  adapted  to  them 
(tropes  and  sequences)  ;  and  the  Hymnarium  of  metrical 
hymns  of  the  Divine  Service  ;  or  (c)  developments  and  elabora 
tions  of  older  formulae,  like  the  Processionale  in  which  were 
combined  the  texts  and  directions  pertaining  to  processions, 


REORGANISATION  OF  THE  ROMAN  BOOKS  xi 

litanies  and  rogations  :  while  (d)  the  Ordinarium  displaced  the 
older  Ordo  as  a  fuller  directory  for  the  execution  of  Mass  and 
Divine  Service  and  their  adjustment  to  the  yearly  variation  in 
the  kalendar.  (e)  Another  book,  in  its  final  form  not  belong 
ing  to  either  of  these  groups,  was  originally  the  collection  of 
certain  supplementary  devotions  which  from  the  Qth  cent, 
onward  were  added  to  the  Divine  Service — the  two  secondary 
offices,  that  of  the  B.V.M.  and  that  of  the  Dead,  the  Com 
mendations,  the  Litany,  and  the  Penitential  and  the  Gradual 
Psalms.  In  the  I5th  cent,  this  collection  was  variously  sup 
plemented  with  all  sorts  of  private  devotions,  and  under 
various  titles,  Horae  beatae  Mariae  virginis,  Horarium,  Hortulus 
animae,  etc.,  became  an  official  manual  of  private  prayers.1 

(2)  By  the  i  ith  cent,  the  books  had  begun  to  be  reorgan 
ised  ;   or  rather,  while  the  old  system  continued  in  use  for 
solemn  functions  in  choir  and  sanctuary,  a  new  system  was 
being  developed  alongside  of  it  for  purposes  of  convenience. 
The  Sacramentarium  was  broken  up  into  three  parts,  and  what 
concerned  the  Mass  and  associated  rites  was  separated  out  and 
combined  with  Graduate,  Lectionarius  and  Evangelium  to  form 
the  Missale  plenum,  containing  the  complete  text  of  the  Mass 
for  the  whole  year  ;  the  episcopal  offices  were  collected  in  the 
Liber  pontificates  or  Pontificate  ;  while  the  offices  pertaining 
to  the  parish  priest  were  combined  in  the  Rituale,  Manuale, 
or  Agenda.     Similarly  the  books  pertaining  to  the  Divine 
Service  were  combined  in  the  Breviarium,  which  enabled  the 
clerk  to  say  his  service  completely  with  the  help  of  only  a 
single  volume.     In  the  Missals  and  Breviaries  of  the  I5th 
cent,    the    contents     also   of     Troperium,    Hymnarium  and 
Ordinarium  were  broken  up  and  inserted  at  their  appropriate 
places  in  the  text,  and  the  supplementary  devotions  which 
formed  the  nucleus  of  the  Horae  were  added  to  the  Breviary. 

(3)  While   the   Gregorian   text   generally   prevailed,   the 
contents  were  not  everywhere  the  same  in  detail,  and  many  of 
the  rites  were  locally  developed  on  a  considerable  scale.     For 

1  See  Littlehales  The  Earliest  English  Primer  (E.  E.  T.  S.)  introduction. 


xii  LOCAL  USAGE 

example,  in  the  Mass,  besides  such  new  features  as  Sequences 
and  Tropes,  a  marked  local  development  is  soon  found  in  the 
accumulations  of  private  prayers  before  the  Introit,  at  the 
Offertory,  and  at  the  Communion,  sometimes  of  enormous 
extent,  sometimes  also  further  extended  to  supply  the  cele 
brant  with  prayers  to  occupy  him  throughout  while  the  choir 
is  singing.  And  again  the  offices  of  the  Rituale,  more  especi 
ally  perhaps  those  of  Matrimony  and  of  the  Sick,  underwent 
large  local  development,  and  diversity  of  local  usage  became 
marked  in  these  more  than  anywhere  else  ;  and  in  fact  the 
reformed  Roman  Rituale  of  Paul  V  (1614)  has  never  entirely 
displaced  local  usage  or  been  regarded  as  binding  everywhere 
in  detail.1 

For  illustrations,  see  the  documents  printed  in  Martene  de  antiquis 
Ecclcsia  ritibus  passim. 

(4)  Local  usage  in  respect  both  of  rite  and  of  ceremony, 
that  is,  of  text  and  of  rubric,  was  consolidated,  and  '  Uses  ' 
were  codified .  When  the  ritual  books  came  to  be  printed  in  the 
1 5th  and  i6th  centuries,  some  144  Missals,  mostly  of  metro 
politan  churches,  which  theoretically  determined  the  rite  of 
their  provinces,2  but  many  of  them  of  diocesan  churches,  were 
published  before  1549,  and  probably  no  two  of  them  would  be 
found  to  agree  with  each  other  in  detail.3  And  no  doubt  the 
variation  went  still  further  ;  since  it  may  well  be  that  it  was 
not  thought  worth  while  to  print  books  which  were  nearly 
allied  to  books  already  printed,  though  not  identical  with 
them,  and  that  the  printing  of  the  books  tended  to  the  practical 
realisation  of  the  theoretical  rule,  and  dioceses  adopted  the 
uses  of  their  metropolitan  churches  in  preference  to  printing 
their  own.  It  must  be  added  that,  besides  these  secular 
uses,  there  were  the  uses  of  the  regulars  :  the  Missals  of  the 
Benedictines  and  their  several  congregations,  of  the 

1  See  Catholic  Encyclopaedia  xiii  p.  89,  s.v.  '  Ritual.' 

2  See  Decretum  I  xii  13  ;  Lyndwood  Provinciate  ii  3. 

3  See  W.  H.  J.  Weale  CataL  Missalium  ritus  latini  pp.  17-219.     Add  to 
the  Missals  there  catalogued  that  of  Schwerin,  c.  1492,  c.  1500,  c.  1518  (Schon- 
felder  Die  Agende  der  Diozese  Schwerin  von  1521  pp.  vi  sq.). 


THE  ROMAN  RITE  IN  ENGLAND  xiii 

Cistercians,  the  Camaldolese,  the  Carthusians,  the  Cluniacs, 
the  Humiliati,  the  Vallombrosians,  the  Pauline  Hermits, 
the  Dominicans,  the  Carmelites,  the  Franciscans,  the  Hierony- 
mites,  the  Trinitarians,  the  Hospitallers  of  S.  John,  the 
Praemonstratensians,  and  the  Augustinians,  were  all  printed 
before  1530  *  ;  while  the  monastic  Divine  Service,  whatever 
may  have  been  its  original  relation  with  the  Roman  Office, 
had  long  been  a  practically  distinct  rite. 

It  follows  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  i6th  cent,  (i)  the 
whole  rite  was  contained  in  five  books  :  the  Missal,  the 
Breviary,  the  Ritual,  the  Processional,  and  the  Pontifical  ; 
with  a  supplementary  and  subordinate  book  of  private 
devotions  ;  and  (2)  uniformity  was  neither  known,  nor 
aimed  at  or  desired  ;  a  broad  Gregorian  basis  was  common, 
but  the  rest  varied  indefinitely  in  detail,  theoretically  from 
province  to  province,  in  practice  rather  from  diocese  to 
diocese,  and  among  the  greater  foundations  from  church  to 
church. 

II 

The  course  of  things  in  England  was  parallel  to  what  it 
was  elsewhere,  and  the  resulting  situation  was  the  same. 

i.  There  can  be  no  question  that  S.  Augustine  and  his 
companions  brought  with  them  to  Kent  in  597  the  Roman 
rite  and  the  Roman  books  2 ;  and  perhaps  the  same  was  the 
case  with  the  mission  of  S.  Felix  to  East  Anglia,  that  of 
S.  Birinus  to  the  West  Saxons,  and  that  of  S.  Wilfrid  among 
the  South  Saxons.3  Nor  is  there  the  least  reason  to  suppose 
that  the  scruples  or  difficulties,  whatever  they  were,  which 
S.  Augustine  felt  or  foresaw  in  view  of  the  diversity  between 
Roman  and  '  Gallican '  usage,  proved  in  the  event  to  be  so 
acute  as  to  lead  him  to  act  on  S.  Gregory's  advice  and  to 

1  See  W.  H.  J.  Weale  Catal.  Missalium  ritus  latini  pp.  220-256. 

z  Cp.  Egbert  of  York  Dial,  cedes,  ins ti tut.  16  (Haddan  and  Stubbs  iii  p.  411) 
'  Nos  autem  in  aeclesia  Anglorum  idem  .  .  .  ut  noster  didascalus  beatus 
Gregorius,  in  suo  Antiphonario  et  Missali  Libro,  per  pedagogum  nostrum 
beatum  Augustinum  transmisit  ordinatum  et  rescriptum  .  .  .  servamus.' 

3  Bede  Hist.  Eccl.  ii  15,  iii  7,  iv  13,  v  19. 


xiv  THE  ROMAN  RITE  IN  ENGLAND 

compile  a  composite  rite  for  the  Church  of  the  English.1  On 
the  other  hand,  the  Scotic  missions  in  Northumbria  and 
Mercia  as  a  matter  of  course  practised  and  diffused  their  own 
'  Gallican '  rite  ;  and  after  the  withdrawal  of  S.  Colman  and 
his  monks  of  Scotic  nationality  after  the  council  of  Whitby 
in  664,2  this  rite  must  have  continued  for  a  while  in  the 
use  of  his  English  disciples,  and  only  gradually  have  given 
place  to  the  Roman,  possibly  leaving  behind  it  traces  like 
those  which  later  on  were  left  by  the  Gallican  rite  on  the 
continent  after  it  had  been  generally  superseded  by  the 
Roman.3 

2.  In  747  the  Council  of  Clovesho,  in  its  I3th  and  I5th 
canons,  finally  enjoined  the  Roman  rite — Kalendar,  Sacra  - 
mentary,   and    Divine   Service — on   the   whole   province   of 
Canterbury,  to  be  observed  in  accordance  with  the  written 
standard  that  had  been  received  directly  from  the  Roman 
Church,  whether  this  was  among  the  documents  despatched 
to  the  Council  by  the  Pope,  Zacharias,  or  otherwise  obtained.4 
Perhaps  there  is  no  such  definite  evidence  for  the  Northern 
province  ;  but  the  penetration  of  the  Roman  rite  is  illustrated 
by  the  mission  of  John,  the  archchanter  of  S.  Peter's,  at  the 
desire  of  S.  Benedict  Biscop,  to  the  monastery  of  Monkwear- 
mouth,  where  for  two  years  he  trained  the  monks  in  'the 
order  and  rite  of  singing  and  reading '  in  the  Divine  Service, 
and  on  his  withdrawal  left  behind  him  a  written  directory 
for  the  whole  annual  cycle.5 

3.  But  of  the  few  English  service-books  which  survive 
from  the  period  before  the  Norman  Conquest  none  appears 
to  represent  any  local  tradition,  independent  of  the  Carlo- 
vingian  reform  and  the  continental  development.    The  Sacra  - 
mentaries  are  'Gregorian,'  i.e.  they  exhibit  Hadrian's  text 
combined  with  Alcuin's  supplement ;  while  the  Benedictionals 

1  Bede  Hist.  Ecd.  \  27.  2  Ibid  iH  26 

3  Cp.  Walafrid  Strabo  de  Rebus  ecdesiasticis  23  ;  and  p.  ix  above. 

4  Haddan  and  Stubbs  Canons  and  Ecclesiastical  Documents  iii  p.  367. 
6  Bede  Hist.  EccL  iv  18  :  Hist  abbatum  5. 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE-  BOOKS  xv 

and  Pontificals  are  the  same  in  character,  and  largely  in  con 
tent,  with  the  corresponding  continental  books.  Consequently 
such  '  Gallican '  features  as  survived  in  the  later  English 
usage  may  have  been  the  result  of  the  intercourse  between 
England  and  the  continent  in  the  9th  and  loth  centuries, 
rather  than  of  any  original  inheritance  or  survival  of  the 
usage  of  the  earliest  days.1 

See  the  Missal  of  Leofric,  bishop  of  Exeter  (1046-1072),  for  the  most 
part  written  in  Lotharingia,  in  F.  E.  Warren  The  Leofric  Missal  Oxford 
1883  ;  that  of  Robert  of  Jumieges,  archbp.  of  Canterbury  (1051-1052)  in 
H.  A.  Wilson  The  Missal  of  Robert  of  Jumieges,  H.B.S.  1896;  the  Red 
Book  of  Derby  (c,  1061)  in  Warren  op.  at.  pp.  271  sqq.  For  Benedic- 
tionals  and  Pontificals  see  H.  A.  Wilson  The  Benedidional  of  Archbishop 
Robert,  H.B.S.  1903,  pp.  xviii  sqq. 

4.  From  the  Qth  cent,  onwards  the  general  situation  is 
reproduced  in  England. 

(1)  The  books  are  multiplied  :  in  particular  the  Ordinale 
or   Pie,    corresponding   to   the   continental    Ordinarium,    is 
developed  ;  the  Processionals  is  compiled  ;  and  the  collec 
tion  of  supplementary  devotions  is  enlarged  by  the  addition 
of  private  prayers  into  what  became  commonly  known  as 
the  Primer. 

(2)  The  new  system   of  books  is  organised  :    viz.   the 
Missale  ;  the  Breviarium,  commonly  known  as  Portiforium  or 
Portuis  ;     the    Manuale   corresponding    to    the    continental 
Rituale  or  Agenda  ;  and  the  Pontificale. 

See  Maskell  Monumenta  ritualia  ecclesiae  anglicanae  i  '  Dissertation  on 
the  ancient  service  books ' ;  G.  W.  Prothero  Memoir  of  Henry  Bradshaw, 
London  1888,  app.  I  pp.  423  sqq.;  Wordsworth  and  Littlehales  The  old 
service-books  of  the  English  Church  London  1904. 

(3)  The  Gregorian  rite  and  ceremony  is  developed,  especi 
ally  in  the  offices  of  the  Manuale. 

(4)  Local  usage  is  organised  in  '  Uses.'     The  origins  of 
these  no  doubt  lie  far  back  in  the  history  of  the  several 
churches  ;  but  a  new  influence  came  in  to  modify  and  develop 
them  with  the   Norman   Conquest  and   the   reorganisation 

1  H.  A.  Wilson  'Notes  on  some  liturgical  questions'  in  A.  J:  Mason  The 
Mission  of  St.  Augustine,  Cambridge  1897,  pp.  243  sq. 


xvi  THE  ENGLISH  USES 

of  the  cathedral  system  carried  through  by  the  Norman 
bishops.1  By  the  i6th  cent,  some  of  these  uses  had  been 
abandoned  ;  but,  as  is  familiarly  known  from  the  preface  to 
the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,2  at  least  five  still  survived — 
those  of  Hereford,  York,  Lincoln,  Bangor  and  Salisbury  ; 
and  of  three  of  them  the  books  had  already,  in  whole  or  in 
part,  been  printed.  The  Hereford  Missal  was  printed  in 
1504,  the  Breviary  in  1505  :  the  York  Missal  in  5  editions, 
from  1509  to  1533  ;  the  Breviary  in  5  editions  from  1493 
to  about  1530  ;  the  Manual  in  1509  and  1530  ;  the  Proces 
sional  in  1530  ;  the  Ordinal  in  1509  ;  and  the  Home  in  4 
editions  from  1510  to  1536  :  while  of  the  Sarum  Missal  48 
editions  had  been  issued  from  1487  to  1534  ;  of  the  Portuis 
39  editions  from  1475  to  1544  ;  of  the  Manual  24  editions 
from  1497  to  1543  ;  of  the  Processional  15  editions  from 
1502  to  1549  ;  of  the  Ordinal  or  Pie  12  editions  from  1477  to 
1508  ;  and  of  the  Home  or  Primer  about  170  editions  from 
1478  to  1544. 

See  Wordsworth  and  Littlehales  Old  Service-books  p.  1 3 ;  Weale  Cata- 
logus  missalium  pp.  65  sq.,  78,  178  sqq. ;  Maskell  The  ancient  liturgy  of 
the  Church  of  England;  Frere  and  Brown  The  Hereford  Breviary,  H.B.S., 
London  1904,  1911;  Henderson  Missale  ad  mum  insignis  eccL  Eborac., 
Surtees  Soc.  lix,  Ix,  Durham  1874;  Lawley  Breviarium  ad  usum  ins.  eccl. 
Eborac.,  Surtees  Soc.  Ixxi,  Ixxv,  Durham  1880,  1883  ;  Henderson  Manuale 
et  Processionale  ad  usum  ins.  eccL  Eborac.,  Surtees  Soc.  Ixiii,  Durham  1875  ; 
Dickinson  Missale  ad  usum  insignis  et  praeclarae  eccl.  Sarum  Burntisland 
1883  j  Wordsworth  and  Procter  Breviarium  ad  usum  insignis  eccl,  Sarum 
Cambridge  1879,  1882,  1886;  Henderson  Manuate  .  .  .  Eborac.  zp\>.  i 
'Manuale  .  .  .  Sarum';  Maskell  Mon.  rit.  eccl.  Angl.  i,  Oxford  1882; 
Henderson  Processionale  ad  usum  insignis  ac praeclarae  eccl.  Sarum  Leeds 
1882  ;  C.  Wordsworth  Ordinale  Sarum  sive  directorium  sacerdotum,  H.B.S., 
London  1901,  1902,  and  Tracts  of  Clement  Maydeston,  H.B.S.,  London 
1 894 ;  E.  Hoskins  Horae  beatae  Mariae  virginis  or  Sarum  and  York  Primers 
London  1901.  On  Pontificals,  which  belonged  rather  to  individual 
bishops  than  to  churches  and  their  uses,  see  Frere  Pontifical  services, 
Alcuin  Club  collections  iii,  iv,  London  1901 ;  Maskell  Mon.  rit.  ii ;  R. 
Barnes  Liber  Pontificalis  of  Edmund  Lacey  bishop  of  Exeter  Exeter  1847  ; 
Henderson  Liber  Pontificalis  Chr.  Bainbridge  archiep.  Ebor.,  Surtees  Soc. 
Ixi,  Durham  1875  ;  H.  A.  Wilson  The  Pontifical  of  Magdalen  College, 

1  See  W.  H.  Frere  Use  of  S arum  \  pp.  xiv  sqq.  2  P.  36  below. 


THE  USE  OF  SARUM  xvii 

H.B.S.,  London  1910.     No  English  Pontifical  was  printed  in  the  i5th  or 
1 6th  cent 

The  enormous  output  of  Salisbury  books  indicates  the 
position  of  the  Use  of  Sarum  as  the  most  important  and  influ 
ential  of  all  the  English  Uses.  The  codification  of  it  is  tra 
ditionally  attributed  to  S.  Osmund,  the  first  of  the  Norman 
bishops  (1078-1099)  ;  and  it  is  possible  that  his  organisation 
of  the  new  cathedral  church  of  Old  Sarum  included  some 
liturgical  enactments.  But  tfte  real  '  author  '  of  the  Use 
appears  to  have  been  Richard  le  Poer,  who  was  dean  from 
1173  to  1215,  and  became  bishop  in  1217  and  removed  the 
see  to  Salisbury.  To  him  or  to  his  influence,  at  a  date  earlier 
than  1214,  is  to  be  ascribed  the  compilation  of  the  Consue- 
tudinarium,  in  which  are  codified  the  rules  affecting  the 
personnel  of  the  church  in  choir  and  sanctuary,  and  the 
Ordinale  which  regulates  the  service  throughout  the  year 
and  the  manner  in  which  the  several  elements  provided 
by  the  service-books  are  to  be  combined.  These  two  books, 
together  with  the  contemporary  service-books,  containing 
the  text  of  the  rite,  represent  the  use  as  it  stood  at  the 
beginning  of  the  I3th  cent.  During  the  rest  of  the  I3th 
and  the  first  half  of  the  I4th  cent,  modifications  were  made, 
chiefly  as  the  result  of  changes  in  the  dignity  of  certain 
existing  festivals  and  of  the  institution  of  new  ones  ;  and 
in  consequence,  in  about  1350,  the  Ordinale  was  thoroughly 
revised,  and  the  *  New  Ordinal '  or  the  '  New  Use  of 
Sarum'  came  into  being.  From  the  first  the  codified  Use 
of  Sarum  exercised  a  wide  influence  outside  the  diocese  of 
Salisbury.  S.  David's,  Lincoln,  Lichfield,  Wells,  Exeter  and 
S.  Paul's  were  all  in  course  of  time  affected,  and  some  of  them 
adopted  the  Sarum  customs  as  a  whole  ;  while  even  York  and 
Hereford  were  not  unaffected.  In  fact  in  the  middle  of  the 
I4th  cent.  Ralph  Higden  can  write  that  nearly  the  whole  of 
England,  Wales  and  Ireland  uses  the  Ordinal  of  S.  Osmund1 ; 

1  R.  Higden  Polychronicon  vii  3  (ed.  Lumby,  Rolls  series,  vii  p.  294) : 
librum  ordinalem  ecclesiastici  officii  quern  Consuetudinarium  vocavit,  quo  fere 
nunc  tota  Anglia  Wallia  utitur  et  Hibernia. 


xviii  THE  GALLICAN  RITE 

and  in  the  bull  of  Osmund's  canonisation  in  I457>  Calixtus  III 
adds  '  the  churches  of  very  many  other  places  '  as  well.1 

See  W.  H.  Frere  The  Use  of  Sarum  Cambridge  1898,  1901  ;  Bradshaw 
and  Wordsworth  Statutes  of  Lincoln  Cathedral pt.  ii  pp.  824  sqq. 

Ill 

I.  It  has  been  noted  already  more  than  once  that  the 
Roman  rite  is  to  be  distinguished  from  other  customs  which 
it  modified  and  finally  displaced  in  Italy,  Gaul,  Spain,  and  the 
British  Isles.  These  customs  belonged  to  a  second  Latin 
rite,  commonly  called  the  *  Gallican,'  which  once  prevailed 
all  over  the  West  outside  of  Rome  and  its  neighbourhood. 
The  original  relation  to  each  other  of  the  two  rites  is  a  subject 
of  dispute  and  the  question  need  not  be  discussed  here  ;  it  is 
enough  to  say  that  it  is  possible  that  they  are  parallel  develop 
ments  of  a  single  Latin  type,  which  may  have  originated  in 
Rome  itself  or  at  least  been  diffused  from  Rome.2  After 
the  Roman  rite  had  been  generally  adopted  throughout 
the  West,  there  remained,  and  still  remain,  two  survivals 
of  the  non-Roman  rite  :  the  *  Ambrosian  '  of  the  diocese  of 
Milan,  and  the  '  Mozarabic  '  observed  in  certain  churches  in 
Spain. 

(i)  The  Ambrosian  appears  to  be  Gallican  at  bottom, 
but  modified  and  overlaid  by  Roman  usage  ;  at  any  rate 
it  is  mixed  and  stands  midway  between  the  two  rites.  Since 
it  has  had  no  influence  on  the  development  of  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer,  it  need  not  be  further  remarked  upon  here. 

See  P.  Lejay's  art.  'Ambrosien  (rit)'  in  Dictionnaire  d' archeologie 
chr'etienne  et  de  liturgie  i  1373;  H.  Jenner's  art.  'Ambrosian  liturgy  and 
rite '  in  Catholic  Encyclopaedia  i  p.  394 ;  J.  M.  Neale  *  The  Ambrosian 
Liturgy'  in  Essays  on  Liturgiology  \  W.  C.  Bishop  'The  Ambrosian 
Breviary'  in  C/i.  Qu.  Rev.  Oct.  1886. 


1  A.  R.  Maiden  The  Canonization  of  Saint  Osmund^  Wilts  Record  Soc., 
Salisbury  1901,  p.  228  :   librum  .  .  .  ordinalem  alias  consuetudinalem  appel- 
latum,  quo  fere  vniuerse  ipsius  Anglie  Wallie  et  Hibernie  ac  aliorum  quampluri- 
um  locorum  vtuntur  ecclesiae. 

2  See  the  note  '  Gallican  versus  Roman '  in  Procter  and  Frere  A  new  history 
of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  p.  508. 


MOZARABIC  USAGE  xix 

(2)  On  the  other  hand,  the  Mozarabic, — so-called  as 
being  the  rite  of  the  muzarabes *  or  '  arabizers,'  a  name  applied, 
first  no  doubt  by  the  Moors,  and  then  by  the  Romanised  free 
Spaniards  of  the  north,  to  the  Christian  population  living 
under  the  Moorish  domination — is  purely  Gallican.  It  is 
the  old  Spanish  rite  which  for  us  first  comes  into  view  in  the 
writings  of  S.  Isidore  of  Seville  (^636)  and  continued  in 
universal  use  down  to  the  nth  cent.  The  pope  Alexander  II 
(1061-1073)  attempted  to  suppress  it  in  1064  ;  but  the 
attempt  was  successfully  resisted.  However,  a  few  years 
later  the  Roman  rite  began  to  be  adopted,  in  Aragon  in  1071, 
in  Navarre  in  1074,  and  in  Catalonia  a  little  later  ;  and  after 
a  severe  struggle  Alphonso  VI,  encouraged  by  S.  Gregory  VII, 
decreed  the  abolition  of  the  Mozarabic  rite  throughout  Leon 
and  Castille,  except  in  six  old  churches  in  Toledo,  in  1086. 
None  the  less  it  continued  in  use,  not  only  in  the  churches 
under  Moslem  rule,  but  also,  for  a  century  or  two,  sporadically 
in  the  Christian  kingdoms.  But  the  Roman  rite  so  far  won 
its  way,  that  by  1500  the  Missals  of  the  uses  of  seven  churches 
in  the  peninsula  had  already  been  printed  2 ;  and  it  had  en 
croached  on  the  Mozarabic  reserve  in  Toledo  so  far  that  the 
old  rite  was  in  danger  of  lapsing  altogether.  To  prevent 
this  and  to  reinvigorate  the  Mozarabic  observance  Francisco 
Ximenes  de  Cisneros,  who  became  archbishop  of  Toledo  in 
1495,  appointed  a  commission  of  divines  to  edit  and  publish 
the  books. 

The  normal  Mozarabic  ritual  books  appear  to  be  three :  viz.  (i)  what 
may  be  called  the  '  Psalter,*  containing  the  Psalms,  Canticles  and  Hymns  of 
Divine  Service,  with  sometimes  the  series  of  the  lesser  offices  appended  (Gil- 
son  The  Mozarabic  Psalter )  H.B.S..  London  1905) ;  (2)  a  book  of  unknown 
name,  now  commonly  known  as  Officia  et  tntssae,  containing  the  variables 
of  Service  and  Mass — and  these  variables  compose  nearly  the  whole,  the 
constants  being  only  the  framework  and  a  few  fixed  formulae — ;  (3)  the 
Liber  ordinum^  a  combined  Pontificate  and  Rituale  (Ferotin  Le  'Liber 
ordinum '  en  usage  dans  Veglise  wisigothiqut  et  mozarabe  d'Espagnc  du  if  au 

1  Arab,  mostarib,  -una. 

2  Viz.  Braga,  Huesca,  Leon,  Orense,  Saragossa,  Tarragona,  Vich  (Weale 
CataL  Missal,  pp.  42,  no,  83,  32,  46  200,  214). 


xx  THE  MOZARABIC  BOOKS 

iof  stick  Paris  1904).  But  parts  of  the  second  book  are  also  found  in 
separation :  e.g.  Liber  sacramentorum,  containing  the  prayers  of  the  Mass 
(Ferotin  Le  Liber  mozarabicus  sacramentorum  et  les  manuscrits  mozarabes 
Paris  1912);  Liber  comitis,  being  the  lessons  and  gospels  of  the  Mass  (G. 
Morin  Liber  comicus  Maredsous  1893);  Anliphonarius,  the  choir-book  of 
Service  and  Mass.  See  Ferotin  Liber  sacramentorum  cc.  679  sqq. ;  Catholic 
Encyclopaedia  x  p.  613. 

Ximenes's  commission  did  not  confine  itself  to  editing 
the  traditional  books  as  they  stood,  but  they  broke  up  the 
second  of  the  old  books,  and  compiled  what  belonged  to  the 
Mass  into  a  Missal  in  the  current  sense,  and  combined  what 
belonged  to  Divine  Service  with  the  Psalter  to  form  a  Breviary. 
The  result  of  their  work  was  the  Missale  mixtum  secundum 
regulam  Beati  Isidori,  dictum  Mozarabes  published  in  I5OO,1 
and  the  Breviarium  ad  debite  persoluendum  Divinum  Officium 
secundum  regulam  beatissimi  Isidori  archiepiscopi  Hispalensis 
published  in  I5O2.2  The  Liber  ordinum  was  not  re-edited 
and  the  Roman  Pontifical  and  Ritual  took  its  place. 

Ximenes  also  founded  a  Mozarabic  chapel  in  the  cathedral  church  of 
Toledo  and  provided  for  13  chaplains  to  sing  mass  and  divine  service 
daily  in  the  chapel ;  an  example  which  was  followed  by  Rodrigo  de  Tala- 
vera  in  1517  in  the  foundation  of  a  chapel  in  the  old  cathedral  of  Sala 
manca  for  the  yearly  celebration  of  55  Mozarabic  masses.  Ximenes's 
foundation  still  survives;  de  Talavera's  is  represented  by  one  or  two 
Mozarabic  masses  a  year. 

See  Pinius  '  de  Liturgia  antiqua  Hispanica '  in  Acta  sanctorum  July  vi ; 
Florez  Espana  sagrada  iii  '  Disertaci6n  de  la  misa  antigua  de  Espana  ' ; 
Krazer  de  antiquis  eccL  accident.  Liturgiis  pp.  70  sqq. ;  J.  M.  Neale  Essays 
in  Liturgiology ;  Ferotin  opp.  citt.  •  W.  C.  Bishop  '  The  Mozarabic  rite '  in 
Church  Qu.  Rev.  Oct.  1906,  Jan.  1907  :  H.  Jenner's  art.  '  Mozarabic  rite' 
in  Catholic  Encyclopaedia  x  pp.  611  sqq. 

2.  The  liturgical  history  of  the  Orthodox  East  in  the  early 
middle  ages  is  so  far  parallel  to  that  of  the  West,  that  its 
outstanding  feature  is  the  enlargement  of  the  area  of  the  rite 
of  Constantinople  both  by  the  extension  of  the  Church 
through  the  conversion  of  pagan  populations  and  by  the  dis 
placement  of  local  rites.  At  the  time  of  the  Monophysite 

1  Reprinted,  from  A.  Leslie's  ed.  with  notes  etc.,  Rome  1755,  in  Migne  P.L. 
Ixxxv. 

2  Reprinted,  as  re-edited  by  F.  A.  Lorenzana,  Madrid  1775,  in  Migne  P.L. 
Ixxxvi. 


THE  EASTERN  RITES  xxi 

schism  in  the  6th  cent,  there  were  three  several  rites  observed 
locally  in  that  part  of  the  Eastern  Church  which  lay  within 
the  Empire  1  ;  the  Egyptian,  the  rite  of  the  patriarchate  of 
Alexandria,  observed  in  Egypt,  Libya,  Cyrene,  and  Abys 
sinia  ;  the  Syrian,  the  rite  of  the  patriarchate  of  Antioch 
(Syria  and  Palestine)  ;  and  the  Byzantine,  the  rite  of  the 
patriarchate  of  Constantinople  (Thrace  and  Asia  Minor). 
The  Syrian  rite  is  already  visible  in  some  detail  in  the  Cate- 
cheses  of  S.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  (347),  in  the  Apostolic  Con 
stitutions  (c.  375),  in  the  Pilgrimage  of  Sylvia  (c.  380),  and 
in  the  writings  of  S.  John  Chrysostom.  The  Egyptian  char 
acteristics  already  appear  in  the  Sacramentary  of  Sarapion 
of  Thmuis  (c.  350).  The  origin  and  early  history  of  the 
Byzantine  rite  is  quite  obscure  ;  it  appears  to  be  a  fusion  of 
the  Cappadocian  (represented  by  the  Liturgy  of  S.  Basil) 
with  another  rite  (represented  by  the  Liturgy  of  S.  Chrysos 
tom),  perhaps  that  of  Heraclea  (Eregli  on  Marmora),  to  the 
province  of  which  Byzantium  originally  belonged.  It  first 
comes  clearly  into  light  at  the  end  of  the  8th  cent.,  our 
knowledge  of  it  for  the  earlier  period  being  derived  only  from 
scattered  allusions. 

See  Duchesne  Origines  pp.  54  sqq.,  469  sqq. ;  Brightman  Liturgies 
eastern  and  western  \ ;  '  The  Sacramentary  of  Sarapion  of  Thmuis '  in 
Journal  of  TheoL  Studies  i. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  earlier  ritual  conditions  in 
Macedonia  and  Greece,  it  may  be  assumed  that,  at  least  after 
the  Byzantine  patriarch  in  the  6th  cent,  had  secured  these 
areas  for  his  own  jurisdiction  and  the  Roman  patriarch  had 
withdrawn  his  claims,2  they  soon  became,  if  they  were  not  so 
already,  solidly  Byzantine  in  rite.  Later,  the  Byzantine  rite 
won  an  extension  further  westwards  in  Italy,  as  a  consequence 
of  the  hellenisation  first  of  Sicily  and  then  of  S.  Italy,  and  of 
the  Byzantine  domination,  both  political  and  ecclesiastical, 
lasting  from  the  8th  cent,  down  to  the  Norman  conquest 

1  So  much  of  Armenian  and  Nestorian  usage  as  was  to  be  found  within  the 
Eastern  frontier  can  be  ignored  for  the  present  purpose. 

2  Cf.  Duchesne  Origines  pp.  41  sqq. 


xxii  THE  BYZANTINE  RITE 

in  the  nth,  during  which  *  Magna  Graecia '  belonged  to  the 
patriarchate  of  Constantinople.1  By  the  conversion  of  the 
eastern  Slavonic  peoples  in  the  gth  and  loth  cents,  the  range 
of  the  Byzantine  rite  was  still  further  extended  in  Europe.2 
In  the  East,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Monophysite  schism  had 
reduced  the  orthodox  of  Syria  and  Egypt  to  a  remnant,  mostly 
Greek  and  naturally  disposed  to  cultivate  and  cherish  close 
relations  with  the  church  of  the  Imperial  City  and  the  patri 
archate  of  Constantinople.  Accordingly  in  the  sphere  of 
worship  the  Byzantine  rite  attracted  them  to  itself,  with  the 
result  that  local  usage  was,  first  modified  and  more  or  less 
assimilated  to  that  of  Constantinople  (so  that  the  earliest 
Greek  MSS  of  the  Syrian  Liturgy  of  S.  James  and  still  more 
those  of  the  Egyptian  S.  Mark,  exhibit  the  local  rite  as  so  far 
accommodated  to  the  Byzantine  framework,  that  the  audible 
parts  of  the  liturgy  tend  to  be  indistinguishable  from  those 
of  the  Byzantine)  ;  and  finally,  by  the  beginning  of  the  I3th 
cent.,  the  local  liturgies  had  practically  disappeared  and  the 
Byzantine  prevailed  everywhere3  ;  while  of  the  local  Divine 
Service,  and  of  the  offices  other  than  the  liturgy,  no  monu 
ments  seem  to  have  survived.  Meanwhile  the  Monophysite 
communions  of  Syria,  Egypt,  and  Abyssinia,  had  retained 
the  original  rites  in  Syriac,  Coptic,  and  Ethiopic  versions. 

See  the  texts  in  Swainson  The  Greek  Liturgies  Cambridge  1884; 
Brightman  Liturgies  eastern  and  western  i.  The  assimilation  to  the 
Byzantine  will  appear  if  the  Greek  texts  of  S.  James  and  S.  Mark  are  com 
pared,  on  the  one  hand,  with  the  Byzantine,  and  on  the  other,  with  the 
Syriac  and  Coptic  versions. 

The  Byzantine  service-books  began  to  be  printed,  mostly 
at  Venice,  in  the  first  half  of  the  i6th  cent.  ;  the  Euchologion, 
corresponding  in  part  to  the  western  Sacramentary,  at  Rome 
in  1526,  and  then  at  Venice  in  1528  ;  the  Horologion,  corre- 

1  See  Batiffol  Uabbaye  de  Rossano   Paris  1891,  introd.  :    Brightman  Lift, 
eastern  and  western  pp.  xc  sq. 

2  Hardwick   History  of  the   Christian  Church  :  Middle  Age,  ed.    Stubbs, 
London  1883,  pp.  119  sqq. 

3  Theodore  Balsamon  in  can.  32  in   Trullo  (Migne  P.G.  cxxxvii  621   B), 
Responsa  ad  Mar  cum  (ib.  cxxxviii  953). 


REFORM  IN  THE  WEST  xxiii 

spending  to  the  Psalteriumol  the  Breviary,  at  Venice  in  1509  ; 
the  Typikon,  corresponding  to  the  Ordinale,  in  1545  ;  and  the 
other  books  at  various  dates  in  the  same  period.1  But  these 
books  are  perhaps  irrelevant  to  the  present  purpose.  The 
Byzantine  rite  affected  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  not 
through  the  official  service-books,  but  rather  through  the 
merely  literary  publications  of  the  west  ;  and  in  particular 
through  'H  Oeia  \6Lrovpyia  TOV  asyiov  'loavvov  [sic]  TOV  X/ouero- 
o-Topov :  Divina  missa  sancti  loannis  Chrysostomi  Venice 
1528,  being  the  text  of  the  liturgy  of  S.  Chrysostom  with  a 
Latin  translation  arranged  on  the  opposite  page.  The 
central  words  of  the  Orthodox  rite,  those  of  the  Consecration, 
were  also  known  from  the  tract  De  Sacramento  Eucharistiae 
of  the  cardinal  Bessarion  of  Nicaea,  the  protagonist  of  the 
latinising  Greeks  at  the  Council  of  Florence  in  1439,  which 
was  printed  at  Strassburg  in  1513,  and  at  Niirnberg  in  1527. 
For  the  texts  of  the  Eastern  rites,  other  than  the  service-books,  available 
in  the  West  in  1549,  see  Gasquet  and  Bishop  Edward  VI  and  the  Book 
of  Common  Prayer,  London  1890,  p.  187  :  Brightman  Liturgies  east, 
and  west,  i  pp.  Ixxxv  sq. 

IV 

The  first  half  of  the  i6th  cent,  was  marked  by  several 
movements  of  liturgical  reform,  initiated  from  different 
points  of  view,  of  varied  scope  and  importance,  and  meeting 
with  different  measures  of  success. 

I.  One  of  them,  happily  checked  almost  at  the  outset,  need 
only  be  mentioned  in  passing.  The  fastidious  Ciceronianism 
of  the  Italian  humanists  was  offended  by  the  latinity  of  the 
service-books,  a  tongue  descended,  not  from  the  literary 
language  of  the  Augustan  age,  but  from  the  spoken  or  semi- 
literary  language  of  the  first  Christian  centuries.  It  was 
therefore  proposed  to  recast  the  books  in  more  classical 
literary  form  ;  and  to  this  end  Zaccaria  Ferreri,  bishop  of 
Guardia  Alferi  in  Campania,  was  commissioned  by  Leo  X 
to  rewrite  the  metrical  hymns  and  to  reform  the  Breviary. 

1  See  Brightman  Liturgies  east,  and  ivesf.  i  p.  Ixxxii 


xxiv  THE  STATE  OF  THE  BREVIARY 

The  hymns  were  rewritten  iuxta  veram  metri  et  latinitatis 
normam  and  published  in  1525,  with  a  letter  of  approbation 
by  Clement  VII  and  a  permission  to  use  them  prefixed.  Re 
garded  from  the  point  of  view  of  their  author  and  his  patrons 
the  verses  are  excellent,  and  very  many  of  them  irreproach 
able  ;  while  others  are  shocking  with  their  pagan  figures  and 
mythological  suggestions  ;  and  in  all,  the  spontaneity  and 
rugged  simplicity  of  the  originals  is  sacrificed  to  a  laboured, 
if  faultless,  smoothness  of  classical  form.  The  projected 
Breviary  never  appeared  :  and  the  whole  scheme  vanished, 
with  the  situation  which  gave  it  birth,  through  the  sack  of 
Rome  in  1527  and  the  changed  atmosphere  of  the  Roman 
Court  which  was  its  result. 

See  Batiffol  Histoire  du  Breviaire  romain,  ed.  3,  Paris  1911,  pp.  269 
sqq. ;  J.  W.  Legg  The  second  recension  of  the  Quignon  Breviary,  H.B.S., 
London  1912,  pp.  7  sqq. 

2.  But  a  different  form  of  dissatisfaction  with  the  Breviary 
was  abroad  and  widely  prevalent.  Almost  from  the  first 
moment  of  the  adoption  of  the  Roman  rite  north  of  the  Alps, 
at  the  end  of  the  8th  cent.,  the  Divine  Service  had  begun 
to  be  modified  by  addition  and  subtraction.  The  effect  of 
this  process,  continued  during  the  9th,  loth  and  nth  cents, 
and  in  principle  at  least  generally  prevalent  outside  of  Rome, 
was  that  in  the  I2th  cent,  there  existed  great  variety  of  usage, 
and  it  was  realised  that  a  new  type  of  service  had  come  into 
being  as  contrasted  with  the  ancient  office  which  was  still 
observed  by  the  Roman  Church.  Early  in  the  next  century, 
in  the  pontificate  of  Innocent  III,  this  officium  modernum  was 
adopted  by  the  Roman  curia  and  officially  regulated.  From 
the  curia  it  was  adopted  by  the  Franciscan  Order  in  1223  ; 
later,  it  was  revised  and  corrected  by  Aymon,  General  of  the 
Order,  and  in  its  revised  form  it  was  approved  by  Gregory 
IX  in  1241.  This  Breviary  of  the  *  modern  office  '  was  pro 
pagated  all  over  the  West  by  the  Franciscans  and  was  adopted 
by  the  curia  itself  before  1280  ;  and  the  old  Roman  Service 
practically  disappeared.  A  protest  in  behalf  of  the  old 


CARAFA'S  REVISION  xxv 

rite  against  the  innovation  was  made  by  Radulphus  de  Rivo 
(11403),  dean  of  Tongres,  in  the  de  Canonum  Observatione, 
written  in  about  I398.1 

The  characteristics  of  the  '  modern  office,'  the  result  of  developments 
reaching  from  the  9th  to  the  i4th  cent.,  were  mainly  these.  On  the 
one  hand  the  service  was  abridged  in  two  ways ;  first  by  the  shortening 
of  the  lessons  of  Matins,  especially  those  taken  from  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
so  that  they  came  to  consist  each  of  but  a  few  lines ;  and  secondly  by 
change  in  the  use  of  the  antiphons,  so  that  they  were  recited,  not  after  each 
verse,  but  only  at  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  Psalm  or  Canticle. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  office  was  lengthened  by  the  adoption  of  metrical 
hymns  (in  this  following  the  pattern  of  the  Monastic  Office),  of  the 
Quicunque  vult  recited  daily  at  Prime,  and  of  Memoriae  after  the 
collects  of  Lauds  and  Vespers,  of  preces  after  the  Pater  noster  of  the 
ferial  day-hours,  and  of  an  anthem  of  the  B.V.M.  after  Compline;  and 
most  of  all  by  the  frequent  recitation  of  the  Office  of  the  B.V.M.  and  of  that 
of  the  Dead,  of  the  Gradual  and  the  Penitential  Psalms.  And  besides  all 
this,  by  the  multiplication  of  new  festivals  and  still  more  by  the  addition 
of  octaves  to  existing  festivals,  the  use  of  the  ferial  office  was  reduced  to 
a  minimum,  and  as  a  consequence  the  Psalter  was  no  longer  recited 
as  a  whole,  but  the  festal  Psalms  were  constantly  repeated.  It  is  to  be 
added  that  the  lessons  from  the  lives  of  the  saints  were  largely  apocryphal 
or  puerile.  See  Batiffol  Histoire  du  Breviaire  romain  pp.  179  sqq. 

By  the  i6th  cent,  this  long  and  complicated  service  was 
felt  to  be  burdensome  and  in  part  unedifying.  To  remedy 
the  situation  two  attempts  were  made  under  Clement  VII 
(1523-1534)  and  with  his  encouragement.  First,  he  formally 
approved  the  design  of  Giovanni  Pietro  Carafa,  bishop  of 
Chieti,  General  of  the  Theatine  Order,  afterwards  Pope 
Paul  IV,  to  revise  the  Office,  and  the  Missal  as  well,  for  the 
use  of  his  Order,  and  gave  licence  to  the  Order  to  use  the  re 
vised  books  for  a  year  by  way  of  experiment.  Little  is  known 
of  Carafa's  work,  and  nothing  came  of  it  for  the  moment, 
though  it  was  possibly,  later  on,  the  basis  of  the  revision  of 
Pius  V. 

See  Batiffol  Histoire  du  Breviaire  romain  pp.  289  sqq. ;  J.  W.  Legg 
The  second  recension  of  the  Quignon  Breviary  ii,  H.B.S.,  London  1912, 
pp.  1 2  sqq. 

1  C.  Mohlberg  Radulph  de  Rivo,  Louvain  191 1,  p.  47.  De  Can.  Obs.  is  printed 
in  Hittorp  de  Officiis  divinis  Rome  1591,  p.  633. 


xxvi  THE  FIRST  BREVIARY  OF  QUINONES 

In  1529  Clement  issued  a  second  commission,  this  time 
to  Francisco  de  Quinones,  General  of  the  Franciscans  and 
Cardinal  of  S.  Croce  in  Gerusalemme,  so  to  reorganise  the 
Divine  Service  that  by  the  removal  of  the  existing  difficulties 
and  defects  and  inconveniences  the  clergy  might  be  attracted 
to  the  discharge  of  their  canonical  duty  of  reciting  it. 
Quinones  carried  out  his  task  with  the  help  of  three  Spanish 
divines,  and  the  new  book,  Breviarium  Romanum  nuper 
reformatum  in  quo  sacra  scriptures  libri  probat&q;  sanctorum 
histories  eleganter  beneq;  dispositce  leguntur,  appeared  in  1535, 
with  a  preface  addressed  to  Paul  III,  who  had  succeeded 
Clement  VII  in  1534,  explaining  the  origin  and  character 
of  the  book,  and  with  a  letter  of  Paul  III  himself  giving 
permission  to  secular  clerks  to  recite  the  new  Breviary 
instead  of  the  old,  on  condition  of  obtaining  a  licence  from 
the  Apostolic  See. 

The  reform  was  drastic.  Antiphons,  responds,  chapters  and  preces 
are  abolished.  The  Psalter  is  redistributed,  3  Psalms  being  assigned 
to  each  office  throughout  the  week,  except  in  so  far  that  the  Venite  is  added 
at  Matins,  and  the  O.T.  Canticle  of  each  day  serves  as  the  third  Psalm  in 
Lauds  (150  Pss.  +  i  [Ps.  xxx  1-6  being  repeated] +  10  [Ps.  cxviii  being 
divided  as  before  into  n]  +  7  [Can tides]  =  i 68  =  7  X8x  3,  i.e.  7  days  of  8 
offices  each  with  3  Psalms).  Matins  consists  invariably  of  a  single  nocturn, 
with  three  lessons;  the  first,  from  the  O.T.  (exclusive  of  the  deutero- 
canonical  books),  of  which  the  greater  part  is  read  book  by  book  in 
the  course  of  the  year;  the  second  from  the  N.T.,  which  is  also  read 
through,  with  the  exception  of  Apoc.  iii-xxii,  book  by  book,  and  only 
Passion,  Holy,  and  Easter  Weeks  have  propers ;  the  third  from  the  Acts 
and  the  Epistles,  except  on  holy  days  (other  than  Sundays),  when  proper 
third  lessons  are  assigned,  on  Saints'  days  from  records  of  the  lives  of 
the  saints,  otherwise  from  Holy  Scripture  (except  on  Christmas  Day 
and  Easter  Day,  when  they  are  from  patristic  homilies).  The  metrical 
hymns,  which  are  variable  at  Matins  and  Vespers,  precede  the  Psalms  in 
all  offices,  except  in  Lauds  which  is  deprived  of  its  hymn.  Te  Deum 
is  used  daily  except  in  Advent  and  Lent,  when  Miserere  is  substituted  for  it ; 
Quicunque  is  confined  to  Sundays,  the  Apostolicum  being  substituted  for 
it  on  weekdays.  The  supplementary  office  of  the  B.V.M.  is  abolished; 
but  to  compensate  for  it,  on  all  unoccupied  Saturdays  the  office  of  the  day 
is  to  be  of  the  B.V.M.  The  memoriae  at  Lauds  and  Vespers  are  restricted 
to  two,  of  the  B.V.M.  and  of  the  apostles  and  all  saints,  unvarying  through 
out  the  year.  The  Penitential  Psalms  and  the  Litany  are  recited  only  on 


THE  SECOND  BREVIARY  OF  QUINONES  xxvii 

Ash  Wednesday  and  Fridays  in  Lent.  Thus  the  Service  is  continuous 
throughout  the  year,  except  that  holydays  and  special  seasons  are  marked 
by  their  invitatory,  hymns  at  Matins  and  Vespers,  3rd  lesson,  and  collect. 

The  text  is  in  J.  W.  Legg  Breviarium  romanum  Quignonianum^ 
Cambridge  1888.  On  the  history  see  Batiffol  Hist,  du  Brev.  romain  pp. 
274  sqq. ;  Legg  The  second  recension  of  the  Quignon  Breviary  ii  pp.  14  sqq. 
This  Breviary  is  denoted  by  ^  in  the  margin  of  the  Synopsis  below. 

The  new  Breviary,  of  which  Quinones  afterwards  wrote 
that  it  had  only  been  put  out  provisionally  and  to  invite 
discussion,1  was  immediately  assailed.  In  July  1535  the 
Sorbonne  condemned  it  for  its  innovations.  In  consequence 
a  revision  was  immediately  taken  in  hand,  and  a  new  recension 
appeared  in  July  1536  as  Breviarium  Romance  Curia,  ex 
sacra  &  canonica  scriptura,  necnon  Sanctorum  historijs,  summa 
vigilantia  decerptis,  accurate  digestum.  Nunc  denuo  ab  autore 
suo  recognitum  diligentius,  &  commodioribus  characteribus 
quam  antehac  excusum. 

The  chief  characteristics  of  the  second  as  compared  with  the  first  recen 
sion  are :  (i)  an  antiphon  is  restored  to  the  Psalms  in  all  offices,  which  in 
Lauds,  Prime,  Vespers  and  Compline  covers  also  Benedictus^  Quicunque, 
Magnificat  and  Nunc  dimittis ;  (2)  the  third  lesson  at  Matins  on  all  Sundays, 
on  all  days  in  Advent  and  Lent,  and  throughout  octaves,  is  taken  from  a 
patristic  homily ;  (3)  Vespers,  Matins  and  Lauds  of  the  Dead  (constructed 
on  the  plan  of  the  other  offices  of  the  book,  except  that  Matins  retains  its 
responds)  is  provided,  to  be  said  in  addition  to  the  Office  of  the  day  on 
Nov.  2,  and  the  Matins  and  Lauds  also  on  certain  Fridays  in  Lent. 

The  text  is  in  J.  W.  Legg  The  second  recension  of  the  Quignon  Breviary 
i,  H.B.S.,  London  1908.  On  the  history  see  ibid,  ii  pp.  18  sqq.;  Batiffol 
Hist,  du  Brev.  romain  pp.  277  sqq. 

Of  this  Breviary  more  than  a  hundred  editions  were  issued 
between  1536  and  1566.  It  was  widely  adopted  by  seculars 
and  even  by  some  regulars  ;  and  in  some  churches  in  Spain 
it  was  used  in  choir.  On  the  other  hand  it  was  not  found  to 
be  generally  satisfactory,  and  the  Tridentine  Council  deter 
mined  on  a  new  and  independent  revision  both  of  Missal  and 
of  Breviary,  and  in  its  last  sitting  (Dec.  4  1563)  it  com 
mitted  the  task  of  revision  to  the  Holy  See.2  In  the  bull 

1  Preface   to    the  2nd  recension  (J.  W.  Legg  The  second  recension  of  the 

Breviary  \  p.  xxiii). 
Canones  ct  dccrcta  Cone.  Trident,  sess.  xxv  contin.  sess.  3. 


xxviii  THE  COUNCIL  OF  COLOGNE 

Quod  a  nobis  of  July  15  1568,  by  which  Pius  V  enjoined  the 
use  of  the  reformed  Breviary,  that  of  Quinones  was  abolished, 
along  with  all  other  Roman  Breviaries  of  less  than  200  years' 
standing. 

3.  In  face  of  the  storm  of  calamities  which  beset  '  the 
ship  of  the  Church,  tossed  among  the  billows,  while  the 
Captain  seemed  to  be  asleep  within  it,'  and  in  view  of  the 
delay  in  the  convocation  of  the  General  Council  so  long 
demanded,1  in  1536  Hermann  von  Wied,  Archbishop-Elector 
of  Cologne,  summoned  a  Provincial  Council  to  deal  provision 
ally  with  abuses  and  to  institute  reforms.  On  the  basis  of  a 
draft  prepared  by  the  eminent  Johann  Cropper  (1503-1559), 
the  os  cleri  Coloniensis,  the  Council  elaborated  and  issued  a 
long  series  of  disciplinary  canons,  including  among  them  a 
number  dealing  with  matters  of  liturgy.  The  standing 
complaints  against  the  Breviary — the  displacement  of  Holy 
Scripture  and  the  unsatisfactory  character  of  the  lessons  from 
the  lives  of  the  saints — are  repeated  ;  the  desire  is  expressed 
for  the  general  reform  of  Missals  and  Breviaries  and  the 
removal  of  superfluities  and  superstitions  (de  officio  6,  n)  ; 
the  disorganisation  of  Service  and  Mass  by  the  observance  of 
unauthorised  festivals,  by  the  invasions  of  choirs  and  organs, 
and  so  forth,  is  rebuked  and  forbidden  (ib.  7,  12,  15)  ;  some 
things  are  enjoined,  which  are  of  interest  in  view  of  what 
happened  afterwards  in  England  :  viz.  that  baptisms  shall  be 
administered,  not  privately,  but  in  facie  ecclesiae  (de  ad- 
ministr.  sacrament.  7),  that  processions  shall  be  confined 
within  the  walls  of  churches  (de  constitut.  8),  and  that  Dedica 
tion-festivals  outside  the  city  of  Cologne  shall  all  be  kept 
on  one  common  day  (ib.  n)  ;  and,  what  is  perhaps  of  chief 
interest,  it  is  required  that  the  people  be  instructed  in  the 
meaning  of  ceremonies,  and  to  this  end  that  sermons  be  made 
at  the  time  of  the  celebration  of  them  (de  administr.  sacra 
ment.  2,  5,  12)  ;  a  requirement  which  apparently  expressed  a 
widely-felt  need,  and  was  provided  for  in  the  Agendae  of 

1  Canones  Cone,  Prov.  Colon.,  Cologne  1538,  prefatory  epistle. 


THE  CANONS  OF  COLOGNE  xxix 

German  dioceses  later  in  the  i6th  cent.,  where  vernacular 
instructions  and  exhortations  are  attached  to  the  text  of  the 
several  offices.1  The  Council  also  promised  that  an  official 
Encheiridion  should  be  issued  to  help  the  clergy  in  the  instruc 
tion  of  the  faithful,  treating  of  the  Ten  Commandments,  the 
Creed,  the  Sacraments,  and  the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  veneration 
of  saints,  relics  and  images,  and  the  explanation  of  ceremonies 
(de  dissemin.  verbi  21,  21).  These  canons  were  hailed  with 
some  enthusiasm  outside  of  Germany  :  Giac.  Sadoleto,  cardinal 
of  S.  Callisto  (1477-1547),  warmly  congratulated  Hermann  ; 
Ambr.  Catharinus  (Lane.  Politi,  1483-1553)  wrote  that  he 
had  seen  nothing  in  his  day  '  more  orthodox,  more  learned, 
more  faithful,  or  more  worthy  of  all  men  to  be  received  '  ; 
and  Cochlaeus  (Joh.  Dobeneck,  1479-1552)  later  on  quoted 
Catharinus  and  applauded  the  canons  as  having  won  for 
Hermann  the  approval  and  praise  of  other  nations.2  The  draft 
submitted  to  the  Council  was  published  in  October  1536  in 
Formula,  ad  guam  Visitatio  intra  dioecesin  Coloniensem  exigetur. 
Adjiciuntur  huic  formulae  Canonum  fere  omnium  argumenta 
Concilii  prouincialis  dudum  celebrati,  quibus  paucis  eliciuntur, 
quaenam  in  illis  ipsis  (breui  in  lucem  prodituris)  ad  longum 
contineantur  3  ;  the  Canons  and  the  Encheiridion  were  pub 
lished  at  Cologne  in  1538  in  Canones  Concilii  Prouincialis 
Coloniensis.  Sub  Reuerendiss.  in  Christo  patre  ac  dno, 
D.  Hermanno  S.  Colonien.  ecdesice  Archiepiscopo  .  .  .  cele- 
brati.  Anno  1536  Quibus  adiectum  est  Encheiridion  Chris 
tiana  institutions.  The  Encheiridion,  which,  in  the  body 

1  See  e.g.  Ritus  ecclesiastici  Augustensis  episcopatus  [Augsburg]  1580,  which 
has  vernacular  instructions  and  exhortations  at  Baptism  (4  pp.),  Confession 
(6  pp.),  Communion  (5  pp.),  Visitation  of  the  Sick  (9  pp.)  and  of  the  Dying  (2  pp.), 
and  Marriage  (6  pp.);   Agenda  ecclesia  Moguntince.  [Mainz]  1599.     See  also 
the  Tridentine  Council  sess.  xxiv  de  reformat.  7  '  sacramentorum  virtus  antequam 
populo  administrentur,  ab  episcopis  et  parochis  explicetur' :  and  the  Rituale 
Romanum  of  Gregory    XIII,    1584,   and  that  of  Paul  V,   1617,   which  direct 
that  at  the   administration   of  the  sacraments  the  priest  'virtutem  vsum  ac 
vtilitatem '  of  the  sacraments,  *  £  caerimoniarum  significations  .  .  .  diligenter 
explicabit.'     For  the  instructions   of  later   French  Ritualia,   see  Rituel  des 
Rituels,  ed.  Migne  1866,  i  cc.  59i-I352- 

2  M.  Deckers  Hermann  von  Wied^.  211,  106.  3  Ibid.  p.  61. 


xxx  THE  ENCHEIRIDION  OF  COLOGNE 

of  the  combined  volume,  bears  the  title  Institutio  compen- 
diaria  doctrinae  christianae,  in  concilia  provinciali  pollicita,  was 
the  work  of  Joh.  Cropper  and  was  written  on  a  larger  scale 
than  had  originally  been  contemplated,  forming  a  consider 
able  treatise,  a  sum  of  divinity  under  the  current  four  head 
ings,  the  Creed,  the  Sacraments,  the  Lord's  Prayer  and  the 
Decalogue  ;  the  ceremonies  being  expounded  along  with  the 
sacraments  to  which  they  severally  belong. 

See  M.  Deckers  Hermann  von  Wied,  Cologne  1840,  pp.  60  sqq. ;  G. 
Drouven  Die  Reformation  in  d.  Colnischen  Kirchenprovinz  zur  Zeit  d. 
Erzbischofes  u.  Kurfilrsten  Hermann  V,  Graf  zu  Wied,  Neuss  1876,  pp. 
79  sqq.  The  provincial  Council  of  Mainz  held  in  1549,  besides  enacting 
a  series  of  canons,  of  which  the  6  2nd  requires  the  revision  of  Missals, 
Antiphoners,  Agendae,  and  Breviaries  (Constttutiones  concilii  prouincialis 
Moguntini  Mainz  1549),  also  authorised  a  catechetical  manual,  Institutio 
ad pietatem  christianam,  the  work  of  M.  von  Hulding,  suffragan  of  Mainz. 

V 

Liturgical  reform  was  everywhere  included  in  the  pro 
gramme  of  the  Reformation  ;  and  this  reform  everywhere 
sooner  or  later  implied  the  substitution,  in  whole  or  in  part, 
of  the  vernacular  for  the  traditional  Latin. 

i.  The  Lutheran  ritual  is  essentially  the  work  of  Luther 
himself,  proposed  in  a  series  of  booklets  issued  primarily 
for  the  use  of  Wittemberg  from  1523  to  1537. 

(1)  In  the  Von  ordenung  gottis  diensts  ynn  der  gemeyne1  of  the 
spring  of  1523  Luther  prescribes  the  abolition  of  the  daily 
Mass  and  of  most  of  the  saints'  days,  and  the  substitution 
of  a  daily  service,  morning  and  evening,  in  which  the  Bible 
should  be  read  in  course  with  an  exposition  of  some  part  of 
the  lesson,  followed  by  a  psalm,  a  respond  or  antiphon,  and 
a  collect.      On  Sundays  Mass  and  Vespers  are  to  be  sung, 
with  a  sermon  at  each. 

(2)  Das  tauff  buchlin  verdeutzcht 2  of  the  same  spring  supplies 

1  In  A.  L.  Richter  Die  euangelischen  Kirchenordnungen  i  p.  i  ;  E.  Sehling 
Die  evangelischcn  Kirchenordnungen  i  p.  2  ;  and  H.  Lietzmann  Liturgische 
Texte  iv  p.  3  (Kleine  Texte  fur  theologische  u.  philologische  Vorlesungen  36, 
Bonn  1909).  2  Richter  i  p.  7  ;  Sehling  i  p.  18  ;  Lietzmann  p.  6. 


LUTHER'S  TAUFF  BUCHLIN  AND  FORMULA  MISSAE    xxxi 

the  Order  of  Baptism  in  German.  In  the  De  Captivitate 
Babylonica  of  1520  Luther  had  blessed  God  that  He  had 
'  at  least  preserved  this  sacrament  in  His  Church  uninjured 
and  uncontaminated  by  the  devices  of  men ' * ;  and  accord 
ingly  the  Order  of  the  Taufbiichlein  is  little  else  than  a  trans 
lation  of  the  baptismal  rite  of  an  Agenda,  probably  that  in 
use  at  Wittemberg,  akin  to  that  of  Magdeburg.2  But  in 
1526  Luther  issued  a  revised  edition,  Das  taufbuchlin  ver- 
deudscht  aufs  neu  zu  gericht?  in  which  two  of  the  prayers  are 
omitted,  the  exorcism  is  reduced  to  a  single  paragraph,  and 
exsufflation,  salt,  spittle,  unction,  white  garment  and  torch 
are  abandoned.  Meanwhile  Andreas  Osiander,  pastor  of 
Nurnberg  (1520-1548),  had  published  another  German  Order 
of  Baptism,  Ordnug  wie  man  Tauffet,  bisher  im  Latein  gehalten, 
verteiitscht  (Nurnberg  1524),  founded  on  the  Rituale  of  Bam- 
berg.4 

(3)    The    Formula    missae    et    communionis    pro    ecclesia 
Wittembergensi 5  was  also  written  in  1523. 

After  an  attack  (cc.  5-7)  on  the  Offertory  and  the  Canon,  votive  and 
requiem  Masses,  and  the  ceremonial  apparatus  of  the  Mass,6  Luther  treats 
of  four  subjects,  (a)  He  prescribes  (8-28)  a  reformed  Latin  Order  of  the 
Mass,  in  which  the  traditional  form  is  retained  as  far  as  to  the  creed  and 
the  sermon  (if  this  is  not  preached  before  the  Mass) ;  after  which  the 
offertory  is  reduced  to  the  preparation  of  the  matter  of  the  sacrament 
without  prayers,  'all  that  suggests  oblation  being  repudiated';  Dominus 
vobiscum  follows,  with  Sursum  corda  and  the  rest  till  the/<?r  \Iesum~\  Chris 
tum  dominum  nostrum  of  the  preface,  and  after  a  short  pause  Qui  pridie 
and  consecration,  followed  by  Sanctus  and  Benedictus,  during  which  the 
elevation  is  made ;  Pater  noster  with  its  prelude ;  Pax  Domini^  and  the 
communion  with  Agnus  Dei  and  '  Communio ' ;  Quod  ore  sumpsimus, 
Bencdicamus,  and  the  blessing  or  Num.  vi  24-26.  (b) '  Concerning  the  com 
munion  of  the  people '  (29-37) :  intending  communicants  are  to  signify  their 

1  Wace  and  Buchheim  Luther's  primary  works,  London  1896,  p.  339. 

2  See  Rietschel  Lehrbuch  der  Liturgik  ii,  Berlin  1909,  pp.  64  sqq. 

3  Sehling  i  p.  21  ;  and  see  Rietschel  ii  pp.  71  sqq. 

4  See  Richter  i  p.  10.     For  other  Orders  see  Rietschel  ii  pp.  69  sq. 

5  Richter  i  p.  2  ;  Sehling  i  p.  4  ;  Lietzmann  p.  1 1. 

(i  It  is  not  quite  clear  how  much  of  this  last  he  wishes  to  abolish,  how  much 
to  retain  :  he  expressly  admits  the  vestments  '  modo  pompa  et  luxus  absit ' 
(c.  28). 


xxxii  LUTHER'S  DEUDSCHE  MESSE 

names  beforehand,  that  the  '  bishop '  may  examine  them  at  least  once  a 
year  as  to  faith,  knowledge,  and  life ;  at  the  Mass  the  communicants  are  to 
stand  together  that  the  congregation  may  recognise  them,  with  a  view  to 
observing  their  life  and  manners ;  private  confession  before  communion  is 
recommended,  but  not  to  be  required  as  of  necessity ;  and  communion  is 
to  be  given  in  both  kinds,  without  waiting  for  the  sanction  of  a  Council. 
(c)  Luther  expresses  a  desire  (38)  for  German  metrical  hymns,  after  the 
manner  of  the  few  existing  vernacular  hymns,  if  poets  can  be  found  to 
compose  them,  to  be  used  by  the  people  at  the  Gradual,  Sanctus  and 
Agnus  Dei.  This  aspiration  began  to  be  satisfied  almost  immediately  in 
collections  of  hymns ;  as  in  Eyn  Enchiridion  oder  Handtbuchlein  Erfurt 
1524,  Geystliche  gesangk  Buchleyn  Wittemberg  1524,  and  others  (see  Julian 
Dictionary  of  Hymnology  pp.  412  sqq.),  to  which  Luther  himself  contributed 
hymns,  some  new,  some  enlargements  or  emendations  of  older  hymns, 
some  metrical  paraphrases  of  Psalms  or  of  formulae  like  the  Credo,  Te 
Deum  or  Media  vita.1  (d)  As  to  Divine  Service  (39-41) :  matins,  hours, 
vespers  and  compline  de  tempore^  are  retained,  with  lessons  and  exposi 
tions  daily  in  German,  morning  and  evening;  but  abridgement  of  the 
number  of  psalms  and  responds  is  suggested,  to  be  determined  by  the 
'  bishop,'  provided  that  the  whole  Psalter  and  the  whole  Bible  are  recited. 

(4)  Luther's  Deudsche  Messe  vnd  ordnung  Gottis  diensts  2  was 
issued  in  1526.  From  the  preface  it  appears  that  there  was 
a  marked  desire  abroad  for  a  vernacular  Mass  and  Divine 
Service,  and  that  men's  minds  were  perplexed  and  distracted 
by  the  variety  of  new  Masses  which  were  being  improvised. 
Luther  himself  in  the  Formula  missae  had  expressed  the 
wish  for  a  vernacular  Mass  3 ;  and  now,  while  desiring  that 
nis  Latin  form  shall  not  be  set  aside  but  continue  in  use 
as  occasion  may  serve,  he  proposes  a  German  Divine  Service 
and  Mass. 

(a)  The  form  of  Divine  Service  for  the  morning  of  Sundays  and 
holydays  (9)  consists  of  psalms ;  a  sermon  on  the  epistle  of  the  day ;  an 
antiphon  and  alternately  Te  Deum  and  Benedictus ;  Our  Father •,  collect,  and 
Benedicamus  Domino.  Vespers  is  apparently  retained,  with  a  sermon  on 
the  Old  Testament  before  Magnificat.  On  weekdays  the  service  (10-12) 
is  primarily  for  schoolboys,  consisting :  in  the  morning,  of  psalms ;  a 
chapter  of  the  New  Testament  read  by  boys,  first  in  Latin,  then  in 


1  Luther's   38   hymns  are   conveniently  printed   in  A.   Leitzmann  Martin 
Luthers  geistliche  Lieder  (Kleine  Texte  24,  25)  Bonn  1907. 

2  Richter  i  p.  35  ;    Sehling   i  p.    10 ;    H.  Lietzmann  Liturgische  Texte  v 
(Kleine  Texte  37,  Bonn  1909).  3  Formula  missae  10. 


LUTHER'S  LITANY  xxxiii 

German ;  an  anthem ;  a  lesson  on  the  Catechism,  S.  Matthew,  S.  John,  or 
the  Epistles,  according  to  a  prescribed  course ;  and  a  German  hymn  :  in  the 
evening,  of  psalms  with  an  antiphon  ;  hymn ;  a  chapter  or  half  a  chapter 
of  the  Old  Testament  in  Latin  and  German  ;  and  Magnificat  with  an 
antiphon;  concluding  both  morning  and  evening  with  Our  Father  said 
privately,  a  collect,  and  Benedicamus.  (b}  In  the  Mass  (13-27)  vestments, 
altar,  and  lights  are  expressly  allowed  for  the  present;  Gloria  in  excehis  is 
omitted,  and  German  metrical  hymns  take  the  place  of  introit  and  gradual, 
and  the  metrical  paraphrase  of  the  Apostles'  Creed  is  substituted  for  the 
c  Nicene '  Creed.  After  the  sermon,  is  recited  the  traditional  '  common 
prayer,'1  or  Our  Father  in  paraphrase,  followed  by  an  exhortation  to 
communicants  :  after  which,  Sursum  cor  da  and  preface  disappearing,  con 
secration  by  the  recitation  of  the  Institution  (  Vnser  herr  Ihesu  Christ^ 
ynn  der  nacht}  follows  immediately.  Luther  prefers  (what  in  the  Formula 
missae  he  had  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  '  bishop ')  that  communion  in 
each  species  should  follow  immediately  on  the  consecration  of  it,  instead 
of  communion  in  both  following  the  consecration  of  both.  During  the 
communion  is  sung  the  German  Sanctus  (Luther's  lesaia  dem  Propheten) 
or  a  metrical  hymn  or  the  German  Agnus  Dei;  and  the  mass  concludes 
with  a  thanksgiving  (  Wyr  dancken  dir  almechtiger  herr  gotf)  and  the 
blessing  (Num.  vi  24-26).  It  is  directed  (25)  that  men  and  women  be 
placed  apart  and  that  the  women  communicate  after  the  men. 

(5)  In  1519  Luther  had  declared  against  the  use  of  proces 
sions,  but  without  any  criticism  of  the  Litany,  which  continued 
in  use  at  Wittemberg.  Later,  probably  as  part  of  Karlstadt's 
proceedings  in  1520  and  1521,  the  Litany  was  abolished.  But 
at  the  end  of  1528  or  early  in  1529,  while  still  denouncing 
processions,  Luther  restored  the  use  of  the  Litany  as  a  method 
of  prayer  against  the  Turkish  peril  ;  and  in  1529  he  issued  a 
reformed  Litany,  first  in  Latin,  and  a  few  months  later  in 
German. 

The  basis  of  Luther's  Litany  is  the  Roman,  to  which  he  was  accustomed 
in  the  use  of  his  own  order,  that  of  the  Augustinian  Hermits.  He  omits 
the  invocations  of  the  saints,  some  12  of  the  Roman  suffrages,  and  the 
psalm  ;  on  the  other  hand  he  adds  some  2  5  suffrages,  either  new  or  derived 
from  other  sources,  and  substitutes  a  new  series  of  collects,  beginning  with 
that  of  the  mass  Pro  tribulations  cordis  (Deus  contritorum)  with  some 
modifications,  each  preceded  by  a  y  and  K?,  mostly  drawn  from  the  preces 
following  the  psalm  of  the  Roman  Litany.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose 

1  The  German  '  gemeines '  or  '  allgemeines  Gebet,'  unlike  the  corresponding 
English  and  French  bidding  of  bedes,  was  and  is  used  after,  not  before, 
the  sermon. 

c 


xxxiv  MATRIMONY  AND  ORDINATION 

that  this  is,  not  Luther's  work,  but  'an  old  German  Litany,'  as  has  some 
times  been  said.  For  the  text  and  history  of  Luther's  Litany  see  P.  Drews 
Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  Gottesdienstes  und  des  gottesdienstl.  Lebens  IV 
'  Luthers  lateinische  und  deutsche  Litanei  von  1529,'  Tubingen  1910.  For 
the  text  of  the  contemporary  Roman  Litany  see  Quinones's  Breviary  (J.  W. 
Legg  Brev.  Rom.  a  .  .  .  Quignonio  editum,  Cambridge  1888,  p.  43). 

(6)  In  1534  Luther  issued  a  form  of  solemnisation  of  Matri 
mony  in  the  Traubuchlein  fur  die  einfeltigen  pfarherrn.1 

The  Marriage-order  in  German  Ritualia  is  commonly  much  shorter 
and  simpler  than  that  of  the  English  books ;  and  in  this  respect  Luther 
follows  the  German  precedent.  His  order  consists  of  an  announcement 
to  the  congregation  of  the  intention  of  the  parties  and  their  desire  for  its 
prayers,  and  a  challenge  to  objectors ;  a  demand  for  consent  in  the  form 
of  a  single  short  question  addressed  to  each  party ;  the  imposition  of  the  ring 
and  the  joining  of  hands  :  '  What  God  hath  joined,'  and  a  declaration  of 
the  marriage  (as  commonly  in  the  German  Ritualia} ;  a  lesson  (Gen.  ii  18, 
21-24),  and  an  admonition  (citing  Eph.  v  22-24,  Gen.  iii  16-19,  i  27>  2^>  3X> 
Prov.  xliii  22);  and  a  prayer  while  the  minister  extends  his  hands  over  the 
parties.  On  the  Traubuchlein  see  Rietschel  Lehrb.  d.  Liturgik  ii  pp.  247. 

(7)  The  Lutheran  communities  first  undertook  to  ordain 
in  I535,2  and  Luther  provided  a  rite  in  the  Formula  ordinan- 
dorum  ministrorum  verbi  of  1537  or  earlier.3 

After  the  examination  of  the  fitness  of  the  candidates  (either  on  the 
day  of  the  ordination  or  on  the  day  before),  a  prayer  is  made  for  the  whole 
ministry  and  for  them ;  and  then,  while  the  candidates  kneel  with  the 
ordainer  and  the  ministers  or  presbyters  before  the  altar,  the  choir  sings 
the  hymn  Vent  sancte  Spiritus ;  and  the  ordainer,  after  y  and  ty,  recites 
a  collect  de  Spiritu  sancto.  Then  the  ordainer  addresses  the  candidates, 
citing  i  Tim.  iii  1-7  and  Acts  xx  28;  after  which,  with  the  presbyters,  he 
lays  his  hands  on  the  heads  of  the  candidates  and  recites  the  Our  Father 
and  a  prayer  that  the  Holy  Ghost  be  given  '  to  those  who  are  seeking 
from  this  church  the  confirmation  of  their  vocation  and  to  all  who  are 
called  to  the  ministry  of  the  word,'  and  that  'the  foul  papistical  and 
mohammedan  abomination  and  the  ravings  of  other  sects '  be  repressed. 
Finally  he  dismisses  the  ordained  in  the  words  of  i  Pet.  v  2-4,  with  the 
sign  of  the  cross  and  a  blessing ;  and  if  desired  Luther's  expansion  of  the 
old  hymn  Nu  bitten  wir  den  heilig  geist  is  sung.  This  rite  was  apparently 
to  be  inserted  in  the  Mass  after  the  sermon  :  accordingly  the  Mass  now 
proceeds  with  the  Lord's  prayer,  and  the  ordained  persons  communicate. 
On  this  rite  see  Rietschel  Lehrb.  d.  Liturgik  ii  pp.  427  sqq. 

1  Sehling  i  p.  23.  2  Rietschel  Lehb.  d.  Liturgik  ii  pp.  420  sqq. 

3  Sehling  i  p.  26  (German),  27  (Latin,  for  ordination  of  foreigners  who  do 
not  understand  German). 


LUTHER'S  CATECHISMS  xxxv 

(8)  Catechesis  or  Catechismus l ;  originally  the  instruction 
of  the  catechumens  in  the  creed  before  baptism  and  of  the 
neophytes  in  the  sacraments  of  baptism  and  the  eucharist 
immediately  after  baptism  ;  later,  when  most  people  were 
baptized  as  infants,  changed  its  meaning,  and  in  the  i6th 
cent,  it  was  generally  used  of  two  or  three  slightly  different 
things  :  either  of  the  Gospel,  Credo,  and  Paternoster,  as  recited 
in  the  Order  of  Baptism — representing  the  old  Roman  Apertio 
aurium2 — together  with  the  charge  to  the  godparents  to  see 
that  the  child  was  instructed  in  Credo  and  Paternoster  3  ;  or 
of  the  questions  and  answers  relating  to  renunciation  and 
faith  4  ;  or  of  those  relating  to  faith  alone  5  ;  or  of  the  charge 
to  the  godparents  alone.6  Colet's  Catechyzon,  written  for 
S.  Paul's  School  (1512),  is  a  summary  of  fundamentals,  put 
into  the  mouth  of  the  boy,  under  the  heads  of  Faith  (the  Creed) , 
the  Seven  Sacraments,  and  Charity,  with  resolutions  relating 
to  Penance,  Communion,  Sickness  and  Death,  followed  by  a 
list  of  '  Preceptes  of  lywynge.'7  It  was  required  of  parish 
priests  in  the  middle  age  regularly  to  instruct  their  flocks 
in  the  Creed,  the  Decalogue,  the  Sacraments,  the  deadly  sins 
and  other  fundamental  topics  8 ;  and  from  time  to  time 
manuals  were  written  to  help  them  in  this  ministry.9  But 
perhaps  Luther  was  the  first  to  fix  the  Decalogue,  the  Creed, 
the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  the  Sacraments,  as  the  four  heads  of 
fundamental  popular  instruction,  and  to  draw  up  manuals  of 
exposition  of  these  topics  under  the  name  of  Catechism.  In 
1520  he  had  published,  in  Encheiridion  piarum  precationum, 

1  Catechismus  of  the  act  of  instruction,  S.  Aug.  de  Fide  et  Opp.  xx  35  ;  of 
the  words  in  which  the  instruction  is  conveyed,  ib.  xiii  19,  xviii  33,  Paulinus 
Vita  Ambrosii  36.  For  later  usage,  Du  Cange  Glossarium  s.v.  Catechismus  and 
cognates.  z  Sacramentarium  Gelasianum  I  xxxiv. 

3  Antididagma  Colon,  f.  xxxvib. 

4  Bucer  Censura  in  Scripta  anglicana  xiv  p.  480. 
6  Encheiridion  Colon,  f.  lxxxib. 

6  Rationale  of  Ceremonies  (ed.  Cobb)  p.  6. 

7  J.  H.  Lupton  Life  of  John  Colet,  London  1887,  pp.  286  sqq. 

8  See  below  p.  clviii. 

9  See  e.g.  The  Lay  folks'  Catechism  E.E.T.S.  118,  London  1881  :  Gasquet 
Parish  life  in  medieval  England  p.  220. 


xxxvi  LUTHER'S  BIBLE 

expositions  of  the  Decalogue,  the  Creed,  and  the  Paternoster 1  ; 
and  in  1526  he  had  urged  the  need  of  '  a  rough  plain  simple 
good  Catechism  '  on  these  three  topics  as  all  that  a  Christian 
needs  to  know,  and  sketched  a  method  of  catechising 2  ;  but 
in  1529,  after  the  Saxon  Visitation,  and  with  the  experience 
of  the  ignorance  of  the  people  which  he  had  gained  in  the 
course  of  it,  he  composed  two  '  Catechisms,'  the  '  Greater  ' 
and  the  '  Short,'  treating  of  the  four  topics  in  the  form  of 
question  and  answer.3  Henceforth  these  four  topics  became 
current  on  all  sides  as  the  heads  of  instruction  :  in  Calvin's 
Catechism  of  1535  ;  in  the  Encheiridion  of  Cologne,  1538* ; 
in  The  Institution  of  a  Christian  man,  1537,  and  A  necessary 
doctrine  and  erudition  for  any.  Christian  man,  1543  (in  both 
these  with  some  subsidiary  topics  added) 5 ;  in  the  Institutio  of 
Mainz,  1549  6 ;  and  in  the  Catechismus  ex  decreto  Concilii 
Tridentini,  I566.7 

(9)  Meanwhile  Luther  had  supplied  what  was  a  first  neces 
sity  for  vernacular  Service  and  Mass,  in  his  translation  of  the 
Bible.  He  issued  the  New  Testament  in  1522  and  the  Old 
Testament  in  successive  instalments  from  1524  to  1534,  when 
the  whole  Bible  (except  3  and  4  Esdras  and  3  and  4  Macca 
bees)  was  collected  in  Biblia,  das  ist,  die  gantze  Heilige  Schrifft 
Deutsch  (Wittemberg) . 

The  Old  Testament  was  rendered  from  the  Hebrew  (Brescia  1494), 
and,  for  the  'Apocrypha,'  from  the  Aldine  Septuagint  of  1518  and 
the  Vulgate,  all  with  the  aid  of  the  Latin  version  of  the  Dominican, 
Xantes  Pagnino  of  Lucca  (published  1528),  and  of  commentaries,  like  the 
Glossa  ordinaria,  compiled  mostly  from  Latin  Fathers  and  Hrabanus 
Maurus  by  Walafrid  Strabo  (f  849),  and  the  Postillae  perpetuae  in  uni- 
versam  s.  Scripturam  of  the  Franciscan,  Nicolas  of  Lyra  (1270-1340).  The 
New  Testament  was  rendered  from  the  2nd  edition  (1519)  of  Erasmus's 

1  Luther  Opera  Wittemberg  1558,  vii  ff.  118  sqq. 

2  Deudsche  messe  5-7  :  in  10  he  adds  'baptism  and  the  sacrament.' 

3  Translated  in  Wace  and  Buchheim  Ltither's  Primary  Works  pp.  i  sqq. 

4  Above  p.  xxx.  5  Below  pp.  liv  sq.  6  Above  p.  xxx. 

7  Catechismus  prooem.  xii :  '  sapientissime  maiores  nostri  totam  hanc  vim 
et  rationem  salutaris  doctrinae  in  quatuor  haec  capita  redactam  distribuerunt  : 
Apostolorum  symbolum,  sacramenta,  decalogum,  dominicam  orationem' — a. 
questionable  statement. 


THE  LUTHERAN  KIRCHENORDNUNGEN        xxxvii 

Greek  text.  See  Darlow  and  Moule  Historical  Catalogue  of  the  printed 
editions  of  Holy  Scripture  in  the  Library  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible 
Society  ii,  London  1911,  nos.  4188,  4189,  4197,  4199,  4594,  4597,  5078, 
6108. 

ii.  Under  cover  of  the  recess  of  the  Diet  of  Speier  in  1526, 
in  which  the  Princes  and  Estates  of  the  Empire  had  under 
taken,  pending  the  convocation  of  a  General  Council  or  of  a 
national  synod,  each  '  so  to  live,  govern,  and  carry  himself, 
as  he  hopes  and  trusts  to  answer  it  to  God  and  his  Imperial 
Majesty/  the  Protestant  Princes,  taking  advantage  of  the 
occupation  of  the  Emperor  with  his  quarrel  with  Clement  VII 
and  that  of  Ferdinand  of  Austria,  first  with  Bohemia  and 
Hungary,  and  then  with  the  Turk,  took  in  hand  the  ecclesi 
astical  reorganisation  of  their  territories  in  the  Lutheran 
sense.1  The  instrument  of  this  reorganisation  was  commonly 
a  Visitation  of  the  parishes  by  commissioners  armed  with  a 
programme  in  the  shape  of  Visitation  Articles  ;  and  the 
permanent  arrangement  was  embodied  in  a  Church  Order 
(Kirchenordnung) ,  defining  the  doctrine,  discipline  and  ritual 
of  the  territory  affected.  Such  Church  Orders  had  already 
appeared  here  and  there  2  ;  but  henceforth,  and  especially 
after  1530,  they  are  indefinitely  multiplied  to  cover  the  whole 
Lutheran  field.  Luther  had  disclaimed  the  purpose  of  dic 
tating  in  the  matter  of  rite  to  the  communities  which  followed 
him,  outside  of  the  range  of  his  immediate  influence  and 
responsibility,  and,  while  desiring  uniformity  within  each 
particular  territory,  he  refused  to  demand  a  general  uni 
formity.3  But  his  rites  were  followed  more  or  less  closely 
in  all  the  Lutheran  territories  ;  and  the  Church  Orders  have 
been  classified,  by  the  standard  of  conformity  to  Luther's 
models,  into  three  principal  groups  :  viz.  those  of  the  strictly 
Lutheran  type,  belonging  to  north  and  middle  Germany  ; 

1  B.  J.  Kidd  Documents  of  the  continental  reformation  pp.  185  sqq. 

*  Richter  Evangelisch.  Kirchenordn.  i  pp.  15  sqq. 

3  Luther  Formula  missae  27,  Deutsche  messe  2  ;  Rietschel  Lehrbuch  der 
Liturgik  \  p.  421  ;  Gasquet  and  Bishop  Edward  VI  and  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  p.  36.  On  the  degree  of  local  uniformity  contemplated,  e.g.  by  the 
Kirchenordnung  of  Albertine  Saxony,  see  Sehling  i  p.  275. 


xxxviii  ERNESTINE-SAXONY  AND  BRANDENBURG-NURNBERG 

a  conservative  group,  approximating  more  nearly  to  the  tra 
ditional  ritual,  belonging,  some  to  north  and  more  of  them  to 
middle  Germany  ;  and  those  approximating  to  the  Reformed 
usage  of  Switzerland,  belonging  to  south  Germany.1  Those 
of  them  which  there  is  occasion  to  mention  here  belong  to 
the  first  and  second  groups  ;  and  they  will  be  sufficient  to 
give  some  impression  of  the  character  of  the  books  of  these 
groups  and  of  their  relations  to  one  another. 

A  large  collection  of  the  Orders  (including  those  of  Switzerland)  is 
contained  in  A.  L.  Richter  Die  evangelischen  Kirchenordnungen  d.  sechs- 
zehnten  Jahrhunderts  Weimar  1846  ;  a  fuller  collection  is  in  course  of  pub 
lication  in  E.  Sehling  Die.  evangelischen  Kirchenordnungen  d.  xvi.  Jahr 
hunderts,  of  which  vols.  i-v  have  so  far  appeared,  Leipzig  1902-1913. 
Unfortunately  in  both  these  works  the  documents  are  not  always  printed 
at  full  length.  For  the  liturgiology  of  the  Kirchenordnungen  see  Rietschel 
Lehrbuch  der  Liturgik  Berlin  1900,  1909. 

(i)  The  Visitation  of  ERNESTINE  SAXONY  was  promoted  at 
Luther's  petition  by  the  Elector  John  in  1527,2  and  was 
carried  out  (1527-1529)  by  commissions  which  administered, 
first,  the  Instruction  fur  die  Visitatoren  of  I527,3  and  then  the 
more  important  and  comprehensive  Vnterricht  der  Visitatoren 
an  die  Pfarhern  ym  Kurfurstenthum  zu  Sachssen,  drawn  up 
in  1528  by  Ph.  Melanchthon  with  the  co-operation  of  Luther.4 
This  Vnterricht  in  effect  directs  the  adoption  of  Luther's  ritual. 

(ii)  The  Visitation  of  the  territories  of  George,  margrave  of 
BRANDENBURG-ANSPACH,  was  undertaken  in  I528,5  and  the 
Church  Order  for  Brandenburg  and  Nurnberg  was  issued  in 
1533  under  the  title  Kirchen  Ordnung,  In  .  .  .  der  Marg- 
grauen  zu  Brandenburg,  vnd  .  .  .  der  Stat  Nurnberg  Oberkeyt 
vnd  gepieten,  Wie  man  sich  bayde  mit  der  Leer  vnd  Ceremonien 
halten  solle*  the  work  of  Andreas  Osiander,  pastor  of  Nurn 
berg  (1520-1548),  and  Johann  Brenz,  pastor  in  Swabisch-Hall 
(1522-1546). 

1  Rietschel  Lehrbuch  \  p.  423. 
Kidd  Documents  p.  186  ;  Sehling  i  pp.  32  sqq. 

3  Richter  i  p.  77  ;  Sehling  i  p.  142. 

4  Richter  i  p.  82  ;  Sehling  i  p.  149. 

G  Kidd  Documents  p.  187.  6  Richter  i  p.  176. 


ALBERTINE-SAXONY  xxxix 

After  the  dogmatic  chapters,  in  part  reproduced  from  the  Saxon 
Vntcrricht,  this  Order  prescribes  (i)  Luther's  revised  order  of  Baptism 
(1526),  preceded  by  an  exhortation  (mostly  from  the  epilogue  of  the  Tauff 
buchliri)  and  followed  by  an  admonition  to  the  god-parents  (from  Osiander's 
baptismal  Ordnung,  1524);  (2)  procedure  as  to  Penance,  with  a  form  of 
absolution ;  (3)  an  Order  of  Mass,  partly  in  Latin,  partly  in  German,  in 
structure  intermediate  between  the  Formula  missae  and  the  Deutsche  Messe ; 
(4)  an  Office  to  be  used  instead  of  the  Mass,  when  none  have  signified  their 
intention  to  communicate ;  viz.  two  or  three  Psalms,  according  to  length 
(for  the  last  of  which  Quicunque  vult  is  substituted  on  Sundays)  with  an 
antiphon,  Epistle,  hymn,  Gospel,  Te  Deum  or  hymn,  three  collects, 
Benedicamus  Domino,  and  blessing;  (5)  an  Order  for  the  Communion  of 
the  Sick,  in  which,  after  examination  and  instruction,  the  sacrament  is 
consecrated  by  the  recital  of  the  Institution  (Der  Herr\  the  Lord's  Prayer 
is  said,  the  sick  is  communicated,  and  a  prayer  follows;  (6)  at  the 
Solemnization  of  Matrimony  after  the  parties  have  been  interrogated  as  to 
their  intention,  there  follows  an  instruction  (Gen.  ii  18-24,  S.  Mt.  xix 
3-9,  Eph.  v  25-29,  22-24,  Gen.  iii  16-19),  tne  troth  with  rings  and 
joining  of  hands,  the  declaration  of  the  marriage  and  What  God  hath 
joined,  the  collect  from  the  Traubtichlein,  Ps.  cxxviii,  and  the  dismissal ; 
(7)  the  Burial  of  the  Dead  includes  Bcnedictus  or  Ps.  xc,  with  an  anthem 
(Media  vita  or  Ego  sum  resurrectid)  or  a  hymn,  to  be  sung  over  the  body, 
and  an  exhortation  on  i  Thess.  iv  13-18  to  be  made  either  in  the  house  or 
at  the  grave ;  (8)  the  abrogation  of  minor  ceremonies  is  confirmed — the 
blessing  of  candles,  palms,  fire,  salt,  water,  etc.,  processions  with  the  Cross 
and  with  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  etc. ;  and  (9)  a  table  of  holy  days  is 
set  out. 

The  Saxon  Vnterricht  and  the  Brandenburg-Nurnberg 
Kirchenordnung  were  perhaps  the  most  influential  of  the  docu 
ments  of  the  period  as  affecting  subsequent  Orders. 

(iii)  In  ALBERTINE  SAXONY  the  duke  George  (1500-1539) 
had  all  along  opposed  the  Lutheran  reformation  ;  but  on  his 
death  in  1539  his  brother  and  successor  Henry,  in  spite  of  the 
opposition  of  the  bishops,  instituted  a  Visitation.  Initiated 
at  Luther's  advice  this  Visitation  was  largely  influenced  from 
Wittemberg,  Justus  Jonas  (1493-1555),  provost  of  the  Castle 
church  and  professor  of  Canon  Law  in  the  University, 
and  Georg  Spalatin  (1484-1545),  being  among  the  com 
missioners,  while  the  articles  of  Visitation  were  compiled 
by  the  theological  faculty  of  Wittemberg.1  The  Visitation 

1  Sehling  i  pp.  85  sqq. 


xl  ALBERTINE-SAXONY 

was  begun  in  1539  and  a  Church  Order,  Kirchenordnunge 
zum  anfang,  fur  die  Pfarherrn  in  Hertzog  Heinrichs  zu  Sachsen 
v.  g.  h.  Furstenthum,1  perhaps  the  work  mainly  of  Justus  Jonas,2 
was  issued  in  the  same  year.  But  this  Order  was  avowedly 
only  provisional  (zum  anfang) ,  and  it  was  reissued  in  a  fuller 
form  in  the  following  year  under  the  title  Agenda  das  ist 
kirchenordnung  fur  die  diener  der  kirchen  in  herzog  Heinrich 
zu  Sachsen  furstenthum  gestellet*  This  Order  also  had  con 
siderable  influence  on  later  Orders.4 

The  Saxon  Order  provides  for  (i)  Baptism:  Luther's  amended  Tauf- 
buchlein  of  1526  with  three  exhortations  added;  (2)  private  Baptism  in 
time  of  need,  and  verification  in  church,  with  interrogations  as  to  the 
matter  and  form  employed,  the  Gospel  (S.  Mk.  x  13-16),  a  blessing  and 
dismissal ;  (3)  Penance  with  a  form  of  absolution ;  (4)  the  Visitation  and 
Communion  of  the  Sick,  with  an  instruction  and  exhortation,  absolution, 
psalm,  Gospel,  Lord's  Prayer,  consecration  and  communion,  psalm,  and 
the  Aaronic  blessing ;  (5)  Divine  Service  (approximately  Luther's) ;  (6)  the 
Communion  (Luther's  Deutsche  Messe,  but  with  the  Latin  prefaces  to  be 
sung  on  great  feasts  and  occasionally  on  Sundays) ;  and  a  substitute  when 
there  are  none  to  communicate,  viz.  psalms  or  a  German  hymn,  Gospel, 
creed,  sermon,  psalm  or  hymn,  collect  and  blessing  ;  (7)  the  recitation  of 
Luther's  German  Litany,  in  towns  on  Wednesdays  or  fridays  and  in  Ember 
weeks,  in  villages  on  alternate  Sundays ;  (8)  the  Solemnization  of  Matri 
mony  according  to  Luther's  Traubiichlein^  with  Ps.  cxxvii  or  cxxviii  inserted 
before  the  Lesson  (for  which  S.  Jo.  ii  i-n  is  suggested  in  place  of  Gen.  ii)  ; 
(9)  a  table  of  holydays;  (10)  the  Burial  of  the  Dead;  viz.  a  respond  (e.g. 
Si  bona  suscepimus)  and  a  German  hymn  (e.g.  Luther's  metrical  De  pro- 
fundis  or  Media  vita\  to  be  sung  on  the  way  to  the  grave ;  Luther's  Nunc 
dimittis  and  metrical  creed  at  the  grave,  and  a  collect  (for  the  living)  after 
the  burial;  (n)  a  series  of  German  collects  for  days  and  occasions. 

A  second  and  more  thorough  Visitation  was  begun  at  the 
end  of  1539  and  lasted  till  1542,  carried  through  by  divines 
of  Albertine  Saxony  without  the  interference  of  Wittemberg.5 
Among  the  acts  of  the  commissioners  was  the  issue  of  a  paper 
of  injunctions  to  parish-priests  (Gemeiner  bericht  der  visi- 

1  Richter  i  pp.  307  sqq.  2  See  Sehling  i  pp.  88  sq. 

3  Sehling  i  pp.  264  sqq.,  where  the  Order  of  1539  is  printed  with  the  addi 
tions  and  alterations  of  1 540  in  the  margin. 

4  The  Saxon  Order  is  denoted  by  the  symbol  S  in  the  margin  of  the  first 
column  below. 

6  Sehling  i  pp.  90  sqq. 


ELECTORAL  BRANDENBURG  xli 

tatoren  an  die  pfarrer  und  dortschaft,1  Oct.  n  1540),  including 
directions  to  catechise  at  Vespers  on  Sundays  and  festivals, 
the  requirement  of  confession  and  absolution  before  each 
communion,  and  of  uniformity  in  ceremonies. 

(iv)  In  ELECTORAL  BRANDENBURG,  while  the  Elector 
Joachim  I  (1499-1535)  had  vigorously  opposed  Luther  and 
his  reformation,  his  son  Joachim  II  (1535-1571)  was  favour 
able  to  a  moderate  reform  and  was  supported  by  the  nobles 
and  the  towns,  and  by  Matthias  von  Jagow,  bishop  of  Bran 
denburg.  He  therefore  summoned  a  convention  of  divines, 
including  George  Witzel  (1501-1573),  whose  sympathies  were 
Erasmian,  and  Melanchthon  ;  and  in  Oct.  1539  a  conservative 
programme  of  reform  was  adopted  ;  and  March  i  1540  the 
nobles  and  the  towns  in  the  Diet  accepted  a  correspondingly 
conservative  Church  Order,  Kirchen  Ordnung  in  Churfursten- 
thum  der  Marcken  zu  Brandemburg,  wie  man  sich  beide  mil 
der  Leer  vnd  Ceremonien  halten  sol,  which  was  followed  by  a 
Visitation.2 

Of  the  contents  of  the  Kirchenordnung :  (i)  the  provisions  for  private 
Baptism  and  subsequent  verification  reproduce  those  of  the  Saxon  Order ; 
the  rite  and  the  rubrics  of  public  Baptism  reproduce  in  German  those  of  some 
Agenda,  with  a  didactic  element  derived  from  the  Brandenburg- Niirnberg 
and  Albertine-Saxon  Orders ;  (2)  Confirmation  is  administered  by  prayer 
and  imposition  of  hands  after  instruction  in  the  Catechism  and  examination 
by  the  bishop ;  (3)  the  administration  of  Penance  takes  its  didactic  element 
from  the  Brandenburg-Niirnberg  Order,  while  its  form  is  akin  to  that  of 
the  Saxon  Order ;  (4)  in  the  Mass,  in  which  the  priest  and  his  ministers 
are  to  use  the  accustomed  ornaments,  the  Confiteor  is  first  recited,  and  then 
the  traditional  rite  is  followed  in  exceptional  detail,  except  that  (a)  while 
the  Offertorium  is  sung,  there  are  no  directions  for  the  offertory ;  (b)  the 
Canon  is  reduced  to  four  German  prayers,  for  the  Emperor  and  civil  rulers, 
for  the  clergy,  for  unity,  and  for  forgiveness  of  sins  (from  the  Brandenburg- 
Niirnberg  Order),  and  the  consecration  (Vnser  herr)  in  a  form  akin  to 
that  of  the  same  Order,  with  inclination  and  elevation,  followed  by 
a  respond  or  hymn ;  (c)  after  the  communion-prayers  is  inserted  an 

1  Printed  ibid.  pp.  284  sqq.   This  document  is  denoted  by  A-S.  in  the  margin 
of  the  Synopsis  below. 

2  Kidd  Documents  pp.  306  sq.     The  Kirchenordnung  is  printed  in  Richter 
i  PP-  323  sqq.,  Sehling  iii  pp.  39  sqq.     It  is  denoted  by  Br  in  the  margin  of  the 
first  column  below  (on  p.  790  for  B  read  Br). 


xlii  ELECTORAL  BRANDENBURG 

exhortation  to  communicants  (from  the  Brand.-Niirnb.  Order) ;  (d)  the 
German  thanksgiving  (from  the  same  Order)  is  substituted  for  the  Post- 
communion  ;  and  (e)  all  is  still  in  Latin,  except  that,  besides  the  German 
elements  already  noticed,  the  Epistle  and  Gospel  are  to  be  read  in  German 
as  well  as  in  Latin,  a  German  hymn  is  substituted  for  the  gradual,  and  in 
parish-churches  the  German  metrical  creed  for  Credo  in  unum,  and  Pater 
nosier  and  Pax  Domini  are  in  German :  (5)  on  days  when  there  are  no 
communicants,  the  Order  of  the  Mass  is  to  be  recited  as  far  as  to  the  Sermon, 
after  which  is  to  be  said  the  German  Litany,  or  Luther's  metrical  Pater 
noster  or  Media  vita  or  Deus  misereatur,  his  Da  pacem  Domine  and  the 
collect  pro  pace,  and  the  usual  blessing  :  (6)  the  Litany  is  to  be  used  as 
above  and  also,  in  towns  on  Wednesdays  or  fridays  or  on  other  days,  in 
villages  on  all  Sundays  or  every  other  Sunday :  (7)  the  Solemnization  of 
Matrimony  follows  the  Brandenburg-Niirnberg  Order  in  the  betrothal,  but 
it  adds  a  German  version  of  the  collect  Propitiare  Domine  supplicantibus 
and  of  the  nuptial  benediction  Deus  qui  potestate  virtutis;  and,  after  a  final 
commendation  of  the  parties  each  to  the  other,  the  minister  gives  them 
the  Aaronic  blessing  and  dismisses  them :  (8)  for  the  Sick  it  is  provided 
that  (a)  if  a  sick  person  is  unable  to  be  present  at  the  Mass,  he  may  be 
communicated  in  church  at  a  more  convenient  hour,  if  notice  has  been 
given  overnight;  (b)  if  he  is  too  ill  to  go  to  church,  the  priest,  having  on  a 
surplice,  and  preceded  by  the  sacristan  with  lantern  and  bell,  shall  carry 
the  Sacrament  to  him  directly  from  the  altar  at  the  time  of  communion, 
and  communicate  him  at  home ;  and  (c)  in  a  sudden  emergency  the  priest 
shall  resort  to  the  church  and  there,  after  exhorting  such  as  are  present  to 
pray  for  the  sick,  shall  say  the  Lord's  prayer  at  the  altar  and  consecrate, 
and  then  carry  the  Sacrament  to  the  sick  as  before :  and  in  the  house  in 
both  cases,  after  placing  the  Sacrament  on  a  table  covered  with  a  linen 
cloth,  he  shall  exhort  the  sick  (in  the  form  provided  in  the  Alb.-Saxon 
Order)  and  recite  Ps.  xxv  (and  if  there  is  time  one  or  more  of  Pss.  xx, 
xxiii,  xxvii,  xxxi,  xlii),  S.  Jo.  iii  16  sqq.,  and  a  passage  from  S.  Paul  (e.g. 
from  Rom.  viii,  x),  followed  by  prayers,  the  Apostles'  creed  and  the  Lord's 
prayer;  the  sick  shall  make  his  confession  and  be  absolved;  and  the 
priest  shall  communicate  him  in  both  kinds ;  after  which  he  shall  recite 
Ps.  cxvii  or  ciii  and  give  the  Aaronic  blessing ;  and  if  the  sick  desire  it 
shall  add  Pss.  xci,  cxviii.  These  provisions  apply  to  town-parishes ;  but 
(d)  in  village-parishes,  when  distances  may  be  long  and  roads  bad,  after 
notice  received  overnight,  the  priest  shall  go  in  the  morning  to  the  sick 
person's  house,  and  there,  having  a  surplice,  a  table,  corporal,  vessels, 
pall,  and  light,  shall  first  hear  the  sick  man's  confession,  if  he  have  not 
made  it  the  day  before,  and  absolve  him,  and  use  the  exhortation,  Psalms, 
etc.,  as  above,  and  then  after  preparing  the  host  and  the  chalice  on  the 
corporal,  and,  if  the  sick  person  have  not  just  made  his  confession,  reciting 
the  general  confession  and  the  absolution  and  exhorting  the  sick,  shall 


CALENBERG-GOTTINGEN  xliii 

consecrate,  and  communicate  him,  in  the  Alb.-Saxon  form;  and  after 
washing  his  fingers  and  giving  the  ablution  to  the  sick  or  to  some  other  to 
consume,  he  shall  conclude  with  psalms  and  thanksgiving,  the  blessing, 
and  commendation  of  the  sick  to  God :  (9)  the  Burial  of  the  Dead 
provides  for  a  procession  to  the  grave,  with  cross  and  lights,  while  the 
Media  -vita  and  Luther's  paraphrase  of  it,  with  Luther's  De  profundis,  or 
the  respond  Libera  me  Domine  (from  the  Exsequiarum  Ordo\  are  sung ; 
and  an  office  in  church,  consisting  of  Luther's  Nunc  dimittis,  one  or  more 
lessons  with  responds  or  German  hymns  between,  Benedictus  with  its 
antiphon  Ego  sum  resurrectio^  and  a  collect,  followed  by  the  respond  Si  bona 
suscepimus  (Hist.  Job.  i),  the  Epistle  i  Thess.  iv  13-18  and  the  Gospel  S. 
Jo.  xi  21-28,  and  the  respond  repeated  ;  while  there  is  no  form  of  committal 
of  the  body,  a  deficiency  characteristic  of  Lutheran  rites.1 

(v)  In  the  principalities  of  CALENBERG  and  GOTTINGEN 
the  reformation  made  some  way  in  the  towns  under  the  duke 
Eric  I ;  but  it  was  not  till  after  his  death  (1540)  and  during 
the  regency  of  his  widow,  the  duchess  Elizabeth,  that  it  was 
generally  adopted,  and  was  organised  by  a  Church  Order 
(Christliche  Kirchen  Ordnung,  Ceremonien  und  Gesenge,  Fur 
arme  vngeschickte  Pfarrherrn  gestelt  1542),  compiled  by  Anton 
Rabe  (Corvinus,  1501-1553),  mostly  from  the  Brandenburg  - 
Niirnberg  Order  of  1533,  the  Saxon  Order  of  1539,  and  the 
Brandenburg  Order  of  I54O.2 

(i)  The  Baptismal  orders,  public  and  private,  follow  those  of  the 
Brandenburg  Kirchenordnung  of  1540  ;  (2)  in  Confirmation,  the  candidate 
is  publicly  examined  in  the  catechism  and  then  receives  imposition  of 
hands  accompanied  by  a  prayer  for  strength  and  perseverance,  for  which 
no  particular  form  is  prescribed;  and  after  Confirmation  he  may  be 
admitted  to  communion  ;  (3)  the  Mass  reproduces  Bugenhagen's  Brunswick 
Order  of  I528,3  which  is  practically  identical  with  the  Saxon  order  of  1540, 
noticed  above  (p.  xl),  except  that  the  Preface  and  Sanctus  are  retained, 
and  the  communion  is  dovetailed  into  the  consecration ;  (4)  in  the  Divine 
Service,  Vespers  are  in  the  traditional  form,  except  that  the  Psalms  are 
reduced  to  3,  and  a  lesson  with  an  exposition  is  inserted  after  Magnificat ; 
Matins  and  Lauds  are  fused  into  a  single  office,  on  Sundays  and  festivals 
consisting  of  the  common  introduction  (Deus  in  adiutorium  &c.),  Invita- 
tory  and  Venite,  3  Psalms  with  antiphons,  a  lesson  from  the  Old  or  the 
New  Testament,  Te  Deum,  a  lesson  from  the  N.T.  with  an  exposition, 

1  Rietschel  Lehrbuch  der  Liturgik  ii  p.  330. 

2  In  Richter  i  pp.  362  sqq.,  where  see  introductory  note.     It  is  denoted  in 
the  margin  below  by  C.  *  Richter  i  p.  115. 


xliv  THE  NEUBURG  PALATINATE 

Benedictus  with  antiphon,  collect,  Benedicamus  Domino  and  the  memorial 
for  peace  (Da  pacem  &c.  and  Deus  auctor  pads) ;  while  on  weekdays  the 
Vent  sancte  Spiritus  replaces  Venite,  the  first  Lesson  is  omitted,  and  a 
prayer  follows  the  exposition  of  the  second  lesson;  (5)  Luther's  Litany 
is  to  be  sung  on  Wednesdays  and  Fridays ;  (6)  the  order  for  Solemnization 
of  Matrimony  is  closely  akin  to  the  Brandenburg  order  of  1540;  and  (7) 
at  the  Burial  of  the  Dead  the  German  Media  vita  and  De  profundis  are 
sung  during  the  procession  to  the  grave  and  the  burial,  and  after  the 
burial  follows  a  short  exhortation,  a  lesson  from  S.  John  xi,  and  a  collection 
of  alms. 

(vi)  In  the  NEUBURG  PALATINATE  (Pfalz-Neuburg)  the 
reformation  was  introduced  by  the  palsgrave  Otto  Heinrich 
by  a  mandate,  Ausschreiben  vnd  Ernstlicher  befehl,  dated  June 
22  1542,  and  in  the  next  year  this  was  followed  by  a  Church 
Order,  Kirchenordnung,  Wie  es  mit  der  Christlichen  Lehre, 
heiligen  Sacramenten  vnd  allerley  andern  Ceremonien  .  .  . 
gehalten  wirt,  compiled  with  the  co-operation  of  Osiander,  and 
closely  related  to  the  Orders  of  Brandenburg-Niirnberg,  1533, 
and  Electoral  Brandenburg,  I54O.1 

The  Order  consists  of  three  parts,  of  which  the  second  is  concerned 
with  liturgy ;  and  here  it  chiefly  follows  both  in  rite  and  in  ceremony  the 
Order  of  Electoral  Brandenburg,  1540,  but  sometimes  prefers  that  of 
Brandenburg-Niirnberg,  1533  ;  while  it  has  some  characteristics  of  its  own. 
Only  four  points  need  to  be  noticed  in  particular,  (i)  In  the  Mass, 
after  the  sermon,  or  after  the  creed  if  the  sermon  is  preached  before  the 
Mass  begins,  follows  the  Exhortation  Ir  allerliebsten  in  Gott  of  the 
Brandenburg-Niirnberg  Order;  after  which  is  a  remarkable  prayer  Hcrr 
Jesu  Christe,  presenting  the  gifts  of  bread  and  wine,  and  asking  our  Lord, 
by  His  divine  grace,  goodness,  and  power,  to  hallow,  bless,  and  make  the 
bread  to  be  His  body  and  the  wine  His  blood,  and  to  grant  to  all  who  eat 
and  drink  of  them  to  attain  to  eternal  life.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  this 
prayer  is  addressed  to  our  Lord,  which  is  abnormal  at  such  a  point  (see 
Concil.  Carthag.  Ill  can.  23);  but  cp.  the  prayer  Adesto  adesto  at  the 
corresponding  point  in  the  Mozarabic  Mass  (Migne  P.L.  Ixxxv  550). 
(2)  After  this  prayer  follows  the  consecration  in  the  usual  Lutheran  form 
( Vnser  Herr) ;  Sanctus ;  three  prayers,  for  the  civil  rulers,  for  the  clergy, 
and  for  unity  (from  the  Brandenburg-Niirnberg  Order),  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  Agnus  Dei,  and  the  communion,  during  which  is  sung  the  '  Com- 
munio '  and  if  necessary  another  Latin  hymn,  like  the  responsory  Discubuit 


1  In  Richter  ii  26  sqq.,  where  see  introductory  note.     This  Order  is  denoted 
by  P  in  the  margin  of  the  first  column  below. 


THE  REFORMATION  OF  COLOGNE  xlv 

lesus.  (3)  When  none  have  signified  their  intention  to  communicate,  the 
order  of  the  Mass  is  used  only  as  far  as  to  the  sermon,  and  then  follow  the 
Litany,  a  collect,  Benedicamus  and  the  blessing.  (4)  A  number  of  minor 
ceremonies  are  explicitly  abolished  :  perambulation  at  Rogationtide  (when 
the  usual  ceremonies,  followed  by  an  exhortation  to  the  people  to  pray, 
and  the  Litany,  are  now  to  be  executed  in  church);  the  spectacula  or 
dramatic  elements  in  the  observance  of  the  great  festivals ;  and  the  con 
secration  of  water,  of  lights  at  Candlemas,  ashes  on  Ash  Wednesday,  palms 
on  Palm  Sunday,  the  ceremonies  of  Easter  Even,  etc. 

(vii)  It  does  not  appear  whether  or  not  the  measures  of 
reform  proposed  by  the  Council  of  Cologne  in  1536  were 
enforced  or  proved  in  any  way  effectual.  In  any  case  the 
recess  of  the  Diet  of  Regensburg  (July  29  1541),  which 
required  the  prelates  to  promote  within  their  jurisdictions  a 
Christian  ordering  and  reformation  for  the  better  adminis 
tration  of  ecclesiastical  affairs,  served  as  occasion  for  the 
Archbishop-Elector,  Hermann  von  Wied,  to  attempt  further 
reformation  in  the  diocese  of  COLOGNE.  But  by  this  time 
he  was  drifting  towards  Lutheranism  ;  and  by  1543  he  had 
definitely  taken  the  Lutheran  side,  and  to  advocate  his 
reform  and  carry  it  through  he  had  introduced  Martin  Bucer 
(Butzer)  from  Strassburg,  in  spite  of  the  protests  of  J.  Cropper 
and  the  Chapter  of  Cologne  and  of  the  University,  invited 
Philip  Melanchthon  from  Wittemberg,  and  admitted  other 
divines,  among  them  Joh.  Becker  (Pistorius,  1503-1583),  court- 
preacher  of  Philip  of  Hessen,  and  Caspar  Hedio  (1493-1552) 
of  Strassburg.  The  programme  of  the  reform  was  embodied 
in  a  Church  Order,  compiled  by  Bucer,  who  was  responsible 
for  the  ritual  enactments,  and  Melanchthon,  who  drew  up 
the  dogmatic  articles,  Becker  and  Hedio  co-operating.  The 
Order  was  laid  before  the  Landtag  at  Bonn,  July  1543,  and 
at  least  provisionally  accepted  by  the  lay  estates  ;  and  after 
some  alteration  it  was  published  before  October  under  the  title 
Von  Gottes  genaden,  vnser  Hermans  Ertzbischoffs  zu  Coin,  vnnd 
Churfursten  &c.  einfaltigs  bedencken,  warauff  ein  Christliche, 
in  dem  wort  Gottes  gegriinte  Reformation  an  Lehr,  branch  der 
Heyligen  Sacramenten  vnd  Ceremonien,  Seelsorge,  vnd  anderem 


xlvi        THE  EINFALTIGS  BEDENCKEN  OF  COLOGNE 

Kirchendienst,  biss  vff  eines  freyen,  Christlichen,  Gemeinen  oder 
Nationals  Concilij,  oder  des  Reichs  Teutscher  Nation  Stende,  im 
Heyligen  Geyst  versamlet,  verbesserung,  bey  denen  so  vnsere 
Seelsorge  befohlen,  anzurichten  seye 1  ;  a  corrected  andJmproved 
edition  was  issued  at  Bonn  in  1544  ;  and  in  1545  it  was  pub 
lished,  with  further  modifications,  in  Latin,  under  the  title 
Nostra  Hermanni  ex  gratia  Dei  archiepiscopi  Coloniensis,  et 
principis  elector  is,  &c.  simplex  ac  pia  deliberatio  etc.2 

By  Hermann's  desire  Osiander's  Brandenburg-Niirnberg 
Order  of  1533  was  taken  as  the  basis  of  the  Cologne  Order  ; 
but  use  was  made  also  of  the  Cassel  Order  of  1539,  of  the 
Albertine-Saxon  Order  of  1540,  and  of  the  Schwabisch-Hall 
Order  of  1543  ;  while  at  some  points  Hermann's  Order  is 
original.3  It  bears  the  mark  of  Bucer  in  its  doctrine  of  the 
Eucharist,  which  approximates  to  the  Swiss,  and  won  for  it 
the  denunciation  of  Luther  ;  and,  what  perhaps  more  nearly 
concerns  the  present  purpose,  in  the  excessively  didactic  and 
hortatory  complexion  of  its  ritual.4 

(i)  Baptism  is  to  be  administered  on  a  Sunday  or  festival,  in  the  face 
of  the  church ;  and  by  way  of  some  return  to  ancient  usage,  the  admission 
and  the  scrutiny  of  the  candidate  is  to  happen  on  the  day  preceding. 
Accordingly  the  Order  of  Baptism  is  divided  into  two  parts.  On  the  first 
day,  the  procedure  includes  a  long  exhortation,  being  an  expanded  com 
bination  of  the  exhortations  of  the  Saxon  and  the  Brandenburg-Niirnberg 
Orders ;  the  interrogations  and  the  corresponding  renunciations  and 
confession  of  faith,  expanded  into  a  long  catechism ;  and  a  further  ex 
hortation.  Then  follows  the  sign  of  the  cross  with  Nim  das  Zeichen ; 
the  short  exorcism  (Ich  gebiete,  corresponding  to  Exi  immunde  and  Fahre 

1  Printed  incompletely  in  Richter  ii  pp.  30  sqq. 

2  On  the  history  of  Hermann's  reformation   see  Deckers   Hermann  von 
Wied  chaps,   xii-xiv ;    Drouven   Die  Reformation   in  d.    Coin.   Kirchenprov. 
ch.  xiii.     Hermann's  Church  Order  is  denoted  in  the  margin  below  by  H  whether 
the  German  or  the  Latin  text  be  referred  to.     I  have  aimed  at  using  whichever 
of  the  two  texts  corresponds  more  nearly  to  the  English  in  each  case  :  but  I 
have  not  been  able  always  to  have  the  complete  German  text  before  me. 

3  The  Ordenung  der  Kirchen  zn  Cassel,  of  exceptional  type,  having  been 
compiled  under  Strassburg  influence,  is  printed  in  Richter  i  pp.  295  sqq. ;  the 
Ordnung  der  Kirchen,  inn  eins  Erbarn  Raths  zu  Schivabischen  Hall,  Oberkeit 
vnd  gepiet  gelegen  is  printed  ibid,  ii  pp.  14  sqq. 

4  Melanchthon  describes  Bucer  as  'copiosus'  (Kidd  Documents  p.  352),  and 
Luther  alludes  to  his  '  Klappermaul'  (Deckers  op.  cit.  p.  109). 


THE  EINFALTIGS  BEDENCKEN  OF  COLOGNE       xlvii 

aus\  and  the  two  first  prayers  of  Luther's  Taufbiichkin  of  1526;  the 
Gospel  (S.  Mark  x.  13-16),  and,  in  the  Latin,  a  short  exposition;  the 
Lord's  Prayer  and  the  creed ;  Psalms  cxiv  and  cxv,  or  cxxxv,  and  a  collect. 
On  the  next  day,  after  the  creed  of  the  Mass,  the  minister  recites  an 
exhortation,  an  Epistle  (Tit.  iii  4  sqq.)  and  a  Gospel  (S.  Mt.  xxviii  18  sqq.), 
and  a  long  'general  prayer'  (from  the  Cassel  Order);  after  which  the  Baptism 
is  administered  with  the  traditional  formula  in  German,  followed  by  Der 
Almechtige  Gott  vnd  Vatter  from  the  Tavfbitihlein,  a  German  hymn,  and 
Der  fried  sei  mit  euch  alien  ;  and  the  mass  is  continued.  Private  Baptism 
reproduces  that  of  the  Saxon  Order.  (2)  Before  Confirmation  the 
confirmands  are  examined  in  a  long  and  detailed  catechism,  expanded 
from  that  of  the  Cassel  Order  ;  the  congregation  is  admonished  to  pray  for 
them,  and  the  prayers  are  summed  up  in  a  long  collect,  also  derived  from 
the  Cassel  Order ;  after  which  Confirmation  is  conferred  by  imposition  of 
hands  and  prayer ;  and  a  German  hymn  of  thanksgiving  follows.  (3)  For 
the  Lord's  Supper  an  office  of  preparation  is  provided  to  be  used  on  the 
day  before  communion,  in  which  after  a  German  psalm  and  a  lesson 
(e.g.  from  i  Cor.  x,  xi  or  S.  John  vi)  the  minister  reads  an  exhortation  (for 
which  two  alternatives  are  supplied,  the  one  from  the  Cassel  Order,  the 
other  from  the  Brandenburg-Niirnberg  Order)  and  prays  for  all  the  needs 
of  the  Church  and  especially  for  those  about  to  communicate ;  and  after 
the  people  have  prayed  silently  the  minister  concludes  with  a  collect.  The 
celebration  itself  is  preceded  by  a  confession,  '  comfortable  words,'  and 
absolution ;  it  follows  the  common  order  from  the  introit  to  the  sermon, 
after  which  is  recited  a  prayer  for  all  estates  (from  the  Cassel  Order),  and 
the  Creed,  during  which  the  alms  are  collected :  then  follows  '  The  Lord 
be  with  you,'  *  Lift  up  your  hearts,'  etc.,  and  a  fixed  preface  with  Sanctus 
and  Benedictus  in  Latin  and  German,  the  consecration  (Vnser  Hcrr), 
followed  by  the  people's  Amen,  '  Let  us  pray '  and  the  Lord's  Prayer,  '  The 
peace  of  the  Lord,'  the  communion  with  Agnus  Dei  and  hymns,  'The 
Lord  be  with  you '  and  a  thanksgiving,  either  that  of  the  Brandenburg- 
Niirnberg  Order  or  that  of  Luther's  Deutsche  Messe,  and  the  Aaronic 
blessing.  (4)  In  the  Solemnization  of  Matrimony,  the  minister,  after 
demanding  the  intention  of  the  parties,  recites  passages  from  Gen.  ii  18, 
21-24,  Matt,  xix  3-5,  Eph.  v  25-29,  22-24  (as  in  the  Brandenburg-Niirnberg 
Order)  and  makes  an  exhortation  on  these  texts,  and  admonishes  the 
parties  and  the  congregation  to  pray  that  the  marriage  be  undertaken 
and  fulfilled  to  the  end  according  to  the  divine  precepts ;  the  parties  give 
their  troth  in  answer  to  a  single  question  addressed  to  each,  rings  are 
exchanged  and  hands  joined,  and  the  minister  recites  '  What  God  hath 
joined,'  and  proclaims  the  marriage :  and  after  the  singing  of  Ps.  cxxvii  or 
cxxviii,  the  minister  recites  a  prayer,  either  Almechtiger  gutiger  Gott, 
himlischer  Vater,  from  the  Cassel  Order,  or  Herr  Gott,  der  du  man  vnd 
weib  gcschafen  hast,  from  the  Brandenburg-Nurnberg  Order  and  Luther's 


xlviii  THE  ANTIDIDAGMA  OF  COLOGNE 

Traubuchlein.  (5)  In  the  Visitation  and  Communion  of  the  Sick,  the 
minister  makes  an  exhortation  (from  the  Saxon  Order),  and  reads  S.  John  vi 
53-58,  with  an  exposition,  and  after  '  The  Lord  be  with  you '  recites  a  collect 
and  the  Lord's  Prayer ;  then  he  consecrates  with  the  ordinary  Lutheran 
formula,  repeats  the  Lord's  Prayer  and  'The  peace  of  the  Lord,'  and 
communicates  the  sick  and  those  who  are  with  him,  and  concludes  with 
the  thanksgiving  and  the  blessing.  (6)  At  the  Burial  of  the  Dead,  during 
the  procession  the  German  Media  vita  or  De  profundis  or  other  like  hymns 
are  sung:  at  the  grave  a  lesson  may  be  read  (i  Cor.  xv  20-28,  or  50-58,  or 
Phil,  iii  20  sq.,  or  Rom.  vi  8-n) ;  and  in  the  church  a  short  office  is  said, 
of  which  the  structure  and  most  of  the  contents  are  borrowed  from  Brentz's 
Kirchenordnung  for  Schwabisch  Hall,  I543,1  consisting  of  a  lesson  (i  Th. 
iv  13-18,  S.  Jo.  xi  21-27,  s-  Lk.  vii  11-15,  or  S.  Mt.  ix  18,  19,  23-26)  with 
an  exposition  and  exhortation,  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  two  collects. 

Of  these  Kirchenordnungen  it  will  be  seen  that  those  of 
both  Saxonies,  and  that  of  Brandenburg-Niirnberg  are  of  the 
central  Lutheran  type  ;  and  those  of  Electoral  Brandenburg, 
of  Calenberg-Gottingen,  and  of  the  Neuburg  Palatinate  are 
more  conservative  ;  whereas  that  of  Cologne,  like  the  Cassel 
Order,  while  approximating  to  the  Lutheran  type,  is  excep 
tional,  betraying  the  partly  conservative  influence  of  Bucer. 

iii.  Hermann  von  Wied's  reformation  failed,  and  the 
EinfaUigs  bedencken  was  little  if  at  all  used  in  the  diocese  of 
Cologne,  though  for  a  while  it  had  some  vogue  in  Hessen.2 
Already  on  Oct.  I  1543  the  Chapter  of  Cologne  sent  an  answer 
to  it  to  the  archbishop,  at  the  same  time  petitioning  that  the 
Church  Order  should  not  be  published  ;  adding  that,  if  it  were, 
they  would  be  bound  to  publish  their  answer  and  to  make  their 
protest.3  The  EinfaUigs  bedencken  had,  however,  already  been 
printed  and  was  in  circulation  ;  and  in  fact  a  second  and 
emended  impression  had  been  issued  before  Oct.  I .  The  Chap 
ter  therefore  printed  its  answer,  which  appeared  early  in  1544, 
with  the  title  Christliche  vnd  katholische  Gegenberichtung  eines 
ehrwurdigen  Domcapitels  zu  Koln  wider  das  Buck  der  genannten 
Reformation,  so  den  Standen  des  Erzstiffts  Collen  auf  jungstem 
Landtage  zu  Bonn  vorgehalten,  vnd  nun  vnter  dem  Titel  eines 
Bedenkens  im  Druck  (dock  mil  allerlei  Zusdtzen  vnd  Verande- 

1  Richter  ii  p.  21.  2  Richter  ii  p.  30.  3  Deckers  op.  cit.  pp.  104  sq. 


COLOGNE,  ZURICH,  GENEVA  xlix 

rungen)  ausgangen  ist.1  And  soon  after  appeared  a  Latin 
version  :  Antididagma,  sev  Christiana  et  catholicce  religionis 
per  Reverend.  &  Illust.  dnos  Canonicos  Metropolitans  ecclesice 
Colonien  propugnatio,  aduersus  librum  quendam  uniuersis 
Ordinibus  sen  Statibus  Dicecesis  eiusdem  nuper  Bonnes  titulo 
Reformationis  exhibitum,  ac  posted  (mutatis  quibusdam)  consul- 
torice  deliberationis  nomine  impressum.  The  Antididagma  is  an 
interesting  and  moderate  restatement,  no  doubt  mainly  by  J. 
Cropper,  of  the  traditional  Catholic  doctrine  and  rite,  in  reply 
to  the  Einfaltigs  bedencken,  taken  almost  chapter  by  chapter. 
Of  particular  interest  is  the  exposition  of  the  fourfold  sacrifice  in  the 
Eucharist :  (i)  of  the  material  offering  of  the  bread  and  wine,  in  acknow 
ledgment  of  the  divine  benefits,  at  the  Offertory  (f.  lviiiv) ;  (2)  of  thanks 
giving  :  '  commune  illud  laudis  et  gratiarum  actionis  sacrificium '  (f.  lixv) 
(3)  of  Christ,  who  '  spiritual!  repraesentatione  &  commemoratione  sacratis- 
simae  suae  passionis  offertur  .  .  .  figuratiue  &  spiritualiter,  ad  con- 
sequendam  remissionem  peccatorum'  (ff.  Ixviii  sqq.);  and  (4)  of  the 
whole  Church  (f.  Ixx). 

iv.  It  is  not  relevant  to  the  present  purpose  to  refer  to  the 
Reformed  ritual,  whether  that  of  Zurich  or  that  of  Geneva, 
since  neither  had  any  influence  on  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer.  It  needs  only  to  be  noted  that  the  Zurich  translation 
of  the  Bible  into  Swiss-German  was  published  1527-1529. 
Genesis  to  Canticles  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  whole  of 
the  New  Testament  reproduces  Luther's  version  '  slightly 
revised  and  adapted  throughout  to  the  Swiss  dialect '  ;  the 
translation  of  the  Prophets  was  made  by  the  Zurich  ministers  ; 
and  that  of  the  so-called  '  Apocrypha  '  by  Leo  Jud  (1482-1542), 
pastor  of  S.  Peter's  at  Zurich. 

For  the  Zurich  ritual  see  Kidd  Documents  pp.  443  sqq.,  and  references 
in  Richter  i  p.  20;  for  that  of  Geneva,  Kidd  pp.  484,  514,  528,  577,  615  ; 
Richter  i  pp.  342  sqq.  For  the  Zurich  Bible  see  Darlow  and  Moule  His 
torical  Catalogue  ii  nos.  4194-4196.  See  also  below  pp.  cxlvi  sqq.,  clvi  sq. 

VI 

While  these  various  movements  of  reform  were  being  pro 
jected  or  carried  through  on  the  continent,  measures  were 

1  Deckers  op.  cit.  pp.  107,  112. 
d 


1  THE  GREAT  BIBLE 

being  taken  in  England  which  modified  the  ritual  situation, 
and  some  of  the  materials  were  being  produced  which  after 
wards  contributed  to  the  compilation  of  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer. 

i.  The  Holy  Scriptures  were  translated  into  English  in  a 
version  which  became,  and  in  part  continues  to  be,  the 
liturgical  text. 

In  1534  the  Convocation  of  Canterbury  had  petitioned 
the  king  to  authorise  an  official  translation  to  be  made.1 
But  when  three  years  later  (1537)  there  appeared  a  version, 
purporting  to  be  the  work  of  one  Thomas  Matthew,  Cranmer 
eagerly  welcomed  it  as  the  most  satisfactory  *  heretofore  made  ' 
and  urged  Cromwell  to  '  exhibit '  it  to  the  king  and  to 
obtain,  '  if  you  can,  a  licence  that  the  same  may  be  sold  and 
read  of  every  person  .  .  .  until  such  time  that  we  the  bishops 
shall  set  forth  a  better  translation,  which  I  think  will  not  be 
till  a  day  after  doomsday.' 2 

'Matthew'  was  in  fact  not  a  new  version,  but  a  combination  of  (i)  Wm. 
Tyndale's  Pentateuch  of  1531  (rendered  from  the  Hebrew  with  the  help 
of  the  Vulgate  and  of  Luther's  version  of  1523);  and  his  unpublished 
version  of  Joshua — Chronicles  :  (2)  the  rest  of  the  Old  Testament  from 
Myles  Coverdale's  Bible  of  1535  (rendered  from  Luther's  Bible,  the 
Zurich  Bible  of  1527-1529,  and  the  Latin  of  the  Vulgate  and  of  Pagnino, 
with  the  help  of  Tyndale's  Pentateuch  and  New  Testament) ;  and  (3) 
Tyndale's  New  Testament  (rendered  from  the  Greek  of  Erasmus's  Nouum 
Instrumentum  om?ie  1516,  with  the  help  of  the  Vulgate,  of  Erasmus's  Latin 
version,  1516,  and  of  Luther's  German,  1522)  published  in  1525  and  in  an 
improved  edition  in  1534.  The  compilation  was  made  by  John  Rogers, 
chaplain  to  the  Merchant  Venturers  at  Antwerp,  afterwards  burnt  at  Smith- 
field,  1555  ;  and  the  pseudonym  was  adopted  apparently  to  disguise  the 
use  which  was  made  of  Tyndale's  prohibited  versions. 

The  licence  was  granted  ;  but  Coverdale  was  commissioned 
to  revise  the  translations  throughout.  The  outcome  of  his 
revision  was  The  Byble  in  Englyshe,  that  is  to  saye  the  content 
of  all  holy  scrypture,  both  of  ye  olde  and  newe  testamente,  truly 
translated  after  the  veryte  of  the  Hebrue  and  Greke  textes,  by  y* 

1  Wilkins  Concilia  iii  pp.  770,  776. 

2  Cranmer  Miscellaneous  writings,  Parker  Soc.,  p.  344  ;  Dixon  History  of  the 
Church  of  England  \  p.  520. 


MARSHALL'S  PRIMER  1J 

dylygent  study e  of  dyuerse  excellent  learned  men,  expert  in 
theforesayde  tonges,  published  in  1539  and  commonly  known 
as  '  the  Great  Bible/  of  which  six  further  editions  with  suc 
cessive  corrections  had  been  issued  before  the  end  of  1541, 
the  last  five  of  them  having  a  preface  by  Cranmer  and  being 
consequently  known  as  *  Cranmer's  Bible.' 

Coverdale's  revision  was  made  with  the  help  chiefly  of  the  Latin  trans 
lation  of  the  Hebrew  made  by  Sebastian  Miinster  of  Heidelberg,  accompany 
ing  his  edition  of  the  Hebrew  text,  Basel  1534,  1535  ;  but  also  of  the 
Vulgate,  of  the  Complutensian  Polyglot  (c.  1514-1517),  and  of  Erasmus's 
Latin. 

See  B.  F.  Westcott  A  general  view  of  the  history  of  the  English  Bible, 
ed  3,  London  1905,  pp.  25-83,  126-207:  A.  W.  Pollard  Records  of  the 
English  Bible,  London  191 1,  ch.  i :  Darlow  and  Moule  Historical  Catalogue 
nos.  1-23,  25,  26,  29-37,  1412,  5087,  6096.  As  in  Luther's  and  the  Zurich 
Bible,  both  in  Matthew  and  the  Great  Bible  certain  books  are  without 
authority  transferred  to  the  end  of  the  Old  Testament  and  labelled  '  Apo 
crypha.'  See  H.  H.  Howorth  'The  origin  and  authority  of  the  Biblical 
Canon  in  the  Anglican  Church '  in  Journal  of  Theol.  Studies  viii  pp.  i  sqq. 

2.  (a)  In  1534  or  earlier  appeared  A  prymer  in  Englyshe, 
with  certeyn  prayers  and  godly  meditations,  very  necessary  for  all 
people  that  vnderstonde  not  the  Latyne  tongue,  printed  by  John 
Byddell  for  William  Marshall,  the  bookseller,  and  commonly 
known  as  '  Marshall's  Primer.' x  Possibly  it  had  been  com 
piled  some  years  before  and  printed  abroad  and  is  to  be 
identified  with  '  The  Primer  in  English  '  which  was  prohibited 
in  1531.2 

Apart  from  its  generally  '  reformed '  tone,  the  book  is  marked  by  two 
characteristics,  as  compared  with  the  traditional  Primer :  (a)  by  a  very  large 
didactic  element,  consisting  of  an  '  Admonition '  and  expositions  of  the  Ten 
Commandments,  the  Creed,  Pater  noster  and  Ave  Maria,  all  derived  from 
Luther's  Encheiridion  piarum  precationum  (i52o)3;  the  'Passion  of  our 


1  E.  Hoskins  Horae  beatae  Mariae  virginis  or  Sarum  and  York  Primers, 
London  1901,  p.  195. 

z  Letters  and  papers  foreign  and  domestic  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII  v  app.  18, 
p.  768. 

3  This  among  other  things  had  already  been  published  in  Scottish  in  The 
richt  ivey  to  the  kingdome  of  heauine  (Malmo  1533)  by  John  Gau,  chaplain  at 
Malmo,  being  a  translation  of  the  Den  rette  vey  till  Hiemmerigis  Rige 
(Antwerp  1531)  of  Christiern  Pedersen,  canon  of  Malmo.  See  Scottish  Text 
Society  x. 


Hi  HILSEY'S  PRIMER 

Saviour  Christ '  harmonised  from  the  Gospels ;  an  instruction  for  children  ; 
a  '  Dialogue  between  the  father  and  the  son,'  which  is  a  short  catechism 
for  children,  and  had  been  several  times  included  in  the  list  of  prohibited 
books  from  1526  onwards  (Wilkins  Concilia  iii  pp.  707,  719;  Strype 
Eccl.  Mem.  i  p.  254) ;  (ti)  by  the  omission  of  the  Litany,  and  of  the  Dirige 
(i.e.  the  Vespers,  Matins  and  Lauds  of  the  Dead). 

This  was  perhaps  the  Primer  to  which  the  attention  of 
the  Upper  House  of  Convocation  was  called  by  the  abbot 
of  Northampton  on  Dec.  n  I534,1  with  the  result  that  the 
order  was  given  that  it  should  not  be  used  for  the  instruction 
of  children  ;  and  at  the  petition  of  Convocation  a  royal 
proclamation  was  issued  forbidding  the  printing  of  any  books 
without  official  examination.  In  consequence — or  in  spite — 
of  this, '  Marshall's  Primer '  was  reissued  in  1535  with  the  title 
A  goodly  prymer  in  englyshe,  newly  corrected  and  printed,  with 
certeyne  godly  meditations  and  prayers  added  to  the  same,  very 
necessarie  &  profitable  for  all  them  that  ryghte  assuredly  vnder- 
stande  not  ye  latine  and  greke  tongues  (London,  J.  Byddell).2 

The  contents  are  here  rearranged  and  several  additions  are  made ;  and 
in  particular  the  Litany,  largely  reproducing  Luther's  Litany  of  1529,  and 
the  Dirige  are  restored.  From  1535  to  1540  several  Primers  were  issued, 
containing  '  Marshall's '  Hours  in  combination  with  various  other  matter, 
new  and  old  (Hoskins  pp.  205  sqq.);  while,  from  1536  to  1544,  besides 
some  9  editions  of  the  Sarum  Primer  in  Latin  (ibid.  pp.  151  sq.)  there 
appeared  some  18  editions  of  it  in  English  and  Latin  combined  (ibid. 
pp.  159-186),  some  of  them  with  the  Epistles  and  Gospels  of  Sundays  and 
holydays  appended  in  English. 

(b)  In  1539  appeared  a  new  Primer,  The  Manuall  of  prayers, 
or  the  prymer  in  Englysshe,  set  out  at  lengthe?  the  work  of  John 
Hilsey,  bishop  of  Rochester  (1535-1539),  approved  by  Cranmer 
and  issued  '  at  the  commandment  of  the  right  honourable 
Lord  Thomas  Crumwell.' 

Hilsey's  Primer  consists  mainly  of  a  selection  from  the  Sarum  Primer, 
in  some  cases  modified,  e.g.  in  the  Psalms,  hymns,  antiphons,  lessons, 
responds,  chapters  and  collects  of  the  Hours,  and  in  the  lessons  of  the 
Dirige ;  along  with  some  things  derived  from,  or  at  least  in  common  with, 

1  Wilkins  Concilia  iii  p.  769. 

2  Reprinted  in  Burton  Three  Primers  put  forth  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII 
Oxford  1834,  where  see  preface  :  see  also  Hoskins  p.  200. 

3  Reprinted  in  Hurton  Three  Primers  pp.  305  sqq.  :  see  Hoskins  p.  225. 


THE  'KING'S  PRIMER'  liii 

*  Marshall ' ;  and  with  a  didactic  element  in  the  shape  of  prefaces  to  several 
of  the  sections,  and  especially  *  An  instruction  of  the  manner  in  hearing  of 
the  Mass,'  and  a  section  'Of  works,'  including  the  'Office  of  all  estates,' 
a  selection  from  Holy  Scripture  which  appears  also  in  'Marshall.'  In  the 
same  year,  1539,  appeared  a  Primer  for  children,  in  English,  extracted 
from  Hilsey;  and  in  1540  two  other  Primers  containing  certain  elements 
derived  from  Hilsey  (Hoskins  pp.  233  sq.,  183). 

(c)  Thus  there  was  an  'adversity  of  primer  books  that 
are  now  abroad,  whereof  are  almost  innumerable  sorts.'  To 
remedy  this  '  adversity  '  and  to  satisfy  the  new  desire  for 
uniformity — '  to  have  one  uniform  order  of  all  such  books 
throughout  all  our  dominions  ' 1 — the  '  King's  Primer  '  was 
issued  in  1545,  with  the  title  The  Primer,  set  foorth  by  the 
Kynges  maiestie  and  his  Clergie,  to  be  taught  lerned,  &  read  : 
and  none  other  to  be  vsed  throughout  all  his  dominions.2 

In  this  Primer  the  didactic  element  almost  wholly  disappears ;  besides 
the  king's  preface  and  injunction,  the  text  consists  of  the  Kalendar ;  Our 
Father,  Hail  Mary,  Creed  and  Commandments ;  graces  ;  the  Hours  ;  the 
Litany  (i.e.  'the  King's  Majesty's  Procession'  of  1544) ;  Dirige  and  Com 
mendations;  the  Psalms  of  the  Passion,  and  the  Passion  of  our  Lord 
(S.  Jo.  xviii,  xix) ;  and  '  certain  godly  prayers  for  sundry  purposes.' 

The  '  King's  Primer  '  was  published  also  in  English  and 
Latin  (The  Primer,  In  Englishe  and  Latyn,  set  foorth  &c.  1545) 
and  in  Latin  alone  (Orarium  sen  libellus  precationum  per 
Regiam  maiestatem  &  cleru  latine  osditus  1546),  and  the  issue 
of  other  Primers  ceased  till  the  reign  of  Mary. 

Hoskins  Primers  pp.  63,  65.  It  may  be  noted  that  a  Greek  version  of 
the  Roman  Horce,  Ti2/>cu  TI)<S  denrapOfvov  Ma/oias  KOT'  f6o$  rfj<s  /XD/ACUK^S  «K- 
KATjo-ias,  was  printed  by  Aldus,  Venice  1497,  and  frequently  reprinted  up 
to  1543  (Ommanney  A  critical  dissertation  on  the  Athanasian  Creed 
pp.  278  sqq.). 

3.  (a)  In  order  to  repress  the  '  diversity  of  opinions  ' 
which  had  '  grown  and  sprung  '  in  the  realm,  and  perhaps 
also  to  reassure  those  who  had  misgivings  as  to  the  significance 
of  the  measures  of  the  '  reformation  Parliament '  (1529-1536) 
and  of  the  suppression  of  the  smaller  monasteries  (1536), 

1  Injunction  prefixed  to  the  King's  Primer. 

2  The  text  is  reprinted  in  Burton  Three  Primers  pp.  437  sqq.  :  see  Hoskins 
Primers  p.  237. 


liv  THE  TEN  ARTICLES 

certain  articles  concerning  faith  and  ceremonies  were  laid 
before  the  Upper  House  of  the  Convocation  of  Canterbury 
on  July  II  I536.1  After  debate  they  were  accepted  and 
signed,  and  were  issued  under  the  title  Articles  devised  by  the 
King's  Majestic,  to  stablyshe  Christen  quietnes  and  vnitie  amonge 
us,  and  to  auoide  contentious  opinions,  which  articles  be  also 
approued  by  the  consent  and  determination  of  the  hole  clergie  of 
this  realme,  with  a  preface  by  the  king.2  This  document  is 
commonly  known  as  '  The  Ten  Articles.' 

It  consists  of  two  parts  :  the  one,  a  reassertion  of  the  Catholic  Faith  as 
contained  in  the  three  Creeds  and  a  reprobation  of  what  has  been  condemned 
by  the  General  Councils ;  and  statements  on  the  sacraments  of  baptism, 
penance  and  the  eucharist,  and  on  the  doctrine  of  justification :  the  other 
treating  of  *  laudable  ceremonies  used  in  the  Church.'  The  only  one  of  the 
ten  which  concerns  us  is  the  Qth,  which  treats  of  'rites  and  ceremonies,' 
and  deals  with  minor  ceremonies,  explaining  such  things  as  holy  water, 
holy  bread,  Candlemas  lights,  Ash  Wednesday  ashes,  and  so  on,  which 
are  '  not  to  be  contemned  or  cast  away,  but  to  be  used  and  continued  as 
things  laudable,  to  put  us  in  remembrance  of  those  spiritual  things  that 
they  do  signify  .  .  .  but  none  of  these  ceremonies  have  power  to  remit 
sin,  but  only  to  stir  and  lift  up  our  minds  unto  God,  by  whom  only  our 
sins  are  forgiven.'3 

(b)  The  '  Ten  Articles  '  was  evidently  held  to  be  insuffi 
cient,  and  in  the  next  year,  1537,  the  bishops  issued  The 
institution  of  a  christen  man,  conteynynge  the  Exposition  or 
Interpretation  of  the  commune  crede,  of  the  seuen  Sacramentes, 
of  the  .x.  command  ententes,  and  of  the  Pater  noster,  and  the  Aue 
Maria,  lusty fication,  &  Purgatorie,  commonly  known  as  *  The 
Bishops'  Book.'  4 

This  document  is  a  *  sum  of  divinity '  under  the  now  current  four 
heads — Creed,  Sacraments,  Commandments,  and  Lord's  Prayer — for  the 

1  Dixon  Hist,  of  the  Ch.  of  England  \  p.  410  :  A.  F.  Pollard  Thomas  Cranmer 
pp.  102  sqq. 

2  Reprinted  in  Lloyd  Formularies  of  faith  set  forth  by  authority  during  the 
reign  of  Henry  VIII,  Oxford  1856,  pp.  xv  sqq.     The  Royal  Injunctions  of  1536 
require  the  clergy  to  declare  the  Ten  Articles  to  the  people  (Gee  and  Hardy 
Documents  p.  270). 

3  A  royal  proclamation  of  Feb.  26  1538-9  requires  these  ceremonies  to  be 
observed  and  the  explanation  of  them  to  be  given  on  each  occasion  of  their 
observance  (Wilkins  Concilia  iii  p.  842  ;  cp.  Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  i  p.  56). 

4  Reprinted  in  Lloyd  Formularies  pp.  21  sqq. 


THE  INSTITUTION  AND  THE  NECESSARY  DOCTRINE   Iv 

direction  of  the  clergy  in  the  instruction  of  their  flocks.  The  greater  part 
of  the  '  Ten  Articles '  is  incorporated  in  it ;  and  in  particular  the  Qth,  of 
'  rites  and  ceremonies,'  is  included  in  the  exposition  of  the  4th  command 
ment.  (It  may  be  noted  in  passing  that,  here  perhaps  for  the  first 
time,  the  Hebrew  reckoning  of  the  Commandments  is  adopted,  as  against 
the  traditional  Christian  reckoning,  according  to  which  i  and  2  are 
combined  in  the  '  first  commandment,'  and  10  is  divided  into  two).  The 
expositions  of  the  Creed,  the  Commandments,  and  the  Lord's  Prayer 
include  an  appreciable  element  derived  from  Luther's  Encheiridion piarum 
prccationum,  not  directly,  but  through  the  translation  incorporated  in 
*  Marshall's  Primer,'  1534. 

(c)  The  Institution  was  presented  to  the  king  ;  but  he 
refused  to  adopt  it,  while  privately  authorising  its  publication, 
and  its  use  for  three  years.  On  April  12  1540  Thomas 
Crumwell  addressed  the  House  of  Lords  to  the  effect  that 
the  king,  in  order  to  obtain  concord  in  religion,  had  endeav 
oured,  first  to  set  forth  true  religion,  and  then  to  separate 
pious  from  impious  ceremonies  and  to  teach  the  right  use 
of  them  ;  and  to  advance  these  designs  he  now  chooses  two 
commissions  of  bishops,  the  one  to  declare  what  pertains  to 
the  institution  of  a  Christian  man,  the  other  to  set  forth  a 
discrimination  and  a  ground  of  ceremonies.1 

(1)  The  result  of  the  work  of  the  first  commission  appeared 
in  1543  in  A  necessary  doctrine  and  erudition  for  any  christen 
man,  set  fur  the  by  the  kynges  maiestie  of  Englande  &c.,2  with 
a  preface  by  the  king,  and  commonly  known  as  '  The  King's 
Book.' 

The  Necessary  doctrine  is  an  emended  edition  of  the  '  Bishops'  Book,' 
reduced  by  the  omission  of  the  '  Notes  and  observations,'  as  opposed  to 
the  exposition,  'of  the  Creed'  and  of  what  is  derived  from  Luther's 
Encheiridion  in  the  exposition  of  the  Pater  noster,  and  elsewhere  corrected 
and  expanded,  and  throughout  brought  up  to  the  standard  of  the  Six 
Articles  Act  of  1539.  The  Qth  of  the  'Ten  Articles,'  on  rites  and 
ceremonies,  retains  its  place  in  the  exposition  of  the  4th  Commandment. 

(2)  The  work  of  the  other  commission,  on  ceremonies,  seems 
to  be  represented  by  the  book  entitled  Ceremonies  to  be  vsed 

1  Journal  of  the  House  of  Lords  \  pp.  126  sqq.  :  Dixon  Hist,  of  the  C/i-  of 
England  ii  pp.  233  sq. 

2  Reprinted  in  Lloyd  Formularies  pp.  213  sqq. 


Ivi     THE  RATIONALE  AND  THE  THIRTEEN  ARTICLES 

in  the  Churche,  commonly  called  the  '  Rationale/  which  was 
not  published  and  led  to  no  result. 

The  '  Rationale '  is  in  the  main  an  explanation  of  the  ceremonies  of 
Baptism  and  the  Mass  in  detail,  with  a  cursory  treatment  of  some  others. 
It  incorporates  nearly  the  whole  of  the  9th  of  the  'Ten  Articles,'  and  is 
largely  indebted  to  the  Encheiridion  of  Cologne,  from  which  a  great  part 
of  the  exposition  of  the  ceremonies  of  Baptism  is  derived,  while  traces  of 
it  are  found  throughout  the  book.  The  book  was  first  printed  in  Strype 
Ecclesiastical  memorials  I  pt.  ii  no.  109.  It  has  been  re-edited  from  the 
MSS,  with  notes  and  a  discussion  of  its  history  and  significance,  by 
Mr.  C.  S.  Cobb  in  The  Rationale  of  Ceremonial  1540-1543  (Alcuin  Club 
Collections  xviii)  London  1910. 

(d)  Meanwhile,  threatened  with  a  sentence  of  deposition 
and  an  interdict  on  the  accession  of  Paul  III  ;  at  all  times 
liable  to  be  attacked  by  the  Emperor,  if  opportunity  occurred  ; 
and  anxious  to  prevent  the  assembling  of  a  General  Council, 
which  would  be  likely  to  pronounce  unfavourably  on  his 
'  affair ' ;  Henry  VIII,  at  the  end  of  1535,  opened  negotiations 
for  alliance  with  the  Protestant  Princes  of  the  Smalkaldic 
League.1  The  negotiations  failed  for  the  present  ;  but  they 
were  renewed  in  I538,2  and  German  envoys  were  sent  to 
England  to  treat  and  to  attempt  to  arrive  at  a  sufficient 
doctrinal  agreement  on  the  basis  of  the  Confessio  Augustana, 
the  Lutheran  confession,  that  is,  presented  to  the  Emperor  on 
June  25  1530  during  the  Diet  of  Augsburg.  The  negotiations 
again  failed  ;  but  the  theological  discussions  had  resulted  in 
a  document  which  formulated  such  agreement  as  was  found 
possible.  This  document,  known  as  The  Thirteen  Articles, 
influenced  on  the  one  hand  by  the  Confession  of  Augsburg, 
and  on  the  other  by  the  '  Ten  Articles,'  had  no  effect  at 
the  moment,  and  it  was  not  published.  But  later  it  served 
as  the  channel  through  which  the  Confession  of  Augsburg 
influenced  the  Forty-two  Articles  of  Religion  of  1552,  and 
the  Thirty-nine  of  1563. 

The    Thirteen   Articles  were  first  printed   complete   in    H.    Jenkyns 

1  Political  history  of  England  v  pp.  356  sqq.  (H.  A.  L.  Fisher)  :   Dixon 
Hist,  of  the  Ch.  of  England  \  pp.  308  sqq.  :  Pollard  Thomas  Cranwerpp.  115  sq. 

2  Dixon  ii  pp.  2  sqq. 


RITUAL  MEASURES  Ivii 

Remains  of  Thottias  Cranmer,  Oxford  1833,  iv  pp.  273  sqq.  ;  and  they  are 
reprinted  in  Hardwick  History  of  the  Articles  app.  II.  Only  two  of  them 
concern  the  present  purpose  (p.  Ixxxv  below) ;  viz.  one  paragraph  of  the 
5th  ('de  Ecclesia'),  on  the  variability  of  rites  and  ceremonies  of  human 
institution,  which  also  forms  part  of  the  34th  of  the  Articles  of  Religion  ; 
and  the  nth  ('de  ritibus  ecclesiasticis ')  treating  of  the  purpose,  value, 
and  limitations  of  ceremonies. 

4.  The  measures  and  documents  hitherto  referred  to  in 
this  section  have  been  concerned  with  ritual  matters  only 
indirectly.  It  remains  to  notice  some  measures  which  more 
directly  affected  the  liturgical  situation. 

(a)  Certain    changes  were   made  in   the  observance  of 
feasts  and  in  some  other  annual  arrangements. 

In  1536  the  King  and  Convocation  required  that  all  parishes  should 
keep  their  Dedications  on  the  first  Sunday  in  October1;  that  neither 
patronal  feasts  nor  any  feast  falling  in  harvest-time  (July  i — Sept.  29)  or 
in  legal  terms — except  those  of  the  B.  V.  M.,  Apostles  and  S.  George,  and 
those  on  which  the  judges  did  not  sit 2 — should  any  longer  be  observed  as 
holydays,  i.e.  with  cessation  of  work3;  the  four  'offering  days'  (i.e.  the 
days  on  which  adult  parishioners  were  required  to  make  offerings  to  the 
parish-priest)  were  fixed  as  Christmas,  Easter,  S.  John  Baptist,  and  S. 
Michael  (i.e.  practically  once  a  quarter)  instead  of  Christmas,  Easter,  the 
Patronal  feast,  and  the  Dedication  of  the  church  or  All  Saints.4  On  July 
19  the  Convocation  of  Canterbury  enjoined  further  that,  unless  they  fell 
on  sunday,  no  saints'  days  should  be  kept  as  holidays  except  feasts  of 
the  B.  V.  M.  and  of  Apostles,  and  those  of  S.  John  Baptist,  S.  Gregory  and 
S.  Michael 5 ;  in  1539  the  feasts  of  S.  Thomas  of  Canterbury  were  abolished 
by  royal  injunction6;  and  in  1541  it  was  directed  that  the  feasts  of  the 
Cross  be  no  longer  observed  as  holydays.7 

(b)  In   1541  a  new  and  emended  edition  of  the  Sarum 
Breviary  was  issued,  of  which  the  character  is  sufficiently 
indicated  by  the  title  :    Portiforium  secundum  vsum  Sarum 
nouiter  impressum,  et  a  plurimis  purgatum  mendis.     In  quo 

1  Cp.  p.  xxviii  above. 

2  In  1537  S.  Mark  (Wilkins  Concilia  iii  826)  and  in  1541  S.  Luke  and  S.  M. 
Magdalen  were  added  to  these  exceptions,  while  S.  Mark  (as  Litaniae  maiores, 
the  Roman  Rogation)  and  the  eve  of  S.  Laurence  were  forbidden  to  be  fasted 
(ibid.  839  sq.). 

3  Already  in  1532  the  Petition  of  the  Commons  had  complained   of  the 
excessive  number  of  holy  days  (Gee  and  Hardy  Doctiments  illustrative  of 
English  Church  history  xlvi  p.  1 50). 

4  Wilkins  Concilia  iii  823.  5  Ibid.  827.  fi  Ibid.  848.  ~  Ibid.  860. 


Iviii  RITUAL  MEASURES 

nomen  Romano  pontifici  false  adscriptum  [i.e.  'papa'!] 
omittitur,  vna  cum  aliis  que  Christianissimo  nostri  Regis 
statute  repugnant  [e.g.  the  name  of  S.  Thomas  of  Canterbury], 
Excussum  Londini  per  Eduardum  Whytchurch l ;  and  on 
March  3  1542-3  the  Convocation  of  Canterbury  imposed 
the  Sarum  Breviary  on  all  clerks,2  no  doubt  largely  by  reason 
of  the  suppression  of  the  religious  houses  (1536-1539)  and 
the  consequent  refoundation  of  regular  cathedral  chapters 
as  secular. 

(c)  In  the  session  of  Convocation  Feb.  14  1541-2  Cranmer 
brought  up  before  the  House  the  question  '  of  correcting  and 
emending  the  portifories,  missals  and  other  books  '  3  ;    and 
on  Feb.  21  1542-3  he  announced  to  the  House  4  that  it  was 
the  king's  will  '  that  all  mass  books,  antiphoners,  portuises  in 
the  church  of  England  should  be  newly  examined,  corrected, 
reformed,  and  castigated  from  all  manner  of  mention  of  the 
bishop  of  Rome's  name,  from  all  apocryphes,  feigned  legends, 
superstitious  orations  [i.e.  prayers],  collects,  versicles,  and  re 
sponses  ;    that  the  names  and  memories  of  all  saints  which 
be  not  mentioned  in  the  Scripture,'  or  'authentical  doctors, 
should  be  abolished  and  put  out  of  the  same  books  and 
calendars  ;  and  that  the  services  should  be  made  out  of  the 
Scriptures,  and  other  authentic  doctors.' 

(d)  In  the  same  session,  Feb.  21,  'it  was  ordered  also, 
that  every  sunday  and  holyday  throughout  the  year,  the 
curate  of  every  parish  church  after  the  Te  Deum,  and  Mag 
nificat,  should  openly  read  unto  the  people  one  chapter  of 
the  New  Testament  in   English,   without  exposition  ;    and 
when  the  New  Testament  was  read  over,  then  to  begin  the 
Old.' 

5.  But  more  important  than  all  these  was  the  issue  of 
the  English  LITANY.  In  1544  Henry  was  at  war  at  once 
with  Scotland  and  with  France,  and  was  himself  about  to 

1  This  Breviary  was  reissued  in  1543-1544  by  R.  Grafton  and  E.  Whitchurch 
(Cobb  The  Rationale  of  Ceremonial  pp.  Ixx  sqq.). 

2  Wilkins  Concilia  iii  86 1.  3  Ibid.  *  Ibid.  863. 


THE  ENGLISH  LITANY  lix 

cross  over  to  France.  He,  therefore,  as  was  usual  in  such 
circumstances  of  emergency,  on  June  n  wrote  to  Cranmer, 
in  a  letter  no  doubt  written  by  the  archbishop  himself,  requir 
ing  processions  to  be  made  throughout  the  province. 

1  We  greet  you  well ;  and  let  you  wit  that,  calling  to  our  remembrance 
the  miserable  state  of  .all  Christendom,  being  at  this  present,  besides  all 
othefTroubles,  so  plagued  with  most  crueljwars,  hatreds,  and  dissensions, 
as  no  place  of  the  same  almost,  being  the  whole  reduced  to  a  very  narrow 
corner,  remaineth  in  good  peace,  agreement,  and  concord,  the  help  and 
remedy  whereof,  far  exceeding  the  power  of  any  man,  must  be  called  for 
of  him  who  only  is  able  to  grant  our  petitions,  and  never  forsaketh  nor 
repelleth  any  that  firmly  believe  and  faithfully  call  on  him  .  .  .  being 
therefore  resolved  to  have  continually  from  henceforth  general  processions 
in  all  cities,  towns,  churches,  and  parishes  of  this  our  realm,  said  and  sung 
with  such  reverence  and  devotion,  as  appertaineth,  forasmuch  as  heretofore 
the  people,  partly  for  lack  of  good  instruction  and  calling,  partly  for  that 
they  understood  no  part  of  such  prayers  or  suffrages,  as  were  used  to  be 
sung  and  said,  have  used  to  come  very  slackly  to  the  procession,  when  the 
same  have  been  commanded  heretofore :  we  have  set  forth  certain  godly 
prayers  and  suffrages  in  our  native  English  tongue,  which  we  send  you 
herewith ' ;  and  the  letter  goes  on  to  require  that  the  supplications  be  not 
observed  only  for  a  month  or  two,  but  be  so  commended  urgently  to  the 
people  by  sermons  and  so  on,  that  they  may  gladly  frequent  them ;  and  to 
command  the  archbishop  to  see  that  the  procession  be  kept  in  his  own 
diocese,  and  to  communicate  it  to  the  bishops  of  the  province.1 

Accordingly  on  June  18  Cranmer  issued  a  mandate,  in  the 
usual  form,  to  Edmund  Bonner,  bishop  of  London,  dean  of 
the  province,  enclosing  the  royal  letter  and  a  copy  of  the 
Litany,  ordering  him  to  see  that  it  is  used  as  required  through 
out  the  province.2  The  '  godly  prayers  and  suffrages  '  so 
communicated  had  been  already  published,  with  the  title 
An  exhortation  vnto  prayer,  thoughte  mete  by  the  hinges 
maiestie,  and  his  clergy,  to  be  read  to  the  people  in  euery  church 
afore  processyons.  Also  a  Letanie  with  suffrages  to  be  said  or 
song  in  the  tyme  of  the  said  processyons. 

The  Exhortation,  in  which  there  are  traces  of  the  influence  of  The 
Institution  of  a  Christian  man,  is  to  the  effect  that  we  are  here  gathered  'to 

1  Cranmer  Miscellaneous  writings  and  letters,  Parker  Soc.,  p.  494. 

2  Ibid.  495. 


Ix  THE  LITANY 

make  our  common  prayer,'  and  that  it  may  be  effectual  we  must  know  both 
what  and  how  we  ought  to  ask.  What  we  ought  to  ask  is  set  forth,  generally 
in  a  paraphrase  of  the  Pater  noster ;  particularly,  in  view  of  the  immediate 
circumstances,  by  reference  to  i  Tim.  ii  i.  As  to  how  we  ought  to  pray : 
it  must  be  with  faith  and  confidence,  with  charity  and  with  sincerity, 
accompanied  by  faith  and  almsdeeds.  The  Exhortation  is  followed  by  a 
Note  explaining  that  for  the  increase  of  devotion  '  the  common  prayer  of 
procession  is  set  forth  in  English,'  and  directing  the  laity  how  to  take  their 
part  in  it ;  and  the  text  of  the  Litany  completes  the  book. 

The  book  was  issued  (i)  by  Tho.  Berthelet,  27  May  1554,  8°  (Oxford, 
Bodleian,  Douce  B.  231  :  Cambridge,  University  Library  Syn.  8,  54.  681, 
106) :  here  the  4th  suffrage  omits  'three  persons  and,'  the  5th  has  'Saint 
Mary,'  and  the  antiphons  are  in  the  order  ' .  .  .  honour,'  ' .  .  .  names  sake ' : 
(2)  by  Rich.  Grafton  for  T.  Berthelet,  16  June  1544,  8°  (Bodleian,  Douce 
B.  230) :  the  Litany  is  accompanied  by  its  plain-song  notation ;  with  all 
subsequent  editions  it  reads  'three  persons  and'  and  '  Holy  Virgin  Mary,' 
and  with  all  subsequent  editions  but  one  it  has  the  antiphons  in  the  order 
' .  .  .  names  sake,'  ' .  .  .  honour ' :  (3)  without  printer's  name  or  date, 
8C :  but  the  exhortation  and  the  following  Note  is  by  Berthelet,  the  Litany, 
which  has  its  plain-song  notation,  perhaps  by  Grafton :  the  date  is 
probably  1544  (Oxford,  Brasenose  Coll.) :  (4)  by  Tho.  Petyt,  12  Oct.  1544, 
8°  (Brit.  Mus.  c.  35.  b.  16) :  (5)  by  Tho.  Berthelet,  undated,  8° :  probably 
1 545  (Bodleian,  Tanner  i  :  Manchester,  J.  Rylands) :  the  antiphons  are  in 
the  order  of  (i).  (6)  W.  Herbert  in  his  edition  of  Ames  Typographical 
Antiquities  i  p.  5 1 9,  on  the  authority  of  '  Mr.  T.  Baker's  Maunsell '  (i.e. 
an  interleaved  copy  of  MaunselPs  Catalogue  of  English  Books  1595,  now 
in  the  Cambridge  University  Library),  cites  '  The  Letany  in  five  parts 
accordyng  to  the  notes  vsed  in  the  Kynges  Mates  ties  Chapel,  June  26,  1544' 
as  among  the  books  printed  by  Grafton  :  but  I  can  find  no  other  trace  of 
this.  (7)  The  Litany  with  the  Note,  but  without  the  Exhortation,  is 
included  in  the  King's  Primers  of  1545-1549  (Hoskins  Primers  pp.  237- 
245):  in  one  of  the  two  Grafton  editions  dated  Nov.  30,  1547,  by  the 
omission  of  the  invocations  of  the  saints,  the  modification  of  suffrage  37 
*  geue  and  preserue,'  and  the  compression  of  the  final  collects,  the  Litany, 
apart  from  some  details  of  reading,  is  already  in  the  form  in  which  it  was 
included  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  1549.  (8)  The  Litany,  with 
neither  Exhortation  nor  Note,  is  also  included  in  The  psalter  or  boke  of  the 
Psalmes  where  vnto  is  added  the  Letany  and  certayne  other  deuout  prayers, 
printed  by  Roger  Car  for  Anthoni  Smyth,  July  1548,  8°  (Brit.  Mus.  c.  25. 
b.  2).  In  (4),  (7)  and  (8),  suffrage  13  reads  'all  hardness,'  31  'and 
comfort '  (omitting  '  to ') ;  and  in  (8)  suffrage  2  7  reads  '  give  all '  (omitting 
'to').  Berthelet's  first  issue  is  reprinted  in  Private  prayers  put  forth  by 
authority  during  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  Parker  Soc.,  p.  564  sqq. 
(but  the  form  of  the  invocations  of  the  saints  is  wrongly  represented  : 
it  should  be  as  below  p.  174).  Pages  of  (2)  and  (3)  are  reproduced  in 


I 


A  PROJECTED  PROCESSIONAL  Ixi 

t 

R.  Steele  The  earliest  English  music-printing.  Bibliographical  Soc.,  1911, 
plates  9  10  (but  the  facsimiles  are  wrongly  assigned;  the  titles  should  be 
reversed).  In  the  reprint  of  the  King's  Primer  in  Burton  Three  Primers 
in  suffrage  n  (p.  481)  read  'all  the  deceits,'  in  13  (p.  482)  read  'detestable ' 
(not  'abominable'). 

On  Oct.  7  of  the  same  year  we  find  Cranmer  writing  to  the 
king, 

*  that  according  to  your  highness  commandment  ...  I  have  translated 
into  the  English  tongue,  so  well  as  I  could  in  so  short  time,  certain 
processions,  to  be  used  upon  festival  days,  if  after  due  correction  and 
amendment  of  the  same  your  highness  shall  think  it  so  convenient.  In 
which  translation,  forasmuch  as  many  of  the  processions,  in  the  Latin, 
were  but  barren,  as  meseemed,  and  little  fruitful,  I  was  constrained  to 
use  more  than  the  liberty  of  a  translator :  for  in  some  processions  I  have 
altered  divers  words;  in  some  I  have  added  part;  in  some  taken  part 
away ;  some  I  have  left  out  whole,  either  for  by  cause  the  matter  appeared 
to  me  to  be  little  to  purpose,  or  by  cause  the  days  be  not  with  us  festival 
days;  and  some  processions  I  have  added  whole,  because  I  thought  I 
had  better  matter  for  the  purpose,  than  was  the  procession  in  Latin  :  the 
judgement  whereof  I  refer  wholly  unto  your  majesty ;  and  after  your 
highness  hath  corrected  it,  if  your  grace  command  some  devout  and 
solemn  note  to  be  made  thereunto  (as  is  to  the  procession  which  your 
majesty  hath  already  set  forth  in  English  [i.e.  the  Litany],)  I  trust  it  will 
much  excitate  and  stir  the  hearts  of  all  men  unto  devotion  and  godliness  :  but 
in  mine  opinion,  the  song  that  shall  be  made  thereunto  would  not  be  full 
of  notes,  but,  as  near  as  may  be,  for  every  syllable  a  note  ;  so  that  it  may 
be  sung  distinctly  and  devoutly,  as  be  in  Matins  and  Evensong  Venite, 
the  hymns  Te  Deum,  Benedictus,  Magnificat,  Nunc  dimittis,  and  all  the 
Psalms  and  Versicles ;  and  in  the  mass  Gloria  in  excelsis,  Gloria  Patri, 
the  Creed,  the  Preface,  the  Pater  nosier,  and  some  of  the  Sanctus  and  Agnus. 
As  concerning  the  Salve  festa  dies,  the  Latin  note,  as  I  think,  is  sober  and 
distinct  enough ;  wherefore  I  have  travailed  to  make  the  verses  in  English, 
and  have  put  the  Latin  note  unto  the  same.  Nevertheless  they  that  be 
cunning  in  singing  can  make  a  much  more  solemn  note  thereto.  I  made 
them  only  for  a  proof,  to  see  how  English  would  do  in  song.  But  by  cause 
mine  English  verses  lack  the  grace  and  facility  I  would  wish  they  had,  your 
majesty  may  cause  some  other  to  make  them  again,  that  can  do  the  same 
in  more  pleasant  English  and  phrase.  As  for  the  sentence  [meaning],  I 
suppose  [it]  will  serve  well  enough.' 1 

From  this  it  is  clear  that  Cranmer  was  attempting  to 
compile  a  complete  English  Processional.     The  experiment 

1  Cranmer  Miscellaneous  writings  and  letters,  Parker  Soc.,  p.  412:  on  the 
date  of  this  letter  see  English  Historical  Review,  Jan.  1909,  pp.  101  sqq. 


Ixii  THE  ENGLISH  PROCESSION 

evidently  failed,  and  in  the  following  year  things  took  quite  a 
different  turn  and  the  Litany  became  the  sole  procession. 

From  some  curious  depositions,  now  unfortunately  mutilated,  made  in 
reference  to  what  happened  at  the  procession  in  the  parish  church  of 
Myddleton  or  Mylton.  near  Sittingbourne  in  Kent,  on  June  28  1545,  it 
appears  that  Cranmer  had  ordered  the  priest  of  the  parish  to  use  the  new 
Litany  on  Sundays  in  place  of  the  ordinary  processions.  This  was  no 
doubt  an  exceptional  case  and  Cranmer's  order  was  apparently  made  in 
pursuance  of  a  petition  of  some  of  the  parishioners,  who  desired  to  assist 
at  the  Litany  but  were  unable  to  do  so  on  work-days  (Letters  and  papers 
foreign  and  domestic:  Henry  VIII  xx.  i  no.  1118).  A  few  months  later, 
'  the  eighteenth  of  October,  being  Sainct  Lukes  daie  and  Soundaie,  Paules 
quire  song  the  procession  in  English  by  the  Kinges  iniunction,  which  shall 
be  song  in  euerie  parish  church  throughout  Englande  euerie  Soundaie  and 
festiual  daie,  and  non  other '  (  Wriothesley 's  Chronicle,  ed.  Camden  Soc.,  i  p. 
161).  From  this  it  appears  that  by  royal  injunction  the  English  Litany  is 
henceforth  to  serve  as  the  sole  procession,  and  that  the  Processional  is 
abolished.  Since  neither  in  the  injunction  of  June  n  1544,  quoted 
above,  nor  in  that  of  Aug.  n  1545  (Cranmer  Miscellaneous  writings  p. 
495),  in  which  processions  'on  the  accustomed  days'  (Wednesday  and 
friday)  are  again  enjoined  in  view  of  the  imminent  departure  of  'a 
puissant  navy'  to  deal  with  the  French,  is  there  any  such  order,  it  is 
necessary  to  suppose  that  another  injunction  had  been  issued,  which  is 
not  forthcoming.  Wriothesley  mentions  only  parish-churches :  but  since 
he  is  recording  what  happened  at  S.  Paul's,  it  would  not  seem  that  he 
intends  to  exclude  cathedral  and  collegiate  churches  from  the  scope  of 
the  revolution :  for  to  assign  the  Litany  to  festal  days  was  a  revolutionary 
measure:  the  Litany  had  long  been  regarded  as  a  penitential  rite,  con 
gruous  only  with  the  Wednesday  and  friday  stations  and  the  Rogation 
days.1 

A  further  step  was  taken  at  the  beginning  of  the  next 
reign,  when  in  the  24th  of  the  royal  Injunctions  of  August 
1547,  it  is  ordered  : 

'  To  avoid  all  contention  and  strife,  which  heretofore  hath  risen  .  .  . 
by  reason  of  fond  courtesy  and  challenging  of  places  in  procession,  and 
also  that  they  may  the  more  quietly  hear  that  which  is  said  or  sung  to 
their  edifying,  they  shall  not  from  henceforth  ...  at  any  time,  use  any 
procession  about  the  church  or  churchyard,  or  other  place,  but  immediately 
before  high  mass  the  priests  with  other  of  the  choir  shall  kneel  in  the 

1  The  Litany  was  said,  kneeling  in  choir,  after  Terce  on  all  ferias  in  Lent 
(Breviarium  .  .  .  Sarum  fasc.  I  c.  dxc) ;  and  special  supplications  causa  necessi 
tates,  in  which  the  Litany  was  used,  were  habitually  assigned  to  Wednesday  and 
Friday  (see  the  mandates  in  Wilkins  Concilia  passim). 


SARUM  PROCESSIONS  Ixiii 

midst  of  the  church,  and  sing  or  say  plainly  and  distinctly  the  litany  which 
is  set  forth  in  English  with  all  the  suffrages  following,  and  none  other 
procession  or  litany  to  be  had  or  used  but  the  said  litany  in  English.'1 

The  processions  so  displaced  were  chiefly  of  four  kinds, 
and  it  is  only  with  reference  to  these  that  the  origin,  structure, 
and  use  of  the  English  Litany  can  be  understood. 

These  processions  were  (i)  that  before  the  high  Mass  on  Sundays  and 
Festivals,2  in  which,  on  their  outward  way  from  the  choir  and  at  their 
return  as  far  as  to  the  rood-beam,  the  clerks  sang  a  proper  respond  or 
anthems,  on  great  days  preceded  by  a  prose  (e.g.  Salue  festa  dies);  a 
station  was  made  before  the  rood,  and  on  Sundays  between  Trinity  and 
Advent  an  antiphon,  y  and  R?  and  collect,  of  the  Cross  were  sung,  and  on  all 
Sundays  (with  a  few  exceptions)  the  priest  turned  to  the  people  and  bade 
the  bedes  in  English,  and  recited  the  prayers  for  the  living  and  the  dead  in 
Latin  3 ;  then  while  passing  into  the  choir  they  sang  an  anthem  (antiph.  ad 
introitum  chori) ;  this  finished  the  priest  standing  at  the  step  at  the  E. 
end  of  stalls  (gradus  chori)  recited  a  proper  versicle,  to  which  the  choir 
responded,  and  the  collect  of  the  day  followed  :  (2)  on  Wednesdays  and 
Fridays  in  Lent,4  after  None  and  immediately  before  the  Mass,  a  procession 
was  made  to  an  altar  in  the  church  with  the  singing  of  a  respond;  before 
the  altar  all  knelt  and  recited  Kyrie  cleison,  Pater  noster  and  preces  with 
Miserere,  and  a  collect  followed  ;  on  the  way  back  to  thd  choir,  a  varying 
selection  of  the  invocations  of  the  Litany  was  sung :  (3)  on  Rogation 
days  and  S.  Mark,6  before  the  procession  set  out,  an  anthem  (Exsurge 
Domine.  Deus  auribus  [Ps.  xliii  (xliv)  26,  i]  :  see  p.  182  below)  was  sung  in 
choir ;  on  the  way  to  the  church  at  which  the  station  was  to  be  made  and 
the  Mass  sung,  the  choir  sang  a  series  of  anthems,  the  penitential  Psalms 
with  the  antiphon  Ne  reminiscaris  doming  (Tobit  iii  3),  the  Litany,  and 
Pater  noster •,  followed  by  a  series  of  preces  and  seven  collects ;  at  the 
station-church,  first  was  sung  a  respond,  an  antiphon,  y  and  ty  and 
collect,  of  the  patron  saint  of  the  church ;  secondly  Kyrie  eleison  etc.  as  on 
Wednesday  and  friday  in  Lent,  all  kneeling ;  and  lastly  the  Mass ;  on  the 
way  back  to  the  church  from  which  the  procession  set  out,  a  selection  of 
the  invocations  of  the  Litany  with  special  responses  was  sung,  followed,  if 
need  be,  by  verses  tempore  belli  (Ab  inimicis:  see  p.  182),  and  at  the 
'  choir  step '  was  said  a  V  and  ty  with  a  collect  (on  Ascension  Eve  Infirmi- 

1  Cardwell  Documentary  Annals  i  p.  14  :  Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  p.  425. 

2  See  Processionale  ad  usum  insignis  ac  praeclarae  ecclesiae  Saruw,  ed. 
Henderson,  Leeds  1882,  pp.  5  sqq. 

3  In  parish  churches  the  bidding  of  the  bedes  was  not  made  in  the  pro 
cession,  but  before  some  altar  or  in  a  pulpit,  after  the  Offertorium,  i.e.  before 
the  sermon  when  there  was  one  (Processionale  p.  8  :  below  p.  1056). 

4  Processionale  pp.  32  sqq.  5  Processionale  pp.  103  sqq.,  145. 


Ixiv      THE  SARUM  AND  THE  ENGLISH  PROCESSIONS 


tatem  nostram:  see  p.  182):  (4)  in  Proccssiones  causa  necessitate -,1  i.e. 
supplications  for  special  emergencies,  such  as  drought,  plague,  or  war,  the 
procedure  is  the  same  as  at  the  Rogations,  except  that  the  anthems  are 
proper  to  the  special  occasion,  the  penitential  Psalms  and  what  follows  on 
the  outward  way  are  only  used  if  the  way  is  long  enough,  and  on  the 
way  back  the  whole  Litany  is  sung  (without  Pater  noster  etc.). 

The  following  table  exhibits  the  relation  of  these  forms  of 
procession  to  one  another  and  to  the  Litany  of  1544. 

The  Lenten  processions  are  omitted  in  the  table  in  consideration  of 
space,  and  because  their  form  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  asterisked 
items  in  the  first  column,  the  first  and  last  of  which  correspond  to,  the 
intermediate  ones  are  identical  with,  features  in  the  Lenten  form. 


ROGATIONS 

PROCESS.  CAUSA  NECESS. 

SUNDAYS  &  FESTIVALS 

LITANY  1544 

(Processionale  p.  105) 

(ibid.  p.  164) 

(ibid.  p.  6) 

'3 

Anth.  :  Exsurge  Do- 

M 

o 

mine.    Deus   auri- 

a 

bus.     Gloria 

*Anthems 

Anthems 

{Anthems}with{  Prose 

i 

Penitential        Psalms 

Penitential              Psalms 

(e.g.      &alue    festa 
dies)\  on  occasion 

I 

with  ant.  Ne  remi- 

with     ant.     Ne    remi- 

cu 

niscaris 

niscaris 

LITANY 

LITANY 

LITANY  (with  Ne  re- 

miniscaris       incor 

porated) 

§ 

Pater  noster 

Pater  noster 

Our  Father 

jfry    &    R?R?,    and    7 

yy  &  R?Rj,  and  7  Collects 

J  &  R?,  and  Collect 

Collects 

3 

{Respond 
Antiphon 
y  &  R?  and  Collect 

C  Respond  or 
I  Anthem 
1  Collect 

{Antiphon 
y  &  R?  and  Collect, 
of  the  Cross 

in 
O 

*Kyrie  eleison,  Pater 

Kyrie      eleison,      Pater 

noster 

noster 

2 

*Wy     &     R?R?     and 

W  &  R?E?  and  Collect 

BIDDING  OF  THEBEDES 

^ 

Collect 

MASS 

MASS 

bJO 

invocations  of  Litany 

LITANY 

{Anthem} 

Anthem  :      O     Lord 

.5 

arise.     O    God   we 

s 

have  heard.     Glory 

3 

be 

2 

[In  time  of  war  :  Ab 

From  our  enemies  .  . 

i^ 

inimicis  .   .   .  Ex- 

hear  us  O  Christ 

audinosChriste} 

f 
1 

Collect  :     (Infirmita- 
tem  nostram  respice 
on  Ascension  Eve) 

^  &  R? 
Collect  :       Infirmitatem 
nostram  respice 

|^&  R?} 
{Collect  of  the  day} 

Collect  :    We  humbly 
beseech      thee,       O 
Father,  mercifully 

±5 

to  look  upon  our  in 

<« 

firmities,      and      5 

others 

i 

MASS 

MASS 

1  Processionale  p.  164. 


NOTES  ON  THE  LITANY  Ixv 

The  text  of  the  Litany  of  1544  is  given  below  at  pp.  174- 
190,  being  that  part  of  the  second  column  which  is  printed  in 
distinctive  type. 

The  sources  of  the  text  are  (i)  the  Sarum  Litanies,  both 
that  referred  to  already  as  used  at  the  Rogations  etc.  with 
Pater  noster,  preces  and  collects,  as  found  in  the  Processionals 
and  in  the  Portiforium  ;  and  that  used  in  the  Commendatio 
animae  in  articulo  mortis  found  in  the  Manuale  ;  (2)  Luther's 
Litany  in  its  Latin  form  ;  (3)  the  Roman,  from  which  certain 
details  are  derived  through  Luther,  others  perhaps  directly 
from  Quinones  ;  (4)  the  York  Litany,  from  which  perhaps  one 
detail  is  derived  ;  (5)  the  Litany  of  some  other  use,  perhaps 
that  of  Brixen  :  see  below  ;  (6)  the  Liturgy  of  Constantinople. 

For  some  additions  to  the  first  column  see  pp.  936-940  below :  and  on 
p.  176  add  '  Sb  Vt  regi  nostro  .  .  .  victoriam  donare  digneris.' 

For  the  Sarum  Litanies  see  Processionale  .  .  Sarum,  ed.  Henderson, 
p.  107 ;  Breviarium  ,  .  Sarum,  ed.  Procter  and  Wordsworth,  fasc.  ii  c. 
250;  Maskell  Mon.  rit,  ecd,  anglic.  i  p.  122  :  for  Luther's  see  P.  Drews 
Beitrdge  zu  Luthers  liturgischen  Reformen  (Tubingen  1910)  p.  24  (Latin 
and  German) ;  for  the  Roman,  Breviarium  Rom.  Quignonianum,  ed.  Legg, 
p.  43;  for  York  see  Breviarium  .  .  .  Eborac.,  Surtees  Soc.  Ixxi,  c.  931 ; 
and  for  the  Liturgy  of  Constantinople,  Brightman  Liturgies  eastern  and 
western  i  pp.  309,  353. 

NOTES,  (i)  Marked  new  features  in  Cranmer's  Litany  are  the  omission 
of  invocations  of  individual  saints,  except  the  B.  V.  M. ;  the  massing  of 
several  suffrages  into  one,  by  which  the  ejaculatory  character  of  the  whole 
is  destroyed ;  the  reduction  of  the  preces  after  the  Pater  noster  to  one 
(suggested  by  Luther's  arrangement) ;  and  the  accumulation  of  collects  at 
the  end  of  the  procession  instead  of  after  the  preces.  (2)  The  opening 
Kyrie  .  .  .  audi  nos  is  omitted,  as  in  the  Commendatio  animae  (Maskell 
M.  R.  i  122).  (3)  P.  174  '  blessed  and  glorious'  in  the  4th  invocation  no 
doubt  comes  from  the  antiphon  to  Quicunque  in  Trinity  week  '  O  beata  et 
benedicta  et  gloriosa  Trinitas'  etc.  (Breviarium  .  .  Sarum  fasc.  ii  49). 
(-4)  Ne  reminiscaris  was  closely  associated  with  the  Litany.  Down  topeccatis 
nostris  it  was  the  ant.  of  the  Gradual  Psalms  recited  daily  in  Lent  before  the 
Litany  (ibid.  i  c.  dlxxxix) ;  Parce  .  .  .  irascaris  was  the  ant.  of  the  Peni 
tential  Pss.  preceding  the  Litany  in  the  Commendatio  animae  (Maskell 
M.  R.  i  122);  the  two  combined,  with  two  further  clauses  added,  formed 
the  ant.  of  the  Penitentials  before  the  Litany  in  processions  (Brev. 
Sarum.  fasc.  ii  249);  and  Marshall's  second  Primer  has  Remember 
not  .  .  .  for  ever  prefixed  to  the  Litany  (Burton  Three  Primers  p. 

e 


Ixvi  NOTES  ON  THE  LITANY 

124).  Here  it  is  substituted  for  Propitius  esto,  the  response  to 
which,  Pane  nobis  doming,  ought  to  have  been  printed  in  the  first  col. 
(5)  'Crafts  and  assaults  of  the  devil'  is  perhaps  from  ab  insidiis 
ft  laqueis  diaboli  .  .  Ab  incur su  malignorum  spirituum  of  the  Litany  in 
Commend,  animae  (Maskell  M.  R.  i  p.  126).  (6)  P.  176  'A  peste  fame  et 
bello'  should  be  deleted:  it  was  not  added  to  it  till  1847  (see  Thalhofer 
Handbuch  der  Liturgik  ii  p.  499).  (7)  Notice  Roman  details,  sanctam  with 
natiuitatem,  et  sepulturam  ttiam,  aduentum  for  gratiam  (but  &  has  ad- 
uentum  in  Commend,  animae},  sanctam  with  ecclesiam  tuam,  all  derived 
through  Luther;  while  &  prevails  in  damnations  (for  morte},  a  caecitate 
cordis,  ab  appetitu  in.  gloriae,  per  \sanctani\  drcumcisionem  tuam,  predosam, 
gloriosam,  in  hora  mortis  (the  last,  in  Luther  also).  (8)  Per  agoniam  etc. 
perhaps  comes  from  the  Golden  Litany,  the  English  of  which  has  '  For  that 
agony  .  .  and  thi  blode  swette '  (Maskell  M.  R.  iii  p.  267);  or  perhaps 
Luther  derived  it  from  '  Durch  sein  angst  vnd  bliitigen  schwaiss '  of  Ain 
Lettaney  zil  Gott  dem  vatter,  In  alien  angsten,  -vnnd  den  sterbenden  in  todes 
nbtcn  trostlich  vor  zu  sprechen  vn  zii  beten.  Aussgegangen  zii  alten 
Miinster.  Im  jar  MDXxiij ;  a  Litany  of  the  same  character  as  the 
Golden  Litany  and  perhaps  dependent  on  it.  (9)  The  suffrage  Vt 
regem  nostrum  et  omnes  gradus  ecclesiae  in  sancta  religione  conseruare 
digneris  occurs  in  the  Processiondle  of  1544,  regem  having  been  boldly 
substituted  for  domnum  apostolicum,  king  for  pope  !  (10)  P.  178  *  Vnitie, 
peace,  and  Concorde ' :  cp.  Vt  regibus  .  .  .  pacem  et  veram  concordiam  .  . 
Vt  cuncto  populo  christiano  pacem  et  vnitatem,  successive  suffrages  in  1£ 
(Brev.  Rom.  Quignon.  p.  44).  (n)  With  lapsos  erigere  cp.  Ps.  cxliv  14, 
cxlv  8  :  pusillanimes  .  .  adiuuare  i  Thess.  v  14,  Heb.  ii  18  :  praegnantibus 
et  lactentibus  Mt.  xxiv  19  (the  Germ,  seugern  shows  that  lactentibus,  which 
Hermann  reads,  is  meant).  The  suffrages  at  this  point  may  have  been 
influenced  in  Luther  or  in  Cranmer  or  in  both  by  a  paragraph  in  the 
Liturgy  of  S.  Basil'.  TOVS  oAtyo^v^ovs  TrapafjLv6r)0'ov  .  .  .  TOVS 
jj-tvovs  eiravdyaye  .  .  .  TOIS  TrAeovo-t  <rvfjLTr\.€varov,  TOIS  oSotTropovtrt 
<rov  xnP&v  n7>oo"T77#i,  opfavwv  VTre/aao-Trioroi',  aixpah-VTOvs  /Svcrai,  vocrovvras 
tacrat,  riav  €V  .  .  .  Tracrv^  6 Aii^ei  /cai  dvayKy  Kat  ir€.pia"ro.<T€.i  ovrdiv  fJivvjuovevcrov 
o  dtos,  Kat  7rai/TO)i/  TW^  Seo/tevwi'  rrjs  [Aeyd\.v)<s  <rov  evcr7rAayxi/l/a5  (Lift.  east, 
and  -west.  \  p.  334).  (12  )  "Yirep  rov  pva-6ijvai  KT\.  from  the  MeyaAr; 
crvvaTTTr)  or  'Great  Litany '  at  the  beginning  of  the  office  which  precedes  the 
Liturgy  (ibid.  p.  363) :  the  English  seems  to  be  influenced  by  the  Latin  of 
D.  Liturgia  S.Joan.  Chrys.  Venice  1528,  'pro  nauigantibus :  viatoribus : 
egrotis  :  laborantibus  :  captiuis.'  (13)  P.  180  'to  give  us  true  repentance' 
etc.  must  certainly  be  derived  from  the  suffrages  quoted  on  p.  940,  whether 
Cranmer  took  them  from  the  Brixen  Agenda  or  from  some  use  nearer 
home.  The  2nd.  and  3rd.  of  them  occur  in  a  slightly  different  form  in  a 
litany  printed  by  H.  Menard  in  Notae  et  observ.  in  Librum  sacramentorum 
S.  Gregorii  (Paris  1641)  p.  157;  and  It  has  'Vt  nobis  indulgeas  ...  ad 
veram  pcenitentiam  nos  perducere  digneris.'  The  fact  that  Cranmer  has 


NOTES  ON  THE  LITANY  Ixvii 

here  drawn  from  some  more  or  less  remote  source  suggests  that  some  of  the 
other  suffrages  of  which  no  source  has  been  discovered  may  yet  be  borrowed. 
He  was  not  original,  but,  as  the  Litany  is  enough  to  prove,  he  had  an 
extraordinary  power  of  absorbing  and  improving  other  people's  work.  For 
'sins  negligences  and  ignorances'  Dr.  Frere  quotes  also  Horae  B.  M.  V. 
Paris  1530  'sanguis  tuus  ...  sit  mihi  in  remissionem  omnium  peccatorum 
negligentiarum  et  ignorantiarum.'  (14)  The  first  Agnus  Dei  of  J5,  $£  and 
Luther  is  suppressed,  and  the  response  of  the  second,  Parce  nobis  doming,  is 
changed.  The  Litany  in  Commend,  animae  (Maskell  M.R.  i  128)  also  has 
only  two,  substituting  for  the  middle  one  another  formula,  and  the  re 
sponses  correspond  to  those  here,  but  in  reverse  order.  'Thy'  in  the 
rendering  of  Dona  nobis  pacem  seems  to  be  derived  from  the  (prelutheran) 
'German  Agnus'  (Christe  du  lamm  Gottes):  cp.  p.  702  where  there  is 
quoted  for  it  the  Brunswick  Kirchtnordnung  of  1528  in  which  it  is  quoted 
in  full  by  Richter  (Evang.  Kirchenordn.  i  p.  115),  while  it  is  referred  to 
in  the  Wittemberg  Order  of  1533  (ib.  p.  224)  and  the  Saxon  Order  of  1539 
(ib.  p.  313).  See  Julian  Dictionary  of  Hymnology  p.  31.  Of  course  'thy' 
rests  ultimately  on  S.  Jo.  xiv  27.  (15)  For  the  text  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  see 
p.  784.  (16)  P.  182  The  collect  'O  God  merciful  Father'  is  put  here  in 
accordance  with  Luther's  Litany,  and  is  translated,  not  directly  from  the 
mass  pro  tribulatione  cordis,  but  from  Luther's  Latin  remaniement  of  it,  the 
original  being  '  Deus  qui  contritorum  .  .  .  nostris,  qua s  pietati  tue  pro  tri 
bulatione  nostra  offerimus :  implorantes  vt  nos  clementer  respidas,  et  solito 
pietatis  tue  intuitu  tribuas  vt  quidquid  .  .  .  et  consilio  misericordie  tue 
aiiidas :  quatenus  nullis  aduersitatibus  lesi  .  .  .  gratias  tibi  in  ecclesia  tua  re- 
feramus  consolati' (Missale  .  .  .  Sarum,  ed.  Dickinson  797*).  (17)  The 
anthem  Exsurge^  for  whatever  reason,  is  rearranged,  so  that  the  Gloria 
comes  after  instead  of  before  the  repetition  of  the  antiphon.  (18)  The 
rendering  of  the  2nd.  clause  of  Gloria  Patri  is  to  be  noticed.  Marshall's 
Primer  had  'As  it  was  .  .  .,  as  it  is  now,  and  ever  .  .  .  ';  Hilsey's 
'As  it  was  .  .  .,  and  as  it  is  now,  and  ever  .  .  .  ' ;  and  that  of  the  Litany  is 
the  same  in  sense.  But  no  doubt  all  are  wrong.  If  the  Latin  be  com 
pared  with  the  Greek  it  is  obvious  that  Sicut  erat  in  principio  is  a 
parenthesis : 

Gloria  Patri   et    Filio  et    Spiritui     sancto. 
Ao£a     Harpi  KCU  Yi<£    KCU  Hi/cu/ian  ayia>. 
Sicut  erat  in  principio  et    nunc  et    semper  et   in  saecula         saeculorum. 

Kelt  VVV        KCU  Ct€t  KGU  CIS  TOU9  CtltoVaS   T0>!>  ai(t)V(i)V  '. 

so  that  the  meaning  is  '  Glory  be  .  .  (as  it  was  in  the  beginning)  both 
now '  etc. ;  or  rather  perhaps  the  insertion  of  sicut  has  altered  the  meaning 
of  et  and  made  it  the  sign  of  the  apodosis,  so  that  the  meaning  is  '  As 
it  was  ...  so  now ' ;  cp.  '  sicut  in  caelo  et  in  terra '  (S.  Mt.  vi  10). 
(19)  The  verses  tempore  belli  were  not  originally  alternate  versicles  and 
responses,  but  each  verse  was  repeated.  (20)  The  7  and  B?  '  O  Lord 
let  thy  mercy '  etc.  are  among  the  preces  after  the  Pater  noster  in  & ;  and 


Ixviii  THE  HOMILIES 

the  collect  Infirmitatem  nostrum  is  also  that  which  concludes  processions 
causa  necessitatis  (Professional*  p.  167).  (21)  The  collects  which  follow  are 
the  i  St.,  2nd.  and  5th.  of  the  Litany  of  & ;  that  of  the  mass  dc  ieiunio  which 
follows  the  procession  on  Rogation  Monday  (Processionale  p.  113);  and 
the  last  of  the  three  prayers  of  the  preliminary  office  of  the  Liturgy  of  Con 
stantinople  (Lift.  E.  and  W.  i  pp.  31 1,  367).  This  last  prayer  is  described 
as  '  A  Prayer  of  Chrysostome,'  from  which  it  is  obvious  that  it  is  derived 
from  a  text  of  the  Liturgy  of  S.  Chrysostom  alone ;  since  the  prayer  in  fact 
is  part  of  the  framework  of  the  Greek  Liturgy,  used  whether  the  mass  of 
S.  Chrysostom  or  that  of  S.  Basil  is  said.  And  in  fact  it  is  plain,  as  was 
pointed  out  by  the  late  bishop  of  Edinburgh  (J.  Dowden  The  workmanship 
of  the  Prayer  Book,  London  1899,  pp.  227  sqq.),  that  it  was  translated,  not 
so  much  from  the  Greek,  as  from  the  Latin  translation,  of  the  D.  Liturgia 
S.  Joannis  Chrysostomt\  Venice  1528:  Qvi  communes  has:  &  Concordes 
nobis  largitus  es  supplicationes :  &  qui  duobus :  aut  tribus  conuenientibus  in 
nomine  tuo :  petitiones  tribuere  pollicitus  es  tu  &  nunc  seruorum  tuorum 
petitiones  ad  vtilitatem  expleas :  tribuens  nobis  in  praesenti  saeculo  cog- 
nitionem  tuae  veritatis  :  &  in  future  vitam  :  seternam  concedens.  Notice 
that  Cranmer  has  misunderstood  conuenientibus  and  so  has  imported  a  mis 
quotation  of  Mt.  xviii  19  into  his  version.  The  abrupt  ending  of  the  prayer, 
without  its  doxology  '  For  thou  art  a  good  God  and  loving  mankind,  and 
to  thee,  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  send  up  the  glory, 
now  and  ever  and  world  without  end,'  is  presumably  due  to  a  misunder 
standing  of  the  Greek  text,  where  the  common  conclusion  of  the  prayer 
and  the  accompanying  litany  is,  as  usual,  printed  at  the  end  of  the  latter. 

Nothing  further  was  done  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII 
which  affected  the  ritual  situation,  or  concerns  the  present 
purpose. 

But  see  below,  pp.  clxvii  sq.,  for  a  further  matter  of  detail. 


VII 

Edward  VI  ascended  the  throne  on  Jan.  28  1546-7.  Of 
the  measures  of  the  first  two  years  of  the  reign,  the  following 
require  to  be  noted. 

i.  (a)  Already  in  1542  it  had  been  proposed  in  Convoca 
tion,  with  the  approval  of  the  king,  to  make  *  a  stay  of  errors  ' 
such  '  as  were  then  by  ignorant  preachers  spread  among  the 
people,'  by  the  issue  of  a  collection  of  homilies  to  be  delivered 
in  church  in  place  of  the  sermons  complained  of  ;  and  some 


THE  INJUNCTIONS  Ixix 

such  homilies  were  prepared  by  certain  prelates  and  presented 
to  the  Upper  House  of  Convocation.1  But  nothing  further 
happened,  the  king  having  meanwhile  changed  his  mind.2 
But  at  the  beginning  of  the  new  reign,  Cranmer  again  took 
the  matter  in  hand  and  carried  it  to  a  successful  conclusion. 
There  was  issued  Certain  Sermons,  or  Homilies,  appoynted 
by  the  Kynges  Maiestie  to  be  declared  &  redde,  by  all  Parsones, 
Vicars,  or  Curates,  euery  Soday  in  their  Churches,  where  thei 
haue  cures,  dated  July  31  1547. 

The  volume  contains  12  homilies,  4  of  them  (i,  3-5)  written  by 
Cranmer,  one  (6)  by  Edmund  Bonner  bishop  of  London,  one  (2)  by 
Nicholas  Harpsfield  archdeacon  of  Canterbury,  and  one  (u)  by  Thomas 
Becon,  Cranmer's  chaplain ;  the  rest  of  unknown  authorship,  unless,  as 
has  been  sometimes  supposed,  8  and  9  were  by  Nicholas  Ridley  and  1 2 
by  Hugh  Latimer.  See  J,  Griffiths  The  two  books  of  Homilies,  Oxford 
1859,  preface;  J.  T.  Tomlinson  Prayer  Book,  Articles  and  Homilies, 
London  1897,  pp.  230  sqq.  In  editions  issued  in  and  after  1549  each 
homily  is  divided  into  either  two  or  three  parts,  for  separate  delivery,  if 
desired  (see  p.  648  below). 

(6)  In  August  1547  were  issued  a  series  of  royal  Injunc 
tions  to  be  administered  in  a  general  Visitation  of  the  kingdom 
entrusted  to  30  visitors.3 

The  22nd  of  these  Injunctions  requires  that  at  high  mass  the  Epistle 
and  Gospel  be  read  'in  English  and  not  in  Latin  in  the  pulpit  or  in 
such  convenient  place  as  the  people  may  hear  the  same ' ;  and  confirms 
the  direction  that  on  all  Sundays  and  holy  days  an  English  Lesson  be 
read  at  matins  and  at  evensong;  the  24th,  as  already  noted,  directs 
the  use  of  the  Litany,  kneeling  and  without  perambulation,  before  high 
Mass ;  the  33rd  provides  for  the  use  of  the  book  of  Homilies  (which  was 
distributed  by  the  visitors  during  the  visitation)  according  to  the 
directions  of  the  preface,  viz.  that  one  of  the  homilies  be  read  every 
Sunday ;  while  the  37th  orders  that  Prime  and  Hours  be  omitted  when 
there  is  a  sermon  ;  and  the  3oth  orders  that  a  strong  box  '  with  a  hole  in 
the  upper  part  thereof  be  fixed  near  the  high  altar,  to  receive  'the 
oblation  and  alms'  of  the  parishioners  'for  their  poor  neighbours'  (cp. 
p.  662  below). 

(c)  In  spite  of  the  Necessary  doctrine  which  requires  the 

1  Wilkins  Concilia  iii  p.  863. 

2  Strype  Memorials  of  Cranmer  II  3  (ed.  Oxford  1840,  i  p.  21 1). 

3  Dixon  History  of  the  Church  of  England  ii  pp.  428  sqq.     For  the  text  of 
the  Injunctions  see  Card  well  Doc.  Ann.  i  p.  4. 


Ixx  THE  MINOR  CEREMONIES,  ETC. 

minor  ceremonies  to  be  observed,  Cranmer's  fifth  homily, 
Of  good  works,  denounces  hallowed  bread,  holy  water,  palms, 
candles,  etc.,  as  '  Papisticall  superstitions  &  abuses/  Six 
months  later,  Jan.  27,  1547-8,  the  Council  ordered  that 
candles,  ashes  and  palms  should  no  longer  be  used  at  Candle 
mas,  on  Ash  Wednesday,  and  on  Palm  Sunday 1 ;  and  soon 
after  this,  that  the  veneration  of  the  cross  on  Good  Friday, 
holy  bread  and  holy  water  should  be  abandoned  2  ;  so  abolish 
ing  long  sections  of  the  Missal.3 

(d)  In  1547  and  1548  the  use  of  English  in  church  was 
largely  extended,  especially  in  London.  The  texts  of  the 
forms  of  vernacular  service  so  introduced  have  not  for  the 
most  part  been  preserved,  and  it  is  consequently  unknown 
how  they  were  related,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  Latin  texts, 
and,  on  the  other,  to  that  of  the  subsequent  Book  of  Common 
Prayer. 

For  the  progress  of  this  movement  see  Gasquet  and  Bishop 
Edward  VI  and  the  Bk.  of  Com.  Prayer  p.  58  (Ap.  1547) ;  Wriothesley*  s 
Chronicle,  ed.  Camden  Soc.,  i  p.  187,  ii  p.  2  ;  Gray  Friars'  Chronicle,  ed. 
Camden  Soc.,  p.  55  ;  Wilson  The  Order  of  Communion,  H.B.S.,  pp.  xx 
sq. ;  Somerset's  Letter  to  the  Vice-chancellor  of  Cambridge  in  Gasquet 
and  Bishop  p.  147  (Sept.  1548);  Cranmer's  Register,  Sept.  9  1548 
in  Courayer  Def.  de  la  Dissertation  ii  2  app.  p.  xxxvii  (Estcourt  The 
question  of  Anglican  ordinations  app.  p.  xxvii).  Dr.  Frere  has  collected  some 
individual  formulae,  creed,  canticles,  etc.,  from  musical  MSS  of  this  date,  in 
'  Edwardine  vernacular  services  before  the  first  Prayer  Book/  Journal  of 
Theol.  Studies  i  pp.  229  sqq.  There  is  an  English  translation  of  the 
Canon  of  the  Mass  made  by  Coverdale  in  Foxe  Actes  and  Monuments, 
*S63*  P-  891. 

(e)  In  1547  an  anonymous  English  translation  of  the  Latin 
form  of  the  Cologne  Church  Order,  Simplex  ac  pia  deliberatio, 
was  published  by  John  Daye,  and  a  revised  edition  was  issued 
in  1548  with  the  title  A  Simple,  and  Religious  consultatio  of 
vs  Herma  by  the  grace  of  God  Archbishop  of  Colone,  and  prince 

1  Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  i  p.  37.  2  Ibid.  p.  35. 

3  Missale  Sarum,  ed.  Dickinson,  cc.  133  sq.,  253-262, 328-331, 696-703.  Cran- 
mer  had  almost  succeeded  in  abolishing  the  veneration  of  the  cross  and  some  other 
things  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII  :  Cranmer  Miscellaneous  writings,  Parker 
Soc.,  pp.  414  sqq.  Cp.  Wilkins  Concilia  iii  847. 


THE  ORDER  OF  COMMUNION  Ixxi 

Electour.  &c.  by  what  means  a  Christian  reformation,  and 
founded  in  Gods  worde.  Of  doctrine,  Administratio  of  deuine 
Sacramentes,  Of  ceremonies,  &  the  whole  cure  of  soules,  and 
other  ecclesiastical!  ministeries,  may  be  begon  among  men  com 
mitted  to  our  pastorall  charge,  vntill  the  lord  graunte  a  better 
to  be  appoynted,  either  by  a  free,  and  Christian  counsaile,  generall 
or  national,  or  else  by  the  states  of  the  Empire  of  the  nation  of 
Germany,  gathered  together  in  the  holye  Cost.  Perused  by  the 
translator  therof  and  amended  in  many  places.  1548.  London 
J.  Daye  &  W.  Seres. 

2.  On  Dec.  17  1547,  there  was  finally  passed  in  Parliament 
an  Act  '  Against  such  as  imreverently  speak  against  the 
Sacrament  of  the  Altar,  and  of  the  receiving  thereof  under 
both  kinds.'  The  Act  requires  that  henceforth  the  Blessed 
Sacrament  be  administered  to  the  people  in  both  kinds,  and 
directs  that  the  priest  at  least  one  day  before  the  administra 
tion  shall  exhort  the  people  to  come  to  the  holy  communion 
and  meanwhile  to  prepare  themselves  to  receive  it,  and  that 
at  the  time  of  the  communion  he  shall  use  a  godly  exhortation 
in  which  the  benefits  of  worthy  receiving  and  the  danger  of 
unworthy  receiving  shall  be  set  forth.1  As  a  directory  for 
the  priest  in  carrying  out  the  provisions  ot  this  measure  there 
was  issued  The  order  of  the  Communion  dated  March  8  1547-8, 
prefaced  by  a  royal  proclamation,  recalling  the  provisions  of 
the  Act  and  requiring  the  use  of  the  present  book  in  order 
to  avoid  the  diversity  of  usage  that  might  otherwise  arise. 
According  to  a  letter  of  the  Council  directed  to  the  bishops 
on  March  13  the  book  was  compiled  by  '  sundry  of  his 
majesty's  most  grave  and  well  learned  prelates,  and  other 
learned  men  in  the  scripture  '  who  were  by  the  King's  majesty 
caused  '  to  assemble  themselves  '  and  '  after  long  conference ' 
'  agreed  upon  such  an  order.'  2  Who  were  the  prelates  and 

1  Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  Ixvii  pp.  327  sq.     On  the  history  of  the  Act 
and  the  relation  of  Convocation  to  it  see  Gasquet  and   Bishop  pp.  69  sqq.  ; 
Wilson  The  Order  of  the  Communion  pp.  vii  sqq. 

2  Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  \  p.  61. 


Ixxii  THE  ORDER  OF  COMMUNION 

divines  so  commissioned  does  not  appear  ;  it  is  obvious  that 
Cranmer  was  among  them  and  perhaps  contributed  most  to 
the  result ;  while  certain  coincidences  of  language,  as  between 
the  Act  of  Parliament  and  the  book,  suggest  that  the  book 
was  already  in  some  sort  of  existence  before  the  Bill  was 
drafted.  The  Order  of  Communion  forms  an  English  supple 
ment  to  the  Latin  Missal,  its  formulae  being  directed  to  be 
inserted  into  the  Mass  '  without  the  variyng  of  any  other 
Rite  or  Ceremony  in  the  Masse  (vntill  other  order  shalbe 
prouided).'  In  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  Act  the 
Order  consists  of  two  parts  :  (i)  a  notice  of  the  day  on  which 
communion  will  be  administered  to  the  people,  with  a  warning 
and  instruction  on  the  means  of  preparation,  itself  '  or  such 
lyke  f  to  be  delivered  on  the  preceding  Sunday  or  holy  day  or 
at  least  the  day  before  ;  and  (2)  the  form  of  administration 
to  be  used  in  the  Mass  immediately  after  the  celebrant's 
communion,  consisting  of  an  exhortation  to  the  communi 
cants,  a  warning,  an  invitation,  confession,  absolution  and 
'  comfortable  words,'  a  prayer  before  communion,  the  words 
of  administration,  and  a  blessing  ;  together  with  two  notes, 
one  on  the  form  of  the  bread,  the  other  as  to  further  consecra 
tion  of  wine  in  case  of  need. 

The  sources  of  the  text,  besides  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and 
the  Greek  rite  and  medieval  commonplaces,  which  contribute 
a  few  details,  are  traditional  usage  and  the  Pia  deliberatio  of 
Cologne. 

(a)  The  order  of  communicating  the  people  which  had  hitherto  been 
used  Is  not  known  from  any  of  the  official  service-books.  But  MS  Harley 
2383  contains  a  formula  (printed  in  Maskell  Mon.  rit.  iii  p.  408)  which  pro 
bably  represents  what  was  usual :  consisting  of  a  warning  in  English  not 
to  come  to  communion  without  faith  in  the  Sacrament,  repentance,  charity, 
and  purpose  of  amendment ;  a  confession  in  English  to  be  said  after  the 
priest;  and  absolutions.  And  there  is  other  reason  to  believe  that  at 
least  Confiteor  and  absolution  were  generally  used  (Wilson  Order  of 
communion  pp.  xv  sq.).  The  words  of  administration  were  of  course 
the  same  as  were  used  for  the  communion  of  the  sick  (see  below).  The 
new  order  therefore  follows  the  traditional  use  in  its  general  form,  adding 
a  prayer  to  correspond  with  the  prayers  supplied  in  the  Missal  for  the  use 


NOTES  ON  THE  ORDER  Ixxiii 

of  the  priest,  besides  the  text  of  the  absolution  and  of  the  form  of 
administration,  and  a  blessing,  (b)  The  Pia  deliberatio  contributed,  perhaps 
some  suggestions  for  an  exhortation,  part  of  the  confession  and  of  the  'com 
fortable  words,'  and  the  clauses  added  to  the  absolution  and  to  the  form 
of  administration  (ff.  89b  sqq.). 

Nearly  the  whole  of  the  Order  of  Communion  is  to  be  found 
below  in  what  is  printed  in  distinctive  type  on  pp.  652-658, 
650-652,  696-700,  710. 

The  Order  is  printed  in  Maskell  Ancient  Liturgy  of  the  Ch.  of  E?igland, 
Oxford  1882,  pp.  294  sqq.  from  the  Brit.  Mus.  copy  c.  25  f.  12 ;  and  in 
facsimile  from  the  Brit.  Mus.  copy  c.  25  f.  15  in  H.  A.  Wilson  The  Order 
of  Communion ,  H.B.S.,  London  1908.  For  the  bibliography  see  Wilson 
pp.  xxv  sqq. 

NOTES,  (i)  The  notice  (p.  652  below)  is  preceded  by  the  rubric  Fyrste 
the  personne,  Vicar,  or  curat,  the  next  Sonday  or  holyday,  or  at  the  least, 
one  day  before  he  shall  minister  the  Communion,  shall  geue  warnyng  to  his 
parishioners,  or  those  whiche  be  present,  that  they  prepare  them  selues  therto, 
saiyng  to  theim  openly  and  play  nly  as  hereafter  followeth,  or  such  lyke.  It  is 
obviously  not  directed  or  assumed  that  the  communion  will  be  delivered 
to  the  people  at  every  mass,  even  on  Sundays  or  holy  days.  (2)  The 
notice  and  exhortation  Dere  frendes  and  you  especially  seems  to  be 
original ;  but  some  of  its  language  is  found  in  the  Act  of  Dec.  1547  ;  viz. 
*  the  most  comfortable  sacrament  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,' '  in 
remembrance  of  him  and  to  declare  and  set  forth  his  death  and  most 
glorious  passion,'  'the  benefit  and  comfort  promised  to  them  which 
worthily  receive  the  said  holy  sacrament,  and  the  danger  .  .  .  threatened 
to  them  which  shall  presume  to  receive  the  same  unworthily,  to  the  end 
that  every  man  try  and  examine  his  own  conscience  before  he  shall  receive 
the  same.'  (3)  The  contents  of  the  second  part  of  the  book  are  as  follows : 
'  The  time  of  the  Communion,  shalbee  immediatly  after  that  the  priest  him 
selfe  hath  received  the  Sacrament,  without  the  variyng  of  any  other  Rite  or 
Ceremony  in  the  Masse  (vntill  other  order  shalbe  prouided}  but  as  heretofore 
vsually  the  priest  hath  doen  with  the  Sacrament  of  the  body,  to  prepare, 
blisse  and  consecrate  so  muche  as  will  serue  the  people  :  so  it  shall  contynue 
still  after  the  same  maner  and  fourme,  saue  that  he  shal  blesse  and  con 
secrate  the  biggest  Chalice  or  soome  faire  and conuenient  Cup  or  Cuppes  fullof 
wyne,  with  soome  water  put  vnto  it  [p.  662  below].  And  that  daie,  not 
drinke  it  vp  al  himselfe,  but  takyng  one  onely  suppe  or  draught,  leue  the  reste 
vpon  the  Aultare  couered,  and  turne  to  theim  that  are  disposed  to  bee 
partakers  of  the  Communion,  and  shal  thus  exhorte  theim  as  foloweth. 
Derely  beloued  in  the  lorde  .  .  .  sondri  kindes  of  death  [p.  650  below], 
ludge  therefore  youre  selfes  .  .  .  dayes  of  our  life.  Amen  [pp.  650, 
^52]-  C  Then  the  priest  shall  say  to  them  which  be  redy  to  take  the 


Ixxiv  THE  ORDER  OF  COMMUNION 

Sacrament.  If  any  man  here  be  an  ope  blasphemer  .  .  .  bothe  of  body 
and  soule  [p.  650].  Here  the  priest  shall  pause  a  while,  to  se  if  any  man 
will  withdraws  hym  selfe  :  and  if  he  perceiue  any  so  to  do,  then  let  him 
common  with  hym  priuely  at  conuenient  leasure  and  se  whether  he  can  with 
good  exhortation,  bring  him  to  grace :  and  after  a  little  pause,  the  priest  shall 
sate.  You  that  do  truly  .  .  .  people,  say  thus.  Our  blessed  Lorde,  who 
hath  left  power  to  his  Church,  to  absolue  penitet  synners  from  their  synnes, 
and  to  restore  to  the  grace  of  the  heuely  father  such  as  trulie  beleue 
in  Christ,  have  mercy  .  .  .  euerlastyng  life.  [pp.  696,  698]  Then  shall 
the  priest  stande  vp,  and  turnyng  him  toward  the  people,  say  thus,  Here  what 
comfortable  .  .  .  precious  bloud.  Amen.  [pp.  698,  700]  Then  shall  the 
priest  rise,  the  people  still  reuerentlie  kneling,  and  the  priest  shall  deliuer 
the  Communio?i,  first  to  the  ministers,  if  any  be  .  .  .  before  writte?i.  [p.  700] 
Then  shal  the  priest,  turnyng  .  .  .  aunswere.  Amen.  [p.  710].  Note,  that 
the  breade  that  shalbe  consecrated  shalbe  suche  as  heretofore  hath  bene 
accustomed  And  euery  of  the  said  consecrated  breades  shalbe  broken  in  twoo 
pects  .  .  .  lesu  Christ,  [p.  716]  Note,  that  if  it  doth  so  chaunce,  that  the 
wyne  halowed  and  consecrate  dooth  not  suffice  or  bee  ynough  for  theim  that 
dooe  take  the  Communion,  the  priest  after  the  firste  Cup  or  chalice  be  emptied, 
may  go  again  to  ye  auttare,  and  reuerentlie,  and  deuoutlie,  prepare,  and 
consecrate  an  other,  and  so  the  thirde,  or  more  lykwise,  begynning  at  these 
woordes.  Simili  modo,  postquam  cenatum  est,  and  endyng  at  these  wordes, 
qui  pro  uobis  &  pro  multis  effundetur  in  remissionem  peccatoru,  and 
without  any  leuacion  or  lifting  vp'  [cp.  p.  703].  The  important 
differences  between  the  text  of  the  Order  and  that  of  the  pages  referred 
to  are  noticed  below.  (4)  It  seems  clear  that  the  author  of  the  exhortation 
Derely  beloued  in  the  lorde  had  before  him,  or  was  influenced  by  remini 
scences  of,  the  chapter  De  Coena  Domini  and  the  two  exhortations 
{Cassel  and  Brandenburg-Niirnberg)  of  the  preparation  office  (p.  xlvii  above) 
of  the  Pia  deliberatio  of  Cologne.  The  opening  seems  to  be  suggested 
by  that  of  the  2nd  exhortation:  '  Quandoquidem  Charissimi  in 
Domino  .  .  .  Sacratissima  Domini  nostri  lesu  Christi  Ccena  celebra- 
bimus  .  .  .  AEquum  est,  ut  summo  studio  singuli  sese  explorent,  sicut 
nos  hortatur  D.  Paulus  ' ;  and  then  a  word,  a  phrase,  or  a  clause,  is  picked 
up  here  and  there  from  one  or  other  of  the  three  documents :  *  fidemque 
nostram  in  Christum  confirmemus  et  excitemus'  (Pia  delib.  f.  91),  'in 
hoc  sanctissimo  mysterio '  (f.  86),  '  pro  nobis  nostrique  redemptione '  (f.  91), 
'  Deum  et  hominem '  (#.),  '  immensam  et  ineffabilem  charitatem  Dei ' 
(f.  89*),  '  unici  Saluatoris  &  Domini  nostri '  (f.  85),  '  unicum  Magistrum 
et  Dominum  nostrum'  (f.  85b),  'unicus  Magister  &  Doctor  noster' 
(f.  86),  'quantaque  etiam  beneficia  nobis  sua  morte  &  resurrectione 
impetrarit'  (f.  85b),  'qusecunque  nobis  .  .  .  sanguine  suo  impetrauit,  & 
promeritus  est'  (f.  84*),  'pignus'  (f.  91),  'hoc  enim  sacramentum  ad 
singularem  consolationem  et  confirmationem  datum  est  a  Domino '  (f.  9ob). 
(5)  The  warning  If  any  man  here  is  perhaps  suggested  by  the  long  list  of 


THE  ORDER  OF  COMMUNION  Ixxv 

those  who  are  not  to  be  admitted  to  communion  at  the  end  of  the  first 
exhortation  in  Pia  delib.  f.  90**  ;  but  it  has  no  verbal  coincidences  except 
*  blasphemer,'  *  aduouterer.'  (6)  In  the  Pia  deliberatio  (f.  9ib),  the  order  is 
confession,  comfortable  words,  absolution  ;  and  these  precede  the  introit 
of  the  Mass.  In  the  confession,  add  to  the  parallels  from  Pia  delib. 
'  id  uero  nobis  ex  animo  dolet,'  '  ueniam  a  te  oremus  \sic\  omnium,  quae 
contra  te  admisimus,'  'in  noua  vita  ad  gloriam  nominis  tui  .  .  .  tibi 
seruiamus,  &  complaceamus  '  (f.  92).  In  spite  of  these  borrowings, 
the  contrast  between  the  German  and  the  English  confession  is  to  be 
noted.  The  opening  of  the  absolution  (see  above  and  cp.  p.  828 
below)  represents  'Quia  Dominus  noster  benedictus,  hanc  Ecclesise 
suae  potestatem  reliquit,  ut  eos  a  peccatis  absoluat,  &  in  gratiam  Patris 
coelestis  restituat,  quicuq;  peccatorum  pcenitentes  Christo  Domino  vere 
credunt'  (Pia  delib.  f.  92).  (7)  To  the  parallels  to  the  We  do  not 
presume  add  :  Dan.  ix  18  'we  do  not  cast  our  prayers  before  ye  in  our 
owne  ryghteousnesse  :  no,  but  only  in  thy  great  mercyes  '  :  Lit.  S.James  ov 


aya0<3  (Litt.  E.  and  W.  i  p.  46);  Florus  of  Lyons  Expos.  Missae  109  non  de 
ullis  nostris  meritis  sed  de  multitudine  miserationum  tuarum  sperantibus  : 
Paschas.  Radbert.  de  Corpore  et  Sanguine  Domini  1  1  caro  quidem  carne 
pascitur  .  .  .  anima  vero  Christi  sanguine  reparatur  ;  19  totus  enim  homo 
qui  ex  duobus  constat  substantiis  redimitur  et  ideo  carne  et  sanguine 
saginatur  :  S.  Thorn.  Aq.  Verbum  supernum  prodiens  f  Quibus  sub  bina 
specie  |  carnem  dedit  et  sanguinem  |  ut  duplicis  substantiae  |  totum  cibaret 
hominem  '  ;  and  the  passages  collected  in  Scudamore  Notitia  eucharistica 
pp.  545  sqq.  and  Dowden  Further  studies  in  the  Prayer  Book  pp.  317  sqq. 
With  'made  clean'  and  'washed'  cp.  'ut  peccata  que  ex  carne  et 
sanguine  contraximus,  caro  mundet,  sanguts  lauet  domini  nostri  ihesu 
christi'  (Missale  Westmonaster.,  ed.  Legg,  H.B.S.  London  1893,  c.  519: 
Missale  Hereford,  in  Maskell  Anc.  Lit.  ofCh.  ofEngl.  p.  1  79  ;  Scudamore  and 
Dowden  locc.  citt.}.  (8)  The  Sarum  form  of  administration  for  the  sick,  of 
course  only  in  one  kind,  was  '  Corpus  domini  nostri  iesu  christi  custodial 
corpus  tuum  et  animam  tuam  in  vitam  eternam  '  (see  Maskell  Mon.  rit. 
i  p.  114).  This  form  is  here  (a)  in  part  reduplicated,  in  part  redistributed, 
so  that  'body'  may  answer  to  'corpus,'  and  'soul'  to  'sanguis,' 
as  in  the  preceding  prayer  ;  (b)  expanded  with  '  whiche  was  geuen  for 
thee  '  and  'whiche  was  shed  for  thee,'  adapted  from  the  Words  of  Institution. 
Corresponding  words  are  common  in  Lutheran  usage  :  e.g.  the  Prussian 
Kirchenordn.  1525  '  Nym  hyn  vnd  yss  (trinck),  das  ist  der  leyb  der  (d. 
blut  das)  fur  dich  gegeben  (vergossen)  ist  '  (Richter  i  p.  30)  ;  Branden- 
burg-Niirnberg  1533,  Brandenburg  1540  '  Nyme  hyn  vnd  yss  (trinck),  Das 
ist  der  leib  Christi  der  (das  blut  des  n.  T.  das)  fur  dich  geben  (dein 
siinde  vergossen)  ist'  (ib.  pp.  207,  327)  ;  Cologne  1543  'Nim  hin  vnd  iss 
(drinck)  zu  deinem  heil,  den  leib  Christi,  der  (das  blut  des  n.  T.,  das) 
fiir  dich  gegeben  (fur  deine  sunde  vergossen)  ist'  (ib.  ii  p.  44)-  Cp. 


Ixxvi  CRANMER'S  BREVIARY  I 

Rietschel  Lehrb,  d.  Liturgik  i  p.  440.  (9)  The  note  directing  that,  if  the 
chalice  be  spent,  another  (not  the  same)  and  a  third  or  a  fourth,  if  neces 
sary,  be  consecrated,  seems  to  be  an  adaptation  of  the  Cautela  of  the 
Sarum  Missal  (ed.  Dickinson  cc.  653  sq.)  as  to  what  is  to  be  done  if  the 
celebrant  after  consecration  finds  that  there  has  been  no  wine  in  the 
chalice ;  when  he  is  directed  to  consecrate  wine,  beginning  from  Simili 
modo.  (See  H.  A.  Wilson  The  order  of  communion  pp.  xvi  sq.) 

3.  Before  1549  Cranmer  was  making  experiments  in  the 
reform  of  the  Divine  Service.  Two  such  experiments  survive, 
marking  two  stages  in  the  progress  of  his  ideas,  contained 
in  the  MS  Reg.  7  B.  iv  in  the  British  Museum  collection. 

Attention  was  first  called  to  this  MS  and  its  importance  by  Dom 
Gasquet  and  Mr.  Edmund  Bishop  in  Edward  VI  and  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer^  London  1890,  where  the  MS  is  described  and  discussed 
in  Appendix  i,  the  most  important  of  its  contents  printed  or  described  in 
Appendices  ii-iv,  and  their  liturgical  character  and  relations  discussed  in 
chaps,  ii  and  iii. 

(i)  The  first  scheme  (Horarum  canonicarum  series),  which 
probably  belongs  to  the  last  years  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII, 
includes  all  the  canonical  hours  from  Matins  to  Compline, 
and  in  respect  of  structure  follows  closely  the  second 
recension  of  Quinones's  Breviarium  Romanum,1  while  deriving 
its  material  almost  wholly  from  the  Sarum  Breviary. 

On  the  date  of  this  scheme,  see  Gasquet  and  Bishop,  pp.  25  sqq. 
This  scheme  (ff.  133-150)  departs  from  Quinones  in  some  points. 
(a)  While  Quinones  abolished  the  Kyrie  eleison,  Pater  noster  and  preces 
altogether,  Cranmer  retains  them  at  Prime,  None  and  Compline,  using 
for  preces  however,  not  those  of  the  Breviary,  but  the  more  concise  form 
of  the  Bidding  of  the  Bedes  for  the  living,2  and  in  these  substituting  for 
Domine  fiat  pax  in  virtute  tua  the  antiphon  of  the  memorial  for  peace 
Da  pacem  Domine  of  the  Horae  B.M.V.,  and  omitting  Domine  exaudi. 
(#)  Cranmer  retains  the  first  vespers  of  Sundays  and  festivals,3  while 
Quinones  ignores  them,  (c)  Memoriae  at  Lauds  and  Vespers,  the  recitation 
of  the  Penitential  Psalms  in  Lent,  and  the  Office  of  the  Dead,  are  omitted. 
(d)  On  Christmas  day,  Innocents,  Easter-Monday  to  Wednesday,  Low 
Sunday,  and  Whit-Monday  to  Wednesday,  Matins  has  a  4th  Lesson ;  Lauds 
and  Vespers  have  each  a  Lesson  every  day  in  place  of  a  capitulum ;  and 
all  Lessons  are  from  Holy  Scripture,  the  histories  of  the  Saints  being  read, 
instead  of  the  Martyrology,  after  Prime,  and  the  commemoration  of  the 

1  See  above  p.  xxvii.  2  Processionale  Sarum,  ed.  Henderson,  p.  7. 

3  Gasquet  and  Bishop's  statement  to  the  contrary,  p.  24,  is  a  mistake. 


CRANMER'S  BREVIARY  II  Ixxvii 

Saints  being  confined  to  this,  except  on  the  three  days  after  Christmas.  In 
the  Lectionary  (ff.  151  sqq.),  the  greater  part  of  the  Old  Testament  is  read 
in  continuous  course  in  the  first  two  Lessons  of  Matins  and  in  Vespers, 
except  Prov.,  Eccles.,  Wisd.  and  Ecclus.  which  are  read  at  Lauds,  and 
Chron.,  Canticles,  Ezek.  and  Maccabees,  which  are  omitted  altogether ; 
the  New  Testament,  except  Rom.,  i  Cor.  and  Apoc.,  is  read  in  the  3rd 
Lesson  of  Matins.  Whether  the  distribution  of  the  Psalter  was  that  of 
Quinones  is  unknown,  since  while  reference  is  made  to  the  'order'  (f.  133), 
it  is  not  described  in  the  MS. 

(ii)  In  the  second  experimental  scheme,  which  perhaps 
is  to  be  dated  as  of  1547,  the  Hours  are  reduced  to  two, 
Matins  and  Evensong  ;  partly,  it  is  explained,1  because  the 
existing  order  involved  much  unnecessary  repetition,  partly 
because  the  ancient  distribution  of  the  hours  of  the  day  had 
fallen  into  disuse  and  in  practice  the  Service  was  accumulated 
at  two  points  in  the  day.  The  scheme  is  preceded  by  a 
preface,  largely  reproduced  from  that  of  the  first  recension  of 
Quinones. 

'Canon'  (f.  9)  prescribes  the  monthly  recitation  of  the  Psalter,  the 
reading  of  the  Gospels,  Epistles  and  Acts  three  times  a  year,  and  the  rest 
of  the  Bible  once ;  the  Old  Testament,  except  the  Prophets,  being  read  in 
the  first  lessons,  morning  and  evening,  the  Prophets  and  Apocalypse  in 
the  second  lesson  of  Matins,  the  Gospels  and  Acts  in  the  third ;  while 
the  Epistles  are  assigned  to  the  second  lesson  at  Evensong.  In  regard 
of  the  structure  of  the  service  (f.  n):  both  offices  begin  with  the 
Lord's  Prayer  in  English,  followed  by  Domine  labia  at  Matins  and  Deus 
in  adiutorium  at  Evensong,  with  Gloria  Patri  etc.  Venite  is  not  said 
daily,  but  only  as  it  occurs  in  the  course  of  the  Psalms.  The  Hymn 
follows,  and  three  Psalms :  then  the  Lord's  Prayer  in  English,  and,  in 
Matins,  three  lessons,  in  Evensong,  two,  with  blessings  before  and 
Tu  autem  with  a  new  response  after ;  and  then  Te  Deum  in  the  morning 
and  Magnificat  in  the  evening.  At  Matins  a  fourth  lesson  is  read  on 
Sundays,  great  festivals  and  saints'  days.  All  these  lessons  are  to  be  in 
English  and  to  be  read  from  the  pulpit.  After  Benedictus  at  Matins  and 
Magnificat  at  Evensong  follows  Dominus  vobiscum,  the  collect  of  the  day, 
and  Benedicamus  Domino  with  the  response  Laudemus  et  superexaltemus 
nomen  eius  in  saecula.  Amen.  On  Sundays  after  Matins  is  to  be  said 
Quicunque  vult  and  the  final  preces  of  Prime  from  Ostende  nobis  onward 
and  the  Prime  collect  Domine  sancte  Pater,  with  Dominus  vobiscum,  and 
Benedicamus  Domino  and  response  as  above.  A  Kalendar,  containing, 


1  ff.  i  ib  sq. 


Ixxviii         THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRA  YER 

besides  a  singular  series  of  names  of  Saints  for  which  no  service  is 
provided,  a  table  of  Lessons,  is  prefixed  to  this  scheme  (f.  4).  The  table 
of  Lessons  carries  out  in  detail  what  is  generally  prescribed  in  the 
*  canon,'  and  assigns  the  lessons  to  the  days  of  the  civil  year,  Genesis, 
Isaiah,  S.  Matthew,  and  Romans  being  begun  on  Jan.  i. 

There  is  also  (f.  157)  another  Kalendar  and  table  of  Lessons,  providing 
3  Lessons  for  Matins,  and  one  for  Vespers,  which  corresponds  to  neither 
scheme  of  Service,  and  assigning  Gen.-Job  to  the  first  and  second  Lessons 
of  Matins,  Prov.-Amos  to  Vespers,  from  Jan.  to  Nov. ;  Isaiah  to  the  first 
and  second  of  Matins  and  to  Vespers  in  Dec. ;  and  the  New  Testament  to 
the  3rd  of  Matins  throughout  the  year. 


VIII 

I.  In  pursuance  of  the  purpose  expressed  in  the  Proclama 
tion  prefixed  to  the  Order  of  Communion  l  to  trauell  for  the 
reformation  &  setting  furthe  of  suche  godly  orders,  as  maye 
bee  moste  to  godes  glory,  the  edifiyng  of  our  subiectes,  and 
for  thaduauncemente  of  true  religion,' 1  and  '  to  the  intent 
a  uniform  quiet  and  godly  order  should  be  had,'  in  place  at 
once  of  the  variety  of  traditional  use,  and  of  the  '  much 
more  divers  and  sundry  forms  and  fashions  '  '  now  of  late  ' 
prevailing,  the  king  '  appointed  the  Archbishop  of  Canter 
bury,  and  certain  of  the  most  learned  and  discreet  bishops, 
and  other  learned  men  of  this  realm,  to  consider  and  ponder 
the  premises.'  2  The  outcome  of  the  consideration  of  this 
commission  was  The  booke  of  common  prayer  and  administra 
tion  of  the  Sacramentes,  and  other  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the 
Churche  :  after  the  vse  of  the  Churche  of  England,  commonly 
called  '  The  First  Prayer-Book  of  Edward  VI  '  ;  which  was 
enforced  by  the  Act  of  Uniformity  finally  passed  on  Jan.  21 
1548-9,  requiring  the  book  to  be  in  exclusive  use  on  and 
after  the  following  Whitsunday  (June  9).  The  earliest 
known  printed  copy  of  the  book  is  dated  March  7  1549  ; 
and,  in  the  same  year,  at  least  5  other  editions  in  13  impres 
sions  were  issued,  the  last  being  dated  July  30. 

1  The  order  of  the  Communion  f.  A  iii. 

2  Act  of  Uniformity  1549,  Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  Ixix,  p.  358. 


THE  PRINCIPAL  SOURCES  Ixxix 

On  what  is  known  or  conjectured  of  the  authorship  of  the  book  and 
of  its  compilation,  and  on  the  question  whether  or  not  it  was  submitted 
to  Convocation,  see  Gasquet  and  Bishop  Edward  VI  and  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  chaps,  ix,  x ;  Procter  and  Frere  New  history  of  the  Book 
of  Common  Prayer  pp.  45  sqq. ;  on  the  bibliography,  J.  Parker  History  of 
the  successive  revisions  pp.  xxiv  sqq. 

2.  Of  the  materials  used  in  the  compilation  of  the  riter 
these  points  may  be  noticed. 

(1)  The  Holy  Scriptures,  which  of  course  supply  by  far 
the  greatest  part,  are  quoted  or  referred  to  for  the  Psalms, 
however  used,  and    for  all   Lessons,   Epistles  and   Gospels 
(except  one),  according  to  the  version  of  the  Great  Bible. 

See  above  pp.  1  sqq.  The  Canticles  (except  Benedicite),  and  many  of  the 
Offertories,  '  Postcommunions,'  anthems  and  incidental  quotations,  and 
the  Gospel  at  Baptism,  are  independent  of  the  Great  Bible  or  depart  from 
it  more  or  less. 

(2)  The  traditional  Latin  rite,  according  to  the  Use  of 
Sarum,  is  the  source  of  the  structure  of  the  several  offices  ; 
for  the  most  part,  of  the  particular  selection  of  the  passages 
drawn  from  the  Holy  Scriptures,  except  the  lessons  of   the 
Divine  Service  ;   and,  by  way  of  translation,  paraphrase,  or 
adaptation,  of  most  of  the  rest  of  the  content,  apart  from  the 
didactic  and  hortatory  matter. 

(3)  The  Mozarabic  and  the  Eastern  Orthodox  rites  con 
tribute  some  small  part. 

See  pp.  738,  740;  690,  692,  694. 

(4)  Of  continental   Catholic    reforming  documents,   the 
Breviary  of  Quinones,  and  the  Encheiridion  and  the  Antidi- 
dagma  of  Cologne,  have  made  some  impression  on  the  book. 

See  pp.  34  sqq.,  690,  692,  694,  734,  778,  and  notes  pp.  Ixxxiv  sqq.  below. 

(5)  The  Litany  of  1544,  with  the  omission  of  the  invoca 
tions  of  the  saints  and  of  three  of  the  collects,  and  the  Order 
of  Communion  of  1548,  are  incorporated  bodily  with  little 
further  change  ;   the   ritual  reforms  already  mentioned  are 
perpetuated  ;  and  many  of  the  documents  described  above 
(pp.  li  sqq.)  have  had  some  influence  on  the  text. 


Ixxx  THE  LUTHERAN  SOURCES 

(6)  The  Lutheran  Kirchenordnungen  make  a  contribution, 
which  is  considerable  but  not  strictly  measurable,  since  simil 
arity  between  the  books,  apart  from  actual  quotation,  does 
not  of  necessity  imply — and  where  the  similarity  is  one  of 
omission  there  is  no  means  of  showing — that  the  one  has 
borrowed  from  the  others.  But  in  any  case  the  following 
points  are  to  be  noted. 

(a)  The  Kirchenordnungen  which  have  been  here  identified 
as  influencing  the  English  book  are  those  of  Electoral  Branden 
burg,  1540,  and  Cologne,  1543  ;   in  a  lesser  degree   that  of 
Albertine  Saxony,  1540  ;   and  probably  those  of  Calenberg, 
1542,  and  Pfalz-Neuburg,  1543.     That  is  to  say,  those  which 
have  been  influential  include  the  most  conservative  Orders. 

It  has  commonly  been  said  that  Cranmer  made  use  of  the  Brandenburg- 
Niirnberg  Order  of  1533  ;  but  there  appear  to  be  no  signs  of  the  use  of  it, 
except  indirectly  through  the  Brandenburg  and  Cologne  Orders.  The 
quotations  from  the  Order  of  Albertine  Saxony  on  pp.  748,  750,  760 
might  well  be  indirect,  through  the  Brandenburg  Order ;  but  the  direct 
use  of  the  Alb. -Sax.  Order  seems  to  be  implied  in  the  passages  referred  to 
in  the  notes  on  pp.  604,  732,  734  (below  pp.  xcvii  sqq.).  By  far  the  largest 
use  is  made  of  the  Cologne  Order  (Einfaltigs  bedencken,  Pia  ddiberatio, 
Consultation)  j  here  sometimes  the  German  is  followed,  sometimes  the 
Latin;  while  perhaps  in  most  cases  (see  especially  notes  on  pp.  732,  806) 
the  influence  of  the  English  translation  can  be  detected. 

(b)  To  the  German  Orders  is  due,  no  doubt  the  suggestion, 
certainly  sometimes  part  of  the  wording,  of  the  didactic  and 
hortatory  element  of  the  English  book.     But,  as  we  have 
seen  (p.  xxviii  above),  such  instructions  were  desired  by  the 
Council  of  Cologne  in  1536,  were  supplied  in  the  later  French 
and  German  diocesan  Ritualia  and  Agendae,  and  were  enjoined 
by  the  reformed  Roman  Rituale. 

(c)  The  debt  of  the  English  book  to  the  Lutheran  Orders 
is  in  matter  of  practice,  not  of  doctrine.     There  is  no  '  Luther- 
anism  '  in  the  book  ;    and  the  differences  and  avoidances 
should  be  noted  as  carefully  as  the  likenesses  and  borrowings. 
And  even  in  matter  of  practice,  what  is  borrowed  is  often  a 
traditional  practice  or  an  adaptation  of  a  traditional  practice, 
not  mere  innovation. 


CHARACTERISTICS  Ixxxi 

The  positive  contributions  of  the  Kirchenordnungen  may  be  divided 
into  three  classes. 

(1)  Traditional  practice  or  adaptation  of  it :  the  explicit  direction  for 
the  people  to  offer  money  at  the  Mass  (p.  662  :  for  which  see  Scudamore, 
Notitia  eucharistica  p.  350  :  Dowden  Further  studies  pp.  186  sqq.) ;  '  table 
prayers  '  (an  adaptation  of  the  missa  sicca ;  see  note  on  p.  714) ;  S.  Mk.  x 
13  sqq.  at  Baptisms  (see  note  on  p.   730);  Baptism  in  private  houses, 
which  materially  only  sets  out  at  length  what  is  directed  in  the  JManuale, 
and  may  well  have  been  translated  by  Cranmer  only  to  save  himself  the 
trouble  of  writing  it  out  for  himself  (pp.  748  sqq.) ;  and  the  declaration  of 
marriage,  traditional  in  Germany  (p.  806). 

(2)  New   practice :   the   separation   of  the   communicants   from    the 
general  congregation  at  Mass  (p.  662) ;  the  use  of  the  Litany  throughout 
the  year,  and  not  only  at  Rogationtide,  in  Lent,  and  on  special  occasions 
(p,  714);  and  the  communion  of  the  sick,  if  possible  directly  from  the 
altar  (which  is  primitive,  S.  Just.  Mart.  ApoL  i  65,  67),  or  otherwise  with  a 
celebration  in  the  house  (p.  843). 

(3)  Incidental  matter,  of  no  special  significance. 

German  influence  on  the  Litany  and  on  the  Order  of  Communion  has 
been  noticed  above  (pp.  Ixxiii  sqq.). 

On  Lutheran  influence  on  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  H.  E.  Jacobs 
The  Lutheran  Movement  in  England,  London  1892,  ch.  xvii-xxiii,  is 
exaggerated  and  misleading. 

3.  In  reference  to  the  general  character  of  the  new  rite, 
the  following  points  may  be  noted. 

(i)  The  books  are  reduced  to  three,  the  Psalter,  the  Bible, 
and  the  composite  book  which  combines  in  a  single  volume 
a  Breviary  (without  the  Psalms  and  Lessons),  a  Processional, 
a  Missal,  and  a  Manual.  Since  no  pontifical  office  is  provided, 
except  Confirmation,  which  also  formed  part  of  the  Manual, 
presumably  the  unreformed  Pontifical  continued  in  force. 

(a)  The  Psalter,  of  the  Great  Bible  version,  pointed  and  provided  with 
the  Table  (p.  48),  was  printed  by  R.  Grafton  in  Aug.  1549  and  March  1552, 
and  by  J.  Oswen  in  Sept.  1549  (J.  W.  Legg  The  Clerk's  Book  pp.  xii,  xiv; 
p.  900  below).  The  Great  Bible  was  reissued  with  '  A  Table  to  finde  the 
Epistles  and  Gospels  vsually  read  in  the  Churche,  accordyng  vnto  the 
booke  of  Common  prayer,'  printed  by  E.  Whitchurch  in  1549  and  1550; 
and  with  also  the  table  of  Psalms,  the  Kalendar,  and  'The  order  of 
commen  prayer  for  Mattins  and  Euensonge,'  Quicunque,  and  the  tables  of 
proper  Psalms  and  Lessons ;  the  collects  of  Sundays  and  saints'  days,  the 
collects  for  the  king,  the  confession, '  We  do  not  presume,'  and  thanksgiving, 
of  the  Mass;  and  the  Litany;  printed  by  N.  Hyll  in  1552  (Darlow  and 


Ixxxii  THE  BOOK  OF  1549 

Moule  Historical  Catalogue  nos.  49,  56,  68  :  cp.  62).  (b)  According  to  the 
title-page,  The  booke  combines  (i)  the  common  prayer,  strictly  the  Divine 
Service  (p.  34 ;  Act  of  Uniformity  passim),  here  perhaps  including  the 
Litany,  and  the  Mass  considered  apart  from  the  communion  (see  art. 
'Common  Prayer'  in  Journ.  Theol.  Studies  x  pp.  497  sqq.);  thus  corre 
sponding  to  contents  of  the  Breviary,  the  Processional,  and  the  Missal : 

(2)  the  administracion  of  the  Sacramentes  ;  viz.  Communion  pp.   696-702, 
Baptism  p.  724,  Confirmation  p.  790,  Penance  p.  828,  Matrimony  p.  800, 
Extreme  Unction  p.  834  ;  (3)  and  other  rites  and  ceremonies ;  viz.  Purifica 
tion  of  women  p.  880,  Visitation  of  the  sick  p.  818,  Burial  of  the  dead 
p.  848,  and  the  penitential  office  of  Ash  Wednesday  p.  886 ;   (2)  and 

(3)  thus  corresponding  to  the  Manual.     The  book  thus  reproduces  the 
rites  of  the  churche,  but  after  the  vse  of  the  Churche  of  England  which 
thus  becomes  one,  in  place  of  the  diversity  hitherto  prevailing,     (c)  The 
Pontificalia  were  not  among  '  the  bokes   of  seruice,  the  keping  wherof 
shold  be  a  let  to  the  vsage  of  the  said  boke  of  commene  prayers,'  which 
accordingly  the  order  in   council  of  Dec.  25  1549  and  the  subsequent 
act  of  Parliament   required  to  be  brought  in,  defaced   and   abolished 
(Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  i  p.  74).     (d)  There  was  printed,  also,  for  the  use  of 
the  parish  clerk,  a  selection  from  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  :  The  Psalter 
.  .  .  Hereunto  is  added,  diuerse  thynges  as  mate  appere  on  the  next  side, 
where  is  expressed  the  contentes  of  this  boke  (R.  Grafton,  Aug.  1549:  re 
printed  in  J.  W.  Legg  The  ClerKs  book  of  1549,  H.  B.  S.,  London  1903) ; 
containing  the  directions  how  the  Psalter  is  to  be  read,  and  the  table  of 
Psalms;    Matins   and   Evensong,   and    Litany;    all   that  appertains   to 
the  clerk  in  the  Mass,  Matrimony,  Visitation  of  the  Sick,  Burial,  Purifica 
tion,  and  on  Ash  Wednesday;  and  the  Psalter.     Another  book,  under 
almost  the  same  title  (R.  Grafton,  March  1552),  is  the  same  in  contents, 
except  that,  in  place  of  the  items  from  Matrimony  to  Ash  Wednesday,  it 
has  the  Introits  and  Collects,  proper  Psalms  and  lessons  for  certain  holy 
days,  the  collects  for  the  king  and  the  confession  of  the  Mass,  '  We  do 
not  presume,'  the  thanksgiving  and  blessing  after  communion,  and  the 
collects  appended  to  the  Mass  (Legg  op.  cit.  pp.  xiv.  sq.).     Of  this  book 
it  is  difficult  to  discern  the  purpose. 

(2)  The  whole  is  in  English. 

For  a  stage  in  the  process  by  which  this  result  was  arrived  at,  see  the 
questions  submitted  to  the  bishops  (1547  or  1548)  in  Burnet  Reformation 
pt.  II  bk.  i  record  xxv :  Gasquet  and  Bishop,  ch.  vi. 

(3)  Rite  and  ceremony  are  simplified. 

Marked  examples  of  simplification  are  to  be  found  in  the  structure  of 
Divine  Service  and  of  the  Order  of  the  Burial  of  the  Dead  ;  in  the  directions 
for  the  preparation,  the  offertory,  and  the  conclusion,  of  the  Mass,  and  in 
the  detailed  ceremonies  throughout  the  Mass ;  and  in  the  omission  of  the 


CHARACTERISTICS  Ixxxiii 

dramatic  ceremonies,  not  only  those  already  abolished  (p.  Ixx),  but  also 
the  salt,  spittle  and  effeta,  oil  and  taper  at  Baptism. 

(4)  Metrical  hymns  find  no  place  in  the  book. 

This  omission  was  probably  caused,  not  by  any  hostility  to  metrical 
hymns,  but  by  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  them  in  English.  There  was 
no  growth  of  hymnology  in  England  like  that  which  followed  Luther's 
appeal  in  Germany  (p.  xxxii).  Coverdale  had  paraphrased  some  of  the 
Lutheran  hymns  etc.  and  composed  one  or  two  of  his  own  before  1539 
(Goostly  Psalmes  and  Spirituall  Songes  drawen  out  of  the  holy  Scripture^ 
printed  by  J.  Gough :  reprinted  in  Remains  of  Myles  Coverdalc,  Parker 
Soc.,  Cambridge  1846,  pp.  533  sqq.).  These  are  of  no  merit;  and  the 
translations  in  the  King's  Primer  of  1545  are  worse.  Cranmer  was 
conscious  of  his  own  inability  to  write  verse  (p.  Ixi),  and  the  version  of 
Veni  Creator  in  the  Ordinal  of  1550,  if  it  is  his,  confirms  his  judgment, 
and  if  not,  shows  that  his  colleagues  were  as  incapable  as  himself. 
Thomas  Sternhold's  Certayne  Psalmes,  chose  out  of  the  Psalter  of  Dauid 
and  drawe  into  Englishe  metre,  which  was  published  in  1547  or  1548,  and 
in  an  enlarged  posthumous  ed.  in  1549,  seems  to  mark  the  best  that  was 
attainable.  See  Julian  Diet,  of  Hymnology  art.  '  English  Hymnody,  Early.' 

(5)  All  benedictions  of  things,  except  of  course  of  the 
matter  of  some  of  the  sacraments,  are  omitted. 

Those  involved  in  the  minor  and  dramatic  ceremonies  vanished  along 
with  the  ceremonies  themselves.  That  of  the  marriage-ring  is  adapted 
to  another  purpose  (p.  806) ;  all  allusion  to  incense,  and  therefore  to  the 
blessing  of  it,  is  omitted;  and  there  is  nothing  to  correspond  to  the 
section  of  Benedictions  in  the  Manual.  Those  of  the  Pontifical  are  so 
far  explicitly  not  affected.  According  to  Daniele  Barbaro's  'Report  of 
his  legation  to  England'  1551  (Calendar  of  State  Papers:  Venetian  v  p. 
348),  the  chrism  (p.  742)  and  the  oil  of  the  sick  (p.  834)  used  under  the 
Book  of  1549  were  unconsecrated. 

(6)  Invocations  of  the  Saints  and  all  allusion  to  their 
merits  and  intercessions  are  excluded. 

In  contrast  with  the  usage  of  the  Orthodox  East,  invocation  had 
comparatively  little  place  in  the  ritual  of  the  West.  On  the  other  hand 
*  comprecation '  or  prayers  to  God  for  the  intercession  of  the  saints,  and 
petition  for  a  share  in  their  merits,  were  general  characteristics  of  prayers 
at  commemorations  of  saints.  The  rejection  of  these  implied  the  general 
rewriting  of  the  collects  of  Saints'  days ;  and  the  type  of  the  old  collects 
of  the  Conversion  of  S.  Paul  (p.  560)  and  of  S.  Bartholomew's  day  (p.  614) 
was  followed. 

(7)  Two  matters  of  form  may  be  noted  :  (a)  the  book  is 
printed   almost   wholly  in  black ;  and  (b)  no  musical  nota 
tion  is  provided. 


Ixxxiv  J549 

(a)  The  Latin  books  were  printed  with  rubrics  in  red  throughout ;  and 
the  Litany  of  1544  had  its  initials,  responses,  and  lines  of  the  musical 
stave  in  red ;  but  the  book  of  1549  has  red  only  in  the  preliminary  matter 
and  the  kalendar,  as  below  pp.  2-124,  the  rubrics  elsewhere  being  dis 
tinguished  only  by  smaller  type,  (b)  The  printed  Latin  Missals  and 
Manuals  contained  the  music  required  by  the  celebrant  or  officiant,  the 
Processionals  that  of  the  choir;  while  some  MS  Missals  included  the 
whole  music  of  the  Gradual  and  the  Sequential.  Luther's  Dtudsche  messe, 
and  some  at  least  of  the  Kirchenordnungen,  supplied  a  musical  notation. 
John  Merbecke,  a  clerk  of  S.  George's,  Windsor  (for  his  history  see  Foxe 
Acts  and  Monuments,  ed.  Pratt,  v  pp.  474  sqq.)  provided  plainsong,  partly 
traditional,  partly  new,  for  the  Divine  Service,  the  Mass,  and  the  Burial 
and  Mass  of  the  Dead,  of  1549,  in  The  books  of  Common  prater  no  fed, 
R.  Grafton,  1550  (reprinted  by  C.  Whittingham  for  W.  Pickering,  1844), 
in  which  there  is  more  of  monotone  than  was  traditionally  customary,  and 
the  principle  of  a  note  to  a  syllable  is  applied  much  more  stringently  than 
Cranmer  had  desiderated  in  his  letter  to  Henry  VIII  (above,  p.  Ixi). 

NOTES.  P.  34.  The  Preface,  except  in  the  last  paragraph  (pp.  36,  38), 
deals  only  with  '  the  common  prayers,'  '  commonly  called  diuine  seruice,' 
not  with  the  whole  book.  Cranmer  had  already  in  his  second  scheme  of 
Divine  Service  paraphrased  in  Latin  much  of  the  preface  to  the  first 
recension  of  Quifiones's  Breviary.  See  the  parallel  columns  in  Gasquet 
&  Bishop,  pp.  356  sqq.  The  extraordinary  statement  about  the  division 
of  the  Psalter,  which  may  contain  a  reminiscence  of  the  passage  quoted 
from  Radulph  of  Tongres,  is  corrected  by  Radulph's  actual  words.  P.  36. 
'muche  agreable  to  the  mynde,'  &c.,  was  more  or  less  true  of  Quifiones's 
Breviary,  but  much  less  true  either  of  Cranmer's  second  scheme  or  of 
the  Divine  Service  of  1549.  P.  38.  Cp.  Rationale  (ed.  Cobb  p.  31)  'It 
is  also  laudable  and  convenient  that  (except  sickness,  or  any  other  reason 
able  impediment  or  let)  every  bishop,  priest,  and  other  having  orders,  and 
continuing  in  their  administration,  shall  daily  say  divine  service.'  Unless 
they  refer  to  religious  who  had  adopted  lay  life  on  the  suppression  of  the 
religious  houses,  the  words  'continuing  in  their  administration'  seem 
to  imply  the  same  exemption  as  is  given  in  the  text.  Pp.  38-44.  The 
essay  '  Of  ceremonies '  as  is  indicated  by  the  enclosing  { },  is  placed  here 
for  convenience,  but  belongs  to  the  end  of  the  book :  see  p.  900.  As  to 
ceremonies  of  human  institution,  two  attitudes  are  discernible  in  England 
in  the  i6th  cent.  Both  are  agreed  that  they  are  alterable  by  authority, 
and  are  not  to  be  regarded  *  as  works  or  workers  of  ...  salvation  but 
as  godly  policies  and  ordinances  made  and  devised  by  Christian 
governors,  to  the  intent  (as  Saint  Paul  saith  i  Cor.  14)  that  things  should 
be  done  and  used  amongst  the  Christian  congregation  with  an  honest  re 
verence  and  a  decent  order*  (Rationale,  ed.  Cobb,  pp.  3  sq. ;  cp.  Wilkins 
Concilia  iii  842).  But  then  the  two  views  diverge:  the  one  would 
keep  the  traditional  ceremonies  as  they  are  and  take  care  to  explain  them 


PREFACE  AND  OF  CEREMONIES  Ixxxv 

to  the  people ;  the  other  would  reduce  them  to  a  minimum  of  obvious 
meaning.     The   one  view   is   expressed  by  the    Ten   Articles  and   the 
Rationale  (cp.  the  Council  of  Cologne,  above  p.  xxviii) ;  the  other  by 
the  Thirteen  Articles  and  the  present  essay.     Cp.  Confessio  Augustana  xv 
and   the  paragraph    on   Ceremonies    in    the    Hanover    Kirchenordnung 
1536   in  Richter  i   p.  275.     To   the   sources   add,  p.  38,  Ten  Articles 
'Of  images,'    'the    same    hath    entered    by    deuotion,    and   fallen   to 
custom ' ;  and  Thirteen  Art.  xi,  '  Ritus  ceremoniae  et  ordinationes  eccle- 
siasticae  humanitus    institutae';    p.    40,   ibid,    'reuocandos  penitus  et 
abolendos   esse   iudicamus,'    and    'tamen   in   illarum    obseruatione   ea 
libertatis  christianae  ratio  habenda  est  vt  nemo  se  illis  ita  teneriputet 
quin  eas  possit  omittere,  modo  adsit  iusta  violandi  ratio  et  causa  et  absit 
contemptus';  p.  42,  'quae  Christi  gloriam  ac  beneficium  laedunt  atque 
obscurant ' ;  '  quoniam  ordo  et  tranquillitas  Ecclesiae  absque  ritibus  et 
ceremoniis  conseruari  non  potest';  and   'ita   nee  sine  ritibus  ac  tradi- 
tionibus  Ecclesiae  ordo  seruari,  confusio  vitari  .  .  .  potest ' ;  p.  44  ibid. 
v,  'traditiones  vero  et  ritus  atque  ceremoniae  quae  vel  ad  decorem  vel 
ordinem  vel   disciplinam   Ecclesiae  ab  hominibus  sunt   institutae,   non 
omnino  necesse  est  vt  eaedem  sint  vbique  aut  prorsus  similes.    Hae  enim 
et  variae  fuere  et  variari  possunt  pro  regionum  et  morum  diuersitate,  vbi 
decus  ordo  et  vtilitas    Ecclesiae   videbuntur  postulare '  (cp.  Articles  of 
Religion   xxxiii   of  1553,   and  xxxiv  of  1571).      On  the  situation  with 
relation    to    ceremonial   in   the    i6th   cent,    see   Cobb     The  Rationale 
of  Ceremonial  introduction.     P.  50.  The  rubric  of  the   Pian   missal  is 
quoted  here  only  because  it  would  perhaps  be  difficult  to  find  an  earlier 
general   statement    of    what    of    course   was   the   practice  everywhere. 
Pp.  79  sqq.  The  plan  of  adapting  the  scheme  of  lessons  to  the  civil, 
rather  than  to  the  ecclesiastical,  year,  and  of  attaching  the  Table  of  Lessons 
to  the  Kalendar,  was  adopted  by  Quinones  for  the  3rd  lesson  of  ferial 
matins,  and  in  Cranmer's  2nd  and  3rd  experimental  lectionaries  (pp.  Ixxvii 
sq.  above).     On  the  holy  days  retained  see  below  p.  xciii.     Pp.  132  sqq. 
The  following  table  exhibits  the  relation  of  the  Divine  Service  of  1549  to  the 
traditional  service  and  to  contemporary  reforms.     The  traditional  service 
is  represented  in  its  ferial  shape.     On  Sundays  and  on  all  festivals  'of  ix 
Lessons '  (see  Kalendar)  (a)  at  Matins  two  further  nocturns  are  added, 
«ach   with   3   psalms   and   3   lessons,   each    lesson   being    followed   by 
a  respond  except  the  last,   which  is  followed  by  Te  Deum :  (b)  Kyrie 
e/eison,  Pater  nosier,  and  preces,  at  Lauds  and  Vespers,  are  omitted.     The 
Calenberg-Gottingen    service    of   1542    (Richter  i    p.   363)  is   cited  as 
approximating  the  most  closely,  of  the  German  Services  which  I  have 
noticed,  to  the  English  Service,  and  as  perhaps,  so  far  as  it  goes,  the 
pattern  on  which  the  latter  was  constructed.     Variables  are  enclosed  in  {  }. 
In  columns  4  and  5  features  described  in  Latin  are  said  in  Latin,  those 
in  English  are  said  in  English  (in  the  Calenberg  Order  it  does  not  appear 
precisely  how  much  is,  or  may  be,  said  in  German). 


Ixxxvi 


1549 


SARUM 

QUINONES  II 

CRANMER  I 

AD  MATUTINAS. 

AD  MATUTINUM. 

AD  MATUTINAS. 

Pater  noster.     Aue. 

Pater  noster.     Aue. 

Pater  noster. 

Credo. 

Confiteor  &  absolutio. 

Domine  labia. 

Domine  labia. 

Domine  labia. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Gloria.     Sicitt. 

Gloria.     Sicut. 

Gloria.     Sicut. 

Alleluia. 

Halleluia. 

Haleluya. 

Venite  with  {Invitato- 

Venitevt'ifa  {Invitato- 

Venite  with  {Invitato- 

rium}. 

rium}. 

rium}. 

{Hymnus}. 

{Hymnus}. 

{Hymnus}. 

{12  Psalmi  with  6  anti- 

{3  Psalmi  with  anti- 

{Psalmi    with    anti- 

phonae}. 

phona}. 

phona}. 

{y  &  R7}. 

Pater  noster.     Aue. 

Pater  noster 

{Benedictio} 

Benedictio 

Benedictio 

{Lectio  1} 

{Lectio  1} 

{Lectio  1} 

Tu    autem.     R7.  Deo 

Tu  autem  &  R7. 

Tu  autem  &  R7. 

gratias. 

{Respons.  I}. 

{Benedictio} 

Benedictio 

Benedictio 

{Lectio  11} 

{Lectio  11} 

{Lectio  11} 

Tu  autem  &  R7. 

Tu  autem  &  R7. 

Tu  autem  &  R7. 

{Respons.  II}. 

{Benedictio} 

Benedictio 

Benedictio 

{Lectio  III} 

{Lectio  III} 

{Lectio  III} 

Tu  autem  &  R7. 

Tu  autem  &  R7. 

Tu  autem  &  0%. 

{Respons.  III}. 

(On  certain  days 

Benedictio 

{Lectio  IV} 

Tu  autem  &  R7.). 

Te    Deum  (as  noted 

Te  Deum  (or,  in  Advent 

Te  Deum  (or,  in  Advent 

above). 

and  from  Septuages. 
to  Maundy  Thursday, 

and  from  Septuages. 
to  Wednesday  in  Hob 

Miserere]. 

Week,  Miserere]. 

AD  LAUDES. 

AD  LAUDES. 

AD  LAUDES. 

Pater  noster. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Gloria.     Sicut. 

Gloria.     Sicut. 

Gloria.     Sicut. 

Alleluia. 

Halleluya. 

Haleluya. 

Ps.    1   (li),  {Ps.},    Pss. 
Ixii  (Ixiii),  Ixvi  (Ixvii), 

{3  Psalmi}  and 

{Psalmi}. 

{Canticum},        Pss. 

cxlviii-cl  :      with     5 

{antiphonae}. 

{Capitulum}.      R?  Deo 
gratias. 

{Lectio}.      R7   Deo 
gratias. 

{Hymnus} 

DIVINE  SERVICE 


Ixxxvii 


CRANMER  II 


iS49 


CALENBERG 


OFFICIUM  MATUTINUM. 
Our  Father. 

Domine  labia. 
Deus  in  adiutorinm. 
Gloria.     Sicut. 
Alleluia. 


{Hymnus}. 
{3  Psalmi}. 


Our  Father. 
Benedictio 
{Lesson  I}. 
Tu  autem  & 


Benedictio 
{Lesson  II}. 
Tu  autem  & 

Benedictio 
{Lesson  1 1 1}. 
Tu  autem  & 


Te  Deum. 


ORDRE  FOR  MATTYNS. 
Our  Father. 

O  Lorde,  open. 
O  God)  make  spede. 
Glory  be.     As  it  was. 
Pray se ye  (&  Alleluyd). 

O  come  let  vs. 


{Psalms}. 


FRUHMESSE. 


Deus  in  adiutorium. 
Gloria.     Sicut. 

Venite  with  {Invitatory}, 


{3  Psalms}  with  one  or 
more  antiphons. 


{Lesson  I}. 


{Lesson  I}. 


We  praise  thee,  O  God 
(or,  in  Lent  O  all  ye 
works}. 


Te  Deum. 


{Lesson  IV}  if  one  occurs 
Tu  autem  & 


{Lesson  II}. 


{Lesson   II  with  com 
ments}. 


Ixxxviii 


1549 


SARUM 

QUINONES  II 

CRANMER  I 

Benedictus  with 

Benedictus  under  one 

Benedictus  with 

{antiphona} 

{antiphona}. 

{antiphona}. 

Kyrieleison,       Pater 

noster  and  preces. 

Domine  exaudi. 

Domine  exaudi. 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Oremus  &  {Oratio}. 

Oremus  &  {Oratio}. 

Oremus  &  {Oratio}. 

Dominus  vobiscum, 

Benedicamus. 

{Memoriae} 

Memoriae 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Benedicamus. 

Benedicamus 

Benedicamus. 

Fidelium  anime. 

AD  PRIMAM. 

AD  PRIMAM. 

AD  PRIMAM. 

Pater  noster  &c. 

Pater  noster.    Aue. 

Pater  noster. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Gloria.     Sicut. 

Gloria.     Sicut. 

Gloria.     Sicut. 

Alleluia. 

Halleluia. 

Haleluya. 

Hymnus. 

Hymnus. 

Hymnus. 

9   Psalmi    under    one 

{3   Psalmi}   and,   on 

{Psalmi}  and,   on 

{antiphona}. 
Quicunque    vult  with 
{antiphona}. 

Sundays, 
Quicunque  vult,  under 
one  {antiphona}. 

Sundays, 
Quicunque   vult   with 
antiphona  (on  ferias 

On  ferias,  Credo. 

Credo}. 

{Capitulum}. 

{Respons.} 

and  y  and  !£. 

Kyrieleison,       Pater 

Kyrieleison,       Pater 

noster,    Credo, 

noster                and 

preces,  confession,  &c 

preces 

Domine  exaudi 

Domine  exaudi 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Oremus 

Oremus 

Oremus 

Oratio  Domine  sancte, 

Oratio   Domine    Deus 

Oratio   Domine  sancte, 

Pater  omnipotens. 

omnipotens. 

Pater  omnipotens. 

Benedicamus 

{Lectio  of  the  feast}, 

Fidelium  anime. 

if  so  be. 

Preciosa  est. 

Preciosa 

Preciosa  est 

O  FCJit  1iS 

Sancta  Maria  mater. 

Sancta  Maria  5^  omnes 

Sancta  Maria  mater. 

Dominus  vobiscum 
Benedicamus. 

-Zx/&y  ct  ctctus  fiostfos* 

Dominus  vobiscum 
Benedicamus. 

AD  VESPERAS. 

AD  VESPERAS. 

AD  VESPERAS. 

Pater  noster  &c. 

Paternoster.    Aue. 

Pater  noster. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 

Gloria.     Sicut. 

Gloria.     Sicut. 

Gloria.     Sicut. 

Alleluia. 

Halleluia. 

Haleluya. 

DIVINE  SERVICE 


Ixxxix 


CRANMER  II 


1549 


CALENBERG 


Benedictus. 


Dominus  vobiscum 
Oremus  &  {Oratio.} 


Benedicamus. 


Blessed  be    the    Lord 
God  of. 


Benedictus    with 
{antiphona}. 


On  Sundays  are  added : 
Quicunque  vult 


Preces 

Domine  exaudi 
Dominus  vobiscum 
Oremus 


Oratio  Domine  sancte^ 
Pater  omnipotens\ 


Whosoever  will  be  saved 
(on  certain  days). 


Lord  have  mercy.  Creed, 
Our  Father  and 
'  prayers.' 

The  Lord  be  with  you 
Let  us  pray 
{Collect} 
Collect 

Collect  O  Lord  our 
heavenly  Father. 


Dominus  vobiscum} 
Benedicamus. 


{Collect} 


Benedicamus 
Dapacem. 


OFFICIUM  VESPERTIN. 
Our  Father. 

Deus  in  adiutorium. 
Gloria.     Sicut. 
Alleluia. 


ORDRE  FOR  EUENSONG. 
Our  Father. 
O  God  make  spede. 
Glory  be.     As  it  was. 
Prayseye  (&  Alleluya\\ 


DIE  VESPER. 


Deus  in  adiutorium. 
Gloria.     Sicut. 


xc 


1549 


SARUM 


QUINONES   II 


CRANMER  I 


{5  Psalmi  with  ant'ae}. 


{Capitulum}. 


{Responsorium}. 

{Hymnus} 

{y  &  Bfr 

Magnificat  with  {ant.}. 


Kyrieleison,       Pater 

noster  &  preces 
Domine  exaudi 
Dominns  vobiscum 
Or  emus  &  (O  ratio} 
Memoriae    &c.    as   at 
Lauds. 


Hymnus}. 
3  Psalmi}  and 


{Hymnus}. 
{Psalmi}  and 


Magnificat  under  one 
{ant.}. 


Domine  exaudi 

Oremus  &  {Oratio} 
Memoriae    &c.   as    at 
Lauds. 


Magnificat  under  one 

{ant.}. 
Benedictio. 
{Lectio},  Tu  autem  &c. 


Dominus  vobiscum. 
Oremus  &  {Oratio}. 


AD  COMPLETORIUM. 
Pater  noster  &c. 

Conuerte  nos. 
Deus  in  adiutorium. 
Gloria.     Sicut. 
Alleluia. 

4  Psalmi  with  {ant.}. 

Capitulum. 

{Hymnus} 


with 


Nunc    dimittis 

{ant}. 
Kyrieleison 

Pater  noster 

y&E? 

Credo 


Confiteor  &  absolutio 
Preces 

Domine  exaudi 
Dominus  vobiscum 
Oremus 


Oratio  Illumina. 
Dominus  vobiscum 
Benedicamus. 


AD  COMPLETORIUM. 
Pater  noster.   Aue. 

Conuerte  nos. 
Deus  in  adiutorium. 
Gloria.     Sicut. 
Halleluia. 

Hymnus. 

{3  Psalmi}  and 


Nunc    dimittis    under 
one  ant. 


Domine  exaudi 
Oremus 


Oratio  Visita. 
Benedicamus 
Fidelium  anime. 


AD  COMPLETORIUM. 
Pater  noster. 

Conuerte  nos. 
Deus  in  adiutorium. 
Gloria.     Sicut. 
Haleluya. 

{Hymnus}. 
{Psalmi}  and 


Nunc   dimittis    under 
one  ant. 

Kyrie  eleison 

Pater  noster 


Preces 

Dominus  vobiscum 
Oremus 


Oratio  Illumina. 
Dominus  vobiscum. 
Benedicamus. 


DIVINE  SERVICE 


xci 


CRANMER  II 

.549 

CALENBERG 

{Hymnus}. 
{3  Psalmi}. 

Our  Father. 
Benedictio 
{Lesson  I},  Tuautem&c.. 
Benedictio 
{Lesson  1  1},  Tu  autem  &c. 

{Psalms}. 
{Lesson  I}. 

{3  Psalmi  with  ant.}. 

{Hymnus} 

Magnificat. 

My  soul  doth  magnify. 

Magnificat  with  {ant.} 

{Lectio  &  Exposition}. 

Dominus  vobiscum 
Oremus  &  {Oratio}. 

{Collecta}. 
Benedictio. 

{Lesson  II}. 

Lord  now  lettest  thou. 

Lord  have  mercy 
I  believe 
Our  Father 

'  Prayers  ' 

The  Lord  be  with  you 
Let  us  pray 
{Collect} 
Collect 
Collect  Lighten. 

xcii  1 549 

P.  132.  In  the  Breviary  the  Pater  noster  was  and  is  a  private  devotion 
said  inaudibly.  The  first  J  and  B?  (Ps.  li  15)  follows  the  Great  Bible, 
except  that  with  Marshall's,  Hilsey's,  and  the  King's  Primer,  it  is  put  in 
the  imperative,  and  with  Marshall  and  Hilsey  '  forth '  is  added.  On  the 
rendering  of  Gloria  Patri  see  p.  Ixvii.  In  the  Breviary  Alleluia  simply 
was  used  every  day  except  from  Septuagesima  to  Easter  Even :  from  Sept. 
to  Wednesday  in  Holy  Week  Laus  tibi  domine  rex  eterne  glorie  took  its 
place.  P.  136.  The  ministre  that  readeth  &c.  Hermann  Pia  delib. 
f.  9ib  'quse  [epistola]  tali  loco  legi  debet  (uertente  Lectore  faciem  ad 
populum)  ut  exaudiri  &  intelligi  a  tota  Ecclesia  possit.'  The  translation 
of  Te  Deum  is  practically  that  of  the  King's  Primer.  See  further  Julian 
Diet,  of  Hymnology  s.v.  'Te  Deum  laudamus':  Dowden  Workmanship  of 
the  Prayer  Book  pp.  88  sqq.  P.  138.  The  version  of  Benedicite  (in  the 
Breviary,  the  Sunday  Canticle  among  the  Psalms  at  Lauds)  is  from  the 
Great  Bible  'The  songe  of  the  thre  chyldren,'  there  transferred  from 
Dan.  iii  to  the  'Apocrypha.'  P.  142.  The  version  of  the  King's  Primer. 
P.  146.  The  Creed  follows  Ps.  cxix  175  sq.  after  Pater  noster  of  Prime  in 
the  Breviary,  and  precedes  Kyrieleison  in  Cranmer's  first  scheme.  The 
preccS)  except  *O  God  make  clean'  &c.,  are  those  of  Cranmer's  first 
scheme,  and,  except  for  the  omission  of  a  petition  for  the  dead,  are  the 
same  in  scope  as  those  of  ferial  Lauds,  Terce,  Sext,  Nones,  and  Vespers, 
but  shorter  (JBrev.  Sarum,  ed.  Wordsworth  and  Procter  89).  Down  to 
'  hereditati  tue '  they  come  from  the  Bidding  of  the  Bedes  for  the  living 
(Processionale  Sarum,  ed.  Henderson,  p.  7,  and  below  p.  1052);  'Da 
pacem  .  .  .  noster '  is  the  ant.  of  the  Memoria  de  pace  (of  which  the 
collect  at  Lauds  is  '  Deus  auctor,'  at  Vespers  '  Deus  a  quo ')  of  the  Office 
of  the  B.V.M.  (Brev.  Sar.  286);  'O  God  make  clean'  &c.  is  from  the 
preces  of  Prime  (ib.  52).  P.  158.  The  version  of  Magnificat  is  that  of  the 
King's  Primer.  P.  160.  The  version  of  Nunc  dimittis  is  that  of  the 
King's  Primer,  except  that  the  latter  has  'thy  people,'  'for  to  lighten,'  and 
'  of  Israel.'  Pp.  168  sqq.  Cranmer's  first  Breviary  scheme  has  '  symbolum 
Athanasij  Quicunque  vult,'  the  second  simply  '•symbolum  Quicunque 
vult'  (Gasquet  and  Bishop  pp.  321,  375).  The  version  of  Quicunque  vult 
is  that  of  Hilsey's  Primer  (Burton  Three  Primers  p.  325)  considerably 
emended :  (i)  language  and  rhythm  are  improved;  e.g.  in  verses  2,  7,  u, 
26  ('together'  for  'to  themselves'),  27,  32;  in  17  'lykewyse'  is  an 
addition  for  the  sake  of  sound;  29  'furthermore'  is  paraphrase;  (2)  the 
language  is  made  to  follow  the  Latin  more  closely:  5  'for'  added,  10 
sq.  'eternal,'  27  'as  it  is  aforesaid,'  'is  to,'  32  'subsisting,'  35  'flesh,'  38 
'dead,'  41  'good';  excrescences  are  removed  in  3,  20,  24,  35,  37 ;  while 
in  26  'the  whole'  is  nearer  to  the  Latin  than  'all  the,'  but  is  curious  as 
English ;  (3)  the  sense  is  emended  :  rightly,  perhaps  in  1 7  ('  Lord '  for  '  the 
Lord'),  certainly  in  40  ('shall'  for  the  absurd  'must');  wrongly,  perhaps 
in  6  ('godhead'  for  'divinity'),  19  (order  of  words),  33  ('  as  touching'  for 
'by'),  34  ('he  is  not'  for  'is  there  not');  certainly  in  28  'must/  29  'in 


DIVINE  SERVICE,  LITANY,  PROPER  MASSES         xciii 

the  incarnation,'  42  '  a  man '  for  ' every  man' ;  (4)  in  several  places  the  text 
is  emended  in  accordance  with  the  Greek  version  in  theTfi/aai  rrjs  deurap- 
Ofvov  Ma/Has  (p.  liii  above)  ;  viz.  2  '  undefiled '  <X/AW/X^TOV,  4  *  dividing '  /*e/ot- 
£OVT«S,  7-10,  15,  17  'and'  KCU,  9,  12  'incomprehensible'  dKaraA^Trros,  12 
'as  also'  o>o-7T€/o  ovSe,  29  'rightly'  d/30<3?,  30  'for'  eo-rt  yap,  31  omission  of 
'He  is,'  32  'and'  KO.I,  33  'inferior'  cAarTwv (perhaps),  39  'the  father,  God 
almighty  .  .  .  from  whence '  rov  Trarpbs  KCU  &€ov  .  .  .  50ci',  40  '  works ' 
Zpytav,  42  omission  of  'and  steadfastly.'  But  defects  have  been  left  in  the 
version  :  i  '  hold '  instead  of  '  hold  fast '  (teneat,  Kpareiv) ;  but  no  doubt 
'  hold'  had  a  stronger  meaning  in  the  i6th  cent,  than  it  has  now  (Dowden 
Workmanship^.  115  sqq.) ;  27  should  have  'the  vnitie  is  to  be  wor 
shipped  in  trinitie  and'  &c. ;  36  for  'One  altogether,  not'  should  be  read 
'  One,  altogether  not '  or  '  One,  not  at  all ' ;  while  23  imports  a  new  in 
accuracy  in  '  and  of  the  son.'  '  Holy '  in  v.  2  is  no  doubt  a  misprint ;  while 
the  readings,  v.  25  'nor  after,'  33  'touching'  without '  as '  in  the  second 
clause,  in  which  the  text  differs  from  one  or  both  of  the  other  cols.,  are 
peculiar  to  the  impression  of  the  Book  here  followed  ;  27  '  as  it  is,'  to  this 
and  one  other  impression  (see  J.  Parker  The  first  Prayer  Book  of  Edward  VI 
p.  96).  Pp.  174  sqq.  The  Litany  is  printed  here  for  convenience  of  com 
parison  with  the  later  columns ;  in  the  book  it  occurs  as  indicated  on  p. 
722  ;  or,  in  some  copies  printed  by  Grafton,  after  the  Commination  (see 
Parker  History  of  revisions  pp.  xxv  sq.).  On  the  Litany  see  pp.  Ixv  sqq. 
What  is  enclosed  in  square  brackets  occurs  in  1544  and  is  omitted  or 
changed  in  1549.  These  changes  and  omissions  are  already  made  in  one 
of  the  two  issues  of  The  Primer  set  forth  by  the  Kings  majesty  printed  by 
Grafton  and  dated  Nov.  30  1547  (see  above,  p.  Ix).  P.  188.  With 
the  omission  of  the  title  A  Prayer  of  Chrysostome  (1544)  cp.  that  of 
the  name  of  Athanasius  in  the  title  of  Quicunque  vult  p.  168. 
Pp.  200-637.  As  to  the  days  for  which  proper  masses  are  here  provided  : 
(i)  the  cycle  de  tempore  is  unaffected,  except  that  the  i3th  cent,  festival 
of  Corpus  Christi,  the  vigils  of  Christmas,  Epiphany  and  Pentecost,  week 
days  in  Lent  (except  Ash  Wednesday  and  Holy  Week),  all  octaves 
(except  for  Monday  and  Tuesday  in  Easter-  and  Whitsun-weeks),  Ember 
days  and  Rogation  days  (but  the  Rogation  processions,  within  the 
churches,  continued  in  use  :  see  Grey  Friars'  Chronicle,  Camden  Soc.,  pp. 
56,  77)  are  omitted  :  (2)  in  the  Sanctorale,  except  for  All  Saints,  the  com 
memorations  are  reduced  to  those  of  New  Testament  names,  including 
two  feasts  of  the  B.V.M.,  all  Apostles  and  Evangelists,  and  SS.  Stephen, 
Innocents,  John  Bapt.,  Mary  Magd.,  and  Michael:  (3)  the  feast  of  the 
Dedication  of  a  church  and  all  votive  masses  are  omitted  :  (4)  the  feasts 
retained  are  fewer  by  12  than  those  of  the  list  of  holy  days  to  be  kept 
with  cessation  of  work,  i.e.  of  '  holidays ',  to  be  observed  in  the  whole 
province  of  Canterbury,  issued  by  the  archbishop  Simon  Mepham  in 
1332  (which  excludes  Conv.  S.  Paul  and  S.  Barnabas,  and  includes  Corpus 
Christi,  Wednesday  in  Easter-  and  Whitsun-week,  3  more  festivals  of  the 


XC1V 


1549 


B.V.M.,  2  of  the  Cross,  2  of  S.  Thomas  of  Canterbury,  SS.  Nicolas  and 
Laurence,  and  Dedication  and  Patronal  festivals :  Wilkins  Concilia  ii 
560);  and  fewer  by  19  than  the  similar  list  of  Tho.  Arundel  in  1400 
(which  adds  to  Mepham's  list  SS.  Chad,  Gregory,  Augustine,  Anne,  and 
Katharine,  and  All  Souls  [the  omission  of  Corpus  Christi  must  be  a  mis 
take]  :  ib.  iii  252);  and  the  same  in  number  with  those  enjoined  by  the 
Interim  of  1548  (Corpus  Christi,  Lawrence  and  Martin  being  here 
included,  and  Innocents,  Mark  and  Luke  omitted),  except  that  the 
Interim  also  enjoins  the  local  patron-saints  (Kidd  Documents  p.  360). 
The  German  Kirchenordnungen  commonly  retain  the  cycle  de  temporc 
in  the  main  (Brandenburg  retains  Corpus  Christi),  one  or  two  days 
after  Easter  and  Pentecost,  3  feasts  of  the  B.V.M.,  the  Apostles, 
and  S.  John  Baptist,  with  varying  selections  of  other  days  (Richter  i 
211,  332,  364,  ii  17,  49).  Pp.  200  sqq.  Notice  the  omission,  here 
and  elsewhere,  of  any  provision  for  first  vespers  of  Sundays  and 
Festivals,  as  in  Quinones.  The  scheme  of  the  Introits  is  exhibited  in  the 
following  table : — 


xlvii 


Ixvii 


cxxix 
cxxyiii 


cxxx 


cxxxiii 


cxv 

cxvii 

cxiii 

cxxxvii 

cxlix 


Advent  i 

Ps.      i 

»         2 

»      3 

iv 

»      4 

V 

Christmas 

S.  Stephen 

S.  John 

xi 

Innocents 

Sunday 

Circumcision 

Epiphany 

5)                * 

xiii 

2 

xiv 

»        3 

XV 

»        4 

»        5 

XX 

Septuag. 

xxiii 

Sexag. 

xxiv 

Quinquag. 

xxvi 

Ash  Wed. 

Lent  i 

»    2 

»     3 

xliii 

»     4 

xlvi 

»     5 

liv/» 

»    6 

brii 

Good  Friday 

^ 

Easter  Even 

Easter  Day 

» ,r  •. 

Mond. 
Tuesd.  3 
i 


Easter   2 

Ixx 

cxx 

j>       3 

Ixxv 

»       4 

Ixxxii 

»     .5 

Ixxxiv 

xcviii 

Ascension 

viii 
Iii 

Sunday 
Whitsunday 

xciii 

„    mond. 

c 

Ixxix 

„    tuesd. 

ci 

cxxi 

Trinity 

cxxii 

„      1-22 

cxix 

xcvi 

»     23 

cxxiv 

»     24 

cxxv 

»     25 

cxxvii 

S.  Andrew 

ii 

S.  Thomas        <, 

.>W|l| 

S.  Paul              cxxxviii 

Candlemas 

S.  Matthias 

cxl 

Annunciation 

vi 

S.  Mark 

cxli 

xxxii 

SS.  Phil.  &  Jac. 

cxxx 

S.  Barnabas 

cxiii 

S.  Jo.  Bapt. 

cxliii 

S.  Peter 

cxliv 

jvf 

S.  M.  Magd. 
S.  James 

cxlvi 
cxlviii 

xxii 

S.  Barthol. 

Ixxxviii 

S.  Matthew 

xvi 

S.  Michael 

iii 

S.  Luke 

Ixii 

S.  Sim.  &  Jude 

cl 

cxiii 

All  Saints 

cxii 

It  is  obvious  (i)  that  appropriate  Psalms  are  first  chosen  for  the  chief 
feasts  and  holy  days :  (2)  selected  Psalms  are  then  assigned  to  Sundays 


THE  TEMPORALE  xcv 

and  Saints'  days  down  to  S.  James  in  the  order  of  their  occurrence  in  the 
Psalter,  except  in  so  far  as  the  order  is  here  and  there  slightly  varied  to 
secure  more  appropriateness :  (3)  the  group  cii-cxviii,  having  been 
neglected  in  order  to  begin  cxix  on  Trinity  i,  is  used,  after  cxlviii,  for 
S.  Barth.-S.  Mich. :  (4)  there  are  some  exceptional  selections :  (a)  on 
Adv.  2,  the  subject  of  Coll.,  Ep.  and  Gosp.  being  the  Holy  Scriptures  and 
*  My  words,'  Ps.  cxx  is  no  doubt  the  plaint  of  the  *  scriptural '  reformer 
among  opponents  :  (/?)  Ps.  cxxi  on  Sunday  after  Christmas  seems  to  have 
the  new  year  in  view :  (y)  on  Epiph.  4,  Ep.  treating  of  obedience  to 
rulers,  and  Gosp.  being  lengthened  to  include  the  allaying  of  spiritual  as  well 
as  of  physical  tumult,  Ps.  ii  contemplates  Christ  the  King  confronted  with 
the  tumult  of  the  world  :  (S)  Ash  Wed.-Lent  2,  three  of  the  Penitential 
Psalms :  (e)  Ps.  cxiii  is  assigned  to  Michaelmas  for  the  sake  of  v.  7  ;  *  the 
princes  of  his  people '  being  commonly  interpreted  to  mean  the  angels 
(see  Hugo,  Nic.  Lyr.,  R.  Rolle,  Ludolph.  Sax.,  Lorinus  in  loc.,  S.  Bernard 
in  Cantica  vii  7,  pro  Dom.  i  Nov.  serm.  i  4 :  so  much  for  the  criticism  in 
Gasquet  and  Bishop  p.  191  note1).  The  Roman  Introits  were  originally 
whole  Psalms,  sung  through  so  far  as  required,  with  an  antiphon  repeated 
at  the  beginning,  after  each  verse  and  after  the  Gloria  (see  Duchesne 
Origines  p.  155).  Luther  had  expressed  the  desire  for  the  use  of 
whole  Psalms  (Formula  missae  8).  P.  200.  With  the  Collect,  cp.  Greg. 
138  'ut  qui  de  adventu  unigeniti  Filii  tui  secundum  carnem  laetantur,  in 
secundo,  quum  venerit  in  maiestate  sua,praemium  aeternaevitae  percipiant': 
Miss.  Vesont.  (Neale  and  Forbes  Galilean  Masses  355)  'ut  cum  in 
maiestate  sua  unigenitus  tuus  advenerit  ad  immbrtalitatis  gloriam  resttr- 
gamus ' :  S.  Athan.  de  Incarn.  56.  P.  204.  Collect :  cp.  Homilies  \ 
(Cranmer)  c  let  vs  reuerently  heare  and  read  holy  Scripture,'  *  I  say  not 
nay,  but  a  man  may  prosper  with  onely  hearing,  but  hee  may  much  more 
prosper,  with  both  hearing  &  reading.'  For  'the  blessed  hope'  &c.  see 
Tit.  ii  13,  iii  7.  P.  212.  Collect:  cp.  Ps.  Ixxix  (Ixxx)  3  (2).  P.  220. 
Collect:  see  Journal  of Theo 1.  Studies  xiii  p.  562.  P.  244.  The  change 
of  collect  and  epistle,  and  the  choice  of  lessons,  has  emphasised  the 
Circumcision,  which  had  hitherto  been  noticed  only  in  the  Gospel  and  the 
lessons  of  Matins,  and  altered  the  proportions  of  things,  and  in  fact  turned 
the  day  into  a  commemoration  of  circumcision,  rather  than  of  the 
Circumcision  of  our  Lord ;  not  to  edification.  With  the  Collect :  cp. 
Hereford  Breviary,  ed.  Frere,  H.  B.  S.,  i  p.  180  note  b  Lect.  i  ad  Mat. 
'  Christus  autem  fratres  .  .  .  circumcisionem  non  respuit  ut  nos  spiritu 
circumcideremur,  quoniam  circumcisione  cordis  delectatur ' :  and  Col. 
iii  5,  Tit.  ii  12,  i  Pet.  ii  ii.  P.  266.  Rom.  xiii  8-10,  the  Sarum  Ep.,  has 
already  been  prefixed  to  the  Ep.  of  Adv.  Sunday,  p.  202.  P.  270.  Collect: 
notice  the  mistranslation  of pietate— 'fatherly  affection  ':  cp.  Trin.  22,  23. 
P.  286.  '  the  bonde  of .  .  all  vertues ' :  cp.  Col.  iii  14.  P.  200.  Collect : 
cp.  Missale  Sarum  f.  xxx,  in  capite  ieiunii  '  Omnipotens  sempiterne  Deus 
qui  misereris  omnium  6°  nichil  odisti  eorum  que  fecisti,  dissimulans  peccata 


xcvi  1549 

hominum  propter  poenitentiam*  (Wisd.  xi  23,  24):  Ps.  li  10,  17.  P.  294. 
Collect:  cp.  Hermann  Pia  ddiberatio  f.  116  earn  .  .  .  abstinentiam,  qua 
spiritui  caro  magis  subiiciatur,  &  morigera  reddatur.  P.  298.  As  to  the 
line  omitted  in  the  Ep. :  the  textus  receptus  omits  /ca0o>s  *ai  TreptTraTeire ; 
but  the  omission  of  u/a  Tre/ncro-ev^re  /MaAAov  seems  to  be  a  mistake  of  the 
Great  Bible.  P.  326.  '  Haceldama,  that  is,'  is  in  small  type  and  enclosed 
in  brackets  in  the  Gt.  Bible,  being  a  note  derived  from  Acts  i  19. 
P.  330.  It  is  difficult  to  account  for  the  transference  of  the  Lesson  of 
Monday  to  Tuesday,  and  of  that  of  Wednesday  to  Monday.  P.  352. 
The  omission  of  *  after  supper '  is  a  misprint  (not  Great  Bible).  P.  372. 
Collects  :  transferred  from  the  Orationes  solennes,  the  litany  following  the 
Gospel,  the  use  of  which  since  the  Qth  cent,  has  survived  only  on  Good 
Friday,  and  is  otherwise  represented  only  by  the  isolated  Oremus  before 
the  Offertory  (Duchesne  Origines  du  culte  chretien  p.  164).  P.  386. 
Easter  Even  so  treated,  as  a  commemoration  of  the  Burial  and  the 
Descent  into  hell,  is  a  novelty.  Hitherto,  as  still  in  1549  on  Tuesday  and 
Thursday,  the  Burial  had  been  commemorated  as  a  sequel  to  the 
Passion.  P.  390.  The  Burial  in  S.  Matt,  is  omitted  p.  330.  P.  402. 
Whereas  in  the  Missale  every  day  both  of  Easter-  and  of  Whitsun-week  has 
a  proper  mass,  here  only  Monday  and  Tuesday  are  so  provided.  This 
means  besides  that  the  holy  days,  on  which  work  is  to  be  suspended,  are 
reduced  to  two  in  place  of  the  three  traditional  since  the  i4th  cent. 
(Wilkins  Concilia  ii  560,  iii  252:  but  W.  de  Cantilupe  in  1240  orders 
only  two  in  the  diocese  of  Worcester,  ib.  i  678).  But  the  Wednes 
days  continued  partially  in  some  sense  to  be  kept  till  the  observance 
was  suppressed  in  1552  (Grey  friars'  Chronicle  p.  74;  Wriotheslcy 's 
Chronicle  ii  pp.  14,69).  The  Kirchcnordnungen  of  Electoral  Brandenburg 
and  Calenberg  have  two  days  both  at  Easter  and  Pentecost  (Richter  i 
332,  364),  Cologne  two  at  Easter,  one  at  Pentecost  (ib.  ii  49),  Branden- 
burg-Niirnberg  and  Hall  one  at  each  (ib.  i  211,  ii  17).  P.  418.  For  the 
new  collect  see  Heb.  x  12,  26,  and  Epistle.  P.  432.  Notice  omission  of 
Rogation  days.  P.  442.  Collect :  '  holy  comfort '  as  in  Cranmer's  first 
scheme  (Gasquet  and  Bishop  p.  347).  P.  444.  The  Gospel  S.  Jo.  xiv.  15- 
21  is  that  of  Whitsun  Eve  in  the  Missal.  P.  446.  See  on  p.  402  above. 
P.  504.  Line  13  sq. :  the  omission  of  a  line  in  the  Gospel  appears  to  be 
a  misprint  in  the  Great  Bible.  P.  512.  Epistle  :  if,  as  seems  not  un 
likely,  the  next  paragraph  to  that  of  the  traditional  lectionary  was  sub 
stituted  in  order  better  to  illustrate  the  subject  of  the  Gospel,  viz.  unity 
of  aim,  it  follows  that  the  revision  of  the  lectionary-system  was  carried  out 
with  serious  thoughtfulness.  P.  538.  Notice  here  again  the  mistransla 
tion  of  pietate-.  cp.  on  p.  270.  P.  548.  'and  sayd  :  damosel  aryse':  in 
Gt.  Bible  in  small  print,  in  brackets,  and  asterisked  :  from  Mk.  v  41. 
P.  566-  Perhaps  Mai.  iii  i  sqq.  was  omitted  as  the  Ep.  because  it  is 
assigned  as  the  first  Lesson  of  Matins  of  S.  John  Baptist,  p.  590.  P.  578. 
Collect :  see  Ep.  P.  592.  In  the  Kalendar  of  Hilsey's  Primer  Is.  xl  is 


THE  SANCTORALE  xcvii 

assigned  as  the  Ep. ;  whence  derived,  does  not  appear.  P.  598.  In  Sacr. 
Greg.  (Muratori  ii  102)  and  subsequently,  June  29  is  devoted  almost  ex 
clusively  to  S.  Peter,  June  30  to  S.  Paul ;  e.g.  in  the  Sarum  books  there 
is  scarcely  any  allusion  to  S.  Paul  on  29  except  in  collect  and  sequence. 
Hence,  though  the  change  in  the  title  of  the  day  (which  however  is  only 
'Natale  sancti  Petri'  in  Greg.}  is  unfortunate,  it  corresponds  approxi 
mately  to  the  traditional  ritual  facts.  P.  600.  Collect :  cp.  S.  Jo.  xxi  15- 
17-  P.  604.  The  Collect,  perhaps  the  worst  in  the  book,  seems  to  be 
not  independent  of  that  of  the  Kirchenordnung  of  Albertine-Saxony,  1540 
(Sehling  Kirchcnordnungen  i  279)  '  Barmherziger  ewiger  gott  .  .  .  und  sie 
uns  zu  einem  exempel  der  buss  und  deiner  gnade  fiirgestellt,  verleihe 
uns  gnediglich,  das  wir  auch  reu  und  leid  uber  unsere  siinde  haben  und 
mit  rechtem  glauben  die  vergebung  derselben  bei  deinem  liben  son  lesu 
Christo  suchen  .  .  .'  P.  6l6. '  (and  that  .  .  .  infirmities) ' :  in  Gt.  Bible  in 
small  print,  in  brackets,  asterisked :  an  addition  in  DE  Vulg.  P.  618. 
Ep.  seems  to  be  chosen  for  the  sake  of  the  last  verse,  as  explaining  the 
compelling  force  of  our  Lord's  call  (cp.  Jer.  in  Mat.  ix  9 ;  Ludolph.  Sax. 
Vita  Christi  i  31 ;  Taverner  Postil  in  die).  P.  620.  Hitherto  Sept.  29  had 
in  its  title  been  dedicated  to  the  commemoration  of  S.  Michael  alone  :  but 
both  Mass  and  Service  had  treated  of  the  angelic  hierarchy  generally  :  and 
hence  Cranmer's  second  Breviary-scheme  has  'Michael  cum  omnibus 
Angelis.'  Cp.  the  Prussian  Kirchenordnung  1544  (Richter  ii  70).  P.  628. 
Ep. :  J5  (Brev.  950)  identifies  Jude  with  'Judas  zelotes '  i.e.  apparently 
Thaddaeus,  whom  the  Golden  Legend  (in  die)  further  identifies  with  the 
brother  of  James  the  Lord's  brother.  P.  632.  For  the  ist  lesson  see 
'  communio  '  of  the  vigil  (Wisd.  iii  i,  2,  3b),  6th  lesson  of  matins  (4-6),  3rd 
ant.  of  first  vespers  (7),  and  alleluia  (S) :  for  the  2nd  lesson,  see  6th  lesson 
of  matins  (Heb.  xi  36-38*).  With  the  collect  cp.  that  of  the  vigil :  '  Domine 
deus  noster  multiplica  super  nos  gratiam  tuam  :  &  sanctorum  tuorum 
quorum  preuenimus  gloriosa  solennia,  tribue  subsequi  [in]  sancta  profes- 
sione  letitiam.'  P.  638.  The  requirement  that  notice  of  intention 
to  communicate  be  given  is  expressed  or  implied  in  several  Kirchen- 
ordnunge?i :  e.g.  Brandenburg-Niirnberg  (Richter  i  p.  208),  Albertine- 
Saxony  (ib.  313),  Brandenburg  (ib.  327),  Pfalz-Neuburg  (ib.  ii  29), 
Cologne  (ib.  41).  The  use  of  the  cope  as  an  alternative  for  the  'vest 
ment  '  (on  the  meaning  of  which  see  Scudamore  Notitia  eucharistica  ed.  2, 
pp.  72  sqq.)  may  have  been  suggested  by  the  direction  in  the  Branden 
burg  and  Pfalz-Neuburg  Kirchenordnungen  (Richter  i  p.  327,  ii  29  :  cp. 
p.  714  below)  that  only  the  cope  should  be  used  at  'table  prayers.' 
P.  640.  The  relation  of  the  Mass  of  1549  to  the  traditional  order  and  to 
some  Lutheran  orders  is  exhibited  in  the  following  table.  It  is  not 
always  clear,  in  the  general  directions  of  the  Lutheran  Orders,  how  much 
is  intended  to  be  included:  e.g.  in  the  Brandenburg  Order,  whether  'the 
accustomed  preface '  includes  Sursum  corda  &c.,  and  the  varying  proper 
prefaces.  It  is  assumed  here  that  these,  and  the  like,  are  implied. 

g 


xcvni 


^549 


MISSALE  SARUM 
(ed.  Dickinson  577) 

[In  the  vestry] 
Vesting,  with 
Vent  Creator,  JP  &  f£, 
Deus  cut  omne. 
Introibo,  Ps.  xlii  (xliii), 

Gloria,  Introibo 
Kyrie    eleison,    Pater 

noster,  Ave  Maria. 

{OFFICIUM  (introit)} 

[During    Officium  : 
before  the  altar] 

Confitemini 
Confiteor 
Misereatur 
Absolutionem. 
Adiutorium  nostrum 
Osculum  pacis. 

[at  the  altar] 
Oremus.   Auferanobis. 

Censing  of  the  altar. 

KYRIE  ELEISON. 
GLORIA  IN  EXCELSI$. 

Dominus  v  obis  cum 

Oremus 

{ORATIONES}. 

Lectio  ep.  b.  Pauli  .  .  . 
{EPISTOLA}. 

{GRADUALE} 
{ALLELUIA  and 

SEQUENTIA  ;  or 
TRACTUS}. 

Kvangelium  secundum. . 
Gloria  tihi  Doming 
{EVANGELIUM}. 


CREDO  IN  UNUM. 


[S49 


Vesting. 


{OFFICE  (introit)} 
[During  Office  : 


COLOGNE 
(Richterii  42  ;  Pia  delib.  9ib) 


at  the  altar] 

Our  Father. 

Almighty  God,  to  whom. 
LORD  HAVE  MERCY. 

GLORY  BE  TO  GOD  ox 

HIGH. 

The  Lord  be  with  you 
Let  us  prav 
{COLLECTS}. 

The  Epistle  of  S.Paul.. 
{EPISTLE|. 


The  holy  Gospel  is  .  . 
Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Lord 
{GOSPEL}. 


/  BELIEVE  IN  ONE. 

[BIDDING  OF  BEDES, 

&c.] 
SERMON. 

EXHORTATION  TO 
COMMUNICANTS.  - 


/  will  confess 

Confession 

'  Comfortable  words 

Absolution. 


{INTROITUS}. 
KYRIE  ELEYSON. 
GLORIA  IN  EXCELS  is. 

The  Lord  be  with  you 
Let  us  pray. 
{COLLECT}. 

{EPISTLE}. 

{ALLELUIA  or 
GRADUALE  or 

SEQUENTIA} 

{HYMN}. 


{GOSPEL}. 

SERMON. 

PRAYER  FOR  ALL  CON 
DITIONS. 

CREED. 


THE  MASS 


XC1X 


PKALZ-NEUBURG 
(Ricbter  ii  27) 

BRANDENBURG 
(Richter  i  326) 

LUTHER  1526 
(Richter  i  38) 

Vesting. 

Vesting. 

Vesting. 

Confiteor  or  psalm. 

Confiteor. 

{INTROITUS}. 

KYRIE  E  LEY  SON. 

{INTROITUS}. 
KYRIE  ELEISON. 

{HYMN  or  PSALM}. 
KYRIE  ELEISON. 

GLORIA  IN  EXCELSIS. 

GLORIA  IN  EXCELSIS. 

The  Lord  be  with  us  all 
Let  us  pray 
{COLLECTS}. 

Dominus  vobiscwn 
Oremus 

{COLLECTA}. 

{COLLECT}. 

{EPISTLE}. 
{GRADUALE  :  or 
TRACTUS  :  or 
ALLELUIA  with 
SEQUENT  i  A  :  or 
HYMN}. 

{EPISTLE}. 
{HYMN  :  and 

ALLELUIA  with 
SEQUENTIA  ;  or 
TRACTUS}. 

{EPISTLE}. 

{HYMN}. 

{GOSPEL}. 

{GOSPEL}. 

{GOSPEL}. 

CREDO  IN  UNUM. 

CREED. 

CREED. 

SERMON. 

SERMON. 

SERMON. 
Paraphrase     of    OUR 
FATHER, 
or  COMMON  PRAYER. 

EXHORTATION  TO 
COMMUNICANTS. 

EXHORTATION  TO 
COMMUNICANTS. 

J549 


MISSAI.E  SARUM 


Dominus  vobiscum 
Oremus. 

{OFFERTORIUM}. 

Oblation  of  gifts,  with 
Suscipe  sancta  Trin. 

In  nomine 

Censing  of  gifts  £c. 

Lavatory 

In  spiritu  humilitatis. 

Orate  fratres. 
[BIDDING  OF  BEDES, 

&c.] 
[SERMON]. 

{SECRETAE}. 

Dominus  vobiscum 
Sursum  corda 
Gratias  agamus 

VERB  DIGNUM 

aeterne  Deus 
{PRAEFATIO} 
{Et  ideo  cum  angelis} 
SANCTUS 
OSANNA 
BENEDICTUS. 
CANON : 


1.  Te  igitur 

2.  Memento  domine 

3.  Communicantes 

[See  10] 

4.  Hanc  igitur          \ 

5.  Quam  oblationem] 
6. 


with  elevations  &c. 


7.  Unde  et  memores 

8.  Supra  quae 

9.  Supplices  te 

10.  Memento  etiam 

1 1.  Nobis  quoque 

1 2.  Per  ipsum  et. 


Oremus 

Praeceptis  salutaribus 


1549 


IJJ>v,l  AT'*H 

•-.  -  Pr\ 

{OFFERTORY} 

Offering  of  Alms,  &c. 
Preparation  of  gifts. 


The  Lord  be  with  you  j 
Lift  up  your  hearts 
Let  us  give  thanks 

IT  IS  VERY  MEET  .  .  . 

everlasting  God 
{PREFACE} 

{Therefore  with  angels} 
HOLY 
OSANNA 


CANON  : 

Let   us  pray  for  the 
whole 

1.  Almighty    &>    ever- 

living 

2.  And  to  all  t/iy  people 

3.  And  here  we  do  give 

4.  We  commend  unto  thy 

5.  O  God  heavenly  Father 

6.  Who  in  the  same  night 


7.  Wherefore,  O  Lord 

8.  Entirely  desiring 

9.  And  here  we  offer 

[See  4] 

10.  And  although  we  be 

1 1 .  By  whom  and. 


COLOGNE 


The  Lord  be  with  you 
Lift  tip  your  hearts 
Let  us  give  thanks 

IT  IS  VERY  MEET  .  . 

everlasting  God 
PREFACE 

with  all  thy  holy  angels 
SANCTUS,  holy 
OSANNA,  help,  O  Lord 
BLESSED  BE  HE. 


Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
in  the  same  night 
with  Amen. 


Let  us  pray 

As  our  Saviour  Christ 


Let  us  pray 


THE  MASS 


ci 


PFALZ-NEUBURG 


BKANUENBUKG 


Do  minus  vobiscum. 
{OFFERTORIUM}. 


LUTHER  1526 


Lord   Jesus     Christ, 

eternal 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

in  the  same  night 
with  elevations. 
SANCTUS. 
Merciful  heavenly  (for 

rulers) 
Almighty  gracious  (for 

clergy)  ' 
Merciful  (for  unity). 


Dominus  vobiscum 
Sursum  corda 
Gratias  agamus 
VERE  DIGNUM  . . . 

aetcrne  Deus. 
{PRAEFATIOJ 
\Et  ideo  cum  angelis} 
SANCTUS 

OSANNA 

BENEDICTUS. 

Merciful  heavenly  (for 

rulers) 
Almighty  gracious  (for 

clergy) 

Merciful  (for  unity) 
Almighty  merciful  (for 

forgiveness). 


Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
in  the  same  night 
with  elevations. 
HYMN. 


Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
in  the  same  night 
with  elevations. 


Let  us  pray 


Let  us  pray 
As    the    Lord    CJirist 
Jesus 


Cll 


1549 


MISSALE  SARUM 


PATER  NOSTER 
Libera  &  FRACTION. 

PAX  DOMINI  SIT, 


AGNUS  DEI 
[&  meanwhile] 
Haec  sacrosancta 
Domine  sancte 

Pax  tibi  and 
OSCULUM  PACIS. 


{COMMUNIO} 
[&  meanwhile] 
Deus  Pater  fons  et 
Domine  lesu  Christe 
Corporis  et  sanguinis 


The  COMMUNION 

of  the  priest. 
Gratias  tibi  ago 

[Exhortation 
Confession  and  absolu- 

tio. 
Communion   of  the 

people]. 

Ablutio  : 

Quod  ore  sumpsimus 
Haec  nos  communio. 

Handwashing. 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Oremus 

{POSTCOMMUNIONES}. 


Dominus  vobiscum. 
Ite  missa  est. 
[Benedictio]. 

Placcat  tibi. 

In  nomine  Patris. 


OUR  FA  THER. 

THE  PEACE  OF  THE 
LORD  BE. 


Ye  that  do  truly. 
Confession 
Absolution 
Comfortable  words. 
We  do  not  presume. 
O  LAMB  OF  GOD 
[&  meanwhile] 


The  COMMUNION, 


{'  POSTCOMMUNION '} 


The  Lord  be  with  you 

Let  us  pray 

Almighty  ^everlasting. 


The  peace  of  God  .  . 
the  blessing  of  God. 


COLOGNE 


OUR  FATHER. 

THE  PEACE  OF  THE 
LORD  BE. 


AGNUS  DEI&  HYMNS 
[&  meanwhile] 


The  COMMUNION. 


J^he  Lord  be  with  you 
Let  us  pray 
O  almighty  everlasting 
or,    We    thank    thee, 
almighty. 


The  Lord  bless  you  and 
keep  you. 


THE  MASS 


cm 


PFALZ-NEUBURG 


OUR  FATHER. 


AGNUS  DEI  &  (H  YMN} 

{COMMUNIO} 


DISCUBUIT  IESUS  or 

{HYMN} 
[&  meanwhile] 
The  COMMUNION 

of  the  people. 


Communion  of  the 
priest. 


Let  us  pray 

O  almighty  everlasting. 


The  Lord  bless  you  and 
keep  you. 


BRANDENBURG 

O  UR  FA  THER. 

THE  PEACE  OF  THE 
LORD  BE, 


LUTHKR  1526 


AGNUS  DEI 


D  omine  lesu  Christe  qui 
Do  mine  lesu  Christe 
Sacramentum  corporis. 
Exhortation    to    com 
municants. 
D[SCUBUIT  IESUS  and 

HYMNS 
[£  meanwhile] 
The  COMMUNION. 


'with  COMMUNION  in 
each  kind  after  the 
consecration  of  it : 
while  {HYMNS}  are 

.      sung. 


O  almighty  everlasting. 


Corpus  tuum  domiiie 
Quod  ore  sumpshinis. 


\\'c  Hi  ank  thee^  almighty 


'/'//>-  Lord  bless  tl/ee  and 
keep  thcc. 


civ  1549 

P.  640.  *  As  they  call  it ' :  *  officium  missae '  was  used  in  England  for  the 
Roman  'introitus.'  Notice  that  Our  Father  and  the  collect  are  private 
prayers  of  the  priest  said  while  the  choir  sings  the  introit.  P.  644.  Gloria 
in  excehis :  *  on  high '  is  from  the  Great  Bible ;  in  the  3rd  par.  the  addi 
tion  of '  God '  and  the  omission  of  '  lesu '  are  unaccounted  for.  P.  646. 
The  indication  of  the  chapter  in  the  announcement  of  the  Ep.  and  the 
Gospel  follows  Lutheran  precedent :  see  Richter  Kirchenordnungen  \ 
pp.  115,  206.  The  omission  of  Gradual,  and  Alleluia  or  Tract,  is  a  serious 
departure  from  the  traditional  and  even  from  the  Lutheran  order;  but 
possibly  it  corresponded  to  much  parochial  practice ;  at  present,  if  I  am 
not  mistaken,  they  are  often  not  sung,  except  by  skilled  choirs.  P.  648. 
In  the  Creed  :  '  his  father '  has  no  ground  in  the  original  texts :  the  omis 
sion  of  the  clause  '  cuius  regni '  &c.  has  no  satisfactory  explanation ;  perhaps 
it  is  a  mere  mistake  :  the  omission  of  '  the '  before  '  geuer '  is  unfortunate  ; 
the  comma  after  'together'  is  perhaps  only  a  printer's  blunder,  since 
'  simul  adoratur '  simply  represents  crv/xTr/ooo-Kwov/ievov ;  '  I  believe  one,'  i.e., 
apparently,  'that  there  is  one,'  no  doubt  rightly  represents  the  'et  unam' 
of  the  version  of  Dionysius  Exiguus  and  of  the  Latin  liturgical  version  (for 
the  interpretation  implied  see  Rufmus  in  Symb.  apost.  39  ;  Luther  Enchei- 
ridion  f.  i24b;  Institution  of  a  Christian  man,  ed.  Lloyd,  p.  52);  but  the 
Greek  has  ets  />uav,  and  other  Latin  texts  '  in  unam.'  See  Hahn  Bibliothek 
d.  Symbolen  pp.  165  sq. ;  A.  E.  Burn  Facsimiles  of  the  Creeds,  H.B.S. 
1909,  p.  17  and  plates  xii  sq. ;  Dowden  Workmanship  of  the  Prayer  Book 
pp.  105  sq.  The  omission  of '  holy '  represents  a  current  Latin  reading 
(see  evidence  in  Dowden  pp.  104  sqq. ;  to  which  add  Burn,  plates  xii  sq.). 
P.  648.  Normally  the  place  of  the  Sermon  is  immediately  after  the  Gospel 
(S.  Just.  Mart.  Ap.  i  67  :  Duchesne  Origines  pp.  163,  188),  and  this  was 
enjoined  by  the  Pian  Missal  of  1570  (Rit.  celebr.  vi  6);  in  medieval 
English  practice  it  was  after  the  Offertorium  and  the  '  preces  consuetae '  i.e. 
the  Bidding  of  the  Bedes  (Lyndwood  Provinciale  v  5  n.  i,  ed.  1679,  p.  291  : 
Processionale  Sarum,  ed.  Henderson,  p.  8:  Chaucer  Prologue  710  sqq.); 
but  Durandus  (Rationale  IV  xxvi  i)  places  it  after  the  Creed,  and  this  usage 
is  followed  by  Luther  and  the  Lutheran  Kirchenordnungen^  and  here. 
While  preaching  on  the  part  of  the  English  parish-priest  in  the  middle 
ages  appears  to  have  been  comparatively  infrequent  (Scudamore  Notitia 
eucharistica^  ed.  2,  pp.  314  sqq. ;  Gasquet  Parish  Life  pp.  211  sqq.),  the 
Homilies  of  1547  are  directed  to  be  used  every  Sunday  (p.  Ixix  above), 
and  the  rubrics  of  1549  (here  and  p.  710)  provide  for  a  sermon  every 
sunday  and  festival.  Cp.  the  questions  on  the  subject  addressed  to 
bishops  in  Jan.  1548  and  their  answers  in  Burnet  Reformation  ii  i  record 
25  n.  8.  Pp.  650-658.  See  p.  Ixxiv  above.  P.  656.  Cp.  Luther  Formula 
missae  34  (Sehling  i  p.  8)  De  confessione  vero  privata  ante  communionem 
sentio,  sicut  hactenus  docui,  esse  earn  scilicet  nee  necessarian!  nee 
exigendam,  utilem  tamen  et  non  contemnendam.  Pp.  658-662.  The  Offer 
tory  is  essentially  (i)  the  offering  on  the  part  of  all  the  faithful  of  material 
gifts  for  all  the  purposes  of  the  Church,  including  the  bread  and  wine 


THE  MASS  cv 

immediately  to  be  consecrated ;  (2)  the  preparation  of  these  last  and  the 
disposition  of  them  on  the  altar  by  the  ministers.  In  the  Roman  rite  as 
we  first  know  it  in  detail,  the  whole  action  it  covered  by  the  singing  of  the 
Offertorium,  and  (2)  is  followed  by  the  handwashing  and  the  recitation  of 
the  collect  Seer  eta,  a  verbal  offering  of  the  gifts.  By  the  i6th  cent,  (i) 
had  long  been  represented  only  by  an  occasional  offering  of  money 
{cp.  Burkard  Ordo  missae  in  Legg  Tracts  on  the  Mass  p.  149),  for  which 
the  offerings  in  kind  had  been  commuted  by  the  i2th  cent.  (Honorius  of 
Autun  Gemma  animae  66  [Migne  P.L.  clxxii  564]) ;  while  (2)  had  been 
enlarged  by  a  series  of  prescribed  private  prayers  of  the  celebrant,  and  cens- 
ings,  etc.,  which  along  with  the  older  elements  made  up  the  'canon  minor.' 
See  Scudamore  Notitia  eucharistica,  ed.  2,  pp.  344  sqq. ;  Thalhofer 
JEfandbuch  d.  katholischen  Liturgik  ii  pp.  132  sqq. ;  Gasquet  Parish  Life 
pp.  129  sq.  Here  the  balance  is,  perhaps  too  violently,  redressed;  and 
the  offertory  becomes  the  offering  of  alms  and  accustomed  offerings  and 
of  the  price  of  the  bread  and  wine  (p.  716)  by  the  people  during  the  sing 
ing  of  an  '  Offertory,'  and  the  preparation  of  the  eucharistic  gifts  and  the 
setting  of  them  on  the  altar  without  prescribed  prayers  or  further  cere 
monies,  the  whole  of  the  'canon  minor'  being  omitted.  On  the  efforts 
made,  especially  in  the  i6th  cent.,  to  encourage  the  bringing  of  alms  and 
oblations  on  the  part  of  the  people  see  Thalhofer  Handbuch  ii  pp.  150 
sq.  For  Luther  on  'tota  ilia  abominatio,'  the  offertory,  see  Formula 
missae  15  sq. ;  his  rubric  is  'omnibus  illis  repudiatis  quae  oblationern 
sonant  .  .  .  apparetur  panis  et  vinum  ad  benedictionem,  ritu  solito,'  but  he 
doubts  whether  the  chalice  should  be  mixed.  The  Brandenburg  Order 
retains  the  Offertorium  (Richter  i  326).  P.  658.  The  traditional  Offer- 
toria  are,  like  these,  verses  of  Holy  Scripture ;  but  they  seldom  if  ever 
have  any  relevancy  to  what  is  being  done ;  they  bear  on  the  commemora 
tion  of  the  day  or  season.  The  Offertories  here  in  general  follow  the 
Great  Bible,  but  in  detail  they  often  forsake  it.  P.  662.  On  'the  poore 
mennes  boxe '  see  p.  Ixix.  Cp.  Pia  deliberatio  f.  95  '  constitui  uolumus 
in  singulis  templis  locum  aliquem  insignem,  non  procul  ab  altari,  qui  adiri 
decenter  ab  omnibus  possit,  in  quern  fideles  oblationes  suas  coram  omni 
Ecclesia  palam  offerant.'  On  'the  offerynge  daies' (in  Germany  called 
'  offertoria ' :  Constt.  Cone.  Mogunt.  1549,  c.  75)  see  p.  Ivii  above.  For 
the  rubric  as  to  the  wine  and  water  see  above  p.  Ixxiii.  'If  the 
Chalice  wil  not  serue ' :  the  medieval  Gothic  chalice  was  made  only  for 
the  communion  of  the  celebrant:  a  fact  forgotten  in  modern  days. 
P.  682.  'Lift  vp,'  'We  lift  them  vp':  cp.  Lam.  iii  41  :  Lit.  Mozarab. 
(Migne  P.L.  Ixxxv  547)  '  Levemus  ad  Dominum,'  and  Einfalt.  bedencken 
(Richter  ii  43)  '  Erheben,'  'Wir  erheben.'  'Our  Lorde  God 'should  be 
' the  Lord  our  God.'  P.  684.  'Holy  Lord,  Father  almighty,  everlasting 
God'  represents  the  Latin:  with  the  English,  cp.  Einfalt.  bedencken 
(Richter  ii  43)  '  O  heiliger  Vater,  ewiger  Gott.'  The  Alb.-Saxon  Kirchen- 
ordnung  (Sehling  i  281)  reduces  the  current  10  proper  prefaces  to  6  ;  viz. 
these  5  and  that  of  the  Epiphany.  The  effect  of  the  limitation  of  propers 


Cvi  1549 

to  5  days  in  the  year,  is  that  the  days  on  which  only  the  framework  of  the 
preface  is  said  are  increased  by  about  130  as  compared  with  Sarura  usage. 
The  Pia  deliberatio  f.  96  has  a  single  fixed  preface  of  an  early  and  oriental 
type.  Pp.  686-694.  The  Canon  (for  the  title  see  p.  844)  is  an  eloquent 
paraphrase  and  expansion  of  the  Roman  Canon  (i)  adjusting  it  clearly  to 
the  conception  of  the  Eucharistic  Sacrifice  as  threefold  :  viz.  (a)  as  a  com 
memoration  of  our  Lord's  historical  self-oblation  in  His  Death  upon  the 
Cross;  (b)  as  a  sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  for  the  benefits  of 
redemption  so  secured ;  and  (c)  as  the  offering  of  the  Church,  of  ourselves, 
our  souls  and  bodies  :  and  concentrating  all  sacrificial  language  on  these 
three  moments.  With  this  cp.  Encheiridion  Colon,  f.  cv  '  Quatenus  ergo 
ecclesia  verum  corpus  &  verum  sanguinem  Christi  deo  patri  offert,  sacri- 
ficium  mere  representatiuum  est  eius  quod  in  cruce  semel  est  peractum. 
Quatenus  vero  seipsam  (quae  est  corpus  Christi  mysticum)  per  Christum 
offert,  seque  ac  sua  omnia  per  Christum  deo  dedicat,  verum,  sed  spirituale 
sacrificium  est,  hoc  est,  sacrificium  eucharisticum,  laudis,  gratiarum 
actionis,  &  deo  propriae,  debitae  obedientiae ' :  cp.  f.  cviib ;  Antididagma 
Colon,  as  above  p.  xlix :  (2)  combining  the  Eastern  with  the  Western 
conception  of  the  '  form '  of  consecration  by  the  addition  of  the  Invocation 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  while  avoiding  the  difficulties  this  might  involve  for  a 
western,  by  placing  the  Invocation  before,  instead  of  after,  the  recital  of 
the  Institution.  P.  686.  The  clause  of  the  Sarum  rubric  ' et primo*  etc. 
(which  only  occurs  in  the  editions  of  Dickinson's  group  D,  to  which  ed.  1534, 
here  used,  belongs  :  see  Missale  Sarum  p.  xviiand  c.  324)  answers  a  ques 
tion  which  has  been  raised,  and  shows  that  '  whole  state '  means  '  universal ' 
and  not  '  healthy '  « state.'  Pp.  688,  690.  This  corresponds  to  the  para 
graphs  Te  igitur — Communicantes  and  Memento  etiam  of  the  Roman 
Canon,  which  is  followed  so  far  as  it  goes ;  but  the  intercession  for  the 
living  is  also  influenced  by  the  prolix  prayer  '  pro  omnibus  hominum  stati- 
bus,  &  necessitatibus  Ecclesiae'  of  Pin  deliberatio  flf  gib  sqq.,  recited  after 
the  sermon,  itself  derived  from  the  Kirchenordnung  of  Cassel  (Richter  i 
p.  299).  Add  therefore  to  col.  i  :  '  Omnipotens  sempiterne  Deus  .  .  . 
qui  per  .  .  .  Apostolos  mandasti  .  .  .  pro  seruis  tuis  .  «  .  Rege  nostro, 
pro  aliis  Regibus,  Principibus,  et  Magistratibus  omnibus  ...  ut  ...  uitam 
agamus  placidam  et  quietam,  cum  omni  pietate  et  honestate  .  .  .  tibi 
seruiamus  in  omni  iustitia  et  sanctitate  .  .  .  Oramus  te  .  .  .  pro  omni 
bus  .  .  .  quoscunque  et  afflictione  aliqua  castigas  .  .  .  egestate  .  .  . 
morbis  aliisque  calamitatibus  &  infortuniis  .  .  .  Consolare.  .  .  .  Post- 
remo  oramus  te  .  .  .  pro  nobis,  qui  hie  in  conspectu  tuo,  ad  tuum 
uerbum,  orationem  &  Sacramenta,  conuenimus.'  P.  6pO.  *  possesse  .  .  . 
begynning ' :  S.  Mt.  xxv  34  KX^povo^a-arf  .  .  .  /cara/^oA^s :  '  inheret  .  .  . 
begynnynge '  (Gt.  Bible) :  Missale  Sarum  in  die  plur.  mart.  Communio 
'  possidete  .  .  .  initio ' ;  Erasmus  Nouum  Instrument,  in  loc.  '  possidete  .  .  • 
exordio ' :  Old  Lat.  '  possidete  .  .  .  origine ' ;  Vulg.  '  possidete  .  .  .  con- 
stitutione.'  See  below  p.  cxxviii.  P.  6p2.  The  first  paragraph  corre 
sponds  to  Hanc  tgitur  and  Quam  oblationem,  or  rather  to  Hanc  igitvr  .  .  . 


THE  CANON 


cvn 


accipias  [<?/]  in  omnibus  benedictam  &c.  as  must  have  been  read  before 
S.  Gregory's  addition  of  diesque  nostros  &c.  (Bede  H.E.  ii  i);  but  (i) 
substitutes  for  the  oblation  of  the  material  gifts  a  commemoration  of  our 
Lord's  Self-oblation  and  of  the  Institution,  expressed  in  words  correspond 
ing  to  those  of  the  Antididagma  Coloniense  ('one  oblation':  one  of  the 
Grafton  issues  of  March  1549  has  'awne  oblation,'  and  'own'  is  read  by 
the  1597  ed.  of  the  Elizabethan  book  and  some  later  ones  [Liturgical 
Services  p.  194];  by  Sanderson's  'Liturgy'  [Jacobson  Fragmentary  illus 
trations  p.  26];  by  the  1665  8°  ed.  of  the  book  of  1662;  and  by  the 
Scottish  'Communion  Office'  from  1755  onwards  [Dowden  Historical 
account  of  the  Scottish  and  American  Communion  Offices p.  209]);  (2)  alters 
the  form  of  the  petition  ('  oblationem  .  . .  benedictam  . .  .  acceptabilemque 
facere  digneris  ')  and  makes  it  a  prayer  for  the  consecration  of  the  '  gifts ' 
(here  not  the  dona  of  Te  igitur,  the  8&pa  of  S.  Basil,  viz.  our  gifts  to  God, 
but  the  tua  dona  ac  data  of  Vnde  et  mentores}  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (S.  Basil) 
and  the  divine  word  (S.  Aug.  Serm.  ccxxvii :  '  sanctincatus  per  verbum 
Dei' :  cp.  i  Tim.  iv  5) ;  (3)  renders  fiat  by  '  may  be '  (but  from  Cranmer's 
comments  on  the  passage  ['  Answer  to  Gardiner '  in  Writings  and  disputa 
tions^  ed.  Parker  Soc.,  pp.  79,  271]  it  does  not  appear  that  this  has  any 
special  significance).  Gasquet  and  Bishop,  Edward  VI  and  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  pp.  444  sqq.,  are  at  pains  to  argue  that  the  Institution, 
'  Who  in  the  same  night '  &c.,  is  derived  from  that  of  the  Brandenburg- 
Niirnberg  Kirchenordnung,  approximately  reproduced  in  the  Latin  version 
of  the  Niirnberg  Catechism  made  by  Justus  Jonas,  and  thence  in 
Cranmer's  adaptation  of  Justus  Jonas,  Catechismus  That  is  to  say  a  shorte 
Instruction  into  Christia?i  Religion  for  the  syngulcr  commoditie  and  profyte 
of  childrc  and  yong  people  Gualt.  Lynne  1548  (re-edited  by  Burton  and 
reprinted  with  the  Latin,  Oxford  1844).  The  formula  is  as  follows  (for 
the  Kirchenordnung  see  Richter  i  pp.  200,  207  ;  for  J.  Jonas  and  Crarmer^ 
Burton  pp.  181,  195) : 

Justus  Jonas  Catechismus.  Cranmer  Catechismus. 

Dominus  lesus 
in  ea  node  qua  tradebat- 


B.N.  Kirchcnord. 
VnstT  herr  lesus 
in  cler  nacht  do  er  verraten 
wardt,  Nam  er  das  brot, 

dancket  vnd  brachs,  vnd 
gabs  seinen  liingern  vnd 
sprach,  Nemet  hyn  vnd 
esset,  Das  ist  mein  leyb 
tier  fur  euch  gegeben  wirdt, 
das  thut  zu  meinem  gedecht- 
nuss. 

Desselben  gleicben  nam  er 
auch  den  Kelch  nach  dem 
Abentmal  vnd  dancket,  vnd 
gal)  jn  den  vnd  sprach, 
Trincket  alle  darauss,  das  ist 
mein  blut  des  newen  Testa 
ments,  das  fur  euch  vnd 
fur  vil  vergossen  wirdt  zur 
vergebung  der  siinden, 
Solchs  thut  so  offt  jrs 
trinckt,  zu  meinem  gedecht- 


ur  accepit  panem 

gratias  agens  fregit  dedit- 
que  discipulis  suis  et 
dixit,  Accipite 
edite  :  hoc  est  corpus  meum 
quod  pro  uobis  datur 
hoc  facite  in  meam  com- 
memorationem. 
Similiter  accepit 
et  calicem  postquam  cen- 
auit,  gratias  agens 
dedit  eis  et  dixit : 
Bibite  ex  hoc  omnes,  hie  est 
sanguis  meus  noui  testa- 
menti  qui  pro  uobis  et 

multis  effundetur  in 
remissionem  peccatorurn. 
Hoc  facite  quotiescunqu- 
bibitis  in  mei  commemo- 
rationem. 


Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
the  same  night  that  he  was  be 
trayed,  took         bread 
and  giuing  thanks  break  it  and 
gaue  it  to  his  disciples  and 
said  Take, 
eat,  this  is  my  body 
which  is  giuen  for  you. 
Do  this  in  remembrance  of 
me. 
Likewise  he  took 

the  cup  after  he  had 
supped  and  giuing  thanks 
gaue  it  to  them  and  said  : 
Drink  of  this  all  ye.     This  is 
my  blood  of  the  new  testa 
ment,  which  is  shed  for  you 
and  for  many  for  tl;e 
forgeuenes  of  sins. 
Do  this  as  often  as  yr 
drink  in  remembrance 
of  me. 


It  is  quite  likely  that,  in  spite  of  certain  differences,  the  form  of  1549 


CV111 


J549 


is  dependent  on  this  text,  or  rather,  on  that  of  the  Brandenburg 
Order,  which  retains  gebentdeiet  es  and  vnd  benedeiet  in  in  the  respective 
institutions  (Sehling  iii  p.  69).  But  it  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  this. 
For  (i)  assuming,  what  is  obvious,  that  the  aim  was  to  weave  a  form  out 
of  all  the  four  New  Testament  records,  if  we  put  these  records  in  parallel 
columns  and  italicise  the  words  in  them  which  are  found  in  the  form  of 
1549,  these  italicised  words  will  be  found  to  form  almost  the  fullest 
possible  combined  record  of  our  Lord's  acts  and  words,  and  one  which 
might  quite  naturally  have  been  arrived  at  by  two  persons  independently. 
Thus  (the  text  is  that  of  the  Great  Bible,  to  be  found  below,  pp.  318  sqq.) : 

i  Cor.  xi  (p.  360)  S.  Lk.  xxii  (p.  353) 

For  the  Lorde  lesus  the    And  he 
same  night  in  whiche 

he  was  betrayed,  tooke  toke 

bread,  and  when  he  had  bread,  fir1  when  he  had 
geuen  thankes  he  brake    geuc  thankes  he  brake 
it  and 

sayd:  Take 
ye  &  eat,  this  is  my 
body,  whiche  is  broken 


for  you.     This  do  ye 
in  the  remembraunce 
of  me.     After  the  same 
manner  also  he  toke 
the  cu-t 
was 


:up  when  supper 
done 


it  and gaue    vn/othem, 
saying : 

This  is  my 
body,  which  is  geuen 
for  you  :  This  do 
in  the  remembraunce 
of  me.     Lykewyse  also 
when  he  had  supped 
he  tooke  the  cuppe 


St.  Mt.  xxvi  (p.  318)  S.  Mk.  xiv  (p.  336) 

When  they  were  eatyng,  And  as  they  dyd  eate, 

lesus  lesus 

tooke  toke 

bread,  and  when  he  had  bread,  &*  when  he  had 

geuen  thankes,  he  brake  geuen  thankes  he  brake 

it  and  gaue  it  to  the  it,  and  gaue      to  them, 
Dtsciptesa.n<lsaiyde:Ta&e,  and  sayd  :   Take, 


eate,  this  is  my 
bodye. 


body. 


eate,  this  is  my 


And 

he  toke  the  cup, 

and  thanked 
and 
gaue  it      them, 


And 


saying : 

this  cup  is  the  newe 
testament  in  my  bloud 


This 

dooe,  as  oft  as  ye  drinke 
it,  in  remembraunce 
of  me. 


saying:  saying: 

drinke  ye  all  of  this. 

This  cup  is  the  newe        For  this  is' my  bloude 
testamenteinmybloude,   (whiche  is  of  the  newe 
which  is  shed  testamet)  that  is  shed 
for  you.  for  many,  for  the  re 

mission  of  sinnes. 


he  toke  the  cup, 

and  when,  he 
had  geuen  thankes  he 
toke  it  to  them,  and 
they  all  dranke  of  it. 
And  he  sayd  vnto  the  : 

This  is  my  bloud 
of  the  newe 

lestamcn  le,wh  ich  is  shed 
for  many. 


(2)  The  form  in  the  Roman  canon  is  also  composite,  being  a  combina 
tion  of  the  four  N.T.  records,  along  with  the  dramatic  non-scriptural 
embellishments  which  had  been  traditional  at  least  since  the  Apostolic 
Constitutions  of  about  375  (see  Liturgies  E.  &  W.\  p.  20)  and  [S. 
Ambrose]  de  Sacramentis  2 1  sq.  of  about  400.  The  Mozarabic  form  is 
without  these  embellishments  and  for  the  most  part  reproduces  i  Cor.  xi 
23  sqq.  The  N.T.  features  of  Roman  and  Mozarabic  combined  would 
account  for  the  form  of  1549.  The  following  table  exhibits  the  relation 
of  the  English  to  the  Roman  and  the  Mozarabic  forms.  The  non- 
scriptural  features  of  the  Latin  are  included  in  square  brackets  :  the 
N.T.  (Vulgate  or  O.L.)  sources  of  both  Roman  and  Mozarabic  are 
indicated  by  the  type  (Mat.,  MARK,  Luke,  I  Cor.  xi) ;  and  what  is 
italicised  in  the  middle  column  occurs  in  one  or  other  of  the  Latin 
columns  : 

Roman  Canon  1549  Mozarabic  (Migne/'.Z.lxxxv  550) 

[Qui  pridie  quam  pateretur]        Who  in  thesamenyghte  that  he  in  qua  npcte  tradeba- 
accepit  pancm  [in  was  betrayed :  tooke  breade,        tur  accepit  pattern 


sanctasac  uenerabiles  manus 
suas]  tt  [eleuatis  oculis  in 


and 


THE  CANON 


cix 


Roman  Canon, 
celum  ad  te  deum  patrem 
suum  omnipotentem  tibi] 
gratias  agens  benedixit 

fregit  deditque  discipu- 
lis  suis  tUceas  Accipite 
et  aianducate  [ex  hoc  om- 
nes].     Hoc  est  [enim]  corpus 
meum. 


Simili 


*549 


Mozarabic  (Migne  P.L.  Ixxy  550) 


when  he  had  blessed,  and genen  gratias  agens  benedixit 

thankes  : 

he  brake  it,  and  gaue  it  to  his    et  fregit  deditque  discipu- 


disciples,  sayinge  :  Take 
eate, 

this  is  my 

bodye  tvhiche  is  geuen  for 
you  : 

do  this  in 
remembraunce  of  me. 

Like- 


modo  posteaquam  cenatum    wyse  afte 


est  accipiens  et  [hunc  prae- 
clarum]  calicem  [in  sanctas 
ac  uenerabiles  manus  suas 
item  tibi]  GRATIAS  AGENS 
[benedixit]  deditque  [discipu- 
lis  suis]  dicens  [Accipite  et] 
bibite  ex  eo  omnes.     Hie  est 
enim  calix  sangu\n\s  mei 
noui  [et  eterni]  testamenti 
[mysterium  fidei]  qui  pro 
uobis  [et]  fro  mitltis 
effundctur  in  remissionem 


supper 


he  take 

the  cuppe  and 


Us  suis,  dicens  Accipite 
et  manducate 

Hoc  est          corpus 
meum  quod  pro  uobis  tra- 
detur.    Quotiescumque  man- 
ducaueritis  hoc  facite  in 
meam  commemorationem. 

Simili  - 

ter  et  calicem  postquam  ce- 
nauit 


when  he  had  geuen  thankes 

he  gaue  it  to  them 

saying  :  dicens 

drinkeye  alt  of  this.    For  this  Hie 

is  my  blonde  est  calix  noui  testamenti 

of  the  tiewe  Testament 

which  is 


shed  for  you  and  for  many 
for  remission 


peccatorum.  Hec  quotiescum-  of  sinnes  :  do  this  as 
que  feceritis  in  mei  mem-          oft  as  you  shall  drinke  it, 
oriam  facietis. 


in  meo  sanguine 

qui  pro 
uobis  [et]  fro  multis 
fffundetur  in  remissionem 
peccatorum.     Quotiescum- 
que  biberitis  hoc  facite 
in  meam  commemorationem. 


in  remembraunce  of  me. 

Here,  besides  'bread'  (not  'das  brot '),  the  English  (a)  agrees  with  the 
Latin  as  against  Brand. -Niirnb.  in  'blessed  and,'  'saying,'  'of  me,'  'after 
supper  he  took  the  cup'  (order),  'when  he  had  given  thanks,'  'for,' 
'  shall  drink  ' :  (b)  deserts  the  Latin,  where  the  German  follows  it,  in  'Take, 
eat ' :  (c)  agrees  with  the  German  in  'is  geuen,'  'is  shed,'  and  'to  them/ 
but  in  each  case  with  Gt.  Bible ;  in  '  after  supper/  '  nach  dem  abentmal ' 
(as  Luther  Deudsche  messe],  but  this  is  a  natural  translaion  of  the  Roman 
'posteaquam  cenatum  est'  (S.  Aug.  Ep.  liv  7  has  'post  coenam');  and 
in  the  substitution  in  part  of  the  record  of  Mt.-Mk.  for  Lk.-Paul,  at  the 
Institution  of  the  chalice.  (3)  A  like  result  is  reached  if  the  English 
formula  is  compared  with  the  Orthodox  rite  of  S.  Chrysostom  and 
S.  Basil,  when  the  traditional  non-scriptural  embellishments  are  removed 
from  the  latter.  Thus  (the  italics  in  col.  2  mark  words  [Lk.  xxii  19, 
i  Cor.  xi  24,  Mt.  xxvi  28,  i  Cor.  xi  25]  not  represented  in  the  Greek)  : 

Lit.  S.  Chrys.  1528  1549  Lit.  S.  Bets. 

Ss  .  .  .  TT)  VVKTI  fj  Who  in  the  same  nyght  that  TTJ  VVKTI  77 

TraptolSoTo  [.  .  .]  Xa/SuH'    he  was  betrayed  tooke  irapeoldov  eavTov  [. . . 

apTov  breade  apTov 

[tv  Tats  a/ytais  avTov  Kal  dxpo-v-  [C'T*  r&v  a.ylui>  avTov  K 

TOIS    Kal    dfj.<t)/j.r)TOis    XeP(r*'J'] 

€vxa-p<-o~Tr)<ras  Kal  and  when  he  had  blcs-  /cat  llaTpl]  et)j 

evXoyfjffas ,  [ayido~as]  sed  and  geuen  thankes :  euXoyjJcras  |  dyidyas] 

/cXdVay  £5w/ce  TO?S  [0,7/0*5]          he  brake  it,  and  gaue  it  to          *X(i<ras  tdwKe  rots  fa7t'o«] 
ai/rou    /j.aBrjra'is    [Kal    diroo~-    his        disciples,  avTov    /ua^TjTats    [Kal    diroa- 

T6Xou, )  r6Xo«] 

eiircir'    Ad/iteTe  <pdyeT€,  TOVTO  sayinge  :  Take  cate,  this  eiiruv     Aa/tere  <f>dyfTC'  TOVTO 

fj.ov  faTt  TO  o-&fj.a  TO  virtp  is  my  body  whiche  is  geuen        fj.ov  e<TTt  TO  <rw/ja  TO  v-rrtp 

jj.fvov  [ets  (Ltpeffiv         for  you :  i'ftwv  xXdj/jLcvov  [eis  &<f>effw 

j  a  >  //•:'(•  'v  rtiiii-mvraunce  dfj.apTi.ui/.] 

•O/iotcjs  Kal  TO  TTOTTJ-    ofme.     Likewyse  after  sup-  'O/xotws  Kal  TO  TTOTT;- 

per  he  toke  the  cuppe  piov  [in  TOV 

yew/1/j.aros  TTJJ  dfjur  Aou]  ? 
and  when  he  had  geuen 


ex  1549 

Lit.  S.  Chrys.  1528  1549  Lit.  S.  Bas. 

thankes  he  gaue  it  to  Tjcras  crytacras]  £5w/ce  [rocs 

them  aylois  O.VTOV  fj.adtjTous  KO.I 

A^ywf  lli^re  e£  saying:  drinke  ye  all  ctTrooriXois]  eiiruv'  Ili^re  ^£ 

ai/rou  TrdiTf  s,  rouro  e<rrt  TO       of  this.     For  this  is  my  ai/rou  Trajrey  TOUTO  e<rrt  TO 

al/id  juou  TO  TT?J  icaivijs  5ta-        bloude  of  the  newe  Testa-  al/j.d  (JLOV  TO  TTJS  KO.IVTJS  Sia- 

6*17x^5  TO  inrtp  v/m.&t>,  /ecu  TroA-     ment  which  is  shed  for  you  #77*07$  T6  inrtp  vfi&v  KO!  TTO\- 

Xujv  tKxe&/j,evov  els  &<pe(ri.v          and  for  many  for  remission  \uv  eKxvvbfifvov  e/s  &(p€<rit> 

djuapTuij/.  of  sins.     Do  this  oj  0/?  as  you  a/^apTiuv.     TOUTO  Trocetre 

^Aa//  drinke  it,  in  remem-  ei?  rV  ^/XTJI' 

braunce  of  me.  avdfj.vnjau>. 

(4)  Again,  how  obvious  the  form  is  may  be  judged  from  S.  Basil 
de  Baptismo  i  3  §  2  A.a/3u>r  oi'i'  .  .  .  aprov  KOLL  €V)^apiarTijcra<i  l/cAacre  KOU 
eSi8ov  roi<s  /xa^/yrats  Kat  ear*  Aa^Serc  <j6ay€Tf  TOUTO  €(TTI  TO  crto/Aa  yutou  TO 
K^(op.€vov°  TOVTO  TTOICITC  ct's  T^f  ([iv)V  di'dfjivrjarLV.  /cat  AajScov  TO 
Kai  cvxypifrT^cras  ISwKei-  avrots  Aeywv  IIieTe  1^  auTOV 

TOVTO     y<*p      [J.OV      fCTTL     TO     tttfJLOL     TO     TT^S      KttlV^S     Oia^KTJS     TO     TTCpl 

cK^wd/xevov  ets  a<f)€O'tv  a/j.apTtMV'  TOVTO  TrotetTt  ets  T^F  «[Ar)v 
which  so  far  as  it  goes  is  almost  verbally  identical  with  the  English  form. 
P.  694.  '  Renderynge  vnto  thee ' :  cp.  Antididagma  f.  lxb  *  cum  primis 
autem  debet  ista  gratiarum  actio  fieri  &  offerri,  pro  eximijs  beneficijs 
nobis  impetratis  et  impertitis,  per  sacrificiu  Christi  semel  in  cruce 
oblatum.'  With  '  Entyerly  desyringe '  &c.,  which  corresponds  to  Supra  quac, 
cp.  Enchdrid.  Colon,  f.  cviii  'ergo  non  suam  oblationem  applicat  [Ecclesia], 
sed  fructum  oblationis  Christi,  quam  recolendo  rememorat,  per  fidem 
sibi  applicari  petit';  Rom.  iii  25  'through  faith  in  his  blood'  (but  '  in  his 
blood'  should  go  with  'obteigne,'  not  with  ' faith ');  the  prayer  Domine 
sanctc (Missate  Sarum,  ed.  Dickinson,  c.  624)  'utmerear  .  .  .  remissionem 
omnium  peccatorum  meorum  accipere.'  *  And  here  wee  offre '  &c.  answers 
to  Supplices  te,  one  interpretation  of  which  identified  hacc  with  the  Mystical 
Body :  Alexander  of  Hales  Summa  IV  xxvii  p.  2  m.  3  art.  3  (repeated  in 
Durandus  Rationale  IV  xliv  9)  '  lube  haec,  i.e.  significatum  per  hasformas 
visibiles,  hoc  est  corpus  Christi  mysticum,  perferri  i.e.  associari,  in 
sublime  altare  tuurn  i.e.  in  ecclesiam  triumphantem  quae  dicitur  altare.' 
(For  another  interpretation  see  below.)  For  the  offering  of  the  mystical 
body  see  S.  Aug.  de  civ.  Dei  x  3,  6,  20,  Ep.  cxlix  16.  Cp.  Encheirid. 
Colon,  f.  cviii  '  Denique  quatenus  ecclesia  seipsam  deo  consecrat  &  per 
Christum  hostiam  laudis  &  gratiaru  actionis  breuiter  fidei  spei  &: 
charitatis,  offert,  reddit  vota  sua  asterno  deo,  viuo  &  vero.'  '  Vns  selb '  &c.  : 
Einfalt.  bcdencken  f.  6gb :  Pia  delib.  f.  60  has  '  Porro  per  Christum 
offerimus  Deo  Patri  &  corpora  &  animas  nostras,  acceptum  Sacrificium 
per  fidem  in  laudem  &  gloriam  nominis  eius.  Ad  quod  nos  hortatur 
D.  Paulus  Roma.  xii.  cum  inquit,  Obsecro  vos  fratres  per  misericordiam 
Dei,  ut  prsebeatis  corpora  uestra,  hoc  est,  uos  ipsos&  totam  uitam  uestram, 
hostiam  uiuentem,  Sanctam,  acceptam  Deo.'  (Cp.  Dowden  Further 
studies  in  the  Prayer  Book  pp.  238  sqq.)  Cp.  the  7th  lesson  at  Matins 
of  All  Saints  day  (Brev.  Sarum  ed.  Proctor  and  Wordsworth  iii  973)  'in 
mensa  altaris  sacra  Christi  corporis  et  sanguinis  mysteria  celebrantes  in 


THE  COMMUNION  cxi 

sui  cordis  penetralibus  hostiam  vivam  Deoque  placentem,  id  est  semetipsos, 
.  .  .  offerre  non  desistant '  (Bede).  '  And  although  we  be  vnworthy '  &c. 
corresponds  to  Nobis  quoque  peccatoribus,  of  which,  besides  the  general 
sense  of  the  opening  words,  only  the  last  clause  is  retained  ;  while  for  the 
body  of  the  paragraph  is  substituted  (a)  '  yet  we  beseeche '  &c. :  cp.  *  Hanc 
igitur  oblationem  servitutis  nostrae  .  .  .  quaesumus  Domine  ut  placatus 
accipias ' ;  (b)  '  and  commaunde '  &c.  from  the  paragraph  Sttpplices  te,  with 
a  second  current  interpretation  of  haec\  Innocent  III  de  sacro  altaris 
Mysterio  v  5  (Migne  P.  L.  cxvii  841)  'tube  haec,  vota  fidelium  scilicet  et 
preces,  ptrferri  per  manus  sancti  angeli  tut,  hoc  est,  per  ministerium 
angelorum.'  For 'thy  holy  Tabernacle' see  Apoc.  xv  5.  P.  696.  With 
'As  our  sauiour'  &c.  cp.  Brandenburg  Kirchenordnung  (Richter  i  p.  327) 
'  wie  vns  der  herr  Christus  lesus  befohlen  hat,  das  wir  aus  rechter  zu- 
uersicht  vnd  vertrawen  dorffen  sagen.'  Notice  omission  of  directions  for 
the  fraction  (which  however  is  ordered  p.  7 1 6),  and  of  the  commixture  and 
the  kiss  of  peace.  The  formula  '  Christ  our  Pascal  labe '  corresponds  to 
nothing  in  the  older  rites,  unless  it  be  in  a  measure  to  the  Mera  <£o/3ov 
0c-ov,  irurrcttfs  KCU  dyazr^s  irpoo-cA&Te  of  the  Orthodox  Greek  rite  (Lift.  E. 
6°  W.  i  p.  395).  For  '  once  for  al '  see  Heb.  x  10  '  by  the  offrynge  of  the 
body  of  leus  Chryst  ones  for  all ' ;  for  '  sinnes  '  see  Agnus  Dei  and  Gloria 
in  excelsis.  For  'Here  the  prieste  .  .  .  fourme  afore  written'  (p.  700) 
see  above  pp.  Ixxiv  sqq.  Notice  that  the  confession  etc.  are  now  said  before 
the  priest's  communion  (p.  700),  not  after  as  in  1548.  P.  702.  On  'thy 
peace '  see  above  p.  Ixvii.  P.  702-704.  These  '  sentences '  (which  do 
not,  except  in  some  cases,  apparently  by  accident,  agree  with  the  text  of 
the  Great  Bible)  correspond  to  the  traditional  Communio,  but  are  called 
'  Postcommunions '  because  no  doubt  in  practice  then  as  now  the  Agnus 
Dei  (originally  covering  the  fraction)  covered  the  communion,  and  the 
Communio  was  sung  during  the  ablutions.  Perhaps  also  Mt.  xxvi  30, 
Mk.  xiv  26  '  hymno  dicto '  was  also  in  view.  P.  708.  The  fixed  thanks 
giving  takes  the  place  of  the  variable  Postcommunio  of  the  Latin  rite. 
With  its  opening  words  and  general  structure,  cp.  the  priest's  thanksgiving, 
Missale  Sarum  f.  ciiij  (ed.  Dickinson,  626):  'Gratias  tibi  ago  domine 
sancte  pater  omnipotens  eterne  deus:  qui  me  refecisti  de  sacratissimo 
corpore  et  sanguine  nlij  tui  domini  nostri  iesu  christi  et  precor  vt  .  ,  .': 
and  Hermann  Pia  delib,  f.  96**  (  =  Brandenburg-Niirnb.,  Richter  i  p.  207) 
'  Omnipotens  aeterne  Deus,  gratias  agimus  immensae  benignitati  tuse,  quod 
nos  corpore  &  sanguine  unigeniti  Filii  tui  Domini  nostri  cibasti,  &  potasti, 
Et  oramus  supplices  .  .  .  '  With  '  and  hast  assured  vs  '  &c.  cp.  Encheir. 
Colon,  f.  ex  '  qui  hoc  sacramento  digne  communicat,  certus  sit  se  in  Christi 
corpore  esse.'  P.  710.  The  Blessing,  which  is  an  anticlimax  after 
communion,  and  no  doubt  came  into  use  just  because  the  people  had  not 
as  a  rule  communicated  in  the  Mass  (cp.  Bernold  of  Constance  Micrologus 
21),  never  found  its  way  into  the  English  Missals,  though  it  was  sometimes 
used.  It  appears  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Roman  Missal,  1474  (Missale 


cxii  1 549 

Romanum:  Mediolani  1474,  ed.  Henry  Bradshaw  Soc.  i  p.  211).  The 
Exeter  Pontifical  (Barnes  Lib.  Pontif.  of  Edmund  Lacey  p.  153)  is  quoted 
here,  not  as  the  immediate  source  of  the  English  form,  but  as  a  convenient 
reference  for  a  form  of  the  traditional  benediction.  The  rule  that  Gloria 
in  excelsis  be  omitted  '  on  the  worke-daye '  roughly  corresponds  to  Sarum 
usage,  except  that  it  was  there  omitted  on  all  days  in  Advent  and  from 
Septuagesima  to  Easter  Even  (see  Frere  Use  of  Sarum  i  91):  the  rule  as 
to  the  Creed  is  practically  the  Sarurn  rule  (see  Missale,  ed.  Dickinson, 
15) ;  but  in  both  cases  the  Sarum  direction  is  absolute,  not  permissive. 
P.  714.  'After  suche  forme'  i.e.  kneeling,  without  perambulation:  see 
pp.  Ixii  sq.  The  prohibition  of  Mass  when  there  are  none  to  com 
municate  with  the  celebrant  and  the  provision  of  an  alternative  service 
is  borrowed  from  Lutheran  usage :  see  above  pp.  xxxix  sqq.  (for  other 
forms  than  these,  see  the  Kirchenordnung  of  Prussia  1525  [Richter  i  p.  30] 
and  Brunswick  1540  \tb.  p.  115]);  but  the  alternative  service  has  some 
thing  more  than  a  precedent  in  the  traditional  missa  sicca  or  mass  without 
consecration  and  communion,  with  which  Bucer  ( Centura  p.  458)  evidently 
identifies  it ;  and  Tho.  Cartwright  Second  Admonition  to  Parliament  1571, 
p.  42,  describes  it  as  '  the  dry  communion,  as  they  call  it.'  (See  also  J.  W. 
Legg  Tracts  on  the  Mass,  Henry  Bradshaw  Soc.,  pp.  173,  250.)  P.  716- 
On  the  Holy  Loaf  see  Rock  Ch.  of  our  fathers,  ed.  Hart  and  Frere,  i  no 
sqq.;  Gasquet  Parish  life  in  mediaeval  England  p.  157  sq.  It  had  been 
abolished  in  1548;  see  above  p.  Ixx.  P.  718.  '  Diuine  seruice  'is 
apparently  here  used  in  the  large  sense,  as  including  the  Mass.  Cp.  Journ. 
Theol.  Studies  x  p.  516.  Notice  that  it  is  not  assumed  that  the  people 
will  listen  to  the  service  in  detail,  but  rather  the  contrary  :  with  the  wording 
cp.  also  'The  king's  proclamation  for  uniformity'  1536  (Wilkins  Concilia 
iii  p.  811)  'virtuously  and  devoutly  to  hear  their  divine  services  and 
masses,  and  use  that  time  in  reading  or  praying  with  peace  and  silence,  as 
good  Christian  men  ought  to  do.' 

P.  724-  Cp.  Concil.  Colon.  1536  '  de  administr.  sacrament.'  7  :  'Magna 
certe  ratione  ecclesiasticis  patribus  visum  est,  vt  baptismus  in  conspectu 
ecclesiae  in  loco  sacro  recipiatur,  nisi  tamen  imminens  necessitas  fieri  aliud 
suaserit.  Quamobrem  displicet  nobis  quod  quidam  fastuosi  templum 
dfii  despicientes,  ambiunt  magis  suos  infantes  in  domibus  priuatim 
baptizari.  Quod  deinceps,  nisi  necessitas  idipsum  exiget  &  causa? 
cognitio  prcecesserir,  indulgeri  nolumus.'  Cp.  Sarum  Manuale  (Maskell 
i  P-  33)  *  Non  licet  aliquem  baptizare  in  aula,  camera,  vel  aliquo  loco 
privato,  sed  duntaxat  in  ecclesiis  in  quibus  sunt  fontes  ad  hoc  specialiter 
ordinati,  nisi  fuerit  filius  regis  vel  principis,  aut  talis  necessitas  emerserit 
propter  quam  ad  ecclesiam  accessus  absque  periculo  haberi  non  potest ' : 
but  this  says  nothing  of  in  facie  ecclesiae.  With  the  text  cp.  the  Hall 
Kirchenordnung  of  1526  (Richter  i  41)  '  Es  muss  frey  sein  das  man  an 
alien  orten  zu  yder  zeyt  rach  erfordrung  der  noturfft  moge  tauffen.  .  .  . 
Es  warn  in  der  ersten  kirchen  allein  zwo  zeyt  dem  TaufTen  bestimpt, 


BAPTISM  cxiii 

Ostern  vnd  pfingsten  .  .  .  Aber  ...  sol  ein  ordnung  .  .  .  gehalten 
warden  .  .  .  das  die  .  .  .  kinder  biss  auff  die  versamlung  der  kirchen 
am  feyertag  zu  Tauffen  gespart  wurden  darmit  nit  allein  dem  kind  ein 
guthat  bewyssen  durch  gemein  gebet  Bonder  auch  idermann  seins  tauffs 
sich  desselbigen  gemess  in  seinem  leben  zu  halten  ermant  wurde  ...  1st 
es  nit  allein  [vnjmitzlich  sender  auch  vnuerniifftiglich  in  fremder  sprach  zu 
tauffen ' — which  may  be  in  part  the  source  of  the  English.  In  line  3, 
' commolye '  =  ' publicly '  (see  first  col.).  Pp.  726-746.  The  relation 
of  the  English  to  the  traditional  and  to  contemporary  baptismal  rites 
is  exhibited  in  the  table  on  the  following  pages.  The  order  of  the 
Gelasianum  (I  Ixxi,  xxx-xxxiii,  xxxiv-xxxvi,  xlii,  xliv)  is  given  because  it 
marks  the  articulation  of  the  rite,  which  originally  and  at  the  date  of  the 
Gelasianum  and  later  consisted  of  several  acts  distributed  over  some 
time  (Duchesne  Origincs  pp.  284  sqq.).  The  second  col.  exhibits  the 
rite  of  some  German  diocesan  Agendae,  by  way  of  illustrating  Luther's 
sources.  The  Agendae  cited  are  those  of  Naumburg  1502  (N),  Cologne 
of  about  1485  (C),  and  Schwerin  1521  (S) :  printed  in  Schonfelder 
Liturgische  Bibliothek  Paderborn  1904,  1906.  The  third  col.  gives  the 
rite  of  Luther's  Taufbuchlein  of  1523,  with  the  features  omitted  in  that  of 
1526  enclosed  in  [  ].  The  fourth  col.  gives  the  rite  of  Hermann's 
Einfaltigs  bedencken-.  the  Pia  deliberatio  differs  from  it  so  far  that  the 
short  exorcism  precedes  the  signation  and  so  corresponds  to  the  traditional 
Exi  immunde  ;  and,  as  in  the  English  of  1549,  a  short  exhortation  follows 
the  Gospel.  In  the  1549  col.  features  omitted  later  are  enclosed  in  [  ]. 
As  compared  with  Sarum,  the  English  omits  the  salt  (with  Luther), 
and  spittle,  oil  and  torch  (with  Luther's  revised  book) ;  while  omitting 
where  they  stand  the  prayers  *  over  the  elect,'  at  the  beginning  of  the  rite 
utilises  Luther's  emended  form  of  Deus  patrum  nostrorum  for  the  same 
purpose  ;  reduces  the  exorcisms  to  a  single  formula ;  shifts  the  charge  to 
the  godparents  to  the  end ;  and  adds  3  exhortations.  P.  726.  Hermann's 
'Lieben  freunde'  is  from  Alb.-Saxon  Kirchenordn.  (Richter  i  309). 
The  prayer  Almechtiger  ewiger  is  here  quoted  from  Luther  Taufbuchlein 
(Sehling  i  18),  since  the  English  is  closer  to  this  than  to  the  Latin  of  the 
Pia  delib.  (from  which  however  perhaps  come  *  armie,'  virtute  eius  bellica, 
and  '  al  other,'  cceteras).  The  prayer  is  an  expansion,  apparently  by  Luther, 
of  the  '  Deus  patrum  nostrorum  .  .  .  te  supplices  exoramus  vt  hunc 
famulum  tuum  N.  respicere  digneris  propitius  .  .  .  quatenus  sit  semper 
domine  spiritu  feruens,  spe  gaudens,  tuo  nomini  seruiens  .  .  .  vt  cum  fideli- 
bus  tuis  promissionum  tuarum  eterna  premia  consequi  mereatur'  (Gel. 
i  32).  On  a  possible  origin  of  it  see  P.  Drews  Beitrdge  zu  Luthers  Liturg. 
Reformen  pp.  112  sqq.  P.  728.  The  passage  of  the  Rationale  is  derived 
from  Encheir.  Colon,  f.  lxxxh  '  signu  crucis  fit  principio  in  fronte,  ad  signifi- 
candu,  quod  baptizandus  nome  dat  Christo  crucifixo,  in  quo  confidat  &  que 
publicitus  confiteri,  nunquam  erubescat.'  P.  730.  The  Exorcism  is  mostly 
made  up  of  fragments  from  4  of  the  Latin  formulae.  S.  Mark  x  13-16, 

h 


CX1V 


1549 


GELASIANUM 


AGENDAS 


LUTHER 


AD  CATECHUMENUM 
FACIENDUM. 


Catechismus. 


Exsufflation. 

Signation  : 

Accipe  signum  crucis. 


Te  deprecor. 


Administration  of  Salt. 
Domine  sancte,  Pater. 

ORATIONES  s.  ELECTOS 


Omnipotens  sempiterne 

Preces  nostras 
Deus  qui  humani. 

BENEDICTIO  SALIS  &c. 
Exorcizo  te  creatura 
Accipe  sal  sapientiae 
Deus  patrum  nostr. 

EXORCISMI  S.  ELECTOS 
Deus  Abraham,  Deus 
Ergo  maledicte 


Audi  maledicte 

Exorcizo  te 
Ergo  maledicte 
Aeternum  ac  iustiss. 


AURIUM  APERTIO 


AD  BENEDICENDUM 
CATECHUMUM. 


Abrenuncias  &c.  Credis 
&c.  (C). 

Exsufflation  : 
Exi  immunde. 

Signation  : 

Accipe   signaculum  s. 

crucis  (S) 
Accipe  signaculum  N. 

dei patris  (N) 
Signum  crucis  (C). 


TAUFF  BUCHLIN. 


Dominus  vobiscum  (C) 

Oremus 

Omnipotens  sempiterne 

Preces  nostras  (SC) 
Deus  qui  humani  (SC}. 


Exorcise  te  creatura 
Accipe  salem  sapientiae 
Deus  patrum  nostr. 


Deus  Abraham,  Deus 
Ergo  maledicte 

Deus,  immortale 
Ergo  maledicte 
Audi  maledicte 
Ergo  maledicte  (N) 
Exorcizo  te 
Ergo  maledicte  (SC) 
Aeternam  ac  iustiss. 


Dominus  vobiscum 


Euangel.  s.  Mat.  (N) 
Euangel.  s.  Marc.  (SC) 
Gloria  tibi  do  mine  (S) 


[Exsufflation]  : 

Go  forth,  thou  unclean, 

Signation  : 
Receive  the  sign. 


Let  us  pray 

[O  almighty  everlast-\ 

ing] 
O  God,  thou  immortal.} 


{Receive  N.  the  salt  of] 
Almighty  everlasting. 


{Therefore   thou  griev 
ous] 
(see  above) 

{Hear  now  thou] 
I  adjure  thee 

{Holy    Lord,     Father 
almighty}. 


[  The  Lord  be  with  you] 


Saint  Marfts  Gospel 
\Glorybe  to  thee, o  Lord] 


BAPTISM 


cxv 


EINF.  BEDENCKEN 


FORM  OF  CATECHISM. 
Dear  friends  in  Christ, 


Catechism    (renuncia 
tion  and  faith). 
Exhortation  to  people. 


Signathm  : 
Receive  the  sign. 


Exorcism 

I  command  in  the  Name. 


The  Lor  a  be  with  you 
Let  us  pray 

O  almighty  everlasting. 


Almighty  everlasting. 


77ie  Lord  be  with  you 
Hear      the      gracious 
words  .  . 

out  of.  .  of  Mark,  x. 


1549 


PUBLIKE  BAPTISMS. 

Deare    beloued,   foras- 

muche. 
Almightie  and  euerl. 


Signation  : 

N.  Receiue  the  signe. 


\Let  vs  praye\ 


Almyghtie  andimmort. 
[7  commaunde  thee\. 


The  Lord  be  with  you 
Heare  nowe  the  Cospell 


written  by  S.  Marke. 


SARUM 


AD  FACIENDUM 
CATECHUMENUM. 


Signation 


Signum  saluatoris. 


Dominus  vobiscum 

Oremus 

Omnipotens  sempiterne 

Preces  nostras 
Deus  qui  humani. 


Exorcizo  te  creatura 
Accipe  sal  sapientiae 
Deus  patrum  nostr. 


Deus  Abraham,  Deus 
Ergo  malcdicte 

Deus,  immortale 
Audi  maledicte 

Exorcizo  te 
Ergo  malcdicte 
Aeternam  ac  iustiss. 

Nee  tc  latet. 
Dominus  vobiscum 
Euang.  sec.  Matt. 


CXV1 


1549 


GELASIANUM 


AGENDAK 


LUTHER 


Traditio  Evangeliorum 

Traditio  Symboli 
Traditio  Orat.  Domin. 


Evangelium 

Per  istos  sermones  ( N  S) 


Pater  noster 

Ave  Maria 

Credo. 

Charge  to  godparents 

(SC). 


Gospel 


Our  Father. 


Nee  te  latet. 
Spittle  and  EJfeta. 
Unction  with  oil. 
Abrenundas  Satanae  & 
Credo. 


Nee  te  lateat. 
Spittle  and  Ejfeta. 


Entry  into  church  : 
Dominus  custodiat  (N) 
Ingredere  in  templum 
(S). 


[Spittle  and  Ephthati\. 


Entry  into  church  : 
The  Lord  preserve. 


BENEDICTIO  FONTIS 
(below  p.  cxx) 


[BENEDICTIO  FONTIS] 


Credis  in  Deum  &c. 


Quis  vocaris?  (NS) 
Abrenundas  Sathanae? 
&c. 


Credis  in  deum  &c. 
Unction  with  oil  and 
Et  ego  te  linio 


N.  Dost  thou  renounce 
&c. 


Dost  thou  believe  &c. 
[Unction  with  oil  and 
And  I  annoint  thee\. 


Baptism. 

Unction  with  chrism,  & 
Deus  omnipotens,  pater. 


Vis  baptizari  ? 
Ego  te  baptizo. 

Unction  with  chrism,  & 
Deus  omnipotens, pater. 


Wilt  thou  be  baptized? 
And  I  baptize  thee. 

[Unction,  with] 

The  almighty  God  and. 


BAPTISM 


CXVll 


EINF.  BEDENCKEN 

1549 

SARUM 

Gospel 

Gospel 

Evangelium. 

Exhortation. 

Our  Father 

[Our  Father} 

Spittle  and  Ejfeta. 
Pater  noster 

Ave  Maria 

I  believe. 

[Ibeleue]. 

Credo. 

Pss.  cxiv,  cxv,  or  Ps. 

cxxxv. 

The  Lord  be  with  you 

Let  us  fray 
Almighty  God,  heavenly. 

Almightie    .    .     God, 

heauenly. 

Blessing. 

Signation  of  hand,  with 

Trado  tibi  signaculum. 

On  the  following  day 
after  the   Creed    in 
the  Mass 
ADMINISTRATION  OF 
BAPTISM. 

[Entry  into  church  : 
The  Lorde  vouchesafe~\. 

Entry  into  church  : 
Ingredere  in  templutn. 
Charge  to  godparents. 

BENEDICTION  OF  THE 

BENEDICTIO  FONTIS 

FONT  (below  p.  cxx) 

(below  p.  cxx) 

RITUS  BAPTIZANDI 

Dear  friends  intheLord. 

Welbeloued  frendes. 

N.  Doest  thou  forsake 

N.  A  brenuncias  Sathane? 

&c. 

&c. 

Unction  with  oil  and 

N.  Et  ego  linio  te. 

Doest  thou  beleue  &c. 

N.  Credis  in  Deum  &c. 

Epistle  :  Tit.  iii  4-8*. 

Gospel  :  S.  Mt.  xxviii 

18-20. 

The  Lord  be  with  you 

Let  us  pray 

Almighty  and  merciful 

God. 

What  dost  thou  desire  f 
Wilt  thou  be  baptised? 

Quidpetis  f 
Vis  baptizari  ? 

I  baptize  thee. 

N.  I  Baptize  thee. 

N.  Et  ego  baptizo  te 

Unction  with  chrism,  & 

The  almighty  God  and. 

Deus  omnipotens,pater* 

CXV1I1 


1549 


GELASIANUM 


AGENDAS 


Ac  ripe  vestem  candidam. 
Pax  tecum  (NS). 


Communion  of  neophyte 

(SC). 
A  crip e  lampadem. 

Pax  tecum  (S). 


LUTHER 


[Take  the  white,  holy}. 
Peace  be  with  thee. 

[  Take  this  burning torch~\ 


instead  of  S.  Mat.  xix  13-15,  comes  directly  from  Hermann  and  Luther, 
who  inherited  it  from  their  local  uses :  it  is  common  in  German  and 
Scandinavian  Ritualia;  see  e.g.  those  of  Cologne,  Miinster,  Schwerin, 
Skara.  The  text  of  the  Gospel  is  not  precisely  that  of  the  Great  Bible 
('lytle  children,'  ' and  forbyd,'  ' to  suche  belongeth,'  'title  childe').  P. 
732.  For  the  opening  of  this  exhortation  see  Alb. -Sax.  Kirchenordnung 
(Sehling  i  p.  266  note  2)  'Lieben  freunde  Christi,  wir  horen  in  diesem 
kurzen  evangelio  .  .  .  das  Christus  .  .  so  ganz  bereit  und  willig  ist, 
den  kindern,  so  im  zugetragen  werden  .  .  .  gnediglich  zu  helfen,  also 
das  er  auch  driiber  unwillig  wird,  das  man  sie  hindert  und  nicht  treulich 
zu  im  fodert  .  .  .  und  leget  seine  .  .  .  hand  auf  sie  ...  und  segenet 
sie.'  The  prayer  Almechtiger  Go  ft  seems  to  be  original  in  Hermann. 
The  translation  is  almost  exactly  that  of  the  Consultation.  The  conclu 
sion  of  the  exhortation  and  this  prayer,  besides  being  incoherent  with  the 
context  of  the  rite,  tend  to  disguise  the  fact  that  the  Gospel,  Pater  noster  and 
Credo  represent  the  tradition  of  the  mysteries  to  the  catechumen ;  but 
perhaps  this  only  completes  what  had  been  begun  long  before  in  the  substitu 
tion  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Children  for  the  beginnings  of  all  four  Gospels 
(Gel.  i  34).  P.  734.  Add  to  the  sources  of  the  exhortation  '  Wel- 
beloued,'  Alb.-Sax.  Kirchenordnung  (Sehling  i  266)  'Lieben  freunde,  ir 
habt  dieses  kindlein  dem  herrn  Christo  zugetragen,  gebeten,  das  ers 
annehmen  wolt,  seine  hand  auflegen,  segnen  und  im  auch  das  him- 
melreich  und  ewiges  leben  geben.  So  habt  ir  auch  gehort  das  unser 
herr  Christus  ,  .  .  alles  im  evangelio  zugesagt  hat,  welches  er  auf 
seiner  seiten  alles  also  wil  halten  ...  So  sol  im  das  kind  auf  solche 
zusage  durch  euch  als  seine  paten  und  mittelperson  .  .  .  auch  ein 
festen  glauben  zusagen  .  .  .  und  dem  teufel  auch  alien  seinen  .  .  . 
werken  absagen.'  P.  736.  The  third  renunciation  is  no  doubt  added  to 
complete  the  triplet — devil,  world,  flesh — which  becomes  very  frequent  in 
i6th  cent,  writings.  The  substitution  of  the  whole  Apostolicum  for  the 


BAPTISM 


CXIX 


EINF.  BEDENCKEN    * 

1549 

SARUM 

[  Take  this  why  te  vesture}. 

N.  Actipe  vestem  can- 
diaam. 

[Unction  with  chrism,and 
A  ImightieGod  the  father}. 

Peace  be  with  you  all. 
Hymn. 

Charge  to  godparents. 

N.  Accipe  lampadem. 

The  Lord's  Supper  pro 
ceeds. 

traditional  baptismal  confession  has  partial  precedents  in  the  Alb.-Sax.  and 
Brandenburg  Kirchenordn.  (Sehling  i  267,  iii  58)  and  Hermann's  rough 
paraphrase.  P.  738.  The  consecration  of  the  font  is  put  here  for 
convenience  of  comparison  with  the  $rd  and  4th  cols. :  for  its  position 
in  the  book  see  p.  760.  The  relation  of  the  English  form  to  the 
Gelasian,  Sarum  and  Mozarabic  forms  is  exhibited  in  the  table  on  the 
following  page.  Features  of  col.  3  later  omitted  are  enclosed  in  [  ]* 
*  Adsiste  quesumus  .  .  .  Vt  per  ministerium  .  .  .'  occurs  also  in  Missale 
Gallicanum  vetus  (Muratori  Lit.  rom.  vet.  ii  740 ;  Neale  and  Forbes 
Gallican  masses  p.  190),  without  the  'Amen,'  and  with  variations  of  read 
ing  with  some  of  which  the  English  agrees,  as  against  the  Mozarabic ;  viz. 
the  omission  of  'hie'  after  'moriatur,'  'confesse  t/iee,'  and  the  inversion  of 
the  order  of  the  two  clauses  *  Quicunque  hie  se  '  and  '  Quicunque  hie  tuus.' 
The  consecration  of  the  water  is  omitted  by  Luther  and  the  Lutheran 
Kirchenordnungen  (see  Rietschel  Lehrbuch  ii  p.  75).  P.  744.  To  the  ist 
col.  add  Pia  delib.  f.  77b  « Quare  uobis  .  .  .  incumbit  .  .  .  efficere,  ut  hie 
infans  Dei,  ubi  primum  per  aetatem  liceat  .  .  .'  For  the  quotations  from 
Pia  delib.  see  f.  73.  Notice  the  omission  of  the  Sacraments  in  the 
English  :  see  p.  xxxvi.  With  the  end  of  the  charge  cp.  Encheirid.  Colon, 
i.  Ixxxiii  '  Baptismi  ergo  vis  &  effectus  tota  vita  in  nobis  ad  hunc  modum 
.  .  .  exercendus  est,  atque  ita  viuendum,  vt  vitali  huic  moriamur  vsui,  vt 
seipsum  homo  sibi  abneget,  &  totus  mutetur,  imitans  Christum  ducem.' 
P.  748.  The  Manuale  is  more  concerned  to  secure  that  lay-people 
know  how  to  baptize  in  case  of  necessity  than  that  they  do  not  use  their 
knowledge  without  necessity  (Maskell  i  p.  31).  The  directions  are  the 
same  as  those  of  the  Manuale,  except  in  requiring  prayers  and  Our  Father. 
Pp.  75O  sqq.  This  Order  only  sets  out  in  detail  what  the  Manuale 
directs  generally  (Maskell  i  pp.  31  sqq.)  except  (a)  in  directing  that  the 
interrogation  be  made  in  church,  instead  of  beforehand ;  (b)  in  adding 
'I  certifye  you  .  .  .';  (c)  in  omitting  (it  would  seem  fittingly)  the  whole 


cxx 


1549 


GELASIANUM 
(I  xliv) 


Omnipotens  sempit. 


Deus  qui  invisibili 
1  Vnde  benedico  te 
Haec  nobis  praecepta 
Descendat  in  hanc 


SARUM 
(MaskellM.tf.  i  15) 


Litaniae. 


Dominus  vobiscum 
Or  emus 
Omnipotens  sempit. 


1549 
(pp.  738,  740) 


Dominus  vobiscum 

Sursum  corda 
Gratias  agamus 
Vere  dignum  et  .  .  . 
.  .   .  qui  inuisibili 2 
Ben(Jf)edico  te 
Haec  nobis  praecepta  3 
Descendat  in  hanc  * 

Coniunciio  olei 
Fecundetur  et 
Coniunctio   chris- 
matis  5 


[O  most  merciful  God 


be  present  at  this  .  .  .] 

O    merciful     God, 
graunt 

Graunt  that  all  car- 
nail 


Graunte  to  all  them 
'  Whosoeuer  shallconf. 
Grant  that  all  sinne 


Graunte  that  whoso 
Graunt  that  all  they] 
Graunt  that  whoso.  .  . 
thro^lghe  thy  mercy. 

The  Lorde  be  with 
you 


A  Imightieeuerliuing 


MOZARABIC 
(Migne />./,.  Ixxxv  461) 


Litania. 

Exorcizo  te  ...  his 
qui  in  te  vel  ex  te  .  .  , 

Humiliate  vos  bened. 
Dominus  sit  semper 

Deus  qui  solus  .   .  . 
adsiste  quesumus  .   .  . 
Fiat  locus 
Sepeliatur  hie 

Moriatur  hie 

Exuantur 

Quicunque  in  Christo 
Quicunque  hie  ren. 
Quicunque  in  hoc 
Sic  in  hunc 
Sic  invalescant 
Mittant  fontes 
Totus  hie  horror 
Quicunque  hie  se 
Quicunque  hie  tuus 
Vt per  ministerium 
Per  misericordiam. 

Dominus  sit  semper 
Or  emus 


Te  deprecamur. 


Dominus  sit  semper 
Signo  te  sacratissime. 6 
Dominus  sit  semper 
Abiecti  et  humiles. 

Dominus  sit  semper 
Et  benedictio  Dei 


1  Here  the  water  is  signed.  2  During  which  the  water  is  signed  5  times  and  some  of  it 

is  scattered  to  the  4  quarters.  3  During  which  the  consecrator  breathes  on  the  water. 

4  With  which  he  drops  wax  from  the  taper  cross-wise  into  the  water  and  signs  the  water 
with  the  taper.  5  He  pours  in  oil,  then  chrism,  then  both  together  at  these  several  formulas 
respectively.  6  The  consecrator  pours  in  oil  and  chrism. 

of  the  Ordo  ad  faciendum  catechumenum  except  the  Gospel.  Why  the 
chrism  (p.  742)  is  omitted  on  p.  756  does  not  appear.  The  Alb.-Sax. 
Order  (Sehling  i  268)  which  is  reproduced  generally  by  Hermann,  and  so 
far  as  it  goes  is  closely  followed  by  the  English,  has  only  a  short  prayer  and 
a  dismissal  after  the  Gospel.  P.  7&X  Alb.-Sax.  and  Hermann  reject 
conditional  baptism  and  in  case  of  doubt  direct  that  the  child  be  baptized 
unconditionally  (ibid.  268,  cp.  222;  Pia  delib.  f.  78). 

P.  776.  Public   profession   after   catechetical   instruction  practically 
took  the  place  of  confirmation  in  many  or  most  of  the  Lutheran  com- 


CONFIRMATION  cxxi 

munities,  and  the  most  conservative  required  it  as  a  condition  (e.g.  Bran 
denburg  :  see  below  p.  790),  with  the  consequent  postponement  of  con 
firmation.  In  view  of  the  ignorance,  which  both  otherwise  and  in  hearing 
confessions  he  had  found  to  prevail,  Erasmus  in  1522  had  suggested  the 
institution  of  catechetical  instruction,  and  of  a  public  profession  of 
baptismal  obligations  on  the  part  of  children  of  competent  age,  in  the 
presence  of  the  bishop ;  see  Paraphrases  in  Matthaeum  preface :  '  illud  mihi 
videtur  non  mediocriter  ad  hanc  rem  conducturum,  si  pueri  baptizati,  quum 
jam  ad  pubertatem  pervenerint,  jubeantur  hujusmodi  concionibus  adesse, 
in  quibus  illis  dilucide  declaretur,  quid  in  se  contineat  professio  baptismi. 
Deinde  diligenter  privatim  examinentur  a  probis  viris  satis  ne  teneant,  ac 
meminerint  ea,  quae  docuit  Sacerdos.  Si  comperientur  satis  tenere,  inter- 
rogentur  ratum  ne  habeant,  quod  susceptores  illorum  nomine  polliciti 
suntin  baptismo.  Si  respondeant  se  ratum  habere,  turn  publice  reno- 
vetur  ea  professio,  simul  congregatis  aequalibus,  idque  cerimoniis  gravibus, 
aptis  castis,  seriis,  ac  magnificis  :  quaeque  deceant  earn  professionem,  qua 
nulla  potest  esse  sanctior.  .  .  .  Quae  quidem  hoc  plus  habebunt  auctoritatis, 
si  tractentur  per  ipsos  Episcopos,  non  per  Parochos,  aut  conductos 
suffraganeos.'  (Cp.  Rietschel  Lehrbuch  ii  p.  147).  But  Erasmus  does  not 
suggest  that  this  ceremony  should  accompany  confirmation.  P.  778. 
The  startling  statement  made  under  '  Thirdely '  (a)  may  possibly,  though 
it  is  scarcely  conceivable,  represent  a  misunderstanding  of  Decretum  III 
v  6  '  ut  ieiuni  ad  confirmationem  veniant  perfectae  setatis,'  which  means, 
not  that  all  who  come  to  confirmation  are  to  be  '  perfectae  aetatis,'  but 
that  grown  up  candidates  are  to  come  fasting  (see  Dowden  Further  studies 
pp.  280  sqq.);  but  (b)  more  probably  is  meant  to  reproduce  Pia  delib. 
f.  78  '  Et  in  ueteri,  &  in  nouo  Testamento  mos  hie  obseruatus  est  .  .  .  ut 
qui  prima  infantia  recepti  essent  in  gratiam  Domini  .  .  .  ubi  primum 
acceptum  hoc  Dei  beneficium  cognouissent,  et  fidem  in  Deum  solidam 
concepissent,  ipsi  fide  suam  in  Ecclesia  profiterentur,  &  se  ipsi  obedientiae 
Dei  atque  Ecclesiae  addicerent.  Ad  quam  confessionem  .  .  .  confirmari 
etiam  in  religione  ab  Ecclesia  solleniter  solebant,  per  orationem  &  aliquod 
diuinae  corroborationis  Symbolum  .  .  .  Florete  Euangelio,  impositione 
manuum,  &  communione  Ccenae  Domini ' ;  or  Brandenburg  Kirchenordn. 
(Richter  i  325)  '  Wollen  wir  das  die  Confirmation  nach  dem  alien  brauch 
gehalten  werde,  Nemlich  also,  Wenn  die  getaufften  zu  jren  jaren  kommen, 
das  sie  wissen,  was  sie  glauben  vnd  beten  .  .  .  sollen,  Sollen  sie  in  der 
Visitation  des  Bischoffs  erfordert  vnd  verhoret  werden,  Vnd  wo  befunden, 
das  sie  des  glaubens  vnd  Christlichen  wandels  guten  bericht  haben,  Sol,  als 
obstet,  der  Bischoff  mit  aufflegung  der  hende,  Gott  .  .  .  bitten  .  .  .  vnd 
sie  also  darauff  Confirmiren.'  But  neither  of  the  three  statements, 
express  or  implied,  is  precisely  true  of  the  west,  still  less  of  the  east. 
The  last  three  lines  of  the  paragraph  seem  to  be  derived  from  Pia  delib. 
as  quoted  above  :  '  ipsi  fide  .  .  .  addicerent.'  P.  778.  The  admirable 
opening,  in  the  first  four  questions  and  answers,  which  are  perhaps  quite 


CXX11 


1549 


peculiar  to  the  English  Catechism,  may  well  have  been  suggested  by  the 
words  of  Erasmus  quoted  above  (p.  cxxi).  P.  784.  Cp.  the  summary  of 
the  Commandments  at  the  end  of  Homily  V  of  1547.  P.  786.  The 
English  Catechism  is  perhaps  unique  among  the  manuals  of  the  period  in 
containing  no  treatment  of  the  Sacraments.  Cranmer's  own  version  and 
adaptation  of  the  Catechism  of  Justus  Jonas  (Catechismus,  That  is  to  say, 
a  shorte  Instruction  into  Christian  Religion  1548)  had  dealt  with  Baptism, 
the  Keys,  and  the  Holy  Communion.  Was  it  that  Cranmer  did  not  know 
his  own  mind,  or  that  agreement  was  found  impossible,  in  1549?  P.  79^- 
For  the  godparents  at  Confirmation,  see  Maskell  Mon.  rit.  anglic.  i  p.  41 
note  9 ;  Canones  Cone.  prov.  Colon,  f.  xxvi.  P.  792.  The  relation  of  the 
English  to  the  Latin  and  to  the  reformed  Cologne  Order  of  Confirmation 
is  exhibited  in  the  following  table. 


GELASIANUM 
(I  xliv) 

SARUM 
(  Maskell  i  38) 

1549 

COLOGNE 
(Richter  ii  40) 

AD  CONSIGNANDUM. 

CONFIRM.  PUERORUM. 

CONFIRMATION. 

FIRML'NG. 

Catechism. 

Catechism. 

Adiutorium  nostrum 

Our  helpe  is  in 

Sit  no  men  domini 

Blessed  is  the  name 

Dominus  vobiscum 

The  lorde  be  with  you 

Or  emus 

Let  vs  praye 

Imposition  of  hand  : 

Deus  Omnipotens 
.  .  qui  regenerasti  .  .  . 

Omnipotens  sempit. 
.  .  qui  regenerare  dig- 

Almightie  and  euerl. 
.  .  who  hast  vouchsafed 

Almighty  and  merci 
ful  God,   heavenly 

natus  es 

to  regenerate  .  . 

Father,  who 

Et  consigna  eos. 

Signe  them  (o  lorde}. 

Signing  on  forehead 
with  chrism  : 

Signing  on  forehead 
with  chrism  : 

Signing  on  forehead, 
&  imposition  of  hand  : 

Imposition  of  hands  : 

Signum  Christi  in. 

Consigno  te  N. 

N.  I  signe  thee. 

O  Lord  lesu  Christ. 

Pax  tecum. 

Pax  tibi. 

The  peace  of  the  Lorde. 

Hymn. 

Or  emus 

Let  vs  praye 

Deus  qui  Apostolis. 

Almightie  eutrliuing. 

Ecce  sic  beneJicatur. 

Benedicat  vos  dominus 

Benedicat  vos  otnnipot. 

The  blessing  of  God 

almightie. 

P.  794.  Notice  that,  while  the  Chrism  is  retained  in  Baptism  (p.  742), 
it  is  omitted  here  :  the  case  is  the  same  with  the  Brandenburg  Kirchen- 
ordnung  (Richter  i  p.  325).  P.  796.  The  extracts  in  col.  i  are  from  a 
very  long  prayer  preceding  the  imposition  of  hands  in  the  Piadelib.  f.  8ib 
derived  from  the  Cassel  Order  (Richter  i  303). 

Pp.  800-816.  This  is  but  little  altered  from  the  order  of  the  Manuale 
except  in  (i)  the  lengthening  of  the  exhortation  ;  (2)  the  omission  of  the 
blessing  of  the  ring;  (3)  the  substitution  of  the  prayer  'O  eternall  God' 
(p.  806),  made  up  out  of  the  two  prayers  for  the  blessing  of  the  ring,  for  the 
first  Psalm  (Ixvii  [Ixviii]  28-30*),  preces  and  collect;  (4)  the  addition  of 
the  declaration  of  the  marriage  (p.  806) ;  (5)  the  removal  of  the  nuptial 
benediction  'O  God  whiche  by '  and  the  preceding  prayer  (pp.  810  sq.y 


MATRIMONY  cxxiii 

from  before  the  communion  to  its  present  position,  and  a  redistribution 
of  the  prayers ;  and  (6)  the  addition  of  the  final  instruction.  P.  8<X). 
Gasquet  Parish  life  in  mediaeval  England  p.  209  quotes  the  following  form 
of  banns  from  a  document  of  about  1426  :  'N.  of  V.  has  spoken  with 
N.  of  P.  to  haue  hir  to  his  wife,  and  to  ryght  lyue  in  forme  of  holy  chyrche. 
If  any  mon  knowe  any  lettyng  qwy  they  may  not  come  togedyr  say  now 
or  neuer  on  payne  of  cursying.'  With  the  exhortation,  cp.  Chaucer 
Parson's  tale  '  de  luxuria ' :  '  God  made  manage  in  paradys,  in  the  estaat 
of  innocence,  to  multiplye  mankynde  to  the  service  of  God  .  .  .  and,  for 
to  halwen  manage,  he  was  at  a  weddynge,  where  as  he  turned  water  in  to 
wyn,  which  was  the  firste  miracle  that  he  wroghte  ...  for  mariage  is 
figured  bitwixe  Crist  and  holy  chirche  ...  in  entente  of  engendrure  of 
children,  to  the  service  of  God,  for  certes  that  is  the  cause  final  of 
matrimoyne  ...  for  to  eschewe  leccherye  and  vileynye.'  The  exhorta 
tion  appears  to  be  directly  based  on  Encheirid.  Colon,  f.  200  '  Est  autem 
matrimonium  ob  diuersas  caussas  a  deo  [f.  20 ib  in  paradiso]  institutum. 
Principio  vt  esset  prima  humanae  societatis  [f.  204  mutuae  societatis  ac 
familiaritatis]  copula,  quse  germanam  atque  amicabilem  quandam  con- 
iunctionem,  alterius  quidem  regentis,  alterius  autem  obsequentis  com- 
plecteretur.  Secundo,  vt  esset  artissima  qusedem  coniunctio  qua?  soboli 
&  amanter  suscipiendae  &  religiosae  \sic\  educandae  deseruiret  .  .  .  Tertius 
institutionis  finis  .  .  .  vt  infirmitatis  incontinentise  nostrae,  honestate 
nuptiarum  exciperetur  .  .  .  dixit  Apostolus,  Propter  fornicationem 
vitandam  .  .  .  Praeter  hos  fines  non  postrema  sed  potissima  caussa 
institutionis  matrimonij  .  .  .  est,  vt  esset  congruum  signum  artissimae  illius 
coniunctionis  venturi  Christi  &  ecclesiae  ' :  f.  213  'Christi,  qui  non  dubium 
propterea  nuptijs  in  Ghana  Galilaeae  interesse,  easdemque  suo  illo  miraculo 
omnium  primo  commendare  ac  veluti  consecrare  voluit':  f.  2i4b, 
'matrimonij  itaque  sacramentum  auspicandum  est  in  timore  dei' 
(Tobit  iii  18);  and  Heb.  xiii  4  is  quoted  f.  2i3b;  Tobit  vi  17,  f.  2i4b. 
Cp.  also  The  Order  of  Matrimony  London,  A.  Scolaker,  [1548],  being  a 
long  allocution  for  use  at  weddings.  For  the  ref.  to  Hermann  see  Richter 
ii  48  (Pia  delib.  f.  108).  P.  802.  For  the  refs.  to  Luther  see  Sehling 
i  24.  P.  804.  On  the  substitution  of  the  3rd  finger  of  the  left  hand  for 
that  of  the  right  hand  as  ring-finger  see  J.  Wickham  Legg  in  Trans,  of 
S.  Paul's  Ecclesiological  Soc.  iii  pp.  175  sqq.  (reprinted  in  Ecclesiological 
Essays,  London  1905,  pp.  181  sqq.).  P.  806.  '  Those  whome  God '  (S.  Mt. 
xix  6  :  not  after  Great  Bible,  but  partly  after  Consultation]  is  found  in 
Luther's  Traubuchlein  and  thence  in  other  German  Orders.  It  is  also 
found  in  a  Limoges  order  of  matrimony  (Martene  de  ant.  Eccl.  rit.  I  ix  5 
ord.  xii)  and  in  the  Ambrosian  rite  (ib.  ord.  xv).  Encheir.  Colon,  f.  2i2b 
1  sacerdos  Christi  verbis  inter  copulandum  vtitur,  nempe  ijs :  Quos  deus 
coniunxit '  &c.  seems  to  indicate  that  the  formula  was  customary  at 
Cologne,  whether  prescribed  in  the  Rituale  or  not.  For  other  examples 
see  Legg  as  above,  pp.  179  sq.  The  declaration  of  the  marriage  is  a 


cxxiv  J549 

common  feature  of  German  Ritualia  and  was  thence  inherited  by  Luther 
and  his  followers :  see  e.g.  in  those  of  Meissen  and  Naumburg:  'Matri- 
monium  inter  vos  contractual  deus  confirm et :  et  ego  illud  in  facie 
ecclesiae  solennizo  :  In  nomine  Patris '  etc.  (Schonfelder  Ritualbiicher, 
Paderborn  1904,  pp.  26,  62):  cp.  that  of  Schwerin  (Schonfelder  Die 
Agende  d.  Dibzese  Schwerin,  Paderborn  1906,  p.  22).  Hermann's  form 
is  approximately  that  of  Luther's  Traubiichlein.  P.  8lO.  *  O  God  of 
Abraham'  (cp.  Tobit  vii  15  vulg.)  combines  the  2nd  and  3rd  of  the  Sarum 
collects,  the  first  and  fourth  being  omitted.  The  prayers  Propitiare  and 
Deus  qui  potestate  (the  second  of  which  includes  the  *  benedictio  sacra- 
mentalis,'  viz.  Deus  qui  tarn  .  .  .  nuptiaruni]  in  Sarum  use  are  recited  over 
the  parties,  prostrate  at  the  altar-step  under  the  pallium^  immediately 
before  the  Pax  Domini  of  the  Mass :  in  German  uses,  the  whole  section 
within  the  church,  corresponding  to  pp.  808-812,  is  commonly  said  after 
the  Mass,  before  or  after  the  second  Gospel ;  see  e.g.  the  Ritualia  of 
Cologne,  Meissen,  Naumburg,  Schwerin  (Schonfelder  Ritualb.  97,  26,  63 ; 
Agende  23);  the  Electoral-Brandenburg  Kirchenordnung  of  1540  has 
within  the  church  only  Propitiare  and  Deus  qui  potestate  (in  German) 
after  Mass  (Richter  i  p.  331).  'O  merciful  Lorde  '  combines  Propitiare 
with  the  penultimate  clause  sit  fecunda  .  .  .  progeniem  of  the  Deus  qui 
potestate.  P.  8l2.  The  blessing  Omnipotens  sempiterne  has  been 
removed  from  its  place  after  the  collects  before  the  Mass,  p.  810. 
Pp.  814,  8l6.  This  admonition  was  no  doubt  suggested  by  the  Lutheran 
Orders :  Luther  Traubiichlein  (Sehling  i  p.  24)  *  Fur  den  altar  uber  den 
brdutgam  und  braut  lese  er  gottes  wort  \  Gen.  ii  18,  21-24.  Darnach  wende 
er  sich  zu  ihnen  beiden^  rede  sie  an  also  Weil  ihr  euch  beide  in  den 
ehestand  begeben  habt,  in  gottes  namen,  so  horet  aufs  erste  das  gebot 
gottes  uber  diesen  stand:  So  spricht  St.  Paulus :  Eph.  v  2  2-29:  Zum 
andern  horet  auch  das  kreuz,  so  gott  auf  diesen  stand  gelegt  hat.  So 
sprach  gott  zum  weibe:  Gen.  iii  16.  Und  zum  mann  sprach  gott: 
Gen.  iii  17-19.  Zum  dritten,  so  ist  das  euer  trost,  dass  ihr  wisset  und 
glaubet,  dass  euer  stand  fur  got  angenehme  und  gesegnet  ist :  denn  also 
stehet  geschrieben  Gen.  i  27,  28,  31*.  Darum  spricht  also  Salomo 
Prov.  xviii  22.'  Brandenb.-Nurnb.  order  has  the  same  passages  with 
Mat.  xix  3-9  added  after  Gen.  ii  24,  and  Eph.  v  in  the  order  25-29,  22-24 
(Richter  i  p.  209);  and  Hermann  has  Gen.  ii  18,  21-24;  Mat.  xix  3-9, 
Eph.  v  25-29,  22-24,  followed  by  an  exhortation  of  the  usual  Bucerian 
prolixity.  Compare  also  Encheirid.  Col'on.  f.  ccxv :  '  Debent  aut 
presbyteri,  dum  copulant  coniuges,  eos  de  matrimonij  institutione  ex 
Genesi  (Gen.  2.),  de  sacramenti  sanctitate  &  efficacia  ex  Euagelio 
(Matth.  19.  Marci.  10.  Lucse.  16.  i.  Cor.  7.),  deque  sacramenti  mysterio 
&  officio  coniugali  ex  Paulo.  Ephe.  v.  denique  de  matrimonij  molestijs, 
tanquam  originalis  peccati  reliquijs,  aequo  animo  tolerandis  ex  Genesi 
(Gene.  3.),  commonefacere,  vt  sciant,  quid  apprehenderint,  &  qua  ratione 
in  ea  vocatione  viuere  debeant.'  P.  816.  In  the  Sarum  rite  the  mass  is 


VISITATION  OF  THE  SICK  cxxv 

that  of  Trinity  Sunday  except  that  theEp.  is  i  Cor.  vi  19,  20 ;  the  Sequence 
is  different ;  and  the  Gospel  is  Mt.  xix  3-6 ;  and  proper  Collect,  Secret, 
and  Postcommunion  are  added  to  those  of  Trinity  Sunday  (Maskell 
Mon.  rit.  i  pp.  64  sqq.). 

Pp.  818-830.  The  structure  of  the  Sarum  Order  of  Visitation  and  the 
principal  contents  are  retained,  the  number  of  alternative  or  duplicated 
forms  being  reduced.  P.  8l8.  In  eundo,  viz.  to  the  sick  person's 
house.  P.  822.  The  collects  are  reduced  to  the  9th  and  the  3rd  of  the 
9  Sarum  collects.  The  first  part  of  the  exhortation,  on  the  uses  of  sickness, 
is  very  much  expanded  as  compared  with  the  Sarum  form ;  while  the  last 
part  of  the  Sarum  form,  on  charity  and  repentance,  which  is  of  considerable 
length,  is  here  replaced  by  rubrics  merely  directing  the  priest  to  deal  with 
these  topics ;  and  the  topic  of  hope  is  omitted.  P.  824.  The  quotation 
from  Hermann  is  from  the  chapter  *  De  cruce  et  afflictionibus '  of  the  Pia 
deliberatio  f.  44.  P.  826.  Sarum  has  also  a  form  of  14  interrogations  on 
the  faith,  in  the  framework  of  the  Quicunque^  for  clerks.  P.  828.  Sarum 
has  the  ordinary  short  absolution  Misereatur  tui  before  the  Dominus 
noster.  On  the  clause  of  the  absolution  derived  from  Hermann  see  pp. 
Ixxiv  sq.  above.  Before  Deus  misericors  Sarum  has  a  collect  and  the  bless 
ing,  and  after  it  a  collect  and  a  final  absolution.  Pp.  830-834.  The  Order 
of  Extreme  Unction  is  greatly  simplified,  as  compared  with  the  Sarum, 
which  has  a  collect  after  Ps.  Ixx  (Ixxi),  7  applications  of  the  oil  to  different 
members,  each  with  a  formula  of  administration  and  a  psalm,  a  concluding 
formula  and  psalm,  the  prayer  Domine  deus  saluator,  and,  after  communion, 
the  final  prayer  Deus  qui peccatoris  and  a  solemn  blessing.  P.  834.  The 
prayer  As  with  this  is  largely  made  up  of  fragments  of  the  collect 
Omnipotens  sempiterne  after  Ps.  Ixx,  the  prayer  Domine  deus  saluator 
and  the  formulae  of  administration.  For  unction  with  a  single  form  and 
perhaps  a  single  application  of  the  oil,  see  Martene  de  ant.  Ecd.  rit.  I 
vii  4,  ordines  vi,  viii,  ix ;  with  a  single  form,  but  several  applications  of 
oil,  ib.  iv,  v,  x,  xiii.  P.  836.  Ps.  xiii  (xii)  is  the  first  of  the  8  Psalms 
of  the  Latin  order  said  by  the  clerk  during  the  administration.  Pp.  842- 
846.  In  the  Sarum  order  the  sick  person  is  communicated  in  the  reserved 
sacrament  immediately  after  the  unction,  first  making  an  act  of  faith  in 
the  sacrament :  and  after  the  communion  follows  a  collect  and  Ps.  cxlv 
(cxlvi).  The  Lutheran  Kirchenordnungen  generally  provide  for  consecration, 
with  the  recital  of  the  institution  simply,  and  communion,  in  the  sick 
person's  house ;  the  Brandenburg  order,  which  is  so  far  here  followed,  is 
exceptional  in  providing  for  communion  in  the  reserved  sacrament  if  Mass 
is  said  that  day  in  the  church,  and  in  the  careful  directions  for  reverent 
administration  ('  Der  Priester  aber,  sol  ein  sonderlichen  kilch  darzu 
verordnet  an  einem  bequemen  ort  haben,  sampt  einem  Corporal,  vnd  in 
einem  futter  die  partes,  darzu  auch  ein  gefess  zum  wein,  Auch  ein  sonder- 
lich  palla,  damit  er  den  Tisch  ferner  bedecke,  Item  auch  ein  Korrock, 
vnd  liecht' — and  be  accompanied  by  his  sacristan:  Richter  i  p.  329): 


CXXV1 


the  celebration  still  consisting,  after  the  general  confession  and  absolution, 
of  nothing  but  consecration  by  recital  of  the  institution,  and  communion, 
followed  by  Psalms,  the  blessing,  and  a  commendation  of  the  sick  to  God. 
P.  844.  No  direction  is  given  as  to  what  is  to  follow  the  communion  ; 
but  presumably  the  thanksgiving  was  to  be  said,  as  on  p.  842.  In  the 
first  col.  add  from  the  Brandenburg  order  (Richter  i  p.  328)  '  Auff  den 
fall  aber,  so  ein  krancker  des  Priesters  vnd  hochw.  Sacraments  begeret, 
vnd  in  der  eyl  nicht  haben  mocht,  So  sollen  die  Prediger  offtmals  das 
volck  vnterrichten,  wie  in  solchen  noten,  seine  negste  verwandten, 
nachbarn,  vnd  sonst  einer  den  andern  trosten,  vnd  guts  vorsagen  sol, 
Vnd  das  nicht  desterminder,  ob  sie  das  hochw.  Testament  Christi,  nach 
gehabtem  fleiss  nicht  bekomen  konnen,  gleichwol  darumb  nicht  verzagen, 
sondern  den  worten,  der  zusage  des  Herrn  festiglich  glauben,  darauff 
vertrawen,  vnd  es  also  geistlich  geniessen,  Vnd  sich  damit  in  des  Herrn 
hende  befehlen  sollen.' 

Pp.  848-878.  I.  The  Sarum  offices  of  the  dead  (Commendatio 
animarum,  Seruitium  mortuorum,  Missa  pro  defunctis,  Inhumatio  defunctt) 
form  a  long  and  highly-articulated  series,  involving  much  practical 
repetition.  The  following  is  a  scheme  of  them,  omitting  some  details. 


i.  In  the  death-chamber  : 

1.  The  Commendations : 

a.  Respond  Subuenite  :  2  collects. 

b.  Ps.  cxiii  (cxiv)  with  ant.  Suscipiat 

te:  collect. 

c.  Pss.  cxv  (cxvi)-cxviii  (cxix)  with  ant. 

Choriisangelorum  '.collect :  bidding, 
Pater  nosier,  preces  and  3  collects. 

2.  The  composing  of  the  body:  during 

which 

a.  Vespers  of  the  dead  (Placebo). 

b.  Pss.  v,  vi,  cxiv  (cxvi  1-9),  cxv  (cxvi 

10-16),    cxxix  (cxxx),    cxli    (cxlii), 
with  ant.  Requiem  eternam :  Kyri 
eleison,    Pater    nosier,    preces,    2 
collects, 
ii.  Procession  to  the  church : 

a.  on  setting  out :  Kyrieleison,  Pater 

nosier,  preces,  2  collects. 

b.  on   the   way :    anthem    Subuenite, 

Pss.  cxxix  (cxxx),  cxiii  (cxiv). 

c.  on  entering  cemetery  :  resp.  Libera 

me. 

iii.  In  church  : 

a.  on  entering  :   resp.  In  paradisum  : 

Kyrieleison,  bidding,  Pater  twster, 
preces,  collect. 

b.  Mattins    and   Lauds  of   the  dead 

(Dirige}. 

c.  Mass  for  the  Dead  (Requiem  eter 

natn}. 

d.  Censing  of  the  body : 

Ant.  Circumdederunt :  Kyrieleison, 

collect. 
Resp.  Qui  Lazarum  :  Kyrieleison, 

collect  (Deus  cui  omnia). 
Resp.     Heu     mihi\      Kyrieleison, 

collect. 


Resp.     Libera     me :     Kyrieleison, 
Pater  nosier,  preces,  collect. 

iv.  Procession  to  the  grave,  with 

Pss.  cxiii  (cxiv),  xxiv  (xxv),  with  ant. 
In  paradisum ;  bidding  (Piae 
recordationis)  and  collect  (Te 
domine}. 

v.  At  the  grave  : 

1.  Opening  of  the  grave  ;  during  which 
Ps.    cxvii    (cxviii)   with    ant.    Aperite 

michi :  2  collects. 

2.  Blessing  of  the  grave  : 
Collect,  preces  and  2  collects. 

3.  Deposition  and  covering  of  the  body  : 

a.  Ps.   xli  (xlii)   with  ant.   Ingrediar: 

bidding,  collect  and  absolution. 

b.  Ps.  cxxxi   (cxxxii)  with   ant.    Haec 

requies  mea  :  2  collects  (Deus  apud 
quern,  Tu  domine  deus). 

c.  Ps.    cxxxviii  (cxxxix)  with  ant.  De 

terra  plasmasii:  Commendo  and 
2  collects. 

4.  Thanksgiving  and  intercession  : 

a.  Pss.    cxlviii-cl     with     ant.     Omnis 
spiritus:  bidding. 

b.  Benedictus  with  ant.    Ego  sum   re- 

surrectio :  Kyrieleison ,  Pater  nosier, 
preces,  2  collects  (Deus  origo  and 
Tibi  domine  commendamus). 

c.  Ps.  l(li)  with  ant.  Requiem  eternam : 

Pater  nosier,  preces  and  collect. 

vi.  Return  from  the  grave  : 

Penitential  Pss.  (orDeprofundis  alone) 
with  ant.  Requiem  eternam  :  Kyri 
eleison,  Pater  nosier,  preces, 
collect. 


BURIAL  OF  THE  DEAD 


cxxvn 


II.    The   Lutheran  orders  are  of  a  different  character.     The  following 
will  serve  as  examples. 


BRANDENB.-NURNB. 

(Richter  i  210) 


At  the  grave. 

Benedictus  or  Ps.  xc. 
Media  vita  or 
Ego  sum  resurrectio 
or  a  Germ.  hymn. 

[Burial] 

Sermon  (here  or  in 
the  house) 


BRANDENBURG 
(ib.  329) 


On  the  way  to  and  at 
the  grave. 


CALENBERG 
(ib.  365) 


In  procession  and  at 
the  grave. 


Mediavlta(\a.t.  &germ.)    Media  vita  (germ.) 
De proj "undis  (germ.)      j  De  prof  undis  (germ.) 
or  resp.  Li  her  a  me. 


[Burial] 


In  church. 

a.  Nuncdimittis(germ.) 

b.  One  or  more  lessons 

(from  ]obor  i  Cor. 

xv)&  between  them 

responds  or  german 

hymns. 
Benedicttis  with  ant. 

Ego  sum  resurrectio 
Collect  (germ.) 

c.  Resp.  Si  bona  susce- 

pimus 

Collection  of  alms 
Off.  Si  enimcredimus 
Ep.  i  Th.  iv  12-17 
Ev.  S.  Jo.  xi  21-27 
Resp.  Si  bona  susce- 

pimus. 


[Burial] 
Sermon 

Lesson  (S.Jo,  xi  16- 
44) 


Invitation  to  alms. 


COLOGNE 
(Pia  delib.  f.  108") 


On  the  way  to  and  at 
the  grave. 

Media  vita  or 
De  prof  undis  or  the 
like. 


[Burial] 


Lesson  (i  Cor.  xv 
20-28,  50-58,  Phil, 
iii  20,  21,  or  Rom. 
vi  8-1 i ) 

Exposition 


In  church. 

Lesson  (i  Th.  iv  12- 
17,  Jo.  xi  21-27, 
Lk.  vii  11-15,  or 
Mt.  1x18,19,23-26) 

Sermon. 

Pater  noster 

Dominus  vobiscum. 

Oremus 

2  collects. 


Here  (i)  there  is  no  ceremonial  deposition  of  the  body,  and  no  commen 
dation  or  intercession  for  the  departed,  still  less  a  Mass;  (2)  the  only 
interest  is  the  edification  of  the  living;  and  in  the  Brandenburg  and 
Cologne  orders  such  fragments  of  the  Seruitium  mortuorum  and  the  Missa 
pro  defunctis  as  are  retained,  relate  only  to  this.  See  Rietschel  Handbuch 
d.  Liturgik  ii  pp.  316  sqq.  III.  The  English  follows  the  traditional 
order,  while  reducing  it  to  its  essential  elements — Procession  (Sarum  ii,  iv); 
Deposition  of  the  body  and  symbolical  covering  of  it,  with  intercessory 
prayers  and  thanksgiving  (v  3,  4) ;  Service  of  the  Dead,  reduced  to  a 
single  office,  with  3  Psalms,  lesson,  Kyrieleison,  Lord's  Prayer,  preces  and 
collect  (i  2  a,  iii  b) ;  and  Mass  (iii  c).  The  matter  is  mostly  Sarum,  the 
Lutheran  orders  suggesting  only  the  use  of  Media  vita,  not  hitherto  used 
in  this  connexion;  part  of  the  2nd  prayer  on  p.  860;  and  the  use  of 
i  Cor.  xv  in  service.  P.  848.  The  processional  ants,  approximately,  but 
not  exactly,  follow  the  Great  Bible.  Ego  sum  resurrectio  is  the  ant.  of 
Benedictus  both  in  Dirige  and  in  Inhitmatio.  P.  858.  '  Manne  that 


cxxviii  J549 

is  borne ':  Great  Bible,  except  '  staye '  for  '  state.'  On  the  history  and  use 
of  Media  vita  see  Julian  Diet,  of  Hymnology  s.v.  It  was  pointed  out  by 
Dr.  J.  Dowden  (  Workmanship  of  the  Prayer  Book  pp.  162  sq.)  that  the 
English  version  has  been  strongly  affected  by  the  first  stanza  of  Cover- 
dale's  translation,  *  In  the  myddest  of  our  lyuynge,'  of  Luther's  paraphrase, 
'  Mytten  wir  ym  leben  synd.'  Luther  (A.  Leitzmann  Martin  Luthers 
Geistliche  Lieder  p.  6)  has  ' .  .  .  Heyliger  herre  Got,  Heyliger  starcker 
gott,  Heyliger  barmhertziger  heyland  du  ewyger  Gott,  las  vnns  nicht 
versyncken  yn  des  pittern  todes  nott,'  which  Coverdale  (Remains,  ed. 
Parker  Soc.,  pp.  555)  renders  'O  Lord  God,  most  holy,  O  Lord  God, 
most  myghtie,  O  holy  and  mercyfull  Sauioure,  Thou  most  worthy  God 
eternall,  Suffre  vs  not  at  our  last  houre  For  any  death  from  the  to  fall.' 
'  Eyes '  is  obviously  a  misprint  for  '  ears.'  '  Who  shall  chaunge ' :  approxi 
mately  Great  Bible,  except  for  the  addition  of  '  mightie.'  Audiui  vocem 
is  the  ant.  to  Magnificat  in  the  Placebo.  P.  860.  '  Receyue  .  .  .  before 
the  begynnyng  .  .  .'  So  'percipite  .  .  .  ab  origine  .  .  .'  in  Introit  of  Wed. 
in  Easter  week  and  ant.  to  Benedictus  of  ist  Mon.  in  Lent;  S.  Ans.  Med. 
xvii  12  ;  from  the  African  version  (Cyp.  Opt.  Aug.  &c.) :  see  Journal  of 
Theol.  Studies  xiv  pp.  552  sqq.  Cp.  note  on  p.  690  above.  The  opening 
of  the  first  collect  is  from  '  Tibi  domine  commendamus  animam  famuli 
tui  N.'  of  Sarum  (v  4  b  of  scheme  above).  The  second  is  constructed 
after  the  second  collect  of  Hermann  (Pia  delib.  f.  ii2b)  'Gratias  agimus 
tibi  omnipotens  Deus  .  .  .  quod  hunc  fratrem  nostrum  ...  in  tuum 
Regnum  euocare,  ac  transferre  dignatus  sis.  Concede  nobis  qusesumus  .  .  .' 
P.  862.  Domine  probasti  also  in  Inhumatio  defuncti  (v  3  c  above).  P.  872, 
The  preces  are  those  of  Inhumatio  defuncti  (iii  d  above).  The  collect  is 
composed  of  fragments  from  Deus  apud  quern  (v  3  b),  Piae  recordationis, 
Te  domine  sancte  (iv),  and  Deus  cui  omnia  (iii  d) ;  and  perhaps  from 
Suscipe  domine  (Missale  Westmonast.  c.  1286,  Magdalen  Coll.  Pontifical 
p.  195,  edd.  Henry  Bradshaw  Soc.)  'in  sinibus  patriarcharum  tuorum 
abrahe  ysaac  et  iacob  collocare  digneris  vt  .  .  inter  suscipientes  corpora  in 
die  resurrectionis  corpus  suum  suscipiat.'  P.  874.  On  the  end  of  the 
collect  see  notes  on  pp.  690,  860  above.  Quemadmodum  :  in  Inhum.  defunct. 
(v  3  a).  P.  876.  For  the  sources  of  the  later  petition  of  the  collect  see 
Deus  cui  omnia  (iii  d  above)  'et  in  nouissimo  magni  iudicii  die  inter 
sanctos  et  electos  tuos  earn  facias  perpetue  glorie  tue  percipere  portionem  ' ; 
Te  domine  sancte  (iv)  'cum  magnus  ille  dies  resurrectionis  aduenerit  resus- 
citare  eum  digneris  vna  cum  sanctis  et  electis  tuis  .  .  .  tecumque  .  .  . 
vitam  et  regnum  consequatur  eternum:  de  extr.  Vnctione,  Litany,  'Vt  ei 
gaudium  et  exultationem  in  regno  tuo  cum  sanctis  et  electis  tuis  donare 
digneris  .  .  .  Donaeipacemeternamquefelicitatem'(MaskellJ/"../?.  i  p.  128). 
P.  880.  Except  for  the  change  of  place,  and  the  consequent  omission 
of  Ingredere  in  templum  Dei  &c.  at  the  end,  the  addition  of  the  (un- 
grammatical)  admonition,  and  the  omission  of  the  second  Psalm  and  of 
the  holy  water,  this  order  reproduces  that  of  Sarum. 


ASH  WEDNESDAY  AND  'CERTAYNE  NOTES'       cxxix 

P.  886.  This  office,  so  far  as  to  the  end  of  the  first  collect,  reproduces  the 
Sarum  penitential  office  preceding  the  blessing  of  the  ashes,  except  that 
the  fixed  comminations  and  following  exhortation  are  substituted  for  the 
sermon ;  Miserere  alone,  and  not  all  the  penitential  Psalms  with  ant.  Ne 
reminiscans,  and  only  the  first  and  part  of  the  sixth  of  the  7  collects,  are 
said ;  and  the  final  absolution  is  omitted.  P.  898.  The  prayer  '  O  most 
mighty  God'  is  composed  of  fragments  of  the  two  blessings  of  the  ashes, 
of  the  6th  collect  of  the  penitential  office,  and  of  the  collect  after  the  dis 
tribution  of  the  ashes.  P.  900.  The  conclusion  of  the  'antheme'  is  the 
first  ant.  sung  during  the  distribution  of  the  ashes. 

P.  926.  (i)  The  vestments  of  the  Mass  are  provided  for  on  p.  638  (on 
which  see  note).  The  present  '  Note '  makes  no  provision  for  Litany  (see 
also  p.  718),  Matrimony,  and  Churching  of  women,  or  for  Commination  ; 
while  the  Unction  and  Communion  of  the  Sick  fall  under  the  permissive 
direction  as  to  *  all  other  places  '  (for  medieval  use  of  the  surplice  here,  see 
J.  Myrc  Instructions  for  parish  priests,  E.  E.  T.  S.,p.  60,  and  plates  in  Words 
worth  and  Littlehales  Old  English  Service-books  p.  297  and  Gasquet  Parish 
Life  in  medieval  England  p.  202).  The  rule  as  to  hoods  in  cathedral 
and  collegiate  churches  no  doubt  implies  the  abolition  of  almuces  (see 
Wriothesley 's  Chronicle  ii  p.  14);  but  the  use  of  the  hood  over  the 
surplice  was  no  novelty  (see  E.  C.  Atchley  '  The  hood  as  an  ornament  of 
the  minister'  in  Trans,  of  St.  Paul's  Ecclesiol.  Soc.  iv  pp.  313  sqq. :  see 
also  title-page  of  the  Great  Bible  of  1539,  where  the  preacher  wears  his 
doctor's  hood  over  his  surplice).  The  last  clause  of  the  paragraph  means 
that,  when  they  preach,  all  graduates  everywhere  shall  wear  their  hoods 
over  gown  or  surplice.  (2)  Notice  that  a  bishop,  according  to  traditional 
usage,  wears  his  rochet,  whatever  else  he  adds ;  his  crosier  is  '  borne  or 
holden  by  hys  chapeleyne '  when  his  hands  are  otherwise  employed ;  and 
no  mention  is  made  of  the  mitre  (Cranmer  celebrated  at  S.  Paul's  without 
mitre  on  July  21,  1549:  Grey  Friar?  Chronicle  p.  60).  (3)  The  third 
paragraph  evidently  applies  primarily  to  the  ministers  (Bucer  Censura  v. 
p.  465).  (4)  From  the  fourth  paragraph  it  is  evident  that  the  project  of  a 
more  or  less  complete  Processional  in  English  (pp.  Ixi  sq.)  had  not  been 
abandoned.  (5)  In  view  of  the  rubrics  on  pp.  648,  710,  the  directions  of 
the  fifth  paragraph  are  curious.  The  rubric  on  p.  648  already  and 
naturally  regards  the  Sermon  and  the  Homily  as  alternative  ;  while  that 
on  p.  7:0  provides  for  ferial  Masses.  This  'note'  seems  to  provide  that 
the  ferial  Mass  may  be  used  on  any  day  when  a  sermon,  instead  of  one  of 
the  Homilies,  occurs. 


cxxx  THE  ORDINATIONS  OF   1550 

IX 

The  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  which  took  the  place  of 
Breviary,  Missal,  Processional  and  Manual,  contained  no 
pontifical  office  except  that  of  Confirmation,  which  had  been 
already  included  in  the  Manual,  perhaps  to  relieve  the  bishop 
of  the  necessity  of  always  carrying  about  his  own  book.  The 
Pontificals,  therefore  (which  as  we  have  seen  were  the  pro 
perty  of  bishops,  not  of  churches,  were  never  printed,  and  were 
not  called  in  and  defaced *)  continued  in  use,  except  for  Con 
firmation,  so  far  at  least  as  bishops  chose  to  use  them.  But 
a  year  after  the  publication  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer 
a  beginning  had  been  made  in  the  compilation  of  a  new  Ponti 
fical  in  English.  An  Act  of  Jan.  31  1549-50  empowered  the 
King  to  nominate  six  bishops  and  six  other  learned  men  to 
produce  English  forms  of  Ordination,  to  be  set  forth  under 
the  Great  Seal  before  April  i  1550  2  ;  and  an  Order  in  Council 
of  Feb.  2  named  the  commissioners.3  The  work  of  the  com 
missioners  was  done  in  a  week,4  a  fact  which  can  only  mean 
that  the  compilation  of  the  new  order  was  already  far  advanced 
before  the  work  of  the  commission  began  ;  and  in  fact  it  is 
possible  that  the  '  Ordinal  '  5  was  already  finished  and  had 
been  used  by  Cranmer  at  S.  Paul's  before  Dec.  31  I549-6 
This  germ  of  an  English  Pontifical  was  published  in  March 
1 549-50  as  The  fourme  and  maner  of  makyng  and  consecratyng 
of  Archebisshoppes  Bisshoppes,  Priestes  and  Deacons,  printed 
by  R.  Graf  ton. 

For  the  bibliography,  see  J.  Parker  Introduction  to  tJie  successive 
revisions  p.  xxix. 

1  Pp.  xvi,  Ixxxii  above.  2  Stat.  3  and  4  Edward  VI  c.  12. 

3  Acts  of  the  Privy  Council  ii.  379.  The  names  of  the  commissioners  are 
unknown. 

*  Dixon  History  of  the  Church  of  England  \\\  p.  322  ;  Procter  and  Frere,  p.  81. 

5  Perhaps  the  use  of  '  Ordinal '  in  this  new  sense  first  occurs  in  Bramhall 
The  consecration  and  succession  of  Protestant  bishops  justified  1656   (Works^ 
Angl.-Cath.  Libr.,  iii  p.  96),  and  was  first  officially  recognised  in  the  bull  Apos- 
tolicae  curae  of  Leo  XIII  (1896)  and  the  Responsio  of  the  English  archbishops 

(1897). 

6  Strype  Memorials  of  Cranmer  ii  II  (ed.  Oxon.  1840,  i  p.  273). 


THE  LATIN  ORDINATIONS  cxxxi 

The  materials  employed  in  the  compilation  of  the  rite, 
other  than  the  New  Testament,  were  two  :  the  traditional 
Roman  rite  of  the  Pontificalia,  and  the  De  ordinatione  legitima 
ministrorum  ecclesice  reuocanda  of  Martin  Bucer. 

(i)  Like  the  rites  of  other  sacraments,  that  of  Ordination  is  in  its  essence 
quite  simple  and   obvious.     After   the  choice  of  the   church  is  made, 
the  elect  are  presented  to  the  ordainer  or  ordainers,  and  he,  or  they, 
lay  hands  upon  them  and  pray  (Acts  vi  5,  6  '  elegerunt  .  .  .  hos  statu- 
erunt  ante  conspectum  apostolorum,  et  orantes  imposuerunt  eis  manus  '). 
In  the  old  Roman  rite,  the  three  lowest  of  the  minor  orders  were  not 
ordained  publicly,  if  at  all ;  acolytes  and  subdeacons  were  presented  to 
the  bishop,  at  the  communion  during  Mass,  received  the  characteristic 
instruments  of  their  ministry,  and  were  ordained  with  a  benediction  with 
out  imposition  of  hands  (Ordo  Romanus  VIII  in  Mabillon  Mus.  Ital.  ii 
p.  85).     Deacons  and  presbyters,  after  being  presented  to  the  faithful  for 
approval  on  the  Ember  Wednesday  and  Friday,  were  solemnly  ordained 
before  the  Gospel  of  the  stational  Mass  of  Saturday  night.     After  the 
Pope  had  recited  the  deed  of  their  election,  the  archdeacon  brought  them 
before  him ;  the  Pope  bade  the  prayers  of  the  Church  for  them,  and  the 
Litany  was  recited,  followed  by  a  collect.     Then  the  Pope  ordained,  first 
the  deacons,  then  the  priests,  with  imposition  of  hands  and  a  solemn 
prayer ;  after  which  they  were  clothed,  each  with  his  characteristic  vest 
ment,  and  one  of  the  new  deacons  read  the  Gospel  (Ord.  Rom.  IX,  ibid. 
pp.  89  sqq.).     The  procedure  was  essentially  the  same  in  the  case  of  a 
bishop-elect.     After  election  he  resorted  to  Rome  with  representatives  of 
his  church,  and  there  his  election  and  his  qualifications  were  scrutinised. 
If  all  was  found  satisfactory,  he  was  consecrated  on  a  Sunday.     After  the 
Gradual,  the  archdeacon  went  forth  to  the  sacristy  and  clothed  him  in 
dalmatic,  planeta  and  shoes;  and  then  brought  him  before  the  Pope. 
The  Pope  proclaimed  his  election  and  bade  the  prayers  of  the  faithful, 
and  the  Litany  was  sung  ;  and  after  a  collect  followed  the  imposition  of 
hands  and  the  solemn  prayer  of  consecration  ;  and  the  Mass  was  resumed 
with  the  Alleluia  (Ord.  Rom.   VIII,  ibid.    pp.  86   sqq.).     The   Gallican 
Ordinations  were  of  the  same  general  form  as  the  Roman,  except  that  the 
minor  orders  were  all  ordained  publicly,  with  the  delivery  of  the  instru 
ments  by  the  bishop,  a  bidding  and  a  prayer ;  during  the  solemn  prayer 
and  imposition  of  hands  at  the  consecration  of  a  bishop,  two  bishops  held 
the  book  of  the  Gospels  open  on  the  head  of  the  elect;  and  in  the 
ordinations  of  presbyters  and  bishops,  after  the  imposition  of  hands  and 
the  solemn    prayer,   their  hands  were   anointed,  with  an  accompanying 
formula    (Statuta  ecd.  antiq.    [Bruns  Canones  i  pp.    140  sqq.];  Missale 
Francorum    [Muratori   Lit.   rom.   vet.   ii   66 1    sqq.];   Duchesne    Origines 
pp.  349  sqq.).     The  Pope  ordained  and  consecrated  alone :  in  all  other 
cases   everywhere,   at  the  ordination  of  a  presbyter  all  the  presbyters 


cxxxii  THE  LATIN  ORDINATIONS 

present,  and  at  the  consecration  of  a  bishop  all  the  bishops  (who  must  of 
necessity  be  two  at  least  besides  the  metropolitan),  joined  in  the  imposi 
tion  of  hands  (Duchesne  Origines  pp.  348  sq.,  357,  361). 

In  the  course  of  the  middle  ages  the  rite  became  complicated  and 
decentralised,  (i)  Already  in  Gelasianum  I  xcv  sq.,  xcix  the  Roman  and 
the  Gallican  rites  are  found  combined,  so  that  in  the  ordinations  of 
deacons  and  presbyters  the  central  prayers  of  both  rites  occur  in  succes 
sion.  (2)  Later,  the  hands  of  presbyters  and  bishops  (and  of  bishops 
the  head  as  well)  were  anointed.  (3)  The  delivery  of  instruments  was 
extended  from  the  minor  orders  to  the  diaconate  and  the  presbyterate, 
and  each  delivery  had  its  appropriate  formula.  (4)  Subdeacons, 
deacons,  and  presbyters  were  clothed  each  with  his  characteristic 
vestment,  and  the  bishop  invested  with  his  insignia,  viz.  staff,  ring 
and  mitre,  as  a  formal  part  of  the  rite,  each  delivery  being  accom 
panied  by  its  formula.  (5)  The  imposition  of  hands,  in  the  case  of 
deacons  and  presbyters,  becomes  detached  from  the  Prayer,  and  in  the 
case  of  priests  a  second  imposition,  with  Accipe  Spiritum  sanctum :  quorum 
(S.  Jo.  xx  23)  is  added  at  some  point  in  the  rite.1  (6)  The  Litany  is 
shifted  from  its  original  connexions,  in  the  Ordination  of  deacons  and 
priests ;  and  Veni  Creator  is  introduced  into  that  of  presbyters  and 
bishops.  (7)  The  whole  series  of  ordinations,  from  that  of  doorkeepers  up 
to  that  of  presbyters,  is  dovetailed  into  the  Mass  of  Catechumens  of  the 
Ember  vigil-mass,  the  seven  orders  being  conferred  one  before  each  of  the 
five  Lessons  and  before  and  after  the  Gospel.  Among  the  consequences 
of  some  of  these  developments,  perhaps  the  most  significant  was  this,  that 
differences  of  opinion,  some  of  them  certainly  mistaken,  emerged  as 
to  what  is  the  essential  act  of  Ordination ;  differences  and  mistakes 
which  were  not  corrected  till  the  i7th  cent.2;  and  in  fact  they  persisted 
till  the  igth  cent.,  and  perhaps  have  not  wholly  vanished  even  now. 

(2)  Martin  Bucer  (Butzer),  driven  from  Strassburg  by  the  enforcement 
of  the  Interim  of  Augsburg  (i548),3  at  Cranmer's  invitation4  came  to 
England,  April  1549.  He  was  made  Regius  Professor  of  Divinity  at 
Cambridge,  and  assumed  his  duties  there  at  the  beginning  of  the 
academical  year.  Meanwhile  he  was  Cranmer's  guest  for  three  months  ; 
and  no  doubt  it  was  during  these  months  that  he  wrote  the  De  ordinatione 
legitima?  in  view  of  the  project  of  English  forms  of  Ordination,  which 
must  have  been  already  in  Cranmer's  mind. 


1  For  the  various  positions   in  the  rite  in  which  this  formula   is   found, 
see  H.  A.  Wilson  The  Pontifical  of  Magdalen  College,  H.  B.  S.  1910,  p.  267. 

2  By  the  Oratorian,  Jean  Morin,  in  Commentarius  de  sacris  Ecclesice  Ordina- 
tionibus  Paris  1655. 

3  Kidd  Documents  pp.  358  sqq. 

4  Cranmer  Miscellaneous   writings,    ed.    Parker     Soc.,    p.    423 ; 
Strype  Memorials  of  Cranmer  ii  13. 

5  Bucer  Scripta  Anglicana,  Basel  1577,  pp.  238  sqq. 


BUCER  DE  ORDINATIONS  LEG1TJMA          cxxxiii 

The  tract  consists  of  (a)  an  essay  on  the  sacred  ministry  and  the 
need  and  method  of  scrutinising  ordinands ;  and  (b)  a  rite  of  Ordina 
tion.  The  preliminary  enquiries  to  be  made  about  the  ordinands, 
and  the  examination  of  the  ordinands  themselves,  comprised  under  32 
heads,  are  characteristically  detailed  and  inquisitorial,  while  at  the  end 
the  ordinands  are  required  to  swear  that  they  have  answered  truly ;  and 
the  features  of  the  rite  are  characteristically  prolix.  The  examination 
over,  on  the  Sunday  preceding  that  of  the  Ordination,  the  names  of  the 
ordinands  are  announced  in  church.  Since  in  Bucer's  conception  the  dis 
tinction  between  the  'three  orders  of  presbyters'  is  a  vague  one,  he  pro* 
vides  only  a  single  form,  while  suggesting  that  things  '  be  done  somewhat 
more  at  length  and  more  weightily  '  (aliquanto pluribus  et  grauius)  in  the 
case  of  bishops,  and  that  a  like  distinction  be  made  between  the  ordina 
tions  of  'presbyters  of  the  second  and  of  those  of  the  third  order.'1  After 
a  sermon  to  the  people  on  the  sacred  ministry,  setting  forth  in  what  sort 
the  Lord  instituted  it,  in  what  honour  He  would  have  it  held,  and  what  He 
would  confer  on  His  people  through  it,  and  the  duties  of  the  minister  to 
the  Church,  and  commending  the  ordinands  to  the  prayers  of  the  Church  ; 
and  after  the  *  common  prayers '  which  customarily  follow  the  sermon  ; 
the  whole  congregation  is  to  sing  the  Veni  sancte  Spiritus  2 ;  and  Pss.  xl, 
cxxxii,  cxxxv,  the  Epistle  (Acts  xx  17-35  or  i  Tim.  iii)  and  the  Gospel 
(S.  Mat.  xxviii  18-20,  S.  Jo.  x  1-16,  or  S.  Jo.  xx  19-23)  follow.  The  chief 
ordainer  then  delivers  a  long  allocution  to  the  ordinands  and  scrutinises 
them  once  more  in  a  series  of  nine  questions ;  and  having  presented  them 
to  the  people  and  challenged  objections,  he  bids  the  people  pray  for  them 
in  silence.  The  silent  space  over,  he  says  Dominus  vobiscum,  Oremus  and 
a  long  prayer  ;  which  ended,  he  and  all  the  presbyters  impose  hands  on  the 
kneeling  ordinands,  while  he  says  Manus  Dei  omnipotentis,  Patris,  Filij^  6>° 
Spiritus  sancti  sit  super  vos,  protegat  &  gubernet  vos,  vt  eatis,  &  fructum 
vestro  ministerio  quamplurimum  afferatis,  isque  maneat  in  vitam  ceternam 
[S.  Jo.  xv  1 6].  Amen.  The  Mass  is  resumed  with  the  Creed,  and  the 
newly  ordained  remain  where  hands  were  laid  on  them  till  they  have 
communicated. 

These  were  the  materials  out  of  which  the  English  rite 
was  compiled  ;  and  the  result  may  perhaps  be  sufficiently 
described  as  follows. 

(i)  The  Minor  Orders  and  the  Subdiaconate,  and  with 
them  the  rites  of  their  ordination,  are  abolished  by  a  stroke 
of  the  pen,  without  even  so  much  as  the  authority  of  the 
Act  of  Parliament,  which  provided  for  '  a  form  and  manner  of 
making  and  consecrating  of  archbishops,  bishops,  priests, 
deacons,  and  other  ministers  of  the  Church.' 

1  Bucer  Scripta  Anglicana,  Basel  1577,  p.  259.  2  Cp.  p.  xxxiv  above. 


cxxxiv  THE  ENGLISH  ORDINATIONS 

(2)  For  the  three  highest  of  the  Sacred  Orders,  the  frame 
work  and  arrangement  of  the  traditional  rite  is  preserved, 
with  some  shifting  of  individual  features  ;  in  particular,  of 
the  presentations  and  of  the  Litany  in  the  ordination  of 
deacons    and   presbyters,   and   of    Veni  creator  and   Accipe 
Spiritum  sanctum  in  that  of  presbyters  ;    while  in  the  con 
secration  of  bishops,  the  scrutiny  and  the  oath  of  obedience 
are  separated  and  differently  placed,  the  imposition  of  hands 
and  of  the  Gospels,  for  which  latter  the  Bible  is  substituted, 
is  placed  after  the  consecratory  prayer,  and  the  ceremony  as 
a  whole  is  postponed  till  after  the  Gospel. 

The  standard  of  comparison  in  respect  of  order  of  parts  here  adopted 
is  the  rite  of  the  Salisbury  Pontifical  printed  by  Maskell  (Mon.  rit.  ii 
pp.  164  sqq.).  But  (i)  in  the  existing  English  Pontificals  of  the  1 2th 
cent.,  two  of  which  (those  of  Magd.  Coll.  Oxford  and  Trinity  Coll. 
Dublin)  are  Canterbury  books  and  may  represent  the  traditional  use  of 
the  archbishops  with  which  Cranmer  was  familiar,  the  presentation  of  all 
orders  at  once,  with  the  Litany  immediately  following,  is  placed  after  the 
Introit  (H.  A.  Wilson  The  Pontifical  of  Magdalen  College^.  58  sq.,  264)  ; 
(2)  in  some  of  the  same  Pontificals  marginal  notes  in  later  hands  direct 
the  addition  of  Accipe  Spiritum  sanctum  and  Veni  creator  at  some  point  or 
points  of  the  rite,  the  Magd.  Coll.  book  placing  both,  the  Dublin  book 
Veni  creator,  immediately  after  the  Gospel  (ibid.  p.  267).  Thus  the  change, 
relatively  to  the  order  of  the  Canterbury  books,  of  the  position  of  the 
presentation  and  the  Litany  in  the  ordination  of  deacons,  and  in  that  of 
both  deacons  and  priests  when  both  are  ordained  together  (as  is  implied 
in  the  rubric  on  p.  996),  is  very  slight;  while  the  position  of  Veni  creator 
is  unchanged. 

(3)  Whereas  hitherto  deacons  and  priests  had  been  ordained 
in  the  course  of  the  Mass  of  the  Ember  vigil,  which  had 
nothing  to  do  with  ordinations,  the  Mass  is  now  in  each  case 
so  far  proper  that  it  has  its  own  Epistle  and  Gospel,  and  that 
of  the  ordination  of  priests  its  own  Introit  as  well. 

(4)  The  ordination  of  deacons  and  priests  is  in  one  respect 
assimilated  to  the  consecration  of  bishops.     Hitherto  there 
had  been  no  public  scrutiny  except  in  the  case  of  bishops  : 
now,  those  to  be  ordained  deacons  or  presbyters  are  examined 
before  the  Church  ;   the  deacons  with  seven  questions  (4  of 
them   derived    from    Bucer,    one   adapted    from   traditional 
material)  ;  the  priests  in  8  questions,  all  from  Bucer. 


THE  ENGLISH  ORDINATIONS  cxxxv 

On  the  examination  of  bishops,  see  the  so-called  Canons  of  the  4th 
Council  of  Carthage,  or  Statuta  antiqua  ecclesiae,  in  fact  a  collection  of 
canons  of  the  early  6th  cent,  belonging  to  the  province  of  Aries  (Bruns 
Canones  i  p.  140 :  Duchesne  Origines  du  culte  p.  337).  There  are 
sporadic  instances  of  a  short  public  scrutiny  of  presbyters :  Martene  de 
ant.  Eccl.  rit.  I  viii  n  ordines  vii  (Compiegne),  viii  (Salzburg),  xiii 
(Cambrai),  xvi  (Mainz). 

(5)  While,  among  the  universally  observed  elements  of 
the  Latin  rite,  there  was  no  didactic  element,  except  what 
was  implied  in  the  scrutiny  of  bishops,  individual  Pontificals 
might  and  did  contain  charges  to  be  delivered  to  candidates 
for  each   order,  varying  from  a  summary  Diaconum  oportet 
(p.  950),  to  allocutions  of  considerable  length.     In  the  Eng 
lish  rite  this  element  is  made  normal  and  constant  at  the 
ordination  of  priests,  in  the  allocution  preceding  the  scrutiny. 
This  allocution,  which  repeats  in  part  what  has  already  been 
provided  for  in  the  sermon,  reproduces  all  but  a  few  lines  of 
that  of  Bucer,  with  the  effect  that  the  teaching-office  and  the 
personal  life  of  the  priest  are  didactically  emphasised  as  they 
had  not  been  in  the  Latin  rite. 

See  the  Admonitions  to  the  several  orders  in  Martene  de  ant.  Eccl.  rit. 
I  viii  8  §  3,  and  Maskell  Mon.  rit.  ii  pp.  171  sqq.  notes,  and  pp.  237  sqq. 
With  the  emphasis  on  personal  life  and  teaching-office,  cp.  the  ancient 
treatises  on  the  priesthood:  S.  Greg.  Naz.  Apol.  de  Fuga;  S.  Chrys. 
de  Sacerdotio ;  S.  Jer.  Ep.  Hi  ad  Nepotianum  :  S.  Greg.  M.  Liber  regulae 
pastoralis. 

(6)  The  traditional  multiplied  and  diffused  acts  of  consec 
ration  are  avoided,  and  the  whole  action  is  concentrated  on 
a  central  imposition  of  hands  and  its  accompanying  formula. 
Here  no  doubt  Cranmer  and  the  rest  were  so  far  misled  by 
current  theory  as  to  suppose  the  imperative  formula  to  be 
the  proper  '  form  '  of   Ordination,  with  the  result  that  in 
the  ordination  of  deacons  they  omitted  the  prayer  originally 
accompanying  the  imposition  of  hands  (only  using  parts  of 
it  in  the  post-communion  collect)  ;  and  in  the  ordination 
of  presbyters  they  adopted  a  thanksgiving,  including  some 
general  petitions,  derived  so  far  as  it  goes  from  Bucer,  but 
omitting  Bucer's  most  relevant  clauses  :  in  this  perhaps  again 
misled  by  the  opening  of  the  current  Latin  form  (Sursum 


cxxxvi  THE  ENGLISH  ORDINATIONS 

cor  da,  Vere  dignum)  so  far  as  to  suppose  that  the  traditional 
prayer  was  only  a  eucharistic  adjunct  to  the  act  of  ordination. 
This  is  avoided  in  the  consecration  of  bishops,  where,  after 
Bucer's  introduction,  the  text  of  the  prayer  reproduces  part 
of  the  ancient  prayer.  In  Bucer's  rite  also  the  central  action 
is  concentrated  on  the  imposition  of  hands  with  an  imperative 
formula  ;  but  here,  at  the  decisive  point,  the  English  rite 
deserts  Bucer's  formula  and  retains  the  traditional  and 
scriptural  Accipe  Spiritum  sanctum. 

(7)  The  unction  of  presbyters  and  bishops,  and  the  formal 
vesting  of  all  three  orders  is  abolished,  and  the  staff  alone 
among  his  insignia  is  delivered  to  the  bishop. 

The  imposition  of  the  Bible  on  the  head  of  the  bishop,  after  the 
imposition  of  hands,  is  no  doubt  meant  to  represent  both  the  imposition 
and  the  tradition  of  the  Gospel. 

The  table  on  the  following  pages  exhibits  the  relation  of  the  English 
Ordinations  of  Deacons  and  Priests  to  those  of  the  Pontifical  and  to 
Bucer's  rite.  Details  which  were  afterwards  omitted  are  enclosed  in  [  ]. 

NOTES.  P.  930.  The  Mass  of  Ember  Saturdays  is  in  origin  that  of 
the  vigil,  anticipated  for  convenience'  sake,  and  really  belongs  to  Sunday. 
The  last  paragraph  therefore  essentially  only  restores  the  ancient  usage. 
P.  932  sqq.  On  the  position  of  the  Presentation  and  the  Litany,  see 
p.  cxxxiv  above.  P.  934  sqq.  In  the  Pontifical,  only  the  Litany  itself  is 
said  (without  Pater  noster  and  the  prayers  following)  and  that  in  a  some 
what  shorter  form  than  at  Rogations.  In  the  first  col.  the  sources  here 
enclosed  in  [  ]  were  omitted  on  pp.  174  sqq.  (see  pp.  Ixv  sqq.).  No 
doubt  the  whole  English  Rogation  is  said  (unfortunately  enough)  to 
avoid  the  duplication  which  would  otherwise  be  required  by  Injunction 
24  of  1547  (pp.  Ixii  sq.).  P.  944  col.  i :  from  the  consummatio  (Maskell 
M.R.  ii  p.  208).  P.  946.  'thine  misters,'  for  'the  ministers,'  is 
so  printed  in  the  copy  here  followed.  P.  950.  Itaqut  quarendum  est  is 
from  the  preliminary  examination  of  the  ordinand  (Scripta  Anglicana  p. 
248),  not  from  the  scrutiny  at  the  time  of  ordination.  Add  to  it  the  further 
question  in  the  same  examination  '  An  pro  canonicis  libris  habeat  quos 
vetus  ecclesia  canonicos  agnovit  iuxta  canonem  Irenaei,  Origenis,  Eusebii 
&  Hieronymi';  which,  along  with  the  'omnibus'  of  the  former  question, 
perhaps  throws  light  on  the  real  meaning  of  the  question.  P.  954. 
Abundet  ineis:  from  Vere  dignum  .  .  .  honorum  dator  (Maskell  ii  p.  208), 
the  central  prayer  of  consecration  of  deacons.  P.  974.  On  this  position 
of  Veni  creator  see  above  p.  cxxxiv.  P.  976.  The  stanza  Da  gaudiorum 
is  not  in  the  texts  of  the  Sarum  Missal  (ed.  Dickinson  c.  577)  or  Breviary 
(ed.  Wordsworth  and  Procter  c.  mviii),  but  it  is  found  in  other  texts  (see 


ORDINATIONS  OF  DEACONS  AND  PRIESTS     cxxxvii 


PONTIFICAL 
Maskell  M.K.  ii 
pp,  165  sqq. 

1550  :  DEACONS 
(pp.  932  sqq.) 

1550:  PRIESTS 
(pp.  960  sqq.) 

BUCER 
(Scr.  Ang.  pp.  238sqq.  ] 

Sermon. 

Sermon. 

Sermon. 

Sermon. 

Presentation. 

LITANY 

Ven  i  sa  n  cte  Spiritus. 

Collect. 

OFFICIUM  (de  die). 

[INTROIT  (of  day)]. 

[INTROIT     (Ps.     Xl, 

Pss.       xl,      cxxxii, 

cxxxii,  or  cxxxv)]. 

cxxxv. 

Lord  have  mercy. 

Lord  have  mercy. 

Glory  be  to  God  on 

Glory  be  to  God  on 

high. 

high. 

ORATIO  I  (de  die). 

COLLECT  (of  day). 

COLLECT  (of  day). 

Presentation  of  ordi- 

nands. 

Ordination    of  minor 

orders     and     sub- 

deacons,  one  before 

each  lesson. 

EPISTOLA  (de  die). 

EPISTLE  (proper). 

EPISTLE  (proper). 

EPISTLE  (proper). 

Tractus  (de  die). 

LlTANIA. 

Oath  of  supremacy. 

Diaconum  oportet. 

Examination. 

IMPOSITION  OF  BISH 

IMPOSITION  OF  BISH 

OP'S  HAND  with 

OP'S  HANDS  with 

Accipe  Spiritum  s. 

Take  thou  authority. 

Ortmus  diltctissimi 

Oremus.  Flectamus 

(silent  prayers) 

Levate 

Exaudi  Domine. 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Sursum  corda 

Gratias  agamus 

Vere  dignum  .  .  hon- 

orum  dator  .  . 

Tradition  of  Stole  : 

In  nomine    .    .    .    ac- 

cipe  stolam. 

Pax  tecum. 

Tradition  of  Gospels  : 

Tradition  of  N.T. 

In  nomine   .    .    accipe 

Take  thou  authority 

potestatem  legendi. 

to  read. 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Oremus 

Domine  sancte  pater. 

Tradition  of  Dalmatic  : 

A  deacon  [puts  on 

Jnduat  te  dominus. 

a      tunicle      and] 

Rt  sit  in  corde 
EVANGELIUM  (de  die). 

reads  the 
GOSPEL  (proper). 

GOSPEL  (proper). 

GOSPEL  (proper). 

Come  holy  ghost. 

Presentation. 

LITANY 

Collect. 

Oath  of  supremacy. 

CXXXV111 


ORDINATION  OF  PRIESTS 


PONTIFICAL 

1550:  DEACONS 

1550  :  PRIESTS 

BUCER 

Sacerdotem  oportet. 

Allocution 

Allocution 

Examination. 

Examination. 

IMPOSITION  OF  HANDS 

OF       BISHOP       AND 

PRESBYTERS       (in 

silence). 

Oremus  dilectissimi 

Bidding 

Or  emus.  Flectamus 

(silent  prayer). 

(silent  prayer). 

Exaudi  nos. 

Dominus  vodiscum 

The  Lorde  be  with  yon 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Sursum  corda 

Gratias  agamus 
Vere  dignum  .  .   . 
honorum  dator.  .  . 

Let  us  praie 
Almightie  god  and 
heauenly  father. 

Oremus 
Deus        omnipotens 
pater  Domini. 

IMPOSITION         OF 

IMPOSITION         OF 

HANDS  OF  BISHOP 

HANDS  OF  CHIEF 

AND  PRESBYTERS 

ORDAINER       AND 

PRESBYTERS 

Receaue     the     holy 

Man-us      Dei     om- 

Gkoste,  whose. 

nii>otentis. 

Disposition  of  Stole  : 

Accipe  iugum 

Pax  tecum. 

Tradition  of  Chasuble. 

Accipe  -vest  em. 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Oremus 

Deus  sanctificationum. 

Veni  creator. 

Blessing  and  unction 

of  hands  : 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Oremus 

Benedic  .  .  hasmanu^ 

Consecrare  .  .  tnanus 

istas. 

Tradition     of     Paten 

Tradition    of  Bible 

and  Chalice  : 

[and  Chalice]  : 

Accipe      potestatem 

Take  thou  authority 

qfferendi. 

to   preach  .  .  and 

to  minister  the. 

CREED. 

CREED 

CREED. 

OFFERTORY  to  COM 

OFFERTORY  to  COM 

OFFERTORY  to  COM 

Continuation         to 

MUNION. 

MUNION. 

MUNION. 

COMMUNION. 

IMPOSITION  OF  BISH 

OP'S  HANDS  : 

Accipe        Spirit  um 

sanctum  :  quoriim. 

ClothingwithChasuble. 

Kiss  and 

Pax  domini. 

Orate  pro  me. 

Benedictio  Dei. 

POSTCOMMUNIO. 

Almightie  and  euerl. 

Almightie  and  euerl. 

A  i  might  ie  God,  geuer 

Most  mercifull  Fa 

Prayer. 

ther. 

Benedicamus  Domino. 

Blessing. 

Blessing. 

Blessing. 

CONSECRATION  OF  BISHOPS  cxxxix 

Julian  Diet,  of  Hymnology  p.  1 207),  among  them  in  that  of  a  Christ  Church, 
Canterbury,  Psalter  and  Hymnal  (Bodl.  MS  Ashmole  1525  f.  149). 
P.  992.  On  the  omission  of  Bucer's  clauses  in  this  prayer  ('et  precamur 
vt  sanctum  Spiritum  tuum  in  nomine  filij  tui  opulente  in  hos  ipsos  tuos 
ministros  effundas,  eosque  semper  eos  doceas  et  gubernes,  quo  tuo  populo 
gregi  boni  pastoris  nostri  filij  tui  ministerium  suum  et  fideliter  et  vtiliter 
praestent :  ac  eo  quam  plurimos  glorise  tuse  quotidie  adducant ')  see  above 
p.  cxxxv.  With  Bucer's  prayer  cp.  that  of  the  Cassel  Kirchenordnung  of 
1539  (Richter  i  p.  305),  which  is  either  the  nucleus  of  Bucer's,  or  an 
abbreviation  of  it,  unless  both  depend  upon  a  common  original.  The 
rubric  Benedicente  eos  precedes  Oremus  dikctissimi  (pp.  cxxxviii,  988). 
P.  994.  On  Accipe  Spiritum  sanctum :  quorum,  which  was  gradually 
adopted  in  Pontificals  from  the  i2th  or  i3th  cent,  onwards,  and  came  to 
be  regarded  as  the  *  form '  of  presbyteral  ordination,  see  Morin  de 
Ordinationibus  III  vii  6;  Martene  de  ant.  Ecd.  rit.  I  viii  9  §§  n  sq. ; 
Denney  and  Lacey  de  Hierarchia  anglicana  §§  101  sqq.  ;  Encheirid.  Colon. 
f.  cxcviii ;  Cone.  Trident,  sess.  xxiii  can.  4.  On  its  several  positions  in  the 
rite,  see  above  pp.  cxxxii,  cxxxiv;  it  most  commonly  occurs,  with  the  imposi 
tion  of  the  hands  of  the  bishop  alone,  before  the  post-communion  (Wilson 
Pontifical  of  Magd.  Coll.  p.  267  ;  Maskell  Mon.  rit.  ii  p.  231).  With  the 
formula  Take  thou  aucthoritie  cp.  the  Brandenburg  Kirchenordnung 
(Richter  i  p.  332)  '  Man  sol  auch  die  misbreuch  vnterlassen,  als  furnem- 
lich  da  gesagt  wird  .  .  .  Accipe  potestatem  offerendi  sacrifidum  pro  uiuis 
et  defunctis,  Das  dem  haubdartickel  unserer  Christl.  Religion  entgegen, 
An  des  stad  sol  jnen  befohlen  werden,  Das  h.  Euangelium  zupredigen, 
vnd  die  hochw.  Sacramenta  nach  Christi  einsetzung  zureichen  vnd 
auszuteilen.'  With  'to  heare  and  receaue'  in  the  collect  cp.  i  Thess. 

iii3- 

P.  998  sqq.  The  table  on  the  following  pages  exhibits  the  English 
Consecration  of  Bishops,  compared  with  the  rite  of  the  Gelasianum  and 
Ordo  Romanus  viii,  a  medieval  English  Pontifical,  and  Bucer's  rite  of 
ordination.  In  col.  i,  [  ]  indicate  the  successive  features  of  the  Mass, 
inserted,  in  accordance  with  Ordo  Rom.  viii,  into  the  Gelasian  scheme ; 
in  col.  3,  features  altered  or  rejected  later. 

P.  998.  Cantor  incipiat  should  have  &  in  the  margin,  since  the  ex 
amination  of  the  elect  (p.  1006  sqq.)  in  the  Pontifical  precedes  the  Introit. 
In  Maskell's  Pontifical  (Mon.  rit.  ii  pp.  268  sqq.)  the  Mass  is  that  of  the 
day,  with  the  collect  Adesto  supplicationibus  added  to  that  of  the  day  ;  but  in 
the  Magd.  Coll.  Pontifical  (Canterbury)  the  collect  is  Adesto  supplicationi 
bus,  the  Ep.  i  Tim.  iii  (as  here),  and  the  gradual  Immola  deo  (Wilson  p.  73). 
P.  1006.  That  it  may  please  thee :  the  Magd.  Coll.  Pontifical  has  'Ut 
fratrem  nostrum  N.  electum  pontificem  in  vera  religione  conseruare 
digneris'  (Wilson  p.  73).  P.  1012.  The  detailed  examination  of  the 
faith  of  the  elect,  after  Hec  omnia,  is  omitted.  P.  1012.  Sint  speciosi : 
from  the  prayer  Hoc  domine  following  the  unction  (Maskell  ii  p.  279). 


cxl 


CONSECRATION  OF  BISHOPS 


GELASIANUM 
(I  xclx) 

PONTIFICAL 
(MaskellJl/.tf.  ii  pp. 
254  sqq.) 

1550 
(pp.  998  sqq.) 

BUCER 
(Scr.  A  ng.pp.  238  sqq.  ) 

Sermon. 

Veni  sancte  Spiritus. 

Examination  with 

Oath  of  Obedience. 

[ANTIPH.ADlNTROIT/ 

OFFICIUM  (de  die). 

[INTROIT      (Ps.       xl, 

Pss.  xl,  cxxxii,  cxxxv. 

cxxxii,  or  cxxxv)]. 

Kyrie  e  lei  son. 

Lord  have  mercy. 

[Gloria  in  txcelsis\. 

Gloria  in  excelsis. 

Glory  be  to  God  on  high. 

[ORATIO]. 

ORATIONES. 

COLLECT  (of  day). 

[EPISTOLA]. 

EPISTOLA  (de  die). 

EPISTLE  (proper). 

EPISTLE  (proper). 

[GRADUALE]. 

GRADUALE  (de  die). 

[ALLELUIA]. 

ALLELUIA  (de  die). 

GOSPEL  (proper). 

GOSPEL  (proper). 

Vesting  of  elect. 

Presentation. 

King's  Mandate. 

Oath  of  Supremacy 

Oath  of  Obedience. 

Episcopum  oportet. 

Or  emus  dilectissimi 

Orem  us  dilectissimi 

Brethren  it  is  written 

[LlTANIA]. 

LlTANIA. 

LITANY 

Collect. 

Allocution. 

Examination. 

Examination. 

IMPOSITION  OF  THE 

GOSPELS  AND  OF 

THE  HANDS   of  the 

Metropolitan     and 

the  Bishops,  during 

Ven  i  crea  tor  Spiriius 
and 

Come  holy  Ghost. 

Orem  us 

Propitiare  domine. 

Propitiare  domine. 

Domin  its  vobiscum 
Sursum  corda 

The  Lorde  be  "with  you 

Dominus  vobiscum 

Gratias  agamus 
Vere  dignum  et  .   .  . 

Let  vs  praie 

Orem  us 

Deus  honorum  .   .  . 

honor  omnium  ,  .  . 

Almightie   God  and 

Deus  omnipotens,pa- 

fluore  sane  ti  fie  a. 

rare  sanctifica. 

1         ... 

er     omini  .  .   . 

Unction  of  the  Head 

with  oil  and  chrism: 

Unguatur  &  consecr. 

Pax  tibi 

Hoc  domine  copiose. 

Hoc  domine  copiose 

sint  speciosi  munere 
tuo    

sint  speciosi  munere 

that  he  may  evermore 

tempore  necessario    . 

tempore  opportune  .  . 

in  due  season   .... 

Per. 

Perdominum  nostrum 

through   lesu   Christ 

lesum  Christum,  fili- 

our  Lord  who  .... 

um  iuum  qui    .  .  . 

Pater  sancte  omnip. 

Spiritus  s.  septiform. 

Ant.    Unguentum  in 

capite.     Ecce  quam. 

Gloria. 

Unction  of  the  Head 

with  chrism  : 

Unguatur  et  cons. 

CONSECRATION  OF  BISHOPS 


cxli 


GELASIANUM 

PONTIFICAL 

155° 

BUCER 

Unction  of  Hands  : 

Unguantur  manus 

Deus  et  pater 

Immensam  clement. 

IMPOSITION  OF  THE 

IMPOSITION  OF  THE 

HANDS  of  the  Me 

HANDS  of  the  or- 

tropolitan  and  the 

dainer    and    the 

Bishops  : 
Take  the  holy  Ghost. 
[IMPOSITION]  OF  THE 

presbyters  : 
Manus  Dei  omnipot. 

BIBLE  : 

Geue  hede  vnto  read 

ing. 

Blessing  of  Staff: 
Sustentator  human. 

Tradition  of  Staff  : 

[Tradition  of  Staff:] 

Accipe  baculum. 

Be  to  the  flocke. 

Blessing  of  Ring: 

Creator  et  conserv. 

Tradition  of  Ring  : 

Accipe  annulum. 

Blessing  of  Mitre  : 

Deus  cuius  provid. 

Tradition  of  Mitre  : 

Deus  qui  mitrae. 

Tradition  of  Gospels  : 
Accipe  euangelium. 

Pax  tibi. 

[EVANGELIUM] 

EvANGELiUM(dedie). 

[Orcmus    to    POST- 

Credo  to   POSTCOM- 

CREED  to  THANKS 

CREED     to     COM 

COMMUNIO]. 

MUNIO. 

GIVING. 

MUNION. 

Moste  merciful  Father. 

Prayer. 

[/&,  missa  esf\. 

Ite,  missa  est. 

Blessing. 

Blessing. 

P.  1014.  Et  ordinatore  should  have  j$  in  the  margin  :  it  occurs  between 
the  Litany  and  Veni  creator  (Maskell  ii  p.  272).  On  Accipe  Spiritum 
sanctum  as  the  form  of  episcopal  consecration  see  J.  Morin  de  sacris 
Ordinationibus  III  ii  2  :  none  of  the  English  Pontificals  has  it  except 
Lacey's  (Barnes  Liber  pontificate  of  Edm.  Lacey,  bishop  of  Exeter ;  p. 
95).  2  Tim.  i  6,  7,  which  here  determines  the  intention  of  'Take  the 
holy  ghost,'  was  generally  interpreted  as  referring  to  S.  Timothy's  conse 
cration  to  the  episcopate  :  e.g.  Glossa  ordinaria^  S.  Thomas  Aq.,  Nicholas 
of  Lyra,  Erasmus,  in  loc.  Et  duo  cpiscopi :  viz.  immediately  after  the 
Litany.  The  Scriptural  citations  on  this  page  are  perhaps  influenced 
by  the  Great  Bible,  but  none  of  them  follows  it  exactly.  P.  I0l6.  The 
final  collect  follows  the  sense  and  order  of  the  Inthronization  prayer,  but 
derives  its  wording  from  i  and  2  Tim.  (not  according  to  the  Great  Bible). 
Cp.Journ.  of  Theol.  Studies  xiii  p.  561. 


cxlii  RECEPTION  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  1549 

X 

I.  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer  was  variously  received, 
(i)  It  is  possible,  and  even  likely,  that  it  was  widely  accepted 
as  satisfactory  on  its  merits,  or  at  least  silently  acquiesced  in. 
But  what  is  more  apparent  is  (2)  that,  on  the  one  hand,  many 
who  welcomed  it  regarded  it  with  only  a  relative  satisfaction, 
as  an  instalment,  and  hoped  for  more  drastic  measures  to 
follow  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  many  disliked  it,  sub 
mitted  to  it  only  with  open  reluctance,  and  endeavoured 
to  make  the  best  of  it  ;  while  (3)  there  were  those  on  both 
sides  who  deplored  and  rejected  it,  from  opposite  points  of 
view.  The  middle  groups  found  their  most  notable  repre 
sentatives,  for  the  present  purpose,  in  Martin  Bucer,  on  the 
one  side,  and  Stephen  Gardiner,  bishop  of  Winchester,  on  the 
other. 

(i)  On  June  4  1549  the  Protector  Somerset  writes  to  Reg.  Pole 
that . '  a  form  and  rite  of  service '  has  been  '  allowed,  set  forth  and  estab 
lished  by  act  and  statute,  and  so  published  and  divulged  to  so  great  a 
quiet  as  ever  was  in  England  and  as  gladly  received  of  all  parts ' 
(Pocock  Troubles  connected  with  the  Prayer  Book  of  1549^  Camden  Soc., 
p.  x) ;  and  on  the  next  day,  Dryander  (the  Spaniard  Francisco  Enzinas, 
71552)  writes  from  Cambridge  to  Heinr.  Bullinger  at  Strassburg,  'A 
book  has  now  been  published  a  month  or  two  back,  which  the  English 
churches  received  with  the  greatest  satisfaction'  (Original  Letter s> 
Parker  Soc.,  p.  350) ;  but  all  this  is  before  the  book  came  into  use, 
and  both  the  writers  are  interested  to  make  the  best  of  the  situation. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  state  of  things  revealed  by  the  second  Act  of 
Uniformity  (p.  9  below)  presupposes  the  tyranny  and  violence  which 
followed  the  fall  of  Somerset.  (2)  For  relative  approval,  combined  with 
criticism,  see  Original  Letters  pp.  266,  351,  535  sq.,  635.  But  the 
tract  in  which  Martin  Bucer  represents  this  attitude,  while  it  is  the 
only  detailed  estimate  which  survives,  is  also  notable  for  its  keen 
appreciation  of  the  merits  of  the  book  and  for  the  ability  and  modera 
tion  and  discrimination  of  its  criticism.  Censura  Martini  Buceri  super 
libra  sacrorutn,  sev  ordinationis  Ecclesiae  atque  ministerii  ecclesiastici  in 
regno  Anglice.  (Bucer  Scripta  anglicana  Basel  1577,  p.  456  sqq.)  was 
written  in  response  to  a  request  for  his  judgment  on  the  book  and  was 
presented  to  Tho.  Goodrich,  bishop  of  Ely  (1534-1554),  Jan.  5  1550-1  : 
(in  the  print  it  is  described  as  addressed  to  Cranmer ;  on  the  facts  see 
Gasquet  and  Bishop,  p.  288  note1).  In  a  summary,  and  apart  from 


BUCER'S  CENSURA  cxliii 

the  argument  and  exposition,  it  is  impossible  to  do  any  justice  to 
Bucer's  criticisms;  and  the  following  attempt  barely  to  state  and  to 
classify  them  must  suffice.  (Cp.  the  summary  in  Procter  and  Frere  pp. 
73  sqq.) 

(a)  The  most  important  of  them — he  would  extend  the  objection  to 
the  benediction  of  things  to  the  sacraments  and  would  eliminate  the  con 
ception  of  'consecration'  from  the  Mass  itself:  accordingly  he  objects  to 
the  direction  that  only  *  so  much  bread  and  wine '  be  prepared  at  the 
offertory  'as  shall  suffice  for  the'  communicants  (p.  662  below),  and 
he  would  abolish  the  invocation  and  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  the  acts 
accompanying  the  recital  of  the  Institution1  (p.  692);  and  in  Baptism, 
the  hallowing  of  the  water  (p.  738),  and  with  it  the  clause  '&  by  the 
baptisme  ...  of  sinne'  in  the  first  prayer  of  the  Order  of  Baptism 
(pp.  726  sq.):  (b)  he  would  abolish  the  exorcism  at  Baptism  (p.  730) 
and  proposes  a  prayer  to  take  its  place ;  and  unctions,  both  the  chrism 
of  Baptism  (p.  742)  and  the  oil  of  the  sick  (p.  834) :  (c)  he  deprecates 
pictorial  ceremonies;  the  mass-vestments  (p.  638)  and  the  expressive 
gestures  allowed  (p.  926) ;  beginning  the  baptismal  rite  at  the  church- 
door  (p.  726),  the  chrysom  (p.  742)  and  consequently  the  returning  of 
it  at  Churching  (p.  884) :  (d)  at  the  same  time  his  instinct  for  verbal 
didacticism  appears  in  his  desire  for  further  authorised  Homilies;  for 
the  administration  of  Baptism,  not  in  Divine  Service  (p.  726),  but 
between  the  sermon  and  the  communion,  when  most  people  are  pre 
sent;  for  an  enlargement  of  the  Catechism  and  extended  catechising 
(p.  796);  for  the  use  of  the  Penitential  Office  four  times  a  year,  and  not 
only  on  Ash  Wednesday,  and  for  a  series  of  maledictions  against  violators 
of  the  Decalogue  instead  of  the  existing  series  (pp.  886  sq.) ;  for  detailed 
explanations  of  the  ceremonies  retained;  and  for  a  confession  of  faith  to 
be  added  to  the  book,  setting  forth  controverted  points,  for  the  help 
of  the  clergy:  (e)  his  inquisitorial  instinct  reappears  in  his  desire  for 
new  conditions  of  Confirmation ;  and  for  more  stringent  and  compre 
hensive  inquiries  before  Ordination  :  (f)  he  rejects  a  number  of  traditional 
usages:  the  use  of  the  choir  for  Divine  Service  (p.  132);  the  exclusive 
use  of  wafer-bread  (p.  716),  the  delivery  of  the  Sacrament  into  the  mouth, 
instead  of  into  the  hand  (p.  718),  the  presence  of  non-communicants  at 
the  Mass  (p.  662),  and  the  celebration  of  two  masses  at  Christmas  and 
Easter  (pp.  216,  394);  all  prayer  for  the  dead  (pp.  690,  858  sqq.); 
and  offering  on  the  part  of  the  woman  at  Churching  (p.  884) ;  while  he 
would  limit  the  holydays  to  Sundays,  Annunciation,  Christmas,  Circum 
cision,  Epiphany,  the  Passion,  Easter,  Ascension,  Pentecost,  Visitation, 
S.  Jo.  Baptist,  SS.  Peter  and  Paul,  the  Martyrs  (i.e.  All  Saints)  and  the 
Angels;  and  if  the  commemoration  of  any  other  individual  Martyr 
or  Apostle  be  kept,  he  would  begin  it  only  after  noonday:  (g)  he 

1  Procter  and  Frere  p.  74  are  mistaken  in  saying  that  Bucer  would  abolish 
4  Who  in  the  same  night '  £c.  :  see  Censura  ix  p.  468. 


cxliv  RECEPTION  OF  THE  BOOK  OF   1549 

also   objects   to   two  new   directions :   those   relating  to  the   use   of   a 
'half-mass'  when  none  have  signified   their  intention  to  communicate 
(p.  714),  and  to  the  direction  (p.   716)  which  allows  representatives  of 
households  to  provide  substitutes  to  offer  and  communicate  for  them  : 
(h)  he  makes  certain  prosaical  criticisms :  of  the  phrase  '  the  slepe  of 
peace'  (p.  690);  of  the  reference  to  'the  ministerye  of  thy  holy  Angels' 
as  bringing  our  prayers  before  God  (p.  694  :  cp.  Apoc.  viii  3) ;  of  the 
description   of  infants  as  'coming'  to  Baptism  (p.   728);  and  of  their 
being  directly  addressed  (pp.  728,  734  sq.),  and  accordingly  he  proposes 
a   prayer  at  the  signing   with  the  cross  in  place  of  the  direct  address 
(p.  728);  and  (j)  lastly  he  would  have  the  confession  (p.  696)  and  'We 
do  not  presume '  (p.  698)  said  by  the  people  with  or  after  the  minister. 
Peter    Martyr    (Pietro     Martire    Vermigli    [1500-1562],    a    Florentine 
Augustinian  canon,  who,  suspected  of  heresy,  had  fled  from  Italy,  and 
came  to  England  by  way  of  Zurich  and  Strassburg  in  1547,  and  was 
now  Regius  Professor  of  Divinity  at  Oxford)  also  presented  a  criticism 
to   Cranmer,    on  the  basis  of  such  knowledge  of  the  book  as  he  had 
gained  from  a  partial  translation  into  Latin  made  by  Sir  Jo.  Cheke ;  but, 
on   learning   more   of  it   from   the  Censura,  he  approved  and  adopted 
Bucer's  criticisms,  and  adding  a  further  one,  objecting  to  the  reservation 
of  the  blessed  sacrament  provided  for  on  p.  842,  made  a  further  report 
to  Cranmer  (see  his  letter  to  Bucer,  Jan.  10  1550-1,  in  Strype  Memorials 
of  Cranmer  app.  Ixi :  the  criticisms  are  no  longer  extant).     The  attitude 
of  those   who   accepted  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  reluctantly,  but 
tried  to  make  the  best  of  it,  is  variously  illustrated  :  by  Edm.  Bonner, 
bishop  of  London,  who  did  not  enforce  the  new  rite  in  his  diocese,  and 
himself  'very  seldom  or  never'  officiated  at  it  in  his  cathedral  church 
(Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  i  66  sqq. ;  Foxe  Acts  and  Monuments,  ed.  Pratt,  v 
729),  till  by  order  of  the  Council  he  '  dyd  the  offes  at  Powlles  both  at 
the  processyon  and   the  comunione  dyscretly  and  sadly'  on  Aug.   18 
J549  (Grey friars'  Chronicle  p.  62);  by  those  who  continued  to  observe 
in  the  execution  of  the  new  rite  all  the  ceremonial  usages  which  were 
not  expressly   forbidden   (Bucer    Censura   pp.   472,    493    sq. :    Original 
Letters  p.  72:  Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  i   p.    65);   and,  what   is   more   im 
portant  for  the  present  purpose,  by  Stephen  Gardiner.     As  a  prisoner 
in  the  Tower  from  June  13  1548  till  the  beginning  of  the  next  reign, 
Gardiner  had  no  public  concern  with  the  book ;  but  he  was  willing  to 
acknowledge   that    he    could    in    conscience    observe   and    enforce    it 
(Foxe  vi   p.   114);  and   he  was  able  to  find   in   it  a  weapon  which  he 
could   use   in   his   controversy  with  Cranmer.     In  1549  Cranmer  pub 
lished  a  work  which   he   entitled   A   defence  of  the   true  and  catholike 
doctrine  of  the  sacrament  of  the  body  and  bloud  of  our  sauiour  Christ.^ 

1  A  Latin  version  Defensio  ver<z  et  Catholicce  Doctrines  de  Sacramento 
corporis  et  sanguinis  Chris  ti  Servatoris  nostri,  &c.  London  1553  (reprinted  at 
Emden  1557,  and  with  Writings  and  disputations  of  Thomas  Cranmer.. 


GARDINER'S  EXPLICATION  cxlv 

To  this  Gardiner  in  his  prison  wrote  in  reply  An  Explication  and 
Assertion  of  the  true  Catholick  Faith,  touching  the  most  blessed  Sacrament 
of  the  Aultar :  with  Confutation  of  a  Book  written  against  the  same, 
which  he  handed  to  Cranmer  during  his  trial  at  Lambeth  in  Dec.  1550. 
Cranmer  retorted  in  An  answer  .  .  Vnto  a  craftie  and  Sophisticall 
cauillation,  deuised  by  Stephen  Gardiner  Doctour  of  law,  late  Byshop  of 
Winchester  agaynst  the  true  and  godly  doctrine  of  the  most  holy  Sacra- 
ment,  of  the  body  and  bloud  of  our  Sauiour  IESV  CHRIST,  1551,  of  which 
the  text  is  as  discourteous  as  the  title-page.  Gardiner's  work  is  cited 
at  length  in  this  retort;  and  it  was  also  printed  at  Rouen  without 
printer's  name  in  1551.  In  the  course  of  his  reply  Gardiner  frequently 
appeals  to  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  as  expressing  or  implying  a 
doctrine  different  from  that  set  forth  by  Cranmer.  (a)  '  in  the  book  of 
common  prayer  it  is  truly  said  [below  p.  716],  in  each  part  of  the  bread 
consecrate  and  broken  to  be  Christ's  whole  body '  (  Writings  .  .  .  of  Thomas 
Cranmer  .  .  .  relative  to  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper •,  Parker  Soc., 
p.  63  :  cp.  62) ;  (b)  '  the  church  by  the  minister,  and  with  the  minister, 
prayeth  that  the  creatures  of  bread  and  wine,  set  on  the  altar  (as  the  book 
of  common  prayer  in  this  realm  hath  ordered  [p.  692]),  may  be  unto  us 
the  body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ'  (ib,  p.  83;  cp.  79) :  (c)  'this 
persuasion,'  (that  in  the  mass  we  'join'  ourselves  with  Christ,  'present 
ing  and  offering  Him ')  '  hath  been  duly  conceived,  which  is  also  in  the 
book  of  common  prayer  in  the  celebration  of  the  holy  supper  retained 
[pp.  686  sqq.],  that  it  is  very  profitable  at  that  time,  when  the  memory 
of  Christ's  death  is  solemnized  [p.  688],  to  remember  with  prayer  all 
estates  of  the  church,  and  to  recommend  them  to  God '  (ib.  p.  84) :  (d) 
'  As  touching  the  adoration  of  Christ's  flesh  in  the  sacrament  .  .  .  [it]  is 
in  my  judgement  well  set  forth  in  the  book  of  common  prayer  [p.  698], 
where  the  priest  is  ordered  to  kneel  and  make  a  prayer  in  his  own,  and 
the  name  of  all  that  shall  communicate,  confessing  therein  that  is  pre 
pared  there'  (ib.  p.  229  :  if  this  seems  a  strained  interpretation,  it  must 
be  remembered  that  for  the  priest  to  kneel  before  the  blessed  sacra 
ment  in  the  course  of  the  Mass  was  quite  unfamiliar  and  proportionately 
startling) :  (e)  two  of  Gardiner's  points,  '  They '  (the  '  papists ')  '  agree 
in  form  of  teaching  with  that  the  church  of  England  teacheth  at  this 
day,  in  the  distribution  of  the  holy  communion  [p.  700],  in  that  it  is 
there  said,  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  to  be  under  the  form  of  bread 
and  wine'  (ib.  p.  51),  and  the  'teaching'  'that  they  receive  with  their 
bodily  mouth  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ '  is  « set  forth '  'by  the  book  of 
common  prayer'  (ib.  p.  55),  are  controversially  ineffective,  since  they 

relative  to  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  Parker  Soc.,  1844)  was  made 
either  by  Jo.  Young,  afterwards  Master  of  Pembroke  Hall,  Cambridge  (Strype 
Cranmer  ii  25),  or  by  Sir  John  Cheke,  Edward  VPs  tutor  and  first  Professor  of 
Greek  at  Cambridge  (Cranmer  Writings  and  disputations  p.  xxx),  or  each  of 
them  made  a  version  of  his  own  (ibid.). 

k 


cxlvi  PULLAIN'S  LITURGIA  SACRA 

are  only  inferences  and  open  to  Cranmer's  retort  that  neither  is  explicitly 
asserted  in  the  Book.  (3)  The  attitude  of  simple  rejection  is  illustrated,  on 
the  one  hand,  by  Jo.  Hooper  (11558),  now  Somerset's  chaplain,  after 
wards  bishop  of  Gloucester,  who  wrote  (March  27  1550)  *I  am  so  much 
offended  with  that  book,  and  that  not  without  abundant  reason,  that  if  it 
be  not  corrected,  I  neither  can  nor  will  communicate  with  the  church  in 
the  administration  of  the  supper'  (Original  Letters  p.  79);  on  the  other, 
by  the  insurgents  in  Devon  and  Cornwall,  who  demanded  a  return  to 
the  situation  as  it  was  under  Henry  VIII  and  the  Six  Articles  Act  (see  their 
Articles  in  Strype  Memorials  of  Cranmer  app.  xl ;  and  cp.  Dixon  Hist, 
of  the  Ch.  of  England  iii  pp.  56  sqq.). 

2.  At  this  time  were  published  Latin  versions  of  two 
service-books  of  foreign  congregations  settled  in  England. 

(i)  The  one,  Liturgia  Sacra  seu  Ritus  Minister ii  in 
ecclesia  peregrinorum  profugorum  propter  Euangdium  Christi 
Argentinae.  Adiecta  est  ad  finem  breuis  Apologia  pro  hac 
Liturgia,  per  Valerandum  Pollanum  Flandrum  (London,  Feb. 
2  3  I55I)>  was  the  rite  of  a  company  of  Frenchmen  and 
Walloons,  who  on  the  enforcement  of  the  Interim  migrated 
from  Strassburg  in  1550  and  were  settled  by  Somerset  in  the 
abbey  buildings  of  Glastonbury,  there  to  practise  their 
religion  under  their  pastor,  Val6rand  Pullain,  as  '  Superin 
tendent,'  and  to  pursue  their  occupation  as  weavers.  During 
his  exile  from  Geneva  (1538-1541)  John  Calvin  had  been 
pastor  of  the  '  ecclesiola  gallicana,'  the  congregation  of  French 
reformed  refugees  at  S.  Nicolas  in  Strassburg  ;  and  for  the 
worship  of  his  congregation  he  had  translated  or  paraphrased 
the  German  reformed  rite  of  Strassburg  in  the  shape  into 
which  M.  Bucer  had  developed  it  since  he  became  'Superin 
tendent  '  in  1531.  For  a  short  time  Valerand  Pullain  was 
Calvin's  second  successor  in  the  charge  of  S.  Nicolas  ;  and 
the  rite  represented  by  the  Liturgia  sacra  is  practically 
identical,  both  in  structure  and  in  content,  with  what  he 
inherited  from  Calvin. 

On  the  '  ecclesiola  gallicana '  and  its  history,  see  E.  Doumergue  Jean 
Calvin,  Lausanne  1902,  ii  pp.  357  sqq.;  on  Valerand  Pullain,  a  well 
born  Walloon  of  the  neighbourhood  of  Lille,  of  an  excitable  and 
turbulent  temper,  ibid.  pp.  362  sq.  Bucer's  Strassburg  rite  is  in  Psalter 
mit  aller  Kirchenubung,  die  man  bey  der  christlichen  Gemein  zu  Strass- 


LASKI'S  FORMA  AC  RATIO  cxlvii 

burg  vnd  andersiva  pfldgt  zu  singen,  Strassburg,  W.  Kopfel,  1539  (ibid. 
p.  493  note 4) ;  of  Calvin's  rite  no  copy  of  the  original  ed.  remains,  but 
it  was  reprinted  by  his  successor,  Pierre  Brully,  as  La  many  ere  de 
faire  prieres  aux  eglises  francoyses  .  .  .  le  tout  scion  la  parolle  de  nostre 
Seigneur,  1542,  of  which  one  copy  is  extant  (ibid.  p.  489  note).  On  the 
relations  of  the  two  rites,  see  A.  Erichson  Die  Calvinische  und  die  Altstrass- 
burgische  Gottesdienstordnung  Strassburg  1894;  Doumergue  op.  cit.  pp. 
494  sqq. ;  W.  Walker  John  Calvin  ('  Heroes  of  the  Reformation ')  pp. 
222  sqq.  On  the  Glastonbury  community  and  their  rite,  see  Strype 
Mem.  of  Cranmer  ii  23  ;  Eccles.  Mem.  II  i  29,  where  an  account  of  the  rite 
is  given;  and  R.  Laurence  Bampton  Lectures  1805,  p.  199,  and  Procter 
and  Frere  pp.  86  sqq.  where  the  passages  possibly  important  as  bearing  on 
the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  are  cited. 

(2)  The  second  foreign  rite  now  published,  was  Forma  ac 
ratio  tola  ecclesiastici  Ministerij,  in  peregrinorum,  potissimum 
uerb  Germanorum  Ecdesia :  instituta  Londini  in  Anglia,  per 
Pientissimum  Principem  Anglice  &c.  Regem  Edvardum,  eius 
nominis  Sextu  :  Anno  post  Christum  natum  1550  (without 
place  of  publication  or  date,  but  of  1551  :  reprinted,  with  an 
apologia  as  against  certain  calumnies,  Frankfort  a.  M.  1555). 
This  was  the  rite  of  a  congregation  of  Germans,  who,  after  the 
enforcement  of  the  Interim  in  Friesland,  emigrated  from 
Emden  in  1550  with  their  pastor  John  Laski,  and  on  settling 
in  London  were  incorporated  by  the  crown,  allowed  the 
free  exercise  of  their  religion,  and  had  assigned  to  them  the 
church  of  the  Austin  Friars  ;  while  Laski  was  made  '  Super 
intendent  '  of  all  the  foreign  congregations,  German,  French, 
and  Italian,  in  London.  The  Forma  ac  ratio  is  a  prolix, 
didactic,  and  tedious  directory  of  worship  and  discipline,  of 
which  the  ritual  seems,  in  some  respects  at  least,  certainly  to 
be  derived  from  Guil.  Farel's  Genevan  La  maniere  etfasson  . . . 
quon  tient  es  lieux  que  Dieu  de  sa  grace  a  visiles,  1533. 

On  John  Laski  (a  Lasco),  a  Polish  noble,  a  pupil  of  Erasmus,  who  was 
made  bishop  of  Vesprim,  and,  on  embracing  extreme  reforming  opinions, 
left  Poland  and  became  pastor  of  a  congregation  at  Emden,  and  on  the 
publication  of  the  Interim  first  came  to  England  in  1548  to  negotiate 
hospitality  for  his  flock,  see  Diet.  Nat.  Biog.  xxxii  pp.  158  sqq. :  on  his 
community  in  London,  see  Strype  Mem.  of  Cranmer  ii  22;  Dixon  iii 
pp.  231  sqq.,  424  sqq.  Farel's  La  maniere  et  fasson,  of  which  apparently 
only  one  copy  is  known  to  exist,  in  the  Zurich  Library,  was  printed  by 


cxlviii 


REFORMED  SERVICES 


Pierre  de  Vingle  at  Serrieres ;  it  is  reprinted,  from  the  Zurich  copy, 
verbatim  et  litteratim>  in  J.  G.  Baum  Premiere  Liturgie  des  eglises 
reformtes  de  France  de  Van  1333  Strassburg  1859.  It  consists  largely  of 
directions  as  to  procedure  and  topics  of  prayer,  instruction,  and  exhor 
tation,  rather  than  of  prescribed  formulae.  (It  may  be  noted  that 
Calvin's  La  forme  des  prieres  et  chantz  ecclesiastiques  \Corpus  reformatorum 
xxxiv.pp.  161  sqq.;  in  Latin,  Kidd  Documents  pp.  615  sqq.],  adopted, 
after  Calvin's  return,  as  part  of  the  ecclesiastical  organisation  of  Geneva  of 
1542,  which  became  the  liturgical  norm  of  all  Calvinistic  communities,  is 
Farel's  La  matiitre  et  fasson  combined  with  much  of  the  matter  of 
Calvin's  Strassburg  rite.) 

All  that  concerns  us  in  these  books  is  the  Sunday  morning 
service  ;  and  of  this  the  following  table  exhibits  the  schemes 
of  Calvin's  (Strassburg)  service,  Pullain's,  Farel's,  and  Laski's. 
It  is  to  be  noted  that  Farel  prescribes  only  an  order  and 
general  subject-matter,  without  formulae,  except  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  the  Creed  and  the  Ten  Commandments. 


CALVIN. 

PULLAIN. 

FAREL. 

LASKI. 

*Our  help  is  in. 
*Admonition 
*Confession 
Absolution 
Decalogue  i-iv 
(sung,  in  metre) 
Prayer 
Decalogue  v-x 
(sung,  in  metre). 

Lift  up  your  heart. 
Decalogue  i-iv 
(sung,  in  metre) 
Our  help  is  in. 
Admonition 
Confession 
Absolution 
Decalogue  v-x 
(sung,  in  metre) 
Prayer. 

*  Prayer 

Lesson 
*Sermon. 

Prayer 

Lesson 
Sermon. 

Prayer 
Lord's  Prayer 

Lesson 
Sermon. 

Bidding 
Prayer 
Lord's  Prayer 
Psalm 
Lesson 
Sermon. 

Decalogue  (recited 
by  minister) 
Admonition 
Confession 
Absolution. 

Decalogue  (recited 
by  minister) 
Admonition 
Confession 
Absolution. 

Intercession 
*  Lord's  Prayer. 
*Creed. 

Psalm. 
*Blessing.. 

Intercession 
Lord's  Prayer. 
Creed. 
[LORD'S  SUPPER] 
Psalm. 
Blessing. 

Admonition 
Creed. 
Intercession. 

Dismissal. 

Creed. 
Intercession 
Lord's  Prayer. 

[LORD'S  SUPPER] 
Psalm. 
Blessing. 

THE  SECOND  ACT  OF  UNIFORMITY  cxlix 

Calvin's  Genevan  Sunday  Morning  Service  follows  his  own  Strassburg 
service,  rather  than  Farel's,  and  consists  of  the  items  asterisked  in  the 
first  col.  together  with  a  Psalm  after  the  Confession  and  an  Admonition 
to  pray  before  the  Intercession ;  while  a  Lesson  is  no  doubt  implied  as  a 
'text'  for  the  Sermon — the  purpose  which  the  Lesson  is  directed  to  serve 
in  all  the  other  books.  The  Lord's  Supper,  when  celebrated,  follows 
the  Creed  in  Pullain,  Laski,  and  Calvin's  Genevan  rite  :  presumably  there 
fore  it  was  the  same  in  Calvin's  Strassburg  rite,  of  which  I  have  not  seen 
the  text,  and  perhaps  in  Farel's  use,  where  the  book  gives  no  direction. 

3.  On  Ap.  14  1552  was  finally  passed  a  second  Act  of 
Uniformity,  declaring  that,  whereas  '  a  verye  Godlye  ordre  ' 
.was  '  sette  forthe  '  in  the  book  of  1549,  '  agreable  to  the 
woorde  of  God  and  the  primatiue  Churche,  verye  coumfort- 
able  to  all  good  people,'  yet  '  a  greate  noumbre  of  people, 
in  diuerse  partes  of  this  Realme  .  .  .  dooe  wilfully,  and 
damnablye  before  almightie  God,  absteyn  and  refuse  to 
come  to  theyr  parishe  Churches ' ;  and  that,  *  because  there 
hath  arisen  in  the  vse  and  exercise  of  the  foresayde  common 
seruice  in  the  Churche  heretofore  set  forth,  diuers  doubtes 
for  the  fasshion  &  maner  of  the  ministracio  of  thesame,' 
1  therfore  aswel  for  the  more  playne  &  manifest  explanacion 
hereof,  as  for  the  more  perfeccio  of  the  said  ordre  of  common 
seruice,  in  some  places  where  it  is  necessary  to  make  the  same 
prayer  and  fasshion  of  seruice  more  earnest  and  fitte,  to 
stirre  christia  people  to  the  true  honouring  of  almighty  God  : 
The  kynges  most  excellente  maiestie,  with  thassent  of  the 
Lordes  and  commos  in  this  present  Parlamet  assembled,  and 
by  thauctoritie  of  the  same,  hath  caused  the  foresayd  ordre 
of  commo  seruice,  entituled,  The  boke  of  commo  prayer,  to 
be  faythfully  &  godly  perused,  explaned,  &  made  fully 
perfect :  &  by  the  forsaid  auctoritie,  hath  anexed  &  ioyned 
it,  so  explaned  &  perfected,  to  this  present  statute,  adding 
also  a  forme  &  maner  of  making  &  consecrating  of  Arche- 
bisshops,  Bisshops,  Priestes  &  Deacos,  to  be  of  like  force, 
auctoritie,  &  value,  as  the  same  like  foresaid  boke  entituled, 
The  boke  of  common  prayer,  was  beefore.'  The  revised 
book  is  to  come  into  use  on  the  ensuing  feast  of  All  Saints  ; 
attendance  at  its  rites  is  to  be  enforced  by  spiritual 


cl  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER 

penalties,  and    attendance  at  any  other    forbidden   under 
violent  temporal  penalties. 

For  the  Act  of  Uniformity  see  pp.  9-23  below.  It  combines  two  bills;  the 
one,  'For  the  appointing  an  order  to  come  to  divine  service,'  i.e.  for 
enforcing  attendance  at  the  rites  of  1549,  was  read,  for  the  third  time  in 
the  Lords  and  for  the  first  time  in  the  Commons,  on  Jan.  26  1551-2,  and 
for  the  present  got  no  further.  On  March  9  the  Uniformity  bill  was  read 
for  the  first  time  in  the  Lords ;  and  then  the  former  bill,  now  relating  to 
attendance  at  the  revised  rite,  was  attached  to  it,  and  the  composite  bill 
was  read  in  the  Lords  on  March  30,  31,  and  Ap.  6,  and  for  the  first  time 
in  the  Commons  on  Ap.  6,  and  was  finally  disposed  of  on  Ap.  14  (Dixon 
Hist,  of  Ch.  of  Engl.  iii  pp.  431  sqq.). 

4.  (i)  The  revised  book,  known  as  '  The  Second  Prayer 
Book  of  Edward  VI,'  with  the  tille  The  Boke  of  common 
prayer,  and  administration  of  the  Sacramentes  and  other  rites 
and  Ceremonies  in  the  Churche  of  Englande,  now  including  The 
fourme  and  maner  of  makynge  and  consecratynge,  Bisshoppes, 
Priestes  and  Deacons,  as  had  been  stated  in  the  Act  of  Uni 
formity,  and  with  an  addition  unauthorised  by  the  Act,  was 
printed  several  times  by  Edw.  Whitchurch  and  by  Rich. 
Graf  ton  in  London,  and  once  by  John  Oswen  in  Worcester, 
and  issued  in  1552  in  at  least  6  editions  and  12  impressions. 

(a)  For  what  little  is  known  or  surmised  of  the  authorship  and  history 
of  the  revision,  see  Peter  Martyr's  letter  to  Bucer  in  Strype  Mem.  of 
Cranmer  app.  Ixi ;  Cranmer's  letter  to  the  Council  in  State  Papers  of 
Edw.  VI:  domestic  xv  no.  15 ;  Gasquet  and  Bishop  xv,  xvi;  Procter  and 
Frere  iv ;  Gee  The  Elizabethan  Prayer  Book  and  Ornaments  pp.  40  sqq. 
(b)  The  fourme  and  maner  still  retains  its  own  title-page,  and  in  one 
edition  at  least  it  has  a  separate  foliation,  1-16.  (c)  The  addition  is  the 
'Declaration  on  kneeling'  or  the  'Black  rubric,'  p.  721.  Hooper  had 
ventilated  his  desire  for  sitting,  instead  of  kneeling,  at  Communion  in  the 
6th  of  his  Sermons  upon  Jonas  in  Lent  1550  (Early  writings  of  Bishop 
Hooper,  Parker  Soc.,  p.  536);  and  Laski  wrote  against  'the  posture  of 
kneeling  at  the  reception  of  the  holy  sacrament :  whereby  he  incurred  the 
censure  of  a  meddling  temper,  and  of  ingratitude  to  that  nation  that  so 
kindly  had  entertained  him'  (Strype  Mem.  of  Cranmer  ii  22).  The 
firebrand  John  Knox  (c.  1505-1572)  in  his  ministrations  at  Berwick-on- 
Tweed  (1549-1550)  had  substituted  sitting  for  kneeling;  and,  after  his 
appointment  as  royal  chaplain  (1551),  he  preached  a  sermon  before  the 
King  and  the  Council  in  1552  'in  which  he  inveighed  with  great  freedom 
against  kneeling,'  and  this  gave  rise  to  an  agitation  and  '  disputes  '  'among 
the  bishops'  (Original Letters  p.  591).  In  consequence  the  Council  sent 


THE  DECLARATION  ON  KNEELING  cli 

a  letter  to  Grafton  on  Sept.  26  ordering  him  to  refrain  from  '  uttering ' 
copies  of  the  revised  book  'until  certain  faults  '  were  'corrected'  (Dixon 
Hist,  of  Ch.  of  EngL  iii  p.  476);  and  also  required  Cranmer,  'calling  to' 
him  *  the  bishop  of  London  and  some  other  learned  men,  as  Mr.  Peter 
Martyr  or  such  like,'  'to  expend  and  weigh  the'  'prescription'  of  the 
revised  book,  which  (unlike  that  of  1549,  which  took  kneeling  for  granted) 
directed  kneeling  at  communion.  Cranmer  in  his  reply  (Oct.  7)  refused 
to  reconsider  what  had  been  'weighed'  by  himself  and  the  others,  and 
also  by  '  a  great  many  bishops  and  others  of  the  best  learned  within  this 
realm  and  appointed  for  that  purpose/  and  had  been  '  read  and  approved 
by  the  whole  state  of  the  realm  in  the  High  Court  of  Parliament  with  the 
King's  Majesty  his  royal  assent '  (State  papers  of  Edw.  VI:  domestic  xv 
no.  15  :  J.  T.  Tomlinson  The  Prayer  Book,  Articles  and  Homilies  p.  256) ; 
and  proceeded  to  argue  against  the  contention  of  the  innovators  on  its 
merits.  The  upshot  was  that  on  Oct.  27  the  Lord  Chancellor,  Goodrich 
bishop  of  Ely,  was  ordered  by  the  Council  to  have  'joined  unto  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  lately  set  forth  a  certain  declaration  signed  by  the  King's 
Majesty,'  'touching  the  kneeling  at  the  receiving  of  the  Communion* 
(Dixon  iii  p.  483).  Accordingly,  of  the  copies  of  the  revised  book,  (i)  in 
some,  the  '  Declaration '  occurs  on  an  inserted  leaf  after  the  Order  of  Holy 
Communion  and  the  following  rubrics  (as  in  the  copy  printed  below, 
where  it  is  inserted  between  ff.  O.  i.  and  O.  ii.) ;  in  some,  on  an  inserted 
leaf  after  the  4th  rubrical  paragraph  following  the  Order  of  Holy  Com 
munion  ;  and  in  one  copy  it  follows  the  Commination ;  (2)  in  some  it  is 
part  of  the  book  as  originally  printed ;  and  (3)  in  some,  issued  no  doubt 
before  the  order  of  the  Council,  it  is  wanting  altogether  (J.  Parker  The 
first  Prayer  Book  of  Edward  VI  compared  with  the  successive  revisions 
p.  266;  F.  Bulley  Tabular  View  of  the  variations  in  the  Communion  and 
Baptismal  Offices,  Oxford  1842,  p.  80).  (d)  On  the  editions  and  impres 
sions  see  J.  Parker  Introduction  to  revisions  pp.  xxxii  sqq.  Two  of 
Whitchurch's  impressions  have  The  Psalter,  or  Psalms  of  Dauid,  after  the 
Trdslation  of  the  greate  Byble,  pointed  as  it  shall  be  sayde  or  songe  in 
Churches,  printed  uniform  with  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  and  bound 
up  with  it  (ibid.).  ('  The  Psalter  with  Mattins  and  Evensong,  bearing  the 
date  of  March,  1552,  and  printed  by  Grafton,'  in  the  Durham  University 
Library  [Routh  Collection  xvii.  E.  28  (2)],  mentioned  in  Parker  Intro 
duction  p.  xxxiii  note  m,  is  the  volume  alluded  to  on  p.  Ixxxii  above,  and 
belongs  to  the  rite  of  1549.) 

(2)  The  effect  of  the  revision  may  be  summarised  as  follows: 

I.  In  the  preliminary  matter  :  the  note  on  Ceremonies  now  follows  the 
Preface  (p.  39) ;  the  references  for  proper  Psalms  and  Lessons  are  collected 
in  a  table  (pp.  57  sqq.)  ;  '  An  Almanack  for  .xix.  yeares '  is  prefixed  to  the 
Kalendar  (p.  72) ;  in  the  Kalendar,  S.  Mary  Magdalen's  day  is  removed 
(p.  104),  four  names  in  black  type  (pp.  92,  108,  120)  and  certain  notes  of 


clii  CHANGES  IN   1552 

natural  seasons  and  legal  terms  are  added.  II.  The  Divine  Service 
(i)  is  again  made  obligatory  on  all  priests  and  deacons,  to  be  said 
publicly  in  church  if  possible,  otherwise  privately  (p.  39);  (2)  is  to  be  said 
no  longer  necessarily  IN  CHOIR,  but  where  it  may  best  be  heard  (p.  127); 
(3)  the  titles  of  the  offices  are  changed  to  'Morning'  and  'Evening 
Prayer'  (ibid.);  (4)  a  penitential  introduction  is  prefixed  to  both  offices 
(12  texts  to  be  selected  from,  a  short  homily  on  them,  general  confession 
and  absolution :  pp.  129  sqq.) ;  (5)  the  opening  versicles  at  evensong  are 
assimilated  to  those  of  matins,  and  Alleluia  in  Eastertide  is  abandoned 
(PP-  I33>  I57))  (6)  the  Easter  procession  disappears,  the  anthems  being 
now  substituted  for  Venite  on  Easter  day  (p.  393)  :  (7)  Benedidte  is  made 
simply  alternative  to  Te  Deum,  and  Psalms  alternative  to  the  N.T.  canticles 
are  supplied  (pp.  139,  145,  159,  161):  (8)  Quicunque  is  directed  to  be 
said  on  13  days  instead  of  only  6  (p.  169) :  (9)  the  Creed  is  to  be  said  by 
allt  standing,  immediately  after  Benedictus  or  Quicunque  (pp.  145,  169): 
and  (10)  '  The  Lord  be  with  you '  and  '  Let  us  pray '  are  brought  up  from 
the  end  of  the preces  to  precede  Kyrieleison  (p.  147).  III.  The  prayers 
for  rain  and  for  fair  weather  are  removed  from  the  end  of  the  Mass 
(p.  712)  and  along  with  4  new  occasional  prayers  are  inserted  into  the 
Litany,  to  precede  the  final  prayer  (p.  187).  IV.  In  the  Mass:  (i)  the 
title  is  changed  and  '  commonly  called  the  Masse '  eliminated  (p.  639), 
*  table'  or  'Lord's  table'  is  substituted  for  'altar'  (p.  639  and^assim),  and 
'offertory'  is  no  longer  used  (pp.  659,  663):  (2)  VESTMENTS,  except 
surplice  and  rochet  are  abolished  (pp.  127,  639),  the  'table'  is  to  stand 
in  the  body  of  the  church  or  in  the  chancel  (p.  639)  and  the  celebrant  is 
to  stand  at  the  north  side  of  it  (p.  641) :  (3)  Introit  (p.  641),  B?  to  the 
announcement  of  the  Gospel  (p.  649),  Osanna  and  Benedictus  (p.  687), 
'The  peace  of  the  Lorde'  and  'Christ  our  Pascal  labe'  (p.  697),  Agnus 
Dei  (p.  701),  and  the  '  postcommunion '  (p.  703)  are  omitted:  (4)  some 
of  these  omissions  are  perhaps  related  to  the  discouragement  of  singing 
in  the  Mass,  nothing  being  now  directed  to  be  sung  except  Epistle  and 
Gospel  (p.  137),  Creed  (p.  995),  and  Gloria  in  excelsis  (p.  709):  the  low 
mass  is  rather  the  model  assumed  (see  p.  647,  where  the  Epistle  and 
Gospel  are  assigned  to  the  priest  alone,  and  p.  711):  (5)  the  Kyrieleison 
is  changed  and  expanded,  and  utilised  as  a  series  of  responses  to  the 
Decalogue  recited  before  the  collect  (p.  641):  (6)  Gloria  in  excelsis  is 
transferred  till  after  the  final  thanksgiving  (p.  709):  (7)  the  missing  clause 
is  restored  to  the  Creed  (p.  649) :  (8)  at  the  Offertory  all  directions  for 
the  preparation  of  the  gifts  are  omitted  (p.  663);  the  gifts  are  now  to  be 
provided  by  the  curate  and  the  churchwardens  at  the  expense  of  the 
parish  (p.  717),  so  that  OFFERINGS  AND  COMMUNION  are  no  longer  directed 
to  be  made  by  representatives  of  THE  ABSENT  (p.  716);  and  the  bread  is 
no  longer  required  to  be  in  the  form  of  unleavened  WAFERS  (p.  717): 
(9)  the  Prayer  for  the  Church  (the  commemoration  of  the  saints  and  the 
INTERCESSION  FOR  THE  DEAD,  and  with  it  the  phrase  '  THE  SLEPE  OF  PEACE/ 


CHANGES  IN   1552 


cliii 


being  eliminated,  and  the  bidding  altered  accordingly,  pp.  690,  663),  with  a 
petition  added  for  the  acceptance  of  the  alms  (p.  663)  and  a  change  in  the 
petition  for  the  people  (p.  665),  is  removed  from  the  canon  and  attached 
to  the  relics  of  the  offertory  (ibid.} :  (10)  the  Exhortations  (to  which  a  new 
one  is  added,  containing  a  rebuke  to  those  who  ASSIST  WITHOUT  COM 
MUNICATING,  pp.  665  sqq.)  are  moved  on  from  after  the  sermon  to  follow 
the  Prayer  for  the  Church  (p.  665),  and  the  penitential  preparation  of  the 
communicants  is  brought  back  to  follow  the  Exhortation  immediately 
{p.  681):  (n)  We  do  not  presume  is  also  moved  back  to  follow  the 
Sanctus  (pp.  687,  691):  (12)  in  the  central  paragraphs  of  the  canon 
(which  thus  follow  '  We  do  not  presume '),  (a)  the  INVOCATION  and  the 
CROSSINGS  are  suppressed  and  a  new  text  is  substituted :  (b)  the  directions 
for  the  MANUAL  ACTS  at  the  consecration  are  removed  (p.  693):  (13)  the 
Communion  is  placed  immediately  after  the  Consecration,  the  words  of 
administration  of  both  kinds,  now  described  as  '  the  bread  '  and  '  the  cup,' 
are  entirely  altered,  and  the  species  of  bread  is  DELIVERED  INTO  THE 
HAND,  no  longer  into  the  mouth  (pp.  701,  719);  and  communion  is 
required  of  the  laity  three  times,  instead  of  once,  a  year  (p.  719) ;  (14)  the 
rest  of  the  canon  (reduced  by  the  omission  of  the  anamnesis,  of  the  peti 
tions  no  longer  appropriate  after  communion,  and  of  the  final  petition  for 
the  acceptance  of  our  prayers  'BY  THE  MINISTERYE  OF  THY  HOLY  ANGELS') 
is  postponed  till  after  communion,  as  an  alternative  to  the  thanksgiving, 
with  the  Lord's  Prayer  (without  its  preface,  and  said  by  the  people  after 
the  priest)  preceding  instead  of  following  it  (pp.  705  sqq.).  These  changes 
(9)-(i4)  are  exhibited  in  the  following  table,  where  in  the  first  column  the 
items  mentioned  in  (3),  (9)  and  (14)  as  simply  abolished  are  omitted,  and 
in  both  columns  the  items  which  have  changed  their  position  are  printed 
in  italic. 


1549 


Sermon. 


Exhortation. 

Offertory. 

Preface  and  Sanctus. 

'Intercession  for  living 
Consecration 

.  Oblation. 

Lord's  Prayer 
r  Penitential  preparation. 

We  do  not  presume 

Communion 

.Thanksgiving. 


1552 


Sermon. 
'  Offertory 

Intercession  for  living. 
Exhortation. 
Penitential  preparation. 

Preface  and  Sanctus. 
'  We  do  not  presume.' 

Consecration. 
Communion. 

Lord's  Prayer. 


Oblation,  or 
Thanksgiving. 


cliv  CHANGES  IN  1552 

(15)  Miscellaneous   points:   the  publication  of  FURTHER  HOMILIES  is 
contemplated  (p.  649) ;  holy  days  and  fasts  are  explicitly  directed  to  be 
announced  after  the  Sermon  (ibid.)-,   and   'table-prayers,'  now  contain 
ing  the  whole  order  up  to  the  'general  prayer'  i.e.  the  Prayer  for  the 
Church,  are  ordered  to  be  used  only  on  holydays  when  there  is  no 
Communion  (p.  715);  the  Declaration  on  kneeling  is  appended  (p.  721) : 

(16)  in   the    Temporale,   the   first  mass   of  Christmas  and   the   second 
of  Easter  are  omitted  (pp.  217,  399);    the  great  octaves  are  explicitly 
recognised  (pp.  227,  685)  and  the  collect  of  Easter  day  is  repeated  on 
the  octave  (p.  415);  the  Sarum  Gospel  for  Whitsunday  is  restored  and 
added   to   that  of  the  vigil,  which  in   1549  was  assigned   to  the  day 
(p.  445);  and  provision  is  explicitly  made  for  the  dominicae  vagantes 
after  Trinity  (p.  553):  in  the  Sanctorak^  the  collect  of  S.  Andrew  is  re 
written  (p.  553),  and  the  mass  of  S.  Mary  Magdalen  is  omitted  (p.  603) : 
and  lastly,  no  provision  is  made  for  the  modification  of  the  festal  mass  on 
weekdays  (p.  711),  and  a  daily  mass  is  no  longer  mentioned  (p.   652). 
V.  In  Baptism:  (i)  the  rite  is  no  longer  begun  AT  THE  CHURCH-DOOR 
(p.  727)  and  this  change  carries  with  it  the  abandonment  of  the  formal 
entry  into  church  (p.  735) ;  the  EXORCISM  (p.  731),  the  recitation  of  Pater 
noster  and  Creed  (p.  733),  the  BENEDICTION  OF  THE  WATER  (p.  739), 
the  WHITE  GARMENT  (p.  743),  and  THE  UNCTION  (ibid.),  are  all  abolished : 
(2)  the  signing  with  the  cross,  with  its  formula  modified,  is  postponed  till 
after  baptism,  and  converted  into  a  novel  and  not  wholly  edifying  cere 
mony  of  'reception'  of  the  neophyte  (p.  741) ;  (3)  the  interrogations  are 
directed  to  be  addressed  to  the  godparents,  not  TO  THE  CHILD  (pp.  735, 
755);   (4)  a  bidding,  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  a  thanksgiving  are  added 
after  the  'reception'  (pp.  743  sq.).     VI.  In  the  Catechism  and  Confirma 
tion:  (i)  the  Commandments,  for  no  obvious  purpose,  are  expanded,  by 
the  introduction  and  the  addition  of  their  reasons,  to  correspond  with 
Ex.  xx  (p.  781);  (2)  the  Prayer  of  Confirmation  is  emended;  (3)  the 
petition  for  signing,  and  the  signing  itself,  are  omitted ;  and  (4)  the  indi 
cative  form  is  exchanged  for  a  precatory  form,  different  in  effect  (p.  795). 
VII.  The  Order  of  Matrimony  is  practically  unchanged,  except  by  the 
substitution  of  '  the  accustomed  duty'  for  '  tokens  of  spousage '  &c.  (p.  805, 
and  consequential  changes  on  p.  807),  and  the  elimination  of  the  allusion 
to  'Apocrypha'  (p.  811).     VIII.  In  the  ministrations  to  the  Sick:  (i) 
the  penitential  Psalm  (p.  819)  and  the  reference  to  'Apocrypha'  (p.  823) 
are  removed ;  (2)  the  UNCTION  and  its  formulae  are  abolished  (p.  835) ; 
and  (3)  RESERVATION  for  the  Communion  of  the  sick  (p.  843)  is  omitted, 
and  'a  good  number'  is  required  to  communicate  (ibid.}.     IX.  The  Order 
for  the  Burial  of  the  Dead  is  spoiled  by  the  destruction  of  the  short 
Service  of  the  Dead  (cp.  p.  cxxvii  above),  in  which  the  Psalms  and  \.\\zprcces 
are  eliminated,  and  what  remains  of  it  is  substituted  for  the  prayers  at  the 
grave  (pp.  86 1  sqq.);  while  all  PRAYERS  and  the  Mass  FOR  THE  DEAD  are 
suppressed  (pp.  861,  873,  875  sq.).     X.  In  the  Purification  of  Women: 


SOURCES  OF  CHANGES  civ 

the  title  is  changed  (p.  88 1),  and  the  order  for  the  return  of  the  CHRYSOM 
(p.  885)  naturally  disappears  (p.cliv).  XI.  The  Penitential  Office  (p.  887)  has 
its  title  altered  and  is  no  longer  assigned  to  Ash  Wednesday  but  to  *  DYUERS 
TYMES  ' ;  and  the  anthem  is  no  longer  directed  to  be  sung,  but  is  treated  as  a 
prayer  (p.  899).  XII.  'Certayne  notes '  (p.  926)  disappear,  except  in  so  far 
as  they  are  represented  by  the  rubric  on  p.  127.  XIII.  In  the  Ordinations: 
(i)  the  vestments  (pp.  933,  953,  979,  1005),  and  the  tradition  of  the  chalice 
to  priests  (p.  995)  and  of  the  staff  to  bishops  (p.  1015;  cp.  1005)  are 
suppressed ;  and  the  tradition  is  substituted  for  the  imposition  of  the 
Bible  in  the  consecration  of  bishops  (p.  1015);  and  (2)  the  termination 
of  the  oaths  is  changed  (pp.  951,  1005).  XIV.  Signing  with  the  cross 
throughout,  except  after  baptism  (pp.  693,  739,  795,  807,  813,  835),  and 
the  mutual  salutation  (The  Lord  be  with  you  &c.),  except  in  Matins  and 
Evensong  (pp.  645,  683,  707,  731,  795,  993,  1013),  disappear.  XV.  Textual 
changes  occur  passim,  some  significant,  others  only  verbal  and  for  the 
sake  of  style.  XVI.  The  text  of  the  Act  of  Uniformity  is  included  in  the 
book :  in  some  copies  next  after  the  table  of  contents  (as  below  p.  9) ;  in 
others,  after  the  Kalendar;  and  in  one,  after  the  colophon  (see  The  two 
liturgies  of  Edward  VI,  Parker  Soc.,  pp.  192,  213);  and  in  the  earlier 
copies  it  appears  to  be  an  insertion  and  not  a  part  of  the  impression 
(Parker  Introduction  to  revisions  p.  xxxiv). 

(3)  The  external  influences  which  affected  the  revision  of 
1552,  so  far  as  for  the  present  they  appear  to  be  dis 
cernible,  were  the  following. 

(a)  Some  two  thirds  of  the  objections  contained  in  the 
Censura  of  Martin  Bucer  are  recognised  and  dealt  with,  if  not 
always  exactly  in  the  way  that  Bucer  desired  ;  while  the 
further  objection  of  Peter  Martyr  is  simply  accepted  and 
satisfied. 

The  points  at  which  Bucer's  and  Martyr's  criticisms  are  accepted  are 
marked  by  small  capitals  in  (2)  above.  But  it  is  obvious  from  the  text  of 
the  Censura  that  proposals  for  change  had  already  been  made  and  were 
familiar  to  Bucer,  and  from  some  of  them  he  definitely  dissents.  Hence 
it  is  likely  that  some  of  his  criticisms  only  echoed  and  supported  home 
grown  criticisms.  In  several  cases  where  the  criticism  expressed  by  Bucer 
is  recognised  and  a  change  is  made,  Bucer's  proposed  remedy  is  not 
accepted,  but  either  the  passage  is  simply  omitted  where  Bucer  proposed 
a  substitute  (e.g.  the  intercession  for  the  dead  [p.  665],  the  petition  for  the 
acceptance  of  our  prayers  by  the  ministry  of  the  angels  [pp.  694,  709], 
the  exorcism  at  Baptism  [p.  731]),  or  a  different  substitute  is  adopted  (e.g.  the 
invocation  [p.  693],  the  formula  at  the  signing  in  Baptism  [pp.  728,  757])- 
On  the  other  hand,  in  3  passages  changes  or  omissions  are  made  where 
Bucer  expressly  asked  for  no  change ;  viz.  in  '  humbly  besechyng  thee ' 


clvi  SOURCES  OF  CHANGES 

cSz:c.  (pp.  694,  707),  'We  do  not  presume'  &c.  (pp.  698,  691),  and  in  the 
form  of  administration  (pp.  700  sq.) ;  while  some  third  part  of  his 
criticisms  is  ignored.  The  direction  to  communicate  the  sick  person 
from  the  altar,  if  on  the  day  the  Mass  is  said  in  church  (p.  842),  which 
Bucer  had  approved,  but  Peter  Martyr  had  objected  to,  is  suppressed. 
The  book  of  1552  might  have  been  better  than  it  was,  if  Bucer  had  been 
followed  more  closely.  (Poynet's  Catechism  and  the  Forty-two  Articles,  of 
1553  [reprinted  in  Liturgies  of  King  Edward  VI,  Parker  Soc.],  whether 
intentionally  or  not,  answered  in  some  sort  to  Bucer's  aspiration  for  a 
longer  Catechism  and  a  Confession  of  faith  [p.  cxliii].) 

(b)  Several   of  the   marked   changes  in  the  Mass  were 
evidently  dictated  by  the  determination  to  cut  the  ground 
from  under  so  much  of  the  argument  of  Stephen  Gardiner's 
Explication  and  Assertion   as  was  based    on    the  Book   of 
Common  Prayer. 

The  influence  of  Gardiner's  book  on  the  revision  of  1552  was  first 
pointed  out  by  Dom  Gasquet  and  Mr.  E.  Bishop  in  Edivard  VI  and  the 
Book  of  Common  Prayer  1890,  pp.  280  sqq.  If  we  take  Gardiner's  points 
as  set  out  above  (pp.  cxlv  sq.) :  the  first,  (a),  is  exploded  by  the  sub 
stitution  of  a  new  rubric  (p.  717);  (b),  by  the  recasting  of  the  passages 
referred  to  (p.  693) ;  (c),  by  detaching  the  Prayer  for  the  Church  from  the 
canon  and  attaching  it  to  the  Offertory  (p.  663) ;  (d),  by  placing  the 
prayer  We  do  not  presume  before  the  consecration  (p.  691);  and  (e),  by 
entirely  changing  the  words  of  administration  (p.  701). 

(c)  The  Simplex  ac  pia  deliberatio  of  Cologne  has  again 
influenced  the  book,  certainly  in  one  place,  probably  in  several. 

See  p.  858;  and  notes  on  pp.  131  bis,  665,  667. 

(d)  It   is   commonly   conjectured   or   asserted    that   the 
Liturgia  sacra  of  Valerand  Pullain  or  the  Forma  ac  ratio  of 
J.  Laski,  or  both,  affected  the  book  of  1552  at  two  points, 
suggesting  the  addition  of  the  penitential  introduction  to  the 
Divine  Service,  and  that  of  the  recitation  of  the  Decalogue  in 
the  Mass,  and  influencing  some  of  the  language  at  both  places  ; 
and  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  conjecture  is  right.     On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  only  a  conjecture  ;   there  are  other  possible 
and  perhaps  more  likely  sources  for  both  suggestions ;  and 
the  coincidences  of  language  are  not  very  striking  and  might 
be  regarded  as  due  merely  to  the  use,  in  all  three  texts,  of  the 
commonplaces  of  the  subject-matter. 

The  influence  of  Pullain  on  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  was  appar- 


POSSIBLE  INFLUENCE  OF  REFORMED  SERVICE     clvii 

ently  first  suggested  by  R.  Laurence  Bampton  Lectures  1805,  pp.  198  sqq. ; 
that  of  Laski  by  E.  Cardwell  Two  liturgies  of  Edward  VI,  Oxford  1838, 
p.  xxxii  note  *  (as  against  Laurence).     For  the  schemes  of  Pullain's  and 
Laski's  Sunday-morning  service,  see  above  p.  cxlviii.     (a)  Quifiones,  in  both 
recensions  of  his  Breviary  (pp.  xxvi  sq.  above),  had  removed  the  mutual 
confession  and  absolution  of  officiant  and  congregation  from  among  the 
preces  of  Prime  and  Compline,  and  placed  it  after  Pater  noster  at  the 
beginning  of  Matins  only  (p.  Ixxxvi) :  an  obvious  precedent,  so  far  as  it 
goes,    for    1552.       But    Pullain's    arrangement — Adiutorium     nostrum, 
Admonition,  Confession,  and  Absolution — is  strikingly  like  the  English  ; 
and  it  is  possible  to  suppose  that  it  influenced  it,  whatever  may  have 
been  the  influence  of  Quinones.     (b)  The  association  of  the  Decalogue 
with  Kyrieleison  was  not  new.     Luther's  metrical  paraphrase  Dys  synd  die 
heylgen  zehn  gebot  (A.  Leitzmann  M.  Luthers  Geistliche  Liedtr  p.  5  :  see 
above  p.  xxxii)  belongs  to  the  traditional  class  of  hymns  having  Kyri 
eleison  as  a  refrain  and  hence  known  as  Kirleison^  Leisen,  or  Leichen  (Julian 
Diet,  of  Hymnology  p.  413);  and  accordingly  it  has  Kyrioleys  after  each 
commandment   and  each  verse ;   and  consequently  Coverdale's  English 
rendering  of  Luther  in  Goostly  Psalmes  (in  Remains  of  Myles  Coverdalc, 
Parker   Soc.,  p.    544)   has   Kirieleyson  for   a   refrain.     The  suggestion, 
therefore,  of  using  the  Kyries  of  the  Mass  to  serve  as  a  series  of  responses 
to   the   Decalogue   was   near  at   hand.     In   a   number  of  the  German 
Kirchenordnungen  it  is  directed  that  the  Decalogue  be  recited  after  the 
sermon  in  the  Mass  :  e.g.  in  those  of  Prussia  1525,  Bremen  1534,  Nordheim 
1539,  Calenberg  1542  (Richter  i  29,  245,  288,  363);  while  in  those  of 
Frankfort  1530  and  Pomerania  1535  (ib.  141,  258)  it  is  sung  by  the  people, 
no  doubt  in  Luther's  metrical  version,  after  the  sermon.     In  England  it 
had  been  ordered  to  be  taught  and  expounded  periodically  to  the  people 
since  the  i3th  cent.  (Wilkins  Concilia  ii  54,  iii  599,  865  :  Injunction  3  of 
1536  [Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  p.  272]  :  Injunction  5  of  1547  [Cardwell 
Doc.  Ann.  i  p.  7]).      These  precedents  seem  perhaps  more  likely  to  have 
suggested  the  insertion  of  the  Decalogue  into  the  Mass  of  1552,  than  the 
comparatively  obscure  rite  of  Pullain.     However  this  may  be,  it  is  to  be 
noticed  that  in  the  German  Kirchenordnungen  the  Decalogue  generally 
forms  an  item  in  a  group  of  devotions  (including  the  Creed,  the  Lord's 
Prayer,a  general  Confession  and  Absolution,  and  the  'Common 'or 'General 
Prayer,'  i.e.  an  intercession  for  the  Church)  of  which  some  Orders  prescribe 
more,  some  fewer.     (Cp.   Rietschel  Lehrb.  d.  Liturgik  i  pp.  429  sqq.) 
In  other  words  the  Decalogue  in  the  Kirchenordnungen  is  attached  to  the 
traditional   series  of  vernacular  devotions  following  the  sermon  of  the 
Mass,  which  was  known  as  the  *  pronaus '  or  '  prone  '  (Thalhofer  Hand- 
buch  d.    catholischen   Liturgik   ii  pp.    123  sqq.).     Whether  the   German 
'  pronaus '  anywhere  included  the  Decalogue,  or  it  was  a  Lutheran  addi 
tion,  I  have  not  discovered.     Now,  if  Farel's  and  Laski's  Sunday-morning 
service  be  carefully  observed,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  items  following  the 


clviii  ORIGIN  OF  REFORMED  SERVICE 

sermon,  down  to  the  general  intercession  and  the  Lord's  Prayer,  are  those 
of  the  traditional  *  pronaus,'  together  with  the  Decalogue ;  while  Calvin's 
and  Pullain's  services  have  divided  these  items  (including  with  them  the 
Decalogue)  into  two  groups,  which  they  have  rearranged.  And  from  this 
it  follows,  that  the  recitation  of  the  commandments  was  possibly  part  of 
the  traditional  '  pronaus '  in  the  areas  in  which  these  services  originated, 
and  that  the  Sunday-morning  services  of  Strassburg  and  Geneva,  apart 
from  the  Lord's  Supper,  only  perpetuate,  and  mainly  consist  of,  the  ver 
nacular  elements  of  the  traditional  High  Mass.  Further,  in  England,  the 
Decalogue  was  only  one  of  a  series,  including  the  Creed,  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  the  deadly  sins,  etc.,  ordered  to  be  taught  and  expounded  in  the 
pulpit  (see  refs,  above),  and  these  with  the  Bidding  of  the  Bedes  (the 
'common  prayers')  formed  a  'pronaus,'  which  in  England  preceded  the 
sermon  instead  of  following  it.  Consequently,  whether  it  was  the  Kirchen- 
ordnungen  or  Pullain  or  Laski  or  English  tradition  or  all  of  them  together, 
which  suggested  the  recitation  of  the  Decalogue  in  the  book  of  1552,  the 
ultimate  origin  of  the  suggestion  is  the  same,  viz.  the  traditional  vernacular 
devotions  accompanying  the  sermon.  See  further  below,  pp.  1050  sqq. 
(c)  The  coincidences  of  language  as  between  the  English  on  the  one  hand, 
and  Pullain  and  Laski,  on  the  other,  are  noticed  in  the  following  notes. 

NOTES. — P.  3.  It  is  difficult  to  explain  the  change  in  the  title  of  the  book 
except  as  expressing  a  petulant  desire  to  ignore  the  inheritance  of  the  tradi 
tion  of  the  Church.  P.  9.  On  the  Act  and  its  place  in  the  book  see  above 
pp.  cl,  civ.  Pp.  80,  100.  Of  the  impressions  I  have  seen,  all  have  '  Con. 
Paul.'  in  black,  and  omit  the  name  of  S.  Barnabas,  except  one  of  Grafton's 
which  has  it  in  black.  This  is  clearly  due  to  the  Act  5,  6  Edw.  VI  c.  3 
(Gibson  Codex  i  p.  277),  prescribing  which  of  the  feasts  are  to  be  kept 
as  holidays,  and  omitting,  according  to  English  tradition  (p.  xciii),  both 
these  days.  P.  127.  These  rubrics  partially  satisfy  two  of  Bucer's 
objections  (Centura  i,  ii  pp.  457  sq.).  P.  129.  These  *  sundry  places '  of 
*  the  Scripture '  are  not  drawn  from  the  Great  Bible,  but,  as  is  evident  if  the 
texts  be  compared,  are  rough  translations  or  paraphrases  of  the  Vulgate. 
The  first  is  made  up  of  clauses  from  Ezek.  xviii  27,  21,  22  :  cp.  Homily 
viii  '  Of  the  declining  from  God,'  near  the  end :  '  as  GOD  by  Ezechiel 
saith,  what  time  soeuer  a  sinner  doth  returne,  and  take  earnest  and  true 
repentance,  I  will  forget  all  his  wickednesse ' ;  with  8  '  Amende  your 
lyues '  cp.  Great  Bible  in  loc.  '  Repente  of  the  lyfe  that  is  past.'  P.  131. 
To  the  passage  in  the  first  col.  add  Pia  delib.i.  91*  'uerae  pietati  con- 
sentaneum  est,  ut  quoties  apparemus  coram  Domino  in  Ecclesia  eius,  ante 
omnia  agnoscamus  &  confiteamur  peccata  nostra,  &  remissionem  oremus.' 
That  the  paragraph  '  And  although  '  etc.  is  not  natural  and  spontaneous, 
but  a  combination  of  this  with  such  passages  as  are  cited  in  col.  i,  seems 
to  follow  from  (i)  the  occurrence  of  'acknowledge  and  confess'  (agnos 
camus  &  confiteamur)  a  few  lines  above,  and  '  most  chiefly '  (ante  omnia 
[fur  alien] :  which  however  here  means  /  first  of  all ') :  (2)  the  fact  that 


NOTES  ON   I552  clix 

the  a  fortiori  argument  in  the  text  is  entirely  unconvincing;  it  is  not  in 
fact  intelligible  to  any  one  why  he  should  confess  his  sins  to  God,  most 
chiefly  when  the  Church  '  assembles  and  meets  together ' ;  whereas  in  the 
three  passages  cited  the  argument  is  simple  and  straightforward.  The  ref. 
to  S.  Avitus  is  derived  from  W.  Palmer  Origines  Liturgicae,  Lond.  1845, 
i  p.  239.  For  the  description  of  the  purposes  of  Divine  Service,  *  to  rendre 
thankes'  etc.,  cp.  Institution  of  a  Christian  man  and  A  necessary  doctrine 
under  4th  Commandment  (ed.  Lloyd  pp.  143,  307  :  the  additions  made 
by  the  latter  to  the  former  are  marked  by  [  ])  *  We  be  bound  by  this 
precept  .  .  to  hear  [the  divine  service  approved,  used,  and  observed  in 
the  church,  and  also]  the  word  [of  God],  to  [acknowledge  our  own 
sinfulness  unto  God,  and  his  great  mercy  and  goodness  unto  us,  to  give 
thanks  unto  him  for  his  benefits,  to  make  public  and  common  prayer  for 
all  things  needful.'  *  Wherfore  I  praye '  etc. :  the  Admonition  in  Pullain's 
Liturgia  sacra  f.  ib  (above  p.  cxlviii)  is,  '  Fratres,  cogitet  nunc  uestrum 
unusquisque  se  coram  Deo  sisti,  ut  peccata  &  delicta  sua  omnia  simplici 
animo  confiteatur  &  agnoscat,  atque  apud  uosmetipsos  me  praeeutem 
sequimini  his  uerbis.'  *  Vnto  the  throne '  etc.  (Heb.  iv  16) :  Laski's  confes 
sion  (above  p.  cxlviii)  has  '  ad  thronu  tuae  gratiae  prostrati  prouoluimur.' 
1  Saying  after  me ' :  cp.  *  Exhortation  before  communion '  in  Maskell  Mon. 
rit.  iii  p.  409  *  Also  ye  shall  knell  adown  apon  yowr  kneys,  seying  after 
me  ' :  and  Pullain  Lit.  sacra  above.  *  We  have  offended '  etc. :  cp.  Pullain 
f.  ib  'tuas  leges  sanctissimas  assidue  transgredimur.'  'There  is  no 
health  in  us/  which  has  often  been  remarked  upon  and  criticised,  seems 
to  depend  either  (i)  on  Isa.  i  6  '  non  est  in  eo  sanitas,'  OVK  IO-TIJ/  iv 
CUJTW  oXoKXrjpia  (ohp :  cp.  Ps.  xxxviii  3) :  when  the  meaning  would  be 
1  there  is  no  soundness,  absolute  health,  in  us  ' :  or  (2)  more  probably, 
especially  in  view  of  *  But  thou  '  following,  on  Ps.  cxlv  (cxlvi)  3  '  in  quibus 
non  est  salus,'  <us  ov*c  CO-TI  o-wr^pia  (ny-IK^n)  :  Gt.  Bible  'there  is  no  help 
in  them,'  but  earlier  versions  have  '  health '  or  '  hele '  (e.g.  Earliest  complete 
English  prose  Psalter,  E.  E.  T.  S.,  1891,  'in  which  non  hel]?e  nys':  Early 
English  Psalter,  Surtees  Soc.  1844,  'in  whilk  hele  is  nane':  R.  Rolle  '  in 
whaim  is  noght  hele':  Marshall's  Primer  '  in  whom  there  is  no  saving 
health  ' :  and  so  also  the  King's  Primer  '  in  whom  there  is  no  helth  '),  while 
The  Psalter  or  booke  of  Psalmes  both  in  Latyne  and  Englyshe,  R.  Grafton 
1540,  has  'in  whom  is  no  saluacyon';  and  the  meaning  then  is  'there  is 
no  salvation  in  us '  i.e.  '  we  cannot  save  ourselves ' :  cp.  Homily  ii  '  Of  the 
misery  of  mankind,'  'wee  can  finde  in  our  selues  no  hope  of  saluation  .  .  . 
as  God  himselfe  sayth  by  the  Prophet  Osee,  O  Israel,  thy  destruction 
commeth  of  thy  selfe,  but  in  me  only  is  thy  helpe.'  Cp.  also  Ps.  iii  3, 
Ixii  7  ;  and  Acts  iv  12  '  neyther  is  there  saluacyon  in  any  other.' 
Absolution  :  '  desireth  not '  etc. :  cp.  Laski's  confession  (Forma  ac  ratio 
p.  69)  '  neque  amplius  velis  mortem  peccatoris :  sed  potius  vt  conuertatur 
&  viuat '  (Ezek.  xxxiii  n  vulg.  '  nolo  mortem  impii;  sed  ut  convertatur 


clx  I552 

impius  a  via  sua  et  vivat ' :  Gt.  Bible  '  I  haue  no  pleasure  in  the  death 
of  the  wycked  but  much  rather  that  ye  wycked  turne  from  hys  waye,  and 
lyue').  Laski's  absolution  (p.  70)  runs:  'Habemus  certain  et  indubitatam 
promissionem,  de  seterna  atque  immutabili  voluntate  Dei :  quod  omnibus 
vcre  painitentibus  (qui  videlicet  agnitis  peccatis  suis,  cum  sui  accusatione, 
gratiam  ipsius  per  nomen  Christi  Domini  implorant)omniaipsorumpeccata 
prorsus  condonet,  atque  aboleat :  neque  illorum  deinceps  vnquam  memi- 
nisse  vllo  modo  velit.  .  .  Omnibus,  inquam,  vobis  qui  ita  affecti  estis, 
denuncio  fiducia  promissionum  Christi,  vestra  peccata  omnia  in  coelo  a 
Deo  Patre  nostro,  modis  planb  omnibus  remissa  esse :  propter  Dominum 
,  .  .' :  which  resembles  the  English  only  in  the  words  italicised.  Pia  delib. 
f.  92b  (absolution  before  the  Lord's  Supper)  '  Ego  .  .  .  omnibus,  quibus 
sua  peccata  dolent,  qui  Christo  Domino  ueram  fidem  habent,  .  .  .  annuncio 
remissionem  omnium  peccatorum,'  may  well  be  a  source  of  the  English, 
especially  since  in  the  English  version  {Consultation  f.  202)  'annuncio  '  is 
rendered  '  declare  and  pronounce.'  This  last  illustrates  a  peculiarity  of 
style  in  this  penitential  introduction  which  has  been  often  remarked :  viz. 
reduplication  by  means  of  synonyms  :  'acknowledge  and  confess,'  'sins 
and  wickedness,'  'dissemble  nor  cloke,'  'acknowledge  and  confess/ 
and  the  rest.  The  same  is  to  be  observed  in  some  degree  in  the  new 
exhortation  of  1552  (pp.  665  sqq.);  in  the  Ordinal  of  1550;  and  in  the 
'copious'  Bucer  (pp.  980  sqq.).  P.  139.  The  emendation  of  Benedicite 
is  evidently  for  the  better.  The  making  of  it  simply  alternative  to  Te 
Deum  is  parallel  to  the  provision  of  alternatives  to  the  N.T.  Canticles 
(pp.  145,  159,  161).  The  object  of  both  is,  perhaps,  only  variety;  but 
the  latter  anticipates  the  puritan  objections  dealt  with  in  Hooker 
E.P.  v  40.  P.  145.  In  Baptism  (p.  737)  and  the  Catechism  (p.  781), 
where  alone  the  Apostles'  Creed  was  printed  at  length  in  1549,  the  text 
of  1552  reads  'at'  for  'on'  'the  right  hand'  (as  was  read  in  the  Nicene 
creed  from  the  outset) ;  and,  in  the  Catechism,  '  he  shall  come '  for  '  shall 
he  come.'  It  would  seem  therefore  that  these  changes  were  intended  to 
be  made,  but  that,  perhaps,  only  a  general  direction  being  given  to  print 
the  creed  at  length  in  the  Divine  Service,  the  printer  followed  an  un- 
corrected  text  of  1549.  'On'  remains  in  Quicunque  (p.  173).  Pp.  187, 
189.  Food  was  very  dear  in  1551,  and  the  sweating-sickness  raged  in  the 
summer  (  Wriothesley*  s  Chronicle  ii  pp.  46  sq.,  49  sq.).  Pp.  217,  399.  The 
excision  of  the  first  mass  of  Christmas  and  of  the  second  of  Easter  day 
satisfies  Bucer's  objections,  Censura  vi  p.  465,  xxvii  p.  495.  P.  445.  The 
Sarum  Gospel  (S.  Jo.  xiv  23-31)  is  restored  and  added  to  that  of  the  Vigil 
(15-21),  together  with  the  connecting  verse  (22).  P.  553.  The  new 
collect  practically  reproduces  that  of  S.  James  (p.  6n);  and  the  change 
relates  itself  to  the  elimination  of  allusions  to  'apocrypha'  elsewhere 
(pp.  811,  823).  P.  603.  Was  the  mass  of  S.  Mary  Magdalen  omitted 
because  the  collect  of  1549  was  a  poor  one,  the  traditional  lesson  in 
congruous,  and  the  traditional  Gospel  at  best  doubtful  in  its  reference? 


1552  cki 

P.  639.  The  elimination  of  the  direction  as  to  the  Mass-vestments  corre 
sponds  to  Bucer's  objections  (Censura  ii  p.  458;  cp.  Strype  Mem.  ofCranmer 
ii  1 7,  Eccl.  Mem.  ii  2  docs.  LL,  NN).  P.  641.  On  the  recitation  of  the  Deca 
logue  see  above  pp.  clvii  sq.  With  'write  all  these  thy  laws  in  our  hearts'  cp. 
Pullain  f.  2  'dignarecordibus  nostris  earn  ita  tuo  spiritu  inscribere':  Laskip. 
70  'ut  lex  tua  sancta  illi  \sc.  cordi]  insculpi . . .  possit';  which  yet  is  scriptural 
and  obvious;  Heb.  viii  10,  Jer.  xxxi  33;  cp.  Prov.  iii  3,  vii  3  :  and  was 
so  familiar  a  thought  that  it  had  already  occurred  in  the  1550  version  of 
Veni  Creator  (below  p.  976),  'In  faithfull  hartes  writyng  thy  law/ 
where  there  is  nothing  corresponding  to  it  in  the  Latin.  P.  649.  The 
unfortunate  misprint  'goddes'  is  found  only  in  the  ed.  here  reprinted 
(Parker  First  Prayer  Book  p.  221).  'After  suche  sermon':  the  English 
and  French  tradition  was  to  give  out  notices  of  holydays  etc.  along  with 
the  Bidding  of  the  Bedes  before  the  sermon  (see  Rock  Church  of  our 
fathers,  ed.  Hart  and  Frere,  ii  p.  295  ;  Gasquet  Parish  life  p.  222  sq. ; 
below  pp.  1023,  1038  sq.).  P.  663.  The  omission  of  'Then  so  manye' 
is  consequential  on  the  new  rubric  as  to  the  altar  (p.  639),  and  the  dis 
couragement  of  the  presence  of  those  not  intending  to  communicate 
(p.  669).  The  omission  of  all  allusion  to  the  preparation  of  the  gifts  is 
not  one  of  Bucer's  suggestions,  Censura  iv  p.  463.  It  is  obvious  that  it 
is  not,  as  is  often  said,  that  the  direction  to  mix  the  chalice  was  omitted 
in  1552,  but  that  at  this  point,  where  alone  in  1549  the  contents  of  the 
chalice  were  fully  described,  all  allusion  to  the  matter  of  the  sacrament  is 
omitted;  while,  on  pp.  693,  717  the  description  is  unchanged:  and  on 
p.  701  it  is  'the  bread'  and  'the  cuppe"*  that  are  mentioned;  its  char 
acter  is  therefore  unaffected.  P.  665.  *al  Christian  kinges '  &c. :  Pia 
delib.  f.  93  'pro  aliis  (sc.  than  the  Emperor)  Regibus,  Principibus,  et 
Magistratibus  omnibus.'  The  omission  of  the  clause  praying  for  the  con 
gregation  at  the  Mass  (p.  688),  and  the  insertion  of  the  clause  'and 
especially  to,'  is  consequential  on  the  inclusion  of  'the  general  prayer'  in 
'table-prayers'  (p.  715).  The  omission  of  the  commemoration  of  the 
saints  exceeds  Bucer's  proposal  in  Censura  ix  pp.  467  sq.,  where  he 
assumes  that  it  will  be  retained.  For  his  proposed  substitute  for  the 
petition  for  the  dead,  see  below,  on  p.  873.  P.  667.  '  beyng  so  louingly  ' 
&c. :  Pia  delib.  f.  84b  '  tarn  clementer  nos  uocantem,  &  amanter  inuitantem 
ad  epulum  istud  salutis,  et  cibum  uitae  aeternae,  aspernari.'  P.  691.  In 
'We  do  not  presume,'  the  words  'in  these  holy  Mysteries'  were  omitted 
without  any  suggestion  of  Bucer's,  who  asked  for  no  change  (Censura  ix 
P-  473) ;  cp.  next  note.  P.  693.  'Graunt  that  wee' :  Bucer  proposed  (ib. 
p.  468)  '  benedic  nobis,  &  sanctifica  nos  verbo  ac  Spiritu  S.  tuo,  vt  corpus 
&  sanguinem  filij  tui  ex  ipsius  manu  his  mysterijs  vera  fide  percipiamus 
in  cibum  potumque  vitae  aeternae '  (which  in  part  answers  to  Eastern  for 
mulae  :  e.g.  D.Missa  S.fvan.C/irys.ff.H.sq.  KardTTf^ov  TO  Trvev/xa  <rov 
TO  ayiov  e<fi  ^//ds  /cat  errt  TO,  TrpoKetfj-eva  Sutpa  ravra  .  .  .  uxrrf  yevf(rdai  TOIS 

H€Ta\.afj.f3dvovcriv  .  .  .).     With  '  receyuyng  .  .  according  to '&c.,  cp.  Bucer's 


clxii  1552 

'  vt  quicunque  ea  (sc.  symbola)  ex  Domini  institute  .  .  .  sumerent ' 
(Censura  ix  p.  471).  The  omission  of  the  manual  acts  is  a  suggestion  of 
Bucer's  (ibid.  p.  472).  P.  701.  'in  theyr  handes,'  ibid,  iii  p.  462.  The 
form  of  communion,  defiant  alike  of  tradition  and  of  the  New  Testament, 
in  part  resembles  Laski's  (Forma  ac  ratio  pp.  254  sq.)  'Accipite,  edite 
(bibite),  &  memineritis  corpus  (sanguinem)  Domini  nostri  lesu  Christi 
pro  nobis  in  mortem  traditum  (fusum)  esse  in  crucis  patibulo,  ad  remis- 
sionem  omnium  peccatorum  nostrorum.'  Cp.  a  later  Lutheran  form, 
Kirchen  Ordnung .  .  in  der  Her rs chaff t  Waldeck  1556  (Richter  ii  p.  170) 
'  Gedenck,  Gleube  vnd  bekenne,  Das  Christus  (das  Blut  Christi)  fur  dich 
gestorben  (vergossen)  ist.'  Pp.  707,  7°9-  Of  the  omissions  in  '  O  Lorde 
and  heauenly,'  as  compared  with  p.  694,  the  first  is  consequential  on  the 
change  in  the  position  of  the  prayer ;  the  second  and  third  were  made 
against  Bucer's  entreaty  (Censura  ix  p.  473) ;  the  last  at  Bucer's  sugges 
tion,  his  proposed  substitute  being  rejected  (ibid.  p.  472),  '  Et  suscipe 
beneuolus  propter  filium  tuum  Mediatorem  nostrum  has  preces  nostras  & 
supplicationes,  non  ponderans  nostra  merita.'  P.  709.  The  'post  com 
munion'  (p.  702)  having  been  suppressed,  no  doubt  Gloria  in  excelsis  is 
put  here  to  supply  the  '  hymn '  of  S.  Mat.  xxvi  30.  The  additional  clause 
in  the  text  has  not  been  satisfactorily  accounted  for.  The  Codex 
Alexandrinus  (Swete  The  Psalms  in  Greek  p.  811)  has  an  additional 
cAe^crov  17/xas,  and  an  analogous  Greek  text  may  have  been  current 
in  the  i6th  cent.  P.  711.  The  addition  to  the  rubric  puts  these 
collects,  meagre  collection  as  they  are,  into  the  position  of  the 
memoriae  communes  of  the  Missal  (Miss.  Sarum,  ed.  Dickinson,  813* 
sqq.).  P.  7I5-  ' tne  general  prayer ' :  the  generates  orationes  of  the 
Missal  are  mass-collects  commemorating  classes  as  distinguished  from 
individuals  (ibid.  879*  sqq.);  the  German  gemein  or  allgemein  gebet 
corresponded  to  the  English  'bidding  of  the  bedes,'  but  in  this  the 
Cologne  Council  of  1536  (f.  xxv)  ordered  that  genealogiae  of  departed 
individuals  should  cease  and  only  a  communis  oratio  for  the  dead  in 
general  should  be  bidden ;  while  the  Lutheran  '  general  prayers'  were  'pro 
omnibus  hominum  statibus  et  necessitatibus  Ecclesiae,'  recited  by  the 
minister,  and  without  special  reference  to  individuals ;  and  as  we  have 
seen  the  English  prayer  for  the  Church  was  in  part  derived  from  the 
*  general  prayer '  of  the  Pia  deliberatio.  See  Journal  of  Theol.  Studies  x, 
pp.  497  sqq.  P.  717.  The  allowance  of  the  use  of  ordinary  bread  ('pane 
fermentato,  &  vsuali')  was  suggested  by  Bucer  Censura  iii  p.  459;  and 
perhaps  the  rest  of  the  rubric  was  intended  at  the  moment  to  carry 
Bucer's  sense  (ib.  iv  p.  464)  and  referred  even  to  the  consecrated  species. 
The  omission  of  the  third  paragraph  satisfies  an  objection  of  Bucer  (ibid. 
iii  p.  461).  P.  719.  The  omission  of  the  rubric  on  delivery  into  the  mouth 
is  Bucer's  suggestion  (see  above,  note  on  p.  701).  P.  721.  On  the  origin, 
status,  and  position  in  the  book,  of  this  paragraph,  see  above  pp.  cl  sqq. 
Pp.  727-743.  For  a  conspectus  of  the  omissions  here  made  from  the  rite 


clxiii 

of  1549,  seethe  items  enclosed  in  [  ]  in  the  tables  on  pp.  cxiv  sqq.  above. 
P.  727.  'at  the  Fonte,'  substituted  for  the  expressive  '  at  the  churche  doore,' 
is  in  accordance  with  Bucer's  suggestion,  Censura  ix  p.  477.  In  the 
first  prayer,  Bucer's  objection  (ibid,  xi  p.  479)  to  the  assertion,  as  old  as 
^S.  Ignatius  ad  Eph,  18,  of  the  consecration  of  water  by  our  Lord's  baptism, 
is  ignored.  The  emendations  are  generally  happy.  P.  731.  Bucer's 
proposed  substitute  for  the  exorcism  is  ignored  (ibid,  xiii  p.  480  :  Aeterne 
fili  Dei,  qui  vim  omnes  [sic]  malorum  spirituum  morte  tua  deuicisti : 
•depelle  ab  hoc  infante,  quern  ad  baptisma  tuum  sanctum,  vt  membrum 
fiat  tui  corporis,  vocare  es  dignatus,  fraudem  omnem  ac  violentiam 
Sathanae  &  angelorum  eius,  liberatumq;  potestate  tenebrarum  transfer  in 
regnum  filij  tui  dilecti,  ne  vlli  ei  immundi  spiritus  vnqua  queant  nocere 
vel  in  corpore,  vel  in  anima,  propter  gloriam  nominis  tui.  Amen.)  P.  733. 
On  what  is  omitted,  see  above  p.  cxviii.  P.  735.  The  omission  of  the 
entry  into  church  is  consequential  on  the  change  on  p.  727.  'Godfathers 
and  godmothers':  in  accordance  with  Bucer's  objection  to  direct  address 
to  the  child  (ibid.  p.  480).  For  the  interrogations,  except  for  adults,  he 
would  substitute  'Vultis  vos,  pro  vestra  parte,  dare  fidelem  operam,  vt 
hie  infans  cum  eb  adoleuerit,  discat  religionis  nostrae  Catechismum,  eoque 
percepto  renunciet  Sathanae,  &  credere  se  profiteatur  in  Deum'  &c. 
P.  737.  On  the  emendations  in  the  creed,  see  above  p.  clx.  P.  739. 
The  omission  of  the  collect  praying  for  the  consecration  of  the  water 
answers  to  Bucer's  objection,  Censura  xvi  p.  481.  P.  741.  The  omission 
of  the  direction  for  trine  immersion  is  wanton  enough,  even  though 
S.  Gregory  the  Great  had  declared  it  to  be  indifferent  (Epp.  i  41).  The 
postponement  of  the  crossing  till  after  baptism  makes  an  obvious  anticlimax 
(cp.  p.  cxi).  Bucer's  suggested  substitute  for  the  formula  is  rejected : 
Censura  xii  p.  479  *  Da  huic,  6  Deus,  infanti,  figmento  tuo,  sic  meritum 
ac  vim  excipere  crucis  filij  Dei,  vt  eius  ipsum  nunquam  pudeat,  semper- 
que  crucifigatur  mundo,  &  ei  mundus,  depugnetque  strenue  sub  hoc  signo 
-contra  peccatum,  mundum  &  Sathanam  :  atque  perseueret  fidelis  in  tua 
iusticia  atque  obsequio  vsque  ad  finem  vitae  suae.  Amen.'  P.  743.  The 
abolition  of  the  white  garment  and  the  unction  is  in  accordance  with 
Bucer's  objection  (ibid,  x  p.  478).  The  recitation  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  at  this 
point  is  a  substitute  for  the  tradition  of  it  at  p.  733;  but  it  is  justifiable 
as  the  first  utterance  of  the  '  children  of  adoption.'  Pp.  755'757»  Notice 
the  additions  here,  as  compared  with  that  in  the  rubric  on  p.  735  above, 
on  which  see  note.  P.  797.  The  multiplication  of  occasions  of  catechising 
is  in  accordance  with  Bucer's  suggestion,  Censura  xviii  p.  485.  Pp.  8OI, 
803.  Bucer  (ibid,  xx  p.  488)  would  alter  the  order  of  the  causes  of  matri 
mony,  putting  the  last  first  (cp.  Encheirid.  Colon,  above  p.  cxxiii).  P.  805. 
'  the  accustomed  duty  to  the  priest  and  clerk.'  It  is  amusing  to  notice 
that,  of  all  the  changes  in  1552,  none  compromises  the  financial  interests 
of  the  clergy;  while  here  they  are  emphasised.  P.  807.  Here  the 
omission  and  the  change  are  mostly  consequential  on  what  is  referred  to 


clxiv  1552 

in  the  preceding  note.  P.  8ll.  Notice  the  new  avoidance  of  allusions 
to  'apocrypha.'  P.  835.  The  omission  of  the  Unction  of  the  Sick  is  in 
accordance  with  Bucer's  criticism  (Centura  xxi  p.  489)  who  describes  it  as 
'  praepostera  inuectum  Apostolici  facti  imitatione '  (cp.  Artt.  of  Religion 
xxv,  1563),  and  as  in  practice  only  administered  in  extremis.  P.  843.  The 
omission  of  the  second  paragraph  satisfies  Peter  Martyr's  criticism  (p.  cxliv 
above).  The  almost  absolute  requirement  of  *  a  good  nombere  to  receyue 
the  communion  wyth  the  sycke  personne '  (cp.  p.  847),  it  is  difficult  to 
describe  as  other  than  merely  superstitious.  P.  849.  On  the  ruin  of  the 
Order  for  the  Burial  of  the  Dead  see  above  p.  cliv.  P.  859.  The  change 
in  the  rubric  as  to  '  casting  earth '  would  seem  to  imply  that  the  actual 
filling  in  of  the  grave  is  here  contemplated,  unless  ''the  earth'  means  the 
familiar  earth  of  the  traditional  use.  The  passage  quoted  from  Pia  delib, 
is  the  beginning  of  the  second  exhortation  at  the  burial  of  the  dead  (f.  1 10). 
The  omission  of  petitions  for  the  dead  throughout  is  in  accordance  with 
Bucer's  criticism  (Censura  xxiii  p.  490;  only,  he  supposed  that  in  the 
Mass  of  1549  'pro  viuis  tantum  oratur').  P.  86l.  The  omission  of  the 
Psalms  was  probably,  in  part  at  least,  occasioned  by  the  fact  that  those 
of  1549  were  only  intelligible  as  said  in  persona  defuncti  and  therefore 
involved  prayer  for  the  departed.  P.  873.  The  suppression  of  the  preces 
and  the  change  in  the  collect  is  dictated,  negatively  by  the  rejection 
of  prayers  for  the  dead;  positively,  perhaps  by  Pia  delib.  f.  ii2b 
'  Gratias  agimus  tibi  omnipotens  Deus .  .  .  quod  hunc  fratrem  nostrum  .  .  . 
in  tuum  Regnum  euocare,  ac  transferre  dignatus  sis,'  certainly  by  Bucer's 
proposed  substitute  for  the  petition  for  the  dead  in  the  Mass,  Censura  ix 
p.  468  '  Quomodo  vna  cum  his  (sc.  the  saints),  &  omnibus  qui  ad  te  nos 
hinc  in  fide  nominis  tui  praecesserunt,  possimus  in  aduentu  filij  tui  gloriose 
prodire  ad  resurrectionem  vitse,  atq;  collocari  ad  dextera  filij  tui,  & 
audire  laeta  illam  vocem,  venite  benedicti,  &c.'  P.  877.  In  the  new 
ending  of  the  collect,  '  we  maye  be  ...  prepared  for  you '  is  from  the  other 
wise  suppressed  collect  on  p.  860  ;  '  from  the  beginning  .  .  .  redemer '  from 
the  old  conclusion  of  the  Service  collect,  p.  874.  P.  88l.  The  change  in 
the  rubric  is  more  or  less  consequential  on  the  new  rubric  pp.  639  sq. 
P.  885.  The  new  clause  in  the  rubric  is  consequential  on  the  change  in 
the  title  of  the  office,  the  omission  on  those  on  p.  743.  Bucer  Censura 
xxiv  p.  490  also  criticised  the  'accustomed  offerings,' apparently  depre 
cating  offerings  at  or  for  particular  offices,  as  distinguished  from  the 
general  offerings  of  the  Church.  P.  887.  Bucer  Censura  xxv  p.  491 
desired  that  this  office  should  be  used  at  least  4  times  a  year.  His 
proposed  'maledictions,'  based  on  the  Decalogue  (ibid.\  are  ignored. 
P.  901.  On  the  Psalter  see  above  p.  cli.  P.  927.  The  first  and 
second  of  'certayne  notes'  is  now  represented  by  the  new  rubric  on 
p.  127.  The  omission  of  the  third  is  in  accordance  with  Bucer's  criticism, 
Censura  v  p.  465  ;  that  of  the  fourth,  indicates  that  the  project  of  a  Proces 
sional  in  English  (cp.  pp.  Ixi,  cxxix)  has  now  been  abandoned.  P.  951. 


THE  REIGN  OF  MARY  clxv 

Almost  immediately  on  the  publication  of  the  Fourme  and  maner 
J.  Hooper  in  the  third  of  his  Sermons  on  Jonas  preached  before  the  King 
and  the  Council  on  March  5  1549-50  assailed  the  formula  with  which  the 
oath  concluded  (Early  writings  of  bishop  Hooper \  Parker  Soc.,  p.  479  : 
cp.  his  letter  to  Bullinger,  March  27,  in  Original  Letters  \>.  81).  At  Easter 
he  was  nominated  to  the  see  of  Gloucester  but  refused  it  partly  on  account 
of  these  words  of  the  oath  (Letter  to  Bullinger,  June  29,  ibid.  p.  87) ;  and 
his  scruples  on  this  point  were  not  satisfied  till  his  second  appearance 
before  the  Council  on  July  20,  when,  according  to  M.  Micronius's  story, 
in  consequence  of  Hooper's  arguments  young  Edward  struck  out  with  his 
own  hand  the  incriminated  words  (Micronius  to  Bullinger,  Aug.  28,  ibid. 
pp.  566  sq.).  P.  1005.  Hooper  had  not  criticised  the  form  of  the  Oath 
of  Canonical  Obedience,  since  *  in  the  oath  for  the  bishop  is  no  mention 
made  of  any  saints  '  (Early  writings  p.  479)  ;  but  it  is  here  modified  in  the 
same  sense  as  is  the  Oath  of  Supremacy  (see  preceding  note). 

XI 

I.  Edward  VI  died  July  6  1553,  and  after  a  few  months 
the  career  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  was  closed  for  the 
present.1  In  the  autumn  Mary's  first  Act  of  Repeal  required 
that,  on  and  after  December  20, '  such  divine  service  and  ad 
ministration  of  the  sacraments  as  were  most  commonly  used  ' 
4  in  the  last  year  of  '  Henry  VIII  be  '  used  and  frequented 
throughout  the  whole  realm  of  England  and  all  other  the 
queen's  majesty's  dominions  '  2  :  that  is  to  say,  the  traditional 
rite  was  restored,  with  three  modifications  :  viz.  certain 
changes  in  the  observance  of  festivals,  the  addition  of  an 
English  lesson  at  Matins  and  Evensong,  and  the  substitution 
of  the  English  Litany  for  the  Processional.3  On  March  4, 
1 553-4  a  series  of  royal  Injunctions  was  issued,  the  I2th  of 
which  confirmed  the  first  of  these  modifications  ;  while  the 
nth  restored  the  Processional,  and  by  implication  abolished 
the  English  Litany.4  Perhaps  the  English  lessons  were  ignored 
from  the  outset. 

1  What  there  was  of  a  history  of  the  Book  from  1553  to  !558  was  transacted 
-on  the  Continent.    See  A  Brieff  discours  off  the  troubles  begonne  at  Franckford 
in  Germany  Anno  Domini   1554.   Abowte  the  Booke  off  common  prayer  and 
Ceremonies  .  .  .  M.D.LXXV. 

2  Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  Ixxiii  p.  379. 

3  Above  pp.  Ivii  sq.,  Ixii. 

4  Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  Ixxiv  p.  382. 


clxvi  MARIAN  AND  ELIZABETHAN  LITANIES 

Yet  the  Litany  was  reissued  at  some  date  later  than  the  marriage  of 
Philip  and  Mary  (July  25  1554),  without  title-page  or  colophon,  date  or 
printer's  name  (Brit.  Mus.  c.  25.  b.  10).  The  text  is  in  general  that  of 
1552 ;  but  in  suffrage  9  it  reads  'lightening  and  tempest'  and  omits  'and 
murder';  in  10  omits  *  from  the  tyranny  .  .  .  enormities';  in  14  reads 
'  vniuersal ' ;  in  15,  '  Phylyp  and  Mary '  with  consequential  changes  in  this 
and  the  two  following  suffrages  ;  in  18  '  the  true ' ;  in  26  *  and  comfort ' ;  in 
the  Lord's  Prayer,  'let  vs  not  be  ledde,'  and  omits  'Amen';  in  the  two 
following  rubrics  omits  'The';  at  the  end  of  the  collect  reads  'lesus'; 
and  lower  down  has  'sorow'  for  '  sorowes,' and  'names  sake';  after  the 
second  collect,  instead  of  the  occasional  prayers,  it  inserts  the  collect  for 
Advent  Sunday  (p.  201)  and  '  Almightye  God,  the  fountayne  of  all  wysdo, 
whiche  hast  promysed  .  .  .  these  thinges  which  we  faithfullye  asked  .  .  . 
our  lord  '  (see  3rd  and  4th  collects  on  p.  713) ;  and  after  the  final  prayer 
adds  'C  The  ende  of  the  Letanie.' 

2.  Elizabeth  succeeded  Nov.  17  1558,  and  for  6  months 
things  continued,  officially,  as  they  were,  except  that  the 
royal  Proclamation  of  Dec.  27,  which  forbade  all  preaching 
and  teaching  except  of  the  Epistle  and  Gospel,  and  the  Ten 
Commandments,  in  English,  'without  exposition  or  addition 
of  any  manner  sense,'  until  measures  have  been  taken  in 
Parliament,  allowed  the  general  use  of  '  the  common  Litany 
used  at  this  present  in  her  majesty's  chapel,'  and  the  Lord's 
Prayer  and  the  Creed  in  English 1 ;  and,  to  further  this 
use,  before  Feb.  7  1558-9  was  published  The  Letanye,  vsed 
in  the  Queues  Maiesties  Chappel,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the 
Proclamation.  Anno  Christi  1559? 

The  Litany  had  already  been  published  in  two,  apparently  unofficial, 
editions,  without  title-page  or  colophon,  since  the  accession  of  Elizabeth. 
The  one  is  reprinted,  from  W.  Maskell's  '  unique  copy,'  in  Liturgical 
services  of  the  reign  of  queen  Elizabeth^  Parker  Soc.,  pp.  3  sqq.  It  follows 
the  text  of  1552,  except  that,  according  to  this  reprint,  in  suffrage  n  it 
has  ' the  holy  nativity ';  in  14  'universal';  in  15  'Elizabeth,'  with  con 
sequential  changes  in  this  and  the  two  following  suffrages;  in  26  'and 
comfort' ;  in  32  'so  that' ;  in  the  Lord's  Prayer  'suffer  us  not  to  be  led' 
(1544);  after  the  first  collect  'Amen';  below,  'dolour  of  our  heart' 
(1544);  in  the  second  collect  'us  those  evils'  (omitting  'all') :  instead  of 
the  occasional  prayers,  the  2nd,  3rd  and  5th  of  the  final  collects  of  1544, 


1  Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  Ixxvii  p.  416. 

2  On   the   date   of  the  issue  of  this   Litany,  see   Parker  Introduction 
revisions  p.  xxxix  note  v. 


THE  LITANY  OF  THE  QUEEN'S  CHAPEL  clxvii 

but  with  'the  pitifulness*  in  the  2nd,  'lesus'  in  the  3rd,  and  'we  against' 
(omitting  *  may')  and  *  only  mediator  '  in  the  5th  ;  and  in  the  final  prayer, 
entitled  '  A  prayer  of  ChrysostomeJ  reads  'gathered  together.'  The  other 
edition  (Cambridge,  University  Library,  A.  17.  30)  is  identical  with  the 
first,  except  that  in  suffrage  10  it  omits  'from  the  tyranny  .  .  .  enormities.' 
The  Let  any  e  vsed  in  the  Queries  Maiesties  Chappel  is  reprinted,  from  the 
copy  in  the  Harsnet  Library  at  Colchester,  in  Liturgical  services  of  the  reign 
of  Queen  Elizabeth  pp.  10  sqq.  Here  the  Litany  is  preceded  by  the  Con 
fession  before  communion  (p.  68 1)  with  the  pronouns  in  the  singular; 
the  text  of  the  Litany  is  that  of  1552,  but  in  suffrage  9  it  reads  'lightning 
and  tempest';  in  10  omits  'from  the  tyranny  .  .  .  enormities';  enlarges 
15  into  the  proper  suffrage  used  at  Coronations,  from  which  it  would 
appear  that  this  Litany  was  prepared  for  Elizabeth's  coronation  on  Jan. 
15  1558-9  * ;  in  26  reads  '  and  comfort ' ;  in  32  '  so  that ' ;  adds  '  Amen  '  to 
the  first  collect;  after  the  2nd  collect  follow  *  A  prayer  for  the  Queen's 
Majesty'  23\&  the  3rd  of  the  final  collects  of  1544  (for  the  clergy  etc., 
reading  '  everlasting '  for  '  everliving  '),  the  '  Prayer  of  Chrysostome '  (read 
ing  *  gathered  together '),  '  The  grace  of  our  Lord,'  and  '  Here  endeth 
the  Litany  used  in  the  Queen's  Chapel ' ;  after  which  are  added  the  occasional 
prayers  of  1552  (omitting  the  second  alternative  '/»  the  time  of  dearth'} 
and  the  2nd  of  the  final  collects  of  1544  ('O  God  whose  nature');  the 
Lord's  Prayer,  the  Creed  and  the  Ten  Commandments ;  and  a  series  of 
graces  before  and  after  meat.  The  Psalmi  seu  precationes  of  John  Fisher 
bishop  of  Rochester  (Cologne  1525  [?] ;  reprinted  iny.  Fischerii  Opera 
Wiirzburg  1597,  cc.  1734  sqq.,  and  in  Private  prayers  put  forth  by  authority 
during  the  reign  of  queen  Elizabeth,  Parker  Soc.,  pp.  318  sqq.)  was  trans 
lated  into  English,  and  was  printed  by  T.  Berthelet  in  1544  and  1545 
with  the  title  Psalmes  or  prayers  taken  out  of  holie  Scripture.  To  this 
version  are  appended  two  further  prayers,  one  'A  prayer  for  the  King,' 
the  other  *  A  prayer  for  men  to  saye  entring  into  battayle ' ;  and  the  same 
two  prayers  are  also  appended  to  Prayers  or  medytacions,  wherin  the 
mynde  is  styrred  padently  to  suffre  all  afflictions  here,  to  sette  at  nought  the 
vayne  prosperitie  of  this  worlde,  and  alway  to  longe  for  the  euerlastyng 
felicitie :  collected  out  of  holy  woorkes  by  the  moste  vertuous  and  gracious 
princes  Catharine  [Parr]  Quene  of  Englande,  France,  and  Irelande, 
Berthelet,  1545;  and  to  the  Litany  in  The  psalter  or  boke  of  the  Psalmes 
&c.,  R.  Car,  1548  (p.  Ix  above).  The  'prayer  for  the  King,'  in  the  text  of 

1  The  rendering  is  so  fine  that  it  is  tempting  to  suppose  that  it  had  been  made 
by  Cranmer  in  view  of  the  coronation  of  Edward  VI  ;  and  it  is  to  be  noted  that 
it  does  not  perhaps  quite  exactly  represent  the  Latin,  while  Cranmer  habitually 
thought  that  pietas  means  '  religion '  or  '  godliness,'  here  '  worshipping,'  (quite 
wrongly  in  collects  of  Epiph.  v,  Trin.  xxii,  xxiii)  and  commonly  introduced  '  true  ' 
in  this  connexion  (Epiph.  v  pietate,  Trin.  vii ;  religionis,  xiii  digne).  But  the 
Litany  was  not  sung  either  in  Latin  or  in  English  at  Edward's  Coronation 
(Burnet  Hist.  Ref.  ii,  rec.  4). 


clxviii  THE  THIRD  ACT  OF  UNIFORMITY 

Psalmes  or  prayers,  is  as  follows  :  '  O  Lorde  lesu  Christe  most  hygh,  most 
mighty  e,  kynge  of  kynges  lorde  of  lordes,  the  oncly  rular  of  princis,  the  very 
sonne  of  god,  on  whose  ryght  hand  syttynge,  doeste  frame  thy  throne 
beholde  all  the  dwellers  vpon  earth  :  with  moste  lowly  hartes  we  beseche  the, 
vouchesafe  with  fauourable  regarde,  to  beholde  our  most  gratious  soueraygne 
lorde,  kynge  HENRY  the  eight,  and  so  replenyshe  hym  with  the  grace  of  thy 
holye  spyrite,  that  he  alway  indyne  to  thy  wyll,  and  walke  in  thy  waye, 
Kepe  hym  farre  of  frome  ignoraunce,  but  thoroughe  thy  gyft,  let  prudence 
and  knowlage  alwaye  abounde  in  his  royall  hart  so  instructe  hym.  [sic]  (O 
LORDE  IKSV)  reygnynge  vpon  vs  in  earth,  that  his  humaine  maiestie,  alwaye 
obeye  thy  diuine  maiestye  in  feare  and  dreade.  Indue  hym  plenty  fully 
with  heuenly  giftes.  Graunt  him  in  helth  and  welthe  longe  to  lyue. 
Heape  glory  and  honour  vppon  him.  Gladde  hymn  with  the  ioye  of 
thy  countenace.  So  strength  hym,  that  he  may  vanquysshe  and  ouercome 
all  his  and  our  foes,  and  be  dread  and  feared  of  all  the  ennemies  of  his 
realme.'  The  'prayer  for  the  Queen's  Majesty'  in  the  chapel-Litany 
consists  of  the  italicised  clauses  of  this  prayer,  connected  and  concluded 
as  on  pp.  149,  151  below.  The  first  half  of  the  prayer  seems  to  depend 
upon  the  first  prayer  after  the  Litany  of  the  Or  do  consecrationis  regis  (Missalc 
Westmonasteriense,  ed.  Legg,  H.B.S.  1893,  c.  687)  'Omnipotens  sempi- 
terne  deus  .  .  .  rex  regnancium.  dominusque  dominancium  .  .  .  respice 
quesumus  .  .  .  super  hunc  famulum  tuum  .  .  .  quatinus  .  .  .  tibi  in 
omnibus  placeat.  et  per  tramitem  iusticie  inoffenso  gressu  semper  in- 
cedat.  .  .  .' 

3.  (a)  The  new  Act  of  Uniformity,  which  was  introduced 
into  Parliament  on  Ap.  18  1559  and  disposed  of  on  Ap.  28, 
restored  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  '  authorized  by  Parlia 
ment  in  the  .  .  .  fifth  and  sixth  year  of  the  reign  of  King 
Edward  the  sixth,  with  one  alteration  or  addition  of  certein 
lessons  to  be  vsed  on  every  Sunday  in  the  year,  and  the  form 
of  the  Letany  altered,  and  corrected,  and  two  sentences  only 
added  in  the  delivery  of  the  sacrament  to  the  communicants,' * 
to  be  used  and  frequented,  on  pain  of  severer  penalties  than 
those  of  the  former  Acts,  on  and  after  the  following  feast  of 
S.  John  Baptist.2  The  Act  further  provided  that  '  such  orna 
ments  of  the  church,  and  of  the  Ministers  thereof  shall  be 
retained,  and  be  in  vse,  as  was  in  this  church  of  England  by 
the  authority  of  Parliament  in  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of 

1  P.  ii  below. 

2  The  English  service  began  in  the  Queen's  chapel  on  May  12  (Machyrls 
Diary  p.  197). 


THE  BOOK  OF  1559  clxix 

King  Edward  the  sixth,  vntil  other  order  shall  be  therein 
taken,  by  authority  of  the  Queens  Maiesty,  with  the  advice  of 
her  Commissioners  appointed  and  authorized  vnder  the  great 
seal  of  England,  for  causes  ecclesiasticall  or  of  the  Metropoli- 
tane  of  this  Realm  '  ;  and  empowered  the  Queen,  if  needful, 
4  by  the  like  advice  '  to  '  ordain  and  publish  such  further 
Ceremonies  or  Rites,  as  may  be  most  for  the  advancement  of 
Gods  glory,  the  edifying  of  his  Church,  and  the  due  reverence 
of  Christs  holy  Mysteries  and  Sacraments.' * 

For  the  history  of  the  revision  and  of  the  passing  of  the  Act  of 
Uniformity  see  H.  Gee  The  Elizabethan  Prayer  Book  and  Ornaments  i, 
ii :  W.  H.  Frere  The  English  Church  in  the  reigns  of  Elizabeth  and 
James  I  i-iii ;  for  the  text  of  the  Act,  below  pp.  9  sqq. 

(b)  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer  was  issued,  during  1559, 
by  Rich.  Jugge  and  Jo.  Cawood  in  two  or  three  impressions, 
and  by  Rich.  Graf  ton  in  more  than  one  impression.  The 
text  of  1552  is  emended  or  supplemented  at  three  points  in 
accordance  with  the  Act  of  Uniformity  ;  but  otherwise,  the 
Book  does  not  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the  Act,  since 
several  other  changes  are  made,  nor  is  the  text  at  all  uniform 
in  the  several  impressions  ;  while  later  in  the  reign  many, 
apparently  quite  unauthorised,  changes  are  made  in  it. 

For  the  several  impressions  of  1559  see  Parker  Introduction  to  revisions 
p.  xlii ;  and  for  later  editions  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  ibid.  pp.  xlv  sq. 
One  of  the  Jugge  and  Cawood  impressions  of  1559  (Brit.  Mus.  c.  25. 
m.  7),  is  reprinted  with  variants  of  a  Grafton  impression  in  the  margin,  in 
Liturgical  services  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  pp.  23  sqq. ;  a  Grafton  impres 
sion  (Brit.  Mus.  468.  b.  8)  was  reprinted  for  W.  Pickering  1844. 

(a)  As  to  the  changes  required  by  the  Act,  (i)  proper  first  lessons  are 
provided  for  all  Sundays,  (2)  the   petition  against  the  Pope  (p.  177)  is 
omitted    in    the   Litany,   and    (3)    in   the   administration  of    the    holy 
communion  (p.   701),  the   form   of   1549  is   prefixed  to  that  of   1552. 

(b)  The  further  changes  in  the  text  of  1552  are:  (i)  proper  first  lessons 
.are  provided,  not  only  for  Sundays,  but  also  for  other  festivals  and  holy- 
days;  (2)  the  substance  of  the  provision  of  the  Act  as  to  the  ornaments 
of  the  minister  is  substituted  for  the  second  rubric  on  p.  127,  while  the 
preceding  rubric  is  also  modified;  (3)  the  Litany  is  not  that  of  1552,  but 
that  of  the  royal  chapel  (but  without  its  readings  in  suffrages  26  and  32, 
and  without '  Amen '  after  the  first  collect :  p.  clxvii  above) ;  while  at  least 

1  Pp.  23,  25  below. 


clxx  THE  ORDINAL  AND  THE  INJUNCTIONS 

one  issue  of  Jugge  and  Cawood  in  1559  follows  the  chapel-Litany  down 
to  the  end  of  the  first  collect,  and  then  reverts  to  that  of  1552  (see 
Liturgical  services  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  pp.  74  sq.);  (4)  the  '  Declara 
tion  on  kneeling'  (p.  721)  is  omitted,  being  regarded,  no  doubt,  in  view 
of  its  origin,  as  no  part  of  the  Book,  (c)  The  Book  was  not  issued  in  any 
uniform  text.  The  issues  of  Jugge  and  Cawood  on  the  one  hand  and 
those  of  Grafton  on  the  other  are  neither  themselves  uniform  nor 
consistent  with  each  other  or  with  the  text  of  1552,  itself  not  wholly 
uniform  in  the  several  impressions  of  it  (see  Liturgical  services  of  the  reign 
of  Elizabeth  pp.  xiv  sq.  and  the  collations  pp.  23-245). 1  (d}  Later  in  the 
reign  a  large  number  of  small  unauthorised  changes  are  made  in  the  text 
whether  by  addition  or  by  modification,  besides  one  much  more  consider 
able  in  the  collect  of  S.  Mark's  day  (p.  579:  see  Liturgical  Services 
pp.  xv,  i67).2 

4.  The  four  me  and  maner  of  making  and  consecratyng, 
bisshops,  priestes,  and  deacons  was  not  included  in  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  of  1559,  nor  in  any  subsequent  issue  before 
1662  ;  but  it  was  printed  separately  by  Jugge  and  Cawood  in 
1559,  with  no  change  except  in  the  terms  of  the  '  Oath  of  the 
Queen's  Sovereignty.' 

Reprinted  in  Liturgical  services  pp.  272  sqq.  It  was  probably 
assumed  in  the  measures  of  1559  that  the  Ordinal  was  part  of  the  Book 
of  Common  Prayer,  as  in  1552,  and  therefore  needed  no  express  restoration. 
But  it  was  still  possible  to  contend  that  it  was  an  independent  book  and 
therefore  still  unauthorised ;  a  contention  that  might  seem  to  be  justified 
by  the  fact  that  it  was  issued  independently.  For  the  questions  that  arose 
out  of  this  contention  see  Strype  Annals  I  ii  ch.  xlix ;  Estcourt  Anglican 
Ordinations  iii ;  Denny  and  Lacey  de  Hierarchia  Anglicana  §§  14,  32,  300. 
The  legal  status  of  the  rite  was  expressly  and  retrospectively  secured  by  the 
36th  of  the  Articles  of  Religion  1563  and  the  Act  8  Eliz.  c.  i  (1565-6). 

5.  (a)  In  the  summer  of  1559  was  issued  a  series  of  royal 
Injunctions,  repeating  with  little  change  26  out  of  the  38  of 
1547, 3  and  adding  29  new  ones.     These   Injunctions  were 
distributed  by  the  visitors  who  carried  out  the  royal  Visita 
tion,  for  the  enforcement  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer 

1  In  the  4th  col.  of  the  Synopsis  readings  of  Jugge  and  Cawood,  which  are 
perpetuated  in   1661,  are   denoted  by  the  index  la,  those  of  Grafton  by  lb  ; 
those  common  to  both  by  1  simply.    I  have  not  collated  the  impressions  of  1559, 
but  have  followed  W.  K.  Clay's  collations  in  Liturgical  Services. 

2  In  the  4th  col.  these  unauthorised  readings  are  denoted  by  the  index  3. 
Here  again  I  have  not  collated  the  editions  of  Elizabeth's  reign,  but  have  made 
use  of  Clay's  collation  of  the  1596  edition.     These  changes  begin  to  appear  at 
least  as  early  as  about  1570.  3  See  above  p.  Ixix. 


THE  INTERPRETATIONS  clxxi 

and  the  administration  of  the  oath  of  supremacy,  in  the 
following  August,  September  and  October. 

For  the  text  of  the  Injunctions  see  Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  i  pp.  178  sqq.  \ 
Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  Ixxviii  pp.  417.  Of  the  new  Injunctions,  31, 
32,  34  reproduce  73,  77,  80  of  Cranmer's  Articles  to  be  enquired  of  in  the 
visitations  to  be  had  within  the  diocese  of  Canterbury  of  1547,  printed  in 
Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  \  pp.  41  sqq.  Among  the  additions  made  by  the 
Elizabethan  Injunctions  to  those  of  Edward  VI  are  (a)  an  exception  to 
the  prohibition  of  processions,  permitting  '  the  perambulation  of  the 
circuits  of  parishes'  at  Rogationtide,  and  providing  a  rite  for  it,  and 
contemplating  further  provision;  (t>)  the  requirement  that  existing  choral 
foundations  in  collegiate  and  parochial  churches  be  maintained,  and  that 
plainsong  be  used  in  all  parts  of  the  service,  but  with  a  permission  to  use, 
before  or  after  matins  and  evensong,  'a  hymn  or  such  like  song'  in 
figured  music,  so  long  as  the  meaning  of  the  words  be  not  obscured; 
(c)  the  requirement  of  wafer-bread  at  the  Eucharist  '  somewhat  bigger  in 
compass '  than  the  traditional  c  singing-cakes ' ;  while  (d]  the  form  of  the 
Bidding-prayer  is  emended  (see  below  p.  1027). 

(b)  The  Injunctions,  together  with  the  Act  of  Uniformity, 
and  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  constituted  the  new  ritual 
'  settlement.'  But  in  view  of  the  attitude  of  the  extreme 
reforming  party,  and  especially  of  the  returned  exiles,  and  of 
the  practical  impossibility  of  enforcing  the  ceremonial  regu 
lations  as  they  stood,  in  1560  the  bishops  drew  up,  'as  an 
appendix  to  the  Injunctions,'  what  is  known  as  the  Interpre 
tations  and  further  considerations,  primarily  it  would  seem  for 
their  own  guidance  in  the  administration  of  their  dioceses, 
embodying  a  compromise  on  the  ceremonial  question  chiefly 
at  issue,  that  of  the  vestments. 

For  the  text  of  the  Interpretations  see  Strype  Annals  I  i  ch.  xvii :  it 
is  re-edited  from  all  the  three  known  MSS  in  W.  M.  Kennedy  The 
*  Interpretations'  of  the  bishops,  Alcuin  Club  Tracts,  1908.  The  text  con 
tained  in  Petyt  MSS  538.  38  and  538.  47,  in  the  Library  of  the  Inner 
Temple,  is  earlier  than  Jan.  1560-1;  while  the  copy  among  the  Parker 
MSS  (vol.  cvi  p.  423,  in  the  Library  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge) 
is  later  than  the  new  Kalendar  of  Jan.  1560-1,  and  differs  somewhat  in 
content  and  in  text  from  the  Petyt  copies  :  Kennedy  pp.  7  sq.  For  the  place 
and  significance  of  the  Interpretations  in  the  development  of  the  situation, 
see  Gee  Elizabethan  Prayer  Book  and  Ornaments  pp.  1 56  sqq. ;  Frere  History 
of  the  Church  of  England  in  the  reigns  of  Elizabeth  and  James  /pp.  59  sq. ; 
Kennedy  op.  cit.  Introd.  The  Interpretations,  among  other  provisions, 


clxxii    ADVERTISEMENTS  AND  THE  NEW  KALENDAR 

(a)  further  define  the  rite  of  Rogation  processions ;  (b}  propose  a  longer 
Catechism  '  for  the  erudition  of  simple  curates ' ;  (c)  propose  subjects  for 
further  official  Homilies ;  and  (d)  take  a  first  step  in  a  compromise  as  to 
the  Ornaments  Rubric,  requiring  the  use  of  the  cope  at  '  the  ministration 
of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  the  surplice  at  other  ministrations.' 

(c)  The  difficulties  of  administration  and  the  ceremonial 
disorder  increased  during  the  next  four  years  ;  and  on  Jan.  25 
1564-5  the  Queen  wrote  a  peremptory  letter  to  the  bishops, 
describing  the  prevailing  diversity  of  practice,  and  requiring 
uniformity  to  be  enforced.  Consequently  the  bishops  drew 
up  a  book  of  Articles,  which  then  the  Queen  capriciously 
refused  to  authorise.  In  the  event,  early  in  1566  the  Articles, 
somewhat  modified,  were  issued  for  his  own  province  by  the 
archbishop,  Matthew  Parker  (1559-1575),  without  the  formal 
consent  of  the  crown,  under  the  title  Aduertisments  partly 
for  due  order  in  the  publique  administration  of  common  prayers 
and  vsinge  the  holy  Sacramentes,  and  partly  for  the  apparell  of 
all  persons  ecclesiasticall,  by  vertue  of  the  Queenes  maiesties 
letters,  commaunding  the  same,  the  xxv.  day  of  January  [1564-5]. 
The  Advertisements  are  based  on  the  Interpretations,  and  they 
mark  a  further  step  in  the  compromise. 

For  the  text  see  Card  well  Doc.  Ann.  i  pp.  287  sqq. ;  for  their  history 
and  significance,  Gee  pp.  163  sqq.;  Frere  pp.  114  sqq.  It  is  sufficient 
to  notice  here  that  the  Advertisements  (a)  require  the  use  of  the  cope  for 
the  three  ministers  at  the  altar  only  in  collegiate  and  cathedral  churches, 
and  elsewhere  the  surplice;  and  (b)  repeat  the  prescription  of  the 
later  text  of  the  Interpretations  for  the  Rogation-rite  (see  below,  p.  1046), 

6.  After  18  months'  use  the  restored  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  was  officially  recognised  to  be  unsatisfactory  in  one 
respect  ;  and  for  a  remedy  Elizabeth  exercised  the  authority 
to  '  take  further  order  '  conferred  on  the  crown  by  the  Act  of 
Uniformity.  In  a  letter  dated  Jan.  22  1560-1  she  directed 
M.  Parker,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Edm.  Grindal,  bishop 
of  London  (1559-1570),  Wm.  Bill,  dean  of  Westminster 
(1560-1561),  and  Walter  Haddon,  master  of  requests  (f  1572), 
as  ecclesiastical  commissioners,  to  examine  the  Table  of 
Lessons,  and  where  desirable  to  reform  it  by  substituting 
more  edifying  chapters,  and  to  issue  a  new  Kalendar  embody- 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  HOMILIES  clxxiii 

ing  their  amendments.1  The  outcome  was  a  revised  edition, 
published  in  1561,  of  the  preliminary  pages  of  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer,2  remedying  the  faults  complained  of. 

The  new  kalendar  etc.  of  1561  is  reprinted  in  Liturgical  services  of 
the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  Parker  Soc.,  pp.  436  sqq.  In  the  new 
Table  of  Lessons,  some  changes  are  made  in  the  selection  of  first  lessons 
of  weekdays,  and  some  seven  propers  of  holydays  are  changed.  But  in 
some  respects  the  revisers  exceeded  the  express  terms  of  their  commission. 
(a)  In  the  book  of  1559,  while  proper  first  lessons  are  provided  for  all 
Sundays  and  holydays,  the  existing  lessons  are  left  in  their  places 
throughout  the  year,  so  that  on  immovable  feasts  the  lessons  of  the  course 
are  simply  obliterated  every  year  by  the  propers  ;  whereas  the  new  kalendar 
shifts  the  lessons  of  the  course  so  as  to  leave  the  immovable  feasts  vacant  for 
the  propers,  (b)  Whereas  the  kalendar  of  1552  and  1559  had  contained 
only  four  feasts  for  which  no  service  was  assigned,  the  new  kalendar  adds 
59  more,  besides  marking  the  first  of  'the  great  O's'  (Dec.  16).  (c) 
Besides  some  other  added  matter,  the  holidays  retained  in  the  Act  of 
1551  (which  in  the  kalendar  are  marked  in  red)  and  the  relation  of 
Septuagesima  &c.,  Rogations,  Whitsunday  and  Trinity  Sunday  to  Easter, 
are  set  out  at  length,  and  the  Vigils  are  marked  in  the  kalendar.3 

7.  A  note  at  the  end  of  the  Homilies  of  1547  had  promised 
further  homilies  on  several  subjects  ;  the  Books  of  1552  and 
1559  and  the  Injunctions  had  contemplated  the  issue  of  them  ; 
and  Bucer  and  the  Interpretations  of  1560  had  proposed 
themes.4  On  Feb.  5  1563  the  Convocation  of  Canterbury 
sanctioned  a  new  book,  which  appeared  before  the  end  of 
July,  under  the  title  The  Seconde  Tome  of  Homelyes,  of  such 
matters  as  were  promysed  and  Instituted  in  the  former  part  of 
Homely  es,  set  out  by  the  aucthoritye  of  the  Queues  Maiestie : 
And  to  be  read  in  euery  par y she  Churche  agreablye  ;  being  20 
sermons  on  subjects,  including  some  of  those  promised  in  1547, 
some  of  those  suggested  by  Bucer,  and  some  of  those  proposed 
by  the  Interpretations  ;  preceded  by  a  Preface  and  '  An  Admon- 

1  Card  well  Doc.  Ann.  \  p.  260, 

2  Corresponding  to  the  right-hand  pages  49-°5>  73,  77,  67,  81-125  below. 

3  What  is  derived  from  the  new  kalendar  in  the  4th  col.  of  the  Synopsis 
below   is   marked  by  the  index  number  2.     It  may  be  well  to  say  that  on 
PP-  53-63  ^  is  assumed  that  the  contents  of  the  red-framed  cols,  will  be  read 
straight  across  without  regard  to  the  perpendicular  lines,  and  the  index  number 
covers  everything,  so  read,  down  to  the  asterisk. 

4  Pp.  649,  651  below  ;  Bucer  Censura  vii  p.  466  ;  Injunction  27  (Gee  and 
Hardy  p.  430) ;  Interpretations,  ed.  Kennedy,  pp.  30,  40. 


clxxiv  THE  GENEVA  BIBLE 

ition  to  all  Ministers  Ecclesiastical!.'  In  1571  Convocation 
added  a  2ist  'against  disobedience  and  wilfull  rebellion/ 
being  a  homily  occasioned  by  the  Rising  in  the  North  in 
November  and  December  1569,  which  was  written  early  in 
1570,  and  had  already  been  published  in  five  editions. 

The  Preface  was  written  by  Rich.  Cox,  bishop  of  Ely  (1559-1580) ;  of 
the  Homilies,  1-3,  7-9,  15,  16,  19  were  probably  written  by  Jo.  Jewel 
bishop  of  Salisbury  (1560-1571);  4  by  Edm.  Grindal  bishop  of  London 
(1559-1570);  5,  6  by  Jo.  Pilkington  bishop  of  Durham  (1561-1576);  part 
of  10  is  borrowed  from  Erasmus  Paradesis  id  est  adhortatio  ad  christianae 
philosophiae  studium;  133.  and  14  are  from  Rich.  Taverner's  Epistles  and 
Gospels  wyth  a  brief  Postil  vpon  the  same  1540;  17,  of  which  the  first 
three  parts  had  already  been  published,  in  1560  or  1561,  was  probably  by 
M.  Parkerj  of  18  the  first  half  and  the  conclusion  is  translated  from  the 
Adhortatio  ad  Pios  Contuges  of  Veit  Dietrich  of  Niirnberg,  Luther's  ally 
(t  1549),  and  the  rest  is  a  translation  of  a  section  of  Jo.  Fisher  of 
Rochester's  Latin  version  of  S.  Chrysostom's  Horn,  xxvi  in  i  Cor., 
included  in  Erasmus's  Latin  ed.  of  S.  Chrysostom,  1520;  20  is  in  part 
derived  from  the  6th  homily  on  Joel  of  Rudolph  Gualther  of  Zurich 
(t  1586).  Between  Feb.  5  and  the  end  of  July  the  book  was  for  some 
time  in  the  Queen's  possession  and  changes  were  made  in  Homilies  2,  4, 
9,  12,  15.  See  J.  Griffiths  The  two  books  of  Homilies  pp.  xiv  sqq. ;  J.  T. 
Tomlinson  Prayer  Book,  Articles  and  Homilies  pp.  244  sqq.  The  two 
books  of  Homilies  were  first  combined  in  Certaine  Sermons  Or  Homilies 
appointed  to  be  read  in  Churches  London,  John  Bill,  1623.  For  the 
bibliography  see  Griffiths  pp.  Ixii  sqq. 

XII 

The  ritual  '  settlement '  thus  reached  remained  officially 
unchanged  for  the  next  forty  years.  We  turn  now  to  two 
groups  of  the  products  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  which  affected 
the  text  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  later  on. 

i.  Two  new  or  amended  versions  of  the  Bible,  and  one  of 
the  New  Testament  alone,  were  published. 

(a)  The  so-called  '  Geneva  Bible  '  was  the  work  of  some 
of  the  Marian  exiles  in  Geneva.  In  1557  Wm.  Whittingham, 
afterwards  dean  of  Durham  (1563-1579),  published  The 
Nevve  Testament  of  ovr  Lord  lesus  Christ.  Conferred  dili 
gently  with  the  Greke,  and  best  approued  translations,  with  argu 
ments,  '  diuersities  of  readings,'  and  annotations  (Geneva, 


THE  BISHOPS'  BIBLE  clxxv 

Conrad  Badius).  This  was  followed  in  1560  by  The  Bible  and 
Holy  Scriptvres  conteyned  in  the  Olde  and  Newe  Testament. 
Translated  according  to  the  Ebrue  and  Greke,  and  conferred  With 
the  best  translations  in  diners  langages.  With  most  profitable 
annotations  vpon  all  the  hard  places,  and  other  things  of  great 
importance  (Geneva,  Rouland  Hall),  the  work  of  Whittingham, 
Ant.  Gilby  (f  1585),  Tho.  Sampson,  afterwards  dean  of 
Christ  Church  (1561-1565),  and  perhaps  others.  These  were 
the  first  English  versions  to  be  printed  in  roman  type,  with 
verse-divisions,  and  in  portable  form  ;  and  the  Geneva  Bible 
became  the  popular  version,  while  it  was  commonly  used  even 
by  such  a  divine  as  Lancelot  Andrewes.  The  issue  of  it  was 
restricted  during  the  lifetime  of  Mat.  Parker  ;  but  after  his 
death  in  1575  it  was  freely  issued. 

Whittingham's  New  Testament  is  based  on  Tyndale's  (p.  1  above), 
compared  with  the  Great  Bible  (ibid.),  and  largely  influenced  by  the 
Latin  version  of  Theodore  Beza  (1519-1605),  Calvin's  coadjutor  and 
successor  at  Geneva,  which  formed  part  of  Robert  Estienne's  Biblia 
vtriusque  Testamenti (Geneva  1556,  1557).  The  verse-divisions  of  the  New 
Testament  are  those  of  R.  Estienne's,  Gk.-Lat.,  "Airavra  ra  TTJS  *a  11/17$ 
SiaflrjKTjs  Geneva  1551.  In  the  Geneva  Bible,  the  Old  Testament  is  based 
on  the  Great  Bible,  corrected  by  the  Hebrew  and  the  Greek,  with  the  help 
of  other  versions  ;  viz.  (i)  the  Biblia  sacrosancta  Testamenti  Veteris  6°  Noui 
(Zurich  1543)  of  Leo  Jud  and  other  Zurich  divines;  (2)  the  Latin  of 
Seb.  Miinster  (p.  li) ;  and  (3)  Calvin's  revision  of  the  French  version  of 
Pierre  Robert  Olivetan,  La  Bible  Qui  est  toute  la  Saincte  escripture 
(Neuchatel  1535),  which  was  founded  on  the  version  of  Jacques  le  Fevre 
of  Etaples  (Faber  Stapulensis)  La  saincte  Bible  (Antwerp  1530  :  itself  in 
part  a  revision  of  La  bible  historiee  of  Jean  de  Rely,  c.  1498),  and 
influenced  by  Pagnino's  Latin  (p.  xxxvi),  Luther's  German  (ibid.),  and  the 
Italian  version  (Venice  1532)  of  Ant.  Brucioli,  the  Florentine  humanist 
(c.  1 490 — c.  1 550).  The  New  Testament  is  that  of  Whittingham  corrected 
by  further  use  of  Beza's  Latin. 

See  Darlow  and  Moule  Historical  Catalogue  nos.  76,  77,  6140,  6124, 
4623,  3710,  3708,.  3703,  5578;  Westcott  History  of  the  English  Bible, 
ed.  Wright,  pp.  90  sqq.,  212  sqq. ;  A.  W.  Pollard  Records  of  the  English 
Bible  pp.  24  sqq. 

(b)  Having  regard  at  once  to  the  superiority  of  the  Geneva 
Bible  to  the  Great  Bible,  considered  as  a  version,  and  to  the 
Calvinistic  character  of  the  annotations  with  which  it  was 


clxxvi  THE  RHEIMS  VERSION 

embellished,  in  1566  or  earlier  Mat.  Parker  revived  the  pro 
ject  of  a  '  Bishops'  Bible  '  which  had  failed  of  result  in  the 
reign  of  Henry  VIII.1  The  work  of  revision  was  distributed 
among  a  number  of  bishops  and  other  divines,  and  The 
.  holie  .  Bible  .  conteynyng  the  olde  Testament  and  the  newe, 
known  as  '  The  Bishops'  Bible  '  was  ready  in  Oct.  1568.  The 
text  is  divided  into  verses,  as  in  the  Geneva  version  ;  and 
certain  passages  are  enclosed  in  inverted  commas,  as  to  be 
omitted  in  public  reading.  A  canon  of  the  Convocation  of 
Canterbury  of  1571  requires  churchwardens  to  provide 
copies  for  all  churches  '  if  it  can  conveniently  be  done  '  2  ;  and 
after  1569  the  Great  Bible  was  no  longer  printed. 

The  translation  is  a  revision  of  the  Great  Bible  by  reference  to 
the  Hebrew  and  the  Greek,  to  the  Latin  versions  of  Pagnino  (p.  xxxvi 
above)  and  Miinster  (p.  li)  and  that  of  Sebastien  Chateillon  (JBiblia, 
Interprete  Sebastiano  Castalwne,  Basel  1551),  and  to  the  English  of  the 
Geneva  Bible. 

See  Darlow  and  Moule  nos.  89,  93,  96  &c.,  6131,  3720;  Westcott 
pp.  95  sqq.,  230  sqq. ;  Pollard  pp.  28  sqq.,  37  sqq. 

(c)  In  1582  appeared  The  New  Testament  of  lesvs  Christ, 
translated  faithfully  into  English,  out  of  the  authentical  Latin, 
according  to  the  best  corrected  copies  of  the  same,  diligently  con 
ferred  with  the  Greeke  and  other  editions  in  diners  languages, 
with  arguments,  annotations,  and  criticisms  of  the  English 
Bibles  (Rheims,  Jo.  Fogny),  known  as  the  '  Rheims  version/ 
The  translation  was  suggested  by  Wm.  Allen,  president  of 
the  English  College  at  Douai,  which  at  the  moment  had  with 
drawn  to  Rheims  (1578-93),  and  was  made  by  Gregory  Martin, 
lecturer  in  Hebrew  and  Holy  Scripture,  under  the  supervision 
of  Allen,  and  of  Richard  Bristow,  moderator  of  the  College. 
In  The  Text  of  the  New  Testament  of  lesvs  Christ,  trans 
lated  ovt  of  the  vulgar  Latine  by  the  Papists  of  the  traiterous 
Seminarie  at  Rhemes,  issued  in  1589,  and  reprinted  in  1601, 
1617,  and  1633,  Wm.  Fulke,  master  of  Pembroke  Coll.,  Cam 
bridge  (1578-1589),  gave  a  wider  currency  to  the  Rheims 
version  by  reproducing  the  text,  arguments,  and  annotations, 

1  P.  1  above.  2  Cardwell  Synodalia  i  p.  123. 


POYNET'S  AND  NOWELL'S  CATECHISMS         clxxvii 

in  parallel  with  the  New  Testament  of  the  Bishops'  Bible, 
together  with  his  owrt  '  confutation.'  The  Old  Testament  was 
translated  at  the  same  time  as  the  New,  but  remained  unpub 
lished  until  1609-10  (The  Holie  Bible  faithfully  translated  into 
English,  ovt  of  the  avthentical  Latin  Doway,  Lavrence  Kellam). 

The  translation  is  of  the  text  of  the  Vulgate,  with  careful  reference  to 
the  Greek ;  but  it  is  based  on  the  earlier  English  versions  and  is  especially 
affected  by  Coverdale's  The  newe  testament  both  Latine  and  Englyshe  ech 
correspondent  to  the  other  after  the  vulgare  texte,  communely  called  S.  leroms, 
1538. 

See  Darlowand  Moule  nos.  134,  156,  231,  19  ;  Westcott  pp.  102  sqq., 
245  sqq. ;  Pollard  pp.  33  sqq.,  298  sqq. 

2.  The  English  Catechism  was  exceptional  not  only,  as  it 
still  is,  in  its  shortness,  and  in  leaving  much  to  oral  develop 
ment  on  the  part  of  the  catechist  ;  but  also  in  treating  of  only 
three  of  the  current  heads  and  omitting  all  treatment  of  the 
Sacraments. 

(a)  Perhaps  as  a  help  to  the  catechist  in  developing  its 
suggestions,  perhaps  still  more  to  give  a  certain  colour  to  the 
development,  there  appeared  in  1553  A  short  Catechisme,  or 
playne  instruction,  conteynynge  the  sume  of  Christian  learninge, 
sett  fourth  by  the  Kings  maiesties  authoritie,for  all  Scholemaisters 
to  teache.  This  Catechism  was  the  work  of  Jo.  Poynet,  bishop  of 
Winchester  (I55O-I553).1     Like  the  Catechism  of  1549  it  did 
not  treat  at  length  of  the  Sacraments,  but  only  noticed  them 
under  the  9th  article  of  the  Creed. 

It  was  also  issued  in  Latin  :  Catechismus  brevis,  christianae  disdplinae 
summam  continens,  omnibus  Ludimagistris  authoritate  regia  commendatus, 
1553- 

(b)  More  famous  and  more  influential  were  the  Catechisms 
of  Alex.  No  well,  dean  of  S.  Paul's  (1560-1602). 

(i)  The  Catechismus,  siue  prima  Institutio,  Disciplinaque 
pietatis  Christiana,  Latine  explicata  was  published  in  1570 
(Reg.  Wolf)  at  the  desire  of  the  two  archbishops,  Parker  and 
Grindal.  This  Catechism,  which  borrows  appreciably  from 
Poynet,  and  is  perhaps  not  unaffected  by  the  Calvin's  Cate- 

1  R.  Churton  Life  of  Alexander  Novell  p.  161. 

m 


clxxviii  NOWELL'S  CATECHISMS 

chisme  de  Veglise  de  Geneve  of  1545 1,  is  on  altogether  a  different 
scale  from  that  of  the  Church  Catechism,  and  it  treats,  at 
proportionate  length,  of  the  sacraments  of  Baptism  and  the 
Eucharist. 

NowelPs  first  Catechism  was  written  some  years  before  it  was  pub 
lished,  and  it  received  the  approval  of  the  Lower  House  of  the  Convoca 
tion  of  Canterbury  in  1563,  when  it  was  also  presented  to  the  Upper 
House,  but  with  no  result.  Ten  editions  were  issued  up  to  1603,  and  it 
was  also  translated  into  Greek  (1573)  and  English  (1570).  It  is  reprinted, 
with  Tho.  Norton's  English  version,  in  A  Catechism  written  in  Latin  by 
Alexander  Nowell,  Parker  Soc.,  1853. 

(2)  In  the  same  year,   1570,   Nowell  also  published  an 
abridgement,  Christianae  Pietatis  prima  Institutio  ad  usum 
scholarum. 

This  also  was  translated  into  English  (1572)  and  Greek  (1575),  and 
was  popular  in  the  i7th  cent.,  appearing  in  10  editions  up  to  1687. 

(3)  In   1572  Nowell  published  a  third  catechism,   Cate- 
chismus  parvus  pueris  primum  Latine  qui  ediscatur  proponendus 
in  scholis,  being  the  Church  Catechism  expanded  by  a  develop 
ment  of  the  duty  towards  neighbours  and  a  treatment  of  the 
two  greater  Sacraments. 

This  also  was  translated  into  Greek  (1574)  and  English  (1577),  and 
continued  to  be  popular,  appearing  in  8  editions  up  to  1687.  Mr. 
W.  Hunt  in  Diet.  National  Biog.  xli  p.  249  argues  that  the  Catechismus 
parvus  is  the  original  of  the  Catechism  of  1549 ;  but  his  argument  is  not 
convincing.  In  particular,  with  reference  to  the  statement  which  Mr. 
Hunt  quotes  from  Izaak  Walton  (CompUat  Angler,  London  1653,  p.  31), 
it  seems  evident  from  the  context,  where  Nowell's  Catechism  is  assigned 
to  '  the  Reformation  of  Queen  Elizabeth  (not  that  of  Henry  the  V1I2}J 
that  either  (i)  Walton  is  referring  to  some  edition  of  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  which  had  one  of  Nowell's  Catechisms  bound  up  with  it  ('that 
.  .  .  Catechism  which  is  printed  with  our  good  old  Service  Book  ') ;  or  (2), 
what  is  much  more  likely,  knowing  that  Nowell  published  'a  Catechism,' 
which  became  authorised,  and  being  familiar  with  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  only  as  it  was  at  the  moment  he  was  writing,  he  inferred  that 
Nowell  was  the  author  of  the  Church  Catechism.  For  the  bibliography 
of  Nowell's  Catechisms  see  Mr.  Hunt's  article,  pp.  248  sq. 


1  Churton  Life  of  Alexander  Nowell^.  158  says  'the  catechism  of  Henry 
Stephens';  but  Henri  Estienne  only  translated  Calvin's  Catechism  into  Greek 
TYJS  xptvTiav&v  Trio-Teas  Rob.  Stephanus  1551). 


HAMPTON  COURT  CONFERENCE  clxxix 

XIII 

On  his  way  to  England  in  April  1603,  James  I  received  a 
petition  as  from  '  more  than  a  thousand  of  [his]  majesty's 
subjects  and  ministers,'  in  which  the  petitioners  'acquaint* 
the  king  with  their  '  particular  griefs  '  as  touching  both  the 
ecclesiastical  situation  generally  and  the  '  burden  of  human 
rites  and  ceremonies  '  under  which  they  are  suffering.1  So 
far  as  concerns  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  this  *  Millenary 
Petition  '  was  the  beginning  of  the  agitation  which  beset  the 
king,  to  secure  satisfaction  of  the  long-standing  puritan 
objections,2  which  Hooker  had  spaciously  contended  with  six 
years  before.3  The  upshot  of  the  agitation  was  that  James 
consented  to  a  Conference  to  be  held  between  representatives 
of  the  aggrieved  and  of  those  responsible  for  the  order  of  the 
Church.  The  Conference — which  was  a  curious  one,  being 
not  so  much  a  conference  between  the  parties  as  one  between 
each  of  the  parties  and  the  king — met  at  Hampton  Court  on 
Jan.  14,  16,  18,  1603-4.  Many  subjects  were  discussed  and 
treated  of  with  characteristic  loquacity  by  the  king  ;  and  in 
the  end  the  puritan  divines  gained  some  concessions  in 
partial  satisfaction  of  their  desires  and  convictions.4  The 
king  then,  in  the  exercise  of  the  authority  conferred  on  the 
crown  by  the  Act  of  Uniformity  of  1559  '  to  take  further  order  ' 
in  respect  of  rites  and  ceremonies,  directed  the  Metropolitan, 
Jo.  Whitgift  (1583-1604),  Rich.  Bancroft,  bishop  of  London 
(1597-1604),  Ant.  Watson,  bishop  of  Chichester  (1596-1605) 
and  '  some  others  of  our  commissioners,'  '  to  take  some  care 
and  payns  '  as  to  *  certeyne  thinges  '  in  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  which  '  require  some  declaration  and  enlargement  by 
way  of  explanation.'  The  commissioners  thereupon  framed 
the  amendments  proposed  and  reported  them  to  the  king, 

1  Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  Ixxxviii,  pp.  508  sq. 

2  These  complaints  had  already  begun  to  be  formulated  by  1563:    Frere 
English  Church  p.  95. 

3  The  fifth  book  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Polity  was  published  in  1597. 

4  For  the   proceedings  of  the  Conference  see  the   documents   printed  in 
Cardwell  Conferences  pp.  148  sqq.  ;  and  Frere  The  English  Church  in  the  reigns 
of  Elizabeth  and  James  I  pp.  295  sqq. 


clxxx  1 604 

who  returned  them  on  Feb.  9  with  his  approval  and  an  order 
that  the  Metropolitan  command  the  royal  printer,  Rob. 
Barker,  to  reprint  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  in  the  amended 
text,  and  take  order  that  the  Book  be  procured  and  observed 
in  every  parish-church  1  ;  and  on  March  5  he  issued  a  Pro 
clamation  enforcing  the  amended  Book.2  The  book  was 
printed  by  R.  Barker  before  March  25,  and  was  issued  in  some 
4  further  editions  in  1604. 

For  these  issues  see  Parker  Introduction  pp.  Ivii  sq. ;  and  for  subse 
quent  issues  in  the  reign  oi  James  I,  ibid.  p.  lix.  One  of  the  issues  of 
1604  was  reprinted  for  W.  Pickering  1844.  The  changes  made  are  the 
following,  (i)  The  Proclamation  of  March  5  is  inserted  after  the  Act  of 
Uniformity:  (2)  the  title  of  the  absolution  in  Divine  Service  (p.  131)  is 
expanded  :  (3)  the  incipits  of  the  Gospels  of  the  2nd  Sunday  after  Easter 
and  the  20th  after  Trinity  (pp.  421,  533)  are  corrected  :  (4)  the  title  of 
Confirmation  is  enlarged  (p.  793  :  this  to  satisfy  rather  the  king  [Cardwell 
Conferences^.  172]  than  the  puritans,  who  would  have  abolished  Confirma 
tion  altogether  [Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  p.  509]) :  (4)  the  first  lessons 
of  the  mornings  of  Aug.  26  and  Oct.  i,  and  those  of  the  evenings  of 
Oct.  2  and  Nov.  1 7  are  changed — a  concession,  so  far  as  it  goes,  to  the 
puritan  objections  to  '  apocrypha.'  Two  other  changes  are  more  important. 
(5)  The  rubrics  of  the  Order  of  Private  Baptism  were  altered  (pp.  749, 
751)  so  as  to  secure  that  children  should  be  baptized  only  by  a  'lawful 
minister,'  in  satisfaction  of  puritan  clericalism  and  objections  to  the 
ministry  of  women,  even  in  cases  of  necessity.  And  (6)  in  consequence 
of  the  complaint  that  the  Catechism  was  'too  brief,'  a  section  treating  of 
the  Sacraments  of  Baptism  and  the  Eucharist  was  added  (pp.  787-791), 
thus  bringing  up  the  Catechism  to  the  normal  standard.  In  the  'third 
series '  of  J.  Cosin's  '  Notes  on  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer '  ( Works 
Ang.-Cath.  Libr.  v  p.  491)  it  is  asserted  that  this  section  of  the  Catechism 
1  was  first  penned  by  Bishop  Overall  (then  dean  of  Paul's) ' ;  but  this  may 
be  only  a  misunderstanding  on  Cosin's  part  of  a  report  that  it  was  the 
work  of  '  the  dean  of  S.  Paul's ' ;  for  verbally  the  text  is  in  fact  almost 
wholly  derived  from  the  Catechisms  of  Overall's  predecessor,  Alexander 
Nowell,  while  no  doubt  the  colour  is  in  some  degree  changed  by  abridge 
ment  and  some  modification.  On  pp.  787-790  below,  Nowell's  '  Middle 
Catechism '  is  cited  as  the  source  of  this  section ;  but  in  some  respects 
the  English  is  nearer  to  the  '  Little  Catechism '  (p.  clxxviii  above) :  in  fact 
the  abbreviator  seems  to  have  had  both  catechisms  before  him  and  to 
have  followed  sometimes  the  one,  sometimes  the  other.  The  correspond- 

1  See  the  king's  letter,  Cardwell  Conferences  pp.  217  sqq. 

2  Ibid.  pp.  225  sqq. 


1 604  clxxxi 

ing  text  of  the  '  Little  Catechism '  is  as  follows  :  '  Quot  in  Ecclesia  sua  Sac- 
ramentainstituitDominus?  Duo:  Baptismum  et  Coenam  Dpmini.  Quidest 
Sacramentum  ?  Est  externum  et  aspectabile  signum  internam  arcanamque 
spiritualem  gratiam  repraesentans,  ab  ipso  Christo  institutum,  .  .  .  quo 
.  .  .  earum  [Dei  promissionum]  veritas  in  cordibus  nostris  certius  confir- 
matur.  Sacramentum  quot  partibus  constat  ?  Duabus  :  signo  externo  atque 
aspectabili,  et  interna  invisibilique  gratia.  Quod  est  in  Baptismo  signum 
externum  ?  Aqua,  in  quam  baptizatus  intingitur  ...  In  Nomine  Patris  et 
Filii  et  Spiritus  sancti.  Quae  est  arcana  et  spiritualis  gratia?  Remissio 
peccatorum  et  regeneratio  .  .  .  Quum  natura  .  .  filii  irae  .  .  .  simus, 
per  Baptismum  .  .  certiores  facti  filios  Dei  iam  nos  esse  .  .  .  Quae 
requiruntur  ab  iis  qui  ad  baptismum  accedunt  ?  Fides  et  poenitentia.  .  . 
Qui  fit  turn  vt  infantes  baptizentur,  qui  haec  per  aetatem  hactenus 
praestare  non  possunt  ?  .  .  .  quae  postquam  adoleuerint,  ipsos  intelligere 
,  .  oportet :  enitique  vt  .  .  .  quod  in  Baptismo  polliciti  sunt  atque 
professi,  moribus  et  vita  praestent.  Quae  est  Coenae  dominicae  ratio  ?  .  . 
In  quern  vsum?  Vt  mortis  Domini  .  .  .  gratam  perpetuo  memoriam 
celebremus  .  .  .  Quae  est  huius  Sacramenti  terrena  et  sensibilis  pars  ?  Panis 
et  vinum,  quibus  vtrisque,  ut  omnes  peraeque  vterentur,  Dominus  diserte 
praecepit.  Coelestis  ilia  pars  et  remota  ab  omnibus  externis  sensibus 
quaenam  est  ?  Corpus  et  sanguis  Christi,  quae  in  Coena  dominica  fidelibus 
dantur  ab  illisque  accipiuntur  .  .  revera  .  .  adeo  quidem,  vt  sicuti  panis 
corpora  nutrit,  ita  et  Corpus  Christi  animas  nostras  spiritualiter  per  fidem 
alat:  et  sicut  vino  .  .  roborantur  vires,  ita  sanguine  Christi  animae 
nostrae  reficiantur  atque  recreentur  per  fidem  .  .  .  Nostrum  quod  est 
officium  vt  recte  ad  Coenam  dominicam  accedamus?  Vt  nosipsos 
exploremus  ...  si  ex  animo  nos  poeniteat  peccatorum  nostrorum : 
deinde  si  certa  spe  de  Dei  per  Christum  misericordia  nitamur  .  .  .  cum 
grata  redemptionis  per  mortem  eius  acquisitae  memoria  :  .  .  si  de  vita  in 
futurum  pie  degenda  .  .  .  destinatum  propositum  suscipiamus  .  .  si 
proximos,  id  est  mortales  omnes  fraterno  amore  .  .  .  prosequamur.' 
(7)  Occasion  was  taken  to  make  some  further  additions,  which  had  not 
been  suggested  at  the  Conference :  viz.  a  suffrage  and  a  prayer  for  the 
queen  and  the  royal  family  were  added  to  the  suffrage  and  the  prayer  for  the 
king  in  the  Litany  (pp.  177,  clxvii  sqq.) ;  and  six  occasional  thanksgivings, 
very  poor  in  quality,  were  appended  to  the  occasional  prayers  after  the 
Litany  (pp.  195-199).  According  to  the  third  series  of  Cosin's  Notes  on 
the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  (  Works,  Angl.-Cath.  Libr.  v  p.  455)  and  his 
Particulars  to  be  considered  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  (ibid.  p.  5 1  o)  these 
thanksgivings  were  added  at  the  instance  of  the  puritan  divines  at  Hampton 
Court ;  but  there  is  no  notice  of  this  in  the  records  of  the  Conference.  Tho. 
Cartwright  had  criticised  *  the  default  of  the  book '  in  that  it  contained  no 
such  thanksgivings  (Hooker  E.  P.  v  43  §§  i,  2  and  Keble's  note  86  ad  loc.). 

In  the  revised  book  the  unauthorised  readings  which  had 


clxxxii  THE  CANONS  OF  1604 

found  their  way  into  the  text  in  the  preceding  30  or  40  years  * 
were  perpetuated,  and  further  readings  of  the  same  kind  were 
now  introduced.2  All  these  new  readings,  as  well  as  the 
changes  made  expressly,  may  be  said  to  have  been  implicitly 
authorised  by  the  8oth  canon  of  1604,  which  required  church 
wardens  with  all  convenient  speed  to  procure  copies  of  the 
book  '  nuper  in  paucis  explanatum  ex  auctoritate  regia.'  * 
But  the  process  was  not  yet  over,  and  new  emendations 
appear  from  time  to  time  between  1604  and  the  suppression 
of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  in  1645.* 


XIV 

I.  The  Convocation  of  Canterbury,  which  met  on  March 
20  1603-4,  under  the  presidency,  in  the  vacancy  of  the  metro 
politan  see,  of  Rich.  Bancroft,  bishop  of  London,  enacted  a 
series  of  141  disciplinary  canons.  The  series  is,  in  great 
measure,  only  a  codified  collection  of  enactments  issued  from 
time  to  time  and  by  various  authorities  during  the  preceding 
period  from  1547  onwards  ;  but  there  is  much  that  is  new. 
Besides  the  Latin  text,  Constitutiones  sive  canones  ecclesiastic} 
(J.  Norton,  1604),  the  canons  were  published  in  English  as 
recited  in,  and  forming  part  of,  the  royal  letters-patent  of 
assent  and  ratification,  in  Constitutions  and  Canons  Ecclesi 
astical,  treated  upon  by  the  Bishop  of  London  .  .  .  and  the 
rest  of  the  Bishops  and  Clergy  of  the  said  Province  ;  and  agreed 
upon  with  the  Kings  Majestys  Licence,  in  their  Synod  begun 
at  London,  Anno  Domini  1603  .  .  .  Imprinted  at  London  by 
Robert  Barker  .  .  .  anno  1604.  The  letters-patent  required 

1  See  above  p.  clxx. 

2  The  changes  and  additions  of  1604  and  these  further  emendations  of  the 
text,  so  far  as  they  are  perpetuated  in  the  text  of  1661,  are  marked  in  the  4th 
col.  below  by  the  index  number  4. 

3  Cardwell  Synodalia  \  pp.  210,  292. 

4  These  emendations  are   marked  below  by  the  index  5.     The   editions 
issued  between  1604  and  1642  have  not  been  examined  in  detail,  and  only  those 
new  readings  have  been  marked  which  the  text  of  1661  shares  with  that  of 
J.  Bill  1636.     The  passage  on  p.  151  marked5  was  not  changed  unofficially  :  see 
note  on  it  below,  p.  ccxiv. 


THE  BIBLE  OF   1611  clxxxiii 

the  canons  to  be  observed  throughout  the  kingdom  ;  but  to 
this  the  Convocation  of  York  demurred,  and  asked  for  a 
royal  licence  enabling  them  to  deal  with  the  matter ;  and 
having  received  it,  they  met  on  March  5  1606  and  after 
deliberation  unanimously  accepted  the  whole  series  and 
required  it  to  be  observed  in  the  province  of  York. 

For  the  Latin  text  of  the  canons  see  Card  well  Synodalia  \  pp.  164 
sqq. ;  for  the  English  and  the  letters-patent  ibid.  pp.  245  sqq. ;  for  the  history 
ibid.  p.  164  notes;  Frere  English  Church  in  the  reigns  of  Elizabeth  and 
fames  I  pp.  313  sq.  The  canons  deal  successively  with  the  Church  of 
England  and  impugners  of  it  (1-12),  divine  service  and  administration  of 
the  sacraments  (13-30),  the  clergy  (31-76),  schoolmasters  (77-79),  the 
maintenance  of  churches  (80-88),  churchwardens  and  sidesmen  (89-91), 
ecclesiastical  courts  and  officials  (9 2- 138),  and  synodal  authority  (139-141). 
Those  which  are  related  to  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  are  13-30,  mostly 
derived  from  the  rubrics,  the  Injunctions  of  1559  and  the  Advertisements  of 
1566,  but  including,  among  other  new  matter,  the  'further  declaration'  on 
the  use  of  the  sign  of  the  cross,  in  can.  30  ;  55  prescribing  the  Elizabethan 
Bidding-prayer  (p.  clxxi  above);  58,  67,  80-88. 

2.  As  we  have  seen,1  there  were  current  two  rival  versions 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  the  '  Bishops'  Bible  '  in  use  for  public 
reading  in  Divine  Service,  and  the  '  Geneva  Bible  '  in  wide 
spread  use  for  other  purposes.  At  the  Hampton  Court 
Conference  Jo.  Reynolds,  speaking  for  the  puritan  side,  had 
complained  of  the  imperfections  in  the  versions  allowed  in 
the  reigns  of  Henry  VIII  and  Edward  VI,  i.e.  in  the  '  Great 
Bible.'  If  the  *  Bishops'  Bible '  is  ignored,  this  is  no  doubt 
only  because  what  is  particularly  in  view  is  the  Psalter  and 
the  biblical  texts  contained  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer, 
from  which  in  fact  the  examples  of  mistranslation,  produced 
at  the  Conference,  are  cited.  Reynolds  accordingly  petitioned 
that  a  new  translation  be  taken  in  hand  ;  and  the  proposal 
was  eagerly  adopted  by  the  King,  who  desired  that  '  one 
uniform  translation  '  should  be  made  '  by  the  best  learned 
in  both  the  universities,'  '  to  be  reviewed  by  the  bishops,  and 
the  chief  learned  of  the  church  ;  from  them  to  be  presented 
to  the  privy  councel ;  and  lastly,  to  be  ratified  by  his  royal 

1  Above  pp.  clxxiv  sqq. 


clxxxiv  THE  BIBLE  OF   l6ll 

authority.  And  so  this  whole  church  to  be  bound  unto  it,  and 
none  other.'  *  By  the  end  of  June  1604  the  translators  had 
been  selected.  These  however  did  not  seriously  begin  their 
work  till  1607,  when  they  were  distributed  into  six  companies, 
of  which  two  worked  at  Oxford,  two  at  Cambridge,  and  two 
at  Westminster,  each  with  a  section  of  the  whole  assigned  to 
it.  The  work  was  finished  and  the  so-called  '  Authorised 
Version  '  was  published  in  i6n.2  An  edition  issued  by  the 
printers  to  the  University  of  Cambridge  in  1629  exhibits  a 
carefully  revised  text  of  the  version  ;  and  this  revision  is 
carried  still  further  in  the  Cambridge  edition  of  i638.3 

In  the  rules  laid  down  for  the  translators  it  is  required  that  the 
'  Bishops'  Bible '  be  adopted  as  the  basis  of  the  revision,  to  be  corrected 
where  necessary  by  the  versions  of  Tyndale,  Matthew,  and  Coverdale,  the 
'  Great  Bible  '  and  the  '  Geneva  Bible.' 4  But  besides  these  the  translators, 
as  they  state  in  their  preface  '  To  the  reader,'  had  recourse  to  the  '  Chaldee, 
Hebrewe,  Syrian,  Greeke '  and  '  Latine,'  and  to  the  Spanish,  French, 
Italian  and  Dutch  (i.e.  German).  The  Chaldee,  i.e.  the  Aramaic  of  the 
Targums,  had  been  printed,  both  otherwise,  and  in  the  '  Antwerp  Poly 
glot'  (Plantin  1572)  edited  by  Bendito  Arias  Montano  (1527-1598)  :  the 
Syriac  of  the  New  Testament  had  been  edited  by  J.  A.  Widmanstadt 
(1506-1559)  assisted  by  a  Syrian  ecclesiastic,  Moses  of  Mardin  (Liber 
Sacrosancti Evangelii  Vienna  1555),  and  again  by  Immanuel  Tremellius  of 
Ferrara  (1510-1580),  professor  of  Hebrew  at  Heidelberg,  along  with  the 
Greek,  Vulgate  Latin,  and  a  Latin  version  of  the  Syriac  ('H  Kouvr)  Aiafl^KT; 
etc.,  H.  Estienne,  Geneva  1569);  and  Tremellius  in  conjunction  with 
Frangois  du  Jon  (Franciscus  Junius)  of  Bourges  (1545-1602)  had  issued  a 
new  Latin  version  of  the  Old  Testament  (Testamenti  Veteris  Biblia  Sacra 
Frankfort  a.  M.  1577,  1579).  The  latest  Spanish  versions  were  La  Biblia 
(Basel  1569)  of  Cassiodoro  de  Reina  of  Seville  (c.  1520-1594),  who  from 
*559  to  I5^3  ministered  to  a  Spanish  congregation  in  London;  and 
La  Biblia  (Amsterdam  1602),  a  revision  of  C.  de  Reina's  version  made 
by  Cipriano  de  Valera  of  Seville  (c.  1532-1602),  who  took  refuge 
in  England  and  became  a  fellow  of  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge. 
In  French  the  notable  recent  versions  were  La  Bible  (H.  Estienne, 

1  Cardwell  Conferences  pp.  187  sq. 

2  In   1911  the  Clarendon  Press  issued  The  Holy  Bible  A  Facsimile  in  a 
reduced  size  of  the  Authorised  Version  published  in  the  year  1611  'with  an  intro 
duction  by  A.  W.  Pollard  and  illustrative  documents. 

3  A.  W.  Pollard  Records  of  the  English  Bible  (reprint  of  the  'introduction' 
above)  p.  75. 

4  A.  W.  Pollard  Records  pp.  53  sqq.  ;  Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  ii  pp.  in  sq. 


COSIN'S  DEVOTIONS  clxxxv 

Geneva  1560),  a  revision  of  Olivetan's  version,  and  La  Bible  (Geneva 
1588),  a  further  revision  by  C.  B.  Bertram,  professor  of  Oriental  languages 
at  Geneva,  assisted  by  Th.  Beza  and  others.  The  latest  Italian  translation 
was  La  Bibbia  (Geneva  1607)  of  Giov.  Diodati  (1576-1649),  professor  of 
Hebrew  at  Geneva,  which  is  still  the  official  protestant  version.  In  German 
nothing  new  had  appeared;  Luther's  Bible  continued  to  be  printed  in  its 
several  dialectical  forms  ;  and  the  version  of  the  Dominican  Joh.  Dieten- 
berger,  originally  issued  in  1534,  was  reissued  in  Catholische  Bibell 
(Cologne  I57S)-  These  were  the  materials  available  and  presumably 
referred  to  by  the  revisers  in  their  acknowledgment  of  indebtedness. 
But  they  incurred  another  debt '  with  no  other  acknowledgment  than  a  gibe  ' 
(Pollard  p.  61),  viz.  to  the  Rheims  version  of  the  New  Testament  (p.  clxxvi 
above)  from  which  they  took  'much  that  was  good.' 

See  Darlow  and  Moule  Historical  Catalogue  nos.  240,  1422,  8947, 
1421,  6165,  8472  sq.,  8475,  3722,  3736»  42°°>  4211,  5598>  X34;  and  for 
the  Cambridge  issues  of  1629  and  1638,  ibid.  324,  403;  Cardwell  Doc. 
Ann.  ii  pp.  65  sqq.,  106  sqq. ;  Westcott  History  pp.  107  sqq.,  255  sqq. ; 
Pollard  Records  pp.  37  sqq. ;  J.  G.  Carleton  The  part  of  Rheims  in  the 
making  of  tTie  English  Bible,  Oxford  1902. 

3.  In  1627  there  appeared  anonymously,  with  the  im 
primatur  of  Geo.  Monteigne,  bishop  of  London  (1621-1628),  A 
collection  of  private  devotions :  in  the  practice  of  the  ancient 
Chwch  called  the  hovrs  Of  Prayer.  As  they  were  after  this 
maner  published  by  Authoritie  of  Q.  Eliz.,  1560.  Taken  Out  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures,  the  Ancient  Fathers,  and  the  diuine  Seruice 
of  our  owne  Church  (London,  R.  Young)  .*  The  book  is  in  fact 
a  Primer,  founded  on  the  Orarivm  sev  libellvs  Precationum 
per  Regiam  maiestatem  Latine  ceditus  London,  W.  Seres,  I56o.2 
It  was  compiled,  at  the  desire  of  Charles  I,  by  John  Cosin,  at 
the  moment  canon  of  Durham  and  archdeacon  of  the  E. 
Riding,  for  the  use  of  the  English  ladies  in  the  suite  of  Hen 
rietta  Maria.3  Later  editions  bore  Cosin's  name  on  the 
title-page  ;  and  Wm.  Prynne  made  the  book  notorious  by 
his  attack  on  it  in  A  Brief e  Survay  and  Censure  of  Mr.  Cozens 
his  Couzening  Devotions  1628. 

1  Reprinted  in  Cosin    Works,  Libr.  Angl.-Cath.  Theol.,  ii  pp.  83  sqq.  ;  cp. 
Hoskins  Primers  pp.  270  sqq. 

2  Reprinted  in  Private  Prayers  set  forth  .  .  during  the  reign  of  Queen  Eliza 
beth,  Parker  Soc,  pp.  115  sqq.  :  cp.  Hoskins  pp.  253  sqq. 

3  For  the  circumstances  of  its  origin  see  Evelyn  Diary  Oct.  I  1651. 


clxxxvi  SCOTLAND 

It  contains  the  Kalendar  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  (1561),  with 
descriptions  and  dates  added  to  the  names  of  the  minor  saints ;  a  table  of 
feasts  etc. ;  the  Creed,  the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  Commandments,  etc.  :  the 
Hours,  from  Matins  to  Compline  (except  Prime) ;  the  Penitential  Psalms  ; 
the  Litany ;  the  Collects  ;  devotions  for  holy  Communion  and  for  Penance  ; 
prayers  for  the  king  and  queen,  for  Ember  weeks,  and  for  the  sick ;  and 
prayers  and  thanksgivings  for  sundry  purposes ;  with  instructions  in  the 
preface  and  at  other  points  in  the  book.1 

4.  In  Scotland  the  Book  of  1552  was  in  partial  use  from 
1557  onwards  ;  but  after  the  reformation  of  1560  it  was 
gradually  replaced  by  the  Book  of  Common  Order,  which  was 
substantially  identical  with  the  book — itself  largely  identical 
with  Calvin's  La  forme  des  prieres — compiled  by  Knox  and 
his  fellows  at  Geneva,2  and  was  authorised  by  the  General 
Assembly  in  I564.3  After  the  restoration  of  a  real  episcopate 
in  1 6 10,  in  place  of  the  '  tulchan  '  bishops  instituted  in  1572,, 
projects  for  a  new  service-book  began  to  be  formed,  and  in 
1616  the  General  Assembly  assented  to  the  adoption  of  a 
fixed  uniform  rite.  But,  except  that  The  forme  and  maner  of 
ordaining  ministers :  and  consecrating  of  arch-bishops  and 
bishops  used  in  the  Church  of  Scotland,  founded  on  the  English 
Ordinal,  but  ignoring  the  diaconate,  was  printed  in  1620,* 
no  definite  result  was  reached  till  1629,  when  the  Scottish 
bishops  negotiated  with  the  King,  and  in  consequence  Charles 
desired  Wm.  Laud,  bishop  of  London  (1628-1633)  to  com 
municate  with  the  bishops  on  the  matter.  Laud  recom 
mended  the  adoption  of  the  English  book,  and  induced  the 
King  to  take  the  same  view.  But  after  some  delay,  in  1633 

1  What  is  derived  from  this  book  in  the  4th  col.  of  the  Synopsis  below  is 
marked  by  the  index  7a. 

2  The  Forme  of  Prayers  and  Administration  of  the  Sacraments,  &c.  Vsed  in 
the  English  Congregation  at  Geneva  :  and  approved  by  tJie  famous  and  learned 
man  John   Calvin  .  .  ,  Printed  first  at   Geneva  MDLVIII  London    1643: 
Ratio  et  forma  publice  orandi  Deum,  atque  ad-minis  trandi  Sacramenta  et  cat. 
In  Anglorum   Ecclesiam,  qua  Geneuce  colligitur  recepta  Geneva  1556.     For 
Knox's  opinion  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  see  Kidd  Documents  pp.  691  sq. 

3  For  the  text  see  G.  W.  Sprott  The  Book  of  Common  Order  of  the  Church 
of  Scotland  Edinburgh  1901  :  for  the  history  ibid,  introduction  and  pp.  197  sqq.  ; 
Kidd  Documents  pp.  704  sq.,  708  sqq. 

4  Reprinted  in  The  Miscellany  of  the  Wodroiu  Society,  Edinburgh  1844,  pp. 
597  sqq. 


THE  SCOTTISH  BOOK  OF  1637  clxxxvii 

Charles  yielded  to  the  desire  of  the  Scottish  bishops  for  a 
service-book  of  their  own,  and  directed  a  committee  of 
bishops  to  prepare  it,  following  the  English  book  '  as  near  as 
can  be,'  and  to  submit  it  to  the  censure  of  Laud,  now  arch 
bishop  of  Canterbury  (1633-1645),  Wm.  Juxon,  bishop  of 
London  (1633-1660)  and  Matthew  Wren,  dean  of  Windsor 
(1628-1634).  The  work  was  carried  out  in  the  main  by  the 
bishops,  John  Maxwell  of  Ross  and  James  Wedderburn  of 
Dunblane.  Laud  had  been  reluctant  to  co-operate,  but  having 
consented  he  gave  them  '  the  best  help  he  could,'  and  the 
King  interested  himself  in  the  details  of  their  work.  The 
booke  of  Common  Prayer,  and  Administration  Of  The  Sacraments. 
And  other  parts  of  divine  Service  for  the  use  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland  was  published  early  in  1637.  Unhappily  it  rested 
only  on  the  authority  of  the  Crown  and  the  bishops,  without 
reference  to  the  General  Assembly  or  anybody  else,  and  was 
enjoined  by  a  royal  proclamation  dated  Dec.  20  1636  and 
prefixed  to  the  book.  The  results,  as  is  well  known,  were 
disastrous. 

See  J.  Cooper  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer  .  .  .  for  the  use  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland^  Church  Service  Society,  Edinb.  1904,  introduction; 
Procter  and  Frere  A  new  history  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  pp.  143 
sqq. ;  and  detailed  references  there  given. 

The  Scottish  book  is  a  revision  of  the  contemporary 
English  book,  partly  in  the  way  of  a  return  to  the  book  of 

1549- 

Its  chief  characteristics  are  the  following,  (i)  The  'Authorised 
Version'  of  1611  is  adopted  throughout,  even  for  the  Psalms ;  (2)  the  use 
of  the  'Apocrypha*  is  reduced  to  a  minimum;  (3)  the  prayers  for  the 
king,  the  royal  family  and  the  clergy,  the  prayer  of  S.  Chrysostom  and 
the  grace  are,  unfortunately,  appended  to  Divine  Service,  morning  and 
evening,  when  the  Litany  is  not  ordered  to  be  said;  (4)  a  prayer  for 
Embertides,  adapted  from  the  Ordinal,  is  provided ;  (5)  Easter  Even  is 
given  a  proper  collect,  and  the  collect  of  S.  Luke  is  modified ;  (6)  in  the 
Liturgy :  the  collect  for  the  king,  unhappily,  precedes  the  collect  of  the 
day;  the  offertory  rubrics  are  supplemented ;  in  the  prayer  for  the  Church, 
the  petition  for  the  congregation  and  the  commemoration  of  the  Saints 
are  restored  approximately  in  the  form  of  1549 ;  in  the  prayer  of  consecra 
tion  the  Invocation  is  reinserted,  and  immediately  after  the  consecration 


clxxxviii  THE  MEMORANDUM  OF  1641 

follows  the  prayer  of  oblation,  with  its  opening  paragraph  'Wherefore, 
O  Lord  ...  by  the  same '  (p.  694  below)  and  the  clause  *  whosoever  shall 
be  ...  and  they  in  him '  (tb.)  restored ;  and  the  Lord's  Prayer  with  its 
preface  (p.  696)  follows  the  canon ;  the  '  We  do  not  presume '  imme 
diately  precedes  the  communion  ;  and  the  form  of  administration  is  that 
of  1549,  with  the  1^  'Amen ' ;  (7)  the  Commination  is  once  more  directed 
to  be  used  on  Ash  Wednesday.  The  Ordinal  is  not  included  in  the 
book.1 

5.  Four  months  after  the  first  meeting  of  the  Long  Parlia 
ment  and  on  the  day  on  which  Laud  was  committed  to  the 
Tower  (March  i  1640-1),  the  Lords  appointed  a  Committee 
of  30  lay  peers  and  10  bishops  (to  whom  another  bishop  and 
2  other  lay  lords  were  added  on  March  12)  'to  take  into  con 
sideration  all  innovations  in  the  Church  concerning  religion.' 
Among  the  bishops  were  Jo.  Williams  of  Lincoln  (1621-1641) 
and  Matthew  Wren  of  Ely  (1638-1667).  On  March  10  a 
resolution  of  the  House  empowered  the  Committee  to  sum 
mon  any  divines  they  might  choose  '  for  their  better  informa 
tion  ' ;  and  accordingly  16  divines  were  summoned,  including 
the  great  Jas.  Ussher,  archbishop  of  Armagh  (1625-1656), 
Jo.  Hacket,  afterwards  bishop  of  Coventry  and  Li ch field 
(1661-1670),  and  Rob.  Sanderson,  afterwards  bishop  of 
Lincoln  (1660-1663).  The  Committee  appointed  a  Sub- 
Committee,  consisting  of  Williams  and  2  other  bishops,  and 
the  1 6  divines,  which  met  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber,  under 
the  presidency  of  Williams,  for  6  days,  and  discussed  a  number 
of  proposals.  The  Committee  itself  met  only  four  or  five 
times  up  to  April  8.  The  '  Root  and  Branch  '  Bill  of  May  27 
destroyed  all  hope  of  conciliation  ;  and  nothing  in  fact  is 
heard  of  either  Committee  or  Sub-Committee  after  May  7. 
And  nothing  is  known  of  the  details  of  their  proceedings 
except  what  can  be  inferred  from  a  document  drawn  up  by 
Williams,  Ussher  and  Hacket  and  four  other  members  of  the 
Sub-Committee,  which  was  published  unofficially  in  A  copie 
of  The  proceedings  of  some  worthy  and  learned  Divines,  appointed 
by  the  Lords  to  meet  at  the  Bishop  of  Lincolnes  in  Westminster  : 

1  Features  derived  from  the  Scottish  book  are  marked  by  the  index  6  in  the 
4th  col.  of  the  Synopsis. 


THE  DIRECTORY  clxxxix 

Touching  Innovations  in  the  Doctrine  and  Discipline  of  the  Church 
of  England,  Together  with  considerations  upon  the  Common  Prayer 
Book  1641.  This  document,  which  appears  to  be  a  memor 
andum  of  points  to  be  submitted  by  the  compilers  to  the  Sub- 
Committee,  is  in  three  sections,  treating  respectively  of 
'  Innovations  in  doctrine,'  '  Innovations  in  discipline/  and 
'  Considerations  on  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  '  ;  the  last 
consisting  of  35  suggestions  for  the  emendation  of  the  book. 

The  best  account  of  the  whole  incident  is  in  Selborne  Notes  on  some 
passages  in  the  liturgical  history  of  the  reformed  English  Church,  London 
1878,  pp.  31  sqq.,  where  all  the  authorities  are  referred  to.  The 
memorandum  is  reprinted  in  Mat.  Sylvester  Reliquiae  Baxterianae  1696, 
p.  369:  and  thence  in  Cardwell  Conferences  pp.  270  sqq.  (where,  on  pp. 
276  sqq.,  in  20  for  'confined'  read  'consigned,'  in  30  for  'Communion,' 
'  Commination,'  and  in  31  for  '  Liturgy,'  '  Litany ').  Of  the  35  suggestions 
three  (24,  25,  35)  do  not  relate  to  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  at  all; 
two  (15,  1 8)  relate  to  typographical  peculiarities  only  of  some  impres 
sions  ;  most  of  the  rest  relate  to  the  long-standing  puritan  criticisms. 

6.  By  an  Ordinance  of  Jan.  3  1644-5  tne  Long  Parlia 
ment  abolished  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  and  substituted 
for  it  A  Directory  for  the  PuUike  Worship  of  GOD,  Through 
out  the  Three  Kingdomes  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  a 
manual  of  Reformed  type,  akin  but  in  some  respects  superior 
to  the  Scottish  Book  of  Common  Order,  enjoining  an  order  of 
service  and  administration  of  the  sacraments,  and  suggesting 
the  topics  of  prayer  without  prescribing  fixed  formulae.1  A 
second  Ordinance  of  Aug.  23,  '  for  the  more  effectual  putting 
in  execution  of  the  Directory  for  Public  Worship,'  attached 
penalties  to  the  use  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  either 
publicly  or  in  the  family.2 

(a)  Under  these  conditions  the  question  naturally  arose 
as  to  the  duty  of  the  clergy  :  whether  they  were  still  bound 

1  London  1644  :  reprinted  with  the  Ordinance  in  P.  Hall  Reliquiae  Litur- 
gicae  iii.     It  may  be  noticed  that  the  Directory  differs  from  Knox  and  Calvin  in 
placing  the  Prayer  for  all  estates  before,  instead  of  after  the  sermon,  in  accord 
ance  with  the  English  tradition  as  to  the  Bidding  of  the  Bedes  (see  below  p.  1042). 

2  Ib.  p.  83.     On  Nov.  13  the  King  issued  at  Oxford  a  proclamation  enjoining 
the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  and  inhibiting  the  Directory.   See  Hen.  Hammond 
A    View  of  the  New  Directory,  where  the  proclamation  is  reprinted  ( Works, 
1684,  i  p.  353). 


cxc  SANDERSON  AND  JEREMY  TAYLOR 

by  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  and  the  Act  of  Uniformity. 
The  question  was  discussed  in  1652  by  Robert  Sanderson, 
then  rector  of  Booth  by  Pagnell  in  Lincolnshire,  afterwards 
bishop  of  Lincoln.  He  concludes  that  under  the  circum 
stances  the  clergy  are  not  so  bound,  and  describes  his  own 
practice,  which  was  to  use  the  matter  of  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  so  far  as  was  possible,  but  with  such  abbreviations, 
substitutions  and  modifications  '  that  it  might  appear  not  to 
be,  and  yet  be  the  same  ' l  ;  and  this  seems  sufficiently  to 
have  satisfied  the  terms  of  the  Ordinances.  The  forms  which 
Sanderson  drew  up  for  his  own  use  are  preserved  in  a  MS 
in  the  Chapter  Library  of  Windsor  and  were  published  in 
the  last  century  as  Bishop  Sanderson's  Liturgy  in  the  times  of 
rebellion  and  usurpation,  written  with  his  own  hand.2 

(b)  Under  the  same  conditions  and  for  the  same  purpose, 
Jeremy  Taylor,  while  chaplain  to  the  Earl  of  Carbery  at 
Golden  Grove  in  Carmarthenshire,  composed  A  Collection 
of  offices  or  Forms  of  Prayer  in  Cases  Ordinary  and  Extra 
ordinary.  Taken  out  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  ancient  liturgies 
of  several  Churches,  especially  the  Greek  (London,  J.  Fisher 
for  R.  Royston,  1658)  ;  *  being  intended  onely  as  a  charitable 
ministery  to  them  who  are  not  permitted  to  use  those  which 
were  appointed  formerly.'  3  Except  in  point  of  structure 
these  Offices  are  almost  wholly  independent  of  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer. 

Reprinted  in  J.  Taylor  Works,  ed.  Heber,  London  1828,  xv  pp.  237 
sqq.  I  have  not  traced  the  sources  in  detail :  but  the  c  Office  of  Holy 
Communion '  is  largely  drawn  from  the  Liturgy  of  S.  James ;  and  the 
Preface  (not  given  in  Heber)  mentions  that  the  Mozarabic  and  Ethiopic 
(Abyssinian)  offices  have  been  used.  This  Preface,  §  46,  also  contains  a 
description  and  a  criticism  of  the  Directory. 

7.  There  remain  to  be  noticed  two  important  papers, 
containing  definite  proposals  of  amendments  and  additions 
to  be  made  in  the  text  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer. 

1  Sanderson  Nine  Cases  of  Conscience :  Occasionally  Determined  (167%)  ix. 
Cp.  I.  Walton  Life  of  Dr.  Robert  Sanderson. 

2  W.  Jacobson  Fragmentary  illustrations  of  the  History  of  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  London  1874.  3  ^ee  '  Advertisement '  prefixed. 


COSIN'S  PARTICULARS 


CXCl 


(1)  Jo.  Cosin,  bishop  of  Durham   (1660-1672),  drew  up 
a  paper  of  Particulars  to  be  considered,  explained  and  cor 
rected  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  ;  to  be  found  bound  up 
with  the  interleaved  copy  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer, 
printed  by  Norton  and  Bill  in  1619,  which  contains  the  '  First 
Series  '  of  the  '  Notes  on  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  '  and 
is  preserved  in  the  Cosin  Library  at  Durham.     The  paper 
makes  some  91  criticisms,  for  the  most  part  of  rubrics,  with 
suggested    amendments  ;     some    relating    only    to    printer's 
errors  in  the  current  text,  others  to  the  legal  status  of  the 
passage   in    question  ;     betraying   throughout   a   meticulous 
anxiety,  perhaps  natural  at  the  moment,  to  obviate  the  least 
diversity   of  usage,   and   nowhere   betraying  any   profound 
intelligence  of  liturgical  precedents,  while  from  time  to  time 
appealing  to  them.     The  date  and  the  immediate  occasion 
of  the  Particulars  are  unknown  ;  but  the  handwriting  is  said 
to  indicate  that,  while  the  bulk  of  the  paper  was  written  in 
the  reign  of  Charles  I,  Cosin  made  additions  to  it  at  a  later 
date.1 

The  Particulars  was  first  printed  in  W.  Nicholls  A  Comment  On  the 
Book  of  Common-Prayer,  London  1710,  appendix  pp.  67  sqq. ;  and 
Nicholls's  text  was  collated  with  the  autograph  and  re-edited  by  J.  Barrow 
in  Cosin's  WorTcs^  Libr.  of  Anglo-Cath.  Theol.,  v  pp.  502  sqq. ;  see  also 
ibid.  pp.  xi  sqq.,  p.  502  note  a  (but  it  may  be  questioned  whether  '  No.  30 
shews  that  they  [the  Particulars}  were  made  in  the  reign  of  Charles  I,' 
while  it  does  suggest  that  they  '  were  made '  before  the  Restoration). 

(2)  A  much  more  extended  series  of  criticisms  and  sug 
gestions  for  amendment  was  compiled  by  Mat.  Wren,  bishop 
of  Ely  (1638-1667),  in  1660  or  early  in  1661  ;    in  which  he 
points  out  how  opportune  the  moment  is  for  revision,  and 
suggests  that  every  one  '  of  such  a  quality '  be  invited,  if  he 
will,  to  send  in  his  exceptions  against  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer,  to  be  transmitted  to  the  Chancery,  and  then  to  '  be 
viewed  and  judged  of  by  those  whom  His  Majesty  shall  think 
fit  to  appoint  in  his  own  stead  '  ;  and  that,  if  the  exceptions 

1  Those  of  the  suggestions  of  the  Particulars  which  were  adopted  in  the 
revision  of  1661  are  marked  by  the  index  7b  in  the  4th  col.  of  the  Synopsis 
below. 


cxcii  WREN'S  SUGGESTIONS 

be  '  admitted,'  the  Book  be  accordingly  amended  and  '  come 
forth.'  His  own  criticism  is  detailed,  following,  sometimes 
page  by  page,  the  text  of  Rob.  Barker's  4°  of  1639.  It 
relates  to  the  text  of  the  rite  perhaps  more  than  to  rubric  ; 
suggesting  verbal  alterations,  additional  clauses,  and  new 
formulae.  He  would  leave  unexplained  no  technicality,  which 
is  not  immediately  intelligible  to  the  ordinary  person  ;  every 
direction  is  to  be  precise  and  nothing  left  to  common  intelli 
gence  ;  and  every  precaution  is  to  be  taken  that  in  any  series 
of  years  no  passage  of  Holy  Scripture  be  used  twice  on  the 
same  occasion.  He  is  thoroughly  prosaical.1 

The  MS  of  this  document  was  given  in  1859  to  Wm.  Jacobson,  after 
wards  bishop  of  Chester  (1865-1884),  by  Walter  Ker  Hamilton,  bishop 
of  Salisbury  (1854-1869),  whose  father  had  received  it  through  Rich, 
Terrick,  bishop  of  London  (1764-1777).  Jacobson  printed  the  text  in 
Fragmentary  illustrations  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  London  1874, 
pp.  43  sqq. ;  and  gave  the  MS  to  the  Bodleian  (MSS  Add.  A.  213).  It 
is  attributed  to  Wren  on  the  ground  of  the  handwriting,  which  is  said  to 
be  certainly  his  (ibid.  p.  xii).  It  was  written  15  years  after  the  suppression 
of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  (p.  45  :  see  p.  clxxxix  above),  i.e.  in  1660 
or  at  latest  early  in  1661  ;  and  since  there  is  no  suggestion  that  any  steps 
had  as  yet  been  taken  in  respect  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  but 
rather  the  contrary,  it  would  seem  that  the  document  belongs  to  the  first 
days  of  the  Restoration  and  is  earlier  than  the  Declaration  of  Oct.  25 
1660.  On  the  last  page  the  writer,  referring  to  the  translation  of  Vent 
Creator  in  the  Ordinal,  says  { I  hear  that  at  the  King's  Coronation  there 
was  another.'  This  cannot  refer  to  Charles  II  's  Coronation  (Ap.  23  1661), 
since  Wren  was  present  and  read  the  Gospel ;  and  besides,  the  old 
version,  Come  holy  ghost  eternall  God,  was  then  used  (R.  Baker  A 
Chronicle  of  the  Kings  of  England,  London  1670,  p.  763).  Consequently 
'  the  King '  must  be  Charles  I ;  and  it  is  to  be  noted  that  in  the  MS  of  the 
Coronation  Order  used  by  Charles  I  himselfat  his  coronation  (Feb.  2  1626), 
while  the  old  version  is  given  in  its  place,  the  new  version  Come  Holy 
Ghost  our  soules  inspire  is  written  on  an  otherwise  blank  leaf  (p.  69)  before 
the  coronation  of  the  Queen  (C.  Wordsworth  The  Coronation  of  King 
Charles  /,  H.B.S.  1892,  p.  57),  and  was  perhaps  used.  Of  course 
this  note,  and  even  the  bulk  of  Wren's  notes,  may  have  been  drawn  up 
years  before  1660,  and  only  supplemented  and  provided  with  an  introduc 
tion  in  1660.  At  first  sight  it  might  seem  that  he  reckons  it  (Jacobson 


1  Those  of  Wren's  suggestions  which  were  adopted  in  1661  are  indicated  by 
the  index-number  8  in  the  4th  col.  of  the  Synopsis  below. 


THE  RESTORATION  cxciii 

p.  47)  as  70  years  'since  the  former  Book  was  composed';  in  which  case 
he  would  be  counting  from  1549,  or  at  latest  from  1559,  and  would  be 
writing  in  1619  or  1629:  but  in  fact  he  is  only  saying  that  language 
changes  a  good  deal  '  in  every  Age  (of  seventy  years)/  i.e.  in  a  lifetime 
(Ps.  xc  10),  and  still  more  must  English  have  changed  'since  the  former 
Book  was  composed.' 

XV 

I.  In  the  Declaration  of  Breda,  dated  T^  April  i66o,1 
Charles  II  *  declared  a  liberty  to  tender  consciences  '  and 
undertook  to  consent  to  an  Act  of  Parliament  devised  to 
secure  it.  His  return  to  England  was  followed  by  an  agita 
tion  and  continued  negotiations,  designed  to  gain  complete 
relief  for  the  old  puritan  grievances,  and  by  a  number  of 
pamphlets2  directed  against  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer. 
On  Oct.  25  the  King  issued  a  Declaration  concerning  ecclesi 
astical  affairs  3  in  which  he  undertakes  to  '  appoint  an  equal 
number  of  learned  divines  of  both  persuasions,  to  review  the  r 
Book  of  Common  Prayer,  '  and  to  make  such  alterations  as 
shall  be  thought  most  necessary,  and  some  additional  forms 
(in  the  scripture  phrase  as  near  as  may  be)  suited  unto  the 
nature  of  the  several  parts  of  worship,  and  that  it  be  left  to 
the  minister's  choice  to  use  one  or  other  at  his  discretion  '  ; 
and  in  the  interim,  among  other  concessions,  he  dispenses  the 
puritan  clergy  from  the  use  of  such  parts  of  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  as  they  take  exception  to.4  In  pursuance 
of  the  promise  of  the  Declaration,  on  March  25  1661  he  issued 
Letters  patent  5  appointing  12  bishops  and  12  puritan  divines, 
with  9  assessors  on  each  side  to  act  as  substitutes  for  such 
of  the  bishops  or  divines  as  might  be  from  time  to  time 
unable  to  serve,  and  authorised  them  to  meet  during  the  next 
4  months  at  the  Master's  Lodgings  in  the  Savoy  or  else 
where,  '  to  advise  upon  and  review  '  the  Book  of  Common 

1  Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  cxiv. 

2  Declaration  (Cardwell  Conferences  p.  289)  ;  below,  p.  29. 

3  Cardwell  Conferences  pp.  286  sqq. 

4  See  the  puritan  petitions,  ibid.  pp.  252  sq.,  282  sqq. 

5  Cardwell  Conferences  pp.  298  sqq.  ;  Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  cxv  pp. 
588  sqq. 


cxciv  THE  SAVOY  CONFERENCE 

Prayer,  '  comparing  the  same  with  the  most  ancient  liturgies  ' 
and  '  to  take  into  your  serious  and  grave  considerations  the 
several  directions  and  rules,  forms  of  prayer,  and  things  in 
the  said  Book  of  Common  Prayer  contained,  and  to  advise 
and  consult  upon  and  about  the  same,  and  the  several  objec 
tions  and  exceptions  which  shall  now  be  raised  against  the 
same.  And  if  occasion  be,  to  make  such  reasonable  and 
necessary  alterations,  corrections,  and  amendments  therein 
as  by  and  between  you  .  .  .  shall  be  agreed  upon  to  be 
needful  or  expedient  .  .  .  but  avoiding,  as  much  as  may 
be,  all  unnecessary  alterations.'  The  Conference  met  first 
on  Ap.  15,  and  it  was  immediately  demanded  by  Gilbert 
Sheldon,  bishop  of  London  (1660-1663),  on  the  part  of  the 
bishops,  that  the  puritan  divines  should  state  their  objections 
in  writing  and  propose  the  alterations  and  additional  forms 
that  they  desired.  The  puritan  divines  accordingly,  while 
demurring  to  the  procedure,  chose  a  committee  to  draw  up 
the  list  of  their  objections,  and  entrusted  the  compilation  of 
the  desired  additional  forms  to  Richard  Baxter  (1615-1691). 
Their  Exceptions  against  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  1  was 
presented  on  May  4  ;  and  a  few  days  later  Baxter  produced 
his  Reformation  of  the  Liturgy,  which  was  not  a  matter  of 
mere  additions  and  alternatives,  but  a  new  and  independent 
service-book  of  mixed,  English  and  Genevan,  type,  known 
as  '  The  Savoy  Liturgy.'  2  Baxter's  work  was  ignored  ;  but 
to  the  Exceptions  the  bishops  replied  in  detail,3  dealing 
with  it  point  by  point  ;  and  in  the  end  refusing  concession 
except  in  17  particulars.  And  in  fact  these  17  concessions 
were  the  whole  avowed  result  of  the  Conference,  the  rest 
of  the  time  allowed  to  it  being  exhausted  by  the  Rejoinder  of 
the  Ministers  to  the  Answer  of  the  Bishops  4  and  a  few  days 
of  curiously  scholastic  but  fruitless  debate  ;  and  the  pre- 

1  In  Cardwell  Conferences  pp.  303  sqq.          2  P.  Hall  Reliquiae  liturgicae  iv. 

3  The  Answer  of  the  Bishops  to  the  Exceptions  of  the  Ministers  in  Cardwell 

PP-  335  sqq. 

4  In  Documents  relating  to  the  Act  of  Uniformity  of  1662,  London  1862,  pp. 
201  sqq. 


CONCESSIONS  OF  THE  BISHOPS  cxcv 

scribed  term  of  the  life  of  the  Conference  was  reached  on 
July  24. 

(a)  For  Baxter's  own  eloquent  account  of  the  Conference,  see  Sylvester 
Reliquiae  Baxterianae  1696  pp.  303  sqq.  See  also  Burnet  History  of  my 
own  times  ed.  Oxford,  1823,  i  pp.  308  sqq. ;  Cardwell  Conferences  pp.  245 
sqq.  (b)  The  '  Exceptions '  are  arranged  in  2  chapters,  the  one  of  general 
exceptions,  containing  some  22  objections  to  principles  and  characteristics 
of  the  Book;  the  other  of  particulars,  being  some  77  criticisms  (some  of 
them  covering  more  than  a  single  passage)  of  details  throughout  the  Book. 
Of  the  general  exceptions  3,  of  the  particular  19,  had  appeared  in  the 
memorandum  of  1641  (p.  clxxxviii  above),  to  which  the  puritan  divines 
appeal  in  the  Rejoinder  (Documents  relating  to  the  Act  of  Uniformity  pp. 
202,  235,  251  sq.).  (c)  The  17  concessions  made  by  the  bishops  (Cardwell 
Conferences  pp.  362  sq.)  were:  (i)  that  Epistles  and  Gospels  follow  the 
version  of  16 1 1 ;  (2)  that  *  For  the  epistle '  be  used  when  the  Lesson  is  not  in 
fact  from  an  Epistle;  (3)  that  the  Psalms  be  corrected  by  the  Great 
Bible ;  (4)  that  '  this  day '  be  used  in  collects  and  prefaces  only  on  the 
day  itself,  and  'as  about  this  time'  on  the  following  days;  (5)  that  com 
municants  be  required  to  give  notice  'at  least  some  time  the  day  before'; 
(6)  that,  on  the  repelling  of  scandalous  persons  from  communion,  canons 
26  and  27  be  observed ;  (7)  that  the  whole  preface  (Ex.  xx  2)  be  prefixed 
to  the  Decalogue ;  (8)  that  the  2nd  exhortation  be  read  beforehand ;  (9) 
that  the  confession  before  communion  be  recited  by  one  of  the  ministers, 
the  people  saying  it  after  him ;  (10)  that  the  manual  acts  be  used  in  con 
secration;  (n)  that  the  position  of  the  font  be  referred  to  the  Ordinary, 
if  it  stands  where  the  congregation  cannot  hear;  (12)  that  in  the  Cate 
chism  '  Yes,  they  do  perform  them  '  be  changed  to  '  Because  they  promise 
them  both  by  their  sureties';  (13)  that  the  rubric  as  to  children  baptized, 
but  dying  unconfirmed,  be  amended;  (14)  that  'or  be  ready  and  desirous 
to  be  confirmed'  be  added  to  the  rubric  after  Confirmation;  (15)  that  in 
Matrimony  be  substituted  'I  thee  honour'  for  'I  thee  worship,'  and  (16) 
'till  death  us  do  part'  for  'till  death  us  depart';  (17)  in  the  Burial  of 
the  Dead  'sure  and  certain'  be  omitted  before  'hope  of  the  resurrection.'1 
Of  these,  i,  5,  6,  9,  15,  17  are  included  in  the  memorandum  of  1641. 

2.  Meanwhile  the  Convocation  of  Canterbury  had  met 
on  May  8.  On  May  16  Matthew  Wren  of  Ely  (1638-1667), 
Rob.  Skinner  of  Oxford  (1641-1663),  Benj.  Laney  of  Peter 
borough  (1660-1663),  and  Humph.  Henchman  of  Sarum 
(1660-1663),  with  eight  members  of  the  Lower  House,  were 
commissioned  to  draw  up  a  service  for  the  2Qth  of  May,  the 

1  Points  in  the  revision  of  1661  suggested  at  the  Savoy  Conference  are 
marked  by  the  index  9  in  the  4th  col.  of  the  Synopsis  below. 


cxcvi  FIRST  STAGE  OF  REVISION 

Anniversary  of  the  King's  return  ;  and  Jo.  Warner  of 
Rochester  (1638-1666),  Hen.  King  of  Chichester  (1642-1669), 
Geo.  Morley  of  Worcester  (1660-1662),  and  Edward  Reynolds 
of  Norwich  (1661-1676),  also  with  eight  members  of  the 
Lower  House,  to  devise  a  form  of  service  for  Jan.  30,  the 
Anniversary  of  the  death  of  Charles  I.1  Wren  produced  the 
result  of  the  work  of  the  first  committee  on  May  18  ;  and 
on  the  same  day  Henchman  and  Laney,  with  Geo.  Griffith 
of  S.  Asaph  (1660-1666)  and  six  members  of  the  Lower 
House,  were  commissioned  to  compile  an  Order  for  the 
Baptism  of  Adults.2  This  was  introduced  by  Henchman  on 
May  31  and  unanimously  approved.3  Nothing  further  relat 
ing  to  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  was  done  in  this  session, 
and  Convocation  was  adjourned  on  July  31. 

During  the  vacation,  the  bishops  employed  themselves 
'  in  making  such  alterations  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer, 
as  they  thought  would  make  it  more  grateful  to  the  dissenting 
brethren  .  .  .  and  such  additions,  as  in  their  judgements 
the  temper  of  the  present  time  and  the  past  miscarriages 
required.'  4  The  record  of  these  labours  is  preserved  in  the 
so-called  '  Durham  Book,'  a  copy  of  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  printed  by  Norton  and  Bill  in  1619,  in  which  a  mass  of 
corrections  have  been  made,  including  among  others  (a)  most 
of  the  amendments  suggested  in  Wren's  paper  of  1660  ; 
(b)  some  two-thirds  of  those  suggested  in  Cosin's  Particu 
lars  ;  (c)  14  out  of  the  17  conceded  at  the  Savoy  Conference, 
and  some  8  more  of  those  suggested  in  the  puritafr  Excep 
tions  which  were  not  conceded  at  the  Conference  ;  (d)  the 
principal  amendments  that  had  appeared  in  the  Scottish 
Book  of  1637.  These  corrections  are  mostly  in  Cosin's 
handwriting  ;  but  some  of  them  are  in  that  of  Wm.  Sancroft, 
at  this  time  canon  of  Durham  and  Cosin's  chaplain  ;  and 

1  Cardwell  Synodalia  ii  p.  640. 

2  Ibid.  pp.  640  sq. ;   Lathbury  Hist,  of  Conruoc.  p.  282.    There  appears  to  be 
no  further  record  of  the  second  committee  appointed  on  May  16  ;  for  its  result 
see  p.  ccxxv.  3  Cardwell  Synodalia  ii  p.  642. 

4  Clarendon  Life,  ed.  Oxford  1827,  ii  p.  118. 


CONVOCATION  cxcvii 

it  is  evident  that  first  Cosin  and  then  Bancroft  acted  as 
secretary  at  successive  stages  of  the  process  of  correction, 
and  wrote  in  the  amendments  as  they  were  made,  if  necessary 
further  correcting  or  deleting  and  rewriting  them  as  the 
discussion  proceeded.  When  the  amendments  were  finally 
agreed  upon,  Bancroft  copied  them  out  into  the  folio  Book 
of  Common  Prayer  printed  by  Barker  in  1634,  combined 
with  the  Psalter  and  the  Ordinal  of  the  same  year  and  the 
same  printer,  which  is  preserved  in  the  Bodleian,  and  is 
commonly  known  as  '  Bancroft's  Fair  Copy.' 

No  account  has  been  taken  here  of  the  assumption  which  has  com 
monly  been  made,  notably  by  Mr.  Parker  in  the  Introduction,  that  the 
corrections  in  the  Durham  Book  are  the  private  work  of  Cosin,  written 
from  time  to  time,  1640-1661 ;  an  assumption  involving  the  inference 
that  Cosin  must  be  credited  with  almost  the  whole  of  the  revision  of  1661. 
It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  it  rests  merely  on  the  fact  that  the  corrections 
are  in  the  handwriting  of  Cosin  and  his  chaplain ;  while  it  involves  the 
singular  result  that  almost  the  whole  of  Wren's  suggestions  were  borrowed 
from  Cosin.  See  further  on  this,  and  on  the  history  of  this  stage  of  the 
revision,  Selborne  Notes  pp.  42  sqq. ;  Tomlinson  Prayer  Book,  Articles 
and  Homilies^  ch.  vii. 

3.  A  new  Session  of  Convocation,  in  which  the  bishops 
of  the  province  of  York  sat  with  the  Upper  House  of  Canter 
bury,1  began  on  Nov.  21,  when  royal  letters  were  read  direct 
ing  that  a  revision  be  made  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  ; 
and  eight  bishops,  Jo.  Cosin  of  Durham  (1660-1672),  Mat. 
Wren  of  Ely  (1638-1667),  Rob.  Skinner  of  Oxford  (1641- 
1663),  Jo.  Warner  of  Rochester  (1638-1666),  Humph.  Hench 
man  of  Sarum  (1660-1663),  Geo.  Morley  of  Worcester  (1660- 
1662),  Rob.  Sanderson  of  Lincoln  (1660-1663)  and  Wm. 
Nicholson  of  Gloucester  (1661-1672),  were  commissioned  to 
meet  daily  at  5  in  the  afternoon  at  Ely  House,  and  there  to 
continue  the  work  of  revision,  after  the  formal  sittings  of 
the  Convocation,  from  8  to  10  a.m.  and  2  to  4  p.m.,  were  over.2 
The  work  was  at  once  proceeded  with  ;  the  proposals  of  the 

1  The  Northern  bishops  had  already  sat  with  the  Southern  from  June  21 
onwards  (Gibson  Synodus  Anglic,  p.  210;  Lathbury  Hist,  of  Convoc.  p.  285). 

2  On  the  purpose  and  functions  of  this  committee  see  Selborne  Notes  p.  46. 


cxcviii  REVISION 

bishops  as  contained  in  the  '  Durham  Book '  were  apparently 
in  some  form  1  submitted  to  the  Upper  House  or  to  the 
Committee,  and  accepted,  emended  or  rejected,  and  further 
proposals  were  discussed  ;  and  the  '  first  part '  of  the  Book 
had  been  '  revised  and  examined  '  by  Sat.  Nov.  23,  the  '  second 
part '  by  Nov.  27  ;  and  the  Psalms  and  the  Ordinations  were 
taken  in  hand  on  Nov.  28  and  29.  During  the  fortnight, 
Dec.  2-14,  new  matter,  'Preface'  (Dec.  2,  5),  Kalendar, 
1  Prayers  to  be  used  at  sea  '  (Dec.  5),  and  the  *  General 
Thanksgiving  '  (Dec.  14),  was  discussed  and  agreed  upon. 
Meanwhile,  the  results  reached  in  the  Upper  House  were 
successively  passed  on  to  the  Lower  House  and  returned  with 
schedules  of  proposed  amendments  ;  and  the  discussion  of 
these,  of  other  amendments,  and  of  the  selection  of  final 
censors  of  the  text,  occupied  what  was  left  of  the  time  of  the 
Upper  House.  The  whole  revision  was  completed  in  a  debate 
on  Dec.  18.  As  the  final  results  were  reached,  account  was 
kept  of  them  by  Bancroft,  who  entered  them  in  a  copy  of  the 
Book  of  Common  Prayer  printed  by  Barker  in  1636  and 
copies  of  The  Psalter  and  The  form  and  manner  of  making 
and  consecrating  of  bishops,  priests  and  deacons,  both  printed 
by  Barker  in  1639.  This  composite  book,  so  corrected  in 
Bancroft's  hand,  is  preserved  in  the  Library  of  the  House  of 
Lords,  and  is  known  as  the  '  Convocation  Book.'  2  Finally 
the  whole  corrected  text  was  copied  out  in  professional  fair- 
hands,  and  this  MS  book  was  subscribed  on  Dec.  20  by  both 
Houses  of  the  Convocation  of  Canterbury,  and  by  the  Upper 
House  of  the  Convocation  of  York  and  the  proxies  of  the 
Lower  House.  The  Book  thus  subscribed  was  sent  to  the  King. 

1  Mr.  Parker  (Introduction  pp.  xcvi  sq.,  ccccxi  sqq.)  argues  that  the  proposals 
of  the  bishops,  made  in  the  '  Durham  Book,'  were  read  in  Convocation  from 
'  Sancroft's  Fair  Copy,'  the  purpose  of  which  is  otherwise  not  clear ;  Lord 
Selborne  (Notes  p.  48),  with  less  probability,  holds  it  to  be  not  unlikely  that  the 
'  Fair  Copy '  represents  '  the  whole  result '  of  the  *  Bishops'  Revision '  and  the 
form  in  which  it  was  sent  down  to  the  Lower  House. 

2  The  list  of  '  Alterations '  and  '  Additions '  on  two  inserted  leaves,  pp.  3-6,  is 
in  the  handwriting  of  Jo.   Pearson,  archdeacon  of  Surrey,  afterwards  bishop 
of  Chester  (1673-1686). 


ACT  OF  UNIFORMITY  cxcix 

4.  Meanwhile,  a  '  Bill  for  the  Uniformity  of  Public  Prayers 
and  Administration  of  the  Sacraments  '  had  been  introduced 
into  the  House  of  Commons  on  June  29  1661,  and  passed, 
with  the  Book  of  1604  annexed  to  it,  on  July  9.  Next  day  it 
was  sent  up  to  the  Lords  ;  but  Parliament  was  adjourned  on 
July  30  before  anything  further  had  been  done.  Parliament 
met  again  on  Nov.  20  ;  but,  in  spite  of  the  impatience  of 
the  Commons,  the  Bill  was  not  read  in  the  Upper  House 
till  Jan.  14  1 661-2.  On  Jan.  17  it  was  read  a  second  time 
and  referred  to  a  Committee.  But  the  Committee  postponed 
its  report  until  the  revised  book  should  have  been  received 
from  the  King.  It  was  not  till  Feb.  19  that  the  King  ordered 
the  Book  to  be  brought  to  the  Board  of  the  Privy  Council 
at  its  next  sitting  ;  and  it  was  debated  on  Feb.  21  and  24, 
perhaps  amended  in  some  respects,  approved,  and  ordered 
to  be  sent  to  the  Lords,  with  the  royal  letters  approving  it 
and  recommending  it  to  be  enjoined  by  the  Act  of  Uniformity.1 
On  receipt  of  the  Book  on  Feb.  25,  the  Upper  House  proceeded 
with  the  Bill  for  Uniformity ;  which  at  length,  with  the 
manuscript  Book,  subscribed  by  the  Convocation  on  Dec.  20, 
annexed  to  it,  received  the  royal  assent  on  May  19.  The 
revised  Book  was  to  come  into  use  before  S.  Bartholomew's 
day  following. 

For  the  history  of  the  revision,  and  the  proceedings  both  in  Convoca 
tion  and  in  Parliament,  studied  in  detail  see  J.  Parker  Introduction  pp. 
Ixxxi  onwards,  corrected  in  some  points  by  Selborne  Notes  pp.  45  sqq. 
See  also  Cardwell  Conferences  pp.  369  sqq.,  Synodalia  ii  pp.  640  sqq. ; 
Procter  and  Frere  pp.  193  sqq.  The  'Durham  Book'  is  in  the  Cosin 
Library  at  Durham;  Bancroft's  'Fair  copy'  is  in  the  Bodleian  (C.P.  1634 
c.  i) ;  the  '  Convocation  Book '  is  in  the  Library  of  the  House  of  Lords, 
and  is  reproduced  in  Facsimile  of  the  Black-letter  Prayer-book  of  1636, 
shewing  the  manuscript  alterations  made  in  1661,  1870,  and,  in  its  main 
features  and  compared  with  the  '  Durham  Book,'  the  '  Fair  copy,'  Cosin's 
Particulars  and  Notes,  and  the  proposals  of  the  memorandum  of  1641, 
in  Parker  Introduction  pp.  c  sqq.  The  '  Book  Annexed '  is  reproduced  in 
Facsimile  of  the  original  manuscript  of  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer  Signed 
by  Convocation  December  2Oth,  1661,  and  attached  to  the  Act  of  Uniformity, 


1  Kennet  Register  Feb.  19,  21,  24  1661-2  (pp.  631  sq.). 


cc  THE  BOOK  ANNEXED 

1662  London,  Eyre  &  Spottiswoode,  C.  J.  Clay  &  Sons,  1891 ;  for  a 
description  of  it  see  Parker  Introduction  pp.  ccccxxxv  sqq.  The  text  is 
printed  in  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer  from  the  Original  Manuscript 
attached  to  the  act  of  uniformity  of  1662,  Eyre  &  Spottiswoode,  1892; 
and  in  the  4th  col.  of  the  Synopsis  below.  For  the  text  of  the  Act  of 
Uniformity,  see  Parker  pp.  cccclxxxvi  sqq. ;  Gee  and  Hardy  Documents 
cxvii,  pp.  600  sqq. 

5.  The  text  of  the  '  Book  Annexed  '  throughout  shows 
many  signs  of  correction,  and  some  of  the  corrections  are 
interesting,  some  important. 

On  Dec.  13  a  Committee  of  Convocation,  consisting  of  Henchman 
of  Sarum,  Griffith  of  S.  Asaph,  Sterne  of  Carlisle,  Nicholson  of  Gloucester, 
Rob.  Pory,  Jo.  Pearson,  and  Ant.  Sparrow,  had  been  appointed  'pro 
diligenti  examinatione  et  revisione  libri  .  .  .  debita  forma  script0  et 
exarat0  '  (Card well  Synodalia  ii  p.  658). 

The  corrections  may  be  classified  as  follows. 

(1)  Ordinary  mistakes  of  transcription  corrected  by  the  scribes  them 
selves  at  the  time  of  writing,  or  by  correctors  who  have  worked  over  the 
text,  comparing  it  with  the  standards,  viz.  the  'Convocation  Book'  (hence 
forth  referred  to  as  C)  and  the  Bible  of  1611.     One  of  the  correctors,  as 
is  plain  from  the  handwriting,  was  certainly  Sancroft  himself,  no  doubt 
acting  as  secretary  to  the  committee. 

(2)  Corrections  of  (a)  omissions  of  what  is  retained  in  C ;  (b)  reten 
tions  of  what  has  been  altered  in  C ;  (c}  omissions  of  what  has  been 
added  in  C  (a  curious  instance,  under  this  head,  is  the  title  of  apostles  and 
evangelists  in  the  marginal  references,  which  in  C  is  uniformly  '  S.,'  as  in 
the  titles  and  headlines  of  the  Gospels  in  Gt.  Bible  and  1611 ;  while  in 
the  'Book  Annexed'  the  correctors  have  inserted  '  S.'  in  Matins  and 
Evensong,  except  at  Nunc  dimittis,  where  it  is  '  S| '  in  a  different  hand 
from  that  of  the  surrounding  instances;    'S:'  from  Advent  Sunday  to 
Epiph.  3;  'S:'  from  Epiph.  4  to  Commination,  in  perhaps  four  different 
hands,  one  from  Epiph.  4  to  Mond.  in  Holy  Week,  another  from  Tu.  to 
Public  Baptism  and  in  Adult  Baptism,  a  third  in  Communion  of  the  Sick, 
and  a  fourth  in  the  Commination.    In  Tables,  Kalendar,  Private  Baptism, 
and  Ordinal,  'S.'  seems  to  be  in  the  original  hand  and  not  added);  (<f) 
readings  of  '  Sancroft's  Fair  Copy '  which  were  rejected  and  therefore  do 
not  occur  in  C  :  e.g.  p.  175  below  'The  Minister  and  People  all  kneeling'; 
189  'vs  who';  575  'Annunciation  of  our  Lord  to  the  blessed'  (Wren); 
727   'pray.     And  here  all  the  congregation  shall  kneel'  (Wren);  733 
'favourably  accepteth';   745   'covenanted  [Wren]  and  promised';  749 
'into  the  Parish  church'  (Wren);  797  'these  thy  children  (or  servants)'; 
799  'Communion  or  vnto  Matrimonie'  (Wren);  829  'These  words  .  .  . 
cause  '  omitted  :  (e)  readings  found  neither  in  the  '  Fair  Copy '  nor  in  C  : 


THE  BOOK  ANNEXED  cci 

e.g.  p.  39  below  'openly  where  they  conveniently  may,  not';  147,  165 
'standing  vp,  and  so  continuing  to  the  end  of  the  service,  shall';  235 
*  Infants  to  be  thy  Confessors  and  to ' ;  505  '  attain  thy  eternal  happiness  ' ; 
575  'as  the  Incarnation  of  thy  son  Jesus  Christ  was  made  known  to  the 
world  by';  677  'when  the  communicants  have  conveniently  placed  them 
selves';  691  'bodies  and  souls  .  .  .  body,  and  washed'  (cp.  Exceptions  of 
Ministers  ad  loc.);  701  'the  consecrated  bread';  839  'his  bodily 
departure ' ;  859  '  departed  out  of  the  miseries  of  this  life.' 

(3)  Six  passages,  which  reproduce  the  emended  text  of  C  have  been 
corrected;  and  the  same  corrections  of  the  already  emended  text  have 
been  made  in  C ;  in  other  words,  further  corrections  were  made  at  some 
time  after   the   text   had   been   emended   and   copied   into  the  'Book 
Annexed ' ;  viz.  p.  187  below,  '  such  kindly  weather ' ;  639  sq.  '  stand  in  the 
most  convenient  place  in  the  upper  end  of  the  Chancel  (or  of  the  body  of  the 
church  where  there  is  no  Chancel)  .  .  .  standing  on  the  north  part  of;  641 
'thy  God  who  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of 
bondage  :  Thou  ' ;  663,  715  'for  the  good  estate  of  the  Catholick  Church  of 
Christ' ;  68 1  '  Draw  neer  in  full  Assurance  of  faith ' ;  where,  both  in  C  and 
in  the  '  Book  Annexed,'  the  italicised  words,  in  the  first  five  cases,  have 
been  eliminated  and  the  text  as  it  stood  restored ;  in  the  last  case,  have 
been  displaced  by  '  with.'     Of  these  corrections,  all  but  those  on  pp.  663, 
715,  are  in  Bancroft's  handwriting:  that  on  p.  663  appears  to  be  in  the 
same  hand  in  C  and  the  'Book  Annexed';  that  on  p.  715  in  the  'Book 
Annexed'  in  another  hand,  while  in  C  it  is  not  corrected. 

(4)  Four  additions  have  been  made  to  the  '  Book  Annexed, 'in  Bancroft's 
handwriting,  and  the  same  additions  are  made  to  C,  also  in  Bancroft's 
hand,   but   not   written   at   the   same  time  as  the   surrounding   correc 
tions ;  viz.  p.  673  below  'Therfore  if  any  ...  &  soule,'  which,  occurring 
originally  in  the  Exhortation  'Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord'  (p.  679),  is 
deleted  there  in  C,  and  does  not  appear  at  all  in  the  '  Book  Annexed '  as 
originally  written;  p.  721,  the  'Declaration  on  kneeling,' which  is  not  so 
clearly  a  later  addition  in  C,  but  is  certainly  more  carelessly  written  than 
the  surrounding  corrections;  p.  747,  the  note  '  To  take  away  all  scruple '  &c. 
and  p.  1017  '  The  Forms  of  Prayer  for '  &c.  both  of  which  are  in  C  obviously 
written  with  a  different  pen  from  that  with  which  the  neighbouring  correc 
tions  were  made. 

Of  these  corrections  (i)  the  first  group  requires  no  explana 
tion.  (2)  Of  the  second  group  the  explanation  seems  obvious. 
In  order  to  be  ready  for  subscription  on  Dec.  20  the  writing 
of  the  '  Book  Annexed  '  must  have  begun  well  before  the 
revision  was  finished  on  Dec.  18  ;  and  further,  the  scribes 
cannot  all  have  used  the  same  book  from  which  to  copy  ; 
while  the  'Convocation  Book'  itself  was  available,  if  at  all, 


ccii  THE  BOOK  ANNEXED 

only  for  the  use  of  one  of  them.  Consequently  they  must 
have  been  supplied  with  other  copies  or  parts  of  another 
copy  ;  and  it  is  clear  that  these  were  very  imperfectly  cor 
rected,  omitting  some  additions,  and  retaining  rejected  read 
ings,  whether  of  the  current  text,  or  new  ones  proposed 
officially,  either  to  the  Upper  House  by  the  bishops  who  sat 
during  the  vacation,  or  by  the  Upper  House  to  the  Lower 
(2  d) l,  or  proposed  by  private  members  of  Convocation  (2  e).2 
The  groups  of  corrections  (3)  and  (4)  are  of  more  importance 
and  more  difficult  to  explain.  They  at  once  suggest  the  ques 
tion  as  to  when  they  were  made,  whether  before  the  book 
was  signed  or  after  ;  and  if  after,  where  and  by  what  author 
ity  the  changes  wrere  made.  It  seems  impossible  at  present 
to  answer  the  question  decisively.  All  that  can  be  said  is 
that  the  corrections  and  additions  do  not  necessarily  all 
stand  together  :  some  may  have  been  made  in  Convocation 
during  the  last  stages  of  the  revision,  before  the  subscription, 
others  later  ;  while  there  is  reason  to  think  that  one  of  them, 
and  that  the  most  important — the  addition  of  the  *  Declara 
tion  on  kneeling  ' — was  proposed  and  discussed  in  the  Privy 
Council  on  Feb.  21  and  24. 

Lord  Selborne  on  no  quite  decisive  grounds  concludes  that  these 
changes  were  made  in  Convocation  before  the  book  was  subscribed 
(Notes  pp.  68  sq.) ;  Mr.  Parker  shows  some  reasons  for  supposing  that 
they  were  made  after  subscription  and  while  the  book  was  in  the  King's 
possession,  and  concludes  that  the  debate  in  the  Upper  House  of  Convoca 
tion  on  March  5  'circa  nonnullas  emendationes  sive  alterationes  alias  in 
libro  publicarum  precum  per  domum  parliamenti  fact9,'  and  the  com 
mittee  of  3  bishops  then  Appointed  '  nomine  totius  domus  superioris 


1  See  above  p.  cxcviii  note  \ 

2  Clarendon  Life,  Oxford  1827,  ii  p.  118:  'the  consideration  of  it  took  up 
much  time  :  all  men  offering  such  alterations  and  additions,  as  were  suitable  to 
their  own  fancies,  and  the  observations  which  they  had  made  in  the  time  of 
confusion.'    An  illustration  of  the  pressure  of  time  is  supplied  by  the  '  Book 
Annexed'  pp.    81-83,  where  on  p.   81   'O  God  whose   nature   and  property7 
follows  the  Ember-day  prayers,  and  the  rest  of  p.  81  and  the  whole  of  pp.  82,  83 
were  left  blank,  and  were  afterwards  partially  filled  up  with  the  prayers  for 
Parliament  and  for  all  Conditions,  and  the  General  Thanksgiving,  all  written  in 
another  handwriting  (not,  as  is  stated  in  Parker  Introduction  p.  ccccxliv,  in  the 
same  hand). 


THE  SEALED  BOOKS  cciii 

convocationis  ad  emendand0  et  corrigend0  easdem  alterationes,'  were  con 
cerned  with  these  changes  and  the  authorising  of  them  (Parker  pp.  ccccliii 
sqq. ;  cp.  Card  well  Synodalia  ii  666).  Mr.  Tomlinson  (Prayer  Book, 
Articles  and  Homilies  pp.  262  sq.)  points  out  that  by  command  of  the 
king  certain  bishops  (Sheldon  of  London,  Morley  of  Worcester,  Cosin  of 
Durham,  Henchman  of  Sarum,  and  Feme  of  Chester)  were  present  at  the 
meeting  of  the  Privy  Council  on  Feb.  24  (Kennet  Register  ad  diem),  while 
Burnet  (Harley  MS  6584  p.  158)  referring  to  the  addition  of  the 
'Declaration,'  which  he  attributes  to  the  influence  of  Jo.  Gauden,  bishop 
of  Exeter  (1660-1662  :  cp.  p.  720  below),  says  that  Gauden  was  opposed 
by  Sheldon,  but  supported  by  Morley  and  Southampton ;  the  presence 
of  the  last  suggesting  that  the  occasion  referred  to  was  the  Privy  Council 
meeting  of  Feb.  24.  (If  this  is  so,  it  does  not  necessarily  follow,  as  Mr. 
Tomlinson  suggests,  p.  261,  that  the  Convocation  had  nothing  to  say  to 
the  matter.)  Some  light  might  be  thrown  on  the  question  if  the  hand 
writings,  mentioned  above,  of  the  corrections  of  the  bidding  to  the  Prayer 
for  the  Church  (pp.  663,  715  below)  and  that  of  two  notes  in  the  margin 
of  C  directing  the  correction  of  the  bidding  (p.  663)  and  the  reinsertion 
of  the  omitted  passage  in  the  Exhortation  (p.  673),  could  be  identified. 
On  the  circumstances  under  which  certain  mistakes  were  corrected,  see 
Parker  Introduction  pp.  ccccli,  cccclxxviii,  cccclxxxviii. 

6.  Already  on  March  8  the  Upper  House  of  Convocation 
had  appointed  Bancroft  to  supervise  the  printing  of  the 
Book  of  Common  Prayer,  and  Masters  Scattergood  and 
Dillingham  to  correct  the  press.1  The  printing  seems  to 
have  begun  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  text  was  accepted 
(Ap.  1 6),  but  the  book  was  not  ready,  at  least  in  sufficient 
numbers,  till  shortly  before  S.  Bartholomew's  Day.2  At  least 
3  folio  editions,  an  8°,  and  a  I2mo,  were  issued  by  the  King's 
printers  in  1662. 

The  Act  of  Uniformity  requires  that  before  Dec.  25  1662 
the  Chapter  of  every  cathedral  and  collegiate  church  shall 
at  their  own  cost  procure  a  printed  copy  of  the  Act  and  of  the 
Book  Annexed,  and  that  a  copy  of  the  Act  and  of  the  Book 
shall  be  delivered  to  each  of  the  Courts  at  Westminster  and 

1  Cardwell  Synodalia  ii  p.  667.     Antony  Scattergood  (1611-1687),  of  Trinity 
Coll.,  Cambridge,  Canon  of  Lincoln,   with  the  two  Pearsons  and  Gouldman 
edited  Critici  sacri  (1660),  and  himself  corrected  nearly  the  whole  9  vols.  for 
press  ;  Wm.  Dillingham  (c.  1617-1689)  was  Master  of  Emmanuel  Coll.,  Cam 
bridge  ;  and  both  were  old  Cambridge  friends  of  Sancroft's. 

2  Kennet  Register  pp.  741,  743  ;  Burnet  Hist,  of  my  own  times,  ed.  Oxford 
1823,  i  p.  318. 


cciv  THE  SEALED  BOOKS 

to  the  Tower  of  London,  in  each  case  to  be  preserved  for  ever 
and  produced  if  necessary  in  any  court  :  the  copies  to  be 
exemplified  under  the  Great  Seal,  after  being  examined  and 
compared  with  the  original  and  attested  as  true  and  perfect 
under  the  hands  and  seals  of  commissioners  to  be  appointed 
under  the  Great  Seal,  or  of  any  three  of  them.1  Of  the 
1  Sealed  Books  '  those  of  the  Courts  and  of  the  Tower  are 
preserved  in  the  Record  Office,  and  several  of  those  of  the 
Chapters  survive  :  being  folios,  minutely  corrected  through 
out  2  by  the  standard  of  the  '  Book  Annexed,'  attested 
at  the  bottom  of  the  last  page  by  the  signatures  and  seals 
of  commissioners  appointed  on  Nov.  I,  and  having  attached 
to  them  the  Great  Seal  of  England  and  a  copy  of  the  Letters 
Patent  certifying  that  the  terms  of  the  Act  have  been  com 
plied  with  and  that  the  Seal  has  been  attached. 

On  the  printing  etc.  see  Parker  Introduction  pp.  diii  sqq. ;  on  the 
Sealed  Books,  pp.  dx  sqq. ;  for  the  text  of  the  latter,  A.  J.  Stephens  The 
Book  of  Common  Prayer  .  .  .  the  Text  taken  from  the  Sealed  Book  for  the 
Chancery  and  collated  with  the  Sealed  Books  for  the  Kings  Bench,  the 
Common  Pleas,  the  Exchequer,  St.  Paul's,  Christ  Church,  Ely  and  the 
Tower,  Ecclesiastical  Hist.  Soc.,  London  1849-1854.  The  corrected  text 
of  the  Tower  copy  was  printed  in  fo.  for  Wm.  Pickering,  London  1844, 
and  in  8°  by  Jos.  Masters,  London  1853.  There  was  no  need  to  procure 
or  deliver  separate  copies  of  the  Act,  since  in  the  first  impressions  of  the 
Book  it  was  printed  after  the  Elizabethan  Act.  But  since  it  did  not 
really  belong  to  the  Book  as  subscribed  and  enacted,  the  commissioners 
erased  the  headline  of  the  pages  containing  it  in  the  Sealed  Books. 

7.  As  to  the  effect  of  the  revision,  the  new  Preface  (pp.  31, 
33)  summarises  it  under  three  heads  :  (i)  '  the  better  direc 
tion  of  them  that  are  to  officiate ' ;  (2)  elucidation,  by  (a) 
removal  of  archaisms,  (b)  explanation  of  what  was  ambiguous 
or  '  liable  to  misconstruction/  and  (c)  '  a  more  perfect  rend- 
ring  of  such  portions  of  holy  scripture  '  as  are  contained  in 
the  book  ;  and  (3)  the  provision  of  certain  '  convenient ' 
additions.  This  scarcely  gives  an  adequate  account  of  the 
changes ;  but  it  may  serve  as  a  scheme  on  which  to  arrange 
the  chief  alterations. 

1  Gee  and  Hardy  Documents  pp.  617  sq. 

2  Except  in  the  Psalter  :  see  below,  p.  cv. 


THE  RESULT  OF  THE  REVISION  ccv 

According  to  this  scheme,  the  principal  features  of  the  revised  book 
may  be  described  as  follows,  (i)  The  ' better  directions '  appear  in  the 
added  particularity  of  the  rubrics  throughout ;  and  especially  in  the  added 
rubrics  for  the  offertory  (p.  663),  at  the  Consecration  (p.  693),  for  further 
consecration  of  the  chalice,  if  required,  and  the  veiling  of  the  blessed 
Sacrament  after  Communion  (p.  703).  (2)  Elucidations  :  (a)  the  removal 
of  archaisms  seems  to  refer,  for  the  most  part,  to  the  substitution  of  c  who ' 
for  '  which  '  in  reference  to  persons  (but  with  some  happy  discrimination) ; 
of  '  is '  or  '  are '  for  '  be ' ;  and  of  '  acknowledge '  for  '  knowledge ' ;  but 
perhaps  there  are  to  be  added  under  this  head  the  explanations  of 
technical  words,  like  'Litany'  (p.  175),  and  of  the  titles  of  Sundays  and 
Festivals  throughout.  (b)  The  elimination  of  ambiguities  perhaps  relates 
to  the,  wholly  desirable,  replacement  of  'congregation'  by  'church';  to 
that  of  '  pastors  and  ministers '  by  '  priests  and  deacons '  (p.  179) ;  and  to 
the  obvious,  but,  in  the  central  'form 'of  Ordination,  hitherto  implicit, 
distinction  between  presbyters  and  bishops  (pp.  995,  1015);  and  besides 
these,  to  the  prosaical  substitution  of  'The  portion  of  Scripture  appointed 
for  the  Epistle'  for  'The  Epistle'  (p.  647),  when  the  traditional  Lectio  is 
not  drawn  from  an  Epistle  (why  not  'Lesson'?);  and  to  the,  equally 
prosaical,  substitution  of  ' as  on  this  day '  or  'as  at  this  time,'  for  ' this 
day'  (p.  221  and  passim)  on  festivals,  which  in  fact  are  ideal  and  not 
realistic,  (c)  The  '  more  perfect  rendring '  of  holy  Scripture  is  secured  by 
the  adoption,  of  the  version  of  1611  in  Epistles,  Gospels,  and  all  Lessons, 
in  the  'sentences  '  before  Divine  Service  (pp.  129,  153),  in  the  processional 
anthems  at  Burial  of  the  Dead  (p.  849),  and  in  one  at  least  of  the  inci 
dental  quotations  (p.  825);  while  elsewhere  the  former  version  remains 
unchanged  (pp.  659  sqq.,  683).  The  Psalter  is  now  included  in  the 
Book,  and,  in  accordance  with  the  3rd  of  the  17  concessions  made  at  the 
Savoy  Conference,  it  has  been  collated  with  the  Great  Bible  ;  and,  as  in 
the  Great  Bible  many  words  and  clauses  which  are  not  found  in  the 
Hebrew  text  (most  of  them  derived  from  the  Psalterium  Gallicanum  of  the 
Vulgate,  some  from  Seb.  Miinster's  Latin  version :  on  them  see  Westcott 
Hist,  of  English  Bible,  ed.  3,  pp.  333  sqq. ;  Driver  Parallel  Psalter  pp. 
xix  sqq.)  are  in  small  print,  enclosed  in  round  brackets  and  asterisked, 
so  in  the  Book  Annexed  the  same  passages  and  some  others  are  written 
in  rubric-script  and  enclosed  in  square  brackets.  Similarly,  in  some  of 
the  Epistles  and  Gospels,  words  and  clauses  not  represented  in  the  Greek, 
which  in  the  Bible  of  1611  are  printed  in  small  type  and  enclosed  in 
round  brackets,  in  the  Book  Annexed  are  either  written  in  rubric-hand  or 
underlined.  All  this  apparatus  is  ignored  in  the  printed  text  and  has  not 
been  inserted  in  the  Sealed  Books.  Under  the  same  head  it  is  con 
venient,  if  arbitrary,  to  refer  to  the  emendation  of  the  Collects,  which 
generally  is  admirable,  worthily  redeeming  Cranmer's  defects.  So  the  new 
Collects  (pp.  209,  273,  389)  are  admirable  in  their  kind  (the  kind,  viz., 
composed  of  a  mosaic  of  passages  and  phrases  from  the  Holy  Scriptures), 


ccvi  THE  RESULT  OF  THE  REVISION 

and  so  are  the  new  occasional  prayers  and  the  General  Thanksgiving 
(pp.  191-195);  while  the  verbal  emendations  throughout  the  book  are 
generally  excellent.  The  same  cannot  be  said  of  the  Prayers  for  use  at 
Sea  (p.  903).  The  new  version  of  Veni  Creator  is  not  very  meritorious, 
but  it  is  better  than  the  lumbering  and  tedious  older  one,  even  as 
emended  in  1661  (pp.  989,  1013).  The  general  excellence  of  the 
emendations  is  the  more  remarkable,  in  that  most  of  the  best  work  was 
done,  not  in  the  leisure  of  '  the  vacation,'  but  in  the  pressure  of  the  last 
month,  while  Convocation  was  sitting  and  the  final  revision  was  in  process ; 
so  that  it  appears  first  in  the  '  Convocation  Book.'  By  way  of  illustration 
of  this,  in  the  '  Notes '  below,  it  is  noted,  from  time  to  time  (and  mostly  by 
the  help  of  Parker  Introduction)^  where  the  changes  first  appear;  but 
these  are  only  illustrations,  and  the  matter  can  be  further  studied  in 
Parker,  but,  of  course,  exhaustively,  only  by  means  of  the  '  Durham 
Book,' the  'Fair  Copy'  and  the  'Convocation  Book.'  (3)  The  principal 
Additions  are :  of  the  conclusion  of  the  Jacobean  Litany  to  matins  and 
evensong  (pp.  149,  167);  of  new  occasional  prayers  and  thanksgivings 
(pp.  191  sqq.);  of  a  Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel  for  a  6th  Sunday  after 
Epiphany  (p.  273)  and  a  collect  on  Easter  Even  (p.  389) ;  of  renewal  of 
baptismal  vows  at  Confirmation  (p.  793);  of  occasional  prayers  in  the 
Visitation  of  the  Sick  (pp.  837  sqq.) ;  of  Psalms  in  the  Burial  of  the  Dead 
(pp.  849  sqq.);  and  of  an  Order  for  the  Baptism  of  adults  (p.  761),  and 
Forms  of  prayer  to  be  used  at  sea  (p.  903) ;  while  the  Ordinal  and  the  Psalter 
now  become  parts  of  the  Book  (pp.  3, 7).  Some  furtherdetails  maybe  noticed. 
(4)  Traditional  principles  or  usages  are  reverted  to  in  the  recognition  of 
the  first  Evensong  of  festivals  (p.  201);  in  the  provision  of  a  memoria  of 
the  season  at  Divine  Service  and  at  the  Eucharist  throughout  Advent 
(p.  203)  and  Lent  (p.  291) ;  the  restoration  of  the  announcement  of  fasts 
and  festivals,  and  other  notices,  to  their  old  position  (p.  649);  the  restora 
tion  of  the  proper  Lesson  of  Candlemas  (p.  567),  of  a  commemoration 
of  the  dead  at  the  altar  (p.  665),  and  of  the  benediction  of  the  font 
(p.  741).  (5)  Some  other  new  features  are  improvements:  e.g.  the  addition 
of  descriptions  to  the  names  in  the  Kalendar  (pp.  81  sqq.);  the 
lengthening  of  the  Candlemas  Gospel  (p.  569) ;  the  addition  of  the 
doxology  to  Our  Father  after  the  communion  (p.  707  :  on  pp.  133,  883, 
it  is  questionable).  (6)  Some  things  are  to  be  regretted  :  e.g.  the  breaking  up 
of  the  Gloria  into  verse  and  response  on  pp.  133,  183  ;  the  conventional 
addition  of  Gloria  to  the  Easter-day  anthems  (p.  393) ;  the  elimination  of 
the  traditional  endings  of  the  Collects  (whereas  hitherto  it  had  been  gene 
rally  left  to  the  officiant  to  finish  the  Collects  in  the  traditional  form,  now 
they  are  ended  off,  usually  as  shortly  as  possible,  with  '  Amen '  added) ; 
the  halving  of  the  Passions  on  Palm  Sunday  and  Good  Friday  by  the 
assignment  of  the  first  chapter  as  a  Lesson  at  Matins  (pp.  325,  381),  and  the 
omission  of  the  Burial  on  Tu.,  Th.,  Fr.  (pp.  349,  367,  387);  the  change 
of  order  in  the  Burial  of  the  Dead  (pp.  849  sqq.),  resulting  in  the  present 


ORIGIN  OF  CHANGES  ccvii 

hopeless  structure  of  the  office ;  and  the  insertion  of  the  Declaration  on 
kneeling  (p.  721)  and  the  note  on  the  sign  of  the  cross  (p.  747),  which 
at  least  are  out  of  place  in  the  text  of  a  service-book. 

8.  As  to  the  origin  of  the  changes  made  in  1661,  the  follow 
ing  is  to  be  noted. 

(1)  At  some  points  there  is  a  definite  return  to  the  lan 
guage  of  1549. 

This  is  marked  in  the  title  p.  3,  the  offertory  rubric  p.  663,  in  the  exhor 
tation  pp.  669,  671,  in  the  directions  for  the  manual  acts  p.  693,  in  the 
second  rubric  on  p.  717,  and  in  the  last  on  p.  845  ;  while  the  coincidences 
with  1549  in  the  second  rubrics  on  pp.  647,  651  are  slight  and  perhaps 
accidental.  All  this  appears  already  in  the  Durham  Book  ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  Book  of  1549  exerted  its  influence  directly,  not  in  Convocation,  but 
in  the  preliminary  stage  of  the  revision.  The  only  detail  in  which  the 
Book  Annexed  goes  beyond  the  Durham  Book  in  assimilation  to  1549  is 
in  '  Here '  in  the  directions  for  the  first  and  fourth  of  the  manual  acts ; 
but  this  may  be  accidental  (the  Durham  Book  here  follows  the  Scottish). 
If  the  Book  of  1549  was  difficult  to  meet  with  in  the  i7th  cent,  the  text 
of  it  was  largely  reproduced  in  Hamon  L'Estrange  The  alliance  of  divine 
offices  London  1659  (2nd  ed.  1690,  reprinted  in  *  Libr.  of  Ang.-Cath. 
Theol.'  Oxford  1846).  See  Tomlinson  Prayer  Book,  Articles,  and  Homilies 
pp.  137  sq.  But  L'Estrange  does  not  appear  to  cite  the  offertory-rubric 
of  1549 ;  and  of  course  the  Book  itself  was  accessible  to  the  bishops. 

(2)  Besides  a  large  number  of  minor  details,  the  Scottish 
Book  of  Common  Prayer  of  1637  contributed  some  substantial 
additions. 

(a)  Among  the  details  may  be  mentioned  :  the  addition  of  verse  numbers 
to  the  marginal  references  throughout,  and  (unfortunately  and  needlessly) 
to  the  announcements  of  Epistle  and  Gospel  (p.  647) ;  emendations  of 
language,  '  acknowledge '  for  the  obsolete  verb  '  knowledge '  (passim),  '  do 
part'  for  the  obsolete  'depart'  (p.  805),  'church'  for  'congregation' 
(passim) ;  and  the  correction  of  the  longstanding  misprint  '  holy '  for 
'whole'  in  v.  2  of  Quicunque  (p.  169).  (b)  The  more  substantial  con 
tributions  are  (i)  the  addition  of  the  doxology  to  the  Our  Father  (pp.  133, 
I57>  7°7)»  and  of  the  concluding  prayers  of  the  Litany  to  Matins  when 
the  Litany  is  not  appointed  to  be  said,  and  to  Evensong  (pp.  149,  167); 
and  the  provision  of  a  prayer  for  Ember-tides  (p.  191),  and  of  a  collect 
for  Easter  Even  (p.  389) :  (2)  in  the  Mass :  the  restored  Offertory  rubrics 
(pp.  659,  663) ;  the  commemoration  of  the  dead  (p.  665) ;  the  directions 
for  the  manual  acts  at  Consecration  (p.  693) ;  the  direction  for  further 
consecration  if  necessary  (p.  703  :  derived  in  part  from  the  Order  of  Com 
munion  of  1548  [p.  Ixxiv  above];  the  coincidence  of  language,  beyond 


ccviii  ORIGIN  OF  CHANGES 

what  is  found  in  the  Scottish  rubric,  may  imply  the  direct  use  of  the 
Order  of  1548,  or  it  may  be  accidental) ;  the  directions  for  the  veiling  of 
the  blessed  Sacrament  after  communion  (p.  703),  for  the  consumption  of 
what  remains  of  the  consecrated  species  (p.  717),  and  for  the  disposal  of 
the  alms  (p.  719).  The  most  important  features  of  the  Scottish  Book, 
the  restoration  of  the  canon,  practically  to  the  form  of  1549,  and  of  the 
Lord's  Prayer  and  '  We  do  not  presume '  to  their  normal  positions,  though 
the  adoption  of  them  was  contemplated  in  the  first  stages  of  the  revision 
and  they  are  consequently  found  in  the  Durham  Book  and  Sancroft's 
Fair  Copy,  were  rejected  at  a  later  stage,  when  c  My  L.L.  [Lords]  the  B.B. 
[Bishops]  at  Ely  House  ordered  all  in  the  old  method '  (Durham  Book  : 
see  Parker  Introduction  to  revisions  pp.  ccxi-ccxxviii ;  and  for  a  theory  as 
to  the  circumstances  and  date  referred  to,  see  Tomlinson  Prayer  Book, 
Articles,  and  Homilies,  pp.  207  sq.). 

(3)  The  Exceptions  of  the  Ministers  of  1661  had  consider 
able  influence  on  the  revision  ;  while  the  memorandum  of 
1641  perhaps  directly  affected  it  at  two  points. 

On  the  Exceptions  see  p.  cxciv  above;  on  the  Memorandum,  p.  clxxxviii. 
(a)  Of  the  1 7  changes  conceded  by  the  bishops  at  the  Savoy  in  reply  to 
the  Exceptions  (p.  cxcv),  all  but  1 1  (which  does  not  affect  the  text  of  the 
Book),  15  and  17  (both  of  which  were  embodied  in  the  Durham  Book 
and  the  Fair  Copy,  but  were  subsequently  withdrawn),  were  carried  out 
in  the  Book  Annexed,  though  7  has  been  deleted  (p.  cci),  and  3  was 
ignored  in  the  printed  copies  and  the  Sealed  Books  (p.  ccv).  But  besides 
these  some  13  other  of  the  Exceptions  were  recognised  in  the  revision  and 
changes  were  made  which  satisfy  in  whole  or  in  part  the  puritan  objec 
tions  :  viz.  (i)  further  occasional  thanksgivings  are  provided  (p.  195); 
(2)  the  doxology  is  added  to  Our  father  in  5  places  (pp.  133,  157,  707, 
883,  909);  (3)  the  direction  to  sing  the  Lessons  is  removed  (p.  137);  (4) 
the  collects  on  pp.  231,  235,  427,  457,  481,  503,  621,  625  are  emended; 
(5)  the  Declaration  on  Kneeling  is  replaced  (p.  721) ;  (6)  the  first  prayer  at 
Baptism  is  emended  (p.  727);  (7)  the  rubric  as  to  qualification  for  Con 
firmation  is  also  modified  (p.  791) ;  (8)  the  formal  consent  of  the  curate  to 
the  confirmation  of  any  parishioner  is  required  (p.  791);  (9)  communion 
at  the  time  of  marriage  is  no  longer  required  (p.  817) ;  (10)  the  rubric  as  to 
the  sick  man's  confession  is  slightly  altered  (p.  829) ;  (i  i)  '  this  our  brother, 
and'  and  'other'  are  omitted  in  the  last  prayer  but  one  in  the  Burial  of 
the  Dead  (p.  873) ;  (12)  the  direction  as  to  the  place  at  which  women  are 
to  be  churched  is  altered  (p.  881);  and  (13)  new  Psalms  are  provided 
in  the  Churching  of  Women  (p.  881).  Of  these  changes  all  but 
2,  4  (except  on  pp.  427,  457),  5,  6,  9,  n,  were  made  in  the  earliest 
stage  of  the  revision  and  appear  in  the  Durham  Book ;  the  rest  being 
made  in  Convocation,  and  appearing  in  the  Convocation  Book,  except  5, 
which  was  perhaps  made  elsewhere  (p.  ccii  above),  (b)  Of  the  30  '  Con- 


INDIVIDUAL  INFLUENCES  ccix 

siderations '  of  the  Memorandum  of  1641  which  really  apply  to  the  author 
ised  text  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  13  were  recognised  and  in 
some  sort  dealt  with  in  the  revision;  but  of  these  13  all  but  3  were 
repeated  in  some  form  in  the  Exceptions,  while  of  these  3  one  (the  omis 
sion  of  's  sake'  in  the  last  prayer  on  p.  191,  which  was  still  in  the  same 
form  as  on  p.  184)  was  also  proposed  by  Wren.  Consequently  the 
Memorandum  can  be  held  to  be  possibly  responsible  for  only  2  sugges 
tions,  viz.  the  note  on  the  sign  of  the  cross  (p.  747),  and  the  addition  of 
'reading  Pew  or'  on  p.  887. 

(4)  Among  individuals  who  affected  the  revision  in  differ 
ent  ways  and  in  various  degrees,  there  are  three  whose  in 
fluence  is  more  or  less  definable  :  viz.  Mat.  Wren  of  Ely, 
Robt.  Sanderson  of  Lincoln,  and  Jo.  Cosin  of  Durham. 

(a)  So  far  as  evidence  remains  from  which  to  form  an  opinion,  it 
appears  that  Wren's  was  the  most  considerable  influence.  He  had  the 
reputation  of  being  '  particularly  versed  in  the  old  liturgies  of  the  Greek 
and  Latin  churches '  (Clarendon  Rebellion  ii  init.) ;  along  with  Laud  and 
Juxon  he  had  been  censor  of  the  Scottish  Book  of  1637  (ibid. ;  p.  clxxxvii 
above) ;  and  while  bishop  of  Hereford  (1634-1635)  he  had  compiled  the 
order  for  the  consecration  of  Abbey  Dore  (Legg  English  orders  for  con 
secrating  churches,  H.B.S.  1911,  pp.  146  sqq.).  Some  part  of  the  pre 
liminary  stages  of  the  revision  was  effected  at  Ely  House  (above  p.  ccviii), 
where  also  the  committee  of  the  bishops,  of  which  he  was  a  member,  was 
originally  appointed  to  meet  (above  p.  cxcvii).  His  influence  on  the 
revision  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  nearly  all  of  the  suggestions  made  in 
his  paper  mentioned  above  (p.  cxci  sqq.)  were  finally  accepted  and  acted 
upon.  At  the  same  time  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  prosaical  element  in 
his  suggestions  was  neutralised  and  his  work  generally  improved.  (b)  As 
to  Sanderson,  Izaak  Walton  (Life  of  Dr.  Robert  Sanderson,  1678,  f.l.4b) 
no  doubt  represents  the  current  report :  *  How  many  of  those  new  Collects 
were  worded  by  Dr.  Sanderson,  I  cannot  say ;  but  am  sure  the  whole  Con 
vocation  valued  him  so  much,  that  he  never  undertook  to  speak  to  any 
Point  in  question,  but  he  was  heard  with  great  willingness  and  attention  ; 
and  when  any  Point  in  question  was  determin'd,  the  Convocation  did 
usually  desire  him  to  word  their  intentions,  and  as  usually  approve  & 
thank  him.  At  this  Convocation  the  Common  Prayer  was  made  more 
compleat,  by  adding  3  new  necessary  Offices  [for  Jan.  30,  May  29  and 
Baptism  of  Adults].  ...  I  cannot  say  Dr.  Sanderson  did  form  or  word  them 
all  [certainly  not  the  last :  see  above  p.  cxcvi],  but  doubtless  more  than 
any  single  man  of  the  Convocation;  and  he  did  also,  by  desire  of 
the  Convocation,  alter  &  add  to  the  forms  of  Prayers  to  be  used  at 
Sea  (now  taken  into  the  Service  BooK).  .  .  .  And  lastly  it  may  be  noted, 
That  for  the  satisfying  all  the  dissenting  Brethren  and  others,  the  Convo- 


ccx 


1661 


cations  Reasons  for  the  alterations  and  additions  to  the  Liturgy,  were  by 
them  desir'd  to  be  drawn  up  by  Dr.  Sanderson  ;  which  being  done  by  him, 
and  approv'd  by  them,  was  appointed  to  be  printed  before  the  Liturgy, 
and  may  be  known  by  this  Title, —  The  Preface'  The  coincidences  of 
language  noted  below,  p.  840,  suggest  that  Sanderson  was  also  the  author 
of  the  prayers  appended  to  the  Visitation  of  the  Sick  (pp.  837  sqq.);  and 
in  the  Burial  of  the  Dead  both  the  selection  of  the  Psalms  and  the  new 
arrangement  of  the  office  are  Sanderson's  (Jacobson  Fragmentary  illustra 
tions  p.  36).  (c)  Cosin  had  long  interested  himself  in  ritual  matters  (see 
his  three  series  of  Notes  on  thy  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  reprinted  in 
Works,  Anglo-Catholic  Library,  v) ;  he  took  an  official  part  in  the  Savoy 
Conference,  was  secretary  to  the  bishops  during  the  preliminary  stages  of 
the  revision,  and  was  one  of  the  bishops'  revision  committee  (pp.  cxcvi  sq.). 
His  influence  on  the  revision  is  indicated  by  the  facts,  that  part  of  the 
Tables  and  Rules  (pp.  67  sq.),  the  notes  in  the  Kalendar  (pp.  81  sqq.), 
the  first  of  the  Embertide  prayers  (p.  191),  and  the  new  version  of  Veni 
creator  (pp.  989,  1013),  are  derived  from  his  Collection  of  Devotions 
1627  (pp.  clxxxv  sq.);  and  that  some  three-fifths  of  the  91  suggestions 
made  in  his  Particulars  to  be  considered  (p.  cxci)  were  adopted  in  the 
revised  Book  (see  more  exact  statistics  in  Tomlinson  Prayer  Book, 
Articles,  and  -Homilies  p.  191).  Here  again  the  prosaic  element  in 
the  suggestions  was  avoided  in  Convocation,  (d)  Izaak  Walton's 
report,  'that  William  [Sancroft],  the  now  right  Reverend  Bishop  of 
Canterbury,  was  in  these  imployments  diligently  useful,  especially  in 
helping  to  rectify  the  Calendar  and  Kubrick"1  (Life  of  Dr.  Robert  Sander 
son  f.l.  5),  can  at  most  only  relate  to  drafting  and  informal  suggestion, 
since  he  was  only  secretary  to  the  Upper  House  and  the  Committee,  and 
was  not  a  member  of  Convocation.  Lord  Selborne  notes  that  'contem 
porary  writers,  such  as  Baxter  and  Burnet,  ascribed  the  prevailing  influence 
to  Sheldon,  Morley,  and  Henchman  .  .  .  Neal  in  the  next  century  .  .  . 
mentions  the  same  three  names,  with  seven  others '  as  '  reputed  by  the 
Puritans  to  have  been  the  chief  authors  and  promoters  of  the  Act  of 
Uniformity'  (Notes  p.  48).  But  Baxter  is  referring  to  the  Savoy  Confer 
ence  (Sylvester  Reliquiae  Baxterianae  p.  363);  Burnet  to  the  general 
influence  of  Sheldon  and  Morley  on  the  election  of  proctors  for  the  Lower 
House  (Own  Times,  ed.  Oxford  1823,  i  p.  316  'such  care  was  taken  in  the 
choice  and  returns  of  the  members  of  the  convocation,  that  every  thing 
went  among  them  as  was  directed  by  Sheldon  and  Morley ') ;  and  Dan. 
Neal  (History  of  the  Puritans,  ed.  Toulmin,  iv  pp.  379  sq.),  writing  some 
70  years  after  the  events  (1732-1738),  if  he  is  referring  to  anything  but 
the  polemical  attitude  of  the  persons  named  (six,  not  seven,  besides  the 
three  already  mentioned,  viz.  Peter  Gunning,  proctor  of  Peterborough 
diocese;  Jo.  Dolben,  proctor  for  Christ  Church,  Oxford;  Rich.  Sterne, 
bishop  of  Carlisle;  Wm.  Pierce,  archd.  of  Taunton;  Ant.  Sparrow,  archd. 
of  Sudbury ;  and  Jo.  Barwick,  dean  of  Paul's),  and  the  incidence  of  their 


PREFACE  &c.  ccxi 

votes  in  Convocation,  gives  no  particulars  as  to  any  proposals  that  any 
of  them  may  have  made.  For  examples  of  individual  influence  at  particular 
points,  see  p.  194  below,  and  the  following  notes  on  pp.  27,  193,  693, 
727,  801,  823,  849,  873,  903,  995. 

NOTES.  P.  3.  Notice  that,  as  hitherto,  so  now,  no  prominence  is 
given  to  '  Common  Prayer'  over  the  rest  of  the  contents  of  the  Book.  In 
the  Scottish  Book  of  1637,  'Common  Prayer'  is  in  larger  letters  than 
what  follows,  the  size  of  the  type  being  gradually  diminished  as  the  page 
proceeds;  and  in  at  least  one  issue  of  1662  the  words  are  a  little  promi 
nent,  because  the  initial  capitals  are  rather  large  and  the  down  strokes  of 
the  minuscules  rather  thick,  but  this  is  balanced  by  'sacraments'  and 
'rites  and  ceremonies'  being  in  capitals  throughout.  And  already  in  an 
edition  of  the  English  Book  by  J.  Hayes,  Cambridge  1670,  'common 
prayer'  is  printed  larger  than  anything  else  on  the  page,  but  scarcely  yet, 
as  in  more  modern  practice,  so  dominates  the  page  as  to  suggest  that 
*  The  book  of  common  prayer '  is  the  essential  title  and  rest  only  subordi 
nate  to  it  (cp.  p.  Ixxxii).  This  modern  practice  did  not  establish  itself, 
apparently,  till  the  end  of  the  i8th  or  the  beginning  of  the  i9th  cent. 
P.  27.  Sanderson's  Preface  (pp.  ccx,  26)  was  committed  for  consideration 
to  Wren  of  Ely,  Skinner  of  Oxford,  Henchman  of  Sarum  and  Griffith 
of  S.  Asaph  (Cardwell  Synodalia  ii  pp.  655  sq.,  658).  It  is  scarcely 
conciliatory  and  perhaps  illustrates  R.  Baxter's  remark  on  Sander 
son  — '  his  great  Learning  and  Worth  are  known  by  his  Labours, 
and  his  aged  Peevishness  not  unknown'  (Sylvester  Reliq.  Baxter. 
P-  3^3)-  Tne  first  paragraph  is  a  comment  on  the  puritan  plea:  'con 
sidering  that  all  human  works  do  gradually  arrive  at  their  maturity  and 
perfection,  and  this  in  particular  .  .  .  hath  already  admitted  sever.il 
emendations  since  the  first  compiling  thereof:  It  cannot  be  thought  any 
disparagement  or  derogation  either  to  the  work  itself,  or  to  the  compilers 
of  it,  or  to  those  who  have  hitherto  used  it,  if  after  more  than  an  hundred 
years,  since  its  first  composure,  such  further  emendations  be  now  made 
therein,  as  may  be  judged  necessary  for  satisfying  the  scruples  of  a  multi 
tude  of  sober  persons'  {Exceptions  in  Cardwell  Conferences  p.  303). 
P.  39.  In  the  printed  books  of  1662,  the  essay  '  Of  Ceremonies '  is  printed 
in  small  italic  type,  and  is  only  printed  large  here  for  convenience,  to 
correspond  with  1549  and  1552,  where  it  is  printed  in  full-sized  gothic 
text- type,  as  it  is  also  in  1559;  while  in  1604  it  is  in  small  gothic. 
P.  49.  The  emended  note  at  the  top  of  the  page  makes  no  very  good 
sense,  since  the  Gt.  Bible  continued  to  be  'set  forth  and  used'  till  1569 
(p.  clxxv  above).  In  the  Durham  Book  '  K.H.  VIII.  & '  is  inserted  above 
the  line.  It  seems  that  the  text  as  first  written  was  seen  to  be  a  mistake, 
since  the  Gt.  Bible  was  'set  forth'  under  Henry,  while  yet  the  Psalter  of 
the  Gt.  Bible  only  began  to  be  'used,'  in  Divine  Service  &c.,  under 
Edward;  and  the  insertion  of  'K.H.  VIII.  &'  is  a  slovenly  attempt  at 
correction.  P.  51.  'where  there  is  a  blank  left':  hitherto  the  proper 


ccxii  KALENDAR 

lessons  of  immovable  feasts   had  been  inserted  in  their   place   in  the 
Kalendar,  as  well  as  set  out  elsewhere ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  understand 
why  this  is  now  changed.     P.  67.  Burnet  Own  Times,  Oxford  1823,  i  p. 
3 1 5,  says  '  the  convocation  .  .  .  added  some  new  holy  days,  St.  Barnabas, 
and  the  conversion  of  St.  Paul ' ;  and  so,  no  doubt  following  Burnet,  Neal 
Puritans,  ed.  Toulmin,  iv  p.  354.     Burnet   knew  what   he  was  talking 
about ;  and  so  perhaps  did  Neal,  but  not  his  editor  (see  his  note  in  lot.). 
In  the  Act  of  1551  (p.  clviii  above)  and  the  Kalendar  of  1561  (pp.  clxxii  sq.), 
in  accordance  with  traditional  English  usage  (see  above,  pp.  xciii  sq.), 
these  days  had  not  been  included  in  the  list  of  'holy  days'  i.e.  holidays, 
and    had    not   hitherto    been    observed    as    holidays ;    but    they    had 
always  been  feasts.     The  Convocation  of  1661  made  them  into  holidays, 
not  by  including  them  in  the  list  of  feasts  here,  but,  if  at  all  intention 
ally,  by  putting  them  in  the  Kalendar  in  red,  which  had  hitherto  been 
reserved  for  holidays  (cp.  p.  clviii  above).     But  obviously  some  people 
had  taken  advantage  of  the  fact,  that  these  two  days  were  marked  in  the 
Kalendar  only  in  black,  to  excuse   themselves  from  the   observance  of 
them;  for  in  1636  Wren  in  Particular  orders  vi  (Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  ii 
p.   202)  has  occasion  to  direct  '  that  ministers  forget  not  to  read  the 
Collects,  Epistles,  and  Gospels  appointed  for  the  conversion  of  St.  Paul, 
and  for  all  the  holy  week  before  Easter,  and  for  St.  Barnaby's  day,  and 
for   Ash-Wednesday.'     P.   69.  The   fast-days  are  those   of  the   Act  of 
1551,  which  enjoins  the  vigils  explicitly,  the  rest  generally,  as  customary. 
On  the  'Certain  solemn  days'  see  pp.  ccxxv  and  1017  below.     P.  73. 
A  corresponding  table,    omitting   cols.   3,    5,    12,   had   been   contained 
in  the  Kalendar  of  1561  (Liturgical  Services  p.  440)  and  thenceforward. 
P.  77-  This  table  appears  in  the  official  Latin  translation,  Liber  precum 
publicarum  1560  (ibid.  p.  325),  and  also  in  the  Kalendar  of  1561  (ibid. 
p.  442),  and  onwards.     P.  8l.  The  change  in  the  first  lessons,  Jan.  7 
even.-24,  which  should  have  been  printed  in  black  type  (see  Corrigenda),  is 
caused  by  the  omission  of  Gen.  xi,  xxxvi,  and  the  addition  of  Gen.  xxxviii, 
made  in  1561.     On  Jan.  30,  Ex.  vi,  which  had  been  omitted  in  1561, 
was  restored  in  1661,  with  the  result  that  the  first  Lessons  henceforth  till 
Aug.  26  are  a  chapter  behind  those  of  1561.     (It  will  be  seen  that  the 
asterisk  following  « vi '  belongs  to  the  text  of  the  Book  Annexed,  and  not 
to  the  indexes  of  the  Synopsis).     P.  89.  March  2  :  Cedde  (1561  :  Sarum, 
1  Cedda '),  as  Cosin's  note  rightly  indicates,  is  Chad  (Ceadda),  not  his 
elder  brother  Cedd ;  who,  however,  as  '  Cedde '  is  placed  on  this  day  in 
the  'addicyons'  to  the  main  entry,  which  includes  Chadde,   in    Rich. 
Whytford's  Martiloge  in  englysshe  1526  (ed.  H.B.S.  1893,  p.  35  :  he  does 
not  occur  on  his  own  day,  Jan.  7,  p.  6).     P.  97.  Ven.  Bede  is  in  the  Liber 
precum  publicarum  1560  (Liturgical  Services  p.  319).     P.  101.  S.  Alban  is 
in  the  Liber  precum  (ibid.}  and  in  the  Orarium  of  1560  (Private  prayers  of 
the  reign  of  Eliz.,  Parker  Soc.,  p.   121)  on  his  right  day,  June  22:  he 
appears  on  June  17 — perhaps  ultimately  through  some  confusion  of  xxii 


DIVINE  SERVICE  ccxiii 

with  xvii — in  the  Preces  privatae  of  1564  (ibid.  p.  218),  and  on  both  days  in 
an  ed.  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  1617.  See  Lord  Aldenham 
'  S.  Alban's  Day  in  the  Calendar  of  1662  '  in  Trans,  of  St.  PauPs  Ecclesi- 
ological  Soc.  v  pp.  32  sqq.  (notice  by  the  way  that  the  writer  appears  to 
ignore  the  Kalendar  of  1561).  P.  105.  S.  Mary  Magdalen  should  be  on 
the  22nd.  The  Convocation  Book  has  'Magdalene'  printed  opposite 
xxii :  Sancroft  wrote  in  '  S.',  and  a  caret  before  it  and  '  Marie '  above, 
along  the  horizontal  line  between  xxi  and  xxii ;  and  then,  not  thinking  the 
result  clear,  he  crossed  out  the  whole  and  rewrote  '  S.  Mary  Magdalene  '  in 
the  next  available  space  above,  which  is  that  opposite  to  xxi.  The  scribe 
of  the  Book  Annexed  supposed  the  name  to  belong  to  the  2ist  and  wrote 
accordingly,  and  the  first  impressions  followed  the  Book  Annexed.  The 
Commissioners  on  their  own  authority  corrected  the  mistake  in  the  Sealed 
Books;  but  the  error  appeared  in  many  subsequent  editions.  See 
Aldenham  loc.  cit.  p.  34  (where  however  the  Convocation  Book  is  not 
quite  correctly  reproduced).  P.  I  Op.  In  1561  Dan.  xiii  (Susannah)  was 
assigned  to  Aug.  26  morning,  xiv  (Bel  and  the  Dragon)  to  the  evening. 
These  are  now  put  among  the  'apocrypha,'  Nov.  22,  23.  Con 
sequently,  henceforth  (till  Sept.  30)  the  first  lessons  are  one  chapter  ahead 
of  those  of  1561.  In  the  royal  letter  after  the  Hampton  Court  Conference 
(Cardwell  Conferences,  p.  221)  it  was  directed  that  the  last  verse  (65)  of 
Dan.  xiii  should  be  omitted,  and  that  Prov.  xxx  should  be  substituted  for 
Dan.  xiv;  and  these  changes  were  made.  P.  113.  By  1578  Sept.  7  was 
marked  with  «Nati.  of  Eliza./  i.e.  Elizabeth's  birthday.  For  a  related 
incident  see  Strype  Annals:  Elizabeth  iii  i  p.  123.  In  1604  '  Enurchus ' 
(a  misprint  for  '  Euurtius')  was  inserted.  '  Euurtius5  occurs  in  the  Sarum 
Horae,  Regnault,  1535-6  (Hoskinsp.  44);  '  Enurchus  'in  the  Preces  privatae 
of  1564  (Private  prayers  p.  221).  The  great  Cyprian  of  Carthage  was 
commemorated  on  Sept.  14 ;  while  the  Cyprian  of  the  26th  is  the  Diocletian 
martyr  of  Antioch.  Cosin  was  apparently  misled  by  the  Elizabethan 
Orarium  (Private prayers  of  the  reign  of  Eliz.,  Parker  Soc.,  p.  124)  which 
has  'Cypriani  et  Justinae '  on  Sept.  26  and  nothing  on  the  i4th  (similarly 
the  Primer  of  1545  leaves  the  i4th  blank,  and  has  'S.  Cyprian'  on  the 
26th).  The  Pian  Breviary  of  1568  first  put  S.  Cyprian  of  Carthage  on  the 
1 6th.  See  J.  W.  Legg  'Notes  on  the  day  assigned  to  St.  Cyprian  of 
Carthage  '  in  Trans,  of  St.  Paul's  Ecclesiological  Soc.  v  pp.  47  sqq.  Sept.  30  : 
through  the  omission  of  Tob.  v,  the  first  lessons  now  become  two  chapters 
ahead  of  those  of  1561.  In  1604  Ex.  vi  and  Josh,  xx  had  been  substi 
tuted  for  Tob.  v,  vi  (Cardwell  Co?iferences  pp.  221  sq.).  P.  121.  Nov.  22, 
23  :  the  insertion  of  Dan.  xiii,  xiv,  restores  the  order  of  1561.  •  P.  127. 
The  second  rubric  is  adjusted  to  the  exact  terms  of  the  Act  of  Uniformity 
(p.  23  below).  P.  133.  The  multiplication  of  'responsals  of  the  clerk 
and  people '  is  not  only  an  aggravation  of  the  puritan  grievance  (Cardwell 
Conferences  p.  305),  but  also  a  departure  from  immemorial  usage. 
P-  137.  Notice  the  retention  of  the  originally  unauthorised  insertion  of 


ccxiv  1 66 1 

the  musical  colon  in  Te  Deum,  to  enable  it  to  be  sung  to  a  chant,  in  spite 
of  its  structure.     P.  143.  It  might  be  thought  that  the  fact  that  Benedictus 
has  just   been  read   in  its    context  is  a  further  reason  for  singing  it. 
P.  145.  Hitherto  Quicunqut  had  not  been  directed  to  be  substituted  for 
the  Apostolicum,  but  to  be  used  after  Benedictus  (as  traditionally  it  had 
been  used  independently  of,  and  in  addition  to,  the  Apostolicum).     But 
evidently  it  had  come  to  be  regarded  as  alternative,  since  in  1636  Wren, 
Particular  orders  vi,  enjoins  that  it  *  be  used  on  the  days '  '  appointed, 
instead  of  the  Apostles'  Creed '  (Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  ii  p.  202).     P.  149.  If 
*  All  kneeling'  (not  on  p.  165)  is  intended  to  include  the  priest,  it  is  obviously 
ridiculous.     Notice  the  form  of  the  note  on  the  Anthem  (already  in  the 
Durham  Book).     In  England  rubrics  had  always  been  in  some  imperative 
form,  as  they  still  are  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.     Hence  this  is 
rather  a  note,  than  a  rubric,  recognising  and  authorising  a  fact,  not  giving 
a  direction.     The  so-called  Anthem  is  obviously  the  outcome  of  the  use 
recognised  by  the  Elizabethan  Injunction  (above  p.  clxxi),  '  in  the  begin 
ning,  or  in  the  end  of  the  common  prayers,  either  at  morning  or  evening, 
there  may  be  sung  an  hymn,  or  such  like  song  to  the  praise  of  Almighty 
God,  in  the  best  sort  of  melody  and  music  that  may  be  conveniently 
devised,  having  respect  that  the  sentence  [i.e.  meaning]  of  hymn  may  be 
understanded  and  perceived'  (Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  i.  p.  196).     The  'five 
Prayers '  (already  directed  in  the  Durham  Book)  are  the  conclusion  of  the 
Jacobean  Litany  (p.  clxxxi),  and  the  first  and  the  last  three  that  of  the 
Elizabethan  (p.  clxvii).     In  the  place  of  '  the  fountain  of  all  goodnes,' 
in  the  second  of  the  prayers,  1604  has  'which  hast  promised  to  bee  a 
Father  of  thine  Elect,  and  of  their  seede.'     'the  fountain  of  all  goodnes' 
first  appeared  in  A  form  of  Common  Prayer  together  with  order  of  fasting 
1625  (on  occasion  of  the  pestilence),  when  Charles  I  was  without  issue, 
and  was  adopted  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  Norton  and  Bill  1627  ; 
while  the  old  reading  was  restored  in  the  ed.  R.  Barker  1632,  after  the 
birth  of  Charles  and  Mary.    But  in  1633,  after  Laud  had  become  primate, 
the  new  phrase  was  again  adopted  (not  in  R.  Barker's  8°,  but  in  his  folio, 
of  this  year),  and  was  henceforth  retained,  no  doubt  in  order  to  obviate  the 
need  of  constant  change.    For  the  consequent  puritan  charge  of  innovation, 
see  H.  Burton  For  God  and  the  King  1636  p.  130;  and  Cardwell  Con 
ferences  p.  234.     The  order  (May  30  1662)  for  filling  in  of  the  title,  and 
of  the  names  both  here  and  on  p.  177,  in  the  printed  books,  is  in  Calendar 
of  State   Papers  :  domestic  :  1661-1662    p.    384    (Parker   Introduction   p. 
clviii).     P.    157.    At   Matins  in   the   Convocation    Book    'we    beseech' 
has  been  corrected  in  Bancroft's  hand,  first  to  '  beseech  we '  and  then  to 
'  let  us  beseech  ' :  the  Book  Annexed  was  copied  between  the  dates  of  these 
corrections,  and  has  at  both  places  '  beseech  we/  which  has  been  corrected 
by  Sancroft  to  '  let  us  beseech '  at  Matins,  but  remains  here.     The  printed 
books  have  'let  us  beseech'  at  both  places.      P.   169.  'Instead  of  the 
Apostles  Creed':  see  on  p.  145.     'Commonly  called  the  Creed  of  Saint 


OCCASIONAL  PRAYERS  ccxv 

Athanasius ' :  in  his  De  tribus  symbolis  published  in  1642  and  dedicated  to 
Charles  I,  Gerard  Voss  had  argued  successfully  against  the  Athanasian 
authorship  of  Quicunque,  assigning  it  to  a  Prankish  writer  of  the  8th  or 
the  9th  cent. ;  and  in  1647  Jas.  Ussher  in  De  symbolis  had  accepted  the 
non-Athanasian  origin,  but  assigned  the  creed  to  a  date  earlier  than  447. 
See  Waterland  A  critical  history  of  the  Athanasian  Creed  ch.  i.     In  1549 
the  pages  containing  Quicunque  had  no  headline  :  from  1552  till  1604,  the 
headline  'Evening   Prayer'  was  continued  so  as  to  cover   it:  in  1604 
'  Quicunque  vult '  was  substituted  :  Wren  proposed  to  omit  it,  and  from 
the  Durham  Book  to  the  Book  Annexed  the  headline  was  'At  Morning 
Prayer';  but  the  printed  issues  of  1662  had  'The  Creed  of  Sfc  Athan 
asius,' which  in  the  Sealed  Books  is  corrected  to  'At  Morning  Prayer.' 
P.    175.    On     the    rubric     see     'Corrigenda.'     P.    183.    It    is   unfor 
tunate  that,  while  uniformly  inserting  '  Amen '  elsewhere,  the  people  of 
1 66 1  did  not  insert  it  after  the  collect  here,  and  so  left  room  for  the 
absurd   practice  of  treating  the  following  anthem  as  a  response  to  the 
collect.     But  of  course  the  case  is  really  covered  by  the  general  rule  on 
P-   I33>     P-  187.  The  second  prayer   'in   time  of  dearth,'  which   was 
omitted  in  the  Chapel-Litany  of  1559,  in  the  Book  of  1559  (except  in 
Jugge  and  Cawoode's  first  issue)  and  onwards,  is  restored  in  the  Durham 
Book.     P.  191.    The  Embertide  Prayers  are  proposed  in  the  Durham 
Book.     In  the  printed  books  of  1662,  the  prayer  '  O  God  whose  nature  ' 
(which  was  inserted  at  the  end  of  the  occasional  prayers  in  the  Elizabethan 
Litany;  see  p.  clxvii)  was  set  after  the  'Prayer  for  all  conditions.'     Con 
sequently  in  the  Sealed  Books  the  commissioners  cancelled  it  and  had 
a   new   leaf  printed  and  inserted,  reproducing  the  order  of  the  Book 
Annexed.     None  the  less  it  long  continued  generally  to  be  printed  in  the 
wrong  place.     See  Wheatly  Rational  illustration  of  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer^  ed.  Corrie,  Cambridge   1858,   p.   186:  A.   J.  Stephens  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  i  pp.  583,  587.     P.  193.  On  May  24  1661  Rob.  Pory, 
archd.  of  Middlesex,  and  'the  archbishop's  other  chaplains,'  were  com 
missioned  to  make  '  a  prayer  for  the  parliament  sitting,  and  one  for  the 
synod';  and  on   May  31   Pory  produced  the  forms,  which  were  then 
referred  to  the  censorship  of  Rob.  Creighton,  dean  of  Wells,  Wm.  Creede, 
archd.  of  Wilts,  Jo.  Pearson,  archd.  of  Surrey,  Jos.  Crowther,  proctor  for 
Worcester  diocese,  and  the  archbishop's  two  chaplains  (D'Oyly  Life  of 
Sancroft  i  p.  113,  cited  in  Cardwell  Conferences  pp.  374  sq.).     As  appears 
from  p.  192,  the  Prayer  for  Parliament  is  partly  derived  from  a  prayer  of 
1625.     It   was  first   issued  in  a   form  of  prayer  for  a  general  fast   on 
June  12   1661  (Cardwell  ibid.).     It  was  inserted  here  by  Convocation  at 
a  late  stage  of  the  revision  (see  p.  ccii  n.2),  and  does  not  appear  in  the 
Durham  Book  or  in  Sancroft's  Fair  Copy.     P.  197.  Wren's  Thanksgiving 
'  For   restoring   publick   peace '  (altered   almost  to  its  present  form)  is 
already  adopted  in  the  Durham  Book.     P.  201.  The  new  rubric,  explicitly 
directing  the  first  Vespers  of  festivals,  appears  already  in  the  Durham 


ccxv 


Book.  P.  203.  The  new  rubric  here  also  is  found  in  the  Durham  Book. 
In  Sarum  usage,  on  feasts  &c.  in  Advent,  the  collects  of  Advent  Sunday  are 
added  to  those  of  the  day  in  the  Mass  ;  and  the  daily  memorial  de  omnibus 
sanctis  at  Lauds  and  Vespers  is  of  an  Advent-character.  P.  209.  The 
new  collect  appears  in  the  Durham  Book.  P.  213.  The  emendations  in 
the  collect  first  appear  in  the  Convocation  Book.  P,  217.  Wren 
had  suggested  '  On  the  Birth  of  Christ,  called.'  P.  227.  The  expanded 
collect  (omitting  '  those  ')  appears  in  the  Durham  Book.  With 
the  conclusion  cp.  Hen.  Hammond  Paraphrase  and  Annotations  on  the 
New  Testament  (1653)  on  Acts  vii  55  '  standing  (as  in  a  posture  of  readiness 
to  assist  and  help)  '  :  (so  S.  Chrys.  in  Cramer  Catena  iii  p.  128  ri  ovv  eon-tora 
«cu  ov^l  Ka6ijfA€vov  ;  tVa  Sei^yrrjv  avrt'A^i/'tv  rrjv  €is  rov  pdpTvpa  :  S.  Greg.  M. 
Horn,  in  Evang.  xxix  7  '  in  labore  certaminis  positus  stantem  vidit  quern 
adiutorem  habuit').  P.  231.  The  Exceptions  (Cardwell  Conferences 
p.  317)  had  asked  for  the  emendation  of  the  collect.  It  appears  so 
amended  (cp.  i  Jo.  i  7,  2  Jo.  4,  Jo.  viii  12)  first  in  the  Convocation  Book. 
P.  235.  The  Exceptions  (Cardwell  ibid.)  had  also  asked  that  this  collect 
be  amended.  The  emendation  (cp.  Ps.  viii  2)  first  appears  in  the  Con 
vocation  Book.  P.  247.  The  alteration  of  the  rubric  was  made  in  the 
Scottish  Book.  P.  265.  The  collect  is  emended  first  in  the  Convocation 
Book.  P.  273.  Sarum  had  provided  for  6  Sundays  after  Epiphany, 
repeating  the  mass  of  the  day  (with  only  a  change  of  Gospel  and  omission 
of  the  Sequence)  on  the  Sunday  within  the  octave,  and  beginning  the 
series  above,  pp.  252  sqq.,  on  the  Sunday  after  the  octave.  The  English 
Book  from  1549  onwards  followed  the  Roman  order,  and  began  the  series 
on  the  Sunday  within  the  octave,  so  providing  for  only  5  Sundays  (see 
Missale  Romanum  1474,  H.B.S.,  i  pp.  32  sqq.).  The  reformed  Missal  of 
Pius  V  (1570)  provided  a  new  mass  for  a  6th  sunday  (ibid.  ii  p.  29)  ;  and 
the  same  is  done  here.  Cosin  had  suggested  the  addition  in  the  Par 
ticulars,  and  it  is  already  made  in  the  Durham  Book.  P.  291.  The 
new  rubric  appears  already  in  the  Durham  Book.  In  Sarum  usage,  from 
Ash  W.  till  Maundy  Th.  each  day  has  its  own  proper  mass,  and  of  the  6 
further  collects  following  those  of  the  day  one  is  de  penitentibus  ;  and 
Lauds  and  Vespers  has  each  its  own  proper  collect  daily,  while,  except  on 
sat.  and  sund.  the  super  populum  of  the  mass  is  added  to  Vespers. 
P.  389.  The  emended  Scottish  collect  appears  in  the  Durham  Book. 
P.  405-  Notice  here  and  on  p.  41  1,  *  thy  '  in  the  first  line  is  retained.  '  Thine  ' 
on  p.  397  only  perpetuates  an  accidental  reading  of,  e.g.,  the  edition  of 
1636.  P.  417.  The  omission  of  '  of  God  '  in  the  last  line  of  the  Ep.  is  in 
accordance  with  the  Bible  of  1611,  where  perhaps  it  is  a  misprint.  The 
words  are  restored  in  the  Cambridge  Bibles  of  1629  and  1638  (above,  p. 
clxxxiv)  ;  and  the  scribe  of  the  Book  Annexed  wrote  them  here,  but  a 
corrector  has  deleted  them.  P.  427.  The  Exceptions  of  the  Ministers 
asked  for  the  emendation  of  this  collect  (Cardwell  Conferences  p.  317). 
The  emendation  appears  first  in  the  Convocation  Book  (Durham  Book 


THE  EUCHARIST  ccxvii 

has  '  who  doest  make  all  faithful  men  to  be  of  one  mind ').     P.  457.  Re 
consideration  of  this  collect  was  also  asked  for  in  the  Exceptions  (ibid.).    It 
appears  as  amended  in  the  Durham  Book.     Pp.  467,  471,  481,  489,  491, 
499,  503.  The  emendations  of  all  these  collects,  the  reconsideration  of 
the  last  of  which  was  asked  for  in  the  Exceptions  (Cardwell  id'id.),  appear 
first  in  the  Convocation  Book.     Pp.  505,  513,  525,  531,  547,  561,  567. 
Here   again    the    emendations   first    occur   in   the   Convocation   Book. 
P.  567.  The  restoration  of  the  Lesson  and  the  lengthening  of  the  Gospel 
are  both  proposed  in  the  Durham  Book.     P.  579.  The  reading  of  the 
Collect,  from  at  least  1578,  was  'that  we  be  not  like  children  carried 
away  with  euery  blast  of  vaine  doctrine,  but  firmely  to  be  established  in 
the  trueth  of  thy  holy  Gospel '  (Liturgical  Services  p.  167).     P.  585.  First 
corrected  in  the  Convocation  Book.     Pp.  621,  625.  Reconsideration  of 
these  collects  was  asked  for  in  the  Exceptions  (Cardwell,  as  above).     The 
emendations  first  appear  in  the  Convocation  Book;  in  the  collect  of  S.  Luke, 
'  that '  and  *  may  be  healed  '  come  from  the  Scottish  Book.    P.  641.  Whereas 
in  the  first  printed  copy  of  1662,  *  Amen '  is  elsewhere  printed  in  rubric-type, 
as  a  response,  that  after  the  Lord's  Prayer  here  is  in  text-type,  as  to  be  said 
by  the  celebrant ;  and   it   has   not   been  altered   in  the  Sealed   Books. 
Perhaps  it  indicates  the  traditional  practice,  and  the  rule  on  p.  133  was 
not  understood  to  interfere  with  this.     P.  647-  The  unhappy  transference 
of  the  memorial  of  the  King  to  a  place  before  the  Collect  was  suggested 
by  both  Wren  and  Cosin,  adopted  in  the  Durham  Book  and  the  Fair 
Copy,  and  had  already  been  effected  in  the  Scottish  Book.     It  is  a  good 
instance  of  the  profound  lack  of  appreciation,  on  the  part  of  the  Carolines, 
of  the   liturgical   precedents,    which,    on   occasion,   they   were   fond   of 
invoking.     ' The  Portion'  &c.  gives  effect  in  an  ugly  form  to  the  2nd  con 
cession  of  the  Savoy  bishops  (above  p.  cxcv).     P.  649.  'on  the  right'  (also 
Scottish),  see  above   p.  clx.     P.  663.   The  Exceptions  of  the  Ministers 
(Cardwell  Conferences  p.  318)  had  pointed  out  that  four  of  the  offertories 
are  'more  proper  to  draw  out  the  people's  bounty  to  their  ministers, 
than    their    charity   to    the    poor.'      Perhaps   in   consequence   of    this, 
it  is  now  defined,  by  the  change  on  p.   659,   by  the  new  rubric  here 
and  the  addition  of  'and  oblations'  to  'alms,'  and  by  the  last  rubric 
on   p.    719,  that  the   'devotion   of  the  people'  is  to   serve  other  pur 
poses  besides  that  of  alms.     The  direction  to  present  the  offerings  on  the 
altar,  while  it  comes  from  the  Scottish  Book,  represents  what  was  already 
in  some  measure  English  customary  practice :  see  Wren  Particular  orders 
.  .  .  given  in  the  diocese  of  Norwich  xviii  (in  Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  ii  p.  205) 
'  That  the  holy  oblations  ...  be  received  by  the  minister  .  .  .  and  then 
by  him  to  be  reverently  presented  before  the  Lord,  and  set  upon  the  table 
till  the  service  be  ended ' ;  Jer.  Taylor  Collection  of  Offices  ( Works,  ed. 
Heber,  xv  p.  298)  'let  [the  Minister]  in  an  humble  manner  present  it  to 
God,  laying  it  on  the  Communion  table;  secretly  and  devoutly  saying; 
"  Lord  accept  the  oblation  and  almes  of  thy  people," '  etc.     The  offering- 


CCXV111 


1661 


days,  except  in  so  far  as  they  are  still  represented  by  Easter  offerings,  had 
apparently  fallen  into  disuse.  Notice  that  the  direction  as  to  the  setting 
of  the  bread  and  wine  on  the  altar  in  the  main  follows  the  language  of 
1549,  not  that  of  the  Scottish  Book.  On  the  intended  meaning  of  *  Obla 
tions '  see  Dr.  Dowden's  careful  investigation  in  Further  Studies  in  the 
Prayer  Book  pp.  176  sqq.  (reprinted  from  Journal  of  TheoL  Studies  i  pp. 
321  sqq.).  Only,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  it  is  a  mere  accident  that  the 
denotation  of  '  oblations '  had  become  specialised,  since  alms  are  at  least 
as  much  oblations  as  anything  else  (Heb.  xiii  16)  and  are  offered  here; 
and  that,  though  *  oblations '  here  was  not  meant  to  denote  specifically  the 
bread  and  wine  on  the  altar,  yet  the  bread  and  wine  are  provided  out  of 
the  money  offered,  which  historically  is  in  part  a  commutation  for  offerings 
of  bread  and  wine.  Consequently,  since  it  is  not  the  money  in  itself  that 
is  offered,  but  what  the  money  represents,  the  bread  and  wine  are  part  of 
the  Church's  oblations,  and  are  legitimately,  not  to  say  necessarily, 
included  in  the  offering  of  *  these  our  alms  and  oblations/  It  may  be 
added  also,  that  whatever  in  the  developed  Offertory,  e.g.  of  the  Latin 
rite,  goes  beyond  what  is  expressed  or  implied  in  the  English  rite  as  now 
amended,  does  not  belong  to  the  essence  of  the  Offertory,  but  is  '  canon 
minor'  and  anticipatory  of  the  Canon  (cp.  pp.  civ  sq.).  Pp.  669  sq. 
See  pp.  ccvii.  P.  679.  See  p.  cci.  P.  68l.  'with  faith':  the  Durham 
Book  has  *  with  a  true  heart  in  full  assurance  of  faith '  (Heb.  x  22),  further 
corrected  by  the  deletion  of  '  with  .  .  .  heart ' ;  and  in  the  Book  Annexed 
the  scribe  wrote  '  in  full  assurance  of  faith,'  as  in  the  Fair  Copy ;  but  San- 
croft  has  erased  'in  ...  of  and  substituted  'with.'  Cp.  Mera  <f>6/3ov  Geov 
KCU  Trto-rews  irpcxrcA&rc  of  the  Orthodox  rite,  already  cited  by  L'Estrange 
in  illustration  of  'draw  near'  (Alliance,  A.C.L.,  p.  311).  In  the  Order  of 
Communion  1548,  the  direction  'draw  near  and  take  .  .  .  make' 
was  apparently  only  an  invitation  to  communion,  after  confession 
first  made,  and  did  not  imply  any  physical  movement  at  the  moment. 
Under  the  rule  of  1549  the  meaning  was  still  plainly  the  same;  only  the 
communicants  were  already  in  the  quire,  having  been  directed  (p.  662)  to 
remain  there  after  making  their  offering.  The  Book  of  1552  omitted  the 
last  direction  (p.  663);  but  apparently  in  the  xyth  cent,  it  still  continued 
to  be  observed  in  effect;  so  that  Andrewes  (Minor  Works,  A.C.L.,  p. 
156,  quoted  by  both  L'Estrange  and  Cosin)  and  Wren  (Fragmentary 
illustrations  p.  79),  understanding  'draw  near' to  mean  'come  into  the 
quire,'  proposed  to  omit  it;  while  others  (L'Estrange  Alliance  p.  309; 
Cosin  '  Notes'  II  in  Works,  A.C.L.,  v  p.  328)  held  that  the  existing  prac 
tice  was  mistaken,  and  that  'draw  near'  was  .the  sign  for  the  communi 
cants  to  enter  the  quire.  No  doubt  it  was  to  settle  this  difference  that  the 
rubric  (p.  677)  directing  the  communicants  to  be  'conveniently  placed' 
before  the  exhortation,  was  inserted.  P.  687.  From  1559  onwards 
Sanctus  has  been  printed  continuously  with  the  Preface,  as  to  be  said  by 
the  priest  alone,  which  had  no  doubt  long  been  the  traditional  custom 


THE  EUCHARIST  ccxix 

where  there  were  no  clerks  to  sing  (cp.  Simmons  Lay  folks  mass  book 
pp.  271  sq.).  But  by  1661  the  curious  custom  seems  to  have  become 
traditional  for  the  people  to  take  up  the  Preface  itself  at  '  Therefore '  and 
say  the  rest  of  it  and  the  Sanctus  with  the  priest.  See  Answer  to  the 
Exceptions  (Cardwell  Conf.  p.  344),  where  the  bishops  include  'Therefore 
with  angels '  &c.  with  the  Canticles,  Gloria  in  excelsis  and  Gloria  Patri 
as  a  '  public  thanksgiving ' ;  and  Ant.  Sparrow,  Rationale  upon  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  1657  ad  loc.,  treats  'Therefore  with'  &c.  as  part  of  'the 
thrice  holy  and  triumphant  Song.'  The  new  'sung  or  said,' which  else 
where  is  used  only  in  reference  to  what  is  'sung  or  said'  by  all  together, 
appears  to  sanction  and  confirm  the  custom.  Anyhow  the  custom  con 
tinued  (see  e.g.  Nicholls  Comment  on  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  1710, 
Wheatly  Rational  illustration  1710,  ad  loc.),  and  it  lasted  down  till  the 
last  quarter  of  the  iQth  cent.  (Jebb  Choral  Service  of  the  United  Church 
of  England  and  Ireland,  1843,  p.  506:  Scudamore  Notitia  eucharistica, 
1876,  p.  542)  and  no  doubt  still  persists  in  many  places.  On  the  other 
hand  of  course  from  Merbecke  and  Tallis  downwards  choir-music  has  only 
been  provided  for  Sanctus  (Jebb  ubi  supra].  P.  693.  The  first  rubric  is 
already  in  the  Durham  Book.  '  Before  the  people '  is  perhaps  due  to  Cosin, 
who,  in  Particulars  57,  has  'to  break  the  bread  before  the  people.'  (The 
prints  of  the  Particulars  in  Nicholls  and  the  '  Library  of  Anglo-Cath.  Theol.' 
are  both  so  far  misleading  that  by  italics  or  quotation-marks  they  suggest 
that  Cosin  supposed  that  '  before  the  people '  was  '  in  K.  Edward's  Service- 
Book ' ;  whereas  Cosin  wrote  '  nor  to  Break  the  Bread  before  the  people.' 
Of  course  Cosin's  statement  is  itself  misleading,  since,  while  a  fraction  is 
generally  directed  in  the  Book  of  1549  [p.  716],  there  is  no  suggestion 
that  it  shall  be  made  at  the  words  '  he  brake  it '),  The  rubrics  concerning 
the  manual  acts  are  already  in  the  Durham  Book.  The  insertion  of  one 
or  more  of  these  directions  was  proposed  on  all  sides :  by  Wren  and 
Cosin,  and  by  the  Ministers  in  the  Exceptions ;  and  Jer.  Taylor  represents 
two  of  them  in  his  'Office'  (Works  xv  p.  301).  'In  most  places'  the 
fraction  was  already  'in  use'  by  custom  (Cosin  Particulars  57);  and  no 
doubt  puritan  influence  was  on  the  side  of  the  custom,  since  the  Calvinians 
pressed  the  necessity  of  the  ceremonial  fraction,  as  the  essential  'memo 
rial  '  of  the  Lord's  death,  on  the  one  side  as  against  the  Latin  use  of  whole 
wafers  in  communicating  the  people,  and  on  the  other  against  the 
Lutherans  who  regarded  the  Fraction  as  an  aSta<£o/oov  and  as  only  signifying 
distribution  (F.  Turretin  Institutio  theologtae  elencticae  1 696,  xix  24).  P.  701. 
'  to  any  one  '  (already  in  the  Durham  Book) :  obviously  to  guard  against  a 
possible  interpretation  of  the  existing  rubric,  that  the  form  of  administra 
tion  need  only  be  said  once.  Cp.  Can.  21  of  1604  'the  minister  shall 
deliver  both  the  bread  and  the  wine  to  every  communicant  severally ' ; 
Wren  Particular  orders  xv  '  that  the  minister  repeat  to  every  communicant 
severally  all  the  words,  that  are  appointed  to  be  said  at  the  distribution 
of  the  holy  sacrament'  (Cardwell  Doc.  Ann.  ii  p.  205).  P.  703-  The 


ccxx  BAPTISM 

coincidences  of  language  in  the  first  rubric  with  the  Order  of  Communion 
1548  are  perhaps  accidental.     Though  no  directions  had  been  given  in 
the  Books  of  1549,  1552,  and  1559,  this  rubric  represents  the  customary 
practice,  which  was  enforced  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  (see  the  case  cited 
in  Scudamore  Notitia  eucharistica,  ed.  2,  p.  762  note4);  and  Canon  21 
of  1604  enacts  that  'no  bread  and  wine  newly  brought  shall  be  used,  but 
first  the  words  of  institution  shall  be  rehearsed,  when  the  said  bread  and 
wine  be  present  upon  the  communion-table.'    P.  719.  For  *  Divine  Service ' 
used  in  this  extended  sense,  as  including  the  Mass,  see  pp.  651,  801 ;  and, 
for  similar  use  in  1549,  p.  718,  and  '  seruice  time '  p.  800.     P.  133  it  is  used 
in  perhaps  a  still  larger  sense.     P.  721.  See  pp.  cci  sqq. ;  and  L.  Pullan 
Hist,  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  pp.  3 1 6  sqq.     This  '  Declaration '  and 
the  two  notes  at  the  end  of  the  Order  of  Baptism  (p.  747)  are,  in  the 
printed  Books  of  1662,  neither  in  the  black-letter  of  the  text  nor  in  the 
roman  type  of  the  rubrics,  but  in  italic.     Yet  already  in  the  Exceptions 
and  in  the  Answer  to  them  (Card well    Conferences  pp.    322,    354)   the 
'  Declaration'  is  called  a  'rubrick';  and  the  Memorandum  of  1641  (ibid. 
276)  suggests  a  'discreet  rubrick'  on  the  sign  of  the  cross.     P.  727* 
Sanderson  Liturgy  p.  31  has  '  Christ  in  the  river  of  Jordan,  didst  sanctify 
the  element  of  water.'     P.  741.  The  retention  of  '  Congregation '  here, 
as  against  the  suggestion  of  the  Durham  Book  to  substitute  '  Church,'  is 
happy.      'sanctifie  this  water'  etc.,  first  in  the  Convocation  Book.     It  was 
at  first  proposed  to  read  'Sanctifie  we   beseech  thee  this  fountaine  of 
Baptisme  and  for'  (cp.  Scottish)  in  line  3  p.  728,  and  this  is  found  in  the 
Durham  Book,  but  has  been  cancelled,  and  does  not  appear  in  the  Fair 
Copy.     Sanderson  Liturgy  p.   34  has   'this  child  which  is  to  be  now 
baptized.'     P.  747.  See  on  p.  721.     P.  749.  The  Thanksgiving  with  the 
preceding  rubric  appears  in  the  Durham  Book.    Pp.  761  sqq.  The  Order 
of  Adult  Baptism  was  compiled    May  18-31    1661,  before  the  revision 
began  (p.  cxcvi  above) ;  and  it  will  be  noticed  that  in  some  small  points 
(pp.  769,  773)  it  follows  the  unrevised  text  of  the  Baptism  of  Infants. 
P.  8oi.  On  'divine  service'  see  on  p.  719.     Sanderson   Liturgy  p.   38 
omits  'in  Paradise.'     P.  805.  In  accordance  with  the  i5th  of  the  con 
cessions  made  at  the  Savoy  Conference,  '  I  thee  worship '  was  altered  to 
1 1  doe  thee  honour '  in  the  Durham  Book ;  but  this  was  not  accepted  in 
Convocation.     P.  813.  '  christianly  and '  etc.  first  in  Convocation  Book. 
P.  8l7-  The  change  in  the  final   rubric   satisfies   an   Exception  of  the 
Ministers  (Cardwell  Conf.  p.  331).     P.  821.  The   new   matter  appears 
already  in  the  Durham  Book.     P.  823.  Except  for  the  conclusion,  which 
is  already  proposed  in  the  Durham  Book,  the  emendation  of  the  second 
collect  was  made  in  Convocation.     It  betrays  the  influence  of  Sanderson, 
who  in  his  Liturgy  (Fragmentary  illustrations  pp.  9,  21)  has  'Sanctify  thy 
corrections  unto  them,'  and  '  Strengthen  him  .  .  .  with  faith  .  .  .  Grant 
that  he  may  so  patiently  take  thy  fatherly  visitation  .  .  .'     P.  825.  The 
changes  in  the  exhortation,  which  for  the  most  part  are  adjustments  of 


BURIAL  OF  THE  DEAD 


CCXXl 


the  quotation  (Heb.  xii  6-10)  to  the  text  of  1611,  do  not  appear  in  the 
Fair  Copy.  P.  827.  The  two  lines  following  the  creed  are  in  the  Durham 
Book  (cp.  p.  757).  P.  829.  In  the  rubric  before  the  absolution:  'if  he 
humbly '  &c.  is  in  the  Durham  Book,  the  other  changes  first  in  the  Con 
vocation  Book ;  and  together  the  changes  largely  satisfy  an  Exception  of 
the  ministers  (Card well  Conf.  p.  331).  P.  831.  Wren's  new  clause  in  the 
prayer  is  already  adopted  in  the  Durham  Book.  Ps. :  *  [That  .  .  .  Glory] ' : 
in  Great  Bible  in  small  type,  bracketed  and  asterisked,  as  from  Vulg.  '  ut 
cantem  gloriam  tuam '  (LXX  OTHOS  V/AV^O-W  ryv  86£av  o-ov),  unrepresented 
in  Heb.  (The  brackets  of  the  first  two  columns  disappeared  in  1559.) 
P.  835.  The  changes  in  the  anthem  first  appear  in  the  Convocation 
Book.  Pp.  837  sqq.  These  prayers  occur  first  in  the  Convocation  Book ; 
they  may  be  Sanderson's,  but,  if  so,  a  comparison  of  them  with  Sanderson's 
Liturgy  suggests  that  they  were  improved  in  Convocation.  It  is  to  be 
noted  that  Canon  67  of  1604  (Cardwell  Synodalia  i  p.  284),  recognising 
that  a  Visitation  Office  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  fixed  formula,  but  only  as 
a  mass  of  suggestions  to  be  adapted  by  the  ministrant  to  the  circum 
stances  of  the  individual  case,  only  imposes  the  Office  as  it  stands  on 
curates  who  are  not  '  preachers ' ;  while  ( a  preacher '  is  to  minister  '  as  he 
shall  think  most  needful  and  convenient.'  Lane.  Andrewes's  Manual  for 
the  Sick  is  an  example  of  how  '  a  preacher '  will  deal  with  the  Office.  This 
necessary  freedom  is  recognised  in  some  measure  in  the  Office  itself, 
pp.  823,  827.  P.  849.  The  first  rubric  is  already  in  the  Durham  Book. 
The  structure  of  the  three  forms  of  the  Office  will  be  clear  from  the  follow 
ing  table : — 


1549 

1552 

1661 

Procession 

Procession 

Procession 

Burial 

Burial 

Psalms 
Lesson 

Our  Father 
Preces 
Collect 

Lesson 
Our  Father 
Collect 
Collect 

Psalms 
Lesson 
Burial 
Our  Father 

Collect 
Collect 

Mass 

The  first  column  is  intelligible  (p.  cxxvii)  and  excellent:  the  second  is 
only  the  first  spoiled  by  the  omission  of  Psalms  and  preces  :  the  third  is 
unintelligible.  Besides  the  selection  of  the  Psalms,  the  order — Psalms, 
Lesson,  Burial — is  Sanderson's  ;  but  he  also  put  an  Our  Father  before  the 
Psalms  (Fragmentary  illustrations  pp.  36  sq.).  Ps.  :  '  (at  the  last) ' :  in  the 
Great  Bible  bracketed,  but  not  in  small  print  nor  asterisked.  Not  in 
Heb.,  LXX,  Vulg. ;  and  apparently  a  gloss  to  bring  out  the  sense.  P.  851. 


ccxxii  PURIFICATION  AND  COMMINATION 

'  [fretting  a  garment], '  a  gloss  interpreting  the  text,  wrongly  it  seems,  being 
Seb.  Minister's  'vestem  arrodens':  not  bracketed  or  marked  in  any  way 
in  the  Great  Bible.  P.  853.  '  [dryed  vp] ' :  in  small  print,  bracketed  and 
asterisked  in  Great  Bible :  Vulg.  *  induret,'  LXX  vK^pwBtir].  '  O  teach ' : 
so  in  Great  Bible  and  Psalter  hitherto ;  while  in  the  Psalter  of  the  Book 
Annexed  it  is  corrected  'So  teach.'  P.  859.  The  iyth  concession  at  the 
Savoy  Conference  had  consented  to  omit  'sure  and  certain'  and  it  is 
deleted  in  the  Durham  Book  and  Sancroft's  Fair  Copy ;  but  the  conces 
sion  was  withdrawn  in  Convocation,  since  it  does  not  appear  in  the 
Convocation  Book.  Sanderson  had  read  only  'in  hope'  (Fragmentary 
illustrations  p.  37).  The  addition  of  'the'  before  'resurrection  to  eternal 
life'  (S.  Jo.  v  29)  clearly  mitigates  the  reasonable  puritan  objection,  that 
the  '  words  cannot  in  truth  be  said  of  persons  living  and  dying  in  open 
and  notorious  sins,'  suggesting,  as  they  did,  a  '  sure  and  certain  hope '  of  the 
'  resurrection  to  eternal  life '  of  each  individual,  whatever  his  character 
might  be:  whereas  now,  with  the  added  'the,'  they  only  assert  'the  sure 
and  certain  hope '  that  such  a  resurrection  will  be,  and  suggest  the  charit 
able  hope  that,  in  spite  of  all  human  judgment,  the  individual  is  such 
that  he  will  have  part  in  it.  P.  86l.  '  For '  is  an  unhappy  change  :  except 
for  the  punctuation  (which  appears  corrected  first  in  the  Book  Annexed) 
the  text  was  right  as  it  stood  (iva  dvaTravoruvTai,  ut  requiescant).  Pp.  873, 
875.  Except  'with, 'the  omission  of  'A"., 'and  the  conclusion,  these  cor 
rections  appear  first  in  the  Convocation  Book.  The  omission  of  'this  our 
brother,  and '  and  '  other '  satisfies  one  of  the  Exceptions  (Cardwell  Conf. 
p.  333).  Sanderson  Liturgy  p.  37  has  'we  and  all  other  departed.' 
P.  88l.  '  As  hath  .  .  .  direct '  provides  a  remedy  for  an  inconvenience 
pointed  out  in  the  Exceptions  (ibid.  p.  334).  The  hopeless  gram 
matical  incoherence  of  the  opening  admonition  remains  uncorrected. 
The  Exceptions  also  (ibid.)  proposed  a  change  of  Psalm,  suggesting  cxiii 
or  cxxviii.  P.  885.  The  changes  in  the  collect  appear  first  in  the  Con 
vocation  Book.  P.  887.  The  Scottish  Book  had  already  directed  that 
the  Commination  should  be  used  'especially  on  the  first  day  of  Lent  com 
monly  called,  Ashwednesday ;  (cp.  1549).  But  this  of  course  represents 
what  had  always  been  customary  in  England:  see  Frere  Visitation 
Articles  and  Injunctions  iii  pp.  254,  278,  304:  Second  Report  of  the 
Ritual  Commission  1868,  p.  418,  &c.  'Reading  Pew  or':  cp.  p.  ccix. 
P.  889.  'Perverteth  the,'  'Jdolaters,'  as  in  version  of  1611.  P.  891. 
'Ready  to  fall  upon  vs':  suggested  in  Durham  Book.  P.  893.  'the 
propitiation':  from  version  of  1611.  P.  895.  Ps.  li  9:  the  addition  of 
'away'  which  appears  first  in  the  Convocation  Book,  and  is  not  made  in 
the  Psalter,  is  unexplained.  P.  897.  Ps.  li  15:  'and,'  inserted  here  in 
the  Convocation  Book,  is  found  in  the  Psalter  of  1639,  and  appears  in 
that  of  the  Book  Annexed.  Ver.  17:  the  article  before  'contrite'  dis 
appears  here  in  1604,  and  is  not  in  the  Psalter  of  1639,  but  it  remains  in 
the  Bible  of  1611.  P.  899.  'always':  cp.  pp.  184,  700.  P.  901.  Why 


FORMS  OF  PRAYER  TO  BE  USED  AT  SEA        ccxxiii 


the  Aaronic  blessing  should  be  thus  mutilated  is  not  obvious.  On  the 
Psalter,  see  above  pp.  cxcv,  ccv.  Pp.  903  sqq.  The  *  Formes  of  Prayer,' 
in  the  printed  copies  of  1662  are  in  smaller  type  than  the  rest  of  the 
book,  and  in  one  impression  at  least  occupy  a  sheet  to  themselves 
(*  1-6)  between  sheets  Nn  (1-8)  and  Oo  (1-6).  As  a  supplement  to  the 
Directory  of  1544  the  Parliament  had  issued  A  Supply  of  Prayer  for  the 
Ships  that  want  ministers  to  pray  with  them  (Procter  and  Frere  pp.  162, 
644) ;  and  Jer.  Taylor  in  his  Collection  of  Offices  had  provided  An  Office, 
or  Form  of  Prayer,  for  Sailors  or  Mariners  (  Works  xv  p.  349).  As  we 
have  seen  (p.  ccix),  Izaak  Walton  attributes  some  responsibility  for  the 
'  Formes  of  Prayer  to  be  vsed  at  Sea'  to  Sanderson  ;  and,  besides  what  is 
noted  on  p.  924,  they  bear  other  marks,  which  betray  his  hand,  viz.  'vs 
thy  poor  servants'  p.  905,  and  'We  thy  poor  creatures'  p.  917,  a 
form  of  phrase  which  recurs  in  his  Liturgy  (Jacobson  fragmentary 
illustrations^.  13  sq.,  16);  p.  903  1.  13  (cp.  Lit.  p.  9  'receive  into  thy 
gracious  protection');  p.  919  1.  21  (ibid.  17  'express  the  true  thankful 
ness  ...  by  obedience  to  thy  most  holy  commandments ').  Along  with 
the  occasional  thanksgivings  of  1604  (pp.  195  sqq.)  these  'Formes'  must 
take  the  lowest  place  among  the  contents  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer. 
P.  929.  The  curious  addition  of  an  imprint  to  the  title  of  what  is  no 
longer  a  separate  book  was  not  reproduced  in  the  printed  Books,  but  is 
reinserted  in  the  Sealed  Books.  Pp.  953,  955.  The  proper  Gospel  and 
'  Prevent  us,  O  Lord '  first  appear  in  the  Convocation  Book.  Pp.  959- 
995.  The  new  arrangement  of  the  Ordination  of  Priests  is  exhibited  in  the 
following  table. 


1552 


1661 


Sermon 

Mass  as  far  as  to  the  Gospel. 

Come  holy  Ghost 

Presentation 

Litany 

Oath  of  allegiance 
Allocution 
Examination 
Silent  prayer 

Consecration  prayer 
Imposition  of  hands  &c. 
Delivery  of  Bible  &c. 


Sermon 


Presentation 

Litany 

Mass  as  far  as  to  the  Gospel 

Oath  of  allegiance 

Allocution 

Examination 

Silent  prayer 

Come  holy  Ghost 

Consecration  prayer 

Imposition  of  hands  &c. 

Delivery  of  Bible  &c. 


The  purpose  of  the  change  is  evidently,  by  assimilating  the  order  of  parts 
to  that  of  the  Ordination  of  Deacons,  to  make  it  easier  to  combine  the 
two  rites  when  both  orders  are  conferred  in  immediate  succession.  The 
new  arrangement  appears  first  in  Sancroft's  Fair  Copy.  (The  Durham 


ccxxiv  ORDINATIONS 

Book  is  no  longer  available,  since  it  does  not  contain  the  Ordinations, 
which  must  have  been  corrected  in  a  separate  book  now  lost.)  P.  967. 
The  use  of  the  prayer  '  Almighty  God,  giver '  as  the  Collect,  appears  first 
in  the  Convocation  Book.  Pp.  969  sqq.  The  first  of  the  Epistles  of 
1550,  and  the  first  and  third  of  the  Gospels,  are  now  transferred  to  the 
Consecration  of  Bishops  (pp.  1001,  1003).  This  change  and  the  new 
Ep.  and  Gospel,  occur  first  in  the  Convocation  Book.  Henceforward, 
down  to  p.  997,  the  greater  part  of  the  emendations  (except  in  the  version 
of  Veni  Creator •;  which  however  is  to  stand  'as  tis  corrected  paper  E,' 
not  forthcoming)  are  found  already  in  Bancroft's  Fair  Copy.  P.  989.  The 
omission  in  lines  3-5,  and  the  new  conclusion,  the  rubric  as  to  Veni  Creator 
and  the  new  version  of  the  hymn  itself,  appear  first  in  the  Convocation 
Book.  On  the  version,  see  above  pp.  ccvi,  ccx.  P.  995.  The  Jesuit  Peter 
Talbot  in  a  Treatise  of  the  Nature  of  Catholick  Faith  and  Heresie  (Rouen 
1657,  p.  22),  in  disputing  the  validity  of  English  Ordinations,  had  used 
the  argument  that  in  the  English  rite  the  form  '  Receive  the  holy  Ghost ' 
is  used  indiscriminately  for  the  presbyterate  and  the  episcopate,  without 
any  words  explicitly  defining  which  order  is  being  conferred;  and 
Bramhall  had  replied  in  The  Consecration  of  protestant  bishops  vindicated 
(1658),  arguing  with  good  reason  that  the  order  intended  to  be  con 
ferred  is  adequately  defined  by  the  whole  context  of  the  rite  ( Works, 
Anglo-Cath.  Libr.,  iii  pp.  162  sqq.).  On  the  other  hand,  according  to 
Burnet  (Reformation  ii  p.  144  [1680])  and  Humphrey  Prideaux  (Validity 
of  the  Orders  of  the  Church  of  England pp.  9,  22,  42  sq.  [1688]:  cp.  Card- 
well  Conferences  p.  385  note p),  presbyterians  had  argued  from  the 
common  formula  that  bishops  and  presbyters  are  regarded  as  essentially 
identical.  Although  it  is  obvious  that,  if  the  first  contention  had  been 
valid,  it  was  too  late  to  remedy  the  alleged  defect  by  any  modification  of 
the  form ;  and  although  Burnet  and  Prideaux  report  that  the  new  defining 
clause  was  inserted  only  to  meet  the  latter  contention  :  yet  it  is  likely 
that  both  contentions  contributed  to  suggest  the  addition  of  '  for  the  office 
and  work'  etc.  here  and  on  p.  1015.  According  to  Prideaux  (ibid.  p.  43) 
Peter  Gunning  and  Jo.  Pearson  were  *  the  prime  advisers '  of  the  insertion 
of  the  words.  Bancroft's  Fair  Copy  proposes  '  Take  the  Holy  Ghost  by 
whom  the  Office  and  Authority  of  a  Bishop  is  now  committed  vnto  thee ' 
for  the  consecration  of  bishops,  but  suggests  no  change  here.  P.  999. 
Wren  suggested  'Ordering  or'  in  the  title.  The  new  Collect  is  found 
first  in  the  Convocation  Book.  P.  1005.  'the  Arch-Bishop  .  .  .  Table,' 
in  substance  suggested  by  Wren.  Henceforward,  except  where  it  is  other 
wise  noted,  all  the  more  important  amendments,  and  most  of  the  smaller 
ones,  are  already  found  in  Bancroft's  Fair  Copy.  P.  1007.  '  the  edifying 
and  well  governing'  (from  the  Bidding  prayer  of  Canon  55  of  1604  :  see  p. 
1053  below)  first  in  the  Convocation  Book.  Pp.  IOII,  1013.  The  new 
question  and  answer,  the  new  rubrics,  and  the  short  version  of  Veni  Creator, 
appear  first  in  the  Convocation  Book.  P.  1015.  On  the  amended  form 


THE  STATE  SERVICES  ccxxv 

see  on  p.  995  above.  P.  1017.  The  final  note  was  naturally  omitted  in 
the  printed  copies;  but  it  has  been  reinserted  in  the  Sealed  Books. 
The  'Certain  solemn  dayes'  (p.  69),  which  are  marked  in  red  in  the 
Kalendar,  were  enjoined  respectively  by  the  Acts  3  Jac.  I  c.  i,  12  Car.  II 
c.  30,  and  12  Car.  II  c.  14  (for  all  of  which  see  A.  P.  Perceval  The  original 
services  for  the  State  holiday 's,  London  1838,  pp.  17  sqq.).  A  form  of 
service  for  Nov.  5  was  issued  by  royal  authority  in  1606  (Prayers  and 
Thankesgiuing  .  .  .  for  the  happy  deliverance  of  his  Maiestie  .  .  .  R. 
Barker);  a  form  was  issued  for  Jan.  30  1660-1  (see  Lathbury  Hist,  of  the 
Book  of  Common  Prayer  pp.  334  sq.),  and  a  revision  of  this  (reprinted 
in  Kennet  Register  p.  368),  presumably  made  by  the  committee  of 
Convocation  appointed  on  May  16  1661  (above,  p.  cxcvi),  was  issued 
for  Jan.  30  1661-2  (Lathbury  loc.  cit.);  while  for  May  29  a  form  was 
devised,  May  16-18  1661,  by  a  committee  of  Convocation  (above,  pp. 
cxcv  sq.)  and  issued  (reprinted  in  Kennet,  p.  452).  All  these  forms  were 
revised  by  Convocation  in  the  spring  of  1662,  being  finally  read,  as  revised, 
and  unanimously  approved  in  the  Upper  House  on  Ap.  26  (Cardwell 
Synodalia  ii  pp.  670  sq.).  A  royal  order  of  May  2  directed  that  they  be 
printed  and  published  and  '  annexed '  to  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer 
and  be  henceforth  universally  used  (Cardwell  Conferences^.  383  note11). 
Accordingly  they  were  annexed  to  the  printed  copies  of  the  Book,  in 
small  type,  after  '  FINIS,  under  a  new  title-page  with  the  royal  order 
printed  on  the  verso. 


ADDENDA   AND   CORRIGENDA 

P.  5  c.  2  1.  13,  for  'Lessons  and'  read  *  Lessons,  and5 
„      „  1.  21,  for  'EuenzVz^'  read  'Evenz^' 
„      „  1.  31,  for  ' ministration*  read  ''Ministration* 
P.  19  c.  2  11.  9,  10,  add  hyphens  after  'distress'  and  before  '  And* 
P.  46  c.  i  11.  23  sq.,  for  lHor.  Can.  series'  read  '  "Breviary"' 
P.  691.  24,  for'  — 'read'— .' 
Pp.  79  sqq.    In  all  three  books  the  days  throughout  are  "divided  from  one 

another  by  red  lines  right  across  the  Kalendar,  which  are  here 

omitted  for  convenience. 
P.  8 1  day  7  even,  to  24  even.,  for  'xii  .  .  .  xlvii'  read  '2xii  .  .  .  xlvii'  (see 

note  p.  ccxii). 

Pp.  85  11.  6,  28  ;  101  11.  28,  33  ;  105  1.  29  ;  109  1.  28,  for  '7aFast'  read  '2Fast' 
P.    85  1.  34,  for  'xii'  read  'xiii' 
P.  109  1.  12,  for  '7aName'  read  '2Name' 
P.  113  1.  12,  for  '7aEnurchus  B.  of  read  '4Enurchus  B.  7aof ' 

„  1.  31,  for 'aS.' read '7aS.' 
P.  117!.  23,  for  'S.'read  '7aS.' 
P.  121  1.  10,  for  'Papists'  read  '5Papists' 

„     1.  28,  for 'Isai.' read '2Isai.' 
P.  124  1.    i,  for  '  HATH  .XXXI.  DAYES '  read  '  HA  TH  .XXX L  DA  YES* 

P.    127   C.    I    1.  3,   for   'SHALBE   VSED    AND    SAYDE'   read    ' SHALBE   VSED  AND 

SA  YDE  * 

P.  129  c.  2,  all  chapter  numbers  in  the  references,  except  (Jer.)  10,  (Ps.)  143, 
should  be  in  italic. 

„       „      11.  11-14,  for  '  When  .  .  .  alive*  read  'When  .  .  .  alive' 

„        „      1.37,  for '10 'read '10' 

„        „      1.  48,  for  '  143 '  read  '  /^3 ' 
P.  133  c.  2  1.  21,  read  'him*' 

P.  137  c.  2  11.  22,  40,  for  'acknowledge'  read  ^acknowledge' 
P.  142  c.  I  1.  23,  for  'secula'  read  'seculo' 
P.  153,  correct  as  above  on  p.  129. 
P.  169  c.  2  1.  25,  for  'whole'  read  '°whole' 
P.  174  c.  i  1.  33,  see  note  p.  Ixvi  top. 
P.  175  c.  2  1.  2,  read  ' Supplication*,  to  be  sung,  or  said  "after3 

„     cc.  I,  2  1.  40,  for  '  all '  read  '  all  * 

ccxxvii 


ccxxviii  ADDENDA  AND  CORRIGENDA 

P.  176  c.  i  11.  i,  2,  omit  what  is  bracketed  :  see  note  p.  Ixvi. 
P.  177  c.  i  1.  35,  for  *  universal/^ '  read  ' vniuersal/y ' 
P.  178  c.  i  1.  1 6,  for  'pusillanimos'  read  '  pusillanimes ' 
P.  183  cc.  i,  2  1.  26,  for  'be'  read  'be' 

„     c.  2  1.  35,  for  'hearts'  read  'hearts5' 
P.  185  c.  2  1.  23,  for  412}  read  'Ib2' 
P.  187  c.  2  1.  8,  for  'lesus'  read  'lesur' 
P.  188  c.  2,  prefix  '[A  prayer  of  Chrysostome.] ' 
P.  189  c.  2  11.  7,  8,  read  'the  relief e  of  those' 
Pp.  193,  195  c.  2,  enclose  the  indented  notes  with  a  long  square  bracket  on  the 

inner  side. 

P.  197  c.  i,  opposite  1.  1 6  of  c.  2,  add  '[1604  this  thy]' 
P.  216  c.  i  1.  i,  omit  % 
P.  227  c.  2  line  17,  for  'the'  read  t6thej 
P.  247  c.  2  1.  30,  for  'serve'  read  '6serve' 
P.  287  c.  2  1.  7,  for  'of  all'  read  'of  all' 
P.  289  c.  2  end,  read  '6coSiONLY  .  .  .  WEDNESDAY.*' 
P.  291  c.  2  1.  8,  read  ^acknowledging' 
P.  294  c.  2  1.  36,  'monicions'  is  read  only  in  the  ed.  of  1549  here  used  :  in  the 

rest  it  is  *  motions.' 
P.  295  c.  i  I.  7,  'monicions'  is  read  in  one  other  ed.  of  1552  :  in  the  rest  it  is 

'  motions.' 
Pp.  329  c.  2  1.  39 ;  347  c.  2  1.  36 ;  365  c.  2  1.  54 ;  383  c.  2  1.  54,  the  Title  on 

the  Cross  is  written  in  larger  script,  and  in  the  printed  book  it  is  in 

small  roman  capitals. 
Pp.  331  c.  2  1.  6 ;  349  c.  2  1.  3,  'Eli'  &c.  is  written  in  rather  larger  script,  and 

in  the  printed  book  it  is  in  roman  type. 
P.  397  c.  2  1.  3,  for  '  thine '  read  '  thine5 ' 
P.  421  c.  2  1.  7,  read  « said  4         *,  I' 
Pp.  423  c.  2  1.  43;  427  c.  2  1.  36;  445  c.  2  1.  32;  483  c.  2  1.  15  :  the  first  5 

words  are  written  in  the  script  of  the  rubrics.     This  is  ignored  in  the 

printed  book,  and  remains  unnoticed  in  the  Sealed  Books. 
P.  427  c.  2  1.  2,  for  'who8'  read  '8who*' 
P.  474  c.  i  1.  7,  for  '[Gr.'  read  '(Greg.  166)' 
P.  476  c.  i  1.  17,  for  'xviii  38'  read  '379  :  Greg.  166' 
P.  490  c.  i  11.  9  sq.,  read  '(Leon.  434 ;  Gel.  iii  4)' 
P.  504  c.  i  end,  for  'xviii  29'  read  '371' 
P.  510  c.  i  1.  6,  for  'xviii  33'  read  '374' 
P.  533  c.  2  1.  3,  read  'said  4         *  The' 
P.  546  c.  i  1.  6,  for  'Leon.  419'  read  'Greg.  121 ' 
P.  551  c.  2  11.  12  sq.,  'The  Lord  our  Righteousness'  is  written  in  larger  script, 

and  in  the  printed  book  is  in  roman  capitals. 
P.  575  c.  2  1.  26,  read  ^BLESSED' 


ADDENDA  AND  CORRIGENDA  ccxxix 

P.  591  c.  i  after  1.  29,  add  'SAINCT  IOHN  BAPTIST.' 

„     c.  2  after  1.  29,  add  'SAINT  IOHN  BAPTIST.' 
P.  625  c.  2  11.  n,  14,  read  'Gthat*',  f6may  be  healed*' 
P.  647  c.  2  1.    5,  read  '  pray.  *         * ' 
„      „    „  47,  read  *  9for  the  Epistle* ' 
„       „     „  54,  read  '6tlie  People  all  standing  up* ' 

P.  662  C.  2  11.  39  sq.,  read  'Chalice  or  els  in  somefaire  or  conueniente  cup  ' 
„       „     1.  41,  read  'pwttyng' 
„       „     1.  42,  read  *  water ' 
P.  663  cc.  i,  2  bottom,  and  p.  665  top,  add  long  square  bracket  on  the  inner 

side  of  the  indented  note. 
P.  665  c.  2  1.  30,  read  '4  specially' 
P.  673  c.  2  1.  15,  read  'an' 
P.  683  c.  2  1.  13,  read  'strengthen1*' 

„       „     1.  40,  read  'After*         *  which' 
P.  685  c.  2,  enclose  the  indented  note  in  a  long  square  bracket  on  the  inner 

side. 

P.  686  c.  i  1.  40,  add  &  in  margin. 

P.  687  c.  2  11.  34  sq.,  add  hyphen  after  'saying,'  and  before  'Holy' 
P.  693  c.  2  1.    5,  read  '  7bbefore ' 
„      „    1.  23,  read  '6most' 
„      „     1.  27,  read  '  lesus* ' 
„      „    note  (c),  for 'SAM' read 'Ana' 
„      „     note  (d),  read  'sue' 
P.  704  c.  2  1.  i,  read  'commaunde-' 
P.  707  c.  2l.  5,  read' Tor ' 
P.  717  c.  2  1.  14,  for  c7'  read  '7b' 
P.  721  c.  2,  add  9  at  the  beginning,  and  *  at  the  end. 

P.  727,  and  odd-numbered  pages  down  to  p.  775,  c.  2,  the  descriptions  of  the 
subject  or  subjects  of  Baptism  ('this  child,'  'these  persons,'  &c.)  and 
most  of  the  pronouns  referring  to  them,  in  the  Book  Annexed  are 
written  in  the  larger  script  of  the  rubrics,  as  to  be  adjusted  to  the 
sex  and  number  of  the  subjects,  and  in  the  printed  book  are  in  the 
roman  type  of  the  rubrics. 
P.  734  c.  2  1.  5,  for  'end'  read  'and' 
Pp.  740  c.  I  1.  13  ;  742  c.  i  1.  27,  add  '(Gel.  i.  44)' 
P.  748  c.  i  1.  23,  add  S  in  margin. 

Pp.  787  c.  2  1.  38 ;  789  c.  2  11.  3  sq.,  '  Sacrament '  and  the  Baptismal  formula 
are  written  in  the  rubric  script,  and  in  the  printed  book  are  in  the 
roman  type  of  the  rubrics. 
P.  790  c.  i  1.  21  marg.,  for  '  B '  read  *  Br' 
P.  791  c.  2  1.  32,  read  '9are  .  .  .  and*' 
P.  791  c.  2  1.  50,  read  '9as  he  .  .  .  confirmed* ' 


ccxxx  ADDENDA  AND  CORRIGENDA 

Pp.  821,  823,  831,  837,  839,  845,  c.  2,  the  3rd  pers.  pronouns  are  written  in 

rubric  script,  and  in  the  printed  book  (here  and  also  p.  841)  are  in 

the  roman  rubric  type. 
Pp.  859  c.  2  1.  39;  873  c.  2  1.  23;  877  c.  2  1.  1 6,  'brother'  is  written  in  rubric 

script,  and  in  the  printed  book  both  it  and  'his'  on  p.  859  1.  41  are  in 

roman  rubric  type. 

P.  873  c.  2  11.  28  sq.,  read  '  with  Q         *  air 
P.  877  cc.  i,  2  1.  24,  read  'from' 

P.  887  C.  2  11.  4  sq.,  read  '6THE  FIRST  DAY  OF  LENT*3 
P.  898  c.  I  1.  14,  add  '(Greg.  201,  247)' 

P.  900  c.  2  11.  1 8  sqq. ;  the  title  of  the  Psalter  should  not  be  in  italic. 
P.  901  c.  i  bottom,  add   '  [THE    PSALTER,    or    Psalms    of   Dauid,    after   the 
Traslation  of  the  greate  Byble,  pointed  as  it  shall  be  sayde  or  songe 
in  Churches.     Edward  Whitchurch  1552.]' 
P.  944  c.  i  bottom,  add  '(Gel.  i  23)' 
P.  954  c.  i  1.  13,  read  'dignisque' 

„       „    1.  19,  add  '(Leon.  424  :  Gel.  i  22)' 
P.  978  c.  i  1.  14,  add  '(Gel.  i  20)' 
P.  983  c.  2  1.  13,  read  'nor' 
P.  984  c.  I  11.  29  sq.,  read  '  administretis ' 
P.  999  c.  2  1.  14,  read  'didst' 
P.  1005  c.  2  11.  1 8  sqq.,  read  '8the  .  .  .  Table*' 
Pp.  1006  c.  i  1.  5  ;  1014  c.  i  1.  8,  add  '(Gel.  i  99)' 
P.  1014  c.  I  1.  9,  add  &  in  margin. 


A  SYNOPSIS  OF  THE  SOURCES  AND  REVISIONS 
OF  THE  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER 


1549 

THE 

booke  of  the  common 
prayer  and  admi- 

nistracion  of 

the 
Sacramentes,  and  other 

rites  and  ceremonies  of 

the  Churche  :  after  the 

vse  of  the  Churche 

of  England. 


Londini  in  officina 

Edouardi  Whitchurche. 

Cum  priuilegioad  imprimendum  solum. 

Anno.  Do.  1549.  Mense 

Junij. 


1552 

The  Boke  of 

common  prayer,  and  ad- 

ministracion  of  the 


1661 

THE  BOOKE  OF 

Common  Prayer 

And 
Administration  of  the 


Sacramentes 
and  other 

rites 
and  Ceremonies  in 

the  Churche  of 
Englande. 


C  Londini,  in  officina  Ed- 

vvardi  Whytchurche. 

«;  Cum  priuilegio  ad  ImPri- 

mendum  Solum. 

Anno  JS-- 


Sacraments 
And  other  Rites  and 

Ceremonies 

of  the  Church 

According  to  the  Vse  of 

the  Church  of  England 

8  Together  with 
The  Psalter  or  Psalmes  of 

David 

Pointed  as  they  are  to  be 
sung  or  said  in  Churches  * 

And 

The  Forme  or  Manner  of 
Making,  ordeining,  &  con- 
[secrating 
of 

Bishops,  Priests,  &  Dea- 
[cons. 


THE  CONTENTS 


SOURCES 


1549 


THE  CONTENTES  OF  THIS  BOOKE. 


Breuiarium  Romanum  nuper  reforma- 
tum  (Quignon)  Venice  1535,  praefatio. 

Portiforium  seu  Breuiarium  ad  vsum 
ecclesie  Sarisburiensis  [Paris,  Reg- 
nault,  1535]. 


i.  A  preface. 

[See  xiiii.  below.] 

ii.  A  table  and  Kalendar  for  Psalmes 
&  Lessons,  with  necessary  rules 
perteyning  to  the  same. 
[See  p.  48  below.] 


[Seep.  48  below.] 
[See  iiii.  below.] 


Portiforium  as  above. 


iii.  The     ordre    for     Mattins     and 
Euensong, 
throughout  the  yeare. 

[See  vi.  below.] 


Missale  ad  vsum  ecclesie  Sarisburiensis 
[Paris,  Regnault,  1534]  passim. 


Ibid.  Ordinarium  misse,  Canon  [after 
Temporale]. 

Processionals  ad  vsus  insignis  ecclesie 
Sarum  obseruandos  accomodum  [Roer- 
mund,  1544,  ff.  116  sqq.]. 

Manuale  ad  vsum  percelebris  ecclesie 
Sarisburiensis  [Rouen,  Nic.  Rufus, 
1543]  Ordo  ad  cathecuminum  facien 
dum  [if.  33  sqq.],  Benedictio  fontis 
[ff.  37  sqq.],  De  baptismo [ff.  42  sqq.]. 


The  Introites,  Collectes,  Epistles 
and  Gospelles,  to  be  vsed  at 
the  celebracion  of  the  Lordes 
Supper,  and  holy  Communio, 
through  the  yere,  with  proper 
Psalmes  and  Lessons,for  diuerse 
feastes  and  dayes. 

The  Supper  of  the  Lorde  and 
holy  Communion,  commonly 
called  the  Masse. 

The  Letany  and  Suffrages. 


Of  Baptisme  both 
publike  and  priuate. 


OF  THIS  BOOK 


1552 


1661 


THE   CONTENTES  OF  THYS   BOOKE. 


i.  A  preface. 

zV.  Of   ceremonies,    why    some    be 
abolisshed)  and  some  retayned. 
Hi.  The  ordre  howe  the  Psalter  is 
appointed  to  be  read. 

Hit.  The  Table  for   thorder  of  the 

Psalmes  to  be  sayd  at  Mornyng 

and  EuenzVzcr prayer, 
v.  The  order  how  the  rest  of 

holy  Scripture  is  appointed  to 

be  read. 
m.  Propre  Psalmes  and 

Lessons  at  Morning  and  Euen- 

ingpraier,  for  certayne  feastes 

and  dayes. 
vii.  An  Almanack. 


mit.  The  Table  and  Kaleder  for 
Psalmes  and  Lessons,  with 
necessarie  Rules  apperteynyng 
to  the  same. 

ix.  Thorder  for  Mornyng  prayer  and 
E  u  e  n  inge  prater, 
throughout  the  yere. 

x.  The  Letanie. 


The  Collectes  Epistles, 

and   Gospels,  to  be  vsed  at 
the  ministration  of  the 

holy  Communion, 
throughout  the  yere. 


THE  CONTENTS  OF  THIS  BOOK 

1  An  Act  for  the  Vniformitie  of 

Common  Prayer. 

2  The  Preface. 

3  Concerning  the  service  of  the 

Church. 

4  Concerning  Ceremonies. 

5  The    Order   how    the    Psalter   is 

appointed  to  be  read. 


6  The  Order  how  the  rest  of  the 

holy  Scripture   is  appointed  to 
be  read. 

7  A  Table  of  proper  Lessons  and 

Psalms. 


8  Tables,  and  Eules  for  the  Feasts, 

and  Fasts  through  the  whole 
year. 

9  The  Kalendar  with  the  Table  of 

Lessons. 


10  The  Order  for  Morning  Prayer. 

11  The  Order  for  Euen/X^  Prayer. 

12  The  Creed  of  St.  Athanasius. 

13  The  Litany. 

14  Prayers     and     Thanksgivings, 

vpon  severall  Occasions. 

15  The  Collects,  Epistles, 

and    Gospels,    to    be    vsed    at 
the  ministration  of  the 

holy  Communion 
throughout  the  year. 


xii.  Thorder  of  the  ministration  of 
the  holy  Communion. 

[See  x.  above.] 


16  The    Order  of  the  ministration  of 
the  holy  Communion. 

[See  13  above.] 


xiii. 


Baptisme 
publique  and  priuate. 


both      17  The    Order     of    Baptism,    both 

publick,  and  private. 
18  The  Order  of  Baptism  for  those 
of  riper  years. 


THE  CONTENTS 


SOURCES 


Pontificate  Confirmatio  puerorum  [ap. 

Maskell  Mon.  rit.  eccl.   angl.  i.  pp. 

38  sqq.]. 
Manuale  Ordo  ad  faciendum  sponsalia 

[ff.  47  sqq.]. 
Ibid*     Ordo  ad   visitandum   infirmum 

[fF.  85  sqq.].  De  extrema  vnctione 

[ff.  93  sqq.]. 
Ibid.     Commendatio  animarum  [fF.  101 

sqq.],  Missa  pro  defunctis  [fF.  133  v 

sqq.l  Inhumatio  defunct!  [fF.  144  v 

sqq.]. 
Ibid.     Ordo  ad  purificandum  mulierem 

post  partum  [f.  46  v]. 
Missale  ad  vsum  ecclesie  Sarisburiensis 

[Paris,   Regnault,  1534],   In   capite 

ieiunii  [fF.  28  sqq.]. 


Psalterium  Dauiticum  ad  vsum  ecclesie 
Sarisburiensis  in  Portiforiurn  pars 
hyemalis. 


1549 


viii.  Of  Confirmation,  where  also  is  a 
Cathechisme  for  children. 

ix.  Of  Matrimony. 

x.  Of  visitacion  of  the  sicke,  & 
Communion  of  the  same. 

xi.Of  Buriall. 


xii.  Of  purificacion  of  women. 

xiii.  A  declaracion  of  scripture, 

with  certeine 

prayers  to  bee  vsed  the  firste 
daye  of  Lent,  commonlye  called 
Ashwednesdaie. 
xiiii.Of   Ceremonies  omitted   or  re- 

teyned. 

xv.  Certeine  notes  for  the  more  plain 
explicacion  and  decent  minis- 
tracion  of  thinges  conteined  in 
this  booke. 


Pontificate  Celebratio  ordinum  [ap. 
Maskell  Mon.  rit.  eccl.  angl.  ii.  pp. 
165  sqq.],  Consecratio  electi  in  epis- 
copum  \ib.  p.  254  sqq.]. 


[1550 

The  forme  and  maner  of  makyng 
and  consecratyng  of  Arche- 
bishoppes  Bishoppes,  Priestes 
and  Deacons.  M.D.xlix.] 


OF  THIS  BOOK 


1552 

xiiii.        Confirmacion,  where  also  is  a 
Cathechisme  for  children. 

xv.        Matrimonie. 

xvi.       Visitacion  of  the  sicke. 
xvii.  The  Communion  of  the  sicke. 

xviii.       Burial. 


1661 

19  The  Catechism,  with  the  Order 

for  Confirmation  of  children. 

20  Matrimony. 

21  Visitation    of    the    Sick,    and 

Communion  of  the  Sick. 

22  Burial. 


xix.  The  thankes  getting  of  women 

after  childe  birth. 
xx.  A  Comminacio 

against  sinners,  with  certain 
praiers  to  be  vsed  diuerse 
tymes  in  the  y ere. 

[See  if.  above.] 


23        Thanksgiving      for       women 

after  Gh'/^-bearing. 
24.  A  Comminution  or  8  Denouncing 

of  Gods  Anger  and  Judgements 

against  Sinners. 


[See  3  above.] 


25  The  Psalter. 


26  The  Order  of  Prayers  to  be  vsed 
at  Sea. 


xxi.  Thefourmeandmanerofmakyng      27.  A  form  and  manner  of  ordaining 
and    consecrating   of 

Bisshoppes,  Priestes,  Bishops,  Priests 

and  Deacons.  and  Deacons. 


AN  ACT  FOR  THE  UNIFORMITY 

SOURCES  1549 


5  &  6  Edw.  vi.  cap.  1. 
1  Eliz.  cap.  2. 


OF  COMMON  PRAYER 


1552 


1661 


AN  ACTE  FOR  THE  VNIFORMITIE  OF 
COMMON  PR  A  YER, 

AND  ADMINISTRACION 
OF  THE  SACRAMENTES. 


Where  there  hath  been  a  verye 
Godly e  ordre  setle  forthe  by  auctoritie 
of  Parlamente,  for  com  mon  prayer  and 
administration  of  the  Sacramentes,  to 
bee  vsed  in  the  mother  tongue  within 
this  Churche  of  Englande,  agreable 
to  the  woorde  of  God  and  the  prima- 
tiue  Churche,  verye  coumfortable  to 
all  good  people,  desyryng  to  lyue  in 
Christen  conuersation,  and  moste  pro- 
fytable  to  the  state  of  this  Realme : 
vpon  the  whiche,  the  mercy,  fauour, 
and  blessing  of  almighty  God,  is  in 
no  ivyse  so  readyly  and  plentuously 
powred,  as  by  common  prayers,  due 
•using  of  the  Sacramentes,  and  often 
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  'with  the 
deuocion  of  the  hearers  :  And  yet  thys 
notwithstandinge,  a  greate  noumbre  of 
people,  in  diuers  paries  of  this  Realme, 
folowing  theyr  own  sensualitie,  and 
liuing  either  without  knowledge  or 
due  feare  of  God,  dooe  wilfully,  and 
damnably  e  before  almightie  God,absteyn 
and  refuse  to  come  to  theyr  parishe 
Churches  and  other  places,  where 
common  prayer,  administration  of  the 
Sacramentes,  and  preaching  of  the 
woord  of  God  is  vsed,  vpon  the 
Sunday es  and  other  dayes,  ordeined  to 
be  holy  dayes. 


AN  ACT  FOR  THE  VNIFORMITY  OF 

COMMON  PRAYER,  XAND  SERVICE  IN 

THE  CHURCH,  AND  ADMINISTRATION 

OF  THE  SACRAMENTS, 

8primo  Elisabetha* 

1  Where  at  the  death  of  our  late 
soveraign  Lord  King  Edward  the 
sixth,  there  remained  one  vniform 
order  of  Common  Service  and  prayer, 
and  of  the  Administration  of  Sacra 
ments,  Bites  and  Ceremonies  in  the 
Church  of  England  which  was  set 
forth,  in  one  Book,  intituled,  The 
Book  of  Comon  Prayer,  and  Ad 
ministration  of  SacramentSj  and 
other  Rites  and  Ceremonies  in  the 
Church  of  England,  authorized  by 
Act  of  Parliament  holden  in  the 
fifth  and  sixth  years  of  our  said 
late  Soveraign  Lord  King  Edward 
the  sixth,  intituled,  An  Act  for  the 
vniformity  of  common  prayer,  and 
Administration  of  the  sacraments : 
The  which  was  repealed  and  taken 
away  by  Act  of  Parliament  in  the 
first  year  of  the  raign  of  our  late 
soveraign  Lady  Queen  Mary  to  the 
great  decay  of  the  due  honour  of 
God,  and  discomfort  to  the  Pro- 
fesso™  of  the  truth  of  Christs  re 
ligion. 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the 
authority  of  this  present  Parlia 
ment,  that  the  said  Statute  of 
repeal,  and  every  thing  therein 
contained,  only  concerning  the  said 
Book,  and  the  Service,  Administra 
tion  of  Sacraments,  Rites,  and  Cere 
monies  contained  or  appointed  in 
or  by  the  said  book,  shall  be  void, 
and  of  none  effect,  from  and  after 
the  feast  of  the  Nativity  of  S*  lohn 
Baptist  next  coming. 

And  that  the  said  book  with  the 
order  of  service,  and  of  the  admini 
stration  of  Sacraments,  Eites,  and 
Ceremonies,  with  the  Alteration 
and  additions  therein  added  and 
appointed  by  this  Statute,  shall 
stand  and  be  from  and  after  the 
said  feast  of  the  nativity  of  Saint 
lohn  Baptist  in  full  force  and  effect, 


io  AN  ACT  FOR  THE  UNIFORMITY 

SOURCES  1549 


See  the  first  Act  of  Vniformity,  2  &  3 
Edw.  vi.  cap.  1. 


OF  COMMON  PRAYER  n 

1552  1661 

according  to  the  tenor  and  effect  of 
this  Statute :  any  thing  in  the  fore- 
said  Statute  of  repeal  to  the  con 
trary  notwithstanding. 

And  further  be  it  enacted  by  the 
Queens  Highness,  with  the  assent 
of  the  Lords  and  Commons  of  this 

E resent  Parliament  assembled,  and 
y  the  authority  of  the  same,  that 
all  and  singular  Ministers  in  any 
Cathedral!,  or  parish-church,  or  other 
place  within  this  Realm  of  England, 
Wales,  and  the  Marches  of  the  same, 
or  other  the  Queens  dominions,  shall 
from  and  after  the  feast  of  the  nativity 
of  S*  lohn  Baptist  next  coming,  be 
bounden  to  say  and  vse  the  Mattens, 
Evensong,  celebration  of  the  Lords 
Supper,  and  Administration  of  each 
of  the  Sacraments,  and  all  other  com 
mon  and  open  prayer  in  such  order 
and  form  as  is  mentioned  in  the  said 
book,  so  authorized  by  Parliament  in 
the  said  fifth  and  sixth  year  of  the 
reign  of  King  Edward  the  sixth, 
with  one  alteration  or  addition  of 
certein  lessons  to  be  vsed  on  every 
Sunday  in  the  year,  and  the  form 
of  the  Letany  altered,  and  corrected, 
and  two  sentences  only  added  in 
the  delivery  of  the  sacrament  to 
the  communicants,  and  none  other 
or  otherwise.  And  that  if  any  manner 
of  Parson,  Vicar,  or  other  whatsoever 
Minister,  that  ought  or  should  sing  or 
say  common  prayer  mentioned  in  the 
said  book,  or  minister  the  Sacraments 
from  and  after  the  feast  of  the  nativity 
of  Saint  John  Baptist  next  coming, 
refuse  to  vse  the  said  common  prayers, 
or  to  minister  the  sacraments,  in  such 
Cathedral,  or  Parish  church,  or  other 
places,  as  he  should  vse  to  minister 
the  same  in  such  order  and  form  as 
they  be  mentioned  and  set  forth  in 
the  said  book,  or  shall  wilfully  or 
obstinately  standing  in  the  same,  vse 
any  other  Rite,  Ceremony,  Order, 
Form,  or  Manner  of  celebrating  of 
the  Lords  Supper  openly  or  privily, 
or  Mattens,  Evensong,  Administration 
of  the  Sacraments,  or  other  open 
prayers,  then  is  mentioned  and  set 
forth  in  the  said  book  [Open  prayer 
in  and  through  this  Act,  is  meant  that 
prayer  which  is  for  other  to  come 
vnto,  or  hear,  either  in  common 


12  AN  ACT  FOR  THE  UNIFORMITY 

SOURCES  i 549 


OF  COMMON  PRAYER  13 

1552  1661 

churches,  or  private  Chappels,  or 
Oratories,  commonly  called,  the 
Service  of  the  Church]  or  shall 
preach,  declare,  or  speak  any  thing 
in  the  derogation,  or  depraving  of  the 
said  book,  or  any  thing  therein  con- 
teined,  or  of  any  part  thereof,  and 
shall  be  thereof  lawfully  convicted, 
according  to  the  lawes  of  this  Realm 
by  verdict  of  twelve  men,  or  by  his 
own  confession,  or  by  the  notorious 
evidence  of  the  fact :  shall  lose  and 
forfeit  to  the  Queens  Highness  her 
heirs  and  successors,  for  his  first 
offence,  the  profit  of  all  his  Spirituall 
benefices,  or  promotions,  coming  or 
arising  in  one  whole  year  next  after 
his  conviction  :  And  also  that  the 
person  so  convicted,  shall  for  the 
same  offence  suffer  imprisonment  by 
the  space  of  six  months  without  bail 
or  mainprise.  And  if  any  such  person 
once  convict  of  any  offence  concern 
ing  the  premisses,  shall  after  his  first 
conviction,  eftsoons  offend,  and  be 
thereof  in  form  aforesaid  lawfully 
convict :  that  then  the  same  person 
shall  for  his  second  offence  suffer 
imprisonment,  by  the  space  of  one 
whole  year,  and  also  shall  therefore 
be  deprived  ipso  facto  of  all  his 
spiritual  promotions,  And  that  it 
shall  be  lawfull  to  all  Patrons  or 
Donors  of  all  and  singular  the  same 
spirituall  promotions  or  any  of  them 
to  present  or  collate  to  the  same,  as 
though  the  person  or  persons  so 
offending  were  dead.  And  that  if  any 
such  person  or  persons  after  he  shall 
be  twice  convicted  in  form  aforesaid, 
shall  offend  against  any  of  the  pre 
misses  the  third  time,  and  shall  be 
thereof  in  form  aforesaid  lawfully 
convicted  :  that  then  the  person  so 
offending,  and  convicted  the  third 
time,  shall  be  deprived  ipso  facto  of 
all  his  spirituall  promotions,  and 
also  shall  suffer  imprisonment  during 
his  life. 

And  if  the  person  that  shall  offend 
and  be  convict  in  form  aforesaid, 
concerning  any  of  the  premisses, 
shall  not  be  beneficed,  nor  have  any 
spirituall  promotion :  that  then  the 
same  person  so  offending,  and  convict, 
shall  for  the  first  offence  suffer  im 
prisonment  during  one  whole  year 


14  AN  ACT  FOR  THE  UNIFORMITY 

SOURCES  1549 


OF  COMMON  PRAYER  15 

1552  1661 

next  after  his  said  conviction,  with 
out  bail  or  mainprise.  And  if  any 
such  person  not  having  any  spiritual 
promotion,  after  his  first  conviction 
shall  eftsoons  offend  in  any  thing 
concerning  the  premisses,  and  shall 
in  form  aforesaid  be  thereof  lawfully 
convicted,  that  then  the  same  person 
shall  for  his  second  offence  suffer 
imprisonment  during  his  life. 

And  it  is  ordained  and  enacted  by 
the  authority  aforesaid  that  if  any 
person  or  persons  whatsoever  after 
the  said  feast  of  the  nativity  of  Saint 
lohn  Baptist  next  coming  shall  in 
any  Enterludes,  Playes,  Songs,  Rimes, 
or  by  other  open  words  declare  or 
speake  any  thing  in  the  derogation, 
depriving  or  despising  of  the  same 
book,  or  of  any  thing  therein  con- 
teined,  or  any  part  thereof,  or  shall 
by  open  fact,  deed,  or  by  open 
threatnings  compell  or  cause,  or 
otherwise  procure  or  mantein  any 
Parson,  Vicar  or  other  Minister,  in 
any  Cathedrall  or  parish  church,  or 
in  chappel,  or  in  any  other  place  to 
sing  or  say  any  common  or  open 
prayer,  or  to  minister  any  sacrament 
otherwise,  or  in  any  other  manner  and 
form  then  is  mentioned  in  the  said 
book,  or  that  by  any  of  the  said  means 
shall  vnlawfully  interrupt,  or  let  any 
Parson  Vicar  or  other  Minister  in  any 
Cathedrall  or  parish  church,  chappel, 
or  any  other  place,  to  sing  or  say 
common  and  open  prayer,  or  to 
minister  the  sacraments,  or  any  of 
them  in  such  manner  and  form  as  is 
mentioned  in  the  said  book :  that 
then  every  such  person,  being  thereof 
lawfully  convicted  in  form  abovesaid, 
shall  forfeit  to  the  Queen  our  Soveraign 
Lady  her  heirs,  and  successor  for 
the  first  offence  an  hundred  marks. 
And  if  any  person  or  persons  being 
once  convict  of  any  such  offence, 
eftsoons  offend  against  any  of  the 
last  recited  offences,  and  shall  in 
form  aforesaid  be  thereof  lawfully 
convict :  that  then  the  same  person 
so  offending  and  convict,  shall  for  the 
second  offence  forfeit  to  the  Queen 
our  Sovereign  Lady,  her  heirs  and 
successors  four  hundred  Marks. 
And  if  any  person  after  he  in  form 
aforesaid  shall  have  been  twice  con- 


16  AN  ACT  FOR  THE  UNIFORMITY 

SOURCES 


OF  COMMON  PRAYER 


1552 


For  reformation  hereof,  be  it  enacted 
by  the  Kyng  our  souereigne  Lord,  with 
thassente  of  the  Lordes  and  commons, 
in  this  present  Parlament  assembled, 
and  by  the  auctoritie  of  the  same, 
that  from,  and  after  the  feaste 
of  all  Sainctes 

next  camming,  all  and  every  persone, 
and  persones,  enhabyting  within  this 
Realme,  or  any  other  the  kinges 
maiesties  dominions,  shal  diligently 
&>  faythfulli,  (hauing  no  lawful 
or  reasonable  excuse  to  be  abset,)  en- 
deuour  themselues  to  resorte  to  theyr 
Parish  Church,  or  Chapel  accustomed, 
or  vpon  reasonable  let  therof,  to  some 
•usual  place,  where  com  on  prayer  and 
such  seruice  of  God  shalbe  vsed  in  such 
tyme  of  let,  upon  euery  Sunday,  &* 
other  dayes,  ordeyned,  &*  vsed  to  bee 
kepte  as  holy  dayes,  &*  then,  6^  there 
to  abide,  orderly,  and  soberly  e,  during  the 
tyme  of  the  common  prayer,preachinges^ 
or  other  seruice  of  God,  there  to  be  vsed 
and  ministred,  vpon  payne  of  punishe- 
ment  by  the  Censures  of  the  Church. 


1661 

vict  of  any  offence  concerning  any  of 
the  last  recited  offences,  shall  offend 
the  third  time,  and  be  thereof  in  form 
abovesaid  lawfully  convict :  that  then 
every  person  so  offending  and  convict, 
shall  for  his  third  offence  forfeit  to 
our  Soveraign  Lady  the  Queen  all  his 
goods  and  chattels,  and  shall  suffer 
imprisonment  during  his  life.  And  if 
any  person  or  persons  that  for  his  first 
offence  concerning  the  premisses  shall 
be  convict  in  form  aforesaid,  do  not 
pay  the  summe  to  be  payed  by  virtue 
of  his  conviction,  in  such  manner  and 
form  as  the  same  ought  to  be  payed, 
within  six  weeks  next  after  his  con 
viction  :  that  then  every  person  so 
convict,  and  so  not  paying  the  same, 
shall  for  the  same  first  offence,  instead 
of  the  said  summe,  suffer  imprison 
ment  by  the  space  of  six  months 
without  bail  or  mainprise  :  And  if  any 
person  or  persons  that  for  his  second 
offence  concerning  the  premisses  shall 
be  convict  in  form  aforesaid,  do  not 
pay  the  said  summe  to  be  paied  by 
virtue  of  his  conviction,  and  this 
estatute  in  such  manner  and  form  as 
the  same  ought  to  be  payed  within 
six  weeks  next  after  this  said  second 
conviction  :  that  then  every  person  so 
convicted,  and  not  paying  the  same, 
shall  for  the  same  second  offence, 
in  the  stead  of  the  said  summe, 
suffer  imprisonment  during  twelve 
monthes  without  Bail  or  mainprise. 
And  that  from  and  after  the  said  feast 
0/the  nativity  of  Saint  John  Baptist 
next  coming  all  and  every  person 
and  persons  inhabiting  within  this 
Realm,  or  any  other  the  Queens 
Maiesties  Dominions,  shall  diligently 
and  faithfully,  having  no  lawfiill 
or  reasonable  excuse  to  be  absent,  in- 
deavour  themselves  to  resort  to  their 
parish  church  or  chappell  accustomed, 
or  vpon  reasonable  let  thereof,  to  some 
vsuall  place  where  common  prayer,  and 
such  service  of  God  shall  be  vsed  in  such 
tyme  of  let,  vpon  every  Sunday,  and 
other  dayes  ordained,  and  vsed  to  be 
kept  as  holy  dayes  :  and  then  and  there 
to  abide  orderly  and  soberly  during  the 
time  of  common  prayer,  preachings 
or  other  service  of  God  there  to  be  vsed 
and  ministred,  vpon  pain  of  punish 
ment  by  the  censures  of  the  Church : 


i8  AN  ACT  FOR  THE  UNIFORMITY 

SOURCES  1549 


OF  COMMON  PRAYER 


1552 


And  for  the  due  execution  hereof,  the 
Kinges  most  excellent  maiestie,  the 
lordes  Temporal,  <S>°  all  the  commas  in 
th  is  present  Par  lament  assembled,  doeth 
in  Goddes  name,  earnestly  requyre  and 
charge  altharchebisshops,  Bisshops,  and 
other  Ordenaries,  that  they  shall  en- 
deuour  them  selues  to  the  'uttermost  of 
theyr  knowledges,  that  the  due  &*  true 
execucio  hereof  may  be  had  through 
out  theyr  Diocesses  and  charges,  as 
they  ivy II  auswere  before  God,  for  such 
euylles  and  plagues,  wherwith  al- 
mightie  God  may  iustely  punishe  his 
people,  for  neglecting  this  good  and 
wholesome  lawe. 

And  for  theyr  auctoritie  in  this 
behalfe,  bee  it  further  likewise  enacted 
by  thauctoritie  aforesaid,  that  all 
&•  singuler  the  same  Archbisshops, 
Bisshops,  <S°  al  other  theyr  officers, 
exercisinge  Ecclesiasticall  iurisdiccion, 
as  well  in  place  exempt,  as  not  exempt, 
within  their  diocesses,  shal  haue  ful 
power  and  auctoritie  by  this  acte,  to 
refourme,  correct,  and  punishe,  by 
censures  of  the  Church,  al  &*  singuler 
persones  which  shal  offende  within  any 

theyr  iurisdiccios  or  Diocesses  :  after 
the  said  feast  of  all  sainctes 

next  coming,  against  this 
acte  &°  statute,  any  other  lawe,  statute, 
priuilege,  libertie,  or  prouision  hereto 
fore  made,  had,  or  siiffred,  to  the  con- 
trarie  not  withstanding. 

And  because  there  hath  arisen  in 
the  vse  and  exercise  of  the  foresayde 
common  seruice  in  the  Churche  hereto 
fore  set  forth,  diuers  doubtes  for  the 
fasshion  &>  maner  of  the  ministracio 
of  the  same,  rather  by  the  curiositie  of 
the  minister  and  mistakers,  then  of 
any  other  worthy  cause:  therfore  as- 
w el  for  the  -more  playne  &*  manifest 
explanacion  hereof,  as  for  the  more 
perfeccio  of  the  said  ordre  of  common 
seruice,  in  some  places  where  it  is 
necessary  to  make  the  same  prayer  and 


1661 

and  also  vpon  pain  that  every 
person  so  offending  shall  forfeit  for 
every  such  offence  twelve  pence 
to  be  levied  by  the  church-wardens 
of  the  parish  where  such  offence 
shall  be  don  to  the  vse  of  the  poor 
of  the  same  parish,  of  the  goods 
lands  and  tenements  of  such  offender, 
by  way  of  distress. 

And  for  due  execution  hereof,  the 
Queens  most  excellent  Majesty,  the 
Lords  temp  or  all,  and  all  the  Commons  in 
this  present  Parliament  assembled  doth 
in  Gods  name  earnestly  require  and 
charge  all  the  A  rchbishops,  Bishops,  and 
other  Ordinaries  that  they  shall  en 
deavour  themselves  to  the  vttermost  of 
their  knowledges  that  the  due  and  true 
execution  hereof  may  be  had  through 
out  their  Diocess  and  charges,  as 
they  will  answer  before  God,  for  such 
evils  and  plagues  wherewith  Al 
mighty  God  may  iustly  punish  his 
people  for  neglecting  his  good  and 
wholesom  law-. 

-And  for  the  authority  in  this 
behalf,  be  it  further  inacted 

by  the  authority  aforesayd  that  all 
and  singular  the  same  Archbishops, 
Bishops,  and  all  other  their  officers 
exercising  ecclesiasticall  lurisdiction, 
as  well  in  place  exempt,  as  not  exempt 
within  their  Diocess,  shall  have  full 
power  and  authority  by  this  Act  to 
reform  correct,  and  punish  by 
censures  of  the  church,  all  and  singular 
persons  which  shall  offend  within  any 
of  their  iurisdictions,  or  Diocess  after 
the  said  feast  0/"the  nativity  of  Saint 
John  Baptist  next  coming  against  this 
act  and  statute  :  any  other  I  aw,  Statute, 
priviledge  liberty  or  provision  hereto 
fore  made  had  or  suffered  to  the  con 
trary  notwithstanding. 

And  it  is  ordained  and  enacted  by 
the  authority  aforesaid  that  all  and 
every  Justice  of  Oyer  and  Determiner, 
or  Justices  of  Assize  shall  have  full 
power  and  authority  in  every  of  their 
open  and  generall  Sessions,  to  inquire 
hear  and  determine  all  and  all  manner 
of  offences,  that  shall  be  committed 
or  done  contrary  to  any  Article  con- 
teined  in  this  present  Act,  within  the 
limits  of  the  Commission  to  them 
directed,  and  to  make  process  for  the 
execution  of  the  same,  as  they  may 


20  AN  ACT  FOR  THE  UNIFORMITY 

SOURCES  J549 


OF  COMMON  PRAYER 


21 


1552 

fasshion  of  seruice  more  earnest  and 
fitte,  to  stirre  christia  -people  to  the 
true  honouring  of  almighty  God:  The 
kynges  most  excellente  maiestie,  with 
thassent  of  the  Lordes  and  commos  in 
this  present  Parlamet  assembled,  and 
by  thauctoritie  of  the  same,  hath 
caused  the  foresayd  ordre  of  commo 
seruice,  entituled,  The  boke  of  commo 
prayer,  to  be  faythfully  &°  godly  per 
used,  explaned,  &*  made  fully  per 
fect  :  &  by  the  for  said  auctoritie,  hath 
anexed  &*  ioyned  it,  so  explaned  &> 
perfected,  to  this  present  statute, 
adding  also  a  forme  <S°  maner  of 
making  &•»  consecrating  of  Arche- 
bisshops,  Bisshops,  Priestes  &>  Deacos, 
to  be  of  like  force,  auctoritie,  6°  value, 
as  the  same  likeforesaid  boke  entituled, 
The  boke  of  common  prayer,  was 
beefore:  6°  to  bee  accepted,  receiued, 
-used  &>  estemedin  lyke  sorte  &>  maner, 
&0  with  the  same  clauses  of  prouisions 
and  excep dons,  to  all  ententes,  con- 
struccios  and  purposes,  as  by  the  acte 
of  Parlament  made  in  the  second  yere 
of  the  kinges  Maiesties  reygne,  was 
ordeyned,  limited,  expressed,  &*  ap- 
poynted  for  the  vniformitie  of  seruice, 
&*  administracio  of  the  Sacrametes 
throughout  the  realme,  vpon  such  seue- 
ral Paynes,  as  in  the  sayd  acte  of  Parla 
met  is  expressed.  And  the  said  former 
acte  to  stand  in  ful  force  6°  strength, 
to  al  ententes  &*>  construccions,  and  to 
be  applied,  practised,  6°  putte  in  vre, 
to,  <S°  for  the  establishing  of  the  boke 
of  common  prayer,  now  explaned,  and 
hereunto  annexed:  &*  also  the  sayd 
fourme  of  making  of  Archebisshops, 
Bisshops,  priestes,  &•"  Deacons,  here 
unto  annexed,  as  it  was  for  the  former 
boke. 

And  by  thauctoritie  aforesaid  it  is 
now  further  enacted,  that  yf  anye 
maner  ofpersone,  orpersones,  enhabit- 
inge,  and  beeyng  within  thys  Realme, 
or  any  other  the  Kynges  Maiesties 
dominions,  shall  after  the  sayd  feast 
ofallSainctes,  willingly,  and  wittingly, 
heare,  and  be  presente  at  anye  other 
maner,  or  fourme  of  common  prayer, 
of  administracion  of  the  Sacramentes, 
of  making  of  ministers  in  the  Churches, 
or  of  any  other  rytes  coteined  in  the 
boke  anexed  to  this  acte,  the  is  mecioned 
6°  set  forth  in  the  said  boke,  or  that  is 


1 661 

do  against  any  person  being  indicted 
before  them  of  trespass,  or  lawfully 
convicted  thereof. 

Provided  alwayes,  and  be  it  enacted 
by  the  authority  aforesaid  that  all  and 
every  Archbishop  and  Bishop  shall 
and  may  at  all  time  and  times  at  his 
liberty  and  pleasure  ioin,  and  associate 
himself,  by  virtue  of  this  Act,  to  the 
said  Justices  of  Oyer,  and  Determiner, 
or  to  the 'said  lustices  of  Assize,  at 
every  of  the  said  open  and  generall 
sessions,  to  be  holden  in  any  place 
within  his  Diocess  for  and  to  the 
inquiry,  hearing,  and  determining  of 
the  offences  aforesaid. 

Provided  also,  and  be  it  enacted  by 
the  authority  aforesaid  that  the  books 
concerning  the  said  service,  shall  at  the 
costs  and  charges  of  the  parishioners 
of  every  parish,  and  Cathedrall  church 
be  attained  and  gotten  before  the  said 
feast  of  the  nativity  of  Saint  John 
Baptist  next  following :  and  that  all 
such  parishes  and  Cathedrall  churches, 
or  other  places  where  the  said  books 
shall  be  attained,  and  gotten  before 
the  said  feast  of  the  nativity  of  saint 
John  Baptist,  shall  within  three  weeks 
next  after  the  said  books  so  attained 
and  gotten,  vse  the  said  service  and 
put  the  same  in  vse  according  to  this 
Act. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the 
authority  aforesaid  that  no  person  or 
persons  shall  be  at  any  time  hereafter 
impeached  or  otherwise  molested  of 
or  for  any  of  the  offences  above  men 
tioned  hereafter  to  be  committed  or 
don  contrary  to  this  Act  vnless  he  or 
they  so  offending  be  thereof  indicted 
at  the  next  generall  Sessions  to  be 
holden  before  any  such  lustices  of 
Oyer  and  Determiner,  or  Justices  of 
Assize  next  after  any  offence  committed 
or  don  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  this 
Act. 

Provided  allwayes  and  be  it  ordained 
and  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid, 
that  all  and  singular  Lords  of  the 
Parliament  for  the  third  offence  above 
mentioned,  shall  be  tryed  by  their 
Peers 

Provided  also  and  be  it  ordained 
and  enacted  by  the  authority  afore 
said,  that  the  Major  of  London,  and 
all  other  Majors  Bayliffs,  and  other 


22  AN  ACT  FOR  THE  UNIFORMITY 

SOURCES  1549 


OF  COMMON  PRAYER 


23 


1552 

cotrary  to  the  forme  of  sundrye  pro- 
uisions  and  exceptions,  conteyned  in 
the  foresayd  former  statute,  and  shall  e 
therof  conuicted,  according  to  the 
lawes  of  this  Realme,  before  the  Justices 
of  Assise,  Justices  of  Oyer  and  Deter- 
miner,Iustices  of  peace  in  theyr  Sessions, 
or  any  of  them,  by  the  verdict  of  xii.  men, 
or  by  his,  or  their  owne  confession,  or 
otherwise,  shall  for  the  fyrste  offence 
suffre  emprisonme  nte,for  sixe  monethes, 
without  baile,  or  maynprise :  &°  for 
the  seconde  offence,  being  lykewise 
conuicted,  (as  is  abouesayd,}  emprieson- 
ment  for  one  whole  yeare  :  &*  for  the 
third  offence,  in  like  maner,  emprieson- 
ment  during  his,  or  their  lyues.  And 
for  the  more  knowledge  to  be  geue 
hereof,  and  better  obseruacion  of  this 
lawe :  Be  it  enacted  by  the  auctoritie 
aforesayd,  that  al  andsinguler  Curates 
shall  vpon  one  Sunday  euery  quarter 
of  the  y  ere,  during  one  whole  y  ere,  next 
folowing  the  fores  ay  de  feaste  of  all 
Sainctes,  next  coming,  reade  this 
presente  Acte  in  the  Churche,  at  the 
tyme  of  the  moste  assembly :  &*  lyke 
wise  once  in  euery  yere  folowing,  at 
the  same  time,  declaringe  vnto  the 
people  by  the  auctoritie  of  the  Scripture, 
howe  the  mercy  &>  goodnes  of  God 
hath  in  al  ages  been  shewed  to  his 
People,  in  theyr  necessities  and  ex 
tremities,  by  meanes  of  heartye  and 
faythfull  prayers  made  to  almightye 
God,  specially  e  where  people  be  gathered 
together  wyth  one  fayth  and  mynde,  to 
offre  vp  theyr  heartes  by  prayer,  as  the 
beste  Sacrifices  Christian  menne  can 
yelde. 


1661 

head-officers  of  all  and  singular  cities, 
boroughs,  and  towns  corporate  within 
this  Realm,  Wales,  and  the  Marches 
of  the  same  to  the  which  lustices  of 
Assize  do  not  commonly  repair,  shall 
have  full  power  and  authority  by  virtue 
of  this  Act  to  enquire  hear  and  deter 
mine  the  offences  above  said  and 
every  of  them  yearly,  within  fifteen 
dayes  after  the  feasts  of  Easter,  and 
Saint  Michael  the  Archangel,  in  like 
manner  and  form  as  Justices  of  Assize, 
and  Oyer,  and  Determiner  may  do. 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  ordained 
and  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid, 
that  all  and  singular  Archbishops,  and 
Bishops,  and  every  of  their  Chan 
cellors,  Commissaries,  Archdeacons, 
and  other  Ordinaries,  having  any 
peculiar  ecclesiasticall  iurisdiction, 
shall  have  full  power  and  authority 
by  virtue  of  this  Act,  as  well  to 
inquire  in  their  Visitation,  Synods,  or 
elsewhere  within  their  iurisdiction,  at 
any  other  time  and  place  to  take 
accusations  and  informations  of  all 
and  every  the  things  above  men 
tioned,  done  committed  or  perpetrated 
within  the  limits  of  their  iurisdiction, 
and  authority,  and  to  punish  the  same 
by  admonition,  excommunication  se 
questration,  or  deprivation,  or  other 
censures,  and  Processes  in  like  form 
as  heretofore  hath  been  vsed  in  like 
cases,  by  the  Queens  ecclesiasticall 
lawes. 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  enacted, 
that  whatsoever  person  offending  in 
the  premisses,  shall  for  the  first  offence 
receive  punishment  of  the  Ordinary, 
having  a  testimonial  thereof  vnder  the 
said  Ordinaries  seal,  shall  not  for  the 
same  offence  eftsoons  be  convicted 
before  the  lustices :  and  likewise 
receiving  for  the  said  first  offence, 
punishment  by  the  Justices,  he  shall 
not  for  the  same  first  offence,  eftsoons 
receive  punishment  of  the  Ordinary  : 
any  thing  contained  in  this  Act  to  the 
contrary  notwithstanding. 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  en 
acted,  that  such  ornaments  of  the 
church,  and  of  the  Ministers  there 
of  shall  be  retained,  and  be  in  vse, 
as  was  in  this  church  of  England  by 
the  authority  of  Parliament  in  the 
second  year  of  the  reign  of  King 


24  AN  ACT  FOR  THE  UNIFORMITY 

SOURCES  1549 


OF  COMMON  PRAYER  25 

1552  1661 

Edward  the  sixth,  vntil  other  order 
shall  be  therein  taken,  by  authority 
of  the  Queens  Maiesty,  with  the 
advice  of  her  Commissioners  ap 
pointed  and  authorized  vnder  the 
great  seal  of  England,  for  causes 
ecclesiasticall  or  of  the  Metropoli- 
tane  of  this  Realm.  And  also,  that 
if  there  shall  happen  any  contempt 
or  irreverence  to  be  vsed  in  the 
Ceremonies  or  Bites  of  the  Church 
by  the  misvsing  of  the  orders  ap 
pointed  in  this  book:  the  Queens 
Maiesty  may  by  the  like  advice  of 
the  said  Commissioners,  or  Metro- 
politane,  ordain  and  publish  such 
further  Ceremonies  or  Rites,  as  may 
be  most  for  the  advancement  of 
Gods  glory,  the  edifying  of  his 
Church,  and  the  due  reverence  of 
Christs  holy  Mysteries  and  Sacra 
ments. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the 
authority  aforesaid,  that  all  lawes 
Statutes  and  ordinances  wherein  or 
whereby  any  other  Service,  admini 
stration  of  Sacraments,  or  common 
prayer  is  limited,  established,  or  set 
forth  to  be  vsed  within  this  Realm 
or  any  other  the  Queens  Dominions 
and  Countries  shall  from  henceforth 
vtterly  be  voyd  and  of  none  effect.* 


26  THE  PREFACE 

SOURCES  1549 


"And  lastly,  it  may  be  noted,  That, 
for  the  satisfying  all  the  dissenting 
Brethren  and  others,  the  Convocations 
Reasons  for  the  alterations  and  addi 
tions  to  the  Liturgy,  were  by  them  de- 
si  r'd  to  be  drawn  up  by  Dr.  Sanderson  ; 
which  being  done  by  him,  and  approv'd 
by  them,  was  appointed  to  be  printed 
before  the  Liturgy,  and  may  be  known 
by  this  Title,— The  Preface:  and  be 
gins  thus — It  hath  been  the  wisdom  of 
the  Church."— I.  Walton  The  Life  of 
Dr.  Sanderson,  1678,  f.l  5. 


THE  PREFACE  27 

1552  1661 

THE  PREFACE. 

Jt  hath  been  the  wisdom  of  the 
Church  of  England,  ever  since  the 
first  compiling  of  her  publick 
Liturgie  to  keep  the  meane  be 
tween  the  two  extreams;  of  too 
much  stiffness  in  refusing,  and  of 
too  much  easiness  in  admitting 
any  variation  from  it.  ffor  as  on 
the  one  side  common  experience 
sheweth,  that  where  a  change  hath 
been  made  of  things  advisedly 
established,  no  evident  necessity  so 
requiring,  sundry  inconveniences 
have  therevpon  ensued,  and  those 
many  times  more,  and  greater,  then 
the  evils  that  were  intended  to  be 
remedied  by  such  change:  So  on 
the  other  side,  the  particular  Forms 
of  divine  Worship,  and  the  Rites 
and  Ceremonies  appointed  to  be 
vsed  therein,  being  things  in  then- 
own  nature  indifferent,  and  alter 
able,  and  so  acknowledged;  it  is 
but  reasonable  that  vpon  waighty 
and  important  considerations,  ac 
cording  to  the  various  exigency  of 
times  and  occasions,  such  changes 
and  alterations  should  be  made 
therein  as  to  those  that  are  in  place 
of  Authority,  should  from  time  to 
time  seem  either  necessary  or  ex 
pedient.  Accordingly  we  find  that 
in  the  Eeignes  of  severall  Princes  of 
blessed  memory  since  the  reforma 
tion,  the  Church  vpon  iust  and 
weighty  considerations  her  there- 
vnto  moving,  hath  yeilded  to  make 
such  alterations  in  some  particulars, 
as  in  their  respective  times  were 
thought  convenient.  Yet  so  as  that 
the  main  body  and  essentials  of  it 
(as  well  in  the  chiefest  materials, 
as  in  the  frame  and  order  thereof) 
have  still  continued  the  same  vnto 
this  day ;  and  do  yet  stand  firm  and 
vnshaken,  notwithstanding  all  the 
vain  attempts,  and  impetuous 
assaults  made  against  it  by  such 
men  as  are  given  to  change,  and 
have  alwayes  discovered  a  greater 
regard  to  their  own  private  fancies 
and  interests,  then  to  that  duty 
they  ow  to  the  publick. 


28  THE  PREFACE 

•    SOURCES 


THE  PREFACE  29 

1552  1661 

By  what  vndue  means,  and  for 
what  mischievous  purposes  the  vse 
of  the  Liturgy  (though  inioyned  by 
the  Lawes  of  the  land,  and  those 
laws  never  yet  repealed)  came, 
during  the  late  vnhappy  confusions 
to  be  discontinued,  is  too  well- 
known  to  the  world,  and  we  are 
not  willing  here  to  remember.  But 
when  vpon  his  Majesties  happy 
restauration,  it  seemed  probable, 
that  amongst  other  things,  the  vse 
of  the  Liturgy  also  would  return  of 
course  (the  same  having  never  been 
legally  abolished;)  vnless  some 
timely  means  were  vsed  to  prevent 
it :  those  men,  who  vnder  the  late 
vsurped  powers,  had  made  it  a  great 
part  of  their  business,  to  render  the 
people  disaffected  therevnto,  saw 
themselves  in  point  of  reputation, 
and  interest  concerned  (vnless  they 
would  freely  acknowledge  them 
selves  to  have  erred,  which  such 
men  are  very  hardly  brought  to  do) 
with  their  vtmost  endeavors  to 
hinder  the  restitution  thereof.  In 
order  wherevnto  divers  pamphlets 
were  published  against  the  Book  of 
Common-prayer,  the  old  objections 
mustred  vp,  with  the  addition  of 
some  new  ones,  more  then  formerly 
had  been  made,  to  make  the  number 
swell.  In  fine,  great  importunities 
were  vsed  to  his  Sacred  Majesty 
that  the  said  Book  might  be  revised, 
and  such  alterations  therein,  and 
additions  therevnto  made,  as  should 
be  thought  requisite  for  the  ease  of 
tender  consciences.  Wherevnto  his 
Maiesty  out  of  his  pious  inclination 
to  give  satisfaction  (so  far  as  could 
be  reasonably  expected)  to  all  his 
subjects  of  what  perswasion  soever, 
did  gratiously  condescend. 

Jn  which  review  we  have  en 
deavored  to  observe  the  like 
moderation  as  we  find  to  have  been 
vsed  in  the  like  case  in  former 
times ;  And  therefore  of  the  sundry 
alterations  proposed  vnto  vs,  we 
have  reiected  all  such,  as  were 
either  of  dangerous  consequence  (as 
secretly  striking  at  some  established 
doctrine,  or  laudable  practise  of  the 
church  of  England,  or  indeed  of  the 
whole  Catholick  church  of  Christ ;) 


30  THE  PREFACE 


SOURCES  I549 


THE  PREFACE  31 

1552  1661 

or  else  of  no  consequence  at  all,  but 
vtterly  frivolous  and  vain.  But 
such  alterations  as  were  tendred 
to  vs  (by  what  persons,  under  what 
pretenses,  or  to  what  purpose  so 
ever  so  tendred)  as  seemed  to  ys  in 
any  degree  requisite  or  expedient, 
we  have  willingly,  and  of  our  own 
accord  assented  vnto.  Not  enforced 
so  to  do  by  any  strength  of  Argu 
ment  convincing  ys  of  the  necessity 
of  making  the  said  alterations :  for 
we  are  fully  perswaded  in  our  iudge- 
ments  (and  we  here  profess  it  to  the 
world)  that  the  Book,  as  it  stood 
before  established  by  Law,  doth  not 
contain  in  it  any  thing  contrary 
to  the  word  of  God,  or  to  sound 
doctrine,  or  which  a  godly  man 
may  not  with  a  good  conscience 
vse,  and  submitt  vnto,  or  which  is 
not  fairly  defensible  against  any 
that  shall  oppose  the  same;  if  it 
shall  be  allowed  such  iust  and 
favourable  construction  as  in  com 
mon  equity  ought  to  be  allowed  to 
all  humane  writings,  especially  such 
as  are  set  forth  by  Authority,  and 
even  to  the  very  best  translations 
of  the  holy  scripture  it  selfe. 

Our  generall  aime  therefore  in 
this  vndertaking  was,  not  to  gratify 
this  or  that  party  in  any  their 
vnreasonable  demands:  but  to  do 
that  which  to  our  best  vnderstand- 
ings  we  conceived  might  most  tend 
to  the  preservation  of  peace  and 
vnity  in  the  Church ;  the  procuring 
of  reverence,  and  exciting  of  piety, 
and  devotion  in  the  publick  worship 
of  God ;  and  the  cutting  off  occasion 
from  them  that  seek  occasion  of 
cavill,  or  quarell  against  the  Liturgy 
of  the  Church.  And  as  to  the 
severall  variations  from  the  former 
Book,  whether  by  alteration,  addi 
tion,  or  otherwise :  it  shall  suffice 
to  give  this  generall  account.  That 
most  of  the  alterations  were  made 
either  ffirst,  for  the  better  direction 
of  them  that  are  to  officiate  in  any 
part  of  Divine  service,  which  is 
chiefly  don  in  the  Kalendars,  and 
Eubricks,  or  secondly  for  the  more 
proper  expressing  of  some  words  or 
phrases  of  antient  vsage,  in  terms 
more  suteable  to  the  language  of 


32  THE  PREFACE 

SOURCES  1549 


THE  PREFACE 


33 


1552  1661 

the  present  times ;  and  the  clearer 
explanation  of  some  other  words 
and  phrases  that  were  either  of 
doubtfull  signification,  or  other 
wise  liable  to  misconstruction.  Or 
thirdly,  for  a  more  perfect  rendring 
of  such  portions  of  holy  Scripture, 
as  are  inserted  into  the  Liturgy: 
which  in  the  Epistles  and  Gospells 
especially,  and  in  sundry  other 
places  are  now  ordered  to  be  read 
according  to  the  last  Translation. 
And  that  it  was  thought  convenient 
that  some  prayers  and  thanks 
givings  fitted  to  speciall  occasions 
should  be  added  in  their  due  places, 
particularly  for  those  at  Sea,  To 
gether  with  an  Office  for  the  baptism 
of  such  as  are  of  riper  years ;  (which 
although  not  so  necessary  when  the 
former  Book  was  compiled,  yet  by 
the  growth  of  Anabaptism,  through 
the  licentiousness  of  the  late  times 
crept  in  amongst  vs,  is  now  become 
necessary)  and  may  be  alwayes 
ysefull  for  the  baptizing  of  Natives 
in  our  plantations,  and  others  con 
verted  to  the  Faith. 

Jf  any  man  who  shall  desire  a 
more  particular  account  of  the 
severall  alterations  in  any  part  of 
the  Liturgie,  shall  take  the  pains 
to  compare  the  present  book  with  the 
former, :  we  doubt  not,  but  the  reason 
of  the  change  may  easily  appear. 

And  having  thus  indeavored  to 
discharge  our  duties  in  this  weighty 
affair,  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  to 
approve  our  sincerity  therein  (so  far 
as  lay  in  vs)  to  the  consciences  of  all 
men :  Although  we  know  it  impos 
sible  (in  such  variety  of  Apprehen 
sions,  humors,  and  interests  as  are 
in  the  world)  to  please  all ;  nor  can 
expect  that  men  of  factious,  peevish, 
and  perverse  spirits  should  be 
satisfied  with  any  thing  that  can  be 
don  in  this  kind,  by  any  other  then 
themselves :  Yet  we  have  good  hope, 
that  what  is  here  presented,  and  hath 
been  by  the  Convocations  of  both  Pro 
vinces  with  great  diligence  examined 
and  approved ;  will  be  also  well  ac 
cepted  and  approved  by  all  sober, 
peaceable,  and  truly  conscientious 
Sons  of  the  Church  of  England. 


34 


THE  PREFACE 


SOURCES 


1549 


PRAEFATIO. 


THE  PREFACE. 


Horarias  preces  quas  canonicas  etiam 
appellamus  .  .  .  Et  profecto  si  quis 
modum  precandi  olim  a  maioribus 
traditum  diligenter  consyderet,  horum 
omnium  ab  ipsis  habitam  esse  rationem 
manifesto  deprehendet  .  .  . 


vt  reli- 

gionis  quoque  futuri  magistri  quoti- 
diana  sacrae  scripturae  et  eeclesiasti- 
carum  historiarum  lectione  erudiantur, 
complectanturque,  vt  Paulus  ait,  eum, 
qui  secundum  doctrinam  est,  fidelem 
sermonem  et  potentes  sint  exhortari 
in  doctrina  sacra,  et  eos,  qui  contra 
dicunt,  arguere. 

Sed  factum  est  nescio  quo  pacto 
hominum  negligentia,  vt  paulatim  a 
sanctissimis  illis  veterum  patrum  in- 
stitutis  discederetur. 

Nam  primum  libri  sacrae  scripturae,  qui 
statis  anni  temporibus  erant  perlegendi, 
vix  dum  incoepti  a  precantibus  praeter- 
mittuntur.  Vt  exemplo  esse  possunt 
liber  Genesis,  qui  incipitur  in  septua- 
gesima,  et  liber  Isaiae,  qui  in  aduentu, 
quorum  vix  singula  capitula  perlegimus, 
ac  eodem  modo  caetera  veteris  testa- 
meiiti  volumina  degustamus  magis, 
quam  legimus,  nee  secus  accidit  in 
euangelia,  et  reliquam  scripturam  noui 
testamenti,  quorum  in  loco  succes- 
serunt  alia,  nee  vtilitate  cum  his,  nee 
grauitate  comparanda,  quae  quotidie 
agitatione  linguae  magisquam  inten- 
tione  mentis  inculcantur. 

[Radulph.  Tungr.  de  can.  obs.  10 :  venera- 
biles  vero  patres  Hieronymus  et  Benedictus 
ex  sanctorum  patrum  obseruatione  consider - 
antes  totum  psalterium  ex  integro  qualibet 
hebdomada  persolui  debere  .  .  .  pro  aliquibus 
horis  diurnis  certis  psalmis  reseruatis  residues 
omnes  in  septem  nocturnes  distribuerunt.] 

Deinde  psalmorum  plerisque  qui 
singulis  hebdomadae  diebus  erant 
destinati,  reiectis,  pauci  quidam  toto 
fere  anno  repetuntur  .  .  . 


THere  was  neuer  anything  by  the  wit 
of  man  so  well  deuised ,  or  so  s  urely  established , 
which  (in  continuace  of  time)  hath  not 
been  corrupted :  as  (emong  other  thinges) 
it  may  plainly  appere  by  the  common 
prayers  in  the  Churche,  commonly  called 
diuine  seruice :  the  firste  originall  and 
grounde  whereof,  if  a  manne  woulde  searche 
out  by  the  auncient  fathers,  he  shall  finde 
that  the  same  was  not  ordeyned,  but  of  a  good 
purpose,  and  for  a  great  aduauncement  of 
godlines :  For  they  so  ordred  the  matter, 
that  all  the  whole  Bible  (or  the  greatest  parte 
thereof)  should  be  read  ouer  once  in  the 
yeare,  intendyng  thereby,  that  the  Cleargie, 
and  specially  suche  as  were  Ministers  of  the 
congregation,  should  (by  often  readyng  and 
meditacion  of  Gods  worde)  be  stirred  vp 
to  godlines  themselfes,  and  be  more  able 
also  to  exhorte  other  by  wholsome  doctrine, 
and  to  confute  them  that  were  aduersaries  to 
the  trueth.  And  further,  that  the  people  (by 
daily  hearyng  of  holy  scripture  read  in  the 
Churche)  should  continuallye  profite  more 
and  more  in  the  knowlege  of  God,  and  bee 
the  more  inflamed  with  the  loue  of  his  true 
religion-. 

-But  these  many  yeares  passed,  this  Godly 
and  decent  ordre  of  the  auncient  fathers,  hath 
bee  so  altered,  broken,  and  neglected,  by 
planting  in  vncertein  stories,  Legedes, 

Responses,  Verses,  vaine 
repeticions,  Commemoracions  and  Syno- 
dalles,  that  commonly  when  any  boke  of 
the  Bible  was  begon :  before  three  or  foure 
Chapiters  were  read  out,  all  the  rest  were 
vnread.  And  in  this  sorte,  the  boke  of  Esaie 
was  begon  in  Aduent,  and  the  booke  of 
Genesis  in  Septuagesima :  but  they  were 
onely  begon,  and  neuer  read  thorow.  After 
a  like  sorte  wer  other  bokes  of  holy  scrip 
ture  vsed-. 

-And  moreouer,  whereas  s.  Paule  would 
haue  suche  language  spoken  to  the  people  in 
the  churche,  as  they  mighte  vnderstande  and 
haue  profite  by  hearyng  the  same  :  the  seruice 
in  this  Church  of  England  (these  many 
yeares)  hath  been  read  in  Latin  to  the  people, 
whiche  they  vnderstoode  not,  so  that  they 
haue  heard  with  theyr  eares  onely :  &  their 
hartes,  spirite  and  minde,  haue  not  been 
edified  thereby-. 

-And  furthermore,  notwithstandyng  that  the 
auncient  fathers  had  deuided  the  psalmes 
into  seuen  porcions :  wherof  euery  one  was 
called  a  nocturne :  now  of  late  tyme  a  fewe 
of  them  haue  been  dailye  sayed  (and  ofte 
repeated)  and  the  rest  vtterly  omitted-. 


CONCERNING  THE  SERVICE  OF  THE  CHURCH 
1552  1661 


35 


THE  PREFACE. 


THere  was  neuer  anye  thynge  by  the  wytte 
of  man  so  wel  deuised,  or  so  sure  established, 
whiche  (in  continuaunce  of  tyme)  hath  not 
been  corrupted :  as  (emonge  other  thynges) 
it  maye  playnlye  appeare  by  the  common 
prayers  in  the  Churche,  commonlye  called 
diuine  seruyce :  The  firste  originall  and 
grounde  wherof,  yf  a  manne  woulde  searche 
out  by  ye  auncient  fathers,  he  shall  fynde 
that  the  same  was  not  ordayned  but  of  a  good 
purpose,  and  for  a  greate  aduauncemente  of 
godlynesse.  For  they  so  ordered  the  matter, 
that  all  the  whole  Bible  (or  the  greatest  part 
therof)  should  be  readde  ouer  once  in  the 
yeare :  entendynge  thereby,  that  the  clergie, 
and  speciallye  suche  as  were  ministers  of  the 
congregacion,  should  (by  often  readynge  and 
meditacion  of  Goddes  woorde)  be  stirred  vp 
to  godlynesse  them  selues,  and  be  more  able 
also  to  exhorte  other  by  wholesome  doctrine, 
and  to  confute  them  that  were  aduersaries  to 
the  trueth.  And  further,  that  the  people  (by 
dayly  hearynge  of  holye  scripture  read  in  flie 
Churche)  shoulde  continuallye  profyte  more 
and  more  in  the  knoweledge  of  God,  and  be 
the  more  inflamed  with  the  loue  of  hys  true 
religion-. 

-But  these  manye  yeres  passed,  this  godly 
and  decent  order  of  the  auncient  fathers,  hath 
been  so  altered,  broken,  and  neglected,  by 
plantinge  in  vncertayn  Stories,  Legendes, 
Respondes,  Verses,  vayne 
Repeticions,  Commemoracions,  and  Sino- 
dalles,  that  commonlye  when  anye  boke  of 
the  Bible  w  as  begonne,  before  three  or  foure 
Chapiters  were  read  out,  al  the  rest  were 
vnread.  And  in  thys  sorte  the  boke  of  Esay 
was  begonne  in  Aduent,  and  the  boke  of 
Genesis  in  Septuagesima :  but  they  were 
onely  begon,  and  neuer  read  through.  After 
a  lyke  sorte  were  other  bokes  of  holy  scrip 
ture  vsed-. 

-And  moreouer,  where  as  sainct  Paule  woulde 
haue  such  language  spoken  to  the  people  in 
the  Churche,  as  thei  might  vnderstande,  and 
haue  profite  by  hearing  the  same,  the  seruice 
in  this  Churche  of  Englande  (these  manye 
yeres)  hath  been  read  in  Latyn  to  the  people, 
whiche  they  vnderstode  not :  so  that  they 
haue  heard  with  their  eares  onely,  and  their 
heartes,  spirite,  and  mynde,  haue  not  been 
edified  therby-. 

-And  furthermore,  notwithstandy  nge  that  the 
auncient  fathers  haue  deuided  the  Psalmes 
into  seuen  porcions,  whereof  everye  one  was 
called  a  Nocturne,  nowe  of  late  tyme,  a  fewe 
of  them  haue  been  daylye  sayed  (and  ofte 
repeated)  and  the  rest  vtterlye  omitted-. 


CONCERNING  THE  SERVICE  OF  THE 
CHURCH. 

There  was  never  any  thing  by  the  wit 
o  f  man  so  well  devised ,  or  so  sure  established , 
which  in  continuance  of  time  hath  not 
been  corrupted :  as,  among  other  things 
it  may  plainly  appear  by  the  Common 
Prayers  in  the  Church,  commonly  called 
divine  service.  The  first  original  and 
ground  whereof  if  a  man  would  search 
out  by  the  ancient  Fathers  he  shall  find 
that  the  same  was  not  ordeined,  but  of  a  good 
purpose,  and  for  a  great  advancement  of 
godliness.  For  they  so  ordered  the  matter, 
that  all  the  whole  Bible  (or  the  greatest  part 
thereof)  should  be  read  over  once  3  every 
year :  intending  thereby,  that  the  Clergie, 
and  4  especially  such  as  were  Ministers  in  the 
Congregation  should  (by  often  reading  and 
meditation  in  Gods  word)  be  stirred  vp 
to  godliness  themselves,  and  be  more  able 
la  *  to  exhort  others5  by  wholesom  doctrine, 
and  to  confute  them  that  were  Adversaries  to 
the  Truth.  And  further  that  the  people  (by 
daily  hearing  of  holy  Scripture  read  in  the 
Church)  might  continually  profit  more 
and  more  in  the  knowledge  of  God  and  be 
the  more  inflamed  with  the  love  of  his  true 
Religion. 

But  these  many  years  passed  this  godly 
and  decent  order  of  the  ancient  Fathers  hath 
been  so  altered,  broken,  and  neglected  by 
planting  in  vncertein  Stories  and  Legends, 
with  multitude  of  Responds,  Verses,  vain 
repetitions,  Commemorations,  and  Syno- 
dals ;  that  commonly  when  any  book  of 
the  bible  was  begun,  after  three  or  four 
chapters  were  read  out,  all  the  rest  were 
vnread.  And  in  this  sort,  the  book  of  Esay 
was  begun  in  Advent,  and  the  book  of 
Genesis  in  Septuagesima:  but  they  were 
only  begun,  and  never  read  through.  After 
like  sort  were  other  books  of  holy  scrip 
ture  vsed. 

And  moreover,  whereas  Saint  Paul  would 
have  such  language  spoken  to  the  people  in 
the  church,  as  they  might  vnderstand,  and 
have  profit  by  hearing  the  same  :  the  service 
in  this  churche  of  England  these  many 
years  hath  been  read  in  latine  to  the  people, 
which  they  vnderstand5  not ;  so  that  they 
have  heard  with  their  ears  only,  and  their 
heart  4  spirit  and  mind  have  not  been 
edified  thereby. 

And  furthermore  notwithstanding  that  the 
ancient  Fathers  have  divided  the  Psalms 
into  seaven  portions,  whereof  every  one  was 
called  a  Nocturn :  now  of  late  time  a  few 
of  them  have  been  daily  said, 

and  the  rest  vtterly  omitted. 


THE  PREFACE 


SOURCES 

Accedit  tarn  perplexus  ordo,  tamque 
difficilis  precandi  ratio,  vt  interdum 
paulo  minor  opera  in  inquirendo  pona- 
tur,  quam  cum  inueueris  in  legendo. 


Quibus  rebus  animaduersis,  felicis 
recordationis  Clemens  .  VII .  Pontifex 
Maximus  ...  me  hortatus  est  .  .  .  vt 
.  .  .  preces  horarias  ea  ratione  dis- 
ponerem,  vt  .  .  .  clerici  maioribus 
etiam  commodis  ad  precandum  alli- 
cerentur  .  .  . 

Omissis  antiphonis,  capitulis,  et 
responsorijs,  ac  multis  hymnis,  caeteris- 
que  id  genus  rebus  scripturae  sacrae 
lectionem  impedientibus  .  .  . 

Propter  inconstantiam  temporis  pas- 
chatis,  et  aliorum  festorum,  quae 
mobilia  dicuntur,  fieri  non  potuit,  vt 
regulas  omnino  vitaremus  .  .  .  nos 
tarn  raras,  et  perspicuas  regulas  dis- 
posuimus,  vt  eas  cuiuis  facile  sit  in- 
telligere  .  .  . 

Itaque  siquis  diligenter  animaduer- 
tat,  et  vetus  patrum  consilium  institu- 
tumque  consyderet,  plane  intelliget, 
hoc  breuiarium  non  tarn  esse  nouum 
inuentum,  quam  breuiarij  veteris  in 
commodiorem,  et  cultiorem  formam 
restitutionem,  sublatis  quibusdam  rebus 
quae  medio  tempore  praeter  iudicium, 
et  grauitatem  obrepserant  ...  In 
hoc  autem  legitur  singulis  annis  magna, 
et  praecipua  pars  veteris  testamenti, 
et  totum  nouum  praeter  partem 
Apocalypsis  .  .  .  epistolis,  et  actis 
apostolorum  etiam  repetitis  .  .  .  Porro 
quanquam  non  fuit  nobis  propositum 
breuitati,  sed  commoditati  precantium 
consulere,  vtrunque  tamen,  vt  spera- 
mus  consecuti»  sumus  ...  In  hoc  .  .  . 
in  sacrae  scripturae  continua  lectione 
potissimum,  et  grauibus  sanctorum 
historijs  versamur  paucis  et  perspicuis 
regulis  appositis  .  .  .  Qui  noster 
ordo  non  parum  facit  ad  temporis 
breuitatem,  et  laboris  leuamen  .  .  . 

Si  cui  autem  laboriosum  in  hoc 
breuiario  videbitur  pleraque  omnia  ex 
libro  legi,  cum  multa  in  alio  quae 
propter  frequentem  repetitionem  edi- 
scuntur,  memoriter  pronuntientur, 
compenset  cum  hoc  labore  cognitionem 
scripturae  sacrae,  quae  sic  in  dies 


1549 

-Moreouer,  the  nobre  &  hardnes  of 
the  rules  called  the  pie,  and  the  manifolde 
chaunginges  of  the  seruice,  was  the  cause, 
y*  to  turne  the  boke  onlye,  was  so  hard  and 
intricate  a  matter,  that  many  times,  there 
was  more  busines  to  fynd  out  what 
should  be  read,  then  to  read  it  when  it  was 
founde  out. 

These  inconueniences  therfore  considered  : 
here  is  set  furth  suche  an  ordre,  whereby 
the  same  shal  be  redressed.  And  for  a  readi- 
nes  in  this  matter,  here  is  drawen  out  a 
Kalendar  for  that  purpose,  whiche  is  plaine 
and  easy  to  be  vnderstanded,  wherin  (so 
muche  as  maie  be)  the  readyng  of  holy 
scripture  is  so  set  furthe,  that  all  thynges 
shall  bee  doen  in  ordre,  without  breakyng  one 
piece  therof  from  another.  For  this  cause  be 
cut  of  Anthemes,  Respondes,  Inuitatories, 
and  suche  like  thynges,  as  did  breake  the 
continuall  course  of  the  readyng  of  the 
scripture-. 

-Yet  because  there  is  no  remedy,  but  that 
of  necessitie  there  must  be  some  rules  :  ther 
fore  certein  rules  are  here  set  furth,  whiche 
.as  they  be  fewe  in  nobre:  so  they  be  plain 
and  easy  to  be  vnderstanded.  So  y*  here 
you  haue  an  ordre  for  praier  (as  touchyng 
the  readyng  of  holy  scripture)  muche 

agreable  to  the  mynde  &  purpose  of  the  olde 
fathers,  and  a  greate  deale  more  profitable  and 
commodious,  then  that  whiche  of  late  was 
vsed.  It  is  more  profitable,  because  here  are 
left  out  many  thynges,  whereof  some  be 
vntrue,  some  vncertein,  some  vain  and 
supersticious :  and  is  ordeyned  nothyng  to  be 
read,  but  the  very  pure  worde  of  God,  the 
holy  scriptures,  or  that  whiche  is  euidently 
grounded  vpon  thesame :  and  that  in  suche 
a  language  &  ordre,  as  is  moste  easy  & 
plain  for  the  vnderstandyng,  bothe  of  the 
readers  and  hearers.  It  is  also  more  co- 
modious,  bothe  for  the  shortnes  thereof,  & 
for  the  plaines  of  the  ordre,  &  for  that 
the  rules  be  fewe  &  easy.  Furthermore, 
by  this  ordre,  the  curates  shal  nede  none 
other  bookes  for  their  publique  seruice,  but  this 
boke  &  the  Bible:  by  the  meanes  wherof, 
the  people  shall  not  be  at  so  great  charge 
for  bookes,  as  in  tyme  past  they  haue  been. 

And  where  heretofore,  there  hath  been 
great  diuersitie  in  saying  and  synging  in 
churches  within  this  realme  :  some  folowyng 
Salsbury  vse,  some  Herford  vse,  some 
the  vse  of  Bangor,  some  of  Yorke,  &  some  of 
Lincolne :  Now  from  hecefurth,  all  the 
whole  realme  shall  haue  but  one  vse.  And 
if  any  would  iudge  this  waye  more  painfull, 
because  that  all  thynges  must  be  read  vpo 
the  boke,  where  as  before,  by  the  reason  of 
so  often  repeticion,  they  could  saye  many 
thinges  by  heart:  if  those  men  will  waye 
their  labor,  with  the  profite  in  know- 
lege,  whiche  dayely  they  shal  obtein  by 
readyng  vpon  the  boke,  they  will  not  refuse 
the  payn,  in  consideracion  of  the  greate  profite 
that  shall  ensue  therof. 

And  forsomuche  as  nothyng  can,  almoste, 


CONCERNING  THE  SERVICE  OF  THE  CHURCH         37 


1552 

-Moreouer,  the  numbre  and  hardnesse  of 
the  rules,  called  the  Pie,  and  the  manyfolde 
chaungynges  of  the  seruyce,  was  the  cause, 
that  to  tourne  the  boke  onely,  was  so  harde  and 
intricate  a  matter,  that  manye  tymes  there 
was  more  busynesse  to  fynde  out  what 
shoulde  be  read,  then  to  reade  it  when  it  was 
founde  out. 

These  inconueniences  therefore  consydered, 
here  is  set  furthe  suche  an  order,  whereby 
the  same  shalbe  redressed.  And  for  a  redy- 
nesse  in  thys  matter,  here  is  drawen  out  a 
kalender  for  that  purpose,  whiche  is  playne 
and  easye  to  be  vnderstandew,  wherin  (so 
muche  as  maye  be)  the  readynge  of  holye 
scriptures  is  so  set  furthe,  that  all  thynges 
shalbe  doen  in  order,  without  breakynge  one 
pece  thereof  from  another.  For  thys  cause  be 
cut  of  Anthemes,  Respondes,  Inuitatories, 
and  suche  lyke  thynges,  as  dyd  breake  the 
continuall  course  of  the  readynge  of  the 
scripture-. 

-Yet  because  there  is  no  remedye,  but  that 
of  necessitie  there  must  be  some  rules,  there 
fore  certayne  rules  are  here  sette  furth,  whiche 
as  they  be  fewe  in  numbre,  so  they  be  playne 
and  easie  to  be  vnderstande«.  So  that  here 
you  haue  an  order  for  prayer  (as  touchynge 
the  readynge  of  '  holye  scripture)  muche 
agreable  to  the  mynde  and  purpose  of  thold 
fathers,  &  a  great  deale  more  profitable  and 
commodious,  then  that  whiche  of  late  was 
vsed.  It  is  more  profitable,  because  here  are 
lefte  out  manye  thynges,  whereof  some  be 
vntrue,  some  vncertayn,  some  vayne  and 
supersticious,  and  is  ordeined  nothynge  to  be 
read,  but  the  very  pure  worde  of  God,  the 
holye  scriptures,  or  that  which  is  euidentlye 
grounded  vpon  the  same,  and  that  in  such 
a  language  and  order,  as  is  most  easy  and 
playne  for  the  vnderstandynge,  both  of  the 
readers  and  hearers.  It  is  also  more  com 
modious,  bothe  for  the  shortnes  thereof,  and 
for  the  playnesse  of  the  order,  and  for  that 
the  rules  be  fewe  and  easye.  Furthermore, 
by  thys  order,  the  curates  shall  nede  none 
other  bokes  for  their  publyke  seruice,  but  thys 
boke,  and  the  Bible  :  By  the  meanes  whereof, 
the  people  shall  not  be  at  so  greate  charge 
for  bokes,  as  in  tyme  paste  they  haue  been. 

And  where  heretofore  there  hath  been 
greate  diuersitie,  in  sayeng  and  syngyng  in 
Churches  within  this  realme,  some  folowynge 
Salisbury  vse,  some  of  Herford  vse,  some 
the  vse  of  Bangor,  some  of  Yorke,  and  some  of 
Lincolne :  Nowe  from  hence  furthe  all  the 
whole  realme,  shall  haue  but  one  vse.  And 
yf  any  woulde  Judge  thys  waye  more  painfull, 
because  that  all  thynges  muste  be  read  vpon 
the  booke,  where  as  before  by  the  reason  of 
so  often  repeticion,  they  could  saye  many 
thynges  by  heart,  yf  those  men  wyl  weygh 
their  laboure,  with  the  profyte  and  know 
ledge,  which  dayly  they  shal  obtayne  by 
reading  vpon  the  boke,  they  wyl  not  refuse 
the  payne,  in  cosideracion  of  the  great  profile 
that  shall  ensue  therof. 

And  for  ajmuche  as  nothynge  can  almoste 


1661 

Moreover  the  number  and  hardnes  of 
the  rules,  called  the  Pie,  and  the  manifold 
changings  of  the  service,  was  the  cause 
that  to  turn  the  book  only  was  so  hard  and 
intricate  a  matter,  that  many  times  there 
was  more  busines  to  find  out  what 
should  be  read,  then  to  read  it,  when  it  was 
found  out. 

These  inconveniences  therefore  considered, 
here  is  set  forth  such  an  order,  whereby 
the  same  shall  be  redressed.  And  for  a  readi 
ness  in  this  matter,  here  is  drawn  out  a 
Kalendar  for  that  purpose,  which  is  plain 
and  easie  to  be  vnderstood5 ;  wherein  (so 
much  as  may  be)  the  reading  of  holy 
scripture  6  is  so  set  forth  that  all  things 
shall  be  don  in  order,  without  breaking  one 
piece  8  *  from  another.  For  this  cause  be 
cutt  off  Anthemes,  Responds,  Invitatories, 
and  such  like  things  as  did  break  the 
continual  course  of  the  reading  of  the 
Scripture. 

Yet  because  there  is  no  Remedy,  but  that 
of  necessity  there  must  be  some  Rules :  there 
fore  certein  Rules  are  here  set  forth  ;  which, 
as  they  are  few  in  number,  so  they  axe  plain, 
and  easie  to  be  vnderstood.5  So  that  here 
you  haue  an  Order  for  prayer,  and  for 
the  reading  of  the  holy  Scripture,  much 
agreable  to  the  mind  and  purpose  of  the  old 
Fathers,  and  a  great  deal  more  profitable,  and 
commodious  then  that,  which  of  late  was 
vsed.  It  is  more  profitable  ;  because  here  are 
left  out  many  things,  whereof  some  are 
vntrue,  some  vncertein,  some  vain  and 
superstitious ;  and  5  nothing  is  ordeined  *  to  be 
read,  but  the  very  pure  word  of  God,  the 
holy  Scriptures,  or  that  which  is  agreeable 
to  the  same ;  and  that  in  such 

a  language  and  order  as  is  most  easie  and 
plain  for  the  vnderstanding  both  of  the 
readers  and  hearers.  It  is  also  more  com 
modious  ;  both  for  the  shortness  thereof,  and 
for  the  plainness  of  the  order,  and  for  that 
the  rules  be  few  and  easy. 


And  whereas  heretofore  there  hath  been 
great  diversity  in  saying,  and  singing  in 
Churches  within  this  Realm  ;  some  following 
Salisbury  vse,  some  Hereford  vse, 4  and  some 
the  vse  of  Bangor,  some  of  York,3  *  some  of 
Lincoln ;  now  from  henceforth  all  the 
whole  realme  shall  have  but  one  vse. 


And  for  as  much  as  nothing  can 


THE  PREFACE 


SOURCES 

augescit,  et  intentionem  animi,  quam 
deus  ante  omnia  in  precantibus  re- 
quirit,  (hanc  enim  maiorem  legentibus, 
quam  memoriter  proferentibus  adesse 
necesse  est)  et  huiusmodi  laborem  non 
modo  fructuosum,  sed  etiam  salutarem 
iudicabit. 


1549 

be  so  plainly  set  furth,  but  doubles  male  rise 
in  the  vse  &  praclisyng  of  the  same:  to 
appease  all  suche  diuersitie  (if  any  arise) 
and  for  the  resolucion  of  all  doubles,  con- 
cernyng  the  maner  how  to  vnderslande, 
do,  and  execule  Ihe  thynges  conteygned  in  ihis 
booke  :  the  parlies  that  so  doubt,  or  diuersly 
take  any  thyng,  shall  alwaye  resorle  lo  Ihe 
Bishop  of  the  Diocese,  who  by  his  dis- 
crecion  shall  take  ordre  for  the  quietyng  and 
appeasyng  of  thesame:  so  that  thesame 
ordre  be  not  contrary  to  any  thyng  con- 
leigned  in  this  boke. 


Canones  Aelfrici,  19 :  decet  presbyteros  et 
omnes  Dei  ministros  ut  ecclesias  suas  sancto 
obsequio  venerentur  et  in  iis  septem  horarios 
cantus  psallant,  qui  constituti  sunt,  prouti 
synodus  eos  praescripsit  (Wilkins  i.  p.  252). 
Gratian  Decretum  i.  dist.  91:  presbyter 
mane  matutinali  officio  expleto,  pensum 
seruitutis  sue  canendo  primam,  tertiam, 
sextam,  nonam,  vesperamque  persoluat :  ita 
tamen  vt  horis  competentibus  &  signis  desig- 
nantibus  iuxta  possibilitatem  aut  a  se  aut  a 
scholaribus  publice  compleantur. 


Though  it  be  appointed  in  the  afore 
written  preface,  thai  al  ihinges  shalbe 
read  and  songe  in  Ihe  churche,  in  Ihe 
Englishe  tongue,  to  thende  thai  Ihe  con- 
gregacion  maie  be  iherby  edified  :  yel  il  is 
not  meante,  but  when  men  saye  Matins 
and  Euensong  priuately,  Ihey  maye 
saie  thesame  in  any  language  that  they 
theselues  do  vnderslande-. 

-Neilher  lhal  any  man  shalbe 
bounde  to  the  saying  of  them,  bul  suche 
as  from  tyme  to  tyme,  in  Calhedrall  and 
Collegiate  Churches,  Parishe  Churches, 
and  Chapelles  to  the  same  annexed,  shall 
serue  the  congregacion. 


[See  below  after  the  Commination.]        { 


Rom.  x.  2 


OF  CEREMONIES 
WHY  SOME  BE  ABOLISHED  AND 

SOME  RETAYNED. 


OF  suche  Ceremonies  as  be  vsed 
in  the  Churche,  and  haue  had  their 
beginnyng  by  thinstitucion  of  man  : 
Some  at  the  first  were  of  godly  intent 
and  purpose  deuised,  and  yet  at  length 
turned  to  vanitie  and  supersticio  : 
Some  entred  into  the  Church  by 
vndiscrete  deuocion,  and  suche  a  zeale 
as  was  without  knowleage  :  and  for- 
because  they  were  winked  at  in  the 


CONCERNING  THE  SERVICE  OF  THE  CHURCH         39 


1552 

be  so  playnly  set  f urthe ,  but  doubtes  may  ryse 
in  the  vse  and  practisynge  of  the  same :  To 
appease  all  suche  diuersitie  (yf  anye  aryse) 
and  for  the  resolucion  of  all  doubtes,  con- 
cernynge  the  maner  howe  to  vnderstande, 
doe,  &  execute  the  thynges  conteyned  in  thys 
boke :  the  partes  that  so  doubt,  or  diuerslye 
take  any  thyng,  shal  alway  resorte  to  the 
Byshoppe  of  the  Diocesse,  who  by  hys  dis- 
crecion  shall  take  order  for  the  quietynge  and 
appeasyng  of  the  same:  so  that  the  same 
order  be  not  contrarye  to  anye  thing  con 
teyned  in  thys  boke.  And  yf  the  Byshoppe  of 
the  Diocesse  be  in  anye  doubte,  then  maye  he 
sendefor  the  resolucion  therofvnto  the  Arche- 
byshoppe. 


1661 

be  so  plainly  set  forth,  but  doubts  may  5  arise 
in  the  vse  and  practise5  of  the  same :  to 
appease  all  such  diversity  (if  any  arise) 
and  for  the  resolution  of  all  doubts  con 
cerning  the  manner  how  to  vnderstand, 
do  and  execute  the  things  contained  in  this 
book ;  The  parties  that  so  doubt  or  diversly 
take  any  thing,  shall  alway  resort  to  the 
Bishop  of  the  Diocess,  who  by  his  dis 
cretion  shall  take  order  for  the  quieting  and 
appeasing  of  the  same  ;  so  that  the  same 
order  be  not  contrary  to  any  thing  con 
tained  in  this  book.  And  if  the  Bishop  of 
the  Diocess  be  in  3  *  doubt;  then  4  he  may  * 
send  for  the  Resolution  thereof  to  the  Arch- 
Bishop. 


Though  it  be  appoynted  in  the  afore 
wrytten  Preface,  that  all  thynges  shalbe 
read  and  songe  in  the  Churche,  in  the 
Englyshe  tongue,  to  the  ende  that  the  con- 
gregacion  maye  be  therby  edified  :  yet  it  is 
not  ment,  but  when  menne  sayeMornynge 
and  E.uenynge  prayer  priuatly,  they  may 
saie  the  same  in  anye  language  that  they 
them  selues  do  vnderstande. 

And  all  Priestes  and  Deacons,  shalbe 
bounde  to  say  dayly  the  Mornynge  and 
Euenyng  prayer,  either  priuatly  or  openly, 
excepte  they  be  letted  by  preaching,  studieng 
of  diuinitie,  or  by  some  other  vrgent 

cause. 

And  the  Curate  that  ministreth  in  euery 
Parish  Churche  or  Chapell,  beynge  at  home, 
and  not  beyng  otherwyse  reasonably  letted, 
shall  say  the  same  in  the  Parishe  Churche 
cr  Chapell  where  he  ministreth,  and  shall 
tolle  a  belle  therto,  a 

conuenient  tyme  before  he  begyn,  that  suche 
as  be  disposed  maye  come  to  heare  goddes 
worde,  and  to  praie  with  hym. 


Though  it  be  appointed 

that  all  things  shall  be 
read  and  sung  in  the  Church,  in  the 
english  tongue,  to  the  end  that  the  con 
gregation  may  be  thereby  edified  :  Yet  it  is 
not  meant,  but  that  when  men  say  Morning 
and  Evening  Prayer  privatly,  they  may 
say  the  same  in  any  Language  that  they 
themselves  do  vnderstand. 

And    all    Priests    and    Deacons    are 
to   say  daily  the  Morning  and 
Evening  Prayer,  either  privatly ,  or  openly, 
not  foing  let  3    *  by 

7t>  sickness  or    some  other  vrgen  t 
cause. 

And  the  Curate  that  ministreth  in  every 
parish-church  or  Chappel  being  at  home, 
and  not  being  otherwise  reasonably  Mndred, 
shall  say  the  same  in  the  parish  church 
or  chappel  where  he  ministreth,  and  shall 
cause  a  Bell  to  be  tolled,  there  vn/0  a 
convenient  time  before  he  begin  ;  that  the 
people  may  come  to  hear  Gods 
•word,  and  to  pray  with  him. 


<r  OF  CEREMONIES, 

WHY  SOME  BE  ABOLISHED,  AND 
SOME  RETEINED. 

OF  sucbe  Ceremonies  as  be  vsed 
in  the  church,  &  haue  had  their 
beginning  by  ye  institutio  of  man  : 
some  at  the  first  were  of  Godly  entent 
&  purpose  deuised,  and  yet  at  length 
turned  to  vanitie  &  supersticio  : 
some  entred  into  the  church  by 
vndiscrete  deuocio,  and  such  a  zeale 
as  was  without  knowledge,  &  for- 
because  thei  were  winked  at  in  the 


OF  CEREMONIES, 
WHY  SOME  BE  ABOLISHED  AND 

SOME  RETAINED. 

Of  such  Ceremonies  as  be  vsed 
in  the  Church,  and  have  had  their 
beginning  by  the  Institution  of  man, 
some  at  the  first  were  of  godly  intent 
and  purpose  devised,  and  yet  at  length 
turned  to  vanity  and  superstition : 
some  entred  into  the  Church  by 
vndiscreet  devotion,  and  such  a  Zeale 
as  was  without  knowledge  ;  and  for 
because  they  were  winked  at  in  the 


40  OF  CEREMONIES 

SOURCES  1549 

beginning,  they  grewe  dayly  to  more 
and  more  abuses,  which  not  onely  for 
theyr  vnprofitablenesse,  but  also  be 
cause  they  haue  muche  blynded  the 
people,  and  obscured  the  glory  of 
God,  are  worthy  to  be  cut  awaye,  and 
cleane  reiected.  Other  there  be, 
whiche  although  they  haue  been 
deuised  by  man  :  yet  it  is  thought 
good  to  reserue  them  still,  aswell  for 
a  decent  ordre  in  the  Churche  (for  the 
whiche  they  were  first  deuised)  as 
because  they  pertayne  to  edificacion  : 

1  Cor.  xiv.  26.  wherunto    all    thinges    doen    in    the 

Churche  (as  the  Apostle  teacheth) 
ought  to  be  referred.  And  although 
the  kepyng  or  omitting  of  a  ceremonie 
(in  it  selfe  considered)  is  but  a  small 
thing  :  Yet  the  wilful  and  conteptuous 
transgression,  and  breakyng  of  a 
common, ordre,  and  discipline,  is  no 
smal  offence  before  God-. 

1  Cor.  xiv.  40.  -Let  al  thinges   bee  done  emong 

you  (sayeth  Saincte  Paule)  in  a  semely 
and  due  ordre.  The  appointemete  of 
the  whiche  ordre,  pertaineth  not  to 
priuate  menne  :  Therfore  no  manne 
ought  to  take  in  hande,  nor  presume 
to  appointe  or  alter  any  publike  or 
common  ordre  in  Christes  Churche, 
excepte  he  be  lawfully  called  and 
autorized  therunto-. 
.  -And  whereas  in  this  our  tyme,  the 
myndes  of  menne  bee  so  diuerse,  that 
some  thynke  it  a  greate  matter  of  con 
science  to  departe  from  a  peece  of  the 
leaste  of  theyr  Ceremonies  (they  bee  so 
addicted  to  theyr  olde  customes)  and 
agayne  on  the  other  syde,  some  bee  so 
newe  fangle  that  they  woulde  innouate 
all  thing,  and  so  doe  despyse  the  olde 
that  nothyng  canne  lyke  them,  but 
that  is  newe :  It  was  thought  ex- 
pediente  not  so  muche  to  haue  re- 
specte  howe  to  please  and  satisfye 
eyther  of  these  partyes,  as  howe  to 
please  God,  and  profite  them  bothe. 
And  yet  leste  any  manne  should  bee 
offended  (whom  good  reaso  might 
satisfie)  here  be  certaine  causes 
rendered,  why  some  of  the  accus 
tomed  Ceremonies  be  put  awaye,  and 
some  be  retained  and  kept  still. 

Some  are  put  awaye,  because  the 
great  excesse  and  multitude  of  them 
hathe  so  encreased  in  these  latter 
daies,  that  the  burthen  of  them  was 


OF  CEREMONIES 


1552 

beginning,  thei  grewe  daily  to  more 
&  more  abuses  :  whiche  not  onely  for 
their  vnprofitablenesse,  but  also  be 
cause  thei  haue  much  blinded  the 
people,  and  obscured  the  glory  of 
God,  are  worthy  to  be  cut  awaie,  & 
clene  reiected.  Other  there  be, 
which  although  thei  haue  been 
deuised  by  man  :  yet  it  is  thought 
good  to  reserue  them  still,  aswel  for 
a  decent  order  in  the  churche  (for  the 
whiche  thei  were  first  deuised)  as 
because  thei  partein  to  edification  : 
wherunto  all  thynges  doen  in  the 
churche  (as  the  Apostle  teacheth) 
ought  to  be  referred.  And  although 
the  kepyng  or  omittyng  of  a  Ceremonie 
(in  it  self  considered)  is  but  a  small 
thynge:  yet  the  wilful  and  con tempteous 
transgression  and  breakynge  of  a 
common  order  and  discipline,  is  no 
small  offence  before  God. 

Let  al  thynges  be  doen  emonge 
you  (saith  .  S.  Paule)  in  a  semely 
and  due  order.  The  appointmet  of 
the  which  order,  parteineth  not  to 
priuate  men  :  therfore  no  man 
ought  to  take  in  hand,  nor  presume 
to  appoynte  or  alter  any  publique  or 
common  order  in  Christes  church, 
except  he  be  lawfully  called  and 
aucthorized  thereunto. 

And  where  as  in  this  our  tyme,  the 
mindes  of  menne  are  so  diuerse,  that 
some  thynke  it  a  greate  matter  of  con 
science  to  departe  from  a  pece  of  the 
least  of  their  Ceremonies  (thei  be  so 
addicted  to  their  old  customes  :)  and 
again  on  the  other  side,  some  be  so 
newe  fagle*/,  that  thei  would  innouate 
all  thyng,  and  so  do  despise  the  old, 
that  nothing  can  like  them,  but 
that  is  new  :  it  was  thought  ex- 
pediet,  not  so  much  to  haue  re 
spect  how  to  please  and  satisfie 
either  of  these  parties,  as  howe  to 
please  God,  &  profyte  them  bothe. 
And  yet  lest  any  man  should  be 
offeded  (whom  good  reason  mighte 
satisfie)  here  be  certain  causes 
redred,  why  some  of  the  accus 
tomed  Ceremonies  be  put  away,  and 
some  retayned  and  kept  styll. 

Some  are  put  away,  because  the 
great  excesse  &  multitude  of  the, 
hath  so  encreased  in  these  latter 
claies,  that  the  burthen  of  them  was 


1661 

begining  they  grew  daily  to  more 
and  more  abuses  which  not  only  for 
their  vnprofitableness,  but  also  be 
cause  they  have  much  blinded  the 
people,  and  obscured  the  glory  of 
God,  are  worthy  to  be  cut  away  and 
clean  rejected.  Other  there  be, 
which  although  they  have  been 
devised  by  man,  yet  it  is  thought 
good  to  reserve  them  still,  as  well  for 
a  decent  order  in  the  Church  (for  the 
which  they  were  first  devised)  as 
because  they  pertain  to  edification, 
wherevnto  all  things  done  in  the 
church  (as  the  Apostle  teacheth) 
ought  to  be  referred.  And  although 
the  keeping  or  omitting  of  a  Ceremony, 
in  it  self  considered,  is  but  a  small 
thing,  yet  the  wilfull  and  contemptuous 
transgression  and  breaking  of  a 
common  order  and  discipline  is  no 
small  offence  before  God. 

Let  all  things  be  don  among 
you,  saith  S.  Paul,  in  a  seemly 
and  due  order.  The  appointment  of 
the  which  order  pertaineth  not  to 
private  men  :  therefore  no  man 
ought  to  take  in  hand,  nor  presume 
to  appoint  or  alter  any  publick,  or 
common  order  in  Christs  church, 
except  he  be  lawfully  called  and 
authorized  thereunto. 

And  whereas  in  this  our  time,  the 
minds  of  men  are  so  divers,  that 
some  think  it  a  great  matter  of  con 
science  to  depart  from  a  peece  of  the 
least  of  their  Ceremonies  ;  they  be  so 
addicted  to  their  old  customs  :  and 
again  on  the  other  side,  some  be  so 
newfangled,  that  they  would  innovate 
all  things,4  and  so  3  *  despise  the  old, 
that  nothing  can  like  them  but 
that  is  new :  Jt  was  thought  ex 
pedient,  not  so  much  to  have  re 
spect  how  to  please  and  satisfie 
either  of  these  parties,  as  how  to 
please  God  and  profitt  them  both. 
And  yet  lest  any  man  should  be 
offended,  whom  good  reason  might 
satisfie,  here  be  certein  causes 
rendred  why  some  of  the  accus 
tomed  Ceremonies  be  put  away,  and 
some  retained,  and  kept  still. 

Some  are  put  away  because  the 
great  excess  and  multitude  of  them 
hath  so  increased  in  these  latter 
dayes,  that  the  burthen  of  them  was 


OF  CEREMONIES 


SOURCES 

[S.  Aug.  Ep.  Iv  ad  Jan.  35 :  omnia 
itaque  talia  quae  neque  sanctarum 
scripturarum  auctoritatibus  conti- 
nentur  nee  in  conciliis  episcoporum 
statuta  inveniuntur,  nee  consuetudine 
universae  ecclesiae  roborata  sunt,  sed 
pro  diversorum  locorum  diversis 
moribus  innumerabilia  variantur,  ita 
ut  vix  aut  omnino  nunquam  inveniri 
possint  caussae  quas  in  eis  instituendis 
homines  secuti  stint,  ubi  facultas 
tribuitur  sine  ulla  dubitatione  rese- 
canda  existimo.  Quamvis  enim  neque 
hoc  inveniri  possit  quomodo  contra 
fidem  sint :  ipsam  tamen  religionem 
quam  paucissimis  et  manifestissimis 
celebrationum  sacramentis  misericordia 
Dei  esse  liberam  voluit,  servilibus 


oneribus     premunt, 


tolerabilior 


sit  conditio  ludaeorum  qui  etiamsi 
tempus  libertatis  non  agnoverunt, 
legalibus  tamen  sarcinis,  non  humanis 
presumptionibus  subiiciuntur.] 


1549 

intollerable :  wherof  saincte  Augustine 
in  his  tyme  complained,  that  they 
were  growen  to  suche  a  noumbre  : 
that  the  state  of  Christian  people  was 
in  wurse  case  (concernyng  that 
matter)  then  were  the  lewes.  And 
he  counsayled  that  suche  yocke  and 
burthen  shoulde  be  taken  awaye,  as 
tyme  wolde  serue  quiettrly  to  doe  it-. 

-But  what  woulde  saincte  Augustine 
haue  sayed  yf  he  hadde  seen  the 
Ceremonies  of  late  dayes  vsed  among 
vs?  wherunto  the  multitude  vsed  in 
his  time  was  not  to  bee  compared. 
This  our  excessiue  multitude  of  Cere 
monies  was  so  great,  and  many  of 
them  so  darke  :  that  they  dyd  more 
confounde,  and  darken,  then  declare 
and  setteforth  Christes  benefites  vnto 
vs-. 

-And  besides  this,  Christes  Gospell 
is  not  a  Ceremoniall  lawe  (as  muche 
of  Moses  lawe  was :)  but  it  is  a  religion 
to  serue  God,  not  in  bondage  of  the 
figure  or  shadowe  :  but  in  the  freedome 
of  spirite,beeyngcontenteonelyewith 
those  ceremonies  whiche  doe  serue  to 
a  decente  ordre  and  godlye  discipline, 
and  suche  as  bee  apte  to  stirre  vppe 
the  dulle  mynde  of  manne,  to  the 
remembraunce  of  his  duetie  to  God, 
by  some  notable  and  speciall  signifi- 
cacion,  whereby  he  might  bee  edified. 

<L  Furthermore,  the  most  weightie 
cause  of  the  abolishment  of  certaine 
Ceremonies  was,  that  they  were  so 
farre  abused,  partely  by  the  super- 
sticious  blindenes  of  the  rude  and 
vnlearned,  and  partelye  by  the  vn- 
saciable  auarice  of  suche  as  soughte 
more  theyr  owne  lucre  then  the  glorye 
of  God  :  that  the  abuses  coulde  not 
well  bee  taken  awaye,  the  thyng  re- 
mayning  styll.  But  nowe  as  con 
cernyng  those  persones,  whiche  per- 
aduenture  will  bee  offended  for  that 
some  of  the  olde  Ceremonies  are 
retained  still :  Yf  they  consyder,  that 
withoute  some  Ceremonies  it  is  not 
possible  to  kepe  anye  ordre  or  quiete 
discipline  in  the  church  :  they  shall 
easilye  perceiue  iuste  cause  to  re- 
fourme  theyr  iudgementes.  And  yf 
they  thynke  much  e  that  anye  of  the  olde 
dooe  remayne,  and  woulde  rather  haue 
all  deuised  a  newe :  then  suche 
menne  (grauntyng  some  Ceremonies 


OF  CEREMONIES 


43 


1552 

intollerable,  whereof  .  S  .  Augustine 
in  his  tyme  complayned,  that  they 
were  growen  to  such  a  numbre, 
that  the  state  of  Christian  people  was 
in  worse  case  (concernynge  that 
matter)  then  were  the  I  ewes.  And 
he  counsayled  yfc  such  yoke  & 
burthe  should  be  taken  away,  as 
tyme  would  serue  quietly  to  doe  it. 

But  what  would  .  S.  Augustine 
haue  sayed,  if  he  had  seen  the 
ceremonies  of  late  daies  vsed  emong 
vs?  whervnto  the  multitude  vsed  in 
his  time,  was  not  to  be  compared. 
This  cure  excessiue  multitude  of  Cere 
monies  was  so  great,  and  many  of 
them  so  darke :  that  they  did  more 
confounde,  and  darken,  then  declare 
and  set  furth  Christes  benefites  vnto 
vs. 

And  besides  thys,  Christes  Gospell 
is  not  a  Ceremonial  lawe  (as  much 
of  Moses  lawe  was)  but  it  is  a  religion 
to  serue  God,  not  in  bondage  of  the 
figure  or  shadowe,  but  in  the  fredome 
of  spirite,  beynge  content  only  with 
those  Ceremonies,  which  do  serue  to 
a  decent  ordre  and  godly  discipline, 
and  such  as  be  apte  to  stirre  vp 
the  dull  mynde  of  man,  to  the 
remembraunce  of  his  duety  to  God, 
by  some  notable  and  speciall  signifi- 
cacion,  whereby  he  myght  be  edified. 

Furthermore,  the  moste  weightie 
cause  of  thabolishemet  of  certayn 
Ceremonies  was,  that  thei  were  so 
farre  abused,  partly  by  the  super- 
sticious  blyndnes  of  the  rude  and 
vnlearned,  and  partly  by  the  vn- 
saciable  auarice  of  suche  as  sought 
more  their  owne  lucre,  then  the  glory 
of  God  :  that  the  abuses  could  not 
well  be  taken  away,  the  thing  re- 
mayning  stil.  But  now  as  co- 
cerning  those  persones,  which  per- 
aduenture  wylbe  ofifeded,  for  that 
some  of  thold  ceremonies  are 
reteyned  styl :  if  they  cosider  that 
without  some  Ceremonies,  it  is  not 
possible  to  kepe  any  ordre,  or  quiete 
discipline  in  the  churche  :  they  shal 
easely  perceyue  iust  cause  to  re- 
forme  their  iudgemetes.  And  yf 
thei  thinke  much,  that  any  of  thold 
do  remain,  &  would  rather  haue 
all  deuised  a  newe  :  Then  suche 
men  grauntyng  some  ceremonies 


1661 

intolerable  ;  whereof  S.  Augustine 
in  his  tyme  complained  that  they 
were  grown  to  such  a  number, 
that  the  estate  of  Christian  people  was 
in  worse  case  concerning  that 
matter,  then  were  the  lews.  And 
he  counselled  that  such  yoke  and 
burthen  should  be  taken  away,  as 
time  would  serve  quietly  to  do  it. 

But  what  would  S.  Augustine 
have  said,  if  he  had  seen  the 
Ceremonies  of  late  daies  vsed  among 
vs  :  whereunto  the  multitude  vsed  in 
his  time  was  not  to  be  compared? 
This  our  excessive  multitude  of  Cere 
monies  was  so  great,  and  many  of 
them  so  dark,  that  they  did  more 
confound  and  darken,  then  declare 
and  sett  forth  Christs  benefits  vnto 
vs. 

And  besides  this,  Christs  Gospell 
is  not  a  ceremoniall  law,  (as  much 
of  Moses  law  was)  but  it  is  a  Religion, 
to  serve  God,  not  in  bondage  of  the 
figure,  or  shadow,  but  in  the  freedom 
of  4  the  spirit,  being  content  only  with 
those  ceremonies  which  do  serve  to 
a  decent  order,  and  godly  discipline, 
and  such  as  be  apt  to  stir  up 
the  dull  mind  of  man  to  the 
remembrance  of  his  duty  to  God, 
by  some  notable  and  speciall  signifi 
cation,  whereby  he  might  be  edified. 

Furthermore,  the  most  weighty 
cause  of  the  abolishment  of  certain 
Ceremonies  was,  that  they  were  so 
far  abused,  partly  by  the  super 
stitious  blindness  of  the  rude,  and 
vnlearned,  and  partly  by  the  vn- 
satiable  avarice  of  such  as  sought 
more  their  own  lucre,  then  the  glory 
of  God;  that  the  abuses  could  not 
well  be  taken  away,  the  thing  re 
maining  still.  But  now,  as  con 
cerning  those  persons  which  per- 
adventure  will  be  offended,  for  that 
some  of  the  old  ceremonies  are 
retained  still :  if  they  consider  that 
without  some  ceremonies  it  is  not 
possible  to  keep  any  order  or  quiet 
discipline  in  the  Church,  they  shall 
easily  perceive  iust  cause  to  re 
form  their  iudgements.  And  if 
they  think  much  that  any  of  the  old 
do  remain,  and  would  rather  have 
all  devised  anew  :  then  such 
men  granting  some  ceremonies 


OF  CEREMONIES 

SOURCES  1549 

conuenientetobeehadde)suerlye  where 
the  olde  maye  bee  well  vsed  :  there 
they  cannot  reasonablye  reproue  the 
olde  (onelye  for  their  age)  withoute 
bewraying  of  theyr  owne  folye.  For 
in  such  a  case  they  oughte  rather  to 
haue  reuerence  vnto  them  for  theyr 
antiquitie,  yf  they  wyll  declare  them- 
selues  to  bee  more  studious  of  vnytie 
and  concorde,  then  of  innouacions  and 
newe  fanglenesse,  whyche  (as  muche 
as  maye  be  with  the  trewe  settyng 
foorthe  of  Christes  religion)  is  alwayes 
to  bee  eschewed.  Furthermore,  suche 
shall  haue  no  iuste  cause  with  the 
Ceremonies  reserued,  to  be  offended  : 
for  as  those  be  taken  awaie  which 
were  moste  abused,  and  dydde  burden 
mennes  consciences  withoute  anie 
cause  :  So  the  other  that  remaine  are 
retained  for  a  discipline,  and  ordre 
whiche  (vpon  iust  causes)  maye  be 
altered  and  chaunged,  and  therfore 
are  not  to  be  estemed  equal  with 
goddes  law.  And  moreouer  they  be 
neither  darke  nor  dumme  ceremonies, 
but  are  so  set  forth  that  euery  man 
maye  vnderstande  what  they  dooe 
meane,  and  to  what  vse  they  do  serue. 
So  that  it  is  not  lyke  that  they,  in 
tyme  to  come,  should  be  abused  as 
the  other  haue  been.  And  in  these  al 
oure  dooinges  wee  condemne  no  other 
nacions,  nor  prescrybe  anye  thyng, 
but  to  oure  owne  people  onelye.  For 
we  thinke  it  conueniente  that  euery 
countreye  should  vse  suche  ceremonies, 
as  they  shall  thynke  beste  to  the 
setting  foorth  of  goddes  honour  and 
glory :  and  to  the  reducing  of  the 
people  to  a  moste  perfecte  and  godly 
lyuing,  without  errour  or  supersticion  : 
a'nd  that  they  shoulde  putte  awaye 
other  thinges,  which  from  time  to 
time  they  perceyue  to  be  moste 
abused,  as  in  mennes  ordinaunces  it 
often  chaunceth  diuerslye  in  diuerse 
countreyes.  } 


OF  CEREMONIES 


45 


1552 

couueniet  to  be  had,  surely  where 
the  olde  may  be  well  vsed,  there 
thei  cannot  reasonably  reproue  the 
old,  only  for  their  age,  without 
bewraying  of  their  owne  foly.  For 
in  suche  a  case,  they  ought  rather  to 
haue  reuerece  vnto  them  for  their 
antiquitie,  if  they  wyl  declare  them 
selues  to  be  more  studious  of  vnitie 
and  cocorde,  then  of  innouacions  and 
newe  fanglenes,  whiche  (asmuche 
as  may  be  with  the  true  setting 
furth  of  Christes  Religion)  is  alwayes 
to  be  eschewed.  Furthermore,  such 
shall  haue  no  iust  cause  with  the 
ceremonies  reserued,  to  be  offended. 
For  as  those  be  taken  away,  whiche 
were  moste  abused,  and  dyd  burthen 
mens  consciences  without  any 
cause :  so  the  other  that  remain,  are 
retayned  for  a  Discipline  and  order, 
whiche  (vpon  iuste  causes)  may  be 
altered  and  chaunged,  and  therefore 
are  not  to  be  estemed  equal  with 
gods  law.  And  moreouer,  they  be 
neither  darke  nor  dombe  ceremonies  : 
but  are  so  sette  furthe,  that  euery  man 
may  vnderstande  what  they  doe 
meane,  &  to  what  vse  thei  do  serue. 
So  that  it  is  not  like  that  thei  in 
tyme  to  come,  should  be  abused  as 
the  other  haue  been.  And  in  these 
our  doinges,  we  condemne  no  other 
nacions,  nor  prescribe  any  thyng, 
but  to  our  owne  people  only.  For 
we  thinke  it  couenient  that  euery 
coutrey  should  vse  such  ceremonies, 
as  they  shal  thinke  best  to  the 
settyng  furth  of  Goddes  honour  or 
glorye,  and  to  the  reducyng  of  the 
people  to  a  most  perfecte  and  godly 
lyuyng,  without  errour  or  Supersticion. 
And  that  they  shoulde  put  awaye 
other  thynges  whiche  from  tyme  to 
tyme,  they  perceyue  to  be  moste 
abused,  as  in  mennes  ordinaunces  it 
often  chaunceth  diuersely  in  diuerse 
countreyes. 


1661 

convenient  to  be  had ;  surely  where 
the  old  may  be  well  vsed,  there 
they  cannot  reasonably  reprove  the 
old,  only  for  their  age,  without 
bewraying  of  their  own  folly.  For 
in  such  a  case  they  ought  rather  to 
have  reverence  vnto  them  for  their 
antiquitie  :  if  they  will  declare  them 
selves  to  be  more  studious  of  vnitie 
and  concord,  then  of  innovations,  and 
newfangleness,  which  (as  much 
as  may  be  with  the  true  setting 
forth  of  Christs  religion)  is  alwayes 
to  be  eschewed.  Furthermore  such 
shall  have  no  iust  cause  with  the 
Ceremonies  reserved  to  be  offended. 
For  as  those  be  taken  away  which 
were  most  abused,  and  did  burden 
mens  consciences  without  any 
cause ;  so  the  other  that  remain,  are 
retained  for  a  discipline  and  order, 
which  (vpon  iust  causes)  may  be 
altered  and  changed,  and  therefore 
are  not  to  be  esteemed  equall  with 
Gods  law.  And  moreover  they  be 
neither  dark  nor  dumb  ceremonies, 
but  are  so  set  forth,  that  every  man 
may  vnderstand  what  they  do 
mean,  and  to  what  vse  they  do  serve. 
So  that  it  is  not  like  that  they  in 
time  to  come  should  be  abused,  as 
other  have  been.  And  in  these 
our  doings  we  condemn  no  other 
Nations,  nor  prescribe  any  thing, 
but  to  our  own  people  only.  For 
we  think  it  convenient  that  every 
country  should  vse  such  ceremonies 
as  they  shall  think  best  to  the 
setting  forth  of  Gods  honour  and 
glory,  and  to  the  reducing  of  the 
people  to  a  most  perfect  and  godly 
living  without  errour  or  superstition  : 
And  that  they  should  put  away 
other  things,  which  from  time  to 
time  they  perceive  to  be  most 
abused,  as  in  mens  ordinances  it 
often  chanceth  diversely  in  divers 
countries. 


THE  ORDER  HOW  THE  PSALTER 

SOURCES  1549 


THE    TABLE    AND    KALENDER, 

EXPRESSING     THE     ORDRE     OF     THE 

PSALMES  AND  LESSONS  TO  BE  SAVED 
AT  MATYNS    AND    EUENSONG, 

THROUGHOUT  THE  YEARE, 
EXCEPTE  CERTAYNE  PROPER 
FEASTES,  AS  THE  RULES  FOLOWING 

MORE  PLAINLYE  DECLARE. 


De  lectione  psalmorum. 


Psalterium  quolibet  mense  semel  absoluetur. 
Seel  quoniam  mensium  magna  est  inequalitas, 
eos  sic  ad  equalitatem  quondam  in  primis  redi- 
gendos  censuimus. 

Quilibet  mensis  quantum  ad  hanc  rationem 
attinet,  justum  numerum  triginta  dierum  ob- 
tinebit. 

Quia  igitur  Januarius  et  Martiut  tricenarium 
numerum  uno  die  superant,  intermedius  eorum 
Februarius  qui  28  dies  tantummodo  complec- 
titur  utrinque  diem  unum  mutuabitur.  Et  sic 
Februarii  psalterium  ultimo  die  Januarii  incipietur 
et  primo  Martii  terminabitur. 


Rursus quoniam  Maius,  Julius,  Augustus,  October 
et  December  vno  die  tinguli  abundant,  in  omnium 
istorum  mensium  ultimis  diebus  eosdem  ipsos 
psalmoa  uolumus  iterari  qui  penultimis  eorumdem 
diebus  deseruiebant,  ut  in  sequentis  semper  mensis 
capite  psalterium  denuo  inchoetur,  .  .  . 


Psalmum  118  in  viginti  duas  paries  jam  olim 
distinctum  nos  quoque  pro  uiginti  duobus  psalmis 
distinctim  recitari  ttatuimus.  (Cranmer  Hor. 
Can.  series  ii.) 


THE  ORDRE  HOW  THE  PSALTER 

IS  APPOYNTED  TO  BEE  REDDE. 

THC  Psalter  shalbe  red  through,  once 
euery  Moneth,  &  because  that  some 
Monethes  be  longer  then  some  other  be :  it 
is  thought  good,  to  make  the  euen  by  this 
meanes. 

To  every  Moneth,  as  concernyng  this  pur 
pose,  shalbe  appointed  iust  .  xxx .  dayes. 

And  because  January  and  Marche  hath 
one  daye,  aboue  the  sayed  nombre,  and  Feb 
ruary  whiche  is  placed  betwene  them  bothe, 
hath  onely  .xxviii.  daies,  February  shall 
borowe  of  either  of  the  Monethes,  of  January 
and  Marche  one  daye,  and  so  the  Psalter 
whiche  shalbe  red  in  Februarye,  muste  bee 
begon  the  laste  daye  of  January,  and  ended 
the  first  daye  of  Marche. 

And  whereas  Maie,  luly, 

August,  October,  and  December,  haue  .xxxi. 
dayes  a  piece,  it  is  ordred  that 
the-same  Psalmes  shall  bee  redde  the  last 
daye  of  the  saied  Monethes,  whiche  were  red 
the  daye  before :  so  that  the  Psalter  maye 
bee  begon  agayne  the  first  daye  of  the  next 
Monethes  ensuing. 

Now  to  know  what  Psalmes  shalbe  red 
euery  daye,  looke  in  the  Kalendar  the 
nombre  that  is  appointed  for  the  Psalmes, 
and  then  finde  the  same  noumbre  in  this  Table, 
and  vpon  that  noumbre  shall  you  se,  what 
Psalmes  shalbee  sayd  at  Matyns,  and  Euen- 
song. 

And  where  the  .C.xix.  Psalme  is  deuided 
into  .xxii.  porcions,  and  is  ouer  long  to  bee  red 
at  one  tyme :  it  is  so  ordred  that  at  one 
tyme  shall  not  bee  red  aboue  .iiii.  or  .v. 
of  the  saied  porcions,  as  you  shall  per- 
ceiue  to  bee  noted  in  this  Table. 


And  here  is  also  to  be  noted,  that  in  this 
Table,  and  in  al  other  partes  of  the  seruice, 
where  any  Psalmes  are  appoincted,  the 


IS  APPOINTED  TO  BE  READ 
1552  1661 


47 


c    THE     TABLE    AND     KALENDER 

EXPRESSYNGE  THE  ORDRE  OF  THE 
PSALMES  AND  LESSONS,  TO  BE  SAVED 
AT  THE  MORNYNG  AND  E  YEN  KM? 
PRAIER  THROUGHOUT  THE  YERE, 
EXCEPTE  CERTAYN  PROPER 
FEASTES,  AS  THE  RULES  FOLOWYNGE 
MORE  PLAINLYE  DECLARE. 


C   THE  ORDER    HOWE   THE   PSALTER 
IS   APPOYNTED  TO   BE  READDE. 

THE  Psalter  shalbe  readde  through,  once 
euery  Moneth.  And  because  that  some 
Monethes  be  longer  then  some  other  be,  it 
is  thought  good  to  make  them  euen  by  thys 
tneanes. 

To  euerye  Moneth,  shalbe  appoynted  (as 
concernynge  thys  purpose)  iuste  .xxx.  dayes. 

And  because   January  and  Marche  hath 
one  daie  aboue  the  sayed  numbre,  and  Feb 
ruary  whiche  is  placed  betwene  them  bothe, 
hath  onely    .xxviii.   dayes  :    February  shal 
borowe  of  either  of  the  Monethes  (of  January 
and  Marche)  one  daye.     And  so  the  Psalter 
whiche  shalbe  readde  in  February,  muste 
begyn  the  last  daye  of  January,  and  ende 
the  first  daye  of  Marche. 

And  where  as  Maye,  luly, 

August,  October,  and  December,  haue  xxxi. 

dayes  a  piece  :   it  is  ordered  that 

the  same  Psalmes,  shalbe  readde  the  laste 

daye  of  the  sayed  Monethes,  whiche  were  read 

the  daye  before.     So  that  the  Psalter  may 

begvn  agayne  the  fyrst  day  of  the  nexte 

Monethes  ensuynge. 

Nowe  to  knowe  what  Psalmes  shalbe  read 
euerye  daye,  loke  in  the  Kalender,  the 
numbre  that  is  appointed  for  the  Psalmes, 
and  then  finde  the  same  numbre  in  thys  table, 
and  vpon  that  numbre  shal  you  see,  what 
Psalmes  shalbe  sayed  at  Mornyng  and  Even- 
yngprayer. 

And  where  the  .Cxix.  Psalme  is  deuided 
into .  xxii.  porcions,  and  is  ouerlonge  to  be  read 
at  one  tyme :  it  is  so  ordered,  that  at  one 
tynie  shall  not  be  read  aboue  foure  or  fyue 
of  the  sayed  porcions,  as  you  shall  per- 
ceyue  to  be  noted  in  thys  Table  folowynge. 


And  here  is  also  to  be  noted,  that  in  thys 
table,  and  in  all  other  partes  of  the  Seruyce, 
where  anye  Psalmes  are  appoynted,  the 


THE  ORDER  HOW  THE  PSALTER 
IS  APPOINTED  TO  BE  READ. 

The  Psalter  shall  be  read  through  once 
every  month,  as  it  is  there  appointed, 
both  for  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer. 


6  But  in  February  it  shall  be  read  onely  to 
the  twenty  eighth  or  twenty  ninth  day 
of  the  month. 


And,  whereas  January,  March,  May,  July, 
August,  October  and  December  have  one 
and  thirty  dayes  a  peece ;  Jt  is  ordered  that 
the  same  Psalms  shall  be  read  the  last 
day  of  the  said  Monthes  which  were  read 
the  day  before:  So  that  the  Psalter  may 
begin  again  the  first  day  of  the  next 
month  lb  *  ensuing. 


And,  whereas  the  cxix.  psalm  is  divided 
into  xxii.  portions,  and  is  overlong  to  be  read 
at  one  time :  Jt  is  so  ordered,  that  at  one 
time  shall  not  be  read  above  four  or  five 
of  the  said  portions. 

And  at  the  end  of  every  Psalm,™  and  of 
every  such  part  of  the  cxix  Psalm  *  shall 
be  repeated  this  Hymn. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son : 

and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and 

ever  shall  be :  world  without  end.  Amen. 
Note,  that 


THE  ORDER  HOW  THE  PSALTER 
SOURCES  1549 


nombre  is  expressed  after  the  greate  Englishe 
Bible,  whiche  from  the.ix.  Psalme  vnto  the 
.C.xlviii.  Psalme  (folowyng  the  diuision  of 
the  Ebrues)  doeth  vary  in  nombres  from 
the  como  Latyn  translacion. 


A  TABLE  FOR  THE  ORDRE  OF  THE 

PSALMES,   TO   BE    SAVED   AT   MATINS 
AND  EUENSONG. 


C  Matins. 

<T  Euensong. 

ii 

ix.  x.  xi. 

xii.  xiii.  xiiii. 

iii 

xv.  xvi.  xvii. 

xviii. 

iiii 

xix.  xx.  xxi. 

xxii.  xxiii. 

V 

xxiiii.  xxv.  xxvi. 

xxvii.  xxviii.  xxix. 

vi 

xxx.  xxxi. 

xxxii.    xxxiii. 

xxxiiii. 

vii 

xxxv.  xxxvi. 

xxxvii. 

viii 

xxxviii.  xxxix.  xl. 

xii.  xiii.  xiiii. 

ix 

xliiii.  xlv.  xlvi. 

xlvii.  xlviii.  xlix. 

X 

1.  li.  Iii. 

Iiii.  liiii.  Iv. 

xi 

Ivi.  Ivii.  Iviii. 

lix.  Ix.  Ixi. 

xii 

Ixii.  Ixiii.  Ixiiii. 

ixv.  Ixvi.  Ixvii. 

xiii      Ixviii. 

xix.  Ixx. 

xiiii     Ixxi.  Ixxii. 

ixxiii.  Ixxiiii. 

XV 

Ixxv.lxxvi.lxxvii. 

Ixx  viii. 

xvi 

Ixxix.  Ixxx.  Ixxxi. 

Ixxxii.      Ixxxiii. 

Ixxxiiii.  Ixxxv. 

xvii 

Ixxxvi.     Ixxxvii. 

Ixxxix. 

Ixxxviii. 

xviii 

xc.  xci.  xcii. 

xciii.  xciiii. 

xix 

xcv.  xcvi.  xcvii. 

xcviii.  xcix.  c.  ci. 

XX 

cii.  ciii. 

ciiii. 

xxi 

cv. 

cvi. 

xxii 

cvii. 

cviii.  cix. 

xxiii 

ex.  cxi.  cxii.  cxiii. 

cxiiii.  cxv. 

xxiiii 

cxvi.  cxvii.  cxviii. 

cxix.  Inde.iiii. 

xxv    ilnde.v. 

Inde.iiii. 

xxvi 

Inde.v. 

Inde.iiii. 

xxvii 

cxx    cxxi    cxxii 

cxxvi.      cxxvii. 

cxxiii     cxxiiii 

cxxviii.  cxxix. 

cxxv. 

cxxx.  cxxxi. 

xxviii  cxxxii.     cxxxiii. 

cxxxvi.   cxxxvii. 

cxxxiiii.  cxxxv. 

cxxxviii. 

xxix 

cxxxix.  cxl.  cxli. 

cxlii.  cxiiii. 

XXX 

cxliiii.  cxlv.  cxlvi. 

cxlvii.      cxlviii. 

cxlix.  cl. 

De  Lectione  ceterarum  scripturarum. 


In  primis  lectionibus  turn  matutinis  turn  uesper- 
tinis  universum  Vetus  Instrumentum  preter  Pro- 
phetas  semel  in  anno  perlegetur .  .  .  Omnes  .  .  . 
Prophets  .  .  .  in  secundis  lectionibus  matutinis 
recitabuntur. 


THE  ORDRE  HOWE  THE  REST  OF 

HOLY     SCRIPTURE     (BESIDE     THE 

PSALTER)  is  APPOYNTED  TO  BEE 

REDDE. 

The  olde  Testamet.]    The  old  Testament 
is  appoynted  for  the  first  Lessons,  at  Matins 
and    Euensong,     and 

shal    bee    redde    through    euery 


IS  APPOINTED  TO  BE  READ 


49 


1552 

numbre  is  expressed  after  the  gre.ite  Englyshe 
Bible,  whiche  from  the  .ix.  Psalme  vnto  the 
.Cxlviii.  Psalme  (folowyng  the  diuision  of 
the  Hebrues)  doeth  varie  in  numbres  from 
the  common  Latyn  translacion. 


1661 


the  Psalter  followeth  the  divi 
sion  of  the  Hebrews,  and  the  Translation 
Of  the  great  English  Bible,  set  forth  and 
vsed  in  the  time  of  K,  H.  viii.  and  Edw. 
vi. 


c  THE  TABLE  FOR  THE  ORDER  OF  THE 

PSALMES  TO  BE  SAVED  AT  MORNYNG 
AND  EVENFJVG  PRAIER. 


C  Morn  ing  pro,  ier 

CEuenjw^/razer 

i 

\.  11.  in.  mi.  v. 

VI.  Vll.  Vlll. 

ii 

ix.  x.  xi. 

xii.  xiii.  xiiii. 

iii 

xv.  xvi.  xvii. 

xviii. 

iiii 

xix.  xx.  xxi. 

xxii.  xxiii. 

V 

xxiiii.  xxv  xxvi. 

xxvii.  xxviii.  xxix. 

vi 

xxx.  xxxi. 

xxxii.          xxxiii. 

xxxiiii. 

vii 

xxxv.  xxxvi. 

xxxvii. 

viii 

xxxviii.  xxxix.  xl. 

xii.  xiii.  xiiii. 

ix 

xliiii.  xlv.  xlvi. 

xlvii.  xlviii.  xlix. 

X 

1.  li.  Iii. 

Iiii.  liiii.  Iv. 

xi 

Ivi.  Ivii.  Iviii. 

lix.  Ix.  Ixi. 

xii 

Ixii.  Ixiii.  Ixiiii. 

Ixv.  Ixvi.  Ixvii. 

xiii 

Ixviii. 

Ixix.  Ixx. 

xiiii 

[xxi.  Ixxii. 

[xxiii.  Ixxiiii. 

XV 

lxxv.  Ixxvi.  Ixxvii. 

[xxviii. 

xvi 

[xxix.  Ixxx.  Ixxxi. 

[xxxii.        Ixxxiii. 

Ixxxiiii.  Ixxxv. 

xvii 

[xxxvi.      Ixxxvii. 

Ixxxix. 

Ixxxviii. 

xviii 

xc.  xci.  xcii. 

xciii.  xciiii. 

xix 

xcvi.  xcvii 

xcviii.  xcix.  c.  ci. 

XX 

cii.  ciii. 

ciiii. 

xxi 

cv. 

cvi. 

xxii 

cvii. 

cviii.  cix. 

xxiii 

ex.  cxi.  cxii.  cxiii. 

cxiiii.  cxv. 

xxiiii 

cxvi.  cxvii.  cxviii. 

cxix.  Inde.  iiii. 

XXV 

Inde.  v. 

Inde.  iiii. 

xxvi 

Inde.  v. 

Inde.  iiii. 

xxvii 

cxx    cxxi    cxxii 

cxxvi           cxxvii 

cxxiii      cxxiiii 

cxxviii      cxxix 

cxxv. 

cxxx  cxxxi 

xxviii 

cxxxii.     cxxxiii. 

cxxxvi.     cxxxvii. 

cxxxiiii.  cxxxv. 

cxxx  viii. 

xxix 

cxxxix.  cxl.  cxli. 

cxlii.  cxiiii. 

XXX 

cxliiii.  cxlv.  cxlvi. 

cxlvii.        cxlviii. 

cxlix.  cl. 

C    THE    ORDER    HOW    THE    REST    OF 
HOLY       SCRIPTURE       (BESIDE        THE 

PSALTER)  is  APPOYNTED  TO  BE 

READ. 

Tnold  Testament 

is  appointed  for  the  firste  lessons,  at  Morn- 
ynge    and     Euenynge    prater,    and 

shalbe  read  throughe,  euery 


THE  ORDER  HOW  THE  REST  OF 
HOLY  SCRIPTURE 

IS  APPOINTED  TO  BE 

READ. 

The  Old  Testament 

is  appointed  for  the  first  Lessons  at  Morn 
ing,  and  Evening  Prayer;  80  as  the 
most  part  thereof  will  be  read  every 


50     THE  ORDER  HOW  THE  REST  OF  HOLY  SCRIPTURE 


SOURCES 


Porro  secundia  lectionibus  uespertinis  Epistolas 
Paulinas  una  cum  ceteris  canonicis  assignauimus, 
quas  omnes  ter  in  unius  anni  circulo  percurremus. 
.  .  .  Postremo  Euangelia  cum  Actis  Apostolicis 
in  tercias  lectiones  matutinas  dispartiuimus,  que 
etiam  ter  in  anno  uniuersa  reuoluentur.  (Cran- 
mer  ib.) 

Ex  nouo  autem  nihil  praetermittitur, 
praeter  Apocalypsim,  cuius  principium 
tantum  legitur. 


1549 

yere  once,  except  certain  bokes  and 
Chapiters,  whiche  bee  least  edifying,  and 
might  best  be  spared,  and  therfore  are  left 
vnred. 

The  newe  Testamet.]  The  newe  Testament 
is  appoynted  for  the  second  Lessons,  at 
Matins  and  Euensong,  and  shalbe 
red  ouer  ordrely  euery  yere  thrise,  beside 
the  Epistles  and  Gospelles  :  except  the  Apo- 
calips,  out  of  the  whiche  there  be  onely 
certain  Lessons  appoynted  vpon  diuerse 

proper  feastes. 

Lessons.]  And  to  knowe  what  Lessons  shall 
bee  red  euery  daye :  finde  the  daye  of  the 
Moneth  in  the  Kalendar  folowyng  :  and  there 
ye  shal  perceiue  the  bookes  and  Chapiters, 
that  shalbe  red  for  the  Lessons,  bothe  at 
Matins  and  Euensong. 


Infra  Hebdomadam  si  dicenda  sit 
Missa  de  Feria,  resumitur  Missa  de 
Dominica  praecedenti,  nisi  propria  Missa 
assignetur.  (Missale  ad  dom.  i.  Adv.) 

Illud  preterea  non  est  silentio  pretermittendum 
quod  in  annis  bissextilibus  dies  ille  additicius  qui 
in  Februario  intercalatur,  idem  per  omnia  ser- 
vitium  cum  diequiprecesseratobservabit.  (Cran- 
mer  ib.) 


Proper  Psalmes.]  And  here  is  to  be  noted, 
that  whensoeuer  there  be  any  proper  Psalmes 
or  Lessons,  appoynted  for  any  feast,  moue- 
able  or  vnmoueable:  the  the  Psalmes  and 
Lessons  appoynted  in  the 

Kalendar, 
shall  bee  omitted  for  that  tyme. 

Ye  muste  note  also  that  the  Collect,  Epistle, 
and  Gospel,  appoynted  for  the  Sundaye, 
shall  serue  all  the  weeke  after,  except  there 
fal  some  feast  that  hath  his  propre. 

The  Leape  yeare.]  This  is  also  to  bee  noted, 
concernyng  the  leape  yeares,  that  the  .xxv. 
day  of  February,  whiche  in  leape  yeares  is 
coumpted  for  twoo  dayes,  shall  in  those  twoo 
dayes,  alter  neither  Psalme  nor  Lesson  :  but 
the  same 'Psalmes  and  Lessons,  whiche  be 
sayed  the  first  daye,  shall  serue  also  for  the 
seconde  daye. 

Also,  wheresoeuer  the  beginning  of  any 
Lesson,  Epistle,  or  Gospel  is  not  expressed, 
there  ye  must  begin  at  the  beginnyng  of 
the  Chapter. 


IS  APPOINTED  TO  BE  READ 


1552 

yere  ones,  except  certain  bokes  and 
chapiters,  whiche  be  least  edifyeng,  and 
might  best  be  spared,  and  therfore  be  lefte 
vnread. 

The  Newe  Testament 

is  appoynted  for  the  seconde  Lessons,  at 
Mornynge  and  Euenj#£2  praier,  and  shalbe 
read  ouer  orderlye  euerye  yere  thrise,  beside 
the  Epistles  and  Gospelles :  excepte  the  Apo- 
calips,  out  of  the  whiche  there  be  onelye 
certain  Lessons  appoynted,  vpondiuerse 

proper  feastes. 

And  to  knowe  what  Lessons  shal 
be  read  euerye  daie :  finde  the  daie  of  the 
Monethe  in  the  Kalender  folowynge:  and  there 
ye  shall  perceiue  the  bokes  and  Chapiters, 
that  shalbe  read  for  the  Lessons,  both  at 
Morninge  and  Evenjyw^  praier. 


And  here  is  to  be  noted, 
that  whensoeuer  there  be  any  proper  Psalmes 
or  Lessons,  appoynted  for  anye  feast,  moue- 
able  or  vnmoueable :  then  the  Psalmes  and 
Lessons,  appoynted  in  the 

Kalender, 
shall  be  omitted  for  that  tyme. 

Ye  muste  note  also  that  the  Collect,  Epistle 
and  Gospell,  appoynted  for  the  Sondai, 
shall  serue  all  the  wieke  after,  excepte  there 
fall  some  feast  that  hath  hys  proper. 

Thys  is  also  to  be  noted, 
concernynge  the  Leape  yeres,  that  the  .xxv. 
daie  of  February,  whiche  in  Leape  yere  ,  is 
compted  for  two  daies,  shall  in  those  two 
daies,  alter  neither  Psalme  nor  Lesson  :  but 
the  same  Psalmes  and  Lessons,  whiche  be 
sayed  the  firste  daye,  shall  also  serue  for  the 
seconde  daie. 

Also,  wheresoeuer  the  begynnynge  of  any 
Lesson,  Epistle  or  Gospell  is  not  expressed, 
there  ye  must  begyn  at  the  begynnynge  of 
the  Chapiter. 

And  wheresoeuer  is  not  expressed  howe 
farre  shalbe  read  there  shall  you  reade  to  tht 
eitde  of  the  Chapiter. 


1661 

year   once   as   in   the   Kalendar   is 
pointed. 


ap- 


The  New  Testament 

is  appointed  for  the  second  Lessons  at 
Morning  and  Evem'w^  Prayer,  and  shall  be 
read  over  orderly  every  year  thrice,  besides 
the  Epistles  and  Gospels;  except  the  Apo- 
calyps,  out  of  which  there  are  only 

certein  proper  Lessons  appointed  vpon  divers 
Feasts. 

And  to  know  what  Lessons  shall 
be  read  every  day,  looke  for  the  day  of  the 
month  in  the  Kalendar  following  ;  and  there 
ye  shall  find  the  Chapters 

that  shall  be  read  for  the  Lessons,  both  at 
morning  and  evening  Prayer.  Except  only 
the  Moveable  Feasts^  which  are  not  in  the 
Kalendar ;  and  the  Jmoveable,  where  there 
is  a  blank  left  in  the  Column  of  Lessons ; 
The  proper  Lessons  for  all  which  dayes  are 
to  be  found  in  the  Table  of  Proper  Lessons. 
And  note  , 

that  whensoever  proper  Psalms, 

or  Lessons  are  appointed ; 

then  the  Psalms  and 

Lessons  of  ordinary  course  appointed  in  the 
Psalter,  and  Kalendar  (if  they  be  different) 
shall  be  omitted  for  that  time. 

Note  also,  that  the  Collect,  Epistle, 
and  Gospel  appointed  for  the  Sunday, 
shall  serve  all  the  week  after,  where  it  is 
not  in  this  book  otherwise  ordered. 


52  PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 

SOURCES  1549 


Dom.  i  Adv.  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii :  Esai. 
i  1-6. 

Dom.  ii  Adv.  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii :  Esai. 

i  27-ii  3. 
Dom.  iii  Adv.  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii:  Esai. 

iii  8-15. 
Dom.  iv  Adv.  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii :  Esai. 

v  fic-10. 


Dom  in  Ixx.  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii :  Gen. 

i  1-13. 
Dom.  in  Ix.  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii :  Gen. 

v  32-vi  7. 
Dom.  in  1.  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii :  Gen. 

xii  1-12. 


Dom.  ii  in  xl.  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii :  Gen. 

xxvii  1-12. 
Dom.  iii  in  xl.  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii :  Gen. 

xxxvii  2-8. 
Dom.  iv.  in  xl.  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii:  Ex. 

i  l-12a. 


PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 
1552  1661 


c  PROPER  PSALMES  AND  LESSONS 

FOR  DIUERSE  FEASTES  AND  DAYES, 
A  TMORNYNGE  A  ND  E  UENYNGE  PR  A  I- 
ER. 


PROPER  LESSONS 

TO   BE   READ 

AT  MORNING  AND  EVENING  PRAY 
ER  ^N  THE  SUNDAYES*,  &»  OTHER 
HOLY-DAtES  THROUGHOUT  THE  YEAR.* 


If  Lessons 

proper  for 

Sundaies 

Sundries  of 
Advent 
The  first 

1  Mattens 
Isai.  i. 

Evensong 
Isai.it 

ii 

V. 

xxiv 

ill 

XXV. 

xxvi 

iv 

XXX. 

xxxii. 

Sundaies 
after 
Christmas 
The  first 

xxxvii 

xxxviii 

ii 

xli 

xlilt 

Sundaies 
after  the 
Epiphanie 
The  First 

xliv 

xlvi 

ii 

Ii 

liii 

iii 

Iv 

Ivi 

iv 

Ivii 

Iviii 

V 

lix 

Ixiv* 

vi 

Ixv 

Ixvi 

1  Septua- 
gesima 

Gen.  i. 

Gen.  ii 

Sexagesima 

iii 

vi 

Quinquag1. 

ix*to  vr.  xx 

lxii 

Lent. 
First  Sunday 

xix*tovr.30 

1xxii 

ii 

xxvii 

xxxiv 

iii 

xx^cix 

xlii 

iv 

xliii 

xlv 

V 

Exod.  iii 

Exod.  v 

vi 

i.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

ix 
«Matth.xxvi* 

X* 

Hebr.  5.  to. 
vr.  xi. 

54  PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 

SOURCES  1549 


[Exod.  xii 
Rom.  vi  Acts  ii] 


[Acts  x  34          Acts  xix  1-21] 


[Gen.  xviii 
Mat.  iii] 


1  Sam.  begins  on  the  1st  Sunday  after 
Trinity. 


£>  Ezek.    begins    on    the    Sunday   after 
Oct  28. 


PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 
1552 


55 


[See  p.  59.] 


[See  p.  61.] 
[See  p.  63.] 


1661 


Easter  day 
i.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 
1  Sundaies 
after  Easter 
Tlie  first 
ii 

Mattens 

Exod.  xii. 
Rom.  vi 

Num.  xvi 
xxiii.*  xxiv. 

Evensong 

1  Exod.  xiv* 
Acts.  2.  vr.  22 

Num.  xxii. 
Jxxv 

iii 

Deut.  iv. 

Deut.  v. 

iv 

vi 

vii. 

V 

viii 

ix 

Sunday  after 
Ascension 
day. 

xii 

xiii* 

Whitsunday 
1.  Lesson. 

2.  Lesson. 

Deut.  2  16.* 
to  vr.  18. 

Acts.  10.  vr.  34 

Isai.  xi. 

Acts.  19.  to 
vr.  21. 

Trinitie 
Sunday. 
i.  Lesson. 
2.  Lesson. 

Gen.  i. 
Matth.  iii 

Gen.  xviii. 
1.  Jo.  v. 

1  Sundaies 
after  Trinitie 
The  first 

los.  x 

los.  xxiii 

ii 

Judg.  iv. 

Judg.  v. 

iii 

1.  Sam.  ii 

1.8am.  iii. 

iv 

xii 

xiii 

V 

XV 

3  xvii 

*vi 

2.  Sam  xii 

2.  Sam.*  xix 

vii 

xxi 

'xxiv 

viii 

1.  King,  xiii 

1.  King,  xvii 

ix 

xviii 

xix 

X 

xxi 

xxii 

3d 

2.  King,  v 

2.  King.  ix. 

iii 

X 

xviii 

xiii 

xix 

xxiii 

xiv. 

lerem.  v 

lerem.  xxii 

XV 

XXXV 

xxxvL 

xvi 

Ezekii 

Ezek.*  xiii 

xvii 

xiv 

ixviii 

56  PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 

SOURCES  1549 


[See  below  under  the  several  days, 
along  with  the  Introits,  Collects,  etc.] 


In  Nat.  dom.  ad  Mat.  Lect.  i :   Esai.  . 

ix   l-7a :    ad   missam  in  gallicantu  ["•  lx                        "•  V11 

Evang.  Luc.  ii  1-14 :   ad  missam  in  Mat-  J 
aurora  Epist.  Tit.  iii  4-7. 


In  die  s.  Stephani  ad  missam  Lect.  Act.          [Acts  vi  8-vii  30       Acts  vii  30-55] 
vi  8-10,  vii  54-60 


[Apoc.  i  Apoc.  xxii] 


PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 


57 


1552 


1661 


On  Christe- 
mas  dai  at 
m  o  r  n  y  n  g 
praier. 


At  Euenynge 
praier. 


On  sainct 
Stephes  day, 
at  morn- 
ynge  praier. 

At       Euen- 

ynge  praier. 


On  sainct 
John  the 
Euagelistes 
day,  at  morn 
ing  praier. 
At  Kuenyrtge 
praier. 


Psalme.      xix.  \  The  first  Les- 
Psalme.      xlv.  Vson.  Esay.ix. 
Psalme.  Ixxxv.  )  The  ii.  Lesso. 
Luk.  ii  Vnto. 
Andvnto  me 
a  good  wyl. 
The  first  Les 
son.  Esa.  vii. 
God    spake 
\  once  agayn  to 
Psalm.  Ixxxix.  VAchas.    &c. 
j  Vntotheende. 
Psalme.      Cx.     The     second 
1  Lesson.    Tit. 

Psal.     Cxxxii.  Viii.  Thekind- 
J  nes  and  loue. 
&c.  Vnto  fool - 
yshe    ques 
tions. 

The  seconde  lesson.  Actes.  vi. 
and  vii.  Stephen  ful  of  fayth 
and  power,  Vnto.  And  when 
fourtie  yeres  -were  &c. 
The  seconde  lesson.  Actes.  vii. 
And  when  fourtie  yeres  were 
expired,  there  appeared  vnto 
Moses.  &c.  Vnto.  Stephen  full 
of  the  holy  ghost. 

The    secode    lesson.    Apoca- 
lips.  i.  The  whole  Chapter. 


The  seconde  Lesson.  Apoca- 
lips.  xxii. 


Sundaies 
after  Trinitie 
xviii 

Mattens 

XX 

Evensong 
xxiv 

xix 

Dan.  iii 

Dan.  vL 

XX 

loel.  ii 

Mic.  vi 

xxi 

Habak.  ii 

Prov.  i 

xxii 

Prov.  ii 

iii. 

xxiii 

xi 

.    xii 

xxiv 

xiii 

xiv 

XXV 

XV 

xvi. 

xxvi 

xvii 

xix 

Lessons 

Proper  for 

Holydaies* 

^.Andrew. 

Mattens 
Prov.  xx 

Evensong 
Prov.  xxi 

S.  Thomas 
the  Apostle 

xxiii 

xxiv 

Nativitie  of 
Christ.* 
i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

Isai.  9.  to  vr. 

O* 

Luke.    2.    to 
vr.  15. 

Isai.  7.  vr.  10. 
to  vr.  17. 
Titus.  3.  vr.  4. 
to  vr.  9 

S.  Stephen 
1i.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Prov.  xxviii 
Acts.  6.  vr.  8. 
&  c.  7.  to  vr. 
30. 

Eccles.  iv.* 

Acts.  7.  vr.  30. 
to  vr.  55 

S.  John 
Jl.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Eccles.  v. 
Apoc.  i 

Eccles.  vi.* 
Apoc.  xxii 

PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 

SOURCEb  1549 

[Jer.  xxxi  1-18] 


[Gen.  xvii 
Rom.  ii" 


Deut.  x  12 
Col.  ii] 


In   die   Epiphan.    ad   Mat.    Lect.    iv :  [Isa.  Ix  Isa.  xlix 

Esai.  Ix  1-6  :  post  Mat.  Luc.  iii  21  b-  Luke  iii  21  Jo.  ii  12] 

iv  la. 


[Acts  xxii  1-22        Acts  xxvi] 


In  Cena  domini  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii : 
Lam.  i.  1-8 :  Euangelium  (and  at 
the  Feetwashing)  Jo.  xiii  1-15: 
fratribus  potum  caritatis  sumentibus, 
ib.  16-xiv  31 :  in  Parasceue  ad  Mat. 
Lectt.  i-iii :  Lam  i  10-17 


[Lam.  i.] 
[Lam.  ii. 


Lam.  iii] 


[Gen.  xxii  Isa.  liii] 


In  Sabbato  sancto  ad  Mat.  Lectt.  i-iii : 
Lam.  ii  13-22a. 


[Lam.  iv,  v] 


PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 


59 


On  the  Inno- 
cetes  daie,  at 
?n  o  r  n  y  n  g  e 

praier. 

On    the    Cir- 


at      morning 
praier. 

At  Euenjjw^? 
prater. 

On   the   Epi- 

phanie,     at 

morn  ing  e 

praier. 

At  Euenynge 

prayer. 


1552 


The  firste  Lesson.  leremie. 
xxxi.  vnto  Moreouer  I  heard 
Ephraim. 

The  first  Lesson.  Genesis,  xvii. 
The  seconde  Lesson.  Roma.  ii. 


The  .i.  Lesson.  Deut.  x.  And 

now  Israel.  &c. 

The  seconde  Lesson.  Collos.  ii. 

The  firste  Lesson.  Esay.  Ix. 
The  seconde  Lesson.  Luke.  iii. 
And  it  fortuned.  &c. 


1661 


The  first  lesson.  Esay.  xlix. 
The  seconde  lesson.  lohn.  ii. 
After  thys  he  went  doune  to 
Capernaum. 

[See  p.  63  below.  ] 


On     wednes- 

daie      before    The  first   lesson.    Ozee.    xiii. 

Easter,        at    xiiii. 

E  u  e  n  i  n  g 

praier. 

On       Thurs- 

daye     before 

Easter,        at 

morning 

praier. 

At 

prayer. 

On  Good  Fri 
day,  at  morn 
ing  praier. 
At  ISxuuiynge 

praier. 

On     Easter 

euenatMorn- 
ynge  praier. 


The  first  Lesson.  Daniel,  ix. 

The     first     Lesson.     leremie. 
xxxi. 

The  first  lesson.  Genesis,  xxii. 
The  first  lesson.  Esay.  liii. 

The  first  lesson,  zachary.  ix. 


On  Easter 
day  at  Morn- 
yng  praier. 

At    Eueny«£ 

praier. 


The  first  les- 

Psalme.         ii.  \  son.     Exodi. 
Psalme.      Ivii.  >  xii. 
Psalme.     Cxi.  J  The  seconde 

lesson.  Ro.  vi. 

Psalme.  Cxiii.  \  The  second 
Psalm.  Cxiiii.  V  lesson.  Act. 
Psal.  Cvxiii.  )  ii. 


Innocents 
day. 

Mattens 

ler.  xxxi.  t 
vr.  1  8 

Evensong 
!Wisd.  1.* 

Circumcision 
i.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Gen.  xvii 
Rom.  ii. 

Deut.  x.  vr.  12 
Coloss.  ii 

Epiphanie 
i.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Isai.  Ix. 
Luke.  3.2  to 
vr.  23* 

Isai.  xlix. 
Joh.  2.  2  to* 
vr.  12 

Conversion  of 
S.  Paul. 
Jl.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Wisd.  v. 

ActS.  22.  tO 

vr.  22. 

Wisd.  vi.* 
Acts.  xxvi. 

1  Purification 
of  the 
Virg.  Mary 

Wisd.ix 

Wisd.  xii. 

S.  Matthias. 

xiz 

Ecclus.  i. 

Anunciation 
of  our  Ladie 

Ecclus.  ii 

iii* 

Wedensday 
before  Easter. 
i.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

^os.  xiii.* 
Ioh.xi.vr.  45. 

Hos.  xiv 

Thursday 
before  Easter 
i.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Dan.  ix 
Joh.  xiii 

Jerem.  xxxi. 

Good-Friday 
i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

Gen.  22.  7bto 
vr.  20* 
Joh.  xviii. 

Isai.  liii. 
1.  Pet.  ii. 

Easter  Even 
i.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Zech.  ix 
Luke.  23. 
vr.  50 

iBxod.  xiii* 
Hebr.  iv 

60  PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 

SOURCES  1549 

In    vig.    Pasche    Euang.    Mat.    xxviii  [Mat.  xxviii  Acts  iii] 

1-7 :  feria  vi  post  Pascha  Euang. 
ib.  16-20:  feria  iv  post  Pascha, 
ad  miss.  Lect.  Act.  iii  12, 13-15, 17-19. 


Feria    iv    hebd.    ii    post   oct.    Pasche  [Luke  xxiv  1-13       1  Cor.  xv] 

Euang.  Luc.  xxiv  1-12 :  feria  iv 
post  oct.  Pasche,  Epist.  1  Cor.  xv 
12-23a 


[Acts  viii  1-14] 

[Jo.  xiv  Eph.  iv] 


PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 


61 


On    Monday 

in      Easter 

wieke,     at 

morning 

praier. 

At  Euen/w^ 

praier. 

On    Tuisday 

in      Easter 

wieke,       at 

morning 

praier. 

At  Euenjx«£tf 

praier. 


1552 


The    seconde    lesson.    Math. 
xxviii. 


The  seconde  lesson.  Actes.  iii. 


The  seconde  lesson.  Luke. 
xxiiii.  Vnto.  And  beholde  two 
of  them. 


The  seconde  Lesson,  i.  Corin. 
xv. 


1661 


'iiL  )  The.ii.lesson. 
*:   (lohn.  xiiii. 


At  EuenywPE    Psalme.  xxiiii. 
praier.    *  "      Psalme.  Ixviii. 


JTSaUIlC.     1AV111.    >.-,     , 

Psalme.  Cviii.  j  EPhe<  mu 

The    seconde 
Psalm.    xlviii.)les^on-     Act- 


On  whitson- 
day  at  Morn- 
ynge  prayer. 


The     second 

At  Euenyw^    Psalme.    Ciiii.  ^  lesson.     Act. 

prayer.  Psalm.     Cxlv.  (  xix.     It    for- 

f  tuned     when 

)  Apollo    went 

to    Corinthu. 

&c.       Vnto 

After      these 

thynges. 


Munday  in 
Easter  week 
11.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Mattens 

Exod.  xvi 
Matth.  xxviii 

Evensong 

Exod.  xvii.* 
Acts.  iii. 

Tuesday  in 
Easter  week 
li.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Exod.  xx. 

Luke.  24.  to 
vr.  13 

Exod.  xxxii.* 
i.  Cor.  xv. 

*S.  Mark. 

Ecclus.  iv 

Ecclus.  v* 

8S.  ^Philip, 
and* 
S.1  Jacob. 
1.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

vii 
Ion.  1.  vr.  43 

ix* 

Assension 
day 
'1.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Deut.  x* 
Luke.  24. 
vr.  44 

22.  King,  ii.* 
Eph:  4.  to 
vr.  17. 

1  Munday  in 
Whitsun 
Week 
1.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

2  Gen.  xi.  to 
vr.  10 
1.  Cor.  xii* 

2  Num.  xi.  vr. 
16.  to  vr.  30.* 
1.  Cor.  14.  to 
vr.  26 

Tuesday  in 
Whitsun 
Week 
1.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

2i.  Sam.  19. 
vr.  18.* 
1.  Thess.  v. 
vr.   12.  to 
vr.  24 

'Deut^xxx.* 

1.  Jon.  iv.  to 
vr.  14. 

62  PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 

SOURCES  1549 


[Acts  xiv  Acts  xv  1-36] 


[Mai.  iii  Mai.  iv 

Mat.  iii  Mat.  xiv  1-13] 


[Acts  iii  Acts  iv] 

In  vigil,  ss.  Petri  et  Pauli  ad  missam 
Lect.  Act.  iii  1-10. 


[Wisd.  iii  1-14        Wisd.  v  1-17 
Heb.  xi  33-xii  7     Apoc.  xix  1-17] 


PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 


1552 


C  On  Trinitie 

sonday,       at    The  first  lesson.  Gene,  xviii. 

mornyn ge    The  seconde  lesson.  Math.  iii. 

prayer. 

Conuersion    The    seconde    lesson.    Actes. 

of      saynct    xxii.  Vnto.  They  heard  hym. 

Paule,       at 

morning 

prayer. 

At  Euenynge   The    seconde    lesson.    Actes. 

prayer.  xxvi. 


1661 


Sainct  Bar- 
nabiej  dai, 
at  mornytige 
prayer. 
At 
prayer. 

C  Sainct  lohn 
baptistej  day, 
at  morning 
praier. 
At 
prayer. 


The    seconde    lesson.    Actes. 
xiiii. 


The    second    lesson.     Actes. 
xv.  Vnto.  After  certayne  dayes. 

The  first  lesson.  Malachi.  iii. 
The  seconde  lesson.  Math.  iii. 


The  first  lesson.  Malachi.  iiii. 
The  seconde  lesson.  Math, 
xiiii.  Vnto  when  lesus  heard. 


SainctePeters  The  seconde   Lesson.   Actes. 

daie,a.lMorn-  iii. 

ing  prayer. 

At  TLuenynge  The  seconde   Lesson.  Actes. 

prayer.  iiii. 


Al  sainctes  The  first  Lesson.  Sapien.  iii. 
day  at  Morn-  Vnto.  Blessed  is  rather  the 
ynge  praier.  barrayne. 

The  second  Lesso.  Hebr.  xi. 

xii.  Sainctes  by  faith  subdued. 

Vnto  If  you  endure  chastisyng. 
At  Euent'w^  The  fyrst  Lesson.  Sapience,  v. 
praier.  Vnto  Hys  lelosie  also. 

The  seconde  Lesson.  Apoca- 

lips.  xix.  Vnto  And  I  sawe  an 

Angell  stande. 


[See  p.  59.] 

Mattens 

Evensong 

S.  Barnabas 
*!.  Lesson. 
2.  Lesson. 

Ecclus.  x. 
Acts:  xiv 

Ecclus.  xii.* 
Acts.  15.  to 
vr.  36 

S.  lohn 
Baptist 
i.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Malach.  iii 
Matth.  iii 

Malach.  iv 
Matth.  14.  to 
vr.  {3 

S.  Peter. 
U.  Lesson 
2.  Lesson 

Ecclus.  xv 

Acts,  iii 

Ecclus.  xix* 
Acts,  iv 

!S.  James 

Ecclus.  xxi 

Ecclus.  3xxii* 

^.Bartho 
lomew  * 

xxiv 

*xxix 

S.  Matthew 

XXXV 

xxxvili 

S.  Michael 
i.  Lesson* 
2.  Lesson 

Gen.  xxxii 
Acts.  12.  to 
vr.  20 

Dan.  x.  vr.  5. 
Jude.vr.  6.  to 
vr.  16. 

iS.  Luke. 

Ecclus.  li. 

Job:L 

S.  Simon 
and'S^Jude 

Job.  xxiv. 

XXV 

xlii* 

All  saints 
i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

Wisd.  iii.  to 
vr.  10. 
Hebr.  xi.  vr. 
33  &  c.  12. 
to  vr.  7. 

Wisd.  v.  to 
vr.  17. 
Apoc.  xix.  to 
vr.  17. 

64  PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 

SOURCES  1549 


[See     below,     with     the     Jntroits, 
Collects,  etc.] 


Pss.  xviii  (xix),  xliv  (xlv),  Ixxxiv 
(Ixxxv),  Ixxxviii  (Ixxxix),  in  Natiu. 
dom.  ad  Mat. ;  cix  (ex),  cxxxi  (cxxxii), 
ad  Vesp. 

Psalmi  penitentiales  in  capite  ieiimii 
ante  benedictionem  cinerum. 

Pss.  xxi  (xxii),  xxxix  (xl),  liii  (liv), 
Ixxxvii  (Ixxxviii)  in  Feria  vi  in 
Parasceue  ad  Mat.  ;  Ixviii  (Ixix)  in 
Cena  domini  ad  Mat. 

Ps.  ii  in  dom.  Resur.  ad  Mat. ;  ex  (cxi) 
ad  Vesp. 

Pss.  viii,  xlvi  (xlvii)  in  Ascens.  dom. 
ad  Mat. 

Pss.  xlvii  (xlviii),  Ixvii  (Ixviii),  ciii  (civ) 
in  dom.  Pentecost,  ad  Mat. ;  cxiii 
(cxiv)  ad  Vesp. 


PROPER  PSALMS  AND  LESSONS 


1552 


[See  above  under  the  several  days.] 


1661 


1  Proper  Psalms  on  certain  Dales/ 

1f  Christmas 
day 

Mattens 
Psalm,  xix 
xlv 
Ixxxv 

Evensong 
Ixxxix 
ex. 
cxxxii 

s  IT  Ash-Wed- 
ensday 

vi 

xxxii 
xxxviii 

Cii 

CXXX 

cxliiL 

IF  Good 
Friday 

xxii* 
xl 
liv 

Ixix 
Ixxxviii 

IT  Easter  day 

ii 
Ivii 
cxi 

cxiii 
cxiv 
cxviii 

TT  Ascension 
day 

viii 

XV 

xxi 

xxiv 
xlvii 
cviii 

IT  Whitsun 
day 

xlviii 
Ixviii 

civ 
cxlv 

66  TABLE  OF  FEASTS 

SOURCES  1549 


TABLE  OF  FEASTS 


67 


1552 


i66i 

TABLES,  AND  RULES  FOR  THE  MOVE- 
ABLE  AND  IMMOVEABLE  FEASTS  ;  TO 
GETHER  WITH  THE  DAIES  OF  FAST 
ING  AND  ABSTINENCE  THROUGH  THE 
WHOLE  YEAR. 

'•Rules  to  know  when  the  Moveable 
Feasts,  and  Holy-dayes  begin. 

Easter-Day,  (on  which  the  rest  depend, 
is  always  the  first  Sunday  after  the*  first 
*afull  Moon,  which*  happens  next  after 
the  one  and  twentith  day  of  March.  And 
if  the  full  Moon  happens  vpon  a  Sunday, 
Easter  day  is  the  Sunday  after. 

'aAdvent  Sunday  is  alwaies  the  nearest 
Sunday  to  the  Feast  of  Saint  Andrew, 
whether  before  or  after.* 
-Septuagesima 
Sexagesima 
Quinquagesima 
Quadragesima 


Sunday  is 


Easter. 


Rogation  Sunday 
7a  Ascension  day 
^Whitsunday 
Trinitie  Sunday 


Mt 


5.  weeks  ^ 

40.  dales  I  after 

weeks  f  Easter.* 
8.  weeks' 


A  Table  of  all  the  Feasts  that  are  to  be 
observed  in  the  Church  of  England 
through  the  year. 
"All  Sundaies  in  the  year. 

The  Circumcision  of  our  Lord 

lesus  Christ. 
The  Epiphany.* 
The  Conversion  of  S.  Paul 
"The  purification  of  the  blessed 

Virgin. 

Saint  Matthias  the  Apostle. 
The  Anunciation  of  the  blessed 

Virgin. 

S.  Mark  the  Evangelist. 
S.  Philip,  and*  S.  aiacob  the 

Apostles. 
The  Ascension    of  our    Lord 

lesus  Christ.* 
S.  Barnabas. 

2The  Nativity  of  S.  lohn  Baptist. 
The  dales    S.  Peter  the  Apostle, 
of  the         S.  lames  the  Apostle. 
Feast  of     S.  Bartholmew  the  Apostle. 
S.  Matthew  the  Apostle. 
S.  Michael*  and  all  Angels. 
^S.  Luke  the  Evangelist. 
S.   Simon,   and*  S.  siude  the 

Apostles. 
All  Saints. 

S.  Andrew  the  Apostle. 
S.  Thomas  the  Apostle. 
The  Nativity  of  our  Lord 
S.  Stephen  the  Martyr. 
S.  lohn  the  Evangelist 
The  holy  Innocents 


68  TABLE  OF  FASTS 

SOURCES  1549 


Post  cineres,  pneuma,  post  crucem,  postque 

luciam. 
Mercurii,  veneris,  sabbata :  ieiunia  fieht. 


TABLE  OF  FASTS  69 

1552  1661 

A  Table  of  the  Vigils,  Fasts,  and  Dales  of 
Abstinence  to  be  observed  in  the  year 

The  Nativitie  of*  our  Lord. 

7aThe  Purification  of  the  blessed 
virgin*  Mary. 

7aThe    Annunciation    of    the 
blessed  Virgin.* 

Easter  day. 

Ascension  day. 
7aThe          Pentecost. 
Eves         I 7as.  Matthias. 
or  Vigils  \  S.  lohn  Baptist 
before        S.  Peter. 

S.  lames. 

S.  Bartholmew. 

S.  Matthew. 

S.  Simon  and*  S.  ?alude. 

S.  Andrew. 

S.  Thomas 

All  Saints* 

Note,  that  if  any  of  these  Feast-daies  fall 
vpon  a  Monday,  then  the  Vigil,  or  Fast- 
day  shall  be  kept  vpon  the  Saturday,  and 
not  vpon  the  Sunday  next  before  it.— 

Dales  of  Fasting,  or  Abstinence. 

7*1.  The  fortie  dales  of  Lent. 

2.  The  Ember  dales  at  the  foure  seasons 

being  the 

Wednesday   \      /-the  first  Sunday  in  Lent 
Friday,  and    I      I  the  feast  of  Pentecost 
Saturday       f—1     Septemb.  14. 
after  J      I    Decemb.  13. 

3.  The  three  Rogation  dales  being  the 
Monday,  Tuesday,   and    Wednesday 
before  Holy  Thursday,  or  the  Ascen 
sion  of  our  Lord. 

4.  All  the  Friday es  in  the  year;  Except 
Christmas*  day. 

Certain  solemn  dayes,  for  which  particular 
services  are  appointed. — 

1.  The  5.  day  of  November,  being  the 
day  of  the  Papists  Conspiracy. 

2.  The  30.  day  of  January,  being  the  day 
of  the  Martyrdom  of  King  Charles  the 
first. 

3.  The  29.  day  of  May,  being  the  day  of 
the  birth,  and  return  of  King  Charles 
the  second.—. 


70  MOVEABLE  FEASTS 

SOURCES 

C  Tabula  ad  inueniendum  perpetue  omnia  festa  mobilia. 

Aureua   Lra   Septua-  Cinerii    Pascha   Ascesip   Penthe   Corpo.  Resid.     Aduentus 
uuerus.   do.    gesima.  dies         domini  domini    costes.    christi  dnica.      domini. 
lanua.    Februa.  Marcij.    Aprilis     Maij        Maij     Postoc.sa. 


V 

d 

xvij 

iiii 

xxij 

XXX 

X 

xxj 

xxvj 

xxix 

Noueber 

e 

xix 

v 

xxiij 

j.  Maij 

xi 

xxij 

xxvj 

XXX 

xiij 

f 

XX 

vi 

xxiiii 

ii 

xii 

xxiii 

xxvi 

i 

Deceber 

ij 

g 

xxj 

vii 

XV 

iii 

xiii 

xxiiii 

xxvi 

ii 

A 

xxij 

viii 

xxvi 

iiii 

xiiii 

XXV 

xxvi 

iii 

X 

b 

xxiij 

ix 

xxvii 

V 

XV 

xxvi 

XXV 

xxvii 

Noueber 

c 

xxiiij 

X 

xxviii 

vi 

xvi 

xxvii 

XXV 

xxviii 

xviij 

d 

XXV 

xi 

xxix 

vii 

xvii 

xxviii 

XXV 

xxix 

vij 

e 

xxvi 

xii 

XXX 

viii 

xviii 

xxix 

XXV 

XXX 

f 

xxvii 

xiii 

xxxi 

ix 

xix 

XXX 

XXV 

i 

Deceber 

XV 

g 

xxviii 

xiiii 

j.  Aprilis  x 

XX 

xxxi 

XXV 

ii 

iiij 

A 

xxix 

XV 

ii 

XI 

xxi 

j.  lunij 

XXV 

iii 

b 

XXX 

xvi 

iii 

xii 

xxii 

ii 

xxiiii 

xxvii 

Noueber 

xij 

c 

xxxi 

xvii 

iiii 

xiii 

xxiii 

iii 

xxiiii 

xxviii 

j 

d 

j.  Februa.  xviii 

V 

xiiii 

xxiiii 

1111 

XXllll 

xxix 

e 

ii 

XIX 

vi 

XV 

XXV 

v 

xxiiii 

XXX 

ix 

f 

iii 

XX 

vii 

xvi 

xxvi 

vi 

xxiiii 

i 

Deceber 

g 

iiii 

xxi 

viii 

xvii 

xxvii 

vii 

xxiiii 

ii 

xvij 

A 

V 

xxii 

ix 

xviii 

xxviii 

viii 

xxiiii 

iii 

VJ 

b 

vi 

xxiii 

X 

xix 

xxix 

ix 

xxiii 

xxvii 

Noueber 

c 

vii 

xxiiii 

xi 

XX 

XXX 

X 

xxiii 

xxviii 

xiiij 

d 

viii 

XXV 

xii 

xxi 

xxxi 

xi 

xxiii 

xxix 

iij 

e 

ix 

xxvi 

xiii 

xxii 

j.  lunij 

xii 

xxiii 

XXX 

f 

X 

xxvii 

xiiii 

xxiii 

ii 

xiii 

xxiii 

i 

Deceber 

xj 

g 

xi 

xxviii 

XV 

xxiiii 

iii 

xiiii 

xxiii 

ii 

A 

xii 

j.  Martij  xvi 

XXV 

iiii 

XV 

xxiii 

iii 

xix 

b 

xiii 

ii 

xvii 

xxvi 

V 

xvi 

xxii 

xxvii 

Noueber 

viij 

c 

xiiii 

iii 

xviii 

xxvii 

vi 

xvii 

xxii 

xxviii 

d 

XV 

iiii 

xix 

xxviii 

vii 

xviii 

xxii 

xxix 

e 

xvi 

V 

XX 

xxix 

viii 

xix 

xxii 

XXX 

f 

xvii 

vi 

xxi 

XXX 

ix 

XX 

xxii 

i 

Deceber 

g 

xviii 

vii 

xxii 

xxxi 

X 

xxi 

xxii 

ii 

A 

xix 

viii 

xxiii 

j.  lunij 

vi 

xxii 

xxii 

iii 

b 

XX 

ix 

xxiiii 

ii 

xii 

xxiii 

xxi 

xxvi 

Noueber 

xvj 

c 

xxi 

X 

XXV 

iii 

xiii 

xxiiii 

xxi 

xxviii 

(Mlssale  Paris  1513) 


MOVE  ABLE  FEASTS  71 

1549 


72 


MOVEABLE  FEASTS 

1552 

AN  ALMANACK  FOR  .xix.   YE  A  RES. 


ft? 

MI 

c  The  Golden 
Nombre. 

The  epacte. 

8^a 

3  ^^ 

*»   **  rv 

<*  rT^ 

1 

Dominical 
letter. 

&.fej 

1| 

M.D.  Hi. 

xiiii. 

iiii. 

xx  i. 

C.        B. 

xvii.  Aprill. 

M.D.  liii. 

XV. 

XV. 

xxii. 

A. 

ii.  Aprill. 

M.D.  liiii. 

xvi. 

xxvi. 

xxiii. 

G. 

xxv.  Marche. 

M.D.  Iv. 

xvii. 

vii. 

xxiiii. 

F. 

xiiii.  Aprill. 

M.D.  Ivi. 

xviii. 

xvii  i. 

XXV. 

E.       D. 

v.  Aprill. 

M.D.  Ivii. 

xix. 

xxix. 

xxvi. 

C. 

xviii.  April. 

M.D.  Iviii 

i. 

xi. 

xxvii. 

B. 

x.  April. 

M.D.  lix. 

ii. 

xxii. 

xxviii. 

A. 

xxvi.  Marche. 

M.D.  Ix. 

Hi. 

Hi. 

i. 

G.       F. 

xiiii.  Aprill. 

M.D.  Ixi. 

iiii. 

xiiii. 

ii. 

E. 

vi.  Aprill. 

M.D.  Ixii. 

V. 

XXV. 

Hi. 

D. 

M.D.  Ixiii. 

vi. 

xxvi. 

iiii. 

C. 

M.D.  x  liiii. 

vii. 

xvii. 

V. 

B.       A. 

M.D.  Ixv. 

viii. 

xxviii. 

vi. 

G. 

M.D.  Ixvi. 

ix. 

ix. 

vii. 

F. 

M.D.  Ixvii. 

X. 

XX. 

viii. 

E. 

M.D.  Ixv  Hi. 

xi. 

i. 

ix. 

D.        C. 

M.D.  lix. 

xii. 

xii. 

X. 

B. 

M.D.  I  xx. 

.viii. 

xxiii. 

xi. 

A. 

MOVEABLE  FEASTS 
1661 


73 


A  Table  of  the  Moveable  Feasts  calculated  for  forty  years. 

\l 

ii 

1661. 
1662. 

The  golden 
number 

The  Epact 

The  Domicall 
Letter. 

*l 

-g"l 

II 

If 
v» 

f 

1 

I 

x 

-Ascension  ' 
day 

-Whitsunday" 

t! 
?l 

24. 
~2<f 

2  Ad  vent 
Sunday  * 

9 
10 

9 

20 

~r 

12 

F 

4 
~2~ 

Febr.10. 

Febr.  27.  'Apr.     14.May.19. 

May23. 

June   2. 

Dec.  1. 

£ 

Ian.  26. 

12  March  30 

4 

8 

May  18 

Nov.30. 

1663. 

11 
~12~ 

D 

5 

Febr.15. 

March  4 

Apr.      19 

24 

28. 

lune  7. 

23 

29. 

1664. 

CB 

4 

1 

Febr.  24 

10 

15 

19 

May  29 

24 

27. 

1665. 

13 

23. 

4 

A 

2 

Ian.  22 

8. 

March  26 

Apr.  30 

4 

14 

27 

Dec.  3. 

1666. 

14 

6 

5 

Febr.ll. 

28. 

Apr.      15. 

May20 

24 

June  3 

24 

2. 

1667. 
1668. 

15 

15 
"26~ 

F 

3 

3 

20 

7 

12 

16 

May  26 

25 

L 

16 

ED 

1 

Jan.  19 

5 

March  22 

Apr.  26 

Apr.  30 

10 

27 

Nov.29. 

1669. 

17 

7 

C 

4 

Febr.  7 

24 

Apr.      11 

May.16 

May  20 

30 

24 

28 

1670. 

18 

18 

B 

3 

Jan.  30 

16 

3 

8 

12 

22 

25 

27 

1671. 

19 

29 

A 

6 

Febr.  19 

March.  8. 

23 

28 

June  1 

June  11 

23 

Dec.   3 

1672. 

1 

11 

GF 

4 

4 

Febr.  21 

7 

12 

Mayl6 

May  26 
18 

25 

1 

1673. 

2 

22 

£ 

2 

Jan.  16. 

12 

March.  30 

4 

8 

26 

NOV.  30 

1674. 

3 

3 

D 

5 

Febr.15. 

March.  4 

Apr.      19 

24 

28 

June.  7 

23 

29 

1675. 

4 

14 

C 

3 

Jan.  31 

Febr.  17 

4 

9 

13 

May  23 

25 

28 

1676. 
1677. 

5 
6 

25 

BA 
G 

2 

23 

9 

March.  26 

Apr.  30 

4 

14 

27 

Dec.  3 

6 

5 

Febr.ll 

28 

Apr.      15 

May20 

24 

June.  3 

24 

2 

1678. 

7 

17 

F 

2 

Jan.  27 

13 

March.  31, 

5 

9 

May.  19 

26 

1 

1679. 

8 

28 

E 

5 

Febr.16 

March.  5 

Apr.     20 

25 

29 

June.  8. 

23 

NOV.  30 

1680. 

9 

9 

DC 

4 

8. 

Febr.  25 

11 

16 

20 

May.  30 

24 

28 

1681. 

10 

20 

B 
A 

3 
5 

Ian.  30. 

16 

8 

8 

12 

22 

25 

27. 

1682. 

11 

1 

Febr.  12 

March.  1. 

16 

21 

25 

lune    4 

24 

Dec.  3. 

1683. 

12 

12 

G 

4 

4 

Febr.  21 

8. 

13 

17. 

May.  27 

25 

2 

1684. 
1685. 

13 
14 

23 

FE 
D 

2 
5 

Jan.  27 

13 

March.  30 

4 

8 

18 

26 
23 

Nov.30 

4 

Febr.15 

March,  4 

Apr.      19 

24 

28 

lune    7 

29 

1686 
1687. 

15 

15 

C 

3 

Jan.  31* 

Febr.  17. 

4 

9 

13 

May.  23 

25 

28 

16 

26 

B 

2 

23 

9. 

March.  27 

1 

5 

15 

26 

27 

1688. 

17 

7 

AG 

5 
2 

Febr.  12 

March.  1 

Apr.      15 

May20 

24 

June  3 

24 

Dec.  2. 

1689. 

18 

18 

F 

Ian.  27 

Febr.  13 

March.  3i 

5 

9 

May  19 

26 

1 

1690. 

19 

29 

E 

5 

Febr.16 

March.  5. 

Apr.      20 

25 

29 

lune   8 

23 

NOV.30 

1691. 
1692. 

1 

11 

D 
CB 

4 
2 

8 

Febr.  25 

12 

17 

21 

May  31 

24 

29 
27 

2 

22 
3 
14 

Ian.  24 

10 

March.  27 

1 

5 

15 

26 

1693. 

3 

A 

g 

4 

Febr.12 

March.  1 

Apr.      16 

21 

25 

June  4 

24 

Dec.  3 

1694. 

4 

G 

F 

4 

Febr.  21 

8 

13 

17 

May  27 

25 

2 

1695. 

5 

25 

X 

Ian.  20 

6 

March.  24 

Apr.  28 

2 

12 

27 

1 

1696. 

6 

6 

& 
C 
B 

4    Febr.  9 

26 

Apr.      12 

Mayl7 

21 

31 

24 

NOV.29 

1697. 

7 
8 

17 
28 

~6~ 

Ian.  31 

17 

4 

9 

13 

23 

25 

28 

1698. 

Febr.20 

March.  9 

24 

29 

June  2 

June  12 

22 

27 

1699. 

9 

9 

A      4 

5 

Febr.  22 

9 

14 

MaylS 

May  28 

25 

Dec.   3 

1700. 

10 

20 

GF     3    Jan.  28 

14 

March.  31 

5 

9 

19 

26 

1 

2  Note,  that  the  supputation  of  the  year  of  our  Lord  in  the  Church  of  England 
beginneth  the  25.  day  of  March.* 


74 


DATE  OF  EASTER 
SOURCES 


Tabula  ad  iuueniemlum  pascha  in  perpetuum. 


Numerus 
aureus. 

Litere 
A 

B 

C 

Domini 
D 

E 

F 

cales. 
G 

i 

ix 

X 

xi 

xiJ 

vi 

vij 

•viij 

ij 

xxvi 

xxvij 

xx  viij 

xxix 

XXX 

xxxi 

i 

iij 

xvi 

xvij 

xviij 

xix 

XX 

xviiij 

XV 

iiij 

ix 

iij 

iiij 

v 

vi 

vij 

viij 

V 

xxvi 

xxvij 

xxviij 

xxix 

xxiij 

xxiiij 

XXV 

VJ 

xvi 

xvij 

xi 

xij 

xiij 

xiiij 

XV 

vij 

ij 

iij 

iiij 

V 

vi 

xxxi 

i 

viij 

xxiij 

xxiiij 

XXV 

xix 

XX 

xxi 

xxii 

ix 

ix 

X 

xi 

xij 

xiij 

xiiij 

viij 

X 

»j 

iij 

xxviii 

xxix 

XXX 

xxxi 

i 

xi 

xvi 

xvij 

xviii 

xix 

XX 

xxi 

xxij 

xiJ 

ix 

X 

xi 

V 

vi 

vij 

viii 

xiij 

xxvi 

xxvij 

xxviij 

xxix 

XXX 

xxxi 

XXV 

xiiij 

xvi 

xvii 

xviii 

xix 

xiij 

xiiij 

XV 

XV 

ij 

iij 

iiij 

V 

vi 

vii 

viij 

xvi 

xxvi 

xxvij 

xxviij 

xxij 

xxiij 

xxiiij 

XXV 

xvii 

xvi 

X 

xi 

xii 

xiii 

xiiii 

XV 

xviii 

ii 

iii 

iiii 

V 

XXX 

xxxi 

i 

xix 

xxiii 

xxiiij 

XXV 

xix 

XX 

xxi 

xxii 

(Missale  Rouen,  Morin,  1508) 


DATE  OF  EASTER  75 

1549 


;6  DATE  OF  EASTER 

1552 


DATE  OF  EASTER 
1661 


77 


To  FINDE  EASTER  FOR  EVER. 


The 
golden 
Number 

A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

P 

G 

i 

April,  ix 

X 

xi 

xii 

vi 

vii 

viii 

ii 

Mar.  xxvi 

xxvii    xxviii 

xxix 

XXX 

xxxi 

Apr.  i 

iii 

Apr:  xvi 

xvii 

xviii 

xix 

XX 

xiv 

XV 

iv 

Apr.  ix 

iii 

iv 

V 

vi 

vii 

viii 

V 

Mar.  xxvi 

xxvii 

xxviii 

xxix 

xxiii 

xxiv 

XXV 

vi 

Apr.  xvi 

xvii 

xi 

xii 

xiii 

xiv 

XV 

vii 

Apr.  ii 

iii 

iv 

V 

vi 

Mar.  31. 

Apr. 

viii 

Apr.  xxiii 

xxiv 

XXV 

xix 

XX 

xxi 

xxii 

ix 

Apr.  ix 

X 

xi 

xii 

xiii 

xiv 

viii 

X 

Apr.  ii 

iii 

Mar.  28. 

xxix 

XXX 

xxxi 

Apr. 

xi 

Apr.  xvi         xvii 

xviii 

xix 

XX 

xxi 

xxii 

xii 

Apr.  ix          x 

xi 

V 

vi 

vii 

viii 

xiii 

Mar.  xxvi 

xxvii 

xxviii 

xxix 

XXX 

xxxi 

XXV 

xiv 

Apr.  xvi 

xvii 

xviii 

xix 

xiii 

xiv 

XV 

XV 

Apr.  ii 

iii 

iv 

V 

vi 

vii 

viii 

xvi 

Mar.  xxvi 

xxvii 

xxviii 

xxii 

xxiii 

xxiv 

XXV 

xvii 

Apr.  xvi 

X 

xi 

xii 

xiii 

xiv 

XV 

xviii 

Apr.  ii. 

iii 

iv 

V 

Mar.  30 

xxxi 

Apr.  i 

xix 

Apr.  xxiii 

xxiv 

xviii 

xix 

XX 

xxi 

xxii 

IT  When  ye  have  found  the  Sunday  Letter  in  the  vppermost  line,  guide  your 
eye  downwards  from  the  same  till  you  come  right  over  against  the  Prime,  and 
there  is  shewed  both  what  moneth,  and  what  day  of  the  month  Easter  falleth 
that  year.*  But  note  that  the  name  of  the  Moneth  is  set  at  the  left  hand  or  els 
iust  with  the  figure;  and  followeth  not  as  in  other  Tables  by  descent,  but 
collateral!. 


78  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

IANUARIUS, 

d  Annus  habet  duodecim  menses :   hebdomadas  .lij.  et  diem  vnum.    Et  habet  dies 
.ccclxv.  et  boras  sex. 


rr  j       lanuarius  habet  dies  .xxxj.  Luna  .xxx. 

•"-  ^    Nox  habet  horas  .xvj.  Dies  vero  .viij. 

Prirna  dies  mensis :  et  aeptima  truncat  vt  ensis. 

iij        A     lanuarij.  Circumcisio  domini.  minus  duplex  .ix.  lectionu. 

b      iiij     No.  Octa.  sancti  stephani  protomartis.  iij.  lectionu. 
xi         c      iij      No.  Octa.  sctl  iohanis  apli  &  euageliste.  iij.  lectionu. 

d    pridie  No.  Octa.  sanctorum  innocentiu  martyrum.  iij.  lectionu. 
xix       e      None.        Octa.  sctl  thome  marty.  &  edwardi  regis  &  confes. 
viij      f      viii     Id.  Epyphania  dfii.  festu  principale  dup.  ix.  lectionu. 

g      vij      Id.  Claues  septuagesime. 

xvi      A     vi        Id.  Luciani  presbyteri  &  socioru.  memoria  tantum. 
v          b      v         Id. 

c      iiij      Id. 

xiij       d      iij       Id.  Sol  in  aquario. 

ij          e    pridie   Id. 

f      Idus.          Octa.  epypha.  inuita.  tri.  ix.  1.  med.  Ic.  de.  s.  hilario. 
x          g      xix    kal.  Februarij.  Felicis  pbfi  &  mar.  inuita.  simp.  iij.  Ic. 

A     xviij  kal.  Mauri  abbatis.  inuita.  simplex,  iij.  lectionu. 
xviij     b      xvij   kal.  Marcelli  pape  &  mar.  luita.  simplex,  iij.  lectionu. 
vii        c      xvi     kal.  Sulpitij  epi  &  cofessoris.  Antonij  confessoris. 

d      xv     kal.  Prisce  virgis  &  mar.  inui.  simp.  iij.  lc.Prima.lxx. 
xv        e      xiiij  kal.  Vulfrani  episcopi  &  confesso.  ix.  lectionu  de  comuni. 
iiij       f      xiij    kal.  Fabiani  &  sebastiani  marty.  ix.  lectionum. 

g      xy     kal.  Agnetis  Virginia  &  martyris.  ix.  lectionum. 
xii       A     xi      kal.  Vincentij  martyris.  nouem  lectionum. 
j  b     x       kal. 

c      ix      kal. 
ix         d     viii    kal.  Couersio.  s.  pauli.  du.  lui.  tri.  ix.  1.  meo.  de.  s.  piecto. 

e      vii     kal. 

xvij      f      vi      kal.  luliani  epi  &  confessoris.  inui.  dup.  iij.  lectionum. 
vi         g      v       kal.  Agnetis  secudo.  inui.  dupl.  iij.  lee.  Claues.  xl. 

A     iiij    kal. 

xiiij      b      iij      kal.  Baltildis  regie  virgls  no  marty.  inui.  simple,  iii.  Ic. 
iij         c  pridie  kal. 

In  iano  Claris  calidisque  cibis  potiaris. 

Atque  decens  potus  post  f  ercula  sit  tibi  notus. 

Ledit  enim  medo  potus  tune,  vt  bene  credo. 

Balnea  tune  intres,  et  venam  findere  cures. 


KALENDAR 

1549 


79 


IANUARY. 

C   January. 

Matins. 

Euensong. 

C  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

A 

Kalend. 

i 

Circumci. 

i 

Gen.  xvii 

Roma,    ii 

Deut.      x 

Collos.  ii. 

b 

iiii.  No. 

ii 

ii 

Gene,      i 

Math,      i 

Gene,     ii 

Roma,    i 

c 

iii.  No. 

iii 

iii 

iii 

ii 

iiii 

ii 

d 

Prid.  No. 

iiii 

iiii 

v 

iii 

vi 

iii 

e 

Nonas. 

v 

v 

vii 

iiii 

viii 

iiii 

f 

viii.  Id. 

vi 

Epiphani. 

vi 

Esai.     Ix. 

Luke,    iii 

Esai.  xlix 

John.     ii. 

g 

vii.  Id. 

vii 

vii 

Gen.      ix. 

Math,     v 

Gen.      xi. 

Roma    v 

A 

vi.  Id. 

viii 

viii 

xii 

vi 

xiii 

vi 

b 

v.  Id. 

ix 

ix 

xiiii 

vii 

XV 

vii 

c 

iiii.  Id. 

X 

X 

xvi 

viii 

xvii 

viii 

d 

iii.  Id. 

xi 

xi 

xviii 

ix 

xix 

ix 

e 

Prid.  Id. 

xii 

xii 

XX 

X 

xxi 

x 

f 

Idus. 

xiii 

xiii 

xxii 

xi 

xxiii 

xi 

g 

xix.  kl. 

xiiii 

xiiii 

xxiiii 

xii 

XXV 

xii 

A 

xviii.  kl. 

XV 

XV 

xxvi 

xiii 

xxvii 

xiii 

b 

xvii.  kl. 

xvi 

xvi 

xxviii 

xiiii 

xxix 

xiiii 

c 

xvi.  kl. 

xvii 

xvii 

XXX 

XV 

xxxi 

XV 

d 

XV.   kl. 

xviii 

xviii 

xxxii 

xvi 

xxxiii 

xvi 

e 

xiiii.  kl. 

xix 

xix 

xxxiiii 

xvii 

XXXV 

i.    Cor.   i 

f 

xiii.  kl. 

XX 

XX 

xxxvi 

xviii 

xxxvii 

ii 

g 

xii.  kl. 

xxi 

xxi 

xxxviii 

xix 

xxxix 

iii 

A 

xi.  kl. 

xxii 

xxii 

xl 

XX 

xii 

iiii 

b 

x.  kl. 

xxiii 

xxiii 

xiii 

xxi 

xiiii 

v 

c 

ix.  kl. 

xxiiii 

xxiiii 

xliiii 

xxii 

xlv 

vi 

d 

viii  kl. 

XXV 

Con.  Pauli 

XXV 

xlvi 

Act.    xxii. 

xlvii 

Act.  xxvi 

e 

vii  kl. 

xxvi 

xxvi 

xlviii 

mat   xxiii 

xlix 

i.  Cor.  vii 

f 

vi.  kl. 

xxvii 

xxvii 

1 

xxiiii 

Exod.      i 

viii 

g 

v.  kl. 

xxviii 

xxviii 

Exod.    ii 

XXV 

iii 

ix 

A 

iiii.  kl. 

xxix 

xxix 

iiii 

xxvi 

v 

x 

b 

iii  kl. 

XXX 

XXX 

vi 

xxvii 

vii 

xi 

c 

Prid.  kl. 

xxxi 

1 

viii 

xxviii 

ix 

xii 

8o 


KALENDAR 

1552 


C  IANUARY  HATH  .XXXI,  DA  YES. 

Aforn  ing  prayer 

Euenz'n^  prayer 

C  Psalmes. 

5.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

Hi         A      Kalencl.       Circucision 

i 

Gen.  xvii 

Roma,    ii 

Deut.      x 

Collos.     ii. 

b      iiii.  No. 

ii 

Gene,      i 

Math,      i 

Gene,     ii 

Roma.       i 

xi         c      iii.   No. 

iii 

iii 

ii 

iiii 

ii 

d      Prid.  No. 

iiii 

v 

iii 

vi 

iii 

xix       e       Nonas. 

v 

vii 

iiii 

viii 

iiii 

viii      f      viii.  Id.         Epiphanie 

vi 

Esai.     Ix. 

Luke,    iii 

Esai.  xlix 

John.        ii. 

g      vii.  Id. 

vii 

Gen.      ix. 

Math,     v 

Gene.    xi. 

Roma      v 

xvi       A     vi.    Id. 

viii 

xii 

vi 

xiii 

vi 

v          b      v.     Id. 

ix 

xiiii 

vii 

XV 

vii 

c      iiii.  Id. 

X 

xvi 

viii 

xvii 

viii 

xiii      d      iii.    Id.         Sol  in  aqua. 

xi 

xviii 

ix 

xix 

ix 

n          e      Prid.  Id. 

xii 

XX 

X 

xxi 

x 

f       Idus. 

xiii 

xxii 

xi 

xxiii 

xi 

g      xix.    kl.       Februarii. 

xiiii 

xxiiii 

xii 

XXV 

xii 

A     xviii.  kl. 

XV 

xxvi 

xiii 

xxvii 

xiii 

xviii    b      xvii.   kl.       Terme  begi 

xvi 

xxviii 

xiiii 

xxix 

xiiii 

vii        c       xvi     kl. 

xvii 

XXX 

XV 

xxxi 

XV 

d      xv      kl. 

xviii 

xxxii 

xvi 

xxxiii 

xvi 

xv        e      xiiii    kl. 

xix 

xxxiiii 

xvii 

XXXV 

i.  Corin.  i 

iiii       f      xiii     kl. 

XX 

xxxvi 

xviii 

xxxvii 

ii 

g      xii      kl. 

xxi 

xxxix 

xix 

xxxix 

iii 

xii        A     xi       kl. 

xxii 

xl 

XX 

xii 

iiii 

i           b      x        kl. 

xxiii 

xiii 

xxi 

xiiii 

v 

c      ix       kl. 

xxiiii 

xliiii 

xxii 

xlv 

vi 

ix         d      viii     kl.      Con.  Paul 

XXV 

xlvi 

Act.    xxii 

xlvii 

Actes.  xxvi 

e      vii      kl. 

xxvi 

xlviii 

mat   xxiii 

xlix 

i.  Corin.  vii 

xvii      f       vi       kl. 

xxvii 

1 

xxiiii 

Exod.      i 

viii 

vi         g       v        kl. 

xxviii 

Exod.     ii 

XXV 

iii 

ix 

A     iiii      kl. 

xxix 

iiii 

xxvi 

v 

x 

xiiii     b      iii       kl. 

XXX 

vi 

xxvii 

vii 

xi 

iii        c      Prid.  kl. 

i 

viii 

xxviii 

ix 

xii 

KALENDAR 
1661 

THE  KALENDER,  WITH  THE  TABLE  OF  LESSONS 


81 


I  ANUARY  HA  TH  XXXJ.  DA  YES 

s  The  Moon  hath  xzx 

}       }         } 

Morning 
grayer 

Evening 
prayer 

i.  LessonJ2.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

ii 

i. 

A. 

Kalend. 

Circumc.7a  of  our  L* 

2. 

B. 

4.  No. 

Gen.     i 

Matth.  i. 

Gen.    2. 

Rom.    i. 

X 

3- 

C. 

3-  No. 

iii 

ii 

iv 

ii 

4- 

D. 

pr.  No. 

V 

iii 

vi 

iii 

xix 

5- 

E. 

Nonas 

vii 

iv 

viii 

iv 

viii 

6. 

F. 

8.  Id. 

Epiphanie78  of  OUT  L* 

7- 

G. 

7.  Id. 

ix 

V 

xii 

V 

xvi 

8. 

A. 

6.  Id 

-Lucian  •  "Pr.  &  Mart. 

xiii 

vi 

xiv 

vi 

V 

9- 

B. 

5-  Id 

XV 

•  vii 

xvi 

vii 

10 

C. 

4.  Id. 

xvii 

viii 

xviii 

viii 

xiii 

ii. 

D. 

3-  Id. 

xix 

ix 

XX 

ix 

ii 

12. 

E. 

pr.  Id. 

xxi 

X 

xxii 

X 

*3- 

F. 

Idus 

»Hilarie7aB.*&Conf. 

xxiii 

xi 

xxiv 

xi 

X 

14. 

G. 

19.  Kl.  Febr. 

XXV 

xii 

xxvi 

xii 

15- 

A. 

18.  Kl. 

xxvii 

xiii 

xxviii 

xiii 

xviii 

16. 

B. 

17.  Kl. 

xxix 

xiv 

XXX 

xiv 

vii 

17- 

C. 

16.  Kl. 

xxxi 

XV 

xxxii 

XV 

i8. 

D. 

15.  Kl. 

Trisca  7*Rom.  Virg.  &  Mart. 

xxxiii 

xvi 

xxxiv 

xvi 

XV 

19. 

E. 

14.  Kl. 

XXXV 

xvii 

xxxvii 

i.  Cor.  i 

iv 

20. 

F. 

13-  Kl. 

2Fabian  r*B.  of  Rome  &  Mart. 

xxxviii 

xviii 

xxxix 

ii 

21. 

G. 

12.  Kl. 

«Agnes  '"Rom.  Virg.  &  Mart. 

xl. 

xix 

xii 

iii 

xii 

22. 

A. 

ii.  Kl. 

-Vincent  ""Span.  Deac.  &  M. 

xiii 

XX 

xliii 

iiii 

i 

23. 

B. 

10.  Kl 

xliv 

xxi 

xiv 

V 

24 

C. 

9.    Kl 

xlvi 

xxii 

xlvii 

vi 

ix 

25- 

D. 

8.    Kl. 

Convers:78ofS.  Paul. 

26. 

E. 

7.    Kl 

xlviii 

xxiii 

xlix 

vii 

xvii 

27. 

F. 

6.    Kl. 

1. 

xxiv 

Exod.    i 

viii 

vi 

28. 

G. 

5-    Kl. 

Exod.  2. 

XXV 

iii 

ix 

29- 

A. 

4.    Kl. 

iiii 

xxvi 

V 

X 

xiii 

30. 

B. 

3-    Kl. 

E.  Charles  Mart 

vi* 

xxvii 

vii 

xi 

3i. 

C. 

prid.  Kl. 

viii 

xxviii 

ix 

xii 

Note,  that  *  Exodus  6.  is  to  be  read  only  to  vr.  14. 


82  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

FEBRUARIUS, 


KL 


Februarius  habct  dies  .xxviii.  Luna  .xxix. 
Nox  habet  boras  .xiiii.  Dies  vero  .x. 


Quarta  subit  mortem :  prosternit  tertia  fortem. 

d     Februarij.  Brigide  virgis  &  marty.  inuita.  simpl.  iii.  lect. 
xj         e      iiii     No.  Purificatio  bte  marie,  maius  duplex,  none  lect. 
xix       f      iii      No.    Blasii  epi  &  marty.  inuita.  duplex,  iii.  lectionum. 
vi:j       g    pridie  No. 

A        None       Agathe  virginis  &  martyris.  luita.  dup.  ix.  lectio, 
xvi       b      viii    Id.      Vedasti  &  amadi  eporum.  inuita.  simp.  iii.  lectionu. 
v          c      vii     Id.        Ubicuque  prima  luna  f uerit  post  festu  agatbe 

d      vi      Id.         proxima  dominica  sequent!  exit  dnica  .xl. 
xiij       e      v       Id.  Sol  in  piscibus. 

ij          f       iiij     Id.      Scholastice  virginis.  inuit.  simplex,  triu  Ictonu. 

g      iii      Id.      Translatio  sancte  f  redeswide  virginis. 
x          A  pridie  Id. 

b        Idus. 

xviij     c      xvi     kal.  Marti j.  Valetini  epi  &  marty.  inuit.  simp.  iii.  Ic. 
vii        d      xv     kal. 

e      xiiii  kal.    luliane  virginis  &  marty.  inuit.  simpl.  iii.  Ictonu. 
xv         f      xiii    kal. 
iiii        g      xii     kal. 

A  xi  kal. 
xii  b  x  kal. 
i  c  ix  kal.  Vltima  septuagesima. 

d     viii    kal.  Cathedra  sancti  petri.  Inuita.  triplex,  none.  lee. 
ix        e      vii     kal. 

f      vi      kal.   Mathie  apli.   Inui.    du  .ix.  Ic.      CSi  bissextus  fuerit 
xvii      g      v       kal.  quarta    die    a    cathedra    sancti    petri    fiat    festu 

vi        A     iiii     kal.          sancti  mathie.  et.  f  litera  his  numeretur. 

b  iii  kal. 
xiii  c  pridie  kal. 

Post  cineres,  pneuma,  post  crucem,  postque  luciam. 
Mercurii,  veneris,  sabbati :  ieiunia  fient. 

Nascitur  occulta  febris  februario  multa. 

Potibus  ac  escis  vti  si  tune  bene  nescis. 

Frigus  et  horrorem  fuge,  pollice  funde  cruorem. 

Suge  fauum  mellis,  quo  morbos  pectore  pellis. 


KALENDAR 

1549 


FEBRUARY. 

<r 

February. 

Matins. 

Euensong. 

C  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

d 

Kalend. 

i 

ii 

Exod.     x. 

Mark.     i. 

Exod.    xi. 

i.  Cor.  xiii 

e 

iiii  No. 

ii 

Puri.  Ma. 

iii 

xii 

ii 

xiii 

xiiii 

f 

iii  No. 

iii 

iiii 

xiiii 

iii 

XV 

XV 

g 

Prid.  No 

iiii 

v 

xvi 

iiii 

xvii 

xvi 

A 

Nonas. 

v 

vi 

xviii 

v 

xix 

ii.  Cor.  i 

b 

viii  Id. 

vi 

vii 

XX 

vi 

xxi 

ii 

c 

vii  Id. 

vii 

viii 

xxii 

vii 

xxiii 

iii 

d 

vild. 

viii 

ix 

xxiiii 

viii 

xxxii 

iiii 

e 

vld. 

ix 

X 

xxxiii 

ix 

xxxiiii 

v 

f 

iiii  Id. 

X 

xi 

XXXV 

x 

xl 

vi 

g 

iii  Id. 

xi 

xii 

leui.  xviii 

xi 

leui.     xix 

vii 

A 

Prid  Id. 

xii 

xiii 

XX 

xii 

Nume.   x 

viii 

b 

Idus. 

xiii 

xiiii 

Num.    xi 

xiii 

xii 

ix 

c 

xvi  kl. 

xiiii 

XV 

xiii 

xiiii 

xiiii 

x 

d 

xv  kl. 

XV 

xvi 

XV 

XV 

xvi 

xi 

e 

xiiii  kl. 

xvi 

xvii 

xvii 

xvi 

xviii 

xii 

f 

xiii  kl. 

xvii 

xviii 

xix 

Luk.  di.  i 

XX 

xiii 

g 

xii  kl. 

xviii 

xix 

xxi 

di.  i 

xxii 

Galath.   i 

A 

xikl. 

xix 

XX 

xxiii 

ii 

xxiiii 

ii 

b 

x.  kl. 

XX 

xxi 

XXV 

iii 

xxvi 

iii 

c 

ix.  kl. 

xxi 

xxii 

xxvii 

iiii 

xxviii 

iiii 

d 

viii  kl. 

xxii 

xxiii 

xxix 

v 

XXX 

v 

e 

vii  kl. 

xxiii 

xxiiii 

xxxi 

vi 

xxxii 

vi 

f 

vi.  kl. 

xxiiii 

Mathias. 

XXV 

xxxiii 

vii 

xxxiiii 

Ephes.    i 

g 

v.  kl. 

XXV 

xxvi 

XXXV 

viii 

xxxvi 

ii 

A 

iiii.  kl. 

xxvi 

xxvii 

Deut.       i 

ix 

Deut.     ii. 

iii 

b 

iii.  kl. 

xxvii 

xxviii 

iii 

x 

iiii 

iiii 

c 

Prid.  kl. 

xxviii 

xxix 

v 

xi 

vi 

v 

84 


KALENDAR 
1552 


C  FEBRUARY  HA  TH  .XXVIIJ,  DA  YES. 

Morn  ing  prayer 

Euenz'  ng  prayer 

<I  Psalmes 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

i  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

d      Kalend. 

ii 

Exodi.    x 

Marke.    i 

Exodi.  xi 

i.  Cor.  xiii 

xi          e      iiii.  No.         Puri.  Mary. 

iii 

xii 

ii 

xiii 

xiiii 

xix        f       iii.    No. 

iiii 

xiiii 

iii 

XV 

XV 

viii       g      Prid.  No. 

v 

xvi 

iiii 

xvii 

xvi 

A     Nonas 

vi 

xviii 

v 

xix 

ii.  Corin.  i. 

xvi        b      viii.  Id. 

vii 

XX 

vi 

xxi 

ii 

v           c       vii.    Id. 

viii 

xxii 

vii 

xxiii 

iii 

d      vi.    Id. 

ix 

xxiiii 

viii 

xxxii 

iiii 

xiii       e      v.     Id. 

x 

xxxiii 

ix 

xxxiiii 

v 

ii           f       iiii.   Id.          Sol  in  Pis. 

xi 

XXXV 

x 

xl 

vi 

g      iii.    Id. 

xii 

Le.    xviii. 

xi 

Leu.    xix 

vii 

x           A      Prid.  Id. 

xiii 

XX 

xii 

Num.      x 

viii 

b     Idus. 

xiiii 

Nume.  xi 

xiii 

xii 

ix 

xviii     C       xvi.    kl.          Marche. 

XV 

xiii 

xiiii 

xiiii 

x 

vii        d      xv.     kl. 

xvi 

XV 

XV 

xvi 

xi 

e      xiiii.  kl. 

xvii 

xvii 

xvi 

xviii 

xii 

xv         f       xiii.    kl. 

xviii 

xix 

Luk.  di.  i. 

XX 

xiii 

iiii        g      xii.     kl. 

xix 

xxi 

di.  i. 

xxii 

Galath.     i. 

A      xi.      kl. 

XX 

xxiii 

ii 

xxiiii 

ii 

xii        b      x.       kl. 

xxi 

XXV 

iii 

xxvi 

iii 

/             c       ix.      kl. 

xxii 

xxvii 

iiii 

xxviii 

iiii 

d      viii.   kl. 

xxiii 

xxix 

v 

XXX 

v 

ix          e      vii.     kl. 

xxiiii 

xxxi 

vi 

xxxii 

vi 

f      vi.      kl.         S.  Mathias 

XXV 

xxxiii 

vii 

xxxiiii 

Ephesi.     i. 

xv  ii       g      v.       kl. 

xxvi 

XXXV 

viii 

xxxvi 

ii 

vi         A      iiii.    kl. 

xxvii 

Deut.       i. 

ix 

Deut.      ii 

iii 

b      iii.      kl. 

xxviii 

iii 

x. 

iiii 

iiii 

xiiii      c      Prid.  kl 

xxix 

v 

xi 

vi. 

v 

KALENDAR 
1661 


FEBRUARY  HATH.  XXVIIJ  DA  YES 

3  The  Moon  bath  xxx. 

I   \      ' 

- 

Morning 
prayer 

Evem7z,f 
prayer 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson. 

i 

D 

Kalend. 

'•Fast 

Exod.io. 

Mark.  i. 

Exod.n. 

i.  Cor.  13. 

xi 

2 

E 

4.  No. 

Purif.  of  Marie  7ay  *  B  '»Virg. 

ii 

xiv 

xix 

3 

F 

3.  No. 

-Blasius  7»an  Armen.  B.  &  M. 

xii 

iii 

xiii 

XV 

viii 

4 

G 

pr.  No. 

xiv 

iv 

XV 

xvi 

5 

A 

Nonas. 

aAgatha.  ?aa  Sicilian  V.  &  M. 

xvi 

V 

xvii 

2.  Cor.  i. 

xvi 

6 

B 

8.  Id. 

xviii 

vi 

xix 

ii 

V 

7 

C 

7.  Id. 

XX 

vii 

xxi 

iii 

8 

D 

6.  Id. 

xxii 

viii 

xxiii 

iv 

xiii 

9 

E 

5.  W. 

xxiv 

ix 

xxxii 

V 

ii. 

10 

F 

4.  Id. 

xxxiii 

X 

xxxiv 

vi 

XI 

G 

3-  Id. 

Levit.i8. 

xi 

Levit  19. 

vii 

X 

12 

A 

pr.  Id. 

XX 

xii 

xxvi 

viii 

13 

B 

Idus 

Num.  ii. 

xiii 

Num.  12. 

ix 

xviii 

14 

C 

16.  K\Mart. 

^Valentine*  Bish.  ?a&  M. 

xiii 

xiv 

xiv 

X 

mi 

IS 

D 

15.  Kl. 

xvi 

XV 

xvii 

xi 

16 

E 

14.  Kl. 

XX 

xvi 

xxi 

xii 

XV 

17 

F 

13-  Kl. 

xxii 

Luke.     i. 

to  39. 

xxiii 

xiii 

iv 

18 

G 

12.  Kl. 

xxiv 

1-39 

XXV 

Gal.      i. 

19 

A 

ii.  Kl. 

xxvii 

ii 

XXX 

ii 

xii 

20 

B 

10.  Kl. 

xxxi 

iii 

xxxii 

iii 

i 

21 

C 

9.    Kl. 

XXXV 

iv 

xxxvi 

iv 

22 

D 

8.    Kl. 

Deut.   1 

V 

Dent.  2. 

V 

ix 

23 

E 

7.    Kl. 

7»Fast 

iii 

vi 

iv 

vi 

24 

F 

6.    Kl. 

Matthias  ?»Ap08k  &  M. 

vii 

Eph.     i. 

xvii 

25 

G 

5-    Kl. 

V 

viii 

vi 

ii 

vi 

26 

A 

4.    Kl. 

vii 

ix 

viii 

iii 

27 

B 

3-    Kl. 

ix 

X 

X 

iv 

xiv 

28 

C 

pr.  KL 

xi 

xi 

xii 

V 

29 

xii 

Matt  7. 

xiiii 

Rom.  12. 

86  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

MARTIUS, 


TT-  T      Martins  habet  dies  .xxxj.  Luna  .xxx. 

A»--L *    Nox  habet  horas  .xij.  Dies  etia  .xij. 

Primus  mandentem  disrumpit :  quarta  bibentem. 

iij        d        Martij     Dauidis  episcopi  &  cofessoris.  nouem  lectionum. 

e      vi       No.  Cedde  episcopi  &  cofessoris.  nouem  lectionum. 
xi        f      v        No. 

g  iiij  No. 
xix  A  iij  No. 
viij  b  pridie  No. 

c      None         Perpetue  &  felicitatis  virginu  &  mar.  iij.  lectio, 
xvi       d      viii      Id. 
v          e      vii       Id. 

f      vi        Id. 

xiij      g      v         Id.  Claues  pasche.     Sol  I  ariete.     Equinoctiu  vernale. 
ij         A     iiii      Id.  Gregorij  pape  &  confessoris.  inferius  duplex,  ix.  lee. 

b  iii  Id. 
x  c  pridie  Id.  Vltima  quadragesima.  Post 

d     Idus  istum  locum  no  potest  esse  initiu  .xl. 

xviij    e      xvij   kal.  Aprilis.  Introitus  noe  in  arcam. 

vij       f      xvi    kal.  Patricij  episcopi  &  cofessoris.  noue  lectionu. 

g      xv     kal.  Edwardi  regis  &  martyris.  nouem  lectionum. 
xv        A     xiiij  kal. 
iiij       b      xiij    kal.  Cutheberti  epi  &  confessoris.  noue  lectionum. 

c      xij     kal.  Benedicti  abbatis.  nouem  lectionum. 
xij       d      xi      kal.  Hie  adam  creatur. 

j          e      x       kal.  Primum  pascha. 

f  ix  kal. 
ix  g  viii  kal.  Annunciatio  duica.  minus  duplex,  noue  lectionu. 

A     vii     kal. 

xvij     b      vi      kal.  Resurrectio  domini  principale  duplex  f  estum. 
vi        c      v       kal. 

d  iiij  kal. 
xiiij  e  iij  kal. 
iij  f  pridie  kal. 

Martius  humores  gignit :  variosque  dolores. 

Sume  cibum  pure :  cocturas  si  placet  vre. 

Balnea  sunt  sana,  sed  queque  superflua  vana. 

Vena  nee  abdenda,  nee  potio  sit  tribuenda. 


KALENDAR 


MARCHE. 

C  Marche. 

Matins. 

Euensong. 

€  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

d 

Kalend. 

i 

xxx 

Deu.    vii. 

Luk.    xii 

Deu.   viii 

Ephe.   vi 

e 

vi.  No. 

ii 

i 

ix 

xiii 

X 

Philip,    i 

f 

v.  No. 

iii 

ii 

xi 

xiiii 

xii 

ii 

g 

iiii.  No. 

iiii 

iii 

xiii 

XV 

xiiii 

iii 

A 

iii.  No. 

v 

iiii 

XV 

xvi 

xvi 

iiii 

b 

Prid.  No 

vi 

v 

xvii 

xvii 

xviii 

Colos.     i 

c 

Nonas. 

vii 

vi 

xix 

xviii 

XX 

ii 

d 

viii.  Id. 

viii 

vii 

xxi 

xix 

xxii 

iii 

e 

vii.  Id. 

ix 

viii 

xxiii 

XX 

xxiiii 

iiii 

f 

vi.  Id. 

X 

ix 

XXV 

xxi 

xxvi 

i.  Thes.  i 

g 

v.  Id. 

xi 

X 

xxvii 

xxii 

xxviii 

ii 

A 

iiii.  Id. 

xii 

xi 

xxix 

xxiii 

xxx 

iii 

b 

iii.  Id. 

xiii 

xii 

xxxi 

xxiiii 

xxxii 

iiii 

c 

Prid.  Id 

xiiii 

xiii 

xxxiii 

lohn       i 

xxxiiii 

v 

d 

Idus. 

XV 

xiiii 

losue.     i 

ii 

losue.    ii 

ii  Thes.  i 

e 

xvii.  kl. 

xvi 

XV 

iii 

iii 

iiii 

ii 

f 

xvi.  kl. 

xvii 

xvi 

v 

iiii 

vi 

iii 

g 

xv.  kl. 

xviii 

xvii 

vii 

v 

viii 

i  Timo  i 

A 

xiiii.  kl. 

xix 

xviii 

ix 

vi 

X 

ii.  iii 

b 

xiii.  kl. 

XX 

xix 

xi 

vii 

xii 

iiii 

c 

xii.  kl. 

xxi 

XX 

xiii 

viii 

xiiii 

v 

d 

xi.  kl. 

xxii 

xxi 

XV 

ix 

xvi 

vi 

e 

x.  kl. 

xxiii 

xxii 

xvii 

X 

xviii 

ii.  Tim.  i 

f 

ix.  kl. 

xxiiii 

xxiii 

xix 

xi 

XX 

ii 

g 

viii.  kl. 

XXV 

Annuncia. 

xxiiii 

xxi 

xii 

xxii 

iii 

A 

vii.  kl. 

xxvi 

XXV 

xxiii 

xiii 

xxiiii 

iiii 

b 

vi.  kl. 

xxvii 

xxvi 

ludic.     i 

xiiii 

ludic.    ii 

Titus,      i 

c 

v.  kl. 

xx  viii 

xxvii 

iii 

XV 

iiii 

ii.  iii 

d 

iiii.  kl. 

xxix 

xxviii 

v 

xvi 

vi 

Phile.     i 

e 

iii.  kl. 

XXX 

xxix 

vii 

xvii 

viii 

Hebre.    i 

f 

Prid.  kl. 

xxx  i 

xxx 

ix 

xviii 

X 

ii 

KALENDAR 
1552 


H  MARC  HE  HATH  .XXX  I  t  DAVES, 

yearning  prayer. 

T&Mexdng  fraier. 

Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson,  ii.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

Hi        d      Kalend. 

XXX 

Deut.   vii.   Luk.     xii. 

Deu.   viii 

Ephe.      vi. 

e       vi.    No. 

i 

ix 

xiii 

X 

Philip.       i. 

xi         f       v.     No. 

ii 

xi 

xiiii 

xii 

ii 

g      iiii.  No. 

iii 

xiii 

XV 

xiiii 

iii 

xix       A     iii.  No. 

iiii 

XV 

xvi 

xvi 

iiii 

viii       b      Prid.  No 

v 

xvii 

xvii 

xviii 

Collos.      i. 

c      Nonas. 

vi 

xix 

xviii 

XX 

ii 

xvi       d      viii.  Id. 

vii 

xxi 

xix 

xxii 

iii 

e      vii.  Id. 

viii 

xxiii 

XX 

xxiiii 

iiii 

f      vi.    Id. 

ix 

XXV 

xxi 

xxvi 

i.  thessa.  i. 

xiii      g      v.     Id.       Equinoctium 

X 

xxvii 

xxii 

xxviii 

ii 

ii          A     iiii.  Id.      Solin  arietc 

xi 

xxix 

xxiii 

XXX 

iii 

b      iii.    Id. 

xii 

xxxi 

xxiiii 

xxxii 

iiii 

*           c       Prid.  Id. 

xiii 

xxxiii 

John.      i. 

xxxiiii 

v 

d      Idus. 

xiiii 

losue.     i. 

ii 

losue.    ii. 

ii.  thessa.  i. 

xviii     e      xvii.   kl.    Aprilis. 

XV 

iii 

iii 

iii 

ii 

vii        f       xvi.    kl. 

xvi 

iiii 

iiii 

iiii 

iii 

g      xv.     kl. 

xrii 

v 

v 

v 

i.  Timo.  i 

xv         A      xiiii.  kl. 

xviii 

vi 

vi 

vi 

ii.  iii 

iiii        b      xiii.    kl. 

xix 

vii 

vii 

vii 

iiii 

c      xii.     kl. 

XX 

viii 

viii 

viii 

v 

xii        d      xi.      kl. 

xxi 

ix 

ix 

ix 

vi 

e      x.       kl. 

xxii 

X 

X 

xi 

ii.  Timo.  i. 

f       ix.      kl. 

xxiii 

xii 

xi 

XX 

ii 

ix         g      viii.     kl.    Annunciacion 

xxiiii 

xxi 

xii 

xxii 

iii 

A     vii.     kl. 

XXV 

xxiii 

xiii 

xxiiii 

iiii 

xvii      b      vi.      kl. 

xxvi 

ludic.      i. 

xiiii 

ludic.     ii. 

Titus.        i. 

•vi          c       v.       kl. 

xxvii 

iii 

XV 

iiii 

ii.  iii 

d      iiii.     kl. 

xxviii 

v 

xvi 

vi 

Philem.     i. 

xiiii     e      iii.      kl. 

xxix 

vii 

xvii 

viii 

Hebre.      i. 

Hi         f       Prid.  kl. 

XXX 

ix 

xviii 

X 

ii. 

KALENDAR 
1661 


89 


MARCH  HATH  XXXJ.  DA  YES 

3  The  Moon  hath  xxx. 

J 

Morning 

Evem'w^ 

1      J 

prayer 

prayer 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

\.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

iii 

j 

D 

Kalend. 

2David*  Arch-^B.  of*  Menevia 

Deut.  15. 

Luke.  12. 

Deut.  16. 

Eph.    6. 

2 

E 

6. 

No. 

2Cedde,  7»or  Chad  B.  of  Litcht 

xvii 

xiii 

xviii 

Phil.     i. 

xi 

3 

F 

5- 

No. 

xix 

xiv 

XX 

ii 

4 

G 

4- 

No. 

xxi 

XV 

xxii 

iii 

xix 

S 

A 

3- 

No. 

xxiv 

xvi 

XXV 

iv 

viii 

6 

B 

pr 

No. 

xxvi 

xvii 

xxvii 

Col.      i. 

7 

C 

Nonas 

aperpetua*  Mauritan.  ?aM. 

xxviii 

xviii 

xxix 

ii 

xvi 

8 

D 

8. 

Id. 

xxx 

xix 

xxxL 

iii 

V 

9 

E 

7- 

Id. 

TTX11 

XX 

xxxiii 

iv 

IO 

F 

6. 

Id. 

xxxiv 

xxi 

Josh.  1. 

i.Thes.i. 

xiii 

II 

G 

5- 

Id. 

Josh.  2. 

xxii 

iii 

ii 

ii 

12 

A 

4- 

Id. 

2Qregori9  7  'M.B.  of  Rome*,  &  C 

iv 

xxiii 

V 

iii 

13 

B 

3- 

Id. 

vi 

xxiv 

vii 

iv 

X 

14 

C 

pr. 

Id. 

viii 

John.  i. 

ix 

V 

IS 

D 

Jdus 

X 

ii 

xxiii 

a.Thes.i. 

xviii 

16 

E 

17- 

Kal.^/r. 

xxiv 

iii 

Judg.  1. 

ii 

vii 

17    F 

16 

Kl. 

e 

ludg.  2. 

iv 

iii 

iii 

18 

G 

15 

Kl. 

-Edward  ?»K.  of  7.  West  Saxons 

iv 

V 

V 

i.  Tim.  i. 

XV 

^9 

A 

14 

Kl. 

vi 

vi 

vii 

ii,  iii. 

iv 

20 

B 

13 

Kl. 

viii 

vii 

ix 

iv 

21 

C 

12 

Kl. 

^Benedict  "-Abbot 

X 

viii 

xi 

V 

xii 

22 

D 

II 

Kl. 

xii 

ix 

xiii 

vi 

i 

23 

E 

10.  Kl. 

xiv 

X 

XV 

2.  Tim.  i. 

24 

F 

9- 

Kl. 

apast 

xvi 

xi 

xvii 

ii 

ix 

25 

G 

8. 

Kl. 

Annunc.  *of  Mary. 

xii 

iii 

26 

A 

7- 

Kl. 

xviii 

xiii 

xix 

iv 

xvii 

27. 

B 

6. 

Kl. 

XX 

xiv 

xxi 

Titus,  i. 

vi 

23 

C 

5- 

Kl. 

Ruth.  1. 

XV 

Ruth  2. 

ii,  iii 

29 

D 

4- 

Kl. 

iii 

xvi 

iv 

Philem 

xiv 

3° 

E 

3- 

Kl. 

l.Sam.l. 

xvii 

I.Sam.  2. 

Hebr.  i. 

iii 

31- 

F 

pr 

Kl. 

- 

iii 

xriii 

iv 

ii 

9o  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

APRILIS, 


Aprilis  habet  dies  .xxx.  Luna  .xxix. 
Nox  habet  horas  .x.  Dies  vero  .xiiij. 
Denus  et  vndenus  est  mortis  vulnere  plenus. 

g      Aprilis. 
xi        A     iiii     No. 

b      iii       No.     Richardi  episcopi  &  cofessoris.  noue  lectionum. 
xix      c    pridie  No.    Ambrosij  epi  &  doctoris..inferius  dup.  ix.  lecthmu. 
viij      d        None, 
xvi       e      viii      Id. 
v          f      vii       Id. 

g  vi  Id. 
xiij  A  v  Id. 
ij  b  iiii  Id. 

c      iii        Id.  Sol  in  tauro. 

x          d    pridie  Id. 

e        Idus. 

xviij    f      xviii  kal.    Maij.  Tyburtij  valeriani  &  maximia.  mar.  iij.  le. 
vij       g      xvii  kal.  Claues  rogationum. 

A  xvi  kal. 
xv  b  xv  kal. 
iiij  c  xiiii  kal. 

d      xiii    kal.    Alphegi  episcopi  &  martyris.  trium  lectionum. 
xij       e      xii     kal. 
j  f      xi      kal. 

g  x  kal. 
ix  A  ix  kal.  Georgij.  marty.  inferius  dup.  iij.  lee.  cu  regi.  chori. 

b      viii    kal. 

xvij     c      vii     kal.    Marci  euage.  Iferius  d.  iij.  le.     Letania  maior.    Vltimum  pascha. 
vj         d      vi      kal. 

e      v       kal. 

xiiij     f      iiii     kal.    Vitalis  martyris.  triu  lect.  cu  regimine  chori. 
i  j         g      iii      kal.  Egressus  noe  de  area. 

A  pridie  kal.    Depositio  scti  erkenwaldi  epi  london.  diocesis. 

Se  probat  in  vere  vires  aprilis  habere. 

Cuncta  renascuntur,  pori  tune  apperiuntur. 

In  quo  scalpescit  corpus,  sanguis  quoque  crescit. 

Ergo  soluatur  venter,  cruor  et  minuatur. 


KALENDAR 
1549 


APRILL. 

C  Aprill. 

Matins. 

Euensong. 

<t  Psalraes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

g 

Kalend. 

i 

i 

ludi.      xi 

lohn.  xix 

ludi.     xii 

Hebre.  iii 

A 

iiii.  No. 

ii 

ii 

xiii 

XX 

xiiii 

iiii 

b 

iii.  No. 

iii 

iii 

XV 

xxi 

xvi 

v 

c 

Prid.  No 

iiii 

iiii 

xvii 

Actes.     i 

xviii 

vi 

d 

Nonas. 

v 

v 

xix 

ii 

XX 

vii 

e 

viii.  Id. 

vi 

vi 

xxi 

iii 

Ruth.      i 

viii 

f 

vii.  Id. 

vii 

vii 

Ruth,     ii 

iiii 

iii 

ix 

g 

vi.  Id. 

viii 

viii 

iiii 

v 

i.  Regu.  i 

X 

A 

v.  Id. 

ix 

ix 

i.  Regu  ii 

vi 

iii 

xi 

b 

iiii.  Id. 

X 

X 

iiii 

vii 

v 

xii 

c 

iii.  Id. 

xi 

xi 

vi 

viii 

vii 

xiii 

d 

Prid.  Id 

xii 

xii 

viii 

ix 

ix 

lacob.     i 

e 

Idus. 

xiii 

xiii 

X 

X 

xi 

ii 

f 

xviii.  kl. 

xiiii 

xiiii 

xii 

xi 

xiii 

iii 

g 

xvii.  kl. 

XV 

XV 

xiiii 

xii 

XV 

iiii 

A 

xvi.  kl. 

xvi 

xvi 

xvi 

xiii 

xvii 

v 

b 

XV.  kl. 

xvii 

xvii 

xviii 

xiiii 

xix 

i.  Peter,  i 

c 

xiiii.  kl. 

xviii 

xviii 

XX 

XV 

xxi 

ii 

d 

xiii.  kl. 

xix 

xix 

xxii 

xvi 

xxiii 

iii 

e 

xii.  kl. 

XX 

XX 

xxiiii 

xvii 

XXV 

iiii 

f 

xi.  kl. 

xxi 

xxi 

xxvi 

xviii 

xxvii 

v 

g 

x.  kl. 

xxii 

xxii 

xxviii 

xix 

xxix 

ii.  Peter,  i 

A 

ix.  kl. 

xxiii 

xxiii 

XXX 

XX 

xxxi 

ii 

b 

viii.  kl. 

xxiiii 

xxiiii 

ii.  Reg.  i 

xxi 

ii.  Reg.  ii 

iii 

c 

vii.  kl. 

XXV 

Mar.  Euan. 

XXV 

iii 

xxii 

iiii 

i.  lohn.  i 

d 

vi.  kl. 

xxvi 

xxvi 

v 

xxiii 

vi 

ii 

e 

v.  kl. 

xxvii 

xxvii 

vii 

xxiiii 

viii 

iii 

f 

iiii.  kl. 

xxviii 

xxviii 

ix 

XXV 

X 

iiii 

g 

iii.  kl. 

xxix 

xxix 

xi 

xxvi 

xii 

v 

A 

Prid.  kl. 

XXX 

XXX 

xiii 

xxvii 

xiiii 

ii.  iii.  Iho 

KALENDAR 

1552 


C  APRILL  HATH  .XXX,  DA  YES. 

Mo  rn  ing  prayer. 

Euemwf/ra/Vr. 

<L  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

g     Kalend. 

i 

ludic.    xi 

lohn.  xix 

ludi.     xii. 

Hebre.    iii. 

xi         A      iiii.  No. 

ii 

xiii 

XX 

xiiii 

iiii 

b      iii.    No. 

iii 

XV 

xxi 

xvi 

v 

xix        c       Prid.  No. 

iiii 

xvii 

Actes.     i. 

xviii 

vi 

viii       d     Nonas. 

v 

xix 

ii 

XX 

vii 

xvi        e       viii.  Id. 

vi 

xxi 

iii 

Ruth.      i. 

viii 

f       vii.   Id. 

vii 

Ruth.     ii. 

iiii 

iii 

ix 

g      vi.    Id. 

viii 

iiii 

v 

i.  Regu.  i. 

x 

xiii      A      v.       Id. 

ix 

i.  Regu.  ii 

vi 

iii 

xi 

ii           b      iiii.     Id. 

x 

iiii 

vii 

v 

xii 

c       iii.     Id. 

xi 

vi 

viii 

vii 

xiii 

x            d      Prid.  Id.    Sol  in  tau. 

xii 

viii 

ix 

ix 

lacobi.      i. 

e     Idus. 

xiii 

x 

x 

xi 

ii 

xviii     f      xviii.  kl.      Mail. 

xiiii 

xii 

xi 

xiii 

iii 

vii         g      xvii.   kl. 

XV 

xiiii 

xii 

XV 

iiii 

A      xvi.     kl. 

xvi 

xvi 

xiii 

xvii 

v 

xv          b      xv.      kl. 

xvii 

xviii 

xiiii 

xix 

i.  Petri.  i. 

iiii        c      xiiii.   kl. 

xviii 

XX 

XV 

xxi 

ii 

d      xiii.     kl. 

xix 

xxii 

xvi 

xxiii 

iii 

xii         e      xii.      kl. 

XX 

xxiiii 

xvii 

XXV 

iiii 

i            f       xi.       kl. 

xxi 

xxvi 

xviii 

xxvii 

v 

g      x.        kl. 

xxii 

xxviii 

xix 

xxix 

ii.  Petri.  i. 

ix         A      ix.       kl.     S.  George. 

xxiii 

XXX 

XX 

xxxi 

ii 

b      viii.     kl. 

xxiiii 

ii.  Reg.  i 

xxi 

ii.  Reg.  ii. 

iii 

xvii      c      vii.     kl.       Marke  eua. 

XXV 

iii 

xxii 

iiii 

i.    lohn.   i. 

d      vi.       kl. 

XXV 

v 

xxiii 

vi 

ii 

e      v.       kl. 

xxvii 

vii 

xxiiii 

viii 

iii 

xiiii      f       iiii.      kl. 

xxviii 

ix 

XXV 

x 

iv 

iii         g      iii.       kl. 

xxix 

xi 

xxvi 

xii 

v 

A     Prid.  kl. 

XXX 

xiii 

xxvii 

xiiii 

ii.  iii.  lohn. 

KALENDAR 

1661 


93 


APRILL  HATH  XXX.  DA  YES. 

3Tlie  Moon  hath  xxix. 

I    (      1 

Morning, 
prayer 

Everu»Sr- 
prayer 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

I. 

G 

Kalend. 

1.  Sam.  C. 

Job.  19. 

1.  Sam.  6. 

Hebr.  3 

xl 

2 

A 

4.  No. 

vii 

XX 

viii 

iv 

3 

B 

3-  No. 

-Richard  7aB.  of  Chichester 

ix 

xxi 

X 

v 

xix 

4 

C 

pr.  No. 

-Ambrose  "  "B.  of  Millan. 

xi 

Acts,     i 

xii 

vi 

viii 

5 

D 

Nonae 

xiii 

ii 

XJH1 

vii 

xvi 

6 

E 

8.  Id. 

XV 

iii 

xvi 

viii 

V 

7 

F 

7.  Id. 

xvii 

iv 

xviii 

ix 

8 

G 

6.  Id. 

xix 

V 

XX 

X 

xiii 

9- 

A 

5-  Id. 

xxi 

vi 

xxii 

xi 

ii 

10 

B 

4.  Id. 

xxiii 

vii 

xxiv 

xii 

ii 

C 

3-  Id. 

XXV 

viii 

xxvi 

xiii 

X 

12 

D 

pr.  Id. 

xxvii 

ix 

xxviii 

Jam.     i. 

13 

E 

Idus 

xxix 

X 

XXX 

ii. 

xviii 

14. 

F 

18.  Kl.  Maij 

xxxi 

xi 

2.  Sam.  1. 

iii 

vii 

15 

G 

17.  Kl. 

2.  Sam.  2. 

xii 

iii 

iv 

16 

A 

16.  Kl. 

iv 

xiii 

V 

V 

XV 

17 

B 

15-  Kl. 

vi 

xiv 

vii 

i.  Pet.  i. 

IV 

18 

C 

14.  Kl. 

viii 

XV 

ix 

ii 

19 

D 

13.  Kl. 

sAlphege  "-'Arch-B.  of  Cant 

X 

xvi 

xi 

iii 

xii 

20 

E 

12.  Kl. 

xii 

xvii 

xiii 

iv 

i 

21 

F 

xr.  Kl. 

xiv 

xviii 

XV 

V 

22 

G 

10.  Kl. 

xvi 

xix 

xvii 

2.  Pet.  i. 

ix 

23 

A 

9.    Kl. 

S.  George  '*M. 

xviii 

XX 

xix 

ii 

24 

B 

8.    Kl. 

XX 

xxi 

xxi 

iii 

xvii 

2S 

C 

7.    Kl. 

7*S  Mark  Evang.  7a&  Mart. 

xxii 

t.  Job.  i. 

VI 

26 

D 

6.    Kl. 

xxii 

xxiii 

xxiii 

ii 

27 

E 

5.    Kl. 

xxiv 

xxiv 

1.  Kings.  1 

iii 

xiv 

28 

F 

4.    Kl. 

I.Kings.  2. 

XXV 

iii 

iv 

iii 

29 

G 

3-    Kl. 

iv 

xxvi 

V 

V 

30 

A 

pr.  Kl. 

vi 

xxvii 

vii 

2,  3.  lohn 

94  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

MAIUS, 


KL 


Maius  habet  dies  .xxxi.  Luna  .xxx. 
Nox  habet  boras  .viij.  Dies  vero  .xvi. 


Tertius  occidit  et  septimus  ora  relidit. 

xi         b        Maij        Aplorum  philippi  &  iacobi.  inferius  duplex  .iij.  lect. 

c      vi       No. 

xix       d     v        No.    Inuentio  scte  crucis.  mi.  du.  ij.  lee.  meo.  de  mar.  alexandro  &  euentio. 
viii       e      iiii     No. 

f      iii      No. 

xvi       g    pridie  No.    lohanis  ante  porta  latina.  Inuit.  tripl.  iij.  lect. 
v         A       None.        lohis  epi  &  confesso.  de  beuerlaco.  iij.  le.  cu  regi.  cho. 

b      viii     Id. 

xiii       c      vii       Id.    Translatio  sancti  nicolai.  cu  regimine  chori. 
ii          d      vi        Id.     Sctorum  gordiani  &  epimachi  martyrum.  trium  lect. 

e      v        Id. 
x          f      iiii      Id.    Sct5rum  nerei,  achillei,  atque  pancratij.  iii.  lectionu. 

g     iii       Id.  Sol  in  geminis. 

xviii    A    prid.    Id.    <t  Nota  quod  fes.  trasl.  s.  cedde  epi  semper  debet   celebrari    dnica 
vii        b      Idus.  (proxima  ante  asce.  dfii.  cu  regi.  chori. 

c      xvii   kal.    lunii. 
xv        d      xvi     kal. 
iiii       e      xv     kal. 

f      xiiii  kal.    Dustani  epi  &  confess,  ix.  lee.  meo.  de  seta  potetiana. 
xii        g      xiii    kal. 
i          A     xii     kal. 

b      xi      kal. 
ix         ex       kal. 

d      ix      kal.    Festum  sancti  saluatoris. 

xvii     e      viii    kal.    Aldelmi  epi  &  confes.  media  lee.  de  scto  vrbano.  ix.  lect. 
vi         f      vii     kal.    Augustini  anglorum  apli.  inferius  duple,  ix.  lectionu. 

g      vi      kal. 

xiii      A     v       kal.    Germani  epi.  &  confessoris.  trium  lectionum. 
iii         b      iiii     kal. 

c      iii      kal. 

xi         d  pridie  kal.     Petronille  virgi.  no  mar.  iij.  lee.  cu  noc.  cu  extra,  oct.  sancte  trinita. 

(contigerit. 

Maio  secure,  laxari  sit  tibi  cure. 

Scindatur  vena,  sed  balnea  dentur  amena. 

Cum  calidis  rebus,  sint  f  ercula  seu  speciebus 

Potibus  astricta,  sit  saluia  turn  benedicta. 


KALENDAR 

1549 


95 


MAYE. 

C  Maye. 

Matins.                                Euensong. 

C  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

b 

Kalend. 

i 

Phil.  &  la. 

i 

ii.  Re.  xv 

Acte.  viii 

ii.  Re.  xvi 

ludas.     i 

c 

vi.  No. 

ii 

ii 

xvii 

xxviii 

xviii 

Roma,    i 

d 

v.  No. 

iii 

iii 

xix 

Math,    i 

XX 

ii 

e 

iiii.  No. 

iiii 

iiii 

xxi 

ii 

xxii 

iii 

f 

iii.  No. 

v 

v 

xxiii 

iii 

xxiiii 

iiii 

g 

Prid.  No 

vi 

vi 

iii.  Reg.  i 

iiii 

iii.  Re.   ii 

v 

A 

Nonas. 

vii 

vii 

iii 

v 

iiii 

vi 

b 

viii.  Id. 

viii 

viii 

v 

vi 

vi 

vii 

c 

vii.  Id. 

ix 

ix 

vii 

vii 

viii 

viii 

d 

vi.  Id. 

X 

X 

ix 

viii 

X 

ix 

e 

v.  Id. 

xi 

xi 

xi 

ix 

xii 

X 

f 

iiil  Id. 

xii 

xii 

xiii 

X 

xiiii 

xi 

g 

iii.  Id. 

xiii 

xiii 

XV 

xi 

xvi 

xii 

A 

Prid  Id 

xiiii 

xiiii 

xvii 

xii 

xviii 

xiii 

b 

Idus. 

XV 

XV 

xix 

xiii 

XX 

xiiii 

c 

xvii.  kl. 

xvi 

xvi 

xxi 

xiiii 

xxii 

XV 

d 

xvi.  kl. 

xvii 

xvii 

iiii.  Re.  i 

XV 

iiii.  Re.  ii 

xvi 

e 

xv.  kl. 

xviii 

xviii 

iii 

xvi 

iiii 

i.  Cor.     i 

f 

xiiii.  kl. 

xix 

xix 

v 

xvii 

vi 

ii 

g 

xiii.  kl. 

XX 

XX 

vii 

xviii 

viii 

iii 

A 

xii.  kl. 

xxi 

xxi 

ix 

xix 

X 

iiii 

b 

xi.  kl. 

xxii 

xxii 

xi 

XX 

xii 

v 

c 

x.  kl. 

xxiii 

xxiii 

xiii 

xxi 

xiiii 

vi 

d 

ix.  kl. 

xxiiii 

xxiiii 

XV 

xxii 

xvi 

vii 

e 

viii.  kl. 

XXV 

XXV 

xvii 

xxiii 

xviii 

viii 

f 

vii.  kl. 

xxvi 

xxvi 

xix 

xxiiii 

XX 

ix 

g 

vi.  kl. 

xxvii 

xxvii 

xxi 

XXV 

xxii 

X 

A 

v.  kl. 

xxviii 

xxviii 

xxiii 

xxvi 

xxiiii 

xi 

b 

iiii.  kl. 

xxix 

xxix 

XXV 

xxvii 

i.  Esd.  i. 

xii 

c 

iii.  kl. 

XXX 

XXX 

i.  Esd.    ii 

xxviii 

iii 

xiii 

d 

Prid.  kl. 

xxxi 

XXX 

iiii 

Mark,    i 

v 

xiiii 

96 


KALENDAR 
1552 


C  MA  YE  HATH,  XXXL  DA  YES 

Warning  prayer. 

Euen  i  ng  prayer. 

C  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

xi         b      Kalend.     Philip  &  la. 

i 

ii.  Re.  xv. 

Acte.  viii 

ii.  Re.  xvi 

ludas.      i. 

c      vi.    No. 

ii 

xvii 

xxviii 

xviii 

Roma.       i 

xix       d      v.     No. 

iii 

xix 

Math,     i 

XX 

ii 

viii      e      iiii.  No. 

iiii 

xxi 

ii 

xxii 

iii 

f       iii.   No. 

v 

xxiii 

iii 

xxiiii 

iiii 

xvi       g      Prid.  No. 

vi 

iii.  Regu.i 

iiii 

iii.  Reg.*. 

v 

v          A     Nonas. 

vii 

ii 

v 

ii. 

vi 

b      viii.  Id. 

viii 

iii 

vi 

iiii 

vii 

xiii      c      vii.   Id. 

ix 

v 

vii 

ix 

viii 

it          d      vi.    Id. 

x 

ix 

viii 

x 

ix 

e       v.     Id.       Sol  in  Ge. 

xi 

xi 

ix 

xii 

x 

x           f      iiii.  Id. 

xii 

xiii 

x 

xiiii 

xi 

g      iii.    Id. 

xiii 

XV 

xi 

xvi 

xii 

xviii    A     Prid.  Id. 

xiiii 

xvii 

xii 

xviii 

xiii 

vii       b      Idus. 

XV 

xix 

xiii 

XX 

xiiii 

c       xvii.  kl.  lunii. 

xvi 

xxi 

xiiii 

xxii 

XV 

xv        d      xvi     kl. 

xvii 

iiii.  Re.  i 

XV 

iiii.  Re.  ii. 

xvi 

iiii       e      xv      kl. 

xviii 

iii 

xvi 

iiii 

i.    Cor.     i 

f      xiiii    kl. 

xix 

v 

xvii 

vi 

ii 

xii       g       xiii     kl. 

XX 

vii 

xviii 

viii 

iii 

i           A     xii      kl. 

xxi 

ix 

xix 

x 

iiii 

b      xi       kl. 

xxii 

xi 

XX 

xii 

v 

ix         c      x        kl. 

xxiii 

xiii 

xxi 

xiiii 

vi 

d      ix       kl. 

xxiiii 

XV 

xxii 

xvi 

vii 

xvii      e      viii     kl. 

XXV 

xvii 

xxiii 

xviii 

viii 

vi         f      vii      kl. 

xxvi 

xix 

xxiiii 

XX 

ix 

g      vi       kl. 

xxvii 

xxi 

XXV 

xxii 

x 

xiiii     A     v        kl. 

xxviii 

xxiii 

xxvi 

xxiiii 

xi 

iii        b      iiii      kl. 

xxix 

XXV 

xxvii 

XXV 

xii 

c      iii       kl. 

XXX 

i.  Esdr.  i. 

xxviii 

i.  Esd.   ii 

xiii 

xi         d       Prid.  kl. 

XXX 

iii 

Mark.    i. 

iiii 

xiiii 

KALENDAR 

1661 


97 


MAY  HATH  XXXJ.  DA  YES. 

s  The  Moon  hath  xxx. 

/ 

Morning 

Evenz'w^ 

| 

prayer 

prayer 

i.  Lesson 

2  Lesson 

i.  Lesson 

2  Lesson 

ii 

i 

B 

Kalend 

'»S.  Phil  &  S.  lac.  "Ap.  &  M. 

lude 

2 

C 

6. 

No. 

l.Kings.8. 

Acts  28. 

l.Xings.9. 

Rom.  i 

xLv 

3 

D 

5- 

No. 

-Invention  of  the  Cross. 

X 

Mat.     i. 

xi 

ii 

viii 

4 

E 

4- 

No. 

xii 

ii 

xiii 

iii 

5 

F 

3- 

No. 

xiv 

iii 

XV 

iv 

xvi 

6 

G 

pr. 

No. 

'aS.  siohn  Evang.  *ante  7aport. 

xvi 

iv 

xvii 

V 

Z' 

7 

A 

Nonee 

[latin. 

xviii 

V 

xix 

vi 

8 

B 

8.  Id. 

XX 

vi 

xxi 

vii 

xiii 

9 

C 

7.  Id. 

xxii 

vii 

2.  Kings.  1 

viii 

ii 

10 

D 

6.  Id. 

2.Kings.2. 

viii 

iii 

ix 

ii 

E 

5- 

Id. 

iv 

ix 

V 

X 

x 

12 

F 

4.  Id. 

vi 

X 

vii 

xi 

13 

G 

3-  Id. 

viii 

xi 

ix 

xii 

xviii 

14 

A 

pr. 

Id. 

X 

xii 

xi 

xiii 

vii 

15 

B 

Idus 

xii 

xiii 

xiii 

xiv 

16 

C 

17- 

Kl./««,> 

xiiii 

xiv 

XV 

XV 

XV 

17 

D 

16 

Kl. 

xvi 

XV 

xvii 

xvi 

iv 

18 

E 

15 

Kl. 

xviii 

xvi 

xix 

i.  Cor.  i. 

19 

F 

14 

Kl. 

2Dunstan  ?aArcn.  B.  of  Cant. 

XX 

xvii 

xxi 

ii 

xii 

20 

G 

13 

Kl. 

xxii 

xviii 

xxiii 

iii 

i 

21 

A 

12 

Kl. 

xxiv 

xix 

XXV 

iv 

22 

B 

II 

Kl. 

Ezra     1 

XX 

Ezra     3. 

V 

Ix 

23 

C 

IO 

Kl. 

iv 

xxi 

V 

vi 

24 

D 

9 

Kl. 

vi 

xxii 

vii 

vii 

xvii 

25 

E 

8 

Kl. 

e 

ix 

xxiii 

Neh.     1 

viii 

vi 

26 

F 

7 

Kl. 

2Aug:  -  "y  .  first  Arch  B.  of  Cant 

Neh.     2 

xxiv 

iv 

ix 

27 

G 

6 

Kl. 

Yen.  Bede  pr. 

V 

XXV 

vi 

X 

xiv 

28 

A 

5 

Kl. 

viii 

xxvi 

ix 

xi 

iii 

29 

B 

4 

Kl. 

CH.  II.  Nat.  et  Ret. 

X 

xxvii 

xiii 

xii 

30 

C 

3 

Kl. 

Ester,  i. 

xxviii 

Ester    2. 

xiii 

xi 

31 

D 

pr 

Kl. 

iii 

Mark.  i. 

iv 

xiv 

98  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

IUNIUS, 


Tr  -r      lunius  habet  dies  .xxx.  Luna  .xxix. 

*—*    Nox  habet  horas  ..vj.  Dies,  vero  .xiiij. 
Denus  pallescit,  quindenus  federa  nescit. 

e       lunij  Nicomedia  martyris.  trium  lectionum. 

xix       f       iiii     No.     Sct5rum  marcelini  &  petri  mar.  inuita.  trip.  iij.  lee. 
viii       g      iii      No. 
xvi       A    pridie  No. 
v          b       None         Bonifacij  socioruque  eius  marty.  iuita.  dup.  iij.  lee. 

c  viii  Id. 
xiij  d  vii  Id. 
ii  e  vi  Id.  Sanctorum  raedardi  &  gildardi  confes.  iii.  lectionum. 

f      v         Id.    Trasla.  set!  edmudi  mar.  meo.  &  media  lee.  de  mar.  primo  &  feliciano. 
x          g      iiii       Id.  (inuit.  tri.  ix.  lectionum. 

A     iii       Id.    Barnabe  apli.  inuita.  triplex,  nouem  lectionum. 
xviii     b    pridie  Id.     Sanctorum  basilidis,  cyrini,  &  naboris.  iii.  Ictdnu. 
vii       c       Idus.  Sol  in  canoro.     Solstitium. 

d      xviii  kal.    lulij.  Basilii  epi  &  confessoris.  trium  lectionum 
xv        e      xvii   kal.     Sctorum  viti  &  modesti  atque  crescetie.  triu  lectionu. 
iiii        f      xvi    kal.     Trasla.  sctl  richardi.  de.  s.  cyrico  &  iul.  ix.  le. 

g     xv     kal. 

xii        A     xiiii  kal.     Sanctorum  marci  &  marcelliani.  inuita.  dup.  iii.  lee. 
i  b     xiii    kal.     Sctorum  geruasij  &  prothasij.  luit.  dup.  iii.  lectionu. 

c      xii     kal.     Tras.  B.  edwardi  regis  &  mar.  ix.  le-  nisi  facte  fuerlt  in.  xl. 
ix         d      xi      kal. 

e      x       kal.    Albani  protomartyris.  ix.  lectionum. 

xvii      f      ix       kal.     Etheldrede  virgls.  iii.  lectio,  cu  noc.  Vigilia. 

vi         g      viii    kal.     Natiuitas  scti  iohis  baptiste.  minus  duple,  ix.  lect. 

A     vii     kal. 

xiiii      b      vi      kal.     Sctorum  iohanis  &  pauli  marty.  inuita.  duple,  iii.  le. 
iii         c      v       kal. 

d      iiii     kal.    Leonis  pape  &  confes.  triu.  lee.  cu.  noc.  Vigilia. 

xi        e      iii      kal.     Petri  aplorum  &  pauli.  minus  duplex  .ix.  lectionum. 

f    pridie  kal.     domeorfttio  scti  pauli.  inuita.  trip.  ix.  lectionu. 
Post  personas  tres  librum  regum  dare  debes.  Deus  omnium. 

In  iunio  gentes  perturbat  medo  bibentes. 

Tumque  nouellarum  fuge  potus  ceruisiarum 

Ne  noceat  cholera  :  valet  ista  refectio  vera. 

Lactuce  frondes  ede,  ieiunus  bibe  fontes 


KALENDAR 

1549 


99 


IUNE. 

<[  lune. 

Matins 

Euensong. 

<[  Psalraes 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

e 

Kalend. 

i 

i 

i.  Esd.  vi 

Mark,  ii 

i.  Esd.  vii 

i.  Cor.  xv 

f 

iiii  No. 

ii 

ii 

viii 

iii 

ix 

xvi 

g 

iii.  No. 

iii 

iii 

X 

iiii 

ii.  Esd.  i 

ii.  Cor.  i 

A 

Prid.  No.  . 

iiii 

iiii 

ii.  Esd.  ii 

v 

iii 

ii 

b 

Nonas, 

v 

v 

iiii 

vi 

v 

iii 

c 

viii.  Id. 

VI 

vi 

vi 

vii 

vii 

iiii 

d 

vii  Id. 

vii 

vii 

viii 

viii 

ix 

v 

e 

vi.  Id. 

viii 

viii 

X 

ix 

xi 

vi 

f 

v.  Id. 

ix 

ix 

xii 

X 

xiii 

vii 

g 

iiii.  Id. 

X 

X 

Hester,  i 

xi 

Hester,  ii 

viii 

A 

iii.  Id. 

xi 

Barna.  apo. 

xi 

iii 

Act.  xiiii. 

iiii 

Actes.  xv 

b 

Prid.  Id 

xii 

xii 

v 

Mar.    xii 

vi 

ii.  Cor.  ix 

c 

Idus. 

xiii 

xiii 

vii 

xiii 

viii 

X 

d 

xviii.  kl. 

xiiii 

xiiii 

ix 

xiiii 

lob.    i 

xi 

e 

xvii.  kl. 

XV 

XV 

lob.    ii 

XV 

iii 

xii 

f 

xvi.  kl. 

xvi 

xvi 

iiii 

xvi 

v 

xiii 

g 

xv.  kl. 

xvii 

xvii 

vi 

Luke,     i 

vii 

Galath.  i 

A 

xiiii.  kl. 

xviii 

xviii 

viii 

ii 

ix 

ii 

b 

xiii.  kl. 

xix 

xix 

X 

iii 

xi 

iii 

c 

xii.  kl. 

XX 

XX 

xii 

iiii 

xiii 

iiii 

d 

xi.  kl 

xxi 

xxi 

xiiii 

v 

XV 

v 

e 

x.  kl. 

xxii 

xxii 

xvi 

vi 

xvii  xviii 

vi 

f 

ix.  kl. 

xxiii 

xxiii 

xix 

vii 

XX 

Ephe.     i 

g 

viii.  kl. 

xxiiii 

Na.  lo.  ba. 

xxiiii 

Mala.  iii. 

Math,  iii 

Mala,  iiii 

math.xiiii 

A 

vii.  kl. 

XXV 

XXV 

lob.    xxi 

Lu.     viii 

lob.   xxii 

Ephe.    ii 

b 

vi.  kl. 

xxvi 

xxvi 

xxiii 

ix 

xxiiii  xxv 

iii 

c 

v.  kl. 

xxvii 

xxvii 

xxvi  xxvii 

X 

xxviii 

iiii 

d 

iiii.  kl. 

xxviii 

xxviii 

xxix 

xi 

XXX 

v 

e 

iii  kl. 

xxix 

S.  Peter. 

xxix 

xxxi 

Actes.  iii 

xxxii 

Actes.  iiii 

f 

Prid.  kl. 

XXX 

XXX 

xxxiii 

Luke,  xii 

xxxiiii 

Ephe.   vi 

100 


KALENDAR 

1552 


C  IUNE  HATH,  XXXI.  DAVES. 

Morn  ing  prayer 

Euenz«£  prater 

C  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

e      Kalend. 

i 

i.  Esd.  iiii 

Marke.  ii 

i.  Esdr.  v 

i.  Cor.     xv 

xix       f       iiii.  No. 

ii 

vi 

iii 

vi 

xvi 

mit       g      iii.    No. 

iii 

vii 

iiii 

vii 

ii.  Corin.  i. 

xvi       A     Prid.  No. 

iiii 

viii 

v 

viii 

ii 

v          b      Nonas. 

v 

ix 

vi 

x. 

iii 

c       viii.  Id. 

vi 

ii.  Esdr.  i 

vii 

iii 

iiii 

xiii      d      vii.   Id. 

vii 

iiii 

viii 

V 

v 

ii          e       vi.    Id. 

viii 

vi 

ix 

viii 

vi 

f       v.      Id. 

ix 

ix 

x 

xiii 

vii 

x           g      iiii.    Id. 

x 

Hester,  i. 

xi 

Hester,  ii 

viii 

A     iii.    Id. 

xi 

iii. 

Acte.  xiiii 

iiii 

Actes.    xv. 

xviii    b      Prid.  Id. 

xii 

v 

Mar.  xii. 

vi 

ii.  corin.  ix 

vii        c       Idus.        Sol  in  can. 

xiii 

vii 

xiii 

viii 

x 

d      xviii.  kl.  lulii. 

xiiii 

ix 

xiiii 

lob.         i 

xi 

xv        e      xvii.   kl. 

XV 

lob.        ii 

XV 

iii 

xii 

iiii       f       xvi.     kl. 

xvi 

iiii 

xvi 

v 

xiii 

g      xv.      kl.      Termt  begin  . 

xvii 

vi 

Luke.     i. 

vii 

Galath.    i. 

xii        A     xiiii.    kl. 

xviii 

viii 

ii. 

ix 

ii 

*            b      xiii.     kl. 

xix 

x 

iii 

xi 

iii 

c       xii.      kl. 

XX 

xii 

iiii 

xiii 

iiii 

ix         d      xi.       kl. 

xxi 

xiiii 

v 

XV 

v 

e      x.        kl. 

xxii 

xvi 

vi 

xvii.  xviii 

vi 

xvii      f       ix.       kl. 

xxiii 

xix 

vii 

XX 

Ephesi.    i. 

vi         g      viii.     kl.     lohn  Baptist 

xxiiii 

Mai.      iii 

Math.  iii. 

Mai.     iiii 

Math,  xiiii 

A     vii.      kl. 

XXV 

lob.    ;  xxi 

Luke,  viii 

lob.    xxii 

Ephesi.    ii 

xiiii     b      vi.       kl. 

xxvi 

Xxiii 

ix 

xxiiii  xxv 

iii 

Hi        c      v.        kl. 

xxvii 

xxvi  xxvii 

x. 

xxviii 

iiii 

d      iiii.      kl. 

xxviii 

xxix 

xi 

XXX 

v 

xi         e      iii.       kl.    S.  Peter  ap. 

xxix 

xxxi 

Actes.  iii. 

xxxii 

Actes.    iiii 

f       Prid.  Kl. 

XXX 

xxxiii 

Luke,  xii 

xxxiiii 

Ephesi.  vi 

KALENDAR 
1661 


101 


IUNE  HATH  XXX.  DA  YES. 

3  The  Moon  hath  xxix. 

Morning 

Eveimy 

prayer 

prayer 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

I 

E 

Kalend 

-Nicomede  "*Rom.  Pr.  &  M.  Ester.    6.   Mark.  2. 

Ester    6. 

i.  Cor.i5. 

xix 

2 

F 

4.  No. 

vii 

iii 

viii 

xvi 

•viii 

3 

G 

3- 

No. 

ix 

iv 

lob.      l. 

2.  Cor.  i. 

xvi 

4 

A 

pr. 

No 

lob.       2. 

V 

iii 

ii 

V 

5 

B 

Nonae 

-Boniface    ~'B.  of  Mentz 

iv 

vi 

v                iii 

6 

C 

8. 

Id. 

[&M. 

vi 

vii 

vii              iv 

xiii 

7 

D 

7- 

Id. 

viii 

viii 

ix 

V 

ii 

8 

E 

6.  Id. 

X 

ix 

xi 

vi 

9 

F 

5- 

Id. 

xii 

X 

xiii 

vii 

X 

10 

G 

4.  Id. 

xiv 

xi 

XV 

viii 

ii 

A 

3:  Id. 

*»S.  Barnab,  Apost.  '»&  M. 

xviii 

12 

B 

pr. 

Id. 

xvi 

xii 

xvii  xviii. 

ix 

vii 

13 

C  |  Idus 

xix 

xiii 

XX 

X 

14 

D    18. 

KI./«/y 

xxi 

xiv 

xxii 

xi 

XV 

15 

E 

17- 

Kl. 

xxiii 

XV 

xxi  v.  xxv. 

xii 

iv 

16 

F 

16. 

Kl. 

xx  vi.  xx  vii. 

xvi 

xxviii 

xiii 

17 

G 

IS- 

Kl 

S.  Alban  M. 

xxix 

Luke,  i 

XXX 

Galat.  i. 

xii 

18 

A 

14. 

Kl. 

xxxi 

ii 

xxxii 

ii 

19 

B 

13. 

Kl. 

xxxiii 

iii 

xxxiv 

iii 

20 

C 

12. 

Kl. 

'^Transl  :  of  2£dw*  ^K.  of  y.l  xxxv 

iv 

xxxvi 

iv 

ix 

21 

D 

II. 

Kl. 

[W.  Sax. 

xxxvii 

V 

xxxviii 

V 

22 

E 

IO. 

Kl. 

xxxix 

vi 

xl 

vi 

xvii 

23 

F 

9- 

Kl. 

7»Fast 

xii 

vii 

xiii 

Eph.    i. 

vi 

24 

G 

8. 

Kl. 

Nativ.  7»of  S.  lohn  Bapt  : 

25 

A 

7- 

Kl. 

Prov.     1 

viii 

Prov.    2. 

ii 

xiv 

26 

B 

6. 

Kl. 

iii 

ix 

iv 

iii 

Hi 

27 

C 

5- 

Kl. 

V 

X 

vi 

iv 

28 

D 

4- 

Kl. 

'•Fast 

vii 

xi 

viii 

V 

xi 

29 

Tp 

3- 

Kl. 

S  Pet.  Apost.  r*&  M. 

30 

F 

pr. 

Kl. 

ix 

xii 

X 

vi 

102  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

I U  I.I  US. 


KL 


lulius  habet  dies  .xxxi.  Luna  .  xxx. 
Nox  habet  horas  .viii.  Dies  vero  .xvi. 


Tredecimus  mactat :  iuli  denus  labefactat. 

xix      g     lulii.    Octa. scti  iohanis  baptiste.  inuita.  dup  .iii.  lectio. 

viii       A     vi       No.     Visitatio  bte  marie,  dup.  meo.  de  inr.  sub  siletio 

b      v        No. 

xvi       c      iiii     No.     Traslatio  &  ordinatio  scti  martini  .ix.  lectionu. 
v          d      iii       No. 

e    pridie  No.    Octa.  aplorum  petri  &  pauli.  inuita.  dup  .ix.  Ictonu. 
xiii      f     None.          Tralatio  scti  thome  martyris  .  ix.  lectionum. 
ii         g      viii      Id.     Dnica  prima  post  fes.  tras.  s.  tho.  cele.  fes.  reliquiaru  .ix.  lectionu. 

A     vii       Id. 
x          b      vi        Id.     Sctorum  septe  fratru  martyru.  inuitata.  dup. iij.  lect. 

c      v         Id.     Tras.  s.  bndicti  abbatis  .ix.  le.  nisi  fete  fuerint  I.  xl.  tune  fiat.  iij.  le.  & 
xviii    d      iiii       Id.  (mi.  dup. 

vii        e      iii        Id. 

f      prid.    Id.  Sol  in  leone.  Dies  cuuiculares. 

xv       g    Idus.  Translatio  scti  swithini  socioruque  eius.ix.  Ictonu. 

iiii       A     xvii  kal.     Augusti.  Traslatio  sancti  osmudi  .ix  lectionu. 

b      xvi    kal.     Kenelmi  regis  &  marty.  inuita.  duple,  triu  lectio, 
xii       c      xv     kal.     Arnulphi  episcopi  &  martyris.  trium  lectionum. 
i  d      xiiii  kal. 

e      xiii    kal.    Margarete  virginis  &  martyris  .ix.  lectionum. 
ix        f      xii     kal.    Praxedis  virginis  no  marty.  trium  lectionum. 

g      xi      kal.    Marie  Magdalene,  inuita.  triple,  nonem  lectionu. 
xvii     A     x       kal.    Apollinaris  episcopi  &  marty.  trium  lectionum. 
vi        b      ix      kal.     Christine  virgis  &  mar  .iij.  lee.  cum  noc.  Vigilia. 

c      viii    kal.     lacobi  apostoli.  inferius  duple  .ix.  lectionum. 
xiiii     d     vii     kal.     Anne  matris  marie,  inuita.  triplex  .ix.  lectionu. 
iii        e      vi      kal.    Sctorum  septe  dormietiu  mar.  inuita.  dup  .iij.  lect. 

f      v       kal.     Sansonis  episcopi.  inuita.  duple,  trium  lectionu. 
xi         g      iiii     kal.     Sanctorum  felicis  &  faustini.  inuita.  dup.  triu.  lect. 
xix      A     iii      kal.     Sctorum  abdon  &  sennes  marty.  inuita.  dup  .iij.  lee. 

b    pridie  kal.     Germani  epi  &  confessoris.  trium  lectionum. 
Et  post  sansouem,  sapientem  da  salomonem.  In  principio. 

Qui  vult  solamen,  iulio  probet  hoc  medicamen. 

Venam  non  scindat,  nee  ventrem  potio  ledat. 

Somnum  compescat,  et  balnea  cuncta  pauescat. 

Sana  recens  unda,  simul  allia,  saluia  munda. 


KALENDAR 
1549 


103 


IULY. 

duly. 

Matins 

Euensong. 

C  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

g 

Kalend. 

i 

i 

iob.  xxxv 

Luk.  xiii. 

iob.  xxxvi 

Philip,   i. 

A 

vi.  No. 

ii 

ii 

xxxvii 

xiiii 

xxxviii 

ii 

b 

v.No. 

iii 

iii 

xxxix 

XV 

xl 

iii 

c 

iiii.  No. 

iiii 

iiii 

xii 

xvi 

xiii 

iiii 

d 

iii.  No. 

v 

v 

Prouer.    i 

xvii 

Prou.     ii. 

Collos.  i. 

e 

Prid.  No 

vi 

vi 

iii 

xviii 

iiii 

ii 

f 

Nonas. 

vii 

vii 

v 

xix 

vi. 

iii 

g 

viii.  Id. 

viii 

viii 

vii 

XX 

viii 

iiii 

A 

vii.  Id. 

ix 

ix 

ix 

xxi 

X 

i.  Thes.  i 

b 

vi.  Id. 

X 

X 

xi 

xxii 

xii 

ii 

c 

v.  Id. 

xi 

xi 

xiii 

xxiii 

xiiii 

iii 

d 

iiii.  Id. 

xii 

xii 

XV 

xxiiii 

xvi 

iiii 

e 

iii.  Id. 

xiii 

xiii 

xvii 

John.       i 

xviii 

v 

f 

Prid.  Id 

xiiii 

xiiii 

xix 

ii 

XX 

ii  Thes.  i 

g 

Idus. 

XV 

XV 

xxi 

iii 

xxii 

ii 

A 

xvii.  kl. 

xvi 

xvi 

xxiii 

iiii 

xxiiii 

iii 

b 

xvi.  kl. 

xvii 

xvii 

XXV 

v 

xxvi 

i.  Timo  i 

c 

XV.  kl. 

xviii 

xviii 

xxvii 

vi 

xxviii 

ii.  iii 

d 

xiiii.  kl. 

xix 

xix 

xxix 

vii 

XXX 

iiii 

e 

xiii.  kl. 

XX 

XX 

xxxi 

viii 

Eccles.    i 

v 

f 

xii.  kl. 

xxi 

xxi 

Eccles.   ii 

ix 

iii 

vi 

g 

xi.  kl. 

xxii 

Magdalen 

xxii 

iiii 

X 

v 

ii.  Tim.  i 

A 

x.  kl. 

xxiii 

xxiii 

vi 

xi 

vii 

ii 

b 

i.\.  kl. 

xxiiii 

xxiiii 

viii 

xii 

ix 

iii 

c 

viii.  kl. 

XXV 

lames  ap. 

XXV 

X 

xiii 

xi 

iiii 

d 

vii.  kl. 

xxvi 

xxvi 

xii 

xiiii 

lere.        i 

Titus.      i 

e 

vi.  kl. 

xxvii 

xxvii 

lere.       ii 

XV 

iii 

ii.  iii 

f 

v.  kl. 

xxviii 

xxviii 

iiii 

xvi 

v 

Phile.      i 

g 

iiii.  kl. 

xxix 

xxix 

vi 

xvii 

vii 

Hebre.    i 

A 

iii.  kl. 

XXX 

XXX 

viii 

xviii 

ix 

ii 

b 

Prid.  kl. 

xxxi 

XXX 

X 

xix 

xi 

iii 

104 


KALENDAR 
1552 


C  IULY  HATH,  XXXL  DA  YES. 

Morning  prayer. 

Euem'w,^  prayer. 

C  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

xix       g      Kalend. 

i 

lob.  xxxv 

Luk.  xiii. 

iob.  xxxvi 

Philip,      i. 

viii       A     vi.    No. 

ii 

xxxvii. 

xiiii 

xxxviii 

ii. 

b      v.     No. 

iii 

xxxix 

XV 

xl 

iii 

xvi        c      iiii.  No. 

iiii 

xii 

xvi 

xiii 

iiii 

v           d      iii.   No. 

v 

Prouer.    i 

xvii 

prouer.  ii 

Collos.     i. 

e       Prid.  No.     Term  end. 

vi 

iii 

xviii 

iiii 

ii 

xiii       f       Nonas.        Dog  day  es. 

vii 

v 

xix 

vi 

iii 

ii          g      viii.  Id. 

viii 

vii 

XX 

viii 

iiii 

A     vii.   Id. 

ix 

ix 

xxi 

x 

i.  Thes.  i. 

x           b      vi.    Id. 

x 

xi 

xxii 

xii 

ii 

c      v.     Id. 

xi 

xiii 

xxiii 

xiiii 

iii 

xviii     d      iiii.   Id. 

xii 

XV 

xxiiii 

xvi 

iiii 

vii        e       iii.    Id. 

xiii 

xvii 

lohn.      i. 

xviii 

v 

f       Prid.  Id.      Sol  in  Leo. 

xiiii 

xix 

ii 

XX 

ii.  Thes.    i 

xv         g      Idus. 

XV 

xxi 

iii 

xxii 

ii 

iiii        A      xvii.    kl.  Augustii. 

xvi 

xxiii 

iiii 

xxiiii 

iii 

b      xvi.    kl. 

xvii 

XXV 

v 

xxvi 

i.  Timo.  i. 

xii        c       xv.      kl. 

xviii 

xxvii 

vi 

xxviii 

ii.  iii 

*             d      xiiii.  kl. 

xix 

xxix 

vi 

XXX 

iiii 

e       xiii.    kl. 

XX 

xxxi 

viii 

Eccle.     i. 

v 

ix          f       xii      kl. 

xxi 

Eccles.   ii 

ix 

iii 

vi 

g      xi       kl. 

xx  ii 

iiii 

x 

v 

ii.  Timo.  i 

xvii      A     x         kl. 

xxiii 

vi 

xi 

vii 

ii 

vi         b      ix       kl. 

xxiiii 

viii 

xii 

ix 

iii 

c       viii     kl.       lames  apo. 

XXV 

x 

xiii 

xi 

iiii 

xiiii     d      vii       kl. 

xxvi 

xii 

xiiii 

lerem.    i. 

Titus.       i. 

iii        e       vi       kl. 

xxvii 

lerem.    ii 

XV 

iii 

ii.  iii 

f       v        kl. 

xxviii 

iiii 

xvi 

v 

Phile.       i. 

xi          g      iiii      kl. 

xxix 

vi 

xvii 

vii 

Hebre.       i 

A     iii       kl. 

XXX 

viii 

xviii 

ix 

ii 

xix       b      Prid.  kl. 

XXX 

x 

xix 

xi 

iii 

KALENDAR 
1661 


IULY  HATH  XXXJ.  DA  YES. 

3  The  Moon  hath.  xxx. 

1   J 

• 

Morning 
prayer. 

Kvenirtg 

prayer. 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson. 

xix 

i 

G 

Kalend. 

ProvilL 

Luke:  13. 

Prov:  12 

Phil.    i. 

viii 

2 

A 

6.  No. 

2Visit:*  of  y.  BL  Virg.  2Marie 

xiii 

xiv 

xiv 

ii 

3 

B 

5-  No. 

XV 

XV 

xvi 

iii 

xvi 

4 

C 

4.  No. 

7»Transl:  of  S.  2Martin  7aB. 

xvii 

xvi 

xviii 

iv 

V 

5 

D 

3-  No. 

[&C. 

xix 

xvii 

XX 

Col.     i. 

6 

E 

pr. 

No. 

xxi 

xviii 

xxii 

ii 

xiii 

7 

F 

Nonae 

xxiii 

xix 

xxiv 

iii 

ii 

8 

G 

8.  Id. 

XXV 

XX 

xxvi 

iv 

9 

A 

7.  Id. 

xxvii 

xxi 

xxviii 

i.  Thes.  i. 

X 

10 

B 

6.  Id. 

xxix 

xxii 

xxxi 

ii 

ii 

C 

5-  Id. 

Eccles.  1. 

xxiii 

Eccles.  2 

iii 

xviii 

12 

D 

4.  Id. 

iii 

xxiv 

iv 

iv 

mi 

13 

E 

3-  Id. 

V 

loh.     i. 

vi 

V 

14 

F 

pr. 

Id. 

vii 

ii 

viii 

2.  Thes.  i. 

XV 

15 

G 

Idus 

sswitnun  7»B.  of  Winch.* 

ix 

iii 

X 

ii 

iv 

16 

A 

i?- 

Kl.  Aug. 

[TransL 

xi 

iv 

xii 

iii 

J7 

B 

16. 

Kl. 

lerem.  L 

v 

lerem.  2 

i.  Tim.  i. 

xii 

18 

C 

I5- 

Kl. 

iii 

vi 

iv 

ii.  iii. 

i 

J9 

D 

14. 

Kl. 

[Antioch. 

v 

vii 

vi 

iv 

20 

E 

13- 

Kl. 

2Margaret   7»V.    &  M.   at 

vii 

viii 

viii 

V 

ix 

21 

F 

12. 

Kl. 

7>S.  Marie  2Magdalen. 

ix 

ix 

X 

vi 

22 

G 

II. 

Kl. 

xi 

X 

xii 

2.  Tim.  i. 

xvii 

23 

A 

10. 

Kl. 

xiii 

xi 

xiv 

ii 

vi 

24 

B 

9- 

Kl. 

?»Fast 

XV 

xii 

xvi 

iii. 

25 

C 

8. 

Kl. 

7»S,  lames  Apost.  'a&  M. 

xiii 

iv 

xiii 

26 

D 

7- 

K 

'»S.  «Anne,  7amother  to  y. 

xvii 

xiv 

xviii 

Titus   i. 

Hi 

2? 

E 

6. 

Kl. 

[BLV.M. 

xix 

XV 

XX 

ii.  iii. 

28 

F 

5- 

Kl. 

xxi 

xvi 

xxii 

Philem. 

xi 

29 

G 

4- 

Kl. 

xxiii 

xvii 

xxiv 

Hebr.  i. 

30 

A 

3- 

Kl. 

XXV 

xviii 

xxvi 

ii 

xix 

31 

B 

pr. 

Kl. 

xxvii 

xix 

xxviii 

iii 

ro6  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

AUGUSTUS. 


TT-  T       Augustus  habet  dies  .xxxi.  Luna  .xxx. 
-"••*—'    Nox  habet  horas  .x.  Dies  vero  .xiiii. 
Prima  necat  fortem,  perditque  secunda  cohortem. 
viii      c  Augusti.        Ad  vincula  sancti  petri.  Inuita.  triplex  .ix.  lectio, 
xvi      d      iiii     No.     Stephani  pape  &  marty.  inuita.  dup.  trium.  lee. 
v         e      iii      No.     Inuetio  scti  etephani  protomarty  .ix.  lectionum. 

f     pridie  No. 

xiii     g      None.         Festu  niuis.  Oswaldi  regis  &  mar.  lui.  dup  .iii.  lee. 
ii          A     viii      Id.     Trasfiguratio  dfii.  dupl.  meoria  de  martyribus. 

b      vii       Id.     Festu  nois  iesu.  du.  ma  .ix.  le.  doati  epi  &  m.  meo.  tm. 
x         c      vi        Id.     Cyriaci  socioruque  eius  marty.  memoria  tantum. 

d      v         Id.     Romani  marty.  memoria  tantum.  Vigilia. 

xviii    e      iiii      Id.     Laurentii  martyris.  Inuita.  triplex,  noue  lectio, 
vii       f      iii        Id.     Tyburtii  martyris.  memoria  tantum. 

g    pridie  Id. 

xv        A   Idus.  Hippolyti  socioruque  eius  martyrum.  noue  lectionu. 

iiii      b      xix    kal.     Septebris.  Oct.  no.  iesu.  Eusebii  pbfi  &  conf.  Vigilia 

c      xviii  kal.     Asaumptio  bte  marie  virginis.  maius  dup  &  princi. 
xii       d      xvii  kal.  Sol  in  virgine.  Equinoctium. 

i          e      xvi    kal.     Octa.  sancti  laurentii.  memoria  tantum. 

f      xv     kal.    Agapiti  martyris.  memoria  tantum. 
ix        g      xiiii  kal.     Magni  martyris.  memoria  tantum. 

A  xiii  kal. 
xvii  b  xii  kal. 
vi  c  xi  kal.  Octa.  bte  marie  .ix.  lectionu.  meoria  de  sanctis. 

d      x        kal.     Sctorum  thimothei  &  apollinaris.  cu  no.  Vigilia. 

xiiii    e      ix      kal.     Bartholomei  apli.  inferius  duplex  .ix.  lectionum. 
iii        f      viii    kal. 

g      vii     kal. 

xi        A     vi      kal.     Rufi  martyris.  inuita.  triplex,  trium  lectionum. 
xix      b      v       kal.     Augustini  epi  &  doctoris.  inuita.  duple  .ix.  lectionu. 

c      iiii     kal.     Decollatio  set!  iohanis  bapti.  inuita.  triple  .ix.  lee. 
viii      d      iii      kal.     Sctorum  felicis  &  adaucti  mar.  inuita.  dup  .iii.  lect. 

e  pridie  kal.       Cuthburge  virginis  no  marty.  inui.  dup  .iii.  lect 
Post  augustinum  doctorem,  iob  lege  iustum.  Si  bona. 

Tobiam  dictum  post  prothum  atque  hyacinthum.  Peto  domine. 

Quisque  sub  augusto,  viuat  medicamine  iusto. 

Raro  dormitet,  estum  coitum  quoque  vitet. 

Balnea  non  curet,  nee  multa  comestio  duret. 

Nemo  laxari  debet,  vel  phlebotomari. 


KALENDAR 

1549 


107 


AUGUST. 

e.  August. 

Matins. 

Euensong. 

C  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

li.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

c 

Kalend. 

i 

i 

lere.     xii 

lohn.  xx. 

lere.    xiii 

Hebr.  iiii 

d 

iiii.  No. 

ii 

ii 

xiiii 

xxi 

XV 

V 

e 

iii.  No. 

iii 

iii 

xvi 

Actes.      i 

xvii 

vi 

f 

Prid.  No 

iiii 

iiii 

xviii 

ii 

xix 

vii 

g 

Nonas. 

V 

V 

XX 

iii 

xxi 

viii 

A 

viii  Id. 

vi 

vi 

xxii 

iiii 

xxiii 

ix 

b 

vii.  Id. 

vii 

vii 

xxiiii 

V 

XXV 

X 

c 

vild. 

viii 

viii 

xxvi 

vi 

xxvii 

xi 

d 

v.  Id. 

ix 

ix 

xxviii 

vii 

xxix 

xii 

e 

iiii.  Id. 

X 

X 

xxx 

viii 

xxxi 

xiii 

f 

iii.  Id. 

xi 

xi 

xxxii 

ix 

xxxiii 

lacob.     i 

g 

Prid.  Id. 

xii 

xii 

xxxiiii 

X 

XXXV 

ii 

A 

Idus. 

xiii 

xiii 

xxxvi 

xi 

xxxvii 

iii 

b 

xix.  kl. 

xiiii 

xiiii 

xxxviii 

xii 

xxxix 

iiii 

c 

xviii.  kl. 

XV 

XV 

xl 

xiii 

xii 

V 

d 

xvii.  kl. 

xvi 

xvi 

xiii 

xiiii 

xiiii 

i.  Peter,  i 

e 

xvi.kl. 

xvii 

xvii 

xliiii 

XV 

xlv.  xlvi 

ii 

f 

xv.  kl. 

xviii 

xviii 

xlvii 

xvi 

xlviii 

iii 

g 

xiiii.  kl. 

xix 

xix 

xlix 

xvii 

1 

iiii 

A 

xiii.  kl. 

XX 

XX 

Ii 

xviii 

Hi 

V 

b 

xii.  kl. 

xxi 

xxi 

Lamet.    i 

xix 

Lamet.  ii 

ii.  Peter,  i 

c 

xi.kl. 

xxii 

xxii 

iii 

XX 

iiii 

ii 

d 

x.  kl. 

xxiii 

xxiii 

V 

xxi 

Ezech.    ii 

iii 

e 

ix.  kl. 

xxiiii 

Bart,  apost. 

xxiiii 

Ezech    iii 

xxii 

vi 

i.  lohn.   i 

f 

viii.  kl. 

XXV 

XXV 

vii 

xxiii 

xiii 

ii 

g 

vii.  kl. 

xxvi 

xxvi 

xiiii 

xxiiii 

xviii 

iii 

A 

vi.  kl. 

xxvii 

xxvii 

xxxiii 

XXV 

xxxiiii 

iiii 

b 

v.kl. 

xx  viii 

xxviii 

Dani.       i 

xxvi 

Dani.      ii 

V 

c 

iiii.  kl. 

xxix 

xxix 

iii 

xxvii 

1111 

ii.  iii.  Iho 

d 

iii.kl. 

XXX 

xxx 

V 

xxviii 

vi 

lude.       i 

e 

Prid.  kl. 

xxx  i 

xxx 

vii 

Math,      i 

viii 

Roma,    i 

io8 


KALENDAR 

1552 


C  AUGUST  HATH,  XXXI.  DA  YES. 

Warning  prayer. 

Euenz'  ng  pra  yer. 

CPsalmes. 

i.  Lesson 

ii.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson 

ii.  Lesson 

viii       c      Kalend.       Lammas. 

i 

lere.    xii. 

lohn.  xx. 

lere.    xiii 

Hebr.     iiii 

xvi        d      iiii.  No. 

ii 

xiiii 

xxi 

XV 

v 

v            e      iii.    No. 

iii 

xvi 

Actes.    i  . 

xvii 

vi 

f       Prid.  No. 

iiii 

xviii 

ii 

xix 

vii 

xiii       g     Nonas. 

v 

XX 

iii 

xxi 

viii 

ii          A      viii.  Id. 

vi 

xxii 

iiii 

xxiii 

ix 

b      vii.    Id. 

vii 

xxiiii 

v 

XXV 

x 

x            c      vi.    Id. 

viii 

xxvi 

vi 

xxvii. 

xi 

d      v.     Id. 

ix 

xxviii 

vii 

xxix 

xii 

xviii     e      iiii.  Id.        S.  Laurence. 

x 

XXX 

viii 

xxxi 

xiii 

vii         {       iii.    Id. 

xi 

xxxii 

ix 

xxxiii 

lacobi.     i. 

g      Prid.  Id. 

xii 

xxxiiii 

x 

XXXV 

ii 

xv         A     Idus 

xiii 

xxxvi 

xi 

xxxvii 

iii 

iiii        b      xix     kl.  Septembris. 

xiiii 

xxxviii 

xii 

xxxix 

iiii 

c      xviii   kl.      Sol  in  virgo. 

XV 

xl 

xiii 

xii 

v 

xii         d      xvii    kl. 

xvi 

xiii 

xiiii 

xiiii 

i.  Peter,    i 

*             e      xvi      kl. 

xvii 

xliiii 

XV 

xlv,  xlvi 

ii 

f       xv      kl. 

xviii 

xlvii 

xvi 

xlviii 

iii 

ix          g      xiiii    kl. 

xix 

xlix 

xvii 

1 

iiii 

A      xiii     kl. 

XX 

Ii 

xviii 

Iii 

v 

xvii       b      xii      kl. 

xxi 

Lamen.  i 

xix 

Lame,    ii 

ii.  Peter,   i 

vi          c       xi       kl. 

xxii 

iii 

XX 

iiii 

ii 

d      x        kl. 

xxiii 

v 

xxi 

Ezech.    ii 

iii 

xiiii      e       ix       kl.      Bartho.  apo. 

xxiiii 

Ezech.  iii 

xxii 

vi 

i.  lohn.     i 

iii          f       viii     kl. 

XXV 

vii 

xxiii. 

xiii 

ii 

g       vii       kl. 

xxvi 

xiiii 

xxiiii 

xviii 

iii 

xi          A      vi       kl. 

xxvii 

xxxiii 

XXV 

xxxiiii 

iiii 

b      v        kl. 

xxviii 

Daniel,    i 

xxvi 

Danie.    ii 

v 

xix        c       iiii      kl. 

xxix 

iii 

xxvii 

iiii 

ii.  iii.   loh 

viii       d      iii       kl. 

XXX 

v 

xxviii 

vi 

lude.         i 

e      Prid.  kl. 

XXX 

vii 

Math.     i. 

viii 

Roma.      i 

KALENDAR 
1661 


109 


AUGUST  HATH  XXXJ.  DA  YES. 

s  The  Moon  hath  xxx. 

1    1      1 

Morning 
Prayer. 

Even^^ 
Prayer. 

i.  Lesson  2.  Lesson 

\.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

viii 

i     C 

Kalencl 

Lammas^&xj.                       Ierem.29. 

loh.   20. 

Ierem.30 

Hebr.  4. 

xvi 

2 

D 

4.  No. 

|  xxxi 

xxi 

Txxii 

V 

V 

3 

E 

3-  No. 

xxxiii     Acts,    i 

xxxiv 

vi 

4 

F 

pr.  No. 

xxxv     j   ii 

xxxvi 

vii 

xiii 

5 

G 

Nonas 

xxxvii      iii 

xxxviii 

viii 

it 

6 

A 

8.  Jd. 

2Transfigur.  7*of  our  Lord.       xxxix 

iv 

xl 

ix 

7 

B 

7-JA 

7llName  of  lesus.                       zli         |   v               xlii 

X 

X 

8 

C 

6.  Id. 

xliii       j   vi 

xliv 

xi 

9 

D 

5-  Id. 

xlv.  xlvij    vii 

xlvii 

xii 

xviii 

10 

E 

4.  Id. 

S.  Laur.  ?aArch  D.  of  Rom. 

xlviii     ;   viii 

xlix 

xiii 

mi 

ii 

F 

3-  Id. 

[*X, 

L 

ix 

Li 

Jam.    i. 

12 

G 

pr.  Id 

Lii 

X 

Lam:   1. 

ii 

XV 

13 

A 

Idus 

Lam:   2. 

xi 

iii 

iii 

iv 

14 

B 

19.  Kl.  Sept. 

iv 

xii 

V 

iv 

IS 

C 

18.  Kl. 

Ezek.    2. 

xiii 

Ezek.  3 

v 

xii 

16 

D 

17.  Kl. 

!  ^ 

xiv 

vii 

i.  Pet.  i. 

i 

i? 

E 

16.  Kl. 

xiii 

XV 

xiv 

ii 

18 

F 

15.  Kl. 

xviii 

xvi 

xxxiii 

iii 

ix 

19 

G 

14.  Kl. 

xxxiv 

xvii 

Dan.    1.' 

iv 

20 

A 

13-  Kl. 

Dan.    2. 

xviii 

iii 

v 

xvii 

21 

B 

12.   Kl. 

- 

iv 

xix 

V 

2.  Pet.  i. 

vi 

22 

C 

11.  Kl. 

vi 

XX 

vii 

ii 

23 

D 

10.  Kl. 

7«Fast. 

viii 

xxi 

ix 

iii 

xiv 

24 

E 

9.     Kl. 

7«S   Barth.  Apost.  7ft&  M. 

xxii 

i.  lohn.  i 

Hi 

25 

F 

8.    Kl. 

X                 xxiii 

xi 

ii 

26 

G 

7.     Kl 

xii 

xxiv 

Eos.     1. 

iii 

xi 

27 

A 

6.     Kl. 

Hos.2.3 

XXV 

iv 

iv 

28 

B 

5-     Kl. 

7"S.  'Aug.  7»B.  Of  Hippo.*  C.  D. 

v.vL 

xxvi 

vii 

v 

xix 

29 

C 

4.    Kl. 

2Behead:  of  ?M3.  2Iohn  7*Bapt. 

viii 

xxvii 

ix 

2.  3.  lohn. 

viii 

3° 

D 

3.    Kl 

X 

xxviii 

xi 

lude. 

3* 

E 

pr.  Kl. 

xii 

Matt.    i. 

xiii 

Rom.  i. 

no  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

SEPTEMBER, 


September  habet  dies  .xxx.  Luna  .xxix. 
Nox  habet  boras  .xij.  Dies  etia  .xij. 
Ternus  septembris  et  denus  fert  mala  membris. 

xvi      f    Septembrie.    Egidij  abbatis  .ix.  lee.  medie  lee.  de  sancto  prisco. 
v         g      iiij     No. 

A     iij      No. 

xiij      b    pridie  No.    Trasla.  acti  cuthberti  epi  &  conf  .ix.  le.  nisi  fete  fuerint  in.  xl. 
ij         c      None          Bertini  abbatis  &  confesso.  iij.  lee.  cu  noctur. 

d      viii     Id. 
x          e      vii       Id. 

f      vi        Id.    Natiuitas  bte  marie  virginis.  maius  duple  .ix.  lee. 
xviij    g      v         Id.     Gorgonij  martyris.  memoria  tantum. 
vii       A     iiii      Id. 

b      iii       Id.    Prothi  &  hyacinthi  martyrum.  memoria  tantum. 
xv        c      pridie  Id. 
iiij       d     Idus  Sol  in  libra,    (cy.  Equino.  autunale.   Et  firiiut  dies  cafi. 

e      xviii  kal.    Octobrie.  Exalta.  s.  crucis.  mi.  d.  ix.  le.  med.  le.  de  sctis  cornel.  & 
xij       f      xvij  kal.     Octa.  bte  marie,  inuita.  triplex  noue  lectionum. 
j  g      xvi     kal.     Edithe  virgis  no  marty.  ix.  lee.  medie  lee.  de  mart. 

A  xv  kal.  Lamberti  epi  &  marty.  inuita.  simple,  iij.  lectionu. 
ix  b  xiiij  kal.  Obseruat  mensis  noni  ieiunia  semper 

c      xiij    kal.        Post  exaltatum  feria  quarta  diem, 
xvij     d     xij     kal.  Vigilia. 

vi        e      xi      kal.     Mathei  apli  &  euage.  ifer  du  .ix.  lee.  meo.  de.  s.  laudo  epo  &  confes. 

f      x       kal.     Mauricij  socioruque  eius  mar  .ix.  lee. 
xiiii     g      ix       kal.     Tecle  virgis.  no  marty.  iij.  lectionu  cu  nocturno. 
iij        A     viii     kal. 

b  vii  kal.  Firmini  epi  &  marty.  inuita.  simplex,  iij.  lectionu. 
xi  c  vi  kal.  Cypriani  epi  &  Justine  virgis.  inuita.  dup.  triu  lee. 
xix  d  v  kal.  Cosme  &  damiani  marty.  inuita.  du.  iij.  lectionu. 

e       iiij     kal. 
viij      f      iij      kal.    Michaelis  archageli.    Inferiua  duplex,  noue  lee. 

g    pridie  kal.     Hieronymi  pbfi  &  docto.     Inferius  duplex  .ix.  lect. 

Subiungas  iudith  post  vigiliamque  mathei  Adonai. 

Post  sanctum  cosmam  des  historiam  machabeo.  Adaperiat. 

Fructus  maturi  septembri  sunt  valituri. 

Et  pyra  cum  vino,  panis  cum  lacte  caprino. 

Quamque  dat  vrtica  tibi  potio  fertur  arnica. 

Tune  venam  pandas,  species  cum  semine  mandas. 


KALENDAR 

1549 


in 


SEPTEMBER. 

C  September. 

Matins. 

Euensong. 

C  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

Ii.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

f 

Kalend. 

i 

i 

Dani.  ix. 

Math,     ii 

Dani.     x 

Roma,   ii 

g 

iiii.  No. 

ii 

ii 

xi 

iii 

xii 

iii 

A 

iii.  No. 

iii 

iii 

xiii 

iiii 

xiiii 

iiii 

b 

Prid.  No. 

iiii 

iiii 

Ose.         i 

v 

Ose.  ii.  iii 

v 

c 

Nonas. 

v 

v 

iiii 

vi 

v.  vi 

vi 

d 

viii.  Id. 

vi 

vi 

vii 

vii 

viii 

vii 

e 

vii.  Id. 

vii 

vii 

ix 

via 

X 

viii 

f 

vi.  Id. 

viii 

viii 

xi 

ix 

xii 

ix 

g 

v.  Id. 

ix 

ix 

xiii 

X 

xiiii 

X 

A 

iiii.  Id. 

X 

X 

loel.        i 

xi 

loel.       ii 

xi 

b 

iii.  Id. 

xi 

xi 

iii 

xii 

Amos,     i 

xii 

c 

Prid.  Id. 

xii 

xii 

Amos,    ii 

xiii 

iii 

xiii 

d 

Idus. 

xiii 

xiii 

iiii 

xiiii 

v 

xiiii 

e 

xviii.  kl. 

xiiii 

xiiii 

vi 

XV 

vii 

XV 

f 

xvii.  kl. 

XV 

XV 

viii 

xvi 

ix 

xvi 

g 

xvi.  kl. 

xvi 

xvi 

Abdias.  i 

xvii 

lonas.     i 

i.  Cor.    i 

A 

xv.  kl. 

xvii 

xvii 

lo     ii.  iii 

xviii 

iiii 

ii 

b 

xiiii.  kl. 

xviii 

xviii 

Miche.    i 

xix 

Miche.   ii 

iii 

c 

xiii.  kl. 

xix 

xix 

iii 

XX 

iiii 

iiii 

d 

Mi.  kl. 

XX 

XX 

v 

xxi 

vi 

v 

e 

xi.  kl. 

xxi 

Matbewe. 

•  xxi 

vii 

xxii 

Naum.    i 

vi 

f 

x.  kl. 

xxii 

xxii 

Naum.  ii 

xxiii 

iii 

vii 

g 

ix.  kl. 

xxiii 

xxiii 

Abacuc.  i 

xxiiii 

Abacu.  ii 

viii 

A 

viii.  kl. 

xxiiii 

xxiiii 

iii 

XXV 

Sopho.    i 

ix 

b 

vii.  kl. 

XXV 

XXV 

Soph,     ii 

xxvi 

iii 

X 

c 

vi.  kl. 

xxvi 

xxvi 

Agge.      i 

xxvii 

Agge.     ii 

xi 

d 

v.  kl. 

xxvii 

xxvii 

Zacha.    i 

xxviii 

Zach.ii.iii 

xii 

e 

iiii.  kl. 

xxviii 

xxviii 

iiii.  v 

Mark,      i 

vi 

xiii 

f 

iii.  kl. 

xxix 

Michael. 

xxix 

vii 

ii 

viii 

xiiii 

g 

Prid.  kl. 

XXX 

XXX 

ix 

iii 

X 

XV 

112 


KALENDAR 

1552 


C  SEPTEMBRE  HATH.  XXX.  DAVES. 

yearning  prayer.                    }L\iening  prayer 

<I  Psalmes. 

1 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

xvi       f      Kalend. 

i 

Danie.  ix 

Math,     ii 

Danie.    x 

Roma.    ii. 

v           g      iiii.  No. 

ii 

xi 

iii 

xii 

iii 

A     iii.    No. 

iii 

xiii 

iiii 

xiiii 

iiii 

xiii       b      Prid.  No. 

iiii 

Ozee.      i. 

v 

Oze.  ii.  iii 

v 

ii          c      Nonas.        Dog  dales  end 

v 

iiii 

vi 

v.  vi 

vi 

d      viii.  Id. 

vi 

vii 

vii 

viii 

vii 

x           e      vii.  Id. 

•\ 

ix 

viii 

x 

viii 

f       vi.    Id. 

vii. 

xi 

ix 

xii 

ix 

xviii     g      v.     Id. 

ix 

xiii 

x 

xiiii 

x 

vii        A     iiii.   Id. 

x 

loel.       i. 

xi 

loel.      ii. 

xi 

b      iii.    Id. 

xi 

iii 

xii 

Amos.    i. 

xii 

xv         c      Prid.  Id. 

xii 

Amos.  ii. 

xiii 

iii 

xiii 

iiii        d      Idus. 

xiii 

iiii 

xiiii 

v 

xiiii 

e      xviii.  kl.  Octobris 

xiiii 

vi 

XV 

vii 

XV 

xii         f       xvii.   kl.       Sol  in  Libra 

XV 

viii 

xvi 

ix 

xvi 

j            g      xvi.     kl. 

xvi 

Abdias.  i 

xvii 

lonas.     i 

i.  Corin.    i 

A      xv.      kl. 

xvii 

loh.  ii.  iii 

xviii 

iiii 

ii 

ix          b      xiiii.   kl. 

xviii 

Miche.    i 

xix 

Miche.   ii 

iii 

c       xiii.     kl. 

xix 

iii 

XX 

iiii 

iiii 

xvij      d      xii.     kl. 

XX 

v 

xxi 

vi 

v 

vi         e      xi.      kl.      S.  Matthew, 

xxi 

vii 

xxii 

Naum.    i 

vi 

f       x.       kl. 

xxii 

Naum.  ii 

xxiii 

iii 

vii 

xiiii     g      ix.      kl. 

xxiii 

Abacu.  i. 

xxiiii 

Abacu.   ii 

viii 

iii         A      viii.    kl. 

xxiiii 

iii 

xxv 

Soph.     i. 

ix 

b      vii.     kl. 

XXV 

Soph.    ii. 

xxvi 

iii 

x 

xi           c       vi.       kl. 

xxv  i 

Agge.     i. 

xxvii 

Agge.   ii. 

xi 

d      v.       kl. 

xx  vii 

Zacha.    i. 

xxviii 

Zac.  ii.  iii 

xii 

xix        e      iiii.     kl. 

xx  viii 

iiii.  v 

Marke.    i 

vi 

xiii 

viii       f      iii.      kl.     S.  Michael. 

xxix 

vii 

ii 

viii 

xiiii 

g      Prid.  kl. 

XXX 

ix 

iii 

x 

XV 

KALENDAR 
1661 


SEPTEMBER  HATH  XXX.  DA  YES. 

3  The  Moon  hath  xxix. 

1   \     1 

Morning 
Prayer. 

EvemVrj' 
Prayer. 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

xvi 

I 

F 

Kalenci 

2Giles  -"Abbot  *&  Conf. 

Eos.    14. 

Mat.    2. 

loel.       i. 

Rom.  2 

V 

2 

G 

4.  No. 

Joel.      2. 

iii 

iii 

iii 

3 

A 

3-  No. 

Amos.   1. 

iv 

Amos    2. 

iv 

xiii 

4 

B 

pr.  No. 

iii 

V 

iv 

V 

ii 

5 

e 

Nona: 

V 

vi 

vi 

vi 

6 

D 

8.  Id. 

vii 

vii 

viii 

vii 

X 

7 

E 

7.  Id. 

7a£nurchus  B.  of  Orleans 

ix 

viii 

Obadiah 

viii 

8 

F 

6.  Id. 

2Nativ.*  of  y.BLVirg.2Mary 

lonah.  1. 

ix 

lonah.  2.  3. 

ix 

xv  Hi 

9 

G 

5-  Id. 

iv 

X 

Mich.    1. 

X 

vii 

10 

A 

4.  Id. 

Micha.  2. 

xi 

iii 

xi 

ii 

B 

3-  Id. 

iv 

xii 

V 

xii 

XV 

12 

C 

pr.  Id. 

vi 

xiii 

vii 

xiii  ' 

iv 

13 

D 

Idus 

Nahum.l. 

xiv 

Nahum.2. 

xiv 

14 

E 

i8.KLOrf0£. 

-Holy  crosse  7aday 

iii 

XV 

Habak.  1. 

XV 

xii 

15 

F 

17.  Kl. 

Habak.  2 

xvi 

iii 

xvi 

i 

16 

G 

16.  Kl. 

Zepn.     1. 

xvii 

Zeph.     2. 

i.  Cor.  i. 

17 

A 

15.  Kl. 

*  Lambert  -"B.&M. 

iii 

xviii 

Hagg.   1. 

ii 

ix 

18 

B 

14.  Kl. 

Hagg.   2. 

xix 

Zecn.     1. 

iii 

19 

C 

13.  Kl. 

Zech.2.3. 

XX 

iv.v. 

iv 

xvii 

20 

D 

12.  Kl. 

Vtol 

vi 

xxi 

vii 

V 

vi 

21 

E 

ii.  Kl. 

S.  Mat.  7aAp.  Evang.  &  M. 

xxii 

vi 

22 

F 

10.  Kl. 

viii 

xxiii 

ix 

vii 

xiv 

23 

G 

9.    Kl. 

z 

xxiv 

xi 

viii 

Hi 

24 

A 

8.    Kl. 

xii 

XXV 

xiii 

ix 

25 

B 

7.    Kl. 

xiv 

xxv  i 

Mai.       1. 

X 

XI 

26 

C 

6.    Kl. 

»S.2Cypr:*  Ar.^B.  of  Garth 

Mai.        2 

xxvii 

iii 

xi 

xlx 

27 

D 

5-    Kl. 

[*K 

iv 

xxviii 

Tob.       1 

xii 

28 

E 

4-    Kl. 

Tob.        2 

Mark.  i. 

iii 

xiii 

viii 

29 

F 

3.    Kl. 

5.  Mich.  7»&  all  Angels 

ii 

xiv 

3O 

G 

pr.  Kl. 

7*8.  sffierome  '»Pr.  Conf.  & 

iv 

iii 

vi 

XV 

[Doct. 

ii4  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

OCTOBER, 


IT  T      October  habet  dies  .xxxj.  Luna  .xxx 
Nox  habet  boras  .xiiij.  Dies  vero  .x. 
Tertius  et  denus  est  sicut  mors  alienus. 

x vi      A     Octobris.    Remigi j,  germa .  veda.  &  bauo .  eporum.  ix.  lee.  medie  lee.  de  scto  meloro. 
v         b      vi      No.    Th5e  herfordesis  epi  &  confes  .ix.  le.  med.  le.  de.  s.  leod. 
xiiij     c      v        No. 
ii         d     iiii     No. 

e      iii      No. 
x          f     pridie  No.     Fidis  Virginia  &  marty.  inuita.  sim.  iii.  lectionu. 

g     None.          Marci  &  marcelliani.  inuita.  duple,  iij.  lectionum. 
xviij    A     viii      Id. 
vij       b      vii      Id.    Dionysij  socioruque  eius  martyrum  .ix.  lectionu. 

c  vii  Id.  Georeonis  socioruque  eius  marty.  inui.  sim  .iij.  lect. 
xv  d  v  Id.  Nigasij  socioruque  eius  martyrum  inui.  dup  .iij.  lect. 
iiij  e  iiij  Id. 

f      iii       Id.    Traslatio  set!  edwardi  regis.     Inferius  dup  .iij.  le. 
xij       g     pridie  Id.     Calixti  pape  &  mar.  Iferius  du.  iij.  le.    Sol  I  scorpioe. 
j          A     Idus.  Vulfrani  epi  &  confessoris  .ix.  lectionum. 

b      xvii  kal.    Nouebris.    Michaelis  i  mote  tuba.  inui.  tri  .ix.  lee. 
ix        c      xvi    kal.    Etheldre  Virginia  no  marty.  noue  lectionum. 

d     xv     kal.    Luce  euangeliste.    Inferius  duplex,  noue  lectionu. 
xvij     e      xiiii  kal.    Fredeswide  virginis  no  marty.  noue  lectionum. 
vj        f      xiii    kal. 

g      xii     kal.     Vndecim  miliu  virginu.  inuita.  dup  .iij.  lectionu. 
xiiij     A     xi       kal. 
iii        b      x       kal.     Romani  epi  &  cofessoris  .iii.  lectionu  eu.  noctur. 

c      ix      kal. 

xi        d      viii    kal.    Crispini  &  crispiniani  .mi.  d.  ix.  lee.  medie  lee.  de  scto  iohane  de 
xix      e      vii     kal.  (beuerlaco  epo  &  conf  essore. 

f      vi      kal.  Vigilia. 

viii      g      v       kal.    Simonis  &  iude  aplorum.     Inferiua  dup  .ix.  lectio. 

A     iiii     kal. 
xvi      b      iii      kal. 

v         c    pridie  kal.    Quintini  marty.  triu.  lectio,  cu  noc.  Vigilia. 

Post  iudam  simonem  subiungas  ezecbielem.  Vidi  dominum. 

October  vina  prebet  cum  came  f  erina. 

Necnon  aucina  caro  tune  valet  &  volucrina. 

Quamuis  sit  sana  :  tamen  est  repletio  vana. 

Quantum  vis  comede  :  sed  non  precordia  lede. 


KALENDAR 

1549 


OCTOBER. 

C  October. 

Matins. 

Euensong. 



C  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

A 

Kalend. 

i 

i 

Zacha.  xi 

Mar.    iiii 

Zacha.  xii 

i.   Cor.  x 

b 

vi.  No. 

ii 

ii 

xiii 

v 

.xiiii 

ii.   Cor.  i 

c 

v.  No. 

iii 

iii 

Mala,      i 

vi 

Mala,     ii 

ii 

d 

iiii.  No. 

iiii 

iiii 

iii 

vii 

iiii 

iii 

e 

iii.  No. 

V 

V 

Toby,     i 

viii 

Toby,    ii 

iiii 

f 

Prid.  No. 

vi 

vi 

iii 

ix 

iiii 

v 

g 

Nonas. 

vii 

vii 

V 

X 

vi 

vi 

A 

viii  Id. 

viii 

viii 

vii 

xi 

iii 

vii 

b 

vii.  Id. 

ix 

ix 

ix 

xii 

X 

viii 

c 

vi.  Id. 

X 

X 

xi 

xiii 

xii 

ix 

d 

V.  Id. 

xi 

xi 

xiii 

xiiii 

iiii 

x 

e 

iiii.  Id. 

xii 

xii 

ludith     i 

XV 

ludit.     ii 

xi 

f 

iii.  Id. 

xiii 

xiii 

iii 

xvi 

iiii 

xii 

g 

Prid.  Id. 

xiiii 

xiiii 

v 

Lu.  di.  i 

vi 

xiii 

A 

Idus. 

XV 

XV 

vii 

di.  i 

viii 

Galath.   i 

b 

xvii.  kl. 

xvi 

xvi 

ix 

ii 

X 

ii 

c 

xvi.  kl. 

xvii 

xvii 

xi 

iii 

xii 

iii 

d 

XV.  kl. 

xviii 

Luc.  Euan. 

xviii 

xiii 

iiii 

xiiii 

iiii 

e 

xiiii.  kl. 

xix 

xix 

XV 

v 

xvi 

v 

f 

xiii.  kl. 

XX 

XX 

Sapi.       i 

vi 

Sapi.      ii 

vi 

g 

xii.  kl. 

xxi 

xxi 

iii 

vii 

iiii 

Ephe.      i 

A 

xi.  kl. 

xxii 

xxii 

v 

viii 

vi 

ii 

b 

x.  kl. 

xxiii 

xxiii 

vii 

ix 

viii 

iii 

c 

in.  kl. 

xxiiii 

yxiiii 

ix 

X 

X 

iiii 

d 

viii.  kl. 

XXV 

XXV 

xi 

xi 

xii 

v 

e 

vii.  kl. 

xxvi 

XXV 

xiii 

xii 

xiiii 

vi 

f 

vi.  kl. 

xxvii 

xxvii 

XV 

xiii 

xvi 

Philip,     i 

g 

v.kl. 

xxviii 

Sy.  and.  lu. 

xxviii 

xvii 

xiiii 

xviii 

ii 

A 

iiii.  kl. 

xxix 

xxix 

xix 

XV 

Eccls.      i 

iii 

b 

iii.  kl. 

XXX 

XXX 

Eccls.    ii 

xvi 

iii 

iiii 

c 

Prid.  kl. 

xxxi 

XXX 

iiii 

xvii 

v 

Colos.     i 

n6 


KALENDAR 

1552 


C  OCTOBRE  HATH.  XXXI.  DA  YES. 

"Morning  prayer.                    Y.\\&s\ing  prayer. 

, 

Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

xv  i        A      Kalenel. 

i 

Zacha.  xi 

Mar.  iiii. 

Zach.  xii. 

i.  cori.  xvi. 

v           b      vi.   No. 

ii 

xiii 

v 

xiiii 

ii.  corin.  i 

xiii       c       v      No. 

iii 

Malac.     i 

vi 

Mala,     ii 

ii 

ii          d      iiii   No. 

iiii 

iii 

vii 

iiii 

iii 

e       iii    No. 

v 

Tobi.      i 

viii 

Tobi.     ii 

iiii 

x           f       Prid.  No. 

vi 

iii 

ix 

iiii 

v 

g      Nonas 

vii 

v 

x 

vi 

vi 

xviii     A     viii   Id. 

viii 

vii 

xi 

viii 

vii 

vii         b      vii    Id.          Terme.  begin 

ix 

ix 

xii 

x 

viii 

c      vi     Id. 

x 

xi 

xiii 

xii 

ix 

xv         d      v       Id. 

xi 

xiii 

xiiii 

xiiii 

x 

iiii       e       iiii    Id. 

xii 

ludith.    i 

XV 

ludit.     ii 

xi 

f       iii     Id. 

xiii 

iii 

xvi 

iiii 

xii 

xii        g      Prid.  Id.     Sol.  in  scor. 

xiiii 

v 

Luke.di.i 

vi 

xiii 

i            A      Idus 

XV 

vii 

di.  i 

viii 

Galath.     i 

b      xvii    kl.       Novembris 

xvi 

ix 

ii 

x 

ii 

ix          c       xvi      kl. 

xvii 

xi 

iii 

xii 

iii 

d      xv      kl.         Luke  Euan. 

xviii 

xiii 

iiii 

xiiii 

iiii 

xvii      e       xiiii    kl. 

xix 

XV 

v 

xvi 

v 

vi          f       xiii      kl. 

XX 

Sapie.      i 

vi 

Sapi.      ii 

vi 

g      xii      kl. 

xxi 

iii 

vii 

iiii 

Ephes.      i 

xiiii     A      xi       kl. 

xxii 

v 

viii 

vi 

ii 

iit         b      x        kl. 

xxiii 

vii 

ix 

viii 

iii 

c      ix       kl. 

xxiiii 

ix 

X 

x 

iiii 

xi          d      viii      kl. 

XXV 

xi 

xi 

xii 

v 

e       vii       kl. 

xxvi 

xiii 

xii 

xiiii 

vi 

xix        f       vi        kl. 

xxvii 

XV 

xiii 

xvi 

Philip,     i. 

viii       g      v        kl.     Simon  &  lude 

xxviii 

xvii 

xiiii 

xviii 

ii 

A      iiii      kl. 

xxix 

xix 

XV 

Eccles.  i. 

iii 

xvi       b      iii       kl. 

XXX 

Eccles.  ii 

xvi 

iii 

iiii 

v            c       Prid.  Kl. 

XXX 

iiii 

xvii 

v 

Collosi.    i. 

KALENDAR 
1661 


117 


OCTOBER  HATH  XXXJ.  DA  YES. 

3  The  Moon  hath  TTT. 

I   }      1 

Morning 
Prayer. 

Evemwjf 
Prayer. 

i.  Lesson. 

2.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

xvi 

I 

A 

Kalend, 

2Remigius  ?»B.  of  Khemes 

Tob.     7. 

Mark.  4. 

Tob.     8. 

i.  Cor.  16. 

V 

2 

B 

6.  No. 

iz 

V 

X 

2.  Cor.  i. 

xiii 

3 

C 

5-  No. 

3d 

vi 

xii 

ii 

a 

4 

D 

4.  No. 

xiii 

vii 

xiv 

iii 

5 

E 

3.  No. 

ludeth.l. 

viii 

Iudetb.2. 

iv 

X 

6 

F 

pr.  No. 

2Faith7»Virg.  &M. 

ill 

ix 

iv 

V 

7 

G 

Nonse 

V 

X 

vi 

vi 

xviii 

8 

A 

8.  Id. 

vli 

xi 

viii 

vii 

vii 

9 

B 

7.  Id. 

S.  2Denys  r»Areop.  B.  &  M. 

ix 

xii 

X 

viii 

10 

C 

6.  Id. 

xi 

xiii 

xii 

ix 

XV 

XI 

D 

5-  Id. 

xiii 

xiv 

xiv 

X 

in 

12 

E 

4.  Id. 

XV 

XV 

xvi 

xi 

*3 

F 

3-  W. 

7aTranaLof  K.  2Edward7»Con£ 

Wiad.  i. 

xvi 

Wisd.  2. 

xii 

xii 

14 

G 

pr.  Id. 

iii 

Luke  i  to 
hp. 

iv 

xiii 

i 

IS 

A 

Idus. 

V 

i.39-39 

vi 

Gal.      i. 

16 

B 

17.  Kl.  Nov. 

vii 

ii 

viii 

ii 

ix 

17 

C 

16.  Kl. 

'Ethelrede  *Virg. 

ix 

iii 

X 

iii 

18 

D 

15.  Kl. 

S.  Luke  Evang. 

iv 

iv 

xvii 

19 

E 

14.  KL 

xi 

v 

xii 

V 

vi 

20 

F 

13-  Kl. 

xiii 

vi 

xiv 

V 

21 

G 

12.   Kl. 

XV 

vii 

xvi 

Ephes.  i. 

xiv 

22 

A 

u.  Kl. 

xvii 

viii 

xviii 

ii 

iii 

23 

B 

10.  Kl. 

xix 

ix 

Eccrus.i. 

iii. 

24 

C 

9.    Kl. 

Ecctus.2. 

X 

iii 

iv 

xi 

25 

D 

8.    Kl. 

'Crispine  7»Mart. 

iv 

xi 

V 

V 

26 

E 

7.    Kl. 

vi 

xii 

vii 

vi 

xix 

27 

F 

6.    Kl. 

araat 

viii 

xiii 

ix 

Phil.     i. 

via 

28 

G 

5.    Kl. 

7»S.  Sim.  &  '»S.  lud.  '»Ap.  &  M. 

xiv 

ii 

29 

A 

4.    KL 

X 

XV 

xi 

iii 

xvi 

30 

B 

3-    KL 

xii 

xvi 

xiii 

iv 

V 

31 

C 

pr.  Kl. 

apast 

xiv 

xvii 

XV 

Col.      i. 

n8  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

NOUEMBEK. 


in""  T       Nouember  habet  dies  .  xxx.  Luna  .  xxix. 
•^^  •"-J    Nox  habet  boras  .xvi.  Dies  vero  .viii. 
Scorpius  est  quintus :  et  tertius  est  nece  cinctus. 

d    Nouembris  Solenitas  olm  sctorum.  maius  duplex  .ix.  lectionu. 

xiii      e      iiii     No.     Comeo.  oim  defucto.  ix.  lee.  ad  ves.  de.  s.  maria  fiat  meo.  de.  s.  eusta. 
ii         f      iii       No.    Vvenefrede  virgi.  &  mr.  ix.  lee.  (&  so. 

g    pridieNo. 
x          A     None. 

b      viii      Id.    Leonardi  abbatis.  ix.  lectionum. 
xviii    c      vii       Id. 
vii       d     vi        Id.    Quatuor  coronatoru  mar.  inui.  dup.  iii.  lectionu 

e      v         Id.    Theodori  marty.  inuita.  simplex,  triu  lectionu. 
xv        f      iiii      Id. 
iiii       g      iii        Id.     Martini  epi  &  confes.  inuita.  triplex,  nemo  lectionu. 

A  pridie  Id.    Meoria  de  scto  mena  marty.  Sol.  in  sagittario. 
xii        b     Idus.  Brictii  epi  &  confes.  mi.  dup.  iii.  le.  Meo.  de.  s.  martino 

i  c     xviii  kal.    Decebris.    Translatio  scti  erkenwaldi  episcopi. 

d     zvii  kal.    Machuti  epi  &  confes.  ix.  lee.  med.  lee.  de  scto  martino. 
ix         e      xvi    kal.    Depositio  scti  edmudi  archiepi,  inui.  triplex,  ix.  le. 

f      xv     kal.    Hugonis  epi  &  confes.  ix.  lee.  med.  lee.  de  scto  aniano. 
xvii      g      xiiii  kal.    Octa.  sancti  martini,  inuita.  duplex,  triu  Ictonu. 
vi         A     xiii    kal. 

b     xii     kal.    Edmundi  regis  &  martyris.  ix.  lectionum. 
xiiii     c      xi      kal. 
iii        d      x       kal.    Cecilie  virginis  &  martyris.  ix.  lectionum. 

e      ix      kal.    Clemetis  pape  &  mar.  ix.  le.  meo.  de.  s.  felicitate  virgi. 
xi        f      viii    kal.     Chrysogoni  marty.  inuit.  simplex,  triu  lectionu. 
xix      g      vii     kal.    Katherine  virginis  &  martyris.  noue  lectionum. 

A    vi      kal.    Lini  pape  et  marty.  inuita.  simplex,  iii.  lectionu. 
viii       b      v        kal. 

c      iiii     kal. 

xvi       d     iii      kal.     Saturnini  &  sisinij.  iii.  lee.  cum  noc.  Vigilia. 

v          e  pridie  kal.    Andree  apli.  inferius  duplex,  nouem  lectionum. 
Post  f  estum  lini  erit  semper  aduentus  domini.  Aspiciens. 

Hoc  tibi  scire  datur  quod  reuma  nouembre  creatur. 

Queque  nociua  veta,  tua  sit  preciosa  dieta. 

Balnea  cum  venere  tune  non  conducit  habere. 

Fotio  tune  sana,  tune  nulla  minutio  vana. 


KALENDAR 
1549 


119 


NOUEMBER. 

€  Nouember. 

Matins. 

Euensong. 

C  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson 

d 

Kalend. 

i 

Al  sainctes. 

i 

Sap.    iii. 

He.xi.xii. 

Sap.      v. 

Apoc.  xix 

e 

iiii.  No. 

ii 

ii 

Eccle.  vi. 

Lu.    xviii 

Eccl.    vii 

Colos.    ii 

f 

iii.  No. 

iii 

iii 

viii 

xix 

ix 

iii 

g 

Prid.  No 

iiii 

iiii 

X 

XX 

xi 

iiii 

A 

Nonas. 

V 

V 

xii 

xxi 

xiii 

i.  Thes.  i 

b 

viii.  Id. 

vi 

vi 

xiiii 

xxii 

XV 

ii 

c 

vii.  Id. 

vii 

vii 

xvi 

xxiii 

xvii 

iii 

d 

vi.  Id. 

viii 

viii 

xviii 

xxiiii 

xix 

iiii 

e 

v.  Id. 

ix 

ix 

XX 

lohn.       i 

xxi 

v 

f 

iiii.  Id. 

X 

X 

xxii 

ii 

xxiii 

iiThes.   i 

K 

iii.  Id. 

xi 

xi 

xxiiii 

iii 

XXV 

ii 

A 

Prid.  Id 

xii 

xii 

xxvi 

iiii 

xxvii 

iii 

b 

Idus. 

xiii 

xiii 

xxviii 

V 

xxix 

i.  Timo  i 

c 

xviii.  kl. 

xiiii 

xiiii 

XXX 

vi 

xxx  i 

ii.  iii 

d 

xvii.  kl. 

XV 

XV 

xxxii 

vii 

xxxiii 

iiii 

e 

xvi.  kl. 

xvi 

xvi 

xxxiiii 

viii 

XXXV 

v 

f 

xv.  kl. 

xvii 

xvii 

xxxvi 

ix 

xxxvii 

vi 

g 

xiiii.  kl. 

xviii 

xviii 

xxxviii 

X 

xxxix 

ii.  Tim.  i 

A 

xiii.  kl. 

xix 

xix 

xl 

xi 

xii 

ii 

b 

xii.  kl. 

XX 

XX 

xiii 

xii 

xiiii 

iii 

c 

xi.  kl. 

xxi 

xxi 

xliiii 

xiii 

xlv 

iiii 

d 

x.  kl. 

xxii 

xxii 

xlvi 

xiiii 

xlvii 

Titus,      i 

e 

is.  kl. 

xxiii 

xxiii 

xlviii 

XV 

xlix 

ii.  iii 

f 

viii.  kl. 

xxiiii 

xxiiii 

1 

xvi 

Ii 

Phile.      i 

g 

vii.  kl. 

XXV 

XXV 

Baruc.    i 

xvii 

Baruc.  ii 

Hebre.    i 

A 

vi.  kl. 

xxvi 

xxvi 

iii 

xviii 

iiii 

ii 

b 

v.kl. 

xxvii 

xxvii 

V 

xix 

vi 

iii 

c 

iiii.  kl. 

xxviii 

xxviii 

Esay.      i 

XX 

Esay.     ii 

iiii 

d 

iii.  kl. 

xxix 

xxix 

iii 

xxi 

iiii 

v 

e 

Prid.  kl. 

XXX 

Andre,  apo. 

XXX 

V 

Actes.      i 

vi 

vi 

120 


KALENDAR 
1552 


f[  NOUEMBRE  HATH  .XXX.  DA  YES. 

Mo  rn  ing  prayer. 

EuemVzf  prayer. 

C  Psalmes 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

d      Kalend.      All  Samtes. 

i 

Sap.     iii. 

He.xi.xii. 

Sap.       v. 

Apoc.  xix. 

xiii       e       iiii.  No. 

ii 

Eccle.  vi. 

Luk.  xviii 

Eccle.  vii 

Collos.    ii. 

ii           f       iii.    No. 

iii 

viii 

xix 

ix 

iii 

g      Prid.  No. 

iiii 

x 

XX 

xi 

iiii 

x          A     Nonas. 

v 

xii 

xxi 

xiii 

i.   Thes.   i 

b      viii.  Id. 

vi 

xiiii 

xxii 

XV 

ii 

xv  iii     c       vii.   Id. 

vii 

xvi 

xxiii 

xvii 

iii 

vii         d      vi.    Id. 

viii 

xviii 

xxiiii 

xix 

iiii 

e      v.     Id. 

ix 

XX 

lohn.       i 

xxi 

v 

xv         f       iiii.   Id. 

x 

xxii 

ii 

xxiii 

ii.  Thes.  i. 

iiii        g      iii.    Id. 

xi 

xxiiii 

iii 

XXV 

ii 

A      Prid.  Id. 

xii 

xxvi 

iiii 

xxvii 

iii 

xii         b      Idus.            Sol  in  Sa. 

xiii 

xxviii 

v 

xxix 

i.   Timo.   i 

i            c       xviii.  kl.      December. 

xiiii 

XXX 

vi 

xxxi 

ii.  iii 

d      xvii.   kl. 

XV 

xxxii 

vii 

xxxiii 

iiii 

ix          e       xvi.     kl. 

xvi 

xxxiiii 

viii 

XXXV 

v 

f         XV.        kl. 

xvii 

xxxvi 

ix 

xxxvii 

vi 

xvii      g      xiiii.   kl. 

xviii 

xxxviii 

x 

xxxix 

ii.  Timo.  i 

vi          A      xiii.     kl. 

xix 

xl 

xi 

xii 

ii 

b      xii      kl. 

XX 

xiii 

xii 

xiiii 

iii 

xiiii     c       xi        kl. 

xxi 

xliiii 

xiii 

xlv 

iiii 

iii         d      x         kl. 

xxii 

xlvi 

xiiii 

xlvii 

Titus.       i. 

e      ix        kl.      S.  Clement. 

xxiii 

xlviii 

XV 

xlix 

ii.  iii 

xi          f       viii      kl. 

xxiiii 

1 

xvi 

Ii 

Phile.       i. 

g      vii       kl. 

XXV 

Baruc.     i 

xvii 

Baruc.    ii 

Hebre.      i 

xix       A      vi        kl. 

xxvi 

iii 

xviii 

iiii 

ii 

viii       b      v         kl. 

xxvii 

v 

xix 

vi 

iii 

c       iiii       kl.       Terms  ende 

xxviii 

Esai.    i 

XX 

Esai.       ii 

iiii 

xvi        d      iii        kl. 

xxix 

iii 

xxi 

iiii 

v 

v           e      Prid    kl.         Andrew  ap. 

XXX 

v 

Actes.      i 

vi 

vi 

KALENDAR 

1661 


121 


NOVEMBER  HATH  XXX.  DA  YES 

3  The  Moon  hath  TTIX. 

Morning 

Evem'w^ 

Prayer. 

Prayer. 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

i 

D 

Kalend 

All  Saints  May. 

xiii 

2 

E 

4.  No 

Ecctus.16. 

Luke.  1  8. 

Ectus.17. 

Coloss.  2. 

ii 

3 

F 

3-  No. 

xviii 

xix 

xix 

iii 

4 

G 

pr. 

No. 

XX 

XX 

xxi 

iv 

X 

5 

A 

Nonae 

Papists  Conspiracy 

xxii 

xxi 

xxiii 

i.Thes.i. 

6 

B 

8.  Id. 

-Leonard  ""Confess. 

xxiv 

xxii 

xxv  a) 

ii 

xviii 

7 

C 

7.  Id. 

xxvii 

xxiii 

xxviii 

iii 

vii 

3 

D 

6.  Id. 

xxix 

xxiv 

xxx  b) 

iv 

9 

E 

5-  Id. 

xxxi 

lohn.  i 

xxxii 

V 

XV 

10 

F 

4.  Id. 

xxxiii 

ii 

xxxiv 

2.Thes.i. 

iv 

II 

G 

3-  Id. 

2S.  Martin  7«B.*&Confi 

XXXV 

iii 

xxxvi 

ii. 

12 

A 

pr. 

Id. 

xxxvii 

iv 

xxxviii 

iii 

xii 

13 

B 

Idus 

?Britius*  Bishop 

xxxix 

V 

xl 

i.  Tim.  i. 

i 

14 

C 

1  8. 

Kl.  Dec 

xii 

vi 

xiii 

ii.  iii. 

15 

D 

17- 

Kl. 

2Machutus*  B. 

xliii 

vii 

xliv 

iv 

ix 

16 

E 

1  6. 

Kl. 

xiv 

viii 

xlvic) 

V 

17 

F 

15- 

Kl. 

-Hugh  7»B.  of  Lincoln. 

xlvii 

ix 

xlviii 

vi 

xvii 

18 

G 

14. 

Kl. 

xlix 

X 

L 

2.  Tim.  i 

vi 

19 

A 

13. 

Kl. 

Li. 

xi 

Baruch.  1. 

ii 

20 

B 

12. 

Kl. 

••Edmund  *-K.  &  M. 

Baruch.  2. 

xii 

iii 

iii 

xiv 

21 

C 

II. 

Kl. 

iv 

xiii 

V 

iv 

iii 

22 
23 

D 

E 

10. 
9- 

Kl. 
Kl. 

acecilia  7«Virg.  &  M. 
S.  Clem'.  7»1.  B.  of  Rom.  &  M. 

Bel&y. 
[Drag. 

xiv 

XV 

Hist,  of 

[Susan. 
Isai.     1. 

Titus    i 
ii.  iii 

xi 

24 

F 

8. 

Kl. 

Jsai.     2 

xvi 

iii 

Philemon 

xix 

25 

G 

7- 

Kl. 

2Catherine'aVirg.&M. 

iv 

xvii 

V 

Hebr.  i. 

26 

A 

6. 

Kl. 

vi 

xviii 

vii 

ii 

viii 

27 

B 

5- 

Kl. 

viii 

xix 

ix 

iii 

2 

8 

C 

4- 

Kl. 

X 

XX 

xi 

iv 

xvi 

29 

D 

3- 

Kl. 

«Fast 

xii 

xxi 

xiii 

v 

V 

3° 

E. 

pr. 

Kl. 

?»S.  Andr.  Apost.  *«&  M. 

Acts.  i. 

vi 

Note  that  a)  Ecctus  26.— .is  to  be  read  onely  to  vr.  13.  &  b)  Ecctus  30.— onely  to  vr.  18.  & 
c)  Ecctus  46.— onely  to  vr.  20. 


122  KALENDAR 

SOURCES 

DECEMBER, 


l?r  T       December  habet  dies  .xxxj.  Luna  .xxx. 

•*—J    Nox  habet  horas  .xviij.  Dies,  vero  vj. 
Septimus  exanguis :  virosus  denus  vt  anguis. 

f      Decembris. 
xiij      g      iij      No. 
ii          A     iii      No. 
x          b   pridie  No.    Osmundi  episcopi  &  cofessoris  .ix.  lectionu. 

c      None. 

xviij    d      viii     Id.    Nicolai  epi  &  cofessoris  .ix.  lectionum. 
vii       e      vii      Id.     Octa.  sancti  andree  apli.  inuita.  trip  .iii.  lectionu. 
f      vi       Id.    Coceptio  beate  marie,  minus  duplex  .ix.  lectionu. 
xv        g      v        Id. 
iiij       A     iiij      Id. 
b      iii       Id. 
xij        c     pridie  Id. 
j  d      Idus  Lucie  virginis  &  martyris.  nouem  lectionum. 

e      xix   kal.    lanuarij.     Sol  in  capricorno.     Solstitiu  hyemale, 
ix        f      xviiikal. 

g      xvii  kal.  O  sapientia. 

xvii     A     xvi    kal.  Nulle  deinceps  fiant  preces  ad  vesperas. 

vi         b      xv     kal. 
c      xiiii  kal. 

xiiii     d      xiii  kal.  Vigilia. 

iii        e      xii    kal.    Thome  apli.  Inferius  duplex,  none  lectionum. 

f  xi  kal. 
xi  g  x  kal. 
xix  A  ix  kal.  Vigilia. 

b      viii   kal.    Natiuitas  dni  uri  iesu  xpi.  principale  fes  .ix.  lect. 
viii      c      vii    kal.    Stephani  ptomartyris.  minus  dup  .ix.  lectionu 

d      vi     kal.    lohannis  apli  &  euageliste.  minus  dup  .ix.  lectio, 
xvi      e      v       kal.    Sctorum  innocetiu  martyrum.  minus  duplex  .ix.  lectio, 
v          f      iiii    kal.    Thome  cant,  archiepi  &  mar.  minus  duplex  .ix.  lee. 

g      iii     kal. 

xiii      A  pridie  kal.     Siluestri  pape  &  confes  .ix.  lee.  med.  lee.  de  nati.  dni. 
Sane  sunt  membris  calide  res  mense  decembris. 
Frigus  vitetur,  capitalis  vena  secetur. 
Lotio  tune  vana,  sed  ventri  potio  sana. 
Sit  tepidus  potus,  pugnans  cum  frigore  totus. 


KALENDAR 
1549 


123 


DECEMBER. 

C  December. 

Matins. 

Euensong. 



<I  Psalmes. 

i.  Lesson. 

ii.  Lesson. 

i.  Lesson. 

H.  Lesson. 

f 

Kalend. 

i 

i 

Esai.  vii. 

Actes.     ii 

Esai.   viii 

Hebr.  vii 

g 

iiii.  No. 

ii 

ii 

ix 

iii 

x 

viii 

A 

iii.  No. 

iii 

iii 

xi 

iiii 

xii 

ix 

b 

Prid.  No 

iiii 

iiii 

xiii 

v 

xiiii 

x 

c 

Nonas. 

v 

v 

XV 

vi 

xvi 

xi 

d 

viii.  Id. 

vi 

vi 

xvii 

di.  vii 

xviii 

xii 

e 

vii.  Id. 

vii 

vii 

xix 

di.  vii 

xx.  xxi 

xiii 

f 

vi.  Id. 

viii 

viii 

xxii 

viii 

xxiii 

lacob.     i 

g 

v.  Id. 

ix 

ix 

xxiiii 

ix 

xxv 

ii 

A 

iiii.  Id. 

X 

X 

xxvi 

x 

xxvii 

iii 

b 

iii.  Id. 

xi 

xi 

xxviii 

xi 

xxix 

iiii 

c 

Prid.  Id. 

xii 

xii 

XXX 

xii 

xxxi 

v 

d 

Idus. 

xiii 

xiii 

xxxii 

xiii 

xxxiii 

i.  Peter,  i 

e 

xix.  kl. 

xiiii 

xiiii 

xxiiii 

xiiii 

XXXV 

ii 

f 

xviii.  kl. 

XV 

XV 

xxxvi 

XV 

xxxvii 

iii 

g 

xvii.  kl. 

xvi 

xvi 

x  xxviii 

xvi 

xxxix 

iiii 

A 

xvi.  kl. 

xvii 

xvii 

xl 

xvii 

xii 

v 

b 

xv.  kl. 

xviii 

xviii 

xiii 

xviii 

xhn 

u.  Peter,  i 

c 

xiiii.  kl. 

xix 

xix 

xliiii 

xix 

xlv 

ii 

d 

xiii.  kl. 

XX 

XX 

xlvi 

XX 

xlvii 

iii 

e 

xiu  kl. 

xxi 

Tho.  Apost 

xxi 

xlviii 

xxi 

xlix 

i.  lohn.  i 

f 

xi.  kl. 

xxii 

xxii 

1 

xxii 

Ii 

ii 

g 

x.  kl. 

xxiii 

xxiii 

Hi 

xxiii 

Iiii 

iii 

A 

ix.  kl. 

xxiiii 

xxiiii 

liiii 

xxiiii 

Iv 

iiii 

b 

viii.  kl. 

XXV 

Nati.  dni.     • 

XXV 

Esay.    ix 

Math,     i 

Esay.   vii 

Tit.        iii 

c 

vii.  kl. 

xxvi 

Stephen. 

xxvi 

Ivi 

act.  vi.vii 

Ivii 

Actes.  vii 

d 

vi.  kl. 

xxvii 

Ihon.  Euan. 

xxvii 

Iviii 

Apoc.      i 

lix 

Apo.  xxii 

e 

v.  kl. 

xxviii 

Innocen. 

xxviii 

ler.    xxxi 

Act.   xxv 

Esay.    Ix 

5.  lohn.  v 

f 

iiii.  kl. 

xxix 

xxix 

Esay.  Ixi 

xxvi 

Ixii 

ii.  lohn.  i 

g 

iii.  kl. 

XXX 

XXX 

Ixiii 

xxvii 

Ixiiii 

iii.  Iho.  i. 

A 

Prid.  kl. 

xxxi 

XXX 

Ixv 

xxviii 

Ixvi 

lude.       i 

124 


KALENDAR 
1552 


|[  DECEMBRE  HATH  .XXXI.  DAYES. 

"Morning  prayer.                  Eueninge  prayer. 

C  Psalmes 

1                  1 

i.  Lesson 

ii.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson 

ii.  Lesson 

f      Kalend. 

i 

Esai.    vii. 

Actes.    ii 

Esai.   viii 

Hebr.     vii 

xiii       g      iiii.  No. 

ii 

ix 

iii 

x 

viii 

ii          A      iii.  No. 

iii 

xi 

iiii 

xii 

ix 

x            b      Prid.  No. 

iiii 

xiii 

v 

xiiii 

x 

c      Nonas. 

v 

XV 

vi 

xvi 

xi 

xviii     d      viii.  Id. 

vi 

xvii 

di.  vii 

xviii 

xii 

vii        e      vii.  Id. 

vii 

xix 

di.  vii 

xx.  xxi 

xiii 

f       vi.    Id. 

viii 

xxii 

viii 

xxiii 

lacob.       i 

xv         g      v.     Id. 

ix 

xxiiii 

ix 

xxv 

ii 

iiii        A      iiii.  Id. 

x 

xxvi 

x 

xxvii 

iii 

b      iii.    Id. 

xi 

xxviii 

xi 

xxix 

iiii 

xii        c      Prid.  Id.   Sol  in  Ca. 

xii 

XXX 

xii 

xxxi 

v 

i            d      Idus. 

xiii 

xxxii 

xiii 

xxxiii 

i.  Peter,  i 

e      xix     kl.     lanuarii. 

xiiii 

xxxiiii 

xiiii 

XXXV 

ii 

ix          f       xviii  kl. 

XV 

xx  xvi 

XV 

xxxvii 

iii 

g      xvii    kl. 

xvi 

xxxviii 

xvi 

xxxix 

iiii 

xvii      A      xvi     kl. 

xvii 

xl 

xvii 

xii 

v 

vi          b      xv      kl. 

xviii 

xiii 

xviii 

xiiii 

ii.  Peter,  i 

c       xiiii    kl. 

xix 

xliiii 

xix 

xlv 

ii 

xiiii     d      xiii     kl. 

XX 

xlvi 

XX 

xlvii 

iii 

Hi         e      xii      kl.       Thomas  apo. 

xxi 

xlviii 

xxi 

xlix 

i.   lohn.    i 

f       xi       kl. 

xxii 

1 

xxii 

Ii 

ii 

**'         g      x        kl. 

xxiii 

Iii 

xxiii 

Iiii 

iii 

A     ix       kl. 

xxiiii 

liiii 

xxiiii 

Iv 

iiii 

xix        b      viii      kl.     Christmas 

XXV 

Esai.     ix 

Luk.  xxii 

Esai.    vii 

Titus,      iii 

viii       c      vii      kl.     5.  Stephan 

xxvi 

Ivi 

act.  vi.  vii 

Ivii 

Acte.      vii 

d      vi       kl.     S.  John 

xxvii 

Iviii 

Apoca.    i 

lix 

Apo.     xxii 

xvi        e      v        kl.     Innocentes 

xxviii 

ler.    xxxi 

Acte.  xxv 

Ix 

i.   lohn.  v 

f       iiii      kl. 

xxix 

Esai.    Ixi 

xxvi 

Ixii 

ii.  lohn.  i 

g      iii       kl. 

XXX 

Ixiii 

xxvii 

Ixiiii 

iii.  Ih5.     i 

xiii      A     Prid   kl. 

XXX 

Ixv 

xxviii 

Ixvi 

lude.         i 

KALENDAR 
1661 


125 


DECEMBER  HATH  XXXJ.  DAVES 

3  The  Moon  hath  xxx. 

\                             j                                                           Morning 

Events 

1                                                     Prayer. 

Prayer. 

.  Lesson 

2.  Lesson 

i.  Lesson 

2  Lesson 

i 

F 

Kalend 

Isai.    14. 

Acts.    2. 

Isai    16. 

Hebr.  7. 

xiii 

2 

G 

4.  No. 

xvi 

iii 

xvii 

viii 

ii 

3 

A 

3-  No. 

xviii 

iv 

xix 

ix 

x 

4 

B 

pr.  No. 

xx.xxi. 

V 

xxii 

X 

5 

C 

Nonse 

xxiii 

vi 

xxiv 

xi 

xviii 

6 

D 

8.  Id. 

2Nicholas7aB.ofMyrainLycia 

XXV 

7.tovr.3o. 

xxvi 

xii 

vii 

7 

E 

7.  Id. 

xxvii 

7-  3°- 

xxviii 

xiii 

8 

F 

6.  Id. 

sconcep:  ?aof*  y.  BL  V.  'Mary. 

xxix 

viii 

xxx 

Jam.    i. 

XV 

9 

G 

5.  Id- 

xxxi 

ix 

xxxii 

ii 

iv 

10 

A 

4.  Id. 

xxxiii 

X 

xxxiv 

iii 

ii 

B 

3-  Id. 

XXXV 

xi 

xxxvi 

iv 

xii 

12 

C 

pr.  Id. 

xxxvii 

xii 

xxxviii 

V 

»3 

D 

Idus 

•fcucie  "Virg.  &  M. 

xxxix 

xiii 

xl 

i.  Pet.  i. 

14 

E 

19.  Kl.  Ian. 

xii 

xiv 

xiii 

ii 

ix 

15 

F 

18.  Kl 

xliii 

XV 

xliv 

iii 

16 

G 

17.  Kl. 

20  Sapientia. 

xiv 

xvi 

xlvi 

iv 

xvii 

17 

A 

16.  Kl. 

xlvii 

xvii 

xlviii 

V 

vi 

18 

B 

15.  Kl. 

xlix 

xviii 

L 

2.  Pet.  i. 

I9 

C 

14.  Kl. 

Li 

xix 

Lii 

ii 

xiv 

20 

D 

13-  Kl. 

Vut 

Liii 

XX 

Liv 

iii 

iii 

21 

E 

12.    Kl. 

7aS  Thomos  Apost.  7a&  M. 

xxi 

i.  lohn  i 

22 

F 

ii.  Kl. 

tv 

xxii 

Lvi 

ii 

xi 

23 

G 

10.  Kl. 

Lvii 

xxiii 

Lviii 

iii 

24 

A 

9.    Kl. 

'Fast 

Lix 

xxiv 

Lx 

iv 

xix 

25 

B 

8.    Kl. 

Christmas  day. 

viii 

26 

C 

7.     Kl. 

5.  Steph.  7ay.  first  Mart. 

27 

D 

6.     Kl. 

S.  lohn  7°Apost.  &  Evang. 

xvi 

28 

E 

5.     Kl. 

Innocents  7aday. 

XXV 

V 

V 

29 

F 

4.    Kl. 

Lxi 

xxvi 

Lxii 

2.  lohn 

3° 

G 

3-    Kl. 

Lxiii 

xxvii 

Lxiv 

3.  lohn. 

xiii 

31 

A 

sgilvester  7aB.  of  Rome. 

Lxv 

xxviii 

Lxvi 

lude. 

126  ORNAMENTS  RUBRIC 

SOURCES 


1549 


Cp.  p.  23  above. 


ORNAMENTS  RUBRIC 


127 


1552 

THE  ORDER  WHERE  MoRNINGE 
AND  EVENING  PRAYER 
SHALBE  VSED  AND  SAYDE. 


C  The  morning,  and  eueninge  prayer,  sfialbe 
vsed  in  suche  place  of  the  Churche, 

chapell,  or  Chauncell,  &*  the  minister  shal  so 
turns  him,  as  y* people  maye  best  heare.  And 
if  there  be  any  c otrouersie  therin,  the  matter 
shalbe  referred  to  the  ordenarie,  dr5  he  or  his 
deputie  shal  appoynte  the  place,  and  the 
chaucels  shal  remayn,  as  they  have  done  in 
times  past. 

And  here  is  to  be  noted,  that 

the  minister 

at  the  tyme  of  the  colhunion,  6»  at  a  I 
other  times  in  his  ministracion,  shall 
vse  nether  Albe,  Vestemet,  nor  Cope:  but 
beyng  Archebishop,  or  Bishop,  he  shal  have 
and  weare  a  rochet:  &  beeyng  a  priest  or 
Deacon^  he  shal  have  and  weare  a  surples 
only. 


1661 

THE     ORDER     FOR     MORNING 
AND  EVENING  PRAYER  DAILY  TO 
BE  SAID  AND  VSED    THROUGH 
OUT  THE  YEAR. 

The  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer  shall  be 
used  in  Jthe  accustomed  place  of  the  Church^ 
Ckappel  or  Chancell ; 

Except  it  shall  be  otherwise  determined 
by  tAeordinarieoftbeplSiCQ,* 

and  the 

Chancels  shall  remain  as  they  have  done  in 
times  past. 

And  heere  is  to  be  noted,  That  Jsuch  Orna 
ments  of  the  Church*,  and  of  the  Ministers 
thereoi  at  all 

times  Of  their  Ministration,  shall 
be  retained,  and  be  'in  vse,  as  were*  in  this 
Church  of  England  !by*  the  ^uthoritie  of 
Parliament,  in  the  second  year  of  the 
raigne  of  King  Edw.  VL* 


128  MATTINS 

SOURCES  i 549 

AN       ORDRE       FOR      MATTYNS 

DAYLY  THROUGH 
THE  YERE. 


MATTINS 


129 


1552 

<T  AN  ORDRE  FOR  MORNINGS 
PRAYER  DAYLY  THROUGHOUT 
THE  YEARE. 

At  the  beginning  both  of  morning 
prayer,  and  likewyse  of  evening  praier,  ye 
minister  shal  reade  with  a  loud  voyce,  some 
one  of  these  senteces  ofye  scriptures 

thatfolowe.     And  the  he  shal  say  that,  which 
is  writte  after  the  said  senteces. 

[Ezechiel  xviii. 

A  T  "what  time  soeuer  a  synner  doeth 
repente  hym  of  hys  synne,  from  the 
bottome  of  hys  heart:  I  ivy  I  put  all  his 
wickednes  oute  of  my  remembraunce 
sayth  the  Lorde.  [Psalm,  li. 

I  do  know  mine  owne  wickednes,  and 
my  synne  is  alway  against  me. 

[Psalm,  li. 

Turne  thy  face  awaye  from  oure 
sinnes  (O  Lorde}  and  blot  out  all  oure 
offences.  [Psalm,  li. 

A  soroivfull  spyryte,  is  a  Sacrifice 
to  God:  despyse  not  (O  Lord]  humble 
and  contrite  heartes. 

[loel  ii. 

Rente  your  heartes,  and  not  your 
garmentes,  and  turne  to  the  lor de  your 
God,  because  he  is  gentle  and  mercyful, 
he  is  pacient  andofmuche  mercy,  and 
suche  a  one  that  is  sory  for  your  afflic 
tions.  [Daniel,  ix. 

To  thee  O  lord  God  belongeth  mercy 
&°  forgeuenes,  for  we  haue  gone  awaye 
from  thee,  and  haue  not  harkened  to 
thy  voyce,  whereby  we  mighte  walke 
in  thy  lawes,  which  thou  hast  ap- 
poyntedfor  vs.  [lerem.  ii. 

Correct  vs,  O  Lorde,  and  yet  in  thy 
iudgement,  not  in  thy  furie,  lest  we 
should  be  consumed  and  broughte  to 
nothinge.  [  Math.  Hi. 

Amende  your  lyues,for  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  at  hande.  [  Luk.  xv. 

I  wyll  goe  to  my  father  and  saye  to 
hym :  father  I  haue  synned  agaynst 
heauen,  and  agaynste  thee,  I  am  no 
more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  sonne. 
[P.m.  cxlii. 

Entre  not  into  iudgement  wyth  thy 
seruauntes  O  Lorde,  for  no  fleshe  is 
righteous  in  thy  syght. 

[i.      John.  i. 

Yf  we  saye  that  we  haue  no  synne^ 
we  deceyue  oure  selues,  and  there  is  no 
trueth  in  vs. 


1661 

THE   ORDER   FOR    MORNING 
PRAYER  DAYLY  THROUGHOUT 

THE  YEAR. 

II  At    the    beginning  of  Morning 

Prayer*  *the 

Minister  shall  read  with  a  loud  voice,  some 
one,  or  more  of  these  sentences  of  the  Scriptures 
that  follow.  And  then  he  shall  say  that  which 
is  written  after  the  said  sentences. 

[Ezech.  1 8.  27. 

When  the  wicked  man  turneth  away 
from  his  wickedness  that  he  hath  com 
mitted,  and  doth  that  which  is  lawfull 
and  right,  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive. 
[Psal.  51.  3. 

I  acknowledge  my  transgressions,  and 
my  sin  is  ever  before  me. 

[Psal.  51.  69. 

Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot 
out  mine  iniquities. 

[Psal.  51.  617. 

The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken 
spirit,  a  broken,  and  a  contrite  heart, 
O  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise. 

[Joel  2.  613. 

Rent  your  hearts,  and  not  your 
garments,  and  turn  vnto  the  Lord  your 
God;  for  he  is  gracious  and  mercifull, 
slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness, 
and  repenteth  him  of  the  evil. 

[Dan.  9.  9,  10. 

To  the  Lord  our  God  belong  mercies, 
and  forgivenesses,  though  we  have  re 
belled  against  him  :  Neither  have  we 
obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God, 
to  walk  in  his  Laws  which  he  set 
before  vs.  [Jer.  10.  624. 

O  Lord  correct  me,  but  with  iudge 
ment,  not  in  thine  anger,  lest  thou  bring 
me  to  nothing. 

[S.  Mat.  3.  2. 

Repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven 

is  at  hand.  [S.  Luke.  15.  18, 19. 

/  will  arise,  and  go  to  my  father, 

and  will  say  vnto  him :  Father,  I  have 

sinned  against  heaven,  and  before  thee, 

and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called 

thy  son.  [Psal.  143.  2. 

Enter  not  into  iudgement  with  thy 

servant  [O  Lord]  for  in  thy  sight  shall 

no  man  living  be  iustified. 

[i  S.  John  i.  68*,  9. 

If  we  say,  that  we  have  no  sin,  we 
deceive  ourselves,  and  the  Truth^  is  not 
in  vs:  [But]  if  we  confess  our  sins,  he 
is  faithfull  and  iust  to  forgive  vs 
our  sinns,  and  to  cleanse  vs  from 
all  vnrighteousness. 


1 30  MATTINS 

SOURCES  1549 


Cp.  Flor.  Lugd.  Eocpos.  missae.  109 
(  =  ps.-Alcuin  de  div.  off.  p.  505)  licet 
omni  tempore  peccatores  nos  esse  ex 
corde  cognoscere  debeamus,  tamen 
maxime  hoc  attentius  agendum  et  con- 
fitendum  est,  cum  in  illo  sacro  mysterio 
celebratur  remissionis  gratia,  indul- 
gentia  peccatorum,  etc.  S.  Avitus 
Vien.  Serm.  de  Rogat.  Si  diocerimus 
inquit  apostolus  quia  peccatum  non 
habemus,  nos  ipsos  seducimus :  et  si 
confiteri  debemus  assidue  nos  peccare, 
opus  est  confitendi  oiEcio,  humilitate 
poenitendr,  praesertim  cum  plebis 
adunatae  compunctio  sic  ad  incita- 
mentum  boni  operis  possit  aptari. 


Ps.  cxix.  176. 


Tit.  ii.  12. 


Ezek.  xxxiii.  11. 


MATTINS 


1552 

DEarely  beloned  brethren,  the  scrip 
ture  moueth  vs  in  sondrye  places,  to 
acknowledge  and  confesse  our  many- 
folde  synnes  and  wyckednesse,  and  that 
we  should  not  dissemble  nor  cloke  them 
before  the  face  of  almighty  God  oure 
heauenly  father,  but  confesse  them 
with  an  humble,  lowely,  penitent,  and 
obedient  heart,  to  thende  that  we  may 
obtayne  forgeuenes  of  the  same  by  hys 
infinite  goodnes  &>  mercie.  And  al 
though  we  ought  at  al  times,  hilbly 
to  knowledge  our  synnes  before  God  : 
yet  oughte  we  most  chiefly  so  to  doe, 
when  we  assemble  and  mete  together, 
to  rendre  thankes  for  the  greate  bene- 
fytes,  that  we  haue  receyued  at  his 
handes,  to  setfoorth  hys  moste  worthy 
prayse,  to  heare  his  most  holy  word, 
and  to  aske  those  things,  which  be 
requisite  &>  necessary 'e,  aswell  for  the 
body  as  the  settle.  Wherfore  I  pray e 
and  beseche  you,  as  many  as  be  here 
present,  to  accopanye  me  wyth  a  pure 
heart  &>  humble  voyce,  vnto  the  throne 
of  the  heauenly  grace,  saying  after  me. 

C  A  generall  confession,   to  be  sayd  of  the 
whole    congregacion    after    the    minister, 
knelynge. 

ALmightie  &>  moste  merciful  father, 
we  haue  erred  and  strayed  from  thy 
wayes,  lyke  loste  shepe.  We  haue  fol- 
owed  to  much  the  deuises  and  desyres 
of  oure  owne  heartes.  We  haue  offended 
against  thy  holy  lawes.  We  haue  left 
•undone  those  thinges  whiche  we  oughte 
to  haue  done,  and  we  haue  done  those 
thynges  which  we  ought  not  to  haue 
done:  and  there  is  no  health  in  vs : 
but  thou,  O  Lorde,  haue  mercy  vpon 
vs  miserable  offenders.  Spare  thou 
them,  O  God,  whiche  confesse  theyr 
faultes.  Restore  thou  them  that  be 
penitent,  according  to  thy  promises 
declared  vnto  mankynde,  in  Christe 
lesu  our  Lorde.  And graunt,  O  most 
mercy ful  father,  for  his  sake,  that  we 
may  hereafter  lyue  a  godly,  righteous, 
6°  so bre  lyfe,  to  the  glory  of  thy  holy 
name.  Amen. 

The  absolncion 

to  be  pronounced  by  the  minister  alone. 

ALmightie  God,  the  father  of  oure 
Lorde  lesus  Christ,  which  desireth  not 
the  death  of  a  synner,  but  rather  that 
he  maye  turne  jrom  his  wickednes  and 


1661 

Dearly  beloved  brethren,  the  Scrip 
ture  moveth  vs  in  sundry  places  to 
acknowledge,  and  confess  our  mani 
fold  sins  and  wickednes,  and  that 
we  shotdd  not  dissemble  nor  cloak  them 
before  the  face  of  Almighty  God  our 
heavenly  father;  but  confess  them 
with  an  humble  lowly  penitent,  and 
obedient  heart,  to  the  end  that  we  may 
obtein  forgivenes  of  the  same  by  his 
infinite  goodnes  and  mercy.  And  al 
though  we  ought  at  all  times  humbly 
to  Acknowledge  our  sins  before  God, 
yet  ought  we  most  chiefly  so  to  do, 
when  we  assemble  and  meet  together 
to  render  thanks  for  the  great  bene 
fits  that  we  have  received  at  his 
hands,  to  set  forth  his  most  worthy 
praise,  to  hear  his  most  holy  word, 
and  to  aske  those  things  which  are 
requisite  and  necessary  as  well  for  the 
body  as  the  soul.  Wherefore  I  pray 
and  beseech  you,  as  many  as  are  here 
Present,  to  accompany  me  with  a  pure 
heart,  and  humble  voice,  vnto  the  throne 
of  the  heavenly  grace,  saying  after  me 

IT  A  generall  Confession  to  be  said  of  the 
whole  congregation,  after  the  Minister, 
all  kneeling. 

Almighty  and  most  mercifull  Father, 
We  have  erred  and  strayed  from  thy 
wayes  like  lost  sheep,  We  have  fol 
lowed  too  much  the  devices  and  desires 
of  our  own  hearts,  We  have  offended 
against  thy  holy  laws,  We  have  left 
vndon  those  things  which  we  ought 
to  have  don,  And  we  have  don  those 
things  which  we  ought  not  to  have 
don,  And  there  is  no  health  in  vs: 
But  thou,  O  Lord,  have  mercy  vpon 
vs  miserable  offenders  j  Spare  thou 
'them,  O  God,  which  confess  their 
faults,  Restore  thou  them  that  are 
penitent,  According  to  thy  promises 
declared  vnto  mankind,  in  Christ 
Jesu  our  Lord:  And  grant  O  most 
mercifull  father,  for  his  sake,  That  we 
may  hereafter  live  a  godly,  righteous, 
and  sober  life,  To  the  glory  of  thy  holy 
Name.  Amen. 

If  The  Absolution,  4or  Remission  of  Sins 

to  be  pronounced    by  the   8  Priest    alone, 

e  standing,  the  people  still  kneeling. 

Almighty   God,  the  Father  of  our 

Lord  lesus  Christ,  whop  desireth  not 

the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that 

he  may  turn  from  his  wickedness,  and 


132 


MATTINS 


SOURCES 


1549 


Ad  matutinas  dicat  sacerdos. 


The  priest  beeyng  in  the  quier,  shall  be- 
gynne  with  a  loude  voyce  the  Lordes  prayer, 
called  the  Pater  noster. 


Pater  noster  qui  es  in  cells  sancti- 
ficeturnomentuum.  Adueniatregnum 
tuum.  Fiat  voluntas  tua  sicut  in  celo 
et  in  terra.  Panem  nostrum  quoti- 
dianum  da  nobis  hodie.  Et  dimitte 
nobis  debita  nostra  sicut  et  nos  dimit- 
timus  debitoribus  nostris.  Et  ne  nos 
inducas  in  tentationem  sed  libera  nos 
a  mala. 

Amen.  .  . 

Incipiat  seruitium  hoc  modo. 
Domine  labia  mea  aperies. 
Chorus  respondeat. 

Et  os  meum  annunciabit  laudem 
tuam-  Sacerdos  statim. 

Deus  in  adiutorium  meum  intende. 

Jfc 

Domine  ad  adiuuandum  me  festina. 

Gloria  patri  et  filio  et  spiritui  sancto. 


Sicut  erat  in  principio  et  nunc 
et  semper  et  in  secula  seculorum. 
Amen. 


Alleluia. 


OURE  father  whiche  art  in  heauen, 
hallowed  be  thy  name.  Thy  kingdom 
come.  Thy  will  be  done  in  earth  as 
it  is  in  heauen.  Geue  vs  this  daye  our 
dayly  bread.  And  forgeue  vs  our  tres 
passes,  as  we  forgeue  them  that  tres- 
passe  against  vs.  And  leade  vs  not 
into  temptacion.  But  deliuer  vs  from 
euill. 

Amen. 

Then  lykewyse  he  shall  saye. 
O  Lorde,  open  thou  my  lippes. 

Aunswere. 

And  my  mouth  shall  shewe  forth 
thy  prayse.  Priest 

O  God,  make  spede  to  saue  me. 

Aunswere. 
O  Lorde,  make  haste  to  helpe  me. 

Priest. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne  :  &  to  the  holy  gost. 

As  it  was  in  the  begynning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shall  be :  worlde  without  ende. 
Amen. 

Prayse  ye  the  Lorde. 

And  from  Easter  to  Trinitie  Sonday. 
Alleluya. 


MATTINS 


133 


1552 

lyue :  6*  hath  geue  power  and  com- 
maundementto  his  ministers,  to  declare 
and  pronounce  to  hys  people  beeynge 
penitent,  the  absolucion  and  remission 
of  theyr  synnes :  he  par  done  th  &°  ab- 
solueth  al  them,  which  trudy  repet, 
and  vnfeynedly  beleue  his  holy  Gospell. 
Wherfore  we  beseche  him  to  graunt 
vs  true  repentaunce,  &*  his  holy  spirite, 
that  those  thinges  may  please  him, 
whiche  we  do  at  this  present,  &>  that 
the  rest  of  our  lyfe  hereafter,  may  be 
pure  &  holy :  so  that  at  the  last,  we 
may  come  to  hys  eternal  wye,  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lorde. 
C  The  people  shal  answere. 
Amen. 


C  Then  shall  the  Minister  begin 
the  Lordes  prayer  wyth  a  loude 


voyce. 


OUR  father  which  art  in  heaue, 
hallowed  bee  thy  name.  Thy  kingdo 
come.  Thy  wyl  be  done  in  earth  as 
it  is  in  heaue.  Geue  vs  this  daye  oure 
dayly  bread.  And  forgeue  vs  our  tres 
passes,  as  we  forgeue  them  that  tres- 
passe  against  vs.  And  leade  vs  not 
into  temptacion.  But  delyver  vs  from 
euyll. 

Amen. 

C  Then  lykewyse  he  shall  saye. 
O  Lorde  open  thou  our  lyppes. 

Aunswere. 

And  our  mouth  shal  shewe  forth 
thy  prayse.  Prieste 

O  God  make  spede  to  saue  vs. 

Aunswere. 
O  Lord  make  haste  to  helpe  vs. 

Prieste. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shalbe :  worlde  wythout  ende. 
Amen. 

Prayse  ye  the  Lord. 


1661 

live;  and  hath  given  power  and  com 
mandment  to  his  ministers  to  declare, 
and  pronounce  to  his  people  being 
penitent,  the  absolution  and  remission 
of  their  sins  :  He  pardoneth,  and  ab- 
solveth  all  them  8that  truly  repent, 
and  vnfeignedly  believe  his  holy  Gospel. 
Wherefore  let  US  beseech  him  to  grant 
vs  true  repentance,  and  his  holy  spirit, 
that  those  things  may  please  him 
which  we  do,  at  this  present,  and  that 
the  rest  of  our  life  hereafter  may  be 
pure  and  holy,  so  that  at  the  last  we 
may  come  to  his  eternall  ioy,  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

The  people  shall  answer  8here,  and  at  the 
end  of  all  other  prayers.    Amen. 

1T  Then  the  Minister  shall  kneel  and  say 
the  Lords  Prayer  with  8an  audible  voice  : 
7b  the  people  also  kneeling,  and  repeat 
ing  it  with  him,  both  here,  and  where 
soever  else  it  is  vsed  in  divine  service. 
Our   Father  which  art  in  heaven, 
Hallowed  be  thy  name,    Thy  kingdom 
come,    Thy  will  be  don  in  earth  as 
it  is  in  heaven,     Give  vs  this  day  our 
daily  bread  :  And  forgive  vs  our  tres 
passes,    As  we  forgive  them  that  tres 
pass   against  vs  :    And  lead   us  not 
into  temptation,     But  deliver  us  from 
evil.     6For  thine  is  the  kingdom, 
the  power,  and  the  glory,    For  ever 
and  ever.    Amen. 

^[  Then  likewise  he  shall  say. 
O  Lord,  open  thou  our  lips. 

Answer. 

And  our  mouth  shall  shew  forth 
thy  praise.  Priest> 

O  God,  make  speed  to  save  vs. 

Answer. 

O  Lord  make  hast  to  help  vs. 
^[6Here,  all  standing  vp,  the  Priest  shall  say. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

^Answer. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without  end. 
Amen. 

Priest. 

Praise  ye  the  Lord. 


6Answer. 
The  Lords  name  be  praised. 


134 


MATTINS 


SOURCES 
Sequatur  inuitatorium .  . .  Psalmus  Venite. 


1549 

Then  shalbe  sayed  or  song  without  any 
Inuitatorie  this  Psalme,  Venite  exultemus. 
&c.  in  Englishe,  as  foloweth. 


Venite  exu.temus  domino  iubilemus 
deo  salutari  nostro :  preoccupemus 
faciem  eius  in  confessione  et  in  psalmis 
iubilemus  ei. 


Quoniam  deus  magnus  domiuus  et 
rex  magnus  super  omnes  deos :  quoniam 
non  repellet  dominus  plebem  suam, 
quiain  manueius  suntomnesfines  terrae 
et  altitudines  montium  ipse  conspicit. 

Quoniam  ipsius  est  mare  et  ipse  fecit 
illud  et  aridam  fundauerunt  manus 
eius :  venite  adoremus  et  procidamus 
ante  deum,  ploremus  coram  domino 
qui  fecit  nos :  quia  ipse  est  dominus 
deus  noster :  nos  autem  populus  eius 
et  oues  pascuae  eius. 

Hodie  si  vocem  eius  audieritis,  nolite 
obdurare  corda  vestra  :  sicut  in  exacer- 
batione  secundum  diem  tentacionis  in 
deserto,  vbi  tentauerunt  me  patres 
vestri :  probauerunt  et  viderunt  opera 
mea. 

Quadraginta  annis  proximus  fui 
generacioni  huic  et  dixi,  semper  hi 
errant  corde :  ipsi  vero  non  cogno- 
uerunt  vias  meas,  quibus  iuraui  in  ira 
mea :  si  introibunt  in  requiem  meam. 

Gloria  patri  et  filio  et  spiritui  sancto. 

Sicut  erat  in  principio  et  nunc  et 
semper:  etinseculaseculorum.  Amen. 

[Hymnus.     Psalmi.] 


[psal.  xcv. 

O  Come,  let  vs  syng  vnto  the  Lorde  : 
lette  vs  hartely  reioyce  in  the  strength 
of  our  salvacion. 

Let  vs  come  before  his  presence 
with  thankes  geuing :  and  shewe  our 
selfe  glad  in  hym  with  Psalmes. 

For  the  Lorde  is  a  great  God  :  and 
a  great  kyng  aboue  all  goddes. 

In  his  hande  are  all  the  corners  of 
the  earth  :  and  the  strength  of  the 
hilles  is  his  also. 

The  sea  is  his,  and  he  made  it :  and 
his  handes  prepared  the  drye  lande. 

O  come,  let  us  worship  and  fall 
downe :  and  knele  before  the  Lorde  our 
maker. 

For  he  is  (the  Lorde)  oure  God  :  and 
we  are  the  people  of  his  pasture,  and 
the  shepe  of  his  handes. 

To  daye,  yf  ye  wyll  heare  his  voyce, 
harden  not  youre  heartes  :  as  in  the 
prouocacion,  and  as  in  the  daye  of 
temptacion  in  the  wildernes. 

When  your  fathers  tempted  me : 
proued  me,  and  sawe  my  workes. 

Fourtyeyeares  long  was  I  greuedwith 
this  generacion, and  sayed:  itisapeople 
that  doe  erre  in  their  heartes,  for  they 
haue  not  knowen  my  wayes. 

Vnto  whom  I  sware  in  my  wrathe  : 
that  they  shoulde  not  entre  into  my  rest. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  &  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  gost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  worlde  without 
ende.  Amen. 

The  shall  folowe  certaine  Psalmes  in 
ordre  as  they  been  appoynted  in  a  table 
made  for  that  purpose,  excepte  there  be 
proper  Psalmes  appoynted  for  that  day. 
And  at  the  ende  of  euery  Psalme  throughout 
the  yeare,  and  lykewyse  in  the  ende  of  Bene- 
dictus,  Benedicite,  Magnificat,  and  Nunc 
dimittis,  shalbe  repeated. 
Glory  be  to  the  father  and  to  the 
sonne.  &c. 


MATTINS 


1552 

e.  Then  shal  be  sayd  or  song 
thys  Psalme 
' 


O  Come  let  vs  synge  vnto  the  Lorde : 
let  vs  hartely  reioice  in  the  strength 
of  oure  saluacion. 

Lette  vs  come  before  hys  presence 
wyth  thankes  geuynge :  and  shewe  oure 
selfe  glad  in  hym  wyth  Psalmes. 

For  the  lorde  is  a  greate  God  :  and 
a  greate  Kynge  aboue  all  Goddes. 

In  hys  hand  are  al  the  corners  of 
the  earth  :  and  the  strength  of  the 
hylles  is  hys  also. 

The  sea  is  his,  and  he  made  it :  and 
hys  handes  prepared  the  drye  lande. 

O  come,  lette  vs  worship  and  fal 
downe  :  and  knele  before  the  lorde  our 
maker. 

For  he  is  the  lorde  our  God  :  and 
we  are  the  people  of  his  pasture,  and 
the  shepe  of  his  handes. 

To  daye  yf  ye  wyl  heare  his  voyce, 
harden  not  your  heartes  :  as  in  the 
prouocacion,  and  as  in  the  daye  of 
temptacion  in  the  wyldernesse. 

When  youre  fathers  tempted  me  : 
proued  me  &  sawe  my  workes. 

Fortye  yeres  long  was  I  greued  with 
this  generacion,  &  sayd  :  it  is  a  people 
that  do  erre  in  theyr  heartes,  for  they 
haue  not  knowen  my  wayes. 

Vnto  whom  I  sware  in  my  wrath  : 
that  they  should  not  entre  into  my  rest. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  &  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  ghoste. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  worlde  wythout 
ende.  Amen. 

€  Then  shal  folowe  certayne  Psalmes  in 
order,  as  they  bee  appoynted  in  a  Table, 
made  for  that  purpose :  excepte  there  be 
proper  Psalmes  appoynted  for  that  daye. 
And  at  thende  of  euery  Psalme  throughout 
the  yere,  &  lykewyse  in  thende  of  Bene- 
dictus,  Benedicite,  Magnificat,  and  Nunc 
Dimittis,  shall  be  repeated. 
Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 

sonne,  &c. 


1661 

IT  Then  shall  be  said  or  sung 
this  Psalm 

followz'w^-:  Except  on  Easter 

Day,  vpon  which   another  Anthem  is 

appointed :    7b  and   on  the  nineteenth 

day  of  every  moneth  it  is  not  to  be 

read  here,  but  in  the  ordinary  course 

of  the  Psalms. 

[Venite  exultemus  Domino.  Psal.  95. 

O  come,  let  vs  sing  vnto  the  Lord  : 
let  vs  heartily  reioyce  in  the  strength 
of  our  salvation. 

Let  vs  come  before  his  presence 
with  thanksgiving  :  and  shew  our 
selves3  glad  in  him  with  Psalms. 

For  the  Lord  is  a  great  God  :  and 
a  great  King  above  all  Gods. 

In  his  hand  are  all  the  Corners  of 
the  Earth  :  and  the  strength  of  the 
Hills  is  his  alsoe. 

The  sea  is  his,  and  he  made  it  :  and 
his  hands  prepared  the  dry  Land. 

O  come,  let  vs  worship,  and  fall 
downe  :  and  kneel  before  the  Lord  our 
Maker. 

For  he  is  the  Lord  our  God  :  and 
we  are  the  people  of  his  pasture  and 
the  sheepe  of  his  hand. 

To  day  if  ye  will  heare  his  voyce, 
harden  not  your  hearts  :  as  in  the 
provocation,  and  as  in  the  day  of 
temptation  in  the  wilderness. 

When  your  fathers  tempted  mee  : 
proved  me  and  saw  my  works. 

Forty  yeares  long  was  I  grieved  with 
this  generation  and  said  :  it  is  a  people 
that  do  erre  in  their  hearts,  for  they 
have  not  known  my  Wayes. 

Vnto  whom  I  sware  in  my  wrath  : 
that  they  should  not  enter  into  my  rest. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without 
end.  Amen. 

"1[Then    shall    follow         the    Psalms    in 
"  order  as  they  be  appointed. 


"  And  at  the  end  of  every  Psalm  throughout 
"  the  yeare,  and  likewise  in  the  end  of  Bene- 
"  dicite,  Benedictus,  Magnificat,  and  Nunc 
"  dimittis  shall  be  repeated. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 
"Answers. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without  end. 
Amen. 


136 


MATTINS 


SOURCES 
<&      [Lectiones  iii  vel  ix] 


1549 

Then  shalbe  read  .ii.  lessons  distinctely 
with  a  loude  voyce,  that  the  people  may 
heare.  The  firste  of 

the  olde  testamente,  the  seconde  of  the  newe. 
Lyke  as  they  be  appoynted  by  the  Kalender, 
excepte  there  be  proper  lessons  assigned 
for  that  day :  The  ministre  that  readeth  the 
lesson,  standyng  and  turning  him  so  as  he 
maye  best  be  heard  of  all  suche  as  bee  pre- 
sente. 


Canticum  Ambrosii  &  Augustini. 

TE  deum  laudamus :  te  domiuum 
confitemur. 

Te  eternum  patrem  omnis  terra 
veneratur. 

Tibi  omnes  angeli :  tibi  cell  & 
vniuerse  potestates. 

Tibi  cherubin  &  seraphin :  incessa- 
bili  voce  proclamant. 

Sanctus.     Sanctus.     Sanctus. 

Dominus  deus  sabaoth. 

Pleni  sunt  celi  &  terra:  maiestatis 
glorie  tue. 

Te  gloriosus  apostolorum  chorus  : 

Te  prophetarum  laudabilis  numerus  : 

Te  martyrum  candidatus  laudat 
exercitus. 

Te  per  orbem  terrarum  :  sancta  con- 
fitetur  ecclesia. 

Patrem  immense  maiestatis. 

Venerandum  tuum  verum  &  vnicum 
filium. 

Sanctum  quoque  paraclitum  spiri- 
tum. 

Tu  rex  glorie  christe. 

Tu  patris  sempiternus  es  films. 


And  before  euery  lesson,  the  minister 

shall  saye  thus.  The  firste,  seconde  .iii. 
or  .iiii.  Chapter  of  Genesis,  or  Exodus, 
Matthewe,  Marke,  or  otherlyke  as  is 
appoynted  in  the  Kalender.  And  in  the 
ende  of  euery  Chapter  he  shall  saye. 

C  Here  endeth  suche  a  Chapter  of 
suche  a  booke. 

And  (to  the  ende  the  people  maye  the  better 
heare)  in  suche  places  where  they  doe  syng, 
there  shall  the  lessons  be  song  in  a  playne 
tune  after  the  maner  of  distincte  readyng  : 
and  lykewyse  the  Epistle  and  Gospell. 
C  After  the  fyrste  lesson  shall  folowe  Te 
deum  laudamus  in  Englyshe,  dayly 
throughout  the  yeare,  excepte  in 

Lent,  all  the  which  time  in  the  place  of  Te 
deum  shalbe  vsed  Benedicite  omnia  opera 
Domini  Domino,  in  Englishe  as  foloweth. 

Te  deum  laudamus. 

WE  prayse  thee,   O    God,   we 
knowlage  thee  to  be  the  Lorde. 

All  the  earth  doeth  worshippe  thee, 
the  father  euerlasting. 

To    thee   all  Angels    crye   aloude, 
the  heauens  and  all  the  powers  therin. 

To  thee   Cherubin,  and    Seraphin 
continually  doe  crye. 

Holy,   holy,    holy,   Lorde    God    of 
Sabaoth. 

Heauen  and  earth  are  replenished 
with  the  maiestie  of  thy  glory. 

The    glorious    coumpany    of    the 
Apostles,  prayse  thee. 

The  goodly  felowship  of  the  Pro- 
phetes,  prayse  thee. 

The  noble  armie  of  Martyrs  prayse 
thee. 

The  holy  Churche  throughout  all 
the  worlde  doeth      knowlage  thee. 

The  father  of  an  infinite  maiestie. 

Thy  honourable,   true,  and    onely 
sonne. 

The  holy  gost  also  beyng  the  coum- 
forter. 

Thou    art    the    kyng  of   glory,   O 
Christe. 

Thou  art  the   euerlasting  sonne  of 
the  father. 


MATTINS 


137 


1552 

€  Then  shalbe  read  two  lessons  distinctlye 
wyth  a  loude  voyce,  that  the  people  maye 
heare.  The  fyrst  of 

the  old  Testament,  the  second  of  the  newe. 
Lyke  as  they  be  appoynted  by  the  Kaleder, 
except  there  be  proper  lessons  assigned 
for  that  daye  :  the  minister  that  readeth  the 
Lesson,  stading  and  turning  him  so,  as  he 
may  best  be  heard  of  al  such  as  be  pre 
sent. 


And  before  euery  Lesson,  the  minister 
shall  saye  thus.  The  first,  second,  third, 
or  fourth  Chapiter  of  Genesis,  or  Exodus, 
Matthew,  Marke,  or  other  like,  as  is 
appoynted  in  the  Kalender.  And  in  the 
ende  of  euery  Chapiter,  he  shall  saye. 

C  Here  endeth  such  a  Chapiter,  of 
such  a  Boke. 

€  And  (to  thende  the  people  may  the  better 
heare)  in  suche  places  where  they  do  sing, 
there  shall  the  lessons  be  song  in  a  plain 
tune,  after  the  maner  of  distincte  reading  : 
and  likewyse  the  Epistle  and  Gospell. 

C  After  the  fyrst  lesson,  shall  folowe  Te 
Deum  laudamus,  in  Englishe,  dayly 
through  the  whole  yeare. 


1661 

1  IT  Then  shall  be  read  distinctly 

'  with  an  audible  voice, 

the  first  Lesson,  taken  out  of 
'  the  old  Testament 

as  is  appointed  3in  the  Kalender. 
'  Except  there  be  proper  Lessons  assigned 
'  for  that  day.  He  that  readeth 

'  so  standing  and  turning  himself,  as  he 
'  may  best  be  heard  of  all  such  as  are  pre- 
'  sent ;  And  after  that,  shall  6be  said  or  sung 
1  in  English,  the  Hymn  called  Te  Deum 
'  laudamus,  daily  throughout  the  yeare. 
'If  Note  that  before  every  Lesson  the  Minister 
1  shall  say,  Here  beginneth  such  a 

1  Chapter,  or  verse  of  such  a  chapter  of 
'  such  a  Book. 

And  after 
1  every  Lesson, 

"  Here  endeth  the  first,  or  the 
1 '  second  Lesson. 


[Te  deum. 

WE  prayse  thee,  O  God  :  we 
knowledge  thee  to  be  the  Lorde. 

All  the  earth  doeth  worshyp  thee, 
the  father  euerlastinge. 

To  thee  all  Aungels  crye  a  loude, 
the  heauens  &  al  the  powers  therein. 

To  thee   Cherubin,   and    Seraphin 
continually  doe  crye. 

Holy,   holy,   holy,    Lorde    God    of 
Sabaoth. 

Heauen  and  y earth  are         ful  of 
the  Maiestie  of  thy  glorye. 

The     glorious     company     of     the 
Apostles,  praise  thee. 

The  goodly  fellowship  of  the  pro- 
phetes,  praise  thee. 

The  noble  armye  of  Martirs,  prayse 
thee. 

The  holy   Church   throughoute    al 
the  worlde,  doeth      knowledge  thee. 

The  Father  of  an  infinite  Maiestie. 

Thy    honorable,    true,    and    onely 
sonne. 

Also  the  holy  ghoste,  the  com 

forter. 

Thou    art    the    kyng  of   glory,   O 
Christ. 

Thou  art  the  euerlasting  sonne  of 
the  father. 


[Te  deum  laudamus. 

We  praise  thee,  O  God  :  we  ac 
knowledge  thee  to  be  the  Lord. 

All  the  Earth  doth  worship  thee  3:* 
the  Father  everlasting. 

To  thee  all  Angells  cry  aloud  3:* 
the  heavens  and  all  the  powers  therein. 

To  thee  Cherubin  and  Seraphin  3:* 
continually  do  cry. 

Holy,  holy,  holy  3:*Lord  God  of 
Sabbaoth. 

Heaven  and  earth  are  full  of 
the  Majesty  3:*of  thy  glory. 

The  glorious  Company  of  the 
Apostles  3:*praise  thee. 

The  goodly  fellowship  of  the  Pro 
phets  3:*praise  thee. 

The  noble  army  of  Martyrs  3:*praise 
thee. 

The  holy  Church  throughout  all 
the  world  3:*doth  acknowledge  thee. 

The  Father  3:*of  an  infinite  Majesty. 

Thine3  honourable,  true  3:*and  only 
Son. 

Also  the  holy  Ghost3:*  the  Com 
forter. 

Thou  art  the  king  of  glory  3:*O 
Christ. 

Thou  art  the  everlasting  son  3:*of 
the  Father. 


MATTINS 


SOURCES 

Tu  ad  liberandum  suscepturus  ho- 
minem  :  non  horruisti  virginis  vterum. 

Tu  deuicto  mortis  aculeo  :  aperuisti 
credentibus  regna  celorum. 

Tu  ad  dexteram  del  sedes  :  in  gloria 
patris. 

ludex  crederis  esse  venturus. 

Te  ergo  quesumus  famulis  tuis 
subueni  :  quos  precioso  sanguine  re- 
demisti. 

Eterna  fac  cum  sanctis  tuis  in  gloria 
numerari. 

Saluum  fac  populum  tuum  domhie  : 
et  benedic  hereditati  tue. 

Et  rege  eos  :  et  extolle  illos  vsque 
in  eternum. 

Per  singulos  dies  benedicimus  te. 

Et  laudamus  nomen  tuum  in  secu- 
lum  :  &  in  seculum  seculi. 

Dignare  domine  die  isto  :  sine 
peccato  nos  custodire. 

Miserere  nostri  domine  :  miserere 
nostri. 

Fiat  misericordia  tua  domine  super 
nos  :  quemadmodum  sperauimus  in  te. 

In  te  domine  speraui :  non  confundar 
in  eternum. 

JO  Diebus  dominicis  ad  Laudes. 

Canticum  trium  puerorum. 

Benedicite  omnia  opera  domini 
domino  :  laudate  et  superexaltate  eum 
in  secula. 

Benedicite  angeli  domini  domino  : 


benedicite  celi  domino. 

Benedicite  aque   omnes   que   super 
celos  sunt  domino  : 

benedicite  omnes  virtutes  domini  do 
mino. 

Benedicite  sol  et  luna  domino  : 
benedicite  stelle  celi  domino. 

Benedicite  imber   et  ros  domino   : 


1549 

Whan  thou  tookest  vpon  thee  to 
delyuer  manne,  thou  dyddest  not  ab- 
horre  the  virgins  wombe. 

Whan  thou  haddest  ouercomed  the 
sharpenes  of  death,  thou  diddest  open 
the  kyngdome  of  heauen  to  all  beleuers. 

Thou  sittest  on  the  ryghthand  of 
God,  in  the  glorye  of  the  father. 

We  beleue  that  thou  shalt  come 
to  be  our  iudge. 

We  therfore  pray  thee  helpe  thy 
seruauntes,  whom  thou  haste  redemed 
with  thy  precious  bloud. 

Make  them  to  be  noumbred  with 
thy  saintes,  in  glorye  euerlastyng. 

O  Lorde,  saue  thy  people,  and 
blesse  thyne  heritage. 

Gouerne  them,  and  lift  them  vp  for 
euer. 

Daye  by  daye  we  magnifie  thee. 

And  we  wurship  thy  name  euer 
world  without  ende. 

Vouchsafe,  O  Lorde,  to  kepe  vs 
this  day  without  sinne. 

O  Lorde,  haue  mercy  vpon  vs  : 
haue  mercy  vpon  vs. 

O  Lorde  let  thy  mercy  lyghten 
vpon  vs  :  as  oure  trust  is  in  thee. 

O  Lorde,  in  thee  haue  I  trusted  : 
let  me  neuer  bee  confounded. 

Benedicite  omnia  opera 
domini  domino. 

O  All  ye  workes  of  the  Lorde,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him  & 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  Angels  of  the  Lorde,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  & 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  heauens,  speake  good  of  the 
Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and  set  him  vp 
for  euer. 

O  ye  waters  that  be  aboue  the 
fyrmament,  speake  good  of  the  Lorde  : 
prayse  him,  and  set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  all  ye  powers  of  the  Lorde,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  Sunne  and  Moone,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  starres  of  heauen,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  showers  and  dewe,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 


MATTINS 


139 


1552 

When  thou  tookest  vpon  thee  to 
delyuer  man,  thou  dyddest  not  ab- 
horre  the  vyrgins  wombe. 

When  thou  hadst  ouercome  the 
sharpenes  of  death,  thou  diddest  open 
the  kingdo  of  heaue  to  al  beleuers. 

Thou  sittest  on  the  right  hande  of 
God,  in  the  glorie  of  the  father. 

We  beleue  that  thou  shalt  come 
to  be  oure  iudge. 

We  therefore  praye  thee,  helpe  thy 
seruauntes,  who  thou  hast  redemed 
with  thy  precious  bloud. 

Make  them  to  bee  noumbred  with 
thy  sainctes,  in  glory  euerlastinge. 

O  lorde  saue  thy  people  :  and 
blesse  thyne  heritage. 

Gouerne  them  and  lyft  them  vp  for 
euer. 

Daye  by  daye  we  magnifye  thee. 

And  we  worshyppe  thy  name,  euer 
worlde  without  ende. 

Vouchsafe,  O  Lorde,  to  kepe  vs 
this  daye  wythout  synne. 

O  lord  haue  mercy  vpon  vs  : 
haue  mercy  vpon  vs. 

O  Lorde,  lette  thy  mercy  lighten 
vpon  vs  :  as  oure  trust  is  in  thee. 

O  Lorde,  in  thee  haue  I  trusted  : 
lette  me  neuer  bee  confounded. 

C  Or  this  canticle,  Benedicite  omnia  opera 
domini  domino. 

[Benedicite. 

O  All  ye  workes  of  the  Lorde,  blesse 
ye  the  Lorde  :  prayse  hym  and 
magnifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  Aungelles  of  the  Lorde,  blesse 
ye  the  Lord  :  prayse  ye  hym  & 
magnifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  heauens,  blesse  ye  the 
Lorde  :  prayse  hym  and  magnifye  hym 
for  euer. 

O  ye  waters  that  be  aboue  the 
firmament,  blesse  ye  the  Lorde  : 
prayse  hym  and  magnifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  all  ye  powers  of  the  Lorde,  blesse 
ye  the  Lorde  :  prayse  hym  and  mag 
nifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  Sunne,  and  Moone  blesse  ye 
the  Lorde  :  praise  hym  and  mag 
nifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  starres  of  heaue,  blesse  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  mag 
nifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  showres  and  dewe,  blesse  ye 
the  Lord  :  prayse  him  and  mag- 
nyfye  hym  for  euer. 


1661 

When  thou  tookest  vpon  thee  to 
deliver  man  3:*thou  didst  not  ab 
hor  the  Virgins  Womb. 

When  thou  hadst  overcome  the 
sharpness  of  Death  3:*thou  didst  open 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  beleevers. 

Thou  sittest  3at  the  right  hand  of 
God  3:*in  the  glory  of  the  Father. 

Wee  believe  that  thou  shalt  come 3:* 
to  be  our  Iudge. 

We  therefore  pray  thee  help  thy 
servants  3:*whom  thou  hast  redeemed 
with  thy  precious  blood. 

Make  them  to  be  numbred  with 
thy  Saints  3:*in  glory  everlasting. 

O  Lord  save  thy  people  :  and 
bless  thine  heritage. 

Govern  them  3:*and  lift  them  vp  for 
ever. 

Day  by  Day  3:*we  magnifie  thee. 

And  we  worship  thy  name  3:*ever 
world  without  end. 

Vouchsafe,  (O  Lord  3:*)  to  keep  vs 
this  day  without  sin. 

O  Lord  have  mercy  vpon  vs  : 
have  mercy  vpon  vs. 

O  Lord  let  thy  mercy  lighten 
vpon  vs  :  as  our  trust  is  in  thee. 

O  Lord  in  thee  have  I  trusted  : 
let  me  never  be  confounded. 

H  Or  this  Canticle,  Benedicite  omnia  opera. 


O  All  ye  works  of  the  Lord,  bless 
ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and 
magnifie  him  forever. 

O  ye  Angels  of  the  Lord,  bless 
ye  the  Lord  :  praise3  *him  and 
magnifie  him  forever. 

O  ye  heavens,  bless  ye  the 
Lord  :  praise  him,  and  magnifie  him 
for  ever. 

O  ye  waters  that  be  above  the 
firmament,  bless  ye  the  Lord  : 
praise  him,  and  magnifie  him  for  ever. 

O  all  ye  powers  of  the  Lord,  bless 
ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  mag- 
nifie  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Sun  and  Moon,  bless  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  mag 
nifie  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  stars  of  heaven,  bless  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and  mag 
nifie  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  showers  and  deaw,  bless  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  mag 
nifie  him  for  ever. 


140 


MATTINS 


SOURCES 
benedicite  omues  spiritus  del  domino. 

Benedicite  ignis  et  estus  domino  : 
benedicite  frigus  et  estas  domino. 

Benedicite  rores  et  pruina  domino  : 
benedicite  gelu  et  frigus  domino. 

Benedicite  glacies  et  niues  domino  : 
benedicite  iioctes  &  dies  domino. 

Benedicite  lux  et  tenebre  domino  : 
benedicite  fulgura  &  nubes  domino. 

Benedicat  terra  dominum  :  laudet 
&  superexaltet  eum  in  secula. 

Benedicite  montes  &  colles  domino  : 

benedicite     vniuersa    germinantia    in 
terra  domino. 

Benedicite  fontes  domino, 
benedicite  maria  et  flumina  domino. 


Benedicite  cete  et  omnia  que  mo- 
uentur  in  aquis  domino  : 

benedicite  omnes  volucres  celi  domino. 


Benedicite  omnes  bestie   et  pecora 
domino  : 

benedicite  filii  hominum  domino. 


Benedicat  israel  dominum  :  laudet  & 
superexaltet  eum  in  secula. 

Benedicitesacerdotesdomini  domino: 


1549 

O  ye  windes  of  God,  speake  good 
of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and  set  him 
vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  fyre  and  heate,  praise  ye  the 
Lorde  :  praise  him,  and  set  him  vp 
for  euer. 

O  ye  winter  and  summer,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  dewes  and  frostes,  speake  good 
of  the  Lorde  :  praise  him,  and  set  him 
vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  frost  and  colde,  speake  good 
of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and  set 
him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  yse  and  snowe,  speake  good 
of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and  set 
him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  nightes  and  dayes,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  lyght  and  darkenesse,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  lightenynges  and  cloudes, 
speake  good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him, 
and  set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  let  the  earth  speake  good  of  the 
Lorde  :  yea,  let  it  praise  him,  and  set 
him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  mountaynes  and  hilles,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  praise  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  all  ye  grene  thinges  vpon  the 
earth,  speake  good  of  the  Lorde  : 
prayse  him  and  set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  welles,  speake  good  of  the 
Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and  set  him  vp  for 
euer. 

O  ye  seas  and  floudes,  speake  good 
of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and  set  him 
vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  whales,  and  all  that  moue 
in  the  waters,  speake  good  of  the  Lorde : 
prayse  him,  and  set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  all  ye  foules  of  the  ayre,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  all  ye  beastes  and  cattell,  speake 
ye  good  of  the  Lord  :  prayse  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  children  of  men,  speake  good 
of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and  set 
him  vp  for  euer. 

O  let  Israel  speakegoodof  the  Lorde : 
prayse  him,  and  set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  priestes  of  the  Lorde,  speake 


MATTINS  " 


141 


1552 

O  ye  wyndes  of  God,  blesse  ye 
the  Lorde  :  prayse  hym  and  mag- 
nifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  fyre  and  heate,  blesse  ye  the 
Lord  :  prayse  hym  and  magnifie  him 
for  euer. 

O  ye  wynter  and  sommer,  blesse 
ye  the  Lord  :  praise  hym  and 
magnifie  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  dewes  and  frostes,  blesse  ye 
the  Lorde : pray sehym  and  magnifiehym 
for  euer. 

O  ye  froste  and  colde,  blesse  ye 
the  lorde  :  prayse  hym  and  magnifie 
hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  Ise  and  Snowe,  blesse  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  hym  and  magnify e 
hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  nightes  and  dayes,  blesse  ye 
the  Lorde  :  prayse  hym  and  magnifye 
hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  lyght  and  darkenesse,  blesse 
ye  the  lorde  :  prayse  hym  and  mag 
nifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  lighteninges  and  cloudes, 
blesse  ye  the  Lord  :  prayse  hym, 
and  magnifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  let  the  yearth  blesse  the  Lorde  : 
yea,  lette  it  prayse  hym  and  magnifye 
hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  Mountaynes  and  hylles,  blesse 
ye  the  Lorde  :  prayse  hym  and  mag 
nifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  all  ye  grene  thinges  vpon  the 
earth,  blesse  ye  the  Lord  :  prayse 
hym  and  magnifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  welles,  blesse  ye  the  Lorde  : 
prayse  hym  &  magnifye  hym  for 
euer. 

O  ye  Seas  &  fluddes,  blesse  ye 
the  lorde  :  prayse  him  and  magnifye 
hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  whales  &  al  that  moue 
in  the  waters,  blesse  ye  the  lorde  : 
prayse  him  and  magnifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  al  ye  foules  of  the  ayre,  blesse 
ye  the  lorde  :  prayse  hym  and  mag 
nifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  al  ye  beastes  and  cattell,  blesse 
ye  the  Lord  :  praise  hym  and  mag 
nifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  children  of  men,  blesse  ye 
the  Lord,  praise  hym  and  magnifye 
hym  for  euer. 

O  let  Israel  blesse  the  Lorde  : 
prayse  him  and  magnyfye  hym  for  euer. 

O   ye  priestes   of  the  Lord,  blesse 


1661 

O  ye  winds  of  God,  bless  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and  mag 
nifie  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  fire,  and  heat,  bless  ye  the 
Lord  :  praise  him  and  magnifie  him 
for  ever. 

O  ye  winter  and  summer,  bless 
ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and 
magnifie  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  deaws,  and  frosts,  bless  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  magnifie  him 
for  ever. 

O  ye  frost  and  cold,  bless  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  magnifie 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  yce,  and  snow,  bless  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  magnifie 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  nights  and  daies,  bless  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and  magnifie 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  light,  and  darkness,  bless 
ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  mag 
nifie  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  lightnings,  and  clouds, 
bless  ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him, 
and  magnifie  him  for  ever. 

O  Let  the  earth  bless  the  Lord  : 
yea,  let  it  praise  him,  and  magnifie 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  mountains  and  hills,  bless 
ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  mag 
nifie  him  for  ever. 

O  all  ye  green  things  vpon  the 
earth,  bless-  ye  the  Lord  :  praise 
him  and  magnifie  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  wells,  bless  ye  the  Lord  : 
praise  him,  and  magnifie  him  for 
ever. 

O  ye  seas  and  floods,  bless  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  magnifie 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  whales,  and  all  that  move 
in  the  waters,  bless  ye  the  Lord  : 
praise  him  and  magnifie  him  for  ever. 

O  all  ye  fowles  of  the  aire  bless 
ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and  mag 
nifie  him  for  ever. 

O  all  ye  beasts  and  cattell,  bless 
ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and  mag 
nifie  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  children  of  men,  bless  ye 
the  Lord  :  praise  him,  and  magnifie 
him  for  ever. 

O  let  Israel  bless  the  Lord  : 
praise  him,  and  magnifie  him  for  ever. 

O    ye   Priests  of   the    Lord,   bless 


142 


MATTINS 


SOURCES 


benedicite  serui  domini  domino. 


Benedicite  spiritus  et  anime  iustorum 
domino  : 

benedicite    sancti    &    humiles    corde 
domino. 

Benedicite  aiiania  azaria  misael  do 
mino  :  laudate  &  superexaltate  eum  in 
secula. 

Benedicamus  patrem  &  filium  cum 
sancto  spiritu  :  laudemus  &  supej*- 
exaltemus  eum  in  secula. 

Benedictus  es  domine  in  firmamento 
celi  :  &  laudabilis  &  gloriosus  et  super- 
exaltatus  in  secula. 


1549 

good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  seruauntes  of  the  Lorde,  speake 
good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse  him,  and 
set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  spirites  and  soules  of  the 
righteous,  speake  good  of  the  Lorde  : 
prayse  him,  and  set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  ye  holy  and  humble  menne  of 
heart,  speake  ye  good  of  the  Lorde  : 
prayse  ye  him,  and  set  him  vp  for  euer. 

O  Ananias,  Asarias,  and  Misael, 
speake  ye  good  of  the  Lorde  :  prayse 
ye  him,  and  set  him  vp  for  euer. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.  &c. 


As  it  was  in  the  beginning.  £c. 


Ad  laudes.    [Capitulum.     Hymnus.] 


Canticum  zacharie  prophete.    [Luce.i. 

Bsnedictus  dominus  deus  israel  : 
quia  visitauit  &  fecit  redemptionem 
plebis  sue. 

Et  erexit  cornu  salutis  nobis  :  in 
domo  dauid  pueri  sui. 

Sicut  locutus  est  per  os  sanctorum  : 
qui  a  secula  sunt  prophetarum  eius. 

Salutem  ex  inimicis  nostris  :  et  de 
manu  omnium  qui  oderunt  nos. 

Ad  faciendam  misericordiam  cum 
patribus  nostris  :  et  memorari  testa- 
menti  sui  sancti. 

lusiurandum  quod  iurauit  ad  abra- 
ham  patrem  nostrum  :  daturum  se 
nobis. 

Vt  sine  timore  de  manu  inimicorum 
nostrorum  liberati  :  seruiamus  illi. 

In  sanctitate  &  iusticia  coram  ipso  : 
omnibus  diebus  nostris. 

Et  tu  puer  propheta  altissimi  voca- 
beris  :  preibis  enim  ante  faciem  domini 
parare  vias  eius. 

Ad  dandam  scientiam  salutis  plebi 
eius  :  in  remissionem  peccatorum 
eorum. 


And  after  the  second  lesson,  throughout 
the  whole  yere,  shalbe  vsed 
Benedictus  dominus  deus   Israel.   &c.   in 
Englishe  as  foloweth. 

[Benedictus.       Luc.i. 

BLessed  be  the  Lorde  God  of 
Israel  :  for  he  hath  visited  and  re- 
demed  his  people. 

And  hath  lyfted  vp  an  home  of 
saluacion  to  vs  :  in  the  house  of  his 
seruaunt  Dauid. 

As  he  spake  by  the  mouth  of  his 
holy  Prophetes  :  which  hath  been 
sence  the  worlde  began. 

That  we  should  be  saued  from  our 
enemyes  :  and  from  the  handes  of  all 
that  hate  vs. 

To  performe  the  mercy  promysed 
to  our  fathers  :  and  to  remembre 
his  holy  couenaunt. 

To  perfourme  the  othe  whiche  he 
sware  to  our  father  Abraham  : 
that  he  would  geue  us. 

That  we  being  deliuered  out  of  the 
handes  of  oure  enemies  :  might  serue 
him  without  feare. 

In  holynesse  and  ryghteousnes 
before  him  :  all  the  dayes  of  our  lyfe. 

And  thou  childe,  shalt  be  called  the 
Prophete  of  the  highest :  for  thou  shalt 
goe  before  the  face  of  the  Lorde,  to 
prepare  his  wayes. 

To  geue  knowledge  of  saluacion 
vnto  his  people  :  for  the  remission  of 
their  sinnes. 


MATTINS 


1552 

ye  the  Lord  :  prayse  hym  and  mag- 
nifye  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  seruauntes  of  the  Lorde,  blesse 
ye  the  Lorde  :  prayse  hym  and  mag 
nifie  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  spirites  and  soules  of  the 
righteous,  blesse  ye  the  Lord  :  prayse 
hym  and  magnifie  hym  for  euer. 

O  ye  holy  and  humble  menne  of 
hearte,  blesse  ye  the  Lord  :  prayse 
hym  and  magnifie  him  for  euer. 

O  Ananias,  Azarias,  and  Misael, 
blesse  ye  the  lord  :  prayse  him 
and  magnifie  hym  for  euer. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  &  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  ghoste. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  worlde  wythout 
ende.  Amen. 


C  And  after  the  second  lesson, 

shalbe  vsed    and  sayde, 
Benedictus,  in 

Englishe,  as  foloweth. 

[Benedictus. 

BLessed  be  the  Lorde  God  of 
Israel  :  for  he  hath  visited  &  re- 
demed  his  people. 

And  hath  raysed  vp  a  myghtie 
saluacion  for  vs  :  in  the  house  of  hys 
seruaunt  Dauid. 

As  he  spake  by  the  mouthe  of  hys 
holy  Prophetes  :  whyche  haue  been 
sence  the  worlde  beganne. 

That  we  should  be  saued  from  our 
enemies  :  &  from  the  handes  of  all 
that  hate  us. 

To  perfourme  the  mercie  promysed 
to  oureywrfathers  :  and  to  remembre 
hys  holy  couenaunt. 

To  perfourme  the  othe,  which  he 
sware  to  our  /tfr^father  Abraham  : 
that  he  would  geue  vs. 

That  we  beyng  deliuered  out  of  the 
handes  of  cure  enemies  :  might  serue 
hym  wythout  feare. 

In  holynesse  and  righteousnesse 
before  him  :  all  the  dayes  of  cure  lyfe. 

And  thou  childe  shalte  be  called  the 
Prophete  of  the  highest :  for  thou  shalt 
go  before  the  face  of  the  Lorde,  to 
prepare  hys  wayes. 

To  geue  knowledge  of  saluacion 
vnto  hys  people  :  for  the  remission  of 
theyr  synnes, 


1661 

ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  mag 
nifie  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  servants  of  the  Lord,  bless 
ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him  and  mag 
nifie  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  spirits,  and  souls  of  the 
righteous,  bless  ye  the  Lord  :  praise 
him,  and  magnifie  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  holy,  and  humble  men  of 
heart,  bless  ye  the  Lord  :  praise 
him  and  magnifie  him  for  ever. 

O  Ananias,  Azarias,  and  Misael, 
bless  ye  the  Lord  :  praise  him, 
and  magnifie  him  for  ever. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without 
end,  Amen. 

IT  Then  shall  be  read  in  like  maner  the 

Second  Lesson  taken  out  of  the  New 

Testament.    And  after  that  the  Hymn 

following    (except    when    that    shall 

happen  to  be  read  in  the  chapter  for 

the  day,  or  for  the  Gospel  on  saint  John 

Baptist's  Day.) 

[Benedictus.  S.  Luke  i.  668. 

Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel  :  for  he  hath  visited,  and  re 
deemed  his  people. 

And  hath  raised  vp  a  mighty 
salvation  for  vs  :  in  the  house  of  his 
servant  David. 

As  he  spake  by  the  mouth  of  his 
holy  Prophets  :  which  have  been 
since  the  world  began. 

That  we  should  be  saved  from  our 
enemies  :  and  from  the  hands  of  all 
that  hate  vs. 

To  perform  the  mercy  promised 
to  our  /<w?fathers  :  and  to  remember 
his  holy  covenant. 

To  perform  the  oath  which  he 
sware  to  our  forefather  Abraham  : 
that  he  would  give  vs. 

That  we  being  delivered  out  of  the 
hands  of  our  enemies  :  might  serve 
him  without  fear. 

Jn  holines,  and  righteousnes 
before  him  :  all  the  dayes  of  our  life. 

And  thou  child  shalt  be  called  the 
Prophet  of  the  Highest  :  for  thou  shalt 
go  before  the  face  of  the  Lord  to 
prepare  his  wayes. 

To  give  knowledge  of  salvation 
vnto  his  people  :  for  the  remission  of 
their  sins. 


144 


MATTINS 


SOURCES 

Per  viscera  misericordie  dei  nostri  : 
in  quibus  visitauit  nos  oriens  ex  alto. 

Illuminare  his  qui  in  tenebris  et  in 
vmbra  mortis  sedent  :  ad  dirigendos 
pedes  nostros  in  viam  pacis. 

Gloria  patri  et  filio  :  et  spiritui 
sancto. 

Sicut  erat  in  principio  et  nunc  et 
semper  :  et  in  secula  seculorum. 
Amen. 

Dominicis  diebus  ad  laudes.     Psalmus. 

xcix. 

Jubilate  deo  omnis  terra  :  seruite 
domino  in  letitia. 

Introite  in  conspectu  eius  :  in  exul- 
tatione. 

Scitote  quoniam  dominus  ipse  est 
deus  :  ipse  fecit  nos  &  non  ipsi  nos. 


1549 

Through  the  tendre  mercy  of  our 
God  :  whereby  the  daye  spring  from 
an  high  hath  visited  vs. 

To  geue  light  to  them  that  sitte 
in  darkenes,  &  in  the  shadowe  of 
death  :  and  to  guide  our  feet  into 
the  way  of  peace. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginnyng.  &c. 


Populus  eius  &  oues  pascue  eius 
introite  portas  eius  in  confessione  atria 
eius  in  hymnis  confitemini  illi. 

Laudate  nomen  eius  quoniam  suauis 
est  dominus  in  eternum  misericordia 
eius  :  et  vsque  in  generatione  &  genera- 
tionem  veritas  eius. 

Gloria  patri  &  filio  :  et  spiritui 
sancto. 

Sicut  erat  in  principio  et  nunc  et 
semper  :  et  in  secula  seculorum.  Amen. 

Deinde  dicantur  preces  f eriales  hoc  modo. 


IT  Then  shalbe 
the  yere, 


sayed  dayly  through 


Ad  primam. 

Credo  in  deum  patrem  omnipoten- 
tem  :  creatorem  celi  et  terre  :  &  in 
iesum  christum  filium  eius  vnicum 
dominum  nostrum  :  qui  conceptus  est 
de  spiritu  sancto  :  natus  ex  maria 
virgine  :  passus  sub  pontio  pilato 
crucifixus  mortuus  &  sepultus  :  de- 
scendit  ad  inferna  :  tertia  die  resur- 
rexit  a  mortuis  :  ascendit  ad  celos 
sedet  ad  dexteram  dei  patris  omnipo- 
tentis  :  inde  venturus  est  iudicare 
viuos  et  mortuos.  Credo  in  spii-itum 
sanctum,  sanctam  ecclesiam  catholicam, 
sanctorum  communionem,  remissionem 
peccatorum,  carnis  resurrectionem, 
vitam  eternam.  Amen. 


[See  p.  146  below.  For  the  text  of 
the  Creed  see  the  Catechism  below ; 
and  compare  A  necessary  doctrine 
and  erudition  for  any  Christian  man 
1543.] 


MATTINS 


145 


1552 

Throughe  the  tender  mercie  of  oure 
God  :  whereby  the  daye  spryng,  from 
an  hyghe  hath  vysyted  vs. 

To  geue  lighte  to  them  that  syt 
in  darkenes,  and  in  the  shadowe  of 
death  :  and  to  guyde  our  feete  into 
the  waye  of  peace. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  ghoste. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  worlde  wythout 
ende.  Amen. 

C  Or  the  .  C.  Psalme  lubilate. 


IT  Then  shalbe  sayd 

the  Crede,    by   the 

Minister  and  the  people,  standings. 


I  Beleue  in  God  the  father  al- 
mightie,  maker  of  heauen  &  earth. 
And  in  lesus  Christ  his  onely  sonne 
our  Lord,  which  was  coceyued  by  the 
holy  ghost,  borne  of  the  virgin  Mary. 
Suffred  vnder  Ponce  Pilate,  was 
crucified,  dead  and  buryed,  he  de 
scended  into  hell.  The  thyrd  day 
he  rose  agayne  from  the  dead.  He 
ascended  into  heauen,  &  sytteth  on 
the  ryghte  hand  of  God  the  father 
almightye.  From  thence  shal  he 
come  to  iudge  the  quicke  and  the 
dead.  I  beleue  in  the  holy  ghost. 
The  holy  Catholique  Churche.  The 
Communion  of  sainctes.  The  forgeue- 
nesseofsynnes.  Theresurrectionofthe 
body.  Andthelyfeeuerlastinge.  Amen. 


1661 

Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our 
God  :  whereby  the  day-spring  from 
onlb  high  hath  visited  vs. 

To  give  light  to  them  that  sit 
in  darkness,  and  in  the  shadow  of 
death  :  and  to  guide  our  feet  into 
the  way  of  peace. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without 
end.  Amen. 

IT  Or  lathis  Psalm. 

\Iubilate  Deo. 

O  be  ioyfull  in  the  Lord  all  ye 
Lands  :  serve  the  Lord  with  gladnes, 
and  come  before  his  presence  with  a 
song. 

Be  ye  sure  that  the  Lord  he  is  God : 
it  is  he  that  hath  made  vs,  and  not  we 
our  selves,  we  are  his  people,  and  the 
sheep  of  his  pasture. 

0  go  your  way  into  his  gates  with 
thanksgiving,  and  into  his  courts  with 
praise  :  be  thankfull  vnto   him,  and 
speak  good  of  his  Name. 

For  the  Lord  is  gratious,  his  mercy 
is  everlasting  :  and  his  truth  endureth 
from  generation  to  generation. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and 
ever  shall  be :  worldwithout  end.  A  men. 

IT  Then  shall  be  sung,  or  said, 

the  8ApOStles  Creed,  by  the 
Minister  and  the  people  standing  :  Except 
only  such  Dayes  as  the  Creed  of  saint 
Athanasius  is  appointed  to  fce  read. 

1  believe  in  God,  the   Father  Al 
mighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth  : 
And  in    lesus   Christ   his    only   Son 
our  Lord,  Who8  was  conceived  by  the 
holy  Ghost,  Born  of  the  virgin  Mary, 
Suffered  vnder  Pontius  Pilate,  Was 
crucified,  dead  and  buried.     He  de 
scended  into    Hell,     The  third  day 
he  rose  again  from  the  dead.      He 
ascended  into  Heaven,  And  sitteth  on 
the  right  hand  of  God  the   Father 
Almighty.     From  thence  lbhe  shall* 
come    to   judge  the    quick    and  the 
dead.     I  believe  in  the  holy  Ghost, 
The  holy   Catholick   Churche,     The 
Comunion    of    Saints,    The    forgive 
ness  of  sins,  The  resurrection  of  the 
body,  And  the  life  everlasting.   Amen. 


146 


MATTINS 


SOURCES 


1549 

the    prayers    folowyng, 
as    well    at    Euensong    as    at    Mattyns, 
all  deuoutly  knelyng. 


Kyrie  eleyson  ter.     Christe  eleyson  Lorde  haue  mercy  vpon  us.    Christe 

ter.     Kyrie  eleyson  ter.  haue  mercy  vpon  us.      Lorde    haue 

mercy  vpon  us. 

Then  the  minister  shall 

saye  the  Crede  and  the  Lordes  prayer  in 
Englishe,  with  a  loude  voice.  &c. 
Pater  noster. 


Et  ne  nos  inducas  in  tentationem. 
Sed  libera  nos  a  malo.  .  . 

Solus  sacerdos  erigat  se  .  .  dicendo  .  . 
Dominicis  ad  processionem. 

Ostende  nobis  domine  misericordiam 
tuam. 

Et  salutare  tuum  da  nobis. 
Sacerdotes  tui  induantur  iustitiam. 
Et  sancti  tui  exultent. 

Domine  saluum  fac  regem. 


Et  exaudi  nos  in  die  qua  inuocaueri- 
mus  te. 


Saluum  fac  populum  tuum 

et  benedic  hereditati  tue. 
Ad  laudes  B.M.V. 

Da  pacem  domine  in  diebus  nostris. 

Quia  non  est  alius  qui  pug-net  pro 
nobis  nisi  tu  deus  noster. 
Ad  primam. 

Cor  mimdum  crea  in  me  deus.  . 


Aunswere. 
But  deliuer  vs  from  euill.     Amen. 

Priest. 
O  Lorde  shewe  thy  mercy  vpon  vs. 

Aunswere. 
And  graunte  vs  thy  saluacion. 

Priest. 
O  Lorde  saue  the  kyng. 

Aunswere. 

And  mercifully  heare  us,  when  we 
call  vpon  thee. 

Priest. 

Indue  thy  ministers  with  ryghteous- 
nes. 

Aunswere. 

And  make  thy  chosen  people  ioyfull. 

Priest. 
O  Lorde  saue  thy  people. 

Aunswere. 
And  blesse  thyne  inheritaunce. 

Priest. 
Geue  peace  in  cure  time,  O  Lorde. 

Aunswere. 

Because  there  is  none   other  that 
fyghteth  for  vs,  but  only  thou,  O  God. 

Priest. 

O    God,   make  clene    our    heartes 
within  vs. 


MATTINS 


147 


1552 

<[  And  after  that,    these  prayers    folowing, 
aswell  at  Euenzw^  prayer,  as  at  Morning 
prayer:  all  deuoutly  kneling.     The  minis 
ter  first  pronouncinge  with  a  loudc  voyce. 
The  Lorde  be  wyth  you. 

Aunswere. 

And  wyth  thy  spyryte. 
The  Minister. 
Let  vs  praye. 

Lorde  haue  mercy  vpon  vs. 
Christ  haue  mercy  vpon  vs. 
Lorde  haue  mercy  vpon  vs. 

C  Then  the  Minister,  Clerkes  and  people,  shall 
saye  the  Lordes  prayer  in 

Englishe,  with  a  loud  voyce. 
OUR  FATHER  WHICH  ART.  &C. 


1661 

IF  And  after  that,   these  praiers   following, 

all  devoutly  kneeling,  the  Minis 
ter  first  pronouncing  with  a  loud  voice. 
The  Lord  be  with  you. 

Answer. 
And  with  thy  Spirit. 

ib          *Minister. 

IT  Let  vs  pray. 
Lord  have  mercy  vpon  vs. 
Christ  haue  mercy  vpon  vs. 
Lord  have  mercy  vpon  vs. 

IF  Then  the  Minister,  Clerks  and  people  shall 
say  the  Lord's  prayer 

with  a  loud  voice. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven, 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy  king- 
dome  come.  Thy  will  be  don  in 
Earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  vs 
this  day  our  dayly  bread.  And  for 
give  vs  our  trespasses,  As  we  for 
give  them  that  trespass  against  vs. 
And  lead  vs  not  into  temptation  : 
But  deliver  us  from  evill.  Amen. 


C  Then  the  Minister  standing  vp  shall  saye. 
O  Lord  shewe  thy  mercy  vpon  vs. 

Aunswere. 

And  graunt  vs  thy  saluacion. 
Priest. 

O  Lorde  saue  the  Kynge. 

Aunswere. 

And  mercyfully  hear  vs,  when  we 
call  vpon  thee. 

Priest. 

Indue  thy  ministers  wyth  righteous- 
nes. 

Aunswere. 
And  make  thy  chosen  people  ioyefull. 

Priest. 
O  Lorde  saue  thy  people. 

Aunswere. 
And  blesse  thyne  enheritaunce. 

Priest. 
Geue  peace  in  oure  tyme,  O  Lorde. 

Aunswere. 

Because  there   is  none  other  that 
fyghteth  for  vs,  but  onely  thou,  O  God. 

Prieste. 

O   God  make  cleane    our  heartes 
within  vs. 


If  Then  the  Priest  standing  up,  shall  say. 
O  Lord  shew  thy  mercy  upon  vs. 

Answer. 
And  grant  vs  thy  salvation. 

Priest. 
O  Lord  save  the  King. 

Answer. 

And  mercifully  heare  vs  when  we 
call  vpon  thee. 

Priest. 

Indue  thy  Ministers  with  righteous 
ness. 

Answer. 

And  make  thy  chosen  people  ioyfull. 

Priest. 
O  Lord  save  thy  people. 

Answer. 
And  bless  thine  Inheritance. 

Priest. 
Give  peace  in  our  time,  o  Lord. 

Answer. 

Because  there  is  none  other  that 
fighteth  for  vs,  but  only  thou,  O  God. 

Priest. 

O   God    make    cleane    our   hearts 
within  vs. 


148 


MATTINS 


SOURCES 

Et  spiritum  sanctum  tuum  ne  auferas 
a  me  .  .  . 

Dominus  vobiscum. 
Et  cum  spiritu  tuo. 


Oremus. 

Ad  laudes.     Oratio. 
Ad  laudes  B.M.V. 

DEUS  auctor  pacis  et  amator  quern 
nosse  viuere,  cui  seruire  regnare  est, 
protege  ab  omnibus  impugnationibus 
supplices  tuos  :  vt  qui  in  defensione 
tua  confidimus,  nullius  hostilitatis 
arma  timeamus.  Per  dominum.  (Gel. 
iii  56) 


Ad  primam.     In  omnibus  dominicis  et  in 

f  estis  sanctorum  non  dup.  et  in  f  eriis  extra 

hebdomadam  pasche  dicatur  hec  oratio. 

Domine    sancte    pater    omnipotens 

eterne   deus    qui    nos  ad   principium 

htiius  diei  peruenire   fecisti,  tua  nos 

hodie  salua  virtute  :  et  concede  vt  in 

hac  die  ad  nullum  declinemus  pecca- 

tum  :  nee  vllum  incurramus  periculum  : 

sed  semper  ad  tuam  iustitiam  faciendam 

omnis  nostra  actio   tuo    moderamine 

dirigatur.     Per. 


1637  C  After  this  collect  ended,  followeth  the 
Letany :  if  the  Letany  be  not  appointed  to  be 
said  or  sung  that  morning,  then  shall  next 
be  said  the  prayer  for  the  Kings  Majestie, 
with  the  rest  of  the  prayers  following  at 
the  end  of  the  Letany,  and  the  Benediction. 

See  Psalmes  or  prayers  taken  out  ofholye 
Scripture  (Berthelet)  1545  f.  L.  vi ; 
Prayers  or  Medytacions,  wherein  the 
mynd  is  stirred,  paciently  to  suffre  all 
afflictions  here,  to  set  at  naught  the 
vayne  prosperitee  of  this  worlde,  and 
alwaie  to  longe  for  the  euerlastynge 
felicitee  :  Collected  out  of  holy  woorkes 


1549 

Aunswere. 

And  take  not  thyne  holy  spirite 
from  vs. 

Priest. 
The  Lorde  be  with  you. 

Aunswere. 
And  with  thy  spirite. 

d  Then  shall  dayly  folowe  three  Collectes. 
The  firste  of  the  daye,  which  shalbe  thesame 
that  is  appoynted  at  the  Comunion.  The 
second  for  peace.  The  third  for  grace  to 
lyue  well.  And  the  two  laste  Collectes  shall 
neuer  alter,  but  dayly  be  sayed  at  Mat- 
tyns  throughout  al  the  yere,  as  foloweth. 
The  priest  standyng  vp,  and  saying. 

Let  vs  pray. 
C  Then  the  Collect  of  the  daye. 

C  The  second  Collect  :  for  peace. 

O  God,  which  art  author  of  peace, 
&  louer  of  concorde,  in  knowledge 
of  whom  standeth  our  eternall  lyfe, 
whose  seruice  is  perfecte  fredome  : 
defende  vs  thy  humble  seruautes,  in 
all  assaultes  of  our  enemies,  that  we 
surely  trustyng  in  thy  defence,  may 
not  feare  the  power  of  any  aduersaries  : 
through  the  might  of  lesu  Christ  our 
Lorde.  Amen. 


C  The  thyrd  Collect  :  for  grace. 
O  Lord  our  heauenly  father,  al 
mighty  and  euerlyuyng  God,  whiche 
haste  safelye  brought  vs  to  the  begin 
ning  of  this  day  :  Defend  vs  in  the 
same  with  thy  mighty  power,  & 
graunt  that  this  day  we  fall  into  no 
sinne,  neither  runne  into  any  kinde  of 
daunger,  but  that  all  our  doinges 
may  be  ordred  by  thy  gouernaunce, 
to  doe  alwayes  that  is  ryghteous  in 
thy  sight  :  through  lesus  Christe  our 
Lorde.  Amen. 


MATTINS 


149 


1552 

Aunswere. 

And  take  not  thyne  holy  spyryte 
from  vs. 


1661 
Answer. 

And    take    not    thy 
from  vs. 


holy   Spirit 


.  Then  shal  folowe  thre  Collectes. 

The  fyrst  of  the  daye,  whyche  shalbe  the  same 
that  is  appoynted  at  the  Communion.  The 
second  for  Peace.  The  thyrde  for  Grace  to 
lyue  wel.  And  the  two  last  Collectes  shal 
neuer  altre,  but  dayly  be  sayd  at  Moruingt 
prayer,  throughout  al  the  yere  as  foloweth. 


IF  Then  shall  follow  three  Collects. 

The  first  of  the  day,  which  shall  be  the  same 
that  is  appointed  at  the  Comunion.  The 
second  for  Peace.  The  third  for  grace  to 
live  well.  And  the  two  last  Collects  shall 
never  alter,  but  daily  be  said  at  Morning 
Prayerthroughout  all  the  year,  as  followeth, 
All  kneeling. 


C  The  seconde  Collecte  for  Peace. 
OGOD,whicheart  aucthourofpeace, 
&  louer  of  Concorde,  in  knowledge 
of  whome  standeth  our  eternal  lyfe, 
whose  seruice  is  perfecte  freedome, 
defend  vs  thy  humble  seruautes,  in 
al  assaultes  of  our  enemies,  that  we 
surely  trusting  in  thy  defence,  may 
not  feare  the  power  of  any  aduersaries  : 
through  the  might  of  lesu  Christ  our 
Lorde.  Amen. 


IF  The  second  Collect  for  Peace. 
O  God  who  art  the  Author  of  peace,, 
and  lover  of  Concord,  in  knowledge 
of  whom  standeth  our  eternall  life, 
whose  service  is  perfect  freedom  : 
defend  vs  thy  humble  servants  in 
all  assaults  of  our  enemies,  that  we 
surely  trusting  in  thy  defence,  may 
not  fear  the  power  of  any  Adversaries 
through  the  might  of  lesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  Amen. 


C  The  thyrde  Collecte  for  Grace. 
O  Lord  our  heauenly  father,  al 
mighty  and  everlasting  God,  which 
hast  safely  broughte  vs  to  the  begin- 
ninge  of  this  daye  :  defende  vs  in  the 
same  wyth  thy  mightie  power,  and 
graunte  that  this  daye  we  fall  into  no 
synne,  nether  runne  into  any  kind  of 
daunger  :  but  that  al  our  doynges 
may  be  ordred  by  thy  gouernaunce 
to  doe  alwayes,  that  is  righteous  in 
thy  syght  :  through  lesus  Christe  our 
LORDE.  Amen. 


IT  The  third  Collect  for  Grace. 
O  Lord  our  heavenly  Father,  Al 
mighty  and  everlasting  God,  who 
hast  safely  brought  vs  to  the  begin 
ning  of  this  day,  defend  vs  in  the 
same  with  thy  mighty  power,  and 
grant  that  this  day  we  fall  into  no 
sin,  neither  run  into  any  kind  of 
danger  :  but  that  all  our  doings 
may  be  ordered  by  thy  governance, 
to  do  allwayes  that  is  righteous  in 
thy  sight,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  Amen. 

If  In  Quires  and  places  where  they  sing 
here  followeth  the  Anthem. 
Then  these  five  Prayers  following  are 
to  be  read  here,  Except  when  the  Litany 
is  read  :  and  then  only  the  two  last  are 
to  be  read,  as  they  are  there  placed. 

*A  Prayer  for  the  Kings  Majesty. 
*0  Lord  our  heavenly  Father,  high 
and  mighty,  King  of  Kings,  Lord  of 
Lords,  the  only  ruler  of  Princes,  who 
dost  from  thy  throne  behold  all  the 
dwellers  upon  earth :  most  heartily  we 
beseech  thee  with  ^hyfauourto  behold 
our  most  gracious  soveraign  Lord  King 


I50  MATTINS 

SOURCES  J549 

by  the  most  vertuous  and  graciouse 
Princesse  Katherine  quene  of  Eng- 
lande,  Fraunce,  and  Irelande.  Anno 
dm.  1545  (Berthelet)  f .  D  i ;  Litany 
1559. 


Litany  1544  ;  see  p.  184  below. 

Omnipotens  sempiterne  deus,  qui 
facis  mirabilia  magna  solus  :  pretende 
super  famulos  tuos  pontifices  et  super 
cunctas  congregationes  illis  commissas 
spiritum  gratie  salutaris  :  et  vt  in  veri- 
tate  tibi  complaceant,  perpetuum  eis 
rorem  tue  benedictionis  infunde.  (Gel. 
iii  50) 

Litany  1544 ;  see  p.  185  below. 

CO  ras  Koivas  ravras  KOL  o-vp.(pa>vovs 
f]p,1v  ^apto'd.p.evos  irpo(rfv\a$,  6  KOL  dvo 
xal  rpia\  <rvp.<f>a)vov<n,v  eVt  ro>  ovofiari 
crov  ras  alTrj&fis  Trape^eiv  cira.yyeiXdp.fvos' 
avros  KOL  vvv  ra>v  SovXtov  crov  ra  alrr)- 
paTa  irpos  TO  o~vp.<pepov  TrX^poxroz/  x°PT}y^>v 
f)p,1v  ev  T<»  irapovTi  ala>vi  TTJV  ftriyvwo-iv 
rrjs  a-rjs  d\T)0eias  nal  ev  roi  fieXXovrt  faqv 
al&viov  a 


Litany  1559. 


MATTINS  I5i 

1552  1661 

Charles,  and  so  replenish  him  with  the 
grace  of  thy  holy  Spirit,  that  he  ^ay 
aliuay  incline  to  thy  will,  and  walk  in 
thy  way.  Indue  him  p/ewfeously3  with 
heavenly  gifts;  grant  him  in  health, 
and  wealth  long  to  Hue;  strengthen3 
him  that  he  may  vanquish  and  overcome 
all  his  enemies;  !and  finally  after  this 
life  he  may  attain  everlasting  ioy, 
and  felicity,  through  lesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  Amen. 
1T4  A  Prayer  for 

Almighty  God,  5the  fountain  of  all 
goodnes,  *we  humbly  beseech  thee 
to  bless 

Indue  them  with  thy  holy 
spirit,  enrich  them  with  thy  heav 
enly  grace,  prosper  them  with  all 
happiness,  and  bring  them  to  thine 
everlasting  kingdom,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.  Amen.* 

IT  A  Prayer  for  tne  Clergy  and  people. 

Almighty  and  everlasting1  God,  who 
alone  workest  great  marvels,  send 
down  upon  our  Bishops  and  Curats,  and 
all  congregations  committed  to  their 
charge  the  healthfull  spirit  of  thy 
grace :  and  that  they  may  truly  please 
thee,  pour  upon  them  the  continuall 
dew  of  thy  blessing :  grant  this,  0  Lord, 
for  the  honour  of  our  Advocate,  and 
Mediatour  lesus  Christ.  Amen. 

If  A  Prayer  of  Saint  Chrysostome. 

Almighty  God,  who  hast  given  us  grace 
at  this  time  with  one  accord  to  make 
our  common  supplications  unto  thee, 
and  do'st  promise  that  when  two  or 
three  are  gathered  together  in  thy 
Name,  thou  wilt  grant  their  Requests  : 
fulfil  now,  0  Lord,  the  desires,  and 
petitions  of  thy  servants,  as  may  be 
most  expedient  for  them,  granting  us  in 
this  world  knowledge  of  thy  truth  and 
in  the  world  to  come  life  everlasting. 
Amen. 

12.  Corinthians  13. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  lesus  Christ, 
and  the  love  of  God,  and  the  fellow 
ship  of  the  holy  Ghost,  be  with  vs 
all  evermore.  Amen.* 
Here  endeth  the  Order  of  Morning  Prayer 
throughout  the  year. 


152  EVENSONG 

SOURCES  1549 


AN   ORDRE   FOR   EUENSONG 

THROUGHOUT  THE  YERE. 


EVENSONG  153 

1552  1661 

AN  ORDRE  FOR  EUEN/M;  PRAYER      THE  ORDER  FOR  EVEN/JVC  PRAYER 

THROUGHOUT  THE  YERE.  DAYLY  THROUGHOUT  THE  YEAR. 

[See  p.  129]  IT  At  the  beginning  of  Evening  Prayer  the 

Minister  shall  read  with  a  loud  voice,  some 
one  Of  more  of  these  sentences  of  the  scrip 
tures  that  follow.  And  then  he  shall  say 
that  which  is  written  after  the  said 
sentences. 

[Ezech.  1 8.  27. 

When  the  wicked  man  turneth  away 
from  his  wickedness  that  he  hath  com 
mitted,  and  doth  that  which  is  lawfull 
and  right,  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive. 
[Psal.  51.  3. 

/  acknowledge  my  transgressions, 
and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me. 

[Psal.  51.  6». 

Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot 
out  mine  iniquities. 

[Psal.  51.617. 
The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken 

f'rit,  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart, 
God,  thou  wilt  not  despise. 

[Joel  2.  613. 

Rent  your  hearts,  and  not  your 
garments,  and  turn  vnto  the  Lord 
your  God,  for  he  is  gracious,  and 
mercifull,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great 
kindness,  and  repenteth  him  of  the  evil. 
[Dan.  9.  69, 10. 

To  the  Lord  our  God  belong  mercies, 
and  forgivenesses,  though  we  have 
rebelled  against  him:  Neither  have 
we  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our 
God,  to  walk  in  his  laws  which  he  set 
before  vs. 

[Jer.  10.  624.*  Psal.  6.  1. 

0  Lord,  correct  me,  but  with  iudge- 
ment,  not  in  thine  anger,   lest  thou 
bring  me  to  nothing. 

[S.  Mat.  3.  2. 

Repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  at  hand. 

[S.  Luke  15.  18, 19. 

1  will  arise,  and  go  to  my  father, 
and  will  say  vnto  him,  Father,  I  have 
sinned  against  heaven,  and  before  thee, 
and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called 
thy  son. 

[PsaL  143.  2. 

Enter  not  into  iudgement  with  thy 
servant,  [O  Lord]  for  in  thy  sight  shall 
no  man  living  be  iustified. 

f i.  S.  John.  i.  68*,  9. 

If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we 
deceive  our  selves,  and  the  Truth  is 
not  in  w.[but]  if  we  confess  our 
sins,  lie  is  faithfull  and  iust  to  for- 


154  EVENSONG 

SOURCES 


EVENSONG  155 

1552  1661 

give  vs  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  vs 
from  all  vnrighteousness. 

[See  p.  131]  Dearly  beloved  brethren,  the  scrip 

ture  moveth  vs  in  sundry  places  to 
acknowledge  and  confess  our  mani 
fold  sins  and  wickedness,  and  that  we 
should  not  dissemble  nor  cloak  them 
before  the  face  of  Almighty  God  our 
heavenly  Father,  but  confess  them 
with  an  humble,  lowly,  penitent,  and 
obedient  heart,  to  the  end  that  we 
may  obtein  forgiveness  of  the  same  by 
his  infinite  goodness  and  mercy;  And 
although  we  ought  at  all  times  humbly 
to  Acknowledge  our  sins  before  God: 
yet  ought  we  most  chiefly  so  to  do, 
when  we  assemble  and  meet  together, 
to  render  thanks  for  the  great  benefits 
that  we  have  received  at  his  hands,  to 
set  forth  his  most  worthy  praise,  to 
hear  his  most  holy  word,  and  to  ask 
those  things  which  are  requisite  and 
necessary  as  well  for  the  body  as  the 
soul.  Wherefore  I  pray  and  beseech 
you,  as  many  as  are  here  present,  to 
accompany  me  with  a  pure  heart,  and 
humble  voice  vnto  the  throne  of  the 
heavenly  grace,  saying  after  me. 

IT  A  generall  Confession  to  be  said  of  the 
whole  congregation,  after  the  Minister,  all 
kneeling. 

Almighty,      and     most     mercifull 
Father,     We  have  erred  and  strayed 
from  thy  wayes  like  lost  sheep,     We 
have  followed  too  much  the  devices, 
and  desires  of  our  own  hearts,     We 
have  offended  against  thy  holy  laws, 
We  have  left  vndon  those  things  which 
we  ought  to  have  don,    And  we  have 
don  those  things  which  we  ought  not 
to  have  don,     And  there  is  no  health 
in  vs,    But  thou,  O  Lord,  have  mercy 
vpon  vs  miserable  offenders;    Spare 
thou  them,  O  God,  which  confess  their 
faults,     Restore  thou  them  that  are 
penitent,    According  to  thy  promises 
declared  vnto  mankind  in  Christ  lesu 
our  Lord;  And  grant,  O  most  merci 
full  Father,  for  his  sake,     That  we 
may  hereafter  live  a  godly,  righteous, 
and  sober  life,     To  the  glory  of  thy 
holy  Name.    Amen. 
IF  The  Absolution,  <or  Remission  of  sins, 
to    be   pronounced    by  the    8Priest  alone, 
"standing,  the  people  still  kneeling. 
Almighty  God,  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  lesus  Christ,  wh<$  desireth  not 


EVENSONG 


SOURCES 


1549 


Ad  vesperas. 
Pater  noster  [&c.]. 


<E  The  priest  shall  saye. 

OVRE  FATHER,  &c, 


Then  lykewise  he  shall  saye. 


Deus  in  adiutorium  meum  intende. 
Domine  ad  adiuuandum  me  festina. 
Gloria  patri  et  filio  et  spiritui  sancto. 


Sicut  erat  in  principio  et  nunc  et 
semper  et  in  secula  seculorum.    Amen. 


Alleluia. 


O  God  make  spede  to  saue  me. 

Aunswere. 
O  Lorde  make  haste  to  helpe  me. 

Priest. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  &  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  gost. 

As  it  was  in  the  begynnyng,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  worlde  without  ende. 
Amen. 

Prayse  ye  the  Lorde. 

And  from  Easter  to  Trinitie  Sonday. 
Alleluya. 


As  before  is  appoynted  at  Mattyns. 


EVENSONG 


1552 


C  The  Priest  shal  saye. 

OUR   FATHER  WHICHE,  &C, 


Then  likewise  he  shal  say. 
O  Lord  open  thou  our  lippes. 

Aunswere. 

And  our  mouth  shal  shewefurth  thy 
prayse. 

Priest. 
O  God  make  spede  to  saue  vs. 

Aunswere. 
Lorde  make  haste  to  helpe  vs. 

Priest. 

Glory  bee  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Sonne,  and  to  the  holy  gost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginnyng,  is  now, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  world  without  ende. 
Amen. 

Prayse  ye  the  Lorde. 


1661 

the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that 
he  may  turn  from  his  wickednes  and 
live;  and  hath  given  power  and  com 
mandment  to  his  Ministers,  to  declare, 
and  pronounce  to  his  people  being 
penitent  the  Absolution,  and  Remission 
of  their  sins :  He  pardoneth  and 
absolveth  all  them  that  truly  repent 
and  vnfeignedly  believe  his  holy  Gospel. 
Wherefore  beseech  we  him  to  grant  vs 
true  repentance  and  his  holy  Spirit, 
that  those  things  may  please  him  which 
we  do  at  this  present,  and  that  the  rest 
of  our  life  hereafter  may  be  pure  and 
holy,  so  that  at  the  last  we  may  come 
to  his  eternall  ioy,  throug  lesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  Amen. 

IT  Then  the  Minister  shall  kneel  and  say 
the  Lords  Prayer:   7bthe  people  also 
kneeling  and  repeating  it  with  him. 
Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven, 
Hallowed  be  thy  name.    Thy  kingdom 
come,     Thy  will  be  don  in  earth  as  it 
is  in  heaven.     Give  vs  this  day  our 
daily  bread,    And  forgive  vs  our  tres 
passes,      As  we  forgive    them    that 
trespass  against  vs,    And  lead  vs  not 
into  temptation,     But  deliver  vs  from 
evil,    Tor  thine   is   the  kingdom, 
The  power,  and  the  glory,    For  ever 
and  ever.    Amen. 

IT  Then  likewise  he  shall  say. 
O  Lord  open  thou  our  lips. 

Answer. 

And  our  mouth  shall  shew  forth  thy 
praise. 

Priest. 
O  God  make  speed  to  save  vs. 

Answer. 

O  Lord  make  haste  to  help  vs. 
<j  ejjere  all  standing  vp  the  Priest  shall  say. 
Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

Answer. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without  end. 
Amen. 

"Priest. 
Praise  ye  the  Lord. 


6Answer. 
The  Lords  name  be  praised. 


158 


EVENSONG 


SOURCES 


[Piahnl] 


[CapitulumJ 


[HymnuB] 

[    Luc.  i. 

MAgnificat  anima  mea  dominum. 

Et  exultauit  spiritus  meus  :  in  deo 
sal u tar i  meo. 

Quia  respexit  humilitatem  ancille 
sue  :  ecce  enim  ex  hoc  beatam  me 
dicent  omiies  generationes. 

Quia  fecit  mihi  magna  qui  potens 
est  :  et  sanctum  nomen  eius. 

Et  misericordia  eius  a  progenie  in 
progenies  :  timentibus  eum. 

Fecit  potentiam  in  brachio  suo  : 
dispersit  superbos  merite  cordis  sui. 

Deposuit  potentes  de  sede  :  et  exalta- 
uit  humiles. 

Esurientes  impleuit  bonis  :  et  diuites 
dimisit  inanes. 

Suscepit  israel  puerum  suum  :  re- 
cordatus  misericordie  sue. 

Sicut  locutus  est  ad  patres  nostros  : 
abraham  &  semini  eius  in  secula. 

Gloria  patri  et  filio. 

Sicut  erat. 


1549 

Then  I'::alm'-.s 

in  ordre  as  they  be  appoynted  in  the 
Table  for  Psalmes,  except  there  be  propre 
I 'sal  rues  appointed  for  that  dayr.  'i  h':ii 
a  lesson  of  the  olde  testamente,  as  it  is 
appoyntcd  lykewise  in  tin:  kalrnck-r,  excepte 
there  be  proper  lessons  appointed  for  that 
daye.  After  that,  (Magnificat  anima  mea 
dominum)  in 

Englishe,  as  foloweth. 

[Magnificat  Luc.  i. 
MY  soule  doeth  magnifie  the  Lorde. 
And  my  spirite  hath  reioyced  in 

God  my  sauiour. 

For  he  hath  regarded  the  lowely- 

nesse,  of  his  hadmaiden. 

For   beholde,  from  henceforth   all 

generacions  shall  call  me  blessed. 
For  he  that  is  myghtie  hath  magni- 

fyed  me  :  and  holy  is  his  name. 

And  his  mercy  is  on  them  that  feare 

him  :  throughout  all  generacions. 
He  hath  shewed  strength  with  his 

arme  :  he  hath  scatered  the  proude  in 

the  imaginacion  of  their  heartes. 
He  hath   put   downe  the    mightie 

from  their  seate   :  and  hath  exalted 

the  humble  and  meke. 

He  hathe  filled   the  hungry,  with 

good  thynges  :  and  the  ryche  he  hath 

sent  emptie  awaye. 

He  remembring  his   mercye,  hath 

holpen  his  seruaunte  Israel   :  as  he 

promysed  to  cure       fathers,  Abraham 

and  his  sede  for  euer. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 

sonne.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning.&c. 


EVENSONG 


1552 

Then  Psalmes 

in  ordre,  as  they  be  appointed  in  ye 
Table  for  Psalmes,  except  there  be  proper 
Psalmes  appointed  for  that  day.  Then 
a  Lesson  of  the  old  Testament?  as  it  is 
appointed  like  wise  in  the  Kalender,  except 
there  be  propre  lessons  appointed  for  that 
day.  After  that,  Magnificat, 

in 
Englishe,  as  foloweth. 

[Magnificat. 

MY  soule  doeth  magnifie  the  Lorde : 
And  my  spirite  hath  reioyced  in 

god  my  Sauiour. 

For  he  hath  regarded  the  loweli- 

nes  of  his  handmaiden  : 

For  beholde  from    henceforth    all 

generacions  shal  cal  me  blessed. 

For  he  that  is  mightie,  hath  magni 
fied  me  :  and  holy  is  his  name. 

And  his  mercy  is  on  them  that  feare 

hym  :  throughout  al  generacions. 
He  hath  shewed  strength  with  his 

arme  :  he  hath  scatered  the  proud,  in 

the  imaginacio  of  their  heartes.  . 
He    hath    put    down    the    mighty 

from  their  seate   :  and  hath  exalted 

the  humble  and  meke. 

He    hath    filled    the    hungry  with 

good  thinges  :  and  the  riche  he  hath 

sent  emptie  away. 

He  remembrynge  his  mercye,  hath 

holpen    hys    servaut    Israel    :   as    he 

promised  to  our /^^fathers,  Abraham 

and  his  sede  for  euer. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 

Sonne,  and  to  the  holy  gost. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 

and   euer  shall  be   :  worlde  without 

ende.    Amen. 

Or  the  .xcviii.  Psalm.  Cantate  Domino 
canticum  nouum,  quia  mirabilia  fecit. 


1661 

H  Then  shall  be  said  or  sung  3the*  Psalms 
in  order  as  they  be  appointed. 

Then 

a  Lesson  of  the  old  Testament  as       is 
appointed  ; 

And  after  that  Magnificat   (or   the 
song  of  the  blessed  virgin  Mary)   in 

English  as  followeth. 

[Magnificat  8.  Luke.  i. 

My  soul  doth  magnifie  the  Lord  : 
and  my  spirit  hath  reioiced  in 
God  my  Saviour. 

For  he  hath  regarded:5:*the  lowli 
ness  of  his  hand-maiden. 

For  behold,  from  henceforth3:*all 
generations  shall  call  me  blessed. 

For  he  that  is  mighty  hath  magni 
fied  me  :  and  holy  is  his  Name. 

And  his  mercy  is  on  them  that  fear 
him  :  throughout  all  generations. 

He  hath  shewed  strength  with  his 
arm  :  he  hath  scattered  the  proud  in 
the  Imagination  of  their  hearts. 

He  hath  put  down  the  mighty 
from  their  seat  :  and  hath  exalted 
the  humble  and  meek. 

He  hath  filled  the  hungry  with 
good  things  :  and  the  rich  he  hath 
sent  empty  away. 

He  remembring  his  mercy,  hath 
holpen  his  servant  Israel  :  as  he 
promised  to  our/^r^fathers,  Abraham, 
and  his  seed  for  ever. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  World  without 
end.  Amen. 

U  Or  laelse  this*  Psalm,  except  it  be  on  the 
nineteenth  day  of  the  month,  when  it 
is  read  in  the  ordinary  course  of  the 
Psalms.  [Cantate  Domino.  Psal:  98. 

O  sing  vnto  the  Lord  a  new  song  : 

for  he  hath  don  marvelous  things. 
With  his  own  right  hand,  and  with 

his  holy  at  m  :  hath  he  gotten  himself e 

the  Victory. 

The  Lord  declared  his  salvacon :  his 

righteousness  hath  he  openly  shewed  in 

the  sight  of  the  heathen. 

He  hath  remembred  his  mercy  and 

truth  toward  the  house  of  Israel :  and 

all  the  ends  of  the  world  have  seen  the 

salvation  of  our  God. 

Shew  your  selves  ioyfull  vnto  the 

Lord,  all  ye  Lands  :  sing,  rejoyce,  and 

give  thancks. 


i6o 


EVENSONG 


SOURCES 


1549 


Ad  completorium.    [Capitulum.] 
[Hymnus] 

Canticum  Simeonis.  [Luce  ij. 

Nunc  dimittis  seruum  tuum  domine  : 
secundum  verbum  tuum  in  pace. 

Quia  viderunt  oculi  mei  :  salutare 
tuum. 

Quod  parasti  :  ante  faciem  omnium 
populorum. 

Lumen  ad  reuelationem  gentium  : 
et  gloriam  plebis  tue  israel. 

Gloria  patri  et  filio  :  et  spiritui 
sancto. 

Sicut  erat  in  principio  et  nunc  et 
semper  :  et  in  secula  seculorum. 
Amen. 


Then  a  lesson  of   the  newe  testamente. 
And  after  that  (Nunc 

dimittis  seruum  tuum)  in 

Englishe  as  foloweth. 

[Nunc  dimittis.          Luc.  ii. 

Lorde,  nowe  lettest  thou  thy  ser- 
uaunte  departe  in  peace  :  accordyng 
to  thy  worde. 

For  myne  iyes  haue  seen  :  thy 
saluacion. 

Whiche  thou  haste  prepared  :  before 
the  face  of  all  people. 

To  be  a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles : 
and  to  be  the  glorye  of  thy  people 
Israel. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  £  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  gost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  worlde  without  ende. 
Amen. 


EVENSONG 


161 


1552 


Then  a  Lesson  of  the  newe  Testament. 
And  after  that,  (Nunc 
dimittis  )  in 

Englishe,  as  foloweth. 

Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  ser- 
uant  departe  in  peace  :  accordynge 
to  thy  worde. 

For  mine  iyes  haue  seen  :  thy 
saluacyon. 

Whiche  thou  hast  prepared  :  before 
the  face  of  all  people  ; 

To  be  a  lighte  to  lighten  the  Gentiles : 
and  to  be  the  glory  of  thy  people 
Israel. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
Sonne.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  begynning,  is  now. 
&c. 


Or        thys  Psalme.  Deus  misereatur  nostri, 
in  Englishe. 


1661 

Praise  the  Lord  vpon  the  Harp  : 
sing  to  the  Harp  with  a  Psalm  of 
thanksgiving. 

With  Trumpets  also  and  Shawms  : 
O  shew  your  selves  ioyfull  before  the 
Lord  the  King. 

Let  the  Sea  make  a  noise,  and  all 
that  therein  is  :  the  round  world,  and 
they  that  dwell  therein. 

Let  the  Floods  clap  their  hands,  and 
let  the  hills  be  joyfull  together  before 
the  Lord  :  for  he  cometh  to  iudge  the 
earth. 

With  righteousness  shall  he  iudge 
the  world:  and  the  People  with  equity. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without  end. 
Amen. 

U  Then  a  Lesson  of  the  New  Testament, 

as  it  is  appointed.    And  after  that  Nunc 

dimittis  (or   the   song  of   Simeon)    in 

English,  as  followeth. 

[Nunc  dimittis.  St.  Luke  2.  29. 

Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  ser 
vant  depart  in  peace  :  according 
to  thy  word. 

For  mine  eyes  have  seen  :  thy 
Salvation. 

which  thou  hast  prepared  :  before 
the  face  of  all  people. 

To  be  a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles  : 
and  to  be  the  glory  of  thy  people 
Israel. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without  end. 
Amen. 

IF  Or  laelse*  this  Psalm  (except  it  be  on  the 
twelfth  day  of  the  month.) 

[Deus  misereatur.  Psal:  67. 

God  be  mercifull  vnto  vs,  and  bless 
vs  :  and  shew  vs  the  light  of  his 
Countenance,  and  be  mercifull  vnto  vs. 

That  thy  Way  may  be  known  vpon 
earth  :  thy  saving  health  among  all 
nations. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O  God : 
yea  let  all  the  people  praise  thee. 

O  Let  the  nations  rejoyce  and  be 
glad  :  for  thou  shalt  iudge  the  folk 
righteously,  and  govern  the  nations 
vpon  earth. 

Let  the  people  praise  thee,  (O  God:} 
yea  let  all  the  people  praise  thee. 


162 


EVENSONG 


SOURCES 


1549 


Ad  completorium. 

Credo  in  deum  patrem  omnipo- 
tentem  :  creatorem  cell  et  terre  :  &  in 
iesum  christum  filium  eius  unicum 
dominum  nostrum  :  qui  conceptus  est 
de  spiritu  sancto  :  natus  ex  maria 
virgine  passus  sub  pontio  pilato  cruci- 
fixus  mortuus  &  sepultus  :  descendit 
ad  inferna  :  tertia  die  resurrexit  a 
mortuis  :  ascendit  ad  celos  sedet  ad 
dexteram  dei  patris  omnipotentis  :  inde 
venturus  est  iudicare  viuos  et  mortuos. 
Credo  in  spiritum  sanctum,  sanctam 
ecclesiam  catholicam,  sanctorum  com- 
munionem,  remissionem  peccatorum, 
carnis  resurrectionem,  vitam  eternam. 
Amen. 


Then    the    suffrages 

before  assigned  at  Mattyns, 
the  clerkes  knelyng  lykewise, 
[See  p.  144.] 


Ad  vesperas.    Preces  vt  supra  [ad  matu- 
tinas] 

See  p.  146. 


EVENSONG 


163 


1552 


C  Then  shal  folowe   the   Crede,  with  other 
prayers  as  is  before  appointed  at  Morning 
prayer,  after  Benedictus. 
[See  p.  145.] 


1661 

Then  shall  the  earth  bring  forth  her 
increase  :  and  God,  even  our  own  God 
shall  give  vs  his  blessing. 

God  shall  bless  us  :  and  all  the  ends 
of  the  world  shall  fear  him. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  World  without  end. 
Amen. 

IT  Then  shall  be  said,  or  sung  the  Apostles 
Creed  by  the  Minister,  and  the  people 
standing. 

I  beleeve  in  God  the  Father  Al 
mighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth. 
And  in  lesus  Christ  his  only  Son  our 
Lord,  Who  was  conceived  by  the 
holy  Ghost,  Borne  of  the  virgin 
Mary.  Suffered  vnder  Pontius  Pilate, 
Was  crucified,  dead  and  buried.  He 
descended  into  Hell,  The  third  day 
he  rose  again  from  the  dead.  He 
ascended  into  heaven,  And  sitteth 
on  the  right  hand  of  God  the  father 
Almighty.  From  thence  he  shall 
come  to  judge  the  quicke  and  the 
dead.  I  beleeve  in  the  holy  Ghost, 
The  holy  Catholick  Church,  The 
Communion  of  Saints,  The  forgive 
ness  of  Sinns,  The  Resurrection  of 
the  body,  And  the  life  everlasting. 
Amen. 

IT  And  after  that  these  Prayers  following,  all 
devoutly  kneeling,  the  Minister  first  pro 
nouncing  with  a  loud  voice. 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 

Answer. 

And  with  thy  Spirit. 
Minister. 

Let  vs  pray. 
Lord  have  mercy  vpon  vs. 

Christ  haue  mercy  vpon  vs. 
Lord  have  mercy  vpon  vs. 

If  Then  the  Minister,  Clerks  and  people 
shall  say  the  Lords  Prayer  with  a  loud 
Voice. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven, 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.  Thy  King 
dom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in  earth 
as  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  vs  this  day 
our  daily  bread.  And  forgive  vs  our 
Trespasses,  As  we  forgive  them  that 
trespass  against  vs.  And  lead  vs  not 
into  temptation  ;  But  deliver  vs  from 
evil.  Amen. 


164 


EVENSONG 


SOURCES 


1549 


Oratio  vt  decet. 


AdvesperasB.M.V.    Oratio. 

DEUS  a  quo  sancta  desideria,  recta 
consilia,  &  iusta  sunt  opera  :  da  seruis 
tuis  illam  quam  mundus  dare  non 
potest  pacem  :  vt  et  corda  nostra 
mandatis  tuis  dedita  :  et  hostium 
sublata  formidine,  tempora  sint  tua 
protectione  tranquilla.  per  do.  (Gel. 
iii  56.) 


So       Ad  completorium. 

iLlumina  quesumus  domine  deus 
tenebras  nostras  :  et  totius  huius  noctis 
insidias  tu  a  nobis  repelle  propitius. 
Per  do.  in  vnitate.  (Gel.  iii  85.) 


with  three  Collectes. 

Fyrste  of  the  day :          Second  of  peace  : 
Thirde  for  aydeagainst  all  perilles,  as  here 
foloweth.    Whiche  .ii.  laste  Collectes 
shall     be     dayly     sayed     at     Euensong 
without  alteracion. 

The  second  Collect  at  Euensong. 
O  God,  from  whome  all  holy  desyres, 
all  good  counsayles,  and  all  iust  workes 
doe  precede  :  Geue  vnto  thy  ser- 
uauntes  that  peace,  whiche  the  worlde 
cannot  geue,  that  both  our  heartes 
maye  be  sette  to  obey  thy  commaunde- 
mentes,  and  also  that  by  thee,  we 
beyng  defended  from  the  feare  of  cure 
enemyes,  may  passe  oure  tyme  in  rest 
and  quietnesse  :  through  the  merites 
of  lesu  Christe  our  sauiour.  Amen. 
The  thirde  Collect  for  ayde  against 

all  perils. 

Lvghten  our  darkenesse  we  beseche 
thee,  O  Lord,  and  by  thy  great  mercy, 
defend  vs  from  all  perils  and 
daungers  of  this  night,  for  the  loue 
of  thy  onely  sonne  our  sauiour  lesu 
Christe.  Amen. 


EVENSONG 


165 


1552 


And  with  thre  Collectes  : 

First  of  the  day :  the  seconde  of  peace : 
Third  for  aide  against  al  perilles,  as  here- 
after  foloweth :  wnich  two  laste  Collectes 
shalbe  daiely  said  at  Evening  praier 
without  alteracion. 

The  second  Collecte  at  Euenyng prayer. 

O  GOD,  from  whom  al  holy  desyres, 
al  good  counsayls,  and  all  iuste  woorkes 
dooe  procede  :  geue  vnto  thy  ser- 
vauntes  that  peace,  whiche  the  worlde 
cannot  geue  :  that  both  our  heartes 
may  bee  set  to  obeye  thy  commaunde- 
ments,  and  also  that  by  thee  we  beyng 
defended  from  the  feare  of  our  enemies, 
may  passe  our  time  in  rest  and  quiet- 
nes,  throughe  the  merites  of  lesus 
Chryste  our  Sauiour.  Amen. 

The  thirde  Collecte,  for  ayde  agaynst 

al  perilles. 

Lighten  our  darkenes  we  beseche 
thee,  O  lord,  and  by  thy  great  mercy, 
defende  vs  from  all  perylles,  and 
daungers  of  thys  nyghte,  for  the  loue 
of  thy  onely  Sonne  our  Sauyoure  lesus 
Chryst.  Amen. 


1661 

IT  Then  the  Priest  standing  vp,  shall  say. 
O  Lord  shew  thy  mercy  vpon  vs. 

Answer. 
And  grant  vs  thy  Salvation. 

Priest. 
O  Lord  save  the  King. 

Answer. 

And  mercifully  hear  vs  when  we 
call  vpon  thee. 

Priest. 

Indue  thy  Ministers  with  right- 
eousnes. 

Answer. 
And  make  thy  chosen  people  joyfull. 

Priest. 
O  Lord  save  thy  people. 

Answer. 
And  bless  thine  Inheritance. 

Priest. 
Give  peace  in  our  tyme,  O  Lord. 

Answer. 

Because  there  is  none  other  that 
fighteth  for  vs  but  only  thou,  O  God. 

Priest. 

O  God  make  cleane  our  hearts 
within  vs. 

Answer. 
And  take  not  thy  holy  Spirit  from  vs. 

11  Then  shall  follow  three  Collects.  The 
first  of  the  day ;  The  second  for  Peace ; 
The  third  for  aid  against  all  perils,  as  here- 
after  followeth  :  which  two  last  Collects 
shall  be  daily  said  at  Evening  Prayer 
without  Alteration. 

If  The  second  Collect  at  evening  Prayer. 
O  God  from  whom  all  holy  desires, 
all  good  Counsels,  and  all  iust  Works 
do  proceed  :  give  vnto  thy  ser 
vants  that  peace  which  the  world 
cannot  give,  that  both  our  hearts 
may  be  sett  to  obey  thy  Comand- 
ments,  and  alsoe  that  by  thee  we 
being  defended  from  the  fear  of  our 
enemies,  may  passe  our  time  in  rest 
and  quietness,  through  the  meritts 
of  lesus  Christ  our  Saviour.  Amen. 

IF  The  third  Collect  for  Aid  against 

all  Perils. 

Lighten  our  darkness  wee  beseech 
thee,  O  Lord,  and  by  thy  great  mercy 
defend  vs  from  all  Perils  and 
dangers  of  this  night,  for  the  love 
of  thy  only  Son,  our  Saviour  lesus 
Christ.  Amen. 


166  EVENSONG 

SOURCES  1549 


1637  Then  shall  follow  the  prayer  for  the 
King's  Majesty,  with  the  rest  of  the 
prayers  at  the  end  of  the  Letany,  to  the 
Benediction. 

See  p.  148. 


See  p.  184  below. 

Omnipotens  sempiterne  deus,  qui 
facis  mirabilia  magna  solus  :  pretende 
super  famulos  tuos  pontifices  et  super 
cunctas  congregationes  illis  commissas, 
spiritum  gratie  salutaris  :  et  vt  in 
veritate  tibi  complaceant,  perpetuum 
eis  rorem  tue  benedictionis  infunde. 
(Gel  iii  50) 

See  p.  185  below. 

'O  ras  KOIVO.S  ravras  KOI  avfj.<pa>vovs 
rjfuv  xapio-ci/iei/os  Trpocreu^ap,  6  Kal  8vo 
Kal  rpttri  <rvp.(f)(i)vovcriv  eVt  TO>  OVOfMTt 
(rov  TO.S  alrrja-eis  7rape%€iv  eirayyeiXd/jifvos' 
avros  KCU  vvv  T&v  dovXcov  <rov  ra  dirt] para 
irpbs  TO  arvfjupepov  ir\r}pa)(rov  xoprjywv 
J//LUZ/  ev  TW  irapovri  aiwvi  TTJV  tireyvoKTUt 
TTJS  o-rjs  aXrjdfias  KOI  ev  ra>  p.e\\ovTi  farjv 
alwviov  ai^duevof. 


EVENSONG  167 


1552  1661 


IF  In  Quires  and  Places  where  they  sing, 

here  followeth  the  Antheme. 
If  iA  Prayer  for  the  Kings  Majesty. 

J0  Lord  our  heavenly  Father 
High  and  Mighty,  King  of  kings,  Lord 
of  lords,  the  only  ruler  of  Princes,  who 
do'st  from  thy  throne  behold  all  the 
dwellers  upon  earth,  most  heartily  we 
beseech  theewith  ^hj  favour  to  behould 
our  most  gracious  sovereign  Lord  King 
Charles,  and  soe  replenish  him  with 
the  grace  of  thy  holy  spirit,  that  he 
may1  alway  incline  to  thy  will,  and 
walk  in  thy  way:  Indue  him  plente- 
ously3  with  heavenly  guifts,  grant  him 
in  health  and  wealth  long  to  live, 
strengthen3  him  that  he  may  vanquish 
and  overcome  all  his  enemies,  *and 
finally  after  this  life  he  may  attaine 
everlasting  ioy  and  felicity,  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 
IT  ^A  Prayer  for 

Almighty  God  ^he  fountaine  of 
all  goodness,  4we  humbly  beseech 
thee  to  bless 

Indue 

them  with  thy  holy  spirit,  enrich 
them  with  thy  heavenly  grace, 
prosper  them  with  all  happines,  and 
bring  them  to  thine  everlasting 
Kingdom,  through  lesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  Ainen.* 

«JJ  A  Prayer  for  the  Clergy  and  people. 

Almighty  and  ei/erlasting1  God,  who 
alone  worhest  great  marvels,  send 
down  vpon  our  Bishops  _and  Curates, 
and  all  Congregations  comitted  to  their 
charge  the  healthfull  Spirit  of  thy  grace, 
and  that  they  may  truly  please  thee, 
pour  vpon  them  the  continuall  dew  of 
thy  blessing.  Grant  this,  0  Lord,  for 
the  honor  of  our  Advocate  and  Mediator 
lesus  Christ.  Amen 

If  A  Prayer  of  Saint  Chrysostome. 

Allnighty  God,  who  hast  given  vs 
grace  at  this  time  with  one  accord  to 
make  our  common  supplications  vnto 
thee,  and  do'st  promise  that  when  two  : 
or  three  are  gathered  together  in  thy 
Name,  thou  wilt  grant  their  Requests; 
fulfill  now,  0  Lord,  the  desires  and 
petitions  of  thy  servants,  as  may  be 
most  expedient  for  them,  granting  vs  in 
this  world  knowledge  of  thy  truth,  and 
in  the  world  to  come  life  everlasting. 
Amen. 


i68 


QUICUNQUE  VULT 


SOURCES 


1549 


See  p.  172. 

<§?        Ad  primam. 


<L  In  the  feastes  of   Christmas 
piphanie, 
Thascencion          .    Penticost, 


Easter 


The- 


Simbolum  Athanasii. 

Quicunque  vult  saluus  esse  :  ante 
omnia  opus  est  vt  teneat  catholicam 
fidem. 

Quam  nisi  quisque  integram,  inuio- 
latamque  seruauerit  :  absque  dubio  in 
eternum  peribit. 

Fides  autem  catholica  hec  est,  vt 
vnum  deum  in  trinitate  :  et  trinitatem 
in  imitate  veneremur. 

Neque  confundetes  persohas  :  neque 
substantiam  separantes. 

Alia  est  enim  persona  patris,  alia 
filii  :  alia  spiritussancti. 

Sed  patris  et  filii  et  spiritussancti 
vna  est  divinitas  :  equalis  gloria, 
coeterna  maiestas. 

Qualis  pater,  talis  films  :  talis 
spiritussanctus. 

Increatus  pater,  increatus  films  : 
increatus  spiritussanctus. 

Immensus  pater,  immensus  films  : 
immensus  spiritussanctus. 

Eternus  pater,  eternus  filius  :  eternus 
spiritussanctus. 

Et  tamen  no  tres  eterni  :  sed  vnus 
eternus. 

Sicut  non  tres  increati  nee  tres 
immensi  :  sed  vnus  increatus  et  vnus 
immensus. 

Similiter  omnipotes  pater,  omni- 
potens  filius  :  omnipotens  spiritus 
sanctus. 

Et  tamen  no  tres  omnipotentes  : 
sed  vnus  omnipotens. 


and  vpon  Trinitie 

Sonday,  shall  be  song  or  sayed  immediately 
after  Benedictus 
this  confession  of  our  Christian  fayth. 


[Quicunque  vult.&c. 

WHosoeuer  will  be  saued  :  be 
fore  all  thynges  it  is  necessary  that  he 
holde  the  Catholyke  fayth. 

Whiche  fayth,  excepte  euery  one  doe 
kepe  holy  and  vndefiled  :  without 
doubte  he  shall  peryshe  euerlastyngly. 

And  the  Catholike  fayth  is  this  : 
that  we  wurshippeone  God  in  Trinitie, 
and  Trinitie  in  vnitie. 

Neytherconfoundyngthe  persones  : 
nor  deuydyng  the  substaunce. 

For  there  is  one  person  of  the 
father,  another  of  the  sonne  :  and 
an  other  of  the  holy  gost. 

But  the  Godhead  of  the  father,  of 
the  sonne,  and  of  the  holy  gost,  is  all 
one  :  the  glory  equall,  the  maiestie 
coeternal. 

Suche  as  the  father  is,  suche  is  the 
sonne  :  and  suche  is  the  holy  gost. 

The  father  vncreate,  the  sonne  vn- 
create  :  and  the  holy  gost  vncreate. 

The  father  incomprehensible,  the 
sonne  incomprehensible  :  and  the 
holy  gost  incomprehensible. 

The  father  eternall,  the  sonne 
eternall  :  and  the  holy  gost  eternall. 

And  yet  they  are  not  threeeternalles : 
but  one  eternall. 

As  also  there  be  not  three  incom- 
prehensibles,  nor  three  vncreated  : 
but  one  vncreated,  and  one  incompre 
hensible. 

So  lykewyse,  the  father  is  almightie  : 
the  sonne  almightie,  and  the  holy 
gost  almightie. 

And  yet  are  they  not  three  al- 
mightyes  :  but  one  almighty. 


QUICUNQUE  VULT 


169 


1552 


In    the    feastes    of   Christmas  ,    the 

Epiphanie,    saincte   Mathie,    Easter 
Thassencion         ,    Pentecost,  Sainct  lohn 
Baptist,  Sainct  lames,  Sainct  Bartholomew, 
Sainct  Mathewe,  Sainct  Symon  and 
lude,  Sainct  Andrewe,  and  Trinitie 

Sundaye :  shalbe  song,  or  sayd  immediately 
after  Benedictus 
this  confession  of  our  Christen  fayth. 


[Quicunque  vult. 

Wnosoeuer  wyll  be  saued  :  bee- 
fore  all  thinges  it  is  necessary  that  he 
holde  the  catholike  fayth. 

Which  faith  except  euery  one  dooe 
kepe  holy  and  vndefyled  :  wythoute 
doubt  he  shal  perishe  euerlastyngly. 

And  the  catholyke  fayth  is  this  : 
that  we  worship  one  God  in  Trinitie, 
and  Trinitie  in  vnity. 

Neither  confounding  the  persons  : 
nor  deuiding  the  substaunce. 

For  there  is  one  person  of  the 
father,  an  other  of  the  Sonne  :  and 
an  other  of  the  holy  Ghost. 

But  the  godhed  of  the  Father,  of 
the  Sonne,  and  of  the  holy  goste  is  all 
one  :  the  glory  equall,  the  maiestie 
coeternall. 

Such  as  the  Father  is,  such  is  the 
Sonne  :  and  such  is  the  holy  gost. 

The  father  vncreate,  the  Sonne  vn- 
create  :  and  the  holy  gost  vncreate. 

The  Father  incomprehensible,  the 
Sonne  incomprehensible  :  and  the 
holy  gost  incomprehensible. 

The  Father  eternal,  the  Sonne 
eternal  :  and  the  holy  gost  eternal. 

And  yet  they  are  not  three  eternalles : 
but  one  eternall. 

As  also  there  bee  not  three  incom- 
prehensibles,  nor  three  vncreated  : 
but  one  vncreated,  and  one  incompre 
hensible. 

So  likewise  the  father  is  almightie, 
the  Sonne  almighty  :  and  the  holy 
gost  almighty. 

And  yet  are  they  not  three  al- 
myghtyes  :  but  one  almighty. 


1661 

IT  12  Corinthians.  13. 
The  grace  of  our  Lord  lesus  Christ, 
and  the  Love  of  God,  and  the  Fel 
lowship  of  the  holy  Ghost  be  with 
vs  all  evermore.     Amen.* 

Here  endeth  the  Order  of 

Evening  Prayer  throughout  the         Year. 

At  Morning  Prayer. 

H  Vppn  these  Feasts ;  Christmas  day,  the 
Epiphany,  Saint  Matthias,  Easter  day, 
Ascension  day,  Whitsunday,  Saint  John 
Baptist,  Saint  James,  Saint  Bartholomew, 
Saint  Matthew,  Saint  Simon,  and  Saint 
Jude,  Saint  Andrew,  and  vpon  Trinity 
Sunday,  shall  be  sung,  or  said  at  morning 
Prayer,  ^instead  of  the  Apostles  Creed, 
this  Confession  of  our  Christian  Faith, 
commonly  called  the  Creed  of  Saint 
Athanasius,  *by  the  Minister  and  people 
standing.  [Quicunque  vult. 

Whosoever  will  be  saved  :  be 
fore  all  things  it  is  necessary  that  he 
hold  the  Catholick  Faith. 

Which  Faith,  except  every  one  do 
keepe  whole  and  vndefiled  :  without 
doubt  he  shall  perish  everlastingly. 

And  the  Catholick  Faith  is  this  : 
that  we  worship  one  God  in  Trinity, 
and  Trinity  in  Vnity. 

Neither  confounding  the  persons  : 
nor  dividing  the  Substance. 

For  there  is  one  person  of  the 
Father,  another  of  the  Son  :  and 
another  of  the  holy  Ghost. 

But  the  Godhead  of  the  Father,  of 
the  Son,  and  of  the  holy  Ghost  is  all 
one  :  the  glory  equall,  the  Majesty 
coeternall. 

Such  as  the  Father  is,  such  is  the 
Son  :  and  such  is  the  holy  Ghost. 

The  Father  vncreate,  the  Son  vn 
create  :  and  the  holy  Ghost  vncreate. 
The  Father  incomprehensible,  the 
Son    incomprehensible     :    and    the 
holy  Ghost  incomprehensible. 

The     Father     eternall,     the     Son 
eternall  :  and  the  holy  Ghost  eternall. 
And  yet  they  are  not  three  eternals  : 
but  one  eternall. 

As  also  there  are  not  three  incom- 
prehensibles,  nor  three  vncreated  : 
but  one  vncreated,  and  one  incompre 
hensible. 

So  likewise  the  Father  is  Almighty, 
the  Son  Almighty  :  and  the  holy 
Ghost  Almighty. 

And  yet  lathey  are*  not  three  Al- 
mightyes  :  but  one  Almighty. 


170 


QUICUNQUE  VULT 


SOURCES 

Ita  Deus  pater,  deus  films  :  deus 
spiritussanctus. 

Et  tamen  non  tres  dii  :  sed  vnus  est 
deus. 

Ita  dominus  pater,  dominus  filius  : 
dominus  spiritussanctus. 

Et  tamen  non  tres  dni  :  sed  vnus 
est  dominus. 

Quia  sicut  singillatim  vnaquanque 
personam,  deum  aut  dominum  coiifiteri 
Christiana  veritate  compellimur  : 

Ita  tres  deos  aut  dnos  dicere, 
catholica  religione  prohibemur. 

Pater  a  nullo  est  factus  :  nee  creatus, 
nee  genitus. 

Filius  a  patre  solo  est  :  non  factus 
nee  creatus,  sed  genitus. 

Spiritussanctus  a  patre  et  filio  :  non 
factus,  nee  creatus,  nee  genitus,  sed 
procedens. 

Vnus  ergo  pater,  non  tres  patres  : 
vnus  filius,  non  tres  filij  :  vnus  spiritus 
sanctus,  non  tres  spiritussancti. 

Et  in  hac  trinitate  nihil  prius  aut 
posterius  :  nihil  maius  aut  minus. 

Sed  tote  tres  persone  :  coeterne  sibi 
sunt  et  coequales. 

Ita  vt  per  ola  (sicut  iam  supra 
dictu  est)  et  vnitas  in  trinitate  :  et 
trinitas  in  vnitate  veneranda  sit. 

Qui  vult  ergo  saluus  esse  :  ita  de 
trinitate  sentiat. 

Sed  necessarium  est  ad  eterna 
salutem  :  vt  incarnatione  quoque  diii 
nostri  iesu  christi  fideliter  credat. 

Est  ergo  fides  recta  vt  credamus  et 
confiteamur  :  quia  dominus  noster  iesus 
christus  dei  filius  deus  et  homo  est. 

Deus  est  ex  substantia  patris  ante 
secula  genitus  :  et  homo  est  ex  sub 
stantia  matris  in  seculo  natus. 

Perfectus  deus  perfectus  homo  :  ex 
anima  rational!  et  humana  carne  sub- 
sistens. 

Equalis  patri  secundum  diuinitatem  : 
minor  patre  secundum  humanitatem. 

Qui  licet  deus  sit  et  homo  :  no  duo 
tamen,  sed  vnus  est  christus. 


1549 

So  the  father  is  God,  the  sonne 
God  :  and  the  holy  gost       God. 

And  yet  are  they  not  three  Gods  : 
but  one  God. 

So  lykewyse  the  father  is  Lorde,  the 
sonne  Lorde  :  and  the  holy  gost 
Lord. 

And  yet  not  three  Lordes  :  but  one 
Lorde. 

For  like  as  we  be  compelled  by 
the  Christian  veritie  :  to  acknowlege 
euery  person  by  himselfe  to  be  God 
and  Lorde  : 

So  are  we  forbidden  by  the  Catho- 
like  religion  :  to  saye  there  be  three 
Gods,  or  three  Lordes. 

The  father  is  made  of  none  :  neither 
created  nor  begotte. 

The  sonne  is  of  the  father  alone  : 
not  made  nor  created,  but  begotten. 

The  holy  gost  is  of  the  father  and 
of  the  sonne  :  neyther  made  nor 
created,  nor  begotten,  but  preced 
ing. 

So  there  is  one  father,  not  three 
fathers,  one  sonne,  not  three  sonnes  : 
one  holy  gost  not  three  holy  gostes. 

And  in  this  trinitie,  none  is  afore 
nor  after  other  :  none  is  greater  nor 
lesse  then  other. 

But  the  whole  three  persones  :  be 
coeternall  together  and  coequall. 

So  that  in  all  thinges,  as  it  is  afore- 
sayed  :  the  vnitie  in  trinitie,  and  the 
trinitie  in  vnitie,  is  to  be  wurshipped. 

He  therefore  that  will  be  saued  : 
must  thus  thinke  of  the  trinitie. 

Furthermore,  it  is  necessarie  to  euer- 
lastyng  saluacion  :  that  he  also  beleue 
rightly  in  the  incarnacion  of  oure 
Lorde  Iesu  Christe. 

For  the  right  fayth  is  that  we 
beleue  &  confesse  :  that  our  Lorde 
Iesus  Christe,  the  sonne  of  God,  is  God 
and  man  ; 

God  of  the  substaunce  of  the  father, 
begotten  before  the  worldes  :  and  man 
of  the  substaunce  of  his  mother,  borne 
in  the  worlde. 

Perfecte  God  andperfectemanne  :  of 
a  resonable  soule,  and  humayne  fleshe 
subsisting. 

Equall  to  the  father  as  touchyng 
his  Godhead  :  and  inferior  to  the 
father  touchyng  his  manhode. 

Who  although  he  be  God  and  manne : 
yet  he  is  not  two,  but  one  Christe. 


QUICUNQUE  VULT 


171 


1552 

So  the  Father  is  God,  the  Sonne  is 
God  :  and  the  holy  gost  is  God. 

And  yet  are  they  not  three  Goddes  : 
but  one  God. 

So  likewise  the  father  is  lord,  the 
Sonne  lord  :  and  the  holy  Gost 
lord. 

And  yet  not  three  Lordes  :  but  one 
Lorde. 

For  like  as  we  be  compelled  by 
the  Christian  verytie  :  to  acknowlege 
every  person  by  himselfe,  to  be  God 
and  Lorde. 

So  are  we  forbidden  by  the  Catho- 
lyke  religion  :  to  saye  there  be  three 
Goddes,  or  three  Lordes. 

The  Father  is  made  of  none  :  neyther 
created  nor  begotten. 

The  Sonne  is  of  the  Father  alone  : 
not  made  nor  created,  but  begotten. 

The  holy  gost  is  of  the  father  and 
of  the  Sonne  :  neither  made,  nor 
created,  nor  begotten,  but  preced 
ing. 

So  there  is  one  father,  not  three 
fathers,  one  sonne  not  three  sonnes  : 
one  holy  gost,  not  three  holye  gostes. 

And  in  this  Trinitie,  none  is  afore 
or  after  other  :  none  is  greater,  nor 
lesse  then  an  other. 

But  the  whole  three  persons  :  be 
coeternal  together  and  coequal. 

So  that  in  al  thynges,  as  is  afore 
said  :  the  vnitie  in  Trinitie,  and  the 
Trinite  in  vnitie,  is  to  be  worshypped. 

He  therefore  that  wil  be  saued  : 
muste  thus  thinke  of  the  Trinitie. 

Furthermore,  it  is  necessary  to  euer- 
lasting  saluacion  :  that  he  also  beleue 
rightely  in  the  incarnacion  of  our 
Lorde  lesu  Christ. 

For  the  righte  faith  is,  that  we 
beleue  and  confesse  :  that  our  Lord 
lesus  Christ,  the  sonne  of  God,  is  God 
and  man. 

God  of  the  substaunce  of  the  father, 
begotten  before  the  worldes  :  and  man 
of  the  substaunce  of  his  mother,  borne 
in  the  world. 

Perfecte  god,  and  perfect  man  :  of 
a  reasonable  soule,  and  humaine  fleshe 
subsistyng. 

Equall  to  the  Father,  as  touchyng 
hys  Godhead  :  and  inferiour  to  the 
Father,  touchyng  hys  manhode. 

Who  although  he  be  God  and  man  : 
yet  he  is  not  two,  but  one  Christ. 


1661 

So  the  Father  is  God,  the  Son  is 
God  :  and  the  holy  Ghost  is  God. 

And  yet  3they  are*  not  three  Gods  : 
but  one  God. 

So  likewise  the  Father  is  Lord,  the 
Son  Lord  :  and  the  holy  Ghost 
Lord. 

And  yet  not  three  Lords  :  but  one 
Lord. 

For  like  as  we  are  compelled  by 
the  Christian  Verity  :  to  acknowledge 
every  person  by  himself  to  be  God 
and  Lord. 

So  are  we  forbidden  by  the  Catho- 
lick  religion  :  to  say  there  be  three 
Gods,  or  three  Lords. 

The  Father  is  made  of  none  :  neither 
created  nor  begotten. 

The  Son  is  of  the  Father  alone  : 
not  made,  nor  created  but  begotten. 

The  holy  Ghost  is  of  the  Father,  and 
of  the  Son  :  neither  made,  nor 
created,  nor  begotten,  but  proceed 
ing. 

So  there  is  one  Father,  not  three 
Fathers,  one  Son,  hot  three  Sons  : 
one  holy  Ghost,  not  three  holy  Ghosts. 

And  in  this  Trinity  none  is  afore, 
or  after  other  :  none  is  greater,3  *or 
less  then  another. 

But  the  whole  three  Persons  are 
co-eternall  together  :  and  co-equall. 

So  that  in  all  things,  as  is  afore 
said  :  the  Vnity  in  Trinity,  and  the 
Trinity  in  vnity  is  to  be  worshipped. 

He  therefore  that  will  be  saved  : 
must  thus  thinke  of  the  Trinity. 

Furthermore  it  is  necessary  to  ever 
lasting  Salvation  :  that  he  also  believe 
rightly  6  *  the  Incarnation  of  our 
Lord  Jesus6  Christ. 

For  the  right  Faith  is  that  we 
believe,  and  confesse  :  that  our  Lord 
lesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  is  God 
and  Man. 

God  of  the  Substance  of  the  Father, 
begotten  before  the  Worlds  :  and  Man 
of  the  Substance  of  his  mother,  borne 
in  the  world. 

Perfect  God,  and  perfect  man  :  of 
a  reasonable  soule,  and  humane  flesh 
subsisting. 

Equall  to  the  Father,  as  touching 
his  Godhead  :  and  inferiour  to  the 
Father,  as  touching  his  manhood. 

Who  although  he  be  God  and  man  : 
yet  he  is  not  twoe,  but  one  Christ ; 


172 


QUICUNQUE  VULT 


SOURCES 

Vnus  autem  non  conuersione  diuini- 
tatis  in  carne  :  sed  assumptione 
humanitatis  in  deum. 

Vnus  olno  non  confusione  sub- 
stantie  :  sed  vnitate  persone. 

Nam  sicut  anima  rationalis  et  caro 
vnus  est  homo  :  ita  deus  et  homo  vnus 
est  christus. 

Qui  passus  est  pro  salute  nra, 
descendit  ad  inferos  :  tertia  die  resur- 
rexit  a  mortuis. 

Ascendit  ad  celos  sedet  ad  dexteram 
dei  patris  olpotentis  :  inde  veturus 
est  iudicare  viuos  &  mortuos. 

Ad  cuius  aduentu  omnes  homines 
resurgere  habent  cum  corporibus  suis 
et  reddituri  sunt  de  factis  proprijs 
rationem. 

Et  qui  bona  egerunt  ibunt  in  vitam 
eterna  :  qui  vero  mala  in  igne  eter- 
num. 

Hec  est  fides  catholica,  quam  nisi 
quisque  fideliter  firmiterque  crediderit: 
saluus  esse  non  poterit. 

Gloria  patri  &  filio  :  et  spui  sacto. 

Sicut  erat  in  prlcipio  &  nuc  &  semper. 


1549 

One,  not  by  conuersion  of  the  God 
head  into  fleshe  :  but  by  taking  of 
the  manhode  into  God. 

One  altogether,  not  by  confusion  of 
substaunce  :  but  by  vnitie  of  person. 

For  as  the  resonable  soule  and 
flesheisonemanne :  So  God  and  manne 
is  one  Christe. 

Who  suffered  for  our  saluacion  : 
descended  into  hell,  rose  agayne  the 
thirde  daye  from  the  dead. 

He  ascended  into  heauen,  he  sitteth 
on  the  righthande  of  the  father,  God 
almightie  :  from  whence  he  shall  come 
to  iudge  the  quicke  and  dead. 

At  whose  comming  all  men  shall  ryse 
againe  with  theyr  bodyes  :  and  shall 
geue  accompte  of  theyr  owne  workes. 

And  they  that  haue  done  good, 
shall  goe  into  lyfe  euerlasting  :  and 
they  that  haue  done  euyll,  into  euer 
lasting  fyre. 

This  is  the  Catholyke  fayth  :  whiche 
excepte  a  manne  beleue  faythfully,  he 
cannot  be  saued. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  &  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  gost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  worlde  without 
ende.  Amen. 

Thus  endeth   the  ordre  of  Mattyns  and 
Euensong  through  the  whole  yere. 


QUICUNQUE  VULT 


1552 

One,  not  by  conuersion  of  the  God 
head  into  fleshe  :  but  by  takyng  of 
the  manhode  into  God. 

One  altogether,  not  by  confusion  of 
substaunce  :  but  by  vnitie  of  person. 

For  as  the  reasonable  soule  and 
fleshe  is  one  man  :  so  God  and  man 
is  one  Christ. 

Who  suffred  for  cure  saluacion  : 
descended  into  hell,  rose  agayne  the 
thirde  daye  from  the  dead. 

He  ascended  into  heauen,  he  sytteth 
on  the  ryghte  hand  of  the  father,  god 
almightie  :  from  whence  he  shal  come 
to  iudge  the  quicke  and  the  dead. 

At  whose  coming  all  men  shall  ryse 
agayne  with  their  bodyes  :  and  shall 
geue  accoumpte/0r  theyr  own  woorkes. 

And  they  that  haue  done  good, 
shall  goe  into  lyfe  euerlasting  :  and 
they  that  haue  done  euill,  into  euer- 
lastyng  fyre. 

This  is  the  Catholike  faythe  :  whiche 
except  a  man  beleue  faythfully,  he 
cannot  be  saued. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  goste. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  euer  shall  bee  :  worlde  without 
ende.    Amen. 
CThus  endeth  the  ordre  of  Morning  and 

Y.uening prayer,  through  the  whole  Yere. 


1661 

One,  not  by  Conversion  of  the  God 
head  into  Flesh  :  but  by  taking  of 
the  manhood  into  God. 

One  altogether,  not  by  Confusion  of 
substance  :  but  by  Vnity  of  person. 

For  as  the  reasonable  soule  and 
Flesh  is  one  man  :  So  God  and  man 
is  one  Christ. 

Who  suffered  for  our  Salvation  : 
descended  into  hell ;  rose  againe  the 
third  day  from  the  dead. 

He  ascended  into  heaven,  he  sitteth 
on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  God 
Almighty  :  from  whence  he  shall  come 
to  iudge  the  quicke  and  the  dead. 

At  whose  coming  all  men  shall  rise 
againe  with  their  Bodies  :  and  shall 
give  Account  for  their  own  Works. 

And  they  that  have  done  good, 
shall  go  into  life  everlasting  :  and 
they  that  have  done  evill  into  ever 
lasting  fire. 

This  is  the  Catholick  Faith  :  which 
except  a  man  believe  faithfully  he 
cannot  be  saved. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son  :  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now, 
and  ever  shall  be  :  world  without 
end.  Amen. 


174 


SOURCES 
LETANIA. 


7544        i 549 
{THE  LETANY  AND  SUFFRAGES. 


Pater  de  cells  deus.     Miserere  nobis. 

Pater   de    cells   deus.      Miserere 

nobis. 

Fill  redemptor  mundi  deus.     Miserere 
nobis. 

Fill      redemptor      mundi      deus 

miserere  nobis. 
Spiritus  sancte  deus.     Miserere  nobis. 


Spiritus    sancte   deus.      Miserere 
nobis. 


Sancta  trinitas  vnus  deus. 
nobis. 


Miserere 


Sancta  Maria  .  .  Sancta  del  genitrix 
.  .  Sancta  virgo  virgin  um. 

Ora  pro  nobis. 

Omnes  sancti  angeli  &  archangel!  .  . 
Omnes  sancti  beatorum  spirituum 
ordines. 

Orate  pro  nobis. 

Omnes  sancti  patriarche  et  prophete .  . 
Omnes  sancti  apostoli. .  Omnes  sancti 
marty  res . .  Omnes  sancti  confessores . . 
Omnes  sancte  virgines.  .Omnes  sancti. 

Orate  pro  nobis. 

j$  Ne  reminiscaris  domine  delicta  nostra 
vel  parentum  nostrorum  neque  vin- 
dictam  sumas  de  peccatis  nostris 
[Tob.  iii  3]  :  parce  domine  parce 
populo  tuo  [Joel  ii  17]  quern  redemisti 
precioso  sanguine  tuo,  ne  in  eternum 
irascaris  ei  [4  Esdr.  viii  45].  (Ordo 
ad  visitandum  infirmum). 
L  Ab  omni  malo  .  .  ab  omni  peccato  .  . 
Ab  insidijs  dyaboli .  .  (Ab  ira  tua  De 
extr.  unct.)  A  damnatione  perpetua. 
Libera  nos  domine. 

A  cecitate  cordis  .  .  (A  peste  superbie 

f)  .  .  Ab  appetitu  inanis  glorie  .  . 
b  ira  &  odio  &  omni  mala  volun- 
tate.     Libera. 

A  spiritu  fornicationis. 


0  GOD  the  father  of  heauen  :  haue 
mercye  upon  us  miserable  sinners. 

0  God  the  father  of  heauen  :  haue  mercye 
upon  us  miserable  sinners. 

0    God   the   sonne,   redemer  of  the 

worlde  :  haue  mercye  upon  us  miserable 

sinners. 

0  God  the  sonne,  redemer  of  the  worlde  : 
haue  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners. 
0  God  the  holy  gost,  procedyng  from 

the  father  and  the  sonne  :  haue  mercy 

upon  us  miserable  sinners. 

0  God  the  holy  gost,  procedyng  from  the 
father  and  the  sonne  :  haue  mercy  upon  us 
miserable  sinners. 

0  holy,  blessed,  and  gloryous  Irinitie, 
three  persons  and  one  God  :  haue  mercy 
upon  us  miserable  sinners. 

0  holy,  blessed,  and  gloryous  Trinitie,  three 
persons  and  one  God  :  haue  mercy  upon  us 
miserable  sinners. 

[Holye  virgin  Mary  mother  of  God  our 
Sauyoure  lesu  Chryst 

Praye  for  us. 

All  holye  Aungels  and  Archaungels 
and  all  holye  orders  of  blessed  spirites. 

Praye  for  us. 

All  holye  Patriarkes,  and  Prophetes, 
Apostels,  Martyrs,  Confessors,  <fc  Vir 
gins  :  and  all  the  blessed  company  of 
heauen  : 

Praye  for  us.] 

Remembre  not  Lorde,  our  offences, 
nor  the  offences  of  our  forefathers, 
neither  take  thou  uengeaunce  of  our 
synnes :  spare  us  good  Lorde,  spare  thy 
people,  whome  thou  haste  redemed  with 
thy  moste  precious  bloud,  and  bee  not 
angry  with  us  for  euer. 

Spare  us  good  Lorde. 

From  all  euill  and  mischiefe,  from 
synne,  from  the  craftes  and  assaultes 
of  the  deuil,  from  thy  w  rathe,  and  from 
euerlastyng  damnacion : 

Good  Lorde  detiuer  us. 

From  blind  nes  of  heart,  from  pryde, 
vainglory,  &  Hypocrisy,  from  enuy, 
hatred  and  malice,  and  all  uncharit- 
ablenesse : 

Good  Lorde  deliuer  us. 

From  fornicacion,  and  all  other 
deadly  synne,  and  from  all  the  de- 


1552 


i66i 


Herefoloweth  the  Letanye 
to  be  -used 

vpon  Sundayes,   Wednes 
day  es,  and  Fridayes ,  and  at  other  times,  when 
it  shal  be  commaunded  by  the  Ordenarye. 
0  God  the  father  of  heaue  :  haue 
mercie  upon  us  miserable  synners. 

C  0  God  the  father  of  heauen  :  haue  mercie 

vpon  vs  miserable  synners. 
0   God   the   Sonne   redemer  of   the 
worlde  :  haue  mercy  upon  us  miserable 
synners. 

C  0  God  the  Sonne,  redemer  of  the  world  : 

haue  mercy  vpon  vs  miserable  synners. 
0  God  the  holy  Gost,  procedyng  from 
the  Father  &  the  Sonne  :  haue  mercye 
upon  us  myserable  synners. 

<I  0  God  the  holy  Gost,  preceding  from  the 
Father  and  the  Sonne  :  haue  mercy  vpon  vs 
miserable  synners. 

0  holy,  blessed,  and  glorious  Trinitie, 
thre  persones  and  one  god  :  haue  mercy 
upon  us  miserable  sinners. 

C  0  holy,  blessed,  and  glorious  Trinitie,  thre 
persons,  and  one  God  :  have  mercie  vpon  us 
miserable  synners. 


1T  Here  fplloweth  the  Litanie,  or  8generall 
Supplication,  to  be  sung,  or  said  after 
Morning  Prayer,  vpon  S-undaies,  Wednes- 
daies,  and  Fridayes,  and  at  other  times  when 
it  shall  be  colhanded  by  the  Ordinarie  : 
0  God,  the  Father  of  heauen  :  haue 

mercy  upon  us  miserable  Sinners. 
0  God,   the  Father  of  heauen  :  haue  mercy 

vpon  vs  miserable  Sinners. 
0    God   the    Son    Redeemer  of    the 

World  :  haue  mercy  upon  us  miserable 

Sinners. 
0    God    the   Son    Redeemer   of    the    world    : 

haue  mercy  vpon  us  miserable  Sinners. 

0  God  the  holy  Ghost  proceeding  from 
the  Father  and  the  Son  :  haue  mercy 
upon  us  miserable  Sinners. 

0  God  the  holy  Ghost  proceeding  from  the 
Father  and  the  Son  :  haue  mercy  vpon  vs 
miserable  Sinners. 

0  holy,  blessed,  and  glorious  Trinity, 
three  persons,  and  one  God :  haue  mercy 
upon  us  miserable  Sinners. 

0  holy,  blessed,  and  glorious  Trinity,  three 
persons,  and  one  God  :  haue  mercy  vpon  vs 
miserable  Sinners. 


Remember  not  lord  our  offences, 
nor  the  offences  of  our  forefathers, 
neither  take  thou  uengeaunce  of  oure 
sinnes  :  spare  us  good  Lords,  spare  thy 
people  whom  thou  hast  redemed  with 
thy  most  precious  bloud,  and  be  not 
angry  with  us  for  euer. 

Spare  us  good  Lorde. 

From  all  euill  and  myschyefe,  from 
sinne,  from  the  craftes  and  assaultes 
of  the  deuil,  from  thy  wrath,  and  from 
euerlastyng  damnacion. 

Good  Lorde  deliuer  vs. 

From  all  blyndnes  of  heart,  from  pryde, 
uaine  glorye  and  hypocrisie,  from  enuy, 
hatred,  and  malice,  and  all  uncharit- 
ablenes. 

Good  Lorde  deliuer  vs. 

From  fornicacion  &  al  other 
deadly  sinne,  &  from  all  the  dis- 


Remember  not  Lord  our  offences, 
nor  the  offences  of  our  forefathers, 
neither  take  thou  vengeance  of  our 
Sinns  :  Spare  us  good  Lord,  spare  thy 
people  whom  thou  hast  redeemed  with 
thy  most  pretious  blood,  and  be  not 
angry  with  us  foreuer. 

Spare  vs  good  Lord. 

From  all  euil  and  mischief,  from 
Sin,  from  the  Crafts,  and  Assaults 
of  the  deuil,  from  thy  wrath,  and  from 
everlasting  damnation, 

Good  Lord  deliver  vs. 

From  all  blindness  of  heart,  from  Pride, 
vain-glory  and  Hypocrisie,  from  enuy, 
hatred  and  malice,  and  all  uncharit- 

ableness, 

Good  Lord  deliuer  vs, 

From  fornication,  and  all  other 
deadly  sin,  and  from  all  the  de- 


i76 


LITANY 


SOURCES 


A  fulgure  &  tempestate  .  .  (A  peste 
fame  et  bello  E)  a  peste  et  fame  .  .  A 
bello  et  cede  .  .  A  subitanea  &  im- 
prouisa  morte.  Libera. 

A  sedition e  et  simultate. 


Per  mysterium  sancte  incarnationis 
tue .  .  Per  sanctam  natiuitatem  tuam 
.  .  Per  circumcisionem  tuam  .  .  Per 
baptismum  tuum  .  .  Per  ieiunium 
tuum  et  tentationes  tuas.  Libera. 

Per  agoniam  et  sudorem  tuum  san- 
guineum  .  .  Per  crucem  &  passionem 
tuam  .  .  Per  preciosam  mortem  tuam 
et  sepulturam  tuam  .  .  Per  gloriosam 
res urrectionem  tuam . .  Peradmirabi- 
lem  ascensionem  tuam  .  .  Per  aduen- 
tum  spiritus  sancti  paraclyti.  Libera. 

In  omni  temp  ore  tribulation  is  nostre 
.  .  In  omni  tempore  felicitatis  nostre 
.  .  In  hora  mortis  .  .  In  die  iudicii. 
Libera. 

Peccatores.  Te  rogamus  audi  nos  .  .  Vt 
ecclesiam  tuam  sanctam  catholicam 
regere  et  gubernare  digneris.  Te 
rogamus  audi  nos. 

Vt  presentem  famulum  tuum  in  tua 
pietate  iusticia  et  sanctitate  con- 
firmare  et  conseruare  digneris  (Con- 
secratio  regis. ) 


Vt  regem  nostrum .  .  in  sancta  religion  e 
conseruare  digneris.     Te  ro. 


1544        1549 

ceytes  of  the  worlde,  thefleshe,  and  the 
deuill :        Good  Lorde  deiiuet.  USi 

From  lightning  and  tempest  ,  from 
plage,  pestilence  and  famine,  from 
battaile  and  murther,  and  from  sodaine 
death.  Good  Lorde  denuet.  ux. 

From  all  sedicion  and  priuie  con- 
spiracie,  from  the  tyrannye  of  the 
bishoppe  of  Rome  and  all  his  detest 
able  enormities,  from  all  false  doctrine 
and  heresye,  from  hardnes 

of  hearte,  and  contempt  of  thy  worde 
and  commaundemente. 

Good  Lorde  deliuer  us. 

By  the  misterye  of  thy  holy  incarna- 
cion,  by  thy  holy  natiuitie  and  Circum 
cision,  by  thy  Baptisme,  fastyng,  and 
temptacion : 

Good  Lorde  deliuer  us. 

By  thyne  agonye  and  bloudye  sweate, 
by  thy  crosse  and  passion,  by  thy  pre 
cious  death  and  buriall,  by  thy  glorious 
resurreccion  and  ascencion,  by  the 
corny ng  of  the  holy  gost : 

Good  Lorde  deliuer  us. 

in  all  tyme  of  our  tribulacion,  in  all 
tyme  of  our  wealth,  in  the  houre  of 
death,         in  the  daye  of  Judgement : 
Good  Lorde  deliuer  us. 

We  sinners  doe  beseche  thee  to  heare 

us  (0  Lorde  God)  and  that  it  may  please 

thee  to   rule   and   gouerne   thy    holye 

Churche  vniuersall   in  the  right  ivaye  : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 

That   it   maye   please  thee  to  hepe 


Edwarde  the.  vi.  thy  seruaunt 
[and]       our  kyng  and 

gouernour  : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  vs  good  lorde. 
That  it  maye  please  thee  to  rule  his 
hearte  in  thy  faythe,  feare,  and  loue, 
that  he  maye  [ever]  alwayes  haue 
affiaunce  in  thee,  and   euer  sehe  thy 
honour  and  glory : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  be  his 
defendour,  and  keper,  geuyng  him  the 
victory  ouer  all  his  enemyes : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  vs  good  lorde. 
[That  it  maye  please  the  to  hepe  oure 
noble  Quene  Katherin  in  thy  feare  and 
loue,  gyuing  her  increase  of  al  godly- 
nes,  honour,  and  chyldren. 

We  besech  the  to  heare  us  good  lord. 


LITANY 


177 


1552 

ceites  of  the  world,  the  fleshe  and  the 
deuill.  Good  lord  deijuer  us. 

From  lightninges  and  tempestes,  from 
plage,  pestilence  and  famine,  from 
battayle  and  murther,  and  from  sodayn 
death.  Good  iord  deiiuer  USi 

From  all  sedicion  and  prieuie  con- 
spiracie,  from  the  tyranny  of  the 
Byshop  of  Rome,  and  all  hys  detest 
able  enormities,  from  all  false  doctrine 
and  heresye,  from  hardnesse 

of  heart,  and  contempt  of  thy  woorde 
and  commaundement. 

Good  lord  deliuer  us. 

By  the  mistery  of  thy  holy  incarna- 
cion,  by  thy  holy  Natiuitie  and  Circum 
cision,  by  thy  baptisme,  fasting,  and 
temptacion. 

Good  lord  deliuer  us. 

By  thyne  agonie  and  bloudy  siveate, 
by  thy  crosse  and  passion,  by  thy  pre 
cious  death  and  buriall,  by  thy  gloryous 
resurreccion  and  ascencion,  and  by  the 
cumming  of  the  holy  gost. 

Good  lord  deliuer  us. 

In  all  time  of  our  tribulacio,  in  al 
tyme  of  our  wealth,  in   the  houre  of 
death,  and  in  the  daye  of  iudgemente. 
Good  lord  deliuer  us. 

We  sinners  doe  beseche  thee  to  heare 
us  (0  Lorde  God)  and  that  it  may  please 
thee    to    rule    and    gouerne    thy    holy 
churche  universally  in  the  right  way. 
We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 

That  it  maye   please  thee   to    hepe 


Edward  the  sixth,  thy  seruaunt, 
our  King  and 

gouernour. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us,  good  lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  rule  hys 
hearte  in   thy  fayth,  feare,  and  loue, 
that  he  may  alwayes  haue 

affiaunce  in   thee,   and  euer    sehe    thy 
honour  and  glory. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to   bee  his 
defendour  and   keper,    geuing  him   the 
victory  ouer  al  his  enemies. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 


1661 

ceipta  of  the  world,  the  Flesh,  and  the 
deuill,  Good  Lord  deliuer  us. 

From  lightning13-  and  tempest1*,  from 
plague,  pestilence,  and  famine,  from 
battel,  and  murder,  and  from  sudden 
death,  6ood  Lord  deliver  vs. 

From    all   sedition  privy    Con 

spiracy  and  Rebellion J 

*from  all  false  Doctrine, 
heresie  and  8schism,  from  hardnes 
of  heart,   and  contempt  of  thy    Word 
and  Commandment, 

Good  Lord  deliuer  us. 

By  the  mystery  of  thy  holy  Incarna 
tion,  by  thy  holy  Nativity  and  Circum 
cision,  by  thy  Baptism,  Fasting  and 
Temptation, 

Good  Lord  deliuer  us. 

By  thine  Agonie,  and  bloody  sweat, 
by  thy  Cross  and  Passion,  by  thy  pre- 
tious  Death  and  Buriall,  by  thy  glorious 
Resurrection,  and  Ascention,  and  by  the 
coming  of  the  holy  Ghost, 

Good  Lord  deliuer  us. 

In  all  time  of  our  Tribulation,  in  all 
time    of   our    wealth,   in   the  hour  of 
death,  and  in  the  day  of  ludgement, 
Good  Lord  deliuer  us. 

We  sinners  do  beseech  thee  to  hear 
vs,  (0  Lord  God)  and  that  it  may  please 
thee    to    rule    and    govern    thy    holy 
Church  vniversall   in  the  right  Way. 
We  beseche  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  keep 
*and  strengthen  in  the  true  wor 
shipping  of  thee,  in  righteousnes 
and  holines  of  life,  thy  servant 
Charles  our  most  gracious  King  and 
Govern  our, 

Wu  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  rule  his 
heart  in  thy  faith,  fear,  and  loue, 
laand  that  he  may  evermore1  haue 
Affiance  in  thee,  and  euer  seek  thy 
honor  and  glory, 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  be  his 
defender,  and  keeper,  giving  him  the 
victory  over  all  his  Enemies, 

Wee  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 

4  That  it  may  please  thee  to  bless 
and  preserve 


i78 


LITANY 


SOURCES 


L  Vt  cunctos  episcopos  pastores  et  minis- 
tros  ecclesie  in  sano  verbo  et  sancta 
vita  seruare  digneris.  Te  rogamus. 


Vt  cunctum  populum  christiauum  pre- 

cioso  sanguine  tuo  redemption  con- 

seruare  digneris. 
Vt  regibus  et  principibus  nostris  pacem 

&  veram  concordiam  atque  victoriam 

donare  digneris. 


L  Vt  incrementum  verbi  et  fructum  spiritus 
cunctis  audientibus  donare  digneris  : 
te  rogamus. 


Vt  errantes  et  seductos  reducere  in 
viam  veritatis. 


Vt  lapsos  erigere  et  stantes  confortare 
digneris .  .  Vt  pusillanimos  et tentatos 
consolari  et  adiuuare  digneris  .  .  Vt 
satanam  sub  pedibus  nostris  conterere 
digneris  [Rom.  xvi  20]. 


Vt  afflictos  et  periclitantes  respicere  et 
saluare  digneris.  'YTrep  TOV  pvcrdijvai 
f)p.as  CLTTO  TTacrrjs  dXtyfas  opyrjs  KIV- 
dvvov  KOI  dvdyKrjs. 

'YTrep  TrAediToai'  odonropovvrw  VCHTOVVTCOV 
Kap,v6vTO>v  at^/iaXcoro)!'  KOI  TTJS  aratTrjpias 
avrcov  (Lit.  Byz.  init. ).  Vt  pregnanti- 
bus  et  lactentibus  felicem  partum  et 


7544         i 549 

That  it  maye  please  the  to  kepe  and 
defende  oure  noble  Prynce  Edwarde,  and 
all  the  hynges  maiesties  chyldren  : 
We  besech  the  to  heare  vs  good  lord.] 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  illuminate 
all  Byshoppes,  pastours  and  ministers 
of  the  Churche,  with  true  knowlege  and 
understandyng  of  thy  woorde,  and  that 
both  by  theyr  preachyng  and  lyuyng, 
they  may  sette  it  forth  and  sheu/e  it 
accordingly : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lords. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  endue  the 
Lordes  of  the  counsayle,  and  all  the 
nobilitie,  with  grace,  wysedome,  and 
understandyng. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  blesse  and 
kepe  the  magistrates,  geuyng  them  grace 
to  execute  iustice,  and  to  mayntaine 
trueth : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  blesse  and 
kepe  all  thy  people: 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  vs  good  lorde. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  geue  to 
al  nacions  unitie,  peace,  and  concorde. 
We  beseche  thee  to  heare  vs  good  lorde. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  geue  us  an 
hearte  to  loue  and  drea.de  thee,  &  dili 
gently  to  Hue  after  thy  commaunde- 
metes : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  vs  good  lorde. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  geue  all 
thy  people  increase  of  grace  to  heare 
mekely  thy  woorde,  and  to  receyue  it 
with  pure  affeccion,  and  to  bryng  furth 
thefruites  of  the  spirite: 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  bryng  into 
the  waye  of  trueth  all  suche  as  haue 
erred  and  are  deceyued : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  strengthen 
suche  as  doe  stande,  and  to  coum- 
fort  and  helpe  the  weake  hearted, 
and  to  rayse  up  them  that  fall,  and 
finally  to  beate  downe  Sathan  under 
ourfeete. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  succoure, 
helpe,  and  coumforte  all   that   be   in 
daunger,  necessitie  and  tribulacion  : 
We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  preserue 
all  that  trauayle  by  lande  or  by  water, 
all  weomen  labouring  of  childe,  all 
sycke  persons  and  young  chyldren,  and 


LITANY 


179 


1552 


1661 


That  it  may  please  thee  to  illuminate 
al  Bishops,  Pastours,  and  ministers 
of  the  Churche,  with  true  knowledge  and 
understanding  of  thy  word  :  and  that 
both  by  theyr  preachyng  and  liuing, 
they  may  sette  it  furth  and  shew  it 
accordingly. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lord. 
That  it  maye  please  thee  to  endue  the 
Lordes  of  the  counsayle,   and  all  the 
nobilitie,   with   grace,    wisedome,    and 
understanding. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  blesse  and 
kepe  the  Magistrates,  geuing  them  grace 
to    execute   iustice,   and  to    mainteine 
trueth. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  bless  & 
kepe  al  thy  people. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  geue  to 
al  nacions,  unitie,  peace  and  Concorde. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 
That  it  maye  please  thee  to  geue  us  an 
heart  to  lone  and  dreade  thee,  and  dili 
gently  to  lyue  after  thy  commaunde- 
mentes. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  maye  please  thee  to  geue  all 
thy  people  encrease  of  grace,  to  heare 
mekely  thy  worde,  and  to  receiue  it 
with  pure  affeccion,  and  to  bryng  furthe 
the  fruites  of  the  spirite. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  bryng  into 
the  waye  of  trueth,  al  suche  as  haue 
erred  and  are  deceiued. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 
That  it  maye  please  thee  to  strengthen 
suche  as  doe  stande,  and  to  com 
fort  and  helpe  the  weake  harted 
and  to  raise  them  up  that  fal,  and 
finally  to  beate  downe  Satan  under 
our  fete. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us,  good  Lorde. 
That  it  maye  please  thee  to  succour, 
helpe    and    comfort,    al    that    be    in 
daunger,  necessitie,  and  trybulacyon. 
We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  preserue 
al  that  trauaile  by  land  or  by  water, 
al    women    labouryng    of    childe,    all 
sicke  persones,  and  younge  children,  and 


We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord.* 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  illuminate 
all  Bishops,  7bPriests*  and  Deacons, 
with  true  knowledge  and 
understanding  of  thy  word,   and  that 
both    by    their    preaching   and   liuing 
they   may   set   it  forth   and  shew  it 
accordingly, 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  indue  the 
Lords    of    the    Council,    and   all    the 
Nobility    with    grace,    wisedom,    and 
understanding, 

We  beteech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  bless  and 
keep  the  Magistrates,  gluing  them  grace 
to    execute    Iustice,    and    to    mantein 
truth, 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  bless  and 
keep  all  thy  people, 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  give  to 
all  Nations,  unity,  peace  and  Concord, 

We  beteech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  give  us  an 
heart  to  love  and  dread  thee,  and  dili 
gently    to    Hue    after    thy    Comande- 
ments, 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  give  3to  all 
thy  people  increase  of  grace,  to  heare 
meekly  thy  word,  and  to  receiue  it 
with  pure  Affection,  and  to  bring  forth 
the  Fruits  of  the  Spirit, 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  bring  into 
the    way   of   truth,  all   such  as  haue 
erred  and  are  deceiued, 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  strengthen 
such  as  do  stand,  and  to  com 
fort  and  help  the  weak  -  hearted, 
and  to  raise  3up  them*  that  fall,  and 
finally  to  beat  downe  Satan  under 
our  Feet. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to    succor, 
helpe   and   comfort    all    that    are    in 
danger,  necessity  and  tribulation, 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  preserue 

all  that  travel  by  land  or  by  water, 

all     Women     laboring    of    Child,    all 

sick  persons  and  young  children,  and 


i8o 


LITANY 


SOURCES 

incrementum  largire  digneris  .  .  Vt 
infantes  et  egros  fouere  et  custodire 
digneris  .  .  Vt  captiuos  liberate 
digneris. 

Vt    pupillos   et   viduas    protegere    et 
prouidere  digneris. 


Vt  cunctis  hominibus  misereri  digneris. 

Vt  hostibus  persecutor ibus  et  calum- 
niatoribus  nostris  ignoscere  et  eos 
conuertere  digneris. 

Vt  fructus  terre  dare  et  conseruare 
digneris. 


Fili  dei.     Te  rogamus  audi  nos.   .  . 
Agnus  dei  qui  tollis  peccata  mundi. 

Parce  nobis  domine. 
Agnus  dei  qui  tollis  peccata  mundi. 

Miserere  nobis. 
Christe  audi  nos. 

Christe  exaudi  nos. 
Kyrie  eleyson. 

Christe  eleyson. 
Kyrie  eleyson. 


7544        1549 

to  sheive  thy  pietie  upon  all  prisoners 
and  captiues : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  defende 
and  prouyde  for  the  fatherles  chyldren 
and  wyddowes,  and  all  that  bee  desolate 
and  oppressed : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  haue  mercy 
upon  all  men  : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  forgeue  oure 
enemyes,  persecutours  and  sclaunderers, 
and  to  turne  theyr  heartes  : 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  geue  and 
preserue  to  oure  use  the  kyndely  fruites 
of  the  earth,  so  as  in  due  tyme  we  may 
enioy  them :  [and  to  preserue  them] 
We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  geue  us 
true  repentaunce,  to  forgeue  us  all  oure 
synnes,   neglygences  and  ignoraunces, 
and  to  endue  us  with  the  grace  of  thy 
holy  spirite,  to  amend  our  lyues  accord- 
yng  to  thy  holy  woorde: 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  lorde. 
SonneofGod:webesechetheeto  heare  us. 
Sonne  of  God  :  we  beseche  thee  to  heare  us. 
0  lambe  of  God  that  takest  away  the 
sinnes  of  the  world: 

Graunt  us  thy  peace. 

0  lambe  of  God  that  tahest  away  the 
sinnes  of  the  world : 

Haue  mercy  upon  us. 
0  Christe  heare  us. 

0  Christ  heare  us. 
Lorde  haue  mercy  upon  us. 

Lorde  haue  mercy  upon  us. 
Christe  haue  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ  haue  mercy  upon  us. 

Lorde  haue  mercy  upon  us. 

Lorde  haue  mercy  upon  us. 


Pater  noster. 


Our  father  whiche  art  in  heauen. 
the  residue  of  the  pater  noster. 


With 


Et  ne  nos  inducas  in  tentacionem. 

Sed  libera  nos  a  malo  .  .  . 

Domine  non  secundum  peccata  nostra 
facias  nobis. 

Neque  secundum  iniquitates  nostras 
retribuas  nobis. 


And  [suffre~]  leade  us  not  [to  be  led] 
into  temptacion. 

But  deliuer  us  from  euill.    A  men. 
The  uersicle. 

0  Lorde  deale  not  with  us  after  our 
Sinnes.  f^e  aunswere. 

Neytherrewarde  us  afterour  iniquities. 


LITANY 


181 


1552 

to  shelve  thy  pitie  upon  al  prisoners 
and  captiues. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 

That  it  maye  please  thee  to  defends 
and  prouide  for  the  fatherles  children 
and  wiedowes,  and  all  that  bee  desolate 
and  oppressed. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 

That  it  maye  please  thee  to  haue  mercy e 
upon  all  men. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  forgeue  our 
enemies,  persecutours  and  slaunderers, 
and  to  turne  their  hartes. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  geue  and 
preserue  to  our  use  the  hyndly  fruites 
of  the  y earth,  so  as  in  due  tyme  we  may 
enioie  them. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 
That  it  may  please  the,  to  geue  us 
true  repentauce,  to  forgeue  us  all  our 
synnes,  negligences,  and  ignoraunces, 
and  to  endue  us  with  the  grace  of  thy 
holy  spirite  to  amende  oure  lyues  accord- 
ynge  to  thy  holy  worde. 

We  beseche  thee  to  heare  us  good  Lorde. 
SonneofGod.-webesechetheetoheareus: 
Sonne  of  God  :  we  beseche  thee  to  heare  us. 
0  Lambe  of  God  that  tahest  awaye  the 
sinnes  of  the  worlde: 
Graunt  us  thy  peace. 

0  Lambe  of  God  that  tahest  awaye  the 
synnes  of  the  worlde : 
Haue  mercie  upon  us. 
0  Christe  heare  us  : 

0  Christ  heare  vs. 
Lorde  haue  mercy  upon  us. 

Lorde  haue  mercy  upon  us. 
Christ  haue  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ  haue  mercy  upon  us. 

Lorde  haue  mercy  upon  us. 

Lorde  haue  mercy  upon  us. 


c  Our  father  which  art  in  heauen.  &c. 


A  nd  lea.de  us  not  into  temptacion. 
But  deliuer  us  from  euill. 

The  uersicle. 

0  lorde  deale  not  with  us  after  our 
Sinnes.  The  aunswere. 

Neither  reward  us  after  our  iniquities. 


1661 

to  shew  thy  pitie  upon  all  prisoners 
and  Captiues, 

Wee  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  please  thee  to  defend 
and  prouide  for  the  fatherles  children 
and  widowes,  and  all  that  are  desolate 
and  oppressed, 

Wee  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  haue  mercy 
upon  all  men, 

Wee  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  forgive  our 
enemies,    persecuters    and    slanderers, 
and  to  turn  their  hearts, 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  giue  and 
preserve  to  our  use  the  kindly  fruits 
of  the  earth,  so  as  in  due  time  we  may 
inioy  them. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  please  thee  to  giue  us 
true  repentance,  to  forgive  us  all  our 
sins,  negligences  and  Ignorances, 
and  to  indue  us  with  the  grace  of  thy 
holy  Spirit,  to  amend  our  Hues  accord 
ing  to  thy  holy  Word. 

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us  good  Lord. 
Son  of  God :  Wee  beseech  thee  to  hear  us. 

Son  of  God  :  we  beseech  thee  to  hear  us. 
0  Lamb  of  God  :  that  tahest  away  the 
sins  of  the  world, 

Grant  us  thy  peace. 

0  Lamb  of  God  :  that  tahest  away  the 
sins  of  the  world, 

Haue  mercy  upon  us. 
0  Christ  heare  us. 

0  Christ  hear  us. 
Lord  haue  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord  haue  mercy  upon  ut. 
Christ  haue  mercy  upon  us. 
Christ  haue  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord  haue  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord  haue  mercy  upon  us. 
H  Then  shall  the  Priest  (and  the  People 
with  him)  say  the  Lords  Prayer. 
Our   Father   which    art    in    heauen, 
Hallowed  be  thy  Name.     Thy  Kingdom 
com.    Thy  will  be  don  in  earth  as  it  is  in 
heauen.    Giue  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trespasses.    As  we 
forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us. 
And  lead  us  not  into  temptation;  But 
deliuer  us  from  evil.    Amen. 

1[  spriest. 
0  Lord  deale  not  with  us  after  our 

Sl'nS.  Answer. 

Neither  reward  us  after  our  iniquities. 


182 


LITANY 


SOURCES 

Oremus. 

£?L  Deus  misericors  pater  qui  contri- 
torum  non  despicis  gemitum  &  me- 
rentium  non  spernis  affectum  :  adesto 
precibus  nostris  quas  in  afflictionibus 
que  iugiter  nos  premunt  coram  te 
effundimus  casque  clementer  exaudi 
vt  quicquid  contra  nos  diabolice 
fraudesatque  humane  moliuntur  aduer- 
sitates,  ad  nihilum  redigas  :  et  consilio 
tue  bonitatis  dispergatur  :  vt  nullis 
insectacionibus  lesi  in  ecclesia  tua 
sancta  tibi  semper  gratias  referamus. 
Perdominum  nostrum  lesum  Christum. 
(Mlssale  missa  pro  tribulations  cordis.) 

<5v      Hec  sequens  Antiphona  cantatur  a  toto 
choro  in  stallis. 

Exurge  domine  adiuua  nos  et  libera 
nos  propter  nomen  tuum  alleluya. 

Ps.  Deus  auribus  nostris  audiuimus 
patres  nostri  annunciauerunt  nobis. 


Non  dicatur  nisi  primus  versus,  sed  statim 
sequatur  Gloria  patri.  Deinde  repetatur 
Exurge. 

(Processionale  feria  iia  in  Rog.). 


S>  Tempore  belli.  V.  Ab  inimicis  nostris 
defende  nos  christe.  Chorus  idem. 
Clerici  Afflictionem  nostram  benignus 
vide.  .  .  .  Dolorem  cordis  nostri 
respice  clemens.  .  .  .  Peccata  populi 
tui  pius  indulge.  .  .  .  Orationes 
nostras  pius  exaudi.  .  .  .  Fill  dei  viui 
miserere  nobis.  .  .  .  Hie  et  in  per- 
petuum  nos  custodire  digneris  christe. 
.  .  .  Exaudi  nos  xpe,  exaudi  exaudi 
nos  xpe.  (ib.) 

<§j  In  vigilia  ascensionis  finita  aliqua  litania 
dicat  sacerdos  .  .  .  versiculum  .  . 


Resp.  .  .  . 

Oratio. 

Infirm  itatem  nostram  quesumus 
domine  propitius  respice  :  et  mala 
omnia  que  iuste  meremur,  omnium 
sanctorum  tuorum  intercessionibus 
auerte.  Per  christum  dominum  nos 
trum.  Amen,  (ib.) 


1544 


1549 


Let  us  praye. 

0  God  mercifull  father,  that  de- 
spyseste  not  the  sighing  of  a  contrite 
hearte,  nor  the  desyre  of  suche  as  be 
sorowefu  II,  mercifullyassyst  our  prayers, 
that  we  make  before  thee  in  all  oure 
troubles  and  aduersityes,  whensoeuer 
they  oppresse  us :  And  graciouselye 
heare  us,  that  those  euylles,  whiche  the 
crafte  and  subtiltie  of  the  deuill  or  man 
ivorheth  agaynst  us,  be  broughte  to 
noughte,  and  by  the  prouidence  of  thy 
goodnesse,  they  maye  bee  dyspersed, 
that  we  thy  seruauntes,  beeyng  hurte  by 
no  persecucions,  maye  euermore  geue 
thankes  unto  thee,  in  thy  holy  Churche, 
through  lesu  Christe  our  Lorde. 

0  Lorde,  aryse,  hetpe  us,  and  del  liter  us  for 
thy  names  sake. 

0  God  we  haue  hearde  with  our  eares, 
and  our  fathers  haue  declared  unto  us,  the 
noble  workes  that  thou  diddest  in  theyr 
dayes,  and  in  the  olde  tyme  before  them. 

0  Lorde,  aryse,  helpe  us,  and  deliuer  us,  for 
thy     honour. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  the  sonne, 
and  to  the  holy  Goste  : 

as  it  was  in   (hath    been   from)  the 
beginning,  is  nowe,  and  euer  shall  be 
[euer],  worlde  without  ende.     Amen. 
From  our  enemies  defende  us,  0  Christe. 

Graciousely  looke  upon  our  afficcions. 
Pitifully  beholde  the  [dolour]  sorowes 
of  our  hearte. 

Mercifullyeforgeue  the  sinnes  of  thy  people. 
Fauourably    with    mercy    heare    our 
prayers. 

0  sonne  of  Dauid  haue  mercie  upon  us, 
Both    nowe   and   euer   vouchsafe   to 
heare  us     Christe. 

Graciously  heare  us,  0  Christe. 
Graciously  heare  us,  0  Lorde  Christe. 

The  uersicle. 

0  Lorde,  let  thy  mercie  be  shewed  upon 
us. 

The  aunswere. 
As  we  doe  put  our  trust  in  thee. 

Let  us  praye. 

WE  humbly  beseche  thee,  0  father, 
mercifully  to  loke  upon  our  infirmities, 
and  for  the  glory  of  thy  name  sake, 
turne  from  us  all  those  euilles  that  we 
moste  righteously  haue  deserued :  [Graut 
this  0  Lorde  God  for  oure  mediatour  and 
aduocate  lesu  Christes  sake.  Amen. 


LITANY 


183 


1552 

C  Let  us  pray. 

0  God  merciful  father,  that  de- 
spysest  not  the  sighing  of  a  contrite 
hearte,  nor  the  desyre  of  such  as  be 
sorowful :  mercifully  assist  our  prayers 
that  we  make  before  thee,  in  al  our 
troubles  and  aduersities  whesoeuer 
they  oppresse  us.  And  graciously 
heare  us,  that  those  euilles,  which  the 
craft  and  subtiltie  of  the  deuil  or  man 
worheth  agaynst  us,  be  brought  to 
naught,  and  by  the  prouidence  of  thy 
goodnes,  they  may  be  dispersed, 
that  we  thy  seruautes  beeing  hurte  by 
no  persecucions,  may  euermore  geue 
thankes  unto  the  in  thy  holy  Churche, 
through  lesu  Christ  our  Lorde. 


1661 

H  Let  us  pray. 

0  God  mercifull  Father,  that  de- 
spisest  not  the  sighing  of  a  contrite 
heart,  nor  the  desire  of  such  as  be 
sorrowful!,  mercifully  assist  our  praiers 
that  we  make  before  thee  in  all  our 
troubles  and  aduersities  whensoever 
they  oppress  us,  and  graciously 
hear  us,  that  those  evils  which  the 
Craft  and  subtilty  of  the  deuil  or  man 
worheth  against  us,  be  brought  to 
nought,  and  by  the  prouidence  of  thy 
goodness  they  may  be  dispersed, 
that  we  thy  servants  being  hurt  by 
no  persecutions,  may  evermore  give 
thanks  unto  thee  in  thy  holy  Church, 
through  lesus  Christ  our  Lord. 


0  Lord  aryse,  helpe  us,  and  deliuer  us  for 

thy  names  sake. 

0  God  we  have  heard  with  our  eares, 
&  our  fathers  haue  declared  unto  us,  the 
noble  woorkes  that  thou  didst  in  theyr 
dayes,  and  in  the  old  time  before  them. 
0  Lord  aryse,  helpe  us,  and  deliuer  us  for 

thyne  honor. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the  sonne, 
and  to  the  holy  Goste  : 

as  it  was  in  '  the 

beginning,   is  now,  and  euer  shalbe  : 

worlde  without  end.     Amen. 
From  our  enemies  defende  us,  0  Christe. 
Graciously  loke  upon  our  afflictions. 

Pitifully  beholde  the  sorowes 

of  our  heart. 

Mercifully  forgeue  the  synnes  of  thy  people. 
Fauourably    with    mercy    heare    our 
prayers. 

0  sonne  of  Dauid  haue  mercy  upon  us. 
Both  nowe  and  euer   uouchesafe   to 
heare  us',  O  Christ. 

Graciousely  heare  us,  0  Christe, 
Graciously  heare  us,  0  Lord  Christe. 

The  Versicle. 
0  Lorde  let  thy  mercy  be  shewed  upon 


us. 


The  Aunswere. 


As  we  do  put  our  trust  in  thee. 
Let  us  praye. 

WE  humbly  beseche  thee,  0  father, 
mercifully  to  loke  upo  our  infirmities, 
and  for  the  glory  of  thy  names  sake, 
turne  from  us  all  those  euilles  that  we 
most  righteously  haue  deserued  : 


0  Lord  arise,  help  us,  and  deliuer  us  for 
thy  Names  sake. 

0  God,  we  haue  heard  with  our  eares, 

and  our  fathers  haue  declared  unto  us  the 

noble  works  that  thou  didst  in   their 

dayes,  and  in  the  old  time  before  them. 

0  Lord  arise,  help  us,  and  deliuer  us  for 

thine  honor. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son  : 
and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

8Answer. 

As  it  was  in  the 

beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be  : 

world  without  end.     Amen. 
From  our  enemies  defend  us,  0  Christ. 
Graciously  look  upon  our  Afflictions. 

Pitifully  behold  the  sorrowes 

of  our  hearts. 

Mercifully  forgive  the  sins  of  thy  people. 

Fauourably    with     mercy    hear    our 
prayers. 

0  son  ofUauid  haue  mercy  upon  us. 
Both    now    and    euer   vouchsafe   to 
hear  us,  O  Christ. 

Graciously  hear  us,  0  Christ, 
graciously  hear  us,  0  Lord  Christ. 

If  Priest. 
0  Lord  let  thy  mercy  be  shewed  upon 

us. 

Answer. 

As  we  doe  put  our  trust  in  thee. 
IF  Let  us  pray. 

We   humbly  beseech  thee  0  Father, 
mercifully  to  look  upon  our  infirmities  : 
and  for  the  glory  of  thy  Name  8 
turne  from  us  all  those  evils  that  we 
most  righteously  haue  deserued, 


184 


LITANY 


SOURCES 

Deus  cui  proprium  est  misereri 
semper  &  parcere,  suscipe  depreca- 
tionem  nostram  :  &  quos  delictorum 
cathena  constringit,  miseratio  tue  pie- 
tatis  absoluat.  Per  christum  dominum 
nostrum.  (Greg.  200,  248) 


Omnipotens  sempiterne  deus  qui 
facis  mirabilia  magna  solus  :  pretende 
super  famulos  tuos  pontifices  &  super 
cunctas  congregationes  illis  commissas  : 
spiritum  gratie  salutaris  :  &  vt  in 
veritate  tibi  complaceant  :  perpetuum 
eis  rorem  tue  benedictionis  infunde. 
(Gel  iii  50) 


Ineffabilem  misericordiam  tuam 
nobis  quesumus  domine  clementer 
ostende  :  vt  simul  nos  a  peccatis 
exuas  et  a  penis  quas  pro  his  meremur 
benignus  eripias.  (Gel.  iii.  28)  ... 


Presta  quesumus  omnipotens  deus 
vt  qui  in  afflictione  nostra  de  tua 
pietate  confidimus  :  contra  omnia 
aduersa  tua  protectione  muniamur. 
Per  dominum.  (Greg.  81) 


7544        1549 

0  GOD,  whose  nature  and  propertie  is 
euer  to  haue  mercye  and  to  forgyue, 
receyue  our  humble  petition,  and  thoughe 
we  be  tyed  and  bound  with  the  chaine 
of  our  synnes  :  yet  let  thy  pitifulnesse 
of  thy  greate  mercye  leuse  us  for  the 
honours  of  lesu  Christes  sake,  our 
mediatour  and  aduocate.  Amen. 

Almyghtye  and  euerlyuynge  God, 
whyche  onely  workest  great  maruayles, 
send  downe  upon  our  byshoppes,  and 
curates,  and  all  congregacyons,  com- 
mytted  to  theyr  charge,  the  healthful 
spy  rite  of  thy  grace,  and  that  they  maye 
trulye  please  the  :  poure  upon  them  the 
contynuall  dewe  of  thy  blessynge. 
Graunte  this  (0  Lorde)  for  the  honours 
of  our  aduocate  and  mediatour  lesu 
Christe.  Amen. 

WE  besech  the  (0  lord)  to  shewe  uppon 
us  thyne  excedyng  greate  mercy,  whyche 
no  lounge  can  worthely  expresse,  and 
that  it  may  please  the,  to  delyuer  us 
from  all  our  synnes,  and  also  from  the 
paynes,  that  we  haue  for  them  deserued. 
Graunte  thys  (0  Lorde)  through  our  medi- 
atoure  and  aduocate  lesu  Christ.  Amen,] 
andgraunte  [we  beseche  the,  Oalmyghtye 
God,']  that  [we]  in  all  our  troubles  we 
maye  put  oure  whole  truste  and  con- 
fydence  in  [uppon]  thy  mercye,  [that  we 
may  agaynst  all  aduersytye  be  defended 
under  thy  protection]  and  euermore 
serue  thee  in  purenes 

of  liuing,  to  thy  honour  and  glory  : 
[Graunt  thys  0  Lorde  God,]  through 
[for]  our  onelye  mediator  and  aduocate 
lesus  Christ[es  sake]  our  Lorde.  Amen. 


[See  p.  188.] 


LITANY 


1552 


185 


1661 


and  graunt 

that  in  all  our  troubles  we 

maye  put  our  whole   trust    and  con 
fidence  in  thy  mercy, 

and  euermore 

serue  thee  in  holinesse  and.  purenesse 

of  lyuyng,  to  thy  honour  and  glory  : 

Through 

our  only  mediatoure  and  aduocate 
lesus  Christ  our  Lorde.    Amen. 

[See  p.  189.] 


and  grant 

that  in  all  our  Troubles,  we 
may  put  our  whole  trust  and  con 
fidence  in  thy  mercy, 

and  evermore 

serve   thee    in   holmes    and  purenes 

of   living,   to  thy  honor  and    glory, 

through 

our  only  mediatour  and  Advocate, 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 

IT  A  prayer  of  Saint  Chrysostome. 
Almighty  God,  who  hast  given  us 
grace  at  this  tyme  with  one  accord  to 
make  our  comon  supplications  unto  thee, 
and  dost  promise  that  when  two  or  three 
are  gathred J  together  in  thy  name,  thou 
wilt  grant  their  requests  :  fulfill  now,  0 
Lord,  the  desires  and  peticons  of  thy 
servants  as  may  be  most  expedient  for 
them,  granting  us  in  this  world  know 
ledge  of  thy  truth,  and  in  the  world  to 
come  life  everlasting.  Amen. 
IT  12.  Corinthians.  13. 
The  grace  of  our  Lord  lesus 
Christ,  and  the  Love  of  God,  and 
the  fellowship  of  the  holy  Ghost 
be  with  vs  all  evermore.  Amen.* 

HERE  ENDETH  THE  LITANIE. 


1 86  LITANY 

SOURCES  1549 


[See  below  after  the  Mass.] 
S.  Mat.  vi  33. 


[See  below  after  the  Mass.] 
Gen.  vii  21-23,  ix  11. 


1571  be  praise  for  ever.     Amen. 

Omitted  from  1559  to  1661,  except 
in  Jugge  and  Cawode's  issue  of  1559. 

2  Kings  vii. 


LITANY 


187 


1552 


For  rayne,  if  the  tyme  require.  • 
O  God  heauenly  Father,  whiche  by 
thy  sonne  lesur  Christ  hast  pro 
mised  to  al  them  that  seke  thy  King 
dom,  and  the  righteousnes  therof, 
al  thinges  necessarie  to  thez'r  bodily 
sustenaunce :  sende  vs  we  beseche 
theinthisour  necessity,  suche  moderate 
raineandshowers,thatwemayereceiue 
the  fruites  of  the  yearth  to  cure  com- 
forte,  and  to  thy  honour :  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord  :  Amen. 

C  For  fayre  weather. 

O  Lorde  God,  whiche  for 

the  sinne  of  man  diddest  once  drowne 
al  the  world,  excepte  eight  persons, 
and  afterward  of  thy  great  mercy 
diddest  promise  neuer  to  destroie  it 
so  agayn  :  we  humbly  beseche  thee, 
that  although  we  for  our  iniquities 
haue  worthely  deserued  this  plague 
of  rain  and  waters,  yet  vpon  our  true 
repentaunce  thou  wilt  send  vs  suche 
weather  whereby  we  may  receiue  the 
fruites  of  the  earth  in  due  season,  and 
learne  bothe  by  thy  punyshmente  to 
amende  our  Hues,  and  for  thy  clemency 
to  geue  thee  praise  and  glory  :  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lorde.  Amen. 
In  the  time  of  dearth  and  famine. 
O  God  heauenly  father,  -whose  gyft 
it  is  that  the  rayn  doethfall,  theyearthe 
is  fruitfully  beast es  increase,  and  fishes 
doe  multiplye  :  behold  we  beseche  thee 
thaffliccions  of  thy  people,  &>  graunt 
that  the  scarcitie  &*  dearth  (which  we 
doe  now  most  iustly  suffer  for  our 
iniquitie)  may  through  thy  goodnes  be 
mercifullye  ttirned  into  cheapnes  and 
plentie,for  the  loue  of  lesu  Christe  our 
lord :  to  whom  with  thee  and  the  holy 
gost.  &>(:. 

C  Of  thus. 

O  God  mercifull  father,  whiche  in 
the  time  of  Heliseus  the  Prophete,  didst 
sodainly  turne  in  Samaria,  great 
scarcitie  Or3  dearthe,  into  plentie  <3>° 
cheapnes,  and  extreme  famine,  into 
abudance  of  victual :  haue  pietie  vpo 


1661 

U  Prayers  and  Thanksgivings  vpon 
severall  occasions,  to  be  vsed  before 
the  two  finall  Prayers  of  the  Litany, 
or  of  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer. 

PRAYERS. 

IT  For  Rain. 

O  God  heavenly  Father,  who  by 
thy  Son  lesus  Christ,  hast  pro 
mised  to  all  them  that  seek  thy  King 
dom,  and  the  righteousnes  thereof, 
all  things  necessary  to  .their  bodily 
sustenance  :  send  vs,  we  beseech 
thee,  in  this  ournecessity,such  moderate 
rain  and  showres,  that  we  may  receive 
the  fruits  of  the  earth  to  our  com 
fort,  and  to  thy  honour,  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 
IT  For  fair  weather. 

O  Almighty  Lord  God,  who  for 
the  sin  of  man  didst  once  drowne 
all  the  world,  except  eight  persons, 
and  afterward  of  thy  great  mercy 
didst  promise  never  to  destroy  it 
so  againe  :  we  humbly  beseech  thee, 
that  although  we  for  our  iniquities 
have  worthily  deserved  a  plague  of 
rain  and  waters,  yet  vpon  our  true 
repentance  thou  wilt  send  vs  such 
weather,  as  that  we  may  receive  the 
fruits  of  the  earth  in  due  season,  and 
learne  both  by  thy  punishment  to 
amend  our  lives,  and  for  thy  Clemency 
to  give  thee  praise  and  glory,  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 
IT  In  the  time  of  dearth  and  Famine. 

O  God  heavenly  Father,  whose  guift 
it  is,  that  the  rain  doth  fall,  the  earth 
is  fruitfull,  beasts  increase,  and  fishes 
do  multiply  :  behold,  we  beseech  thee, 
the  Afflictions  of  thy  people,  and  grant 
that  the  scarcity  and  dearth  (which  we 
do  now  most  iustly  suffer  for  our 
Iniquity]  may  through  thy  goodnes  be 
mercifully  turned  into  cheapnes  and 
plenty,  for  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  to  whom  with  thee  and  the  holy 
Ghost  3be  all  honour  and*  glory,  now 
and  for  ever.  Amen. 

IT  Or  this. 

O  God  merciful  father,  who,  in 
the  time  of  Elisha  the  Prophet  didst 
suddenly  in  Samaria  turne  great 
Scarcity  and  dearth  into  plenty  and 
Cheapnes  : 

have  mercy  vpon 


1 88  LITANY 

SOURCES  1549 


Esther  xiii  11  Dominus  omnium  es 
nee  est  qui  resistat  maiestati  tuae. 


Num.  xvi  41-50. 


2  Sam.  xxiv  15,  16. 
Hab.  iii  2. 


CO   ras  Koivas  ravras  KOL  (rvp.<pa>vovs  ALmightie  God  Luhiche  haste  geuen  us 

rjfiiv  xap«rdpi€j/oy  Trpovevxas  (supplica-  grace  at  thys  tyme  with  one  accorde  to 

tiones),  6  KOL  8vo,  KOL  rpial  avp.<pa>vov(riv  make  our  commune  supplicacyons  unto 

(conuenientibus)  eVi  ra>  ovd/zari  o-ou,  ras  thee,  and  dooeste  promyse,  that  whan 

aiTT)(r€Ls  Trape^fLv  (TrayyetXafievos  avrbs,  two  or  three  bee  gathered                       in 

KOI  vvv  T&V  8ov\a>v  <rov  TO.  atr^ara  (peti-  thy    name    thou    witte    graunte    theyr 


LITANY 


189 


1552 

vs,  that  now  be  punished  for 

our  sinnes  with  like  aduersitie, 

encrease  thefruites  of  the  y earth  by  thy 
heauenly  benedicdon.  And  grant ',  that 
we  receuing  thy  bountifull  liberalitie, 
may  vse  the  same  to  thy  glory,  our 
comforte  and  reliefe  of  our  nedy 
neyghbours :  throughe  lesus  Christe 
our  lorde.  Amen. 

In  the  tyme  of  Warre. 
O  Almightie  God,Kyngofallkynges, 
and  gouernour  of  all  thynges,  whose 
power  no  creature  is  able  to  resiste,  to 
whom  it  belongeth  iustly  to  punishe 
synners,  and  to  bee  mercifull  to  them 
that  truly  repent :  saue  and  deliuer  vs 
(we  humbly  beseche  thee}  from  the 
handes  of  our  enemies,  abate  their 
pryde,  ass  wage  their  malice ',  and  con- 
founde  their  deuises,  that  we  beeing 
armed  with  thy  defence,  may  be  pre- 
serued  euermore  from  al  perilles  to 
glory  fie  thee,  whiche  art  the  onely  geuer 
of  all  victory,  through  the  merites  of 
thy  only  sonne  lesu  Chryste  our  Lorde. 

C   In  the  tyme  of  any  common  plague  or 

Sickenes. 

O  Almightie   God,  whiche  in   thy 
wrath, 


in  the 

tyme  ofkyng  Dauyd,  dyddeste  slea  with 
the  plague  of  pestilence  .lx.  and 
ten  thousande,  &>  yet  remembryng  thy 
mercy  diddeste  saue  the  rest  :  haue 
pitie  vpon  vs  miserable  synners,  that 
nowe  are  visited  with  greate  sickenes 
andmortalitie,  that  lyke  as  thou  diddeste 
then 

commaunde    thy 

aungel  to  ceasse  from  punyshyng  :  So 
it  may  now  please  thee  to  withdrawe 
from  vs  this  plague  and  greuous 
sickenesse,  throughe  lesu  Chryste  oure 
Lorde. 

C  And  the  Let  any  shal  euer  ende  with  thys 

Collecte  folowyng. 

Aimightie  god,  which  hast  geuen  vs 
grace  at  this  time  with  one  accorde  to 
make  oure  common  supplications  unto 
thee,  and  dooest  promyse  that  when 
two  or  three  bee  gathered  in 

thy    name,    thou    wilt    graunte    theyr 


1661 

vs  that  we  who  are  now  for  our  sins 
punished  with  like  Adversity,  may 
likewise  find  a  seasonable  relief. 
Increase  the  fruits  of  the  earth  by  thy 
heavenly  benediction;  and  grant  that 
we  receiving  thy  botmtifull  liberality 
may  vse  the  same  to  thy  Glory,  the 
reliefe  of  those  that  are  needy,  and  our 
own  Comfort,  through  lesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  Amen. 

IT  In  the  tyme  of  War  Sand  Tumults. 
O  Almighty  God,  King  of  all  kings, 
and  Governor  of  all  things,  whose 
Power  no  creature  is  able  to  resist,  to 
whom  it  belongeth  iustly  to  punish 
Sinners,  and  to  be  mercifull  to  them 
that  truly  repent  :  save  and  deliver  vs, 
we  humbly  beseech  thee  from  the 
hands  of  our  enemies;  abate  their 
pride,  asswage  their  malice,  and  con 
found  their  devices,  that  we  being 
armed  with  thy  defence,  may  be  pre 
served  evermore  from  all  perils,  to 
glorify  thee  who  art  the  only  giver 
of  all  victory  through  the  merits  of 
thy  only  son  fesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

If  In  the  time  of  any  comon  plague  or 
sicknes. 

O  Almighty  God,  who  in  thy 
wrath  didst  wn&9.plagut  upon  thine 
own  people  in  the  wildernes  for 
their  obstinate  rebellion  against 
Moses  and  Aaron,  and  also  in  the 
time  of  King  David,  didst  slay  with 
the  plague  of  pestilence  threescore  and 
ten  thousand,  and  yet  remembring  thy 
mercy  didst  save_  the  rest  :  have 
pitie  vpon  vs  miserable  sinners,  who 
now  are  visited  with  great  sicknes 
and  mortality,  that  like  as  thou  didst 
then  8accept  of  an  atonement,  and 
didst  command  8the  destroying 
Angell  to  cease  from  punishing  :  so 
it  may  now  please  thee  to  withdraw 
from  vs  this  plague  and  grievous 
sicknes,  through  Jesus  Christ  ottr 
Lord.  Amen. 


[See  p.  185.] 


190 


LITANY 


SOURCES 

tiones)  rrpbs  TO  (rv/j,(pepov  ir\r]pu>(rov. 
Xoprjywv  rjp.1v  eV  ro>  Trapovri  alwvi  TTJV 
emyvaxriv  rrjs  (rrjs  d\r)6eias,  <al  ev  TW 
p.e\\ovn  £cor)v  alutviov  ^api^o/nevoy.  [CH 
6eia  \eiTovpyia  TOV  ayiov  'Itodvvov  TOV 
Xpv<ro(TT6p,ov  :  diuina  missa  sancti 
loannis  Ghrysostomi,  Venice  1528 
(gk.  &lat.)]/ 

Cosin  A  Collection  of  private  devotions, 
1627,  p.  355. 

Almighty  .  .  upon  thy  whole  Con 
gregation  and  at  ....  so  rule  and 
gouern  the  hearts  and  minds  ....  fit 
men  to  serue  thee  in  ...  those  that 
shall  ...  to  that  holy  .  .  .  men. 
Grant  this  O  Lord  for  his  sake,  who 
is  the  great  Shepherd,  and  Bishop  of 
our  soules.  lesus  Christ  our  Lord. 


1549 

requestes  :  fulfyll  nowe,  0  Lorde,  the 
desyres  and  petitions  of  thy  seruauntes, 
as  may  bee  moste  expedyente  for  them, 
grauntyng  us  in  thys  worlde  knowledge 
of  thy  trueth,  and  in  the  worlde  to  come 
lyfe  euerlasting.  Amen.} 


[See  Ordination  below.] 


[Seep.  184.] 


[See  p.  184.] 


PRAYERS 


191 


1552 

requestes  :  fulfil  nowe,  0  Lorde,  the 
desyres  and  petycyons  of  thy  seruauntes, 
as  maye  bee  moste  expedyente  for  them, 
graunting  us  in  thys  worlde  knowledge 
of  thy  trueth,  and  in  the  worlde  to  come, 
lyfe  euerlasting.  Amen. 


1661 


[See  Ordination  below.] 


Ipln  the  Ember  Weeks,  to  be  said  every 
day,  „  For  those  that  are  to  be  admitted 
into  holy  orders. 

Almighty  God  our  heavenly 
Father,  who  hast  purchased  to 
thyselfe  an  vniversall  Church  by 
the  pretious  blood  of  thy  dear  Son  : 
mercifully  looke  vpon  the  same, 
and  at  this  time  so  guide  and 
govern  the  minds  of  thy  servants 
the  Bishops  and  Pastors  of  thy 
Flock,  that  they  may  lay  hands 
suddenly  on  no  man,  but  faithfully 
and  wisely  make  choice  of  fitt 
persons  to  serve  in  the  sacred 
ministery  of  thy  Church.  And  to 
those  which  shall  be  ordeined  to 
any  holy  function,  give  thy  grace 
and  heavenly  benediction,  that  both 
by  their  life  and  doctrine  they  may 
set  forth  thy  glory,  and  set  forward 
the  Salvation  of  all  men,  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen.* 

IFOr  this. 

Almighty  God,  the  giver  of  all  good 
guifts,  who  of  thy  divine  providence 
hast  appointed  divers  orders  in  thy 
Church  :  give  thy  grace,  we  humbly 
beseech  thee,  to  all  those  who  are 
to  be  called  to  any  office  and  Admini 
stration  in  the  same  :  And  soe  re 
plenish  them  with  the  truth  of  thy 
Doctrine,  and  indue  them  with  in- 
nocency  of  life,  that  they  may  faith 
fully  serve  before  thee,  to  the  glory 
of  thy  great  name,  and  the  benefitt 
of  thy  holy  Church,  through  lesus 
Christ  our  Lord.  Amen.* 

IT  A  Prayer  that  may  be  said  after  any 
of  the  former. 

Ib0  God  whose  nature  and  property  is 
euer  to  have  mercy  and  to  forgiue,  re 
ceive  our  humble  petitions  :  and  though 
we  be  tied  and  bound  with  the  chain  of 
our  sins,  yet  let  the  pitifulnes  of  thy 
great  mercy  loose  us,  for  the  honour  of 
lesus  Christ  our  Mediator  and  Aduocate. 
Amen.* 


i92  PRAYERS 

SOURCES  1549 

A  form  of  Common  Prayer  together 
with  an  order  of  fasting  1625 :  A 
Prayer  for  the  High  Court  of  Parlia 
ment,  to  be  read  during  their  Session, 
in  such  place  of  these  Prayers  after 
the  Letanie,  as  the  Minister  shall 
thinke  fit. 

Most  Gracious  God  .  .  to  blesse  & 
direct  all  ...  to  the  preseruation  of 
thy  glory  .  .  his  kingdoms.  Lord  looke 
vpon  the  humility  and  deuotion  with 
which  they  are  come  into  thy  Courts  ; 
And  they  are  come  into  thy  house  in 
assured  confidence  vpon  the  merits  and 
mercies  of  Christ  (our  blessed  Sauiour) 
that  thou  wilt  not  deny  them  the 
Grace  and  Fauour  which  they  begge  of 
thee.  Therefore  O  Lord,  blesse  them 
with  all  that  wisdom,  which  thou 
knowest  necessary  to  speed,  &  bring 
great  Designes  into  Action,  and  to 
make  the  maturity  of  his  Maiesties 
and  their  Counsels,  the  happinesse 
and  the  blessing  of  this  Common 
wealth.  These  and  all  other  .  .  . 
Amen.  (Cp.  A  forme  of  prayer 
necessary  to  bee  vsed  in  these  dangerous 
times  ofwarre.  .  .  .  London  1628  f.F). 

Tho.  Bisse  The  beauty  of  holiness  in 
the  Common-Prayer,  London  1716, 
p.  97  note  r :  '  Upon  the  complaint  of 
the  Dissenters,  who  thought  our  Liturgy 
deficient  for  want  of  such  a  form  of 
daily  Intercession  (tho'  they  them 
selves  observe  no  days  but  Sundays;) 
to  satisfy  all  complaints,  this  Prayer 
was  added  to  supply  the  place  of  the 
Litany:  and  for  this  reason,  is  to  be 
ff  used  at  such  times,  when  the  Litany 
is  not  appointed  to  be  said."  And 
therefore  Bishop  Gunning,  the  supposed 
author  of  it,  in  the  College  whereof 
he  was  head,  suffered  it  not  to  be  read 
in  the  afternoons,  because  the  Litany 
was  never  read  then,  the  place  of 
which  it  was  supposed  to  supply.' 


PRAYERS  193 


1552  1661 


A  Prayer  for  the  high  Court  of  Parliament 
to  be  read  during  their  Session. 

Most  gracious  God,  we  humbly 
beseech  thee,  as  for  this  Kingdom 
in  generall,  so  especially  for  the 
high  Court  of  Parliament,  vnder 
our  most  religious,  and  gracious 
King,  at  this  time  assembled  :  That 
thou  wouldst  be  pleased  to  direct 
and  prosper  all  their  consultations 
to  the  advancement  of  thy  glory, 
the  good  of  thy  Church,  the  safety 
honour  and  welfare  of  our  Soveraign, 
and  his  kingdoms ;  that  all  things 
may  be  so  ordered  and  setled  by 
their  endeavors  vpon  the  best  and 
surest  foundations,  that  peace  and 
happiness,  truth  and  iustice,  religion 
and  Piety  may  be  established  among 
vs  for  all  generations.  These  and 
all  other  necessaries  for  them,  for 
vs,  and  thy  whole  Church,  we 
humbly  begg  in  the  Name  and 
Mediation  of  lesus  Christ  our  most 
blessed  Lord  and  Saviour.  Amen. 

A  Collect  or  Prayer  for  all  Conditions  of 
men  to  be  vsed  at  such  times  when  the 
Litanie  is  not  appointed  to  be  said. 

0  God,  the  Creatour  and  Preserver 
of  all  mankind,  We  humbly  beseech 
thee  for  all  sorts,  and  conditions  of 
men,  that  thou  wouldst  be  pleased 
to  make  thy  waies  known  vnto  them, 
thy  saving  health  vnto  all  nations. 
More  especially  we  pray  for  the 
good  estate  of  the  Catholick  Church, 
that  it  may  be  so  guided  and 
governed  by  thy  good  Spirit,  that 
all  who  profess  and  call  themselves 
Christians,  may  be  led  into  the  way 
of  truth,  and  hold  the  faith  in 
vnity  of  Spirit,  in  the  bond  of  peace, 
and  in  righteousness  of  life.  Finally 
wee  commend  to  thy  Fatherly  good 
ness  all  those  who  are  any  wayes 
afflicted  or  distressed  in  .  Thif  tg  be 
mind  body  or  estate,  sai 
^especially  those  for  whom 
pur  prayers  are  desired]  that 
it  may  please  thee  to 
comfort  and  relieve  them  accord 
ing  to  their  severall  necessities, 
giving  them  patience  vnder  their 
sufferings,  and  a  happy  issue  out 
of  all  their  afflictions.  And  this 
we  begg  for  lesus  Christ  his  sake. 
Amen. 


194  THANKSGIVINGS 

SOURCES  1 549 


[Die  Sabbati  14.  viz.  die  mensis 
Decembris  inter  horas  8.  et  10.  ante 
meridiem  eiusdem  diei  .  .  .  reverendus 
pater  dominus  episcopus  Norwicen ' 
[Edw.  Reynolds]  introduxit  et  in 
manus  domini  praesidentis  tradidit 
formam  cuiusdam  precis  alias  per  eum 
concept'  concern'  Deo  gratias  pro  gene- 
ralibus  misericordiis  publice  usitand' : 
qua  prece  publice  perlecta,  et  post 
aliquot  tractat'  desuper  habit'  et  fact', 
idem  reverendus  pater  &c.  Acta 
superioris  domus  Convocationis  .  .  . 
MDCLXI  ap.  Cardwell  Synodalia  ii 
658]. 


S.  Luke  i  75. 


Jer.  v  24. 
Ps.  civ  14. 


Ps.  Ixviii  10. 


THANKSGIVINGS  195 

1552  1661 


THANKSGIVINGS. 

A  generall  Thanksgiving. 
Almightie  God,  Father  of  all 
mercies,  We  thine  vnworthy  ser 
vants  do  give  thee  most  humble 
and  hearty  thanks  for  all  thy 
goodnes,  and  loving  kindness  to  vs 
and  to  all  men  rparticu- 
larly  to  those  who  desire  now 
to  offer  vp  their  praises,  and 
thanksgivings  for  thy  late 
mercies  vouchsafed  vnto  them] 
We  bless  thee  for  our  creation, 
preservation,  and  all  the  bless 
ings  of  this  life,  but  above  all 
for  thine  inestimable  love  in  the 
redemption  of  the  world  by  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  means 
of  grace,  and  for  the  hope  of  glory. 
And  we  beseech  thee  give  vs  that 
due  sence  of  all  thy  mercies  that 
our  hearts  may  be  vnfeignedly 
thankfull,  and  that  we  shew  forth 
thy  prayse,  not  only  with  our  lips, 
but  in  our  lives,  by  giving  vp  our 
selves  to  thy  service,  and  by  walk 
ing  before  thee  in  holiness  and 
righteousnes  all  our  dayes  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  to  whom 
with  thee  and  the  holy  Ghost  be 
all  honour  and  glory  world  without 
end.  Amen. 

H  4For  Rain 

0  God  our  heavenly  Father,  who 
by  thy  gracious  providence  do'st 
cause  the  former  and  the  latter  rain 
to  descend  vpon  the  earth ;  that  it 
may  bring  forth  fruit  for  the  vse  of 
man :  We  give  thee  humble  thanks 
that  it  hath  pleased  thee  in  our 

[1604  greatest]  great  necessity  to  send  vs  at  the 

last  a  ioyfull  rain  vpon  thine  in 
heritance,  and  to  refresh  it  when 
it  was  dry,  to  the  great  Comfort  of 
vs  thy  vnworthy  servants,  and  to 
the  glory  of  thy  holy  Name  through 
thy  mercies  in  lesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  Amen. 

IT  For  fair  weather. 

0  Lord  God,  who  hast  iustly 
humbled  vs  by  thy  late  plague  of 
immoderate  rain  and  waters,  and  in 
thy  mercy  hast  relieved  and  com- 


1 96  THANKSGIVINGS 

SOURCES 


Ps.  Ixi  3. 


Ps.  cxxiv  6. 


Ps.  Ixviii  7. 


1  Tim.  ii  1. 


THANKSGIVINGS  197 

1552  1661 

forted  our  soules  by  this  seasonable 
and  blessed  change  of  weather :  we 
prayse  and  glorify  thy  holy  Name 
for  this  thy  mercy,  and  will  alwayes 
declare  thy  loving  kindnesse  from 
generation  to  generation,  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 

H  For  Plenty. 

[1604  which]  0  most  mercifull  father,  who  of 

thy  gracious  goodnes  hast  heard 
the  devout  prayers  of  thy  Church, 
and  turned  our  dearth  and  Scarcity 
into  cheapnes  and  plenty:  Wee 
give  thee  humble  thanks  for  this 
thy  speciall  bounty,  beseeching  thee 
to  continue  thy  loving  kindnes  vnto 
vs,  that  our  Land  may  yeild  vs  her 
fruits  of  increase  to  thy  glory  and 
our  comfort  through  lesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  Amen. 

[1604  A  thanksgiuing  for  peace  and         IT  For  Peace  and  ^deliverance  from  our 
victorie]  Enemies. 

[1604  which]  40    Almighty   God,    who   art   a 

strong  tower  of  defence  vnto  thy 
Servants  against  the  face  of  their 
Enemies :  we  yeild  thee  praise  and 
thanksgiving  for  our  deliverance 
from  those  great  and  apparent 
dangers  wherewith  we  were  com 
passed  :  We  acknowledge  it  thy 
goodnes  that  we  were  not  delivered 
over  as  a  prey  vnto  them,  beseech 
ing  thee  still  to  continue  such  thy 
mercies  towards  vs,  that  all  the 
world  may  know  that  thou  art  our 
Saviour  and  mighty  deliverer, 
through  lesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen.* 

•;  spor  restoring  publick  peace  at  home. 
O  eternall  God  our  heavenly 
Father,  who  alone  makest  men  to 
be  of  one  mind  in  a  house,  and 
stillest  the  outrage  of  a  violent  and 
vnruly  people :  We  bless  thy  holy 
Name,  that  it  hath  pleased  thee,  to 
appease  the  seditious  tumults  which 
have  been  lately  raised  vp  amongst 
vs:  most  humbly  beseeching  thee 
to  grant  to  all  of  vs  grace,  that  we 
may  henceforth  obediently  walk  in 
thy  holy  Commandments,  and  lead 
ing  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life,  in  all 
godliness  and  honesty,  may  con 
tinually  oflfer  vnto  thee  pur  sacrifice 
of  prayse  and  thanksgiving  for  these 


THAI 


THANKSGIVINGS  199 

1661 


o^Lcrd.    ^e,. 


0  Lord  CkMi,  wfco  ] 


thy  late 


wUefc 

JgaliriBS 

St-wayes  pravs- 
thy  nercies  in 


We  humbly 


the" 


niercifull  Father,  that 


lastly 
of  <rar 


in  thy  law. 
TS,W 


[IfiMtke 


200 


FIRST  SUNDAY 


SOURCES 


1549 


C  Missale  ad  vsum  Sarum  incipit  f  eliciter. 


THE  INTROITES  COLLECTES,  EPIS- 
TLES,  AND  GOSPELS,  TO  BE  VSED  AT 
THE  CELEBRACION  OF  THE  LORDES 
SUPPER  AND  HOLY  COMMUNION, 
THROUGH  THE  YEARE  :  WITH 

PROPER   PSALMES,  AND  LESSONS  FOR 
DIUERS  FEASTES  AND  DAYES. 


Et  primo  dominica  prima  aduentus  domini. 

Ad  missam.     Officium. 
[Ps.  xxiv  (xxv)  1,  2a:  3] 


Gloria  patri. 
Sicut  erat. 


Oremus. 

Oratio. 

[Excita  quesumus  domine  potentiam 
tuam  et  veni  :  vt  ab  imminentibus 
peccatorum  nostrorum  periculis,  te 
mereamur  protegente  eripi,  te  liberante 
saluari.  Qui  viuis  et  regnas  cum  deo 
patre  in  vnitate  spiritus  sancti  deus. 
Per  omnia  secula  seculorum  (Greg. 
133).]  Amen. 


C  THE  FIRST  SONDAY   IN  ADUENTE. 

[Beatus  vir  psal.  i. 

BLessed  is  that  manne  that  hath 
not  walked  in  the  counsayle  of  the 
vngodly  :  nor  stand  in  the  way  of 
sinners,  and  hath  not  sit  in  the  seate 
of  the  skornefull. 

But  his  delight  is  in  the  lawe  of  the 
Lorde  :  and  in  his  lawe  will  he  exer 
cise  himselfe  day  and  night. 

And  he  shall  be  lyke  a  tree  planted 
by  the  water  syde  :  that  will  bring 
forth  his  fruite  in  due  season. 

His  leafe  also  shall  not  wither  :  and 
looke  whatsoeuer  he  doth,  it  shall 
prospere. 

As  for  the  vngodly,  it  is  not  so  with 
them  :  but  they  are  lyke  the  chaffe, 
whiche  the  wynde  skattereth  awaye 
(from  the  face  of  the  earth). 

Therfore  the  vngodly  shall  not 
be  hable  to  stand  in  the  Judgement  : 
neyther  the  synners  in  the  congrega- 
cion  of  the  righteous. 

But  the  Lorde  knoweth  the  waye  of 
the  righteous  :  and  the  waye  of  the 
vngodly  shall  perishe. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  &  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  gost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  worlde  without  ende. 
Amen. 

And  so  must  euery  Introite  be  ended. 

Let  vs  praye. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  God,  geue  vs  grace,  that 
we  maye  caste  away  the  workes  of 
darkenes,  and  put  vpon  vs  the  armour 
of  light,  now  in  the  time  of  this  mortal 
Ivfe,  (in  the  which  thy  sonne  lesus 
Christe  came  to  visite  vs  in  great 
humilitie)  that  in  the  last  daye,  when 
he  shall  come  again  in  his  gloryous 


IN  ADVENT 


1552 


201 


1661 


THE  COLLECTES,  EPIS 

TLES,  AND  GOSPELS,  TO  BE  VSED  AT 
THE  CELEBRACION  OF  THE  LORDES 
SUPPER,  AND  HOLY  COMMUNION 
THROUGH  THE  YEARE. 


THE  COLLECTS  EPIS 

TLES  AND  GOSPELS  TO  BE  VSED8 


THROUGHOUT  THE  YEAR. 


€  THE  FYRST  SUNDAYE  IN  ADUENT. 


IT  Note  that  the  Collect  appointed  for 
every  Sunday;  or  for  any  Holy-day  that 
hath  a  Vigil  or  Eve  shall  be  said  at  the 
evening  Service  next  before. 

THE  FIRST  SUNDAY  IN  ADVENT. 


C  The  Collecte. 

ALmighty  God,  geue  vs  grace,  that 
we  maye  cast  away  the  workes  of 
darkenes,  and  put  vpo  vs  the  armour 
of  light,  now  in  the  time  of  thys  mortal 
lyfe,  (in  the  whych  thy  sonne  lesus 
Christ  came  to  visite  vs  in  great 
humilitie)  that  in  the  last  daye,  when 
he  shall  come  againe  in  hys  glorious 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  give  vs  grace  that 
we  may  cast  away  the  works  of 
darkness,  and  put  vpon  vs  the  armour 
of  light  now  in  the  time  of  this  mortall 
life  (in  which  thy  son  lesus 

Christ  came  to  visite  vs  in  great 
humility)  :  that  in  the  last  day,  when 
he  shall  come  againe  in  his  glorious 


202 


FIRST  SUNDAY 


SOURCES 


1549 

maiestie,  to  iudge  both  the  quicke  and 
the  dead  :  we  maye  ryse  to  the  lyfe 
immortall,  through  him,  who  liueth 
and  reigneth  with  thee  and  the  holy 
gost,  nowe  and  euer.  Amen. 


Q  Lectio  epistole  beati  pauli  apostoli  :  ad 
romanos.  [xiii.  D 


FBatres.  Scientes  quia  hora  est  iam 
nos  de  somno  surgere.  Nunc  autem 
propior  est  nostra  salus  :  quam  cum 
credidimus.  Nox  precessit :  dies  autem 
appropinquauit.  Abijciamus  ergo  opera 
tenebrarum,  et  induamur  arm  a  lucis  : 
sic  vt  in  die  honeste  ambulemus.  Non 
in  commessationibus  et  ebrietatibus  : 
non  in  cubilibus  et  impudicitijs,  non 
in  contentione  et  emulatione.  Sed 
induimini  :  dominum  iesum  xpm. 


Euangelium. 

Secundum  matheum.  [xxi. 
IN  illo  tempore.  Cum  appropin- 
quasset  iesus  hierosolymis  et  venisset 
bethphage  ad  montem  oliueti :  tune 
misit  duos  discipulos  dicens  eis.  Ite 
in  castellum  quod  contra  vos  est :  et 
statim  inuenietis  asinam  alligatam  et 
pullum  cum  ea.  Soluite  et  adducite 
michi.  Et  si  quis  vobis  aliquid  dixerit, 
dicite  quia  dominus  his  opus  habet : 
et  confestim  dimittet  eos.  Hoc  autem 
totum  factum  est:  vt  adimpleretur 
quod  dictum  est  per  prophetam  dicen- 
tem.  Dicite  filie  sion.  Ecce  rex  tuus 
venit  tibi  mansuetus :  sedens  super 


The  Epistle. 

[Roma.  xiii. 

Owe  nothing  to  any  man  but  this, 
that  ye  loue  one  another.  For  he  that 
loueth  another,  fulfilleth  the  lawe. 
For  these  commaundementes  :  Thou 
shalt  not  commit  adultrye  :  Thou 
shalt  not  kyll  :  Thou  shalt  not  steale  : 
Thou  shalt  beare  no  false  witnes  : 
Thou  shalt  not  lust  :  and  so  forth  (if 
there  be  any  other  commaundement) 
it  is  all  comprehended  in  this  say 
ing  :  namely,  loue  thy  neigh 
bor  as  thy  selfe.  Loue  hurteth 
not  his  neighbor  :  therfore  is  loue 
the  fulfillyng  of  the  lawe.  This  also, 
we  knowe  the  season,  how  that  it  is 
time  that  we  should  nowe  awake  out 
of  slepe,  for  nowe  is  oure  saluacion 
nerer,  then  when  we  beleued.  The 
night  is  passed,  the  day  is  come  nye  : 
let  vs  therfore  cast  away  the  dedes 
of  darkenes,  and  let  vs  put  on  the 
armoure  of  light.  Let  vs  walke 
honestly,  as  it  were  in  the  day  light  : 
not  in  eating  and  drinking,  neither  in 
chambouring  and  wantonnes,  neither 
in  stryfe  and  enuying  :  but  put  ye  on 
the  Lorde  Iesus  Christe.  And  make 
not  prouision  for  the  fleshe,  to  fulfill 
the  lustes  of  it. 

The  Gospell. 

[    Mat.  xxi. 

ANd  when  they  drewe  nigh  to  Jeru 
salem,  &  were  come  to  Bethphage 
vnto  Mount  Oliuete, then  sent  Iesus 
two  disciples,  saying  vnto  them  : 

Go  into  the  towne  that  lyeth  ouer 
against  you,  and  anone  ye  shall 
fynde  an  Asse  bound,  and  a  Colte  with 
her  :  looce  them  and  bryng  them  vnto 
me.  And  yf  any  manne  saye  ought  vnto 
you,  saye  ye,  the  Lord  hath  neede  of 
them  :  and  straight  waye  he  wyll  lette 
them  goe.  All  this  was  done  that  it 
myght  bee  fulfilled,  whiche  was  spoken 
by  the  Prophete,  saying  :  Tell  ye  the 
daughter  of  Sion,  beholde,  thy  kyng 
cummeth  vnto  thee  meeke,  syttyng 


IN  ADVENT 


203 


1552 

maiestie,  to  iudge  bothe  the  quicke  and 
the  dead  :  we  may  ryse  to  the  life 
immortal,  through  him,  who  lyueth 
and  reygneth  with  thee  and  the  holy 
ghost,  nowe  and  euer.  Amen. 


The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  xiij 

Owe  nothing  to  any  man  but  thys, 
that  ye  loue  one  another.  For  he  that 
loueth  another,  fulfylleth  the  lawe. 
For  these  commaundementes  :  Thou 
shalt  not  commit  adulterye  :  Thou 
shalte  not  kyll :  Thou  shalte  not  steale  : 
Thou  shalte  beare  no  false  witnesse  : 
Thou  shalt  not  lust  :  and  so  forth  (yf 
there  be  any  other  commaundemente) 
it  is  all  comprehended  in  thys  say- 
inge  :  namely,  loue  thy  neygh- 

bour  as  thy  self.  Loue  hurteth 
not  hys  neyghbour  :  therefore  is  loue 
the  fulfyllinge  of  the  lawe.  Thys  also, 
we  know  the  season,  how  that  it  is 
tyme  that  we  shoulde  now  awake  out 
of  slepe,  for  now  is  oure  saluacion 
nerer,  then  when  we  beleued.  The 
night  is  passed,  the  day  is  come  nye  : 
lette  vs  therefore  cast  awaye  the  dedes 
of  darkenes,  and  lette  vs  put  on  the 
armoure  of  lyght.  Let  vs  walke 
honestly,  as  it  were  in  the  daye  lyght : 
not  in  eatinge  and  drinkinge,neyther  in 
chambouringe  &  wantonnes,  nether 
in  stryfe  and  enuying  :  but  put  ye  on 
the  Lord  lesus  Christ.  And  make 
not  prouision  for  the  fleshe,  to  fulfyl 
the  lustes  of  it. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[    Mat.  xxi 

ANd  whe  they  drew  nygh  to  leru- 
sale,  and  were  come  to  Bethphage 
vnto  mout  Oliuete,  then  sent  lesus 
two  of  his  disciples,  saying  vnto  the  : 
Go  into  the  town  that  lyeth  ouer 
against  you,  and  anon  you  shal 
fynd  an  Asse  boud,  &  a  Colte  wyth 
her :  looce  them  &  bring  them  vnto 
me.  And  yf  any  man  say  ought  vnto 
you,  say  ye,  the  Lord  hath  neede  of 
them  :  &  strayght  waye  he  wyl  let 
them  go.  Al  this  was  done  that  it 
might  be  fulfylled,  which  was  spoken 
by  the  Prophete,  saying  :  Tell  ye  the 
daughter  of  Sion  :  beholde,  thy  kyng 
commeth  vnto  thee  meeke,  syttinge 


1661 

Majesty ;  to  iudge  both  the  quicke  and 
the  dead,  we  may  rise  to  the  life 
immortall,  through  him  who  liveth 
and  reigneth  with  thee  and  the  holy 
Ghost  now  and  ever.  Amen. 
SIT  This  Collect  is  to  be  repeated  every 

day  with  the  other  Collects  in  Advent, 

vntil  Christmas  Eve. 

The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  13 : 48. 
Owe  no  man  any  thing,  but 

to  love  one  another  :  for  he  that 
loveth  another  hath  fulfilled  the  law. 
For  this,  thou 

shalt  not  committ  Adultery,  thou 
shalt  not  kill,  thou  shalt  not  steale, 
Thou  shalt  not  beare  false  witness, 
thou  shalt  not  covet  :  And  if 

there  be  any  other  Commandement, 
it  is  briefly  comprehended  in  this  Saye- 
ing,  namely  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neigh 
bour  as  thy  selfe.  Love  worketh  no 
ill  to  his  neighbour,  therefore  love  is 
the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  And  that, 
knowing  the  time,  that  now  it  is  high 
time  to  awake  out 

of  sleepe  :  for  now  is  our  Salvacon 
nearer  then  when  we  beleeved.  The 
night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand  : 
let  vs  therefore  cast  off  the  works 
of  darkness,  and  let  vs  put  on  the 
Armour  of  light.  let  vs  walke 
honestly,  as  in  the  day, 

not  in  rioting,  and  drunkenness,  not  in 
chambering  and  wantonness,  not 
in  strife  and  envyeing.  But  put  ye  on 
the  Lord  lesus  Christ,  and  make 
not  provision  for  the  Flesh,  to  fulfill 
the  lusts  thereof. 

The  Gospell. 

[8:  Matth:  21.  *L 

When  they  drew  nigh  vnto  Jeru 
salem,  and  were  come  to  Bethphage, 
vntothemountofOlives,  then  sent  lesus 
two  disciples,  sayeing  vnto  them, 
Go  into  the  Village  over 

against  you,  and  straight  way  ye  shall 
find  an  Ass  tied,  and  a  Colt  with 
her  ;  loose  them  and  bring  them  vnto 
me.  And  if  any  man  say  ought  vnto 
you,  ye  shall  say  the  Lord  hath  need  of 
them ;  and  straightway  he  will  send 
them.  All  this  was  done,  that  it 
might  be  fulfilled,  which  was  spoken 
by  the  Prophet,  sayeing.  Tell  ye  the 
daughter  of  Sion,  Behold,  thy  King 
cometh  vnto  thee,  meek  and  sitting 


204 


SECOND  SUNDAY 


SOURCES 

asinam  et  pullum  filium  subiugalis. 
Euiites  autem  discipuli :  fecerunt  sicut 
precepit  illis  iesus.  Et  adduxerunt 
asinam  et  pullum  :  et  imposuerunt 
super  eos  vestimenta  sua,  et  eum 
desuper  sedere  fecerunt.  Plurima 
autem  turba :  strauerunt  vestimenta 
sua  in  via.  Alij  autem  cedebant  ramos 
de  arboribus  :  et  sternebant  in  via. 
Turbe  autem  que  precedebant  et  que 
sequebantur  clamabant  dicentes. 
Osanna  filio  dauid :  benedictus  qui 
venit  in  nomine  domini. 


C  Dominica  secunda  aduentus. 

Ad  missam.     Officium. 
[Esa.  xxx  30  :  Ps.  Ixxix  (Ixxx)  la] 


Oratio. 

[Excita  domine  corda  nostra  ad  pre- 
parandas  vnigeniti  tui  vias  :  vt  per  eius 
aduentum  purificatis  tibi  mentibus 
seruire  mereamur.  Qui  tecum  viuit 
et  reg.  (Gel.  ii  81)] 


1549 

vpon  an  Asse  and  a  colte,  the  foale 
of  the  Asse  vsed  to  the  yoke.  The 
disciples  wente  and  did  as  Iesus  com- 
maunded  them,  and  brought  the  Asse 
and  the  colte,  and  put  on  them  theyr 
clothes,  and  set  him  theron.  And 
many  of  the  people  spred  theyr 
garmentes  in  the  way.  Other  cut 
downe  brauches  from  the  trees,  and 
strawed  them  in  the  waye.  Moreouer 
the  people  that  wente  before,  and  they 
that  came  after  cryed,  saying : 
Hosanna  to  the  sonne  of  Dauid : 
Blessed  is  he  that  cummeth  in  the 
name  of  the  Lorde  :  Hosanna  in  the 
highest.  And  when  he  was  come  to 
lerusalem,  all  the  citie  was  moued, 
saying  :  who  is  this  ?  And  the 
people  sayde  :  this  is  Iesus  the  Pro- 
phete  of  Nazareth  a  citie  of  Galile. 
And  Iesus  went  into  the  temple  of 
God,  and  cast  out  all  them  that  solde 
and  bought  in  the  temple,  and  ouer- 
threwe  the  tables  of  the  money 
chaungers,  and  the  seates  of  them 
that  solde  doues,  and  sayd  vnto 
them  :  It  is  written :  My  house  shal- 
be  called  the  house  of  prayer,  but  ye 
haue  made  it  a  denne  of  theues. 

THE  SECONDE  SONDAY. 

[Ad  dominu  cum  tribularer.  psal.  cxx. 

WHen  I  was  in  trouble,  I  called 
vpon  the  Lord  :  and  he  heard  me. 

Deliuer  my  soule,  O  Lord,  from 
lying  lippes  :  and  from  a  deceiptfull 
tongue. 

What  rewarde  shalbe  geuen  vnto 
thee,  thou  false  tongue  ?  euen  mightye 
&  sharpe  arrowes,  with  hote  burnyng 
coales. 

Woe  is  me  that  I  am  constrained  to 
dwell  with  Mesech  :  and  to  haue  myne 
habitacion  among  the  tentes  of  Cedar. 

My  soule  hath  long  dwelte  among 
them,  that  bee  enemies  vnto  peace. 

I  labour  for  peace,  but  when  I 
speake  vnto  them  therof  :  they  make 
them  to  battayle. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.  £c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning.  &c. 

The  Collect. 

BLessed  Lorde,  whiche  haste  caused 
all  holy  scriptures  to  be  written  for 
pur  learning ;  graut  vs  that  we  maye 
in  suche  wyse  hearethem,reade,marke, 
learne,and  inwardlydigeste  them:  that 


IN  ADVENT 


205 


1552 

vpon  an  Asse  and  a  colte,  the  foale 
of  the  Asse  vsed  to  the  yoke.  The 
disciples  went  &  did  as  lesus  com- 
maunded  them,  and  brought  the  Asse 
and  the  colte,  and  put  on  them  theyr 
clothes,  and  set  him  thereon.  And 
many  of  the  people  spred  theyr 
garmentes  in  the  waye.  Other  cut 
down  braunches  from  the  trees,  and 
strawed  them  in  the  way.  Moreouer 
the  people  that  went  before,  and  they 
that  came  after  cryed,  sayinge : 
Hosanna  to  the  sone  of  Dauid : 
Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord :  Hosanna  in  the 
highest.  And  whe  he  was  come  to 
lerusale,  all  the  citie  was  moued, 
saying  :  who  is  this  ?  And  the 
people  said  :  this  is  lesus  the  Pro- 
phete  of  Nazareth,  a  citie  of  Galile. 
And  lesus  went  into  the  Teple  of 
God,  &  cast  out  all  them  that  solde 
and  bought  in  the  temple,  &  ouer- 
threw  the  tables  of  the  money 
chaungers,  and  the  seates  of  them 
that  solde  doues :  and  sayde  vnto 
them  :  It  is  wrytten  :  My  house  shal- 
be  called  the  house  of  prayer,  but  ye 
haue  made  it  a  denne  of  theues. 

THE  SECOND  SUNDAIE  IN  ADUENTE. 


1661 

vpon  an  Ass,  and  a  Colt  the  foal 
of  an  Ass.  And  the 

disciples  went,  and  did  as  lesus  com 
manded  them,  and  brought,  the  Ass, 
and  the  Colt,  and  put  on  them  their 
Clothes,  and  they  set  him  thereon.  And 
a  very  great  multitude  spread  their 
Garments  in  the  way,  others  cut 
down  branches  from  the  Trees  and 
strawed  them  in  the  way.  And  the 
multitudes  that  went  before,  and 
that  followed,  cried,  sayeing, 
Hosanna  to  the  son  _of  David  : 
blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  Hosanna  in  the 
highest.  And  when  he  was  come  into 
Jerusalem,  all  the  City  was  moved, 
saying,  who  is  this  ?  And  the 
multitude  sayd,  This  is  lesus  the  pro 
phet  of  Nazareth  of  Galilee. 
And  lesus  went  into  the  Temple  of 
God  ;  and  cast  out  all  them  that  sold 
and  bought  in  the  Temple,  and  over 
threw  the  tables  of  the  mony- 
changers,  and  the  seats  of  them 
that  sold  doves.  And  sayd  vnto 
them,  Jt  is  written,  my  house  shall 
be  called,  the  house  of  prayer,  but  ye 
have  made  it  a  Den  of  theeves. 

THE  SECOND  SUNDAY  IN  ADVENT. 


C  The  Collecte. 

BLessed  Lorde,  which  haste  caused 

.   all  holy  scriptures  to  be  wrytten  for 

our  learning  :  graunt  vs  that  we  maye 

in  suche  wy  se  heare  them,  reade,jnarke, 

learne,  and  inwardly  digeste  the  :  that 


The  Collect. 

Blessed  Lord,  who8  hast  caused 
all  holy  Scriptures  to  be  written  for 
our  learning  :  Grant  that  we  may 
in  such  wise  hear  them,  read,  marke, 
learne,  and  inwardly  digest  them,  that 


2O6 


SECOND  SUNDAY 


SOURCES 


Lectio  epistole  beati  pauli  apostoli  :  ad 
romanos.  [xv.  c 

Fnatres.  Quecunque  scripta  sunt : 
ad  nostram  doctrinam  scripta  sunt. 
Vt  per  patientiam  et  consolationem 
scripturarum  :  spem  habeamus.  Deus 
autem  patientie  &  solatij  det  vobis 
id  ipsum  sapere  in  alterutrum  secundum 
iesum  xpm :  vt  vnanimes  vno  ore 
honorificetis  deum  &  patrem  domini 
nostri  iesu  xpi.  Propter  quod  sus- 
cipite  inuicem  :  sicut  et  xps  suscepit 
vos  in  honorem  dei.  Dico  enim  xpm 
iesum  ministrum  fuisse  circuncisionis 
propter  veritatem  dei :  ad  confirmandas 
promissiones  patrum.  Gentes  autem 
super  misericordia  honorare  deum  : 
sicut  scriptum  est.  Propterea  con- 
fitebor  tibi  in  gentibus  domine :  et 
nomini  tuo  cantabo.  Et  iterum  dicit. 
Letamini  gentes :  cum  plebe  eius.  Et 
iterum.  Laudate  omnes  gentes  domi- 
num :  et  magnificate  eum  omnes  populi. 
Et  rursum  esaias  ait.  Erit  radix 
iesse,  et  qui  exurget  regere  gentes : 
in  eum  gentes  sperabunt.  Deus  autem 
spei  repleat  vos  omni  gaudio  et  pace  in 
credendo :  vt  abundetis  in  spe,  et 
virtu te  spiritussancti. 

Euangelium. 

Secundum  lucam.  [xxi.  E 

IN  illo  tempore.  Dixit  iesus  dis- 
cipulis  suis.  Erunt  signa  in  sole,  et 
luna,  et  stellis  :  &  in  terris  pressura 
gentium  pre  confusione  sonitus  maris 
et  fluctuum.  Arescentibus  hominibus 
pre  timore  et  expectatione  :  que  super- 
uenient  vniuerso  orbi.  Nam  virtutes 
celorum  mouebuntur  :  et  tune  vide- 
bunt  filium  hominis  venientem  in  nube, 
cum  potestate  magna  et  maiestate. 
His  autem  fieri  incipientibus  :  respicite 
et  leuate  capita  vestra,  quoniam  appro- 


1549 

by  pacience  and  coumforte  of  thy  holy 
worde,  we  maye  embrace  and  euer 
holde  fast  the  blessed  hope  of  euer- 
lastyng  lyfe,  whiche  thou  haste  geuen 
vs  in  our  sauiour  Iesus  Christe. 

The  Epistle. 

[Roma  xv. 

Wnatsoeuer  thynges  are  written 
afore  tyme,  they  are  written  for  cure 
learnyng,  that  we  through  pacience 
and  comfort  of  the  scriptures,  myght 
haue  hope.  The  God  of  pacience 

and  consolacion,  graut  you  to  be  lyke 
mynded  one  towardes  an  other,  after 
the  ensaumple  of  Christe  Iesu  :  that  ye 
all  agreeyng  together,  may  with  one 
mouth  prayse  God  the  father  of  our 
Lord  Iesus  Christe  :  wherfore  receyue 
ye  one  an  other  as  Christe  receyued 
vs,  to  the  prayse  of  God.  And  this  I 
saye,  that  Iesus  Christe  was  a  minister 
of  the  circumcision  for  the  trueth  of 
God,  to  confirme  the  premisses  made 
vnto  the  fathers  :  and  that  the 
Gentiles  might  prayse  God  for  his 
mercy,  as  it  is  written.  For  this 
cause  I  will  prayse  thee  among  the 
Gentiles,  and  syng  vnto  thy  name. 
And  agayne  he  sayeth  :  reioyce  ye 
Gentiles  with  his  people.  And  againe : 
prayse  the  Lorde  all  ye  Gentiles,  and 
laudehymallyenacyons  together.  And 
againe  Esai  sayth  :  there  shalbe  the 
roote  of  Iesse,  and  he  that  shall  ryse 
to  reigne  ouer  the  Gentiles  :  in  hym 
shal  the  Gentiles  trust.  The 

God  of  hope  fyll  you  with  al  ioy, 
and  peace  in  beleuyng,  that  ye  maye 
be  riche  in  hope,  through  the  power 
of  the  holy  gost. 

The  Gospell. 

[     Luc.  xxi. 

Tnere  shall  be  signes  in  the 
Sunne  and  in  the  Moone,  and  in  the 
starres  :  and  in  the  earth  the  people 
shalbe  at  their  wittes  ende,  through 
despayre.  The  sea  and  the  water  shall 
roare,  and  mennes  heartes  shall  fayle 
them  for  feare,  and  for  lookyng  after 
those  thinges  whiche  shall  come  on 
the  earth.  For  the  powers  of  heauen 
shall  moue.  And  then  shall  they  see 
the  sonne  of  man  come  in  a  cloud, 
with  power  and  great  glory.  When 
these  thynges  begynne  to  come  to 
passe,  then  looke  vp,  and  lyfte  vp 
youre  heades,  for  your  redempcion 


IN  ADVENT 


207 


1552 

by  pacience  and  comforte  of  thy  holy 
woorde,  we  may  embrace  and  euer 
holde  faste  the  blessed  hope  of  euer- 
lasting  lyfe,  whych  thou  haste  geuen 
vs  in  oure  sauioure  lesus  Christe. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  xv 

Wnatsoeuer  thynges  are  wrytte 
afore  time,  they  are  written  for  our 
learning,  that  we  through  pacience 
and  comfort  of  the  scriptures,  myght 
haue  hope.  The  God  of  pacience 

and  consolation,  graunte  you  to  be  lyke 
mynded  one  towardes  another,  after 
the  ensample  of  Christe  lesu  :  that  ye 
all  agreeyng  together,  may  wyth  one 
mouth  prayse  God  the  father  of  our 
Lorde  lesu  Christe :  wherefore  receaue 
ye  one  another  as  Christ  receaued 
vs,  to  the  prayse  of  God.  And  this  I 
saye :  that  lesus  Christe  was  a  minister 
of  the  circumcision  for  the  trueth  of 
god,  to  cofirme  the  premisses  made 
vnto  the  fathers  :  and  that  the 
Gentyles  myghte  prayse  God,  for  hys 
mercye,  as  it  is  wrytten :  For  thys 
cause  I  wyll  prayse  thee  amonge  the 
Gentyles,  and  synge  vnto  thy  name. 
And  agayne  he  sayeth  :  reioyce  ye 
Gentyles  with  his  people.  And  again  : 

E  raise  the  lord  al  ye  Getiles  and 
mde  him  all  ye  nations  together.  And 
agayne,  Esai  sayth  :  there  shalbe  the 
roote  of  lesse,  and  he  that  shal  ryse 
to  reygne  ouer  the  Gentiles,  in  hym 
shall  the  Gentyles  trust.  The 

God  of  hope  fyll  you  wyth  all  ioye, 
and  peace  in  beleuing,  that  ye  may 
be  ryche  in  hope,  through  the  power 
of  the  holy  ghoste. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[    Luke,  xxi 

Tnere  shalbe  signes  in  the 
Sunne  &  in  the  Moone,  &  in  the 
starres  :  &  in  the  earth  the  people 
shalbe  at  their  wittes  end,  through 
despayre.  The  sea  &  the  water  shal 
roare,  and  mens  heartes  shal  faile 
the  for  feare,  and  for  loking  after 
those  thinges  whych  shal  come  on 
the  earth.  For  the  powers  of  heaue 
shal  moue.  And  the  shall  they  see 
the  sonne  of  ma  come  in  a  cloude, 
wyth  power  &  great  glory.  When 
these  thinges  begyn  to  come  to 
passe,  then  loke  vp,  and  lyft  vp 
your  heades,  for  your  redemption 


1661 

by  patience  and  comfort  of  thy  holy 
word,  we  may  embrace,  and  ever 
hold  fast  the  blessed  hope  of  ever 
lasting  life,  which  thou  hast  given 
vs  in  our  Saviour  lesus  Christ.  lbAmen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  15.  H. 

Whatsoever  things  were  written 
aforetime,  were  written  for  our 
learning,  that  we  through  patience 
and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  might 
have  hope.  Now  the  God  of  patience, 
and  consolation  grant  you  to  be  like 
minded  one  towards  another,  accord 
ing  to  Christ  lesus  :  That  ye  may 
with  one  minde,  and  one  mouth 
glorifie  God,  even  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  lesus  Christ.  Wherefore  receive 
ye  one  another,  as  Christ  also  received 
vs,  to  the  glory  of  God.  Now  I 
say  that  lesus  Christ  was  a  minister 
of  the  Circumcision,  for  the  truth  of 
God,  to  confirm  the  promises  made 
vnto  the  Fathers,  and  that  the 
Gentiles  might  glorifie  God  for  his 
mercy  as  it  is  written,  For  this 
cause  I  will  confess  to  thee  among  the 
Gentiles,  and  sing  vnto  thy  name. 
And  againe  he  sayth,  Reioyce  ye 
Gentiles  with  his  people.  And  againe, 
Prayse  the  Lord  all  ye  Gentiles,  and 
laud  him  all  ye  people.  And 

againe  Esaias  saith,  there  shall  be  a 
root  of  lesse,  and  he  that  shall  rise 
to  reigne  over  the  Gentiles,  in  him 
shall  the  Gentiles  trust.  Now  the 
God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  ioy 
and  peace  in  believing,  that  ye  may 
abound  in  hope,  through  the  power 
of  the  holy  Ghost. 

The  Gospell. 

[S:  Luke.  at.  425 

And  there  shall  be  signes  in  the 
Sunne,  and  in  the  Moon,  and  in  the 
Starrs ;  and  vpon  the  earth  distress 
of  Nations,  with 

perplexity,  the  Sea,  and  the  Waves 
roaring,  mens  hearts  fayling 

them  for  fear,  and  for  looking  after 
those  things  which  are  coming  on 
the  earth  :  for  the  powers  of  heaven 
shall  be  shaken,  and  then  shall  they 
see  the  son  of  man  coming  in  a  Cloud 
with  power  and  great  glory.  And  when 
these  things  begin  to  come  to 
pass,  then  looke  vp,  and  lift  vp 
your  heads,  for  your  redemption 


208 


THIRD  SUNDAY 


SOURCES 

pinquat  redemptio  vestra.  Et  dixit 
illis  similitudinem.  Videte  ficulneam 
&  omnes  arbores.  Cum  producunt 
iam  ex  se  fructum  :  scjtis  quoniam 
prope  est  estas.  Ita  et  vos  cum 
videritis  hec  fieri  :  scitote  quoniam 
prope  est  regnum  dei.  Amen  dico 
vobis  :  quia  non  preteribit  generatio 
hec  donee  omnia  fiant.  Celum  et  terra 
transibunt  :  verba  autem  mea  non 
transibunt. 

C  Dominica. iij.  aduentus  domini. 

Ad  missam.     Officium. 

[Phil.  iv.  4-6  : 7] 


Oratio. 

Avrem  tuam  quesumus  domine  pre- 
cibus  nostris  accomoda  :  et  mentis 
nostre  tenebras,  gratia  tue  visitationis 
illustra.  Qui  viuis.  (Greg.  135) 


1549 

draweth  nye.  And  he  shewed  them 
a  similytude  :  beholde  the  figtree,  & 
all  other  trees,  when  they  shoote 
furth  theyr  buddes,  ye  see  and  knowe  of 
your  owne  selues  that  summer  is  then 
nye_at  hand.  So  likewise  ye  also 
(whe  ye  se  these  thinges  come  to 
passe)  be  sure,  that  the  kingdom  of 
God  is  nye.  Verely  I  say  vnto 

you  :  this  generacion  shall  not  passe, 
till  all  be  fulfilled.  Heauen  and  earth 
shall  passe  :  but  my  wordes  shall  not 
passe. 

<E  THE  THIRDE  SONDAY. 

[Cum  inuocarem.  psal.  iiii. 
HEare  me  when  I  call,  O  God  of 
my  righteousnes  :  thou  hast  set  me 
at  libertie  whe  I  was  in  trouble ; 
haue  mercy  vpon  me,  and  herken  vnto 
my  prayer. 

0  ye  sonnes   of  men,   howe   long 
will  ye  blaspheme  myne  honour  :  and 
haue  such  pleasure    in   vanitie,   and 
seke  after  leasyng  ? 

Knowe  this  also,  that  the  Lorde  hath 
chosen  to  himselfe  the  manne  that  is 
godly  :  when  I  call  vpon  the  Lorde,  he 
will  heare  me. 

Stande  in  awe  and  sinne  not  : 
common  with  your  owne  heart,  and  in 
your  chamber,  and  be  still. 

Offre  the  sacrifice  of  righteousnes  : 
and  put  your  trust  in  the  Lorde. 

There  bee  many  that  will  saye  :  who 
will  shewe  vs  any  good? 

Lorde  lifte  thou  vp  the  lyght  of  thy 
countenaunce  vpon  vs. 

Thou  haste  put  gladnes  in  myne 
hearte  :  sence  the  tyme  that  theyr 
corne  and  wyne  (and  oyle)  increased. 

1  will  laye  me  downe  in  peace  and 
take  my  rest  :   for  it  is  thou  Lorde 
onely,   that    makest  me   to  dwell  in 
safetie. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.  &c. 
As  it  was  in  the  beginning.  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Lorde,  we  beseche  thee,  geue  eare 
to  our  prayers,  and  by  thy  gracious 
visitacion  lyghten  the  darkenesse  of 
our  hearte,  by  our  Lorde  lesus  Christe. 


IN  ADVENT 


209 


1552 

draweth  nye.  And  he  shewed  them 
a  similitude  :  beholde  the  figtree,  & 
all  other  trees  :  whe  they  shoote 
furth  their  buddes,  ye  see  &  knowe  of 
your  owne  selues  that  sommer  is  the 
nie  at  hand.  So  likewyse  ye  also 
(whe  ye  see  these  thynges  come  to 
passe)  be  sure  that  the  kingdo  of 
God  is  nye.  Verely  I  say  vnto 

you  :  this  generacio  shal  not  passe, 
tyl  al  be  fulfilled.  Heauen  and  earth 
shal  passe  :  but  my  wordes  shall  not 
passe. 

THE   THIRDE   SUNDAIE. 


1661 

draweth  nigh.  And  he  spake  to  them 
a  parable.  Behold  the  Figtree,  and 
all  the  trees  when  they  now  shoot 
forth,  ye  see  and  know  of 

your  own  selves  that  Summer  is  now 
nigh  at  hand.  So  likewise  ye, 
when  ye  see  these  things  come  to 
pass,  know  ye  that  the  kingdome  of 
God  is  nigh  at  hand.  Verely  I  say  vnto 
you,  this  generation  shall  not  pass  away 
till  all  be  fulfilled  ;  heaven  and  earth 
shall  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not 
pass  away. 

THE  THIRD  SUNDAY  SIN  ADVENT. 


The  Collect. 

Lord,  we  beseche  thee,  geue  eare 
to  oure  prayers,  and  by  thi  gracious 
visitacion,  lighte  the  darkenesse  of 
oure  heart,  by  our  Lord  lesus  Christ. 


The  Collect. 

0  Lord  lesu  Christ,  who  at  thy  first 
coming  didst  send  thy  messenger  to 
prepare  thy  way  before  thee :  grant 
that  the  ministers  and  Stewards  of 
thy  mysteries  may  likewise  so  pre 
pare  and  make  ready  thy  way  by 
turning  the  hearts  of  the  disobedient 
to  the  wisdome  of  the  iust,  that  at 


210 


THIRD  SUNDAY 


SOURCES 


1549 


Ad  corinthios.  [i.  iiii.  A 

FBatres.  Sic  nos  existimet  homo  vt 
ministros  xpi  :  et  dispensatores  minis- 
teriorum  del.  Hie  iam  queritur  inter 
dispensatores  :  vt  fidelis  quis  inueni- 
atur.  Michi  autem  pro  minimo  est  vt 
a  vobis  iudicer,  aut  ab  humano  die  : 
sed  neque  meipsum  iudico.  Nichil 
enim  michi  conscius  sum  :  sed  non 
in  hoc  iustificatus  sum.  Qui  autem 
iudicat  me  :  dominus  est.  Itaque  nolite 
ante  tempus  iudicare  :  quoadusque 
veniat  dominus,  qui  &  illuminabit  ab- 
scondita  tenebrarum,  et  manifestabit 
consilia  cordium.  Et  tune  laus  erit 
vnicuique  a  deo. 

Secundum  Matheum.  [xi.  A 

IN  illo  tempore.  Cum  audisset 
iohannes  in  vinculis  opera  christi  : 
mittens  duos  de  discipulis  suis,  ait  illi. 
Tu  es  qui  venturus  es  :  an  alium 
expectamus?  Et  respondens  iesus  : 
ait  illis.  Euntes  renunciate  iohauni 
que  audistis  et  vidistis.  Ceci  vident  : 
claudi  ambulant  :  leprosi  mundantur 
Surdi  audiunt  :  mortui  resurgunt 
pauperes  euangelizantur.  Et  beatus 
est  :  qui  non  fuerit  scandalizatus  in 
me.  Illis  autem  abeuntibus  :  cepit 
iesus  dicere  ad  turbas  de  iohanne. 
Quid  existis  in  desertum  videre  ? 
Arundinem  vento  agitatam?  Sed 
quid  existis  videre?  Hominem  mollibus 
vestitum?  Ecce  qui  mollibus  vesti- 
untur  :  in  domibus  regum  sunt.  Sed 
quid  existis  videre  ?  Prophetam  ? 
Etiam  dico  vobis  :  et  plusquam  pro- 
phetam.  Hie  est  enim  de  quo  scriptum 
est.  Ecce  ego  mitto  angelum  meum 
ante  faciem  tuam  :  qui  preparabit  viam 
tuam  ante  te. 


The  Epistle. 

[i.  Cor.  iiii. 

LEt  a  man  this  wise  esteme  vs,  euen 
as  the  ministers  of  Christe,  and 
stewardes  of  the  secretes  of  God. 
Furthermore,  it  is  required  of  the 
stewardes,  that  a  man  be  found 
faithfull :  with  me  it  is  but  a  very 
smal  thing  that  I  should  be  iudged  of 
you,  either  of  mans  iudgemente  :  no  I 
iudge  not  myne  owne  selfe,  for  I  knowe 
nought  by  my  selfe,  yet  am  I  not 
therby  iustifyed.  It  is  the  Lorde  that 
iudgeth  me.  Therfore  iudge  no 
thing  before  the  time,  vntill  the  Lorde 
come,  which  will  lighten  thinges 
that  are  hidde  in  darkenesse,  and 
open  the  counsayles  of  the 
heartes,  and  then  shall  euery  man 
haue  prayse  of  God. 

The  Gospell. 

[    Math.  xi. 

Wnen  Ihon  beyng  in  prieson 
hearde  the  woorkes  of  Christe,  he  sente 
two  of  his  disciples,  and  sayed  vnto 
hym  :  Art  thou  he  that  shall  come  ? 
or  doe  we  looke  for  an  other?  Iesus 
aunswered  and  sayed  vnto  them:  Goe, 
and  shewe  lohn  agayne, 
what  ye  haue  hearde  and  scene.  The 
blynd  receyue  their  sight,  the  lame 
walke,  the  Lepers  are  clensed,  and  the 
deafe  heare,  the  dead  are  raised  vp, 
&  the  poore  receyue  the  glad  tyd- 
inges  of  the  gospell  :  and  happy  is  he 
that  is  not  offended  by 
me.  And  as  they  departed,  Iesus 
began  to  saye  vnto  the  people  con- 
cernyng  lohn  :  What  went  ye  out  into 
the  wildernes  to  see  ?  A  reede  that  is 
shaken  with  the  winde?  or  what  went 
ye  out  for  to  see  ?  A  man  clothed  in 
softe  rayment  ?  behold,  they  that  weare 
softe  clothyng,  are  in  kynges  houses. 
But  what  wente  ye  out  for  to  see  ?  a 
Prophete  ?  verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  and 
more  then  a  Prophete.  For  this  is  he 
of  whome  it  is  written :  beholde,  I  sende 
my  messenger  before  thy  face,  which 
shall  prepare  thy  waye  before  thee. 


IN  ADVENT 


211 


1552 


C  The  Epistle. 

[i.  Cor.  iiii. 

LEt  a  man  this  wise  esteme  vs,  eue 
as  the  ministers  of  Christe,  and 
stewardes  of  the  secretes  of  God. 
Furthermore  it  is  required  of  the 
stewardes,  that  a  ma  be  founde 
faythfull :  wyth  me  it  is  but  a  verye 
small  thyng  that  I  should  be  iudged  of 
you,  eyther  of  mans  iudgement  :  no  I 
iudge  not  myne  own  self,  for  I  know 
nought  by  my  self,  yet  am  I  not 
therby  Justified.  It  is  the  lord  that 
iudgeth  me.  Therefore  iudge  no 
thing  before  the  tyme,  vntyll  the  Lord 
come,  which  wyll  lighten  thinges 
that  are  hyd  in  darkenes,  and 
open  the  counsayles  of  the 
heartes,  and  then  shal  euery  man 
haue  prayse  of  God. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[    Math,  xi 

WHen  lohn  beynge  in  prieson 
hearde  the  workes  of  Christ,  he  sent 
two  of  his  disciples,  and  sayd  vnto 
him  :  Art  thou  he  that  shal  come  ? 
or  doe  we  loke  for  another?  lesus 
answered  &  sayd  vnto  them  :  Goe, 
and  shew  lohn  agayne, 
what  ye  haue  heard  &  sene.  The 
blynd  receyue  theyr  syght,  the  lame 
walke,  the  Lepers  are  clensed,  &  the 
deaf  heare,  the  dead  are  raysed  vp, 
&  the  poore  receyue  the  glad  tyd- 
inges  of  the  gospel :  &  happy  is  he 
that  is  not  offended  by 
me.  And  as  they  departed,  lesus 
began  to  saye  vnto  the  people  con 
cerning  lohn :  What  wente  ye  oute  into 
the  wildernes  to  see?  A  rede  that  is 
shaken  with  the  wind  ?  or  what  went 
ye  out  for  to  see  ?  A  man  clothed  in 
softerayment?  beholde,  they  that  weare 
softe  clothinge,  are  in  Kynges  houses. 
But  what  went  ye  oute  for  to  see  ?  a 
Prophete?  verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  and 
more  then  a  Prophete.  For  thys  is  he 
of  whom  it  is  wrytten:  behold,  I  sende 
my  messenger  before  thy  face,  which 
shal  prepare  thy  waye  before  thee. 


1661 

thy  second  coming  to  iudge  the 
world  wee  may  ba  found  an  accept 
able  people  in  thy  sight,  who  livest 
and  reignest  with  the  Father  and 
the  holy  spirit  ever  one  God,  world 
without  end.  Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[i.  Cor.  4.  *1. 

Let  a  man  soe  account  of  vs, 
as  of  the  ministers  of  Christ,  and 
Stewards  of  the  Mysteries  of  God. 
Moreover  it  is  required  in 
Stewards,  that  a  man  be  found 
faithfull.  But  with  me  it  is  a  very 
small  thing  that  I  should  be  iudged  of 
you  or  of  mans  Judgement  :  yea  I 
iudge  not  my  own  selfe.  For  I  know 
nothing  by  my  selfe,  yet  am  I  not 
hereby  Justified ;  but  he  that  iudgeth 
mee  is  the  Lord.  Therefore  iudge  no 
thing  before  the  time,  vntill  the  Lord 
come,  who  both  will  bring  to  light  the 
hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  will 
make  manifest  the  Counsels  of  the 
hearts :  And  then  shall  every  man 
have  prayse  of  God. 

The  Gospell. 

[S:  Matth.  ii.  42. 

Now  when  lohn  had  heard  in 
prison,  the  works  of  Christ,  he  sent 
two  of  his  disciples,  and  sayd  vnto 
him,  Art  thou  he  that  should  come, 
or  do  we  looke  for  another?  lesus 
answered,  and  sayd  vnto  them,  Go 
and  shew  John  againe  those  things, 
which  ye  do  hear  and  see :  The 
blinde  receive  their  sight,  and  the  lame 
walke,  the  lepers  are  clensed,  and  the 
deafe  hear,  the  dead  are  raysed  vp, 
and  the  poor  have  the  Gospell 
preached  to  them,  and  blessed  is  he 
whosoever  shall  not  be  offended  in 
me.  And  as  they  departed,  lesus 
began  to  say  vnto  the  multitudes  con 
cerning  lohn,  What  went  ye  out  into 
the  wilderness  to  see?  A  reed 
shaken  with  the  winde?  But  what  went 
ye  out  for  to  see  ?  A  man  clothed  in 
soft  raiment?  Behold,  they  that  wear 
soft  clothing  are  in  Kings  houses. 
But  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see?  A 
Prophet  ?  yea  I  say  vnto  you,  and 
more  then  a  Prophet,  for  this  is  he 
of  whom  it  is  written.  Behold  I  send 
my  Messenger  before  thy  Face,  which 
shall  prepare  thy  way  before  thee. 


FOURTH  SUNDAY 


SOURCES 

<T  Dominica  quarta  aduentus  domini. 

Ad  missam.     Officium. 
[Ps.  cv  (cvi)  4,  6  :  6] 


Oratio. 

Excita  quesumus  domine  potentiam 
tuam  et  veni,  &  magna  nobis  virtute 
succurre  :  vt  per  auxilium  gratie  tue 
quod  nostra  peccata  prepediunt  : 


1549 

C  THE   FOURTH   SONDAY. 

f[Verba  mea  auribus.  psal.  v. 

Ponder  my  woordes,  O  Lorde  :  con- 
sidre  my  meditacion. 

O  barken  thou  vnto  the  voyce  of  my 
callyng,  my  kyng  and  my  God  :  for 
vnto  thee  will  I  make  my  prayer. 

My  voyce  shall  thou  heare  betymes, 
O  Lorde  :  early  in  the  mornyng  will  I 
directe  my  prayer  vnto  thee,  and  will 
looke  vp. 

For  thou  art  the  God  that  hath  no 
pleasure  in  wickednes  :  neyther  shall 
any  euill  dwell  with  thee. 

Suche  as  be  foolyshe  shall  not  stande 
in  thy  syght  :  for  thou  hatest  all  them 
that  worke  vanitie. 

Thou  shalt  destroy  them  that  speake 
leasyng  :  the  Lorde  will  abhorre  both 
the  bloud  thirsty,  and  deceyptfull 
manne. 

But  as  for  me,  I  wyll  come  into  thy 
house,  euen  vpon  the  multitude  of  thy 
mercye  :  and  in  thy  feare  wyll  I  wurship 
towarde  thy  holy  temple. 

Leade  me,  O  Lorde,  in  thy  ryghteous- 
nesse,  because  of  myne  enemyes  : 
make  thy  waye  playne  before  my  face. 

For  there  is  no  faithfulnes  in  his 
mouth  :  their  inwarde  partes  are  very 
wickednes. 

Their  throte  is  an  open  sepulchre  : 
they  flatter  with  their  tongue. 

Destroy  thou  them,  O  God,  let  them 
peryshe  through  theyr  owne  imagina- 
cions  :  cast  them  out  in  the  multitude 
of  their  vngodlines,  for  they  haue 
rebelled  against  thee. 

And  let  all  them  that  put  their  trust 
in  thee  reioyce  :  they  shal  euer  be 
geuing  of  thakes  because  thou  de- 
fendest  them,  they  that  loue  thy  name 
shalbe  ioyfull  in  thee. 

For  thou  Lorde  wylt  geue  thy  bless 
ing  vnto  the  ryghteous  :  and  with  thy 
fauorable  kyndnes  wylt  thou  defende 
him,  as  with  a  shielde. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer.&c. 

The  Collect. 

Lorde  rayse  vp  (we  pray  thee)  thy 
power,  and  come  among  vs,  and  with 
great  might  succor  vs,  that  where  as 
through  our  synnes  and  wickednes  we 
be  sore  lette  and  hyndred, 

thy 


IN  ADVENT  213 

1552  1661 

THE   FOURTH  SUNDAIE.  THE  FOURTH  SUNDAY  SIN  ADVENT. 


C  The  Collect.  The  Collect. 

Lord  raise  vp  (we  pray  thee)  thy  0  Lord,  rayse  vp  (we  pray  thee)  thy 

power,   £   come    among   vs,   &   with  power,  and  come  among  vs,  and  with 

greate  might  succor  vs:  that  where  as  great  might  succour  vs  ;  that  whereas 

(through  our  sinnes  and  wickednes)  we  through  our  sins,  and  wickedness,  we 

be  sore  let  &  hindred  :  are  sore  let  and  hindred  in  running 

thy  the  race  that  is  set  before  vs  ;  thy 


214 


FOURTH  SUNDAY 


SOURCES 
dulgentia  tue  propitiatioriis 

acceleret. 
Qui  vi.  (Gel.  ii  80) 


Lectio  epistole  beati  pauli  apostoli  ad 

philippenses.  [iiii.  A 

FBatres.  Gaudete  in  domino  sem 
per  :  iterum  dico  gaudete.  Modestia 
vestra  :  nota  sit  omnibus  hominibus. 
Dominus  prope  est.  Nichil  solicit! 
sitis :  sed  in  omni  oratione  et  ob- 
secratione  cum  gratiarum  actione, 
petitiones  vestre  innotescant  apud 
deum.  Et  pax  dei  que  exuperat 
omnem  sensum :  custodiat  corda 
vestra,  et  intelligentias  vestras. 
In  christo  iesu,  domino  nostro. 


Secundum  iohannem. 


P- 


In  illo  tempore  Miserunt  iudei  ab 
hierosolymis  sacerdotes  et  leuitas  ad 
iohannem :  vt  interrogarent  eum  Tu 
quis  es  ?  Et  confessus  est :  et  non 
negauit.  Et  confessus  est :  quia  non 
sum  ego  xps.  Et  interrogauerunt  eum. 
Quid  ergo?  Helias  es  tu?  Et  dixit. 
Non  sum.  Propheta  es  tu?  Et  re- 
spondit.  Non.  Dixerunt  ergo  ei. 
Quis  es,  vt  responsum  demus  his  qui 
miserunt  iios?  Quid  dicis  de  teipso? 
Ait.  Ego  vox  clamantis  in  deserto, 
dirigite  viam  domini :  sicut  dicit  esaias 
propheta.  Et  qui  missi  fuerant :  erant 
ex  phariseis.  Et  interrogauerunt  eum  : 
&  dixerunt  ei.  Quid  ergo  baptizas  si 
tu  non  es  xps,  neque  helias :  iieque 
propheta  ?  Respondit  eis  iohannes  : 
dicens.  Ego  baptizo  in  aqua  :  medius 
autem  vestrum  stetit,  quern  vos  nescitis. 
Ipse  est  qui  post  me  venturus  est,  qui 
ante  me  factus  est,  cuius  ego  non  sum 
dignus  vt  soluam  eius  corrigiam  calcia- 
menti.  Hec  in  bethania  facta  sunt 
trans  iordanem :  vbi  erat  iohannes 
baptizans. 


1549 

bountifull  grace  and  mercy,  through 
the  satisfaccion  of  thy  sonne  oure 
Lorde,  may  spedely  delyuer 

vs  :  to  whome  with  thee,  and  the  holy 
goste  be  honor  and  glory  worlde  with 
out  ende. 

The  Epistle. 

[Philip,  iiii. 

REioyce  in  the  Lorde  alwaye,  and 
againe  I  say,  reioyce.  Let  youre  soft- 
nes  bee  knowen  vnto  all  men  :  the 
Lord  is  euen  at  hande.  Be  carefull 
for  nothing  :  but  in  all  prayer 

and  supplicacion  let  your  peticions  be 
manifest  vnto  God,  with  geuing  of 
thankes.  And  the  peace  of  God 
(whiche  passeth  all  vnderstandyng) 
kepe  your  heartes  and  myndes, 
through  Christe  lesu. 

The  Gospell. 

[     Ihon.  i. 

THIS  is  the  recorde  of  Ihon  :  when 
the  lewes  sente  priestes  and  Leuites 
from  lerusalem,  to  aske  hym  :  what 
art  thou?  And  he  confessed  and 
denyed  not,  and  sayed  playnly  :  I  am 
not  Christe.  And  they  asked  him  : 
what  then  ?  art  thou  Helyas  ?  and  he 
sayeth  :  I  am  not.  Art  thou  that 
Prophete?  £  he  aunswered,  no. 
Then  sayed  they  vnto  him  :  what  art 
thou,  that  we  maye  geue  an  aunswere 
vnto  them  that  sent  vs  ?  what  sayest 
thou  of  thy  selfe  ?  he  sayed  :  I  am  the 
voyce  of  a  cryer  in  the  wildernesse  : 
make  straight  the  waye  of  the  Lord,  as 
sayd  the  Prophete  Esay.  And  they 
which  were  sent  were  of  the  Phariseis: 
and  they  asked  him,  and  sayed  vnto 
him  :  why  baptisest  thou  then,  if  thou 
be  not  Christe,  nor  Helias,  neyther 
that  Prophete?  I ohn  aunswered  them, 
saying :  I  baptise  with  water,  but  there 
standeth  one  among  you,  whome  ye 
knowe  not  :  he  it  is  whiche  though  he 
came  after  me,  was  before  me,  whose 
shooe  latchet  I  am  not  worthy  to 
vnlooce.  These  thinges  were  done  at 
Bethabara  beyond  Jordan,  where  lohn 
did  baptise. 


IN  ADVENT 


215 


1552 

bountyful  grace  &  mercy,  (through 
the  satisfaction  of  thy  sonne  our 
Lord,)  may  spedely  delyuer 

vs  :  to  whom  wyth  thee,  &  the  holye 
ghost,  be  honour  and  glory  world  wy  th- 
out  ende. 

€  The  Epistle. 

[Phil.  iiii. 

REioyce  in  the  Lord  alway,  & 
agayne  I  say,  reioice.  Let  your  softe- 
nes  be  knowe  vnto  al  men  :  the 
Lord  is  euen  at  hand.  Be  careful 
for  nothing  :  but  in  al  prayer 

and  supplication,  let  youre  peticions  be 
manifeste  vnto  God,  wyth  geuinge  of 
thankes.  And  the  peace  of  god 
(whych  passeth  all  vnderstanding) 
kepe  your  heartes  &  myndes, 
through  Christ  lesu. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[    John.  i. 

Tnis  is  the  record  of  lohn  :  whe 
the  lewes  sent  priestes  &  Leuites 
fro  Jerusalem,  to  aske  him :  what 
art  thou?  and  he  confessed  and 
denied  not,  and  sayde  playnely  :  I  am 
not  Christ.  And  they  asked  him  : 
what  then?  art  thou  Helias?  &  he 
sayeth :  I  am  not.  Art  thou  the 
prophete  ?  and  he  answered,  no. 
Then  saide  they  vnto  hym  :  what  arte 
thou,  that  we  maye  geue  an  answere 
vnto  them  that  sent  vs  ?  what  sayest 
thou  of  thy  selfe  ?  he  sayd  :  I  am  the 
voyce  of  a  cryer  in  the  wildernesse  : 
make  stray  ght  thewaye  of  the  Lorde,as 
sayde  the  Prophete  Esai.  And  they 
which  were  sente  were  of  the  Phariseis : 
and  they  asked  him,  and  sayd  vnto 
him  :  why  baptisest  thou  then,  yf  thou 
be  not  Christ,  nor  Helias,  nether 

that  Prophete?  lohn  answered  the, 
sayinge :  I  baptise  with  water,  but  there 
standeth  one  among  you,  who  ye 
knowe  not :  he  it  is  whiche  though  he 
came  after  me,  was  before  me,  whose 
shoe  lachet  I  am  not  worthye  to 
vnlooce.  These  thynges  were  doone  at 
Bethabarabeyonde  lordan, where  lohn 
dyd  baptyse. 


1661 

bountifull  grace  and  mercy  may 
speedily  help  and  deliver  us,  through 
the  satisfaction  of  thy  Son,  our  Lord  : 
to  whom  with  thee  and  the  holy 
Ghost  be  honour  and  glory  world  with 
out  end.  lbAmen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Phil.  4.  44. 

Reioyce  in  the  Lord  alway,  and 
againe  I  say  reioyce.  Let  your  moder 
ation  be  known  vnto  all  men.  The 
Lord  is  at  hand,  be  carefull 

fornothing:  but  inevery thing byprayer 
and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving, 
let  your  requests  be  made  known 
vnto  God.  And  the  peace  of  God 
which  passeth  all  vnderstanding 
shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds 
through  Christ  lesus. 

The  Gospell. 

[S:  John.  i.  *19. 

This  is  the  record  of  lohn,  when 
the  Jewes  sent  Priests  and  Levites 
from  Jerusalem  to  aske  him,  Who 
art  thou  ?  And  he  confessed,  and 
denyed  not :  but  confessed,  I  am 
not  the  Christ.  And  they  asked  him, 
what  then  ?  Art  thou  Elias  ?  And  he 
sayth,  I  am  not.  Art  thou  that 
Prophet?  And  he  answerd  no. 
Then  sayd  they  vnto  him,  Who  art 
thou,  that  we  may  give  an  Answer 
to  them  that  sent  vs  ?  what  sayest 
thou  of  thy  selfe  ?  He  sayd,  I  am  the 
voyce  of  one  cryeing  in  the  Wilderness, 
Make  straight  the  way  of  the  Lord,  as 
sayed  the  Prophet  Esaias.  And  they 
which  were  sent, were  of  the  Pharisees ; 
And  they  asked  him  and  sayd  vnto 
him,  Why  baptizest  thou  then  if  thou 
be  not  that  Christ,  nor  Elias,  neither 
that  Prophet?  John  answered  them 
saying,  I  baptize  with  water :  but  there 
standeth  one  among  you,  jyhom  ye 
know  not.  He  it  is  who  coming  after 
me,  is  preferred  before  me ;  whose 
shoos  latchet  I  am  not  worthy  to 
vnloose.  These  things  were  don  in 
Bethabara  beyond  lordan,  where  lohn 
was  baptizing. 


216 


CHRISTMAS  DAY 


SOURCES 
In  die  natiuitatis  domini. 


«v  Ad  tertiam  missam.     Officium. 

Puer  natus  est  nobis  [&c] 
Ps.   Cantate  domino  canticum  nouum 
quia  mirabilia  fecit. 


In  vigilia  natiuitatis  domini.  Oratio. 
DEUS  qui  nos  redemptionis  nostre 
annua  expectatione  letificas  :  presta  vt 
vnigenitum  tuum  quern  redemptorem 
leti  suscipimus  :  venientem  quoque 
iudicem  securi  videamus,  dominum 
nostrum  iesum  xpum  filium  tuum.  Qui 
te.  (Gel.  ii  84) 


Ad  missam  in  galli  cantu.     Epistola. 

Ad  titum.  [ii.  D 

Cnarissime.      Apparuit    gratia    dei 

saluatoris  nostri  omnibus  hominibus  : 


1549 

C  PROPER  PSALMES  AND  LESSONS  ON 
CHRISTMAS  DAY. 


Psal.  xix. 
Psal.  xlv. 
Psal.  Ixxxv. 


<I  At  Mattyns. 
\  The  first  lesson.     Esai.  ix. 


I 


vnto  the  ende. 


f  The  seconde  lesson.     Mat:i. 

vnto  the  ende. 
C  At  the  fyrst  Communion. 

[Cantate  domino,  psal.  xcviii. 

O  Syng  vnto  the  Lorde  a  ncwe  song : 
for  he  hath  done  meruaylous  thinges. 

With  his  owne  right  hande  and  with 
his  holye  arme  :  hath  he  gotten  him- 
selfe  the  victorie. 

The  Lord  declared  his  saluacion  : 
his  righteousnes  hath  he  openly  shewed 
in  the  sight  of  the  heathen. 

He  hath  remembred  his  mercye  and 
trueth  towarde  the  house  of  Israel  : 
and  all  the  endes  the  worlde  haue 
scene  the  saluacion  of  our  God. 

Shewe  youre  selues  ioyfull  vnto  the 
Lorde,  all  ye  landes  :  syng,  reioyce, 
and  geue  thankes. 

Prayse  the  Lord  vpon  the  Harpe  : 
sing  to  the  Harpe  with  a  Psalme  of 
thankesgeuing. 

With  trumpettes  also  and  shawmes  : 
O  shewe  your  selues  ioyfull  before  the 
Lorde  the  kyng. 

Lette  the  sea  make  a  noyse,  and  all 
that  therin  is  :  the  rounde  worlde  and 
they  that  dwell  therein. 

Let  the  fluddes  clap  theyr  handes, 
and  lette  the  hilles  be  ioyfull  together 
before  the  Lorde  :  for  he  is  come  to 
iudge  the  earth. 

With  righteousnes  shall  he  iudge  the 
worlde  :  and  the  people  with  equitie. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer.&c. 

The  Collect. 

God,  which  makest  vs  gladde  with 
the  yerely  remembraunce  of  the  birth 
ofthyonelysonnelesusChriste:  graunt 
that  as  we  Joyfully  receiue  him  for  our 
redemer,  so  we  may  with  sure  con 
fidence  beholde  hym,  when  he  shall 
come  to  be  our  iudge,  who  liueth  and 
reigneth.&c. 

The  Epistle. 

[Tit.  ii. 

THe  grace  of  God  that  bryngeth 
saluacion  vnto  all  menne,  hathe  ap- 


CHRISTMAS  DAY  217 

I552  1661 

THE  NATIVITY  OF  OUR  LORD,  OR  THE  BIRTHDAY 
CHRISTMAS  DAIE.       OP  CHRIST,  COMONLY  CALLED  CHRISTMAS  DAY. 


2l8 


CHRISTMAS  DAY 


SOURCES 

erudiens  nos  vt  almegantes  impietatem 
et  secularia  desideria,  sobrie  et  iuste 
et  pie  viuamus  in  hoc  seculo.  Expec- 
tantes  beatam  spem  :  &  aduentum 
glorie  magni  del  et  saluatoris  nostri 
iesu  xpi.  Qui  dedit  semetipsum  pro 
nobis  :  vt  nos  redimeret  ab  iniquitate, 
et  mundaret  sibi  populum  acceptabilem , 
sectatorem  bonorum  operum.  Hec 
loquere  :  et  exortare.  In  xpo  iesu 
domino  nostro. 

Euangelium. 

Secundum  Lucam.  [ii.  A 

IN  illo  tempore.  Exijt  edictum  a 
cesare  augusto  :  vt  describeretur  vni- 
uersus  orbis.  Hec  descriptio  prima  : 
facta  est  a  preside  syrie  cyrino.  Et 
ibant  omnes  vt  profiterentur  :  singuli 
in  suam  ciuitatem.  Ascendit  autem  & 
ioseph  a  galilea  de  ciuitate  nazareth  in 
iudeam  ciuitatem  dauid  (que  vocatur 
bethleem)  eo  quod  esset  de  domo  et 
familia  dauid  :  vt  profiteretur  cum 
maria  desponsata  sibi  vxore  pregnante. 
Factum  est  autem  cum  essent  ibi, 
impleti  sunt  dies  vt  pareret.  Et  peperit 
nlium  suum  primogenitum  :  &  pannis 
eum  inuoluit.  Et  reclinauit  eum  in 
presepio  :  quia  non  erat  ei  locus  in 
diuersorio.  Et  pastores  eraut  in  re- 
gione  eadem  vigilantes,  et  custodientes 
vigilias  noctis  supra  gregem  suum.  Et 
ecce  angelus  domini  stetit  iuxta  illos  : 
et  claritas  dei  circunfulsit  illos,  et 
timuerunt  timore  magno.  Et  dixit 
illis  angelus.  Nolite  timere.  Ecce 
enim  euangelizo  vobis  gaudium  mag 
num  quod  erit  omni  populo  :  quia 
natus  est  vobis  hodie  saluator,  qui 
est  xps  dominus  in  ciuitate  dauid. 
Et  hoc  vobis  signum.  Inuenietis  in- 
fantem  pannis  inuolutum  :  et  positum 
in  presepio.  Et  subito  facta  est  cum 
angelo  multitude  militie  celestis  : 
laudantium  deum  et  diceritium.  Gloria 
in  altissimis  deo  :  et  in  terra  pax 
homiiiibus  bone  voluntatis. 


1549 

peared,  and  teacheth  vs  that  we  should 
denye  vngodlinesse,and  worldly  lustes, 
and  that  we  shoulde  liue  soberly,  and 
righteousely,  and  godly  in  this  present 
worlde,  looking  for  that  blessed  hope, 
and  appearing  of  the  glory  of  the  great 
God,  and  of  our  sauiour  Iesu  Christ,, 
which  gaue  himselfe  for  vs,  to  redeme 
vs  from  all  vnrighteousnes,  and  to 
pourge  vs  a  peculiare  people  vnto 
himselfe,  feruently  geue  vnto  good 
workes.  These  thinges  speake  and 
exhort,  and  rebuke  with  all  feruentnes 
of  commaundyng .  See  that  no  manne 
despise  thee. 

The  Gospell. 

[Luc.  ii. 

ANd  it  chaunsed  in  those  dayes, 
that  there  went  out  a  commaundemet 
from  Augustus  the  Emperoure,  that 
all  the  worlde  shoulde  bee  taxed.  And 
this  taxing  was  the  first,  and  executed 
whe  Sirenius  was  lieutenaunt  in  Siria.. 
And  euery  man  went  vnto  his  owne 
citie  to  be  taxed.  And  Ioseph  also 
ascended  from  Galile,  out  of  a  citie 
called  Nazareth,  into  lewry,  vnto  the 
citie  of  Dauid,  which  is  called  Beth 
leem,  because  he  was  of  the  house 
and  linage  of  Dauid,  to  bee  taxed r, 
with  Mary  his  spoused  wyfe,  which 
was  with  chylde.  And  it  fortuned 
that  whyle  they  were  there,  her  tyme 
was  come  that  she  shoulde  be  de- 
liuered.  And  she  brought  furth  her 
first  begotten  sone,  and  wrapped  him 
in  swadling  clothes,  &  layed  him  in  a 
Maunger,  because  there  was  no  roume 
for  them  in  the  Inne.  And  there 
were  in  thesame  region  shepeheardes 
watchyng  and  kepyng  theyr  flocke  by 
night.  And  loe,  the  Angel  of  the  lord 
stoode  hard  by  them,  and  the  bright- 
nesse  of  the  Lord  shone  rounde  about 
them,  and  they  were  soore  afrayed.. 
And  the  Angel  saied  vnto  them  :  Be 
not  afrayde  :  for  behold,  I  bring  you 
tydinges  of  great  ioy  that  shall  come 
to  all  people  :  for  vnto  you  is  borne 
this  daye,  in  the  citie  of  Dauid,  a 
sauiour  whiche  is  Christe  the  Lorde. 
And  take  this  for  a  sygne  :  ye  shall 
fynde  the  childe  wrapped  in  swadlyng 
clothes,  and  layde  in  a  maunger.  And 
straightway  there  was  with  the  Angell, 
a  multitude  of  heauenly  souldiers, 
praysyng  God,  and  saying  :  Glory  to 


CHRISTMAS  DAY  219 

1552  1661 


220 


CHRISTMAS  DAY 


SOURCES 


Ad  tertiam  missam.  Oratio. 
[Concede  quesumus  omnipotens  deus 
vt  nos  vnigeniti  tui  noua  per  carnem 
natiuitas  liberet  :  quos  sub  peccati  iugo 
vetusta  seruitus  tenet.  Per  eundem. 
(Cf.  Gel.  ii  84)] 


1549 

God  on  hye,  and  peace  on  the  earthe, 
and  vnto  men  a  good  will. 

C  At  the  seconde  Communion. 

[Domine  dominus  noster.  psal.  viii. 

O  Lorde  our  gouernour,  howe  ex 
cellent  is  thy  name  in  all  the  worlde  : 
thou  that  haste  set  thy  glorye  aboue 
the  heauens  ? 

Out  of  the  mouthe  of  very  babes 
and  suckelynges,  haste  thou  ordayned 
strength,  because  of  thyne  enemies  : 
that  thou  mightest  still  the  enemye 
and  the  auenger. 

For  I  will  considre  thy  heauens, 
euen  the  workes  of  thy  fyngers  :  the 
Moone  and  the  starres  whiche  thou 
haste  ordayned. 

What  is  manne  that  thou  art  so 
myndefull  of  hym  :  and  the  sonne  of 
manne,  that  thou  visitest  him  ? 

Thou  madest  hym  lower  then  the 
Angels  :  to  croune  hym  with  glory 
and  wurship. 

Thou  makest  hym  to  haue  dominion 
of  the  workes  of  thy  handes  :  and  thou 
haste  put  all  thynges  in  subieccion 
vnder  his  feete. 

All  shepe  and  oxen  :  yea,  and  the 
beastes  of  the  fielde. 

The  foules  of  the  ayre,  and  the 
fishes  of  the  sea :  and  whatsoeuer 
walketh  thorowe  the  pathes  of  the 
seas. 

O  Lorde  our  gouernoure  :  howe  ex 
cellent  is  thy  name  in  all  the  worlde. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer.&c. 

The  Collect. 

ALMYGHTIE  God,  whiche  haste 
geuen  vs  thy  only  begotten  sonne  to 
take  our  nature  vpon  him,  and 
this  daye  to  be  borne  of  a  pure  virgin  : 
Graunt  that  we  being  regenerate  and 
made  thy  children  by  adopcion  and 
grace,  maye  dayly  be  renued  by  thy 
holy  spirite,  through  thesame  oure 
Lorde  lesus  Christe,  who  lyueth  and 
reigneth  .&c. 


Lectio  epistole  beati  pauli  apostoli  ad 
Hebreos. 

[i.  A. 

FRatres.   Multifarie  multisque  modis 
olim    deus   loquens   patribus   in   pro- 


The  Epistle. 

[Hebre.  i. 

GOD  in  tymes  paste,  dyuerslye  and 
many  wayes  spake  vnto 


CHRISTMAS  DAY 


221 


1661 


€  The  Collect. 

ALmighty  God,  which  hast 
geue  vs  thy  onely  begotte  sonne  to 
take  our  nature  vpo  him,  and 
thys  daye  to  be  borne  of  a  pure  virgin : 
Graunte  that  we  beynge  regenerate  & 
made  thy  children  by  adoptio  & 
grace,  may  daylye  be  renued  by  thy 
holy  spirit,  through  the  same  our 
lorde  lesus  Christ,  who  lyueth  and 
raygneth  with.  &c. 

Amen. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Hebre.  i. 

GOD   in   tymes   past,   dyuerslye   & 
manye  wayes  spake  vnto 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who8  hast 
given  vs  thy  only  begotten  Son  to 
take  our  Nature  vpon  him,  and  8as  at 
this  tyme*  to  be  borne  of  a  pure  virgine : 
grant  that  we  being  regenerate,  and 
made  thy  children  by  Adoption  and 
grace,  may  daily  be  renewed  by  thy 
holy  spirit,  through  the  same  our 
Lord  lesus  Christ  who  liveth  and 
reigneth  with  lbthee  and  the*  same 
spirit  ever  one  God  world  without 
end.  Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Heb.  i.  41, 

God  who  at  sundry  times,  and  in 
divers  manners  spake  in  time  past  vnto 


222 


CHRISTMAS  DAY 


SOURCES 

phetis  :  nouissime  diebus  istis  locutus 
est  nobis  in  filio.  Quern  constituit 
heredem  vniuersorum,  per  quern  fecit 
et  secula.  Qui  cum  sit  splendor  glorie 
et  figura  substantie  eius,  portansque 
omnia  verbo  virtutis  sue  :  purgationem 
peccatorum  faciens  sedet  ad  dexteram 
maiestatis  in  excelsis.  Tanto  melior 
angelis  effectus :  quanto  difFerentius 
pre  illis  nomen  hereditauit.  Cui  enim 
dixit  aliquando  angelorum,  films  meus 
es  tu :  ego  hodie  genui  te  ?  Et  rursum. 
Ego  ero  illi  in  patrem :  &  ipse  erit 
michi  in  filium.  Et  iterum  cum  intro- 
duxit  primogenitum  in  orbem  terre : 
dicit.  Et  adorent  eum  omnes  angeli 
dei.  Et  ad  angelos  quidem  dicit. 
Qui  facit  angelos  suos  spiritus :  et 
ministros  suos  flammam  ignis.  Ad 
filium  autem.  Thronus  tuus  deus  in 
seculum  seculi :  virga  equitatis  virga 
regni  tui.  Dilexisti  iustitiam  et  odisti 
iniquitatem :  propterea  vnxit  te  deus 
deus  tuus  oleo  exultationis  pre  parti- 
cipibus  tuis.  Et  tu  in  principio  domine 
terram  fundasti :  et  opera  manuum 
tuarum  sunt  celi.  Ipsi  peribunt  tu 
autem  permanebis  :  et  omnes  vt  vesti- 
mentumveterascent.  Etvelutamictum 
mutabis  eos :  et  mutabuntur.  Tu 
autem  idem  ipse  es :  et  anni  tui  non 
deficient. 

<I  Initium  sancti  euangelii  secundum 

iohannem.  [i.  A 

IN  principio  erat  verbum  :  et  verbum 
erat  apud  deum,  et  deus  erat  verbum. 
Hoc  erat  in  principio  apud  deum. 
Omnia  per  ipsum  facta  sunt :  et  sine 
ipso  factum  est  nicb.il.  Quod  factum 
est  in  ipso  vita  erat :  &  vita  erat  lux 
hominum.  Et  lux  in  tenebris  lucet : 
et  tenebre  earn  non  comprehenderunt. 
Fuit  homo  missus  a  deo :  cui  nomen 
erat  iohannes.  Hie  venit  in  testimo- 
nium  vt  testimonium  perhiberet  de 


1549 

the  fathers  by  Prophetes  :  but  in 
these  last  dayes,  he  hath  spoken  to 
vs  by  his  owne  sonne,  whom  he  hath 
made  heyre  of  all  thynges,  by  whom 
also  he  made  the  worlde.  Whiche 
(sonne)  being  the  brightnesse  of  his 
glory,  and  the  very  image  of  his 
substaunce,  rulyng  all  thinges  with 
the  woorde  of  his  power,  hath  by  his 
owne  person  purged  our  synnes,  and 
sytteth  on  the  ryght  hande  of  the 
maiestie  on  high  :  being  so 

muche  more  excellent  then  the  Angels, 
as  he  hath  by  inheritaunce  obtayned  a 
more  excellent  name  then  they.  For 
vnto  whiche  of  the  Angels  sayed  he  at 
anytime?  Thou  art  my  sonne,  this  daye 
haue  I  begotten  thee.  And  againe,  I 
wyll  bee  his  father,  and  he  shall 
be  my  sonne.  And  agayne,  when 
he  bryngeth  in  the  first  begotten  sonne 
into  the  worlde,  he  sayeth  :  and  lette  all 
the  Angels  of  God  wurship  hym.  And 
vnto  the  Angels  he  sayeth:  He  maketh 
his  Angels  spirites,  and  his  ministers 
a  flame  of  fyre.  But  vnto  the  sonne  he 
sayeth  :  thy  seate  (O  God)  shalbe  for 
euer  and  euer.  The  scepter  of 
thy  kingdom  is  a  right  scepter. 
Thou  hast  loued  righteousnes  and 
hated  iniquitie :  wherfore  God,  euen  thy 
God,  hath  anointed  thee  with  the  oyle 
of  gladnes  aboue  thy  felowes.  And 
thou  Lorde  in  the  beginning  haste 
layed  the  foundacion  of  the  earth  : 
and  the  heauens  are  the  workes  of  thy 
handes.  They  shall  perishe,  but  thou 
endurest :  But  they  all  shall  waxe  olde 
as  doeth  a  garmente,  and  as  a  vesture 
shalt  thou  chaunge  them,  and  they 
shall  be  chaunged.  But  thou  art  euen 
thesame,  and  thy  yeares  shall  not  fayle 

The  Gospell. 

[     lohn.  i. 

IN  the  beginning  was  the  worde, 
and  the  worde  was  with  God :  and  God 
was  the  worde.  Thesame  was  in 
the  beginnyng  with  God.  All  thinges 
were  made  by  it,  £  without  it 
was  made  nothing  that  was  made. 
In  it  was  lyfe,  and  the  lyfe  was  the 
light  of  me,  and  the  light  shineth 
in  darkenes,  and  the  darkenes  com- 
preheded  it  not.  There  was  sent 
fro  God  a  manne  whose  name  was  Ihon. 
Thesame  came  as  a  witnes,  to  beare 


CHRISTMAS  DAY 


223 


1552 

the  fathers  by  Prophetes  :  but  in 
these  last  dayes,  he  hath  spoke  to 
vs  by  hys  owne  sonne,  whom  he  hath 
made  heyre  of  all  thynges,  by  whom 
also  he  made  the  world.  Whych 
(sonne)  being  the  brightnes  of  his 
glorie,  &  the  very  image  of  his 
substaunce,  ruling  al  thinges  wyth 
the  worde  of  hys  power,  hath  by  hys 
owne  person  purged  our  synnes,  & 
sytteth  on  the  ryght  had  of  the 
maiestie  on  high  :  being  so 

much  more  excellent  then  the  Angels, 
as  he  hath  by  inheritaunce  obtayned  a 
more  excellent  name  then  they.  For 
vnto  which  of  the  Angels  said  he  at 
anytyme?  Thou  art  my  sonne,  this  day 
haue  I  begotten  thee.  And  agayn,  I 
wyl  be  his  father,  &  he  shal 
be  my  sonne.  And  agayne :  when 
he  bringeth  in  the  firste  begotten  sonne 
into  the  worlde,  he  sayth  :  &  let  al 
the  Angels  of  God  worship  him.  And 
vnto  the  Angels  he  sayth  :  He  maketh 
hys  Angels  spirites,  and  hys  ministers 
a  flame  of  fyre.  But  vnto  the  sonne  he 
sayth  :  thy  seate  (O  God)  shalbe  for 
euer  and  euer.  The  scepter  of 
thy  kyngdom  is  a  ryght  scepter. 
Thou  haste  loued  righteousnes  & 
hated  iniquitie:  wherforeGod,euen  thy 
God,  hath  annointed  thee  wyth  oyle 
of  gladnes  aboue  thy  felowes.  And 
thou  Lord  in  the  beginning  hast 
layde  the  foundation  of  the  earth  : 
&  the  heauens  are  the  workes  of  thy 
hades.  They  shall  peryshe,  but  thou 
endurest :  But  they  al  shall  waxe  olde 
as  doeth  a  garmente,  and  as  a  vesture 
shalte  thou  chaunge  them,  and  they 
shall  be  chaunged.  But  thou  art  euen 
the  same, and  thyyeares  shall  not  fayle. 

The  Gospell. 

[    lohn.  i. 

IN  the  beginning  was  the  worde, 
&  the  worde  was  wyth  God,  and  God 
was  the  word.  The  same  was  in 
the  beginning  with  God.  Al  thinges 
were  made  by  it,  &  without  it 
was  made  nothinge  that  was  made. 
In  it  was  lyfe,  and  the  lyfe  was  the 
light  of  me :  &  the  light  shineth 
in  darkenes,  &  the  darkenes  co- 
preheded  it  not.  There  was  sente 
fro  God  a  man  whose  name  was  lohn. 
The  same  came  as  a  witnes,  to  beare 


1661 

the  Fathers  by  the  Prophets,  hath  in 
these  last  dayes  spoken  vnto 

vs   by  his  Son,  whom  he  hath 

appointed  heire  of  all  things,  by  whom 
also  he  made  the  worlds,  who 
being  the  brightness  of  his 
Glory  and  the  expresse  Jmage  of  his 
person,  and  vpholding  all  things  by 
the  word  of  his  power,  when  he  had 
by  himselfe  purged  our  sins  sate 
downe  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high;  Being  made  so 
much  better  then  the  Angels, 

as  he  hath  by  Inheritance  obteined  a 
more  excellent  name  then  they.  For 
vnto  which  of  the  Angells  sayd  he  at 
any  time,  thou  art  my  Son,  this  day 
have  I  begotten  thee ;  And  again  I 
will  be  to  him  a  Father,  and  he  shall 
be  to  me  a  son  ?  And  again,  when 
he  bringeth  in  the  first  begotten 
into  the  world,  he  sayth,  And  let  all 
the  Angels  of  God  worship  him.  And 
of  the  Angels  he  sayth,  who  maketh 
his  Angels  Spirits,  and  his  Ministers 
a  flame  of  fire.  But  vnto  the  Son  he 
sayth,  thy  throne  O  God  is  for 
ever  and  ever,  a  scepter  of  righteous 
ness  is  the  scepter  of  thy  Kingdom. 
Thou  hast  loved  righteousness,  and 
hated  iniquity,  therefore  God,  even  thy 
God  hath  anointed  thee  with  the  oyl 
of  gladness  above  thy  fellowes.  And, 
Thou  Lord  in  the  beginning  hast 
layed  the  foundation  of  the  earth  ; 
and  the  heavens  are  y?  works  of  thine 
hands ;  They  shall  perish,  but  thou 
remainest :  and  they  all  shall  wax  old 
as  doth  a  Garment.  And  as  a  Vesture 
shalt  thou  fold  them  vp,  and  they 
shall  be  changed :  but  thou  art 
the  same,  and  thy  years  shall  not  fayl. 

The  Gospell. 

[S:  lohn.  i.  •»!. 

In  the  beginning  was  the  word, 
and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the 
Word  was  God.  The  same  was  in 
the  beginning  with  God.  All  things 
were  made  by  him,  and  without  him 
was  not  any  thing  made  that  was  made. 
In  him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the 
light  of  men.  And  the  light  shineth 
in  darkness,  and  the  darkness  com 
prehended  it  not.  There  was  a  man 
sent  from  God,  whose  name  was  lohn. 
The  same  came  for  a  witness,  to  bear 


224 


S.  STEPHEN 


SOURCES 

lumine  :  vt  omnes  crederent  per  ilium. 
Non  erat  ille  lux  :  sed  vt  testimonium 
perhiberet  de  lumine.  Erat  lux  vera  : 
que  illuminat  omnem  hominem  veni- 
eutem  in  hunc  muudum.  In  mundo 
erat :  &  mundus  per  ipsum  factus  est, 
et  mundus  eum  non  cognouit.  In 
propria  venit :  et  sui  eum  non  re- 
ceperunt.  Quotquot  autem  receperunt 
eum :  dedit  eis  potestatem  filios  dei 
fieri,  his  qui  credunt  in  nomine  ems. 
Qui  non  ex  sanguinibus,  neque  ex 
voluntate  carnis,  neque  ex  voluntate 
viri :  sed  ex  deo  nati  sunt.  Et  verbum 
caro  factum  est :  et  habitauit  in  nobis. 
Et  vidimus  gloriam  eius :  gloriam  quasi 
vnigeniti  a  patre.  Plenum  gratie  :  & 
veritatis. 


C  In  die  sancti  stephani  protomartyris. 

Officium. 
[Ps.  cxviii  (cxix)  23a,  86b,  23b  :  1] 


1549 

witnes  of  the  light,  that  all  men- 
through  hym  might  beleue.  He  was 
not  that  light,  but  was  sente  to  beare 
witnes  of  the  light.  That  light  was  the 
true  light,  which  lighteth  euery  man 
that  cometh  into  the  worlde.  He  was 
in  the  worlde,  £  the  worlde  was  made 
by  him  :  and  the  worlde  knewe  him  not. 
He  came  among  his  owne,and  his  ou  ne 
receyued  him  not :  But  as  many  as 
receyued  hym,  to  them  gaue  he  power 
to  be  the  sonnes  of  God  :  eue 

them  that  beleued  on  his  name,  which 
were  borne,  not  of  bloud,  nor  of  the 
will  of  the  fleshe,  nor  yet  of  the  will  of 
man,  but  of  God.  And  thesame  woorde 
became  fleshe  and  dwelt  amonge  vs  : 
and  we  sawe  the  glory  of  it,  as  the  glory 
of  the  only  begotten  sonne  of  the  father, 
full  of  grace  and  trueth. 

<E  Propre  Psalmes  and  lessons  at  Euensong. 

Psal.  Ixxxix.  -v  The  first  Lesson.     Esay.  vii. 

Psal.  ex.         I     God   spake  once  agayn    to 

Psal.  cxxxii.  J      Achas.  &c.  vnto  the  ende. 

The  seconde  Lesson.  Tit.  iii. 
The  kyndnes  and  loue  of 
cure  sauiour.  &c.  vnto. 
foolishe  questions. 

C  SAINCT  STEPHINS  DAYE. 

C  At  Mattyns. 
The  seconde  Lesson.   Actes.  vi.  vii.     Stephin 

full  of  fayth  and  power  (vnto)  and  when. 

xl.  yeres. 

At  the  Communion. 
[Quid  gloriaris  in  malicia.psal.  Iii. 

WHy  boastest  thou  thy  self,  thou 
tyraunt  :  that  thou  canst  doe  mis- 
chiefe  ? 

Where  as  the  goodnes  of  God  : 
endureth  yet  dayly. 

Thy  tong  imagineth  wickednesse  : 
&  with  lyes  thou  cuttest  lyke  a  sharpe 
rasor. 

Thou  haste  loued  vngraciousnes 
more  then  goodnes  :  and  to  talke  of 
lyes  more  then  righteousnes. 

Thou  hast  loued  to  speake  all 
woordes  that  maye  doe  hurt  :  O  thou 
false  tongue. 

Therfore  shall  God  destroy  thee  for 
euer,  he  shall  take  thee  and  plucke 
thee  out  of  thy  dwelling :  and  roote 
thee  out  of  the  lande  of  the  lyuing. 

The  ryghteous  also  shall  see  this,and 
feare  :  and  shall  laugh  him  to  skorne. 

Loe,  this  is  the  man  that  tooke  not 


S.  STEPHEN 


225 


1552 

vvitnes  of  the  light,  that  al  me 
through  him  might  beleue.  He  was 
not  that  light,  but  was  sent  to  beare 
witnesof thelyght.  That  lyghtewas  the 
true  light,  which  lighteth  euery  ma 
that  cometh  into  the  world.  He  was 
in  the  world,  and  the  world  was  made 
by  him  :  £  the  world  knew  him  not. 
He  came  am5g  his  owne,  &  his  own 
receyued  him  not :  But  as  many  as 
receyued  hym,  to  the  gaue  he  power 
to  be  made  sones  of  god  :  cue 
the  that  beleued  on  his  name,  which 
were  borne,  not  of  bloud,  nor  of  the 
wil  of  the  flesh,  nor  yet  of  the  wyl  of 
ma,  but  of  god.  And  the  same  word 
became  fleshe  and  dwelt  amog  vs  : 
&  we  sawe  the  glory  of  it,  as  the  glory 
of  the  only  begotte  sone  of  the  father, 
ful  of  grace  &  trueth. 


1661 

witness  of  the  light,  that  al  men 
through  him  might  believe.  He  was 
not  that  light,  but  was  sent  to  bear 
witness  of  that  light.  That  was  the 
true  light  which  lighteneth  every  man 
that  cometh  into  the  World.  He  was 
in  the  world,  and  the  world  was  made 
by  him,  and  the  world  knew  him  not. 
He  came  vnto  his  own,  and  his  own 
received  him  not.  But  as  many  as 
received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power 
to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to 
them  that  believe  on  his  name :  which 
were  born  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the 
Will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of 
man,  but  of  God.  And  the  Word 
was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  vs, 
(and  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as 
of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father 
full  of  grace  and  truth. 


SAINT  STEPHINS  DAIE. 


SAINT  STEVENS  DAY. 


226 


S.  STEPHEN 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 
DA  nobis  quesumus  domine  imitari 


1549 

God  for  his  strength  :  but  trusted 
vntp  the  multitude  of  his  riches,  and 
stregthed  himselfe  in  his  wickednes. 

As  for  me  I  am  lyke  a  greene  Oliue 
tree  in  the  house  of  God  :  my  trust  is 
in  the  tendre  mercye  of  God  for  euer 
and  euer. 

I  will  alway  geue  thankes  vnto  thee, 
for  that  thou  haste  done  :  and  I  will 
hope  in  thy  name,  for  thy  sainctes 
lyke  it  well. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe 
and  euer.&c. 

The  Collect. 
GRaunt  vs,  O  Lorde, 


quod  colimus 


vt  discamus  et  inimicos 


diligere,,  quia  eius  natalitia  celebramus 

qui    nouit    etiam   pro    persecutoribus       exaumple  of  thy 

*\v  <\imi»f*    ,i^»^,*,,          ~~j • .      —  otCDnin.    who   nr; 


exorare,  dominum  nostrum  iesum  xpm 
filium  tuum.     Qui  tecum.     (Greg.  12) 


to  learne  to  loue 
enemies     by     the 
martir  Saincte 


Stephin,  who  prayed  to  thee  for  his 


persecutours  : 
reignest.&c 


whiche     liuest     and 


Memoria  de  natiuitate  tantum. 


C  Then  shall  folowe  a  Collect  of  the  Natiuitie. 


Lectio  actuum  apostolorum. 


[vi. 


The  Epistle. 


IN  diebus  illis.  Stephanus  ...  in 
eum  (vi  8-10,  vii  54).  Cum  autem  esset 
stephanus  plenus  spiritu  sancto  :  in- 
tendens  in  celum  vidit  gloriam  dei :  et 
iesum  stantem  a  dextris  dei,  et  ait. 
Ecce  video  celos  apertos :  et  filium 
hominis  stantem  a  dextris  virtutis  dei. 
Exclamantes  autem  voce  magna  con- 
tinuerunt  aures  suas :  &  impetum 
fecerunt  vnanimiter  in  eum.  Et 
eijcientes  eum  extra  ciuitatem  :  lapi- 
dabant.  Et  testes  deposuerunt  vesti- 
menta  sua  secus  pedes  adolescentis 
qui  vocabatur  saulus :  et  lapidabant 
stephanum,  inuocantem  et  dicentem. 
Domine  iesu  :  suscipe  spiritum  meum. 
Positis  autem  genibus  :  clamauit  voce 
magna  dicens.  Domine  ne  statuas  illis 
hoc  peccatum.  Et  cum  hoc  dixisset, 
obdormiuit  in  domino. 


[Actes.  vii. 


ANd  Stephin  beyng  full  of  the  holy 
gost,  looked  vp  stedfastly  with  his  iyes 
into  heauen,  and  sawe  the  glory  of 
God,  and  lesus  standing  on  the  right 
hand  of  God,  and  saied  :  behold,  I  see 
the  heauens  open,  and  the  sonne  of 
manne  standyng  on  the  ryght  hande 
of  God.  Then  they  gaue  a  shoute  with 
a  loude  voyce,  and  stopped  theyr  eares, 
and  ran  vpon  hym  all  at  once,  and 
cast  him  out  of  the  citie,  and  stoned 
him.  And  the  witnesses  layd  downe 
theyr  clothes  at  a  young  mannes  feete, 
whose  name  was  Saul.  And  they 
stoned  Stephin,  callyng  on  and 

saying:  Lorde  Iesu,  receyue  my  spirite. 
And  he  kneled  downe  and  cryed  with 
a  loude  voyce  :  Lorde,  lay  not  this 
sinne  to  theyr  charge.  And  when  he 
had  thus  spoken,  he  fell  a  slepe. 


S.  STEPHEN 


227 


1552 


1661 


C  The  Collect 
GRaunt  vs,  O  Lord, 


to  learne  to  loue 

our     enemyes     by     the 

exaple     of     thy  martyr     Saint 

Stephin,   who    prayed  for  his   perse- 

cutours   to   thee :    which    liuest  and. 

&c. 


C  Then  shall  folow  a  Collect  of  the  Natiuitie, 
which  shalbe  sayd  continually  vnto  newe 
yeres  daye. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Acte.  vii. 

ANd  Stephin  beinge  full  of  the  holye 
ghoste,lokedvp  stedfastly  with  his  eyes 
into  heaue,  and  sawe  the  glory  of 
God,  &  lesus  standing  on  the  right 
hand  of  God,  &  sayd  :  beholde,  I  see 
the  heauens  open,  &  the  sonne  of 
ma  stonding  on  the  ryght  hand 
of  God.  The  they  gaue  a  shout  wyth 
a  loude  voyce,  and  stopped  theyr  eares, 
&  ran  upo  hym  al  at  once,  and 
cast  hym  out  of  the  cytie,  and  stoned 
him.  And  the  witnesses  layde  downe 
theyr  clothes  at  a  yonge  mans  fete, 
whose  name  was  Saul.  And  they 
stoned  Stephin,  calling  on  and 

saying:  Lord  Iesu,receyuemyspyryte. 
And  he  kneled  downe  and  cryed  with 
a  loud  voyce  :  Lorde,  laye  not  thys 
synne  to  theyr  charge.  And  when  he 
had  thus  spoken,  he  fell  aslepe. 


The  Collect. 

Grant  ,  O  Lord,  that  in  all  our 
sufferings  here  vpon  earth,  for  the 
testimony  of  thy  truth,  we  may 
stedfastly  look  vp  to  heaven,  and 
by  faith  behold  the  glory  that  shall 
be  revealed;  and  being  filled  with 
the  holy  Ghost,  may  learn  to  love 
and  bless  our  Persecutors,  by  the 
example  of  thy  first  Martyr  Saint 
Steven,  Who  prayed  for  his  mur- 
therers  to  thee,  o  blessed  lesus,  who 
standest  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
to  succour  all  those  that  suffer  for 
thee,  our  only  mediatour  and  Advo 
cate.  Amen. 

IT  Then  shall  followthe  Collect  of  the  Nativity, 
which  shall  be  sayd  continually  vnto  New 
years  eve. 

9For  the  Epistle. 

[Acts:  7.  <55. 

Steven  being  full  of  the  holy 
Ghost,  looked  vp  stedfastly 
into  Heaven,  and  saw  the  glory  of 
God,  and  lesus  standing  on  the  right 
hand  of  God.  And  said,  behold,  I  see 
the  heavens  opened  and  the  son  of 
man  standing  on  the  right  hand 
of  God  ;  Then  they  cryed  out  with 
a  loud  voice,  and  stopped  their  ears, 
and  ran  vpon  him  with  one  Accord ;  and 
cast  him  out  of  the  City,  and  stoned 
him  :  and  the  Witnesses  layed  down 
their  Clothes  at  a  young  mans  feet, 
whose  name  was  Saul.  And  they 
stoned  Steven,  calling  vpon  God,  and 
sayeing,  Lord  lesus  receive  my  spirit. 
And  he  kneeled  down,  and  cryed  with 
a  loud  voyce,  Lord,  lay  not  this 
sin  to  their  charge.  And  when  he 
had  sayd  this,  he  fell  asleep. 


228 


S.  JOHN  THE  EVANGELIST 


SOURCES 

Secundum  Matheum. 

[xxiii.  D. 

IN  illo  tempore.  Dixit  iesus  turbis 
iudeorum  :  et  principibus  sacerdotum. 
Ecce  ego  mitto  ad  vos  prophetas  & 
sapientes  &  scribas  :  et  ex  illis  occidetis 
&  crucifigetis.  Et  ex  eis  flagellabitis 
in  synagogis  vestris :  &  persequemini 
de  ciuitate  in  ciuitatem.  Vt  veniat 
super  vos  omnis  sanguis  iustus  qui 
effusus  est  super  terrain  :  a  sanguine 
abel  iusti,  vsque  ad  sanguinem  zacharie 
filij  barachie  quern  occidistis  inter 
templum  et  altare.  Amen  dico  vobis  : 
venieut  hec  oninia  super  generationem 
istam.  Hierusalem  hierusalem  que 
occidis  prophetas,  et  lapidas  eos  qui  ad 
te  missi  sunt :  quotiens  volui  congre- 
gare  filios  tuos  quemadmodum  gallina 
congregat  pullos  suos  sub  alas,  et 
noluisti  ?  Ecce  relinquetur  vobis  domus 
vestra  deserta.  Dico  enim  vobis  :  non 
me  videbitis  amodo  donee  dicatis. 
Benedictus  qui  venit^in  nomine  domini. 


C  In  die  sancti  iohannis  euangeliste 

Officium. 
[Ecclus.  xv  5:6a] 


The  Gospell. 

[Math,  xxiii. 

BEholde,  I  sende  vnto  you  Pro- 
phetes  &  wise  men,  and  Scribes,  and 
some  of  them  ye  shall  kill  &  crucifye  : 
and  some  of  the  shall  ye  scourge  in 
your  Sinagogues,  and  persecute  them 
from  citie  to  citie  :  that  vpon  you  may 
come  all  the  ryghteous  bloud  whiche 
hath  been  shed  vpon  the  earth,  from 
the  bloud  of  righteous  Abel,  vnto  the 
bloud  of  Zacharias  the  s5ne  of 
Barachias,  whom  ye  slewe  betwene 
the  teple  and  the  altare.  Verely  I 
say  vnto  you  :  all  these  thinges  shal 
come  vpon  this  generacion.  O  Jeru 
salem,  lerusale,  thou  that  killeste  the 
Prophetes  and  stonest  them  whiche 
are  sent  vnto  thee  :  howe  often  would 
I  haue  gathered  thy  children  together, 
euen  as  the  hene  gathereth  herchickens 
vnder  her  winges,  &  ye  would  not  ? 
Beholde,  youre  house  is  lefte  vnto  you 
desolate.  For  I  say  vnto  you  :  ye 
shall  not  see  me  henceforth,  tyll  that 
ye  say:  Blessed  is  he  that  cummeth 
in  the  name  of  the  Lorde. 

The  seconde  lesson  at  Euensong. 
Act.vii.     C  And  when   .xl.    yeres  were  ex- 
spired,  there  appeared  vnto  Moses,  vnto. 
Stephen  full  of  the  holy  gost.&c. 

C  SAINCT  IOHN         EUANGELISTES  DAVE. 

At  Mattyns. 
<[  The  Seconde  Lesson  Apoca.i.  vnto  the  ende. 

At  the  Communion. 

[In  domino  confido.  psal.  xi. 

IN  the  Lorde  put  I  my  trust :  how 
say  ye  then  to  my  soule,  that  she 
should  flye  as  a  birde  to  the  hyll  ? 

For  loe,  the  vngodly  bend  their 
bowe  :  and  make  ready  their  arrowes 
within  the  bowe,  that  they  may 
prieuely  shoote  at  them  which  are 
trewe  of  hearte. 

For  the  foundacions  will  be  cast 
downe  :  and  what  hath  the  righteous 
done? 

The  Lorde  is  in  his  holy  temple  : 
the  Lordes  seate  is  in  heauen. 

His  eyes  considre  the  poore  :  and 
his  eyes  liddes  tryeth  the  children  of 
men. 

The  Lord  alloweth  the  righteous  : 
but  the  vngodly,  and  him  that  delyteth 
inwickednesse,doethhissouleabhorre. 


S.  JOHN  THE  EVANGELIST 


1552 

C  The  Gospell. 

[     Mat.  xxiii 

BEhold,  I  send  vnto  you  pro- 
phetes  &  wise  men,  £  Scribes,  & 
some  of  them  ye  shall  kyll  and  crucifye : 
and  some  of  them  shall  ye  scourge  in 
youre  Sinagogues,  &  persecute  them 
from  citie  to  cytie :  that  vpon  you  maye 
come  all  the  righteous  bloude  whych 
hath  been  shedde  vpon  the  earth,  from 
the  bloud  of  ryghteous  Abel,  vnto  the 
bloude  of  Zacharias  the  sonne  of 
Barachias,  whome  ye  slewe  betwene 
the  temple  and  the  aultare.  Verely  I 
saye  vnto  you  :  all  these  thinges  shall 
come  vpon  this  generation.  O  leru- 
sale,  Jerusalem,  thou  that  kylleste  the 
Prophetes  and  stonest  them  whyche 
are  sente  vnto  thee,  how  often  would 
I  haue  gathered  thy  chyldren  together, 
cue  as  the  hennegathereth  her  chickens 
vnder  her  winges,  and  ye  would  not? 
Behold,  your  house  is  left  vnto  you 
desolate.  For  I  saye  vnto  you  :  ye 
shall  not  see  me  henceforth,  tyll  that 
ye  say:  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh 

in  the  name  of  the  Lorde. 


1661 

The  Gospell. 

[S:  Mat.  23.  434. 

Behold,  I  send  vnto  you  Pro 
phets,  and  wise  men,  and  scribes  ;  and 
some  of  them  ye  shall  kill,  and  crucify, 
and  some  of  them  shall  ye  scourge  in 
your  Synagogues,  and  persecute  them 
from  City  to  City :  That  vpon  you  may 
come  all  the  righteous  blood 

shed  vpon  the  earth,  from 
the  blood  of  righteous  Abel,  vnto  the 
blood  of  Zacharias,  son  of 

Barachias,  whom  ye  slew  between 
the  temple,  and  the  altar.  Verely,  I 
say  vnto  you,  all  these  things  shall 
come  vpon  this  generation.  O  Jeru 
salem,  Jerusalem,  thou  that  killest  the 
Prophets,  and  stonest  them  which 
are  sent  vnto  thee  ;  how  often  would 
I  have  gathered  thy  children  together, 
even  as  a  Hen  gathereth  her  chickens 
vnder  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not. 
Behold  your  house  is  left  vnto  you 
desolate.  For  I  say  vnto  you,  ye 
shall  not  see  me  henceforth  till 
ye  shall  say,  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 


SAINT  IOHN 


EUANGELISTES   DAYE. 


SAINT  JOHN 


EVANGELISTS  DAY. 


S.  JOHN  THE  EVANGELIST 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 
Ecclesiam  tuam   quesumus  domine 

benignus  illustra :  vt  beati  iohannis 
apostoli  tui  et  euangeliste  illuminata 
doctrinis :  ad  dona  perueniat  sempi- 

terna.     Per.  (Leon.  476) 

Lectio  libri  sapientie. 

[Ecclus.  xv  1-6] 


1549 

Vpon  the  vngodly  he  shall  rayne 
snares,  fyre  and  brimstone,  storme 
and  tempeste :  this  shall  bee  theyr 
porcion  to  drinke. 

For  the  righteous  Lorde,  loueth 
righteousnes  :  his  countenaunce  will 
beholde  the  thinge  that  is  iust. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe 
and  euer.&c. 

The  Collect. 

MErcifull  Lorde,  we  beseche  thee 
to  caste  thy  bryght  beames  of  lyght 
vpon  thy  Churche  :  that  it  beeyng 
lyghtened    by    the    doctrine    of    thy 
blessed  Apostle  and  Euangelist 
John, 

may 

attain  to  thy  euerlasting 

giftes :    Through    lesus    Christe    our 
Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[     i.  Ihon.  i. 

THat  which  was  from  the  beginning, 
which  we  haue  hearde,  whiche  we 
haue  scene  with  oure  eyes,  which  we 
haue  looked  vpon,  and  oure  handes 
haue  handled,  of  the  worde  of  lyfe.  And 
the  lyfe  appeared,  and  we  haue 
scene  and  beare  witnes,  and  shewe 
vnto  you  that  eternall  lyfe  whiche  was 
with  the  father,  and  appeared 
vnto  vs.  That  whiche  we  haue  seen 
and  heard,  declare  we  vnto  you,  that  ye 
also  may  haue  felowship  with  vs,  and 
that  oure  felowship  may  bee  with  the 
father  and  his  sonne  lesus  Christe. 
And  this  write  we  vnto  you,  that 
ye  may  reioyce,  and  that  youre  ioy 
may  be  full.  And  this  is  the  tydinges 
which  we  haue  heard  of  him,  and 
declare  vnto  you,  that  God  is  lyght, 
and  in  him  is  no  darkenes  at  all.  If 
we  saye  that  we  haue  felowship  with 
him,  and  walke  in  darkenesse,  we  lye, 
and  doe  not  the  trueth.  But  and  if 
we  walke  in  light,  euen  as  he  is  in 
light,  then  haue  we  felowship  with 
him,  and  the  bloud  of  lesus  Christe 
his  sonne,  clenseth  vs  from  all  sinne. 
If  we  saye  we  haue  no  synne,  we 
deceyue  our  selues,  and  the  trueth  is 
not  in  vs.  If  we  knowledge  our  sinnes, 
he  is  faythfull  and  iust,  to  forgeue  vs 
our  sinnes,  and  to  dense  vs  from  al 


S.  JOHN  THK  EVANGELIST 


231 


1552 


1661 


C  The  Collect. 

MErcyful    lord,    we    beseche    thee 
to   cast  thy  bright  beames   of  light 
vpon  thy  Churche  :  that  it  beynge 
lightned    by    the     doctrine     of    thy 
blessed  Apostle  &  Euangelist 
lohn, 

may 

attayne  to  thy  euerlasting 

giftes.      Through    lesus    Christ    our 
lord.     Ante. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[    i.  lohn.  i. 

Tnat  which  was  fro  the  begming, 
which  we  haue  heard,  whiche  we 
haue  sene  with  oure  eyes,  whiche  we 
haue  loked  vpo,  &  our  handes 
haue  handled,  of  the  word  of  lyfe.  And 
the  lyfe  appeared,  &  we  haue 
sene  ,  &  beare  witnes,  &  shewe 
vnto  you  ye  eternal  life  whych  was 
with  the  father,  &  appeared 
vnto  vs.  That  which  we  haue  sene 
&  heard,  declare  we  vnto  you,  that  ye 
also  may  haue  felowshyp  with  vs,  and 
that  our  felowship  maye  be  with  the 
father  and  hys  sonne  lesus  Christ. 
And  this  we  write  vnto  you,  that 
ye  may  reioice,  and  that  your  ioye 
may  be  ful.  And  this  is  the  tidinges 
which  we  haue  hearde  of  hym,  & 
declare  vnto  you,  that  God  is  light, 
&  in  him  is  no  darkenes  at  all.  Yf 
we  saye  :  we  have  felowship  with 

him,  and  walke  in  darkenesse,  we  lye, 
&  doe  not  the  trueth.  But  &  yf 
we  walke  in  light,  euen  as  he  is  in 
light,  the  haue  we  felowship  with 
him,  and  the  bloud  of  lesus  Christ 
his  sonne,  clenseth  vs  fro  all  synne. 
Yf  we  saye  we  haue  no  synne,  we 
deceyue  our  selues,  and  the  trueth  is 
not  in  vs.  Yf  we  knowlege  our  synnes, 
he  is  faithful  &  iust  to  forgeue  vs 
oure  sinnes,  and  to  clese  vs  from  al 


The  Collect. 

Mercifull  Lord,  we  beseech  thee 
to  cast  thy  bright  beams  of  light 
vpon  thy  Church,  that  it  being  en 
lightened  by  the  Doctrine  of  thy 
blessed  Apostle,  and  Evangelist  Saint 
lohn,  may  so  walke  in  the  light  of 
thy  truth,  that  it  may  at  length 
attaine  to  the  light  of  everlasting 
life  through  lesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  Amen.\ 


The  Epistle. 


[S:  i.  John.  i.  1. 
the  beginning, 


That  which  was  from 
which  we  have  heard,  which  we 
have  seen  with  our  eyes,  which  we 
have  looked  vpon,  and  our  hands 
have  handled  of  the  word  of  life.  (For 
the  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have 
seen  it,  and  bear  witness  and  shew 
vnto  you  that  eternall  life  which  was 
with  the  Father,  and  was  manifested 
vnto  vs  :)  That  which  we  have  seen 
and  heard,  declare  we  vnto  you,  that  ye 
also  may  have  fellowship  with  vs  :  and 
truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the 
Father,  and  with  his  Son  lesus  Christ. 
And  these  things  writewe  vntoyou, 

that  your  ioy 

may  be  full.  This  then  is  the  message 
which  we  have  heard  of  him,  and 
declare  vnto  you,  that  God  is  light, 
and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all.  If 
we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with 
him,  and  walke  in  darkness,  we  lye, 
and  do  not  the  truth  :  But  if 

we  walke  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in 

the  light,  we  have  fellowship  one  with 
another,  and  the  blood  of  lesus  Christ 
his  Son  clenseth  vs  from  all  sin. 
If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin  we 
deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is 
not  in  vs.  If  we  confess  our  sins, 
he  is  faithfull,  and  iust  to  forgive  vs 
our  sins,  and  to  dense  vs  from  all 


THE  HOLY  INNOCENTS 


SOURCES 


Euangelium.     Secundum  iohannem. 

[xxi  F 
IN  illo  tempore.     Dixit  iesus  petro. 

Sequere  me.  Conuersus  petrus  :  vidit 
ilium  discipulum  quern  diligebat  iesus 
sequentem,  qui  et  recubuit  in  cena 
super  pectus  eius :  et  dixit.  Domine 
quis  est  qui  tradet  te  ?  Hunc  ergo  cum 
vidisset  petrus :  dixit  iesu.  Domine 
hie  autem  quid  ?  Dicit  ei  iesus.  Sic 
eum  volo  manere  donee  veniam  :  quid 
ad  te?  Tu  me  sequere.  Exijt  ergo 
sermo  iste  inter  fratres :  quia  discipulus 
ille  non  moritur.  Et  non  dixit  ei. 
iesus  non  moritur  :  sed  sic  eum  volo 
manere  donee  veuiam  :  quid  ad  te  ? 
Hie  est  discipulus  ille  qui  testimonium 
perhibet  de  his :  et  scripsit  hec.  Et 
scimus  quia  verum  est  testimonium 
eius. 


C  In  die  sanctorum  innocentium. 


Officium. 
[Ps.  viii  2a  :  la] 


1549 

vnrighteousnes.      If  we  say  we 

haue  not  sinned,  we  make  hym  a  Iyer, 
and  his  worde  is  not  in  vs. 

The  Gospell. 

[     lohn.  xxi. 

IESUS  sayed  vnto  Peter :  folowe  thou 
me.  Peter  turned  about, and  sa we 

the  disciple  whome  Iesus  loued,  folow- 
ing  (which  also  leaned  on  his  breaste 
at  Supper,  and  sayed  :  Lorde  whiche 
is  he  that  betray eth  thee?)  when  Peter 
therfore  sawe  him,  he  sayed  to  Iesus  : 
Lorde  what  shall  he  here  doe? 

Jesus  sayed  vnto  him  :  If  I  will  haue 
hym  to  tarye  tyll  I  come,  what  is  that 
to  thee?  Folowe  thou  me.  Then 
wente  this  saying  abroade  among  the 
brethren,  that  that  disciple  should  not 
dye.  Yet  Iesus  sayed  not  to  him, 
he  shall  not  dye  :  but  if  I  wil  that  he 
tary  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee  ? 
Thesame  disciple  is  he  whiche  testi- 
fyeth  of  these  thinges,  and  wrote  these 
thinges  :  and  we  knowe  that  his 
testimonye  is  true.  There  are  also 

many  other  thinges  which  Iesus  did, 
the  which  if  they  should  be  written 
euery  one,  I  suppose  the 

worlde  coulde  not  conteine  the 

bookes  that  should  be  written. 

C  At  Euensong. 

C  The  second  lesson.  Apoca.  xxii.  vnto 
the  ende. 

C  THE  INNOCENTES  DAYE. 
At  Mattyns. 

C  The  firste  lesson,  Hiere.  xxxi.  vnto. 
Moreouer  I  heard  Effraym. 

<[  At  the  Communion. 

[Deus  venerunt  gentes.  psal.  Ixxix. 

O  God,  the  heathen  are  come  into 
thyne  inheritaunce  :  thy  holy  temple 
haue  they  defyled,  and  made  leru- 
salem  an  heape  of  stones. 

The  dead  bodies  of  thy  seruauntes 
haue  they  geuen  to  bee  meate  vnto 
the  fowles  of  the  ayre  :  and  the  fleshe 
of  thy  Sainctes  vnto  the  beastes  of  the 
lande. 

Theyr  bloud  haue  they  shed  like 
water  on  euery  syde  of  lerusalem  : 
and  there  was  no  man  to  bury  them. 

We  are  become  an  open  shame  to 
oure  enemyes  :  a  very  skorne  and 
derision  vnto  them  that  are  rounde 
aboute  vs. 


THE  HOLY  INNOCENTS 


233 


1552 

vnrighteousnes.     Yf  we  say  we 

haue  not  sinned,  we  make  him  a  Iyer, 
&  his  word  is  not  in  vs. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[     lohn.  xxi. 

IESUS  sayde  vnto  Peter:  folowe  thou 
me.  Peter  turned  about,  and  sawe 

the  disciple  whom  lesus  loued  folow- 
ing  (which  also  leaned  on  his  breast 
at  Supper,  &  sayde  :  Lorde,  whych 
is  he  that  betrayeth  thee  ?)  when  Peter 
therfore  sawe  him,  he  sayd  to  lesus  : 
Lorde,  what  shall  he  here  doe  ? 
lesus  sayde  vnto  hym  :  Yf  I  wyll  haue 
hym  to  tarye  tyll  I  come,  what  is  that 
to  thee?  Folowe  thou  me.  Then 
wente  thys  sayinge  abroade  among  the 
brethren, that  that  Disciple  shoulde  not 
dye.  Yet  lesus  sayd  not  to  hym, 
he  shal  not  dye  :  but,  yf  I  wyll  that  he 
tarye  tyl  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee  ? 
The  same  disciple  is  he  which  testi- 
fieth  of  these  thinges,  and  wrote  these 
thinges  :  and  we  know  that  his 
testimonye  is  true.  There  are  also 

many  other  thinges  whyche  lesus  dyd, 
the  whych  yf  they  shoulde  be  wrytten 
euerye  one,  I  suppose  the 

world  could  not  conteyne  the 

bookes  that  should  be  wrytten. 


1661 

vnrighteousness.  If  we  say  that  we 
have  not  sinned,  we  make  him  a  lyar, 
and  his  word  is  not  in  vs. 

The  Gospell. 

[S:  John.  21.  419. 

lesus  sayd  vnto  Peter,  follow 
me.  Then  Peter  turning  about  seeth 
the  disciple  whom  lesus  loved,  follow 
ing  which  also  leaned  on  his  brest 
at  Supper;  and  sayd,  Lord,  which 
is  he  that  betrayeth  thee  ?  Peter 

seeing  him,  sayeth  to  lesus, 
Lord,  and  what  shall  this  man  do? 
lesus  sayeth  vnto  him,  If  J  will  that 
he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that 
to  thee  ?  follow  thou  me.  Then 
went  this  sayeing  abroad  among  the 
brethren  that  that  disciple  should  not 
dye  :  Yet  lesus  sayd  not  vnto  him, 
he  shall  not  dye  :  but,  if  I  will  that  he 
tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee  ? 
This  is  the  disciple  which  testi- 
fieth  of  these  things,  and  wrote  these 
things,  and  we  know  that  his 
testimony  is  true.  And  there  are  also 
many  other  things  which  lesus  did  ; 
the  which  if  they  should  be  written 
every  one,  I  suppose  that  even  the 
world  it  selfe  could  not  containe  the 
Books  that  shold  be  written. 


THINNOCENTES  DAIE. 


THE  JNNOCENTS  DAY. 


234 


THE  HOLY  INNOCENTS 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 

DEUS  cuius  hodierna  die  preconium 
innocentes  martyres  non  loquendo  sed 
moriendo  confess!  sunt :  omnia  in  nobis 
vitiorum  mala  mortifica  :  vt  fidem  tuam 
quam  lingua  nostra  loquitur,  etiam 
moribus  vita  fateatur.  Qui  cum  deo 
patre  et  spiritu  sancto  vi.  et  reg. 
Per.  (Gel.  i  8) 

C  Lectio  libri  apocalvpsis  beati  iohannis 

apostoli.  [xiiii  A 

IN  diebus  illis.     Vidi  supra  montem 

sion  agnum  stantem :  et  cum  eo  centum 


1549 

Lorde,  howe  long  wilt  thou  be  angry ; 
shall  thy  gelousye  burne  lyke  fyer  for 
euer  ? 

Powre  out  thyne  indignacion  vpon 
the  Heathen  that  haue  not  knowen 
thee  :  and  vpon  the  kingdomes  that 
haue  not  called  vpon  thy  name. 

For  they  haue  deuoured  lacob  :  and 
layed  waste  his  dwellyng  place. 

O  remembre  not  our  olde  sinnes, 
but  haue  mercy  vpon  vs  and  that 
soone  :  for  we  are  come  to  great 
misery. 

Helpe  us,  O  GOD  of  our  saluacion, 
for  the  glory  of  thy  name  :  O  deliuer 
vs,  and  bee  mercifull  vnto  our  synnes 
for  thy  names  sake. 

Wherfore  doe  the  Heathen  saye  : 
where  is  nowe  theyr  God? 

O  lette  the  vengeaunce  of  thy  ser- 
uauntes  bloud  that  is  shed  :  be  openly 
shewed  vpon  the  Heathen  in  our  syght. 

O  let  the  sorowfull  sighing  of  the 
prisoners  come  before  thee  :  acordyng 
vnto  the  greatnesse  of  thy  power,  pre- 
serue  thou  those  that  are  appoynted 
to  dye. 

And  as  for  the  blasphemye  (wher- 
with  oure  neyghbours  haue  blasphemed 
thee  :)  reward  thou  them,  O  Lord, 
seuen  folde  into  their  bosome. 

So  we  that  be  thy  people  and  shepe 
of  thy  pasture,  shall  geue  thee  thakes 
for  euer  :  and  will  alway  be  shewing 
furth  thy  prayse,  from  generacion  to 
generacion. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe 
and  euer.&c. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  God,  whose  prayse 
this  day  the  young  innocentes  thy  wit 
nesses  hath  confessed,  and  shewed 
foorth,  not  in  speakyng,  but  in  dying  : 
mortifye  and  kyll  all  vyces  in  vs, 

that 

in  our  conuersacion,  our  lyfe  may 
expresse  thy  fayth,  whiche  with  oure 
tongues  we  doe  confesse  : 

through  lesus  Christe  our  Lorde. 


The  Epistle. 

[Apoca.  xiiii. 

I  Looked,  and  loe,  a  lambe  stode  on 
the   mounte   Sion,  and  with  him  an 


THE  HOLY  INNOCENTS 


1552 


235 


1661 


C  The  Collect. 

ALmighty  god,  whose  praise 
this  daye  theyong  Innocentes  thy  wit 
nesses  hath  confessed,  and  shewed 
foorth,  not  in  speakinge,  but  in  dyinge : 
mortifye  &  kyl  al  vyces  in  vs, 

that 

in  our  couersatio,  our  lyfe  may 
expresse  thy  fayth,  whiche  wyth  oure 
togues  we  do  confesse  : 

through  lesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

<[  The  Epistle. 

[Apo.  xiiii 

I    Loked,   &  loe,  a  labe  stode  on 
the     mout     Sio,     &     with     him    an 


The  Collect. 

0  Almighty  God,  who  out  of  the 
mouths  of  babes,  and  sucklings  hast 
ordeined  strength,  and  madest  In 
fants  to  glorifie  thee  by  their  deaths : 
mortifie  and  kill  all  vices  in  vs  ;  and 
so  strengthen  vs  by  thy  grace,  that 
by  the  Innocency  of  our  lives,  and 
constancy  of  our  Faith,  even  vnto 
death,  we  may  glorifie  thy  holy 
name,  through  lesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
6  Am  fin, 

9For  the  Epistle. 

[ReveL  14.  41. 

1  looked,  and  lo,  a  Lamb  stood  on 
the   mount   Sion,  and  with   him,   an 


236 


THE  HOLY  INNOCENTS 


SOURCES 

quadraginta  quatuor  milia,  habentes 
uomen  eius  et  nomen  patris  eius  scrip- 
turn  in  frontibus  suis.  Et  audiui  vocem 
de  celo  tanquam  vocem  aquarum  mul- 
tarum  :  et  tanquam  vocem  tonitrui 
magni.  Et  vocem  quam  audiui  :  si  cut 
citharedorum  citharizantium  in  citharis 
suis.  Et  cantabant  quasi  canticum 
iiouum  ante  sedem  dei  :  et  ante  quatuor 
animalia  et  seniores.  Et  nemo  poterat 
dicere  canticum  :  nisi  ilia  centum  quad 
raginta  quatuor  milia,  qui  empti  sunt 
de  terra.  Hi  sunt  qui  cum  mulieribus 
non  sunt  coinquinati  :  virgines  enim 
sunt.  Hi  sequuntur  agnum  :  quo- 
cumque  ierit.  Hi  empti  sunt  ex 
omnibus  primitie  deo  et  agno  :  et  in 
ore  ipsorum  non  est  inuentum  men- 
dacium.  Sine  macula  sunt  :  ante 
thronum  dei. 

Secundum  matheum 


IN  illo  tempore.  Angelus  domini 
apparuit  in  somnis  ioseph  :  dicens 
Surge  et  accipe  puerum  et  matrem 
eius  &  fuge  in  egyptum  :  et  esto  ibi 
vsque  dum  dicam  tibi.  Futurum  est 
enim  vt  herodes  querat  puerum:  ad 
perdendum  eum.  Qui  consurgens 
accepit  puerum  &  matrem  eius  nocte, 
&  secessit  in  egyptum  :  et  erat  ibi 
vsque  ad  obitum  herodis.  Vt  adim- 
pleretur  quod  dictum  est  a  domino  : 
per  prophetam  dicentem.  Ex  egypto 
vocaui  filium  meum.  Tune  herodes 
videns  quoniam  illusus  esset  a  magis  : 
iratus  est  valde.  Et  mittens  occidit 
omnes  pueros  qui  erant  in  bethleem 
&  in  omnibus  finibus  eius  :  a  bimatu 
et  infra  secundum  tempus  quod  ex- 
quisierat  a  magis.  Tune  adimpletum 
est  quod  dictum  est  per  hieremiam 
prophetam  :  dicentem.  Vox  in  rama 
audita  est,  ploratus  &  vlulatus  multus  : 
rachel  plorans  filios  suos.  Et  noluit 
consolari  :  quia  non  sunt. 


1549 

hundred  and  .xliiii.  thousande 
hauing  his  name  and  his  fathers  name 
written  in  their  foreheades.  And  I 
hearde  a  voice  from  heauen,  as  the 
sounde  of  many  waters,  and  as  the 
voice  of  a  great  thundre.  And  I 
heard  the  voice  of  harpers  harpyng 
with  their  harpes.  And  they  sog  as 
it  were  a  new  song  before  the  seate, 
and  before  the  .iiii  beastes  and  the 
elders,  and  no  man  coulde  learne  the 
song,  but  the  .C.  &  xliiii. 
thousand,  which  were  redemed 
from  the  earth.  These  are  they  which 
were  not  defyled  with  weomen,  for  they 
are  virgins.  These 
folowe  the  lambe  whithersoeuer  he 
goeth.  These  were  redemed  from 
men  being  the  firste  fruites  vnto 
God,  and  to  the  lambe,  and  in  their 
mouthes  was  foud  no  guile  :  for  they 
are  without  spotte  before  the  throne  of 
God. 

The  Gospell. 

[      Math.  ii. 

THe  Angell  of  the  Lorde  appeared 
to  Ioseph  in  a  slepe,  saying  :  aryse 
and  take  the  chylde  and  his 

mother,  and  flye  into  Egypt,  and  be 
thou  there  till  I  bryng  thee  worde. 
For  it  will  come  to  passe  that  Herode 
shall  seke  the  childe  to  destroy 

him.  So  when  he  awoke,  he  tooke  the 
childe  and  his  mother,  by 
nyght,  and  departed  into  Egypt,  and 
was  there  vnto  the  death  of  Herode  : 
that  it  myght  bee  fulfilled  whiche  was 
spoken  of  the  Lorde  by  the  Prophete, 
saying  :  out  of  Egypt  haue  I  called 
my  sonne.  Then  Herode  when  he  sawe 
that  he  was  mocked  of  the  wise  men, 
he  was  exceding  wroth,  and  sent 
furth  men  of  warre,  and  slewe  al  the 
children  that  were  in  Bethleem,  and 
in  all  the  coastes  (as  many  as  were  .ii. 
yere  olde  or  vnder)  according  to  the 
time  whiche  he  had  diligently  knowen 
out  of  the  wisemen.  Then  was  fulfilled 
that  whiche  was  spoken  by  the  Prophete 
leremie,  where  as  he  sayde  :  in  Rama 
was  there  a  voyce  hearde,  lamentacion, 
weping  and  great  mournyng ; 
Rachel  wepyng  for  her  children,  and 
would  not  be  coumforted,  because 
they  were  not. 


THE  HOLY  INNOCENTS 


237 


1552 

hudred  and  .  xliiii  .  thousad 
hauig  his  name  &  his  fathers  name 
wrytten  in  theyr  forheades.  And  I 
heard  a  voyce  fro  heaue,  as  the 
sound  of  many  waters,  £  as  the 
voyce  of  a  greate  thundre.  And  I 
hearde  the  voyce  of  harpers  harping 
with  theyr  harpes.  And  they  song  as 
it  were  a  new  song  before  the  seate, 
•&  before  the  iiii.  beastes  &  the 
elders,  £  no  ma  could  learne  the 
songe,  but  the  hundred  fourtie  and 
foure  thousand,  which  were  redemed 
from  the  earth.  These  are  they  which 
were  not  defyled  wyth  women,  for  they 
are  virgins.  These 
folow  the  lambe  wheresoeuer  he 
goeth.  These  were  redemed  fro 
men,  being  the  first  fruites  vnto 
God,  £  to  the  lambe,  and  in  their 
mouthes  was  founde  no  guyle  :  for  they 
are  "wythout  spot  before  the  throne  of 
God. 


1661 

hundred  fourty  and  foure  thousand, 
having  his  Fathers  name 

written  in  their  foreheads.  And  I 
heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  as  the 
voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the 
voyce  of  a  great  thunder  :  And  I 
heard  the  voice  of  harpers  harping 
with  their  harps  :  And  they  sung  as 
it  were  a  new  song  before  the  Throne, 
and  before  the  foure  Beasts,  and  the 
Elders  ;  and  no  man  could  learn  that 
Song,  but  the  hundred  and  fourty  and 
foure  thousand  which  were  redeemed 
from  the  earth.  These  are  they  which 
were  not  defiled  with  women,  for  they 
are  Virgins  ;  These  are  they  which 
follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he 
goeth  :  These  were  redeemed  from 
among  men,  being  the  first-fruits  vnto 
God,  and  to  the  Lamb.  And  in  their 
mouth  was  found  no  guile  ;  for  they 
are  without  fault  before  the  Throne  of 
God. 


C  The  Gospell. 

[      Math,  ij 

THaungel  of  the  Lorde  appeared 
to  loseph  in  a  slepe,  sayinge  :  aryse 
&  take  the  childe  &  his 

mother,  £  flee  into  Egipt,  £  be 
thou  there,  tyll  I  bring  thee  woorde. 
For  it  wyll  come  to  passe  that  Herode 
shal  seke  the  childe  to  destroye 

him.  So  when  he  awoke,  he  toke  the 
chylde  and  his  mother,  by 
night,  and  departed  into  Egipt,  and 
was  there  vnto  the  death  of  Herode  : 
that  it  myghte  be  fulfylled  whych  was 
spoke  of  the  Lord  by  the  Prophete, 
saying  :  out  of  Egipt  haue  I  called 
my  sonne.  The  Herode  when  he  sawe 
that  he  was  mocked  of  the  wyse  men, 
he  was  exceadinge  wroth,  and  sente 
foorth  men  of  warre,  and  slewe  all  the 
chyldren  that  were  in  Bethleem,  and 
in  al  the  coastes  (as  many  as  were  two 
yere  olde  or  vnder)  accordynge  to  the 
tyme  whych  he  had  diligently  knowe 
out  of  the  wyse  men.  Then  was  fulfylled 
that  whyche  was  spoken  by  the  Prophet 
leremie,  where  as  he  sayd  :  in  Rama 
was  there  a  voyce  heard,  lamentacio, 
weping,  and  great  mourning  : 
Rachel  weping  for  her  chyldren,  £ 
would  not  be  comforted,  because 
they  were  not. 


The  Gospell. 

[S:  Mat.  2.  ^13. 

The  Angel  of  the  Lord  appeareth 
to  loseph  in  a  dream,  saying  Arise, 
and  take  the  young  childe  and  his 
mother,  and  flee  into  Egypt,  and  be 
thou  there,  vntill  I  bring  thee  word  : 
for  Herod 

will  seeke  the  young  childe  to  destroy 
him.  When  he  arose,  he  tooke  the 
young  childe  and  his  mother  by 
night,  and  departed  into  Egypt  ;  and 
was  there  vntill  the  death  of  Herod  : 
that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was 
spoken  of  the  Lord,  by  the  Prophet, 
saying,  Out  of  Egypt  have  I  called 
my  Son.  Then  Herod  when  he  saw 
that  he  was  mocked  of  the  Wise  men 

was  exceeding  wroth,  and  sent 
forth  ,  and  slew  all  the 

Children  that  were  in  Bethlehem,  and 
in  all  the  Coasts  thereof,  from  two 
years  ould,  and  vnder,  according  to  the 
time  which  he  had  diligently  enquired 

of  the  wisemen.  Then  was  fulfilled 
that  which  was  spoken  by  leremy 
the  Prophet  sayeing,  In  Rama 
was  there  a  voice  heard,  Lamentation, 
and  weeping,  and  great  mourning, 
Rachel  weeping  for  her  children,  and 
would  not  be  comforted,  because 
they  are  not. 


238 


SUNDAY  AFTER  CHRISTMAS 


SOURCES 

<[  Sexta  die  a  natiuitate  domini  sine 

dominica  fuerit  siue  non. 
[Sap.  xviii  14,  loa :  Ps.  xcii  (xciii)  1] 


1549 

C  THE  SONDAY  AFTER  CHRISTMAS  DAY. 

[Leuaui  oculos.  psal  cxxi. 

I  will  lyfte  vp  myne  iyes  vnto  the 
hilles  :  from  whence  cummeth  my 
helpe  ? 

My  helpe  cummeth  euen  from  the 
Lorde :  whiche  hath  made  heauen 
and  earth. 

He  will  not  suffer  thy  foote  to  be 
moued  :  and  he  that  kepeth  thee,  will 
not  slepe. 

Behold,  he  that  kepeth  Israel ;  shal 
neither  slumber  nor  slepe. 

The  Lorde  himselfe  is  thy  keper  : 
the  Lord  is  thy  defence  vpon  thy 
ryght  hande. 

So  that  the  Sunne  shall  not  burne 
thee  by  day  :  neither  the  Moone  by 
night. 

The  Lord  shall  preserue  thee  from 
all  euill :  yea,  it  is  euen  he  that  shall 
kepe  thy  soule. 

The  Lord  shall  preserue  thy  going 
out,  and  thy  comming  in  :  from  this 
tyme  forth  for  euermore. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe 
and  euer.  .&c. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  God  whiche  hast  geuen 
vs.&C.  As  vpon  Christmas  daye. 


Ad  galathas 

[iiii.  A 
Fratres.       Quanto    tempore    heres 

paruulus  est,  nichil  differt  a  seruo  : 
cum  sit  dominus  omnium.  Sed  sub 
tutoribus  &  actoribus  est :  vsque  ad 
prefmitum  tempus  a  patre.  Ita  et  nos 
cum  essemus  paruuli :  sub  elementis 
mundi  huius  eramus  seruientes.  At 
vbi  veriit  plenitude  temporis  :  misit 
deus  filium  suum  factum  ex  muliere, 
factum  sub  lege,  vt  eos  qui  sub  lege 


The  Epistle. 

[Gala.  iiii. 

ANd  I  say,  that  the  heyre  (as  long 
as  he  is  a.  childe)  differeth  not  from 
a  seruaunt,  though  he  be  Lorde  of  all, 
but  is  vnder  tutours  and  gouernours, 
vntill  the  tyme  that  the  father  hath 
appointed.  Euen  so  we  also,  when  we 
were  children,  were  in  bondage  vnder 
the  ordeinaunces  of  the  worlde  :  But 
when  the  tyme  was  full  come, 
God  sente  his  sonne  made  of  a 

woman,  and  made  bonde  vnto  the  lawe, 
to  redeme  them  whiche  were  bonde 
vnto  the  lawe :  thatwe  through  eleccion 


SUNDAY  AFTER  CHRISTMAS 


1552 

THE   SUNDAIE   AFTER   CHRISTMAS   DAYE. 


239 


1661 


THE  SUNDAY  AFTER  CHRISTMAS  DAY. 


C  The  Collecte. 

Almighty  God  whych   hast  geuen 
vs.  &c.      As  vpon  Christmas  daye. 


C  The  Epistle. 

[Galat.  iiii 

ANd  I  saye :  that  the  heyre  (as  longe 
as  he  is  a  child)  differeth  not  fro 
a  seruaunt,  though  he  be  Lorde  of  all, 
but  is  vnder  tutours  &  gouernours, 
vntil  the  time  that  the  father  hath 
appoynted.  Euen  so  we  also,  whe  we 
were  chyldre,  were  in  bodage  vnder 
the  ordeinauces  of  the  world  :  But 
when  the  tyme  was  ful  come, 
God  sente  hys  sonne  made  of  a 

worm,  &  made  bonde  vnto  the  law, 
to  redeme  them  which  were  bonde 
vnto  the  law  :  that  we  through  election 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who  hast  given 
vs  thy  only  begotten  Son,  to  take  our 
nature  vpon  him,  and  as  at  this  time, 
to  be  born  of  a  pure  Virgin  ;  grant 
that  we  being  regenerate,  and  made 
thy  children  by  adoption  and  grace, 
may  daily  be  renewed  by  thy  holy 
spirit,  through  the  same  our  Lord 
lesus  Christ,  who  liveth  and  reigneth 
with  thee,  and  the  same  spirit,  ever 
one  God,  world  without  end.  Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Gal.  4.  •»!. 

Now  I  say,  that  the  heir,  as  long 
as  he  is  a  childe,  differeth  nothing  from 
a  servant,  though  he  be  Lord  of  all. 
But  heisundertutours,andgovernours, 
vntill  the  time  appointed  of  the 
Father.  Even  so  we  ,  when  we 

were  children,  were  in  bondage  vnder 
the  Elements  of  the  world  :  But 
when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come, 
God  sent  forth  his  son  made  of  a 
Woman,  made  vnder  the  law: 
to  redeeme  them  that  were 
vnder  the  law,  that  we 


240 


SUNDAY  AFTER  CHRISTMAS 


SOURCES 

erant  redimeret :  vt  adoptionem  fili- 
orum  reciperemus.  Quoniam  autem 
estis  filii  dei :  misit  deus  spiritum  filij 
sui  in  corda  vestra  clamantem  abba 
pater.  Itaque  iam  non  est  seruus  :  sed 
filius.  Quod  si  filius  et  heres  per 
deum. 

Secundum  Lucam. 

[S.  Luke  ii  33-40] 

In  nocte  natiuitatis  domini  post  nouem 
lectiones  cantetur  hoc  euangelium  in  pulpito 
a  diacono.  €  Initium  sancti  euangelij  se- 
cundum  Matheum. 

Liber  generationis  .  .  .  qui  vocatur  xps 
(Mat.  i.  1-16). 

Calendar  1561:  'Item,  so  oft  as  the 
first  Chapter  of  Saint  Mathie  is  read 
either  for  Lesson  or  Gospel :  ye  shall 
begin  the  same  at.'  The  birth  of  Jesus 
Christ  was  on  this  wise.  &c. :  Wren 
Suggestions :  '  The  first  half  of  this  Gos 
pel  should,  by  former  Directions,  be 
omitted,  and  is  to  begin  at  the  18th 
verse.' 


In  vigilia  natiuitatis  domini. 

Seeundum  Matheum.  [i.  c 

IN    illo  tempore.      Cum   esset   de- 

sponsata    mater    iesu    maria   ioseph  : 


1549 

myght  receyue  the  inheritaunce  that 
belongeth  vnto  the  naturall  sonnes. 
Because  ye  are  sonnes,  God  hath 
sent  the  spirite  of  his  sonne  into 
oureheartes,whichecryethAbbafather. 
Wherfore  nower  thou  art  not  a 
seruaunte,  but  a  sonne  :  If  thou  bee  a 
sonne,  thou  art  also  an  heyre  of  God 
through  Christe. 

The  Gospell. 

[    Math.  i. 

Tnis  is  the  booke  of  the  generacion 
of  lesus  Christ  the  sonne  of  Dauid, 
the  sonne  of  Abraham  :  Abraham 
begat  Isaac :  Isaac  begat  lacob : 
lacob  begat  ludas  and  his  brethren  : 
ludas  begat  Phares  and  Zaram  of 
Thamar :  Phares  begat  Esrom  :  Esrom 
begat  Aram  :  Aram  begat  Aminadab  : 
Aminadab  begat  Naasso  :  Naasson 
begat  Salmon  :  Salmon  begat  Boos  of 
Rahab  :  Boos  begat  Obed  of  Ruth  : 
Obed  begat  lesse  :  lesse  begat  Dauid 
the  kyng  :  Dauid  the  kyng  begat 
Salomon  of  her  that  was  the  wife  of 
Urie :  Salomo  begat  Roboam :  Ro- 
boam  begat  Abia  :  Abia  begat  Asa  : 
Asa  begat  losaphat :  losaphat  begat 
loram :  loram  begat  Osias :  Osias 
begat  loatham  :  loatham  begat  Achas : 
Achas  begat  Ezechias:  Ezechias  begat 
Manasses  :  Manasses  begat  Amon  : 
Amon  begat  losias :  losias  begat 
leconias  and  his  brethren,  about  the 
tyme  that  they  were  caryed  awaye  to 
Babilon.  And  after  they  were  brought 
to  Babilon,  leconias  begat  Salathiell : 
Salathiell  begat  Zorobabel :  Zorobabel 
begat  Abiud  :  Abiud  begat  Eliachim  : 
Eliachim  begat  Azor  :  Azor  begat 
Sadoc  :  Sadoc  begat  Achin  :  Achin 
begat  Eliud :  Eliud  begat  Eleasar : 
Eleasar  begat  Matthan  :  Matthan 
begat  lacob  :  lacob  begat  Ioseph  the 
husbande  of  Marie  :  of  whome  was 
borne  lesus,  euen  he  that  is  called 
Christe.  And  so  all  the  generacions 
from  Abraham  to  Dauid,  are  .xiiii. 
generacions.  And  from  Dauid  vnto 
the  captiuitie  of  Babilon,  are  .xiiii. 
generacions.  And  from  the  captiuitie 
of  Babilon  vnto  Christ,  are  .xiiii 
generacions. 


The   birth   of  lesus   Christe   was   on 
this  wyse  :  When       his  mother  Marie 


SUNDAY  AFTER  CHRISTMAS 


241 


1552 

myght  receyue  the  inheritaunce  that 
belongeth  vnto  the  naturall  sonnes. 
Because  ye  are  sonnes,  God  hath 
sent  the  spirit  of  his  sonne  into 
our  heartes,  whych  cryeth  Abba  father. 
Wherefore  now,  thou  arte  not  a 
seruaunt,  but  a  sonne  :  Yf  thou  bee  a 
sonne,  thou  art  also  an  heyre  of  God 
through  Christe. 

The  Gospell. 

[    Math,  i 

THis  is  the  booke  of  the  generation 
of  lesus  Christ,  the  sone  of  Dauid, 
the  sone  of  Abraham  :  Abraha 
begat  Isaac  :  Isaac  begat  lacob  : 
lacob  begat  ludas  and  hys  brethren  : 
ludas  begat  Phares  and  Zaram  oi 
Thamar:  Phares  begat  Esrom:  Esrom 
begat  Aram  :  Aram  begat  Aminadab  : 
Aminadab  begat  Naasson  :  Naasson 
begat  Salmon  :  Salmon  begat  Boos  of 
Rahab  :  Boos  begat  Obed  of  Ruth  : 
Obed  begat  lesse  :  lesse  begat  Dauid 
the  king  :  Dauid  the  king  begat 
Salomo,  of  her  that  was  the  wife  of 
Urye  :  Salomo  begat  Roboam  :  Ro- 
boam  begat  Abia  :  Abia  begat  Asa  : 
Asa  begat  losaphat  r  losaphat  begat 
loram  :  loram  begat  Osias :  Osias 
begat  loatham  :  loathambegat  Achas: 
Achas  begat  Ezechias :  Ezechias  begat 
Manasses  :  Manasses  begat  Amon  : 
Amo  begat  losias  :  losias  begat 
leconias  &  hys  brethren,  about  the 
tyme  that  they  were  caryed  awaye  to 
Babilo.  And  after  they  were  brought 
to  Babilo,  lechonias  begat  Salathiel  : 
Salathiel  begat  Zorobabel  :  Zorobabel 
bt-gat  Abiud  :  Abiud  begat  Eliachim  : 
Eliachim  begat  Azor  :  Azor  begat 
Sadoc  :  Sadoc  begat  Achin  :  Achin 
begat  Eliud  :  Eliud  begat  Eleasar  : 
Eleasar  begat  Matthan  :  Mattha 
begat  lacob  :  lacob  begat  Joseph  the 
husband  of  Marie  :  of  who  was 
borne  lesus,  euen  he  that  is  called 
Christ.  And  so  all  the  generations 
from  Abraham  to  Dauid,  are  .xiiii. 
generatios.  And  fro  Dauid  vnto 
the  captiuitie  of  Babilon,  are  .xiiii 
generations.  And  from  the  captiuitie 
of  Babilon  vnto  Christe,  are  .xiiii. 
generations. 


1661 

might     receive     the     Adoption     of 

sonns. 

And  because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath 
sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into 
your  hearts,  cryeing,  Abba,  Father. 
Wherefore  thou  art  no  more  a 

servant,  but  a  son,  and  if  a 
son  then  an  heir  of  God 
through  Christ. 

The  Gospel. 

[S:  Mat.  i.  418 


The   byrth   of   lesus    Christ   was   on       The   birth    of    lesus   Christ   was   on 
this  wyse  :  When     hys  mother  Marye       this  wise  :  When  as  his  mother  Mary 

Q 


242 


THE  CIRCUMCISION 


SOURCES 

antequam  conuenirent  inuenta  est  in 
vtero  habens  de  spiritu  sancto.  loseph 
autem  vir  eius  cum  esset  iustus,  et 
nollet  earn  traducere :  voluit  occulte 
dimittere  earn.  Hec  autem  eo  cogi- 
tante :  ecce  angelus  domini  in  somnis 
apparuit  ei  dicens.  loseph  fili  dauid  : 
noli  timere  accipere  mariam  coniugem 
tuam.  Quod  enim  in  ea  natum  est : 
de  spiritu  sancto  est.  Pariet  autem 
filium :  ct  vocabis  nomen  eius  iesum. 
Ipse  enim  saluum  faciet  populum  suum : 
a  peccatis  eorum. 


C  In  die  circumcisionis  domini. 


Officium. 
[Esa.  ix  6  :  Ps.  xcvii  (xcviii)  la] 


1549 

was  maryed  to  loseph  (beefore  they 
came  to  dwell  together)  she  was 
founde  with  childe  by  the  holy  goste. 
Then  loseph  her  husbande  (because 
he  was  a  righteous  manne,  and  woulde 
not  put  her  to  shame)  was  minded 
prieuelytodepartefrom  her.  But  whyle 
he  thus  thought,  beholde,  the 
Angell  of  the  Lorde  appeared  vnto 
him  in  slepe,  saying  :  loseph,  thou 
sonne  of  Dauid,  feare  not  to  take  vnto 
thee  Mary  thy  wyfe  :  for  that  whiche 
is  conceyued  in  her,  cummeth  of  the 
holy  goste.  She  shall  bryng  furth 

a  sonne,  and  thou  shalt  call  his  name 
lesus  :  for  he  shall  saue  his  people 
from  theyr  sinnes. 

All  this  was  done,  that  it  myght 
bee  fulfilled  whiche  was  spoken  of 
Lorde  by  the  Prophete  saying  :  Be 
holde,  a  mayde  shall  bee  with  chylde, 
and  shall  bryng  furthe  a  sonne,  and 
they  shall  call  hys  name  Emanuell, 
whiche  yf  a  manne  interprete,  is  as- 
muche  to  say  as  God  with  us.  And 
loseph  assone  as  he  awoke  out  of 
slepe,  did  as  the  Angel  of  the  Lorde 
had  bidden  him  :  and  he  toke  his  wyfe 
vnto  him,  and  knew  her  not,  til  she 
had  brought  furth  her  first  begotten 
sonne,  and  called  his  name  lesus. 

C.  THE  CIRCUMCISION  OF  CHRISTE. 
At  Mattyns. 

The  first  lesson.  Gene.  xvii.  vnto  the  ende. 
The  second  lesson.  Rom.  ii.  vnto  the  ende. 

IT  At  the  Communion. 

[Letatus  sum.  psal.  cxxii. 

I  was  glad,  when  they  sayde  vnto 
me  :  we  will  goe  into  the  house  of  the 
Lorde. 

Oure  feete  shall  stande  in  thy  gates  : 
O  Jerusalem. 

Jerusalem  is  buylded  as  a  citie  :  that 
is  at  vnitie  in  it  selfe. 

For  thither  the  Tribes  goe  vp,  euen 
the  Tribes  of  the  Lorde  :  to  testifye 
vnto  Israel,  to  geue  thankes  vnto  the 
name  of  the  Lorde. 

For  there  is  the  seate  of  iudge- 
mente  :  euen  the  seate  of  the  house  of 
Dauid. 

O  praye  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem  : 
they  shall  prosper  that  loue  thee. 

Peace  be  within  thy  walles  :  and 
plenteousnes  within  thy  palaces. 


THE  CIRCUMCISION 


243 


1552 

was  maryed  to  Joseph,  (before  they 
came  to  dwell  together)  she  was 
founde  with  chylde  by  the  holy  ghoste. 
Then  Joseph  her  husbande  (because 
he  was  a  righteous  man,  and  would 
not  put  her  to  shame)  was  mynded 
pryuelytodepartefromher.  Butwhyle 
he  thus  thoughte,  beholde,  the 
Angell  of  the  Lorde  appeared  vnto 
him  in  slepe,  sayinge  :  Joseph,  thou 
sonne  of  Dauid,  feare  not  to  take  vnto 
thee  Marye  thy  wyfe  :  for  that  whyche 
is  conceaued  in  her,  commeth  of  the 
holye  ghoste.  She  shall  bringeforthe 
a  sonne,  and  thou  shalte  call  hys  name 
Jesus  :  for  he  shall  saue  his  people 
from  theyr  synnes. 

All  thys  was  done,  that  it  might 
bee  fulfylled  whych  was  spoken  of  the 
Lorde  by  the  Prophete,  sayinge  :  Be 
holde,  a  mayde  shall  bee  wyth  chylde, 
and  shall  brynge  forthe  a  sonne,  and 
they  shall  call  hys  name  Emanuel, 
whych  yf  a  man  interprete,  is  as- 
much  to  say  as  god  wyth  vs.  And 
Joseph,  assone  as  he  awoke  out  of 
slepe,  dyd  as  the  Angel  of  the  Lord 
had  bidde  him  :  &  he  toke  his  wyfe 
vnto  him,  and  knewe  her  not,  till  she 
had  brought  furthe  the  firste  begotten 
sonne,  and  called  his  name  Jesus. 

THE  CIRCUMCISION  OF  CHRISTE. 


1661 

was  espoused  to  Joseph,  (before  they 
came  together)  she  was 

found  with  Childe  of  the  holy  Ghost. 
Then  Joseph  her  husband,  being 
a  iust  man,  and  not  willing  to  make 
her  a  publique  example,  was  minded 
to  put  her  away  privily.  But  while 
he  thought  on  these  things,  behold,  the 
Angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  vnto 
him  in  a  dream,  saying,  Joseph,  thou 
son  of  David,  feare  not  to  take  vnto 
thee  Mary  thy  wife ;  for  that  which 
is  conceived  in  her  is  of  the 
holy  Ghost.  And  she  shall  bring  forth 
a  Son,  and  thou  shall  call  his  name 
Jesus,  for  he  shall  save  his  people 
from  their  sins.- 

-(Now  all  this  was  don,  that  it  might 
be  fulfilled,  which  was  spoken  of  the 
Lord  by  the  Prophet,  sayeing,  Be 
hold,  a  virgin  shall  be  with  childe 
and  shall  bring  forth  a  son,  and 
they  shall  call  his  name  Immanuel, 
which  being  interpreted  is 

God  with  vs.)  Then 
Joseph  being  raysed  from 
sleep,  did  as  the  Angel  of  the  Lord 
had  bidden  him,  and  tooke  vnto  him 
his  wife  :  And  knew  her  not  till  she 
had  brought  forth  her  first  born 
son,  And  he  called  his  name  Jesus. 

THE  CIRCUMCISION  OF  CHRIST. 


244 


THE  CIRCUMCISION 


SOURCES 


[Cp.  Omnipotens  deus  cuius  uni- 
genitus  hodierna  die  ne  legem  solueret 
quam  adimplere  uenerat  corporalem 
suscepit  circumcisionem.  mentes 
uestras  contra  oninia  uiciorum 
uincencia  (al.  incentiua)  sua  gratia 
muniat.  et  suam  in  uos  benediccionem 
clementerinfundat.  (Miss.  Westmonast. 
c.  540)  ] 

Epistola. 
[Tit.  ii  11-15] 


1549 

For  my  brethren  and  companions 
sakes  :  I  will  wishe  thee  prosperitie. 

Yea  because  of  the  house  of  the 
Lorde  our  God  :  I  wyll  seke  to  doe 
thee  good. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe 
and  euer.&c. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  God,  whiche  madest  thy 
blessed  sonne  to  be  circumcised  and 
obedient  to  the  lawe  for  man  ;  graunte 
vs  the  true  circumcisio  of  thy  spirite, 
that  our  heartes  and  all  our  members 
being  mortifyed  from  al  worldly  and 
carnal  lustes,  may  in  all  thinges 
obey  thy  blessed  will :  through  the- 
same  thy  sonne  lesus  Christe  our 
Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  iiii. 

BLessed  is  that  man  to  whom  the 
Lord  wil  not  impute  sinne.  Came 
this  blessednes  then  vpon  the  vncir- 
cucision  ,  or  vpo  the  circu- 

cisio  also  ?  for  we  say,  that  fayth  was 
rekoned  to  Abraha  for  righteous- 
nes.  Howe  was  it  then  rekoned? 
when  he  was  in  the  circumcision,  or 
when  he  was  in  the  vncircumcisyon  ? 
not  in  the  tyme  of  circumcisyon  ;  but 
whenhewasyetvncircumcised.  Andhe 
receyued  the  signe  of  circumcisyon,  as 
a  scale  of  the  righteousnes  of  faith, 
which  he  had  yet  being  vncircumcised : 
that  he  should  bee  the  father  of  all 
them  that  beleue,  though  they  bee  not 
circumcysed,  that  ryghteousne's  myght 
be  imputed  to  them  also  :  and  that 
he  myght  bee  the  father  of  circum- 
cysion,  not  vnto  them  onely  whiche 
came  of  the  circumcysed,  but  vnto 
them  also  that  walke  in  the  steppes 
of  the  fayth  that  was  in  our  father 
Abraham  before  the  time  of 
circumcysion.  For  the  promyse  (that 
he  shoulde  bee  the  heyre  of  the 
worlde)  happened  not  to  Abraham,  or 
to  his  seede,  through  the  law,  but 
through  the  ryghteousnes  of  faythe. 
For  if  they,  whiche  are  of  the  lawe,  be 
heyres,  then  is  fayth  but  vayne,  and 
the  promise  of  none  effect. 


THE  CIRCUMCISION 


245 


1552 


1661 


C  The  Collecte. 

ALmighty  God,  which  madest  thy 
blessed  sone  to  be  circumcised  and 
obedient  to  the  lawe  for  man  :  graunt 
vs  the  true  circumcisio  of  th<?  spirite, 
that  our  heartes  &  all  our  members 
being  mortified  fro  all  worldlye  and 
carnall  lustes,  maye  in  all  thinges 
obey  thy  blessed  wil  :  through  the 
same  thy  sonne  lesus  Christ  our 
Lord. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  iiii 

BLessed  is  that  man  to  who  the 
Lord  wyl  not  impute  sinne.  Came 
thys  blessednesse  then  vpon  the  vncir- 
cumcisio  ,  or  vpon  the  circum 

cision  also?  for  we  saye,  that  fayth  was 
rekoned  to  Abraha  for  righteous- 
nes  How  was  it  the  rekoned? 
whe  he  was  in  the  circumcisio,  or 
whe  he  was  in  the  vncircucision  ? 
not  in  time  of  circumcisio  :  but 
when  he  wasyet  vncircumcised.  And  he 
receyued  the  signe  of  circumcision,  as 
a  seale  of  the  righteousnes  of  fayth, 
which  he  had  yet  beyng  vncircucised  : 
that  he  shulde  bee  the  father  of  al 
the  that  beleue,  though  they  be  not 
circumcised,  that  righteousnesse  might 
bee  imputed  to  the  also  :  £  that 
he  might  be  the  father  of  circu- 
cision,  not  vnto  the  only  that 
came  of  the  circumcised,  but  vnto 
the  also  that  walke  in  the  steppes 
of  the  fayth  which  was  in  our  father 
Abraham  before  the  tyme  of 
circucisio.  For  the  promyse  (that 
he  should  be  the  heyre  of  the 
world)  happened  not  to  Abraham,  or 
to  hys  seede,  through  the  lawe,  but 
throughe  the  righteousnesse  of  fayth. 
For  yf  they,  whyche  are  of  the  lawe,  be 
heyres,  then  is  fayth  but  vayne,  and 
the  promise  of  none  effecte. 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who8  madest  thy 
blessed  son  to  be  circumcised,  and 
obedient  to  the  law  for  man  :  Grant 
vs  the  true  Circumcision  of  the  spirit, 
that  our  hearts,  and  all  our  members 
being  mortified  from  all  worldly  and 
carnall  lusts,  8we  may  in  all  things 
obey  thy  blessed  will,  through  the 
same  thy  Son  lesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  6Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  4.  48. 

Blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  the 
Lord  will  not  impute  sin.  cometh 
this  blessedness  then  vpon  the  Cir 
cumcision  only,  or  vpon  the  vncircum- 
cision  also  ?  for  we  say,  that  faith  was 
reckoned  to  Abraham  for  righteous 
ness.  How  was  it  then  reckoned  ? 
when  he  was  in  Circumcision,  or 
in  vncircumcision  ? 
not  in  circumcision,  but 

in  vncircumcision.  And  he 
received  the  signe  of  circumcision, 
a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith 
which  he  had,  yet  being  vncircumcised ; 
that  he  might  be  the  father  of  all 
them  that  believe,  though  they  be  not 
circumcised ;  that  righteousness  might 
be  imputed  vnto  them  also.  And 

the  father  of  circum 
cision  to  them  who  are  not 
of  the  Circumcision  only,  but 

also  walke    in    the    steps 

of  that  Faith  of  our  father 
Abraham  which  he  had  being  yet 
vncircumcised.  For  the  promise  that 
he  should  be  the  heir  of  the 
world,  was  not  to  Abraham,  or 
to  his  seed,  through  the  Law  ;  but 
through  the  righteousnes  of  faith. 
For  if  they  which  are  of  the  law  be 
heirs,  Faith  is  made  voyd,  and 

the  promise  made  of  none  effect. 


246 


THE  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 
Sequentia  sancti  euangelii  secundum  lucam. 

IN  illo  tempore. 


[ii.  c. 

Postquam  consummati  sunt  dies  octo 
vt  circumcideretur  puer  :  vocatum  est 
nomen  eius  lesus.  Quod  vocatum  est 
ab  angelo  :  priusquam  in  vtero  con- 
ciperetur. 


C  In  die  epiphanie. 


Officium. 
[Ecce  aduenit  :  Ps.  Ixxi  (Ixxii)  1] 


1549 

The  Gospell. 

[      Luc.  ii. 

ANd  it  fortuned,  assone  as  the 
Aungels  were  gone  awaye  from 
the  shepeheardes  into  heauen,  they 
sayde  one  to  another  :  let  vs  goe  nowe 
euen  vnto  Bethleem,  and  see  thys 
thyng  that  we  heare  say  is  happened, 
which  the  lord  hath  shewed  vnto 
vs.  And  they  came  with  hast,  and 
found  Maryeand  Joseph,  and  the  Babe 
laide  in  a  maunger.  And  when  they 
had  sene  it,  they  published  abroade 
the  saying  whiche  was  tolde  them 
of  that  childe.  And  all  they 
that  heard  it  wondered  at  those 
thynges  which  were  tolde  them  of  the 
shepeheardes.  But  Marye  kepte  all 
those  sayinges,  and  pondered  them  in 
her  heart.  And  the  shepeheardes  re 
turned,  praising  &  lauding  God,  for 
all  the  thyngesthat  theyhad  heardeand 
seene,  euen  as  it  was  tolde  vnto  them. 
And  when  the  eyght  daye  was 
come  that  the  childe  shoulde  be  cir 
cumcised,  his  name  was  called  lesus, 
whiche  was  named  of  the  Angell  be 
fore  he  was  conceiued  in  the  wombe. 

C  At  Euen  song. 

{The  first  lesson.  Deute.  x.  And  now  Israel, 
vnto  the  ende. 
The  seconde  Lesson.     Coloss.  ii.  vnto  the 
ende. 
THE  EPIPHANIE. 

C  At  Mattyns. 

f  The  first  Lesson.  Esai.  Ix.  vnto  the  ende. 
-|  The    seconde    Lesson.    Luke.  iii.  And    it 
v.        fortuned,  vnto  the  ende. 

C  At  the  Communion. 

[Cantate  domino,  psal.  xcvi. 

O  Syng  vnto  the  Lorde  a  newe  song : 
syng  vnto  the  Lorde  all  the  whole 
earth. 

Syng  vnto  the  Lorde,  and  prayse 
his  name  :  bee  tellyng  of  his  saluacion 
from  daye  to  daye. 

Declarehishonourvntothe  Heathen : 
and  his  woonders  vnto  all  people. 

For  the  Lorde  is  great,  and  cannot 
worthely  be  praised  :  he  is  more  to  be 
feared  then  all  Gods. 

As  for  all  the  Gods  of  the  Heathen, 
they  be  but  ydolles  ;  but  it  is  the  Lorde 
that  made  the  heauens. 

Glory     and    wurshyp     are     before 


THE  EPIPHANY 


247 


1552 

C  The  Gospell. 

[      Luke,  ii 

ANd  it  fortuned,  assone  as  the 
Aungels  were  gone  awaye  fro 
the  shepherdes  into  heauen,  they 
sayd  one  to  another :  let  vs  goe  now 
euen  vnto  Bethleem,  and  see  thys 
thinge  that  we  heare  saye  is  happened, 
whych  ye  lord  hath  shewed  vnto 
vs.  And  they  came  wyth  hast  and 
found  Mary  and  Joseph,  &  the  babe 
layd  in  a  mauger.  And  when  they 
had  sene  it,  they  published  abrode 
the  sayinge  that  was  tolde  them 
of  that  chylde.  And  all  they 
that  hearde  it,  wondred  at  those 
thynges  whyche  were  tolde  them  of  the 
shepeheardes.  But  Mary  kepte  all 
those  sayinges,  and  pondred  them  in 
her  heart.  And  the  shepeheardes  re 
turned,  praysinge  &  lauding  God  for 
all  the  thinges  they  had  heard  and 
seen,  euen  as  it  was  tolde  vnto  them. 
And  when  the  eyghte  daye  was 
come  that  the  chyld  should  be  cir- 
cucysed,  his  name  was  called  lesus, 
which  was  named  of  the  Aungel  be 
fore  he  was  conceaued  in  the  wombe. 

C  Yf  there  be  a  Sundaye  betwene  the  Epi 
phany  e,  and  the  Circumcision,  then  shal  be 
•vsed  the  same  Collecte,  Epistle,  and  Gospell, 
at  the  Communion,  whych  was  vsed  vpon  the 
day  of  Circumcision. 

THE  EPIPHANIE. 


1661 

The  Gospel. 

[S:  Luke.  2.  415. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  as  the 

Angels  were  gone  away  from 
them  into  heaven  the  shepherds 
sayd  one  to  another,  Let  vs  now  go 
even  vnto  Bethlehem,  and  see  this 
thing  which  is  come  to  pass, 
which  the  Lord  hath  made  known  vnto 
vs.  And  they  came  with  hast,  and 
found  Mary  and  Joseph,  and  the  babe 
lyeing  in  a  Manger.  And  when  they 
had  seen  it,  they  made  known  abroad 
the  saying  which  was  told  them 
concerning  this  childe.  And  all  they 
that  heard  it,  wondered  at  those 
things  which  were  tould  them  by  the 
Shepherds  :  But  Mary  kept  all 
these  things,  and  pondered  them  in 
her  heart.  And  the  shepherds  re- 
turned,glorifieingand  praysingGod  for 
all  the  things  that  they  had  heard  and 
seen,  as  it  was  tould  vnto  them. 

And  when  eight  dayes  were  accom 
plished  for  the  circumcising  of  the 
childe,  his  name  was  called  lesus, 
which  was  so  named  of  the  Angel  be 
fore  he  was  conceived  in  the  Womb. 


The  same  Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel, 
shall  serve  for  every  day  after  vnto  the 
Epiphany. 

THE  EPIPHANY,  OR  »THE  MANIFESTATION  OF 
CHRIST  TO  THE  GENTILES. 


248 


THE  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 
DEUS   qui  hodierna  die  vnigenitum 

tuum  gentibus  stella  duce  reuelasti : 
concede  propitius  vt  qui  iam  te  ex  fide 
cognouimuSj  vsque  ad  contemplandam 
speciem  tue  celsitudinis  perducamur. 
Per  eundem.  (Greg.  16) 

[Lectio  esaie  prophete. 
Isa.  Ix  1-6] 


bym  :   power  and  honoure  are  in  his 
sanctuary. 

Ascribe  vnto  the  Lorde,  (O  ye 
kynreds  of  the  people  :)  Ascribe  vnto 
the  Lorde,  wurship  and  power. 

Ascribe  vnto  the  Lorde,  the  honour 
due  vnto  his  name  :  bryng  presentes 
and  come  into  his  courtes. 

O  wurshyp  the  Lorde  in  the  beautie 
of  holynes  :  let  the  whole  earth  stande 
in  awe  of  hym. 

Tell  it  out  among  the  Heathen,  that 
the  Lorde  is  kyng,  and  that  it  is  he 
whiche  hath  made  the  rounde  worlde 
so  fast  that  it  cannot  be  moued  :  and 
howe  that  he  shall  iudge  the  people 
righteously. 

Let  the  heauens  reioyce,  and  let  the 
earth  be  glad  :  let  the  sea  make  a 
noyse  and  all  that  therin  is. 

Let  the  fielde  bee  ioyfull  and  all 
that  is  in  it  :  then  shall  all  the  trees 
of  the  wood  reioyce  before  the  Lorde. 
For  he  cummeth,  for  he  cummeth 
to  iudge  the  earth  :  and  with  right- 
euousnes  to  iudge  the  worlde,  and 
the  people  with  his  trueth. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.&c.  As  it 
was  in  the  beginning.&c. 

The  Collect. 

O  God,  whiche  by  the  leadyng  of  a 
starre  diddest  manyfeste  thy  onely 
begotten  sonne  to  the  Gentiles  : 
Mercifully  graunt  that  we  which  know 
thee  nowe  by  faythe,  maye  after  this 
lyfe  haue  the  fruicion  of  thy  glorious 
Godhead,  through  Christ  our 

Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[Ephe.  iii. 

Forthyscause  I  Pauleamapryesoner 
of  lesus  Christe  for  you  heathen  ;  if 
ye  haue  heard  of  the  ministracion  of 
the  grace  of  god,  which  is  geuen  me 
to  youwarde.  For  by  reuelacion 
shewed  he  the  misterye  vnto  me,  as 
I  wrote  afore  in  fewe  wordes,  wherby, 
whe  ye  reade,  ye  maye  vnderstande  my 
knoweledge  in  the  mysterye  of  Christe : 
whiche  mysterye  in  tymes  passed  was 
not  opened  vnto  the  sonnes  of 
menne,  as  it  is  nowe  declared  vnto  his 
holy  Apostles  and  Prophetes  by  the 
spirite  :  that  the  Gentiles  should  be 
inheritours  also,  &  of  the  same  bodie, 
andpartakersofhyspromyse  in  Christe, 


THE  EPIPHANY 


1552 


249 


1661 


C  The  Collect. 

O  God,  whych  by  the  leadinge  of  a 
starre  dyddest  manyfeste  thy  onely 
begotten  sonne  to  the  Gentyles  : 
Mercyfully  graunt,  that  we  which  know 
thee  now  by  fayth,  may  after  this 
lyfe  haue  the  fruicion  of  thy  glorious 
Godhead,  through  Christ  our 

Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[Ephe.  iii. 

For  this  cause  I  Paule  am  a  priesoner 
of  lesus  Christe  for  you  heathen  :  yf 
ye  haue  heard  of  the  ministracion  of 
the  grace  of  god,  which  is  geue  me 
to  youward.  For  by  reuelacion 
shewed  he  the  misterye  vnto  me,  as 
I  wrote  afore  in  fewe  wordes,  wherby, 
whenyereade,yeinayevnderstandemy 
knoweledge  in  the  misterye  of  Christ: 
which  misterye  in  tymes  paste  was 
not  opened  vnto  the  sonnes  of 
men,  as  it  is  now  declared  vnto  hys 
holy  Apostles  and  Prophetes  by  the 
spirite :  yfc  the  Gentiles  shulde  be 
inheritours  also,  and  of  thesame  bodye, 
and  partakers  of  his  promise  of  Christe, 


The  Collect. 

O  God,  who8  by  the  leading  of  a 
Starr,  didst  manifest  thy  only 
begotten  son  to  the  Gentiles  : 
mercifully  grant,  that  we  which  know 
thee  now  by  Faith,  may  after  this 
life  have  the  fruition  of  thy  glorious 
Godhead,  through  8Iesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  3Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Ephe:  3.  *1. 

For  this  cause  I  Paul,  the  prisoner 
of  lesus  Christ  for  you  Gentiles.  If 
ye  have  heard  of  the  dispensacon  of 
the  grace  of  God,  which  is  given  me 
to  you-ward :  How  that  by  revelation  he 
made  knowne  vnto  me  the  mystery,  (as 
I  wrote  afore  in  few  words,  whereby 
when  ye  read,  ye  may  vnderstand  my 
knowledge  in  the  mystery  of  Christ) 
which  in  other  Ages  was 

not  made  known  vnto  the  sons  of 
men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  vnto  his 
holy  Apostles,  and  Prophets  by  the 
spirit.  That  the  Gentiles  should  be 
fellow-heirs  and  of  the  same  body, 
and  partakers  of  his  promise  in  Christ, 


250 


THE  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 


C  Sequentia  sancti  euangelii  secundum 

matheum.  [ij.  A 

Cum  natus  esset  iesus  in  bethleem 

iude,  in  diebus  herodis  regis :  ecce 
magi  ab  oriente  venerunt  hierosoly- 
mam  dicentes.  Vbi  est  qui  natus  est 
rex  iudeorum  ?  Vidimus  enim  stellam 
eius  in  oriente :  &  venimus  adorare 
eum.  Audiens  autem  herodes  rex 
turbatus  est :  &  omnis  hierosolyma 
cum  illo.  Et  congregans  omiies  prin- 
cipes  sacerdotum  et  scribas  populi : 
sciscitabatur  ab  eis  vbi  xps  nasceretur. 
At  illi  dixerunt  ei.  In  bethleem  iude. 
Sic  enim  scriptum  est  per  prophetam. 
Et  tu  bethleem  terra  iuda :  nequa- 
quam  minima  es  in  principibus  iuda. 
Ex  te  enim  exiet  dux  :  qui  regat  popu- 
lum  meum  israel.  Tune  herodes  clam 
vocatis  magis :  diligenter  didicit  ab 
eis  tempus  stelle  que  apparuit  eis.  Et 
mittens  eos  in  bethleem  :  dixit.  Ite 
et  interrogate  diligenter  de  puero,  & 
cum  inueneritis  renunciate  michi :  vt 
&  ego  veniens  adorem  eum.  Qui  cum 
audissent  regem  :  abierunt.  Et  ecce 
stella  quam  viderant  in  oriente  ante- 


1549 

by  the  meanes  of  the  Gospell,  whereof 
I  am  made  a  minister,  accordyng  to 
the  gifte  of  the  grace  of  God,  which  is 
geuen  vnto  me  after  the  woork- 

yng  of  his  power.  Vnto  me 

the  leaste  of  all  sainctes,  is  this 
grace  geuen,  that  I  shoulde  preache 
amoge  the  Gentiles,  the  vnsearcheable 
ryches  of  Christe,  and  to  make  all 
men  see  what  the  felowshyppe  of 
the  misterie  is,  which  fro  the  begin 
ning  of  the  worlde,  hath  bene  hydde  in 
God,  which  made  all  thinges  through 
Iesus  Christe :  to  the  entente,  that  nowe 
vnto  the  rulers  and  powers  in 
heauenly  thynges,  might  be  knowen  by 
the  congregacion,  the  manifolde  wise- 
dome  of  God,  accordyng  to  the  eternal 
purpose  whiche  he  wrought  in  Christ 
lesu  our  lorde,  by  whome  we  haue 
boldenes  and  entraunce,  with  the  con 
fidence  whiche  is  by  the  fayth  of  him. 

The  Gospell.  . 

[     Math.  in. 

WHen  Iesus  was  borne  in  Bethlee 
a  citie  of  lury,  in  the  tyme  of  Herode 
the  kyng  :  Beholde,  there  came  wise 
men  from  the  East  to  lerusale,  say 
ing  :  where  is  he  that  is  borne  kyng 
of  lewes?  For  we  haue  scene  hys 
starre  in  the  East,  and  are  come  ta 
wurship  him.  When  Herode  the  kyng 
had  heard  these  thynges,  he  was 
troubled,  and  all  the  citie  of  lerusalem 
with  hym.  And  when  he  had  gathered 
al  the  chiefe  priestes  and  scribes  of 
the  people  together,  he  demaunded  of 
them  where  Christe  shoulde  bee  borne. 
And  they  sayd  vnto  hym  :  at  Beth 
leem  in  lurie.  For  thus  it  is  written 
by  the  Prophete  :  And  thou  Bethleem 
in  the  land  of  lury,  art  not  the  leaste 
among  the  princes  of  Iuda,  for  out 
of  thee  there  shall  come  vnto  me  the 
capitaine  that  shal  gouerne  my  people 
Israeli.  Then  Herode  (when  he  had 
prieuelye  called  the  wise  men)  he  in 
quired  of  them  diligentlye  what  tyme 
the  starre  appeared,  and  he  bad 
them  goe  to  Bethleem,  and  said  :  goe 
your  way  thither  and  searche  dili 
gentlye  for  the  childe.  And  when 
ye  haue  found  him,  bring  me  woorde 
agayne,  that  I  may  come  and  woorship 
him  also.  Whe  they  had  hearde  the 
kyng,  they  departed  :  and  loe,  the 
starre  whiche  they  sawe  in  the  Easte, 


THE  EPIPHANY 


251 


1552 

by  the  meanes  of  the  Gospell,  wherof 
I  am  made  a  minister,  acordyng  to 
the  gifte  of  the  grace  of  god,  whiche  is 
geuen  vnto  me  after  the  work 

ing  of  his  power.    Vnto  me 

the  least  of  al  sainctes,  is  thys 
grace  geuen,  that  I  shoulde  preache 
among  the  Gentiles',  the  vnsearcheable 
ryches  of  Chryst,  and  to  make  all 
men  see  what  the  felowship  of 
the  misterie  is,  whiche  from  the  begin- 
ninge  of  the  worlde,  hath  bene  hydde  in 
God,  which  made  all  thinges  through 
lesus  Chryst :  to  the  entent,  that  nowe 
vnto  the  rulers  and  powers  in 
heauenlye  thynges,  myghtbeknowen  by 
the  congregacion,  the  manifolde  wise- 
dom  of  God,  according  to  the  eternall 
purpose  whiche  he  wroughte  in  Chryste 
lesu  oure  Lorde  :  by  whom  we  haue 
boldnesse  and  entraunce,  with  the  con 
fidence  which  is  by  ye  faith  of  him. 

The  Gospell.     . 

[      Mat.  11. 

Wnen  lesus  was  borne  in  Bethleem 
a  citie  of  lurye,  in  the  tyme  of  Herode 
the  kyng :  Behold,  there  came  wise 
men  fro  the  East  to  Jerusalem,  say 
ing  :  where  is  he  that  is  borne  king 
of  the  lewes  ?  For  we  haue  seen  his 
starre  in  the  East,  and  are  come  to 
wurship  him.  Whe  Herode  the  kinge 
had  heard  these  thinges,  he  was 
troubled,  and  al  the  citie  of  Jerusalem 
with  hym.  And  whe  he  had  gathered 
all  the  chiefe  priestes  and  scribes  of 
the  people  together,  he  demaunded  of 
them  where  Christe  shoulde  be  borne. 
And  they  sayed  vnto  hym :  at  Beth 
leem  in  lurie.  For  thus  it  is  written 
by  the  Prophete  :  And  thou  Bethleem 
in  the  land  of  lury,  art  not  the  least 
amog  the  princes  of  luda  :  for  out 
of  thee  there  shall  come  vnto  me  the 
capitaine  that  shal  gouerne  my  people 
Israel.  Then  Herode  (whe  he  had 
priuely  called  the  wise  me)  he  en 
quired  of  them  diligently  what  time 
the  starre  appeared :  and  he  bad 
them  goe  to  Bethleem,  and  sayd  :  goe 
your  way  thither  and  searche  dili 
gently  for  the  childe.  And  when 
ye  haue  founde  him,  bring  me  woorde 
againe,  that  I  maye  come  and  wurship 
him  also.  When  they  had  heard  the 
king,  they  departed  :  and  loe,  •  the 
starre  which  they  saw  in  the  Easte, 


1661 

by  the  Gospel :  whereof 

I  was  made  a  Minister,  according  to 
the  Gift  of  the  grace  of  God, 
given  vnto  me  by  the  effectuall  work 
ing  of  his  power,  vnto  me  who  am  less 
then  the  least  of  all  Saints,  is  this 
grace  given,  that  I  should  preach 
among  the  Gentiles  the  vnsearchable 
riches  of  Christ ;  and  to  make  all 
men  see  what  is  the  fellowship  of 
the  Mystery,  which  from  the  begin 
ning  of  the  world,  hath  been  hid  in 
God,  who  created  all  things  by 
lesus  Christ.  To  the  Intent  that  now 
vnto  the  Principalityes,  and  powers  in 
heavenly  places,  might  be  known  by 
the  Church,  the  manifold  wis 
dom  of  God  according  to  the  eternall 
purpose  which  he  purposed  in  Christ 
lesus  our  Lord.  In  whom  we  have 
boldness,  and  access  with  con 

fidence,  by  the  Faith  of  him. 

The  Gospel.     [g;  Mat.  2>  41> 

When  lesus  was  borne  in  Bethlehem 
of  ludea,  in  the  daies  of  Herod 
the  King  ;  behold,  there  came  Wise 
men  from  the  East  to  Jerusalem,  saye- 
ing,  where  is  he  that  is  borne  King 
of  the  lewes  ?  for  we  have  seen  his 
Starr  in  the  East,  and  are  come  to 
worship  him.  When  Herod  the  King 
had  heard  these  things,  he  was 
troubled,  and  all  Jerusalem 

with  him.  And  when  he  had  gathered 
all  the  chief  Priests  and  Scribes  of 
the  people  together ;  he  demanded  of 
them,  where  Christ  should  be  born, 
and  they  sayd  vnto  him  ;  In  Beth 
lehem  of  ludea  :  for  thus  it  written 
by  the  Prophet ;  And  thou  Bethlehem 
in  the  land  of  luda,  art  not  the  least 
among  the  Princes  of  luda  ;  For  out 
of  thee  shall  come  a  Gover- 

nour,  that  shall  rule  my  people 
Jsrael.  Then  Herod,  when  he  had 
privily  called  the  Wise  men,  en 
quired  of  them  diligently,  what  time 
the  Starr  appeared  ;  And  he  sent 
them  to  Bethlehem,  and  said,  Go, 
and  search  dili 
gently  for  the  young  childe,  and  when 
ye  have  found  him,  bring  me  word 
againe,  that  I  may  come  and  worship 
him  also.  When  they  had  heard  the 
King,  they  departed ;  and  Lo,  the 
Star  which  they  saw  in  the  East, 


FIRST  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 

cedebat  eos  :  vsque  dum  veniens  staret 
supra  vbi  erat  puer.  Videntes  autem 
stellam :  gauisi  sunt  gaudio  magno 
valde.  Et  intrantes  domum,  inuene- 
runt  puerum  cum  maria  matre  eius : 
&  procidentes  adorauerunt  eum.  Et 
apertis  thesauris  suis  obtulerunt  ei 
munera :  aurum,  thus,  et  myrrham. 
Et  response  accepto  in  somuis  ne  re- 
dirent  ad  herodem  :  per  aliam  viam 
reuersi  sunt  in  regionem  suam. 


€  Dominica.j.post  octa.  epi. 

Officium. 
[In  excelso  tlirono  :  Ps.  xcix  (c)  1] 


Oratio. 
Vota  quesumus  domine  supplicantis 

populi  celesti  pietate  prosequere :  vt 
&  que  agenda  sunt  videant :  et  ad 
implenda  que  videriiit  convalescant. 

Per  dominum.     (Greg.  16.) 

Epistola.     Ad  Romanes. 

[xii.  A. 

Fnatres.     Obsecro  vos   per   miseri- 
cordiam  dei  vt  exhibeatis  corpora  vestra 


1549 

wente  before  them  tyll  it  came  and 
stoode  ouer  the  place  wherein  the 
chylde  was.  When  they  sawe 
the  starre,  they  were  exceading 
glad  and  wente 

into  the  house,  and  founde  the 
childe  with  Mary  his  mother,  and  fell 
downe  flat  and  wurshipped  hym,  and 
opened  theyr  treasures, 
and  offred  vnto  hym  giftes  :  Golde, 
Frankincense,  and  Mirre.  And 
after  they  were  warned  of  God  in  slepe 
(that  they  should  not  goe  agayne  to 
Herode)  they  returned  into  theyr  owne 
countrey  another  way. 

At  Euensong. 

f  The  firste  lesson.  Esai.  xlix.  vnto  the  ende. 
"I  The  seconde  lesson.  lohn.  ii.  After  this  he 
Went  downe  to  Capernaum,  vnto  the  ende. 

THE  FIRST  SONDAY  AFTER  THE  EPIPHANIE. 

[Vsquequo  domine.     Psalm,  xiii. 

Howe  long  wilt  thou  forget  me,  O 
Lord,  for  euer?  howe  long  wilt  thou 
hyde  thy  face  from  me  ? 

Howe  long  shall  I  seke  counsell  in 
my  soule,  and  be  so  vexed  in  my 
hearte  ?  howe  long  shal  myne  enemye 
triumphe  ouer  me? 

Consider  and  heare  me,  O  lorde  my 
God  :  lyghten  myne  eyes  that  I  slepe 
not  in  death. 

Leste  myne  enemye  say,  I  haue 
preuayled  againste  him  :  for  if  I  be 
cast  downe,  they  that  trouble  me  wil 
reioyce  at  it. 

But  my  trust  is  in  thy  mercye  :  and 
my  hearte  is  ioyfull  in  thy  saluacion. 

I  will  sing  of  the  lorde,  because  he 
hath  dealt  so  louyngly  wyth  me  :  (yea 
I  wyll  prayse  the  name  of  the  Lorde 
the  most  highest.) 

Glory  be  to  the  father.&c.  As  it 
was  in  the  beginning.  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Lorde  we  beseche  thee,  merci- 
fullye  to  receyue  the  praiers  of  thy 
people  whiche  call  vpon  thee  :  and 
graunt  that  they  maye  both  perceyue 
and  knowe  what  thynges  they  ought 
to  do,  and  also  haue  grace  and 

power  faithfully  to  fulfyll  the  same. 

The  Epistle. 

[Roma.  xii. 

I  Besech  you  therefore  brethren,  by 
the  mercifulnes  of  God,  that  ye  make 


FIRST  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


253 


1552 

went  before  them  tyll  it  came  and 
stoode  ouer  the  place  wherin  the 
chylde  was.  When  they  sawe 
the  starre,  they  wer  exceading 
glad,  and  went 

into  the  house,  and  founde  the 
childe  with  Maryehis  mother,  and  fell 
down  flat,  and  wurshipped  him,  and 
opened  their  treasures, 
and  offered  vnto  him  giftes :  Gold, 
Frankincense,  and  Mirre.  And 
after  they  were  warned  of  God  in  slepe 
(that  they  should  not  goe  agayne  to 
Herode)  they  returned  into  their  own 
countrey  another  waye. 


1661 

went  before  them,  till  it  came  and 
stood  over  where  the 

young  child  was.  when  they  saw 
the  star,  they  reioyced  with  exceeding 
great  joy.  And  when  they  were  come 
into  the  house,  they  saw  the  young 
childe  with  Mary  his  mother,  and  fell 
down  and  worshipped  him  ;  And 
when  they  had  opened  their  Treasures, 
they  presented  vnto  him  gifts,  gold, 
and  frankincense,  and  Myrrh.  And 
being  warned  of  God  in  a  dream 
that  they  should  not  returne  to 
Herod,  they  departed  into  their  own 
Country  another  way. 


THE  FIRST  SUNDAIE  AFTER  THE  EPIPHANIE.          THE  FIRST  SUNDAY  AFTER  THE  EPIPHANY. 


€  The  Collect. 

Lorde,  we  beseche  thee,  merci 
fully  to  receiue  the  prayers  of  thy 
people  whiche  call  vpon  thee  :  and 
graut  that  they  may  both  perceiue 
and  know  what  thinges  thei  oughte 
to  doe,  and  also  haue  grace  and 
power,  faithfully  to  fulfyll  thesame 
through  lesus  Christ  our  lord. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  xii 

I  Beseche  you  therefore  brethren,  by 
the  mercifulnesse  of  God,  that  ye  make 


The  Collect. 

0  Lord,   we    beseech   thee  merci 
fully   to   receive   the   prayers   of  thy 
people,   which    call    vpon    thee,   and 
grant  that   they  may  both  perceive 
and  know,   what   things    they  ought 
to  do,  and  also  may  have  grace  and 
power,  faithfully  to  fulfill  the  same, 
through  lesus  Christ,our  Lord.  lbAmen 

The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  12.  41. 

1  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren  by 
the  mercyes  of  God,  that  ye  present 


254 


FIRST  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 

hostiam  viuentem,  sanctam,  deo 
placeiitem  :  rationabile  obsequium 
vestrum.  Et  nolite  conformari  huic 
seculo :  sed  reformamini  in  nouitate 
sensus  vestri.  Vt  probetis  que  sit 
voluntas  dei  bona :  et  beneplacens  et 
perfecta.  Dico  enim  vobis  per  gratiam 
que  data  est  michi :  omnibus  qui  sunt 
inter  vos,  non  plus  sapere  quam  oportet 
sapere  :  sed  sapere  ad  sobrietatem.  Et 
vnicuique :  sicut  deus  diuisit  mensuram 
fidei.  Sicut  enim  in  vno  corpore  multa 
membra  habemus  (omnia  autem  membra 
non  eundem  actum  habent)  ita  multi 
vnum  corpus  sumus  in  xpo :  singuli 
autem  alter  alterius  membra.  In  xpo 
iesu :  domino  nostro. 

Secundum  Lucam. 

[ii.F 
Cum    factus    esset    iesus    annorum 

duodecim :  ascendentibus  illis  hiero- 
solymam  secundum  consuetudinem  diei 
festi.  Consummatisque  diebus  cum 
redirent :  remansit  puer  iesus  in  hieru- 
salem,  et  non  cognouerunt  parentes 
eius.  Existimantes  autem  ilium  esse 
in  comitatu:  venerunt  iter  diei  et 
requirebant  eum  inter  cognatos  & 
notos.  Et  non  inuenientes :  regressi 
sunt  in  hierusalem  requirentes  eum. 
Et  factum  est  post  triduum  inuenerunt 
ilium  in  templo :  sedentem  in  medio 
doctorum  :  audientem  illos  &  interro- 
gantem.  Stupebant  autem  omnes  qui 
eum  audiebant  super  prudentia  et 
responsis  eius :  et  videntes  admirati 
sunt.  Et  dixit  mater  eius  :  ad  ilium. 
Fili,  quid  fecisti  nobis  sic  ?  Ecce  pater 
tuus  et  ego :  dolentes  querebamus  te. 
Et  ait  ad  illos.  Quid  est  quod  me 
querebatis  ?  Nesciebatis  quia  in  his  que 
patris  mei  sunt :  oportet  me  esse  ?  Et 
ipsi  non  intellexerunt  verbum  quod 
locutus  est  ad  illos.  Et  descendit  cum 


1549 

youre  bodyes  a  quicke  sacrifice,  holy, 
and  acceptable  vnto  God,  whiche  is 
youre  resonable  seruyng  of  god,  and 
fashion  not  your  selfes  like  vnto  this 
world  :  but  be  ye  chaunged  in  your 
shape  by  the  renuing  of  youre  mynde, 
that  ye  maye  proue  what  thinge  that 
good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  wyll 
of  god  is.  For  I  saye  (throughe  the 
grace  that  vnto  me  geuen  is)  to  euery 
man  amonge  you,  that  no  man 

stand  hygh  in  his  owne  conceite,  more 
then  it  becommeth  hym  to  esteme  of 
hym  selfe  :  but  so  iudge  of  him  selfe, 
that  he  be  gentle  and  sobre  according 
as  God  hath  dealt  to  euery  man  the 
measure  of  faith :  for  as  we  haue 
many  membres  in  one  bodye,  and  all 
membres  have  not  one  office  : 
so  we  being  many,  are  one  body  in 
Christ,  and  euery  man  amog  our 
selues,  one  anothers  members. 

The  Gospel!. 

[      Luc.  ii. 


Tne  father  and  mother  of  Iesus 
wente  to  Jerusalem  after  the  custome 
of  the  feast  daye.  And  when  they  had 
fulfylled  the  dayes  :  as  they  returned 
home,  the  child  Iesus  abode  stil 
in  lerusalem  and  his  father  and 
mother  knewe  not  of  it :  but  they 
supposing  hym  to  haue  beene  in  the 
cumpanye,  came  a  dayes  iourney  and 
sought  hym  amoge  their  kinsfolke 
and  acquaintaunce.  And  when  they 
founde  hym  not,  they  went  backe 
again  to  lerusalem,  and  soughte  hym. 
And  it  fortuned  that  after  three 
dayes  they  founde  hym  in  the  temple, 
sytting  in  the  middest  of  the  doctours, 
hearyng  them,  and  posyng  them. 
And  all  that  heard  hym,  were 
astonyed  at  hys  vnderstandyng  and 
answers.  And  when  they  saw  him, 
they  meruailed,  and  his  mother 
sayd  vnto  him :  Sonne,  why  haste  thou 
thus  dealte  with  vs  ?  Beholde,  thy 
father  &  I  haue  sought  thee  sorow- 
ing.  And  he  sayd  vnto  them  :  howe 
happened  it  that  ye  sought  me  ? 
wyste  ye  not  that  I  muste  go  about 
my  fathers  busynes  ?  And  they  vnder- 
stode  not  that  sayinge,  whiche  he 
spake  vnto  them.  And  he  went  downe 


FIRST  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


255 


1552 

youre  bodies  a  quicke  sacrifice,  holy 
and  acceptable  vnto  God,  whiche  is 
youre  reasonable  seruing  of  god  :  and 
fashion  not  youre  selfes  like  vnto  this 
worlde  :  but  bee  ye  chaunged  in  youre 
shape  by  the  renuinge  of  youre  mynde, 
that  ye  maye  proue  what  thing  that 
good  and  acceptable  and  perfecte  wyll 
of  God  is.  For  I  say  (through  the 
grace  that  vnto  me  geuen  is)  to  euery 
man  among  you,  that  no  ma 

stande  high  in  his  owne  conceite,  more 
then  it  becommeth  him  to  esteme  of 
hymselfe  :  but  so  Judge  of  hymselfe, 
that  he  be  gentle  and  sobre  according 
as  god  hath  dealt  to  euery  ma  the 
measure  of  faith :  for  as  we  have 
many  membres  in  one  bodi,  and  al 
the  membres  haue  not  one  office  : 
so  we  beyng  many  are  one  body  in 
Christ,  and  euery  man  among  our 
selues  one  anothers  membres. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[      Luke.  ii. 


Tne  father  and  mother  of  lesus 
wente  to  Jerusalem  after  the  custome 
of  the  feaste  daye.  And  when  they  had 
fulfilled  the  dayes,  as  they  retourned 
home,  the  childe  lesus  abode  stil 
in  Jerusalem,  and  his  father  and 
mother  knewe  not  of  it :  but  they 
supposing  him  to  haue  been  in  the 
cumpany,  came  a  dayes  iourneye  and 
soughte  hym  amonges  their  kinsfolke 
and  acquaintaunce.  And  when  they 
founde  him  not,  they  went  backe 
againe  to  Jerusalem,  and  soughte  him. 
And  it  fortuned,  that  after  three 
dayes  they  founde  him  in  the  temple, 
sitting  in  ye  middest  of  the  doctours, 
hearing  them,  and  posing  them. 
And  al  that  heard  hym,  were 
astonied  at  his  vnderstanding  and 
answers.  And  when  they  sawe  hym, 
they  meruayled,  £  his  mother 
said  vnto  him  :  Sonne,  why  haste  thou 
thus  dealt  with  vs?  Beholde,  thy 
father  and  I  haue  soughte  the  sorow- 
ing.  And  he  saied  vnto  them  :  howe 
happened  that  that  ye  sought  me? 
wyste  ye  not  that  I  muste  goe  about 
my  fathers  busines  ?  And  they  vnder- 
stode  not  that  saying,  whiche  he 
spake  vnto  them.  And  he  went  down 


1661 

your  bodyes  a  living  sacrifice,  holy, 
acceptable  vnto   God,  which   is 
your  reasonable  service  .     And 

be  not  conformed  to  this 
world  :  but  be  ye  transformed 

,  by  the  renewing  of  your  minde, 
that  ye  may  prove  what  is  that 
good,  and  acceptable,  and  perfect  will 
of  God.  For  I  say,  through  the 
Grace  given  vnto  me,  to  every 
man  that  is  among  you,  not  to 
think  of  himselfe  more  highly 
then  he  ought  to  think,  but  to 
think  soberly,  according  as  God 
hath  dealt  to  every  man  the 
measure  of  faith.  For  as  we  have 
many  members  in  one  body,  and  all 
members  have  not  the  same  office  ; 
so  we  being  many,  are  one  body  in 
Christ,  and  every  one  members  one 
of  another. 

The  Gospel. 

[S:  Luke.  2.  *U. 

6  Now  his  parents  went  to 
Jerusalem  every  year  at  the 
feast  of  the  Passover.  And  when 
he  was  twelve  years  old,  they 
went  vp  to  Jerusalem,  after  the  custorne 
of  the  feast.  And  when  they  had 

fulfilled  the  dayes,  as  they  returned, 
the  childe  Jesus  tarried  behinde 
in  Jerusalem,  and  Joseph  and  his 
mother  knew  not  of  it.  But  they 
supposing  him  to  have  been  in  the 
company,  went  a  dayes  Journey,  and 
they  sought  him  among  their  kinsfolk 
and  acquaintance.  And  when  they 
found  him  not,  they  turned  back 
againe  to  Jerusalem,  seeking  him. 
And  it  came  to  pass,  that  after  three 
dayes  they  found  him  in  the  Temple, 
sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  doctours 
both  hearing  them,  and  asking  them 
questions.  And  all  that  heard  him  were 
astonished  at  his  vnderstanding,  and 
Answers.  And  when  they  saw  him, 
they  were  amazed  :  and  his  mother 
said  vnto  him,  Son  why  hast  thou 
thus  dealt  with  vs  ?  behold  thy 
father  and  I  have  sought  thee  sorrow 
ing.  And  he  said  vnto  them,  How 
is  it  that  ye  sought  me  ? 

Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about 
my  fathers  busines  ?  And  they  vnder- 
stood  not  the  sayeing  which  he 
spake  vnto  them.  And  he  went  down 


256 


SECOND  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 

eis  et  venit  nazareth  :  &  erat  subditus 
illis.  Et  mater  eius  conseruabat  omnia 
verba  hec  :  conferens  in  corde  suo.  Et 
iesus  proficiebat  sapientia,  etate,  et 
gratia  :  apud  deum  et  homines. 

C  Dominica. ij. post  oct.  epi. 

Officium. 
[Ps.  Ixv  (Ixvi)  3  :  1] 


Oratio. 

Oivmipotens  sempiterne  deus  qui 
celestia  simul  et  terrena  moderaris, 
supplicationes  populi  tui  clementer 
exaudi :  &  pacem  tuam  nostris  concede 
temporibus.  Per.  (Greg.  159) 


1549 

with  the,  and  came  to  Nazareth,  and 
was  obedient  vnto  them :  but  his 
mother  kept  all  these  sayinges  to 
gether  in  her  heart.  And  Iesus 
prospered  in  wisdome  and  age,  and 
in  fauour  with  god  and  men. 

C  THE  SECOND  SONDAY. 

[Dixit  insipience  psal.  Xiiii. 

THe  foole  hath  sayd  in  his  heart  : 
there  is  no  god. 

They  are  corrupte  and  become  ab- 
hominable  in  theyr  doinges  :  there  is 
not  one  that  dooeth  good  (no  not  one.) 

The  lorde  loked  downe  from  heauen 
vpon  the  chyldren  of  men  :  to  see  if 
there  were  any  that  woulde  vnderstand 
and  seeke  after  God. 
But  they  are  all  gone  out  of  the 
waye,  they  are  altogether  become 
abhominable  :  there  is  none  that 
doeth  good  (no  not  one.) 
Their  throte  is  an  open  sepulchre  : 
with  theyr  tongues  they  haue  de- 
ceyued,  the  poyson  of  Aspes  is  vnder 
theyr  lyppes. 

Theyr  mouthe  is  full  of  curssyng 
and  bytternes  :  theyr  feete  are  swift 
to  shed  bloud. 

Destruccion  and  vnhappines  is  in 
theyr  wayes  :  and  the  way  of  peace 
haue  they  not  knowen,  there  is  no 
feare  of  God  before  theyr  eyes. 
Haue  they  no  knowlege,  that  they 
are  all  suche  woorkers  of  mischiefe, 
eatyng  vp  my  people  as  it  were  bread, 
and  call  not  upon  the  Lorde  ? 

There  were  they  brought  in  great 
feare  (euen  where  no  feare  was)  for  god 
is  in  the  generacion  of  the  ryghteous. 
As  for  you,  ye  haue  made  a  mocke 
at  the  counsayll  of  the  poore  :  because 
he  putteth  his  trust  in  the  lorde. 

Who  shal  geue  saluacion  unto  Israeli 
out  of  Sion  ?  when  the  lorde  turneth 
the  captiuitie  of  hys  people  :  then  shall 
lacob  reioyce,  and  Israeli  be  glad. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.  &c.  As  it 
was  in  the  beginning.  &c. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  and  euerlasting  God, 
whiche  dooest  gouerne  all  thinges  in 
heauen  and  earthe  :  mercyfuliy  heare 
the  supplicacyons  of  thy  people,  and 
graunte  vs  thy  peace  all  the  dayes  of 
our  lyfe. 


SECOND  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


1661 


257 


1552 

wyth  them,  and  came  to  Nazareth,  and 
was  obediente  vnto  them  :  but  his 
mother  kept  all  these  sayinges  to 
gether  in  her  heart.  And  lesus 
prospered  in  wisedom  and  age,  and 
in  fauoure  with  God  and  men. 

THE  SECOND  SUNDAIE  AFTER  THEEPIPHANY          THE  SECOND  SUNDAY  AFTER  THEEPIPHANY 


with  them,  and  came  to  Nazareth,  and 
was  subject  vnto  them :  but  his 
mother  kept  all  these  sayings 

in  her  heart.  And  lesus 
increased  in  wisdome,  and  stature,  and 
in  favour  with  God  and  Man. 


C  The  Collecte. 

ALmightie  and  euerlasting  God, 
whiche  dooeste  gouerne  all  thinges  in 
heauen  and  earth  :  mercyfullye  heare 
the  supplicacions  of  thy  people,  and 
graunt  vs  thy  peace  al  the  dayes  of 
our  lyfe. 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who8  doest  govern  all  things  in 
heaven,  and  earth,  mercifully  hear 
the  Supplications  of  thy  people,  and 
grant  vs  thy  peace  all  the  dayes  of 
our  life,  through  lesus  Christ  our 
Lord.*  8Amen. 


258 


SECOND  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 

Ad  romanos. 

[xii.  B 

Fnatres.  Habentes  donationes  :  se 
cundum  gratiam  que  data  est  nobis 
differentes.  Siue  prophetiam  secundum 
rationem  fidei :  siue  ministerium  in 
ministrando,  siue  qui  docet  in  doctrina. 
Qui  exhortatur  in  exhortando :  qui 
tribuit  in  simplicitate :  qui  preest  in 
solicitudine :  qui  miseretur  in  hilari- 
tate.  Dilectio  sine  simulatione.  Odi- 
entesmalum:  adherentes  bono.  Chari- 
tate  fraternitatis  inuicem  diligentes : 
honore  inuicem  preuenientes.  Soli 
citudine  non  pigri :  spiritu  feruentes  : 
domino  seruientes.  Spe  gaudentes  : 
in  tribulatione  patientes.  Orationi 
instantes :  necessitatibus  sanctorum 
communicantes :  hospitalitatem  sec- 
tantes.  Benedicite  persequentibus 
vos:  benedicite  et  noli  maledicere. 
Gaudere  cum  gaudentibus :  flere  cum 
flentibus.  Id  ipsuni  inuicem  sentientes. 
Non  alta  sapientes :  sed  humilibus 
consentientes. 

Secundum  iohannem. 

IN  illo  tempore.  Nuptie  facte  sunt 
in  chana  galilee :  et  erat  mater  iesu 
ibi.  Vocatus  est  autem  iesus  et  dis- 
cipuli  eius  ad  nuptias.  Et  deficiente 
vino  :  dixit  mater  iesu  ad  cum.  Virrum 
non  habent.  Et  dicit  ei  iesus.  Quid 
michi  &  tibi  est  mulier?  Nondum  venit 
hora  mea.  Dicit  mater  iesu  ministris. 
Quodcunque  dixerit  vobis :  facite. 
Erant  autem  ibi  lapidee  hydrie  sex 
posite  secundum  purificationem  iude- 
orum :  capientes  singule  metretas  vinas, 
vel  ternas.  Dixit  eis  iesus.  Implete 
hydrias  aqua.  Et  impleuerunt  eas  : 
vsque  ad  summum.  Et  dixit  eis  iesus. 
Haurite  nunc  et  ferte  architriclino. 
Et  tulerunt.  Vt  autem  gustauit  archi- 


1549 

The  Epistle. 

[Roma.  xii. 

SEing  that  we  haue  dyuerse  gyftes, 
accordyng  to  the  grace  that  is  geuen 
vnto  vs  :  if  any  man  haue  the  gyft  of 
prophecy,  let  hym  haue  it,  that  it  be 
agreeing  to  the  faith.  Let  him  that 
hath  an  office  waite  on  his  office.  Let 
him  that  teacheth,  take  hede  to  his 
doctrine.  Let  hym  that  exhorteth,geue 
attendaunce  to  his  exhortacyon.  If  any 
man  geue,  let  hym  do  it  with  singlenes. 
Let  him  that  ruleth,  doe  it  wyth  dili 
gence.  If  any  man  shew  mercy,  let 
him  do  it  wyth  cherefulnes.  Let  loue 
bee  without  dissimulacyon.  Hate 
that  whiche  is  euill,  and  cleaue  vnto 
that  whiche  is  good.  Bekyndeonetoan 
other  with  brotherly  loue.  In  geuing 
honour  goe  one  before  an  other. 
Be  not  slothefull  in  the  busines  which 
ye  haue  in  had.  Be  feruet  in  the 
spirite.  Apply  your  selfes  to  the 
time.  Reioyce  in  hope.  Be  patient  in 
trybulacion.  Continue  in  praier. 

Destribute  vnto  the  necessitie  of  the 
saynctes.  Be  ready  to  harbour.  Blesse 
them  whych  persecute  you  :  blesse, 
Isaye,  and  curse  not  Be  mery  with 
them  that  are  mery,  wepe  also  wyth 
them  that  wepe  :  bee  of  like  affeccion 
one  towardes  another.  Bee  not  hye 
mynded,  but  make  youre  selues  equall 
to  them  of  the  lowersorte. 

The  Gospell . 

[      Ihon.  ii. 

ANd  the  third  daye  was  there  a 
mariage  in  Cana  a  citie  of  Galile,  and 
the  mother  of  Iesus  was  there.  And 
Iesus  was  called  (and  hys  dys- 
ciples)  vnto  the  mariage.  And  when 
the  wine  fayled,  the  mother  of  Iesus 
saide  vnto  him  :  they  haue  no  wine. 
Iesus  said  vnto  her :  woman,  what 
haue  I  to  doe  with  thee  ?  myne  houre 
is  not  yet  come.  Hys  mother  said 
vnto  the  ministers :  whatsoeuer  he 
sayeth  vnto  you,  do  it.  And  there 
were  standyng  there  vi.  waterpottes  of 
stone,  after  the  manner  of  the  purifiyng 
of  the  lewes,  conteyning  .ii.  or  .iii. 
fyrkyns  a  peece.  Iesus  sayde  vnto 
them  :  fyll  the  water  pottes  with  water. 
And  they  filled  them  vp  to  the  brimme. 
And  he  saide  vnto  them  :  draw  out 
now,  and  beare  vnto  the  Gouernour 
of  the  feast  :  And  they  bare  it.  When 


SECOND  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


259 


1552 

C.  The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  xii 

SEyng  that  we  haue  dyuerse  gyftes 
according  to  the  grace  that  is  geuen 
vnto  vs  :  yf  a  man  haue  the  gyfte  of 
prophecie,  let  hym  haue  it,  that  it  be 
agreeing  to  the  faith.  Let  hym  that 
hath  an  office,  wait  on  his  office.  Let 
him  that  teacheth,  take  hede  to  hys 
doctryne.  Let  him  that  exhorteth,  geue 
attendaunce  to  his  exhortacio.  If  any 
man  geue,  let  hym  do  it  with  singlenes. 
Let  him  that  ruleth,  doe  it  with  dili 
gence.  If  any  man  shewe  mercy e,  let 
hym  doe  it  with  cherefulnesse.  Let  loue 
bee  wythoute  dissimulacyon.  Hate 
that  whyche  is  euil,  and  cleaue  vnto 
that  which  is  good.  Bekyndeone  to  an 
other  with  brotherly  loue.  In  geuynge 
honoure  goe  one  beefore  another. 
Be  not  slothefull  in  the  busines  which 
ye  haue  in  hande.  Be  feruente  in  the 
spyryte.  Apply  e  youre  selfes  to  the 
tyme.  Reioyce  in  hope.  Bepacientein 
tribulacion.  Continue  in  prayer. 

Distribute  vnto  the  necessitie  of  the 
sainctes.  Bereadytoharboure.  Blesse 
them  whiche  persecute  you  :  blesse, 
I  saye,  and  curse  not.  Be  mery  wyth 
them  that  are  mery,  wepe  with 

the  that  wepe  :  be  of  lyke  affeccio 
one  towardes  another.  Bee  not  hye 
mynded,  but  make  your  selues  equal  1 
to  them  of  the  lower  sorte. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[      lohn.  iii. 

ANd  the  thirde  daye  was  there  a 
maryage  in  Cana  a  citie  of  Galyle,  and 
the  mother  of  lesus  was  there.  And 
lesus  was  called  (and  his  dis 
ciples)  vnto  the  mariage.  And  whe 
the  wine  fayled,  the  mother  of  lesus 
said  vnto  hym  :  they  haue  no  wyne. 
lesus  saied  vnto  her  :  woman,  what 
haue  I  to  doe  with  thee?  myne  houre 
is  not  yet  come.  His  mother  sayed 
vnto  the  ministers :  whatsoeuer  he 
sayeth  vnto  you,  doe  it.  And  there 
were  standing  there  .vi.  waterpottes  of 
stone,  after  the  maner  of  the  purifyinge 
of  the  lewes,  conteyning  .ii.  or  .iii. 
fyrkens  a  piece.  lesus  sayd  vnto 
them  :  fyll  the  waterpottes  with  water. 
And  thei  filled  them  vp  to  the  brim. 
And  he  sayd  vnto  them  :  draw  out 
now,  and  beare  vnto  the  Gouernour 
of  the  feast :  And  they  bare  it.  When 


1661 

The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  12.  *6. 

Having       then       gifts,       differing 
according  to  the  grace  that  is  given 

to  vs,  whether  prophesy,  let  v- 
prophesy  according  to  the  pros 
portion  of  fayth.  or  ministry, 
let  vs  wait  on  our  ministring : 
or  he  that  teacheth,  on  teach 
ing  :  or  he  that  exhorteth, 
on  exhortation  :  he  that  giveth, 
let  him  do  it  with  simplicity  : 
he  that  ruleth,  with  diligence  : 
he  that  sheweth  mercy,  with 
cheerfulness.  Let  love  be  with 
out  dissimulation  :  abhor  that  which 
is  evil,  cleave  to  that  which  is 
good.  Be  kindly  affectioned  one 
to  another,  with  brotherly  love,  in 
honour  preferring  one  another. 
Not  slothfull  in  business  : 

fervent  in 

spirit,  serving  the  Lord :  rejoycing 
in  hope,  patient  in  Tribulation, 
continuing  instant  in  prayer,  dis 
tributing  to  the  necessity  of 
saints :  given  to  hospitality.  Bless 
them  which  persecute  you,  bless 
and  curse  not.  Reioyce  with  them 
that  do  rejoyce,  and  weep  with  them 
that  weep,  be  of  the  same  mind  one 
toward  another.  Minde  not  high 
things,  but  condescend  to  men  of  low 
estate. 

The  Gospel. 

[S:  lohn.  2.  41. 

And  the    third  day   there    was  a 
marriage  in  Cana  of  Galilee,  and 

the  mother  of  lesus  was  there.  And 
both  lesus  was  called,  and  his  dis 
ciples  to  the  marriage.  And  when 
they  wanted  wine,  the  mother  of  lesus 
saith  vnto  him,  They  have  no  wine  ; 
lesus  saith  vnto  her ;  woman,  what 
have  I  to  do  with  thee?  mine  hour 
is  not  yet  come.  His  mother  saith 
vnto  the  servants,  Whatsoever  he 
saith  vnto  you,  do  it.  And  there 
were  set  there  six  Water-pots  of 
Stone,  after  the  manner  of  the  purifying 
of  the  lewes,  conteyning  two  or  three 
firkins  apeece.  lesus  sayth  vnto 
them,  fill  the  water-pots  with  water  ; 
And  they  filled  them  vp  to  the  brim. 
And  he  saith  vnto  them  ;  Draw  out 
now,  and  bear  vnto  the  governour 
of  the  feast.  And  they  bare  it.  When 


260 


THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 

triclinus  aquam  vinum  factum  :  et  non 
sciebat  vnde  esset  (ministri  autem 
sciebant  qui  hauserant  aquam)  vocat 
sponsum  architriclinus  :  et  dicit  ei. 
Omnis  homo  primum  bonum  vinum 
ponit :  et  cum  inebriati  fuerint,  tune 
id  quod  deterius  est.  Tu  autem 
seruasti  vinum  bonum  :  vsque  adhuc. 
Hoc  fecit  initium  signorum  iesus  in 
chana  galilee  :  et  manifestauit  gloriam 
suam.  Et  crediderunt  in  eum  discipuli 
eius. 

C  Dominica. iij. post  oct.epi. 

Officium. 
[Ps.  xcvi  (xcvii)  7c,  8  :  1] 


Oratio. 

OMnipotens  sempiterne  deus  infirmi- 
tatem  nostram  propitius  respice  :  atque 
ad  protegendum  nos  dexteram  tue 
maiestatis  extende.  Per  dominum. 
(Greg.  160) 

Ad  Romanes. 

[xii.  r> 

Fnatres.  Nolite  esse  prudentes  apud 
vosmetipsos  :  nulli  malum  pro  malo 


1549 

the  ruler  of  the  feast  had  tasted  the 
water  that  was  turned  into  wine,  and 
knewe  not  whence  it  was,  (but  the 
ministers,  which  drewe  the  water, 
knewe)  he  called 

the  bridegrome,  and  sayd  vnto  him  : 
Euerye  man  at  the  beginning  doth  set 
forth  good  wyne,  and  when  men 
be  dronke,  then  that  whych  is  woorse, 
but  thou  hastkepte  the  good  wine  vntill 
now.  This  beginning  of  miracles  did 
Iesus  in  Cana  of  Galile,  and  shewed 
hys  glorye,  and  his  dis 
ciples  beleued  on  him. 

C  THE  .in.  SOONDAYE. 

[Domine  quis  habitabit  psal.  xv. 

Lorde,  who  shal  dwelle  in  thy 
tabernacle  ?  who  shal  reste  vpon  thy 
holyehill? 

Euen  he  that  leadeth  an  vncorupte 
lyfe,  and  dothe  the  thyng  whiche  is 
ryght :  and  speaketh  the  truthe  from 
his  hearte. 

He  that  hath  vsed  no  deceyt  in  his 
tongue  :  nor  done  euyll  to  his  neigh 
bour,  and  hath  not  slaundered  his 
neighbours. 

He  that  setteth  not  by  hym  selfe, 
but  is  lowelye  in  hys  owne  iyes  :  and 
maketh  muche  of  them  that  feare  the 
lorde. 

He  that  sweareth  vnto  his  neigh 
bour  and  disapointeth  hym  not : 
though  it  were  to  his  owne  hinder- 
aunce. 

He  that  hath  not  geuen  hys  money 
vnto     vsury    :    nor     taken     rewarde 
agaynst  the  innocente. 
Whoso    dothe    these    thinges  :  shal 
neuer  fall. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.  £c.  As  it 
was  in  the  beginning.  &c. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightye  and  euerlasting  God, 
mercyfullye  looke  vpon  oure  infirmities, 
and  in  al  our  daungiers  and  neces 
sities,  stretche  foorthe  thyryghte  hande 
to  helpe  and  defende  vs,  through 
Christ  our  Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[Rcm.  xii. 

BE  not  wise  in  your  owne  opinions. 
Recompece  to  no  man  euill  for  euill. 


THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


261 


1552 

the  ruler  of  the  feast  had  tasted  the 
water  turned  into  wine,  and 

knewe  not  whence  it  was,  (but  the 
ministers,  which  drew  the  water, 
knew)  he  called 

the  bridegrome,  and  said  vnto  hym  : 
euery  man  at  the  beginning  dooeth  set 
foorth  good  wyne,  and  when  men  be 
dronke,  then  that  which  is  woorse  : 
but  thouhastekeptethe  good  winevntill 
nowe.  This  beginning  of  miracles  did 
lesus  in  Cana  of  Galile,  and  shewed 
his  glory,  &  his  5  dis 
ciples  beleued  on  him. 


1661 

the  ruler  of  the  feast  had  tasted  of  the 
water  that  was  made  wine,  and 
knew  not  whence  it  was  (but  the 
servants  which  drew  the  water 
knew)  the  governour  of  the  feast  called 
the  bridegroom,  and  saith  vnto  him, 
Every  man  at  the  beginning,  doth  set 
forth  good  wine,  and  when  men  have 
well  drunk,  then  that  which  is  worse  : 
but  thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  vntil 
now.  This  beginning  of  Miracles  did 
lesus  in  Cana  of  Galilee,  and  mani 
fested  forth  his  glory,  and  his  dis 
ciples  believed  on  him. 


THE  THIRD  SUNDAIE, 


THE  THIRD  SUNDAY  SAFTER  THE  EPIPHANY. 


C  The  Collecte. 

ALmightie  and  euerlasting  God, 
mercifully  loke  vpon  oure  infirmities  : 
and  in  all  oure  daungiers  and  neces 
sities,  stretche  furth  thy  ryghte  hande 
to  helpe  and  defende  vs,  throughe 
Chryste  our  Lorde. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  xii 

BE  not  wise  in  your  own  opinions. 
Recompence  to  no  man  euil  for  euil. 


The  Collect 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
mercifully  looke  vpon  our  Infirmities, 
and  in  all  our  dangers,  and  neces 
sities  stretch  forth  thy  right  hand 
to  help,  and  defend  vs,  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord.  6Ainen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  12.  416. 

Be  not  wise  in  your  own  conceits. 
Recompence  to  no  man  evil  for  evil. 


262 


THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 

reddentes.  Prouidentes  bona  non 
tantum  coram  deo  :  sed  etiam  coram 
omnibus  liominibus.  Si  fieri  potest 
quod  ex  vobis  est :  cum  omnibus 
hominibus  pacem  habentes.  Non  vos- 
metipsos  defendentes  charissimi :  sed 
date  locum  ire.  Scriptum  est  enim. 
Michi  vindictam  :  &  ego  retribuam, 
dicit  dominus.  Sed  si  esurierit  inimicus 
tuus  :  ciba  ilium.  Si  sitit :  potum  da 
illi.  Hoc  enim  faciens  carbones  ignis 
congeres  super  caput  eius.  Noli  vinci 
a  malo  :  sed  vince  in  bono  malum. 

Secundum  Matheum. 

[viii.  A 
IN  illo   tempore  Cum  descendisset 

iesus  de  moiite  :  secute  sunt  eum  turbe 
multe.  Et  ecce  leprosus  veniens : 
adorabat  eum  dicens.  Domine,  si  vis  : 
potes  me  mundare.  Et  extendens 
iesus  manum  tetigit  eum  dicens.  Volo, 
mundare.  Et  confestim  mundata  est 
lepra  eius.  Et  ait  illi  iesus.  Vide 
nemini  dixeris :  sed  vade  ostende  te 
sacerdoti,  et  offer  munus  quod  precipit 
moyses  in  testimonium  illis.  Cum 
autem  introisset  capharnaum,  accessit 
ad  eum  centurio  rogans  eum  :  et 
dicens.  Domine,  puer  meus  iacet  in 
domo  paralyticus  :  et  male  torquetur 
Et  ait  illi  iesus.  Ego  veniam  :  et 
curabo  eum.  Et  respoiidens  centurio  : 
ait.  Domine  non  sum  dignus  vt  intres 
sub  tectum  meum  :  sed  tantum  die 
verbo,  et  sanabitur  puer  meus.  Nam 
&  ego  homo  sum  sub  potestate  con- 
stitutus :  habens  sub  me  milites.  Et 
dico  huic  vade  et  vadit :  et  alio  veui 
et  venit :  et  seruo  meo  fac  hoc  et  facit. 
Audiens  autem  iesus,  miratus  est :  et 
sequentibus  se  dixit.  Amen  dico 
vobis  :  non  inueni  tantam  fidem  in 
israel.  Dico  autem  vobis  quod  multi 
ab  oriente  &  occidente  venient :  et 


1549 

Prouide  aforehande  thinges  honest, 
not  onely  before  God,  but  also  in  the 
syghte  of  all  men.  If  it  be  possible 
(as  much  as  is  in  you)  Hue  peace- 
ablye  with  all  menne.  Dearely  be- 
loued,  auenge  not  your  selues,  but 
rather  geue  place  vnto  wrath.  For  it 
is  written :  vengeaunce  is  mine,  I 
will  re  warde  saith  the  lorde.  Therfore, 
if  thine  enemie  hunger,  feede  him  :  if 
he  thirst,  geue  him  drynke.  For  in 
so  dooyng,  thou  shalte  heape  coales 
of  fyre  on  his  heade.  Be  not  ouer- 
come  of  euill,  but  ouercome  euill  with 
goodnes. 

The  Gospell. 

[      Math.  viii. 

WHen  he  was  come  downe  from  the 
mountayne,  muche  people  folowed 
hym.  And  beholde,  there  came  a 
Leper  and  wurshipped  hym,  saying  : 
Maister,  if  thou  wilte,  thou  canst  make 
me  cleane.  And  Iesus  putte  foorth 
his  hande  and  touched  hym,  saying  : 
I  will,  be  thou  cleane  :  and  immedi- 
atlye  his  Leprosye  was  cleansed. 
And  Iesus  said  vnto  him  :  see  thou 
tel  no  manne,  but  goe  and  shew 
thy  selfe  to  the  priest,  &  offre  the  gift 
(that  Moses  comaunded  to  be  offered) 
for  a  witnesse  vnto  them. 

And  when  Iesus  was  entred  into 
Capernaum,  there  came  vnto  hym  a 
Centurion,  and  besoughte  hym,  say 
ing  :  Maister,  my  seruaunt  lieth  at  home 
sicke  of  the  paulsey,  and  is  greuously 
payned.  And  Iesus  sayde :  when  I 
come  vnto  him,  I  wil  heale  him.  The 
Centurion  aunswered,  and  said  :  Sir 
I  am  not  woorthye  that  thou  shouldeste 
come  vnder  my  roofe  :  but  speake  the 
word  onely,  &  my  seruaunt  shalbe 
healed.  For  I  also  my  selfe  am  a  ma 
subiect  to  the  autoritie  of  another, 
and  haue  souldiers  vnder  me  :  and  I 
say  to  this  manne,  goe,  and  he  goeth  : 
and  to  another  manne,  come,  and  he 
cummeth  :  and  to  my  seruaunt,  doe 
this,  and  he  doeth  it.  When  Iesus 
heard  these  woordes,  he  merueiled,and 
sayde  to  them  that  folowed  hym  : 
verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  I  haue  not 
founde  so  great  fayth  in  Israeli. 

I  say  vnto  you,  that  many  shall 
come  from  the  Easte,  and  West,  and 
shall  reste  with  Abraham,  and 
Isaac,  and  lacob,  in  the  kingdome  of 


THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


263 


1552 

Prouide  aforehande  thynges  honeste, 
not  only  before  god,  but  also  in  the 
sight  of  all  men.  If  it  be  possible, 
(as  muche  as  is  in  you)  lyue  peace- 
ablye  wyth  all  me.  Dearely  be- 
loued,  auenge  not  youre  selfes,  but 
rather  geue  place  vnto  wrath.  For  it 
is  wrytten :  vengeaunce  is  mine,  I 
wil  rewarde  saith  the  Lord.  Therfore, 
yf  thine  enemy  hunger,  feede  him  :  yf 
he  thirst,  geue  hym  drinke.  For  in 
so  doing,  thou  shalt  heape  coles 
of  fyre  on  hys  head.  Be  not  ouer- 
come  of  euil,  but  ouercome  euill  with 
goodnes. 

<T  The  Gospell. 

[      Mat.  viii 

Wnen  he  was  come  down  from  the 
moiitayne,  much  people  folowed 
hym.  And  beholde,  there  came  a 
Leper  and  wurshipped  hym,  sayinge  : 
Maister,  yf  thou  wylte,thou  canst  make 
me  cleane.  And  lesus  put  forth 
his  hand  and  touched  hym,  saying  : 
I  wyl,  be  thou  cleane  :  and  immedi- 
atly  his  Leprosye  was  clensed. 
And  lesus  sayd  vnto  hym  : 
tel  no  man,  but  goe  and  shewe 
thy  selfe  to  the  priest,  and  offer  the  gyft 
(that  Mosescommaunded  to  be  offered) 
for  a  witnesse  vnto  them.- 

-And  when  lesus  was  entred  into 
Capernaum,  there  came  vnto  hym  a 
Centuryon,  and  besoughfce  hym,  say 
ing:  Maister,  my  seruauntelieth  at  home 
sicke  of  the  paulseye,  and  is  greuouslye 
pained.  And  lesus  sayed  :  when  I 
come  vnto  him,  I  wyll  heale  hym  .  The 
Centuryon  aunswered,  and  sayed  :  Sir, 
I  am  not  woorthye  that  thou  shouldeste 
come  vnder  my  roofe  :  but  speake  the 
word  only,  and  my  seruaunte  shal  be 
healed.  For  I  also  am  a  man 

subiecte  to  the  aucthoritie  of  an  other, 
and  haue  souldiers  vnder  me :  and  I 
say  to  this  man,  goe,  and  he  goeth  : 
and  to  another  man,  come,  and  he 
commeth  :  and  to  my  seruaunt,  do 
this,  and  he  doeth  it.  When  lesus 
heard  these  wordes,  he  merueiled,  and 
sayd  to  them  that  folowed  him : 
verely  I  say  vnto  you,  I  haue  not 
found  so  great  fayth  in  Israel. 

I  say  vnto  you,  that  many  shall 
come  fro  the   East,  and   West,   and 
shal     rest      with      Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  lacob,  in  the  kingdom  of 


1661 

Provide  things  honest 

in  the 

sight  of  all  men.  If  it  be  possible, 
as  much  as  lyeth  in  you,  live  peace 
ably  with  all  men.  Dearly  be 
loved,  avenge  not  your  selves,  but 
rather  give  place  vnto  wrath  :  for  it 
is  written,  Vengeance  is  mine,  I 
will  repay,  sayth  the  Lord.  Therefore 
if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him  :  if 
he  thirst,  give  him  drinke:  for  in 
so  doing  thou  shalt  heap  coals 
of  fire  on  his  head.  Be  not  over 
come  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with 
good. 

The  Gospel. 

[S:  Mat.  8.  *L 

When  he  was  come  down  from  the 
mountain,  great  multitudes  followed 
him.  And  behold,  there  came  a 
leper  and  worshipped  him,  saying, 
Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make 
me  clean.  And  lesus  put  forth 
his  hand  and  touched  him  saying, 
1  will,  be  thou  clean.  And  immedi- 
atly  his  leprosy  was  cleansed. 
And  lesus  sayth  vnto  him,  see  thou 
tell  no  man,  but  go  thy  way,  shew 
thy  selfe  to  the  Priest,  and  offer  the  gift 
that  Moses  commanded 
for  a  testimony  vnto  them.- 
-And  when  lesus  was  entred  into 
Capernaum,  there  came  vnto  him  a 
Centurion,  beseeching  him,  and  saye- 
ing,  Lord,  my  servant  lyeth  at  home 
sick  of  the  Palsy,  griev-ously 

tormented.  And  lesus  sayth  vnto  him,  I 
will  come  and  heal  him.  The 
Centurion  answered  and  sayd,  Lord, 
I  am  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldst 
come  vnder  my  roof:  but  speak  the 
word  only,  and  my  servant  shall  be 
healed,  for  I  am  a  man 

vnder  authority, 

having  souldiers  vnder  me ;  and  I 
say  vnto  this  man,  Go,  and  he  goeth  ; 
and  to  another,  Come,  and  he 

cometh :  and  to  my  servant,  do 
this,  and  he  doth  it.  When  Jesus 
heard  it,  he  marvelled,  and 

said  to  them  that  followed, 
Verely,  I  say  vnto  you,  I  have  not 
found  so  great  faith,  no  not  in  Jsrael. 
And  I  say  vnto  you  that  many  shall 
come  from  the  East  and  West,  and 
shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and 
Isaac,  and  lacob  in  the  Kingdom  of 


264 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 

recumbent  cum  abraham  et  Isaac  et 
iacob,  in  regno  celorum.  Filii  autem 
regni :  eijcientur  in  tenebras  exteriores. 
Ibi  erit  fletus  :  et  stridor  dentium.  Et 
dixit  iesus  centurioni.  Vade  :  et  sicut 
credidisti,  fiat  tibi.  Et  sanatus  est 
puer  :  in  ilia  hora. 

<[  Dominica,  iiij. 
[Ps.  xcvi  (xcvii)  7c,  8  :  1] 


Oratio. 

DEUS   qui   nos    in    tantis    periculis 
constitutes  pro  humana  scis  fragilitate 


1549 

heauen  :  but  the  children  of  the  kyng- 
dome  shall  be  caste  out  into  vtter  darke- 
nes,  there  shalbe  weping  and 
gnashing  of  teeth.  And  Iesus  saide 
vnto  the  Centurion  :  Goe  thy  way,  and 
as  thou  beleueste  so  bee  it  vn 

to  thee :  and  his  seruaunte  was  healed 
in  the  selfe  same  houre. 

<[  THE  .nij.  SONDAY. 

[Quare  fremuerunt  gentes.  psal.  ii. 

WHy  doe  the  Heathen  so  furiously 
rage  together?  and  why  doe  the 
people  imagin  a  vayne  thyng  ? 

The  kynges  of  the  earth  stand  vp, 
and  the  rulers  take  counsel  together  : 
against  the  Lorde  and  agaynst  his 
anoynted. 

Let  vs  breake  theyr  bondes  a  sunder : 
and  caste  awaie  theyr  coardes  from  vs. 

He  that  dwelleth  in  heauen,  shal 
laugh  them  to  skorne  :  the  Lorde 
shall  haue  them  in  derision. 

Then  shal  he  speake  vnto  them  in 
his  wrath  :  and  vexe  them  in  his  sore 
displeasure. 

Yet  haue  I  set  my  king  :  vpon  my 
holy  hill  of  Sion. 

I  will  preach  the  lawe,  wherof  the 
Lorde  hath  sayd  vnto  me  :  thou  art 
my  sonne,  this  daye  haue  I  begotten 
thee. 

Desire  of  me,  and  I  shal  geue  thee 
the  heathen  for  thine  inheritaunce  : 
and  the  vttermoste  partes  of  the  earth 
for  thy  possession. 

Thou  shalt  bruise  them  with  a  rod 
of  yron  :  and  breake  them  in  pieces 
lyke  a  potters  vessell. 

Be  wise  nowe  therfore,  o  ye  kinges  : 
be  learned  ye  that  are  Judges  of  the 
yearth. 

Serue  the  Lorde  in  feare  :  and 
reioyce  (vnto  hym)  with  reuerence. 

Kisse  the  sonne  lest  he  be  angrie, 
and  so  yeperishe  from  the  righte  way  : 
if  hys  wrathe  be  kiendled  (yea  but  a 
lytle)  blessed  are  all  they  that  put 
theyr  trust  in  him. 

Glorye  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne,  and  to  the.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe 
and  euer  shalbe.&c. 

The  Collect. 

God,  whiche  knoweste  vs  to  be  set 
in  the  middeste  of  so  many  and  great 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY                 265 

1552  1661 

heauen  :  but  the  children  of  the  king-  heaven.  But  the  children  of  the  king 
dom  shalbe  cast  out  into  vtter  darke-  dom  shall  be  cast  out  into  outer  dark- 
nes,  there  shalbe  weping  and  ness :  there  shall  be  weeping,  and 
gnashyng  of  teeth.  And  lesus  sayed  gnashing  of  teeth.  And  lesus  said 
vnto  the  Centurion  :  Goe  thy  way,  and  vnto  the  Centurion,  Go  thy  way,  and 
as  thou  beleuest,  so  be  it  vn-  as  thou  hast  believed,  so  be  it  don  vn 
to  thee  :  &  his  seruaunt  was  healed  to  thee.  And  his  servant  was  healed 
in  the  selfe  same  houre.  in  the  self  same  houre. 

C  THE  FOURTH  SUNDAYE,  THE  FOURTH  SUNDAY  3AFTER  THE  EPIPHANY. 


C  The  Collect.  The  Collect. 

God  which  knowest  vs  to  be  set          0  God,  who8  knowest  vs  to  be  set 
in  the  middeste  of  so  many  and  great       in  the  midst  of  so  many  and   great 


266 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 
non  posse  subsistere,  da  nobis  salutem 

mentis  et  corporis :  vt  ea  que  pro 
peccatis  nostris  patimur,  te  adiuuante 
vincamus.  Per.  (Greg.  33) 

Ad  roman. 
[Rom.  xiii.  8-10] 


[xiij.  c 


Secundum  matheum. 

[viij.  c 

IN  illo  tempore.  Ascendente  iesu 
in  nauiculam,  secuti  sunt  eum  dis- 
cipuli  eius.  Et  esse  motus  magnus 
factus  est  in  mari  :  ita  vt  nauicula 
operiretur  fluctibus.  Erat  autem  illis 
ventus  contrarius :  ipse  vero  dormiebat. 
Et  accesserunt  ad  eum  discipuli  eius  : 
et  suscitauerunt  eum  dicentes.  Domine, 
salua  nos :  perimus.  Et  dixit  eis. 
Quid  timidi  estis  :  modice  fide  ?  Tune 
surgens,  imperauit  ventis  et  mari :  et 
facta  est  tranquillitas  magna.  Porro 
homines  mirati  sunt :  dicentes.  Qualis 
est  hie  ?  Quia  venti  &  mare  :  obediunt 
ei. 


1549 

daungers,  that  for  mans  frailnesse 
we  cannot  alwayes  stande 
vprightly  :  Graunt  to  vs  the  health  of 
body  and  soule,  that  all  those  thynges 
whiche  we  suffer  for  synne,  by  thy 
helpe  we  maye  well  passe  and  ouer- 
come:  through  Christ  our  Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  xiii. 

LEt  euery  soule  submit  hymselfe 
vnto  the  auctoritie  of  the  hygher 
powers :  for  there  is  no  power  but 
of  God.  The  powers  that  bee,  are 
ordayned  of  God  :  whosoeuer  therfore 
resisteth  power,  resisteth  the  ordi- 
naunceofGod:  But  they  that  resyste, 
shall  receyue  to  themselues  damna- 
cion.  For  rulers  are  not  feareful  to 
the  that  do  good,  but  to  them  that 
do  euill.  Wilt  thou  be  without  feare 
of  the  power  ?  do  wel  then,  &  so 
shalt  thou  bee  praysed  of  thesame  : 
for  he  is  the  minister  of  God, 
for  thy  wealth.  But  &  yf  thou  doe  that 
whicheiseuyll,thenfeare,forhebeareth 
notthe  sweordefor  naught :  forhe  is  the 
minister  of  God  to  take  vengeaunce 
on  him  that  doth  euill.  Wher- 
fore,  ye  must  nedes  obey,  not  only 
forfeareofvengeaunce,butalsobecause 
of  conscience  :  and  euen  for  this 
cause  paye  ye  tribute  :  For  they  are 
Gods  ministers  seruing  for  thesame 
purpose.  Geue  to  euery  man  therefore 
his  duetie :  tribute,  to  whome  tribute  be- 
longeth  :  custome,  to  whom  custome 
is  due :  feare,  to  whom  feare  be- 
longeth :  honour,  to  whom  honour 
pertayneth. 

The  Gospell. 

[       Math.  viii. 

ANd  when  he  entred  into  a  ship, 
his  disciples  folowed  him.  And  behold, 
there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  sea, 
insomuche  that  the  shyp  was  couered 
with  waues,  but  he  was  aslepe. 
And  his  disciples  came  to  him,  & 
awoke  hym,  saying  :  Maister  saue  vs, 
we  perishe.  And  he  sayth  vnto  them  : 
why  are  ye  feareful,  O  ye  of  litle 
faith?  Then  he  arose,  £  rebuked 
the  windes  and  the  sea,  and  there 
folowed  a  great  calme.  But  the  men 
meruayled,  saying  :  what  maner  of  man 
is  thys,  that  both  wyndes  and  sea 
obey  him  ?  And  when  he  was  come 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


267 


1552 

daungers,  that  for  mans  frailnesse 
we  cannot  alwaies  stande 
vprightly  :  Graunt  to  vs  the  health  of 
body  and  soule,  that  al  those  thynges 
which  we  suffer  for  sinne,  by  thy 
helpe  we  may  wel  passe  and  ouer- 
come :  through  Chryste  our  Lorde. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Ro.  xiii. 

LEt  euery  soule  submit  hymselfe 
vnto  the  auctoritie  of  the  higher 
powers  :  for  there  is  no  power  but 
of  God.  The  powers  that  be,  are 
ordained  of  god  :  whosoeuer  therfore 
resisteth  power,  resisteth  the  ordi- 
naunce  of  God  :  But  they  that  resiste, 
shall  receyue  to  themselues  damna- 
cion.  For  rulers  are  not  fearefull  to 
them  that  doe  good,  but  to  them  that 
do  euill.  Wilt  thou  be  without  feare 
of  the  power?  doe  well  then,  and  so 
shalt  thou  be  praysed  of  the  same  : 
for  he  is  the  minister  off  god, 
for  thy  wealth.  But  and  yf  thou  doe  that 
whiche is  euill,  then  feare,forhebeareth 
notthesweordefornoughte:forheisthe 
minister  of  god  to  take  vengeaunce 
on  them  that  doe  euill.  Where 
fore  ye  muste  nedes  obey,  not  only 
for  feare  ofvengeaunce,butalso  because 
of  conscyence,  and  euen  for  this 
cause  paye  ye  tribute  :  For  they  are 
gods  ministers  seruying  for  that 
purpose.  Geue  to  euery  man  therefore 
his  duetie  :  tribute,  to  whom  tribute  be- 
longeth  :  custome,  to  whom  custome 
is  due :  feare,  to  whom  feare  be- 
longeth  :  honoure,  to  whom  honour 
pertayneth. 

1[  The  Gospell. 

[      Matt.viii. 

ANd  whe  he  entred  into  a  ship, 
his  disciples  folowed  him.  And  behold, 
there  arose  a  greate  tempest  in  the  sea, 
insomuche  as  the  shyp  was  couered 
with  waues,  but  he  was  aslepe. 
And  his  disciples  came  to  him,  and 
awoke  him,  sayinge  :  Maister  saue  vs, 
we  peryshe.  And  he  said  vnto  them  : 
Why  are  ye  feareful,  O  ye  of  litle 
faith  ?  Then  he  arose,  and  rebuked 
the  windes  and  the  sea,  and  there 
folowed  a  great  calme.  But  the  men 
meruailed, sayinge:  what  manerof man 
is  this,  that  bothe  wyndes  and  sea 
obeye  hym  ?  And  when  he  was  come 


1661 

dangers,  that  by  reason  of  the  frailty 
of  our  nature,  we  cannot  alwayes  stand 
vpright  :  grant  to  vs  such  strength 
and  protection,  as  may  support  vs 
in  all  dangers,  and  carry  vs  through 
all  temptations, 

through  8Iesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
6  Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Rom.  13.  «L 

Let  every  soul  be  subject 
vnto  the    higher 

powers,  for  there  is  no  power  but 
of  God :  the  powers  that  be,  are 
ordeined  of  God.  Whosoever  therefore 
resisteth  the  power,  resisteth  the  ordi 
nance  of  God  :  and  they  that  resist, 
shall  receive  to  themselves  damna 
tion.  For  rulers  are  not  a  terrour 
to  good  works,  but  to  the  evil : 
wilt  thou  then  not  be  afraid  of  the 
power?  do  that  which  is  good,  and 
thou  shalt  have  praise  of  the  same. 
For  he  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee 
for  good :  but  if  thou  do  that 
which  is  evil,  be  afraid ;  for  he  beareth 
not  the  sword  in  vain.  For  he  is  the 
minister  of  God,  a  revenger  to  execute 
wrath  vpon  him  that  doth  euil.  Where 
fore  ye  must  needs  be  subject,  not  only 
for  wrath,  but  also  for  conscience 
sake.  For,  for  this  cause  pay  you 
tribute  also  :  for  they  are  Gods  minis 
ters,  attending  continually  vpon  this 
very  thing.  Render  therefore  to  all 
their  dues:  tribute  to  whom  Tribute 
is  due,  custome  to  whom  custome, 

fear  to  whom  fear, 
honour  to  whom  honour. 


The  Gospel. 

[St:  Mat.  8.  423. 

And  when  he  was  entred  into  a  ship, 
his  disciples  followed  him.  And  behold 
there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  sea, 
insomuch  that  the  ship  was  covered 
with  the  waves  :  but  he  was  asleep. 
And  his  disciples  came  to  him  and 
awoke  him  saying,  Lord  save  vs, 
we  perish.  And  he  sayeth  vnto  them, 
why  are  ye  fearfull,  O  ye  of  little 
faith?  Then  he  arose,  and  rebuked 
the  Windes,  and  the  sea,  and  there 
was  a  great  calm.  But  the  men 
marvelled  saying,  what  manner  of  man 
is  this,  that  even  the  windes,and  the  sea 
obey  him  ?  And  when  he  was  come 


268 


FIFTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 


C  Dominica,  v.  post  oct.  epi. 

Ad  missam  officium. 
[Ps.  xcvi  (xcvii)  7c,  8  :  1] 


1549 

to  the  other  syde  into  the  countrey  of 
the  Gergesites,  there  met  him  .ii. 
possessed  of  deuilles,  whiche  came 
out  of  the  graues,  and  were  out  of 
measure  fierce,  so  that  no  man  might 
goe  by  that  way.  And  beholde,  they 
cryed  out,  saying:  O  lesu,  thou 
sonne  of  God,  what  haue  we  to  dooe 
with  thee  ?  Art  thou  come  hyther  to 
torment  vs  before  the  tyme?  And 
there  was  a  good  way  of  from  them, 
a  heerd  of  many  Swyne  feeding.  So 
the  deuils  besoughte  hym,  saying  :  If 
thou  caste  vs  oute,  suffre  vs  to  goe 
into  the  heerd  of  Swyne.  And 
he  sayd  vnto  them  :  goe  your  wayes. 
Then  wente  they  oute  and  departed 
into  the  heerde  of  Swine.  And  beholder 
the  whole  heerd  of  Swine  was  caryed 
hedlong  into  the  sea,  &  peryshed  in 
the  waters.  Then  they  that  kept  them 
fled,  and  went  theyr  wayes  into  the 
citie,  and  tolde  euery  thing,  &  what 
had  happened  vnto  the  possessed  of 
the  deuils.  And  behold,  the  whole 
citie  came  out  to  mete  lesus  :  and 
when  they  sawe  hym,  they  besought 
hym  that  he  would  depart  out  of  theyr 
coastes. 

<I  THE  v.  SONDAY. 

[Exaudiat  te  dominus.  psal.  xx. 

Tne  Lord  heare  thee  in  the  daye 
of  trouble  :  the  name  of  the  God  of 
lacob  defende  thee. 

Sende  thee  helpe  from  the  Sanct 
uary  :  and  strength  thee  out  of  Sion. 

Remembre  all  thy  offerynges  :  and 
accepte  thy  brente  sacrifice. 

Graunte  thee  thy  heartes  desyre  : 
and  fulfyll  all  thy  mynde. 

We  will  reioyce  in  thy  saluacionr 
and  tryumphe  in  the  name  of  the 
Lorde  oure  God  :  the  Lorde  perfourme 
all  thy  peticions. 

Nowe  knowe  I  that  the  Lorde 
helpeth  hys  annoynted,  and  wyll  heare 
him  from  hys  holy  heauen  :  euen  with 
the  wholesome  strength  of  hys  ryght 
hande. 

Some  put  their  trust  in  Chariotes, 
and  some  in  horsses  :  but  we  wyll 
remembre  the  name  of  the  Lorde 
our  God. 

They  are  brought  doune  and  fallen  : 
but  we  are  rysen  and  stande  vp- 
ryght. 


FIFTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


269 


1552 

to  the  other  syde,  into  the  countrey  of 
the  Gergesites,  there  met  him  .ii. 
possessed  of  deuilles,  which  came 
out  of  the  graues,  and  wer  out  of 
measure  fierce,  so  that  no  ma  myght 
goe  by  that  waye.  And  beholde,  they 
cryed  oute,  saying :  O  lesu,  thou 
sonne  of  god,  what  haue  we  to  doe 
with  thee  ?  Art  thou  come  hither  to 
tormente  vs  beefore  the  tyme  ?  And 
there  was  a  good  waye  of  from  them, 
a  heerd  of  Swyne  feeding.  So 

the  deuils  besought  him,  saying :  If 
thou  cast  vs  out,  suffre  vs  to  goe 
into  the  heerd  of  Swyne.  And 
he  sayed  vnto  them  :  goe  youre  wayes. 
Then  wente  they  oute  and  departed 
into  the  heerd  of  Swyne.  And  beholde, 
the  whole  heerd  of  Swine  was  caryed 
hedlong  into  the  sea,  and  perished  in 
the  waters.  Then  they  that  kept  them 
fled,  and  went  their  wayes  into  the 
citie,  and  tolde  euery  thing,  and  what 
had  happened  vnto  the  possessed  of 
the  deuils.  And  beholde,  the  whole 
citie  came  out  to  mete  lesus :  and 
when  they  saw  him,  thei  besought 
him  that  he  would  depart  out  of  their 
coastes. 

C  THE  FIFTH  SUNDAYE. 


1661 

to  the  other  side,  into  the  Country  of 
the   Gergesens,  there  met  him    two 
possessed    with    devils,    coming 
out  of  the  tombes,  exceeding 

fierce,  so  that  no  man  might 
pass  by  that  way.  and  behold,  they 
cried  out  saying,  What  have  we 
to  do  with  thee,  lesus,  thou  son 
of  God?  art  thou  come  hither  to 
torment  vs  before  the  time?  And 
there  was  a  good  way  of  from  them 
an  heard  of  many  swine,  feeding.  So 
the  devils  besought  him  saying,  Jf 
thou  cast  vs  out,  suffer  vs  to  go 
away  into  the  heard  of  swine.  And 
he  sayd  vnto  them,  Go ;  And  when  they 
were  come  out,  they  went  into  the  herd 
of  swine;  and  behold  —  the  whole 
herd  of  swine  ran  violently  downe  a 
steep  place  into  the  sea,  and  perished  in 
the  Waters  ;  And  they  that  kept  them 
fled,  and  went  their  wayes  into  the 
City,  and  told  every  thing,  and  what 
was  befaln  to  the  possessed  of 
devils.  And  behold,  the  whole 
City  came  out  to  meet  lesus  :  And 
when  they  saw  him,  they  besought 
him,  that  he  would  depart  out  of  their 
Coasts. 

THE  FIFTH  SUNDAY  SAFTER  THE  EPIPHANY 


270 


FIFTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 

FAmiliam  tuam  quesumus  domine 
continua  pietate  custodi  :  vt  que  in 
sola  spe  gratie  celestis  innititur  :  tua 
semper  protectione  muniatur.  per. 
(Greg.  39) 

Ad  colossen. 

[iij.  B 

Fnatres.  Induite  vos  sicut  electi 
dei  sancti  et  dilecti  viscera  miseri- 
cordie :  mansuetudinem,  benignitatem, 
humilitatem,  modestiam,  patientiam. 
Supportantes  inuicem :  et  donantes 
vobismetipsis,  si  quis  aduersus  aliquem 
habet  querelam.  Sicut  &  dominus 
donauit  vobis  :  ita  et  vos.  Super  hec 
omiiia  autem  charitatem  habentes  : 
quod  est  vinculum  perfectionis.  Et 
pax  xpi  exultet  in  cordibus  vestris,  in 
qua  et  vos  vocati  estis  in  viio  corpore  : 
et  grati  estote.  Verbum  xpi  habitet  in 
vobis  abundanter  in  omni  sapientia  : 
docentes  et  commonentes  vosmetipsos 
psalmis  hymnis  et  canticis  spiritalibus, 
in  gratia  cantantes  et  psallentes  in 
cordibus  vestris  deo.  Omne  quodcum- 
que  facitis  in  verbo  aut  in  opere :  omnia 
in  nomine  domini  nostri  iesu  xpi  facite, 
gratias  _agentes  deo  et  patri.  Per 
iesum  xpm  :  dominum  nostrum. 

Secundum  matheum. 

xiij.  D 

IN  illo  tempore  Dixit  iesus  dis- 
cipulis  suis  parabolam  lianc.  Simile 
factum  est  regnum  celorum  homiiii  qui 
seminauit  bonum  semen  in  agro  suo. 
Cum  autem  dormirent  homines,  venit 
inimicus  eius  &  superseminauit  zizania 
in  medio  tritici :  et  abijt.  Cum  autem 
creuisset  herba  &  fructum  fecisset : 
tune  apparuerunt  et  zizania.  Acced- 
entes  autem  serui  patrisfamilias  :  dix- 
erunt  ei.  Domine,  nonne  bonum  se 
men  seminasti  in  agro  tuo?  Vnde 
ergo  habet  zizania?  Et  ait  illis. 
Inimicus  homo  hoc  fecit.  Serui  autem 
dixerunt  ei.  Vis  imus  et  colligimus 


1549 

Saue  Lorde,  and  heare  vs,  O  kyng  of 
heauen  :  when  we  call  vpon  thee. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  begynnyng.&c. 

The  Collect. 

Lorde,  we  beseche  thee  to  kepe  thy 
Churche  &  housholde  continually  in 
thy  true  religion  :  that  they  whiche 
doe  leane  only  vpon  hope  of  thy 
heauenly  grace,  may  euermore  be  de 
fended  by  thy  mightie  power :  Through 
Christe  our  Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[Colos.  iii. 

Put  vpon  you  as  the  electe  of  God, 
tendre  mercye,  kyndnes,  humblenes 
of  minde,  mekenes,  long  sufferyng, 
forbearyng  one  an  other,  and  for- 
geuyng  one  an  other,  if  any  man  haue 
a  quarell  against  another  :  as  Christ 
forgaue  you,  euen  so  do  ye.  Aboue 
all  these  thinges  put  on  loue,  which 
is  the  bonde  of  perfectnes.  And  the 
peace  of  God  rule  in  your  heartes  :  to 
the  whiche  peace  ye  are  called  in  one 
bodye  :  And  see  that  ye  bee  thanke- 
full.  Let  the  woorde  of  Christe  dwell 
in  you  plenteouslye,  with  all  wysedome. 
Teache  and  exhort e  youre  owne  selues 
in  Psalmes  and  Himnes  and  spirituall 
songes,  syngyng  with  grace  in  your 
heartes  to  the  Lord.  And  what- 
soeuer  ye  doe  in  woorde  or  dede, 
doe  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Iesu,  geuyng  thankes  to  God  the 
father  by  hym. 

The  Gospell. 

[      Math.  xiii. 

Tne  kyngdome  of  heauen  is  lyke 
vnto  a  manne  whiche  sowed  good 
seede  in  his  fielde  :  but  while  menne 
slepte,  his  enemye  came,  and  sowed 
tares  among  the  wheate,  and  wente 
his  waye.  But  when  the  blade  was 
sprong  vp,  and  had  brought  furthe 
fruite,  then  appeared  the  tares  also. 
So  the  seruauntes  of  the  houshoulder 
came,  and  sayd  vnto  him  :  Sir,  dydst 
not  thou  sowe  good  seede  in  thy 
fielde  ?  from  whence  then  hathe  it 
tares  ?  he  sayde  vnto  theim  :  the 
enuyous  manne  hath  done  this.  The 
seruauntes  sayd  vnto  him  :  wilt  thou 
then  that  we  goe  and  wede  them  vp? 


FIFTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 
1552  1661 


271 


IT  The  Collecte. 

Lord,  we  beseche  thee  to  kepe  thy 
Church,  and  houshold  continually  in 
thy  true  religio :  that  they  which 
doe  leane  only  vpon  hope  of  thy 
heauenly  grace,  may  euermore  be  de 
fended  by  thy  mighty  power :  Through 
Christe  our  Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[Colo.  iii. 

Put  vpon  you  as  the  elect  of  god, 
tendre  mercye,  kindnesse,  humblenes 
of  minde,  mekenesse,  long  sufferyng, 
forbearing  one  another,  &  for- 
geuing  one  an  other  yf  any  man  haue 
a  quarel  agaist  an  other:  as  Christ 
forgaue  you,  cue  so  doe  ye.  Aboue 
al  these  thinges,  put  on  loue,  which 
is  the  bond  of  perfectnes.  And  the 
peace  of  god  rule  youre  heartes,  to 
the  which  peace  ye  are  called  in  one 
body  :  And  see  that  ye  be  thanke- 
ful.  Let  the  worde  of  Christ  dwell 
in  you  plenteously  with  all  wisedome  : 
Teache  and  exhort  your  own  selfes 
in  Psalmes  &  Himnes  &  spiritual 
songes,  singing  with  grace  in  your 
heartes  to  the  lord.  And  what- 
soeuer  ye  doe  in  word  or  dede, 
doe  al  in  the  name  of  the  Icrd 
lesu,  geuing  thankes  to  God  the 
father  by  hym. 

IT  The  Gospell. 

[      Mat.  xiii. 

Tne  kyngdome  of  heauen  is  lyke 
vnto  a  man  whiche  sowed  good 
seede  in  hys  fielde  :  but  while  men 
slept,  his  enemy  came,  and  sowed 
tares  amog  the  wheate,  and  went 
his  way.  But  whe  the  blade  was 
sprong  vp,  and  had  broughte  furth 
fruite,  then  appeared  the  tares  also  : 
So  the  seruauntes  of  the  houshoulder 
came,  and  sayd  vnto  him  :  Sir,  didste 
not  thou  sowe  good  seede  in  thy 
fielde  ?  from  whence  then  hath  it 
tares  ?  He  sayd  vnto  them  :  the 
enuious  man  hath  done  this.  The 
seruauntes  sayd  vnto  him  :  wilt  thou 
then  that  we  goe  and  wede  them  vp  ? 


The  Collect. 

0  Lord  We  beseech  thee  to  keep  thy 
Church  and  houshold  continually  in 
thy  true  religion,  that  they  who 
do  lean  only  vpon  the  hope  of  thy 
heavenly  grace,  may  evermore  be  de 
fended  by  thy  mighty  power,  through 
3Iesus  Christ  our  Lord.  6Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Col.  3.  412. 

Put  on  therefore  (as  the  elect  of  God, 
holy,  and  beloved,)  bowels  of  mercies, 
kindenes,  humblenes  of  minde,  meek 
ness,  longsuffering  :  Forbearing  one 
another,  and  forgiving  one  another  ;  if 
any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any  ; 
even  as  Christ  forgave  you,  so  also 
do  ye.  And  above  all  these  things,  put 
on  charity,  which  is  the  Bond  of  per- 
fectness.  And  let  the  peace  of  God 
rule  in  your  hearts,  to  ye  which  also 
ye  are  called  in  one  body  :  And  be  ye 
thankfull.  Let  the  word  of  Christ 
dwell  in  you  richly  in  all  wisedome, 
teaching,  and  admonishing  one  another 
in  Psalms,  and  hymns,  and  spiritual 
Songs,  singing  with  grace  in  your 
hearts  to  the  Lord.  And  what 
soever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed, 
do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
lesus,  giving  thanks  to  God,  and  the 
father  by  him. 

The  Gospel. 

[8*:  Mat.  13.  -»24. 

The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened 
vnto  a  man  which  sowed  good 
seed  in  his  field ;  but  while  men 
slept,  his  enemy  came  and  sowed 
tares  among  the  wheat,  and  went 
his  way.  But  when  the  blade  was 
sprung  vp,  and  brought  forth 

fruit,  then  appeared  the  tares  also. 
So  the  servants  of  the  housholder 
came  and  sayd  vnto  him,  Sir,  didst 
not  thou  sow  good  Seed  in  thy 
field?  from  whence  then  hath  it 
tares  ?  He  sayeth  vnto  them,  An 
enemy  hath  don  this :  The 
servants  said  vnto  him ;  wilt  thou 
then  that  we  go,  and  gather  them  vp  ? 


272 


SIXTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


SOURCES 

ea?  Et  ait.  Non.  Ne  forte  colli- 
gentes  zizania  :  eradicetis  simul  cum 
eis  &  triticum.  Sinite  vtraque  crescere 
vsque  ad  messem  :  et  in  tempore  mes- 
sis  dicam  messoribus.  Colligite  pri- 
mum  zizania :  et  alligate  ea  in  fascicules 
ad  comburendum.  Triticum  autem 
congregate  :  in  horreum  meum. 

[Cosin  Particulars  to  be  considered^  : 
( After  the  fifth  Sunday  then  it  is 
appointed,  that  if  there  be  a  sixth,  the 
same  Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel  shall 
be  used  which  was  read  upon  the  fifth. 
But  it  were  both  fit  and  easy  rather  to 
supply  the  day  with  Collect,  Epistle,  and 
Gospel  proper  to  itself,  than  to  suffer 
this  defect  to  stand  still  without  need.'] 

1  Jo.  iii.  8,  1,  3,  2  :  Tit.  iii.  7 : 
S.  Mat.  xxiv.  30. 


1549 

But  he  sayde,  naye,  leste  whyle  ye 
gather  vp  the  tares,  ye  plucke  vp  also 
the  wheate  with  them  :  lette  both 
growe  together  vntill  the  haruest : 
and  in  tyme  of  harueste,  I  will  say 
to  the  reapers  :  gather  ye 
firste  the  tares,  and  bynde  them  to 
gether  in  sheaues  to  be  brente  :  but 
gather  the  wheate  into  my  barne. 

The  .vi.  sonday  (if  ther  bee  so  many)  shall 
have  the  same  Psalme,  Collect,  Epistle, 
and  Gospell,  that  was  vpon  the  .v. 


SIXTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EPIPHANY 


273 


1552 

But  he  sayd,  naye  :  lest  whyle  ye 
gather  vp  the  tares,  ye  plucke  vp  also 
the  wheate  with  them :  let  both 
growe  together  vntill  the  harueste : 
and  in  the  time  of  haruest,  I  wil  say 
to  the  reapers  :  gather  ye 
first  the  tares,  and  bind  them  to 
gether  in  sheaues  to  be  brente  :  but 
gather  the  wheate  into  my  barne. 

The  .vi.  Sunday  (if  there  be  so  many)  shal 
haue  the  same  Collect,  Epistle, 

and  Gospel ,  that  was  vpon  the  fyf th  Sunday e. 


1661 

But  he  sayd  nay  ;  least  while  ye 
gather  vp  the  tares,  ye  root  vp  also 
the  wheat  with  them.  Let  both 
grow  together  vntil  the  Harvest, 
and  in  the  time  of  Harvest,  I  will  say 
to  the  reapers,  Gather  ye  together 
first  the  tares,  and  bind  them 

in  bundles  to  burne  them,  but 
gather  the  wheat  into  my  barn. 

THE  SIXTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  THE  EPIPHANY. 
The  Collect. 

0  God  whose  blessed  son  was 
manifested  that  he  might  destroy 
the  works  of  the  devil,  and  make 
vs  the  sons  of  God,  and  heirs  of 
eternall  life:  grant  vs,  we  beseech 
thee,  that  having  this  hope,  we  may 
purifie  our  selves,  even  as  he  is 
pure:  that  when  he  shall  appeare 
againe  with  power,  and  great  glory, 
we  may  be  made  like  vntp  him  in 
his  eternall  and  glorious  kingdome, 
where  with  thee,  0  Father,  and 
thee,  0  Holy  Ghost,  he  liveth  and 
reigneth  ever  one  God,  world  with 
out  end.  Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[1.  St:  loh.  3.  1. 

Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the 
Father  hath  bestowed  vpon  vs,  that 
we  should  be  called  the  Sons  of 
God :  Therefore  the  world  knoweth 
vs  not,  because  it  knew  him  not. 
Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of 
God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appeare 
what  we  shall  be:  but  we  know 
that  when  he  shall  appear  we  shall 
be  like  him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as 
he  is  :  And  every  man  that  hath 
this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himselfe 
even  as  he  is  pure.  Whosoever 
coffiitteth  sin  transgresseth  also  the 
law :  for  sin  is  the  transgression  of 
the  law.  And  ye  know  that  he 
was  manifested  to  take  away  our 
sins ;  and  in  him  is  no  Sin.  Whoso 
ever  abideth  in  him  sinneth  not. 
whosoever  sinneth  hath  not  seen 
him,  neither  known  him.  Little 
children,  let  no  man  deceive  you : 
he  that  doth  righteousness  is  right 
eous,  even  as  he  is  righteous.  He 
that  comitteth  sin  is  of  the  devil : 
for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  be 
ginning:  for  this  purpose  the  son 


274  SEPTUAGESIMA 

SOURCES  JS49 


C  Dominica  in.lxx.  <[  THE  SONDAY  CALLED  SEPTUAGESIMA. 

Officium.  [Dominus  regit.  psal.  xxiii. 

[Ps.  xvii  (xviii),  3a,  4a,  5a,  6a  :  la]  THC  Lorde  is  my  shepehearde  : 

therfore  can  I  lacke  nothing. 

He  shall  feede  me  in  a  greene 
pasture  :  and  leade  me  furth  besyde 
the  waters  of  coumforte. 

He  shall  conuerte  my  soule  :  and 
bryng  me  furthe  in  the  pathes  of 
righteousnes,  for  his  names  sake. 

Yea,  though  I  walke  through  the 
valley  of  the  shadowe  of  death  :  I  will 
feare  no  euil,  for  thou  art  with  me, 
thy  rod  and  thy  staffe  coumforte  me. 

Thou  shalt  prepare  a  table  before 


SEPTUAGESIMA  275 

1552  1661 

of  God  was  manifested,  that  he 
might  destroy  the  works  of  the 
devil. 

The  Gospell. 

[St:  Mat.  24.  23. 

Then  if  any  man  shall  say  vnto 
you,  Lo  here  is  Christ  or  there: 
believe  it  not.  for  there  shall  arise 
false  Christs,  and  false  Prophets, 
and  shall  shew  great  signes  and 
wonders :  insomuch  that  (if  it  were 
possible)  they  shall  deceive  the  very 
elect.  Behold,  I  have  told  you 
before,  wherefore  if  they  shall  say 
vnto  you;  Behold  he  is  in  the 
Desert,  go  not  forth :  behold,  he  is 
in  the  secret  chambers,  believe  it 
not :  For  as  the  lightning  cometh  out 
of  the  East,  and  shineth  even  vnto 
the  West :  so  shall  also  the  coffiing 
of  the  son  of  man  be.  For  whereso 
ever  the  Carcas  is,  there  will  the 
Eagles  be  gathered  together.  Im 
mediately  after  the  tribulation  of 
those  dayes,  shall  the  sun  be 
darkned,  and  the  moon  shall  not 
give  her  light,  and  the  Stars  shall 
fall  from  heaven,  and  the  powers  of 
the  heaven  shall  be  shaken.  And 
then  shall  appear  the  signe  of  the 
son  of  man  in  heaven :  And  then 
shall  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth 
mourn,  and  they  shall  see  the  son 
of  man  coming  in  the  Clouds  of 
heaven,  with  power  and  great  glory. 
And  he  shall  send  his  Angels  with 
a  great  sound  of  a  Trumpet,  and 
they  shall  gather  together  his  elect 
from  the  foure  windes,  from  one 
end  of  heaven  to  the  other. 

THE  SUNDAYE  CALLED  SEPTUAGESIMA.  THE  SUNDAY  CALLED  SEPTUAGESIMA, 

OR  8THE  THIRD  SUNDAY  BEFORE  LENT. 


276 


SEPTUAGESIMA 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 
Pneces  populi  tui  quesumus  domine 

clementer   exaudi :    vt  qui   iuste   pro 
peccatis   nostris    affligimur  :    pro    tui 


1549 

me  against  them  that  trouble  me  : 
thou  haste  annoynted  my  head  with 
oyle,  and  my  cuppe  shalbe  full. 

But  thy  louyng  kyndenes  and  mercye 
shall  folowe  me  all  the  dayes  of  my 
lyfe  :  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of 
the  Lorde  for  euer. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  gost. 

As  it  was  in  the  begynnyng,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  worlde  without 
ende.  Amen. 

The  Collect. 

O  Lord  we  beseche  thee  fauourably 
to  heare  the  prayers  of  thy  people,  that 
we  whiche  are  iustlye  punyshed  for 


our   offences :     may    be    mercyfully 
deliuered    by    thy    goodnes,  for    the 
iiomiiris  gloria  misericorditer   libere-       glory   of   thy   name  :    through    lesu 

Christ   our  sauiour,   who   liueth   and 


mur.     Per  dominum.     (Greg.  137) 


reigneth.&c. 


Epistola.     Ad  corinthios. 

[j.  ix.  D 

Fnatres.  Nescitis  quod  hi  qui  in  stadio 
curruiit,omnesquidemcurrunt:sedvnus 
accipit  brauium  ?  Sic  currite  vt  com- 
prehendatis.  Omnis  enim  qui  in  agone 
contendit :  ab  omnibus  se  abstinet. 
Et  illi  quidem  vt  corruptibilem  coronam 
accipiant:  DOS  autem  incorruptam. 
Ego  igitur  sic  curro :  non  quasi  in 
iucertum.  Sic  pugno :  non  quasi 
aerem  verberaris.  Sed  castigo  corpus 
meum  et  in  servitutem  redigo :  ne 
forte  cum  alijs  predicauerim :  ipse 
reprobus  official-.  Nolo  enim  vos  [x.  A 
ignorare  fratres  quoniam  patres  nostri 
omnes  sub  nube  fuerunt :  et  omnes 
mare  transierunt :  et  omnes  in  moyse 
baptizati  sunt  in  nube  et  in  mari.  Et 
omnes  eandem  escam  spiritualem  man- 
ducauerunt :  et  omnes  euiidem  potum 
spiritalem  biberunt.  Bibebant  autem 
de  spiritali  :  consequente  eos  petra. 
Petra  autem  erat  xps. 

Secundum  matheum. 

[xx.  A 

IN  illo  tempore.  Dixit  iesus  dis- 
cipulis  suis  parabolam  hanc.  Simile  est 
regnum  celorum  homini  patrifamilias  : 
qui  exijt  primo  mane  conducere  ope- 
rarios  in  vineam  suam.  Conuentione 
autem  facta  cum  operarijs  ex  denario 


The  Epistle. 

[i.  Cor.  ix. 

PErceyueyenot,  ho  we  thatthey  whiche 
runne  in  a  course,  runne  all,  but  one 
receyueth  the  rewarde  ?  So  runne  that 
ye  may  obtayne  :  Euerye  man  that 
proueth  masteryes,  abstayneth 
from  all  thinges.  And  they  doe  it  to 
obtaine  a  crowne  that  shal  perishe,  but 
we  to  obtaine  an  euerlasting  crowne.  I 
therfore  so  runne,  not  as  at  an  vncer- 
tayne  thyng.  So  fight  I,  not  as  one 
that  beateth  the  ayre  :  but  I  tame 
my  body,  and  bryng  it  into 
subieccion,  leaste  by  any  meanes 
it  come  to  passe,  that  when  I  haue 
preached  to  other  ,  I  my  selfe  should 
be  a  castawaye. 


The  Gospell. 

[       Math.  xx. 

THe  kingdome  of  heauen  is  lyke 
vnto  a  manne  that  is  an  housholder* 
which  went  out  early  in  the  morning 
to  hyre  labourers  into  his  vineyard. 
And  whe  the  agremente  was  made  wy th 
the  labourers  for  a  peny  a  daye,  he 
sent  them  into  his  vineyarde.  And 


SEPTUAGESIMA 


277 


1552 


1661 


IT  The  Collecte. 

O  Lorde,we  beseche  theefauourably 
to  heare  the  prayers  of  thy  people,  that 
we  which  are  iustlye  punished  for 
our  offences,  may  be  mercyfully 
delyuered  by  thy  goodnes,  for  the 
glorye  of  thy  name  :  through  lesu 
Christe  our  sauiour,  who  lyueth  and 
reigneth 

world  without 
ende. 

IT  The  Epistle. 

[i.  Cor.  ix. 

PErceiueye  not,howthat  they  whiche 
runne  in  a  course,  runne  al,  but  one 
receiueth  the  reward  ?  So  runne  that 
ye  may  obtaine  :  Euery  ma  that 
proueth  masteries,  abstaineth 
from  al  thinges.  And  they  doe  it  to 
obteyne  a  crowne  that  shal  peryshe,but 
we  to  obtaine  an  euerlasting  crown.  I 
therfore  so  runne,  not  as  at  an  vncer- 
tayne  thyng.  So  fyghte  I,  not  as  one 
that  beateth  the  ayre :  but  I  tame 
my  body,  and  bryng  it  into 
subieccion,  lest  by  any  meanes 

it  come  to  passe,  that  when  I  haue 
preached  to  other  ,  I  my  selfe  should 
be  a  cast  away. 


The  Collect. 

0  Lord,  we  beseech  thee  favourably 
to  hear  the  prayers  of  thy  people,  that 
we  who  are  iustly  punished  for 
our  offences,  may  be  mercifully 
delivered  by  thy  goodness,  for  the 
glory  of  thy  name,  through  Iesuslb 
Christ  our  Saviour,  who  liveth  and 
reigneth  8with  thee,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  ever  one  God,  world  without 
End.  3Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[i.  Cor.  9.424 

Know  ye  not  that  they  which 

run  in  a  race,  run  all,  but  one 
receiveth  the  prize?  So  run  that 
ye  may  obtein  ;  And  every  man  that 
striveth  for  the  mastery,  is  temperate 
in  all  things :  Now  they  do  it  to 
obtein  a  corruptible  Crown,  but 
we  an  incorruptible.  I 

therefore  so  run  not  as  vncer- 
teinly  ;  so  fight  I,  not  as  one 
that  beateth  the  Air ;  but  I  keep 
vnder  my  body,  and  bring  it  into 
subjection,  least  that  by  any  means 
,  when  I  have 

preached  to  others,  I  my  selfe  should 
be  a  cast-away. 


<[  The  Gospell. 

[      Mat.  xx 

THC  kyngdome  of  heauen  is  lyke 
vnto  a  man  that  is  an  housholder, 
which  went  out  early  in  the  mornyng 
to  hyre  labourers  into  his  vineyarde. 
And  when  the  agrement  was  made  with 
the  labourers  for  a  peny  a  day,  he 
sente  them  into  hys  vineyarde.  And 


The  Gospel. 

[S*:  Mat.  20.  41 

The  Kingdome  of  heaven  is  like 
vnto  a  man  that  is  an  houshoulder, 
which  went  out  early  in  the  morning 
to  hire  labourers  into  his  Vineyard. 
And  when  he  had  agreed  with 
the  Labourers  for  a  penny  a  day  he 
sent  them  into  his  Vineyard,  And 


278 


SEXAGESIMA 


SOURCES 

diurno :  misit  eos  in  vineam  suam. 
Et  egressus  circa  horam  tertiam  :  vidit 
alios  stantes  in  foro  ociosos,  et  dixit 
illis.  Ite  et  vos  in  vineam  meam  :  et 
quod  iustum  fuerit  dabo  vobis.  Illi 
autem  abierunt.  Iterum  autem  exijt 
circa  sextam  et  nonam  horam  :  et  fecit 
similiter.  Circa  vndecimam  vero  exijt 
et  inuenit  alios  stantes  :  et  dicit  illis. 
Quid  hie  statis  tota  die  ociosi  ?  Dicunt 
ei.  Quia  nemo  uos  conduxit.  Dicit 
illis.  Ite  et  vos  in  vineam  meam. 
Cum  sero  autem  factum  esset :  dicit 
dominus  vinee  procurator!  suo.  Voca 
operarios  et  redde  illis  mercedem  :  in- 
cipiens  a  nouissimis  vsque  ad  primes. 
Cum  venissent  ergo  qui  circa  vnde 
cimam  horam  venerant :  acceperunt 
singulos  denarios.  Venientes  autem 
et  primi :  arbitrati  sunt  quod  plus 
essent  accepturi.  Acceperunt  autem 
et  ipsi :  singulos  denarios.  Et  accipi- 
entes  murmurabant  aduersus  patrem- 
familias  :  dicentes.  Hi  nouissimi 
vna  hora  fecerunt :  &  pares  illos  nobis 
fecisti  qui  portauimus  pondus  diei  et 
estus.  At  ille  respondens  :  vni  eorum 
dixit.  Amice  :  non  facio  tibi  iniuriam. 
Nonne  ex  denario  conuenisti  mecum  ? 
Tolle  quod  tuum  est :  et  vade.  Volo 
autem  et  huic  iiouissimo  dare  :  sicut  et 
tibi.  Aut  non  licet  michi  quod  volo 
facere?  An  oculus  tuus  nequam  est, 
quia  ego  bonus  sum?  Sic  erunt  no 
uissimi  primi :  et  primi  nouissimi. 
Multi  enim  sunt  vocati :  pauci  vero 
elect?. 

C  Dominica  in  Sexagesima. 

Officium. 
[Ps.  xliii  (xliv)  23-2G  :  la] 


1549 

he  wente  out  about  the  thirde  houre, 
and  sawe  other  standyng  idle  in  the 
markette  place,  and  sayed  vnto  them  : 
Goe  ye  also  into  the  vineyarde,  and 
whatsoeuer  is  ryghte,  I  wyll  geue  you. 
And  they  went  theyr  waye.  Agayne 
he  went  out  about  the  vi.  &  .ix. 
houre, anddydlykewyse.  Andaboutthe. 
xi.  houre  he  went  out,  and  founde 
other  standyng  idle,  and  sayd  vnto 
them :  why  stand  ye  here  all  the  daye 
idle?  They  sayde  vnto  hym :  because 
no  man  hath  hyred  vs.  He  sayeth  vnto 
them  :  Goe  ye  also  into  the  vineyarde, 
and  whatsoeuer  is  ryghte,  that  shall  ye 
receyue.  So,  when  euen  was  come,  the 
Lorde  of  the  vyneyarde  saide  vnto  his 
stewarde  :  call  the  labourers  and  geue 
them  theyr  hyre,  begynning  at  the  last 
vntyll  the  first.  And  whe  they  did 
come  that  came  about  the  .xi. 
houre,  they  receyued  euery  man  a  peny : 
But  when  the  firste  came  also,  they  sup 
posed  that  they  shoulde  haue  receiued 
more,  &  they  lykewyse  receyued  euery 
man  a  peny.  And  when  they  had 
receiued  it,  they  murmured  agaynste 
the  goodman  of  the  house,  saying  : 
these  last  haue  wrought  but  one  houre, 
&  thou  haste  made  them  equall  wyth 
vs,  whyche  haue  borne  the  burthen 
and  heate  of  the  day.  But  he  aun- 
swered  vnto  one  of  them,  and  sayd  : 
Frende,  I  do  thee  no  wrong,  diddest 
thou  not  agree  wyth  me  for  a  peny  ? 
Take  that  thyne  is,  and  go  thy  waye  : 
I  wyll  geue  vnto  this  last,  even  as  vnto 
thee.  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do 
as  me  lusteth  with  myne  owne  goodes? 
Is  thyne  eye  euil  because  I  am  good  ? 
So  the  last  shalbe  first,  and  the  first 
shalbe  last.  For  many  be  called  but 
fewe  be  chosen. 

C  THE  SONDAY  CALLED  SEXAGESIMA. 

C  At  the  Communion. 

[Domini  est  terra,  psal.  xxiiii. 

THC  earth  is  the  Lordes,  and  all  that 
therein  is  :  the  compasse  of  the  worlde, 
and  they  that  dwell  therin. 

For  he  hath  founded  it  vpon  the 
seas  :  and  prepared  it  vpon  the 
fluddes. 

Who  shall  ascende  into  the  hyll  of 
the  Lorde  ?  or  who  shal  rise  up  in  his 
holy  place  ? 

Euen  he  that  hath  cleane  handes 


SEXAGESIMA 


279 


1552 

he  went  out  aboute  the  third  houre, 
and  sawe  other  standing  idle  in  the 
market  place,  and  said  vnto  them  : 
Goe  ye  also  into  the  vyneyard,  and 
whatsoeuer  is  right,  I  wil  geue  you. 
And  thei  went  theyr  waye.  _  Againe 
he  wente  oute  aboute  the  .vi.  and  .ix. 
houre,anddidlykewyse.  Andaboutethe 
.xi.  houre  he  went  out,  and  founde 
other  standing  idle,  and  said  vnto 
them  :  why  stande  ye  here  al  the  day 
idle  ?  They  said  vnto  hym  :  because 
nomanhathhyred  vs.  Hesayethvnto 
them  :  Goe  ye  also  into  the  vineyarde, 
and  whatsoeuer  is  ryghte,  that  shall  ye 
receiue.  So  when  euen  was  come,  the 
Lorde  of  the  vineyarde  sayd  vnto  his 
stewarde :  call  the  labourers,  and  geue 
the  theyr  hyre,  beginning  at  the  last 
until  the  first.  And  when  thei  did 
come  that  came  about  the  .xi. 
houre,  they  receiued  euery  man  a  peny  : 
But  when  the  first  came  also,  they  sup 
posed  that  they  should  haue  receiued 
more,  and  they  likewise  receiued  euery 
ma  a  peny  :  And  when  they  had 
receiued  it,  they  murmured  agaynst 
the  good  ma  of  the  house,  saying  : 
these  last  haue  wrought  but  one  houre, 
and  thou  hast  made  them  equal  with 
vs,  which  haue  borne  the  burthe 
&  heat  of  the  day.  But  he  aun- 
swered  vnto  one  of  them,  and  saied  : 
Frende,  I  doe  thee  no  wrong:  diddest 
thou  not  agree  with  me  for  a  peny? 
Take  that  thyne  is,  and  goe  thy  waye : 
I  wyll  geue  vnto  this  last,  euen  as  vnto 
thee.  Is  it  not  lawfull  for  me  to  doe 
as  me  lusteth  with  myne  owne  goodes? 
Is  thine  eie  euill  because  I  am  good? 
So  the  laste  shallbee  first,  and  the  first 
shalbe  last.  For  many  be  called,  but 
few  be  chosen. 

THE  SUNDAIE  CALLED  SEXAGESIMA. 


1661 

he  went  out  about  the  third  houre, 
and  saw  others  standing  idle  in  the 
market  place,  and  sayd  vnto  them, 
Go  ye  also  into  the  vineyard,  and 
whatsoever  is  right  I  will  give  you ; 
And  they  went  their  way.  Againe 
he  went  out  about  the  sixth,  and  ninth 
houre,  and  did  likewise.  And  about  the 
eleaventh  hour  he  went  out,  and  found 
others  standing  idle,  and  sayth  vnto 
them,  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day 
idle?  They  say  vnto  him  because 
no  man  hath  hired  vs  ;  He  sayth  vnto 
them,  Go  ye  also  into  the  Vineyard, 
and  whatsoever  is  right,  that  shall  ye 
receive.  So  when  Even  was  come,  the 
Lord  of  the  Vineyard  sayth  vnto  his 
Steward,  call  the  Labourers,  and  give 
them  their  hire,  beginning  from  the  last 
vnto  the  first.  And  when  they  came 
that  were  hired  about  the  eleaventh 
hour,  they  received  every  man  a  penny. 
But  when  the  first  came  ,  they  sup 
posed  that  they  should  have  received 
more,  and  they  likewise  received  every 
man  a  penny.  And  when  they  had 
received  it,  they  murmured  against 
the  goodman  of  the  house  saying 
these  last  have  wrought  but  one  houre, 
and  thou  hast  made  them  equall  vnto 
vs  which  have  born  the  burden, 
and  heat  of  the  day.  But  he  an 
swered  one  of  them,  and  sayd, 
Freind,  I  do  thee  no  wrong  :  didst 
not  thou  agree  with  mee  for  a  penny  ? 
Take  that  thine  is  and  go  thy  Way : 
I  will  give  vnto  this  last  even  as  vnto 
thee.  Is  it  not  lawfull  for  me  to  do 
what  I  will  with  mine  own 
Is  thine  Eye  evil  because  I  am  good  ? 
So  the  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first 
last :  for  many  be  called,  but 
few  chosen. 

THE  SUNDAY  CALLED  SEXAGESIMA, 
OR  STHE  SECOND  SUNDAY  BEFORE  LENT. 


280 


SEXAGESIMA 


SOURCES 


Oratio 

DEUS  qui  couspicis  quia  ex  nulla 
uostra  actione  confidimus  :  concede 
propitius  vt  contra  aduersa  omnia 
doctoris  gentium  protectione  muni- 
amur.  Per.  (Greg.  27). 

Ad  corinthios. 

[ij.  xi.  D 

Fnatres.  Libenter  suffertis  insi- 
pientes :  cum  sitis  ipsi  sapientes. 
Sustinetis  enim  si  quis  vos  in  serui- 
tutem  redigit,  si  quis  deuorat,  si  quis 
accipit,  si  quis  extollitur,  si  quis  in 
faciem  vos  cedit.  Secundum  ignobili- 
tatem  dico  :  quasi  nos  infirmi  fuerimus 
in  hac  parte.  In  quo  quis  audet  (in 
insipientia  dico)  audeo  et  ego.  Hebrei 
sunt  :  et  ego.  Israelite  sunt :  et  ego. 
Semen  abrahe  sunt :  et  ego.  Miuistri 
christi  sunt :  et  ego.  Vt  minus  sapiens 
dico  :  plus  ego.  In  laboribus  plurimis, 
in  carceribus  abundautius,  in  plagis 
supra  modum,  in  mortibus  frequenter. 
A  iudeis  quinquies  quadragenas  vna 
minus  accepi.  Ter  virgis  cesus  sum  : 


1549 

and  a  pure  hearte  :  and  that  hath 
not  lyfte  vp  his  mynde  vnto  vanitie  : 
nor  sworne  to  deceyue  hys  neigh 
bour. 

He  shall  receyue  the  blessyng  from 
the  Lorde  :  and  righteousnes  from  the 
God  of  his  saluacion. 

This  is  the  generacion  of  them  that 
seke  hym  :  euen  of  them  that  seke  thy 
face,  O  lacob. 

Lifte  vp  your  heades  (O  ye  gates) 
and  be  ye  lyfte  vp  ye  euerlastyng 
doores  :  and  the  king  of  glory  shall 
come  in. 

Who  is  thys  kynge  of  glory  ?  it  is 
the  Lorde,  strong  and  mightie  :  euen 
the  Lorde  mightie  in  battayll. 

Lifte  vp  your  heades  (O  ye  gates) 
and  be  ye  lifte  vp  ye  euerlasting 
doores  :  and  the  kyng  of  glory  shal 
come  in. 

Who  is  thys  kyng  of  glory  ?  euen 
the  Lorde  of  Hostes,  he  is  the  kyng 
of  glory. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe. 
&c. 

The  Collect. 

Lorde  God,  whiche  seest  that  we 
put  not  cure  trust  in  anye  thynge  that 
we  do  :  mercyfully  graunte  that  by  thy 
power  we  may  be  defended  agaynst  all 
aduersitie,  through  lesus  Christe  our 
Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[ii.  Cor.  xi. 

YE  suffre  fooles  gladly,  seeyng  ye 
youre  selues  are  wyse.  For  ye  suffre 
if  a  man  brynge  you  into  bondage :  if  a 
man  deuour  :  if  a  man  take  : 

if  a  man  exalt  himselfe :  if  a  man  smite 
you  on  the  face.  I  speake  as  con 
cerning  rebuke,  as  though  we  hadde 
been  weake  in  this  behalfe.  Howbeit, 
wherinsoeuer  any  man  dare  be  bolde 
(I  speake  folishly)  I  dare  be  bold 
also.  They  are  Hebrues,  euen  so  am 
I.  They  are  Israelytes,  euen  so  am  I. 
They  are  the  seede  of  Abraham,  euen 
so  am  I.  They  are  the  mynisters  of 
Christe.  (I  speake  as  a  foole)  I  am 
more  :  In  labours  more  aboundaunt  : 
In  strypes  aboue  mesure  :  In  preson 
more  plenteously  :  In  death  oft :  Of 
the  lewes  fiue  times  receiued  I  .xl. 
stripes  saue  one  :  Thrise  was  I  beaten 


SEXAGESIMA 


281 


1552 


1661 


C  The  Collect. 

Lord  God,  which  seest  that  we 
put  not  our  trust  in  any  thyng  that 
we  doe :  mercifullye  graunt,  that  by  thy 
power  we  may  be  defended  against  all 
aduersitie,  through  lesus  Christ  our 
Lorde. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[ii.  Cor.  xi. 

YE    suffre    fooles    gladly,   seig 
your  selfes  are  wyse.     For  ye  suffer 
yf  a  man  bryng  you  into  bondage:  yfa 
man  deuoure        :  yfa  man  take  : 

yfa  man  exalt  hymselfe:  yfa  man  smite 
you  on  the  face.  I  speake  as  con 
cerning  rebuke,  as  thoughe  we  had 
been  weake  in  this  behalfe.  Howbeit, 
wherinsoeuer  any  man  dare  be  bolde 
(I  speake  foolishlye)  I  dare  be  bolde 
also.  They  are  Hebrues,  euen  so  am 
I.  They  are  Israelites,  euen  so  am  I. 
They  are  the  seede  of  Abraham,  euen 
so  am  I.  They  are  the  ministers  of 
Christe,  (I  speake  as  a  foole)  I  am 
more  :  In  labours  more  aboundaunt  : 
In  stripes  aboue  measure  :  In  prieson 
more  plenteously  :  In  death  oft :  Of 
the  lewes  fiue  times  receiued  I  .xl. 
stripes  saue  one  :  Thrise  was  I  beate 


The  Collect. 

0  Lord  God,  who  seest  that  we 
put  not  our  trust  in  any  thing  that 
we  do,  mercifully  grant  that  by  thy 
power  we  may  be  defended  against  all 
Adversity  through  lesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  cAmen. 

The  Epistle. 

[2.  Cor.  ii.  419 

Ye  suffer  fools  gladly,  seeing  ye 
your  selves  are  wise.  For  ye  suffer 
if  a  man  bring  you  into  bondage,  if  a 
man  devour  you,  if  a  man  take  of  you, 
if  a  man  exalt  himselfe,  if  a  man  smite 
you  on  the  face.  I  speake  as  con 
cerning  reproach,  as  though  we  had 
been  weak  :  howbeit, 

whereinsoever      any  is      bold, 

I  speak  foolishly,  I  am  bold 
also.  Are  they  Hebrews  ?  so  am 
I  :  are  they  Israelites  ?  so  am  I  : 

are  they  the  seed  of  Abraham  ? 
so  am  I  :  are  they  ministers  of 
Christ?  I  speak  as  a  fool,  I  am 
more :  in  labours  more  abundant : 
in  stripes  above  measure  :  in  prisons 
more  frequent,  in  deaths  oft.  Of 
the  lewes  five  times  received  I  fourty 
stripes,  save  one.  Thrice  was  J  beaten 


282 


SEXAGESIMA 


SOURCES 

semel  lapidatus  sum.  Ter  naufragium 
feci :  nocte  ac  die  in  profundum  maris 
fui.  In  itineribus  sepe.  Periculis 
fluminum,  periculis  latronum,  periculis 
ex  genere,  periculis  ex  gentibus,  peri 
culis  in  ciuitate,  periculis  in  solitudine, 
periculis  in  mari,  periculis  in  falsis 
fratribus.  Jn  labore  et  erumna :  in 
vigilijs  multis.  In  fame  et  siti :  in 
ieiunijs  multis.  In  frigore  &  nuditate. 
Preter  ilia  que  extrinsecus  sunt  in- 
stantia :  mea  quotidiana  solicitude 
omnium  ecclesiarum.  Quis  infirmatur 
&  ego  non  infirmor?  Quis  scandali- 
zatur,  &  ego  non  vror  ?  Si  gloriari 
oportet  :  que  infirmitatis  mee  sunt 
gloriabor.  Deus  et  pater  domini  nostri 
iesu  xpi  scit  (qui  est  benedictus  in 
secula)  quod  non  mention  (  +  xii  1-9) 

Secundum  Lucam. 

[viii.  A 

IN  illo  tempore  Cum  turba  plurima 
conueniretj  et  de  ciuitatibus  propera- 
rent  ad  iesum :  dixit  per  similitudinem. 
Exijt  qui  seminat  seminare  semen 
suum.  Et  dum  seminat,,  aliud  cecidit 
secus  viam  :  et  conculcatum  est  :  & 
volucres  celi  comederunt  illud.  Et 
aliud  cecidit  supra  petram  :  &  natum 
aruit  quia  non  habebat  humorem.  Et 
aliud  cecidit  inter  spinas :  et  simul 
exorte  spine  suffocauerunt  illud.  Et 
aliud  cecidit  in  terrain  bonam :  et 
ortum  fecit  fructum  centuplum.  Hec 
dicens  clamabat.  Qui  habet  aures 
audiendi:  audiat.  Interrogabant  autem 
eum  discipuli  eius :  que  esset  hec 
parabola.  Quibus  ipse  dixit.  Vobis 
datum  est  nosse  mysterium  regni  dei : 
ceteris  autem  in  parabolis  :  vt  videntes 
non  videant,  &  audientes  non  intelli- 
gant.  Est  autem  hec  parabola.  Semen 
est  verbum  dei.  Qui  autem  secus  viam, 
hi  sunt  qui  audiunt :  deinde  venit  dia- 
bolus  et  tollit  verbum  de  corde  eorum  : 
ne  credentes  salui  fiant.  Nam  qui 
supra  petram:  hisuntquicumaudierint, 


1549 

with  rods  :  I  was  once  stoned  :  I 
suffered  thrise  shipwrake  :  Night 
and  day  haue  I  been  in  the  depe 
see.  In  iorneying  often  :  in  parels  of 
waters  :  in  parels  of  robbers  :  in 
ieopardyes  of  myne  owne  nacion  :  in 
iopardyes  among  the  heathen  :  in 
parels  in  the  citie  :  in  parels  in 
wildernes  :  in  parels  in  the  sea :  in 
parels  among  false  brethren  :  in 
laboure  and  trauaile :  in  watchynges 
often  :  in  hunger  and  thyrste  :  in  fast- 
ynges  often:  in  cold  and  nakednes: 
besyde  the  thynges  which  outwardly 
happen  vnto  me,  I  am  combred  dayely, 
and  do  care  for  all  congregacions. 
Who  is  weake,  and  I  am  not  weake  ? 
who  is  offended,  and  I  burne  not? 
If  I  muste  nedes  boast,  I  will  boast  of 
the  thynges  that  concerne  mine  in 
firmities.  The  God  and  father  of  our 
Lorde  lesus  Christ,  whiche  is  blessed 
for  euermore,  knoweth  that  I  lye  not. 

The  Gospell. 

[        Luc.  viii. 

WHen  muche  people  were  gathered 
together,  &  were  come  to  hym  out 
of  all  cyties,  he  spake  by  a  simylytude. 
The  sower  went  out  to  sowe  his  sede  : 
and  as  he  sowed,  some  fel  by  the  waye 
syde,  and  it  was  troden  doune,  and  the 
foules  of  the  ayre  deuoured  it  vp.  And 
some  fell  on  stones,  &  assone 
as  it  was  sprong  vp,  it  withered  away, 
because  it  lacked  moystnes.  And 
some  fell  among  thornes,  and  the 
thornes  sprang  vp  with  it  &  choked 
it.  And  some  fell  on  good  ground, 
and  sprang  vp  and  bare  fruite  an 
hundreth  folde.  And  as  he  sayd 
these  thynges,  he  cryed  :  he  that  hath 
eares  to  heare  let  hym  heare.  And 
hys  dyscyples  asked  hym,  saying :  what 
maner  of  similytude  is  thys  ?  And  he 
sayde  :  vnto  you  it  is  geuen  to  knowe 
the  secretes  of  the  kyngdome  of  God  : 
but  to  other  by  parables,  that  whe 
they  see,  they  should  not  see,  &  when 
they  heare,  they  shoulde  not  vnderstand. 
The  parable  is  thys  :  The  sede  is 
the  worde  of  God  :  those  that  are 
beside  the  way,  are  they  that  heare  : 
the  cometh  the  deuyll  and  taketh 
awaye  the  worde  out  of  their  heartes, 
leste  they  should  beleue  and  be  saued. 
They  on  the  stones,  are  they  whiche 


SEXAGESIMA 


283 


1552 

with  roddes,  I  was  once  stoned  :  I 
suffered  thrise  shypwrake  :  Nyghte 
and  daye  haue  I  been  in  the  deepe 
sea  :  In  iorneyinge  often  :  in  parels  of 
waters  :  in  parels  of  robbers  :  in 
ieopardies  of  mine  own  nacio  :  in 
Jeopardies  amonge  the  heathen  :  in 
parels  in  the  citie :  in  parels  in 
wildernes  :  in  parels  in  the  sea  :  in 
parels  amonge  false  brethren  :  in 
labour  and  trauaile :  in  watchinges 
often  :  in  hunger  and  thyrst :  in  fast- 
inges  often  :  in  cold  and  nakednes  : 
beside  the  thinges  which  outwardlye 
happen  vnto  me,  I  am  combred  dayly, 
&  do  care  for  al  congregacions. 
Who  is  weake,  &  I  am  not  weake? 
Who  is  offended,  and  I  burne  not? 
If  I  must  nedes  boast,  I  will  boaste  of 
the  thinges  that  concerne  myne  in 
firmities.  The  God  and  father  of  our 
Lord  lesus  Christe,  which  is  blessed 
for  euermore,  knoweth  that  I  lie  not. 

C  The  gospell. 

[        Luk.  viii. 

WHe  much  people  wer  gathered 
together  and  wer  come  to  him  out 
of  all  cities,  he  spake  by  a  similitude. 
The  sower  wente  oute  to  sowe  his  sede : 
and  as  he  sowed,  some  fel  by  the  way 
side,  and  it  was  troden  down,  and  the 
foules  of  the  ayre  deuoured  it  vp.  And 
some  fell  on  stones,  &  assone 
as  it  was  sprong  vp,  it  withered  away, 
because  it  lacked  moystnes.  And 
some  fell  among  thornes,  and  the 
thornes  sprang  vp  with  it  and  choked 
it.  And  some  fell  on  good  ground, 
and  sprang  vp  and  bare  fruite  and 
hudreth  folde.  And  as  he  sayed 
these  thynges,  he  cryed  :  he  that  hath 
eares  to  heare  lette  him  heare.  And 
his  disciples  asked  him,  saylg :  what 
maner  of  similitude  is  this  ?  And  he 
said  :  vnto  you  it  is  geuen  to  knowe 
the  secretes  of  the  kingdome  of  God  : 
but  to  other  by  parables,  that  when 
they  see,  they  should  not  see,  and  when 
theyheare,theyshouldnotvnderstande. 
The  parable  is  this  :  The  sede  is 
the  worde  of  God :  those  that  are 
beside  the  waye,  are  they  that  heare  : 
then  commeth  the  deuill  and  taketh 
awaye  the  woorde  oute  of  their  heartes, 
leste  they  should  beleue  and  be  saued. 
They  on  the  stones,  are  they  which 


1661 

with  rods  ;  once  was  I  stoned  ;  thrice 
J  suffered  shipwrack  :  a  night 
and  a  day  I  have  been  in  the  deep 
.  In  iourneying  often,  in  perils  of 
waters,  in  perils  of  robbers,  in 
perils  by  mine  own  country  men,  in 
perils  by  the  heathen,  in 
perils  in  the  City,  in  perils  in  the 
Wilderness,  in  perils  in  the  Sea,  in 
perils  among  fals  brethren  ;  In 
weariness,andpainfulness,inwatchings 
often,  in  hunger  and  thirst,  in  fast 
ings  often,  in  cold  and  nakedness. 
Besides  those  things  that  are  without, 
that  which  cometh  vpon  me  daily, 
the  care  of  all  the  Churches. 
Who  is  weak,  and  I  am  not  weake  ? 
Who  is  offended,  and  I  burn  not? 
Jf  I  must  needs  glory,  I  will  glory  of 
the  things  which  concern  mine  Jn- 
firmityes.  The  God,  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  lesus  Christ,  which  is  blessed 
for  evermore,  knoweth  that  I  lie  not. 

The  Gospel. 

[St:  Luke  8.  *4. 

When  much  people  were  gathred 
together,  and  were  come  to  him  out 
of  every  City,  he  spake  by  a  parable  : 
A  sower  went  out  to  sow  his  seed : 
and  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  way 
side,  and  it  was  troden  down,  and  the 
fowls  of  the  air  devoured  it  .  And 
some  fell  vpon  a  Rocke,  and  as  soon 
as  it  was  sprung  vp,  it  withered  away, 
because  it  lacked  moisture.  And 
some  fell  among  Thorns  and  the 
thorns  sprang  vp  with  it,  and  choaked 
it.  And  other  fell  on  good  ground, 
and  sprang  vp,  and  bare  fruit  an 
hundred  fold.  And  when  he  had  sayd 
these  things,  he  cryed,  He  that  hath 
Ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear.  And 
his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  what 
might  this  parable  be  ?  and  he 
said,  Vnto  you  it  is  given  to  know 
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God  : 
but  to  others  in  parables  ;  that 
seeing  they  might  not  see,  and 
hearing  they  might  not  vnderstand. 
Now  the  parable  is  this.  The  seed  is 
the  word  of  God.  Those  by  the 
way  side  are  they  that  hear  ; 
then  cometh  the  devil,  and  taketh 
away  the  word  out  of  their  hearts, 
lest  they  should  believe  and  be  saved. 
They  on  the  rock,  are  they  which 


284 


QUINQUAGESIMA 


SOURCES 

cum  gaudio  suscipiunt  verbum.  Et  hi 
radices  non  habent :  quia  ad  tempus 
credunt  &  in  tempore  tentationis 
recedunt.  Quod  autem  in  spinis 
cecidit :  hi  sunt  qui  audierunt  et  a 
solicitudinibus  et  diuitijs  &  volup- 
tatibus  vite  euntes  suffocantur,  et  non 
referunt  fructum.  Quod  autem  cecidit 
in  terram  bonam  :  hi  sunt  qui  in  corde 
bono  et  optimo  audientes  verbum 
retinent.  Et  fructum  afferunt  in 
patientia. 

C  Dominica  in  quinquagesima. 

Officium. 
[Ps.  xxx  (xxxi)  3,  4  :  1] 


1549 

when  they  heare,  receiue  the  worde 
with  ioye  :  &  these  haue  no  rootes, 
which  for  a  whyle  beleue,  and  in  tyme 
of  temptacion  go  awaye.  And  that 
whiche  fell  among  thornes,  are  they 
which  when  they  haue  hearde,  go 
furth,  and  are  choked  with  cares  and 
ryches,  and  voluptuous  lyuyng,  and 
bryng  furth  no  fruite.  That 

which  fell  in  the  good  grounde,  are 
they  whyche  with  a  pure  and  good 
hearte,  heare  the  worde  and  kepe  it,, 
and  bryng  furth  fruite  through  pacience. 

C  THE  SONDAY  CALLED  QUINQUAGESIMA. 

[ludica  me  domine.  psal.  xxvi. 

BE  thou  my  iudge,  O  Lorde,  for  I 
haue  walked  innocently  :  my  trust 
hath  been  also  in  the  Lorde,  therfore 
shal  I  not  fall. 

Examine  me,  O  Lorde,  and  proue 
me  :  trye  out  my  raynes  and  my 
hearte. 

For  thy  louyng  kyndnes  is  before 
myne  iyes  :  and  I  wyll  walke  in  thy 
trueth. 

I  haue  not  dwelt  with  vaine  persons  : 
neither  wil  I  haue  felowship  with  the 
deceiptfull. 

I  haue  hated  the  congregacion  of 
the  wicked  :  and  wyll  not  syt  among 
the  vngodly. 

I  wyll  washe  my  handes  in  inno- 
cencie,  O  Lorde  :  and  so  wyll  I  go  to 
thyne  alter. 

That  I  may  shewe  the  voyce  of 
thankesgeuyng  :  and  tell  of  all  thy 
wonderous  workes. 

Lorde,  I  haue  loued  the  habitacion 
of  thy  house  :  and  the  place  where 
thyne  honoure  dwelleth. 

O  shutte  not  vp  my  soule  with  the 
synners  :  nor  my  lyfe  with  the  bloud- 
thursty  ; 

In  whose  handes  is  wickednes  : 
and  theyr  ryght  hande  is  full  of 
gyftes. 

But  as  for  me  I  will  walke  innocently  : 
O  Lord  delyuer  me,  and  be  mercyfull 
vnto  me. 

My  foote  standeth  ryght  :  I  wyll 
praise  the  Lorde  in  the  congregacions. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  begynning,  is  nowe 
&c. 


QUINQUAGESIMA 


285 


1552 

when  they  heare,  receyue  the  woorde 
wyth  ioye  :  and  these  haue  no  rootes, 
whiche  for  a  whyle  beleue,  and  in  tyme 
of  temptacion  goe  away.  And  that 
whiche  fel  among  thornes,  are  they 
which  whe  they  haue  heard,  goe 
furth  and  are  choked  with  cares  and 
riches,  and  voluptuous  liuing,  and 
bryng  furth  no  fruite.  That 

which  fel  in  the  good  grounde,  are 
they  which  with  a  pure  and  good 
heart,  heare  the  worde  and  kepe  it, 
and  bryngfurthfruitethrough  pacience. 


1661 

when  they  hear,  receive  the  word 
with  ioy ;  and  these  have  no  root, 
which  for  a  while  believe,  and  in  time 
of  temptation  fall  away.  And  that 
which  fell  among  Thornes,  are  they 
which  when  they  have  heard,  goe 
forth,  and  are  choked  with  cares,  and 
riches  and  pleasures  of  this  life,  and 
bring  no  fruit  to  perfection.  But  that 
on  the  good  ground,  are 
they,  which  in  an  honest  and  good 
heart,  having  heard  the  word  keep  it, 
and  bring  forth  fruit  with  patience. 


THE  SUNDAIE  CALLED   QUINQUAGESIMA. 


THE  SUNDAY  CALLED   QUINQUAGESIMA 
OE  8THE  NEXT  SUNDAY  BEFORE  LENT. 


286 


QUINQUAGESIMA 


SOURCES 

Oratio. 

[Faeces  nostras  quesumus  domine 
clementer  exaudi :  atque  a  peccatorum 
vinculis  absolutes,  ab  omni  nos  aduer- 
sitate  custodi.  Per.  (Greg.  27)]. 


Ad  corinthios. 

[i.  xiii.  A 

Fnatres.  Si  linguis  hominum  loquar 
et  angelorum,  charitatem  autem  non 
habeam  :  factus  sum  velut  es  sonans 
aut  cymbalum  tinniens.  Et  si  habuero 
prophetiam  et  nouerim  mysteria  omnia 
&  omnem  scientiam  :  &  si  habuero 
omnem  fidem  ita  vt  montes  trans- 
feram  :  charitatem  autem  non  habeam  : 
nichil  sum.  Et  si  distribuero  in  cibos 
pauperum  omnes  facultates  meas :  et 
si  tradidero  corpus  meum  ita  vt  ar- 
deam  :  charitatem  autem  non  habuero, 
nichil  michi  prodest.  Charitas  patiens 
est :  benigna  est.  Charitas  non  emula- 
tur  :  non  agit  perperam  :  non  inflatur  : 
non  est  ambitiosa  :  non  querit  que  sua 
sunt.  Non  irritatur,  non  cogitat  malum, 
non  gaudet  super  iniquitate :  con- 
gaudet  autem  veritati.  Omnia  suffert : 
omnia  credit :  omnia  sperat :  omnia 
sustinet.  Charitas  nunquam  excidit 
siue  prophetic  euacuabuntur  :  siue  lin- 
gue  cessabunt :  siue  scientia  destruetur. 
Ex  parte  enim  cognoscimus :  et  ex  parte 
prophetamus.  Cum  autem  venerit  quod 
perfectum  est :  euacuabitur  quod  ex 
parte  est.  Cum  essem  paruulus, 
loquebar  vt  paruulus :  sapiebam  vt 
paruulus :  cogitabam  vt  paruulus. 
Quando  autem  factus  sum  vir  euacuaui 
que  erant  paruuli.  Videmus  nunc  per 
speculum  in  enigmate :  tune  autem 
facie  ad  faciem.  Nunc  cognosco  ex 
parte  :  tune  autem  cognoscam  sicut  et 
cognitus  sum.  Nunc  autem  manent 
fides  spes  charitas :  tria  hec.  Maior 
autem  horum  :  est  charitas. 


1549 

The  Collect. 

O  Lord  which  dost  teache  vs,  that 
all  our  doinges  without  charitie  are 
nothyng  worthe  ;  sende  thy  holy  gost 
and  powre  into  oure  heartes  that  moste 
excellent  gyfte  of  charitie,  the  very 
bonde  of  peace  and  all  vertues,  with 
out  the  whiche,  whosoeuer  lyueth  is 
counted  dead  before  thee :  Graunt 
this  for  thy  onely  sonne  lesus  Christes 
sake. 

The  Epistle. 

[i.  Cor.  xiii 

Tnough  I  speake  with  the  tongues 
of  men  and  of  angels,  &  haue  no 
loue,  I  am  cue  as  soudyng  brasse, 
or  as  a  tinkling  Cimbal.  And  though 
I  could  prophecy  &  vnder- 

stode  al  secretes,  and  all  knowledge  ; 
yea,  if  I  haue  al  faith,  so  that  I 
can  moue  moutaines  out  of  their 
places,  and  yet  haue  no  loue,  I  am 
nothyng.  And  though  I  bestowe  all  my 
goodestofeedethepoore,thoughelgaue 
my  body  euen  that  I  burned,  &  yet 
haue  no  loue,  it  profiteth  me  nothyng. 
Loue  suffreth  long,  &  is  courteous  : 
loue  enuieth  not :  loue  doeth  not 
frowardly,  swelleth  not,  dealeth  not 
dishonestly,  seketh  not  her  owne,  is 
not  prouoked  to  anger,  thynketh  none 
euil,  reioyseth  not  in  iniquitie.  But 
reioyseth  in  the  trueth,  suffreth  al 
thinges,  beleueth  all  thynges,  hoopeth 
all  thynges,  endureth  all  thinges. 

Though 

that  propheciyng  faile, 

eyther  tongues 

ceasse,  or  knowledge 

vanishe  away,  yet  loue  falleth 
neuer  awaye.  For  our  knowlege  is 
vnperfite,  and  our  propheciyng  is  vn- 
perfite.  But  when  that  which  is  per- 
fite  is  come,  then  that  whiche  is  vn 
perfite  shalbe  done  away.  When  I  was 
a  childe,  I  spake  as  a  childe  :  I  vnder- 
stode  as  a  child  :  I  imagined  as  a 
child.  But  assone  as  I  was  a  man,  I 
put  away  childishnes.  Now 

we  see  in  a  glasse,  euen  in  a  darke 
speaking  :  but  then  shall  wee  see  face 
to  face.  Nowe  I  knowe  vnperfectly  : 
but  then  shal  I  knowe  euen  as  I 
am  knowen.  Nowe  abydeth  fayth, 
hope,  and  loue,  euen  these  three : 
but  the  chiefe  of  these  is  loue. 


QUINQUAGESIMA 


287 


1552 

C  The  Collect. 

O  Lord  which  doest  teache  vs,  ye 
al  our  doinges  without  charitie  are 
nothing  worth :  send  thy  holy  ghost, 
and  powre  into  our  heartes  that  most 
excellent  gift  of  charitie,  the  very 
bonde  of  peace  and  al  vertues,  with 
out  the  which,  whosoeuer  lyueth  is 
counted  dead  before  thee :  Graunte 
this  for  thy  onely  sonne  lesus  Christes 
sake. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[i.  Cor.  xiii. 

THoughe  I  speake  with  tongues 
of  men  and  of  Aungels,  and  haue  no 
loue,  I  am  euen  as  sounding  brasse, 
or  as  a  tinklyngeCimball.  And  thoughe 
I  could  prophecie,  and  vnder- 

stode  al  secretes,  and  al  knowledge  : 
yea,  yf  I  haue  al  fayth,  so  that  I 
could  moue  mountaines  oute  of  their 
places,  and  yet  haue  no  loue,  I  am 
nothing.  And  though  I  bestow  al  my 
goddes  tofeedeyepoore,&though  I  gaue 
my  bodye  euen  that  I  burned,  and  yet 
haue  no  loue,  it  profiteth  me  nothing. 
Loue  suffereth  long,  and  is  courteous, 
loue  enuieth  not,  loue  doth  not 
frowardly,  swelleth  not,  dealeth  not 
dishonestly,  seketh  not  her  own,  is 
not  prouoked  to  anger,  thinketh  none 
euill,  reioyseth  not  in  iniquitie.  But 
reioiseth  in  the  trueth  :  suffreth  all 
thinges,  beleueth  al  thinges,  hopeth 
al  thinges,  endureth  all  thinges. 
Thoughe 

that   prophecyinge  fayle, 

eyther  tongues 

ceasse,  or  knowlege 

vanishe  awaye,  yet  loue  falleth 
neuer  away.  For  our  knowlege  is 
vnperfecte,  &  our  propheciyng  is  vn- 
perfecte.  But  when  that  which  is  per 
fect  is  come,  the  yl  which  is  vn- 
perfect  shalbe  done  away.  When  I  was 
a  childe,  I  spake  as  a  child  :  I  vnder- 
stode  as  a  childe  :  I  imagined  as  a 
child.  But  assone  as  I  was  a  man,  I 
put  away  childishnes.  Now 

we  see  in  a  glasse,  cue  in  a  darke 
speaking  :  but  the  shal  we  see  face 
to  face.  Now  I  know  vnperfectly  : 
but  then  shall  I  knowe  euen  as  I 

am  knowen.  Nowe  abideth  faith, 

hope,  and  loue,  euen  these  three  : 
but  the  chicfe  of  these  is  loue. 


1661 
The  Collect. 

O  Lord  who  hast  taught  vs  that 
all  our  doings  without  charity  are 
nothing  worth  :  send  thy  holy  Ghost, 
and  pour  into  our  hearts  that  most 
excellent  Gift  of  charity,  the  very 
bond  of  peace,  and  of  all  vertues,  with 
out  which  whosoever  liveth  is 
counted  dead  before  thee :  Grant 
this  for  thine3  only  son  lesus  Christs 
sake.  8Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[i.  Cor.  13.  n. 

Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues 
of  men  and  of  Angels,  and  have  not 
charity,  I  am  become  as  sounding  brass, 
or  a  tinkling  Cymbal.  And  though 
J  have  the  gift  of  prophecy,  and  vnder- 
stand  all  Mysteries,  and  all  knowledge : 
And  though  I  have  all  Faith,  so  that  I 
could  remove  mountains, 

and  have  no  charity  I  am 
nothing.  And  though  I  bestow  all  my 
goods  to  feed  the  poor,and  though  I  give 
my  body  to  be  burned,  and 
have  not  charity,it  profiteth  menothing. 
Charity  suffereth  long,  and  is  kinde  ; 
charity  envieth  not ;  charity.vauntethnot 
it  selfe,  is  not  puffed  vp,doth  not  behave 
it  selfevnseemly,seekethnotherown.is 
not  easily  provoked,  thinketh  no 
evil,  Rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but 
rejoiceth  in  the  truth  :  Beareth  all 
things,  believeth  all  things,  hopeth 
all  things,  endureth  all  things  ; 
charity  never  faileth  :  but  whether 
there  be  prophecies,  they  shall  fail : 
whether  there  be  tongues,  they  shall 
cease  :  whether  there  be  knowledge, 
it  shall  vanish  away. 

For  we  know 

in  part,  and  we  prophesy  in 
part ;  but  when  that  which  is  per 
fect  is  come,  then  that  which  is  in 
part  shall  be  don  away.  When  I  was 
a  child,  I  spake  as  a  childe,  I  vnder- 
stood  as  a  childe,  I  thought  as  a 
child,  but  when  I  became  a  man  I 
put  away  childish  things.  For  now 
we  see  through  a  glass  darkly  ; 
but  then  face 

to  face :  now  I  know  in  part, 
but  then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I 
am  known.  And  now  abideth  faith, 
hope,  charity :  these  three, 

but  the  greatest  of  these  is  charity. 


288 


ASH  WEDNESDAY 


SOURCES 

S.  lucam. 

[xviii  F 

IN  illo  tempore  Assumpsit  iesus 
duodecim  discipulos  suos :  et  ait  illis. 
Ecce  ascendimus  hierosolymam :  et 
consummabuntur  omnia  que  scripta 
sunt  per  prophetas  de  filio  liominis. 
Tradetur  enim  gentibus  &  illudetur : 
et  flagellabitur  &  conspuetur.  Et 
postquam  flagellauerint  Occident  eum  : 
et  tertia  die  resurget.  Et  ipsi  nichil 
horum  intellexerunt.  Erat  autem 
verbum  istud  absconditum  ab  eis  :  & 
non  intelligebant  que  dicebantur. 
Factum  est  autem  cum  appropinquaret 
hierico  :  cecus  quidam  sedebat  secus 
viam,  mendicans.  Et  cum  audiret 
turbam  pretereuntem  :  interrogabat 
quid  hoc  esset.  Dixerunt  autem  ei : 
quod  iesus  nazarenus  transiret.  Et 
clamauit  dicens.  Jesu  fili  dauid : 
miserere  mei.  Et  qui  preibant  incre- 
pabant  eum  vt  taceret :  ipse  vero 
multo  magis  clamabat.  Fili  dauid : 
miserere  mei.  Stans  autem  iesus  : 
iussit  ilium  adduci  ad  se.  Et  cum 
appropinquasset  interrogauit  ilium 
dicens.  Quid  tibi  vis  faciam  ?  At 
ille  dixit.  Domine :  vt  videam.  Et 
iesus  dixit  illi.  Respice  :  fides  tua  te 
saluum  fecit.  Et  confestim  vidit :  et 
sequebatur  ilium  magnificans  deum. 
Et  omnis  plebs  vt  vidit :  dedit  laudem 
deo. 

C  Feria  .iiij.  in  capite  ieiunij. 

Officium. 
[Sap.  xi  24,  25,  27 :  Ps.  Ivi  (Ivii)  1.] 


1549 

The  Gospell. 

[     Luce.  xViii 

IESUS  toke  vnto  him  the  .xii. 
and  said  vnto  the  :  beholde  we  go 
vp  to  lerusale,  and  al  shalbe 

fulfilled  that  are  written  by  the  Pro- 
phetes,  of  the  sonne  of  man. 

For  he  shalbe 

deliuered  vnto  the  Gentiles,  and 
shalbe  mocked,  and  dispitefully  in- 
treated,  and  spitted  on.  And  when 
they  haue  scourged  him,  they  will  put 
him  to  deathe,  and  the  third  day  he 
shall  rise  again.  And  they  vnderstode 
none  of  these  thinges.  And  this 
saiyng  was  hid  from  them  so  that  they 
perceiued  not  the  thinges  which  were 
spoken.  And  it  came  to  passe,  that 
as  he  was  come  nigh  vnto  Hierico,  a 
certayne  blynde  man  sate  by  the  hye 
wayeside,beggyng.  And  when  he  heard 
the  people  passe  by,  he  asked  what 
itment.  And  they  sayd  vnto  hym,  that 
Iesus  of  Nazareth  passed  by.  And 
he  cryed,  saiyng  :  lesu  thou  sonne  of 
Dauid,  haue  mercy  on  me.  And  they 
which  went  before  rebuked  hym,  that 
he  shoulde  holde  his  peace.  But  he 
cryed  so  muche  the  more:  thousoonne 
of  Dauid  haue  mercye  on  me.  And 
Iesus  stode  styll,  and  commaunded 
hym  to  bee  brought  vnto  hym.  And 
when  he  was  come  nere,  he  asked 
hym,  saiyng  :  what  wilt  thou  that  I 
doe  vnto  thee?  and  he  sayd  : 
Lorde,  that  I  may  receyue  my  sight. 
And  Iesus  sayd  vnto  him  :  receiue  thy 
sight,  thy  fayth  hath  saued  thee. 
And  immediatly  he  receiued  his  sight, 
and  folowed  hym  praysyng  god. 
And  al  the  people,  when  they  sawe  it, 
gaue  praise  vnto  God. 

<T  THE  FIRST  DAY  OF  LENT,   COMMONLY 
CALLED   ASHWEDNESDAY. 

[Domine  ne.  psalm  Vi 

O  Lord  rebuke  me  not  in  thine 
indignacion  :  neither  chasten  me  in 
thy  displeasure. 

Haue  mercy  vpon  me,  O  Lord,  for 
I  am  weake  :  O  Lord  heale  me,  for 
my  bones  are  vexed. 

My  soule  also  is  score  troubled  :  but 
Lorde  howe  longe  wilt  thou  punishe 
me? 

Turne  thee,  O  Lorde,  and  delyuer 
my  soule  :  Oh  saue  me  for  thy  mercies 
sake. 


ASH  WEDNESDAY 


289 


1552 

C  The  Gospell. 

[     Luk.  xviii 

IESUS  toke  vnto  him  the  .xii. 
and  said  vnto  them  :  beholde,  we  go 
up  to  Jerusalem,  and  al  shalbe 

fulfilled  that  are  written  by  the  Pro- 
phetes    of   the    sonne  of   ma. 

For  he  shall  be 

deliuered  vnto  the  Gentiles,  and 
shalbe  mocked  and  despitefully  in- 
treated,  and  spitted  on.  And  when 
they  haue  scourged  him,  they  wyll  put 
hym  to  death,  and  the  third  day  he 
shall  rise  againe.  And  they  vnderstode 
none  of  these  thinges.  And  this 
saying  was  hid  from  them,  so  that  they 
perceiued  not  the  thinges  which  wer 
spoken.  And  it  came  to  passe,  that 
as  he  was  come  nigh  to  lerico,  a 
certaine  blind  ma  sate  by  the  hye 
waysyde,beggyng.  And  when  he  heard 
the  people  passe  by,  he  asked  what 
it  ment.  And  thei  said  vnto  hym,  that 
lesus  of  Nazareth  passed  by.  And 
he  cryed,  saying :  lesu  thou  sonne  of 
Dauid,  haue  mercye  on  me.  And  they 
which  wente  before,  rebuked  hym,  that 
he  should  holde  hys  peace.  But  he 
cryed  so  much  the  more  :  thou  sonne 
of  Dauid  haue  mercye  on  me.  And 
lesus  stode  styll,  and  commaunded 
hym  to  bee  broughte  vnto  him.  And 
whe  he  was  come  nere,  he  asked 
him,  saying :  what  wylte  thou  that  I 
dooe  vnto  thee  ?  and  he  sayed  : 
Lorde,  that  I  myghte  receiue  my  syght. 
And  lesus  said  vnto  hym  :  receiue  thy 
syght,  thy  fayth  hath  saued  thee. 
And  immediatly  he  receiued  his  sight, 
and  folowed  him  praysing  god. 
And  al  the  people,  when  they  saw  it, 
gaue  prayse  vnto  god. 

THE  FIRST  DAIE  OF   LENT. 


1661 

The  Gospel. 

[St;  Luke.  18.  31 

Then  Jesus  took  vnto  him  the  twelve, 
and  said  vnto  them,  behold.  We  go 
vp  to  Jerusalem,  and  all  things 

that  are  written  by  the  pro 
phets  concerning  the  son  of  man  shall 
be  accomplished.  For  he  shall  be 
delivered  vnto  the  Gentiles,  and 
shall  be  mocked,  and  spitefully  en 
treated,  and  spitted  on.  And 
they  shall  scourge  him,  and  put 
him  to  death,  and  the  third  day  he 
shall  rise  again.  And  they  vnderstood 
none  of  these  things :  And  this 
saying  was  hid  from  them,  neither 
knew  they  the  things  which  were 
spoken.  And  it  came  to  pass,  that 
as  he  was  come  nigh  vnto  Jericho,  a 
certain  blind  man,  sate  by  the 
way  side  begging :  And  hearing 
the  multitude  pass  by,  he  asked  what 
it  meant.  And  they  told  him  that 
lesus  of  Nazareth  passeth  by.  And 
he  cryed  saying,  lesus  thou  son  of 
David,  have  mercy  on  me.  And  they 
which  went  before  rebuked  him,  that 
he  should  hold  his  peace :  but  he 
cried  so  much  the  more,  Thou  son 
of  David,  have  mercy  on  me.  And 
lesus  stood,  and  comanded 

him  to  be  brought  vnto  him ;  and 
when  he  was  come  neer,  he  asked 
him  saying,  what  wilt  thou  that  I 
shall  do  vnto  thee?  And  he  said, 
Lord  that  I  may  receive  my  sight. 
And  lesus  said  vnto  him,  receive  thy 
sight  :  thy  faith  hath  saved  thee. 
And  immediatly  he  received  his  sight, 
and  followed  him,  gloryfying  God  : 
And  all  the  people,  when  they  saw  it, 
gave  praise  vnto  God. 

THE  FIRST  DAY  OF  LENT,   COSfoNLY 

CALLED  ASH-WEDNESDAY. 


2QO 


ASH  WEDNESDAY 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 

[PResta  quesumus  domine  fidelibus 
tuis:  vt  ieiuniorum  veneranda  solennia, 
«t  congrua  pietate  suscipiant :  &  secura 
deuotione  percurrant.  Per.  (Gel.  ii. 
€0)]. 


Ab  hac  die  vsque  ad  cenam  domini,  in 
omnibus  missis  de  ieiunio  fiat  memoria  pro 
penitentibus  cum  hac  oratibne  Exaudi 
quesumus  domine  supplicum. 

C  Lectio  lohelis  prophete. 

[ii.  c 

HEC  dicit  dominus  deus.  Conuer- 
timini  ad  me  in  toto  corde  vestro  :  in 
ieiunio  et  fletu  et  planctu  :  et  scindite 
€orda  vestra,  et  non  vestimenta  vestra. 
Et  conuertimini  ad  dominum  deum 
vestrum  :  quia  benignus  et  misericors 
est,  patiens  et  multe  misericordie,  & 
prestabilis  super  malitia.  Quis  scit  si 
conuertatur  et  ignoscat  deus  :  &  relin- 
quat  post  se  benedictionem :  Sacrificium 
et  libamen :  domino  deo  nostro.  Canite 
tuba  in  sion :  sanctificate  ieiunium, 
vocate  cetum,  congregate  populum, 
sanctificate  ecclesiam.  Coadunate 
senes :  congregate  paruulos  et  sugentes 


1549 

For  in  death  no  man  remembreth 
thee  :  and  who  wyll  geue  the  thankes 
in  the  pitte? 

I  am  wery  of  my  groning,  euery 
night  washe  I  my  bed  :  and  water  my 
couche  with  my  teares. 

My  beautie  is  gone  for  very  trouble  : 
and  worne  awaye  because  of  all  mine 
enemies. 

Awaye  fro  me  all  ye  that  worke 
vanitie  :  for  the  Lorde  hath  hard  the 
voice  of  my  wepyng. 

The  lord  hath  heard  my  peticion  : 
the  lord  wyll  receyue  my  prayer. 

All  mine  enemies  shalbe  con 
founded  and  soore  vexed  :  they 
shalbe  turned  backe  and  put  to  shame 
sodainly. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginnyng.&c. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  and  euerlastyng  god, 
which  hatest  nothing  that  thou  haste 
made,  and  doest  forgeue  the  synnes 
of  al  them  that  be  penitent :  Create 
and  make  in  vs  new  and  contrite 
heartes,  that  we  worthily  lamentyng 
our  synnes,  and  knowlegyng  our 
wretchednesse,  may  obtayne  of  thee, 
the  God  of  all  mercy,  perfecte  remis 
sion  and  forgeuenesse,  through  lesus 
Christe. 


The  Epistle. 


[loel.  ii. 


Turn  you  vnto  me 
with    al    your    hertes,    with    fasting, 
weping  &  mourning  : 

rent  your  hertes,  and  not  your 
clothes.  Turne  you  vnto  the  lord 

your  god,  for  he  is  gracious  & 
merciful,  logsufferyng,  and  of  great 
compassion,  and  ready  to  pardon 
wickednes.  Then  (no  doubt)  he  also 
shall  turne  and  forgeue  :  and  after  his 
chastenyng  he  shall  let  your  encrease 
remain  for  meate  and  drinke  offerynges 
vnto  the  Lorde  your  God.  Blowe  out 
with  the  trompet  in  Sion,  proclaime  a 
fastyng,  call  the  congregacion,  and 
gather  the  people  together :  warne 
the  congregacion,  gather  the  elders, 
bring  the  children,  &  suckelynges 


ASH  WEDNESDAY 


291 


1552 


1661 


The  Collect. 

ALmightie  and  euerlastyng  god, 
which  hatest  nothing  that  thou  hast 
made,  and  dooest  forgeue  the  synnes 
of  al  them  that  be  penitent :  Create 
and  make  in  vs  newe  and  contryte 
heartes,  that  we  worthelye  lamentinge 
oure  sinnes,  and  knowleging  our 
wretchednesse,  may  obtayne  of  thee, 
the  God  of  all  mercye,  perfecte  remis 
sion  and  forgeuenesse,  throughe  lesus 
Chryste. 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who8  hatest  nothing  that  thou  hast 
made,  and  doest  forgive  the  sins 
of  all  them  that  are  penitent :  create 
and  make  in  vs  new  and  contrite 
hearts,  that  we  worthily  lamenting 
our  sins,  and  acknowledging  our 
wretchedness,  may  obtein  of  thee, 
the  God  of  all  mercy,  perfect  remis 
sion,  and  forgiveness,  through  lesus 
Christ  our  Lord.  6Amen. 

8lf  This  Collect  is  to  be  read  every  day* 
in  Lent  after  "the  Collect  appointed 
for  the  day.* 


The  Epistle. 


[loel.  ii. 


Turne  you  vnto  me 
with  all  your  hertes,  with  fastlg, 

weping  and  mourning  : 

rent  your  hertes  &  not  youre 
clothes.  Turne  you  vnto  the  Lorde 
your  God,  for  he  is  gracious  and 
mercifull,  longe  sufferyng,  and  of  greate 
compassion,  and  readye  to  pardon 
wickednesse.  The  (no  doubt)  he  also 
shal  turne  and  forgeue  :  and  after  his 
chasteninge  he  shal  let  your  encrease 
remaineformeat  and  drynke  offerynges 
vnto  the  Lorde  your  God.  Blowe  oute 
wyth  the  trompet  in  Sion,  proclaime  a 
fastynge,  call  the  congregacion,  and 
gather  the  people  together :  warne 
the  cogregacion,  gather  the  elders, 
bryng  the  children  &  suckelynges 


opor  the  Epistle. 

[loel.  2.  412. 

Turn  ye,  even  to  me  saith  the  Lord 
with  all  your  heart,  and  with  fasting, 
and  with  weeping,  and  with  mourning. 
And  rent  your  heart,  and  not  your 
garments,  and  turn  vnto  the  Lord 
your  God,  for  he  is  gracious,  and 
mercifull,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great 
kindness,  and  repenteth  him  of 
the  evil,  who  knoweth  if  he 
will  return,  and  repent,  and  leave  a 
blessing  behind  him,  even  a  meat 
offering,  and  a  drink-offering 
vnto  the  Lord  your  God  ?  Blow 

the  trumpet  in  Zion,  sanctifie  a 
fast,  call  a  solemn  Assembly  : 
Gather  the  people  :  sanctifie 

the  Congregation :  assemble  the  elders : 
gather  the  children,  and  those  that  suck 


292 


FIRST  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


SOURCES 

vbera.  Egrediatur  sponsus  de  cubili 
suo  :  et  sponsa  de  thalamo  suo.  Inter 
vestibulum  et  altare  plorabunt  sacer- 
dotes  et  miiiistri  domirii :  &  dicent. 
Farce  domine  parce  populo  tuo  :  et  lie 
des  hereditatem  tuam.  in  opprobrium, 
vt  dominentur  eis  nationes.  Quare 
dicunt  in  populis :  vbi  est  deus  eorum, 
(  +  vers.  18,  19). 

Secundum  matheum. 

[vi.  B 

IN  illo  tempore.  Dixit  iesus  dis- 
cipulis  sujs.  Cum  ieiunatis :  nolite 
fieri  sicut  hypocrite  tristes.  Exter- 
minant  enim  facies  suas  :  vt  appareant 
hominibus  ieiunantes.  Amen  dico 
vobis :  quia  receperunt  mercedem 
suam.  Tu  autem  cum  ieiunas,  vnge 
caput  tuum  &  faciem  tuam  laua :  ne 
videaris  hominibus  ieiunans,  sed  patri 
tuo  qui  est  in  abscondito.  Et  pater 
tuus  qui  videt  in  abscondito :  reddet 
tibi.  Nolite  thesaurizare  vobis  the- 
sauros  in  terra :  vbi  erugo  et  tinea 
demolitur,  et  vbi  fures  effodiunt  et 
furantur.  Thesaurizate  autem  vobis 
thesauros  in  celo :  vbi  nee  erugo  nee 
tinea  demolitur,  et  vbi  fures  non  effo 
diunt  neque  furantur.  Vbi  enim  est 
thesaurus  tuus :  ibi  est  et  cor  tuum. 

C  Dominica  prima  quadragesime. 

Ad  missam.     Officium. 
[Ps.  xc  (xci)  15,  16a  :  1] 


1549 

together.  Let  the  bridegrome  go 
forth  of  his  chaumbre,  and  the  bride 
out  of  her  closet.  Let  the  priestes 
serue  the  Lorde  betwene  the  Porche 
and  the  alter,  wepyng  and  saiyng  :  be 
fauourable,  O  lord,  be  fauourable  vnto 
thy  people  :  let  not  thyne  herytage  be 
broughte  to  suche  confusion,  leaste  the 
heathen  be  lordes  thereof.  Where 
fore  should  they  say  among  the 
heathen  :  where  is  nowe  their  God  ? 

The  Gospell. 

[    Matt.  Vi. 

Wnen  ye  faste,  be  not  as  sad  as  the 
Hipocrites  are, 

for  they  disfigure  their  faces  that 
it  maye  appeare  vnto  menne  howe  that 
they  fast.  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you, 
they  haue  theyr  rewarde.  But  thou, 
when  thou  fasteste,  annoynte  thyne 
head,  and  washe  thy  face,  that  it 
appeare  not  vnto  men  howe  that  thou 
fasteste,  but  vnto  thy  father  whiche  is  in 
secrete  :  and  thy  father  which  seeth  in 
secrete,  shall  reward  thee  openly.  Lay 
not  vp  for  your  selues  treasure  vpon 
earth,  where  the  rust  and  moth  doth 
corrupt,  and  where  theues  breake 
through  and  steale.  But  laye  vp 
for  you  treasures  in  heauen, 

where  neither  rust  nor  moth  doth 
corrupt,  &  where  theues  doe  not 
breake  through  nor  steale.  For  where 
your  treasure  is,  there  wil  your  heartes 
be  also. 

THE  FIRST  SONDAY  IN   LENT. 

[Beati  quoru  psal.  xxxii 

BLessed  is  he,  whose  vnrighteous- 
nes  is  forgeuen  :  and  whose  sinne  is 
couered. 

Blessed  is  the  manne,  vnto  whom 
the  Lord  imputeth  no  sinne  :  and  in 
whose  spirite  there  is  no  guile. 

For  while  I  helde  my  toungue  :  my 
bones  consumed  away  thorough  my 
daily  complainyng. 

For  thy  hande  is  heauy  vpon  me 
both  day  and  nyghte  :  and  my  moys- 
ture  is  lyke  the  drouth  in  Sommer. 

I  will  knowlage  my  sinne  vnto 
thee  :  and  myne  vnrighteousnes  haue 
I  not  hyd. 

I  sayd,  I  will  confesse  my  sinnes 
unto  the  Lord  :  and  so  thou  forgauest 
the  wickednes  of  my  sinne. 

For  this   shall  euery  one  that  is 


FIRST  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


293 


1552 

together.  Let  the  bridegrome  goe 
forth  of  hys  chaumbre,  and  the  bride 
out  of  her  closet.  Let  the  priestes 
serue  the  lord  betwene  the  Porche 
and  the  alter,  weping  and  saying  :  be 
fauourable,  O  Lord,  be  fauourable  vnto 
thy  people  :  let  not  thyne  herytage  be 
broughte  to  suche  confusion,  lest  the 
Heathen  be  Lordes  thereof.  Wher- 
fore  shoulde  they  saye  amonge  the 
Heathen  :  where  is  nowe  theyr  God  ? 

C  The  Gospell. 

[    Math.  vi. 

Wnen  ye  faste,  bee  not  sad  as  the 
Hipocrites  are, 

for  they  disfygure  theyr  faces  that 
it  maye  appeare  vnto  men  how  that 
they  fast.  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you, 
they  haue  theyr  reward.  But  thou, 
when  thou  fasteste,  annoynte  thyne 
head,  and  washe  thy  face,  that  it 
appeare  not  vnto  men  how  that  thou 
fastest,  but  vnto  thy  father  which  is  in 
secrete:  and  thy  father  which  seeth  in 
secrete,  shal  rewarde  thee  openly.  Lay 
not  vp  for  your  selues  treasure  vpon 
earth,  where  the  ruste  &  moth  doth 
corrupt,  and  where  theues  breake 
through  and  steale.  But  laye  vp 
for  you  treasures  in  heauen, 

where  neyther  rust,  nor  moth  doth 
corrupt,  and  where  theues  do  not 
breake  through  nor  steale.  For  where 
your  treasure  is,  there  wyl  your  heartes 
be  also. 


1661 

the  breasts  :  let  the  bridegroom  go 
forth  of  his  chamber,  and  the  bride 
out  of  her  closet.  Let  the  Priests, 
the  ministers  of  the  Lord  weepe  be- 
tweene  the  Porch,  and  the  Altar,  and 
let  them  say,  Spare  thy  people,  O 
Lord,  and  give  not  thine  Heritage  to 
reproach  ;  that  the 

heathen  shold  rule  over  them  :  where 
fore  should  they  say  among  the 
people,  Where  is  their  God. 

The  Gospell. 

[S*:  Mat.  6.  *16. 

When  ye  fast,  be  not  as  the 

hypocrites,  of  a  sad  countenance 
for  they  disfigure  their  faces,  that 
they  may  appear  vnto  men 
to  fast.  Verily,  I  say  vnto  you, 
they  have  their  reward.  But  thou 
when  thou  fastest,  anoynt  thine 
head,  and  wash  thy  face,  that  thou 
appear  not  vnto  men  to 

fast,  but  vnto  thy  father  which  is 
secret :  and  thy  Father  which  seeth  in 
secret  shall  reward  thee  openly.  Lay 
not  vp  for  your  selves  treasures  vpon 
earth,  where  moth  and  rust  doth 
corrupt,  and  where  theeves  break 
through  and  steal.  But  lay  vp 
for  your  selves  treasures  in  heaven 
where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth 
corrupt,  and  where  theeves  do  not 
breake  through  nor  steal.  For  where 
your  treasure  is,  there  will  your  heart 
be  also. 


THE  FIRST  SUNDAIE  IN   LENT. 


THE  FIRST  SUNDAY  IN  LENT. 


294 


FIRST  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 

[DEUS  qui  ecclesiam  tuam  annua 
quadragesimal!  obseruatione  purificas : 
presta  familie  tue  vt  quod  a  te  obtinere 
abstinendo  nititur  :  hoc  bonis  operibus 
exequatur.  Per  dominum.  (Greg.  30)] 


1549 

godlye,  make  his  praier  vnto  thee,  in 
a  tyme  when  thou  maiest  be  founde  : 
but  in  the  great  water  floudes,  they 
shall  not  come  nye  hym. 

Thou  art  a  place  to  hyde  me  in, 
thou  shalt  preserue  me  from  trouble  : 
thou  shalt  compasse  me  about  with 
songes  of  deliueraunce. 

I  will  enforme  thee  and  teache 
thee  in  the  way  wherein  thou  shalt 
go  :  and  I  will  guide  thee  with  mine 
eye. 

Be  not  ye  lyke  horsse  and  Mule, 
whiche  haue  no  vnderstandyng  :  whose 
mouthes  must  be  holden  with  bytte 
and  bridle,  leste  they  fall  vpon 
thee. 

Great  plagues  remaine  for  the  vn- 
godly  :  but  whoso  putteth  his  trust  in 
the  Lord,  mercy  embraceth  hym  on 
euerye  side. 

Be  glad,  O  ye  righteous,  and  re- 
ioyce  in  the  Lorde  :  and  be  ioyfull 
all  ye  that  are  true  of  heart. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  ghoste. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginnyng,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shall  be  :  world  without  end. 
Amen. 

The  Collect. 

O  Lorde,  whiche  for  our  sake, 
diddest  fast  fortye  da"yes  and  fortie 
nightes  :  Geue  vs  grace  to  vse  such 
abstinece  that  our  fleshe  beyng  sub- 
dewed  to  the  spirite,  we  maye  euer 
obey  thy  godly  monicions,  in  right- 
eousnes  and  true  holynes,  to  thy 
honour  and  glory  :  whiche  liuest  and 
reignest.&c. 


Epistola.    Ad  corinthios. 

[ii.  vi.  A 

Fnatres.  Hortamur  vos :  ne  in 
vacuum  gratiam  dei  recipiatis.  Ait 
enim.  Tempore  accepto  exaudiui  te  : 
et  in  die  salutis  adiuui  te.  Ecce  nunc 
tempus  acceptabile :  ecce  nunc  dies 
salutis.  Nemini  dantes  vllam  offen- 
sionem  :  vt  non  vituperetur  ministe- 
rium  nostrum.  Sed  in  omnibus 
exhibeamus  nosmetipsos :  sicut  dei 
ministros.  In  multa  patientia,  in 
tribulationibuSj  in  necessitatibus,  in 
angustijs,  in  plagis,  in  carceribus,  in 


The  Epistle. 

[ii.  Cor.  Vi. 
WE  as   healpers 

exhorte  you,  that  ye  receiue 
not  the  grace  of  God  in  vayne.  For 
he  sayeth :  I  haue  heard  thee  in  a  tyme 
excepted  :  and  in  the  day  of  saluacion 
haue  I  succoured  thee.  Behold,  now 
is  that  accepted  time  :  behold,  now  is 
that  day  of  saluacion.  Let  vs  geue 
no  occasion  of  euil,  that  in  our  office 
be  foud  no  faute,  but  in  al  thinges 
let  vs  dehaue  our  selues  as  the  minis 
ters  of  God  :  In  muche  pacience,  in 
affliccions,  in  necessities,  in  anguishes, 


FIRST  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


1552 


295 


1661 


C  The  Collect. 

O  Lord,  which  for  our  sake, 
dyddest  fast  fortie  dayes  and  fortie 
nightes  :  Geue  vs  grace  to  vse  such 
abstinence,  that  our  fleshe  beynge  sub 
dued  to  the  spyryte,  we  maye  euer 
obeye  thy  godly  monicions,  in  right- 
•-•ousnesse  and  true  holynesse,  to  thy 
honour  and  glory :  whych  lyuest  and 
reygneste.&c. 


C  The  Epistle. 

[ii.  Cor.  vi 
WE  as   helpers 

exhort  you,  that  ye  receiue 

not  the  grace  of  God  in  vayne.  For 
he  sayeth :  I  haue  heard  thee  in  a  tyme 
accepted  :  £  in  the  day  of  saluacion 
haue  I  succoured  thee.  Behold,  now 
is  that  accepted  time  :  behold,  now  is 
that  day  of  saluacio.  Let  vs  geue 
none  occasio  of  euill,  that  in  our  office 
be  found  no  faute  :  but  in  al  thinges 
let  vs  behaue  our  selues  as  the  minis 
ters  of  God  :  In  much  pacience,  in 
afflictions,  in  necessities,  in  anguishes, 


The  Collect. 

O  Lord,  who8  for  our  sake 
didst  fast  forty  dayes,  and  forty 
nights :  give  vs  grace  to  vse  such 
Abstinence  that  our  flesh  being  sub 
dued  to  the  spirit,  we  may  ever 
obey  thy  godly  taotions  in  right 
eousness,  and  true  holiness,  to  thy 
honour  and  glory  who8  livest,  and 
reignest,  5with  the  Father  and  the, 
holy  Ghost,  one  God  world  without 
end.  Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[2.  Cor.  6.  «1. 

We  then  as  workers  together  with 
him,  beseech  you  also,  that  ye  receive 
not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain.  (For 
he  sayth,  I  have  heard  thee  in  a  time 
accepted,  and  in  the  day  of  Salvation 
have  J  succoured  thee  :  behold,  now 
is  the  accepted  time  :  behold,  now  is 
the  day  of  Salvation)  Giving  no 
offence  in  any  thing  that  the  ministery 
be  not  blamed :  But  in  all  things 
approving  our  selves  as  the  minis 
ters  of  God,  in  much  patience,  in 
Afflictions,  in  necessities,  in  distresses, 


296 


FIRST  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


SOURCES 

seditionibus,  in  laboribus,,  in  vigilijs 
in  ieiunijs,  in  castitate,  in  scientia,  in 
louganimitate,  in  suauitate,  in  spiritu 
sancto,  in  charitate  non  ficta,  in  verbo 
veritatis_,  in  virtute  dei.  Per  arma 
iustitie,  a  dextris  et  a  sinistris.  Per 
gloriam  et  ignobilitatem :  per  infamiam 
et  bonam  famam.  Vt  seductores :  et 
veraces.  Sicut  qui  ignoti :  et  cogniti. 
Quasi  morientes :  et  ecce  viuimus. 
Vt  castigati :  &  non  mortificati.  Quasi 
tristes:  semper  autem  gaudentes.  Sicut 
egentes :  multos  autem  locupletantes. 
Tanquam  nichil  habentes :  et  omnia 
possidentes. 

Euangelium.     Secundum  Matheum. 

[iij.   A 

IN  illo  tempore.  Ductus  est  iesus 
in  desertum  a  spiritu  vt  tentaretur  a 
diabolo.  Et  cum  ieiunasset  quadra- 
ginta  diebus  et  quadraginta  noctibus 
postea  esurijt.  Et  accedens  tentator  : 
dixit  ei.  Si  films  dei  es:  die  vt 
lapides  isti  panes  fiant.  Qui  respon- 
dens :  dixit.  Scriptum  est.  Non  in 
solo  pane  viuit  homo :  sed  in .  omni 
verbo  quod  procedit  de  ore  dei.  Tune 
assumpsit  eum  diabolus  in  sanctam 
ciuitatem  :  &  statuit  eum  super  pinna-, 
culum  templi,  &  dixit  ei.  Si  films  dei 
es :  mitte  te  deorsum.  Scriptum  est 
enim :  quia  angelis  suis  mandauit  de 
te :  et  in  manibus  tollent  te :  ne  forte 
offendas  ad  lapidem  pedem  tuum.  Ait 
illi  iesus  rursum.  Scriptum  est.  Non 
tentabis  dominum  deum  tuum.  Iterum 
assumpsit  eum  diabolus  in  montem 
excelsum  valde :  et  ostendit  ei  omnia 
regna  mundi  &  gloriam  eorum :  & 
dixit  illi.  Hec  omnia  tibi  dabo :  si 
cadens  adoraueris  me.  Tune  dixit  ei 
iesus.  Vade  sathana.  Scriptum  est 
enim.  Dominum  deum  tuum  adora- 
bis  :  et  illi  soli  seruies.  Tune  reliquit 
eum  diabolus :  et  ecce  angeli  acces- 
serunt :  et  ministrabant  ei. 


1549 

in  stripes,  in  prisonmetes,  in  strifes, 
in  labours,  in  watchinges  in  fastynges, 
in  purenes,  in  knowledge,  in  long 
sufferyng,  in  kyn denes,  in  the  holy 
ghost,  in  loue  vnfayned,  in  the 
worde  of  trueth,  in  the  power  of 
God  :  by  the  armour  of  righteousnes 
of  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left : 
by  honour  and  dishonour:  by  euill 
report  and  good  report :  as  deceiuers, 
and  yet  true  :  as  vnknowen,  and  yet 
knowen :  as  diyng,  and  beholde  we 
Hue :  as  chastened,  and  not  kylled :  as 
sorowyng,  and  yet  alwaye  merye : 
as  poore,  and  yet  make  many  riche  : 
as  hauyng  nothyng,  and  yet  posses- 
syng  all  thynges. 

The  Gospell. 

[     Matth.  iiii. 

Tnen  was  Iesus   led  away  of  the 
spirit    into  wildernes,    to    be 

tempted  of  the  deuill.  And  whe  he 
had  fasted  fortie  dayes  &  fortie 
nightes,  he  was  at  the  last  an  hungred. 
And  when  the  tempter  came  to  hym, 
he  sayde,  if  thou  be  the  soonne  of  God, 
commaunde  that  these  stones  be  made 
breade.  But  he  aunswered  and  said  : 
it  is  written,  man  shal  not  Hue  by 
bread  only,  but  by  euery  woord  that 
procedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  god. 
Then  the  deuill  taketh  hym  vp  into 
the  holye  citye,  and  setteth  hym  on  a 
pynacle  of  the  Temple,  and  sayeth  vnto 
hym  :  if  thou  be  the  sonne  of  god,  caste 
thy  self  doune  headelong.  For  it  is 
written :  he  shall  geue  his  Angels 
charge  ouer  thee,  and  with  theyr 
handes  they  shall  hold  thee  vp,  lest  at 
any  tyme  thou  dashethyfoote  agaynst 
a  stone.  And  Iesus  sayd  vnto  him  : 
it  is  written  agayne.  Thou  shalt  not 
tempt  the  Lorde  thy  God.  Agayne,  the 
deuill  taketh  hym  vp  into  an  exced- 
yng  high  mountayne,  and  sheweth  hym 
al  the  kyngdomes  of  the  worlde,  and 
the  glorye  of  them,  and  sayeth  vnto 
hym  :  all  these  wyll  I  geue  thee, 

yf  thou  wylte  fall  downe  and  wurship 
me.  Then  sayth  Iesus  vnto  him : 
Auoyde  Sathan,  for  it  is  written  : 
Thou  shalt  wurship  the  Lorde  thy 
God,  and  him  onely  shalte  thou  serue. 
Then  the  deuill  leaueth  hym,  and 
behold,  the  Aungels  came  and  minis- 
tred  vnto  hym. 


FIRST  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


297 


1552 

in  strypes,  in  prysonmentes,  in  stryfes. 
in  labours,  in  watchinges,  in  fastinges, 
in  purenes,  in  knowledge,  in  longe 
suffering,  in  kyndnes,  in  the  holy 
ghoste,  in  loue  vnfayned,  in  the 
worde  of  the  trueth,  in  the  power  of 
God  :  by  the  armoure  of  righteousnes 
of  the  righte  hand  and  on  the  lefte  : 
by  honour  and  dishonour  :  by  euyl 
report  &  good  reporte  :  as  deceyuers, 
&  yet  true :  as  vnknowen,  &  yet 
knowen :  as  dyinge,  and  beholde  we 
lyue:  as  chastened,  and  not  kylled:  as 
sorowynge,  and  yet  allwaye  merye  : 
as  poore,  and  yet  make  many  ryche  : 
as  hauing  nothing,  and  yet  posses- 
singe  all  thynges. 

€  The  Gospell. 

[    Mat.  iiii. 

Tnen  was  lesus  led  away  of  the 
spirite  into  wyldernesse,  to  bee 
tempted  of  the  deuil.  And  whe  he 
had  fasted  fortie  dayes  &  fortie 
nightes,  he  was  at  the  laste  an  hungred. 
And  whe  the  tempter  came  to  hym, 
he  sayde  :  yf  thou  be  the  sonne  of  God, 
comaund  that  these  stones  be  made 
bread.  But  he  aunswered  and  sayde : 
it  is  wrytten,  man  shall  not  lyue  by 
bread  onely,  but  by  euery  worde  that 
procedeth  oute  of  the  mouth  of  God. 
Then  the  deuyl  taketh  him  vp  into 
the  holy  citie,  and  setteth  him  on  a 
pynacle  of  the  Temple,  ancj  sayth  vnto 
him:  yf  thou  be  the  sonne  of  God,  cast 
thy  self  downe  headlong.  For  it  is 
wrytten :  he  shall  geue  his  Angels 
charge  ouer  thee,  &  with  theyr 
handes  they  shal  holde  thee  vp,  lest  at 
any  tyme  thou  dashe  thy  fote  against 
a  stone.  And  lesus  sayd  vnto  him  : 
it  is  written  agayne.  Thou  shalt  not 
tempt  the  Lord  thy  God.  Agayn  the 
deuyl  taketh  him  vp  into  an  excead- 
inge  highe  mountayne,  &  shewed  him 
all  the  kingdoms  of  the  worlde,  & 
the  glorye  of  them,  &  sayeth  vnto 
him  :  all  these  wyll  I  geue  thee, 

yf  thou  wilt  fall  downe  &  worshyp 
me.  The  sayth  lesus  vnto  him  : 
Auoyde  Sathan,  for  it  is  written  : 
Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy 
god,  &  him  onely  shalt  thou  serue. 
Then  the  deuyl  leaueth  him  :  & 
beholde,  the  Angels  came  and  minis- 
tred  vnto  him. 


1661       « 

in  stripes,in  Imprisonments,in  tumults, 
in  labours,  in  Watchings,  in  fastings  ; 
By  pureness,  by  knowledge,  by  long- 
suffering,  by  kindness,  by  the  holy 
Ghost,  by  love  vnfeigned ;  By  the 
word  of  truth,  by  the  power  of 
God,  by  the  Armour  of  righteousness 
on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left ; 
By  honour,  and  dishonour,  by  evil 
report,  and  good  report :  as  deceivers, 
and  yet  true,  as  vnknown,  and  yet 
well  known  :  as  dying,  and  behold  we 
live  :  as  chastened,  and  not  killed  :  as 
sorrowfull,  yet  alway  rejoycing  : 
As  poore,  yet  making  many  rich  : 
as  having  nothing,  and  yet  posses 
sing  all  things. 

The  Gospell. 

[S*:  Mat:  4.  «1. 

Then  was  lesus  led  vp  of  the 
Spirit  into  the  wilderness  to  be 
tempted  of  the  devil.  And  when  he 
had  fasted  fourty  dayes,  and  fourty 
nights,  he  was  afterward  an  hungred. 
And  when  the  tempter  came  to  him, 
he  said,  If  thou  be  the  son  of  God, 
cornand  that  these  stones  be  made 
bread.  But  he  answered  and  said, 
It  is  written,  Man  shall  not  live  by 
bread  alone,  but  by  every  word,  that 
proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God. 
Then  the  devil  taketh  him  vp  into 
the  holy  City,  and  setteth  him  on  a 
pinacle  of  the  Temple,  and  saith  vnto 
him,  If  thou  be  the  son  of  God,  cast 
thy  selfe  down  ;  for  it  is 

written  he  shall  give  his  Angells 
charge  concerning  thee,  and  in  their 
hands  they  shall  bear  thee  vp,  lest  at 
any  time  thou  dash  thy  foot  against 
a  stone.  lesus  said  vnto  him, 

It  is  written  again,  Thou  shalt  not 
tempt  the  Lord  thy  God.  Again  the 
Devil  taketh  him  vp  into  an  exceed 
ing  high  mountain,  and  sheweth  him 
all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and 
the  glory  of  them  :  and  saith  vnto 
him,  All  these  things  will  I  give  thee, 
if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship 
me.  Then  saith  Jesus  vnto  him, 
Get  thee  hence  Satan  :  for  it  is  written, 
thcu  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy 
God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve. 
Then  the  devil  leaveth  him,  and 
behold,  Angels  came  and  minis- 
tred  vnto  him. 


298 


SECOND  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


SOURCES 

C  Dominica  secunda  quadragesime. 

Ad  missam.     Officium. 
[Ps.  xxiv  (xxv)  6,  Id,  21  : 1  a-c] 


Oratio. 
DEUS  qui  conspicis  omni  nos  virtute 

destitui,  interius  exteriusque  custodi  : 
vt  ab  omnibus  aduersitatibus  munia- 
mur  in  corpore  :  &  a  prauis  cogitati- 
onibus  mundemur  in  mente.  Per. 

(Greg.  35) 

Ad  thessalonicenses. 

[i.  v.  A. 

FBatres.  Rogamus  vos  et  obsecra- 
mus  in  domino  iesu  :  vt  quemadmodum 
accepistis  a  nobis  quomodo  vos  oporteat 
ambulare  et  placere  deo  :  sic  &  ambu- 
letis  vt  abundetis  magis.  Scitis  enim 
que  precepta  dederim  vobis  :  per 
dominum  iesum.  Hec  est  enim  vo- 
luntas  dei  sanctificatio  vestra  :  vt 
abstineatis  vos  a  fornicatione,  vt  sciat 
vnusquisque  vestrum  suum  vas  pos- 
sidere  in  sanctificatione  &  honore. 
Non  in  passione  desiderij  :  sicut  et 
gentes  que  ignorant  deum.  Et  ne 
quis  supergrediatur  neque  circum- 
ueniat  in  negocio  fratrem  suum : 
quoniam  vindex  est  dominus  de  his 
omnibus  sicut  prediximus  vobis :  et 


1549 

C  THE  SECOND   SONDAY. 

[De  profudis  psal.  cxxx. 

Out  of  the  depe  haue  I  called  vnto- 
thee,  O  Lorde  :  Lorde  heare  my 
voyce. 

Oh  let  thine  eares  cosider  well  :  the 
voice  of  my  complaint.  , 

If  thou  Lorde  wilt  be  extreme  to 
marke  what  is  done  amysse  :  Oh 
Lord  who  may  abide  it  ? 

For  there  is  mercy  with  thee  :  ther- 
fore  shalt  thou  be  feared. 

I  looke  for  the  lorde,  my  soule 
doeth  waite  for  him  :  in  his  word  is 
my  trust. 

My  soule  flyeth  vnto  the  Lorde, 
beefore  the  moarnynge  watche  :  I 
say,  before  the  mornyng  watche. 

O  Israel  trust  in  the  Lorde,  for 
with  the  Lorde  there  is  mercy  :  and 
with  hym  is  plenteous  redempcion. 

And  he  shall  redeme  Israeli,  from 
all  his  sinnes. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginnyng.&c. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  God,  whiche  doest  see 
that  we  haue  no  power  of  our  selues 
to  helpe  our  selues  :  kepe  thou  vs 
both  outwardly  in  oure  bodies,  and 
inwardly  in  our  soules,  that  we  may 
be  defended  from  al  aduersities  whiche 
may  happen  to  the  body,  and  from 
al  euill  thoughtes  whiche  may  assault 
and  hurt  the  soule :  through  lesus 
Christ.&c. 

The  Epistle. 

[i.  Tessa,  iiii. 

WE  beseche  you  brethren,  and 
exhorte  you  by  the  lorde  lesus,  that  ye 
encrease  more  and  more,  euen  as  ye 
haue  receiued  of  vs,  howe  ye  oughte 
to  walke  and  to  please  God. 

For  ye  know 

what  commaundementes  we  gaue  you 
by  our  Lord  Iesu  Christe.  For  this  is 
the  will  of  God,  euen  your  holynes, 
that  ye  shoulde  abstayne  from  fornica- 
cion,  and  that  euery  one  of  you  should 
knowe  howe  to  kepe  his  vessell  in- 
holynes  and  honour,  and  not  in 
the  lust  of  concupiscence  as  do  the 
Heathen,  which  know  not  God  :  that 
no  man  oppresse  and  defraude  his 
brother  in  bargaining :  because  that 
the  lord  is  the  aueger  of  al  such 


SECOND  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


299 


1552 
THE  SECOND  SUNDAIE. 


1 66 1 

THE  SECOND  SUNDAY  SIN  LENT. 


C  The  Collect. 

ALmightye  God,  whyche  doest  see 
that  we  haue  no  power  of  oure  selues 
to  helpe  oure  selues  :  kepe  thou  vs 
both  outwardly  in  our  bodies,  & 
inwardly  in  oure  soules,  that  we  may 
be  defended  fro  all  aduersities  whych 
may  happen  to  the  body,  and  from 
all  euyl  thoughtes  whych  maye  assaulte 
and  hurte  the  soule  :  through  lesus 
Christe.&c. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[i.  Thessa.  iiii. 

WE  beseche  you  brethren,  and 
exhort  you  by  the  lord  lesus,  that  ye 
encrease  more  and  more,  euen  as  ye 
haue  receyued  of  vs,  how  ye  oughte 
to  walke  &  to  please  God. 

For  ye  know 

what  commaundmentes  we  gaue  you 
by  oure  lord  lesus  Christ.  For  this  is 
the  wyl  of  God  :  euen  your  holines, 
that  ye  should  abstayne  from  fornica- 
cion,  &  that  euery  one  of  you  should 
know  how  to  kepe  hys  vessell  in 
holynes'  and  honour,  and  not  in 
the  luste  of  concupiscece  as  do  the 
Heathen,  which  know  not  God  :  that 
no  man  oppresse  and  defraude  hys 
brother  in  bargayninge  :  because  that 
the  Lord  is  the  auenger  of  al  such 


The  Collect. 

Almighty   God,   who8  seest 

that  we  have  no  power  of  our  selves, 
to  help  our  selves  :  keepe  vs 

both  outwardly  in  our  bodyes,  and 
inwardly  in  our  soules,  that  we  may 
be  defended  from  all  Adversities  which 
may  happen  to  the  body,  and  from 
all  evil  thoughts  which  may  assault, 
and  hurt  the  soul  through  lesus 
Christ  8our  Lord.  6Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[i.  Thes.  4.  «1. 

We    beseech    you    bretheren,   and 
exhort  you  by  the  Lord  lesus, 

that  as  ye 

have  received  of  vs  how  ye  ought 
to  walk  and  to  please  God,  so  ye  wold 
abound  more  and  more.  For  ye  know 
what  Commandements  we  gave  you 
by  the  Lord  lesus  .  For  this  is 

the  will  of  God,even  your  sanctification, 
that  ye  should  abstain  from  fornica 
tion  :  That  every  one  of  you  should 
know  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in 
sanctification  and  honour.  Not  in 

the  lust  of  concupiscence  even  as  the 
Gentiles  which  know  not  God :  That 
no  man  go  beyond  and  defraud  his 
brother  in  any  matter,  because  that 
the  Lord  is  the  Avenger  of  all  such 


300 


THIRD  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


SOURCES 

testificati  sumus.  Non  euim  vocauit 
nos  deus  in  immunditiam :  sed  in 
sanctificationem.  In  xpo  iesu :  domino 
nostro. 


Secundum  matheum. 

[xv.  c. 

IN  illo  tempore.  Egressus  iesus 
secessit  in  partes  tyri  et  sidouis :  & 
ecce  mulier  chananea  a  finibus  illis 
egressa,  clamauit  dicens  ei.  Miserere 
mei  domine  fili  dauid  :  filia  mea  male 
a  demonio  vexatur.  Qui  non  respondit 
ei  verbum.  Et  accedentes  discipuli 
ems :  rogabant  eum  dicentes.  Dimitte 
earn :  quia  clamat  post  nos.  Ipse 
autem  respondens  :  ait.  Non  sum 
missus :  nisi  ad  oues  que  perierunt 
domus  Israel.  At  ilia  venit :  & 
adorauit  eum  dicens.  Domine,  adiuua 
me.  Qui  respondens :  ait.  Non  est 
bonum  sumere  panem  filiorum :  et 
mittere  canibus.  At  ilia  dixit.  Etiam 
domine  :  nam  et  catelli  edunt  de  micis 
que  cadunt  de  mensa  dominorum 
suorum.  Tune  respondens  iesus :  ait 
illi.  O  mulier,  magna  est  fides  tua : 
fiat  tibi  sicut  vis.  Et  sanata  est  filia 
eius  :  ex  ilia  hora. 

C  Dominica  tertia  quadragesime. 

Ad  missam.     Officium. 
[Ps.  xxiv  (xxv)  14,  15:1  a-c] 


1549 

thinges,  as  we  tolde  you  before,  and 
testified.  For  God  hath  not  called 
vs  vnto  vnclennesse,  but  vnto  holynes. 
He  therfore  that  despiseth,  despiseth 
not  manne,  but  God  whiche  hath 
sente  his  holy  spirite  among 

you. 

The  Gospell. 

[     Matth.  xV. 

IESUS  wente  thence,  and  departed 
into  the  coastes  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  : 
and  beholde,  a  woman  of  Canaan 
(whiche  came  oute  of  the  same  coastes) 
cryed  vnto  hym,  saiyng  :  haue 
mercye  on  me.  O  Lord,  thou  sone 
of  Dauid  :  My  daughter  is  pieteously 
vexed  with  a  deuill.  But  he  aunswered 
her  nothyng  at  all.  And  his  disciples 
came  and  besought  him,  saiyng : 
send  her  awaye,  for  she  cryeth  after 
vs.  But  he  aunswered,  and  sayd  :  I 
am  not  sent,  but  to  the  lost  shepe  of 
the  house  of  Israel.  Then  came  she 
&  wurshipped  him,  saiyng :  Lord, 
help  me.  He  answered  &  said  : 

it  is  not  mete  to  take  the  chyldrens 
bread,  and  cast  it  to  dogges.  She 
answered  and  said :  truth  Lorde,  for  the 
dogges  eate  of  the  crummes  which  fall 
from  theyr  maisters  table.  Then  Iesus 
aunswered,  and  said  vnto  her :  O 
woman,  great  is  thy  faythe,  be  it  vnto 
thee,  euen  as  thou  wilt.  And  her 
daughter  was  made  wholt  euen  at  the 
same  time. 

C  THE.III.SONDAY. 

[ludica  me  deus.  psal.  xliii 

GEVC  sentence  with  me  (O  god)  and 
defed  my  cause  against  the  vngodly 
people  :  Oh  deliuer  me  from  the 
deceiptful  and  wicked  man. 

For  thou  art  the  god  of  my  strength, 
why  hast  thou  put  me  from  thee  ?  and 
why  goe  I  so  heauily,  while  the  enemye 
oppresseth  me  ? 

Oh  sende  out  thy  light  and  thy 
trueth,  that  they  maye  leade  me  :  & 
bryng  me  vnto  thy  holy  hyll,  &  to  thy 
dwellyng. 

And  that  I  maye  go  vnto  the  aultare 
of  god,  euen  vnto  the  god  of  my  ioye 
and  gladnes  :  and  vpon  the  harpe  will  I 
geue  thankesvnto  thee(O  god)my God. 

Why  art  thou  so  heauy  (O  my  soule) 
and  why  art  thou  so  disquieted  within 
me? 


THIRD  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


301 


1552 

thinges,  as  we  tolde  you  before,  and 
testified.  For  God  hath  not  called 
vs  vnto  vnclennes,  but  vnto  holynes. 
He  therefore  that  despyseth,  despyseth 
not  ma,  but  God  which  hath 
sente  his  holy  spyryte  among 

you. 

<T  The  Gospell. 

[      Math,  xv 

IESUS  went  thence,  and  departed 
into  the  coastes  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  : 
and  beholde,  a  woman  of  Canaan 
(which  came  out  of  the  same  costes) 
cryed  vnto  hym,  saying  :  haue 
mercy  on  me,  O  Lorde,  thou  sonne 
ofDauid.  My  doughter  is  pieteouslye 
vexed  with  a  deuyl.  But  he  aunswered 
her  nothing  at  all.  And  hys  disciples 
came  and  besought  him,  saying  : 
sende  her  awaye,  for  she  cryeth  after 
vs.  But  he  aunswered,  and  sayde  :  I 
am  not  sente  but  to  the  lost  shepe  of 
the  house  of  Israel.  Then  came  she 
and  worshipped  him,  sayinge  :  Lorde, 
helpe  me.  He  answered  &  sayde  : 

it  is  not  mete  to  take  the  chyldrens 
bread,  and  caste  it  to  dogges.  She 
answered  and  sayd :  trueth  Lord,for  the 
dogges  eate  of  the  crummes  which  fall 
fr5  their  maysters  table.  Then  lesus 
answered,  and  sayd  vnto  her :  O 
woman,  great  is  thy  faythe,  be  it  vnto 
thee,  euen  as  thou  wilt.  And  her 
doughter  was  made  whole,  euen  the 
same  tyme. 

THE  THIRDE  SUNDAIE. 


1661 

as  we  also  have  forewarned  you,  and 
testified.  For  God  hath  not  called 
vs  vnto  vncleanness,  but  vnto  holiness ; 
He  therefore  that  despiseth,  despiseth 
not  man,  but  God,  who  hath  also 
given  vnto  vs  his  holy  spirit 

The  Gospel. 

[S*:  Mat.  15.  421. 

lesus  went  thence,  and  departed 
into  the  Coasts  of  Tyre,  and  Sidon  ; 
And  behold,  a  Woman  of  Canaan 
came  out  of  the  same  Coasts 
and  cryed  vnto  him  sayeing,  Have 
mercy  on  me  O  Lord,  thou  son 
of  David,  my  daughter  is  grievously 
vexed  with  a  devil.  But  he  answered 
her  not  a  word.  And  his  Disciples 
came  and  besought  him,  sayeing, 
send  her  away,  for  she  crieth  after 
vs.  But  he  answered  and  said,  I 
am  not  sent,  but  vnto  the  lost  sheep  of 
the  house  of  Israel.  Then  came  she 
and  worshipped  him,  saying,  Lord 
help  me.  But  he  answered  and  said, 
It  is  not  meet  to  take  the  childrens 
bread,  and  to  cast  it  to  dogs.  And 
she  said,  Truth  Lord  :  yet  the 
dogs  eat  of  the  Crumbs  which  fall 
from  their  masters  table.  Then  lesus 
answered,  and  said  vnto  her,  O 
Woman  great  is  thy  Faith  :  be  it  vnto 
thee  even  as  thou  wilt.  And  her 
daughter  was  made  whole  from  that 
very  hour. 

THE  THIRD  SUNDAY  3iN  LENT. 


302 


THIRD  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 

Quesumus  omnipotens  deus  vota  humi- 
lium  respice :  atque  ad  defensionem 
nostram  dexteram  tue  maiestatis  ex- 
tende.  Per  do.  (Greg.  34) 

Ad  ephesios. 

[V.   A 

Fnatres.  Estote  imitatores  del  sicut 
filij  charissimi&  ambulate  in  dilectione: 
$icut  et  christus  dilexit  nos :  et  tradidit 
semetipsum  pro  nobis  oblationem  et 
hostiam  deo  in  odorem  suauitatis. 
Fofnicatio  autem  et  omnis  immunditiaj 
aut  auaritia  :  iiec  nominetur  in  vobis  : 
sicut  decet  sanctos.  Aut  turpitude, 
aut  stultiloquium,  aut  scurrilitas  que 
ad  rem  non  pertinet  :  sed  magis 
gratiarum  actio.  Hec  autem  scitote 
intelligentes  :  quod  omnis  fornicator, 
aut  immuudus,  aut  auarus  quod  est 
idolorum  seruitus :  non  habet  heredi- 
tatem  in  regno  xpi  et  dei.  Nemo  vos 
seducat  inanibus  verbis :  propter  hec 
enim  venit  ira  dei :  in  filios  diffidentie. 
Nolite  ergo  effici :  participes  eorum. 
Eratis  enim  aliquando  tenebre,  nunc 
autem  lux  in  domino:  vt  filij  lucis 
ambulate.  Fructus  enim  lucis  est  in 
omni  bonitate  :  et  iustitia :  &  veritate. 


1549 

O  put  thy  trust  in  God  :  for  I  wil 
yet  geue  hym  thankes  whiche  is  the 
helpe  of  my  countenaunce  and  my 
God. 

Glory  be  to  the  father. &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginnyng.&c. 

The  Collect. 

WE  beseche  thee  almightie  God 
loke  vpon  the  heartie  desires  of  thy 
humble  seruauntes :  and  stretche  forth 
the  right  hand  of  thy  maiestie,  to  bee 
oure  defence  agaynste  all  our  enemyes : 
through  lesus  Christe  our  Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[Ephesian.  V 

BE   you  the  folowers   of  god 

as  dere  children  and  walke  in  loue, 
euen  as  Christ  loued  vs,  and 

gaue  himselfe  for  vs  an  offring 
&  a  sacrifice  of  a  sweete 

sauour  to  god.  As  for  fornicacion  & 
all  vnclennes  or  couetousnes,  let 
it  not  bee  once  named  among  you, 
as  it  becometh  sainctes :  or  filthy- 
nes,  or  folish  talkyng,  or  iesting, 
whiche  are  not  comely,  but  rather 
geuyng  of  thankes.  For  this  ye  knowe, 
that  no  whoremonger,  eyther  vncleane 
persone,  or  couetous  persone  (whyche 
is  awurshypper  of  ymages)  hath  anyin- 
herytaunce  in  the  kyngdome  of  Christ 
and  of  God.  Let  no  man  deceiue  you 
with  vayne  wordes.  For  because  of 
suche  thynges,  cummeth  the  wrath  of 
God  vpon  the  childre  of  disobedience. 
Be  not  ye  therfore  companions  of 
them.  Ye  were  somtyme  darcke- 

nes,  but  nowe  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord : 
walke  as  children  of  lyghte,  for  the 
fruite  of  the  spirite  consisteth  in  all 
goodnes,  and  ryghteousnes,  &  truth. 
Accepte  thatwhich  is  pleasyngvnto  the 
Lorde,  and  haue  no  felowship  with  the 
vnfruitful  workes  of  darckenes,  but 
rather  rebuke  them.  For  it  is  a  shame 
euen  to  name  those  thynges,  whiche  are 
done  of  them  in  secrete :  but  al  thinges 
when  they  are  brought  furth  by  the 
lyght  are  manifest.  For  whatsoeuer  is 
manyfeste,  the  same  is  lyghte  :  where 
fore  he  sayeth  :  awake  thou  that 
slepest,  and  stande  vp  from  death, 
and  Christ  shall  geue  thee  lyghte. 


THIRD  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


303 


1552 


1661 


C  The  Collect. 

WE  beseche  thee  almightie  God, 
Joke  vpon  the  hartie  desyres  of  thy 
humble  seruaiites  :  and  stretche  forth 
the  ryght  hade  of  thy  maiestie,  to  be 
oure  defence  agaynst  all  oure  enemies : 
through  lesus  Christ  our  Lorde. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Ephesi.  v 

BE  you  the  folowers  of  God 
as  dere  chyldren,  and  walke  in  loue, 
•euen  as  Christ  loued  vs,  and 

gaue  hym  selfe  for  vs  an  offerynge 
and  a  sacrifice  of  a  swete 

sauour  to  God.  As  for  fornication,  & 
all  vnclennes,  or  couetousnes,  let 
it  not  be  once  named  among  you, 
as  it  becometh  sainctes :  or  filthi- 
nes,  or  folishe  talking,  or  iestinge, 
whych  are  not  comely,  but  rather 
geuingeof thankes.  For thysye knowe, 
that  no  whoremonger,  eyther  vncleane 
persone,  or  couetous  persone  (which 
is  a  worshipper  of  ymages)  hathe  anye  in- 
heritaunce  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
&  of  God.  Let  no  ma  deceyue  you 
with  vayne  wordds.  For  because  of 
such  thinges,  cometh  the  wrath  of 
God  vpon  the  chyldren  of  disobedience. 
Be  not  ye  therfore  companions  of 
the.  Ye  were  sometimes  darke- 

nes,  but  now  are  ye  lyght  in  the  Lord : 
walke  as  children  of  lighte,  for  the 
fruyte  of  the  spirite  consisteth  in  all 
goodnes,  &  ryghteousnes,  &  trueth. 
Accepte  that  which  is  pleasing  vnto  the 
Lord,  and  haue  no  felowship  wyth  the 
vnfruytfull  workes  of  darkenes,  but 
rather  rebuke  them.  For  it  is  a  shame 
euen  to  name  those  thinges,  which  are 
done  of  them  in  secrete  :  but  all  thinges 
when  they  are  broughte  forthe  by  the 
light,  are  manifest.  For  whatsoeuer  is 
manifest,  the  same  is  lyght :  wher- 
fore  he  saith  :  awake  thou  that 
slepest,  and  stand  vp  from  death, 
and  Christ  shall  geue  thee  lyght. 


The  Collect. 

We  beseech  thee  Almighty  God, 
look  vpon  the  hearty  desires  of  thy 
humble  servants,  and  stretch  forth 
the  right  hand  of  thy  Majesty,  to  be 
our  defence  against  all  our  Enemies, 
through  lesus  Christ  our  Lord.  "Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Ephe.  5.  <1. 

Be  ye  therefore  followers  of  God, 
as  dear  children  ;  and  walk  in  Love, 
as  Christ  also  hath  loved  vs,  and 
hath  given  himselfe  for  vs,  an  offering, 
and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet 
smelling  savour.  But  fornication,  and 
all  vncleanness,  or  covetousness,  let 
it  not  be  once  named  amongst  you 
as  becometh  Saints  :  Neither  filthi- 
ness,  nor  foolish  talking,  nor  iesting, 
which  are  not  convenient :  but  rather 
giving  of  thanks ;  for  this  ye  know, 
that  no  whoremonger,  nor  vnclean- 
person,  nor  covetous  man,  who 
is  an  Idolater,  hath  any  In 
heritance  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ, 
and  of  God.  Let  no  man  deceive  you 
with  vain  words  :  for  because  of 
these  things  cometh  the  wrath  of 
God  vpon  the  children  of  disobedience. 
Be  not  ye  therefore  partakers  with 
them  ;  For  ye  were  sometimes  dark 
ness,  but  now  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord  : 
walke  as  children  of  light,  (for  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all 
goodness  and  righteousness,  and  truth) 
proving  what  is  acceptable  vnto  the 
Lord.  And  have  no  fellowship  with  the 
vnfruitfull  works  of  darkness,  but 
rather  reprove  them.  For  it  is  a  shame 
even  to  speake  of  those  things  which  are 
don  of  them  in  secret.  But  all  things 
that  are  reproved,  are  made  manifest 
by  the  light :  for  whatsoever  doth  make 
manifest  is  light.  Where 

fore  he  sayth,  Awake  thou  that 
sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead, 
and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light. 


3°4 


THIRD  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


SOURCES 

Euangelium.     Secundum  lucam. 

[xi.  B 

IN  illo  tempore  Erat  iesus  eijciens 
demonium  et  illud  erat  mutum.  Et  cum 
eiecisset  demonium-,  locutus  est  mutus : 
et  admirate  sunt  turbe  Quidam  autem 
ex  eis,  dixerunt.  In  beelzebub  prin- 
cipe  demoniorum  :  eijcit  demonia.  Et 
alij  tentantes :  signum  de  celo  quere- 
bant  ab  eo.  Ipse  autem  vt  vidit 
cogitationes  eorum  :  dixit  eis.  Omne 
regnum  in  seipsum  diuisum  desola- 
bitur :  et  domus  supra  domum  cadet. 
Si  autem  et  sathanas  in  se  ipsum 
diuisus  est :  quomodo  stabit  regnum 
ipsius,  quia  dicitis  in  beelzebub  eijcere 
me  demonia?  Si  autem  ego  in  beel 
zebub  eijcio  demonia :  filij  vestri  in 
quo  eijciunt?  Ideo  et  ipsi  iudices 
vestri  erunt.  Porro  si  in  digito  dei 
eijcio  demonia :  profecto  pervenit  in 
vos  regnum  dei.  Cum  fortis  armatus 
custodit  atrium  suum :  in  pace  sunt 
ea  que  possidet.  Si  autem  fortior  eo 
superueniens  vicerit  eum :  vniuersa 
arma  eius  auferet  in  quibus  confidebat, 
&  spolia  eius  distribuet.  Qui  non  est 
mecum  contra  me  est :  &  qui  non 
colligit  mecum,  dispergit.  Cum  im- 
mundus  spiritus  exierit  ab  homine  : 
ambulat  per  loca  inaquosa  querens 
requiem,  et  non  inueniens  dicit.  Re- 
uertar  in  domum  meam  :  vnde  exiui. 
Et  cum  venerit :  inuenit  earn  scopis 
mundatam.  Tune  vadit,  &  assumit 
septem  alios  spiritus  secum  nequiores 
se  :  et  ingressi  habitant  ibi.  Et  fiunt 
nouissima  hominis  illius :  peiora  priori- 
bus.  Factum  est  autem  cum  hec 
diceret  :  extollens  vocem  quedam 
mulier  de  turba  dixit  illi.  Beatus 
venter  qui  te  portauit :  et  ubera  que 
suxisti.  At  ille  dixit.  Quinimmo 
beati  qui  audiunt  verbum  dei :  et 
custodiunt  illud 


1549 
The  Gospell. 

[       Luc.  xi. 

IESUS  was  casting  out  a  deuil  that 
was  dumme.  And  when  he  had  cast 
out  the  deuyll,  the  dumme  spake, 
and  the  people  woondered.  But  some 
of  them  sayde  :  he  casteth  out  deuyls 
through  Beelzebub  the  chiefe  of  the 
deuils.  And  other  tempted  hym,  and 
required  of  hym  a  sygne  from  heauen. 
But  he  knowyng  theyr  thoughtes,  sayd 
vnto  them :  Euery  kyngdome  deuyded 
agaynst  it  selfe,  is  desolate  : 
and  one  house  doeth  fall  vpon 
another.  If  Sathan  also  be  deuyded 
agaynste  hymselfe,  howe  shall  hys 
kyngdome  endure  ?  Because  ye  saye 
that  I  caste  out  deuyls  through  Beel 
zebub.  If  I  by  the  helpe  of  Beel 
zebub  cast  out  deuils  :  by  whose  helpe 
doe  your  chyldren  caste  them  oute? 
Therfore  shall  they  be  youre  iudges. 
But  if  I  with  the  fynger  of  God  cast 
out  deuylles,  no  doubt  the  kyngdome 
of  God  is  come  vpon  you.  When  a 
strong  man  armed  watcheth  hys  house, 
the  thynges  that  he  possesseth  are  in 
peace.  But  when  a  stroger  then  he 
commeth  vpon  him,  &  ouercommeth 
him,  he  taketh  from  him  al  hys  harnes 
(wherin  he  trusted)  and  deuideth  hys 
goodes.  He  that  is  not  with  me,  is 
agaynste  me.  And  he  that  gathereth 
not  with  me,  scattreth  abroad.  When 
the  vncleane  spirite  is  gone  out  of  a 
man,  he  walketh  through  drye  places 
seeking  reste.  And  when  he  findeth 
none,  he  sayth  :  I  wil  returne  againe 
into  my  house  whence  I  came  out. 
And  when  he  cometh,  he  fyndeth  it 
swept  and  garnyshed.  Then  goeth 
he  and  taketh  to  him  .vii.  other 
spirites  worse  then  himselfe  :  and 
they  enter  in  &  dwell  there.  And  the 
end  of  that  man  is  worse  then  the 
beginning.  And  it  fortuned  that  as 
he  spake  these  thinges,  a  certayne 
woma  of  the  company  lift  vp  her 
voyce,  and  sayd  vnto  hym  :  happy  is 
the  woumbe  that  bare  thee,  &  the 
pappes  which  gaue  thee  sucke.  But 
he  said  :  yea,  happie  are  they 
that  heare  the  woorde  of  God,  and 
kepe  it. 


THIRD  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


305 


1552 
€  The  Gospell. 

[       Luke,  xi 

IESUS  was  castinge  oute  a  deuyll  that 
was  dumme.  And  when  he  had  caste 
out  the  deuyll,  the  dumme  spake, 
&  the  people  wondered.  But  some 
of  them  sayde  :  he  casteth  oute  deuyls 
through  Beelzebub  the  chiefe  of  the 
deuils.  And  other  tempted  hym,  and 
requyred  of  him  a  sygne  from  heauen. 
But  he  knowyng  theyr  thoughtes,  sayd 
vnto  them  :  Euery  kyngdom  deuyded 
agaynst  it  selfe,  is  desolate  : 
and  one  house  doeth  fall  vpon 
another.  Yf  Sathan  also  be  deuyded 
agaynst  hymselfe :  how  shall  hys 
kyngdom  endure?  Because  ye  saye 
I  cast  oute  deuyls  through  Beel 
zebub.  Yf  I  by  the  helpe  of  Beel 
zebub  caste  out  deuyls :  by  whose  helpe 
do  youre  children  cast  them  out  ? 
Therfore  shall  they  be  your  iudges. 
But  yf  I  wyth  the  fynger  of  God  cast 
oute  deuyls,  no  doubte  the  kyngdom 
of  God  is  come  vpo  you.  When  a 
strong  man  armed  watcheth  hys  house, 
the  thynges  that  he  possesseth  are  in 
peace.  But  when  a  stronger  then  he 
commeth  vpon  him,  and  ouercommeth 
him,  he  taketh  from  him  all  hys  harnes 
(wherein  he  trusted)  and  deuydeth  hys 
goodes.  He  that  is  not  wyth  me,  is 
against  me.  And  he  that  gathereth 
not  wyth  me,  scattereth  abroad.  Whe 
the  vncleane  spirite  is  gone  out  of  a 
ma,  he  walketh  through  drye  places 
seking  rest.  And  whe  he  findeth 
none,  he  sayth  :  I  wyll  returne  agayne 
into  my  house  whence  I  came  oute. 
And  when  he  cometh,  he  fyndeth  it 
swepte  and  garnyshed.  Then  goeth 
he  and  taketh  to  hym  seuen  other 
spirites  worse  then  himself :  and 
they  entre  in  &  dwell  there.  And  the 
ende  of  that  man  is  worse  the  the 
beginning.  And  it  fortuned  that  as 
he  spake  these  thinges,  a  certayn 
woman  of  the  copany  lyft  vp  her 
voyce,  and  sayde  vnto  hym  :  happy  is 
the  wombe  that  bare  thee,  &  the 
pappes  whyche  gaue  thee  sucke.  But 
he  said  :  yea,  happy  are  they 
that  heare  the  worde  of  God,  and 
kepe  it. 


1661 
The  Gospel. 

[S*:  Luke.  n.  414. 

lesus  was  casting  out  a  devil,  and  it 
was  dumb.  And  it  came  to  pass  when 
the  devil  was  gon  out,  the  dumb  spake : 
and  the  people  wondered.  But  some 
of  them  said,  He  casteth  out  devils 
through  Beelzebub,  the  chief  of  the 
devils,  And  other  tempting  him, 
sought  of  him  a  signe  from  heaven. 
But  he  knowing  their  thoughts,  said 
vnto  them,  Every  kingdom  devided 
against  it  selfe  is  brought  to  desolation : 
and  a  house  divided  against  a  house 
falleth.  Jf  Satan  also  be  devided 
against  himselfe,  how  shall  his 
kingdom  stand  ?  because  ye  say 
that  I  cast  out  Devils  through  Beel 
zebub.  And  if  I  by  Beel 
zebub  cast  out  Devils,  by  whom 
do  your  sons  cast  them  out  ? 
therefore  shall  they  be  your  Judges. 
But  if  I  with  the  finger  of  God  cast 
out  Devils,  no  doubt  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  come  vpon  you.  When  a 
strong  man  armed  keepeth  his  palace, 
his  goods  are  in 
peace.  But  when  a  stronger,  then  he 
shall  come  vpon  him,  and  overcome 
him,  he  taketh  from  him  all  his  Armour 
wherein  he  trusted,  and  divideth  his 
spoils.  He  that  is  not  with  me,  is 
against  mee :  and  he  that  gathereth 
not  with  me,  scattereth  .  When 
the  vnclean  spirit  is  gon  out  of  a 
man,  he  walketh  through  dry  places, 
seeking  rest  :  and  finding 
none,  he  saith,  I  will  returne 
vnto  my  house  whence  I  came  out. 
And  when  he  cometh  he  findeth  it 
swept,  and  garnished  ;  Then  goeth 
he,  and  taketh  to  him  seaven  other 
spirits  more  wicked  then  himselfe,  and 
they  enter  in,  and  dwell  there ;  and  the 
last  state  of  that  man  is  worse  then 
the  first.  And  it  came  to  pass,  as 
he  spake  these  things,  a  certein 
Woman  of  the  Company  lift  vp  her 
voyce  and  said  vnto  him.  Blessed  is 
the  Womb  that  bare  thee,  and  the 
paps  which  thou  hast  sucked.  But 
he  said,  yea,  rather  blessed  are  they 
that  hear  the  word  of  God  and 
keep  it. 


u 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


SOURCES 
C  Dominica  media  quadragesime. 

Ad  missam.    Officium. 
[Isa.  Ixvi  10,  lla :  Ps.  cxxi  (cxxii)  1] 


Oratio. 
Concede  quesumus,  omnipotens  deus: 

vt  qui  ex  merito  nostre  actionis  affligi- 
mur :  tue  gratie  consolatione  respire- 
mus.  Per  do.  (Greg.  43) 

Ad  galathas. 

fiiij.  c 
Fnatres.       Scriptum     est    quoniam 

abraham  duos  filios  habuit :  vnum  de 
ancilla,  &  vnum  de  libera.  Sed  qui 
de  ancilla,  secundum  earn  em  natus 
est:  qui  autem  de  libera,  per  repro- 
missionem :  que  sunt  per  allegoriam 


1549 
C  THE. mi.  SONDAYE. 

[Deus  noster  refugium.  psal.  xlvi. 

God  is  our  hope  and  strength  :  a 
very  present  helpe  in  trouble. 

Therfore  wyll  not  we  feare,  though 
the  earthe  be  moued  :  and  thoughe 
the  hylles  bee  caryed  into  the  myddest 
of  the  sea. 

Though  the  waters  therof  rage  and 
swell  :  and  though  the  mountaines 
shake  at  the  tempest  of  the  same. 

The  riuers  of  the  floude  thereof  shall 
make  gladde  the  citie  of  God  :  the 
holye  place  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 
moste  highest. 

God  is  in  the  middeste  of  her,  there 
fore  shall  she  not  bee  remoued  :  God 
shall  helpe  her,  and  that  right  early. 

The  heathen  make  muche  a  dooe, 
and  the  kyngdomes  are  moued  :  but 
God  hath  shewed  hys  voyce,  and  the 
earth  shall  melte  awaye. 
The  Lord  of  hoostes  is  with  vs  :  the 
God  of  Jacob  is  our  refuge. 

O  come  hyther,  and  beholde  the 
workesoftheLorde  :  what  destruccion 
he  hath  brought  vpon  the  earth. 

He  maketh  warres  to  ceasse  in  all 
the  worlde  :  he  breaketh  the  bowe, 
and  knappeth  the  speare  in  sunder, 
and  burneth  the  Chariotes  in  the  fyer. 

Be  styll  then,  and  knowe  that  I  am 
God  :  I  wilbe  exalted  among  the 
heathen,  and  I  wylbe  exalted  in  the 
yearth. 

The  Lord  of  hoostes  is  with  vs,  the 
God  of  lacob  is  our  defence. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.&c.  As  it 
was  in  the  beginning.&c. 

The  Collect. 

GRaunt  we  beseche  thee  almightye 
God,  that  we,  which  for  our  euill  dedes 
are  worthely  punyshed : 

by  the  comforte  of  thy  grace  may  mer 
cifully  be  relieued,throughe  oure  Lorde 

lesus  Christe. 

The  Epistle. 

[Gala.  iiii. 

TEll  me  (ye  that  desyre  to  be  vnder 
the  lawe)  doe  ye  not  heare  of  the  lawe? 
for  it  is  wrytten  that  Abraham  had  .ii. 
sonnes,  the  one  by  a  bondemayde,  the 
other  by  a  free  woman.  Yea,  and  he 
which  was  borne  of  the  bondewoman, 
was  borne  after  the  fleshe  :  but  he 
whyche  was  borne  of  the  freewoman, 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


307 


1552 

C  THE  FOURTH  SUNDAIE. 


1661 
THE  FOURTH  SUNDAY  3m  LENT. 


<I  The  Collect. 

GRaunt  we  beseche  thee  almightye 
God,  that  we  which  for  our  euyll  dedes 
are  worthely  punished  : 

by  the  coforte  of  thy  grace  may  mer- 
cyfully  be  relieued,  through  our  Lord 
lesus  Christ. 

€  The  Epistle. 

[Gala.  iiii. 

TEll  me  (ye  that  desire  to  be  vnder 
the  lawe)  do  ye  not  heare  of  the  law  ? 
for  it  is  writte  that  Abraha  had  two 
sonnes :  the  one  by  a  bondemayde,  the 
other  by  a  frewoma.  Yea,  &  he 
which  was  borne  of  the  bondwoman, 
was  borne  after  the  fleshe :  but  he 
which  was  borne  of  the  frewoman, 


The  Collect 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee  Almighty 
God,  that  we  who  for  our  evil  deeds, 
do  worthily  deserve  to  be  punished, 
by  the  comfort  of  thy  grace,  may  mer 
cifully  be  relieved,  through  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  lesus  Christ.  6Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Gal.  4.  421. 

Tell  me,  ye  that  desire  to  be  vnder 
the  law,  do  ye  not  hear  the  law? 
For  it  is  written  that  Abraham  had  two 
sons,  the  one  by  a  bond-maid,  the 
other  by  a  freewoman.  But  he 

who  was  of  the  bondwoman 

was    born    after   the   flesh :    but    he 
of  the  free  woman 


308 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


SOURCES 

dicta.  Hec  enim  sunt  duo  testamenta. 
Vnum  quidem  in  monte  sina,  in  serui- 
tutem  generans  :  que  est  agar.  Sina 
enim  mons  est  in  arabia  qui  coniunctus 
est  ei  que  nunc  est  hierusalem  :  et 
seruit  cum  filijs  suis.  Ilia  autem  que 
sursum  est  hierusalem  libera  est :  que 
est  mater  nostra.  Scriptum  est  enim. 
Letare  sterilis  que  non  paris,  erumpe 
et  clama  que  non  parturis  :  quia  multi 
filij  deserte  magis  quam  eius  que  habet 
virum.  Nos  autem  fratres  secundum 
isaac  promissionis  filij  sumus.  Sed 
quomodo  tune  is  qui  secundum  carnem 
natus  fuerat,  persequebatur  qui  secun 
dum  spiritum  :  ita  et  nunc.  Sed  quid 
dicitscriptura?  Eiice  aucillam  etfilium 
eius  :  non  enim  heres  erit  filius  ancille 
cum  filio  libere.  Itaque  fratres,  non 
sumus  ancille  filij :  sed  libere.  (  +  v  la) 

Secundum  lohannem. 

[vi.  A 
IN  illo  tempore.     Abijt  lesus  trans 

mare  galilee  quod  est  tyberiadis  :  & 
sequebatur  eum  multitude  magna,  quia 
videbant  signa  que  faciebat  super  his 
qui  infirmabantur.  Subijt  ergo  in 
montem  iesus :  et  ibi  sedebat  cum 
discipulis  suis.  Erat  autem  proximum 
pascha  :  dies  festus  iudeorum.  Cum 
subleuasset  ergo  oculos  iesus,  &  vidisset 
quia  multitude  maxima  venit  ad  eum  : 
dixit  ad  philippum.  Vnde  ememus 
panes,  vt  manducent  hi  ?  Hoc  autem 
dicebat  tentans  eum  :  ipse  enim  sciebat 
quid  esset  facturus.  Respondit  ei 
philippus.  Ducentorum  denariorum 
panes  non  sufficiunt  eis :  vt  vnusquis- 
que  modicum  quid  accipiat.  Dixit  ei 
vnus  ex  discipulis  eius  :  andreas  frater 
simonis  petri.  Est  puer  vnus  hie  qui 
habet  quinque  panes  ordeaceos :  et 
duos  pisces.  Sed  hec  quid  sunt  inter 
tantos?  Dixit  ergo  iesus.  Facite 
homines  discumbere.  Erat  autem 


1549 

was  borne  by  promes :  which  thinges 
are  spoken  by  an  allegory.  For  these 
are  two  testamentes,  the  one  from 
the  mount  Sina,  which  gendreth  vnto 
bondage,  whiche  is  Agar  :  For 
mount  Sina  is  Agar  in  Arabia,  and 
bordreth  vpon  the  citie,  whiche 
is  nowe  called  lerusalem,  and  is  in 
bondage  wyth  her  chyldren.  But 
lerusalem,  whiche  is  aboue,  is  free, 
whyche  is  the  mother  of  vs  all.  For  it 
is  written  :  Reioyce  thou  barren  that 
beareste  no  children :  breake  furth  and 
crye,  thou  that  trauaylest  not.  For  the 
desolate  hath  many  moe  chyldren  then 
she  whyche  hath  an  husbande.  Brethren 
we  are  after  Isaac  the  chyldren 
of  promes.  But  as  then  he  that  was 
borne  after  the  fleshe,  persecuted  him 
that  was  borne  after  the  spirite  :  Eue 
so  is  it  nowe.  Neuerthelesse,  what 
sayeth  the  scripture?  put  awaye  the 
bondewoman  and  her  sonne.  For  the 
sonne  of  the  bondewoman  shall  not  be 
heyre  wyth  the  sonneof  the  free  woman: 
So  then  brethren,  we  are  not  chyldren 
of  the  bondewoman,  but  of  the  free- 
woman. 

The  Gospell. 

[        lohn  vi. 

IESUS  departed  ouer  the seaofGalile, 
which  is  the  sea  of  Tiberias,  and  a 
greate  multytudefolowed  hym,  because 
they  sawe  hys  myracles  whyche  he  dyd 
on  them  that  were  dyseased.  And 
Iesus  wente  vp  into  a  mountayne,  and 
there  he  sate  with  hys  Disciples.  And 
Easter,  a  feaste  of  the  lewes,  was 
nye.  When  Iesus  then  lift  vp  hys 
eyes  and  sawe  a  great  company  come 
vntohym,hesayeth  vnto  Philip:  whence 
shall  we  bye  breade  that  these  may 
eate  ?  This  he  sayd  to  proue  hym  : 
for  he  him  selfe  knewe  what  he  woulde 
dooe.  Philip  aunswered  hym  :  two 
hundreth  peniwoorth  of  bread,  are  not 
sufficyente  for  them,  that  euery  manne 
may  take  a  litle.  One  of  hys 
dyscyples  (Andrewe,  Simon  Peters 
brother)  sayeth  vnto  him  :  There  is  a 
lad  here  which  hath  fiue  barley  loaues 
and  two  fyshes  :  but  what  are 

they  amonge  so  manye  ?  And  Iesus 
sayd  :  make  the  people  sit  downe. 
There  was  muche  grasse  in  the 
place  :  so  the  menne  sate  downe,  in 
number  about  fiue  thousand.  And 


FOURTH  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


309 


1552 

was  borne  by  promes  :  which  thinges 
are  spoken  by  an  allegory.  For  these 
are  two  testamentes,  the  one  fro 
the  mounte  Sina,  whych  gendreth  vnto 
bondage,  which  is  Agar :  For 
mount  Sina  is  Agar  in  Arabia,  and 
bordreth  vpon  the  citie,  which 
is  nowe  called  lerusale,  &  is  in 
bondage  with  her  children.  But 
Jerusalem,  which  is  aboue,  is  free, 
which  is  the  mother  of  vs  al.  For  it 
is  written  :  Reioyce  thou  barren  that 
bearest  no  childre :  breake  forth  & 
crie,  thou  that  trauaylest  not :  For  the 
desolate  hath  many  moe  childre  the 
she  which  hath  an  husband.  Brethre, 
we  are  after  Isaac  the  children 
of  promes.  But  as  then  he  that  was 
borne  after  the  fleshe,  persecuted  him 
that  was  borne  after  the  spirite :  Euen 
so  is  it  now.  Neuertheles,  what 
sayeth  the  scripture  ?  put  away  the 
bondwoman  &  her  sonne.  For  the 
sonne  of  the  bondwoma  shal  not  be 
heyre  with  the  sonne  of  the  frewoman : 
So  then  brethren,  we  are  not  chyldren 
of  the  bondwoman,  but  of  the  fre 
woman. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[        lohn.  vi. 

IESUS  departed  ouer  the  seaof  Galile, 
whych  is  the  sea  of  Tiberias,  &  a 
greatemultytudefolowedhym,  because 
they  sawe  his  miracles  which  he  dyd 
on  them  that  were  dyseased.  And 
lesus  wet  vp  into  a  moutain,  and 
there  he  sate  with  his  disciples.  And 
Easter,  a  feast  of  the  I  ewes,  was 
nye.  Whe  lesus  then  lift  vp  his 
eyes  &  sawe  a  great  company  come 
vnto  him,  he  said  vnto  Philip  :  whence 
shal  we  bye  bread  that  these  maye 
eate?  Thishesaydetoprouehym: 

for  he  himselfe  knew  what  he  would 
do.  Philip  answered  him  :  two 
hundreth  penyworth  of  bread,  are  not 
sufficient  for  them,  that  euery  man 
may  take  a  lyttle.  One  of  his 
disciples  (Andrew,  Simo  Peters 
brother)  sayth  vnto  him  :  There  is  a 
lad  which  hath  flue  barly  loues, 

and  two  fyshes  :   but  what  are 

they  amonge  so  many?  And  lesus 
sayd  :  make  the  people  syt  downe. 
There  was  much  grasse  in  the 
place  :  so  the  men  sat  down,  in 
numbre  about  fyue  thousande  :  And 


1661 

was  by  promise.    Which  things 

are  an  allegory  :  for  these 

are  the  two  Covenants  ;  the  one  from 
the  mount  Sinai,  which  gendereth  to 
bondage,  which  is  Agar.  For  this 
Agar  is  mount  Sinai  in  Arabia, 

and  answereth 

to  Jerusalem  which  now  is,  and  is  in 
bondage  with  her  children.  But 
Jerusalem  which  is  above  is  free  ; 
which  is  the  mother  of  vs  all.  For  it 
is  written,  Reioyce  thou  barren  that 
bearest  not  :  break  forth,  and 
cry,  thou  that  travailest  not :  for  the 
desolate  hath  many  moe  children  then 
she  which  hath  an  husband.  Now  we, 
brethren,  as  Isaac  was,  are  the  children 
of  promise.  But  as  then,  he  that  was 
born  after  the  flesh  persecuted  him 
that  was  born  after  the  spirit,  even 
so  it  is-  now.  Nevertheless,  what 
saith  the  Scripture?  cast  out  the 
bondwoman,  and  her  son,  for  the 
son  of  the  bondwoman  shall  not  be 
heir  with  the  son  of  the  freewoman. 
So  then  bretheren,  we  are  not  children 
of  the  bondwoman,  but  of  the  free 
• 

The  Gospel. 

[S»:  lohn.  6.  *L 

lesus  went  over  the  sea  of  Galilee, 
which  is  the  sea  of  Tiberias.  And  a 
great  multitude  followed  him  because 
they  saw  his  miracles  which  he  did 
on  them  that  were  diseased.  And 
Jesus  went  vp  into  a  mountain,  and 
there  he  sate  with  his  disciples.  And 
the  Passeover,  a  feast  of  the  lewes,  was 
nigh.  When  lesus  then  lift  vp  his 
Eyes,  and  saw  a  great  company  come 
vnto  him,  he  saith  vnto  Philip,  Whence 
shall  we  buy  bread,  that  these  may 
eat  ?  (And  this  he  said  to  prove  him  : 
for  he  himselfe  knew  what  he  would 
do)  Philip  answered  him,  Two 
hundred  penyworth  of  bread,  is  not 
sufficient  for  them,  that  every  one  of 
them  may  take  a  little.  One  of  his 
disciples,  Andrew,  Simon  Peters 
brother  saith  vnto  him.  There  is  a 
lad  here,  which  hath  five  barly  loaves, 
and  two  small  fishes  :  but  what  are 
they  among  so  many?  And  lesus 
said,  make  the  men  sit  down. 
Now  there  was  much  grass  in  the 
place.  So  the  men  sate  down,  in 
number  about  five  thousand.  And 


3io 


FIFTH  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


SOURCES 

fenum  multum  in  loco.  Discubuerunt 
ergo  viri :  numero  quasi  quinque  milia. 
Accepit  ergo  iesus  panes:  et  cum 
gratias  egisset,  distribuit  discumben- 
tibus.  Similiter  et  ex  piscibus :  quantum 
volebant.  Vt  autem  impleti  sunt : 
dixit  discipulis  suis.  Colligite  que 
superauerunt  fragmenta  :  ne  pereant. 
Collegerunt  ergo,  et  impleuerunt  duo- 
decim  cophinos  fragmentorum  ex 
quinque  panibus  ordeaceis  :  que  super- 
fuerunt  his  qui  manducauerant.  Illi 
ergo  homines  cum  vidissent  quod  iesus 
fecerat  signum  :  dicebant.  Quia  hie 
est  vere  propheta  qui  venturus  est  in 
mundum. 

C  Dominica  in  passione  domini. 

Ad  missam.    Officium. 
[Ps.  xlii  (xliii)  1,  2a  :  3] 


Oratio. 

Qvesumus  omnipotens  deus  familiam 
tuam  propitius  respice,  vt,  te  largiente, 
regatur  in  corpore :  et  te  seruante 
custodiatur  in  mente.  Per  dominum. 
(Greg.  47) 

Ad  hebreos. 

[ix.  D 

FBatres.  Xps  assistens  pontifex 
futurorum  bonorum  per  amplius  et 
perfectius  tabernaculum  non  manu- 


1549 

Iesus  toke  the  bread,  and  when  he 
had  geuen  thankes,  he  gaue  to 
the  Disciples,  and  the  Disciples  to 
them  that  were  set  downe  &  lykewise 
of  the  fishes  asmuch  as  they  would. 
When  they  had  eaten  inough  he  sayd 
vnto  his  Disciples  :  gather  vp  the 
broken  meate  whiche  remayneth,  that 
nothyng  be  loste.  And  they 
gathered  it  together  and  fylled 
.xii,  baskettes  with  the  broken  meate  of 
the  fyue  barley  loaues  :  which  broken 
meate  remained  vnto  the  that  had 
eaten.  Then  those  menne  (when  they 
had  scene  the  miracle  that  Iesus  did) 
said :  this  is  of  a  trueth  the  same 
Prophete  that  shoulde  come  into  the 
worlde. 

THE  .v.  SONDAY. 

[Deus  in  nomine  tuo.  psal  liiii. 

SAUC  me  (O  God)  for  thy  names 
sake  :  and  auenge  me  in  thy  strength. 

Heare  my  prayer  (O  God  :)  and 
harken  vnto  the  woordes  of  my  mouth. 

For  straungers  are  risen  vp  agaynst 
me  :  and  Tirauntes  (which  haue  not 
god  before  theyr  eyes)  seke  after  my 
soule. 

Beholde,  God  is  my  helper  :  the 
Lorde  is  with  them  that  vpholde  my 
soule. 

He  shall  rewarde  euill  vnto  mine 
enemies  :  destroye  thou  them  in  thy 
trueth. 

An  offeryng  of  a  free  hearte  wyll  I 
geue  thee,  and  prayse  thy  name  (O 
Lorde  :)  because  it  is  so  coumfortable. 

For  he  hath  delyuered  me  oute  of 
all  my  trouble  :  and  myne  eye  hath 
scene  his  desyre  vpon  myne  enemies. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning.&c. 

The  Collect. 

WE  beseche  thee  almightie  God, 
mercifullye  to  looke  vpon  thy  people  : 
that  by  thy  great  goodnesse,  they  may 
be  gouerned  and  preserued  euermore 
bothe  in  body  and  soule :  through 
Iesus  Christ  our  Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[Hebrues.  ix. 

CHriste  beyng  an  hye  priest 

of  good  thynges  to  come,  came  by  a 
greater  and  a  more  perfecte  tabernacle, 


FIFTH  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


1552 

lesus  tooke  the  bread,  and  when  he 
had  geuen  thankes,  he  gaue  to 
the  Disciples,  &  the  Disciples  to 
the  that  were  set  downe,  and  lykewyse 
of  the  fyshes  asmuche  as  they  woulde. 
When  they  had  eaten  ynough,  he  sayd 
vnto  hys  disciples :  gather  vp  the 
broken  meate  whyche  remayneth,  that 
nothyng  be  loste.  And  they 
gathered  it  together  &  fylled 
.xii.  baskets  with  the  broke  meat  of 
the  fyue  barley  loues  :  which  broken 
meat  remayned  vnto  the  that  had 
eaten.  Then  those  men  (when  they 
had  sene  the  miracle  that  lesus  dyd) 
sayde :  thys  is  of  a  trueth  the  same 
Prophete  that  should  come  into  the 
worlde. 

THE  FIFTH  SUNDAIE. 


1661 

lesus  took  the  loaves,  and  when  he 
had  given  thanks,  he  distributed  to 
the  disciples,  and  the  disciples  to 
them  that  were  set  down,  and  likewise 
of  the  fishes  as  much  as  they  would. 
When  they  were  filled,  he  said 
vnto  his  disciples,  Gather  vp  the 
Fragments  that  remain,  that 
nothing  be  lost.  Therefore  they 
gathered  them  together,  and  filled 
twelve  baskets  with  the  fragments  of 
the  five  barley  loaves,  which  remained 
over  and  above  vnto  them  that  had 
eaten.  Then  those  men  when  they 
had  seen  the  miracle  that  lesus  did, 
said,  This  is  of  a  truth  that 
Prophet  that  should  come  into  the 
World. 

THE  FIFTH  SUNDAY  SIN  LENT 


C  The  Collect. 

WE  beseche  thee  almightye  God, 
mercyfully  to  loke  vpon  thy  people  : 
that  by  thy  great  goodnesse,  they  may 
be  gouerned  and  preserued  euermore 
both  in  body  and  soule :  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lorde. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Hebr.  ix 

Cnrist  being  an  hie  Priest  of 

good  thinges    to    come,   came  by   a 
greater  &  a  more  perfecte  tabernacle, 


The  Collect. 

We  beseech  thee,  Almighty  God 
mercifully  to  looke  vpon  thy  people, 
that  by  thy  great  goodness,  they  may 
be  governed  and  preserved  evermore, 
both  in  body  and  soul,  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord.  6Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Heb.  9.  ni. 

Christ  being  come  an  high  Priest 
of  good  things  to  come,  by  a 

greater,  and    more  perfect  tabernacle, 


3I2 


FIFTH  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


SOURCES 

factum,  id  est  non  huius  creationis : 
neque  per  sanguinem  hircorum  aut 
vitulorum :  sed  per  proprium  sanguinem 
introiuit  semel  in  sancta  eterna  redemp- 
tione  inuenta.  Si  enim  sanguis  hir 
corum  aut  taurorum,  et  ciiiis  vitule 
aspersus  inquinatos  sauctificat  ad 
emundationem  carnis,  quanto  magis 
sanguis  xpi  qui  per  spiritum  sanctum 
semetipsum  obtulit  immaculatum  deo, 
emundabit  conscientiam  nostram  ab 
operibus  mortuis,  ad  seruiendum  deo 
viuenti?  Et  ideo  noui  testamenti 
mediator  est :  vt  morte  intercedente 
in  redemptionem  earum  preuarica- 
tionum :  que  erant  sub  priori  testa- 
mento,  repromissionem  accipiant  qui 
vocati  sunt  eterne  hereditatis.  In  xpo 
iesu  :  domino  nostro. 

Euangelium.     Secundum  lohannem. 

[viij.  F 

IN  illo  tempore.  Dicebat  iesus 
turbis  iudeorum  :  et  principibus  sacer- 
dotum.  Quis  ex  vobis  arguet  me  de 
peccato  ?  Si  veritatem  dico :  quare  non 
creditis  michi  ?  Qui  ex  deo  est :  verba 
dei  audit.  Propter  ea  vos  non  auditis  : 
qui  ex  deo  non  estis.  Responderunt 
igitur  iudei :  et  dixerunt  ei.  Nonne 
bene  dicimus  nos  :  quia  samaritanus  es 
tu,  et  demonium  habes?  Respondit 
iesus.  Ego  demonium  non  habeo :  sed 
honorific©  patrem  meum,  et  vos  in- 
horastis  me.  Ego  autem  non  quero 
gloriam  meam :  est  qui  querat  et  iudicet. 
Amen  amen  dico  vobis :  si  quis  ser- 
monem  meum  seruauerit,,  mortem  non 
videbit  in  eternum.  Dixerunt  ergo 
iudei.  Nunc  cognouimus  quia  de 
monium  habes.  Abraham  mortuus  est 
et  prophete :  et  tu  dicis,  si  quis  ser- 
monem  meum  seruauerit :  mortem  non 
gustabit  in  eternum.  Numquid  tu 
maior  es  patre  nostro  abraham,  qui 
mortuus  est :  &  prophete  mortui  sunt? 
Quern  teipsum  facis  ?  Respondit  iesus. 
Si  ego  glorifico  meipsum  :  gloria  mea 
nichil  est.  Est  pater  meus  qui  glori- 
ficat  me:  quern  vos  dicitis  quia  deus 
vester  est,  et  non  cognouistis  eum. 
Ego  autem  noui  eum.  Et  si  dixero 
quia  nescio  eum :  ero  similis  vobis 
mendax.  Sed  scio  eum  :  et  sermonem 


1549 

not  made  with  handes,  that  is  to  saye, 
not  of  thys  buildyng,  neyther  by  the 
bloud  of  goates  and  calues,  but  by  his 
owne  bloude  he  entred  in  once  into  the 
holye  place,  and  founde  eternall 
redempcion.  For  if  the  bloud 

of  oxen  and  of  goates,  and  the  ashes 
of  a  young  kowe,  when  it  was 
sprynkled,  purifyeth  the  vncleane  as 
touchyng  the  purifying  of  the  fleshe : 
howe  much  more  shall  the  bloud  of 
Christ  (which  through  the  eternall 
spirite,  offered  himselfe  withoute  spot 
to  god)  purge  your  consciece  from 
dead  workes,  for  to  serue  the  liuing 
god?  And  for  thys  cause  is  he  the 
mediator  of  the  new  testament :  that 
through  death,  which  chaunsed  for 
the  redempcion  of  those  transgressios 
that  were  vnder  the  first  testament, 
they  which  are  called,  might  receyue 
the  promes  of  eternall  enheritaunce. 

The  Gospell. 

[    lohn.  viii. 

Wniche  of  you  can  rebuke 
me  of  synne  ?  If  I  saye  the  truethe, 
why  doe  ye  not  beleue  me  ?  He  that 
is  of  God  heareth  Gods  woordes  :  ye 
therfore  heare  them  not,  because  ye 
are  not  of  God.  Then  aunswered  the 
lewes,  and  sayde  vnto  hym :  saye  wee 
not  well,  that  thou  art  a  Samaritan  and 
hast  the  deuyll?  Iesus  answered  :  I 
haue  not  the  deuill,  but  I  honour  my 
father,  and  ye  haue  dishonored  me. 
I  seeke  not  mine  owne  praise : 
there  is  one  that  seeketh  and  iudgeth. 
Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you  :  if  a 
manne  kepe  my  saying,  he  shall  neuer 
see  deathe.  Then  said  the  lewes  vnto 
him :  now  kno we'we  that  thou  haste  the 
deuill.  Abraham  is  dead,  and  the 
Prophetes,  and  thou  sayest :  If  a  man 
kepe  my  saying,  he  shall  neuer  tast 
of  death.  Art  thou  greater  then  our 
father  Abraham,  whiche  is  dead?  And 
the  Prophetes  are  dead  :  whome 
makest  thou  thy  selfe?  Iesus  aun 
swered  :  if  I  honor  my  selfe,  myne 
honor  is  nothyng :  It  is  my  father 
that  honoreth  me,  which  ye  say 
is  your  God,  and  yet  ye  haue  not 
knowen  him :  but  I  know  him.  And  if 
I  say  I  knowe  him  not,  I  shal- 

be  a  Iyer,  like  vnto  you.  But  I  knowe 
him  and  kepe  his  saying.  Your  father 


FIFTH  SUNDAY  IN  LENT 


313 


1552 

not  made  with  hades,  that  is  to  say, 
not  of  this  building,  neyther  by  the 
bloud  of  goates  &  calues,  but  by  his 
owne  bloud  he  entred  in  once  into  the 
holy  place,  &  foud  eternal 
redepti5.  For  yf  the  bloud 

of  oxen  &  of  goates,  and  the  ashes 
of  a  yonge  kowe,  whe  it  was 
sprinkled,  purifieth  the  vnclene  as 
touching  the  purifying  of  the  fleshe  : 
how  much  more  shal  the  bloud  of 
Christ  (which  through  the  eternal 
spirite,  offred  himself  without  spot 
to  god)  purge  your  conscience  fro 
dead  workes,  for  to  serue  the  liuing 
God?  And  for  this  cause  he  is  the 
mediator  of  the  new  testamet :  that 
through  death,  which  chaunsed  for 
the  redemption  of  those  transgressions, 
that  were  vnder  the  first  testamet, 
they  which  are  called,  might  receyue 
the  promes  of  eternal  inheritaunce. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[    loh.  viii. 

WHych  of  you  can  rebuke 
me  of  synne  ?  Yf  I  .say  the  truth, 
why  do  ye  not  beleue  me?  He  that 
is  of  God,  heareth  Gods  wordes :  ye 
therefore  heare  the  not,  because  ye 
are  not  of  God.  Then  aunswered  the 
lewes,  &  sayde  vnto  him  :  say  we 
not  well  that  thou  art  a  Samaritane,  & 
hast  the  deuil?  lesus  answered:  I 
haue  not  the  deuil,  but  I  honour  my 
father,  &  ye  have  dishonoured  me. 
I  seke  not  myne  owne  prayse  : 
there  is  one  that  seketh  &  iudgeth. 
Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you  :  yf  a 
man  kepe  my  saying,  he  shal  neuer 
see  death.  The  sayd  the  lewes  vnto 
hym ;  now  knowe  we  that  thou  hast  the 
deuil.  Abraham  is  dead,  &  the 
Prophetes,  and  thou  sayest :  Yf  a  man 
kepe  my  sayinge,  he  shall  neuer  tast 
of  death.  Art  thou  greater  then  oure 
father  Abraha,  which  is  dead  ?  And 
the  Prophetes  are  dead  :  wh5 
makest  thou  thy  self?  lesus  an 
swered  :  Yf  I  honor  my  selfe,  myne 
honor  is  nothinge  :  it  is  my  father 
that  honoreth  me,  which  you  saye 
is  youre  God,  &  yet  ye  haue  not 
knowenhim :  but  I  knowe  hym :  And  yf 
I  saye  I  know  him  not,  I  shall 

be  a  Iyer,  lyke  vnto  you.     But  I  know 
him  &  kepe  his  saying.    Your  father 


1661 

not  made  with  hands,  that  is  to  say, 
not  of  this  building  :  Neither  by  the 
blood  of  goats,  and  calves  :  but  by  his 
own  blood  he  entred  in  once  into  the 
holy  place,  having  obteined  eternall 
Redemption  for  vs.  For  if  the  blood 
of  Bulls,  and  of  goats,  and  the  Ashes 
of  an  heifer 

sprinkling  the  vnclean,  sanctifieth 
to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh  : 
How  much  more  shall  the  blood  of 
Christ,  who  through  the  eternall 
spirit,  offered  himselfe  without  spot 
to  God,  purge  your  Conscience  from 
dead  works  to  serve  the  living 
God?  And  for  this  cause  he  is  the 
Mediatour  of  the  new  testament,  that 
by  means  of  Death  for 

the  redemption  of  the  transgressions 
that  were  vnder  the  first  testament, 
they  which  are  called  might  receive 
the  promise  of  eternall  inheritance. 

The  Gospel 

[S*:  John.  8.  *46. 

(lesus  said)  Which  of  you  convinceth 
me  of  sin?  And  if  I  say  the  truth, 
why  do  ye  not  believe  me  ?  He  that 
is  of  God,  heareth  Gods  words  :  ye 
therefore  hear  them  not,  because  ye 
are  not  of  God.  Then  answered  the 
lews,  and  said  vnto  him,  say  we 
not  well  that  thou  art  a  Samaritan,  and 
hast  a  devil  ?  lesus  answered,  I 
have  not  a  devil :  but  I  honour  my 
father,  and  ye  do  dishonour  me. 
And  I  seeke  not  myne  own  glory, 
there  is  one  that  seeketh,  and  iudgeth. 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  vnto  you,  If  a 
man  keep  my  sayeing,  he  shall  never 
see  death.  Then  said  the  lews  vnto 
him,  Now  we  know  that  thou  hast  a 
devil.  Abraham  is  dead,  and  the 
Prophets  ;  and  thou  saiest,  If  a  man 
keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never  tast 
of  death.  Art  thou  greater  then  our 
Father  Abraham,  which  is  dead  ?  and 
the  Prophets  are  dead  :  whom 
makest  thou  thy  selfe?  lesus  an 
swered,  If  J  honour  my  selfe,  my 
honour  is  nothing:  it  is  my  Father 
that  honoureth  me,  of  whom  ye  say, 
thatheisyourGod.  Yet  ye  have  not 
known  him,  but  I  know  him  :  and  if 
I  should  say,  I  know  him  not,  I  shall 
be  a  liar  like  vnto  you  ;  but  I  know 
him,  and  keep  his  saying.  Your  Father 


314 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

eius  seruo.  Abraham  pater  vester 
exsultauit  vt  videret  diem  meum  : 
vidit  et  gauisus  est.  Dixerunt  ergo 
iudei  ad  eum.  Quinquaginta  annos 
nondum  habes :  et  abraham  vidisti  ? 
Dixit  eis  iesus.  Amen  amen  dico 
vobis :  antequam  abraham  fieret  ego 
sum.  Tulerunt  ergo  lapides  :  vt 
iacerent  in  eum.  Iesus  autem  ab- 
scondit  se :  et  exiuit  de  templo. 

C  Dominica  in  ramis  palmarum. 

Officium. 
[Ps.  xxi  (xxii)  19,  21  :  1] 


Oratio. 

OMnipotens  sempiterne  deus  qui 
humano  generi  ad  imitandum  humi- 
litatis  exemplum  saluatorem  nostrum 
carnem  sumere,  et  crucem  subire  fecisti: 
concede  propitius  vt  &  patientie  ipsius 
habere  documenta,  et  resurrectionis 
consortia  mereamur.  Per  eundem 
do.  (Greg.  51) 


1549 

Abraham  was  glad  to  see  my  day :  and 
he  saw  it  and  reioysed.  Then  sayd 
the  lewes  vnto  hym.  Thou  arte  not  yet 
.1.  yere  olde,  and  hast  thou  seene 
Abraham?  Iesus  sayde  vnto  them: 
Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you  :  ere 
Abraham  was  borne,  I  am.  Then 
tooke  they  vp  stones  to  cast  at  hym  : 
but  Iesus  hid  himselfe,  and  went  out 
of  the  temple. 

C  THE  SONDAYE  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER. 
[Exaudi  deus  deprecatione  psal.  1x5. 

HEare  my  crying,  O  GOD  :  geue 
eare  vnto  my  prayer. 

From  the  endes  of  the  earth  will  I 
call  vnto  thee  :  when  my  heart  is  in 
heauines. 

Oh  set  me  vp  vpon  the  rocke  that 
is  higher  then  I  :  for  thou  haste  bene 
my  hope,  and  a  strong  tower  for  me 
agaynst  the  enemie. 

I  will  dwell  in  thy  tabernacle  for 
euer  :  and  my  trust  shal  be  vnder  the 
couering  of  thy  winges. 

For  thou,  O  Lorde,  hast  heard  my 
desyres  :  and  hast  geuen  an  heritage 
vnto  those  that  feare  thy  name. 

Thou  shalt  graunte  the  king  a  long 
life  :  that  his  yeares  may  endure 
throughout  all  generacions. 

He  shall  dwell  before  God  for  euer  : 
O  prepare  thy  louing  mercy  and  fayth- 
fulnes,  that  they  may  preserue  him. 

So  will  I  alway  sing  prayse  vnto 
thy  name  :  that  I  may  dayly  perfourme 
my  vowes. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  gost. 

As  it  was  in  the  begynnyng,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  world  without  ende. 
Amen. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightye  and    euerlastyng    God, 
whiche  of  thy  tendre  loue  toward  man 
,  haste  sent  our  sauiour 

Iesus  Christe  to  take  vpon  him  oure 
fleshe,  and  to  suffre  deathe  vpon  the 
crosse,  that  all  mankinde  should  folow 
the  exaumple  of  his  great  humilitie : 
mercifully  graunt  that  we  both 

folowe  the  exaumple  of  his  pacience, 
and  be  made  partakers  of  his 

resurreccion  :  through  the  same  Iesus 
Christe  our  Lorde. 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


1552 

Abraha  was  glad  to  see  my  day:  & 
he  saw  it  and  reioysed.  The  sayd 
the  lewes  vnto  him.  Thou  art  not  yet 
fyftie  yere  old,  and  hast  thou  sene 
Abraham  ?  lesus  sayd  vnto  them  : 
Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you :  ere 
Abraham  was  borne,  I  am.  The 
toke  they  vp  stones  to  caste  at  him  : 
but  lesus  hyd  hym  self,  and  went  out 
of  the  temple. 

C  THE  SUNDAIE  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER. 


i66i 

Abraham  rejoyced  to  see  my  day :  and 
he  saw  it,  and  was  glad.  Then  said 
the  Jews  vnto  him,  Thou  art  not  yet 
fifty  years  old,  and  hast  thou  seen 
Abraham?  lesus  said  vnto  them, 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  vnto  you,  Before 
Abraham  was,  I  am.  Then 

took  they  vp  stones  to  cast  at  him  : 
but  lesus  hid  himselfe,  and  went  out 
of  the  Temple. 

THE  SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER. 


C  The  Collect. 

ALmighty    &     euerlastinge     God, 
which  of  thy  tendre  loue  towardes  man 
,  hast  sent  our  sauiour 

lesus  Christ  to  take  vpon  hym  cure 
fleshe,  &  to  suffre  death  vpon  the 
crosse,  that  all  mankynd  should  folowe 
the  example  of  hys  great  humilitie  : 
mercyfully  graunt,  that  we  both 

folow  the  example  of  hys  pacience, 
and  be  made  partakers  of  hys 

resurrection  :  throughe  the  same  lesus 
Christ  our  Lorde. 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God, 
who8  of  thy  tender  love  towards  man 
kind,  hast  sent  thy  Son,  our  Saviour 
lesus  Christ  to  take  vpon  him  our 
flesh,  and  to  suffer  death  vpon  the 
Cross,  that  all  mankind  should  follow 
the  example  of  his  great  humility  : 
mercifully  grant,  that  we  may  both 
follow  the  example  of  his  patience, 
and  also  be  made  partakers  of  his 
resurrection,  Through  the  same  lesus 
Christ  our  Lord.  °Amen. 


3i6 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

Ad  philippenses. 

[ii.  A 
FRatres.    Hoc  sentite  in  vobis  :  quod 

et  in  christo  iesu.  Qui  cum  in 
forma  dei  esset,  non  rapinam  arbi- 
tratus  est  esse  se  equalem  deo  sed 
semetipsum  exinaniuit  formam  serui 
accipiens,  in  similitudinem  hominum 
factus :  et  habitu  inuentus  vt  homo. 
Humiliauit  semetipsum :  factus  obediens 
vsque  ad  mortem,  mortem  autem  crucis. 
Propter  quod  et  deus  exaltauit  ilium  : 
et  donauit  illi  nomen  quod  est  super 
omne  nomen :  vt  in  nomine  iesu 
omne  genu  flectatur,  celestium  ter- 
restrium  et  infernorum.  Et  omnis 
lingua  confiteatur  quia  dominus  noster 
iesus  xps  :  in  gloria  est  dei  patris. 

C  Passio  domini  nostri  iesu  xpi :  secundum 
Matheum. 

[xxvj.  A 

IN  illo  tempore.  Dixit  iesus  dis- 
cipulis  suis.  Scitis  quia  post  biduum 
pascha  net :  et  films  hominis  tradetur. 
Tune  congregati  sunt  principes  sacer- 
dotum  et  seniores  populi,  in  atrium 
principis  sacerdotum  qui  dicebatur 
caiphas :  &  consilium  fecerunt  vt 
iesum  dolo  tenerent,  et  occiderent. 
Dicebant  autem.  Non  in  die  festo. 
Ne  forte  tumultus  fieret  in  populo. 
Cum  autem  esset  iesus  in  bethania,  in 
domo  simonis  leprosi :  accessit  ad  eum 
mulier  habens  alabastrum  vnguenti 
preciosi :  et  effudit  super  caput  ipsius 
recumbentis.  Videntes  autem  dis- 
cipuli :  indignati  sunt  dicentes.  Vt  quid 
perditio  hec?  Potuit  enimistud  venun- 
dari  multo  :  et  dari  pauperibus.  Sciens 
autem  iesus :  ait  illis.  Quid  molesti 
estis  huic  mulieri  ?  Opus  enim  bonum 
operata  est  in  me.  Nam  semper 
pauperes  habetis  vobiscum  :  me  autem 
non  semper  habebitis.  Mittens  enim 
hec  vnguentum  hoc  in  corpus  meum  : 
ad  sepeliendum  me  fecit.  Amen  dico 
vobis :  vbicunque  predicatum  fuerit 


1549 
The  Epistle. 

[Philip,  ii. 

LEtte  the  samemynde  bee  in  you,  that 
was  also  in  Christe  Iesu:  whiche  when 
he  was  in  the  shape  of  God,  thought 
it  no  robbery  to  be  equal  with 
god,  neuertheles  he  made  himselfe  of 
no  reputacio,  takyng  on  him  the 
shape  of  a  seruaunte,  &  beecame 
lyke  vnto  men,  and  was  founde  in 
his  apparell,  as  a  man.  He  humbled 
himselfe,  and  became  obediet  vnto  the 
death,  euen  the  death  of  the  crosse. 
Wherefore  God  hath  also  exalted 
hym  on  hygh,  and  geuen  him  a  name 
whiche  is  aboue  all  names :  that  in 
the  name  of  Iesus,  eueryknee  shoulde 
bowe,  both  of  thinges  in  heauen,  and 
thynges  in  yearth,  and  thynges  vnder 
the  yearth,  and  that  all  tonges 
shoulde  confesse,  that  Iesus  Christe  is 
the  Lorde,  vnto  the  prayse  of  God  the 
father. 

The  Gospell. 

[Math,  xxvi 

ANd  it  came  to  passe,  when  Iesus 
had  fynyshed  all  these  sayinges,  he 
sayd  vnto  his  disciples  :  ye  know  that 
after  two  dayes  shall  be  Easter,  and 
the  sonne  of  man  shalbe  deliuered 
ouer  to  be  crucifyed.  Then  assembled 
together  the  chiefe  Priestes,  &  the 
Scrybes,  and  the  Elders  of  the  people, 
vnto  the  palace  of  the  hygh  prieste 
(which  was  called  Caiphas)  and  held 
a  counsell  that  they  might  take  Iesus 
by  subteltie,  &  kil  hym.  But  they 
said  :  not  on  the  holy  day,  lest  there 
be  an  vproare  among  the  people. 
When  Iesus  was  in  Bethanie  in  the 
house  of  Symon  the  Leper,  there  came 
vnto  him  a  woman  hauyng  an  Ala 
baster  boxe  of  precious  oyntment.  and 
powred  it  on  his  head,  as  he  sate  at 
the  bourde.  But  when  his  disciples 
saw  it,  they  had  indignacyon,  saying : 
wherto  serueth  this  wast?  Thys  oyn- 
ment  myght  haue  bene  well  solde,  and 
geuen  to  the  poore.  When  Iesus 
vnderstode  that,  he  sayd  vnto  them : 
why  trouble  ye  the  woman?  for  she 
hath  wroughte  a  good  woorke  vpon 
me.  For  ye  haue  the  poore  alwayes 
with  you  :  but  me  shall  ye  not  haue 
alwaies.  And  in  that  she  hath  cast 
this  oyntment  on  my  body,  she  dyd  it 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


7552 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Philip,  ii 

LEtte  the  same  mynde  be  in  you,  that 
was  also  in  Christ  lesu  :  which  whe 
he  was  in  the  shape  of  God,  thought 
it  no  robbery  to  be  equall  wyth 
god  :  neuertheles  he  made  hym  selfe  of 
no  reputacio,  takinge  on  him  the 
shape  of  a  seruaut,  &  became 
lyke  vnto  me,  &  was  found  in 
his  apparel,  as  a  ma.  He  humbled 
himself,  &  became  obediet  to  the 
death,  cue  the  death  of  the  crosse. 
Wherefore  God  hath  also  exalted 
hym  on  high,  and  geue  him  a  name 
which  is  aboue  all  names :  that  in 
the  name  of  lesus,  euery  knee  should 
bowe,  bothe  of  thinges  in  heaue,  & 
thinges  in  earth,  &  thinges  vnder 
the  earth,  &  that  al  tongues 
should  confesse,  that  lesus  Christ  is 
the  Lord,  vnto  the  praise  of  God  the 
father. 

C  The  Gospel. 

[Ma.  xxvi 

ANd  it  came  to  passe,  whe  lesus 
had  finished  al  these  sayinges,  he 
sayde  vnto  hys  Disciples :  ye  know  that 
after  two  daies  shalbe  Easter,  & 
the  sone  of  ma  shalbe  deliuered 
ouer  to  be  crucified.  The  assebled 
together  the  chiefe  Priestes,  &  the 
Scribes,  and  the  Elders  of  the  people, 
vnto  the  palace  of  the  hyghe  Priest 
(whiche  was  called  Cayphas)  and  helde 
a  counsell  that  they  mighte  take  lesus 
by  subteltie,  &  kil  him.  But  they 
said  :  not  on  the  holy  day,  lest  there 
be  an  vproare  amog  the  people.- 
-Whe  lesus  was  in  Bethanie  in  the 
house  of  Symon  the  Leper,  there  came 
vnto  him  a  woma  hauing  an  Ala 
baster  boxe  of  precious  oyntmet,  & 
powred  it  on  his  head,  as  he  sate  at 
the  boarde.  But  whe  his  disciples 
sawe  it,  they  had  indignation,  saying  : 
wherto  serueth  this  wast  ?  Thys  oynt- 
ment  might  haue  bene  wel  solde,  & 
geuen  to  the  poore.  When  lesus 
vnderstode  that,  he  sayd  vnto  them  : 
why  trouble  ye  the  woman?  for  she 
hath  wroughte  a  good  worke  vpon 
me.  For  ye  haue  the  poore  allwayes 
wyth  you,  but  me  ye  shal  not  haue 
alwayes.  And  in  that  she  hath  cast 
this  ointment  on  my  body,  she  dyd  it 


1661 

The  Epistle. 

[Phil.  2.  *5. 

Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which 

was  also  in  Christ  lesus  :  Who 
being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought 
it    not    robbery    to    be    equall    with 
God  :    But  made    himselfe    of 

no  reputation,  and  took  vpon  him  the 
form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the 
likeness  of  men.  And  being  found  in 
fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled 
himselfe,  and  became  obedient  vnto 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross. 
Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly 
exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name, 
which  is  above  every  name :  That  at 
the  name  of  lesus  every  knee  should 
bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and 

things  in  earth,  and  things  vnder 
the  earth :  And  that  every  tongue 
should  confess  that  lesus  Christ  is 
Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the 
Father. 


The  Gospel. 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

hoc  euangelium  in  toto  mundo :  dicetur 
&  quod  hec  fecit  in  memoriam  eius. 
Tune  abijt  vnus  de  duodecim  qui  dice- 
batur  iudas  scarioth,  ad  principes  sacer- 
dotum  :  &  ait  illis.  Quid  vultis  michi 
dare :  &  ego  vobis  eum  tradam  ?  At 
illi  constituerunt  ei  triginta  argenteos : 
et  exinde  querebat  opportunitatem  vt 
eum  traderet.  Prima  autem  die  azy- 
morum  accesserunt  discipuli  ad  iesum : 
dicentes.  Vbi  vis  paremus  tibi  come- 
dere  pascha?  At  iesus  dixit.  Ite  in 
ciuitatem  ad  quemdam  &  dicite  ei. 
Magister  dicit.  Tempus  meum  prope 
est :  apud  te  facio  pascha  cum  discipulis 
meis.  Et  fecerunt  discipuli  sicut  con- 
stituit  illis  iesus :  et  parauerunt  pascha. 
Vespere  autem  facto,  discumbebat  cum 
duodecim  discipulis  suis  :  &  edentibus 
illis  dixit.  Amen  dico  vobis:  quia 
vnus  vestrum  me  traditurus  est.  Et 
contristati  valde :  ceperunt  singuli 
dicere.  Nunquid  ego  sum  domine? 
At  ipse  respondens  ait.  Qui  intingit 
mecum  manum  in  parapside :  hie  me 
tradet.  Filius  quidem  hominis  vadit 
sicut  scriptum  est  de  illo.  Ve  autem 
homini  illi  per  quern  films  hominis 
tradetur.  Bonum  erat  ei  si  natus  non 
fuisset  homo  ille.  Respondens  autem 
iudas  qui  tradidit  eum :  dixit.  Nun- 
quid  ego  sum  rabbi?  Ait  illi.  Tu 
dixisti.  Cenantibus  autem  eis  accepit 
iesus  panem  :  et  benedixit  ac  fregit, 
deditque  discipulis  suis  :  &  ait. 
Accipite  et  comedite :  hoc  est  corpus 
meum.  Et  accipiens  calicem  gratias 
egit:  et  dedit  illis  dicens.  Bibite  ex 
hoc  omnes.  Hie  est  enim  sanguis 
meus  noui  testamenti :  qui  pro  multis 
effundetur  in  remissionem  peccatorum : 
Dico  autem  vobis :  non  bibam  amodo 
de  hoc  genimine  vitis,  vsque  in  diem 
ilium  cum  illud  bibam  vobiscum  nouum 
in  regno  patris  mei.  Et  hymno  dicto  : 
exierunt  in  montem  oliueti.  Tune 
dixit  illis  iesus.  Omnes  vos  scandalum 
patiemini  in  me  :  in  ista  nocte.  Scrip- 


1549 

to  bury  me.  Verely  I  say  vnto 
you  :  whersoeuer  this  gospell  shalbe 
preached  in  al  the  worlde,  there  shall 
also  this  that  she  hath  done,  be  tolde 
for  a  memoriall  of  her.  Then  one  of 
the  .xii.  (which  was  called  Iudas 
Iscarioth)  wente  vnto  the  chiefe 
priestes,  &  said  vnto  the  :  what  wil  ye 
geue  me,  and  I  will  deliuer  him  vnto 
you?  And  they  appoynted  vnto  hym 
.xxx.  pieces  of  syluer.  And  from  that 
tyme  furth,  he  sought  oportunitie  to 
betray  hym  :  The  first  day  of  swete 
bread,  the  disciples  came  to  Iesus, 
saying  vnto  him  :  where  wilte  thou 
that  we  prepare  for  thee,  to  eate  the 
Passeouer.  And  he  sayde  :  Goe  into 
the  citie  to  suche  a  man,  and  saye  vnto 
hym,  the  Maister  sayeth  :  my  time  is 
at  hand,  I  wil  kepe  my  Easter  by  thee 
with  my  disciples.  And  the  disciples 
dyd  as  Iesus  had  appoynted  the,  and 
they  made  readye  the  Passeouer. 
When  the  euen  was  come,  he  sate 
downe  with  the  .xii.  And  as  they  dyd 
eate,  he  said  :  Verely  I  say  vnto  you, 
that  one  of  you  shal  betray  me.  And 
they  were  exceading  sorowful,  and 
began  euery  one  of  them  to  say  vnto 
him :  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  He  answered 
and  sayd  :  he  that  dyppeth  his  hande 
with  me  in  the  dyshe,  the  same  shal 
betray  me.  The  sone  of  ma  truely 
goeth,  as  it  is  written  of  him  :  but  woe 
vnto  that  man  by  whome  the  sonne  of 
man  is  betrayed.  It  had  bene  good 
for  that  man,  if  he  had  not  beene 
borne.  Then  Iudas,  whiche  betrayed 
hym,  aunswered  and  sayd.  Maister 
is  it  I  ?  He  sayde  vnto  hym :  thou  hast 
sayd.  When  they  were  eatyng, 

Iesus  tooke  bread,  and  when  he  had 
geuen  thankes,  he  brake  it  and  gaue 
it  to  the  Disciples,  and  sayde  :  Take, 
eate,  this  is  my  bodye.  And  he  toke 
the  cup,  and  thanked,  and  gaue  it 
them,  saying :  drinke  ye  all  of  this. 
For  this  is  my  bloude  (whiche  is  of  the 
newe  testamet)  that  is  shed  for  many, 
for  the  remission  of  sinnes.  But  I 
saye  vnto  you  :  I  will  not  drinke 
hencefoorth  of  this  fruite  of  the  vyne 
tree,  vntill  that  day  when  I  shall 
drinke  it  newe  with  you,  in  my  fathers 
kingdome.  And  when  they  had  sayd 
grace,  they  went  out  vnto  mount 
Oliuete.  Then  saith  Iesus  vnto  them: 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 

1552  1661 

to    bury    me.      Verely   I    saye   vnto 

you  :  wheresoeuer  thys  gospell  shalbe 

preached  in  al  the  world,  there  shal 

also  this  be  tolde  that  she  hath  done 

for  a  memoriall  of  her.     Then  one  of 

the.  xii.   (whyche  was    called   ludas 

Iscarioth)      went     vnto      the      chief 

Priestes,  &  said  vnto  the  :  what  wil  ye 

geue  me,  and  I  wil  deliuer  him  vnto 

you  ?     And  they  apointed  vnto  him 

,xxx.  pieces  of  syluer.     And  fro  that 

tyme  forth  he  sought  oportunitie  to 

betraye  hym.    The  firste  daye  of  swete 

bread,  the  disciples  came  to   lesus, 

saying       to    him :    where  wilt    thou 

that  we  prepare  for  the,  to  eate  the 

Passeouer  ?    And  he  sayd  :  Goe  into 

the  cytie  to  suche  a  man,  &  say  vnto 

him  :  the  Mayster  sayth  :  my  time  is 

at  hande,  I  wyll  kepe  my  Easter  by  thee 

wyth  my  disciples.     And  the  disciples 

dyd  as  lesus  had  appoynted  the,  & 

they    made    ready    the     Passeouer. 

Whe  the   euen   was    come,  he    sate 

downe  wyth  the.  xii.    And  as  they  dyd 

eate,  he  sayd :  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you, 

that  one  of  you  shal  betray  me.     And 

they     were     exceding     sorowful,     & 

began  euery  one  of  them  to  say  vnto 

him  :    Lorde,  is  it  I  ?     He  answered 

&  sayd  :    he  that  dyppeth  his  hand 

with  me  in  the  dishe,  the  same  shall 

betraye  me.     The  s5ne  of  ma  truely 

goeth,  as  it  is  writte  of  him  :  but  woe 

vnto  that  man  by  who  the  sonne  of 

man  is  betrayed.     It  had  been  good 

for  that  man,   yf   he  had  not  been 

borne.     The   ludas,  which   betrayed  ' 

him,   answered    and    said :    Maister, 

is  it  I  ?     He  said  vnto  him  :  thou  hast 

said.      And    whe    they  were    eating, 

lesus   toke  bread,   &   when   he    had 

geuen  thankes,  he  brake  it  &  gaue 

it   to   the    disciples,   &    said:    Take, 

eate,  this  is  my  body.     And  he  toke 

the   cup,  and  thanked,   and  gaue   it 

them,  saying :   drinke  ye  all  of  thys. 

For  thys  is  my  bloude  (whych  is  of  the 

newe  Testament)  that  is  shed  for  many, 

for  the  remission  of  synnes.     But   I 

say    vnto    you  :    I    wyll    not    drinke 

henceforth  of  thys  fruyte  of  the  vyne 

tree,   vntyll  that  day   when    I    shall 

drinke  it  newe  wyth  you,  in  my  fathers 

kyngdom.    And  whan  they  had  sayd 

grace,    they    went    out    vnto    mount 

Oliuete.     Then  sayd  lesus  vnto  the : 


319 


320 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

turn  est  enim  Percutiam  pastorem : 
&  dispergentur  oues  gregis.  Postquam 
autem  resurrexero :  precedam  vos  in 
galileam.  Respondens  autem  petrus  : 
ait  illi.  Et  si  omnes  scandalizati 
fuerint  in  te :  ego  nunquam  scanda- 
lizabor.  Ait  illi  iesus.  Amen  dico 
tibi :  quia  in  hac  nocte  antequam 
gallus  cantet,  ter  me  negabis.  Ait  illi 
petrus.  Etiam  si  oportuerit  me  mori 
tecum :  non  te  negabo.  Similiter  & 
omnes  discipuli  dixerunt.  Tune  venit 
iesus  cum  illis  in  villain  que  dicitur 
gethsemani :  &  dixit  discipulis  suis. 
Sedete  hie :  donee  vadam  illuc,  & 
orem.  Et  assumpto  petro  et  duobus 
filijs  zebedei :  cepit  contristari  et 
mestus  esse.  Tune  ait  illis.  Tristis 
est  anima  mea  vsque  ad  mortem. 
Sustinete  hie  :  et  vigilate  mecum.  Et 
progressus  pusillum  procidit  in  faciem 
suam  orans  et  dicens.  Pater  mi,  si 
possibile  est :  transeat  a  me  calix  iste. 
Verumtamen  non  sicut  ego  volo :  sed 
sicut  tu  vis.  Et  venit  ad  discipulos 
suos:  et  inuenit  eos  dormientes.  Et 
dixit  petro  sic.  Non  potuistis  vna 
hora  vigilare  mecum?  Vigilate  et 
orate  :  vt  non  intretis  in  tentationem. 
Spiritus  quidem  promptus  est :  caro 
autem  infirma.  Iterum  secundo  abijt 
et  orauit :  dicens.  Pater  mi,  si  non 
potest  hie  calix  transire  nisi  bibam 
ilium :  fiat  voluntas  tua.  Et  venit 
iterum,  et  inuenit  eos  dormientes : 
erant  enim  oculi  eorum  grauati.  Et 
relictis  illis  iterum  abijt :  et  orauit 
tertio,  eundem  sermonem  dicens. 
Tune  venit  ad  discipulos  suos  :  &  dixit 
illis.  Dormite  iam :  &  requiescite. 
Ecce  appropinquauit  hora  :  et  filius 
hominis  tradetur  in  manus  peccatorum. 
Surgite,  eamus:  ecce  appropinquabit 
qui  me  tradet.  Adhuc  eo  loquente, 
ecce  iudas  vnus  de  duodecim  venit :  et 
cum  eo  turba  multa  cum  gladijs  et 
fustibus,  missi  a  principibus  sacer- 
dotum  et  senioribus  populi.  Qui 


1549 

all  ye  shalbe  offended  because  of  me 
this  night.  For  it  is  written  :  I  will 
smite  the  shepehearde,  and  the  shepe 
of  the  flocke  shalbe  scatered  abroade : 
but  after  I  am  risen  againe,  I  wil 
goe  before  you  into  Galile.  Peter 
aunswered,  and  sayd  vnto  him :  though 
all  men  be  offended  because  of  thee, 
yet  wyll  not  I  be  offended.  Iesus 
sayde  vnto  hym  :  verely  I  saye  vnto 
thee,  that  in  this  same  night  before 
the  cocke  krowe,  thou  shalt  denye  me 
thryse.  Peter  sayde  vnto  him  :  yea, 
though  I  should  dye  with  thee,  yet 
wil  I  not  denye  thee  :  lykewise  also 
sayd  all  the  disciples.  Then  came  Iesus 
with  them  vnto  a  farme  place  (whiche 
is  called  Gethsemane)  and  sayde 
vnto  the  disciples  :  Sit  ye  here,  whyle 
I  goe  and  pray  yonder.  And  he  tooke 
with  him  Peter  and  the  twoo  sonnes  of 
Zebede,  and  began  to  waxe  sorowfull 
and  heauy.  Then  sayd  Iesus  vnto 
them  :  My  soule  is  heauy  euen  vnto 
the  death  :  Tarye  ye  here  and  watche 
with  me.  And  he  went  a  litle  farther 
&  fell  flat  on  his  face  and  prayed, 
saying  :  O  my  father,  if  it  be  possible, 
let  this  cup  passe  from  me :  neuer- 
thelesse,  not  as  I  wil  but  as  thou 
wilt :  And  he  came  vnto  the  disciples, 
and  founde  them  aslepe,and  sayde  vnto 
Peter :  what,  coulde  ye  not  watche  with 
me  one  houre  ?  watche  and  praye  that 
ye  enter  not  into  temptacion :  the 
spirite  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is 
weake.  He  went  awaye  once  againe 
and  prayed,  saying.  O  my  father,  if 
this  cup  may  not  passe  away  from  me 
except  I  drincke  of  it,  thy  wil  be  ful 
filled  :  and  he  came  and  found  them 
aslepe  againe :  for  theyr  eyes  were 
heauie.  And  he  lefte  them,  and  wente 
againe  and  prayed  the  thirde  time, 
saying  thesame  wordes.  Then 
commeth  he  to  his  disciples,  and  sayeth 
vnto  them :  Slepe  on  nowe  and  take 
your  rest.  Behold,  the  houre  is  at 
hande,  and  the  sonne  of  man  is  be 
trayed  intothehandesofsynners.  Ryse, 
let  vs  be  going:  behold,  he  is  at  hand 
that  doeth  betray  me.  Whyle  he  yet 
spake ;  loe,  Iudas  one  of  the  number 
of  the  .xii.  came,  and  with  hym  a  greate 
multitude  with  sweordes  &  staues, 
sent  from  the  chiefe  priestes  and  elders 
of  the  people.  But  he  that  betrayed 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER  321 

1552  1661 

al  ye  shall  be  offended  because  of  me 
thys  night.  For  it  is  written  :  I  wyll 
smyte  the  shepehearde,  and  the  shepe 
of  theflocke  shall  be  scattered  abroade: 
but  after  I  am  risen  agayne,  I  wyl 
go  before  you  into  Galile.  Peter 
aunswered,  and  sayd  vnto  hym :  though 
all  men  be  offended  because  of  thee, 
yet  wyll  I  not  bee  offended.  lesus 
sayde  vnto  hym  :  verely  I  say  vnto 
thee,  that  in  thys  same  nyght,  before 
the  cocke  krowe,  thou  shalte  denye  me 
thryse.  Peter  sayde  vnto  hym  :  yea, 
thoughe  I  shoulde  dye  wyth  thee,  yet 
wyll  I  not  denye  thee  :  lykewyse  also 
saydealthe  disciples.  Then  came  lesus 
with  the  vnto  a  farme  (place  which 
is  called  Gethsemane)  &  said 
vnto  the  disciples  :  Sit  ye  here  whyle 
I  goe  &  pray  yonder.  And  he  toke 
with  him  Peter  and  the  two  sonnes  of 
Zebede,  and  began  to  waxe  sorowfull 
&  heauy.  Then  sayde  lesus  vnto 
them  :  My  soule  is  heauy  euen  vnto 
the  death.  Tarie  ye  here  and  watche 
with  me.  And  he  went  a  little  farther 
&  fel  flat  on  hys  face,  and  prayed, 
sayinge :  O  my  father,  yf  it  be  possible, 
let  thys  cup  passe  from  me  :  neuer- 
thelesse,  not  as  I  wyl,  but  as  thou 
wylt :  And  he  came  vnto  the  disciples, 
&  found  them  aslepe,  and  said  vnto 
Peter  :  what,  could  ye  not  watche  with 
me  one  houre  ?  watch  £  pray  that 
ye  entre  not  into  temptacion :  the 
spirite  is  wyllinge,  but  the  fleshe  is 
weake.  He  went  awaye  once  agayne 
&  prayed,  saying  :  O  my  father,  yf 
this  cup  maye  not  passe  away  fro  me 
except  I  drinke  of  it,  thy  wyl  be  ful- 
fylled  :  and  he  came  &  found  them 
aslepe  agayne,  for  theyr  eyes  were 
heauy.  And  he  left  the,  &  went 
againe  and  prayed  the  thirde  time, 
sayinge  the  same  wordes.  Then 
cometh  he  to  his  disciples,  and  sayd 
vnto  them :  Slepe  on  now  &  take 
your  rest.  Beholde,  the  houre  is  at 
hand,  &  the  sonne  of  man  is  be 
trayed  into  the  hades  of  synners.  Ryse, 
let  vs  be  going  :  behold,  be  is  at  hand 
that  doeth  betraye  me.  Whyle  he  yet 
spake  :  loe,  ludas  one  of  the  numbre 
of  the  .xii.  came,  &  with  him  a  great 
multitude  with  swoerdes  &  staues, 
sent  from  the  chief  Priestes  &  Elders 
of  the  people.  But  he  that  betrayed 


322 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

autem  tradidit  eum  :  dedit  illis  signum 
dicens.  Quemcumque  osculatus  fuero, 
ipse  est :  tenete  eum.  Et  confestim 
accedens  ad  iesum  :  dixit.  Aue  rabbi. 
Et  osculatus  est  eum.  Dixit  illi  iesus. 
Amice  :  ad  quid  venisti  ?  Tune  acces- 
serunt,  et  manus  iniecerunt  in  iesum  : 
&  tenuerunt  eum.  Et  ecce  vnus  ex  his 
qui  erant  cum  iesu  extendens  manum, 
exemit  gladium  suum :  et  percutiens 
seruum  principis  sacerdotum,  ampu- 
tauit  auriculam  eius  dextram.  Tune  ait 
illi  iesus.  Conuerte  gladium  tuum 
in  locum  suum.  Omnes  enim  qui 
acceperint  gladium :  gladio  peribunt. 
An  putas  quia  non  possum  rogare 
patrem  meum :  et  exhibebit  michi 
modo  plusquam  duodecim  legiones 
angelorum  ?  Quomodo  ergo  imple- 
buntur  scripture  quia  sic  oportet  fieri  ? 
In  ilia  hora  dixit  iesus  turbis.  Tan- 
quam  ad  latronem  existis  cum  gladijs 
et  fustibus,  comprehendere  me.  Quo- 
tidie  apud  vos  sedebam  docens  in 
templo :  &  non  me  tenuistis.  Hoc 
autem  totum  factum  est :  vt  adimple- 
rentur  scripture  prophetarum.  Tune 
discipuli  omnes  relicto  eo :  fugerunt. 
At  illi  tenentes  iesum,  duxerunt  ad 
caipham  principem  sacerdotum  :  vbi 
scribe  &  seniores  conuenerant.  Petrus 
autem  sequebatur  eum  a  longe  :  vsque 
in  atrium  principis  sacerdotum.  Et 
ingressus  intro  sedebat  cum  ministris  : 
vt  videret  finem.  Principes  autem 
sacerdotum  &  omne  concilium  quere- 
bant  falsum  testimonium  contra  iesum : 
vt  eum  morti  traderent:  Et  non  in- 
uenerunt :  cum  multi  falsi  testes 
accessissent.  Nouissime  autem  vene- 
ruiit  duo  falsi  testes:  et  dixerunt. 
Hie  dixit.  Possum  destruere  templum 
dei :  et  post  triduum  reedificare  illud. 
Et  surgens  princeps  sacerdotum  :  ait 
illi.  Nichil  respondens  ad  ea  que  isti 
aduersum  te  testificantur?  Iesus  autem 
tacebat.  Et  princeps  sacerdotum  ait 
illi.  Adiuro  te  per  deum  viuum  :  vt 


1549 

him,  gaue  them  a  token,  saying : 
whomsoeuer  I  kysse,  thesame  is  he, 
holde  him  fast.  And  forthwith  he  came 
to  Iesus,  and  sayde :  haile  Maister, 
and  kyssed  him.  And  Iesus  sayd  vnto 
him :  frende,  wherfore  art  thou  come  ? 
Then  came  they  and  layd  handes  on 
Iesus,  &  toke  him.  And  behold, 
one  of  them  which  were  with  Iesus, 
stretched  out  his  hand  and  drewe  his 
sweorde,  and  stroke  a  seruaunte  of  the 
hye  priest,  &  smote  of  his  eare.  Then 
sayde  Iesus  vnto  him :  put  vp  thy 
sweorde  into  the  sheath,  for  al  they 
that  take  the  sweord,  shal  perish 
with  the  sweord.  Thinkest  thou  that 
I  cannot  nowe  pray  to  my  father,  & 
he  shal  geue  me,  euen  now,  more 
then  .xii.  legions  of  Angels?  But  how 
then  shal  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled? 
For  thus  must  it  be.  In  that  same 
houre  saide  Iesus  to  the  multitude:  ye 
be  come  out  as  it  were  to  a  thefe  with 
sweordes  and  staues,  for  to  take  me. 
I  sate  daily  with  you  teaching  in  the 
temple,  £  ye  tooke  me  not.  But  all 
this  is  done  that  the  scriptures  of  the 
Prophetes  might  be  fulfilled.  Then  al 
the  disciples  forsoke  him  and  fled.  And 
they  toke  Iesus  and  led  him  to  Cayphas 
the  hye  priest,  where  the  Scribes  and 
the  Elders  were  assembled.  But 
Peter  folowed  him  a  farre  of  vnto  the 
hie  priestes  palace  :  and  went  in,  and 
sate  with  the  seruauntes  to  see  the 
end.  The  chiefe  priestes  £  the  elders 
£  al  the  counsel,  sought  false  witnes 
against  Iesus  (for  to  put  him  to 
death)  but  found  none  :  yea,  when 
many  false  witnesses  came,  yet  found 
they  none.  At  the  last  came  .ii.  false 
witnesses,  &  sayd :  This  felowe  sayd : 
I  am  able  to  destroye  the  temple  of 
God,  and  to  build  it  againe  in  .iii. 
dayes.  And  the  chiefe  priest  arose, 
£  said  vnto  him  :  aswerest  thou 
nothing?  Why  doe  these  beare 
witnes  against  thee  ?  But  Iesus  helde 
his  peace.  And  the  chiefe  priest 
aunswered  £  said  vnto  him.  I  charge 
thee  by  the  liuing  God,  that  thou  tell 
vs,  whether  thou  be  Christ  the  sonne 
of  God.  Iesus  said  vnto  him  :  thou 
hast  said.  Neuertheles  I  say  vnto 
you :  hereafter  shal  ye  see  the  sonne 
of  man  sitting  on  the  ryght  hande  of 
power,  and  cumming  in  the  cloudes  of 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER  323 

1661 


hym,  gaue  them  a  token,  saying : 
whomsoeuer  I  kysse,  the  same  is  he, 
hold  him  fast.  And  furthwith  he  came 
to  lesus,  and  sayde  :  hayle  Maister, 
&  kissed  hym.  And  lesus  sayd  vnto 
him:  frend,  wherefore  art  thou  come? 
Then  came  they  and  layd  handes  on 
lesus,  and  toke  him.  And  behold, 
one  of  them  which  were  with  lesus, 
stretched  out  his  hand  and  drewe  his 
swoerd,  &  stroke  a  seruaunt  of  the 
hye  Priest,  &  smote  of  his  eare.  Then 
sayde  lesus  vnto  hym  :  putte  vp  thy 
swoerde  into  the  sheath,  for  all  they 
that  take  the  swoerde,  shall  perishe 
with  the  swoerd.  Thinkest  thou  that 
I  can  not  nowe  pray  to  my  father,  & 
he  shall  geue  me,  euen  nowe,  more 
then.  xii.  legions  of  Angels  ?  But  howe 
then  shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled  ? 
For  thus  muste  it  be.  In  that  same 
houre  said  lesus  to  the  multitude  :  ye 
be  come  out  as  it  were  to  a  thefe  with 
swoerdes  and  staues,  for  to  take  me. 
I  sate  daily  with  you  teaching  in  the 
temple,  and  ye  toke  me  not.  But  al 
this  is  done  that  the  scriptures  of  the 
prophetes  might  be  fulfilled.  Then  al 
the  disciples  forsoke  him  &  fled.  And 
they  toke  lesus  &  led  him  to  Caiphas 
the  hye  prest,  where  the  Scribes  and 
the  Elders  were  assembled.  But 
Peter  folowed  him  afarre  of  vnto  the 
hye  priestes  palace  :  &  went  in,  & 
sate  with  the  seruautes  to  see  the 
end.  The  chiefe  prestes  &  elders 
&  all  the  counsel,  sought  false  witnes 
againste  lesus  (for  to  put  hym  to 
death)  but  founde  none :  yea,  when 
many  false  witnesses  came,  yet  found 
thei  none.  At  the  last  came  two  false 
witnesses,  &  sayd  :  Thys  felowe  said  : 
I  am  able  to  destroy  the  temple  of 
God,  &  to  builde  it  agayne  in  thre 
dayes.  And  the  chiefe  priest  arose, 
&  said  vnto  him :  aunswerest  thou 
nothing  ?  Why  do  these  beare 
witnes  agaynst  thee  ?  But  lesus  helde 
his  peace.  And  the  chiefe  Priest 
answered  &  sayd  vnto  him.  I  charge 
thee  by  the  lyuing  god,  that  thou  tel 
vs,  whether  thou  be  Christ  the  sone 
of  god.  lesus  said  vnto  hi :  thou 
hast  said :  Neuertheles  I  say  vnto 
you  :  herafter  shall  ye  see  the  sonne 
of  man  sitting  on  the  ryght  hand  of 
power,  &  comming  in  the  cloudes  of 


324 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

dicas  nobis  si  tu  es  xps  films  dei  viui. 
Dixit  illi  iesus.  Tu  dixisti.  Verum- 
tarneii  dico  vobis :  amodo  videbitis 
nliuin  hominis  sedentem  a  dextris 
virtutis  dei :  et  venientem  in  nubibus 
celi.  Tune  princeps  sacerdotum  scidit 
vestimenta  sua,  dicens.  Blasphemauit : 
quid  adhuc  egemus  testibus?  Ecce 
nunc  audistis  blasphemiam.  Quid 
vobis  videtur  ?  At  illi  respondentes  : 
dixerunt.  Reus  est  mortis.  Tune 
expuerunt  in  faciem  eius  :  et  colaphis 
eum  cederunt.  Alij  autem  palmas  in 
faciem  eius  dederunt :  dicentes.  Pro- 
phetiza  nobis  xpe  :  quis  est  qui  te  per- 
cussit?  Petrus  autem  sedebat  foris  in 
atrio.  Et  accessit  ad  eum  vna  ancilla 
dicens.  Et  tu  cum  iesu  galileo  eras. 
At  ille  negauit  coram  omnibus :  dicens. 
Nescio  quid  dicis.  Exeunte  autem 
illo  ianuam,  vidit  eum  alia  ancilla  : 
et  ait  his  qui  erant  ibi.  Et  hie 
cum  iesu  nazareno  erat.  Et  iterum 
negauit  cum  iuramento :  quia  non 
uoui  hominem.  Et  post  pusillum 
accesserunt  qui  ibi  stabant :  &  dixe 
runt  petro.  Vere  et  tu  ex  illis  es  : 
nam  &  loquela  tua  manifestum  te 
facit.  Tune  cepit  detestari  &  iurare  : 
quia  non  nouisset  hominem.  Et  con 
tinue  gallus  cantauit.  Et  recordatus 
est  petrus  verbi  iesu  quod  dixerat: 
priusquam  gallus  cantet,  ter  me  ne- 
gabis.  Et  egressus  foras :  fleuit  amare. 
Mane  autem  facto  consilium  inierunt 
omnes  principes  sacerdotum  et  seniores 
populi  aduersus  iesum  :  vt  eum  morti 
traderent  Et  vinctum  adduxerunt 
eum  :  et  tradiderunt  pontio  pilato  pre- 
sidi.  Tune  videns  iudas  qui  eum  tra- 
didit  quod  damnatus  esset :  penitentia 
ductus  retulit  triginta  argenteos  princi- 
pibus  sacerdotum  et  senioribus  populi : 
dicens.  Peccaui,  tradens  sanguinem 
iustum.  At  illi  dixerunt.  Quid  ad 
nos?  Tuvideris.  Etproiectisargenteis 
in  templo,  recessit :  et  abiens  laqueo 
se  suspendit.  Principes  autem  sacer 
dotum  acceptis  argenteis  :  dixerunt. 
Non  licet  eos  mittere  in  corbanam  : 
quia  pretium  sanguinis  est.  Consilio 
autem  inito  emerunt  ex  eis  agrum 
figuli :  in  sepulturam  peregrinorum. 
Propter  hoc  vocatus  est  ager  ille  achel- 
demach,  hoc  est  ager  sanguinis  :  vsque 
in  hodiernum  diem.  Tune  impletum 
est  quod  dictum  est  per  hieremiam 


1549 

the  skie.  Then  the  hie  priest  ret 
his  clothes,  saying  :  he  hath  spoken 
blasphemie,  what  nede  we  of  any 
moe  witnesses  ?  Behold,  nowe  ye 
haue  heard  his  blasphemie  :  what 
thinke  ye  ?  They  aunswered  and 
said  :  he  is  worthy  to  dye.  Then 
did  they  spit  in  his  face,  & 
buffetted  him  with  fistes.  And  other 
smote  him  on  the  face  with  the  palme 
of  their  handes,  saying  :  tel  vs  thou 
Christ,  who  is  he  that  smote  thee? 
Peter  sate  without  in  the  palace,  and  a 
damosell  came  to  him,  saying  :  thou 
also  waste  with  Iesus  of  Galilee  :  but 
he  denied  before  the  al,  saying :  I 
wot  not  what  thou  saiest.  When  he 
was  gone  out  into  the  porche,  another 
weche  saw  him,  £  said  vnto  them 
that  were  there  :  This  felow  was  also 
with  Iesus  of  Nazareth.  And  again 
he  denied  with  an  othe,  saying :  I  doe 
not  knowe  the  man.  And  after  a  while 
came  vnto  him  they  that  stode  by, 
and  said  vnto  Peter  :  surely  thou  art 
cue  one  of  them,  for  thy  speche 
bewrayeth  thee.  Then  began  he  to 
curse  and  to  sweare,  that  he  knewe  not 
the  man.  And  immediatlye  the  cocke 
krewe.  And  Peter  remembred  the 
woorde  of  Iesu,  which  sayd  vnto  hym: 
before  the  cocke  krowe,  thou  shalt 
denye  me  thrise  :  and  he  went  out  & 
wept  bitterly.  When  [  Mat.  xxVii. 
the  mornyng  was  come,  all  the 
chiefe  Priestes,  and  the  Elders  of  the 
people  held  a  counsel  against  Iesus, 
to  put  him  to  death,  &  brought 
him  bound 

and  deliuered  him  vnto  Poncius  Pilate 
the  deputie.  Then  Iudas  (which  had 
betrayed  hym)  seeing  that  he 
was  condemned,  repented  himselfe, 
and  brought  againe  the  .xxx.  plates 
of  siluer  to  the  chiefe  priestes  and 
elders,  saying  :  I  haue  sinned, 

betraying  the  innocent  bloud. 
And  they  sayde  :  what  is  that  to  vs  ? 
See  thou  to  that.  And  he  caste  downe 
the  siluer  plates  in  the  temple,  and 
departed,  &  wet  and  hanged  hym- 
selfe.  And  the  chiefe  priestes  toke  the 
siluer  plates,  and  sayd  :  It  is  not 
lawfull  for  to  put  them  into  the 
treasure,  because  it  is  the  price  of 
bloude.  And  they  tooke  counsel,  & 
bought  with  them  a  potters  fielde  to 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


325 


1552 

the  skye.  Then  the  hye  Priest  rent 
hys  clothes,  saying:  he  hath  spoke 
blasphemie,  what  nede  we  of  any 
more  wytnesses  ?  Behold,  now  ye 
haue  heard  his  blasphemie  :  what 
thinke  ye  ?  They  aunswered  and 
sayd :  he  is  worthie  to  dye.  Then 
dyd  they  spyt  in  hys  face,  and 
buffeted  hym  with  fistes.  And  other 
smote  hym  on  the  face  with  the  palme 
of  their  hades,  saying :  tell  vs  thou 
Christ,  who  is  he  that  smote  thee  ? 
Peter  sate  without  in  the  court,  and  a 
damosell  came  to  hym,  sayinge  :  thou 
also  waste  wyth  lesus  of  Galile  :  bat 
he  denyed  before  them  all,  sayinge  :  I 
wote  not  what  thou  sayest.  When  he 
was  gone  out  into  the  porche,  another 
wenche  sawe  hym,  &  said  vnto  them 
that  were  there :  This  felow  was  also 
with  lesus  of  Nazareth.  And  agayne 
he  denied  with  an  othe,  saying  :  I  do 
not  know  the  man.  After  a  while 

came  vnto  hym  they  that  stode  by, 
&  sayde  vnto  Peter  :  surely  thou  arte 
euen  one  of  them,  for  thy  speache 
bewrayeth  thee.  Then  began  he  to 
curse  and  to  sweare,  that  he  knew  not 
the  man.  And  immediatly  the  cocke 
krewe :  And  Peter  remebred  the 
worde  of  lesu,  which  sayd  vnto  hym  : 
before  the  cocke  krowe,  thou  shall 
denye  me  thryse  :  and  he  went  out  £ 
wepte  bitterly.  When 
the  morning  was  come,  all  the 
chiefe  Priestes,  and  Elders  of  the 
people  helde  a  counsell  agaynste  lesus, 
to  put  him  to  death,  &  brought 
him  bound, 

and  deliuered  hym  vnto  Poncius  Pilate 
the  deputie.  Then  ludas  (which  had 
betrayed  him)  seyng  that  he 
was  condemned,  repented  hym  selfe, 
and  brought  agayne  the  .xxx.  plates 
of  syluer  to  the  chiefe  Priestes  & 
elders,  saying  :  I  haue  synned, 

betrayingetheinnocentebloude. 
And  they  sayd :  what  is  that  to  vs  ? 
See  thou  to  that.  And  he  cast  downe 
the  syluer  plates  in  the  temple,  and 
departed,  and  went  and  hanged  hym 
selfe.  And  the  chiefe  Priestes  toke  the 
syluer  plates,  &  sayd :  It  is  not 
lawefull  for  to  put  them  into  the 
treasure,  because  it  is  the  pryce  of 
bloude.  And  they  toke  counsell,  and 
boughte  with  the  a  potters  fielcle  to 


1661 


When  [S*:  Mat.  27.  1. 
the  morning  was  come,  all  the 
chief  Priests,  and  Elders  of  the 
people,  took  counsel  against  Jesus 
to  put  him  to  death.  And  when  they 
had  bound  him,  they  led  him  away, 
and  delivered  him  to  Pontius  Pilate 
the  governour.  Then  Judas,  who  had 
betrayed  him,  when  he  saw  that  he 
was  condemned  repented  himselfe, 
and  brought  again  the  thirty  peeces 
of  silver  to  the  chief  Priests  and 
Elders,  saying,  I  have  sinned,  in  that 
I  have  betraied  the  innocent  blood. 
And  they  said,  What  is  that  to  vs? 
see  thou  to  that.  And  he  cast  down 
the  peeces  of  silver  in  the  temple,  and 
departed,  and  went  and  hanged  him 
selfe.  And  the  chief  Priests  took  the 
silver  peeces,  and  said,  Jt  is  not 
lawfull  for  to  put  them  into  the 
treasury,  because  it  is  the  price  of 
blood.  And  they  took  counsel,  and 
bought  with  them  the  potters  field  to 


326 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

prophetam  :  dicentem.  Et  acceperunt 
triginta  argenteos,  pretium  appreciati 
quern  appretiauerunt  a  filijs  israel :  et 
dederunt  eos  in  agrum  figuli,  sicut 
constituit  michi  dominus.  lesus  autem 
stetit  ante  presidem  :  et  interrogauit 
eum  preses  dicens.  Tu  es  rex  iude- 
orum?  Dixit  illi  iesus.  Tu  dicis. 
Et  cum  accusaretur  a  principibus 
sacerdotum  et  senioribus :  nichil  re- 
spondit.  Tune  dixit  illi  pilatus.  Non 
audis  quanta  aduersum  te  dicunt 
testimonia?  Et  non  respondit  ei  ad 
vllum  verbum  :  ita  vt  miraretur  preses 
vehementer.  Per  diem  autem  solen- 
nem  :  consueuerat  preses  dimittere 
populo  vnum  vinctum,  quern  voluissent. 
Habebat  autem  tune  vnum  vinctum 
insignem,  qui  dicebatur  barabbas  :  qui 
propter  homicidium  missus  fuerat  in 
carcerem.  Congregatis  ergo  illis  : 
lixit  pilatus.  Quern  vultis  dimittam 
robis  barabbam,  an  iesum  qui  dicitur 
xps  ?  Sciebat  enim  quod  per  inuidiam 
tradidissent  eum.  Sedente  autem  illo 
pro  tribunal! :  misit  ad  eum  vxor  eius 
dicens.  Nichil  tibi  &  iusto  illi.  Multa 
enim  passa  sum  hodie  per  visum  prop 
ter  eum.  Principes  autem  sacerdotum 
et  seniores  persuaserunt  populis  vt 
peterent  barabbam :  iesum  vero  per- 
derent.  Respondens  autem  preses  :  ait 
illis.  Quern  vultis  vobis  de  duobus 
dimitti  ?  At  illi  .dixerunt.  Barabbam. 
Dicit  illis  pilatus.  Quid  igitur  faciam 
de  iesu  qui  dicitur  xps?  Dicunt 
omnes.  Crucifigatur.  Ait  illis  preses. 
Quid  enim  mali  fecit?  At  illi  magis 
clamabant  dicentes.  Crucifigatur. 
Videns  autem  pilatus  quia  nichil  pro- 
ficeret.,  sed  magis  tumultus  fieret : 
accepta  aqua  lauit  manus  suas  coram 
populo,  dicens.  Innocens  ego  sum  a 
sanguine  iusti  huius :  vos  videritis. 
Et  respondens  viiiuersus  populus  : 
dixit.  Sanguis  eius  super  nos :  & 
super  filios  nostros.  Tune  dimisit  illis 
barabbam :  iesum  autem  flagellatum 
tradidit  eis  :  vt  crucifigeretur.  Tune 


1549 

bury  strangers  in.  Wherfore  the 
fielde  is  called  Haceldama,  that  is, 
the  fielde  of  bloud,  vntil  this  daye. 
Then  was  fulfilled  that  whiche  was 
spoken  by  leremie  the  Prophete,  say 
ing  :  and  they  toke  .xxx.  syluer 
plates,  the  pryce  of  hym  that  was 
valued  whome  they  bought  of  the  chil 
dren  of  Israel,  and  gaue  them  for  the 
potters  fielde,  as  the  Lorde  appointed 
me.  Iesus  stode  before  the 

deputie  and  the  deputie  asked 
hym,  saying :  Art  thou  the  kyng  of  the 
lewes?  Iesus  said  vnto  him: 

thou  saiest  :  And  when  he  was 
accused  of  the  chiefe  priestes  and 
elders,  he  aunswered  nothyng.  Then 
said  Pilate  vnto  him  :  hearest  thou 
not  how  many  witnesses  thei  lay 
against  thee?  And  he  aunswered  hym 
to  neuer  a  word  :  insomuche  that  the 
deputie  marueiled  greatly.  At 

that  feast,  the  deputie  was  wont  to 
deliuer  vnto  the  people  a  prisoner, 
whom  they  woulde  desyre.  He 

had  then  a  notable  prisoner  called 
Barrabas.  Therfore,  when  they  were 
gathered  together,  Pilate  said  : 

whether  wil  ye  that  I  geue  loce 
vnto  you,  Barrabas,  or  Iesus  which 
is  called  Christ  ?  For  he  knewe  that 
for  enuy  they  had  deliuered  him. 
When  he  was  set  down  to  geue  iudge- 
met,  his  wife  set  vnto  him,  say 
ing  :  haue  thou  nothyng  to  doe  with 
that  iust  man  :  For  I  haue  suffered 
many  thinges  this  day  in  my  slepe, 
because  of  hym.  But  the  chiefe  priestes 
and  elders  perswaded  the  people 
that  they  should  aske  Barrabas,  & 
destroye  Iesus.  The  deputie  an 
swered  £  said  vnto  them  :  whether 
of  the  twaine  wil  ye  that  I  let  loce 
vnto  you  ?  They  sayde :  Barrabas. 
Pylate  sayd  vnto  them  :  what  shall  I 
doe  then  with  Iesus,  whiche  is  called 
Christ  ?  They  all  sayd  vnto  him  :  let 
hym  be  crucifyed.  The  deputie 

sayd  :  what  euill  hath  he  done  ? 

But  they  cryed  the  more  saying  : 
let  hym  be  crucifyed.  When  Pylate 
sawe  that  he  could  preuayle  nothing, 
but  that  more  busines  was  made,  he 
toke  water  &  washed  his  handes 
before  the  people,  saying  :  I  am 
innocent  of  the  bloude  of  this  iust 
persone,  ye  shal  see.  Then  answered 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


327 


1552 

burie  straugers  in.  Wherefore  the 
fielde  is  called, 

the  fielde  of  bloud,  vntyll  thys  daye. 
Then  was  fulfylled  that  whych  was 
spoken  by  leremie  the  Prophete,  say 
ing  :  and  they  toke  .xxx.  siluer 
plates,  the  pryce  of  hym  that  was 
valued  whom  they  boughte  of  the  chyl- 
dren  of  Israel,  and  gaue  them  for  the 
potters  fielde,  as  the  Lorde  appoynted 
me.  lesus  stoode  before  the 
deputie,  and  the  deputie  asked 
hym,  saying :  Art  thou  the  kyng  of  the 
lewes  ?  lesus  sayed  vnto  hym  : 
thou  sayeste.  And  when  he  was 
accused  of  the  chiefe  priestes  and 
elders,  he  aunswered  nothyng.  Then 
saied  Pilate  vnto  hym :  hearest  thou 
not  howe  many  wytnesses  they  laye 
agaynste  thee  ?  And  he  answered  him 
to  neuer  a  worde  :  insomuch  that  the 
deputie  marueiled  greatly.  At 
that  feaste,  the  deputie  was  wont  to 
deliuer  vnto  the  people  a  prisoner, 
whom  thei  woulde  desyre.  He 
had  then  a  notable  prisoner  called 
Barrabas.  Therefore  when  they  were 
gathered  together,  Pilate  said  : 

whether  wyll  ye  that  I  geue  loce 
vnto  you,  Barrabas,  or  lesus  which 
is  called  Chryste  ?  For  he  knewe  that 
for  enuy  they  had  delyuered  hym. 
When  he  was  set  down  to  geue  iudge- 
mente,  hys  wife  sent  vnto  hym,  say 
ing:  haue  thou  nothing  to  doe  with 
that  iuste  man  :  For  I  haue  suffred 
thys  daye  many  thynges  in  my  slepe, 
because  of  hym.  But  the  chiefe  priestes 
and  elders  perswaded  the  people 
that  they  shoulde  aske  Barrabas,  and 
destroye  lesus.  The  deputie  aun 
swered  and  saied  vnto  them  :  whether 
of  the  twayne  wyl  ye  that  I  let  loce 
vnto  you?  They  sayed:  Barrabas. 
Pilate  saied  vnto  them  :  what  shall  I 
dooe  then  wyth  lesus,  whiche  is  called 
Christe?  They  all  sayd  vnto  hym :  let 
him  be  crucified.  The  deputie 

sayd  :  what  euil  hath  he  done  ? 

But  they  cryed  more,  saying  : 

let  him  be  crucified.  When  Pilate 
sawe  that  he  coulde  preuaile  nothing, 
but  that  more  busines  was  made,  he 
toke  water  and  washed  hys  handes 
before  the  people,  saying  :  I  am 
innocent  of  the  bloud  of  this  iust 
person,  see  ye.  Then  answered 


1661 

bury  strangers  in.  Wherefore  that 
field  was  called, 

The  field  of  blood  vnto  this  day. 
Then  was  fulfilled  that  which  was 
spoken  by  leremy  the  Prophet,  say 
ing,  And  they  took  the  thirty  peeces 
of  silver,  the  price  of  him  that  was 
valued,  whom  they  of  the  children  of 
Israel  did  value:  And  gave  them  for  the 
potters  field,  as  the  Lord  appointed 
me.  And  lesus  stood  before  the 
governour ;  and  the  governour  asked 
him,  saying,  Art  thou  the  King  of  the 
lewes?  And  lesus  said  vnto  him, 
Thou  saiest.  And  when  he  was 
accused  of  the  chief  Priests,  and 
Elders,  he  answered  nothing.  Then 
saith  Pilate  vnto  him.  Hearest  thou 
not  how  many  things  they  witness 
against  thee  ?  And  he  answered  him 
to  never  a  word,  insomuch  that  the 
governour  marvelled  greatly.  Now  at 
that  feast  the  governor  was  wont  to 
release  vnto  the  people,  a  prisoner, 
whom  they  would.  And  they 

had  then  a  notable  prisoner  called 
Barabbas.  Therefore,  when  they  were 
gathered  together,  Pilate  said  vnto 
them,  Whom  will  ye  that  I  release 
vnto  you  ?  Barabbas,  or  lesus,  which 
is  called  Christ?  For  he  knew  that 
for  envy  they  had  delivered  him. 
When  he  was  set  down  on  the  Judge 
ment  seat,  his  wife  sent  vnto  him,  say 
ing,  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with 
that  iust  man  :  for  I  have  suffered 
many  things  this  day  in  a  dream, 
because  of  him.  But  the  chief  Priests, 
and  Elders  perswaded  the  multitude 
that  they  should  aske  Barabbas,  and 
destroy  lesus.  The  governour  an 
swered,  and  said  vnto  them,  Whether 
of  the  twain  will  ye  that  I  release 
vnto  you  ?  They  said  Barabbas. 
Pilate  sayth  vnto  them,  What  shall  I 
do  then  with  lesus,  which  is  called 
Christ?  They  all  say  vnto  him,  Let 
him  be  crucified.  And  the  governour 
said,  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  don? 
But  they  cried  out  the  more,  saying. 
Let  him  be  crucified.  When  Pilate 
saw  that  he  could  prevail  nothing, 
but  that  rather  a  tumult  was  made,  he 
took  Water,  and  washed  his  hands 
before  the  multitude,  saying,  I  am 
innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  iust 
person  :  see  ye  to  it.  Then  answered 


328 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

milites  presidis  suscipientes  iesum  in 
pretorium :  congregauerunt  ad  eum 
vniuersam  cohortem.  Et  exuentes 
eum :  chlamydem  coccineam  circum- 
dederunt  ei.  Et  plectentes,  coronam 
de  spinis  posuerunt  super  caput  eius  : 
&  arundinem  in  dextera  eius.  Et 
genu  flexo  ante  eum  illudebant  ei 
dicentes.  Aue  rex  iudeorum.  Et 
expuentes  in  eum  :  acceperunt  arun 
dinem,  &  percutiebant  caput  eius. 
Et  postquam  illuserunt  ei :  exuerunt 
eum  chlamyde,  et  induerunt  eum 
vestimentis  eius,  et  duxerunt  eum  vt 
crucifigerent.  Exeuntes  autem  inuerie- 
runt  hominem  cyreneum,  nomine 
simonem  :  hunc  angariauerunt  vt 
tolleret  crucem  eius.  Et  venerunt  in 
locum  qui  dicitur  golgotha :  quod  est 
caluarie  locus.  Et  dederunt  ei  vinum 
bibere  cum  felle  mixtum :  et  cum 
gustasset  noluit  bibere.  Postquam 
autem  crucifixerunt  eum  :  diuiserunt 
vestimenta  eius,  sortem  mittentes.  Vt 
impleretur  quod  dictum  est  per  pro- 
phetam,  dicentem.  Diuiserunt  sibi 
vestimenta  mea :  &  super  vestem 
meam  miserunt  sortem.  Et  sedentes 
seruabant  eum.  Et  imposuerunt  super 
caput  eius :  causam  ipsius  scriptam. 
Hie  est  iesus  rex  iudeorum.  Tune 
crucifixi  sunt  cum  eo  duo  latrones  : 
vnus  a  dextris,  et  vnus  a  sinistris. 
Pretereuntes  autem  blasphemabant 
eum :  mouentes  capita  sua,  et  dicentes. 
Vah  qui  destruis  templum  dei :  et  in 
triduo  illud  reedificas.  Salua  temet- 
ipsum.  Si  films  dei  es :  descende  de 
cruce.  Similiter  et  principes  sacer- 
dotum  illudentes  cum  scribis  & 
senioribus :  dicebant.  Alios  saluos 
fecit :  seipsum  non  potest  saluum 
facere.  Si  rex  israel  est  descendat 
nunc  de  cruce  :  et  credimus  ei.  Con- 
lidit  in  deo  :  liberet  eum  nunc  si  vult. 
Dixit  enim  :  quia  filius  dei  sum. 
Idipsum  autem  et  latrones  qui  crucifixi 
erant  cum  eo :  improperabant  ei.  A 
sexta  autem  hora  :  tenebre  facte  sunt, 


1549 

al  the  people  &  saide  :  his  bloud 
be  on  vs  &  on  our  children.  Then 
let  he  Barrabas  loce  vnto  them,  £ 
scourged  Iesus,  &  de- 
liuered  hym  to  be  crucifyed.  Then  the 
souldiers  of  the  deputie  toke  Iesus 
into  the  common  hall,  £  gathered 
vnto  him  all  the  copany  : 
£  they  stripped  him,  &  put  on 
him  a  purple  robe,  £ 

platted  a  croune  of  thornes,  and 
put  it  vpo  his  head,  &  a  reede  in 
his  righte  hande,  £  bowed  the 

knee  before  hym,  £  mocked  him, 
saying  :  hayle  kyng  of  the  lewes  :  £ 
whe  they  had  spit  vpo  him,  they 
toke  the  reede  £  smote  him  on  the 
head.  And  after  that  they  had  mocked 
him,  thei  toke  the  robe  of  him 

again,  &  put  his  owne  raiment  on 
him,  &  led  him  away  to  crucifye  him 
And  as  they  came  out,  they  foud  a 
man  of  Cirene  (named  Simo)  him 
they  copelled  to  beare  his  crosse. 
And  they  came  vnto  the  place 
whyche  is  called  Golgotha,  (that  is  to 
say,  a  place  of  dead  mes  sculs)  & 
gaue  him  vineger  to  drynke  mingled 
with  gal.  And  whe  he  had  tasted 
therof  he  wolde  not  drynke.  When 
they  had  crucified  him,  they  parted  his 
garmentes,  and  did  cast  lottes  :  that  it 
might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken 
by  the  prophete :  They  parted  my  gar 
mentes  among  them,  £  vpon  my 
vesture  did  they  cast  lottes.  And 
they  sate  and  watched  him  there,  and 
set  vp  ouer  his  head  the  cause  of  his 
death  written  :  Thysis  Iesus  the  kyngof 
the  lewes.  Then  were  there  .ii.  theues 
crucified  with  him,  one  on  the  ryght 
hande,  and  an  other  on  the  left. 
They  that  passed  by,  reuyled  hym, 
waggyng  theyr  heades,  &  saying: 
thou  that  destroyedst  the  temple  of 
God,  £  didst  build  it  in  thre  daies, 
saue  thy  selfe.  If  thou  be  the  sone  of 
God,  come  downe  fro  the  crosse. 
Lykewise  also  the  high  Priestes  mock 
ing  him,  with  the  Scribes  and  elders, 
sayde  :  he  saued  other,  himselfe  he 
cannot  saue.  If  he  be  the  kyng  of 
Israeli  let  him  now  come  down  from 
the  crosse,  and  we  wil  beleue  hym. 
He  trusted  in  God,  let  him  deliuer 
him  now,  if  he  will  haue  him,  for  he 
said  :  I  am  the  sone  of  god.  The 


SUNDAY  NEXT  BEFORE  EASTER 


329 


1552 

al  the  people  and  sayd  :  his  bloud 
be  on  vs  and  on  our  children.  Then 
let  he  Barrabas  loce  vnto  the  :  and 
scourged  lesus,  and  de- 
iiuered  him  to  be  crucified.  Then  the 
souldiers  of  the  deputie  tooke  lesus 
into  the  common  hall,  and  gathered 
vnto  him  al  the  company  : 
and  thy  stripped  him,  and  put  on 
him  a  purple  robe,  & 

platted  a  croune  of  thornes,  and 
put  it  vpon  his  head,  and  a  reede  in 
his  right  hande,  &  bowed  the 

knee  before  him,  &  mocked  him, 
saying  :  haile  king  of  the  lewes  :  and 
when  they  had  spit  vpon  him,  they 
toke  the  rede  and  smote  him  on  the 
head.  And  after  that  thei  had  mocked 
him,  thei  toke  the  robe  of  him 

againe,  &  put  his  own  raiment  on 
him,  and  led  him  away  to  crucifie  him. 
And  as  they  came  out,  they  found  a 
man  of  Cirene  (named  Simon)  him 
they  compelled  to  beare  his  crosse. 
And  thei  came  vnto  the  place 
which  is  called  Golgotha,  (that  is  to 
say,  a  place  of  dead  mes  sculles)  & 
gaue  him  vineger  mlgled  with  gal 
to  drinke.  And  when  he  had  tasted 
therof,  he  would  not  drinke.  Whe 
thei  had  crucified  him,  thei  parted  his 
garmetes,  £  did  cast  lottes  :  that  it 
might  be  fulfilled  whiche  was  spoken 
by  the  prophet :  They  parted  my  gar- 
mentes  among  them,  and  vpon  my 
vesture  did  thei  cast  lottes.  And 
they  sate  and  watched  him  there,  and 
set  vp  ouer  his  head  the  cause  of  hys 
death  wrytten.  This  is  lesus  the  king  of 
the  lewes.  Then  wer  there,  ii.  theues 
crucified  with  him,  one  on  the  right 
hande,  &  an  other  on  the  lefte. 
Thei  that  passed  by,  reuiled  him, 
wagging  their  heades,  &  saying  : 
thou  that  destroiedst  the  temple  of 
god,  and  didst  build  it  in  three  dayes, 
saue  thy  selfe.  If  thou  be  the  sone  of 
god,  come  down  from  the  crosse. 
Likewise  also  the  high  Priestes  mock 
ing  him,  with  the  Scribes  and  elders, 
said  :  he  saued  other,  himself  he 
cannot  saue.  If  he  be  the  king  of 
Israel  let  him  nowe  come  down  fro 
the  crosse,  &  we  wil  beleue  him. 
He  trusted  in  god,  let  him  deliuer 
him  now,  if  he  wil  haue  him,  for  he 
said :  I  am  ye  sone  of  god.  The 


1661 

all  the  people,  and  sayd,  His  blood 
be  on  vs,  arid  on  our  children.  Then 
released  he  Barabbas  vnto  them  :  and 
when  he  had  scourged  lesus,  he  de 
livered  him  to  be  crucified.  Then  the 
souldiers  of  the  governour  took  lesus 
into  the  common  hall  and  gathered 
vnto  him  the  whole  band  of  soldjers. 
And  they  stripped  him,  and  put  on 
him  a  scarlet  robe.  And  when  they 
had  platted  a  Crown  of  thorns,  they 
put  it  vpon  his  head,  and  a  reed  in 
his  right  hand  :  and  they  bowed  the 
knee  before  him,  and  mocked  him, 
saying,  Hail,  King  of  the  lews.  And 
they  spit  vpon  him,  and 

took  the  reed,  and  smote  him  on  the 
head.  And  after  that  they  had  mocked 
him,  they  took  the  robe  off  from  him, 
and  put  his  own  raiment  on 
him,  and  led  him  away  to  crucifie  him. 
And  as  they  came  out,  they  found  a 
man  of  Cyrene,  Simon  by  name :  him 
they  compelled  to  bear  his  cross. 
And  when  they  were  come  vnto  a  place 
called  Golgotha,  that  is  to 
say,  a  place  of  a  Skull.  They 

gave  him  vinegar  to  drink,  mingled 
with  gall  :  and  when  he  had  tasted 
thereof,  he  would  not  drink.  And 
they  crucified  him,  and  parted  his 
garments,  casting  lots  ;  that  it 
might  be  fulfilled,  which  was  spoken 
by  the  prophet,  They  parted  by  Gar 
ments  among  them,  and  vpon  my 
vesture  did  they  cast  lots  ;  And  sitting 
down  ;  they  watched  him  there  :  And 
set  vp  over  his  head,  his  accusa 
tion  written,  This  is  lesus  the  King  of 
the  lews.  Then  were  (here  two  theeves 
crucified  with  him  :  one  on  the  right 
hand,  and  another  on  the  left.  And 
they  that  passed  by  reviled  him, 
wagging  their  heads,  And  saying, 
Thou  that  destroyest  the  temple 

,  and  buildest  it  in  three  dayes, 
save  thy  selfe  ;  if  thou  be  the  son  of 
God,  come  down  from  the  cross. 
Likewise  also  the  chief  Priests  mock 
ing  him,  with  the  scribes  and  Elders, 
said,  He  saved  others,  himselfe  he 
cannot  save  :  if  he  be  the  King  of 
Israel,  let  him  now  come  down  from 
the  cross,  and  we  will  beleeve  him  : 
He  trusted  in  God,  let  him  deliver 
him  now  if  he  will  have  him  :  for  he 
said,  I  am  the  son  of  God.  The 


330 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

vsque  in  horam  nonam.  Et  circa 
horam  nonam  :  clamauit  iesus  voce 
magna  dicens.  Heloi  heloi  lama 
zabathani?  Hoc  est.  Deus  meus, 
deus  meus:  vt  quid  dereliquisti  me? 
Quidam  autem  illic  stantes  et  audientes : 
dicebant.  Heliam  vocat  iste.  Et  con 
tinue  currens  vnus  ex  eis,  acceptam 
spongiam  impleuit  aceto,  &  imposuit 
arundiui :  et  dabat  ei  bibere.  Ceteri 
vero  dicebant.  Sine,  videamus  an 
veniat  helias  liberans  eum.  Iesus 
autem  iterum  clamans  voce  magna : 
emisit  spiritum.  Et  ecce  velum  templi 
scissum  est  in  duas  partes :  a  summo 
vsque  deorsum.  Et  terra  mota  est,  et 
petre  scisse  sunt  et  monumenta  aperta 
sunt :  &  multa  corpora  sanctorum  qui 
dormierant  surrexerunt.  Et  exeuntes 
de  monumentis  post  resurrectionem 
eius  venerunt  in  sanctam  ciuitatem  et 
apparuerunt  multis.  Centurio  autem 
&  qui  cum  eo  erant  custodientes  iesum : 
viso  terre  motu  &  his  que  fiebant, 
timuerunt  valde  dicentes.  Vere  films 
dei  erat  iste.  Erant  autem  ibi  mulieres 
multe  a  longe  :  que  secute  erant  iesum 
a  galilea  ministrantes  ei.  Inter  quas 
erat  maria  magdalene,  et  maria  iacobi 
et  ioseph  mater  :  &  mater  filiorum 
zebedei  (  +  57-61.  Euangelium  62-66) 

<E  Feria  .ij.  post  dominicam  in  ramis 
palmarum. 

[Isa.  1  5-10] 

[Feria  .iiij.  Lectio  esaie  prophete.  [Ixij.  D 
HEC  dicit  dominus  deus.  Dicite 
[Ixii  lib].  Quis  est  iste  qui  venit  de 
edon  :  tirictis  vestibus  de  bbsra?  Iste 
formosus  in  stola  sua :  gradiens  in 
multitudine  fortitudinis  sue.  Ego  qui 
loquor  iustitiam  :  &  propugnator  sum 
ad  saluandum.  Quare  ergo  rubrum 
est  indumentum  tuum  :  et  vestimenta 
tua  sicut  calcantium  in  torculari  ? 
Torcular  calcaui  solus  :  &  de  gentibus 


theues  also  which  were  crucified  with 
him, caste  the  same  in  his  teeth. 
From  the  sixthoure  was  there  darckenes 
ouer  al  the  land,  vntil  the  ninth  houre. 
And  about  the  ninth  houre,  Iesus  cryed 
with  a  loud  voice,  saying :  Ely,  Ely, 
lamasabathany  ?  that  is  to  say  :  my 
god,  my  god,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me  ?  Some  of  them  that  stode  there, 
when  they  heard  that,  sayd  :  This  man 
calleth  for  Helias.  And  streight  way 
one  of  them  ran  &  toke  a  spounge, 
&  when  he  had  filled  it  ful  of  vineger, 
he  put  it  on  a  reede,  &  gaue  him  to 
drinke.  Other  sayd :  let  be,  let  vs  see 
whether  Helias  wil  come  &  deliuer 
hi.  Iesus,  when  he  had  cryed  agayne 
with  a  loude  voyce,  yelded  vp  the 
goste.  And  behold,  the  vaile  of  the 
teple  dyd  rent  into  two  partes,  from 
the  top  to  the  botome,  and  the  yearth 
did  quake,  and  the  stones  rent,  and 
graues  did  open,  &  many  bodies 
of  sainctes,  whiche  slept,  arose  and 
wente  out  of  the  graues  after  hys 
resurreccion,  and  came  into  the  holy 
cytie  and  appeared  vnto  many. 
When  the  Centurion,  and  they  that 
were  with  him  watching  Iesus,  saw 
the  yearthquake,  and  those  thinges 
which  happened,  they  feared  greatly,, 
saying  :  Truely,  this  was  the  sonne  of 
God.  And  many  weomen  were  there 
(beholding  him  a  farre  of)  which 
folowed  Iesus  from  Galilee,  minystryng 
vnto  him  :  Emong  whiche  was  Mary 
Magdalene,  and  Mary  the  mother  of 
lames  and  loses,  and  the  mother  of 
Zebedes  children. 

C  MONDAYE   BEFORE   EASTER. 

The  Epistle. 

[Esai.  Ixiii. 

WHat  is  he  this  that  commeth  from 
Edom,  with  red  colored  clothes  of 
Bosra  :  (whiche  is  so  costly  cloth) 
&  cummeth  in  so  myghtely  with 
al  hys  strength  ?  I  amhethatteacheth 
righteousnesse,  &  am  of  power  to 
helpe.  Wherfore  then  is  thy  clothyng 
red,  and  thy  rayment  lyke  hys  that 
treadeth  in  the  wyne  presse  ?  1  haue 
troden  the  presse  my  selfe  alone, 

and  of  all  people  there  is  not  one  with 
me.    Thus  wyll  I  treade  downe  myne 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


331 


1552 

theues  also  which  wer  crucified  with 
him,  cast  yesame  in  his  teeth. 
From  the  sixt  hourewas  there  darkenes 
ouer  al  the  lad,  vntil  the  ninth  houre. 
And  about  the  ninth  houre,  lesus  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Ely,  Ely, 
lamasabathany  ?  yfc  is  to  say  :  my 
god,  my  god,  why  hast  thou  forsake 
me  ?  Some  of  the  that  stoode  there, 
when  thei  heard  that  sayd:  This  man 
calleth  for  Helias.  And  streight  waye 
one  of  them  ranne  and  toke  a  spounge, 
and  whe  he  had  filled  it  ful  of  vineger, 
he  put  it  on  a  reede,  and  gaue  hym  to 
drynke.  Other  sayd  :  let  be,  let  vs  see 
whether  Helias  wil  come  and  deliuer 
him.  lesus,  when  he  had  cryedagayne 
wyth  a  loude  voice,  yelded  vp  the 
gost.  And  behold,  the  vaile  of  the 
temple  did  rente  in  two  partes,  from 
the  top  to  the  botome,  £  the  yearthe 
did  quake,  and  the  stones  rent,  and 
graues  did  open,  &  many  bodies 
of  sainctes,  whiche  slept,  arose  and 
went  out  of  the  graues  after  hys 
resurreccion,  and  came  into  the  holy 
citie  and  appeared  vnto  many. 
When  the  Centurion,  and  they  that 
were  wyth  hym  watchinge  lesus,  saw 
the  yearthquake,  and  those  thinges 
which  happened,  they  feared  greatly, 
saying  :  Truely  thys  was  the  sonne  of 
God.  And  many  weomen  wer  there 
(beholdyng  him  a  farre  of)  which 
folowed  lesus  from  Galile,  ministring 
vnto  hym  :  Emonge  whiche  was  Mary 
Magdalene,  and  Mary  the  mother  of 
lames  and  loses,  and  the  mother  of 
Zebedes  chyldren. 

MONDAIE   BEFORE  EASTER 


1661 

theeves  also  which  were  crucified  with 
him,  cast  the  same  in  his  teeth.  Now 
from  the  sixth  hour  there  was  darkness 
over  all  the  land,  vnto  the  ninth  hour. 
And  about  the  ninth  hour,  Jesus  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  sayeing,  Eli,  Eli, 
lamasabachthani,  that  is  to  say,  My 
God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me  ?  some  of  them  that  stood  there, 
when  they  heard  that,  said,  This  man 
calleth  for  Elias.  And  straight  way 
one  of  them  ran,  and  took  a  spunge, 
and  filled  it  with  Vineger, 

and  put  it  on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to 
drinke.  The  rest  said,  Let  be,  let  vs  see 
whether  Elias  will  come  to  save 
him.  lesus,  when  he  had  cried  again, 
with  a  loud  voice,  yeilded  vp  the 
Ghost.  And  behold,  the  vail  of  the 
temple  was  rent  in  twain,  from 
the  top  to  the  bottom,  and  the  earth 
did  quake,  and  the  rocks  rent,  And  the 
graves  were  opened,  and  many  bodies 
of  Saints  which  slept,  arose,  And 
came  out  of  the  graves,  after  his 
resurrection,  and  went  into  the  holy 
City,  and  appeared  vnto  many.  Now 
when  the  Centurion,  and  they  that 
were  with  him,  watching  lesus,  saw 
the  Earthquake,  and  those  things 
that  were  don,  they  feared  greatly, 
saying,  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of 
God. 


MUNDAY  BEFORE  EASTER. 


€  The  Epistle. 

[Esai.  Ixiii 

WHat  is  he  this  that  cummeth  from 
Edom,  wyth  redde  colored  clothes  of 
Bosra  :  (whiche  is  so  costlye  cloth) 
&  cummeth  in  so  mightely  wyth 
al  his  strengthe  ?  I  am  he  that  teacheth 
ryghteousnesse,  and  am  of  power  to 
helpe.  Wherfore  then  is  thy  clothing 
red,  and  thy  raymente  lyke  hys  that 
treadeth  in  the  wyne  presse  ?  I  haue 
troden  the  presse  my  selfe  alone, 

&  of  all  people  there  is  not  one  wyth 
me.     Thus  wyll  I  treade  downe  myne 


9For  the  Epistle. 

[Esay.  63.  •»!. 

Who  is  this  that  cometh  from 
Edom,  with  died  garments  from 
Bozrah?  this  that  is  glorious  in  his 
Apparell,  travelling  in  the  greatness 
of  his  strength?  I  that  speak  in 

righteousness,  mighty      to 

save.  Wherefore  art  thou  red  in  thine 
Apparel,  and  thy  garments  like  him  that 
treadeth  in  the  Wine  fat?  I  have 
troden  the  Wine  Press  alone, 

and  of  the  people  there  was 
none  with  me  :  for  I  will 


332 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

non  est  vir  mecum.  Calcaui  eos  in 
furore  meo  :  &  conculcaui  eos  in  ira 
mea.  Et  aspersus  est  sanguis  eorum 
super  vestimenta  mea :  et  omnia  in 
dumenta  mea  inquinaui.  Dies  enim 
vltionis  in  corde  meo :  annus  retri- 
butionis  mee  venit.  Circumspexi,  et 
non  erat  auxiliator :  quesiui  &  non 
fuit  qui  adiuuaret.  Et  saluauit  michi 
brachium  meum :  et  indignatio  mea 
ipsa  auxiliata  est  michi.  Et  conculcani 
populos  in  furore  meo :  &  inebriaui 
eos  in  indignatione  mea  :  &  detraxi  in 
terrain  virtutem  eorum.  Miserationum 
domini  recordabor.  Laudem  domini 
annunciabo  super  omnibus  que  reddidit 
riobis  :  dominus  deus  noster.] 


1549 

enemies  in  my  wrath,  and  set  my 
feete  vpon  them  in  myne  indignacio. 
And  theyr  blond  shall  bespryng  my 
clothes,  and  so  will  I  stayne  all  my 
rayment.  For  the  daye  of  vengeaunce 
is  assigned  in  my  hearte,  and  the  yeare 
when  my  people  shal  be  delyuered  is 
come.  I  looked  about  me,  &  there 
was  no  man  to  shewe  me  any  helpe. 
I  merueiled  that  no  man  helde  me  vp. 
Then  I  helde  me  by  myne  owne  arme, 
and  my  feruentnesse  sustayned  me. 
And  thus  wyll  I  treade  downe  the 
people  in  my  wrath,  and  bathe  them 
in  my  displeasure,  &  vpo  the 
yearth  wil  1  lay  theyr  strength.  I 
wyl  declare  the  goodnes  of 
the  Lord,  yea  and  the  praise  of 
the  Lorde  for  al  that  he  hath 
geuen  vs,  for  the  great  good 
that  he  hath  done  for  Israel : 
which  he  hathe  geuen  them  of  hys 
owne  fauor,  and  according  to  the 
multitud  of  his  louing  kindnesses. 
For  he  sayde  :  these  no  doubt  are  my 
people,  and  no  shrynking  children,  & 
so  he  was  theyr  sauiour.  In  theyr 
troubles,  he  was  also  troubled  with 
them  :  and  the  Aungell  that  went  furth 
from  his  presence,  deliuered  them.  Of 
very  loue  and  kyndenes  that  he  had 
vnto  them,  he  redemed  them.  He  hath 
borne  them  and  caried  them  vp,  euer 
sence  the  worlde  began :  But  after  they 
prouoked  him  to  wrath  &  vexed  his 
holy  mynde,  he  was  their  enemy  & 
fought  against  them  himself.  Yet 
remembred  Israel  the  old  time  of 
Moses  &  his  people,  saying :  where 
is  he  that  broughte  them  from  thewater 
of  the  sea,  with  them  that  fed  hys 
shepe?  where  is  he  that  hath  geuen 
his  holy  spirite  among  them  ?  he  led 
them  by  the  ryght  had  of  Moses, 
with  his  gloryous  arme  :  deuiding  the 
water  before  them  (wherby  he  gate 
hym  self  an  euerlastyng  name :)  he 
led  them  in  the  depe,  as  an  horse 
is  led  in  the  playn,  that  they  should 
not  stomble,  as  a  tame  beast  goeth 
in  the  fielde  :  and  the  breath  geuen 
of  God,  geueth  hym  reste. 

Thus  ( O  God)  hast  thou  led  thy  people, 
to  make  thy  selfe  a  glorious  name  with- 
all.  Looke  down  then  from  heauen, 
and  beholde  the  dwelling  place  of  thy 
sanctuary,  &  thy  glory.  How  is 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


333 


1552 

enemies  in  my  wrath,  and  set  my 
feete  vpon  them  in  mine  indignacion. 
And  their  bloud  shal  bespring  my 
clothes,  and  so  wil  I  staine  al  my 
raimente.  Forthedaye  of  vengeaunce 
is  assigned  in  my  heart,  and  the  yere 
when  my  people  shall  be  deliuered  is 
come.  '  I  loked  aboute  me,  and  there 
was  no  man  to  shew  me  any  helpe. 
I  merueiled  that  no  man  helde  me  vp. 
Then  1  helde  me  by  myne  owne  arme, 
and  my  feruentnesse  sustayned  me. 
And  thus  wil  I  treade  downe  the 
people  in  my  wrath,  and  bath  them 
in  my  displeasure,  and  vpon  the 
yearth  wyl  I  laye  theyr  strength.  I 
wil  declare  the  goodnesse  of 
the  lord,  yea  and  the  praise  of 
the  lorde  for  all  that  he  hath 
geuen  vs,  for  the  greate  good 
that  he  hath  done  for  Israel  : 
which  he  hath  geuen  them  of  his 
own  fauor,  and  according  to  the 
multitude  of  his  louing  kindnesse  . 
For  he  saied  :  these  no  doubt  are  my 
people,  and  no  shrinking  children,  and 
so  he  was  theyr  sauiour.  In  theyr 
troubles  he  was  also  troubled  wyth 
them :  and  the  Aungel  that  went  furth 
from  his  presence,  deliuered  them.  Of 
very  loue  and  kyndenes  that  he  had 
vnto  the,  he  redemed  them.  He  hath 
borne  them  and  caryed  them  vp,  euer 
sence  the  world  began  :  But  after  they 
prouoked  hym  to  wrath  and  vexed  his 
holy  minde,  he  was  their  enemie  and 
fought  againste  them  himselfe.  Yet 
remembred  Israel  the  old  time  of 
Moses  and  his  people,  saying  :  where 
is  he  that  brought  them  fro  the  water 
of  the  sea,  with  them  that  fed  his 
shepe?  where  is  he  that  hath  geuen 
his  holy  spirite  among  them?  he  led 
them  by  the  right  hand  of  Moses, 
with  his  glorious  arme  :  deuiding  the 
water  before  them  (wherby  he  gate 
hymselfe  an  euerlasting  name :)  he 
led  them  in  the  depe,  as  an  horse 
is  led  in  the  plaine,  that  they  shoulde 
not  stumble,  as  a  tame  beast  goeth 
in  the  fielde  :  and  the  breath  geuen 
of  god,  geueth  him  rest.- 

-Thus(O  god)  hast  thou  led  thy  people, 
to  make  thy  self  a  glorious  name  with 
al.  Loke  downe  then  from  heauen, 
andbeholde  the  dwellinge  place  of  thy 
sanctuary,  and  thy  glorye.  Howe  is 


1661 

tread  them  in  mine  Anger,  and 
trample  them  in  my  fury,  and 
their  blood  shall  be  sprinkled  vpon  my 
Garments,  and  I  will  stain  all  my 
rayment.  For  the  day  of  vengeance 
is  in  mine  heart,  and  the  year 

of    my     redeemed  is 

come.     And  I  looked  ,  and  there 

was  none  to  help ;  and  I  wondered 
that  there  was  none  to  vphold  :  there 
fore  mine  owne  arm  brought  salvation 
vnto  me,  and  my  fury  it  vpheld  me. 
And  I  will  tread  down  the 

people  in  mine  Anger,  and  make  them 
drunke  in  my  fury,  and  I  will  bring 
down  their  strength  to  the  Earth.  I 
will  mention  the  loving  kindnesses  of 
the  Lord,  and  the  prayses  of  the  Lord, 
according  to  all  that  the  Lord  hath 
bestowed  on  vs,  and  the  great  good 
ness  towards  the  house  of  Israel,  which 
he  hath  bestowed  on  them,  according 
to  his  mercyes,  and  according  to  the 
multitude  of  his  lovingkindnesses. 
For  he  said,  Surely  they  are  my 
people,  children  that  will  not  lye  : 
so  he  was  their  Saviour.  In  all  their 
affliction  he  was  afflicted, 

and    the  Angel 

of  his  presence  saved  them :  in  his  love, 
and  in  his  pity 

he  redeemed  them,  and  he 
bare  them,  and  carryed  them  all  the 
dayes  of  old.  But  they  rebelled,  and 
vexed  his  holy  spirit,  therefore  he 
was  turned  to  be  their  enemy,  and 
he  fought  against  them  Then 

he  remembred  the  dayes  of  old, 
Moses  and  his  people,  saying,  Where 
is  he  that  brought  them  vp  out 
of  the  sea,  with  the  Shepheard  of  his 
flock?  Where  is  he  that  put 

his  holy  Spirit  within  him  ?  That  led 
them  by  the  right  hand  of  Moses, 
with  his  glorious  arm,  dividing  the 
water  before  them,  to  make 
himselfe  an  everlasting  name  ?  That 
led  them  through  the  deep,  as  an  horse 
in  the  wilderness,  thatthey  should 
not  stumble  ?  As  a  beast  goeth 

down  into  the  valley,  the  spirit  of  the 
Lord  caused  him  to  rest  :- 

-so  didst  thou  lead  thy  people 

to  make  thy  selfe  a  glorious  name. 

Look  down  from  heaven, 

and  behold  from  the  habitation  of  thy 
holiness,  and  of  thy  glory  :  Where  is 


334 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 


[Jo.  xii  1-36] 

[Feria.iij.  Passio  domini  nostri  lesu  christi 
secundum  Marcum. 

[xiiii.  A 

IN  illo  tempore.  Erat  pascha  et 
a/yma  post  biduum  :  &  querebant 
summi  sacerdotes  et  scribe,  quo  iesum 
dolo  tenerent  &  occiderent.  Dicebant 
autem.  Non  in  die  festo.  Ne  forte 
tumultus  fieret  in  populo.  Et  cum 
esset  iesus  bethanie  in  domo  simonis 
leprosi  et  recumberet:  venit  mulier 
habens  alabastrum  vnguenti  nardi 
spicati  preciosi:  et  fracto  alabastro, 
effudit  super  caput  eius.  Erant  autem 
quidam  indigne  ferentes  intra  seme- 
tipsos :  &  dicentes.  Vt  quid  perditio 
ista  vnguenti  facta  est  ?  Poterat  enim 
vnguentum  istud  venumdari  plusquam 
trecentis  denarijs.  &  dari  pauperibus. 
Et  fremebant  in  earn.  Iesus  autem 
dixit.  Sinite  earn.  Quid  illi  molesti 
estis  ?  Bonum  opus  operata  est  in  me. 
Semper  enim  pauperes  habetis  vobis- 
cum :  et  cum  volueritis  potestis  illis 
benefacere :  me  autem  non  semper 
habebitis.  Quod  habuit  hec  fecit :  pre- 
uenit  vngere  corpus  meum  in  sepul- 
turam.  Amen  dico  vobis :  vbicunque 
predicatum  fuerit  euangelium  istud 


'549 

it  that  thy  gelousy,  thy  strength,  the 
multitude  of  thy  mercies  and  thy 
louing  kindnes,  wil  not  be  intreated 
of  vs  ?  yet  art  thou  our  father.  For 
Abraham  knoweth  vs  not,  neither  is 
Israeli  acquaynted  with  vs  :  But  thou 
Lord,  art  oure  father  and  re- 

demer,  and  thy  name  is  euer- 

lastyng.  O  Lorde,  wherfore  hast  thou 
led  vs  out  of  thy  way?  wherfore 
hast  thou  hardened  our  heartes,  that 
we  feare  thee  not?  Be  at  one  with 
vs  agayne  for  thy  seruauntes  sake,  and 
for  the  generacyon  of  thyne  heritage. 
Thy  people  haue  had  but  a  litle  of  thy 
Sanctuarye  in  possession,  for  our 
enemyes  haue  trod  en  downe  the  holy 
place.  And  we  were  thyne  from  the 
begynnyng,  when  thou  wast  not  theyr 
Lorde,  for  they  haue  not  called  vpon 
thy  name. 

The  Gospell. 


[  Mar.  xiiii. 
AFter  two  dayes  was 
Easter,  and  the  dayes  of  swete 
bread.  And  the  hye  priestes  and  the 
Scribes  sought  how  they  mighte  take 
him  by  crafte,  and  put  him  to  death. 
But  they  sayd  :  not  in  the  feast  day, 
lest  anybusinesarise  among  the  people. 
And  whe  he  was  at  Bethanie  inthehouse 
of  Simon  the  leper,  euen  as  he  sate  at 
meate,  there  came  a  woman  hauyng 
an  Alabaster  boxe  of  oyntmente,  called 
Narde,  that  was  pure  and  costlye :  and 
she  brake  the  boxe  and  powred  it  on 
hys  head.  And  there  were  some  that 
were  not  contente  within  themselues, 
and  sayde :  what  neded  thy s  waste  of 
oyntmente?  for  it  might  haue 

bene  solde  for  more  then  .ccc. 
pence,  and  haue  been  geuen  vnto  the 
poore.  And  they  grudged  agaynst 
her.  And  Iesus  sayde  :  lette  her  alone, 
why  trouble  ye  her  ?  She  hath  done 
a  good  woorke  on  me  :  for  ye  haue 
poore  with  you  alwayes,  &  when- 
soeuer  ye  will  ye  may  doe  them  good: 
but  me  haue  ye  not  alwayes.  She 
hath  done  that  she  could,  she  came 
afore  hande  to  anoynte  my  bodye  to  the 
burying.  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you : 
whersoeuer  thys  Gospel  shal  be 
preached  throughout  the  whole  worlde, 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


335 


1552 

it  that  thy  gelousy,  thy  strength,  the 
multitude  of  thy  mercies,  and  thy 
louing  kindnes,  wil  not  be  intreated 
of  vs  ?  yet  art  thou  our  father.  For 
Abraham  knoweth  vs  not,  neither  is 
Israel  acquaynted  with  vs  :  But  thou 
lord,  art  our  father  and  re- 

demer,   &    thy  name    is  euer- 

lasting.  O  Lorde,  wherefore  hast  thou 
led  vs  out  of  thy  way  ?  wherefore 
haste  thou  hardened  our  heartes,  that 
we  feare  thee  not  ?  Be  at  one  with 
vs  againe  for  thy  seruauntes  sake,  and 
for  the  generacio  of  thyne  heritage. 
Thy  people  haue  had  but  litle  of  thy 
Sanctuary  in  possession  :  for  our 
enemies  haue  troden  down  the  holy 
place.  And  we  were  thyne  from  the 
beginning,  when  thou  wast  not  their 
lord,  for  they  haue  not  called  vpon 
thy  name. 

C  The  Gospell. 


1661 

thy  Zeal,  and  thy  strength,  the  sound 
ing  of  thy  bowels,  and  of  thy  mercyes 
towards  me?  are  they  restrained? 
Doubtless  thou  art  our  Father,  though 
Abraham  be  ignorant  of  vs,  and 
Israel  acknowledge  vs  not :  thou, 

O  Lord,  art  our  Father,  our  re 
deemer,  thy  name  is  from  ever 
lasting.  O  Lord,  Why  hast  thou 
made  vs  to  err  from  thy  Wayes  ?  and 

hardened  our  hearts  from 
thy     fear  ? 
Return  for  thy  servants    sake, 

the  tribes  of  thine  inheritance. 
The  people  of  thy  holiness  have 
possessed  it  but  a  little  while  :  our 
Adversaries  have  troden  down  thy 
Sanctuary.  We  are  thine, 

thou  never  barest  rule  over 
them,  they  were  not  called  by 
thy  name. 

The  Gospel. 


[  Mar.  xiiii 
Arter  two  daies  was 
Easter,  and  the  dayes  of  swete 
bread.  And  the  hye  priestes  and  the 
Scribes  sought  how  thei  might  take 
him  by  craft,  and  put  hym  to  death. 
But  they  sayed  :  not  in  the  feast  day, 
lest  anybusinesarise  amongthe  people. 
And  when  he  wasin  Bethany  in  the  house 
of  Simon  the  Leper,  euen  as  he  sate  at 
meat,  there  came  a  woman  hauing 
an  Alablaster  boxe  of  ointment,  called 
Narde,  that  was  pure  and  costly  :  and 
she  brake  the  boxe  and  powred  it  vpon 
hys  head.  And  there  were  some  that 
wer  not  contente  within  themselues, 
and  sayd  :  what  neded  this  wast  of 
ointmente  ?  for  it  myght  haue 

bene  solde  for  more  then  ccc. 
pence,  and  haue  been  geue  vnto  the 
poore.  And  thei  grudged  agaynste 
her.  And  lesus  saied  :  let  her  alone, 
why  trouble  ye  her?  She  hath  done 
a  good  worke  on  me :  for  ye  haue 
poore  wyth  you  alwayes,  and  when- 
soeuer  ye  wil  ye  may  doe  them  good  : 
but  me  haue  ye  not  alwayes.  She 
hath  done  that  she  coulde,  she  came 
aforehande  to  annoynt  my  body  to  the 
burying.  Verely  I  say  vnto  you  : 
whersoeuer  this  Gospell  shalbe 
preached  throughout  the  whole  worlde, 


[S*:  Mark.  14.  <L 

After  two  dayes,  was  the  feast  of  the 
passeover,  and  of  vnleavened 

bread  :  and  the  chief  Priests  and  the 
Scribes  sought  how  they  might  take 
him  by  craft,  and  put  him  to  death. 
But  they  said,  Not  on  the  feast  day, 
lest  there  be  an  vproar  of  the  people. 
And  being  in  Bethany  in  the  house 
of  Simon  the  Leper,  as  he  sate  at 

meat,  there  came  a  Woman,  having 
an  Alabaster  box  of  ointment  of 
spikenard,  very  pretious,  and 

she  brake  the  box,  and  poured  it  on 
his  head.  And  there  were  some  that 
had  indignation  within  themselves, 
and  said,  Why  was  this  wast  of  the 
ointment  made?  For  it  might  have 
been  sold  for  more  than  three  hundred 
pence,  and  have  been  given  to  the 
poor :  and  they  murmured  against 
her.  And  lesus  said,  Let  her  alone, 
why  trouble  ye  her  ?  she  hath  wrought 
a  good  worke  on  me.  For  you  have 
the  poor  with  you  alwayes,  and  when 
soever  ye  will,  ye  may  do  them  good  : 
but  me  ye  have  not  alwayes.  She 
hath  don  what  she  could  :  she  is  come 
aforehand  to  anoint  my  body  to  the 
burying.  Verily,  I  say  vnto  you, 
Wheresoever  this  Gospel  shall  be 
preached,  throughout  the  whole  world, 


336 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

in  vniuerso  mundo,  et  quod  fecit  hec, 
narrabitur  in  memoriam  eius.  Et 
iudas  scariothis  vnus  de  duodecim  : 
abijt  ad  summos  sacerdotes,  vt  proderet 
eum  illis.  Qui  audientes  gauisi  sunt  : 
&  promiserunt  ei  pecuniam  se  daturos. 
Et  querebat  quomodo  ilium  opportune 
traderet.  Et  primo  die  azymorum 
quando  pascha  immolabant :  dicunt  ei 
discipuli.  Quo  vis  eamus  et  paremus 
tibi,  vt  manduces  pascha  ?  Et  misit 
duos  ex  discipulis  suis :  &  dixit  eis. 
Ite  in  ciuitatem :  et  occurret  vobis 
homo  lagenam  aque  baiulans.  Sequi- 
mini  eum.  Et  quocumque  introierit : 
dicite  domino  domus  :  quia  magister 
dicit.  Vbi  est  refectio  mea,  vbi  pascha. 
cum  discipulis  meis  manducem  ?  Et 
ipse  vobis  demonstrabit  cenaculum 
grande  stratum  :  et  illic  parate  nobis. 
Et  abierunt  discipuli  eius  et  veuerunt 
in  ciuitatem :  et  inuenerunt  sicut 
dixerat  illis,  et  parauerunt  pascha. 
Vespere  autem  facto  :  venit  cum  duo 
decim.  Et  discumbentibus  eis  & 
manducantibus  :  ait  iesus.  Amen  dico 
vobis  :  quia  vnus  ex  vobis  me  tradet 
qui  manducat  mecum.  At  illi  ceperunt 
contristari :  &  dicere  ei  singulatim, 
Nunquid  ego  ?  Qui  ait  illis.  Vnus  ex 
duodecim  :  qui  intingit  mecum  manum 
in  catino.  Et  nlius  quidem  hominis 
vadit  sicut  scriptum  est  de  eo :  ve 
autem  homini  illi  per  quern  nlius 
hominis  tradetur.  Bonum  erat  ei  si 
non  esset  natus  homo  ille.  Et  man 
ducantibus  illis  accepit  iesus  panem  : 
&  benedicens  fregit,  et  dedit  eis  &  ait. 
Sumite,  hoc  est  corpus  meum.  Et 
accepto  calice,  gratias  agens  dedit  eis  : 
&  biberunt  ex  illo  omnes.  Et  ait  illis. 
Hie  est  sanguis  meus  noui  testamenti : 
qui  pro  multis  effundetur.  Amen 
dico  vobis,  quia  iam  non  bibam  de 
genimine  vitis :  vsque  in  diem  ilium 
cum  illud  bibam  nouum  in  regno  dei. 
Et  hymno  dicto  :  exierunt  in  montem 
oliuarum.  Et  ait  eis  iesus.  Omnes 
scandalizabimini  in  me  in  nocte  ista : 


1549 

thys  also  that  she  hath  doone,  shalbe 
rehearsedinremembraunceofher.  And 
Iudas  Iscaryoth,  one  of  the  .xii.  wente 
awaye  vnto  the  bye  Priestes  to  betray 
hym  vnto  them.  When  they  heard 

that,  they  were  glad,  &  promised  that 
they  would  geue  hym  money.  And  he 
sought  how  he  might  coueniently 
betray  him.  And  the  first  day  of 
swete  bread  (when  they  offered 
Passeouer)  hys  disciples  sayd  vnto 
hym  :  where  wilt  thou  that  we  goe  and 
prepare  that  thou  mayest  eate  the 
passeouer  ?  And  he  sente  foorthe 
two  of  hys  disciples,  and  sayde  vnto 
them  :  goe  ye  vnto  the  citie,  and  there 
shal  mete  you  a  man  bearing  a  pitcher 
of  water,  folowe  hym.  And  whitherso- 
euer  he  goeth  in,  say  ye  vnto  the 
goodmanne  of  the  house,  the  maister 
saith  :  where  is  the  geast  chamber, 
where  I  shal  eate  Passeouer  with 
my  disciples  ?  And  he  wil  shewe  you 
a  great  parlor  paued  &  pre 
pared  :  there  make  ready  for  vs. 
And  his  disciples  went  furth,  and 
came  into  the  citie,  &  found  as  he 
had  sayde  vnto  them  :  and  they  made 
ready  the  Passeouer.  And  when  it  was 
nowe  euentyde,  he  came  with  the  .xii. 
And  as  they  sate  at  horde  and  did  eater 
Iesus  said  :  verely  I  say  vnto  you,  one 
of  you  (that  eateth  with  me)  shall 
betray  me.  And  they  began  to  be 
sory,  &  to  saye  to  hym  one  by 
one  :  is  it  I  ?  &  an  other  said  :  is 
it  I  ?  he  aunswered  &  sayd  vnto 
them  :  it  is  one  of  the  .xii.  cue  he 
that  dyppeth  with  me  in  the  platter. 
The  sonne  of  man  truely  goeth  as  it  is 
written  of  him,  but  woe  to  that  man 
by  whome  the  sonne  of  man  is  betrayed: 
Good  were  it  for  that  man,  if  he  had 
neuer  beene  borne.  And  as  they  dyd 
eate,  Iesus  toke  bread,  &  when  he 
had  geuen  thankes  he  brake  it,  and 
gaue  to  them,  and  sayd  :  Take,  eate, 
this  is  my  body.  And  he  toke  the 
cup,  and  when  he  had  geuen  thankes, 
he  toke  it  to  them,  and  they  all  dranke 
of  it.  And  he  sayd  unto  the  :  This 
is  my  bloud  of  the  newe  testamente, 
whiche  is  shed  for  many.  Verely  I 
saye  vnto  you  :  I  will  drinke  no  more 
of  the  fruite  of  the  vyne,  vntil  that 
day  that  I  drinke  it  new  in  the 
kyngdome  of  God.  And  when  they 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


337 


1552 

thys  also  that  she  hath  done,  shal  bee 
rehearsed  in  remembraunce  of  her.  And 
ludas  Iscarioth,  one  of  the  .xii.  went 
away  vnto  the  hye  Priestes  to  betray 
hym  vnto  them.  When  they  heard 

that,  they  wer  glad,  &  promised  that 
they  would  geue  hym  mony.  And  he 
sought  how  he  myght  conueniently 
betray  hym.  And  the  firste  daye  of 
swete  bread  (whe  they  offered 
the  Passeouer)  his  disciples  said  vnto 
him  :  where  wilt  thou  that  we  go  and 
prepare  that  thou  mayst  eate  the 
Passeouer?  And  he  sent  furth 
two  of  his  disciples,  and  said  vnto 
them  :  goe  ye  vnto  the  citie,and  there 
shall  mete  you  a  man  bearyng  a  pitcher 
of  water,  folowe  him.  And  whitherso- 
euer  he  goeth  in,  say  ye  vnto  the 
good  ma  of  the  house,  the  maister 
saith  :  where  is  the  geaste  chamber, 
where  I  shal  eate  Passeouer  with 
my  disciples  ?  And  he  wil  shewe  you 
a  great  parlor,  paued  and  pre 
pared  :  there  make  ready  for  vs. 
And  his  disciples  wente  furth,  and 
came  into  the  citie,  and  founde  as  he 
had  sayed  vnto  them  :  and  they  made 
ready  the  Passeouer.  And  when  it  was 
now  euetyde,  he  came  with  the  .xii. 
And  as  they  sate  at  borde  &  did  eate, 
lesus  sayd  :  verely  I  say  vnto  you,  one 
of  you  (that  eateth  with  me)  shal 
betraye  me.  And  they  bega  to  be 
sory,  and  to  saye  to  him  one  by 
one  :  is  it  I  ?  and  an  other  sayd :  is 
it  I  ?  he  answered,  and  sayed  vnto 
them  :  it  is  one  of  the  .xii.  euen  he 
that  dippeth  with  me  in  the  platter. 
The  sonne  of  man  truely  goeth,  as  it  is 
written  of  him,  but  woe  to  that  man 
by  whom  the  sonne  of  man  is  betrayed : 
Good  were  it  for  that  man,  if  he  had 
neuer  been  borne.  And  as  they  did 
eate,  lesus  tooke  bread,  and  when  he 
had  geuen  thankes,  he  brake  it,  and 
gaue  to  them,  and  sayed  :  Take,  eate, 
thys  is  my  body.  And  he  tooke  the 
cuppe,  and  when  he  had  geuen  thankes, 
he  toke  it  to  them,  and  thei  al  dranke 
of  it.  And  he  said  vnto  the  :  This 
is  my  bloud  of  the  new  testament, 
which  is  shed  for  many.  Verely  I 
saie  vnto  you  :  I  wil  drinke  no  more 
of  the  fruite  of  the  vine,  vntil  that 
daye  that  I  drynke  it  new  in  the 
kyngdome  of  God.  And  when  they 


1661 

this  also  that  she  hath  don  shall  be 
spoken  of  for  a  memorial  of  her.  And 
Judas  Jscariot  one  of  the  twelve,  went 
vnto  the  chief  Priests  to  betray 
him  vnto  them;  And  when  they  heard 
it,  they  were  glad,  and  promised 
to  give  him  mony.  And  he 
sought  how  he  might  conveniently 
betray  him.  And  the  first  day  of 
vnleavened  bread,  when  they  killed 
the  Passeover,  his  disciples  said  vnto 
him,  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  go,  and 
prepare  that  thou  mayst  eat  the 
Passeover?  And  he  sendeth  forth 
two  of  his  disciples,  and  saith  vnto 
them,  Go  ye  into  the  City,  and  there 
shall  meet  you  a  man  bearing  a  Pitcher 
of  water  :  follow  him.  And  whereso 
ever  he  shall  go  in,  say  ye  to  the 
goodman  of  the  house,  The  Master 
saieth,  Where  is  the  guest-chamber, 
where  I  shall  eat  the  Passeover  with 
my  disciples.  And  he  will  shew  you 
a  large  vpper  room  furnished,  and  pre 
pared,  there  make  ready  for  vs. 
And  his  disciples  went  forth,  and 
came  into  the  City,  and  found  as  he 
had  said  vnto  them  :  And  they  made 
ready  the  Passeover.  And  in  the 
evening  he  cometh  with  the  twelve. 
And  as  they  sate  ,  and  did  eat, 

lesus  said,  verily,  I  say  vnto  you,  one 
of  you  which  eateth  with  me,  shall 
betray  me,.  And  they  began  to  be 
sorrowfull,  and  to  say  vnto  him,  one  by 
one,  Is  it  J?  and  another  said,  Is 
it  I  ?  And  he  answered  and  said  vnto 
them,  Jt  is  one  of  the  twelve 
that  dippeth  with  me  in  the  dish. 
The  son  of  man  indeed  goeth  as  it  is 
written  of  him  :  but  wo  to  that  man, 
by  whom  the  son  of  man  is  betrayed  : 
good  were  it  for  that  man  if  he  had 
never  been  born.  And  as  they  did 
eat,  lesus  took  bread,  and 

blessed,  and  brake  it,  and 
gave  to  them,  and  said,  Take,  eat : 
this  is  my  body.  And  he  took  the 
Cup,  and  when  he  had  given  thanks, 
he  gave  it  to  them  :  and  they  all  drank 
of  it.  And  he  said  vnto  them,  This 
is  my  blood  of  the  new  Testament, 
which  is  shed  for  many,  Verily  I 
say  vnto  you,  I  will  drink  no  more 
of  the  fruite  of  the  Vine,  vntill  that 
day  that  I  drink  it  new  in  the 
kingdom  of  God.  And  when  they 


338 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

quia  scriptum  est.  Percutiam  pastorem : 
et  dispergentur  ones.  Sed  postquam 
resurrexero  :  precedam  vos  in  galileam. 
Petrus  autem  ait  illi.  Et  si  omnes 
scandalizati  fuerint :  sed  ron  ego.  Et 
ait  illi  iesus.  Amen  dico  tibi :  quia  tu 
hodie  in  nocte  hac  priusquam  gallus 
bis  vocem  dederit,  ter  me  es  negaturus. 
At  ille  amplius  loquebatur.  Et  si 
oportuerit  me  simul  commori  tibi :  non 
te  negabo.  Similiter  autem  et  omnes 
dicebant.  Et  veniunt  in  predium  cui 
nomen  gethsemani :  et  ait  discipulis 
suis.  Sedete  hie,  donee  orem.  Et  as- 
sumpsit  petrum  et  iacobum  et  iohannem 
secum  :  et  cepit  pauere  et  tedere.  Et 
ait  illis.  Tristis  est  anima  mea  vsque 
ad  mortem.  Sustinete  hie  :  et  vigilate. 
Et  cum  processisset  paululum :  procidit 
super  terram  et  orabat :  vt  si  fieri 
posset  transiret  ab  eo  hora.  Et  dixit. 
Abba  pater,  omnia  tibi  possibilia  sunt : 
transfer  calicem  hunc  a  me.  Sed  non 
quod  ego  volo :  sed  quod  tu.  Et  venit : 
et  inuenit  eos  dormientes.  Et  ait 
petro.  Simon  dormis?  Non  potuisti 
vna  hora  vigilare  ?  Vigilate  &  orate  : 
vt  non  intretis  in  tentationem.  Spiritus 
quidem  promptus  est :  caro  autem 
infirma.  Et  iterum  abiens  orauit : 
eundem  sermonem  dicens.  Et  reuersus 
denuo  inuenit  eos  dormientes.  Erant 
enim  oculi  eorum  grauati :  et  ignora- 
bant  quid  responderent  ei.  Et  venit 
tertio  :  et  ait  illis.  Dormite  iam  :  & 
requiescite.  Sufficit.  Venit  hora  : 
ecce  tradetur  filius  hominis  in  manus 
peccatorum.  Surgite  eamus  :  ecce  qui 
me  tradet  prope  est.  Et  adhuc  eo 
loquente  venit  iudas  scarioth  vnus  ex 
duodecim,  et  cum  eo  multa  turba  cum 
gladijs  et  lignis  :  missi  a  summis  sacer- 
dotibus  et  senioribus  &  scribis. 
Dederat  autem  traditor  eis  signum  : 
dicens.  Quencunque  osculatus  fuero 
ipse  est,  tenete  eum  :  et  ducite 
caute.  Et  cum  venisset  :  statim 
accedens  ad  eum  ait.  Aue  rabbi.  Et 


1549 

had  sayde  grace,  they  wente  oute  to 
mounte  Oliuete.  Andlesussayeth 
vnto  them :  al  ye  shalbe  offended 
because  of  me,  thys  nighte.  For  it  is 
written:  I  will  smite  the  shepeheard  & 
the  shepe  shalbe  scatered  :  but  after 
that  I  am  risen  again,  I  wil  go  into 
Galile  before  you.  Peter  said  vnto 
him :  &  though  al  men  be 

offeded,  yet  will  not  I.  And  Iesus 
saith  vnto  him  :  verely,  I  say  vnto 
thee,  that  this  day,  euen  in  this  night 
before  ye  cocke  krow  twise,  thou 
shalt  deny  me  thre  times.  But  he 
spake  more  vehemetly  :  no,  if  I 
should  die  with  thee,  I  will  not  deny 
thee.  Lykewise  also  sayd 

they  all.  And  they  came  into  a  place 
which  was  named  Gethsemany,  and 
he  sayde  to  his  disciples  :  syt  ye  here 
while  I  goe  asyde  and  praye.  And  he 
taketh  with  hym  Peter,  and  lames, 
&  lohn  and  began  to  waxe 
abashed  and  to  be  in  an  agony,  and 
said  vnto  them.  My  soule  is 
heauy,  euen  vnto  the  death  :  tary  ye 
here  and  watche.  And  he  went  furth  a 
litle  and  fell  downe  flat  on  the  grounde, 
and  prayed,  that  if  it  were  possible, 
the  houre  might  passe  from  him.  And 
he  sayd  :  Abba  father,  all  thinges  are 
possible  vnto  thee,  take  away  thys 
cup  fro  me  :  neuerthelesse,  not  that 
I  will,but  that  thou  wilt  bee  doone.  And 
he  came  and  found  them  slepyng, 
and  sayth  to  Peter :  Simon,  slepest 
thou  ?  Couldest  not  thou  watche  one 
houre?  watche  ye  and  pray,  lest  ye 
enter  into  temptacion :  the  spirite  truely 
is  ready,  but  the  fleshe  is  weake.  And 
again  he  went  asyde  and  prayed,  and 
spake  the  same  woordes.  And 
he  returned  and  founde  them  aslepe 
agayne,  for  theyr  eyes  were  heauy, 
neyther  wiste  they  what  to  aunswere 
hym.  Andhecamethethirdetymeand 
sayd  vnto  them :  slepe  hencefurth  an.d 
take  your  ease,  it  is  inough.  The  houre 
is  come:  behold  the  sonne  of  manne is 
betrayed  into  the  handes  of  synners : 
Rise  vp,  let  vs  go  :  Loe,  he  that 
betraieth  me  is  at  had.  And  imme- 
diatelye  while  he  yet  spake,  cummeth 
Iudas  (whiche  was  one  of  the  .xii.) 
and  with  hym  a  great  noumber  of 
people  with  sweordes  and  staues,  from 
the  hye  Priestes,  and  Scribes, 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


339 


1552 

had  said  grace,  they  went  oute  to 
the  mount  Oliuete.  And  lesussayeth 
vnto  them :  all  ye  shalbe  offended 
because  of  me  this  nyghte.  For  it  is 
writte :  I  wil  smite  the  shepeheard,  and 
the  shepe  shal  be  scatered  :  but  after 
that  I  am  rise  againe,  I  wil  goe  into 
Galile  before  you.  Peter  said  vnto 

him  :    &      though   al    men  be 

offended,  yet  wil  not  I.  And  lesus 
saith  vnto  hym  :  verely,  I  saye  vnto 
thee,  that  this  day,  euen  in  this  nighte, 
beefore  the  cocke  krowe  twise  thou 
shalte  deny  me  three  times.  But  he 
spake  more  vehemently  :  no,  if  I 
shoulde  die  with  thee,  I  will  not  denye 
thee  :  Likewise  also  said 

they  al.  And  they  came  into  a  place 
whiche  was  named  Gethsemany,  and 
he  saied  to  his  disciples  :  sit  ye  here 
while  I  goe  asyde  and  praye.  And  he 
taketh  with  him  Peter,  and  lames, 
and  lohn,  and  began  to  waxe 
abashed  and  to  be  in  an  agony,  and 
said  vnto  them.  Mysouleis 
heauy,  euen  vnto  the  deathe  :  tary  ye 
here  &  watch.  And  he  went  furth  a 
litle  and  fel  down  flat  on  the  grounde, 
&  prayed,  that  if  it  were  possible, 
the  houre  might  passe  from  him.  And 
he  sayed  :  Abba  father,  al  thinges  are 
possible  vnto  thee,  take  away  this 
cup  from  me  :  neuerthelesse,  not  as 
I  wyl,  but  that  thou  wilt  be  doone.  And 
he  came  and  founde  the  slepyng, 
&  sayth  to  Peter :  Simon,  slepeste 
thou?  Couldest  not  thou  watch  one 
houre?  watch  ye  and  pray,  lest  ye 
enter  into  temptacion :  the  spirite  truly 
is  ready,  but  the  fleshe  is  weake.  And 
agayne  he  wente  asyde  and  prayed,  and 
spake  the  same  wordes.  And 
he  returned  &  founde  them  aslepe 
agayne,  for  theyr  eyes  were  heauy, 
neyther  wist  they  what  to  answer 
hym.  Andhecamethethirdetymeand 
saied  vnto  them :  slepe  hencefurth  and 
take  your  ease,  it  is  inoughe.  The  houre 
is  come  :  beholde,  the  sonne  of  man  is 
betrayed  into  the  handes  of  synners  : 
Ryse  vp,  let  vs  goe  :  Loe,  he  that 
betrayeth  me  is  at  hande.  And  imme- 
diatly  whyle  he  yet  spake,  cummeth 
ludas  (which  was  one  of  the  .xii.) 
and  with  hym  a  greate  noumber  of 
people  with  sweordes  and  staues,  from 
the  hie  priestes,  and  Scribes, 


1661 

had  sung  an  hymn,  they  went  out  into 
the  mount  of  Olives.  And  lesus  saith 
vnto  them,  All  ye  shall  be  offended 
because  of  me  this  night :  for  it  is 
written,  I  will  smite  the  shepherd,  and 
the  sheepe  shall  be  scattered,  But  after 
that  I  am  risen,  I  will  go  before 

you  into  Galilee.  But  Peter  said  vnto 
him,  Although  all  shall  be 

offended,  yet  will  not  I.  And  lesus 
saith  vnto  him,  verily  I  say  vnto 
thee,  that  this  day,  even  in  this  night, 
before  the  cock  crow  twice,  thou 
shalt  deny  me  thrice.  But  he 
spake  the  more  vehemently,  If  I 
should  dy  with  thee,  I  will  not  deny" 
thee  in  any  wise.  Likewise  also  sayd 
they  all.  And  they  came  to  a  place 
which  was  named  Gethsemani,  and 
he  saith  to  his  disciples,  sit  ye  here, 
while  I  shall  pray.  And  he 
taketh  with  him  Peter,  and  lames, 
and  lohn,  and  began  to  be  sore 
amazed,  and  to  be  very  heavy,  And 
saith  vnto  them,  My  soul  is  exceeding 
sorrowful  vnto  death :  tarry  ye 
here,  and  watch.  Andhewentforwarda 
little,  and  fell  on  the  ground, 

and  prayed,  that  if  it  were  possible 
the  hour  might  pass  from  him.  And 
he  said,  Abba  Father,  All  things  are 
possible  vnto  thee,  take  away  this 
Cup  from  me  :  nevertheless,  not  what 
I  will,  but  what  thou  wilt  .  And 

he  cometh,  and  findeth  them  sleeping, 
and  saith  vnto  Peter,  Simon,  sleepest 
thou?  couldst  not  thou  watch  one 
hour?  Watch  ye  and  pray,  lest  ye 
enter  into  temptation  :  the  spirit  truly 
is  ready,  but  the  flesh  is  weak.  And 
again  he  went  away,  and  prayed,  and 
spake  the  same  words.  And  when 
he  returned,  he  found  them  asleep 
again,  (for  their  Eyes  were  heavy) 
neither  wist  they  what  to  answer 
him.  And  he  cometh  thethird  time, and 
saith  vnto  them,  Sleep  on  now,  and 
take  your  rest :  it  is  enough ;  the  hour 
is  come,  behold,  the  Son  of  man  is 
betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners. 
Rise  vp,  let  vs  go ;  lo,  he  that 
betrayeth  me  is  at  hand.  And  imme- 
diatly,  while  he  yet  spake,  cometh 
ludas,  one  of  the  twelve, 

and  with  him  a  great  multi 
tude,  with  swords  and  staves,  from 
the  chief  Priests,  and  the  Scribes, 


340 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

osculatus  est  eum.  At  illi  manus 
iniecerunt  in  iesum :  et  tenuerunt 
eum.  Vnus  autem  de  circunstantibus 
educens  gladium,  percussit  seruum 
summi  sacerdotis :  et  amputauit  illi 
auriculam.  Et  respondens  iesus  :  ait 
illis.  Tanquam  ad  latronem  existis 
cum  gladijs  et  lignis :  comprehendere 
me.  Quotidie  eram  apud  vos  in  templo 
docens :  et  non  me  teiiuistis.  Sed  vt 
impleantur  scripture.  Tune  discipuli 
eius  relinquentes  eum :  omnes  f ugerunt. 
Adolescens  autem  quidam  sequebatur 
eum  amictus  sindone  super  nudo  :  & 
tenuerunt  eum.  At  ille  reiecta  sin- 
done  :  nudus  profugit  ab  eis.  Et 
adduxerunt  iesum  ad  summum  sacer- 
dotem  :  et  conuenerunt  omnes  sacer- 
dotes  et  scribe  et  seniores.  Petrus 
autem  a  longe  secutus  est  eum  :  vsque 
intro  in  atrium  summi  sacerdotis.  Et 
sedebat  cum  ministris  :  et  calefaciebat 
se  ad  ignem.  Summi  vero  sacerdotes 
&  omne  concilium  querebant  aduersus 
iesum  testimonium  vt  eum  morti 
traderent :  nee  inueniebant.  Multi 
enim  falsum  testimonium  dicebant 
aduersus  eum  :  et  convenientia  testi- 
monia  illorum  non  erant.  Et  quidam 
surgentes  falsum  testimonium  ferebant 
aduersus  eum  :  dicentes.  Quoniam 
nos  audiuimus  eum  dicentem.  Ego 
dissoluam  templum  hoc  manu  factum  : 
&  post  triduum  aliud  non  manu  factum 
edificabo.  Et  non  erat  conueniens 
testimonium  illorum.  Exurgens  autem 
summus  sacerdos  in  medium  :  inter- 
rogauit  iesum  dicens.  Non  respondes 
quidquam  ad  ea  que  tibi  obijciuntur 
ab  his  ?  Ille  autem  tacebat :  &  nichil 
respondit.  Rursum  summus  sacerdos 
interrogabat  eum  :  et  dixit  ei.  Tu  es 
xps  films  dei  benedicti  ?  Iesus  autem 
dixit  illi.  Ego  sum.  Et  videbitis 
filium  hominis  sedentem  a  dextris 
virtutis  dei :  et  venientem  cum 
nubibus  celi.  Summus  autem  sacer- 


and 


1549 
Elders.    And  he  that  betrayed 


him,  had  geuen  them  a  generall  token, 
saying  :  whosoeuer  I  dooe  kysse,  the 
same  is  he  :  take  him,  and  leade  him 
away  warely.  And  assoone  as  he  was 
come,  he  goeth  straighte  waye  to  him, 
and  saieth  vnto  him :  Maister,  Maister, 
and  kissed  him  :  and  they  layed  theyr 
handes  on  him,  and  toke  him.  And 
one  of  them  that  stoode  by  drewe  out 
a  sweorde,  and  smote  a  seruaunte  of 
the  hye  Prieste,  and  cutte  of  hys  eare. 
And  Iesus  aunswered,  and  sayd  vnto 
them :  ye  be  come  out  as  vnto  a 
thefe  with  sweordes  and  staues, 

for  to  take  me  :  I  was  dayelye  with 
you  in  the  temple  teachyng,  and  ye 
tooke  me  not :  but  these  thynges  come 
to  passe  that  the  Scriptures  shoulde  bee 
fulfylled.  And  they  all  forsooke  hym 
and  ranne  awaye.  And  there  folowed 
him  a  certayne  young  manne  clothed 
in  linnen  vpon  the  bare,  and  the 
young  menne  caught  him,  and  he  left 
his  linnen  garmente  and  fled  from  them 
naked.  And  they  led  Iesus  awaye  to 
the  hygheste  Priest  of  all,  and  with  him 
came  all  the  hye  priestes,  and 
the  Elders,and  the  Scribes.  And  Peter 
folowed  him  a  greate  waye  of  (euen  till 
he  was  come  into  the  palace  of  the  hye 
Prieste)andhesatewiththeseruauntes, 
and  warmed  himselfe  at  the  fyre.  And 
the  hye  Priestes  and  all  the  counsell 
sought  for  witnesse  agaynst  lesu  to 
put  him  to  death,  and  founde  none : 
for  many  bare  false  witnes  agaynste 
hym,  but  theyr  witnesses  agreed  not 
together.  And  there  arose  certayne 
and  broughte  false  witnesse  agaynst 
him,  saying  :  we  heard  him  saye  :  I 
will  destroy  this  temple  that  is  made 
with  handes,  and  within  .iii  dayes 
I  will  builde  an  other  made  without 
handes.  But  yet  theyr  witnesses 
agreed  not  together.  And  the  hye 
priest  stode  vp  among  them,  and 
asked  Iesus,  saying  :  aunswerest  thou 
nothing?  Howe  is  it  that  these  beare 
witnes  agaynste  thee  ?  But  he  helde 
hys  peace,  and  aunswered  nothyng. 
Agayne  the  hye  priest  asked  hym, 
and  sayde  vnto  him  :  arte  thou 
Christ  the  sonne  of  the  blessed  ?  And 
Iesus  said  :  I  am.  And  ye  shall  see 
the  sonne  of  man  sitting  on  the  right 
hand  of  power,  and  dimming  in  the 


MONDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


1552 

and  Elders.  And  he  that  betrayed 
hym,  had  geuen  them  a  general  token, 
saying  :  whosoeuer  I  doe  kysse,  the 
same  is  he  :  take  and  lede  hym 

awaye  warely.  And  assone  as  he  was 
come,  he  goeth  strayght  way  to  him, 
and  sayeth  vnto  hym :  Maister,  Maister, 
and  kissed  hym  :  and  they  layed  theyr 
handes  on  hym,  and  toke  hym.  And 
one  of  them  that  stode  by,  drewe  out 
a  sweorde,  and  smote  a  seruaunt  of 
the  hie  priestes,  and  cutte  of  his  eare. 
And  lesus  aunswered,  and  sayed  vnto 
them  :  ye  bee  come  oute  as  vnto  a 
thefe  with  sweordes  and  staues, 

for  to  take  me  :  I  was  dayelly  with 
you  in  the  temple  teachinge,  and  ye 
tooke  me  not :  but  these  thynges  come 
to  passe  that  the  Scripture  shoulde  bee 
fulfilled.  And  they  al  forsoke  hym 
and  ranne  away :  And  there  folowed 
him  a  certaine  younge  man  clothed 
in  linnen  vpon  the  bare,  and  the 
younge  men  caughte  hym,  and  he  lefte 
his  linnen  garrnente  and  fled  from  them 
naked.  And  they  led  lesus  awaye  to 
the  hyghe  prieste  of  all,  and  with  him 
came  al  the  hie  priestes,  and 
the  Elders,  &  the  Scribes.  And  Peter 
folowed  him  a  greate  waye  of  (cue  til 
he  was  come  into  the  palace  of  the  hie 
priest)  and  he  sate  with  the  seruauntes, 
and  warmed  himself  at  the  fyer.  And 
the  hye  pryestes  and  all  the  counsell 
soughte  for  witnesse  agaynst  lesu  to 
put  him  to  death,  and  founde  none  : 
for  many  bare  false  witnes  againste 
hym,  but  theyr  wytnesses  agreed  not 
together.  And  there  arose  certaine, 
and  brought  false  witnesse  against 
hym,  saying  :  we  heard  hym  saye  :  I 
wyll  destroye  thys  temple  that  is  made 
with  handes,  and  within  three  dayes 
I  wyl  build  an  other  made  withoute 
handes.  But  yet  theyr  witnesses 
agreed  not  together.  And  the  hye 
pryeste  stoode  vp  amonge  them,  and 
asked  lesus,  saying  :  aunswerest  thou 
nothyng?  How  is  it  that  these  beare 
witnesse  agaynste  thee  ?  But  he  helde 
his  peace,  and  answered  nothyng. 
Agayne  the  hye  prieste  asked  hym, 
and  sayed  vnto  hym  :  art  thou 
Christ  the  sonne  of  the  blessed  ?  And 
lesus  sayed  :  I  am.  And  ye  shall  see 
the  sonne  of  man  sitting  on  the  ryght 
hande  of  power,  and  coming  in  the 


1661 

and  the  Elders.  And  he  that  betrayed 
him,  had  given  them  a  token, 

saying,  Whomsoever  I  shall  kiss,  that 
same  is  he ;  take  him,  and  lead  him 
away  safely.  And  as  soone  as  he  was 
come,  he  goeth  straight  way  to  him, 
and  saith,  Master,  Master, 

and  kissed  him ;  And  they  laid  their 
hands  on  him,  and  took  him.  And 
one  of  them  that  stood  by,  drew 
a  sword,  and  smote  a  servant  of 
the  high  Priest,  and  cut  off  his  ear. 
And  lesus  answered,  and  said  vnto 
them,  Are  ye  come  out  as  against  a 
thief,  with  swords,  and  with  staves, 
to  take  me?  I  was  daily  with 
you  in  the  temple,  teaching,  and  ye 
took  me  not :  but 

the  scriptures  must  be 
fulfilled.  And  they  all  forsook  him, 
and  fled.  And  there  followed 
him,  a  certein  young  man  having  a  linen 
cloth  castabout  his  naked  body,  and  the 
youngmenlaidholdonhim.  And  he  left 
the  linen  cloth,  and  fled  from  them 
naked.  And  they  led  lesus  away  to 
the  high  Priest  ,  and  with  him 

wereassembled  all  the  chief  Priests,  and 
the  Elders,  and  the  Scribes ;  And  Peter 
followed  him  a  far  off,  even 

into  the  palace  of  the  high 
Priest :  and  he  sate  with  the  servants, 
and  warmed  himselfe  at  the  fire  :  And 
the  chief  Priests,  and  all  the  councel 
sought  for  witness  against  lesus,  to 
put  him  to  death,  and  found  none. 
For  many  bare  fals  witness  against 
him,  but  their  witness  agreed  not 
together.  And  there  arose  certein, 
and  bare  fals  witness  against 
him,  saying,  We  heard  him  say,  I 
will  destroy  this  temple,  that  is  made 
with  hands,  and  within  three  dayes, 
I  will  build  another  made  without 
hands.  But  neither  so  did  their 
witness  agree  together.  And  the  high 
Priest  stood  vp  in  the  mids,  and 
asked  lesus,  saying,  Answerest  thou 
nothing?  What  is  it  which  these 
witness  against  thee?  But  he  held 
his  peace,  and  answered  nothing. 
Again  the  high  Priest  asked  him, 
and  said  vnto  him,  Art  thou  the 
Christ,  the  son  of  the  blessed  ?  And 
lesus  said,  I  am  ;  and  ye  shall  see 
the  son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right 
hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the 


342 


TUESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

dos  scindens  vestimenta  sua :  ait. 
Quid  adhuc  desideramus  testes?  Au- 
distis  blasphemiam.  Quid  vobis 
videtur  ?  Qui  omnes  condemnauerunt 
eum  esse  reum  mortis.  Et  ceperunt 
quidam  conspuere  in  eum,  et  velare 
faciem  eius  :  et  colaphis  eum  cedere  & 
dicere  ei.  Prophetiza.  Et  ministri  alapis 
eum  cedebant.  Et  cum  esset  petrus 
in  atrio  seorsum  :  venit  vna  ex  ancillis 
summi  sacerdotis.  Et  cum  vidisset 
petrum  calefacientem  se  :  aspiciens 
ilium  ait.  Et  tu  cum  iesu  nazareno 
eras.  At  ille  negauit :  dicens.  Neque 
scio,  neque  noui  quid  dicas.  Et  exijt 
foras  ante  atrium :  et  gallus  cantauit. 
Rursus  autem  cum  vidisset  ilium  alia 
ancilla,  cepit  dicere  circunstantibus : 
quia  hie  ex  illis  est.  At  ille  iterum 
negauit.  Et  post  pusillum  rursus  qui 
astabant,  dicebant  petro.  Vere  ex  illis 
es :  nam  et  galileus  es.  Ille  autem 
cepit  anathematizare  et  iurare  :  quia 
nescio  hominem  istum  quern  dicitis. 
Et  statim  gallus  iterum  cantauit.  Et 
recordatus  est  petrus  verbi  quod  dixerat 
ei  iesus  (priusquam  gallus  cantet  bis, 
ter  me  negabis)  et  cepit  Here.  (  +  xv 
1-46)] 

C  Feria  tertia  post  dominicam  in  ramis 

palmarum. 

[Jer.  xi  18-20] 

[Feria  .ij.     Lectio  esaie  prophete. 

IN  diebus  illis.  Dixit  esaias  Do- 
minus  deus  meus  aperuit  michi  aurem : 
ego  autem  non  contradico,  retrorsum 
non  abij.  Corpus  meum  dedi  per- 
cutientibus :  et  genas  meas  vellentibus. 
Faciem  meam  non  auerti  ab  incre- 
pantibus  et  conspuentibus  in  me. 
Dominus  deus  auxiliator  meus :  ideo 
non  sum  confusus.  Ideo  posui  faciem 
meam  vt  petram  durissimam :  et  scio 
quoniam  non  confundar.  luxta  est 
qui  iustificat  me:  quis  contradicet 


1549 

cloudes  of  heauen.  Then  the  hye 
prieste  rente  hys  clothes,  and  sayde  : 
what  nede  we  any  further  of  witnesses  ? 
ye  haue  heard  blasphemy,  what 
think  ye?  And  they  all  condemned 
him  to  be  woorthye  of  deathe.  And 
some  began  to  spyt  at  hym,  and  to 
couer  hys  face,  and  to  beate  him 
with  fistes,  &  to  say  vnto  him  : 
Areade,  and  the  seruauntes  buffeted 
him  on  the  face.  And  as  Peter  was 
beneth  in  the  palace,  there  came 
one  of  the  weches  of  the  hiest  priest, 
and  whe  she  saw  Peter  warming 
himselfe,  she  loked  on  him,  and 
sayde :  wast  not  thou  also  with  Iesus  of 
Nazareth?  And  he  denyed,  saying: 
I  know  him  not,  neither  wote  I 
what  thou  sayeste.  And  he  wente  out 
into  the  porche,  and  the  cocke  krewe. 
And  a  damosel  (when  she  saw  him) 
began  agayn  to  say  to  them  that 
stoode  by  :  thys  is  one  of  the.  And 
he  denyed  it  agayne.  And  anone  after 
they  that  stoode  by,  sayde  agayne  vnto 
Peter :  surelye  thou  art  one  of  them, 
for  thou  art  of  Galyle,  &  thy  speache 
agreeth  therto.  But  he  began  to 
curse  and  to  sweare,  saying  :  I  knowe 
not  thys  man  of  whome  ye  speake. 
And  agayn  the  Cocke  krewe  :  and 
Peter  remembred  the  worde  that  Iesus 
had  sayde  vnto  hym :  before  the  cocke 
crow  twise,  thou  shalt  denie  me  thre 
times.  And 
he  began  to  wepe. 

<L  TEWESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER. 

The  Epistle. 

[Esai.  1. 

THC  lorde  God  hath  opened  myne 
eare,  therefore  can  I  not  say  nay, 
neyther  withdrawe  my  selfe  :  but  I  offer 
my  backe  vnto  the  smiters,  and  my 
chekes  to  the  nippers. 

I  turne  not  my  face  from 
shame  and  spittyng,  and  the  lord 
god  shal  helpe  me  :  Therfore  shal  I 
not  be  confounded.  I  haue 

hardened  my  face  lyke  a  flint  stone,  for 
I  am  sure  that  I  shall  not  come  to 
confusion.  He  is  at  hand  that  iusti- 
fieth  me,  who  wil  then  goe  to  lawe  with 
me?  Let vsstandeoneagaynst an  other: 
if  there  be  any  that  will  reason  with  me, 
let  hym  come  here  foorth  vnto  me.  Be- 


TUESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


343 


1552 

cloudes  of  heauen.  Then  the  hye 
prieste  rente  his  clothes,  and  sayed  : 
what  nede  we  any  further  of  witnesses? 
ye  haue  heard  blasphemye,  what 
thinke  ye?  And  they  al  condemned 
him  to  bee  worthy  of  death.  And 
some  began  to  spit  at  hym,  and  to 
couer  hys  face,  and  to  beate  him 
with  fistes,  and  to  say  vnto  hym  : 
Arcade,  and  the  seruauntes  buffeted 
hym  on  the  face.  And  as  Peter  was 
beneth  in  the  palace,  there  came 
one  of  the  wenches  of  the  hiest  prieste, 
and  when  she  sawe  Peter  warming 
hymselfe,  she  loked  on  hym,  and 
said:  wast  not  thou  also  with  lesus  of 
Nazareth  ?  But  he  denied,  sayinge  : 
I  know  hym  not,  neither  wote  I 
what  thou  sayest.  And  he  went  out 
into  the  porche,  and  the  cocke  krewe. 
And  a  damosell  (when  she  sawe  hym) 
began  againe  to  saye  to  them  that 
stode  by :  this  is  one  of  them.  And 
he  denied  it  again.  And  anone  after 
they  that  stode  by,  sayed  agayne  vnto 
Peter :  surely  thou  arte  one  of  them, 
for  thou  arte  of  Galile,  and  thy  speche 
agreeth  thereto.  But  he  began  to 
curse  and  to  sweare,  saying  :  I  knowe 
not  thys  man  of  whom  ye  speake. 
And  agayne  the  cocke  krewe  :  and 
Peter  remebred  the  worde  that  lesus 
had  sayed  vnto  hym :  before  the  cocke 
crowe  twise,  thou  shalt  deny  me  three 
tymes.  And 
he  began  to  wepe. 

TUESDAIE   BEFORE   EASTER. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Esai.  1. 

Tne  lord  God  hath  opened  myne 
eare,  therfore  can  I  not  say  nay, 
neyther  withdraw  my  selfe :  but  I  offer 
my  backe  vnto  the  smiters,  and  my 
chekes  to  the  nippers. 

I  turne  not  my  face  from 
shame  &  spitting,  and  the  lord 
god  shal  helpe  me  :  Therfore  shal  I 
not  be  confounded.  I  haue 

hardened  my  face  like  a  flint  stone,  for 
I  am  sure  that  I  shal  not  come  to 
confusion.  He  is  at  hande  that  iusti- 
fieth  me,  who  wil  then  goe  to  lawe  with 
me?  Letvsstandeoneagaynstanother: 
if  there  be  any  that  wy  11  reason  with  me, 
let  hym  come  here  foorth  to  me.  Be- 


1661 

Clouds  of  heaven.  Then  the  high 
Priest  rent  his  clothes,  and  saith, 
What  need  we  any  further  witnesses? 
Ye  have  heard  the  blasphemy :  what 
think  ye  ?  And  they  all  condemned 
him  to  be  guilty  of  death.  And 
some  began  to  spit  on  him,  and  to 
cover  his  face,  and  to  buffet  him,  and 
to  say  vnto  him,  Prophesy ;  and  the 
servants  did  strike  him  with  the 
palms  of  theirhands.  And  as  Peter  was 
beneath  in  the  palace,  there  cometh 
one  of  the  maids  of  the  high  Priest. 
And  when  she  saw  Peter  warming 
himself,  she  looked  vpon  him,  and 
said,  And  thou  also  wast  with  lesus  of 
Nazareth.  But  he  denyed,  saying, 
I  know  not,  neither  vnderstand  I 

what  thou  sayest.  And  he  went  out 
into  the  porch,  and  the  cock  crew. 
And  a  maid  saw  him  again, 
and  began  to  say  to  them  that 
stood  by,  This  is  one  of  them.  And 
he  denied  it  again.  And  a  little  after, 
they  that  stood  by  said  again  to 
Peter,  surely  thou  art  one  of  them  : 
for  thou  art  a  Galilean,  and  thy  speech 
agreeth  thereto.  But  he  began  to 
curs,  and  to  swear,  saying,  I  know 
not  this  man  of  whom  ye  speak. 
And  thesecondtime,thecock crew:  and 
Peter  called  to  mind  the  word  that  lesus 
said  vnto  him,  Before  the  cock 
crow  twice,  thou  shalt  deny  me 
thrice.  And  when  he  thought  thereon, 
he  wept. 

TUESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER. 

9For  the  Epistle. 

[Esay.  50.  45. 

The  Lord  God,  hath  opened  mine 
ear,  and  I  was  not  rebellious, 
neither  turned  away  back.  I  gave 
my  back  to  the  smiters,  and  my 
cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off 
the  hair :  I  hid  not  my  face  from 
shame,  and  spitting.  For  the  Lord 
God  will  help  me,  therefore  shall  I 
not  be  confounded  :  therefore  have  I 
set  my  face  like  a  flint  ,  and 

I  know  that  I  shall  not  be 
ashamed.  He  is  neer  that  iusti- 
fieth  me,  who  will  contend  with 

me  ?  let  vs  stand  together  : 
Who  is  mine  adversary  ? 
let  him  come  neer  to  me.  Be- 


344 


TUESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

michi  ?  Stemus  simul  :  quis  est 
aduersarius  meus?  Accedat  ad  me. 
Ecce  dominus  auxiliator  meus :  quis 
est  qui  condemnet  me?  Ecce  omnes 
quasi  vestimentum  conterentur  tinea 
comedet  eos.  Quis  ex  vobis  timens 
deum :  audiens  vocem  serui  sui  ?  Quis 
ambulauit  in  tenebris  &  non  est  lumen 
ei  ?  Speret  in  nomine  domini :  & 
innitatur  super  deum  suum.] 


C  Passio  domini  nostri  lesu  xpi  secundum 
Marcum. 

[Marc.  xiv  +  ]  Et  confestim  mane 
consilium  facientes  summi  sacerdotes 
cum  senioribus  &  scribis  &  vniuerso 
concilio :  vincientes  iesum  duxerunt, 
&  tradiderunt  pilato.  Et  interrogauit 
eum  pilatus.  Tu  es  rex  iudeorum? 
At  ille  respondens  ait  illi.  Tu  dicis. 
Et  accusabant  eum  summi  sacerdotes 
in  multis.  Pilatus  autem  rursum  inter 
rogauit  eum  :  dicens.  Non  respondes 
quidquam?  Vide  in  quantis  te  accu- 
sant.  lesus  autem  amplius  nichil 
respondit :  ita  vt  miraretur  pilatus. 
Per  diem  autem  festum  solebat 
dimittere  illis  vnum  ex  vinctis  :  quen- 
cunque  petissent.  Erat  autem  qui 
dicebatur  barabbas  :  qui  cum  seditiosis 
erat  vinctus,  qui  in  seditioue  fecerat 
homicidium.  Et  cum  ascendisset  turba: 
cepit  rogare  sicut  semper  faciebat  illis. 
Pilatus  autem  respondit  eis :  et  dixit. 
Vultis  dimittam  vobis  regem  iudeorum? 
Sciebat  enim  quod  per  inuidiam  tradi- 
dissent  eum  summi  sacerdotes.  Ponti- 
fices  autem  concitarunt  turbam :  vt 
magis  barabbam  dimitteret  eis.  Pilatus 
autem  iterum  respondens:  ait  illis. 
Quid  ergo  vultis  faciam  regi  iudeorum  ? 
At  illi  iterum  clamauerunt.  Crucifige 
eum.  Pilatus  vero  dicebat  eis.  Quid 
enim  mali  fecit  ?  At  illi  magis  clama- 


1549 

holde,  the  Lorde  God  standeth  by  me, 
what  is  he  then  that  can  condemne 
me?  loe,  they  shall  be  all  lyke  as  an  olde 
cloth,  the  moth  shall  eate  them  vp. 
Therefore,  whoso  feareth  the  Lorde 
among  you,  let  him  heare  the  voyce 
of  hys  seruaunte.  Whoso  walketh  in 
darkenes,  and  no  lighte  shyneth  vpon 
hym,  let  hym  put  his  trust  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  and  holde  him  by  his 
God  :  but  take  hede,  ye  al  kindle  a 
fyre  of  the  wrath  of  God,  and  steare 
vp  the  coales  :  walke  on  in  the  glystr- 
yng  of  your  owne  fyer,  and  in  the  coales 
that  ye  haue  kyndled.  Thys  cummeth 
vnto  you  from  my  hande,  namelye  that 
ye  shall  slepe  in  sorowe. 

The  Gospell. 

[      Mar.  xv. 

ANd  anone  in  the  dawning,  the 
hye  priestes  held  a  counsel  with 
the  Elders  and  the  Scribes,  and  the 
whole  congregacion, and  bounde  lesus, 
and  led  hym  away,  and  deliuered 
him  to  Pilate.  And  Pilate  asked  hym : 
art  thou  the  kyng  of  the  lewes?  and 
he  aunswered  &  sayd  vnto  him  :  thou 
sayst  it.  And  the  hye  Priestes 
accused  him  of  many  thynges 

.      So    Pylate 

askedhymagayne, saying :  aunswereste 
thou  nothyng  ?     Beholde  howe  many 
thinges  they  laye  vnto  thy  charge, 
lesus  yet  aunswered  nothing,  so  that 
Pilate  merueiled.  At  that  feast 

Pilatediddeliuervnto  them  a  priesoner, 
whomesoeuer  they  would  desyre.   And 
there  was  one  that  was  named  Barrabas, 
which  lay  bound  with  them  that 
made  insurreccion  :   he  had 

committed  murther 
And  the  people  called  vnto  him,  and 
began  to  desyre  him,  that  he  woulde 
doe  according  as  he  had  euer  done 
vntothem.  Pilateaunsweredthem, 
saying:  will  ye  that  I  letteloocevntoyou 
the  king  of  the  lewes  ?  For  he  knewe 
that  the  hye  priestes  had  delyuered  him 
of  enuie.  But  the  hye  priestes  moued 
the  people,  that  he  should  rather  de- 
liuer  Barrabas  vnto  them.  Pilate 

aunswered  agayne,  and  sayde  vnto 
them :  what  will  ye  that  I  then  doe 
vnto  him,  whome  ye  call  the  king  of  the 
lewes?  And  they  cryed  again, 
crucifye  him.  Pilate  said  vnto 


TUESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


345 


1552 

holde,  the  lorde  God  standeth  by  me, 
what  is  he  then  that  can  condemne 
me?  loe,  they  shall  be  like  as  an  olde 
cloth,  the  moth  shall  eate  them  vp. 
Therfore,  whoso  feareth  the  Lord 
among  you,  let  him  heare  the  voyce 
of  his  seruaunte.  Whoso  walketh  in 
darkenes,  and  no  light  shineth  vpon 
him,  let  hym  put  hys  trust  in  the  name 
of  the  lord,  and  holde  hym  vp  by  hys 
god  :  but  take  hede,  ye  al  kindle  a 
fyre  of  the  wrath  of  god,  and  steare 
vp  the  coales  :  walke  on  in  the  glystr- 
yng  of  your  owne  fyre,  and  in  the  coales 
thatyehauekyendled.  Thyscummeth 
vnto  you  from  my  hande,  namely  that 
ye  shal  slepe  in  sorowe. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[      Mark,  xv 

ANd  anon  in  the  dawninge,  the 
hie  priestes  helde  a  counsell  with 
the  Elders  and  the  Scribes,  and  the 
whole  congregacion,and  bounde  lesus, 
and  led  him  awaye,  and  deliuered 
him  to  Pilate.  And  Pilate  asked  him : 
art  thou  the  kyng  of  the  I  ewes?  and 
he  answered  and  sayed  to  him :  thou 
saist  it.  And  the  hye  priestes 
accused  him  of  many  thynges 

.      So    Pilate 

asked  hym  agayne,  saying :  answerest 
thou  nothyng?     Behold    how  many 
thinges  they  laye     to  thy  charge, 
lesus  answered  yet  nothyng,  so  that 
Pilate  merueiled.  At  that  feast 

Pilatedyddeliuervntothemapriesoner, 
whomesoeuertheywouldedesyre.  And 
therewasone  thatwasnamed  Barrabas, 
which  lay  bounde  with  them  that 
made  insurreccion  :   he  had 

comitted  murther 

And  the  people  called  vnto  hym,  & 
began  to  desyre  hym,  that  he  woulde 
dooe  accordyng  as  he  had  euer  done 
vnto  them.  Pilate  answered  them, 

saying :  wyl  ye  that  I  let  looce  vnto  you 
the  kyng  of  the  lewes?  for  he  knew 
that  the  hie  priestes  had  deliuered  him 
of  enuye.  But  the  hye  priestes  moued 
the  people  that  he  should  rather  de- 
lyuer  Barrabas  vnto  them.  Pilate 

answered  agayne,  and  sayed  vnto 
the:  what  wil  ye  that  I  then  doe 

vnto  him,  who  ye  cal  the  king  of  the 
lewes?  And  they  cryed  agayne, 
crucifie  him.  Pilate  said  vnto 


1661 

hold,  the  Lord  God  will  help  me, 
who  is  he  that  shall  condemn 

me  ?  Lo,  they  all  shall  wax  old,  as  a 
garment :  the  moth  shall  eat  them  vp. 
Who  is  among  you  that  feareth 
the  Lord,  that  obeyeth  the  voice 
of  his  servant,  that  walketh  in 
darkness,  and  hath  no  light 

?  let  him  trust  in  the  name 

of  the  Lord,  and  stay  vpon  his 
God.  Behold,  all  ye  that  kindle  a 
fire,  that  compass  your  selves  about 
with  sparks  :  walke  in  the  light 
of  your  fire,  and  in  the  sparks 

that    ye   have   kindled.      This  shall 
ye  have  of  mine  hand, 
ye  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow. 

The  Gospel. 

[S»:  Mark.  15.  «1. 

And  straight  way  in  the  morning,  the 
chief  Priests  held  a  consultation  with 
the  Elders,  and  Scribes,  and  the 
whole  councel,  and  bound  lesus, 
and  carried  him  away,  and  delivered 
him  to  Pilate.  And  Pilate  asked  him, 
Art  thou  the  King  of  the  lewes  ?  And 
he  answering,  said  vnto  him,  Thou 
saiest  it.  And  the  chief  Priests 
accused  him  of  many  things :  but 
he  answered  nothing.  And  Pilate 
asked  him  again,  saying,  Answerest 
thou  nothing  ?  behold,  how  many 
things  they  witness  against  thee.  But 
lesus  yet  answered  nothing  ;  so  that 
Pilate  marvelled.  Now  at  that  feast 
he  released  vnto  them  one  Prisoner, 
whomsoever  they  desired.  And 
therewasone  named  Barabbas, 

which  lay  bound  with  them  that  had 
made  insurrection  with  him,  who  had 
comitted  murder  in  the  Insurrection. 
And  the  multitude  crying  aloud, 
began  to  desire  him  to 

do  as  he  had  ever  don 
vnto  them.  But  Pilate  answered  them, 
saying,  Will  ye  that  I  release  vnto  you 
the  King  of  the  lews  ?  (For  he  knew 
that  the  chief  Priests  had  delivered  him 
for  envy)  But  the  chief  Priests  moved 
the  people  that  he  should  rather  re 
lease  Barabbas  vnto  them.  And  Pilate 
answered,  and  said  again  vnto 
them,  What  will  ye  then  that  I  shall  do 
vnto  him  whom  ye  call  the  King  of  the 
lews?  And  they  cried  out  again, 
Crucifie  him.  Then  Pilate  said  vnto 


346 


TUESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

bant.  Crucifige  eum.  Pilatus  autem 
volens  populo  satisfacere,  dimisit  illis 
barabbam :  et  tradidit  eis  iesum  flagellis 
cesum,  vt  crucifigeretur.  Milites  autem 
duxerunt  eum  in  atrium  pretorij  :  et 
conuocant  totam  cohortem,  et  induunt 
eum  purpura.  Et  imponunt  ei  plec- 
tentes  spineam  coronam :  et  ceperunt 
salutare  eum.  Aue  rex  iudeorum.  Et 
percutiebant  caput  eius  arundine  et 
conspuebant  eum  :  &  ponentes  genua 
adorabant  eum.  Etpostquam  illuserunt 
ei,  exuerunt  ilium  purpura:  &  in- 
duerunt  eum  vestimentis  suis.  Et 
educunt  ilium  vt  crucifigerent  eum  : 
et  angariauerunt  pretereuntem  quem- 
piam  simonem  cyreneum  venientem  de 
villa,  patrem  alexandri  et  run :  vt 
tolleret  crucem  eius.  Et  perducunt 
ilium  in  golgotha  locum  :  quod  est 
interpretatum  calvarie  locus.  Et 
dabant  ei  bibere  myrrhatum  vinum :  et 
non  accepit.  Et  crucifigentes  eum, 
diuiserunt  vestimenta  eius  :  mittentes 
sortem  super  eis,  quis  quid  tolleret. 
Erat  autem  hora  tertia :  &  crucifixerunt 
eum.  Et  erat  titulus  cause  eius  in- 
scriptus:  rex  iudeorum.  Et  cum  eo 
crucifigunt  duos  latrones :  vnum  a 
dextris,  et  alium  a  sinistris  eius.  Et 
adimpleta  est  scriptura  que  dicit :  et 
cum  iniquis  reputatus  est.  Et  pretere- 
untes  blasphemabant  eum :  mouentes 
capita  sua  et  dicentes.  Vah  qui 
destruis  templum  dei  :  et  in  tribus 
diebus  reedificas  illud.  Saluum  fac 
temetipsum  :  descendens  de  cruce. 
Similiter  et  summi  sacerdotes  illu- 
dentes :  ad  alterutrum  cum  scribis 
dicebant.  Alios  saluos  fecit :  seipsum 
non  potest  saluum  facere.  Xps  rex 
israel  descendat  nunc  de  cruce :  vt 
videamus  et  credamus.  Et  qui  cum 
eo  crucifixi  erant :  conuiciabantur  ei. 
Et  facta  hora  sexta :  tenebre  facte 
sunt  per  totam  terram  vsque  in  horam 
nonam.  Et  hora  nona  exclamauit 
iesus  voce  magna :  diceus.  Heloi, 


1549 

them  :  what  euil  hath  he  done  ? 

And  they  cried  the  more  fer- 
uently,  crucifye  hym.  And  so  Pilate 
willing  to  content  the  people,  lette 
looce  Barrabas  vnto  them,  and  de- 
lyuered  vp  Iesus  (whe  he  had  scourged 
him)  for  to  be  crucified.  And  the 
souldiours  led  hym  away  into  the 
common  hall,  and  called  together  the 
whole  multytude,  &  they  clothed  hym 
with  purple,  and  they  platted  a  croune 
of  thornes  and  crouned  hym  withall, 
and  began  to  salute  him  :  Hayle  king 
of  the  lewes.  And  they  smote  him 
on  the  head  with  a  reede,  and  did  spyt 
vpon  hym,  and  bowed  theyr  knees  and 
wurshypped  hym.  And  when  they 
had  mocked  hym,  they  tooke  the  purple 
of  him,  and  put  hys  owne  clothes 
on  hym,  and  led  hym  out  to  crucifye 
him.  And  they  compelled  one  that 
passed  by  called  Simon  of  Cirene 
(the  father  of  Alexander  and  Rufus) 
whiche  came  out  of  the  fielde,  to  beare 
his  crosse.  And  they  brought  him 
to  a  place  named  Golgotha  (whiche,  if 
a  man  interprete  it,  is  the  place  of  dead 
mennes  sculles)  and  they  gaue  him  to 
drinke,  wine  mingled  with  mirrhe,  but 
he  receiued  it  not.  And  when  they 
had  crucifyed  hym,  they  parted  his 
garmentes,  castyng  lottes  vpon  them 
what  euery  man  shoulde  take.  And  it 
was  about  the  thyrde  houre,  and  they 
crucifyed  him.  And  the  tytle 
of  his  cause  was  written  :  The 

kyng  of  the  lewes.  And  they  crucyfyed 
with  hym  two  theues  :  the  one  on  hys 
righte  hande,  and  the  other  on  hys  left. 
And  the  scripture  was  fulfiled,  whiche 
sayeth  :  he  was  counted  among  the 
wicked.  And  they  that  wente  by, 
rayled  on  him,  wagging  their  heades, 
and  saying  :  A  wretch,  thou  that  de- 
stroyest  the  temple  and  buildest  it 
agayne  in  three  dayes  :  saue  thy  selfe 
and  come  downe  fro  the  crosse. 
Lykewyse  also  mocked  him  the  hye 
priestes  among  themselues  with  the 
Scribes,  and  sayed  :  he  saued  other 
men,  himselfe  he  cannot  saue.  Let 
Christ  the  kyng  of  Israeli  descend 
now  from  the  crosse,  that  we  may 
see  and  beleue.  And  they  that  were 
crucified  with  him,  checked  him  also. 
And  when  the  sixt  houre  was  come, 
darkenes  arose  ouer  all  the  earth, 


TUESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


347 


1552 

them  :  what  euil  hath  he  done  ? 

And  they  cried  the  more  fer- 
uently,  crucifye  him.  And  so  Pilate 
willing  to  content  the  people,  let 
looce  Barrabas  vnto  them,  &  de- 
liuered  vp  lesus  (when  he  had  scourged 
hym)  for  to  be  crucified.  And  the 
souldiours  led  him  away  into  the 
comon  hall,  and  called  together  the 
whole  multitude,  and  thei  clothed  him 
with  purple,  and  thei  platted  a  croune 
of  thornes  and  crouned  hym  withal, 
and  began  to  salute  hym  ;  Hailekyng 
of  the  lewes.  And  they  smote  him 
on  the  head  with  a  reede,  and  did  spit 
vpon  hym,  and  bowed  their  knees  & 
wurshipped  hym.  And  when  they 
had  mocked  hym,  they  toke  the  purple 
of  hym,  and  put  hys  own  clothes 
on  him,  and  ledde  hym  oute  to  crucifie 
hym.  And  they  compelled  one  that 
passed  by  called  Symon  of  Syrene 
(the  father  of  Alexander  and  Rufus) 
whiche  came  oute  of  the  fielde,  to  beare 
hys  crosse.  And  they  brought  hym 
to  a  place  named  Golgotha  ( whiche  if 
a  man  interprete  ,  is  the  place  of  dead 
mens  sculles  :)  and  they  gaue  hym  to 
drynke,  wyne  mingled  with  mirrhe,  but 
he  receiued  it  not.  And  whe  thei 
had  crucified  him  :  they  parted  his 
garmentes,  castyng  lottes  vpon  them 
what  euery  man  should  take.  And  it 
was  aboute  the  thyrde  houre,  and  they 
crucified  hym.  And  the  title 
of  hys  cause  was  written  .  The 
kyng  of  the  lewes.  And  they  crucified 
with  hym  two  theues  :  the  one  on  hys 
ryght  hand,  and  the  other  on  hys  lefte. 
And  the  scripture  was  fulfilled,  which 
saith  :  he  was  couted  among  the 
wycked.  And  they  that  wente  by, 
rayled  on  hym,  wagging  their  heades, 
and  saying  :  A  wretche,  thou  that  de- 
stroyest  the  temple,  and  buildeste  it 
agayne  in  three  dayes  :  saue  thy  selfe 
and  come  down  from  the  crosse. 
Lykewyse  also  mocked  hym  the  hye 
priestes  among  themselues  with  the 
Scribes,  and  sayed  :  he  saued  other 
men,  himselfe  he  cannot  saue.  Let 
Christ  the  king  of  Israel  descende 
now  from  the  crosse,  that  we  maye 
see  and  beleue.  And  they  that  wer 
crucified  with  hym,  checked  hym  also. 
And  when  the  sixt  houre  was  come, 
darkenes  arose  ouer  al  the  earth, 


1661 

them,  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  don? 
And  they  cried  out  the  more  exceed 
ingly,  Crucifie  him.  And  so  Pilate, 
willing  to  content  the  people,  re 
leased  Barabbas  vnto  them,  and  de 
livered  lesus,  when  he  had  scourged 
him,  to  be  crucified.  And  the 

soldiers  led  him  away  into  the  hall 
called  Pretorium,and  theycall  together 
the  whole  band.  And  they  clothed  him 
with  purple,  and  platted  a  crown 
of  thorns,  and  put  it  about  his  head. 
And  began  to  salute  him.  Hail  King 
of  the  lews.  And  they  smote  him 
on  the  head  with  a  reed,  and  did  spit 
vpon  him,  and  bowing  their  knees, 
worshipped  him.  And  when  they 
had  mocked  him,  they  took  off  the  Pur 
ple  from  him,  and  put  his  own  clothes 
on  him,  and  led  him  out  to  crucifie 
him.  And  they  compell  one  Simon 
a  Cirenian,  who  passed  by,  coming 
out  of  the  country,  the  father  of 
Alexander  and  Rufus,  to  bear 
his  cross.  And  they  bring  him 
vnto  the  place  Golgotha,  which 

is  being  interpreted,  the  place 
of  a  scull.  And  they  gave  him  to 
drink,  wine  mingled  with  mirrh  :  but 
he  received  it  not.  And  when  they 
had  crucified  him,  they  parted  his 
garments,  casting  lots  vpon  them, 
what  every  man  should  take.  And  it 
was  the  third  hour,  and  they 

crucified  him.  And  the  superscription 
of  his  Accusation  was  written  over,  The 
King  of  the  Jews.  And  with  him  they 
crucified  two  theeves,  the  one  on  his 
right  hand,  the  other  on  his  left. 
And  the  Scripture  was  fulfilled,  which 
saith,  And  he  was  numbred  with  the 
transgressors.  And  they  that  passed  by, 
railed  on  him,  wagging  their  heads, 
and  saying,  Ah  ,  thou  that  de- 

stroiest  the  temple,  and  buildest  it 
in  three  dayes,  save  thy  selfe, 
and  come  down  from  the  Cross. 
Likewise  also,  the  chief  Priests  mock 
ing,  said  among  themselves  with  the 
Scribes.  He  saved  others, 

himself  he  cannot  save.  Let 
Christ  the  King  of  Israel  descend 
now  from  the  Cross,  that  we  may 
see  and  believe  :  And  they  that  were 
crucified  with  him,  reviled  him 
And  when  the  sixth  hour  was  come, 
there  was  darkness  over  the  whole  land, 


348 


WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

heloi,  lamazabathani  ?  Quod  est 
interpretation :  Deus  meus,  deus  meus 
vt  quid  dereliquisti  me?  Ei  quidam 
de  circumstantibus  audientes :  dice- 
bant.  Ecce  heliam  vocat.  Currens 
autem  vnus  et  implens  spongiam  aceto: 
circumponensque  calamo,  potum  dabat 
ei  dicens.  Sinite  videamus  si  veniat 
helias :  ad  deponendum  eum.  lesus 
autem  emissa  voce  magna :  expirauit. 
Et  velum  templi  scissum  est  in  duo  : 
a  summo  vsque  deorsum.  Videns 
autem  centurio  qui  ex  aduerso  stabat : 
quia  sic  clamans  exspirasset,  ait.  Vere 
hie  homo  films  dei  erat.  Erant  autem 
et  mulieres  de  longe  aspicientes :  inter 
quas  erat  maria  magdalene,  et  maria 
iacobi  minoris  et  ioseph  mater,  et 
salome.  Et  cum  esset  in  galilea : 
sequebantur  eum  et  ministrabant  ei : 
et  alie  multe  que  simul  cum  eo  ascen- 
derant  hierosolymam.  Euangelium. 

ET  cum  iam  sero  factum  esset  (quia 
erat  parasceue  quod  est  ante  sabbatum) 
venit  ioseph  ab  arimathia  nobilis 
decurio :  qui  et  ipse  erat  expectans 
regnum  dei.  Et  audacter  introiuit  ad 
pilatum:  et  petijt  corpus  iesu.  Pilatus 
autem  mirabatur  si  iam  obijsset.  Et 
accersito  centurione :  interrogauit  eum 
si  iam  mortuus  esset.  Et  cum  cog- 
nouisset  a  centurione  :  donauit  corpus 
ioseph.  Joseph  autem  mercatus  sin- 
donem  :  &  deponens  eum  inuoluit 
sindone :  et  posuit  eum  in  monumento 
quod  erat  excisum  de  petra.  Et 
aduoluit  lapidem :  ad  ostium  monu- 
menti. 


C  Feria  .iiij.  post  dominicam  in  ramis 
palmar  um. 

[Lectiones.     Isa.  Ixii  lib,  Ixiii  l-7a; 
liii  1-10,  12a] 


1549 

vntill  the  ninth  houre.  And  at  the 
ninth  houre  lesus  cryed  with  a  loude 
voyce,  saying  :  Eloy,  Eloy,  lama- 
sabathany?  whiche  is  (if  one  inter- 
prete  it)  my  God,  my  God,  why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me  ?  And  some  of  them 
that  stoode  by,  when  they  heard  that, 
sayed  :  beholde,  he  calleth  for  Helias. 
And  one  ranne  &  fylled  a  sponge  full 
of  vineger,  and  put  it  on  a  reede,  & 
gaue  hym  to  drincke,  saying:  let  hym 
alone,  let  vs  see  whether  Helias  will 
come  and  take  hym  downe.  But  lesus 
cryed  with  a  loude  voyce,  and  gaue  vp 
the  gost.  And  the  vayle  of  the  temple 
rente  in  .ij.  peces,  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom.  And  when  the  Centurion 
(which  stode  before  him)  sawe  that 
he  so  cryed,  and  gaue  vp  the  gost, 
hesayde:  truelythis  manwasthesonne 
of  God.  There  were  also  women  a 
good  waye  of,  beholdyng  hym :  among 
whom  was  Mary  Magdalene,  and  Mary 
the  mother  of  lames  the  litle,  and  of 
loses,  &  Mary  Salome  (which  also 
when  he  was  in  Galilehadfolowedhym, 
and  ministred  vnto  hym)  and  many 
other  women,  whiche  came  vp  with 
hym  to  lerusale.  And  no  we  when 
the  euen  was  come  (because  it  was 
the  day  of  preparyng  that  goeth  before 
the  Sabboth)  Ioseph  of  the  citie  of 
Aramathia,anoblecounsaylour,  whiche 
also  loked  for  the  kingdome  of  God, 
came  and  went  in  boldely  vnto  Pilate, 
and  begged  of  him  the  body  of  Iesu. 
And  Pilate  merueiled  that  he  was 
already  dead,  and  called  vnto  hym  the 
Centurion,  and  asked  of  hym,  whether 
he  had  been  any  while  dead.  And 
when  he  knewe  the  trueth  of  the  Cen 
turion,  he  gaue  the  body  to  Ioseph 
And  he  bought  a  linnen  clothe,  and 
toke  hym  downe,  and  wrapped  him  in 
the  linnen  cloth,  and  layed  him  in  a 
sepulchre  that  was  hewen  out  of  a 
rocke,  and  rolled  a  stone  before  the 
doore  of  the  sepulchre.  And  Mary 
Magdalene,  and  Mary  loses  behelde 
where  he  was  layde. 

WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER. 

C  At  the  Communion. 

The  Epistle. 

[Hebre.  ix. 

Wnere  as  is  a  testamet,  there  must 
also  (of  necessitie)  be   the  death  of 


WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


349 


1552 

vntill  the  ninth  houre.  And  at  the 
ninth  houre  lesus  cried  with  a  loud 
voice,  saying  :  Eloy,  Eloy,  lama- 
sabathany?  whiche  is  (yf  one  inter- 
prete  it)  my  god,  my  god,  why  hast 
thou  forsake  me  ?  And  some  of  them 
that  stode  by,  whe  thei  heard  that, 
sayd  :  behold,  he  calleth  for  Helias. 
And  one  ranne  and  filled  a  sponge  ful 
of  vineger,  and  put  it  on  a  reede,  & 
gaue  him  to  drinke,  saying  :  let  him 
alone,  let  vs  see  whether  Helias  wil 
come  &  take  him  down.  But  lesus 
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  gaue  vp 
the  gost.  And  the  vaile  of  the  temple 
rent  in  .ii.  peces,  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom.  And  whe  the  Centurio 
(which  stode  before  him)  sawe  that 
he  so  cried,  &  gaue  vp  the  gost, 
he  saied :  truly  this  man  was  the  sonne 
of  god.  There  wer  also  women  a 
good  way  of,  beholding  him  :  among 
whom  was  Mary  Magdalene,  &  Mary 
the  mother  of  lames  the  litle,  and  of 
loses,  and  Mary  Salome  (which  also 
whe  he  was  in  Galile  had  folowed  him, 
and  ministred  vnto  him)  and  many 
other  women,  whyche  came  vp  with 
him  to  Jerusalem.  And  now  when 
the  euen  was  come  (because  it  was 
the  day  of  preparing  that  goeth  before 
the  Sabboth)  loseph  of  the  citie  of 
Arimathia  a  noble  counsailour,  which 
also  loked  for  the  kingdom  of  God, 
came  and  went  in  boldely  vnto  Pilate, 
and  begged  of  him  the  body  of  lesu. 
And  Pilate  merueiled  that  he  was 
already  dead,  and  called  vnto  him  the 
Centuri5,  and  asked  of  him,  whether 
he  had  been  any  while  dead.  And 
when  he  knew  the  trueth  of  the  Cen- 
turyon,  he  gaue  the  body  to  loseph. 
And  he  boueht  a  linnen  cloth,  and 
toke  him  down,  and  wrapped  him  in 
the  linnen  cloth,  and  laied  him  in  a 
sepulchre  that  was  hewen  out  of  a 
rocke,  and  rolled  a  stone  before  the 
dore  of  the  sepulchre.  And  Mary 
Magdalene,  and  Mary  loses  beheld 
where  he  was  layde. 

WEDNESDAIE  BEFORE  EASTER. 


1661 

vntil  the  ninth  hour.  And  at  the 
ninth  hour  lesus  cried  with  a  loud 
voice,  saying,  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama 
sabacthani !  which  is,  being  inter 
preted,  My  God,  My  God,  Why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me  ?  And  some  of  them 
that  stood  by,  when  they  heard  it, 
said,  Behold,  he  calleth  Elias. 
And  one  ran,  and  filled  a  spunge  full 
of  Vineger,  and  put  it  on  a  reed,  and 
gave  him  to  drink,  saying,  Let 
alone,  let  vs  see  whether  Elias  will 
come  to  take  him  down.  And  lesus 
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  gave  vp 
the  Ghost.  And  the  vail  of  the  temple 
was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom.  And  when  the  Centurion 
which  stood  over  against  him,  saw  that 
he  so  cried  out,  and  gave  vp  the  Ghost, 
he  said,  Truly,  this  man  was  the  son 
of  God. 


WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER, 


C  The  Epistle. 

[Hebr.  ix. 

WHeras  is  a  testament,  there  must 
also  (of  necessitie)  be  the   death   of 


The  Epistle. 

[Heb.  9.  -«16. 

Where  a  testament  is,  there  must 
also  of   necessity  be    the    death    of 


35° 


WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 


C  Fassio  domini  nostri  lesu  xpi.     Secundum 
Lucam. 

[xxii.  A 

IN  illo  tempore.  Appropinquabat 
autem  dies  festus  azymorum :  qui 
dicitur  pascha.  Et  querebant  principes 
sacerdotum  et  scribe  :  quomodo  iesum 
interficerent.  Timebant  vero  plebem. 
Intrauit  autem  sathanas  in  iudam  (qui 
cognominabatur  scarioth)  vnum  de 


1549 

him  that  maketh  the  testamet. 
For  the  testament  taketh  authoritie 
when  men  are  dead  :  for  it  is  yet  of  no 
value,  as  log  as  he  that  maketh  the 
testamet  is  aliue  :  for  which  cause  also, 
neyther  the  first  testament  was 
ordayned  without  bloud.  For  when 
Moyses  had  declared  all  the  com- 
maudemente  to  all  the  people,  accord 
ing  to  the  lawe,  he  tooke  the  bloud 
of  calues,  and  of  Goates,  with  water 
and  purple  wolle,  and  ysope,  and 
sprinckled  both  the  booke  &  all  the 
people,  saying :  this  is  the  bloud  of 
the  testamente,  whiche  God  hath  ap 
pointed  vnto  you.  Moreouer  he 
sprinkled  the  tabernacle  with  bloud 
also,  and  all  the  ministring  vessels. 
And  almost  al  thinges  are  by  the 
lawe,  purged  with  bloud,  and  without 
sheding  of  bloud  is  no  remission.  It 
is  nede  then,  that  the  similitudes  of 
heauenly  thinges  be  purified  with 
suche  thinges  :  but  that  the  heauenly 
thinges  themselfes,  be  purified  with 
better  sacrifices  then  are  those.  For 
Christe  is  not  entred  into  the  holy 
places  that  are  made  with  handes 
(whiche  are  similitudes  of  true  thinges) 
but  is  entred  into  very  heauen,  for  to 
appeare  nowe  in  the  sight  of  God  for 
vs  :  not  to  offer  himselfe  often,  as  the 
hye  priest  entreth  into  the  holy  place 
euery  yere  with  strauge  bloud :  for 
then  must  he  haue  often  suffred 
sence  the  worlde  began.  But  nowe 
in  the  end  of  the  world  hath 
he  appeared  once,  to  put  sinne  to 
flight  by  the  offering  vp  of  himself. 
And  as  it  is  appointed  vnto  all  men 
that  they  shall  once  dye,  and  then 
cometh  the  iudgement  :  euen  so 
Christ  was  once  offered  to  take  away 
the  sinnes  of  many,  and  vnto  them 
that  looke  for  him,  shall  he  appeare 
agayne  without  synne  vnto  saluacion. 

The  Gospell. 

[    Luc.  XXii. 

Tne  feast  of  swete  bread 
drew  nye,  whiche  is  called  Easter, 
and  the  hye  priestes  £  Scribes 
sought  howe  they  might  kill  hym,  for 
they  feared  the  people.  Then  entred 
Satha  into  ludas,  whose  sirname  was 
Iscarioth  (whiche  was  of  the  numbre  of 
the  .xii.)  and  he  went  his  waye  and 


WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


35i 


1552 

him  that  maketh  the  testament. 
For  the  testament  taketh  authoritie 
when  me  are  dead  :  for  it  is  yet  of  no 
value,  as  long  as  he  that  maketh  the 
testamet  is  aliue  :  for  which  cause  also, 
neyther  the  firste  testamente  was 
ordayned  withoute  bloud.  For  when 
Moses  had  declared  all  the  com- 
maundemente  to  all  thepeople,accord- 
ynge  to  the  law,  he  toke  the  bloud 
of  calues  and,  of  Goates,  with  water, 
and  purple  wolle,  and  ysope,  and 
sprynckled  bothe  the  booke  and  all  the 
people,  saying:  this  is  the  bloud  of 
the  testamet,  which  God  hath  ap 
pointed  vnto  you.  Moreouer  he 
sprinckled  the  tabernacle  with  bloud 
also,  &  al  the  ministring  vessels. 
And  almost  al  thinges  are  by  the 
law,  purged  with  bloud,  and  without 
sheding  of  bloud  is  no  remission.  It 
is  nede  then,  that  the  similitudes  of 
heauenly  thynges  be  purified  with 
suche  thynges  :  but  that  the  heauenly 
thynges  themselfes,  be  purified  with 
better  sacrifices  then  are  those.  For 
Christ  is  not  entred  into  the  holy 
places  that  are  made  with  hades 
(which  are  similitudes  of  true  thynges) 
but  is  entred  into  verye  heauen,  for  to 
appeare  nowe  in  the  sight  of  god  for 
vs  :  not  to  offer  hymselfe  often,  as  the 
hye  priest  entreth  into  the  holy  place 
euery  yere  with  straunge  bloud :  for 
the  must  he  haue  often  suffred 
sence  the  world  began.  But  nowe 
in  the  ende  of  the  worlde  hath 
he  appeared  once,  to  put  synne  to 
flighte  by  the  offeryng  vp  of  himself. 
And  as  it  is  appointed  vnto  al  men 
that  they  shal  once  dye,  and  then 
cometh  the  iudgemente :  Euen  so 
Chryste  was  once  offered  to  take  awaye 
the  synnes  of  many,  and  vnto  them 
that  looke  for  him  shall  he  appeare 
agayne  without  synne,  vnto  saluacion. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[     Luk.  xxii 

Tne  feaste  of  swete  bread 
drewe  nie,  which  is  called  Easter, 
and  the  hye  Priestes  and  Scrybes 
soughte  how  they  myghte  kyl  hym,  for 
they  feared  the  people.  The  entred 
Sata  into  ludas,  whose  sirname  was 
Iscarioth  (whiche  was  of  the  numbreof 
the  .xii)  and  he  wente  his  waye  and 


1661 

the  testatour 

For  a  testament  is  of  force  after 
men  are  dead  :  otherwise  it  is  of  no 
strength  at  all  while  the  testatour 

liveth.  Whereupon, 
neither  the  first  testament  was 
dedicated  without  blood.  For  when 
Moses  had  spoken  every  pre 
cept  to  all  the  people,  accord 
ing  to  the  law ;  he  tooke  the  blood 
of  calves,  and  of  goats,  with  water, 
and  scarlet  wool,  and  hyssop,  and 
sprinkled  both  the  book,  and  all  the 
people,  saying,  This  is  the  blood  of 
the  testament,  which  God  hath  en- 
ioyned  vnto  you.  Moreover  he 
sprinckled  with  blood,  both  the  taber- 
nacle,andalltheVesselsoftheministry. 
And  almost  all  things  are  by  the 
law  Purged  with  blood :  and  without 
shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission.  It 
was  therefore  necessary  that  the  pat 
terns  of  things  in  the  heavens  should  be 
purified  with  these,  but  the  heavenly 
things  themselves  with 

better  sacrifices  then  these.  For 
Christ  is  not  entred  into  the  holy 
places  made  with  hands, 

which  are  the  figures  of  the  true, 
but  into  heaven  it  selfe,  now  to 
appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for 
vs.  Nor  yet  that  he  should  offer  h  imself 
often,  as  the  high  Priest  entreth  into  the 
holy  place,  every  year,  with  blood  of 
others.  For  then  must  he  often  have 
suffered  since  the  Foundation  of  the 
world  :  but  now  once  in  the  end  of 
the  world,  hath  he  appeared  to  put 
away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself. 
And  as  it  is  appointed  vnto  men 
once  to  die,  but  after  this 
the  ludgement.  So  Christ  was 
once  offered  to  bear  the  sinns 
of  many,  and  vnto  them  that  looke 
for  him,  shall  he  appeare  the  second 
time,  without  sin  vnto  salvation. 
The  Gospel. 

[St:  Luke.  22.  «1. 

Now  the  feast  of  vnleavened  bread 
drew  nigh,  which  is  called  the  Passover. 
And  the  chief  Priests,  and  Scribes 
sought  how  they  might  kill  him  ;  for 
they  feared  the  people.  Then  entred 
Satan  into  ludas  surnamed 
Iscariot,  being  of  the  number  of 
the  twelve.  And  he  went  his  way,  and 


352 


WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

duodecim  :  et  abijt,  &  locutus  est  cum 
principibus    sacerdotum    et    magistra- 
tibus :   quemadmodum   ilium  traderet 
eis.      Et  gauisi   sunt :    et  pacti   sunt 
pecuniam  illi  dare,  et  spopondit.     Et 
querebat    opportunitatem   vt  traderet 
ilium  sine  turbis.      Venit  autem  dies 
azymorum,  in  qua  necesse  erat  occidi 
pascha :  et  misit  petrum  &  iohannem 
dicens.      Euntes  parate  nobis  pascha 
vt  mauducemus.       At   illi    dixerunt. 
Vbi  vis  paremus?      Et  dixit  ad  eos. 
Ecce  introeuntibus  vobis  in  ciuitatem, 
occurret  vobis  homo  quidam  amphoram 
aque     portans :      sequimini     eum     in 
domum  in  quam  intrat,  &  dicetis  patri- 
familias  domus.      Dicit  tibi  magister. 
Vbi  est  diuersorium  vbi  pascha   cum 
discipulis  meis  manducem?     Et  ipse 
vobis    ostendet    cenaculum    magnum 
stratum  :  et  ibi  parate.     Euntes  autem 
inuenerunt  sicut  dixit  illis  :  et  paraue- 
runt  pascha.     Et  cum  facta  esset  hora, 
discubuit:    et  duodecim  apostoli  cum 
eo.     Et  ait  illis.     Desiderio  desideraui 
hoc  pascha  manducare  vobiscum :  ante- 
quam  patiar.      Dico  enim  vobis   quia 
ex  hoc  non  manducabo  illud :  donee 
inpleatur  in   regno  dei.      Et  accepto 
calice  :  gratias  egit  et  dixit.     Accipite 
&  diuidite  inter  vos.     Dico  enim  vobis 
quod  non  bibam  de  generatione  vitis : 
donee  regnum  dei  veniat.     Et  accepto 
pane :  gratias  egit  et  fregit :  et  dedit 
eis  dicens.     Hoc  est  corpus  meum  quod 
pro  vobis  datur :  hoc  facite  in  meam 
commemorationem.     Similiter  et  cali- 
cem  :   postquam  cenauit  dicens.     Hie 
est  calix  nouum  testamentum  in  san 
guine   meo :    qui  pro  vobis  fundetur. 
Veruntamem    ecce    manus     tradentis 
me  :  mecum  est  in  mensa.     Et  quidem 
films  hominis  secundum  quod  diffini- 
tum  est  vadit :  veruntamen  ve  homini 
illi  per  quern  tradetur.     Et  ipsi  cepe- 
runt    querere   inter    se  :    quis    esset 
ex  eis  qui  hoc  facturus  esset.     Facta 
est  autem   contentio  inter  eos  :    quis 


1549 

commoned  with  the  hye  priestes  and 
officers,  howe  he  might  betray  hym 
vnto  them.  And  they  were  glad,  and 
promised  to  geue  hym  money.  And 
he  consented,  and  sought  opor- 
tunitie  to  betraye  hym  vnto  them,  whe 
the  people  were  away.  Then  came 
the  daye  of  swete  breade,  when  of 
necessitie  passeouer  must  be 

offred.     And  he  sent  Peter  and  lohn, 
saying  :  goe  &  prepare  vs  the  passe 
ouer,  that  we  may  eate.  They 
sayed  vnto  him  :  where  wylt  thou  that 
we  prepare  ?  And  he  sayed  vnto  them : 
beholde,  when  ye  entre  into  the  citie, 
there  shall  a  manne  meete  you  bearing 
a  pitcher  of  water,  hym  folowe  into  the- 
same  house  that  he  entreth  in,  and 
ye  shall  saye  vnto  the  good  man  of  the 
house  :  the  maister  sayeth  vnto  thee  : 
where  is  the  geast  chambre  where  I 
shall  eate  the  passeouer  with  my  dis 
ciples?      And  he  shall  shewe  you  a 
great    parlour    paued :     there    make 
ready.     And  they  wente  and  founde 
as  he  had  sayed  vnto  them,  and  they 
made  ready  the  passeouer.    And  when 
the  houre  was  come,  he  sate  downe, 
and    the    .xii.    Apostles    with    him. 
And  he   sayd    vnto    them :    I    haue 
inwardly  desyred  to  eate  this  passe 
ouer  with  you,  before  that   I   suffre. 
For  I  saye  vnto  you  :  hencefurth  I  will 
not  eate  of  it  any  more,  vntill  it  be 
fulfilled  in  the  kingdome  of  God.    And 
he  tooke  the  cup,  and  gaue  thankes, 
and  sayd  :   Take  this  and  deuide  it 
among  you.      For   I    say  vnto   you  : 
I  will  not  drinke  of  the  fruite  of  the 
vine,  vntill  the  kingdome  of  God 
come.     And  he  toke  bread,  &  when 
he  had  geue   thankes,   he  brake  it, 
and  gaue  vnto  them,  saying  :  This  is 
my  body,  which  is  geuen  for  you  :  This 
do  in  the  remembraunce  of  me.    Lyke- 
wyse  also  when  he  had  supped,  he 
tooke  the  cuppe,                         saying  : 
This  cup  is  the  newe  testamente  in 
my  bloude,  whiche  is  shed  for  you. 
Yet  beholde,  the  hande  of  him  that 
betrayeth  me,  is  with  me  on  the  table. 
And  truly  the  sonne  of  manne  goeth 
as  it  is  appointed  :  but  woe  vnto  that 
manne,  by  whom  he  is  betrayed.     And 
they  began  to  enquire  among  them- 
selues,  whiche   of  them   it  was   that 
should     do     it.       And     there    was 


WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


353 


1552 

commoned  with  the  hie  priestes  and 
officers,  how  he  myght  betraye  him 
vnto  them.     And  they  wer  glad,  and 
promysed  to  geue  hym  money.     And 
he    consented,   and    soughte    oppor- 
tunitie  to  betraye  hym  vnto  them,  when 
the  people  were  away.     Then  came 
the  daye  of   swete    bread,   when  of 
necessitie    the    passeouer    must    bee 
offred.     And  he  sente  Peter  and  lohn, 
saying  :  goe  and  prepare  vs  the  passe 
ouer,  that  we  may  eate.  Thei 
said  vnto  him  :  where  wilte  thou  that 
we  prepare  ?   And  he  saied  vnto  them  : 
beholde,  when  ye  entre  into  the  citie, 
there  shal  a  man  mete  you  bearing 
a  pitcher  of  water  :  him  folow  into  the 
same  house  that  he  entreth  in,  and 
ye  shal  say  vnto  the  good  ma  of  the 
house  :  the  maister  sayeth  vnto  thee  : 
where  is  the  geast  chambre  where  I 
shal  eate  the  passeouer  with  my  dis 
ciples?      And  he  shal  shewe  you  a 
great    parlour    paued  :    there    make 
readye.     And  they  went  and  founde 
as   he  had  sayd  vnto  them,  &  they 
made  ready  the  passeouer.    And  when 
the  houre  was  come,  he  sate  downe, 
and    the    .xii.    Apostles     with    him. 
And  he  sayed  vnto  them :    I    haue 
inwardly  desyred  to  eate  this  passe 
ouer  with   you,  before  that  I  suffer. 
For  I  saye  vnto  you  :  hencefurth  will  I 
not  eate  of  it  any  more,  vntil  it  be 
fulfilled  in  the  kingdom  of  god.     And 
he  toke  the  cup,  and  gaue  thankes, 
&  sayd :    Take   thys,  and   deuide   it 
among  you.      For  I  saye  vnto  you  : 
I  wyll  not  drynke  of  the  fruite  of  this 
vine,  vntill  the  kyngedome  of  God 
come.     And  he  toke  bread,  and  whe 
he  had  geuen  thankes,  he  brake  it, 
and  gaue  vnto  the,  saying  :   This  is 
my  body,  which  is  geue  for  you  :  This 
doe  in  remembraunce  of  me.     Like- 
wyse  also  when  he  had  supped,  he 
toke  the  cuppe,                         saying  : 
This  cuppe  is  the  newe  testamente  in 
my  bloud,   whiche  is   shed  for  you. 
Yet  beholde,  the  hande  of  hym  that 
betraieth  me,  is  wyth  me  on  the  table. 
And  trulye  the  sonne  of  manne  goeth 
as  it  is  appoynted,  but  woe  vnto  that 
manne,  by  whom  he  is  betrayed.     And 
they  beganneto  enquire  amonge  them- 
selues,  whiche  of  them  it  was  that 
shoulde    dooe    it.      And    there    was 


1661 

communed  with  the  chief  Priests  and 
captains,  how  he  might  betray  him 
vnto  them.  And  they  were  glad,  and 
covenanted  to  give  him  money.  And 
he  promised,  and  sought  oppor 
tunity  to  betray  him  vnto  them  in  the 
Absence  of  the  multitude.  Then  came 
the  day  of  vnleavened  bread,  when 

the  passover  must  be 
killed.  And  he  sent  Peter,  and  lohn, 
saying,  Go,  and  prepare  vs  the  pass- 
over,  that  we  may  eat.  And  they 
said  vnto  him,  Where  wilt  thou  that 
we  prepare?  And  he  said  vnto  them, 
behold,  when  ye  are  entredinto  the  City 
there  shall  a  man  meet  you,  bearing 
a  pitcher  of  Water,  follow  him  into  the 
house  where  he  entreth  in.  And 
ye  shall  say  vnto  the  goodman  of  the 
house,  The  Master  saieth  vnto  thee, 
Where  is  the  Guest-chamber,  where  I 
shall  eat  the  passover  with  my  dis 
ciples  ?  And  he  shall  shew  you  a  large 
vpper  roome  furnished,  there  make 
ready  And  they  went,  and  found 
as  he  had  said  vnto  them  :  and  they 
made  ready  the  passover.  And  when 
the  hour  was  come,  he  sate  down, 
and  the  twelve  Apostles  with  him. 
And  he  said  vnto  them,  With  desire 
I  have  desired  to  eate  this  pass- 
over  with  you  before  I  suffer. 
For  I  say  vnto  you,  I  will 
not  any  more  eate  thereof,  vntill  it  be 
fulfilled  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  And 
he  took  the  Cup  and  gave  thanks, 
and  said,  Take  this,  and  divide  it 
among  your  selves.  For  I  say  vnto  you, 
I  will  not  drink  of  the  fruit  of  the 
Vine,  vntill  the  kingdom  of  God  shall 
come.  And  he  took  bread,  and 

gave  thancks,  and  brake  it, 
and  gave  vnto  them,  saying,  This  is 
my  body,  which  is  given  for  you,  this 
do  in  remembrance  of  me.  Like 
wise  also 

the  Cup  after  Supper,  saying; 
This  Cup  is  the  new  testament  in 
my  blood,  which  is  shed  for  you  : 
But  behold,  the  hand  of  him  that 
betrayeth  me,  is  with  me  on  the  table. 
And  truly  the  son  of  man  goeth 
as  it  was  determined,  but  wo  vnto  that 
man,  by  whom  he  is  betrayed.  And 
they  began  to  enquire  among  them 
selves,  which  of  them  it  was,  that 
should  do  this  thing.  And  there  was 


354 


WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

eorum  videretur  esse  maior.  Dixit 
autem  eis.  Reges  gentium  dominantur 
eorum  :  et  qui  potestatem  habent  super 
eos,  benefici  vocantur.  Vos  autem  non 
sic.  Sed  qui  maior  est  in  vobis :  fiat 
sicut  minor.  Et  qui  precessor  est : 
sicut  ministrator.  Nam  quis  maior 
est,  qui  recumbit  an  qui  ministrat? 
Nonne  qui  recumbit?  Ego  autem  in 
medio  vestrum  sum  sicut  qui  minis 
trat  :  vos  autem  estis  qui  permansistis 
mecum  in  tentationibus  meis.  Et  ego 
dispono  vobis  (sicut  disposuit  michi 
pater  meus)  regnum  :  vt  edatis  & 
bibatis  super  mensam  meam  in  regno 
meo,  et  sedeatis  super  thronos  iudi- 
cantes  duodecim  tribus  israel.  Ait 
autem  dominus  simoni.  Simon,  ecce 
sathanas  expetiuit  vos :  ut  cribraret 
sicut  triticum.  Ego  autem  rogaui  pro 
te  :  vt  non  deficiat  fides  tua.  Et  tu 
aliquando  conuersus  :  confirma  fratres 
tuos.  Qui  dixit  ei.  Domine,  tecum 
paratus  sum :  &  in  carcerem  et  in 
mortem  ire.  At  ille  dixit.  Dico  tibi 
petre,  non  cantabit  hodie  gallus  donee 
ter  abneges  nosse  me.  Et  dixit  eis. 
Quando  misi  vos  sine  sacculo  et  pera  & 
calciamentis :  nunquid  aliquid  defuit 
vobis?  At  illi  dixerunt.  Nichil. 
Dixit  ergo  eis.  Sed  nunc  qui  habet 
sacculum:  tollat  similiter  &  peram. 
Et  qui  non  habet  vendat  tunicam  suam : 
et  emat  gladium.  Dico  enhn  vobis: 
quoniam  adhuc  hoc  quod  scriptum  est, 
oportet  impleri  in  me.  Et  cum  iniquis 
deputatus  est.  Etenim  ea  que  sunt  de 
me:  finem  habent.  At  illi  dixerunt. 
Domine,  ecce  gladij  duo  hie.  At  ille 
dixit  eis.  Satis  est.  Et  egressus  ibat 
secundum  consuetudinem  in  montem 
oliuarum :  secuti  sunt  autem  ilium 
et  discipuli.  Et  cum  peruenisset  ad 
locum  :  dixit  illis.  Orate,  ne  intretis 
in  tentationem.  Et  ipse  auulsus  est 
ab  eis  quantum  iactus  est  lapidis  :  et 
positis  genibus  orabat  dicens.  Pater, 
si  vis  transfer  calicem  istum  a  me. 


1549 

a  striefe  among  them,  whiche  of 
them    shoulde    seme    to    be 
greatest.    And  he  sayde  vnto  them  : 
the  kinges   of  nacions  reigne 

ouer  them,  &  they  that  haue 
authoritie  vpon  them,  are  called 
gracious  Lordes :  but  ye  shall  not  be  so. 
But  he  that  is  greatest  among  you, 
shalbe  as  the  yonger,  and  he  that 
is  chiefs,  shalbe  as  he  that  doth 
minister.  For  whether  is  greater  he 
that  sitteth  at  meate,  or  he  that 
serueth?  Is  it  not  he  that  sitteth  at 
meate  ?  But  I  am  among  you,  as  he 
that  ministreth.  Ye  are  they  which 
haue  bydden  with  me  in  my  tempta- 
cions.  And  I  appointe  vnto  you  a 
kyngdome,  as  my  father  hath  appointed 
to  me,  that  ye  may  eate  and  drinke 
at  my  table  in  my  kyngdome,  and  sit 
on  seates,  iudgeyng  the  .xii.  tribes 
of  Israel.  And  the  Lorde  sayd :  Simon, 
Simon  behold,  Sathan  hath  desired 
to  sift  you,  as  it  were  wheat : 
But  I  haue  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy 
faith  fayle  not.  And  whe  thou  art 
conuerted,  strength  thy  brethren. 
And  he  sayd  vnto  hym  :  Lorde  I  am 
ready  to  go  with  thee  into  prieson, 
and  to  death.  And  he  sayd:  I  tell 
thee  Peter,  the  Cocke  shall  not  krowe 
this  daye,  tyll  thou  haue  thrise 
denied  that  thou  knowest  me.  And  he 
sayde  vnto  them :  when  I  set  you 
without  wallett,  and  scrip,  and  shoes, 
lacked  ye  any  thing  ?  And  they  sayd, 
no.  Then  sayd  he  vnto  them  :  but 
now  he  that  hath  a  wallet,  let  hym 
take  it  vp,  and  likewise  his  scrip. 
And  he  that  hath  no  sweord,  let  hym 
sell  his  coate  and  bye  one.  For  I 
say  vnto  you,  that  yet  thesame  which 
is  written,  must  be  perfourmed  in  me  : 
euen  among  the  wicked  was  he  re 
puted  :  For  those  thinges  whiche  are 
written  of  me  haue  an  ende.  And  they 
sayed :  Lord,  behold,  here  are  .ii. 
swordes  :  and  he  sayd  vnto  them  :  it 
is  ynough.  And  he  came  out,  and 
wet  (as  he  was  wont)  to  Mount 
Oliuete.  And  the  disciples  folowed 
hym.  And  when  he  came  to  the 
place,  he  sayde  vnto  them  :  pray,  leste 
ye  fall  into  temptacion.  And  he 

gate  hymselfe  from  them  about  a  stones 
cast,  and  kneled  downe  and  prayed, 
saying :  Father  yf  thou  wilt,  re- 


WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


355 


1552 

a  strife  amonge  them,  whiche  of 
them  shoulde  seeme  to  bee  the 
greatest.  And  he  sayed  vnto  them  : 
the  kynges  of  nacions  reigne 

ouer  them,  and  they  that  haue 
authoritie  vpon  them,  are  called 
gracious  :  but  ye  shall  not  so  be. 

But  he  that  is  greateste  amonge  you, 
shall  bee  as  the  yonger,  and  he  that 
is  chiefe,  shalbe  as  he  that  doeth 
minister.  For  whether  is  greater  he 
that  sitteth  at  meate,  or  he  that 
serueth  ?  Is  it  not  he  that  sitteth  at 
meate  ?  But  I  am  among  you,  as  he 
that  ministreth.  Ye  are  they  which 
haue  bydden  with  me  in  my  tempta- 
cions.  And  I  appoynt  vnto  you  a 
kyngdom,  as  my  father  hath  apoynted 
to  me,  that  ye  maye  eate  and  drynke 
at  my  table  in  my  kyngdom,  and  sit 
on  seates,  iudgeyng  the  .xii.  trybes 
of  Israel.  And  the  Lord  said  :  Simon, 
Simon,  behold,  Sathan  hath  desired 
to  sifte  you,  as  it  were  wheate : 
But  I  haue  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy 
faith  fayle  not.  And  whe  thou  art 
conuerted,  strength  thy  brethren. 
And  he  said  vnto  hym  :  Lorde,  I  am 
ready  to  goe  with  thee  intoprieson, 
and  to  death.  And  he  said  :  I  tel 
thee  Peter,  the  Cocke  shal  not  crowe 
thys  daye,  tyl  thou  haue  denied 
thrise  that  thou  knoweste  me.  And  he 
sayed  vnto  them  :  when  I  sente  you 
wythoute  wallet,  and  scrip,  and  shoes, 
lacked  ye  any  thyng  ?  And  they  sayd, 
no.  Then  sayed  he  vnto  them :  but 
now  he  that  hath  a  wallet,  let  hym 
take  it  vp,  and  lykewyse  his  scrip. 
And  he  that  hath  no  sworde,  lette  hym 
sell  hys  coate  and  bye  one.  For  I 
saye  vnto  you,  that  yet  thesame  which 
is  writte,  must  be  perfourmed  in  me  : 
euen  among  the  wicked  was  he  re 
puted  :  For  those  thynges  which  are 
written  of  me  haue  an  ende.  And  they 
sayed  :  Lorde,  beholde,  here  are  .ii. 
swordes  :  and  he  said  vnto  them  :  it 
is  ynough.  And  he  came  out,  and 
went  (as  he  was  wont)  to  Mounte 
Oliuete.  And  the  disciples  folowed 
hym.  And  when  he  came  to  the 
place,  he  sayd  vnto  them  :  praye,  leste 
ye  fall  into  temptacyon.  And  he 
gate  himselfe  fro  them  about  a  stones 
cast,  and  kneled  down  and  prayed, 
saying :  Father,  yf  thou  wilte,  re- 


1661 

also  a  strife  among  them,  which  of 
them  should  be  accompted  the 
greatest.  And  he  said  vnto  them, 
The  Kings  of  the  Gentiles  exercise 
Lordship  over  them,  and  they  that  exer 
cise  authority  vpon  them,  are  called 
benefactors.  But  ye  shall  not  be  so, 
but  he  that  is  greatest  among  you, 
let  him  be  as  the  younger  :  and  he  that 
is  chief,  as  he  that  doth 

serve.  For  whether  is  greater,  he 
that  sitteth  at  meat,  or  he  that 
serveth?  is  not  he  that  sitteth  at 
meat  ?  But  I  am  among  you,  as  he 
that  serveth.  Ye  are  they  which 
have  continued  with  me  in  my  tempta 
tions.  And  I  appoint  vnto  you  a 
kingdom,  as  my  Father  hath  appointed 
vnto  me.  That  ye  may  eate,  and  drink 
at  my  table  in  my  kingdom,  and  sitt 
on  thrones,  iudging  the  twelve  tribes 
of  Israel.  And  the  Lord  said,  Simon, 
Simon,  behold,  Satan  hath  desired  to 
have  you,  that  he  may  sift  you  as  wheat : 
but  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy 
Faith  fail  not ;  and  when  thou  art 
converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren. 
And  he  said  vnto  him,  Lord  I  am 
ready  to  go  with  thee,  both  into  Prison, 
and  to  death.  And  he  said,  I  tell 
thee  Peter,  the  cock  shall  not  crow 
this  day,  before  that  thou  shalt  thrice 
deny  that  thou  knowest  me.  And  he 
said  vnto  them,  when  I  sent  you 
without  purse,  and  scrip,  and  shoes, 
lacked  ye  any  thing  ?  And  they  said, 
nothing.  Then  said  he  vnto  them,  But 
now  he  that  hath  a  purse,  let  him 
take  it,  and  likewise  his  scrip,: 
and  he  that  hath  no  sword,  let  him 
sell  his  garment,  and  buy  one.  For  I 
say  vnto  you,  that  this  that  is  written, 
must  yet  be  accomplished  in  me, 
And  he  was  reckoned  among  the 
transgressours  :  for  the  things  con 
cerning  me  have  an  end.  And  they 
said,  Lord,  behold,  here  are  two 
swords.  And  he  said  vnto  them,  It 
is  enough.  And  he  came  out,  and 
went,  as  he  was  wont,  to  the  mount  of 
Olives,  and  his  disciples  also  followed 
him.  And  when  he  was  at  the 
place,  he  said  vnto  them,  Pray  that 
ye  enter  not  into  temptation.  And  he 
was  withdrawn  from  them  about  a  stones 
cast,  and  kneeled  down,  and  prayed, 
saying,  Father,  if  thou  be  willing,  re- 


356 


WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

Veruntamen  non  mea  voluntas :  sed 
tua  fiat.  Apparuit  autem  illi  angelus 
de  celo  :  confortans  eum.  Et  factus  in 
agonia  prolixius  orabat :  et  factus  est 
sudor  eius  sicut  gutte  sanguinis  decur- 
rentis  in  terram.  Et  cum  surrexisset 
ab  oratione,  et  venisset  ad  discipulos 
suos :  inuenit  eos  dormientes  pre  tris- 
titia.  Et  ait  illis.  Quid  dormitis? 
Surgite  orate,  ne  intretis  in  tenta- 
tionem.  Adhuc  eo  loquente  ecce 
turba :  et  qui  vocabatur  iudas,  vnus 
de  duodecim,  antecedebat  eos.  Et 
appropinquauit  iesu :  vt  oscularetur 
eum.  lesus  autem  dixit  illi.  luda 
osculo  filium  hominis  tradis  ?  Videntes 
autem  hi  qui  circa  ipsum  erant  quod 
futurum  erat:  dixerunt  ei.  Domine 
si  percutimus  in  gladio  ?  Et  percussit 
vnus  ex  illis  seruum  principis  sacer- 
dotum :  et  amputauit  auric ulam  eius 
dexteram.  Respondens  autem  iesus  : 
ait.  Sinite  vsque  hue.  Et  cum  teti- 
gisset  auriculam  eius :  sanauit  eum. 
Dixit  autem  iesus  ad  eos  qui  veneraut 
ad  se  :  principes  sacerdotum  et  magis- 
tratus  templi  et  seniores.  Quasi  ad 
latronem  existis  cum  gladijs  et  fustibus  : 
cum  quotidie  vobiscum  fuerim  in 
templo:  &  non  extendistis  manus  in 
me.  Sed  hec  est  hora  vestra :  et  po- 
testas  tenebrarum.  Conprehendentes 
autem  eum  duxerunt  ad  domum  prin 
cipis  sacerdotum  :  petrus  vero  seque- 
batureumalonge.  Accenso  autem  igne 
in  medio  atrij,  &circumsedentibus  illis  : 
erat  petrus  in  medio  eorum.  Quern 
cum  vidisset  ancilla  quedam  sedentem 
ad  lumen,  et  eum  fuisset  intuita  :  dixit. 
Et  hie  cum  illo  erat.  At  ille  negauit 
eum :  dicens.  Mulier,  non  noui  ilium. 
Et  post  pusillum  alius  videns  eum, 
dixit.  Et  tu  de  illis  es.  Petrus  vero 
ait.  O  homo,  non  sum  Et  iuteruallo 
facto  quasi  hore  vnius :  alius  quidam 
affirmabat  dicens.  Vere  et  hie  cum 
illo  erat :  nam  &  galileus  est.  Et  ait 
petrus.  Homo,  nescio  quid  dicis.  Et 


1549 

moue  this  cup  from  me :  Neuerthelesse, 
not  my  will,  but  thyne  be  fulfilled. 
And  there  appeared  an  Aungel  vnto 
him  from  heauen,  coumfortyng  hym. 
And  he  was  in  an  agony  and  prayed 
the  longer  :  and  hys  sweate  was  lyke 
droppes  of  bloud,  tricklyng  downe 
to  the  ground.  And  whe  he  arose 
from  prayer,  and  was  come  to  his 
disciples,  he  founde  them  slepyng  for 
heauinesse,  and  he  sayed  vnto  them  : 
why  slepe  ye  ?  Ryse  and  praye,  leste 
ye  fall  into  temptacion.  Whyle 

he  yet  spake,  behold,  there  came  a 
companye,  and  he  that  was  called 
ludas,  one  of  the  .xii.  went  before 
the,  and  preased  nye  unto  Iesus,  to 
kisse  hym.  But  Iesus  sayd  vnto 
him  :  ludas,  betrayest  thou  the  sonne 
of  man  with  a  kisse?  When  they 
whiche  were  about  hym  sawe  what 
would  folow,  they  sayde  vnto  him  : 
Lord,  shall  we  smyte  with  the 
sweorde?  And  one  of  them  smote 
a  seruaunt  of  the  hye  priest,  and 
stroke  of  his  ryght  eare.  Iesus 

aunswered  and  sayd :  suffre  ye  thus 
farre  forth.  And  when  he  touched 
his  eare,  he  healed  hym.  Then  Iesus 
sayd  vnto  the  hye  priestes,  and 
rulers  of  the  temple,  and  the  elders, 
whiche  were  come  to  him  :  Ye  be 
come  out  as  vnto  a  thefe,  with 
swordes  and  staues.  When  I  was 
dayly  with  you  in  the  temple,  ye 
stretched  forth  no  handes  againste  me : 
but  this  is  euen  your  very  houre,  and 
the  power  of  darkenes.  Then  toke 
they  hym  &  led  hym,  &  brought 
hym  to  the  hye  priestes  house.  But 
Peter  folowed  a  farre  of.  And  when 
they  had  kindled  a  fyer  in  the 
middes  of  the  palace,  and  were  sette 
downe  together,  Peter  also  sate  downe 
among  them.  But  when  one  of  the 
wenches  behelde  hym,  as  he  sate  by  the 
fyer  (and  loked  vpon  hym)  she 

sayed  :  this  same  felow  was  also  with 
him.  And  he  denied  him,  saying : 
woman,  I  knowe  hym  not.  And  after 
a  litle  whyle,  another  saw  him,  and 
sayd  :  thou  art  also  of  them.  And 
Peter  sayd :  man,  I  am  not.  And 
about  the  space  of  an  houre  after, 
an  other  affirmed,  saying  : 

verely,  this  felow  was  with  hym 
also,  for  he  is  of  Galile.  And  Peter 


WEDNESDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


357 


1552 

moue  this  cup  fro  me  :  Neuerthelesse, 
not  my  wyll,  but  thyne  be  fulfylled. 
And  there  appeared  an  Aungel  vnto 
hym  from  heauen,  comfortinge  hym. 
And  he  was  in  an  agonye  and  prayed 
the  longer  :  and  his  sweat  was  lyke 
droppes  of  bloud,  tricklyng  down 
to  the  ground.  And  when  he  arose 
from  prayer,  &  was  come  to  hys 
Disciples,  he  found  them  slepyng  for 
heuynesse,  and  he  sayde  vnto  them  : 
why  slepe  ye  ?  Ryse  and  praye,  leste 
ye  fall  into  temptacion.  Whyle 

he  yet  spake,  beholde,  there  came  a 
companye,  £  he  that  was  called 
ludas,  one  of  the  twelue,  went  before 
them,  and  preased  nye  vnto  lesus,  to 
kysse  hym.  But  lesus  sayde  vnto 
hym :  ludas,  betrayeste thou  the  sonne 
of  man  wyth  a  kysse?  When  they 
whyche  were  aboute  hym  sawe  what 
woulde  folowe,  they  sayd  vnto  hym  : 
Lorde,  shall  we  smyte  with  the 
sweorde?  And  one  of  them  smote 
a  seruaunte  of  the  hye  Priestes,  and 
stroke  of  hys  ryghte  eare.  lesus 

aunswered  and  sayde  :  suffre  ye  thus 
farre  forth.  And  when  he  touched 
his  eare,  he  healed  hym.  The  lesus 
said  vnto  the  hye  priestes,  and 
rulers  of  the  temple,  and  the  elders, 
whyche  were  come  to  hym  :  Ye  be 
come  oute  as  vnto  a  thefe,  wyth 
sweordes  and  staues.  When  I  was 
dayly  wyth  you  in  the  Temple,  ye 
stretched  forth  no  handes  agaynste  me : 
but  thys  is  euen  youre  very  houre,  and 
the  power  of  darkenesse.  Then  tooke 
they  hym  and  led  hym,  and  broughte 
hym  to  the  hye  Priestes  house.  But 
Peter  folowed  a  farre  of.  And  when 
they  had  kyendled  a  fyre  in  the 
myddes  of  the  palace,  and  were  sette 
downe  together,  Peter  also  sate  downe 
among  them.  But  when  one  of  the 
wenches  behelde  hym,  as  he  sate  by  the 
fyre  (and  looked  vpon  hym)  she 

sayde  :  thys  same  felowe  was  also  wyth 
hym.  And  he  denyed  hym,  sayinge  : 
woman,  I  knowe  hym  not.  And  after 
a  lyttle  whyle,  another  sawe  hym,  and 
sayde,  thou  arte  also  of  them.  And 
Peter  sayde  :  man,  I  am  not.  And 
aboute  the  space  of  an  houre  after, 
another  affirmed,  sayinge  : 

verely,  this  felow  was  -with  him 
also,  for  he  is  of  Galile.  And  Peter 


1661 

move  this  Cup  from  me  :  nevertheless, 
not  my  will,  but  thine  be  don. 
And  there  appeared  an  Angell  vnto 
him  from  heaven,  strengthening  him. 
And  being  in  an  Agony,  he  prayed 
more  ernestly,  and  his  sweat  was  as  it 
were  great  drops  of  blood  falling  down 
to  the  ground.  And  when  he  rose  vp 
from  prayer,  and  was  come  to  his 
disciples,  he  found  them  sleeping  for 
sorrow.  And  said  vnto  them, 

Why  sleep  ye?  rise  and  pray,  lest 
ye  enter  into  temptation.  And  while 
he  yet  spake,  behold,  a 

multitude,  and  he  that  was  called 
ludas,  one  of  the  twelve,  went  before 
them,  and  drew  neare  vnto  lesus  to 
kiss  him.  But  lesus  said  vnto 
him,  ludas,  betrayest  thou  the  son 
of  man  with  a  kiss?  When  they 
who  were  about  him,  saw  what 
would  follow,  they  said  vnto  him, 
Lord,  shall  we  smite  with  the 
sword  ?  And  one  of  them  smote 
the  servant  of  the  high  Priest,  and 
cut  off  his  right  ear.  And  lesus 
answered,  and  said,  suffer  ye  thus 
farr  .  And  he  touched 

his  ear,  and  healed  him.  Then  lesus 
said  vnto  the  chief  Priests,  and 
Captains  of  the  temple,  and  the  Elders, 
who  were  come  to  him,  Be  ye 
come  out  as  against  a  thief,  with 
swords,  and  staves?  When  I  was 
daily  with  you  in  the  temple,  ye 
stretched  forth  no  hands  against  me : 
but  this  is  your  hour,  and 

the  power  of  darkness.  Then  tooke 
they  him,  and  led  him,  and  brought 
him  into  the  high  Priests  house,  and 
Peter  followed  a  far  off,.  And  when 
they  had  kindled  a  fire  in  the 
midst  of  the  .Hall,  and  were  set 
down  together,  Peter  sate  down 
among  them.  But  a  certain 

maid  beheld  him,  as  he  sate  by  the 
fire,  and  ernestly  looked  vpon  him,  and 
said,  This  man  was  also  with 

him.  And  he  denyed  him,  saying, 
Woman,  I  know  him  not.  And  after 
a  little  while  another  saw  him,  and 
said,  Thou  art  also  of  them.  And 
Peter  said,  Man,  I  am  not.  And 
about  the  space  of  one  hour  after, 
another  confidently  affirmed,  saying, 
of  a  truth,  this  fellow  also  was  with 
him  ;  for  he  is  a  Galilean.  And  Peter 


358 


THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

continue  adhuc  eo  loquente  :  cantauit 
gallus.  Et  conuersus  dominus :  re- 
spexit  petrum.  Et  recordatus  est 
petrus  verbi  domini  sicut  dixerat : 
quia  priusquam  gallus  cantet,  ter  me 
negabis.  Et  egressus  foras  petrus  : 
fleuit  amare.  Et  viri  qui  tenebant 
ilium:  illudebant  ei  cedentes.  Et 
velauerunt  eum :  et  percutiebant  faciem 
eius  &  interrogauerunt  eum  dicentes. 
Prophetiza  quis  est  qui  te  percussit? 
Et  alia  multa  blasphemantes  :  dicebant 
in  eum.  Et  vt  factus  est  dies :  con- 
uenerunt  seniores  plebis  et  principes 
sacerdotum  &  scribe :  et  duxerunt 
ilium  in  concilium  suum  dicentes.  Si 
tu  es  xps:  die  nobis.  Et  ait  illis. 
Si  vobis  dixero  :  non  credetis  michi. 
Si  autem  et  interrogauero :  non  re- 
spondebitis  michi,  neque  dimittetis. 
Ex  hoc  autem  erit  filius  hominis  sedens 
a  dextris  virtutis  dei.  Dixerunt  autem 
omnes.  Tu  ergo  es  filius  dei.  Qui 
ait.  Vos  dicitis,  quia  ego  sum.  At 
illi  dixerunt.  Quid  adhuc  desideramus 
testimonium  ?  Ipsi  enim  audiuimus  de 
ore  eius  (  +  xxiii  1-53). 


C  Feria  .v.  in  cena  domini. 


Ad  corinthios. 


Fnatres. 


[X1.E 


Conuenientibus  vobis  in 
vnum  :  iam  non  est  dominicam  cenam 
manducare.  Vnusquisque  enim  suam 
cenam  presumit  ad  manducandum.  Et 
alius  quidem  esurit :  alius  autem  ebrius 
est.  Nunquid  domos  non  habetis  ad 


1549 

sayed :  man,  I  wot  not  what  thou 
sayest.  And  immediatly  whyle  he 
yet  spake,  the  Cocke  krewe.  And  the 
Lorde  turned  backe  and  loked  vpon 
Peter.  And  Peter  remembred  the 
worde  of  the  Lord,  howe  he  had  sayed 
vnto  him  :  before  the  Cocke  krowe, 
thou  shalt  deny  me  thryse  :  and 
Peter  went  out  and  wept  bitterly. 
And  the  men  that  tooke  lesus  mocked 
hym,  and  smote  hym  :  and  when  they 
had  blindfolded  him,  they  stroke 
hym  on  the  face,  and  asked  hym,  say 
ing  :  Areade,  who  is  he  that  smote 
thee?  And  many  other  thynges  de- 
spitefully  sayde  they  against  hym. 
And  assone  as  it  was  daye,  the 
Elders  of  the  people,  and  the  hye 
priestes  and  Scribes,  came  together, 
and  led  hym  into  theyr  counsell,  say 
ing  :  Art  thou  very  Christe?  tell  us. 
And  he  sayed  vnto  them  :  yf  I  tell 
you  ye  will  not  beleue  me,  and  yf  I 
aske  you,  you  will  not  aunswere  me, 
nor  let  me  goe  :  hereafter  shall  the 
sonne  of  man  sit  on  the  right  hande 
of  the  power  of  God.  Then  sayed  they 
all :  Art  thou  then  the  sonne  of  God  ? 
he  sayde  :  Ye  saye  that  I 

am.  And  they  sayed  :  what  nede  we 
of  any  further  witnes  ?  for  we  oure 
selues  haue  heard  of  his  owne  mouth. 

C  At  Euesong.     The  first  lesson. 
Lamenta.  i.  vnto  the  ende. 

C  THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER. 

<T  At  Mattins.    The  first  Lesson. 

Lamenta.  ii.  vnto  the  ende. 

The  Epistle. 

[i.  Cor.  xi. 

THIS  I    warne  you  of,  and 

commende  not,  that  ye  come  not 
together  after  a  better  maner,  but 
after  a  worse.  For  first  of  all,  whe 
ye  come  together  in  the  congregacio, 
I  heare  that  there  is  discension 
among  you,  and  I  partly  beleue 
it.  For  there  must  be  sectes 

among  you,  that  they  whiche  are  per 
fect  amog  you,  may  be  know- 
en.  When  ye  come  together  ther- 
fore  into  one  place,  the  Lordes 
supper  cannot  be  eaten,  for  euery 
man  beginneth  afore  to  eate  his  owne 
supper.  And  one  is  hungry,  & 
another  is  dronken.  Haue  ye 


THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


359 


1552 

sayde  :  man,  I  wote  not  what  thou 
sayest.  And  immediatly  whyle  he 
yet  spake,  the  Cocke  krewe.  And  the 
Lord  turned  backe  and  looked  vpon 
Peter.  And  Peter  remembred  the 
worde  of  the  Lord,  howe  he  had  sayd 
vnto  hym  :  before  the  Cocke  krowe, 
thou  shalt  denye  me  thryse :  and 
Peter  wente  oute  and  wepte  bytterly. 
And  the  men  that  toke  lesus  mocked 
hym,  and  smote  hym  :  and  when  they 
had  blyndfolded  hym,  they  stroke 
hym  on  the  face,  &  asked  hym,  say 
ing  :  Arcade,  who  is  he  that  smote 
thee?  And  many  other  thynges  de- 
spytefully  sayde  they  agaynste  hym. 
And  assoone  as  it  was  daye,  the 
Elders  of  the  people,  and  the  hye 
Priestes  and  Scribes,  came  together, 
and  led  hym  into  theyr  counsel!,  say 
ing  :  Art  thou  very  Christ  ?  tell  vs. 
And  he  sayde  vnto  them  :  yf  I  tell 
you,  ye  wyl  not  beleue  me  :  and  yf  I 

aske  you,  you  wyl  not  answere  , 
nor  let  me  goe  :  hereafter  shall  the 
sonne  of  man  syt  on  the  ryght  hand 
of  the  power  of  God.  Then  sayd  they 
all :  Art  thou  then  the  sonne  of  God? 

he  sayde  :  Ye  saye  that  I 

am.  Then  they  sayde  :  what  nede  we 
of  any  further  wytnesse  ?  For  we  cure 
selues  haue  heard  of  hys  owne  mouth. 


1661 

said,  Man,  I  know  not  what  thou 
saiest.  And  imediatly  while  he 
yet  spake,  the  cock  crew.  And  the 
Lord  turned  ,  and  looked  vpon 

Peter ;  And  Peter  remembred  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  how  he  had  said 
vnto  him,  Before  the  Cock  crow, 
thou  shalt  deny  me  thrice.  And 
Peter  went  out  and  wept  bitterly. 
And  the  men  that  held  lesus  mocked 
him,  and  smote  him.  And  when  they 
had  blindfolded  him,  they  stroke 
him  on  the  face,  and  asked  him,  say 
ing,  Prophecy,  who  is  it  that  smote 
thee.  And  many  other  things  blas 
phemously  spake  they  against  him. 
And  as  soone  as  it  was  day,  the 
elders  of  the  people,  and  the  chief 
Priests,  and  the  Scribes  came  together, 
and  led  him  into  their  Councel,  say 
ing,  Art  thou  the  Christ?  tell  vs. 
And  he  said  vnto  them,  If  I  tell 
you,  you  will  not  believe.  And  if  I 
also  aske  you,  you  will  not  answer  me, 
nor  let  me  go.  Hereafter  shall  the 
son  of  man  sit  on  the  right  hand 
of  the  power  of  God.  Then  said  they 
all,  Art  thou  then  the  son  of  God? 
And  he  said  vnto  them,  Ye  say  that  I 
am.  And  they  said,  What  need  we 
any  further  witness?  for  we  our 
selves  have  heard  of  his  own  mouth. 


THURSDAIE  BEFORE  EASTER. 


THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER. 


€  The  Epistle. 

Tnys  I  warne  you  of,  & 
commend  not,  that  ye  come  not 
together  after  a  better  maner,  but 
after  a  worse.  For  firste  of  al,  when 
ye  come  together  in  the  congregatio ; 
I  heare  that  there  is  discention 
amonge  you,  and  I  partely  beleue 
it.  For  there  muste  bee  sectes 

among  you,  that  they  which  are  per 
fect  among  you  maye  be  know- 
en.  When  ye  come  together  ther- 
fore  into  one  place,  the  Lordes 
supper  cannot  be  eaten,  for  euery 
ma  beglneth  afore  to  eate  his  own 
supper.  And  one  is  hungry,  and 
another  is  dronken.  Haue  ye 


The  Epistle. 

[i.  Cor.  ii.  417. 

In  this  that  I  declare  vnto  you,  I 
praise   you  not:   that  you  come 
together  not  for  the  better  ,  but 

for  the  worse.  For  first  of  all,  when 
ye  come  together  in  the  church, 
I  hear  that  there  be  divisions 
among  you,  and  I  partly  believe 
it.  For  there  must  be  also  heresies 
among  you,  that  they  who  are  ap 
proved,  may  be  made  manifest  among 
you.  When  ye  come  together  there 
fore  into  one  place,  this  is  not  to  eat 
the  Lords  supper.  For  in  eating, 
every  one  taketh  before  other,  his  own 
supper:  and  one  is  hungry,  and 
another  is  drunken.  What,  have  ye 


36° 


THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

manducandum  et  biberidum  ?  Aut  ec- 
clesiam  del  contemnitis :  &  confun- 
ditis  eos  qui  non  habent?  Quid  dicam 
vobis  ?  Laudo  vos  :  in  hoc  non  laudo. 
Ego  enim  accepi  a  domino  quod  et 
tradidi  vobis :  quoniam  dominus  iesus 
in  qua  nocte  tradebatur,  accepit 
panem:  et  gratias  agens  fregit  et 
dixit.  Accipite  &  manducate :  hoc 
est  corpus  meum  quod  pro  vobis  tra- 
detur.  Hoc  facite  in  meam  comme- 
morationem.  Similiter  &  calicem 
postquam  ceriauit :  dicens.  Hie  calix 
nouum  testamentum  est  in  meo  san 
guine.  Hoc  facite  quotienscunque 
bibetis :  in  meam  commemorationem. 
Quotienscuuque  enim  manducabitis 
panem  hunc  et  calicem  bibetis:  mor 
tem  domini  annuntiabitis  donee  veniat. 
Itaquequicunque  manducauerit  panem, 
vel  biberit  calicem  domini  indigne : 
reus  erit  corporis  et  sanguinis  domini. 
Probet  autem  seipsum  homo  :  &  sic  de 
pane  illo  edat,  et  de  calice  bibat.  Qui 
enim  manducat  et  bibit  indigue  :  iudi- 
cium  sibi  manducat  et  bibit :  mm  diju- 
dicans  corpus  domini.  Ideo  inter  vos 
multi  infirmi  &  inbecilles  :  et  dormiunt 
multi.  Quod  si  nosmetipsos  dijudi- 
caremus :  non  vtique  iudicaremur. 
Dum  iudicamur  autem  a  domino  cor- 
ripimur :  vt  non  cum  hoc  mundo 
damnemur. 


Euangelium  [Jo.  xiii.  1-15] 

[Feria  .iiij.  post  dominicam  in  ramis 

palmarum. 

[Luce,  xxiij.  A 
Et  surgens  omnis  multitude  eorum  : 

duxerunt  ilium  ad  pilatum.  Ceperunt 
autem  ilium  accusare  :  dicentes.  Hunc 
inuenimus  subuertentem  gentem  nos- 
tram :  &  prohibentem  tributa  dari 


1549 

not  houses  to  eate  and  drynke  in  ? 
despise  ye  the  congregacion  of  God, 
and  shame  them  that  haue  not?  what 
shall  I  saye  vnto  you  ?  shall  I  prayse 
you?  In  this  I  prayse  you  not.  That 
whiche  I  deliuered  vnto  you,  I  re- 
ceyued  of  the  Lorde.  For  the  Lorde 
Iesus,  thesame  night  in  whiche  he  was 
betrayed,  tooke  bread,  and  when  he 
had  geuen  thankes,  he  brake  it,  & 
sayd  :  Take  ye  &  eate,  this  is  my 
body,  whiche  is  broken  for  you.  This 
doe  ye  in  the  remembraunce  of  me. 
After  the  same  maner  also  he  toke  the 
cup  when  supper  was  done,  saying  : 
this  cup  is  the  newe  testament  in  my 
bloud.  This  dooe  ,  as  oft  as  ye  drinke 
it,  in  remembraunce  of  me.  For  as 
often  as  ye  shall  eate  this  bread,  and 
drinke  this  cuppe,  ye  shall  shewe 
the  Lordes  death  tyll  he  come.  Wher- 
fore,  whosoeuer  shall  eate  of  this  bread, 
or  drinke  of  the  cuppe  of  the  Lorde 
vnworthely,  shalbe  giltie  of  the  bodye 
and  bloud  of  the  Lorde.  But  let  a 
man  examin  himselfe,  and  so  let 
hym  eate  of  the  bread,  and  drinke  of 
the  cup.  For  he  that  eateth  and 
drynketh  vnworthely,  eateth  and 
drinketh  his  owne  damnacion,  be 
cause  he  maketh  no  difference  of  the 
Lordes  body.  For  this  cause  many 
are  weake  &  sicke  among  you, 
and  many  slepe.  For  if  we  had 
iudged  our  selfes  :  we  should  not  haue 
been  iudged.  But  when  we  are  iudged 
of  the  Lorde,  we  are  chastened,  that 
we  should  not  be  damned  with  the 
worlde.  Wherfore  my  brethren, 
when  ye  come  together  to  eate,  tary 
one  for  an  other.  If  any  man 

hongre,  let  him  eate  at  home,  that 
ye  come  not  together  vnto  condemna- 
cion.  Other  thinges  will  I  set  in  ordre 
when  I  come. 

The  Gospell. 


[      Luc.  XXiii. 

THe  whole  multitude  of  them  arose, 
and  led  hym  vnto  Pylate.  And  they 
began  to  accuse  hym,  saying :  we 
found  this  felowe  peruertyng  the 
people,  and  forbyddyng  to  paye  tri 
bute  to  Cesar  :  saying  that  he 
is  Christ  a  kyng.  And  Pilate  apposed 


THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


361 


1552 

not  houses  to  eate  and  drinke  in  ? 
despyse  ye  the  congregation  of  God, 
and  shame  them  that  haue  not  ?  what 
shal  I  saye  vnto  you?  shall  I  prayse 
you?  In  thys  I  prayse  you  not.  That 
whych  I  delyuered  vnto  you,  I  re- 
ceyued  of  the  Lorde.  For  the  Lord 
lesus,  the  same  night  in  which  he  was 
betrayed,  tooke  bread,  and  when  he 
had  geuen  thankes,  he  brake  it,  and 
sayde:  Take  ye  and  eate,  thys  is  my 
bodye,  whiche  is  broken  for  you.  Thys 
doe  ye  in  the  remembraunce  of  me. 
After  the  same  maner  also,  he  toke  the 
cuppe  when  supper  was  done,  sayinge: 
thys  cup  is  the  newe  Testament  in  my 
bloud.  Thys  doe  ,  as  ofte  as  ye  drinke 
it,  in  remebrauce  of  me.  For  as 
often  as  ye  shall  eate  thys  bread,  and 
drynke  of  thys  cuppe,  ye  shal  shewe 
the  Lordes  death  tyll  he  come.  Where 
fore,  whosoeuer  shall  eate  of  thys  bread, 
and  drynke  of  thys  cuppe  of  the  Lorde 
vnworthely,  shalbe  giltie  of  the  body 
and  bloud  of  the  Lord.  But  lette  a 
man  examine  hym  self,  and  so  let 
him  eate  of  the  bread,  and  drynke  of 
the  cup.  For  he  that  eateth  and 
drynketh  vnworthelye,  eateth  and 
drinketh  hys  owne  damnation,  be 
cause  he  maketh  no  difference  of  the 
Lordes  body.  For  this  cause  many 
are  weake,  and  sycke  among  you, 
and  many  slepe.  For  yf  we  had 
iudged  oureselfes:  weshouldenothaue 
bene  iudged.  But  when  we  are  iudged 
of  the  Lorde,  we  are  chastened,  that 
we  should  not  be  damned  with  the 
world.  Wherefore  my  brethren, 
when  ye  come  together  to  eate,  tarye 
one  for  another.  Yf  any  man 

hongre,  let  hym  eate  at  home,  that 
ye  come  not  together  vnto  condemna 
tion.  Other thynges  wyll  I  set  in  ordre 
when  I  come. 


1661 

not  houses  to  eate,  and  to  drinke  in  ? 
or,  despise  ye  the  churche  of  God, 
and  shame  them  that  have  not  ?  What 
shall  I  say  to  you?  shall  I  praise 
you  in  this  ?  I  praise  you  not.  For  I 
have  received  of  the  Lord,  that  which 
also  I  delivered  vnto  you,  that  the  Lord 
lesus,  the  same  night  in  which  he  was 
betrayed,  tooke  bread  :  And  when  he 
had  given  thanks,  he  brake  it,  and 
said,  Take  eat,  this  is  my 

Body,  which  is  broken  for  you :  this 
do  in  remembrance  of  me. 
After  the  same  manner  also  he  took  the 
cup,  when  he  had  supped,  saying, 
This  Cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my 
blood  :  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink 
it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  For  as 
often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and 

drink  this  Cup,  ye  do  shew 
the  Lords  death  till  he  come.  Where 
fore  whosoever  shall  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  this  Cup  of  the  Lord 
vnworthily,  shall  be  guilty  of  the  body 
and  blood  of  the  Lord.  But  let  a 
man  examine  himselfe,  and  so  let 
him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of 
that  Cup.  For  he  that  eateth,  and 
drinketh  vnworthily,  eateth  and 
drinketh  damnation  to  himselfe, 

not  discerning  the 
Lords  body.  For  this  cause  many 
are  weake,  and  sickly  among  you, 
and  many  sleepe.  For  if  we  would 
iudge  our  selves  we  should  not 
be  iudged.  But  when  we  are  iudged, 
we  are  chastened  of  the  Lord,  that 
we  should  not  be  condemned  with  the 
world.  Wherefore  my  bretheren, 
when  ye  come  together  to  eat,  tarry 
one  for  another.  And  if  any  man 
hunger,  let  him  eat  at  home;  that 
ye  come  not  together  vnto  condemna 
tion.  And  the  rest  will  I  set  in  order 
when  I  come. 


C  The  Gospell. 

[      Lu.  xxiii 

THC  whole  multytude  of  them  arose, 
and  led  him  vnto  Pilate.  And  they 
began  to  accuse  hym,  sayinge  :  we 
founde  this  felowe  peruertyng  the 
people,  and  forbiddyng  to  paye  tri 
bute  to  Cesar  :  saying,  that  he 
is  Christe  a  Kynge.  And  Pylate  apposed 


The  Gospel. 

[St:  Luke.  23.  «L 

The  whole  multitude  of  them  arose, 
and  led  him  vnto  Pilate.  And  they 
began  to  accuse  him,  saying,  We 
found  this  fellow  perverting  the 
nation,  and  forbidding  to  give  tri 
bute  to  Cesar,  Saying  that  he  himselfe 
is  Christ  a  King.  And  Pilate  asked 


362 


THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

cesari :  et  dicentem  se  xpm  regem  esse. 
Pilatus     autem     interrogauit     eum : 
dicens.      Tu  es  rex  iudeorum?      At 
ille  respondens :   ait.     Tu  dicis.     Ait 
autem  pilatus  adprincipessacerdotum: 
et  turbas.  Nichil  inuenio  cause  in  hoc : 
homine.      At  illi  inualescebant :    di- 
centes.     Commouit  populum  per  vni- 
uersam    iudeam :    incipiens  a  galilea 
vsque  hue.      Pilatus    autem   audiens 
galileam :  interrogauit  si  homo  galileus 
esset.     Et  vt  cognouit  quod  de  herodis 
potestate  esset :  remisit  eum  ad  hero- 
dem  qui  &  ipse  erat  hierosolymis  illis 
diebus.      Herodes    autem    viso   iesu : 
gauisus  est  valde.     Erat  enim  cupiens 
ex  multo  tempore  videre  eum  :  eo  quod 
audierat  multa  de  eo,  et  sperabat  sig- 
num  aliquod  videre  ab  eo  fieri.     In- 
terrogabat  autem  ilium  multis  sermoni- 
bus.     At  ipse  nichil  illi  respondebat. 
Stabant  autem   principes  sacerdotum 
et  scribe  :  constanter  accusantes  eum. 
Spreuit    autem    ilium     herodes    cum 
exercitu  suo :  et  illusit  indutum  veste 
alba,  et  remisit  ad  pilatum.     Et  facti 
sunt  amici  herodes  et  pilatus  in  ipsa 
die  :  nam  antea  inimici  erant  adinui- 
cem.     Pilatus  autem  conuocatis  prin- 
cipibus  sacerdotum  &  magistratibus  et 
plebe :      dixit    ad    illos.       Obtulistis 
mihi  hunc  hominem  quasi  auertentem 
populum :    et  ecce    ego   coram  vobis 
interrogans  nullam  causam  inuenio  in 
homine  isto,  ex  his  in  quibus  eum  ac- 
cusatis.      Sed   neque  herodes.      Nam 
remisi  vos  ad   ilium :    et  ecce  nichil 
dignum  morte  est  actum  ei.     Emen- 
datum  ergo  ilium  dimittam.     Necesse 
autem  habebat  dimittere  eis  per  diem 
festum:    vnum.       Exclamauit    autem 
simul  vniuersa  turba :  dicens.     Tolle 
hunc,  &  dimitte  nobis  barabbam.    Qui 
erat     propter     seditionem     quandam 
factam    in    ciuitate    et    homicidium  : 
missus   in   carcerem.      Iterum   autem 
pilatus   locutus    est    ad    eos :    volens 
dimittere    iesum.      At  illi  succlama- 


1549 

him,  saying  :  art  thou  the  king  of 
the  lewes?  he  answered  hym  and 
sayed :  thou  sayest  it.  Then  sayed 
Pilate  to  the  hye  priestes  and  to.  the 
people  :  I  fynd  no  faut  in  this  ma. 
And  they  were  the  more  fierce,  say 
ing  :  he  moueth  the  people,  teaching 
throughout  all  lury,  and  began  at 
Galile,  euen  to  this  place.  When 
Pilate  heard  mencion  of  Galile,  he 
asked  whether  the  man  were  of 
Galile.  And  assone  as  he  knewe  that 
he  belonged  vnto  Herodes  iurisdic- 
cion,  he  sente  hym  to  Herode,  which 

was  also  at  lerusale  at  that  time. 
And  when  Herode  saw  lesus,  he  was 
exceding  glad,  for  he  was  desyrous 
to  see  hym  of  a  long  season,  because 
he  had  heard  many  thinges  of  him, 
&  he  trusted  to  haue  seen  some 
miracle  done  by  him.  Then  he  ques 
tioned  with  hym  manywordes.  But 
he  answered  him  nothing.  The 

hye  priestes  and  Scribes  stode  furth 
&  accused  hym  straightly.  And 
Herode  with  his  men  of  warre,  des 
pised  him.  And  when  he  had  mocked 
hym,  he  arayed  hym  in  whyte  cloth- 
yng,  and  sent  hym  again  to  Pylate. 
And  thesame  daye  Pylate  and  Herode 
were  made  frendes  together.  For  be 
fore  they  were  at  variaunce. 

And  Pylate 

called  together  the  hye  priestes,  and 
the  rulers,  and  the  people,  and  sayd 
vnto  them  :  ye  haue  brought  this  man 
vnto  me,  as  one  that  peruerteth  the 
people  :  and,  behold,  I  examine 

him  before  you,  and  finde  no  faute 
in  this  man  of  those  thynges 
wherof  ye  accuse  hym,  no  nor  yet 
Herode  :  For  I  sent  you  vnto  him,  and 
loe,  nothing  worthy  of  death  is  done 
vnto  him :  I  will  therfore  chasten 
hym,  and  let  hym  looce.  For  of  neces- 
sitie  he  must  haue  let  one  looce  vnto 
them  at  that  feast.  And  all  the  people 
cryed  atonce,  saying  :  awaye 

with    hym,     and    deliuer  vs 

Barrabas :  (whiche  for  a  certaine 
insurreccion  made  in  the  citie,  and 
for  a  murther,  was  cast  in  prieson.) 
Pilate  spake  agayne  vnto  the,  will 
ing  to  let  lesus  looce.  But  they 
cryed,  saying  :  crucifye  him,  crucifye 
hym.  He  sayed  vnto  them  the 
thirde  time  :  what  euill  hath  he 


THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


363 


1552 

him,  sayinge  :  art  thou  the  king  of 
thelewes?  he  answered  hym  and 
sayd  :  thou  sayest  it.  The  sayd 
Pilate  to  the  hye  priestes  and  to  the 
people  :  I  fynde  no  faulte  in  thys  man. 
And  they  were  the  more  fierce,  say 
inge  :  he  moueth  the  people,  teachinge 
throughout  al  lury,  and  began  at 
Galile,  euen  to  thys  place.  Whe 
Pilate  hearde  mencion  of  Galile,  he 
asked  whether  the  man  were  of 
Galile.  And  assoone  as  he  knew  that 
he  belSged  vnto  Herodes  iurisdic- 
tio,  he  sent  hym  to  Herode,  which 

was  also  at  Jerusalem  at  that  tyme. 
And  when  Herode  saw  lesus,  he  was 
exceding  glad,  for  he  was  desyrous 
to  see  hym  of  a  longe  season,  because 
he  had  hearde  manyethyngesof  hym, 
and  he  trusted  to  haue  sene  some 
myracles  done  by  hym.  The  he  ques 
tioned  wyth  hym  manywordes.  But 
he  aunswered  hym  nothyng.  The 
hye  Priestes  and  Scribes  stoode  forth 
and  accused  him  strayghtly.  And 
Herode  wyth  hys  men  of  warre,  des- 
pysed  hym.  And  when  he  had  mocked 
hym,  he  arayed  hym  in  whyte  cloth 
ing,  &  sente  hym  agayne  to  Pylate. 
And  the  same  daye  Pylate  and  Herode 
were  made  frendes  together.  For  be 
fore  they  were  at  variaunce. 

And  Pylate 

called  together  the  hye  Priestes,  and 
the  rulers,  and  the  people,  &  sayed 
vnto  them  :  ye  haue  brought  thys  man 
vnto  me,  as  one  that  peruerteth  the 
people  :  and  beholde,  I  examine 

hym  before  you,  and  fynde  no  faute 
in  thys  ma  of  those  thinges 
whereof  ye  accuse  him,  no  nor  yet 
Herode  :  For  I  sent  you  vnto  him,  & 
loe,  nothinge  worthy  of  death  is  done 
vnto  him :  I  wyl  therfore  chaste 
him,  and  let  him  looce.  For  of  neces- 
sitie  he  must  haue  let  one  looce  vnto 
them  at  that  feast.  And  all  the  people 
cried  at  once,  saying  :  away 

with      him,      &      deliuer  vs 

Barrabas  :  (which  for  a  certayne 
insurrection  made  in  the  cite,  & 
for  a  murther,  was  cast  in  prieson.) 
Pylate  spake  agayne  vnto  them,  will 
ing  to  let  lesus  looce.  But  they 
cryed,  sayinge  :  crucifie  him,  crucifie 
him.  He  sayde  vnto  them  the 

thyrde  tyme  :  what  euyl  hath  he 


1661 

him,  saying,  Art  thou  the  King  of 
the  lews  ?  And  he  answered  him,  and 
said,  Thou  saist  it.  Then  said 
Pilate  to  the  chief  Priests,  and  to  the 
people,  I  finde  no  fault  in  this  man. 
And  they  were  the  more  fierce,  say 
ing,  he  stirreth  vp  the  people,  teaching 
throughout  all  lury,  beginning  from 
Galilee  to  this  place.  When 

Pilate    heard  of   Galilee,    he 

asked  whether  the  man  were  a 
Galilean.  And  as  soon  as  he  knew  that 
he  belonged  vnto  Herods  Jurisdic 
tion,  he  sent  him  to  Herod,  who  him- 
selfe  was  also  at  Jerusalem  at  that  time. 
And  when  Herod  saw  lesus,  he  was 
exceeding  glad,  for  he  was  desirous 
to  see  him  of  a  long  season,  because 
he  had  heard  many  things  of  him, 
and  he  hoped  to  have  seen  some 
miracle  don  by  him.  Then  he  ques 
tioned  with  him  in  many  words,  but 
he  answered  him  nothing.  And  the 
chief  Priests,  and  Scribes  stood  , 
and  vehemently  accused  him.  And 
Herod  with  his  men  of  Warr,  set 
him  at  naught,  and  mocked  him, 
and  arrayed  him  in  a  gorgeous 
robe,  and  sent  him  again  to  Pilate. 
And  the  same  day  Pilate  and  Herod 
were  made  freinds  together ;  for  be 
fore  they  were  at  enmity  between 
themselves.  And  Pilate  when  he  had 
called  together  the  chief  Priests,  and 
the  Rulers,  and  the  people,  said 
vnto  them,  Ye  have  brought  this  man 
vnto  me,  as  one  that  perverteth  the 
people,  and  behold,  I  having  examined 
him  before  you,  have  found  no  fault 
in  this  man,  touching  those  things 
whereof  ye  accuse  him  :  No,  nor  yet 
Herod :  for  I  sent  you  to  him,  and 
lo,  nothing  worthy  of  death  is  don 
vnto  him.  I  will  therefore  chastise 
him,  and  release  him.  For  of  neces 
sity  he  must  release  one  vnto 
them  at  the  Feast.  And  they 
cried  out  all  at  once,  saying,  Away 
with  this  man,  and  release  vnto  vs 
Barabbas  (Who  for  a  certein 
sedition  made  in  the  City,  and 
for  murder  was  cast  in  Prison) 
Pilate  therefore  willing  to  release 
lesus,  spake  again  to  them.  But  they 
cried,  saying,  Crucifie  him,  Crucifie 
him ;  And  he  said  vnto  them  the 
third  time,  Why,  what  evil  hath  he 


364 


THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

bant:  dicentes.  Crucifige  crucifige 
eum.  Ille  autem  tertio  dixit  ad  illos. 
Quid  enim  mail  fecit  iste?  Nullam 
causam  mortis  inuenio  in  eo.  Corri- 
piam  ergo  ilium :  et  dimittam.  At 
illi  instabant  vocibus  magnis  postu- 
lantes  vt  crucifigeretur  :  et  inualesce- 
bant  voces  eorum.  Et  pilatus  adiudi- 
cauit  fieri  petitionem  eorum.  Dimisit 
autem  illis  eum  qui  propter  homicidium 
et  seditionem  missus  fuerat  in  car- 
cerem  quern  petebant :  iesum  vero 
tradidit  voluntati  eorum.  Et  cum  du- 
cerent  eum  apprehenderunt  simonem 
quendam  cyrenensem  venientem  de 
villa,  <fe  imposuerunt  illi  crucem  por- 
tare  post  iesum.  Sequebatur  autem 
ilium  multa  turba  populi  &  mulierum  : 
que  plangebant  et  lamentabantur  eum. 
Cofhuersus  autem  ad  illas  iesus  :  dixit. 
Filie  hierusalem  nolite  flere  super  me  : 
sed  super  vosmetipsas  flete :  et  super 
filios  vestros.  Quoniam  ecce  venient 
dies  in  quibus  dicent.  Beate  steriles 
et  ventres  qui  non  genuerunt :  & 
vbera  que  non  lactauerunt.  Tune  in 
cipient  dicere  montibus  cadite  super 
nos  :  et  collibus  operite  nos.  Quia  si 
in  viridi  ligno  hec  faciunt:  in  arido 
quid  net?  Ducebantur  autem  et  alij 
duo  nequam  cum  eo  :  vt  interficeren- 
tur.  Et  postquam  venerunt  in  locum 
qui  vocatur  caluarie,  ibi  crucifixerunt 
eum  &  latrones:  vnum  a  dextris  et 
alterum  a  sinistris.  Iesus  autem  dice- 
bat.  Pater,  dimitte  illis  non  enim 
sciunt  quid  faciunt.  Diuidentes  vero 
vestimenta  eius :  miserunt  sortes.  Et 
stabat  populus  expectans  :  &  deride- 
bant  eum  principes  cum  eis  dicentes. 
Alios  saluos  fecit :  se  saluum  faciat  si 
hie  est  xps  dei  electus.  Illudebant 
autem  ei  &  milites  accedentes  et 
acetum  offerentes  ei :  et  dicentes.  Si 
tu  es  rex  iudeorum :  saluum  te  fac. 
Erat  autem  et  superscriptio  scripta 
super  eum :  literis  grecis  et  latinis 
&  hebraicis.  Hie  est  rex  iudeorum. 
Vnus  autem  de  his  qui  pendebant 


1549 

done?      I  finde    no    cause    of 

death  in  him  :  I  wyl  therfore  chasten 
him,  and  let  hym  go.  And  they 
cryed  with  loude  voyces,  requiring 
that  he  myght  be  crucified.  And  the 
voyces  of  them  and  of  the  hye  priestes 
preuayled.  And  Pilate  gaue  sentence 
that  it  should  be  as  they  required, 
and  he  let  looce  vnto  them  him,  that 
(for  insurreccion  and  murther)  was  cast 
into  prison,  whom  they  had  desired  : 
&  he  deliuered  to  them  Iesus,  to  do 
with  hym  what  they  would.  And  as 
they  led  hym  awaye,  they  caught 
one  Symon  of  Ciren  comming  out  of 
the  field  :  and  on  hym  layde  they  the 
crosse,  that  he  myght  beare  it  after 
Iesus.  And  there  folowed  him  a  great 
company  of  people,  and  of  women, 
which  bewailed  and  lamented  him. 
But  Iesus  turned  backe  vnto  them, 
and  sayed :  ye  daughters  of  lerusalem, 
wepe  not  for  me :  but  wepe  for  your 
selfes  and  for  your  children.  For 
behold,  the  dayes  will  come,  in  the 
whiche  they  shall  saye  :  Happy  are 
the  baren,  &  the  woumbes  that  neuer 
bare,  and  the  pappes  whiche  neuer 
gaue  sucke.  Then  shall  they  begyn 
to  say  to  the  mountaynes,  fall  on  vs  : 
and  to  the  hylles,  couer  vs.  For  if 
they  do  this  in  a  grene  tree, 
what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  ?  And 
there  were  two  euill  doers 

led  with  him  to  be  slaine.  And 
after  that  thei  were  come  to  the  place 
(whiche  is  called  Caluarie)  there  they 
crucyfied  hym  and  the  euill  doers, 
one  on  the  right  hand,  and  the  other 
on  the  left.  Then  sayd  Iesus  :  father 
forgeue  them,  for  they  wote  not  what 
they  do.  And  they  parted  his  ray- 
ment  and  cast  lottes.  And  the  people 
stoode  and  behelde.  And  the  rulers 
mocked  hym  with  them,  saiyng :  he 
saued  other  men,  lette  hym  saue 
himselfe  yf  he  be  very  Christe  the 
chosen  of  God.  The  souldiers  also 
mocked  hym,  and  came  and  offred 
hym  vinegre,  and  sayd  :  if  thou  be 
the  kyng  of  the  I  ewes,  saue  thy  selfe. 
And  a  superscripcion  was  writte 
ouer  hym,  with  letters  of  Greke,  and 
Latin,  and  Hebrue  :  This  is  the  kyng 
of  the  lewes.  And  one  of  the  euil 
doers,  whiche  were  hanged,  railed  on 
him,  saying:  If  thou  be  Christe  saue 


THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


365 


1552 

done  ?       I  fynd    no     cause     of 

death  in  hym :  I  wyll  therfore  chaste 
hym,  and  let  him  goe.  And  they 
cried  with  loude  voyces,  requyring 
that  he  myght  be  crucifyed.  And  the 
voyces  of  them  and  of  the  hye  priestes 
preuayled.  And  Pilate  gaue  sentence 
that  it  shoulde  be  as  they  requyred, 
&  he  let  loo.ce  vnto  them  him,  that 
(for  insurrection  &  murther)  was  cast 
into  prieson,  whom  they  had  desyred  : 
&  he  delyuered  to  the  lesus,  to  doe 
wyth  hym  what  they  would.  And  as 
they  led  hym  awaye,  they  caughte 
one  Symon  of  Cyren  coming  out  of 
the  fielde  :  and  on  him  layde  they  the 
crosse,  that  he  myght  beare  it  after 
lesus.  And  there  folowed  him  a  greate 
company  of  people,  and  of  women, 
whyche  bewayled  and  lamented  hym. 
But  lesus  turned  backe  vnto  them, 
and  sayde  :  ye  daughters  of  Jerusalem, 
wepe  not  for  me  :  but  wepe  for  youre 
selues,  and  for  youre  chyldren.  For 
beholde,  the  dayes  wyll  come,  in  the 
whiche  they  shall  saye :  Happye  are 
the  baren,  and  the  woumbes  that  neuer 
bare,  and  the  pappes  whiche  neuer 
gaue  sucke.  Then  shall  they  begynne 
to  saye  to  the  Mountaynes,  fall  on  vs  : 
and  to  the  hylles,  couer  vs.  For  yf 
they  dooe  thys  in  a  greene  tree, 
what  shall  be  done  in  the  drye  ?  And 
there  were  twoo  euyll  doers 

ledde  wyth  hym  to  be  slayne.  And 
after  that  they  were  come  to  the  place 
(which  is  called  Caluarie)  there  they 
crucified  hym,  &  the  euyll  doers, 
one  on  the  ryght  hande,  and  the  other 
onthelefte.  Then  sayde  lesus:  father 
forgeue  them,  for  they  wote  not  what 
they  doe.  And  they  parted  hys  ray- 
mente,  and  caste  lottes.  And  the  people 
stoode  and  behelde.  And  the  rulers 
mocked  hym  wyth  them,  sayinge  :  he 
saued  other  menne,  lette  hym  saue 
hym  selfe  yf  he  be  very  Christe  the 
chosen  of  God.  The  souldiers  also 
mocked  hym,  and  came  and  offred 
hym  vynegre,  and  sayde  :  yf  thou  bee 
the  Kynge  of  I  ewes,  saue  thy  selfe. 
And  a  superscripcion  was  writte 
ouer  him,  with  letters  of  Greke,  and 
Latin,  and  Hebrue  :  Thys  is  the  Kyng 
of  the  lewes.  And  one  of  the  euyl 
doers,  which  were  hanged,  rayled  on 
him,  saying  :  Yf  thou  be  Christ,  saue 


1661 

don?  I  have  found  no  cause  of 
death  in  him,  I  will  therefore  chastise 
him,  and  let  him  go.  And  they  were 
instant  with  loud  voices,  requiring 
that  he  might  be  crucified  :  and  the 
voices  of  them  and  of  the  chief  Priests 
prevailed.  And  Pilate  gave  sentence 
that  it  should  be  as  they  required. 
And  he  released  vnto  them  him  that 
for  sedition,  and  murder  was  cast 
into  Prison,  whom  they  had  desired  ; 
but  he  delivered  lesus  to 

their  Will.    And  as 
they  led  him  away,  they  laid  hold  vpon 
one  Simon,  a  Cyrenian,  coming  out  of 
the  country,  and  on  him  they  laid  the 
Cross,  that   he   might   bear   it   after 
lesus.  And  there  followed  him  a  great 
company  of  people,  and  of  women, 
who  also  bewailed,  and  lamented  him. 
But      lesus     turning      vnto     them, 
said,  Daughters   of  Jerusalem, 
weep  not  for  me,  but  weep  for  your 
selves,  and  for  your  children.      For 
behold,  the  dayes  are  coming,  in 
which   they  shall    say,   Blessed    are 
the  barren,  and  the  Wombs  that  never 
bare,    and    the    paps    which    never 
gave  suck.      Then  shall  they  begin 
to  say  to  the  mountains,  Fall  on  vs  ; 
and  to  the  hills,  Cover  vs.     For   if 
they  do  these  things  in  a  green  tree, 
what  shall  be  don  in  the  dry?    And 
there  were  also  two  other  Malefacto™ 
led  with  him  to  be  put  to  death.    And 
when  they  were  come  to  the  place 
which   is  called  Calvary,  there  they 
crucified  him  ;  and  the  Malefactours 
one  on  the  right  hand,  and  the  other 
on  the  left.     Then  said  lesus,  Father, 
forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do.      And  they  parted  his  ray- 
ment,  and  cast  lots.    And  the  people 
stood    beholding,     and     the     rulers 
also  with  them  derided  him,  saying,  He 
saved       others,      let       him       save 
himselfe      if     he     be     Christ,    the 
chosen  of  God.  And  the  souldiers  also 
mocked  him,  coming  to  him,  and  offer 
ing  him  vinegar,  and  sayeing,  If  thou  be 
the  King  of  the  lews,  save  thy  self. 
And  a  superscription  also  was  written 
over  him  in  letters   of   Greek,  and 
Latine,  and  Hebrew,  This  is  the  King 
of  the  Jews.     And  one  of  the  Male 
factours  which  were  hanged,  railed  on 
him,  saying,  If  thou  be  Christ,  save 


366 


THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


SOURCES 

latronibus  :  blasphemabat  eum  dicens. 
Si  tu  es  xps :  saluum  fac  teipsum, 
&  nos.  Respondens  autem  alter  :  in- 
crepabat  eum  dicens.  Neque  tu  times 
deum :  qui  in  eadem  damnatione  es. 
Et  nos  quidem  iuste  :  nam  digna  factis 
recipimus,  hie  vero  nichil  mali  gessit. 
Et  dicebat  ad  iesum.  Domine  memento 
mei :  cum  veneris  in  regnum  tuum. 
Et  dixit  illi  iesus.  Amen  dico  tibi : 
hodie  mecum  eris  in  paradiso.  Erat 
autem  fere  hora  sexta:  et  tenebre 
facte  sunt  in  vniuersam  terrain,  vsque 
in  horam  nouam.  Et  obscuratus  est 
sol :  et  velum  templi  scissum  est 
medium.  Et  clamans  voce  magna 
iesus  :  ait.  Pater,  in  manus  tuas  com- 
mendo  spiritum  meum.  Et  hec  dicens 
exspirauit.  Videns  autem  centurio 
quod  factum  fuerat :  glorificauit  deum 
dicens.  Vere  hie  homo  iustus  erat. 
Et  omnis  turba  eorum  qui  simul 
aderant  ad  spectaculum  istud,  et  vide- 
bant  que  fiebant :  percutientes  pectora 
sua  reuertebantur.  Stabant  autem 
omnes  noti  eius  a  longe  :  &  mulieres 
que  secute  erant  eum  a  galilea,  hec 
videntes.  Euangelium. 

ET  ecce  vir  nomine  ioseph  qui  erat 
decurio  vir  bonus  et  iustus  (hie  non 
consenserat  consilio  et  actibus  eorum) 
ab  arimathia  ciuitate  iudee :  qui  ex- 
pectabat  et  ipsi  regnum  dei.  Hie  ac- 
cessit  ad  pilatum :  &  petijt  corpus 
iesu.  Et  depositum  inuoluit  sindone, 
et  posuit  eum  in  monumento  excise : 
in  quo  nondum  quisquam  positus 
fuerat.] 


1549 

thy  selfe  and  vs  :  But  the  other 
answered  and  rebuked  hym,  saying  : 
fearest  thou  not  God,  seyng  thou 
art  in  thesame  damnacion? 
we  are  righteously  punished,  for  we 
receyue  accordyng  to  our  dedes  :  but 
this  man  hath  done  nothing  amisse. 
And  he  sayde  vnto  Iesus  :  Lorde,  re- 
membre  me  when  thou  comest  into 
thy  kyngdome.  And  Iesus  sayd  vnto 
hym  :  verely  I  say  vnto  thee  :  to  day 
shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradise. 
And  it  was  about  the  .vi.  houre  :  and 
there  was  darknesse  ouer  all  the 
earth,  vntill  the  .ix.  houre,  and 
the  Sonne  was  darkened.  And  the 
vayle  of  the  temple  did  rente, 
euen  through  the  middes.  And 
when  Iesus  had  cryed  with  a  loude 
voyce,  he  sayed :  Father,  into  thy 
handes  I  commend  my  spirite.  And 
when  he  thus  had  sayed,  he  gaue  vp 
the  goste.  When  the  Centurion 

sawe  what  had  happened,  he  glori 
fied  God,  saying :  verely,  this  was 
a  righteous  man.  And  all  the  people 
that  came  together  to  that  syght, 
and  sawe  the  thinges  whiche  had  hap 
pened,  smote  their  brestes  and  re 
turned.  And  all  his  acquaintaunce, 
and  the  women  that  folowed  him 
from  Galilee,  stode  a  farre  of,  behold- 
ynge  these  thynges.  And  beholde, 
there  was  a  man  named  Ioseph  a 
consaylor,  and  he  was  a  good  man 
andaiust:  thesame  had  not  consented 
to  the  counsayle  and  dede  of  them, 
whiche  was  of  Aramathia,a  citie  of  the 
lewes,  whiche  same  also  waited  for 
the  kingdome  of  God  :  he  wente  vnto 
Pylate  and  begged  the  body  of  Iesus, 
and  tooke  it  downe,  and  wrapped  it  in  a 
lynnen  clothe,  andlayed  it  in  a  sepulchre 
that  was  hewen  in  stone,  wherein 
neuer  man  before  had  beenelayde.  And 
that  daye  was  the  preparyng  of  the 
Sabboth,  and  the  Sabboth  drue  on. 
The  women  that  followed  after,  whiche 
had  come  with  hym  from  Galilee,  be- 
helde  the  sepulchre,  and  howe  his 
bodye  was  layde.  And  they  returned, 
and  prepared  swete  Odours  &  oynt- 
mentes  :  But  rested  on  the  Sabboth 
daye,  accordyng  to  the  commaunde- 
mente. 

At  Euensong. 

he  first  lesson.    Lamenta  .iii.  vnto  the  ende. 


THURSDAY  BEFORE  EASTER 


367 


1552 

thy  selfe  and  vs.  But  the  other 
answered  and  rebuked  hym,  saying  : 
fearest  thou  not  God,  seynge  thou 
arte  in  the  same  damnation  ? 
we  are  righteouslye  punyshed,  for  we 
receyue  accordynge  to  oure  dedes :  but 
thys  man  hath  done  nothynge  amysse. 
And  he  sayde  vnto  lesus  :  Lorde,  re- 
membre  me  when  thou  commest  into 
thy  Kyngdome.  And  lesus  sayde  vnto 
hym  :  verely  I  saye  vnto  thee  :  to  daye 
shake  thou  be  wyth  me  in  Paradyse. 
And  it  was  aboute  the  syxte  houre:  and 
there  was  a  darkenesse  ouer  all  the 
earth,  vntyll  the  nynthe  houre,  and 
the  Sunne  was  darkened.  And  the 
vayle  of  the  Temple  dyd  rente, 
euen  throughe  the  myddes.  And 
when  lesus  had  cryed  wyth  a  loude 
voyce,  he  sayde :  Father,  into  thy 
handes  I  commende  my  spyryte.  And 
when  he  thus  had  sayde,  he  gaue  vp 
the  ghoste.  When  the  Centurion 

sawe  what  hadde  happened,  he  glory- 
fyed  God,  sayinge :  verely  thys  was 
a  ryghteous  man.  And  all  the  people 
that  came  together  to  that  syghte, 
and  sawe  the  thynges  whych  had  hap 
pened,  smote  theyr  brestes  and  re 
turned.  And  all  his  acquayntaunce, 
and  the  women  that  folowed  him 
from  Galile,  stode  a  farre  of  behold 
ing  these  thinges.  And  beholde, 
there  was  a  manne  named  Joseph,  a 
counsaylor,  and  he  was  a  good  man 
&  a  iust,  the  same  had  not  consented 
to  the  counsayle  and  dede  of  them, 
which  was  of  Arimathia,  a  citie  of  the 
lewes,  which  same  also  wayteth  for 
the  kyngdom  of  God  :  he  wente  vnto 
Pilate  and  begged  the  body  of  lesus, 
and  toke  it  downe,  and  wrapped  it  in  a 
lynnen  cloth,  &  layd  it  in  a  sepulchre 
that  was  hewen  in  stone,  wherein 
neuer  ma  before  had  bene  layde.  And 
that  daye  was  the  preparing  of  the 
Sabboth,  and  the  Sabboth  drew  on. 
The  women  that  folowed  after,  which 
had  come  with  him  from  Galile,  be 
held  the  Sepulchre,  and  how  his 
body  was  layde.  And  they  returned, 
and  prepared  swete  Odours  and  oynt- 
mentes  :  But  rested  on  the  Sabbothe 
daye,  according  to  the  commaunde- 
mente. 


1661 

thy  selfe,  and  vs ;  But  the  other 
answering,  rebuked  him,  saying, 
Doest  not  thou  fear  God,  seeing  thou 
art  in  the  same  condemnation  ?  And 
we  indeed  iustly,  for  we  receive 
the  due  reward  of  our  deeds,  but 
this  man  hath  don  nothing  amiss. 
And  he  said  vnto  lesus,  Lord,  re 
member  me  when  thou  comest  into 
thy  Kingdom.  And  lesus  said  vnto 
him,  Verily  I  say  vnto  thee,  To  day 
shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradise. 
And  it  was  about  the  sixth  hour,  and 
there  was  a  darkness  over  all  the 
Earth,  vntill  the  ninth  hour;  And 
the  sun  was  darkened,  and  the 
vail  of  the  Temple  was  rent 
in  the  mids ;  And 
when  lesus  had  cryed  with  a  loud 
voice,  he  said,  Father,  into  thy 
hands  I  commend  my  spirit :  and 
having  said  thus,  he  gave  vp 
the  Ghost.  Now  when  the  Centurion 
saw  what  was  don,  he  glori 
fied  God,  saying,  certeinly,  this  was 
a  righteous  man.  And  all  the  people 
that  came  together  to  that  sight, 
beholding  the  things  that  were 
don,  smote  their  breasts,  and  re 
turned.  And  all  his  Acquaintance, 
and  the  women  that  followed  him 
from  Galilee,  stood  a  farr  off,  behold 
ing  these  things. 


368 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


SOURCES 

C  Feria  .vi.  in  die  parasceues. 
.&  Ad  laudes. 

Oratio. 
Rsspice     quesumus    domine    super 

hanc  familiam  tuam,  pro  qua  dominus 
noster  iesus  xps  non  dubitauit  manibus 
tradi  nocentium  :  et  crucis  subire  tor- 
mentum.  (Greg.  54) 


Sb      [Lectio  Hos.  vi  1-6  :  Tractus  Hab.  iii 
2,3] 


1549 

ON  GOOD  FRYDAY. 

At  Mattins. 
The  first  lesson.  Gen.  xxii.  Vnto  the  ende. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  God,  we  beseche  thee 
graciously  to  beholde  this  thy  famely : 
for  the  whiche  our  Lorde  Iesus  Christe 
was  contented  to  be  betrayed,  and 
geuen  vp  into  the  handes  of  wicked 
men,  and  to  suffer  death  vpon  the 
crosse  :  who  liueth  and  reigneth. 
£c. 

At  the  Communion. 

[Deus  deus  meus.  psalm  XXii. 

MY  God,  my  God  (loke  vpon  me  :) 

why  hast  thou  forsaken  me,  and  art 

so  farre  from  my  health,  and  from  the 

wordes  of  my  complainte? 

0  my  God,  I  cry  in  the  day  tyme, 
but  thou  hearest  not  :  and  in  the  night 
season  also  I  take  no  rest. 

And  thou  continuest  holy  :  O  thou 
worship  of  Israel. 

Our  fathers  hoped  in  thee,  they 
trusted  in  thee  :  and  thou  diddest 
deliuer  them. 

They  called  vpon  thee,  and  were 
helped  :  they  put  theyr  trust  in  thee, 
and  were  not  confounded. 

But  as  for  me,  I  am  a  worme  and 
no  manne  :  a  verye  skorne  of  men, 
and  the  out  cast  of  the  people. 

All  they  that  see  me,  laugh  me  to 
skorne  :  they  shote  out  their  lippes, 
and  shake  the  head,  saying. 

He  trusted  in  God  that  he  woulde 
deliuer  hym  :  let  hym  deliuer  him  if 
he  will  haue  him. 

But  thou  arte  he  that  tooke  me  out 
of  my  mothers  wombe  :  thou  waste 
my  hope  when  I  hanged  yet  vpon  my 
mothers  brestes. 

1  haue  been  left  vnto  thee  euer  sence 
I  was  borne  :  thou  art  my  God  euen 
from  my  mothers  woumbe. 

0  goe  not  from  me,  for  trouble  is 
here  at  hande  :  and  there  is  none  to 
helpe  me. 

Many  Oxen  are  come  about  me  : 
fatte  Bulles  of  Basan  close  me  in  on 
euery  syde. 

They  gape  vpon  me  with  their 
mouthes  :  as  it  were  a  rampyng  and 
roaryng  Lyon. 

1  am  powred  out  like  water,  and  all 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


1552 
ON  GOOD  FRIDAIE. 


369 


1661 
GOOD  FRIDAY. 


C  The  Collected. 

ALmyghtye  God,  we  beseche  thee 
graciously  e  to  beholde  thys  thy  famely : 
for  the  which  our  Lorde  lesus  Christe 
was  contented  to  bee  betrayed,  & 
geuen  vp  into  the  handes  of  wycked 
men,  and  to  suffre  death  vpon  the 
crosse  :  who  lyueth  and  reygneth. 
&c. 


The  Collects 

Almighty  God,  we  beseech  thee 
gratiously  to  behold  this  thy  Family, 
for  which  our  Lord  lesus  Christ 
was  contented  to  be  betrayed,  and 
given  vp  into  the  hands  of  wicked 
men,  and  to  suffer  death  vpon  the 
cross,  who  now  liveth  and  reigneth, 
6with  thee  and  the  holy  Ghost,  ever* 
one  God,  world  without  end.  6Amen. 


2  A 


37°  GOOD  FRIDAY 

SOURCES  1549 


my  bones  are  out  of  ioynte  :  my  hearte 
also  in  the  middest  of  my  body,  is 
euen  lyke  melting  waxe. 

My  strength  is  dried  vp  like  a  pot 
sherd,  &  my  tongue  cleaueth  to  my 
gummes  :  and  thou  shalte  bring  me 
into  the  dust  of  death. 

For  (many)  dogges  are  come  about 
me  :  and  the  cousaile  of  the  wicked 
lay  siege  against  me. 

They  pearced  my  hades  and  my 
fete  :  I  may  tell  all  my  bones,  they 
stande  staring  and  loking  vpon  me. 

They  parte  my  garmetes  among 
them  :  and  cast  lottes  vpon  my  vesture. 

But  be  not  thou  farre  from  me,  O 
Lorde  :  thou  arte  my  succour,  haste 
thee  to  helpe  me. 

Deliuer  my  soule  from  the  sworde  : 
my  derling  from  the  power  of  the 
dogge. 

Saue  me  from  the  Lyons  mouth  : 
thou  haste  hearde  me  also  from  among 
the  homes  of  the  Vnicornes. 

I  wil  declare  thy  name  vnto  my 
brethren  :  in  the  middes  of  the  con- 
gregacion  wil  I  prayse  thee. 

O  praise  the  Lorde,  ye  that  feare 
him  :  magnifie  him  all  ye  of  the  sede 
of  lacob,  and  feare  ye  him  all  ye  sede 
of  Israel. 

For  he  hath  not  despised  nor  ab 
horred  the  lowe  estate  of  the  poore  : 
he  hath  not  hid  his  face  from  hym, 
but  when  he  called  vnto  him,  he  heard 
him. 

My  praise  is  of  thee  in  the  greate 
congregacio  :  my  vowes  will  I  per- 
forme  in  the  sight  of  them  that  feare 
hym. 

The  poore  shall  eate  &  be  satisfied  : 
they  that  seke  after  the  Lorde  shall 
praise  hym,  your  hearte  shall  Hue  for 
euer. 

All  the  endes  of  the  world  shall 
remembre  themselues  and  be  turned 
vnto  the  Lorde  :  and  all  the  kynreds  of 
the  nacions  shall  worship  before  him. 

For  the  kingdome  is  the  Lordes  : 
and  he  is  the  gouernour  among  the 
people. 

All  suche  as  be  fatte  vpon  earth  : 
haue  eaten  and  worshipped. 

All  they  that  go  downe  into  the 
dust,  shall  kneele  before  him  :  and  no 
man  hath  quickened  his  owne  soule. 

My  seede  shal  serue  hym   :   they 


GOOD  FRIDAY  37, 

1552  1661 


372 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


SOURCES 


Oratio  [Deus  a  quo  et  iudas]. 

<3?  Orationes  solennes. 

OMnipotens  sempiterne  deus :  cuius 

spiritu  totum  corpus  ecclesie  sanctifi- 
catur  et  regitur  :  exaudi  nos  pro 
vniuersis  ordinibus  supplicantes  :  vt 
gratie  tue  munere  ab  omnibus  tibi 
gradibus  fideliter  seruiatur.  Per  do- 
minum.  in  vnitate  eiusdem.  (Gel.  i  41) 


qui  non  mortem  peccatorum  sed  vitam 
semper  inquiris  .  . 

pro  hereticis  .  .  et  pro  perfidis  iudeis .  . 
et  pro  paganis  .  . 

et  aggrega  ecclesie  tue  sancte.    ' 


1549 

shalbe  counted  vnto  the  Lorde  for  a 
generacion. 

They  shall  come,  and  the  heauens 
shall  declare  hys  righteousnes  :  vnto 
a  people  that  shalbe  borne,  whome 
the  Lorde  hath  made. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning.  &c. 

C  After  the  .ii.  Collectes  at  the  Com 
munion,  shalbe  sayed  these  .ii. 
Collectes  folowyng. 

The  Collect. 

ALmyghty  and  euerlastynge  God, 
by  whose  spirite  the  whole  body  of 
the  Churche  is  gouerned  and  sancti 
fied  :  receiue  our  supplicacions  and 
prayers,  whiche  we  offre  before  thee 
for  all  estates  of  men  in  thy  holye 
congregacion,  that  euery  membre  of 
thesame,  in  his  vocacion  and  minis- 
terye,  maye  truly  and  godly  serue  thee : 
thorough  our  Lorde  lesus 

Christe. 

MErcifull  God,  who  haste  made 
all  men,  and  hatest  nothyng  that  thou 
haste  made,  nor  wouldest  the  deathe 
of  a  synner,  but  rather  that  he  should 
be  couerted  and  liue :  haue  mercy 
vpon  all  lewes,  Turkes,  Infidels,  and 
Heretikes,  and  take  from  the  all  ignor- 
aunce,  hardnes  of  hearte,  and  contempt 
of  thy  worde  :  And  so  fetche  them 
home,  blessed  Lorde,  to  thy  flocke, 
that  they  may  be  saued  among  the 
remnant  of  the  true  Israelites,  and  be 
made  one  folde,  vnder  one  shepeherde, 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord :  who  lyuethe 
and  reigneth.&c. 


8> 


Lectio  [Exod.  xii  1-11] 


The  Epistle. 

[Heb.  X. 

THe  lawe(whichehath  butashadowe 
of  good  thynges  to  come,  and  not  the 
very  fashion  of  thingesthemselues) 
can  neuer  with  those  sacrifices,  whiche 
they  offre  yere  by  yere  continually, 
make  the  commers  therunto  perfite. 
For  woulde  not  then  those  sacrifices 
haue  ceased  to  haue  been  offred,  be 
cause  that  the  offerers  once  purged, 
shoulde  haue  had  nomore  conscience 
of  synnes?  Neuerthelesse,  in  those 
sacrifices  is  there  mencion  made  of 
synnes  euerye  yeare.  For  the  bloud 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


373 


1552 


1661 


ALmighty  &  euerlasting  God, 
by  whose  spirite  the  whole  body  of 
the  church  is  gouerned  £  sancti- 
fyed :  receyue  our  supplications  and 
prayers,  which  we  offre  before  thee 
for  all  estates  of  men  in  thy  holy 
congregatio,  that  euery  membre  of 
the  same,  in  hys  vocation  &  minis- 
terie,  may  truely  and  godly  serue  thee : 
thorough  our  Lorde  lesus 

Christe. 

MErciful  God,  who  haste  made 
al  men,  &  hatest  nothing  that  thou 
hast  made,  nor  wouldeste  the  death 
of  a  synner,  but  rather  that  he  should 
be  conuerted  &  lyue :  haue  mercy 
vpo  al  lewes,  Turkes,  Infidels,  & 
Heretikes,  &  take  from  them  al  ignor- 
aunce,  hardnes  of  heart,  &  contempt 
of  thy  word :  And  so  fetche  them 
home,  blessed  Lorde,  to  thy  flocke, 
that  they  may  be  saued  amog  the 
remnaut  of  the  trew  Israelites,  £  be 
made  one  folde,  vnder  one  shepeheard, 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord :  who  lyueth 
and  reygneth.  &c. 


C  The  Epistle. 

[Hebre.  x 

Tne  law  (which  hath  but  a  shadowe 
of  good  thinges  to  come,  &  not  the 
very  fashio  of  thinges  them  selues) 
canne  neuerwyth  those  sacrifices  which 
they  offre  yeare  by  yeare  cotinualli, 
make  the  commers  therunto  perfite. 
For  woulde  not  then  those  sacryfyces 
haue  ceased  to  haue  bene  offered,  be 
cause  that  the  offerers  once  purged, 
should  haue  had  nomore  conscience 
of  synnes?  Neuerthelesse,  in  those 
sacrifices  is  there  mencion  made  of 
synnes  euery  yeare.  For  the  bloud 


Almighty,  and  everlasting  God, 
by  whose  spirit  the  whole  body  of 
the  Church  is  governed,  and  sancti 
fied  :  Receive  our  supplications,  and 
prayers  which  we  offer  before  thee 
for  all  estates  of  men  in  thy  holy 
8Church,  that  every  member  of 
the  same  in  his  vocation,  and  minis- 
tery,  may  truly,  and  godly  serve  thee, 
through  our  Lord  and  Saviour  lesus 
Christ.  6Amen. 

O  mercifull  God  who  hast  made 
all  men,  and  hatest  nothing  that  thou 
hast  made,  nor  wouldest  the  death 
of  a  Sinner,  but  rather  that  he  should 
be  converted,  and  live  :  Have  mercy 
vpon  all  lews,  Turks,  Infidels,  and 
H  ereticks,  and  take  from  them  all  I  gnor- 
ance,  hardness  of  heart,  and  contempt 
of  thy  word  :  and  so  fetch  them 
home,  blessed  Lord,  to  thy  flock, 
that  they  may  be  saved  among  the 
remnant  of  the  true  Israelites,  and  be 
made  one  Fold  vnder  one  Shepherd 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  who  liveth 
and  reigneth  with  thee,  and  the 
holy  Spirit,  one  God,  world  without 
end.  Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Heb:  10.  «L 

The     law     having  a    shadow 

of  good  things  to  come,  and  not  the 
very  image  of  the  things  , 

can  never  with  those  sacrifices  which 
they  offered  year  by  year  continually, 
make  the  comers  therevnto  perfect. 
For  then  would  they  not  have 
ceased  to  be  offered  ?  because 
that  the  worshippers  once  purged, 
should  have  had  no  more  conscience 
of  sins.  But  in  those  sacrifices  there 
is  a  remembrance  again  made  of 
sins  every  year.  For  it  is  not  possible 


374  GOOD  FRIDAY 

SOURCES 


of  Oxen  and  of  Goates  cannot 
take  awaye  sinnes.  Wherfore,  whe 
he  commeth  into  the  worlde,  he  sayeth: 
Sacrifice  &  offeryng  thou  wouldest 
not  haue,  but  a  body  hast  thou  ordayned 
me.  Burnt  offeringes 
also  for  sinne  haste  thou  not  allowed. 
Then  sayd  I  :  loe,  I  am  here.  In  the 
beginnyng  of  the  booke  it  is  written  of 
me,  that  I  should  do  thy  wil,  O  God. 
Aboue,  when  he  sayth,  Sacrifice  and 
offeryng,  &  burnt  sacrifices,  and 
synne  offeringes,  thou  wouldest  not 
haue,  neyther  haste  thou  allowed  them 
(whiche  yet  are  offered  by  the  lawe) 
then  sayed  he  :  loe,  I  am  here  to  do 
thy  will,  O  God  :  he  taketh  away  the 
first  to  establishe  the  later, 
by  the  whiche  will,  we  are  made  holy, 
euen  by  the  offeryng  of  the  body  of 
lesu  Christ  once  for  all.  And  euery 
priest  is  ready  dayly  ministryng 
and  offerynge  often  tymes  one  maner 
of  Oblacion,  which  can  neuer  take 
away  synnes.  But  this  man,  after  he 
hath  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sinnes, 
is  set  downe  for  euer  on  the  ryghte 
hande  of  God,  and  from  henceforth 
tarieth  tyll  his  foes  be  made  his 
foote  stoole.  For  with  one  offeryng 
hath  he  made  perfect  for  euer,  them 
that  are  sanctified.  The  holy 

goste  himself  also  beareth  vs  record, 
euen  when  he  told  before:  This  is 
the  testament  that  I  will  make  vnto 
them  :  After  those  dayes  (sayeth  the 
Lord)  I  wil  put  my  lawes  in  theyr 
heartes,  and  in  their  myndes  will  I 
write  them,  &  theyr  synnes  and 
iniquities  will  I  remembre  nomore. 
And  where  remission  of  these  thynges 
is,  there  is  nomore  offeryng  for  sinne  . 
Seeyng  therefore  brethren,  that  by 
the  meanes  of  the  bloud  of  lesu,  we 
haue  libertie  to  enter  into  the  holye 
place,  by  the  newe  and  lyuing  waie, 
whiche  he  hath  prepared  for  vs, 
through  the  vayle  (that  is  to  say,  by 
his  fleshe  :)  And  seing  also  that  we  haue 
an  hye  priest  whiche  is  ruler  ouer  the 
house  of  God,  let  vs  drawe  nye  with 
a  true  hearte  in  a  sure  fayth, 
sprinkeled  in  our  heartes  from  an 
euill  conscience,  and  washed  in  our 
bodyes  with  pure  water  :  Let  vs  kepe 
the  profession  of  our  hope,  with 
out  waueringe  (for  he  is  faythfull  that 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


375 


1552 

of  Oxen  &  Goates  cannot 
take  away  sinnes.  Wherefore,  when 
he  cometh  into  the  worlde,  he  sayeth  : 
Sacrifice  &  offeringe  thou  wouldest 
not  haue,  but  a  body  hast  thou  ordained 
me.  Burntofferinges 
also  for  sinne  hast  thou  not  allowed. 
Then  sayde  I :  loe,  I  am  here.  In  the 
beginning  of  the  booke  it  is  wrytten  of 
me,  that  I  should  doe  thy  wyll,  O  God. 
Aboue,  when  he  sayeth  :  Sacrifice  & 
offering,  and  burnte  Sacrifices,  & 
synne  offeringes  thou  wouldest  not 
haue,  nether  haste  thou  allowed  them 
(which  yet  are  offered  by  the  lawe) 
then  sayde  he  :  loe,  I  am  here  to  doe 
thy  wyll,  O  God  :  he  taketh  awaye  the 
first  to  establishe  the  latter, 
by  the  which  wyl,  we  are  made  holy  : 
euen  by  the  offeringe  of  the  body  of 
lesu  Christe  once  for  all.  And  euerye 
Priest  is  ready  dayely  mynistringe 
and  offeringe  often  tymes  one  maner 
of  Oblacion,  whiche  can  neuer  take 
away  synnes.  But  thys  man,  after  he 
hathe  offered  one  Sacryfyce  for  synnes, 
is  set  downe  for  euer  on  the  ryghte 
hande  of  God,  and  from  hencefoorth 
taryeth  tyll  hys  foes  be  made  hys 
footestoole.  For  wyth  one  offeryng 
hath  he  made  perfecte  for  euer,  them 
that  are  sanctified.  The  holy 

ghost  hymselfe  also  beareth  vs  recorde, 
euen  when  he  tolde  before  :  This  is 
the  testamente  that  I  wyl  make  vnto 
them  :  After  those  dayes  (sayeth  the 
Lorde)  I  wyl  put  my  lawes  in  theyr 
heartes,  and  in  theyr  myndes  wyll  I 
wryte  them,  and  theyr  synnes  and 
iniquities  wyll  I  remembre  no  more. 
And  where  remyssyon  of  these  thinges 
is,  there  is  nomore  offering  for  synnes. 
Seing  therefore  brethren,  that  by 
the  meanes  of  the  bloud  of  lesu,  we 
haue  libertie  to  entre  into  the  holye 
place,  by  the  newe  and  lyuinge  waye, 
whych  he  hath  prepared  for  vs, 
through  the  vayle  (that  is  to  say,  by 
his  fleshe:)  And  seyng  also  that  we  haue 
an  hye  Priest  whyche  is  ruler  ouer  the 
house  of  God,  let  vs  drawe  nye  wyth 
a  true  hearte  in  a  sure  fayth, 
sprinkeled  in  oure  heartes  from  an 
euyll  conscience,  and  wasshed  in  oure 
bodyes  wyth  pure  water  :  Let  vs  kepe 
the  profession  of  oure  hope,  wyth- 
out  waueringe  (for  he  is  faythful  that 


1661 

that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should 
take  away  Sins.  Wherefore  when 
he  cometh  into  the  world,  he  saith, 
Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  wouldest 
not  ,  but  a  body  hast  thou  prepared 
me  :  In  burnt  offerings,  and  sacrifices 

for  sin  thou  hast  had  no  pleasure : 
Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come  (in  the 
volume  of  the  booke  it  is  written  of 
me)  to  do  thy  will,  O  God. 
Above,  when  he  said,  Sacrifice,  and 
offering,  and  burnt  offerings,  and 
offering  for  sin,  thou  wouldest  not 

,  neither  hadst  pleasure  therein, 
which  are  offered  by  the  law  : 

Then  said  he,  Lo,  I  come  to  do 
thy  Will,  (O  God)  He  taketh  away  the 
first,  that  he  may  establish  the  second. 
By  the  which  will,  we  are  sanctified, 
through  the  offering  of  the  body  of 
lesus  Christ  once  for  all.  And  every 
Priest  standeth  daily  ministring, 
and  offering  oftentimes  the  same 
sacrifices,  which  can  never  take 
away  sins.  But  this  man  after  he 
had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins 
for  ever,  sate  down  on  the  right 
hand  of  God  :  from  henceforth 

expecting  till  his  enemies  be  made  his 
footstool.  For  by  one  offering 
he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them 
that  are  sanctified.  Whereof  the  holy 
Ghost  also  is  a  Witness  to  vs : 

for  after  that  he  had  said  before,  This  is 
the  covenant  that  I  will  make  with 
them  after  those  dayes,  saith  the 
Lord  :  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their 
hearts,  and  in  their  minds  will  I 
write  them  :  and  their  sins,  and 
iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more. 
Now  where  remission  of  these 
is,  there  is  no  more  offering  for  sin. 
Having  therefore,  Brethren,  bold 
ness  to  enter  into  the  holiest 
by  the  blood  of 

lesus,    by  a    new,   and    living   way, 
which   he  hath    consecrated    for  vs, 
through  the  vail ;   that  is  to  say, 
his    flesh  :      And    having  an 

high  Priest  over  the 

house  of  God  :  Let  vs  draw  near  with 
a  true  heart,  in  full  assurance  of  faith, 
having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an 
evill  conscience,  and  our  bodies 
washed  with  pure  water.  Let  vs  hold 
fast  the  profession  of  our  faith  with 
out  wavering  ;  (for  he  is  faithfull  that 


376 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


SOURCES 


C  Sequatur  passio  sine  Dominus  vobiscum 
et  sine  titulo  hoc  modo. 

Eoressus    est   lesus    cum   discipulis 
suis  trans  torrentem  cedron,  vbi  erat 
ortus  :  in  quern  introiuit  ipse  &  dis- 
cipuli  eius.     Sciebat  autem  &  iudas  qui 
tradebat  eum  locum  :  quia  frequenter 
iesus  conuenerat  illuc  cum  discipulis 
suis.     Iudas  ergo  cum  accepisset  co- 
hortem,  et  a  pontincibus  et  phariseis 
ministros  :  venit  illuc  cum  laterals,  et 
fascibus,  et  armis.     lesus  itaque  sciens 
omnia  que  ventura  erant  super  eum  : 
processit  et  dixit  eis.     Quern  queritis  ? 
Respoiiderunt  ei.     lesum  nazarenum. 
Dixit   eis    iesus.      Ego    sum.      Stabat 
autem  et  iudas  qui  tradebat  eum :  cum 
ipsis.     Vt  ergo  dixit  eis  iesus  ego  sum : 
abierunt  retrorsum,  et  ceciderunt  in 
terram.     Iterum  ergo  interrogauit  eos. 
Quern  queritis  ?     Illi  autem  dixerunt. 
lesum   nazarenum.     Respondit  iesus. 
Dixi  vobis  quia  ego  sum.     Si  ergo  me 
queritis :    sinite    hos   abire.      Vt  im- 
pleretur  sermo  quern  dixit :  quia  quos 
dedisti  michi  non  perdidi  ex  eis  quen- 
quam.       Simon    ergo    petrus    habens 
gladium    eduxit    eum  :     et    percussit 
pontificis    seruum :    et   abscidit  auri- 
culam    eius    dextram.       Erat    autem 
nomen    seruo    malchus.      Dixit   ergo 
iesus  petro.     Mitte  gladium  tuum  in 
vaginam.     Calicem  quern  dedit  michi 
pater :  non  vis  ut  bibam  ilium  ?     Co 
nors    ergo    &    tribunus    &    ministri 
iudeorum   comprehenderunt  iesum  et 
ligauerunt  eum :    et  adduxerunt  eum 
ad  annam  primum.     Erat  enim  socer 
caiphe :  qui  erat  pontifex  anni  illius. 
Erat    autem    caiphas    qui    consilium 
dederat  iudeis  :    quia   expedit    vnum 
hominem   mori   pro    populo.     Seque- 
batur  autem  iesum  simon  petrus :   et 
alius    discipulus.      Discipulus    autem 
ille  erat  notus  pontifici :   et  introiuit 
cum  iesu  in  atrium  pontificis.     Petrus 
autem  stabat  ad  ostium  foris.     Exiuit 
ergo   discipulus   alius   qui   erat  notus 


promised)  and  let  vs  considre  one 
another,  to  the  intent  that  we  may 
prouoke  vnto  loue,  and  to  good  workes, 
not  forsakyng  the  felowshyp  that  we 
haue  among  our  selues,  as  the  maner 
of  some  is  :  but  let  vs  exhorte  one 
another,  and  that  so  muche  the  more,  be 
cause  ye  see  that  the  daye  draweth  nye. 

The  Gospell. 

[lohn.  Xviii. 

Wnen  Iesus  had  spoken  these 
wordes,  he  wet  furthe  with  his  dis 
ciples  ouer  the  broke  Cedron,  where 
was  a  garden,  into  the  whiche  he 
entred  with  his  disciples.  Iudas 
also  whiche  betrayed  hym,  knewe  the 
place :  for  Iesus  oft  times  resorted 
thither  with  his  disciples.  Iudas  then 
after  he  had  receyued  a  bende  of  men 
(and  ministers  of  the  hye  priestes  and 
Phariseis)  came  thyther  with  Lanterns, 
and  fyerbrandes,  and  weapons.  And 
Iesus  knowinge  all  thinges  that  should 
come  on  hym,  went  furth,  and  saied 
vnto  them  :  whom  seke  ye  ?  They 
answered  hym  :  Iesus  of  Nazareth. 
Iesus  sayeth  vnto  them  :  I  am  he. 
Iudas  also  which  betrayed  him,  stode 
with  the.  Assone  then  as  he  had 
saied  vnto  them,  I  am  he,  they  went 
backewarde,  &  fell  to  the  grounde. 
Then  asked  he  them  agayne  :  whom 
seke  ye  ?  They  sayed  :  Iesus  of 
Nazareth.  Iesus  aunswered  :  I  haue 
tolde  you  that  I  am  he.  If  ye  seke 
me  therfore,  let  these  goe  theyr  waye : 
that  the  saying  might  be  fulfilled, 
whiche  he  spake  :  Of  the  which  thou 

fauest  me,  haue  I  not  lost  one.  Then 
imon  Peter  hauing  a  sworde,  drew 
it,  and  smote  the  hye  priestes  seruaunt, 
and  cut  of  his  right  eare.  The  ser- 
uauntes  name  was  Malchus.  Therfore 
sayeth  Iesus  vnto  Peter,  put  vp  thy 
sweord  into  the  sheath  :  shall  I  not 
drinke  of  the  cuppe  which  my  father 
hathegeuenme?  Then  the  cumpanye 
and  the  captayne,  and  the  ministers 
of  the  I  ewes,  tooke  Iesus  and  bound 
hym,  and  led  hym  awaie  to  Anna 
firste  :  for  he  was  father  in  lawe  to 
Cayphas,  whiche  was  the  hye  prieste 
thesame  yere.  Cayphas  was  he  that 
gaue  counsell  to  the  lewes,  that  it  was 
expediente  that  one  man  shoulde  dye 
for  the  people.  And  Simon  Peter 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


377 


1552 

promysed)  and  let  vs  consydre  one 
another,  to  the  intente  that  we  may 
prouoke  vnto  loue,  and  to  good  workes, 
not  forsakynge  the  felowshyp  that  we 
haue  amonge  oure  selues,  as  the  maner 
of  some  is  :  but  let  vs  exhorte  one 
another,and  that  so  much  the  more,be- 
cause  ye  see  that  the  daye  draweth  nye. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[loh.  xviii 

Wnen  lesus  had  spoken  these 
wordes,  he  went  forth  with  his  dis 
ciples  ouer  the  broke  Cedron,  where 
was  a  garden,  into  the  whiche  he  then 
entred  wyth  hys  disciples.  ludas 
whiche  also  betrayed  hym,  knewe  the 
place  :  for  lesus  oftymes  resorted 
thyther  wyth  his  disciples.  ludas  then 
after  he  had  receyued  a  bonde  of  men 
(&  ministers  of  the  hye  priestes  & 
Phariseis)camethytherwithLanternes, 
and  fyrebrandes,  £  weapos.  And 
lesus  knowing  al  thinges  that  should 
come  on  him,  went  forth,  and  sayde 
vnto  them  :  whom  seke  ye  ?  They 
answered  him :  lesus  of  Nazareth, 
lesus  sayde  vnto  them  :  I  am  he. 
ludas  also  whiche  betrayed  him,  stode 
with  the.  Assone  then  as  he  had 
said  vnto  them  :  I  am  he,  they  went 
backewarde,  and  fel  to  the  ground. 
Then  asked  he  them  againe :  who 
seke  ye  ?  They  sayde  :  lesus  of 
Nazareth.  lesus  aunswered  :  I  haue 
tolde  you  that  I  am  he.  Yf  ye  seke 
me  therfore,  let  these  goe  theyr  waye, 
that  the  sayinge  myght  be  fulfylled 
whych  he  spake.  Of  the  which  thou 
gauest  me,  haue  I  not  loste  one.  Then 
Simon  Peter  hauinge  a  swoerd,  drewe 
it,  and  smote  the  hye  priestes  seruaunt, 
and  cut  of  hys  right  eare.  The  ser- 
uauntes  name  was  Malchus.  Therfore 
sayeth  lesus  vnto  Peter,  put  vp  thy 
swoerd  into  the  sheath  :  shall  I  not 
drynke  of  the  cuppe  whych  my  father 
hath  geuen  me?  Then  the  copany 
and  the  captayne,  &  the  mynisters 
of  the  lewes  tooke  lesus  and  bounde 
hym,  and  ledde  hym  awaye  to  Annas 
fyrst  :  for  he  was  father  in  law  to 
Cayphas,  which  was  the  hye  Prieste 
the  same  yeare.  Cayphas  was  he  that 
gaue  counsell  to  the  lewes,  that  it  was 
expediente  that  one  man  shoulde  dye 
for  the  people.  And  Symon  Peter 


1661 

promised)  And  let  vs  consider  one 
another,  to 

provoke  vnto  love,  and  to  good  Works. 
Not  forsaking  the  assembling  of 
our  selves  together,  as  the  maner 
of  some  is,  but  exhorting  one 
another:  and  so  much  the  more,  as 
ye  see  the  day  approching. 

The  Gospel. 


378 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


SOURCES 

pontifici,  et  dixit  ostiarie :  et  intro- 
duxit  petrum.  Dixit  ergo  petro  ancilla 
ostiaria.  Nunquid  et  tu  ex  discipulis 
es  hominis  istius?  Dixit  ille.  Non 
sum.  Stabant  autem  serui  et  ministri 
ad  prunas,  quia  frigus  erat :  et  cale- 
faciebant  se.  Erat  autem  cum  eis  et 
petrus  stans :  et  calefaciens  se.  Pontifex 
ergo  interrogauit  iesum  de  discipulis 
suis :  &  de  doctrina  eius.  Respondit 
ei  lesus.  Ego  palam  locutus  sum 
mundo.  Ego  semper  docui  in  synagoga, 
et  in  templo  quo  omnes  iudei  con- 
ueniunt:  et  in  occulto  locutos  sum 
nichil.  Quid  me  interrogas?  Inter- 
roga  eos  qui  audierunt  quid  locutus 
sum  ipsis.  Ecce  hi  sciunt  que  dixerim 
ego.  Hec  autem  cum  dixisset :  vnus 
assistens  ministrorum  dedit  alapam 
iesu  dicens.  Sic  respondes  poritifici? 
Respondit  ei  iesus.  Si  male  locutus 
sum :  testimonium  perhibe  de  malo. 
Si  autem  bene :  quid  me  cedis  ?  Et 
misit  eum  annas  ligatum  ad  caipham 
pontificem.  Erat  autem  simon  petrus 
stans :  et  calefaciens  se.  Dixerunt  ergo 
ei.  Nunquid  et  tu  ex  discipulis  eius 
es?  Negauit  ille :  et  dixit.  Non  sum. 
Dixit  ei  vnus  ex  seruis  pontificis  cog- 
natus  eius  cuius  abscidit  petrus  auri- 
culam.  Nonne  ego  te  vidi  in  orto 
cum  illo  ?  Iterum  ergo  negauit  petrus : 
&  statim  gallus  cantauit.  Adducunt 
ergo  iesum  a  caipha  in  pretorium.  Erat 
autem  mane.  Et  ipsi  non  introierunt 
in  pretorium,  vt  non  contaminarentur : 
sed  manducarent  pascha.  Exiuit  ergo 
pilatus  ad  eos  foras  :  et  dixit.  Quam 
accusationem  affertis  aduersus  homi- 
uem  hunc  ?  Responderunt  &  dixerunt 
ei.  Si  non  esset  hie  malefactor  :  non 
tibi  tradidissemus  eum.  Dixit  ergo 
ei  pilatus.  Accipite  eum  vos :  et 
secundum  legem  vestram  indicate  eum. 
Dixerunt  ergo  ei  iudei.  Nobis  non 
licet  iuterficere  quemquam.  Vt  sermo 
iesu  implei'etur  quern  dixit :  significans 
qua  morte  esset  moriturus.  Introiuit 


1549 

folowed  Iesus,  and  so  dyd  an  other 
disciple  :  that  disciple  was  knowen  to 
the  hye  priest,  and  wente  in  with  Iesus 
into  the  palace  of  the  hye  prieste. 
But  Peter  stode  at  the  doore  without. 
Then  wente  out  that  other  disciple 
(whiche  was  knowen  to  the  hye  prieste) 
and  spake  to  the  damosell  that  kept 
the  doore,  and  brought  in  Peter. 
Then  sayde  the  damosell  that  kept 
the  doore  vnto  Peter :  Art  not  thou 
also  one  of  this  mannes  disciples  ?  he 
sayd  :  I  am  not.  The  seruauntes  and 
ministers  stode  there,  which  had 
made  a  fier  of  coales  :  for  it  was  colde, 
and  they  warmed  themselues.  Peter 
also  stode  among  them  &  warmed 
himselfe.  The  hye  priest  then  asked 
Iesus  of  his  disciples,  and  of  his 
doctrine.  Iesus  aunswered  him :  I 
spake  openly  in  the  worlde  :  I  euer 
taught  in  the  Sinagoge,  and  in  the 
teple,  whither  all  the  lewes  haue 
resorted,  and  in  secrete  haue  I  sayed 
nothing.  Why  askest  thou  me? 
Aske  the  which  heard  me,  what  I 
saied  vnto  them.  Beholde,  they  ca 
tell  what  I  sayed.  When  he  had 
thus  spoken,  one  of  the  ministers, 
which  stode  by,  smote  Iesus  on  the 
face,  saying :  Aunswerest  thou  the 
hye  priest  so  ?  Iesus  aunswered  hym  : 
If  I  haue  euill  spoken,  beare  witnesse 
of  the  euill  :  But  if  I  haue  well  spoken, 
why  smitest  thou  me  ?  And  Annas 
sente  hym  bounde  vnto  Cayphas  the 
hye  priest.  Symon  Peter  stode  and 
warmed  himself.  Then  sayd  they 
vnto  him  :  Art  not  thou  also  one  of 
his  disciples  ?  He  denyed  it,  &  sayde : 
I  am  not.  One  of  the  seruautes  of 
the  hye  priestes  (his  cosin  whose 
eare  Peter  smote  of)  sayed  vnto  him  : 
did  not  I  see  thee  in  the  garden  with 
hym  ?  Peter  therfore  denied  again  : 
and  immediatly  the  Cocke  crewe. 
Then  ledde  they  Iesus  from  Cayphas 
into  the  hall  of  iudgemente.  It  was 
in  the  morninge,  &  they  themselfes 
went  not  into  the  iudgemente  hall, 
leste  they  shoulde  be  defiled,  but 
that  they  mighte  eate  the  Passeouer. 
Pilate  then  went  out  to  them,  & 
sayd :  what  accusacion  bringe  you 
against  this  man  ?  They  answered 
and  sayd  vnto  hym  :  If  he  were  not 
an  euil  doer,  we  would  not  haue  de- 


GOOD  FRIDAY  379 

1552  1661 

folowed  lesus,  and  so  dyd  another 
Dysciple:  that  Dysciplewasknowento 
the  hye  Prieste,andwente  inwyth  lesus 
vnto  the  palace  of  the  hye  Prieste. 
But  Peter  stoode  at  the  doore  wythoute. 
Then  wente  oute  that  other  Disciple 
(whiche  was  knowen  to  the  hye  Prieste) 
and  spake  to  the  damosell  that  kepte 
the  doore,  and  broughte  in  Peter. 
Then  sayde  the  damosell  that  kepte 
the  doore  vnto  Peter :  Arte  not  thou 
also  one  of  thys  mannes  Disciples  ?  he 
sayde:  I  amnot.  The  seruauntes  and 
ministers  stoode  there,  whiche  had 
made  a  fyre  of  coales :  for  it  was  colde, 
and  they  warmed  them  selues.  Peter 
also  stoode  among  them  &  warmed 
hym  self.  The  hye  Pryeste  then  asked 
lesus  of  hys  Disciples,  and  of  his 
doctryne.  lesus  aunswered  hym  :  I 
spake  openlye  in  the  worlde  :  I  euer 
taughte  in  the  Synagoge,  and  in  the 
Temple  whyther  al  the  lewes  haue 
resorted,  and  in  secrete  haue  I  sayde 
nothynge.  Why  askeste  thou  me  ? 
Aske  them  whiche  heard  me,  what  I 
sayde  vnto  them.  Beholde,  they  can 
tell  what  I  sayde.  When  he  had 
thus  spoken,  one  of  the  ministers, 
which  stode  by,  smote  lesus  on  the 
face,  sayinge  :  Aunswerest  thou  the 
hye  Prieste  so  ?  lesus  aunswered  hym : 
Yf  I  haue  euyl  spoken,  beare  wytnesse 
of  the  euyll :  But  yf  I  haue  wel  spoken, 
why  smytest  thou  me  ?  And  Annas 
sente  hym  bounde  vnto  Cayphas  the 
hye  Prieste.  Symon  Peter  stode  and 
warmed  him  selfe.  The  said  they 
vnto  him  :  Art  not  thou  also  one  of 
his  disciples?  He  denyed  it, &  sayde: 
I  am  not.  One  of  the  seruauntes  of 
the  hye  priestes  (his  cosin,  whose 
eare  Peter  smote  of)  said  vnto  him  : 
dyd  not  I  see  thee  in  the  garde  wyth 
him  ?  Peter  therfore  denied  agayn  : 
and  immediatly  the  Cocke  krewe. 
Then  ledde  they  lesus  from  Caiphas 
into  the  hall  of  iudgement.  It  was 
in  the  morning,  &  they  them  selfes 
wente  not  into  the  ludgemente  hall, 
leste  they  should  be  defyled,  but 
that  they  myght  eate  the  Passeouer. 
Pylate  then  wente  out  to  them  and 
sayde  :  what  accusation  brynge  you 
agaynste  thys  man  ?  They  answered 
and  sayde  vnto  hym  :  Yf  he  were  not 
an  euyll  doer,  we  woulde  not  haue  de- 


38o 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


SOURCES 

ergo  iterum  in  pretorium  pilatus  :  et 
vocauit  iesum,  et  dixit  ei.  Tu  es  rex 
iudeorum?  Respondit  iesus.  Atemet- 
ipso  hoc  dicis :  an  alij  tibi  dixerunt 
de  me  ?  Respondit  pilatus.  Nunquid 
ego  iudeus  sum  ?  Gens  tua  et  ponti- 
fices  tui  tradiderunt  te  michi.  Quid 
fecisti?  Respondit  iesus.  Regnum 
meum  non  est  de  hoc  mundo.  Si  ex 
hoc  mundo  esset  regnum  meum  : 
ministri  mei  vtique  decertarent  vt  non 
traderer  iudeis.  Nunc  autem  regnum 
meum  non  est  hinc.  Dixit  itaque  ei 
pilatus.  Ergo  rex  es  tu.  Respondit 
iesus.  Tu  dicis,  quia  rex  sum  ego 
Ego  in  hoc  natus  sum,  et  ad  hoc  veni 
in  mundum :  vt  testimonium  perhi- 
beam  veritati.  Omnis  qui  est  ex 
veritate :  audit  vocem  meam.  Dixit 
ei  pilatus.  Quid  est  veritas.  Et  cum 
hoc  dixisset,  iterum  exiuit  ad  iudeos  : 
et  dixit  eis.  Ego  nullam  inuenio  in 
eo  causam.  Est  autem  consuetude 
vobis :  vt  vnum  dimittam  vobis  in 
pascha.  Vultis  ergo  dimittam  vobis 
regem  iudeorum  ?  Clamauerunt  rur- 
sum  omnes  dicentes.  Non  hunc,  sed 
barabbam.  Erat  autem  barabbas  latro. 
Tune  ergo  apprehendit  pilatus  iesum  : 
et  flagellauit.  Et  milites  plectentes 
coronam  de  spinis  imposuerunt  capiti 
eius :  et  veste  purpurea  circumde- 
derunt  eum.  Et  veniebant  ad  eum, 
et  dicebant.  Aue  rex  iudeorum.  Et 
dabant  ei  alapas.  Exiuit  iterum 
pilatus  foras :  &  dixit  eis.  Ecce 
adduco  eum  vobis  foras :  vt  cognos- 
catis  quia  nullam  iuuenio  in  eo  causam. 
Exiuit  ergo  iesus  portans  spineam 
coronam  :  et  purpureum  vestimentum. 
Et  dixit  eis  pilatus.  Ecce  homo. 
Cum  ergo  vidissent  eum  pontifices  et 


1549 

liuered  him  vnto  thee.  Then  sayd 
Pylate  vnto  them  :  take  ye  him  and 
iudge  him  after  your  owne  lawe.  The 
I  ewes  therfore  sayed  vnto  him  :  It  is 
not  lawfull  for  vs  to  put  any  manne 
to  death  :  that  the  woordes  of  Iesus 
myght  be  fulfilled,  which  he  spake 
signifying  what  deathe  he  shoulde 
dye.  Then  Pylate  entred  into  the 
iudgemente  hall  againe,  &  called 
Iesus,  and  sayed  vnto  him  :  Art 
thou  the  king  of  the  lewes?  Iesus 
answered  :  sayeste  thou  that  of  thy 
selfe,  or  did  other  tel  it  thee  of  me  ? 
Pilate  answered:  am  I  a  lewe? 
Thine  owne  nacion,  &  hye  priestes 
haue  deliuered  thee  vnto  me  :  what 
haste  thou  done  ?  Iesus  answered  : 
my  kyngdome  is  not  of  this  worlde  : 
if  my  kyngdome  were  of  this  worlde, 
then  would  my  ministers  surely 
fight,  that  I  shoulde  not  be  deliuered 
to  the  lewes  :  but  nowe  is  my  kyng 
dome  not  from  hence.  Pylate  there 
fore  sayed  vnto  hym  :  Art  thou  a 
kynge  then?  Iesus  answered  :  thou 
sayest  that  I  am  a  kinge.  For  this 
cause  was  I  borne,  &  for  this  cause 
came  I  into  the  world,  that  I  should 
beare  witnes  vnto  the  trueth.  And 
all  that  are  of  the  truethe,  heare  my 
voyce.  Pylate  sayed  vnto  hym  : 
what  thyng  is  truethe?  And  when 
he  had  saied  this,  he  wente  out  againe 
vnto  the  lewes,  &  sayeth  vnto  them  : 
I  finde  in  him  no  cause  at  all.  Ye 
haue  a  custome  that  I  shoulde  deliuer 
you  one  loce  at  Easter :  wil  ye  that  I 
loce  vnto  you  the'  king  of  the  lewes? 
The  cried  they  al  again,  saying  : 
Not  hym,  but  Barrabas :  thesame  Bar- 
rabas  was  a  murtherer.  [  lohn.  xiX 
Then  Pylate  toke  Iesus  therfore,  & 
scourged  him.  And  the  souldiers 
wounde  a  croune  of  thornes,  &  put 
it  on  his  heade.  And  they  dyd  on 
him  a  purple  garmente,  &  came  vnto 
him  and  sayed  :  hayle  king  of  the 
lewes  :  and  they  smote  hym  on  the 
face.  Pylate  went  furth 

againe,  and  saied  vnto  them  :  be- 
holde,  I  brynge  him  furth  to  you, 
that  ye  may  know  that  I  finde  no 
faulte  in  him.  The  came  Iesus  furth, 
wearing  a  croune  of  thorne,  and 
a  robe  of  purple.  And  he  saieth 
vnto  them  :  beholde  the  man.  When 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


1552 

lyuered  hym  vnto  thee.  Then  sayde 
Pylate  vnto  them  :  take  ye  him  and 
iudge  hym  after  youre  owne  lawe.  The 
I  ewes  therefore  sayde  vnto  hym :  It  is 
not  lawefull  for  vs  to  put  anye  manne 
to  death  :  that  the  woordes  of  lesus 
myght  be  fulfylled,  whyche  he  spake, 
sygnifying  what  death  he  shoulde 
dye.  Then  Pilate  entred  into  the 
Judgement  hall  agayne,  and  called 
lesus,  and  sayde  vnto  hym :  Arte 
thou  the  Kynge  of  the  lewes  ?  lesus 
answered  :  sayeste  thou  that  of  thy 
selfe,  or  dyd  other  tell  it  thee  of  me  ? 
Pylate  aunswered :  Am  I  a  lewe  ? 
Thyne  owne  nacion,  and  hye  Priestes 
haue  deliuered  thee  vnto  me  :  what 
haste  thou  done  ?  lesus  aunswered  : 
my  kyngdome  is  not  of  thys  worlde  : 
yf  my  Kyngdome  were  of  this  worlde, 
then  woulde  my  ministers  surely 
fight,  that  I  shoulde  not  be  delyuered 
to  the  lewes  :  but  nowe  is  my  Kyng 
dome  not  from  hence.  Pylate  there 
fore  sayde  vnto  hym  :  Arte  thou  a 
kynge  then  ?  lesus  aunswered  :  thou 
sayest  that  I  am  a  kyng.  For  this 
cause  was  I  borne,  and  for  this  cause 
came  I  into  the  worlde,  that  I  shoulde 
beare  wytnesse  vnto  the  trueth.  And 
all  that  are  of  the  trueth,  heare  my 
voyce.  Pylate  sayde  vnto  hym  : 
what  thinge  is  trueth?  And  when 
he  had  sayd  this,  he  wente  out  agayne 
vnto  the  lewes,  and  sayth  vnto  them  : 
I  fynde  in  him  no  cause  at  all.  Ye 
haue  a  custome  that  I  shoulde  delyuer 
you  one  looce  at  Easter:  wyll  ye-that  I 
looce  vnto  you  the  kynge  of  the  lewes? 
Then  cryed  they  all  agayne,  saying  : 
Not  him,  but  Barrabas :  the  same  Bar- 
rabas  was  a  murtherer.  [  loh.  xix. 
Then  Pylate  toke  lesus  therfore,  & 
scourged  him.  And  the  souldiers 
wounde  a  crowne  of  thornes,  &  put 
it  on  hys  head.  And  they  dyd  on 
hym  a  purple  garmente,  &  came  vnto 
him  &  sayd :  hayle  kyng  of  the 
lewes  :  and  they  smote  hym  on  the 
face.  Pylate  wente  foorth 

agayne,  and  sayde  vnto  them  :  be- 
holde,  I  brynge  hym  foorth  to  you, 
that  ye  may  knowe  that  I  fynde  no 
faulte  in  hym.  Then  came  lesus  foorth, 
wearinge  a  crowne  of  thorne,  and 
a  robe  of  purple.  And  he  sayth 
vnto  them  :  behold  the  man.  When 


1661 


[St;  lohn.  19.  1. 

Pilate  therefore  took  lesus,  and 
scourged  him.  And  the  souldiers 
platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put 
it  on  his  head,  and  they  put  on 
him  a  purple  robe,  And 

said,  Hail  King  of  the 
lewes  :  and  they  smote  him  with  their 
hands.  Pilate  therefore  went  forth 
again,  and  saith  vnto  them,  Be 
hold,  I  bring  him  forth  to  you, 
that  ye  may  know  that  I  finde  no 
fault  in  him.  Then  came  lesus  forth, 
wearing  the  crown  of  thorns,  and 
the  purple  robe :  and  Pilate  saith 
vnto  them,  Behold  the  man.  When 


382 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


SOURCES 

ministri :  clamabant  dicentes.  Cru- 
cifige  crucifige  eum.  Dixit  eis  pilatus. 
Accipite  eum  vos  &  crucifigite:  ego 
enim  non  inuenio  in  eo  causam.  Re- 
sponderunt  ei  iudei.  Nos  legem 
habemus,  et  secundum  legem  debet 
mori :  quia  filium  del  se  fecit.  Cum 
ergo  audisset  pilatus  hunc  sermonem  : 
magis  timuit.  Et  ingressus  est  pre- 
torium  iterum ;  et  dixit  ad  iesum. 
Vnde  es  tu  ?  lesus  autem  responsum 
non  dedit  ei.  Dixit  ergo  ei  pilatus. 
Michi  non  loqueris  ?  Nescis  quia  potes- 
tatem  habeo  crucifigere  te  :  et  potesta- 
tem  habeo  dimittere  te?  Respondit 
iesus.  Non  haberes  potestatem  aduer- 
sum  me  vllam :  nisi  tibi  datum  esset 
desuper.  Propterea  qui  tradidit  me 
tibi :  maius  peccatum  habet.  Et  ex- 
inde  querebat  pilatus  dimittere  eum. 
Iudei  autem  clamabant :  dicentes.  Si 
hunc  dimittis  :  non  es  amicus  cesaris. 
Omnis  enim  qui  se  regem  facit :  con- 
tradicit  cesari.  Pilatus  ergo  cum 
audisset  hos  sermones,  adduxit  foras 
iesum :  et  sedit  pro  tribunali  in  loco 
qui  dicitur  lithostratos,  hebraice 
autem  gabatha  Erat  autem  parasceue 
pasche  hora  quasi  sexta :  et  dixit  eis. 
Ecce  rex  vester.  Illi  autem  clama 
bant.  Tolle  tolle  :  crucifige  eum 
Dixit  eis  pilatus.  Regem  vestrum  cru- 
cifigam  ?  Responderunt  pontifices. 
Non  habemus  regem  nisi  cesarem. 
Tune  ergo  tradidit  eis  ilium  :  vt  cruci- 
figeretur.  Susceperunt  autem  iesum  : 
et  eduxerunt.  Etbaiulans  sibi  crucem 
exiuit  in  eum  qui  dicitur  calvarie 
locum,  hebraice  autem  golgotha:  vbi 
crucifixerunt  eum.  Et  cum  eo  alios 
duos  hinc  et  hinc :  medium  autem 
iesum.  Scripsit  autem  et  titulum 
pilatus  :  &  posuit  super  crucem.  Erat 


1549 

the  hye  priestes  therfore  and  ministers 
sawe  hym,  they  cryed  ,  saying :  cruci- 
fie  hym,  crucifie  hym.  Pylate  sayth 
vnto  them  :  take  ye  hym  &  crucifie 
him,  for  I  finde  no  cause  in  him. 
The  lewes  aunswered  him  :  we  haue 
a  lawe,  and  by  our  lawe  he  ought  to 
die,  because  he  made  himselfe  the 
sonne  of  God.  When  Pilate 
heard  that  saying,  he  was  the  more 
afraied,  &  went  againe  into  the 
iudgemet  hall,  and  sayeth  vnto  Iesus : 
whence  art  thou  ?  But  Iesus  gaue 
him  none  answere.  The  sayd  Pilate 
vnto  him  :  Speakeste  thou  not  vnto 
me  ?  knoweste  thou  not  that  I  haue 
power  to  crucifie  thee,and  haue  power 
to  looce  thee?  Iesus  answered: 
Thou  couldest  haue  no  power  at  all 
agaynste  me,  excepte  it  were  geue 
thee  fro  aboue  :  Therfore  he  that 
deliuered  me  vnto  thee,  hath  the 
more  sinne  :  And  from  thencefurth 
soughte  Pilate  meanes  to  looce  hym  : 
but  the  lewes  cryed  ,  sayinge  :  yf 
thou  let  hym  goe,  thou  art  not 
Cesars  frende  :  for  whosoeuer  maketh 
himselfe  a  kynge,  is  againste 
Cesar.  When  Pilate  heard 

that  saying,  he  broughte  Iesus  furth, 
and  sate  downe  to  geue  sentence  in 
a  place  that  is  called  the  Paue- 
ment,  but  in  the  Hebrue  tong 
Gabbatha.  It  was  the  prepar- 

inge  day  of  Easter,  aboute  the 
.vi.  houre.  And  he  sayeth  vnto  the 
lewes  :  beholde  your  kyng.  They 
cryed,  saying:  awaye  with  hym,  awaye 
with  hym :  crucify  hym.  Pylate 
sayeth  vnto  them  :  shall  I  crucyfy 
your  kyng?  The  hye  priestes 
aunswered :  we  haue  no  king  but 
Cesar.  Then  deliuered  he  him 

vnto  the  to  be  crucified.  And 
they  toke  Iesus  and  ledde  hym  awaye. 
And  he  beare  his  crosse,  and  wente 
furthe  into  a  place  whiche  is  called 
the  place  of  dead  mennes  sculles  ; 
but  in  Hebrue,  golgotha  :  where  they 
crucyfyed  hym,  and  two  other  with 
hym :  on  either  side  one,  and  Iesus 
in  the  middest.  And  Pilate  wrot  a 
title  and  put  it  on  the  crosse.  The 
writyng  was,  Iesus  of  Nazareth  kyng 
of  the  lewes.  This  title  read  many 
of  the  lewes  :  for  the  place  where 
Iesus  was  crucified,  was  nie  to  the 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


383 


1552 

the  Priestes  therefore 

sawe  hym,  they  cryed  ,  Cruci- 

fie  him,  Crucyfye  hym.  Pylate  sayeth 
vnto  them  :  take  ye  hym  and  crucyfye 
hym,  for  I  fynde  no  cause  in  hym. 
The  lewes  aunswered  hym  :  we  haue 
a  lawe,  and  by  oure  lawe  he  oughte  to 
dye,  because  he  made  hym  selfe  the 
sonne  of  God.  When  Pylate 
hearde  that  sayinge :  he  was  the  more 
afrayde,  and  wente  agayne  into  the 
ludgement  hall,and  sayeth  vnto  lesus: 
whence  arte  thou?  But  lesus  gaue 
hymnoneaunswere.  Then sayde Pylate 
vnto  hym  :  Speakest  thou  not  vnto 
me  ?  knoweste  thou  not  that  I  haue 
power  to  crucify  thee,  and  have  power 
to  looce  thee?  lesus  aunswered: 
Thou  couldeste  haue  no  power  at  all 
agaynste  me,  excepte  it  were  geuen 
thee  from  aboue  :  Therefore  he  that 
delyuered  me  vnto  thee,  hathe  the 
more  synne  :  And  from  thencefoorth 
soughte  Pylate  meanes  to  looce  hym  : 
but  the  lewes  cryed  ,  sayinge  :  yf 
thou  lette  hym  goe,  thou  arte  not 
Cesars  frende  :  for  whosoeuer  maketh 
hymselfe  a  Kynge,  is  agaynste 
Cesar.  When  Pilate  hearde 

that  sayinge, he  broughte  lesus  foorth, 
and  sate  downe  to  geue  sentence  in 
a  place,  that  is  called  the  Paue- 
mente,  but  in  the  Hebrue  tonge, 
Gabbatha.  It  was  the  prepar- 

ynge  daye  of  Easter,  about  the 

syxte  houre.  And  he  sayeth  vnto  the 
lewes  :  beholde  youre  Kynge.  They 
cryed,sayinge:  awayewythhym,awaye 
wyth  hym :  crucyfye  hym.  Pylate 
sayeth  vnto  them  :  shall  I  crucifye 
your  Kynge?  The  hye  Priestes 
answered  :  we  haue  no  Kynge  but 
Cesar.  Then  deliuered  he  him 

to  the  to  be  crucified.  And 
they  toke  lesus  and  ledde  hym  awaye. 
And  he  bare  hys  crosse,  and  wente 
foorth  into  a  place  whych  is  called 
the  place  of  dead  mennes  sculles  : 
but  in  Hebrue,  Golgotha  :  where  they 
crucified  hym,  and  two  other  wyth 
him  :  on  eyther  syde  one,  and  lesus 
in  the  middest.  And  Pylate  wrote  a 
tytle  &  putte  it  vpon  the  crosse.  The 
wrytyng  was,  lesus  of  Nazareth  king 
of  the  lewes.  Thys  tytle  readmanye 
of  the  lewes  :  for  the  place  where 
lesus  was  crucifyed,  was  nere  to  the 


1661 

the  chief  Priests  therefore,  and  officers 
saw  him,  they  cried  out,  saying,  Cruci- 
fie  him,  crucifie  him.  Pilate  saith 
vnto  them,  Take  ye  him,  and  crucifie 
him ;  for  I  finde  no  fault  in  him. 
The  lewes  answered  him,  We  have 
a  law,  and  by  our  law,  he  ought  to 
die,  because  he  made  himselfe  the 
son  of  God.  When  Pilate  therefore 
heard  that  saying,  he  was  the  more 
afraid.  And  went  again  into  the 
ludgement  hall,  and  saith  vnto  lesus, 
Whence  art  thou?  but  Jesus  gave 
him  no  answer.  Then  saith  Pilate 
vnto  him,  Speakest  thou  not  vnto 
me?  knowest  thou  not  that  I  have 
power  to  crucifie  thee,  and  have  power 
to  release  thee?  lesus  answered. 
Thou  couldest  have  no  power  at  all 
against  me,  except  it  were  given 
thee  from  above  :  therefore  he  that 
delivered  me  vnto  thee,  hath  the 
greater  sin.  And  from  thenceforth 
Pilate  sought  to  release  him  : 

but  the  lewes  cried  out,  saying,  if 
thou  let  this  man  go,  thou  art  not 
Cesars  freind :  Whosoever  maketh 
himselfe  a  King,  speaketh  against 
Cesar.  When  Pilate  therefore  heard 
that  saying,  he  brought  lesus  forth, 
and  sate  down  in  the  ludgement  seat, 
in  a  place  that  is  called  the  Pave 
ment,  but  in  the  Hebrew  , 
Gabbatha.  And  it  was  the  prepara 
tion  of  the  Passover,  and  about  the 
sixth  hour :  and  he  saith  vnto  the 
lewes,  Behold  your  King.  But  they 
cried  out,  Away  with  him,  away 
with  him,  crucifie  him.  Pilate 
saith  vnto  them,  shall  I  crucifie 
your  King?  The  chief  Priests 
answered,  We  have  no  King,  but 
Cesar.  Then  delivered  he  him  there 
fore  vnto  them  to  be  crucified :  and 
they  took  lesus,  and  led  him  away. 
And  he  bearing  his  cross,  went 
forth  into  a  place  called  the 
place  of  a  scull,  which  is  called  in 
the  Hebrew  Golgotha.  Where  they 
crucified  him,  and  two  other  with 
him,  on  eyther  side  one,  and  lesus 
in  the  midst.  And  Pilate  wrote  a 
title,  and  put  it  on  the  cross,  and  the 
writing  was,  lesusof  Nazareth,  the  King 
of  the  Jewes.  This  title  then  read  many 
of  the  lewes  :  for  the  place  where 
lesus  was  crucified,  was  nigh  to  the 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


SOURCES 

autem  scriptum.  lesus  nazarenus  rex 
iudeorum.  Hunc  ergo  titulum  multi 
legerunt  iudeorum  :  quia  prope  ciui- 
tatem  erat  locus  vbi  crucifixus  est 
iesus.  Et  erat  scriptum :  hebraice, 
grece,  &  latine.  Dicebant  ergo  pilato 
pontifices  iudeorum.  Noli  scribere 
rex  iudeorum  :  sed  quia  ipse  dixit,  rex 
sum  iudeorum.  Respondit  pilatus. 
Quod  scrips!  scripsi.  Milites  ergo 
cum  crucifixissent  eum :  acceperunt 
vestimenta  eius,  et  fecerunt  quatuor 
partes,  vnicuique  militi  partem.  Et 
tunicam.  Erat  autem  tunica  in- 
consutilis  :  desuper  contexta  per 
totum.  Dixerunt  ergo  adinuicem. 
Non  scindamus  earn :  sed  sortiamur 
de  ilia  cuius  sit.  Vt  scriptura 
impleretur:  dicens.  Partiti  sunt 
vestimenta  mea  sibi :  et  in  vestem 
meam  miserunt  sortem.  Et  milites 
quidem  hec  fecerunt.  Stabant  autem 
iuxta  crucem  iesu  mater  eius,  et  soror 
matris  eius  maria  cleophe :  et  maria 
magdalene.  Cum  vidisset  ergo  iesus 
matrem  et  discipulum  stantem  quern 
diligebat :  dixit  matri  sue.  Mulier 
ecce  filius  tuus.  Deinde  dixit  disci- 
pulo.  Ecce  mater  tua.  Et  ex  ilia 
hora  accepit  earn  discipulus  in  suam. 
Postea  sciens  iesus  quia  iam  omnia 
consummata  sunt :  vt  consummaretur 
scriptura,  dixit.  Sitio.  Vas  ergo 
positum  erat :  aceto  plenum.  Illi 
autem  spongiam  plenam  aceto  hysopo 
circumponentes :  obtulerunt  ori  eius. 
Cum  ergo  accepisset  iesus  acetum : 
dixit.  Consummatum  est.  Et  in- 
clinato  capite :  tradidit  spiritum. 
ludei  ergo  qnoniam  parasceue  erat, 
vt  non  remanerent  in  cruce  corpora 
sabbato  (erat  enim  magnus  dies  ille 
sabbati)  rogauerunt  pilatum  ut  fran- 
gerentur  eorum  crura  :  et  tollerentur. 
Venerunt  ergo  milites :  &  primi  qui 
dem  fregerunt  crura :  &  alterius  qui 
crucifixus  est  cum  eo.  Ad  iesum 
autem  cum  venissent  vt  viderunt  eum 


1549 

citie.  And  it  was  writen  in  Hebrue, 
Greke,  and  Latin.  Then  saied  the 
hye  priestes  of  the  lewes  to  Pilate  : 
wrytenot  kyng  of  thelewes,but  that 
he  sayed  I  am  kyng  of  the  lewes. 
Pylate  aunswered :  what  I  haue 
wrytten,  that  haue  I  written.  The 
the  souldiers,  when  thei  had  crucified 
Iesus,  toke  hys  garmentes  and  made 
.iiii.  partes,  to  euery  souldier  a  parte, 
and  also  his  coate.  The  coate  was 

without  seme,  wrought  vpon 
throughout.  They  sayed  therfore 
among  themselues  :  let  us  not  deuide 
it,  but  cast  lottes  for  it,  who  shall  haue  it. 
That  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled 
saying :  They  haue  parted  my  ray- 
ment  among  them,  and  for  my  coate 
dyd  they  cast  lottes.  And  the 
souldiours  dyd  suche  thynges  in  dede. 
There  stode  by  the  crosse  of  Iesus 
hys  mother  and  hys  mothers  syster, 
Mary  the  wyfe  of  Cleophas,  and 
Mary  Magdalene.  When  Iesus  ther 
fore  sawe  hys  mother,  and  the  dis 
ciple  standynge  ,  whome  he  loued,  he 
saieth  vnto  his  mother :  woman,  be 
hold  thy  sone.  Then  sayd  he  to  the 
disciple  :  beholde  thy  mother.  And 
fro  that  houre  the  disciple  toke  her 
for  his  owne. 

After  these  thynges,  Iesus  knowing 
that  all  thynges  were  now  performed, 
that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled, 
he  saieth  :  I  thrist.  So  there  stode 
a  vessel  by  full  of  vineger  :  therefore 
they  filled  a  sponge  with  vineger, 
and  wounde  it  about  with  Isope, 
and  putte  it  to  his  mouthe.  Assone  as 
Iesus  then  receyued  of  the 

vineger,  he  sayed  :  It  is  finished,  and 
bowed  his  head  and  gaue  up  the 
goste.  The  lewes  therefore,  because 
it  was  the  preparing  of  the  Sabbothe, 
that  the  bodyes  shoulde  not  remayne 
vpon  the  crosse  on  the  Sabboth  day 
(for  that  Sabboth  day,  was  an  hie 
day)  besought  Pilate,  that  their 
legges  myght  be  broken,  and  that  they 
myght  be  taken  downe.  The  came 
the  souldiers  and  brake  the  legges  of 
the  firste,  and  of  the  other  whiche  was 
crucified  with  hym.  But  when  they 
came  to  Iesus,  and  sawe  that  he  was 
deade  already,  they  brake  not  hys 
legges  :  but  one  of  the  souldiours  with 
a  speare  thrust  him  into  the  side,  & 


GOOD  FRIDAY 


385 


1552 

citie.  And  it  was  written  in  Hebrue, 
Greke,  &  Latyn.  The  sayde  the 
hye  priestes  of  the  lewes  to  Pilate  : 
write  not  king  of  the  I  ewes,  but  that 
he  sayde  :  I  am  Kyngeof  the  lewes. 
Pylate  answered :  what  I  haue 
wrytten,  that  I  haue  wrytten.  Then 
the  souldiers,  whan  they  had  crucified 
lesus,  toke  hys  garmentes  and  made 
foure  partes,  to  euery  souldier  a  parte, 
and  also  hys  coate.  The  coate  was 
without  seme,  wrought  vpo 
throughout.  They  sayde  therefore 
amongethemselues:  letvs  not  deuyde 
it,butcastelottesforit,whoshallhaueit. 
That  the  scripture  myght  be  fulfylled, 
sayinge  :  They  haue  parted  my  ray- 
mente  amonge  them,  and  for  my  coate 
dyd  they  caste  lottes.  And  the 
souldiers  dyd  such  thinges  in  dede. 
There  stode  by  the  crosse  of  lesus, 
his  mother,  and  hys  mothers  syster, 
Marye  the  wyfe  of  Cleophas,  and 
Mary  Magdalene.  When  lesus  there 
fore  sawe  hys  mother,  and  the  Dis 
ciple,  whom  he  loued,  standynge  ,  he 
sayeth  vnto  hys  mother  :  woman,  be- 
holde  thy  sonne.  Then  sayde  he  to  the 
Disciple  :  beholde  thy  mother.  And 
from  that  houre  the  Disciple  toke  her 
for  hys  owne. 

After  these  thinges,  lesus  knowing 
that  al  thinges  were  nowe  performed, 
that  the  scripture  myghte  be  fulfylled, 
he  sayth  :  I  thyrst.  So  there  stode 
a  vessell  by,  full  of  vynegre  :  therfore 
they  fylled  a  sponge  with  vynegre, 
and  wounde  it  aboute  wyth  Isope, 
and  putte  it  to  hys  mouth.  Assoone  as 
lesus  then  receaued  of  the 

vynegre,  he  sayde  :  It  is  fynished,  and 
bowed  his  head  and  gaue  vp  the 
ghost.  The  lewes  therfore,  because 
it  was  the  preparing  of  the  Sabboth, 
that  the  bodies  should  not  remayne 
vpon  the  Crosse  on  the  Sabboth  daye 
(for  that  Sabbothe  daye,  was  an  hye 
daye)  besought  Pylate  that  theyr 
legges  myghte  be  broke,  and  that  they 
myght  be  take  downe.  Then  came 
the  souldiers  and  brake  the  legges  of 
the  fyrst,  and  of  the  other  whych  was 
crucified  with  him.  But  when  they 
came  to  lesus,  and  sawe  that  he  was 
dead  alreadye,  they  brake  not  hys 
legges  :  but  one  of  the  souldiours  with 
a  speare  thrust  hym  into  the  syde,  and 


1661 

City,  and  it  was  written  in  Hebrew, 
and  Greek,  and  Latine  Then  said  the 
chief  Priests  of  the  Jewes  to  Pilate, 
write  not,The  King  of  the  Iews,butthat 
he  said,  I  am  the  King  of  the  lews. 
Pilate  answered,  What  I  have 
written,  J  have  written.  Then 

the  souldjers,  when  they  had  crucified 
lesus,  tooke  his  Garments  (and  made 
four  parts,  to  every  souldier  a  part) 
and  also  his  Coat :  now  the  coat  was 
without  seam,  Woven  from  the  top 
throughout.  They  said  therefore 
among  themselves,  Let  vs  not  rend 
it, but  cast  lots  for  it,  whose  it  shall  be  : 
that  the  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled, 
which  saith,  They  parted  my  rai 
ment  among  them,  and  for  my  vesture 
they  did  cast  lots.  These  things 
therefore  the  souldiers  did. 
Now  there  stood  by  the  cross  of  lesus, 
his  mother,  and  his  mothers  sister, 
Mary,  the  wife  of  Cleophas,  and 
Mary  Magdalen.  When  Jesus  there 
fore  saw  his  mother,  and  the  dis 
ciple  standing  by,  whome  he  loved,  he 
saieth  vnto  his  mother,  Woman,  be 
hold  thy  son.  Then  saieth  he  to  the 
disciple,  Behould  thy  mother.  And 
from  that  hour,  that  disciple  took  her 
vnto  his  own  home.- 

-After       this,       lesus       knowing 
that  all  things  were  now  accomplished, 
that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled, 
saith,  I  thirst.     Now  there  was  set 
a    vessel          full    of  Vineger :    and 
they  filled    a    spunge  with    vineger, 
and        put        it       vpon        Hyssop, 
and    put    it    to    his   mouth.      When 
Jesus  therefore  had  received        the 
vineger,  he  said,  it  is  finished :   and 
he  bowed  his  head,  and  gave  vp  the 
Ghost.    The  lews  therefore,  because 
it  was  the  preparation, 
that  the  bodies  should   not    remain 
vpon  the  Cross  on  the  Sabbath-day 
(for  that   Sabbath-day  was  an  high- 
day)    besought     Pilate     that     their 
legs  might  be  broken,  and  that  they 
might  be  taken  away.     Then  came 
the  souldjers,  and  brake  the  legs  of 
the  first,  and  of  the  other,  which  was 
crucified   with  him.   but    when    they 
came  to  lesus,  and  saw  that  he  was 
dead    already,    they    brake    not    his 
legs.      But  one  of  the  soldiers  with 
a     spear     pierced     his     syde,     and 


2  B 


386 


EASTER  EVEN 


SOURCES 

iam    mortuum,    non    fregerunt     eius 
crura  :    sed  vnus  militum  lancea  latus 
eius  aperuit,  et  continue  exiuit  sanguis 
&   aqua.       Et   qui  vidit  testimonium 
perhibuit :  et  verum  est  testimonium 
eius.     Et  ille  scit  quia  vera  dicit :  vt 
et  vos    credatis.       Facta    sunt  enim 
hec :    vt  scriptura    impleretur.       Os 
non  comminuetis  ex  eo.      Et  iterum 
alia       scriptura       dicit.         Videbunt 
in    quern    transfixerunt.     Euangelium. 
Post  hec  autem  rogauitpilatum  ioseph 
ab  arimathia  eo  quod  esset  discipulus 
iesu  (occultus  autem  propter  metum 
iudeorum)  vt  tolleret  corpus  iesu.     Et 
permisit  pilatus.     Venit  ergo,  et  tulit 
corpus  iesu  Venit  autem  &  nicodemus, 
qui  venerat  ad  iesum  nocte  primum  : 
ferens    mixturam    myrrhe    et    aloes, 
quasi     libras     centum.       Acceperunt 
autem  corpus  iesu^  &  ligauerunt  eum 
linteis    cum    aromatibus :    sicut    mos 
iudeis  est  sepelire.       Erat  autem   in 
loco  vbi   crucifixus  est  ortus :    &  in 
orto   monumentum    nouum :    in   quo 
nondum  quisquam  positus  erat.     Ibi 
ergo   propter    parasceuen   iudeorum : 
quia  iuxta  erat  monumentum :  posu- 
erunt  iesum. 


1549 

forthwith  came  there  out  bloud 
and  water.  And  he  that  sawe  it  bare 
recorde,  and  hys  recorde  is  true.  And 
he  knoweth  that  he  sayeth  true,  that 
ye  myght  beleue  also.  For  these 
thinges  were  done  that  the  scripture 
should  be  fulfilled  :  ye  shall  not 
breake  a  bone  of  hym. 
And  agayne  an  other  scripture  sai- 
eth ;  they  shal  loke  vpon  him  whom 
they  haue  pearced.  After  this,  Joseph 
of  Aramathia  (whiche  was  a  disciple 
of  lesus,  but  secretly  for  feare  of  the 
lewes)  besoughte  Pilate  that  he  myght 
take  downe  the  bodye  of  lesus.  And 
Pylate  gaue  him  lycence  :  He  came 
therfore  and  tooke  the  bodye  of  lesus. 
And  there  came  also  Nicodemus 
(whiche  at  the  beginning  came  to  lesus 
by  nyght)  and  brought  of  myrre  and 
Aloes  mingled  together,  aboute  an 
hundreth  pounde  weyght.  Then 
tooke  they  the  body  of  Iesu,  and 
wounde  it  in  lynnen  clothes  with  the 
odours,  as  the  maner  of  the  lewes  is 
to  burye.  And  in  the  place  where  he 
was  crucified,  there  was  a  garden, 
and  in  the  garden  a  newe  Sepulchre, 
wherein  was  neuer  man  layd  :  There 
layed  they  lesus  therfore,  because  of 
the  preparynge  of  the  Sabbothe  of  the 
lewes,  for  the  Sepulchre  was  nye  at 
hande. 

At  Euensong. 
The  first  lesson.  Esai.  Liii.  Vnto  the  ende. 

C  EASTER  EUEN. 

At  Mattyns. 

The  first  lesson.  Lamenta.iiii.  v.  Vnto  the  ende. 
At  the  Communion. 

[Domine  deus  salutis.  psal.  IxxxViii. 

0  Lorde  God  of  my  saluacion,  I 
haue   cryed   daye  and   nyght   before 
thee  :  O  let  my  prayer  enter  into  thy 
presence,  incline  thyne  eare  vnto  my 
callyng. 

For  my  soule  is  full  of  trouble  :  and 
my  lyfe  draweth  nye  vnto  hell. 

1  am  counted  as  one  of  them  that 
goe  downe  vnto  the  pytte  :  and  I  haue 
bene  euen  as  a  manne  that  hathe  no 
strengthe. 

Free  among  the  dead,  lyke  vnto 
them  that  bee  wounded  and  lye  in 
the  graue,  whiche  be  out  of  remem- 
braunce :  and  are  cut  awaye  from  thy 
hande. 


EASTER  EVEN 


387 


1552 

lorthwyth  there  came  out  bloud 
and  water.  And  he  that  sawe  it  bare 
recorde,  and  hys  recorde  is  true.  And 
he  knoweth  that  he  sayeth  true,  that 
ye  myghte  beleue  also.  For  these 
thynges  were  done  that  the  scripture 
shoulde  be  fulfylled  :  ye  shall  not 
breake  a  bone  of  hym. 

And  agayne  another  scripture  say 
eth  :  they  shall  loke  vpon  hym  whom 
they  haue  pearsed.    After  thys,  loseph 
of  Arimathia  (why die  was  a  Disciple 
of  lesus,  but  secretely  for  feare  of  the 
lewes)  besought  Pilate  that  he  myghte 
take  downe  the  bodye  of  lesus.     And 
Pylate  gaue  hym  lycence  :    He  came 
therfore  and  toke  the  body  of  lesus. 
And    there   came    also    Nichodemus 
(which  at  the  beginning  came  to  lesus 
by  night)  and  broughte  of  myrre  and 
Aloes    myngled    together,  about    an 
hundreth    pound     weyghte.        Then 
tooke  they  the  bodye  of  lesus,  and 
wounde  it  in  lynnen  clothes  wyth  the 
odours,  as  the  maner  of  the  lewes  is 
to  burye.     And  in  the  place  where  he 
was   crucifyed,  there  was  a  garden, 
and  in  the  garden  a  newe  Sepulchre, 
wherein  was  neuer  man  layde  :  There 
layde  they  lesus  therefore  because  of 
the  preparynge  of  the  Sabbothe  of  the 
lewes,  for  the  Sepulchre  was  nye  at 
hande. 


1661 

forthwith  came  there  out,  blood 
and  Water.  And  he  that  saw  it,  bare 
record,  and  his  record  is  true  :  and 
he  knoweth  that  he  saith  true,  that 
ye  might  believe.  For  these 

things  were  don,  that  the  scripture 
should  be  fulfilled.  A  bone  of  him 
shall  not  be  broken.- 
-And  again,  another  Scripture  say 
eth,  they  shall  look  on  him  whom 
they  peirced. 


EASTER  EUEN. 


EASTER  EVEN. 


388 


EASTER  EVEN 


SOURCES 


1549 

Thou  haste  layed  me  in  the  lowest 
pytte,  in  a  place  of  darckenes  :  and  in 
the  depe. 

Thyne  indignacion  lyeth  harde  vpon 
me  :  and  thou  hast  vexed  me  with  all 
thy  stormes. 

Thou  hast  put  awaye  myne  ac- 
quayntaunce  far  from  me  :  and  made 
me  to  be  abhorred  of  them. 

I  am  so  faste  in  prison  :  that  I 
cannot  gette  forth. 

My  syght  fayleth  for  very  trouble  : 
lord  I  haue  called  daylye  vpon  thee, 
I  haue  stretched  out  my  handes  vnto 
thee. 

Doeste  thou  shewe  wonders  among 
the  dead?  or  shall  the  dead  rise  vp 
agayne  and  prayse  thee  ? 

Shall  thy  louing  kindnes  be  shewed 
in  the  graue  ?  or  thy  faythfulnesse  in 
destruccion  ? 

Shall  thy  wonderous  workes  be 
knowen  in  the  darke  ?  and  thy  right- 
eousnes  in  the  lande  where  all  thynges 
are  forgotten  ? 

Vnto  thee  haue  I  cryed,  O  Lorde  : 
and  earlye  shall  my  prayer  come 
before  thee. 

Lord,  why  abhorrest  thou  my  soule  ? 
and  hidest  thou  thy  face  from  me  ? 

I  am  in  misery,  and  like  vnto  hym 
that  is  at  the  poynte  to  dye  :  (euen 
from  my  youth  vppe)  thy  terrours 
haue  I  suffred  with  a  troubled  mynde. 

Thy  wrathfull  displeasure  goeth 
ouer  me  :  and  the  feare  of  thee,  hath 
vndone  me. 

They  came  rounde  aboute  me 
dayelye  lyke  water  :  and  compassed 
me  together  on  euery  syde. 

My  louers  and  frendes  hast  thou 
put  awaye  from  me  :  and  hyd  myne 
acquayntaunce  out  of  my  syght. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holy  ghoste. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shalbe  :  worlde  without  ende. 
Amen. 


1637  O  most  gracious  God,  look  upon  us 
in  mercy,  and  grant  that  as  we  are 
baptised  into  the  death  of  thy  Sonne 
our  Saviour  lesus  Christ ;  so  by  our 
true  and  hearty  repentance  all  our 
sins  may  be  buried  with  him,  and  we 
not  fear  the  grave  :  that  as  Christ  was 


EASTER  EVEN 
1552  1661 


The  Collect. 

Grant  0  Lord,  that  as  we  are 
baptized  into  the  death  of  thy 
blessed  Son,  our  Saviour  lesus 
Christ :  so  by  continual!  mortifieing 
our  corrupt  affections,  we  may  be 
buried  with  him,  and  that  through 


39° 


EASTER  EVEN 


SOURCES 

raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory 
of  thee,  O  Father,  so  wee  also  may 
walk  in  newnesse  of  life,  but  our  sins 
may  never  bee  able  to  rise  in  judge 
ment  against  us,  and  that  for  the 
merit  of  lesus  Christ  that  died,  was 
buried  and  rose  again  for  us.  Amen. 

[Feria  vi  post  Pascha :  Epistola,  1  Pet.  iii 
18-22.] 


1549 


<&  [Dom.  in  ramis  palmarum ;  Passio,  S.  Mat. 
xxvi  i-xxvii  61 :  Euangelium  ib.  xxvii  62-66.] 


The  Epistle. 

[i.  Pet  iii. 

IT  is  better  (if  the  will  of  God  be 
so)  that  ye  suffre  for  well  doing  then 
for  euil  doing.  For  asmuche  as 
Christ  hath  once  suffered  for 

sinnes,  the  iust  for  the  vniust,  to 
bryng  vs  to  God :  and  was  kylled 
as  partayning  to  the  flesh,  but  was 
quickened  in  the  spirite.  In  which 
spirite  he  also  went  and  preached  to 
the  spirites  that  were  in  prison,  whiche 
some  tyme  had  been  disobedient,  when 
the  long  sufFring  of  God  was  once 
looked  for  in  the  dayes  of  Noe,  whyle 
the  arke  was  a  preparing  :  wherin  a 
fewe,  that  is  to  saye,  eyghte  soules 
were  saued  by  the  water,  lyke 

as  Baptisme 

also  nowe  saueth  vs  :  not  the  puttyng 
awaye  of  the  fylthe  of  the  fleshe,  but 
in  that  a  good  conscience  consenteth 
to  God  by  the  resurreccion  of  lesus 
Christ,  whiche  is  on  the  right  hande 
of  God  :  and  is  gone  into  heauen  : 
Angels,  powers,  and  might, 

subdued  vnto  him. 

The  Gospell. 

[       Mat.  xxVii. 

WHen  the  cue  was  come,  there 
came  a  riche  ma  of  Aramathia 
named  loseph,  whiche  also 
was  lesus  disciple.  He  wente  vnto 
Pilate  &  begged  the  body  of  lesus. 
Then  Pilate  comauded  the  body  to 
be  deliuered.  And  whe  loseph  had 
taken  the  bodye,  he  wrapped  it  in  a 
cleane  linnen  clothe,  &  layed  it  in 
his  newe  Tobe,  whiche  he  had 
hewen  out  euen  in  the  rocke,  & 
rolled  a  greate  stone  to  the  doore  of 
the  Sepulchre,  and  departed.  And 
there  was  Mary  Magdalene,  and  the 
other  Mary  sytting  ouer  agaynst  the 
Sepulchre.  The  nexte  day  that 

folowed  the  daye  of  preparing, 

the  high  priestes  and  Phariseis  came 


EASTER  EVEN 


1552 


C  The  Epistle. 

[i.  Pete,  iii 

IT  is  better  (yf  the  wyll  of  God  bee 
so)  that  ye  suffre  for  well  doynge  then 
for  euyll  doynge.  For  asmuche  as 
Christe  hath  once  suffered  for 
synnes,  the  iuste,  for  the  vniuste,  to 
bring  vs  to  God :  and  was  kylled 
as  pertayning  to  the  fleshe,  but  was 
quickened  in  the  spyrite.  In  which 
spyryte  he  also  went  &  preached  to 
the  spirites  that  were  in  prieson,  whych 
sometyme  had  bene  disobedient,  when 
the  long  suffering  of  God  was  once 
loked  for,  in  the  dayes  of  Noe,  whyle 
the  Arke  was  a  preparinge  :  wherein  a 
fewe,  that  is  to  saye,  eyghte  soules 
were  saued  by  the  water,  lyke 

as  Baptisme 

also  nowe  saueth  vs  :  not  the  puttinge 
awaye  of  the  filthe  of  the  fleshe,  but 
in  that  a  good  conscience  consenteth 
to  God  by  the  resurrection  of  lesus 
Christ,  whych  is  on  the  ryghte  hande 
of  God,  and  is  gone  into  heauen  : 
Angels,  powers,  and  might, 

subdued  vnto  hym. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[       Mathew.  xxvii. 

Wnen  the  euen  was  come,  there 
came  a  ryche  man  of  Arimathia, 
named  loseph,  whych  also 
was  lesus  Disciple.  He  went  vnto 
Pilate  and  begged  the  body  of  lesus. 
Then  Pilate  comaunded  the  body  to 
be  deliuered.  And  when  loseph  had 
taken  the  bodye,  he  wrapped  it  in  a 
cleane  lynnen  clothe,  and  layed  it  in 
hys  newe  tombe,  which  he  hadde 
hewen  oute,  euen  in  the  rocke,  and 
rolled  a  greate  stone  to  the  doore  of 
the  Sepulchre,  &  departed.  And 
there  was  Mary  Magdalene,  and  the 
other  Mary  sitting  ouer  against  the 
Sepulchre.  The  next  daye  that 

foloweth   the   day  of  preparing, 

the  high  Priestes  &  Phariseis  came 


1661 

the  grave,  and  gate  of  death,  we 
may  pass  to  our  ioyfull  resurrec 
tion,  for  his  merits,  who  died,  and 
was  buried,  and  rose  again  for 
vs,  thy  son  lesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[i.  St:  Pet.  3.  417. 

It  is  better,  if  the  will  of  God  be 
so,  that  ye  suffer  for  well  doing,  then 
for  evil  doing.      For 
Christ  also  hath    once    suffered    for 
Sins,  the    iust  for  the  vniust.   (that 
he  might    bring    vs    to   God)   being 
put  to  death   in  the  flesh,  but 
quickned    by  the    spirit :    By  which 
also  he  went  and  preached  vnto 
the  spirits  in  prison  :  which 

sometime    were    disobedient,    when 
once    the    long  -  suffering     of     God 
waited  in  the  daies  of  Noah,  while 
the  Arke  was  a  preparing  ;  wherein 
few,  that  is  eight  Soules, 

were  saved  by  water.    The  like 

figure  wherevnto,  even  Baptism,  doth 
also  now  save  vs,  (not  the  putting 
away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but 
the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  to 
wards  God)  by  the  resurrection  of  lesus 
Christ.  Who  is  gon  into  heaven, 
and  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God, 
Angels  and  authorities  and  powers 
being  made  subject  vnto  him. 

The  Gospel. 

[St:  Mat.  27.  457. 

When  the  Even  was  come,  there 
came  a  rich  man  of  Arimathea, 
named  loseph,  who  also  himselfe 
was  lesus  disciple.  He  went  to 
Pilate,  and  begged  the  body  of  lesus  : 
then  Pilate  commanded  the  body  to 
be  delivered.  And  when  loseph  had 
taken  the  body,  he  wrapped  it  in  a 
clean  linen  cloth,  and  layed  it  in 
his  own  new  Tombe,  which  he  had 
hewen  out  in  the  Rock,  and  he 

rolled  a  great  Stone  to  the  doore  of 
the  sepulchre,  and  departed.  And 
there  was  Mary  Magdalen,  and  the 
other  Mary  sitting  over  against  the 
sepulchre.  Now  the  next  day  that 
followed  the  day  of  the  preparation, 
the  chief  Priests  and  Pharisees  came 


392 


EASTER  DAY 


SOURCES 


C  In  die  sancto  pasche,  qui  est  resurrec- 

tionis  dominice. 

Static  &  ordo  processionis  in  die  pasche 
ante  matutinas  cum  cruce.  Pulsatis  omni 
bus  campanis  cantetur  antiphona. 


[Communio  Pascha  nostrum  immo- 
latus  est  christus  alleluia  :  itaque 
epulemur  in  azymis  sinceritatis  et  veri- 
tatis  alleluia  alleluia  alleluia.] 


1549 

together  vnto  Pilate,  saying :  Sir,  we 
remembre  that  this  deceyuer  sayed 
while  he  was  yet  aliue :  After  iii. 
dayes  I  will  rise  againe  :  Commaunde 
therfore  that  the  Sepulchre  bee  made 
sure  vntyll  the  thirde  daye,  leste  hys 
disciples  come  and  steale  him 

awaye,  and  saye  vnto  the  people,  he 
is  risen  from  the  dead  :  and  the  last 
erroure  shall  be  worse  then  the  first. 
Pylate  sayed  vnto  them  :  ye  haue  the 
watche,  goe  your  waye,  make  it  as 
sure  as  ye  can.  So  they  wente  and 
made  the  Sepulchre  sure  with  the 
watche  menne,  and  sealed  the  stone. 

C  EASTER  DAYE. 

In  the  mornyng  afore  mattyns,  the  people 
being  assembled  in  the  church :  these 
Anthems  shalbe  fyrst  solemnely  song,  or, 
sayed. 


Cnristus  resurgens  ex  mortuis  iam 
non  moritur  mors  illi  vltra  non  domi- 
nabitur  quod  enim  viuit  viuit  deo 
alleluya  alleluya. 

y.  Dicant  nunc  iudei  [etc.] 
Chorus  respondet  vt  sequitur      Alleluya 
alleluya. 


CHrist  rising  agayne  from  the  dead, 
nowe  dieth  not.  Deathe  from  hence 
furth  hath  no  power  vpon  hym. 

For  in  that  he  dyed,  he  dyed  but  once 
to  put  awaye  sinne :  but  in  that  he  liueth 
he  liueth  vnto  God.  And  so  lykewyse, 
counte  youre  selues  dead 

vnto  synne,  but  lyuyng  vnto  God 
in  Christe  lesus  our  Lord.  Alleluya 
Alleluya. 

CHriste  is  risen  agayne, 

the  fyrste  fruytes  of  them  that 
slepe  :  for  seyng  that  by  man  came 
deathe,  by  manne  also  commeth  the  re 
surrection  of  the  dead  :  For  as  by 
Adam  all  men  do  dye,  so  by 

Christe  all  menne  shalbe  restored  to 
lyfe.  Alleluya. 


EASTER  DAY 


393 


1552 

together  vnto  Pilate,  saying  :  Sir,  we 
remembre  that  this  deceiuer  sayed 
whyle  he  was  yet  alyue  :  After  three 
dayes  I  wyl  ryse  agayne  :  Commaunde 
therfore  that  the  Sepulchre  be  made 
sure  vntil  the  thyrde  daye,  leste  hys 
disciples  come  and  steale  hym 

awaye,  and  save  vnto  the  people,  he 
is  risen  from  the  dead  :  and  the  last 
errour  shalbe  worse  the  the  first. 
Pylate  sayde  vnto  them  :  ye  haue  a 
watche,  goe  youre  waye,  make  it  as 
sure  as  ye  can.  So  they  wente  and 
made  the  Sepulchre  sure  with  the 
watche  menne,  and  sealed  the  stone. 

EASTER  DAIE. 

C  At  morning  prayer,  in  stede,  of  the  Psalme. 
O  come  let  vs.  &c.  These 

Anthemes  shalbe  song,  or 

sayde. 


CHrist  rysing  agayne  from  the  dead, 
now  dyeth  not.  Death  from  hence 
forth  hath  no  power  vpon  him. 
For  in  that  he  dyed,  he  dyed  but  once 
to  put  away  sinne :  but  in  that  he  liueth, 
he  liueth  vnto  god.  And  so  likewise, 
count  your  selues  dead 
vnto  sinne,  but  liuing  vnto  God 
in  Christe  lesus  oure  Lorde. 


Cnriste  is  risen  agayne 

the  fyrst  fruites  of  them  that 
slepe  :  for  seeing  that  by  man  came 
deathe,  by  man  also  cummeth  the  re- 
surreccion  of  the  dead.  For  as  by 
Adam  all  men  doe  dye,  so  by 

Christ    al    men    shalbe    restored    to 
life. 


1661 

together  vnto  Pilate,  saying,  Sir,  We 
remember  that  that  deceiver  said, 
while  he  was  yet  alive,  After  three 
dayes,  I  will  rise  again.  Command 
therefore  that  the  sepulchre  be  made 
sure  vntill  the  third  day;  lest  his 
disciples  come  by  night,  and  steal  him 
away,  and  say  vnto  the  people,  He 
is  risen  from  the  dead  :  so  the  last 
error  shall  be  worse  then  the  first. 
Pilate  said  vnto  them,  ye  have  a 
watch,  go  your  way,  make  it  as 
sure  as  you  can.  so  they  went,  and 
made  the  sepulchre  sure,  sealing  the 
Stone,  and  setting  a  Watch. 

EASTER  DAY. 

f  At  Morning  Prayer  in  stead  of  the  Psalm  : 
O  come  let  vs,  &°c.  these 

Anthems  shall  be  sung,  or 

said. 

[1  Cor.  5.  7. 

Christ  our  Passover  is  sacrificed 
for  vs.  Therefore  let  vs  keep  the 
Feast,  not  with  the  old  Leaven, 
nor  with  the  Leaven  of  malice, 
and  wickedness,  but  with  the  vn- 
leavened  bread  of  sincerity,  and 
truth. 

[Rom.  6.  9. 

Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead, 
dieth  no  more,  death 

hath  no  more  dominion  over  him. 
For  in  that  he  died,  he  died  vnto 
sin  once  :  but  in  that  he  liveth, 
he  liveth  vnto  God.  Likewise 

reckon  ye  also  your  selves  to  be  dead 
indeed  vnto  sin,  but  alive  vnto  God, 
through  lesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

[1.  Cor.  15.  20. 

Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead, 
and  become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that 
slept.  For  since  by  man  came 

death,  by  man  came  also  the  re 
surrection  of  the  dead.  For  as  in 
Adam  all  dy,  even  so  in 

Christ  shall  all  be  made 

alive. 

7Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son ;  and  to  the  holy  Ghost. 

Answer. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  shall  be  :  world 
without  end.  Amen.* 


394 


EASTER  DAY 


SOURCES 

Finita  antiphona  cum  suo  versu  a  toto 
choro  incipiat  excellentior  persona  in 
statione  conuersus  ad  altare  versum. 

Surrexit  dominus  de  sepulcro. 


I£m.  Qui  pro  nobis  pependit  in  ligno. 

Oremus. 
DKUS    qui    pro    nobis  filium    tuum 

crucis  patibulum  subire  voluisti  vt 
inimici  a  nobis  expelleres  potestatem  : 
concede  nobis  famulis  tjiis  vt  in  resur- 
rectionis  eius  gaudijs  semper  viuamus. 
Per  eundem  xpm  dominum  nostrum. 
Amen.  (Greg.  53) 

(Processionale  f.  102) 


Officium. 
[Ps.  cxxxviii  (cxxxix)  18b,  5b,  6a  :  1,  2] 


1549 


The  Priest. 

C  Shewe  forth  to  all  nacions  the 
glory  of  God. 

The  Aunswere. 

C  And  among  all  people  his  wonder 
ful  workes. 

Let  us  praye. 

O  God,  who  for  our  redepcion 
diddest  geue  thine  onely  begotten 
sonne  to  the  death  of  the  crosse  :  & 
by  hys  gloryous  resurreccion  hast 
delyuered  vs  from  the  power  of  our 
enemye  :  Graunte  vs  so  to  dye  dayly 
from  sinne,  that  we  maye  euermore 
liue  with  him  in  the  ioye  of  his  resur 
reccion  :  through  the  same  Christ  our 
Lorde.  Amen. 

C  Proper  psalmes  and  lessons. 

At  mattins. 
DMI   ••         ("The  first  lesson.  Exod.  xii.  Vnto 

Psa  llvii    J      theende- 

n    i   /-.  •'    I  The  seconde  lesson.  Roma.  vi. 

Psal.  Cxi. 


At  the  firste  Communion. 

[Conserua  me  domine.  Psal.  xVi. 
PReserue  me,  O  God  :  for  in  thee 
haue  I  put  my  trust. 

0  my  soule,  thou  haste  saied  vnto 
the    Lorde  :  thou    art  my   God,  my 
goodes  are  nothing  vnto  thee. 

All  my  delyght  is  vpon  the  Sainctes 
that  are  in  the  yearth  :  and  vpon  suche 
as  excell  in  vertue. 

But  they  that  runne  after  an  other 
God  :  shall  haue  great  trouble. 

Their  dryncke  offeringes  of  bloude 
wyll  not  I  offer  :  neither  make  mencion 
of  their  names  within  my  lyppes. 

The  Lord  himselfe  is  the  porcion 
of  myne  inheritaunce,  and  of  my 
Cuppe  :  thou  shalt  mayntayne  my  lotte. 

The  lotte  is  fallen  vnto  me  in  a 
fayre  grounde  :  yea,  I  haue  a  goodly 
heritage. 

1  will  thanke  the  Lorde  for  geuing 
me  warning  :  my  reynes  also  chasten 
me  in  the  night  season. 

I  haue  sette  God  alwayes  before 
me  :  for  he  is  on  my  right  hand,  ther- 
fore  I  shall  not  fall. 

Wherefore  my  hearte  was  glad,  and 
my  glory  reioysed  :  my  fleshe  also 
shall  rest  in  hope. 


EASTER  DAY  395 

1552  1661 


396 


EASTER  DAY 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 
DEUS  qui  hodierna  die  per  vnigeni- 

tum  tuum  eternitatis  nobis  aditum 
deuicta  morte  reserasti :  vota  nostra 
que  preueniendo  aspiras,  etiam  ad- 
iuuando  prosequere.  Per  eundem. 
(Gel.  i  46) 


1549 

For  why?  thou  shalt  not  leaue  my 
soule  in  helle  :  neither  shalt  thou 
sufifre  thy  holy  one  to  see  corrupcion. 

Thou  shalt  shewe  me  the  pathe  of 
life  :  in  thy  presence  is  the  fulnes  of 
ioye,  and  at  thy  right  hand  there  is 
pleasure  for  euermore. 

Glory  be  to  the  father  and  to  the 
sonne,  and  to.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginnyng,  is  nowe, 
and  euer.&c. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  God,  which  through 
thy  onely  begotten  sonne  lesus  Christ, 
hast  ouercome  death,  &  opened  vnto 
vs  the  gate  of  euerlastyng  life  :  we 
humbly  beseeche  thee,  that  as  by  thy 
speciall  grace  ,  preuentyng  vs,  thou 
doest  put  in  our  mindes  good 
desires  :  so  by  thy  continuall  helpe, 
we  may  bring  thesame  to  good  effect, 
thorough  lesus  Christ  our  Lord  : 
who  liueth  and  reigneth.&c. 


[In  vigilia  pasche.    Ad  colossenses. 

[ca.  iii.  A 
Fnatres.     Si  consurrexistis  cum  xpo, 

que  sursum  sunt  querite  :  vbi  christus 
est  in  dextera  dei  sedens.  Que  sursum 
sunt  sapite :  non  que  super  terram. 
Mortui  enim  estis :  et  vita  vestra  est 
abscondita  cum  christo  in  deo.  Cum 
enim  xps  apparuerit  vita  vestra :  tune 
&  vos  apparebitis  cum  ipso  in  gloria.] 


[Sabbato  post  pascha.    Secundum  iohannem. 

[XX.A 
IN  illo  tempore.     Vna  sabbati  maria 

magdalene  venit  mane  cum  adhuc 
tenebre  essent  ad  monumentum :  & 
vidit  lapidem  sublatum  a  monumento. 
Cucurrit  ergo  et  venit  ad  simonem 
petrum  :  et  ad  alium  discipulum  quern 


The  Epistle. 

[Coloss.  iii. 

IF  ye  be  risen  againe  with 

Christe,  seke  those  thynges  which 
are  aboue,  where  Christ  sitteth  on 
the  right  hande  of  God.  Set  your 
affeccion  on  heauenly  thinges  and 
not  on  yearthly  thynges.  For  ye 
are  deade,  and  your  lyfe  is  hyd  with 
Christ  in  God.  When  soeuer  Christ 
(whiche  is  our  lyfe)shall  shewehymself, 
then  shall  ye  also  appeare  with  hym 
in  glory.  Mortifye  therefore  your 
earthly  membres, 

fornicacion,  vnclennesse,  vn- 
naturall  lust,  euill  concupiscence, 
and  couetousnes,  which  is  wurship- 
pyngofldolles:forwhichethyngessake, 
the  wrathe  of  God  vseth  to  come  on 
the  disobedient  chyldren,  among 
whom  ye  walked  sometyme  when 
ye  lyued  in  them. 

The  Gospell. 

[    John.  xx. 

Tne  first  day  of  the  Sabbothes  came 
Mari  magdalene  early  (when  it  was 
yet  darcke)  vnto  the  Sepulchre,  and 
sawe  the  stone  taken  away  fro  the 
graue.  Then  she  ranne  and 
came  to  Symon  Peter,  and  to  the 
other  disciple  whom  lesus  loued  and 


EASTER  DAY 


397 


1552 


1661 


C  The  Collect. 

ALmightie  god,  whiche  through 
thy  onely  begotte  sone  lesus  Christ, 
hast  ouercome  death,  &  opened  vnto 
vs  the  gate  of  euerlastyng  lyfe  :  we 
humbly  beseche  thee,  that  as  by  thy 
speciall  grace  ,  preuentynge  vs,  thou 
doest  put  in  our  myndes  good 
desyres  :  so  by  thy  continual  helpe, 
we  may  bring  thesame  to  good  effect, 
throughe  lesus  Chryste  our  Lorde  : 
who  lyueth  and  reygneth.  &c. 


C  The  Epistle. 

[Coloss.  iii. 

IF   ye  be   risen   agayne   with 

Chryste,  seeke  those  thynges  whiche 
are  aboue,  where  Chryste  sytteth  on 
the  right  hande  of  god.  Set  your 
affeccion  on  heauenlye  thynges,  and 
not  on  earthly  thinges.  For  ye 
are  dead,  and  your  lyfe  is  hyd  with 
Christe  in  God.  Whensoeuer  Christ 
(which  is  our  life)  shal  shew  hymselfe, 
then  shal  ye  also  appeare  with  him 
in  glory.  Mortifie  therfore  your 
yearthlye  membres, 

fornicacio,  vncleannesse,  vn- 
naturall  lust,  euill  concupiscence, 
and  couetousnes,  which  is  a  wurship- 
plg  of  Idols  :  for  which  thynges  sake, 
the  wrath  of  God  vseth  to  come  on 
the  children  of  vnbelief,  among 
who  ye  walked  sometyme  when 

ye  lyued  in  them. 

C  The  Gospel. 

[     lohn.  xx. 

Tne  first  day  of  the  Sabbothes  came 
Marye  Magdalene  earlye  (when  it  was 
yet  darke)  vnto  the  Sepulchre,  and 
sawe  the  stone  taken  awaye  from  the 
graue.  Then  she  ranne  and 
came  to  Simon  Peter,  and  to  the 
other  dyscyple  whom  lesus  loued,  and 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who8  through 
thine  onely  begotten  son  lesus  Christ 
hast  overcome  death,  and  opened  vnto 
vs  the  gate  of  everlasting  life :  we 
humbly  beseech  thee,  that  as  by  thy 
speciall  grace1  "^preventing  vs,  thou 
dost  put  into  our  minds  good 
desires  :  So  by  thy  continuall  help 
we  may  bring  the  same  to  good  effect, 
through  lesus  Christ  our  Lord, 
who  liveth,  and  reigneth  with  thee, 
and  the  holy  Ghost,  ever  one  God, 
world  without  end.  Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[Col.  3.  •»!. 

If   ye    then    be    risen  with 

Christ,  seek  those  things  which 
are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on 
the  right  hand  of  God.  Set  your 
affection  on  things  above, 
not  on  things  on  the  earth.  For  ye 
are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with 
Christ  in  God.  When  Christ 

who  is  our  life  shall  appear, 
then  shall  ye  also  appear  with  him 
in  glory.  Mortifie  therefore  your 
members  which  are  vpon 
the  earth :  fornication,  vncleanness,  in 
ordinate  affection,  evil  concupiscence, 
and  covetousness,  which  is  idola 
try  :  For  which  things  sake 
the  wrath  of  God  cometh  on 
the  children  of  disobedience.  In  the 
which  ye  also  walked  sometime,  when 
ye  lived  in  them. 


The  Gospel 


[S*:  John  20.  «1. 
Week  cometh 


The  first  day  of  the 
Mary  Magdalen  early,  when  it  was 
yet  dark,  vnto  the  sepulchre,  and 
seeth  the  stone  taken  away  from  the 
Sepulchre,.  Then  she  runneth,  and 
cometh  to  Simon  Peter,  and  to  the 
other  disciple  whom  lesus  loved,  and 


EASTER  DAY 


SOURCES 

amabat  iesus,  et  dixit  eis.  Tulerunt 
dominum  meum  de  monumento :  et 
nescimus  vbi  posuerunt  eum.  Exijt 
ergo  petrus,  ei  ille  alius  discipulus  :  et 
venerunt  ad  monumentum.  Curre- 
bant  autem  duo  simul :  &  ille  alius 
discipulus  precucurrit  citius  petro,  & 
venit  primus  ad  monumentum.  Et 
cum  se  inclinasset :  vidit  linteamina 
posita,  non  tamen  introiuit.  Venit 
ergo  simon  petrus  sequens  eum :  & 
introiuit  in  monumentum.  Et  vidit 
linteamina  posita :  et  sudarium  quod 
fuerat  super  caput  eius,  nori  cum 
linteaminibus  positum,  sed  separatim 
inuolutum  in  vnum  locum.  Tune  ergo 
introiuit  et  ille  discipulus  qui  venerat 
primus  ad  monumentum  :  &  vidit  et 
credidit.  Nondum  enim  sciebant  scrip- 
turam  :  quia  oportebat  eum  a  mortuis 
resurgere.] 


1549 

saith  vnto  them :  they  haue  taken 
awaye  the  lord  out  of  the  graue, 
and  we  cannot  tell  where  they  haue 
laied  him.  Peter  therfore  went 
forth  and  that  other  disciple  and 
came  vnto  the  Sepulchre.  They 
ranne  both  together,  and  the  other 
disciple  dyd  out  runne  Peter,  and  came 
fyrste  to  the  Sepulchre.  And  when  he 
had  stowped  doun,  he 

saw  the  lynnen  clothes  liyng,  yet 
wente  he  not  in.  Then  came  Symon 
Peter  folowyng  hym,  and  wente  into  the 
Sepulchre  and  sawe  the  lynnen  clothes 
lye,  and  the  napkyn  that  was  about 
his  head,  not  liyng  with  the  linnen 
clothes,  but  wrapped  together  in  a 
place  by  it  selfe.  Then  wente  in  also 
the  other  disciple  whiche  came  firste 
to  the  sepulchre,  and  he  sawe  and 
beleued.  For  as  yet  they  knewe  not 
the  scripture  that  he  shoulde  rise 
agayne  from  death.  Then  the  dis 
ciples  went  away  again  vnto  their 
owne  home. 

At  the  second  Communion. 

[Domine  quid  multiplicati  psal  iii. 
Lorde,   howe    are    they  encreased 
that  trouble  me  ?  many  are  they  that 
rise  against  me. 

Many  one  there  be  that  saye  of  my 
soule  :  there  is  no  helpe  for  hym  in 
his  God. 

But  thou,  O  Lord,  art  my  defender  : 
thou  art  my  worship,  &  the  lifter  vp  of 
my  heade. 

I  did  call  vpon  the  Lorde  with  my 
voice  :  and  he  heard  me  out  of  his 
holy  hill. 

I  laied  me  doune  and  slept  :  &  rose 
vp  again,  for  the  Lord  sustained 
me. 

I  will  not  be  afraied  for  tenne  thou- 
sandes  of  the  people  :  that  haue  set 
themselfes  against  me  round  about. 

Vp  Lorde  and  helpe  me,  O  my 
God  :  for  thou  smytest  al  myne 
enemies  vpon  the  cheke  bone,  thou 
haste  broken  the  teeth  of  the  vngodly. 

Saluacion  belongeth  vnto  the  Lorde : 
and  thy  blessyng  is  vpon  thy  people. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  the 
sonne  :  and  to  the  holye  ghost. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginnyng,  is  nowe, 
and  euer  shall  be  :  world  without  end. 
Amen. 


EASTER  DAY 


399 


1552 

sayeth  vnto  them  :  they  haue  taken 
away  the  lord  out  of  the  graue, 
and  we  cannot  tell  where  they  haue 
layed  hym.  Peter  therfore  went 
furth,  and  that  other  disciple,  and 
came  vnto  the  Sepulchre.  They 
ranne  both  together,  and  that  other 
disciple  dyd  outrunne  Peter,  and  came 
fyrst  to  the  Sepulchre.  And  when  he 
had  stouped  down,  he 

saw  the  linnen  clothes  lying,  yet 
went  he  not  in.  Then  came  Simon 
Peter  folowing  him,  and  went  into  the 
Sepulchre,  and  saw  the  linnen  clothes 
lye,  and  the  napkin  that  was  about 
his  head,  not  lying  with  the  linnen 
clothes,  but  wrapped  together  in  a 
place  by  it  selfe.  Then  wente  in  also 
that  other  disciple  whiche  came  fyrst 
to  the  Sepulchre,  and  he  sawe  and 
belieued.  For  as  yet  they  knewe  not 
the  scripture  that  he  should  ryse 
again  from  death.  Then  the  dis 
ciples  went  away  againe  to  theyr 
owne  home. 


1661 

saith  vnto  them,  They  have  taken 
away  the  Lord  out  of  the  sepulchre, 
and  we  know  not  where  they  have 
laid  him.  Peter  therefore  went 
forth,  and  that  other  disciple,  and 
came  to  the  Sepulchre.  So  they 
ran  both  together,  and  the  other 
disciple  did  out  run  Peter,  and  came 
first  to  the  sepulchre.  And  he 

stooping  down,  and  looking  in, 
saw  the  Linnen  clothes  lyeing,  yet 
went  he  not  in.  Then  cometh  Simon 
Peter  following  him,  and  went  into  the 
Sepulchre,  and  seeth  the  Linen  clothes 
lie.  And  the  napkin  that  was  about 
his  head,  not  lyeing  with  the  linen 
clothes,  but  wrapped  together  in  a 
place  by  it  self.  Then  went  in  also 
that  other  disciple  which  came  first 
to  the  Sepulchre,  and  he  saw,  and 
believed.  For  as  yet  they  knew  not 
the  Scripture,  that  he  must  rise 
again  from  the  dead.  Then  the  dis 
ciples  went  away  again  vnto  their 
own  home. 


400 


EASTER  DAY 


SOURCES 
[S.  Jo.  iii  16 :  Rom.  iv  26] 

[1  Cor.  v  7,  8.] 


Lectio  epistole  beati  pauli  apostoli  ad 
Corinthios 

[i-v 


Fnatres.  Expurgate  vetus  fermen- 
tum :  vt  sitis  noua  conspersio  sicut 
estis  azymi.  Etenim  pascha  nostrum  : 
immolatus  est  xps.  Jtaque  epulemur. 
Non  in  fermento  veteri :  neque  in 
fermento  malitie  et  nequitie.  Sed  in 
azymis  sinceritatis,  et  veritatis. 

Euangelium.     Secundum  Marcum. 

[xvi.A 
IN  illo  tempore.     Maria  magdalene 

et  maria  iacobi  et  salome  emerunt 
aromata  :  vt  venientes  vngerent  iesum. 
Et  valde  mane  vna  sabbatorum  veniunt 
ad  monumentum :  orto  iam  sole.  Et 
dicebant  adinuicem.  Quis  reuoluet 
nobis  lapidem  ab  ostio  monument!  ? 
Et  respicientes  videnmt  reuolutum 
lapidem  :  erat  quippe  magnus  valde. 
Et  introeuntes  in  monumentum  :  vide- 
runt  iuuenem  sedentem  in  dextris : 
coopertum  stola  Candida,  &  obstupue- 
runt.  Qui  dixit  illis.  Nolite  expaues- 
cere.  Iesum  queritis  nazarenum  cruci- 
fixum :  surrexit  non  est  hie.  Ecce 
locus  vbi  posuerunt  eum.  Sed  ite 
dicite  discipulis  eius  et  petro :  quia 
precedet  vos  in  galileam.  Ibi  eum 
videbitis  :  sicut  dixit  vr  bis. 


1549 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  father,  whichehast  geuen 
thy  onely  sonne  to  dye  for  our  synnes 
and  to  ryse  agayne  for  oure  iustifica- 
cion  :  Graunt  vs  so  to  put  away  the 
leauen  of  malice  and  wickednesse, 
that  we  may  alway  serue  the  in  pure- 
nesse  of  liuyng  and  trueth,  through 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

The  Epistle. 

[i  Cor.  V 

•  KNOW  ye  not  that  a  litle  leauen 
sowreth  the  whole  lompe  of  dowe  ? 
Pourge  therefore  the  olde  leauen,  that 
ye  maye  be  newe  dowe,  as  ye  are 
swete  bread.  For  Christ  our  passe- 
ouer  is  offered  vp  for  vs.  Therfore 
let  vs  kepe  holye  daye,  not  with  olde 
leauen,  neither  with  the  leauen  of 
maliciousnes  and  wickednes  :  but 
with  the  swete  breade  of  purenes  and 
trueth. 

The  Gospell. 

[Mar.  xVi 

WHen  the  Sabboth  was  past,  Mary 
Magdalene,  and  Mary  lacobye,  and 
Salome,  bought  swete  odoures,  that 
they  myghte  come,  and  anoynt  hym. 
And  early  in  the  mornyng,  the  first 
day  of  the  Sabboth,  thei  came  vnto 
the  Sepulchre  when  the  sunne  was 
risen.  And  they  sayed  among  them- 
selues  :  who  shall  rolle  vs  away  the 
stone  fro  the  dore  of  the  Sepulchre  ? 
And  when  they  looked,  they  sawe 
howe  that  the  stone  was  rolled  away, 
for  it  was  a  very  great  one.  And  they 
went  into  the  Sepulchre,  and  sawe  a 
younge  man  sittyng  on  the  right  side, 
clothed  in  a  longe  white  garmente, 
and  they  were  afrayed.  And  he 
sayed  vnto  them  :  be  not  afrayed,  ye 
seice  lesus  of  Nazareth  whiche  was 
crucifyed.  He  is  rysen  he  is  not 
here  :  Beholde  the  place  where  they 
had  put  hym.  But  goe  your  waye 
and  tell  his  disciples,  and  Peter,  that 
he  goeth  before  you  into  Galile,  there 
shall  you  see  hym,  as  he  sayed  vnto 
you.  And  they  went  out  quickly  and 
fledde  from  the  Sepulchre  for  they 
trembled,  and  were  amased,  neyther 
sayed  they  any  thyng  to  any  manne, 
for  they  were  afrayed. 


EASTER  DAY  40I 

1552  1661 


2  C 


402 


MONDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK 


SOURCES 


<[  Feria  .ij.  post  pascha. 


Officium. 
[Exod.  xiii  5,  9 :  Ps.  cxvii  (cxviii)  1] 


1549 

At  Euensong. 
C  Proper  Psalmes  and  lessons. 


Psalm,  cxiii 


Psalm,  cxiiii. 
Psalm,  cxviii. 


...-'      The  .ii.  Lesson.  Act.  ii. 


vnto  the  ende. 


CMONEDAYE   IN   EASTER  WEKE. 

At  Mattyns. 

C  The  seconde  lesson.  Mat.  xxviii.  vnto 
the  ende. 

At  the  Communion. 
[Nonne  deo  subiecta.  Psalm.  Ixii. 

MY  soule  truely  waiteth  still  vpon 
god  :for  of  hym  commeth  my  saluacion. 

He  verely  is  my  strength  &  my 
saluacion  :  he  is  my  defece,  so  that  I 
shal  not  gretly  fal. 

Howe  long  will  ye  imagine  mis- 
chyefe  against  euery  man  ?  ye  shalbe 
slaine  al  the  sort  of  you,  yea,  as  a 
totteryng  wal  shall  ye  be,  and  like  a 
broken  hedge. 

Their  deuice  is  onely  howe  to  put 
him  out  whom  God  will  exalte  :  their 
delyte  is  in  lyes,  they  geue  good 
woordes  with  their  mouth,  but  cursse 
with  their  hearte. 

Neuerthelesse,  my  soule,  wayte 
thou  still  vpon  God  :  for  my  hope  is 
in  him. 

He  truely  is  my  strength  and  my 
saluacion  :  he  is  my  defence,  so  that 
I  shall  not  fall. 

In  god  is  my  helth  and  my  glory  : 
the  rocke  of  my  might,  and  in  God  is 
my  trust. 

O  put  your  trust  in  hym  alway,  ye 
people  :  powre  oute  your  heartes 
before  him,  for  God  is  our  hope. 

As  for  the  children  of  men,  thei  are 
but  vain,  the  children  of  men  are 
deceiptfull  :  vpon  the  weyghtes,  they 
are  altogether  lighter  than  vanitie  it 
selfe. 

O  trust  not  in  wrong  &  robbery, 
geue  not  your  selfes  vnto  vanitie  :  if 
riches  encrease,  set  not  your  heart 
vpon  them. 

God  spake  once  and  twise  :  I  haue 
also  heard  the  same,  that  power  be- 
longeth  vnto  God. 

And  that  thou  Lorde  art  mercifull  : 
for  thou  rewardest  euery  man  accord- 
yng  to  his  worke. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  begynning,  is 
nowe.&c. 


MONDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK  403 

1552  1661 


MONDAIE  IN  EASTER  WERE.  MUNDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK 


4o4 


MONDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK 


SOURCES 

[DEUS  qui  solennitate  paschali 
mundo  remedia  contulisti :  populum 
tuum  quesumus  domine  celesti  dono 
prosequere :  vt  &  perfectam  liber- 
tatem  consequi  mereantur,  et  ad  vitam 
proficiat  sempiternam.  Per.  (Greg.  68)] 


1549 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  God,  whiche  through  thy 
onely  begotten  sone  lesus  Christ, 
hast  ouercome  death,  and  opened 
vnto  vs  the  gate  of  euerlasting  lyfe  : 
we  humbly  beseche  thee,  that  as  by 
thy  specyall  grace  ,  preuentyng  vs, 
thou  dost  put  in  our  mindes  good 
desyres,  so  by  thy  continuall  helpe, 
we  may  bryng  thesame  to  good  effect, 
through  lesus  Christ  our  lorde :  who 
lyueth  and  reigneth.  &c. 


Lectio  actuum  apostolorum 


[X.F 


IN    diebus    illis.      Stans  petrus    in 
medio  plebis,  dixit.     Viri  fratres, 


vos  scitis  quod  factum 
est  verbum  per  vniuersam  iudeam. 
Incipiens  enim  a  galilea  post  baptismum 
quod  predicauit  iohannes  iesum  a 
nazareth  :  quomodo  vnxit  eum  deus 
spiritu  sancto  et  virtute,  qui  pertran- 
siuit  benefaciendo  &  sanando  omnes 
oppresses  a  diabolo,  quoniam  deus  erat 
cum  illo.  Et  nos  testes  sumus  omnium 
que  fecit  in  regione  iudeorum  et  hieru- 
salem  :  quern  occiderunt  suspendentes 
in  ligno.  Hunc  deus  suscitauit  tertia 
die,  &  dedit  eum  manifestum  fieri  non 
omni  populo  :  sed  testibus  preor- 
dinatis  a  deo  nobis  qui  manducauimus 
et  bibimus  cum  illo  postquam  resur- 
rexit  a  mortuis.  Et  precepit  nobis 
predicare  populo  &  testificari :  quia 
ipse  est  qui  constitutus  est  a  deo  iudex 
viuorum  et  mortuorum.  Huic  omnes 
prophete  testimonium  perhibent:  re- 
missionem  peccatorum  accipere  per 
nomen  eius  omnes  qui  credunt  in  eum. 
Euangelium.  Secundum  Lucam. 

[xxiiii.  B 

IN  illo  tempore.     Exeuntes  duo  ex 
discipulis  iesu  ibant  ipsa  die  in  cas- 


The  Epistle. 

[Actes.  x. 

PEter  opened  his  mouthe,  and  sayd: 
of  a  trueth  I  perceyue  that  there  is  no 
respecte  of  persons  with  God  :  but  in 
all  people,  he  that  feareth  hym  and 
woorketh  righteousnes,  is  accepted 
with  hym.  Ye  knowe  the  preaching 
that  God  sente  vnto  the  children  of 
Israeli,  preaching  peace  by  Iesu 
Christe,  whiche  is  Lorde  ouer  all 
thinges :  which  preaching 

was  published  throughout 
all  lewry  (and  began  in  Galilee, 
after  the  baptisme  whiche  lohn 
preached)  howe  God  annoynted  lesus 
of  Nazareth  with  the  holy  ghoste,  and 
with  power.  Which  went  about 

doing  good,  and  healynge  all  that  were 
oppressed  of  the  deuill,  for  god  was 
with  him.  And  we  are  witnesses  of  all 
thinges  whiche  he  did  in  the  lande 
of  the  lewes,  and  at  lerusalem :  whome 
they  slewe  and  hanged  on  tree.  Hym 
God  reised  vp  the  third  day  &  shewed 
him  openly,  not  to  all  the  people,  but 
vnto  vs  witnesses  (chosen  before  of 
God  for  thesame  intent) 
which  did  eate  and  drinke  with  him 
after  he  arose  from  death.  And  he 
commaunded  vs  to  preach  vnto  the 
people,  and  to  testifie,  that  it  is  he 
whiche  was  ordained  of  God  to  be  the 
iudgeofthequickeand  deade.  To 
him  geue  all  the  prophetes  witnes, 
that  through  his  name,  whosoeuer 
beleueth  in  him,  shall  receyue  remis 
sion  of  synnes. 

The  Gospell. 

[      Luc.  xxiiii. 

BEholde,  two  of  the  disciples  wente 
that  same  daye  to  a  towne  called 


MONDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK 


405 


1552 

€  The  Collect. 

ALmightie  God,  which  through  thy 
onely  begotten  sonne  lesus  Christe, 
hast  ouercome  death,  and  opened 
vnto  vs  the  gate  of  euerlasting  life  : 
we  humbly  beseche  thee,  that  as  by 
thy  speciall  grace  ,  preuentyng  vs, 
thou  dooest  put  in  our  mindes  good 
desyres :  so  by  thy  continual  helpe, 
we  may  bryng  thesame  to  good  effect, 
through  lesus  Christ  our  lorde  :  who 
liueth  and  reigneth.  &c. 


C  The  Epistle. 

[Actes.  x. 

PEter  opened  his  mouth,  and  said  : 
of  a  trueth  I  perceyue  that  there  is  no 
respecte  of  persones  with  God  :  but  in 
all  people,  he  that  feareth  hym  and 
woorketh  righteousnes,  is  accepted 
with  hym.  Ye  knowe  the  preaching 
that  god  sent  vnto  the  children  of 
Israel,  preaching  peace  by  lesus 
Christ,  which  is  lord  ouer  al 
thinges:  which  preaching 

was  published  throughout 
al  lewry  (and  began  in  Galile, 
after  the  Baptisme  whiche  lohn 
preached)  how  god  annointed  lesus 
of  Nazareth  with  the  holy  gost,  & 
with  power.  Which  lesus  went  about 
doing  good,  and  healing  al  that  wer 
oppressed  of  the  deuil,  for  god  was 
with  him.  And  we  are  witnesses  of  al 
thlges  which  he  did  in  the  land 
of  the  lewes,  and  at  Jerusalem,  whom 
they  slewe  and  hanged  on  tree.  Hym 
God  reysed  vp  the  third  dayand  shewed 
him  openly,  not  to  al  the  people,  but 

to  vs  witnesses  (chosen  before  of 
god  for  the  same  intent) 
which  did  eate  and  drynke  wyth  him 
after  he  rose  from  death.  And  he 
commaunded  vs  to  preache  vnto  the 
people,  and  to  testifye  that  it  is  he 
whiche  was  ordayned  of  God  to  bee  the 
iudge  of  the  quicke  and  the  dead.  To 
hym  geue  all  the  prophetes  witnesse, 
that  through  hys  name,  whosoeuer 
beleueth  in  hym,  shal  receiue  remis 
sion  of  synnes. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[      Lu.  xxiiii 

BEholde,  two  of  the  disciples  went 
that  same  daye  to  a  towne  called 


1661 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who8  through  thy 
only  begotten  son  lesus  Christ, 
hast  overcome  death,  and  opened 
vnto  vs  the  gate  of  everlasting  life  : 
We  humbly  beseech  thee,  that  as  by 
thy  speciall  grace  ^preventing  vs  ; 
thou  dost  put  into  our  minds  good 
desires,  so  by  thy  continuall  help, 
we  may  bring  the  same  to  good  effect, 
through  lesus  Christ  our  Lord,  who 
liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee  and 
the  holy  Ghost,  ever  one  God  world 
without  end.  Amen. 

9For  the  Epistle. 

[Acts:  10.  434. 

Peter  opened  his  mouth,  and  said, 
Of  a  truth  I  perceive  that  God 
is  no  respecter  of  persons  :  But  in 
every  nation,  he  that  feareth  him,  and 
worketh  righteousness,  is  accepted 
with  him.  The  word 

which  God  sent  vnto  the  children  of 
Israel,  preaching  peace  by  lesus 
Christ  (he  is  Lord  of  all 
)  That  word  (I  say)  you 
know,  which  was  published  throughout 
all  ludea,  and  began  from  Galilee, 
after  the  Baptism  which  lohn 
preached  :  How  God  anointed  lesus 
of  Nazareth  with  the  holy  Ghost,  and 
with  power  ;  who  went  about 
doing  good,  and  healing  all  that  were 
oppressed  of  the  devil :  for  God  was 
with  him.  And  we  are  witnesses  of  all 
things  which  he  did  both  in  the  land 
of  the  lews,  and  in  Jerusalem,  whom 
they  slew,  and  hanged  on  a  tree :  Him 
God  raised vpthethirdday,and  shewed 
him  openly.  Not  to  all  the  people,  but 
vnto  witnesses  chosen  before  of 
God,  even  to  vs, 

who  did  eat  and  drink  with  him 
after  he  arose  from  the  dead.  And  he 
commanded  vs  to  preach  vnto  the 
people,  and  to  testify  that  it  is  he 
who  was  ordeined  of  God,  to  be  the 
Iudge  of  quick,  and  dead.  To 
him  gave  all  the  prophets  witness, 
that  through  his  name,  whosoever 
believeth  in  him  shall  receive  remis 
sion  of  Sins. 

The  Gospel. 

[St:  Luke.  24.  413. 

Behold  two  of  his  disciples  went 
that  same  day  to  a  Village  called 


406 


MONDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK 


SOURCES 

tellum  quod  erat  in  spatio  stadiorum 
sexaginta  ab  hierusalem  :  nomine 
emaus.  Et  ipsi  loquebantur  adin- 
uicem  :  de  his  omnibus  que  acciderant. 
Et  factum  est  dum  fabularentur,  & 
secum  quererent :  &  ipse  iesus  appro- 
pinquans  ibat  cum  illis.  Oculi  autem 
illorum  tenebantur :  ne  eum  agnos- 
cerent.  Et  ait  ad  illos.  Qui  sunt  hi 
sermones  quos  confertis  adinuicem 
ambulantes :  &  estis  tristes  ?  Et 
respondens  vnus  cui  nomen  cleophas 
dixit  ei.  Tu  solus  peregrinus  es  in 
hierusalem :  et  non  cognouisti  que 
facta  sunt  in  ilia  his  diebus  ?  Quibus 
ille  dixit.  Que?  Et  dixerunt.  De 
iesu  nazareno,  qui  fuit  vir  propheta : 
potens  in  opere  et  sermone  coram  deo 
et  omni  populo.  Et  quomodo  tradide- 
runt  eum  summi  sacerdotes  et  principes 
nostri  in  damnationem  mortis:  et  cruci- 
fixerunt  eum.  Nos  autem  sperabamus 
quia  ipse  esset  redempturus  israel.  Et 
nunc  super  hec  omnia,  tertia  dies  est 
hodie  quod  hec  facta  sunt.  Sed  et 
mulieres  quedam  ex  nostris  terruerunt 
nos,  que  ante  lucem  fuerunt  ad  monu- 
mentum  :  et  non  inuento  corpore  eius 
venerunt  dicentes  se  etiam  visionem 
angelorum  vidisse,  qui  dicunt  eum 
viuere.  Et  abierunt  quidam  ex  nostris 
ad  monumentum  :  et  ita  inuenerunt 
sicut  mulieres  dixerunt  ipsum  vero 
non  inuenerunt.  Et  ipse  dixit  ad  eos. 
O  stulti  et  tardi  corde  ad  credendum  : 
in  omnibus  que  locuti  sunt  prophete. 
Nonne  hec  oportuit  pati  xpm :  et  ita 
intrare  in  gloriam  suam  ?  Et  incipiens 
a  moyse  et  omnibus  prophetis :  inter- 
pretabatur  illis  in  omnibus  scripturis, 
que  de  ipso  erant.  Et  appropin- 
quauerunt  castello  quo  ibant :  et  ipse 
se  finxit  longius  ire.  Et  coegerunt 
ilium  :  dicentes.  Mane  nobiscum 
quoniam  aduesperascit :  &  inclinata 
est  iam  dies.  Et  intrauit  cum  eis.  Et 
factum  est  dum  recumberet  cum  illis  : 
accepit  panem  &  beuedixit  ac  fregit,  et 


J549 

Emaus,  whiche  was  from  Jerusalem 
about  .lx.  furlonges  :  and  they 
talked  together  of  all  the  thinges  that 
had  happened.  And  it  chauced 
that  while  they  comoned  together 
and  reasoned  :  Iesus  himself  drue 
nere  and  went  with  the.  But  their 
eyes  were  holde  that  they  should  not 
knowe  hym.  And  he  sayd  vnto  them  ; 
what  maner  of  communicacions  are 
these  that  ye  haue  one  to  another  as 
ye  walke,  and  are  sad  ?  And  the  one 
of  them  (whose  name  was  Cleophas) 
aunswered,  and  sayd  vnto  hym  :  art 
thou  onely  a  straunger  in  Jerusalem, 
and  haste  not  knowen  the  thinges 
whiche  haue  chaunced  there  in  these 
dayes?  he  sayd  vnto  them :  what 

thynges  ?  And  they  sayd  vnto  him :  of 
Iesus  of  Nazareth,  whiche  was  a 
Prophete,mightie  in  dede  and  word  be 
fore  God  and  all  the  people :  and  howthe 
hie  priestes,  and  our  rulers,  deliuered 
him  to  be  condemned  to  death,  and 
haue  crucified  hym.  But  we  trusted 
that  it  had  been  he  whiche  shoulde 
haue  redemed  Israeli.  And  as  touch 
ing  all  these  thynges,  to  daye  is  euen 
the  third  daye  that  they  were 
doen.  Yea,  and  certayne  women  also 
of  our  companye  made  vs  astonied, 
whiche  came  earely  vnto  the  Sepulchre 
and  founde  not  his  body,  and 
came,  saying  that  they  had  sene 
a  vision  of  Angels,  whiche  sayed  that 
he  was  a  lyue.  And  certayne  of  them 
whyche  were  wyth  vs,  wente  to  the 
Sepulchre,  and  found  it  euen  so  as 
the  women  had  sayed  :  but  him  they 
sawe  not.  And  he  sayd  vnto  them  : 
O  fooles  and  slowe  of  hearte  to  be- 
leue  all  that  the  prophetes  haue 
spoke.  Ought  not  Christ  to  haue 
suffred  these  thinges,  and  to  entre 
into  hys  glorye?  And  he  began  at 
Moses  and  al  the  prophetes,  and 
interpreted  vnto  them  in  all  Scrip 
tures  which  were  written  of  hym 
And  they  drue  nye  vnto  the  toune, 
whiche  they  went  vnto.  And  he  made 
as  thoughe  he  woulde  haue  gone 
further.  And  they  constrayned  hym, 
sayinge:  abyde  with  vs,  for  it  draweth 
towardes  nyght,  and  the  day  is  farre 
passed.  And  he  wente  in  to  tary  with 
them.  And  it  came  to  passe  as  he 
sate  at  meate  with  them,  he  toke 


MONDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK 


407 


1552 

Emaus,  which  was  from  Jerusalem 
aboute  .lx.  forlonges  :  and  they 
talked  together  of  al  the  thinges  that 
had  happened.  And  it  chaunced 
while  they  commoned  together 
and  reasoned :  lesus  himselfe  drew 
nere,  and  went  with  them.  But  theyr 
eyes  wer  hoiden  that  thei  should  not 
knowe  hym.  And  he  sayd  vnto  them : 
what  maner  of  communicacions  are 
these  that  ye  haue  one  to  an  other  as 
ye  walke,  and  are  sad  ?  And  the  one 
of  the  (whose  name  was  Cleophas) 
answered,  and  saied  vnto  him :  art 
thou  only  a  straunger  in  Jerusalem, 
and  haste  not  knowen  the  thynges 
whiche  haue  chaunced  there  in  these 
daies  ?  he  said  vnto  them  :  what 

thinges  ?  And  they  sayd  vnto  him :  of 
lesus  of  Nazareth,  which  was  a 
Prophete,  mightie  in  dede  and  word  be 
fore  God  and  all  thepeople :  and  how  the 
hye  priestes,  and  oure  rulers,  deliuered 
hym  to  be  condemned  to  deathe,  and 
haue  crucifyed  him.  But  we  trusted 
that  it  had  been  he,  whiche  shoulde 
haue  redemed  Israel.  And  as  touch 
ing  all  these  thinges,  to  daye  is  euen 
the  thyrd  daye  that  they  wer 
done.  Yea,  and  certayn  weomen  also 
of  oure  companye  made  vs  astonied, 
whiche  came  early  vnto  the  Sepulchre 
and  founde  not  hys  bodye,  and 
came,  saying  that  they  had  seen 
a  vision  of  Aungels,  whiche  sayde  that 
he  was  alyue.  And  certayne  of  them 
whiche  were  with  vs,  wente  to  the 
Sepulchre,  and  founde  it  euen  so  as 
the  weomen  had  sayde  :  but  him  they 
sawe  not.  And  he  sayd  vnto  them: 
O  fooles  and  slowe  of  hearte  to  be- 
lieue  all  that  the  Prophetes  haue 
spoken.  Ought  not  Christ  to  haue 
suffered  these  thynges,  and  to  enter 
into  hys  glorye?  And  he  began  at 
Moses  and  all  the  Prophetes,  and 
interpreted  vnto  them  in  all  Scrip 
tures  which  wer  written  of  him 
And  they  drew  nye  vnto  the  towne, 
which  they  went  vnto.  And  he  made 
as  thoughe  he  woulde  haue  gone 
further.  And  they  constrained  him, 
saying  :  abide  with  vs,  for  it  draweth 
towardes  nyghte,  and  the  daye  is  farre 
passed.  And  he  went  in  to  tary  with 
them.  And  it  came  to  passe  as  he 
sate  at  meate  with  them,  he  toke 


1661 

Emmaus,  which  was  from  Jerusalem 
about  threescore  furlongs.  And  they 
talked  together  of  all  these  things  which 
had  happened.  And  it  came  to  pass 
that  while  they  communed  together, 
and  reasoned ;  lesus  himselfe  drew 
neer,  and  went  with  them.  But  their 
Eyes  were  hoiden,  that  they  should  not 
know  him.  And  he  said  vnto  them, 
What  manner  of  communications  are 
these  that  you  have  one  to  another,  as 
ye  walk,  and  are  sad  ?  And  the  one 
of  them  whose  name  was  Cleopas, 
answering  said  vnto  him,  Art 
thou  onely  a  stranger  in  Jerusalem, 
and  hast  not  known  the  things 
which  are  come  to  pass  there,  in  these 
dayes  ?  And  he  said  vnto  them,  What 
things  ?  and  they  said  vnto  him,  con 
cerning  lesus  of  Nazareth,  who  was  a 
Prophet  mighty  in  deed  and  word,  be 
fore  Godand  all  thepeople:  And  how  the 
chief  Priests,  and  our  rulers  delivered 
him,  to  be  condemned  to  death,  and 
have  crucified  him.  But  we  trusted 
that  it  had  been  he,  who  should 
have  redeemed  Israel  :  and  be 
sides  all  this,  to  day  is 
the  third  day,  since  these  things  were 
don.  Yea  and  certein  Women  also 
of  our  Company  made  vs  astonished, 
who  were  early  at  the  sepulchre  : 
And  when  they  found  not  his  body,they 
came,  saying,  that  they  had  also  seen 
a  vision  of  Angels,  which  said  that 
he  was  alive.  And  certeine  of  them 
who  were  with  vs,  went  to  the 
sepulchre,  and  found  it  even  so,  as 
the  women  had  said,  but  him  they 
saw  not.  Then  he  said  vnto  them, 
O  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  be 
lieve  all  that  the  prophets  have 
spoken :  Ought  not  Christ  to  have 
suffered  these  things,  and  to  enter 
into  his  glory?  And  beginning  at 
Moses,  and  all  the  Prophets  he 
expounded  vnto  them  in  all  the  scrip 
tures,  the  things  concerning  himselfe. 
And  they  drew  nigh  vnto  the  Village, 
whither  they  went  ;  and  he  made 
as  though  he  would  have  gon 
further.  But  they  constrayned  him, 
saying,  Abide  with  vs,  for  it  is 
towards  evening,  and  the  day  is  far 
spent :  and  he  went  in  to  tarry  with 
them.  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  he 
sate  at  meat  with  them,  he  took 


408 


TUESDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK 


SOURCES 

porrigebat  illis.  Et  statim  aperti  sunt 
oculi  eorum,  &  cognouerunt  eum :  et 
ipse  euanuit  ex  oculis  eorum.  Et 
dixerunt  adinuicem.  Nonne  cor 
nostrum  ardens  erat  in  nobis  de  iesu, 
dum  loqueretur  in  via :  et  aperiret 
nobis  scripturas  ?  Et  surgentes  eadem 
hora  regressi  sunt  in  hierusalem :  & 
inueuerunt  congregates  vndecim,  et 
eos  qui  cum  illis  erant :  dicentes  quod 
surrexit  domiiius  vere,  et  apparuit 
simoni.  Et  ipsi  narrabant  que  gesta 
erant  in  via  :  et  quomodo  cognouerunt 
eum  :  in  fractione  panis. 


Feria  .iij.  post  pascha. 


Officium. 
[Ecclus.  xvi  3,  4  :  Ps.  cxvii  (cxviii)  1] 


1549 

breade  and  blessed  it,  and  brake,  and 
gaue  vnto  them.  And  their  eyes  were 
opened,  and  they  knewe  him,  and  he 
vanished  out  of  their  sight.  And  they 
sayd  betwene  themselues :  did  not 
our  heartes  burne  within  vs,  whyle 
he  talked  with  vs  by  the  waye,  and 
opened  to  vs  the  Scriptures  ? 
And  they  rose  vp  thesame  houre  and 
returned  to  lerusale,  and  found  the 
eleuen  gathered  together,  and  them 
that  were  with  them,  saying :  the 
Lorde  is  rysen  in  dede,  and  hath 
appered  to  Simon.  And  they  tolde 
what  thinges  were  done  in  the  way, 
and  howe  they  knew  hym  in 
breaking  of  breade. 

At  Euensong. 
€  The  seconde  lesson.  Act.  iii.  Vnto  the  ende. 

<L  TEWESDAYE  IN  EASTER  WEKE 

At  Mattyns. 

The.  ii.  Lesson.  Luke,  xxiiii.  Vnto.  and 
beholde.  ii.  of  them. 

C  At  the  Communion. 

[Laudate  pueri.  Psal.  Cxiii. 

PRayse  the  Lord  (ye  seruauntes  :) 
O  praise  the  name  of  the  Lorde. 

Blessed  is  the  name  of  the  Lorde  : 
from  this  tyme  furth  for  euer  more. 

The  Lordes  name  is  praysed  :  fro 
the  rysyng  vp  of  the  sonne  vnto  the 
goyng  downe  of  the  same. 

The  lorde  is  hie  aboue  all  heathen  : 
and  hys  glory  aboue  the  heauens. 

Who  is  lyke  vnto  the  Lorde  our 
God,  that  hathe  hys  dwelling  so  hie  : 
and  yet  humbleth  himselfe,  to  beholde 
the  thynges  that  are  in  heauen  and 
earth. 

He  taketh  vp  the  simple  out  of  the 
dust  :  and  lifteth  the  poore  out  of  the 
mier. 

That  he  maye  set  hym  with  the 
princes  :  euen  with  the  princes  of  his 
people. 

He  maketh  the  baren  woman  to 
kepe  house  :  and  to  be  a  ioyfull 
mother  of  children. 

Glory  be  to  the  father  and  to  the 
sonne.&c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer.&c. 


TUESDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK                          409 

1552  1661 

bread  and  blessed  it,  and  brake,  and  bread,  and  blessed  it,  and  brake,  and 

gaue      to  them.     And  theyr  iyes  wer  gave      to  them.     And  their  eyes  were 

opened,  and  they  knewe  hym,  and  he  opened,  and  they  knew  him,  and  he 

vanished  out  of  theyr  sight.    And  they  vanished  out  of  their  sight.    And  they 

sayd  betwene  themselues  :    dyd  not  said     one     to     another,     Did     not 

cure  heartes  burne  within  vs  whyle  our    heart    burn    within    vs,    while 

he  talked  with  vs  by  the  waye,  and  he  talked  with  vs  by  the  way,  and 

opened  to  vs  the  Scriptures  ?  while  he  opened  to  vs  the  scriptures. 

And  they  rose  vp  thesame  houre  and  And  they  rose  vp  the  same  houre,  and 

returned  to  Jerusalem,  and  founde  the  returned  to  lerusalem,  and  found  the 

eleuen  gathered  together,  and  them  eleven  gathered  together,  and  them 

that   were  wyth    them,    saying :    the  that    were    with    them,    saying,    the 

lorde    is    rysen    in    dede,   and   hath  Lord    is    risen    indeed,    and     hath 

appered  to   Simon.     And  they  tolde  appeared  to  Simon.    And  they  told 

what  thynges  wer  done  in  the  way,  what  things   were  don   in   the  way, 

and     howe     they     knewe     hym     in  and  how  he  was  known  of  them,  in 

breakyng  of  bread.  breaking  of  bread. 


TUESDAIE  IN  EASTER  WEKE.  TUESDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK. 


4io 


TUESDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK 


SOURCES 

Oratio 

[DEUS  qui  ecclesiam  tuam  nouo 
semper  fetu  multiplicas :  concede 
famulis  tuis  vt  sacramentum  viuendo 
teneant,  quod  fide  perceperunt.  Per. 
(Gel  i.  78)] 


1549 

The  Collect. 

ALmyghty  father,  which  haste  geuen 
thy  onely  sonne  to  dye  for  our  sinnes, 
&  to  rise  agayne  for  our  iustificacion  : 
Graut  vs  so  to  put  away  the  leuen  of 
malice  &  wickednes,  that  we  maye 
alwaye  serue  thee  in  purenes  of  liuing 
&  trueth,  through  lesus  Christ  our 
Lorde. 


Lectio  actuum  apostolorum. 


[iij.D 


IN  diebus  illis.  Surgens  paulus  :  et 
manu  silentium  indicens :  ait.  Viri 
fratres  filij  generis  abraham  :  &  qui 
in  vobis  timent  deum  :  vobis  verbum 
salutis  huius  missum  est.  Qui  enim 
habitant  hierusalem  &  principes 
eius:  ignorantes  iesum  et  voces  pro- 
phetarum  que  per  omne  sabbatum 
leguntur,  iudicantes  impleuerunt.  Et 
nullam  causam  mortis  inuenientes  in 
eo  :  petierunt  a  pilato  vt  interficerent 
eum.  Cumque  consummassent  omnia 
que  de  eo  scripta  erant :  deponentes 
eum  de  ligno,  posuerunt  eum  in  monu- 
mento.  Deus  vero  suscitauit  eum  a 
mortuis  tertia  die,  qui  visus  est  per 
dies  multos  his  qui  simul  ascenderant 
cum  eo  de  galilea  in  hierusalem  :  qui 
vsque  nunc  sunt  testes  eius  ad  plebem. 
Et  nos  vobis  annuntiamus  earn  que  ad 
patres  nostros  remissio  facta  est  : 
quoniam  hanc  deus  adimpleuit  filijs 
vestris.  Resuscitans  iesum  xpm  : 
dominum  nostrum. 


The  Epistle. 

[Act.  xiii. 

YE  men  and  brethren,  Children  ot 
the  generacion  of  Abraham,  &  who- 
soeuer  among  you  feareth  God  :  to 
you  is  this  worde  of  saluacion  sent. 
For  the  inhabiters  of  lerusale,  and 
their  rulers,  because  they  knewe  him 
not,  nor  yet  the  voices  of  the  pro- 
phetes,  which  are  read  euery  Sabboth 
day,  they  haue  fulfilled  the  I  co- 
dening  him.  And  when  they  found 
no  cause  of  death  in  him,  yet  desired 
they  Pilate  to  kyll  hym.  And 
when  they  had  fulfilled  all  that  were 
written  of  him,  they  tooke  hym  downe 
from  the  tree,  and  put  him  in  a 
Sepulchre.  But  God  raysed  hym 
agayne  from  death  the  thirde  daye, 
and  he  was  sene  manye  dayes  of 
them  whiche  went  with  hym  from 
Galile  to  Jerusalem  :  which  are  his 
witnesses  vnto  the  people.  And  we 
declare  vnto  you,  how  that 

the  promes  (which  was  made  vnto  the 
fathers)  GOD  hath  fulfilled 
vnto      their  children  (euen  vnto  vs)  in 
that  he  raysed  vp  lesus  agayne  : 

Euen  as  it  is  written  in  the  seconde 
Psalme :  Thou  art  my  sonne  thys  daye 
haue  1  begotten  thee.  As  concern- 

yng  that  he  raysed  him  vp  from  death, 
nowe  no  more  to  returneto  corrupcion, 
he  saied  on  this  wise:  The  holy  pro 
mises  made  to  Dauid,  wil  I  geue  fayth- 
fullye  to  you.  Wherefore  he  sayeth  also 
in  an  other  place :  Thou  shalt  not  suffre 
thyne  holy  to  see  corrupcion.  For 
Dauid  (after  that  he  had  in  hys  tyme 
fulfilled  the  wyll  of  GOD)  fell  on 
slepe,  and  was  layed  vnto  his  fathers 
andsawecorrupcio.  But  he  whom  God 
raysed  agayne,  sawe  no  corrupcion. 
Bee  it  knowne  vnto  you  therefore  (ye 


TUESDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK 


411 


1552 

C  The  Collect. 

ALmightie  father,  whichehastegeuen 
thy  only  sonne  to  die  for  our  sinnes, 
and  to  rise  agayne  for  our  iustificacion : 
Graunt  vs  so  to  put  away  the  leauen  of 
malice  and  wickednes,  that  we  may 
alwaye  serue  thee  in  purenes  of  liuing 
and  trueth :  throughe  lesus  Christe  our 
Lorde. 


C  The  Epistle. 

[Acte.  xiii 

YE  men  and  brethren,  Children  of 
the  generacion  of  Abraham,  and  who- 
soeuer  among  you  feareth  God :  to 
you  is  this  worde  of  saluacion  sente. 
For  the  inhabiters  of  Jerusalem,  & 
their  rulers,  because  they  knewe  him 
not,  nor  yet  the  voices  of  the  pro- 
phetes,  which  are  read  euery  Sabboth 
daye,  they  haue  fulfilled  them  in  con 
demning  him.  And  when  they  founde 
no  cause  of  death  in  hym,  yet  desyred 
they  Pilate  to  kil  hym.  And 
when  they  had  fulfilled  al  that  wer 
written  of  hym,  they  tooke  hym  downe 
from  the  tree,  and  put  hym  in  a 
Sepulchre.  But  God  raysed  hym 
agayne  from  death  the  thirde  daye, 
and  he  was  seen  many  dayes  of 
them  whiche  wente  with  him  from 
Galile  to  Jerusalem  :  which  are 
witnesses  vnto  the  people.  And  we 
declare  vnto  you  ,  howe  that 

the  promes  (whiche  was  made  vnto  the 
fathers)  God  hath  fulfilled 
vnto     theyr  chyldren,  (euen  vnto  vs)  in 
that  he  raysed  vp  lesus  againe  : 

Euen  as  it  is  writte  in  the  second 
Psalme :  thou  art  my  sonne,  this  day 
haue  I  begotten  thee.  As  concern- 

yng  that  he  raised  him  vp  from  death, 
now  no  more  to  returne  to  corrupcion, 
he  sayed  on  this  wyse.  The  holy  pro 
mises  made  to  Dauid,  will  I  geue  faith 
fully  to  you.  Wherfore  he  sayeth  also 
in  an  other  place :  Thou  shalt  not  suffre 
thine  holy  to  see  corrupcion.  For 
Dauid  (after  that  he  had  in  his  time 
fulfilled  the  wyll  of  god)  fel  on 
slepe,  and  was  layd  vnto  his  fathers, 
and  saw  corrupcion.  But  he  whom  god 
raysed  agayn,  saw  no  corrupcion. 
Be  it  knowen  vnto  you  therfore  (ye 


1661 

The  Collect. 

8Almighty  God,  who  through  thy 
only  begotten  son  lesus  Christ  hast 
overcome  death,  and  opened  vnto  vs 
the  gate  of  everlasting  life :  We  humbly 
beseech  thee,  that  as  by  thy  speciall 
grace  preventing  vs,  thou  dost  put  into 
our  minds  good  desires,  so  by  thy  con- 
tinuall  help,  we  may  bring  the  same  to 
good  effect,  through  lesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  who  liveth,  and  reigneth  with 
thee,  and  the  holy  Ghost,  ever  one 
God  world  without  end.  Amen.* 

9For  the  Epistle. 

[Acts:  13.  426. 

Men,  and  brethren,  children  of 
the  Stock  of  Abraham,  and  who 
soever  among  you  feareth  God,  to 
you  is  the  word  of  this  Salvation  sent. 
For  they  that  dwell  at  Jerusalem,  and 
their  rulers,  because  they  knew  him 
not,  nor  yet  the  voices  of  the  Pro 
phets  which  are  read  every  Sabbath- 
day,  they  have  fulfilled  them  in  con 
demning  him.  And  though  they  found 
no  cause  of  death  in  him,  yet  desired 
they  Pilate  that  he  should  be  slain.  And 
when  they  had  fulfilled  all  that  was 
written  of  him,  they  tooke  him  down 
from  the  tree,  and  laid  him  in  a 
sepulchre.  But  God  raised  him 

from  the  dead 

And  he  was  seen  many  dayes  of 
them  which  came  vp  with  him  from 
Galilee  to  Jerusalem,  who  are  his 
witnesses  vnto  the  people.  And  we 
declare  vnto  you  glad  tidings,  how  that 
the  promise  which  was  made  vnto  the 
Fathers,  God  hath  fulfilled  the  same 
vnto  vs  their  children,  in 

that  he  hath  raised  vp  lesus  again, 
as  it  is  also  written  in  the  second 
Psalm,  Thou  art  my  Son  this  day 
have  I  begotten  thee.  And  as  concern 
ing  that  he  raysed  him  vp  from  the  dead, 
now  no  more  to  return  to  corruption, 
he  said  on  this  wise,  I  will 
give  you  the  sure  mercyes  of 
David.  Wherefore  he  saith  also 
in  another  Psalm,  Thou  shalt  not  suffer 
thine  holy  one  to  see  corruption.  For 
David  after  he  had  served  his  own 
generation,  by  the  will  of  God,  fell  on 
sleep,  and  was  laid  vnto  his  Fathers, 
and  saw  corruption.  But  he  whom  God 
raised  again  saw  no  corruption. 
Be  it  known  vnto  you  therefore, 


412 


TUESDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK 


SOURCES 


C  Sequentia  sancti  euangelii.     Secundum 

lucam.  [xxiiii.  F 

IN  illo  tempore.  Stetit  iesus  in 
medio  discipulorum  suorum :  &  dixit 
eis.  Pax  vobis.  Ego  sum :  nolite 
timere.  Conturbati  vero  et  conterriti  : 
existimabant  se  spiritum  videre.  Et 
dixit  eis.  Quid  turbati  estis  :  et  cogi- 
tationes  ascendunt  in  corda  vestra? 
Videte  manus  meas  et  pedes  meos : 
quia  ego  ipse  sum.  Palpate,  et  videte : 
quia  spiritus  carnem  et  ossa  non  habet, 
sicut  me  videtis  habere.  Et  cum  hoc 
dixisset :  ostendit  eis  manus  et  pedes. 
Adhuc  autem  illis  non  credentibus  et 
mirantibus  pre  gaudio :  dixit.  Habetis 
hie  aliquid  quod  manducetur?  At  illi 
obtulerunt  ei  partem  piscis  assi :  et 
fauum  mellis.  Et  cum  manducasset 
coram  eis  :  sumens  reliquias,  dedit  eis. 
Et  dixit  ad  eos.  Hec  sunt  verba  que 
locutus  sum  ad  vos  cum  adhuc  essem 
vobiscum :  quoniam  necesse  est  impleri 
omnia  que  scripta  sunt  in  lege  moysi, 
&  prophetis,  et  psalmis  de  me.  Tune 
aperuit  illis  sensum  :  vt  intelligerent 
scripturas.  Et  dixit  eis.  Quoniam 
sic  scriptum  est :  et  sic  oportebat  pati 
xpm,  et  resurgere  a  mortuis  die  tertia. 
Et  predicari  in  nomine  eius  penitentiam 
et  remissionem  peccatorum  :  in  omnes 
gentes. 


1549 

men  and  brethren)  that  throughe  thys 
man,  is  preached  vnto  you  the  for- 
geuenes  of  synnes,  and  that  by  hym 
all  that  beleue,  are  Justified  from  all 
thynges,  from  which  ye  could  not  be 
Justified  by  the  lawe  of  Moses.  Be 
ware  therfore,  lest  that  fall  on  you, 
whiche  is  spoken  of  in  the  Prophetes  : 
behold  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and 
perishe  ye  :  for  I  doe  a  worke  in  your 
dayes,  which  ye  shal  not 

beleue,  though  a  man  declare  it 
you. 

The  Gospel. 

[      Luc.  xxiiii. 

IESUS  stode  in  the  middes 

of  his  disciples,  and  sayed  vnto  them : 
peace  be  vnto  you  :  It  is  I  feare  not. 
But  they  were  abashed  and  afrayd 
&  supposed  that  they  had  sene  a 
spirite.  And  he  saied  vnto  the  :  why 
are  ye  troubled,  &  why  do  thoughtes 
arise  in  your  heartes  ?  Behold  my 
handes  &  my  feete,  that  it  is  euen  I 
my  selfe.  Handle  me  and  see,  for  a 
spirite  hath  not  fleshe  and  bones,  as  ye 
see  me  haue.  And  when  he  had  thus 
spoken,  he  shewed  them  hys  handes, 
and  his  feete.  And  whyle  they  yet 
beleued  not  for  ioy,  and  wondered,  he 
sayed  vnto  them  :  Haue  ye  here  anye 
meate  ?  And  they  offered  hym  a  peace 
of  a  broyled  fishe,  and  of  an  Hony 
combe.  And  he  tooke  it  and  dyd  eate 
before  them.  And  he  sayed  vnto 
them  :  these  are  the  wordes  whiche  I 
spake  vnto  you,  whyle  I  was  yet  with 
you  :  That  all  must  nedes  be  ful 

filled,  whiche  were  written  of  me  in  the 
Lawe  of  Moses,  &  in  the  prophetes,  and 
in  the  Psalmes  .  Then 

opened  he  their  wittes,  that 
they  myghtevnderstandethe  scriptures, 
and  sayed vntothem:  Thusitiswrytten, 
and  thus  it  behoued  Christe  to  suffer, 
and  to  rise  agayne  from  death  the 
thirde  daye,  and  that  repentaunce  and 
remission  of  sinnes,  shoulde  bee 
preached  in  his  name  among  all 
nacions,  and  muste  begin  at  lerusalem. 
And  ye  are  witnesses  of  these 
thynges. 

At  Euensong. 

C  The  seconde  lesson,  i.  Cor.  xv.  vnto 
the  ende. 


TUESDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK 


1552 

me  and  brethren)  that  through  this 
ma,  is  preached  vnto  you  for- 

geuenesse  of  sinnes,  &  that  by  hym 
all  that  beeleue,  are  Justified  from  al 
thinges,  from  which  ye  could  not  be 
Justified  by  the  lawe  of  Moses.  Be 
ware  therefore,  lest  that  fal  on  you, 
which  is  spoken  of  in  the  prophetes  : 
beholde:  ye  despisers,and  wonder,  and 
perishe  ye  :  for  I  doe  a  worke  in  your 
dayes,  '  which  ye  shall  not 

beleue,  though  a  man  declare  it  vnto 
you. 

C  The  Gospel. 

[      Lu.  xxiiii 

IESUS  stode  in  the  middes 

of  his  disciples,  and  saied  vnto  them  : 
peace  be  vnto  you  :  It  is  I,  feare  not. 
But  thei  were  abashed  and  afrayed, 
and  supposed  that  they  had  scene  a 
spirite.  And  he  said  vnto  them  :  why 
are  ye  troubled,  and  why  doe  thoughtes 
arise  in  your  heartes  ?  Behold  my 
handes  and  my  feete,  that  it  is  euen  I 
my  self.  Handle  me  and  see :  for  a 
spirit  hath  no  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye 
see  me  haue.  And  whe  he  had  thus 
spoken  :  he  shewed  them  hys  handes, 
and  his  feete.  And  whyle  they  yet 
beleued  not  for  ioye,  and  wondred,  he 
sayd  vnto  them  :  Haue  ye  here  any 
meate  ?  And  they  offered  him  a  piece 
of  a  broyled  fyshe,  and  of  an  Hony 
combe.  And  he  toke  it,  &  did  eate 
before  them.  And  he  sayd  vnto 
them  :  these  are  the  wordes  whiche  I 
spake  vnto  you,  while  I  was  yet  with 
you :  That  al  muste  nedes  be  ful 

filled,  which  wer  writte  of  me  in  the 
law  of  Moses,  and  in  the  prophetes,  & 
in  the  Psalmes  .  Then 

opened  he  their  wittes,  that 
they  might  vnderstande  the  scriptures, 
and  said  vnto  them.  Thus  it  is  writte, 
and  thus  it  behoued  Christ  to  suffer, 
and  to  rise  again  from  death  the 
third  day,  and  that  repentaunce  & 
remyssyon  of  sinnes,  should  be 
preached  in  his  name  among  al 
nacions,  and  must  begin  at  Jerusalem. 
And  ye  are  witnesses  of  these 
thynges. 


1661 

men,  and  brethren,  that  through  this 
man  is  preached  vnto  you  y?  for 
giveness  of  sins.  And  by  him 
all  that  beleeve  are  Justified  from  all 
things,  from  which  ye  could  not  be 
iustified  by  the  law  of  Moses.  Be 
ware  therefore, lest  that  comevpon  you, 
which  is  spoken  of  in  the  prophets. 
Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and 
perish  :  for  I  worke  a  work  in  your 
dayes,  a  work  which  you  shall  in  no  wise 
believe,  though  a  man  declare  it  vnto 
you. 

The  Gospel. 

[S*:  Luke.  24.  436. 

lesus  himselfe  stood  in  the  midst 
of  them,  and  saith  vnto  them, 
Peace  be  vnto  you 

But  they  were  terrified,  and  affrighted, 
and  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a 
spirit.  And  he  said  vnto  them,  Why 
are  ye  troubled,  and  why  do  thoughts 
arise  in  your  hearts?  Behold  my 
hands,  and  my  feet,  that  it  is  I 

my  self:  handle  me,  and  see,  for  a 
spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye 
see  me  have.  And  when  he  had  thus 
spoken  he  shewed  them  his  hands 
and  his  Feet.  And  while  they  yet 
beleeved  not  for  ioy,  and  wondered,  he 
said  vnto  them,  Have  ye  here  any 
meat?  And  they  gave  him  a  peece 
of  a  broyled  fish,  and  of  an  hony 
comb.  And  he  took  it,  and  did  eat 
before  them.  And  he  said  vnto 
them,  These  are  the  words  which  I 
spake  vnto  you  while  I  was  yet  with 
you,  that  all  things  must  be  ful 

filled,  which  were  written  in  the 

law  of  Moses,  and  in  the  Prophets,  and 
in  the  Psalms  concerning  me.  Then 
opened  he  their  vnderstanding,  that 
they  might  vnderstand  the  Scriptures. 
And  said  vnto  them,  Thus  it  is  written, 
and  thus  it  behooved  Christ  to  suffer, 
and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the 

third  day.  And  that  repentance,  and 
remission  of  sins  should  be 
preached  in  his  name  among  all 
Nations,  beginning  at  Jerusalem. 
And  ye  are  witnesses  of  these 
things. 


414 


THE  FIRST  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


SOURCES 
C  Dominica  in  octauis  pasche. 

Ad  missam.    Officium. 
[Ps.  cxxxviii(cxxxix)  18b,  5b,  6a :  1, 2] 


1549 

THE  FIRST  SONDAYE  AFTER   EASTER. 

[Beatus  Vir.  Psal.  cxii. 

BLessed  is  the  manne  that  feareth 
the  Lorde  :  he  hathe  greate  delyghte 
in  hys  commaundementes. 

His  seede  shalbe  myghtie  vpon 
yearthe  :  the  generacion  of  the  faythe- 
full  shall  be  blessed. 

Riches  and  plenteousnes  shalbe  in 
his  house  :  and  hys  righteousnes 
endureth  for  euer. 

Vnto  the  godly  there  ariseth  vp 
lyght  in  the  darckenes  :  he  is  mercy- 
full,  louing  and  righteous. 

A  good  man  is  mercifull  and  lendeth : 
and  wyll  guyde  his  wordes  with  dis- 
crecion. 

For  he  shall  neuer  be  moued  :  and 
the  righteous  shall  be  had  in  euer- 
lasting  remembraunce. 

He  wyll  not  bee  afrayed  for  any 
euil  tydinges  :  for  hys  hearte  standeth 
fast,  and  beleueth  in  the  Lorde. 

His  hearte  is  stablished  and  wyll 
not  shrynke  :  vntill  he  see  his  desire 
vpon  his  enemies. 

He  hath  sparsed  abroade  and  geue 
to  the  poore  :  and  his  righteousnes 
remaineth  for  euer,  his  home  shalbee 
exalted  with  honor. 

The  vngodly  shall  see  it,  and  it  shall 
greue  him  :  he  shall  gnashe  with  hys 
teeth  and  consume  awaye,  the  desire 
of  the  vngodly  shall  peryshe. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 

sonne.  &c. 
As    it   was   in    the    beginning,   is 

nowe,  and  euer.  &c. 

The  Collect. 

Almighty  Father.  &c.  As  at  the 
seconde  Communion  on  Easterday. 


In  missa  dominical!  per  hebdomadem. 
Lectio  epistole  beati  iohannis  apostoli. 

[j.V.A 

CHarissimi.  Omne  quod  natum  est 
ex  deo :  vincit  mundum.  Et  hec  est 
victoria  que  vincit  mundum  :  fides 
nostra.  Quis  est  qui  vincit  mundum  : 
nisi  qui  credit  quoniam  iesus  est  films 


The  Epistle. 

[i.      Ihon.  V. 

ALl  that  is  borne  of  GOD,  ouer- 
cummeth  the  worlde.  And  this  is  the 
victory  that  ouercummeth  the  worlde, 
euen  our  faith.  Who  is  it  that 
ouercommeth  the  worlde, but  he  whiche 


THE  FIRST  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


415 


1552 

THE   FIRST  SUNDAIE  AFTER   EASTER. 


1661 
THE  FIRST  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER. 


C  The  Collect. 

Almightie     God.     &>c.    As    at 
Communion  on  Easter  day. 


the 


C  The  Epistle. 

[i.      lohn.  v. 

AL  that  is  borne  of  God,  ouer- 
cummeth  the  world  :  And  this  is  the 
victorye  that  ouercummeth  the  world, 
euen  our  fayth.  Who  is  it  that 
ouercummeth  the  world,  but  he  that 


The  Collect 

8Almighty  Father,  who  hast  given 
thine  only  son  to  dy  for  our  sins,  and 
to  rise  again  for  our  iustification : 
grant  vs  so  to  put  away  the  leaven  of 
malice  and  wickedness,  that  we  may 
alway  serve  thee  in  pureness  of  living, 
and  truth,  through  the  merits  of  the 
same  thy  son  Icsus  Christ  our  Lord,* 
Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[i:  St:  John.  5.  «4. 

Whatsoever  is  born  of  God  over- 
cometh  the  world,  and  this  is  the 
victory  that  overcometh  the  world, 
even  our  faith.  Who  is  he  that 
overcometh  the  world,  but  he  that 


4i6 


THE  SECOND  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


SOURCES 

dei  ?  Hie  est  qui  venit  per  aquam  et 
sanguinem :  iesus  christus.  Non  in 
aqua  solum  :  sed  in  aqua  et  sanguine. 
Et  spiritus  est  qui  testificatur :  quoniam 
christus  est  veritas.  Quoniam  tres 
sunt  qui  testimonium  dant  in  celo : 
pater,  verbum,  et  spiritus  sanctus :  et 
hi  tres  vnum  sunt.  Et  tres  sunt  qui 
testimonium  dant  in  terra :  spiritus, 
aqua,  et  sanguis :  et  hi  tres  vnum  sunt. 
Si  testimonium  hominum  accipimus : 
testimonium  dei  maius  est.  Quoniam 
hoc  est  testimonium  dei  quod  maius 
est :  quia  testificatus  est  de  filio  suo. 
Qui  credit  in  filium  dei :  habet  testi 
monium  dei  in  se. 


Secundum  lohannem.  [xx.  B 
IN  illo  tempore.  Cum  esset  sero  die 
illo  vna  sabbatorum,  &  fores  essent 
clause  vbi  erant  discipuli  congregati 
propter  metum  iudeorum :  venit  iesus, 
&  stetit  in  medio,  et  dixit  eis.  Pax 
vobis.  Et  cum  hoc  dixisset :  ostendit 
eis  manus  &  latus.  Gauisi  sunt  ergo 
discipuli :  viso  domino.  Dixit  ergo 
eis  iterum.  Pax  vobis.  Sicut  misit 
me  pater  :  et  ego  mitto  vos.  Hec  cum 
dixisset,  insufflauit :  &  dixit  eis.  Ac- 
cipite  spiritum  sanctum.  Quorum 
remiseritis  peccata  :  remittuntur  eis. 
Et  quorum  retinueritis  :  retenta  sunt. 
(  +  vers.  24-31). 


1549 

beleueth  that  Iesus  is  the  sonne  of 
God  ?  This  Iesus  Christe  is  he  that 
came  by  water  and  bloude,  not  by 
water  onely  but  by  water  and  bloude. 
And  it  is  the  spirite  that  beareth 
witnesse,  because  the  spirite  is  truethe. 
For  there  are  three  whiche  beare 
recorde  in  heauen,  the  father,  the 
woorde  and  the  holy  ghoste,  and  these 
three  are  one.  And  there  are  three 
whiche  beare  recorde  in  yearth,  the 
spirite,  and  water,  and  bloude, 
and  these  three  are  one.  If  wee 
receyue  the  witnesse  of  menne,  the 
witnesse  of  God  is  greater.  For  this 
is  the  witnesse  of  God  that  is  greater, 
whiche  he  testifieth  of  his  sonne. 
He  that  beleueth  on  the  sonne  of  God, 
hath  the  witnes  in  hymselfe.  He 
that  beleueth  not  God,  hath  made  him 
a  Iyer,  because  he  beleueth  not  the 
recorde  that  God  gaue  of  hys  sonne. 
And  thys  is  the  record,  how  that 
God  hath  geuen  vnto  vs  eternall  life, 
and  this  lyfe  is  in  his  sonne.  He  that 
hath  the  sonne,  hath  lyfe :  and  he  that 
hath  not  the  sonne  of  God,  hath  not 
lyfe. 

The  Gospell. 

[      Ihon.  xx. 

THesame  dayeat  nyghte,  whiche  was 
the  first  daye  of  the  Sabbothes,  whe  the 
dores  were  shut  (where  the  disciples 
were  assembled  together,  for  feare  of 
the  lewes)  came  Iesus  and  stode  in 
the  myddes,  and  sayd  vnto  them  : 
Peace  be  vnto  you.  And  when  he 
had  so  sayde,  he  shewed  vnto  them 
his  handes  and  his  syde.  Then  were 
the  disciples  glad,  when  thei  sawe  the 
Lorde.  Then  sayde  Iesus  to  them 
againe.  Peace  be  vnto  you.  As  my 
father  sent  me,  euen  so  sende  I 

you  also.  And  when  he  had  saide 
those  wordes,  he  breathed  on  them,  and 
sayde  vnto  them  :  receyue  ye  the  holy 
gost.  Whosoeuers  synnes  ye  remytte 
they  are  remytted  vnto  them.  And 
whosoeuers  synnes  ye  retaine,  they  are 
retayned. 


THE  SECOND  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


1552 

beleueth  that  lesus  is  the  sonne  of 
God?  This  lesus  Christe  is  he  that 
came  by  water  and  bloud,  not  by 
water  only,  but  by  water  and  bloud. 
And  it  is  the  spirite  that  beareth 
witnesse,  because  the  spirite  is  trueth. 
For  there  are  three  whiche  beare 
recorde  in  heauen  :  the  father,  the 
woorde  and  the  holy  gost,  and  these 
three  are  one.  And  there  are  three 
which  beare  recorde  in  yearth  :  the 
spirite,  and  water,  &  bloud, 
and  these  three  are  one.  If  we 
receiue  the  witnesse  of  me,  the 
witnesse  of  god  is  greater.  For  this 
is  the  witnesse  of  God  that  is  greater, 
which  he  testyfied  of  hys  sonne. 

He  that  beleueth  on  the  sonne  of  God, 
hath  the  witnesse  in  hymselfe.  He 
that  beleueth  not  God,  hath  made  hym 
a  Iyer,  because  he  beleueth  not  the 
recorde  that  God  gaue  of  hys  sonne. 
And  this  is  the  recorde,  howe  that 
God  hath  geuen  vnto  vs  eternall  lyfe, 
and  this  life  is  in  his  sonne.  He  that 
hath  the  sonne,  hath  lyfe :  and  he  that 
hath  not  the  sonne  of  God,  hath  not 
lyfe. 

C  The  Gospel. 

[     lohn.  xx. 

THC  same  day  e  at  nyghte,  whiche  was 
the  first  day  of  the  Sabbothes,  whe  the 
dores  were  shut  (where  the  disciples 
wer  assembled  together,  for  feare  of 
the  lewes)  came  lesus  and  stode  in 
the  myddes,  and  sayed  vnto  them  : 
Peace  be  vnto  you.  And  when  he 
had  so  sayed,  he  shewed  vnto  them 
his  handes  and  hys  syde.  Then  were 
the  disciples  glad,  when  they  sawe  the 
Lorde.  Then  sayed  lesus  to  them 
agayne  :  Peace  bee  vnto  you.  As  my 
father  sente  me,  euen  so  sende  I 

you  also.  And  when  he  had  sayd 
these  wordes,he  breathed  on  them,  and 
sayd  vnto  them  :  receiue  ye  the  holy 
gost.  Whosoeuers  synnes  ye  remitte, 
they  are  remitted  vnto  them.  And 
whosoeuers  sinnes  ye  retayne,  they  are 
retayned. 


1661 

beleiveth  that  lesus  is  the  son  of 
God.  This  is  he  that  came  by  water 
and  blood,  even  lesus  Christ,  not  by 
water  onely,  but  by  water  and  blood  : 
and  it  is  the  spirit  that  beareth 
witness,  because  the  spirit  is  truth. 
For  there  are  three  that  bear 
record  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the 
Word,  and  the  holy  Ghost :  and  these 
three  are  one.  And  there  are  three 
that  bear  witness  in  earth,  the 
spirit,  and  the  water,  and  the  blood  : 
and  these  three  agree  in  one.  If  we 
receive  the  witness  of  men,  the 
witness  of  God  is  greater :  for  this 
is  the  witness  of  God  , 

which  he  hath  testified  of  his  Son. 
He  that  beleiveth  on  the  son  of  God 
hath  the  witness  in  himselfe :  he 
that  believeth  not  God  hath  made  him 
a  liar,  because  he  beleeveth  not  the 
record  that  God  gave  of  his  Son. 
And  this  is  the  record,  that 

God  hath  given  to  vs  eternall  life  : 
and  this  life  is  in  his  son.  He  that 
hath  the  Son,  hath  life,  and  he  that 
hath  not  the  son  ,  hath  not 

life. 

The  Gospel. 

[S»:  lohn.  20.  419. 

The  same  day  at  evening,  being 
the  first  day  of  the  week,  when  the 
doors  were  shut,  where  the  disciples 
were  assembled  ,  for  fear  of 

the  lews,  came  lesus  and  stood  in 
the  midst  and  saith  vnto  them, 
Peace  be  vnto  you.  And  when  he 
had  so  said,  he  shewed  vnto  them 
his  hands,  and  his  side,  Then  were 
the  disciples  glad  when  they  saw  the 
Lord.  Then  said  lesus  to  them 
again,  Peace  be  vnto  you :  as  my 
Father  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send  I 
you  .  And  when  he  had  said 
this,  he  breathed  on  them,  and 
saith  vnto  them,  Receive  ye  the  holy 
Ghost.  Whosesoever  sins  ye  remitt, 
they  are  remitted  vnto  them,  and 
whosesoever  sins  ye  retaine,  they  are 
retained. 


2  D 


4i8 


THE  SECOND  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


SOURCES 

C  Missa  dominicalis  hebdomade.  ij. 
post  pascha. 

Officium. 
[Ps.  xxxii  (xxxiii)  5b,  6a  :  1] 


Oratio. 

[DEUS  qui  in  filij  tui  humilitate 
iacentem  mundum  erexisti,  fidelibus 
tuis  perpetuam  concede  letitiam  :  vt 
quos  perpetue  mortis  eripuisti  casibus  : 
gaudijs  facias  sempiternis  perfrui.  Per 
eundem.  (Gel.  i  57)] 


1549 

C  THE  SECOND  SONDAYE  AFTER  EASTER. 
[Deus  in  adiutorium,  psal.  Ixx. 
HAste  thee,  O  God,  to  deliuer  me : 
Make  haste  to  helpe  me,  O  Lorde. 

Let  them  bee  ashamed  and  con 
founded,  that  seke  after  my  soule  : 
lette  them  be  turned  backeward  and 
put  to  confusion,  that  wishe  me  euill. 

Let  them  (for  their  reward)  be  soone 
brought  to  shame  :  that  crye  ouer  me, 
there,  there. 

But  let  all  those  that  seke  thee,  be 
ioyfull  and  gladde  in  thee  :  and  let  al 
suche  as  delight  in  thy  saluacion,  say 
alway,  the  Lorde  be  praysed. 

As    for    me    I    am  poore   and    in 
misery  :  haste  thee  vnto  me  (O  God.) 
Thou  art  my  helpe  and  my  redemer  : 
O  Lorde  make  no  long  tarying  : 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer.  &c. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  God,  whiche  haste  geuen 
thy  holy  sonne  to  be  vnto  vs,  bothe  a 
sacrifice  for  synne,  and  also  an  exaple 
of  Godly  lyfe  :  Geue  vs  the  grace  that 
we  may  alwayes  moste  thankfully  re- 
ceiue  that  his  inestimable  benefite, 
and  also  dayly  indeuour  our  selfes, 
to  folowe  the  blessed  steppes  of  his 
moste  holy  lyfe. 


Lectio  epistole  beati  petri  apostoli. 

[i.  Pet.  ij. 
Cnarissimi. 


Xps  passus  est  pro  nobis  :  vobis 
relinquens  exemplum,  vt  sequamini 
vestigia  eius.  Qui  peccatum  non  fecit : 
nee  inuentus  est  dolus  in  ore  eius. 
Qui  cum  malediceretur  non  male- 
dicebat :  cum  pateretur  non  commina- 
batur.  Tradebat  autem  iudicanti  se 
iniuste.  Qui  peccata  nostra  ipse  per- 
tulit  in  corpore  suo  super  lignum  ;  vt 
peccatis  mortui  iustitie  viuamus,  cuius 


The  Epistle. 

[i.      Peter,  ii. 

THis  is  thanke  worthy,  yf  a  manne 
for  conscience  toward  God,  indure 
griefe,  and  suffre  wrong  vndeserued. 
For  what  prayse  is  it  yf  when  ye  bee 
buffeted  for  your  fautes,  ye  take 
it  pacyently  ?  But  and  if  when  ye  doe 
well,  ye  suffre  wrong  and  take  it 
pacyently,  then  is  there  thake  with 
God.  For  hereunto  verely  were 

ye  called  :  For  Christe  also  suffered 
for  vs,  leauyng  vs  an  ensample,  that  ye 
shoulde  folowe  hys  steppes,  whyche  dyd 
no  synne,  neyther  was  there  guyle  found 
in  his  mouth  :  which,  when  he  was 
reuiled,  reuiled  not  agayne  :  when  he 
suffered,  he  threatned  not :  but  com 
mitted  the  vengeaunce  to  him  that 
iudgeth  righteously,  which  hys  owne 
selfebeareoursinnesinhys  body  on 
the  tree,  that  we  being  deliuered  from 
sinne,  should  lyue  vnto  ryghteousnes. 


THE  SECOND  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


419 


1552 

THE  SECONDE  SUNDAIE  AFTER   EASTER. 


1661 
THE  SECOND  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER. 


C  The  Collect. 

ALmightie  god,  which  hast  geuen 
thy  holy  sonne  to  bee  vnto  vs,  bothe  a 
sacrifice  for  synne,  and  also  an  example 
of  Godly  lyfe  :  Geue  vs  the  grace  that 
we  maye  alwaies  most  thankfully  re- 
ceiue  that  his  inestimable  benefite  : 
and  also  dayly  indeuour  cure  selues 
to  folowe  the  blessed  steppes  of  hys 
most  holy  lyfe. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[i.      Peter,  ii. 

THis  is  thanke  woorthye,  yf  a  man 
for  conscience  toward  god,  indure 
griefe,  &  suffre  wronge  vndeserued. 
For  what  prayse  is  it,  yf  when  ye  bee 
buffeted  for  your  faultes,  ye  take 

it  paciently  ?  But  and  yf  whe  ye  doe 
wel,  ye  suffre  wrong  &  take  it 
paciently,  the  is  there  thanke  with 
God.  For  hereunto  verely  were 

ye  called :  For  Christ  also  suffered 
for  vs,  leauyng  vs  an  ensaumple,  that  ye 
should  folow  his  steppes,  which  did 
no  sinne,  neither  was  there  guile  foud 
in  his  mouth  :  which,  whe  he  was 
reuiled,  reuiled  not  agayne  :  when  he 
suffered,  he  threatned  not :  but  com- 
mytted  the  vengeaunce  to  hym  that 
iudgeth  righteously,  whiche  his  owne 
selfe  bare  our  sinnes  in  hys  body  on 
the  tree,  that  we  being  deliuered  from 
sinne,  shoulde  liue  vnto  ryghteousnes. 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who8  hast  given 
thine  only3  son  to  be  vnto  vs  both  a 
sacrifice  for  sin,  and  also  an  lbensample 
of  godly  life  :  give  vs  grace  that 
we  may  alwayes  most  thankfully  re 
ceive  that  his  inestimable  benefit, 
and  also  daily  endeavour  our  selves 
to  follow  the  blessed  steps  of  his 
most  holy  life,  6through  the  same 
lesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[j.  S»:  Pet.  2.  419. 

This  is  thankworthy,  if  a  man 
for  conscience  toward  God  endure 
grief,  suffering  wrongfully 

For  what  glory  is  it,  if  when  ye  be 
buffeted  for  your  faults,  ye  shall  take 
it  patiently?  but  if  when  ye  do 
well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  take  it 
patiently  :  this  is  acceptable  with 
God.  For  even  herevnto  were 

ye  called :  because  Christ  also  suffered 
for  vs,  leaving  vs  an  example,  that  ye 
should  follow  his  steps.  Who  did 
no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found 

in  his  mouth.  Who  when  he  was 
reviled,  reviled  not  again,  when  he 
suffered,  he  threatned  not,  but  com 
mitted  himselfe  to  him  that 
iudgeth  righteously.  Who  his  own 
self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on 
the  tree,  that  we  being  dead  to 
sin,  should  live  vnto  righteousnes ; 


420 


THE  THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


SOURCES 

liuore  sanati  sumus.  Eratis  enim  sicut 
cues  errantes  :  sed  conuersi  estis  nunc 
ad  pastorem  et  episcopum,  aiiimarum 
vestrarum. 

Secundum  loliannem.  [x.  B 

IN  illo  tempore.  Dixit  iesus  dis- 
cipulis  suis.  Ego  sum  pastor  bonus. 
Bonus  pastor  animam  suam  dat  pro 
ouibus  suis.  Mercenarius  autem  et 
qui  non  est  pastor,  cuius  non  sunt 
oues  proprie  :  videt  lupum  venientem, 
et  dimittit  oues  et  fugit,  et  lupus  rapit 
et  dispergit  oues.  Mercenarius  autem 
fugit,  quia  mercenarius  est :  &  non 
pertinet  ad  eum  de  ouibus.  Ego  sum 
pastor  bonus  :  et  cognosco  oues  meas  : 
et  cognoscunt  me  mee.  Sicut  nouit 
me  pater  &  ego  agnosco  patrem  :  & 
animam  meam  pono  pro  ouibus  meis. 
Et  alias  oues  habeo  que  non  sunt  ex 
hoc  ouili :  et  illas  oportet  me  adducere, 
&  vocem  meam  audient.  Et  net  vnum 
ouile  :  et  vnus  pastor. 

€  Missa  dominicalis  hebd.  iij. 
[Ps.  Ixv  (Ixvi)  1,  2  :  3] 


1549 

By  whose  stripes  ye  were  healed.    For 
ye  were  as  shepe  goyng  a  stray.     But 
are  nowe  turned  vnto  the  shepheard, 
and  bishop  of  your  soules. 
The  Gospell. 

[      lohn.  x. 

CHriste  sayed  to  his  disciples  :  I 
am  the  good  shepheard,  a  good 
shepheard  geueth  his  lyfe  for  the 
shepe.  An  hired  seruaunte, 

&  he  which  is  not  the  shepheard 
(neyther  the  shepe  are  his  owne)  seeth 
the  wolfe  commyng,  and  leaueth  the 
shepe  and  flieth,  and  the  wolfe  catcheth, 
and  skattreth  the  shepe.  The 
hired  seruaunt  flyeth,  because  he  is  an 
hired  seruaunte,  and  careth  not  for  the 
shepe.  I  am  the  good  shepheard, 
and  knowe  my  shepe,  and  am  knowen 
of  myne.  As  my  Father  knoweth 
me,  euen  so  knowe  I  also  my  Father. 
And  I  geue  my  lyfe  for  the  shepe  : 
and  other  shepe  I  haue,  whiche  are 
not  of  this  folde.  Them  also  must  I 
bryng,  and  they  shall  heare  my  voyce, 
and  there  shalbe  one  folde,  and  one 
shepheard. 

C  THE  .iii.  SONDAY. 

[Confitemur  psal.  Ixxv 

VNto  thee  (O  God)  doe  we  geue 
thankes  :  yea,  vnto  thee  doe  we  geue 
thankes. 

Thy  name  also  is  so  nye  :  and  that 
doe  thy  wonderous  workes  declare. 

When  I  receiue  the  congregacion  : 
I  shal  iudge  accordyng  vnto  right. 

The  earth  is  weake,  and  all  the 
inhabitours  therof :  I  beare  vp  the 
pillers  of  it. 

I  sayed  vnto  the  fooles,  deale  not  so 
madly  :  and  to  the  vngodly,  set  not  vp 
your  home. 

Sette  not  vp  your  home  on  hye  :  and 
speake  not  with  a  stiffe  necke. 

For  promocion  commeth  neither 
from  the  East,  nor  from  the  West  : 
nor  yet  from  the  Southe. 

And  why?  GOD  is  the  iudge:  he 
putteth  downe  one  and  setteth  vp 
an  other. 

For  in  the  hande  of  the  Lorde  there 
is  a  cup,  and  the  wine  is  red  :  it  is  full 
mixte,  and  he  poureth  out  of  the  same. 

As  for  the  dregges  therof  :  all  the 
vngodly  of  the  yearth  shall  drinke 
them,  and  sucke  them  out. 


THE  THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


421 


1552 

By  whose  stripes  ye  wer  healed.    For 
ye  wer  as  shepe  goyng  astraye  :  but 
are  nowe,  turned  vnto  the  shepeheard, 
and  bishop  of  your  soules. 
C  The  Gospell. 

[      lohn.  x. 

Cnriste  sayed  to  his  disciples :  I 
am  the  good  shephearde,  a  good 
shepheard  geueth  his  life  for  the 
shepe.  An  hired  seruaunt, 

and  he  which  is  not  the  shepheard 
(neither  the  shepe  are  his  own)  seeth 
the  wolfe  commyng,  and  leaueth  the 
shepe  and  flieth,  and  the  wolf  catcheth 
and  skattereth  the  shepe.  The 
hired  seruaunt  flyeth,  because  he  is  an 
hired  seruaunte,  and  careth  not  for  the 
shepe.  I  am  the  good  shepeheard, 
and  know  my  shepe,  and  am  knowe 
of  mine.  As  my  father  knoweth 
me,  euen  so  knowe  I  also  my  father. 
And  I  geue  my  lyfe  for  the  shepe  : 
and  other  shepe  I  haue,  whiche  are 
not  of  this  folde.  Them  also  muste  I 
brynge,  and  they  shal  heare  my  voyce, 
and  there  shall  bee  one  folde,  and  one 
shepeheard. 

THE  THIRDE  SUNDAIE. 


1661 

by  whose  stripes  ye  were  healed.    For 
ye  were   as   sheep  going   astray  but 
are  now  returned  vnto  the  Shepherd, 
and  Bishop  of  your  Soules. 
The  Gospel. 

[S»:  lohn.  10.  *ll. 

lesus   said  ,  I 

am  the  good  Shepherd :  the  good 
Shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  the 
sheep.  But  he  that  is  an  hireling, 
and  not  the  shepherd, 

whose  own  the  sheep  are  not,  seeth 
the  wolfe  coming,  and  leaveth  the 
sheep,andfleeth:andthewolfecatcheth 
them,  and  scattereth  the  sheep.  The 
hireling  fleeth,  because  he  is  an 
hireling,  and  careth  not  for  the 
sheep.  I  am  the  good  shepherd, 
and  know  my  sheep,  and  am  known 
of  mine.  As  the  Father  knoweth 
me,  even  so  know  I  the  Father  : 

and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep. 
And  other  sheep  I  have,  which  are 
not  of  this  fold  :  them  also  I  must 
bring,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice  ; 
and  there  shall  be  one  fold,  and  one 
shepherd. 

THE  THIRD  SUNDAY  SAFTER  EASTER. 


422 


THE  THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 
DEUS,    qui    errantibus   vt    in   viam 

possint  redire  iustitie,  veritatis  tue 
lumen  ostendis  :  da  cunctis  qui  xpiana 
professione  censentur  :  et  ilia  respuere 
que  huic  inimica  sunt  nomini  et  ea 
que  sunt  apta  sectari.  Per  dominum. 

(Leon.  301) 

Lectio  epistole  beati  petri  apostoli. 

[i.  Pet  ii.  c 

Cnarissimi.  Obsecro  vos  tanquam 
aduenas  &  peregrines  abstinere  vos  a 
carnalibus  desiderijs :  que  militant 
aduersus  animam.  Conuersationem 
restrain  inter  gentes  habentes  bonam  : 
vt  in  eo  quod  detractant  de  vobis 
tanquam  de  malefactoribus,  ex  bonis 
operibus  vos  considerantes,  glorificent 
deum  in  die  visitationis.  Subiecti 
igitur  estote  omni  humane  creature : 
propter  deum.  Siue  regi,  quasi  pre- 
cellenti :  siue  ducibus  tanquam  ab  eo 
missis  ad  vindictam  malefactorum  : 
laudem  vero  bonorum.  Quia  sic  est 
voluntas  dei :  vt  benefacientes  obmu- 
tescere  faciatis  imprudentium  homi- 
num  ignorantiam.  Quasi  liberi,  et 
non  quasi  velamen  habentes  malitie 
libertatem.  Sed  sicut  serui  dei  omnes 
honorate :  fraternitatem  diligite.  Deum 
timete :  regem  honorificate.  Serui 
subditi  estote  in  omni  timore  dominis  : 
non  tantum  bonis  et  modestis,  sed 
etiam  dyscolis.  Hec  est  enim  gratia. 
In  xpo  iesu  :  domino  nostro. 
C  Secundum  iohannem. 

[xvi.  i> 

IN  illo  tempore  Dixit  iesus  discipulis 
suis.  Modicum  et  iam  non  yidebitis 
me :  et  iterum  modicum  et  videbitis 
me,  quia  vado  ad  patrem.  Dixe- 
runt  ergo  discipuli  eius  adinuicem. 


1549 

But  I  will  talke  of  the  God  of  lacob : 
and  prayse  hym  for  euer. 

All  the  homes  of  the  vngodly  also 
will  I  breake  :  and  the  homes  of  the 
righteous  shalbe  exalted. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer.  &c. 

The  Collect. 

ALmightie  God,  which  shewest  to 
all  men  that  be  in  errour,  the  light 
of  thy  trueth,  to  the  intent  that  they 
may  returne  into  the  waye  of  right- 
eousnes :  Graunte  vnto  all  them 
that  be  admitted  into  the  felowship 
of  Christes  religion,  that  they  may 
exchewe  those  thinges  that  be  con- 
trarye  to  their  profession,  and  folowe 
all  suche  thynges  as  bee  agreable  to 
the  same  :  through  our  Lorde  Iesus 
Christe. 

The  Epistle. 

[i.      Peter,  ii. 

DErely  beloued,  I  beseche  you  as 
straungiers  and  pilgriemes,  abstaine 
fro  fleshly  lustes,  which  fight  agaynst 
the  soule :  and  see  that  ye  haue 
honest  conuersacion  amonge  the 
Gentiles,  that  where  as  they  backbite 
you  as  euill  doers,  they  maye 
see  youre  good  workes, 
and  prayse  God  in  the  day  of 
visitacion.  Submyt  your  selfes  ther- 
fore,  vnto  al  maner  ordinaunce  of 
man,fortheLordes  sake,  whether  it  bee 
vnto  the  kyng  as  vnto  the  chiefe  head: 
eyther  vnto  rulers,  as  vnto  them  that 
are  sent  of  him,  for  the  punishment 
of  euil  doers,  but  for  the  laude  of 
them  that  do  well.  .For  so  is  the 
wil  of  God,  that  wyth  well  doyng,  ye 
may  stop  the  mouthes  of  foolishe  and 
ignoraunte  men  :  as  free,  and  not  as 
hauyng  the  libertye  for  a  cloke  of 
maliciousnes,  but  euen  as  the  ser- 
uauntes  of  God.  Honour  all  menne, 
loue  brotherly  felowshyp,  feare  God, 
honor  the  Kyng. 

The  Gospell. 

[    lohn.  xvi. 

IESUS  sayed  to  his  disciples  :  After 
a  while  ye  shal  not  see  me,  and 
agayne,  after  a  whyle  ye  shal  see 
me  :  for  I  go  to  the  father.  Then 
sayed  some  of  his  disciples  betwene 


THE  THIRD  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 
1552  1661 


423 


C  The  Collect. 

ALmightie  GOD,  whiche  sheweste  to 
all  men  that  bee  in  erroure,  the  lyghte 
of  thy  trueth,  to  the  intente  that  thei 
may  returne  into  the  waye  of  ryght- 
eousnesse :  Graunte  vnto  all  them 
that  be  admitted  into  the  felowshyp 
of  Chrystes  relygion,  that  they  maye 
exchew  those  thynges  that  be  con 
trary  to  theyr  profession,  and  folowe 
all  suche  thynges  as  bee  agreable  to 
the  same  :  throughe  our  Lorde  lesus 
Chryste. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[i.      Pete.  ii. 

DErely  beloued,  I  beseche  you  as 
straungers  and  pilgriemes,  abstaine 
fro  fleshly  lustes,  which  fight  against 
the  soule :  and  see  that  ye  haue 
honest  conuersacio  among  the 
Gentiles,  that  wheras  they  backbite 
you  as  euil  doers,  they  may 
see  your  good  workes, 
and  prayse  god  in  the  daye  of 
visytacion.  Submit  your  selfes  ther- 
fore,  euery 

man  for  the  Lordes  sake,  whether  it  be 
vnto  the  kyng  as  vnto  the  chiefe  head  : 
either  vnto  rulers,  as  vnto  them  that 
are  sent  of  hym,  for  the  punishmente 
of  euill  doers,  but  for  the  laude  of 
them  that  dooe  well.  For  so  is  the 
wyll  of  god,  that  with  well  doing,  ye 
may  stop  the  mouthes  of  folish  and 
ignoraunt  men  :  as  free,  and  not  as 
hauyng  the  libertie  for  a  cloke  of 
maliciousnes,  but  euen  as  the  ser- 
uauntes  of  god.  Honoure  all  men, 
loue  brotherly  felowship,  feare  God, 
honor  the  kyng. 

<I  The  Gospell. 

[     loh.  xvi. 

IESUS  sayed  to  hys  disciples  :  After 
a  while  ye  shall  not  see  me,  and 
againe  after  a  while  ye  shal  se 
me  :  for  I  goe  to  the  father.  Then 
sayed  some  of  his  disciples  betwene 


The  Collect. 

Almighty  God,  who8  shewest  to 
them  that  be  in  errour,  the  light 
of  thy  truth,  to  the  Intent  that  they 
may  return  into  the  way  of  right 
eousness  ;  grant  vnto  all  them 
that  are  admitted  into  the  fellowship 
of  Christs  religion,  that  they  may 
eschew  those  things  that  are  con 
trary  to  their  profession,  and  follow 
all  such  things  as  are  agreable  to 
the  same  through  our  Lord  lesus 
Christ.  6Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[j.  S»:  Pet.  2.  411. 

Dearly  beloved,  I  beseche  you  as 
strangers,  and  Pilgrims,  abstain 
from  fleshly  lusts,  which  warr  against 
the  soul.  Having  your 

conversation  honest  among  the 
Gentiles,  that  whereas  they  speak 
against  you  as  evil  doers,  they  may 
by  your  good  works  which  they  shall 
behold,  glorifie  God,  in  the  day  of 
visitation.  Submit  your  selves 

to  every  ordinance  of 
man  for  the  Lords  sake,  Whether  it  be 
to  the  King,  as  supreme,  or 
vnto  governors,  as  vnto  them  that 
are  sent  by  him  for  the  punishment 
of  evil  doers,  and  for  the  praise  of 
them  that  do  well.  For  so  is  the 
will  of  God,  that  with  well  doing  ye 
may  put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of 
foolish  men.  As  free,  and  not 
vsing  your  liberty  for  a  cloak  of 
maliciousness,  but  as  the  ser 

vants  of  God.  Honour  all  men. 
Love  the  brotherhood.  Fear  God. 
Honour  the  King. 

The  Gospel. 

[St:  lohn.  16.  416. 

Jesus  said  to  his  Disciples.  A  little 
while  and  ye  shall  not  see  mee  :  and 
again,  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see 
me,  because  J  goe  to  the  Father.  Then 
said  some  of  his  disciples  among 


424 


THE  FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


SOURCES 

Quid  est  hoc  quod  dicit  nobis,  modi 
cum  et  non  videbitis  me:  et  iterum 
modicum  et  videbitis  me,  quia  vado  ad 
patrem?  Dicebant  ergo.  Quid  est 
hoc  quod  dicit  modicum  ?  Nescimus 
quid  loquitur.  Cognouit  autem  iesus 
quia  volebant  eum  interrogare ;  & 
dixit  eis.  De  hoc  queritis  inter  vos, 
quia  dixi  modicum  et  non  videbitis 
me :  &  iterum  modicum  et  videbitis 
me.  Amen  amen  dico  vobis  quia 
plorabitis  et  flebitis  vos :  mundus 
autem  gaudebit.  Vos  autem  contris- 
tabimini :  sed  tristitia  vestra  vertetur 
in  gaudium.  Mulier  cum  parit  tris- 
titiam  habet :  quia  venit  hora  eius. 
Cum  autem  peperit  puerum  :  iam  non 
meminit  pressure  propter  gaudium, 
quia  natus  est  homo  in  mundum.  Et 
vos  igitur  nunc  quidem  tristitiam 
habetis.  Iterum  autem  videbo  vos  : 
et  gaudebit  cor  vestrum.  Et  gaudium 
vestrum  nemo  toilet  a  vobis. 

Missa  dominicalis.  hebdo  .iiij.  post  pascha. 

Officium. 
[Ps.  xcvii  (xcviii)  la,  2b  :  Ib] 


1549 

themselues:  what  is  this  that  hesayeth 
vnto  vs,  after  a  whyle  ye  shall  not 
see  me,  and  agayne,  after  a  whyle 
ye  shall  see  me,  and  that  I  go 
to  the  father  ?  They  sayed  therfore  : 
what  is  this  that  he  sayeth,  after  a 
whyle  ?  We  canot  tell  what  he  sayth. 
Iesus  perceyued  that  they  would 
aske  hym,  and  sayed  vnto 
them  :  ye  inquire  of  this  betwene 
your  selfes,  because  I  sayed,  after  a 
whyle  ye  shall  not  see  me,  and 

agayne  after  a  whyle  ye  shall  see 
me.  Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you  : 
ye  shall  wepe  and  lament :  but 
contrary  wyse,  the  worlde  shall  re- 
ioyce.  Ye  shall  sorowe,  but 

your  sorowe  shalbe  turned  to  ioy. 
A  woman  when  she  trauayleth  hath 
sorowe,  because  her  houre  is  come. 
But  assone  as  she  is  delyuered  of  the 
chylde,  she  remembreth  no  more  the 
anguishe,  forioye  that  a  manne  is  borne 
into  the  worlde.  And  ye  nowe  ther 
fore  haue  sorowe  :  but  I  wyll  see  you 
agayne,  and  youreheartes  shall  reioyse, 
and  youreioye  shall  no  manne  take  from 
you. 

C  THE  .iiii.  SONDAYE. 

[Deus  stetit  in  Sinagoga.  psal.  Ixxxiii 

GOD  standeth  in  the  congregacion 
of  princes  :  He  is  iudge  emong  Gods. 

Howe  long  wyll  ye  geue  wrong 
iudgement  :  and  accept  the  persons 
of  the  vngodly  ? 

Defende  the  poore  and  fatherlesse  : 
see  that  suche  as  bee  in  nede  and 
necessitie  haue  right. 

Delyuer  the  outcaste  and  poore  : 
Saue  them  from  the  hande  of  the 
vngodly. 

They  wyll  not  be  learned  nor  vnder- 
stande,  but  walke  on  styll  in  darke- 
nesse  :  all  the  foundacyons  of  the 
yearth  be  out  of  course. 

I  haue  sayed,  ye  are  Gods  :  and  ye 
all  are  chyldren  of  the  moste  highest. 

But  ye  shall  dye  lyke  men  :  and  fal 
lyke  one  of  the  princes. 

Arise,  O  God,  and  iudge  thou  the 
earth  :  For  thou  shalt  take  all  the 
Heathen  to  thyne  inheritaunce. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe. 
&c. 


THE  FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


425 


1552 

themselues :  what  is  this  that  he  sayeth 
vnto  vs  ?  after  a  whyle  ye  shall  not 
see  me,  and  agayne  after  a  whyle 
ye  shall  see  me,  and  that  I  goe 
to  the  father  ?  They  sayed  therfore, 
what  is  thys  that  he  sayeth,  after  a 
whyle  ?  We  cannot  tell  what  he  sayeth. 
lesus  perceiued  that  they  woulde 
aske  hym,  and  saied  vnto 
them  :  ye  inquire  of  this  betwene 
youre  selfes,  because  I  sayed,  after  a 
whyle  ye  shal  not  see  me,  and 

agayne  after  a  while  ye  shal  see 
me.  Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you  : 
ye  shall  wepe  and  lament :  but 
contrary  wyse,  the  world  shall  re- 
ioyce.  Ye  shal  sorowe,  but 

your  sorowe  shalbe  turned  to  ioye. 
A  woman  when  she  trauaileth  hath 
sorowe,  because  her  houre  is  come. 
But  assone  as  she  is  deliuered  of  the 
chylde,  she  remembreth  no  more  the 
anguishe,  for  ioye  that  a  man  is  borne 
into  the  world.  And  ye  now  ther 
fore  haue  sorowe  :  but  I  wyl  see  you 
agayne,  and  youre  heartes  shall  reioyce, 
and  your  ioye  shall  no  man  take  from 
you. 

THE  FOURTH  SUNDAIE. 


1661 

themselves,  what  is  this  that  he  saith 
vnto  vs,  A  little  while  and  ye  shall  not 
see  mee  :  And  again,  a  little  while,  and 
ye  shall  see  me  :  and  because  I  go 
to  the  Father.  They  said  therefore, 
What  is  this  that  he  saith,  A  little 
while  ?  We  cannot  tell  what  he  saith. 
Now  Jesus  knew  that  they  were  de 
sirous  to  aske  him,  and  said  vnto 
them,  Do  ye  enquire  among  your 
selves  of  that  I  said,  A  little 
while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  me.  and 
again  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see 
me  ?  verily,  verily  I  say  vnto  you, 
that  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  but 
the  world  shall  re- 
joyce :  and  ye  shall  be  sorrowfull,  but 
your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  ioy. 
A  woman  when  she  is  in  travail,  hath 
sorrow  because  her  hour  is  come : 
but  as  soone  as  she  is  delivered  of  the 
childe,  she  remembreth  no  more  the 
anguish,  for  ioy  that  a  man  is  born 
into  the  world.  And  ye  now  there 
fore  have  sorrow  :  but  I  will  see  you 
againe,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoyce, 
and  your  Joy  no  man  taketh  from 
you. 

THE  FOURTH  SUNDAY  'AFTER  EASIER. 


426 


THE  FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


SOURCES 
Oratio. 
DEUS    qui    fidelium    mentes    vnius 

efficis  voluntatis:  da  populis  tuis  id 
amare  quod  precipis,  id  desiderare 
quod  promittis  vt  inter  mundanas 
varietates,  ibi  nostra  fixa  sint  corda  vbi 
vera  sunt  gaudia.  Per  dominum. 

(Gel.  i  59) 

Lectio  epistole  beati  iacobi  apostoli 

[i.  c 

Cnarissimi.  Omne  datum  optimum, 
et  omne  donum  perfectum  desursum 
est:  descendens  a  patre  luminum. 
Apud  quern  non  est  transmutatio  :  nee 
vicissitudinis  obumbratio.  Voluntarie 
enim  genuit  nos  verbo  veritatis :  vt 
simus  initium  aliquod  creature  eius. 
Scitis  fratres  mei  dilectissimi.  Sit 
autem  omnis  homo  velox  ad  audien- 
dum  :  tardus  autem  ad  loquendum,  et 
tardus  ad  iram.  Ira  enim  viri :  ius- 
titiam  dei  non  operatur.  Propter  quod 
abijcientes  omnem  immunditiam,  & 
abundantiam  malitie :  in  mansuetudine 
suscipite  insitum  verbum.  Quod  potest 
saluare,  animas  vestras. 

Secundum  lohannem. 

[xvi.  B 

IN  illo  tempore.  Dixit  iesus  dis- 
cipulis  suis.  Vado  ad  eum  qui  misit 
me :  et  nemo  ex  vobis  interrogat  me, 
quo  vadis.  Sed  quia  hec  locutus  sum 
vobis  :  tristitia  impleuit  cor  vestrum. 
Sed  ego  veritatem  dico  vobis  :  expedit 
vobis  vt  ego  vadam.  Si  enim  non 
abiero :  paraclitus  non  veniet  ad  vos. 
Si  autem  abiero  :  mittam  eum  ad  vos. 
Et  cum  venerit  ille :  arguet  mundum 
de  peccato,  &  de  iustitia,  et  de  iudicio. 
De  peccato  quidem  :  quia  non  credi- 
derunt  in  me.  De  iustitia  vero  :  quia 
ad  patrem  vado,  et  iam  non  videbitis 
me.  De  iudicio  autem  :  quia  princeps 
huius  mundi  iam  iudicatus  est.  Adhuc 
multa  habeo  vobis  dicere :  sed  non 
potestis  portare  modo.  Cum  autem 


1549 

The  Collect. 

ALmyghtie  God,  whiche  doest 
make  the  myndes  of  all  faythfull 
menne  to  be  of  one  wyll:  Grauntevnto 
thy  people,  that  they  maye  loue  the 
thynge,  which  thou  commaundest, 
and  desyre  that  whyche  thou  doest 
promes,  that  emong  the  sundery 
and  manyfolde  chaunges  of  the  worlde, 
oure  heartes  maye  surely  there  be 
fixed,  where  as  true  ioyes  are  to  be 
fouride  :  Through  Christe  our 

Lorde. 

The  Epistle. 

[      lames,  i. 

Euery  good  gifte,  and  euery  per 
fect  gyfte,  is  from  aboue,  &  commeth 
downe  from  the  father  of  lightes,  with 
whom  is  no  variablenes,  neyther 
is  he  chauged  vnto  darkenes.  Of  hys 
owne  wyll  begate  he  vs,  with  the 
worde  of  trueth,  that  we  shoulde  be 
the  firste  fruites  of  his  creatures. 
Wherfore  (  dere  brethren)  lette 
euery  man  be  swyft  to  heare,  slowe 
to  speake,  slowe  to  wrathe.  For  the 
wrathe  of  man  worketh  not  that 
whiche  is  ryghteous  before  God. 
Wherfore  laye  aparte  all  fylthynes, 
and  superfluitie  of  maliciousnes,  & 
receiue  with  mekenes  the  worde  that 
is  graffed  in  you,  whyche  is  able  to 
saue  your  soules. 

The  Gospell. 

[      John.  Xvi. 

IESUS  sayed  vnto  hys  disciples : 
nowe  I  goe  my  waye  to  him  that  sent 
me,  and  none  of  you  asketh  me 
whyther  I  goe.  But  because  I 
haue  sayed  suche  thynges  vnto  you, 
youre  heartes  are  full  of  sorowe. 
Neuertheles,  I  tel  you  the  trueth  :  it 
is  expedient  for  you,  that  I  go  away. 
For  if  I  go  not  away,  that  com 
forter  wyll  not  come  vnto  you.  But 
if  I  depart,  I  wyll  sende  hym  vnto 
you.  And  when  he  is  come,  he  wyll 
rebuke  the  worlde  of  sinne,  and  of 
ryghteousnes,  and  of  iudgement.  Of 
synne,  because  they  beleue  not  on 
me  :  Of  ryghteousnes,  because  I  go 
to  my  father,  and  ye  shall  see  me  no- 
more  :  Of  Judgement,  because  the 
Prince  of  thys  worlde  is  Judged  already. 
I  haue  yet  many  thynges  to  saye  vnto 
you,  but  ye  cannot  beare  them  awaye 


THE  FOURTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


427 


1552 

C  The  Collecte. 

ALmyghtie  God,  which  doest 
make  the  mindes  of  all  faythfull 
menne  to  be  of  one  will :  Graunte  vnto 
thy  people,  that  they  maye  loue  the 
thynge,  whiche  thou  commaudest, 
and  desyre  that  which  thou  doest 
promesse  :  that  emong  the  sondry 
and  manyfold  chauges  of  the  world, 
our  heartes  may  surely  there  be 
fixed,  whereas  true  ioyes  are  to  be 
founde  :  Throughe  Christ  our 

Lorde. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[      lames,  i. 

Euerye  good  gyfte,  and  euerye  per- 
fecte  gift,  is  from  aboue,  and  commeth 
down  from  the  father  of  lyghtes,  with 
whom  is  no  variableness,  neither 
shadowe  of  chaunge.  Of  hys 
owne  wyll  begate  he  vs  with  the 
woorde  of  trueth,  that  we  shoulde  bee 
the  fyrste  fruytes  of  hys  creatures. 
Wherfore  (  dere  brethren)  let 

euery  manne  be  swifte  to  heare,  slowe 
to  speake,  slowe  to  wrathe.  For  the 
wrath  of  man  worketh  not  that 
whiche  is  righteous  beefore  god. 
Wherfore  lay  apart  al  fylthines, 
and  superfluitie  of  maliciousnes,  and 
receiue  with  mekenes  the  worde  yfc 
is  grafted  in  you,  whiche  is  able  to 
saue  your  souls. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[       loh.  xvi. 

IESUS  sayde  vnto  his  disciples : 
nowe  I  goe  my  waye  to  him  that  sent 
me,  and  none  of  you  asketh  me 
whither  I  goe.  But  because  I 
haue  said  such  thinges  vnto  you, 
your  heartes  are  full  of  sorowe. 
Neuerthelesse,  I  tell  you  the  trueth  :  it 
is  expedient  for  you  that  I  goe  awaye. 
For  if  I  goe  not  awaye,  that  com 
forter  will  not  come  vnto  you.  But 
if  I  departe,  I  wil  sende  him  vnto 
you.  And  when  he  is  come,  he  will 
rebuke  the  worlde  of  synne,  and  of 
ryghteousnes,  and  of  iudgement.  Of 
sinne,  because  they  beleue  not  on 
me :  Of  righteousnesse,  because  I  goe 
to  my  father,  and  ye  shall  see  me  no 
more :  Of  ludgemet,  because  the 
prince  of  this  worlde  is  iudged  alreadye. 
I  haue  yet  manye  thynges  to  saye  vnto 
you,  but  ye  cannot  beare  them  awaye 


1661 
The  Collect. 

0  Almighty  God,  who8  alone  canst 
order  the  ynruly  Wills,  and  affec 
tions  of  sinfull  men  :  grant  vnto 
thy  people,  that  they  may  love  the 
thing  which  thou  comandest, 
and  desire  that  which  thou  dost 
promise,  that  so  among  the  sundry, 
and  manyfold  changes  of  the  world, 
our  hearts  may  surely  there  be 
fixed  where  true  ioyes  are  to  be 
found,  through  8Iesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  6Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[St:  lam.  i.  -117: 

Every  good  gift,  and  every  per 
fect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh 
down  from  the  Father  of  lights,  with 
whom  is  no  variableness,  neither 
shadow  of  turning.  Of  his 
own  will  begat  he  vs  with  the 
word  of  truth,  that  we  should  be 
a  kind  of  first  fruits  of  his  creatures. 
Wherefore  my  beloved  bretheren,  let 
every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  slow 
to  speak,  slow  to  wrath.  For  the 
wrath  of  man  worketh  not 
the  righteousness  of  God ; 
Wherefore  lay  apart  all  filthiness, 
and  superfluity  of  naughtiness,  and 
receive  with  meekness,  the  ingrafted 
word,  which  is  able  to 
save  your  souls. 

The  Gospel. 

[St:  lohn.  16.  <5. 

Jesus  said  vnto  his  Disciples. 
Now  J  goe  my  way  to  him  that  sent 
me,  and  none  of  you  asketh  me, 
whither  goest  thou  ?  But  because  I 
have  said  these  things  vnto  you, 
sorrow  hath  filled  your  heart. 
Nevertheless  J  tell  you  the  truth,  it 
is  expedient  for  you  that  I  goe  away  : 
for  if  J  go  not  away  the  Com 
forter  will  not  come  vnto  you  :  but 
if  J  depart  J  will  send  him  vnto 
you.  And  when  he  is  come  he  will 
reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of 
righteousness,  and  of  Iudgement.  of 
sin ;  because  they  believe  not  on 
me.  of  righteousness  ;  because  J  goe 
to  my  Father,  and  ye  see  me  no 
more,  of  Judgement ;  because  the 
prince  of  this  world  is  iudged 
J  have  yet  many  things  to  say  vnto 
you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them 


428 


THE  FIFTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


SOURCES 

venerit  ille  spiritus  veritatis :  docebit 
vos  omnem  veritatem.  Non  enim 
loquetur  a  semetipso,  sed  quecumque 
audiet  loquetur  :  &  que  ventura  sunt 
annuntiabit  vobis.  Ille  me  clarifica- 
bit :  quia  de  meo  accipiet :  et  annun 
tiabit  vobis.  Omnia  quecumque  habet 
pater  :  mea  sunt.  Propterea  dixi  quia 
de  meo  accipiet,  et  annunciabit 
vobis. 

IT  Missa  dominicalis.  hebd.  quinte  post 


Officium. 
[Isa.  xlviii  20:  Ps.  Ixv  (Ixvi)  1,  2] 


1549 

nowe,  howbeit  when  he  is  come, 
(whiche  is  the  spirite  of  trueth)  he  wyll 
leade  you  into  all  trueth.  He  shall 

not  speake  of  hymselfe,  but  whatsoeuer 
he  shal  heare,  that  shall  he  speake, 
and  he  wyll  shewe  you  thynges  to 
come.  He  shall  gloryfye  me,  for  he 
shall  receyue  of  myne,  and  shall 
shewe  vnto  you.  All  thinges  that 
the  father  hath,  are  mine:  therfore 
sayed  I  vnto  you,  that  he  shall  take  of 
mine,  and  shewe  vnto  you. 

CTHE   .V.   SONDAY. 

[Qua  dilecta  tabernacula.  Psal.  Ixxxiiii. 

O  Howeamyable  are  thy  dwellynges: 
Thou  Lorde  of  Hostes  ? 

My  soule  hath  a  desyre  and  longyng 
to  entre  into  the  courtes  of  the  Lorde : 
My  hearte  and  my  flesh  reioyce  in  the 
lyuing  God. 

Yea,  the  Sparowe  hath  foud  her  an 
house,  and  the  Swalow  a  nest  where 
she  may  lay  her  younge  :  Euen  thy 
altares,  O  Lorde  of  Hostes,  my  kyng 
and  my  God. 

Blessed  are  they  that  dwell  in  thy 
house:  they  willbealwayepraysingthee. 

Blessed  is  that  manne  whose 
strengthe  is  in  thee  :  In  whose  heart 
are  thy  wayes. 

Whiche  goynge  through  the  vale  of 
mysery,  vse  it  for  a  well  :  and  the 
pooles  are  filled  with  water. 

They  wyll  goe  from  strength  to 
strength  :  and  vnto  the  God  of  Gods 
appeareth  euery  one  of  them  in  Sion. 

0  Lorde  God  of  Hostes,  heare  my 
prayer  :  Harken  O  God  of  lacob. 

Beholde,  O  God,  our  defender  :  and 
loke  vpon  the  face  of  thyne  anoynted. 

For  one  day  in  thy  courtes  :  is 
better  then  a  thousande. 

1  had  rather  be  a  doore  keper  in 
the  house  of  my  God  :  then  to  dwell 
in  the  tentes  of  vngodlines. 

For  the  Lorde  God  is  a  light  and 
defence  :  the  Lorde  will  geue  grace 
and  worshyp,  and  no  good  thyng  shall 
he  withholde  from  them  that  liue  a 
godly  life. 

O  Lorde  God  of  Hostes  :  blessed  is 
the  manne  that  putteth  his  trust  in  thee. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe.  &c. 


THE  FIFTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


429 


1552 

nowe,  hovvebeit  when  he  is  come 
(whiche  is  the  spirite  of  trueth)  he  will 
leade  you  into  all  trueth.  He  shall 

not  speake  of  himself,  but  whatsoeuer 
he  shal  heare,  that  shall  he  speake  : 
and  he  will  shewe  you  thynges  to 
come.  He  shall  glorifye  me,  for  he 
shall  receyue  of  myne,  and  shall 
shewe  vnto  you.  All  thynges  that 
the  father  hath,  are  myne  :  therefore 
sayde  I  vnto  you,  that  he  shall  take  of 
myne,  and  shewe  vnto  you. 

THE  FIFTH  SUNDAIE. 


1661 

now.  Howbeit,  when  he  the  Spirit 
of  truth  is  come,  he  will 
guide  you  into  all  truth :  for  he  shall 
not  speak  of  himselfe  :  but  whatsoever 
he  shall  hear  that  shall  he  speak, 
and  he  will  shew  you  things  to 
come.  He  shall  glorifie  me  :  for  he 
shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall 
shew  it  vnto  you.  All  things  that 
the  Father  hath,  are  mine  :  therefore 
said  I,  that  he  shall  take  of 

mine,  and  shall  shew  it  vnto  you. 

THE  FIFTH  SUNDAY  SAFTER  EASTEB. 


43° 


THE  FIFTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


SOURCES 

Oratio. 
DEUS  a  quo  cuncta  bona  procedunt, 

largire  supplicibus  tuis  vt  cogitemus 
te  inspirante  que  recta  sunt :  et  te 
gubernante  eadem  faciamus.  Per. 
(Gel.  i  60) 

Lectio  epistole  beati  iacobi  apostoli. 

[i.  D 

Cnarissimi.  Estote  factores  verbi, 
et  non  auditores  tantum :  fallentes 
vosmetipsos.  Quia  si  quis  est  auditor 
verbi  &  non  factor :  hie  comparabitur 
viro  consideranti  vultum  natiuitatis 
sue  in  speculo.  Considerauit  enim  se, 
et  abijt:  et  statim  oblitus  est  qualis 
fuerit.  Qui  autem  perspexerit  in  lege 
perfecte  libertatis,  et  permanserit  in 
ea  non  auditor  obliuiosus  factus,  sed 
factor  operis :  hie  beatus  in  facto  suo 
erit.  Si  quis  autem  putat  se  religiosum 
esse,  non  refrenans  linguam  suam,  sed 
seducens  cor  suum  :  huius  vana  est 
religio.  Religio  munda  &  immaculata 
apud  deum  et  patrem,,  hec  est :  visitare 
pupillos  et  viduas  in  tribulatione 
eorum.  Et  immaculatum  se  custodire  : 
ab  hoc  seculo. 

Secundum  iohannem. 

[xvi.  E 

IN  illo  tempore.  Dixit  iesus  dis- 
cipulis  suis.  Amen  amen  dico  vobis  : 
si  quid  petieritis  patrem  in  nomine 
meo  dabit  vobis.  Vsque  modo  non 
petistis  quicquid  in  nomine  meo. 
Petite,  et  accipietis :  vt  gaudium 
vestrum  sit  plenum.  Hec  in  pro- 
uerbiis  locutus  sum  vobis.  Venit 
hora,  cum  iam  non  in  prouerbijs 
loquar  vobis  :  sed  palam  de  patre  meo 
annunciabo  vobis.  Illo  die  in  nomine 
meo  petetis.  Et  non  dico  vobis :  quia 
ego  rogabo  patrem  de  vobis.  Ipse 
enim  pater  amat  vos  :  quia  vos  me 
amastis,  et  credidistis  quia  ego  a  deo 
exiui.  Exiui  a  patre :  &  veni  in 
mundum.  Iterum  relinquo  mundum  : 
et  vado  ad  patrem.  Dicunt  ei  dis- 
cipuli  eius.  Ecce  nunc  palam  loqueris  : 


1549 

The  Collect. 

Lorde,  from  whom  al  good  thinges 
do  come  :  graunt  vs  thy  humble 
seruauntes,  that  by  thy  holy  inspira- 
cion,  we  may  thinke  those  thinges 
that  be  good,  and  by  thy  mercifull 
guydyng  may  performe  the  same : 
thorowe  our  Lorde  Iesus  Christe. 

The  Epistle. 

[       James,  i. 

SE  that  ye  bee  doers  of  the  worde, 
and  not  hearers  onely,  deceyuyng  your 
owne  selfes.  For  yf  any  ma  heare 
the  worde,  and  declareth  not  the  same 
by  his  workes,  he  is  lyke  vnto  a  man 
beholdyng  his  bodely  face  in  a  glasse. 
For  assone  as  he  hath  looked  on  him- 
selfe,  he  goeth  his  waye,  and  fprgetteth 
immediatly  what  his  fashion  was. 
But  whoso  looketh  in  theperfectelawe 
of  lybertie,  and  continueth  therin  (if 
he  be  not  a  forgetfull  hearer,  but  a 
doer  of  the  worke)  the  same  shalbe 
happye  in  his  dede.  If  any  man  emong 
you  seme  to  be  deuout,  and  refraineth 
not  his  tonge,  but  deceiueth  his  owne 
hearte,thismannesdeuocionisinvayne. 
Pure  deuocion,  and  vndefiled  before 
God  the  father,  is  this  :  to  viset 

the  fatherles  and  widowes,  in  their 
aduersitie,  and  to  kepe  hymselfe  vn- 
spotted  of  the  worlde. 

The  Gospell. 

[       lohn.  xvi. 

VErely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you : 
whatsoeuer  ye  shall  aske  the  father  in 
my  name,  he  wyll  geue  it  you.  Hither 
to  haue  ye  asked  nothynge  in  my  name. 
Aske  and  ye  shall  receyue,thatyoureioy 
may  be  full.  These  thinges  haue  I 
spoken  vnto  you  by  prouerbes.  The 
tyme  wyll  come,  when  I  shall  no  more 
speake  vnto  you  by  prouerbes  :  but  I 
shall  shewe  you  playnlye  from  my 
father.  At  that  daye  shall  ye  aske  in 
my  name.  And  I  saye  not  vnto  you 
that  I  wil  speake  vnto  my  father  for 
you  :  For  the  father  hym  selfe  loueth 
you,  because  ye  haue  loued  me,  and 
haue  beleued  that  I  came  out  from 
God.  I  went  out  from  the  father,  and 
came  into  the  world.  Agayne,  I  leaue 
the  worlde,  and  go  to  the  father. 

Hys  disciples  sayed  vnto  hym :  Loe, 
nowe  talkest  thou  playnly,and  speakest 
no  Prouerbe.  Nowe  are  we  sure  that 


THE  FIFTH  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER 


1552 

€  The  Collect. 

Lorde,  from  whom  al  good  thynges 
dooe  come  :  graunte  vs  thy  humble 
seruauntes,  that  by  thy  holy  inspira- 
cio  we  may  thinke  those  thynges 
that  bee  good,  and  by  thy  merciful 
guiding  may  perfourme  the  same : 
thorowe  our  Lorde  lesus  Christ. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[       lames,  i. 

SEC  that  ye  be  doers  of  the  word, 
and  not  hearers  only,  deceiuing  your 
own  selfes.  For  yf  any  ma  heare 
the  worde,  and  declareth  not  thesame 
by  his  workes,  he  is  lyke  vnto  a  man 
beholdyng  his  bodelye  face  in  a  glasse. 
For  assone  as  he  hath  looked  on  hym- 
selfe,  he  goeth  hys  waye,  and  forgetteth 
immediatelye  what  his  fashion  was. 
But  whoso  looketh  in  the  perfect  lawe 
of  libertie,  and  continueth  therin  (yf 
he  be  not  a  forgetfull  hearer,  but  a 
doer  of  the  woorke)  thesame  shalbe 
happy  in  his  dede.  If  any  man  emong 
you  seme  to  be  deuoute,  and  refraineth 
not  his  tonge,  but  deceiueth  his  own 
heart,  this  mans  deuocion  is  in  vayne. 
Pure  deuocion,  and  vndefiled  before 
god  the  father,  is  this  :  to  viset 

the  fatherles  and  widowes,  in  theyr 
aduersitie,  and  to  kepe  himselfe  vn- 
spotted  of  the  worlde. 

e.  The  Gospel. 

[       loh.  xvi. 

VErely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you : 
whatsoeuer  ye  aske  the  father  in 

my  name,  he  wil  geue  it  you.  Hither 
to  haue  ye  asked  nothig  in  my  name. 
Aske  &  ye  shal  receiue,  that  your  ioy 
may  be  ful.  These  thinges  haue  I 
spoken  vnto  you  by  prouerbes.  The 
tyme  wyl  come,  when  I  shall  no  more 
speake  vnto  you  by  prouerbes  :  but  I 
shall  shewe  you  plainly  from  my 
father.  At  that  daye  shall  ye  aske  in 
my  name.  And  I  say  not  vnto  you 
that  I  wil  speake  vnto  the  father  for 
you  :  For  the  father  himself  loueth 
you,  because  ye  haue  loued  me,  and 
haue  beleued  that  I  came  out  from 
god.  I  went  out  from  the  father,  and 
came  into  the  world.  Agayne,  I  leaue 
the  worlde,  and  goe  to  the  father.- 

-  His  disciples  sayed  vnto  hym  :  Loe, 
nowe  thou  talkest  plainly,  and  speakest 
no  prouerbe.  Now  are  we  sure  that 


1661 

The  Collect. 

0  Lord,  from  whom  all  good  things 
do  come :  grant  to  vs  thy  humble 
servants,  that  by  thy  holy  inspira 
tion,  we  may  think  those  things 
that  be  good,  and  by  thy  mercifull 
guiding  may  performe  the  same, 
throughourLordlesusChrist.  lbAmen. 

The  Epistle. 

[St:  James  i.  <22. 
Be  ye  doers  of  the  word, 
and  not  hearers  only,  deceiving  your 
own  selves.  For  if  any  be  a  hearer 
of  the  word,  and  not  a 
doer  ;  he  is  like  vnto  a  man 
beholding  his  natural  face  in  a  glass. 
For  he  beholdeth  himselfe,  and  goeth 
his  way,  and  straightway  forgetteth 
what  maner  of  man  he  was. 
But  whoso  looketh  into  the  perfect  law 
of  liberty,  and  continueth  therein; 
he  being  not  a  forgetfull  hearer,  but  a 
doer  of  the  work,  this  man  shall  be 
blessed  in  his  deed.  Jf  any  man  among 
you  seem  to  be  religious,  and  bridleth 
not  his  tongue,  but  deceiveth  his  own 
heart,  this  mans  religion  is  vain. 
Pure  religion  and  vndefiled  before 
God,  and  the  Father,  is  this  ;  to  visit 
the  fatherless,  and  widows  in  their 
affliction,  and  to  keep  himselfe  vn- 
spotted  from  the  world. 

The  Gospell. 

[St:  John:  16:  <23 

Verily,  verily  I  say  vnto  you, 
whatsoever  ye  shall  aske  the  Father  in 
my  name,  he  will  give  it  you.  Hither 
to  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  my  name : 
ask,  and  ye  shall  receive  that  your  ioy 
may  be  full.  These  things  have  I 
spoken  vnto  you  in  proverbs :  the 
time  cometh  when  J  shall  no  more 
speak  vnto  you  in  proverbs,  but  J 
shall  shew  you  plainly  of  the 
Father.  At  that  day  ye  shall  aske  in 
my  name  :  and  I  say  not  vnto  you, 
that  I  will  pray  the  Father  for 

you  :  For  the  Father  himselfe  loveth 
you,  because  ye  have  loved  me,  and 
have  believed  that  I  came  out  from 
God.  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,and 
am  come  into  the  world :  again,  I  leave 
the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father. - 

-His  disciples  said  vnto  him,  Lo, 
nowspeakest  thou  plainly,and  speakest 
no  Proverb.  Now  are  we  sure  that 


432 


THE  ASCENSION  DAY 


SOURCES 

et  prouerbium  nullum  dicis.  Nunc 
scimus  quia  scis  omnia :  &  non  opus 
est  tibi  vt  quis  te  interroget.  In  hoc 
credimus  :  quia  a  deo  existi. 


1549 

thou  knowest  all  thynges,  and  nedest 
not  that  anye  manne  should  aske  thee 
any  questio  :  therfore  beleue  we,  that 
thou  earnest  from  God.  lesus 

aunswered  them :  nowe  ye  doe  beleue. 
Beholde,  the  houre  draweth  nye,  and  is 
already  come,  that  ye  shalbe  scattered 
euery  manne  to  hys  owne,  and  shal 
leaue  me  alone.  And  yet  am  I  not 
alone :  for  the  father  is  with  me. 
These  woordes  haue  I  spoken  vnto 
you,  that  in  me  ye  myght  haue  peace, 
for  in  the  worlde  shall  ye  haue  tribu- 
lacion  :  but  be  of  good  chere,  I  haue 
ouercome  the  worlde. 


C  In  die  ascensionis  domini. 


Officium. 
[Acts  i  11  :  10] 


<[  THE  ASCENCION  DAYE. 

<[  Proper  Psalmes  and  Lessons. 

At  Mattyns. 

'  vvi'lThesecondLesson-  Iohn-  xiiii- 
Psalm."  xxL /vnto  the  ende. 

C  At  the  Communion. 
[Omnes  gentes  plaudite.  psal.  xlvii. 

O  Clap  your  handes  together  (all  ye 
people  :)  O  syng  unto  God  with  the 
voyce  of  melody. 

For  the  Lorde  is  hye  and  to  be 
feared  :  He  is  the  great  king  vpon  all 
the  earth. 

He  shall  subdue  the  people  vnder 
vs  :  And  the  nacions  vnder  our 
fete. 

He  shall  chose  out  an  heritage  for 
vs  :  euen  the  worshyp  of  lacob  whom 
he  loued. 

God  is  gone  vp  with  a  mery  noyse  : 
And  the  Lorde  with  the  sounde  of  the 
trompe. 

O  synge  prayses,  syng  prayses  vnto 
cure  God  :  O  syng  prayses,  syng 
prayses  vnto  our  kyng. 

For  God  is  the  king  of  all  the 
earth  :  syng  ye  prayses  wyth  vnder- 
standing. 

God  reigneth  ouer  the  heathen  : 
God  sitteth  vpon  hys  holy  seate. 

The  princes  of  the  people  are  ioyned 
to  the  people  of  the  God  of  Abraham  : 
for  God  (whyche  is  verye  hye  exalted) 
doeth  defende  the  earth,  as  it  were 
with  a  shylde. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe. 
&c. 


THE  ASCENSION  DAY 


433 


1552 

thou  knowest  all  thynges,  and  nedest 
not  that  any  man  should  aske  thee 
any  questyo  :  therfore  beleue  we,  that 
thou  earnest  from  God.  lesus 

answered  them:  now  ye  doe  beleue. 
Behold,  the  houre  draweth  nye,  and  is 
already  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattered 
euery  man  to  hys  own,  and  shal 
leaue  me  alone.  And  yet  am  I  not 
alone  :  for  the  father  is  with  me. 
These  wordes  haue  I  spoken  vnto 
you,  that  in  me  ye  might  haue  peace, 
for  in  the  worlde  shall  ye  haue  tribu- 
lacion  :  but  bee  of  good  chere,  I  haue 
ouercome  the  worlde. 


1661 

thou  knowest  all  things,  and  needest 
not  that  any  man  should  aske  thee 
:  by  this  we  believe  that 
thou  earnest  forth  from  God.  Jesus 
answered  them,  Do  ye  now  believe? 
Behold  the  houre  cometh,  yea,  is 
now  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattered, 
every  man  to  his  own,  and  shall 
leave  me  alone  :  and  yet  I  am  not 
alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  me. 
These  things  I  have  spoken  vnto 
you,  that  in  me  ye  might  have  peace, 
in  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribu- 
lation  :  but  be  of  good  cheer,  I  have 
overcome  the  world 


THE  ASCENCION  DAIE. 


THE  ASCENSION  DAY. 


434 


THE  ASCENSION  DAY 


SOURCES 

Oratio. 

Concede  quesumus  omnipotens 
deus  :  vt  qui  hodierna  die  vnigenitum 
tuum  redemptorem  nostrum  ad  celos 
ascendisse  credimus  ipsi  quoque  mente 
in  celestibus  habitemus.  Per  eundem 
[dominum  nostrum  iesum  christum 
filium  tuum  qui  tecum  viuit  et  regnat 
in  vnitate  spiritus  sancti  deus  per  omnia 
secula  seculorum.]  (Greg.  85) 

Lectio  actuum  apostolorum. 


quidem  sermonen  feci  de 
omnibus  o  theophile,  que  cepit  iesus 
facere  et  docere  :  vsque  in  diem  qua 
precipiens  apostolis  per  spiritum 
sanctum,  quos  elegit  assumptus  est. 
Quibus  &  prebuit  seipsum  viuum 
post  passionem  suam  in  multis  argu- 
mentis  :  per  dies  quadraginta  apparens 
eis  et  loquens  de  regno  dei.  Et  con- 
uescens  precepit  eis  ab  hierosolymis  ne 
discederent  :  sed  expectarent  promis- 
sionem  patris  :  quam  audistis  inquit 
per  os  meum.  Quia  iohannes  quidem 
baptizauit  aqua:  vos  autem  baptiza- 
bimini  spiritu  sancto  :  non  post  multos 
hos  dies.  Igitur  qui  conuenerant  : 
interrogabant  eum  dicentes.  Domine, 
si  in  tempore  hoc  restitues  regnum 
israel?  Dixit  autem  eis.  Non  est 
vestrum  nosse  tempora  vel  momenta 
que  pater  posuit  in  sua  potestate  :  sed 
accipietis  virtutem  superuenientis 
spiritus  sancti  in  vos.  Et  eritis  michi 
testes  in  hierusalem,  &  in  omni  iudea 
et  samaria,  et  vsque  ad  vltimum  terre. 
Et  cum  hec  dixisset  videntibus  illis 
eleuatus  est  :  &  nubes  suscepit  eum  ab 
oculis  eorum.  Cumque  intuerentur  in 
celum  euntem  ilium  :  ecce  duo  viri 
astiterunt  iuxta  illos  in  vestibus  albis, 
qui  &  dixerunt.  Viri  galilei  :  quid 
statis  aspicientes  in  celum  ?  Hie  iesus 


1549 

The  Collect. 

GRaunt  we  beseche  thee  almightie 
God,  that  like  as  we  doe  beleue  thy 
onely  begotten  sonne  our  Lorde 

to  haue  ascended  into  the 
heauens  :  so  we  maye  also  in  hearte 
and  minde  thither  ascende,  and  with 
him  continually  dwell. 


The  Epistle. 

[Actes.  i. 

IN  the  former  treatise  (deare  Theo- 
philus)  we  haue  spoken  of  all  that 
Iesus  began  to  doe  and  teache 

vntyll  the  day  in  which  he  was  taken 
vp,  after  that  he  through  the  holy 
goste,  had  geuen  commaundemetes 
vnto  the  Apostles,  whome  he  had 
chosen,  to  whome  also  he  shewed  him- 
selfe  aliue  after  his  passion  (and  that 
by  many  tokens)  appearyng 

unto  the  .xl.  dayes  and  speak- 
yng  of  the 

kyngdome  of  God,  and  gathered  them 
together,  and  commaunded  them 
that  they  should  not  departe  from 
Jerusalem :  but  to  wayte  for  the  promes 
of  the  father,  wherof  (sayeth  he)  ye 
haue  heard  of  me.  For  lohn  truelye 
baptised  wyth  water  :  but  ye  shalbe 
baptised  with  the  holy  gost,  after 
these  fewe  dayes.  When  they  there 
fore  were  come  together,  they  asked 
of  him,  saying :  lord,  wilt  thou  at 
this  time  restore  agayne  the  king 
dom  to  Israel?  And  he  sayde  vnto 
the  :  it  is  not  for  you  to  knowe  the 
times  or  the  seasons,  which  the  father 
hath  put  in  hys  owne  power.  But  ye 
shall  receyue  power  after  that  the  holy 
gost  is  come  vpon  you.  And  ye 
shall  bee  wytnesses  vnto  me,  not  onely 
inlerusalem,butalsoinallewry,andin 

Samaria,  &  euen  vnto  the  worldes 
ende.  And  when  he  had  spoken 
these  thynges,  while  they  beheld,  he 
was  taken  vp  on  hye,  and  a  cloude 
receyued  him  vp  out  of  their  syght. 
And  while  they  loked  stedfastly  vp 
toward  heauen  as  he  wente  ,  beholde, 
two  men  stoode  by  them  in  white 
apparell,  whiche  also  sayed :  ye  men  of 
Galile,  whye  stand  ye  gasing  vp  into 
heauen  ?  This  same  Iesus  whiche  is 


THE  ASCENSION  DAY 


435 


1552 

€  The  Collect. 

GRaunt  we  beseche  thee  almightie 
god,  that  lyke  as  we  doe  beleue  thy 
only  begotte  sonne  our  Lord 

to  haue  ascended  into  the 
heauens  :  so  we  may  also  in  heart 
and  mynde  thither  ascende,  and  wyth 
hym  continually  dwel. 


C  The  Epistle. 

[Actes.  i. 

IN  the  former  treatyse  (deare  Theo- 
philus)  we  haue  spoken  of  all  that 
lesus  began  to  doe  and  teache, 

vntyll  the  daye  in  which  he  was  take 
vp,  after  that  he  throughe  the  holye 
ghost,  had  geuen  commaundemetes 
vnto  the  Apostles,  whom  he  hadde 
chosen,  to  whom  he  also  shewed  hym- 
selfe  alyue  after  hys  passion,  (and  that 
by  many  tokens)  appearing 

vnto  them  fortye  dayes,  and  speak  - 
ynge  of  the 

kyngdome  of  God,  and  gathered  them 
together,  and  commaunded  them 
that  they  should  not  depart  from 
lerusale:  but  to  wayte  for  the  promes 
of  the  father,  whereof  (sayth  he)  ye 
haue  heard  of  me.  For  lohn  truely 
baptysed  with  water :  but  ye  shalbe 
baptysed  with  the  holy  ghost,  after 
these  fewe  dayes.  When  they  there 
fore  were  come  together,  they  asked 
of  hym,  saying  :  Lorde,  wylt  thou  at 
thys  tyme  restore  agayne  the  kyng 
dome  of  Israel?  And  he  sayde  vnto 
them  :  it  is  not  for  you  to  know  the 
tymes  or  the  seasons,  whych  the  father 
hath  put  in  hys  owne  power.  But  ye 
shall  receyue  power  after  the  holy 
ghost  is  come  vpon  you.  And  ye 
shal  be  wytnesses  vnto  me,  not  onely 
in  Ierusalem,butalsoinalllewry,  in 
all  Samaria,  and  euen  vnto  the  worldes 
ende.  And  when  he  had  spoken 
these  thinges,  whyle  they  behelde,  he 
was  taken  vp  on  hye,  and  a  cloude 
receyued  him  vp  oute  of  theyr  syghte. 
And  whyle  they  looked  stedfastlye  vp 
towarde  heauen  as  he  went  ,  beholde, 
two  men  stoode  by  the  in  whyte 
apparel,  which  also  sayde  :  ye  men  of 
Galile,  why  stande  ye  gasinge  vp  into 
heauen?  Thys  same  lesus  whych  is 


1661 

The  Collect. 

Grant,  we  beseech  thee  Almighty 
God,  that  like  as  we  do  believe  thy 
only  begotten  Son  our  Lord  lesus 
Christ  to  have  ascended  into  the 
heavens  :  so  we  may  also  in  heart 
and  minde  thither  ascend,  and  with 
him  continually  dwell,  ^ho  liveth 
and  reigneth  with  thee,  and  the 
holy  Ghost,  one  God,  world  without 
end.*  Amen. 

9For  the  Epistle. 

[Acts.  i.  n. 

The  former  treatise  have  I 
made,  O  Theophilus,  of  all  that 
Jesus  began  both  to  do,  and  teach  ; 
vntill  the  day  in  which  he  was  taken 
vp,  after  that  he  through  the  holy 
Ghost  had  given  commandements 
vnto  the  Apostles  whom  he  had 
chosen.  To  whom  also  he  shewed  him- 
selfe  alive  after  his  passion 
by  many  infallible  proofs,  being  seen 
of  them  fourty  dayes,  and  speak 
ing  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the 
kingdomeofGod:  Andbeingassembled 
together  with  them,  commanded  them 
that  they  should  not  depart  from 
lerusalem,  but  wait  for  the  promise 
of  the  Father,  which,  saith  he,  ye 
have  heard  of  me.  For  lohn  truly 
baptized  with  water,  but  ye  shall  be 
baptized  with  the  holy  Ghost,  not 
many  dayes  hence.  When  they  there 
fore  were  come  together  they  asked 
of  him  saying,  Lord,  wilt  thou  at 
this  time  restore  again  the  King 
dom  to  Israel  ?  And  he  said  vnto 
them,  Jt  is  not  for  you  to  know  the 
times  or  the  seasons,  which  the  Father 
hath  put  in  his  own  power.  But  ye 
shall  receive  power  after  that  the  holy 
Ghost  is  come  vpon  you  ;  And  ye 
shall  be  witnesses  vnto  me,  both 
in  lerusalem,  and  in  all  Judea,  and  in 
Samaria,and  vnto  the  vttermost  part 
of  the  earth.  And  when  he  had  spoken 
these  things,  while  they  beheld,  he 
was  taken  vp  ,  and  a  cloud 

received  him  out  of  their  sight. 
And  while  they  looked  stedfastly 
towards  heaven,  as  he  went  vp,  behold, 
two  men  stood  by  them  in  white 
Apparell,  which  also  said,  Ye  men  of 
Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing  vp  into 
heaven  ?  this  same  lesus  which  is 


436 


THE  SUNDAY  AFTER  ASCENSION  DAY 


SOURCES 

qui  assumptus  est  a  vobis  in  celum  :  sic 
veniet  quemadmodum  vidistis  eum 
euntem  in  celum. 


Secundum  marcum. 

[xvi.  o 

IN  illo  tempore  Recumbentibus 
vndecim  discipulis  apparuit  illis  iesus, 
et  exprobrauit  iucredulitatem  illorum 
et  duritiam  cordis  quia  his  qui  viderant 
eum  resurrexisse,  non  crediderant. 
Et  dixit  eis.  Euntes  in  mundum 
vniuersum  :  predicate  euangelium 
omni  creature.  Qui  crediderit  &  bap- 
tizatus  fuerit :  saluus  erit.  Qui  vero 
non  crediderit :  condemnabitur.  Signa 
autem  eos  qui  crediderint :  hec  se- 
quentur.  In  nomine  meo  demonia 
eijcient,  linguis  loquentur  nouis,  ser- 
pentes  tollent.  Et  si  mortiferum  quid 
biberint :  non  eis  nocebit.  Super 
egros  manus  imponent :  &  bene  habe- 
bunt.  Et  dominus  quidem  iesus  post- 
quam  locutus  est  eis,  assumptus  est  in 
celum :  et  sedet  a  dextris  dei.  Illi 
autem  profecti  predicauerunt  vbique 
domino  cooperante  :  et  sermonem  con- 
firmante,  sequentibus  signis. 


1549 

taken  vp  from  you  into  heauen,  shall 
so  come,  euen  as  ye  haue  seen 
him  goe  into  heauen. 

The  Gospell. 

[       Mar.  xvi. 

IESUS  appered  vnto  the  eleuen  as 
they  sate  at  meate  :  &  cast  in  their 
teth  there  vnbelefe,  &  hardnes  of 
heart,  because  they  beleued  not  them 
which  had  sene  that  he  was  risen 
agayn  from  the  dead  :  &  he  sayd 
vnto  them  :  go  ye  into  all  the  worlde, 
&  preache  the  gospel  to  all 
creatures  :  he  that  beleueth  &  is 
baptised,  shall  be  saued,  But  he  that 
beleueth  not,  shalbe  damned.  And 
these  tokens  shall  folowe  them  that 
beleue.  In  my  name  they  shall  cast 
out  deuils,  they  shall  speake  with  newe 
tonges,  they  shall  dryue  awaye  ser- 
pentes.  And  if  they  drynke  any 
deadly  thynge  it  shall  not  hurte  them. 
They  shal  lay  their  handes  on  the 
sicke,  and  they  shall  recouer.  So  then 
when  the  Lord  had  spoken  vnto  the  : 
he  was  receiued  into  heauen,  and 
is  on  the  right  hande  of  God.  And 
they  wente  furth,  and  preached  euery 
where  :  The  Lord  working  with  them, 
and  confirming  the  worde  with  miracles 
folowing. 

Proper  Psalmes  and  lessons  at  Euensong. 


Psalm' 
Ps±:cviH. 


iThe  seconde  lesson' 
I-,  vnto  the  ende. 


C  Dominica  infra  octauam  ascensionis. 

Officium. 
[Ps.  xxvi  (xxvii)  7a,  8,  9  :  la] 


THE  SONDAYE  AFTER  THE  ASCENCION. 

[Dominus  regnauit.  psal.  xciii. 

Tne  Lord  is  kinge,  and  hath  put  on 
gloryous  apparell  :  the  Lord  hath  put 
on  his  apparel,  and  girded  him  selfe 
with  strength. 

He  hath  made  the  rounde  worlde  so 
sure  :  that  it  cannot  be  moued. 

Euer  sence  the  worlde  beganne, 
hath  thy  seate  been  prepared  :  thou 
art  from  euerlastyng. 

The  fluddes  are  risen,  O  Lorde,  the 
fluddes  haue  lyfte  vp  theyr  noyse  : 
the  fluddes  lyft  vp  theyr  waues. 

The  waues  of  the  sea  are  myghtye, 
and  rage  horribly  :  but  yet  the 
Lorde  that  dwelleth  on  hygh  is 
mightier. 


THE  SUNDAY  AFTER  ASCENSION  DAY 


437 


1552 

taken  vp  from  you  into  heauen,  shall 
so  come,  euen  as  ye  haue  sene 
hym  goe  into  heauen. 

C  The  Gospell. 

IESUS  appeared  vnto  the  eleuen  as 
thei  sate  at  meat :  &  cast  in  their 
teeth  theyr  vnbelefe,  &  hardnes  of 
hearte,  because  they  beleued  not  the 
whiche  had  sene  that  he  was  rysen 
agayne  from  the  dead :  &  he  sayd 
vnto  them  :  goe  ye  into  al  the  world, 
and  preache  the  gospel  to  al 
creatures :  he  that  beleueth  and  is 
baptised,  shall  be  saued.  But  he  that 
beleueth  not,  shall  be  damned.  And 
these  tokens  shall  folowe  them  that 
beleue.  In  my  name  they  shall  cast 
out  deuyls,  they  shal  speake  wyth  newe 
tonges,  they  shal  dryue  awaye  ser- 
pentes.  And  yf  they  drinke  any 
deadly  thinge,  it  shall  not  hurte  them. 
They  shal  lay  their  hades  on  the 
sicke,  and  they  shal  recouer.  So  then 
whe  the  Lord  had  spoken  vnto  them  : 
he  was  receiued  into  heauen,  and 
is  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  And 
they  wet  forth,  &  preached  euery 
where :  The  Lord  workyng  wyth  them, 
&  confirminge  the  worde  wyth  miracles 
folowyng. 


1661 

taken  vp  from  you  into  heaven,  shall 
so  come  in  like  maner  as  ye  have  seen 
him  go  into  heaven. 

The  Gospel. 

[St;  Mar.  16.  414. 

Jesus  appeared  vnto  the  eleaven,  as 
they  sate  at  meat,  and  vpbraided  them 
with  their  vnbeliefe  and  heardness  of 
heart,  because  they  believed  not  them 
which  had  seen  him  after  he  was 
risen  .  And  he  said 

vnto  them,  Go  ye  into  all  the  world, 
and  preach  the  Gospell  to  every 
Creature.  He  that  believeth,  and  is 
baptized  shall  be  saved ;  but  he  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned.  And 
these  signes  shall  follow  them  that 
believe,  In  my  name  shall  they  cast 
out  devils,  they  shall  speak  with  new 
tongues,  They  shall  take  vp  ser 
pents,  and  if  they  drinke  any 
deadly  thing,  it  shall  not  hurt  them, 
They  shall  lay  hands  on  the 

sick,  and  they  shall  recover.  So  then 
after  the  Lord  had  spoken  vnto  them, 
he  was  received  vp  into  heaven,  and 
sate  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  And 
they  went  forth,  and  preached  every 
where,  the  Lord  working  with  them, 
and  confirming  the  word  with  signes 
following. 


THE  SUNDAIE  AFTER  THE  ASCENCION  DA  YE 


3      *SUNDAY  AFTER*       *ASCKNSION  DAY. 


438 


THE  SUNDAY  AFTER  ASCENSION  DAY 


SOURCES 


In  die  ascens.  Ad  ves.  antiphona  [of  Magnif.]. 
O  rex  glorie  domine  virtutum  qui 
triumphator  hodie  super  omnes  celos 
asceudisti,  ne  derelinquas  nos  orphanos: 
sed  mitte  promissum  patris  in  nos 
spiritum  veritatis  alleluia. 


1549 

Thy  testimonies,  O  Lorde,  are  very 
sure  :  holynesse  becommeth  thine 
house  for  euer. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer.  &c. 

The  Collect. 

O  God,  the  kyng  of  glory,  whiche 
haste  exalted  thine  only  sonne  lesus 
Christe,  wyth  greate  triumphe  vnto  thy 
kingdom  in  heauen  :  we  beseche  thee 
leaue  vs  not  comfortles,  but  sende  to 
vs  thine  holy  gost  to  comforte  vs,  and 
exalte  vs  vnto  the  same  place,  whyther 
our  sauioure  Christe  is  gone  before  : 
who  lyueth  and  reigneth.  &c. 


Lectio  epistole  beati  petri  apostoli. 

[i.  Pet  iiii.  B 
Cnarissimi. 

Estote  prudentes :  &  vigilate  in  ora- 
tionibus.  Ante  omnia  autem  mutuam 
in  vobismetipsis  charitatem  continuam 
habentes:  quia  charitas  operuit  mul- 
titudinem  peccatorum.  Hospitales 
inuicem  :  sine  murmuratione.  Vnus- 
quisque  sicut  accepit  gratiam,  in 
alterutrum  illam  administrantes  :  sicut 
boni  dispensatores  multiformis  gratie 
dei.  Si  quis  loquitur  :  quasi  sermones 
dei.  Si  quis  ministrat,  tanquam  ex 
virtute  quam  administrat  deus  :  vt  in 
omnibus  honorificetur  deus.  Per  iesum 
xpm,  dominum  nostrum. 


Secundum  iohannem. 

[xv.  D 

IN  illo  tempore  Dixit  iesus  dis- 
cipulis  suis.  Cum  venerit  paraclitus 
quern  ego  mittam  vobis  a  patre,  spiritum 
veritatis  qui  a  patre  procedit :  ille 
testimonium  perhibebit  de  me.  Et 
vos  testimonium  perhibebitis :  quia  ab 
initio  mecum  estis.  Hec  locutus  sum 
vobis :  vt  non  scandalizemini.  Absque 
synagogis  facient  vos.  Sed  venit  hora  : 
vt  omnis  qui  interficit  vos  :  arbitretur 
obsequium  se  prestare  deo.  Et  hec 


The  Epistle. 

[i.        Peter,  iiii. 

THC  ende  of  all  thynges  is  at  hande : 
be  ye  therfore  sobre,  and  watche  vnto 
praier.  But  aboue  all  thynges  haue 
feruent  loue  among  your  selues  :  for 
loue  shall  couer  the  multitude  of 
synnes.  Be  ye  herberous  one  to  another 
without  grudgeinge.  As  euery  man 
hath  receyued  the  gyft,  euen  so 
minister  the  same  one  to  another,  as 
good  ministers  of  the  manyfold  grace 
of  God.  If  any  man  speake,  let  hym 
talke  as  the  wordes  of  God.  If  any 
manne  minister,  let  hym  do  it  as  of  the 
habilitie  whyche  God  ministreth  vnto 
hym  :  that  God  in  all  thynges  may  be 
gloryfied  through  Iesus  Christ :  to 
whome  be  prayse  and  dominion  for 
euer  and  euer.  Amen 

The  Gospell. 
[      lohn.  XV. 

Wnen  the  comforter  is  come  whom 
I  wyll  sende  vnto  you  from  the  father 
(euen  the  spirite  of  trueth,  whiche 
procedeth  of  the  father)  he  shall 
testifye  of  me.  And  ye  shall  beare 
witnes  also,  because  ye  haue  been  wyth 
me  from  the  beginning.  Qohn  xvi. 

These  thynges  haue  I  sayd  vnto  you, 
because  ye  shoulde  not  bee  offended. 
They  shall  excommunicate  you  : 
yea  the  time  shal  come,  that  whoso- 
euer  killeth  you,  wyll  thynke  that  he 
doeth  God  seruice.  And  suche 
thynges  wyl  they  do  vnto  you,  be- 


THE  SUNDAY  AFTER  ASCENSION  DAY 
'552  I66l 


439 


C  The  Collect. 

O  God,  the  kyng  of  glory,  whiche 
haste  exalted  thyne  onely  sonne  lesus 
Christe,  wyth  great  triumphe  vnto  thy 
kyngdom  in  heauen  :  we  beseche  thee 
leaue  vs  not  comforteles,  but  sende  to 
vs  thyne  holy  ghost  to  coforte  vs,  and 
exalte  vs  vnto  the  same  place,  whyther 
oure  Sauiour  Christe  is  gone  before  : 
who  lyueth  and  reygneth.&c. 


C  The  Epistle. 

[i.        Pet.  iiii 

Tne  ende  of  al  thinges  is  at  had  : 
be  ye  therfore  sobre,  and  watch  vnto 
prayer.  But  aboue  all  thynges  haue 
feruente  loue  among  your  selues  :  for 
loue  shal  couer  the  multitude  of 
synnes.  Beeyeherberousonetoanother 
wythout  grudgeinge.  As  euerye  man 
hath  receaued  the  gyfte,  euen  so 
mynyster  the  same  one  to  another,  as 
good  ministers  of  the  manyfolde  graces 
of  God.  Yf  any  man  speake,  let  him 
talke  as  the  wordes  of  God.  Yf  any 
man  minister,  let  hym  do  it  as  of  the 
habilitie  which  God  ministreth  to 
him :  that  God  in  al  thynges  may  be 
gloryfyed  through  lesus  Christ :  to 
whom  be  prayse  and  dominion  for 
euer  and  euer.  Amen. 

C  The  Gospell. 
[       lohn.  xv. 

WHen  the  comforter  is  come  whom 
I  wyll  sende  vnto  you  from  the  father 
(euen  the  spyryte  of  trueth,  whiche 
procedeth  of  the  Father)  he  shall 
testifie  of  me.  And  ye  shal  beare 
witnes  also,  because  ye  haue  bene  with 
me  from  the  begynnynge.- 

-These  thinges  haue  I  sayde  vnto  you, 
because  ye  should  not  bee  offended. 
They  shall  excommunicate  you  : 
yea,  the  time  shal  come,  that  whoso- 
euer  killeth  you,  wil  thinke  that  he 
doeth  God  seruyce.  And  suche 
thynges  wyll  they  doe  vnto  you,  be- 


The  Collect. 

O  God,  the  King  of  Glory,  who8 
hast  exalted  thine  only  Son  lesus 
Christ  with  great  triumph  vnto  thy 
Kingdom  in  Heaven :  We  beseech  thee 
leave  vs  not  comfortless  ;  but  send  to 
vs  thine  holy  Ghost  to  comfort  vs,  and 
exalt  vs  vnto  the  same  place  whither 
our  saviour  Christ  is  gone  before, 
who  liveth  and  reigneth,  ^with  thee, 
and  the  8holy  Ghost,  one  God  world 
without  end.  Amen. 

The  Epistle. 

[j.  St.  Pet.  4.  47. 

The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand : 
be  ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch  vnto 
prayer.  And  above  all  things  have 
fervent  charity  among  your  selves :  for 
charity  shall  cover  the  multitude  of 
sins.  Vse  hospitality  one  to  another 
without  grudging.  As  every  man 
hath  received  the  gift,  even  so 
minister  the  same  one  to  another,  as 
good  Stewards  of  the  manifold  grace 
of  God.  If  any  man  speake,  let  him 
speak  as  the  Oracles  of  God  :  If  any 
man  minister,  let  him  do  it,  as  of  the 
ability  which  God  giveth 

,  that  God  in  all  things  may  be 
glorified  through  Jesus  Christ ;  to 
whom  be  praise,  and  dominion  for 
ever,  and  ever.  Amen. 

The  Gospel. 
[S*:  lohn:  15. 426.*  and  part  of  chap.  16. 

When  the  Comforter  is  come,  whom 
I  will  send  vnto  you  from  the  Father, 
even  the  spirit  of  truth,  which 
proceedeth  from  the  ffather,  he  shall 
testifie  of  me.  And  ye  also  shall 
bear  witness,  because  ye  have  been  with 
me  from  the  beginning.  - 

-These  things  have  I  spoken  vntoyou, 
that  ye  should  not  be  offended. 
Theyshallputyououtofthesynagogues: 
yea,  the  time  cometh,  that  whoso 
ever  killeth  you  will  think  that  he 
doth  God  service.  And  these 
things  will  they  do  vnto  you  be- 


440 


WHITSUNDAY 


SOURCES 

facient  vobis :  quia  non  nouerunt 
patrem  neque  me.  Sed  hec  locutus 
sum  vobis  :  vt  cum  venerit  hora  eorum, 
reminiscamini  quia  hec  dixi  vobis. 


In  die  sancto  pentecostes. 


Officium. 
[Wisd.  i  7  :  Ps.  Ixvii(lxviii)  1] 


1549 

cause  they  haue  not  knowen  the 
father,  neither  yet  me.  But  these 
thynges  baue  I  told  you,  that  whan 
the  tyme  is  come,  ye  maye  remembre 
then  that  I  tolde  you  .  These 

thynges  sayde  I  not  vnto  you  at  the 
beginning,  because  I  was  present  with 
you. 

c  WHITSONDAY. 
C  Proper  psalmes  and  lessons  at  Mattyns. 

Psalm,  xlviii.  ^  The  seconde  lesson  Act.  x. 
Psalm.  Ixvii.  fThen  Peter  opened  his  mouth: 
Psalm,  cxlv.  J  vnto  the  ende. 

C  At  the  Communion. 
[Exultate  insti  in  domino,  psal.  xxxiii. 

REioy  ce  in  the  Lorde,  O  ye  ryghteous : 
for  it  becommeth  well  the  iust  to  be 
thankefull. 

Prayse  the  Lorde,  wyth  harpe  :  syng 
psalmes  vnto  hym  wyth  the  lute  and 
instrument  of  tenne  stringes. 

Syng  vnto  the  Lorde  a  newe  song  : 
sing  prayses  lustely  (vnto  him)  with  a 
good  courage. 

For  the  worde  of  the  Lorde  is  true  : 
and  all  hys  workes  are  faythfull. 

He  loueth  ryghteousnes  and  Judge 
ment  :  the  earth  is  full  of  the  goodnes 
of  the  Lorde. 

By  the  worde  of  the  Lord  were  the 
heauens  made  :  and  all  the  hostes  of 
them,  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth. 

He  gathereth  the  waters  of  the  sea 
together,  as  it  were  vpon  a  heap  :  and 
layeth  vp  the  depe  as  it  were  in  a 
treasure  house. 

Let  all  the  earth  feare  the  Lorde  : 
stande  in  awe  of  hym  all  ye  that  dwell 
in  the  worlde. 

For  he  speake  and  it  was  done  :  he 
commaunded  and  it  stoode  faste. 

The  Lorde  bryngeth  the  counsayll 
of  the  heathen  to  nought  :  and  maketh 
the  deuises  of  the  people  to  be  of  none 
effect  (and  casteth  out  the  counsayles 
of  princes.) 

The  counsayll  of  the  Lord  shal 
endure  for  euer  :  and  the  thoughtes 
of  his  heart  from  generacion  to  genera- 
cion. 

Blessed  are  the  people  whose  God 
is  the  Lorde  lehouah  :  and  blessed 
are  the  folke  that  haue  chosen  hym  to 
bee  theyr  inheritaunce. 


WHITSUNDAY  441 

1552  1661 

cause    they    haue    not    knowen    the  cause    they    have    not    knowne    the 

father,  neyther   yet  me.      But   these  Father,    nor              me ;     But    these 

thinges  I  have  tolde  you,  that  whan  things   have    I    told   you   that  when 

the  tyme  is  come,  ye  maye  remembre  the  time  shall  come,  ye  may  remember 

then  that  I  tolde  you               .  that  I  told  you  of  them. 


WHITSUNDAIE.  WHITSUNDAY. 


442 


WHITSUNDAY 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 
DEUS  qui  hodierna  die  corda  ndelium 

sancti  spiritus  illustratione  docuisti : 
da  nobis  in  eodem  spiritu  recta  sapere, 
et  de  eius  semper  consolation  e  gaud  ere. 
Per  [dominum  nostrum  iesum  christum 
filium  tuum  qui  tecum  viuit  et  regnat] 
in  vnitate  [eiusdem  spiritus  sancti  deus 
per  omnia  secula  seculorum.  ]  (Greg.  90) 

Lectio  actuum  apostolorum. 

[ii.  A. 

IN  diebus  illis.  Dum  complerentur 
dies  pentecostes :  erant  omnes  dis- 
cipuli  pariter  in  eodem  loco.  Et 
factus  est  repente  de  celo  sonus  tan- 
quam  aduenientis  spiritus  vehementis  : 
et  repleuit  totam  domum  vbi  erant 
sedentes.  Et  apparuerunt  illis  dis- 


1549 

The  Lorde  lokeddowne  from  heauen, 
and  beheld  all  the  children  of  menne  : 
from  the  habitacion  of  hys  dwellyng, 
he  considereth  all  them  that  dwell  in 
the  earth. 

He  fashioneth  all  the  heartes  of 
them  :  and  vnderstandeth  all  theyr 
workes. 

There  is  no  kynge  that  can  be  saued 
by  the  multitude  of  an  hoste  :  neyther 
is  any  mightye  man  delyuered  by 
muche  strength. 

A  horse  is  counted  but  a  vayne 
thyng  to  saue  a  man  :  neither  shall 
he  deliuer  any  man  by  his  greate 
strength. 

Beholde,  the  iye  of  the  Lorde  is 
vpon  them  that  feare  him  :  and  vpon 
them  that  put  theyr  trust  in  his  mercy. 

To  deliuer  theyr  soules  from  death  : 
and  to  feade  them  in  the  tyme  of  derth. 

Our  soule  hath  pacyently  taryed  for 
the  Lorde  :  for  he  is  our  helpe  and 
our  shielde. 

For  our  heart  shall  reioyce  in  him  : 
because  we  haue  hoped  in  his  holy 
name. 

Let  thy  merciful  kyndnes,  O  Lord, 
be  vpon  vs  :  like  as  we  haue  put  our 
trust  in  thee. 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer.  &c. 

The  Collect. 

God,  whych  as  vpon  thys  day  hast 
taught  the  heartes  of  thy  faythful 
people,  by  the  sending  to  the  the 
lyght  of  thy  holy  spirite  :  Graunt  vs 
by  the  same  spirite  to  haue  a  right 
iudgement  in  al  thinges,  &  euermore 
to  reioyce  in  his  holy  comforte,  through 
themeritesofChriste  lesusoursauiour: 
who  lyueth  and  reygneth  with  thee 
in  the  vnitie  of  the  same  spirite  one 
God,  worlde  without  end. 

The  Epistle. 

[Act.  ii. 

Wnen  the  fyftye  dayes  were  come 
to  an  ende,  they  were  all  wyth  one 
accorde  together  in  one  place.  And 
sodenly  there  came  a  sounde  from 
heauen,  as  it  had  been  the  cotnming 
of  a  mighty  winde,  and  it 

filled    all     the     house    where    they 
sate.     And  there  appeared  vnto  the 


WHITSUNDAY 


1552 


443 


1661 


C  The  Collect. 

God,  which  as  vpon  this  daye  hast 
taughte  the  heartes  of  thy  faythfull 
people,  by  the  sendinge  to  the  the 
light  of  thy  holy  spirite :  Graunte  vs 
by  the  same  spirite  to  haue  a  right 
Judgement  in  all  thinges,  &  euermore 
to  reioyce  in  his  holy  comforte,  through 
the  merites  of  Christ  lesu  oure  Sauioure : 
who  lyueth  and  reygneth  with  thee 
in  the  vnitie  of  the  same  spirite,  one 
GOD  worlde  wythout  ende. 

C  The  Epistle. 

[Actes.  ii. 

Wnen  the  fyftye  dayes  were  come 
to  an  ende,  they  were  all  wyth  one 
accorde  together  in  one  place.  And 
sodenlye  there  came  a  sounde  from 
heauen,  as  it  had  been  the  comming 
of  a  mighty  wynde,  &  it 

fylled    all    the    house    where    they 
sate.      And  there  appered   vnto  the 


The  Collect. 

God,  who8  as  9at  this  time*  8didst 
teach  the  hearts  of  thy  faithfull 
people  by  the  sending  to  them  the 
light  of  thy  holy  spirit :  Grant  us 
by  the  same  Spirit  to  have  a  right 
ludgement  in  all  things,  and  evermore 
to  reioyce  in  his  holy  comfort  through 
the  merits  of  Christ  lesus  our  Saviour, 
who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee 
in  the  Vnity  of  the  same  spirit,  one 
God  world  without  end  lbAmen. 

9For  the  Epistle. 

[Acts.  2.  <1. 

When  the  day  of  Pentecost  was 
fully  come,  they  were  all  with  one 
accord,  in  one  place.  And 

suddainly  there  came  a  sound  from 
heaven,  as 

of  a  rushing  mighty  winde,  and  it 
filled  all  the  house  where  they  were 
sitting.  And  there  appeared  vnto  them 


444 


WHITSUNDAY 


SOURCES 

partite  lingue  tanquam  ignis  :  seditque 
supra  singulos  eorum.  Et  repleti  suut 
omnes  spiritu  sancto,  et  ceperunt  loqui 
varijs  linguis :  prout  spiritus  sanctus 
dabat  eloqui  illis.  Erant  autem  in 
hierusalem  habitantes  iudei  viri  re- 
ligiosi :  ex  omni  natione  que  sub  celo 
est.  Facta  autem  hac  voce  conuenit 
multitude,  et  mente  confusa  est : 
quoniam  audiebat  vnusquisque  lingua 
sua  illos  loquentes.  Stupebant  autem 
omnes :  et  mirabantur  adinuicem 
dicentes.  Nonne  ecce  omnes  isti  qui 
loquuntur  galilei  sunt :  &  quomodo 
nos  audiuimus  vnusquisque  linguam 
nostram  in  qua  nati  sumus?  Parthi, 
&  medi,  et  elamite,  et  qui  habitant 
mesopotamiam,  iudeam  &  cappadociam, 
pontum  et  asiam,  phrygiam  &  pam- 
philiam,  egyptum  &  partes  libye  que 
est  circa  cyrenem  :  &  aduene  romani. 
Iudei  quoque  et  proselyti,  cretes  et 
arabes,  audiuimus  eos  loquentes  nostris 
linguis :  magnalia  dei. 

Euangelium.    Secundum  iohannem. 

[xiiij.  o 

IN   illo  tempore.      Dixit  iesus  dis- 
cipulis  suis. 


1549 

clouen  tonges,  lyke  as  they  had  been 
of  fyre,  and  it  sate  vpon  eche  one  of 
them  :  and  they  were  all  filled  wyth 
the  holy  goste,  and  began  to 
speake  with  other  tonges,  euen  as  the- 
same  spirite  gaue  them  vtteraunce. 
There  were  dwellyng  at  leru- 
salem  lewes,  deuoute  men,  out  of 
euerye  nacion  of  them  that  are  vnder 
heauen.  When  this  was  noised 

about,  the  multitude  came  together 
and  were  astonyed,  because  that 
euery  man  heard  the  speake  with  his 
owne  language.  They  wondred 

all  &  merueyled,  saying  among 
them  selfes :  beholde,  are  not  all  these, 
which  speake,  of  Galile  ?  And  howe 
heare  we  euery  man  his  owne  tong, 
wherin  we  were  borne  ?  Parthians, 
and  Medes,  and  Elamites,  and  the 
inhabiters  of  Mesopotamia,  and  of 
lewry,  &  of  Capadocia,  of  Pontus 
and  Asia,  Phrigia  and  Pamphilia,  of 
Egypte  and  of  the  parties  of  Libia, 
whiche  is  besyde  Siren,  and  straungers 
of  Rome,  lewes  and  Proselites,  Grekes 
and  Arrabians,  we  haue  heard  them 
speake  in  our  owne  tongues  the 
greate  workes  of  God. 

The  Gospell. 

[       lohn.  Xiiii. 

IESUS  sayde  vnto  his  disciples  :  If 
y  e  loue  me,  kepe  my  commaundementes, 
and  I  wil  pray  the  father,  &  he  shall 
gene  you  another  comforter,  that  he 
maye  abyde  wyth  you  for  euer :  euen 
the  spirite  of  trueth,  whome  the  worlde 
canne  not  receyue,  because  the  worlde 
seeth  hym  not,  neyther  knoweth  hym. 
But  ye  knowe  hym  :  for  he  dwelleth 
with  you,  and  shalbe  in  you.  I  will 
not  leaue  you  coumfortles  :  but  wyll 
come  to  you.  Yet  a  lytle  whyle  and 
the  worlde  seeth  me  no  more  :  but  ye 
see  me.  For  I  lyue,  and  ye  shall  lyue. 
That  daye  shall  ye  knowe  that  I  am 
in  my  father,  and  you  in  me,  and  I  in 
you.  He  that  hath  my  commaunde 
mentes  and  kepeth  them,  the  same  is 
he  that  loueth  me.  And  he  that 
loueth  me,  shalbe  loued  of  my  father  : 
and  I  will  loue  hym,  and  will  shewe 
myne  owne  selfe  vnto  hym. 


WHITSUNDAY 


445 


1552 

clouen  tonges,  lyke  as  they  had  been 
of  fyre,  and  it  sate  vpon  eche  one  of 
them  :  and  they  were  all  fylled  wyth 
the  holye  Ghoste,  and  beganne  to 
speake  with  other  toges,  euen  as  the 
same  spirite  gaue  them  vtteraunce. 
There  were  dwellinge  at  leru- 
salem  lewes,  deuoute  men,  out  of 
euery  nacion  of  them  that  are  vnder 
heauen.  When  this  was  noised 

about,  the  multitude  came  together 
and  were  astonied,  because  that 
euerye  man  heard  the  speake  with  his 
owne  language.  They  wodred 

al  and  merueyled,  saying  among 
themselfes  :  beholde,  are  not  all  these, 
whiche  speake,  of  Galile  ?  And  howe 
heare  we  euery  man  hys  owne  tongue, 
wherein  we  were  borne?  Parthians, 
and  Medes,  &  Elamites,  and  the 
inhabiters  of  Mesopatamia,  and  of 
lewrye,  &  of  Capadocia,  of  Pontus 
and  Asia,  Phrigia  &  Pamphilia,  of 
Egipt  &  of  the  parties  of  Libia, 
which  is  besyde  Syren,  &  straugers 
of  Rome,  lewes  £  Proselites,  Grekes 
and  Arrabians,  we  haue  hearde  them 
speake  in  oure  owne  tongues  the 
great  workes  of  God. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[      loh.  xiiii 

IESUS  sayde  vnto  his  disciples :  Yf 
ye  loue  me  kepe  my  commaundemetes, 
and  I  wil  pray  the  father,  &  he  shall 
geue  you  another  comforter,  that  he 
may  abyde  with  you  for  euer :  cue 
the  spirite  of  trueth,  who  the  worlde 
can  not  receyue,  because  the  worlde 
seeth  hym  not,  nether  knoweth  him. 
But  ye  know  hym  :  for  he  dwelleth 
wyth  you,  and  shall  be  in  you.  I  wyll 
not  leaue  you  comfortles,  but  wyll 
come  to  you.  Yet  a  lytle  whyle  and 
the  worlde  seeth  me  no  more  :  but  ye 
see  me.  For  I  lyue,  and  ye  shall  lyue. 
That  daye  shal  ye  know  that  I  am 
in  my  father,  and  you  in  me,  and  I  in 
you.  He  that  hath  my  commaunde- 
mentes  and  kepeth  the,  the  same  is 
he  that  loueth  me.  And  he  that 
loueth  me,  shall  be  loued  of  my  father : 
and  I  wyll  loue  hym,  and  wyll  shewe 
myne  owne  selfe  vnto  hym.  ludas 
sayeth  vnto  hym  (not  ludas  Iscarioth :) 
Lord,  what  is  done  that  thouwylt  shewe 
thy  selfe  vnto  vs,  and  not  vnto  the 


1661 

cloven  tongues,  like  as 
of  fire,  and  it  sate  vpon  each         of 
them  :  And  they  were  all  filled  with 
the     holy     Ghost,     and     began     to 
speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the 

spirit  gave  them  vtterance. 
And  there  were  dwelling  at  leru- 
salem,  Jewes,  devout  men,  out  of 
every  nation  vnder 

heaven.  Now  when  this  was  noised 
abroad,  the  multitude  came  together, 
and  were  confounded,  because  that 
every  man  heard  them  speake  in  his 
own  language.  And  they  were  all 
amazed  and  marvelled,  saying  one  to 
another,  Behold,  are  not  all  these 
which  speak,  Galileans?  And  how 
hear  we  every  man  in  our  own  tongue ; 
wherein  we  were  born  ?  Parthians, 
and  Medes,  and  Elamites,  and  the 
dwellers  in  Mesopotamia,  and  in 
ludea,  and  Cappadocia,  in  Pontus, 
and  Asia,  Phrygia,  and  Pamphilya,  in 
Egypt,  and  in  the  parts  of  Libya, 
about  Gyrene,  and  strangers 
of  Rome,  Jews,  and  Proselytes.  Cretes, 
and  Arabians,  we  do  hear  them 
speak  in  our  tongues  the 

wonderfull  works  of  God. 

The  Gospel. 

[8*:  John.  14.  <15 

Jesus  said  vnto  his  disciples.  If 
ye  love  me,  keep  my  Commandements. 
And  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall 
give  you  another  Comforter,  that  he 
may  abide  with  you  for  ever.  Even 
the  spirit  of  truth,  whom  the  world 
cannot  receive  because  it 
seeth  him  not,  neither  knoweth  him  : 
but  ye  know  him,  for  he  dwelleth 
with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you.  I  will 
not  leave  you  comfortless,  I  will 
come  to  you.  Yet  a  little  while  and 
the  world  seeth  me  no  more  ;  but  ye 
see  me:  because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also. 
At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
in  my  Father,  and  you  in  me,  and  I  in 
you.  He  that  hath  my  Comande- 
ments,  and  keepeth  them,  he  it 
is  that  loveth  me ;  and  he  that 
loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of  my  Father, 
and  I  will  love  him,  and  will  manifest 
my  selfe  to  him.  Judas 

saith  vnto   him,   (not  Iscariot) 

Lord,  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest 
thy  selfe  vnto  vs,  and  not  vnto  the 


446 


MONDAY  IN  WHITSUNWEEK 


SOURCES 

Si  quis  diligit  me  :  sermonem  meum 
seruabit.  Et  pater  meus  diliget  eum  : 
et  ad  eum  veniemus,  et  mansionem 
apud  eum  faciemus.  Qui  non  diligit 
me:  sermones  meos  non  seruat.  Et 
sermonem  quern  audistis  non  est 
meus  :  sed  eius  qui  misit  me  patris. 
Hec  locutus  sum  vobis :  apud  vos 
manens.  Paraclitus  autem  spiritus 
sanctus  quern  mittet  pater  in  nomine 
meo :  ille  vos  docebit  omnia  et  suggeret 
vobis  omnia  quecunque  dixero  vobis. 
Pacem  relinquo  vobis :  pacem  meam 
do  vobis.  Non  quomodo  mundus  dat : 
ego  do  vobis.  Non  turbetur  cor 
vestrum :  neque  formidet.  Audistis 
quia  ego  dixi  vobis :  vado  et  venio  ad 
vos.  Si  diligeretis  me,  gauderetis 
vtique  quia  vado  ad  patrem :  quia 
pater  maior  me  est.  Et  nunc  dixi 
vobis  priusquam  fiat :  vt  cum  factum 
fuerit  credatis.  lam  non  multa  loquar 
vobiscum.  Venit  enim  princeps  mundi 
huius  :  et  in  me  non  habet  quicquam. 
Sed  vt  cognoscat  mundus  quia  diligo 
patrem  :  et  sicut  mandatum  dedit 
michi  pater,  sic  facio. 


C  Feria  .ij.  post  pentecosten. 

Officium. 
[Ps.  Ixxx  (Ixxxi)  17  :  2] 


1549 


C  Proper  Psalmes  and  Lessons  at  Euensong. 

Psalm.  Ciiii.  "}  The  .ii.  Lesson.  Actes.  xix.  It 
Psalm.  Cxlv.  I  fortuned  when  Apollo  wente 
I  to  Corinthum.  vnto  After  these 
J  thinges. 

<[  MONDAY  IN  WHITSON  WERE. 

[Jubilate  deo.  psal.  c. 

O  Be  ioy  full  in  the  Lorde  (all  ye 
landes  :)  serue  the  Lorde  with  glad- 
nesse,  and  come  before  his  presence 
with  a  song. 

Be  ye  sure  that  the  Lorde  he  is 
God  :  it  is  he  that  hath  made  vs,  and 
not  we  cure  selfes,  we  are  his  people 
and  the  sheepe  of  his  pasture. 

O  Goe  your  waye  into  his  gates 
with  thankesgeuyng,  and  into  his 
courtes  with  prayse  :  be  thankefull 
vnto  hym,  and  speake  good  of  his 
name. 

For  the  Lorde  is  gracious,  hys 
mercy  is  euerlastyng  :  and  his  trueth 
endureth  from  generacion  to  genera- 
cion. 


MONDAY  IN  WHITSUNWEEK 


447 


1552 

•world?  lesus  aunswered,  and  sayd 
vnto  them :  yf  a  man  loue  me,  he  wyl 
kepe  my  sayinges,  and  my  father  ivy  II 
loue  him :  and  we  ivyl  come  vnto  him, 
and  dwell  ivyth  hym.  He  that 
loueth  me  not,  kepeth  not  my  sayinges. 
And  the  word  which  ye  heare,  is  not 
myne,  but  the  fathers  whych  sente  me. 
These  thinges  haue  I  spoken  vnto  you, 
beynge  yet  present  wyth  you.  But  the 
comforter  which  is  the  holy  ghost  whom 
my  father  wyll  sende  in  my  name,  he 
shall  teache  you  all  thynges,  and  bryng 
all  thynges  to  your  remembrauce  what- 
soeuer  I  haue  said  vnto  you.  Peace  I 
leaue  with  you  :  my  peace  I  geue  vnto 
you.  Not  as  the  worlde  geueth,  geue 
I  vnto  you.  Let  not  youre  heartes  be 
greued,  neyther  feare.  Ye  haue 
heardhowelsaydevntoyou:  I  go  , 
and  come  agayne  vnto  you.  Yfye  loued 
me,  ye  woulde  verely  reioyce,  because  I 
sayde:  I  go  vnto  the  father.  For  the 
father  is  greater  then  I.  And  now 
haue  I  shewed  you  before  it  come  , 

that,  whe  it  is  come  to  passe,  ye  myght 
beleue.  Hereafter  wyll  I  not  talke  many 
wordes  vnto  you.  For  the  prince  of  this 
worlde  cometh,  and  hath  naught  in  me. 
But  that  the  worlde  may  knowe  that  I 
loue  the  father.  And  as  the  father 
gaue  me  commaundement,  euen  so  do  I. 


1661 

world?  Jesus  answered,  and  said 
vnto  him,  Jf  a  man  love  me,  he  will 
keep  my  words :  and  my  Father  will 
love  him,  and  we  will  come  vnto  him, 
and  make  our  abode  with  him;  He  that 
loveth  me  not,  keepeth  not  my  sayings  : 
and  the  word  which  ye  hear  is  not 
mine;  but  the  Fathers  which  sent  me. 
These  things  have  J  spoken  unto  you, 
being  yet  present  with  you.  But  the 
Comforter,  which  is  the  holy  Ghost,  whom 
the  Father  will  send  in  my  Name,  he 
shall  teach  you  all  things,  and  bring 
all  things  to  your  remembrance,  what 
soever  I  have  said  vnto  you.  Peace  1 
leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  vnto 
you;  not  as  the  world  giveth,  give 
J  vnto  you :  let  not  your  heart  be 
troubled,  neither  let  itbe  afraid:  Ye  have 
heard  how  J  said  vnto  you,  J  go  away, 
and  come  again  vnto  you.  Jf  ye  loved 
me,  ye  would  reioyce,  because  I 

said,  J  go  vnto  the  Father :  for  my 
Father  is  greater  than  J.  And  now 
J  have  told  you  before  it  come  to  pass, 
that  when  it  is  come  to  pass,  ye  might 
believe.  Hereafter  J  will  not  talke 
much  with  you :  for  the  Prince  of  this 
world  cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  me. 
But  that  the  world  may  know  that  I 
love  the  Father;  and  as  the  Father 
gave  me  Commandement,  even  so  J  do. 


MONDAIE  IN  WHITSON  WERE. 


MUNDAY  IN  WHITSUN-WEEK. 


448 


MONDAY  IN  WHITSUNWEEK 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 

[DEUS  qui  apostolis  tuis  sanctum  de- 
disti  spiritum :  concede  plebi  tue  pie 
petitionis  effectum  :  vt  quibus  dedisti 
fidem,  largiaris  et  pacem.  Per  do.  in 
vnitate  eiusdem.  (Greg.  91)] 


1549 

Glory  be  to  the  father,  and  to  the 
sonne.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  nowe, 
and  euer.  &c. 

The  Collect. 

C  God   whiche.  &c.    (As    vpon    Whit- 
sonday) 


Lectio  actuum  apostolorum. 

[x.  F 

IN  diebus  illis.     Aperiens  petrus  os 
suum :  dixit. 


Viri  fratres  &  patres,  nobis  precepit 
dominus  populo  predicare  &  testificari : 
quia  ipse  est  qui  constitutus  est  a  deo 
iudex  viuorum  &  mortuorum.  Huic 
omnes  prophete  testimonium  perhi- 
bent :  remissionem  peccatorum  acci- 
pere  per  nomen  eius,  omnes  qui 
credunt  in  eum.  Adhuc  loquente 
petro  verba  hec :  cecidit  spiritus 


The  Epistel. 

[Act.  x. 

Tnen  Peter  opened  his  mouth  and 
sayd  :  of  a  trueth  I  perceyue  that 
there  is  no  respecte  of  persones  wyth 
God,  but  in  all  people,  he  that  feareth 
hym,  and  worketh  righteousnes,  is 
accepted  with  him.  Ye  knowe  the 
preaching  that  God  sente  vnto  the 
chyldren  of  Israeli,  preaching  peace 
by  lesu  Christe,  whiche  is  Lorde  ouer 
all  thynges  :  whiche  preaching 

was    publyshed 

throughout  all  lewry  (and  beganne  in 
Galile  after  the  baptisme  whiche  lohn 
preached)  howe  God  annointed  lesus 
of  Nazareth  with  the  holy  goste, 
and  with  power.  Whiche  lesus  wente 
about,  doyng  good  and  healyng  all 
that  were  oppressed  of  the  deuill. 
For  God  was  with  hym.  And  we  are 
witnesses  of  all  thynges  whiche  he  dyd 
in  the  lande  of  the  lewes  and  at 
lerusalem,  whome  they  slewe  and 
hanged  on  tree  :  Hym  God  raysed 
vp  the  thirde  day,  and  shewed  him 
openly,  not  to  all  the  people,  but  vnto 
vs  witnesses  (chosen  before  of  God  for 
the  same  entente)  which  did 

eate  and  drinke  with  hym  after  he 
arose  from  death.  And  he  com- 
maunded  vs  to  preache  vnto  the 
people,  and  to  testifye  that  it  is  he, 
whyche  was  prdayned  of  God  to  be  the 
iudge  of  quicke  and  dead.  To  hym 
geue  all  the  Prophetes  wytnesse,  that 
through  his  name  whosoeuer  beleueth 
in  hym,  shall  receyue  remission  of 
synnes.  Whyle  Peter  yet  spake  these 
wordes,  the  holy  gost  fell  on  all 


MONDAY  IN  WHITSUNWEEK 
1552  1661 


449 


C  The  Collect. 

C  God    which.  &c.    (As    vpon    Whyt- 
sondaye. ) 


€  The  Epistle. 

[Actes.  x. 

Tnen  Peter  opened  hys  mouthe  and 
sayd :  of  a  trueth  I  perceiue  that 
there  is  no  respecte  of  persones  with 
God,  but  in  all  people,  he  that  feareth 
him,  and  woorketh  righteousnes,  is 
accepted  with  him.  Ye  know  the 
preaching  that  God  sent  vnto  the 
children  of  Israeli,  preachinge  peace 
by  lesus  Christ,  which  is  Lord  ouer 
al  thinges  :  whiche  preachinge 

was    publyshed 

throughoute  all  lewry  (and  began  in 
Galile  after  the  baptisme  which  lohn 
preached)  how  God  annointed  lesus 
of  Nazareth  with  the  holy  ghost, 
and  with  power.  Whych  lesus  went 
about,  doynge  good,  £  healing  all 
that  were  oppressed  of  the  deuyll. 
For  God  was  wyth  him.  And  we  are 
witnesses  of  all  thynges  whiche  he  dyd 
in  the  lande  of  the  lewes,  and  at 
lerusale,  whom  they  slew  and 
hanged  on  a  tree  :  Hym  God  raysed 
vp  the  thyrde  day,  and  shewed  him 
openly,  not  to  all  the  people,  but  vnto 
vs  witnesses  (chosen  before  of  God  for 
the  same  intent)  which  did 

eate  and  drinke  with  him  after  he 
arose  from  death.  "  And  he  com- 
maunded  vs  to  preache  vnto  the 
people,  and  to  testifie  that  it  is  he, 
which  was  ordeyned  of  God  to  be  the 
iudge  of  quick  and  dead.  To  hym 
geue  all  the  Prophetes  wytnesse,  that 
through  his  name  whosoeuer  beleueth 
in  hym,  shal  receyue  remission  of 
synnes.  Whyle  Peter  yet  spake  these 
woordes,  the  holy  ghost  fell  on  all 


The  Collect. 

God  who8  as  9at  this  time*  8didst 
teach  the  hearts  of  thy  faithfull  people, 
by  the  sending  to  them  the  light  of 
thy  holy  spirit :  Grant  vs  by  the  same 
Spirit  to  have  a  right  Judgement  in  all 
things,  and  evermore  to  rejoyce  in  his 
holy  Comfort,  through  the  merits  of 
Christ  Jesu,  our  Saviour,  who  liveth, 
and  reigneth  with  thee,  in  the  vnity  of 
the  same  Spirit,  one  God,  world 
without  end.  Amen. 

"For  the  Epistle. 

[Acts.  10.  434. 

Then  Peter  opened  his  mouth,  and 
said,  Of  a  truth  J  perceive  that 
God  is  no  respecter  of  persons : 
But  in  every  Nation,  he  that  feareth 
him,  and  worketh  righteousness,  is 
accepted  with  him.  The 

word  which  God  sent  vnto  the 
children  of  Jsrael,  preaching  peace 
by  Jesus  Christ  (he  is  Lord  of 
all  )  That  word  I  say 

you  know,  which  was  published 
throughout  all  Judea,  and  began  from 
Galilee,  after  the  Baptism  which  John 
preached  :  How  God  anointed  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  with  the  holy  Ghost, 
and  with  power  ;  who  went 
about  doing  good,  and  healing  all 
that  were  oppressed  of  the  Devil  : 
for  God  was  with  him.  And  we  are 
witnesses  of  all  things  which  he  did 
both  in  the  Land  of  the  lews,  and  in 
Jerusale'm,  whom  they  slew,  and 
hanged  on  a  tree.  Him  God  raised 
vp  the  third  day,  and  shewed  him 
openly.  Not  to  all  the  people,  but  vnto 

witnesses  chosen  before  of  God 

,  even  to  vs  who  did 
eat  and  drink  with  him,  after  he 
rose  from  the  dead.  And  he  com 
manded  vs  to  preach  vnto  the 
people,  and  to  testifie  that  it  is  he 
which  was  ordeined  of  God  to  be  the 
Judge  of  quick  and  dead.  To  him 
give  all  the  Prophets  witness,  that 
through  his  name,  whosoever  believeth 
in  him,  shall  receive  remission  of 
Sins.  While  Peter  yet  spake  these 
words,  the  holy  Ghost  fell  on  all 


2  F 


450 


TUESDAY  IN  WHITSUNWEEK 


SOURCES 

sauctus  super  omnes  qui  audiebant 
verbum.  Et  obstupuerunt  ex  circum- 
cisione  fideles  qui  venerant  cum  petro  : 
quia  &  in  nationes  gratia  spiritus 
sancti  effusa  est.  Audiebant  enim 
illos  loquentes  linguis :  et  magnifi- 
cantes  deum.  Tune  respondit  petrus. 
Nunquid  aquam  quis  prohibere  potest : 
vt  non  baptizentur  hi,  qui  spiritum 
sanctum  acceperunt  sicut  &  nos  ?  Et 
iussit  eos  baptizari  in  nomine  domini 
nostri  iesu  xpi. 

Euangelium.     €  Sequentia  sancti  euangelij. 
Secundum  lohannem. 

[iii.  B 

IN  illo  tempore.  Dixit  iesus  cuidam 
principi  phariseorum.  Sic  deus  dilexit 
mundum  vt  filium  suum  vnigeuitum 
daret :  vt  omnis  qui  credit  in  eum  non 
pereat,  sed  habeat  vitam  eternam. 
Non  enim  misit  deus  filium  suum  in 
mundum  vt  iudicet  mundum  :  sed  vt 
saluetur  mundus  per  ipsum  :  Qui 
credit  in  eum :  non  iudicatur.  Qui 
autem  non  credit,  iam  iudicatus  est: 
quia  non  credit  in  nomine  vnigeniti 
filij  dei.  Hoc  est  autem  iudicium : 
quia  lux  venit  in  mundum,  &  dilexe- 
runt  homines  magis  tenebras  quam 
lucem.  Erant  enim  eorum  mala 
opera.  Omnis  enim  qui  male  agit : 
odit  lucem.  Et  non  venit  ad  lucem  : 
vt  non  arguantur  opera  eius.  Qui 
autem  facit  veritatem  venit  ad  lucem  : 
vt  manifestentur  eius  opera,  quia  in 
deo  sunt  facta. 

C  Feria.  iij.  post  pentecosten. 
Ad  missam.     Officium. 

[4    Esd.    ii    36b,   37b :     Ps.    Lxxvii 

(Lxxviii)  1] 


1549 

them  whyche  heard  the  preachyng. 
And  they  of  the  circumcisio  which 
beleued,  were  astonyed,  as  many  as 
came  wyth  Peter,  because  that  on  the 
gentyles  also,  was  shedde  out  the  gyfte 
of  the  holy  gost.  For  they  heard 
them  speake  wyth  tongues  &  magnifye 
God.  Then  aunswered  Peter :  can  any 
man  forbid  water,  that  these  should 
not  be  baptised  whiche  haue  receyued 
the  holy  gost  as  well  as  we  ?  And 
he  commaunded  them  to  be  baptysed 
in  the  name  of  the  Lorde.  Then 
prayed  they  him  to  tarye  a  fewe  dayes. 

TheGospell. 

[      lohn.  iii. 

SO  God  loued  the  worlde,  that  he 
gaue  his  only  begotten  sone,  that 
whosoeuer  beleueth  in  him,  should 
not  perishe,  but  haue  euerlasting 
lyfe.  For  God  sent  not  hys  sonne 
into  the  worlde,  to  condemne  the 
worlde,  but  that  the  worlde  through 
hym  myght  be  saued.  He  that 

beleueth  on  hym  is  not  condemned. 
But  he  that  beleueth  not,  is  condemned 
already,  because  he  hath  not  beleued 
in  the  name  of  the  onely  begotten 
sonne  of  God.  And  this  is  the  con- 
demnacion  :  that  lyght  is  come  into 
the  worlde,  and  men  loued  darcknes 
more  then  lyght,  because  theyr  dedes 
were  euill.  For  euery  one  that  euyll 
doeth,  hateth  the  light,  neyther 
cummeth  to  the  light,  leste  his  dedes 
should  be  reproued.  But  he  that 
doeth  trueth,  cummeth  to  the 

light,  that   his   dedes   may  be 
knowen,  howe  that  they  are  wrought 
in  God. 

C        TUESDAY 

At  the  Communion. 

[Misericordiam.  psal.  ci. 
MY  song  shall  be  of  mercye  and 
Judgement  :  vnto  thee  (O  Lorde)  will 
I  sing. 

0  let  me  haue  vnderstanding  :  in 
the  way  of  Godlynes. 

When  wilt  thou  come  vnto  me  ?  I 
wyll  walke  in  my  house  with  a  perfect 
heart. 

1  will  take  no  wicked  thing  in  hande  : 
I    hate   the   sinnes   of  vnfaythfulnes, 
there  shall  no  suche  cleaue  vnto  me. 


TUESDAY  IN  WHITSUNWEEK 


1552 

them  whiche  heard  the  preaching. 
And  they  of  the  circucision  which 
beleued,  were  astonied,  as  many  as 
came  with  Peter,  because  that  on  the 
Gentyles  also,  was  shedde  out  the  gyft 
of  the  holy  ghost.  For  they  heard 
them  speake  with  tongues  and  magnifie 
God.  Then  answered  Peter :  can  any 
ma  forbyd  water  that  these  shoulde 
not  be  baptysed  whiche  haue  receyued 
the  holye  ghoste  as  wel  as  we?  And 
he  commaunded  them  to  be  baptysed 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Then 
prayed  they  him  to  tarye  a  fewe  dayes. 

e.  The  Gospel!. 

[       lohn.  iii. 

So  God  loued  the  worlde,  that  he 
gaue  his  onely  begotten  sonne,  that 
whosoeuer  beleueth  in  hym,  shoulde 
not  peryshe,  but  haue  euerlastynge 
lyfe.  For  GOD  sente  not  hys  sonne 
into  the  worlde,  to  condemne  the 
worlde,  but  that  the  worlde  through 
hym  myght  be  saued.  But  he  that 
beleueth  on  hym  is  not  condemned. 
But  he  that  beleueth  not,  is  condemned 
already,  because  he  hathe  not  beleued 
in  the  name  of  the  onely  begotten 
sonne  of  God.  And  this  is  the  con- 
demnatio :  that  lyght  is  come  into 
the  worlde,  and  men  loued  darckenes 
more  then  lyght,  because  theyr  deedes 
were  euyll.  For  euerye  one  that  euyl 
doeth,  hateth  the  lyght,  neyther 
commeth  to  the  lyght,  leste  his  dedes 
should  be  reproued.  But  he  that 
doeth  the  trueth,  commeth  to  the 
lyghte,  that  hys  dedes  may  be 
kiiowen,  howe  that  they  are  wrought 
in  God. 


1661 

them,  who  heard  the  word. 
And  they  of  the  Circumcision  who 
believed,  were  astonished,  as  many  as 
came  with  Peter,  because  that  on  the 
Gentiles  also  was  poured  out  the  gift 
of  the  holy  Ghost.  For  they  heard 
them  speak  with  tongues,  and  magnifie 
God.  Then  answered  Peter,  Can  any 
man  forbid  water,  that  these  should 
not  be  baptized,  who  have  received 
the  holy  Ghost  as  well  as  we?  And 
he  commanded  them  to  be  baptized 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Then 
prayed  they  him  to  tarry  certain  dayes. 

The  Gospel. 

[S»:  lohn.  3.  416. 

God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he 
gave  his  only  begotten  Son :  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  him  should 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting 
life.  For  God  sent  not  his  son 
into  the  world  to  condemn  the 
world,  but  that  the  world  through 
him  might  be  saved.  He  that 

believeth  on  him,  is  not  condemned  : 
but  he  that  believeth  not  is  condemned 
already,  because  he  hath  not  believed 
in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten 
son  of  God.  And  this  is  the  Con 
demnation,  that  light  is  come  into 
the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness 
rather  then  light,  because  their  deeds 
were  evil.  For  every  one  that  doth 
evil  hateth  the  light,  neither 
cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his-  deeds 
should  be  reproved.  But  he  that 
doth  truth,  cometh  to  the 

light,  that  his  deeds  may  be  made 
manifest ;  that  they  are  wrought 

in  God. 


THE  TUESDAIE  AFTER   WHYTSVNDAYE. 


'TUESDAY  3lN          WttlTSUN  'WEEK. 


452 


TUESDAY  IN  WHITSUNWEEK 


SOURCES 


Oratio. 

[Assit  nobis  domine  quesumus  virtus 
spiritus  sancti,  que  &  corda  nostra 
clementer  expurget  &  ab  omnibus 
tueatur  aduersis.  Per  dominum.  in 
vnitate  eiusdem.  (Leon.  321)] 


1549 

A  frowarde  heart  shall  departe  from 
me  :  I  wyll  not  knowe  a  wicked 
person. 

Whoso  prieuely  sclaundreth  his 
neyghbour  :  him  wyl  I  destroy. 

Whoso  hath  also  a  proude  looke, 
and  an  hie  stomake  :  I  will  not  suffre 
hym. 

Mine  iyes  looke  vnto  suche  as  be 
faythfull  in  the  lande  :  that  they  may 
dwell  with  me. 

Whoso  leadeth  a  godly  lyfe  :  he 
shalbe  my  seruaunt. 

There  shal  no  deceytfull  person 
dwell  in  my  house  :  he  that  telleth 
lyes  shall  not  tarye  in  my  syght. 

I  shal  soone  destroy  al  the  vngodly 
that  are  in  the  land  :  that  I  may  roote 
out  al  wicked  doers  from  the  citie  of 
the  Lorde. 

Glory  be  to  the  father.  &c. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning.  &c. 

The  Collect. 
God  whiche.&C.     As  vpon  whitsonday. 


Epistola.     Lectio  actuum  apostolorum. 

[viij.  c 

IN  diebus  illis.  Cum  audissent 
apostoli  qui  erant  hierosolymis,  quia 
recepisset  samaria  verbum  dei,  miser  unt 
ad  eos  petrum  et  iohannem.  Qui  cum 
venissent  orauerunt  pro  ipsis,  vt  acci- 
perent  spiritum  sanctum.  Nondum 
enim  in  quemquam  illorum  venerat, 
sed  baptizati  tantum  erant  in  nomine 
domini  iesu.  Tune  imponebant  manus 
super  illos,  et  accipiebant  spiritum 
sanctum. 

Secundum  iohannem. 

[X.  A 

IN  illo  tempore.  Dixit  iesus  dis- 
cipulis  suis.  Amen  amen  dico  vobis  : 
qui  non  intrat  per  ostium  in  ouile 
ouium,  sed  ascendit  aliunde :  ille  fur 
est  et  latro.  Qui  autem  intrat  per 


The  Epistle. 

[Act.  Viii. 

Wnen  the  Apostles  whiche  were  at 
Jerusalem  hearde  saye,  that  Samaria 
had  receyued  the  word  of  God,  they 
sent  vnto  them  Peter  and  lohn. 
Whyche  when  they  were  come  downe, 
prayed  for  the,  that  they  might  re- 
ceyue  the  holy  gost.  For  as  yet  he 
was  come  on  none  of  them  :  but  they 
were  baptised  onely  in  the  name  of 
Christ  Iesu.  The  laide  they  their 
handes  on  them,  &  they  receiued 
the  holy  goste. 

The  Gospel. 

[      lohn.  x. 

VErely,  verly,  I  saye  vnto  you  :  he 
that  entreth  not  in  by  the  doore  into 
the  shepefolde,  but  climeth  vp  some 
other  waye,  the  same  is  a  thefe,  and  a 
murtherer.  But  he  that  entreth  in  by 
the  doore,  is  the  shephearde  of  the 


TUESDAY  IN  WHITSUNWEEK 

I66l 


453 


C  The  Collect. 
Godwhich.&C.  (AsvponWhytsondaye.) 


C  The  Epistle. 

[Acte.  viii 

Wnen  the  Apostles  which  were  at 
Jerusalem  hearde  saye,  that  Samaria 
had  receyued  the  worde  of  God,  they 
sent  vnto  them  Peter  &  lohn. 
Which  when  they  were  come  downe, 
prayed  for  them,  that  they  myghte  re- 
ceyue  the  holy  Ghoste.  For  as  yet  he 
was  come  on  none  of  them  :  but  they 
were  baptysed  onely  in  the  name  of 
Christ  lesu.  Then  laide  they  theyr 
hades  on  them,  and  they  receyued 
the  holy  ghost. 

C  The  Gospell. 

[      lohn.  x. 

VErelye,  verely  I  saye  vnto  you  ;  he 
that  entreth  not  in  by  the  dore  into 
the  shepefolde,  but  climeth  vp  some 
other  waye,  the  same  is  a  thefe  &  a 
murtherer.  But  he  that  entereth  in  by 
the  doore,  is  the  shepehearde  of  the 


The  Collect. 

God,  who8  as  9at  this  time*  8didst 
teach  the  hearts  of  thy  faithfull 
people  by  sending  to  them  the  light 
of  thy  holy  spirit :  Grant  vs  by  the 
same  spirit,  to  have  a  right  iudgement 
in  all  things,  and  evermore  to  rejoyce 
in  his  holy  comfort,  through  the  merits 
of  Christ  Jesu  our  saviour,  Who  liveth, 
and  reigneth  with  thee  in  the  vnity  of 
the  same  Spirit,  one  God,  world  with 
out  end.  Amen. 

9For  the  Epistle. 

[Acts.  8.  <14. 

When  the  Apostles  who  were  at 
Jerusalem,  heard  that  Samaria 

had  received  the  word  of  God,  they 
sent  vnto  them  Peter  and  lohn  : 
Who  when  they  were  come  down, 
prayed  for  them  that  they  might  re 
ceive  the  holy  Ghost.  For  as  yet  he 
was  fallen  vpon  none  of  them  :  onely 
they  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  lesus.  Then  layd  they  their 
hands  on  them,  and  they  received 
the  holy  Ghost. 

The  Gospel. 

[S*:  lohn.  10.  41. 

Verily,  verily,  J  say  vnto  you,  He 
that  entreth  not  by  the  door  into 
the  sheepfold,  but  climbeth  vp  some 
other  way,  the  same  is  a  thief,  and  a 
robber.  But  he  that  entreth  in  by 
the  door,  is  the  Shepherd  of  the 


454 


TUESDAY  IN  WHITSUNWEEK 


SOURCES 

ostium :  pastor  est  ouium.  Huic 
ostiarius  aperit :  et  cues  vocem  eius 
audiunt.  Et  proprias  cues  vocat 
nominatim  :  et  educit  eas.  Et  cum 
proprias  oues  emiserit :  ante  eas  vadit. 
Et  oues  ilium  sequuntur  :  quia  sciunt 
vocem  eius.  Alienum  autem  non 
sequuntur,  sed  fugiunt  ab  eo :  quia 
non  nouerunt  vocem  alienorum.  Hoc 
prouerbium  dixit  eis  iesus.  Illi  autem 
non  cognouerunt  quid  loqueretur  eis. 
Dixit  ergo  eis  iterum  iesus.  Amen 
amen  dico  vobis  :  quia  ego  sum  ostium 
ouium.  Omnes  quotquot  venerunt : 
fures  sunt  et  latrones,  sed  non  audie- 
runt  eos  oues.  Ego  sum  ostium.  Per 
me  si  quis  introierit  saluabitur,  et 
ingredietur,  et  egredietur :  et  pascua 
inueniet.  Fur  non  venit  nisi  vt 
furetur  et  mactet  &  perdat.  Ego  veni 
vt  vitam  habeaut :  et  abundantius 
habennt. 


1549 

shepe  :  To  hym  the  porter  openeth, 
and  the  shepe  heare  his  voyce,  and  he 
calleth  his  owne  shepe  by  name,  and 
leadeth  them  out.  And  when  he  hath 
sent  furth  his  owne  shepe,  he  goeth 
before  them,  and  the  shepe  folowe 
hym :  for  they  knowe  his  voyce.  A 
straunger  will  they  not  folowe,  but  will 
flye  from  hym  :  for  they  knowe  not 
the  voyce  of  straungers.  Thys  pro- 
uerbe  spake  Iesus  vnto  them,  but  they 
vnderstoode  not  what  thynges  they 
were  whiche  he  spake  vnto  them. 
Then  sayed  Iesus  unto  them  agayne  : 
verely,  verely,  I  say  vnto  you  :  I  am 
the  doore  of  the  shepe.  All  (cue  as 
many  as  came  before  me)  are  theues 
and  murtherers,  but  the  shepe  dyd 
not  heare  them.  I  am  the  doore,  by  me 
yf  any  enter  in,  he  shall  be  safe, 

&  shall  goe  in  and  out,  and  fynde 
pasture.  A  thefe  cummeth  not  but 
for  to  steale,  kyll,  and 

destroy.  I  am  come  that  they  myght 
haue  lyfe,  &  that  they  myght  haue  it 
more  aboundauntly. 


TUESDAY  IN  WHITSUNWEEK 


455 


1552 

shepe  :  To  hym  the  porter  openeth, 
&  the  shepe  heare  hys  voyce,  &  he 
calleth  his  owne  shepe  by  name,  and 
leadeth  them  oute.  And  when  he  hath 
sent  forth  his  owne  shepe,  he  goeth 
before  them,  &  the  shepe  folow 
him  :  for  they  know  his  voyce.  A 

straunger  wyll  they  not  folowe,  but  wyll 
flee  from  him :  for  they  know  not 
the  voyce  of  straungers.  This  pro- 
uerbe  spake  lesus  vnto  the,  but  they 
vnderstode  not  what  thinges  they 
were  which  he  spake  vnto  them. 
The  sayd  lesus  vnto  them  agayne  : 
Verely,  verely,  I  say  vnto  you  :  I  am 
the  dore  of  the  shepe.  All  (cue  as 
many  as  came  before  me)  are  theues 
and  murtherers,  but  the  shepe  did 
not  heare  the.  I  am  the  dore,  by  me 
yf  any  entre  in,  he  shal  be  safe, 

£  shal  go  in  £  out :  and  fynd 
pasture.  A  thefe  cometh  not  but 
for  to  steale,  kyll,  and 

destroy.  I  am  come  that  they  might 
haue  life,  and  that  they  myght  haue  it 
more  aboundauntly. 


1661 

sheep.  To  him  the  porter  openeth  : 
and  the  sheep  hear  his  voice,  and  he 
calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name,  and 
leadeth  them  out.  And  when  he  put- 
teth  forth  his  own  sheep,  he  goeth 
before  them,  and  the  sheep  follow 
him  :  for  they  know  his  voice.  And  a 
stranger  will  they  not  follow,  but  will 
flee  from  him  ;  for  they  know  not 
the  voyce  of  strangers.  This  par 
able  spake  Jesus  vnto  them  :  but  they 
vnderstood  not  what  things  they 
were  which  he  spake  vnto  them. 
Then  said  Jesus  vnto  them  again ; 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  vnto  you,  I  am 
the  door  of  the  sheep.  All  that 
ever  came  before  me,  are  thieves, 
and  robbers  ;  but  the  sheep  did 
not  hear  them.  J  am  the  door,  by  me 
if  any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved, 
and  shall  go  in  and  out,  and  finde 
pasture.  The  thief  cometh  not  but 
for  to  steal,  and  to  kill,  and  to 
destroy  :  J  am  come,  that  they  might 
have  life,  and  that  they  might  have  it 
more  abundantly. 


END  OF  VOLUME  I 


