lii^ 


H.  C.  SHIP  DUKE   or   YORK 
25TH  DECEMBER  1817. 


/o<l/*«x/«_  <y/'    '-vj  -/t   '^'i. 


. ^*-«^(Vi  4"  c// L m^t c  ^ '^      V  />*^-    U'^t/TLiy. 


jis-'^^S-  /s>/v 


^^♦^'^^--w.e/^  >»-»-.- jc-i^^  ^< 


/ 


/\  «-, 


yV 


/-    U  .lu}^(>fA/:. 


^ 


^ 


1: 


c 
X 


\ 
s 

V) 


•^: 


r     \ 


V 


s^ 


N 


^ii  t^ 


X  <s 


^ 


x^  ^^^^^H^ 


^ 

A 

^ 

^  ^• 

^ 

s,  ; 

<> 

< 

^  '^x^  VX  >v  \  V 


THE     BOOK 


OF 


COMMON    PRAYER, 


AND   ADMINISTRATION   OF 


THE    SACRAMENTS, 


AND 


OTHER    RITES    AND    CEREMONIES 


OF 


THE  CHURCH, 

ACCORDING  TO  THE  USE  OF 

%\)t  llniteJj  Ci)urcl)  of  Cnglanti  anb  31relanD : 

TOGETHER  WITH 

THE    PSALTER    OR    PSALMS    OF    DAVID, 

POINTED  AS  THEY  ARE  TO  BE  SUNG  OR  SAID  IN  CHURCHES ; 

AND    THE 

FORM  AND  MANNER  OF  MAKING,  ORDAINING,  AND  CONSECRATING 

OF 

BISHOPS,  PRIESTS,  AND  DEACONS. 


OXFORD: 

PRINTED  AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS, 
BY   BENSLEY,   COOKE,    AND   COLLINGWOOD, 

PRINTERS  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY; 
And  sold  by  E.  GAUDNEn,  at  the  Oxford  Bible  Warehouse,  Paternoster  Row,  London. 

Cum  Privilegic]  1S16.  [Price  Nine  Shilling!. 


THE 

CONTENTS   OF  THIS   BOOK, 


1.  1  HE  Acts  for  the  Uniformity  of  Common  Prayer,  &c. 

2.  The  Preface. 

3.  Concerning  the  Service  of  the  Church. 

4.  Concerning  Ceremonies,  why  some  be  abolished,  and  some  retained. 

5.  The  Order  how  the  Psalter  is  appointed  to  be  read. 

6.  The  Order  how  the  rest  of  the  holy  Scriptme  is  appointed  to  be  read. 

7.  A  Table  of  Proper  Lessons  and  Psalms. 

8.  The  Calendar,  with  the  Table  of  Lessons. 

9.  Tables  and  Rules  for  the  Feasts  and  Fasts  through  the  whole  Year. 
10.  The  Order  for  Morning  Prayer. 

H.  The  Order  for  Evening  Prayer. 

12.  The  Creed  of  St.  Athanasius. 

13.  The  Litany. 

14.  Prayers  and  Thanksgivings  upon  several  occasions. 

15.  The  Collects,  Epistles,  and  Gospels,  to  be  used  at  the  Ministration  of  the  holy  Commmiion, 

tliroughout  the  Year. 

16.  The  Oi"der  of  the  Ministration  of  the  holy  Communion. 

17.  The  Order  of  Baptism  both  Publick  and  Private. 

18.  The  Order  of  Baptism  for  those  of  riper  Years. 

19.  The  Catechism. 

20.  The  Order  of  Confirmation. 

21.  The  Form  of  Solemnization  of  Matrimony. 

22.  The  Order  for  the  Visitation  of  the  Sick,  and  the  Communion  of  the  Sick. 

23.  The  Order  for  the  Burial  of  the  Dead. 

24.  The  Thanksgiving  of  Women  after  Child-birth. 

25.  A  Commination,  or  denouncing  of  God's  anger  and  judgements  against  sinner*. 

26.  The  Psalter. 

27-  Forms  of  Prayer  to  be  used  at  Sea. 

28.  The  Form  and  Manner  of  Making,  Ordaining,  and  Consecrating  of  Bishops,  Priests,  and  Deacons. 

29.  A  Form  of  Prayer  for  the  Fifth  Day  of  November. 

30.  A  Form  of  Prayer  for  the  Thirtieth  Day  of  January. 

31.  A  Form  of  Prayer  for  the  Twenty-ninth  Day  of  May. 

32.  A  Form  of  Prayer  for  the  Twenty-fifth  Day  of  October. 

33.  Articles  of  Religion. 


2000SS4 


An  AH  for  the  Uniformity  of  Common  Prayer,  and  Service  in  the 
Church,  and  Adminijiration  of  the  Sacraments. 


PRIMO     ELIZABETHS. 


WHERE  at  the  death  of  our  late  Sovereign 
Lord  Khig  Eduard  the  Sixth,  there  remained 
one  uniform  Order  of  Common  Service  and  Prayer, 
and  of  the  Administration  of  Sacraments,  Rites 
and  Ceremonies  of  the  Church  of  England,  which 
■was  set  forth  in  one  Book,  intituled,  The  Book  of 
Common  Praijer,  and  Administration  of  Sacraments, 
and  other  Riles  and  Ceremonies  in  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land, Authorized  by  Act  of  Parliament,  holden  in 
the  fifth  and  sixth  years  of  our  said  late  Sovereign 
Lord  King  Eduard  the  Sixth,  intituled,  An  Act  for 
the  Uniformiti/  of  Common  Prayer,  and  Administra- 
tion of  the  Sacraments;  The  which  was  repealed,  and 
taken  away  by  Act  of  Parliament,  in  the  first  Year 
of  the  K^igii  of  our  late  Sovereign  Lady  Queen 
Mary,  to  the  great  decay  of  the  due  honour  of 
God,  and  discomfort  to  the  Professors  of  the  Truth 
of  Christ's  Reiigion : 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  Authority  of  this 
present  Parliament,  That  the  said  Statute  of  Repeal, 
and  every  tiling  therein  contained,  only  concerning 
the  said  Book,  and  the  Service,  Administration  of 
Sacraments,  Rites  and  Ceremonies,  contained  or  ap- 
pointed in  or  by  the  said  Book,  shall  be  void  and  of 
Done  effect,  from  and  after  the  Feast  of  the  Nativity 
of  St.  John  Baptist  next  coming  :  and  that  the  said 
Book  with  the  Order  of  Service,  and  of  the  Admini- 
stration of  Sacraments,  Rites  and  Ceremonies,  with 
the  Alterations,  and  Additions  therein  added  and 
appointed  by  this  Statute,  siiail  stand,  and  be  from 
and  after  the  said  Feast  of  the  Nativity  of  St.  John 
Baptist,  in  full  force  and  effect,  according  to  the 
tenor  and  effect  of  the  Statute:  Any  thing  in  the 
foresaid  Statute  of  Repeal  to  the  contrary  not- 
withstanding. 

And  further  be  it  Enacted  by  the  Queen's  High- 
ness, with  the  assent  of  the  Fiords  and  Commons 
in  this  present  Parliament  assembled,  and  hv  the 
Authority  of  the  same.  That  all  and  singulai  iMi- 
nisters  in  any  Cathedral,  or  Parish-Cliuicli,  or 
other  place  within  tlii.s  Realm  of  Eng/and,  I  Vales, 
and  the  Marches  of  the  same,  or  otiier  the  Queen's 
Dominions,  sliall  from  and  alter  the  Feast  of  the 
Nativity  of  St.  John  Baptist  next  coming,  be 
boundcn  to  say  and  use  the  Mattins,  Evensong, 
Celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  Administra- 


tion of  each  of  the  Sacraments,  and  all  their  com- 
mon and  open  Prayer,  in  such  order  and  form  as  is 
mentioned  in  the  said  Book,  so  Authorized  by  Par- 
liament in  the  said  fifth  and  sixth  Years  of  the 
Reign  of  King  Echcard  the  Sixth  :  with  one  altera- 
tion, or  addition  of  certain  Lessons  to  be  used  on 
every  Sunday  in  the  Year,  and  the  Form  of  the  Li- 
tany altered  and  corrected,  and  two  Sentences  only 
added  in  the  delivery  of  the  Sacrament  to  the  Com- 
municants, and  none  other,  or  otherwise.  And  that 
if  any  manner  of  Parson,  Vicar,  or  other  whatso- 
ever Minister,  that  ought  or  should  sing  or  say 
Common  Prayer  mentioned  in  the  said  13ook,  or 
minister  the  Sacraments,  from  and  after  the  Feast 
of  the  Nativity  of  St.  John  Baptist  next  coming, 
refuse  to  use  the  said  Common  Prayer,  or  to  minis- 
ter the  Sacraments  in  such  Cathedral  or  Parish- 
Church,  or  other  places,  as  he  should  use  to  minis- 
ter the  same,  in  such  order  and  form,  as  they  be 
mentioned,  and  set  forth  in  the  said  Book ;  or  shall 
wilfully,  or  obstinately  standing  in  the  same,  use 
any  other  Rite,  Ceremony,  Order,  Form,  or  Manner 
ot"  Celebrating  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  openly  or  pri- 
vily, or  Mattins,  Evensong.  Administration  of  the 
Sacrainents,  or  other  open  Prayers,  than  is  mention- 
ed and  set  forth  in  the  said  Book,  [open  Praifer  in 
and  thronghout  this  Act,  is  meant  that  Prayer  which 
is  for  others  to  come  unto  or  hear,  either  in  Common 
Churches,  or  Private  Chapels,  or  Oratories,  commonly 
called  the  Service  of  the  Church^  or  shall  preach, 
declare  or  speak  any  thing  in  the  derogation,  or 
depraving  of  the  said  Book,  or  any  thing  therein 
contained,  or  of  any  part  thereof,  and  shall  be  tliere- 
of  lawfidly  convicted,  according  to  the  laws  of  this 
Realin,  by  verdict  of  twelve  men,  or  by  his  own 
confession,  or  by  the  notorious  evidence  of  the  fact, 
shall  lose  and  forfeit  to  the  Queen's  Highness,  her 
Heirs  and  Successors,  for  his  first  Offence,  the  profit 
of  all  his  Spiritual  Benefices,  or  Promotions,  com- 
ing or  arising  in  one  whole  Year  next  after  his 
Conviction:  And  also  that  the  Person  so  convicted, 
shall  for  the  same  Offence  suffer  Imprisonment  by 
the  space  of  six  Months,  without  Bail  or  Mainprise. 
And  if  anv  such  Person,  once  convict  of  any  Of- 
fence concerning  the  Premisses,  shall  after  his  first 
conviction  eftsoons  offend,  ;ind  be  thereof  in  form 


All  A&:  for  the  Unifornutij  of  Common  Prayer. 


aFoiesaid  lawfully  convict ;  That  then  the  same 
Person  shall  for  his  second  Offence  suffer  Impri- 
sonment by  the  space  of  one  whole  Year,  and  also 
shall  therefore  be  deprived,  ipso  facto,  of  ail  his 
{spiritual  Promotions,  and,  that  it  shall  be  lawful 
to  all  Patrons,  or  Donors  of  all  and  singular  the 
same  Spiritual  Promotions,  or  of  any  of  them  to 
present  or  collate  to  the  same,  as  though  the  Per- 
son or  Persons  so  offending  were  dead.  And  that  if 
any  such  Person  or  Persons,  after  he  shall  be  twice 
convicted  in  form  aforesaid,  shall  offend  against  any 
of  the  Premisses  the  third  time,  and  shall  be  there- 
of in  form  aforesaid  lawfully  convicted  ;  That  then 
the  Person  so  offending,  and  convicted  the  third 
time,  shall  be  deprived  ipso  facto  of  all  his  Spiritual 
Promotions,  and  also  shall  suffer  imprisonment  dur- 
ing his  life.  And  if  the  Person  that  shall  offend, 
and  be  convicted  in  form  aforesaid,  concerning 
any  of  the  Premisses,  shall  not  be  beneticed  nor 
have  any  Spiritual  Promotion,  that  then  the  same 
Person  so  offending  and  convict,  shall  for  the  first 
offence  suffer  imprisonment  during  one  whole  Year 
next  after  his  said  Conviction,  without  Bail  or 
Mainprise.  And  if  any  such  Person,  not  having 
any  Spiritual  Promotion,  after  his  first  Conviction 
shall  eftsoons  offend  in  any  thing  concerning  the 
Premisses,  and  shall  in  form  aforesaid  be  thereof 
lawfully  convicted,  that  then  the  same  Person  shall 
for  his  second  Offence  suffer  imprisonment  during 
his  life. 

And  it  is  Ordained  and  Enacted  by  the  Authority 
aforesaid,  That  if  any  Person  or  Persons  whatso- 
ever, after  the  said  Feast  of  the  Nativity  of  St.  John 
Baptist  next  coming,  shall  in  any  Enterludes,  Plays, 
Songs,  Rhimes,  or  by  other  open  Words,  declare  or 
speak  any  thing  in  the  derogation,  depraving,  or 
despising  of  the  same  Book,  or  of  any  thing  there- 
in contained,  or  any  part  thereof:  or  shall  by  open 
fact,  deed,  or  by  open  threatenings,  compel  or 
cause,  or  otherwise  procure  or  maintain  any  Parson, 
Vicar,  or  other  Minister  in  any  Cathedral  or  Parish- 
Church,  or  in  Chapel,  or  in  any  other  place,  to  sing 
or  say  any  common  or  open  Prayer,  or  to  minister 
any  Sacrament  otherwise,  or  in  any  other  manner 
and  form  than  is  mentioned  in  the  said  Book ;  or 
that  by  any  of  the  said  means  shall  unlawfully  inter- 
rupt, or  let  any  Parson,  Vicar,  or  other  Minister, 
in  any  Cathedral  or  Parish-Church,  Chapel,  or  any 
other  Place,  to  sing  or  say  common  and  open 
Prayer,  or  to  minister  the  Sacraments,  or  any  of 
them,  in  such  manner  and  form,  as  is  mentioned  in 
the  said  Book;  that  then  every  such  Person,  being 
thereof  lawfully  convicted,  in  form  abovcsaid,  shall 
forfeit  to  the  Queen  our  Sovereign  Lady,  her  Heirs 


and  Successors,  for  the  first  Offence,  an  hundred 
Marks.  And  if  any  Person  or  Persons,  being  once 
convict  of  any  sucli  Offence,  eftsoons  offend  against 
any  of  the  last  recited  Offences,  and  shall  in  form 
aforesaid  be  tiiereof  lawfully  convict;  that  the  same 
Person  so  offending,  and  convict,  shall  for  the  se- 
cond Offence  forfeit  to  the  Queen  our  Sovereign 
Lady,  her  Heirs  and  Successors,  four  hundred 
Marks.  And  if  any  Person,  after  he  in  form  afore- 
said shall  have  been  twice  convict  of  any  Offence 
concerning  any  of  the  last  recited  Offences,  shall 
offend  the  third  time,  and  be  thereof  in  form  above- 
said  lawfully  convict,  that  then  every  Person  so 
offending  and  convict,  shall  for  his  third  Offence, 
forfeit  to  our  Sovereign  Lady  the  Queen,  all  his 
Goods  and  Chattels,  and  shall  suffer  Lnprisonment 
during  his  Life.  And  if  any  Person  or  Persons, 
that  for  his  first  Offence  concerning  the  Premisses, 
shall  be  convict  in  form  aforesaid,  do  not  pay  the 
Sum  to  be  paid  by  virtue  of  his  Conviction,  in  such 
manner  and  form,  as  the  same  ought  to  be  paid, 
within  six  Weeks  next  after  his  Conviction;  That 
then  every  Person  so  convict,  and  so  not  paying 
the  same,  shall  for  the  same  first  Offence,  instead 
of  the  said  Sum,  suffer  Imprisonment  by  the  space" 
of  six  Months,  without  Bail  or  Mainprise.  And  if 
any  Person  or  Persons,  that  for  his  second  Offence 
concerning  the  Premisses,  shall  be  convict  in  form 
aforesaid,  do  not  pay  the  said  Sum  to  be  paid  by 
virtue  of  his  Conviction  and  this  Estatute,  in  such 
manner  and  form  as  the  same  ought  to  be  paid,  with- 
in six  Weeks  next  after  his  said  second  Conviction  ; 
That  then  every  Person  so  convicted,  and  not  pay- 
ing the  same,  shall  for  the  same  second  Offence, 
instead  of  the  said  Sum,  suffer  Imprisonment  dur- 
ing twelve  Months,  without  Bail  or  Mainprise. 
And  that  from  and  after  the  said  Feast  of  the  Nati- 
vity of  St.  John  Baptist  next  coming,  all  and  every 
Person  and  Persons  inhabiting  within  this  Realm, 
or  any  other  the  Queen's  Majesty's  Dominions, 
shall  diligently  and  faithfully,  having  no  lawful  or 
reasonable  excuse  to  be  absent,  endeavour  them- 
selves, to  resort  to  their  Parish-Church  or  Chapel 
accustomed,  or  upon  reasonable  let  thereof,  to 
some  usual  place,  where  Common  Prayer,  and  such 
Service  of  God,  shall  be  used  in  such  time  of  let, 
upon  every  Sunday,  and  other  days  ordained  or 
used  to  be  kept  as  Holy-days,  and  then  and  there 
to  abide  orderly  and  soberly,  during  the  time  of 
Common  Prayer,  Preaching,  or  other  Service  of 
God  there  to  be  used,  and  ministered  ;  upon  pain 
of  Punishment  b}-  the  Censures  of  the  Church,  and 
also  upon  pain  that  every  Person  so  offending, 
shall  forfeit  for  every  such  Offence,  twelve  Pence, 


An  ASl/or  the  Uniformity  of  Common  Prayer. 


to  be  levied  by  the  Church-wardens  of  the  Parish 
where  such  Offence  shall  be  done,  to  the  use  of 
the  Poor  of  the  same  Parish,  of  the  Goods,  Lands 
and  Tenements  of  such  Offender,  by  way  of  Dis- 
tress. 

And  for  the  due  execution  hereof,  the  Queen's 
most  excellent  Majesty,  the  Lords  Temporal,  and 
all  the  Commons  in  this  present  Parliament  assem- 
bled, do  in  God's  name  earnestly  require  and 
charge  all  the  Archbishops,  Bishops,  and  other  Or- 
dinaries, that  they  shall  endeavour  themselves  to  the 
uttermost  of  their  knowledges,  that  the  due  and 
true  execution  hereof  may  be  had  throughout  their 
Dioceses  and  Charges,  as  they  will  answer  before 
God,  for  such  evils  and  plagues  wherewith  Al- 
Bjighty  God  may  justly  punish  his  people  for  neg- 
lecting this  good  and  wholesome  law.  And  for  their 
Authority  in  this  behalf,  be  it  further  Enacted  by  the 
Authority  aforesaid,  That  all  and  singular  the  said 
Archbishops,  Bishops,  and  other  their  Officers  ex- 
ercising Ecclesiastical  Jurisdiction,  as  well  in  place 
exempt  as  not  exempt,  within  their  Dioceses,  siiall 
have  full  Power  and  Authority  by  this  Act,  to 
reform,  correct  and  punish  by  Censures  of  the 
•Church,  all  and  singular  Persons  which  shall  offend 
Avithin  any  of  their  Jurisdictions,  or  Dioceses,  after 
the  said  Feast  of  the  Nativity  of  St.  John  Baptist 
next  coming,  against  this  Act  and  Statute ;  any 
other  Law,  Statute,  Privilege,  Liberty  or  Provision 
heretofore  made,  had  or  suffered  to  the  contrary 
notwithstanding. 

And  it  is  Ordained  and  Enacted  by  the  Authority 
aforesaid.  That  all  and  every  Justice  of  Oyer  and 
Determiner,  or  Justice  of  Assize,  shall  have  full 
Power  and  Authority  in  every  of  their  open  and 
general  Sessions,  to  enquire,  hear  and  determine 
all  and  all  manner  of  Offences,  that  shall  be  com- 
mitted or  done  contrary  to  any  Article  contained  in 
this  present  Act,  witliiu  the  limits  of  the  Commis- 
sion to  them  directed,  and  to  make  Process  for  the 
execution  of  the  same,  as  they  may  do  against  any 
Person  being  indicted  before  them  of  Trespass,  or 
lawfully  convicted  thereof. 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  Enacted  by  the  Au- 
tliority  aforesaid,  That  all  and  every  Archbishop 
and  Bishop,  shall  or  may  at  all  time  and  times,  at 
his  liberty  and  pleasure,  join  and  associate  himself 
by  virtue  of  this  Act,  to  the  said  Justices  of  Oyer 
and  Determiner,  or  to  the  said  Justices  of  Assize, 
at  every  of  the  said  open  and  general  Sessions  to  be 
holden  in  any  place  within  his  Diocese,  for  and  to 
the  enquiry,  hearing,  and  determining  of  the  Of- 
fences aforesaid. 

Provided  also,  and  be  it  Enacted  by  the  Autho- 


rity afo.esaid.  That  die  Books  concerning  the  said 
Services,  shall  at  the  Costs  and  Charges  of  the  Pa- 
rishiouejs  of  every  Parish  and  Cathedral  Church, 
be  attained  and  gotten  before  the  said  Feast  of  the 
Nativity  of  St.  John  Baptist  next  following ;  and 
that  all  such  Parishes  and  Cathedral  Churches,  or 
other  places,  where  the  said  Books  shall  be  attained 
and  gotten  before  the  said  Feast  of  the  Nativity 
of  St.  John  Baptist,  shall  within  three  Weeks  next 
after  the  said  Books  so  attained  and  gotten,  use  the 
said  Service,  and  put  the  same  in  use  according  t» 
this  Act. 

And  be  it  further  Enacted  by  the  Authority  afore- 
said. That  no  Person  or  Persons  shall  be  at  any 
time  hereafter  impeached,  or  otherwise  molested  of, 
or  for  any  the  Offences  above  mentioned,  hereafter 
to  be  committed,  or  done  contrary  to  this  Act, 
unless  he  or  they  so  offending,  be  thereof  indicted 
at  the  next  general  Sessions,  to  be  holden  before 
any  such  Justices  of  Oyer  and  Determiner,  or  Jus- 
tices of  Assize,  next  after  any  Offence  committed 
or  done  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  this  Act. 

Piovided  always,  and  be  it  Ordained  and  Enacted 
by  the  Authority  aforesaid.  That  all  and  singular 
Lords  of  the  Parliament,  for  the  third  Offence 
above  mentioned,  shall  be  tried  by  their  Peers. 

Provided  also,  and  be  it  Ordained  and  Enacted 
by  the  Authority  aforesaid,  that  the  Mayor  of  Lon- 
don, and  all  other  Mayors,  Bailifts,  and  all  other 
Head-Officers  of  all  and  singular  Cities,  Boroughs, 
and  Towns-Corporate  within  this  Realm,  Wales, 
and  the  Marches  of  the  same,  to  the  which  Justices 
of  Assize  do  not  commonly  repair,  shall  have  full 
Power  and  Authority  by  virtue  of  this  Act,  to  en- 
quire, hear  and  determine  the  Offences  abovesaid, 
and  every  of  them,  yearly  within  fifteen  Days  after 
the  Feast  of  Easter  and  St.  Michael  the  Archangel, 
in  like  manner  and  form  as  Justices  of  Assize  and 
Oyer  and  Determiner  may  do. 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  Ordained  and  Enact- 
ed by  the  Authority  aforesaid,  That  all  and  singular 
Archbishops  and  Bishops,  and  every  of  their  Chan- 
cellors, Commissaries,  Archdeacons,  and  other  Or- 
dinaries, having  any  peculiar  Ecclesiastical  Juris- 
diction, sliall  have  full  Power  and  Authority,  by 
virtue  of  this  Act,  as  well  to  enquire  in  their  Visita- 
tion, Synods,  and  elsewhere  within  their  Jurisdic- 
tion, at  any  other  time  and  place,  to  take  Accusa- 
tions and  Informations  of  all  and  every  the  things 
above  mentioned,  done,  committed,  or  perpetrated, 
within  the  limits  of  their  Jurisdictions  ;uid  Autho- 
rity, and  to  punish  the  same  by  Admonition,  Ex- 
communication, Sequestration  or  Deprivation,  and 
other  Censures  and  Process,  in  like  form,  as  here- 


An  ABfor  the  Uniformity  of  Pnhlick  Prayers. 


tofore  hath  been  used  in  like  Cases  by  the  Queen's 
Ecclesiastical  Laws. 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  Enacted,  That  what- 
soever Person  offending  in  the  Premisses,  shall  for 
their  Offences,  first  receive  Punishment  of  the 
Ordinary,  having  a  Testimonial  thereof  under  the 
said  Ordinary's  Seal,  shall  not  for  the  same  Offence 
eftsoons  be  convicted  before  the  Justices  :  And 
likewise  receiving  for  the  said  Offence,  Punishment 
first  by  the  Justices,  shall  not  for  the  same  Offence 
eftsoons  receive  Punishment  of  the  Ordinary  :  any 
thing  contained  in  this  Act  to  the  contrary  not- 
withstanding. 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  Enacted,  That  such 
Ornaments  of  the  Church  and  of  the  Ministers 
thereof,  shall  be  retained,  and  be  used,  as  was  in 
this  Church  of  England,  by  Authority  of  Parlia- 
ment, in  the  second  Year  of  the  Reign  of  King 
Edward  the  Sixth,  until  otlier  Order  shall  be  therein 
t-aken  by  the  Authority  of  the  Queen's  Majesty, 
with  the  Advice  of  her  Commissioners  appointed 


and  authorized  under  the  Great  Seal  of  England 
for  Causes  Ecclesiastical,  or  of  the  Metropolitan  of 
this  Realm.  And  also,  that  if  there  shall  happen 
any  Contempt  or  Irreverence  to  be  used  in  the 
Ceremonies  or  Rites  of  the  Church,  by  the  mis- 
using of  the  Orders  appointed  in  this  Book,  the 
Queen's  Majesty  may,  by  the  like  Advice  of  the 
said  Commissioners  or  Metropolitan  ordain  and 
publish  such  further  Ceremonies  or  Rites  as  may 
be  most  for  the  advancement  of  God's  Glory,  the 
edifying  of  his  Church,  and  the  due  reverence  of 
Christ's  holy  Mysteries  and  Sacraments. 

And  be  it  further  Enacted  by  the  Authority 
aforesaid.  That  all  Laws,  Statutes  and  Ordinances, 
wherein  or  whereby  any  other  Service,  Administra- 
tion of  Sacraments,  or  Common  Prayer,  is  limited, 
established,  or  set  forth  to  be  used  within  this 
Realm,  or  any  other  the  Queen's  Dominions  or 
Countries,  shall  from  henceforth  be  utterly  void 
and  of  none  effect. 


An  Adl  for  the  Uniformity  of  Publick  Prayers,  and  Adminiftration  of 
Sacraments,  and  other  Rites  and  Ceremonies  :  And  for  ejlablifiing  the 
Form  of  Making,  Ordaijiing,  and  Confecrating  Biflwps,  Priefis,  and 
Deacons  in  the  Church  of  England. 


XIV.  CAROLI    II. 


WHEREAS  in  the  first  Year  of  the  late 
Queen  Elizabeth,  there  was  one  Uniform 
Order  of  Common  Service  and  Prayer,  and  of  the 
Administration  of  Sacraments,  Rites  and  Ceremo- 
nies of  the  Church  of  England,  (agreeable  to  the 
Word  of  God,  and  usage  of  the  Primitive  Church) 
compiled  by  the  Reverend  Bishops  and  Clergy,  set 
forth  in  one  Book,  intituled.  The  Book  of  Common 
Prayer,  and  Administration  of  Sacraments,  and  otlier 
Riles  and  Ceremonies  in  the  Church  of  England,  and 
enjoined  to  be  used  by  Act  of  Parliament,  holden 
in  the  said  first  Year  of  the  said  late  Queen,  intitu- 
led. An  Act  for  the  Uniformity  of  Common  Prayer, 
and  Service  in  the  Church,  and  Administration  of  the 
Sacraments;  Tery  comfortable  to  all  good  people 
desirous  to  live  in  Christian  Conversation,  and 
most  profitable  to  the  Estate  of  this  Realm,  upon 
the  which  the  Mercy,  Favour  and  Blessing  of  Al- 
mighty God  is  in  no  wise  so  readily  and  plentifully 
poured,  as  by  Common  Prayers,  due  using  of  the 
Sacraments,  and  often  preaching  of  the  Gospel, 
with  devotion  of  the  hearers  :  And  yet  this  notwith- 
standing, a  great  number  of  people  in  divers  parts 


of  this  Realm,  following  their  own  sensuality,  and 
living  without  knowledge  and  due  fear  of  God,  do 
wilfully  and  schismatically  abstain  and  refuse  to 
come  to  their  Parish-Churches,  and  other  publick 
places  where  Common  Prayer,  Administration  of 
the  Sacraments,  and  Preaching  of  the  Word  of 
God  is  used  upon  the  Sundays,  and  other  days  or- 
dained and  appointed  to  be  kept  and  observed  as 
Holy-days :  And  v^'hereas  by  the  great  and  scanda- 
lous neglect  of  Ministers  in  using  the  said  Order 
of  Liturgy  so  set  forth  and  enjoined,  as  aforesaid, 
great  mischiefs  and  inconveniences,  during  the 
time  of  the  late  unhappy  troubles,  have  arisen 
and  grown ;  and  man}'  people  have  been  led  into 
Factions  and  Schisms,  to  the  great  decay  and 
scandal  of  the  Reformed  Religion  of  the  Church  of 
England,  and  to  the  hazard  of  many  Souls :  For 
prevention  whereof  in  time  to  come,  for  settling 
the  peace  of  the  Church,  and  for  allaying  the  pre- 
sent distempers,  which  the  indisposition  of  the 
time  hath  contracted,  The  King's  Majesty  (accord- 
ing to  his  Declaration  of  the  five  and  twentieth  of 
October,   One   thousand   six  hundred    and    sixty) 


An  Ad{  ftfT  the  Uniformity  of  Publick  Prayers. 


granted  his  Commission  under  the  Great  Seal  of 
England,  to  several  Bishops,  and  other  Divines,  to 
review  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  and  to  pre- 
pare such  Alteration  and  Additions  as  they  thought 
fit  to  offer ;  And  afterwards  the  Convocations  of 
both  the  Provinces  of  Canterbury  and  York,  being 
by  his  Majesty  called  and  assembled,  (and  now 
sitting,)  His  Majesty  hath  been  pleased  to  autho- 
rize and  require  the  Presidents  of  the  said  Convo- 
cations, and  other  the  Bishops  and  Clergy  of  the 
same,  to  review  the  said  Book  of  Common  Prayer, 
and  the  Book  of  the  Form  and  Manner  of  the 
Making  and  Consecrating  of  Bishops,  Priests  and 
Deacons :  And  that  after  mature  consideration, 
they  should  make  such  Additions  and  Alterations 
in  the  said  Books  respectively,  as  to  them  should 
seem  meet  and  convenient;  and  should  exhibit  and 
present  the  same  to  His  Majesty  in  writing,  for  his 
further  Allowance  or  Confirmation :  Since  which 
time,  upon  full  and  mature  deliberation,  they  the 
said  Presidents,  Bishops  and  Clerg3'  of  both  Pro- 
vinces, have  accordingly  reviewed  the  said  Books, 
and  have  made  some  Alterations  which  thej-  think 
fit  to  be  inserted  to  the  same ;  and  some  additional 
•Prayers  to  the  said  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  to  be 
used  upon  proper  and  emergent  occasions ;  and 
have  exhibited  and  presented  the  same  unto  His 
Majesty  in  writing,  in  one  Book,  intituled.  The 
Book  of  Common  Prayer,  and  jldminist ration  of  the 
Sacraments,  and  other  Rites  and  Ceremonies  of  the 
Church,  according  to  the  Use  of  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land :  together  zcith  the  Psalter  or  Psalms  of  David, 
pointed  as  they  are  to  he  sung  or  said  in  Churches; 
and  the  Form  and  Mariner  of  Making,  Ordaining, 
and  Consecrating  of  Bishops,  Priests  and  Deacons : 
All  which  His  Majesty  having  duly  considered, 
hath  fully  approved  and  allowed  the  same,  and 
recommended  to  this  present  Parliament,  that  the 
said  Books  of  Common  Prayer,  and  the  Form  of 
Ordination  and  Consecration  of  Bishops,  Priests 
and  Deacons  with  the  Alterations  and  Additions, 
which  have  been  so  made  and  presented  to  His 
Majesty  by  the  said  Convocations,  be  the  Book, 
which  shall  be  appointed  to  be  used  by  all  that  offi- 
ciate in  all  Cathedral  and  Collegiate  Churches  and 
Cha])(ls,  and  in  all  Chapels  of  Colleges  and  Halls 
in  both  the  Universities,  and  the  Colleges  of  Eton 
and  IVinchcster,  and  in  all  Parish-Churches  and 
Chupels,  witliin  the  Kingdom  of  England,  Domi- 
nion of  If  ales,  and  Town  of  Berwick  upon  Tzcced, 
and  by  all  that  Make  or  Consecrate  Bishops,  Priests 
or  Deacons,  in  any  of  the  said  places,  under  such 
Sanctions  and  Penalties  as  the  Houses  of  I'arlia- 
nicnt  shall  think  fit.    Now  in  regard  that  nothing 


conduceth  more  to  the  settling  of  the  Peace  of  this 
Nation  (which  is  desired  of  all  good  men)  nor  to 
the  honour  of  our  Religion,  and  the  propagation 
thereof,  than  an  universal  agreement  in  the  Publick 
Worship  of  Almighty  God  ;  and  to  the  intent  that 
every  Person  within  this  Realm,  may  certainly 
know  the  rule,  to  which  he  is  to  conform  in  Pub- 
lick Worship  and  Administration  of  Sacraments, 
and  other  Rites  and  Ceremonies  of  the  Church  of 
England,  and  the  manner  how,  and  by  whom, 
Bishops,  Priests  and  Deacons  are,  and  ought  to  be 
Made,  Ordained  and  Consecrated  ; 

Be  it  Enacted  by  the  King's  most  Excellent 
Majesty,  by  the  advice,  and  with  the  consent  of 
the  Lords  Spiritual  and  Temporal,  and  of  the  Com- 
mons in  this  present  Parliament  assembled,  and  by 
the  Authority  of  the  same.  That  all  and  singular 
Ministers,  in  any  Cathedral,  Collegiate  or  Parish- 
Church  or  Chapel,  or  other  place  of  Publick  Wor- 
ship within  this  Realm  of  England,  Dominion  of 
JVales,  and  Town  of  Berzcick  upon  Tweed,  shall  be 
bound  to  say  and  use  the  Morning  Prayer,  Evening 
Prayer,  Celebration  and  Administration  of  both  the 
Sacraments,  and  all  other  the  Publick  and  Com- 
mon Prayer,  in  such  order  and  form  as  is  mention- 
ed in  the  said  Book  annexed  and  joined  to  this 
present  Act,  and  intituled.  The  Book  of  Common 
Prayer,  and  Administration  of  the  Sacraments,  and 
other  Rites  a?ul  Ceremonies  of  the  Church,  accord- 
ing to  the  Use  of  the  Church  of  England  :  together 
zcith  the  Psalter  or  Psalms  of  David,  pointed  as  they 
are  to  be  sung  or  said  in  Churches;  and  the  Form 
and  Manner  of  Making,  Ordaining,  and  Consecrat- 
ing of  Bishops,  Priests  and  Deacons:  And  that  the 
Morning  and  Evening  Prayers  tlierein  contained, 
shall  upon  every  Lord's  day,  and  upon  all  other 
days  and  occasions,  and  at  the  times  therein  ap- 
pointed, be  openly  and  solemnly  read  by  all  and 
every  Minister  or  Curate,  in  every  Church,  Chapel, 
or  other  place  of  Publick  Worship  within  this 
Realm  of  England,  and  places  aforesaid. 

And  to  the  end  that  Uniformity  in  the  Publick 
Worship  of  God  (which  is  so  much  desired)  may 
be  speedily  effected ;  Be  it  furtlier  Enacted  by  the 
Authority  aforesaid.  That  every  Parson,  Vicar,  or 
other  Minister  whatsoever,  who  now  hath,  and  en- 
joycth  any  Ecclesiastical  Benefice  or  Promotion, 
within  this  Realm  of  England,  or  places  aforesaid, 
shall  in  the  Church,  Chapel  or  place  of  Publick 
Worship  belonging  to  his  said  Benefice  or  Promo- 
tion, upon  some  Lord's  day  before  the  Feast  of  St. 
Bartholomew,  which  shall  be  in  the  Year  of  our 
Lord  God  One  thousand  six  hundred  sixty  and 
two,  openly,  publickly  and  solemnly  read  the  Morn- 


An  Acl  for  the_  Uniformity  of  Puhlick  Prayers. 


ing  and  Evening  Prayer  appointed  to  be  read  by, 
and  according  to  the  said  Book  of  Common  Prayer, 
at  the  times  thereby  appointed ;  and  after  such 
reading  thereof,  shall  openly  and  fiublickly,  before 
the  Congregation  there  assembled,  declare  his  un- 
feigned assent  and  consent  to  the  Use  of  all  things 
in  the  said  Book  contained  and  prescribed,  in  these 
words  and  no  other ; 

1A.  B.  Do  hereby  declare  my  unfeigned  assent 
and  consent  to  all  and  every  thing  contained 
and  prescribed  in  and  by  the  Book  intituled,  The 
Book  of  Common  Prayer,  and  Administration  of 
the  Sacraments,  and  other  Rites  and  Ceremonies  of 
the  Church,  according  to  the  Use  of  the  Church  of 
Ensrland  :  together  nith  the  Psalter  or  Psalms  of 
David,  pointed  as  they  are  to  be  sung  or  said  in 
Churches;  and  the  Form  and  Manner  of  Making, 
Ordaining,  and  Consecrating  of  Bishops,  Priests, 
<md  Deacons. 

And  that  all  and  every  such  person,  who  shall 
^without  some  lawful  Impediment,  to  be  allowed 
and  approved  of  by  the  Ordinary  of  the  place) 
neglect  or  refuse  to  do  the  same  within  the  time 
aforesaid,  or  (in  case  of  such  Impediment)  within 
one  Moirth  after  such  Impediment  removed,  shall, 
ipso  facto,  be  deprived  of  all  his  Spiritual  Promo- 
tions: And  that  from  thenceforth  it  shall  be  lawful  to 
and  for  all  Patrons,  and  Donors  of  all  and  singular 
the  said  Spiritual  Promotions,  or  of  any  of  them, 
according  to  their  respective  Rights  and  Titles,  to 
present  or  Collate  to  the  same,  as  though  the  per- 
son or  persons  so  offending  or  neglecting  were 
dead. 

And  be  it  further  Enacted  by  the  Authority 
aforesaid.  That  every  person  who  shall  hereafter 
be  presented  or  collated,  or  put  into  any  Ecclesias- 
tical Benefice  or  Promotion,  within  this  Realm  of 
England,  and  places  aforesaid,  shall  in  the  Church, 
Chapel  or  place  of  Publick  Worship,  belonging  to 
his  said  Benefice  or  Promotion,  within  two  Months 
next  after  that  he  shall  be  in  the  actual  possession 
of  the  said  Ecclesiastical  Benefice  or  Promotion, 
npon  some  Lord's  Day,  openly,  publickly  and  so- 
lemnly, read  the  Morning  and  Evening  Prayers, 
appointed  to  be  read  by,  and  according  to  the  said 
Book  of  Common  Prayer,  at  the  times  thereby  ap- 
pointed ;  and  after  such  reading  thereof,  shall  open- 
ly and  publickly,  before  the  Congregation  there 
assembled,  declare  his  unfeigned  assent  and  consent 
to  the  use  of  all  things  therein  contained  and  pre- 
scribed, according  to  the  form  before  appointed : 
And  that  all  and   every  such  person,  who   shall 


(without  some  lawful  Impediment  to  be  allowed 
and  approved  by  the  Ordinary  of  the  Place)  neglect 
or  refuse  to  do  the  same  within  the  time  aforesaid, 
(or  in  case  of  such  Impediment,  within  one  Month 
after  such  Impediment  removed)  shall,  ipso  facto, 
be  deprived  of  all  his  said  Ecclesiastical  Benefices 
and  Promotions  :  And  that  from  thenceforth  it  shall 
and  may  be  lawful  to,  and  for  all  Patrons  and  Do- 
nors of  all  and  singular  the  said  Ecclesiastical  Be- 
nefices and  Promotions,  or  any  of  them,  according 
to  their  respective  Rights  and  Titles,  to  present  or 
collate  to  the  same,  as  though  the  person  or  per- 
sons, so  offending  or  neglecting,  were  dead. 

And  be  it  further  Enacted  by  the  Authority 
aforesaid.  That  in  all  places,  where  the  proper  In- 
cumbent of  any  Parsonage,  or  Vicarage,  or  Bene- 
fice with  Cure,  doth  reside  on  his  Living,  and  keep  a 
Curate,  the  Incumbent  himself  in  person  (not  hav- 
ing some  lawful  Impediment  to  be  allowed  by  the 
Ordinary  of  the  place)  shall  once  (at  the  least)  in 
every  Month,  openly  and  publickly  read  the  Com- 
mon Prayers  and  Service,  in  and  by  the  said  Book 
prescribed ;  and  (if  there  be  occasion)  administer 
each  of  the  Sacraments,  and  other  Rites  of  the 
Church,  in  the  Parish-Church  or  Chapel  of  or  be- 
longing to  the  same  Parsonage,  Vicarage,  or  Bene- 
fice, in  such  order,  manner,  and  form,  as  in,  and 
by  the  said  Book  is  appointed,  upon  pain  to  forfeit 
the  sum  of  five  pounds  to  the  use  of  the  Poor  of 
the  Parish  for  every  offence,  upon  conviction  by 
confession,  or  proof  of  two  credible  witnesses  upon 
Oath,  before  two  Justices  of  the  Peace  of  the 
County,  City,  or  Town-Corporate  where  the  of- 
fence shall  be  committed,  (which  Oath  the  said 
Justices  ai'e  hereby  impowered  to  administer,)  and 
in  default  of  payment  within  ten  days,  to  be  levied 
by  distress  and  sale  of  the  goods  and  chattels  of 
the  offender,  by  the  Warrant  of  the  said  Justices, 
by  the  Church-wardens,  or  Overseers  of  the  Poor 
of  the  said  Parish,  rendering  the  surplusage  to  the 
party. 

Ajid  be  it  further  Enacted  by  the  Authority  afore- 
said. That  every  Dean,  Canon,  and  Prebendary  of 
every  Cathedral,  or  Collegiate-Church,  and  all  Mas- 
ters, and  other  Heads,  Fellows,  Chaplains,  and  Tu- 
tors of  or  in  any  College,  Hall,  House  of  Learn- 
ing, or  Hospital,  and  every  publick  Professor  and 
Reader  in  either  of  the  Universities,  and  in  et-ery 
College  elsewhere,  and  every  Parson,  Vicar,  Curate, 
Lecturer,  and  every  other  person  in  holy  Orders, 
and  every  School-master  keeping  any  publick  or 
private  School,  and  every  person  instructing  or 
teacliing  any  Youth  in  any  House  or  private  Fami- 
ly, as  a  Tutor  or  School-master,  who  upon  the  first 

B 


All  ABfor  the  Unifwmity  of  Puhlick  Prayers. 


Day  of  May,  which  shall  be  ia  the  year  of  our 
Lord  God  One  thousand  six  hundred  sixty-two,  or 
at  any  time  thereafter  shall  be  Incumbent,  or  have 
possession  of  any  Deanry,  Canonry,  Prebend,  Mas- 
tersliip.  Headship,  Fellowship,  Professor's  place,  or 
Reader's  place.  Parsonage,  Vicarage,  oi  any  other 
Ecclesiastical  Dignitj'  or  Promotion,  or  of  any  Cu- 
rate's place.  Lecture  or  School;  or  shall  instruct  or 
teach  any  Youth,  as  Tutor  or  School-master,  shall 
before  the  Feast-day  of  Saint  Bartholomezv,  which 
shall  be  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord  One  thousand  six 
hundred  sixty-two,  or  at  or  before  his,  or  their 
respective  admission,  to  be  Incumbent,  or  have 
possession  aforesaid,  subscribe  the  Declaration  or 
Acknowledgement  following,  scilicet, 

'  'W  A.  B.  Do  declare,  That  it  is  not  lawful  upon 

-  -■-  any  pretence  whatsoever  to  take  arms  against 

*  the  Kbg ;  and  that  1  do  abhor  that  traiterous  Po- 
'  sitioa  of  taking  Arms  by  his  Authority  against  his 

-  Person,   or  against  those  that  are  commissioned 

*  by  him;  and  that  I  will  conform  to  the  Liturgy 
'  of  the  Church  of  England,  as  it  is  now  by  Law 
'  established.  And  I  do  declare.  That  I  do  hold 
'  there  lies  no  obligation  upon  me,  or  on  any  other 

*  person,    from   the   Oath,    commonly   called    The 

*  Solemn  League  and  Covenant,  to  endeavour  any 
'  change,  or  alteration  of  Government  either  in 
'  Church  or  State ;  and  that  the  same  was  in  itself 
'  an  unlawful  Oath,  and  imposed  upon  the  Subjects 
'  of  this  Realm  against  the  known  Laws  and  Liber- 
Mies  of  this  Kingdom.' 

-  Which  said  Declaration  and  Acknowledgement 
shall  be  subscribed  by  every  of  the  said  Masters,  and 
other  Heads,  Fellows,  Chaplains,  and  Tutors  of  or 
in  any  College,  Hall,  or  House  of  Learning,  and  by 
every  publick  Professor  and  Reader  in  either  of  the 
Universities,  before  the  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  re- 
spective Universities  for  the  time  being,  or  his  De- 
puty :  And  the  said  Declaration  or  Acknowledge- 
ment shall  be  subscribed  before  the  respective 
Archbishop,  Bishop,  or  Ordinary  of  the  Diocese  by 
every  other  person  litrcby  enjoined  to  subscribe 
the  same ;  upon  pain,  that  all  and  every  of  the  per- 
.sous  aforesaid  failing  in  such  subscription,  shall  lose 
and  forfeit  such  respective  Deanry,  Canonry,  Pre- 
l>end.  Mastership,  Headship,  Fellowship,  Profes- 
sor's place,  Reader's  place,  I'arsonagc,  Vicarage, 
I'kclesiaslicul  Dignity  or  Promotion,  C'urate's  place. 
Lecture  and  School,  and  shall  be  utterly  disabled, 
ond  ipso  facto  deprived  of  the  same  :  And  that  every 
.such  respective  Deanry,  Canonry,  Prebend,  Ma.s- 
tership,   llcadhhip,  Fellowship,   Professor's   place, 


Reader's  place.  Parsonage,  Vicarjige,  Ecclesiastical 
Dignity  or  Promotion,  Curate's  place.  Lecture  and 
School,  shall  be  void,  as  if  such  person  so  failing 
were  naturally  dead. 

And  if  an)'  School-master,  or  other  person,  in- 
structing or  teaching  Youth  in  any  private  House 
or  Family,  as  a  Tutor  or  School-master,  sliall  in- 
struct or  teach  anj'  Youth,  as  a  Tutor  or  .School- 
master, before  Licence  obtained  from  his  respective 
Archbishop,  Bishop,  or  Ordinary  of  the  Diocese, 
according  to  the  Laws  and  Statutes  of  this  Realm 
(for  which  he  shall  pay  twelve-pence  only)  and  be- 
fore such  Subscription  and  Acknowledgement  made, 
as  aforesaid ;  Then  every  such  School-master,  and 
other,  instructing  and  teaching,  as  aforesaid,  shall  for 
the  first  offence  suffer  three  Months  Imprisonment 
without  Bail  or  Mainprise ;  and  for  every  second 
and  other  such  offence,  shall  suffer  three  Months 
Imprisormient  without  Bail  or  Mainprise,  and  also 
forfeit  to  his  Majesty  the  Sum  of  five  pounds. 

And  after  such  Subscription  made,  every  such 
Parson,  Vicar,  Curate,  and  Lecturer,  shall  procure 
a  Certificate  under  the  hand  and  seal  of  the  re- 
spective Archbishop,  Bishop  or  Ordinary  of  the 
Diocese  (who  are  hereby  enjoined  and  required  up- 
on demand  to  make  and  deliver  the  same)  and  shall 
publickly  and  openly  read  the  same,  together  with 
the  Declaration  or  Acknowledgement  aforesaid,  up- 
on some  Lord's  Day  within  three  Months  then  next 
following,  in  his  Parish-Church,  where  he  is  to  offi- 
ciate, in  the  presence  of  the  Congregation  there 
assembled,  in  the  time  of  Divine  Service;  upon 
pain  that  every  person  failing  therein,  shall  lose 
such  Parsonage,  Vicarage  or  Benefice,  Curate's 
place,  or  Lecturer's  place  respectively,  and  shall  be 
utterly  disabled,  and  ipso  facto  deprived  of  the  same; 
and  that  the  said  Parsonage,  Vicarage  or  Benefice, 
Curate's  place,  or  Lecturer's  place,  shall  be  void  as 
if  he  was  naturally  dead. 

Provided  always.  That  from  and  after  the  twenty- 
fifth  Day  of  March,  which  shall  be  in  the  Year  of 
our  Lord  God  One  thousand  six  hundred  eighty- 
two,  there  shall  be  omitted  in  the  said  Declaration, 
or  Acknowledgement  so  to  be  subscribed  and  read, 
these  words  following,  scilicet : 

'  A  ND  I  do  declare.  That  I  do  hold  there  lies  no 
'  -i*-  Obligation  upon  me,  or  on  any  other  person, 
'  from  the  Oath  commonly  called.  The  Solemn  League 
'  and  Covenant,  to  endeavour  any  change  or  altera- 
'  tion  of  Government  either  in  Church  or  State;  and 
'  that  the  same  was  in  itself  an  unlawful  Oath,  and 
'  imposed  upon  the  Subjects  of  this  Realm  against 
'  the  known  Laws  and  Liberties  of  this  Kingdom.' 


An  AB  for  the  Uniformity  of  Puhlick  Prayers. 


So  as  none  of  the  persons  aforesaid,  shall  from 
thenceforth  be  at  all  obliged  to  subscribe  or  read  that 
part  of  the  said  Declaration  or  Acknowledgement. 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  Enacted,  That  from 
and  after  the  Feast  of  St.  Bartholomew,  which  shall 
be  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord  One  thousand  six  hun- 
dred sixty  and  two,  no  person,  who  now  is  Incum- 
bent, and  in  possession  of  any  Parsonage,  Vicarage 
or  Benefice,  and  who  is  not  already  in  holy  Orders 
by  Episcopal  Ordination,  or  shall  not  before  the 
said  Feast-day  of  St.  Bartholomew  be  ordained  Priest 
or  Deacon,  according  to  the  form  of  Episcopal  Or- 
dination, shall  have,  Iiold,  or  enjoy  the  said  Parson- 
age, Vicarage,  Benefice  with  Cure,  or  other  Eccle- 
siastical Promotion  within  this  Kingdom  of  England, 
or  the  Dominion  of  Wales,  or  Town  of  Berwick  upon 
Tweed;  but  shall  be  utterly  disabled,  and  ipso  facto 
deprived  of  the  same;  and  all  his  Ecclesiastical  Pro- 
motions shall  be  void,  as  if  he  was  naturally  dead. 

And  be  it  further  Enacted  by  the  Authority  afore- 
said, That  no  Person  wliatsoever  shall  thenceforth 
be  capable  to  be  admitted  to  any  Parsonage,  Vicar- 
age, Benefice,  or  other  Ecclesiastical  Promotion  or 
Dignity  whatsoever,  nor  shall  presume  to  consecrate 
and  administer  the  holy  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  before  such  time  as  he  shall  be  ordained 
Priest,  according  to  the  Form  and  Manner  in  and 
by  the  said  Book  prescribed,  unless  he  have  formerly 
been  made  Priest  by  Episcopal  Ordination,  upon 
pain  to  forfeit  for  every  Offence  the  sum  of  one 
hundred  pounds ;  one  moiety  thereof  to  the  King's 
Majesty,  the  other  moiety  thereof  to  be  equally 
divided  between  the  Poor  of  the  Parish  where 
the  Offence  shall  be  committed,  and  such  Per- 
son or  Persons  as  shall  sue  for  the  same  by  Action 
of  Debt,  Bill,  Plaint  or  Information,  in  any  of  his 
Majesty's  Courts  of  Record,  wherein  no  Essoign, 
Protection  or  Wager  of  Law  shall  be  allowed,  and 
to  be  disabled  from  taking,  or  being  admitted  into 
the  Order  of  Priest,  by  the  space  of  one  whole 
Year  then  next  following. 

Provided,  That  the  Penalties  in  this  Act  shall  not 
extend  to  the  Foreigners  or  Aliens  of  the  Foreign 
Reformed  Churches  allowed,  or  to  be  allowed  by  the 
King's  Majesty,  his  Heirs  and  Successors  in  England. 

Provided  always,  That  no  Title  to  confer,  or  pre- 
sent by  Lapse,  shall  accrue  by  any  avoidimce  or 
deprivation  ipso  facto  by  virtue  of  this  Statute,  but 
after  six  Months  after  notice  of  such  avoidance  or 
deprivation  given  by  the  Ordinary  to  the  Patron,  or 
such  Sentence  of  deprivation  openly  and  publickly 
read  in  the  Parish-Church  of  the  Benefice,  Parson- 
age or  Vicarage  becoming  void,  or  whereof  the  In- 
cumbent shall  be  deprived  by  virtue  of  this  Act. 


And  be  it  further  Enacted  Ly  the  Aulliority  afore- 
said, That  no  Form  or  Order  of  Common  Pr.iyers, 
Administration  of  Sacraments,  Rites  or  Ceremonies 
shall  be  openly  used  in  any  Church,  Chapel,  or 
other  publick  Place,  of  or  in  any  College  or  iJall  in 
either  of  the  Universities,  the  Colleges  of  IVestmiih-' 
ster,  IVirtchester,  or  Eton;  or  any  of  them,  other  than 
what  is  prescribed,  and  appointed  to  be  used  in  and 
by  the  said  Book ;  and  tliat  the  present  Governor, 
or  Head  of  every  College  and  Hall  in  the  said  Uni- 
versities, and  of  the  said  Colleges  of  Westminster, 
Winchester,  and  Eton,  within  one  Month  after  the 
Feast  of  St.  Bartholomew,  which  shall  be  in  the 
Year  of  our  Lord  One  thousand  six  hundred  sixty 
and  two;  and  every  Governor  or  Head  of  any  of 
the  said  Colleges  or  Halls,  hereafter  to  be  elected 
or  appointed,  within  one  Month  next  after  his  Elec- 
tion or  Collation,  and  Admission  into  the  same 
Government  or  Headship,  shall  openly  and  pub- 
lickly in  the  Church,  Ciiapel,  or  other  publick  place 
of  the  same  College  or  Hall,  and  in  the  presence  of 
the  Fellows  and  Scholars  of  the  same,  or  the  greater 
part  of  them  then  resident,  subscribe  unto  the  Nine 
and  thirty  Articles  of  Religion,  mentioned  in  the 
Statute  made  in  the  thirteenth  Year  of  the  Reign 
of  the  late  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  unto  the  said  Book, 
and  declare  his  unfeigned  Assent  and  Consent  unto, 
and  approbation  of  the  said  Articles,  and  of  the 
same  Book,  and  to  the  use  of  all  the  Prayers,  Rites 
and  Ceremonies,  Forms  and  Orders  in  the  said  Book 
prescribed  and  contained,  according  to  the  Form 
aforesaid  ;  and  tliat  all  such  Governors,  or  Heads  of 
the  said  Colleges  or  Halls,  or  any  of  them,  as  are, 
or  shall  be  in  holy  Orders,  shall  once  (at  least  in 
every  quarter  of  the  year  not  having  a  lawful  Im- 
pediment) openly  and  publickly  read  the  Morning 
Prayer,  and  Service  in  and  by  the  said  Book  ap- 
pointed to  be  read  in  the  Church,  Chapel,  or  other 
publick  place  of  the  same  College  or  Hall;  upon 
pain  to  lose,  and  be  suspended  of  and  from  all  the 
Benefits  and  Profits  belonging  to  the  same  Govern- 
ment or  Headship,  by  the  space  of  six  Months,  by 
tlie  Visitor  or  Visitors  of  the  same  College  or  Hall ; 
and  if  any  Governor  or  Head  of  any  College  or 
Hall,  suspended  for  not  subscribing  unto  the  said 
Articles  and  Book,  and  for  not  reading  of  the 
Morning  Prayer  and  Service,  as  aforesaid,  shall  not 
at,  or  before  the  end  of  six  Months  next  after  such 
Suspension,  subscribe  unto  the  said  Articles  and 
Book,  and  declare  his  Consent  thereunto,  as  afore- 
said, or  read  the  Morning  Prayer  and  Service,  as 
aforesaid,  then  such  Government  or  Headship  shall 
be  ipso  facto  void. 

Provided  always,  That  it  shall  and  may  be  lawful 
B2 


Att  ABfor  the  Uniformity  of  Puhlick  Prayers. 


to  Bse  the  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer,  and  all 
other  Prayers  and  Service  prescribed  in  and  by  the 
said  Booiv,  in  the  Chapels  or  other  publick  places 
of  the  respective  Colleges-  and  Halls  in  both  the 
Universities,  in  the  Colleges  of  Westrninster,  Win- 
chester, and  Eto)i,  and  in  the  Convocations  of  the 
Clergies  of  either  Province,  in  Latin ;  any  thing  in 
this  Act  contained  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding. 
And  be  it  further  Enacted  by  the  Authority  afore- 
said. That  no  Person  shall  be,  or  be  received  as  a 
Lecturer,  or  permitted,  suffered,  or  allowed  to  preach 
as  a  Lecturer,  or  to  preach,  or  read  any  Sermon  or 
Lecture  in  any  Church,  Chapel,  or  other  place  of 
pubHck  Worship,  within  this  Realm  of  England,  or 
the  Dominion  of  Wales,  and  Town  of  Bern^ick  upon 
Tweed,  unless  he  be  first  approved,  and  thereunto 
licensed  by  the  Archbishop  of  the  Province,  or  Bi- 
shop of  the  Diocese,  or  (in  case  the  See  be  void)  by 
the  Guardian  of  the  Spiritualities,  under  his  Seal ; 
and  shall  in  the  presence  of  the  same  Archbishop, 
or  Bishop,  or  Guardian,  read  the  Nine  and  thirty 
Articles  of  Religion  mentioned  in  the  statute  of  the 
Thirteenth  year  of  the  late  Queen  Elizabeth,  with 
Declaration  of  his  unfeigned  Assent  to  the  same; 
and  that  every  person  and  persons,  who  now  is,  or 
hereafter  shall  be  licensed,  assigned,  appointed,  or 
received  as  a  Lecturer,  to  preach  upon  any  Day  of 
the  Week,  in  any  Church,  Chapel,  or   place   of 
publick  Worship  within  this  Realm  of  England,  or 
places  aforesaid,  the  first  time  he  preacheth  (before 
his  Sermon)  shall  openly,  publickly,  and  solemnly 
read  the  Common  Prayers  and  Service  in  and  by  the 
said  Book  appointed  to  be  read  for  that  time  of  the 
day,  and  then  and  there  publickly  and  openly  de- 
clare his  Assent  unto,  and  Approbation  of  the  said 
Book,  and  to  the  Use  of  all  the  Prayers,  Rites  and 
Ceremonies,  Forms  and  Orders  therein  contained 
and  prescribed,  according  to  the  Form  before  ap- 
pointed in  this  Act ;  and  also  shall  upon  the  first 
Lecture-<lay  of  every  Month  afterwards,  so  long  as 
he  continues  Lecturer,  or  Preacher  there,  at  the 
place  appointed  for  his  said  Lecture  or  Sermon,  be- 
fore his  said  Lecture  or  Sermon,  openly,  publickly, 
and  solemnly  read  the  Common  Prayers  and  Ser- 
vice in  and  by  the  said  Book  appointed  to  be  read 
for  that  time  of  the  day,  at  which  die  said  Lecture 
or  Sermon  is  to  be  preached,  and  after  such  reading 
thereof,  shall  openly  and  publickly,  before  the  Con- 
gregation  there  assembled,  declare  his   unfeigned 
Assent  and  Consent  unto,  and  Approbation  of  the 
said  Book,  and  to  the  Use  of  all  the  Prayers,  Rites 
and  Ceremonies,  Forms  and  Orders,  therein  con- 
tained and  prcscribcil,  according  to  the  Form  afore- 
said; and  that  all  and  ii\cty  such  person  or  persons 


who  shr.ll  neglect  or  refuse  to  do  the  same,  shall 
from  thenceforth  be  disabled  to  preach  the  said,  or 
any  other  Lecture  or  Sermon  in  the  said,  or  any- 
other  Church,  Chapel  or  place  of  pul>lick  Worship, 
until  such  time  as  he  and  they  shall  openly,  pub- 
lickly and  solemnly  read  the  Common  Prayers  and' 
Service  appointed  by  the  said  Book,  and  confoviH 
in  all  points  to  the  things  therein  aj>pointed  and 
prescribed,  according  to  the  purport,  true  intent, 
and  meaning  of  this  Act. 

Provided  always.  That  if  the  said  Sermon  or 
Lecture  be  to  be  preached  or  read  in  any  Cathedral 
or  Collegiate  Church  or  Chapel,  it  shall  be  suftici- 
ent  for  the  said  Lecturer,  openly  at  the  time  afore- 
said, to  declare  his  Assent  and  Consent  to  .all  things 
contained  in  the  said  Book,  according  to  the  Form 
aforesaid.     \.    i  ■■'  .t^iMi-^;oiii;..'    ,'^.i,,'-..'..'  ■, 

And  be  it  further  Enactetl  by  the  Authority  afore- 
said. That  if  any  person,  who  is  by  this  Act  disabled 
to  preach  any  Lecture  or  Sermon,  shall  during  the 
time  that  he  shall  continue  and  remain  so  disabled, 
preach  any  Sermon  or  Lecture;  that  then  for  every 
such  offence,  the  person  and  persons  so  offending 
shall  suffer  three  Months  Imprisonment  in  the  com- 
mon Gaol  without  Bail  or  Mainprise;  and  that  any 
two  Justices  of  the  Peace  of  any  County  of  this 
Kingdom  and  places  aforesaid,  and  the  Mayor  or 
other  chief  Magistrate  of  any  City  or  Town-Corpo* 
rate  within  the  same,  upon  Certificate  from  the 
Ordinary  of  the  place  made  to  him  or  them  of  the 
offence  committed,  shall  and  are  hereby  required  !«> 
commit  the  person  or  persons  so  offending,  to  thcr 
Gaol  of  the  same  County,  City  or  Town-Corporate, 
accordingly.       ^  'Uti  «AjvijjVJ  jiU  \u  i'.asi\ai«yt3J  Visto 

Provided  always^  nn«J'  he  it  fisVthfeT  'Enabted  by 
the  Authority  aforesaid.  That  at  all  and  every  time 
and  times  when  any  Sermon  or  Lecture  is  to  be 
preached,  the  Common  Prayers  and  Service  in  and 
by  the  said  Book  appointed  to  be  read  for  that  time 
of  the  day,  shall  be  openly,  publickly  and  solemnly 
read  by  some  Priest  or  Deacon,  in  the  Church,  Cha- 
pel or  place  of  publick  Worship  where  the  said  Ser- 
mon or  Lecture  is  to  be  preached,  before  such  Ser- 
mon or  Lecture  be  preached;  and  the  Lecturer  then 
to  preach  shall  be  present  at  the  reading  thereof-  to 

Provided  nevertheless,  That  this  Act  shall  not  ex- 
tend to  the  University  Churches  in  the  Universities 
of  this  Realm,  or  either  of  them,  when  or  at  such' 
times  as  any  Sermon  or  Lecture  is  preached  or  read 
in  the  same  Churches,  or  any  of  them,  for,  or  as 
the  publick  University  Sermon  or  Lecture;  but  that 
the  same  Sermons  and  Lectures  may  be  pre.ichcd  or 
rejid  in  such  9ort  and  manner  as  the  same  have  been 
heretofore  preached  or  read;  thig  Act,  or  any  thing 


An  ASi/or  the  Uniformity  of  Pnhlick  Prayers. 


lierein  contained  to  the  contraiy  thereof  in  any  wise 
notwithstanding. 

.And  be  it  further  Enacted  by  the  Authority  afore- 
&afA,  That  the  several  good  Laws,  and  Statiitcs  of 
this  Realm,  which  have  been  formerly  made,  and 
are  now  in  force  for  the  Uniformity  of  Prayer  and 
Administration  of  the  Sacraments,  within  this  Realm 
of  England,  and  places  aforesaid,  shall  stand  in  full, 
force  and  strength,  to  all  intents  and  purposes  what- 
soever, for  the  establishing  and  continniug  of  the 
said  Book,  intituled.  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer, 
and  Adminislration  of  the  Sacraments,  and  other  Ititea 
and  Ceremonies  of  the  Church,  according  ti)  the  Use 
of  the  Church  of  England  :  together  with  the  Psa/ier 
or  Psalms  of  iJii\\d, pointed  as  they  are  to  lie  sung  or 
said  in  Churches;  and  the  Form  and  Manner  of 
Making,  Ordaining,  and  Consecrating  of  Bishops, 
Priests,  and  Deacons,  herein  before  mentioned  to  be 
joined  and  annexed  to  this  Act;  and  shall  be  ap- 
plied, practised,  and  |)ut  in  use  for  the  punishing  of 
all  ofi'ences  contrary  to  the  said  Laws,  with  relation 
to  the  Book  aforesaid,  and  no  other. 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  further  Enacted  by 
the  Authorit}'  aforesaid.  That  in  all  those  Prayers, 
Litanies,  and  Collects,  which  do  any  way  relate  to 
the  King,  Queen,  or  Royal  Progeny,  the  Names  be 
altered  and  changed  from  time  to  time,  and  fitted 
to  the  present  occasion,  according  to  the  direction 
of  lawful  Authority. 

Provided  also,  and  be  it  Enacted  by  the  Autho- 
rity aforesaid,  that  a  true  printed  Copy  of  the  said 
Book,  intituled,  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  and 
Administration  of  the  Sacraments,  and  other  Rites 
and  Ceremonies  of  the  Chuirk,  according  to  the  Use 
of  the  Church  of  England  :  together  mth  the  Psalter 
or  Psalms  of  David,  pointed  as  they  are  to  be  sung 
or  said  in  Churches;  and  the  Form  and  Manner  of' 
Making,  Ordaining,  and  Consecrating  of  Bishops, 
Priests,  and  Deacons,  shall  at  the  Costs  and  Charges 
of  the  Parishioners  of  every  Parish-Church  and 
Chapelry,  Cathedral- Church,  College  and  Hall,  be 
attained  and  gotten  before  the  Feast-day  of  St. 
Bartholomew,  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord  One  thousand 
six  hundred  sixty  and  two,  upon  pain  of  forfeiture 
of  tlu-ee  pounds  by  the  month,  for  so  long  time  as 
they  shall  then  after  be  unprovided  thereof,  by  every 
Parish,  or  Chapelry,  Cathedral-Church,  College  and 
Hall,  making  default  therein.  onfsafl  au' 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  Enacted  by  the  Au- 
thority aforesaid.  That  the  Bishops  of  Hereford, 
Saint  David's,  Asaph,  Bangor,  and  Landaff,  and 
their  Successors,  shall  take  such  Order  among  them- 
selves, for  the  souls  health  of  the  Flocks  committed 
to  their  charge  within  Wales,  that  the  Book  here- 


unto annexed  be  truly  and  exactly  translated  into 
the  British  or  Welsh  Tongue;  and  that  the  same  so 
translated,  and  being  by  them,  or  f^^y  three  of  them 
at  the  least,  viewed,  perused  and  allowed,  be  im- 
printed to  such  number  at  least,  so  that  pne  of  the,' 
said  Books  so  translated  and  imprinted,  may  be  had' 
ibr  every  Cathedral,  Collegiate  and  Parish-Church,- 
and  Chapel  of  Ease  in  tlie  said  respective  Dioceses  , 
and  Places  in  Wales,  where  the  Welsh  is  commonly 
spoken  or  used,  before  the  first  Day  of  May,  One,, 
thousand  six  hundred  sixty-five;  and  that  from  andj' 
after  the  imprinting  and  publishing  of  the  said  Book; 
so  translated,   the  whole  Divine  Service  shall  be.- 
used  and  said  by  the  Ministers  and  Curates  through- 
out all  Wales  within  the  said  Dioceses  where  the , 
Welsh  Tongue  is  commonly  used,  in  the  British  qf 
Welsh  Tongue,  in  such  manner  and  form  as  is  pre-  '- 
scribed  according  to  the  Book  hereunto  annexed  to," 
be  used  iii  the  EnglishTongue,  differing  nothing  in  ' 
any  Order  or  Form  from  the  said  English  Book  ;  for 
which  Book  so  translated  and  imprinted,  the  Church- 
wardens of  every  of  the  said  Parishes  sh^U  pay  out  off 
the  ParisJi-Money  in  their  hands  for  the  use  of  the 
respective  Churches,  and  be  allowed  the  same  on     * 
thejr  Account;  and  that  the  said  Bishops  and  their 
Successors,  or  any  three  of  them  at  the  least,  shall 
set  and  appoint  the  price  for  which  the  said  Book 
shall  be  sold :   And  one  other  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  in  the  English  Tongue,  shall  be  bought  and_ 
had  in  every  Church  throughout  Wales,  in  whicK 
the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  in  PVelsh  is  to  be  had 
by  force  of  this  Act,  before  the  first  Day  of  May, 
One  thousand  six  hundred  sixty  and  four;  and  the 
same  Book  to  remain  in  such  convenient  places, 
within  the  said  Churches,  that  such  as  understand 
them  may  resort  at  all  convenient  times  to  read 
and  peruse  the  same,  and  also  such  as  do  not  un- 
derstand  the   said   Language,  may,  by  conferring 
both  Tongues   together,  the  sooner  attain  to  the 
Knowledge  of  the  English  Tongue;  any  thing  in 
this  Act  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding :  And  un- 
til printed  Copies  of  the  said  Book,  so  to  be  trans- 
lated, may  be  had  and  provided,  the  Form  of  Com- 
mon Prayer  established  by  Parliament,  before  the 
making  of  this  Act,  shall  be  used  as  formerly  in 
such  paits  of  Wales  where  the  English  Tongue  is 
not  commonl}'  understood. 

And  to  the  end  that  the  true  and  perfect  Copies 
of  this  Act,  and  the  said  Book  hereunto  annexed, 
may  be  safel}'  kept,  and  perpetually  preserved,  and 
for  the  avoiding  of  all  Disputes  for  the  time  to 
come;  Be  it  therefore  Enacted  by  the  Authority^ 
aforesaid,  That  the  respective  Deans  and  Chapters 
of  every   Cathedral   or   Collegiate-Church  within 


An  ASi/or  the  Uniformity  of  Puhlick  Prayers. 


England  and  Wales,  shall  at  their  proper  Costs  and 
Charges,  before  the  twenty-fifth  Day  of  Deceynber, 
One  thousand  six  hundred  sixty-two,  obtain  under 
the  Great  Seal  of  England,  a  true  and  perfect  print- 
ed Copy  of  this  Act,  and  of  the  said  Book  annexed 
hereunto,  to  be  by  the  said  Deans  and  Chapters, 
and  their  Successors,  kept  and  preserved  in  safety 
for  ever,  and  to  be  also  produced,  and  shewed  forth 
in  any  Court  of  Record,  as  often  as  they  shall  be 
thereunto  lawfully  required ;  and  also  there  shall 
be  delivered  true  and  perfect  Copies  of  this  Act, 
and  of  the  sacne  Book,  into  the  respective  Courts 
at  Westminster,  and  into  the  Tower  of  London,  to 
be  kept  and  preserved  for  ever  among  tlie  Re- 
cords of  the  said  Courts,  and  the  Records  of  the 
Tower,  to  be  also  produced  and  shewed  forth 
in  any  Court  as  need  shall  require :  which  said 
Books,  so  to  be  exemplified  under  the  Great  Seal 
of  England,  shall  be  examined  by  such  persons  as 
the  King's  Majesty  shall  appoint,  under  the  Great 
Seal  of  England,  for  that  purpose,  and  shall  be 
compared  with  the  Original  Book  hereunto  annex- 
ed, and  shall  have  power  to  correct  and  amend  in 
^  Writing  any  error  committed  by  the  Printer  in  the 
printing  of  the  same  Book,  or  of  any  thing  therein 
contained,  and  shall  certify  in  Writing  under  their 
Hands  and  Seals,  or  the  Hands  and  Seals  of  any 
three  of  them,  at  the  end  of  the  same  Book,  that 
they  have  examined  and  compared  the  same  Book, 
and  find  it  to  be  a  true  and  perfect  Copy;  wliich 
said  Books,  and  every  one  of  them  so  exemplified 
under  the  Great  Seal  of  England,  as  aforesaid,  shall 
be  deemed,  taken,  adjudged  and  expounded  to  be 
good  and  available  in  the  Law,  to  all  Intents  and 
purposes  whatsoever,  and  siiall  be  accounted  as 
good  Records  as  this  Book  itself  hereunto  annexed ; 
any  Law  or  Custom  to  the  contrary  in  any  wise 
notwiliistanding. 

Provided  also.  That  this  Act,  or  any  thing  therein 
contained,  sliall  not  be  prejudicial  or  hurtful  unto 
the  King's  Professor  of  Law,  within  the  University 
of  Oiford,  for  or  concerning  the  Prebend  of  Shipton 
within  the  Catliedral-Ch\nch  of  Sarnm,  united  and 
annexed  unto  the  Place  of  the  same  King's  Profes- 
sor for  the  Time  being,  by  the  late  King  James  of 
blessed  memory. 

Provided  always.  That  whereas  the  Six  and  thir- 
tieth Article  of  the  Nine  and  thirty  Articles  agreed 
upon  by  the  Archbishops  and  Bishops  of  both  Pro- 
vinces, and  the  whole  Clergy  in  the  Convocation 


holden  at  London,  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord  One 
thousand  five  hundred  sixty-two,  for  the  avoiding 
of  Diversities  of  Opinions,  and  for  establishing  of 
Consent  touching  true  Religion,  is  in  these  Word? 
following,  viz.  ^^ 

That  the  Book  of  Consecration  of  Archhishopit  and 
Bishops,  and  Ordaining  of  Priests  and  Deacons, 
lately  set  forth  in  the  time  of  King  Edward  the  Sijcth, 
and  confirmed  at  the  same  time  by  Authority  of  Par- 
liament, doth  contain  all  things  necessary  to  such 
Consecration  and  Ordmning,  neither  h-ath  it  any  thing 
that  of  itself  is  superstitious  and  ungodlt/ :  and  there- 
fore whosoever  are  Consecrated  or  Ordered  according 
to  the  Rites  of  that  Book  since  the  second  Year  of 
the  aforenamed  King  Edward  unto  this  time,  or  here- 
after shall  be  Consecrated  or  Ordered  according  to  the 
same  Rites ;  We  decree  all  such  to  be  rightly,  orderly, 
and  lawfully  Consecrated  and  Ordered; 

It  be  Enacted,  and  be  it  therefore  Eivacted  by 
the  Authority  aforesaid,  That  all  Subscriptions  here- 
after to  be  had  or  made  unto  the  said  Articles  by 
any  Deacon,  Priest,  or  Ecclesiastical  person,  or 
other  person  whatsoever,  who  by  this  Act,  or  any 
other  Law  now  in  force  is  required  to  subscribe 
unto  the  said  Articles,  shall  be  construed,  and  taken 
to  extend,  and  shall  be  applied  (for  and  touching 
the  said  Six  and  thirtieth  Article)  unto  the  Book 
containing  the  Form  and  Manner  of  Makine:,  Or- 
daining, and  Consecrating  of  Bishops,  Priests  and 
Deacons,  in  this  Act  mentioned,  in  such  sort  and 
manner  as  the  same  did  heretofore  extend  unto  the 
Book  set  forth  in  the  time  of  King  Edward  the 
Sixth,  mentioned  in  the  said  Six  and  thirtieth  Arti- 
cle ;  any  thing  in  the  said  Article  or  in  any  Statute, 
Act  or  Canon  heretofore  had  or  made,  to  the  coim 
trary  thereof  in  any  wise  notwithstanding.  ^ 

Provided  also.  That  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer, 
and  Administration  of  the  Sacraments,  and  other 
Rites  and  Ceremonies  of  the  Church  of  England, 
together  with  the  Form  and  Manner  of  Ordaining 
and  Consecrating  Bishops,  Priests  and  Deacons, 
heretofore  in  use,  and  respectively  established  by 
Act  of  Parliament  in  the  First  and  Eighth  Years 
of  Queen  Elizabeth,  shall  be  still  used  and  observed 
in  the  Church  of  England,  until  the  Feast  of  Saint 
Bartholomerc,  which  shall  bo  in  the  Year  of  cot 
Lord  God  One  thousand  six  hundred  sixty  and- 
two.  '  odw  ftam 

•   i\ 

I.  (loujstuqai 


THE    PREFACE. 


IT  hath  been  the  wisdom  of  the  Ohurcli  of  Eng- 
land, ever  since  the  first  compiling  of  her  pub- 
lick  Liturgy,  to  keep  the  mean  between  the  two 
extremes,  of  too  much  stiffness  in  refusing,  and  of 
too  much  easiness  in  admitting  any  vaiiation  from  it. 
For,  as  on  the  one  side  common  experience  shewcth, 
that  where  a  change  hath  been  made  of  things  ad- 
visedly established  (no  evident  necessity  so  requiring) 
sundry  inconveniences  have  thereupon  ensued;  and 
those  many  times  more  and  greater  than  the  evils, 
that  were  intended  to  be  remedied  by  such  change: 
So  on  the  other  side,  the  particular  Forms  of  Divine 
worship,  and  the  Rights  and  Ceremonies  appointed 
to  be  used  therein,  being  tilings  in  their  ow  n  nature 
indifferent,  and  alterable,  and  so  acknowledged ;  it 
is  but  reasonable,  that  upon  weighty  and  important 
considerations,  according  to  the  various  exigency 
of  times  and  occasions,  such  changes  and  alterations 
should  be  made  therein,  as  to  those  that  are  in 
place  of  Authority  should  from  time  to  time  seem 
either  necessary  or  expedient.  Accordingly  we  find, 
that  in  the  Reigns  of  several  Princes  of  blessed 
memory  since  the  Reformation,  the  Church,  upon 
just  and  weighty  considerations  her  thereunto  mov- 
ing, hath  yielded  to  make  such  alterations  in  some 
particulars,  as  in  their  respective  times  were  thought 
convenient :  Yet  so,  as  that  the  main  Body  and 
Essentials  of  it  (as  well  in  the  chiefest  materials,  as 
in  the  frame  and  order  thereof)  have  still  continued 
the  same  unto  this  day,  and  do  yet  stand  firm  and 
unshaken,  notwithstanding  all  the  vain  attempts  and 
impetuous  assaults  made  against  it,  by  such  men  as 
are  given  to  change,  and  have  always  discovered  a 
greater  regard  to  their  own  private  fancies  and  in- 
terests, than  to  that  duty  they  owe  to  the  publick. 

By  what  undue  means,  and  for  what  mischievous 
purposes  the  use  of  the  Liturgy  (though  enjoined 
by  the  Laws  of  the  Land,  and  those  Laws  never 
yet  repealed)  came,  during  the  late  unhappy  confu- 
sions, to  be  discontinued,  is  too  well  known  to  the 
world,  and  we  are  not  willing  here  to  remember. 
But  when,  upon  His  Majesty's  happy  Restoration, 
it  seemed  probable,  that,  amongst  other  things,  the 
use  of  the  Liturgy  would  also  return  of  course  (the 
same  having  never  been  legally  abolished)  unless 
some  timely  means  were  used  to  prevent  it ;  those 
men  who  under  the  late  usurped  powers  had  made 
it  a^great  part  of  their  business  to  render  the  people 
disaffected  thereunto,  saw  themselves  in  point  of 
reputation  and  interest  concerned  (unless  they  would 
freely  acknowledge  themselves  to  have  erred,  which 


such  men  are  very  hardly  brought  to  do)  with  their 
utmost  endeavours  to  hinder  the  restitution  thereof. 
In  order  whereunto  divers  Pamphlets  were  publish- 
ed against  the  Book  of  Coininon  Prayer,  the  old 
objections  mustered  up,  with  the  addition  of  some 
new  ones,  more  than  formerly  had  been  made,  to 
make  the  number  swell.  In  fine,  great  importuni- 
ties were  used  to  His  Sacred  Majesty,  that  the  said 
Book  might  be  revised,  and  such  Alterations  there- 
in, and  Additions  thereunto  made,  as  should  be 
thought  requisite  for  the  ease  of  tender  Consciences : 
whereunto  His  Majesty,  out  of  'tis  pious  inclina- 
tion to  give  satisfaction  (so  far  as  could  be  reason- 
ably expected)  to  all  his  subjects  of  what  persuasion 
soever,  did  graciously  condescend. 

In  which  review  we  have  endeavoured  to  observe 
the  like  moderation,  as  we  find  to  have  been  used  in 
the  like  case  in  former  times.  And  therefore  of  the 
sundry  alterations  proposed  unto  us,  we  have  reject- 
ed all  such  as  were  either  of  dangerous  consequence 
(as  secretly  striking  at  some  established  Doctrine, 
or  laudable  Practice  of  the  Church  of  England,  or 
indeed  of  the  whole  Catholick  Church  of  Christ)  or 
else  of  no  consequence  at  all,  but  utterly  frivolous 
and  vain.  But  such  Alterations  as  were  tendered 
to  us  (by  what  persons,  under  what  pretences,  or  to 
what  purpose  soever  tendered)  as  seemed  to  us  in' 
any  degree  requisite  or  expedient,  we  have  willingly, 
and  of  our  own  accord  assented  unto  :  not  enforced 
so  to  do  by  any  strength  of  Argument,  convincing 
us  of  the  necessity  of  making  the  said  Alterations: 
For  we  are  fully  persuaded  in  our  judgments  (and 
we  here  profess  it  to  the  world)  that  the  Book,  as  it 
stood  before  established  by  Law,  doth  not  contain 
in  it  any  thing  contrary  to  the  Word  of  God,  or  to 
sound  Doctrine,  or  which  a  godly  man  may  not 
with  a  good  Conscience  use  and  submit  unto,  or 
which  is  not  fairly  defensible  against  any  that  shall 
oppose  the  same;  if  it  shall  be  allowed  such  just 
and  favourable  construction  as  in  common  equity 
ought  to  be  allowed  to  all  human  Writings,  especi- 
ally such  as  are  set  forth  by  Authority,  and  even  to 
the  very  best  translations  of  the  holy  Scripture  itself. 

Our  general  aim  therefore  in  this  undertaking 
was,  not  to  gratify  this  or  that  party  in  any  their 
unreasonable  demands;  but  to  tlo  that,  which  to 
our  best  understandings  we  conceived  might  most 
tend  to  the  preservation  of  Peace  and  Unity  in  the 
Church ;  the  procuring  of  Reverence,  and  exciting 
of  Piety  and  Devotion  in  the  publick  Worship  of 
God  ;  and  the  cutting  off  occasion  from  them  that 


Concerning  the  Service  of  the  Church. 


seek  occasion  of  cavil  or  quarrel  agair>st  the  Liturgy 
of  the  Church.  And  as  to  the  several  variations 
from  the  former  Book,  whether  by  Alteration,  Ad- 
dition, or  otherwise,  it  shall  suffice  to  give  this  ge- 
neral account,  That  most  of  the  Alterations  were 
made,  eitlier  first,  for  the  better  direction  of  them 
that  are  to  officiate  in  any  part  of  Divine  Service; 
which  is  chiefly  done  in  the  Calendars  and  Ku- 
bricks: or  secondly,  for  the  more  proper  expressing 
of  some  words  or  phrases  of  ancient  usage  in  terms 
more  suitable  to  the  language  of  the  present  times, 
jind  the  clearer  explanation  of  some  other  words 
and  phrases,  that  were  either  of  doubtful  significa- 
tion, or  otherwise  liable  to  misconstruction :  Or 
thirdly,  for  a  more  perfect  rendering  of  such  portions 
of  holy  Scripture,  as  are  inserted  into  the  Liturgy; 
■which,  in  the  Epistles  and  Gospels  especially,  and 
in  sundry  other  places,  are  now  ordered  to  be  read 
according  to  the  last  Translation  :  and  that  it  was 
thought  convenient,  that  some  Prayers  and  Thanks- 
givings, fitted  to  special  occasions,  should  be  added 
in  their  due  places ;  particularly  for  those  at  Sea, 
together  with  an  office  for  the  Baptism  of  such  as 
are  of  riper  years  :  which,  although  not  so  necessary 
when  the  former  Book  was  compiled,  yet  by  the 


growth  of  Anabaptism,  through  the  licentiousness 
of  the  late  times  crept  in  amongst  us,  is  now  be- 
come necessary,  and  may  be  always  useful  for  the 
baptizing  of  Natives  in  our  Plantations,  and  others 
converted  to  the  Faith.  If  any  man,  who  shall 
desire  a  more  particular  account  of  the  several  Al- 
terations in  any  part  of  the  Liturgy,  shall  take  the 
pains  to  compare  the  present  Book  with  the  former; 
we  doubt  not  but  the  reason  of  the  change  may 
easily  appear. 

And  having  thus  endeavoured  to  discharge  our 
duties  in  this  weighty  affair,  as  in  the  sight  of  God, 
and  fo  approve  our  sincerity  therein  (so  far  as  lay 
in  us)  to  the  consciences  of  all  men ;  although  we 
know  it, impossible  (in  such  variety  of  apprehen- 
sions, humours  and  interests,  as  are  in  the  world)  to 
please  all;  nor  can  expect  that  men  of  factious, 
peevish,  and  perverse  spirits  should  be  satisfied  with 
any  thing  that  can  be  done  in  this  kind  by  any 
other  than  themselves :  Yet  we  have  good  hope, 
that  what  is  here  presented,  and  hath  been  by  the 
Convocations  of  both  Provinces  with  great  dili- 
gence examined  and  approved,  will  be  also  well  ac- 
cepted and  approved  by  all  sober,  peaceable,  and 
truly  conscientious  Sons  of  the  Church  of  England. 


Concerning  the  Sei'vice  of  the  Church. 


^I^HERE  was  never  any  thing  by  the  wit  of  man 
-■•  so  well  devised,  or  so  sure  established,  which 
in  continuance  of  time  hath  not  been  corrupted  : 
As,  among  other  things,  it  may  plainly  appear  by 
the  Common  Prayers  in  the  Church,  commonly 
called  Divine  Service.  The  first  original  and  ground 
whereof  if  a  man  would  search  out  by  the  ancient 
Fathers,  he  shall  find,  that  the  same  was  not  ordain- 
ed but  of  a  good  purpose,  and  for  a  great  advance- 
ment of  godliness.  For  they  so  ordered  tlie  matter, 
that  all  the  whole  Bible,  (or  the  greatest  part  there- 
of) should  be  read  over  once  every  year;  intending 
thereby,  that  the  Clergy,  and  especially  such  as 
were  Ministers  in  tiie  congregation,  should  (by 
often  reading,  and  meditation  in  God's  word)  be 
stirred  up  to  godliness  themselves,  and  be  more 
able  to  exhort  others  by  wholesome  Doctrine,  and 
to  confute  ihem  that  were  adversaries  to  the  truth ; 
and  further,  that  the  people  (by  daily  hearing  of 
lioly  Scripture  read  in  the  Church)  might  continu- 
ally profit  more  and  more  in  the  knowledge  of  God, 
and  be  the  more  inflamed  with  the  love  of  his  true 
Religion. 
But  these  many  years  passed,  this  godly  and 


decent  order  of  the  ancient  FiUhers  hath  been  so 
altered,  broken,  and  neglected,  by  planting  in  un- 
certain Stories,  and  Legends,  with  multitude  of 
Responds,  Verses,  vain  Repetitions,  Commemora- 
tions, and  Synodals  ;  that  commonly  when  any  Book 
of  the  Bible  was  begun,  after  three  or  four  Chapters 
were  read  out,  all  ths  rest  were  unread.  And  in 
this  sort  the  Book  of  Isaiah  was  begun  in  Advent, 
and  the  Book  of  Genesis  in  Sepluagcsima;  but  they 
were  only  begun,  and  never  read  through  :  After 
like  sort  were  other  Books  of  holy  Scripture  used. 
And  moreover,  whereas  St.  Paul  would  have  such 
language  spoken  to  the  people  in  the  Church,  as 
they  might  underhiaud,  and  have  profit  by  heating 
the  same;  The  Service  in  this  Church  of  England 
these  many  years  hath  been  road  in  Latin  to  the 
people,  which  they  understaTid  not;  so  that  they 
have  heard  with  their  ears  only,  and  their  heart, 
spirit,  and  mind,  have  not  been  edified  thereby. 
And  furtiiermorc,  notwithstanding  that  tlie  ancient 
Fathers  have  divided  the  Psalms  into  seven  portions, 
whereof  every  one  was  called  a  Noclurn:  Now  of 
late  tim<>  a  few  of  tiiem  have  been  daily  said,  and 
the  rest  utterly  omitted.     Moreover,  the  number 


Of  Ceremonies. 


and  hardness  of  the  Rules  called  the  Pic,  and  the 
manifold  changings  of  tlic  Service,  was  the  cause, 
that  to  turn  tlie  Book  only  was  so  hard  and  intricate 
a  matter,  that  many  times  there  was  more  business 
to  find  out  what  should  be  read,  than  to  read  it 
when  it  was  found  out. 

These  inconveniences  therefore  considered,  here 
is  set  forth  such  an  Order,  whereby  the  same  shall 
be  redressed.  And  for  a  readiness  in  this  matter, 
here  is  drawn  out  a  Calendar  for  that  purpose, 
which  is  plain  and  easy  to  be  understood;  wherein 
(so  much  as  may  he)  the  reading  of  holy  Scripture 
is  so  set  forth,  that  all  things  shall  be  done  in  order, 
without  breaking  one  piece  from  another.  For  this 
cause  be  cut  off  Anthems,  Reiponds,  Invitatories, 
and  such  like  things  as  did  break  tbe^-continual 
course  of  the  reading  of  the  Scripture.       '■,      -, 

Yet,  because  there  is  no  remedy,  but  that  of 
necessity  there  must  be  some  Rules ;  therefore 
certain  Rules  are  here  set  forth ;  which,  as  they  are 
few  in  number,  so  they  are  plain  and  easy  to  be 
understood.  So  that  here  you  have  an  Order  for 
Prayer,  and  for  the  reading  of  the  holy  Scripture, 
much  agreeable  to  the  mind  and  purpose  of  the  old 
Fathers,  and  a  great  deal  more  profitable  and  com- 
modious, than  that  which  of  late  was  used.  It  is 
more  profitable,  because  here  arc  left  out  many 
things,  whereof  some  are  untrue,  some  uncertain, 
some  vain  and  superstitious ;  and  nothing  is  ordain- 
ed to  be  read,  but  the  very  pure  AVord  of  God,  tlie 
■holy  Scriptures,  or  that  which  is  agreeable  to  the 
same;  and  that  in  such  a  Language  and  Order  as  is 
most  easy  and  plain  for  the  understanding  both  of 
the  Readers  and  Hearers.  It  is  also  more  commo- 
dious, both  for  the  shortness  thereof,  and  for  the 
pl.ainness  of  the  Order,  and  for  that  the  Rrrles  be 
few  and  easy. 

And  whereas  heretofore  there  hath  been  great 
diversityia  saying  and  singing  in  Churches  within 


this  Realm ;  some  following  Salisbury  Use,  some 
llerejord  Use,  and  some  the  Use  of  Bangor,  some 
of  York,  some  of  Linco/n ;  now  from  henceforth  all 
the  whole  Realm  shall  have  but  one  Use. 

And  forasmuch  as  nothing  can  be  so  plainly  set 
forth,  but  doubts  may  arise  in  the  use  and  practice 
of  the  same;  to  appease  all  such  diversity  (if  any 
arise)  and  for  the  resolution  of  all  doubts,  concern- 
ing the  manner  how  to  understand,  do,  and  execute, 
the  things  contained  in  diis  Book ;  the  parties  that 
so  doubt,  or  diversly  take  an^-  thing,  sliall  alway 
resort  to  the  Bishop  of  the  Diocese,  who  by  his 
discretion  shall  take  order  for  the  quieting  and  ap- 
peasing of  the  same ;  so  that  the  same  order  be  not 
contrary  to  any  thing  contained  in  this  Book.  And 
if  the  Bishop  of  the  Diocese  be  in  doubt,  then  he 
may  send  for  the  resolution  thereof  to  the  Arch- 
bishop. 


THOUGH  it  be  appointed,  that  all  things  shall, 
be  read  and  sung  in  the  Church  in  the  English 
Tongue,  to  the  end  that  the  congregation  maj'  be 
thereby  edified ;  yet  it  is  not  meant,  but  that  when 
men  say  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer  privately, 
they  may  say  the  same  in  any  language  that  they 
themselves  do  understand.  -^ — 

And  all  Priests  and  Deacons  are  to  say  daily  the 
Morning  and  Evening  Prayer  either  privately  or 
openly,  not  being  let  by  sickness,  or  some  other 
urgent  cause.  v -c,),  -   •,-  2,*^^' 

And  the  Curate  that  ministereth  in  every  Parish- 
Church  or  Chapel,  being  at  home,  and  not  being 
otherwise  reasonably  hindered,  shall  say  the  same 
in  the  Parish-Church  or  Chapel  where  he  minister- 
eth, and  shall  cause  a  Bell  to  be  tolled  thereunto  a 
convenient  time  before  he  begin,  that  the  people 
may  come  to  hear  God's  Word,  and  to  pray  with 
htm. 


0/  Ceremonies,  why  fame  he  aholijhed,  and  fome  retained. 


OJp  such  Ceremonies  as  be  used  in  the  Church, 
,,      .  and  have  had  their  beginning  by  the  institu- 
.lion  of  man,  some  at  the  first  were  of  godly  intent 
i^nd  purpose  devised,  and  yet  at  length  turned  to 
vanity   and   superstition :    some    entered    into   the 
Church  by  undiscreet  devotion,  and  such  a  zeal  as 
M'as  without  knowledge;  and  for  because  they  were 
winked  at  in   the  beginning,   they  grew  daily  to 
Imore  and  more  abuses,  which  not  onlj'  for  their 
(Unprofitableness,  but  also  because  iheyjiave  much 


blinded  the  people,  and  obscured  the  glory  of  God, 
are  worthy  to  be  cut  away,  and  clean  rejected: 
other  there  be,  which  although  they  have  been  de- 
vised by  man,  yet  it  is  thought  good  to  reserve 
them  still,  as  well  for  a  decent  order  in  the  Church, 
(for  the  which  they  were  first  devised)  as  because 
they  pertain  to  edification,  whei'eunto  all  things 
done  in  the  Church  (as  the  Apostle  teacheth)  ought 
to  be  referred. 

And  although  the  keeping  or  omitting  of  a  Ccre- 

■    C 


Of  Ceremonies. 


mony,  in  itself  considered,  is  but  a  small  tiling; 
vet  the  wilful  and  contemptuous  transgression  and 
breakin<r  of  a  common  order  and  discipline  is  no 
small  offence  before  God,  Let  all  things  be  done 
amon"  i/ou,  saith  Saint  Paul,  in  a  seemlj/  and  due 
order:  The  appointment  of  the  whicli  order  per- 
taineth  not  to  private  men;  therefore  no  man  ought 
to  take  in  hand,  nor  presume  to  appoint  or  alter 
an-v  publick  or  common  Order  in  Christ's  Church, 
except  he  be  lawfully  called  and  authorized  there- 
unto. 

And  whereas  in  this  our  time,  the  minds  of  men 
are  so  diverse,  that  some  tliink  it  a  great  matter  of 
conscience  to  depart  from  a  piece  of  the  least  of 
their  Ceremonies,  they  be  so  addicted  to  their  old 
customs ;  and  again  on  the  other  side,  some  be  so 
new-fangled,  that  they  would  innovate  all  things, 
and  so  despise  the  old,  that  nothing  can  like  them, 
but  that  is  new :  it  was  thought  expedient,  not  so 
much  to  have  respect  how  to  please  and  satisfy 
eitljer  of*  these  parties,  as  how  to  please  God,  and 
profit  them  both.  And  yet  lest  any  man  should  be 
offended,  whom  good  reason  might  satisfy,  here  be 
certain  causes  rendered,  why  some  of  the  accustom- 
ed Ceremonies  be  put  away,  and  some  retained  and 
kept  still. 

Some  are  put  away,  because  the  great  excess 
and  multitude  of  them  hath  so  increased  in  these 
latter  days,  that  the  burden  of  them  was  intolerable; 
whereof  Saint  Augustine  in  his  time  complained, 
that  they  were  grown  to  such  a  number,  that  the 
estate  of  Christian  people  was  in  worse  case  con- 
cerning that  matter,  than  were  the  Jews.  And  he 
counselled  that  such  yoke  and  burden  should  be 
taken  away,  as  time  would  serve  quietly  to  do  it. 
But  what  would  Saint  Augustine  have  said,  if  he 
had  seen  the  Ceremonies  of  late  days  used  among 
VS ;  whereunto  the  multitude  used  in  liis  time  was 
not  to  be  compared?  Tliis  our  excessive  multitude 
of  Ceremonies  was  so  great,  and  many  of  liiem  so 
dark,  that  they  did  more  confound  and  darken,  than 
declare  and  set  forth  Christ's  benefits  unto  us.  And 
besides  this,  CiuMst's  Gospel  is  not  a  Ceremoni:il 
Law  (as  much  of  Moses'  Law  was)  but  it  is  a  Kcli- 
gion  to  serve  God,  not  in  bondage  of  the  figure  or 
shadow, but  in  the  freedom  of  the  Spirit;  being  con- 
tent only  wiili  those  Ceremonies  wliich  do  serve  to 
a  decent  Order  and  godly  Discipline,  and  such  as 
be  apt  to  stir  up  the  dull  mind  of  man  to  the  re- 
Hiembrance  of  liis  duty  to  God,  by  some  notable 


and  siX;qial  signification,  whereby  he  might  be  edi-. 
fied.     Furthermore,  the  most  weighty  cause  of  the. 
abolishment  of  certain  Ceremonies  was.  That  tliey 
were  so  far  abused,  partly  by  the  superstitious  blind-, 
ness  of  the  rude  and  unlearned,  and  partly  by  the 
imsatiable  avarice  of  such  as  sought  more  their  own 
lucre,  than  the  glory  of  God,  that  the  abuses  could 
not  well  be  taken  away,  the  thing'remaining  still.    : 
But   now  as   concerning    those   persons,  which 
peradventure  will  be  offended,  for  that  some  of  the 
old  Ceremonies  are  retained  still :  If  they  consider 
that  without  some  Ceremonies  it  is  not  possible  to 
keep  any  Order,  or  quiet  Discipline  in  the  Clun'ch, 
they  shall  easily  perceive  just  cause  to  reform  their 
judgments.    And  if  they  think  much,  that  any  of 
the  old  do  remain,  and  would  rather  have  all  de- 
vised anew :  then  such  men  granting  some  Cere- 
monies convenient  to  be  had,  surely  where  the  old 
may  be  well  used,  there  they  cannot  reasonably  re- 
prove the  old  only  for  their  age,  without  bewra^-ing 
of  their  own  folly.     For  in  such  a  case  they  ought 
rather  to  have  reverence  unto  them  for  their  anti- 
quity, if  they  will  declare  themselves  to  be  more 
studious  of  unity  and  concord,  than  of  innovations 
and  new-fangleness,  which  (as  much  as  may  be 
with  true  setting  forth  of  Christ's  Religion)  is  al- 
ways  to    be   eschewed.     Furthermore,  such  shall 
have  no  just  cause  with  the  Ceremonies  reserved  to 
be  offended.     For  as  those  be  taken  away  which 
were  most  abused,  and  did  burden  men's  consciences 
without  any  cause;  so  the  other  that  remain,  are  re- 
tained for  a  discipline  and  order,  which  (upon  just 
causes)  may  be  altered  and  changed,  and  therefore 
are   not  to  be  esteemed  equal  with  God's   Law. 
And  moreover,  they  be  neither  dark  nor  dumb  Ce- 
remonies, but  are  so  set  forth,  that  every  man  may 
understand  what  they  do  mean,  and  to  what  use 
they  do  serve.     So  that  it  is  not  like  that  they  in 
time  to  come  should  be  abused  as  other  have  been. 
And   in   these  our  doings  we  condemn   no  other 
Nations,  nor  prescribe  any  thing  but  to  our  own 
people  only  :  For  we  think  it  convenient  that  every 
Country  should  use  such  Ceremonies  as  they  shall 
think  best  to  the  settinc;  forth  of  God's  honour  and 
glory,  and  to  the  reducing  of  the  people  to  a  most 
perfect  and  godly  living,  without  error  or  supersti- 
tion ;  and  that  they  should  put  away  other  things, 
which  from  time  to  time  they  perceive  to  be  most 
abused,  as  in  men's  ordinances  it  often  chancelh 
diversly  in  divers  counuies. 


^  T/ie  Order  how  the  P falter  is  appointed  to  he  read. 


THE  Psalter  shall  be  read  tliroiifrli  OMce  every 
Moniii,  as  it  is  there  appointed,  both  tor 
Morning  and  Evening  Prayer.  But  in  February  it 
shall  be  read  only  to  the  twenty-eighth,  or  twenty- 
ninth  day  of  the  month. 

And,  whereas  January,  March,  May,  Jvly,  Au- 
gust, October,  and  December  have  One-and-thirty 
days  apiece;  It  is  ordered,  that  the  same  Psalms 
shall  be  read  the  last  day  of  the  said  months,  which 
were  read  the  day  before:  So  that  the  Psalter  may 
begin  again  the  first  day  of  the  next  Month  ensuing. 

And,  whereas  the  llQth  Psalm  is  divided  into 
twenty-two  portions,  and  is  over-long  to  be  read  at 


one  time;  It  is  so  ordered,  that  at  one  time  shall 
not  be  read  above  four  or  five  of  the  said  portions. 

And  at  the  end  of  every  Psalm,  and  of  every 
such  part  of  the  119th  Psalm,  shall  be  repeated 
this  Hymn, 

Glory  he  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son :  and  to  the 
Holy  Ghost ; 

As  it  uas  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall 
be:  world  without  end.     Amen. 

Note,  that  the  Psalter  followeth  the  Division  of 
the  Hebrews,  and  the  Translation  of  the  great  Eng- 
lish Bible,  set  forth  and  used  in  the  time  of  King 
Henry  the  Eighth,  and  Edzcard  the  Sixth. 


^  The  Order  how  the  reji  of  holy  Scripture  is  appointed  to  he  read. 


THE  Old  Testament  is  appointed  for  the  first 
Lessons  at  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer ;  so 
as  the  most  part  thereof  will  be  read  every  year 
once,  as  in  the  Calendar  is  appointed. 

The  New  Testament  is  appointed  for  the  second 
Lessons  at  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer,  and  shall 
be  read  over  orderly  every  year  thrice,  besides  the 
Epistles  and  Gospels;  except  the  Apocalypse,  out 
of  which  there  are  only  certain  Proper  Lessons  ap- 
pointed upon  divers  Feasts. 

And  to  know  what  Lessons  shall  be  read  every 
day,  look  for  the  day  of  the  Month  in  the  Calendar 
following,  and  there  ye  shall  find  the  Chapters  that 
shall  be  read  for  the  Lessons  both  at   Morning 


and  Evening  Prayer ;  except  only  the  Moveable 
Feasts,  which  are  not  in  the  Calendar,  and  the  Im- 
moveable, where  there  is  a  blank  left  in  the  Co- 
lumn of  Lessons,  the  Proper  Lessons  for  all  which 
days  are  to  be  found  in  the  Table  of  Proper 
Lessons. 

And  note,  that  whensoever  Proper  Psalms  or 
Lessons  are  appointed ;  then  the  Psalms  and  Les- 
sons of  ordinary  course  appointed  in  the  Psalter 
and  Calendar  (if  they  be  different)  shall  be  omitted 
for  that  time. 

Note  also,  that  the  Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel, 
appointed  for  the  Sunday  shall  serve  all  the  week 
after,  where  it  is  not  in  this  Book  otherwise  ordered. 


C2 


f  rilOrER   LESSONS 


To  be  read  at3Ioining  and  Evening  Prayer,  on  the  Sundaj-s,  and  other  Holy-days  throughout  the  Year. 


Sundai/s  of  Advent. 
1 
2 

3 

4 

Sundays  after 

Christmas. 

1 

2 

Sundays  after  the 
Epiphani/. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
C 

Septuagesima. 

Sexagesima. 
Quinquagesima. 

Lent. 
Sunday  1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Easter-day. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Sundays  after 

Easter. 

1 

2 

3 


^  LESSONS   PROPER   FOR   SUNDAYS. 


Mattiiis, 


Isaiah 


1 

5 

25 

30 


37 

41 


44 
51 
55 
57 
59 
65 


Evensong. 
Isaiah 


Genesis 


1 
—  3 

9.  to  V.  20 


\9.tov.30 

27 

39 

43 

Exodus  3 


Genesis 


Exodus 
Matth. 

Exodus 
Romans 


9 
26 


12 
6 


Exodus 


24 
26 
32 


38 
43 


46 
53 
56 
58 
64 
66 

2 

6 

12 


34 

42 

45 

5 


Numb.         16 

23,  24 

Deut.  4 


Exodus        10 
Heb.  5.  <or.  11 

Exodus         14 
Acts  2.  V.  22 


Numb.         C2 

25 

Deut.  5 


Sundays  after 
Easter. 


Sunday  after  Ascen- 
sion-day. 
Whit-Sunday. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 
Trinity  Sunday. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 
Sundays  after 

Trinity. 
1 
2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
33 
24 
25 
26 


Mattins. 


Deut. 


6 
8 

12 


l6.^or.l8 

Acts  10.  V.  34 


Genesis 
Matth. 


Joshua 
Judges 
1  Sam. 


Evensong. 


Deut. 


Isaiali 
Acts  19. 

Genesis 
1  John 


2  Sam. 


1  Kings 


2  Kings 


2  Sam. 


Jerem. 


10  Joshua 

4 

2  1  Sam. 
12 
15 
12 
21 
13 
18 
21 

5 
10 
19 

5 
35 


1  Kings 


2  Kings 


Jert 


Ezekiel 


Daniel 
Joel 

Habakkul 
Proverbs 


2 

Ezekiel 

14 

20 

3 

Daniel 

2 

Micah 

2 

Proverbs 

n 

11 
13 
15 

17 



7 
9 

13 

n 

to  V. 

21 

18 

5 


23 

5 

3 

13 

17 

19 

24 

17 

19 

22 

9 

18 

23 

22 

36 

13 

18 

24 

6 

6 

1 

3 

12 

14 

16 

19 


f  LESSONS   PROPER   FOR   HOLY-DAYS. 


S.  Andrew. 

S.  Thomas  the  Ap. 

Nativ.  of  Christ. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 


Mattins. 
Proverbs      20 
23 


Isaiah  9.  lo  v.  8 
Luke  2.  <o  XI.  15 


Evensong. 
Proverbs      2 1 

24 


Isaiah  7-  v.  10 

tov.  17 

Titus  3.  V.  4  to 

r.  9 


S.  Stephen. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

S.  .John. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 


Mattins. 

Proverbs      28 

Acts  6.  V.  8  &! 

ch.  7.  to  V.  30 


Eccles. 
Revelation 


Evensong. 
Eccles.  4 

Acts  7-  v.  30 

to  V.  55 

Eccles.  6 

Revelation  22 


mmMmiAJUse^ 


%  LESSONS   PROPER   FOR    IIOLY-DAYS. 


Innocents'  Dm/. 

Circumcision. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Epiphani/. 
\  Lesson. 
2  Lesson. 

Comers.  qfS.  Paul. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Purification  of  the 
Virgin  Man/. 

S.  Matthias. 

Annunciation  of  our 
Lady. 

Wednesday  before 
Easter. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Thursdai/  before 
Easter. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Good  Friday. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Easter-Even. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Monday  in  Easter- 
week. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Tuesday  in  Easter- 
week. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 


Mattins. 
Jer.  31.ior.l8 

Genesis         17 
Romans         2 


Luke  3. /or. 23 

Wisdom        5 

Acts  22.  to  V. 
22 


Evensong. 
Wisdom         1 

Dent,  ^0.v.  12 
Colossians      2 


Fsaiah  CO  Isaiali  41) 


Wisdom 


9 
19 


Eccl" 


John  2. /ot).  12 

Wisdom         (i 
Acts  26 

Wisdom       1 2 
Eccl"^  1 


Hosea  13 

John  11.  V.  45 


Daniel 
John 


9 
13 


Hosea 


14 


Jeremiah     3 1 


Gen.22.tov.20 
John  18 

Zechariah       9 
Luke  23.  v.  50 


Exodus        16 
Matthew      28 


Exodus        20 

Luke  24.  to  v. 

13 


Isaiah 
1  Peter 


53 
2 


Exodus         13 
Hebrews        4 


Exodus 
Acts 


Exodus 
1  Cor. 


17 
3 


32 
15 


-S'.  Mark. 

S.  Ph  Hip  ^  S.  James. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Ascension-Day. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Monday  in  Whit- 
sun-Tc'eek. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

'Tuesday  in  Whit- 
sun-xeeek. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

6'.  Barnabas. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

S.  John  Baptist. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

S.  Peter. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

S.  James. 

S.  Bartholomew. 

S.  Matthew. 

S.  Michael. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

S.  Luke. 
S.  Simon  &>  S.  Jude 

All  Saints. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 


Mattins. 
Eccl'"  4 


John   I.  V.  43 


Deut. 


10 


Evensong. 
Eccr 


9 


2  Kings         2 


Luke24.  t).  44  Eph. 4.  to v.^7 


r.en.  11.  lo  V. 

10 

1  Cor.  12 


1  Sam.  19.1)- IB 
lThes.5.t!.  12 

to  v.  24 


Eccr^ 
Acts 

Malachi 
Matthew 

Eccl"^ 
Acts 

Eccl"' 


10 
14 

3 
3 

15 
3 

21 

24 

35 


Num.  11.  t).  16 

to  V.  30 

1  Cor.  14.  to  V. 

26 

Deut.  30 

1  John  4.  to  V. 

14 

Eccr       12 

Actsl5.<ox;.36 

Malachi  4 

Matt.  14.  to  V. 

13 


Genesis        32 
Actsl2.fot).20 


Eccr 
Job 


Eccl™ 

19 

Acts 

4 

Eccr 

22 

29 

38 

Dan.  10.  V.  5 

Juder.6for.l6 


51 
24,25 


Job 


1 

42 


Wis.  S.tov.Wl  Wis.  S.tor.n 
Heb.  11.  D.  33  Rev.  19.  (o  v. 
Si  c\i.  12.  to  V.  71  17 


f  PROPER   PSALMS  ON   CERTAIN  DAYS. 


Christmas-Day. 

Mattins. 
19,  45,  85. 

Evensong. 
89,  no,  132. 

Ash-Wednesday. 

6,  32,  38. 

102,  130,  143. 

Good  Friday. 

22,  40,  54. 

69,  88. 

Easter-Day. 


Ascension- Day. 


Whit-Sunday. 


Mattins. 
2,57,  111. 


8,  15,  21. 


48,  68. 


Evensong. 
113,  114,  118. 


24,  47,  108. 


104,  145. 


THE     CALEISDAR, 

WITH   THE   TABLE   OF   LESSONS. 

JANUARY  hath  xxxi.  Days. 

MORNING 
PRAYER. 

EVENING 
PRAYER. 

~2 
~3 
~4 
"5 
"6 
7 
8 
~9 

A 

b 
c 

T 

e 
T 

A 
b 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

I  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Calends 

Circumciaion  of  our  Lord. 

4  Non. 

Genesis  1 

Matth.    1 

Genesis  2 

Rom.      1 

3  Non. 

3 

2 

4 

2 

Pild.  jNon. 

5 

3 

6 

3 

Nonee 

7 

4 

8 

4 

8  Id. 

Epip/ianij  of  our  Lord. 

7  Id. 

9 
13 

5 

12 

5 

6  Id. 
5  Id. 

Lucian,  Priest  and  Martyr. 

6 

14 

ti 

15 

7 
8 

16 
18 

7 
8 

10 

IT 

T2 
Ti 

15 

17 

18 

T9 
20 
2T 

22 

23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
.31 

c 

T 

e 

y 

g 

A 

"b 
c 

T 

e 
T 

A 

b 
c 

T 

e 

T 
g 

A 
"b" 
c 

4  Id. 

17 
19 
21 

3  Id. 
Prid.  Id. 

9 

10 

20 

22 

9 

10 

Idus 

Hilary,  Bishop  and  Confessor. 

23 

11 

24 

11 

19  CI.  Feb. 

25 

12 

26 
28 

12 

18  Cal. 

—  t 

13 

13 
14 
15 

17  Cal. 
16  Cal. 

29 
31 

14 

30 

15 

32 

15  Cal. 
14  Cal. 
13  Cal. 
12  Cal. 

Prisca,  Rom.  Virg.  and  Mart. 

33 
35 
38 

16 

34 
37 
39 
41 
43 

16 
1  Cor.     1 

17 

18 

Fabian,  Bp.  of  Rome  and  Mart. 
Agnes,  Rom.  V  irg.  and  Mart. 
Vincent.  Span.  1).  and  Mart. 

2 
3 

40 

19 

20 

11  Cal. 
10  Cal. 

9  Cal. 

8  Cal. 

7  Cal. 

4'2 

4 

44 

21 

45 

5 

46 

22 

47 

6 

Conversion  of  St.  Paul. 

48 

23 

4() 

Exodus  1 

3 

7 

6  Cal. 

50 

24 

8 

5  Cal. 

Exodus  2 

25 

9 

4  Cal. 

4 

26 

5 

10 

3  Cal. 

King  C/iiirle.i,  Martyr. 

(«)     6 
8 

27 
28 

7 

11 

Prid.  Cal. 

9 

12 

i: 

Note,  That  («)  Exodns  6.  is  to  be  read  only  to  ver.  14. 

1 

THE     CAT^F.NDAll^ 

WITH   THE   TABLE   OF   LESSONS. 

t 

FEBRUARY  hath  xxviii.  Days. 
And  in  every  Leap -Year  xxix.  Days. 

MORNING 
PRAYER. 

EVENING 
PRAYER. 

d 
e 

T 
g 

A 

¥ 

c 

e 
T 

g 
A 

c 

T 

e 
T 

g 
A 

"b 

c 

d" 

e 

T 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 
Mark      1 

1  Lesson. 
Exod.*  1 1 

13 
15 

2  Lesson. 

1 

Calendse 

Fast. 

Exod.  10 

1  Cor.  13 

~2 

4  Non. 

Purijicatiou  of  Virgin  Mary. 

2 

14 

3 

3  Non. 

Blasius,  Bishop  and  Martyr. 

12 

3 

15 

4 

Prid.  Non. 

14 

4 

16 

2  Cor.     1 

2 

5 

Nonas 
8  Id. 

Agatha,  a  Sicilian  V.  and  M. 

16 

5 

17 
19 
21 

6 

18 

6 

7 
8 

7 

7  Id. 

20 

3 

8 

6  Id. 
5  Id. 

22 

23 
32 
34 

4 
5 

~9 

24 

9 

10 

10 

4  Id. 

33 

6 

7 

11 

3  Id. 
Prid  Id. 
Id  us 

Levit.    18 
20 

11 

Levit.   19 

26 

Num.    12 

12 

12 

8 

9 

10 

13 

Numb.  1 1 

13 

■ 

14 

16  CI.  Mar. 
15  Cal. 

Valentine,  Bishop  and  Mart. 

13 

14 

14 

15 

16 
20 

15 

17 
21 

23 

11 

16 

14  Cal. 

16 

Lu.  1.^0  39 

1 . 1).  39 

12 

17 

13  Cal. 

22 
24 

13 

Galat.     1 
•2 

3 

18 

12  Cal. 

25 
30 

19 

11  Cal. 
10  Cal. 

27 
31 

2 

3 

20 

32 

21 

9  Cal. 

35 

4 

36 

4 
5 

22 

8  Cal. 

Deut.      1 

5 

Deut.     2 
4 

23 

7  Cal. 
6  Cal. 

Fast. 

3 

6 

6 

Ephes.    1 

2 

3 

24 

St.  Matthias,  Apostle  and  Mart. 

7 

2h 

g 

A 
b 

5  Cal. 
4  Cal. 

5 

8 

6 

2() 

7 

9 
10 

8 

27 

3  Cal. 

9 

10 
12 

4 

28 

c 

Prid.  Cal. 

11 

11 

5 

29 

13 

Matth.   7 

14 

Rom.    12 

■JMWW 


THE     CALEKDAB, 

WITH   THE  TABLE   OP>  LESSONS. 

MARCH  hath  xxxi.  Days. 


MORNING 
PRAYER. 


EVENING 
PRAYER. 


14 

3 

II 

T9 
8 

5 


1 
2 

^3 
4 
5 

'!_ 

8 

"9 
10 
11 
12 

Ts 

14 

Ti 
Te 

ll 

18 

T9 
20 
2T 

22 
2h 

24 
25 
26 
27 
28 

§ 
30 

sT 


d 

Caltndae 

e 

6  Non. 

1" 

5  Non. 

g 

4  Non. 

A 

3  Non. 

b 

Prifl.  Non. 

c 

Nona> 

A 

8  Ifl. 

e 

7  Id. 

f 

did. 

g 

5  Id. 

A 

4  Id. 

b 

3  Id. 

c 

Piid.  Id. 

d 

Idus 

e 

17  CI.  Apr. 

f 

16  Cal. 

g 

16  Cal. 

A 

14  Cal. 

b 

13  Cal. 

c 

12  Cal. 

d 

e 

T 

g 
A 

"17 

c 

TT 

e 

11  Cal. 

10  Cal. 

9  Cal. 

8  Cal. 

7  Cal. 

6  Cal. 

5  Cal. 

4  Cal. 

3  Cal. 

f 


Piid.  Cal. 


David,  Archbishop  of  Menev. 


Cedde,  or  Chad,  B.  of  Litch. 


Perpttiia  Maiirit.  Martyr. 


Gre<r.  M.  B.  oC  Rome  and  C. 


1  Lesson. 


Oeut.    13 


17 


19 


21 


24 


26 


28 


30 


32 


34 


2Le 


Luke    12 


13 


14 


13 


16 


18 


19 


20 


21 


Joshua   2 


Edward,  K.  of  West-Sax. 


Benedict,  Abbot. 


East. 


Amiunriulion  of  Virgin  Man/. 


24 


Judt 


10 


12 


14 


16 


18 


20 


Ruth 


23 


24 


John 


1  Lesson. 


Deut.    16 


18 


20 


25 


27 


29 


31 


33 


Joshua    1 


23 


Judges    1 


2  Lesson. 


Ephes.    6 


Philipp.  1 


Coioss.   1 


1  Thess.  1 


2Thess.  1 


10 


13 


14 
13 


,'} 


1  Sam.    1 


If) 


17 


18 


~9 
11 

Ts 

15 

T7 


21 


Kuth       2 


I  Sam.   2 


3 


1  'I'im.    1 


2,3 


3 


2  Til 


I'itus       Vi 


2,3- 


Miilemon 


llobr.     I 


^ 


The  Numbers  here  iircfixed  to  the  several  D.iys,  lictwoen  the  Twenty-first  Day  of  M<iir/i  niul  tlie  Eisrhtccnth' 
Day  of  /Ipri/,  both  inchiHive,  denote  tjie  Days  uihiu  which  those  full  Moons  do  tail,  w  l.ieh  happt  11  u))on  or  next  I 
Jittir  tlie  'J'wcnty-first  Day  of  Muick,  in  those  Years,  of  which  they  arc  respectively  the  Golden  Numbers;  and' I 


THE     CALENDAR, 

WITH   THE   TABLE   OF   LESSONS. 

APRIL  hath  XXX.  Days. 


MORNING 
PRAYER. 


EVENING 
PRAYER. 


13 

To 

18 
7 

15 

4 

12 
1 


1 

~2 
~S 

4 
~b 
~6 
~J_ 

8 
]9 
10 

IT 
Is 

13 

14 
15 
UJ 
I? 
18 
29 
•20 
2T 
22 
23 
24 
25 
20 
27 
28 
29 
30 


g 

Calendse  0 

A 

4  Non. 

b 

3  Non. 

c 

Prid.  Non. 

cl 

NonaB 

e 

8  Id. 

f 

7  id. 

g 

6  Id. 

A 

5  Id. 

b 

4  Id. 

c 

3  Id. 

d 

Prid.  Id. 

e 

Idus 

F 

18  CI.  March 

S 

17  Cal. 

A 

16  Cal. 

b 

13  Cal. 

c 

14  Cal. 

d 

13  Cal. 

e 

12  Cal. 

f 

11  Cal. 

g 

10  Cal. 

A 

9  Cal. 

b 

8  Cal. 

c 

7  Cal. 

d 

6  Cal. 

e 

3  Cal. 

i 

4  Cal. 

g 

3  Cal. 

Richard,  Bishop  of  Chichester. 


St.  Ambrose,  Bishop  of  Milan. 


Prid.  Cal. 


Alphege,  Archbishop  of  Cant. 


St.  George,  Martyr. 


St.  Murk,  Evang.  and  Martyr. 


6 


1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

1  Sam.  5 

John 

19 

7 

20 

9 

21 

11 

Acts 

1 

13 

2 

15 

3 

17 

4 

19 

5 

21 

6 

23 

7 

25 

8 

27 

9 

29 

10 

31 

11 

2  Sam.   2 

12 

4 

13 

(5 

14 

8 

15 

10 

16 

12 

17 

14 

18 

16 



19 
20 

18 

20 

21 

22 

22 

23 

24 

24 

1  Kings  2 

25 

4 

26 

1  Lfs 


1  Sam.  6 


8 


10 


12 


14 


16 


18 


27 


20 


22 


26 


28 


30 


2  Sam.    1 


3 


__9 
11 
13 

~15 

ll 
J9 

21 


23 


1  Kifigs  1 


2  Lesson. 
Hebr.     3 


10 


11 


12 


13 


James     1 


1  Peter  1 


2  Peter  1 


1  John    1 


2,  3  John 


the  Sunday-Letter  next  followinff  any  such  Full  Moon  points  oi- 
until  the  Year  of  our  Lord  1899  inclusive;  after  which  Year,  the 
changed,  as  is  hereafter  expressed. 


t  Eaiter-Day  for  that  Year.     All  which  holds 
Place  of  these  Golden  Numbers  will  be  to  be 


D 


THE     CALENDAR, 

WITH   THE  TABLE   OF   LESSONS. 

MAY  hath  xxxi.  Days.                                      1 

MORNING 
PRAYER. 

EVENING         1 
PRAYER.           1 

^v 

"r"!-! 

i  1  -^'^^  ^  i   ■ 

.OccsJ  S  \    iA.yi-r.-j.l    I  j 

1  Lesson. 

r~ 

2  Lesson. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson.  11 

- 1 

b 

Calendae 

St.  P/tilip  Sf  St.  James,  Ap.  &  M. 

iBC^L  ,jj. 

7^"  ?:'  ■  ■ 

s 

Jude           1 

2 

c 

(j  Non. 

1  King^s  8 

Acts     2(5 
Matth.    i 

1  Kings  9 
11 

Rom.      1  11 

3 

\A 

^5 

d 
e 

T 

0  Noil. 

InventioH  of  the  C^ross.             _^ 

10 

>- 

^1 

4  IS  on.           1  ''- 

j^         '-'^^^  i 

12 

3 

15 

M    A 

'^3  1 

3  Is  on. 

;  ---                -"-  .■■■■^-  -y^ 

-'}_  _    ^14 

-T'-i-'-^l 

8 

"9 

\0 
U 

-I6 

s 

A 
b 
c 

T 

e 
_T 

A 
b 

Prill.  Non. 

St.  John  Evang.  ante  Port.  Lat. 

16 

fl 

17 
19 

- 

1^1 

NonsE             1 

18 

5 

^1 
r     1?| 

8  Id. 

20 

6 

-    p 

21 

7  Id. 

6  Id. 

22 

2  Kings'! 

4j  11=^1 

2  Kings  2 

l8 

3 

A  r^l 

3  Id. 

..,,,4 

..    ..-.^   ^ 

5 

:i  1  ^l 

4  Id.  ■'•'     '•  ,  - 

6 

ID 

.i,'i    .jW' 

'-'- '  ♦-'  1*1 1 

3  W^ i 

Prid.  Id. 

Id  us      -         j  - 

8 

ill 

^ 

-^  1^1 

10 

1,2 

,.:,L    !ii 

;-> 

^b| 

12 

13 

!46 

i 

5 

4k  1 

16 

17 

m 
19 

c 

T 

(' 
T 

17  CI.  Jun. 

,     ■    -•■ 

14 

1^ 

''^V5 

(       . 

3^1 

l6CaL    _^.    _ 
1.5  €al.          15 

\  .-■      ,    ,    _  .        

^  ■'-■■■'  !6 

15 

'17 

'    ;    "■■. 

iiil 

18 

.lb 

1,7 

■21 

i  iGW    1 

14  Cal. 

J)unsia!>,  Archbishop  of  Cant. 

20 

13  Cal. 

1  c-_                  .;c  ic-Jtb  ■.  ■     \: 

-  ■        22 

18 

23 

'-  i  -  ■  '  -  -? 

21 
00 

23 
24 
25 
2^ 
27 
2b 
29 
30 
31 

A 

17 

c 

T 

e 
T 

g 
A 
b 
c 

12  Cal. 
11  Cal. 

■  te 

24 

I'gl 

25 

i    -■  ■    '4 

.  G*-- 

Ezra        1 

,    ._  .20 

Ezra       3 

;  ■■■     '^i 

10  Cal.             ;■ 

..>                      '■■' - 

4 

•21 

5 

— '- —  t  .  r.  1 
J.5'.     1^ 

9  Cal. 

1                      !         .^!'.ii\':.'ci  i'.s 

oV.  /si  \^. 

-';:_:/..  22 

1 

Nehenii  1 
4 

8Cai;^^:2  : 

9 

£!3 
24 

!..     .% 

7  Cal.          '  > 
fi  Cal. 
.3  Cal. 
4  Cal. 
3  Cal. 
Frid.  Cal 

Augustin,  first  Archb.  of  Cant. 

Nehem.2 

Ui''!^ 

Ven.  15ede,  Presb. 

5 

25 

::6 

1--,--'^ 

■■  ■"' 

8 

26 

9 

:  1^1^ 

King  Charles  il.  Nat.  and  R.___ 

'.:;.j^Aj(j} 

b-i    iv.  27 

13 

A;!«! 

'       ■                                   1 

Esther    1 

28 

Esthei'  ^2 

'■       ^    I'^b 

fl 

3 

Mark      1 

4                  14{| 

1 

THE     CALENDAR, 

WITH   THE   TABLE   OF   LESSONS. 

JUNE  hath  XXX.  Days. 


MORNING 
PRAYER. 


EVENING 
PRAYER. 


I 


1 

2 

3 

4 
~5 
~G 
~7 

8 
^ 
10 
11 
T2 

Is 
T4 

15 
16 

T? 

Yi 

I9 

20 

^1 

ao 

23 

24 
25 
26 
,27 
g8 


,1:  J  I 


Cgl 


endae 


4lNon. 


Prid.  Non. 


N 


0x1  ae 


Non. 


Id. 


Id. 


Id. 


^m^ui 


4  m: 


3  Id. 


Prid.  Id. 
Jdus 


1$  Q\.  Julii. 


17  Gal. 


16  Cal. 


15  Cal. 


14  Cal. 


18  Cal. 


1?  Cal. 


H  Cal. 


10  Cal. 


9  Cal. 


Nicomede,  Rom.  t*.  and  Mar. 


iuii.      '.*  ^^Lii^'X  J 


.2201 


Bonifaie,  B.  of  Mfentz,  and  M. 


i       Jfcii.  JXU'i  31. 


i<;  .anav-hQ 


S^.  Barnabas,  Apostle  and  Mart. 


$Ca 


7  Cal. 


6  Cal 


5  Cal. 


Cal. 


3  Cal. 
I  rid.  Cal. 


-  -~ 1 

-""     ""   i        ^ 

'1                                                                                             ;         .   -     - 

St.  Alban,  Martyr. 

Tr.  of  Edward,  K.  of  West-Sax. 

'  ""    Fast. 

Nativity  0^'  St.  John  Baptist. 

I  :J:.^-ja}H      .;.  ;.^   .c 

i  ■> 

1  >          "      \  '              Fast. 

Si.  Peteri  Apostle,  and  Martyr. 


i         idllJiilL 


1  Lesson. 


Esther    5 


Job 


10 


12 


14 


16 


19 


21 


23 


26,  27 


29 


31 
"33 


35 

_39 

41 


Prov.      1 


2  Lesson. 


Mark      2 


(i 

_j — 

8 

~9 

10 


14 


15 


16 


Luke 


10 
"TT 


12 


.■iiislv'i    8 


1  Lesson. 


Esther   6 


8 


Job 


.^■ 


U 


13 


15 


17,  18 


20 


22 


24,25 


28 
~30 


32 
"34 
"36 
"38 
~40 
"42 


Prov. 


10 


2  Lesson. 


1  Cor.  15 


16 


2  Cor.     1 


■^! 


■:     jCP^i 


10 


11 


12 


13 


Galat.     1 


.21! 


6 


Ephes.    1 


D-2 


THE     CALENDAR, 

WITH   THE   TABLE   OF   LESSONS. 

JULY  hath  xxxi.  Days. 

MORNING 
PRAYER. 

EVENING        1 
PRAYER.          1 

1 

~2 

"i 

4 
~5 
~6 
7 
8 
~9 
10 
iT 
T2 

Ti 
u 
T5 
To 
17 

18 
i9 
20 
2T 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
•SO 
3? 

S 
A 

b 

c 

T 

e 
T 

g 
A 

b 

c 

TT 

e 

T 

o- 

A 

17 

c 

e 
T 

g 

A 

"b" 

c 

e 

T 
g 

A 

b 

: 

1  Lesson. 

Prov.    1 1 

13 

2  Lesson. 

Luke     13 

14 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Calendae 
6  Non. 
5  Non. 

Visit,  of  the  Bl.  Virgin  Mary. 

Prov.    12 
14 

Philipp.  I 
0 

15 

15 

16 

18 

3i 

4  Non. 
3  Non. 
Prid.  Non. 

Transl.  of  St.  Martin,  IV  and  C. 

17 

16 
17 
18 

41 

19 
21 

20 

Coloss.    1 

22 

2 

Non  SB 

23 

19 

24 

3 

8  Id. 
7  id. 
tiid. 

25 

20 

26 

4 

27 

21 

28 

1  Thess.  1 

29 

22 

31 

2 

5  Id. 
4  Id. 

Eccles.   1 

23 

Eccles.  2 

3 

3 

24 

4 

4 

3  Id. 
Prid.  Id. 

5 

John        1 

6 

5 

7 

2 

8 

2  Thess.  1 

idu.s 

17  Cl.  Au<j:. 
Ui  Cal. 

Swiiluin,  IJishop  Winch.  Tran. 

9 

3 

10 

2 

1 1 

4 

12 

3 

Jerem.    1 

5 

Jerem.    2 

1  Tim.    1 

15  Cal. 

3 

(i 

4 

2,3 

14  Cal. 

5 

7 

6 

4 

13  C;il. 

Margaret, "V.  and  M.  at  Antioch. 

7 

8 

8 

5 

12  Cal. 

9 

9 

10 

6 
2  Tim.    1 

1 1  Cal. 

St.  Maiy  Magdalene. 

11 

10 

12 

10  Cal. 

13 

11 

14 
16 

2 

9  Cal. 

FaM. 

15 

12 

3 

H  Cal. 

St.  J  times,  A|)ostlc  and  Maityr. 

13 

4 

7  Cal. 

St.  Anne,  Mother  to  the  B.  V.  M. 

17 

14 

18 

Titus      1 

6  Cal. 

19 

16 

20 

2,3 

5  Cal. 

21 

Ifi 

22 

Philcnion 

4  Cal. 

23 

17 
IB 

24 

llcbr.      1 

3  Cal. 
Prid.  Cal. 

25 

26 

2 
3 

27 

19 

28 

1 

WITH    THE   TABLE   OF   LESSONS. 

» 

AUGUST  hath  xxxi.  Days. 

s^ 

MORNING 
PRAYER. 

EVENING 
PRAYER. 

r.<->A    i    j    .IIO¥«'-jJ    1     ] 

I  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

1 

~2 

c 

Calendae 

Lammas  Day*,  ^i-J  f 

J  erem .  29 

John     20 
21 

J  erem.  30 
32 

Hebr.     4 

TT 

4  iSon. 

31 

5 

"3 

e 

3  Non. 

33 

Acts        1 

34 

6 

4 

r 

Prid.  Non. 

35 

2 

36 

7 
8 

5 

fj 

NonsE 

37 

3 

38 

6 

~7 

A 

T 

8  Id. 

Transfiguration  of"  our  Lord. 

39 

4 

40 

9 

7  Id. 

Name  of  Jesus. 

41 

5 

42 

10 

8 

c 

6  Jd. 

43 

(i 

44 

11 

9 

d 

3  Id. 

45,  ^() 

7 

47 

12 

IS 

James     \ 

10 

e 

4  Id. 

St.  Lawrence,  A.  D.  of  R.  and  M . 

4H 

8 

49 
51 

n 
T2 
T3 

14 

1 

3  Id. 

50 

9 

10 

A 
17 

1  nd.  Id. 

52 

Lam.       1 

idiis 

Lam.       2 

1  1 

3 

8 
i    4 

Ul  CI.  Sept. 

-- 

12 

5 

15 

c 

Iti  Cal. 

Lzekiel  2 

13 

Ezekiel  3 

5 

16 

17 

IB 
T9 
20 
2? 
22 
23 
24 
25 

(1 
e 

T 

g 

A 

17 
IT 

e 
T 

17  Cal. 

i\ 

14 

7 

1  J^eter  1 

2 

Iti  Cal. 
I.i  Cal. 

i:i 

15 

14 

IH 

If) 

33 

8 

N  Cal. 

•j-j 

17 

Daniel     1 

4 

13  Cal. 

Daniel    2 

18 

3 

5 

li  Cal. 

19 

5 

2  Peter  1 

11  Cal. 

(i 

20 

7 

2 

10  Cal. 

Fasi. 

8 

21 

9 

3 

9  Cal. 
B  Cal. 

.S7.  Buiiholomew,  Ap.  and  Mart. 

22 

1  John    1 

10 

23 

11 

2 

26 

g 

7  Cal. 
6  Cal. 

12 

24 

Hosea     1 
4 

3 

27 

A 

Hos.  2,  3 

25 

4 
5 

28 

b 

5  Cal. 

St.  Auyju-stin,  H.  of  Hippo,  C.  D. 

5,0 

2f) 

7 

29 

c 

4  Cal. 

Beheading-  of  St.  John  Baptist. 

8 

27 

9 

2,  3  John 
Jude 

80 

d 

3  Cal. 

10 

28 

11 

31 

e 

Prid.  Cal. 

12 

Matth.    1 

13 

Rom.      1 

THE     CALENDAR, 

WITH   THE   TABLE   OF   LESSONS. 


SEPTEMBER  hath  xxx.  Days. 


MORNING 
PRAYER. 


EVENING 
PRAYER. 


1 
"2 
~3 

4 
"5 
]6 

7 

10 
11 

la 

13 

u 

15 
18 

19 

20 

-2 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 


f 

g_ 
A 

"b 

c 

d" 

e 

T 

A 

IT 

c 

1 
e 

T 
s_ 

A 

~b 
c 

e 
T 

A 

c 
~d 
e 

T 

K 


Calendae 


4Nc 


3  Non. 


Prid.  Non. 


NoilcE 


8  Id. 


7  Id. 


6  Id. 


5  Id 


4  Id. 


18  CI.  Oct. 


17  Cal. 


16  Cal. 


5  Cal. 


4  Cal. 


3  Cal. 


Prid.  Cal 


3  Id. 

Prid. 

Id. 

Idas 

15  Cal. 

14  Cal. 

13  Cal. 

12  Cal. 

11  Cal. 

10  Cal. 

9  Cal. 

8  Cal. 

7  Cal. 

6  Cal. 

Giles,  Abbot  and  Confessor. 


Enurchu^s,  Bishop  of  Orleans. 


Nativity  of  the  Bl.  Virgin  Mary. 


1  Lesson. 


Hosea  14 


Joel 


Ainos 

1 

a 

li 

7-- 

■  ■  '■'-■ 

n 

=- 

Jonah 

1 

4 

Micah    2 


Holv-Cross  Dav. 


Lambert,  Bishop  and  Martyr. 


Fast. 


St.  Mallliew,  Apostle  and  Evang. 


St.  Cypr.  A.  B.  of  Carth.  and  M. 


St.  Michael  and  A II  A  tigch. 


St.  Jcnuii,  Pr.  Con.  and   Doct. 


Nahum 


Habak.  2 


Zeph.      1 


Haggai  2 


Zech.2,  3 


2  Lesson. 


Matth.   2 


6 


10 


12 


14 


Malac.    2 


-Tobit--  -2 


A 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


25 


26 


27 


28 


Mark       1 


1  Lesson. 


Joel 


1 


Amos     2 


»^ 


8 


Obadiah 
Jonah  2,3 


Micah     1 
»- 


,5 


Nahutn  2 


Habak.   1 


Zeph. 


Haggai  1 


Zech.      1 


4,5 


% 


11 


Malac.    1 


Tobit      1 


— ~6 


2  Lesson. 


Rom. 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


1  Cor.     1 


ilO; 


|M, 


IS- 


1*0 


1*^ 


:"  ];! 


IG 


K>ih3tes«Eneaa 


THE     CALENDAR, 


n.:??  ■ 


WITH   THE   TABLE   OF   LESSONS. 


OCTOBER  hatifi 


XXXI. 


Days 


1 
'1 


lit 


'!   8 

10 

1,1-1" 

Ti 

13 
14^ 
Id 
15 

:iZ 
1.8 

29 

20 

21 

22. 

23 

24 
:;25 

26 

28 
29 
!30 
'31 


MORNING 
PRAYER. 


EVENING 
PRAYER. 


A 
c 

T 

e 
T 


g-  Nc 


A_ 

c 

e 
T 

A 

¥ 

c 

T 

e 
T 

c 

e 
T 

A 

T 

c 


Calendae™  ■ 


&N( 


3  Non. 

4  ^on. 


3-N 


on. 


PriA.  Non. 


8ftW- 


it- 


4^4- 


7 


i»t.^Ji)€nys  Areop.  Bp.  and  Mart. 

]-j r* — '-^ 


5^  id. 


4  Id. 


3id;- 


Prid^-JW;-:^: 


Idosl 


-17.Cl.-Nov.'  j 


15'CaJ, 


*-! 


U  Cal. 


13  Gill. 


12  Gal. 


lliGal. 


10  i  Gal. 


9  Gal. 


Gal.: 


Gal.    - 


6  Gal. 


^jCal 

--4Gal.--- 
-^Icai.-- 
Prid.  Gal. 


S    .ncxeasJ  ! 


Remigiiis,  Bishop  of  Rhemes. 


Faitli,  Virgin  and  Martyr. 


-1-2 -^ 


'-'^■M  pf 


-Tj-ansl,  6i'-K.  Bdw.  Confessorr 


Etlw;ldreda,V.  Q.  and  A¥.  of  Ely? 


.bV.  Luke,  Evattgelistr 


,  1 .1 1 


Crispin,  Martyr. 


-i-'tesson; 


Tobit     7 


—  9 


11 


13 


Judith  -1 


-UL 


-  5 


« 


11 


13 


li5 


Wisd.     1 


-3 


7- 


43 


—44 


47- 


19 


Eecl" 


Fast. 


St.  SimanS^St.Jude,  Ap-  and  M. 


Fast. 


r^ — _10 

:: — _42 

14 


2  Lesson. 


Mark      4 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


45 


—46 


Lii.  1  lesg 


1.*.39 


-^ 


3 

~4 

5 

— 8 

^! 

4(^ 

1 

H: 

"12 
"^3 
~44' 
15 
Zm 
~17 


1  Lesson. 


Tobit     8 


10 


12 


14 


Judith    2 


&-  r 


-«> 


h2 


14 


16 


Wisdr— 2"  - 


10 


12 


2  Lesson. 


1  Cor.  It) 


2  Cor.     1 


I 


10 


11 


-  12 


13 


Galat.     1 


14 


16 


18 


Eccl 


11 
--     13 

15 


Ephi 


Philipp.  1 


Colciss.    1 


THE     CALE  VDAR, 

[                WITH   THE   TABLE    OF   LESSONS. 

j                          NOVEMBER  hath  xxx.  Days. 

MORNING 
PRAYER. 

EVENING 
PRAYER. 

"3 

4 

~5 

~6 

7 

8 

"P 

10 

d 
e 
T 

g 
A 

b" 

c 

e 
T 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

Calendae 
4  Non. 

All  Saints'  Day.       ^?— —  -  • 

Eccl''*  16 
18 

Ltike     18 
19 
20 

Eccl"^  17 
19 
21 

Coloss.  2 
3 

4 

3  Non. 
Prid.  Non. 
Nona 
8  Id. 
7  Id. 
6  Id. 
^Id. 

20 

Papists'  Conspiracy, 

22 

21 

23 

1  'I'hess.  1 
2 

Leonard,  Confessor. 

24 

22 

C)  25 
28 

27 

23 

3 

29 
31 
33 

24 

John        1 

2 

('')30 
32 
34 
36 

4 

5 

-AM. 

2  Thess.  1 
0 

11 
12 

A 

3  Id. 
Prid.  Id. 

.St.  Martin,  Bislu>|)aiKl  Confessor. 

35 

3 

37 

4 

38 
40 

3 

13 
14 
~\5 

Te 

T7 

18 

20 
2T 
22 

23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
3f> 

b 

Idus 

Britius,  Bishop. 

39 

41 

5 
6 

7 
8 

1  Tim.    1 
2,3 

c 

d" 

e 

T 

g 
A 
"b" 
c 

T 

e 
T 

g 
A 

"b 

c 

T 

e 

18  CI.  Dec. 
17  Cal. 
16  Cal. 

42 
44 
(^)46 
48 
50 
Baruch  1 

Machutus,  Bi.>h<)|i. 

43 

4 

45 

5 
6 

15  Cal. 

9 
10 

11 

47 
49 
51 

14  Cal. 
13  Cal. 

2  Tim.    1 

2 

12  Cal. 

Edmund,  King  and  Martjr.  ^ 

Baruch  2 

12 

3 
5 

3 

M  Cal. 

4 

13 

4 
Titns       I 

10  Cal. 

Cecilia,  Virgin  anil  Martyr. 

() 

14 

Hist.  ijus. 
Isaiah      1 

9  Cal. 

St.  Clement,  1.  B.of  R.  and  M. 

Bel&Dra 

15 

2,  3 

8  Cal. 

Isaiah     2 

1() 

3 

Philemon  . 

Ilchr.  1 
2 
3 
4 

7  Cal. 

Catiiarine,  X'irnjniiind  Martyi-. , 

-    4 
6 

17 
18 
19 

.5 

«  Cal. 

7 

5  Cal. 

8 

9 

1 1 

_ .18 

4  Cal. 

in 

20 

3  Cal. 

Fast. 

0 1 

5! 

Prid.  Cal. 

St.  Andrew,  Apostle  and  Martyr. 

.J    .] 

Acts       1 

6 

II 
Note,  That  (')  Eccl"'  25.  is  to  be  read  only  to  v.  13.  and  (b)  Eccl"'  30.  only  to  v.  in.  uiul  O  Eccl"'  'lO.  only  to  r.  W.          H 

THE     CALENDAR, 

WITH   THE   TABLE   OF   LESSOiNS. 

DECEMBER  hath  xxxi.  Days. 


.         ™ 

MORNING 
PRAYER. 

EVENING 
PRAYER. 

T 
g 

A 
b 
c 

T 

e 
T 

g 
A 

~h 

c 

T 

e 
T 

g 
A 

"b" 

c 

T 

e 

T 
g 

A 

"b" 
c 

T 

e 

T 
g 

A 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 
Acts       2 

1  Lesson. 

2  Lesson. 

1 

Calendae 

Isaiah   14 
16 

Isaiah    15 
■17 
19 
22 

Hebr.     7 

3 

8 

2 

4  Non. 
3  Non. 

3 

18 

4 

9 

4 

Prid.  Non. 
Nonse 

20,  21 

5 

10 

5 

23 

6 

24 

11 

6 

Bid. 

Nicholas,  B.  of  Myra  in  Lycia. 

25 

7  to  V.  30 

26 

12 

7 

7  Id. 
6  Id. 
5  Id. 

27 
29 
31 

7  V.  30 

8 

9 

10 

11 

28 

13 

8 

Concept,  of  the  Bl.  Virg.  Mary. 

30 

James     1 

9 

32 

34 

2 

10 

4  Id. 
3  Id. 
Prid.  Id. 
Idus. 
19  CI.  Jan. 

33 

3 

11 

35 
37 
39 

41 

36 

4 

12 

12 
13 
14 

38 

5 

13 

Lucy,  Virgin  and  Martyr. 

40 

1  Peter  1 

14 

42 

2 

15 

18  Cal. 
17  Cal. 
16  Cal. 

43 

15 

44 

3 

16 

0  Sapientia. 

45 

16 

46 
48 

4 

17 

47 
49 
51 

17 

18 
19 

20 

5 

18 

15  Cal. 

50 

2  Peter  1 

19 

14  Cal. 

52 

2 

20 

13  Cal. 
12  Cal. 

Fast. 
St.  Thomas,  Apostle  and  Martyr. 

53 

54 

3 

21 

55 

21 

1  John    1 

22 

11  Cal. 
10  Cal. 

9  Cal. 

8  Cal. 

22 

23 

24 

56 

58 

2 

23 

57 
59 

3 

24 

Fast. 

60 

4 

25 

Christmas  T)ay. 

St.  Stephen,  First  Martyr. 

26 

7  Cal. 
6  Cal. 
5  Cal. 

27 

St.  John,  Apostle  and  Evang. 

28 

Innocents'  Day. 

25 

5 

29 

4  Cal. 

61 

26 

62 

2  John. 

I'.O 

3  Cal. 
Prid.  Cal. 

63 

27 
28 

64 

3  John. 

31 

Silvester,  Bishop  of  Rome. 

65 

m 

Jude. 

TABLES  and  RULES  for  the  Moveable  and  Immoveable  Feasts;  together 
with  the  Days  of  Fasting  and  Abstinence,  through  the  whole  Year. 

Rules  to  know  when  the  Moveable  Feasts  and  Holy-Days  begin. 

TOASTER-DAY  (on  which  the  rest  depend)  is  always  the  First  Sinidai/  after  the  Full  Moon  which 
"^  happens  upon,  or  next  alter  the  Twenty-first  Day  oi'  March;  and  it'  the  Full  Moon  happens  upon 
a  Sundaif,  Easter-Day  is  the  Sunday  after. 

Advent-Sunday  is  always  the  nearest  Sunday  to  the  Feast  of  St.  Andrew,  whether  before  or  after. 


Septuugesimu 
Sexugesima 
Quinquagesima 
Quadragesima 


■  Sunday  is 


Nine 

Rogation-Sunday 

Five  Weeks 

Eight 

Weeks  be- 

Ascension-Day 

Forty  Days 

after 

Seven 

fore  Easter. 

IV/iit-Sunday 

Seven  Weeks 

Easier 

Six 

Trinity-Sunday 

Eight  Weeks 

A  Table  of  all  the  Feasts  that  are  to  he  observed  in  the  Church  of 

England  throughout  the  Year. 


All  Sundays  in  the  Year. 
^  fThe    Circumcision    of    our 
Lord  JESUS  CHRIST. 
The  Epiphany. 
The  Conversion  of  St.  Paul. 
The  Purification  of  the  Bless- 
ed Virgin. 
St.  Matt/lias  the  Apostle. 
The    Annunciation    of    the 

Blessed  Virgin. 
[_St.  Mark  the  Evangelist. 


Monday  and  Tuesday  in  Easter-week. 


'St.  Philip  and  St.  James  the 

Apostles. 
The  Ascension  of  our  Lord 

JESUS  CHRIST. 
St.  Barnahas. 
The    Nativity    of    St.   John 

Baptist. 
St.  Peter  the  Apostle. 
.SV.  James  the  Apostle. 
St.  Bartholomew  the  Apostle. 
St.  Matthexp  the  Apostle. 


(St.  Michael  and  all  Angels. 
.SV.  Luke  the  Evangelist. 
St.  Simon  and  St.  Jude  the 

Apostles. 
All  Saints. 

St.  Andrew  the  Apostle. 
St.  Thomas  the  Apostle. 
The  Nativity  of  our  Lord. 
St.  Stephen  the  Martyr. 
St.  John  the  Evangelist. 
The  Holy  Innocents. 


Monday  and  Tuesday  in  JVhitsuii-tceek. 


A  Table  of  the  Vigils,  Fasts,  and  Days  of  Abstinence,  to  be  observed  in 

the  Year. 

The  Evens  or  Vigils  before 
<S^  Bartholomeiv. 
St.  Matthew. 
St.  Simon  and  St.  Jude. 
St.  Andrew. 
St.  Thomas. 
Easter-Day.  St.  James.  ■  All  Saints. 

Note,  that  if  any  of  these  Feast-Days  fail  upon  a  Monday,  then  the  Vigil  or  Fast-Day  shall  be  kept 
upon  the  Saturday,  and  not  upon  the  Sunday  next  before  it. 


Li  L 

The  Evens  or  Vigils  before 
The  Nativity  of  our  Lord. 
The   Purification  of  the  Blessed 

Virgin  Mary. 
The  Annunciation  of  the  Blessed 

Virgin. 


The  Evens  or  Vigils  before 
Ascension-Dai/. 
Pentecost. 
St.  Matthias. 
St.  John  Baptist. 
St.  Peter. 
St.  James. 


Days  of  Fasting,  or  Abstinence. 


I.  The  Forty  Days  of  Lent. 

II.  The  Ember- Days  at  the  Four  Seasons, 
The  I'irst  Snndai/  in  Lent. 
The  Feast  of  Pentecost. 
Scptemlier  14. 
Decern  her  I.'). 


Being  the  Wednes- 
duif,  Fridai/,  and 
Salurdai/  after 


HI.  The  Three  Rogation-Days,  being  the  Mon- 
day, Tuesday,  and  Wednesday,  before  Holii 
Thursday,  or  the  Ascension  of  our  LORD. 

IV.  All  the  Fridays  in  the  Year,  except 
CHRISTMAS-DAY. 


Certain  solemn  Days,  for  ivhich  particular  Services  are  appointed. 


11 


The  Til'ih  Day  of  yiovemher,  being  tiie  Day 
kept  in  Memory  of  the  Papists'  Conspi- 
racy. 

.  The  Thirtieth  T).ny  of  .ftinuary,  being  tin,'  Day 
kept  in  Memory  of  the  Martyrdom  ol'  King 
Charles  the  First. 


HI.  The  Nine  and  Twentieth  Day  of  May,  be- 
ing the  Day  kept  in  Memory  of  the  Birth 
and  Return  of  King  Charles  the  Second. 

IV.  The  Twenty-filth  Day  of  October,  being  the 
Day  on  which  his  Majesty  began  his  happy 
Reign. 


A  TABLE  TO  FIND  EASTER-DAY, 

From  the  present  Time  till  the  Year  1899  inclusive,  according  to  the  foregoing  Calendar. 


Golden 
Number. 


14 
3 

11 

19 
8 

IG 
5 

13 

2 

10 


15 

4 

12 
1 


17 
6 


Days  of  the 
Month. 


March 


April 


21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
I 
2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13' 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 


Sunday 
Letters. 


C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
B 
C 


^"^HIS  Table  contains  so  much  of  the  Calendar  as  is  neccs- 
-■•  sary  for  the  determining  of  Easier;  to  find  which,  look 
for  the  Golden  Number  of  the  Year  in  the  first  Column  of  the 
Table,  against  which  stands  the  Day  of  llie  Paschal  Full  Moon ; 
then  look  in  the  Third  Column  for  the  Sunday  Letter,  ne.\t 
after  the  Day  of  the  Full  Moon,  and  the  Day  of  the  Month 
standing  against  that  Sunday  Letter  is  Easter-Dai/.  If  the 
Full  Moon  happens  upon  a  Sunday,  then  (according  to  the 
first  Rule)  the  next  Sunday  after  is  Easter-Daj/. 

To  find  the  Golden  Number,  or  Prime,  add  one  to  the  Year 
of  our  Lord,  and  then  divide  by  19;  the  Remainder,  if  any,  is 
the  Golden  Number;  but  if  nothing  remaineth,  then  19  is  tlie 
Golden  Number. 

To  find  the  Dominical  or  Sunday  Letter,  according 
to  the  Calendar,  until  the  Year  1799  inclusive,  add  to 
the  Year  of  our  Lord  its  fourth  Part,  omitting  Frac- 
tions; and  also  the  Number  1:  Divide  the  sum  by  7; 
and  if  there  is  no  Remainder,  then  A  is  the  Sunday 
Letter:  But  if  any  Number  remaineth,  then  the  Letter 
standing  against  that  Number  in  the  small  annexed 
Table,  is  the  Sunday  Letter. 

For  the  next  Century,  that  is,  from  the  Year  1800  till  the 
Year  1899  inclusive,  add  to  the  current  Year  only  its  fourth 
Part,  and  then  divide  by  7,  and  proceed  as  in  the  last  Rule. 

Note,  that  in  all  Bissextile  or  Leap  Years,  the  Letter  found 
as  above  will  be  the  Sunday  Letter,  from  the  intercalated  Day 
exclusive  to  the  End  of  the  Year. 


0 

A 

1 

G 

2 

F 

3 

E 

4 

D 

5 

C 

6 

B 

E2 


ANOTHER  TABLE  TO  FIND  EASIER 
Till  the  Year  1899  inclusive. 


SUNDAY    LETTERS. 


Golden 
Number. 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

.     X. 

XI. 

XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX 


April    ' 

April 

March 

April 

April 

April 

April 

April 

April 

April 

March 

April 

April 

March 

April 

April 

April 

April 

April 


16  ■ 

9  ■ 

26  ■ 

16-|. 


B 


23  — - 

9       ■ 

2  — r=- 
16 

9  — — 

26  

16  — 

2  

26  

16  

2  

23  

9, 

2  j  March 


17 

3 
27 
17 

3 
24 
iO 

3 
17 
10 
27 
17 

3 
27 
10 

3 
24 
10 
27 


March 


!8 
4 
28 
11 
A 
25 
11 
28 
18 
11 
28 
18 
4 
28 
11 
4 
18 
11 
28 


D 


-19 

-  5 
-29 
-12 

-  5 
-19 
-12 
-29 
-19 

-  5 
-29 
-19 

-  5 
-22 
-12 

-  5 
-19 
-12 
-29 


March 


20 
6 
23 
13 
6 
20 
13 
30 
20 
6 
30 
13 
.6 
23 
13 
30 
20 
13 
30 


March 


April 


14  

7  

24  

i 

14  

31   April 

21 

14 

31 

21 

7 
31 
14 

7 
24 
14 
31 
21 

7 
31 


April 


April 


15 
8 

25 

15 
1 

22 
8 
1 

22 
8 

25 

15 
8 

25 

15 
1 

22 
8 
1 


TO  make  use  of  the  preceding  Table,  find  the  Sunday  Letter  for  the  Year  in  the  uppermost 
Line,  and  the  Golden  Number,  or  Prime,  in  the  Column  of  Golden  Numbers,  and  against 
the  Prime,  in  the  same  Line  under  the  Sunday  Letter,  you  have  the  Day  of  the  Month  on  which 
EASTER  falleth  that  Year.  But  note,  that  the  Name  of  the  Month  is  set  on  the  Left  Hand,  or 
just  with  the  Figure,  and  followeth  not,  as  in  other  Tables,*  by  Descent,  but  Collateral. 


A  TABLE  of  the  MOVEABLE  FEASTS  for  Forty- five  Years, 
according-  to  the  foregomg  Calendar. 


(0 

p 

o 

-1-. 

o 

e 

•n 

5 

H 

3- 

n 

o 

al 
n 

a 

Z 

B 

B 

a" 
re 

H 
n 

c 

3 

a. 
•-1 

c 
s 
a. 

W 

1816 

12 

1 

GF 

5 

1817 

13 

12 

E 

3 

1818 

14 

23 

D 

1 

1819 

15 

4 

C 

4 

1820 

16 

15 

BA 

3 

1821 

17 

26 

G 

F 

6 
3 

1822 

18 

7 

1823 

19 

18 

E 

Q 

1824 

1 

0 

DC 

5 

1825 

2 

11 

B 

3 

1826 

3 

22 

A 

2 

1827 

4 

3 

G 

5 

1828 

5 

14 

FE 

3 

1829 

6 

25 

D 

5 

1830 

7 

6 

C 

4 

1831 

8 

17 

B 

3 

1832 

9 

28 

AG 

6 

1833 

10 
11 

9 

20 

F 

3 

1834 

E 
D 

2 
5 

1835 

12 

1 

1836 

13 

12! 

CB 

3 

1837 

14 

23 

A 
G 

2 
5 

1838 

15 

4 

1839 

16 

15 

F 

o 

1840 

17 

26 

ED 

5 

1841 

18 

7 

C 

4 

1842 

19 

18 

B 

2 

1843 

1 

0 

A 

5 

1844 

2 

11 

GF 

4 

1845 

3 

22 

E 

1 

1846 

4 

3 

D 

4 

1847 

5 

14 

C 

3 

1848 

6 

25 

BA 

6 

1849 

7 

6 

G 

4 

1850 

8 

17 

F 

2 

1851 

9 

28 

E 

5 

1852 

10 

9 

DC 

4 

1853 

11 

20 

B 

2 

1854 

12 

1 

A 

5 

1855 

13 

12 

G 

4 

1856 

14 

23 

FE 

1 

1857 

15 

4 

D 

4 

1858 

16 

15 

C 

3 

1859 

17 

26 

B 

6 

1860 

18 

7 

AG 

4 

(73 


Feb. 

Jan. 
Feb. 
Jan. 
Feb. 


Jan. 
Feb. 
Jan. 


Feb, 


Jan. 
:^eb. 


Jan. 

Feb. 

^an. 


Feb. 
Jan. 
Feb. 

Jan. 
Feb. 

Jan. 
Feb. 
Jan. 
Feb. 

Jan. 
Feb. 

Jan. 
Feb. 

Jan. 
Feb. 
Jan. 
Feb. 


11 
2 

18 

7 
30 
18 

3 
26 
15 
30 
22 
11 

3 
15 

7 
30 
19 

3 
26 
15 
31 
22 
11 
27 
16 

7 
23 
12 

4 
19 

8 
31 
20 

4 
27 
16 

8 
23 
12 

4 
20 

8 
31 
20 

5 


H 

3 

p 

O 

-»2 

Feb. 

28 

19 

4 

24 

16 

March  7 

Feb. 

20 

12 

March  3  | 

Feb. 

16 

8 

28 

20 
:h  4 

Man 

Feb. 

24 

16 

March  7 

Feb. 

20 

12 

March  4 

Feb. 

17 

8 

28 

13 

March  4 

Feb. 

24 

9 

Man 

:h  1 

Feb. 

21 

5 

25 

17 

Man 

:h  8 

Feb. 

21 

13 

March  5 

Feb. 

25 

9 

March  1  | 

Feb. 

21 

6 

25 



17 

Marcli  9  1 

Feb. 

22 

p 


4S 


April  14 

6 

March  22 

April  1 1 

-  2 
— —  22 

7 


March  30 
April    18 


March  26 

April  15 

6 

— ^  19 
— ^—  11 
— -—  3 
22 

7 


March  30 
April     19 

March  26 
April  15 
March  31 
April  19 
11 


March  27 
April     16 

7 


March  23 
April     12 

4 

23 

8 


March  31 
April  20 
11 


March  27 
April    16 

8 

March  23 
April     12 

4 

24 


o 
era 


o 

3 


X 


May    19 
11 


April  26 
May   16 

7 

27 

12 

4 


23 

8 

April  30 
iMay  20 

11 

24 

16 

27 

12 

4 

24 

8 


April  ,30 
May  20 


o 

24 

16 

1 

21 

12 

April  27 
May  17 

9 

28 

13 

5 

25 

16 

1 

21 

13 


April  27 
May   17 

9 

29 

13 


n 
n 

a 

o' 

3 


May  23 

15 

April  30 
May  20 

11 

31 


27 

12 

4 

24 

15 

28 

20 

12 

31 

16 

8 

28 

12 

4 

24 

9 

28 

20 

5 

25 

16 

■ 1 

21 

13 

June     I 
May   17 

9 


29 

20 

5 

25 

17 

1 

21 

13 

June     2 
May    17 


3 

a. 


June 
May 


June 
May 

June 
May 

June 
May 
June 
May 

June 
May 


June 
May 

June 
May 
June 

May 


June 
May 


June 
May 


June 
May 


June 
May 


June 
May 


c 

3 

a. 

P 

-t 

2 

24 

25 

25 

10 

27 

30 

24 

21 

26 

10 

23 

26 

25 

18 

26 

6 

23 

22 

25 

14 

27 

3 

24 

25 

25 

7 

23 

30 

24 

22 

25 

10 

23 

26 

25 

18 

26 

7 

23 

22 

25 

14 

27 

3 

24 

19 

26 

7 

23 

30 

24 

15 

26 

4 

24 

26 

25 

11 

27 

31 

24 

23 

25 

11 

23 

27 

25 

19 

26 

8 

23 

30 

24 

15 

26 

4 

24 

27 

25 

11 

27 

31 

24 

23 

25 

12 

22 

27 

25 

> 


3 


c« 


a. 
p 


Dec.      I 
Nov.  30 

29 

28 

Dec.     3 


Nov.  30 

28 

27 

Dec.     3 
o 


Nov.  30 

29 

28 

27 

Dec.     2 

1 


Nov.  30 

29 

27 

3 
2 

1 


Dec. 


Dec. 


Nov.  29 

28 

27 

Dec.     3 

Nov.  30 

29 

28 

3 
2 

1 

30 

28 

27 

3 

o 

Nov.  30 

28 


Nov, 


Dec. 


Dec. 


o 


A  TABLE  of  the  MOVEABLE  FEASTS,  according 
to  the  several  Days  that  EASTER  can  possibly  fall 
upon. 


Note,  thai  in  a  Bissextile  or  Leap  Year,  the  Number  of  Suiidai/s  after 
Ei)iphany  will  be  the  same,  as  if  pMster-Dmj  hat!  fallen  One  Day  later 
than  it  really  does.  And  for  the  same  Reason,  One  Day  must,  in  every 
Leap  Year,  l)e  added  to  the  Day  of  the  Month  given  by  the  Table  for 
Septiwgesima  Sunday:  Ami  the  like  must  be  done  for  tlic  First  Day  of 
Lent  (commonly  called  yJ.sft~fVednesdai/)  unless  the  Table  gives  some 
Day  in  the  Month  of  March  for  it;  for  in  that  Case,  the  Day  given  by 
the  Table  is  the  right  Day. 


TABLE  to  find  £:«A'- 
ter,  from  the  Year 
1900,  to  2199  in- 
clusive. 


5  2. 


14 
3 

II 

19 

8 

16 
5 

13 
2 

10 

18 

7 

15 

4 

12 
1 

9 

17 

6 


o    " 

3     o 


April 


March  22 
23 

24 

25 

20 

27 

28 

2y 

30 

31 

1 

-  2 

-  3 

-  4 

-  5 

-  6 

-  7 

-  8 

-  9 
-10 
-11 
-12 
-13 
-14 
-15 
-10 
-17 
-18 
-19 
-20 
-21 
-22 
-23 
-24 
-25 


C/5 
c 
3 


D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
B 
C 


TMF  Golilcn  Niimlieri  in  the  forpproinp 
Calciular  will  point  out  the  Dajs  of  the 
Pafclul  Full  Monn.s,  till  the  Yci'  of  our  !-onl 
1900 ;  at  which  Time,  in  onlcr  that  ihs 
I-c<U'li,i(tical  Full  Moons  may  fall  nearly  on 
the  funr  I'l.i^s  with  the  real  Full  M')iins, 
the  Golden  NumherK  muft  he  removed  to 
(litVcrcnt  Days  nf  the  Calendar,  as  is  done 
in  the  annexed  'Falile,  which  contains  fo 
much  of  theCilfndar  then  to  he  iifed,  as  is 
ncccifarv  for  findlnp  th'-  P.ifchal  Full  Moons, 
anil  the  FeUt  of  Fijter,  from  the  Year  ii)Oo, 
to  the  Year  iigp  liulufivx.  This  'Fable  is 
to  be  matic  ufe  of.  In  all  rclnerts,  as  the 
Firft  Tabic  bcftire  infcried,  for  finding  SuJIrr 
till  the  Year  ittvy. 


GENERAL  TABLES 

For  finding  the  DOMINICAL  or  SUN  DAY  LETTER,  and  the  Places  of  the  GOLDEN 

NUMBERS  in  the  Calendar. 


TABLE     L 


B 


D 


1900 
2()00 


2900 


3800 


4700 
4800 


2100 


3000 


3900 
4000 


4900 


5700 


6600 


7500 
7600 


5800 


6700 
6800 


7700 


8500 


&c. 


2200 


3100 
3200 


4100 


5000 


5900 
6000 


6900 


7800 


2300 
2400 


3300 


4200 


5100 
5200 


G 


1  (iOO 


2500 


3400 


4300 
4400 


5300 


6100 


7000 


6200 


7100 
7200 


7900 
8000 


8100 


1 700 


2600 


3500 
3600 


4500 


5400 


6300 
6400 


7300 


8200 


1800 


2700 
2800 


3700 


4600 


5500 
5600 


6500 


7400 


8300 
8400 


nr^O  find  the  Dominical  or  Sunday  Letter  for 
-■■  any  given  Year  of  our  Lord,  add  to  the 
Year  its  Fourth  Part,  omitting  Fractions,  and 
also  the  Number,  which  in  Table  L  standeth  at 
the  Top  of  the  Column,  wherein  the  Number  of 
Hundreds  contained  in  that  given  Year  is  found : 
Divide  the  Sum  by  7,  and  if  there  is  no  Re- 
mainder, then  A  is  the  Sunday  Letter;  but  if 
any  Number  remaineth,  then  the  Letter,  which 
standeth  under  that  Number  at  the  Top  of  the 
Table,  is  the  Sunday  Letter. 


TABLE     IL 


1 

2 

3 

I 

3 

3 

Years  of 

Years  of 

our  Lord. 

our  Lord. 

B 

1600 

0 

B 

5200 

15 

1700 

1 

5300 

16 

1800 

1 

5400 

17 

1900 

0 

5500 

17 

B 

2000 

0 

B 

5G00 

17 

2100 

2 

5700 

18 

2'200 

3 

5800 

18 

2300 

4 

5900 

19 

B 

2400 

3 

B 

6000 

19 

2500 

4 

6100 

19 

2600 

5 

6200 

20 

2700 

5 

6300 

21 

B 

2800 

5 

B 

6400 

20 

2900 

6" 

6500 

21 

3000 

6 

66qo 

22 

3100 

7 

67iDO 

23 

B 

3200 

7 

B 

6800 

22 

3300 

7 

69PO 

23 

3400 

8 

7000 

24 

3.500 

9 

7100 

24 

B 

3600 

8 

B 

7200 

24 

3700 

9 

7300 

25 

3800 

10 

7400 

25 

3900 

10 

7500 

26 

B 

4000 

10 

B 

7600 

26 

4100 

11 

7700 

26 

4200 

12 

7800 

27 

4300 

12 

7900 

28 

B 

4-100 

12 

B 

8000 

27 

4500 

13 

8100 

28 

4600 

13 

8200 

29 

4700 

14 

8300 

29 

B 

4800 

14 

B 

8400 

29 

4900 

14 

8500 

0 

5000 

15 

&c. 

5100 

Ifi 

TO  find  the  Month  and  Days  of  the  Month  to  which 
the  Golden  Numbers  ought  to  be  prefixed  in  the 
Calendar,  in  any  given  Year  of  our  Lord,  consisting 
of  entire  Hundred  Years,  and  in  all  the  intermediate 
Years  betwixt  that  and  the  next  Hundredth  Year 
following,  look  in  the  Second  Column  of  Table  11. 
for  the  given  Year  consisting  of  entire  Hundreds, 
and  Note  the  Number  or  Cyjiher  which  stands  against 
it  in  the  Third  Column ;  then,  in  Table  111.  look  for 
the  same  Number  in  the  Column  under  any  given 
Golden  Number,  which  when  j'ou  have  found,  guide 
your  Eye  Side-ways  to  the  Left  Hand,  and  in  the 
First  Column  you  will  find  the  Month  and  Day  to 
which  that  Golden  Number  ought  to  be  prefixed 
in  the  Calendar,  during  that  Period  of  One  Hun- 
dred Years. 

The  Letter  B  prefixed  to  certain  Himdredth  Years 
in  Table  H.  denotes  those  Years  which  are  still  to 
be  accounted  Bissextile  or  Leap  Years  in  the  New 
Calendar;  whereas  all  the  other  Hundi-edth  Years 
are  to  be  accounted  only  common  Years. 


TABLE  III. 


Paschal 

Full 

Moon. 

March 

21 

March 

22 

March  23 

March  24 

March  25 

March  26 

March 

27 

March  28 

March  29 

March  30 

March  31 

April 

1 

April 

2 

April 

3 

April 

4 

April 

5 

April 

6 

April 

7 

April 

8 

April 

9 

April 

10 

April 

11 

April 

12 

April 

13 

April 

14 

April 

15 

April 

16 

April 

17 

April 

17 

April 

10 

April 

18 

%  = 

n    a. 


c 

D 

E 
F 
G 


A 
B 
C 
D 
E 


F 
G 
A 
B 
C 


D 
E 
F 
G 
A 


B 
C 
D 
E 
F 


G 
A 
B 
B 
C 


C 


8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 
14 
15 
16 

17 


18 
19 
20 
21 
22 


23 
24 
25 
26 
27 


THE  GOLDEN  NUMBERS. 


2  3 


19!  0 

20  j  1 

21  I  2 

22  I  3 

23  4 


24 
25 
26 
27 
28 


29 
0 

1 

2 
3 


10 
11 
12 
13 
14 


11 
12 
13 
14 
15 


16 
17 
18 
19 
20 


21 
22 
23 
24 
25 


15 
16 
17 
18  129 
19!  0 


22 
23 
24 
25 
26 


27 

28 

29 

0 

1 


26 
27 
28 


18 


20 
21 
22 
23 
24 


25 
26 

27 

28 


29 


10 


17 
18 
19 

20 


21 


8 

9 

10 

11 

12 


13 

14 
15 
16 

17 


18 
19 
20 
21 
22 


23 

24 
25 
26 
27 


■^8 

29 

0 


7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19 


4 
5 
6 

7i 
8 


13 


25- 

26 

27 

28 

29 


10 
11 
12 
13 
14 


15 
16 
17 
18 
19 


16 
17 
18 
19 
20 


21 
22 
23 
24 
25 


20 
21 
22 

23 


24 


26 
27 
28 
29 
0 


17 
18 
19 
20 
21 


22 
23 
24 
25 
26 


28 

29 

0 

1 


9 
10 
11 


12 
13 
14 

15 


16 


28 

29 

0 

1 

2 


18 

19 
20 
21 
22 


23 
24 

25 

26 


27 


19 
20 
21 
22 
23 


24 
25 
26 
27 
28 


29 
0 
1 
2 
3 


20 
21 
22 
23 
24 


25 
26 
27 
28 
29 


19 


16 
17 
18 
19 
20 


21 
22 
23 
24 

25 


26 
27 

28 
29 


27 

28 

29 

0 

1 


23 

24 
25 
26 

27 


18 
19 
20 
21 


11  122 


24 
25 
26 
27 
28 


20 
21 
22 
23 
24 


10 
11 
12 
13 


14 


16 
17 
10 
19 
20 


21 
22 
23 

24 


25 


1  The  ORDER  for  MORIVING  and  EVENING  PRAYER  daily  to  be 

said  and  used  throughout  the  Year. 

'T^HE  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer  shall  be  used  in  the  accustomerl  Place  of  the  Ohurch,  Chapel, 
-*-    or  Chancel;  except  it  shall  be  otherwise  determined  by  the  Ordinary  of"  lli(5  Place.     And  the 
Chancels  shall  remain  as  they  have  done  in  times  past. 

And  here  is  to  be  noted,  that  such  Ornaments  of  the  Church,  and  of  the  Ministers  thereof,  at  all 
Times  of  their  Ministration,  shall  be  relaitied,  and  be  in  use,  as  were  in  this  Church  of  England,  by  the 
Authority  of  Pariianicnt,  in  ilie  Second  Year  of  the  lleign  of  King  Kilmird  the  Sixth. 


THE    ORDER    FOR 

MORNING     PRAYER, 

DAILY  THROUGHOUT  THE  YEAR. 


^  At  the  heginning  of  Morning  Prayer  the  Minijler  Jhall  read  with  a 
loiid  voice  fome  one  or  more  of  thefe  Sentences  of  the  Scriptures  that 
follow.     And  tJien  he  fliall  fay  that  which  is  written  after  the  faid 
Sentences. 


WHEN  the  wicked  man  turn- 
eth  away  from  his  wicked- 
nefs  that  he  hath  committed,  and 
,„^doeth  that  which  is  lawful  and 
right,  he  fliall  fave  his  foul  alive. 
Ezekiel  xviii.  27- 

I  acknowledge  my  tranfgref- 
fions,  and  my  fin  is  ever  before 
me.    Pfalm  li.  3. 

Hide  thy  face  from  my  fins, 
and  blot  out  all  mine  iniquities. 
Pfalm  h.  9. 

Tlie  facrifices  of  God  are  a  bro- 
ken fpirit :  a  broken  and  a  contrite 
heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not  de- 
fpife.     Pfalm  li.  17. 

Rend  your  heart,  and  not  your 
gannents,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord 
your  God  :  for  he  is  gracious  and 
merciful,  flow  to  anger,  and  of 
great  kindnefs,  and  repenteth  him 
of  the  evil.    Joel  ii.  13. 

To  the  Lord  our  God  belong 
mercies  and  forgivenefles,  though 
we  have  rebelled  againfl;  him  : 
neither  have  we  obeyed  the  voice 


of  the  Lord  our  God,  to  walk  in 
his  laws  which  he  fet  before  us. 
Datiiel  ix.  9,  10. 

0  Lord,  correct  me,  but  with 
judgement;  not  in  thine  anger, 
lefi;  thou  bring  me  to  nothing. 
Jer.  X.  24.    Pfalm  vi.  1. 

Repent  ye;  for  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven  is  at  hand.  St. Matth.  iii.  2. 

1  will  arife,  and  go  to  my  fa- 
ther, and  will  fay  unto  him.  Fa- 
ther, I  have  finned  againfl;  hea- 
ven, and  before  thee,  and  am  no 
more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  fon. 
aS"^.  Luke  XV.  18,  19. 
'^ Enter  not  into  judgement  with 
thy  fervant,  O  Lord;  for  in  thy 
fight  fliall  no  man  living  be  jufti- 
fied.     Pfalm  cxliii.  2.  , 

If  we  fay  that  we  have  no  fin, 
we  deceive  oui-felves,  and  the  truth 
is  not  in  us  :  but,  if  we  confefs  our 
fins,  he  is  faithful  and  juft  to  for- 
give us  our  fins,  and  to  cleanfe  us 
from  all  uurighteoufnefs.  1  St.  John  V 
i.  8,  9. 

F 


^ 


MORNING     PRAYER. 


v^ 


DEARLY  beloved  brethren, 
the  Scripture  moveth  us  in 
fundiT  places  to  acknowledge  and 
confefs  our  manifold  fins  and  Avic- 
kednefs;  and  that  we  fliould  not 
diffemble  nor  cloke  them  before 
the  face  of  Almighty  God  our 
heavenly  Father ;  but  confefs  them 
with  an  humble,  lowly,  penitent, 
and  obedient  heart;  to  the  end 
that  w^e  may  obtain  forgivenefs  of 
the  fame,  by  his  infinite  goodnefs 
and  mercy.  And  although  we 
ought  at  all  times  humbly  to  ac- 
knowledge our  fins  before  God; 
yet  ought  we  moil  chiefly  fo  to  do, 
when  we  afl'emble  and  meet  to- 
gether to  render  thanks  for  the 
great  benefits  that  we  have  re- 
ceived at  his  hands,  to  fet  forth 
his  molt  worthy  praife,  to  heai* 
his  mofl;  holy  Word,  and  to  afiv 
thofe  things  which  are  requifite 
and  neceflary,  as  well  for  the  body 
as  the  foul.  Wlierefore  I  pray  and 
befeech  you,  as  many  as  are  here 
prefent,  to  accompany  me  with 
a  pure  heart,  and  humble  voice,*" 
unto  the  throne  of  the  heavenly 
grace,  faymg  after  me; 

^  A  general  Confession  to  be  said  of  the  rofio/c  Con- 
gregulion  after  the  Minister,  all  kneeling. 

ALMKillTY  and  moft  merci- 
ful leather;  We  have  erred, 
and  firayed  from  thy  ways  like  loll 
Iheep.  We  have  followed  too  much 
the  devices  and  defires  of  our  own 
hearts.     We  have  offended  againll 


thy  holy  laws.  We  have  left  un- 
done thofe  things  which  we  ought 
to  have  done;  And  we  have  done 
thofe  things  which  we  ought  not 
to  have  done ;  And  there  is  no 
health  in  us.  But  thou,  O  Lord, 
have  mercy  upon  us,  mil'erable  of- 
fenders. Spare  thou  them,  O  God, 
which  confefs  their  faults.  Refl;ore 
thou  tliein  that  are  penitent ;  Ac- 
cording to  thy  promifes  declared 
unto  mankind  in  Chrifl  Jefu  our 
Lord.  And  grant,  O  moft  mer- 
ciful Father,  for  his  fake ;  That  we 
may  hereafter  live  a  godly,  right- 
eous, and  fober  life,  1  o  the  glory 
of  thy  holy  Name.     Amen. 

%  The  Absolution,  or  Remission  of  sins,  to  be  pro- 
nounced bi/  the  Priest  alone,  standing;  the  people 
still  kneeling. 

^\  LMIGHTY  God,  the  Father 
■^^  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  who 
defireth  not  the  death  of  a  finner, 
but  rather  that  he  mav  turn  from 
his  mckednefs,  and  live ;  and  hath 
given  power,  and  commandment, 
to  his  Minifters,  to  declare  and 
pronoimce  to  his  people,  being 
penitent,  the  Abfolution  and  Re- 
miflion  of  their  fins :  He  pardoneth 
and  abiolveth  all  them  that  truly 
repent,  and  unfeignedly  believe 
his  holy  Gofpel.  Wherefore  let 
us  befeech  him  to  grant  us  true 
repentance,  and  his  holy  S[)irit, 
that  thofe  things  may  ])leiife  him, 
Avhich  we  do  at  this  prefent;  and 
that  the  rell  of  our  life  hereafter 


MORNING    PRAYER. 


may  be  pure,  and  holy;  fo  that  at 
the  laft  we  may  come  to  his  eter- 
nal joy;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord. 

%  The  people  shall  answer  here,  and  at  the  end  of  all 
other  prayers,  Ameu. 

^  Then  the  Minister  shall  kneel,  and  say  the  Lord's 
Prayer  with  an  audible  voice;  the  people  also  kneel- 
ing, and  repeating  it  with  him,  both  here,  and 
wheresoever  else  it  is  used  in  Divine  Service. 

'^/""IkUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
V^  ven,  Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpaffes.  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
e\dl :  For  thine  is  the  kingdom, 
The  power,  and  the  gloiy.  For 
ever  and  ever.    Amen. 

5f  Then  likewise  he  shall  say, 

O  Lord,  open  thou  our  lips. 

Anfwer.  And  our  mouth  ftiall 
fhew  forth  thy  praife. 

Prieji.  O  God,  make  fpeed  to 
fave  us. 

Anfwer.  O  Lord,  make  hafte 
to  help  us. 

If  Here  all  standing  up,  the  Priest  shall  $ay, 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

Anfwer.  As  it  was  in  the  be- 
ginning, is  now,  and  ever  fliall 
be  :  world  without  end.    Amen. 

Prieji.  Praife  ye  the  Lord. 

Anfwer.  The  Lord's  Name  be 
praifed. 


5[  Then  shall  he  said  or  sung  this  Psalm  follomng : 
except  on  Easter-Day,  upon  which  another  Anthan 
is  appointed;  and  on  the  'Nineteenth  day  of  every 
Month  it  is  not  to  be  read  here,  but  in  the  ordinary 
Course  of  the  Psalms. 

Venite,  ejcultemus  Domino.  Ps.  xcv. 

OCome,  let  us  fmg  unto  the 
Lord  :  let  us  heartily  rejoice 
in  the  ftrength  of  our  falvation. 

Let  us  come  before  his  prefence 
with  thankfgiving  :  and  fhew  our- 
felves  glad  in  him  with  Pfalms. 

For  the  Lord  is  a  great  God  : 
and  a  great  King  above  all  gods. 

In  his  hand  are  all  the  corners 
of  the  earth  :  and  the  ftrength  of 
the  hills  is  his  alfo. 

The  fea  is  his,  and  he  made  it : 
and  his  hands  prepared  the  diy  land. 

O  come,  let  us  worfhip,  and  fall 
down  :  and  kneel  before  the  Lord 
our  Maker. 

For  he  is  the  Lord  our  God  : 
and  we  are  the  people  of  his  paf- 
ture,  and  the  flieep  of  his  hand. 

To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice, 
harden  not  your  hearts  :  as  in  the 
provocation,  and  as  in  the  day  of 
temptation  in  the  wildernefs  ; 

When  your  fathers  tempted  me : 
proved  me,  and  faw  my  works. 

Forty  years  long  was  I  gi'ieved 
with  this  generation,  and  faid  :  It 
is  a  people  that  do  err  in  their 
hearts,  for  they  have  not  known 
my  ways. 

Unto  whom  I  fware  in  my 
wrath  :  that  they  Ihould  not  en- 
ter into  my  reft. 

Fa 


MORNING     PRAYER, 


nfOMfiJ.- 


'^fc 


Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  (hall  be  ;  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

5f  Then  shall  follow  the  Psalms  in  order  as  they  are 
appointed.  And  at  the  end  of  every  Psalm  through- 
out the  Year,  and  likewise  at  the  end  of  Benedicite, 
Beneciictus,  Magnificat,  and  Nunc  dimittis,  shall 
be  repeated, 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

Anfxver.  As  it  was  in  the  be- 
ginning, is  now,  and  ever  fliall 
be  :  world  without  end.    Anien. 


^^^^  1[  Then  shall  be  read  distinctly  with  an  audible  voice 
the  First  Lesson,  taken  out  of  the  Old  Testament, 
as  is  appointed  in  the  Calendar,  except  there  be 
proper  Lessons  assigned  for  that  day :  He  that 
readeth  so  standing  and  turning  himself]  as  he  may 
best  be  heard  of  all  such  as  are  present.  And  after 
that,  shall  be  said  or  sung,  in  English,  the  Hymn 
called  Te  Deum  Laudamus,  daily  throughout  the 
Year. 

fl  Note,  that  before  every  Lesson  the  Minister  shall 

say.  Here  begiiineth  such  a  Chapter,  or  Verse 

of"  such  a  Chapter,  of  such  a  Book :   And  after 

every  Leswn,  Here  endeth  the  First,  or  the  Se- 

^      cond  Lesson. 

V^  ;€-'  Te  Deiim  Laudamus. 

^J}/^^.  V¥/^E  praife  thee,  O  God  :  we 
▼▼     acknowledge    thee    to   be 
the  Lord. 

All  the  earth  doth  worfhip  thee  : 
the  Father  everlafting. 

Yiy  thee  all  Angels  ciy  aloud  : 
the  Heavens,  and  all  the  Powers 
therein. 

To  thee  Cherubin,  and  Sera- 
phin  :  continually  do  ciy, 

Holy,  Holy,  Holy  :  Lord  God 
of  Sabaoth  ; 


Heaven  and  earth  are  full  of 
the  Majesty  :  of  thy  Gloiy. 

The  glorious  company  of  the 
Apoftles  :  praife  thee. 

The  goodly  fellowfhip  of  the 
Prophets  :  praife  thee. 

The  noble  army  of  Martyrs  : 
praife  thee. 

The  holy  Church  throughout 
all  the  world  :  doth  acknowledge 
thee  ; 

The  Father  :  of  an  infinite 
Majefty ; 

I .;  fl^hine  honourable,   true  :    and 
only  Son; 

Alfo  the  Holy  Ghoft  :  the 
Comforter. 

Thou  art  the  King  of  Glory ^: 
OChrift. 

Thou  art  the  everlafting  Son  • 
of  the  Father. 

When  thou  tookeft  upon  thee 
to  deliver  man  :  thou  didft  not 
abhor  the  A^irgin's  womb. 

When  thou  hadft  overcome  the 
fharpnefs  of  death  :  thou  didft 
open  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  to 
all  believers. 

Thou  fitteft  at  the  right  hand  of 
God  :  in  the  Glory  of  the  Father. 

We  believe  that  thou  flialt 
come  :  to  be  our  Judg^e. 

We  therefore  pray  thee,  help 
thy  fei-vants  :  whom  thou  haft  re- 
deemed with  thy  precious  blood. 

Make  them  to  be  numbered 
with  thy  Saints  :  in  gloiy  ever- 
lafting. 


MORNING     PRAYER. 


O  Lortl,  fave  tliy  j)cople  :  and 
blefs  thine  heritage. 

Govern  them  :  and  lift  them 
lip  for  ever. 

Day  by  day  :  we  magnify  thee  ; 

And  we  worfliip  thy  Name  : 
ever  world  without  end. 

Vouchfafe,  O  Lord  :  to  keep  ns 
this  day  ^vithout  (in. 

O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us  : 
have  mercy  upon  us. 

O  Lord,  let  thy  mercy  lighten 
upon  us  :  as  our  truft  is  in  thee. 

O  Lord,  in  thee  have  1  trufted  : 
let  me  never  be  confounded. 

^  %  Or  this  Canticle,      '^ 

Senedicite,  omnia  Opera. 

OAU  ye  Works  of  the  Lord, 
blefs  ye  the  Lord  :  praife 
him,  and  magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Angels  of  the  Lord,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Heavens,  blefs  ye  the 
Lord  :  praife  him,  and  magnify 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Waters  that  be  above  the 
Firmament,  blefs  ye  the  Lord  : 
praife  him,  and  magnify  him  for 
ever. 

O  all  ye  Powers  of  the  Lord, 
blefs  ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him, 
and  magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Sun,  and  Moon,  blefs  ye 
the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and  magnify 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Stars  of  Heaven,  blefs  ye 


the  Lord  :  jiraife  him,  and  magnify 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Showers,  and  Dew,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  }))'aife  him,  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Winds  of  God,  blefs  yei 
the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and  mag- 
nify him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Lire  and  Heat,  blefs  ye 
the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and  magnify 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Winter  and  Summer,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Dews,  and  Frofis,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Froft  and  Cold,  blefs  ye 
the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and  mag- 
nify him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Ice  and  Snow,  blefs  ye 
the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and  magnify 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Nights,  and  Days,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Light  and  Darknefs,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Lightnings,  and  Clouds, 
blefs  ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him, 
and  magnify"  him  for  ever. 

O  let  the  Eartli  blefs  the  Lord  : 
yea,  let  it  praife  hmi,  and  magnify 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Mountains,  and  Hills,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 


MORNING     PRAYER. 


O  all  ye  Green  Tilings  upon  the 
Earth,  blefs  ye  the  Lord  :  praife 
him,  and  magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Wells,  blefs  ye  the  Lord  : 
praife  him,  and  magnify  him  for 
ever. 

O  ye  Seas,  and  Floods,  blefs  ye 
the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and  magnify 
him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Wliales,  and  all  that 
move  in  the  Waters,  blefs  ye  the 
Lord  :  praife  him,  and  magnify 
him  for  ever. 

O  all  ye  Fowls  of  the  Air,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  all  ye  Beads,  and  Cattle,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Children  of  Men,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  let  Ifrael  blefs  the  Lord  : 
praife  him,  and  magnify  him  for 
ever. 

O  ye  Priefts  of  the  Lord,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and 
magnify  him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Sei-vants  of  the  Lord,  blefs 
ye  the  Lord  :  praife  him,  and  mag- 
nify him  for  ever. 

O  ye  Spirits  and  Souls  of  the 
Righteous,  blefs  ye  the  Lord  : 
praife  him,  and  magnify  him  for 
ever. 

O  ye  holy  and  humble  Men  of 
heart,  blefs  ye  the  Lord  :  praife 
him,  and  magnify  him  for  ever. 


O  Ananias,  Azarias,  and  Mi- 
fael,  blefs  ye  the  Lord  :  praife 
him,  and  magnify  him  for  ever. 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  Ihall  be  :  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

^  Then  shall  be  read  in  like  marine)'  the  Second  Les' 
son,  taken  out  of  the  Aea'  Testament.  And  after 
that,  the  Ili/mn  foUozring ;  except  when  that  shall 
happen  to  be  read  in  the  Chapter  for  the  Day,  or 
for  the  Gospel  on  St.  John  Baptist's  Day. 

Benedictus.    St.  Luke  i.  68. 

BLESSED  be  the  Lord  God 
of  Ifrael  :  for  he  hath  vifited, 
and  redeemed  his  people ; 

And  hath  raifed  up  a  mighty 
falvation  for  us  :  in  the  lioufe  of 
his  fervant  David ; 

As  he  fpake  by  the  mouth  of 
his  holy  Prophets  :  ^vhich  have 
l3een  iince  the  world  began  ; 

That  we  fliould  be  faved  from 
our  enemies  :  and  from  the  hands 
of  all  that  hate  us  ; 

To  perform  the  mercy  promifed 
to  our  forefathers  :  and  to  remem- 
ber his  holy  Covenant ; 

To  perform  the  oath  which  he 
fware  to  our  forefather  Abraham  : 
that  he  would  give  us  ; 

That  we  bein"-  delivered  out  of 
the  hand  of  our  enemies  :  might 
ferve  him  without  fear ; 

In  holinefs  and riohteoufnefs  be- 
fore  him  :  all  the  days  of  our  life. 

And  thou,  Child,  flialt  be  called 


MORNING     PRAYER. 


)&s 


7w«r 


the  Prophet  of  the  Higheil  :  for 
thou  ihalt  go  before  the  face  of 
the  Lord  to  prepare  his  ways  ; 

To  give  knowledge  of  falvatioii 
unto  his  people  :  for  the  reniiffion 
of  their  lins, 

Through  the  tender  mercy  of 
our  God  :  whereby  the  day-fpring 
from  on  high  hath  vifited  us ; 

To  give  light  to  them  that  fit 
in  darknefs,  and  in  the  ftiadow  of 
death  :  and  to  guide  our  feet  into 
the  way  of  peace. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  fliall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

^  Or  this  Psalm, 

Jubilate  Deo.  Pfalm  c. 
Be  joyful   in   the  Lord,   all 
ye    lands   :   ferve   the   Lord 
vnth   gladnefs,    and  come  before 
his  prefence  with  a  fong. 

Be  ye  fure  that  the  Lord  he  is 
God  :  it  is  he  that  hath  made 
us,  and  not  we  ovu'felves  ;  we  are 
his  people,  and  the  ftieep  of  his 
pafture. 

O  go  your  way  into  his  gates 
with  thankfgiving,  and  into  his 
courts  with  praife  :  be  thankful 
unto  hhn,  and  fpeak  good  of  his 
Name. 

For  the  Lord  is  gracious,  his 
mercy  is  everlafting  :  and  his 
truth  endureth  from  generation  to 
generation. 


Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  ftiall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

U  Then  shall  be  sung  or  said  the  Jpostles'  Creed  by 
the  Minister  and  the  people,  standing :  except  only 
such  daijs  as  the  Creed  of  Saint  Alhanasius  is 
appointed  to  be  read. 

I  Believe  in  God  the  Father  Al-  ^ 
mighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth  : 

And  in  Jefus  Chrift  his  only 
Son  our  Lord,  Who  was  conceived 
by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  Born  of  the 
Virgin  Maiy,  Suft'ered  under  Pon- 
tius Pilate,  Was  crucified,  dead, 
and  buried,  He  defcended  into 
hell ;  The  third  day  he  rofe  again 
from  the  dead.  He  afcended  into 
heaven.  And  fitteth  on  the  right 
hand  of  God  the  Father  Almighty; 
From  thence  he  fliall  come  to 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 

I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 
The  holy  Catholick  Church  ;  The 
Communion  of  Saints ;  The  For- 
givenefs  of  fins  ;  The  Refurre6lioii 
of  the  body.  And  the  life  everlaft- 
ing.   Amen. 

II  Jnd  after  that,  these  Prayers  following,  all  devout- 
ly kneeling ;  the  Minister  frst  pronouncing  witJi  a 
loud  voice. 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 
Anfwer.  And  with  thy  fpirit. 

Minifier.    Let  us  pray. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Chriji,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 


MORNING     PRAYER. 


1[  Then  the  Minister,   Clerks,  and  people,  shall  say 
the  Lord's  Prayer  icith  a  loud  voice. 

OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpafles.  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
o-ainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation ;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil.     Amen. 

^  Then  Uie  Priest  standing  up  shall  say, 

O  Lord,  fliew  thy  mercy  upon  us . 

Anfwer.  And  grant  us  thy  fal- 
vation. 

Pr'iefi.  O  Lord,  fave  the  King. 

Anfwer.  And  mercifully  hear  us 
when  we  call  upon  tl^e. 

Prieji.  Endue  thy  Minifters  with 
righteoufnefs. 

Anfwer.  And  make  thy  chofen 
people  joyful. 

Priefl.  O  I^ord,  fave  thy  people. 

Anfwer.  And  blefs  thine  inhe- 
ritance. 

Prieft.  Give  peace  in  our  time, 
O  Lord. 

Anfwer.  Becaufe  there  is  none 
other  that  fighteth  for  us,  but  only 
thou,  O  God. 

Priejl.  O  (lod,  make  clean  our 
hearts  within  us. 

Anfwer.  And  take  not  thy  holy 
^Spii-it  from  us. 

rSCtctfrrmc 

^  %«.  _  If  ^^"  **"'^  follow  three  Collects ;  the  first  of  the 

f   '  Tiay,  which  shall  he  the  same  that  is  appointed  at 

the  Communion ;  the  second  for  Peace;  the  third 


for  Grace  to  live  well.  And  the  two  last  Collects 
shall  never  alter,  but  daily  be  said  at  Morning 
Prayer  throughout  all  the  year,  as  followeth ;  att 


kneeling. 


The  fecond  Colledt,for  Peace. 

OGod,  who  art  the  author  of 
peace  and  lover  of  concord, 
in  knowledge  of  whom  ftandeth 
our  eternal  life,  whofe  fervice  is 
perfect  freedom ;  Defend  us  thy 
humble  fei'vants  in  all  aflaults  of 
our  enemies  ;  that  we,  furely  truft- 
ing  in  thy  defence,  may  not  fear 
the  power  of  any  adverfaries, 
through  the  might  of  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  third  CoUe8i,for  Grace. 
vjT^  Lord,  our  heavenly  Father, 
V^  Almighty  and  everlafting 
God,  who  hall  fafely  brought  us 
to  the  beginning  of  this  day ; 
Defend  us  in  the  fame  w^ith  thy 
mighty  power  ;  and  grant  that  this 
day  _we  fall  into  no  fin,  neither 
run  into  any  kind  of  danger ;  but 
that  all  our  doings  may  be  ordered 
by  thy  governance,  to  do  always 
that  is  lighteous  in  thy  fight; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


^  In  Quires  and  Places  wl/ere  they  sing,  here  followeth 
the  Anthem. 

*\  Then  these  five  Prayers  following  are  to  be  read 
here,  except  when  the  Litany  is  read;  and  then 
onlif  the  two  last  arc  to  be  read,  as  they  are  there 
placed.  ^  JlX^^  ^^f  ^u^;  /6^,u/^a^^  ^ 

A  Prayer  for  the  King\^  Majefly. 

OLord    our  heavenly   Father, 
high  and  mighty.   King   of 


MORNING     PRAYER-. 


kings,  Lord  of  lords,  the  only 
Ruler  of  princes,  who  doft  from 
thy  throne  behold  all  the  dwellers 
upon  earth  ;  Moll  heartily  we  be- 
feech  thee  with  thy  favour  to  be- 
hold our  moft  gracious  Sovereign 
Lord,  King  GEORGE;  and  fo 
replenilli  him  with  the  grace  of 
thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  he  may  alway 
incline  to  thy  will,  and  walk  in 
thy  way  :  Endue  him  plenteoufly 
with  heavenly  gifts  ;  grant  him  in 
health  and  wealth  long  to  live ; 
ftrengthen  him  that  he  may  van- 
quifli  and  overcome  all  his  ene- 
mies ;  and  finally,  after  this  life, 
he  may  attain  everlafting  joy  and 
felicity  ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

A  Prayer  for  the  Royal  Family. 

/J  A  LMIGHTY  God,  the  foun- 
-L%.  tain  of  all  goodnefs,  we  hum- 
bly befeech  thee  to  blefs  tun  ^rn- 
fiioiift  Qinap?!!  Chtnhiltr/ihv'w  Hup 
111    TTi^hiii  (TiFi    Gvuigc  Vrinrr— nf 

all  the  Royal  Family  :  Endue 
them  with  thy  holy  Spirit ;  enrich 
diem  with  thy  heavenly  grace ; 
profper  them  with  all  happinefs ; 
and  bring  them  to  thine  everlaft- 
ing kingdom ;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 


A  Pray  erf  or  the  Clergy  and  people. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  who  alone  workeft  great 
mai-vels  ;  Send  down  upon  our  Bi- 
ftiops,  and  Curates,  and  all  Congre- 
gations committed  to  their  charge, 
the  healthful  Spirit  of  thy  grace ; 
and  that  they  may  truly  pleafe 
thee,  pour  upon  them  the  continual 
dew  of  thy  blefling.  Grant  this, 
O  Lord,  for  the  honour  of  our 
Advocate  and  Mediator,  Jefus  ^  . 
Chrift.    Amen.  ^-    ^^^^ 

A  Prayer  of  %i.  Chryfoftom. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  haft  giv- 
-  en  us  grace  at  this  time  with 
one  accord  to  make  our  common 
fupplications  unto  thee ;  and  doft 
promife,  that  when  two  or  three 
are  gathered  together  in  thy  Name 
thou  wilt  grant  their  requefts :  Ful- 
fil now,  O  Lord,  the  defires  and 
petitions  of  thy  fervants,  as  may 
be  moft  expedient  for  them ;  grant- 
ing us  in  this  world  knowledge  of 
thy  truth,  and  in  the  world  to  come 
life  everlafting.    Amen. 

2  Cor.  xiii. 

THE  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  and  the  love  of  God, 
and  the  fellowftiip  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  be  with  us  all  evennore. 
Amen, 


Here  endeth  the  Order  of  Morning  Prayer  throughout  the  Year. 


G 


THE    ORDER    FOR 

EVENING     P  R  A  Y  E  ll, 

DAILY  THROUGHOUT  THE   YEAR. 


^  At  the  beginning  of  Evening  Prayer  the  Mhiijler  Jliall  read  with  a 
loitd  voice  fome  one  or  more  of  thefe  Sentences  of  the  Scriptures  that 
follow.     And  then  he  fJiall  fay  that  which  is  written  after  the  faid 
Sentences. 


my    tranfgref- 
is  ever  before 


WHEN  the  \vicked  man  tiirn- 
eth  away  fi'om  his  \vicked- 
nefs  that  he  hath  committed,  and 
doeth  that  which  is  lawful  and 
i-iglit,  he  Ihall  fave  his  foul  alive. 
Ezekiel  xviii.  27. 

I  acknowledge 
fions,  and  my  lin 
me.     Pfalm  li.  3. 

Hide  thy  face  from  my  fins, 
and  blot  out  all  mine  iniquities. 
Pfalm  li.  9. 

The  facrifices  of  God  are  a  bro- 
ken fpirit :  a  broken  and  a  contrite 
heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not  de- 
fpife.     Pfalm  li.  17. 

Rend  your  heart,  and  not  your 
garments,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord 
your  God  :  for  he  is  gracious  and 
merciful.  How  to  anger,  and  of 
gi'eat  kindnefs,  and  repenteth  him 
of  the  evil.     Joel  ii.  13. 

To  the  Lord  our  God  belong 
mercies  and  forgivenelles,  though 
we  have  rebelled  againil  him  : 
neither  have  we  obeyed  the  voice 


of  the  Lord  our  God,  to  walk  in 
his  laws  which  he  fet  before  us. 
Daniel  ix.  9,  10. 

0  Lord,  correct  me,  but  with 
judgement ;  not  in  thine  anger, 
left  thou  bring  me  to  nothing. 
Jer.  X.  24.     Pfalm  vi.  1. 

Repent  ye ;  for  the  Kingdom  of 
heaven  is  at  hand.    St.Matth.  iii.  2. 

1  will  arife,  and  go  to  my  fa- 
ther, and  will  fay  unto  him.  Fa- 
ther, I  have  finned  againft  hea- 
ven, and  before  thee,  and  am  no 
more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  fon. 
St.  Puke  XV.  18,  19. 

ErUter  not  into  iudi>ement  with 
thy  fervant,  O  Lord;  for  in  thy 
fight  (hall  no  man  living  be  juili- 
fied.     Pfalm  cxliii.  2. 

If  we  fay  that  we  have  no  fin, 
we  deceive  ourfelves,  and  the  truth 
is  not  in  us  :  but,  if  we  confefs  our 
fins,  he  is  faithful  and  juft  to  for- 
give us  our  (ins,  and  to  cleanfe  us 
from  all  uurighteoufnefs.  1  St.  John 
i.  8,  9. 


EVENING     PRAYER. 


DEARLY  beloved  brethren, 
tlie  Scripture  mo\^eth  us  in 
fundry  places  to  acknowledge  and 
confel's  our  manifold  fins  and  Avic- 
kednefs;  and  that  we  Ihould  not 
diffemble  nor  cloke  them  before 
the  face  of  Almighty  God  our 
heavenly  Father ;  but  confefs  them 
with  an  humble,  lowly,  penitent, 
and  obedient  heart;  to  the  end 
that  we  may  obtain  forgivenefs  of 
the  fame,  by  his  infinite  goodnefs 
and  mercy.  And  although  we 
ought  at  all  times  humbly  to  ac- 
knowledge our  fins  before  God; 
'yet  ought  we  moil  chiefly  fo  to  do, 
when  we  alfemble  and  meet  to- 
gether to  render  thanks  for  the 
great  benefits  that  we  have  re- 
ceived at  his  hands,  to  fet  forth 
his  mofl;  worthy  praife,  to  hear 
his  mofl;  holy  Word,  and  to  aflv 
thofe  things  which  are  requifite 
and  neceflary,  as  well  for  the  body 
as  the  foul.  Wherefore  I  pray  and 
befeech  you,  as  many  as  are  here 
prefent,  to  accompany  me  with 
a  pure  heart,  and  humble  voice, 
imto  the  throne  of  the  heavenly 
grace,  faying  after  me; 

IF  A  general  Confession  to  be  said  of  the  whole  Con- 
gregation after  the  Minister,  all  kneeling. 

ALMIGHTY  and  moft  merci- 
ful Father ;  We  have  erred, 
and  ftrayed  fi-om  thy  ways  like  loft 
flieep.  We  have  followed  too  much 
the  devices  and  defires  of  oiu-  own 
hearts.     We  have  offended  againft 


thy  holy  laws.  We  have  left  un- 
done thofe  things  which  we  ought 
to  have  done;  And  we  have  done 
thofe  things  which  we  ought  not 
to  have  done ;  And  there  is"  no 
health  in  us.  But  thou,  O  Lord, 
have  mercy  upon  us,  miferable  of- 
fenders. Spare  thou  them,  O  God, 
which  confefs  their  faults.  Reftore 
thou  them  that  are  penitent ;  Ac- 
cording to  thy  promifes  declared 
unto  mankind  in  Chrift  Jefu  our 
Lord.  And  grant,  O  moft  mer- 
ciful Father,  for  his  fake ;  That  we 
may  hereafter  live  a  godly,  right- 
eous, and  fober  life,  To  the  gloiy 
of  thy  holy  Name.     Amen. 

^  The  Absolution,  or  Remission  of  sins,  to  be  pro- 
nounced hy  the  Priest  alone,  standing;  the  people 
still  kneeling. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  the  Father 
of  our  I^ord  Jefus  Chrift,  who 
defireth  not  the  death  of  a  finner, 
but  rather  that  he  may  turn  from 
his  wickednefs,  and'  live ;  and  hath 
given  power,  and  commandment, 
to  his  Minifters,  to  declare  and 
pronounce  to  his  people,  being- 
penitent,  the  Abfohition  and  Re- 
mifliion  of  their  fins :  He  pardoneth 
and  abfolveth  all  them  that  truly 
re|>ent,  and  unfeignedly  believe 
his  holy  Gofpel.  Wherefore  let 
us  befeech  him  to  grant  us  true 
repentance,  and  his  holy  Spint, 
that  thofe  things  may  pleafe  him, 
which  we  do  at  this  prefent;  and 
that  the  reft  of  our  life  hereafter 
Go, 


EVENING     PRAYER. 


may  be  pure,  and  holy;  fo  tliat  at 
the  lall  we  may  come  to  his  eter- 
nal joy;  through  Jeliis  Chrift  our 
Lord.     Amen. 

^  Then  the  Minisler  shall  kneel,  and  sai/  the  Lord's 
Prayer;  the  people  also  kneeling,  and  repeating  it 
Kith  him. 

OUR  Father,  which  ait  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpafles,  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
e^'^l :  For  thine  is  the  kingdom. 
The  power,  and  the  gloiy,  For 
evef  and  ever.    Amen. 

5 .-  ^  Then  likewise  he  shall  say, 

/:0  Lord,  open  thou  our  lips. 

Anfwer.  And  our  mouth  ihall 
fliew  fortli  thy  praife. 

Priefl.  O  God,  make  fpeed  to 
fave  us. 

Anfioer.  O  Lord,  make  hafte 
ta  help  us. 

^  Here  all  standing  up,  the  Priest  shall  say. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghoil ; 

yhifwer.  As  it  was  in  the  be- 
ginning, is  now,  and  ever  Ihall 
be  :  world  without  end.     Amen. 

Pricft.  Praife  ye  the  Lord. 

Anfwer.  The  Lord's  Name  be 
praifed. 


If  Then  shall  be  said  or  sung  the  Psalms  in  order  fl,« 
they  are  appointed.  Then  a  Lesson  of  the  Old 
Testament,  as  is  appointed.  And  after  that.  Mag- 
nificat {or  the  Song  of  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary)  in 
English,  asfoUoiceth. 

Magnijicat.    St.  Luke  i. 

IV/TY  foul  doth  magnify  the 
-^^  Lord  :  and  my  fpirit  hath 
rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour. 

For  he  hath  regarded  :  the 
lowlinefs  of  his  hand-maiden. 

For  behold,  from  henceforth  :  all 
generations  fliall  call  me  bleifed. 

For  he  that  is  mighty  hath 
magnified  me  :  and  holy  is  his 
Name.  hju'ij  brie 

And  his  mercy  is  on  them  that 
fear  him   :  throughout  all   gene-*^ 
rations.  wj>». 

He  hath  Ihewed  ftrenoth  with 
his  arm  :  he  hath  fcattered  the 
proud  in  the  unagination  of  their 
hearts.  r 

He  hath  put  down  the  mighty- 
from  their  feat  :  and  hath  exalted 
the  humble  and  meek.  ^  O 

He  hath  filled  the  hungiy  with 
good  things  :  and  the  rich  he  hath 
fent  empty  away. 

He  remembering  his  mercy  hath 
holpen  his  fervant  Ifrael  :  as  he 
promifed  to  our  forefathers,  Abra- 
ham and  his  feed,  for  ever.  /> 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghoft; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  Ihall  be  :  world 
without  end.    Amen.  di 


EVENING     P  11  yV  Y  E  R. 


^  Or  else  this  Psalm ;  except  it  be  on  the  Nineteenth 
Daif  of  tJie  Month,  when  it  is  read  in  the  ordinari/ 
Course  ojthe  Psabm. 

Cantate  Domino.    Pfalm  xcviii. 

OSing  unto   the  Lord  a  new 
fono;  :  for  he  hath  done  mar- 
velloiis  things. 

With  his  own  right  hand,  and 
with  his  holy  arm  :  hath  he  gotten 
himfelf  the  vi6lory. 

The  Lord  declared  his  falvation : 
his  righteoiifnefs  hath  he  openly 
fliewed  in  the  light  of  the  heathen. 

He  hath  remembered  his  mercy 
and  truth  toward  the  houfe  of  If- 
rael :  and  all  the  ends  of  the  world 
have  feen  the  falvation  of  our  God. 

Shew  yourfelves  joyful  imto  the 
Lord,  all  ye  lands  :  ling,  rejoice, 
and  give  thanks. .i,...i  '^^. 

Praife  the  Lord  upon  the  harp  : 
fing  to  the  harp  with  a  pfalm  of 
thankfgiving. 

With  trumpets  alfo  and  Ihawms : 
O  fliew  yourfelves  joyful  before 
the  Lord  the  King. 

Let  the  fea  make  a  noife,  and  all 
that  therein  is  :  the  round  world, 
and  they  that  dwell  therein. 

Let  the  floods  clap  their  hands, 
and  let  the  hills  be  joyful  together 
before  the  Lord  :  for  he  cometh 
to,  judge  the  earth,  oi    oo. 

.With  righteoufnefs  ftiall  he 
judge  the  world  :  and  the  people 
with  equity. 

!  Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 


As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  fliall  be  :  world 
without  end.     Amen. 

^  Then  a  Lesson  of  the  New  Testament,  as  it  is  ap- 
pointed. And  after  that,  Nunc  dimittis  (or  the 
Song  of  Symeon)  in  English,  usfoilouetli. 

Nunc  dimittis.    St.  Luke  ii.  29. 

LORD,  now  letteft  thou  thy 
feiTant  depart  in  peace  :  ac- 
cording to  thy  word. 

For  mine  eyes  have  feen  :  thy 
falvation, 

Which  thou  haft  prepared  : 
before  the  face  of  all  people ; 

To  be  a  light  to  lighten  the 
Gentiles  :  and  to  be  the  gloiy  of 
thy  people  Ifrael.  ^ 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  Ihall  be  :  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

^  Or  else  this  Psalm;  except  it  be  on  the  Tzcelfth 
Day  of  the  Month. 

Deiis  mifereatur.     Pfalm  Ixvii. 

GOD  be  merciful  unto  us,  and 
blefs  us  :  and  fliew  us  the 
light  of  his  countenance,  and  be 
merciful  unto  us : 

That  thy  way  may  be  known 
upon  earth  :  thy  faving  health  a- 
mong  all  nations. 

Let  the  people  praife  thee,  O 
God  :  yea,  let  all  the  people  praife 
thee. 

O  let  the  nations  rejoice  and  be 
glad  :  for  thou  (halt  judge  the  folk  ; 


EVENING     PRAYER. 


righteoufly,  and  govern  the  nations 
upon  earth. 

Let  the  people  praife  thee,  O 
God  :  yea,  let  all  the  people  praife 
thee. 

Then  fliall  the  earth  brino^  forth 
her  increafe  :  and  God,  even  our 
own  God,  fliall  give  us  his  blefiing. 

God  Ihall  blefs  us  :  and  all  the 
ends  of  the  world  ftiall  fear  him. 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 
*"  As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  fliall  be  :  world 
without  end.    Ainen. 

^  Theti  shall  be  said  or  sung  the  Apostles'  Creed  by 
the  Minister  and  the  people,  standing. 

J  Believe  in  God  the  Father  Al- 
mighty, Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth  : 

•  And  in  Jefus  Chrift  his  only 
Son  our  Lord,  \Mio  was  conceived 
by  the  Floly  Gholl,  Born  of  the 
Virgin  Maiy,  Suffered  under  Poii- 
tiuis  Pilate,  Was  crucified,  dead, 
and  buried.  He  defcended  into 
hell ;  The  third  day  he  rofe  again 
from  the  dead.  He  afcended  into 
heaven.  And  fitteth  on  the  right 
hand  of  God  the  Father  Almighty; 
From  thence  he  Ihall  come  to 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 

1  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 
Tlie  holy  Catholick  Church  ;  The 
Communion  of  Saints  ;  The  For- 
givenefs  of  fins  ;  The  Refurret^ion 
of  the  l)o(ly,  And  the  life  everlafl- 
ing.    Amen. 


^  And  after  that,  these  Prayers  following,  all  devout- 
ly kneeling ;  the  Minister  Jirst  pronoufwing  with  a 

loud  voice, 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 
Anfwer.  And  with  thy  fpirit. 

Minifier.    Let  us  pray. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Chrijt,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

^  Then  the  Minister,   Clerks,  and  people,  shall  say 
the  Lord's  Prayer  with  a  loud  voice. 

OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpaffes.  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation ;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil.     Amen. 

51  Then  the  Priest  standing  up  shall  say, 

O  Lord,  fhew  thy  mercy  upon  us; 

Anfwer.  And  grant  us  thy  fal- 
vation. 

Prieji.  O  Lord,  fave  the  King. 

Anfwer.  And  mercifully  hear  us 
when  we  call  upon  thee. 

Priejf.  Endue  thy  Minifters  with 
riijhteoufnefs. 

Anfwer.  And  make  tliy  chofen 
peoj)le  joyful. 

Vriejl.  O  Lord,  fave  thy  ])eople. 

Anfwer.  And  blefs  thine  inhe- 
ritance. 

PrieJl.  Give  peace  in  our  time, 
O  Lord. 


\ 


EVENING     PRAYER. 


Anfwer.  Becaufe  there  is  none 
other  that  fighteth  for  us,  but  only 
thou,  O  God. 

Priefl.  O  God,  make  clean  our 
hearts  within  us. 

Anfwer.  And  take  not  thy  holy 
Spirit  from  us. 

%  Then  shall  foUoro  three  Collects ;  the  first  of  the 
Dai)  ;  the  second  for  Peace;  the  third  for  Aid  a- 
gainst  all  Perils,  as  hereafter  followeth :  which  two 
last  Collects  shall  be  duili/  said  at  Evening  Prayer 
ziitfioiit  alteration. 

The  fecond    ColleB    at   Evening 
Prayer. 

OGod,  from  whom  all  holy 
defires,  all  good  counfels,  and 
all  juft  works  do  proceed  ;  Give 
unto  thy  fei-vants  that  peace  which 
the  world  cannot  give ;  that  both 
our  hearts  may  be  fet  to  obey  thy 
commandments,  and  alfo  that  by 
thee  we  being  defended  from  the 
fear  of  our  enemies  may  pafs  our 
time  in  reft  and  quietnefs ;  through 
the  merits  of  Jefus  Chrift  our  Sa- 
viour.   Amen. 

■  Tlie  third  CoUeSi,  for  Aid  againfi 
all  Perils. 

LIGHTEN  our  darknefs,  we 
befeech  thee,  O  Lord ;  and 
by  thy  great  mercy  defend  us 
fi'om  all  perils  and  dangers  of  this 
night;  for  the  love  of  thy  only 
Son,  our  Saviour,  Jefus  Chrill. 
Amen. 

%  In  Quires  and  Places  zchere  theij  sing,  here  followeth 
the  Anthem. 


A  Prayer  for  the  King's  Majefly. 

OLord  our  heavenly  Father, 
high  and  mighty.  King  of 
kings.  Lord  of  lords,  tlie  only 
Ruler  of  j3rinces,  who  doft  from 
thy  throne  behold  all  the  dwellers 
upon  earth ;  Moft  heartily  we  be- 
feech thee  vAi\\  thy  favour  to  be- 
hold our  moft  gracious  Sovereign 
Lord,  King  GEORGE;  and  fo 
replenifti  him  with  the  grace  of 
thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  he  may  alway 
incline  to  thy  will,  and  walk  in 
thy  way :  Endue  him  plenteoufly 
with  heavenly  gifts  ;  grant  him  in 
health  and  wealth  long  to  live; 
ftrengthen  him  that  he  may  van- 
quiih  and  overcome  all  his  ene- 
mies ;  and  finally,  after  this  life,  he 
may  attain  everlafting  joy  and  fe- 
licity; through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

A  Prayer  for  the  Royal  Family. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  the  foun- 
tain  of  all  goodnefs,  we  hum- 
bly befeech  thee  to  blefs  our  gra- 
cious Queen  Charlotte,  their  Royal 
HighnefTes  GeorgeVYVwce of  JVales, 
the  Princefs  of  Pi  ales,  and  all  the 
Royal  Family:  Endue  them  with 
thy  holy  Spirit ;  enrich  them  with 
thy  heavenly  grace;  profper  them 
with  all  happinefs ;  and  bring 
them  to  thine  everlafting  kingdom; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


EVENING     PRAYER. 


A  Vrayei'for  the  Clergy  and  people. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  who  alone  workeft  great 
mangels ;  Send  down  upon  our 
Bifliops,  and  Curates,  and  all 
Congregations  committed  to  tlieir 
charge,  the  healthful  Spirit  of  thy 
grace;  and  that  they  may  truly 
pleafe  thee,  pour  upon  them  the 
continual  dew  of  thy  bleffing. 
Grant  this,  O  Lord,  for  the  honour 
of  our  Advocate  and  Mediator, 
Jefus  Chilli.    Amen. 

A  Prayer  of  St.  Chnfoftom. 

ALMIGHTY  God,' who   haft 
given  us  grace  at  this  time 
Avith  one  accord  to  make  cm*  com- 


mon fuppUcatiqns  unto  thee  ;  and 
doft  promife,  that  when  two  or 
three  are  gathered  together  in  thy 
Name  thou  wilt  grant  their  re- 
quefts :  Fulfil  now,  O  Lord,  the 
defires  and  petitions  of  thy  fer- 
vants,  as  may  be  moft  expedient 
for  them;  granting  us  in  this  world 
knowledge  of  thy  truth,  and  in 
the  world  to  come  life  everlafting. 
Amen. 


xni. 


2  Cor 

THE  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chriil,  and  the  love  of  God, 
and  the  fellowfiiip  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  be  with  us  all  evermore. 
Amen. 


Here  endeth  the  Order  of  Evening  Prayer  throughout  the  Year. 


^t  Morning  JPrayer. 

^  Vpon  thefe  Feajis;  Chriftmas-day,  the  Epiphany,  Saint  Matthias, 
Eafler-day,  Afcenfion-day,  Whitfunday,  Saint  John  Baptill,  Saint 
James,  Saint  Bartholomew,  Saint  Matthew,  Saint  Simon  and  Saint 
Jude,  Saint  Andrew,  and  upon  Trinity-Sunday,  Jliall  he  fang  orfaid 
at  Morning  Prayer,  inftead  of  the  Apojiles'  Creed,  this  Confejfion  of 
our  Chrijlian  Faith,  commonly  called  The  Creed  of  Saint  Atlianafius, 
by  the  Minijler  and  people  Jianding. 


Quicunqiie  mdt. 

WHOSOEVER  will  be  faved : 
before  all  things  it  is  necef- 
fary  that  he  hold  the  Catholick 
Faith. 

Which  Faith  except  every  one 
do  keep  whole  and  undeiiled  : 
without  doubt  he  Ihall  perilh  ever- 
laftingly. 

And  the  Catholick  Faith  is  this  : 
That  we  worfliip  one  God  in  Tri- 
nity, and  Trinity  in  Unity ; 

Neither  confounding  the  Per- 
fons  :  nor  dividing  the  Subftance. 

For  there  is  one  Perfon  of  the 
Father,  another  of  the  Son  :  and 
another  of  the  Holy  Ghoft. 

But  the  Godhead  of  the  Father, 
of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghoft, 
is  all  one  :  the  Glory  equal,  the 
Majefty  co-eternal. 

Such  as  the  Father  is,  fuch  is 
the  Son  :  and  fuch  is  the  Holy 
Ghoft. 

llie  Father  uncreate,  the  Son 
imcreate  :  and  the  Holy  Ghoft 
uncreate. 

The  Father  incomprehenlible, 
the  Son  incomprehenlible  :  and 
the  Holy  Ghoft  incomprehenlible. 

The   Father    eternal,    the   Son 


eternal :  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  eter- 
nal. 

And  yet  they  are  not  three 
eternals  :  but  one  eternal. 

As  alfo  there  are  not  three  in- 
comprehenlibles,  nor  three  uncre- 
ated :  but  one  uncreated,  and  one 
incomprehenlible . 

So  likewife  the  Father  is  Al- 
mighty, the  Son  Almighty  :  and 
the  Holy  Ghoft  Almighty. 

And  yet  they  are  not  three  Al- 
mighties :  but  one  Almighty. 

So  the  Father  is  God,  the  Son  is 
God  :  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  is  God. 

And  yet  they  are  not  three  Gods: 
but  one  God. 

So  likewife  the  Father  is  Lord, 
the  Son  Lord  :  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft  Lord. 

And  yet  not  three  Lords  :  but 
one  Lord. 

For  like  as  we  are  compelled 
by  the  Chriftian  verity  :  to  ac- 
knowledge eveiy  Perfon  by  him- 
felf  to  be  God  and  Lord  ; 

So  are  we  forbidden  by  tlie  Ca- 
tholick Religion  :  to  fay.  There 
be  three  Gods,  or  three  Lords. 

The  Father  is  made  of  none  : 
neither  created,  nor  begotten. 
H 


At  Morning  Prayer. 


The  Son  is  of  the  Father  alone  : 
not  made,  nor  created,  but  be- 
gotten. 

The  Holy  Ghoft  is  of  the  Father 
and  of  the  Son  :  neither  made, 
nor  created,  nor  begotten,  but 
proceeding. 

So  there  is  one  Father,  not  three 
Fathers ;  one  Son,  not  three  Sons  : 
one  Holy  Ghoft,  not  three  Holy 
Ghofts. 

And  in  this  Trinity  none  is  afore, 
or  after  other  :  none  is  greater,  or 
lefs  than  another ; 

But  the  whole  three  Pei-fons  are 
co-etenial  together  :  and  co-equal. 

So  that  in  all  things,  as  is  afore- 
faid  :  the  Unity  in  Trinity,  and 
the  Trinity  in  Unity  is  to  be  wor- 
fliipped. 

He  therefore  that  will  be  faved  : 
muft  thus  think  of  the  Trinity. 

Furthermore,  it  is  neceffary  to 
everlafting;  falvation  :  that  he  alfo 
believe  rio-htlv  the  Incarnation  of 
our  Lord  .Jefus  Chrift. 

For  the  right  Faith  is,  that  we 
believe  and  confefs  :  that  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift,  the  Son  of  God,  is 
God  and  Man ; 

God,  of  the  Subftance  of  the 
Father,  begotten  before  the  worlds : 
and  Man,  of  the  S\ibftance  of  his 
Mother,  born  in  the  world ; 

I'erfedt  God,  and  ])erfe6t  Man  : 
of  a  reafonable  foul  and  human 
flefti  fnbfilling ; 

Equal  to  the  Father,  as  touching 


his  Godhead  :  and  Inferior  to  the 
Father,  as  touching  his  Manhood. 

Who  although  he  be  God  and 
Man  :  yet  he  is  not  two,  but  one 
Chrift ; 

One ;  not  by  converfion  of  the 
Godhead  into  flefti :  but  by  taking 
of  the  Manhood  into  God  ; 

One  altogether;  not  by  confu- 
fton  of  Subftance  :  but  by  unity  of 
Perfon. 

For  as  the  reafonable  foul  and 
flefti  is  one  man  :  fo  God  and  Man 
is  one  Chrift ; 

Wlio  fuft'ered  for  our  falvation  : 
defcended  into  hell,  rofe  again  the 
third  day  from  the  dead. 

He  afcended  into  heaven,  he 
fitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Fa- 
ther, God  Almighty  :  from  whence 
he  fliall  come  to  judge  the  quick 
and  the  dead. 

At  whofe  coming  all  men  ftiall 
rife  again  with  their  bodies  :  and 
ftiall  give  account  for  their  own 
works. 

And  they  that  have  done  good 
ftiall  go  into  life  everlafting  :  and 
they  that  have  done  evil  into  ever- 
lafting fire. 

This  is  the  Catholick  Faith  : 
which  except  a  man  believe  faith- 
fully, he  cannot  be  faved. 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft  ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  fliall  be  :  world 
^vitllout  end.    Amen. 


THE     LITANY. 

^  Here  followeth  the  LITANY,  or  General  Supplication,  to  he  Jung  or 
faid  after  Morning  Prayer  upon  Sundays,  Wednefdays,  and  Fridays, 
and  at  other  timea  when  itjhall  he  commanded  hy  tlw  Ordinary. 


OGod  the  Father,  of  heaven  : 
have  mercy  upon  us  niiferable 
finners. 

O  God  the  Father,  of  heaven :  have 
mercy  upon  us  mifei'ohle  finners. 

O  God  the  Son,  Redeemer  of 
the  world  :  have  mercy  upon  us 
miferable  finners. 

O  God  the  Son,  Redeemer  of  the 
world :  have  mercy  upvn  us  mifer- 
able Jinners. 

O  God  the  Holy  Ghoft,  pro- 
ceeding from  the  Father  and  the 
Son  :  have  mercy  upon  us  mifer- 
able finners. 

O  God  the  Holy  Ghoft,  proceeding 
from  the  Father  and  the  Son :  have 
mercy  upon  us  miferahle  finners. 

O  holy,  bleffed,  and  glonous 
Trinity,  three  Perfons  and  one 
God  :  have  mercy  upon  us  mifer- 
able finners. 

Oholy,  hlefjed,  and  glorious  Trini- 
ty, three  Perfons  and  one  God:  have 
mercy  upon  us  miferable  Jinners. 

Remember  not.  Lord,  our  of- 
fences, nor  the  offences  of  our  fore- 
fathers ;  neither  take  thou  venge- 
ance of  our  fins  :  fpare  us,  good 
Lord,  fpare  thy  people,  whom  thou 
haft  redeemed  with  thy  moft  pre- 
cious blood,  and  be  not  angiy 
with  us  for  ever. 

Spare  us,  good  Lord. 


From  all  evil  and  mifchief ;  from 
fin,  fi-om  the  crafts  and  alfaults  of 
the  devil ;   from   thy  wrath,   and 
from  everlafting  damnation, 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

From    all   blindnefs   of  heart; 
from    pride,   vain-glory,   and  hy- 
pocrify;  from  envy,   hatred,  and 
malice,  and  all  uncharitablenefs, 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

From  fornication,  and  all  other 
deadly  fin ;  and  from  all  the  deceits 
of  the  world,  theflelh,  and  the  devil, 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

From  lightning  and  tempeft ; 
from  plague,  peililence,  and  fa- 
mine ;  from  battle  and  murder, 
and  fi-om  fudden  death, 

Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

From  all  fedition,  privy  conlpi- 
racy,  and  rebellion ;  from  all  falfe 
doctrine,  herefy,  and  fchifm ;  from 
hardnefs  of  heart,  and  contempt 
of  thy  Word  and  Commandment, 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

By  the  myftery  of  thy  holy  In- 
carnation; by  thy  holy  Nativity 
and  Circumciiion  ;  by  thy  Baptifm, 
Fafting,  and  Temptation, 

Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

By   thine   Agony   and   bloody 

Sweat ;  by  thy  Crofs  and  Paflion  ; 

by  thy  precious  Death  and  Burial ; 

by  thy  glonous  Refurre^ion  and 

Ha 


THE    LITANY. 


Afcenfion ;  and  by  the  coming  of 
the  Holy  Ghoft, 

Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 

In  iill  time  of  our  tribulation ; 
ui  all  time  of  om*  wealth ;  in  the 
hour  of  death,  and  in  the  day  of 
judgement, 

Good  Lord,  delive?'  us. 

We  iinners  do  befeech  thee  to 
hear  us,  O  Lord  God ;  and  that 
it  may  pleafe  thee  to  rule  and 
govern  thy  holy  Church  univerfal 
in  the  right  way ; 
JVe  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  keep 
and  ftrengthen  in  the  tnie  wor- 
fliipping  of  thee,  in  righteoufnefs 
and  holinefs  of  life,  thy  Servant 
GEORGE,  our  moft  gracious 
King  and  Governour ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

Tliat  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  rule 
his  heart  in  thy  faith,  fear,  and 
love,  and  that  he  may  evermore 
have  affiance  in  thee,  and  ever 
feek  thy  honour  and  gloiy ; 
fVe  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  be  his 
defender  and  keeper,  giving  him 
the  victory  over  all  his  enemies ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  blefs 
and  ])referve  nmi  yiniMimk  Qmam 


.V,  iind  all  the  Royal 


Family  ; 

14/e  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 


That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  illu- 
minate all  Bilhops,  Priells,  and 
Deacons,  with  true  knowledge  and 
underllanding  of  thy  Word ;  and 
that  both  by  their  preaching  and 
li\ang  they  may  fet  it  forth,  and 
fliew  it  accordingly ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  its,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  endue 
the  Lords  of  the  Council,  and  all 
the  Nobility,  with  grace,  wifdom, 
and  undei-ftanding ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  blefs 
and  keep  the  Magiftrates,  giving 
them  grace  to  execute  juftice,  and 
to  maintain  truth ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  blefs 
and  keep  all  thy  people ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  give 
to  all  nations    unity,  peace,  and 
concord ;       •'"     '' 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  give 
us  an  heart  to  love  and  dread  thee, 
and   diligently  to   live    after  thy 
commandments ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  give 
to  all  thy  people  increafe  of  grace 
to  hear  meekly  thy  Word,  and  to 
receive  it  with  pure  aft'eetiou,  and 
to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  bring 


THE    LITANY. 


into  tlie  way  of  truth  all  fiich  as 
have  erred,  and  are  deceived; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  ])leare  thee  to 
ftrengthen  fuch  as  do  (land;  and 
to  comfort  and  help  the  weak- 
hearted  ;  and  to  raife  up  them  that 
fall ;  and  finally  to  beat  down  Sa- 
tan under  our  feet ;  r  sf,-* 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  fuc- 
cour,  help,  and  comfort,  all  that  are 
in  danger,  neceffity ,  and  tribulation ; 
JVe  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  pre- 
feiTe  all  that  travel  by  land  or  by 
water,  all  women  labouring  of 
child,  all  fick  peifons,  and  young 
children ;  and  to  fliew  thy  pity  up- 
on all  prifoners  and  captives  ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  de- 
fend, and  provide  for,  the  father- 
lefs  children,  and  widows,  and  all 
that  are  defolate  and  opprefTed ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  have 
mercy  upon  all  men  ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  for- 
give our  enemies,  perfecutors,  and 
ilanderers,  and  to  turn  their  hearts; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  give 
and  preferve  to  our  ufe  the  kindly 
fruits  of  the  earth,  fo  as  in  due 
time  we  may  enjoy  them  ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 


That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  give 
us  true  repentance ;  to  forgive  tfe 
all  our  fins,  negligences,  and  ig- 
norances ;  and  to  endue  us  with 
the  grace  of  thy  Holy  Spirit  to 
amend  our  lives  according  to  thy 
holy  Word  ; 

Tl  e  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,goodL^ord. 
Son  of  C>od  :  we  befeech  thee 
to  heai'  us. 

8on  of  God  :  we  hefeech  thee  to 
hmr  us.  ..\f,    ^^^t 

O  Lamb  of  God  :  that  takeft 
away  the  fins  of  the  world  ; 
'       Grant  us  thy  peace. 
O  Lamb  of  God  :  that  takeft 
away  the  fins  of  the  world  ; 
Have  mercy  upon  us. 
O  Chrifl;,  hear  us. 
O  Chrijl,  hear  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Chrift,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Chrifl,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

^  Then  shall  the  Priest,  and  the  people  with  him,  say 
.,  .the  Lord's  Prayer. 

OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpafleSj  As 
we  forgive  them  that  tre^pafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil.    Amen. 


THE     LITANY. 


Priejf.  O  Lord,  deal  not  Avith 
us  after  our  (ins. 

Anjwer.  Neither  reward  us  after 
our  iniquities. 

Let  us  pray. 

OGod,  merciful  Father,  that 
defpifell  not  the  fighing  of 
a  contrite  heart,  nor  the  delire  of 
fuch  as  be  forrowful ;  Mercifully 
aiTiil  our  prayers  that  we  make 
before  thee  in  all  our  troubles  and 
adverfities,  whenfoever  they  op- 
prefs  us;  and  gracioully  hear  us, 
that  thofe  evils,  which  the  craft 
and  fubtilty  of  the  devil  or  man 
worketh  againft  us,  be  brought  to 
nought ;  and  by  the  providence  of 
thy  goodnefs  they  may  be  difperf- 
ed ;  that  we  thy  fervants,  being 
hurt  by  no  perfecutions,  may  ever- 
more give  thanks  unto  thee  in  thy 
holy  Church  ;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord. 

O  Lord,  arife,  help  us,  and  deli- 
ver us  for  thy  Name's  fake. 

OGod,  we  have  heard  vA\\\  oiu: 
ears,  and  our  fathers  have 
declared  unto  us,  the  noble  works 
that  thou  didft  in  their  days,  and 
in  the  old  time  before  them. 

O  Lord,  arife,  help  us,  and  deli- 
ver us  for  thine  honour. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghoft ; 

Anfwei'.  As  it  was  in  the  begin- 


ning, is  now,  and  ever  Ihall  be  : 
world  without  end.    Amen. 

From  our  enemies  defend  us, 
O  Chrift. 

Gracioufly  look  upon  our  affiic- 
tions. 

Pitifiilly  behold  the  forrows  of 
our  hearts. 

Mercifully  forgive  the  fins  of  thy 
people. 

Favourably  with  mercy  hear 
our  prayers. 

O  Son  of  David,  have  mercy 
upon  us. 

Both  now  and  ever  vouchfafe 
to  hear  us,  O  Chrift. 

Gracioufly  hecvr  us,  O  Chrijl; 
gi'acioufly  hear  us,  O  Lord  Chrift. 

Prieft.  O  Lord,  let  thy  mercy 
be  fliewed  upon  us ; 

Anficer.  As  we  do  put  our  truft 
in  thee. 

Let  us  pray. 

WE  humbly  befeech  thee,  O 
Father,  mercifully  to  look 
upon  our  infirmities ;  and  for  the 
gloiy  of  thy  Name  tiu'u  from  us 
all  thofe  evils  that  we  moft  right- 
eoufly  have  defei-ved ;  and  grant, 
that  in  all  our  troubles  we  may  put 
our  whole  truft  and  confidence  in 
thy  mercy,  and  evermore  ferve 
thee  in  holinefs  and  purenefs  of 
living,  to  thy  honour  and  glory; 
through  our  only  Me(Hator  and 
Advocate,  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
ylmen. 


^Jh~  ^^  e?^<fe>»^^«'»»*f 


THE    LITANY. 

A  Prayer,  of  St.  Chryfoftoin. 
A  LMIGHTY  God,  who  haft 


uiveii  us  ffrace  at  this  time 


with  one  accord  to  make  our  com- 
mon fuppHcations  unto  thee  ;  and 
doft  promife,  that  wlien  two  or 
three  are  gathered  together  in  thy 
Name  thou  ^vilt  grant  their  re- 
quefts  ;  Fulfil  now,  O  Lord,  the 
defires  and  petitions  of  thy  fer- 
vants,  as  may  be  moft  expedient 


for  them ;  granting  us  in  this  world 


knowledge  of  thy  truth,  and  in 
the  world  to  come  life  everlafting. 
Ame7i. 


2  C. 


or.  xni. 


THE  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  and  the  love  of  God, 
and  the  fellowlhip  of  the  Holy 
Glioft,  be  with  us  all  evermore. 
Amen. 


'^z 


Here  endeth  the  Litany. 


^/,  Cff^>j'yyU'('n4.^T^,  rtru^e^,. 


PRAYERS   AND   THANKSGIVINGS, 

tJPON  SEVERAL   OCCASIONS, 

^   To  he  ufed  before  the  two  Jinal  Prayers   of  the  Litany,  or  of 

Morning  and  Evening  Praye)'. 


V 


PRAYERS. 


For  Rain. 


OGod,  heavenly  Father,  who 
by  thy  Son  Jefus  Chrift  haft 
promifed  to  all  them  that  feek  thy 
kmgdom,  and  the  righteoufnefs 
thereof,  all  things  neceflaiy  to  their 
bodily  fuftenance ;  Send  us,  we 
befeech  thee,  in  this  our  neceflity, 
fuch  moderate  rain  and  ftiowers, 
that  we  may  receive  the  fruits  of 
the  earth  to  our  comfort,  and  to 
thy  honour;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 


For  fair  Weather. 

O  Almighty  Lord  God,  who 
for  the  fin  of  man  didft  once 
di-own  all  the  world,  except  eight 
perfons,  and  afterward  of  thy  great 
mercy  didft  promife  never  to  de- 
ftroy  it  fo  again  ;  We  humbly  be- 
feech thee,  that  although  we  for 
our  iniquities  have  worthily  de- 
feiTed  a  plague  of  rain  and  waters, 
yet  upon  our  true  repentance  thou 
wilt  fend  us  fuch  weather,  as  that 
we  may  receive  the  fruits  of  the 


PRAYERS. 


eaitli  in  due  feafoii ;  and  learn  both 
by  thy  punifliment  to  amend  our 
lives,  and  for  thy  clemency  to  give 
thee  praife  and  glory ;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.  Amen, 
hi  the  time  of  Dearth  and  Famine. 

OGod,  heavenly  Father,  whofe 
gift  it  is,  that  the  rain  doth 
fall,  the  earth  is  fruitful,  beafts  in- 
creafe,  and  fifties  do  multiply  ;  Be- 
hold, we  befeech  thee,  the  afflic- 
tions of  thy  people;  and  grant  that 
the  fcarcity  and  dearth,  which  we 
do  now  moll  juftly  fufter  for  our 
iniquity,  may  through  thy  goodnefs 
be  mercifully  turned  into  cheapnefs 
and  plenty  ;  for  the  love  of  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord,  to  whom  with 
thee  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  be  all 
honour  and  glory,  now  and  for 
ever.    Amen. 

Or  this. 

OGod,  merciful  Father,  who, 
in  the  time  of  Eliftia  the  pro- 
phet, didft  fuddenly  in  Samaria  turn 
great  fcarcity  and  dearth  into  plen- 
ty and  cheapnefs ;  Have  mercy  up- 
on us,  that  we,  who  are  now  for 
our  fins  })uniflied  with  like  adver- 
fity,  may  likewife  find  a  feafonable 
relief:  Increafe  the  fruits  of  the 
earth  by  thy  heavenly  benedi^Hon ; 
and  grant  that  we,  receiving  thy 
bountiful  liberality,  may  ufe  the 
fame  to  thy  gloiy,  the  relief  of 
thofe  that  are  needy,  and  oiu*  own 
comfort ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 


In  the  time  of  War  and  Tiomdts. 

O  Almighty  God,  King  of  all 
kings,  and  Governoiu*  of  all 
things,  whofe  power  no  creature  is 
able  to  refill,  to  whom  it  belongeth 
juftly  to  punifli  finners,  and  to  be 
merciful  to  them  that  truly  repent ; 
Save  and  deliver  us,  we  humbly 
befeech  thee,  from  the  hands  of 
our  enemies ;  abate  their  pride, 
aflwage  their  malice,  and  confound 
their  devices ;  that  we,  being  anned 
with  thy  defence,  may  be  prefei-ved 
evermore  from  all  perils,  to  glorify 
thee,  who  art  the  only  giver  of  all 
victory ;  through  the  merits  of  thy 
only  Son,  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

In  the  time  of  any  common  Plague 
or  Sicknefs. 

O  Almighty  God,  who  in  thy 
wrath  didft  fend  a  plague  up- 
on thine  own  people  in  the  wilder- 
nefs,  for  their  obftinate  rebellion 
againft  Mofes  and  Aaron ;  and  alfo, 
in  the  time  of  king  David,  didft 
Hay  with  the  plague  of  Peftilence 
threefcore  and  ten  thoufand,  and 
yet  remembering  thy  mercy  didft 
fave  the  reft ;  Have  pity  upon  us 
miferable  finners,  who  now  are  vi- 
fited  with  great  ficknefs  and  mor- 
tality ;  that  like  as  thou  didft  then 
accept  of  an  atonement,  and  didft 
connnand  the  deftroying  vVngel  to 
ceafe  from  ])unifliing,  fo  it  may 
now  pleafe  thee  to  withdraw  from 
us  this  plague  and  grievous  fick- 


PRAYERS. 


nefs;    through   Jefus   Chrift   our 

Lord.    Amen. 

^  In  the  Ember  Weeks,  to  be  /aid 
every  day,  for  thofe  that  are  to 
he  admitted  into  Holy  Orders. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  our  heaven- 
ly  Father,  who  haft  purchafed 
to  thyfelf  an  univerfal  Church  by 
the  precious  blood  of  thy  dear  Son ; 
Mercifully  look  upon  the  fame, 
and  at  this  time  fo  guide  and  go- 
vern the  minds  of  thy  fervants  the 
Bifliops  and  Paftors  of  thy  flock, 
that  they  may  lay  hands  fuddenly 
on  no  man,  but  faithfully  and  wife- 
ly make  choice  of  fit  perfons  to 
fei've  in  the  facred  Minillry  of  thy 
Church.  And  to  thofe  which  Ihall 
be  ordained  to  any  holy  function 
give  thy  grace  and  heavenly  bene- 
didlion ;  that  both  by  their  life  and 
do^b-ine  they  may  fet  forth  thy  glo- 
ry, and  fet  forward  the  falvation  of 
all  men;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

Or  this. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  the  giver  of 
all  good  gifts,  who  of  thy  di- 
vme  providence  haft  appointed  di- 
vers Orders  in  thy  Church ;  Give 
thy  grace,  we  humbly  befeech  thee, 
to  all  thofe  who  are  to  be  called 
to  any  office  and  adminiftration  in 
the  fame;  and  fo  replenilh  them 
with  the  truth  of  thy  do6lrine,  and 
endue  them  with  innocency  of  life, 
that  they  may  faithfliUy  ferve  be- 
fore thee,  to  the  gloiy  of  thy  great 


Name,  and  the  benefit  of  thy  holy 
Church  ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.     Amen. 

^  A  Prayer  that  may  he  f aid  after 
any  of  the  former. 

OGod,  whofe  nature  and  pro- 
perty is  ever  to  have  mercy 
and  to  forgive,  receive  our  humble 
petitions ;  and  though  we  be  tied 
and  bound  with  the  chain  of  our 
fins,  yet  let  the  pitifulnefs  of  thy 
great  mercy  loofe  us  ;  for  the  ho- 
nour of  Jefus  Chrift,  our  Mediator 
and  Advocate.  Amen. 
^  A  Prayer  for  the  High  Court  of 

Parliament,   to  he  read  during 

their  SeJJion. 

MOST  gTacious  God,  we  hum- 
bly befeech  thee,  as  for  this 
Kingdom  in  general,  fo  efpecially 
for  the  High  Court  of  Parliament, 
under  our  moft  religious  and  gra- 
cious King  at  this  time  aflembled : 
That  thou  wouldeft  be  pleafed  to 
diredl  and  profper  all  their  conful- 
tations  to  the  advancement  of  thy 
glory,  the  good  of  thy  Church,  the 
fafety,  honour,  and  welfare  of  our 
Sovereign,  and  his  Dominions ; 
that  all  things  may  be  fo  ordered 
and  fettled  }3y  their  endeavours, 
upon  the  beft  and  fureft  founda- 
tions, that  peace  and  happinefs, 
truth  and  juftice,  religion  and  piety, 
may  be  eftabliftied  among  us  for  all 
generations.  Thefe  and  all  other 
neceflaries,  for  them,  for  us,  and 
thy  whole  Church,  we  humbly  beg 


PRAYERS. 


o 


in  the  Name  and  Mediation  of 
Jefus  Chrift  our  moft  blefled  Lord 
and  Saviour.  Amen. 
t//ir^^  H  ^  ColleSl  or  Prayer  for  all  Con- 
'^"^^  ditions  of  men,  to  be  iifed  atfiich 
TJ^^c^I.  times  lolien  the  Litany  is  not  ap- 
7^  '   '        pointed  to  he  f aid. 

God,  the  Creator  and  Pre- 
ferver  of  all  mankind,  we 
humbly  befeech  thee  for  all  forts 
and  conditions  of  men ;  that  thou 
wovddeft  be  pleafed  to  make  thy 
ways  known  unto  them,  thy  fav- 
mg  health  unto  all  nations.  More 
efpecially,  we  pray  for  the  good 
eftate  of  the  Catholick  Church ; 
that  it  may  be  fo  guided  and  go- 
verned by  thy  good  Spirit,  that  all 


rt^eiu^^       51  ^  General  Thank fgiving. 

■  ^^  ^r  k  LMIGHTY  God,  Father  of  all 
J^  mercies,  we  thine  unworthy 
fervants  do  give  thee  moft  hinnble 
and  hearty  thanks  for  all  thy  good- 
nefs  and  loving-kindnefs  to  us,  and 
*  This  to  be    to  all  men;   \;^ parti- 

said    when    any       Cularhj  tO  thofe  wko  de- 

SSeir'f^T  /'•'■  «?"•  to  «!<■'■  "I>  t'.'^jr 
sire   to  return    praijcs  and  thanhjgw- 

P*^"'"^-  ings  for  thy  late  mer- 

cies voiichfafed  unto  them.^  We 
blefs  thee  for  our  creation,  prefer- 
vation,  and  all  the  bleflings  of  this 
life ;  but  above  all,  for  thine  inef- 
timable  love  in  the  redemj)tion  of 
the  world  by  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift ; 


who  profefs  and  call  themfelves 
Chriftians  may  be  led  into  the  way 
of  truth,  and  hold  the  faith  in  unity 
of  fpirit,  in  the  bond  of  peace,  and 
in  righteoufnefs  of  life.  Finally, 
we  commend  to  thy  fatherly  good- 
nefs  all  thofe,  who  are  any  ways 
afflicted,  or  diftrefled,  in  mind, 
body,  or  eftate  ;[*<?/-      *  This  to  be 

pecialll/  thofe  for  whom  ''f'^  when  any 
X  u  1  /»       1  -\     desire  the  rray- 

our prayers  are  dejired,\  ers  of  the  Con- 
that  it  may  pleafe  thee  gregation. 
to  comfort  and  relieve  them,  ac- 
cording to  their  feveral  neceffities, 
giving  them  patience  under  their 
fufferings,  and  a  happy  iflue  out  of 
all  their  aiflidtions.  And  this  we 
beg  for  Jefus  Chrift  his  fake.  Amen. 


THANKSGIVINGS. 


for  the  means  of  grace,  and  for  the 
hope  of  glory.  And,  we  befeech 
thee,  give  us  that  due  fenfe  of  all 
thy  mercies,  that  our  hearts  may 
be  unfeignedly  thankful,  and  that 
we  ftiew  forth  thy  praife,  not  only 
with  our  lips,  but  in  our  lives  ;  by 
giving  u])  ourfelves  to  thy  femce, 
and  by  walking  before  thee  in 
holinefs  and  righteoufnefs  all  our 
days  ;  .  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord,  to  whom  with  thee  and  the 
Holy  Ghoft  be  all  honour  and  glo- 
ry, world  without  end.     Amen.  .^/tf. It' 

tor  Kam.  U»»oc  .^ M; 

OGod    our    heavenly    Father, 
who  by  thy  gracious  provi- 


t//u-  4-)^, 


'-roV^t' 


THANKSGIVINGS. 


dence  doll  caufe  the  foiiiier  and 
the  latter  rain  to  defcend  upon  the 
earth,  tliat  it  may  bring  fortli  fruit 
for  the  life  of  man ;  We  give  thee 
humble  thanks  that  it  hath  pleafed 
thee,  in  our  great  neceflity,  to  fend 
us  at  the  lall  a  joyful  rain  upon 
thine  inheritance,  and  to  refrefli 
it  when  it  was  dry,  to  the  great 
comfort  of  us  thy  unworthy  fer- 
vauts,  and  to  the  gloiy  of  thy  holy 
Name ;  through  thy  mercies  in 
Jefus  Clirift  om*  Lord.  Amen. 
For  fair  Weather. 

OLord  God,  who  haft  juftly 
humbled  us  by  thy  late  plague 
of  immoderate  rain  and  waters, 
and  in  thy  mercy  haft  relieved  and 
comforted  our  fouls  by  this  feafon- 
able  and  blefled  change  of  weather ; 
We  praife  and  glorify  thy  holy 
Name  for  this  thy  mercy,  and  will 
always  declare  thy  loving-kindnefs 
from  generation  to  generation ; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

*  For  Plenty. 

OMoft  merciful  Father,  who  of 
thy  gracious  goodnefs  haft 
heard  the  devout  prayers  of  thy 
Church,  and  turned  our  dearth  and 
fcarcity  into  cheapnefs  and  plenty  ; 
iWe  give  thee  humble  thanks  for 
this  thy  fpecial  bounty;  befeech- 
ing  thee  to  continue  thy  loving- 
kindnefs  unto  us,  that  our  land 
may  yield  us  her  fruits  of  in- 
creafe,  to  thy  gloiy  and  our  com- 


fort ;    through   Jefus    Chrift   our 
Lord.    Amen.    . 

For  Peace  and  Deliverance  from 
our  Enemies. 

O  Almighty  God,  who  art  a 
ftronff  tower  of  defence  unto 
thy  fervants  againft  the  face  of 
their  enemies;  We  yield  thee  jjraife 
and  thankfgiving  for  our  deliver- 
ance from  tliofe  great  and  apparent 
dangers  wherewith  we  were  com- 
pafled :  We  acknowledge  it  thy 
goodnefs  that  we  were  not  deli- 
vered over  as  a  prey  unto  them ; 
befeeching  thee  ftill  to  contmue 
fuch  thy  mercies  towards  us,  that 
all  the  world  may  know  that  thou 
art  our  Saviour  and  mighty  Deli- 
verer; through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

For  reftoring  Piihlick  Peace  at 
Flome. 

O  Eternal  God,  our  heavenly 
Father,  who  alone  makeft  men 
to  be  of  one  mind  in  a  houfe,  and 
ftilleft  the  outrage  of  a  violent  and 
unruly  people  ;  We  blefs  thy  holy 
Name,  that  it  hath  pleafed  thee  to 
appeafe  the  feditious  tumults  which 
have  been  lately  raifed  up  amongft 
us ;  moft  humbly  befeeching  thee 
to  grant  to  all  of  us  grace,  that 
we  may  henceforth  obediently  walk 
in  thy  holy  commandments  ;  and, 
leading  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life 
in  all  godlinefs  and  honefty,  may 
continually  offer  unto  thee  our  fa- 
crifice  of  praife  and  thankfgiving 

I  2 


THANKSGIVINGS. 


for  tliefe  thy  mercies  towards  us  ; 
throu2:li  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord, 
Amen. 

For  Deliverance  from  the  Plague, 
or  other  common  Sicknefs. 

OLord  God,  who  haft  wounded 
us  for  our  fins,  and  confumed 
us  for  our  tranfgreffions,  by  thy 
late  heavy  and  dreadful  vifitation; 
and  now,  hi  the  midft  of  judgement 
remembering  mercy,  haft  redeem- 
ed our  fouls  from  the  jaws  of  death; 
We  oifer  unto  thy  fatherly  good- 
nefs  ourfelves,  our  fouls  and  bodies 
which  thou  haft  delivered,  to  be  a 
living  facrifice  unto  thee,  always 
praifing  and  magnifying  thy  mer- 
cies in  the  midft  of  thy  Chm*ch ; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Anten. 


Or  this. 

WE  humbly  acknowledge  be- 
fore thee,  O  moft  merciful 
Father,  that  all  the  punifliments 
which  are  threatened  in  thy  law 
might  juftly  have  fallen  upon  us,  by 
reafon  of  our  manifold  tranfgi-ef- 
fions  and  hardnefs  of  heart :  Yet 
feeing  it  hath  pleafed  thee  of  thy 
tender  mercy,  upon  our  weak  and 
unworthy  humiliation,  to  alfwage 
the  contagious  ficknefs  wherewith 
we  lately  have  been  fore  affli(ftedi 
and  to  reftore  the  voice  of  joy  and 
health  into  our  dwellings ;  We  of- 
fer unto  thy  Divine  Majefty  the 
facrifice  of  praife  and  thankfgiving, 
lauding  and  magnifying  thy  glori- 
ous Name  for  fuch  thy  prefei*vation 
and  providence  over  us  ;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 


THE 


COL.I.ECTS5  EPISl  1^85  AND  GOSPELS 

TO  BE  USED  THROUGHOUT  THE  YEAR. 


^  l!^ote,  that  the  ColleB  appointed  for  every  Simday,  or  for  any  Holy -day 
that  hath  a  Vigil  or  Eve,fliall  he  f aid  at  the  Eoening  Service  next  he/hre. 


Thefirf  Simday  in  Advent. 
The  ColleSi. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  give  us 
grace  that  we  may  call  away 
the  works  of  darknefs,  and  put 
upon  us  the  amiour  of  light,  .now 
in  the  time  of  this  mortal  life,  in 
which  thy  Son  Jefus  Chrift  came 
to  vilit  us  in  great  humility  ;  that 
in  the  laft  day,  when  he  fliall  come 
again  in  his  glorious  Majefty  to 
judge  both  the  quick  and  dead, 
we  may  rife  to  the  life  immortal, 
through  him  who  liveth  and  reign- 
eth  Avith  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghoft, 
now  and  ever.    Amen. 

%  This  Collect  is  to  be  repeated  every  day,  with  the 
other  Collects  in  Advent,  until  Christmas  Eve. 

The  Epiftle.    Rom.  xiii.  8. 

OWE  no  man  any  thing,  but 
to  love  one  another  :  for  he 
that  loveth  another  hath  fulfilled 
the  law.  For  this.  Thou  flialt  not 
commit  adultery.  Thou  flialt  not 
kill,  Thou  Ihalt  not  ileal,  Thou 
ftialt  not  beai'  falfe  witnefs,  Thou 
flialt  not  covet ;  and  if  there  be  any 
other  conunandment,  it  is  briefly 
comprehended  in  this  faying,  name- 


ly. Thou  flialt  love  thy  neighbour 
as  thyfelf.  Love  worketh  no  ill 
to  his  neighbour;  therefore  love  is 
the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  And  that, 
knowing  the  time,  that  now  it  is 
high  time  to  awake  out  of  fleep  *J 
for  now  is  our  falvation  nearer  than 
when  we  believed.  The  night  is 
far  fpent,  the  day  is  at  hand ;  let 
us  therefore  call  oft'  the  works  of 
darknefs,  and  let  us  put  on  the 
armour  of  light.  Let  us  walk  ho- 
neftly  as  in  the  day ;  not  in  rioting 
and  drunkennefs,  not  in  chamber- 
ing and  wantonnefs,  not  in  fl;rife 
and  envying.  But  put  ye  on  the 
Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  and  make  not 
provifion  for  the  flefti,  to  fulfil  the 
lufts  thereof. 
The  Gofpel.    St.  Matth.  xxi.  L 

WHEN  they  drew  nigh  unto 
Jerufalem,  and  were  come 
to  Bethphage,  unto  the  mount  of 
Olives,  then  fent  Jefus  two  difci- 
ples,  faying  unto  them.  Go  into 
the  village  over  againft  you,  and 
ftraightway  ye  fliall  find  an  afs  tied, 
and  a  colt  with  her :  loofe  them, 
and  bring  them  unto  me.    And  if 


Tkefecond  Sunday  in  Advent. 


any  man  fay  ought  unto  you,  ye 
fliall  fay,  The  Lord  hath  need  of 
them ;  and  llraightway  he  will  fend 
them.  All  this  was  done,  that  it 
might  be  fulfilled  which  was  fpoken 
by  the  Prophet,  faying,  Tell  ye 
the  daughter  of  Sion,  Behold,  thy 
King  Cometh  unto  thee,  meek,  and 
fitting  upon  an  afs,  and  a  colt  the 
fole  of  an  afs.  And  the  difciples 
went,  and  did  as  Jefus  commanded 
them ;  and  brought  the  afs,  and 
the  colt,  and  put  on  them  their 
clothes,  and  they  fet  him  thereon. 
And  a  veiy  great  multitude  fpread 
their  garments  in  the  way;  others 
cut  down  l^ranches  from  the  trees, 
and  ftrawed  them  in  the  way.  And 
the  multitudes  that  went  before, 
and  that  followed,  cried,  fapng, 
Hofanna  to  the  fon  of  David; 
Blelfed  is  he  that  cometli  in  the 
Name  of  the  Lord ;  Hofanna  in  the 
hiiiheft.  And  when  he  was  come 
into  Jerufalem  all  the  city  was 
moved,  faying.  Who  is  this?  And 
the  multitude  faid.  This  is  Jefus 
the  Prophet  of  Nazareth  of  (iali- 
lee.  And  Jefus  went  into  the  tem- 
ple of  God,  and  cafl;  out  all  them 
that  fold  and  bouo-ht  in  the  tem- 
pie;  and  overthrew  the  tables  of 
the  money-changers,  and  the  feats 
of  them  that  fold  doves  ;  and  faid 
unto  them,  It  is  written.  My  houfe 
fliall  be  called  the  houfe  of  pray- 
er ;  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of 
thieves. 


The  fecond  Sunday  in  Advent. 
The  Colledi. 

BLESSED  Lord,  who  hafl; 
caufed  all  holy  Scriptures  to 
be  written  for  our  learning ;  Grant 
that  we  may  in  fuch  wife  hear  them, 
read,  mark,  learn,  and  inwardly 
digeft;  them,  that  by  patience,  and 
comfort  of  thy  holy  Word,  we  may 
embrace,  and  ever  hold  fafi;  the 
bleffed  hope  of  everlafting  life, 
which  thou  hafl;  given  us  in  our 
Saviour  Jefus  Chrifl;.  Amen. 
The  Epijile.  Rom.  xv.  4. 

WHATSOEVER  things 
were  wi'itten  aforetime,  were 
written  for  our  learning;  that  we 
through  patience,  and  comfort  of 
the  Scriptures,  might  have  hope. 
Now  the  God  of  patience  and  con- 
folation  grant  you  to  be  like  mind- 
ed one  towards  another,  according 
to  Chrill  Jefus  :  that  ye  may  with 
one  mind,  and  one  mouth,  glorify 
God,  even  the  Father  of  our  l^ord 
Jefus  Chrift.  Wherefore  receive 
ye  one  another,  as  Chrifl;  alfo  re- 
ceived us,  to  the  glory  of  God. 
Now  I  fay,  that  Jefus  Chrifl;  was 
a  minifter  of  the  circumcifion  for 
the  truth  of  God,  to  confirm  the 
promifes  made  unto  the  fathers : 
And  that  the  (lentiles  might  glo- 
rify God  for  his  mercy ;  as  it  is 
written,  For  this  caufe  I  will  con- 
fefs  to  thee  among  the  CJentiles, 
and  fing  unto  thy  Name.  And 
again  he  faith,  Rejoice,  ye  Gen- 


The  third  Sunday  in  Advent.) 


tiles,  with  his  people.  And  again, 
Praife  the  Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles, 
and  laud  him,  all  ye  people.  And 
again,  Efaias  faith,  There  lliall  be 
a  root  of  Jeffe,  and  he  that  Ihall 
rife  to  reign  over  the  Gentiles,  in 
him  fliall  the  Gentiles  trull.  Now 
the  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all 
joy  and  peace  in  believing,  that 
ye  may  abound  in  hope,  through 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghoft. 

The  Go/pel.   St.  Luke  xxi.  25. 

AND  there  Ihall  be  figns  in  the 
fun,  and  in  the  moon,  and  in 
the  ftars;  and  upon  the  earth  dif- 
trefs  of  nations,  with  perplexity, 
the  fea  and  the  waves  roaring ; 
men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear, 
and  for  looking  after  thofe  things 
which  are  coming  on  the  earth  : 
for  the  powers  of  heaven  fliall  be 
Ihaken.  And  then  ihall  they  fee 
the  Son  of  Man  coming  in  a  cloud 
with  power  and  great  gloiy.  And 
when  thefe  things  begin  to  come 
to  pafs,  then  look  up,  and  lift  up 
your  heads ;  for  your  redemption 
draweth  nigh.  And  he  fpake  to 
them  a  parable.  Behold  the  fig- 
tree,  and  all  the  trees ;  when  they 
now  flioot  forth,  ye  fee  and  know 
of  your  own  felves  that  fummer  is 
now  nigh  at  hand.  So  likewife  ye, 
when  ye  fee  thefe  things  come  to 
pafs,  know  ye  that  the  Kingdom 
of  God  is  nigh  at  hand.  Verily 
I  fay  unto  you.  This  generation 


fliall  not  pafs  away,  tiU  all  be  fuW; 
filled  :  heaven  and  earth  fliall  paft^ 
away ;  but  my  words  fliall  not  pais  j 
away.  ,) 

. — . : :i 

The  third  Sunday  in  Advent .  ,^. 
The  Colle^i, 

OLord  Jefu  Chrift,  who  at  thy 
fidl  coming  didft  fend  thyi; 
meflenger  to  }>repare  thy  way  be^ 
fore  thee ;  Grant  that  the  miiiifters 
and  ftewards  of  thy  myfteries  may 
likewife  fo  prepare  and  make  rea- 
dy thy  way,  by  turning  the  hearts 
of  the  difobedient  to  the  wifdom 
of  the  jufi^,  that  at  thy  fecoiid  comr^ 
ing  to  judge  the  world  we  may 
be  found  an  acceptable  people  in 
thy  fight,  who  liveft  and  reigneft 
with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spi- 
rit, ever  one  God,  world  without 
end.    Amen.  -^ 

The  Epijile.    1  Cor.  iv.  1 . 

LET  a  man  fo  account  of  us> 
as  of  the  minifters  of  Cluifl;, 
and  ftewards  of  the  myfteries  of 
God.  Moreover,  it  is  required  in 
ftewards,  that  a  man  be  found 
faithful.  But  with  me  it  is  a  veiy 
fmall  thing  that  I  fliould  be  judged 
of  you,  or  of  man's  judgement; 
yea,  I  judge  not  mine  own  felf. 
For  I  know  nothing  Ijy  niyfelf,  yet 
am  I  not  hereby  juftified ;  but  he 
that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord. 
Therefore  judge   nothing  before 


The  fourth  Sunday  in  Advent. 

the  time,  until  the  Lord  come, 
who  both  will  bring  to  light  the 
hidden  things  of  darknefs,  and  will 
make  manifeft  the  counfels  of  the 
hearts ;  and  then  Ihall  every  man 
have  praife  of  God. 


The  Go/pel   St.  Matth.  xi.  2. 

NOW  when  John  had  heaid  in 
the  prifon  the  works  of  Chrift, 
he  fent  two  of  his  difciples,  and 
faid  unto  him,  Ait  thou  he  that 
fhould  come,  or  do  we  look  for 
another?  Jefus  anfwered  and  faid 
unto  them.  Go  and  fliew  John  again 
thofe  things  which  ye  do  hear  and 
fee :  The  blind  receive  their  light, 
and  the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are 
cleanfed,  and  the  deaf  hear,  the 
dead  ai-e  raifed  up,  and  the  poor 
have  the  Gofpel  preached  to  them : 
And  bleffed  is  he  whofoever  Ihall 
not  be  offended  in  me.  And  as 
they  departed,  Jefus  began  to  fay 
unto  the  multitudes  concerning 
John,  What  went  ye  out  into  the 
\vildernefs  to  fee?  a  reed  fliaken 
with  the  ^vind?  But  what  went  ye 
out  for  to  fee?  a  man  clothed  in 
foft  raiment?  behold,  they  that 
wear  foft  clothing  are  in  kings' 
houfes.  But  what  went  ye  out  for 
to  fee?  a  prophet?  yea,  I  fay  unto 
you,  and  more  than  a  prophet. 
For  this  is  he  of  whom  it  is  writ- 
ten. Behold,  I  fend  my  meffenger 
before  thy  face,  which  fliall  pre- 
pare thy  way  before  thee. 


The  fourth  Sunday  in  Advent. 
The  ColleSi. 

OLord,  raife  up  (we  pray  thee) 
thy  power,  and  come  among 
us,  and  vA\h  great  might  fuccour 
us  ;  that  whereas,  througli  our  fins 
and  wickednefs,  we  are  fore  let 
and  hindered  in  iiuming  the  i-ace 
that  is  fet  before  us,  thy  bountiful 
grace  and  mercy  may  fpeedily  help 
and  deliver  us;  through  the  fatif- 
facftion  of  thy  Son  our  Lord,  to 
whom  with  thee  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft  be  honour  and  gloiy,  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

The  Epijlle.  Phil.  iv.  4. 

REJOICE  in  the  Lord  alway, 
and  again  I  fay,  Rejoice. 
Let  yom*  moderation  be  known 
unto  all  men.  The  Lord  is  at 
hand.  Be  careful  for  nothmg :  but 
in  eveiy  thing,  by  prayer  and  fup- 
plication  with  thankfgiving,  let 
your  requefts  be  made  known  un- 
to God.  And  the  peace  of  God, 
which  palfeth  all  undei-ftanding, 
Ihall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds 
thi'ough  Clirill  Jefus. 

The  Gofpel.    St.  John  i.  19. 

THIS  is  the  record  of  John, 
when  the  Jews  fent  Priefts 
and  Levites  fi'om  Jerufalem  to  allc 
him,  Who  art  thou?  And  he  con- 
feifed,  and  denied  not;  but  con- 
feffed,  I  am  not  the  Chrill.  And 
they  afked  him,  What  then?  Art 
thou  Elias?  And  he  faith,  I  am  not. 
Art  thou  that  Prophet?  And  he 


CHR  IS  TMA  S-DAY. 


anfwered,  No.  Then  faid  they  un- 
to him,  Who  art  thou?  that  we 
may  give  an  anfwer  to  them  that 
fent  us.  What  fay  eft  thou  of  thy- 
felf?  He  faid,  I  am  tlie  voice  of 
one  crying  in  the  wildernefs,  Make 
ftraight  the  way  of  the  Lord,  as 
faid  the  prophet  Efaias.  And  they 
which  were  fent  were  of  the  Pha- 
rifees.  And  they  afl^ed  him,  and 
faid  unto  him.  Why  baptizeft  thou 
then,  if  thou  be  not  tliat  Chrift, 
nor  Elias,  neither  that  Prophet? 
John  anfwered  them,  faying,  I 
baptize  with  water:  but  there  ftand- 
eth  one  among  you,  whom  ye  know 
not :  He  it  is  who  coming  after  me 
is  preferred  before  me,  whofe  (hoe's 
latchet  1  am  not  worthy  to  unloofe. 
Thefe  things  were  done  in  Beth- 
abara  beyond  Jordan,  where  Jolm 
was  baptizing. 

The  Nativity  of  our  Lord,  or  the 
Birth-day  of  CHRIST,    coni- 
monly  called  Chrijimas-day. 
The  Colledt. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  haft 
given  us  thy  only-begotten 
Son  to  take  our  nature  upon  him, 
and  as  at  this  time  to  be  born  of  a 
pure  Virgin  ;  Grant  that  we  being 
regenerate,  and  made  thy  childi'en 
by  adoption  and  grace,  may  daily 
be  renewed  by  thy  Holy  Spirit ; 
through  the  fame  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  who  liveth  and  reigneth 
with   thee   and   the  fame  Spirit, 


ever  one  God,  world  without  end. 
Amen. 

The  Kpijlle.    Heb.  i.  1. 

GOD,  who  at  fuudiy  times  and 
in  divers  manners  fpake  in 
time  paft  unto  the  fathers  })y  the 
prophets,  hath  in  thefe  laft  days 
fpoken  mi  to  us  by  his  Son,  whom 
he  hath  appointed  heir  of  all  things, 
by  whom  alio  he  made  the  worlds ; 
who  being  the  brightnefs  of  his 
glory,  and  the  exprefs  image  of  his 
|3erfon,  and  upholding  all  things 
by  the  word  of  his  power,  when 
he  had  by  himfelf  purged  our  fins, 
fat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majefty  on  high ;  being  made  fo 
much  better  than  the  angels,  as 
he  hath  by  inheritance  obtained  a 
more  excellent  name  than  they. 
For  unto  which  of  the  angels  faid 
he  at  any  time,  Thou  art  my  Son, 
this  day  have  I  begotten  thee? 
And  again,  I  will  be  to  him  a  Fa- 
ther, and  he  Ihall  be  to  me  a  Son? 
And  again,  when  he  bringeth  in 
the  firil-begotten  into  the  world, 
he  faith.  And  let  all  the  angels  of 
God  worfhip  him.  And  of  the  an- 
gels he  faith.  Who  maketh  his  an- 
gels fpirits,  and  his  minifters  a 
flame  of  fire.  But  unto  the  Son  he 
faith.  Thy  throne,  O  God,  is  for 
ever  and  ever ;  a  fceptre  of  right- 
eoufnefs  is  the  fceptre  of  thy  king- 
dom :  Thou  haft  loved  righteouf- 
iiefs,  and  hated  iniquity ;  therefore 
God,  even  thy  God,  hath  anointed 
K 


thee  with  the  oil  of  gladnefs  above 
thy  fellows.  And,  Thou,  Lord,  in 
the  beginning  haft  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  the  earth ;  and  the  heavens 
are  the  works  of  thine  hands :  they 
fhall  perifli,  but  thou  remaineft ; 
and  they  all  Ihall  wax  old  as  doth 
a  gaiTTient ;  and  as  a  vefture  flialt 
thou  fold  them  up,  and  they  ftiall 
be  changed;  but  thou  art  the  fame, 
and  thy  years  fliall  not  fail.  « 

The  Go/pel.   St.  John  i.  1 . 

IN  the  beginning  was  the  Word, 
and  the  Word  was  with  God, 
and  the  Word  was  God.  The  fame 
was  in  the  beginning  with  God. 
All  things  were  made  by  him ; 
and  without  hun  was  not  any  thing 
made  that  was  made.  In  him  was 
life,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of 
i^eu.  And  the  light  fliineth  in 
dai'knefs,  and  the  darknefs  com- 
prehended it  not.  There  was  a 
man  fent  from  God,  whofe  name 
was  .John.  The  fame  came  for  a 
witnefs,  to  bear  witnefs  of  the 
light,  that  all  men  through  him 
might  believe.  He  was  not  that 
light,  but  was  fent  to  bear  witnefs 
of  that  light.  That  was  the  true 
light,  which  lighteth  eveiy  man 
that  cometh  into  the  world.  He 
was  in  the  world,  and  the  world 
was  made  by  him,  and  the  world 
knew  him  not.  He  came  unto  his 
own,  and  his  own  received  him 
not.  But  as  many  as  received  him, 
to  them  gave  he  power  to  became 


Saint  Stephens  Day. 

the  fons  of  God,  even  to  them  that 
believe  on  his  Name :  which  were 
born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will 
of  the  flefli,  nor  of  the  will  of  man, 
but  of  God.  And  the  Word  was 
made  flefli,  and  dwelt  among  us 
(and  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory 
as  of  the  only-begotten  of  the  Fa- 
ther) full  of  grace  and  tnitli. 


h^        Saint  Stephens  Day, 
TJie  Colledl. 

GRANT,  O  Lord,  that,  in  all 
our  fufterings  here  upon  earth 
for  the  teftimony  of  thy  tnith,  we 
may  ftedfaftly  look  up  to  liea^a, 
and  by  faith  behold  the  gloiy  that 
Ihall  be  revealed ;  and,  being  filled 
with  the  holy  Ghoft,  may  learn  to 
love  and  blefs  our  perfecutors  by 
the  example  of  thy  fii-ft  Martyr 
Saint  Stephen,  who  prayed  for  his 
murderers  to  thee,  O  bleifed  Jefus, 
who  ftandeft  at  the  right  hand  of 
God  to  fuccour  aU  thofe  that  fuffer 
for  thee,  our  only  Mediator  and 
Advocate.    Amen. 

5f  Then  shall  follow  the  Collect  of  the  Natirity,  which 
.  shall  he  said  coiitinuallj/  unto  ]Seu'-j/eai''s  Eve. 

For  the  Epijile.    A6ts  vii.  55.    ,, 

STEPHEN,  being  full  of  the 
holy  Ghoft,  looked  up  ftedfaftly 
into  heaven,  and  faw  the  glory  of 
God,  and  Jefus  ftanding  on  the 
right  hand  of  God,  and  f<ud,  Be- 
hold, I  fee  the  heavens  opened, 
and  the  Son  of  Man  ftancUng  on 
the  right  hand  of  God.    T\\e\\  they 


Saint  John  the  JEvangdiff h  Day. 


cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  and 
flopped  their  ears,  and  ran  upon 
him  with  one  accord,  and  caft  him 
out  of  the  city,  and  ftoned  him: 
and  the  witnefles  laid  down  their 
clothes  at  a  young  man's  feet, 
whofe  name  was  Saul.  And  they 
ftoned  Stephen,  calling  upon  God, 
and  faying,  Lord  Jefus,  receive 
my  fpirit.  And  he  kneeled  down, 
and  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lord, 
lay  not  this  (in  to  their  charge. 
And  when  he  had  faid  this,  he  fell 
afleep. 
The  Go/pel.  St.  Matth.  xxiii.  34. 

BEHOLD,  I  fend  unto  you 
prophets,  and  wife  men,  and 
fcribes ;  and  fome  of  them  ye  fliall 
kill  and  ciiicify ;  and  fome  of  them 
fliall  ye  fcourge  in  your  fynagogues, 
and  perfecute  them  from  city  to 
city ;  that  upon  you  may  come  all 
the  righteous  blood  flied  upon  the 
earth,  from  the  blood  of  righteous 
Abel  unto  the  blood  of  Zacharias, 
fon  of  Barachias,  whom  ye  flew 
between  the  temple  and  the  altar. 
Verily  I  fay  unto  you,  All  thefe 
things  fliall  come  upon  this  gene- 
ration. O  Jeriifalem,  Jerufalem, 
thou  that  killeft  the  prophets,  and 
ftoneft  them  which  are  fent  unto 
thee;  how  often  would  I  have  ga- 
thered thy  children  together,  even 
as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens 
under  her  wings,  and  ye  would 
not!  Behold,  your  lioufe  is  left 
unto  you  defolate.    For  I  fay  unto 


you,  Ye  fliall  not  fee  me  hence- 
forth, till  ye  fliaU  fay,  Blefled  is  he 
that  Cometh  in  the  Name  of  the 
Lord. 

Saint  John  the  Evcmgeliji's  Day. 
The  Collcci. 

MERCIFUL  Lord,  we  befeech 
thee  to  caft  thy  bright  beams 
of  light  upon  thy  Church,  that  it 
being  enlightened  by  the  dodtrine 
of  thy  blelfed  Apoftle  and  Evan- 
gelift  Saint  John  may  fo  walk  in 
the  light  of  thy  truth,  that  it  may 
at  length  attain  to  the  light  of  ever- 
lafting  life ;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijllc.  1  St.  John  i.  1. 

THAT  which  was  from  the  be- 
ginning, which  we  have  heard, 
which  we  have  feen  with  our  eyes, 
which  we  have  looked  upon,  and 
our  hands  have  handled  of  the 
word  of  life ;  (for  the  life  was  nia- 
nifefted,  and  we  have  feen  it,  and 
bear  witnefs,  and  Ihew  unto  you 
that  eternal  life,  which  was  with 
the  Father,  and  was  manifefted 
unto  us ;)  That  which  we  have  feen 
and  heard  declare  we  unto  you, 
that  ye  alfo  may  have  feUo^vfliip 
Avitli  us ;  and  ti-uly  our  fellowfliip 
is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his 
Son  Jefus  Chrift.  And  thefe  things 
write  we  unto  you,  that  yom*  joy 
may  be  fidl.  Tliis  then  is  the  mei- 
fage  which  we  have  heard  of  him, 
and  declare  unto  you,  That  God  is 


The  Innocents  Day. 


light,  and  in  him  is  no  darknefs  at 
all.  If  we  fay  that  we  have  fellow- 
Ihip  with  him,  and  walk  in  dark- 
nefs, we  lie,  and  do  not  the  tnith : 
but  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he 
is  in  the  light,  we  have  fellowfliip 
one  Nvith  another,  and  the  blood 
of  Jefus  Chrill  his  Son  cleanfeth 
us  fi'om  all  fin.  If  we  fay  that  we 
have  no  fin,  we  deceive  ourfelves, 
and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.  If  we 
coufefs  our  fins,  he  is  faithful  and 
juft  to  forgive  us  our  fins,  and  to 
cleanfe  us  fi'om  all  unrighteoufnefs. 
If  we  fay  that  we  have  not  finned, 
we  make  him  a  liar,  and  his  word 
is  not  in  us. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  John  xxi.  19. 

JESUS  faid  unto  Peter,  Follow 
me.  Then  Peter,  timiing  a- 
bout,  feeth  the  difciple  whom  Jefus 
loved  follo^\dng ;  which  alfo  leaned 
on  his  breaft  at  fiipper,  and  faid. 
Lord,  which  is  he  that  betraveth 
thee?  Peter  feeino;  him  faith  to 
Jefus,  Lord,  and  what  fhall  this 
man  do?  Jefus  faith  unto  him,  If 
I  will  that  he  tany  till  I  come, 
what  is  that  to  thee?  Follow  thou 
me.  Then  went  this  faying  abroad 
among  the  brethren.  That  that 
difciple  (hould  not  die:  yet  Jefus 
faid  not  unto  him.  He  fliall  not 
die  ;  but,  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till 
I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee?  This 
is  the  difciple  wliich  teftifieth  of 
thcfe  things,  and  \vi-ote  thefe  things, 
and  we  know  that  his  teftimony 


is  true.  And  there  are  alfo  many 
other  things  which  Jefus  did,  the 
which  if  they  fliould  be  ^vritten 
eveiy  one,  I  fuppofe,  that  even  the 
world  itfelf  could  not  contain  the 
books  that  fliould  be  MTitten. 

The  Innocents'  Day. 
The  CoUedi. 

O  Almighty  God,  who  out  of 
the  mouths  of  babes  and  fuck- 
lings  haft  ordamed  ftrength,  and 
madeft  infants  to  glorify  thee  by 
their  deaths ;  Mortify  and  kill  all 
vices  in  us,  and  fo  ftrengthen  us 
by  thy  grace,  that  by  the  innocen- 
cy  of  our  lives,  and  conftancy  of 
our  faith  even  unto  death,  we  may 
glorify  thy  holy  Name ;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.  Amen. 
For  the  Epijile.    Rev.  xiv.  1. 

1  Looked,  and  lo,  a  Lamb  ftood 
on  the  mount  Sion,  and  with 
him  an  hundred  forty  and  four 
thoufand,  having  his  Father's  Name 
written  in  their  foreheads.  And  I 
heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  as  the 
voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the 
voice  of  a  great  thimder :  and  I 
heard  the  voice  of  harjiers  harping 
^vith  their  haips  :  and  they  fung 
as  it  were  a  new  fong  before  the 
throne,  and  before  the  four  beafts, 
and  the  elders  ;  and  no  man  could 
learn  that  fong,  but  the  hundred 
and  forty  and  four  thoufand,  which 
were  redeemed  from  tlie  earth. 
Thefe  are  they  which  were  not 


The  Sunday  after  Chriftmas-day. 

chel  weeping  for  lier  children,  and 
would  not  be  comforted,  becaufe 
they  are  not. 


defiled  with  women,  for  they  are 
virgins:  tliefe  are  they  which  fol- 
low the  Lamb  whitherfoever  he 
goeth:  tliefe  were  redeemed  from 
among  men,  being  the  fidl-fruits 
unto  God,  and  to  the  Lamb.  And 
in  their  mouth  was  found  no  guile ; 
for  they  are  without  fault  before 
the  throne  of  God. 
The  Go/pel.   St.  Matth.  ii.  13. 

THE  Angel  of  the  Lord  ap- 
peareth  to  Jofeph  in  a  di*eam, 
faying,  Arife,  and  take  the  young- 
child,  and  his  mother,  and  flee  into 
Egypt,  and  be  thou  there  until  I 
bring  thee  word;  for  Herod  will 
feek  the  young  child  to  deftroy 
him.  Wlien  he  arofe,  he  took  the 
young  child  and  his  mother  by 
night,  and  •  departed  into  Egypt, 
and  was  there  until  the  death  of 
Herod ;  that  it  might  be  fulfilled 
which  was  fpoken  of  the  Lord  by 
the  prophet,  faying.  Out  of  Egypt 
have  I  called  my  Son.  Then  He- 
rod, when  he  faw  that  he  was 
mocked  of  the  wife  men,  was  ex- 
ceeding wi'oth ;  and  fent  forth,  and 
llew  all  the  children  that  were  in 
Bethlehem,  and  in  all  the  coafts 
thereof,  from  two  years  old  and 
under,  according  to  the  time  which 
he  had  diligently  enquired  of  the 
wife  men.  Then  was  fulfilled  that 
which  was  fpoken  by  Jeremy  the 
prophet,  faying,  In  Rama  was  there 
a  voice  heard,  lamentation,  and 
weeping,  and  great  mournmg,  Ra- 


The  Sunday  after  dhrijfmas-day. 
The  Colleel. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  hall 
given  us  thy  only-begotten 
Son  to  take  our  natm*e  upon  him, 
and  as  at  this  time  to  be  born  of 
a  pure  Virgin;  Grant  that  we  being 
regenerate,  and  made  thy  children 
by  adoption  and  grace,  may  daily 
be  renewed  by  thy  Holy  Spirit; 
through  the  fame  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  who  liveth  and  reigneth 
^vith  thee  and  the  fame  Spirit, 
ever  one  God,  world  without  end. 
Amen. 

The  Epijile.    Gal.  iv.  1. 

NOW  I  fay,  that  the  heir,  as 
long  as  he  is  a  child,  differeth 
nothing  fi'om  a  fervant,  though  he 
be  lord  of  all ;  but  is  under  tutors 
and  goveniours,  until  the  time  ap- 
pointed of  the  father.  Even  fo  we, 
when  we  were  children,  were  in 
bondage  under  the  elements  of  the 
world  :  but  when  the  fulnefs  of  the 
time  was  come,  God  fent  forth  his 
Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made  un- 
der the  law,  to  redeem  them  that 
were  under  the  law,  that  we  might 
receive  the  adoption  of  fons.  And 
becaufe  ye  are  fons,  God  hath  fent 
forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into 
your  hearts,  crying,  Abba,  Father, 
Wherefore   thou  art  no  more  a 


The  Circumci/ion  of  Chrijl. 


ferv^ant,  but  a  foii;   aiid  if  a  fon, 
then  an  heir  of  God  through  Chrift. 

TJie  Go/pel   St.  Matth.  i.  18. 

fXpE  birth  of  Jefus  Chrift  was 
-t  on  this  wife :  Wlien  as  his 
s^nother  Maiy  was  efpoufed  to  Jo- 
feph,  before  they  came  together 
ihe  was  found  with  child  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft.  Tlien  Jofeph  her  huf- 
band,  being  a  juft  man,  and  not 
^villing  to  make  her  a  pubHck  ex- 
ample, was  minded  to  put  her  away 
prinly.  But  while  he  thought  on 
thefe  things,  behold,  the  angel  of 
the  Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  a 
dream,  faying,  Jofeph  thou  fon  of 
David,  fear  not  to  take  unto  thee 
Mary  thy  wife;  for  that  which  is 
conceived  in  her  is  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft :  And  flie  fliall  bring  forth  a 
Son,  and  thou  flialt  call  his  name 
Jesus;  for  he  fliall  fave  his  people 
from  their  fins.  (Now  all  this  was 
done,  that  it  might  be  fulfilled 
which  was  fpoken  of  the  I^ord  by 
the  prophet,  faying,  Behold,  a  Vir- 
gin fliall  be  with  child,  and  fliall 
brmg  forth  a  Son,  and  they  fliall 
call  his  name  Emmanuel,  which 
being  inteipreted  is,  God  with  us.) 
Tlien  Jofeph,  being  raifed  from 
fleep,  did  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
had  bidden  him,  and  took  unto 
him  his  wife ;  and  knew  her  not 
till  flie  had  brought  forth  her  firft- 
born  fon  :  and  he  called  his  name 
JESUS. 


The  Circiimcijion  of  Chrijl. 
Hie  Colledl. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  madeft 
thy  blefled  Son  to  be  circum- 
cifed,  and  obedient  to  the  law  for 
man  ;  Grant  us  the  true  Circumci- 
fion  of  the  Spirijt ;  that,  our  hearts, 
and  all  our  members,  being  mor- 
tified from  all  worldly  and  carnal 
lufts,  we  may  in  all  things  obey 
thy  blefled  will ;  through  the  fame 
thy  Son  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

The  Epijile.    Rom.  iv.  8. 

BLESSED  is  the  man  to  whom 
the  Lord  mil  not  impute  fin. 
Cometh  this  bleflednefs  then  upon 
the  circumcifion  only,  or  upon  the 
uncircumcifion  alfo?  For  we  fay, 
that  faith  was  reckoned  to  Abra- 
ham for  righteoufnefs.  How  was 
it  then  reckoned?  when  he  was  in 
circumcifion,  or  in  uncircumcifion? 
Not  in  circumcifion,  but  in  uncir- 
cumcifion. And  he  received  the 
fign  of  circumcifion,  a  feal  of  the 
righteoufnefs  of  the  faith  which  he 
had  yet  being  uncircumcifed  ;  that 
he  might  be  the  father  of  all  them 
that  believe,  though  they  be  not  cir- 
cumcifed ;  that  righteoufnefs  might 
be  imjiuted  unto  them  alfo :  And 
the  father  of  circumcifion  to  them 
who  are  not  of  the  circiuiicifion 
only,  but  alfo  walk  in  the  fteps  of 
that  faith  of  our  father  Abrahanji, 
which  he  had  being  yet  uncircum- 
cifed.   For  the  promife,  that  he 


fliould  be  the  heir  of  the  workl, 
was  not  to  Abraham,  or  to  his 
feed,  through  the  law,  but  through 
the  righteoufnefs  of  faith.  For  if 
they  which  are  of  the  law  be  heirs, 
faith  is  made  void,  and  the  promife 
made  of  none  effedl. 

TJie  Gofpel.    St.  Luke  ii.  15. 

AND  it  came  to  pafs,  as  the 
angels  were  gone  away  from 
them  into  heaven,  the  fliepherds 
faid  one  to  another,  Let  us  now 
go  even  unto  Bethlehem,  and  fee 
this  thing  which  is  come  to  pafs, 
which  the  Lord  hath  made  known 
unto  us;  And  they  came  with 
hafte,  and  found  Mary  and  Jofeph, 
and  the  babe  lying  in  a  manger. 
And  when  they  had  feen  it,  they 
made  known  abroad  the  faying 
which  was  told  them  concerning 
this  child.  And  all  they  that  heard 
it  wondered  at  thofe  things  which 
were  told  them  by  the  fliepherds. 
But  Mary  kept  all  thefe  things, 
and  pondered  them  in  her  heart. 
And  the  fliepherds  returned,  glo- 
rifying and  prailing  God  for  all 
the  things  that  they  had  heard  and 
feen,  as  it  was  told  unto  them. 
And  when  eight  days  were  accom- 
pliflied  for  the  circumciling  of  the 
child,  his  name  was  called  JESUS, 
which  was  fo  named  of  the  angel 
before  he  was  conceived  in  the 
wombi     s^ 

%The  same  Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel  shall  serve 
for  every  day  after  unto  the  Epiphany. 


a 


TJie  Epiphany. 

The  Epiphamj,  or  the  Manifejiation 

of  Chrijl  to  the  Gentiles'. 

The  ColleSi. 

OGod,  who  by  the  leading  of  i 
fl;ar  didll  manifefl;  thy  only 
begotten  Son  to  the  Gentiles;  Mer- 
cifully grant,  that  we,  which  know 
thee  now  by  faith,  may  after  this 
life  have  the  fruition  of  thy  glorious 
Godhead;  through  Jefus Chrift  our 
Lord.    A7neti.  ^^  .bfsiid 

The  Epi/ile.    Ephef.  iii.  1 . 


FOR  this  caufe,  1  Paul,  the  pri- 
foner  of  Jefus  Chiifl;  for  you 
Gentiles;  if  ye  have  heard  of  the 
difpenfation  of  the  grace  of  Godi 
which  is  given  me  to  you- ward : 
How  that  by  revelation  he  nlad^ 
known  unto  me  the  myfteiy  (as  1 
wrote  afore  in  few  words,  whereby? 
when  ye  read,  ye  may  underflaha 
my  knowledge  in  the  myfteiy  or 
Chrift)  which  in  other  ages  was" 
not  made  known  unto  the  fons  of 
men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto 
his  holy  Apoftles  and  Prophets 
by  the  Spirit;  That  the  Gentiles 
fliould  be  fellow-heirs,  and  of  the 
fame  body,  and  partakers  of  his 
promife  in  Chrift,  by  the  Gofpel  r 
whereof  I  was  maae  a  minifter£ 
according  to  the  gift  of  the  grace 
of  God  given  unto  me  by  the  ef-^ 
fe^lual  working  of  his  power.  Un-' 
to  me,  who  am  lefs  than  the  leaft 
of  all  faints,  is  this  grace  given, 
that  I  fliould  preach  among  the 
Gentiles  the  unfearchable   riches 


Thejiiift  Sunday  a 

of  Chrill ;  and  to  make  all  men  fee 
what  is  the  fellowfliip  of  the  myf- 
teiy,  which  fi'om  the  beginning  of 
the  world  hath  been  hid  in  God, 
who  created  all  things  by  Jefus 
Chrill :  to  the  intent,  that  now  unto 
the  j3rincipahties  and  powers  in 
heavenly  places  might  be  knoAm 
by  the  Church  the  manifold  wifdom 
of  God,  according  to  the  eternal 
purpofe  which  he  purpofed  in  Chrill 
Jefus '  our  Lord :  In  whom  we  have 
boldnefs  and  accefs  with  confidence 
by  the  faith  of  him. 

The  Go/pel.  St.  Matth.  ii.  1. 

WHEN  Jefus  was  bom  in 
Bethlehem  of  Judaea,  in  the 
days  of  Herod  the  king,  behold, 
there  came  wife  men  from  the  eaft 
to  Jerufalem,  faying.  Where  is  he 
that  is  boni  King  of  the  Jews?  for 
we  have  feen  his  liar  in  the  eall, 
and  are  come  to  worfliip  him. 
When  Herod  the  kmg  had  heard 
thefe  things,  he  was  troubled,  and 
all  .lerufalem  with  him.  And  when 
he  had  gathered  all  the  chief  j^riells 
and  fcribes  of  the  jjeople  together, 
he  demanded  of  them,  where  Chrill 
fliould  be  born.  And  they  faid 
unto  him.  In  Bethlehem  of  Judaea: 
for  thus  it  is  written  by  the  pro- 

f)het.  And  thou,  Bethlehem,  hi  the 
and  of  Juda,  art  not  the  leaft  a- 
mong  the  princes  of  Juda:  for  out 
of  thee  fliall  come  a  Goveniour 
that  Ihall  rule  my  people  Ifrael. 
Then  Herod,  when  he  had  privily 


ifter  the  Epiphany. 


called  the  wife  men,  enquired  of 
them  diligently  what  time  the  liar 
appeared.  And  he  fent  them  to 
Bethlehem,  and  faid,  Go,  and 
fearch  diligently  for  the  young 
child,  and  when  ye  have  foimd 
him,  bring  me  word  again,  that  I 
may  come  and  worfliip  him  alfo. 
When  they  had  heard  the  king, 
they  departed ;  and  lo,  the  ftar 
which  they  faw  in  the  eall  went 
before  them,  till  it  came  and  Hood 
over  where  the  young  child  was. 
When  they  faw  the  ftar,  they  re- 
joiced with  exceeding  great  joy. 
And  when  they  were  come  into 
the  houfe,  they  faw  the  young  child 
with  Mary  his  mother,  and  fell 
down  and  worfliipped  him :  and 
when  they  had  opened  their  trea- 
fures,  they  prefented  unto  him 
gifts  ;  gold,  and  frankincenfe,  and 
myrrh.  And  being  warned  of  God 
in  a  dream  that  they  fliould  not 
return  to  Herod,  they  departed  in- 
to their  own  country  another  way. 

Thejirji  Sunday  after  the  Epiphany, 
The  ColleM, 

Ol^ord,  we  befeech  thee  mer- 
cifully to  receive  the  prayers 
of  thy  people  which  call  upon  tliee; 
and  grant  that  they  may  both  per- 
ceive and  know  what  things  they 
ought  to  do,  and  alfo  may  have 
grace  and  power  faithfully  to  fulfil 
the  fame  ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 


Thefecond  Sunday 


The  EnlMc.    Iloiii.  xii.  1. 


IBefeecli  you  therefore,  brethren, 
by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye 
prefent  your  bodies  a  Uving  facri- 
fice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God, 
which  is  your  reafonable  fervice. 
And  be  not  conformed  to  this 
world ;  but  be  ye  transformed  by 
the  renewing  of  your  mind,  that 
ye  may  prove  what  is  that  good, 
and  acceptable,  and  j)erfe61;  will 
of  God.  For  I  fay,  through  the 
grace  given  unto  me,  to  every  man 
that  is  among  you,  not  to  think  of 
himfelf  more  highly  than  he  ought 
to  think,  but  to  think  foberly,  ac- 
cording as  God  hath  dealt  to  eveiy 
man  the  meafure  of  faith.  For  as 
we  have  many  members  in  one 
body,  and  all  members  have  not 
the  fame  office;  fo  we,  being  many, 
are  one  body  in  Chrift,  and  eveiy 
one  members  one  of  another. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  ii.  41. 

NOW  his  parents  went  to  Je- 
rufalem  eveiy  year  at  the 
feaft  of  the  palfover.  And  when 
he  was  twelve  years  old,  they  went 
up  to  Jerufalem,  after  the  cuftom 
of  the  feail.  And  when  they  had 
fulfilled  the  days,  as  they  returned, 
the  child  Jefus  tarried  behind  in 
Jerufalem ;  and  Jofeph  and  his 
mother  knew  not  of  it.  But  they, 
fuppofing  him  to  have  been  in  the 
company,  went  a  day's  journey, 
and  they  fought  him  among  theu' 


after  the  Epiphany. 

kinsfolk  and  acquaintance.     And 
when   they  found  him   not,  they 
turned  back  again  to  Jerufalem, 
feeking  him.    And  it  came  to  pafs, 
that  after  three  days  they  found 
him  in  the  temple,  fitting  in  the 
midil  of  the  do6tors,  both  hearing 
them,  and  alking  them  quefl;ions. 
And  all  that  heard  him  were  afto- 
niftied   at  his   undei'fi;anding  and 
anfwers.    And  when  they  faw  him, 
they  were  amazed :  and  his  mother 
faid  unto  him,  Son,  why  hail  thou 
thus  dealt  with  us?  behold,  thy 
father  and  I  have  fought  thee  for- 
rowing.    And  he  faid  unto  them, 
How  is  it  that  ye  fought  me?  will 
ye  not  that  I  mull  be  about  my 
Father's  bufinefs?  And  they  under- 
ftood  not  the  faying  which  he  fpake 
unto  them.     And  he  went  down 
with  them,  and  came  to  Nazareth, 
and  was  fubjedl  unto  them:  but 
his  mother  kept  all  thefe  fayings 
in  her  heart.    And  Jefus  increafed 
in  wifdom,  and  ft;ature,  and  in  fa- 
vour with  God  and  man. 

Thefecond  Swiday  after  the 

Epiphany. 

The  Collect. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  who  doll  govern  all 
things  in  heaven  and  earth ;  Mer- 
cifully hear  the  fupplications  of  thy 
people,  and  grant  us  thy  peace  all 
the  days  of  our  life ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 


The  third  Sunday 

The  Epijfle.    Rom.  xii.  6. 

HAVING  then  gifts  dift'ering 
according  to  the  grace  that 
is  given  to  lis,  whether  prophecy, 
let  us  prophefy  according  to  the 
proportion  of  faith ;  or  niiniftry, 
let  us  wait  on  our  niiniitering  ;  or 
he  that  teacheth,  on  teaching ;  or 
he  that  exhorteth,  on  exhortation: 
he  that  giveth,  let  him  do  it  with 
fimplicity ;  he  that  ruleth,  with  di- 
ligence ;  he  that  Iheweth  mercy, 
with  cheei'fulnefs.  Let  love  be 
without  diffimulation.  Abhor  that 
which  is  evil,  cleave  to  that  which 
is  good.  Be  kindly  affedlioned  one 
to  another  with  brotherly  love,  in 
honour  preferring  one  another:  not 
flothful  in  bulinefs ;  fervent  in  fpi- 
rit;  ferving  the  Lord;  rejoicing  in 
hope  ;  ])atient  in  tribulation  ;  con- 
tmuing  inllant  in  prayer ;  dillribut- 
ing  to  the  neceflity  of  faints ;  given 
to  hofpitality.  Blefs  them  which 
pei*fecute  you;  blefs,  and  curfe  not. 
Rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice, 
and  weep  with  them  that  weep. 
Be  of  the  fame  mind  one  towards 
another.  Mind  not  high  things, 
but  condefcend  to  men  of  low  ef- 
tate. 

The  GofpeJ.    St.  John  ii.  L 

AND  the  third  day  there  was  a 
marriage  in  Cana  of  Galilee, 
and  the  mother  of  Jefus  was  there. 
And  both  Jefus  was  called,  and 
his  difciples,  to  the  marriage.  And 
when  they  wanted  wine,  die  mo- 


after  the  Epiph  any, 

ther  of  Jefus  faith  unto  him,  They 
have  no  wine.  Jefus  faith  unto 
her,  Woman,  what  have  I  to  do 
with  thee?  mine  hour  is  not  yet 
come.  His  mother  faith  unto  the 
fervants,  Whatfoever  he  faith  un- 
to you,  do  it.  And  there  were  fet 
there  fix  water-pots  of  ftone,  after 
the  manner  of  the  pm-ifying  of  the 
Jews,  containing  two  or  three  fir- 
kins apiece.  Jefus  faith  unto  them, 
Fill  the  water-pots  with  water. 
And  they  filled  them  up  to  the 
brim.  And  he  faith  unto  them, 
Draw  out  now,  and  bear  unto  the 
governour  of  the  feaft.  And  they 
bare  it.  When  the  ruler  of  the 
feaft  had  tafted  the  water  that  was 
made  wine,  and  knew  not  whence 
it  was,  (but  the  fervants  which 
drew  the  water  knew,)  the  gover- 
nour of  the  feaft  called  the  bride- 
groom, and  faith  unto  him,  Every 
man  at  the  beginning  doth  fet  forth 
good  wine,  and  when  men  have 
well  drunk,  then  that  which  is 
worfe:  but  thou  haft  kept  the  good 
wine  until  now.  This  beoinniuff  of 
miracles  did  .1  efus  in  Cana  of  Gali- 
lee, and  manifefted  forth  his  gloiy, 

and  his  difciples  believed  on  him.  • 

_____ . _ ^ _^ 

TliethirdSundm/  after  the  Epiplmnt^ii^ 
Vw  CollcSL  ^      ,fi 

ALMIGUIY  and  everlafting 
God,  mercifullv  look  upon  our 
infirmities,  and'  in  all  our  dangeri? 
and   neceflities  ft  retch   forth   thy 


The  fourth  Sunday 

right  hand  to  help  and  defend  us ; 
through  Jefus  Clu'ill  our  Lord. 
Amen.  "^^  ■* 

The  Epijlle.    Rom.  xii.  16. 

BE  not  ^vife  in  your  own  con- 
ceits. Recompenfe  to  no  man 
evil  for  evil.  Provide  things  honell 
in  the  fight  of  all  men.  If  it  be 
pofllble,  as  much  as  lieth  in  you, 
live  peaceably  vk^ith  all  men.  Dear- 
ly beloved,  avenge  not  yourfelves, 
but  rather  give  place  unto  wrath ; 
for  it  is  written,  Vengeance  is 
mine ;  I  will  repay,  faith  the  Lord. 
Therefore,  if  thine  enemy  hunger, 
feed  him ;  if  he  thirft,  give  him 
drink:  for  in  fo  doing  thou  flialt 
heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head.  Be 
not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome 
evil  with  good. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  viii.  L 

WHEN  he  was  come  down 
from  the  mountain,  great 
multitudes  followed  him.  And  be- 
hold, there  came  a  leper  and  wor- 
Ihipped  him,  faying.  Lord,  if  thou 
wilt,  thou  canft  make  me  clean. 
And  Jefus  put  forth  his  hand, 
and  touched  him,  faying,  I  will ; 
be  thou  clean.  And  immediately 
his  leprofy  was  cleanfed.  And  Je- 
fus faith  unto  him,  See  thou  tell 
no  man,  but  go  thy  way,  Ihew 
thyfelf  to  the  prieft,  and  offer  the 
gift  that  Mofes  commanded,  for  a 
teftimony  unto  them.  And  when 
Jefus  was  entered  into  Capernaum, 
there  came  unto  him  a  centurion 


after  the  Epij^haviy. 

befeeching  him,  and  faying,  Lord, 
my  fervant  lieth  at  home  fick  of 
the  palfy,  grievoully  tormented. 
And  Jefus  faith  unto  him,  I  vvill 
come  and  heal  him.  The  centuriosi 
anfwered  and  faid.  Lord,  I  am  not 
worthy  that  thou  Ihouldeil  come 
under  my  roof;  but  fpeak  the  word 
only,  and  my  fervant  fliall  be  heal- 
ed. For  I  am  a  man  under  autho- 
rity, having  foldiers  under  me : 
and  I  fay  unto  this  man,  Go,  and 
he  goeth ;  and  to  another.  Come, 
and  he  cometh ;  and  to  my  fei-vant, 
Do  this,  and  he  doeth  it.  When 
Jefus  heard  it,  he  mai-velled,  and 
faid  to  them  that  followed.  Verily 
I  fay  unto  you,  I  have  not  found 
fo  great  faith,  no  not  in  Ifrael. 
And  I  fay  unto  you.  That  many 
Ihall  come  from  the  call  and  weft, 
and  fliall  fit  down  vvith  Abraham, 
and  Ifaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven.  But  the  children 
of  the  kingdom  fliall  be  caft  out 
into  outer  darkiiefs :  there  fliall  be 
weeping  and  gnafliing  of  teeth. 
And  Jefus  faid  unto  the  centurion, 
Go  thy  way,  and  as  thou  haft  be- 
lieved, fo  be  it  done  unto  thee. 
And  his  fervant  was  healed  in  the 
felf-fame  hour. 


o 


The  fourth  Sunday  after  the 

Ejnphany. 

The  Colledl. 

God,  who  knoweft  us  to  be 

fet  in  the  rnidft  of  fo  many 

La 


The  fourth  Sundai/  after  the  EpipkSiy. 


and  gi'eat  clangers,  that  by  reafon 
of  the  fraiky  of  our  nature  we  can- 
not ahvays  ftancl  upright ;  Grant  to 
us  fuch  ftrength  and  protedtion, 
as  may  fupport  us  in  all  dangei-s, 
and  cany  us  tlu-ough  all  temj)ta- 
tions ;  thi'ough  Jefus  Chriil  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epiftle.    Rom.  xiii.  1. 

LET  every  foul  be  fubjecft  unto 
the  higher  powers  ;  for  there 
is  no  power  but  of  God :  the  pow- 
ers that  be  are  ordained  of  God. 
Whofoever  therefore  refifteth  the 
power  refifteth  the  ordinance  of 
God :  and  they  that  refift  Ihall 
receive  to  themfelves  damnation. 
For  nders  ai*e  not  a  terror  to  ffood 
works,  but  to  the  evil.  Wilt  thou 
then  not  be  afi-aid  of  the  power? 
do  that  which  is  good,  and  thou 
Jhalt  have  praife  of  the  fame :  for 
he  is  the  minifter  of  God  to  thee 
for  good.  But  if  thou  do  that  which 
is  evil,  be  afraid;  for  he  beareth 
not  the  fword  in  vain :  for  he  is 
the  minifter  of  God,  a  revenger  to 
execute  wrath  upon  him  that  doeth 
evil.  Wherefore  ye  mull  needs 
be  fubjedl;,  not  only  for  wrath,  but 
alfo  for  confcience  fake.  For  for 
this  caufe  pay  ye  tribute  alfo;  for 
they  are  God's  miniftei's,  attending 
continually  ujion  this  veiy  thing. 
Render  therefore  to  all  tlieir  dues ; 
tribute  to  whom  tril)ute  is  due,  cuf- 
ton>  to  whom  cuttom,  fear  to  whom 
feai-,  honour  to  whom  Ixmom-. 


The  Gofpel.   St.  Matth.  viii.  23. 

AND  when  he  was  entered  into 
a  fliip,  his  difciples  followed 
hun.     And  behold,  there  arofe  a 
great  tempeft  in  the  fea,  infomuch 
that  the  fliip  was  covered  with  the 
waves  :  but  he  was  afleep.    And 
his  difciples  came  to  him,  and  a- 
woke  him,  fa^ang.  Lord,  fave  us, 
we  periih.  And  he  faith  unto  them, 
Why  are  ye  fearful,  O  ye  of  little 
faith?  Then  he  ai'ofe,  and  rebuked 
the  winds  and  the  fea,  and  there 
was  a  great  calm.    But  the  men 
mai-velled,  faying,  What  manner 
of  man  is  this,  that  even  the  ^vinds 
and  the  fea  obey  him !  And  when 
he  was  come  to  the  other  fide  in- 
to the  countiy  of  the  Gergefenes, 
there  met  him  two  poifefled  ^vith 
devils,  coming  out  of  the  tombs, 
exceeding  fierce,  fo  that  no  man 
might  pals  by  that  way.    And  be- 
hold, they  cried  out,  faying,  What 
have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Jefus, 
thou  Son  of  God?  art  thou  come 
hither  to   torment  us  before  the 
time?  And  there  was  a  good  Avay 
oft*  from  them  an  herd  of  many 
fwine,  feeding.    So  the  devils  be- 
fouffht  him,  laving,  If  tliou  caft  us 
out,  fuft'er  us  to  go  away  into  the 
herd  of  fwine.    And  he  faid  unto 
them,  Go.    And  when  they  were 
come  out,  they  went  into  the  hei-d 
of  fwine :  and  behold,  the  whole 
herd  of  fwine  ran  Aiolently  down 
a  lleep  place  into  the  fea,  and  pe- 


The  fifth  and  fixth  Sundays  after  the  Epiphany. 


rifhed  in  the  wateis.  And  they 
that  kept  tliem  fled,  and  went  their 
ways  into  the  city,  and  told  eveiy 
thmg,  and  what  was  befallen  to 
the  poH'elled  of  the  devils.  And 
behold,  the  whole  city  came  out 
to  meet  Jefus  :  and  when  they  faw 
him,  they  befought  him,  that  he 
would  depai't  out  of  their  coafts. 

Thejifth  Sunday  after  theEjnphany. 
TheCoUedt. 

OLord,  we  befeech  thee  to  keep 
thy  Church  and  houfhold  con- 
tinually in  thy  true  religion  ;  that 
they  who  do  lean  only  upon  the 
hope  of  thy  heavenly  grace  may 
evermore  be  defended  by  thy  migh- 
ty power;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen.  .   .  ^^ 

The  Epiftle.    Col.  iii.  12. 

PUT  on  therefore,  as  the  eledt 
of  God,  holy  and  beloved, 
bowels  of  mercies,  kindnefs,  hum- 
blenefs  of  mind,  meeknefs,  long- 
fuflfering ;  forbearing  one  another, 
and  forgivmg  one  another,  if  any 
man  have  a  quarrel  againft  any ; 
even  as  Chrift  forgave  you,  fo  alfo 
do  ye.  And  above  all  thefe  things 
put  on  charity,  which  is  the  bond 
of  perfe6lnefs.  And  let  the  peace 
of  God  rule  in  your  hearts,  to  the 
which  alfo  ye  are  called  in  one 
body;  and  be  ye  thankful.  Let 
the  word  of  Chrift  dwell  in  you 
richly  in  all  wifdom,  teaching  and 
admoniftiing  one  another  in  plalms, 


and  hymns,  and  fpiritual  fongs, 
finging  with  grace  in  your  hearts 
to  the  Lord.  And  whatfoever  ye 
do,  in  word  or  deed,  do  all  in  the 
Name  of  the  Lord  Jefus,  giving 
thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  by 
him. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  xiii.  24. 

THE  kingdom  of  heaven  is  lik- 
ened unto  a  man  which  fow- 
ed  good  feed  in  his  field.  But 
while  men  flept,  his  enemy  came 
and  fowed  tares  among  the  wheat, 
and  went  his  way.  But  when  the 
blade  was  fpnmg  up,  and  brought 
forth  fi'uit,  then  appeared  the  tares 
alfo.  So  the  fervants  of  the  houf-; 
holder  came,  and  faid  unto  him. 
Sir,  didft  not  thou  fow  good  feed 
in  thy  field?  from  whence  then 
hath  it  tares  ?  He  faid  unto  them. 
An  enemy  hath  done  this.  The 
fervants  faid  unto  him,  Wilt  thou 
then  that  we  go  and  gather  them 
up  ?  But  he  faid.  Nay ;  left  while 
ye  gather  up  the  tares,  ye  root  up 
alfo  the  wheat  with  them.  Let 
both  grow  together  until  the  har- 
veft ;  and  in  the  time  of  harveft  I 
will  fay  to  the  reapers.  Gather  ye 
together  firft  the  tares,  and  bind 
them  in  bundles  to  burn  them : 
but  gather  the  wheat  into  my  barn. 

TheJiMh  Sunday  after  the  Epiphany. 
The  Collet. 

OGod,  whofe  blefled  Son  was 
manifefted  that  he  might  de- 


The  Jixth  Sunday  a^ 

ftroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  and 
make  us  the  foiis  of  God,  and  heirs 
of  eternal  life ;  Grant  us,  we  be- 
feech  thee,  that,  having  this  hope, 
we  may  purify  ourfelves,  even  as 
he  is  pure ;  that,  when  he  fliall  ap- 
pear again  with  power  and  great 
gloiy,  we  may  be  made  like  unto 
him  in  his  eternal  and  glorious 
kingdom ;  where  vAth  thee,  O  Fa- 
ther, and  thee,  O  Holy  Ghoft,  he 
liveth  and  reigneth,  ever  one  God, 
world  mthout  end.  Amen. 
The  Kpijlle.    1  St.  John  iii.  1 . 

BEHOLD,  what  manner  of  love 
the  Father  hath  bellowed  up- 
on us,  that  we  fliould  be  called  the 
fons  of  God :  therefore  the  world 
knoweth  us  not,  becaufe  it  knew 
him  not.  Beloved,  now  are  we 
the  fons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not 
yet  appear  what  we  fliall  be :  but 
we  know,  that,  when  he  fliall  ap- 
pear, we  fliall  be  like  him  ;  for  we 
fliall  fee  him  as  he  is.  And  every 
man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him 
purifieth  himfelf,  even  as  he  is  pure. 
Whofoever  committeth  fin  tranf- 
grefleth  alfo  the  law  :  for  fin  is  the 
tranfgreflion  of  the  law.  And  ye 
know  that  he  was  manifefted  to 
take  away  our  fins  ;  and  in  him  is 
no  fin.  Whofoever  abideth  in  him 
finneth  not :  whofoever  finnoth 
hath  not  feen  him,  neither  known 
him.  Little  children,  let  no  man 
deceive  you :  he  that  doeth  righte- 
oufnefs  is  righteous,  even  as  he  is 


er  the  Epiphany. 

righteous.  He  that  committeth  fin 
is  of  the  devil :  for  the  devil  finneth 
from  the  beginning.  For  this  pur- 
pofe  the  Son  of  God  was  manifefi;- 
ed,  that  he  might  deftroy  the  works 
of  the  devil. 
The  Go/pel.   St.  Matth.  xxiv.  23. 

THEN  if  any  man  fliall  fay  un- 
to you,  Lo,  here  is  Chrifl;,  or 
there ;  believe  it  not.  For  there 
fliall  arife  falfe  Clirifl;s,  and  falfe 
prophets,  and  fliall  fliew  great  figns 
and  wonders ;  infomuch  that  (if  it 
were  pofllible)  they  fliall  deceive 
the  very  ele6t.  Behold,  I  have 
told  you  before.  Wherefore,  if  they 
fliall  fay  unto  you.  Behold,  he  is  in 
the  defert ;  go  not  forth :  behold, 
he  is  in  the  fecret  chambers ;  be- 
lieve it  not.  For  as  the  lightning 
Cometh  out  of  the  eafl:,  and  fliineth 
even  unto  the  weft ;  fo  fliall  alfo 
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  be. 
For  wherefoever  the  carcafe  is, 
there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered 
together.  Immediately  after  the 
tribulation  of  thofe  days  fliall  the 
fun  be  darkened,  and  the  moon 
flball  not  give  her  light,  and  the 
ftars  fliall  fall  from  heaven,  and 
the  powers  of  the  heavens  fliall  be 
fliaken.  And  then  fliall  appear  the 
fign  of  the  Son  of  Man  in  heaven : 
and  then  fliall  all  the  tribes  of  the 
earth  mourn,  and  they  fliall  fee  the 
Son  of  Man  coming  in  the  clouds 
of  heaven,  with  power  and  great 
glory.     And  he  fliall  fend  his  an- 


geli?  with  a  great  found  of  a  trum- 
pet, and  they  fhuU  gather  together 
his  ele^t;  from  the  four  winds,  from 
one  end  of  heaven  to  the  other. 


The  Sunday  called  Septuagejima, 
or  the  third  Sunday  before  Lent. 
The  Collea. 
Lord,  we  befeech  thee  favour- 
ably to  hear  tlie  prayers  of 
thy  people;  that  we,  who  are  juftly 
puniflied  for  our  oifences,  may  be 
mercifully  delivered  by  thy  good- 
nefs,  for  the  gloiy  of  thy  Name ; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Saviour, 
who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee 
and  the  Holy  Gholl,  ever  one  God, 
world  without  end.  Amen. 
The  Epijile.  1  Cor.  ix.  24. 
T'  NOW  ye  not,  that  they  which 
»-  rim  in  a  race  run  all,  but  one 
receiveth  the  prize?  So  run  that 
ye  may  obtain.  And  every  man 
that  ftriveth  for  the  maftery  is  tem- 
perate in  all  things  :  now  they  do 
it  to  obtain  a  corruptible  crown, 
but  we  an  incorruptible.  I  there- 
fore fo  run,  not  as  uncertainly ;  fo 
fight  I,  not  as  one  that  beateth  the 
air:  but  I  keep  under  my  body, 
and  bring  it  into  fubje6tion,  left 
that  by  any  means,  when  I  have 
preached  to  others,  I  myfelf  Ihould 
^§  a  caft-away.  ,^, 

^^,The  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  XX*  1. 

THE    kingdom    of  heaven    is 
like  unto  a  man  that  is  an 
houlholder,  which  went  out  eai'ly 


Septuagejima  Sunday. 

in  the  morning  to  hire  labourers 
into  his  vineyard.  And  when  he 
had  agreed  with  the  labourers  for 
a  peny  a  day,  he  fent  them  into 
his  vineyard.  And  he  went  out 
about  the  third  hour,  and  faw 
others  ft  an  ding  idle  in  the  market- 
place, and  faid  unto  them.  Go  ye 
alfo  into  the  vineyard,  and  what- 
foever  is  right  1  will  give  you. 
And  they  went  their  way.  Again 
he  went  out  about  the  ftxth  and 
ninth  hour,  and  did  likewife.  And 
about  the  eleventh  hour  he  went 
out,  and  found  others  ftanding  idle, 
and  faith  unto  them.  Why  ftaud  ye 
here  all  the  day  idle?  They  fay  un- 
to him,  Becaufe  no  man  hath  hired 
us.  He  faith  unto  them.  Go  ye  alfo 
into  the  vineyard,  and  whatfoever 
is  right,  that  fliall  ye  receive.  So 
when  even  was  come,  the  lord  of 
the  vineyard  faith  unto  his  fteward, 
Call  the  labourers,  and  give  them 
their  hire,  beginning  from  the  laft 
unto  the  fii-ft.  And  when  they  came 
that  were  hired  about  the  eleventh 
hour,  they  received  every  man  a 
peny.  But  when  the  firft  came, 
they  fuppofed  that  they  fliould 
have  received  more;  and  they  like- 
wife  received  every  man  a  peny. 
And  when  they  had  received  it, 
they  murmured  againft  the  good- 
man  of  the  houfe,  fayino^,  Thefe 
laft  have  wrought  but  one  hour, 
and  thou  haft  made  them  equal 
unto   us,   which  have  borne  the 


burden  and  heat  of  the  day.  But 
he  anfwered  one  of  them,  and  faid, 
Friend,  I  do  thee  no  wrong;  didll 
not  thou  agree  with  me  for  a  peny? 
Take  that  thine  is,  and  go  thy  way; 
I  Avill  give  unto  this  laft  even  as 
unto  thee.  Is  it  not  la\^^d  for  me 
to  do  what  I  will  with  mine  own? 
Is  thine  eve  evil,  becaufe  I  am 
good?  So  the  laft  (liall  be  firft,  and 
the  fii-ft  laft:  for  many  be  called, 
but  few  chofen. 

The  Sunday  called  Setvagejima,  or 

thefecond  Sunday  before  Lent. 

Tfie  Colledi. 

OLord  God,  who  feeft  that  we 
put  not  our  truft  in  any  thing 
that  we  do ;  Mercifully  grant  that 
by  thy  power  we  may  be  defended 
againft  all  advei*fity ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijlle.  2  Cor.  xi.  19. 
^T^E  fuffer  fools  gladly,  feemg 
A  ye  yourfelves  ai'e  wife.  For 
ye  fufter  if  a  man  bring  you  into 
bondage,  if  a  man  devour  you,  if 
a  man  take  of  you,  if  a  man  exaJt 
hmifelf,  if  a  man  finite  you  pn  the 
face.  I  fpeak  as  concerning  re- 
proach, as  though  we  had  been 
weak :  howbeit,  whereinfoever  any 
is  bold,  (1  fpeak  foolilhly,)  I  lun 
bold  alfo.  Are  they  Hebrews?  fo 
am  I.  Are  they  Ifraelites?  fo  am  I. 


Are  they  the  feed  of  yVbraham? 
fo  am  I,  yVi'c  they  miniliers  of 
Chrift?   (I  fpeak  as  a  fool,)  I  am 


Sexagefima  Sunday, 

more :  in  labours  more  abundant ; 
in  ftripes  above  meafure ;  in  pri- 
fons  more  frequent ;  in  deaths  oft. 
Of  the  Jews  five  times  received  I 
-forty  ftripes  fave  one  ;  thrice  was  I 
beaten  with  rods ;  once  was  I  fton- 
ed ;  thrice  I  fuft'ered  fliipwreck ; 
a  night  and  a  day  I  have  been  in 
the  deep  ;  in  journeying  often  ;  in 
perils  of  waters ;  in  perils  of  rob- 
bers ;  in  perils  by  mine  own  coun- 
trymen ;  in  perils  by  the  heathen ; 
in  perils  in  the  city ;  in  perils  m 
the  wildeniefs  ;  in  perils  in  the  fea ; 
in  perils  among  falfe  brethren ; 
in  weai'inefs  and  painfidnefs ;  in 
watchings  often ;  in  hunger  and 
thirft ;  in  faftings  often ;  in  cold 
and  nakednefs;  befides  thofe  things 
that  are  without,  that  which  com- 
eth  upon  me  daily,  the  care  of  all 
the  churches.  Who  is  weak,  and 
I  am  not  weak?  who  is  offended, 
and  I  burn  not?  If  I  muft  needs 
glory,  I  Avill  gloiy  of  the  things 
which  concern  mine  infirmities. 
The  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift,  which  is  blefted  for 
evermore,  knoweth  that  I  lie  not. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  viii.  4. 

WHEN  nuich  people  were 
gathered  together,  and  were 
come  tt)  him  out  of  every  city,  he 
fpake  by  a  parable  :  A  fower  went 
out  to  low  his  feed ;  and  as  he  fow- 
ed,  fome  fell  by  the  way-fide,  awd 
it  was  trodden  down,  and  the  fowls 
of  the  air  devoured  it.    And  fome 


Qiiinquagcfima  Sunday. 


fell  upon  a  rock,  and  as  foon  as  it 
was  fprung  up,  it  withered  away, 
becaufe  it  lacked  moifture.  And 
fome  fell  among  thorns,  and  the 
thorns  fprang  up  with  it,  and 
choked  it.  And  other  fell  on  good 
ground,  and  fprang  up,  and  bare 
fruit  an  hundred-fold.  And  when 
he  had  faid  tliefe  things,  he  cried. 
He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him 
hear.  And  his  difciples  afl^ed  him, 
faying,  What  might  this  parable 
be?  And  he  faid,  Unto  you  it  is 
given  to  know  the  myfteries  of  the 
kingdom  of  God :  but  to  others  in 
parables ;  that  feeing  they  might 
not  fee,  and  hearing  they  might 
not  underftand.  Now  the  parable 
is  this :  The  feed  is  the  Word  of 
God.  Thofe  by  the  way-fide  are 
they  that  hear ;  then  cometh  the 
devil,  and  taketh  away  the  word 
out  of  their  hearts,  left  they  Ihould 
believe,  and  be  faved.  They  on  the 
rock  are  they,  which,  when  they 
hear,  receive  the  word  with  joy; 
and  thefe  have  no  root,  which  for  a 
while  believe,  and  in  time  of  temp- 
tation fall  away.  And  that  which 
fell  among  thorns,  are  they,  which, 
when  they  have  heard,  go  forth, 
and  are  choked  with  cares,  and 
riches,  and  pleafures  of  this  life,  and 
bring  no  fruit  to  perfedHon.  But 
that  on  the  good  ground,  are  they, 
which  in  an  honeft  and  good  heart, 
having  heard  the  word,  keep  it,  and 
bring  forth  fruit  with  patience. 


The  Sunday  called  Quhiquagejima, 
or  the  newt  Sunday  before  Lent. 
The  Colle&. 
Lord,  who  haft  taught  us  that 
all  our  doings  without  charity 
are  nothing  worth ;  Send  thy  Holy 
Ghoft,  and  pour  into  our  hearts 
that  moft  excellent  gift  of  charity, 
the  veiy  bond  of  peace  and  of  all 
virtues,  without  which  whofoever 
liveth  is  counted  dead  before  thee : 
Grant  this  for  thine  only  Son  Jefus 
Chrift's  fake.    Amen. 

The  Epijile.   1  Cor.  xiii.  1. 

THOUGH  I  fpeak  mth  the 
tongues  of  men  and  of  angels, 
and  have  not  charity,  I  am  become 
as  founding  brafs,  or  a  tinldmg 
cymbal.  And  though  I  have  the 
gift  of  prophecy,  and  undei'ftand 
all  myfteries,  and  all  knowledge; 
and  though  I  have  all  faith,  fo  that 
I  could  remove  mountains,  and 
have  no  charity,  I  am  nothing. 
And  though  I  beftow  all  my  goods 
to  feed  the  poor,  and  though  I 
give  my  body  to  be  burned,  and 
have  not  charity,  it  profiteth  me 
nothing.  Charity  fuffereth  long, 
and  is  kind  ;  charity  envieth  not ; 
charity  vaunteth  not  itfelf,  is  not 
pufted  up,  doth  not  behave  itfelf 
unfeemly,  feeketh  not  her  own,  is 
not  eafily  provoked,  thinketh  no 
evil,  rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but 
rejoiceth  in  the  truth ;  beareth  all 
things,  believeth  all  things,  hop- 
eth  all  things,  endureth  all  things. 
M 


Tk  firjl  Day  of  Lent. 


Chai'ity  never  failetli :  but  whethei- 
there  be  prophecies,  they  fhall  fail; 
whether  there  be  tongues,  they 
{hall  ceafe;  whether  there  be  know- 
ledge, it  fhall  vanilh  away.  For  we 
know  in  part,  and  we  jjrophefy  in 
part.  But  when  that  which  is  per- 
fect is  come,  then  that  which  is  in 
part  (hall  be  done  away.  When  I 
was  a  child,  I  fpake  as  a  child,  I 
imderftood  as  a  diild,  1  thought  as 
(t  child ;  but  when  I  became  a  man, 
I  put  away  childifli  things.  For 
now  we  fee  through  a  glafs  darkly; 
but  then  face  to  face :  now  I  know 
in  part ;  bnt  then  fliall  I  know  even 
as  alfo  I  am  kno\^ai.  And  now 
abideth  faith,  hope,  charity,  thefe 
three  ;  but  the  gTcateft  of  thefe  is 
charity. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  xviii.  31. 

THEN  Jefus  took  unto  him  the 
twelve,  and  faid  unto  them, 
Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerufalem, 
and  all  tilings  that  are  \^Titten  by 
the  pro{)hets  concerning  the  Son 
of  Man  fhall  be  accomplillied.  For 
he  fhall  be  delivered  unto  the  Gen- 
tiles, and  fhall  be  hiocked,  and 
fpitefully  entreated,  and  fpitted  on : 
and  they  fliall  fcourge  him,  and 
put  him  to  death  ;  and  the  third 
day  he  fhall  i-ife  again.  And  they 
nnderflood  none  of  thefe  things : 
and  this  faying  was  hid  from  them, 
neither  knew  they  the  things  which 
were  fpoken.  And  it  came  to  pafs, 
that  as  he  was  come 


nigh 


unto 


Jericho,  a  certain  blind  man  fat 
by  the  way-fide  begging :  and 
hearing  the  multitude  pals  by,  he 
allied  what  it  meant.  And  they 
told  him,  that  Jefus  of  Nazareth 
paffeth  by.  And  he  cried,  faying, 
Jefus,  thou  Son  of  David,  have 
mercy  on  me.  And  they  which 
went  before  rebuked  him,  that  he 
fhould  hold  his  peace :  but  he  cried 
fo  much  the  more,  Thou  Son  of 
David,  have  mercy  on  me.  And 
Jefus  flood,  and  commandecl  him 
to  be  broup-ht  unto  him :  and  when 
he  was  come  near,  he  afked  hiin, 
faying,  What  vnXt  thou  that  I 
fliould  do  unto  thee  ?  And  he  faid, 
Lord,  that  I  may  recei^'e  my  fight. 
And  Jefus  faid  unto  him,  Receive 
thy  fight ;  thy  faith  hath  faved  thee. 
And  immediately  he  received  his 
fight,  and  followed  him,  glorifying 
God:  and  all  the  people,  when  they 
faw  it,  gav^e  praife  unto  God. 

The  Jirjl  Day  of  Lent,  commonly 

called  Ajh-  Wednefday. 

the  ColleB. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  who  hateft  nothing  that 
thou  liafl  made,  and  dofl  forgive 
the  fins  of  all  them  that  are  peni- 
tent ;  Create  and  make  in  us  new 
and  contrite  hearts,  that  we  wor- 
thily lamcntino-  our  fins,  and  ac- 
knowled£rini»;     our    wretchednefs, 

or) 

may  obtain  of  thee,  the  God  of  all 
mercy,  perfecit  remiffion  and  for- 


J'hejirft  Sunday  m  Lent. 


givenefs  ;  through  Jefus  Cliriil  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

II  This  Collect  is  to  be  read  every  day  in  Lent  after 
the  Collect  appointed  for  the  Day. 

For  the  Epiftle.  Joel  ii.  12. 

TURN  ye  even  to  me,  faith  the 
Lord,  with  all  your  heart,  and 
with  falling,  and  with  weeping, 
and  with  mourning.  And  rend 
yoiu*  heart,  and  not  your  garments, 
and  turn  vmto  the  Lord  your  God : 
for  he  is  gracious  and  merciful, 
flow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kind- 
nefs,  and  repenteth  him  of  the  evil. 
Wlio  knoweth  if  he  ^vill  return, 
and  repent,  and  leave  a  bleffing 
behind  him,  even  a  meat-offering 
and  a  drink-offering  unto  the  Lord 
your  God?  Blow  the  trumpet  in 
Zion,  fandlify  a  fall,  call  a  folemn 
ailembly,  gather  the  people,  fanc- 
tify  the  congregation,  alfemble  the 
elders,  gather  the  children,  and 
thofe  that  fuck  the  breafts ;  let  the 

brideo-room  oo  forth  of  his  cham- 

• 
ber,  and  the  bride  out  of  her  clo- 

fet ;  let  the  priefts,  the  minillers  of 
the  Lord,  weep  between  the  porch 
and  the  altar,  and  let  them  fay. 
Spare  thy  people,  O  Lord,  and 
give  not  thine  heritage  to  reproach, 
that  the  heathen  Ihould  rule  over 
them :  wherefore  fhould  they  fay 
aanong  the  people,  Where  is  then- 
God? 
The  Go/pel  St.  Matth.  vi.  16. 
HEN  ye  fiiil,  be  not  as  the 
hypocrites,  of  a  fax;l  counte- 


nance: for  they  disfigure  their 
faces,  that  they  may  appear  unto 
men  to  fall.  Verily  1  fay  unto  you, 
They  have  their  reward.  But  thou, 
when  thou  falleft,  anoint  tliine 
head,  and  wafli  thy  face,  that  thou 
appear  not  unto  men  to  fall,  but 
unto  thy  Father  which  Is  in  fe- 
cret;  and  thy  Father,  which  feeth 
in  fecret,  fliall  reward  thee  openly. 
Lay  not  up  for  yourfelves  treafure^ 
upon  eai-tli,  -where  moth  and  rufl 
doth  corrupt,  and  where  thieve* 
break  through  and  ileal ;  but  lay 
up  for  yourfelves  treafures  in  hear 
ven,  where  neither  moth  nor  i-uft 
doth  corrupt,  and  where  tliieves 
do  not  break  through  nor  Heal ; 
for  where  your  treafure  is,  there 
will  your  heart  be  alfo. 

Thejirji  Sunday  in  hent. 
The  CoUeB. 

OLord,  who  for  our  fake  didft 
fall  forty  days  and  forty  nights ; 
Give  us  grace  to  ufe  fuch  abili- 
nence,  that,  our  flefli  being  fubdued 
to  the  Spirit,  we  may  ever  obey 
thy  godly  motions  in  righteoufnefs, 
and  true  holinefs,  to  thy  honour 
and  glory,  who  Uvell  and  reigneft 
with  the  Father  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  one  God,  world  mthout 
end.    Amen. 

The  Epiftle.    2  Cor.  vi.  L 

WE  then,  as  workers  together 
with  him,  befeech  you  alfo, 
that  ye  recdve  not  the  grace  of 
Ma 


Thefecmid  Smida^  m'  LeWt. 


God  in  vain;  (for  he  faith,  I  have 
heard  thee  in  a  time  accepted,  and 
in  the  day  of  falvation  have  1  fuc- 
coured  thee :  behokl,  now  is  the 
accepted  time  ;  behokl,  now  is  the 
day  of  falvation ;)  giving  no  offence 
in  any  thing,  that  the  miniftry  be 
not  blamed ;  but  in  all  things  ap- 
proving ourfelves  as  the  minifters 
of  God,  in  much  patience,  in  afflic- 
tions, in  neceffities,  in  diftreffes,  m 
ftripes,  in  imprifonments,  in  tu- 
mults, in  labours,  in  watchings,  in 
failings ;  hy  purenefs,  by  know- 
ledge, by  long-fuftering,  by  kmd- 
nefs,  by  the  holy  Ghoft,  by  love 
unfeigned,  by  the  word  of  truth, 
by  the  power  of  God,  by  the  ar- 
mour of  righteoufnefs  on  the  right 
hand  and  on  the  left,  by  honour 
and  dilhonour,  by  evil  report  and 
good  report;  as  deceivers,  and  yet 
true;  as  unknown,  and  yet  well 
known ;  as  dying,  and  behold,  we 
live ;  as  chaftened,  and  not  killed ; 
as  foiTowful,  yet  alway  rejoicing ; 
as  poor,  yet  making  many  lich ;  as 
having  nothing,  and  yet  pofl'efiing 
all  things.  t  dlio 

The  Gofpel.    St.  Matth.  iv.  1. 

THEN  was  Jefus  led  up  of  the 
Spirit  into  the  wildcrnefs,  to 
be  tempted  of  the  devil.  And 
when  he  had  fafted  forty  days  and 
forty  nights,  he  was  afterward  an- 
hungred.  yVnd  when  the  tempter 
came  to  him,  he  faid,  If  thou  be 
the  Son   of  God,   connnand  that 


thefe  ftones  be  made  bread.  But 
he  anfwered  and  faid,  It  is  written, 
Man  fball  not  live  by  bread  alone, 
but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth 
out  of  the  mouth  of  God.  Then 
the  devil  taketli  him  up  into  the 
holy  city,  and  fetteth  him  on  a 
pinnacle  of  the  temple,  and  faith 
imto  him,  If  thou  be  the  Son  of 
God,  call  thyfelf  down ;  for  it  is 
^vritten,  He  Ihall  give  his  angels 
charge  concerning  thee,  and  in 
their  hands  they  fliall  bear  thee 
up,  left  at  any  time  thou  daih  thy 
foot  aojainft  a  Hone.  Jefus  faid  un- 
to  him,  It  is  written  again.  Thou 
ihalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God. 
Again,  the  devil  taketh  him  up  in- 
to an  exceeding  high  mountain, 
and  fheweth  him  all  the  kingdoms 
of  the  world,  and  the  gloiy  of  them; 
and  faith  unto  him.  All  thefe  things 
will  I  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall 
down  and  worfliip  me.  Tlien  faith 
Jefus  unto  him.  Get  thee  hence, 
Satan ;  for  it  is  written,  Ihou  (halt 
worfliip  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 
him  only  Ihalt  thou  ferve.  Then  the 
devil  leaveth  him,  and  behold,  an- 
gels came  and  minillered  unto  him. 

The  fecond  S?f?i(Iaf/  in  Lent. 
The  Colk'}^. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  fedl 
that  we  have   no  })ower  of 
ourfelves  to  help  ourfclves ;  K6ep 
us  both  outwardly  in  our  bo(hes, 
and  uiwardly  in  our  fouls ;  that  we 


The  third  Sunday  in  Lent: 


may  be  defended  from  all  adver- 
fities  which  may  happen  to  the 
body,  and  from  all  evil  thoughts 
which  may  aflault  and  hurt  the 
foul ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen.  -  iJiJ   u/jU  tni 

The  Epiftle.   1  Theff.  iv.  1.   " 

WE  befeech  you,  brethren, 
and  exhort  you  by  the  Lord 
Jefus,  that  as  ye  have  received  of 
us  how  ye  ought  to  walk,  and  to 
pleafe  God,  fo  ye  would  abound 
more  and  more.  For  ye  know  what 
commandments  we  gave  you  by 
the  Lord  Jefus.  For  this  is  the 
will  of  God,  even  your  fancftifica- 
tion,  that  ye  fliould  abftain  from 
fornication ;  that  eveiy  one  of  you 
fliould  know  how  to  pofl'efs  his 
veflel  in  fan6lification  and  honour ; 
not  in  the  lull  of  concupifcence, 
even  as  the  Gentiles  which  know 
not  God ;  that  no  man  go  beyond 
and  defraud  his  brother  in  any 
matter ;  becaufe  that  the  Lord  is 
the  avenger  of  all  fuch,  as  we  alfo 
have  forewarned  you,  and  teftified. 
For  God  hath  not  called  us  unto 
uncleannefs,  but  unto  holinefs.  He 
therefore  that  defpifeth  defpifeth 
not  man,  but  God,  who  hath  alfo 
given  unto  us  his  holy  Spirit,  i 
The  Gofpel    St.  Matth.  xv.  2L 

JESUS  went  thence,  and  de- 
parted into  the  coafts  of  Tyre 
and  Sidon.  And  behold,  a  woman 
of  Canaan  came  out  of  the  fame 
coafts,  and  cried  unto  him,  faying, 


Have  Inercy  on  me,  O  Lord,  tKou^ 

Son   of  David ;    my  daughter  \n) 

grievoufly  vexed  with  a  devil.    But* 

he  anfwered  her  not  a  word.    And> 

his  difciples   came   and  befoughfeJ 

him,  faying.  Send  her  away ;  foi^> 

flie  crieth  after  us.    But  he  an^f 

fwered  and  faid,  I  am  not  fent,^i 

but  unto  the  loft  flieej)  of  the  houfe] 

of  Ifrael.   Then  came  fhe  and  wor-r> 

fliipped   him,   faying.   Lord,   help' 

me.    But  he  anfwered  and  faid.  It 

is  not  meet  to  take  the  children's 

bread,  and  to  call  it  to  dogs.  And 

Ihe  faid,  Truth,  Lord ;  yet  the  dogi^I 

eat  of  the  crumbs  which  fall  fromt 

their  matters  table.     Then  Jefus' 

anfwered  and  faid  unto  her,  O  wo-i 

man,  great  is  thy  faith  :  be  it  untoi 

thee  even  as  thou  wilt.    And  heui 

daughter  was   made  whole  from" 

that  very  hour.  ^ 
.J 

The  third  Sunday  in  Lent.       A 
The  ColleSi.  '■{ 

WE  befeech  thee.  Almighty? 
God,  look  upon  the  hearty 
defires  of  thy  humble  fervants,  and 
ftretch  forth  the  right  hand  of  thy 
Majefty,  to  be  our  defence  againft 
all  our  enemies ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Ainen. 

The  Epiftle.  Ephef.  v.  1 . 
E  ye  therefore  followers  of 
God,  as  dear  children ;  and 
walk  in  love,  as  Chrift  alfo  hath 
loved  us,  and  hath  given  himfelf 
for  us,  an  oft'ering  and  a  facrific^ 


Tlie  third  Swiday  in  Lent 

to  God  for  a  fweet-fiiielling  favour. 
But  fornication,  and  all  unclean- 
nefs,  or  covetoufnefs,  let  it  not  be 
once  named  amongft  you,  as  be 


cometli  faints;  neither  filthinefs, 
nor  foolifli-talking,  nor  jefting, 
which  are  not  convenient;  but  ra- 
ther mvinjy  of  thanks  :  for  this  ve 
know,  that  no  whoremonger,  nor 
unclean  perfon,  nor  covetous  man, 
who  is  an  idolater,  hath  any  inhe- 
ritance in  the  kingdom  of  Chrill, 
and  of  God.  Let  no  man  deceive 
you  with  vain  words  :  for  becaufe 
of  thefe  things  cometh  the  wrath 
of  God  upon  the  chikh'en  of  dif- 
obedience.  Be  not  ye  therefore 
partakers  with  them  :  for  ye  were 
Ibmetimes  darknefs,  but  now  ai*e 
ye  light  in  the  Lord :  walk  as  chil- 
dren of  hght ;  (for  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  in  all  goodnefs,  and  right- 
eoufnefs,  and  tiiith ;)  proving  what 
is  acceptable  vmto  the  Lord.  And 
have  no  fellowilii[)  with  the  unfruit- 
fiil  works  of  darknefs,  but  rather 
re})rove  them :  for  it  is  a  fhame 
even  to  fpeak  of  thofe  things  which 
are  done  of  them  in  fecret.  But 
all  things  that  are  reprov^ed  are 
made  manifeft  by  the  Uglit :  for 
whatsoever  doth  make  manifeil;  is 
light.  Wherefore  he  faith,  Awake, 
thou  that  fleepeft,  and  arife  from  the 
dead,  and  Chrill  lliall  give  thee  light. 


Ill 


w 


J 


Gofpd.    St.  Luke  xi.  14. 
ESUS  was  calling  out  a  devil, 
and  it  was  diunb.  And  it  came 


to  pafs,  when  the  devil  was  gone 
out,  the  dumb  fpake;  and  the  peo- 
ple wondered.  But  fome  of  them 
laid,  He  calleth  out  devils  through 
Beelzebub,  the  chief  of  the  devils. 
And  others,  tempting  him,  fought 
of  liim  a  fign  from  heaven.  But 
he,  knowing  their  thoughts,  faid 
unto  them,  Every  kingdom  divided 
againft  itfelf  is  brought  to  defola- 
tion  ;  and  a  houfe  divided  againft 
a  houfe  falleth.  If  Satan  alfo  be 
divided  againft  himfelf,  how  fliall 
his  kingdom  ftand?  becaufe  ye  fay, 
that  I  call  out  devils  through  Beel- 
zebub. And  if  I  by  Beelzebub 
caft  out  devils,  by  whom  do  your 
fons  caft  them  out?  therefore  fliall 
they  be  your  judges.  But  if  I  with 
the  finger  of  God  caft  out  devils, 
no  doubt  the  khigdom  of  God  is 
come  upon  you.  When  a  ftrong 
man  armed  keepeth  his  palace,  Ijds 
goods  are  in  peace ;  but  when  a 
ftronger  than  he  Ihall  come  upon 
him,  and  overcome  him,  he  taketh 
from  him  all  his  armour  wherein 
he  trulled,  and  divideth  his  fpoils. 
He  that  is  not  with  me  is  againft 
me :  and  he  that  gathereth  not  with 
me  fcattereth.    When  the  imclean 


fpirit  is  gone  out  of  a  man,  he 
walketh  through  dry  places,  feek- 
ing  reft ;  and  finding  none,  he  faith, 
I  will  return  unto  my  houfe  whence 
I  came  out.  And  when  he  cometh, 
he  findeth  it  fwept  and  garnilhed. 
Then  goeth  lue  and  taketJ^  to  \m\ 


The  fourth  Sunday  in  Lent. 


feveii  othei-  fpiiits  more  wicked 
than  hiiiifelf,  and  they  enter  in, 
and  dwell  there ;  and  the  laft  ftate 
of  that  man  is  woife  than  the  firll. 
And  it  came  to  pafs,  as  he  fpake 
thefe  things,  a  certain  Avoman  of 
the  company  lift  up  her  voice,  and 
faid  unto  him,  Blelfed  is  the  womb 
that  bare  thee,  and  the  paps  which 
thou  haft  fucked.  But  he  faid.  Yea 
rather,  bleffed  are  they  that  hear 
the  Word  of  God,  and  keep  it. 

The  fourth  Sunday  in  Lent. 
The  Colledi. 

GRANT,  we  befeech  thee.  Al- 
mighty God,  that  we,  who 
for  our  evil  deeds  do  worthily  de- 
ferve  to  be  pimiftied,  by  the  com- 
fort of  thy  grace  may  mercifully 
be  relieved ;  through  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jefus  Chrift.  Amen. 
The  Epiftle.    Gal.  iv.  21. 

TELL  me,  ye  that  delire  to  be 
imder  the  law,  do  ye  not  hear 
the  law?  For  it  is  written,  that 
Abraham  had  two  fons,  the  one  by 
a  bond-maid,  the  other  by  a  free- 
woman.  But  he  who  was  of  the 
bond-woman  was  born  after  the 
flefti ;  but  he  of  the  free-woman 
was  by  promife.  Which  things  are 
an  allegoiy :  for  thefe  are  the  two 
covenants ;  the  one  from  the  mount 
Sinai,  which  gendereth  to  bondage, 
which  is  Agar.  For  this  Agar  is 
mount  Sinai  in  Arabia,  and  an- 
fwereth  to  Jerufalem  which  now 


is,  and  is  in  bondage  with  her 
children.  But  Jerufalem  which  is 
above  is  free ;  which  is  the  mother 
of  us  all.  For  it  is  written.  Rejoice, 
thou  barren  that  beareft  not ;  break 
forth  and  cry,  thou  that  travaileft 
not :  for  the  defolate  hath  many 
more  children  than  llie  which  hath 
ail  hulband.  Now  we,  brethren, 
as  Ifaac  was,  are  the  children  of 
promife.  But  as  then  he  that  was 
born  after  the  flefti  perfecuted  him 
that  was  born  after  the  Spirit ;  even 
fo  it  is  now.  Neverthelefs,  what 
faith  the  Scripture?  Caft  out  the 
bond- woman  and  her  fon ;  for  the 
fon  of  the  bond- woman  ftiall  not 
be  heir  with  the  fon  of  the  fi-ee- 
woman.  So  then,  brethren,  we  are 
not  children  of  the  bond-woman, 
but  of  the  free. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  John  vi.  1 . 

JESUS  went  over  the  fea  of  Ga- 
lilee, which  is  the  fea  of  Tibe- 
rias. And  a  great  multitude  fol- 
lowed him,  becaufe  they  faw  his 
miracles  which  he  did  on  them  that 
were  difeafed.  And  Jefus  went  up 
into  a  mountain,  and  there  he  fat 
with  his  difciples.  And  the  Pafl*- 
over,  a  feaft  of  the  Jews,  was  nigh. 
When  Jefus  then  lift  up  his  eyes, 
and  faw  a  great  company  come 
mito  him,  he  faith  unto  Philip, 
Whence  fliall  we  buy  bread,  that 
thefe  may  eat?  (And  this  he  faid 
to  prove  him ;  for  he  himfelf  knew 
what  he  would  do.)  Philip  anfwer- 


The  fifth  Sunday  in  Lent, 

ed  him,  Two  hundred  peny- worth 
of  bread  is  not  fufficient  for  them, 
that  every  one  of  them  may  take 
a  little.  One  of  his  difciples,  An- 
drew, Simon  Peter's  brother,  faith 
unto  him.  There  is  a  lad  here, 
w^hich  hath  five  barley  loaves,  and 
two  fniall  fillies :  but  what  are  they 
among  fo  many?  And  Jefus  faid. 
Make  the  men  fit  down.  Now 
there  was  much  grafs  in  the  place. 
So  the  men  fat  down,  in  number 
about  five  thoufand.  And  Jefus 
took  the  loaves,  and  when  he  had 
given  thanks  he  diftributed  to  the 
difciples,  and  the  difciples  to  them 
that  were  fet  do\vn ;  and  likewife  of 
the  fiflies  as  much  as  they  would. 
When  they  were  filled,  he  faid 
unto  his  difciples,  Gather  up  the 
fragments  that  remain,  that  no- 
thing be  loft.  Therefore  they  ga- 
thered them  together,  and  filled 
twelve  bafl^ets  with  the  fragments 
of  the  five  barley-loaves,  which  re- 
mained over  and  above  unto  them 
that  had  eaten.  Then  thofe  men, 
when  they  had  feen  the  miracle 
that  Jefus  did,  faid,  This  is  of  a 
truth  that  Prophet  thatlliould  come 
into  the  world. 


goodnefs  they  may  be  governed 
and  prefei-ved  evennore,  both  in 
body  and  foul ;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijile.    Heb.  ix.  11. 

CHRIST  being  come  an  High 
Prieft  of  good  things  to  come, 
by  a  greater  and  more  perfect  ta- 
bernacle, not  made  with  hands ; 
that  is  to  fay,  not  of  this  building; 
neither  by  the  blood  of  goats  and 
calves ;  but  by  his  own  blood  he 
entered  in  once  into  the  holy  place, 
having  obtained  eternal  redemp- 
tion for  us.  For  if  the  blood  of  bulls 
and  of  goats,  and  the  alhes  of  an 
heifer  fprinkling  the  unclean,  fanc- 
tifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flefli ; 
how  much  more  fliall  the  blood  of 
Chrift,  who,  through  the  eternal 
Spirit,  offered  himfelf  mdiout  fpot 
to  God,  purge  your  confcience  from 
dead  works  to  ferve  the  living  God? 
And  for  this  caufe  he  is  the  Me- 
diator of  the  new  teftament,  that 
by  means  of  death,  for  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  tranfgreflions  that  were 
under  the  fii-ft  teflament,  they 
which  are  called  might  receive  the 
promife  of  eternal  inheritance. 

The  Go/pel    St.  John  viii.  46. 
^,       .,  o      z      .    r  TESUS  faid.  Which  of  you  con- 

Theffth  Sundmj  m  Lent.  ^   vinceth  me  of  fm?  and  if  I  fay 

Tlie  Colledi.  the  trudi,  why  do  ye  not  believe 

WE  befeech  thee,   Almighty     me?  He  that  is  of  God  heareth 
God,  mercifully  to  look  up-     God's   words  ;    ye  therefore  hear 
on  thy  people ;  that  by  thy  gi'cat  |  diem  not,  becaufe  ye  are  not  of 


The  Sunday  neoct  before  E after. 


God.  Tlien  anfwered  die  Jews, 
and  Hiid  unto  him,  Say  we  not 
well,  that  thou  art  a  Samaritan, 
and  hall  a  devil?  Jefus  anfwered, 
1  have  not  a  devil ;  but  I  honour 
my  Father,  and  ye  do  diflionour 
me.  And  I  feek  not  mine  own 
glory ;  there  is  one  that  feeketh  and 
judgeth.  Verily,  verily,  I  fay  unto 
you.  If  a  man  keep  my  faying,  he 
fliall  never  fee  death.  Then  faid 
the  Jews  unto  him,  Now  we  know 
that  thou  haft  a  devil :  Abraham  is 
dead,  and  the  prophets ;  and  thou 
fayeft.  If  a  man  keep  my  faying, 
he  fliall  never  tafte  of  death.  Art 
thou  gi-eater  than  our  father  Abra- 
ham, which  is  dead?  and  the  pro- 
phets are  dead :  whom  makeft  thou 
thyfelf?  Jefus  anfwered,  If  I  ho- 
nour myfelf,  my  honour  is  nothing; 
it  is  my  Father  that  honoureth  me, 
of  whom  ye  fay,  that  he  is  your 
God:  yet  ye  have  not  known  him; 
but  I  know  him :  and  if  I  ftiould 
fay,  I  know  him  not,  I  fliall  be  a 
liar  like  unto  you ;  but  I  know  him, 
and  keep  his  faying.  Your  father 
Abraham  rejoiced  to  fee  my  day, 
and  he  faw  it,  and  was  glad.  Then 
faid  the  Jews  unto  him,  Thou  art 
not  yet  fifty  years  old,  and  haft 
thou  feeii  Abraham  ?  Jefus  faid  un- 
to them.  Verily,  verily,  I  fay  unto 
you,  before  Abraham  was,  I  am. 
Then  took  they  up  ftones  to  caft 
at  him:  but  Jefus  hid  himfelf,  and 
went  out  of  the  temple. 


The  Sunday  next  before  Eajler. 
The  ColleH. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
Gou,  who,  of  thy  tender  love 
towards  mankind,  haft  fent  thy 
Son,  our  Saviour  Jefus  Chrift,  to 
take  upon  him  our  flefli,  and  to 
fuffer  death  upon  the  crofs,  that 
all  mankind  fliould  follow  the  ex- 
ample of  his  great  humility ;  Mer- 
cifully grant,  that  we  may  both 
follow  the  example  of  his  patience, 
and  alfo  be  made  partakers  of  his 
refurre^tioii ;  through  the  fame  Je- 
fus Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijlle.  Phil.  ii.  5. 

LET  this  mind  be  in  you,  which 
was  alfo  in  Chrift  Jefus :  who, 
being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought 
it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with 
God ;  but  made  himfelf  of  no  re- 
putation, and  took  upon  him  the 
form  of  a  fervant,  and  was  made 
in  the  likenefs  of  men :  and  being 
found  in  fafliion  as  a  man,  he  hum- 
bled himfelf,  and  became  obedient 
unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the 
crofs.  Wherefore  God  alfo  hath 
highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him 
a  Name  which  is  above  every 
name ;  that  at  the  Name  of  Jefus 
every  knee  fliould  bow,  of  things 
in  heaven,  and  thing's  in  earth, 
and  things  under  the  earth;  and 
that  every  tongue  fliould  confefs 
that  Jefus  Chrift  is  Lord,  to  the 
glory  of  God  the  Father. 


The  Sunday  nex 

'Die  Go/pel.   St.  Mattli.  xx\ii.  1. 

WHEN  tlie  morning  was 
come,  all  the  chief  priefts 
and  elders  of  the  people  took  coiin- 
fel  againft  Jefus,  to  put  him  to 
death.  And  when  they  had  bound 
him,  they  led  him  away,  and  deli- 
vered him  to  Pontius  Pilate  the 
governour.  Then  Judas  who  had 
betrayed  him,  when  he  faw  that  he 
was  condemned,  repented  himfelf, 
and  brought  again  the  thirty  pieces 
of  lilver  to  the  chief  priefts  and 
elders,  faying,  I  have  finned,  in 
that  I  have  betrayed  the  innocent 
blood.  And  they  laid,  What  is  that 
to  us?  fee  thou  to  that.  And  he 
caft  down  the  pieces  of  filver  in 
the  temple,  and  departed,  and 
went  and  hanged  himfelf.  And 
the  chief  priefts  took  the  lilver 
pieces,  and  faid.  It  is  not  lawful  for 
to  put  them  into  the  treafury,  be- 
caide  it  is  the  price  of  blood.  And 
they  took  counfel,  and  bought  with 
them  the  potters  field,  to  bury 
ftrangers  in.  Wherefore  that  field 
was  called,  The  field  of  blood,  unto 
this  day.  (Then  was  fulfilled  that 
which  was  fpoken  by  Jeremy  the 
prophet,  faying,  And  they  took  the 
thirty  pieces  of  filver,  the  })rice  of 
him  that  was  valued,  whom  they 
of  the  children  of  Ifrael  did  value, 
and  gave  them  for  the  j)otter's  field, 
as  the  Lord  appointed  me*)  And 
.Jefus  ftood  l)efore  the  goveniourj 
and  tiie  governour  alkedjmuj  fay- 


t  before  Eajter. 

ing,  Art  thou  the  King  of  the 
Jews?  And  Jefus  faid  unto  him, 
Thou  fayeft.  And  when  he  was  ac- 
cufed  of  the  chief  priefts  and  eld- 
ers, he  anfwered  nothino;.  Then 
faith  Pilate  unto  him,  Heareft  thou 
not  how  many  things  they  witnefs 
againft  thee?  And  he  anfwered  him 
to  never  a  word,  infomuch  that 
the  governoiu"  marvelled  greatly. 
Now  at  that  feaft  the  governour 
was  wont  to  releafe  luito  the  peo- 
ple a  prifoner,  whom  they  would. 
And  they  had  then  a  notable  pri- 
foner, called  Barabbas.  Therefore 
when  they  were  gathered  together, 
Pilate  faid  vmto  thein,  Whom  will 
ye  that  I  releafe  unto  you?  Barab- 
bas, or  Jefus  which  is  called  Chrift? 
For  he  knew  that  for  en^y  they 
had  delivered  him.  When  he  was 
fet  down  on  the  judgement-feat, 
his  wife  fent  unto  him,  faying, 
Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  that 
juft  man :  for  I  have  fuftered  many 
things  this  day  in  a  dream  becaufe 
of  him.  But  the  chief  priefts  and 
elders  perfuaded  the  multitude  that 
they  fliould  aik  Barabbas,  and  de- 


ftroy  Jefus.  The  governour  an- 
fwered and  faid  unto  them,  Whe- 
ther of  the  twain  will  ve  that ,  jt 
releafe  unto  you?  They  faid,  B^f* 
rabbas.  Pilate  faith  unto  them, 
What  Ihall  1  do  then  with  Jefus, 
which  is  called  Chrift?  They  all 
fay  unto  him,  Let  him  be  crucified. 
iViid   the   gpvxjnioiu^  li^id,  .W^byjj 


The  Sunday  next  before  Eafier. 

what  evil  hath  he  clone?  But  they 
cried  out  the  more,  laying,  Let 
him  be  crucified.  When  Pilate 
faw  that  he  could  prevail  nothing, 
but  that  rather  a  tumult  was  made, 
he  took  water,  and  waflied  his  hands 
before  the  multitude,  faying,  I  am 


innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  juft 
perfon  :  fee  ye  to  it.  Then  anfwer- 
ed  all  the  people,  and  faid,  His 
blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our  chil- 
di*en.  Then  releafed  he  Barabbas 
unto  them:  and  when  he  had 
fcourged  Jefus  he  delivered  him 
to  be  crucified.  Then  the  foldiers 
of  the  goveniour  took  Jefus  into 
the  common  hall,  and  gathered  un- 
to him  the  whole  band  of  foldiers. 
And  they  ftripped  him,  and  put  on 
him  a  fcarlet  robe.  And  when  they 
had  platted  a  cro^vn  of  thorns  they 
put  it  upon  his  head,  and  a  reed 
in  his  right  hand :  and  they  bowed 
the  knee  before  him,  and  mocked 
him,  faying,  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews. 
And  they  fpit  upon  him,  and  took 
the  reed,  and  fmote  him  on  the 
head.  And  alter  that  they  had 
mocked  him  they  took  the  robe  off 
fi'om  him,  and  put  his  own  raiment 
on  him,  and  led  him  away  to  cru- 
cify him.  And  as  they  came  out 
they  found  a  man  of  Cyrene,  Si- 
mon by  name  ;  him  they  compel- 
led to  bear  his  crofs.  And  when 
they  were  come  unto  a  place  call- 
ed Golgotha,  that  is  to  fay,  a  place 
of  a  fcull,  they  gave  him  vinegar 


to  drink  mingled  with  gall :  and 
when  he  had  tailed  thereof,  he 
would  not  drink.  And  they  cruci- 
fied him,  and  parted  his  gannents, 
calling  lots :  that  it  might  be  ful- 
filled, which  was  fpoken  by  the 
prophet,  They  parted  my  garments 
among  them,  and  upon  my  veilure 
did  they  call  lots.  And  fitting  down 
they  watched  him  there ;  and  let 
up  over  his  head  his  accufation 
written,  THIS  IS  JESUS  THE 
KING  OF  THE  JEWS.  Then 
were  there  two  thieves  cmcified 
with  him ;  one  on  the  right  hand, 
and  another  on  the  left.  And  they 
that  paffed  by  reviled  him,  wagging 
their  heads,  and  faying.  Thou  that 
dellroyeft  the  temple,  and  build- 
eft  it  in  three  days,  fave  thyfelf : 
if  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come 
down  from  the  crofs.  Likewife 
alfo  the  chief  priefts  mocking  him, 
with  the  fcribes  and  elders,  faidy 
He  faved  others,  himfeif  he  cannot 
fave :  if  he  be  the  King  of  Ifrael, 
let  him  now  come  down  from  the 
crofs,  and  we  will  believe  liiniY 
He  trufted  in  God ;  let  him  deliver 
him  now,  if  he  will  have  him  :  for 
he  faid,  I  am  the  Son  of  God.  The 
thieves  alfo,  which  were  crucified 
with  him,  caft  the  fame  in  his  teeth.« 
Now  from  the  fixth  hour  there  was 
darknefs  over  all  the  land  unto  the 
ninth  hour.  And  about  the  ninth 
hour  Jefus  cried  with  a  loud  voice, 
faying,  £/?,  Eli,  lama  fabachthanii 


Monday  before  Eqfter. 


tFat  is  to  fay,  My  God,  my  God, 
why  haft  thou  forfaken  me?  Some 
of  them  that  flood  there,  when  they 
heard  that,  faid.  This  man  calleth 
for  EHas.  And  ftraightway  one  of 
them  ran,  and  took  a  fpunge,  and 
filled  it  with  \inegar,  and  put  it 
on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to  drink. 
The  reft  faid.  Let  be,  let  ns  fee 
whether  Elias  will  come  to  fave 
him.  Jefus,  when  he  had  cried 
again  with  a  loud  voice,  yielded 
up  the  ghoft.  And  behold,  the  vail 
of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain 
fi'om  the  top  to  the  bottom,  and 
the  earth  did  quake,  and  the  rocks 
rent,  and  the  graves  were  opened, 
and  many  bodies  of  faints  which 
flept  arofe,  and  came  out  of  the 
graves  after  his  refuiTe<5lion,  and 
went  into  the  holy  city,  and  ap- 
peared unto  many.  Now  when  the 
centurion,  and  they  that  were  with 
him,  watching  Jefus,  faw  the  earth- 
quake, and  thofe  things  that  were 
done,  they  feared  greatly,  faying, 
Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God. 

iL.^ 

Moitday  before  Tlajlcr. 
For  the  Kpijile.    Ifaiah  Ixiii.  1 . 

WHO  is  this  that  cometh  from 
Kdom,  with  dyed  garments 
from  Bozrah?  this  that  is  glorious 
in  his  apparel,  travelling  in  tlie 
greatnefs  of  his  ftrength?  1  that 
fpeak  in  righteoufnefs,  mighty  to 
fave.  Where^fore  art  thou  red  in 
thine  apparel,  and  thy  garments 


like  him  that  treadeth  in  the  wine- 
fat?  I  have  trodden  the  ^vine-prefs 
alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was 
none  with  me :  for  I  will  tread 
them  in  mine  anger,  and  trample 
them  in  my  fury,  and  their  blood 
(hall  be  fprinkled  upon  my  gar- 
ments, and  I  ^vill  ftain  all  my  rai- 
ment. For  the  day  of  vengeance 
is  in  mine  heart,  and  the  year  of 
my  redeemed  is  come.  And  I 
looked,  and  there  was  none  to  help; 
and  I  ^v^ondered  that  there  was 
none  to  uphold :  therefore  mine 
own  arm  brought  falvation  unto 
me,  and  my  fury  it  upheld  me. 
And  I  will  tread  doAvn  the  people 
in  mine  anger,  and  make  them 
drunk  in  my  fury,  and  I  will  bring 
do^vn  their  ftrength  to  the  earth. 
I  will  mention  the  loving-kindnefles 
of  the  Lord,  and  the  praifes  of  the 
Lord,  according  to  all  that  the 
I^ord  hath  beftowed  on  us,  and  the 
great  goodnefs  towards  the  houfe 
of  Ifrael,  which  he  hath  beftowed 
on  them,  according  to  his  mercies, 
and  according  to  the  multitude  of 
his  loving-kindneU'es.  For  he  faid. 
Surely  they  are  my  people,  children 
that  will  not  lie :  fo  he  was  their 
Saviour.  In  all  their  affli6tion  he 
was  afflicted,  and  the  angel  of  his 
prefence  faved  them  :  in  his  love, 
and  in  his  pity,  he  redeemed  them, 
and  he  bare  them,  and  carried  them 
all  the  days  of  old.  F>ut  they  re- 
belled, and  vexed  his  Holy  Spirit  ;• 


Monday  before  Eqfter. 


therefore  he  was  turned  to  be  their 
enemy,  and  he  fought  againft  them. 
Then  he  remembered  the  days  of 
old,  Mofes  and  his  people,  faying, 
Where  is  he  that  brought  them 
up  out  of  the  fea  with  the  fliepherd 
of  his  flock?  where  is  he  that  put 
his  Holy  Spirit  within  him?  that 
led  them  by  the  right  hand  of  Mo- 
fes, with  his  glorious  arm,  dividing 
the  water  before  them,  to  make 
himfelf  an  everlafting  Name?  that 
led  them  through  the  deep  as  an 
horfe  in  the  wildernefs,  that  they 
Ihould  not  ftumble?  As  a  beaft 
goeth  down  into  the  valley,  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  caufed  him  to 
reft :  fo  didft  thou  lead  thy  people, 
to  make  thyfelf  a  glorious  Name. 
Look  down  from  heaven,  and  be- 
hold from  the  habitation  of  thy 
holinefs,  and  of  thy  glory :  where 
is  thy  zeal,  and  thy  ftrength,  the 
founding  of  thy  bowels,  and  of  thy 
mercies  towards  me?  Are  they  re- 
ftrained?  Doubtlefs  thou  art  our 
Father,  though  Abraham  be  igno- 
rant of  us,  and  Ifrael  acknowledge 
us  not :  Thou,  O  Lord,  art  our 
Father,  our  Redeemer,  thy  Name 
is  from  everlafting.  O  Lord,  why 
haft  thou  made  us  to  eiT  from  thy 
ways?  and  hardened  our  hearts 
from  thy  fear?  Return  for  thy  fer- 
vants'  fake,  the  tribes  of  thine  in- 
heritance. The  people  of  thy  holi- 
nefs have  poffelfed  it  but  a  little 
while:  our  adverfaries  have  trod- 


den down  thy  fan61;uaiy.  We  are 
thine  :  thou  never  bareft  rule  over 
them  ;  they  were  not  called  by  thy 
Name. 

Jlic  Go/pel.    St.  Mark  xiv.  L 

AFTER  two  days  Avas  the  feaft 
of  the  Paffover,  and  of  unlea- 
vened bread :  and  the  chief  priefts 
and  the  fcribes  fought  how  they 
might  take  him  by  craft,  and  j^ut 
him  to  death.  But  they  faid,  Not  ' 
on  the  feaft-day,  left  there  be  an 
uproar  of  the  people.  And  being 
in  Bethany,  in  the  houfe  of  Simon 
the  leper,  as  he  fat  at  meat,  there 
came  a  woman  having  an  alabafter 
box  of  ointment  of  fpikenard,  veiy 
precious ;  and  flie  brake  the  box, 
and  poured  it  on  his  head.  And 
there  were  fome  that  had  indigna- 
tion within  themfelves,  and  faid, 
Why  was  this  wafte  of  the  ointment 
made  ?  for  it  mig-ht  have  been  fold 
for  more  than  three  hundred  pences 
and  have  been  given  to  the  poor; 
and  they  murmured  againft  her. 
And  Jefus  faid.  Let  her  alone ;  why 
trouble  ye  her?  ftie  hath  wrought 
a  good  work  on  me :  for  ye  have 
the  poor  with  you  always,  and 
whenfoever  ye  will  ye  may  do  them 
good;  but  me  ye  have  not  always. 
She  hath  done  what  ftie  could ;  flie 
is  come  aforehand  to  anoint  my 
body  to  the  bur^nng.  Verily  I  fay 
unto  you,  Wherefoever  this  Gofpel 
fliall  be  preached  throughout  the 
whole  world,  this  alfo  that  ihe  hath 


"   a.5.  ^^/.AA    Sr-'    i 


■J 

done  ftiall  be  fpoken  of  for  a  me- 
morial of  lier.  And  Judas  Ifcaiiot, 
one  of  the  twelve,  went  unto  the 
chief  priefts  to  betray  him  unto 
them.  And  when  they  heard  it 
*they  were  glad,  and  promifed  to 
give  him  money.  And  he  fought 
liow  he  might  conveniently  betray 
bim.  And  the  firft  day  of  unlea- 
vened bread,  when  they  killed  the 
pafTover,  his  difciples  faid  unto  him, 
Where  wilt  thou  that  we, go  and 
prepare,  that  thou  mayeft  eat  the 
paflbver?  And  he  fendeth  forth 
two  of  his  difciples,  and  faith  unto 
them,  Go  ye  into  the  city,  and  there 
fball  meet  you  a  man  bearing  a 
pitcher  of  water;  follow  him:  And 
wherefoever  he  Ihall  go  in,  fay  ye 
to  the  good-man  of  the  houfe.  The 
Matter  faith,  Where  is  the  gueft- 
chamber,  where  I  Ihall  eat  the  paff- 
over  with  my  difciples?  And  he 
will  fliew  you  a  large  upper  room 
furnilhed,  and  prepared :  there 
make  ready  for  us.  And  his  dif- 
ciples went  forth,  and  came  into 
the  city,  and  found  as  he  had  faid 
unto  them :  and  they  made  ready 
the  paflbver.  And  in  the  evening 
he  Cometh  with  the  twelve.  And 
as  they  fat,  and  did  eat,  Jefus  faid, 
Verily  I  fay  unto  you.  One  of  you 
which  eateth  with  me  fliall  betray 
me.  And  they  began  to  be  for- 
rowful,  and  to  fay  unto  him  one 
by  one,  Is  it  I  ?  and  another  faid, 
Is  it  I?  And  he  anfvvered  and  faid 


Moiiday  before  Eqfter. 

umo  them,  It  is  one  of  the  twelve 
that  dippeth  with  me  in  the  difli. 
The  Son  of  Man  indeed  goeth,  as 
it  is  ^\Titten  of  him :  but  avo  to  that 
man  by  whom  the  Son  of  Man  is 
betrayed:  good  were  it  for  that 
man  if  he  had  never  been  born. 
And  as  they  did  eat,  Jefus  took 
bread,  and  blefled,  and  brake  it, 
and  gave  to  them,  and  faid.  Take, 
eat :  this  is  my  body.  And  he  took 
the  cupj  and  when  he  had  given 
thanks  he  gave  it  to  them :  and  they 
all  drank  of  it.  And  he  faid  imto 
them.  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new 
teftament,  which  is  flied  for  many. 
Verily  I  fay  unto  you,  I  will  drink 
no  more  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine, 
until  that  day  that  I  drink  it  new 
in  the  Kingdom  of  God.  And 
when  they  had  fung  an  hymn  they 
went  out  into  the  mount  of  Olives, 
And  Jefus  faith  unto  them,  All  ye 
fliall  be  offended  becaufe  of  me 
this  night:  for  it  is  ^vi'itten,  I  will 
finite  the  fliepherd,  and  the  flieep 
fliall  be  fcattered.  But,  after  that 
I  am  rifen  I  will  go  before  you  in- 
to Galilee.  But  Peter  faid  unto 
him.  Although  all  fliall  be  ott'end- 
ed,  yet  will  not  I.  And  Jefus  faith 
unto  him.  Verily  I  fay  unto  thee, 
That  this  day,  even  in  this  night, 
before  the  cock  crow  twice,  thou 
flialt  deny  me  thrice.  But  he  fpake 
the  more  vehemently.  If  1  fliould 
die  with  thee,  I  will  not  deny  thee 
in  any  wife.     Like  wife   alfo  faid 


i 


Monday  before  Eajier. 


they  all.  And  they  came  to  a  place 
which  was  named  Gethfemane:  and 
he  faith  to  his  difciples,  Sit  ye  here, 
while  I  fliall  pray.  And  he  taketh 
with  him  Peter,  and  James,  and 
John,  and  began  to  be  fore  amaz- 
ed, and  to  be  very  heavy,  and  faith 
unto  them,  My  foul  is  exceeding 
forrowful  unto  death ;  tarry  ye  here, 
and  watch.  And  he  went  forward 
a  little,  and  fell  on  the  ground,  and 
prayed,  that,  if  it  were  poffible,  the 
hour  might  pafs  from  him.  And 
he  faid,  Abba,  Father,  all  things 
are  poffible  unto  thee;  take  away 
this  cup  from  me ;  neverthelefs,  not 
what  I  will,  but  what  thou  wilt. 
And  he  cometh  and  findeth  them 
fleeping,  and  faith  unto  Peter,  Si- 
mon, fleepeft  thou?  eouldeft;  not 
thou  watch  one  hour?  Watch  ye 
and  pray,  left  ye  enter  into  tempta- 
tion :  the  fpuit  tinily  is  ready,  but 
the  flelh  is  weak.  And  again  he 
went  away,  and  prayed,  and  fpake 
the  fame  words.  And  when  he 
returned  he  found  them  afleep  a- 
gain,  (for  their  eyes  were  heavy,) 
neither  wift  they  what  to  anl^ver 
him.  And  he  cometh  the  third 
time,  and  faith  unto  them.  Sleep 
on  now,  and  take  your  reft :  it  is 
enough,  the  hour  is  come ;  behold, 
the  Son  of  Man  is  betmyed  into 
the  hands  of  finners.  Rife  up,  let 
us  go ;  lo,  he  that  beti'ayeth  me  is 
at  hand.  And  immediately,  while 
h^  yet  fpake,  cometh  Judas,  bne  of 


the  twelve,  and  with  him  a  great 
multitude  with  fwords  and  ftaves, 
from  the  chief  priefts,  and  the 
fcribes,  and  the  elders.  And  he 
that  betrayed  him  had  given  them 
a  token,  faying,  Whomfoever  I 
ftiall  kifs,  that  fame  is  he ;  take 
him,  and  lead  him  away  fafely. 
And  as  foon  as  he  was  come  he 
goeth  ftraightway  to  him,  and  faith, 
M after,  matter;  and  killed  him. 
And  they  laid  their  hands  on  him, 
and  took  him.  And  one  of  them 
that  ftood  by  drew  a  fword,  and 
fmote  a  fervant  of  the  high  prieft, 
and  cut  off  his  ear.  And  Jefus 
anfwered,  and  faid  unto  them,  Are 
ye  come  out  as  againft  a  thief,  with 
fwords  and  with  ftaves,  to  take  me? 
I  was  daily  with  you  in  the  temple 
teaching,  and  ye  took  me' not:  but 
the  Scriptures  muft  be  fulfilled,^ 
And  they  all  foi-fook  him,  and  fled. 
And  there  followed  him  a  certain 
young  man,  having  a  linen  cloth 
caft  about  his  naked  body ;  and 
the  young  men  laid  hold  on  him : 
and  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  and 
fled  from  them  naked.  And  they 
led  Jefus  away  to  the  high  prieft :; 
and  with  him  were  affembled  all 
the  chief  priefts,  and  the  elders^ 
and  the  fcribes.  And  Peter  fol-„ 
lowed  him  afar  off,  even  into  the!!, 
palace  of  the  high  prieft ;  and  he 
fat  with  the  fervants,  and  warmed, 
himfelf  at  the  fire.  And  the  chief 
prieftiS  and  all  the  council  fougiit 


Tiiefday  before  Eajler. 


for  Avitnefs  againft  Jefus  to  put  liim 
to  death  ;  and  found  none.  For 
many  bare  falfe  ^vitnefs  againft 
him,  but  their  ^vitnefs  agreed  not 
together.  And  there  arofe  cer- 
tain, and  bare  falfe  witnefs  againft 
him,  faying,  We  heard  liim  fay,  I 
will  deftroy  this  temple  that  is 
made  with  hands,  and  mthin  three 
days  I  will  build  another  made 
without  hands.  But  neither  fo  did 
their  witnefs  agree  together.  And 
the  high  prieftftood  up  in  themidft, 
and  alked  Jefus,  faying,  Anfwereft 
thou  nothing?  what  is  it  which 
thefe  ^vitnefs  againft  thee  ?  But  he 
held  his  peace,  and  anfwered  no- 
thmg.  Again  the  high  prieft  alk- 
ed him,  and  faid  unto  him,  Art 
thou  the  Chrift,  the  Son  of  the 
Bleflfed  ? '  And  Jefus  faid,  I  am ; 
and  ye  fliall  fee  the  Son  of  Man 
fitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power, 
and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  hea- 
ven. Then  the  high  jjrieft  rent 
his  clothes,  and  faith,  What  need 
we  any  further  witnefles?  ye  have 
heard  the  blafphemy :  what  think 
ye?  And  they  all  condemned  him 
to  be  guilty  of  death.  And  fome 
began  to  fpit  on  him,  and  to  cover 
his  face,  and  to  buftet  him,  and  to  fay 
unto  him,  Prophefy  :  and  the  fer- 
vants  did  ftrike  him  with  the  palms 
of  their  hands.  And  as  Peter  was 
beneath  in  the  palace  there  com- 
eth  one  of  the  maids  of  the  high 
prieft;    and  when  ftie  faw  Peter 


warming  himfelf  ftie  looked  upon 
him,  and  faid.  And  thou  alfo  waft 
with  Jefus  of  Nazareth.  But  he 
denied,  faying,  I  know  not,  neither 
imderftand  I  what  thou  fayeft.  And 
he  went  out  into  the  porch ;  and 
the  cock  crew.  And  a  maid  faw 
him  again,  and  began  to  fay  to 
them  that  ftood  by.  This  is  one  of 
them.  And  he  denied  it  ag^ain. 
And  a  little  after,  they  that  ftood 
by  faid  again  to  Peter,  Surely  thou 
art  one  of  them ;  for  thou  art  a 
Galilean,  and  thy  fpeech  agreeth 
thereto.  But  he  began  to  curfe 
and  to  fwear,  faying,  I  know  not 
this  man  of  whom  ye  fpeak.  And 
the  fecond  time  the  cock  crew. 
And  Peter  called  to  mind  the  word 
that  Jefus  faid  unto  him.  Before 
the  cock  crow  twice,  thou  flialt 
deny  me  thrice.  And  when  he 
thought  thereon,  he  wept. 

Tnefday  before  Eajler. 
For  the  Epiftle.    Ifaiah  1.  5. 

THE  Lord  God  hath  opened 
mine  ear,  and  I  was  not  re- 
bellious, neither  turned  away  back. 
I  gave  my  back  to  the  fmiters, 
and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  pluck- 
ed oft*  the  hair  :  I  hid  not  my  face 
from  flianie  and  fpitting.  For  the 
Lord  God  will  help  me,  tlierefore 
fhall  I  not  be  confounded :  there- 
fore have  I  fet  my  face  like  a  flint, 
and  I  know  that  I  (hall  not  be 
afliamed.   He  is  near  that  juftifieth 


Titefday  before  Eajler. 


me;  who  will  contend  with  me? 
Let  us  ftand  together ;  who  is  mine 
adverfaiy?  let  him  come  near  to 
me.  Behold,  the  Lord  God  will 
help  me ;  who  is  he  that  fliall  con- 
demn me?  Lo,  they  all  fliall  wax 
old  as  a  garment :  the  moth  fliall 
eat  them  up.  Who  is  among  you 
that  feareth  the  Lord,  that  obeyeth 
the  voice  of  his  fervant,  that  walk- 
eth  in  darknefs,  and  hath  no  light? 
let  him  trufl;  in  the  Name  of  the 
Lord,  and  fl;ay  upon  his  God. 
Behold,  all  ye  that  kindle  a  fire, 
that  compafs  yourfelves  about  with 
fparks;  walk  in  the  light  of  your 
fire,  and  in  the  fparks  that  ye  have 
kindled.  This  fliall  ye  have  of 
mine  hand,  ye  fliall  lie  do^vn  in 
forrow. 

TJie  Gofpel.    St.  Mark  xv.  L 

AND  ftraightway  in  the  morn- 
ing the  chief  priefi;s  held  a 
confultation  with  the  elders,  and 
fcribes,  and  the  whole  council,  and 
bound  Jefus,  and  carried  him  away, 
and  delivered  him  to  Pilate.  And 
Pilate  aflved  him,  Art  thou  the  King 
of  the  Jews?  And  he  anfwering 
faid  unto  him,  Thou  fayefl;  it.  And 
the  chief  priefl;s  accufed  him  of 
many  things :  but  he  anfwered  no- 
thing. And  Pilate  aflved  him  again, 
faying,  Anfwerefl;  thou  nothing? 
behold  how  many  things  they  wit- 
nefs  againil  thee.  But  Jefus  yet 
anfwered  nothing:  fo  that  Pilate 
marvelled.     Now  at  that  feaft  he 


releafed  unto  them  one  prifoner, 
whomfoever    they   defired.     And 
there  was  one  named  Barabbas, 
which  lay  bound  with  them  that 
had  made  infurre^tion  with  him, 
who  had  committed  murder  in  the 
infurre^lion.    And  the  multitude, 
ciying  aloud,  began  to  defire  him 
to  do  as  he  had  ever  done  unto 
them.    But  Pilate  anfwered  them, 
faying.  Will  ye  that  I  releafe  unto 
you  the  King  of  the  Jews?  For  he 
knew  that  the  chief  priefl;s  had  de-i 
livered  him  for  envy.  But  the  chief 
priefts  moved  the  people,  that  he 
fliould  rather  releafe  Barabbas  un- 
to them.     And  Pilate  anfwered, 
and  faid  again  unto  them,  Wliat 
will  ye  then  that  I  fliall  do  unto 
him  whom  ye  call  the  King  of  the 
Jews?  And  they  cried  out  again. 
Crucify  him.  Then  Pilate  faid  unto 
them.   Why,   what  evil   hath    he 
done?  And  they  cried  out  the  more 
exceedingly.  Crucify  him.    And  fo 
Pilate,  willing  to  content  the  peo- 
ple, releafed  Barabbas  unto  them; 
and  delivered  Jefus,  when  he  had 
fcourged  him,  to  be  crucified.  And 
the  foldiers  led  him  away  into  the 
hall,  called  Pra^torium;  and  they 
call  together  the  whole  band.  And 
they  clothed  him  with  purple,  and 
platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put 
it  about  his  head :  and  began  to 
falute  him.  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews. 
And  they  fmote  him  on  the  lieac^ 
with  a  reed,  and  did  fpit  upon  him, 
O 


and  bowing  their  knees  worfliip- 
ped  him.  And  when  they  had 
mocked  him  they  took  off  the  pur- 
ple firom  him,  and  put  his  own 
clothes  on  him,  and  led  him  out  to 
crucify  him.  And  they  compel  one 
Simon  a  Cyrenian,  who  palled  by, 
coming  out  of  the  countiy,  the  fa- 
ther of  Alexander  and  Rufus,  to 
bear  his  crofs.  And  they  bring 
him  unto  the  place  Golgotha,  wliich 
is,  being  interpreted,  The  place  of 
a  fcuU.  And  they  gave  him  to 
drink  wine  mingled  with  myrrh ; 
but  he  received  it  not.  And  when 
they  had  crucified  him  they  part- 
ed his  garments,  calling  lots  upon 
them,  what  every  man  fhould  take. 
And  it  was  the  third  hoiu',  and  they 
crucified  him.  And  the  fuperfcrip- 
tion  of  his  accufation  was  written 
over,  THE  KING  OF  THE 
iJEWS.  And  with  liim  they  cru- 
bify  two  thieves,  the  one  on  his 
right  hand,  and  the  other  on  his 
left.  And  the  fcripture  was  ful- 
filled, which  faith.  And  he  was 
numbered  with  the  tranfgreHbrs. 
And  they  that  ijall'ed  by  railed  on 
him,  wagging  their  heads,  and  fay- 
ing, Ah,  thou  that  deftroyeft  the 
temple,  and  buildell  it  in  three 
days,  fave  thyfelf,  and  come  down 
from  the  crols.  Likewifc  alfo  the 
chief  priefls  mocking  faid  among 
themfelves,  with  the  fcribes,  He 
faved  others ;  himfelf  he  cannot 
fave.     Let  Chrill  the  King  of  If- 


Wednefday  before  Eqfter. 

rael  defcend  now  from  the  crofs, 
that  we  may  fee  and  believe.  And 
they  that  were  crucified  Avith  him 
reviled  him.  And  when  the  fixth 
hour  was  come,  there  was  dark- 
nefs  over  the  whole  land  until  the 
ninth  hour.  And  at  the  ninth  hour 
Jefus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  fay- 
ing, Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  fahachthwii  ? 
which  is,  being  interpreted,  My 
God,  my  God,  why  haft  thou  for- 
faken  me?  And  fome  of  them  that 
ftood  by,  when  they  heard  it,  faid. 
Behold,  he  calleth  Elias.  And  one 
ran  and  filled  a  fpunge  full  of  \'ine- 
gar,  and  put  it  on  a  reed,  and  gave 
him  to  drink,  faying.  Let  alone ; 
let  us  fee  whether  Elias  will  come 
to  take  him  down.  And  Jefus 
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  gave 
up  the  ghoft.  And  the  vail  of  the 
temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the 
top  to  the  bottom.  And  when  the 
centurion,  which  ftood  over  againft 
him,  faw  that  he  fo  cried  out,  and 
gave  up  the  ghoft,  he  faid,  IVuly 
this  man  was  the  Son  of  God. 


Wednefday  before  Eajfet\ 
The  Epiftle.  Hebrews  ix.  16.  i 
HERE  a  teftament  is,  there 
mull  alfo  of  neceflity  be  the 
death  bf  the  teftator:  for  a  tefta- 
ment is  of  force  after  men  are  dead; 
otherwifc  it  is  of  no  ftreno-th  at  all 
whilft  the  teftator  liveth.  Where- 
upon, neither  the  firft  teftament 
was  dedicated  Avithout  blood:  for 


when  Mofes  had  fpokeii  every  pre- 
cept to  all  the  people,  according 
to  the  law,  he  took  the  blood  of 
calves  and  of  goats,  with  water, 
and  fcarlet  wool,  and  hyfi'op,  and 
fprinkled  both  the  book,  and  all  the 
people,  faying,  This  is  the  blood 
of  the  teilanient,  which  God  hath 
enjoined  unto  you.  Moreover,  he 
fprinkled  with  blood  both  the  ta- 
bernacle, and  all  the  velfels  of  the 
miniftry.  And  ahnoll  all  things  are 
by  the  law  purged  with  blood ;  and 
without  fliedding  of  blood  is  no 
remiffion.  It  was  therefore  necef- 
fary  that  the  patterns  of  things  in 
the  heavens  fliould  be  purified  with 
thefe ;  but  the  heavenly  things 
themfelves  with  better  facrifices 
than  thefe.  For  Chrift  is  not  en- 
tered into  the  holy  places  made 
with  hands,  which  are  the  figures 
of  the  true,  but  into  heaven  itfelf, 
now  to  appear  in  the  prefence  of 
God  for  us ;  nor  yet  that  he  ftiould 
offer  himfelf  often,  as  the  high 
prieft  entereth  into  the  holy  place 
eveiy  year  with  blood  of  others  : 
for  then  mull  he  often  have  fuftered 
fince  the  foundation  of  the  world ; 
but  now  once  in  the  end  of  the 
world  hath  he  appeared  to  put  a- 
way  fin  by  the  facrifice  of  himfelf 
And  as  it  is  appointed  unto  men 
once  to  die,  but  after  this  the 
judgement :  fo  Chrift  was  once  of- 
fered to  bear  the  fins  of  many; 
^nd  unto  them  that  look  for  him 


Wcdiiefday  before  Eafid7\ 

fhall  he  appear  the  fecond  time 

without  fin  iHito  falvation.         />3q 

The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  xxii.  1.    r 

NOW  the  feaft  of  unleavened 
br 


ead  drew  nigh,  which  is 
called  the  Palfover.  And  the  chief 
priefts  and  fcribes  fought  how  they 
might  kill  him ;  for  thev  feared  the 
people.  Then  entered  Satan  into 
Judas  furnanied  Ifcariot,  being  of 
the  number  of  the  twelve.  And 
he  went  his  way,  and  commmied 
with  the  chief  priefts  and  captains, 
how  he  mifjht  betrav  him  unto 
them.  And  they  were  glad,  and 
covenanted  to  give  hmi  money. 
And  he  promifed,  and  fought  op?- 
portunity  to  betray  him  unto  them 
in  the  abfence  of  the  multitude. 
Then  came  the  day  of  unleavened 
bread,  when  the  paflbver  muft  be 
killed.  And  he  fent  Peter  and 
John,  faying.  Go  and  prepare  us 
the  paflbver,  that  we  may  eat.  Aiid 
they  faid  unto  him,  Where  wilt 
thou  that  we  prepare?  And  he  faid 
unto  them,  Behold,  when  ye  are 
entered  into  the  city,  there  ihall  a 
man  meet  you,  bearing  a  pitcher 
of  water;  follow  him  into  the  houfe 
where  he  entereth  in.  And  ye  Ihall 
fay  unto  the  good-man  of  the  houfe, 
The  Mafter  faith  unto  thee,  Where 
is  the  gueft-chamber,  where  I  fliall 
eat  the  paflbver  with  my  difciples? 
And  he  fliall  (hew  you  a  large 
upper  room  fumiflied ;  there  make 
ready.  And  they  went,  and  found 
Oa 


Wednefday  before  Eafier. 

as  he  had  faid  unto  them  :  and  they 
made  ready  the  pailbver.  And 
when  the  hour  was  come  he  fat 
down,  and  the  twelve  Ajjoltles  with 
him.  And  he  faid  unto  them,  With 
delire  I  have  deiired  to  eat  this 
palfover  with  yo"  before  1  fuflfer : 
for  I  fay  unto  you,  I  will  not  any 
more  eat  thereof,  until  it  be  fulfil- 
led in  the  Kingdom  of  God.  And 
he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks, 
and  faid,  Take  this,  and  divide  it 
among"  yourfelves.  For  I  fay  unto 
you,  I  will  not  drink  of  the  fruit 


of  the  vine,  until  the  Kingdom  of 
God  fhall  come.  And  he  took 
bread,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake 
it,  and  gave  unto  them,  faying.  This 
is  my  body,  which  is  given  for  you : 
this  do  in  remembrance  of  me. 
Like\^'ife  alfo  the  cup  after  fupper, 
faying,  This  cup  is  the  new  tella- 
ment  in  my  blood,  which  is  flied 
for  you.  But  behold,  the  hand  of 
him  that  betrayeth  me  is  with  me 
on  the  table.  And  tnily  the  Son 
of  Man  goeth  as  it  was  determined; 
but  wo  imto  that  man  by  whom 
he  is  betrayed.  And  tliev  bec^an  to 
enquire  among  themfelves,  which 
of  them  it  was  that  fliould  do  this 
thing.  And  there  was  alfo  a  ftrife 
among  them,  which  of  them  flioukl 
be  accounted  the  j^reatell.  And 
lie  faid  unto  them,  '\\\v  kinus  of 
the  Gentiles  exercife  lordfliip  over 
them,  and  they  that  exercilb  au- 
thority upon  them  are  called  bene- 


fablors.  But  ye  fliall  not  be  fo : 
but  he  that  is  greateft  among  you, 
let  him  be  as  the  younger;  and 
he  that  is  chief,  as  he  that  doth 
fei-ve.  For  whether  is  greater,  he 
that  fitteth  at  meat,  or  he  that 
ferveth?  is  not  he  that  fitteth  at 
meat?  but  I  am  among  you  as  he 
that  ferveth.  Ye  are  they  which 
have  continued  with  me  in  my 
temptations.  And  I  appoint  unto 
you  a  kingdom,  as  my  Father  hath 
appointed  unto  me ;  that  ye  may 
eat  and  drink  at  my  table  in  my 
kingdom,  and  fit  on  thrones,  judg- 
ing the  twelve  tribes  of  Ifrael. 
And  the  Lord  faid,  Simon,  Simon, 
behold,  Satan  hath  defired  to  have 
you,  that  he  may  fift  you  as  wheat : 
but  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that 
thy  faith  fail  not ;  and  when  thou 
art  converted,  llrengthen  thy  bre- 
thren. And  he  faid  unto  him. 
Lord,  I  am  ready  to  go  with  thee 
both  into  prifon  and  to  death.  And 
he  faid,  I  tell  thee,  Peter,  the  cock 
fliall  not  crow  this  day,  before  that 
thou  (lialt  thrice  deny  that  thou 
knoweft  me.  And  he  laid  unto 
them.  When  I  fent  you  without 
purfe,  and  fcrip,  and  Ihoes,  lacked 
ye  any  thing?  And  tliey  faid.  No- 
thing. Then  faid  he  unto  them. 
But  now,  he  that  hath  a  pui-fe,  let 
him  take  it,  and  likewife  his  fcrip: 
and  he  that  hatli  no  Iword,  let  him 
fell  his  garment,  and  buy  one.  For 
1  fay  unto  you.  That  this  that  is 


Wedyiefday  before  Eafier, 


written  miift  yet  be  acconi])li(lied 
in  nie,  And  he  was  reckoned  anionj^ 


the   tranfgreflbrs :   for  tlie 


things 


concerning  me  have  an  end.  And 
they  faid,  Lord,  behohl,  here  are 
two  fwords.  And  he  faid  unto 
them,  It  is  enough.  And  he  came 
out,  and  went,  as  he  was  wont,  to 
the  mount  of  OHves,  and  his  difci- 
ples  alfo  followed  him.  And  when 
he  was  at  the  place,  he  faid  unto 
them.  Pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into 
temptation .  And  he  was  Avithdrawn 
from  them  about  a  ftone's  caft,  and 
kneeled  down  and  prayed,  faying, 
Father,  if  thou  be  willing,  remove 
this  cup  from  me :  neverthelefs, 
not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done. 
And  there  appeared  an  angel  unto 
him  fi'om  heaven,  ftrengthening 
him.  And  being  in  an  agony,  he 
prayed  more  earaeftly ;  and  his 
fweat  was  as  it  were  great  drops  of 
blood  falling  down  to  the  ground. 
And  when  he  rofe  up  from  prayer, 
and  was  come  to  his  difciples,  he 
found  them  fleeping-  for  forrow, 
and  faid  unto  them,  Why  fleep  ye? 
rife  and  pray,  left  ye  enter  into 
temptation.  And  while  he  yet 
fpake,  behold,  a  multitude,  and  he 
that  was  called  Judas,  one  of  the 
twelve,  went  before  them,  and 
drew  near  unto  Jefus  to  kifs  him. 
But  Jefus  faid  unto  him,  Judas, 
betrayeft  thou  the  Son  of  Man  with 
a  kifs?  When  they  who  were  a- 
bout  him  faw  what  would  follow. 


they  faid  imto  him,  Lord,  fliall  we 
finite  with  the  fword?  And  one  of 
them  fmote  the  fei*vant  of  the  hio-h 
prieft,  and  cut  off  his  right  ear. 
And  Jefus  anfwcred  and  i'aid,  Suf- 
fer ye  thus  far.  And  he  touched 
his  ear,  and  healed  him.  llien 
Jefus  faid  unto  the  chief  ])riefts, 
and  captains  of  the  temple,  and 
the  elders  who  were  come  to  him, 
Be  ye  come  out  as  againft  a  thief, 
with  fwords  and  ftaves?  When  I 
was  daily  with  you  in  the  temple, 
ye  ftretched  forth  no  hands  againft 
me  :  but  this  is  your  hour,  and  the 
power  of  darknefs.  Then  took  they 
him,  and  led  him,  and  brought  him 
into  the  high  prieft's  houfe :  and 
Peter  followed  afar  oft'.  And  when 
they  had  kindled  a  fire  in  the  midft 
of  the  hall,  and  were  fet  down  to- 
gether, Peter  fat  down  among  them. 
But  a  certain  maid  beheld  him,  as 
he  fat  by  the  fire,  and  earneftly 
looked  upon  him,  and  faid,  This 
man  was  alfo  with  him.  And  he 
denied  him,  faying,  Woman,  I 
know  him  not.  And  after  a  little 
while  another  faw  him,  and  faid, 
Thou  art  alfo  of  them.  And  Peter 
faid,  Man,  I  am  not.  And  about 
the  fpace  of  one  hour  after,  another 
confidently  affirmed,  faying.  Of  a 
truth  this  fellow  alfo  was  with  him ; 
for  he  is  a  Galilean.  And  Peter 
faid,  Man,  I  know  not  what  thou 
fayeft.  And  immediately,  while  he 
yet  fpake,  the  cock  crew.   And  the 


Thurfday 

Lord  turned,  and  looked  upon 
Peter;  and  Peter  remembered  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  how  he  had  faid 
unto  him.  Before  the  cock  crow, 
thou  flialt  deny  me  thrice.  And 
Peter  went  out,  and  wept  bit- 
terly. And  the  men  that  held  Je- 
fus  mocked  liim,  and  fmote  him. 
And  when  they  had  bhndfolded 
him,  they  ftruck  him  on  the  face, 
find  afked  him,  faying,  Prophefy, 
who  is  it  that  fmote  thee?  And 
many  other  things  blafphemouily 
fpake  they  againil  him.  And  as 
foon  as  it  was  day,  the  elders  of 
the  people,  and  the  chief  pnefts, 
and  the  fciibes,  came  together,  and 
led  him  into  their  council,  faying, 
Art  thou  the  Chrift?  tell  us.  And 
he  faid  unto  them.  If  I  tell  you,  ye 
will  not  believe :  and  if  I  alfo  alk 
you,  ye  will  not  anfwer  me,  nor  let 
me  go.  Hereafter  fliall  the  Son  of 
Man  fit  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
power  of  God.  Then  faid  they  all. 
Art  thou  then  the  Son  of  God? 
And  he  faid  unto  them.  Ye  fay 
that  I  am.  And  they  faid,  What 
need  we  any  furtlier  witnefs  ?  for 
we  ourfelves  have  heard  of  his  OAvn 
mouth. 

Tlmr/'daj/  before  Kajfer. 
The  Kpljlle.    1  Cor.  xi.  17. 

IN  this  that  I  declare  unto  you, 
I  ))raife  you  not ;  that  ye  come 
together  not  for  the  better,  but  for 
the  worfe.    For  firll  of  all,  when 


efomMafier. 

ye  come  together  in  the  church,  I 
hear  that  there  be  divifions  among 
you,  and  I  partly  believe  it.  For 
there  muft  be  alfo  herefies  among 
you,  that  they  who  are  approved 
mav  be  made  manifeft  among-  vou. 
When  ye  come  together  therefore 
into  one  place,  this  is  not  to  eat 
the  Lord's  fupj)er :  for  in  eating 
eveiy  one  taketh  before  other  his 
own  flipper ;  and  one  is  hungry, 
and  another  is  drunken.  What, 
have  ye  not  houfes  to  eat  and  to 
drink  in?  or  defpife  ye  the  church 
of  God,  and  lliame  them  that  have 
not?  What  (hall  I  fay  to  yon?  fliall 
I  praife  you  in  this?  I  praife  you 
not.  For  I  have  received  of  the 
Lord  that  which  alfo  I  delivered 
unto  you,  Tliat  the  Lord  Jefus,  the 
fame  night  in  which  he  was  be- 
trayed, took  bread;  and  when  he 
had  given  thanks,  he  brake  it,  and 
faid,  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body, 
which  is  broken  for  you :  this  do 
in  remembrance  of  me.  After  the 
fame  manner  alfo  he  took  the  cup, 
when  he  had  fupped,  faying,  This 
cup  is  the  new  teft anient  in  my 
blood :  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink 
it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  For  as 
often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and 
drink  this  cup,  ye  do  fliew  the 
Lord's  death  till  he  come.  Where-* 
fore,  whofoever  fliall  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  this  cup  of  the  Lord, 
unworthily,  fliall  be  guilty  of  the 
body  and  blood  of  the  Lord.    But 


Thurjilay  before  JEaficr. 


let  a  man  examine  himfelf,  and 
fo  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and 
drink  of  that  cup.  For  he  that 
eateth  and  drinketh  unworthily 
eateth  and  drinketh  damnation  to 
himfelf,  not  difcerning  the  Lord's 
body.  For  this  caufe  many  are 
weak  and  fickly  among  you,  and 
many  fleep.  For  if  we  would  judge 
ourfelves,  we  Ihould  not  be  judg- 
ed. But  when  we  are  judged,  we 
are  chaftened  of  the  Lord,  that 
we  fliould  not  be  condemned  with 
the  world.  Wherefore,  my  bre- 
thren, when  ye  come  together  to 
eat,  tariy  one  for  another.  And  if 
any  man  hunger,  let  him  eat  at 
home ;  that  ye  come  not  together 
unto  condemnation.  And  the  reft 
will  I  fet  in  order  when  I  come. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  xxiii.  1. 

THE  whole  multitude  of  them 
arofe,  and  led  him  unto  Pilate. 
And  they  began  to  accufe  him, 
faying.  We  found  this  fellow  per- 
verting the  nation,  and  forbidding 
to  give  tribute  to  Caefar,  faying. 
That  he  himfelf  is  Chrift  a  King. 
And  Pilate  alked  him,  faying,  Art 
thou  the  King  of  the  Jews  ?  And 
he  anfwered  him,  and  faid.  Thou 
fayeft  it.  Then  faid  Pilate  to  the 
chief  priefts,  and  to  the  people,  I 
find  no  fault  in  this  man.  And 
they  were  the  more  fierce,  faying, 
He  ftureth  up  the  people,  teaching 
throughout  all  Jewry,  beginning 
fi-om  Galilee  to  this  place.    When 


Pilate  heard  of  Galilee,  he  alked 
whether  the  man  were  a  Galilean. 
And  as  foon  as  he  knew  that  he 
belonged  unto  Herod's  jurifdi6tion, 
he  fent  him  to  Herod,  wlio  himfelf 
was  alfo  at  Jerufalem  at  that  time. 
And  when  Herod  faw  Jefus  he 
was  exceeding  glad ;  for  he  was 
defirous  to  fee  him  of  a  long  feafon, 
becaufe  he  had  heard  many  things 
of  him ;  and  he  hoped  to  have  feen 
fome  miracle  done  by  him.  Then 
he  -queftioned  with  him  in  many 
words ;  but  he  anfwered  him  no- 
thing. And  the  chief  priefts  and 
fcribes  ftood  and  vehementlv  ac- 
cufed  him.  And  Herod  with  his 
men  of  war  fet  him  at  nought^  and 
mocked  him,  and  arrayed  him  in  ^ 
gorgeous  robe,  and  fent  him  again 
to  Pilate.  And  the  fame  day  Pilate 
and  Herod  were  made  friends  to- 
gether; for  before  they  were  at 
enmity  between  themfelves.  And 
Pilate,  when  he  had  called  together 
the  chief  priefts,  and  the  rulers,  and 
the  people,  faid  unto  them,  Ye  have 
brought  this  man  unto  me,  as  one 
that  perverteth  the  jjeople :  and 
behold,  I,  having  examined  him 
before  you,  have  found  no  fault  in 
this  man  touching  thofe  things 
whereof  ye  accufe  him :  No,  nor 
yet  Herod  :  for  I  fent  you  to  him ; 
and  lo,  nothing  wortliy  of  death  is 
done  unto  hhn.  I  will  therefore 
chaftife  him,  and  releafe  him.  For 
of  neceflity  he  muft  releafe  one 


Thiirfday  before  E after. 


unto  them  at  the  feaft.  And  they 
cried  out  all  at  once,  faying,  Away 
vn\\\  this  man,  and  releafe  unto  us 
Barabbas :  (who  for  a  certain  fedi- 
tion  made  in  the  city,  and  for  mur- 
der, was  call  into  prifon.)  Pilate 
therefore,  wUling  to  releai'e  Jefus, 
fpake  again  to  them.  But  they 
cried,  faying,  Crucify  him,  crucify 
him.  And  he  faid  unto  them  the 
third  time,  Why,  what  evil  hath 
he  done  ?  I  have  found  no  caufe  of 
death  in  him :  I  will  therefore  chaf- 
tife  him,  and  let  him  go.  And  they 
were  inltant  with  loud  voices,  re- 
quiring that  he  might  be  crucified : 
and  the  voices  of  them  and  of  the 
chief  priefts  prevailed.  And  Pilate 
gave  fentence  that  it  fliould  be  as 
they  required.  And  he  releafed 
unto  them  him  that  for  fedition 
and  murder  was  call  into  prifon, 
whom  they  had  defired ;  but  he 
delivered  Jefus  to  their  will.  And 
as  they  led  him  away,  they  laid 
hold  upon  one  Simon  a  Cp-enian, 
coming  out  of  the  country,  and  on 
him  they  laid  the  crofs,  that  he 
might  bear  it  after  Jefus.  And 
there  followed  him  a  ijreat  com- 
pany  of  people,  and  of  women, 
which  alfo  bewailed  and  lament- 
ed him.  But  Jefus,  turning  imto 
them,  faid.  Daughters  of  Jerufa- 
lem,  weep  not  for  me,  but  weep 
for  yoiufelves,  and  for  your  chil- 
dren. For  behold,  the  days  are 
coming,   in   the  which  they  lliall 


fay,  Blefled  are  the  barren,  and 
the  wombs  that  never  bare,  and 
the  paps  which  never  gave  fuck. 
Then  ill  all  they  begin  to  fay  to  the 
mountains,  Fall  on  us ;  and  to  the 
hills.  Cover  us.  For  if  they  do 
thefe  things  in  a  green  tree,  what 
fliall  be  done  in  the  diy  ?  And  there 
were  alfo  two  other,  malefadlors, 
led  with  him  to  be  put  to  death. 
And  when  they  were  come  to  the 
place  which  is  called  Calvaiy,  there 
they  crucified  hun;  and  the  male- 
fadlors,  one  on  the  right  hand, 
and  the  other  on  the  left.  Then 
faid  Jefus,  Father,  forgive  them, 
for  they  know  not  what  they  do. 
And  they  parted  his-ramient,  and 
call  lots.  And  the  people  Hood 
beholding ;  and  the  rulers  alfo  with 
them  derided  him,  faying,  He  fav- 
ed  others;  let  him  fave  himfelf,  if 
he  be  Clirift,  the  chofen  of  God. 
And  the  foldiers  alfo  mocked  him, 
coming  to  him,  and  offering  him 
vmegar,  and  faying,  If  thou  be  the 
King  of  the  Jews,  fave  thyfelf. 
And  a  fuperfcription  alfo  was  wi'it- 
ten  over  him  in  letters  of  Greek, 
and  Latin,  and  Hebrew,  THIS  IS 
THE  RING  OF  THE  JEWS. 
And  one  of  the  malefa6lors,  which 
were  hanged,  railed  on  him,  fay- 
ing, If  thou  be  Chrill,  fave  thyfelf, 
and  us.  But  the  other  anfwering 
rebuked  him,  faying,  Doll  not 
thou  feai"  God,  feeing  thou  ait  in 
the  fame  condenmation?  And  we 


indeed  juftly ;  for  we  receive  the 
due  reward  of  our  deeds,  but  this 
man  liatli  done  nothing  aniifs.  And 
he  faid  unto  Jefus,  Lord,  remem- 
ber me  when  thou  conieft  into  thy 
kinsdom.     And  Jefus  faid    unto 
him,  Verily  I  fay  unto  thee,  To- 
day flialt  thou  be  with  me  in  pa- 
radife.    And  it  was  about  the  fixth 
hour :  and  there  was  a  darknefs 
over  all  the  earth  until  the  ninth 
hour.    And  the  fun  was  darkened, 
and  the  vail  of  the  temple  was  rent 
in  the  midft.    And  when  Jefus  had 
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  he  faid. 
Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend 
my  fpirit:   and  having  faid   thus, 
he  gave  up  the  ghoft.    Now  when 
the  centurion  faw  what  was  done, 
he  glorified  God,  faying.  Certainly 
this  was  a  righteous  man.  And  all 
the  peojile  that  came  together  to 
that  fight,    beholding   the   things 
that  were  done,  fmote  their  breafl;s, 
and  returned.  And  all  his  acquaint- 
ance, and  the  women  that  follow- 
ed him  from  Galilee,  ftood  afar  off, 
beholding  thefe  things. 

GOOD   FRIDAY. 

The  CoUedis. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  we  befeech 
thee  gracioufly  to  behold  this 
thy  family,  for  which  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrifl  was  contented  to  be 
betrayed,  and  given  up  into  the 
hands  of  wicked  men,  and  to  fuffer 
death  upon  the  crofs,  who  now 


Good  Friday. 

liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee  and 
the  Holy  Glioli,  ever  one  God, 
world  without  end.    ylmen. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  by  whofe  Spiiit  the 
whole  i^dy  of  the  Church  is  go- 
verned and  fandlified ;  Receive  our 
fupplications  and  prayers,  which  we 
offer  before  thee  for  all  eftates  of 
men  in  thy  holy  Church,  that  eveiy 
member  of  the  fame,  in  his  voca- 
tion and  miniftry,  may  truly  and 
godly  ferve  thee;  through  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jefus  Chrill.    Amen. 


O  Merciful  God,  who  haft  made 
all  men,  and  hateft  nothing 
that  thou  haft  made,  nor  wouldett 
the  death  of  a  finner,  but  rather 
that  he  fliould  be  converted  and 
live ;  Have  mercy  upon  all  Jews, 
Turks,  Infidels,  and  Hereticks, 
and  take  from  them  all  ignorance, 
hardnefs  of  heart,  and  contempt  of 
thy  Word ;  and  fo  fetch  them  home, 
bleffed  Lord,  to  thy  flock,  that 
they  may  be  faved  among  the  rem- 
nant of  the  true  Ifraelites,  and  be 
made  one  fold  under  one  fhepherd, 
Jefus  Chiift  our  Loi*d,  who  liveth 
and  reigneth  with  thee  and  the 
Holy  Spirit,  one  God,  world  with- 
out end.    Amen. 

The  Epiftle.    Hebr.  x.  1. 

THE  law  having  a  fliadow  of 
good  things  to  come,  and  not 
the  very  image  of  the  things,  can 
never  with  thofe  facrifices,  which 
they  offered  year  by  yeai*  continu- 


Good  Fridd^. 


ally,  make  the  comers  thereunto 
pei*fe6t :  for  then  would  they  not 
have  ceafed  to  be  offered?  becaufe 
that  the  worfhippers  once  purged 
fhoukl  have  had  no  moi'e  confci- 
ence  of  lius.     But  m  tlo^'e  facii- 
fices  there  is  a  remembraiice  a^ahi 
made  of  fins  every  year.    For  it  is 
not  poflible  that  the  blood  of  bulls 
and  of  goats  fliould  take  away  fins. 
Wherefore,  when  he  cometh  into 
the  world,  he  faith,  Sacrifice  and 
offering  thou  wouldeft  not,  but  a 
body  haft  thou  prepared  me:  In 
burnt- offerings  and  facrifices  for  fin 
thou  haft  had  no  pleafure :  Then 
faid  I,  Lo,  I  come  (in  the  volume 
of  the  book  it  is  \vritten  of  me)  to 
do  thy  Avill,  O  God.    Above,  when 
he  faid.  Sacrifice  and  offering,  and 
bunit-oflferings,   and   offering   for 
fin  thou  wouldeft  not,  neither  hadft 
pleafure  therein,  which  are  offered 
by  the  Law :  then  faid  he,  Lo,  I 
come  to  do  thy  will,  O  God.    He 
taketh  away  the  firft,  that  he  may 
eftablilh  the  fecond.    By  the  which 
will  we  are  fancftified,  through  the 
offering  of  the  body  of  Jefus  Chrift 
once    for   all.     And   eveiy  prieft 
ftandeth  daily  miniftering,  and  of- 
fering oftentimes  the  fame  facri- 
fices, which  can  never  take  away 
fins.    But  this  man,  after  he  had 
offered  one  facrifice  for  fins,  for 
ever  fat  down  on  the  right  hand 
of  God ;  from  henceforth  expecting 
till  his  enemies  be  made  his  foot- 


ftool.  For  by  one  offering  he  hath 
perfected  for  ever  them  that  are 
fan(5tified:  Whereof  the  HolyGhoft 
alfo  is  a  ^Htnefs  to  us  :  for  after 
that  he  had  faid  before.  This  is  the 
covenant  that  I  will  make  with 
them  after  thofe  days,  faith  the 
Lord,  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their 
hearts,  and  in  their  minds  will  I 
^vi'ite  them ;  and  their  fins  and  ini- 
quities will  I  remember  no  more. 
Now  where  remiffion  of  thefe  is, 
there  is  no  more  offering  for  fin. 
Having  therefore,  brethren,  bold- 
nefs  to  enter  into  the  holieft  by 
the  blood  of  Jefus,  by  a  new  and 
Hving  way,  which  he  hath  confe- 
crated  for  us,  through  the  vail,  that 
is  to  fay,  his  flefh  ;  and  haiang  an 
High  Prieft  over  the  houfe  of  God; 
let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart, 
in  ftiU  aflurance  of  faith,  having 
our  hearts  fprinkled  fi*om  an  evil 
confcience,  and  our  bodies  wafhed 
with  pure  water.  Let  us  hold  faft 
the  profeflion  of  our  faith  without 
wavering ;  (for  he  is  faithful  that 
promifed ;)  and  let  us  confider  one 
another  to  provoke  unto  love,  and 
to  good  works ;  not  forfaking  the 
alfembling  of  omfelves  together,  as 
the  manner  of  fome  is ;  but  exhort- 
ing one  another:  and  fo  much  the 
more,  as  ye  fee  the  day  appToacl^- 

ing.  f  n:wir>  5^'i9W. 

-^  >i^Tlw  Go/pel.   St.  John  xix.  Itol 
ILATE  therefore  took  Jeftis, 


P 


anil  fcourged  him.     And  the 


Good  Friday. 


foldiers  platted  a  crown  of  thorns, 
and  put  it  on  his  head,  and  they 
put  on  him  a  purple  robe,  and 
laid,  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  :  and 
they  fniote  him  with  their  hands. 
Pilate  therefore  went  forth  again, 
and  faith  unto  them.  Behold,  I 
bring  him  forth  to  you,  that  ye 
may  know  that  I  find  no  fault  in 
him.  Then  came  Jefus  forth,  wear- 
ing the  crown  of  thorns,  and  the 
purple  robe.  And  Pilate  faith  un- 
to them,  Behold  the  man !  When 
the  cliief  priefts  therefore  and  offi- 
cers law  him,  they  cried  out,  fay- 
ing, Crucify  him,  crucify  him.  Pi- 
late faith  unto  them.  Take  ye  him, 
and  crucify  him :  for  I  find  no 
fault  in  him.  The  Jews  anfwered 
him,  We  have  a  law,  and  by  our 
law  he  ought  to  die,  becaufe  he 
^inade  himfelf  the  Son  of  God. 
When  Pilate  therefore  heard  that 
faying,  he  was  the  more  afraid; 
and  went  again  into  the  judge- 
ment-hall, and  faith  imto  Jefus, 
Whence  art  thou?  But  Jefus  gave 
him  no  anfwer.  Then  faith  Pilate 
unto  him,  Speakeft  thou  not  unto 
me?  knoweft  thou  not  that  I  have 
power  to  crucify  thee,  and  have 
power  to  releafe  thee?  Jefus  an- 
fwered. Thou  couldeft  have  no 
power  at  all  againft  me,  except  it 
were  given  thee  fi-om  above:  there- 
fore he  that  delivered  me  unto  thee 
hath  the  gi'eater  fin.  And  from 
:?thenceforth  Pilate  fought  to  releafe 


him  :  but  the  Jews  cried  out,  fay- 
ing. If  thou  let  this  man  go,  thou 
art  not  Ca^far's  friend :  whofoever 
maketh  himfelf  a  king  fpeaketh 
againil  Cajfar.  When  Pilate  there- 
fore heard  that  faying,  he  brought 
Jefus  forth,  and  fat  down  in  the 
judgement-feat,  in  a  place  that  is 
called  the  Pavement,  but  in  the 
Hebrew,  Gabbatha.  And  it  was 
the  preparation  of  the  paffover, 
and  about  the  fixth  hour  :  and  he 
faith  unto  the  Jews,  Behold  your 
King!  But  they  cried  out,  Away 
with  him,  away  Avith  him,  crucify 
hmi.  Pilate  faith  unto  them,  Shall 
I  crucify  your  King?  The  chief 
priefts  anfwered,  We  have  no  king 
but  Ciefar.  Then  delivered  he  him 
therefore  unto  them  to  be  cruci- 
fied :  and  they  took  Jefus,  and  led 
him  away.  And  he,  bearing  his 
crofs,  went  forth  into  a  place  called 
the  place  of  a  fcull,  which  is  called 
in  the  Hebrew,  Golgotha :  where 
they  crucified  him,  and  two  other 
with  him,  on  either  fide  one,  and 
Jefus  in  the  midfi;.  And  Pilate 
wrote  a  title,  and  put  it  on  the 
crofs ;  and  the  writing  was,  JESUS 
OF  NAZARETH  THE  KING 
OF  THE  JEWS.  This  title  then 
read  many  of  the  Jews :  for  the 
place  where  Jefus  was  crucified 
was  nigh  to  the  city :  and  it  was 
written  in  Hebrew,  and  Greek, 
and  Latin.  Then  faid  the  chief 
priefts  of  tlie  Jews  to  Pilate,  Wiite 
Pa 


'^  ^j?«/?er  E 


liot,  Tlie  King  of  the  Jews ;  but 
that  he  faid,  I  am  the  King  of  the 
Jews.  Pilate  anfwered,  What  I 
have  Avi'itten,  I  have  written.  Then 
the  foldiers,  when  they  had  cruci- 
fied Jefus,  took  his  garments,  and 
made  four  parts,  to  eveiy  foldier 
a  part;  and  alfo  his  coat:  now  the 
coat  was  without  feam,  woven  from 
tte  top  throughout.  They  faid 
therefore  among  tliemfelves.  Let 
us^riot  fend  it,  but  call  lots  for  it, 
whofe  it  (hall  be :  that  the  Scrip- 
ture might  be  fulfilled,  which  faith. 
They  parted  my  raiment  among 
them,  and  for  my  vefture  they 
did  caft  lots.  Thefe  things  there- 
fore the  foldiers  did.  Now  there 
ftood  by  the  crofs  of  Jefus,  his  mo- 
ther, and  his  mother's  filler,  Mary 
the  wife  of  Cleophas,  and  Mary 
Magdalene.  When  Jefus  therefore 
faw  his  mother,  and  the  difciple 
(landing  by,  whom  he  loved,  he 
faith  unto  his  mother,  Woman, 
behold  thy  fon.  Then  faith  he  to 
the  difciple,  Behold  thy  mother. 
And  from  that  hour  that  difciple 
took  her  unto  his  own  home. 
After  this,  Jefus,  knowing  that  all 
things  were  nowaccompliflied,  that 
the  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled, 
faith,  I  third.  Now  there  was 
fet  a  vell'el  full  of  vinegar :  and 
they  filled  a  fpunge  with  vin(>gar, 
and  put  it  upon  hyil'op,  and  put  it 
to  his  mouth.  When  Jefus  there- 
fore had  received  the  vinegar,  he 


faid,  It  is  finilhed :  and  he  bowed 
his  head,  and  gave  up  the  ghoft. 
The  Jews  therefore,  becaufe  it  was 
the  preparation,  that  the  bodies 
fliould  not  remain  upon  the  crofs 
on  the  fabbath-day,  (for  that  fab- 
bath-day  was  an  high  day,)  be- 
fouo-ht  Pilate  that  their  le^s  mig-ht 
be  broken,  and  that  they  might  be 
taken  away.  Then  came  the  fol- 
diers, and  brake  the  legs  of  the 
firft,  and  of  the  other  which  was 
cinicified  with  him.  But  when  they 
came  to  Jefus,  and  faw  that  he  was 
dead  already,  they  brake  not  his 
legs.  But  one  of  the  foldiers  ^vith 
a  fpear  pierced  his  fide,  and  forth- 
with came  thereout  blood  and  wa- 
ter. And  he  that  faw  it  bare  re- 
cord, and  his  record  is  true  :  and 
he  knoweth  that  he  faith  true,  that 
ye  might  believe.  For  thefe  things 
were  done  that  the  Scripture  fliould 
be  fulfilled,  A  bone  of  him  Ihall  not 
be  broken.  And  again,  another 
Scripture  faith.  They  Ihall  look  on 
hun  Avhom  they  pierced. 

Eajler  Even. 
The  Colledl. 

(~^  RANT,  O  Lord,  that  as  we 
y^  are  baptized  into  the  death 
of  thy  ])lefled  Son  our  Saviour  Je- 
fus C'hrill,  fo  by  continual  morti^- 
fying  rnir  corru])t  atte6lions  w^ 
may  be  buried  with  him ;  and  that 
thron«:h  the  erave,  and  g-ate  of 
death,  we  may  pafs  to  our  joyful 


EA^J^ER-DAY. 


refurre6lioii ;  for  liis  merits,  who 
died,  and  was  buried,  and  rofe  a- 
gaiii  for  us,  thy  Son  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 
The  Epijlle.    1  St.  Pet.  iii.  17. 

IT  is  better,  if  the  will  of  God  be 
fo,  that  ye  fufter  for  well-doing, 
than  for  evil-doing.  For  Chrift  alio 
hath  once  fuffered  for  fins,  the  juft 
for  the  unjull,  that  he  might  bring 
us  to  God,  being  put  to  death  in 
the  flefli,  but  quickened  by  the 
Spirit.  By  which  alfo  he  went  and 
preached  unto  the  fpirits  in  prifon; 
which  fometime  were  difobedient, 
when  once  the  long-fuffering  of 
God  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah, 
while  the  ark  was  a  preparing; 
wherein  few,  that  is,  eight  fouls, 
were  faved  by  water.  The  like 
figure  whereunto,  even  baptifm, 
doth  alfo  now  fave  us,  (not  the 
putting  away  the  filth  of  the  flelh, 
but  the  anfwer  of  a  good  confci- 
ence  towards  God,)  by  the  refur- 
redlion  of  Jefus  Chrift:  who  is  gone 
into  heaven,  and  is  on  the  rig-ht 
hand  of  God,  angels  and  authori- 
ties and  powers  being  made  fub- 
jedl;  unto  him. 

The  Gofpel.  St.  Matth.  xxvii.  57. 
V^THEN  the  even  was  come, 
.^  "^r  there  came  a  rich  man  of 
Arimathtea,  named  Jofeph,  who 
alfo  himfelf  was  Jefus'  difciple.  He 
went  to  Pilate,  and  begged  the 
body  of  Jefus.  Then  Pilate  com- 
manded this  body  to  be  delivered. 


And  when  Jofeph  had  taken  the 
body,  he  wrapped  it  in  a  clean  li- 
nen cloth,  and  laid  it  in  his  own 
new  tomb,  which  he  had  hewn  out 
in  the  rock;  and  he  rolled  a  great 
ftone  to  the  door  of  the  fepulchre, 
and  departed.  And  there  was  Ma- 
ry Magdalene,  ^nd  the  other  Mary, 
fitting  over  againft  the  fepulchre* 
Now  the  next  day  that  followed 
the  day  of  the  preparation,  the 
chief  priefts  and  Pharifees  came  to- 
gether unto  Pilate,  faying.  Sir,  we 
remember  that  that  deceiver  faid, 
while  he  was  yet  alive.  After  three 
days  I  will  rife  again.  Command 
therefore  that  the  fepidchre  be 
made  fure  until  the  third  day,  left 
his  difciples  come  by  night  and 
fteal  him  away,  and  fay  unto  the 
people.  He  is  rifen  from  the  dead : 
fo  the  laft  error  fliall  be  worfe  than 
the  fii-ft.  Pilate  faid  unto  them.  Ye 
have  a  watch ;  go  your  way,  make 
it  as  fure  as  you  can.  So  they  went 
and  made  the  fepvdchre  fure,  feal-^ 
ing  the  ftone,  and  fetting  a  watch^ 

r 

*moii   EASTER -DAY.  j 

%  At  Morning  Prai/er,  instead  of  the  Psalm,  O 
come  Jet  us  sing,  tStc.  these  Anthems  shall  be  sung 
or  said. 

CHRIST  our  paflbver  is  facri- 
ficed  for  us  :  therefore  let  us 
keep  the  feaft ; 

Not  with  the  old  leaven,  nor 
with  the  leaven  of  malice  and 
wickednefs  :  but  with  the  unlea- 


EASTER-DAY. 


vened  bread  of  fincerity  and  truth,  j 

1  Cor,  V.  7.  I 

I 

CHRIST  being  raifed  from  the  ■ 
dead  dieth  no  more  :  death 
hath  no  more  dominion  over  him. 
,  For  in  that  he  died,  he  died 
bnto  fin  once  ;  but^in  that  he  liv- 
eth,  he  hveth  unto  God.     ^   * 

Likewife  reckon  ye  alfo  your- 
felves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  fin  : 
but  alive  unto  God  through  Jefus 
Chrifi;  our  Lord.    Rom.  vi.  Siidrrri 

I H  III  ST  is  rifen  from  the  dead : 
'^  and  become  the  firfi;-fi'uits  of 
them  that  flept.  ^  «o^  ^^d 

^  For  fince  by  man  came  death  : 
by  man  came  alfo  the  refurrecftion 
of  the  dead. 

^  For  as  in  Adam  all  die  :  even  fo 
lii  Chrifi;  fliall  all  be  made  alive. 
\  Cor.  XV.  20. 

^    Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
Ae  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 
y"  As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
ftow,   and  ever  (hall  be   :   world 
without  end.    Anien. 


orf/i 


TJw  Colledl. 


A  LMIGHTY  God,  who  through 
-^^  thine  only-begotten  Son  Je- 
fus Chrifi;  hafi  overcome  death, 
and  opened  unto  us  the  gate  of 
everlalling  Hfe ;  We  humbly  be- 
feech  thee,  that,  as  by  thy  fjjeciiil 
grace  preventing  us  thou  doft  put 
into  our  minds  good  defires,  fo  by 
thy  continual  help  we  may  bring 
the  fame  to  good  effedl;  through 


Jefus  Chrifi  our  Lord,  who  liveth 
and  reigneth  with  thee  and  the 
Holy  Ghoft,  ever  one  God,  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

The  Epijile.    Col.  iii.  1. 

IF  ye  then  be  rifen  with  Chrift, 
feek  thofe  things  which  are  a- 
bove,  where  Chrift  fitteth  on  the 
light  hand  of  God.  Set  your  afl*ec- 
tion  on  things  above,  not  on  things 
on  the  eartii :  For  ye  are  dead, 
and  your  life  is  hid  Vfith  Chrift  in 
God.  When  Cluift,  who  is  our 
life,  fliall  a]ipear,  then  (hall,  ye  alfo 
appear  with  him  in  gloiy.  Mortity 
therefore  your  members  which  are 
upon  the  earth;  fornication,  im- 
cleannefs,  inordinate  aft'edtion,  evil 
concupifcence,  and  covetoufnefs, 
which  is  idolatry:  For  which  things* 
fake  the  A^Tath  of  God  cometh  on 
the  children  of  difobedience.  In 
the  which  ye  alfo  walked  fome 
time,  when  ye  lived  in  them. 

Tlie  Go/pel.   St.  John  xx.  1 . 

THE  fii*ft  day  of  the  week  com- 
eth Maiy  Magdalene  early, 
when  it  was  vet  dark,  imto  the 
fepulchre,  and  feeth  the  ftone  taken 
away  from  the  fepulchre.  Then 
flie  rimneth  and  cometh  to  Simon 
Peter,  and  to  the  other  difcij)le 
whom  Jefus  loved,  and  faith  unto 
them.  They  have  taken  away  the 
Lord  out  of  the  fepulchre,  and  we 
know  not  where  they  have  laid 
him.     Peter  therefore  went  forth, 


Monday  in  Eajier-'week. 


and  that  other  difciple,  and  came 
to  the  fepulchre.  So  they  ran  both 
together ;  and  the  other  difciple 
did  outrun  Peter,  and  came  firft 
to  the  fepulchre;  and  he,  Hooping 
down  and  looking  in,  faw  the  linen 
clothes  lying  ;  yet  went  he  not  in. 
Then  cometh  Simon  Peter  follow- 
ing him,  and  went  into  the  fepul- 
chre, and  feeth  the  linen  clothes 
lie ;  and  the  napkin  that  was  about 
his  head,  not  lying  with  the  linen 
clothes,  but  wrapped  together  in  a 
place  by  itfelf.  Then  went  in  alfo 
that  other  difciple  which  came  firft 
to  the  fepulchre,  and  he  faw,  and 
believed.  For  as  yet  they  knew  not 
the  Scripture,  that  he  muft  rife  a- 
gaiu  from  the  dead.  Then  the  dif- 
ciples  went  away  again  unto  their 
own  home. 

smca  Monday  in  Eajler-week. 
TJie  ColleSi. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  through 
-  thy  only-begotten  Son  Jefus 
Chrift  haft  overcome  death,  and 
opened  unto  us  the  gate  of  ever- 
lafting  life;  We  humbly  befeech 
thee,  that,  as  by  thy  fpecial  grace 
preventing  us  thou  doft  put  into 
Our  minds  good  defires,  fo  by  thy 
Continual  help  we  may  brmg  the 
fame  to  good  effedl;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord,  who  liveth  and 
"reigneth  with  thee  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  ever  one  God,  world  with- 
<kit  end.   Amen. 


For  the  Epiftle.   Adls  x.  34. 

PETER  opened  his  mouth,  and 
faid.  Of  a  truth  1  perceive 
that  God  is  no  refpe^ler  of  peifons ; 
but  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth 
him,  and  worketh  righteoufnefs, 
is  accepted  with  him.  The  word 
which  God  fent  unto  the  children 
of  Ifrael,  preaching  peace  by  Jefus 
Chrift;  (he  is  Lord  of  all;)  that 
word  (I  fay)  ye  know,  which  was 
publifhed  throughout  all  Judsea, 
and  began  from  Galilee,  after  the 
baptifm  which  John  preached : 
how  God  anointed  Jefus  of  Naza- 
reth with  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and  with 
power;  who  went  about  doing 
good,  and  healing  all  that  were 
oppreffed  of  the  devil:  for  God  was 
with  him.  And  we  are  witnefliss 
of  all  things  which  he  did,  both 
in  the  land  of  the  Jews,  and  in 
Jerufalem ;  whom  they  flew,  and 
hanged  on  a  tree :  Him  God  raif- 
ed  up  the  third  day,  and  ftiewed 
him  openly;  not  to  all  the  people, 
but  unto  witnefles  chofen  before  of 
God,  even  to  us,  who  did  eat  and 
drink  with  him  after  he  rofe  from 
the  dead.  And  he  commanded  us 
to  preach  unto  the  people,  and  to 
teftify  that  it  is  he  who  w^as  or- 
dained of  God  to  be  the  Judge 
of  quick  and  dead.  To  him  give 
all  the  prophets  witnefs,  that 
through  his  Name  whofoever  be- 
lieveth  in  him  fliall  receive  remif- 
fion  of  fm§. 


Monday  in 

The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  xxiv.  13. 

BEHOLD,  two  of  his  difciples 
^v^ent  that  fame  day  to  a  village 
called  Emmaiis,  which  was  from 
Jeriifalem  about  threefcore  fur- 
longs. And  they  talked  together  of 
all  thefe  things  which  had  happen- 
ed. And  it. came  to  pafs,  that  while 
they  communed  together,  and  rea- 
foned,  Jefus  himfelf  drew  near,  and 
went  with  them.  But  their  eyes 
were  holden,  that  they  fliould  not 
know  him.  And  he  faid  unto  them, 
AMiat  manner  of  communications 
are  thefe  that  ye  have  one  to  an- 
other, as  ye  walk,  and  are  fad?  And 
the  one  of  them,  whofe  name  was 
Cleopas,  anfwering,  faid  unto  him, 
Art  thou  only  a  ftranger  in  Jeru- 
falem,  and  haft  not  known  the 
things  which  are  come  to  pafs  there 
in  thefe  days?  And  he  faid  unto 
them.  What  thinos?  And  they  faid 
unto  him,  Concerning  Jefus  of  Na- 
zareth, who  was  a  prophet  mighty 
in  deed  and  word,  before  God  and 
all  the  people:  and  how  the  chief 
priefts  and  our  rulers  delivered 
him  to  be  condemned  to  death,  and 
have  crucified  him.  But  we  trufted 
that  it  had  I)een  he  which  Ihoukl 
have  redeemed  Ifrael :  and  befides 
all  this,  to-day  is  the  third  day 
fince  thefe  things  were  done.  Yea, 
and  certain  women  alfo  of  our  com- 
pany made  us  aftoniflied,  which 
were  early  at  the  fepulchre;  and 
when  they  foimd   not  his  body. 


Eqfter-week. 

they  came,  faying,  that  they  had 
alfo  feen  a  \41ion  of  angels,  which 
faid  that  he  was  alive.     And  cer- 
tain of  them  which  were  with  us 
went  to  the  fepulchre,  and  found  it 
even  fo  as  the  women  had  faid;  but 
him  they  faw  not.    Then  he  faid 
unto  them,  O  fools,  and  flow  of 
heart  to  believe  all  that  the  pro- 
phets have  fpoken:  ought  not  Chrift 
to  have  fuftered  thefe  things,  and 
to  enter  into  his  glory?  And  begin- 
ning at  Moles,  and  all  the  prophets, 
he  expounded  unto  them  in  all  the 
Scriptures  the  things  concerning 
himfelf.    And  they  drew  nigh  unto 
the  village  whither  they  went;  and 
he  made  as  though  he  would  have 
gone  further :  but  they  conftrained 
him,  faying.  Abide  with  us,  for  it 
is  towards  evening,  and  the  day  is 
far  fpent.  And  he  went  in  to  tarry 
with  them.    And  it  came  to  pafs, 
as  he  fat  at  meat  with  them,  he 
took   bread,   and   blefled   it,   and 
brake,  and  gave  to  them.  And  their 
eyes  were  opened,  and  they  knew 
him,  and  he  vanilhed  out  of  their 
fight.    And  they  faid  one  to  ano- 
ther, Did  not  our  heart  burn  with- 
in us,  while  he  talked  with  us  by 
the  way,  and  while  he  opened  to 
us  the  Scriptures?  And  they  rofe 
up  the  fame  hour,  and  returned 
to  Jeiiifalem,  and  found  the  eleven 
o-athered  together,  and  them  that 
were  with  them,  faying.  The  Lord 
is  rifen  indeed,  and  hath  appeai'ed 


Tuefday  in 

to  Simon.  And  they  told  M^iat 
things  were  done  in  the  way,  and 
how  he  was  known  of  them  in 
breaking  of  bread. 

Tuefday  in  Eajier-iceek. 
The  Coiledi. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  through 
thy  only-begotten  Son  Jefus 
Chrift  haft  overcome  death,  and 
opened  unto  us  the  gate  of  ever- 
lafting  life ;  We  humbly  befeech 
thee,  that,  as  by  thy  fpecial  grace 
preventing  us  thou  doft  put  into 
our  minds  good  defires,  fo  by  thy 
continual  help  we  may  bring  the 
fame  to  good  effect ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord,  who  liveth  and 
reigneth  with  thee  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  ever  one  God,  world  with- 
out end.  Amen. 
For  the  Epijile.    A61;s  xiii.  20. 

MEN  and  brethren,  children 
of  the  ftock  of  Abraham,  and 
whofoever  among  you  feareth  God, 
to  you  is  the  word  of  this  falvation 
fent.  For  they  that  dwell  at  Jeru- 
falem,  and  their  rulers,  becaufe  they 
knew  him  not,  nor  yet  the  voices 
of  the  prophets  which  are  read 
every  fabbath-day,  they  have  fulfil- 
led them  in  condemning  hmi.  And 
though  they  found  nocaufe  of  death 
in  him,  yet  defired  they  Pilate  that 
he  Ihould  be  flain.  And  when  they 
had  fulfilled  all  that  was  written  of 
him,  they  took  him  down  from  the 
tree,  and  laid  him  in  a  fepulchre. 


Eajler-iioeek. 

But  God  raifed  him  from  the  dead : 
and  he  was  feen  many  days  of  them 
which  came  up  with  him  from  Gali- 
lee to  Jerufalem,  who  are  his  wit- 
neffes  unto  the  people.  And  we  de- 
clare unto  you  glad  tidings,  how 
that  the  j^romife  which  was  made 
unto  the  fathers,  God  hath  fiilfil- 
led  the  fame  unto  us  their  children, 
in  that  he  hath  raifed  up  Jefus  a- 
gain ;  as  it  is  alfo  ^vi'itten  in  the  fe- 
cond  Pfalm,  Thou  art  my  Son,  this 
day  have  I  begotten  thee.  And  as 
concerning  that  he  raifed  him  up 
from  the  dead,  now  no  more  to  re- 
turn to  corruption,  he  faid  on  this 
wife,  I  will  give  you  the  fure  mer- 
cies of  David.  Wherefore  he  faith 
alfo  in  another  Pfalm,  Thou  ftialt 
not  fuffer  thine  Holy  One  to  fee 
corruption.  For  David,  after  he 
had  ferved  his  own  generation  by 
the  will  of  God,  fell  on  deep,  and 
was  laid  unto  his  fathers,  and  faw 
corruption:  But  he  whom  God  raif- 
ed again  faw  no  corruption.  Be  it 
known  unto  you  therefore,  men  and 
brethren,  that  through  this  man  is 
preached  unto  you  the  forgivenefs 
of  fins :  And  by  him  all  that  be- 
lieve are  juftified  from  all  things, 
from  which  ye  could  not  be  jufti- 
fied by  the  law  of  Mofes.  Beware 
therefore,  left  that  come  upon  you 
which  is  fpoken  of  'n\  the  prophets ; 
Behold,  ye  defpifers,  and  wonder, 
and  perifli ;  for  I  work  a  work  in 
your  days,  a  work  which  ye  Ihall 


^'Thejiijt  Sunday  after  jE after. 


ill  no  wife  believe,  though  a  man 
declare  it  unto  you. 
T/ie  Gofpel.    St.  Luke  xxiv.  36. 

JESUS  himfelf  ftood  in  the  midft 
of  them,  and  faith  unto  them, 
Peace  be  unto  you.  But  they  were 
terrified  and  affrighted,  and  fuppof- 
ed  that  they  had  feen  a  fpirit.  And 
he  faid  unto  them,  Why  are  ye  trou- 
bled, and  why  do  thoughts  arife 
in  your  hearts  ?  Behold  my  hands 
and  my  feet,  that  it  is  I  myfelf : 
handle  me,  and  fee;  for  a  fpirit  hath 
not  flefli  and  bones,  as  ye  fee  me 
have.  And  when  he  had  thus  fpo- 
ken,  he  fliewed  them  his  hands  and 
his  feet.  And  while  they  yet  believ- 
ed not  for  joy,  and  wondered,  he 
faid  unto  them.  Have  ye  here  any 
meat?  And  they  gave  him  a  piece 
of  a  broiled  fiili,  and  of  an  honey- 
comb. And  he  took  it,  and  did  eat 
before  them.  And  he  faid  unto 
them,  Thefe  are  the  words  which 
I  fpake  unto  you,  while  I  was  yet 
with  you,  that  all  things  mull  be 
fulfilled  which  were  written  in  the 
law  of  JNIofes,  and  in  the  Pro})hets, 
and  in  the  Pfalms  concerning  me. 
Then  opened  he  their  underlland- 
ing,  that  they  might  imdei-lland 
the  Scriptures,  and  faid  unto  them, 
Thus  it  is  \\Titten,  and  thus  it  be- 
hoved Chrift  to  fuffer,  and  to  life 
from  the  dead  the  third  day ;  and 
that  repentance  and  remiffion  of 
fins  fliould  be  preached  in  his  Name 
among  all  nations,  beginning  at 


Jerufalem.     And  ye  are  witnefl'es 


of  thefe  thino's. 


Thejirji  Sunday  after  Eajier. 
The  CoUedi. 

ALMIGHTY  Father,  who  haft 
given  thine  only  Son  to  die 
for  our  fins,  and  to  rife  again  for 
our  jullification ;  Grant  us  fo  to 
put  away  the  leaven  of  malicq  and 
wickednefs,  that  we  may  alway 
ferve  thee  in  purenefs  of  living  and 
truth ;  through  the  merits  of  the 
fame  thy  Son  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.  Amen.u»  riouu  aiiJ  a^d^ 
The  Epiftle.   1  St.  JdhliY.  4. 

WHATSOEVER  is  born  of 
God  overcometh  the  world; 
and  this  is  the  vi(^ory  that  over- 
cometh the  world,  even  our  faith. 
Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the 
world,  but  he  that  believeth  that 
Jefus  is  the  Son  of  God?  This  is  he 
that  came  by  water  and  blood,  even 
Jefus  Chrill ;  not  by  water  only, 
but  by  water  and  blood  :  and  it  is 
the  Spirit  that  beareth  witnefs,  be- 
caufe  the  Spirit  is  truth.  For  there 
are  three  that  bear  record  in  hea- 
ven, the  Father,  the  Word,  and 
the  Holy  Ghoft :  and  thefe  three 
are  one.  And  there  are  three  that 
bear  witnefs  in  earth,  the  fpirit, 
and  the  Avater,  and  the  blood :  and 
thefe  three  agree  in  one.  If  we 
receive  the  witnefs  of  men,  the  wit- 
nefs of  God  is  greater :  for  this  is 
the  witnefs  of  God,  which  he  hath 


lliefecond  Sunday  after  E after. 


teftifiecl  of  his  Son.  He  that  be- 
lieveth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath 
the  A^dtnefs  m  himfelf :  he  that  be- 
lieveth  not  God  hath  made  him 
a  har,  becaufe  he  beHeveth  not  the 
record  that  God  gave  of  his  Son. 
And  this  is  the  record,  that  God 
hath  given  to  iis  eternal  life ;  and 
this  life  is  in  his  Son.  He  that  hath 
the  Son  hath  life ;  and  he  that  hath 
not  the  Son  hath  not  hfe.*nb3>fof7 
-    The  GofpeL    St.  John  xx.  19. 

THE  fame  day  at  evening,  be- 
ing the  firft  day  of  the  week, 
when  the  doors  were  Ihut,  where 
the  difciples  were  affembled  for 
fear  of  the  Jews,  came  Jefus  and 
ftood  in  the  midft,  and  faith  unto 
them,  Peace  be  unto  you.  And 
when  he  had  fo  faid,  he  fliewed 
unto  them  his  hands  and  his  fide. 
Then  were  the  difciples  glad  when 
they  faw  the  Lord.  Then  faid  Je- 
fus to  them  again,  Peace  be  unto 
you  :  As  my  Father  hath  fent  me, 
even  fo  fend  I  you.  And  when 
he  had  faid  this,  he  breathed  on 
them,  and  faith  unto  them,  Re- 
ceive ye  the  holy  Ghoft.  Whofe- 
foever  fins  ye  remit,  they  are  re- 
mitted unto  them ;  and  whofefoever 
fins  ye  retain,  they  are  retained. 

^^^hefomnd  Siindm/  after  Eajier. 
9"  "1^  The  ColleB. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  haft 
given  thine  only  Son  to  be 
unto  us  both  a  facrifice  for  fin,  and 


alfo  an  enfample  of  godly  life; 
Give  us  grace  that  we  may  always 
moft  thankfully  receive  that  his 
ineftimable  benefit,  and  alfo  daily 
endeavour  ourfelves  to  follow  the 
blefled  fteps  of  his  moll  holy  life ; 
through  the  fame  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.   Amen. 

TheEpiftle.    1  St.  Pet.  ii.  19. 

THIS  is  thank-worthy,  if  a  man 
for  confcience  toward  God  en- 
dure grief,  fuft'ering  ^viongfully. 
For  what  glory  is  it,  if,  when  ye 
be  bufl^eted  for  your  faults,  ye  {hall 
take  it  patiently?  but  if,  when  ye 
do  well,  and  fuffer  for  it,  ye  take 
it  patiently ;  this  is  acceptable  with 
God.  For  even  hereunto  were  ye 
called :  becaufe  Chrift  alfo  fuffer- 
ed  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example, 
that  ye  fliould  follow  his  fteps : 
who  did  no  fin,  neither  was  guile 
found  in  his  mouth  :  who,  when 
he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again ; 
when  he  fuflbred,  he  threatened 
not;  but  committed  himfelf  to  him 
that  judgeth  righteoufly  :  who  his 
OAvn  felf  bare  our  fins  in  his  own 
body  on  the  tree,  that  we,  being 
dead  to  fins,  fliould  live  unto  right- 
eoufnefs :  by  whofe  ftripes  ye  were 
healed.  For  ye  were  as  flieep  go- 
ing aftray ;  but  are  now  returned 
unto  the  Shepherd  and  Bifliop  of 
your  fouls. 

The  Go/pel    St.  John  x.  1 1 . 

JESUS  faid,  I  am  the  good  fliep- 
lierd :  the  good  fliepherd  give^h 


The  third  Sunday  after  Eajler? 


his  life  for  the  flieep.  But  he  that 
is  an  hireling,  and  not  the  fliep- 
herd,  whofe  own  the  flieep  are  not, 
feetli  the  wolf  coming,  and  leaveth 
the  flieep,  and  fleeth ;  and  the  wolf 
catcheth  them,  and  fcattereth  the 
flieep.  The  hireling  fleeth,  becaufe 
he  is  an  hireling,  and  careth  not 
for  the  flieep.  I  am  the  good  fliep- 
herd,  and  know  my  flieep,  and  am 
knoT^ai  of  mine.  As  the  Father 
knoweth  me,  even  fo  know  I  the 
Father:  and  I  lay  do^yn  my  life 
for  the  flieep.  And  other  flieep  I 
have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold ; 
them  alfo  I  mufl;  bring,  and  they 
fliall  hear  my  voice ;  and  there  fliall 
be  one  fold,  and  one  fliepherd. 


ryo 


iWhe  third  Sunday  after  Eajler. 
>^  I  ^  '-^    The  Colle&. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  fliewefl; 
to  them  that  be  in  error  the 
light  of  thy  truth,  to  the  intent 
that  they  may  return  into  the  way 
of  righteoufnefs ;  Grant  unto  all 
them  that  are  admitted  into  the 
felloAvfliip  of  Chrifl;'s  Religion,  that 
they  may  efchew  thofe  things  that 
are  contrary  to  their  profeflTion, 
and  foUoAV  all  fuch  things  as  are 
agreeable  to  the  fame ;  through 
our  Lord  Jefus  Chrifl;.    Ameji. 

The  Epijile.    1  St.  Pet.  ii.  11. 
T^KAliLY  beloved,  I  befeech 
-■-^  you  as  fl;rangers  and  pilgrims, 
abftain  from  fleflily  lulls,  which  war 
againll  the  foul ;  having  your  con- 


vei*fatioii  honefl;  among  the  Gen- 
tiles ;  that,  whereas  they  fpeak  a- 
gainft  you  as  evil  doers,  they  may, 
by  your  good  works  which  they 
fliall  behold,  glorify  God  ui  the  day 
of  vifitation.  Submit  yourfelves  to 
eveiy  ordinance  of  man  for  the 
Lord's  fake ;  whether  it  be  to  the 
King,  as  fupreme;  or  unto  gover- 
nours,  as  unto  them  that  are  fent 
by  him,  for  the  punifliment  of  evil 
doers,  and  for  the  praife  of  them 
that  do  well.  For  fo  is  the  will  of 
God,  that  with  well-doing  ye  may 
put  to  filence  the  ignorance  of 
foolifli  men :  as  free,  and  not  ufiiig 
your  liberty  for  a  cloke  of  malici- 
oufnefs;  but  as  the  fervants  of  God. 
Honour  all  men.  Love  the  bro- 
therhood. Fear  God.  Flonour  the 
King. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  John  xvi.  16. 

JESUS  faid  to  his  difciples,  A 
little  while  and  ye  fliall  not  fee 
me  ;  and  again,  a  little  while  and 
ye  fliall  fee  me ;  becaufe  I  go  to  the 
Father.  Then  liiid  fome  of  his  dif- 
ciples among  themfelves,  What  is 
this  that  he  faith  unto  us,  A  little 
while  and  ye  fliall  not  fee  me ;  and 
again,  a  little  while  and  ye  fliall  fee 
me;  and,  Becaufe  I  go  to  the  Fa- 
ther? They  faid  therefore.  What  is 
this  that  he  faith,  A  little  while? 
we  cannot  tefl  what  he  faith.  Now 
Jefus  knew  that  they  were  defirous 
to  aik  him,  and  faid  unto  them,  Do 
ye   enquire  among  yourfelves  of 


The  fourth  Sunday  after  Eafter. 


that  I  faki,  A  little  while  and  ye 
Ihall  not  fee  me ;  and  again,  a  little 
while  and  ye  fliall  fee  me?  Verily, 
verily  I  fay  unto  you,  That  yc  lliall 
weep  and  lament,  but  the  world 
ftiall  rejoice :  and  ye  lliall  be  for- 
rowful,  but  your  forrow  fliall  be 
turned  into  joy.  A  woman,  when 
Ihe  is  in  travail,  hath  forrow,  be- 
caufe  her  hour  is  come :  but  as  foon 
as  Ihe  is  delivered  of  the  child,  flie 
remembereth  no  more  the  angiiifh, 
for  joy  that  a  man  is  born  into  the 
world.  And  ye  now  therefore  have 
forrow :  but  I  will  fee  you  again, 
and  your  heart  Ihall  rejoice,  and 
your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you. 

The  fourth  Sunday  after  Eajfer, 
The  CoUedt, 
Almighty  God,  who  alone 
canft  order  the  unruly  Avills 
and  aflfe6lions  of  iinful  men;  Grant 
unto  thy  people,  that  they  may 
love  the  thing  which  thou  com- 
mandeft,  and  delire  that  which 
thou  doll  promife ;  that  fo,  among 
the  fundry  and  manifold  changes 
of  the  world,  our  hearts  may  fure- 
ly  there  be  fixed,  where  true  joys 
are  to  be  found ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijlle.    St.  James  i.  17. 

EVERY  good  gift,  and  eveiy 
perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and 
cometh  do^vn  from  the  Father  of 
lights,  with  whom  is  no  variable- 
nefs,  neither  Ihadow  of  turnmg.  Of 


o 


his  own  will  begat  he  us  with  the 
Word  of  truth,  that  we  fliould  be  a 
kind  of  firft-fruits  of  his  creatures. 
Wherefore,  my  beloved  brethren, 
let  every  man  be  fwift  to  hear, 
flow  to  fpeak,  flow  to  wrath ;  for 
the  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the 
nghteoufnefs  of  God.  Wherefore 
lay  apart  all  filthinefs  and  fuper- 
fluity  of  naughtinefs,  and  receive 
Avith  meeknels  the  engrafted  Word, 
which  is  able  to  fave  your  fouls. 
The  Gofpel.    St.  John  xvi.  5. 

JESUS  laid  unto  his  difciples, 
Now  I  go  my  way  to  him  that 
fent  me,  and  none  of  you  afl<:eth 
me.  Whither  goefi;  thou?  But,  be- 
caufe  I  have  faid  thefe  things  unto 
you,  forrow  hath  filled  your  heart. 
Neverthelefs,  I  tell  you  the  truth; 
it  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go 
away :  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the 
Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you ; 
but  if  I  depart,  I  will  fend  him 
unto  you.  And  when  he  is  come, 
he  will  reprove  the  world  of  fin, 
and  of  righteoufnefs,  and  of  judge- 
ment :  of  fin,  becaufe  they  believe 
not  on  me ;  of  righteoufnefs,  bcr 
caufe  I  go  to  my  Father,  and  ye 
fee  me  no  more ;  of  judgement, 
becaufe  die  prince  of  this  world 
is  judged.  I  have  yet  many  things 
to  fay  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot 
bear  them  now.  Howbeit,  when 
he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he 
will  guide  you  into  all  tiiitli :  for 
he  fliall  not  fpeak  of  himfelf ;  but 


The  fifth 

wliatfoever  he  fliall  hear,  that  fhall 
he  fpeak :  and  he  will  Ihew  you 
things  to  come.  He  fhall  glorify 
me:  for  he  Ihall  receive  of  mine, 
and  Ihall  fhew  it  unto  you.  All 
things  that  the  Father  hath  are 
mine :  therefore  faid  I,  that  he  fhall 
take  of  mine,  and  fliall  ihew  it  un- 
to you. 

The  fifth  Sunday  after  Eajicr. 
39ixn:  i^u     Yh^  Colledi. 

OLord,  from  whom  all  good 
things  do  come ;  Grant  to 
us  thy  humble  fervants,  that  by 
thy  holy  infpiration  we  may  think 
thofe  things  that  be  good,  and  by 
thy  merciful  guiding  may  perform 
tlie  fame  ;  through  our  Lord  .Tefus 
Chrilt.    Amen. 

The  Epijtle.    St.  James  i.  22. 

BE  ye  doers  of  the  Word,  and 
not  hearers  only,  deceiving 
your  own  felves.  For  if  any  be  a 
hearer  of  the  Word,  and  not  a 
doer,  he  is  like  unto  a  man  behold- 
ing his  natural  face  in  a  glafs.  For 
he  beholdeth  himfelf,  and  goeth 
his  way,  and  ftraightway  forgetteth 
what  manner  of  man  he  was.  But 
whofo  looketh  into  the  perfect  law 
of  liberty,  and  continueth  therein, 
he  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer, 
but  a  doer  of  the  work,  this  man 
ftiall  be  blefled  in  his  deed.  If  any 
man  among  you  feem  to  be  reli- 
gious, and  bridleth  not  his  tongue, 
but  deceiveth  his  own  heart,  this 


^^ 


^cifter  Eafler. 

man's  religion  is  vain.  Pure  reli- 
gion, and  undefiled  before  God  and 
the  Father,  is  this,  To  vifit  the  fa- 
therlefs  and  ^vidows  in  their  afflic- 
tion, and  to  keep  himfelf  unfpotted 
from  the  world. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  John  xvi.  23. 

VERILY,  verily  I  fay  unto  yoii, 
Whatfoever  ye  fliall  aflv  the 
Father  in  my  Name,  he  mil  give 
it  you.  Hitherto  have  ye  alked 
nothing  in  my  Name  :  afli,  and  ye 
fliall  receive,  that  your  joy  may 
be  full.  Thefe  things  have  I  fpo- 
ken  unto  you  in  proverbs :  the 
time  Cometh  when  I  fliall  no  more 
fpeak  unto  you  in  proverbs,  but  I 
fliall  fliew  you  plainly  of  the  Fea- 
ther. At  that  day  ye  fliall  alk  in 
my  Name :  and  I  fay  not  unto 
you,  that  I  mil  pray  the  Father 
for  you ;  for  the  Father  himfelf 
lovetli  you,  becaufe  ye  have  loved 
me,  and  have  believed  that  I  came 
out  from  God.  I  came  forth  from 
the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the 
world :  again,  I  leave  the  world, 
and  go  to  the  Father.  His  dif- 
ciples  faid  unto  him,  Lo,  now 
fpeakefl;  thou  plainly,  and  fpeak- 
eft  no  proverb.  Now  are  we  fure 
that  thou  knowefl;  all  things,  and 
needeft  not  that  any  man  fliould 
aflv  thee :  by  this  avc  believe  that 
thou  camefl;  forth  from  God.  Je-^^ 
fus  anfwered  them.  Do  ye  now 
believe?  Behold,  the  hour  com- 
cth,   yea,  is  now  come,   that  ye 


TJie  Afcenfi07b-day. 

iliall  be  fcattered  every  man  to  his 
own,  and  fliall  leave  me  alone : 
and  yet  I  am  not  alone,  becaufe 
the  Father  is  with  me.  Thefe 
things  I  have  fpoken  unto  you, 
that  in  me  ye  might  have  peace. 
In  the  world  ye  fliall  have  tribula- 
tion ;  but  be  of  good  cheer,  I  have 
overcome  the  world. 


The  Afcenjion-day. 
The  ColleSl. 

GRANT,  we  befeech  thee,  Al- 
mighty God,  that  like  as  we 
do  believe  thy  only-begotten  Son 
our  Lord  Jefus  Clirift  to  have  af- 
cended  into  the  heavens ;  fo  we 
may  alfo  in  heart  and  mind  thi- 
ther afcend,  and  with  him  conti- 
nually dwell,  who  liveth  and  reign- 
eth  with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghoft, 
one  God,  world  without  end .  Amen . 
For  the  Epijlle.   A^ls  i. 


T 


1. 

HE  former  treatife  have  I 
made,  O  Theophilus,  of  all 
that  Jefus  began  both  to  do  and 
teach,  until  the  day  in  which  he 
was  taken  up,  after  that  he  through 
the  Holy  Ghoft  had  given  com- 
mandments unto  the  Apoftles  whom 
he  had  chofen :  to  whom  alfo  he 
Ihewed  himfelf  alive  after  his  paf- 
lion,  by  many  infallible  proofs ;  be- 
ing feen  of  them  forty  days,  and 
fpeaking  of  the  things  pertaining 
to  the  Kingdom  of  God :  and,  be- 
ing aflembled  together  with  them, 
commanded  diem  that  diey  fliould 


not  depart  from  JeiTifalem,  but 
wait  for  the  proinlle  of  the  Father, 
which,  faith  he,  ve  have  heard  of 
me.  For  John  truly  baptized  with 
water,  but  ye  fliall  be  baptized 
with  the  Holy  Ghoft  not  many 
days  hence.  When  they  therefore 
were  come  together,  they  aflied  of 
him,  faying.  Lord,  wilt  thou  at  this 


time  reftore  again  the  kingdom  to 
Ifrael?  And  he  faid  unto  them.  It 
is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times 
or  the  feafons^  which  the  Father 
hath  put  ill  his  own  power.  But 
ye  fliall  receive  power  after  that 
the  Holy  Ghoft  is  come  upon  you ; 
and  ye  fliall  be  witnefles  unto  me, 
both  in  Jerufalem,  and  in  all  Ju- 
daea, and  in  Samaria,  and  unto  the 
uttermoft  part  of  the  earth.  And 
when  he  had  fpoken  thefe  things, 
while  they  beheld,  he  was  taken 
up,  and  a  cloud  received  him  out 
of  their  fight.  And  while  they 
looked  ftedfaftly  toward  heaven, 
as  he  went  up,  behold,  two  men 
ftood  by  them  in  white  apparel ; 
which  alfo  faid,  Ye  men  of  Gali- 
lee, why  ftand  ye  gazing  up  into 
heaven?  This  fame  Jefus,  which  is 
taken  up  from  you  into  heaven, 
fliall  fo  come,  in  like  manner  as^ 
ye  have  feen  hmi  go  mto  heaven.  .. 
TJie  GofpeL   St.  Mark  xvi.  14. 

JESUS  appeared  unto  the  ele- 
ven as  they  fat  at  meat,  and 
upbraided  them  with  their  unbelief 
and  hardnefs  of  lieai't,  becaufe  tliey| 


Sunday  after 

believed  not  them  which  had  feeii 
him  after  he  was  rifen.  And  he  faid 
unto  them,  Go  ye  into  all  the 
world,  and  preach  the  (iofpel  to 
every  creature.  He  that  believeth 
and  is  baptized  Ihall  be  faved ;  but 
he  that  believeth  not  fliall  be  damn- 
ed. And  tliefe  iigns  fliali  follow 
them  that  believe :  In  my  Name 
ftiall  they  caft  out  devils ;  they  fliall 
fpeak  Avith  new  tongues ;  they  fliall 
take  up  ferpents ;  and  if  they  drink 
any  deadly  thing,  it  fliall  not  hurt 
them;  they  fliall  lay  hands  on  the 
iick,  and  they  fliall  recover.  So 
then  after  the  Lord  had  fpoken 
unto  them,  he  was  received  up 
into  heaven,  and  fat  on  the  right 
hand  of  God.  And  they  went  forth 
and  preached  eveiy  where,  the 
Ijord  working  with  them,  and  con- 
firming the  Word  mth  figns  fol- 
lowing. 

Sunday  after  AJcenjion-day. 
The  Colledl. 

OGod  the  King  of  glory,  who 
haft  exalted  thine  only  Son 
Jefus  Chrift  with  great  triumph 
unto  thy  kingdom  in  heaven;  We 
befeech  thee,  leave  us  not  com- 
fortlefs;  but  fend  to  us  thine  Holy 
Ghoft  to  comfort  us,  and  exalt  us 
unto  the  fame  place  whither  our 
Saviour  Chrift  is  gone  before,  who 
liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee  and 
the  Holy  (Thoft,  one  God,  world 
Avithout  end.    Atnen. 


Afcenfion-day. 

The  Epijile.    1  St.  Pet.  iv.  7. 

THE  end  of  all  things  is  at 
hand;  be  ye  therefore  fober, 
and  watch  unto  prayer.  And  above 
all  things  have  fervent  chaiity  a- 
niong  yourfelves :  for  charity  fliall 
copier  the  multitude  of  fms.  Ufe 
hofpitality  one  to  another  without 
grudging.  As  every  man  hath  re- 
ceived the  gift,  even  fo  minifter 
the  fame  one  to  another,  as  good 
ftewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of 
God.  If  any  man  fpeak,  let  him 
fpeak  as  the  oracles  of  God :  if 
any  man  minifter,  let  him  do  it  as 
of  the  ability  which  God  giveth ; 
that  God  in  all  things  may  be 
glorified  through  Jefus  Chrift,  to 
whom  be  praife  and  dominion  for 
ever  and  ever.  Amen. 
The  Gofpcl.  St.  John  xv.  2().  and 
part  of  Chapter  xvi. 

WHEN  the  Comforter  is  come, 
whom  I  will  fend  unto  you 
from  the  Father,  even  the  Spirit  of 
truth,  which  proceedeth  from  the 
Father,  he  fliall  teftify  of  me.  And 
ye  alio  fliall  bear  witnefs,  becaufe 
ye  have  been  with  me  from  the 
beginning.  Thefe  things  have  I 
fpoken  unto  you,  that  ye  fliould 
not  be  oftended.  They  fliall  put 
you  out  of  the  fynagogues :  yea, 
the  time  cometh,  that  whofoever 
killeth  you  will  think  that  he  doeth 
Cxod  fervice.  And  thefe  things  will 
they  do  imto  you,  becaufe  they 
have  not  known  the  Father,  nor 


WHiT-SUNBAYi 


me.  But  thefe  things  have  I  told 
you,  that,  when  the  time  fliall  come, 
ye  may  remember  that  I  told  you 
of  them. 

WHIT-SUNDAY. 

The  CoUeH. 

GOD,  who  as  at  this  time  didft 
teach  the  hearts  of  thy  faith- 
ful people,  by  the  fending  to  them 
the  light  of  thy  Holy  Spirit ;  Grant 
us  by  the  fame  Spirit  to  have  a 
right  judgement  in  all  things,  and 
evermore  to  rejoice  in  his  holy 
comfort;  through  the  merits  of 
■Chrift  .lefus  our  Saviour,  who  liv- 
eth  and  reigneth  ^vith  thee,  in  the 
unity  of  the  fame  Spirit,  one  God, 
world  without  end.  Amen. 
For  the  Epijile.   A6ts  ii.  1. 

WHEN  the  day  of  Pentecoft 
was  fully  come,  they  were 
air  with  one  accord  in  one  place. 
And  fuddenly  there  came  a  found 
from  heaven,  as  of  a  rufliing  migh- 
ty wind,  and  it  filled  all  the  houfe 
where  they  were  fitting.  And 
there  appeared  unto  them  cloven 
tongues,  like  as  of  fire,  and  it  fat 
upon  each  of  them :  and  they  were 
all  filled  ^vith  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and 
began  to  fpeak  with  other  tongues, 
as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance. 
And  there  were  d^velling  at  Je- 
rufalem  Jews,  devout  men,  out  of 
every  nation  under  heaven.  Now 
when  this  was  noifed  abroad,  the 
multitude  came  together,  and  were 


confounded,  becaufe  that  eveiy 
man  heard  them  fpeak  in  his  own 
language.  And  they  were  all  a- 
mazed,  and  marvelled,  faying  one 
to  another.  Behold,  are  not  all 
thefe  which  fpeak  Galileans?  And 
how  hear  we  every  man  in  our  own 
tongue  wherein  we  were  born? 
Parthians,  and  Medes,  and  E- 
lamites,  and  the  dwellers  in  Me- 
fopotamia,  and  in  Judaea,  and 
Cappadocia,  in  Pontus,  and  Afia, 
Phrygia,  and  Pamphylia,  in  Egypt, 
and  in  the  parts  of  I^ibya  about 
Cyrene,  and  fi;rangers  of  Rome, 
Jews,  and  Profelytes,  Cretes,  and 
Arabians,  we  do  hear  them  fpeak 
in  our  tongues  the  wonderful  works 
of  God. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  John  xiv.  15. 

JESUS  faid  unto  his  difciples, 
If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  com- 
mandments. And  I  will  pray  the 
Father,  and  he  ftiaU  give  you  an- 
other Comforter,  that  he  may  a- 
bide  with  you  for  ever ;  even  the 
Spirit  of  truth,  whom  the  world 
cannot  receive,  becaufe  it  feeth 
him  not,  neither  knoweth  him : 
but  ye  know  him ;  for  he  dwelleth 
with  you,  and  fliall  be  in  you.  I 
will  not  leave  you  comfortlefs ;  I 
will  come  to  you.  Yet  a  little 
while,  and  the  world  feeth  me  no 
more ;  but  ye  fee  me :  becaufe  I 
live,  ye  fliall  live  alfo.  At  that 
day  ye  fliall  know,  that  I  am  in 
my  Father,  and  ye  in  me,  and  I 
R. 


the  ^^'01x1 
mine,  but 


in  you.  He  that  hath  my  com- 
mandments, and  keepeth  them, 
he  it  is  that  loveth  me ;  and  he 
that  loveth  me  ihall  be  loved  of 
my  Father,  and  I  will  love  him, 
and  will  manifeft  myfelf  to  him. 
Judas  faith  unto  him,  (not  Ifca- 
riot,)  Lord,  how  is  it  that  thou 
wilt  manifell  thyfelf  unto  us,  and 
not  unto  the  world?  Jefus  an- 
fwered  and  faid  unto  him,  Jf  a 
man  love  me,  he  Avill  keep  my 
words,  and  my  Father  will  love 
him,  and  we  wdll  come  unto  him, 
and  make  our  abode  with  him. 
He  that  loveth  me  not  keepeth 
not  my  fayinss :  and 
which  ye  hear  is  not 
the  Father  s  which  fent  me.  Thefe 
things  have  I  fpoken  unto  you, 
being  yet  prefent  with  you.  But 
the  Comforter,  which  is  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  whom  the  Father  will  fend 
in  my  Name,  he  Ihall  teach  you 
all  things,  and  bring  all  things  to 
your  remembrance,  whatfoever  I 
have  faid  unto  you.  Peace  I  leave 
with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto 
you:  not  as  the  world  giveth,  give 
I  unto  you.  Let  not  your  heart  be 
troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid. 
Ye  have  lieai'd  how  I  faid  unto 
you,  I  go  away,  and  come  again 
unto  you.  If  ye  loved  me,  ye 
would  rejoice,  becaufe  I  faid,  1  go 
unto  the  Father:  for  my  Father  is 
greater  than  L  i\nd  now  I  have 
told  you  before  it  come  to  pafs, 


Monday  in  JVhitfun-'week. 

that,  when  it  is  come  to  pafs,  ye 


might  believe.  Hereafter  I  will 
not  talk  much  with  you  :  for  the 
prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and 
hath  nothing  in  me.  But  that  the 
world  may  know  that  I  io^e  the 
Father ;  and  ^as  the  Father  gave 
me  commandment,  even  fo  I  do. 

Monday  in  JVhitfun-iveek. 
The  Colledl. 

GOD,  who  as  at  this  time  didft 
teach  the  hearts  of  thy  faith- 
ful  people,  by  the  fending  to  them 
the  light  of  thy  Holy  Spirit ;  Grant 
us  by  the  fame  Spirit  to  have  a 
right  judgement  in  all  things,  and 
evermore  to  rejoice  in  his  holy 
comfort ;  through  the  merits  of 
Clirift  Jefus  our  Savioiu*,  who  liv- 
eth  and  reigneth  Avitli  thee,  in  the 
unity  of  the  fame  Spirit,  one  God, 
world  without  end.  Ameni\  io  noit 
For  the  Epijlle.  A6ts  x.  34.  >ib 

THEN  Peter  opened  his  mouth, 
and  faid,  Of  a  truth  I  perceive 
that  God  is  no  refpe6ter  of  perfons; 
but  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth 
him,  and  worketh  righteoufnefs,  is 
accepted  with  him.  The  Word 
which  God  fent  unto  the  children 
of  Ifrael,  preaching  peace  by  Jefus 
Chrill ;  (he  is  Lord  of  all ;)  that 
Word,  I  fay,  ye  know,  which  was 
publilhed  throughout  all  .ludfca, 
and  began  from  (ialilee,  after  the 
baptifm  which  John  preached:  how 
God  anointeil  Jefus  of  Nazareth 


Tucfday  m 

with  the  Holy  Glioll,  and  witli 
power ;  who  went  about  doing- 
good,  and  healing  all  that  were 
opprefled  of  the  devil :  for  God 
was  with  him.  And  we  are  wit- 
nelTes  of  all  things  which  he  did, 
both  in  the  land  of  the  Jews,  and 
in  Jerufaleni ;  whom  they  flew, 
and  hanged  on  a  tree  :  Him  God 
raifed  up  the  third  day,  and  ftiew- 
ed  him  openly ;  not  to  all  the  peo- 
ple, but  unto  Avitnefles  chofen  be- 
fore of  God ;  even  to  us  who  did 
eat  and  drink  with  him  after  he 
rofe  from  the  dead.  And  he  com- 
manded us  to  preach  unto  the  peo- 
ple, and  to  teftify  that  it  is  he  which 
was  ordained  of  God  to  be  the 
Judge  of  quick  and  dead.  To  him 
give  all  the  prophets  witnefs,  that 
through  his  Name  whofoever  be- 
lieveth  in  him  fliall  receive  remif- 
(ion  of  fins.  While  Peter  yet  fpake 
thefe  words,  the  Holy  Ghoft  fell 
on  all  them  which  heard  the  word. 
And  they  of  the  circumcifion, 
which  believed,  were  aftoniflied, 
as  many  as  came  with  Peter,  be- 
caufe  that  on  the  Gentiles  alfo  was 
poured  out  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft.  For  they  heard  them  fpeak 
with  tongues,  and  magnify  God. 
Then  anfwered  Peter,  Can  any 
man  forbid  water,  that  thefe  fliould 
not  be  baptized,  which  have  re- 
ceived the  Holy  Ghoft  as  well  as 
we?  And  he  commanded  them  to 
be  baptized  in  the  Name  of  the 


WJiitfmi-week\ 

Lord.    Then  prayed  they  him  to 
tarry  certain  days. 

The  (iofpel.  St.  John  iii.  16. -» 
^()D  \o  loved  the  world,  that 
he  gave  his  only-begotten 
Son,  that  whofoever  believeth  in 
him  fliould  not  perifli,  but  have 
everlallino;  life.  For  God  fent  not 
his  Son  into  the  world  to  condemn 
the  world,  but  that  the  world 
through  him  might  be  faved.  He 
that  believeth  on  him  is  not  con- 
demned :  but  he  that  believeth  not 
is  condemned  already;  becaufe  he 
hath  not  believed  in  the  Name 
of  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God. 
And  this  is  the  condemnation,  that 
light  is  come  into  the  world,  and 
men  loved  darknefs  rather  than 
light,  becaufe  their  deeds  were 
evil.  For  eveiy  one  that  doeth  evil 
hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh  to 
the  light,  left  his  deeds  fliould  be 
reproved.  But  he  that  doeth  truth 
cometh  to  the  light,  that  his  deeds 
may  be  made  manifeft,  that  they 
are  wrought  in  God. 

-..Tucfday  (71  Whitfun-week. 
•!  i  ij.iOii  a  The  Colle&. 

GD,  who  as  at  this  time  didft 
teach  the  hearts  of  thy  faith- 
ful people,  by  the  fending  to  them 
the  light  of  thy  Holy  Spirit ;  Grant 
us  by  the  fame  Spirit  to  have  a 
light  judgement  in  all  things,  and 
evermore  to  rejoice  in  his  holy 
comfort ;  through  the  merits  of 
Ra 


TR  INI  T  Y-  S  UN  DA  Y. 


Chiift  Jefiis  our  Saviour,  who  liv- 
eth  and  reigneth  with  thee,  in  the 
unity  of  the  fame  Spirit,  one  God, 
world  without  end.    Amen. 
For  the  Epiftle.    A6ls  viii.  14. 

WHEN  the  Apoftles,  which 
were  at  Jerufalem,  heard 
that  Samaria  had  received  the 
word  of  God,  they  fent  unto  them 
Peter  and  John ;  who,  when  they 
were  come  do\vn,  prayed  for  them, 
that  they  might  receive  the  Holy 
Glioft :  (for  as  yet  he  was  fallen 
upon  none  of  them ;  only  they 
were  baptized  in  the  Name  of  the 
Lord  Jefus.)  Then  laid  they  their 
hands  on  them,  and  they  received 
the  Holy  Ghoft. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  John  x.  1 . 

VERILY,  verily  I  fay  unto  you, 
He  that  entereth  not  bv  the 

ml 

door  into  the  flieep-fold,  but  climb- 
eth  up  fome  other  way,  the  fame 
is  a  thief  and  a  robber.  But  he 
that  entereth  in  by  the  door  is  the 
fliepherd  of  the  iheep :  to  him  the 
porter  openeth ;  and  the  flieep  hear 
his  voice,  and  he  calleth  his  own 
flieep  by  name,  and  leadeth  them 
out.  7\nd,  when  he  putteth  forth 
his  own  flieep,  he  goeth  before 
them,  and  the  flieep  follow  him ; 
for  they  know  his  voice.  And  a 
ftranger  will  they  not  follow ;  but 
will  flee  from  him ;  for  they  know 
not  the  voice  of  ftrangers.  ,  'Hiis 
pai-able  fpake  Jefus  unto  them :  but 
they  undei-ftood  not  what  things 


they  were  which  he  fpake  unto 
them.  Then  faid  Jefus  unto  them 
again;  Verily,  verily  I  fay  unto 
you,  I  am  the  door  of  the  flieep. 
All  that  ever  came  before  me  are 
thieves  and  robbers ;  but  the  flieep 
did  not  hear  them.  I  am  the  door; 
by  me  if  any  man  enter  in,  he  fliall 
be  faved,  and  fliall  go  in  and  out, 
and  find  pafl;ure.  The  thief  cometh 
not  but  for  to  fl;eal,  and  to  kill, 
and  to  dettroy :  I  am  come  that 
they  might  have  life,  and  that  they 
might  have  it  more  abuiidantlyjoicji 

TRINITY-SUNDA^.%*79w 

TJie  ColleBi  -jh^  ^-i 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  who  hafl;  given  unto  us 
thy  fervants  grace  by  the  confeflTion 
of  a  true  faith  to  acknowledge  the 
gloiy  of  the  eternal  Trhiity,  and 
in  the  })ower  of  the  Divine  Majefl;y 
to  worfliip  the  Unity;  We  befeech 
thee,  that  thou  wouldefl;  keep  us 
ftedfafi;  in  this  faith,  and  evermore 
defend  us  from  all  advei-fities,  who 
livefl;  and  reigneft;,  one  God,  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

For  the  FpiJHe.    Rev.  iv.  1. 

AFTER  this  I  looked,  and  be- 
hold, a  door  was  opened  in 
heaven :  and  the  fidl  voice  M'hich 
I  heard  was  as  it  were  of  a  trum- 
pet talking  with  me;  which  faid. 
Come  up  hither,  and  I  vAW  fliew 
thee  things  which  mull  be  hereaf- 
ter.  And  immediately  1  was  in  the 


TRINJ^J--§  UNmji 


Spirit;  and  behold,  a  throne  was 
fet  in  heaven,  and  one  fat  on  the 
throne :  and  he  that  fat  was  to  look 
upon  like  a  jafper  and  a  fardine 
Hone  :  and  there  was  a  rainbow 
round  about  the  throne,  in  fight 
like  unto  an  emerald.  And  round 
about  the  throne  were  four  and 
twenty  feats ;  and  upon  the  feats 
I  faw  four  and  twenty  elders  fit- 
ting, clothed  in  white  raiment ;  and 
they  had  on  their  heads  crowns 
of  gold:  And  out  of  the  throne 
proceeded  lightnings,  and  thun- 
derings,  and  voices.  And  there 
were  feven  lamps  of  fire  burning 
before  the  throne,  which  are  the 
feven  fpirits  of  God.  And  before 
the  throne  there  was  a  fea  of  glafs 
like  unto  cryllal :  and  in  the  midft 
of  the  throne,  and  round  about 
the  throne,  were  four  beafts  full  of 
eyes  before  and  behind.  And  the 
firft  beaft  was  like  a  lion,  and  the 
fecond  beaft  like  a  calf,  and  the 
third  beaft  had  a  face  as  a  man, 
and  the  fourth  beaft  was  like  a 
flying  eagle.  And  the  four  beafts 
had  each  of  them  fix  wings  about 
him ;  and  they  were  full  of  eyes 
within  :  and  they  reft  not  day  and 
night,  faying.  Holy,  holy,  holy. 
Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was, 
and  is,  and  is  to  come.  And  when 
thofe  beafts  give  gloiy,  and  ho- 
nour, and  thanks,  to  him  that  fat 
on  the  throne,  who  liveth  for  ever 
and  ever,  the  fom*  and  twenty  eld- 


ers fall  do\vn  before  him  that  fat 
on  the  throne,  and  worfliip  him 
that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  and 
caft  their  crowns  before  the  throne, 
faying.  Thou  art  worthy,  O  Lord, 
to  receive  gloiy,  and  honour,  and 
power ;  for  thou  haft  created  all 
things,  and  for  thy  pleafure  they, 
are  and  were  created. 


The  Gofpet.    St.  John  iii.  1 . 

THERE  was  a  man  of  the  Pha- 
rifees,  named  Nicodemus,  a 
ruler  of  the  Jews  :  the  fame  came 
to  Jefus  by  night,  and  faid  unto 
him.  Rabbi,  we  know  that  thou  art 
a  teacher  come  from  God  :  for  no 
man  can  do  thefe  miracles  that 
thou  doeft,  except  God  be  with 
him.  Jefus  anfwered  and  faid  un- 
to him.  Verily,  verily  I  fay  unto 
thee.  Except  a  man  be  born  again, 
he  cannot  fee  the  Kingdom  of  God. 
Nicodemus  faith  unto  him.  How 
can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  old? 
can  he  enter  the  fecond  time  into 
his  mother's  womb,  and  be  born? 
Jefus  anfwered,  Verily,  verily  I 
fay  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be, 
bom  of  water,  and  of  the  Spirit, 
he  cannot  enter  into  the  Kingdom 
of  God.  That  which  is  born  of 
the  fleih  is  flefli ;  and  that  which  is 
born  of  the  Spirit  is  fpirit.  Mai-vel 
not  that  I  faid  unto  thee,  Ye  muft 
be  born  again.  The  wind  bloweth 
where  it  lifteth,  and  thou  heareft 
the  found  thereof,  but  canft  not 


Tli^JirJi  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

Hie  Epijile.   1 
TIELOVED, 


tell  whence  it  cometli,  and  whither 
it  goeth ;  fo  is  eveiy  one  that  is 
born  of  the  Spirit.  Nicodenius 
anfwered  and  faid  unto  him,  How 
can  thefe  thing-s  be?  Jefus  anfwer- 
ed  and  faid  unto  him,  Art  thou  a 
mafter  of  Ifrael,  and  knowell  not 
thefe  tilings?  Verily,  verily  I  fay 
unto  thee.  We  fpeak  that  we  do 
know,  and  teltify  that  we  have 
feen ;  and  ye  receive  not  our  ^\dt- 
nefs.  If  I  have  told  you  earthly 
things,  and  ye  believe  not ;  how 
fhall  ye  believe,  if  I  tell  you  of 
heavenly  things?  And  no  man  hath 
afcended  up  to  heaven,  but  he  that 
came  down  from  heaven,  even  the 
Son  of  man,  who  is  in  heaven. 
And  as  Mofes  lifted  up  the  ferpent 
in  the  wildernefs,  even  fo  muft  the 
Son  of  man  be  lifted  up :  that  who- 
foever  believeth  in  him  fliould  not 
perifli,  but  have  eternal  life. 

Thefirft  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  Colledi. 

OGod,  the  ftrength  of  all  them 
that  put  their  tiiill  in  thee, 
mercifully  accept  our  prayers ;  and 
becaufe  through  the  weaknefs  of 
our  mortal  nature  we  can  do  no 
good  thing  without  thee,  grant  us 
the  help  of  thy  grace,  that  in  keep- 
ing of  thy  connnandments  we  may 
pleafe  thee,  both  in  will  and  deed ; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


St.  John  iv.  7. 

let  us  love  one 
another :  for  love  is  of  God, 
and  every  one  that  loveth  is  born 
of  God,  and  knoweth  God.  He 
that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God; 
for  God  is  love.  In  this  was  ma- 
nifelled  the  love  of  God  towards 
us,  becaufe  that  God  fent  his  only- 
begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that 
we  might  live  through  him.  Here- 
in is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God, 
but  that  he  loved  us>  and  fent  his 
Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our 
fins.  Beloved,  if  God  fo  loved  us, 
we  ought  alfo  to  love  one  another. 
No  man  hath  feen  God  at  any 
time.  If  we  love  one  another,  God 
dwelleth  in  us,  and  his  love  is  per- 
fected in  us.  Hereby  know  we 
that  we  dwell  in  him,  and  he  in 
us;  becaufe  he  hath  given  us  df 
his  Spirit.  And  we  have  feen,  and 
do  teftify,  that  the  Father  fent  the 
Son  to  be  the  Savioiu'  of  the  world. 
Whofoever  Ihall  confefs  that  Jefus 
is  the  Son  of  (jod,  God  dwelleth 
in  him,  and  he  in  God.  And  we 
have  known  and  believed  the  love 
that  God  hath  to  us.  God  is  \o\e ; 
and  he  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwell- 
eth in  God,  and  God  in  him.  Here- 
in is  our  love  made  j)erfe(it  that 
we  may  have  boldnefs  in  the  day 
of  judgement;  becaufe  as  he  is,  fo 
are  we  in  this  world.  There  is  no 
fear  in  love ;  but  perfe(^t  love  call- 
eth  out  fear ;  becaufe  fear  hath  tor- 


The  fecond  Stmday  after  Trinity. 


ment :  lie  that  fearetli  is  not  made 
perfect  in  love.  We  love  him,  be- 
cauie  he  fiilt  loved  us.  If  a  man 
fay,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his 
brother,  he  is  a  liar:  for  he  that 
loveth  not  his  brother,  whom  he 
hath  feen,  how  can  he  love  God, 
whom  he  hath  not  feen?  And  this 
commandment  have  we  from  him, 
That  he  who  loveth  God  love  his 
brother  alfo. 

1)9 /oi  9W  JfidJ  JO 
iiThe  Go/pel.   St.  Luke  xvi.  19. 

THERE  was  a  certain  rich 
man,  which  was  clothed  in 
purple,  and  fine  linen,  and  fared 
fumptuoufly  eveiy  day.  And  there 
was  a  certain  beggar  named  La- 
zarus, which  was  laid  at  his  gate 
full  of  fores,  and  defiring  to  be  fed 
with  the  crumbs,  which  fell  from 
the  rich  man's  table :  moreover, 
the  dogs  came  and  licked  his  fores. 
And  it  came  to  pafs,  that  the  beg- 
gar died,  and  was  carried  by 
the  angels  into  Abraham's  bofom. 
The  rich  man  alfo  died,  and  was 
buried :  and  in  hell  he  lift  up  his 
eyes  being  in  torments,  and  feetli 
Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus  in 
his  bofom.  And  he  cried  and  faid. 
Father  Abraham,  have  mercy  on 
me,  and  fend  Lazarus,  that  he 
may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in 
water,  and  cool  my  tongue;  for  I 
am  tormented  in  this  flame.  But 
Abraham  faid,  Son,  remember  that 
thou  in  thy  life-time  receivedft  thy 


good  things,  and  like  wife  Lazarus 
evil  things ;  but  now  he  is  com- 
forted, and  thou  art  tormented. 
And  belides  all  this,  between  us 
and  you  there  is  a  great  gulf  fix- 
ed :  fo  that  they  who  would  pafs 
from  hence  to  you  cannot ;  neither 
can  they  pafs  to  us,  that  would 
come  from  thence.  Then  he  faid, 
I  pray  thee  therefore,  father,  that 
thou  wouldeft  fend  him  to  my  fa- 
ther's houfe :  for  I  have  five  bre- 
thren; that  he  may  tefi;ify  unto 
them,  left  they  alfo  come  into  this 
place  of  torment.  Abraham  faith 
unto  him,  They  have  Mofes  and 
the  prophets ;  let  them  hear  them. 
And  he  faid,  Nay,  father  Abra- 
ham; but  if  one  went  unto  them 
from  the  dead,  they  will  repent. 
And  he  faid  unto  him,  If  they  hear 
not  Mofes  and  the  prophets,  nei- 
ther will  they  be  perfuaded,  though 
one  rofe  from  the  dead. 


The  fecond  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  CoUedi. 

Lord,  who  never  faileft  to 
help  and  govern  them  whom 
thou  doll  brino-  up  in  thv  ftedfaft 
fear  and  love ;  Keep  us,  we  befeech 
thee,  under  the  protection  of  thy 
good  providence,  and  make  us  to 
have  a  perpetual  fear  and  love  of 
thy  holy  Name ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Aiuen. 


Thefecond  Sunday  after  Trinity, 


The  Epijile.    1  St.  John  iii.  13. 

MARVEL  not,  my  brethren, 
if  the  world  hate  you.  We 
know  that  we  have  paifed  from 
death  imto  Hfe,  becaufe  we  love 
the  brethren.  He  that  loveth  not 
his  brother  abideth  in  death.  Who- 
foever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  mur- 
derer :  and  ye  know  that  no  mur- 
derer hath  eternal  life  abiding  in 
hun.  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love 
of  God,  becaufe  he  laid  down  his 
life  for  us :  and  we  ought  to  lay 
down  our  lives  for  the  brethren. 
But  whofo  hath  this  world's  good, 
and  feeth  his  brother  have  need, 
and  Ihutteth  up  his  bowels  of  com- 
paffion  from  him;  how  dwelleth 
the  love  of  God  in  him?  My  Uttle 
children,  let  us  not  love  in  word, 
neither  in  tongue ;  but  in  deed,  and 
m  truth.  And  hereby  we  know 
that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  Ihall 
affure  our  hearts  before  him.  For 
if  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is 
greater  than  our  heart,  and  know- 
eth  all  things.  Beloved,  if  our 
heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have 
we  confidence  towards  God.  And 
whatfoever  we  alk,  we  receive  of 
him,  becaufe  we  keep  his  com- 
mandments, and  do  thofe  things 
that  are  pleafing  in  his  fight.  And 
this  is  his  commandment.  That  we 
fliould  believe  on  the  Name  of  his 
Son  Jefus  Chrift,  and  love  one  an- 
other, as  he  gave  us  command- 
ment.   And  he  that  keepeth  his 


commandments  dwelleth  in  him, 
and   he   in   him:   and  hereby  we 
know  that  he  abideth  in  us,  by  the 
Spirit  which  he  hath  given  us. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  xiv.  16. 

A  Certain  man  made  a  great  fup- 
per,  and  bade  many;  and  fent 
his  fervant  at  fupper-time  to  fay 
to  them  that  were  bidden.  Come, 
for  all  things  are  now  ready.  And 
they  all  with  one  confent  began  to 
make  excufe.  The  firft  faid  unto 
him,  I  have  bought  a  piece  of 
ground,  and  I  muft  needs  go  and 
fee  it;  I  pray  thee  have  me  excufed. 
And  another  faid,  I  have  bought 
five  yoke  of  oxen,  and  I  go  to 
prove  them;  I  pray  thee  have  me 
excufed.  And  another  faid,  I  have 
married  a  wife,  and  therefore  I 
cannot  come.  So  that  fervant 
came,  and  fliewed  his  lord  thefe 
things.  Then  the  mafl;er  of  the 
houfe  being  angry  faid  to  his  fer-i 
vant.  Go  out  quickly  mto  the  ftreets 
and  lanes  of  the  city,  and  bring  in 
hither  the  poor,  and  the  maimed, 
and  the  halt,  and  the  blind.  And 
the  feiTant  faid.  Lord,  it  is  done 
as  thou  hall  commanded,  and  yet 
there  is  room.  And  the  Lord  faid 
unto  the  fervant.  Go  out  into  the 
high-ways  and  hedges,  and  compel 
them  to  come  in,  that  my  houfe 
may  be  filled.  For  I  fay  unto  you. 
That  none  of  thofe  men  which 
were  bidden  ihall  talle  of  my  fup- 
per. 


The  third  and  fourth  Sundays  after  Trinity. 


The  third  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  Colledi. 

OLord,  we  befeecli  thee  mer- 
cifully to  hear  us ;  and  grant 
that  we,  to  whom  thou  haft  given 
an  hearty  delire  to  pray,  may  by 
thy  mighty  aid  be  defended  and 
comforted  in  all  dangers  and  ad- 
verlities;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijlle.    I  St.  Pet.  v.  5. 

ALL  of  you  be  fubje6l  one  to 
another,  and  be  clothed  with 
humility :  for  God  refifteth  the 
proud,  and  giveth  grace  to  the 
humble.  Humble  yourfelves  there- 
fore under  the  mighty  hand  of 
God,  that  he  may  exalt  you  in  due 
time;  cafting  all  your  care  upon 
him,  for  he  careth  for  you.  Be 
fober,  be  vigilant ;  becaufe  your 
adverfaiy  the  devil,  as  a  roaring 
lion,  walketh  about  feeking  whom 
he  may  devour :  whom  relift  fted- 
faft  in  the  faith,  knoAving  that  the 
fame  afflictions  are  accompliftied 
in  your  brethren  that  are  in  the 
world.  But  the  God  of  all  grace, 
who  hath  called  us  into  his  eter- 
nal gloiy  by  Chrift  Jefus,  after  that 
ye  have  fuflfered  a  while,  make  you 
perfect,  ftablifh,  ftrengthen,  fettle 
you.  To  him  be  glory  and  domi- 
Miion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. 
The  Gofpel.    St.  Luke  xv.  L 

THEN  drew  neai'  unto  him  all 
the  Publicans  and  linners  for 
to  hear  him.    And  the  Pharifees 


and  Scribes  murmured,  faying, 
This  man  receiveth  fmners,  and 
eateth  with  them.  And  he  fpake 
this  parable  unto  them,  faying, 
What  man  of  you  having  an  hun- 
dred ftieep,  if  he  lofe  one  of  them, 
doth  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine 
in  the  Avildernefs,  and  go  after  that 
which  is  loft,  until  he  find  it?  And 
when  he  hath  found  it,  he  layeth  it 
on  his  Ihoulders,  rejoicing.  And 
when  he  cometh  home,  he  calleth 
together  his  friends  and  neigh- 
bours, faying  unto  them.  Rejoice 
with  me,  for  I  have  found  my  ilieep 
which  was  loft.  I  fay  unto  you, 
That  likewife  joy  ftiall  be  in  hea- 
ven over  one  finner  that  repenteth, 
more  than  over  ninety  and  nine 
juft  perfons,  which  need  no  repent- 
ance. Either  what  woman  having 
ten  pieces  of  filver,  if  flie  lofe  one 
piece,  doth  not  light  a  candle,  and 
fweep  the  houfe,  and  feek  diligent- 
ly till  flie  find  it?  And  when  ftie 
hath  found  it,  flie  calleth  her 
friends  and  her  neighbours  toge- 
ther, faymg.  Rejoice  with  me,  for 
1  have  found  the  piece  which  I 
had  loft.  Likewife,  I  fay  unto  you. 
There  is  joy  in  the  prefence  of  the 
angels  of  God  over  one  finner  that 
repenteth. 

The  fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  CoUedi. 

OGod,  the  protestor  of  all  that 
truft  in  thee,  without  whom 

S 


The^th  Stimday  after  Trinity. 

not  be  condemned 


notliing  is  ftrong,  nothing  is  holy; 
Increafe  and  multiply  upon  us  thy 
mercy;  that,  thou  being  our  ruler 
and  guide,  we  may  fo  pafs  through 
things  temporal,  that  we  finally 
lofe  not  the  things  eternal :  Grant 
this,  O  heavenly  Father,  for  Jefus 
Chrift's  fake  our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijile.    Rom.  viii.  18. 

I  Reckon  that  the  fufferings  of 
this  prefent  time  are  not  wor- 
thy to  be  compared  with  the  glory 
which  iliall  be  revealed  in  us.  For 
the  earned  expectation  of  the  crea- 
ture waiteth  for  the  manifeftation 
of  the  fons  of  God.  For  the  crea- 
ture was  made  fubjec^t  to  vanity, 
not  willingly,  but  by  reafon  of  him 
who  hath  fubje6led  the  fame  in 
hope:  becaufe  the  creature  itfelf 
alfo  fliall  be  delivered  from  the 
bondage  of  corruption,  into  the 
glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of 
God.  For  we  know  that  the  whole 
creation  groaneth,  and  travaileth 
in  pain  together  until  now.  And 
not  only  they,  but  ourfelves  alfo, 
which  have  the  firft-fruits  of  the 
Spirit,  even  we  ourfelves  groan 
within  ourfelves,  waiting  for  the 
adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption 
of  our  body. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  vi.  36. 

BE  ye  therefore  merciful,  as 
your  Father  alfo  is  merciful. 
Judge  not,  and  ye  fliall  not  be 
judged:  condemn  not,  and  ye  fliall 


forgive,  and 
ye  fliall  be  forgiven:  give,  and  it 


ihall    be 


given 


unto 


you 


ffood 


!-5 


meafure,  prelfed  doAv^n,  and  fliaken 
together,  and  running  over,  fliall 
men  give  into  your  bofom.  For 
with  the  fame  meafure  that  ye 
mete  withal,  it  fliall  be  meafured 
to  you  again.  And  he  fpake  a  pa- 
rable unto  them.  Can  the  blind 
lead  the  blind?  fliall  they  not  both 
fall  into  the  ditch?  The  difciple  is 
not  above  his  inafter ;  liut  every 
one  that  is  perfect  fliall  be  as  his 
mafter.  And  why  belioldelt  thou 
the  mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's 
eye,  but  perceivell  not  the  beam 
that  is  in  thine  own  eye?  Either 
how  canfl;  thou  fay  to  thy  brother, 
Brother,  let  me  pull  out  the  mote 
that  is  in  thine  eye,  when  thou 
thyfelf  beholdefl;  not  the  beam  that 
is  in  thine  o^vn  eye?  Thou  hypo- 
crite, cafi;  out  lirll  the  beam  out 
of  thine  own  eye,  and  then  (halt 
thou  fee  clearly  to  pull  out  the 

mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's  eye. 

-uijq ^_ 

The  fifth  Sumlaij  after  Trinity. 
The  ColieM. 

GRANT,  O  Lord,  we  befeech 
thee,  that  the  courfe  of  this 
world  may  be  fo  peaceably  order- 
ed by  thy  governance,  that  thy 
Church  may  joyfully  fcrve  thee  in 
all  godly  qnietnefs ;  through  Jefus 
Chrifl;  our  Lord,    ylmcn. 


Thejixth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 


J,,  The  Epijlle.    1  St.  Pet.  iii.  8. 

BE.  ye  all  of  one  mind,  having 
companion  one  of  another, 
love  as  brethren,  be  pitiful,  be 
courteous ;  not  rendering  evil  for 
evil,  or  railing  for  railing ;  but  con- 
trariwife  blelling ;  knowing  that 
ye  are  thereunto  called,  that  ye 
fliould  inherit  a  blelling.  For  he 
that  will  love  life,  and  fee  good 
days,  let  him  refrain  his  tongue 
from  evil,  and  his  lips  that  they 
fpeak  no  guile:  let  him  efchew  evil, 
and  do  good ;  let  him  feek  peace, 
and  enfue  it.  For  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord  are  over  the  righteous,  and 
his  ears  are  open  unto  their  pray- 
ers :  but  the  face  of  the  Lord  is 
againft  them  that  do  evil.  And 
who  is  he  that  will  harm  you,  if 
ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is 
good?  But  and  if  ye  fuffer  for 
righteoufnefs'  fake,  happy  are  ye : 
and  be  not  afraid  of  their  terror, 
neither  be  troubled;  but  fan6tify 
the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts. 
The  Go/pel.  St.  Luke  v.  1 . 
T  came  to  pafs,  that  as  the  peo- 
])le  })reired  upon  him  to  lieai* 
the  Word  of  God,  he  flood  by  the 
lake  of  Gennefareth,  and  law  two 
fliips  Handing  by  the  lake ;  but  the 
lilliermen  were  gone  out  of  them, 
and  were  waQiing  their  nets.  And 
he  entered  into  one  of  the  fliips, 
which  was  Simon's,  and  prayed 
him  that  he  would  thruH  out  a  lit- 
tle from  the  land :  and  he  fat  down, 


and  taught  the  jjeople  out  of  the 
lliip.  Now  when  he  had  left  fpeak-| 
ing,  he  faid  unto  Simon,  Launch 
out  into  the  deep,  and  let  down 
your  nets  for  a  draught.  And  Si- 
mon anfwering  faid  unto  him,  Ma- 
iler, we  have  toiled  all  the  nighty 
and  have  taken  nothing;  never- 
thelefs,  at  thy  word  1  will  let  down 
the  net.  And  when  they  had  this 
done,  they  inclofed  a  great  multi- 
tude of  fillies,  and  their  net  brake. 
And  they  beckoned  unto  their  part- 
ners which  were  in  the  other  lliip, 
that  they  fhould  come  and  help 
them.  And  they  came,  and  filled 
both  the  fhips,  fo  that  they  began 
to  fink.  When  Simon  Peter  faw 
it,  he  fell  down  at  Jefus'  knees, 
faying,  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am 
a  finful  man,  O  Lord.  For  he  was 
afloniflied,  and  all  that  ^vere  with 
him,  at  the  draught  of  the  fifhes 
which  they  had  taken ;  and  fo  was 
alfo  James,  and  John,  the  fons  of 
Zebedee,  which  were  partners  with 
Simon.  And  Jefus  faid  unto  Si- 
mon, Fear  not,  from  henceforth 
thou  flialt  catch  men.  And  when 
they  had  brought  their  fliips  to 
land,  they  forfook  all,  and  follow- 
ed him. 


The  fixth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  CoUeSL 

OGod,  who  haft  prepai*ed  for 
them  that  love  thee  fuch  good 
things  as  pafs  man's  underftand- 

S2 


Thefeventh  Sunday  after  Trinity. 


ing ;  Pour  into  our  hearts  fuch  love 
toward  thee,  that  we,  loving  thee 
above  all  things,  may  obtain  thy 
promifes,  which  exceed  all  that  we 
can  defire ;  through  Jefus  X^hrift 
our  Lord.  Amen.  'A  ^'^^ 
The  Epijile.    Rom.  vi.  3. 

KNOW  ye  not,  that  fo  many 
of  us  as  were  baptized  into 
Jefus  Chrift  were  baptized  into  his 
death?  Therefore  we  are  buried 
with  him  by  baptifm  into  death; 
that  like  as  Chrift  was  raifed  up 
from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  even  fo  we  alfo  Ihould  walk 
in  newnefs  of  life.  For  if  we  have 
been  planted  together  in  the  like- 
nefs  of  his  death,  we  Ihall  be  alfo 
ui  the  hkenefs  of  his  refurredlion : 
knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is 
fcrueified  with  him,  that  the  body  of 
fin  might  be  deftroyed,  that  hence- 
forth  we  ifaouM  not  ferve  fin.  For 
he  that  is  dead  is  freed  from  fin. 
Now  if  we  be  dead  with  C  iu-ift,  we 
believe  that  we  fliall  alfo  live  with 
him ;  knowing  that  Chrift  being 
raifed  from  the  dead  dietli  no  more; 
death  hath  no  more  dominion  over 
him.  For  in  that  he  died,  he  died 
imto  fin  once ;  but  in  that  he  liv- 
eth,  he  liveth  unto  Ciod.  Like^vife 
reckon  ye  alfo  yourfelves  to  be  dead 
indeed  unto  fin,  but  alive  unto  God 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  v.  20. 

JKSUS  faid  unto  his  difciples, 
Kxcept  yoiu*  righteoufnefs  Ihall 


exceed  the  righteoufnefs  of  the 
Scribes  and  Pharifees,  ye  fhall  in 
no  cafe  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of 
heaven.  Ye  have  heard  that  it 
was  faid  by  them  of  old  time,  Thou 
flialt  not  kill :  and  whofoever  ftiall 
kill,  fliall  be  in  danger  of  the  judge- 
ment. But  I  fay  unto  you,  that 
whofoever  is  angiy  with  his  bro- 
ther without  a  caufe  fliall  be  in 
danger  of  the  judgement :  and 
whofoever  fliall  fay  to  his  brother, 
Raca,  fliall  be  m  danger  of  the 
council:  but  whofoever  fliall  fay. 
Thou  fool,  fliall  be  in  danger  of 
hell-fire.  Therefore  if  thou  bring 
thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and  there 
remembereft  that  thy  brother  hath 
ought  againft  thee ;  leave  there  thy 
gift  before  the  altar,  and  go  thy 
way,  fiHl  be  reconciled  to  thy  bro- 
ther, and  then  come  and  offer  thy 
gift.  Agree  with  thine  adverfaiy 
quickly,  whiles  thou  art  in  the  way 
with  him;  left  at  any  time  the  ad- 
verfaiy deliver  thee  to  the  judge, 
and  the  judge  deliver  thee  to  the 
officer,  and  thou  be  call  into  pri- 
fon.  Verily  I  fay  unto  thee.  Thou 
flialt  by  no  means  come  out  thence, 
till  thou  haft  paid  the  uttermoft 

farthing.  j  j 

. —       J 

Thefeventh  Sunday  after  Trmii^ 
The  Collek.  -   - 

LORD  of  all  power  and  might, 
who  art  the  author  and  giver 
of  all  good  tilings ;  Graft  in  our 


The  eighth  Sunday  after  Trinitif, 


hearts  the  love  of  thy  Name,  in- 
creafe  in  us  true  rehgion,  nourifli 
us  with  all  goochiefs,  and  of  thy 
great  mercy  keep  us  in  the  fame ; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  ^.ur.-Lord. 
Amen.  ;....-     -.AA  i(ju  j. 

The  Epijile.   Rbni.  M. '  Is^.^'^ 

I  Speak  after  the  manner  of  men, 
becaufe  of  the  infirmity  of  your 
flefli :  for  as  ye  have  yielded  your 
members  fervants  to  uncleannefs, 
and  to  iniquity,  unto  iniquity;  even 
fo'  now  yield  your  members  fer- 
vants to  rig-hteoufnefs,  unto  lioli- 
nefs.  ror  when  ye  were  the  fer- 
vants of  fin,  ye  were  free  from 
righteoufnefs.  Wliat  fruit  had  ye 
then  in  thofe  things  whereof  ye 
are  now  afhamed?  for  the  end  of 
thofe  things  is  death.  But  now 
being  made  free  from  fin,  and  be- 
come fervants  to  God,  ye  have 
your  fruit  imto  holinefs,  and  the 
end  everlafl;ing  life.  For  the  wages 
of  fin  is  death :  but  the  gift  of 
God  is  eternal  life,  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord. 

>     The  GofpeL   St.  Mai*k  viii.  1. 

IN  thofe  days  the  multitude  be- 
ing very  great,  and  having  no- 
thing to  eat,  Jefus  called  his  dif- 
ciples  unto  him,  and  faith  unto 
them,  I  have  compaflion  on  the 
multitude,  becaufe  they  have  now 
bfeen  with  me  three  days,  and  have 
nothing  to  eat:  and  if  I  fend  them 
away  fafting  to  their  OAvn  houfes. 


they  will  faint  by  the  way;  for  di- 
vers of  them  came  from  far.  And 
his  difciples  ^nfwered  him.  From 
whence  can  a  man  fatisfy  thefe 
men  with  bread  here  in  the  wil- 
dernefs?  And  he  aflied  them.  How 
many  loaves  have  ye?  And  they 
faid,  Seven.  And  he  commanded 
the  people  to  fit  down  on  the 
ground.  And  he  took  the  feven 
loaves,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake, 
and  gave  to  his  difciples  to  fet  be- 
fore them;  and  they  did  fet  them 
before  the  people.  And  they  had 
a  few  finall  fifties ;  and  he  blefled, 
and  commanded  to  fet  them  alfo 
before  them.  So  they  did  eat,  and 
were  filled:  and  they  took  up  of 
the  broken  meat  that  was  left  feven 
balkets.  And  they  that  had  eaten 
were  about  four  thoufand.  And 
he  fent  them  away. 

The  eighth  Sunday  after  Trinity.-. 
The  Colledl. 

OGod,  whofe  never-failing  pro- 
vidence ordereth  all  things 


both 


m 


We 


heaven  and  earth 
humbly  befeech  thee  to  put  away 
from  us  all  hurtful  things,  and  to 
give  us  thofe  things  which  be  pro- 
fitable for  us ;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijile.    Rom.  viii.  12. 

BRETHREN,  we  are  debtors, 
not  to  the  flefti,  to  live  after 
the  flefh.     For  if  ye  live  after  the 


TMiikmSwid^'}^^  m-vrMy. 


flefli,  ye  fliall  die;  but  if  ye  through 
the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of 
the  body,  ye  ftiall  hve.     For  as 
mauy  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,   they  are  the  fous  of  God. 
For  ye  have  not  received  the  fpirit 
of  bondage  again  to  fear ;  but  ye 
have  received  the  fpu'it  of  adop- 
tion, whereby  we  ciy,  Abba,  Fa- 
ther.  The  Spirit  itfelf  beareth  wit- 
nefs  with  our  fpirit,  that  we  are  the 
children  of  God:  and  if  children, 
then  heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint- 
heirs  with  Chrifl :  if  fo  be  that  we 
fuffer  with  him,  that  we  may  be 
alfo  glorified  together. 
The  G  of  pel.    St.  Matth.  vii.  15. 

BEWARE  of  falfe  prophets, 
which  come  to  you  in  flieep's 
clothing,  but  iuAvardly  they  are 
ravening  wolves.  Ye  lliall  know 
them  by  their  fruits  :  do  men  ga- 
grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of 
Even  fo  every  good  tree 
brino^eth  forth  jjood  fruit;  but  a 

evil 
tree  cannot  bring 
fortli  evil  fruit;  neither  can  a  cor- 
rupt tree  bring  forth  good  fruit. 
Eveiy  tree  that  bringeth  not  forth 
good  fiiiit  is  hewn  down,  and  call 
into  the  fire.  Wherefore  by  their 
fruits  ye  fliall  know  them.  Not 
evciy  one  that  faith  unto  me,  Lord, 
Lord,  fliall  enter  into  the  King- 
dom of  heaven ;  but  he  that  doeth 
the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven. 


ther 
thiftles 


corrupt   tree    bringeth  forth 
fruit.     A  ffood 


rightful 
anv  thing 


The  ninth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
Tlie  Collea. 

GRANT  to  us.  Lord,  we  be- 
feech  thee,  the  fpivit  to  think 
and  do  always  fuch  things  as  be 
that  we,  who  cannot  do 
that  is   good  without 
thee,  may  by  thee  be  enabled  to 
live  according  to  thy  will;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 
The  Epijfle.    1  Cor.  x.  L 

BRETHREN,  I  would  not  that 
ye  fliould  be  ignorant,  how 
that  all  our  fathers  were  under  the 
cloud,  and  all  pafled  through  the 
fea;    and  were  all  baptized  unto 
Mofes  in  the  cloud,  and  in  the  fea ; 
and  did  all  eat  the  fame  fpiritual 
meat,  and  did  all  drink  the  fame 
fpiritual  drink  :  (for  they  drank  of 
that  fpiritual  Rock  that  followed 
them  ;  and  that  Rock  was  Chrift.) 
But  with  many  of  them  God  w^as 
not  well  pleafed ;   for  they  were 
overthrown  in  thewildernefs.  Now 
thefe  things  were  our  examples, 
to  the  intent  we  fliould  not  lull;  af- 
ter evil  thinijs,  as  thev  alio  lulled. 
Neither  be  ye  idolaters,  as  were 
fome  of  them ;  as  it  is  written,  The 
people  fat  down  to  eat  and  drink, 
and  rofe  up  to  play.    Neither  let 
us  commit  fornication,  as  fome  of 
them  committed,  and  fell  in  one 
(lav  three   and   twentv   thouilmd. 
Neither   let    us    tem])t   Chrift,    as 
fome  of  them   alfo  tempted,  and 
were  deftroyed  of  ferpcnts.     Nei- 


The  tenth  i^iuiiL 

tlier  murmur  ye,  as  fome  of  them 
alio  murmured,  and  were  deftroy- 
ed  of  the  dellroyer.  Now  all  thefe 
things  happened  unto  them  for 
enfam])les :  and  they  are  written 
for  our  admonition,  upon  whom 
the  ends  of  the  world  are  come. 
Wherefore  let  him  that  thinketh 
he  ftandeth  take  h^ed  left  he  fall. 
There  •  hath  no  temptation  taken 
you,  but  fuch  as  is  common  to 
man :  but  God  is  faithful,  who  will 
not  fuffer  you  to  be  tempted  above 
that  ye  are  able;  but  will  with  the 
temptation  alfo  make  a  way  to 
efcape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to 
bear  it. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  xvi.  1. 

JESUS  faid  vmto  his  difciples. 
There  was  a  certain  rich  man 
which  had  a  fteward ;  and  the  fame 
was  accufed  unto  him  that  he  had 
wafted  his  goods.  And  he  called 
him,  and  faid  unto  him,  How  is  it 
that  I  hear  this  of  thee?  Give  an 
accomit  of  thy  ftewardfliip;  for 
thou  may  eft  be  no  longer  fteward. 
Then  the  fteward  faid  within  him- 
felf,  What  ihall  I  do?  for  my  lord 
taketh  away  from  me  the  fteward- 
fliip :  I  cannot  dig,  to  beg  I  am 
aftiamed.  I  am  refolved  what  to 
do,  that,  when  I  am  put  out  of  the 
ftewardfliip,  they  may  receive  me 
into  their  houfes.  So  he  called 
every  one  of  his  lord's  debtors  unto 
him,  and  faid  unto  the  firft,  How 
much  oweft  thou  unto  my  lord? 


after  Triiiity. 

And  he  faid,  An  hundred  meafures 
of  oil.  And  he  faid  unto  him.  Take 
thy  bill,  and  fit  down  cjuickly,  and 
write  fifty.  Then  faid  he  to  an- 
other, And  how  much  oweft  thou? 
And  he  faid,  An  hundred  meafures 
of  wheat.  And  he  faid  unto  him. 
Take  thy  bill,  and  wi'ite  fourfcore. 
And  the  lord  commended  the  un- 
juft  fteward,  becaufe  he  had  done 
wifely:  for  the  children  of  this  world 
are  in  their  generation  wifer  than 
the  children  of  light.  And  1  fay  un- 
to you,  Make  to  yourfelves  friends 
of  the  mammon  of  unrighteoufnefs; 
that  when  ye  fail,  they  may  receive 
you  into  everlafting  habitations.. 

The  tenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  ColleSi. 

LET  thy  merciful  ears,  O  Lord, 
be  open  to  the  prayers  of  thy 
humble  fervants ;  and  that  they 
may  obtain  their  petitions  make 
them  to  afli  fuch  things  as  fliaU 
pleafe  thee ;  through  Jefus  Clirift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 

Tlie  Epijile.    1  Cor.  xii.  L 

CONCERNING  fpiritual  gifts, 
brethren,  I  would  not  have 
you  ignorant.  Ye  know  that  ye 
were  Gentiles,  carried  away  unto 
thefe  dumb  idols,  even  as  ye  were 
led.  Wherefore  I  give  you  to  un- 
derftand,  that  no  man  fpeaking  by 
the  Spirit  of  God  calleth  Jefus  ac- 
curfed ;  and  that  no  man  can  fay 
that  Jefus  is  the  Lord,  but  by  the 


The  eleventh  Sunday  after  Trinity. 


Holy  Glioft.  Now  there  are  diver- 
fities  of  gifts,  but  the  fame  Sph'it. 
And  there  are  differences  of  ad- 
miniftrations,  but  the  fame  Lord. 
And  there  are  diverfities  of  opera- 
tions, but  it  is  the  fame  God,  who 
worketh  all  in  all.  But  the  mani- 
feftation  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to 
eveiy  man  to  profit  withal.  For  to 
one  is  given  by  the  Spirit  the  word 
of  wifdom ;  to  another  the  word  of 
knowledge  by  the  fame  Spirit;  to 
another  faith  by  the  fame  Spirit ; 
to  another  the  gifts  of  healing  by 
the  fame  Spirit;  to  another  the 
working  of  mii'acles;  to  another 
prophecy;  to  another  difcerning 
of  fpu-its  ;  to  another  divers  kinds 
of  tongues  ;  to  another  the  inter- 
pretation of  tongues.  But  all  thefe 
worketh  that  one  and  the  felfsame 
Spirit,  dividing  to  eveiy  man  feve- 
rally  as  he  will. 
The  Go/pel.   St.  Luke  xix.  41. 

AND  when  he  was  come  near, 
he  beheld  the  city,  and  wept 
over  it,  faying.  If  thou  hadft  known, 
even  thou,  at  leaft  in  this  thy  day, 
the  things  which  belong  unto  thy 
peace!  but  now  they  are  hid  from 
thine  eyes.  For  the  days  fliall  come 
upon  thee,  that  thine  enemies  fliall 
call  a  trench  about  thee,  and  com- 
pafs  thee  round,  and  keep  thee  in 
on  eveiy  fide,  and  fliall  lay  thee 
even  with  the  ground,  and  thy  chil- 
dren within  thee ;  and  they  fliall 
not  leave  m  thee  one  Hone  upon 


anocher ;  becaufe  thou  kneweft  not 
the  time  of  thy  vifitation.  And  he 
went  into  the  temple,  and  began 
to  call  out  them  that  fold  therein, 
and  them  that  bought,  faying  unto 
them.  It  is  written,  My  lioufe  is 
the  lioufe  of  prayer  :  but  ye  have 
made  it  a  den  of  thieves.  And  he 
taught  daily  in  the  temple. 

The  eleventh  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  ColleSi. 

OGod,  who  declareft  thy  al- 
mighty power  moft  chiefly  in 
fliewing  mercy  and  pity;  ]\Ierci- 
fully  grant  unto  us  fucli  a  meafure 
of  thy  grace,  that  we,  running  the 
way  of  tliy  commandments,  may 
obtain  thy  gracious  promifes,  and 
be  made  partakers  of  thy  heavenly 
treafure;  through  Jefus  Chrill  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijile.    1  Cor.  xv.  1. 

BRETHREN,  I  declare  unto 
you  the  Gofpel  which  I  preach- 
ed unto  you,  which  alfo  ye  have 
received,  and  wherein  ye  (land :  by 
which  alfo  ye  are  faved,  if  ye  keep 
in  memoiy  what  I  preached  unto 
you,  unlefs  ye  have  believed  in 
vain.  For  I  delivered  unto  you 
firft  of  all,  that  which  I  alfo  receiv- 
ed, how  that  Clirifi;  died  for  our 
fins,  according  to  the  Scri])tures ; 
and  that  he  was  buried ;  and  that 
he  rofe  again  the  third  day,  accord- 
ing to  the  Scriptures ;  and  that  he 
was  feen  of  Cephas,  then  of  the 


The  twelfth  Sunday  after  Trinity, 


twelve :  after  that,  lie  was  feen  of 
above  five  hundred  brethren  at 
once ;  of  whom  the  greater  part 
remain  unto  this  prefent;  but  fome 
are  fallen  afleep :  after  that,  he  was 
feen  of  James ;  then  of  all  the 
Apoftles :  and  laft  of  all,  he  was 
feen  of  me  alfo,  as  of  one  born  out 
of  due  time.  For  I  am  the  leaft 
of  the  Apoftles,  that  am  not  meet 
to  be  called  an  Apoftle,  becaufe 
I  perfecuted  the  Church  of  God. 
But  by  the  grace  of  God  I  am 
what  I  am :  and  his  grace  which 
was  beftowed  upon  me  was  not  in 
vain ;  but  I  laboured  more  abun- 
dantly than  they  all ;  yet  not  I, 
but  the  grace  of  God  which  was 
with  me.  Therefore  whether  it 
were  I  or  they,  fo  we  preach,  and 
fo  ye  believed. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  xviii.  9. 

JESUS  fpake  this  parable  unto 
certain  which  trufted  in  them- 
felves  that  they  were  righteous, 
and  defpifed  others :  Two  men 
went  up  into  the  temple  to  pray ; 
the  one  a  Pharifee,  and  the  other 
a  Publican.  The  Pharifee  ftood 
and  prayed  thus  with  himfelf,  God, 
I  thank  thee,  that  I  am  not  as  o- 
ther  men  are,  extortioners,  unjuft, 
adulterers,  or  even  as  this  Pub- 
lican :  I  faft  twice  in  the  week,  I 
give  tithes  of  all  that  I  poffefs. 
And  the  Publican,  ftanding  afar 
off,  would  not  lift  up  fo  much  as 
his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but  fmote 


upon  his  breaft,  faying,  God  bfc 
merciful  to  me  a  finner.  I  tell  you, 
this  man  went  down  to  his  houfe 
juftified  rather  than  the  other :  for 
every  one  that  exalteth  himfelf  fhall 
be  abafed ;  and  he  that  humbleth 
himfelf  fliall  be  exalted. 

The  twelfth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  Colledi. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  who  art  always  more 
ready  to  hear  than  we  to  pray,  and 
art  wont  to  give  more  than  either 
we  defire,  or  deferve  ;  Pour  down 
upon  us.  the  abvmdance  of  thy  mer- 
cy; forgiving  us  thofe  things  where- 
of our  confcience  is  afraid,  and 
giving  us  thofe  good  things  which 
we  are  not  worthy  to  alk,  but 
through  the  merits  and  mediation 
of  Jefus  Chrift,  thy  Son,  our  Lord. 
Ame7t. 

The  Epijlle.    2  Cor.  iii.  4. 

SUCH  truft  have  we  through 
Chrift  to  God- ward :  not  that 
we  are  fufficient  of  ourfelves  to 
think  any  thing  as  of  ourfelves ; 
but  our  fufficiency  is  of  God.  Who 
alfo  hath  made  us  able  minifters 
of  the  New  Teftament ;  not  of  the 
letter,  but  of  the  Spirit :  for  the 
letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit  giveth 
life.  But  if  the  miniftration  of  death 
written  and  engraven  m  ftones 
was  glorious,  fo  that  the  children 
of  Ifrael  could  not  ftedfaftly  behold 
the  face  of  Mofes  for  the  gloiy  of 


The  iMrteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 


Ms  countenance,  which  glory  was 
to  be  done  away ;  how  (hall  not 
the  miniftration  of  the  Spirit  be 
rather  glorious?  For  if  the  minif- 
tration of  condemnation  be  glory, 
much  more  doth  the  miniftration 
of  righteoufnefs  exceed  in  glory. 
T^e  Go/pel.    St.  Mark  vii.  31. 

JESUS,  departing  from  the  coafts 
of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  came  unto 
the  fea  of  Galilee,  through  the 
midft  of  the  coafts  of  Decapohs. 
And  they  bring  unto  him  one  that 
was  deaf,  and  had  an  impediment 
in  his  fpeech ;  and  they  befeech 
him  to  put  his  hand  upon  him.  And 
he  took  him  afide  from  the  mul- 
titude, and  put  his  fingers  into  his 
ears,  and  he  fpit,  and  touched  his 
tdngue;  and  looking  up  to  hea- 
ven, he  fighed,  and  faith  unto  him, 
tEphj)hatha,  that  is,  Be  opened. 
^And  ftraightway  his  ears  were  o- 
pened,  and  the  ftring  of  his  tongue 
was  loofed,  and  he  fpake  plain.  And 
he  charged  them  that  they  ftiould 
tell  no  man :  but  the  more  he 
charged  them,  fo  much  the  more 
a  great  deal  they  publiflied  it ;  and 
were  beyond  meafure  aftonillied, 
faying,  He  hath  done  all  things 
well ;  he  maketh  both  the  deaf  to 
hear,  and  the  dumb  to  fpeak. 

TJie  thirteenth  Sunday  aftei'  Trinity. 
TJie  Colka. 

ALMIGHTY  and  merciful  God, 
-  of  whofe  only  gift  it  cometh 


that  thy  faithful  people  do  unto  thee 
true  and  laudable  fervice ;  Grant, 
we  befeech  thee,  that  we  may  fo 
faithfully  fei-ve  thee  in  this  life,  that 
we  fail  not  finally  to  attain  thy  hea- 
venly promifes ;  through  the  merits 
of  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.  Amen. 
The  Epiflle.    Gal.  iii.  16. 

TO  Abraham  and  his  feed  were 
the  promifes  made.  He  faith 
not,  And  to  feeds,  as  of  many;  but 
as  of  one ;  And  to  thy  feed,  which 
is  Chrift.  And  this  I  fay,  That  the 
covenant  that  was  confinned  be- 
fore of  God  in  Chrift,  the  Law, 
which  was  four  hundred  and  thirty 
years  after,  cannot  difannul,  that 
it  Ihould  make  the  promife  of  none 
effedl.  For  if  the  inheritance  be  of 
the  Law,  it  is  no  more  of  promife; 
but  God  gave  it  to  Abraham  by 
promife.  Wherefore  then  ferveth 
the  Law?  It  was  added  becaufe  of 
tranfgreflions,  till  the  feed  fliould 
come,  to  whom  the  promife  was 
made ;  and  it  was  ordained  by 
angels  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator. 
Now  a  mediator  is  not  a  mediator 
of  one ;  •  but  God  is  one.  Is  the 
Law  then  againft  the  promifes  of 
God?  God  forbid :  for  if  there 
had  been  a  law  given  which  could 
have  given  life,  verily  righteoufnefs 
ftiould  have  been  by  the  Law.  But 
the  Scripture  hath  concluded  all 
under  fin,  that  the  promife  by  faith 
of  Jefus  Chrift  might  be  given  to 
them  that  believe.  .       c 


The  fourteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 


e    The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  x.  23. 

BLESSED  are  the  eyes  which 
fee  the  things  that  ye  fee.  For 
I  tell  you,  That  many  prophets 
and  kings  have  defired  to  fee  thofe 
things  which  ye  fee,  and  have  not 
feen  thein;  and  to  hear  thofe  things 
which  ye  hear,  and  have  not  heard 
them.  And  behold,  a  certain  Law- 
yer ftood  up,  and  tempted  him, 
faying,  Matter,  what  (hall  I  do  to 
inherit  eternal  hfe?  He  faid  unto 
him,  What  is  written  in  the  Law? 
how  readeft  thou?  And  he  anfwer- 
ing  faid,  Thou  (halt  love  the  Lord 
thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and 
with  all  thy  foul,  and  with  all  thy 
ftrength,  and  ^vith  all  thy  mind; 
and  thy  neighbour  as  thyfelf.  And 
he  faid  unto  him,  Thou  haft  an- 
fwered  right;  this  do,  and  thou 
ftialt  live.  But  he,  willing  to  juftify 
himfelf,  faid  mito  Jefus,  And  who 
is  my  neighbour?  And  Jefus  an- 
fwering  faid,  A  certain  man  went 
down  from  Jerufalem  to  Jeri- 
cho, and  fell  among  thieves,  which 
ftripped  him  of  his  raiment,  and 
wounded  him,  and  departed,  leav- 
ing him  half  dead.  And  by  chance 
there  came  down  a  certain  Prieft 
that  way,  and,  when  he  faw  him,  he 
pafled  by  on  the  other  lide.  And 
likewife  a  Levite,  when  he  was  at 
the  place,  came  and  looked  on 
him,  and  paffed  by  on  the  other 
fide.  But  a  certain  Samaritan,  as 
he  journeyed,  came  where  he  was ; 


and,  when  he  faw  him,  he  had 
compaffion  on  him,  and  went  to 
him,  and  bound  uj)  his  wounds, 
pouring  in  oil  and  wine,  and  fet 
him  on  his  own  beaft,  and  brought 
him  to  an  inn,  and  took  care  of 
him.  And  on  the  morrow,  when  he 
departed,  he  took  out  two  pence, 
and  gave  them  to  the  hoft,  and  faid 
unto  him.  Take  care  of  him;  and 
whatfoever  thou  fpendeft  more, 
when  I  come  again,  I  will  repay 
thee.  Which  now  of  thefe  three, 
thinkeft  thou,  was  neighbour  unto 
him  that  fell  among  the  thieves  ? 
And  he  faid,  He  that  Ihewed  mer- 
cy on  him.  Then  faid  Jefus  unto 
him.  Go,  and  do  thou  likewife. 


Tlie fourteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
TJie  Colledi. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everiafting 
God,  give  unto  us  the  increafe 
of  faith,  hope,  and  charity ;  and, 
that  we  may  obtain  that  which  thou 
doft  promife,  make  us  to  love  that 
which  thou  doft  command;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.  Amen. 
m&     The  Epijlle.    Gal.  v.  16. 

ISay  then.  Walk  in  the  Spmt, 
and  ye  (hall  not  fulfil  the  luft 
of  the  flefh.  For  the  fleOi  lufteth 
againft  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spiiit 
againft  the  flefli ;  and  thefe  are 
contrary  the  one  to  the  other ;  fo 
that  ye' cannot  do  the  things  that 
ye  would.  But  if  ye  be  led  by  the 
Spirit,  ye  are  not  mider  the  law. 


The  fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 


Now  the  works  of  the  flefti  are 
manifeft,  which  are  thefe,  adulteiy, 
fornication,  iincleamiefs,  lafcivioid*- 
nefs,  idolatiy,  ^vitclicraft,  hatred, 
vaiiance,  emulations,  wrath,  ftrife, 
feditions,  herefies,  envj^ings,  mur- 
ders, dnmkennefs,  reveUings,  and 
fuch  Hke :  of  the  which  I  tell  you 
before,  as  I  have  alfo  told  you  in 
tune  pall,  That  they  who  do  fuch 
things  fliall  not  inherit  the  king- 
dom of  God.  But  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-fuf- 
fering,  gentlenefs,  goodnefs,  faith, 
meeknefs,  temperance:  againftfuch 
there  is  no  law.  And  they  that  are 
Chrift's  have  crucified  the  flelh, 
with  the  affections  and  lulls. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  xvii.  1 1 . 

AND  it  came  to  pafs,  as  Jefus 
went  to  Jenifalem,  that  he 
pafTed  through  the  midfl  of  Sama- 
ria, and  Galilee.  And  as  he  enter- 
ed into  a  certain  village,  there  met 
him  ten  men  that  were  lepers, 
which  Hood  afar  off  And  they 
lifted  up  their  voices,  and  faid,  Je- 
fus, Mafler,  have  mercy  on  us. 
And  when  he  faw  them,  he  faid 
unto  them,  Go,  Ihew  yourfelves 
imto  the  pi-iells.  And  it  came  to 
pafs,  that,  as  they  went,  they  were 
cleanfed.  And  one  of  them,  when 
he  faw  that  he  was  healed,  turned 
back,  and  with  a  loud  voice  glori- 
fied God,  and  fell  down  on  his  face 
at  his  feet,  giving  him  thanks ;  and 
he  was  a  Samaritan.    And  Jefus 


anfwering  faid.  Were  there  not  ten 
cleanfed?  but  where  are  the  nine? 
There  are  not  found  that  return- 
ed to  give  glory  to  God,  fave  this 
ftranger.  And  he  faid  unto  him, 
Arife,  go  thy  way,  thy  faith  hath 
made  thee  whole. 

The  fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity, 
The  Colledl. 

KEEP,  we  befeech  thee,  O 
Lord,  thy  Church  with  thy 
perpetual  mercy:  and,  becaufe  the 
fi'aiity  of  man  without  thee  cannot 
but  fall,  keep  us  ever  by  thy  help 
fi'om  all  things  hurtful,  and  lead 
us  to  all  things  profitable  to  om* 
falvation;  through  Jefus  Chrifl  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijile.  Gal.  vi.  1 L 

E  fee  how  large  a  letter  I  have 


Y 


written  unto  you  with  mine 
own  hand.  As  many  as  defire  to 
make  a  fau*  fliew  in  the  fiefh,  they 
conllrain  you  to  be  circumcifed ; 
only  left  they  fliould  fuffer  perfecu- 
tion  for  the  crofs  of  Chrill.  For 
neither  they  themfelves  who  are 
circumcifed  keep  the  law;  but  de- 
fire  to  have  you  circiuncifed,  that 
they  may  glory  in  your  flefli.  But 
God  forbid  that  1  fliould  gloiy, 
fave  in  the  crofs  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chriil,  by  whom  the  world  is  cru- 
cified unto  me,  and  1  unto  the 
world.  For  in  Chrift  Jefus  neither 
circumcifion  availeth  any  thing,  nor 
uucircumcifion,  but  a  new  creature. 


Tlw  fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trimty. 


And  as  many  as  walk  according  to 
this  rule,  peace  be  on  them,  and 
mercy,  and  upon  the  Ifrael  of  God. 
From  henceforth  let  no  man  trou- 
ble me ;  for  I  bear  in  my  body  the 
marks  of  the  Lord  Jefus.  Bre- 
thren, the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift  be  with  your  fpirit.  Amen. 
The  Go/pel    St.  Matth.  vi.  24. 

NO  man  can  ferve  two  maf- 
ters:  for  either  he  will  hate 
the  one,  and  love  the  other ;  or  elfe 
he,  will  hold  to  the  one,  and  defpife 
the  other.  Ye  cannot  feiTe  God 
and  Mammon.  Therefore  I  fay  un- 
to you,  Take  no  thought  for  your 
life,  what  ye  Ihall  eat,  or  what  ye 
fliall  drink ;  nor  yet  for  your  body, 
what  ye  fliall  put  on :  Is  not  the 
life  more  than  meat,  and  the  body 
than  raiment?  Behold  the  fowls  of 
the  air ;  for  they  fow  not,  neither 
do  they  reap,  nor  gather  into  barns; 
yet  your  heavenly  Father  feed- 
eth  them.  Are  ye  not  much  better 
than  they?  Which  of  you  by  taking 
thought  can  add  one  cubit  unto  his 
ftature?  And  why  take  ye  thought 
for  raiment?  Confider  the  lilies  of 
the  field  how  they  grow :  they  toil 
not,  neither  do  they  fpin  :  and  yet 
I  fey  unto  you.  That  even  Solo- 
mon in  all  his  glory  was  not  ar- 
rayed like  one  of  thefe.  Where- 
fore, if  God  fo  clothe  the  grafs  of 
the  field,  which  to-day  is,  and  to- 
morrow is  call  into  the  oven;  fliall 
he  not  much  more  clothe  you,  O 


ye  of  little  faith?  Therefore  tak^ 
no  thought,  faying,  What  fliall  we 
eat?  or  what  fliall  we  drink?  or 
wherewithal  fliall  we  be  clothed? 
(for  after  all  thefe  things  do  the 
Gentiles  feek:)  for  your  heavenly 
Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need 
of  all  thefe  things.  But  feek  ye  firft 
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righ- 
teoufnefs,  and  all  thefe  things  Ihall 
be  added  unto  you.  Take  therefore 
no  thought  for  the  morrow;  for  the 
morrow  fliall  take  thought  for  the 
things  of  itfelf :  fufficient  unto  the 
day  is  the  evil  thereof. 

The  Jiocteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  Colledi. 

OLord,  we  befeech  thee,  let 
thy  continual  pity  cleanfe  and 
defend  thy  Church ;  and,  becaufe 
it  cannot  continue  in  fafety  without^ 
thy  fuccour,  prefei've  it  evermore ' 
by  thy  help  and  goodnefs ;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 
TJie  Epijile.   Ephef.  iii.  13. 

IDefire  that  ye  faint  not  at  my 
tribidations  for  you,  which  is  »' 
your  gloiy.  For  this  caufe  I  bow 
my  knees  unto  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jefus  Chiift,  of  whom  the 
whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth 
is  named,  that  he  would  grant  you, 
according  to  the  riches  of  his  gloiy, 
to  be  ftrengthened  with  might  by 
his  Spu'it  in  the  inner  man ;  that 
Chrift  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by 
faith;  that  ye,  being  rooted  and 


Tiiefi^eM§M'>^^m§ii/')0er  Trinity. 


grounded  in  love,  may  be  able  to 
comprehend  with  all  faints,  what 
is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and 
depth,  and  height;  and  to  know 
the  love  of  Clu'ift,  which  paffeth 
knowledge,  that  ye  might  be  filled 
with  all  the  fulnefs  of  God.  Now 
mito  him  that  is  able  to  do  exceed- 
ing abundantly  above  all  that  we 
alk  or  think,  according  to  the  pow- 
er that  worketh  in  us,  unto  him 
be  glory  in  the  Church  by  Chrift 
Jefus,  throughout  all  ages,  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

J7ie  Go/pel.  St.  Luke  vii.  1 1 . 

AND  it  came  to  pafs  the  day 
after,  that  Jefus  went  into  a 
city  called  Naim ;  and  many  of  his 
difciples  went  with  him,  and  much 
people.  Now  when  he  came  nigh 
to  the  gate  of  the  city,  behold,  there 
was  a  dead  man  carried  out,  the 
only  fon  of  his  mother,  and  Ihe 
was  a  widow ;  and  much  people  of 
the  city  was  with  her.  And  when 
the  Lord  faw  her,  he  had  com- 
paffion  on  her,  and  faid  unto  her, 
**  Weep  not.  And  he  came  and 
touched  the  bier,  (and  they  that 
bare  him  flood  ftill,)  and  he  faid. 
Young  man,  I  fay  unto  thee,  Arife. 
And  he  that  was  dead  fat  up,  and 
began  to  fpeak :  and  he  delivered 
him  to  his  mother.  And  there  came 
a  fear  on  all,  and  they  glorified 
God,  faying,  That  a  great  Prophet 
is  rifen  up  among  us,  and  that  God 
hath  vifited  his  people.     And  this 


nimour  of  him  went  forth  through- 
out all  Judaea,  and  throughout  all 
the  region  round  about. 

Tliefeventeenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  Colle8l. 

LORD,  we  pray  thee  that  thy 
grace  may  always  prevent  and 
follow  us,  and  make  us  continu- 
ally to  be  given  to  all  good  works ; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen.  ^'  ""^"" 

The  Epiflle.  Ephef  iv.  L  • 

1  Therefore  the  prifoner  of  the 
Lord  befeech  you,  that  ye  walk 
worthy  of  the  vocation  wheremth 
ye  ai'e  called,  vrith  all  lowlinefs 
and  meeknefs,  with  long-fuffering, 
forbearing  one  another  in  love; 
endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of 
the  fpirit  in  the  bond  of  peace. 
There  is  one  body,  and  one  Spi- 
rit, even  as  ye  are  called  in  one 
hope  of  your  calling ;  one  Lord, 
one  faith,  one  baptifm,  one  God  and 
Father  of  all,  who  is  above  all,  and 
through  all,  and  in  you  all. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  xiv.  1. 

IT  came  to  pafs,  as  Jefus  went 
into  the  lioufe  of  one  of  the 
chief  Pharifees  to  eat  bread  on  the 
fabbath-day,  that  they  watched 
him.  And  behold,  there  was  a 
certain  man  before  him  which  had 
the  dropfy.  And  Jefus  anfwering 
fpake  unto  the  La^vyers  and  Pha- 
rifees, faying,  Is  it  lawful  to  heal 
on  the  fabbath-day?  And  they  held 


Tlie  eighteenth  Sunday  after,. ^.rinity. 

only  God;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijlle.    1  Cor.  i.  4. 


their  peace.  And  he  took  him,  and 
healed  him,  and  let  him  go ;  and 
anfwered  them,  faying,  Winch  of 
you  Ihall  have  an  afs,  or  an  ox,  fall- 
en into  a  pit,  and  will  not  flraight- 
way  pull  him  out  on  the  fabbath- 
day?  And  they  could  not  anfwer 
him  again  to  thefe  things.    And  he 
put  forth  a  parable  to  thofe  which 
were  bidden,  when  he  marked  how 
they  chofe  out  the  chief  rooms, 
faying  unto  them.  When  thou  art 
bidden  of  any  man  to  a  wedding, 
fit  not  do\vn  in  the  higheft  room; 
left  a  more  honourable  man  than 
thou  be  bidden  of  him;  and  he 
that  bade  thee  and  him  come  and 
fay  to  thee,  Give  this  man  place ; 
and  thou  begin  with  fliame  to  take 
the  loweft  room.     But  when  thou 
art  bidden,  go  and  fit  down  in  the 
loweft  room ;  that,  when  he  that 
bade   thee   cometh,   he   may  fay 
unto  thee.  Friend,  go  up  higher: 
then  Ihalt  thou  have  worlhip  in  the 
prefence  of  them  that  fit  at  meat 
with  thee.   For  whofoever  exalte th 
himfelf  Ihall  be  abafed;   and  he 
that  humbleth  himfelf  Ihall  be  ex- 
alted. 

The  eighteenth  Sunday  after  Trinitif. 
ij  r>  The  CoUedi. 

fX  ORD,  we  befeech  thee,  grant 
J-i  thy  people  grace  to  withlland 
the  temptations  of  the  world,  the 
flefli,  and  the  devil,  and  mth  pure 
hearts  and  minds  to  follow  thee  the 


I  Thank  my  God  always  on  your 
behalf,  for  the  grace  of  God 
which  is  given  you  by  Jefus  Chrift ; 
that  in  every  thing  ye  are  enriched 
by  him,  in  all  utterance,  and  in  all 
knowledge;  even  as  the  teftimony 
of  Chrift  was  confirmed  in  you ;  fo 
that  ye  come  behind  in  no  gift; 
waiting  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift,  who  ftiall  alfo  confirm 
you  unto  the  end,  that  ye  may  be 
blamelefs  in  the  day  of  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  xxii.  34. 

WHEN    the   Pharifees    had 
heard  that  Jefus  had  put 
the  Sadducees  to  filence,  they  were 
gathered  together.     Then  one  of 
them,  who  was  a  Lawyer,  alked 
him  a  queftion,  tempting  hun,  and 
faying,  Mafter,  which  is  the  great 
commandment  in  the  Law?  Jefus 
faid  unto  him.  Thou  flialt  love  the 
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart, 
and  with  all  thy  foul,  and  with  all 
thy  mind.     This  is  the  firft  and 
great  commandment.    And  the  fe- 
cond  is  like  unto  it,  Thou  Ihait 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyfelf    On 
thefe  two  commandments  hang  all 
the  Law  and  the  Prophets.  While 
the  Pharifees  were  gathered  to- 
gether, Jefus  aflied  them,  faying. 
What  think  ye  of  Chrift?  whofe 
fpn  is^j^t^?  They  fay  ijiitp  hiin,  The 


The  'nineteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity, 


foil  of  David.  He  faith  unto  them, 
How  then  doth  David  in  fpirit  call 
him  Lord,  faying,  The  Lord  faid 
imto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  on  my 
right  hand,  till  I  make  thine  ene- 
mies thy  foot-ftool?  If  David  then 
call  him  Lord,  how  is  he  his  Son? 
And  no  man  was  able  to  anfwer 
him  a  word ;  neither  dui*ft  any  man 
from  that  day  forth  alk  him  any 
more  queftions. 

The  nineteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  Colledi. 

OGod,  forafmuch  as  without 
thee  we  are  not  able  to  pleafe 
thee;  Mercifully  grant,  that  thy 
Holy  Spirit  may  in  all  things  direct 
and  rule  our  hearts ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Ejnjlle.  Ephef  iv.  17- 

THIS  I  fay  therefore,  and  tefti- 
fy  in  the  Lord,  that  ye  hence- 
forth walk  not  as  other  Gentiles 
walk,  in  the  vanity  of  their  mind ; 
having  the  underilanding  darken- 
ed, being  alienated  from  the  life  of 
God  through  the  ignorance  that  is 
in  them,  becaufe  of  the  blindnefs 
of  their  heart :  who,  being  pall 
feeling,  have  given  themfelves  over 
unto  lafcivioufnefs,  to  work  all  un- 
cleannefs  with  greedinefs.  But  ye 
have  not  fo  learned  Chrift ;  if  fo  be 
that  ye  have  heard  him,  and  have 
l>een  taught  by  him,  as  the  truth 
is  in  Jefus :  that  ye  put  oft",  con- 
cerning the  former  converfation. 


the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt  ac- 
cording to  the  deceitful  lufts ;  and 
be  renewed  in  the  fpirit  of  your 
mind ;  and  that  ye  put  on  the  new 
man,  which  after  God  is  created 
in  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs. 
Wherefore,  putting  away  lying, 
fpeak  every  man  truth  with  his 
neighbour :  for  we  are  members 
one  of  another.  Be  ye  angry  and 
fin  not :  let  not  the  fun  go  do^vn 
upon  your  wrath :  neither  give 
place  to  the  devil.  Let  hun  that 
ftole  fteal  no  more ;  but  rather  let 
him  labour,  working  with  his  hands 
the  thing  which  is  good,  that  he 
may  have  to  give  to  him  that  need- 
eth.  Let  no  corrupt  communica- 
tion proceed  out  of  your  mouth, 
but  that  which  is  good  to  the  ufe 
of  edifying,  that  it  may  minifter 
grace  unto  the  hearers.  And  grieve 
not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  where- 
by ye  are  fealed  unto  the  day  of  re- 
demption. Let  all  bitternefs,  and 
^vi'ath,  and  anger,  and  clamour, 
and  evil-fpeaking,  be  put  away 
from  you,  with  all  malice.  And  be 
ye  kind  one  to  another,  tender- 
hearted, forgiving  one  another, 
even  as  God  for  Chrift's  fake  hath 
forgiven  you. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  ix.  1. 

JESUS  entered  into  a  Ihip,  and 
paifed  over,  and  came  into 
his  own  city.  And  behold,  they 
brought  to  him  a  man  fick  of  the 
palfy,  lying  on  a  bed.    And  Jefus, 


The  twentieth  Sun 

feeinjr  their  faith,  faid  unto  the 
fick  of  the  palfy,  Son,  be  of  ^oocl 
cheer,  thy  lins  be  forgiven  thee. 
And  behold,  certain  of  the  fcribes 
faid  Avithin  themfelves,  Tiiis  man 
blafphemeth.  And  Jefiis,  knowing 
tlieir  thouMits,  faid,  Wherefore 
think  ye  evil  in  your  hearts  r*  1^  or 
whether  is  ealier  to  fay,  Thy  lins 
be  forgiven  thee?  or  to  fay,  Arife, 
and  walk?  But  that  ye  may  know 
that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power 
on  earth  to  forgive  lins,  (then  faith 
he  to  the  lick  of  the  palfy,)  Arife, 
take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  unto  thine 
houfe.  And  he  arofe,  and  departed 
to  his  houfe.  But  when  the  multi- 
tude faw  it,  they  marvelled,  and 
glorified  God,  who  had  given  fuch 
power  unto  men. 

The  twentieth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
The  Colle6i. 

O  Almighty  and  moll  merciful 
God,  of  thy  bountiful  good- 
nefs  keep  us,  we  befeech  thee,  from 
all  things  that  may  hurt  us  ;  that 
we,  being  ready  both  in  body  and 
foul,  may  cheerfully  accomplifli 
thofe  things  that  thou  wouldeft 
have  done ;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijile.    Ephef.  v.  15. 

SEE  then  that  ye  walk  circum- 
fpe(5lly,  not  as  fools,  but  as 
wife,  redeeming  the  time,  becaufe 
the  days  are  evil.  Wherefore  be 
ye  not  unwife,  but  underftanding 


day  after  Trinity. 

what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is.  And 
be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein 
is  excefs ;  but  be  filled  with  the 
Spirit ;  fpeaking  to  youri'elves  in 
pfalms,  and  hymns,  and  fpiritual 
fongs ;  finging  and  making  melody 
in  your  heart  to  the  Lord  ;  giving 
thanks  always  for  all  things  unto 
God  and  the  Father,  in  the  Name 
of  our  Lord  .Jefus  Chrift;  fubmit- 
ting  yourfelves  one  to  another  in 
the  fear  of  God. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  xxii.  L 

JESUS  faid.  The  Kingdom  of 
heaven  is  like  unto  a  certain 
king,  who  made  a  marriage  for 
his  fon ;  and  fent  forth  his  fervants 
to  call  them  that  were  bidden  to 
the  wedding ;  and  they  would  not 
come.  Again,  he  fent  forth  other 
fervants,  faying.  Tell  them  which 
are  bidden.  Behold,  I  have  pre- 
pared my  dinner ;  my  oxen  and  my 
fatlings  are  killed,  and  all  things 
are  ready;  come  unto  the  maniage. 
But  they  made  light  of  it,  and  went 
their  ways,  one  to  his  farm,  an- 
other to  his  merchandife :  and  the 
remnant  took  his  fervants,  and  en- 
treated them  fpitefully,  and  flew 
them.  But  when  the  king  heard 
thereof,  he  was  wi-otli ;  and  he  fent 
forth  his  armies,  and  deftroyed 
thofe  murderers,  and  burnt  up 
their  city.  Then  faith  he  to  his 
fei-vants.  The  wedding  is  ready, 
but  they  who  were  bidden  were 
not  worthy.  Go  ye  therefore  into 
U 


The  one  and  twentieth 

the  high-ways,  and  as  many  as  ye 
fhall  find  bid  to  the  marriage.  So 
thofe  feiTants  went  out  into  the 
high-ways,  and  gathered  together 
all,  as  many  as  they  found,  both 
bad  and  good ;  and  the  wedding- 
was  fxu-nilhed  \\\i\\  guefts.  And 
when  the  king  came  in  to  fee  the 
guefts,  he  faw  there  a  man  which 
had  not  on  a  wedding-garment. 
And  he  faith  unto  him,  Friend, 
how  cameft  thou  in  hither,  not  hav- 
ing a  wedding-garment?  And  he 
was  fpeechlefs.  Then  faid  the  king 
to  the  fenants.  Bind  him  hand 
and  foot,  and  take  him  away,  and 
caft  him  into  outer  darknefs :  there 
fhall  be  weeping  and  gnalhing  of 
teeth.  For  many  are  called,  but 
few  are  chofen. 

The  one  and  twentieth  Sunday  after 
Trinity. 

The  Colleel. 

GRANT,  we  befeecli  thee,  mer- 
ciful Lord,  to  thy  faithful  peo- 
ple pardon  and  peace,  that  they 
may  be  cleanfed  from  all  their  fins, 
and  {qyw^  thee  with  a  quiet  mind; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

The  Epijlle.    Ephef.  vi.  10. 

MY  brethren,  be  ftrong  in  the 
Lord,  and  in  the  power  of 
his  might.  Put  on  the  whole  ar- 
mour of  God,  that  ye  may  be  able 
to  ftand  againft  the  ^vilcs  of  the 

devil.    For  we  wreftle  not  affainll 

^  I 


Sunday  after  Trinity. 

flefli  and  blood,  but  againft  princi- 
palities, againft  powers,  againft  the 
rulers  of  the  darknefs  of  this  world, 
againft  fpiritual  wickednefs  in  high 
places.  Wherefore  take  unto  you 
the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  ye 
may  be  able  to  withftand  in  the  evil 
day,  and,  having  done  all,  to  ftand. 
Stand  therefore,  having  your  loins 
girt  about  with  truth ;  and  having 
on  thebreaft-plate  of  righteoufnefs; 
and  your  feet  fliod  ^vith  the  pre- 
paration of  the  Gofpel  of  peace ; 
above  all,  taking  the  fliield  of 
faith,  wherewith  ye  fliall  be  able 
to  quench  all  the  fieiy  darts  of  the 
wicked;  and  take  the  helmet  of 
falvation,  and  the  fword  of  the  Spi- 
rit, which  is  the  Word  of  God  : 
praying  always  with  all  prayer 
and  fupplication  in  the  Spirit,  and 
watching  thereunto  with  all  perfe- 
verance,  and  fupplication  for  all 
faints ;  and  for  me,  that  utterance 
may  be  given  imto  me,  that  I  may 
open  my  mouth  boldly,  to  make 
known  the  myfteiy  of  the  Gofpel, 
for  which  I  am  an  ambalfador  in 
bonds ;  that  therein  I  may  fpeak 
boldly,  as  I  ought  to  fpeak. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  John  iv.  46. 

THLRE  was  a  certain  noble- 
man, wliofe  fon  was  fick  at 
Capernaum.  When  he  heard  that 
Jefus  was  come  out  of  Judjra  in- 
to Galilee,  he  went  imto  him,  and 
befought  him  that  he  would  come 
down  and  heal  his  fon ;  for  he  was 


The  two  and  twentieth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 


at  the  point  of  death.  Then  faid 
Jefus  unto  him,  Except  ye  fee  figns 
and  wonders,  ye  will  not  believe. 
The  nobleman  faith  unto  him,  Sir, 
come  down  ere  my  child  die.  Jefus 
faith  unto  him.  Go  thy  way,  thy 
fon  liveth.  And  the  man  believ- 
ed the  word  that  Jefus  had  fpoken 
unto  him,  and  he  went  his  way. 
And,  as  he  was  now  going  down, 
his  fervants  met  him,  and  told  him, 
faying.  Thy  fon  liveth.  Then  en- 
quired he  of  them  the  hour  when 
he  began  to  amend:  and  they  faid 
unto  him,  Yefterday  at  the  feventh 
hour  the  fever  left  him.  So  the 
father  knew  that  it  was  at  the  fame 
hour,  in  the  which  Jefus  faid  unto 
him,  Thy  fon  liveth;  and  himfelf 
believed,  and  his  whole  houfe.  This 
is  again  the  fecond  miracle  that  Je- 
fus did,  when  he  was  come  out  of 
Judaea  into  Galilee. 

The  two  and  twentieth  Sunday  after 
Trinity. 

The  Colledi. 

LORD,  we  befeech  thee  to  keep 
thy  houlhold  the  Church  in 
continual  godlinefs ;  that  through 
thy  protection  it  may  be  free  fi'om 
all  adverlities,  and  devoutly  given 
to  ferve  thee  in  good  works,  to  the 
glory  of  thy  Name ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Atneji. 

The  Epijile.    Phil.  i.  3. 

1  Thank  my  God  upon  eveiy  re- 
membrance of  you,  (always  in 


eveiy  [)rayer  of  mine  for  you  all 
making  requeft  with  joy,)  for  your 
fellowfliip  in  the  Gofpel  from  the 
fiiil  day  until  now;  being  confident 
of  this  very  thing,  that  he  who 
hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you 
will  perform  it  until  the  day  of 
Jefus  Chrift ;  even  as  it  is  meet  for 
me  to  think  this  of  you  all,  be-r 
caufe  I  have  you  in  my  heart,  in- 
afmuch  as  both  in  my  bonds,  and 
in  the  defence  and  confirmation  of 
the  Gofpel,  ye  all  are  partakers  of 
my  grace.  For  God  is  my  record, 
how  greatly  I  long  after  you  all  in 
the  bowels  of  .Jefus  Chrift.  And 
this  I  pray,  that  your  love  may 
abound  yet  more  and  more  in 
knowledge,  and  in  all  judgement: 
that  ye  may  approve  things  that 
are  excellent,  that  ye  may  be  fin- 
cere,  and  without  offence,  till  the 
day  of  Chrift :  being  filled  with  the 
fruits  of  righteoufnefs,  which  are 
by  Jefus  Chrift,  unto  the  glory  and 
praife  of  God. 
The  Gofpel.   St.  Matth.  xviii.  21. 

PETER  faid  unto  Jefus,  Lord, 
how  oft  ftiall  my  brother  fin 
againft  me,  and  I  forgive  hiiu?  till 
feven  times  ?  Jefus  faith  unto  him, 
I  fay  not  unto  thee,  until  feven 
times ;  but  until  feventy  times  fe- 
ven. Therefore  is  the  Kingdom 
of  heaven  likened  unto  a  certain 
king,  which  would  take  account  of 
his  fervants.  And  when  he  had 
begun  to  reckon,  one  was  brought 
Ua 


The  three  ami  twentieth  Sunday  after  Trinity, 

to  him.  So  likewife  iliall  my  hea- 
venly Father  do  alfo  unto  yoU;,  if 
ye  from  your  hearts  forgive  not 
every  one  his  brother  their  tref- 
paiTes. 


imto  him,  which  owed  him  ten 
thoufand  talents.  But  forafmuch 
as  he  had  not  to  pay,  his  lord  com- 
manded him  to  be  fold,  and  his 
wife  and  children,  and  all  that  he 
had,  and  payment  to  be  made. 
The  forvant  therefore  fell  down 
and  worfliipped  him,  faying.  Lord, 
have  patience  with  me,  and  I  will 
pay  thee  all.  Then  the  lord  of  that 
fervant  was  moved  mth  compaf- 
lion,  and  loofed  him,  and  forgave 
him  the  debt.  But  the  fame  fer- 
vant went  out,  and  found  one  of 
his  fellow -fervants,  which  owed 
him  an  himdred  pence ;  and  he 
laid  hands  on  him,  and  took  him 
by  the  throat,  faying,  Pay  me  that 
thou  oweft.  And  his  fellow-fervant 
fell  do^^Ti  at  his  feet,  and  befought 
him,  faying.  Have  patience  Avith 
me,  and  I  will  pay  thee  all.  And 
he  would  not ;  but  went  and  call 
him  into  })rifon,  till  he  Ihould  pay 
the  debt.  So  when  his  fellow-fer- 
vants  faw  what  was  done,  they 
were  very  forry,  and  came  and  told 
unto  their  lord  all  that  was  done. 
Then  his  lord,  after  that  he  had 
called  him,  laid  mito  him,  ()  thou 
wicked  fervant,  1  forgave  thee  all 
that  (kibt,  becaufc  thou  defiredll 
me  :  fliouldell  not  thou  alfo  have 
had  compafTion  on  thy  fellow-fer- 
vant, even  as  I  had  pity  on  thee? 
7Vn(l  his  lord  was  wroth,  and  de- 
livered him  to  the  tormentors,  till 
he  fhoiikl  j)ay  all  that  was  due  un- 


through  Jefus 


The  three  and  twentieth  Sunday 
after  Trinity. 

TJie  Colledl. 

OGod,  our  refuge  and  ftrength, 
who  art  the  author  of  all  god- 
linefs ;  Be  ready,  we  befeech  thee, 
to  hear  the  devout  prayers  of  thy 
Church;  and  grant  that  thofe  things 
which  we  aik  faithfully  we  may 
obtain  effe6lually 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen 

The  Epiftle.  Phil.  iii.  17. 

BRETHREN,  be  followers  to- 
gether of  me,  and  mark  them 
which  walk  fo  as  ye  have  us  for 
an  enfample.  (For  many  walk,  of 
whom  I  have  told  you  often,  and 
now  tell  you  even  weeping,  that 
they  are  the  enemies  of  the  crofs 
of  Chrift ;  whofe  end  is  deftruc- 
tion,  whofe  god  is  their  belly,  and 
whofe  glory  is  in  their  Ihame, 
who  mind  earthly  things.)  For  our 
converfation  is  in  heaven ;  from 
Avhence  alfo  we  look  for  the  Savi- 
our, the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift ;  who 
fliall  clianoe  our  vile  bodv,  that  it 
may  be  falhioned  like  unto  his  glo- 
rious body,  according  to  the  work- 
ing whereby  he  is  able  ev^en  to 
fubdue  all  things  unto  himl'clf. 


The  four  and  twentieth 

The  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  xxii.  15. 

THEN  went  the  l*harifees  and 
took  coiinfel  how  they  miglit 
entangle  him  in  his  talk.  And  they 
fent  out  unto  him  their  difciples, 
with  the  Herodians,  faying,  Maf- 
ter,  we  know  that  thou  art  true, 
and  teacheft  the  way  of  God  in 
truth,  neither  careft  thou  for  any 
man:  for  thou  regardeft  not  the 
jjerfon  of  men.  Tell  us  therefore, 
what  thinkeft  thou?  Is  it  lawful  to 
give  tribute  unto  Caefar,  or  not? 
But  Jefus  perceived  their  wicked- 
nefs,  and  faid,  Wliy  tempt  ye  me, 
ye  hypocrites?  Ihew  me  the  tribute- 
money.  And  they  brought  unto 
him  a  peny.  And  he  faith  unto 
them,  Whofe  is  this  image  and  fu- 
perfcription  ?  They  fay  unto  him, 
Csefar's.  Then  faith  he  imto  them, 
Render  therefore  unto  Citfar  the 
things  which  are  Ceefar's ;  and  un- 
to  God  the  things  that  are  God's. 
When  they  had  heard  thefe  words, 
they  mai*velled,  and  left  him,  and 
went  their  way. 

The  four  and  twentieth  Sunday 
after  Trinity. 

The  ColleB. 

OLord,  we  befeech  thee,  abfolve 
thy  people  from  their  offen- 
ces ;  that  through  thy  bovmtiful 
goodnefs  we  may  all  be  delivered 
from  the  bands  of  thofe  fins,  which 
by  our  frailty  we  have  commit- 
ted: Grant  this,  O  heavenly  Fa- 


Sundmj  after  Trinity, 

ther,  for  Jefus  Chrift's  fake,   our 

blelfed  Lord  and  Saviour.    Amen, 

'The  EpiJIle.    Col.  i.  3. 

WE  give  thanks  to  God  and 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Je- 
fus Chrift,  praying  always  for  you, 
fince  we  heard  of  your  faith  in 
Chrill  Jefus,  and  of  the  love  which 
ye  have  to  all  the  faints  ;  for  the 
hope  which  is  laid  up  for  you  in 
heaven,  whereof  ye  heard  before 
in  the  word  of  the  truth  of  the 
Gofpel;  which  is  come  unto  you, 
as  it  is  in  all  the  world,  and  bring- 
eth  forth  fruit,  as  it  doth  alfo  in 
you,  fince  the  day  ye  heard  of  it, 
and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in 
truth.  As  ye  alfo  learned  of  Epa- 
phras,  our  dear  fellow-fervant,  who 
is  for  you  a  faithful  miuifi;er  of 
Chrift  ;  who  alfo  declared  unto  us 
your  love  in  the  Spirit.  For  this, 
caufe  we  alfo,  fince  the  day  we 
heard  it,  do  not  ceafe  to  pray  for 
you,  and  to  defire  that  ye  might 
be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  his 
will  in  all  wifdom  and  fpiritual  un- 
derftanding :  that  ye  might  walk 
worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all  j^leaf- 
ing,  being  fruitful  in  every  good 
work,  and  increafing  in  the  know- 
ledge of  God ;  ftrengthened  with 
all  might,  according  to  his  glorious 
power,  unto  all  patience  and  long- 
luffering  with  joyfulnefs ;  giving 
thanks  unto  the  Father,  which  hath 
made  us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the 
inheritance  of  the  faints  in  liffht. 


The  jive  and  twentieth 

The  Go/pel   St.  Matth.  ix.  18. 

WHILE  Jefus  fpake  thefe 
things  unto  John's  difciples, 
behold,  there  came  a  certain  ruler, 
and  worlhipped  him,  faying,  My 
daughter  is  even  now  dead ;  but 
come  and  lay  thy  hand  upon  her, 
and  (lie  (hall  live.  And  Jefus  arofe, 
and  followed  him,  and  fo  did  his 
difciples.  (And  behold,  a  woman, 
which  was  difeafed  with  an  iffue 
of  blood  twelve  years,  came  behind 
him,  and  touched  the  hem  of  his 
garment ;  for  Ihe  faid  within  her- 
felf.  If  I  may  but  touch  his  gar- 
ment, I  fliall  be  whole.  But  Jefus 
turned  him  about,  and,  when'  he 
faw  her,  he  faid,  Daughter,  be  of 
good  comfort,  thy  faith  hath  made 
thee  whole.  And  the  woman  was 
made  whole  from  that  hour.)  And 
when  Jefus  came  into  the  ruler's 
houfe,  and  faw  the  minftrels  and 
the  people  making  a  noife,  he  faid 
imto  them.  Give  place ;  for  the 
maid  is  not  dead,  but  fleepeth. 
And  they  laughed  him  to  fcorn. 
But  when  the  people  were  put 
forth,  lie  went  in,  and  took  her  by 
the  hand,  and  the  maid  arofe.  And 
the  fame  hereof  went  abroad  into 
all  that  land. 

The  Jive  and  twentieth  Sunday  after 
Trinity. 

The  ColleSi. 

STIR  up,  we  befeech  thee,  O 
Lord,  the  Avills  of  thy  faith- 


Sunday  after  Trinity. 

ful  people;  that  they,  plenteoufly 
bringing  forth  the  fi-uit  of  good 
works,  may  of  thee  be  plenteoufly 
rewarded ;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 

For  the  Epijile.   Jer.  xxiii.  5. 

BEHOLD,  the  days  come,  faith 
the  Lord,  that  I  will  raife  un- 
to David  a  righteous  Branch,  and 
a  King  fliall  reign,  and  profper, 
and  fliall  execute  judgement  and 
jullice  in  the  earth.  In  his  days 
Judali  fliall  be  faved,  and  Ifrael 
fliall  dwell  fafely:  and  this  is  his 
Name  whereby  he  fliall  be  called, 
THE  LORD  OUR  RIGHTE- 
OUSNESS. Therefore  behold,  the 
days  come,  faith  the  Lord,  that 
they  fliall  no  more  fay.  The  Lord 
liveth,  which  brought  up  the  chil- 
dren of  Ifrael  out  of  the  land  of  E- 
gypt ;  but,  The  Lord  liveth,  which 
brought  up,  and  which  led  the  feed 
of  the  houfe  of  Ifrael  out  of  the 
north-country,  and  from  all  coun- 
tries whither  I  had  driven  them ; 
and  they  fliall  dwell  in  their  own 
land. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  John  vi.  5. 

WHEN  Jefus  then  lift  up  his 
eyes,  and  fa^v  a  great  com- 
pany coiiie  unto  him,  he  faith  unto 
Philip,  Whence  fliaflwe  buy  bread 
that  thefe  may  eat?  (And  this  he 
faid  to  prove  him  ;  for  he  himfelf 
knew  what  he  would  do.)  Philip 
anfwered  him,  Two  hundred  peny- 
worth  of  bread  is  not  fuflicient  for 


Sahit  And? 

them,  that  every  one  of  them  may 
take  a  little.    One  of  his  difciples, 
Andrew,   Simon   Peter's   brother, 
faith  unto  him,  There  is  a  lad  here, 
which  hath  five  barley-loaves,  and 
two  fmall  fifties ;  but  what  are  they 
among  fo  many?  And  Jefus  faid. 
Make  the  men  fit  down.     Now 
there  was  much  grafs  in  the  place. 
So  the  men  fat  doAvn,  in  number 
about  five  thoufand.     And  Jefus 
took  the  loaves,  and,  when  he  had 
given  thanks,  he  difl:ributed  to  the 
difciples,  and  the  difciples  to  them 
that  were  fet  down,  and  likewife  of 
the  fifties,  as  much  as  they  would. 
When  they  were  filled,  he  faid  un- 
to his  difciples.  Gather  up  the  frag- 
ments that  remain,  that  nothing 
be  loft^.    Therefore  they  gathered 
them  together,   and  filled  twelve 
bafliets  with  the  fragments  of  the 
five  barley-loaves,  which  remained 
over  and  above  unto  them  that  had 
eaten.  Then  thofe  men,  when  they 
had  feen  the  miracle  that  Jefus  did, 
faid.  This  is  of  a  truth  that  Prophet 
that  ftiould  come  into  the  world. 

%  If  there  be  any  more  Sundays  before  Advent-Sun- 
dai/,  the  Service  of  some  of  those  Sundays  that  were 
omitted  after  the  Epiphany  shall  be  taken  in  to 
supply  so  many  as  are  here  wanting.  And  if  there 
be  fewer,  the  overplus  may  be  omitted:  Provided 
that  this  last  Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel  shall  al- 
ways be  used  upon  the  Sunday  next  before  Advent. 

Saint  Andreiii's  Day. 
The  ColleSi. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  didft 
give  fuch  grace  unto  thy  holy 


•eiios  Day. 

Apofl;le  Saint  Andrew,  that  he  rea- 
dily obeyed  the  calling  of  thy  Son 
Jefus  Chrifl;,  and  followed  him 
without  delay;  Grant  unto  us  all, 
that  we,  being  called  by  thy  holy 
Word,  may  forthwith  give  up  our- 
felves  obediently  to  fulfil  thy  holy 
commandments ;  through  the  fame 
Jefus  Chrifl;  our  Lord.  Amen. 
The  Epiftle.    Uoni.  x.  9. 

IF  thou  flialt  confefs  with  thy 
mouth  the  Lord  Jefus,  and  ftialt 
believe  in  thine  heart  that  God 
hath  raifed  him  from  the  dead, 
thou  Ihalt  be  faved.  For  with  the 
heart  man  believeth  unto  righte- 
oufnefs,  and  with  the  mouth  con- 
feflion  is  made  unto  falvation.  For 
the  Scripture  faith,  Whofoever  be- 
lieveth on  him  fliall  not  be  aftiam- 
ed.  For  there  is  no  difference  be- 
tween the  Jew  and  the  Greek  :  for 
the  fame  Lord  over  all  is  rich  un- 
to all  that  call  upon  him.  For  who- 
foever fliall  call  upon  the  Name  of 
the  Lord  fliall  be  faved.  How  then 
fliall  they  call  on  him,  in  whom 
they  have  not  believed?  And  how 
fliafl  they  believe  in  him,  of  whom 
they  have  not  heard?  And  how 
fliall  they  hear  without  a  preacher? 
And  how  fliall  they  preach,  except 
they  be  fent?  As  it  is  written,  How 
beautiful  are  the  feet  of  them  that 
preach  the  Gofpel  of  peace,  and 
bring  glad  tidings  of  good  things! 
But  they  have  not  all  obeyed  the 
Gofpel.  *  For  Efaias  faith,  Lord, 


Saint  TJiomas  the  Apqftle. 


who  hatli  believed  our  report?  So 
then  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and 
hearing  by  the  Word  of  God.  But 
I  fay,  Have  they  not  heard?  Yes 
verily,  their  found  went  into  all  the 
earth,  and  their  words  unto  the 
ends  of  the  world.  But  I  fay,  Did 
not  Ifrael  know?  Firft  Mofes  faith, 
I  will  provoke  you  to  jealoufy  by 
them  that  are  no  people,  and  by 
a  fooliih  nation  I  will  anger  you„ 
But  Efaias  is  veiy  bold,  and  faith, 
1  was  found  of  them  that  fought 
me  not;  I  was  made  manifeft  unto 
them  that  alked  not  after  me.  But 
to  Ifrael  he  faith.  All  day  long  I 
have  ftretched  forth  my  hands  un- 
to a  difobedient  and  gainfaying 
people. 

TJie  Go/pel    St.  Matth.  iv.  18. 

JESUS,  walking  by  the  fea  of 
Galilee,  faw  two  brethren,  Si- 
mon called  Peter,  and  Andrew  his 
brother,  calling  a  net  into  the  fea, 
(for  they  were  fifliers ;)  and  he  faith 
unto  them,  Follow  me ;  and  I  will 
make  you  fi(hers  of  men.  And 
they  ftraightway  left  their  nets, 
and  followed  him.  And  going  on 
from  thence  he  faw  other  two  bre- 
thren, James  the  fon  of  Zebedee, 
and  John  his  brother,  in  a  fliip 
with  Zebedee  their  father,  mend- 
ing their  nets ;  and  he  called 
them.  And  they  immediately  left 
the  (hij)  and  their  father,  and  fol- 
lowed him. 


Saint  Thomas  the  Apojile. 
The  CoUeSt. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everliving 
God,  who  for  the  more  confir- 
mation of  the  faith  didft  fuffer  thy 
holy  Apoftle  Thomas  to  be  doubt- 
ful in  thy  Son's  refurre6lion ;  Grant 
us  fo  perfectly,  and  without  all 
doubt,  to  believe  in  thy  Son  Jefus 
Chrift,  that  our  faith  in  thy  fight 
may  never  be  reproved.  Hear  us, 
O  Lord,  through  the  fame  Jefus 
Chrilt,  to  whom,  mth  thee  and  the 
Holy  Ghofl^,  be  all  honour  and  glo- 
ry, now  and  for  evermore.    Amen. 

The  Epiftk.   Ephef.  ii.  19. 

NOW  therefore  ye  are  no  more 
ftranoers  and  foreio-ners,  but 
fellow-citizens  with  the  faints,  and 
of  the  houQiold  of  God ;  and  are 
built  upon  the  foundation  of  the 
Apoltles  and  Prophets,  Jefus  Chrift 
himfelf  being  the  chief  corner- 
ftone ;  in  whom  all  the  building, 
fitly  framed  together,  groweth  un- 
to an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord ;  in 
whom  ye  alfo  are  builded  together 
for  an  habitation  of  God,  through 
the  Spirit. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  John  xx.  24. 

THOMAS,  one  of  the  twelve, 
called  Didymus,  was  not  with 
them  when  Jefus  came.  Ilie  other 
difciples  therefore  faid  unto  him, 
We  have  feen  the  Lord.  But  he 
faid  unto  them,  Except  I  Ihall  fee 
in  his  hands  the  print  of  the  nails, 


The  Converfion  of  Saint  Paul. 


and  put  my  finger  into  the  print  of 
the  nails,  and  thruil  my  hand  into 
his  fide,  I  will  not  believe.  And 
after  eight  days  again  his  difciples 
were  within,  and  Thomas  with 
them :  then  came  Jefus,  the  doors 
being  flint,  and  fl:ood  in  the  midfl;, 
and  faid.  Peace  be  unto  you.  Then 
faith  he  to  Thomas,  Reach  hither 
thy  finger,  and  behold  my  hands ; 
and  reach  hither  t4iy  hand,  and 
thruft  it  into  my  fide ;  and  be  not 
faithlefs,  but  believing.  And  Tho- 
mas anfwered  and  faid  unto  him. 
My  Lord,  and  my  God.  Jefus  faith 
unto  him,  Thomas,  becaufe  thou 
haft  feen  me,  thou  haft  believed ; 
bleffed  are  they  that  have  not  feen, 
and  yet  have  believed.  And  many 
other  figns  tiiily  did  Jefus  in  the 
prefence  of  his  difciples,  which  are 
not  written  in  this  book.  But  thefe 
are  wi'itten,  that  ye  might  believe 
that  Jefus  is  the  Chrift,  the  Son  of 
God  ;  and  that  believing  ye  might 
have  life  through  his  Name. 

The  Converjion  of  Saint  Paul. 
The  Colledi. 

OGod,  who,  through  the  preach- 
ing of  the  blefled  Apoftle  Saint 
Paul,  haft  caufed  the  iio-ht  of  the 
Gofpel  to  fliine  throughout  the 
world ;  Grant,  we  befeech  thee, 
that  we,  having  his  wonderful  con- 
verfion  in  remembrance,  may  fliew 
forth  our  thankfulnefs  unto  thee  for 


the  fame,  by  following  the  holy 
doctrine  which  he  taught ;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 


A 


For  the  Epijile.    A6ts  ix.  L 
ND  Saul,  yet  breathing  out 


threatenings  and  llaughter 
againft  the  difciples  of  the  Lord, 
went  unto  the  high  prieft,  and  de- 
fired  of  him  letters  to  Damafcus  to 
the  fynagogues,  that,  if  he  found 
any  of  this  way,  whether  they  were 
men  or  women,  he  might  bring 
them  bound  unto  Jerufalem.  And, 
as  he  journeyed,  he  came  near 
Damafcus,  and  fuddenly  there  fliin- 
ed  round  about  him  a  light  from 
heaven.  And  he  fell  to  the  earth, 
and  heard  a  voice  faying  unto  him, 
Saul,  Saul,  why  perfecuteft  thou 
me?  And  he  faid,  Who  art  thou, 
Lord?  And  the  Lord  faid,  I  am 
Jefus  whom  thou  perfecuteft:  it 
is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  againft  the 
pricks.  And  he,  trembling  and 
aftoniflied,  faid,  Lord,  what  wilt 
thou  have  me  to  do?  And  the  Lord 
faid  unto  him,  Arife,  and  go  into 
the  city,  and  it  fliall  be  told  thee 
what  thou  muft  do.  And  the  men 
which  journeyed  with  him  ftood 
fpeechlefs,  hearing  a  voice,  but 
feeing  no  man.  And  Saul  arofe 
from  the  earth,  and  when  his  eyes 
were  opened  he  faw  no  man;  but 
they  led  him  by  the  hand,  and 
brought  him  into  Damafcus.  And 
he  was  three  days  without  fight, 


Tlie  Converfioii  of  Saint  Paid. 


and  neither  did  eat  nor  drink.  And 
there  was  a  certain  difciple  at  Da- 
mafcus,  named  Ananias,  and  to 
hini  faid  the  Lord  in  a  vifion,  Ana- 
nias. And  he  faid,  Behold,  I  am 
liere,  Lord.  And  the  Lord  faid 
unto  him,  Arife,  and  go  into  the 
ftreet  which  is  called  Straight,  and 
enquire  in  the  houfe  of  Judas  for 
one  called  Saul,  of  Tarfus :  for  be- 
hold, he  prayeth,  and  hath  feen  in 
a  vifion  a  man  named  Ananias, 
coming  in,  and  putting  his  hand 
on  him,  that  he  might  receive  his 
fight.  Then  Ananias  anfvvered. 
Lord,  I  have  heard  by  many  of 
this  man,  how  much  evil  he  hath 
done  to  thy  faints  at  Jerufalem ; 
and  here  he  hath  authority  from 
the  chief  priefts  to  bind  all  that 
call  on  thy  Name.  But  the  Lord 
faid  unto  hun.  Go  thy  way;  for  he 
is  a  chofen  veflel  unto  me,  to  bear 
my  Name  before  the  Gentiles,  and 
kings,  and  the  children  of  Ifrael : 
for  I  will  fliew  him  how  great 
things  he  muft  fuffer  for  my  Name's 
fake.  And  Ananias  went  his  way, 
and  entered  into  the  houfe ;  and, 
putting  his  hands  on  him,  faid, 
Brother  Saul,  the  Lord,  (even  Je- 
fus  that  appeared  unto  thee  in  the 
way  as  thou  camell,)  hath  fent  me, 
that  thou  mightell  receive  thy  fight, 
and  be  filled  with  the  holy  Ghoft. 
And  immediately  there  fell  from 
his  eyes  as  it  had  been  fcales ; 
and   he  received  fight  forthwith, 


and  arofe,  and  was  baptized.  And 
when  he  had  received  meat,  he  was 
fl:rengthened.  Then  was  Saul  cer- 
tain days  with  the  difci})les  which 
were  at  Damafcus.  And  ftraight- 
way  he  preached  Chrifl:  in  the  fyna- 
gogues,  that  he  is  the  Son  of  God. 
But  all  that  heard  him  were  amaz- 
ed, and  faid,  Is  not  this  he  that 
deftroyed  them  which  called  on 
this  N  ame  in  Jerufalem,  and  came 
hither  for  that  intent,  that  he  might 
bring  them  bound  unto  the  chief 
priefts?  But  Saul  increafed  the 
more  in  ftrength,  and  confounded 
the  .Tews  which  dwelt  at  Damafcus, 
proving  that  this  is  very  Chrift. 

Tlie  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  xix.  27. 

PETER  anfivered  and  faid  un- 
to Jefus,  Behold,  we  have  for- 
faken  all,  and  followed  tJiee ;  what 
ftiall  we  have  therefore?  And  Jefus 
faid  unto  them,  Verily  I  fay  mito 
you,  That  ye  which  have  followed 
me,  in  the  regeneration  when  the 
Son  of  man  fliall  fit  in  the  throne 
of  his  gloiy,  ye  alfo  (hall  fit  upon 
twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Ifrael.  And  every  one 
that  hath  forfaken  houfes,  or  bre- 
thren, or  fifters,  or  father,  or  mo- 
ther, or  wife,  or  children,  or  lands, 
for  my  Name's  fake,  fliall  receive 
an  hundred-fold,  and  fliall  inherit 
everlatting  life.  But  many  that  are 
firft  fliall  be  latt,  and  the  lail  fliall 
be  firft. 


The  Purification 

The  Prefentation  of  Chriji  in  the 
;      Temple,  commonly    called.    The 

Purification  of  Saint  Mary  the 

Virgin. 

TJie  Colledl. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everliving 
God,  we  humbly  befeech  thy 
Majefty,  that,  as  thy  only-begot- 
ten Son  was  this  day  prefented  in 
the  temple  in  fubllance  of  our 
jflefh,  fo  we  may  be  prefented  un- 
to thee  \nt\\  pure  and  clean  liearts, 
by  the  fame  thy  Son  Jefus  Chrift 

bur  Lord.    Amen, 
ijeibfuio- 
.    For  the  Epijile.    Mai.  iii.  L 

BEHOLD,  I  will  fend  my  mef- 
fenger,  and  he  ihall  prepare 
the  way  before  me :  and  the  Lord, 
whom  ye  feek,  Ihall  fuddenly  come 
to  his  temple;  even  the  meflenger 
of  the  covenant,  whom  ye  delight 
in ;  behold,  he  fliall  come,  faith 
the  Lord  of  hofts.  But  who  may 
abide  the  day  of  his  coming?  and 
who  flaall  ftand  when  he  appear- 
eth?  for  he  is  like  a  refiner's  fire, 
and  like  fullers'  foap.  And  he  fliall 
fit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  fil- 
ver ;  and  he  fliall  purify  the  fons 
of  Levi,  and  pm'ge  them  as  gold 
and  filver,  that  they  may  ofier  un- 
to the  Lord  an  ofl^ering  in  righte- 
oufnefs.  Then  fliall  the  ofterings 
of  Judah  and  Jerufalem  be  plea- 
fant  unto  the  Lord,  as  in  the  days 
of  old,  and  as  in  former  years. 
And  I  will  come  near  to  you  to 


of  Saint  Mary. 

judgement,  and  I  will  be  a  fwift 
witnefs  againfl  the  forcerers,  and 
againft  the  adulterers,  and  againll 
falfefwearers,  and  againfl:  thofe  that 
opprefs  the  hireling  in  his  wages, 
the  widow,  and  the  fatherlefs,  and 
that  turn  afide  the  ilranger  from 
his  right,  and  fear  not  me,  faith 
the  Lord  of  hofi;s. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  ii.  22. 

AND  when  the  days  of  her  pu- 
rification, according  to  the 
Law  of  Mofes,  were  accompliflied, 
they  brought  him  to  Jerufalem,  to 
prefent  him  to  the  Lord ;  (as  it  is 
written  in  the  Law  of  the  Lord, 
Every  male  that  openeth  the  womb 
fliall  be  called  holy  to  the  Lord ;) 
and  to  offer  a  facrifice,  according 
to  that  which  is  faid  in  the  Law  of 
the  Lord,  A  pair  of  turtle-doves, 
or  two  young  pigeons.  And  be- 
hold, there  was  a  man  in  Jerufa- 
lem, wliofe  name  was  Symeoii ; 
and  the  fame  man  was  jufl;  and 
devout,  waiting  for  tlie  confolation 
of  Ifrael :  and  the  Holy  Gliofi;  was 
upon  him.  And  it  was  revealed 
unto  him  by  the  Holy  Ghofi;,  that 
he  fliould  not  fee  death,  before  he 
had  feeii  the  Lord's  Chnft.  And 
he  came  by  the  Spirit  into  the  tem- 
ple ;  and  when  the  parents  brought 
in  the  child  Jefus,  to  do  for  him 
after  the  cufl;om  of  the  law,  then 
took  he  him  up  in  his  arms,  and 
blefled  God,  and  faid,  Lord,  now 
letteft  thou  thy  fervant  depart  in 

X  2 


Sti.i        AjiJs» 


\^'^iv"       Sciint  Matthias  s  Day. 

peace,  according  to  thy  word:  for 
mine  eyes  have  feen  thy  falvation, 
which  thou  haft  prepared  before 
the  face  of  all  people ;  a  light  to 
lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the  gloiy 
of  thy  people  Ifrael.  And  Jofeph 
and  his  mother  marvelled  at  thofe 
tilings  which  were  fpoken  of  him. 
And  Symeon  blelfed  them,  and  faid 
unto  Maiy  his  mother,  Behold, 
this  child  is  fet  for  the  fall  and 
rifing  again  of  many  in  Ifrael ;  and 
for  a  fign  which  fliall  be  fpoken 
againft;  (yea,  a  fword  Ihall  pierce 
through  thy  own  foul  alfo;)  that 
the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  may 
be  revealed.  And  there  was  one 
Anna  a  prophetefs,  the  daughter 
of  Phanuel,  of  the  tribe  of  Afer ; 
Ihe  was  of  a  ffreat  ag^e,  and  had 
lived  with  an  hulband  feven  years 
from  her  virginity:  and  Ihe  was  a 
widow  of  aliout  fourfcore  and  four 
years ;  which  departed  not  from 
the  temple,  but  ferved  God  with 
faftings  and  prayers  night  and 
day.     And  flie  coming  in  that  in 


ftant  gave  thanks  likewife  unto  the 
Lord,  and  fpake  of  him  to  all  them 
that  looked  for  redemption  in  Je- 
rufalcm.  And  when  they  had  ])er- 
formed  all  things  according  to  the 
law  of  the  Lord,  they  returned  into 
Galilee  to  their  own  city  Nazareth. 
And  the  child  grew,  and  waxed 
ftrong  in  fpirit,  filled  widi  wifdom; 
and  the  grace  of  God  was  upon 
liim. 


Sai7it  Matthias's  Day. 
The  Colledt. 


O  Almighty  God,  who  into  the 
place  of  the  traitor  Judas  didft 
choofe  thy  faithful  fervant  Mat- 
thias to  be  of  the  number  of  the 
twelve  Apoftles  ;  Grant  that  thy 
Church,  being  alway  prefeiTed 
from  falfe  Apoftles,  may  be  order- 
ed and  guided  by  faithful  and  true 
paftors ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.   Amen. 

For  the  Epijile.   A6ls  i.  15. 

IN  thofe  days  Peter  ftood  up  in 
the  midft  of  the  difciples,  and 
faid,  (the  number  of  the  names  to- 
gether were  about  an  hundred  and 
twenty,)  Men  and  brethren,  this 
Scripture  muft  needs  have  been 
fiilfilled,  which  the  Holy  Ghoft  by 
the  mouth  of  David  fpake  before 
concerning. ludas,  which  was  guide 


to  them  that  took  Jefus :  for  he 
was  numbered  with  us,  and  had 
obtained  part  of  this  miniftiy.  Now 
this  man  purchafed  a  field  with 
the  reward  of  iniquity ;  and  falling 
headlong  he  burft  afunder  in  the 
midft,  and  all  his  bowels  gulhed 
out.  vVnd  it  was  known  unto  all 
the  dwellers  at  Jerufalem,  info- 
much  as  that  field  is  called  in  their 
proper  tongue,  Aceldama,  that  is 
to  fay,  The  field  of  blood.  For  it 
is  written  in  the  book  of  Pfalms, 
Let  his  habitation  be  defolate,  and 
let  no  man  dwell  therein  ;  and, 
His  biftioprick  let  another  take. 


The  Annunciation  of' the  Virgin  Mary. 


Wherefore,  of  thefe  men  which 
have  companied  with  us  all  the 
time  that  the  Lord  Jefus  went  in 
and  out  among  us,  beginning  from 
the  baptifm  of  John,  unto  that  fame 
day  that  he  was  taken  up  from  us, 
mull  one  be  ordained  to  be  a  wit- 
nefs  with  us  of  his  refurrection. 
And  they  appointed  two,  .Tofeph 
called  Barfabas,  who  was  furnamed 
Julius,  and  Matthias.  And  they 
prayed,  and  faid,  Thou,  Lord, 
which  knowell  the  hearts  of  all 
men,  Ihew  whether  of  thefe  two 
thou  haft  chofen ;  that  he  may  take 
part  of  this  miniftiy  and  apoftlefliip, 
from  Avhich  Judas  by  tranfgreffion 
fell,  that  he  might  go  to  his  own 
place.  And  they  gave  forth  their 
lots ;  and  the  lot  fell  upon  Mat- 
thias, and  he  was  numbered  .with 
the  eleven  Apoftles.  >  > 

The  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  xi.  25. 

AT  that  time  Jefus  anfwered  and 
-^^  faid,  I  thank  thee,  O  Father, 
Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  becaufe 
thou  haft  hid  thefe  things  from 
the  wife  and  prudent,  and  haft  re- 
vealed them  unto  babes.  Even  fo. 
Father,  for  fo  it  feemed  good  in 
thy  fight.  All  things  are  deliver- 
ed unto  me  of  my  Father:  and 
no  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but  the 
Father;  neither  knoweth  any  man 
the  Father,  fave  the  Son,  and  he 
to  whomfoever  the  Son  will  reveal 
him.  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that 
labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I 


will  give  you  reft.  Take  my  yoke 
upon  you,  and  learn  of  me;  for  I 
am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and 
ye  fliall  find  reft  imto  your  fouls. 
For  my  yoke  is  eafy,  and  my  bur- 
den is  light. 

The  Annunciatioii  of  the  hlejjed 
Virgin  Mary. 

The  ColleSl. 
E  befeech  thee,  O  Lord, 
pour  thy  grace  into  our 
hearts ;  that,  as  we  have  known 
the  incarnation  of  thy  Son  Jefus 
Chrift  by  the  meflage  of  an  angel, 
fo  by  his  crofs  and  paflion  we  may 
be  brought  unto  the  gloiy  of  his 
refuiTe^tion ;  through  tlie  fame  Je- 
fus Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

For  the  Ejnjile.    Ifai.  vii.  10.     r 

lY/fOREOVER,  the  Lord  fpake 
-^  ▼  A  again  unto  Ahaz,  faying,  Alk 
thee  a  fign  of  the  Lord  thy  God ; 
afk  it  either  in  the  depth,  or  in  the 
height  above.  But  Ahaz  faid,  I 
will  not  alk,  neither  will  I  tempt 
the  Lord.  And  he  faid.  Hear  ye 
now,  O  houfe  of  David;  Is  it  a 
fmall  thing  for  you  to  weary  men, 
but  will  ye  weary  my  God  alfo? 
Therefore  the  Lord  himfelf  iliall 
give  you  a  fign;  Behold,  a  Virgin 
Ihall  conceive,  and  bear  a  fon,  and 
fliall  call  his  name  Immanuel.  But- 
ter and  honey  fliall  he  eat,  that  he 
may  know  to  refufe  the  evil,  and 
choofe  the  good. 


.'T 


r^j^Saint  MarUs  Day. 

Tlie  Go/pel   St.  Luke  i.  26. 

AND  ill  the  fixth  month  the 
angel  Gabriel  was  fent  from 
God  unto  a  city  of  Galilee  named 
Nazareth,  to  a  Virgin  efpoufed  to 
a  man  whofe  name  was  Jofeph,  of 
the  lioufe  of  David ;  and  the  \  ir- 


gin's  name  was  Mary.  And  the 
angel  came  in  unto  her,  and  faid. 
Hail,  thou  that  art  highly  favour- 
ed, the  Lord  is  with  thee;  blefl'ed 
art  thou  among  women.  And  when 
Ihe  faw  him  (he  was  troubled  at 
his  faying,  and  caft  in  her  mind 
what  manner  of  falutation  tliis 
fliould  be.  And  the  angel  faid 
unto  her,  Fear  not,  Mary;  for  thou 
haft  found  favour  mth  God.  And 
behold,  thou  (halt  conceive  in  thy 
womb,  and  bring  forth  a  Son,  and 
flialt  call  his  name  JESUS.  He 
Ihall  be  great,  and  fliall  be  called 
the  Son  of  the  Higheft ;  and  the 
Lord  God  fliall  give  unto  him  the 
throne  of  his  father  David.  And 
he  fliall  reign  over  the  houfe  of 
Jacob  for  ever;  and  of  his  king- 
dom there  fliall  be  no  end.  Then 
faid  Mary  unto  the  angel.  How 
fliall  this  be,  feeing  I  know  not  a 
man?  And  the  angel  anfwered  and 
faid  unto  her,  The  Holy  Ghoft  fliall 
come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of 
the  Highell  fliall  overfliadow  thee : 
therefore  alfo  that  holy  thing  which 
fliall  be  born  of  thee  fliall  be  call- 
ed the  Son  of  God.  And  lieliold, 
thy  coufm  Elizabeth,  flie  hath  alfo 


conceived  a  fon  m  her  old  age ; 
and  this  is  the  lixth  month  with 
her  who  was  called  barren:  for  with 
God  nothing  fliall  be  impofllble. 
And  Mary  faid.  Behold  the  hand- 
maid of  the  Lord  ;  be  it  unto  me 
according  to  thy  word.  And  the 
angel  departed  from  her. 

Sfjiif'^o*^^^'^^  il/tfrA'V  Day. 

Almighty  God,  who  haft  in- 
fti'u6ted  thy  holy  Church  with 
the  heavenly  doctrine  of  thy  Evan- 
gelift  Saint  Mark ;  Give  us  grace, 
that,  being  not  like  children  cai-- 
ried  away  with  eveiy  blaft  of  vain 
dodlrine,  we  may  be  eftablilhed 
in  the  truth  of  thy  holy  Gofpel ; 
through  J  efus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen.     \  ip>  <^>p5^^-^^ 

The  Epi^le.  Ephef.  iv.  7. 
T  TNTO  every  one  of  us  is  given 
^  grace,  according  to  the  iiiea- 
fure  of  the  gift  of  Clmft.  Where- 
fore he  faith,  When  he  afcended 
up  on  high,  he  led  captivity  cap- 
\Axe,  and  gave  gifts  unto  men. 
(Now  that  he  afcended,  what  is  it 
but  that  he  alfo  defcended  firft 
into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth? 
He  that  defcended  is  the  fame  alfo 
that  afcended  up  far  above  all  hea- 
vens, that  he  might  All  all  things.) 
And  he  gave  foiiie  Apoftles,  and 
fome  Prophets,  and  foiiic  Evange- 
lifts,  and  fome  Paftors  and  teach- 
ers ;  for  the  perfedting  of  the  faints, 


Saint  Philip  and  Saint  James  s  Day. 

forth  much  fruit ;  for  without  me 


for  the  work  of  the  miniftry,  for 
the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Chrift ; 
till  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the 
faith,  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Son  of  God,  mito  a  perfe6l  man, 
unto  the  meafure  of  the  ftature 
of  the  fulnefs  of  Chrift ;  that  we 
henceforth  be  no  more  children, 
toffed  to  and  fro,  and  carried  a- 
bout  with  every  wind  of  doctrine, 
by  the  Height  of  men,  and  cunning 
craftinefs,  whereby  they  lie  in  wait 
to  deceive;  but  fpeaking  the  truth 
in  love,  may  grow  up  into  him  in 
all  things,  which  is  the  head,  even 
Chrift  :  from  whom  the  whole  bo- 
dy fitly  joined  together,  and  com- 
pacted by  that  which  every  joint 
fupplieth,  according  to  the  effectual 
working  in  the  meafure  of  eveiy 
part,  maketh  increafe  of  the  body, 
unto  the  edifying  of  itfelf  in  love. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  John  xv.  1 . 

IAm  the  true  vine,  and  my  Fa- 
ther is  the  hulbandman.  Every 
branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit 
he  taketh  away;  and  eveiy  branch 
that  beareth  fruit,  he  purgeth  it, 
that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit. 
Now  ye  are  clean  through  the 
word  which  I  have  fpoken  unto 
you.  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you. 
As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of 
itfelf,  except  it  abide  in  the  vine ; 
no  more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide 
in  me.  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the 
branches.  He  that  abideth  in  me, 
and  I  in  him,  the  fame  bringeth 


ye  can  do  nothing.  If  a  man  abide 
not  in  me,  he  is  caft  forth  as  a 
branch,  and  is  withered;  and  men 
gather  them,  and  caft  them  into 
the  fire,  and  they  are  burned.  If 
ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  a- 
bide  in  you,  ye  Ihall  alk  what  ye 
will,  and  it  fliall  be  done  imto  you. 
Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that 
ye  bear  much  fruit ;  fo  ftiall  ye  be 
my  difciples.  As  the  Father  hath 
loved  me,  fo  have  I  loved  you : 
continue  ye  in  my  love.  If  ye  keep 
my  commandments,  ye  fhall  abide 
in  my  love ;  even  as  I  have  kept 
my  Father's  commandments,  and 
abide  in  his  love.  Thefe  things 
have  I  fpoken  unto  you,  that  my 
joy  might  remain  in  you,  and  that 
your  joy 


might  be  full. 


Saint  Philip  and  Saint  James's  Day. 
'^^'^       The  ColleB. 

O  Almighty  God,  whom  truly 
to  know  is  everlafting  life; 
Grant  us  perfe6lly  to  know  thy  Son 
Jefus  Chrift  to  be  the  way,  the 
truth,  and  the  life;  that,  following 
the  fteps  of  thy  holy  Apoftles,  Saint 
Philip  and  Saint  James,  we  may 


ftedfaftly  walk  in  the  way  that  lead- 
eth  to  eternal  life;  through  the 
fame  thy  Son  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


^f-v.'.n 


J 


Tlie  Epijlle.  St.  James  i.  I!  "' 
AMES,  a  fervant  of  God  and 
of  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  to  the 


Saint  Philip  and 

t^A'elve  tribes  which  are  fcattered 
abroad,  greeting.     My  brethren, 
count  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall  into 
di\'ers  temptations  ;  kno\ving  this, 
that  the  trying  of  your  faith  work- 
eth    patience.     But   let   patience 
have    her   perfedl  work,   that   ye 
may  be  perfedl  and  entire,  wanting 
nothing.     If  any  of  you  lack  wif- 
dom,  let  him  alk  of  God,  that  giv- 
eth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  up- 
braideth  not,  and  it  (hall  be  given 
hmi.     But  let  him   alk  in  faith, 
nothing  wavering ;  for  he  that  wa- 
vereth  is  like  a  wave  of  the  fea, 
driven  with  the  wind,  and  tofled. 
For  let  not  that  man  think  that  he 
fliall  receive  any  thing  of  the  Lord. 
A  double-minded  man  is  unliable 
in  all  his  ways..     Let  the  brother 
of  low  degree  rejoice  in  that  he  is 
exalted ;  but  the  rich  in  that  he  is 
made  low;  becaufe  as  the  flower 
of  the  grafs  he  ftiall  pafs  away. 
For  the  fun  is  no  fooner  rifen  with 
a  burning  heat,  but  it  withereth 
the  grafs,  and  the  flower  thereof 
falleth,  and  the  grace  of  the  fa- 
fliion  of  it  periflieth :  fo  alfo  lliall 
the   rich   man   fade    away  in    his 
ways.  Blelfed  is  the  man  that  en- 
dureth  temptation  ;  for  when  he 
is  tried,  he  fhall  receive  the  crown 
of  life,  which  the  Lord  hath  pro- 
mifed  to  them  that  love  him. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  .John  xiv.  1 . 

AND  Jefus  faid  unto  his  difci- 
ples,  Let  not  your  heart  be 


Saint  James  s  Day. 

troubled ;  ye  believe  in  God,  be- 
lieve alfo  in  me.  In  my  Father's 
houfe  ai'e  many  manfions ;  if  it 
were  not  fo,  I  would  have  told  you. 
I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you: 
and  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place 
for  you,  I  ^vill  come  again,  and  re- 
ceive you  unto  myfelf,  that  where 
I  am,  there  ye  may  be  alfo.  And 
whither  I  go  ye  know,  and  the 
way  ye  know.  Thomas  faith  unto 
him.  Lord,  we  know  not  whither 
thou  goell,  and  how  can  we  know 
the  way?  Jefus  faith  unto  him,  I 
am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the 
life :  no  man  cometh  mito  the  Fa- 
ther but  by  me.  If  ye  had  known 
me,  ye  Ihould  have  knowii  my  Fa- 
ther alfo  :  and  from  henceforth  ye 
know  him,  and  have  feen  him. 
Philip  faith  unto  him,  Lord,  fliew 
us  the  Father,  and  it  fufficeth  us. 
Jefus  faith  unto  him,  Have  I  been 
fo  long  time  with  you,  and  yet 
haft  thou  not  known  me,  Philip? 
He  that  hath  feen  me  hath  feen 
the  Father ;  and  how  fayeft  thou 
then.  Shew  us  the  Father?  Be- 
lieveft  thou  not  that  I  am  in  the 
Father,  and  the  Father  in  me?  The 
words  that  I  fpeak  unto  you  I  fpeak 
not  of  myfelf;  but  the  Father  that 
dwelleth  in  me,  he  doeth  the  works. 
Believe  me,  that  I  am  in  the  Fa- 
ther, and  the  Father  in  me  ;  or 
elfe  believe  me  for  the  very  works' 
fake.  Verily,  verily  I  fay  imto  you. 
He  that  believeth  on  me,  tlie  works 


that  I  do  lliall  he  do  alfo ;  and 
greater  works  than  tliefe  fliall  he 
do ;  becaiife  I  go  unto  my  Father. 
And  whatfoever  ye  Ihall  alk  in  my 
Name,  that  will  I  do,  that  the  Fa- 
ther may  be  glorified  in  the  Son. 
If  ye  Ihall  aik  any  thing  in  my 
Name,  1  will  do  it. 


o 


Saint  Barnabas  the  JlpoJiU. 
The  Collect. 
Lord  God  Almighty,  who 
didft  endue  thy  holy  Apoftle 
Barnabas  M'ith  fingular  gifts  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft;  Leave  us  not,  we  be- 
feech  thee,  deftitute  of  thy  mani- 
fold gifts,  nor  yet  of  grace  to  ufe 
them  alway  to  thy  honour  and 
gloiy ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.   Amen. 

For  the  Bpiftle.    A^s  xi.  22. 
IDINGS  of  thefe  things  came 


T 


unto  the  ears  of  the  Church 
which  was  in  Jerufalem ;  and  they 
fent  forth  Barnabas,  that  he  ftiould 
go  as  far  as  Antioch.  Who,  when 
he  came,  and  had  feen  the  grace 
of  God,  was  glad ;  and  exhorted 
them  all,  that  with  purpofe  of  heart 
they  would  cleave  unto  the  Lord. 
For  he  was  a  good  man,  and  full  of 
the  holy  Ghoft,  and  of  faith  :  and 
much  people  was  added  unto  the 
Lord.  Then  departed  Barnabas 
to  Tarfus,  for  to  feek  Saul.  And 
when  he  had  found  him,  he  brought 
him  unto  Antioch.  And  it  came  to 
pafs,  that  a  whole  year  they  airem- 


Saint  Barnabas  the  Apojile. 

bled  themfelves  with  the  Church, 
and  taught  much  people :  and  the 
difciples  were  called  Chriftians  firft 
in  Antioch.  And  in  thefe  days 
came  prophets  from  Jerufalem  un- 
to Antioch.  And  there  ftood  up 
one  of  them  named  Agabus,  and 
fignified  by  the  Spirit,  that  there 
ftiould  be  great  dearth  throughout 
all  the  world ;  which  came  to  pafs 
in  the  days  of  Claudius  Caifar. 
Then  the  difciples,  every  man  ac- 
cording to  his  ability,  determined 
to  fend  relief  unto  the  brethren 
which  dwelt  in  Judaea.  Which 
alfo  they  did,  and  fent  it  to  the 
elders  by  the  hands  of  Barnabas 
and  Saul. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  John  xv.  12. 

THIS  is  my  commandment. 
That  ye  love  one  another,  as  I 
have  loved  you.  Greater  love  hath 
no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay 
down  his  life  for  his  friends.  Ye 
are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  whatfoever 
I  command  you.  Henceforth  I  call 
you  not  fervants ;  for  the  fervant 
knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth : 
but  I  have  called  you  friends  ;  for 
all  things  that  I  have  heard  of  my 
Father  I  have  made  known  unto 
you.  Ye  have  not  chofen  me,  but 
I  have  chofen  you,  and  ordained 
you,  that  ye  ftiould  go  and  bring 
forth  fruit,  and  that  your  fruit 
ftiould  remain :  that  whatfoever  ye 
Ihall  aftc  of  the  Father  in  my  Name, 
he  may  give  it  you. 
Y 


Saint  John  Baptijl's  Day. 

Saint  John  Baptijl's  Day. 


The  Colledi. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  by  wliofe 
providence  thy  fervant  John 
Baptilt  was  wonderfully  born,  and 
fent  to  prepare  the  way  of  thy  Son 
our  Saviour,  by  preaching  of  re- 
pentance ;  Make  us  fo  to  follow 
his  dotftrine  and  holy  life,  that  we 
may  truly  repent  according  to  his 
preaching ;  and  after  his  example 
conftantly  fpeak  the  truth,  boldly 
rebuke  vice,  and  patiently  fufter 
for  the  truth's  fake ;  through  Jefus 
Cliriil  our  Lord.    Amen. 

For  the  Epijtle.    Ifai.  xl.  L 

COMFORT  ye,  comfort  ye  my 
'  people,  faith  your  God.  Speak 
ye  comfortably  to  Jerufalem,  and 
cry  unto  her.  That  her  warfare  is 
accompliflied  ;  that  her  iniquity  is 
pardoned:  for  flie  hath  received  of 
the  Lord's  hand  double  for  all  her 
fins.  The  voice  of  him  that  crieth 
in  the  wildernefs,  Prepare  ye  the 
way  of  the  I^ord,  make  ftraight  in 
the  defert  a  high -way  for  our  God. 
Eveiy  valley  Ihall  be  exalted,  and 
every  mountain  and  hill  fliall  be 
made  low,  and  the  crooked  fliall 
be  made  flraight,  and  the  rough 
places  plain.  yVnd  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  fliall  be  revealed,  and  all  flefli 
fliall  fee  it  together:  for  the  mouth 
of  the  Lord  hath  fpoken  it.  The 
voice  faid,  Cry.  And  he  faid,  What 
fliall  I  ciy?  All  flefli  is  grafs,  and 
all  the  goodlincfs  thereof  is  as  the 


flo\v'er  of  the  field.    The  grafs  wl- 
thereth,  the  flower  fadeth,  becaufe 
the   Spirit   of   the   Lord   bloweth 
upon  it:  furely  the  people  is  grafs. 
The    grafs   withereth,   the   flower 
fadeth ;  but  the  word  of  our  God 
fliall  ftand  for  ever.    O  Zion,  that 
bringefl  good  tidings,  get  thee  up 
into  the  hioh  mountain  :  O  Jeru- 
falem,  that  bringeft  good  tidings, 
lift  up  thy  voice  with  ftrength ;  lift 
it  up,  be  not  afraid :  fay  unto  the 
cities  of  Judah,  Behold  your  God. 
Behold,  the  Lord  God  will  come 
with  ftrong  hand,  and  his  arm  ihall 
rule  for  him:  behold,  his  reward 
is  with  him,  and  his  work  before 
him.     He  fliall  feed  his  flock  like 
a  fliepherd ;   he   fliall   gather  the 
lambs   with    his    arm,   and    cany 
them  in  his  bofom,  and  fliall  gently 
lead  thofe  that  are  with  young. 
The  Go f pel.    St.  Luke  i.  57- 

ELISABETH'S  full  time  came 
that  flie  fliould  be  delivered ; 
and  flie  brought  forth  a  fon.  And 
her  neighbours  and  her  coufins 
heard  how  the  Lord  had  fliewed 
great  mercy  ujion  her ;  and  they 
rejoiced  with  her.  And  it  came  to 
pafs,  that  on  the  eighth  day  they 
came  to  circiuncife  the  child ;  and 
they  called  him  Zacharias,  after 
the  name  of  his  father.  And  his 
mother  anfwered  and  faid,  Notfo; 
but  he  fliall  be  called  John.  And 
they  faid  unto  her.  There  is  none 
of  thy  kindred  that  is  called  by 


this  name.     And  they  made  figns 
to  his  father,  liovv  he  woidd  have 
him  called.     And  he  alked  for  a 
writing-table,   and  wrote,  faying, 
His    name    is   John.     And    they 
marvelled    all.     And    his    month 
was  opened  innnediately,  and  his 
tongne  loofed,  and  he  fpake,  and 
praifed  God.     And  fear  came  on 
all  that  dwelt  round  about  them ; 
and  all  thefe  fayings  were  noifed 
abroad    throughout    all    the    hill- 
country  of  Judaea.     And  all  they 
that  had  heard  them  laid  them  up 
in  their  hearts,  faying.  What  man- 
ner of  child  fliall  this  be?  And  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  him. 
And  his  father  Zacharias  was  filled 
with  the  holy  Ghoft,  and  prophe- 
fied,  faying,  Bleffed  be  the  Lord 
God  of  Ifrael :  for  he  hath  vifited 
and  redeemed  his  people,  and  hath 
raifed  up  an  horn  of  falvation  for 
us  in  the  houfe  of  his  fervant  Da- 
vid ;  as  he  fpake  by  the  mouth  of 
his  holy  prophets,  which  have  been 
fince  the  world  began ;   that  we 
ftiould  be  faved  from  our  enemies, 
and  from  the  hand  of  all  that  hate 
us  ;  to  perform  the  mercy  promif- 
ed  to  our  fathers,  and  to  remem- 
ber his  holy  covenant ;  the  oath 
which  he  fware  to  our  father  Abra- 
ham, that  he  would  grant  unto  us, 
that  we,   beino^  delivered  out  of 
the  hands  of  our  enemies,  might 
ferve  him  without  fear,  in  holinefs 
and  righteoufnefs  before  him  all 


Saint  Peters  Day. 

the  days  of  our  life.  And  thou, 
Child,  Ihalt  be  called  the  Prophet 
of  the  llighell:  for  thou  flialt  go 
before  the  face  of  the  Lord  to 
prepare  his  ways  ;  to  give  know- 
ledge of  falvation  unto  his  j3eo- 
ple,  by  the  remiflion  of  their  fins, 
through  the  tender  mercy  of  our 
God,  whereby  the  day-fpring  from 
on  high  hath  vifited  us  ;  to  give 
light  to  them  that  fit  in  darknefs 
and  in  the  fliadow  of  death,  to 
guide  our  feet  into  the  way  of 
peace.  And  the  child  grew,  and 
waxed  ftrong  in  fpirit ;  and  was 
in  the  deferts  till  the  day  of  his 
lliewing  unto  Ifrael. 


Saint  Peters  Day. 

The  CoUeB. 

O  Almighty  God,  who  by  thy 
Son  Jefus  Chrift  didfi;  give  to 
thy  Apoftle  Saint  Peter  many  ex- 
cellent gifts,  and  commandedft  him 
earnefl;ly  to  feed  thy  flock  ;  Make, 
we  befeech  thee,  all  Bilhops  and 
Pafl;ors  diligently  to  j)reach  thy 
holy  Word,  and  the  people  obedi- 
ently to  follow  the  fame,  that  they 
may  receive  the  crown  of  everlafi- 
ing  glory;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 

For  the  Epljtle.   A6ls  xii.  L 

ABOUT  that  time  Herod  the 
king  ftretched  forth  his  hands 
to  vex  certain  of  the  Church.  And 
he    killed  James    the  brother  of 

Y2 


Samt  Peter's  Day. 

John  with  the  fword.  And,  be- 
caiife  he  faw  it  pleafed  the  Jews, 
he  proceeded  fiuther  to  take  Pe- 
ter alfo.  (Then  were  tlie  days  of 
unleavened  bread.)  And  when  he 
had  apprehended  him,  he  put  him 
in  prifon,  and  deHvered  him  to 
four  quaternions  of  foldiers  to  keep 
him,  intending  after  Eafter  to  bring 
him  forth  to  the  people.  Peter 
therefore  was  kept  in  prifon ;  but 
prayer  was  made  without  cealing 
of  the  Church  unto  God  for  him. 
And  when  Herod  would  have 
brought  him  forth,  the  fame  night 
Peter  was  fleeping  between  two 
foldiers,  bound  with  two  chains ; 
and  the  keepers  before  the  door 
kept  the  prifon.  And  behold,  the 
angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him, 
and  a  light  fliined  in  the  prifon  ; 
and  he  fmote  Peter  on  the  fide, 
and  raifed  him  up,  faying,  Arife 
up  quickly.  And  his  chains  fell 
off  from  his  hands.  And  the  angel 
faid  unto  him,  Gird  thyfelf,  and 
bind  on  thy  fandals :  and  fo  he  did. 
And  he  faith  unto  him.  Call  thy 
garment  about  thee,  and  follow 
me.  And  he  went  out  and  fol- 
lowed him ;  and  wift  not  that  it 
was  true  which  was  done  by  the 
angel ;  but  thought  he  faw  a  vifion. 
When  tliey  were  paft  the  fidl  and 
the  fecond  ward,  they  came  unto 
the  iron  gate  that  leadeth  unto 
the  city,  which  opened  to  them  of 
his  own  accord;   and  they  went 


out,  and  paffed  on  through  one 
ftreet,  and  forthwith  the  angel 
departed  from  him.  And  when 
Peter  was  come  to  himfelf,  he 
faid,  Now  I  know  of  a  furety, 
that  the  Lord  hath  fent  his  angel, 
and  hath  delivered  me  out  of  the 
hand  of  Herod,  and  fi'om  all  the 
expectation  of  the  people  of  the 
Jews. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  xvi.  13. 

WHEN  Jefus  came  into  the 
coafts  of  Caefarea  Philippi,  he 
aflvcd  his  difciples,  faying,  \\liom 
do  men  fay  that  I,  the  Son  of 
man,  am?  And  they  faid.  Some 
fay  that  thou  art  John  the  Baptift, 
fome  Elias,  and  others  Jeremias, 
or  one  of  the  prophets.  He  faith 
imto  them,  But  whom  fay  ye  that 
I  am?  And  Simon  Peter  anfwered 
and  faid,  Thou  art  Chrift,  the  Son 
of  the  living  God.  And  Jefus  an- 
fwered and  faid  unto  him,  Blelfed 
art  thou,  Simon  Bar-jona :  for  flefh 
and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  un- 
to thee,  but  my  Father  which  is 
in  heaven.  And  I  fay  alfo  unto 
thee.  That  thou  art  Peter,  and 
upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my 
Church ;  and  the  gates  of  hell  fliall 
not  prevail  againll  it.  And  I  will 
give  imto  thee  the  keys  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  :  and  whatfo- 
ever  thou  flialt  bind  on  earth  fliall 
be  bound  in  heaven ;  and  whatfo- 
ever  thou  flialt  loofe  on  earth  fliall 
be  loofcd  in  heaven. 


Saint  James  the  Apqflle. 


Saint  James  the  Apoflle. 
The  ColleSl. 

GRANT,  O  niercifiil  God,  that 
as  thine  holy  Apoftle  Saint 
James,  leaving  his  father  and  all 
that  he  had,  without  delay  was 
obedient  unto  the  calling  of  thy 
Son  Jefus  Chrift,  and  followed  him; 
fo  we,  forfaking  all  worldly  and 
carnal  affections,  may  be  evermore 
ready  to  follow  thy  holy  command- 
ments ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

For  the  Epiftle.    Aas  xi.  27. 

IN  thofe  days  came  prophets 
from  Jerufalem  unto  Antioch. 
And  there  ftood  up  one  of  them 
named  Agabus,  and  fignified  by 
the  Spirit,  that  there  fliould  be 
great  dearth  throughout  all  the 
world ;  w^hich  came  to  pafs  in  the 
days  of  Claudius  Caefar.  Then  the 
difciples,  every  man  according  to 
his  ability,  determined  to  fend  re- 
lief unto  the  brethren  which  dwelt 
in  Judaea.  Which  alfo  they  did, 
and  fent  it  to  the  elders  by  the 
hands  of  Barnabas  and  Saul.  Now 
about  that  time  Herod  the  king 
ftretched  forth  his  hands  to  vex 
certain  of  the  Church.  And  he 
killed  James  the  brother  of  John 
with  the  fword.  And,  becaufe  he 
faw  it  pleafed  the  Jews,  he  proceed- 
ed further  to  take  Peter  alfo. 

The  Go/pel   St.  Matth.  xx.  20. 
nr^HEN  came  to  him  the  mother 

J-  of  Zebedee's  children  with  her 


fons,  worfliij^ping  him,  and  defiring 
a  certain  thing  of  him.  And  he 
faid  unto  her,  What  wilt  thou? 
She  faith  unto  hhn.  Grant  that 
thefe  my  two  fons  may  fit,  the  one 
on  thy  right  hand,  and  the  other 
on  the  left,  in  thy  kingdom.  But 
Jefus  anfwered  and  faid,  Ye  know 
not  what  ye  alk.  Are  ye  able  to 
drink  of  the  cup  that  I  Ihall  drink 
of,  and  to  be  baptized  with  the 
baptifm  that  I  am  baptized  with? 
They  fay  vmto  him,  We  are  able. 
And  he  faith  unto  them.  Ye  (hall 
drink  indeed  of  my  cup,  and  be 
baptized  Avith  the  baptifm  that  I  ^ 
am  baptized  with :  but  to  fit  on 
my  right  liand,  and  on  my  left,  is 
not  mine  to  give ;  but  it  Ihall  be 
given  to  them  for  whom  it  is  ])re- 
pared  of  my  Father.  And  when 
the  ten  heard  it,  they  were  moved 
with  indignation  againft  the  two 
brethren.  But  Jefus  called  them 
unto  him,  and  faid.  Ye  know  that 
the  princes  of  the  Gentiles  ex- 
ercife  dominion  over  them,  and 
they  that  are  great  exercife  au- 
thority upon  them.  But  it  fliall 
not  be  fo  among  you :  but  whofo- 
ever  will  be  great  among  you,  let 
him  be  your  minifter ;  and  who- 
foever  will  be  chief  among  you, 
let  him  be  your  fervant :  even  as 
the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be 
miniftered  unto,  but  to  minifter, 
and  to  give  his  life  a  ranfom  for 
many. 


Saint  Bartholoinew,  and  Saint  MattJiew. 


Sahit  Bartholomew  the  Apojile. 
The  Colledi. 

O  Almighty  and  everlafting  God, 
who  didll  give  to  thine  Apo- 
ftle  Bartholomew  grace  truly  to 
believe  and  to  preach  thy  Word ; 
Grant,  we  befeech  thee,  unto  thy 
Church,  to  love  that  Word  which 
he  believed,  and  both  to  preach 
and  receive  the  fame ;  through  Je- 
fus  Chrift  our  Lord.  Amen. 
For  the  Epijlle.    A6ls  V.  12. 

BY  the  hands  of  the  Apoftles 
were  many  ligns  and  wonders 
\vTought  among  the  people :  (and 
^  they  were  all  with  one  accord  in 
Solomon's  porch :  and  of  the  reft 
durft  no  man  join  himfelf  to  them : 
but  the  people  magnified  them : 
and  believers  were  the  more -add- 
ed to  the  Lord,  multitudes  both  of 
men  and  women  :)  infomuch  that 
they  brought  forth  the  fick  into 
the  ftreets,  and  laid  them  on  beds 
and  couches,  that  at  the  leall  the 
fliadow  of  Peter  palling  by  might 
overfliadow  fome  of  them.  There 
came  alfo  a  nuiltitude  out  of  the 
cities  round  about  unto  Jerufalem, 
bringing  ficU  folks,  and  them  which 
were  vexed  with  unclean  fpirits  ; 
and  they  were  healed  every  one. 
The  Go/pel.    St.  Luke  xxii.  24. 

AND  there  was  alfo  a  Ilrife  a- 
mong  them,  Avhich  of  them 
fliould  l)e  accounted  the  greateft. 
And  he  faid  unto  them,  I'he  kings 
of  the  Gentiles  exercife  lordlhip 


over  them ;  and  they  that  exercife 
authority  upon  them  are  called 
benefactors.  But  ye  Ihall  not  be 
fo :  but  he  that  is  greateft  among 
you,  let  him  be  as  the  younger ; 
and  he  that  is  chief,  as  he  that 
doth  ferve.  For  whether  is  great- 
er, he  that  (itteth  at  meat,  or  he 
that  feiTeth?  is  not  he  that  fitteth 
at  meat?  but  I  am  among  you  as 
he  that  ferveth.  Ye  are  they  which 
have  continued  \vith  me  in  my 
temptations.  And  I  appoint  unto 
you  a  kingdom,  as  my  Father  hath 
appointed  unto  me ;  that  ye  may 
eat  and  drink  at  my  table  in  my 
kingdom,  and  fit  on  thrones  judg- 
ing the  twelve  tribes  of  Ifrael. 

Saint  Matthew  the  Apojile. 
The  ColleB. 

O  Almighty  God,  who  by  thy 
blelled  Son  didft  call  Matthew 
from  the  receipt  of  cuftom  to  be 
an  Apoftle  and  Evangelift  ;  Grant 
us  grace  to  forfake  all  covetous  de- 
fires,  and  inordinate  love  of  riches, 
and  to  follow  the  fame  thy  Son  Je- 
fus  Chrift,  wlu)  liveth  and  reigneth 
with  thee  and  the  Holv  Ghoft,  one 
God,  world  without  end.  Amen. 
The  Epijile.    2  Cor.  iv.  L 

THEKEFORE  feeing  we  have 
this  miniftry,  as  we  have  re- 
ceived mercy,  we  faint  not ;  but 
have  renounced  the  hidden  thin"s 
of  diflionefty,  not  walking  in  craf- 
tiiiefs,  nor  handling  the  Word  of 


Saint  Michael  and  all  Angels. 


God  deceitfully,  but  by  nianifefta- 
tioii  of  the  truth  conimciidlng-  our- 
felves  to  every  man's  confcience 
ill  the  fight  of  God.  But  if  our 
gofpel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them 
that  are  loll :  in  whom  the  God  of 
this  world  hath  blinded  the  minds 
of  them  which  believe  not,  leil 
the  light  of  the  glorious  Gofpel  of 
Chrift,  who  is  the  image  of  God, 
fliould  Ihiiie  unto  them.  For  we 
preach  not  ourfelves,  but  Chrift 
Jefus  the  Lord ;  and  ourfelves  your 
fervants  for  Jefus'  fake.  For  God, 
who  commanded  the  light  to  lliine 
out  of  darknefs,  hath  fliined  in  our 
hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God,  in 
the  face  of  Jefus  Chrift. 

The  Gofpel.  St.  Matth.  ix.  9. 

AND  as  Jefus  pafled  forth  from 
thence,  he  faw  a  man  named 
Matthew,  fitting  at  the  receipt  of 
cnftom :  and  he  faith  unto  him, 
Follow  me.  And  he  arofe,  and  fol- 
lowed him.  And  it  came  to  pafs, 
as  Jefus  fat  at  meat  in  the  lioufe, 
behold,  many  Publicans  and  fin- 
ners  came,  and  fat  down  with  him 
and  his  difciples.  And  when  the 
Pharifees  faw  it,  they  faid  unto  his 
difciples.  Why  eateth  your  Mafter 
with  Publicans  and  finners?  But 
when  Jefus  heard  that,  he  faid  un- 
to them.  They  that  be  w^hole  need 
not  a  phyfician,  but  they  that  are 
fick.  But  go  ye  and  learn  what 
that  meaneth,  I  will  have  mercy, 


and  not  facrifice ;  for  I  am  not 
come  to  call  the  righteous,  but 
finners  to  repentance. 


Saint  Blichael  and  all  Angels. 


OEverlafting   God, 
ordained  and  conlt: 


The  CollcSi. 

who  haft 
conltituted  the 
fervices  of  Angels  and  men  in  a 
wonderful  order;  Mercifully  grant, 
that  as  thy  holy  Angels  alway  do 
thee  fervdce  in  heaven,  fo  by  thy 
appointment  they  may  iuccour  and 
defend  us  on  earth ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

For  the  Epijlle.    Rev.  xii.  7. 

THERE  was  war  in  heaven : 
Michael  and  his  angels  fought 
againft  the  dragon,  and  the  dragon 
fought  and  his  angels ;  and  pre- 
vailed not,  neither  was  their  place 
found  any  more  in  heaven.  And 
the  great  dragon  was  caft  out,  that 
old  ferpent,  called  the  devil  and 
Satan,  which  deceive tli  the  whole 
world ;  he  was  caft  out  into  the 
earth,  and  his  angels  were  caft  out 
with  him.  And  I  heard  a  loud 
voice  faying  in  heaven,  Now  is 
come  falvation,  and  ftrength,  and 
the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the 
power  of  his  Chrift :  for  the  accu- 
ier  of  our  brethren  is  caft  down, 
which  accufed  them  before  our 
God  day  and  night.  And  they 
overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,  and  by  the  word  of  their 
teftimony ;  and  they  loved  not  their 


Saint  Luke  the  Evangelijl, 


lives  unto  the  death.  Therefore 
rejoice,  ye  heaveiis,  and  ye  that 
dwell  in  them.  Wo  to  the  in- 
habiters  of  the  earth,  and  of  the 
fea :  for  the  devil  is  come  down 
unto  you,  having  great  ^vi-ath,  be- 
caufe  he  knoweth  that  he  hath  but 
a  fliort  time. 

TJie  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  xyiii.  I. 

AT  the  fame  time  came  the  dif- 
ciples  unto  Jefus,  fapng,  Who 
is  the  greateft  in  the  Kino^dom  of 
heaven  ?  And  Jefus  called  a  little 
child  unto  him,  and  fet  him  in  the 
midft  of  them,  and  faid,  Verfly  I 
fay  unto  you,  Except  ye  be  con- 
verted, and  become  as  little  chil- 
dren, ye  fiiall  not  enter  into  the 
Kingdom  of  heaven.  Whofoever 
therefore  fliall  humble  himfelf  as 
this  little  child,  the  fame  is  greateft 
in  the  Kingdom  of  heaven.  And 
whofo  Ihall  receive  one  fuch  little 
child  in  my  Name,  receiveth  me. 
But  whofo  fliall  offend  one  of  thefe 
little  ones  which  believe  in  me,  it 
were  better  for  him  that  a  milftone 
were  hanged  about  his  neck,  and 
that  he  were  drowned  in  the  depth 
of  the  fea.  Wo  unto  the  world 
becaufe  of  offences :  for  it  nmfl 
needs  be  that  offences  come :  but 
wo  to  that  man  by  whom  the  of- 
fence Cometh.  Wherefore  if  thy 
hand  or  thy  foot  offend  thee,  cut 
them  off,  and  call  them  from  thee : 
it  is  better  for  thee  to  enter  into 


life  halt  or  maimed,  rather  than 
having  two  hands  or  two  feet  to 
be  call  into  everlafting  fire.  And  if 
thine  eye  offend  thee,  ])luck  it  out, 
and  call  it  fi'om  thee  :  it  is  better 
for  thee  to  enter  into  life  with  one 
eye,  rather  than  having  two  eyes 
to  be  call  into  hell-fire.  Take  heed 
that  ye  defpife  not  one  of  thefe 
little  ones ;  for  I  fay  unto  you. 
That  in  heaven  their  aneels  do  al- 
ways  behold  the  face  of  my  Father 
which  is  in  heaven. 

Saint  Luke  the  Evangeliji. 
The  CoUedi. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  calledfl 
Luke  the  Phyfician,  wliofe 
praife  is  in  the  Gofpel,  to  be  an 
Evangelill,  and  Phyfician  of  the 
foul ;  May  it  pleafe  thee,  that,  by 
the  wholfome  medicines  of  the  doc- 
trine delivered  by  him,  all  the  dif- 
eafes  of  our  fouls  may  be  healed ; 
through  the  merits  of  thy  Son  Je- 
fus Chrifl  our  Lord.    Ameii. 

The  Epijlle.    2  Tim.  iv.  5. 

WATCH  diou  in  all  things, 
endure  afflictions,  do  the 
work  of  an  Evangelifl,  make  full 
])roof  of  thy  minifhy.  For  I  am 
now  ready  to  be  oflbred,  and  the 
time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand. 
I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  1  have 
finiflied  my  courfe,  1  have  kept 
the  faith.  Henceforth  there  is  laid 
up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteouf- 


Saint  Simon  and  Saint  Jude. 


nefs,  which  the  Lord,  the  righte- 
ous Judge,  Ihall  give  me  at  that 
day :  and  not  to  me  only,  but  unto 
all  them  alfo  that  love  his  appear- 
ing. Do  thy  diligence  to  come 
ftiortly  vmto  me :  for  Demas  hath 
forfaken  me,  having  loved  this  pre- 
fent  world,  and  is  departed  unto 
Theffalonica ;  Crefcens  to  Galatia, 
Titus  unto  Dalmatia.  Only  Luke 
is  with  me.  Take  Mark  and  bring 
him  with  thee :  for  he  is  profitable 
to  me  for  the  miniftry.  And  Ty- 
chicus  have  I  fent  to  Ephefus. 
The  cloke  that  I  left  at  Troas  with 
Carpus,  when  thou  comeft,  bring 
with  thee;  and  the  books,  but 
efpecially  the  parchments.  Alex- 
ander the  copper-fmith  did  me 
much  evil :  the  Lord  reward  him 
according  to  his  works.  Of  whom 
be  thou  ware  alfo,  for  he  hath 
greatly  withftood  our  words. 

The  Go/pel.   St.  Luke  x.  L 

THE  Lord  appointed  other  fe- 
venty  alfo,  and  fent  them  two 
and  two  before  his  face  into  eveiy 
city  and  place  whither  he  himfelf 
would  come.  Therefore  faid  he 
unto  them.  The  harveft  truly  is 
great,  but  the  labourers  are  few; 
pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the 
harveft,  that  he  would  fend  forth 
labourers  into  his  harveft.  Go  your 
ways ;  behold,  I  fend  you  forth  as 
lambs  among  wolves.  Carry  nei- 
ther purfe,  nor  fcrip,  nor  flioes, 


and  falute  no  man  by  the  way. 
And  into  whatfoever  houfe  ye  en- 
ter, firft  fay.  Peace  be  to  this  houfe. 
And  if  the  fon  of  peace  be  there, 
your  peace  fliall  reft  upon  it :  if 
not,  it  ihall  turn  to  you  agam.  And 
in  the  fame  houfe  remain,  eating 
and  drinking  fuch  things  as  they 
give:  for  the  labourer  is  worthy  of 
his  hire. 

St.  Simon  and  St.  Jude,  Apojlles. 

The  Colledl. 

O  Almighty  God,  who  haft  built 
thy  Church  upon  the  founda- 
tion of  the  Apoftles  and  Prophets, 
Jefus  Chrift  himfelf  being  the  head 
corner-ftone ;  Grant  us  fo  to  be 
joined  together  in  unity  of  fpirit 
by  their  dodtrine,  that  we  may  be 
made  an  holy  temple  acceptable 
unto  thee ;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 

The  Epijlle.    St.  Jude  1 . 

JUDE,  the  fervant  of  Jefus 
Chrift,  and  brother  of  James, 
to  them  that  are  fandtified  by  God 
the  Father,  and  prefer>^ed  in  Jefus 
Chrift,  and  called:  Mercy  unto  you, 
and  peace,  and  love  be  multiplied. 
Beloved,  when  I  gave  all  diligence 
to  write  unto  you  of  the  common 
falvation,  it  was  needful  for  me  to 
write  unto  you,  and  exhort  you, 
that  ye  ftiould  earneftly  contend 
for  the  faith  which  was  once  deli- 
vered unto  the  faints.     For  there 


All  Saints  Day. 


are  certain  men  crept  in  unawares, 
who  were  before  of  old  ordained  to 
this  condemnation  ;  ungodly  men, 
turning  the  grace  of  our  God  into 
lafcivioufnefs,     and    denying    the 
only  Lord  God,  and  our  Lord  Je- 
fus  Chrift.    I  will  therefore  put  you 
in  remembrance,  though  ye  once 
knew  this,  how  that  the  Lord,  hav- 
ing faved  the  people  out  of  the 
land  of  Egyq3t,  afterward  deftroyed 
them  that  believed  not.     And  the 
angels  which  kept  not   their  firft 
eftate,  but  left  their  own  habita- 
tion, he  hath  referved  in  everlaft- 
ing  chains  under  darknefs  unto  the 
judgement  of  the  great  day.    Even 
as  Sodom  and  Gomorrha,  and  the 
cities  about  them  in  like  manner 
giving  themfelves  over  to  fornica- 
tion, and  going  after  ftrange  flefli, 
are  fet  forth  for  an  example,  fuf- 
ferin"'  the  venoeance  of  eternal  fire. 
Likewiie  alfo  thefe  filthv  dreamers 
defile  the  flefli,  defpife  dominion, 
and  fpeak  evil  of  dignities. 

The  Gofpel.    St.  John  xv.  17. 

THESE  things  I  command  you, 
that  ye  love  one  another.  If 
the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that 
it  hated  me  before  it  hated  you. 
If  vc  were  of  the  world,  the  world 
would  love  his  own  :  })ut  becaufe 
ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have 
chofcn  you  out  of  the  world,  there- 
fore the  world  hateth  you.  lie- 
member  the  word  that  I  laid  unto 


you.  The  fei-vant  is   not  greater 
than  the  lord  :  if  they  have  perfe- 
cuted  me,  they  will  alfo  pedecute 
you  ;  if  they  have  kept  my  faying, 
they  will  keep  your's  alfo.     But 
all  thefe  things  will  they  do  unto 
you  for  my  Name's  fake,  becaufe 
thev  know  not  him  that  fent  me. 
If  I  had  not  come  and  fpoken  un- 
to them,   they  had   not  had  fin : 
but  now  they  have  no  cloke  for 
their  fin.    He  that  hateth  me  hat- 
eth my  Father  alfo.    If  I  had  not 
done  among  them  the  works  which 
none  other  man  did,  they  had  not 
had  fin ;  but  now  have  they  both 
feen,  and  hated,  both  me  and  my 
Father.     But  this  cometh  to  pafs, 
that  the  word  might  be  fulfilled 
that  is  written  in  their  law,  They 
hated  me  without  a  caufe.     But 
when  the  Comforter  is  come,  Avhom 
I  will  fend  unto  you  from  the  Fa- 
ther, even  the  Spirit  of  truth,  which 
proceedeth   from   the   Father,    he 
fhall  teftify  of  me.     And  ye  alfo 
(hall  bear  witnefs,  becaufe  ye  have 
been  with  me  from  the  beginning. 

:.-  .or(t  '\i  :. 

All  Saints'  Day. 
The  ColleSt. 

O  Almighty  God,  who  haft  knit 
together  thine  ele(5l  in  one 
connnunion  and  fellowfliip,  in  the 
myftical  body  of  thy  Son  Chrift 
our  Lord  ;  (irant  us  grace  fo  to 
follow  thy  blefled  Saints  in  all  vir- 


All  Saints'  Day. 


tnous  and  godly  living,  that  we 
may  come  to  thofe  imfpeakable 
joys,  which  thou  hall  prepared  for 
them  that  unfeignedly  love  thee ; 
through  Jefiis  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

For  the  Epijik.    llev.  vii.  2. 

AND  I  faw  another  angel  af- 
cending  from  the  eaft,  having 
the  feal  of  the  living  God ;  and  he 
cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  four 
angels,  to  whom  it  was  given  to 
hurt  the  earth,  and  the  fea,  faying. 
Hurt  not  the  earth,  neither  the 
fea,  nor  the  trees,  till  we  have  feal- 
ed  the  fervants  of  our  God  in  their 
foreheads.  And  I  heard  the  num- 
ber of  them  which  were  fealed ; 
and  there  were  fealed  an  hundred 
and  forty  and  four  thoufand,  of 
all  the  tribes  of  the  children  of 
Ifrael. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Juda  w6re  fealed 
twelve  thoufand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Reuben  were 
fealed  twelve  thoufand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Gad  were  fealed 
twelve  thoufand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Afer  were  fealed 
twelve  thoufand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Nephthali  were 
fealed  twelve  thoufand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  ManalTes  were 
fealed  twelve  thoufand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Svmeon  were 
fealed  twelve  thoufand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Levi  were  fealed 
twelve  thoufand. 


Of  the  tribe  of  Ifachar  were 
fealed  twelve  thoufand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Zabulon  were 
fealed  twelve  thoufand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  .Jofeph  were  feal- 
ed twelve  thoufand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  were 
fealed  twelve  thoufand. 

After  this  I  beheld,  and  lo,  a 
great  multitude,  which  no  man 
could  number,  of  all  nations,  and 
kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues, 
ftood  before  the  throne,  and  be- 
fore the  Lamb,  clothed  with  white 
robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands ; 
and  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  fay- 
ing, Salvation  to  our  God  which 
litteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto 
the  Lamb.  And  all  the  angels 
ftood  round  about  the  throne,  and 
about  the  elders,  and  the  four 
beafts,  and  fell  before  the  throne 
on  their  faces,  and  worlhipped  God, 
faying.  Amen ;  Bleffing,  and  gloiy, 
and  wifdom,  and  thankfgiving,  and 
honour,  and  power,  and  might,  be 
unto  our  God  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen. 

The  Go/pel.    St.  Matth.  v.  L 

JESUS,  feeing  the  multitudes, 
went  up  into  a  mountain ;  and 
when  he  was  fet,  his  difciples  came 
unto  him.  And  he  opened  his 
mouth,  and  taught  them,  faying, 
Bleffed  are  the  poor  in  fpirit:  for 
their's  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
Bleffed  are  they  that  mourn:  for 
they  ftiall  be  comforted.     Bleffed 


All  Saints  Day. 

are  the  meek :  for  they  ftiall  in- 
herit the  eai'th.  Bleffed  are  they 
which  do  hunger  and  thidl  after 
righteoufnefs :  for  they  fliall  be  fill- 
ed. Bleffed  are  the  merciful :  for 
they  fliall  obtain  mercy.  Bleffed 
are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  fliall 
fee  God.  Bleffed  are  the  peace- 
makers :  for  they  fliall  be  called  the 
children  of  God.    Bleffed  aie  they 


which  are  perfecuted  for  righteouf- 
nefs' fake :  for  their's  is  the  king- 
dom of  heaven.  Bleffed  are  ye, 
when  men  fliall  revile  you,  and  per- 
fecute  you,  and  fliall  fay  all  manner 
of  evil  againfl;  you  falfely  for  my 
fake.  Rejoice,  and  be  exceeding 
glad ;  for  great  is  your  reward  in 
heaven :  for  fo  perfecuted  they  the 
prophets  which  were  before  you. 


THE  ORDER  OF  THE 

ADMINISTRATION   OF  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER, 


OR 


HOLY    COMMUNION. 


^  SO  many  as  intend  to  he  partakers  of  the  holy  Communion  Jliall  Jignify 
their  names  to  the  Curate,  at  leajl  fome  time  the  day  before. 

^  And  if  any  of  thofe  he  an  open  and  notorious  evil  liver,  or  have  done 
any  wrong  to  his  neighbours  hy  word  or  deed,  fo  that  the  Congregation 
he  thereby  offended;  the  Curate,  having  knoivledge  thereof  Jhall  call 
him  and  advertife  him,  that  in  any  wife  he  prefime  not  to  come  to  the 
Lord's  Table,  until  he  hath  openly  declared  himfelf  to  have  truly  re- 
pented and  amended  his  former  naughty  life,  that  the  Congregation 
may  thereby  be  fatisfed,  which  before  were  offended ;  and  that  he  hath 
recompenfed  the  parties.,  to  whom  he  hath  done  wrong;  or  at  leafi  de- 
clare himfelf  to  he  in  full  purpofe  fo  to  do,  as  foon  as  he  conveniently 
may. 

^  The  fame  order  Jhall  the  Curate  ufe  with  thofe  hetwiwt  whom  he  per- 
ceiveth  malice  and  hatred  to  reign  ;  not  fuffering  them  to  he  partakei's 
of  the  Lord's  Table,  until  he  know  them  to  he  reconciled.  And  if  one 
of  the  parties  fo  at  variance  be  content  to  forgive  from  the  bottom  of 
his  heart  all  that  the  other  hath  trefpaffed  againji  him,  and  to  make 
amends  for  that  he  himfelf  hath  offended ;  and  the  other  party  will  not 
he  perfuaded  to  a  godly  unity,  hut  remain  Jlill  in  his  frowardnefs  and 
malice :  the  Minijier  in  that  cafe  ought  to  admit  the  penitent  perfon  to 
the  holy  Communion,  and  not  him  that  is  ohjlinate.  Provided  that 
every  Minijier  fo  repelling  any,  as  is  fpecified  in  this,  or  the  next  pre- 
cedent  Paragraph  of  this  Rubrick,  fludl  be  obliged  to  give  an  account 
of  the  fame  to  the  Ordinary  within  fourteen  days  aj'ter  at  the  farthejl. 
And  the  Ordinary  JJudl  proceed  againji  the  offending  petf on  according 
to  the  Canon. 

^  The  Table,  at  the  Communion-time  having  a  fair  white  linen  cloth 
upon  it,  Jhall  Jland  in  the  Body  of  the  Church,  or  in  the  Chancel, 
tvhei'e  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer  are  appointed  to  be  faid.  And 
the  Prieji  Jianding  at  the  North-Jide  of  the  Table  Jliall  fay  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  with  the  Collet  following,  the  people  kneeling. 


The  Communion. 


O 


UR  Father  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
'V\\y  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven, 
(live  ns  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpalfes,  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
g-ainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation ;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil.    Amen. 

TJie  ColleB. 

A  LMIGHTY  God,  unto  whom 
i^^  all  hearts  be  open,  all  defires 
kno\Aai,  and  from  whom  no  fecrets 
are  hid ;  Cleanfe  the  thoughts  of 
our  hearts  by  the  infpiration  of  thy 
Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  perfectly 
love  thee,  and  worthily  magnify 
thy  holy  Name;  through  Chrill 
our  Lpl'd. ^,/lme/i . 

^  Tlien  shall  the  Priest,  timiins^  to  the  people,  rehearse 
distmctly  all  the  TEN  COMMANDMENTS; 
and  the  people  still  kneeling  shall,  after  every  Com- 
mandment, ask  God  mercy  for  their  transgression 
thereof  for  the  time  past,  and  grace  to  keep  the 
same  for  the  time  to  come,  as  followeth. 

Mhiificr. 

C^  OD  fpake  thefe  words,  and 
^  faid ;  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God : 
Thou  {halt  have  none  other  gods 
but  me. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep 
this  law. 

Wimftcr.  Thou  (halt  not  make 
to  thyfelf  any  graven  image,  nor 
the  likenefs  of  any  thing  that  is  in 
heaven  above,  or  in  the  earth  be- 


neath, or  in  the  water  under  the 
earth.  Thou  flialt  not  bow  down 
to  them,  nor  worfliip  them :  for  I 
the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous 
God,  and  vilit  the  fins  of  the  fa- 
thers upon  the  children,  unto  the 
third  and  fourth  o'eneration  of  them 
that  hate  me,  and  fliew  mercy  un- 
to thoufands  in  them  that  love  me, 
and  keep  my  commandments. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep 
this  law. 

Minijler.  Thou  (halt  not  take 
the  Name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in 
vain :  for  the  Lord  will  not  hold 
him  guiltlefs,  that  taketh  his  Name 
in  vain. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep 
this  law. 

Minijler.  Remember  that  thou 
keep  holy  the  Sabbath-day.  Six 
days  flialt  thou  labour,  and  do  all 
that  thou  haft  to  do ;  but  the  fe- 
venth  day  is  the  Sabbath  of  the 
Lord  thy  God.  In  it  thou  flialt 
do  no  manner  of  work,  thou,  and 
thy  foil,  and  thy  daughter,  thy 
man-feiTant,  and  thy  maid-fervant, 
thy  cattle,  and  the  ftranger  that  is 
within  thy  gates.  For  in  fix  days 
tlie  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth, 
tlie  fea,  and  all  that  in  them  is, 
and  nulled  the  fcventh  day :  where- 
fore the  Lord  bleffed  the  ieventh 
day,  and  hallowed  it. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 


The  Communion, 


us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep 
this  hiw. 

Minllhr.  Honour  thy  father  and 
thy  mother;  that  thy  days  may  be 
long  in  the  land,  which  the  Lord 
thy  God  giveth  thee. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep 
this  law. 

Minijier.  Thou  flialt  do  no  mur- 
der. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep 
this  law. 

Mmiftcr.  Thou  flialt  not  commit 
adultery. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep 
this  law. 

Minijier.  Thou  flialt  not  Heal. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep 
this  law. 

Minijier.  Thou  flialt  not  bear 
falfe  witnefs  againfl;  thy  neigh- 
bour. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep 
this  law. 

Minijier.  Thou  flialt  not  covet 
thy  neighbour  s  houfe,  thou  flialt 
not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife, 
nor  his  fervant,  nor  his  maid,  nor 
his  ox,  nor  his  afs,  nor  any  thing 
that  is  his. 

People.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
us,  and  write  all  thefe  thy  laws  in 
our  hearts,  we  befeech  thee. 


%  Tlii-n  sliult  folloxv  one  of  l/irse  hco  Collects  for  (lit 
King,  tite  Pried  standing  un  before,  and  saying, 

Let  us  pray. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  whofe  king- 
dom is  everlalling,  and  pow- 
er infinite;  Have  mercy  ujion  the 
whole  Church;  and  fo  rule  the  heart 
of  thv  chofen  fervant  GEORGE, 
our  King  and  Governour,  that  he 
(knowing  whofe  miniller  he  is)  may 
above  all  things  feek  thy  honour 
and  glory :  and  that  we,  and  all  his 
fubjedls  (duly  confidering  whofe 
authority  he  hath)  may  faithfully 
ferve,  honour,  and  humbly  obey 
him,  in  thee,  and  for  thee,  accord- 
ing to  thy  blefl*ed  Word  and  ordi- 
nance ;  through  Jefus  Chrifl;  our 
Lord,  who  with  thee  and  the  Holy 
Glioft  liveth  and  reigneth,  ever  one 
God,  world  without  end.  Amen. 
Or, 
LMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  we  are  taught  by  thy 
holy  Word,  that  the  hearts  of  Kings 
are  in  thy  rule  and  governance, 
and  that  thou  doft;  difpofe  and  turn 
them  as  it  feemeth  befl  to  thy  god- 
ly wifdoni :  We  humbly  befeech 
thee  fo  to  difpofe  and  govern  the 
heart  of  GEORGE  thy  Servant, 
our  King  and  Governour,  that,  in 
all  his  thoughts,  words,  and  works, 
he  may  ever  feek  thy  honour  and 
glory,  and  ftudy  to  preferve  thy 
people  committed  to  his  charge, 
in  wealth,  peace,  and  godlinefs^ 
Grant  this,  O  merciful  Father,  for 


The  Communion. 


thy  deal-  Son's  fake,  Jefiis  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Atne?!. 

*[[  Then  shall  be  said  the  Collect  of  the  Day.  And 
immediately  after  the  ColJect  the  Priest  shall  read 
the  Epistle,  saying,  The  Epistle  [or,  The  portion 
of  Scripture  appointed  for  the  Epistle]  is  written 

in  the Chapter  of beginning  at  the 

Verse.  And  the  Epistle  ended,  he  shall  say.  Here 
endeth  the  Epistle.  Tlien  shall  he  read  the  Gospel 
{the  people  all  standing  up)  saying,  The  holy  Gos- 
pel is  written  in  the Chapter  of begin- 
ning at  the Verse.     And  the  Gospel  ended, 

shall  be  sung  or  said  the  Creed  following,  the  people 
still  standing,  as  be/ore. 

I  Believe  in  one  God  the  Father 
Almighty,  Maker  of  lieaven 
and  earth,  And  of  all  things  vifible 
and  invifible : 

And  in  one  Lord  Jefus  Chrift, 
the  only-begotten  Son  of  God, 
Begotten  of  his  Father  before  all 
worlds,  God  of  God,  Light  of  Light, 
Very  God  of  very  God,  Begotten, 
not  made,  Being  of  one  fubftance 
with  the  Father,  By  whom  all 
things  were  made :  Who  for  us 
men,  and  for  our  falvation  came 
down  from  heaven.  And  was  in- 
carnate by  the  Holy  Ghoft  of  the 
A^irgin  Mary,  And  was  made  man. 
And  was  crucified  alfo  for  us  un- 
der Pontius  Pilate.  He  fuffered 
and  was  buried,  And  the  third 
day  he  rofe  again  according  to 
the  Scriptures,  And  afcended  into 
heaven.  And  fitteth  on  the  right 
hand  of  the  Father.  And  he  lliall 
come  again  with  glory  to  judge 
both  the  quick  and  the  dead  : 
Whofe  kingdom  fliall  have  no  end. 

And  1  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghoft, 


The  Lord  and  Giver  of  life,  Wlio 
proceedeth  from  the  Father  and 
the  Son,  Who  with  the  Father  and 
the  Son  together  is  worfliipped  and 
glorified.  Who  fpake  by  the  Pro- 
phets. And  I  believe  one  Catho- 
lick  and  Apoftolick  Church.  I  ac- 
knowledge one  Baptifm  for  the 
remiflion  of  fins,  And  I  look  for 
the  llefurredlion  of  the  dead,  And 
the   life    of  the  world   to  come. 

^  Then  the  Curate  shall  declare  unto  the  people  what 
Holy-days,  or  Fasting-days,  are  in  the  Wtek  foU 
lotcing  to  be  observed.  And  then  also  (if  occasion 
be)  shall  notice  be  given  of  the  Communion;  and 
Briefs,  Citations,  and  Excommunications  read. 
And  nothing  shall  be  proclaimed  or  published  in 
the  Church,  during  the  time  of  Divine  Service,  but 
by  the  Minister:  nor  by  him  any  thing,  but  what  is 
prescribed  in  the  Rules  of  this  Book,  or  enjoined 
by  the  King,  or  by  the  Ordinary  of'  the  place. 

If  Then  shall  follow  the  Sermon,  or  one  of  the  Homi- 
lies already  set  forth,  or  hereafter  to  be  set  forth, 
by  authority. 

^  Then  shall  the  Priest  7'eturn  to  the  Lord's  Table, 
and  begin  the  Offertory,  saying  one  or  ynore  of 
these  Sentences  following,  as  he  thinketh  most  con- 
venient in  his  discretion. 

LET  your  light  fo  fliine  before 
men,  that  they  may  fee  your 
good  works,  and  glorify  your  Fa- 
ther which  is  in  heaven.  St.  3Iatt.  v. 
Lay  not  up  for  yourfelves  trea- 
fure  upon  the  earth ;  where  the  ruft 
and  moth  doth  corrupt,  and  where 
thieves  break  through  and  Ileal : 
but  lay  up  for  yourfelves  treafures 
in  heaven  ;  where  neither  ruft  nor 
moth  doth  corrupt,  and  where 
thieves  do  not  break  through  and 
fteal.    St.  3Iatt.  vi. 


The  Communion. 


Wliatfoever  ye  would  that  men 
flioiild  do  unto  you,  even  fo  do 
unto  them ;  for  this  is  the  Law 
and  the  Prophets.  St.  Matt.  vii. 

Not  every  one  that  faith  unto 
me,  Lord,  Lord,  fliall  enter  into 
the  Kingdom  of  heaven ;  but  he 
that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father 
which  is  in  heaven.  St.  3Iatt.  vii. 

Zacchaeus  flood  forth,  and  faid 
unto  the  Lord,  Behold,  Lord,  the 
half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the 
poof;  and  if  I  have  done  any  ^vi'ong 
to  any  man,  I  reftore  fourfold.  St. 
Luke  xix. 

Who  goeth  a  warfare  at  any  time 
of  his  own  coft?  Who  planteth  a 
vineyard,  and  eateth  not  of  the 
fruit  thereof?  Or  who  feedeth  a 
flock,  and  eateth  not  of  the  milk 
of  the  flock?   1  Cor.  ix. 

If  we  have  fown  unto  you  fpiri- 
tual  things,  is  it  a  great  matter  if 
we  fliall  reap  your  worldly  things? 
1  Cor.  ix. 

Do  ye  not  know,  that  they  who 
minifl;er  about  holy  things  live  of 
the  facrifice ;  and  they  who  wait 
at  the  altar  are  partakers  with  the 
altar?  Even  fo  hath  the  Lord  alfo 
ordained,  that  they  who  })reach  the 
Gofpel  fliould  live  of  the  Gofpel. 
1  Cor.  ix. 

He  that  foweth  little  fliall  reap 
little ;  and  he  that  foweth  plente- 
oufly  fliall  reap  plenteoufly.  Let 
every  man  do  according  as  he  is 
difpofed  in  his  heart,  not  grudg- 


ingly, or  of  neceflity ;  for  God  lov- 
eth  a  cheerful  giver.   2  Cor.  ix. 

Let  him  that  is  taught  in  the 
Word  minifler  unto  him  that  teach- 
eth,  in  all  good  things.  Be  not 
deceived,  God  is  not  mocked :  for 
wliatfoever  a  man  foweth  that  fliall 
he  reap.    Gal.  vi. 

While  we  have  time,  let  us  do 
good  unto  all  men  ;  and  fpecially 
vmto  them  that  are  of  the  houfliold 
of  faith.    Gal.  vi. 

Godlinefs  is  great  riches,  if  a 
man  be  content  with  that  he  hath : 
for  we  brought  nothing  into  the 
world,  neither  may  we  carry  any 
thing  out.    1  Tim.  vi. 

Charge  them  who  are  rich  in 
this  world,  that  they  be  ready  to 
give,  and  glad  to  difi;ribute ;  laying 
up  in  fi;ore  for  themfelves  a  good 
foundation  againfl;  the  time  to 
come,  that  they  may  attain  eternal 
life.    1  Tim.  vi. 

God  is  not  unrighteous,  that  he 
will  forget  your  works,  and  labour 
that  proceedeth  of  love;  which  love 
ye  have  fliewed  for  his  Name's 
lake,  who  have  miniftered  unto  the 
faints,  and  yet  do  minifl;er.  Heb.  vi. 

To  do  good,  and  to  diftribute, 
forget  not ;  for  with  fuch  facrifices 
God  is  well  pleafed.  Heh.  xiii. 

Whofo  hath  this  world's  good, 
and  feeth  his  brother  have  need, 
and  fliutteth  up  his  compaflion 
from  him,  how  dwelleth  the  love 
of  God  in  him?  1  St.  John  iii. 
Aa 


The  Communion. 


Give  alms  of  thy  goods,  and 
never  turn  thy  face  from  any  {Door 
man ;  and  then  the  face  of  the 
Lord  fliall  not  be  turned  away 
from  thee.    Toh.  iv. 

Be  merciful  after  thy  power.  If 
thou  haft  much,  give  plenteoufly : 
if  thou  haft  little,  do  thy  diUgence 
gladly  to  give  of  that  little :  for 
fo  gathereft  thou  thyfelf  a  good 
reward  in  the  day  of  neceffity. 
Tob.  iv. 

He  that  hath  pity  upon  the 
poor  lendeth  unto  the  Lord  :  and 
look,  what  he  layeth  out,  it  ftiall  be 
paid  him  again.    Prov.  xix. 

Bleffed  be  the  man  that  provid- 
eth  for  the  fick  and  needy:  the 
Lord  ftiall  deliver  him  in  the  time 
of  trouble.    Pfalm  xli. 

^  Whilst  these  Sentences  are  in  reading,  the  Deacons, 
Church-zcardens,  or  other  Jit  person  appointed  for 
that  purpose,  shall  receive  the  Alms  for  the  Poor, 
and  other  devotions  of  the  people,  in  a  decent  bason 
to  he  provided  by  the  Parish  for  that  purpose;  and 
reverentlji  bring  it  to  the  Priest,  zcho  shall  humbly 
present  and  place  it  upon  the  holy  Table. 

51  And  when  there  is  a  Communion,  the  Priest  shall 
then  place  upon  the  Table  so  much  Bread  and  Wine, 
as  he  shall  think  sufficient. 

After  which  done,  the  Priest  sJiall  say, 

Let  us  pray  for  the  whole  ftate  of 
Chrift's  Church  militant  here  in 
earth. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everli ving 
God,  who  by  thy  holy  Aj)oftle 
haft  taught  us  to  make  j)rayers,  and 
fupplications,  and  to  give  thanks, 
for  all  men ;  We  humbly  befeech 


thee  moft  mercifiilly 

\iO    accent    our    (thus  V   "'<^^re    be    no 

J       J  I    .'  7-1       alms    or    oblations, 

and  oblations,  and\  , hen  shall  the  rcords 
to  receive  thefe  our  i^^  accepting  our 
prayers,   which  we    f"-?-' ablations] 

1        J  '  he  lejt  out  unsatd. 

offer  unto  thy  Di- 
vine Majefty;  befeeching  thee  to 
infpire  continually  the  univerfal 
Church  with  the  fpirit  of  truth, 
unity,  and  concord :  And  grant, 
that  all  they  that  do  confefs  thy 
holy  Name  may  agree  in  the  truth 
of  thy  holy  Word,  and  live  in 
unity,  and  godly  love.  We  befeech 
thee  alfo  to  fave  and  defend  all 
Chriftian  Kings,  Princes,  and  Go- 
vernours ;  and  fpecially  thy  fervant 
GEORGE  our  King;  that  under 
him  we  may  be  godly  and  quietly 
governed :  And  grant  unto  his 
whole  Council,  and  to  all  that  are 
put  in  authority  under  him,  that 
they  may  truly  and  indifferently 
minifter  juftice,  to  the  punifliment 
of  wickednefs  and  vice,  and  to  the 
maintenance  of  thy  true  religion, 
and  virtue.  Give  grace,  O  heaven- 
ly Father,  to  all  Biftiops  and  Cu- 
rates, that  they  may  both  by  their 
life  and  docSirine  fet  forth  thy  true 
and  lively  Word,  and  rightly  and 
duly  adminifter  thy  holy  Sacra- 
ments :  And  to  all  thy  j)cople  give 
thy  heavenly  grace ;  and  efpecially 
to  this  congregation  here  prefent; 
that,  with  meek  heart  and  due  re- 
verence, they  may  hear,  and  re- 
ceive thy  holy  Word ;  truly  ferving 


21ie  CojnmuumL 


thee  in  holinefs  and  rigliteoufnels 
all  the  days  of  their  life.  And  we 
moft  humbly  befeech  thee  of  thy 
goodnefs,  O  Lord,  to  comfort  and 
fuccoiir  all  them,  who  in  this  tran- 
fitory  life  are  in  trouble,  forrow, 
need,  licknefs,  or  any  other  adver- 
fity.  And  we  alio  blefs  thy  holy 
Name  for  all  thy  fervants  departed 
this  life  in  thy  faith  and  fear ;  be- 
feeching  thee  to  give  us  grace  fo 
to  follow  their  good  examples,  that 
with  them  we  may  be  partakers  of 
thy  heavenly  kingdom :  Grant  this, 
O  Father,  for  Jefus  Chrift's  fake, 
our  only  Mediator  and  Advocate. 
Amen. 

^  JF/ien  the  Minister  giveth  warniiisr  for  the  celebra- 
tion of  the  hull/  Communion,  {which  he  shall  alzcw/s 
do  upon  the  Sundae/,  or  some  Hoh/-dat/,  immediately 
preceding,)  after  the  Sermon  or  Homily  ended,  he 
shall  rend  this  Exhortation  Jbllozcing. 

DEARLY  beloved,  on — day 
next  I  purpofe,  through  God's 
afliftance,  to  adminifter  to  all  fuch 
as  Ihall  be  religioufly  and  devo'itly 
difpofed  the  moll  comfortable  Sa- 
crament of  the  Body  and  Blood 
of  Chrift;  to  be  by  them  received 
in  remembrance  of  his  meritorious 
Crofs  and  Paflion  ;  whereby  alone 
we  obtain  remiffion  of  our  fins, 
and  are  made  partakers  of  the 
Kingdom  of  heaven.  Wherefore 
it  is  our  duty  to  render  moft  hum- 
ble and  hearty  thanks  to  Almighty 
God  our  heavenly  Father,  for  that 
he  hath  given  his  Son  our  Saviour 
Jefus  Chrift,  not  only  to  die  for 


us,  but  alfo  to  be  our  fpiritual  food 
and  fuftenance  in  that  holy  Sacra- 
ment. Which  being  fo  divine  and 
comfortable  a  thing  to  them  who 
receive  it  worthily,  and  fo  danger- 
ous to  them  that  will  prefume  to 
receive  it  unworthily;  my  duty  is 
to  exhort  you  in  the  mean  feafon 
to  confider  the  dignity  of  that  holy 
myftery,  and  the  great  peril  of  the 
unworthy  receiving  thereof;  and 
fo  to  fearch  and  examine  your  own 
confciences,  (and  that  not  lightly, 
and  after  the  manner  of  diifem- 
blers  with  God ;  but  fo)  that  ye 
may  come  holy  and  clean  to  fuch 
a  heavenly  Feaft,  in  the  maniage- 
garment  required  by  God  in  holy 
Scripture,  and  be  received  as  wor- 
thy partakers  of  that  holy  Table. 

The  way  and  means  thereto  is ; 
Firft,  to  examine  your  lives  and 
converfations  by  the  rule  of  God's 
commandments ;  and  whereinfo- 
ever  ye  Ihall  perceive  yourfelves 
to  have  oft'ended,  either  by  will, 
word,  or  deed,  there  to  bewail 
your  own  finfulnefs,  and  to  confefs 
yourfelves  to  Almighty  God,  with 
full  purpofe  of  amendment  of  life. 
And  if  ye  Ihall  perceive  your  of- 
fences to  be  fuch  as  are  not  only 
againft  God,  but  alfo  againft  your 
neighbours ;  then  ye  ihall  reconcile 
yourfelves  unto  them ;  being  ready 
to  make  reftitution  and  fatisfadtion, 
according  to  the  uttermolt  of  your 
powers,  for  all  injuries  and  wrongs 

A  a  2 


The  Commimioji. 


done  by  you  to  any  other ;  and 
being  likewife  ready  to  forgive 
others  that  have  offended  you,  as 
ye  would  have  forgivenel's  of  your 
offences  at  God's  hand :  for  other- 
wife  the  receiving  of  the  holy  Com- 
munion doth  nothing  elfe  but  in- 
creafe  your  damnation.  Therefore 
if  any  of  you  be  a  blafphemer  of 
God,  an  hinderer  or  llanderer  of 
his  Word,  an  adulterer,  or  be  in 
malice,  or  envy,  or  in  any  other 
grievous  crime,  repent  you  of  your 
fins,  or  elfe  come  not  to  that  holy 
Table ;  left,  after  the  taking  of  that 
holy  Sacrament,  the  devil  enter  in- 
to you,  as  he  entered  into  Judas, 
and  fill  you  full  of  all  iniquities, 
and  bnng  you  to  deftrudlion  both 
of  body  and  foul. 

And  becaufe  it  is  requifite,  that 
no  man  fliould  come  to  the  holy 
Communion,  but  with  a  full  truft 
in  God's  mercy,  and  with  a  quiet 
confcience ;  therefore  if  there  be 
any  of  you,  who  by  this  means 
cannot  quiet  his  own  confcience 
herein,  but  requireth  further  com- 
fort or  counfel,  let  him  come  to 
me,  or  to  fome  other  difcreet  and 
learned  Minifter  of  God's  Word, 
and  open  his  grief;  that  by  the 
miniftiy  of  God's  holy  Word  he 
may  receive  the  benefit  of  abfolu- 
tion,  together  with  ghoftly  counfel 
and  advice,  to  the  quieting  of  his 
confcience,  and  avoicUng  of  all 
fcniple  and  doubtfulnels. 


D 


^  Or,  ill  case  he  shall  see  the  people  negligent  to  come 
to  the  hoi}/  Communion,  instead  of  the  former,  he 
shall  Kse  this  Exhortation. 

EARLY  beloved    brethren, 

on I  intend,   by  God's 

grace,  to  celebrate  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per :  unto  which,  in  God's  behalf, 
I  bid  you  all  that  are  here  prefent ; 
and  befeech  you,  for  the  Lord  Je- 
fus  Chrift's  fake,  that  ye  will  not 
refufe  to  come  thereto,  being  fo 
lovingly  called  and  bidden  by  God 
himfelf.     Ye  know  how  grievous 
and  unkind  a  thing  it  is,  when  a 
man  hath  prepared  a  rich  feaft, 
decked  his  table  with  all  kind  of 
provifion,  fo  that  there  lacketh  no- 
thing but  the  guefts  to  fit  do^vn ; 
and  yet  they  who  are  called  (with- 
out any  caufe)  moft  imthankftilly 
refufe  to  come.    Which  of  you  in 
fuch  a  cafe  would  not  be  moved? 
Who  would  not  think  a  great  in- 
juiy  and  wrong  done  unto  him? 
Wherefore,   moft    dearly  beloved 
in  Chrift,  take  ye  good  heed,  left 
ye,   ^vithdrawing  yourfelves  from 
this  holy  Supper,   provoke  God's 
indignation  againft  you.     It  is  an 
eafy  matter  for  a  man  to  fay,  I  will 
not  communicate,   becaufe  I   am 
otherwife   hindered  \vith  worldly 
bufinefs.     But   fuch    excufes    are 
not  fo  eafily  accepted  and  allowed 
before  God.     If  any  man  fay,  I 
am  a  grievous  finner,  and  therefore 
am  afraid  to  come :  wherefore  then 
do  ye  not  repent  and  amend?  When 
God  calleth  you,  are  yc  not  afliam- 


The  Com77iunio7t. 


ed  to  fay  ye  will  not  come?  When 
ye  (liould  return  to  God,  will  ye 
excufe  yourfelves,  iind  fay  ye  are 
not  ready?  Confider  earneftly  with 
yourfelves  how  little  fuch  feign- 
ed excufes  will  avail  before  God. 
They  that  refufed  the  feaft  in  the 
Gofpel,  becaufe  they  had  bought 
a  farm,  or  would  try  their  yokes  of 
oxen,  or  becaufe  they  were  marri- 
ed, were  not  fo  excufed,  but  count- 
ed unworthy  of  the  heavenly  feall. 
I,  for  my  part,  fliall  be  ready ;  and, 
according  to   mine  Office,  I  bid 
you  in  the  Name  of  God,  I  call 
you  in  Chrift's  behalf,  I  exhort  you, 
as  ye  love  your  own  falvation,  that 
ye  will  be  partakers  of  this  holy 
Communion.     And  as  the  Son  of 
God  did  vouchfafe  to  yield  up  his 
foul  by  death  upon  the  Crofs  for 
your  falvation ;  fo  it  is  your  duty 
to  receive  the  Communion  in  re- 
membrance of  the  facrifice  of  his 
death,    as    he  himfelf  hath   com- 
manded :  whiph  if  ye  fliall  negledl 
to  do,  confider  with  yourfelves  how 
great  injuiy  ye  do  unto  God,  and 
how  fore  punifhment  hangeth  over 
your  heads  for  the  fame;  when  ye 
wilfully   abftain  from   the   Lord's 
Table,  and  feparate  from  your  bre- 
thren, who  come  to  feed  on  the 
banquet  of  that  moll  heavenly  food. 
Thefe  things  if  ye  earneftly  confi- 
der, ye  will  by  God's  grace  return 
to  a  better  mind :  for  the  obtaining 
whereof  we  fliall  not  ceafe  to  make 


our  humble  petitions  unto  Almigh- 
ty God  our  heavenly  Father. 

^I  At  the  time  of  the  celebration  of  the  Communion, 
the  Communicants  being  coutenienllj/  placed  for  the 
receiving  of  the  holy  Sacrament,  the  Priest  shall 
sai/  this  Exhortation. 

DEARLY  beloved  in  the  Lord, 
ye  that  mind  to  come  to  the 
holy  Communion  of  the  Body  and 
Blood  of  our  Saviour  Chrift,  muft 
confider  how  Saint  Paul  exhorteth 
all  perfons  diligently  to  try  and 
examine   themfelves,   before   they 
prefume  to  eat  of  that  Bread,  and 
drink  of  that  Cup.     For   as  the 
benefit  is  great,  if  with  a  true  pe- 
nitent heart   and  lively  faith  we 
receive  that  holy  Sacrament ;  (for 
then  we  fpiritually  eat  the  flelh  of 
Chrift,  and  drink  his  blood ;  then 
we  dwell  in  Chrift,  and  Chrift  in 
us  ;  we  are  one  with  Chrift,  and 
Chrift  with  us ;)  fo  is  the  danger 
great,  if  we  receive  the  fame  un- 
worthily.   For  then  we  are  guilty 
of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Chrift 
our  Saviour ;  we  eat  and  drink  our 
own   damnation,   not   confidering 
the  Lord's  Body ;  we  kindle  God's 
wrath  againft  us;  we  provoke  him 
to  plague  us  with  divers  difeafes, 
and  fundiy  kinds  of  death.   Judge 
therefore  yourfelves,  brethren,  that 
ye  be  not  judged  of  the  Lord;  re- 
pent you  truly  for  your  fins  paft ; 
have  a  lively  and  fledfaft  faith  in 
Chrift  our  Saviour;   amend  your 
lives,  and  be  in  perfedl  charity  with 
aU  men ;  fo  Ihall  ye  be  meet  par- 


The  Communion. 


takers  of  tliofe  holy  myfteiies.  And 
above  all  things  ye  muft  give  moll 
humble  and  hearty  thanks  to  God, 
the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  for  the  redemption  of  the 
world  by  the  death  and  paffion  of 
our  Saviour  Chrift,  both  God  and 
man;  who  did  humble  himfelf,  even 
to  the  death  upon  the  Crofs,  for 
lis,  miferable  finners,  who  lay  in 
darknefs  and  the  fliadow  of  death ; 
that  he  might  make  us  the  chil- 
dren of  God,  and  exalt  us  to  ever- 
lafting  life.  And  to  the  end  that 
we  fliould  alway  remember  the  ex- 
ceeding great  love  of  our  M  after, 
and  only  Saviour,  Jefus  Chrift,  thus 
dying  for  us,  and  the  innumerable 
benefits  which  by  his  precious 
blood- fliedding  he  hath  obtained 
to  us ;  he  hath  inftituted  and  or- 
dained holy  myfteries,  as  pledges 
of  his  love,  and  for  a  continual 
remembrance  of  his  death,  to  our 
great  and  endlefs  comfort.  To  him 
therefore,  with  the  Father  and  the 
Holy  Ghoft,  let  us  give  (as  we  are 
moft  bounden)  continual  thanks  ; 
fubmitting  ourfelves  wholly  to  his 
holy  will  and  pleafure,  and  Undy- 
ing to  ferve  him  in  true  holinefs 
and  rightcoufnefs  all  the  days  of 
our  life.    Amen. 

5[  Then  shall  the  Priest  say  to  them  that  come  to  re- 
ceive the  holif  Communion, 

YE  that  do  truly  and  earneftly 
repent  you  of  your  fins,  and 
are  in  love  and  charity  with  your 


neighbours,  and  intend  to  lead  a 
new  life,  following  the  command- 
ments of  God,  and  walking  from 
henceforth  in  his  holy  ways ;  Draw 
near  with  faith,  and  take  this  holy 
Sacrament  to  your  comfort ;  and 
make  your  humble  confeflion  to 
Almighty  God,  meekly  kneeling 
upon  your  knees. 

^  Then  shall  this  general  Confession  be  made,  in  the 
name  of  all  those  that  are  minded  to  receive  the  holy 
Communion,  by  one  of  the  Ministers ;  both  he  and 
all  the  people  kneeling  humbly  upon  their  knees, 
and  saying, 

ALMIGHTY  God,  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  Maker 
of  all  things,  Judge  of  all  men ;  We 
acknowledge  and  bewail  our  ma- 
nifold fins  and  wickednefs,  Which 
we,  from  time  to  time,  moft  griev- 
oufly  have  committed.  By  thought, 
word,  and  deed,  Againft  thy  Di- 
vine Majefty,  Provoking  moft  juft- 
ly  thy  wrath  and  indignation  a- 
gainft  us.  We  do  earneftly  repent. 
And  are  heartily  forry  for  thefe 
our  mifdoings  ;  The  remembrance 
of  them  is  orievous  unto  us  :  The 
burden  of  them  is  intolerable.  Have 
mercy  upon  us.  Have  mercy  upon 
us,  moft  merciful  Father ;  For  thy 
Son  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift's  fake, 
Forgive  us  all  that  is  paft ;  And 
m-ant  that  we  may  ever  hereafter 
Serve  and  pleafe  thee  In  newnefs 
of  life,  To  tlie  honour  and  glory 
of  thy  Name;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord.    Amen. 


The  Communion. 


*[[  Then  shall  the  Priest  (or  the  Bishop,  being  present,) 
stand  up,  and  turning  himself  to  the  people,  pro- 
nounce this  Absolution. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  our  heaven- 
ly Father,  who  of  his  great 
mercy  hath  promifed  forgivenefs 
of  fins  to  all  them  that  with  hearty 
repentance  and  true  faith  turn  un- 
to him ;  Have  mercy  upon  you ; 
pardon  and  deliver  you  from  all 
your  fins  ;  confirm  and  ftrengthen 
you  in  all  goodnefs ;  and  biing  you 
to  everlafl;ing  life ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

If  Then  shall  the  Priest  say. 

Hear  what  comfortable  words  our 
Saviour  Chrift  faith  unto  all  that 
truly  turn  to  him. 

COME  unto  me  all  that  travail 
and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I 
will  refrefti  you.  St.  Matt.  xi.  28. 
So  God  loved  the  world,  that  he 
gave  his  only-begotten  Son,  to  the 
end  that  all  that  believe  in  him 
Ihould  not  perifli,  but  have  ever- 
lafting  life.    St.  John  iii.  16. 

Hear  alfo  what  Saint  Paul  faith. 

This  is  a  true  faying,  and  worthy 
of  all  men  to  be  received.  That 
Chrift  Jefus  came  into  the  world 
to  fave  finners.    1  Thn.  i.  15. 

Hear  alfo  what  Saint  John  faith. 
If  any  man  fin,  we  have  an  Ad- 
vocate with  the  Father,  Jefus  Chrift 
the  righteous ;  and  he  is  the  pro- 
pitiation for  our  fins.  1  St.  John 
ii.  1. 


^  After  which  the  Priest  shall  proceed,  saying, 

Lift  up  your  hearts. 

ylnjwcr.  We  lift  them  up  unto 
the  Lord. 

Prieji.  Let  us  give  thanks  unto 
our  Lord  God. 

Anfwer.  It  is  meet  and  right  fo 
to  do. 

^   Then  shall  the  Priest  turn  to  the  Lord's  Table, 
and  say, 

IT  is  very  meet,  right,  and  our 
bounden  duty,  that  we  ftiould 
at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  give 
thanks  unto  thee, 

f^  -r         1     u    1     "c  Ihese  words  [Holy 

(J  Lord,  Holy  r  a-      Father]  must  be  omit. 
ther.  Almighty,  E-      ^^^  "«  Trinity   Sun. 

verlafting  God.         ''*^' 

^  Here  shall  follow  the  Proper  Preface,  according  to 
the  time,  if  there  be  any  specially  appointed:  or  else 
immediately  shall  folloze, 

THEREFORE  Avith  Angels 
and  Archangels,  and  with  all 
the  company  of  heaven,  we  laud 
and  magnify  thy  glorious  Name ; 
evermore  praifing  thee,  and  fay- 
ing. Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God 
of  hofts,  heaven  and  earth  are  full 
of  thy  glory :  Glory  be  to  thee,  O 
Lord  moft  High.    Amen. 

Proper  Prefaces. 

Upon  Chriftmas-day,  and /even 
days  after. 

ECAUSE  thou  didft  give  Je- 


B 


fus  Chrift  thine  only  Son  to  be 
born  as  at  this  time  for  us  ;  who, 
by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghoft, 
was  made  veiy  man  of  the  fub- 


The  Communion. 


Itaiice  of  the  \''irgin  Maiy  his  mo- 
ther ;  and  that  mthoiit  fpot  of  fin, 
to   make   us   clean  from    all  fin. 
Therefore  with  Angels,  S^c. 
Upon  Eafter-day,  and /even  days 
after. 

BUT  chiefly  are  we  bound  to 
praife  thee  for  the  glorious  Re- 
furredlion  of  thy  Son  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord :  for  he  is  the  veiy  Paf- 
chal  Lamb,  which  was  oftered  for 
us,  and  hath  taken  away  the  fin  of 
the  world;  who  by  his  death  hath 
deftroyed  death,  and  by  his  rifing 
to  life  again  hath  reftored  to  us 
everlafting  life.  Therefore  with 
Angels,  ^  c. 
Upon  Afcenfion-day,  and /even 
days  after. 

THROUGH  thy  moft  dearly 
beloved  Son  Jefus  Chrifl;  our 
Lord ;  who  after  his  moft  glorious 
Refurre6lion  manifeftly  appeared 
to  all  his  Apoftles,  and  in  their 
fight  afcended  up  into  heaven  to 
prepare  a  place  for  us ;  that  where 
he  is,  thither  we  might  alfo  afcend, 
and  reign  \vith  him  in  glory.  There- 
fore with  Angels,  S^c. 
Upon  Whit-fimday,  and Jix  days 
after. 

THROUGH  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord ;  according  to  whofe 
moft  true  promife,  the  Holy  Glioft 
came  down  as  at  this  time  fVom 
heaven  with  a  fudden  great  found, 
as  it  had  been  a  mighty  wind,  in 
the  likenefs  of  fiery  tongues,  light- 


ing upon  the  Apoftles,  to  teach 
them,  and  to  lead  them  to  all  tiiith ; 
giving  them  both  the  gift  of  divers 
languages,  and  alfo  boldnefs  mth 
fervent  zeal  conftantly  to  preach 
the  Gofpel  unto  all  nations ;  where- 
by Ave  have  been  brought  out  of 
darknefs  and  eiTor  into  the  clear 
light  and  true  knowledge  of  thee, 
and  of  thy  Son  Jefus  Chrift.  There- 
fore with  Angels,  ^c. 
Upon  the  Feaji  of  Trinity  only. 

WHO  art  one  God,  one  Lord ; 
not  one  only  Perfon,  but 
three  Perfons  in  one  Subftance. 
For  that  which  we  believe  of  the 
glory  of  the  Father,  the  fame  Ave 
believe  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft,  Avithout  any  differ- 
ence or  inequality.  Therefore  with 
Angels,  S^c. 

^  After  each  of  which  Prefaces  fJiall 
immediately  hefiing  or  faid, 

THEREFORE  Avith  Angels  and 
Archangels,  and  wath  all  the 
company  of  heaven,  we  laud  and 
magnify  thy  glorious  Name;  ever- 
more praifing  thee,  and  faymg, 
Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  of 
hofts,  heaven  and  earth  are  full 
of  thy  glory:  Gloiy  be  to  thee, 
O  Lord  moft  high.    Amen. 

%  Then  shall  the  Priest,  kneeling  douii.  at  the  Lord's 
Table,  suif  in  the  name  of  all  them  that  shall  receive 
the  CommtDiinn  this  Prayer  following. 

WE  do  not  prefume  to  come 
to  this  thy  Table,  O  mer- 
ciful  Lord,   truiting  in  our  own 


Tlie  Communion. 


righteoufiiefs,  but  in  thy  iiianifokl 
and  great  mercies.  We  are  not 
worthy  fo  much  as  to  gather  up 
the  crumbs  under  thy  Table.  But 
thou  art  the  fame  Lord,  whofe 
property  is  always  to  have  mercy: 
Grant  us  therefore,  gracious  I^ord, 
fo  to  eat  the  flefli  of  thy  dear  Son 
Jefus  Chrift,  and  to  drink  his  blood, 
that  our  finfiil  bodies  may  be  made 
clean  by  his  body,  and  our  fouk 
waflied  through  his  mod  precious 
blood,  and  that  we  may  evermore 
dwell  in  him,  and  he  in  us.  Amen. 

%  When  the  Priest,  standing  before  the  Table,  hath  so 
ordered  the  Bread  and  Wine,  that  he  may  with  the 
more  readiness  and  decency  break  the  Bread  before 
the  people,  and  take  the  Clip  into  his  hands,  he  shall 
say  the  Prayer  of  Consecration,  asfolloweth. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  our  heaven- 
-  ly  Father,  who  of  thy  tender 
mercy  didft  give  thine  only  Son 
Jefus  Chrift  to  fuflfer  death  upon 
the  crofs  for  our  redemption ;  who 
made  there  (by  his  one  oblation  of 
himfelf  once  offered)  a  full,  per- 
fedl,  and  fufficient  facrifice,  obla- 
tion, and  fatisfadlion,  for  the  fins 
of  the  whole  world ;  and  did  infti- 
tute,  and  in  his  holy  Gofpel  com- 
mand us  to  continue,  a  perpetual 
memory  of  that  his  precious  death, 
until  his  coming  again ;  Hear  us, 
O  merciful  Father,  we  moft  hum- 
bly befeech  thee;  and  grant  that 
we  receiving  thefe  thy  creatures  of 
bread  and  wine,  according  to  thy 
Son  our  Saviour  Jefus  Chrilt's  ho- 
ly inftitution,  in  remembrance  of 


[lis  death  and  paffion,  may  be  par- 
takers of  his  moft  blefled  Body  and 
Blood:  Avho,  in  the  fame  night 
that  he  was  betray- 
ed, *  took  Bread  ;  *  ^^«'*«  ^/'«  J^^iest 
and,  when  he  had  trrLt:^""" 

given    thanks,     t  he        f  And  here  to  break 

brake  it,  and  gave  "'-^^''^"■'^^ 
it  to  his   difbiples, 
faying.   Take,    eat, 

I  this     is     my    Body        t^'^  here  to  lay 

which  is  given  for  '«;;'-;'^  "/'"^ «« '*. 
you :  Do  this  in  re- 
membrance of  me. 
Likewife  after  fup- 

per     he    *    took     the        *   Here   he   is   to 

Cup;  and,  when  he  tj'^^^Jh^  Cup  into  hi, 
had  given  thanks,  he 
gave  it  to  them,  fay- 
ing. Drink  ye  all  of 
this ;  for  this  t  is  my     .+  ^'"^  ^'""^  *"  ^"^^ 

1)1         1        r*     1         AT  ^'*  hand  upon  even/ 

Blood    Ot    the    New    ,,,,,,/  (^e  u  Malice 

Teftament,  which  is    or  Flagon)  in  ichich 

Qied  for  you  and  for  ^t'lirj.' '"  '" 
many  for  the  remif- 
fion  of  fins  :  Do  this,  as  oft  as  ye 
Ihall  drink  it,  in  remembrance  of 
me.    Amen. 

5f  Then,  shall  the  Minister  first  receive  the  Communion 
in  both  kinds  himself,  and  then  proceed  to  deliver 
the  same  to  the  Bishops,  Priests,  and  Deacons,  in 
like  manner,  {if  any  be  present,)  and  after  that  to 
the  people  also  in  order,  into  their  hands,  all  meekly 
kneeling.  And,  when  he  delivereth  the  Bread  to 
any  one,  he  shall  say, 

THE  Body  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,   which  was  given  for 
thee,  preferve  thy  body  and  foul 
unto  everlafting  life.  Take  and  eat 
this  in  remembrance  that  Chrift 
Bb 


The  Communion. 


died  for  thee,  and  feed  on  him 
in  thy  heart  by  faith  with  thankf- 
giving. 

^  And  the  Minister  that  deliveretJi  the  Cup  to  aiii/ 
one  shall  sai/, 

THE  Blood  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrill,  wliich  was  (hed  for  thee, 
preferve  thy  body  and  foul  unto 
everlafting  hfe.  Diink  this  in  re- 
membrance that  Chrift's  Blood  was 
flied  for  thee,  and  be  thankful. 

^  If  the  consecrated  Bread  or  Wine  he  all  spent  be- 
fore all  have  communicated,  the  Priest  is  to  conse- 
crate more  according  to  the  Form  before  prescribed; 
beginning  at  [Our  Saviour  Christ  in  the  same 
night,  S)c.]  for  the  blessing  of  the  Bread;  and  at 
[Likewise  after  Supper,  S\:c.]  for  the  blessing  of 
the  Cup. 

U  fVhen  all  have  communicated,  the  Minister  shall 
return  to  the  Lord's  Table,  and  reverently  place 
upon  it  what  remaineth  f  the  consecrated  Elements, 
covering  the  same  with  a  fair  litien  cloth. 

^  Then  shall  the  Priest  sni/  the  Lord's  Praj/cr,  the 
people  repealing  after  him  evert/  Petition. 

OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpaffes,  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainll  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
e\i\ :  For  thine  is  the  kingdom. 
The  power,  and  the  glory,  For 
ever  and  ever.    Amen. 

U  Jfter  shall  be  said  asfolloweth. 

OLord   and  heavenly  Father, 
we  thy  humble  fervants  en- 
tirely defue  thy  fatherly  goodnefs 


mercifully  to  accept  this  our  facri- 
fice  of  praife  and  thankfgiving ; 
moll  humbly  befeeching  thee  to 
grant,  that  by  the  merits  and 
death  of  thy  Son  Jefus  Chrilt,  and 
through  faith  in  his  blood,  we 
and  all  thy  whole  Church  may 
obtain  remiflion  of  our  fms,  and 
all  other  benefits  of  his  paffion. 
And  here  we  offer  and  prefent 
Unto  thee,  O  Lord,  ourfelves,  our 
fouls  and  bodies,  to  be  a  reafon- 
able,  holy,  and  lively  facrifice  un- 
to thee ;  humbly  befeeching  thee, 
that  all  we,  who  are  partakers  of 
this  holy  Communion,  may  be  ful- 
filled with  thy  grace  and  heavenly 
benediction.  And  although  we  be 
unworthy,  through  our  manifold 
fins,  to  offer  unto  thee  any  facri- 
fice, yet  we  befeech  thee  to  accept 
this  our  bounden  duty  and  fervice ; 
not  weighing  our  meFits,  but  par- 
doning our  oftences,  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord ;  by  whom,  and 
with  whom,  in.  the  unity  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft,  all  honour  and  gloiy 
be  unto  thee,  O  Father  Almighty, 
world  without  end.    Amen. 

Or  this. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everliving 
God,  we  moil  heartily  thank 
thee,  for  that  thou  doll  vouchfafe 
to  feed  us,  who  have  duly  received 
thefe  holy  mylleries,  with  the  fpi- 
ritual  food  of  the  mod  precious 
Body  and  IMood  of  thy  Son  our 


The  Communion. 


Saviour  Jefus  Chrift  ;  and  doll  af- 
fiire  us  thereby  of  diy  favour  and 
goodnefs  towards  us ;  and  that  we 
are  veiy  members  incorporate  in 
the  myftical  body  of  thy  Son,  which 
is  the  blefled  company  of  all  faithful 
people;  and  are  alfo  heirs  through 
liope  of  thy  everlafting  kingdom, 
by  the  merits  of  the  moft  precious 
death  and  paffion  of  thy  dear  Son. 
And  we  moft  humbly  befeech  thee, 
O  heavenly  Father,  fo  to  affift  us 
with  thy  grace,  that  we  may  con- 
tinue in  that  holy  fellowlhip,  and 
do  all  fuch  good  works  as  thou 
haft  prepared  for  us  to  walk  in ; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord,  to 
whom,  vA\\\  thee  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  be  all  honour  and  gloiy, 
world  without  end.    Amen. 

^  ThenJJiall  be /aid  or  Jung, 

GLORY  be  to  God  on  high, 
and  in  earth  peace,  goodwill 
towards  men.  We  praife  thee,  we 
blefs  thee,  we  worlliip  thee,  we 
glorify  thee,  we  give  thanks  to 
thee  for  thy  great  gloiy,  O  I^ord 
God,  heavenly  King,  God  the  Fa- 
ther Almighty. 

O  Lord,  the  only-begotten  Son 
Jefu  Chrift;  O  Lord  God,  Lamb 
of  God,  Son  of  the  Father,  that 
takeft  away  the  fins  of  the  world, 
have  mercy  upon  us.  Thou  that 
takeft  away  the  fins  of  the  world, 
have  mercy  upon  us.  Thou  that 
takeft  away  the  fins  of  the  world, 


receive  our  prayer.  Thou  that  fit- 
ted at  the  right  hand  of  God  the 
Father,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

For  thou  only  art  holy ;  thou 
only  art  the  Lord ;  thou  only,  O 
Chrift,  with  the  Holy  Ghoft,  art 
moft  high  in  the  glory  of  God  the 
Father.    Amen. 

^  Then  the  Priejl  [or  BiJJiop  if  he 
be  prefent)  Jliall  let  them  depart 
with  this  JBlejUing. 

THE  peace  of  God,  which  pafl"- 
eth  all  underftauding,  keep 
your  hearts  and  minds  in  the  know- 
ledge and  love  of  God,  and  of  his 
Son  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord:  and 
the  blefling  of  God  Almighty,  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  be  among-ft  you  and  remain 
with  you  always.    Amen. 

^  ColleSts  to  be  /aid  after  the  Of- 
fertory, when  there  is  no  Com- 
munion,  every  fuch  day  one  or 
more;  and  the  fame  may  be  faid 
alfo,  as  often  as  occajion  fhall 
ferve,  after  the  Colledts  either  of 
Morning  or  Evening  Prayer, 
Communion,  or  Litany,  by  the 
difcretion  of  the  Minijler. 

ASSIST  us  mercifully,  O  Lord, 
in  thefe  our  fupplications  and 
prayers,  and  dif})ofe  the  way  of  thy 
fervants  towards  the  attainment 
of  everlafting  falvation ;  that,  a- 
mong  all  the  changes  and  chances 
of  this  mortal  life,  they  may  ever 
Bba 


The  Conmmnion. 


be  defended  by  thy  moft  gracious 
and  ready  help ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 


O  Almighty  Lord,  and  everlaft- 
ing  God,  vouchfafe,  we  be- 
feech  thee,  to  diretft,  fandtify,  and 
govern,  both  our  heai'ts  and  bo- 
dies, in  the  ways  of  thy  laws,  and 
in  the  works  of  thy  command- 
ments ;  that  through  thy  moft 
miglity  protection,  both  here  and 
ever,  we  may  be  preferved  in  body 
and  foul ;  through  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jefus  Chrift.    Amen. 

GRANT,  we  befeech  thee.  Al- 
mighty God,  that  the  words, 
which  we  have  heard  this  day  with 
our  outward  ears,  may  through 
thy  grace  be  fo  grafted  inwardly 
in  our  hearts,  that  they  may  bring 
forth  in  us  the  fruit  of  good  living, 
to  the  honour  and  praife  of  thy 
Name ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.   A?nen. 

PREVENT  us,  O  Lord,  in  all 
our  doings  with  thy  moft  gra- 
cious favour,  and  further  us  with 
thy  continual  help;  that  in  all 
our  works  begun,  continued,  and 


ended  in  thee,  we  may  glorify 
thy  holy  Name,  and  finally  by 
thy  mercy  obtain  everlafting  life ; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Attien. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  the  fountain 
of  all  wifdom,  who  knoweft 
our  neceflities  before  we  alk,  and 
our  ignorance  in  afliing ;  We  be- 
feech thee  to  have  compaflion  upon 
our  infirmities ;  and  thofe  things, 
which  for  our  imworthinefs  we 
dare  not,  and  for  our  blindnefs 
we  cannot  alk,  vovichfafe  to  give 
us,  for  the  worthinefs  of  thy  Son 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  haft 
promifed  to  hear  the  petitions 
of  them  that  afli  in  thy  Son's 
Name;  We  befeech  thee  merci- 
fully to  incline  thine  ears  to  us 
that  have  made  now  our  prayers 
and  fupplications  unto  thee ;  and 
grant,  that  thofe  things,  which  we 
have  faithfully  alked  according  to 
thy  will,  may  eft'edlually  be  obtain- 
ed, to  the  relief  of  our  neceflity, 
and  to  the  fetting  forth  of  thy  glo- 
ry ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


II  Ujxm  the  Sundays  and  oilier  Holy-days  (if  there  be  no  Conwiiinion)  shall  he  said  all  that  is  ap- 
pointed at  the  Cominunion,  until  the  end  of  the  general  Prayer  [For  the  whole  state  of  Christ's 
Church  inihtant  heie  on  earthj  together  with  one  or  more  of  these  Colleets  lust  before  rehears- 
ed, concluding  with  the  Blessing. 

^  And  there  shall  be  no  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  except  theix  be  a  convenie?it  number  to 
communicate  xvith  the  Priest,  according  to  his  discretion. 


The  Communion 

If  And  if  there  be  not  above  twenty  persons  in  the  Parish  of  discretion  to  receive  the  Conmiunion  ; 
yet  there  shall  be  no  Communion,  except  four  {or  three  at  the  least)  communicate  with  the  Priest. 

%  And  in  Cathedral  and  Collegiate  Churches,  and  Colleges,  where  there  are  inani/  Priests  and 
Deacons,  they  shall  all  receive  the  Communion  with  the  Priest  every  .Sunday  at  the  least,  except 
they  have  a  reasonable  cause  to  the  contrary. 

1[  And  to  take  away  all  occasion  of  dissention,  and  superstition,  which  any  Person  hath  or  might 
have  concerning  the  Bread  and  J  fine,  it  shall  suffice  that  the  Bread  be  such  as  is  iisual  to  be 
eaten ;  but  the  best  and  purest  JVhcat  Bread  that  conveniently  may  be  gotten. 

%  And  if  any  of  the  Bread  and  JVine  remain  unconsecrated,  the  Curate  shall  have  it  to  his  own 
use:  but  f  any  remain  (f  that  zvhich  was  consecrated,  it  shall  not  be  canned  out  of  the  Church, 
but  the  Priest  and  such  other  of  the  Communicants  as  he  shall  then  call  unto  linn,  shall,  imme- 
diately after  the  Blessing,  reverently  eat  and  drink  the  same. 

%  The  Bread  and  JFine  for  the  Communion  shall  be  provided  by  the  Curate  and  the  Chmxh- 
loardens  at  the  charges  of  the  Parish. 

If  And  note,  that  every  Parishioner  shall  communicate  at  the  least  three  times  in  the  yea?',  ofzthich 
Easter  to  be  one.  And  yearly  at  Easter  every  Parishioner  shall  reckon  ziith  the  Parson, 
Vicar,  or  Curate,  or  hit  or  their  Deputy  or  Deputies;  and  pay  to  the?u  or  him  all  Ecclesiastical 
Duties,  accustomably  due,  then  and  at  that  time  to  be  paid. 

%  After  the  Divine  Service  ended,  the  money  given  at  the  Offertory  shall  be  disposed  of  to  such 
pious  and  charitable  uses,  as  the  Minister  and  Chiarh-wardens  shall  think  Jit.  JFherein  if 
they  disagree,  it  shall  be  disposed  of  as  the  Ordinary  shall  appoint. 


""VM/^HEREAS  it  is  ordained  in  this  Office  for  the  Administration  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  that  the  Com- 
"  municants  should  receive  the  same  kneeling;  (which  order  is  well  meant,  for  a  signification  of  our 

"  humble  and  grateful  acknowledgement  of  the  benefits  of  Christ  therein  given  to  all  worthy  Receivers, 
"  and  for  the  avoiding  of  such  profanation  and  disorder  in  the  holy  Communion,  as  might  otherwise  ensue;) 
"  yet,  lest  the  same  kneeling  should  by  any  persons,  either  out  of  ignorance  and  infirmity,  or  out  of  malice 
"  and  obstinacy,  be  misconstrued  and  depraved;  It  is  hereby  declared.  That  thereby  no  adoration  is  intend- 
"  ed,  or  ought  to  be  done,  either  unto  the  Sacramental  Bread  or  Wine  there  bodily  received,  or  unto  any 
"  Corporal  Presence  of  Christ's  natural  Flesh  and  Blood.  For  the  Sacramental  Bread  and  Wine  remain 
"  still  in  their  very  natural  substances,  and  therefore  may  not  be  adored ;  (for  that  were  idolatry,  to  be 
"  abhorred  of  all  faithful  Christians ;)  and  the  natural  Body  and  Blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ  are  in  Hea- 
"  ven,  and  not  here ;  it  being  against  the  truth  of  Christ's  natural  Body  to  be  at  one  time  in  more  places 
"  than  one." 


THE   MINISTRATION   OF 


PUBLICK    BAPTISM    OF    INFANTS, 

TO  BE  USED  IN  THE   CHURCH. 


^  The  people  are  to  he  admotiished,  that  it  h  most  convenient  that  Baptism  should  not  be  adminis- 
tered but  upon  Suiulays,  and  other  Holy-days,  z-ihen  the  most  number  of  people  come  together; 
as  well  for  that  the  Cmgregation  there  present  may  testify  the  I'eceiving  of  them  that  be  newly 
baptized  into  the  number  of  Christ's  Church;  as  also  because  in  the  Baptism  of  Infants  every 
j\Iaii  present  may  be  put  in  remembrance  of  his  moi  profession  made  to  God  in  his  Baptism. 
For  Xiihich  cause  also  it  is  expedient  that  Baptism  be  ministered  in  the  vulgar  tongue.  Never- 
theless, {f  necessity  so  require,)  Children  may  be  baptized  upon  any  other  day. 

%  And  note,  that  there  shall  be  for  every  Male-child  to  be  baptized  tivo  Ciodfathers  and  one  God- 
viother;  and  for  every  Female,  otw  Godfather  and  two  Godnwthers. 

If  When  there  are  Children  to  be  baptized,  the  Parents  shall  give  knorvledge  thereof  over  night,  or 
in  the  morning  before  the  beginning  of  Morning  Prayer,  to  the  Curate.  And  then  the  God- 
fathers and  Godmothers,  and  the  people  with  the  Children,  must  be  ready  at  the  Font,  either 
immediately  after  the  last  Lesson  at  Morning  Prayer,  or  else  hnmediately  after  the  last  Lesson 
at  Evening  Prayer,  as  the  Curate  by  his  discretion  shall  appoint.  And  the  Priest  coming  to 
the  Font,  {which  is  then  to  be  filed  with  pure  JVater,)  and  standing  there,  shall  say. 


HATH  this  Child  been  ah-eady 
baptized,  or  no? 

^  If  they  atiswer,  No  :  Then  shall  the  Priest  proceed 
asfollowetk. 

DEARLY  beloved,  forafmuch 
as  all  men  are  conceived  and 
born  in  (in  ;  and  that  our  Saviour 
Chrift  faith,  None  can  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God,  except  he  be 
regenerate  and  born  anew  of  Wa- 
ter and  of  the  holy  Ghoil ;  I  be- 
feech  you  to  call  upon  God  the 
Father,  through  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  that  of  his  bounteous  mer- 
cy he  will  grant  to  t/iis  Child  that 
thing  which  by  nature  he  cannot 
have ;  that  he  may  be  baptized 
with  Water  and  the  holy  (ihoft, 
and  received  into  C'hrift's  holy 
Church,  and  be  made  a  lively/  mem^ 
her  of  the  fame. 


%  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 

Let  us  pray. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  who  of  thy  great  mercy 
didft  fave  Noah  and  his  family  in 
the  ark  from  perifliing  by  water ; 
and  alfo  didft  fafely  lead  the  chil- 
dren of  Ifrael  thy  people  through 
the  Red  Sea,  figuring  thereby  thy 
holy  Baptifm ;  and  by  the  Baptifm 
of  thy  well-beloved  Son  Jefus 
Chrift,  in  the  river  Jordan,  didft 
lan6lify  Water  to  the  myftical  wafli- 
ing  away  of  fin ;  We  befeech  thee, 
for  thine  infinite  mercies,  that  thou 
wilt  mercifully  look  upon  this  Child; 
wafli  him  and  fan^tify  him  with  the 
holyCihoft;  that//^,  being  delivered 
from  thy  wrath,  may  be  received 
into  the  ark  of  C'hrift's  Church  ; 
and  being  ftedfail  in  faith,  joyful 


Piiblick  Baptifm  of  Infants. 


through  hope,  and  rooted  in  cha- 
rity, may  fo  pafs  the  waves  of  this 
troublefome  world,  that  finally  he 
may  come  to  the  land  of  everlaft- 
ing  life,  there  to  reign  with  thee 
world  without  end;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

ALMIGHTY  and  immortal 
God,  the  aid  of  all  that  need, 
the  helper  of  all  that  flee  to  thee 
for  fuccour,  the  life  of  them  that 
believe,  and  the  refurre6tion  of  the 
dead ;  We  call  upon  thee  for  this 
Infant,  that  he,  coming  to  thy  ho- 
ly Baptifm,  may  receive  remifllon 
oihis  fins  by  fpiritual  regeneration. 
Receive  him,  O  Lord,  as  thou  hafi; 
promifed  by  thy  well-beloved  Son, 
laying^  Aik,  and  ye  fliall  have; 
feek,  and  ye  Ihall  find;  knock,  and 
it  ftiall  be  opened  unto  you  :  So 
give  now  unto  us  that  alk ;  let  us 
that  feek  find;  open  the  gate  unto 
us  that  knock ;  that  this  Infant 
may  enjoy  the  everlafl;ing  bene- 
didlion  of  thy  heavenly  wafliing, 
and  may  come  to  the  eternal  king- 
dom which  thou  haft  promifed  by 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

^  Then  shall  the  people  stand  up,  and  the  Priest 
shall  say, 

Hear  the  words  of  the  Gofpel, 
written  by  Saint  Mark,  in  the 
tenth  Chapter,  at  the  thirteenth 
Verfe. 

THEY  brought  young  children 
to  Chrift,  that  he  lliould  touch 
them ;   and  his  difciples  rebuked 


thofe  that  brought  them.  But  when 
Jefus  faw  it,  he  was  much  dif- 
pleafed,  and  faid  unto  tliem,  Sufl*er 
the  little  children  to  come  unto 
me,  and  forbid  them  not ;  for  of 
fuch  is  tlie  kingdom  of  God.  Verily 
I  fay  unto  you,  Whofoever  fliall 
not  receive  the  kingdom  of  God 
as  a  little  child,  he  fliall  not  enter 
therein.  And  he  took  them  up  in 
his  arms,  put  his  hands  upon  them, 
and  bleffed  them. 

If  After  the  Gospel  is  read,  the  Minister  shall  make 
this  brief  Exhortation  upon  the  words  of  the  Gospel. 

BELOVED,  ye  hear  in  this 
Gofpel  the  words  of  our  Savi- 
our Chrift,  that  he  commanded  the 
children  to  be  brought  unto  him ; 
how  he  blamed  thofe  that  would 
have  kept  them  from  him ;  how  he 
exhorteth  all  men  to  follow  their 
innocency.  Ye  perceive  how  by 
his  outward  gefture  and  deed  he 
declared  his  goodwill  toward  them; 
for  he  embraced  them  in  his  arms, 
he  laid  his  hands  upon  them,  and 
blefled  them.  Doubt  ye  not  there- 
fore, but  earneftly  believe,  that  he 
will  likewife  favourably  receive  this 
prefent  hfant;  that  he  will  em- 
brace him  with  the  arms  of  his 
mercy ;  that  he  will  give  unto  him 
the  blefling  of  eternal  life,  and 
make  him  partaker  of  his  everlaft- 
ina:  kingdom.  Wherefore  we  be- 
ing  thus  perfuaded  of  the  goodmll 
of  our  heavenly  Father  towards 
this  Infant,  declared  by  his  Son 


Puhlich  Baptifm  of  Infants. 


Jefus  Chrift ;  and  nothing  doubt- 
ing but  that  he  favourably  allow- 
eth  this  charitable  work  of  our's 
in  bringing  this  Infant  to  his  holy 
Baptifm ;  let  us  faithfiilly  and  de- 
voutly give  thanks  unto  hun,  and 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  heavenly  Father,  we  give 
thee  humble  thanks,  for  that  thou 
haft  vouchfafed  to  call  us  to  the 
knowledge  of  thy  grace,  and  faith 
in  thee :  Increafe  this  knowledge, 
and  confirm  this  faith  in  us  ever- 
more. Give  thy  holy  Spirit  to  this 
Infant,  that  he  may  be  born  again, 
and  be  made  an  heir  of  everlaftinff 
falvation;  through  our  Lord  Je- 
fus Chrift,  who  liveth  and  reigneth 
with  thee  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  now 
and  for  ever.    Amen. 

%  Then  shalt  the  Priest  speak  unto  the  Godfathers 
and  Godmothers  on  this  wise. 

DEARLY  beloved,  ye  have 
brought  this  Child  here  to 
be  baptized,  ye  have  prayed  that 
our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  would  vouch- 
fafe  to  receive  hi)n,  to  releafe  hi?n 
of  his  fins,  to  fandtify  him  with 
the  holy  Ghoft,  to  give  him  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  and  everlaft- 
ing life.  Ye  have  heard  alfo  that 
our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  hath  pro- 
mifed  in  his  Gofpel  to  grant  all 
thefe  things  that  ye  have  ])rayed 
for:  which  promife  he,  for  his  part, 
will  moft  furely  keep  and  perform. 
Wherefore,  after  this  promife  made 


by  Chrift,  this  Infant  muft  alfo 
faithfully,  for  his  part,  promife  by 
you  that  are  his  fureties,  (until  he 
come  of  age  to  take  it  upon  him- 
felf)  that  he  will  renounce  the  de- 
vil and  all  his  works,  and  conftant- 
ly  believe  God's  holy  Word,  and 
obediently  keep  his  command- 
ments. 

I  demand  therefore, 

DOST  thou,  in  the  name  of  this 
Child,  renounce  the  devil  and 
all  his  Avorks,  the  vain  pomp  and 
gloiy  of  the  world,  with  all  covet- 
ous defires  of  the  fame,  and  the 
carnal  defires  of  the  flefli,  fo  that 
thou  wilt  not  follow,  nor  be  led  by 
them? 

Anfwer.    I  renounce  them  all. 
Minifter. 

DOST  thou  believe  in  God  the 
Father  Almighty,  Maker  of 
heaven  and  earth? 

And  in  Jefus  Chrift  his  only-be- 
gotten Son  our  Lord?  And  that  he 
was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 
born  of  the  A^irgin  Mary ;  that  he 
fuftered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  was 
crucified,  dead,  and  buried ;  that 
he  went  down  into  hell,  and  alfo 
did  rife  again  the  third  day;  that 
he  afcended  into  heaven,  and  fit- 
teth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the 
Father  Almighty;  and  from  thence 
fliall  come  ajjain  at  the  end  of  the 
world,  to  judge  the  quick  and  the 
dead? 

And  (loft  thou  believe  in   the 


Piiblich  Baptifm  of  Infants. 


Holy  Glioft ;  the  holy  Catholick 
Church;  the  Communion  of  Saints; 
the  RemifTion  of  fins  ;  the  Refur- 
redtion  of  the  flefli ;  and  everlaft- 
ing  hfe  after  death? 

Anfwer.  All  this  I  ftedfaftly  be- 
lieve. 


iijter. 

WI LT  thou  be  baptized  in  this 
faith? 
Anfiver.   That  is  my  defire. 
Minijier. 

WILT  thou  then  obediently 
keep  God's  holy  will   and 
commandments,  and  walk  in  the 
fame  all  the  days  of  thy  life? 
Anfwer.    I  will. 

%  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 

O  Merciful  God,  grant  that  the 
old  Adam  in  this  Child  may 
be  fo  buried,  that  the  new  man 
may  be  raifed  up  in  hi??i.    Amen. 

Grant  that  all  carnal  affections 
may  die  in  him,  and  that  all  things 
belonging  to  the  Spirit  may  live 
and  grow  in  him.    Ame?i. 

Grant  that  he  may  have  power 
and  ftrength  to  have  vidloiy,  and 
to  triumph,  againft  the  devil,  the 
world,  and  the  flefli.    Amen. 

Grant  that  whofoever  is  here 
dedicated  to  thee  by  our  office  and 
miniftry  may  alfo  be  endued  with 
heavenly  virtues,  and  everlaftingly 
rewarded,  through  thy  mercy,  O 
bleffed  Lord  God,  who  doll  live, 
and  govern  all  things,  world  with- 
out end.    Amen. 


ALMIGHTY,  everliving  God, 
whofe  moft  dearly  beloved  Son 
Jefus  Chrift,  for  the  forgivenefs  of 
our  fins,  did  flied  out  of  his  moft 
precious  fide  both  water  and  blood; 
and  gave  commandment  to  his  dif- 
ciples,  that  they  ihould  go  teach 
all  nations,  and  baptize  tliem  In 
the  Name  of  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghoft ;  Regard,  we 
befeech  thee,  the  fupplications  of 
thy  congregation;  fandtify  this  Wa- 
ter to  the  myftical  walliing  away 
of  fin ;  and  grant  that  this  Child, 
now  to  be  baptized  therein,  may 
receive  the  fulnefs  of  thy  grace, 
and  ever  remain  in  the  number 
of  thy  faithful  and  ele6l  children  ; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

1[  Then  the  Priest  shall  take  (lie  Child  into  his  hands, 
and  shall  say  to  the  Godfathers  and  Godmothers, 

Name  this  Child. 

•[[  Jnd  then  naming  it  after  them  {if  they  shall  certify 
him  that  the  Child  may  well  endure  it)  he  shall  dip 
it  in  the  Water  discreetly  and  warily,  saying, 

NI  baptize  thee  In  the  Name 
•  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  Amen. 

^  But  if  they  certify  that  the  Child  is  rceak,  it  shall 
suffice  to  pour  Water  upon  it,  saying  the  foresaid 
words, 

NI  baptize  thee  In  the  Name 
•  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  Amen. 

^  Then  the  Priest  shall  say, 

E   receive   this  Child   into 
the  congregation  of  Chrift's 
Cc 


w 


Publick  Baptifm  of  Infants. 


*tj     ,i   p    /  flock,  *and  do  fio-n 

*  Here  the  Friest  '  _  S 

shall  make  a    Cross    hwi  witll  the  figll  01 
Y^on  the  Child's  fore-    ^j^^    Qvok,    ill    tokcil 

that  hereafter  he  ihall 
not  be  afliamed  to  coiifefs  the  faith 
of  Chrill  crucified,  and  manfully 
to  fight  under  his  banner,  againil 
fin,  the  world,  and  the  devil ;  and 
to  continue  Chrifl;'s  faithful  foldier 
and  fervant  unto  his  life's  end. 
Amen. 

^  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 

Sl^EING  now,  dearly  beloved 
brethren,  that  this  Child  is  re- 
generate, and  grafted  into  the  bo- 
dy of  Chrifl:'s  Church,  let  us  give 
thanks  unto  Almighty  God  for 
thefe  benefits;  and  with  one  accord 
make  our  prayers  unto  him,  that 
this  Child  may  lead  the  rell  of  ///,y 
life  accordino^  to  this  be^innino-. 

IT  Then  shall  be  said,  all  kneeling ; 

^Ull  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpafles,  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation ;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil.    Amen. 

51  Then  .-hall  the  Priest  sai/, 

WE  yield  thee  hearty  thanks, 
moll  merciful  Father,  that 
it  hath  pleafed  thee  to  regenerate 
this  Infant  with  thy  holy  Spirit, 
to  receive  hint  for  thine  own  Child 


by  adoption,    and   to  incorporate 
him  into  thy  holy  Church.     And 
humbly  we  befeech  thee  to  grant, 
that  he,  being  dead  unto  fin,  and 
living  unto  righteoufnefs,  and  be- 
ing buried  with  C  hrilt  in  his  death, 
may  crucify  the  old  man,  and  ut- 
terly abolifli  the  whole  body  of  fin ; 
and  that,  as  he  is  made  partaker  of 
the  death  of  thy  Son,  he  may  alfo 
be  partaker  of  his  refurre6lion ;  fo 
that  finally,   with   the   refidue  of 
thy  holy  Church,  he  may  be  an 
inheritor  of  thine  everlafl;ing  king- 
dom ;    through   Chrift;   our   Lord. 
Amen. 

^  Then,  all  standing  up,  the  Priest  shall  say  to  the 
Godfathers  and  Godmothers  this  Exhortation  J'ol- 

I^j^ORASMUCH  as  this  Child 
hath  promifed  by  you  his  fure- 
ties  to  renounce  the  devil  and  all 
his  works,  to  believe  in  God,  and 
to  ferve  him  ;  ye  muft  remember, 
that  it  is  your  parts  and  duties  to 
fee  that  this  Infant  be  taught,  fo 
foon  as  he  fliall  be  able  to  learn, 
what  a  folemn  vow,  promife,  and 
profefiion,  he  hath  here  made  by 
you.  And  that  he  may  know  thefe 
things  the  better,  ye  fliall  call  up- 
on him  to  hear  Sermons ;  and  chief- 
ly ye  fliall  provide,  that  he  may 
learn  the  Creed,  the  Lord's  Prayer, 
and  the  Ten  Commandments,  in 

the  vulo-ar  tong-ue,  and  all  other 

.  .   . 

things  which  a  Chrillian  ought  to 

know    and    believe    to    his    foul's 

health;   and   that  this  Child  may 


Private  Baptifm  of  Infants. 


be  virtuoiifly  brought  up  to  lead  a 
godly  and  a  chriftian  life;  remem- 
bering- always,  that  Baptifm  doth 
reprefent  unto  us  our  profeffion ; 
which  is,  to  follow  the  example  of 
our  Saviour  Chrift,  and  to  be  made 
like  unto  him  ;  that,  as  he  died, 
and  rofe  again  for  us,  fo  ftiould 
we,  who  are  baptized,  die  from 
fin,  and  rife  again  unto  righteouf- 
nefs ;  continually  mortifying  all  our 
evil    and  corrupt    affedlions,   and 


daily  proceeding  in  all  virtue  and 
godlinefs  of  living. 

*      If  Then  shall  he  add  and  say, 

YE  are  to  take  care  that  this 
Child  be  brought  to  the  Bi- 
fliop  to  be  confirmed  by  him,  fo 
foon  as  he  can  fay  the  Creed,  the 
Lord's  Prayer,  and  the  Ten  Com- 
mandments, in  the  vulgar  tongue, 
and  be  further  infl;ru6ted  in  the 
Church-Catechifm  fet  forth  for  that 
purpofe. 


IT  is  ceitaia  by  God's  Word,  that  Children  which  are  baptized,  dying  before  they  commit  actual  sin, 
are  undoubtedly  saved. 

To  take  away  all  scruple  concerning  the  use  of  the  sign  of  the  Cross  in  Baptism;  the  true  explication 
thereof,  and  the  just  reasons  for  the  retaining  of  it,  may  be  seen  in  the  xxxth  Canon,  first  published  in  the 
Year  MDCIV. 


THE   MINISTRATION   OF 

PRIVATE    BAPTISM    OF    CHIT.DREN 

IN     HOUSES, 


■«* 


%  The  Curates  of  every  Parish  shall  often  admonish  the  people,  that  they  defer  not  the  Baptism 
of  their  Children  longer  than  the  Jirst  or  second  Sunday  next  after  their  birth,  or  other  Holy- 
day  falling  beticeen,  unless  upon  a  great  and  reasonable  cause,  to  be  approved  by  the  Curate. 

If  And  also  they  shall  warn  them,  that  without  like  great  cause  atid  necessity  they  procure  not 
their  Children  to  he  baptized  at  home  in  their  houses.  But  when  need  shall  compel  them  so  to 
do,  then  Baptism  shall  be  administered  on  this  fisliion  : 

•f  First,  let  the  Minister  of  the  Parish  {or,  in  his  absence,  any  other  lauful  Jl/inister  that  can  be 
procured)  with  them  that  are  present  call  upon  God,  and  say  the  Lords  Prayer,  and  so  many 
ff  the  Collects  appointed  to  be  said  before  in  the  Form  of  Publick  Baptism,  as  the  time  and  pre- 
sent exigence  tnll  suffer.  And  then,  the  Child  being  tiamed  by  some  one  that  is  present,  the 
Minister  shall  pour  IFater  upon  it,  saying  these  words ; 


NI  baptize  thee  In  the  Name 
•  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  HolyGhoft.  Amen. 

^  Then,  all  kneeling  dorcii,  the  Minister  shall  give 
thanks  unto  God,  and  say, 

E  yield  thee  hearty  thanks, 
moft  merciful  Father,  that 


it  hath  pleafed  thee  to  regenerate 
this  Infant  with  thy  holy  Spirit, 
to  receive  him  for  thine  own  Child 
by  adoption,  and  to  incorporate 
him  into  thy  holy  Church.  And 
we  humbly  befeech  thee  to  grant, 
that  as  he  is  now  made  partaker 
Cc  2 


Private  Baptifm  of  Infants. 


of  the  death  of  thy  Son,  fo  he  may 
be  alfo  of  his  refurredlion ;  and 
that  finally,  with  the  refidue  of  thy 
Saints,  he  may  inherit  thine  ever- 
lafting  kingdom ;  through  the  fame 
thy  Sou  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

^  And  let  them  not  doubt,  but  that  the  Child  so 
baptized  is  lazij'ulli/  and  sufficiently  baptized,  and 
ought  not  to  be  baptized  again.  Yet  nevertheless, 
if'  the  Child,  which  is  after  this  sort  baptized,  do 
aftencard  live,  it  is  expedient  that  it  be  brought 
into  the  Church,  to  the  intent  that,  if  the  Minister 
of  the  same  Parish  did  himself  baptize  that  Child, 
the  Congregation  may  be  certified  of  the  true  Form 
of  Baptism,  bif  him  privately  before  used:  In  which 
case  he  shall  say  thus, 

I  Certify  you,  that  according  to 
the  due  and  prefcribed  Order  of 
the  Church,  at  fiich  a  time,  and  at 
fuch  a  place,  before  divers  witneffes 
I  baptized  this  Child. 

1[  But  if  the  Child  were  baptized  by  any  other  lawful 
Minister,  then  the  Minister  of  the  Parish,  where 
the  Child  was  born  or  christened,  shall  examine  and 
try  whether  the  Child  be  lavfuUy  baptized,  or  no. 
In  which  case,  if  those  that  bring  any  Child  to  the 
Church  do  answer,  that  the  same  Child  is  alreadi/ 
baptized,  then  shall  the  Minister  examine  them  fur- 
ther, saying, 

BY  whom  was  this  Child  bap- 
tized? 

Who  was  prefent  when  this 
Child  was  baptized? 

Becaufe  fome  things  elTential  to 
this  Sacrament  may  happen  to  be 
omitted  through  fear  or  halle,  in 
fuch  times  of  extremity ;  therefore 
1  demand  further  of  you, 

With  what  matter  was  this  Child 
4f  aptizcd  ? 


With  what  words  was  this  Child 
baptized? 

%  And  if  the  Minister  shall  find  by  the  answers  of 
such  as  bring  the  Child,  that  all  things  were  done 
as  they  ought  to  be ;  then  shall  not  he  christen  the 
Child  again,  but  shall  receive  him  as  one  of  the 
flock  of  true  christian  people,  saying  thus, 

I  Certify  you,  that  in  this  cafe  all 
is  well  done,  and  according  un- 
to due  order,  concerning  the  bap- 
tizing of  this  Child ;  who  being 
born  in  original  iin,  and  in  the 
wrath  of  God,  is  now,  by  the  laver 
of  Regeneration  in  Baptifm,  re- 
ceived into  the  number  of  the  chil- 
dren of  God,  and  heirs  of  ever- 
lafting  life :  for  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift  doth  not  deny  his  grace  and 
mercy  unto  fuch  Infants,  but  moft 
lovingly  doth  call  them  unto  him, 
as  the  holy  Gofpel  doth  witnefs  to 
our  comfort  on  this  wife. 

St.  3IarA-  x.  13. 

THEY  brought  young  children 
to  Chi-ift,  that  he  fliould  touch 
them ;  and  his  difciples  rebuked 
thofe  that  brought  them.  But 
when  Jefus  faw  it,  he  was  much 
difpleafed,  and  faid  imto  them, 
Suffer  the  little  children  to  come 
unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not;  for 
of  fuch  is  the  kini>'dom  of  God. 
Verily  I  fay  imto  you,  Whofoever 
fliall  not  receive  the  kingdom  of 
God  as  a  little  child,  he  Ihall  not 
enter  therein.  And  he  took  them 
up  in  his  arms,  put  his  hands  upon 
them,  and  blefl'ed  them. 


Private  Bapti/ht  of  Iiifmts. 


^  After  the  Qoapel  is  read,  the  Minister  shall  make 
this  brief  Exhortation  npon  the  Kords  of  the  Gospel. 

BELOVED,  ye  hear  In  this 
Gofpel  the  words  of  our  Savi- 
our Chrill,  that  he  coniuiandecl  the 
children  to  be  brought  unto  him ; 
how  he  blamed  thofe  that  would 
have  kept  them  from  him ;  how 
he  exhorted  all  men  to  follow  their 
innocency.  Ye  perceive  how  by 
his  outward  gefture  and  deed  he 
declared  his  good  will  toward  them; 
for  he  embraced  them  in  his  arms, 
he  laid  his  hands  upon  them,  and 
blefled  them.  Doubt  ye  not  there- 
fore, but  earneftly  believe,  that  he 
hath  likewife  favourably  received- 
this  prefent  Infant;  that  he  hath 
embraced  Mm  with  the  arms  of  his 
mercy;  and  (as  he  hath  promifed 
in  his  holy  Word)  will  give  unto 
him  the  bleffing  of  eternal  life,  and 
make  him  partaker  of  his  everlaft- 
ing  kingdom.  Wherefore,  we  be- 
ing thus  perfuaded  of  the  good 
will  of  our  heavenly  Father,  de- 
clared by  his  Son  Jefus  Chrift, 
towards  this  Infant^  let  us  faith- 
fully and  devoutly  give  thanks  un- 
to him,  and  fay  the  Prayer  which 
the  Lord  himfelf  taught  us  : 

OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  om*  trefpaffes.  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 


gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil.     Amen. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  heavenly  Father,  we  give 
thee  humble  thanks,  that  thou  hall 
vouchfafed  to  call  us  to  the  know- 
ledge of  thy  grace,  and  faith  in 
thee ;  Increafe  this  knowledge,  and 
confirm  this  faith  in  us  evermore. 
Give  thy  holy  Spirit  to  this  Infant, 
that  he,  being  born  again,  and  be- 
ing made  an  heir  of  everlafting 
falvation,  through  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  may  continue  thy  fermint, 
and  attain  thy  promife ;  through 
the  fame  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift 
thy  Son,  who  liveth  and  reigneth 
with  thee  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  now 
and  for  ever.    Amen. 

51  Then  shall  the  Priest  demand  the  Name  of  the  Child; 
zehieh  being  by  the  Godfathers  and  Godmothers  pro- 
itounced,  the  Minister  shall  sat/, 

DOST  thou,  in  the  name  of 
this  Child,  renounce  the  devil 
and  all  his  works,  the  vain  pomp 
and  glory  of  this  world,  with  all 
covetous  defires  of  the  fame,  and 
the  carnal  defires  of  the  flefli,  fo 
that  thou  wilt  not  follow,  nor  be 
led  by  them? 

Anfwer.    I  renounce  them  all. 
Minijier. 

DOST  thou  believe  in  God  the 
Father  Almighty,  Maker  of 
heaven  and  earth? 

And  in  Jefus  Chrift  his  only-be- 
gotten Son  our  Lord?  And  that  he 
was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghoft; 


Private  Baptifm  of  Infants. 


born  of  tlie  ^^iroin  Mary;  that  he 
fufferecl  under  Vontius  Pilate,  was 
crucified,  dead,  and  buried;  that  he 
went  down  into  hell,  and  alfo  did 
rife  again  the  third  day;  that  he 
afcended  into  heaven,  and  fitteth 
at  the  riii'lit  liand  of  God  the  Fa- 
ther  Ahniohtv;  and  from  thence 
lliall  come  aoain  at  the  end  of 
the  world,  to  judge  the  quick  and 
the  dead? 

And  doft  thou  believe  in  the 
Holv  Gholl ;  the  holy  Catholick 
Church;  the  Connnuuion  of  Saints; 
the  llemidion  of  iins  ;  the  llefur- 
redlion  of  the  fleilr;  and  everlaft- 
ing  life  after  death? 

Anjher.  All  this  I  ftedfaftly  be- 
lieve. 

jSIimJicr. 

WILT   thou    then   obediently 
keep  God's   holy  will   and 
commandments,  and  walk  in  the 
fame  all  the  days  of  thy  life? 
Anfwer.    I  will. 

^  Then  the  Priest  shall  sat/, 

WE    receive    this    Child    into 
the  congregation  of  C  hrift's 

*Here  the  Priest  ^^^ck,  *  aud  do  figU 
shall  make  a  Cross  llWl  witll  the  figU  of 
^n^^'^theChMsforc-    j.|j^,    Q.^f'^^    J^^    fy].^,,^ 

that  hereafter //<"  fliall 
not  be  afliained  to  confefs  the  faith 
of  Chrift  crucified,  and  manfully 
to  fight  under  his  banner,  againll 
fin,  the  Avorld,  and  the  devil ;  and 
to  continue  Chriirs  faithful  Ibldicr 


and  fervant    unto  his   life's    end. 
Amen. 

5[  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 

SEEING  now,  dearly  beloved 
brethren,  that  this  Child  is  by 
Baptifin  regenerate,  and  grafted 
into  the  body  of  Chrifl;"s  Church, 
let  us  give  thanks  unto  Almighty 
God  for  thefe  benefits ;  and  with 
one  accord  make  our  prayers  un- 
to him,  that  he  may  lead  the  reft 
of  his  life  according  to  this  be- 
ginning. 

51  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 

WE  yield  thee  moft  hearty 
thanks,  moft  merciful  Fa- 
ther, that  it  hath  pleafed  thee  to 
regenerate  this  Infant  with  thy 
holy  Spirit,  to  receive  him  for  thine 
own  Child  by  ado])tion,  and  to  in- 
corporate him  into  thy  holy  Church. 
And  humbly  we  befeech  thee  to 
grant,  that  he  being  dead  unto  fin, 
and  living  imto  righteoufnefs,  and 
beino-  bmied  with  Chrift  in  his 
death,  may  crucify  the  old  man, 
and  utterly  abolifh  the  whole  bo- 
dy of  fin  ;  and  that,  as  he  is  made 
partaker  of  the  death  of  thy  Son, 
he  may  alfo  be  partaker  of  Iiis  re- 
furrec^tion ;  fo  that  finally,  with  the 
refidue  of  thy  holy  C  hurch,  he  may 
be  an  inheritor  of  thine  cverlafting 
kingdom ;  throuirh  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Ijord.    ylmen. 

51  Then,  all  slandin'^  up,  the  Minister  shall  make  this 
K.ihorlation  to  the  (jodfathers  anil  Godmothers. 

ORASMUCIT  as  this  Child 
hath  promifed  by  you  his  fure- 


F 


Private  Baptifm  (rf'  Infants. 


ties  to  renounce  the  devil  and  all 
his  works,  to  believe  in  God,  and 
to  ferve  him ;  ye  muft  remember, 
that  it  is  your  parts  and  duties  to 
fee  that  this'  Infant  be  taught,  fo 
foon  as  he  lliall  be  able  to  learn, 
what  a  folemn  vow,  promife,  and 
profeflion  he  hath  made  by  you. 
And  that  he  may  know  thefe  things 
the  better,  ye  lliall  call  upon  him 
to  hear  Sermons  ;  and  chiefly  ye 
(hall  ])rovide,  that  he  may  learn 
the  Creed,  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and 
the  Ten  Commandments,  in  the 
vulgar  tongue,  and  all  other  things 
which  a  Chriftian  ought  to  know 
and  believe  to  his  foul's  health ; 
and  that  this  Child  may  be  virtu- 
oufly  brought  up  to  lead  a  godly 
and  a  chriilian  life  ;  remembering 
alway,  that  Baptifm  doth  reprefent 
unto  us  our  })rofeflion ;  which  is, 


to  follow  the  example  of  our  Savi- 
our CIniil,  and  to  be  made  like 
unto  him  ;  that,  as  he  died,  and 
role  again  for  us,  fo  Ihould  we, 
who  are  baptized,  die  from  (in, 
and  rife  again  unto  righteoufnefs ; 
continually  mortifying  all  our  evil 
and  corrupt  affections,  and  daily 
])roceeding  in  all  virtue  and  god- 
linefs  of  living. 


II  But  if  t/iei/  which  bring  the  Infant  to  the  Church 
do  make  such  uncertain  auszvers  to  the  Priesfs  ques- 
tions, as  that  it  cannot  appear  that  the  Child  by/s 
baptized  zcith  Water,  In  the  Name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  {tthich 
are  essential  parts  of  Baptism,)  then  let  the  Priest 
baptize  it  in  the  form  before  appointed  for  Pub- 
lick  Baptism  of  Infants;  saving  that  at  the  dipping 
of  the  Child  in  the  Font,  he  shall  use  this  form  of 
words. 

F  thou  art  not  already  baptized, 
N.  I  baptize  thee  In  the  Name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Floly  Ghoii    iVmen. 


THE  MINISTRATION  OF 


BAPTISM  to  fuch  as  are  of  RIPER  YEARS, 

AND  ABLE  TO  ANSWER  FOR  THEMSELVES. 


If  IFIieu  amj  such,  pemon-'i,  as  are  of  riper  years,  are  to  he  baptized,  time/i/  7totice  shall  be  given  to 
the  Bishop,  or  whom  he  shall  appoint Jor  that  purpose,  a  zreek  before  at  the  least,  by  the  Parents, 
or  some  other  discreet  persons ;  that  so  due  care  may  be  taken  for  their  Examination,  -whether 
they  be  sufficicnth/  instructed  in  the  Principles  of  the  Christian  Religion;  and  that  they  may 
be  e.vhortcd  to  prepare  themselves  with  Prayers  and  Fasting  for  the  receiving  of  this  holy 
Sacrament. 

^  And  if  they  shall  be  found  ft,  then  the  Godfathers  and  Godmothers  (the  people  being  assembled 
upon  the  Sunday  or  Holy-dai/  appointed)  shall  be  ready  to  present  them  at  the  Font  immediately 
after  the  second  Lesson,  either  at  Morning  or  Evening  Prayer,  as  the  Curate  in  his  discretion 
shall  think  ft. 

•[  And  .standing  there,  the  Priest  shall  ask,  z-vhether  any  rf  the  persons  here  presented  be  baptized, 
or  no :  If  they  shall  ansicer,  No ;  then  shall  the  Priest  say  thus, 


DEARLY  beloved,  forafmuch 
as  all  men  are  conceived  and 
born  in  fin,  (and  that  which  is.  born 
of  the  flefh  is  liefli,)  and  they  that 
are  in  the  flefli  cannot  pleafe  God, 
but  live  in  fin,  committing  many 
actual  tranfgreffions ;  and  that  our 
Saviour  Chrifl:  faith,  None  can  en- 
ter into  the  kingdom  of  God,  ex- 
cept he  be  regenerate  and  born 
anew  of  Water  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft;  I  befeech  you  to  call  upon 
God  the  Father,  through  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrifi;,  that  of  his  bounte- 
ous goodnefs  he  vnW  grant  to  thcfe 
perfons  that  which  by  nature  they 
cannot  have ;  that  they  may  be 
baptized  with  Water  and  the  holy 
(ihofi;,  and  received  into  Chrifi's 
holy  Church,  and  be  made  lively 
members  of  the  fame. 


^  Tlien  shall  the  Priest  say, 

Let  us  pray. 

(^  And  here  all  the  Congregation  shall  kneel.) 

AL  M I G  H 1^  Y  ^  and  everlafting 
God,  who  of  thy  great  mercy 
didfl;  fave  Noah  and  his  family  in 
the  ark  from  perifliing  by  water ; 
and  alfo  didfl;  fafely  lead  the  chil- 
dren of  Ifrael  thy  people  through 
the  Red  Sea,  figuring  thereby  thy 
holy  Baptifm ;  and  by  the  Baptifm 
of  thy  well-beloved  Son  Jefus 
Chrifl,  in  the  river  Jordan,  didfl; 
fantHify  the  element  of  water  to 
the  myftical  walhing  away  of  fin ; 
We  befeech  thee,  for  thine  infinite 
mercies,  that  thou  wilt  mercifiilly 
lool^  upon  thf^'e  x\\y  fervants ;  wafli 
them  and  fanc^lify  them  with  the 
holy  Ghoft,  that  they,  being  deli- 
vered   from    thy  wrath,    may  be 


Piiblick  Baptifm  qffach 

received  into  the  ark  of  Clirifl's 
Church;  and  being  lledfaft  in  faith, 
joyful  tlu-ough  hope,  and  rooted  in 
charity,  may  fo  pafs  the  waves  of 
tliis  troublefome  world,  that  finally 
theij  may  come  to  the  land  of 
everlalting  life,  there  to  reign  with 
thee  world  without  end ;  through 
Jefus  Chriil  our  Lord.    Amen. 

ALMIGHTY  and  immortal 
God,  the  aid  of  all  that  need, 
the  helper  of  all  that  flee  to  thee 
for  fuccour,  the  life  of  them  that 
believe,  and  the  refurredlion  of  the 
dead ;  We  call  upon  thee  for  thefe 
pcrfona,  that  they,  coming  to  thy 
holy  Baptifm,  may  receive  remif- 
fion  of  their  fins  by  fpiritual  rege- 
neration. Receive  them,  O  Lord, 
as  thou  haft  promifed  by  thy  well- 
beloved  Son,  faying,  Aflc,  and  ye 
ftiall  receive ;  feek,  and  ye  fliall 
find;  knock,  and  it  Ihall  be  open- 
ed unto  you :  So  give  now  unto  us 
that  alk ;  let  us  that  feek  find ; 
open  the  gate  unto  us  that  knock ; 
that  thefe  perfons  may  enjoy  the 
everlafting  benedi6lion  of  thy  hea- 
venly walhing,  and  may  come  to 
the  eternal  kingdom  which  thou 
haft  promifed  by  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

If  Then  shall  the  people  stand  up,  and  the  Priest 
shall  saif, 

Hear  the  words  of  the  Gofpel, 
written  by  Saint  John,  in  the 
third  Chapter,  beginning  at  the 
firft  Veife. 


as  are  of  Riper  Years. 

THP2RE  was  a  man  of  the  Pha- 
rifees,  named  Nicodemus,  a 
ruler  of  the  Jews.  The  fame  came 
to  Jefus  by  night,  and  faid  unto 
him,  Rabbi,  we  know  that  thou 
art  a  teacher  come  from  God  ;  for 
no  man  can  do  thefe  miracles  that 
thou  doeft,  except  God  be  with 
him.  Jefus  anfwered  and  faid  un- 
to him.  Verily,  verily  I  fay  unto 
thee,  Except  a  man  be  born  again, 
he  cannot  fee  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Nicodemus  faith  unto  him.  How 
can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  old? 
Can  he  enter  the  fecond  time  into 
his  mother's  womb,  and  be  born? 
Jefus  anfwered,  ^  erily,  verily  I  fay 
unto  thee.  Except  a  man  be  born 
of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  can- 
not enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 
That  which  is  born  of  the  flelh  is 
flefli ;  and  that  which  is  born  of 
the  Spirit  is  fpirit.  Marvel  not  that 
I  faid  unto  thee.  Ye  muft  be  born 
again.  The  wind  bloweth  where 
it  lifteth,  and  thou  heareft  the  found 
thereof;  but  canft  not  tell  whence 
it  cometh,  and  whither  it  goeth : 
fo  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the 
Spirit. 

^  After  which  he  shall  say  this  Exhortation  following. 

BELOVED,  ye  hear  in  this 
Gofpel  the  exprefs  words  of 
our  Saviour  Chrift,  that  except  a 
man  be  born  of  water  and  of  the 
Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  God.  Whereby  ye  may 
perceive  the  great  neceflity  of  this 
Dd 


Puhlick  Baptifm  offuch 

Sacrament,  where  it  may  be  had. 
Like\vife,  immediately  before  his 
afcenfion  into  lieaven,  (as  we  read 
in  tlie  U\ft  Chapter  of  Saint  Mark's 
Gofpel,)  lie  gave  command  to  his 
difciples,  faying,  Go  ye  into  all  the 
world,  and  jsreach  the  Gofpel  to 
every  creature.  He  that  belie veth 
and  is  baptized  fliall  be  faved ; 
but  he  that  beiieveth  not  fliall  be 
daimied.  \\  liich  alfo  flieweth  unto 
us  the  great  benefit  we  reap  there- 
by. For  which  caufe  Saint  Peter 
the  Apoftle,  when  upon  his  firft 
preaching  of  the  Gofpel  many  were 
pricked  at  the  heart,  and  faid  to 
him  and  the  reft  of  the  Apoftles, 
Men  and  brethren,  what  (hall  we 
do?  replied  and  faid  unto  them, 
Repent,  and  lie  ba})tized  every 
one  of  you  for  the  remiflion  of 
fins,  and  ye  fliall  receive  the  gift 
of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  For  the  pro- 
mife  is  to  you  and  your  children, 
and  to  all  that  are  afar  oft',  even 
as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God 
fliall  call.  And  \\\\\\  many  other 
words  exhorted  he  them,  faying. 
Save  yourfelves  from  this  untoward 
generation.  For  (as  the  fame  A- 
poftle  teftifieth  in  another  j)lace) 
even  liaptifin  doth  alfo  now  fave 
us,  (not  the  putting  away  of  the 
filth  of  the  flcfli,  but  the  aiifwer  of 
a  good  confcience  towards  (iod,) 
by  the  rcfurredtion  of  Jcfus  Chrill. 
l)oul)t  ye  not  therefore,  but  ear- 
iieltly  believe,  that  he  will  favour- 


as  are  of  Rijoer  Years. 

ably  receive  tJufc  prefent  pcrfons, 
truly  repenting,  and  coming  unto 
him  by  faith ;  that  he  will  grant 
them  remiflion  of  their  fins,  and 
beftow  upon  them  the  holy  Ghoft ; 
that  he  will  give  them  the  blefling 
of  eternal  life,  and  make  tliem  par- 
takers of  his  everlaftino-  kingdom. 
Wherefore  we  being  thus  per- 
fuaded  of  the  good  will  of  our 
heavenly  Father  towards  thefe  per- 
fons,  declared  by  his  Son  Jefus 
Chrift ;  let  us  faithfully  and  devout- 
ly give  thanks  to  Inm,  and  fay, 
ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  heavenly  Father,  we  give 
thee  humble  thanks,  for  that  thou 
haft  vouchfafed  to  call  us  to  the 
knowledge  of  thy  grace,  and  faith 
in  thee  :  Increafe  this  knowledge, 
and  confirm  this  fiiitli  in  us  ever- 
more. Give  thy  holy  Spirit  to  thefe 
per  fons,  that  they  may  be  born  a- 
gain,  and  be  made  heirs  of  ever- 
lafting falvation;  through  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift,  who  liveth  and  reign- 
eth  with  thee  and  the  Holy  Spirit, 
now  and  for  ever.    Amen. 

^  Then  the  Priest  shall  speak  to  the  persons  to  he 
baptized  OH  this  zcise : 

WELL-beloved,  who  are  come 
hither  dcfirino-  to  receive 
holy  l>aptifin,  j/e  have  heard  how 
the  congregation  hath  prayed,  that 
our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  would  vouch- 
fafe  to  receive  you  and  blefs  you, 
to  releafe  you  of  your  fins,  to  give 
you  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and 


Piiblick  Baptifm  offuc 

everlafting"  life.  Yc  have  heard 
alfo,  that  our  Lord  Jefiis  Chrifl 
hath  promifed  in  his  holy  Word  to 
grant  all  thofe  things  that  we  have 
prayed  for;  whicli  promife  he,  for 
his  part,  will  moll  Jlirely  keep  and 
perform. 

Wherefore,  after  this  promife 
made  by  Chrift,  yc  muil  alfo  faith- 
fully, for  your  part,  promife  in  the 
prefence  of  thefe  your  Witneffes, 
and  this  whole  congregation,  that 
ye  will  renounce  the  devil  and  all 
his  works,  and  conftantly  believe 
God's  holy  word,  and  obediently 
keep  his  commandments. 

%  Then  shall  the  Priest  demand  of  each  of  the  per- 
sons to  he  baptized,  severally,  these  Questions  fol- 
lowins: 

o 

Que  ft  ion. 

DOST  thou  renounce  the  devil 
and  all  his  works,  the  vain 
pomp  and  gloiy  of  the  world,  with 
all  covetous  defires  of  the  fame, 
and  the  carnal  delires  of  the  flefli, 
fo  that  thou  wilt  not  follow,  nor 
be  led  by  them? 

Aufwer.    I  renounce  them  all. 

Quejfion. 

DOST  thou  believe  in  God  the 
Father  Almighty,  Maker  of 
heaven  and  earth? 

And  in  Jefus  Chrift  his  only-be- 
gotten Son  our  Lord?  And  that  he 
was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 
born  of  the  Virgin  Mary ;  that  he 
fuffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  was 
crucified,  dead,  and  buried;  that 


li  as  are  of  Riper  Years. 

he  went  down  into  hell,  and  alfo 
did  rife  again  the  third  day;  that 
he  afcended  hito  heaven,  and  fit- 
teth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the 
Father  Almighty;  and  from  thence 
fliall  come  again  at  the  end  of  the 
world,  to  judge  the  quick  and  the 
dead? 

And  doft  thou  believe  in  the 
Holy  Ghoft ;  the  holy  Cathoiick 
Church;  the  Communion  of  Saints; 
the  Remifllon  of  fins  ;  the  Refur- 
redlion  of  the  flefli ;  and  everlaft- 
ing life  after  death? 

Anfwer.  All  this  I  ftedfaftly  be- 
lieve. 

Quejlum. 

WILT  thou  be  baptized  in  this 
faith? 
Anfwer.  That  is  my  defire. 
Qucjlion. 

WILT  thou  then  obediently 
keep  God's  holy  will  and 
conmiandments,  and  walk  in  the 
fame  afl  the  days  of  thy  life? 

Anfwer.  I  will  endeavour  fo  to 
do,  God  being  my  helper. 

^  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 

O  Merciful  God,  grant  diat  the 
old  Adam  in  thefe pcrfons  may 
be  fo  buried,  that  the  new  man 
may  be  raifed  up  in  them.  Aincn. 
Grant  that  all  carnal  aftec^ions 
may  die  in  them,  and  that  all  diings 
belonging  to  the  Spirit  may  live 
and  grow  in  them.    Amen. 

Grant  that  they  may  have  power 
and  ftrength  to  have  vi6toiy,  and 
Dd  a 


Publick  Baptifm  offucli  as  are  of  Riper  Years. 


to  triumph,  againft  the  devil,  the 
world,  and  the  flelh.    Amen. 

Grant  that  they,  being  here  de- 
dicated to  thee  by  our  office  and 
nimilliy,  may  alfo  be  endued  with 
heavenly  virtues,  and  everlaftingly 
rewarded,  through  thy  mercy,  O 
blefled  Lord  God,  who  doll  live, 
and  govern  all  things,  world  \vith- 
out  end.    Amen. 

ALMIGHTY,  everliving  God, 
wliofe  moft  dearly  beloved  Son 
Jefus  Chrili;,  for  the  forgivenefs  of 
our  fins,  did  fhed  out  of  his  moll 
jDrecious  fide  both  water  and  blood, 
and  gave  commandment  to  his  dif- 
ciples,  that  they  fliould  go  teach 
all  nations,  and  baptize  them  In 
the  Name  of  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  GhoU ;  Regard,  we 
befeech  thee,  the  fupplications  of 
this  congregation;  fan6tify  this  Wa- 
ter to  the  myftical  wafliing  away 
of  fin ;  and  grant  that  the  perjons 
now  to  be  baptized  therein  may 
receive  the  fulnefs  of  thy  grace, 
and  ever  remain  in  the  number 
of  thy  faithful  and  ele(5l  children, 
through  Jefus  Chrill  our  Lord. 
yimen. 

H  Then  shall  the  Priest  take  each  person  to  be  bap- 
tized 1)1/  the  right  hand,  and  placing  him.  coineid- 
entltf  hij  the  Font,  according  to  his  discretion,  shall 
ask  the  Godfathers  and  Godmothers  the  Name;  and 
then  shall  dip  him  in  the  neater,  or  pour  xcatcr  upon 
him,  saying, 

NI  baptize  thee  In  the  Name 
•  of  the  leather,  and  of  the 
Son,  andofthcIIolyGlioll.  Amen. 


%  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 

E  receive  this  peifon  into 
the  congregation  of  Chrill's 
flock ;  *  and  do  fimi      ..„     ,;    n    . 

'  o  *  Here  the  Priest 

Jum  with  the  fign  of   shall  make  a   Cross 

the  Crofs,  in  token  ".P^^^jj"  p'''""'' 
that  hereafter //c  111  all  " 
not  be  alliamed  to  confefs  the  faith 
of  Chriil  crucified,  and  manfully 
to  fight  under  his  banner,  agaiiift 
fin,  the  world,  and  the  devil ;  and 
to  continue  Chrift's  faithful  foldier 
and  fervant  unto  his  life's  end. 
Amen. 

^  Then  shall  the  Priest  say, 

SEEING  now,  dearly  beloved 
brethren,  that  fhej'e  pcrfons 
are  regenerate,  and  grafted  into 
the  body  of  Chrifl's  Church,  let  us 
give  thanks  unto  iVlmighty  God  for 
thefe  benefits,  and  with  one  accord 
make  our  prayers  unto  him,  that 
they  may  lead  the  reft  of  their  life 
according;  to  this  bemnnino-. 

^  Then  shall  he  said  the  Lord's  Prayer,  all  kneeling. 

OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven. Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpaifes.  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil.     vVmen. 

WE  yield  thee  humble  thanks, 
(  )  heavenly  Father,  that  thou 
haft  vouchfafed  to  call  us  to  the 


Pitblick  Baj)tifm  offach  as  are  of  Riper  Years. 


knowledge  of  thy  grace,  and  ftiitli 
in  thee  ;  Increafe  this  knowledge, 
and  coniinn  this  faith  in  us  ever- 
more. Give  thy  holy  Spirit  to 
thefe perj'ons ;  that,  being  now  born 
again,  and  made  heirs  of  everlall- 
ing  falvation,  through  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift,  they  may  continue 
thy  fervants,  and  attain  thy  pro- 
mifes ;  through  the  fame  Lord  Je- 
fus Chrift  thy  Son,  who  liveth  and 
reigneth  with  thee,  in  the  unity  of 
the  fame  Holy  Spirit,  everlaftingly. 
Amen. 

IT  Then,  all  standing  up,  the  Priest  shall  use  this  Ex- 
hortation follomng ;  speaking  to  the  Godfathers  and 
Godmothers  first. 

FORASMUCH  as  thefe  perfons 
have  promifed  in  your  pre- 
fence  to  renounce  the  devil  and  all 
his  works,  to  believe  in  God,  and 
to  ferve  him ;  ye  muft  remember, 
that  it  is  your  part  and  duty  to 
put  them  in  mind,  what  a  folemn 
vow,  promife,  and  profeflion  they 
hmie  now  made  before  this  conore- 
gation,  and  efpecially  before  you 
their  chofen  witneffes.  And  ye  are 
alfo  to  call  upon  them  to  ufe  all 


diligence  to  be  rightly  inftru6ted 
in  Ciod's  holy  Word ;  that  fo  they 
may  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  and  live  godly,  nghteoufly, 
and  foberly  in  this  prefent  world. 

(^  And  then,  speaking  to  the  new  baptized  persons,  he 
shall  proceed,  and  say,) 

AND  as  for  you,  who  have  now 
by  Baptifm  put  on  Chrift,  it 
is  your  part  and  duty  alfo,  being 
made  the  children  of  God  and  of 
the  light,  by  faith  in  Jefus  Chrift, 
to  walk  anfwerably  to  your  Chrif- 
tian  calling,  and  as  becometh  the 
children  of  light ;  remembering  al- 
ways that  Baptifm  reprefenteth  un- 
to us  our  profeflion  ;  which  is,  to 
follow  the  example  of  our  Saviour 
Chrift,  and  to  be  made  like  unto 
him ;  that  as  he  died,  and  rofe 
again  for  us ;  fo  (liould  we,  who 
are  baptized,  die  from  fin,  and  rife 
again  unto  righteoufnefs ;  continu- 
ally mortifying  all  our  evil  and 
corrupt  afte6tions,  and  daily  pro- 
ceeding in  all  virtue  and  godlinefs 
of  living. 


IT  It  is  cvpedient  that  every  person,  thus  baptized,  should  be  cmifii-mcd  bi/  the  Bishop  so  soon  after 
his  Baptism  as  co?ivenientlt/  may  be;  that  so  he  may  be  admitted  to  the  holy  Commiuiion. 

%  If  any  persons  not  baptized  in  their  infancy  shall  be  brought  to  be  baptized  be/ore  they  come  to 
years  cf  discretion  to  anstverfor  themselves  ;  it  may  suffice  to  use  the  Office  J  or  Publicfc  Baptism 
of  Infants,  or  {in  case  of  extreme  danger)  the  Office  for  Private  Baptism  ;  only  changing  the 
zvord  [Infantjybr  [Child  or  Person]  as  occasion  requireth. 


A    CATECHISM, 

THAT    IS    TO    S  A  V, 

AN  INSTRUCTION  TO  BE  LEARNED  OF  EVERY  PERSON,  BEFORE  HE  BE 
BROUGHT  TO  BE  CONFIRMED  BY  THE  BISHOP. 


Quejiion. 

WHAT  is  your  Name? 
Anjwer.  N.  or  M. 

QuejL  \\  ho  gave  you  this  Name? 

AuJ'w.  My  Godfathers  and  God- 
mothers ill  my  Baptifm  ;  wherein 
I  was  made  a  member  of  Chrill, 
the  child  of  God,  and  an  inheritor 
of  the  kino-dom  of  lieaven. 

Queft.  What  cUd  your  Godfa- 
thers and  Godmothers  then  for 
you? 

Anfw.  Tliey  did  promife  and 
vow  three  thinos  in  my  name. 
Fiiil,  that  I  fhould  renounce  the 
devil  and  all  his  works,  the  pomps 
and  vanity  of  this  wicked  world, 
and  all  the  fiiiful  lulls  of  the  liefli. 
Secondly,  that  I  fliould  believe  all 
the  Aiticles  of  the  Chriltian  Faith. 
And  thirdly,  that  I  fliould  keep 
God's  holy  will  and  command- 
ments, and  walk  in  the  fame  all 
the  days  of  my  life. 

Qucfl.  Doll  thou  not  think  that 
thou  art  bound  to  believe,  and 
to  do,  as  they  have  promifed  for 
thee? 

Anfw.  Yes  verilv ;  and  by  God's 
helpfo  I  will.  And  I  heartily  thank 
our  heavenly  Father,  that  he  hath 
called  me  to  this  Hate  of  falvation, 


through  Jefus  Chrill  our  Saviour. 
And  I  pray  unto  God  to  give  me 
his  grace,  that  I  may  continue  in 
the  fame  unto  my  life's  end. 
Catechijl. 
Rehearfe  the  Articles  of  thy 
Belief. 

Anfwer. 

1  Believe  in  God  the  Father  Al- 
mighty, JMaker  of  heaven  and 
earth : 

And  in  Jefus  Clirift  his  only  Son 
our  Lord,  Who  was  conceived  by 
the  Holy  Ghoft,  Born  of  the  A  ir- 
giii  Mary,  Suffered  under  Pontius 
Pilate,  Was  crucified,  dead,  and 
buried.  He  defcended  into  hell ; 
The  third  day  he  rofe  again  from 
the  dead.  He  afcended  into  hea- 
ven. And  fitteth  at  the  right  hand 
of  God  the  Father  Almighty;  From 
thence  he  fliall  come  to  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead. 

I  believe  in  the  l^Ioly  Ghoft ; 
The  holy  Catholick  Clnu'ch  ;  Ihe 
Communion  of  Saints  ;  I'lie  For- 
li'ivenefs  of  fins :  The  Rcfurred^ion 
of  the  body;  And  the  life  everlatt- 
ino-.    yVnieii. 

^Qhc/L  What  (loft  thou  chiefly 
learn  in  thefe  Articles  of  thy  Belief? 

Anfw.  Firft,  1  learn  to  believe  in 


A  Cateclufm. 

God  the  Father,  wlio  hath  made 
me,  and  all  the  world. 

Secondly,  in  God  the  Son,  who 
liath  redeemed  me,  and  all  man- 
kind. 

Thirdly,  in  God  the  Holy  Ghoft, 
who  iancvlifieth    me,   and  all   the 
elec^l  people  of  God. 
Quejiion. 

Yon  faid,  that  yonr  Godfathers 
and  Godmothers  did  promife  for 
yon,  that  yon  llionld  keep  God's 
Commandments.  Tell  me  how 
many  there  be? 

Anfwer.    Ten. 

Quejiion.  Which  be  they? 
Anfwer. 

THE  fame  which  God  fpake 
in  the  twentieth  Chapter  of 
Exodns,  faying,  I  am  the  Lord 
thy  God,  w^ho  bronght  thee  ont 
of  the  land  of  Egypt,  ont  of  the 
honfe  of  bondage 


I. 

Thon  flialt  have  none  other  gods 
bnt  me. 

H. 

Thon  fhalt  not  make  to  thyfelf 
any  graven  image,  nor  the  likenefs 
of  any  thing  that  is  in  heaven 
above,  or  in  the  earth  beneath, 
or  in  the  water  nnder  the  earth. 
Thon  ftialt  not  bow  down  to  them, 
nor  worfliip  them :  for  I  the  Lord 
thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  and 
vifit  the  fins  of  the  fathers  upon 
the  children,  unto  the  third  and 
fourth   generation    of  them    that 


hate  me,  and  fhew  mercy  unto 
thonfands  in  them  that  love  me, 
and  keep  my  commandments. 

Thon  ihalt  not  take  the  Name 

of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain :  for 

the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  gnilt- 

lefs  that  taketh  his  Name  in  vain. 

IV. 

Remember  that  thou  keep  holy 
the  Sabbath-day.  Six  days  flialt 
thou  labour,  and  do  all  that  thou 
haft  to  do ;  but  the  feventh  day  is 
the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God. 
In  it  thou  flialt  do  no  manner  of 
work,  thou,  and  thy  foil,  and  thy 
daughter,  thy  man-fervant,  and  thy 
maid-fervant,  thy  cattle,  and  the 
ftranger  that  is  within  thy  gates. 
For  in  fix  days  the  Lord  made 
heaven  and  earth,  the  fea,  and  all 
that  in  them  is,  and  refted  the  fe- 
venth day  •  wherefore  the  Lord 
blefled  the  feventh  day,  and  hal- 
lowed it.  jr 

Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mo- 
ther, that  thy  days  may  be  long  in 
the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God 
givetli  thee.       ttt 

Thou  flialt  do  no  murder. 

VH. 
Thou  flialt  not  commit  adulteiy. 

VUL 
Thou  flialt  not  fteal. 

IX. 
Thou  flialt  not  bear  falfe  witnefs 
againft  thy  neighbour. 


X. 

Thou  Ihalt  not  covet  thy  neigh- 
bour's houfe,  thou  flialt  not  covet 
tliy  neighbom*'s  wife,  nor  his  fer- 
vant,  nor  his  maid,  nor  his  ox,  nor 
his  afs,  nor  any  thing  that  is  his. 
Quejiion. 

What  doft  thon  chieflv  learn  by 
thefe  connnandments  ? 

Anfw.  I  learn  two  things  :  my 
duty  towards  God,  and  my  duty 
towards  my  Neighbour. 

Que/i.  What  is  thy  duty  towards 
God?  ' 

A)ifw.  My  duty  towards  God, 
is  to  believe  in  him,  to  fear  him, 
and  to  love  him  with  all  my  heart, 
with  all  my  mind,  with  all  my  foul, 
and  with  all  my  ftrength ;  to  wor- 
fliip  liun,  to  give  him  thanks,  to 
put  my  whole  truft  in  him,  to  call 
upon  him,  to  honour  his  holy  Name 
and  his  Word,  and  to  ferve  him 
ti*uly  all  the  days  of  my  life. 

QueJL  What  is  thy  duty  towards 
thy  Neighbour? 

Anfw.  My  duty  towards  my 
Neighbour,  is  to  love  him  as  my- 
felf,  and  to  do  to  all  men,  as  I 
would  they  fliould  do  unto  me : 
To  love,  honoiu*,  and  fuccour  my 
father  and  mother :  To  honour  and 
obey  the  King,  and  all  that  are  put 
in  authority  imder  him :  To  fubmit 
myfelf  to  all  my  governours,  teach- 
ers, fpiritual  pallors  and  mailers : 
To  order  myfelf  lowly  and  reve- 
rently to  all  my  betters :  to  hurt 


A  Cateclufm. 

no  body  by  word  nor  deed  :  To  be 
true  and  juft  in  all  my  dealing : 
To  bear  no  malice  nor  hatred  in 
ni}'  heart :  To  keep  my  hands  from 
picking  and  ftealing,  and  my  tongue 
from  evil-fpeaking,  lying,  and  flan- 
dering  :  To  keep  my  body  in  tem- 
perance, fobernefs,  and  chaftity: 
Not  to  covet  nor  delire  other  men's 
goods ;  but  to  learn  and  labour 
truly  to  get  mine  own  living,  and 
to  do  my  duty  in  that  Hate  of  life, 
unto  which  it  Ihall  pleafe  God  to 
call  me. 

Catechijl. 
]\Iy  good  Child,  know  this,  that 
thou  art  not  able  to  do  thefe 
things  of  thyfelf,  nor  to  walk  in 
the  Commandments  of  God,  and 
to  ferve  him,  without  his  fpecial 
grace ;  which  thou  nmft  learn  at 
all  times  to  call  for  by  diligent 
prayer.  Let  me  hear  therefore,  if 
thou  canft  fay  the  Lord's  Prayer. 

AnJ'wer. 
^"VUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 


ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  tref})aires,  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainll  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil.    Amen. 

QncJL  What  defirell  thou  of  God 
in  this  Prayer? 

Anfw,    I  delire  my  Lord  God 


our  heavenly  Father,  who  is  the 
giver  of  all  goodnefs,  to  fend  his 
grace  unto  me,  and  to  all  peoj3le ; 
that  we  may  worfliip  him,  ferve 
hinij  and  obey  him,  as  we  ought 
to  do.  And  1  pray  unto  God,  that 
he  will  fend  us  all  things  that  be 
needful  both  for  our  fouls  and 
bodies;  and  that  he  will  be  mer- 
ciful unto  us,  and  forgive  us  our 
fins ;  and  that  it  will  pleafe  him  to 
fave  and  defend  us  in  all  dangers 
ghoftly  and  bodily;  and  that  he  will 
keep  us  from  all  fin  and  mcked- 
nefs,  and  from  our  ghoftly  enemy, 
and  from  everlafting  death.  And 
this  I  truft  he  will  do  of  his  mercy 
and  goodnefs,  through  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift.  And  therefore  I  fay, 
Amen,  So  be  it. 

Queftion. 

HOW  many  Sacraments  hath 
Chrift  ordained  in  his  Church? 

Anfw.  Two  only,  as  generally 
necelfary  to  falvation,  that  is  to 
fay,  Baptifm,  and  the  Supper  of 
the  Lord. 

QuejL  What  meaneft  thou  by 
this  word  Sacrament  f 

Aufw.  I  mean  an  outward  and 
vifible  fign  of  an  inward  and  fpiri- 
tual  grace  given  unto  us,  ordain- 
ed by  Chrift  himfelf,  as  a  means 
whereby  we  receive  the  fame,  and 
a  pledge  to  affure  us  thereof. 

Qiiejl.  How  many  parts  are  there 
in  a  Sacrament? 

Anfw.    Two;  the  outward  vifi- 


A  Catechifm, 

ble  fign,  and  the  inward  fpiritual 


grace. 


Qiwft.  What  is  the  outward  vi- 
fible fign  or  form  in  Ikiptifm? 

Anfw.  Water ;  wherein  the  j)er- 
fon  is  baptized  In  the  Name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft. 

Queji.  What  is  the  inward  and 
fpiritual  grace? 

Anfw.  A  death  unto  fin,  and  a 
new  birth  unto  riohteoufnefs  :  for 
being  by  nature  born  in  fin,  and 
the  children  of  wrath,  we  are  here- 
by made  the  children  of  grace. 

QueJi.  What  is  required  of  per- 
fons  to  be  baptized? 

Anfw.  Repentance,  whereby 
they  foi*fake  fin ;  and  Faith,  where- 
by they  ftedfaftly  believe  the  pro- 
mifes  of  God  made  to  them  in 
that  Sacrament. 

Quefl.  Why  then  are  Infants 
baptized,  when  by  reafon  of  their 
tender  age  they  cannot  perform 
them? 

Anfw.  Becaufe  they  promife 
them  both  by  their  Sureties ;  which 
promife,  when  they  come  to  age, 
themfelves  are  bound  to  perform. 

Queft.  Why  was  the  Sacrament 
of  the  Lord's  Supper  ordained? 

Anfw.  For  the  continual  re- 
membrance of  the  facrifice  of  the 
death  of  Chrift,  and  of  the  benefits 
which  we  receive  thereby. 

QueJl.  What  is  the  outward  part 
or  fign  of  the  Lord's  Supper? 
Ee 


A  Catcc/tifin. 


Anfic.  Bread  and  Wine,  which 
the  Lord  hath  commanded  to  be 
received. 

Quefl.  What  is  the  inward  part, 
or  thino'  fionified? 

Anjw.  The  Body  and  Blood  of 
Chrill,  which  are  verily  and  indeed 
taken  and  received  by  the  faithful 
in  the  Lord's  Supper. 

Quejf.  What  are  the  benefits 
whereof  we  are  partakers  there- 
by ? 

Aufw.    The  ftrengthening  and 


refrefliinof  of  our  fouls  l^v  the  Bo- 
dy  and  Blood  of  Chrift,  as  our  bo- 
dies are  by  the  Bread  and  \\^ine. 

Quejl.  What  is  recjuired  of  them 
who  come  to  the  Lord's  Supper? 

AnJw.  To  examine  themfelves, 
whether  they  repent  them  truly  of 
their  foiiner  fins,  ftedfaftly  purpof- 
ingf  to  lead  a  new  life ;  have  a  live- 
ly  faith  in  God's  mercy  through 
Chrift,  with  a  than]<ful  remem- 
brance of  his  death ;  and  be  in 
charity  with  all  men. 


H  T}xt  Curate  of  every  Parish  shall  diligently  upon  Sundays  and  Holy-days,  after  the  second  Les- 
son at  Erening  Prayer,  openlt/  in  the  Church  instruct  and  examine  so  many  Children  of  his 
Parish  sent  unto  him,  as  he  shall  think  coiivenient,  in  some  part  of  this  Catechism. 

■%  And  all  Fathers,  Mothers,  Masters,  and  Dames,  shall  cause  their  Children,  Servants,  a7ul 
•  Apprentices,  {xchich  have  not  learned  their  Catechism,)  to  come  to  the  Church  at  the  time  ap- 
pointed, and  obediently  to  hear,  and  be  ordered  by  the  Curate,  until  such  time  as  they  have  learned 
all  that  is  here  appointed  Jar  them  to  learn. 

U  So  soon  as  Children  are  come  to  a  competent  age,  and  can  say,  in  their  JMotlier  Tongue,  the 
Creed,  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  the  Ten  Commandments ;  and  also  can  answer  to  the  other  Ques- 
tiojis  of  this  .short  Catechism ;  they  shall  be  brought  to  the  Bishop.  And  every  one  shall  have  a 
Godfather,  or  a  Godmother,  as  a  fC/tncs-s  of  their  Confrmatio)i.  • 

^  A7id  whensoever  the  Bishop  shall  give  knowledge  for  Children  to  be  brought  unto  him  for  their 
Conjirmation,  the  Curate  of  every  Parish  shall  either  bring,  or  send  in  writing,  xcith  his  hand 
subscribed  thereunto,  the  names  (f  all  .such  persons  zcithin  his  Parish,  as  he  shall  think  Jit  to  be 
presented  to  the  Bishop  to  be  conjirmcd.     And,  If  the  Bishop  approve  of  them,  he  shall  confirm 

•     them  in  juaniier following. 


THE   ORDER   OF 

C  O  N  F  1  11  M  A  T  1  O  N, 

OR  LAYING  ON  OF  HANDS  UPON  THOSE  THAT  ARE  BAPTIZED  AND 

COME  TO  YEARS  OF  DISCRETION. 


^  Upon  the  day  appointed,  all  that  are  to  he  (hen  conjirmcd,  heing  placed, 
and  /landing  in  order,  before  the  Bijhop ;  he  (or  fomc  other  Minijler 
appointed  by  him)  /hall  read  this  Preface  following. 

TO  the  end  that  Confirmation 
may  be  miniftered  to  the  more 


edifyhig  of  fuch  as  ftiall  receive  it, 
the  Church  hath  thought  good  to 
order,  That  none  hereafter  Ihall  be 
Confirmed,  but  fuch  as  can  fay  the 
Creed,  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  the 
Ten  Commandments ;  and  can  alfo 
anfwer  to  fuch  other  Quefi;ions,  as 
in  the  fhort  Catechifm  are  contain- 
ed :  which  order  is  veiy  convenient 
to  be  obferved ;  to  the  end,  that 
children,  being  now  come  to  the 
years  of  difcretion,  and  having 
learned  what  their  Godfathers  and 
Godmothers  promifed  for  them  in 
BajDtifm,  they  may  themfelves,  with 
their  own  mouth  and  confent,  open- 
ly before  the  Church,  ratify  and 
confirm  the  fame ;  and  alfo  pro- 
mife,  that  by  the  grace  of  God  they 
will  evermore  endeavour  themfelves 
faithfully  to  obferve  fuch  things, 
as  they,  by  their  own  confeffion, 
have  aU'ented  unto. 

^  Then  Jliall  the  Bijhop  fay, 

DO  ye  here,  in  the  prefence  of 
God,  and  of  this  congregation, 
renew  the  folemn  promife  and  vow 
that  was  made  in  your  name  at 


your  Baptifm  ;  ratifying  and  con 
firming  the  fame  in  your  own 
and 


})er- 
foo!^,  and  acknowledging  your- 
i'elves  bound  to  believe,  and  to  do, 
all  thofe  things,  which  your  God- 
fathers and  Godmothers  then  un- 
dertook for  you? 

^  And  every  one  f hall  audibly 
anfwer,   I  do. 

The  IMJIiop. 
UR  help  is  in  the  Name  of 
the  Lord; 
Anfw.   Who  hath  made  heaven 
and  earth.  ' 

Bijhop.  Blefled  be  the  Name  of 
the  Lord; 

Anfw.  Henceforth,  world  with- 
out end. 

BiJJiop.  Lord,  hear  our  prayers. 
Anfw.    And   let  our  cry  come 
unto  thee. 

The  Bifliop.   Let  us  pray. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everliving 
God,  who  haft  vouchfafed  to 
regenerate  thefe  thy  fervants  by 
Water  and  the  holy  Ghoft,  and 
haft  o-iven  unto  them  formvenefs 
of  all  their  fins ;  Strengthen  them, 
we  befeech  thee,  O  Lord,  with  the 
Ee  2 


The  Order  of  Confirmation. 


Holy  Ghoft  the  Comforter,  and 
daily  increafe  in  them  thy  manifold 
gifts  of  grace ;  the  fjjirit  of  wifdom 
and  nnderftanding ;  the  fpirit  of 
counfel  and  ghoftly  ftrength ;  the 
fpirit  of  knowledge  and  true  god- 
linefs ;  and  fill  them,  O  Lord,  with 
the  fpirit  of  thy  holy  fear,  now  and 
for  ever.    Amen. 

U  Then  alt  of  them  in  order  kneeling  before  the  Bi- 
shop, he  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of'  even/ 
one  severalty,  sai/ing, 

DEFEND,  O  Lord,  this  thy 
Child  [or  t/tis-  thy  Servant] 
with  thy  heavenly  grace,  that  he 
may  continue  thine  for  ever ;  and 
daily  increafe  in  thy  holy  Spirit 
more  and  more,  until  he  come  un- 
to thy  everlafting  kingdom.  Amen. 

H  Then  shall  the  Bisfiop  say, 

The  Lord  be  with  you. 
Anfw.  And  with  thy  fpirit. 

'    %  And  (all  Icneeling  down)  the  Bishop  shall  add, 

liCt  US  pray. 

OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven. Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpaffes,  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil.    Amen. 


And  this  Collect. 

L  M I  ( 1 1 1 T  Y    and    everli  ving 
God,  Avho  makeli  us  l)oth  to 
will  and  to  do  thofe  thin<>-s  that  be 


A 


good  and  acceptable  unto  thy  di- 
vine Majeliy;  We  make  our  hum- 
ble fupplications  unto  thee  for  thefe 
thy  fervants,  upon  whom  (after  the 
example  of  thy  holy  Apoftles)  we 
have  now  laid  our  hands,  to  certify 
them  (by  this  fign)  of  thy  favour 
and  gracious  goodnefs  towards 
them.  Let  thy  fatherly  hand,  we 
befeech  thee,  ever  be  over  them ; 
let  thy  Holy  Spirit  ever  be  with 
them ;  and  fo  lead  them  in  the 
knowledge  and  obedience  of  thy 
Word,  that  in  the  end  they  may 
obtain  everlafting  life ;  through  our 
Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  who  with  thee 
and  the  Holy  Ghoft  liveth  and 
reigneth,  ever  one  God,  world 
without  end.    Amen. 


O  Almighty  Lord,  and  ( 
ins   God,  vouchfafe, 


everlaft- 
we  be- 
feech thee,  to  diredt,  faultily,  and 
govern,  both  our  hearts  and  bo- 
dies, in  the  ways  of  thy  laws,  and  in 
the  works  of  thy  commandments; 
that,  through  thy  moft  mighty  pro- 
tedtion  both  here  and  ever,  we  mav 
be  preferved  in  body  and  foul ; 
through  bur  Lord  and  Saviour  Je- 
fus Chrift.    Amen. 

5J  Then  the  Bishop  shall  bless  them,  saying  thus, 

THE  r,leffing  of  God  Almigh- 
ty, the  Father,  the  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Ghoft,  be  upon  you,  and 
remain  with  you  for  ever.     Amen. 

If  A}id  there  shall  none  he  admitted  to  the  holy  Com- 
munion, until  such  time  as  he  lie  coiifirmed,  or  be 
ready  and  desirous  to  be  conjirmed. 


THE   FORM  OF 

SOLEMNIZATION    OF   MATKIMONY. 


U  First  the  Banns  of  all  that  art  to  be  married  together  must  be  published  in  the  Church  three 
several  Sundays,  during  the  time  of  Morning  Service,  or  of  Evening  Service,  {if'  there  be  no 
Morning  Service,)  immediately  after  the  second  Lesson;  the  Curate  saying  after  the  accus- 
tomed manner. 


IPublilli  the  Banns  of  Marriage 
between  M.  of — and  N.  of — . 
If  any  of  you  know  caufe,  or  jiift 
impediment,  why  thefe  two  perfons 
fliould  not  be  joined  together  in 
holy  Matrimony,  ye  are  to  declare 
it.  This  is  the  firft  S^fecond,  or 
thh'd\  time  of  alking. 

iT  And  if  the  persons  that  are  to  be  married  dzvell  in 
divers  Parishes,  the  Banns  must  be  asked  in  both 
Parishes ;  and  the  Curate  of  the  one  Parish  shall 
not  solemnize  Matrimony  betwixt  them,  without  a 
Certificate  of  the  Banns  being  thrice  asked,  from  the 
Curate  of  the  other  Parish. 

%  At  the  day  and  time  appointed  for  solemnization  of 
Matrimony,  the  persons  to  be  married  shall  come 
into  the  body  of  the  Church  rcith  their  friends  and 
neighbours :  and  there  standing  together,  the  Man 
on  the  right  hand,  and  the  Woman  on  the  left,  the 
Priest  shall  say, 


D 


EARLY  beloved,  we  are  ga- 
thered together  here  in  the 
fight  of  God,  and  in  the  face  of 
this  congregation,  to  join  together 
this  Man  and  this  Woman  in  holy 
Matrimony;  which  is  an  honour- 
able eflate,  inftituted  of  God  in 
the  time  of  man's  innocency,  fig- 
nifying  imto  us  the  myftical  uni- 
on that  is  betwixt  Chrift  and  his 
Church ;  which  holy  eftate  Chrift 
adorned  and  beautified  with  his 
prefence,  and  firft  miracle  that  he 
wrought,  in  Cana  of  Galilee  ;  and 
is  commended  of  Saint  Paul  to  be 


honourable  among  all  men :  and 
therefore  is  not  by  any  to  be  en- 
terprifed,  nor  taken  in  hand,  un- 
advifedly,  lightly,  or  wantonly,  to 
fatisfy  men's  carnal  lufts  and  ap- 
petites, like  brute  beafts  that  have 
no  underftanding ;  but  reverently, 
difcreetly,  advifedly,  foberly,  and 
in  the  fear  of  God  ;  duly  confider- 
inp;  the  caufes  for  which  Matri- 
mony  was  ordained. 

Firft,  It  was  ordained  for  the 
procreation  of  children,  to  be 
brought  up  in  the  fear  and  nur- 
ture of  the  Lord,  and  to  the  praife 
of  his  holy  Name. 

Secondly,  It  was  ordained  for  a 
remedy  againft  fin,  and  to  avoid 
fornication ;  that  fuch  perfons  as 
have  not  the  gift  of  continency 
might  marry,  and  keep  themfelves 
undefiled  members  of  Chrift 's  body. 

Thirdly,  It  was  ordained  for  the 
mutual  fociety,  help,  and  comfort, 
that  the  one  ouo-ht  to  have  of  the 
other,  both  in  profperity  and  adver- 
fity.  Into  which  holy  eftate  thefe 
two  perfons  prefent  come  now  to 
be  joined.  Therefore  if  any  man 
can  ftiew  any  jnft  caufe,  why  they 
may  not  lawfully  be  joined  toge- 
ther, let  him  now  fpeak,  or  elfe 
hereafter  for  ever  hold  his  peace. 


Solemnization  of  Matrimony. 


^  And  also,  speaking  unto  the  persons  that  shall  be 
married,  he  shall  say, 

I  Require  and  charge  you  hoth, 
as  ye  will  anfwer  at  the  dread- 
ful day  of  judgement  when  the  fe- 
crets  of  all  hearts  ihall  be  difclofed, 
that  if  either  of  you  know  any  im- 
pediment, why  ye  may  not  be  law- 
fully joined  together  in  Matrimony, 
ye  do  now  confefs  it.  For  be  ye 
well  affured,  that  fo  many  as  are 
coupled  together  otherwife  than 
God's  Word  doth  allow  are  not 
joined  together  by  God ;  neither  is 
theu'  Matrimony  lawful. 

U  At  which  day  of  Marriage,  if  any  man  do  alledge 
and  declare  any  impediment,  why  they  may  not  be 
coupled  together  in  Matrimoni/,  by  God's  Law,  or 
the  Laws  of  this  Realm ;  and  will  be  bound,  and 
sufficient  sureties  with  him,  to  the  parties;  or  else 
put  in  a  Caution  {to  the  full  value  of  such  charges 
as  the  persons  to  be  married  do  thereby  sustain)  to 
prove  his  allegation :  then  the  solemnization  must  be 
deferred,  until  such  time  as  the  truth  be  tried. 

^  If  no  impediment  be  alledged,  then  shall  the  Curate 
say  unto  the  Man, 

M.Vl/^lLT  thou  have  this  Wo- 
▼  »  man  to  thy  wedded  wife, 
to  live  tooether  after  God's  ordi- 
nance  in  the  holy  ellate  of  Matri- 
mony? Wilt  thou  love  her,  com- 
fort her,  honour,  and  keep  her  in 
licknefs  and  in  health ;  and,  forfak- 
ing  all  other,  keep  thee  only  unto 
her,  fo  long  as  ye  both  Ihall  live? 

^  The  Man  JIuill  aiifwer,  I  will. 

^  Then  shall  the  Priest,  tuy  unto  the  Woman, 

iV.Vl/^ILT  thou  have  this  Man 

^^    to  tliy  wedded  hulband, 

to  live  together  after  God's  ordi- 


nance in  the  holy  eftate  of  Matri- 
mony? Wilt  thou  obey  him,  and 
ferve  him,  love,  honour,  and  keep 
him  in  ficknefs  and  in  health;  and, 
forfaking  all  other,  keep  thee  only 
unto  him,  fo  long  as  ye  both  ihall 
live? 

^  The  Woman  Jhall  anfwer,  I  will. 

^  Then  shall  the  Minister  say, 

W  ho  giveth  this  Woman  to  be 
married  to  this  Man? 

51  Then  shall  they  give  their  troth  to  each  other  in 
this  manner. 

The  Minister,  receiving  the  Woman  at  her  father's  or 
friend's  hands,  shall  cause  the  Man  with  his  right 
hand  to  tu/:e  the  If  onian  by  her  right  hand,  and  to 
say  after  him  asfolloweth, 

131.  take  thee  N.  to  my  wedded 
wife,  to  have  and  to  hold  from 
this  day  forward,  for  better  for 
worfe,  for  richer  for  poorer,  in 
ficknefs  and  in  health,  to  love  and 
to  cherifti,  till  death  us  do  part, 
according  to  God's  holy  ordinance; 
and  thereto  I  plight  thee  my  troth. 

•ll  Then  shall  they  loose  their  hands ;  and  the  IVoman, 
with  her  right  hand  taking  the  Man  bt/  his  right 
hand,  shall  likewise  say  after  the  Minister, 

IN.  take  thee  M.  to  my  wedded 
hulband,  to  have  and  to  hold 
from  this  day  forward,  for  better 
for  worfe,  for  richer  for  poorer,  in 
iicknefs  ami  in  health,  to  love,  che- 
rilh,  and  to  obey,  till  death  us  do 
part,  accor(Ung  to  God's  holy  or- 
dinance ;  and  thereto  I  give  thee 
mv  troth. 

^  Then  shall  they  again  loose  their  hands;  and  the 
Man  shall  give  unto  the  Woman  a  Ring,  laying  the 


Solemnization  of'  Matrimony. 


same  Upon  the  book  with  the  accustomed  duty  to 
the  Priest  and  Clerk.  And  the  Priest,  taking  the 
Hiii^,  shall  deliver  it  unto  the  Man,  to  put  it  upon 
the  fourth  Jlnger  of  the  Woman's  left  hand.  And 
the  Man  holding  the  liing  there,  and  taught  by 
the  Priest,  shall  say, 

ITH  this  Ring  I  thee  wed, 
with  my  body  I  thee  wor- 
(hip,  and  with  all  my  worldly  goods 
I  thee  endow:  In  the  Name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft.    Amen. 

%  Then  the  Man  leaving  the  Ring  upon  the  fourth 
Jinger  of  the  Woman's  left  hand,  theij  shall  both 
kneel  down ;  and  the  Minister  shall  say. 

Let  us  pray. 
(Eternal  God,  Creator  and  Pre- 
ferver  of  all  mankind,  Giver 
of  all  fpiritual  grace,  the  Author 
of  everlalling  life;  Send  thy  blefling 
upon  tliefe  thy  fervants,  this  man 
and  this  woman,  whom  we  blefs 
in  thy  N  ame ;  that,  as  Ifaac  and 
Rebecca  lived  faithfully  together, 
fo  thefe  perfons  may  furely  per- 
form and  keep  the  vow  and  cove- 
nant betwixt  them  made,  (where- 
of this  Ring  given  and  received  is 
a  token  and  pledge,)  and  may  ever 
remain  in.  perfect  love  and  peace 
together,  and  live  according  to 
thy  laws ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

%  Then  shall  the  Priest  join  their  right  hands  together, 
and  say, 

Thofe  whom  God  hath  joined 
together  let  no  man  put  afunder. 

If  Then  shall  the  Minister  speak  unto  the  people. 

FORASMUCH  as  M.  and  N. 
have  confented   together   in 


holy  wedlock,  and  have  witnefled 
the  fame  before  God  and  this  com- 
})any,  and  thereto  have  given  and 
pledged  their  troth  either  to  other, 
and  have  declared  the  fame  by 
giving  and  receiving  of  a  Ring, 
and  by  joining  of  hands ;  I  pro- 
nounce that  they  be  Man  and  Wife 
together,  In  the  Name  of  the  Fa- 
ther, and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft.    Amen. 

%  And  the  Minister  shall  add  this  Blessing. 

GOD  the  Father,  God  the  Son, 
God  the  Holy  Ghoft,  blefs, 
preferve,  and  keep  you ;  the  Lord 
mercifully  with  his  favour  look  up- 
on you ;  and  fo  fill  you  with  all 
fpiritual  benedidiion  and  grace, 
that  ye  may  fo  live  together  in 
this  life,  that  in  the  world  to 
come  ye  may  have  life  everlafting. 
Amen. 

^  Then  the  Minister  or  Clerks,  going  to  the  Lord's 
Table,  shall  say  or  sing  this  Psalm  following. 

licati  omne.S'.    Pfalm  cxxviii. 
LESSED  are  all  they  that  fear 
the  Lord  :  and  walk  in  his 
ways. 

For  thou  flialt  eat  the  labour  of 
thine  hands  :  O  well  is  thee,  and 
happy  flialt  thou  be. 

Thy  wife  fliall  be  as  the  fruitful 
vine :  upon  the  walls  of  thine  lioufe; 
Thy    children    like    the    olive- 
branches  :  round  about  thy  table. 

Lo,  thus  fliall  the  man  be  blefl*- 
ed  :  that  feareth  the  Lord. 

The  Lord  from  out  of  Sion  fliall 


SoJemnhation  of  Matrimony. 


To  blefs  thee  :  that  thou  Ihalt  fee 
Jeriifalem  in  profperity  all  thy  hfe 
long ; 

Yea,  that  thou  flialt  fee  thy  chil- 
dren's children  :  and  peace  upon 
Ifrael. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  lliall  be  :  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

t  Or  this  Psalm. 

Deiis  inijheatar.    Pfalm  lx\ai. 

GOD  be  merciful  unto  us,  and 
blefs  us  :  and  lliew  us  the 
light  of  his  countenance,  and  be 
merciful  unto  us. 

That  thy  way  may  be  known 
upon  earth  :  thy  faving  health  a- 
mong  all  nations. 

Let  the  people  praife  thee,  O 
God  :  yea,  let  all  the  people  praife 
thee. 

O  let  the  nations  rejoice  and  be 
glad  :  for  thou  flialt  judge  the  folk 
righteoufly,  and  govern  the  nations 
upon  earth. 

Let  the  people  praife  thee,  O 
God  :  yea  let  all  the  people  praife 
thee. 

Then  fliall  the  earth  bring  forth 
her  increafe  :  and  God,  even  our 
own  God,  Ihall  give  us  his  blefling. 

God  (hall  blefs  us  :  and  all  the 
ends  of  the  world  Ihall  fear  him. 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 


no\v,   and  ever  fliall  be   :   world 
without  end.    Amen. 

%  The  Psalm  ended,  and  the  Man  and  the  JVomnn 
kneeling  before  the  Lord's  Table,  the  Priest  stand- 
ing at  the  Table,  and  turning  his  face  towards  them, 
shall  say, 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Anfwer.  Chrift,  have- mercy  up- 
on us. 

Minijier.  Lord,  have  mercy  up- 
on us. 

OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven. Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpalfes,  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation ;  But  deliver  us  from 
e^dl.     Amen. 

Minijier.  O  Lord,  fave  thy  fer- 
vant,  and  thy  handmaid  ; 

Anfwer.  Who  put  their  truft  in 
tjaee. 

Minijier.    O   Lord,   fend  them 
help  from  thy  holy  place ;'       '" 

Anfwer.  And  evermore  defend 
them. 

Minijier.  Be  unto  them  a  tower 
offtrength, 

AnJ'wer.   From  the  face  of  their 
enemy. 

Minift.  O  Lord,  hear  our  prayer. 

AnJ'wer.   And  let  our  cry  come 
imto  thee. 

Minijier. 

OGod  of  yVbraham,  Godof  Ifaac, 
God  of  Jacob,  blefs  thefe  thy 


Solemnization  of  Matrimony. 


fervants,  and  fow  the  feed  of  eter- 
nal life  in  their  hearts ;  that  what- 
foever  in  thy  holy  Word  they  fliall 
profitably  learn,  they  may  in  deed 
fulfil  the  fame.  Look,  O  Lord, 
mercifully  u})on  them  from  hea- 
ven, and  blefs  them.  And  as  thou 
didll  fend  thy  blefTmg  u})on  Abra- 
ham and  Sarah,  to  their  great  com- 
fort, fo  vouchfafe  to  fend  thy  blelf- 
ing-  upon  thefe  thy  fervants ;  that 
they  obeying  thy  will,  and  alway 
being  in  fafety  under  thy  protec- 
tion, may  abide  in  thy  love  unto 
their  lives'  end ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Ameft. 

%  This  Prayer  next  fotlowhig  shall  be  omitted,  where 
the  fi'oman  is  past  child-bearing. 

O  Merciful  Lord,  and  heavenly 
Father,  by  whofe  gracious  gift 
mankind  is  increafed ;  We  befeech 
thee,  affift  with  thy  blefling  thefe 
two  perfons,  that  they  may  both 
be  fruitful  in  procreation  of  chil- 
dren, and  alfo  live  together  fo  long- 
in  godly  love  and  honefty,  that 
they  may  fee  their  children  chrif- 
tianly  and  virtuoufly  brought  up, 
to  thy  praife  and  honour ;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

OGod,  who  by  thy  mighty  pow- 
er haft  made  all  things  of  no- 
thing ;  who  alfo  (after  other  things 
fet  in  order)  didft  appoint,  that 
out  of  man  (created  after  thine 
own  image  and  fimilitude)  woman 
ftiould  take  her  beginning;  and, 
knitting  them  together,  didft  teach 


that  it  fliould  never  be  lawful  to 
[)ut  afunder  thofe  whom  thou  by 
M  atrimony  hadft  made  one :  O  God, 
who  haft  confecrated  the  ftate  of 
Matrimony  to  fuch  an  excellent 
myftery,  that  in  it  is  fignified  and 
reprefented  the  fpiritual  marriage 
and  unity  betwixt  Chrift  and  his 
Church ;  Look  mercifully  upon 
thefe  thy  fervants,  that  both  this 
man  may  love  his  wife,  according 
to  thy  Word,  (as  Chrift  did  love 
his  fpoufe  the  Church,  who  gave 
himfelf  for  it,  loving  and  cherifli- 
ing  it  even  as  his  own  flefti,)  and 
alfo  that  this  woman  may  be  lov- 
ing and  amiable,  faithful  and  obe- 
dient to  her  hulband ;  and  in  all 
quietnefs,  fobriety,  and  peace,  be 
a  follower  of  holy  and  godly  ma- 
trons. O  Lord,  blefs  them  both, 
and  grant  them  to  inherit  thy  ever- 
lafting  kingdom ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

If  Then  shall  the  Priest  sa)/, 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  at  the 
beginning  did  create  our  fii-ft 
parents,  Adam  and  Eve,  and  did 
fandlify  and  join  them  together  in 
marriage;  Pour  upon  you  the  riches 
of  his  grace,  fandlify  and  blefs  you, 
that  ye  may  pleafe  him  both  in 
body  and  foul,  and  live  together 
in  holy  love  unto  your  lives'  end. 
Amen. 

If  ^fter  which,  if  there  be  no  Sermon  declaring  the 
duties  of  Man  and  Wife,  the  Minister  shall  read  as 
followeth. 

Ff 


Solemnization  of  Matrimony. 


ALL  ye  that  are  married,  or 
that  intend  to  take  the  lioly 
eftate  of  matrimony  upon  you,  hear 
what  the  holy  Scripture  doth  lay 
as  touching  the  duty  of  hulbands 
towards  theu*  wives,  and  wives  to- 
wards their  hulbands. 

Saint  Paul,  in  his  Epiftle  to  the 
Ephelians,  the  fifth  Chapter,  doth 
give  this  commandment  to  all  mar- 
ried men ;  Hulbands,  love  your 
wives,  even  as  Chrift  alfo  loved  the 
Church,  and  gave  himfelf  for  it, 
that  he  might  fan61;ify  and  cleanfe 
it  Avitli  the  wafliing  of  water,  by 
the  Word ;  that  he  might  prefent 
it  to  himfelf  a  glorious  Church, 
not  having  fpot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any 
fuch  thing ;  but  that  it  fliould  he 
holy,  and  without  blemith.  So 
ought  men  to  love  their  wives  as 
their  own  bodies.  He  that  loveth 
his  wife  loveth  himfelf:  for  no  man 
ever  yet  hated  his  own  flelh,  but 
nourillieth  and  cherillieth  it,  even 
as  the  Lord  the  Church  :  for  we 
are  memlicrs  of  his  body,  of  his 
flefli,  and  of  his  bones.  For  this 
caufe  Ihall  a  man  leave  his  father 
and  mother,  and  lliall  be  joined 
unto  his  wife ;  and  they  two  fliall 
be  one  flefli.  Tliis  is  a  great  my- 
ftery;  but  I  fpeak  concerning  Chrift 
and  the  Chiu'ch.  Neverthelefs,  let 
evciy  one  of  you  in  ])articular  fo 
love  his  wife,  even  as  himfelf. 

Likewifc  the  fame  Saint  Paul, 
writing  to  the  ColofTians,  fpeaketh 


thus  to  all  men  that  are  married ; 
LIufbands,  love  your  wives,  and 
be  not  bitter  againft  them. 

Hear  alfo  what  Saint  Peter,  the 
Apoftle  of  Chrift,  who  was  him- 
felf a  married  man,  faith  unto  them 
that  are  married ;  Ye  hulbands, 
dwell  with  your  wives  according 
to  knowledge;  giving  honour  unto 
the  wife,  as  unto  the  weaker  veflel, 
and  as  being  heirs  together  of  the 
grace  of  life,  that  your  prayers  be 
not  hindered. 

Hitherto  ye  have  heard  the  duty 
of  the  hulband  toward  the  wife. 
Now  likewife,  ye  wives,  hear  and 
learn  your  duties  toward  your  huf- 
bands,  even  as  it  is  plainly  fet 
forth  in  holy  Scripture. 

Saint  Paul,  in  the  aforenamed 
Epiftle  to  the  Ephelians,  teacheth 
you  thus;  Wives,  fubmit  yourfelves 
unto  your  own  hulbands,  as  unto 
the  Lord.  For  the  hulband  is  the 
head  of  the  wife,  even  as  Chrift  is 
the  head  of  the  Chm-ch  :  and  he  is 
the  Saviour  of  the  body.  There- 
fore as  the  Chiu'ch  is  fubjedl  unto 
Chrift,  fo  let  the  wives  be  to  their 
own  hulbands  in  every  thing.  And 
again  he  faith.  Let  the  wife  fee 
that  flie  reverence  her  hulband. 

And  in  his  J^piftle  to  the  Colof- 
fians.  Saint  Paul  giveth  you  this 
ftiort  leflbn ;  W  ives,  fubmit  your- 
felves inito  your  own  hulbands,  as 
it  is  fit  in  the  Lord. 

Saint  Peter   alfo   doth   inftriit^ 


Tlie  Vifitatmi  of  the  Side. 


you  very 'well,  thus  faying;  Ye 
wives,  be  in  fubje^tion  to  your 
own  hulbands ;  that,  if  any  obey 
not  the  Word,  they  alfo  may  with- 
out the  Word  be  won  by  the  con- 
verfation  of  the  wi^^es ;  while  they 
behold  your  challe  converfation 
coupled  with  fear.  Whofe  adorn- 
ing, let  it  not  be  that  outward 
adorning  of  plaiting  the  hair,  and 
of  wearing  of  gold,  or  of  putting 
on  of  apparel ;  but  let  it  be  the 
hidden  man  of  the  heart,  in  that 


which  is  not  corruptible;  even  the 
ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet 
fpirit,  which  is  in  the  fight  of 
God  of  great  price.  For  after 
this  manner  in  the  old  time  the 
holy  women  alfo,  who  truiled  in 
God,  adorned  themfelves,  being 
in  fubjedlion  unto  their  own  huf- 
bands ;  even  as  Sarah  obeyed  A- 
braham,  calling  him  lord ;  whofe 
daughters  ye  are  as  long  as  ye  do 
well,  and  are  not  afraid  with  any 
amazement. 


%  It  is  convenient  that  the  new-married  persons  should  receive  the  holy  Communion  at  the  time  of 
their  Marriage,  or  at  the  first  opportunity  after  their  Marriage. 


THE  ORDER   FOR 

THE   VISITATION   OF  THE   SICK. 


%  When  any  person  is  sick,  notice  shall  be  given  thereof 
to  the  Minister  of  the  Parish;  who,  coming  into  the 
sick  person's  house,  shall  say, 

PEACE  be  to  this  houfe,  and 
to  all  that  dwell  in  it. 

^  IVhen  he  cometh  into  the  sick  man's  presence  he  shall 
■say,  kneeling  down, 

REMEMBER  not.  Lord,  our 
iniquities,  nor  the  iniquities 
of  our  forefathers :  Spare  us,  good 
Lord,  fpare  thy  people,  whom  thou 
haft  redeemed  with  thy  moft  pre- 
cious blood,  and  be  not  angry  with 
us  for  ever. 

Anfw.  Spare  us,  good  Lord. 

51  Then  the  Minister  shall  say. 

Let  us  pray. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Chriji,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 


OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpalfes.  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil.    Amen. 

Minifier.  O  Lord,  fa^e  thy  fer- 
vant ; 

Anfwer.  Which  putteth  his  truft 
in  thee. 

Mmijier.    Send  him  help  from 
thy  holy  place ; 

Anfwer.  And  evermore  mightily 
defend  him. 

Ff  2 


The  Vifitation  of  the  Sick. 


]\ftinijier.  Let  the  enemy  have 
no  advantage  of //2'?w;^vi^-'  x^j*'*  61 

Anfwer.  Nor  the  Hvicke3  lip- 
proach  to  hurt  him.    y  .... 

Minijier.  Be  unto  A^  O'Lofit, 
a  ftrong  tower, 

Aufwev.  From  the  face  of  his 
enemy.  :     ; 

Min.  O  Lord,  hear  our  prayers. 

Anfwer.  And  let  our  cry  come 
unto  thee.  ai  6'i^iii  9t 

Minijier. 

OLord,  look  down  from  hea- 
ven, behold,  vifit,  and  relieve 
this  thy  fervant.  Look  upon  Mm 
with  the  eyes  of  thy  mercy,  give 
him  comfort  and  fure  confidence 
in  thee,  defend  him  from  the  dan- 
ger of  the  enemy,  and  keep  him  in 
peipetual  peace  and  fafety;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    A^m^n. 

HEAR  us,  Almighty  and  moft 
merciful  God  and  Saviour; 
extend  thy  accuftomed  goodnefs 
to  this  thy  fervant  who  is  grieved 
\vith  ficknefs.  8an6lify,  we  befeech 
thee,  this  thy  fatherly  correction 
to  him ;  that  the  fenfe  of  his  weak- 
nefs  may  add  ftrength  to  his  faith, 
and  ferioufnefs  to  his  repentance : 
That,  if  it  Ihall  be  thy  good  plea- 
fure  to  rellore  him  to  his  former 
health,  he  may  lead  the  refidue  of 
his  life  in  thy  fear,  and  to  thy  glory: 
or  elfe,  give  him  grace  fo  to  take 
thy  vilitation,  that,  after  this  pain- 
ful life  ended,  he  may  dwell  with 


thee  in  life  everlafting ;  through  Je- 
fus Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

^  Then  shall  the  Minister  exhort  the  sick  person  after 
this  form,  or  other  like. 

DEARLY  beloved,  know  this, 
that  Almighty  God  is  the 
Lord  of  life  and  death,  and  of  all 
things  to  them  pertaining,  as  youth, 
ftrength,  health,  age,  weaknefs, 
and  iicknefs.  Wherefore,  whatfo- 
ever  your  ficknefs  is,  know  you 
certainly,  that  it  is  God's  vifitation. 
And  for  what  caufe  foever  this 
ficknefs  is  fent  unto  you ;  whether 
it  be  to  tiy  your  patience  for  the 
example  of  others,  and  that  your 
faith  may  be  found  in  the  day  of 
the  Lord  laudable,  glorious,  and 
honourable,  to  the  increafe  of  glo- 
ry and  endlefs  felicity;  or  elfe  it 
be  fent  unto  you  to  correct  and 
amend  in  you  whatfoever  doth  of- 
fend the  eyes  of  your  heavenly  Fa- 
ther; know  you  certainly,  that  if 
you  tiaily  repent  you  of  your  fins, 
and  bear  your  ficknefs  patiently, 
trufting  in  God's  mercy,  for  his 
dear  Son  Jefus  Chrift's  fake,  and 
render  unto  him  humble  thanks 
for  his  fatherly  vifitation,  fubmit- 
ting  yourfelf  wholly  unto  his  will, 
it  Ihall  turn  to  your  profit,  and 
help  you  fonvard  in  the  right  way 
that  leadeth  unto  everlafting  life. 

^  If  the  person  visited  be  verxf  sick,  then  the  Curate 
muy  end  his  exhortation  in  this  place,  or  else  pro- 
ceed. 

TAIvE  therefore  in  good  part 
the  chaftifement  of  the  Lord  : 


The  Vifitation  of  the  Sick. 


For  (as  Saint  Paul  faith  in  the 
twelfth  Chapter  to  the  Hebrews) 
whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chaften- 
eth,  and  fcourgeth  eveiy  fon  whom 
he  receiveth.  If  ye  endure  chaf- 
tening,  God  dealeth  with  you  as 
with  fons ;  for  what  fon  is  he  whom 
the  Father  chafteneth  not?  But  if 
ye  be  without  chaftifement,  where- 
of all  are  partakers,  then  are  ye 
baftards,  and  not  fons.  Further- 
more, we  have  had  fathers  of  our 
flelh,  which  corredled  us,  and  we 
gave  them  reverence :  Ihall  we  not 
much  rather  be  in  fubje6lion  unto 
the  Father  of  fpirits,  and  live?  For 
they  Verily  for  a  few  days  chaften- 
ed  us  after  their  own  pleafure;  but 
he  for  our  profit,  that  we  might 
be  partakers  of  his  holinefs.  Thefe 
words,  ^oodi  bj'other,  are  MTitten  in 
holy  Scripture  for  our  comfort  and 
inftrudlion;  that  we  fhould  pati- 
ently, and  with  thankfgiving,  bear 
our  heavenly  Father's  corredlion, 
whenfoever  by  any  manner  of  ad- 
verfity  it  fliall  pleafe  his  gracious 
goodnefs  to  vilit  us.  And  there 
fliould  be  no  greater  comfort  to 
Chriftian  perfons,  than  to  be  made 
like  unto  Chrift,  by  fuffering  pati- 
ently advei*fities,  troubles,  and  lick- 
neffes.  For  he  himfelf  went  not 
up  to  joy,  but  firft  he  fuffered  pain ; 
he  entered  not  into  his  gloiy  be- 
fore he  was  crucified.  So  truly 
our  way  to  eternal  joy  is  to  fuffer 
here  with  Chrifi; ;  and  our  door  to 


enter  into  eternal  life  is  gladly  to 
die  with  Chrill ;  that  we  may  rife 
again  from  death,  and  dwell  with 
him  in  everlafl;ing  life.  Now  there- 
fore, taking  your  ficknefs,  which  is 
thus  profitable  for  you,  patiently, 
I  exhort  you,  in  the  Name  of  God, 
to  remember  the  profefllon  which 
you  made  unto  God  in  your  Bap- 
tifm.  And  forafmuch  as  after  this 
life  there  is  an  account  to  be  given 
unto  the  righteous  Judge,  by  whom 
all  muft  be  judged,  without  refpedt 
of  perfons,  I  require  you  to  exa- 
mine yourfelf  and  your  eftate,  both 
toward  God  and  man  ;  fo  that,  ac- 
cufing  and  condenming  yourfelf 
for  your  own  faults,  you  may  find 
mercy  at  om*  heavenly  Father's 
hand  for  Chrift^'s  fake,  and  not  be 
accufed  and  condenmed  in  that 
fearful  judgement.  Therefore  I 
ihall  rehearfe  to  you  the  Articles 
of  our  Faith,  that  you  may  know 
whether  you  do  believe  as  a  Chrif- 
tian man  fliould,  or  no. 

^  Here  the  Minister  shall  rehearse  the  Articles  of  the 
I  Faith,  saying  thus, 

DOST  thou  believe  in  God  the 
Fatlier  Almighty,  Maker  of 
heaven  and  earth? 

And  in  Jefus  Chrifi;  his  only-be- 
gotten Son  our  Lord  ?  And  that  he 
was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghoft, 
born  of  the  Virgin  Marv ;  that  he 
fuftered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  was 
crucified,  dead,  and  buried ;  that 
he  went  down  into  hell,  and  alfo 


The  Vifitation  of  the  Sick. 


ilicl  rife  again  the  third  clay;  that 
he  afcended  into  heaven,  and  lit- 
teth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the 
Father  Ahiiiglity;  and  from  thence 
fliall  come  again  at  the  end  of  the 
world,  to  judge  the  quick  and  the 
dead? 

And  doft  thou  believe  in  the 
Holy  Ghoft ;  the  holy  Catholick 
Church;  the  Communion  of  Saints; 
the  Remillion  of  lins  ;  the  Refur- 
redlion  of  the  flelh  ;  and  everlaft- 
ing  Life  after  death? 

51  The  sicl;  person  shall  aiimer, 

All  this  I  Itedfaftly  believe. 

^  Then  shall  the  Minister  examine  tchether  he  repent 
him  truly  of  his  sins,  and  he  in  charifi/  zcitk  all  the 
Kvrld;  exhorting  him  to  forgive,  from  the  bottom  of 
his  heart,  all  persons  that  hate  offended  him;  and  if 
he  hath  offended  am/  other,  to  ask  them  forgiveness; 
and  shere  he  hath  done  injur)/  or  u'roiig  to  am/ 
man,  that  he  make  amends  to  the  uttermost  of  his 
power.  And  if  he  hath  not  before  disposed  of  his 
goods,  let  him  then  be  admonished  to  make  his  If  ill, 
and  to  declare  his  Debts,  zehat  he  orcelh,  and  tchat 
is  ozring  unto  him;  for  the  better  discharging  of  his 
conscience,  and  the  quietness  of  his  Executors.  But 
men  should  often  be  put  in  remembrance  to  take 
order  for  the  settling  of'  their  temporal  estates,  whilst 
they  are  in  health. 

%  These  words  before  rehearsed  may  be  said  before  the 
Minister  begin  his  Prai/er,  as  he  shall  see  cause. 

^  The  Minister  should  not  omit  earnesthj  to  move  such 
sick  persons  as  are  of  ability  to  be  liberal  to  the  poor. 

^  Here  shall  the  sick  person  be  moved  to  make  a  spe- 
cial Cojfession  of  his  sins,  if  he  feel  his  conscience 
troubled  with  am/  iceighty  matter.  After  which 
Confession,  the  Priest  shall  absolve  him  (if  he  huni- 
bly  and  heartily  desire  it)  after  this  sort. 

OUR  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  who 
hath  left  power  to  his  Church 
to  abfolve  all  (inuers  who  truly 
repent  and  believe  in  him,  of  his 
great  mercy  forgive  thee  thine  of- 
fences :  And  by  his  authority  com- 


mitted to  me,  I  abfolve  thee  from 
all  thy  fins,  In  the  Name  of  the 

m 

Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft.    Amen. 

%  And  then  the  Priest  shall  say  the  Collect  following. 

Let  us  pray. 

OJMoft  merciHil  God,  who,  ac- 
cording to  the  multitude  of 
thy  mercies,  doft  fo  put  away  the 
fins  of  thofe  who  truly  repent,  that 
thou  remembereft  them  no  more ; 
Open  thine  eye  of  mercy  upon 
this  thy  fervant,  who  moft  earneft- 
ly  defireth  pardon  and  forgivenefs. 
Renew  in  him,  moft  loving  Father, 
whatfoever  hath  been  decayed  by 
the  fraud  and  malice  of  the  devil, 
or  by  his  own  carnal  will  and  fi'ail- 
nefs ;  preferve  and  continue  this 
fick  member  in  the  unity  of  the 
Church ;  confider  his  contrition, 
accept  his  tears,  afl*wage  his  pain, 
as  fiiall  feem  to  thee  moft  expe- 
dient for  him.  And  forafmuch  as 
he  putteth  his  full  truft  only  in  thy 
mercy,  impute  not  unto  him  his 
former  fins,  but  ftrengthen  him 
with  thy  blelfed  Spirit ;  and,  Avhen 
thou  art  pleafed  to  take  him  hence, 
take  him  unto  thy  favour,  through 
the  merits  of  thy  moft  dearly  be- 
loved Son  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

5[  Then  shall  the  Minister  say  this  Psalm. 

In  te,  Domine,  fperavi.  Ffalm  Ixxi. 
N  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I  put  my 
truft ;  let  me  never  be  put  to 
confufion  :  but  rid  me,  and  deliver 


The  Vifitation  of  the  Sick. 


me   in   thy  righteoiifnefs ;   incline 
thine  ear  unto  me,  and  fave  me. 

Be  thou  my  ftrong  hold,  where- 
unto  I  may  alwjiy  refort  :  thou 
haft  promiied  to  help  me ;  for 
thou  art  my  houfe  of  defence,  and 
my  caftle. 

Deliver  me,  O  my  God,  out  of 
the  hand  of  the  ungodly  :  out  of 
the  hand  of  the  unrighteous  and 
cruel  man. 

For  thou,  O  Lord  God,  art  the 
thing  that  I  long  for  :  thou  art  my 
hope,  even  from  my  youth. 

Through  thee  have  I  been  hold- 
en  up  ever  fince  I  was  born  :  thou 
art  he  that  took  me  out  of  my 
mother's  womb ;  my  praife  fliall 
alway  be  of  thee. 

I  am  become  as  it  were  a  mon- 
fter  unto  many  :  but  my  fure  truft 
is  in  thee. 

O  let  my  mouth  be  filled  with 
thy  praife  :  that  I  may  fing  of  thy 
glory  and  honour  all  the  day  long. 

Caft  me  not  away  in  the  time 
of  age  :  forfake  me  not  when  my 
ftrength  faileth  me. 

For  mine  enemies  fpeak  againft 
me,  and  they  that  lay  wait  for  my 
foul  take  their  counfel  together, 
faying  :  God  hath  forfaken  him, 
perfecute  him,  and  take  him ;  for 
there  is  none  to  deliver  him. 

Go  not  far  from  me,  O  God  : 
my  God,  hafte  thee  to  help  me. 

Let  them  be  confounded  and 
perilh  that  are  againft  my  foul :  let 


them  be  covered  with  iliame  and 
dillionour  that  feek  to  do  me  evil. 

As  for  me,  I  will  patiently  abide 
alway  :  and  will  praiie  thee  more 
and  more. 

My  mouth  ftiall  daily  fpeak  of 
thy  righteoufnefs  and  falvation  :  for 
I  know  no  end  thereof 

I  will  go  forth  in  the  ftrength 
of  the  Lord  God  :  and  will  make 
mention  of  thy  righteoufnefs  only. 

Thou,  O  God,  haft  taught  me 
from  my  youth  up  until  now  : 
therefore  will  I  tell  of  thy  won- 
drous works. 

Forfake  me  not,  O  God,  in  mine 
old  age,  when  I  am  gray-headed  : 
until  I  have  fliewed  thy  ftrength 
unto  this  generation,  and  thy  pow- 
er to  all  them  that  are  yet  for  to 
come.  ' 

Thy  righteoufnefs,  O  God,  is 
veiy  high,  and  great  things  are 
they  that  thou  haft  done  :  O  God, 
who  is  like  unto  thee? 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  fyc. 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  S^c. 

51  Adding  this. 

O  Saviour  of  the  world,  who  by 
thy  Crofs  and  precious  Blood 
haft  redeemed  us,  Save  us,  and 
help  us,  we  humbly  befeech  thee, 
OLord. 

^  Then  shall  the  MinistW  satf, 

THE  Almighty  Lord,  who  is  a 
moft  ftrong  tower  to  all  them 
that  put  their  truft  in  him,  to  whom 
all  things  in  heaven,  in  earth,  and 


under  the  earth,  do  bow  and  obey, 
be  noAv  and  evermore  thy  defence ; 
and  make  thee  know  and  feel,  that 
there  is  none  other  Name  under 
heaven  given  to  man,  in  whom, 
and  through  whom,  thou  mayeft 
receive  health  and  falvation,  but 
only  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift.    Amen. 

^  And  after  that  shall  say, 

UNTO  God's  gracious  mercy 
and  protedtion  we  commit 
thee.  The  Lord  blefs  thee,  and 
keep  thee.  The  Lord  make  his 
face  to  Ihine  upon  thee,  and  be 
gracious  unto  thee.  The  Lord  lift 
up  his  countenance  upon  thee,  and 
give  thee  peace,  both  now  and 
evermore.    Amen. 


The  Vi/itation  of  the  Sick. 

bitations,  where  the  fouls  of  them 
that  lleep  in  the  Lord  Jefus  enjoy 
perpetual  reft  and  felicity.  Grant 
this,  O  Lord,  for  thy  mercies  fake, 
in  the  fame  thy  Son  our  Lord  Je- 
fus Chrift,  who  liveth  and  reigneth 
with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghoft,  ever 
one  God,  world  without  end.  Amen. 


o 


A  Prayer  for  a  sick  child. 
Almighty  God,  and  merciful 
Father,  to  whom  alone  belong 
the  iffues  of  life  and  death  ;  Look 
down  from  heaven,  we  humbly  be- 
feech  thee,  \vith  the  eyes  of  mercy 
upon  this  child  now  lying  upon  the 
bed  of  ficknefs :  Vilit  him,  O  Lord, 
with  thy  falvation ;  deliver  him  in 
thy  good  appointed  time  from  his 
bodily  pain,  and  fave  his  foul  for 
thy  mercies  fake :  That,  if  it  fliail 
be  thy  pleafure  to  prolong  his  days 
here  on  earth,  he  may  live  to  thee, 
and  be  an  inftrument  of  thy  glory, 
by  ferving  thee  faithfully,  and  do- 
ing good  in  his  generation ;  or  elfe 
receive  him  into  thofe  heavenly  ha- 


A  Prayer  for  a  sick  person,  ivhen 
there  appeareth  small  hope  of  re- 
covery. 

O  Father  of  mercies,  and  God 
of  all  comfort,  our  only  help 
in  time  of  need ;  We  fly  unto  thee 
for  fuccour  in  behalf  of  this  thy 
fervant,  here  lying  under  thy  hand 
in  great  weaknefs  of  body.  Look 
gracioufly  uj^on  him,  O  Lord  ;  and 
the  more  the  outward  man  de- 
cayeth,  ftrengthen  him,  we  befeech 
thee,  fo  much  the  more  continu- 
ally with  thy  grace  and  holy  Spi- 
rit in  the  inner  man.  Give  him 
unfeigned  repentance  for  all  the 
errors  of  his  life  paft,  and  ftedfaft 
faith  in  thy  Son  Jefus ;  that  his  iins 
may  be  done  away  by  thy  mercy, 
and  his  pardon  fealed  in  heaven, 
before  he  go  hence,  and  be  no  more 
feen.  We  know,  C)  Lord,  that  there 
is  no  word  impoflible  with  thee ; 
and  that,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canft 
even  yet  raife  him  up,  and  grant 
hi)n  a  longer  continuance  amona'ft 
US :  Yet,  forahuuch  as  in  all  appear- 
ance the  time  of  his  dillblution 
drawcth  near,  fo  fit  and  j)repare 
him,  we  befeech  thee,  againft  the 


The  Vifitation  of  the  Sick, 


hour  of  death,  that  after  his  tle- 
pai'ture  hence  in  peace,  and  in  thy 
favour,  his  foul  may  be  received 
into  thine  everlalling-  kingdom, 
through  the  merits  and  mecUation 
of  Jefus  Chrill,  thine  only  Son, 
our  Lord  and  Saviour.    Amen. 

A  commendatory  Prayer  for  a  sick 
person  at  the  point  of  departure. 

O  Almighty  God,  with  whom  do 
live  the  fpirits  of  juft  men 
made  perfedl,  after  they  are  deli- 
vered from  their  earthly  prifons ; 
We  humbly  commend  the  foul  of 
this  thy  feiTant,  our  dear  brother, 
into  thy  hands,  as  into  tlie  hands 
of  a  faithful  Creator,  and  moll  mer- 
ciful Saviour;  moft  humbly  be- 
feeching  thee,  that  it  may  be  pre- 
cious in  thy  fight.  Walli  it,  we 
pray  thee,  in  the  blood  of  that  im- 
maculate Lamb,  that  was  flain  to 
take  away  the  fins  of  the  world; 
that  whatfoever  defilements  it  may 
have  contradled  in  the  midft  of 
this  miferable  and  naughty  world, 
through  the  lufts  of  the  flelh,  or 
the  wiles  of  Satan,  being  purged 
and  done  away,  it  may  be  prefent- 
ed  pure  and  without  fpot  before 
thee.  And  teach  us  who  furvive, 
in  this  and  other  like  daily  fpe6la- 
cles  of  mortality,  to  fee  how  frail 
and  uncertain  our  own  condition 
is ;  and  fo  to  number  our  days, 
that  we  may  ferioufly  apply  our 
hearts  to  that  holy  and  heavenly 
wifdom,  whilft  we  five  here,  which 


may  in  the  end  bring  us  to  life 
everlalling,  through  the  merits  of 
Jefus  Chrift  thine  only  Sou  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

A  Prayer  for  persons  troubled  in 
mind  or  in  conscience. 

OBlefled  Lord,  the  Father  of 
mercies,  and  the  God  of  all 
comforts ;  We  befeech  thee,  look 
down  in  pity  and  compaflion  upon 
this  thy  afflidled  fervant.  Thou 
writell  bitter  things  againft  /t?w?, 
and  makeft  him  to  poflefs  his  for- 
mer iniquities ;  thy  wrath  lieth  hard 
upon  him,  and  his  foul  is  full  of 
trouble :  But,  O  merciful  God,  who 
hall  written  thy  holy  Word  for  our 
learning,  that  we,  through  patience 
and  comfort  of  thy  holy  Scriptures, 
might  have  hope ;  give  him  a  right 
underftanding  oUiimfelf,  and  of  thy 
threats  and  promifes;  that  he  may 
neither  call  away  his  confidence 
in  thee,  nor  place  it  any  where 
but  in  thee.  Give  him  flrength  a- 
gainfl  all  his  temptations,  and  heal 
^1  his  dillempers.  Break  not  the 
bruifed  reed,  nor  quench  the  fmok- 
ing  flax.  Shut  not  up  thy  tender 
mercies  in  difpleafure ;  but  make 
him  to  hear  of  joy  and  gladnefs, 
that  the  bones  which  thou  haft 
broken  may  rejoice.  Deliver  him 
fi'om  fear  of  the  enemy,  and  lift  up 
the  light  of  thy  countenance  upon 
him,  and  give  him  peace,  through 
the  merits  and  mediation  of  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.  Amen. 
Gg 


THE   COMMUNION   OF   THE   SICK. 

f  For-asmuck  as  all  viortal  men  be  subject  to  inatiy  sitd:len  perils,  diseases,  and  sicknesses,  and  ever 
uncertain  xchat  time  they  shall  depart  out  of  this  iij'e;  tlicrejhre,  to  the  intent  they  may  be  always 
in  a  readiness  to  die,  whensoever  it  shall  please  Almighty  God  to  call  them,  the  Curates  shall 
diligently  from  time  to  time  {but  especially  in  the  time  of  pestilence,  or  other  injections  sichtess) 
exhort  their  Parishioners  to  the  often  7-eceiving  of  the  holy  Communion  of  the  Body  and  Blood 
of  our  Saviour  Christ,  when  it  shall  be  publickly  administered  in  the  Church;  that  so  doin<r, 
they  may,  in  case  of  sudden  visitation,  have  the  less  cause  to  he  disquieted  for  lack  of  the  same. 
But  if  the  sick  person  be  not  able  to  come  to  the  Church,  and  yet  is  desirous  to  receive  the  Com- 
munion in  his  house ;  then  he  must  give  timely  ?iotice  to  the  Curate,  signifying  also  how  many 
there  are  to  communicate  with  him,  {which  shall  be  three,  or  two  at  the  least,)  and  having  a 
convenient  place  in  the  sick  man's  house,  with  all  things  necessary  so  prepared,  that  the  Curate 
7nay  reverently  minister,  he  shall  there  celebrate  the  holy  Communion,  beginning  with  the  Collect, 

'•  Epistle,  and  Gospel,  here  following. 

TJie  ColleB. 


ALMIGHTY,  everliving  God, 
Maker  of  mankind,  who  doft 
corredl  tliofe  whom  thou  doft  love, 
and  chaftife  every  one  whom  thou 
doft  receive  •  We  befeech  thee  to 
have  mercy  upon  this  thy  fervant 
vifited  with  thine  hand,  and  to 
grant  that  lie  may  take  his  ficknefs 
patiently,  and  recover  his  bodily 
health,  (if  it  be  thy  gracious  will ;) 
and  whenfoever  his  foul  ftiall  depart 
from  the  body,  it  may  be  without 
fpot  prefented  unto  thee;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 


The  Epijile.    Hebrews  xii.  5. 

MY  fon,  defpife  not  thou  the 
chaftening  of  the  Lord,  nor 
faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of 
him.  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth 
he  chafteneth ;  and  fcourgeth  every 
fon  whom  he  receiveth. 

TJie  Go/pel.    St.  John  v.  24. 

VERILY,  verily  I  fay  unto  you. 
He  that  heareth  my  word, 
and  believeth  on  him  that  fent  me, 
hath  everlafting  life,  and  fliall  not 
come  into  condemnation ;  but  is 
pafled  from  death  unto  life. 

•1  After  -which  the  Priest  sliall  proceed  according  to  the  form  before  prescribed  for  the  holy  Com- 
munion, beginning  at  these  words  [Ye  that  do  truly,  S^c.'] 

U  At  the  time  of  the  distribution  of  the  holy  Sacrament,  the  Priest  shall  frst  receive  the  Com- 
munion himself,  and  after  minister  unto  them  that  are  appointed  to  communicate  with  the  sick, 
and  last  of  all  to  the  sick  person. 

If  But  if  a  man,  either  by  reason  of  extremity  of  sickness,  or  for  want  of  warning  in  due  time  to 
the  Curate,  or  for  lack  (f  company  to  receive  with  him,  or  by  any  other  just  impediment,  do  not 
receive  the  Sacrament  of  Christ's  Body  and  Blood,  the  Curate  shall  instruct  him,  that  if  he  do 
truly  repent  him  of  his  sins,  and  stedfastly  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  hath  suffered  death  upon  the 
Cross  j  or  him,  and  shed  his  Blood  J  or  his  redemption,  earnestly  remembering  the  benefits  he  hath 
thereby,  and  giving  him  hearty  thanks  therefore,  he  doth  eat  and  drink  the  Body  and  Blood  of 
our  Sav'wur  Christ  projitably  to  his  Soul's  health,  although  he  do  not  receive  the  Sacrament 
with  his  mouth. 

%  IVhen  the  sick  person  is  visited,  a/ul  rece'voeth  the  holy  Communion  all  at  one  time,  then  the 
Priest,  for  more  expedition,  shall  cut  off  the  form  of  the  Visitation  at  the  Psalm  [In  thee,  O 
Loifl,  have  I  ])ut  my  trust,  (^'c]  and  go  straight  to  the  Communion. 

%  In  the  time  of  the  Plague,  Sweat,  or  such  other  like  contagious  times  of  sickness  or  diseases, 
when  none  of  the  Parish  or  neighbours  can  be  gotten  to  communicate  zcith  the  sick  in  their 
hou.fes,  for  fear  of  the  infection,  upon  special  request  <f  the  diseased,  the  Minister  may  only 
communicate  with  him. 


THE  ORDER  FOR 

THE  BUmALi   OF  THE   HEAH. 


II  Here  is  to  be  noted,  that  the  Office  ensuing  is  not  to  be.  used  for  any  that  die  unbaptized,  or, 
exxommunicate,  or  have  laid  'violent  hands  upon  themselves. 

5  The  Priest  and  Clerks  meeting  the  Corpse  at  the  entrance  of  the  Church-yard,  and  going  before 
it,  either  into  the  Church,  or  towards  the  Grave,  shall  say,  or  sing, 


I  Am  the  refurrecftion  and  the 
life,  faith  the  Lord  :  he  that 
believeth  in  me,  though  he  were 
dead,  yet  fliall  he  live  :  and  who- 
foever  liveth  and  believeth  in  me 
fliall  never  die.  St.  John  xi.  25,  26. 

IKnow  that  my  Redeemer  liv- 
eth, and  that  he  (hall  Hand  at 
the  latter  day  upon  the  earth.  And 
though  after  my  Ikin  worms  deftroy 
this  body,  yet  in  my  flefli  fliall  I 
fee  God  :  Avhom  I  fliall  fee  for  my- 
felf,  and  mine  eyes  fliall  behold, 
and  not  another.  Job  xix.  25, 
26,  27. 

WE  brought  nothing  into  this 
world,  and  it  is  certain  we 
can  cany  nothing  out.  The  Lord 
gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  a- 
way;  blefled  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord.    1  Tim.  vi.  7.   Job  i.  21. 

1[  After  they  are  come  into  the  Church,  shall  be  read 
one  or  both  of  these  Psalms  following. 

Dici'i,  Ciiftodiam.    Pfalm  xxxix. 
%  Said,  I  will   take  heed  to  my 
-■-  ways  :  that  I  oftend  not  in  my 
tongue. 

I  will  keep  my  mouth  as  it  were 
with  a  bridle  :  while  the  ungodly 
is  in  my  fight. 


I  held  my  tongue,  and  fpake 
nothing  :  I  kept  filence,  yea,  even 
from  good  words ;  but  it  was  pain 
and  grief  to  me. 

My  heart  was  hot  ^vithin  me, 
and  while  I  was  thus  mufing  the 
fire  kindled  :  and  at  the  lafl;  I  fpake 
with  my  tongue ; 

Lord,  let  me  know  mine  end, 
and  the  number  of  my  days  :  that 
I  may  be  certified  how  long  I  have 
to  live. 

Behold,  thou  hafl;  made  my  days 
as  it  were  a  fpaii  long  :  and  mine 
age  is  even  as  nothing  in  refpedl 
of  thee;  and  verily  eveiy  man  liv- 
ing is  altogether  vanity. 

For  man  walketh  in  a  vain  flia- 
dow,  and  difquieteth  himfelf  in 
vain  :  he  heapeth  up  riches,  and 
cannot  tefl  who  fliall  gather  them. 

And  now.  Lord,  what  is  my 
hope  :  truly  my  hope  is  even  in 
thee. 

Deliver  me  from  all  mine  offen- 
ces :  and  make  me  not  a  rebuke 
unto  the  foolifli. 

I  became  dumb,  and  opened 
not  my  mouth  :  for  it  was  thy 
doing. 

Take  thy  plague  away  from  me  : 
Gga 


At  the  Burial 

I  am  even  coiifmned  by  means  of 
thy  heavy  hand. 

When  thou  ivith  rebukes  doft 
chaften  man  for  fin,  thou  makeft 
his  beauty  to  confume  away,  Uke 
as  it  were  a  moth  fretting  a  gar- 
ment :  eveiy  man  therefore  is  but 
vanity. 

Heai'  my  prayer,  O  Lord,  and 
with  thine  ears  confider  my  call- 
ing :  hold  not  thy  peace  at  my 
tears. 

For  I  am  a  llranger  with  thee  : 
and  a  fojourner,  as  all  my  fathers 
were. 

O  fpare  me  a  little,  that  I  may 
recover  my  ftrength  :  before  I  go 
hence,  and  be  no  more  feen. 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Glioft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  fliall  be  :  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

Domine,  refugium.    Pfahn  xc. 

LORD,  thou  haft  been  our  re- 
fuge :  from  one  generation  to 
another. 

Before  the  mountains  were 
brought  forth,  or  ever  the  earth 
and  the  world  were  made  :  thou 
art  God  from  everlafting,  and  world 
without  end. 

Thou  turnell  man  to  deftru61:ion : 
again  thou  fayeli;.  Come  again,  ye 
chil(h-en  of  men. 

For  a  thoufand  years  in  thy  fight 
are  but  as  yefterday  :  feeing  that  is 
paft  as  a  watch  in  the  night. 


of  the  Dead. 

As  foou  as  thou  fcattereft  them, 
they  are  even  as  a  fleep  :  and  fade 
away  fuddenly  like  the  grafs. 

In  the  morning  it  is  green,  and 
groweth  up  :  but  in  the  evening 
it  is  cut  down,  dried  uj3,  and 
mthered. 

For  we  confume  away  in  thy 
difpleafure  :  and  are  afraid  at  thy 
wrathful  indignation. 

Thou  haft  fet  our  mifdeeds  be- 
fore thee  :  and  our  fecret  fins  in 
the  light  of  thy  countenance. 

For  when  thou  art  angiy  aU  our 
days  are  gone  :  we  bring  our  years 
to  an  end,  as  it  were  a  tale  that  is 
told. 

The  days  of  our  age  are  three- 
fcore  years  and  ten ;  and  though 
men  be  fo  ftrong,  that  they  come 
to  fourfcore  years  :  yet  is  their 
ftrength  then  but  labour  and  for- 
row;  fo  foon  pafleth  it  away,  and 
we  are  gone. 

But  who  regardeth  the  power  of 
thy  wrath  :  for  even  thereafter  as  a 
man  feareth,  fo  is  thy  difpleafure. 

O  teach  us  to  number  our  days  : 
that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  mi- 
to  wifdom. 

l\irn  thee  again,  O  Lord,  at 
the  laft :  and  be  gracious  imto  thy 
fervants. 

()  fatisfy  us  with  thy  mercy, 
and  that  foon  :  fo  fliall  we  re- 
joice and  be  glad  all  the  days  of 
our  life. 

Comfort  us  again  now  after  the 


At  the  Burial  of  the  Dead, 


time  that  thou  haft  placed  us  : 
and  for  the  years  wherein  we  have 
fuffered  adverfity. 

Shew  thy  fervants  thy  work  : 
and  their  children  thy  glory. 

And  the  glorious  Majefty  of  the 
Lord  our  God  be  upon  us  :  prof- 
per  thou  the  work  of  our  hands 
upon  us,  O  profper  thou  our  han- 
dy-work. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  ftiall  be  :  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

%  Then  shall  follow  the  Lesson  taken  out  oftheffteetUh 
Chapter  of  the  former  Epistle  of  Saint  Paul  to  the 
Corinthians. 

1  Cor.  XV.  20. 

NOW  is  Chrift  rifen  from  the 
dead,  and  become  the  firft- 
fruits  of  them  that  flept.  For  fince 
by  man  came  death,  by  man  came 
alfo  the  refurredtion  of  the  dead. 
For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  fo  in 
Chrift  fliall  all  be  made  alive.  But 
every  man  in  his  own  order ;  Chrift 
the  firft-fruits ;  afterward  they  that 
are  Chrift's,  at  his  coming.  Then 
Cometh  the  end,  when  he  fliall  have 
delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God, 
even  the  Father ;  when  he  fliall 
have  put  do\vn  all  rule,  and  all 
authority,  and  power.  For  he  muft 
reign,  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies 
under  his  feet.  The  laft  enemy 
that  fliall  be  deftroyed  is  death. 
For  he  hath  put  all  things  under 


his  feet.  But  when  he  faith,  all 
things  are  put  under  him,  it  is 
manifeft  that  he  is  excepted,  which 
did  put  all  things  under  him.  And 
when  all  things  fliall  be  fubdued 
unto  him,  then  fliall  the  Son  alfo 
himfelf  be  fubjedt  unto  him  that 
put  all  things  under  "^him,  that 
God  may  be  all  in  all.  Elfe  what 
fliall  they  do  which  are  baptized 
for  the  dead,  if  the  dead  rife  not 
at  all?  Why  are  they  then  baptized 
for  the  dead?  and  why  ftand  we  in 
jeopardy  every  hour?  1  protdl  by 
your  rejoicing,  which  I  have  in 
Chrift  Jefus  our  Lord,  I  die  daily. 
If  after  the  manner  of  men  I  have 
fought  with  beafts  at  Ephefus,  what 
advantageth  it  me,  if  the  dead  rife 
not?  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to 
morrow  we  die.  Be  not  deceived: 
evil  communications  corrupt  good 
manners.  Awake  to  righteoufnefs, 
and  fin  not ;  for  fome  have  not  the 
knowledge  of  God.  I  fpeak  this 
to  your  fliame.  But  fome  man 
will  fav.  How  are  the  dead  raifed 
up?  and  with  what  body  do  they 
come?  Thou  fool,  that  which  thou 
foweft  is  not  quickened,  except  it 
die.  And  that  which  thou  foweft, 
thou  foweft  not  that  body  that  fliall 
be,  but  bare  grain,  it  may  chance 
of  wheat,  or  of  fome  other  grain  : 
But  God  giveth  it  a  body,  as  it 
hath  pleafed  him,  and  to  every 
feed  his  owii  body.  All  flefli  is 
not  the  fame  flefli ;  but  there  is 


At  the  Burial  of  the  Dead. 


one  kind  of  fleflii  of  men,  another 
flefli  of  beafts,  another  of  filhes, 
and  another  of  birds,  Tliere  are 
alfo  celeftial  bodies,  and  bodies 
terreftrial;  but  the  glory  of  the 
celeftial  is  one,  and  the  glory  of 
the  terreftrial  is  another.  There 
is  one  glory  of  the  fun,  and  an- 
other gloiy  of  the  moon,  and  an- 
other glory  of  the  ftars ;  for  one 
ftar  cUffereth  from  another  ftar  in 
gloiy.  So  alfo  is  the  refurre6lion 
of  the  dead :  It  is  fown  in  corrup- 
tion ;  it  is  raifed  in  incorruption : 
It  is  fown  in  diflionour;  it  is  raifed 
in  gloiy:  It  is  fown  in  weaknefs ; 
it  is  raifed  in  power :  It  is  fown  a 
natural  body ;  it  is  raifed  a  fpiritual 
body.  There  is  a  natural  body, 
and  there  is  a  fpiritual  body.  And 
fo  it  is  written,  The  iirft  man  Adam 
was  made  a  living  foul ;  the  laft 
Adam  was  made  a  quickening  fpi- 
rit.  Howbeit,  that  was  not  fii-ft 
which  is  fpiritual,  but  that  which  is 
natural;  and  afterward  that  which 
is  fpiritual.  The  firft  man  is  of 
the  earth,  earthy:  the  fecond  man 
is  the  Lord  from  heaven.  As  is 
the  earthy,  fucli  are  they  that  are 
earthy :  and  as  is  the  heavenly, 
fuch  are  they  alfo  that  are  hea- 
venly. And  as  we  have  borne  the 
image  of  the  earthy,  we  ihall  alfo 
bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly. 
Now  this  I  fay,  brethren,  that  fleih 
and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kini>- 
doni  of  God ;  neither  doth  corrup- 


tion inherit  incorruption.  Behold, 
I  fliew  you  a  myftery:  We  Ihall 
not  all  ileep,  but  we  Ihall  all  be 
changed,  in  a  moment,  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  laft 
trump,  (for  the  trumpet  Ihall  found,) 
and  the  dead  fhall  be  raifed  incor- 
ruptible, and  we  Ihall  be  changed. 
For  this  corruptible  muft  put  on 
iucoiTuption,  and  this  mortal  muft 
put  on  immortality.  So  when  this 
corruptible  fliall  have  put  on  incor- 
ruption, and  this  mortal  lliall  have 
put  on  innnortality ;  then  fliall  be 
brought  to  pafs  the  faying  that  is 
vvi'itten,  Death  is  fwallowed  up  in 
vidtoiy.  O  death,  where  is  thy 
fting?  O  grave,  where  is  thy  vic- 
tory? The  fting  of  death  is  fm,  and 
the  ftrength  of  fin  is  the  law.  But 
thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth 
us  the  victory  through  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift.  Therefore,  my  be- 
loved brethren,  be  ye  ftedfaft,  un- 
moveable,  always  abounding  in  the 
work  of  the  Lord,  forafmuch  as  ye 
know  that  your  labour  is  not  in 
vain  in  the  Lord. 

^  When  the}/  come  to  the  Grave,  while  the  Corpse  is 
made  readi/  (o  be  laid  into  the  earth,  the  Priest  shall 
sal/,  or  the  PrieH  and  Clerics  shall  sing : 

MAN  that  is  born  of  a  woman 
hath  but  a  fliort  time  to  live, 
and  is  full  of  mifery.  He  conieth 
up,  and  is  cut  down,  like  a  flower; 
he  fleeth  as  it  were  a  fliadow,  and 
never  ciontinueth  in  one  flay. 
In  the  midil  of  life  we  are  in 


death :  of  wlioni  may  we  feek  for 
fiiccoiir,  but  of  thee,  ()  Lord, 
who  for  our  iins  art  juftly  dif- 
pleafed? 

Yet,  O  Lord  God  moft  holy, 
O  Lord  moll  mighty,  O  holy  and 
moft  merciful  Saviour,  deliver  us 
not  into  the  bitter  pains  of  eternal 
death. 

Thou  knoweft,  Lord,  the  fecrets 
of  our  hearts  ;  Ihut  not  thy  merci- 
ful ears  to  our  prayer ;  but  fpare 
us.  Lord  moft  holy,  O  God  moft 
mighty,  O  holy  and  merciful  Savi- 
our, thou  moft  worthy  Judge  eter- 
nal, fuifer  us  not,  at  our  laft  hour, 
for  any  pains  of  death,  to  fall  from 
thee. 

^  Then,  znhile  the  earth  shall  be  cast  upon  the  Body 
by  some  standing  by,  the  Priest  shall  say, 

FORASMUCH  as  it  hath  pleaf- 
ed  Almighty  God  of  his  great 
mercy  to  take  unto  himfelf  the 
foul  of  our  dear  brother  here  de- 
parted, we  therefore  commit  his 
body  to  the  ground ;  earth  to  earth, 
allies  to  allies,  duft  to  duft ;  in  fure 
and  certain  hope  of  the  Refurrec- 
tion  to  eternal  life,  through  our 
Lord  JefusChrift;  who  ftiall  chano-e 
our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  like 
unto  his  glorious  body,  according 
to  the  mighty  working,  whereby 
he  is  able  to  fubdue  all  things  to 
himfelf, 

^  Then  shall  be  said  or  sung, 

Heard  a  voice  from   heaven, 
faying  unto  me,  Write,  From 


At  the  Burial  of  the  Dead. 

henceforth  blefled  are  the  dead 
which  die  in  the  Lord :  even  fo 
faith  the  Spirit ;  for  they  reft  from 
their  labours. 


I 


•[[  Then  the  Priest  shall  say, 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Chri/i,  have  mere?/  iqnm  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea^ 
veil.  Hallowed  be  thy  Name/ 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpalTes,  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gaiiift  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
e^dl.    Amen. 

Prieji. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  with  whom 
do  live  the  fpirits  of  them 
that  depart  hence  in  the  Lord, 
and  with  whom  the  fouls  of  the 
faithful,  after  they  are  delivered 
from  the  burden  of  the  flefli,  are 
in  joy  and  felicity;  We  give  thee 
hearty  thanks,  for  that  it  hath 
pleafed  thee  to  deliver  this  our 
brother  out  of  the  miferies  of  this 
fulfill  world ;  befeeching  thee,  that 
it  may  pleafe  thee,  of  thy  gracious 
goodnefs,  fliortly  to  accomplifli  the 
number  of  thine  ele6t,  and  to  haft- 
en  thy  kingdom ;  that  we,  wdth 
all  thofe  that  are  departed  m  the 
true  faith  of  thy  holy  Name,  may 
have    our    perfect    confunimation 


At  the  Burial  of  the  Dead, 


and  blifs,  both  in  body  and  foul, 
in  thy  eternal  and  everlaftmg  glo- 
ry;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Aiuen. 

The  Colledl. 

OMerciM  God,  the  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  who 
is  the  refurredtion  and  the  life;  in 
whom  whofoever  believeth  fliall 
live,  though  he  die ;  and  whofo- 
ever liveth,  and  believeth  in  him, 
fliall  not  die  eternally;  who  alfo 
hath  taught  us,  by  his  holv  Apo- 
ftle  Saint  Paul,  not  to  be  forry,  as 
men  without  hope,  for  them  that 
fleep  in  him ;  We  meekly  befeech 
thee,  O  Father,  to  raife  us  from 
the  death  of  fin  unto  the  life  of 
righteoufnefs ;  that,  when  we  fliall 
depart  this  life,  we  may  reft  in 


him,  as  our  hope  is  this  our  bro- 
ther doth ;  and  that,  at  the  general 
Refurre6lion  in  the  laft  day,  we 
may  be  found  acceptable  in  thy 
fight ;  and  receive  that  blefling, 
which  thy  well-beloved  Son  fliall 
then  pronounce  to  all  that  love 
and  fear  thee,  faying,  Come,  ye 
bleffed  children  of  my  Father,  re- 
ceive the  kingdom  prepared  for 
you  fi'om  the  beginning  of  the 
world :  Grant  this,  we  befeech  thee, 
O  merciful  Father,  through  Jefus 
Chrift,  our  Mediator  and  Redeem- 
er.   Amen. 

THE  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  and  the  love  of  God, 
and  the  feUowfliip  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  be  with  us  all  evermore. 
Amen. 


THE 


THANKSGIVING  OF  WOMEN  AFTER  CHILD-BIRTH, 

COMMONLY    CALLED, 

THE   CHURCHING   OF   WOMEN* 


II  The  JVuman,  ill  l/ic  imial  time  after  Iter  Ddhery,  shall  come  into  the  Church  decentlj/  appa- 
relled, and  there  shall  kneel  down  in  some  convenient  place,  as  hath  been  accustomed,  or  as  the 
Ordinary  shall  direct:  And  then  the  Priest  shall  say  unto  her. 


FORASMUCH  as  it  hath  pleaf- 
ed  Ahnighty  God  of  his  good- 
iiefs  to  give  you  fafe  deliverance, 
and  hath  preferved  you  in  the  great 
danger  of  Child-birth ;  you  fliall 
therefore  give  hearty  thanks  unto 
God,  and  fay. 


(^  Then  shall  the  Priest  say  the  cxvi"'  Psalm,) 


I 


Dilecvi  qiioniam. 

Am    well    pleafed    :    that    the 
Lord  hath  heard  the  voice  of 
my  prayer ; 

That  he  hath  inclined  his  ear 
unto  me  :  therefore  will  I  call 
upon  him  as  long  as  I  live. 

The  fnares  of  death  compafled 
me  round  about :  and  the  pains  of 
hell  gat  hold  upon  me. 

I  found  trouble  and  heavinefs, 
and  I  called  upon  the  Name  of 
the  Lord :  O  Lord,  I  hefeech  thee, 
deliver  my  foul. 

Gracious  is  the  Lord,  and  right- 
eous :  yea,  our  God  is  merciful. 

The  Lord  prefeiTeth  the  lim- 
ple  :  I  was  in  mifery,  and  he  help- 
ed me. 


Turn  again  then  unto  thy  reft, 
O  my  foul  :  for  the  Lord  hath  re- 
warded thee. 

And  why?  thou  haft  delivered 
my  foul  from  death  :  mine  eyes 
fi'om  tears,  and  my  feet  from  fall- 
ing. 

I  will  walk  before  the  Lord  :  in 
the  land  of  the  living. 

I  believed,  and  therefore  will  I 
fpeak ;  but  I  was  fore  troubled  :  I 
faid  in  my  hafte,  All  men  are  liars. 

What  reward  fliall  I  give  unto 
the  Lord  :  for  all  the  benefits  that 
he  hath  done  unto  me? 

I  will  receive  the  cup  of  falva- 
tion  :  and  call  upon  the  Name  of 
the  Lord. 

I  will  pay  my  vows  now  in  the 
prefence  of  all  his  people  :  in  the 
courts  of  the  Lord's  houfe,  even  in 
the  midft  of  thee,  O  Jerufalem. 
Fraife  the  Lord. 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,   and   ever  fliall  be   :   world 
without  end.    Amen. 
Hh 


The  CJmrclii 

Or,  Pfalm  cxx\ai.    Niji  Dominus. 

EXCEPT  the  Lord  build  the 
hoiife  :  their  labour  is  but  loft 
that  build  it. 

Except  the  Lord  keep  the  city  : 
the  watchman  waketh  but  in  vain. 

It  is  but  loft  labour  that  ye 
liafte  to  rile  up  early,  and  ib  late 
take  reft,  and  eat  the  bread  of 
carefulnefs  :  for  fo  he  giveth  his 
beloved  fleep. 

Lo,  children  and  the  fruit  of  the 
womb  :  are  an  heritage  and  gift 
that  Cometh  of  the  Lord. 

Like  as  the  arrows  in  the  hand 
of  the  giant  :  even  fo  are  the 
young  children. 

Happy  is  the  man  that  hath  his 
quiver  full  of  them  :  they  fliall  not 
be  aftiamed  when  they  fpeak  with 
then'  enemies  in  the  gate. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  ftiall  be  :  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

%  Then  the  Priest  shall  say, 

liCt  us  pray. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Chrijl,  have  mei'cy  upon  us. 
l-(Ord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 


ng  of  Women. 

dojie  in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  oiu'  daily  bread. 
And  forgiv^e  us  our  trefpaffes.  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation ;  But  deliver  us  from 
e\\\ :  For  thine  is  the  kingdom, 
The  power,  and  the  gloiy,  For 
ever  and  ever.    Amen. 

Blinifte)-.  O  Lord,  fave  this  wo- 
man thy  fervant ; 

Aiifwer.  Who  putteth  her  truft 
in  thee. 

Minijier.  Be  thou  to  her  a  ftrong 
tower ; 

Anfwer.    From  the  face  of  her 
enemy. 

Minijier.  Lord,  hear  our  prayer. 

Anfwer.   And  let  our  ciy  come 
unto  thee. 

Minijier.  Let  us  pray. 

O  Almighty  God,  we  give  thee 
humble  thanks  for  that  thou 
haft  vouchfafed  to  deliver  this  wo- 
man thy  fervant  from  the  great  pain 
and  peril  of  Child-birth;  Grant,  m'c 
befeech  thee,  moft  merciful  Fa- 
ther, that  Ihe,  through  thy  help, 
may  both  faithfully  live,  and  walk 
according  to  thy  will,  in  this  life 
prefent;  and  alfo  may  be  partaker 
of  everlafting  glory  in  the  life  to 
come ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.   Amen. 


fl  The  jyoman,  that  comcth  to  give  he?'  Tha files,  must  offer  accustomed  Offerings ;  and,  if  there  he 
a  Commwiion,  it  is  convenient  that  she  receive  the  holy  C'oymmmion. 


A    COMMINATION, 


OR 


DENOUNCING  OF  GOD'S  ANGER  AND  JUDGEMENTS 

AGAINST  SINNERS, 

With  certain  Prayers,  to  be  used  on  the  first  Day  of  Lent,  and  at  other  times, 

as  the  Ordinary  shall  appoint. 


H  After  Morning  Prayer,  the  Litany  ended  according  to  the  accustomed  manner,  the  Priest  shall, 

in  the  Reading-Pezv  or  Pulpit,  say, 


BRETHREN,  in  the  Primitive 
Church  there  was  a  godly  dif- 
cipline,  that,  at  the  beginning  of 
Lent,  fuch  perfons  as  ftood  con- 
victed of  notorious  fin  were  put  to 
open  penance,  and  puniftied  in  this 
world,  that  their  fouls  might  be 
faved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord ;  and 
that  others,  admonifiied  by  their 
example,  might  be  the  more  afraid 
to  offend. 

Inflead  whereof,  (until  the  faid 
difcipline  may  be  reilored  again, 
which  is  much  to  be  wiflied,)  it  is 
thought  good,  that  at  this  time 
(in  the  prefence  of  you  all)  fliould 
be  read  the  general  fentences  of 
God's  curfing  againfi;  impeniterit 
finners,  gathered  out  of  the  feven 
and  twentieth  Chapter  of  Deute- 
ronomy, and  other  places  of  Scrip- 
ture; and  that  ye  Ihould  anfwer  to 
eveiy  Sentence,  Amen :  To  the  in- 
tent that,  being  admonifiied  of  the 
great  indignation  of  God  againfi; 
finners,  ye  may  the  rather  be  mov- 
ed to  earneft  and  true  repentance ; 
and  may  walk  more  warily  in  thefe 


dangerous  days ;  fleeing  from  fuch 
\'ices,  for  which  ye  afliirm  with 
your  own  mouths  the  curie  of  God 
to  be  due. 

CURSED  is  the  man  that  mak- 
eth    any    carved    or    molten 
image,  to  worfliip  it. 

^  And  the  people  shall  answer  aiid  say.  Amen. 

Minijfer.  Curfed  is  he  that  curf- 
eth  his  fiitlier  or  mother. 

An  fiver.    Amen. 

Mimjicr.  C'urfed  is  he  that  re- 
moveth  his  neighbour's  land-mark. 

Anfiver.    Amen. 

Minifier.  Curfed  is  he  that  mak- 
eth  the  blind  to  go  out  of  his  way. 

Anfwer.    Amen. 

Minijhr.  Curfed  is  he  that  per- 
verteth  the  judgement  of  the  ftran- 
ger,  the  fatherlefs,  and  ^vidow. 

Anfwer.    Amen. 

Minijler.  Cui-fed  is  he  that  fmit- 
eth  his  neighbour  fecretly. 

Anfwer.    Amen. 

Minijler.  Curfed  is  he  that  lieth 
with  his  neighbour's  wife. 

Anfwer.    Amen. 
Hh^ 


A  Commination. 


Psalm 
cxix.  21. 


S.  Matt, 
iii.  10. 


Hcb.  X. 
31. 

Psalm  xi. 
6. 


Mimjier.  Curfed  is  he  that  tak- 
eth  revvard  to  Hay  the  innocent. 
■it.Anfwe}\  Amen. 
yMinijler.  Curfed  is  he  that  put- 
teth  his  trull  in  man,  and  taketh 
man  for  his  defence,  and  in  liis 
heart  goeth  from  the  Lord. 

Anj'wer.  Amen. 
.'^.Mimjler.  Curfed  are  the  unmer- 
ciful, fornicators,  and  adulterers, 
covetous  peifons,  idolaters,  flan- 
derers,  drunkards,  and  extortion- 
ers. 

Anfwer.    Amen. 

Minijier. 

NOW  feeing  that  all  they  are 
accurfed  (as  the  prophet  Da- 
vid beareth  witnefs)  who  do  err 
and  go  afti'ay  fi*om  the  command- 
ments of  God  ;  let  us  (remember- 
ing the  dreadful  judgement  hang- 
ing over  our  heads,  and  always 
ready  to  fall  upon  us)  return  unto 
our  Lord  God,  with  all  contrition 
and  meeknefs  of  heart ;  bewailing 
and  lamenting  our  linful  life,  ac- 
knowledging and  confefling  our  of- 
fences, and  feeking  to  bring  forth 
worthy  fruits  of  penance.  For  now 
is  the  ax  put  unto  the  root  of  the 
trees,  fo  that  every  tree  that  bring- 
eth  not  forth  good  fniit  is  hewn 
down,  and  call  into  the  fire.  It 
is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God :  he  fliall 
pour  down  rain  upon  the  iinners, 
fnares,  fire  and  brimftone,  llorm 
and  temped ;  this  fliall  be  their  por- 


tion to  drink.     For  lo,  the  Lord'"'"*'' 

C    \  •  1  •/>     x'^vi.  21. 

IS  come  out  ot   Ins  place  to  vilit 
the  wickednefs   of  fuch  as  dwell 
upon   the   earth.     But   who   may  Mai.  iii. 
abide  the  day  of  his  coming?  Who  ~ 
fliall  be  able  to  endure  when  he 
appeareth?  His  fan  is  in  his  hand,  s.  Matt, 
and  he  will  purge  his  floor,  and '"  ^"" 
gather  his  wheat  into  the  barn; 
but  he  will  burn  the  chaft*  with 
unquenchable    fire.     The   day  ofixhess. 
the  Lord  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the^'^'/n. 
night :    and  wlien   men   fliall  fay. 
Peace,  and  aU  things  are  fafe,  tlieii 
Ihall  fudden  dellrin5tion  come  up- 
on them,  as  forrow  cometh  upon 
a  woman  travailing  with  child,  and 
they  Ihall  not  efcape.     Then  fliall  Rom.  ii. 
appear  the  wrath  of  God  in  the 
day  of  vengeance,  which  obftinate 
finners,  through  the  llubbornnefs 
of  their  heart,  have  heaped  unto 
themfelves ;    which    defpil'ed    the 
goodnefs,  patience,  and  long-fuf- 
feraiice  of  God,  when  he  calleth 
them    continually    to    repentance. 
Then  fliall  they  call  uiioii  me,  (faith  p^v-  «• 

•'  1  ^  28  20  30 

the  Lord,)   but  I  will  not  hear;    '   ' 
they  fliall  feek  me  early,  but  they 
fliall  not  find  me;  and  that,  be- 
caufe  they  hated  knowledge,  and 
received  not  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
but  abhorred  my  counfel,  and  de- 
fpifed  my  correc^tion.     Then  fliall  s.  Matt. 
it  be  too  late  to  knock  when  the  11,12.* 
door  fliall  be  Ihut;  and  too  late  to 
cry  for  mercy  when  it  is  the  time 
of  jufl;ice.    O  terrible  voice  of  moll 


A  Commination, 


jiift  judgement,  which  fliall  be  ])ro- 
iioiinced  upon  them,  when  it  fliall 
be  faid  unto  them,  Go,  ye  cui'fed, 
into  the  fire  eveilalling-,  wliich  is 
prepared  for  tlie  devil  and  his  an- 
cor.  vi.  gels.  Therefore,  brethren,  take  we 
heed  betime,  while  the  day  of  fal- 
.  John   vation  lafteth  ;  for  the  night  com- 
''*'^'  eth,  when  none  can  work.     But 
let  us,  while  we  have  the  light,  be- 
lieve in  the  light,  and  walk  as  chil- 
.  Matt,  dren  of  the  light ;  that  we  be  not 
"'^^'^   call  into  utter  darknefs,  where  is 
weeping   and  gnafhing  of  teeth. 
Let  us  not  abufe  the  goodnefs  of 
God,  who  calleth  us  merciliilly  to 
amendment,  and  of  his  endlefs  pity 
promifeth   us   forgivenefs   of  that 
which  is  paft,  if  with  a  perfe^  and 
true  heart  we  return  unto   him. 
Isaiah  i.  Poi«  though  our  fins  be  as  red  as 

18.  ^ 

fcarlet,  they  fliall  be  made  white  as 
fno^v ;  and  though  they  be  like  pur- 
ple, yet  they  fliall  be  made  white 
Ezekiei  as  wool.  Turn  ye  (faith  the  Lord) 
from  all  your  wickednefs,  and  your 
fin  fliall  not  be  your  deftru(5tion : 
Caft  away  from  you  all  your  un- 
godlinefs  tliat  ye  have  done:  Make 
you  new  hearts,  and  a  new  fpirit : 
Wherefore  will  ye  die,  O  ye  houfe 
of  Ifrael,  feeing  that  I  have  no 
pleafure  in  the  death  of  him  that 
dieth,  faith  the  Lord  God?  Turn 
lis.  John  ye  then,  and  ve  fliall  live.  Although 
'"■  '  ■  we  have  finned,  yet  have  we  an 
Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jefus 
Chrill  the  righteous;  and  he  is  the 


xviii.  30. 


propitiation  for  our  fins.     For  he  i;:^>ah 
was  wounded  for  our  offences,  and 
fmitten  for  our  wickednefs.     Let 
us  therefore  return  unto  him^  who 
is  the  merciful  receiver  of  all  true 
penitent  finners ;  affuring  ourfelvCvS 
that  he  is  i-eady  to  receive  us,  and 
nioft  willing  to  pardon  us,  if  we 
come  unto  him  witli  faithful  re- 
})eiitance ;  if  we  fubmit  ourfelves 
unto    him,   and    from    henceforth 
walk  in  his  ways  ;  if  we  will  take  ^:  ^^*^ 
his  eafy  yoke,   and  light  burden 
upon  us,  to  follow  him  in  lowli- 
iiefs,   patience,   and   charity,   and 
be  ordered  by  the  governance  of 
his   Holy  Spirit ;    feeking  always 
his   glory,  and  ferving  him   duly 
in    our  vocation   with    thankfoiv- 
ing :  This  if  we  do,  Chrift  will  tie- 
liver  us  from  the  curfe  of  the  law,' 
and  from  the  extreme  malediciion 
which  fliall  light  upon  them  that 
fliall  be  fet  on  the  left  hand ;  and  ^-Jl^f^] 
he  \vill  fet  us  on  his  right  hand,  3^- 
and  give  us  the  gracious  benedic- 
tion  of  his   Father,   commanding 
us  to  take  pofl'eflion  of  his  glorious 
kingdom :  unto  Avliich  he  vouchfafe 
to  bring  us  all,  for  his  infinite  mer- 


cy. 


Amen. 


^  llien  shall  they  all  kneel  upon  their  knees,  and  the 
Priest  and  Clerks  kneeling  (in  the  place  zohere  they 
are  accustomed  io  sai/  the  Litany)  shall  say  fkii 
Psalm. 

Wlifcrere  met,  Deus.    Pfalm  li.^q 

Hy\VE   mercy   upon   me,   O 
God,  after  thy  great  good* 


J) 


A  Commination. 


nefs  :  according  to  the  multitude 
of  thy  mercies  do  away  mine  of- 
fences. 

Wafli  me  throughly  from  my 
wickednefs  :  and  cleanfe  me  from 
my  fin. 

For  I  acknowledoe  mv  faults  : 
and  my  fm  is  ever  before  me. 

Againft  thee  only  have  I  fmned, 
and  done  this  evil  in  thy  fight  : 
that  thou  mighteft  be  juftified  in 
thy  faying,  and  clear  when  thou 
art  judged. 

Behold,  I  was  (hapen  in  wick- 
ednefs :  and  in  fin  hath  my  mother 
conceived  me. 

But  lo,  thou  requireft;  truth  in 
the  inward  parts  :  and  ftialt  make 
me  to  underlland  wifdom  fecretly. 

Thou  flialt  purge  me  with  hyf- 
fop,  and  I  fliall  be  clean  :  thou 
flialt  wafli  me,  and  I  fliall  be  whiter 
than  fnow. 

Thou  flialt  make  me  hear  of 
joy  and  gladnefs  :  that  the  bones 
which  thou  haft;  broken  may  re- 
joice. 

Tiu'ii  thy  face  away  from  my 
fins  :  and  put  out  all  my  mifdeeds. 

Make  me  a  clean  heart,  O 
God  :  and  renew  a  right  fpirit 
within  me. 

Call  me  not  away  from  thy  pre- 
ience  :  and  take  not  thy  holy  Spirit 
from  ine. 

O  give  me  the  comfort  of  thy 
help  again  :  and  ftablilh  me  witli 
thy  free  Spiiit. 


Then  fliall  I  teach  thy  ways  un- 
to the  wicked  :  and  fiimers  fliall 
be  converted  unto  thee. 

Deliver  me  fi'om  blood-ffuilti- 
nefs,  O  God,  thou  that  art  the 
God  of  my  health  :  and  my  tongue 
fliall  fino'  of  thv  riohteoufnefs. 

Thou  flialt  open  my  lips,  O 
Lord  :  and  my  mouth  fliall  fliew 
thy  praife. 

For  thou  defireft  no  facrifice, 
elfe  would  I  give  it  thee  :  but 
thou  delio-hteft  not  in  burnt-ofter- 
ings. 

The  facrifice  of  God  is  a  trou- 
bled fpirit  :  a  broken  and  contrite 
heart,  O  God,  flialt  thou  not  de- 
fpife. 

O  be  favourable  and  g-racious 
unto  Sioii :  build  thou  the  walls  of 
Jerufalem. 

Then  flialt  thou  be  pleafed  with 
the  facrifice  of  righteoufnefs,  vnih. 
the  burnt  offerings  and  oblations  : 
then  fliall  they  oft'er  young  bul- 
locks upon  thine  altar. 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

AnJ'wer.  As  it  was  in  the  begiii-^ 
ning,  is  now,  and  ever  fliall  be  : 
world  without  end.    Amen. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Chrijl,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

OUR  Father,  ^vhich  art  in  hea- 
ven, 1  lallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdojii  come.    Thy  will  be 


A  Commination. 


done  ill  earth,  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpalies,  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  dehver  us  from 
evil.     Amen. 

Mimjier.  O  Lord,  lave  thy  fer- 
vants ; 

Anfwer.  That  put  their  truft  in 
thee. 

Mimjier,   Send  unto  them  help 
from  above. 

Anfwer.  And  evermore  mightily 
defend  them. 

Minifier.  Help  us,  O  God  our 
Saviour. 

Anfwer.  And  for  the  gloiy  of 
thy  Name  deliver  us ;  be  mer- 
ciful to  us  finners,  for  thy  Name's 
fake. 

Mm.  O  Lord,  hear  our  prayer. 

Anfwer.  And  let  our  cry  come 
unto  thee. 

Mimjier.   Let  us  pray. 

OLord,  we  befeech  thee,  mer- 
cifully hear  our  prayers,  and 
fpare  all  thofe  who  confefs  their 
fins  unto  thee;  that  they,  whofe 
confcienccs  by  fin  are  accufed,  by 
thy  merciful  pardon  may  be  ab- 
folved ;  through  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Ameyi. 

OMofi  mighty  God,  and  mer- 
ciful Father,  who  hall  com- 
paffion  upon  all  men,  ^aiid  hateft 


nothing  that  thou  haft  made ;  who 
wouldell  not  the  death  of  a  finnerj 
but    that    he    lliould    rather   turn 
from  his  fin,  and  be  faved ;  Mer- 
cifully forgive   us   our  treljialfes ; 
receive  and  comfort  us,  who  are 
grieved  and  wearied  with  the  bur- 
den of  our  fins.     Thy  property  is 
always  to  have  mercy ;  to  thee  on- 
ly it  appertaineth  to  forgive  fins. 
Spare   us   therefore,   good  Lord, 
fpare  thy  people,  whom  thou  haft 
redeemed ;  enter  not  into  judge- 
ment mth  thy  fervants,  who  are 
vile  eardi,  and  miferable  finners ; 
but  fo  turn  thine  anger  from  us, 
who  meekly  acknowledge  our  vile- 
nefs,  and  truly  repent  us  of  our 
faults,  and  fo  make  hafte  to  help 
us  in  this  world,  that  we  may  ever 
live  with    thee   in    the  world    to 
come;   through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.   Amen. 

^  Thm  shall  the  people  say  this  that  follovseth,  after 
the  Minister. 

TURN  thou  us,  O  good  Lord, 
and  fo  (hall  we  be  turned. 
Be  favourable,  O  Lord,  be  favour- 
able to  thy  people.  Who  turn  to 
thee  in  weeping,  fafting,  and  }3ray- 
ing.  For  thou  art  a  merciful  God, 
Full  of  compaflion,  Long-fiifter- 
ing,  and  of  great  pity.  Thou  fpar- 
eft  when  we  deferve  puniihment. 
And  in  thy  wrath  thinkeft  upon 
mercy.  Spare  thy  people  good 
Lord,  fpare  them.  And  let  not 
thine  heritage  be  brought  to  con- 


j4  Commination. 


fufion.  Hear  us,  O  Lord,  for  thy 
mercy  is  great,  And  after  the  mul- 
titude of  thy  mercies  look  upon 
us ;  Tlu'ough  the  merits  and  me- 
diation of  thy  bleffed  Son,  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 


5[  Then  the  Minister  alone  shall  say, 

THE  Lord  blefs  us,  and  keep 
us ;  the  Lord  lift  up  the  light 
of  his  countenance  upon  us,  and 
give  us  peace,  now  and  for  ever- 
more.   Amen. 


[ 


THE 


PSALMS     OF     DAVID. 


THE    FIRST    DAY. 


Psalm  i.    Beatus  vir,  qui  non 
abiit  S^c. 

BLESSED  is  the  man  that  hath 
not  walked  in  the  counfel  of 
the  ungodly,  nor  ftood  in  the  way 
of  finners  :  and  hath  not  fat  in  the 
feat  of  the  fcornful. 

2  But  his  delight  is  in  the  law 
of  the  Lord  :  and  in  his  law  will 
he  exercife  himfelf  day  and  night. 

3  And  he  Ihall  be  like  a  tree 
planted  by  the  water-fide  ;  that 
will  bring'  forth  his  fruit  in  due 
feafon. 

4  His  leaf  alfo  fliall  not  wither  : 
and  look,  whatfoever  he  doeth,  it 
fliall  profper. 

5  As  for  the  ungodly,  it  is  not 
fo  with  them  :  but  they  are  like 
the  chaff,  which  the  wind  fcat- 
tereth  away  from  the  face  of  the 
earth. 

6  Therefore  the  ungodly  fliall 
not  be  able  to  ftand  in  the  judge- 
ment :  neither  the  finners  in  the 
congregation  of  the  righteous. 

7  But  the  Lord  knoweth  the 
way  of  the  righteous  :  and  the  way 
of  the  ungodly  fliall  perifli. 


Psalm  ii.    Quare fremueruni     - 
gentes? 

WHY  do  the  heathen  fo  fu- 
rioully  rage  together  :  and 
why  do  the  people  imagine  a  vain 
thing? 

2  The  kings  of  the  earth  fl;and 
up,  and  the  rulers  take  counfel 
together  :  againft:  the  Lord,  and 
againfl;  his  Anointed. 

3  Let  us  break  their  bonds  a- 
funder  :  and  cafl;  away  their  cords 
from  us. 

4  He  that  dwelleth  in  heaven 
fliall  laugh  them  to  fcorn  :  the 
Lord  fliall  have  them  in  derifion. 

5  Then  fliall  he  fpeak  unto  them 
in  his  wi'ath  :  and  vex  them  in  his 
fore  difpleafure. 

6  Yet  have  I  fet  my  King :  upon 
my  holy  hill  of  Sion. 

7  I  will  preach  the  law,  where- 
of the  Lord  hath  faid  unto  me  : 
Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I 
begotten  thee. 

8  Defire  of  me,  and  I  fliall  give 
thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inherit- 
ance :  and  the  utmofi;  parts  of  the 
earth  for  thy  pofleflion. 

9  Thou  flialt  bruife  them  with 

Ii 


Daijl.  THE    P 

a  rod  of  iron  :  and  break  them  in 
pieces  like  a  potter's  veffel. 

10  Be  wife  now  therefore,  O  ye 
kings  :  be  learned,  ye  that  are 
judges  of  the  earth. 

1 1  Serve  the  Lord  in  fear  :  and 
rejoice  unto  him  with  reverence. 

12  Kifs  the  Son,  left  he  be 
angiy,  and  fo  ye  perilh  from  the 
rio-ht  way  :  if  his  wrath  be  kindled, 
(yea,  but  a  little,)  blefled  are  all 
they  that  put  their  truft  in  him. 
Psalm  iii.   Domhie,  quid  multipli- 

cati? 
ORD,  how  are  they  increafed 
that  trouble  me  :  many  are 
they  that  rife  againft  me. 

2  Many  one  there  be  that  fay 
of  my  foul  :  There  is  no  help  for 
him  in  his  God. 

3  But  thou,  O  Lord,  art  my  de- 
fender :  thou  art  my  worfliip,  and 
the  lifter  up  of  my  head. 

4  I  did  call  upon  the  Lord  with 
my  voice  :  and  he  heard  me  out  of 
his  holy  hill. 

5  I  laid  me  down  and  flept, 
and  rofe  up  again  :  for  the  Lord 
fuftained  me. 

6  I  will  not  be  afraid  for  ten 
thoufands  of  the  people  :  that  have 
fet  themfelves   aijainft  me  round, 
about.  ,,  , 

7  Up,  Lord,  and  help  me,  O 
my  God  :  for  thou  fmitelt  all  mine 
enemies  upon  the  cheek-bone ; 
thou  haft  broken  the  teeth  of  the 
ungodly. 


S  A  L  M  S.  Day  1. 

8  Salvation  belongeth  unto  the 
Lord  :  and  thy  bleliing  is  upon 
thy  people. 

Psalm  iv.    Cum  invocarem. 

EAR  me  when  I  call,  O  God 

of  my  righteoufnefs   :   thou 

haft  let  me  at  liberty  when  I  was 

in  trouble  ;  have  mercy  upon  me, 

and  hearken  unto  my  prayer. 

2  O  ye  fons  of  men,  how  long 
will  ye  blafpheme  mine  honour  : 
and  have  fuch  pleafure  in  vanity, 
and  feek  after  leafing? 

3  Know  this  alfo,  that  the  Lord 
hath  chofen  to  himfelf  the  man 
that  is  godly  :  when  I  call  upon 
the  Lord,  he  will  hear  me. 

4  Stand  in  awe,  and  fin  not  : 
commune  with  your  own  heart, 
and  in  your  chamber,  and  be  ftill. 

5  Offer  the  facrifice  of  right- 
eoufnefs :  and  put  your  truft  in 
the  Lord. 

6  There  be  many  that  fay  :  Who 
will  fliew  us  any  good? 

7  Lord,  lift  thou  up  :  the  light 
of  thy  coimtenance  upon  us. 

8  Thou  haft  put  gladnefs  in  my 
heart  :  fince  the  time  that  their 
corn,  and  wine,-  and  oil,  increafed. 

9  I  will  lay  me  down  in  peace, 
and  take  my  reft  :  for  it  is  thou, 
Lord,  only,  that  makeft  me  dwell 
in  fafety. 

Psalm  v.    Verba  men  cmribtis. 

PONDER  my  words,  O  Lord  : 
coniider  my  meditation. 
•I 

2  O  heiu'ken  thou  unto  the  voice 


Day  1. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  1. 


of  my  calliiiig,  my  King*,  and  my 
God  :  for  unto  tiiee  will  I  make 
my  prayer. 

3  My  voice  Hialt  thou  hear  be- 
times, O  Lord  :  early  in  tlie  morn- 
ing will  I  direct  my  prayer  unto 
thee,  and  will  look  up. 

4  For  thou  art  the  God  that  hail 
no  pleafure  in  wickednefs  :  neither 
fliall  any  evil  dwell  with  thee. 

5  Such  as  be  foolilli  fliall  not 
Hand  in  thy  fight  :  for  thou  hateft 
all  them  that  work  vanity. 

6  Thou  flialt  deftroy  them  that 
fpeak  leafing  :  the  l^ord  will  abhor 
both  the  blood-thirrty  and  deceitful 
man. 

7  But  as  for  me,  I  will  come 
into  thine  houfe,  even  upon  the 
multitude  of  thy  mercy  :  and  in 
thy  fear  will  I  worfliip  toward  thy 
holy  temple. 

8  Lead  me,  O  Lord,  in  thv 
righteoufnefs,  becaufe  of  mine  ene- 
mies :  make  thy  way  plain  before 
my  face. 

9  For  there  is  no  faithfulnefs  in 
his  mouth  :  their  inward  parts  ai-e 
very  wickednefs. 

10  Their  throat  is  an  open  fe- 
pulchre  :  they  flatter  with  their 
tongue. 

11  Deftroy  thou  them,  O  God; 
let  them  perifli  through  their  own 
imaginations  :  cafl;  them  out  in  the 
multitude  of  their  ungodlinefs ;  for 
they  have  rebelled  againft  thee. 

12  And  let  all  them  that  put 


their  tnift  in  thee  rejoice  :  they 
fliall  ever  be  pivinfj  of  thanks,  be- 
caufe  thou  defendeft  them ;  they 
that  love  thy  Name  fliall  be  joyful 
in  thee ; 

13  For  thou.  Lord,  Avilt  give 
thy  bleflTing  unto  the  righteous  : 
and  with  thy  favourable  kindnefs 
wilt  thou  defend  him  as  with  a 
fliield. 

evening  |0raper. 

Psalm  vi.    Domine,  ne  in  furore. 

OLord,  rebuke  me  not  in  thine 
indignation  :  neither  chaften 
me  in  thy  difpleafure. 

2  Have  mercy  uj)on  me,  O 
Lord,  for  I  am  weak  :  O  Lord, 
heal  me,  for  my  bones  are  vexed. 

3  My  fold  alfo  is  fore  troubled  : 
but,  Lord,  how  long  wilt  thou 
punifli  me? 

4  Turn  thee,  O  Lord,  and  de- 
liver my  foul  :  O  fave  me  for  thy 
mercy's  lake. 

5  For  in  death  no  man  remem- 
bereth  thee  :  and  who  will  give 
thee  thanks  in  the  pit? 

6  I  am  weary  of  my  groaning; 
every  night  wafli  I  my  bed  :  and 
water  my  couch  with  my  tears. 

7  My  beauty  is  gone  for  very 
trouble  :  and  worn  away  becaufe 
of  all  mine  enemies. 

8  Away  from  me,  all  ye  that 
work  vanity  :  for  the  Lord  hath 
heard  the  voice  of  my  weeping. 

9  The  Lord  hath  heard  my  pe- 

Ii2 


Day  1. 


THE    PSALMS. 


titioii  :  the  Lord  will  receive  my 
prayer. 

10  All  mine  enemies  fiiall  be 
confounded,  and  fore  vexed  :  diev 
Ihall  be  turned  back,  and  put  to 
fhame  fuddenly. 
PsAL3r  vii.    I)omi?ie,  Deus  mens. 

OLord  my  God,  in  thee  have  I 
put  my  truft  :  fave  me  from 
all  them  that  perfecute  me,  and 
deliver  me ; 

2  Left  he  devour  my  foul,  like  a 
lion,  and  tear  it  in  pieces  :  while 
there  is  none  to  help. 

3  O  Lord  my  God,  if  I  have 
done  any  fuch  thing  :  or  if  there 
be  any  mckednefs  in  my  hands; 

4  If  I  have  rewarded  evil  unto 
him  that  dealt  friendly  with  me  : 
yea,  I  have  delivered  him  that 
without  any  caufe  is  mine  enemy; 

5  Then  let  mine  enemy  perfe- 
cute  my  foul,  and  take  me  :  yeai 
let  him  tread  my  life  down  upon 
the  earth,  and  lay  mine  honour  in 
the  duft. 

6  Stand  up,  O  Lord,  in  thy 
wrath,  and  lift  up  thyfelf,  becaufe 
of  the  indignation  of  mine  ene- 
mies :  arife  up  for  me  in  the  judge- 
ment that  thou  haft  commanded. 

7  And  io  Ihall  the  congregation 
of  the  people  come  about  thee  : 
for  their  fakes  therefore  lift  up  thy- 
felf ao-aia, 

8  The  Lord  fliall  judge  the  peo- 
ple; give  fentence  witli  me,  O 
Lord  :  according  to  my  righteouf- 


Day  1. 

nefs,  and  according  to  the  inno- 
cency  that  is  in  me. 

9  O  let  the  wickednefs  of  the 
ungodly  come  to  an  end  :  but 
guide  thou  the  juft. 

10  For  the  rijjhteous  God  :  tri- 
eth  the  very  hearts  and  reins. 

11  My  help  Cometh  of  God  : 
who  preferveth  them  that  ai'e  true 
of  heart. 

12  God  is  a  righteous  Judge, 
ftrong,  and  patient  :  and  God  is 
provoked  every  day. 

13  If  a  man  will  not  turn,  he 
will  whet  his  fword  :  he  hath  bent 
his  bow,  and  made  it  ready. 

14  He  hath  prepared  for  him 
the  inftruments  of  death  :  he  or- 
daineth  his  arrows  againft  the  per- 
fecutors. 

15  Behold,  he  travaileth  with 
mifchief  :  he  hath  conceived  for- 
row,  and  brought  forth  ungodlinefs. 

16  He  hath  graven  and  digged 
up  a  pit  :  and  is  fallen  himfelf  in- 
to the  deftrudtion  that  he  made 
for  other. 

17  For  his  travail  fliall  come 
upon    his    own    head    :    and   his 
wickednefs  fliall  fall  on  his  own, 
pate. 

18  1  will  a'ive  thanks  unto  the 
I^ord,  according  to  his  righteouf- 
neis  :  and  I  will  praifc  the  Name 
of  the  Lord  moft  High. 

FsALM  viii.  Difumt^ Dumhins nojier. 

OLord    our    Governour,    how 
excellent  is  thy  Name  in  all 

■.Jl'JVJL    '-JlV->  •' 

'ft 


Dmj  2. 

the  world  :  thou  that  haft  fet  thy 
glory  above  the  heavens ! 

2  Out  of  the  mouth  of  very 
babes  and  fucklings  haft  thou  or- 
dained ftrength,  becaufe  of  thine 
enemies  :  that  thou  mighteft  ftill 
the  enemy,  and  the  avenger. 

3  For  1  will  confider  thy  hea- 
vens, even  the  works  of  thy  fin- 
gers  :  the  moon  and  the  ftars, 
which  thou  haft  ordained. 

4  What  is  man,  that  thou  art 
mindful  of  him  :  and  the  fon  of 
man,  that  thou  vifiteft  him  ? 

5  Thou  madeft  him  lower  than 
the  ansfels  :  to  crown  him  with 
glory  and  worlhip. 

6  Thou  makeft  him  to  have  do- 
minion of  the  works  of  thy  hands  : 
and  thou  haft  put  all  things  in  fub- 
jedlion  under  his  feet ; 

7  All  Iheep  and  oxen  ;  yea,  and 
the  beafts  of  the  field  ; 

8  The  fowls  of  the  air,  and  the 
fifties  of  the  fea  :  and  whatfoever 
walketh  through  the  paths  of  the 
feas. 

9  O  Lord  our  Governour  :  how 
excellent  is  thy  Name  in  all  the 
world ! 

horning  i&raper. 

Psalm  ix.    Conjitehor  tihi. 

I  Will  give  thanks  imto  thee,  O 
Lord,  with  my  whole  heart  : 
I  will  fpeak  of  all  thy  marvellous 
works. 

2  I  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in 


THE    PSALMS. 


Ba\j% 

thee  :  yea,  my  fongs  will  I  make 
of  thy  Name,  ()  thou  moft  iligheft 

3  While  mine  enemies  ai'e  dri- 
ven back  :  they  fliall  ftirfl  and  perifti 
at  thy  prefence. 

4  For  thou  haft  maintained  my 
right  and  my  caufe  :  thou  art  fet 
in  the  throne  that  judgeft  right. 

5  Thou  haft  rebuked  the  hea- 
then, and  deftroyed  the  ungodly  : 
thou  haft  put  out  their  name  for 
ever  and  ever. 

6  O  thou  enemy,  deftru6lions 
are  come  to  a  perpetual  end  :  even 
as  the  cities  which  thou  haft  de- 
ftroyed ;  their  memorial  is  perifti- 
ed  with  them. 

7  But  the  Lord  ftiall  endure  for 
ever  :  he  hath  alfo  prepared  his 
feat  for  judgement. 

8  For  he  ftiall  judge  the  world 
in  riffhteoufnefs  :  and  niinifter  true 
judgement  unto  the  people. 

9  The  Lord  alfo  will  be  a  de- 
fence for  the  opprefled  :  even  a  re- 
fuse in  due  time  of  trouble. 

10  And  they  that  know  thy 
Name  will  put  their  truft  in  thee  . 
for  thou,  Lord,  haft  never  failed 
them  that  feek  thee. 

11  O  praife  the  Lord  which 
dwelleth  in  Sion  :  ftiew  the  people 
of  his  doings. 

12  For,  when  he  inaketh  inqui- 
fition  for  blood,  he  remembereth 
them  :  and  forgetteth  not  the  com- 
plaint of  the  poor.  .       , 

\6   Have  mercy  upon  me,  TJ 


Day  2. 


THE    P 


Lord ;  confider  the  trouble  which 
I  fuffer  of  them  that  hate  me  : 
thou  that  lifted  me  up  from  the 
gates  of  death. 

14  That  I  may  fliew  all  thy 
praifes  within  the  ports  of  the 
daughter  of  Sioii  :  1  will  rejoice  in 
thy  falvation. 

15  The  heathen  are  funk  down 
in  the  pit  that  they  made  :  in  the 
fame  net  which  they  hid  privily, 
is  their  foot  taken. 

16  The  Lord  is  known  to  exe- 
cute judgement  :  the  ungodly  is 
trapped  in  the  work  of  his  own 
hands. 

17  The  wicked  fliall  be  turned 
into  hell  :  and  all  the  people  that 
forget  God. 

18  For  the  poor  fliall  not  alway 
be  forgotten  :  the  patient  abiding 
of  the  meek  fliall  not  perifli  for 
ever. 

19  Up,  Lord,  and  let  not  man 
have  the  upper  hand  :  let  the  hea- 
then be  judged  in  thy  fight. 

20  Put  them  in  fear,  O  Lord  : 
that  the  heathen  may  know  them- 
felves  to  be  but  men. 

Psalm  x.    Ut  quid,  Domine? 

WHY  ftandeft  thou  fo  far  ofl", 
()  Lord  :  and  hidefi;  thy  face 
in  the  needful  time  of  trouble? 

2  The  ungodly  for  his  own  lufi^ 
doth  perfecute  the  poor  :  let  them 
be  taken  in  the  crafty  wilinefs  that 
they  have  imagined. 

o  For  the  ungodly  hath  made 


S  A  L  M  S  Bay  ± 

boalt  of  his  own  heart's  defire  : 
and  fpeaketh  good  of  the  covetous, 
whom  God  abhorreth. 

4  The  ungodly  is  fo  proud,  that 
he  careth  not  for  God  :  neither  is 
God  in  all  his  thoughts. 

5  His  ways  are  alway  grievous  : 
thy  judgements  are  far  above  out 
of  his  fight,  and  therefore  defieth 
he  all  his  enemies. 

6  For  he  hath  faid  in  his  heart, 
Tuih,  I  fliall  never  be  cafl;  down  : 
there  fliall  no  harm  happen  un- 
to me. 

7  His  mouth  is  full  of  cui'fing, 
deceit,  and  fraud :  under  his  tongue 
is  imgodlinefs  and  vanity. 

8  He  fitteth  lurking  in  the 
thievifli  corners  of  the  fi;reets  :  and 
privily  in  his  lurking  dens  doth  he 
murder  the  innocent;  his  eyes  are 
fet  againft  the  poor. 

9  For  he  lieth  waiting  fecretly, 
even  as  a  lion  lurketh  he  in  his 
den  :  that  he  may  ravifii  the  poor. 

10  He  doth  ravifli  the  poor  : 
when  he  getteth  him  into  his  net. 

1 1  He  falleth  down,  and  hum- 
bletli  himfelf  :  that  the  congrega- 
tion of  the  poor  may  fall  into  the 
hands  of  his  captains. 

12  He  hath  faid  in  his  heart, 
Tufli,  God  hath  forgotten  :  he  hid- 
eth  away  his  face,  and  he  will  ne- 
ver fee  it. 

13  Arife,  O  Lord  (jod,  and  lift 
up  thine  hand  :  forget  not  the 
poor. 


Day±  THE    PSALMS 

14  Wherefore  flioiild  the  wicked 
blafpheine  God  :  while  lie  doth 
fay  ill  his  heart,  Tufti,  thou  God 
careft  not  for  it. 

15  Surely  thou  haft  feen  it :  for 
thou  beholdeft  uno-odlinefs  and 
wrong. 

16  That  thou  may  eft  take  the 
matter  into  thine  hand  :  the  poor 
committeth  himfelf  unto  thee ; 
for  thou  art  the  helper  of  the 
fiiendlefs. 

17  Break  thou  the  power  of  the 
ungodly  and  malicious  :  take  away 
his  ungodiinefs,  and  thou  flialt 
find  none. 

18  The  Lord  is  King  for  ever 


and  ever  :  and  the  heathen  are 
periihed  out  of  the  land. 

19  Lord,  thou  haft  heard  the 
delire  of  the  poor  :  thou  prepareft 
their  heart,  and  thine  ear  hearken- 
eth  thereto ; 

20  To  help  the  fatherlefs  and 
poor  unto  their  right :  that  the  man 
of  the  earth  be  no  more  exalted 
againft  them. 


,j.. 


SALM  XI. 


In  Domino  conjido. 

IN  the  Lord  put  I  my  truft  : 
how  fay  ye  then  to  my  foul, 
that  flie  iliould  flee  as  a  bird  unto 
the  hill? 

2  For  lo,  the  ungodly  bend  their 
bow,  and  make  ready  their  arrows 
within  the  quiver  :  that  they  may 
privily  llioot  at  them  which  are 
true  of  heart. 

3  For  the  foundations  will  be 


Day  2. 

caft  down   :   and  what   hath  the 
righteous  done? 

4  The  Lord  is  in  his  holy  tem- 
ple :  the  Lord's  feat  is  in  heaven. 

5  His  eyes  conlider  the  poor  : 
and  his  eye-lids  try  the  children 
of  men. 

6  The  Lord  alloweth  the  right- 
eous :  but  the  ungodly,  and  him 
that  delighteth  in  wickednefs  doth 
his  foul  abhor. 

7  Upon  the  ungodly  he  fliall  rain 
fnares,  fire  and  brimftone,  ftorm 
and  tempeft  :  this  fliall  be  their 
portion  to  drink. 

8  For  the  righteous  Lord  loveth 
righteoufnefs  :  his  countenance  will 
behold  the  thing  that  is  juit. 


Psalm  xii.    Salvum  me  fac. 
ELP  me,  Lord,  for  there  is 
not  one  godly  man  left  :  for 
the  faithful  are  miniflied  from  a- 
mong  the  children  of  men. 

2  They  talk  of  vanity  eveiy  one 
with  his  neighbour  :  they  do  but 
flatter  with  their  lips,  and  diflem- 
ble  in  their  double  heart. 

3  The  Lord  fliall  root  out  all 
deceitful  lips  :  and  the  tongue  that 
fpeaketh  proud  things  ; 

4  Which  have  faid.  With  our 
tongue  will  we  prevail  :  we  are 
they  that  ought  to  fpeak,  who  is,^ 
lord  over  us  ?  rj 

5  Now  for  the  comfortlefs  trou4j 
bles'  fake  of  the  needy  :  and  be- 


Day  9,. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  ± 


caufe  of  the  deep  figliing  of  the 
poor, 

6  I  will  up,  faith  the  Ijord  :  and 
will  help  every  one  from  him  that 
fwelleth  againft  him,  and  will  fet 
him  at  reft. 

7  The  words  of  the  Lord  are 
pure  words  :  even  as  the  filver, 
which  fi'om  the  earth  is  tried,  and 
purified  feven  times  in  the  fire. 

8  Thou  flialt  keep  them,  O 
Lord  :  thou  (halt  preferve  him 
from  this  generation  for  ever. 

9  The  ungodly  walk  on  every 
fide  :  when  they  are  exalted,  the 
children  of  men  are  put  to  re- 
buke. 

Psalm  xiii.    Vfque  quo,  Domine? 

HOW  long  wilt  thou  forget 
me,  O  Lord,  for  ever  :  how 
long  wilt  thou  hide  thy  face  from 
me? 

2  How  long  fliall  I  feek  coun- 
fel  in  my  foul,  and  be  fo  vexed  in 
my  heart  :  how  long  fliall  mine 
enemies  triumph  over  me? 

3  Confider,  and  hear  me,  O 
Lord  my  God  :  lighten  mine  eyes, 
that  I  fleep  not  in  death. 

4  Left  mine  enemy  fay,  I  have 
prevailed  againft  him  :  for  if  I  be 
caft  down,  they  that  trouble  me 
will  rejoice  at  it. 

5  But  my  truft  is  in  thy  mercy  : 
and  my  heart  is  joyful  in  thy  fal- 
vation. 

6  I  will  fing  of  the  Lord,  be- 
caufe   he    hath  dealt  fo   lovingly 


with  me  :  yea,  I  will  praife  the 
Name  of  the  Lord  moft  Hioheft. 
Psalm  xiv.    Divit  injipicns. 

THE  fool  hath  faid  in  his  heart : 
There  is  no  God. 

2  They  are  corrupt,  and  be- 
come abominable  in  their  doings  : 
there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no 
not  one. 

3  The  Lord  looked  down  from 
heaven  upon  the  children  of  men  : 
to  fee  if  there  were  any  that  would 
underftand,  and  feek  after  God. 

4  But  they  are  all  gone  out  of 
the  way,  they  are  altogether  be- 
come abominable  :  there  is  none 
that  doeth  good,  no  not  one. 

5  Their  throat  is  an  open  fepul- 
chre,  with  their  tongues  have  they 
deceived  :  the  poifon  of  afps  is  un- 
der their  lips. 

6  Their  mouth  is  full  of  curfing 
and  bitternefs  :  their  feet  are  fwift 
to  Ihed  blood. 

7  Deftrucftion  and  imhappinefs 
is  in  their  ways,  and  the  way  of 
peace  have  they  not  known  :  there 
is  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes. 

8  Have  they  no  knowledge,  that 
they  are  all  fuch  workers  of  mif- 
chief  :  eating  up  my  people  as  it 
were  bread,  and  call  not  upon  the 
Lord? 

9  There  were  they  brought  in 
great  fear,  even  where  no  fear 
was  :  for  God  is  in  the  generation 
of  the  righteous, 

10  As  for  you,  ye  liave  made  a 


Bay  S. 

mock  at  the  counfel  of  the  poor  : 
becaufe  he  putteth  his  truil  in  the 
Lord. 

1 1  Who  fhall  give  falvation  un- 
to Ifrael  out  of  Sion?  When  the 
Lord  turneth  the  captivity  of  his 
people  :  then  fliall  Jacob  rejoice, 
and  Ifrael  fliall  be  glad. 

JHonung  j^raper. 

Psalm  xv.  Domine,  quis  habitabit? 

LORD,  who  fliall  dwell  in  thy 
tabernacle  :  or  who  fliall  reft 
upon  thy  holy  hill? 

2  Even  he,  that  leadeth  an  un- 
cormpt  life  :  and  doeth  the  thing 
which  is  right,  and  fpeaketh  the 
truth  from  liis  heart. 

3  He  that  hath  ufed  no  deceit 
in  his  tongue,  nor  done  evil  to  his 
neighbour  :  and  hath  not  flander- 
ed  his  neighbour. 

4  He  that  fetteth  not  by  him- 
felf,  but  is  lowly  in  his  own  eyes  : 
and  inaketh  much  of  them  that 
fear  the  Lord. 

5  He  that  fweareth  unto  his 
neighbour,  and  difappointeth  him 
not  :  though  it  were  to  his  own 
hindrance. 

6  He  that  hath  not  given  his 
money  upon  ufury  :  nor  taken  re- 
ward againil  the  innocent. 

7  Whofo  doeth  thefe  things  : 
Ihall  never  fall. 

Psalm  xvi.    Conferva  me,  Domine. 

PRESERVE  me,  O  God  :  for 
in  thee  have  I  put  my  truft. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  S. 

2  O  my  foul,  thou  haft  faid  un- 
to the  Ijord  :  Thou  art  my  God, 
my  goods  are  nothing  unto  thee. 

3  All  my  delight  is  upon  the 
faints,  that  are  in  the  earth  :  and 
upon  fuch  as  excel  in  virtue. 

4  But  they  that  run  after  an- 
other god  :  fliall  have  great  trouble. 

5  Their  drink-ofl'erings  of  blood 
will  I  not  offer :  neither  make  men- 
tion of  their  names  within  my  lips. 

6  The  Lord  himfelf  is  the  por- 
tion of  mine  inheritance,  and  of 
my  cup  :  thou  flialt  maintain  my 
lot. 

7  The  lot  is  faflen  unto  me  in  a 
fair  ground  :  yea,  I  have  a  goodly 
heritage. 

8  I  will  thank  the  Lord  for  giv- 
ing me  warning  :  my  reins  alfo 
chaften  me  in  the  night  feafon. 

9  I  have  fet  God  always  before 
me  :  for  he  is  on  my  right  hand, 
therefore  I  fliall  not  fall. 

10  Wherefore  my  heart  was 
glad,  and  my  glory  rejoiced  :  my 
flefli  alfo  fliall  reft  in  hope. 

11  For  why?  thou  flialt  not 
leave  my  foul  in  hell :  neither  flialt 
thou  fuffer  thy  Holy  One  to  fee 
corruption. 

12  Thou  flialt  fliew  me  the  path 
of  life ;  in  thy  prefence  is  the  ful- 
nefs  of  joy  :  and  at  thy  right  hand 
there  is  pleafure  for  evermore. 

Psalm  xvii.    Ecvaudi,  Domine. 

HEAR  the  right,  O  Lord,  con- 
fider  my  complaint   :   and 
Kk 


Bay  S. 

hearken  unto  my  prayer,  that  go- 
eth  not  out  of  feigned  lips. 

2  Let  my  fentence  come  forth 
from  thy  prefence  :  and  let  thine 
eyes  look  upon  the  thing  that  is 
equal. 

3  Thou  haft  proved  and  vilited 
mine  heart  in  the  night-feafon ; 
thou  haft  tried  me,  and  ftialt  find 
no  wickednefs  in  me  :  for  I  am 
utterly  purpofed  that  my  mouth 
ftiall  not  offend. 

4  Becaufe  of  men's  works,  that 
are  done  againft  the  words  of  thy 
lij)s  :  I  have  kept  me  from  the 
ways  of  the  deftroyer. 

5  O  hold  thou  up  my  goings  in 
thy  paths  :  that  my  footlleps  flip 
not. 

6  I  have  called  upon  thee,  O 
God,  for  thou  flialt  hear  me  :  in- 
cline thine  ear  to  me,  and  hearken 
unto  my  words. 

7  Shew  thy  marvellous  loving- 
kindnefs,  thou  that  art  the  Savi- 
our of  them  which  put  their  truft 
in  thee  :  from  fuch  as  refift  thy 
right  hand. 

8  Keep  me  as  the  apple  of  an 
eye  :  hide  me  under  the  Ihadow  of 
thy  wings, 

9  From  the  ungodly  that  trou- 
ble me  :  mine  enemies  compafs 
me  round  about  to  take  away  my 
foul. 

10  They  are  inclofed  in  their 
own  fat  :  and  their  mouth  fpeak- 
eth  proud  things. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  3. 


1 1  They  lie  waiting  in  our  way 
on  every  fide  :  turning  their  eyes 
down  to  the  ground  ; 

12  lAke  as  a  lion  that  is  greedy 
of  his  prey  :  and  as  it  were  a  lion's 
whelp,  lurking  in  fecret  places. 

13  Up,  Lord,  diiappoint  him, 
and  caft  him  down  :  deliver  my 
foul  from  the  ungodly,  which  is  a 
fword  of  thine ; 

14  From  the  men  of  thy  hand, 
O  Lord,  from  the  men,  I  fay,  and 
from  the  evil  world  :  which  have 
their  portion  in  this  life,  whofe 
bellies  thou  filleft  ^vith  thy  hid 
treafure. 

15  They  have  children  at  their 
defire  :  and  leave  the  reft  of  their 
fubftance  for  their  babes. 

1  ()  But  as  for  me,  I  will  behold 
thy  prefence  in  righteoufnefs  :  and 
when  I  a\A'ake  up  after  thy  like- 
iiefs,  I  ftiall  be  fatisfied  with  it. 

Psalm  xviii.   DiUirmn  te,  Domine. 

I  Will  love  thee,  O  Lord,  my 
ftrength;  the  Lord  is  my  ftony 
rock,  and  my  defence  :  my  Savi- 
our, my  God,  and  my  might,  in 
whom  1  will  truft,  my  buckler,  the 
horn  alfo  of  my  falvation,  and  my 
refuffe. 

2  I  will  call  upon  the  Lord, 
which  is  "svorthy  to  be  praifed  : 
fo  ftiall  I  be  fafe  from  mine  ene- 
mies. 

3  The  forrows  of  death  com- 


Bay  3. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bay  3. 


pafled  me  :  and  the  overflowings 
of  ungodlinefs  made  me  afraid. 

4  The  pains  of  hell  came  about 
me  :  the  fnares  of  death  overtook 


me. 


5  In  my  trouble  I  will  call  up- 
on the  Lord  :  and  complain  unto 
my  God. 

6  So  fliall  he  hear  my  voice  out 
of  his  holy  temple  :  and  my  com- 
plaint Ihail  come  before  him,  it 
Ihall  enter  even  into  his  ears. 

7  The  earth  trembled  and  quak- 
ed :  the  very  foundations  alfo  of 
the  hills  fliook,  and  were  removed, 
becaufe  he  M^as  wroth. 

8  There  went  a  fmoke  out  in 
his  prefence  :  and  a  confuming  fire 
out  of  his  mouth,  fo  that  coals 
were  kindled  at  it. 

9  He  bowed  the  heavens  alfo, 
and  came  down  :  and  it  was  dark 
under  his  feet. 

10  He  rode  upon  the  cherubims, 
and  did  fly  :  he  came  flying  upon 
the  wings  of  the  wind. 

1 1  He  made  darknefs  his  fecret 
place  :  his  pavilion  round  about 
him  with  dark  water,  and  thick 
clouds  to  cover  him. 

12  At  the  brightnefs  of  his  pre- 
fence his  clouds  removed  :  hail- 
ftones,  and  coals  of  fire. 

13  The  Lord  alfo  thundered 
out  of  heaven,  and  the  Higheft 
gave  his  thunder  :  hail-flones,  and 
coals  of  fire. 

14  He  fent  out  his  arrows,  and 


fcattered  them  :  he  caft  forth  light- 
nings, and  dellroyed  them. 

15  The  fprings  of  waters  were 
feen,  and  the  foundations  of  the 
round  world  were  difcovered,  at 
thy  chiding,  ()  Lord  :  at  the 
blafl;ing  of  the  breath  of  thy  dif- 
pleafure. 

16  He  fliall  fend  down  from  on 
high  to  fetch  me  :  and  fliall  take 
me  out  of  many  waters. 

17  He  fliall  deliver  me  from  my 
ftrongeft;  enemy,  and  from  them 
which  hate  me  :  for  they  are  too 
mighty  for  me. 

18  They  prevented  me  in  the 
day  of  my  trouble  :  but  the  Lord 
was  my  upholder. 

19  He  brought  me  forth  alfo 
into  a  place  of  liberty  :  he  brought 
me  forth,  even  becaufe  he  had  a 
favour  unto  me. 

20  The  Lord  fliall  reward  me 
after  my  righteous  dealing  :  ac- 
cording to  the  cleannefs  of  my 
hands  fliall  he  recompenfe  me. 

21  Becaufe  I  have  kept  the 
ways  of  the  Lord  :  and  have  not 
forfaken  my  God,  as  the  wicked 
doth. 

22  For  I  have  an  eye  unto  all 
his  laws  :  and  will  not  cafl;  out  his 
commandments  fi-om  me. 

23  I  was  alfo  uncorrupt  before 
him  :  and  efchewed  mine  own 
wickednefs. 

24  Therefore  fliall  the  Lord  re- 
ward me  after  my  righteous  deal- 

Kka 


Day  S. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  8. 


ing  :  and  according  unto  the  clean- 
nefs  of  my  hands  hi  his  eye-fight. 
j:  25  With  the  holy  thou  fliah  be 
holy  :  and  with  a  perfect  man  thou 
flialt  be  perfedt. 

26  With  the  clean  thou  ftialt  be 
clean  :  and  with  the  froward  thou 
flialt  learn  frowardnefs. 

27  For  thou  ftialt  fave  the  peo- 
ple that  are  in  adverfity  :  and 
ihalt  bring  down  the  high  looks 
of  the  proud. 

28  Thou  alfo  flialt  light  my 
candle  :  the  Lord  my  God  fliall 
make  my  darknefs  to  be  light. 

29  For  in  thee  I  fliall  difcomfit 
an  hoft  of  men  :  and  with  the 
help  of  my  God  I  fliall  leap  over 
the  wall. 

30  The  way  of  God  is  an  un- 
defiled  way  :  the  word  of  the  Lord 
alfo  is  tried  in  the  fire ;  he  is  the 
defender  of  all  them  that  put  their 
tnifl;  in  him. 

31  For  who  is  God,  but  the 
Lord  :  or  who  hath  any  fl;rength, 
except  our  God? 

32  It  is  God,  that  girdeth  me 
with  ftrength  of  war  :  and  maketli 
my  way  perfect. 

33  He  maketh  my  feet  like 
harts'  feet  :  and  fetteth  me  up  on 
high. 

34  He  teacheth  mine  hands  to 
fight  :  and  mine  arms  fliall  break 
even  a  bow  of  fteel. 

35  Thou  hafl;  given  me  the  de- 
fence of  thy  falvation  :  thy  right 


hand  alfo  fliall  hold  me  up,  and 
thy  loving  corredlion  fliall  make 


me  great. 


36  Thou  flialt  make  room  e- 
iiougli  under  me  for  to  go  ;  that 
my  footfteps  fliall  not  flide. 

37  I  will  follow  upon  mine  ene- 
mies, and  overtake  them  ;  neither 
will  I  turn  ao^aiii  till  I  have  de- 
ftroyed  them. 

38  I  will  finite  them,  that  they 
fliall  not  be  able  to  fl;and  :  but  fall 
under  my  feet. 

39  Thou  haft;  girded  me  with 
fl;rengtli  unto  the  battle  :  thou 
flialt  throw  down  mine  enemies 
under  me. 

40  Thou  haft  made  mine  ene- 
mies alfo  to  turn  their  backs  upon 
me  :  and  I  fliall  deftroy  them  that 
hate  me. 

41  They  fliall  cry,  but  there 
fliall  be  none  to  help  them  :  yea, 
even  unto  the  Lord  fliall  they  ciy, 
but  he  fliall  not  hear  them. 

42  I  Avill  beat  them  as  fiiiall  as 
the  duft  before  the  wind  :  I  will 
caft  them  out  as  the  clay  in  the 
ftreets. 

43  Thou  flialt  deliver  me  from 
the  ftrivings  of  the  people  :  and 
thou  ftialt  make  me  the  head  of 
the  heathen. 

44  A  people  whom  I  have  not 
known  :  fliall  ferve  me. 

45  As  loon  as  they  hear  of  me, 
they  fliall  obey  me  :  but  the  ftrange 
children  fliall  diftemble  with  me. 


Day  4. 


THE    P 


46  The  ftrange  children  ftiall 
fail  :  and  be  afraid  out  of  their 
prifons. 

47  The  Lord  liveth,  and  blelTed 
be  my  llrong  helper  :  and  praifed 
be  the  God  of  my  falvation. 

48  Even  the  God  that  feeth 
that  I  be  avenged  :  and  fubdueth 
tlie  people  unto  me. 

49  It  is  he  that  delivereth  me 
from  my  cruel  enemies,  and  fet- 
teth  me  up  above  mine  adver- 
faries  :  thou  flialt  rid  me  from  the 
wicked  man. 

50  For  this  caufe  will  I  give 
thanks  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  among 
the  Gentiles  :  and  ling  praifes  un- 
to thy  Name. 

51  Great  profperity  giveth  he 
unto  his  King  :  and  flieweth  lov- 
ing-kindnefs  unto  David  his  An- 
ointed, and  unto  his  feed  for  ever- 
more. 

£@orning  l^uvtx. 

Psalm  xix.    Coeli  enarrant. 

THE  heavens  declare  the  gloiy 
of  God  :  and  the  firmament 
flieweth  his  handy-work. 

2  One  day  telleth  another  :  and 
one  night  certifieth  another. 

3  There  is  neither  fpeech  nor 
language  :  but  their  voices  are 
heard  among  them. 

4  Their  found  is  gone  out  into 
all  lands  :  and  their  words  into  the 
ends  of  the  world. 

5  In  them  hath  he  fet  a  taber- 


SALMS.  Day^. 

nacle  for  the  fun  :  which  cometh 
forth  as  a  bridegroom  out  of  his 
chamber,  and  rejoiceth  as  a  giant 
to  run  his  couife. 

6  It  goeth  forth  from  the  utter- 
moft  part  of  the  heaven,  and  run- 
neth about  unto  the  end  of  it 
again  :  and  there  is  nothing  hid 
from  the  heat  thereof 

7  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  an 
undefiled  law,  converting  the  foul : 
the  teftimony  of  the  Lord  is  fure, 
and  giveth  wifdom  unto  the  fimple. 

8  The  ftatutes  of  the  Lord 
are  right,  and  rejoice  the  heart  : 
the  commandment  of  the  Lord  is 
pure,  and  giveth  light  unto  the 
eyes. 

9  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  clean, 
and  endureth  for  ever  :  the  judge- 
ments of  the  Lord  are  true,  and 
righteous  altogether. 

10  More  to  be  delired  are  they 
than  gold,  yea,  than  much  fine 
gold  :  fweeter  alfo  than  honey, 
and  the  honey-comb. 

11  Moreover,  by  them  is  thy 
fervant  taught  :  and  in  keeping  of 
them  there  is  great  reward. 

12  Who  can  tell  how  oft  he  of- 
fendeth  :  O  cleanfe  thou  me  from 
my  fecret  faults. 

13  Keep  thy  fervant  alfo  from 
prefumptuous  fins,  left  they  get 
the  dominion  over  me  :  fo  fliall  I 
be  undefiled,  and  innocent  from 
the  great  offence. 

14  Let  the  words  of  my  mouth. 


Day  4. 


THE    PSALMS. 


and  the  meditation  of  my  heart  : 
be  alway  acceptable  in  thy  fight, 

15  O  Lord  :  my  lirength,  and 
my  redeemer. 
Psalm  xx.    Kcvaudiat  te  Domiims. 

THE  Lord  hear  thee  in  the  day 
of  trouble  :  the  Name  of  the 
God  of  Jacob  defend  thee ;  _ 

2  Send  thee  help  fi*om  the  fanc- 
tuaiy  :  and  ftrengthen  thee  out  of 
Sion ; 

3  Remember  all  thy  offerings  : 
and  accept  thy  biu'nt  facrifice ; 

4  Grant  thee  thy  heart's  defire  : 
and  fulfil  all  thy  mind. 

5  We  will  rejoice  in  thy  falva- 
tion,  and  triumph  in  the  Name  of 
the  Lord  our  God  :  the  Lord  per- 
fomi  all  thy  petitions. 

6  Now  know  I,  that  the  Lord 
helpeth  his  Anointed,  and  will 
hear  him  from  his  holy  heaven  : 
even  with  the  wholefome  llrength 
of  his  right  hand. 

7  Some  put  their  trull  in  cha- 
riots, and  fome  in  horfes  :  but  we 
will  remember  the  Name  of  the 
Lord  our  God. 

8  They  are  brought  down,  and 
fallen  :  but  we  are  rifen,  and  ftand 
upright, 

9  Save,  Lord,  and  hear  us,  O 
King  of  heaven  ;  when  we  call 
upon  thee. 

Psalm  xxi.  Domme,  in  virtute  tun. 

THE  King  ihall  rejoice  in  thy 
ftrength,  O  Lord  :  exceeding 
glad  fliall  he  be  of  thy  falvation. 


Day  4, 

2  Thou  haft  given  him  his 
heart's  defire  :  and  haft  not  deni- 
ed him  the  requeft  of  his  lips. 

3  For  thou  flialt  prevent  him 
with  the  bleflings  of  goodnefs  : 
and  flialt  fet  a  crown  of  pure  gold 
upon  his  head. 

4  He  alked  life  of  thee,  and 
thou  gaveft  him  a  long  life  :  even 
for  ever  and  ever. 

5  His  honour  is  great  in  thy 
falvation  :  gloiy  and  great  worfliip 
flialt  thou  lay  upon  him. 

6  For  thou  flialt  give  him  ever- 
lafting  felicity  :  and  make  him 
glad  with  the  joy  of  thy  counte- 
nance. 

7  And  why?  becaufe  the  King 
putteth  his  truft  in  the  Lord  :  and 
in  the  mercy  of  the  moft  Highell 
he  fliall  not  mifcarry. 

8  All  thine  enemies  fliall  feel 
thy  hand  :  thy  right  hand  Ihall 
find  out  them  that  hate  thee. 

9  Thou  flialt  make  them  like  a 
fiery  oven  in  time  of  thy  wrath  : 
the  Lord  fliall  deftroy  them  in  his 
difpleafure,  and  the  fire  fliall  con- 
fume  them. 

10  Their  fniit  flialt  thou  root 
out  of  the  earth  :  and  their  feed 
from  among  the  children  of  men. 

11  For  they  intended  mifchief 
againll  thee  :  and  imagined  fuch 
a  device  as  they  are  not  able  to 
perfonn. 

12  Therefore  flialt  thou  put 
them  to  flight  :  and  the  ftrings  of 


Day  4<. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  4: 


thy   bow  flialt  thou   make  ready 
againll  the  face  of  them. 

13  Be  thou  exalted,  Lord,  in 
thine  own  ftrengtli  :  fo  will  we 
ling,  and  praife  thy  power. 

Psalm  xxii.    Dens,  Dens  mens. 

MY  God,  my  God,  look  upon 
me ;  why  haft  thou  forlak- 
en  me  :  and  art  fo  far  from  my 
health,  and  from  the  words  of  my 
complaint? 

2  O  my  God,  I  cry  in  the  day- 
time, but  thou  heareft  not  :  and 
in  the  night  feafon  alfo  I  take  no 
reft. 

3  And  thou  continueft  holy  :  O 
thou  worfliip  of  Ifrael. 

4  Our  fathers  hoped  in  thee  : 
they  trufted  in  thee,  and  thou 
didft  deliver  them. 

5  They  called  upon  thee,  and 
were  holpen  :  they  put  their  truft 
in  thee,  and  were  not  confounded. 

6  But  as  for  me,  I  am  a  w^orm, 
and  no  man  :  a  very  fcorn  of  men, 
and  the  out-caft  of  the  people. 

7  All  they  that  fee  me  laugh  me 
to  fcorn  :  they  Ihoot  out  their  lips, 
and  fliake  their  heads,  faying, 

8  He  trufted  in  God,  that  he 
would  deliver  him  :  let  him  deli- 
ver him,  if  he  will  have  him. 

9  But  thou  art  he  that  took  me 
out  of  my  mother's  womb  :  thou 
waft  my  hope,  when  I  hanged  yet 
upon  my  mother's  breafts. 


10  1  have  been  left  unto  thee 
ever  fince  I  was  born  :  thou  art^ 
my  God  even  from  my  mother's 
womb. 

11  O  go  not  from  me,  for  trou- 
ble is  hard  at  hand  :  and  there  is 
none  to  helj)  me. 

12  Many  oxen  are  come  about 
me  :  fat  bulls  of  Bafan  clofe  me  in 
on  eveiy  fide. 

13  They  gape  upon  me  with 
their  mouths  :  as  it  were  a  ramp- 
ing and  a  roaring  lion. 

14  I  am  jjoured  out  like  water, 
and  all  my  bones  are  out  of  joint : 
my  heart  alfo  in  the  midft  of  my 
body  is  even  like  melting  wax. 

15  My  ftrengtli  is  dried  up  like 
a  potlherd,  and  my  tongue  cleaveth 
to  my  gums  :  and  thou  ftialt  bring 
me  into  the  duft  of  death. 

16  For  many  dogs  are  come  a- 
bout  me  :  and  the  council  of  the 
wicked  layeth  fiege  againft  me. 

17  They  pierced  my  hands  and 
my  feet ;  I  may  tell  all  my  bones  : 
they  ftand  ftaring  and  looking  up- 
on me. 

18  They  part  my  garments  a- 
mong  them  :  and  caft  lots  upon 
my  vefture. 

19  But  be  not  thou  far  from  me, 
O  Lord  :  thou  art  my  fuccour, 
hafte  thee  to  help  me. 

20  Deliver  my  foul  from  th^ 
fword  :  my  darling  from  the  pow- 
er of  the  dog. 

21  Save   me   from   the   lion's 


DayV.  THE    P 

Diouth  :  thou  haft  heard  me  alfo 
from  among  the  horns  of  the  uni- 
conis. 

22  I  ^vill  declare  thy  Name  un- 
to my  brethren  :  in  the  midft  of 
the  congregation  will  I  praife  thee. 

23  O  praife  the  Lord,  ye  that 
fear  him  :  magnify  him,  all  ye  of 
the  feed  of  Jacob,  and  fear  him, 
all  ye  feed  of  Ifrael ; 

24  For  he  hath  not  defpifed, 
nor  abhorred,  the  low  eftate  of  the 
poor  :  he  hath  not  hid  his  face 
from  him,  but  when  he  called  un- 
to him  he  heard  him. 

25  My  praife  is  of  thee  in  the 
great  congregation  :  my  vows  ^vill 
I  perfonn  in  the  fight  of  them 
that  fear  him. 

26  The  poor  fliall  eat,  and  be 
fatisfied  :  they  that  feek  after  the 
Lord  fliall  praife  him ;  your  heart 
fliall  live  for  ever. 

27  All  the  ends  of  the  world 
fliall  remember  themfelves,  and  be 
turned  unto  the  Lord  :  and  all  the 
kindreds  of  the  nations  fliall  wor- 
fliip  before  him. 

28  For  the  kingdom  is  the 
Lord's  :  and  he  is  the  Governour 
among  the  peojile. 

29  All  fuch  as  be  fat  upon  eai'th  : 
have  eaten,  and  worfliipped. 

30  All  they  that  go  down  into 
the  duft  fliall  kneel  before  him  : 
and  no  man  hath  quickened  his 
own  foul. 

31  My  feed  fliall  ferve  him  : 


SALMS.  Day  5. 

they  fliall   be  counted   unto   the 
Lord  for  a  generation. 

32  They  fliall  come,   and  the 

heavens  fliall  declare  his  righteouf- 

nefs  :  unto  a  people  that  fliall  be 

born,  whom  the  Lord  hath  made. 

Psalm  xxiii.    Dommus  regit  me. 

THE   Lord   is  my  fliepherd   : 
therefore  can  I  lack  nothing. 

2  He  fliall  feed  me  in  a  green 
paftm'e  :  and  lead  me  forth  befide 
the  waters  of  comfort. 

3  He  fliall  convert  my  foul  : 
and  bring  me  forth  in  the  paths  of 
righteoufnefs,  for  his  Name's  fake. 

4  Yea,  though  I  walk  through 
the  valley  of  the  fliadow  of  death, 
I  will  fear  no  evil  :  for  thou  art 
mth  me ;  thy  rod  and  thy  ftaff 
comfort  me. 

5  Thou  flialt  prepare  a  table  be- 
fore me  againft  them  that  trouble 
me  :  thou  haft  anointed  my  head 
Avith  oil,  and  my  cup  fliall  be  full. 

6  But  thy  loving-kindnefs  and 
mercy  fliall  follow  me  all  the  days 
of  my  life  :  and  I  will  dwell  in  the 
houfe  of  the  Lord  for  ever. 

£0ormng  i^raper* 

Psalm  xxiv.    Domini  eji  terra, 

THE  eai'th  is  the  Lord's,  and 
all  that  therein  is  :  the  com- 
jiafs  of  the  world,  and  they  that 
dwell  therein. 

2  For  he  hath  founded  it  upon 
the  feas  :  and  prepared  it  upon 
the  floods. 


II 


Day  5. 

3  Who  fliall  afcend  into  the  hill 
of  the  Lord  :  or  who  fliall  rife  up 
in  his  holy  place? 

4  Even  he  that  hath  clean 
hands,  and  a  pure  heart :  and  that 
hath  not  lift  up  his  mind  unto 
vanity,  nor  fworn  to  deceive  his 
neighbour. 

5  He  fliall  receive  the  blefling 
from  the  Lord  :  and  righteoufnefs 
from  the  God  of  his  falvation. 

6  This  is  the  generation  of  them 
that  feek  him  *.  even  of  them  that 
feek  thy  face,  O  Jacob. 

7  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye 
gates,  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  ever- 
lafl;ing  doors  :  and  the  King  of 
glory  fliall  come  in. 

8  Who  is  the  King  of  gloiy  : 
it  is  the  Lord  fl;rong  and  mighty, 
even  the  Lord  mighty  in  battle. 

9  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye 
gates,  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  ever- 
lafting  doors  :  and  the  King  of 
gloiy  fliall  come  in. 

10  Who  is  the  King  of  glory  : 
even  the  Lord  of  hofts,  he  is  the 
King  of  glory. 

Psalm  xxv.  Adte,  Domine,  levavi. 

UNTO  thee,  O  Lord,  will  I  lift 
up  my  foul ;  my  God,  I  have 
put  my  truft  in  thee  :  O  let  me 
not  be  confounded,  neither  let 
mine  enemies  triumph  over  me. 

2  For  all  they  that  hope  in  thee 
fliall  not  be  afliamed  :  but  fuch  as 
tranfgrefs  without  ^  caufe  fliall  be 
put  to  confufion. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  5. 

3  Shew  me  thy  ways,  O  Lord  : 
and  teach  me  thy  paths. 

4  Lead  me  forth  in  thy  truth, 
and  learn  me  :  for  thou  art  the 
God  of  my  falvation ;  in  thee  hath 
been  my  hope  all  the  day  long. 

5  Call  to  remembrance,  O  Lord, 
thy  tender  mercies  :  and  thy  lov- 
ing-kindnefles,  which  have  been 
ever  of  old. 

6  O  remember  not  the  (ins  and 
offences  of  my  youth  :  but  accord- 
ing to  thy  mercy  think  thou  upon 
me,  O  Lord,  for  thy  goodnefs. 

7  Gracious  and  righteous  is  the 
Lord  :  therefore  will  he  teach  lin- 
ners  in  the  way. 

8  Them  that  are  meek  fliall 
he  guide  in  judgement  :  and  fuch 
as  are  gentle,  them  fliall  he  learn 
his  way. 

9  All  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are 
mercy  and  truth  :  unto  fuch  as 
keep  his  covenant,  and  his  tef- 
timonies. 

10  For  thy  Name's  fake,  O 
Lord  :  be  merciful  unto  my  (in, 
for  it  is  great. 

1 1  What  man  is  he,  that  fear- 
eth  the  Lord  :  him  fliall  he  teach 
in  the  way  that  he  fliall  choofe. 

12  His  foul  fliall  dweU  at  eafe  : 
and  his  feed  fliall  inherit  the  land. 

13  The  fecret  of  the  Lord 
is  among  them  that  fear  him  : 
and  he  will  fliew  them  his  cove- 
nant. 

14  Mine  eyes  are  ever  looking 

LI 


Day 


D. 


THE    PSALMS. 


unto  the  Lord  :  for  he  fliall  pluck 
my  feet  out  of  the  net. 

15  Turn  thee  unto  me,  and 
have  mercy  upon  me  :  for  I  am 
defolate,  and  in  mifery. 

16  The  forrows  of  my  heart  are 
enlarged  :  O  brino-  thou  me  out 
of  my  troubles. 

1 7  Look  upon  my  adverfity  and 
mifery  :  and  forgive  me  all  my  fm. 

18  Conlider  mine  enemies,  how 
many  they  are  :  and  they  bear  a 
tp'annous  hate  againft  me. 

19  O  keep  my  foul,  and  deliver 
me  :  let  me  not  be  confounded, 
for  I  have  put  my  truft  in  thee. 

20  Let  perfedtnefs  and  right- 
eous dealing  ^vait  upon  me  :  for 
my  hope  hath  been  in  thee. 

2 1  Deliver  Ifrael,  O  God  :  out 
of  all  his  troubles. 

Psalm  xxvi.    Judica  me,  Domine. 

BE  thou  my  Judge,  O  Lord, 
for  I  have  walked  innocently  : 
my  truft  hath  been  alfo  in  the 
Lord,  therefore  fliall  I  not  fall. 

2  Examine  me,  O  Lord,  and 
prove  me  :  try  out  my  reins  and 
my  heart. 

3  For  thy  loving-kindnefs  is 
ever  before  mine  eyes  :  and  I  will 
walk  in  thy  truth. 

4  I  have  not  dwelt  with  vain 
perfons  :  neither  will  I  have  fel- 
lowftiip  with  the  deceitful. 

5  1  have  hated  the  conorcffa- 
tion  of  the  wicked  :  and  will  not 
fit  among  the  ungodly. 


Day  5. 

6  I  \vill  wafli  my  hands  in  in- 
nocency,  O  Lord  :  and  fo  will  I 
go  to  thine  altar ; 

7  That  I  may  fliew  the  voice  of 
thankfgiving  :  and  tell  of  all  thy 
wondrous  works. 

8  Lord,  I  have  loved  the  habi- 
tation of  thy  houfe  :  and  the  place 
where  thine  honour  dwelleth. 

9  O  fliut  not  up  my  foul  with 
the  finners  :  nor  my  life  vnth  the 
blood-thirfty  ; 

10  In  whofe  hands  is  wicked- 
nefs  :  and  their  rio^ht  hand  is  full 
of  gifts. 

1 1  But  as  for  me,  I  will  walk 
innocently  :  O  deliver  me,  and  be 
merciful  unto  me. 

12  My  foot  ftandeth  light  :  I 
will  praife  the  Lord  in  the  congre- 
gations. 

Psalm  xxvii.  Domimis  illuminatio. 

THE  Lord  is  my  light,  and  my 
falvation ;  whom  then  fliall  I 
fear  :  the  Lord  is  the  ftrength  of 
my  life ;  of  whom  then  fliall  1  be 
afraid? 

2  When  the  mcked,  even  mine 
enemies,  and  my  foes,  came  upon 
me  to  eat  up  my  flefli  :  they  ftum- 
bled  and  fell. 

3  Though  an  hoft  of  men  were 
laid  againft  me,  yet  fliall  not  my 
heart  be  afraid  :  and  though  there 
rofe  up  war  againft  me,  yet  will  1 
put  my  truft  in  him. 


i 


JDay 


5. 


THE    PSALMS. 


4  One  thing  have  I  defired  of 
the  Lord,  which  I  will  require  : 
even  that  I  may  dwell  in  the  houfe 
of  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  my 
life,  to  behold  the  fair  beauty  of 
the  Lord,  and  to  vifit  his  temple. 

5  For  in  the  time  of  trouble  he 
fliall  hide  me  in  his  tabernacle  : 
yea,  in  the  fecret  place  of  his 
dwellinjr  fliall  he  hide  me,  and  fet 
me  up  upon  a  rock  of  ftone. 

6  And  now  fhall  he  lift  up  mine 
head  :  above  mine  enemies  round 
about  me. 

7  Therefore  will  I  oifer  in  his 
dwelling  an  oblation  with  great 
gladnefs  :  I  will  fing,  and  fpeak 
praifes  unto  the  Lord. 

8  Hearken  unto  my  voice,  O 
Lord,  when  I  cry  unto  thee  :  have 
mercy  upon  me,  and  hear  me. 

9  My  heart  hath  talked  of  thee. 
Seek  ye  my  face  :  Thy  face.  Lord, 
will  I  feek. 

10  O  hide  not  thou  thy  face 
from  me  :  nor  call  thy  fervant  a- 
way  in  difpleafure. 

1 1  Thou  haft  been  my  fuccour  : 
leave  me  not,  neither  forfake  me, 
O  God  of  my  falvation. 

12  When  my  father  and  my 
mother  forfake  me  :  the  Lord  tak- 
eth  me  up. 

13  Teach  me  thy  way,  O  Lord  : 
and  lead  me  in  the  right  way,  be- 
caufe  of  mine  enemies. 

14  Deliver  me  not  over  into  the 
will  of  mine  adverfaries  :  for  there 


Day  5. 

are  falfe  witnefles  rifen  up  againft 
mc,  and  fuch  as  fjjcak  wrong. 

151  Ihould  utterly  have  fainted  : 
but  that  1  believe  verily  to  fee  the 
goodnefs  of  the  Lord  in  the  land 
of  the  liviup. 

IT)  O  tarry  thou  the  Lord's  lei- 
fure  :  be  llrong,  and  he  fhall  com- 
fort thine  heart ;  and  ])ut  thou  thy 
truft  in  the  Lord. 
Psalm  xxviii.    Ad  fe,  Domine. 

UNTO  thee  will  I  cry,  O  Lord 
my  ftrength  :  think  no  fcorn 
of  me ;  left,  if  thou  make  as  though 
thou  heareft  not,  I  become  like 
them  that  go  down  into  the  pit. 

2  Hear  the  voice  of  my  hum- 
ble petitions,  when  I  cry  unto 
thee  :  when  I  hold  up  my  hands 
towards  the  mercy-feat  of  thy  ho- 
ly temple.  ■   ' 

3  O  pluck  me  not  away,  neither 
deftroy  me  with  the  ungodly  and 
wicked  doers  :  which  fpeak  friend- 
ly to  their  neighbours,  but  ima- 
gine mifchief  in  their  hearts. 

4  Reward  them  according  to 
their  deeds  :  and  according  to  the 
wickednefs  of  their  own  inventions. 

5  Recompenfe  them  after  the 
work  of  their  hands  :  pay  them 
that  they  have  deferved. 

6  For  they  regard  not  in  their 
mind  the  works  of  the  Lord,  nor 
the  operation  of  his  hands  :  there- 
fore Ihali  he  break  them  down, 
and  not  build  them  up. 

7  Praifed  be  the  Lord  :  for  he 

Ll2 


Day  5. 


THE    PSALMS. 


hath  heard  the  voice  of  my  hum- 
ble petitions. 

8  The  Lord  is  my  ftrength,  and 
my  fliieid ;  my  heart  hath  trailed 
in  him,  and  I  am  helped  :  there- 
fore my  heart  danceth  for  joy,  and 
in  my  fong  will  I  praife  him. 

9  The  Lord  is  my  ftrength  : 
and  he  is  the  wholfome  defence  of 
his  Anointed. 

10  O  fave  thy  people,  and  give 
thy  bleffing  unto  thine  inherit- 
ance :  feed  them,  and  fet  them 
up  for  ever. 

Psalm  xxix.    Afferte  Domino. 

BRING  unto  the  Lord,  O  ye 
mighty,  bring  young  rams 
unto  the  Lord  :  aibribe  unto  the 
Lord  worlhip  and  ftrength. 

2  Give  the  Lord  the  honour 
due  unto  his  Name  :  worfliip  the 
Lord  ^vith  holy  worfliip. 

3  It  is  the  I^ord,  that  command- 
eth  the  waters  :  it  is  the  glorious 
God,  that  maketh  the  thunder. 

4  It  is  the  Lord,  that  ruleth  the 
fea ;  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  migh- 
ty in  operation  :  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  is  a  glorious  voice. 

5  The  voice  of  the  Lord  break- 
eth  the  cedar-trees  :  yea,  the  Lord 
breaketh  the  cedars  of  Libanus. 

6  He  maketh  them  alfo  to  Iklp 
like  a  calf  :  Libanus  alfo,  and  Si- 
rion,  like  a  young  unicorn. 

7  The  voice  of  the  Lord  divid- 
eth  the  flames  of  fire ;  the  voice 
of  the  Lord  ftiaketli  the  wilder- 


Day  6. 

nefs  :  yea,  the  Lord  fhaketh  the 
wildernefs  of  Cades. 

8  The  voice  of  the  Lord  maketh 
the  hinds  to  bring  forth  young, 
and  difcovereth  the  thick  buflies  : 
in  his  temple  doth  eveiy  man  fpeak 
of  his  lionour. 

9  The  Lord  fitteth  above  the 
water-flood  :  and  the  Lord  re- 
maineth  a  King  for  ever. 

10  The  Lord  fliall  give  ftrength 
unto  his  people :  the  Lord  fliall  give 
his  people  the  blefluig  of  peace. 

iEottting  l^ra^er. 

Psalm  xxx.   ILxaltaho  te,  Domine. 

I  Will  magnify  thee,  O  Lord,  for 
thou  haft  fet  me  up  :  and  not 
made  my  foes  to  triumph  over  me. 

2  O  Lord  my  God,  1  cried  unto 
thee  :  and  thou  haft  healed  me. 

3  Thou,  Lord,  haft  brought  my 
foul  out  of  hell  :  thou  haft  kept 
my  life  from  them  that  go  down 
to  the  pit. 

4  Sing  praifes  unto  the  Lord,  O 
ye  faints  of  his  :  and  give  thanks 
unto  him  for  a  remembrance  of 
his  holinefs. 

5  For  his  wrath  endureth  but 
the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  and  in 
his  pleafure  is  life  :  heavinefs  may 
endure  for  a  iiiglit,  but  joy  com- 
eth  in  the  morning. 

()  And  in  my  profperity  I  faid, 
I  fliall  never  be  removed  :  thou, 
Lord,  of  thy  goodncfs  haft  made 
my  hill  I'o  ftrong. 


Day  6. 

7  Thou  didft  turn  thy  face  from 
me  :  and  I  was  troubled. 

8  Then  cried  1  unto  thee,  O 
Lord  :  and  gat  me  to  my  Lord 
right  humbly. 

9  What  profit  is  there  in  my 
blood  :  when  I  go  down  to  the  pit? 

10  Shall  the  dull  give  thanks 
unto  thee  :  or  ftiall  it  declare  thy 
truth? 

11  Hear,  O  Lord,  and  have 
mercy  upon  me  :  Lord,  be  thou 
my  helper. 

12  Thou  haft  turned  my  hea- 
vinefs  into  joy  :  thou  haft  put  off 
my  fackcloth,  and  girded  me  with 
gladnefs.  j  i.  ^ 

13  Therefore  fliall  every  good 
man  fing  of  thy  praife  without 
ceafing  :  O  my  God,  I  will  give 
thanks  unto  thee  for  ever. 

Ps  A  L  M  xxxi.  hi  te,  Domine,fperam. 

JN  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I  put  my 
truft  :  let  me  never  be  put  to 
confufion,  deliver  me  in  thy  right- 
eoufnefs. 

2  Bow  down  thine  ear  to  me  : 
make  hafte  to  deliver  me. 

3  And  be  thou  my  ftrong  rock, 
and  houfe  of  defence  :  that  thou 
mayeft  fave  me. 

4  For  thou  art  my  ftrong  rock, 
and  my  caftle  :  be  thou  alfo  my 
guide,  and  lead  me  for  thy  Name's 
fake. 

5  Draw  me  out  of  the  net,  that 
they  have  laid  privily  for  me  :  for 
thou  art  my  ftrength. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  6. 

6  Into  thy  hands  I  commend 
my  fpirit  :  for  thou  haft  redeemed 
me,  O  Lord,  thou  God  of  truth. 

7  I  have  hated  them  that  hold 
of  fupei-ftitious  vanities  :  and  my 
truft  hath  been  in  the  Lord. 

8  I  will  be  glad,  and  rejoice  in 
thy  mercy  :  for  thou  haft  confi- 
dered  my  trouble,  and  haft  known 
my  foul  in  advei*fities. 

9  Thou  haft  not  ftiut  me  up  in- 
to the  hand  of  the  enemy  :  but  haft 
fet  my  feet  in  a  large  room. 

10  Have  mercy  upon  me,  O 
Lord,  for  I  am  in  trouble  :  and 
mine  eye  is  confumed  for  very  hea- 
vinefs ;  yea,  my  foul  and  my  body. 

11  For  my  life  is  waxen  old 
\vith  heavinefs  :  and  my  years  with 
mourning. 

12  My  ftrength  faileth  me,  be- 
caufe  of  mine  iniquity  :  and  my 
bones  are  confumed. 

13  I  became  a  reproof  among 
all  mine  enemies,  but  efpecially  a- 
mong  my  neighbours  :  and  they  of 
mine  acquaintance  were  afi'aid  of 
me ;  and  they  that  did  fee  me  with- 
out conveyed  themfelves  from  me. 

14  I  am  clean  forgotten,  as  a 
dead  man  out  of  mind  :  I  am  be- 
come like  a  broken  veflel. 

15  For  I  have  heard  the  blaf- 
phemy  of  the  multitude  :  and  fear 
is  on  every  fide,  while  they  con- 
fpire  together  againft  me,  and  take 
tlieir  counfel  to  take  away  my  fife. 

16  But  my  hope  hath  been  in 


Day  6. 

thee,  O  Lord  :  I  have  faid.  Thou 
art  my  God. 

1 7  My  time  is  in  thy  hand ; 
dehver  me  from  the  hand  of  mine 
enemies  :  and  from  them  that 
perfecute  me. 

18  Shew  thy  fervant  the  light  of 
thy  countenance  :  and  fave  me  for 
thy  mercy's  fake. 

19  Let  me  not  be  confounded, 
O  Lord,  for  I  have  called  upon 
thee  :  let  the  ungodly  be  put  to 
confufion,  and  be  put  to  lilence 
in  the  grave. 

20  Let  the  lying  lips  be  put  to 
iilence  :  which  cruelly,  difdainful- 
ly,  and  defpitefully,  fpeak  againft 
the  righteous. 

2 1  O  how  plentiful  is  thy  good- 
nefs,  which  thou  haft  laid  up  for 
them  that  fear  thee  :  and  that 
thou  haft  prepared  for  them  that 
put  their  truft  in  thee,  even  before 
the  fons  of  men ! 

22  Thou  (halt  hide  them  privi- 
ly by  thine  own  prefence  from  the 
provoking  of  all  men  :  thou  ftialt 
keep  them  fecretly  in  thy  taberna- 
cle from  the  ftrife  of  tongues. 

23  Thanks  be  to  the  Lord  : 
for  he  hath  ftiewed  me  marvellous 
great  kindnefs  in  a  ftrong  city. 

24  And  when  I  made  haftc,  I 
faid  :  I  am  caft  out  of  the  fight  of 
thine  eyes. 

25  Neverthelefs,  thou  heardeft 
the  voice  of  my  prayer  :  when  I 
cried  unto  thee. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bay  6. 

26  O  love  the  Lord,  all  ye  his 
faints  :  for  the  Lord  preferveth 
them  that  are  faithful,  and  plente- 
oufly  rewardeth  the  proud  doer. 

27  Be  ftrong,  and  he  fliall  efta- 
blilh  your  heart  :  all  ye  that  put 
your  truft  in  the  Lord. 

Psalm  xxxii.    JSeati,  quorum. 

BLESSED  is  he  whofe  unrigh- 
teoufnefs   is    forgiven   :   and 
whofe  fin  is  covered. 

2  Blelled  is  the  man  unto  whom 
the  Lord  imputeth  no  fin  :  and  in 
whofe  fpirit  there  is  no  guile. 

3  For  while  I  held  my  tongue  : 
my  bones  confumed  away  through 
my  daily  complaining. 

4  For  thy  hand  is  hea\'y  upon 
me  day  and  night  :  and  my  moif- 
ture  is  like  the  drought  in  fumnier. 

5  I  will  acknowledge  my  fin  un- 
to thee  :  and  mine  unrighteoufnefs 
have  1  not  hid. 

6  I  faid,  I  will  confefs  my  fins 
unto  the  Lord  :  and  fo  thou  for- 
gaveft  the  wickednefs  of  my  fin. 

7  For  this  ftiall  every  one  that  is 
godly  make  his  prayer  unto  thee,  in 
a  time  when  thou  mayeft  be  found : 
but  in  the  great  water-floods  they 
(liall  not  come  nigh  him. 

8  Thou  art  a  place  to  hide  me 
in,  thou  flialt  jjreferve  me  from 
trouble  :  thou  flialt  compafs  me 
about  with  foiigs  of  deliverance. 

9  1  will  inform  thee,  and  teach 


Day  6. 


THE    PSALMS. 


thee  in  the  way  wherehi  tlioii  flialt 
go  :  and  I  will  guide  thee  with 
mine  eye. 

10  Be  ye  not  like  to  horfe  and 
mule,  which  have  no  undei*ftand- 
ing  :  whole  mouths  mull  be  held 
with  bit  and  bridle,  led  they  fall 
upon  thee. 

11  Great  plagues  remain  for 
the  ungodly  :  but  whofo  putteth 
his  truli  in  the  Lord,  mercy  em- 
braceth  him  on  eveiy  fide. 

12  Be  glad,  O  ye  righteous,  and 
rejoice  in  the  Lord  :  and  be  joyful, 
all  ye  that  are  true  of  heart. 

Psalm  xxxiii.    Kobndtate,  jufti. 
~  EJOICE  in  the  Lord,  O  ye 


R 


righteous  :  for  it  becometh 
well  the  juft  to  be  thankful. 

2  Praife  the  Lord  with  harp  : 
fing  praifes  unto  him  with  the  lute, 
and  inftrument  of  ten  firings. 

3  Sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new 
fong  :  fing  praifes  luftily  unto  him 
with  a  good  courage. 

4  For  the  word  of  the  Lord  is 
true  :  and  all  his  works  are  faithful. 

5  He  loveth  righteoufnefs  and 
judgement  :  the  earth  is  full  of 
the  goodnefs  of  the  Lord. 

6  By  the  word  of  the  Lord 
were  the  heavens  made  :  and  all 
the  hofts  of  them  by  the  breath  of 
his  mouth. 

7  He  gathereth  the  Avaters  of 
the  fea  together,  as  it  were  upon 
an  heap  :  and  layeth  up  the  deep, 
as  in  a  treafure-houfe. 


Day  6. 

8  Let  all  the  earth  fear  the 
Lord  :  ftand  in  awe  of  him,  all  ye 
that  dwell  in  the  world. 

9  For  he  fpake,  and  it  was  done  : 
he  commanded,  and  it  flood  faft. 

1 0  The  Lord  bringeth  the  coun- 
fel  of  the  heathen  to  nought  :  and 
maketh  the  devices  of  the  people 
to  be  of  none  eftedl,  and  cafteth 
out  the  counfels  of  princes. 

1  IThe  counfel  of  the  Lord  fhall 
endure  for  ever  :  and  the  thoughts 
of  his  heart  from  generation  to  ge- 
neration. 

1 2  Blefled  are  the  people,  whofe 
God  is  the  Lord  Jehovah  :  and 
blelled  are  the  folk,  that  he  hath 
chofen  to  him  to  be  his  inheritance. 

13  The  Lord  looked  down  from 
heaven,  and  beheld  all  the  chil- 
dren of  men  :  from  the  habitation 
of  his  dwelling  he  confidereth  all 
them  that  dwell  on  the  earth. 

14  He  fafiiioneth  all  the  hearts 
of  them  :  and  underftandeth  all 
their  works. 

15  There  is  no  king  that  can 
be  faved  by  the  multitude  of  an 
hofi^  :  neither  is  any  mighty  man 
delivered  by  much  ftrength. 

1 6  A  horfe  is  counted  but  a  vain 
thing  to  fave  a  man  :  neither  fliall 
he  deliver  any  man  by  his  great 
ftrength. 

17  Behold,  the  eye  of  the  Lord 
is  upon  them  that  fear  him  :  and 
upon  them  that  put  their  truft  in 
his  mercy; 


Day  6. 


THE    PSALMS. 


18  To  deliver  their  foul  from 
death  :  and  to  feed  them  in  the 
time  of  dearth. 

19  Our  foul  hath  patiently  tar- 
ried for  the  Lord  :  for  he  is  our 
help,  and  our  fliield. 

20  For  our  heart  fliall  rejoice 
in  him  :  becaufe  we  have  hoped 
in  his  holy  Name. 

21  Let  thy  merciful  kindnefs, 
O  Lord,  be  upon  us  :  like  as  we 
do  put  our  truit  in  thee. 
Psalm  xxxiv.  Benedicam  Domino. 

IWill  alway  give  thanks  unto 
the  Lord  :  his  praife  ftiall  ever 
be  in  my  mouth, 

2  My  foul  Ihall  make  her  boaft 
in  the  Lord  :  the  humble  fliall 
hear  thereof,  and  be  glad. 

3  O  praife  the  Lord  with  me  : 
and  let  us  magnify  his  Name  to- 
gether. 

4  I  fought  the  Lord,  and  he 
heard  me  :  yea,  he  delivered  me 
out  of  all  my  fear. 

5  They  had  an  eye.  unto  him, 
and  were  lightened  :  and  their 
faces  were  not  afliamed. 

6  Lo,  the  poor  crieth,  and  the 
Lord  heareth  him  :  yea,  and  faveth 
him  out  of  all  his  troubles. 

7  The  angel  of  the  Lord  tarri- 
eth  round  about  them  that  fear 
him  :  and  delivereth  them. 

8  O  tafte,  and  fee,  how  gracious 
the  Lord  is  :  blefled  is  the  man 
that  trufteth  in  him, 

9  O  fear  the  Lord,  ye  that  aie 


Day  6. 

his  faints  :  for  they  that  fear  hun 
lack  nothing. 

10  The  lions  do  lack,  and  fuffer 
hunger  :  but  they  who  feek  the 
Lord  fliall  want  no  manner  of 
thing  that  is  good. 

11  Come,  ye  children,  and 
hearken  unto  me  :  I  wiU  teach 
you  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 

12  What  man  is  he  that  lufi;eth 
to  live  :  and  would  fain  fee  good 
days? 

13  Keep  thy  tongue  from  evil  : 
and  thy  lips,  that  they  fpeak  no 
guile, 

14  Efchew  evil,  and  do  good  : 
feek  peace,  and  enfue  it. 

15  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are 
over  the  righteous  :  and  his  ears 
are  open  unto  their  prayers. 

16  The  countenance  of  the  Lord 
is  againfl;  them  that  do  evil :  to  root 
out  the  remembrance  of  them  from 
the  earth. 

17  The  righteous  cry,  and  the 
Lord  heareth  them  :  and  deliver- 
eth them  out  of  all  their  trou- 
bles, 

18  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  them 
that  are  of  a  contrite  heart  :  and 
will  fave  fuch  as  be  of  an  humble 
fpirit, 

19  Great  are  the  troubles  of  the 
righteous  :  but  the  Lord  deliver- 
eth him  out  of  all. 

20  He  keepeth  all  his  bones  : 
fo  that  not  one  of  them  is  broken. 

2 1  But  misfortune  fliall  flay  the 


Day  7. 


THE    PSALMS. 


ungodly  :  and  tliey  that  hate  the 
righteous  ihall  be  defolate. 

22  The  Lord  delivereth  the 
fouls  of  his  fervants  :  and  all  they 
that  {lut  their  trull  in  liini  Ihall 
not  be  deilitute. 

ililorning  |araper» 

Psalm  xxxv.   Judica,  Domine. 

PLEAD  thou  my  caufe,  O  Lord, 
with  them  that  ftrive  with  me  : 
and  fight  thou  againft  them  that 
light  againft  me. 

2  Lay  hand  upon  the  fliield 
and  buckler  :  and  ftand  up  to 
help  me. 

3  Bring  forth  the  fpear,  and 
flop  the  way  againft  them  that 
perfecute  me  :  fay  unto  my  foul, 
I  am  thy  falvation. 

4  Let  them  be  confounded,  and 
put  to  Ihame,  that  feek  after  my 
foul  ;  let  them  be  turned  back, 
and  brought  to  confufion,  that 
imao-ine  mifchief  for  me. 

5  Let  them  be  as  the  duft  be- 
fore the  wind  :  and  the  angel  of 
the  Lord  fcattering  them. 

6  Let  their  way  be  dark  and 
flippeiy  :  and  let  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  perfecute  them. 

7  For  they  have  privily  laid 
their  net  to  deftroy  me  without  a 
caufe  :  yea,  even  without  a  caufe 
have  they  made  a  pit  for  my  foul. 

8  Let  a  fudden  deftrudlion  come 
upon  him  unawares,  and  his  net, 
that   he   hath   laid  privily,   catch 


Day  7. 

himfelf  :  that  he  may  fall  into  \\n 
own  mifchief. 

9  And,  my  foul,  be  joyful  in 
the  Lord  :  it  Ihall  rejoice  in  his 
falvation. 

10  All  my  bones  Ihall  fay.  Lord, 
who  is  like  unto  thee,  who  deliver- 
eft  the  poor  from  him  that  is  too 
ftrong  for  him  :  yea,  the  poor, 
and  him  that  is  in  mifery,  from 
him  that  fpoileth  him? 

1 1  Falfe  witnefles  did  rife  up  : 
they  laid  to  my  charge  things  that 
I  knew  not. 

12  They  rewarded  me  evil  for 
good  :  to  the  great  difcomfort  of 
my  foul. 

13  Neverthelefs,  when  they 
were  lick,  I  put  on  fackcloth,  and 
humbled  my  foul  with  fafting  :  and 
my  prayer  Ihall  turn  into  mine 
own  bofom. 

14  I  behaved  myfelf  as  though 
it  had  been  my  friend,  or  my  bro- 
ther :  I  went  heavily,  as  one  that 
mourneth  for  his  mother. 

15  But  in  mine  advei-fity  they 
rejoiced,  and  gathered  themfelves 
together  :  yea,  the  very  abje^ls 
came  together  againft  me  una- 
wares, making  mouths  at  me,  and 
ceafed  not. 

16  With  the  flatterers  were  bu- 
fy  mockers  :  who  gnaftied  upon  me 
with  their  teeth. 

17  Lord,  how  long  ^vilt  thou 
look  upon  this  :  O  deliver  my 
foul    fi'om    the    calamities    which 

M  m 


Bay  7 


THE    PSALMS. 


they  biing  on  iiie,  and  my  darling 
from  the  lions. 

18  So  will  I  give  thee  thanks 
in,  the  great  congi'egation  :  I  will 
praife  thee  among  much  people. 

19  O  let  not  them  that  are 
mine  enemies  triumph  over  me 
ungodly  :  neither  let  them  wink 
with  their  eyes  that  hate  me  with- 
out a  caufe. 

20  And  why?  their  communing 
is  not  for  peace  :  but  they  imagine 
deceitful  words  aoaiiiil  them  that 
are  quiet  in  the  land. 

21  They  gaped  upon  me  with 
their  mouths,  and  faid  :  Fie  on 
thee,  fie  on  thee,  we  faw  it  with 
our  eyes. 

22  This  thou  haft  feen,  O  Lord  : 
hold  not  thy  tongue  then,  go  not 
far  from  me,  O  Lord. 

23  Awake,  and  iland  up  to 
judge  my  quarrel  :  avenge  thou 
my  caufe,  my  God,  and  my  Lord. 

24  Judge  me,  O  Lord  my  God, 
according  to  thy  righteoufnefs  : 
and  let  them  not  triumph  over  me. 

25  Let  them  not  fay  in  their 
hearts,  There,  there,  fo  would  we 
have  it  :  neither  let  them  fay,  We 
have  devoured  him. 

26  Let  them  be  put  to  confufi(m 
and  fliame  together,  that  rejoice  at 
my  troul)le  :  let  them  be  clothed 
with  rebuke  and  diihonour,  that 
boaft  themfelves  aoainft  me. 

27  Let  them  be  glad  and  rejoice, 
that  favour  my  righteous  dealing  : 


Day  7. 

yea,  let  them  fay  alway,  Bleffed  be 
the  Lord,  who  hath  pleafure  in 
the  profperity  of  his  fervant. 

28  And  as  for  my  tongue,  it  fliall 
be  talking  of  thy  righteoufnefs  : 
and  of  thy  praife  all  the  day  long. 

Psalm  xxxvi.    Didi't  injiijius. 
]%/FY    heart    flieweth    me    the 
I^jL  wickednefs  of  the  ungodly  : 
that  there  is  no  fear  of  God  be- 
fore his  eyes. 

2  For  he  flattereth  himfelf  in 
his  own  fight  :  until  his  abomina- 
ble fin  be  found  out. 

3  The  words  of  his  mouth  are 
unrighteous,  and  full  of  deceit :  he 
hath  left  off  to  behave  himfelf 
wifely,  and  to  do  good. 

4  He  imagineth  mifchief  upon 
his  bed,  and  hath  fet  himfelf  in 
no  good  way  :  neither  doth  he  ab- 
hor any  thing  that  is  evil. 

5  Thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  reacheth 
unto  the  heavens  :  and  thy  faith- 
fulnefs  unto  the  clouds. 

6  Thy  righteoufnefs  fl;andeth 
like  the  llrong  mountains  :  thy 
judgements  are  like  the  great  deep. 

7  Thou,  Lord,  (halt  fave  both 
man  and  beall ;  How  excellent  is 
thy  mercy,  O  God  :  and  the  chil- 
dren of  men  Ihall  put  their  trull 
imder  the  fliadow  of  thy  wings. 

8  They  Ihall  be  fatisfied  with 
the  plcnteoufnefs  of  thy  houfe  : 
and  thou  Ihalt  give  them  drink  of 
thy  pleafures,  as  out  of  the  river. 

i)  For  with  thee  is  the  well  of 


Day  7 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  7. 


life  :  and  in  thy  light  (liall  we  fee 


light 
10 
ing-k 
thee 
them 
11 


O  continue  forth  thy  lov- 
indnefs  unto  them  that  know 
:  and  thy  righteoufnefs  unto 
that  are  true  of  heart. 
O  let  not  the  foot  of  pride 
come  againll  me  :  and  let  not  the 
hand  of  the  ungodly  caft  me  down. 
12  There  are  they  fallen,  all  that 
work  wickednefs  :  they  are  caft 
down,  and  fliall  not  be  able  to  ftand. 

Psalm  xxxvii.    Noli  cemiilari. 

FRET  not   thyfelf  becaufe   of 
the  ungodly  :  neither  be  thou 
envious  againft  the  evil  doers. 

2  For  they  fliall  foon  be  cut 
down  like  the  grafs  :  and  be  wi- 
thered even  as  the  green  herb. 

3  Put  thou  thy  truft  in  the  Lord, 
and  be  doing  good  :  dwell  in  the 
land,  and  verily  thou  flialt  be  fed. 

4  Delight  thou  in  the  Lord  :  and 
he  fliall  give  thee  thy  heart's  defire. 

5  Commit  thy  way  unto  the 
Lord,  and  put  thy  truft  in  him  : 
and  he  fliall  bring  it  to  pafs. 

6  He  fliall  make  thy  righteouf- 
nefs as  clear  as  the  light :  and  thy 
juft  dealing  as  the  noon-day. 

7  Hold  thee  ftill  in  the  Lord, 
and  abide  patiently  upon  him  :  but 
grieve  not  thyfelf  at  him,  whofe 
way  doth  profper,  againft  the  man 
that  doeth  after  evil  counfels. 

8  Leave  off  from  wrath,  and  let 


go  difpleafure  :  fret  not  thyfelf,  elfe 
flialt  thou  be  moved  to  do  evil. 

9  Wicked  doers  fliall  be  rooted 
out  :  and  they  that  jiatiently  abide 
the  Lord,  tliofe  fliall  inherit  the 
land. 

10  Yet  a  little  while,  and  the 
ungodly  fliall  be  clean  gone :  thou 
flialt  look  after  his  place,  and  he 
fliall  be  away. 

1 1  But  the  meek-fpirited  fliall 
poflefs  the  earth  :  and  fliall  be  re- 
freflied  in  the  multitude  of  peace. 

12  The  ungodly  feeketh  coun- 
fel  againft  the  juft  :  and  gnaflieth 
upon  him  with  his  teeth. 

13  The  Lord  fliall  laugh  him  to 
fcorn  :  for  he  hath  feen  that  his 
day  is  coming. 

14  The  ungodly  have  drawn 
out  the  fword,  and  have  bent  their 
bow  :  to  caft  down  the  poor  and 
needy,  and  to  flay  fuch  as  are  of 
a  right  converfation. 

1 5  Their  fword  fliall  go  through 
their  own  heart  :  and  their  bow 
fliall  be  broken. 

16  A  fmall  thing  that  the  right- 
eous hath  :  is  better  than  great 
riches  of  the  ungodly. 

17  For  the  arms  of  the  ungodly 
fliall  be  broken  :  and  the  Lord  up- 
holdeth  the  righteous. 

18  The  Lord  knoweth  the  days 
of  the  godly  :  and  their  inherit- 
ance fliall  endure  for  ever. 

19  They  fliall  not  be  confound- 
ed in  the  perilous  tune  :  and  in 

M  m  2 


Bay  7. 

the  days  of  dearth  they  fliall  have 
enough. 

20  As  for  the  ungodly,  they 
fliall  perifh ;  and  the  enemies  of 
the  Lord  fliall  confunie  as  the  fat 
of  lambs  :  yea,  even  as  the  fnioke, 
fliall  they  confume  away. 

2 1  The  ungodly  borroweth,  and 
payeth  not  again  :  but  the  righte- 
ous is  merciful,  and  liberal. 

22  Such  as  are  blefl^ed  of  God 
fliall  poffefs  the  land  :  and  they 
that  are  curfed  of  him  fliall  be 
rooted  out. 

23  The  Lord  ordereth  a  good 
man's  going  :  and  maketh  his  way 
acceptable  to  himfelf. 

24  Though  he  fall,  he  fliall  not 
be  caft  away  :  for  the  Lord  up- 
holdeth  him  with  his  hand. 

25  1  have  been  young,  and  now 
am  old  :  and  yet  law  I  never  the 
righteous  forfaken,  nor  his  feed 
begging  their  bread. 

2()  The  righteous  is  ever  mer- 
ciful, and  leiideth  :  and  his  feed 
is  blefled. 

27  Flee  from  evil,  and  do  the 
thing  that  is  good  :  and  dwell  for 
evermore. 

28  For  the  Lord  loveth  the 
thing  that  is  right  :  he  forfaketh 
not  his  that  be  godly,  but  they  arc 
preferved  for  ever. 

29  The  unrighteous  fliidl  be 
puniflied  :  as  for  the  feed  of  the 
ungodly,  it  fliall  be  rooted  out. 

30  The  righteous  fliull  inherit 


THE    PSALMS.  Day!. 

the  land  :  and  dwell  therein  for 


ever. 

31  The  mouth  of  the  righteous 
is  exercifed  in  wifdoni  :  and  his 
tongue  will  be  talking  of  judge- 
ment. 

32  The  law  of  his  God  is  in  his 
heart :  and  his  goings  fliall  not  Aide. 

33  The  ungodly  feetli  the  right- 
eous :  and  feeketh  occafioii  to  flay 
him. 

34  The  Lord  mil  not  leave  him 
in  his  hand  :  nor  condemn  him 
when  he  is  judged. 

35  Hope  thou  in  the  Lord,  and 
keep  his  way,  and  he  fliall  pro- 
mote thee,  that  thou  Ihalt  poffefs 
the  land  :  when  the  ungodly  fliall 
perifli,  thou  flialt  fee  it. 

36  I  myfelf  have  feen  the  un- 
godly in  great  power  :  and  flourifli- 
iiig  like  a  green  bay-tree. 

37  I  went  by,  and  lo,  he  was 
gone  :  I  fought  him,  but  liis  place 
could  no  where  be  found. 

38  Keep  innocency,  and  take 
heed  unto  the  thing  that  is  right  : 
for  that  fliall  bring  a  man  peace 
at  the  lafl;. 

39  As  for  the  tranfgreffors,  they 
fliall  perifli  together  :  and  the  end 
of  the  ungodly  is,  they  fliall  be 
rooted  out  at  the  laft. 

40  But  the  falvation  of  the 
righteous  cometh  of  the  Lord  : 
who  is  alfo  their  ftrength  in  the 
time  of  trouble. 

41  And  the  Lord  fliall  ftand  by 


DayQ.  THE    PSALMS. 

them,  and  fave  them  :  he  fliall  de- 
liver them  from  the  ungodly,  and 
fliall  fave  them,  becaufe  they  put 
their  trull  in  him. 


£©ornins  draper. 

Ps A  L M  xxxviii.  Domine^  ne  m furore. 

PUT  me  not  to  rebuke,  O  Lord, 
in  thine  anger :  neither  chaften 
me  in  thy  heavy  difpleafure. 

2  For  thine  arrows  ftick  faft  in 
me  :  and  thy  hand  prefTeth  me  fore. 

3  There  is  no  health  in  my 
flefli,  becaufe  of  thy  difpleafure  : 
neither  is  there  any  reft  in  my 
bones,  by  reafon  of  my  fin. 

4  For  my  wickednelfes  are  gone 
over  my  head  :  and  are  like  a  fore 
burden,  too  heavy  for  me  to  bear. 

5  My  wounds  ftink,  and  are 
corrupt ;  through  my  fooliflinefs. 

6  I  am  brought  into  fo  great 
trouble  and  mifeiy  :  that  I  go 
mourning  all  the  day  long. 

7  For  my  loins  are  filled  with  a 
fore  difeafe  :  and  there  is  no  whole 
part  in  my  body. 

8  I  am  feeble,  and  fore  fmitten  : 
I  have  roared  for  the  veiy  difquiet- 
nefs  of  my  heart. 

9  Lord,  thou  knoweft  all  my 
defire  :  and  my  groaning  is  not 
hid  fi'om  thee. 

1 0  My  heart  panteth,  my  ftrength 
hath  failed  me  :  and  the  fight  of 
mine  eyes  is  gone  from  me. 

11  My  lovers  and  my  neigh- 
bom-s  did  ftand  looking  upon  my 


Day  8. 

trouble   :  and  my  kinfmen  ftood 
afar  off. 

12  They  alfo  that  fought  after 
my  life  laid  fnares  for  me  :  and 
they  that  went  about  to  do  me  evil 
talked  of  wickednefs,  and  ima- 
gined deceit  all  the  day  long. 

13  As  for  me,  I  was  like  a  deaf 
man,  and  heard  not  :  and  as  one 
that  is  dumb,  who  doth  not  open 
his  mouth. 

14  1  became  even  as  a  man  that 
heareth  not  :  and  in  whofe  mouth 
are  no  reproofs. 

15  For  in  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I 
put  my  trull  :  thou  (halt  anfwer 
for  me,  O  Lord  my  God. 

16  1  have  required  that  they, 
even  mine  enemies,  Ihould  not  tri- 
umph over  me  :  for  vrhen  my  foot 
flipped,  they  rejoiced  greatly  a- 
gainft  me. 

17  And  I,  truly,  am  fet  in  the 
plague  :  and  my  heavinefs  is  ever 
in  my  fight. 

18  For  I  will  confefs  my  wicked- 
nefs ;  and  be  foriy  for  my  fin. 

19  But  mine  enemies  live,  and 
are  mighty  :  and  they  that  hate 
me  wrongfully  are  many  in  num- 
ber. 

20  They  alfo  that  reward  evil 
for  good  are  againft  me  :  becaufe 
I  follow  the  thing  that  good  is. 

2 1  Forfake  me  not,  O  Lord  my 
God  :  be  not  thou  far  from  me. 

22  Hafte  thee  to  help  me  :  O 
Lord  God  of  my  falvation. 


Day  \ 


THE    PSALMS. 


Psalm  xxxix.    Dili,  ciiJtoiUam. 

I  Said,  I  will  take  heed  to  my 
ways  :  that  I  offend  Dot  in  my 


tongue. 


2  I  will  keep  my  mouth  as  it 
were  with  a  bridle  :  while  the  un- 
godly is  in  my  fight. 

3  I  held  my  tongue,  and  fpake 
nothing  :  I  kept  filence,  yea,  even 
from  good  words ;  but  it  was  pain 
and  grief  to  me. 

4  My  heart  was  hot  within  me, 
and  while  I  was  thus  mufing  the 
fire  kindled  :  and  at  the  lafl;  I  fpake 
with  my  tongue ; 

5  Lord,  let  me  know  mine  end, 
and  the  number  of  my  days  :  that 
I  may  be  certified  how  long  I  have 
to  live. 

6  Behold,  thou  haft  made  my 
days  as  it  were  a  fpan  long  :  and 
mine  age  is  even  as  nothing  in 
refpe6l  of  thee ;  and  verily  eveiy 
man  living  is  altogether  vanity. 

7  For  man  walketh  in  a  vain 
ftiadow,  and  difquieteth  himfelf  in 
vain  :  he  heapeth  up  riches,  and 
cannot  tell  who  fliall  «ather  them. 

8  And  now,  Lord,  what  is  my 
hope  :  truly  my  hope  is  even  in 
thee. 

9  Delivei*  me  from  all  mine  of- 
fences :  and  make  me  not  a  rebuke 
unto  the  fooliflh 

10  I  became  dumb,  and  open- 
ed not  my  mouth  :  for  it  was  thy 
doing. 

1 1  Take  thy  plague  away  from 


Day  8. 

me  :  I  am  even  confumed  by  the 
means  of  thy  heavy  hand. 

12  When  thou  with  rebukes  doft 
chaften  man  for  fin,  thou  makeft 
his  beauty  to  confume  away,  like 
as  it  were  a  moth  frettino;  a  ffar- 
ment  :  eveiy  man  therefore  is  but 
vanity. 

13  Hear  my  prayer,  O  Lord, 
and  with  thine  ears  confider  my 
calling  :  hold  not  thy  peace  at  my 
tears. 

14  For  I  am  a  ftranger  with 
thee  :  and  a  fojourner,  as  all  my 
fathers  were. 

15  O  fpare  me  a  little,  that  I 
may  recover  my  ftrength  :  before  I 
go  hence,  and  be  no  more  feen. 

Psalm  xl.   EjrpeBans  eivpedlavi. 

1  Waited  patiently  for  the  Lord  : 
and  he  inclined  unto  me,  and 
heard  my  calling. 

2  He  brought  me  alfo  out  of 
tlie  horrible  pit,  out  of  the  mire 
and  clay  :  and  fet  my  feet  upon 
the  rock,  and  ordered  my  goings. 

3  And  he  hath  put  a  new  fong 
in  my  mouth  :  even  a  thankfgiving 
unto  our  God. 

4  Many  fliall  fee  it,  and  fear  : 
and  fliall  put  their  truft  in  the 
Lord. 

5  Blefl'ed  is  the  man  that  hath 
fet  his  hope  in  the  Lord  :  and 
turned  not  unto  the  proud,  and  to 
fuch  as  go  about  with  lies. 

0  ()  Lord  my  (iod,  great  are  the 
wondrous  works  which  thou  haft 


done,  like  as  be  alfo  thy  thoughts 
which  are  to  us-ward  :  and  yet 
there  is  no  man  that  ordereth  them 
unto  thee. 

7  If  1  ihould  declare  them,  and 
fpeak  of  them  :  they  Ihould  be 
more  than  I  am  able  to  exprefs. 

8  Sacrifice,  and  meat-offering, 
thou  woiddeft  not  :  but  mine  ears 
haft  thou  ojjened. 

9  Burnt-offerings,  and  facrifice 
for  lin,  haft  thou  not  required  : 
then  faid  I,  Lo,  I  come, 

10  In  the  volume  of  the  book 
it  is  written  of  me,  that  I  fliould 
fulfil  thy  will,  O  my  God  :  I  am 
content  to  do  it ;  yea,  thy  law  is 
^vithin  my  heart. 

11  I  have  declared  thy  right- 
eoufnefs  in  the  oreat  consfreoa- 
tion  :  lo,  I  will  not  refrain  my  lips, 
O  Lord,  and  that  thou  knoweft. 

12  I  have  not  hid  thy  right- 
eoufnefs  within  my  heart :  my  talk 
hath  been  of  thy  truth,  and  of  thy 
falvation. 

13  I  have  not  kept  back  thy 
loving  mercy  and  truth  :  from  the 
great  congregation. 

14  Withdraw  not  thou  thy  mer- 
cy from  me,  O  Lord  :  let  thy  lov- 
ing-kindnefs  and  thy  truth  alway 
preferve  me. 

15  For  innumerable  troubles  are 
come  about  me ;  my  fins  have 
taken  fuch  hold  upon  me  that  I 
am  not  able  to  look  up  :  yea,  they 
are  more  in  number  than  the  hairs 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  8. 

of  my  head,  and  my  heart  hath 
failed  me. 

10  O  Lord,  let  it  be  thy  pleafure 
to  deliver  me  :  make  hafte,  O  Lord, 
to  help  me. 

17  Let  them  be  afliamed,  and 
confounded  together,  that  feek  af- 
ter my  foul  to  deftroy  it  :  let  them 
be  driven  backwai'd,  and  put  to 
rebuke,  that  wifli  me  evil. 

18  Let  them  be  defolate,  and 
rewarded  with  ftiame  :  that  fay 
unto  me,  Fie  upon  thee,  fie  upon 
thee. 

19  Let  all  thofe  that  feek  thee 
be  joyful  and  glad  in  thee  :  and 
let  fuch  as  love  thy  falvation  fay 
alway,  The  Lord  be  praifed. 

20  As  for  me,  I  am  poor  and 
needy :  but  the  Lord  caretli  for  me. 

21  Thou  art  my  helper  and  re- 
deemer :  make  no  long  tarrying, 
O  my  God. 

Ctjentng  |0ra|>er. 

Psalm  xli.    Beat  us  qui  iiitelUgit. 

BLESSED  is  he  that  confider- 
eth  the  poor  and  needy  :  the 
Lord  ftiall  deliver  him  in  the  time 
of  trouble. 

2  The  Lord  prefei-ve  him,  and 
keep  him  alive,  that  he  may  be 
bleffed  upon  earth  :  and  deliver 
not  thou  him  into  the  will  of  his 
enemies. 

3  The  Lord  comfort  him,  when 
he  lieth  fick  upon  his  bed  :  make 
thou  all  his  bed  in  his  ficknefs. 


Day  8. 

4  I  faid,  Lord,  be  merciful  unto 
me  :  heal  my  foul,  for  I  have  fin- 
ned againft  thee. 

5  Mine  enemies  fpeak  evil  of 
me  :  When  fliall  he  die,  and  his 
name  perifli? 

6  And  if  he  come  to  fee  me, 
he  fpeaketh  vanity  :  and  his  heart 
conceiveth  falfliood  within  him- 
felf,  and  when  he  cometh  forth 
he  telleth  it. 

7  AH  mine  enemies  whifper  to- 
gether againft  me  :  even  againft 
me  do  they  imagine  this  evil. 

8  Let  the  fentence  of  guiltinefs 
proceed  againft  him  :  and  now  that 
he  lieth,  let  him  rife  up  no  more. 

9  Yea,  even  mine  own  familiar 
iiiend,  whom  I  ti-ufted  :  who  did 
alfo  eat  of  my  bread,  hath  laid 
great  wait  for  me. 

10  But  be  thou  merciliil  unto 
me,  O  Lord  :  raife  thou  me  up 
again,  and  I  Ihall  reward  them. 

1 1  By  this  I  know  thou  favour- 
eft  me  :  that  mine  enemy  doth 
not  triumph  againft  me. 

12  And  when  I  am  in  my  health, 
thou  upholdeft  me  :  and  Ihalt  fet 
me  liefore  thy  face  for  ever. 

13  Blelled  be  the  Lord  God  of 
Ifrael  :  world  without  end.  Amen. 

Psalm  xlii.    Quonadinofhan. 

LIKE  as  the  hart  defireth  the 
water-brooks  :  fo  longeth  my 
foul  after  thee,  O  God. 

2  My  foul  is  athirft  for  God, 
yea,  even  for  the  living  God  :  when 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  8. 

fhall  I  come  to  appear  before  the 
prefence  of  God  ? 

3  My  tears  have  been  my  meat 
day  and  night  :  while  they  daily 
fay  unto  me.  Where  is  now  thy 
God? 

4  Now  when  I  think  thereupon, 
I  pour  out  my  heart  by  myfelf  :  for 
I  went  with  the  multitude,  and 
brought  them  forth  into  the  houfe 
of  God ; 

5  In  the  voice  of  praife  and 
thankfgiving  :  among  fuch  as  keep 
holy-day. 

6  Why  art  thou  fo  full  of  hea- 
vinefs,  O  my  foul  :  and  why  art 
thou  fo  difquieted  within  me? 

7  Put  thy  truft  in  God  :  for  I 
vnW.  yet  give  him  thanks  for  the 
help  of  his  countenance. 

8  My  God,  my  foul  is  vexed 
Avithin  me  :  therefore  will  I  re- 
member thee  concerning  the  land 
of  Jordan,  and  the  little  hill  of 
Ilermon. 

9  One  deep  calleth  another,  be- 
caufe  of  the  noife  of  the  water- 
pipes  :  all  thy  waves  and  ftorms 
are  gone  over  me. 

10  The  Lord  hath  P-ranted  his 
loving-kindnefs  in  the  day-time  : 
and  in  the  night-feafon  did  I  fing 
of  him,  and  made  my  prayer  unto 
the  (lod  of  my  life. 

Ill  will  fay  unto  the  God  of 
my  ftrength,  Why  haft  thou  for- 
gotten me  :  why  go  I  thus  heavily, 
while  the  enemy  oppreft'eth  me? 


Bay  8. 

12  My  bones  are  fmitten  afun- 
der '  as  with  a  fword  :  while  mine 
enemies  that  trouble  me  caft  me 
in  the  teeth ; 

13  Namely,  while  they  fay  daily 
unto  me  :  Where  is  now  thy  God? 

14  Why  art  thou  fo  vexed,  O 
my  foul  :  and  why  art  thou  fo  dif- 
quieted  within  me? 

15  O  put  thy  trull  in  God  :  for 
I  will  yet  thank  him,  which  is  the 
help  of  my  countenance,  and  my 
God. 

Psalm  xliii,    Judica  me,  Deus. 

GIVE  fentence  with  me,  O 
God,  and  defend  my  caufe 
againft  the  ungodly  people  :  O  de- 
liver me  from  the  deceitful  and 
wicked  man. 

2  For  thou  art  the  God  of  my 
ftrength,  why  haft  thou  put  me 
from  thee  :  and  why  go  I  fo  hea- 
vily, while  the  enemy  oppreffeth 
me? 

3  O  fend  out  thy  light  and  thy 
truth,  that  they  may  lead  me  : 
and  bring  me  unto  thy  holy  hill, 
and  to  thy  dwelling. 

4  And  that  I  may  go  unto  the 
altar  of  God,  even  unto  the  God 
of  my  joy  and  gladnefs  :  and  upon 
the  harp  will  I  give  thanks  unto 
thee,  O  God,  my  God. 

5  Why  art  thou  fo  heavy,  O 
my  foul  :  and  why  art  thou  fo  dif- 
quieted  within  me? 

6  O  put  thy  truft  in  God  :  for 
I  will  yet  give  him  thanks,  which 


THE    PSALMS. 


Baij  9. 


is   the  help   of  my  countenance, 
and  my  God. 

iHortiittg  |0raper» 

PsALAi  xliv.    DeiiSy  aurilms. 

WE  have  heard  with  our  ears, 
O  God,  our  fathers  have 
told  us  :  what  thou  haft  done  in 
their  time  of  old ; 

2  How  thou  haft  driven  out  the 
heathen  with  thy  hand,  and  plant- 
ed them  in  :  how  thou  haft  de- 
ftroyed  the  nations,  and  caft  them 
out. 

3  For  they  gat  not  the  land 
in  poffeflion  through  their  own 
fword  ;  neither  was  it  their  own 
arm  that  helped  them ; 

4  But  thy  right  hand,  and  thine 
arm,  and  the  light  of  thy  counte- 
nance :  becaufe  thou  hadft  a  favom* 
unto  them. 

5  Thou  art  my  King,  O  God  : 
fend  help  unto  Jacob. 

6  Through  thee  will  we  over- 
throw our  enemies  :  and  in  thy 
Name  will  we  tread  them  under, 
that  life  up  againft  us. 

7  For  I  Avill  not  truft  in  my 
bow  :  it  is  not  my  fword  that  fliall 
help  me ; 

8  But  it  is  thou  that  faveft  us 
from  our  enemies  :  and  putteft 
them  to  confufion  that  hate  us. 

9  We  make  our  boaft  of  God 
all  day  long  :  and  will  praife  thy 
Name  for  ever. 

10  But  now  thou  ai't  far  oft^ 

Nn 


Day  9. 

and  putted  us  to  confufion  :  and 
goeft  not  forth  with  our  armies. 

1 1  Thou  makeft  us  to  turn  our 
backs  upon  our  enemies  :  fo  that 
they  which  hate  us  fpoil  our  goods. 

12  Thou  letteft  us  be  eaten  up 
Uke  fheep  :  and  haft  fcattered  us 
among  the  heathen. 

13  Thou  felleft  thy  people  for 
nought  :  and  takeft  no  money  for 
them. 

14  Thou  makeft  us  to  be  rebuk- 
ed of  our  neighbours  :  to  be  laugh- 
ed to  fcorn,  and  had  in  derifion  of 
them  that  are  round  about  us. 

15  Thou  makeft  us  to  be  a  by- 
word among  the  heathen  :  and  that 
the  people  Ihake  their  heads  at  us. 

16  My  confufion  is  daily  before 
me  :  and  the  fliame  of  my  face 
hath  covered  me ; 

17  For  the  voice  of  the  flan- 
derer  and  blafphemer  :  for  the 
enemy  and  avenger. 

18  And  though  all  this  be  come 
upon  us,  yet  do  we  not  forget  thee  : 
nor  behave  ourfelves  frowardly  in 
thy  covenant. 

10  Our  heart  is  not  turned 
back  :  neither  our  fteps  gone  out 
of  thy  way ; 

20  No,  not  when  thou  haft 
fmitten  us  into  the  place  of  dra- 
gons :  and  covered  us  with  tiie 
fliadow  of  death. 

21  If  we  have  foro-otten  the 
iXame  of  our  God,  and  holden  up 
our  hands   to  any  ftrange  god  : 


THE    PSALMS.  Bay  Q. 

Ihall  not  God  fearch  it  out?  for  he 
knoweth  the  veiy  fecrets  of  the 
heart. 

22  For  thy  fake  alfo  are  we  kill- 
ed all  the  day  long  :  and  are  count- 
ed as  ftieep  appointed  to  be  flain. 

23  Up,  Lord,  why  fleepeft  thou  : 
awake,  and  be  not  abfent  fi'om  us 
for  ever. 

24  Wherefore  hideft  thou  thy 
face  :  and  forgetteft  our  mifery  and 
trouble? 

25  For  our  foul  is  brought  low, 
even  unto  the  duft  :  our  belly 
cleaveth  unto  the  ground. 

26  Arife,  and  help  us  :  and  de- 
liver us  for  thy  mercy's  fake. 
Psalm  xlv.    Eriidlavit  cor  meum. 

MY  heart  is  inditing  of  a  good 
matter  :  I  fpeak  of  the  things 
which  I  have  made  unto  the  King. 

2  My  tongue  is  the  pen  :  of  a 
ready  writer. 

3  Thou  art  ftiirer  than  the  chil- 
dren of  men  :  full  of  grace  are  thy 
lips,  becaufe  God  hath  blefted  thee 
for  ever. 

4  (tird  thee  \\\\\\  thy  fword  up- 
on thy  thigh,  O  thou  moft  Migh- 
ty :  according  to  thy  worfliip  and 
renown. 

5  Good  luck  have  thou  with 
thine  honour  :  ride  on,  becaufe 
of  the  word  of  truth,  of  meeknefs, 
and  righteoufncfs  ;  and  thy  right 

.^„....,    .....     handfliall  teacli  thee  terrible  things. 

6  Thy  arrows  are  veiy  (liarj), 
and  die  people  fliall  be  fubdued 


Dayd. 

unto  thee  :  even  In  the  midft  a- 
mong  the  King's  enemies. 

7  Thy  feat,  O  God,  enduretli  for 
ever  :  the  fceptre  of  thy  kingdom 
is  a  right  fceptre. 

8  Thou  hail  loved  righteoufnefs, 
and  hated  iniquity  :  wherefore  God, 
even  thy  God,  hath  anointed  thee 
with  the  oil  of  gladnefs  above  thy 
fellows. 

9  All  thy  garments  fmell  of 
myrrh,  aloes,  and  caffia  :  out  of 
the  ivory  palaces,  whereby  they 
have  made  thee  glad. 

10  Kino's'  daug-hters  were  a- 
mong  thy  honourable  women  :  up- 
on thy  right  hand  did  (land  the 
queen  in  a  vefture  of  gold,  wrought 
about  with  divers  colours. 

11  Hearken,  O  daughter,  and 
confider,  incline  thine  ear  :  forget 
alfo  thine  own  people,  and  thy  fa- 
ther s  houfe. 

12  So  (hall  the  King  have  plea- 
fure  in  thy  beauty  :  for  he  is 
thy  Lord  God,  and  worfliip  thou 
him. 

13  And  the  daughter  of  Tyre 
fliall  be  there  ^vith  a  gift  :  like  as 
the  rich  alfo  among  the  people 
fliall  make  their  fupplication  be- 
fore thee. 

14  The  King's  daughter  is  all 
glorious  within  :  her  clothing  is  of 
wrought  gold. 

15  She  fliall  be  brought  unto 
the  King  in  raiment  of  needle- 
work :  the  virgins  that  be  her  fel- 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  9. 

lows  fliall  bear  her  company,  and 
fliall  be  brought  unto  thee. 

16  With  joy  and  gladnefs  fliall 
they  be  brought  :  and  fliall  enter 
into  the  King's  palace. 

17  Inllead  of  thy  fathers  thou 
flbalt  have  children  :  whom  thou 
mayeft  make  princes  in  all  lands. 

18  1  will  remember  thy  Name 
from  one  generation  to  another  : 
therefore  fliall  the  people  give 
thanks  unto  thee,  world  without 
end. 

Psalm  xl vi .   Dens  nojier  refugium . 

GOD  is  our  hope  and  ftrength  : 
a  very  prefent  help  in  trouble. 

2  Therefore  will  we  not  fear, 
though  the  earth  be  moved  :  and 
though  the  hills  be  carried  into 
the  midfl;  of  the  fea. 

3  Though  the  waters  thereof 
rage  and  fwell  :  and  though  the 
mountains  fliake  at  the  tempeft  of 
the  fame. 

4  The  rivers  of  the  flood  there- 
of fliall  make  glad  the  city  of  God  : 
the  holy  place  of  the  tabernacle  of 
the  moft;  Highefl;. 

5  God  is  in  the  iiiidfl;  of  her, 
therefore  fliall  flie  not  be  removed  : 
God  fliall  help  her,  and  that  right 
early. 

6  The  heathen  make  much  ado, 
and  the  kingdoms  are  moved  :  but 
God  hath  fliewed  his  voice,  and 
the  earth  fliall  melt  away. 

7  The  Lord  of  liofts  is  with  us  : 
the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  refuge. 

N  n  2 


Daijd. 

8  O  come  hither,  and  behold 
the  works  of  the  Lord  :  what  de- 
llrudtion  he  hath  brought  upon 
the  earth. 

9  He  maketh  wars  to  ceafe  in 
all  the  world  :  he  breaketh  the  bow, 
and  knappeth  the  fpear  in  funder, 
and  burnetii  the  chariots  in  the  fire. 

10  Be  ftill  then,  and  know  that 
I  am  God  :  I  will  be  exalted  a- 
mong  the  heathen,  and  I  will  be 
exalted  in  the  earth. 

1 1  The  Lord  of  hofts  is  with  us  : 
the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  refuge. 

Ps A  L  M  xlvii .  Omnesgentes,plaudite. 

OClap   your    hands    together, 
all  ye  people  :  O  fing  unto 
God  with  the  voice  of  melody. 

2  For  the  Lord  is  high,  and  to 
be  feared  :  he  is  the  great  King 
upon  all  the  earth. 

3  He  fhall  fubdue  the  people 
under  us  :  and  the  nations  under 
our  feet. 

4  He  fliall  choofe  out  an  herit- 
age for  us  :  even  the  worlliip  of 
Jacob,  Avhom  he  loved. 

5  (lod  is  gone  up  with  a  meriy 
noife  :  and  the  Lord  with  the  found 
of  the  trump. 

6  ()  fing  jjraifes,  fing  praifes 
unto  our  God  :  O  fijig  praifes, 
fing  |)raifes  unto  our  King. 

7  For  God  is  the  Kino;  of  all 
the  earth  :  fing  ye  praifes  with  un- 
derllaading. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bay  9, 

8  God  reigneth  over  the  hea- 
then :  God  fitteth  upon  his  holy 
feat. 

9  The  princes  of  the  people  are 
joined  unto  the  people  of  the  God 
of  Abraham  :  for  God,  which  is 
very  high  exalted,  doth  defend  the 
earth,  as  it  were  with  a  lliield. 

Psalm  xlviii.   Magnus  Dominus. 

GREAT  is  the  Lord,  and  highly 
to  be  praifed  :  in  the  city  of 
our  God,  even  upon  his  holy  hill. 

2  The  hill  of  Sion  is  a  fair  place, 
and  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  :  up- 
on the  north-fide  lieth  the  city  of 
the  great  King ;  God  is  well  known 
in  her  palaces  as  a  fure  refuge. 

3  For  lo,  the  kings  of  the  earth  : 
are  gathered,  and  gone  by  together. 

4  They  marvelled  to  fee  fuch 
things  :  they  were  aftoniflied,  and 
fuddenly  call  down. 

5  Fear  came  there  upon  them, 
and  forrow  :  as  upon  a  woman  in 
her  travail. 

6  Thou  (halt  break  the  (hips  of 
the  fea  :  through  the  eaft-wind. 

7  Like  as  we  have  heard,  fo  have 
we  feen  in  the  city  of  the  Lord  of 
hofts,  in  the  city  of  our  God  :  God 
upholdeth  the  fame  for  ever. 

8  We  wait  for  thy  loving-kind- 
nefs,  ()  God  :  in  the  midft  of  thy 
temple. 

9  O  God,  according  to  thy 
Name,  fo  is  thy  j)raife  unto  the 
world's  end  :  thy  right  hand  is 
full  of  righteoufnefs. 


Day  9. 

10  Let  the  mount  Sion  rejoice, 
and  the  daughter  of  Judah  be 
glad  :  becaufe  of  thy  judgements. 

11  Walk  about  Sion,  and  go 
round  about  her  :  and  tell  the 
towers  thereof. 

12  Mark  well  her  bulwarks,  fet 
up  her  houfes  :  that  ye  may  tell 
them  that  come  after. 

13  For  this  God  is  our  God  for 
ever  and  ever  :  he  fliall  be  our 
guide  unto  death. 

Psalm  xlix.   Audite  hcec,  omnes. 

OHear  ye  this,  all  ye  people  : 
ponder  it  with  your  ears,  all 
ye  that  dwell  in  the  world ; 

2  High  and  low,  rich  and  poor  : 
one  ^vith  another. 

3  My  mouth  fliall  fpeak  of  wif- 
dom  :  and  my  heart  Ihall  mufe  of 
underftanding. 

4  I  will  incline  mine  ear  to  the 
parable  :  and  Ihew  my  dark  fpeech 
upon  the  harp. 

5  Wherefore  fliould  I  fear  in 
the  days  of  wickednefs  :  and  when 
the  wickednefs  of  my  heels  com- 
pafleth  me  round  about? 

6  There  be  fome  that  put  their 
truft  in  their  goods  :  and  boaft 
themfelves  in  the  multitude  of 
their  riches. 

7  But  no  man  may  deliver  his 
brother  :  nor  make  agreement  un- 
to God  for  him; 

8  For  it  coft  more  to  redeem 
their  fouls  :  fo  that  he  muft  let 
that  alone  for  ever ; 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  9. 

9  Yea,  though  he  live  long  :  and 
fee  not  the  grave. 

10  For  he  feeth  that  wife  men 
alfo  die,  and  pcrifli  together  :  as 
well  as  the  ignorant  and  foolifli, 
and  leave  their  riches  for  other. 

1 1  And  yet  they  think  that  their 
houfes  fhall  continue  for  ever  :  and 
that  their  dwelling-places  fliall  en- 
dure from  one  generation  to  an- 
other; and  call  the  lands  after  their 
own  names. 

12  Neverthelefs,  man  will  not 
abide  in  honour  :  feeing  he  may 
be  compared  unto  the  beafl;s  that 
perifli ;  this  is  the  way  of  them. 

13  This  is  their  fooliflmefs  :  and 
their  pollerity  praife  their  faying. 

14  They  lie  in  the  hell  like 
flieep,  death  gnaweth  upon  them, 
and  the  righteous  fliall  have  domi- 
nation over  them  in  the  morning : 
their  beauty  fliall  confume  in  the 
fepulchre  out  of  their  dwelling. 

15  But  God  hath  delivered  my 
foul  from  the  place  of  hell  :  for  he 
Ihall  receive  me. 

16  Be  not  thou  afraid,  though 
one  be  made  rich  :  or  if  the  gloiy 
of  his  houfe  be  increafed ; 

17  For  he  fliall  carry  nothing 
away  with  him  when  he  dieth  : 
neither  fliall  his  pomp  follow  him. 

18  For  while  he  lived,  he 
counted  himfelf  an  happy  man  : 
and  fo  long  as  thou  doefl;  weU 
unto  thyfelf,  men  will  fpeak  good 
of  thee. 


Day  10. 


THE    P 


19  He  fliall  follow  the  genera- 
tion of  his  fathers  :  and  fliall  never 
fee  liofht. 

20  Man  beino;  in  honour  hath 
no  undei-ftanding  :  but  is  compar- 
ed unto  the  beaits  that  perifli. 


T 


Psalm  1.    Dt'us  deorimi. 
HE  Lord,  even  the  moft  migh 


ty  God,  hath  fpoken  :  and 
called  the  world,  from  the  riling 
up  of  the  fun,  unto  the  going  down 
thereof. 

2  Out  of  Sion  hath  God  appear- 
ed :  in  perfect  beauty. 

3  Our  God  fliall  come,  and  fliall 
not  keep  filence  :  there  fliall  go 
before  him  a  confuming  fire,  and 
a  mighty  tempeft  fliall  be  ftirred 
up  round  about  him. 

4  He  fliall  call  the  heaven  from 
above  :  and  the  earth,  that  he  may 
judge  his  people. 

5  Gather  my  faints  together  un- 
to me  :  thofe  that  have  made  a  co- 
venant with  me  with  facrifice. 

6  And  the  heaven  fliall  declare 
his  righteoufnefs  :  for  God  is  Judge 
hinifelf. 

7  Hear,  O  my  people,  and  I 
will  fpeak  :  I  myfelf  will  teftify 
againll  thee,  O  Ifrael ;  for  I  am 
God,  even  thy  God. 

8  I  will  not  reprove  thee  becaufe 
of  thy  facrifices,  or  for  thy  burnt- 
offerings  :  becaufe  they  were  not 
alway  before  me. 


SALMS.  DmjlO. 

9  I  will  take  no  bullock  out  of 
thine  houfe  :  nor  he-goat  out  of 
thy  folds. 

10  For  all  the  beafts  of  the  fo- 
rell  are  mine  :  and  fo  are  the  cattle 
upon  a  thoufand  hills. 

1 1  I  know  all  the  fowls  upon 
the  mountains  :  and  the  wild  beafts 
of  the  field  are  in  my  fight. 

12  If  I  be  huiigiy,  I  will  not 
tell  thee  :  for  the  whole  world  is 
mine,  and  all  that  is  therein. 

13  Thinkeft  thou  that  I  will  eat 
bulls'  flefli  :  and  diink  the  blood 
of  goats? 

14  Offer  unto  God  thankfgiv- 
iiig  :  and  pay  thy  vows  unto  the 
moft  Hioheft. 

15  And  call  upon  me  in  the 
time  of  trouble  :  fo  will  I  hear 
thee,  and  thou  fhalt  praife  me. 

16  But  unto  the  ungodly  faid 
God  :  Why  doft  thou  preach  my 
laws,  and  takeft  my  covenant  in 
thy  mouth ; 

17  Whereas  thou  hateft  to  be 
reformed  :  and  haft  call  my  words 
behind  thee? 

18  When  thou  faweft  a  thief, 
thou  confentedft  unto  him  :  and 
haft  been  partaker  with  the  adul- 
terers. 

19  Thou  haft  let  thy  mouth 
fpeak  wickednefs  :  and  with  thy 
tongue  thou  haft  fet  forth  deceit. 

20  Thou  fateft,  and  fpakeft  a- 
gainft  thy  brother  :  yea,  and  haft 
flandered  thuie  own  mothers  fon. 


Bay  10. 

21  Thefe  things  haft  thou  done, 
and  I  held  my  tongue,  and  thou 
thoughteft  wickedly,  that  I  am 
even  fuch  a  one  as  thyfelf  :  but  I 
will  reprove  thee,  and  fet  before 
thee  the  things  that  thou  haft  done. 

22  O  confider  this,  ye  that  for- 
get God  :  left  1  pluck  you  away, 
and  there  be  none  to  deliver  you. 

23  Whofo  offereth  me  thanks 
and  praife,  he  honoureth  me  :  and 
to  him  that  ordereth  his  converfa- 
tion  right  will  I  ftiew  the  falvation 
of  God. 

Psalm  li.    Miferere  met,  Deus. 

HAVE  mercy  upon  me,  O 
God,  after  thy  great  good- 
nefs  :  according  to  the  multitude 
of  thy  mercies  do  away  mine  of- 
fences. 

2  Walh  me  throughly  from  my 
wickednefs  :  and  cleanfe  me  from 
my  fin. 

3  For  I  acknowledge  my  faults  : 
and  my  fin  is  ever  before  me. 

4  Againft  thee  only  have  I  fin- 
ned, and  done  this  evil  in  thy  fight : 
that  thou  mighteft  be  juftified  in 
thy  faying,  and  clear  when  thou 
art  judged. 

5  Behold,  I  was  fliapen  in  wick- 
ednefs :  and  in  fin  hath  my  mother 
conceived  me. 

6  But  lo,  thou  requireft  truth  in 
the  inward  parts  :  and  (halt  make 
me  to  underftand  wifdom  fecretly. 

7  Thou  flialt  purge  me  with 
hyflbp,  and  I  fliall  be  clean  :  thou 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  10. 


flialt  wafli  me,  and  I  fliall  be  whiter 
than  fnow. 

8  Thou  flialt  make  me  hear  of 
joy  and  gladnefs  :  that  the  bones 
which  thou  haft  broken  may  re- 
joice. 

9  Tiu'ii  thy  face  from  my  fins  : 
and  put  out  all  my  mifdeeds. 

10  Make  me  a  clean  heart,  O 
God  :  and  renew  a  right  fpirit 
within  me. 

1 1  Caft  me  not  away  from  thy 
prefence  ;  and  take  not  thy  holy 
Spirit  from  me. 

1 2  O  give  me  the  comfort  of  thy 
help  again  :  and  ftablifli  me  with 
thy  free  Spirit. 

13  Then  fliall  I  teach  thy  ways 
unto  the  wicked  :  and  finners  fliall 
be  converted  unto  thee. 

14  Deliver  me  from  blood-guil- 
tinefs,  O  God,  thou  that  art  the 
God  of  my  health  :  and  my  tongue 
fliall  fing  of  thy  righteoufnefs. 

15  Thou  flialt  open  my  lips,  O 
Lord  :  and  my  mouth  fliall  fliew 
thy  praife. 

1 6  For  thou  defireft  no  facrifice, 
elfe  would  I  give  it  thee  :  but  thou 
delighteft  not  in  burnt-oft'erings. 

17  The  facrifice  of  God  is  a 
troubled  fpirit :  a  broken  and  con- 
trite heart,  O  God,  flialt  thou  not 
defpife. 

18  O  be  favourable  and  gracious 
unto  Sion  :  build  thou  the  walls  of 
Jerufalem. 

19  Then  flialt  thou  be  pleafed 


Bay  10. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bay  10. 


wath  the  facrlfice  of  righteoufnefs, 
with  the  burnt-offerings  and  obla- 
tions :  then  fliall  they  offer  young 
bullocks  upon  thine  altar. 

Psalm  lii.    Quid gloriaris? 

WHY   boaflefl    thou   thyfelf, 
thou  tyrant :  that  thou  canfl 
do  mifchief ; 

2  Whereas  the  goodnefs  of  God : 
endureth  yet  daily? 

3  Thy  tongue  imagineth  ^vick- 
ednefs  :  and  with  lies  thou  cutteft 
like  a  Iharp  razor. 

4  Thou  haft  loved  unrighteoiif- 
nefs  more  than  goodnefs  :  and  to 
talk  of  lies  more  than  righteoufnefs. 

5  Thou  haft  loved  to  fpeak  all 
words  that  may  do  hurt  :  O  thou 
falfe  tongue. 

6  Therefore  fliall  God  deftroy 
thee  for  ever  :  he  fhall  take  thee, 
and  pluck  thee  out  of  thy  dwell- 
ing, and  root  thee  out  of  the  land 
of  the  living. 

7  The  righteous  alfo  fliall  fee 
this,  and  fear  :  and  Ihall  laugh 
hmi  to  fcorn; 

8  Lo,  this  is  the  man  that  took 
not  God  for  his  ftrength  :  but 
trufted  unto  the  multitude  of  his 
riches,  and  ftrengthened  himfelf 
in  his  wickednefs. 

9  As  for  me,  I  am  like  a  green 
olive-tree  in  the  houfe  of  God  :  my 
truft  is  in  the  tender  mercy  of  God 
for  ever  and  ever. 

10  I  will  always  give  thanks 
unto  thee  for  that  thou  haft  done  : 


and  I  will  hope  in  thy  Name,  for 
thy  faints  like  it  well. 

Psalm  liii.    Didit  injipiens. 

THE  foolifti  body  hath  faid  in 
his  heart  :  There  is  no  God. 

2  Corrupt  are  they,  and  become 
abominable  in  their  wickednefs  : 
there  is  none  that  doeth  good. 

3  God  looked  down  from  hea- 
ven upon  the  children  of  men  :  to 
fee  if  there  were  any,  that  would 
underftand,  and  feek  after  God. 

4  But  they  are  all  gone  out  of 
the  way,  they  are  altogether  be- 
come abominable  :  there  is  alfo 
none  that  doeth  good,  no  not  one. 

5  Are  not  they  without  under- 
ftanding  that  work  wickednefs  : 
eating  up  my  people  as  if  they 
would  eat  bread?  they  have  not 
called  upon  God. 

6  They  were  afraid  where  no 
fear  was  :  for  God  hath  broken  the 
bones  of  him  that  befieo  ed  thee : 
thou  haft  put  them  to  confiifion, 
becaufe  God  hath  defpifed  them. 

7  Oh,  that  the  falvation  were 
given  unto  Ifrael  out  of  Sion  :  Oh, 
that  the  Lord  would  deliver  his 
people  out  of  captivity ! 

8  Then  Ihould  Jacob  rejoice  : 
and  Ifrael  ftiould  be  right  glad. 

Psalm  liv.    Deus,  in  nomine. 

SAVE   me,    O   God,    for    thy 
Name's  fake  :  and  avenge  me 
in  thy  ftrength. 


Day  10. 

2  Hear  my  prayer,  O  God  :  and 
hearken  unto  the  words  of  my 
mouth. 

3  For  ftrangers  are  rifen  up  a- 
gainft  me  :  and  tyrants,  which  have 
not  God  before  their  eyes,  feek 
after  my  foul. 

4  Behold,  God  is  my  helper  : 
the  Lord  is  Avith  them  that  up- 
hold my  foul. 

5  He  fliall  reward  evil  unto 
mine  enemies  :  deftroy  thou  them 
in  thy  truth. 

6  An  offering  of  a  free  heart 
will  I  give  thee,  and  praife  thy 
Name,  O  Lord  :  becaufe  it  is  fo 
comfortable. 

7  For  he  hath  delivered  me  out 
of  all  my  trouble  :  and  mine  eye 
hath  feen  his  defire  upon  mine 
enemies. 

Psalm  Iv.    Eaiaiidi,  Deus. 

HEAR  my  prayer,  O  God   : 
and   hide  not  thyfelf  from 
my  petition. 

2  Take  heed  unto  me,  and  hear 
me  :  how  I  mourn  in  my  prayer, 
and  am  vexed. 

3  The  enemy  crieth  fo,  and  the 
ungodly  cometh  on  fo  fail :  for  they 
are  minded  to  do  me  fome  mifchief; 
fo  malicioufly  are  they  fet  againft  me. 

4  My  heart  is  difquieted  within 
me  :  and  the  fear  of  death  is  fallen 
upon  me. 

5  Fearfulnefs  and  trembling  are 
come  upon  me  :  and  an  horrible 
dread  hath  overwhelmed  me. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  10. 

6  And  I  faid,  O  that  I  had  wings 
like  a  dove  :  for  then  would  1  flee 
away,  and  be  at  reft. 

7  Lo,  then  would  I  get  me  away 
far  off  :  and  remain  in  the  wilder- 
nefs. 

8  I  would  make  hafte  to  efcape  : 
becaufe  of  the  ftormy  wind  and 
tempeft. 

9  Deftroy  their  tongues,  O 
Lord,  and  divide  them  :  for  I  have 
fpied  unrighteoufnefs  and  ftrife  in 
the  city. 

10  Day  and  night  they  go  a- 
bout  within  the  walls  thereof  : 
mifchief  alfo  and  forrow  are  in  the 
midft  of  it. 

1 1  Wickednefs  is  therein :  deceit 
and  guile  go  not  out  of  their  ftreets. 

12  For  it  is  not  an  open  enemy, 
that  hath  done  me  this  difhonour  : 
for  then  I  could  have  borne  it. 

13  Neither  was  it  mine  adver- 
faiy,  that  did  magnify  himfelf  a- 
gainft  me  :  for  then  peradventure 
I  would  have  hid  myfelf  from  him. 

14  But  it  was  even  thou,  my 
companion  :  my  guide,  and  mine 
own  familiar  friend. 

15  We  took  fweet  counfel  to- 
gether :  and  walked  in  the  houfe 
of  God  as  friends. 

16  Let  death  come  haftily  upon 
them,  and  let  them  go  down  quick 
into  hell :  for  wickednefs  is  in  their 
dwellings,  and  among  them. 

17  As  for  me,  I  will  call  upon 
God  :  and  the  Lord  ihall  fave  me. 

Oo 


Day  11. 

18  In  the  evening,  and  morn- 
ing, and  at  noon-day  ^vill  I  pray, 
and  that  inftantly  :  and  he  fliall 
hear  my  voice. 

19  It  is  he  that  hath  deUvered 
my  foul  in  peace  from  the  battle 
that  was  againft  me  :  for  there 
were  many  with  me. 

20  Yea,  even  God,  that  endur- 
eth  for  ever,  (hall  hear  me,  and 
bring  them  dowai  :  for  they  will 
not  turn,  nor  fear  God. 

2 1  He  laid  his  hands  upon  fuch 
as  be  at  peace  ^vitll  him  :  and  he 
brake  his  covenant. 

22  The  words  of  his  mouth  were 
fofter  than  butter,  having  war  in 
his  heart :  his  words  were  fmooth- 
er  than  oil,  and  yet  be  they  veiy 
fwords. 

23  O  call  thy  burden  upon  the 
Lord,  and  he  fliall  nourifli  thee  : 
and  fliall  not  fuffer  the  righteous 
to  fall  for  ever. 

24  And  as  for  them  :  thou,  O 
God,  flialt  bring  them  into  the  pit 
of  deftrudtion. 

25  The  blood-thirfl;y  and  de- 
ceitful men  fliall  not  live  out  half 
their  days  :  neverthelefs,  my  trull 
fliall  be  in  thee,  O  Lord. 

iHorntns  i^raper^ 

Psalm  Ivi.    Mifererc  met,  Dens. 

BE  merciful  unto  me,  O  God, 
for  man  goetli  about  to  de- 
vour me  :  he  is  daily  tigliting,  and 
troubling  me. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  11. 

2  Mine  enemies  are  daily  in 
hand  to  fwallow  me  up  :  for  they 
be  many  that  fight  againft  me,  O 
thou  iiioft  Higheft. 

3  Neverthelefs,  though  I  am 
fometime  afraid  :  yet  put  I  my 
truft  in  thee. 

4  I  will  praife  God,  becaufe  of 
his  word  :  1  have  put  my  truft  in 
God,  and  will  not  fear  what  flelh 
can  do  unto  me. 

5  They  daily  miftake  my  words  : 
all  that  they  imagine  is  to  do  me 
evil. 

6  They  hold  all  together,  and 
keep  themfelves  clofe  :  and  mark 
my  fteps,  when  they  lay  wait  for 
my  foul. 

7  Shall  they  efcape  for  their 
wickednefs  :  thou,  O  God,  in  thy 
difpleafure  flialt  caft  them  down. 

8  Thou  telleft  my  flittings;  put 
my  tears  into  thy  bottle  :  are  not 
thefe  things  noted  in  thy  book? 

9  Whenfoever  I  call  upon  thee, 
then  Ihall  mine  enemies  be  put  to 
flight  :  this  1  know;  for  God  is  on 
my  fide. 

10  In  God's  word  will  I  re- 
joice :  in  the  Lord's  word  will  1 
comfort  me. 

1 1  Yea,  in  God  have  I  put  my 
truft  :  I  will  not  be  afraid  what 
man  can  do  unto  me. 

12  Unto  dice,  ()  God,  will  I 
pay  my  vows  :  unto  thee  will  I 
give  thanks. 

13  For  thou  haft  delivered  my 


Day  11. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  11. 


foul  from  death,  and  my  feet  from 
falling  :  that  I  may  walk  before 
God  in  the  light  of  the  living. 
(/**    Psalm  Ivii.    Miferere  mei,  Deus'. 

BE  merciful  unto  me,  O  God, 
be  merciful  unto  me,  for  my 
foul  trufteth  in  thee  :  and  under 
the  fliadow  of  thy  wings  Ihall  be 
my  refuge,  until  this  tyranny  be 
over-pail. 

2  I  will  call  unto  the  moll  high 
God  :  even  unto  the  God  that 
fliall  perform  the  caufe  which  I 
have  in  hand. 

3  He  fliall  fend  from  heaven  : 
and  fave  me  from  the  reproof  of 
him  that  would  eat  me  up. 

4  God  fliall  fend  forth  his  mercy 
and  truth  :  my  foul  is  among  lions. 

5  And  I  lie  even  among  the 
children  of  men,  that  are  fet  on 
fire  :  whofe  teeth  are  fpears  and 
arrows,  and  their  tongue  a  Iharp 
fword. 

6  Set  up  thyfelf,  O  God,  above 
the  heavens  :  and  thy  glory  above 
all  the  earth. 

7  They  have  laid  a  net  for  my 
feet,  and  prefled  down  my  foul  : 
they  have  digged  a  pit  before  me, 
and  are  fallen  into  the  niidH  of  it 
thenifelves. 

8  My  heart  is  fixed,  O  God, 
my  heart  is  fixed  :  I  will  fing, 
and  give  praife. 

9  Awake  up,  my  glory;  awake, 
lute  and  harp  :  I  myfelf  will  awake 
right  early. 


1 0  I  will  give  thanks  unto  thee, 
()  Lord,  among  the  people  :  and 
I  will  fing  unto  thee  among  the 
nations. 

1 1  For  the  greatnefs  of  thy  mer- 
cy reacheth  unto  the  heavens  :  and 
thy  truth  unto  the  clouds. 

12  Set  up  thyfelf,  O  God,  above 
the  heavens  :  and  thy  gloiy  above 
all  the  earth. 

Psalm  Iviii.    Si  vere  utique. 

ARE  your  minds  fet  upon  right- 
eoufnefs,  O  ye  congregation  : 
and  do  ye  judge  the  thing  that  is 
right,  O  ye  fons  of  men? 

2  Yea,  ye  imagine  mifchief  in 
your  heart  upon  the  earth  :  and 
your  hands  deal  with  wickednefs. 

3  The  ungodly  are  froward, 
even  from  their  mother's  womb  : 
as  foon  as  they  are  born,  they  go 
afl;ray,  and  fpeak  lies. 

4  They  are  as  venomous  as  the 
poifon  of  a  ferpent  :  even  like  the 
deaf  adder  that  ftoppeth  her  ears ; 

5  Which  refufeth  to  hear  the 
voice  of  the  charmer  :  charm  he 
never  fo  wifely. 

6  Break  their  teeth,  O  God,  in 
their  mouths ;  finite  the  jaw-bones 
of  the  lions,  O  Lord  :  let  them 
fall  away  like  water  that  runneth 
apace ;  and  when  they  flioot  their 
aiTOws  let  tljem  be  rooted  out. 

7  Let  them  confume  away  like 
a  fiiail,  and  be  like  the  untimely 
fruit  of  a  woman  :  and  let  them 

not  fee  the  fun. 

Oo  2 


Day  11. 


THE    PSALMS. 


8  Or  ever  your  pots  be  made 
hot  ^vith  thorns  :  fo  let  indignation 
vex  him,  even  as  a  thing  that  is  raw, 

9  The  righteous  fliall  rejoice 
when  he  feeth  the  vengeance  : 
he  fliall  wafli  his  footfteps  in  the 
blood  of  the  ungodly. 

10  So  that  a  man  fliall  fay, 
Verily  there  is  a  reward  for  the 
righteous  :  doubtlefs  there  is  a 
God  that  judge th  the  earth. 

Ctienins  |0raj»er. 

Psalm  lix.   Eripe  me  de  inimicis. 

DELIVER  me  from  mine  ene- 
mies, O  God  :  defend  me 
from  them  that  rife  up  againfi;  me. 

2  O  deliver  me  from  the  wick- 
ed doers  :  and  fave  me  from  the 
blood-thii"fty  men. 

3  For  lo,  they  lie  waiting  for 
my  foul  :  the  mighty  men  are  ga- 
thered againft  me,  without  any  of- 
fence or  fault  of  me,  O  Lord. 

4  They  run  and  prepare  them- 
felves  without  my  fault :  arife  thou 
therefore  to  help  me,  and  behold. 

5  Stand  up,  O  Lord  God  of 
hofl;s,  thou  God  of  Ifrael,  to  vilit 
all  the  heathen  :  and  be  not  mer- 
ciful unto  them  that  offend  of  ma- 
licious wickednefs. 

6  They  go  to  and  fro  in  the 
evening  :  they  grin  like  a  dog,  and 
nm  about  through  the  city. 

7  Behold,  they  fpeak  with  their 
mouth,  and  fwords  are  in  their 
lips  :  for  who  doth  hear? 


Day  11. 

8  But  thou,  O  Lord,  Ihalt  have 
them  in  derifion  :  and  thou  flialt 
laugh  all  the  heathen  to  fcorn. 

9  My  fl;rength  will  I  afcribe  un- 
to thee  :  for  thou  art  the  God  of 
my  reftige. 

10  God  flieweth  me  his  goodnefs 
plenteoufly  :  and  God  fliall  let  me 
fee  my  defire  upon  mine  enemies. 

1 1  Slay  them  not,  left  my  people 
forget  it  :  but  fcatter  them  abroad 
among  the  people,  and  put  them 
down,  O  Lord,  our  defence. 

12  For  the  fin  of  their  mouth, 
and  for  the  words  of  their  lips, 
they  fliall  be  taken  in  their  pride  : 
and  why?  their  preaching  is  of 
curfing  and  lies. 

13  Confume  them  in  thy  ^vi*ath, 
confume  them,  that  they  may  pe- 
rifli :  and  know  that  it  is  God  that 
ruleth  in  Jacob,  and  unto  the  ends 
of  the  world. 

14  And  in  the  evening  they 
will  return  :  grin  hke  a  dog,  and 
will  go  about  the  city. 

1 5  They  will  run  here  and  there 
for  meat  :  and  giiidge  if  they  be 
not  fatisfied. 

1 6  As  for  me,  I  mil  fing  of  thy 
power,  and  vnW  })raife  thy  mercy 
betimes  in  the  morning  :  for  thou 
haft  been  my  defence  and  refuge 
in  the  day  of  my  trouble. 

17  Unto  thee,  O  my  ftrength, 
will  I  fing  :  for  thou,  O  God, 
art  my  refuge,  and  my  merciful 
God. 


Day  11. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Dmj  l± 


Psalm  Ix.    Deiis^  repulijli  nos. 

OGod,  thou  haft  caft  us  out, 
and  fcattered  us  abroad  :  thou 
haft  alfo  been  difpleafed ;  O  turn 
thee  unto  us  again. 

2  Thou  haft  moved  the  land, 
and  divided  it  :  heal  the  fores 
thereof,  for  it  Ihaketh. 

3  Thou  haft  ftiewed  thy  people 
heavy  things  :  thou  haft  given  us 
a  drink  of  deadly  wine. 

4  Thou  haft  given  a  token  for 
fuch  as  fear  thee  :  that  they  may 
triumph  becaufe  of  the  truth. 

5  Therefore  were  thy  beloved 
delivered  :  help  me  with  thy  right 
hand,  and  hear  me. 

6  God  hath  fpoken  in  his  ho- 
linefs,  I  will  rejoice,  and  divide 
Sichem  :  and  mete  out  the  valley 
of  Succoth. 

7  Gilead  is  mine,  and  Manafles  is 
mine  :  Ephraim  alfo  is  the  ftrength 
of  my  head;  Judah  is  my  law-giver; 

8  Moab  is  my  walh-pot;  over 
Edom  will  I  caft  out  my  flioe  : 
Philiftia,  be  thou  glad  of  me. 

9  Who  will  lead  me  into  the 
ftrong  city  :  who  will  bring  me 
into  Edom? 

10  Haft  not  thou  caft  us  out, 
O  God  :  wilt  not  thou,  O  God,  go 
out  Avith  our  hofts? 

1 1  O  be  thou  our  help  in  trou- 
ble :  for  vain  is  the  help  of  man. 

12  Through  God  will  we  do 
great  a6ts  :  for  it  is  he  that  ftiall 
tread  down  our  enemies. 


H 


Psalm  Ixi.    Ecvcmdi,  Dcus. 

EAR  my   crying,    O  God   : 
give  ear  unto  my  prayer. 

2  From  the  ends  of  the  earth 
will  I  call  upon  thee  :  when  my 
heart  is  in  heavinefs. 

3  O  fet  me  up  upon  the  rock 
that  is  higher  than  1  :  for  thou 
haft  been  my  hope,  and  a  ftrong 
tower  for  me  againft  the  enemy. 

4  I  will  dwell  in  thy  tabernacle 
for  ever  :  and  my  tiiift  Ihall  be  un- 
der the  covering  of  thy  wings. 

5  For  thou,  O  Lord,  haft  heard 
my  defires  :  and  haft  given  an 
heritage  unto  thofe  that  fear  thy 
Name. 

6  Thou  ftialt  grant  the  King 
a  long  life  :  that  his  yeai's  may 
endure  throughout  all  genera- 
tions. 

7  He  ftiall  dwell  before  God  for 
ever  :  O  prepare  thy  loving  mer- 
cy and  faithfulnefs,  that  they  may 
preferve  him. 

8  So  \vill  I  alway  fing  praife 
unto  thy  Name  :  that  I  may  daily 
perform  my  vows. 


iS^orning  draper. 

Psalm  Ixii.    Nonne  Deo? 

MY  foul  truly  waiteth  ftill  up- 
on God  :  for  of  him  cometh 
my  falvation. 

2  He  verily  is  my  ftrength  and 
my  falvation  :  he  is  my  defence,  fo 
that  I  ftiall  not  greatly  fall. 


Day  12. 

3  How  long  will  ye  imagine 
niifchief  againll  eveiy  man  :  ye 
fliall  be  flain  all  the  fort  of  you ; 
yea,  as  a  tottering  wall  fliall  ye 
be,  and  like  a  broken  hedge. 

4  Their  device  is  only  how  to 
put  him  out  whom  God  will  exalt : 
their  delight  is  in  lies ;  they  give 
good  words  with  their  mouth,  but 
curfe  with  their  heart. 

5  Neverthelefs,  my  foul,  wait 
thou  Hill  upon  God  :  for  my  hope 
is  in  him. 

6  He  truly  is  my  ftrength  and 
my  falvation  :  he  is  my  defence,  fo 
that  I  fliall  not  fall. 

7  In  God  is  my  health,  and  my 
glory  :  the  rock  of  my  might,  and 
in  God  is  my  truft;. 

8  O  put  your  trufl;  in  him  al- 
way,  ye  people  :  pour  out  your 
hearts  before  him,  for  God  is  our 
hope. 

9  As  for  the  children  of  men, 
they  are  but  vanity  :  the  children 
of  men  are  deceitful  upon  the 
weights,  they  are  altogether  lighter 
than  vanity  itfelf 

10  O  trufl;  not  in  Avi'ong  and 
robbery,  give  not  yourfelves  unto 
vanity  :  if  riches  increafe,  fet  not 
your  heart  upon  them. 

11  God  fpake  once,  and  twice 
I  have  alfo  heard  the  fame  :  that 
power  belongeth  unto  God  ; 

12  And  that  thou,  Lord,  art 
merciful  :  for  thou  rewardefl:  every 
man  according  to  his  work. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  12. 

Psalm  Ixiii.    Deus,  Deus  mens. 

OGod,  thou  art  my  God  :  early 
will  I  feek  thee. 

2  My  foul  thirfteth  for  thee,  my 
flefli  alfo  longeth  after  thee  :  in  a 
barren  and  diy  land  where  no 
water  is. 

3  Thus  have  I  looked  for  thee 
in  holinefs  :  that  I  might  behold 
thy  power  and  gloiy. 

4  For  thy  loving-kindnefs  is 
better  than  the  life  itfelf :  my  lips 
fliall  praife  thee. 

5  As  long  as  I  live  ^vill  I  mag- 
nify thee  on  this  manner  :  and  lift 
up  my  hands  in  thy  Name. 

6  My  foul  fliall  be  fatisfied, 
even  as  it  were  with  marrow  and 
fatnefs  :  when  my  mouth  praifeth 
thee  with  joyful  lips. 

7  Have  I  not  remembered  thee 
in  my  bed  :  and  thought  upon 
thee  when  I  was  waking? 

8  Becaufe  thou  haft  been  my 
helper  :  therefore  under  the  flia- 
dow  of  thy  wings  will  I  rejoice. 

9  My  foul  hangeth  upon  thee  : 
thy  right  hand  hath  upholden 
me. 

10  Thefe  alfo  that  feek  the  hurt 
of  my  foul  :  they  fliall  go  under 
the  earth. 

1 1  Let  them  fall  upon  the  edge 
of  the  fword  :  that  they  may  be  a 
portion  for  foxes. 

1 2  But  the  King  fliall  rejoice  in 
(lod  ;  all  they  alfo  that  fwear  by 
him  (hall  be  conmiended  :  for  the 


Bay  12. 

mouth  of  them  that  fpeak  Hes  fliall 
be  Hopped. 

Psalm  Ixiv.    JEcraudi,  Deus. 

HEAR  my  voice,  O  God,  in 
my  prayer  :  preferve  my  life 
from  fear  of  the  enemy. 

2  Hide  me  from  the  gathering 
together  of  the  froward  :  and  fi-om 
the  infurre^lion  of  wicked  doers ; 

3  Who  have  whet  their  tongue 
like  a  fword  :  and  fboot  out  their 
arrows,  even  bitter  words; 

4  That  they  may  privily  Ihoot  at 
him  that  is  perfect  ;  fuddenly  do 
they  hit  him,  and  fear  not. 

5  They  encourage  themfelves 
in  mifchief :  and  commune  among 
themfelves  how  they  may  lay 
fnares,  and  fay,  that  no  man  fliall 
fee  them. 

6  They  imagine  wickednefs,  and 
pra6tife  it  :  that  they  keep  fecret 
among  themfelves,  every  man  in 
the  deep  of  his  heart. 

7  But  God  fliall  fuddenly  flioot 
at  them  with  a  fwift  arrow  :  that 
they  fliall  be  wounded. 

8  Yea,  their  own  tongues  fliall 
make  them  fall  :  infomuch  that 
whofo  feeth  them  fliall  laugh  them 
to  fcorn. 

9  And  all  men  that  fee  it  fliall 
fay,  This  hath  God  done  :  for  they 
fliall  perceive  that  it  is  his  work. 

10  The  righteous  fliall  rejoice 
in  the  Lord,  and  ])ut  his  trufl; 
in  him  :  and  all  they  that  are 
true  of  heart  fliall  be  glad. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  12. 

Psalm  Ixv.    Te  decet  hymnus. 

THOU,  ()  God,  art  praifed  in 
Sion  :  and  unto  thee  fliall  the 
vow  be  performed  in  Jerufalem. 

2  Thou  that  hearefl;  the  prayer  : 
unto  thee  fliall  all  flefli  come. 

3  My  mifdeeds  prevail  againfl; 
me  :  O  be  thou  merciful  unto  our 
fins. 

4  Blefled  is  the  man,  whom  thou 
choofeft,  and  receiveft  unto  thee  : 
he  fliall  dwell  in  thy  court,  and  fliall 
be  fatisfied  with  the  pleafures  of 
thy  houfe,  even  of  thy  holy  temple. 

5  Thou  flialt  fliew  us  wonder- 
ful things  in  thy  righteoufnefs, 
O  God  of  our  falvation  :  thou  that 
art  the  hope  of  all  the  ends  of 
the  earth,  and  of  them  that  remain 
in  the  broad  fea. 

6  Who  in  his  ftrength  fetteth 
fafl;  the  mountains  :  and  is  girded 
about  with  power. 

7  W  ho  fl;illetli  the  raging  of  the 
fea  :  and  the  iioife  of  his  waves, 
and  the  madnefs  of  the  people. 

8  They  alfo  that  dwell  in  the 
uttermoft  parts  of  the  earth  fliall 
be  afraid  at  thy  tokens  :  thou  that 
niakeft  the  outgoings  of  the  morn- 
ing and  evening  to  praife  thee. 

9  Thou  vifitell  the  earth,  and 
blefleil  it  :  thou  makeft  it  veiy 
plenteous. 

10  The  river  of  God  is  full  of 
water  :  thou  prejiarefl;  their  corn, 
for  fo  thou  providell  for  the  earth. 


Dmj  12. 

11  Thou  watereft  her  fiirrows, 
thou  fendeft  rain  into  the  little 
valleys  thereof  :  thou  makeft  it 
foft  with  the  drops  of  rain,  and 
blefleft  the  increafe  of  it. 

12  Thou  crowneft  the  yeai*  mth 
thy  goodnefs  :  and  thy  clouds  di'op 
fatnefs. 

13  They  fliall  drop  upon  the 
dwellino's  of  the  mldernefs  :  and 
the  little  hills  fliall  rejoice  on  eve- 
ly  fide. 

14  The  folds  fliall  be  full  of 
flieep  :  the  valleys  alfo  fliall  fl:and 
fo  thick  with  com,  that  they  fliall 
laugh  and  fing*. 

Psalm  Ixvi.    Jubilate  Deo. 

OBe  joyful  in  God,  all  ye  lands  : 
fing  praifes  unto  the  honour 
of  his  Name,  make  his  praife  to 
be  glorious. 

2  Say  unto  God,  O  howwondei'ful 
art  thou  in  thy  works  :  through  the 
greatnefs  of  thy  power  fliall  thine 
enemies  be  found  liars  unto  thee. 

3  For  all  the  world  fliall  wor- 
fliip  thee  :  fing  of  thee,  and  praife 
thy  Name. 

4  O  come  hither,  and  behold 
the  works  of  God  :  how  wonderfiil 
he  is  in  his  doing  toward  the  chil- 
dren of  men. 

5  He  turned  the  fea  into  dry 
land  :  fo  that  they  went  through 
the  water  on  foot ;  there  did  we 
rejoice  thereof. 

6  He  ruleth  with  his  power  for 
ever  j  his  eyes  behold  the  people  : 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  12. 


and  fuch  as  will  not  believe  fliall 
not  be  able  to  exalt  themfelves. 

7  O  praife  our  God,  ye  people  : 
and  make  the  voice  of  his  praile  to 
be  heard ; 

8  Who  holdeth  our  foul  in  life  : 
and  fuft'ereth  not  our  feet  to  flip. 

9  For  thou,  O  God,  haft  proved 
us  :  thou  alfo  haft  tried  us,  like  as 
filver  is  tried. 

10  Thou  broughteft  us  into  the 
fnare  :  and  laideft  trouble  upon 
our  loins. 

1 1  Thou  fufferedft  men  to  ride 
over  our  heads  :  we  went  through 
fire  and  water,  and  thou  brought- 
eft us  out  into  a  wealthy  place. 

12  I  will  go  into  thine  houfe 
with  burnt-oft'erings  :  and  will  pay 
thee  my  vows,  which  I  promifed 
with  my  lips,  and  fpake  with  my 
mouth,  when  I  was  in  trouble. 

13  I  will  offer  unto  thee  fat 
burnt-facrifices,  vni\\  the  incenfe 
of  rams  :  I  will  offer  bullocks  and 
goats. 

14  O  come  hither,  and  hearken, 
all  ye  that  fear  God  :  and  1  will 
tell  you  what  he  hath  done  for 
my  foul. 

15  I  cafled  unto  him  ^vith  my 
mouth  :  and  gave  him  praifes  with 
my  tongue. 

16  If  I  incline  unto  wickednefs 
with  mine  heart  :  the  Lord  wsSi 
not  hear  me. 

17  But  God  hath  heard  me  :  and 
confidered  the  voice  of  my  prayer. 


Day\^.  THE    P 

18   Praifed  be  God  who  hath 
not  call  out  my  prayer  ;  nor  turn- 
ed his  mercy  from  me. 
Psalm  Ixvii.    Deus  mifereatur. 

GOD  be  merciful  unto  us,  and 
blefs  us  :  and  fliew  us  the 
light  of  his  countenance,  and  be 
merciful  unto  us ; 

2  That  thy  way  may  be  known 
upon  earth  :  thy  faving  health  a- 
mong  all  nations. 

3  Let  the  people  praife  thee,  O 
God  :  yea,  let  all  the  people  praife 
thee. 

4  O  let  the  nations  rejoice  and 
be  glad  :  for  thou  (lialt  judge  the 
folk  righteoufly,  and  govern  the 
nations  upon  earth. 

5  Let  the  people  praife  thee, 
O  God  :  let  all  the  people  praife 
thee. 

6  Then  Ihall  the  earth  bring- 
forth  her  increafe  :  and  God,  even 
our  own  God,  fliall  give  us  his 
bleffing. 

7  God  (hall  blefs  us  :  and  all  the 
ends  of  the  world  fliall  fear  him. 

Psalm  Ixviii.    EcViirgat  Dens. 

LET  God  arife,  and  let  his  ene- 
mies be  fcattered  :  let  them 
alfo  that  hate  him  flee  before  him. 
2  Like  as  the  fmoke  vaniflieth, 
fo  flialt  thou  drive  them  away  :  and 
like  as  wax  melteth  at  the  fire,  fo 
let  the  ungodly  perifli  at  the  pre- 
fence  of  God. 


SALMS. 


Day  13. 


3  But  let  the  righteous  })e  glad 
and  rtyoice  before  (lod  :  let  them 
alfo  be  merry  and  joyful. 

4  O  fing  unto  God,  and  fing 
praifes  unto  his  Name  :  magnify 
him  that  rideth  upon  the  heavens, 
as  it  were  upon  an  horfe ;  praife 
him  in  his  Name  JAH,  and  re- 
joice before  him. 

5  He  is  a  Father  of  the  fadier- 
lefs,  and  defendeth  the  caufc  of 
the  widows  :  even  God  in  his  holy 
habitation. 

6  He  is  the  God  that  maketh 
men  to  be  of  one  mind  in  an  houfe, 
and  bringeth  the  prifoners  out  of 
captivity  :  but  letteth  the  runa- 
gates continue  in  fcarcenefs. 

7  O  God,  when  thou  wenteft 
forth  before  the  people  :  when  thou 
wenteft  through  the  wildernefs, 

8  The  earth  fliook,  and  the  hea- 
vens dropped  at  the  prefence  of 
God  :  even  as  Sinai  alfo  was  mov- 
ed at  the  prefence  of  God,  who  is 
the  God  of  Ifrael. 

9  Thou,  O  God,  fenteft  a  gra- 
cious rain  upon  thine  inheritance  : 
and  refi-eftiedft  it  when  it  was 
weary. 

10  Thy  congregation  fliall  dwell 
therein  :  for  thou,  O  God,  haft  of 
thy  goodnefs  prepared  for  the  poor. 

11  The  Lord  gave  the  word  : 
great  was  the  company  of  the 
preachers. 

12  Kings  with  their  armies  did 
flee,  and  were  difcomfited  :  and 

Pp 


Day\^.  THE    P 

they  of  the  hoiifliokl  divided  the 
fpoil. 

13  Though  ye  have  hen  among 
the  pots,  yet  ihall  ye  be  as  the 
winos  of  a  dove  :  that  is  covered 
with  iiher  wings,  and  her  feathers 
hke  i>okl. 

14  \\  hen  the  Ahnighty  fcatter- 
ed  kin  us  for  their  fake  :  then  were 
they  as  white  as  fnow  in  Sahiion. 

15  As  the  hill  of  Bafan,  fo  is 
God"s  hill  :  even  an  high  hill,  as 
the  hill  of  Bafan. 

16  \\  hy  hop  ye  fo,  ye  high  hills? 
this  is  God's  hill,  in  the  which  it 
pleafeth  him  to  dwell  :  yea,  the 
Lord  will  abide  in  it  for  ever. 

17  The  chariots  of  God  are 
twenty  thouHmd,  even  thoufands 
of  angels  :  and  the  Lord  is  among 
them,  as  in  the  holy  place  of  Sinai. 

18  Thoo  art  gone  up  on  high, 
thou  haft  led  captivity  captive,  and 
received  gifts  for  men  :  yea,  even 
for  thine  enemies,  that  the  Lord 
God  might  dwell  among  them. 

19  Praifed  be  the  Lord  daily  : 
even  the  (iod  who  helpeth  us,  and 
poureth  his  benefits  upon  us. 

20  He  is  our  God,  even  the 
God  of  Avhoni  cometh  falvation  : 
God  is  the  Lord,  by  whom  we 
efcape  death. 

21  (Vod  fliall  wound  the  head 
of  his  enemies  :  and  the  hairy 
fcalp  of  fuch  a  one  as  goeth  on 
ftill  in  his  wickcdnefs. 

22  The  Lord  hath  faid,  1  will 


SAL  MS.  Z)rt^  13. 

bring  my  people  again,  as  I  did 
from  Bafan  :  mine  own  will  I  brino- 
again,  as  I  did  fometime  from  the 
deep  of  the  fea. 

23  That  thy  foot  may  be  dip- 
ped in  the  blood  of  thine  enemies  : 
and  that  the  tongue  of  thy  dogs 
may  be  red  through  the  fame. 

24  It  is  well  feen,  O  God,  how 
thou  goeft  :  how  thou,  my  God 
and  King,  goeft  in  the  fandhiaiy. 

25  The  fingers  go  before,  the 
minftrels  follow  after  :  in  the  midft 
are  the  damfels  playing  with  the 
timbrels. 

26  Give  thanks,  O  Ifrael,  unto 
God  the  Lord  in  the  congrega- 
tions :  from  the  ground  of  the  heart. 

27  There  is  little  Benjamin  their 
ruler,  and  the  princes  of  Judah 
their  counfel :  the  princes  of  Zabu- 
lon,  and  the  princes  of  Nephthali. 

28  Thy  God  hath  fent  forth 
ftreno-th  for  thee  :  ftablilh  the 
thing,  O  God,  that  thou  haft 
wrought  in  us, 

29  For  thy  temple's  fake  at 
.Jerufalem  :  fo  lliall  kings  bring 
prefents  unto  thee. 

30  When  the  company  of  the 
fj>ear-men,  and  multitude  of  the 
mighty  are  fcattered  abroad  a- 
mong  the  bcafts  of  the  people,  fo 
that  they  humbly  bring  pieces  of 
fiber  :  and  \vhen  he  hath  fcattered 
the  people  that  delight  in  war ; 

31  Then  Ihall  the  j)rinces  come 
out  of  Lgy})t  :  the  IVlorians'  land 


Bay  13. 


THE    PSALMS. 


fliall  fooii  ftretch   out  her  hands 
unto  God. 

32  Sing  unto  God,  O  ye  king- 
doms of  the  earth  :  O  fing  praifes 
unto  the  Lord ; 

33  Who  fitteth  in  the  heavens 
over  all  from  the  beginning  :  lo, 
he  doth  fend  out  his  voice,  yea, 
and  that  a  mighty  voice. 

34  Afcribe  ye  the  power  to 
God  over  Ifrael  :  his  worfliip,  and 
llrength  is  in  the  clouds. 

35  O  God,  wonderful  art  thou 
in  thy  holy  places  :  even  the  God 
of  Ifrael ;  he  will  give  ftrength  and 
power  unto  his  people ;  blefled  be 
God. 

€\3emng  i^raper. 

Psalm  Ixix.    Sahnim  me  fac. 

SAVE  me,  O  God :  for  the  waters 
are  come  in,  even  unto  my  foul. 

2  I  Hick  fall  in  the  deep  mire, 
where  no  ground  is  :  I  am  come 
into  deep  waters,  fo  that  the  floods 
run  over  me. 

3  I  am  weaiy  of  crying ;  my 
throat  is  dry  :  my  fight  faileth  me 
for  waiting  fo  long  upon  my  God. 

4  They  that  hate  me  without  a 
caufe  are  more  than  the  hairs  of 
my  head  :  they  that  are  mine  ene- 
mies, and  would  deftroy  me  guilt- 
lefs,  are  mighty. 

5  I  paid  them  the  things  that  I 
never  took  :  God,  thou  knoweft  my 
fimplenefs,  and  my  faults  are  not 
hid  from  thee. 


Day  13. 

G  Let  not  them  that  truft  in 
thee,  O  Lord  (lod  of  holls,  be  a- 
Ihamed  for  my  caufe  :  let  not  thofe 
that  feek  thee  be  confounded 
through  me,  O  Lord  God  of  Ifrael. 

7  And  why?  for  thy  fake  have 
I  fuffered  reproof  :  iliame  hath  co- 
vered my  face. 

8  I  am  become  a  ftranirer  unto 
my  brethren  :  even  an  alien  unto 
my  mother  s  children. 

9  For  the  zeal  of  thine  houfe 
hath  even  eaten  me  :  and  the  re- 
bukes of  them  that  rebuked  thee 
are  fallen  upon  me. 

10  1  wept,  and  challened  myfelf 
with  falling  :  and  that  was  turned 
to  my  reproof. 

1 1  I  put  on  fackcloth  alfo  :  and 
they  jelled  upon  me. 

12  They  that  fit  in  the  gate 
fpeak  againll  me  :  and  the  drunk- 
ards make  fongs  upon  me. 

13  But,  Lord,  1  make  my  prayer 
unto  thee  :  in  an  acceptable  time. 

14  Hear  me,  O  God,  in  the 
multitude  of  thy  mercy  :  even  in 
the  truth  of  thy  falvation. 

15  Take  me  out  of  the  mire, 
that  I  fink  not  :  O  let  me  be  deli- 
vered from  them  that  hate  me, 
and  out  of  the  deep  waters. 

16  Let  not  the  water-flood 
drown  me,  neither  let  the  deep 
fwallow  me  up  :  and  let  not  the 
pit  Ihut  her  mouth  upon  me. 

17  Hear  me,  O  Lord,  for  thy 
loving-kindnefs    is   comfortable   : 

Pp  2 


Day  13. 


THE    PSALMS. 


turn  thee  unto  me  according  to 
the  muhitude  of  thy  mercies. 

18  And  hide  not  thy  face  from 
thy  fervant,  for  I  am  m  trouble  : 
O  halle  thee,  and  hear  me. 

19  Draw  nigh  unto  my  foul, 
and  fave  it :  O  deliver  me,  becaufe 
of  mine  enemies. 

20  Thou  haft  knoAvn  my  re- 
proof, my  fliame,  and  my  diflio- 
nour  :  mine  adverfaries  are  all  in 
thy  fight. 

2 1  Thy  rebuke  hath  broken  my 
heart ;  I  am  full  of  heavinefs  :  I 
looked  for  fome  to  have  pity  on 
me,  but  there  was  no  man,  nei- 
ther found  I  any  to  comfort  me. 

22  They  gave  me  gall  to  eat  : 
and  when  I  was  thirfty  they  gave 
me  vinegar  to  drink. 

23  Let  their  table  be  made  a 
fnare  to  take  themfelves  withal  : 
and  let  the  things  that  fliould  have 
been  for  their  wealth  be  unto  them 
an  occafion  of  falling. 

24  Let  their  eyes  be  blinded, 
that  they  fee  not  :  and  ever  bow 
thou  downi  their  backs. 

25  Pour  out  thine  indignation 
upon  them  :  and  let  thy  wrathful 
difj)leafure  take  hold  of  them. 

26  Let  their  habitation  be  void  : 
and  no  man  to  dwell  in  their  tents. 

27  For  they  perfccute  him  whom 
thou  haft  fmitten  :  and  they  talk 
how  they  may  vex  them  whom 
thou  haft  wounded. 

28  Let  them  fall  from  one  wick- 


Bmj  13. 

eduefs  to  another  :  and  not  come 
into  thy  righteoufnefs. 

29  Let  them  be  wiped  out  of 
the  book  of  the  living  :  and  not 
be  written  amono-  the  rio-hteous. 

30  As  for  me,  when  1  am  poor 
and  in  heavinefs  :  thy  help,  O  God, 
fliall  lift  me  up. 

311  will  praife  the  Name  of  God 
with  a  fong  :  and  magnify  it  with 
thankfjoivino'. 

32  This  alfo  fliall  pleafe  the 
Lord  :  better  than  a  bullock  that 
hath  horns  and  hoofs. 

33  The  humble  fliall  confider 
this,  and  be  glad  :  feek  ye  after 
God,  and  your  foul  fliall  live. 

34  For  the  Lord  heareth  the 
poor  :  and  defpifetli  not  his  pri- 
loners. 

35  Let  heaven  and  earth  praife 
him  :  the  fea,  and  all  that  inoveth 
therein. 

36  For  God  will  lave  Sion,  and 
build  the  cities  of  Judah  :  that 
men  may  dwell  there,  and  have  it 
in  pofleflion. 

3/    rhe  pofterity  alfo  of  his  fer- 
vants  fliall  inherit  it :  and  they  that 
love  his  Name  fliall  dwell  therein. 
Psalm  Ixx.    De^is  in  acljntorhim. 

HASTE  thee,  O  God,  to  deli- 
ver me  :  make  halle  to  help 
me,  O  Lord. 

2  Let  them  be  afliamed  and  con- 
foun(i(Hl  that  leek  after  my  foul :  let 
them  be  turned  backward  and  put 
to  coiifufion  that  wifli  me  evil. 


Bay  14. 

3  Let  them  for  their  reward  be 
foon  brought  to  ftiame  :  that  cry 
over  me,  There,  there. 

4  But  let  all  thofe  that  feek  thee 
be  joyful  and  glad  in  thee  :  and  let 
all  fuch  as  delight  in  thy  falvation 
fay  alway,  The  Lord  be  praifed. 

5  As  for  me,  I  am  poor  and  in 
mifery  :  hade  thee  unto  me,  O  God. 

C  Thou  art  my  helper,  and  my 
redeemer  :  O  Lord,  make  no  long- 
tarrying. 

jOPortiing;  i^raper* 

Psalm  Ixxi.  In  te, Domin€,fperavi. 

IN  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I  put  my 
truft,  let  me  never  be  put  to 
confufion  :  but  rid  me,  and  deliver 
me,  in  thy  righteoufnefs ;  incline 
thine  ear  unto  me,  and  fave  me. 

2  Be  thou  my  ftrong  hold, 
whereunto  I  may  alway  refort  : 
thou  haft  promifed  to  help  me,  for 
thou  art  my  houfe  of  defence,  and 
my  caftle. 

3  Deliver  me,  O  my  God,  out  of 
the  hand  of  the  ungodly  :  out  of 
the  hand  of  the  unrighteous  and 
cruel  man. 

4  For  thou,  O  Lord  God,  art  the 
thing  that  I  long  for :  thou  art  my 
hope,  even  from  my  youth. 

5  Through  thee  have  I  been 
holden  up  ever  lince  I  was  born  : 
thou  art  he  that  took  me  out  of 
my  mother's  womb ;  my  praife  fliall 
always  be  of  thee. 

6  I  am  become  as  it  were  a 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  14. 

monfter  unto  many  :  but  my  fare 
truft  is  in  thee. 

7  O  let  my  mouth  be  filled  with 
thy  praife  :  that  I  may  fing  of  thy 
glory  and  honour  all  the  day  long. 

8  Call  me  not  away  in  the  time 
of  age  :  forfake  me  not  when  my 
ftrength  faileth  me. 

9  For  mine  enemies  fpeak  againft 
me,  and  they  that  lay  wait  for  my 
foul  take  their  counfel  together, 
faying  :  God  hath  forfaken  hi.n; 
p^rfecute  him,  and  take  him,  for 
there  is  none  to  deliver  him. 

10  Go  not  far  from  me,  O  God  : 
my  God,  hafte  thee  to  help  me. 

1 1  Let  them  be  confounded  and 
perifli  that  are  againft  my  foul  : 
let  them  be  covered  with  fliame 
and  diflionour  that  leek  to  do  me 
evil. 

12  As  for  me,  I  will  patiently 
abide  alway  :  and  will  praife  thee 
more  and  more. 

13  My  mouth  fliall  daily  fpeak 
of  thy  righteoufnefs  and  falvation  : 
for  I  know  no  end  thereof. 

14  1  will  go  forth  in  the  ftrength 
of  the  Lord  God  :  and  will  make 
mention  of  thy  righteoufnefs  only. 

15  Thou,  O  God,  haft  taught 
me  from  my  youth  up  until  now  : 
therefore  will  I  tell  of  thy  won- 
drous works. 

16  Forfake  me  not,  O  God,  in 
mine  old  age,  when  I  am  gray- 
headed  :  until  I  have  fliewed  thy 
ftrength  unto  this  generation,  and 


Day  14. 


THE    PSALMS. 


thy  ])o\ver  to  all  them  that  are  yet 
for  to  come. 

17  Thy  nghteoufnefs,  O  God, 
is  very  high  :  and  great  things  are 
they  that  thou  haft  done ;  O  God, 
who  is  like  unto  thee? 

18  O  what  great  troubles  and 
advei*fities  haft  thou  ftiewed  me ! 
and  yet  didft  thou  turn  and  re- 
frefti  me  :  yea,  and  broughteft  me 
from  the  deej3  of  the  earth  again. 

19  Thou  haft  brought  me  to 
great  honour  :  and  comforted  me 
on  every  lide. 

20  Therefore  will  I  praife  thee 
and  thy  faithfulnefs,  O  God,  play- 
ing upon  an  inftrument  of  inufick  : 
unto  thee  will  I  fing  upon  the  harp, 
O  thou  Holy  One  of  Ifrael. 

21  My  lips  will  be  ftiin  when  I 
fing  unto  thee  :  and  fo  will  my 
foul  whom  thou  haft  delivered. 

22  My  tongue  alfo  fliall  talk 
of  thy  righteoufnefs  all  the  day 
long  :  for  they  are  confounded 
and  brouo'ht  unto  fliame  that  feek 
to  do  me  evil. 

Psalm  Ixxii.    Dcus,  judicium. 

GIVE  the  King  thy  judge- 
ments, O  God  :  and  thy 
righteoufnefs  unto  the  King's  fon. 

2  Then  ftiall  he  judge  thy  peo- 
ple accor(Hng  unto  right  :  and  de- 
fend the  poor. 

'3  The  mountains  alfo  Ihall  brin<>- 
peace  :  and  the  little  hills  right- 
eoufnefs unto  the  people. 

4  He  fliall  keep  the  (imple  folk  by 


Day  14. 

their  right :  defend  the  children  of 
the  poor,  and  punilh  the  wrongdoer. 

5  They  fliall  fear  thee,  as  long  as 
the  fun  and  moon  endureth  :  from 
one  generation  to  another. 

6  He  fliall  come  down  like  the 
rain  into  a  fleece  of  wool :  even  as 
the  drops  that  water  the  earth. 

7  In  his  time  fliall  the  rio-ht- 
eous  flourifli  :  yea,  and  abundance 
of  peace,  fo  long  as  the  moon 
endureth. 

8  His  dominion  fliall  be  alfo 
from  the  one  fea  to  the  other  :  and 
from  the  flood  unto  the  world's  end. 

9  They  that  dwell  in  the  wil- 
dernefs  fliall  kneel  before  him  : 
his  enemies  fliall  lick  the  duft. 

10  The  kings  of  Tharfis  and  of 
the  ifles  fliall  gi\e  prefents  :  the 
kings  of  Arabia  and  Saba  fliall 
bring  gifts. 

11  All  kings  fliall  fall  down  be- 
fore him  :  all  nations  fliall  do  him 
fervice. 

12  For  he  fliall  deliver  the  poor 
when  he  crieth  :  the  needy  alfo, 
and  him  that  hath  no  helper. 

13  He  fliall  be  favourable  to  the 
fimple  and  needy  :  and  fliall  pre- 
feiTe  the  fouls  of  the  poor. 

14  He  fliall  deliver  their  fouls 
from  falfliood  and  wrong  :  and  dear 
fliall  their  blood  be  in  liis  fiMit. 

15  He  fliall  live,  and  unto  him 
fliall  be  given  of  the  gold  of  Arabia: 
prayer  fliall  be  made  ever  unto  him, 
and  daily  fliall  he  be  praifed. 


Day  14. 

16  There  fliall  be  an  heap  of 
corn  in  the  earth,  liigh  iij)on  tlie 
hills  :  his  fruit  Ihall  Ihake  like  Li- 
banus,  and  fliall  be  green  in  the 
city  like  grafs  upon  the  earth. 

17  His  Name  fliall  endure  for 
ever;  his  Name  fliall  remain  un- 
der the  fun  among  the  pollerities  : 
which  fliall  be  blefled  through  him; 
and  all  the  heathen  fliall  praife 
him. 

18  Blefled  be  the  Lord  God, 
even  the  God  of  Ifrael  :  which 
only  doeth  wondrous  things; 

19  And  blefled  be  the  Name 
of  his  Majefl;y  for  ever  :  and  all 
the  earth  fliall  be  filled  with  his 
Majefl;y.     Amen,  Amen. 

Psalm  Ixxiii.    Qiiam  homts  Ifrael! 

TRULY  God    is   loving  unto 
Ifrael  :  even  unto  fuch  as  are 
of  a  clean  heart. 

2  Neverthelefs,  my  feet  were 
alniofl;  gone  :  my  treadings  had 
well-nigh  flipt. 

3  And  why?  I  was  grieved  at 
the  wicked  :  I  do  alfo  fee  the  im- 
godly  in  fuch  profperity. 

4  For  they  are  in  no  peril  of 
death  :  but  are  lufty  and  fl;roiig. 

5  They  come  in  no  misfortune 
like  other  folk  :  neither  are  they 
plagued  like  other  men. 

'  6  And  this  is  the  caufe  that 
they  are  lb  holden  with  pride  : 
and  overwhelmed  with  cruelty. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  14. 

7  Their  eyes  fwell  with  fatnefs  : 
and  they  do  even  what  they  luft. 

8  They  corrupt  other,  and  fpeak 
of  wicked  blafphemy  :  their  talk- 
ing is  againft  the  moll  High. 

9  For  they  ftretch  forth  their 
mouth  unto  the  heaven  :  and  their 
tongue  goetli  through  the  world. 

10  Therefore  fall  the  people 
unto  them  :  and  thereout  fuck 
they  no  fniall  advantage. 

11  Tufli,  fay  they,  how  fliould 
God  perceive  it  :  is  there  know- 
ledge in  the  moft  High? 

12  Lo,  thefe  are  the  ungodly, 
thefe  profper  in  the  world,  and 
thefe  have  riches  in  polfeflion  : 
and  I  faid,  Then  have  1  cleanfed 
my  heart  in  vain,  and  waflied  mine 
hands  in  innocency. 

13  All  the  day  long  have  I 
been  puniflied  :  and  chaftened 
eveiy  morning. 

14  Yea,  and  I  had  almoft  faid 
even  as  they  :  but  lo,  then  I  fliould 
have  condemned  the  generation  of 
thy  children. 

15  Then  thought  I  to  underftand 
this  :  but  it  was  too  hard  for  me, 

16  Until  I  went  into  the  fanc- 
tuary  of  God  :  then  underftood  I 
the  end  of  thefe  men  ; 

17  Namely,  how  thou  dofl;  fet 
them  in  flippery  places  :  and  cafteft 
them  down,  and  dellroyeft  them. 

18  Oh,  how  fuddenly  do  they 
confume  :  perifli,  and  come  to  a 
fearful  end! 


Day  14. 


THE    PSALMS. 


19  Yea,  even  like  as  a  dream 
when  one  awaketh  :  fo  flialt  thou 
make  their  miage  to  vanilh  out  of 
the  city. 

20  Thus  my  heart  was  grieved  : 
and  it  went  even  through  my  reins. 

2 1  So  foolifli  was  I,  and  ignorant : 
even  as  it  were  a  bealt  before  thee. 

22  Neverthelefs,  I  am  alway  by 
thee  :  for  thou  haft  holden  me  by 
my  right  hand. 

23  Thou  flialt  guide  me  with 
thy  counfel  :  and  after  that  re- 
ceive me  ^vith  gloiy. 

24  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but 
thee  :  and  there  is  none  upon  earth 
that  I  delire  in  comparifon  of  thee. 

25  My  flefli  and  my  heart  fail- 
eth  :  but  God  is  the  ftrength  of 
my  heart,  and  my  portion  for  ever. 

26  For  lo,  they  that  forfake  thee 
fliall  perifli  :  thou  haft  deftroyed 
all  them  that  commit  fornication 
againft  thee. 

27  But  it  is  good  for  me  to 
hold  me  faft  by  God,  to  put  my 
truft  in  the  Lord  God  :  and  to 
fpeak  of  all  thy  works  in  the  gates 
of  the  daughter  of  Sion. 

Psalm  Ixxiv.     Vt  quid,  Deu.s? 

OGod,  wherefore  art  thou  ab- 
fent  from  us  fo  long  :  \\\\y  is 
thy  wrath  fo  hot  againft  the  flieep 
of  thy  pafture? 

2  O  think  upon  thy  congrega- 
tion :  whom  thou  haft  purchafed, 
and  redeemed  of  old. 

3  Think  upon  the  tribe  of  thine 


Day  14 

inheritance    :    and    mount    Sion, 
wherein  thou  haft  dwelt. 

4  Lift  up  thy  feet,  that  thou 
mayeft  utterly  deftroy  eveiy  ene- 
my :  which  hath  done  evil  in  thy 
fan61uary. 

5  Thine  adverfaries  roar  in  the 
midft  of  thy  congregations  :  and 
fet  up  their  banners  for  tokens. 

6  He  that  hewed  timber  afore 
out  of  the  thick  trees  :  was  known 
to  bring  it  to  an  excellent  work. 

7  But  now  they  break  down  all 
the  carved  work  thereof :  with  axes 
and  hammers. 

8  They  have  fet  fire  upon  thy 
holy  places  :  and  have  defiled  the 
dwelling-place  of  thy  Name,  even 
unto  the  ground. 

9  Yea,  they  faid  in  their  hearts. 
Let  us  make  havock  of  them  alto- 
gether :  thus  have  they  burnt  up 
all  the  houfes  of  God  in  the  land. 

10  We  fee  not  our  tokens,  there 
is  not  one  prophet  more  :  no,  not 
one  is  there  among  us,  that  un- 
derftandeth  any  more. 

no  God,  how  long  fliall  the 
adverfaiy  do  this  diflionour  :  how 
long  fliall  the  enemy  blafpheme  thy 
Name,  for  ever? 

12  Why  withdraweft  thou  thy 
hand  :  why  pluckeft  thou  not  thy 
right  hand  out  of  thy  boibm  to 
confume  the  enemy? 

13  For  God  is  my  Ring  of  old  : 
the  help  that  is  done  upon  earth 
he  doeth  it  himfelf. 


Ba^U.  THE    PSALMS. 

14  Thou  didft  divide  the  fea 
through  thy  power  :  thou  brakeft 
the  heads  of  the  dragons  in  the 
waters. 

15  Thou  fmoteft  the  heads  of 
Leviathan  in  pieces  :  and  gaveft 
him  to  be  meat  for  the  people 
in  the  wildeniefs. 

16  Thou  broughteft  out  foun- 
tains and  waters  out  of  the  liard 
rocks  :  thou  driedft  up  mighty 
waters. 

17  The  day  is  thine,  and  the 
night  is  thine  :  thou  haft  pre- 
pared the  Hght  and  the  fun. 

18  Thou  haft  fet  all  the  borders 
of  the  earth  :  thou  haft  made  fum- 
mer  and  winter. 

19  Remember  this,  O  Lord, 
how  the  enemy  hath  rebuked  : 
and  how  the  foolifti  people  hath 
blafphemed  thy  Name. 

20  O  deliver  not  the  foul  of  thy 
turtle-dove  unto  the  multitude  of 
the  enemies  :  and  forget  not  the 
congregation  of  the  poor  for  ever. 

2 1  Look  upon  the  covenant :  for 
all  the  earth  is  full  of  darknefs,  and 
cruel  habitations. 

22  O  let  not  the  fimple  go  away 
afliamed  :  but  let  the  poor  and 
needy  give  praife  unto  thy  Name. 

23  Arife,  O  God,  maintain 
thine  own  caufe  :  remember  how 
the  foolifli  man  blafphemeth  thee 
daily. 

24  Forget  not  the  voice  of  thine 
enemies  :  the  prefumption  of  them 


Dai/  15. 


that  hate  thee  increafeth  ever  more 
and  more. 

Psalm  Ixxv.    Conjitehimur  tihi. 

UNTO  thee,  O  God,    do  we 
give  thanks  :  yea,  unto  thee 
do  we  give  thanks. 

2  Thy  Name  alfo  is  fo  nigh  : 
and  that  do  thy  wondrous  works 
declare. 

3  When  I  receive  the  congre- 
gation :  I  fliall  judge  according 
unto  right. 

4  The  earth  is  weak,  and  all  the 
inhabiters  thereof  :  I  bear  up  the 
pillars  of  it. 

5  I  faid  unto  the  fools.  Deal 
not  fo  madly  :  and  to  the  ungod- 
ly, Set  not  up  your  horn. 

6  Set  not  up  your  horn  on  high  : 
and  fpeak  not  with  a  ftiff  neck. 

7  For  promotion  cometli  nei- 
ther from  the  eaft,  nor  from  the 
weft  :  nor  yet  from  the  fouth. 

8  And  why?  God  is  the  Judge  : 
he  putteth  down  one,  and  fetteth 
up  another. 

9  For  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
there  is  a  cup,  and  the  wine  is  red  : 
it  is  full  mixed,  and  he  poureth  out 
of  the  fame. 

10  As  for  the  dregs  thereof  :  all 
the  ungodly  of  the  earth  lliall  drink 
them,  and  fuck  them  out. 

1 1  But  I  will  talk  of  the  God  of 
Jacob  :  and  praife  him  for  ever. 

12  All  the  horns  of  the  ungodly 


Daij  15. 

alfo  will  1  break  :  and  the  horns  of 
the  riohteous  fhall  be  exalted. 
Psalm  Ixxvi.    Notus  in  Juclooa. 

IN  JewTy  is  God  known  :  his 
Name  is  g-reat  in  Ifrael. 

2  At  Salem  is  his  tabernacle  : 
and  his  dwelling  in  Sion. 

3  There  brake  he  the  arrows  of 
the  bow  :  the  flaield,  the  fword, 
and  the  battle. 

4  Thou  art  of  more  honour  and 
might :  than  the  hills  of  the  robbers. 

5  The  proud  are  robbed,  they 
have  flept  their  fleep  :  and  all  the 
men  whofe  hands  were  mighty 
have  found  nothing. 

6  At  thy  rebuke,  O  God  of 
Jacob  :  both  the  chariot  and  hoife 
are  fallen. 

7  Thou,  even  thou  art  to  be 
feared  :  and  who  may  ftand  in  thy 
fight  when  thou  art  angiy? 

8  Thou  didft  caufe  thy  judge- 
ment to  be  heard  from  heaven  : 
the  earth  trembled,  and  was  Hill, 

9  When  God  arofe  to  judge- 
ment :  and  to  help  all  the  meek 
upon  earth. 

10  The  fiercenefs  of  man  (hall 
turn  to  thy  praife  :  and  the  fierce- 
nefs of  them  flialt  thou  refrain. 

1 1  Promife  unto  the  Lord  your 
God,  and  keep  it,  all  ye  that  are 
round  about  him  :  bring  prefents 
unto  him  that  ought  to  be  feared. 

12  He  Ihall  refrain  the  fpirit  of 
princes  :  and  is  wonderful  among 
the  kings  of  the  earth. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  15. 

Psalm  Ixxvii.    Voce  mea  ad 
Dominum. 

I  Will  cry  unto  God  with  my 
voice  :  even  unto  God  will  I 
ciy  with  my  voice,  and  he  fliall 
hearken  unto  me. 

2  In  the  time  of  my  trouble  I 
fought   the  Lord   :   my  fore  ran, 
and  ceafed  not  in  the  night  fea 
fon ;  my  foul  refufed  comfort. 

3  When  I  am  in  heavinefs,  I 
will  think  upon  God  :  when  my 
heart  is  vexed,  I  will  complain. 

4  Thou  holdeft  mine  eyes  wak- 
ing :  I  am  fo  feeble,  that  I  can- 
not fpeak. 

5  I  have  confidered  the  days  of 
old  :  and  the  years  that  are  pail. 

6  I  call  to  remembrance  my 
fong  :  and  in  the  night  1  commune 
with  mine  own  heart,  and  fearch 
out  my  fpirits. 

7  Will  the  Lord  abfent  himfelf 
for  ever  :  and  will  he  be  no  more 
intreated? 

8  Is  his  mercy  clean  gone  for 
ever  :  and  is  his  promife  come  ut- 
terly to  an  end  for  evermore? 

9  Hath  God  forgotten  to  be 
gracious  :  and  will  he  ftiut  up  his 
loving-kindnefs  in  difpleafure? 

10  And  I  faid,  It  is  mine  own 
infirmity  :  but  I  will  remember 
the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the 
moll  Highell. 

1 1  I  will  remember  the  works 
of  the  Lord  :  and  call  to  mind 
thy  wonders  of  old  time. 


Day\5.  THE    P 

12  I  will  think  alfo  of  all  thy 
works  :  and  my  talking  Ihall  be  of 
thy  doings. 

13  Thy  way,  O  God,  is  holy  : 
who  is  fo  great  a  God  as  our  God? 

14  Thou  art  the  God  that  doeth 
wonders  :  and  haft  declared  thy 
power  among  the  people. 

15  Thou  haft  mightily  delivered 
thy  people  :  even  the  fons  of  Jacob 
and  Jofeph. 

16  The  waters  faw  thee,  O  God, 
the  waters  faw  thee,  and  were 
afraid  :  the  depths  alfo  were  trou- 
bled. 

17  The  clouds  poured  out  wa- 
ter, the  air  thundered  :  and  thine 
arrows  went  abroad. 

18  The  voice  of  thy  thunder 
was  heard  round  about :  the  light- 
nings flione  upon  the  ground ; 
the  earth  was  moved,  and  ftiook 
withal. 

19  Thy  way  is  in  the  fea,  and 
thy  paths  in  the  great  waters  :  and 
thy  footfteps  are  not  known. 

20  Thou  leddeft  thy  people  like 
ftieep  :  by  the  hand  of  Mofes  and 
Aaron. 

Ctiemng  0raj>er» 

Psalm  Ixxviii.    Attendite,  popule. 

HEAR  my  law,  O  my  people  : 
incline  your  ears   unto   the 
words  of  my  mouth. 

2  I  will  open  my  mouth  in  a 
parable  :  I  will  declare  hard  fen- 
tences  of  old ; 


SAL  MS.  Day  15. 

3  Which  we  have  heard  and 
known  :  and  fuch  as  our  fathers 
have  told  us ; 

4  That  we  ftiould  not  hide  them 
from  the  children  of  the  genera- 
tions to  come  ;  but  to  ftiew  the  ho- 
nour of  the  Lord,  his  mighty  and 
wonderful  works  that  he  hath  done. 

5  He  made  a  covenant  with  Ja- 
cob, and  gave  Ifrael  a  laAV  :  which 
he  commanded  our  forefathers  to 
teach  their  children ; 

6  That  their  pofterity  might 
know  it  :  and  the  children  which 
were  yet  unborn ; 

7  To  the  intent  that  when  they 
came  up  :  they  might  fliew  their 
children  the  fame ; 

8  That  they  might  put  their 
truft  in  God  :  and  not  to  forget  the 
works  of  God,  but  to  keep  his 
commandments ; 

9  And  not  to  be  as  their  fore- 
fathers, a  faithlefs  and  ftubborn  ge- 
neration :  a  generation  that  fet  not 
their  heart  aright,  and  whofe  fpirit 
cleaveth  not  ftedfaftly  unto  God ; 

10  Like  as  the  children  of  E- 
phraim  :  who  being  hamefled,  and 
carrying  bows,  turned  themfelves 
back  in  the  day  of  battle. 

1 1  They  kept  not  the  covenant 
of  God  :  and  would  not  walk  in 
his  law; 

12  But  forgat  what  he  had 
done  :  and  the  wonderful  works 
that  he  had  ihewed  for  them. 

13  Marvellous  things  did  he  in 


Day  \5.  T  H  E    P 

the  fight  of  our  forefathers,  in  the 
land  of  Egypt  :  even  in  the  field 
of  Zoan. 

14  He  divided  the  fea,  and  let 
them  go  through  :  he  made  the 
waters  to  ftand  on  an  heap. 

15  In  the  day-time  alfo  he  led 
them  with  a  cloud  :  and  all  tlie 
night  through  with  a  light  of  fire. 

16  He  clave  the  hard  rocks  in 
the  wildernefs  :  and  gave  them 
drink  thereof,  as  it  had  been  out 
of  the  great  depth. 

17  He  brought  waters  out  of 
the  ilony  rock  :  fo  that  it  guihed 
out  like  the  rivers. 

18  Yet  for  all  this  they  finned 
more  againfi;  him  :  and  provoked 
the  mofi;  Highefl;  in  the  wildernefs. 

19  They  tempted  God  in  their 
hearts  :  and  required  meat  for 
their  luit. 

20  They  fpake  againfi;  God  alfo, 
faying  :  Shall  God  prepare  a  table 
in  the  wildernefs? 

21  He  fmote  the  ftony  rock  in- 
deed, that  the  water  guflied  out, 
and  the  ftreams  flowed  \vithal :  but 
can  he  give  bread  alfo,  or  provide 
flefli  for  his  people? 

22  When  the  Lord  heard  this, 
he  was  wroth  :  fo  the  fire  was  kind- 
led in  Jacob,  and  there  came  up 
heavy  difpleafure  againft  Ifrael ; 

23  Becaufe  they  believed  not 
in  God  :  and  put  not  their  truil 
in  his  help. 

24  So  he  connnanded  the  clouds 


SAL  MS.  Day  15^ 

above  :  and  opened  the  doors  of 
heaven. 

25  He  rained  down  manna  alfo 
upon  them  for  to  eat  :  and  gave 
them  food  from  heaven. 

26  So  man  did  eat  angels 
food  :  for  he  fent  them  meat 
enough. 

27  He  caufed  the  eafl;-wind  to 
blow  under  heaven  :  and  through 
his  power  he  brought  in  the  fouth- 
wefi;-wind. 

28  He  rained  flelh  upon  them 
as  thick  as  dull  :  and  feathered 
fowls  like  as  the  fand  of  the  fea. 

29  He  let  it  fall  among  their 
tents  :  even  round  about  their 
habitation. 

30  So  they  did  eat,  and  were 
well  filled  ;  for  he  gave  them  their 
own  defire  :  they  were  not  difap- 
pointed  of  their  lull. 

31  But  while  the  meat  was  yet 
in  their  mouths,  the  hea^y  wrath 
of  God  came  upon  them,  and  flew 
the  wealthiell  of  them  :  yea,  and 
fmote  do^vn  the  chofen  men  that 
were  in  Ifrael. 

32  But  for  all  this  they  finned 
yet  more  :  and  believed  not  his 
wondrous  works. 

33  Therefoi'e  their  days  did  he 
confume  in  vanity  :  and  their  years 
in  trouble. 

34  When  he  flew  them,  they 
fought  him  :  and  turned  them 
early,  and  enquired  after  God. 

35  And  they  remembered  that 


Day  15. 


THE    PSALMS. 


God  was  their  ftrenoth  :  and  that 
the  hiffh  God  was  their  redeemer. 

36  Neverthelefs,  they  did  but  flat- 
ter him  with  their  mouth  :  and  dif- 
fembled  with  him  in  their  tongue. 

37  For  their  heart  was  not  whole 
with  him  :  neither  continued  they 
iledfaft  in  his  covenant. 

38  But  he  was  fo  merciful,  that 
he  forgave  their  mifdeeds  :  and 
deftroyed  them  not. 

39  Yea,  many  a  time  turned  he 
his  wrath  away  :  and  would  not  fuf- 
fer  his  whole  difpleafure  to  arife. 

40  For  he  confidered  that  they 
were  but  flelh  :  and  that  they  were 
even  a  wind  that  pafleth  away,  and 
Cometh  not  again. 

41  Many  a  time  did  they  pro- 
voke him  in  the  wildernefs  :  and 
grieved  him  in  the  defert. 

42  They  turned  back,  and 
tempted  God  :  and  moved  the 
Holy  One  in  Ifrael. 

43  They  thought  not  of  his 
hand  :  and  of  the  day  when  he 
delivered  them  from  the  hand  of 
the  enemy; 

44  How  he  had  wi'ought  his 
miracles  in  Egypt  :  and  his  won- 
ders in  the  field  of  Zoan. 

45  He  turned  their  waters  into 
blood  :  fo  that  they  might  not 
drink  of  the  rivers. 

46  He  fent  lice  among  them, 
and  devoured  them  up  :  and  frogs 
to  deftroy  them. 

47  He  gave  their  fruit  unto  the 


Day  15. 

caterpillar  :  and  their  labour  unto 
the  grafshop[)er. 

48  He  deflroyed  their  vines 
with  hail-flones  :  and  their  mul- 
berry-trees with  the  froH. 

49  He  fmote  their  cattle  alfo 
with  hail-ltones  :  and  their  flocks 
with  hot  thunder-bolts. 

50  He  call  upon  them  the  furi- 
oufnefs  of  his  wrath,  anger,  dif- 
pleafure, and  trouble  :  and  fent 
evil  angels  among  them. 

51  He  made  a  way  to  his  in- 
dignation, and  fpared  not  their 
foul  from  death  :  but  gave  their 
life  over  to  the  peftilence  ; 

52  And  fmote  all  the  firil- 
born  in  Egypt  :  the  moft  prin- 
cipal and  mightieft  in  the  dwell- 
ings of  Ham. 

53  But  as  for  his  o^vn  people, 
he  led  them  forth  like  Iheep  :  and 
carried  them  in  the  wildernefs  like 
a  flock. 

54  He  brought  them  out  fafe- 
ly,  that  they  fhould  not  fear  :  and 
overwhelmed  their  enemies  with 
the  fea. 

55  And  brought  them  within 
the  borders  of  his  fan6luary  :  even 
to  his  moimtain  which  he  purchaf- 
ed  with  his  right  hand. 

56  He  cafi;  out  the  heathen  alfo 
before  them  :  caufed  their  land  to 
be  divided  among  them  for  an  he- 
ritage, and  made  the  tribes  of  If- 
rael to  dwell  in  their  tents. 

57  So  they  tempted,  and  dif- 


Day  15. 

pleafed  the  luoft  high  God  :  and 
kept  not  his  teftimonies  ; 

58  But  turned  their  backs,  and 
fell  away  hke  their  forefathers  : 
ftarting  afide  Hke  a  broken  bow. 

59  For  they  grieved  him  ^vith 
their  hill-ahars  :  and  provoked  him 
to  difpleafure  with  their  images. 

60  When  God  heard  this,  he 
was  wi'oth  :  and  took  fore  dif- 
pleafure at  Ifrael. 

6 1  So  that  he  forfook  the  taber- 
nacle in  Silo  :  even  the  tent  that 
he  had  pitched  among  men. 

62  He  delivered  their  power 
into  captivity  :  and  their  beauty 
into  the  enemy's  hand. 

63  He  gave  his  people  over  al- 
fo  unto  the  fword  :  and  was  wroth 
with  his  inheritance. 

64  The  fire  confumed  their 
young  men  :  and  their  maidens 
were  not  given  to  marriage. 

65  Their  j)riefts  were  llain  with 
the  fword  :  and  there  were  no  en- 
dows to  make  lamentation. 

66  So  the  Lord  awaked  as  one 
out  of  fleep  :  and  like  a  giant  re- 
freflied  with  wine. 

67  He  fmote  his  enemies  in  the 
hinder  parts  :  and  put  them  to  a 
perpetual  fliame. 

68  He  refufed  the  tabernacle  of 
Jofeph  :  and  chofe  not  the  tribe  of 
Ephraim  ; 

()!)  I^)ut  chofe  the  tribe  of  Ju- 
dah  :  even  the  hill  of  Sion  which 
he  loved. 


THE    PSALMS.  Bay  \Q. 

70  And  there  he  built  his  tem- 


ple on  high  :  and  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  it  like  the  ground  which 
he  hath  made  continually. 

7 1  He  chofe  David  alfo  his  fer- 
vant  :  and  took  him  away  from 
the  flieep-folds. 

72  As  he  was  followmg  the  ewes 
great  with  young  ones  he  took 
him  :  that  he  might  feed  Jacob  his 
people,  and  Ifrael  his  inheritance. 

73  So  he  fed  them  with  a  faith- 
ful and  true  heart :  and  ruled  them 
prudently  with  all  his  power. 

iHorning  i^raper* 

Psalm  Ixxix.    Detts,  venerunt. 

OGod,  the  heathen  are  come 
into  thine  inheritance  :  thy 
holy  temple  have  they  defiled,  and 
made  Jerufalem  an  heap  of  ftones. 

2  The  dead  bodies  of  thy  fer- 
vants  have  they  given  to  be  meat 
unto  the  fowls  of  the  air  :  and  the 
fleih  of  thy  faints  unto  the  beafts 
of  the  land. 

3  Their  blood  have  they  Ihed 
like  water  on  every  fide  of  Jeru- 
falem :  and  there  was  no  man  to 
bury  them. 

4  We  are  become  an  open  fliame 
to  our  enemies  :  a  very  fcorn  and 
derifion  unto  them  that  are  round 
about  us. 

5  Lord,  how  long  wilt  thou  be 
angry  :  fliall  thy  jealoufy  burn  like 
fire  for  ever? 

6  Pour  out   thine   indignation 


Day  16. 

upon  the  heathen  that  have  not 
known  thee  :  and  npon  the  kino- 
donis  that  have  not  called  upon 
thy  Name. 

7  For  they  have  devoured  Jacob : 
and  laid  waile  his  dwelling-place. 

8  O  remember  not  our  old  fins, 
but  have  mercy  upon  us,  and  that 
foon  :  for  we  are  come  to  great 
mifery. 

9  Help  us,  O  God  of  our  falva- 
tion,  for  the  glory  of  thy  Name  : 
O  deliver  us,  and  be  merciful  un- 
to our  fins,  for  thy  Name's  fake. 

10  Wherefore  do  the  heathen 
fay  :  Where  is  now  their  God? 

11  O  let  the  vengeance  of  thy 
fervants'  blood  that  is  Ihed  :  be 
openly  ftiewed  upon  the  heathen 
in  our  fight. 

12  O  let  the  forrowful  fighing 
of  the  prifoners  come  before  thee  : 
according  to  the  greatnefs  of  thy 
power,  prefei've  thou  thofe  that 
are  appointed  to  die. 

13  And  for  the  blafphemy  where- 
with oiu-  neighbours  have  blaf- 
phemed  thee  :  reward  thou  them, 
O  Lord,  feven-fold  into  their  bo- 
fom. 

14  So  we,  that  are  thy  people, 
and  ftieep  of  thy  pafture,  Ihall  give 
thee  thanks  for  ever  :  and  will  al- 
way  be  fhewing  forth  thy  praife 
from  generation  to  generation. 

Psalm  Ixxx.    Qui  regis  Ifrael. 

HEAR,  O  thou  Shepherd  of  If- 
rael, thou  that  leadeft  Jofeph 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  16. 


like  a  flieep  :  Ihew  thyfelf  alfo, 
thou  that  fitteft  upon  the  cheru- 
bims. 

2  Before  Ephraini,  Benjamin, 
and  Manaffes  :  ilir  up  thy  fl;rength, 
and  come,  and  help  us. 

3  Turn  us  again,  O  God  :  fliew 
the  light  of  thy  countenance,  and 
we  ihall  be  whole. 

4  O  Lord  God  of  hofls  :  how 
long  wilt  thou  be  angiy  with  thy 
people  that  prayeth? 

5  Thou  feedefl;  tliem  with  the 
bread  of  tears  :  and  givefl;  them 
plenteoufnefs  of  tears  to  drink. 

6  Thou  haft  made  us  a  veiy 
ftrife  unto  our  neighbours  :  and 
our  enemies  laugh  us  to  fcorn. 

7  Turn  us  again,  thou  God  of 
hofts  :  fliew  the  light  of  thy  coun- 
tenance, and  we  fliall  be  whole. 

8  Thou  haft  brought  a  vine  out 
of  Egypt  :  thou  haft  caft  out  the 
heathen,  and  planted  it. 

9  Thou  madeft  room  for  it  : 
and  when  it  had  taken  root  it 
filled  the  land. 

10  The  hills  were  covered  with 
the  fliadow  of  it  :  and  the  boughs 
thereof  were  like  the  goodly  ce- 
dar-trees. 

1 1  She  ftretched  out  her  branch- 
es unto  the  fea  :  and  her  boughs 
unto  the  river. 

12  Why  haft  thou  then  broken 
down  her  hedge  :  that  all  they  that 
go  by  pluck  off  her  grapes? 

13  The  wild  boar  out  of  the 


Day  16. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  16. 


wood  doth  root  it  up  :  and  the 
wild  beads  of  the  field  devour  it. 

14  Turn  thee  again,  thou  God 
of  hofls,  look  down  from  heaven  : 
behold,  and  vilit  this  vine; 

15  And  the  place  of  the  vineyard 
that  thy  right  hand  hath  planted  : 
and  the  branch  that  thou  madeft 
fo  ftrong  for  thyfelf. 

16  It  is  burnt  with  fire,  and  cut 
down  :  and  they  Ihall  perifti  at  the 
rebuke  of  thy  countenance. 

17  Let  thy  hand  be  upon  the 
man  of  thy  right  hand  :  and  upon 
the  fon  of  man,  >vhom  thou  madefl; 
fo  fi;rong  for  thine  own  felf. 

18  And  fo  will  not  we  go  back 
fi'om  thee  :  O  let  us  live,  and  Ave 
fliall  call  upon  thy  Name. 

19  Turn  us  again,  O  Lord  God  of 
hofl;s  :  fliew  the  light  of  thy  coun- 
tenance, and  we  Ihall  be  whole. 

Psalm  Ixxxi.    Emdtate  Deo. 

SING  we  merrily  unto  God  our 
ftrength  :  make  a  cheerful  noife 
unto  the  God  of  Jacob. 

2  Take  the  pfalm,  bring  hither 
the  tabret  :  the  meriy  harp  with 
the  lute. 

3  Blow  up  the  trumpet  in  the 
new-moon  :  even  in  the  tune  ap- 
pointed, and  upon  our  folemn 
feaft-day. 

4  For  this  was  made  a  ftatute 
for  Ifrael  :  and  a  law  of  the  God 
of  Jacob. 

5  This  he  ordained  in  Jofeph 
for  a  teftimony  :  when  he  came 


out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  had 
heard  a  fl;range  language. 

6  I  eafed  his  flioulder  from  the 
burden  :  and  his  hands  were  deli- 
vered from  making  the  pots. 

7  Thou  calledft  upon  me  in 
troubles,  and  I  delivered  thee  :  and 
heard  thee  what  time  as  the  fi;orm 
fell  upon  thee. 

8  I  proved  tliee  alfo  :  at  the 
waters  of  ftrife. 

9  Hear,  O  my  people,  and  I 
will  affure  thee,  O  Ifrael  :  if  thou 
wilt  hearken  unto  me, 

10  There  fliall  no  ftrange  god 
be  in  thee  :  neither  Ihalt  thou  wor- 
fliip  any  other  god. 

1 1  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  who 
brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt :  open  thy  mouth  wide,  and 
I  fliall  fill  it. 

12  But  my  people  would  not 
hear  my  voice  :  and  Ifrael  would 
not  obey  me. 

13  So  I  gave  them  up  unto  their 
own  hearts'  lufts  :  and  let  them  fol- 
low their  own  imaginations. 

14  O  that  my  people  would 
have  hearkened  unto  me  :  for  if 
Ifrael  had  walked  in  my  ways, 

15  1  fliould  foon  have  put  down 
their  enemies  :  and  turned  my  hand 
againft  their  adverfaries. 

10  The  haters  of  the  Lord 
fliould  have  been  found  liars  :  but 
their  time  fliould  have  endured 
for  ever. 

17   Me  fliould  have  fed  them 


Dai/ Id.  THE    PSALMS 

alfo  with  the  fineft  wheat-flour  : 
and  with  honey  out  of  the  llony 
rock  flioukl  I  have  fatisfiecl  thee. 


DciT/  16. 


6t3mm0  i^iaper. 

Psalm  Ixxxii.    Deus Jiet'd. 

GOD  ftandeth  in  the  congre- 
gation  of  princes   :  he  is  a 
Judge  among  gods. 

2  How  long  will  ye  give  wrong 
judgement  :  and  accept  the  per- 
fons  of  the  ungodly? 

3  Defend  the  poor  and  father- 
lefs  :  fee  that  fuch  as  are  in  need 
and  necelTity  have  right. 

4  Dehver  the  out-caft  and  poor : 
fave  them  from  the  hand  of  the 
ungodly. 

5  They  will  not  be  learned  nor 
undei-ftand,  but  walk  on  ftill  in 
darknefs  :  all  the  foundations  of 
the  earth  are  out  of  courfe. 

6  I  have  faid,  Ye  are  gods  :  and 
ye  are  all  the  children  of  the  moft 
Higheft. 

7  But  ye  fhall  die  like  men  : 
and  fall  like  one  of  the  princes. 

8  Arife,  O  God,  and  judge  thou 
the  earth  :  for  thou  (halt  take  all 
heathen  to  thine  inheritance. 
Psalm  Ixxxiii.   Deus,  quis Jimilis? 

HOLD  not  thy  tongue,  O  God, 
keep  not  ftill  filence  :  refrain 
not  thyfelf,  O  God. 

2  For  lo,  thine  enemies  make  a 
murmuring  :  and  they  that  hate 
thee  have  lift  up  their  head. 

3  They  have  imagined  craftily 


againft    thy   people    :    and    taken 
counl'el  againft  tliy  fecret  ones. 

4  ITiey  have  faid,  Come,  and 
let  us  root  them  out,  that  they  be 
no  more  a  people  :  and  that  the 
name  of  Ifrael  may  be  no  more  in 
remembrance. 

5  For  they  have  call  their  heads 
together  with  one  confent  :  and 
are  confederate  againft  thee  ; 

G  The  tabernacles  of  the  E- 
domites,  and  the  Ifinaelites  :  the 
Moabites,  and  Hagarens ; 

7  Gebal,  and  Annnon,  and  A- 
malek  :  the  Philiftines,  Avith  them 
that  dwell  at  Tyre. 

8  Affur  alfo  is  joined  with 
them  :  and  have  holpen  the  chil- 
dren of  Lot. 

9  But  do  thou  to  them  as  unto 
the  Madianites  :  unto  Sifera,  and 
unto  Jabin  at  the  brook  of  Kifon  ; 

10  Who  periihed  at  Endor :  and 
became  as  the  dung  of  the  earth. 

11  Make  them  and  their  prin- 
ces like  Oreb  and  Zeb  :  yea,  make 
all  their  princes  like  as  Zeba  and 
Salmana ; 

12  Who  fay,  Let  us  take  to 
ourfelves  :  the  houfes  of  God  in 
pofleflion. 

13  O  my  God,  make  them  like 
unto  a  wheel  :  and  as  the  ftubble 
before  the  wind ; 

14  Like  as  the  fire  that  burneth 
up  the  wood  :  and  as  the  flame 
that  confmneth  the  mountains. 

15  Perfecute  them  even  fo  with 

Rr 


Day  16. 


THE    PSALMS. 


thy  tempeft  :  and  make  them  a- 
fraid  watli  thy  ftorm. 

16  Make  their  faces  alhamed, 
O  Lord  :  that  they  may  feek  thy 
Name. 

17  Let  them  be  confounded 
and  vexed  ever  more  and  more  :  let 
them  be  put  to  Ihame,  and  perilh. 

1 8  And  they  (hall  know  that  thou, 
whofe  Name  is  Jehovah  :  art  only 
the  moft  Higheft  over  all  the  earth. 

Psalm  Ixxxiv.    Quam  diledia! 

OHow  amiable  are  thy  dwell- 
ings :  thou  Lord  of  hofts ! 

2  My  foul  hath  a  defire  and 
longing  to  enter  into  the  courts  of 
the  Lord  :  my  heart  and  my  flelh 
rejoice  in  the  living  God. 

3  Yea,  the  fparrow  hath  found 
her  an  lioufe,  and  the  fwallow 
a  nefl  where  (lie  may  lay  her 
young  :  even  thy  altars,  O  Lord 
of  holls,  my  King  and  my  God. 

4  Bleffed  are  they  that  dwell 
in  thy  houfe  :  they  will  be  alway 
praifing  thee. 

5  Blefled  is  the  man  whofe 
ftrength  is  in  thee  :  in  whofe 
heart  are  thy  ways. 

6  Who  going  through  the  vale 
of  mifery  ufe  it  for  a  well  :  and 
the  pools  are  filled  with  water. 

7  They  will  go  from  ftrength  to 
ftrenffth  :  and  unto  the  (iod  of  o'ods 
appeareth  every  one  of  them  in  Sion. 

8  ()  Lord  (lod  of  hofts,  hear  my 
prayer  :  hearken,  ()  (lod  of  .Tacob. 

9  Behold,  O  God  our  defender  : 


Bay  16. 

and  look  upon  the  face  of  thine 
Anointed. 

10  For  one  day  in  thy  courts  : 
is  better  than  a  thoufand. 

1 1  I  had  rather  be  a  door-keeper 
in  the  houfe  of  my  God  :  than  to 
dwell  in  the  tents  of  ungodlinefs. 

1 2  For  the  Lord  God  is  a  light 
and  defence  :  the  Lord  will  give 
grace  and  worfliip,  and  no  good 
thing  fliall  he  AA^thhold  from  them 
that  live  a  godly  life. 

13  O  Lord  God  of  hofts  :  blefled 
is  the  man  that  putteth  his  truft 
in  thee. 

Psalm  Ixxxv.  Benedij?ijii,  Domhie. 

LORD,  thou  art  become  gra- 
cious unto  thy  land  :  thou 
haft  turned  away  the  captivity  of 
Jacob. 

2  Thou  haft  forgiven  the  oftence 
of  thy  people  :  and  covered  all 
their  fins. 

3  Thou  haft  taken  away  all  thy 
difpleafure  :  and  turned  thyfelf 
from  thy  wrathful  indignation. 

4  Turn  us  then,  O  God  our 
Saviour  :  and  let  thine  anger  ceafe 
from  us. 

5  Wilt  thou  be  difpleafed  at  us 
for  ever  :  and  wilt  thou  ftretch  out 
thy  wrath  from  one  generation  to 
another? 

6  Wilt  thou  not  turn  again,  and 
quicken  us  :  that  thy  people  may 
rejoice  in  thee? 

7  Shew  us  thy  mercy,  O  Lord  : 
and  grant  us  thy  falvation. 


Day  17. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  17. 


8  I  will  hearken  what  the  Lord 
God  will  fay  concerning  nie  :  for 
he  fliall  fpeak  peace  unto  his  peo- 
ple, and  to  his  faints,  that  they 
turn  not  again. 

9  For  his  falvation  is  nigh  them 
that  fear  him  :  that  glory  may  dwell 
in  our  land. 

10  Mercy  and  truth  are  met 
together  :  righteoufnefs  and  peace 
have  kilfed  each  other. 

11  Truth  fliall  flourifli  out  of 
the  earth  :  and  righteoufnefs  hath 
looked  down  from  heaven. 

12  Yea,  the  Lord  fliall  fliew 
loving-kindnefs  :  and  our  land  fliall 
give  her  increafe. 

13  Righteoufnefs  fliall  go  be- 
fore him  :  and  he  fliall  dire6t  his 
going  in  the  way. 

£0ormns  i^raper* 

PsALk  Ixxxvi.    Inclina,  Domine. 

BOW  down  thine  ear,  O  Lord, 
and  hear  me  :  for  I  am  poor, 
and  in  niifery. 

2  Preferve  thou  my  foul,  for  I 
am  holy  :  my  God,  fave  thy  fervant 
that  putteth  his  trufl;  in  thee. 

3  Be  merciful  unto  me,  O  Lord : 
for  I  will  call  daily  upon  thee. 

4  Comfort  the  foul  of  thy  fer- 
vant :  for  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  do 
I  lift  up  my  foul. 

5  For  thou.  Lord,  art  good  and 
gracious  :  and  of  great  mercy  unto 
all  them  that  call  upon  thee. 

6  Give   ear,    Lord,    unto   my 


prayer  :  and  ponder  the  voice  of 
my  humble  delires. 

7  111  the  time  of  my  trouble  I  will 
call  upon  thee  :  for  thou  heareft  me. 

8  Among  the  gods  there  is  none 
like  unto  thee,  O  Lord  :  there  is 
not  one  that  can  do  as  thou  doeft. 

9  All  nations  whom  thou  hafi; 
made  fliall  come  and  worfliip  thee, 
O  Lord  :  and  fliall  glorify  thy 
Name. 

10  For  thou  art  great,  and  doefl; 
wondrous  things  :  thou  art  God 
alone. 

1 1  Teach  me  thy  way,  O  Lord, 
and  I  will  walk  in  thy  truth  :  O 
knit  my  heart  unto  thee,  that  I 
may  fear  thy  Name. 

12  I  will  thank  thee,  O  Lord 
my  God,  with  all  my  heart  :  and 
will  praife  thy  Name  for  evermore. 

13  For  great  is  thy  mercy  to- 
ward me  :  and  thou  hall  delivered 
my  foul  from  the  nethermoft  hell. 

14  O  God,  the  proud  are  rifen 
againfl;  me  :  and  the  congregations 
of  naughty  men  have  fought  after 
my  foul,  and  have  not  fet  thee  be- 
fore their  eyes. 

15  But  thou,  O  Lord  God,  art 
full  of  compaflion  and  mercy  : 
long-fuffering,  plenteous  in  good- 
iiefs  and  truth. 

16  O  turn  thee  then  unto  me, 
and  have  mercy  upon  me  :  give 
thy  fl;rength  unto  thy  fervant,  and 
help  the  fon  of  thine  handmaid. 

17  Shew  fome  token  upon  me 

Rr  a 


Day  17. 


THE    PSALMS. 


for  good,  that  they  who  hate  me 
may  fee  it,  and  be  alhamed  :  be- 
caufe  thou,  Lord,  haft  holpen  me, 
and  comforted  me. 
Psalm  Ixxxvii.   Fundamenta  ejus. 

HER  foundations  are  upon  the 
holy  hills  :  the  Lord  loveth 
the  gates  of  Sion  more  than  all  the 
dwellings  of  Jacob. 

2  Very  excellent  things  are  fpo- 
ken  of  thee  :  thou  city  of  God. 

3  I  will  think  upon  Rahab  and 
Babylon  :  with  them  that  know 
me. 

4  Behold  ye  the  Philiftines  alfo  : 
and  they  of  Tyre,  with  the  Mo- 
rians;  lo,  there  was  he  born. 

5  And  of  Sion  it  fliall  be  report- 
ed that  he  was  born  in  her  :  and 
the  nioft  Hio-h  ihall  ftablifh  her. 

()  The  Lord  ihall  rehearfe  it 
w^hen  he  writeth  up  the  people  : 
that  he  was  born  there. 

7  The  fingers  alfo  and  trumpet- 
ers (hall  he  rehearfe  :  All  my  frefh 
fpnngs  fliall  be  in  thee. 
Psalm  Ixxxviii.  Domine  Dens. 
Lord  God  of  my  falvation,  I 
have  cried  day  and  night  be- 
fore thee  :  O  let  my  prayer  enter 
into  thy  prefence,  incline  thine 
ear  unto  my  calling. 

2  For  my  foul  is  full  of  trouble  : 
and  my  life  draweth  nigh  unto  hell. 

3  I  am  counted  as  one  of  them 
that  go  down  into  the  pit  :  and  I 
have  been  even  as  a  man  that  hath 
no  ftrength. 


Day  17. 

4  Free  among  the  dead,  like 
unto  them  that  are  wounded,  and 
lie  in  the  grave  :  who  are  out  of 
remembrance,  and  are  cut  away 
from  thy  hand. 

5  Thou  haft  laid  me  in  the 
loweft  pit  :  in  a  place  of  darknefs, 
and  in  the  deep. 

6  Thine  indignation  lieth  hard 
upon  me  :  and  thou  haft  vexed  me 
with  all  thy  ftorms. 

7  Thou  haft  put  away  mine  ac- 
quaintance far  from  me  :  and  made 
me  to  be  abhorred  of  theuL 

8  I  am  fo  faft  in  prifon  :  that  I 
cannot  get  forth. 

9  My  fight  faileth  for  veiy  trou- 
ble :  Lord,  I  have  called  daily  up- 
on thee,  I  have  ftretched  forth  my 
hands  unto  thee. 

10  Doft  thou  fliew  wonders  a- 
mong  the  dead  :  or  fliall  the  dead 
rife  up  again,  and  praife  thee? 

1 1  Shall  thy  loving- kindnefs  be 
fliewed  in  the  grave  :  or  thy  faith- 
fuhiefs  in  deft ru(ft ion? 

12  Shafl  thy  wondrous  works 
be  known  in  the  dark  :  and  thy 
riohteoufnefs  in  the  land  where  all 
things  are  forgotten? 

13  Unto  thee  have  I  cried,  O 
Lord  :  and  early  fliall  my  prayer 
come  before  thee. 

14  Lord,  why  abhorreft  thou 
my  foul  :  and  hideft  thou  thy  face 
from  me? 

1 .3  I  am  in  mifery,  and  like  unto 
him  that  is  at  the  point  to  cUe :  even 


Day  17. 


THE    PSALMS. 


from  my  youth  up  thy  terrors  have 
I  fufferetl  with  a  troubled  mind. 

16  Thy  wrathful  difpleafure  go- 
eth  over  me  :  and  the  fear  of  thee 
hath  undone  me. 

17  They  came  round  about  me 
daily  like  water  :  and  compafled 
me  together  on  every  fide. 

18  My  lovers  and  friends  haft 
thou  put  away  from  me  :  and 
hid  mine  acquaintance  out  of  my 
fight. 

Psalm  Ixxxix.  Mifericordias 
Domini. 
1%/TY  fong  Ihall  be  alway  of  the 
-^^  A  loving-kindnefs  of  the  Lord  : 
with  my  mouth  will  I  ever  be 
ihewing  thy  truth  from  one  gene- 
ration to  another. 

2  For  I  have  faid,  Mercy  ftiall 
be  fet  up  for  ever  :  thy  truth  flialt 
thou  ftablifti  in  the  heavens. 

3  I  have  made  a  covenant  with 
my  chofen  :  I  have  fworn  unto 
David  my  fervant ; 

4  Thy  feed  will  I  ftablifti  for 
ever  :  and  fet  up  thy  throne  from 
one  generation  to  another. 

5  O  Lord,  the  very  heavens 
fliall  praife  thy  wondrous  works  : 
and  thy  truth  in  the  congregation 
of  the  faints. 

6  For  who  is  he  among  the 
clouds  :  that  ftiall  be  compared 
unto  the  Lord? 

7  And  what  is  he  among  the 


Day  17. 

gods  :  that  ftiall  be  like  unto  the 
Lord? 

8  God  is  veiy  greatly  to  be  fear- 
ed in  the  couiifel  of  the  faints  :  and 
to  be  had  in  reverence  of  all  them 
that  are  round  about  him. 

9  O  Lord  God  of  hofts,  who  is 
like  unto  thee  :  thy  truth,  moft 
mighty  Lord,  is  on  every  fide. 

10  Thou  ruleft  the  raging  of  the 
fea  :  thou  ftilleft  the  waves  thereof 
when  they  arife. 

11  Thou  haft  fubdued  Egypt, 
and  deftroyed  it  :  thou  haft  fcat- 
tered  thine  enemies  abroad  with 
thy  mighty  arm. 

12  The  heavens  are  thine,  the 
eardi  alfo  is  thine  :  thou  haft  laid 
the  foundation  of  the  round  world, 
and  all  that  therein  is. 

13  Thou  haft  made  the  north 
and  the  foutli  :  Tabor  and  Her- 
mon  fliall  rejoice  in  thy  Name. 

14  Thou  haft  a  mighty  arm  : 
ftrong  is  thy  hand,  and  high  is  thy 
right  hand. 

15  Righteoufnefs  and  equity  are 
the  habitation  of  thy  feat  :  mercy 
and  truth  fliall  go  before  thy  face. 

16  Bleffed  is  the  people,  O 
Lord,  that  can  rejoice  in  thee  : 
they  fliall  walk  in  the  light  of  thy 
countenance. 

17  Their  delight  fliall  be  daily 
in  thy  Name  :  and  in  thy  right- 
eoufnefs fliall  they  make  their 
boaft. 

18  For  thou  art  the  glory  of  their 


BayXl.  THE    P 

ftrength  :  and  in  thy  loving-kind- 
nefs  thou  flialt  lift  up  our  horns. 

19  For  the  Lord  is  our  defence  : 
the  Holy  One  of  Ifrael  is  our  King. 

20  Thou  fpakeft  fometime  in 
vilions  unto  thy  faints,  and  faidft  : 
I  have  laid  help  upon  one  that  is 
mighty ;  I  have  exalted  one  cliofen 
out  of  the  people. 

211  have  found  David  my  fer- 
vant  :  with  my  holy  oil  have  I 
anointed  him. 

22  My  hand  ftiall  hold  him  faft  : 
and  my  arm  fliall  ftrengthen  him. 

23  The  enemy  fliall  not  be  able 
to  do  him  violence  :  the  fon  of 
wickednefs  fliall  not  hurt  him. 

24  I  will  fmite  down  his  foes 
before  his  face  :  and  plague  them 
that  hate  him. 

25  My  truth  alfo  and  my  mercy 
fliall  be  with  him  :  and  in  my 
Name  fliall  his  honi  be  exalted. 

26  I  will  fet  his  dominion  alfo 
in  the  fea  :  and  his  right  hand  in 
the  floods. 

27  He  fliall  call  me,  Thou  art 
my  Father  :  my  God,  and  my 
ftrong  falvation. 

28  And  I  will  make  him  my 
firll-born  :  higher  than  the  kings 
of  the  earth. 

29  My  mercy  will  I  keep  for 
him  for  evermore  :  and  my  cove- 
nant fliall  fl;and  faft  with  him. 

30  His  feed  alfo  will  I  make  to 
endure  for  ever  :  and  his  throne  as 
the  days  of  heaven. 


SAL  MS.  BayXl, 

31  But  if  his  children  forfake 
my  law  :  and  walk  not  in  my 
judgements  ; 

32  If  they  break  my  ftatutes, 
and  keep  not  my  commandments  : 
I  will  ^i(it  their  offences  with  the 
rod,  and  their  fin  with  fcourges. 

33  Neverthelefs,  my  loving- 
kindnefs  will  I  not  utterly  take 
from  him  :  nor  fuffer  my  truth 
to  fail. 

34  My  covenant  will  I  not 
break,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is 
gone  out  of  my  lips  ;  I  have  fworn 
once  by  my  holinefs,  that  I  will 
not  fail  David. 

35  His  feed  fliall  endure  for 
ever  :  and  his  feat  is  like  as  the 
fun  before  me. 

36  He  fliall  ftaiid  faft  for  ever- 
more as  the  moon  :  and  as  the 
faithful  %vitnefs  in  heaven. 

37  But  thou  haft  abhorred  and 
forfaken  thine  Anointed  :  and  art 
difpleafed  at  him. 

38  Thou  haft  broken  the  cove- 
nant of  thy  fervant  :  and  caft  his 
crown  to  the  ground. 

39  Thou  haft  overthrown  all 
his  hedges  :  and  broken  down  his 
ftrong  holds. 

40  All  they  that  go  by  fpoil 
him  :  and  he  is  become  a  reproach 
to  his  neighbours. 

41  Thou  haft  fet  up  the  right 
hand  of  his  enemies  :  and  made  all 
his  adverfaries  to  rejoice. 

42  Thou  haft  taken  away  the 


Dmj  18. 

edge  of  his  fword  :  and  giveft  him 
not  vi6tory  in  the  battle. 

43  Tliou  haft  put  out  his  glory  : 
and  caft  his  throne  down  to  the 
ground. 

44  The  days  of  his  youth  haft 
thou  Ihortened  :  and  covered  him 
with  diflionour. 

45  Lord,  how  long  wilt  thou 
hide  thyfelf,  for  ever  :  and  ftiall 
thy  wvdXh  burn  like  fire? 

46  O  remember  how  fhort  my 
time  is  :  wherefore  haft  thou  made 
all  men  for  nought? 

47  What  man  is  he  that  liveth, 
and  (liall  not  fee  death  :  and  lliall 
he  deliver  his  foul  from  the  hand 
of  hell? 

48  Lord,  where  are  thy  old 
loving-kindneffes  :  which  thou 
fwareft  unto  David  in  thy  truth? 

49  Remember,  Lord,  the  re- 
buke that  thy  fervants  have  :  and 
how  I  do  bear  in  my  bofom  the 
rebukes  of  many  people  ; 

50  Wherewith  thine  enemies 
have  blafphemed  thee,  and  flander- 
ed  the  footfteps  of  thine  Anointed  : 
Praifed  be  the  Lord  for  evermore. 
Amen,  and  Amen. 

iHorning  i^ra^er. 

Psalm  xc.    Domine,  refugiiim. 

LORD,  thou  haft  been  our  re- 
fuge :   fi-om  one  generation 
to  another. 

2  Before  the  mountains  were 
brought  forth,  or  ever  the  earth 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bmj  18. 


and  the  world  were  made  :  thou  art 
God  from  everlafting,  and  world 
without  end. 

3  Thou  turneft  man  to  deftruc- 
tion  :  again  thou  fayeft.  Come  a- 
gaiu,  ye  children  of  men. 

4  For  a  thoufand  years  in  thy 
fight  are  but  as  yefterday  :  feeinj^ 
that  is  paft  as  a  watch  in  the  night. 

5  As  foon  as  thou  fcattereft  them 
they  are  even  as  a  lleep  :  and  fade 
away  fuddenly  like  the  grafs. 

6  In  the  morning  it  is  green, 
and  groweth  up  :  but  in  the  even- 
ing it  is  cut  down,  dried  uj3,  and 
withered. 

7  For  we  confume  away  in  thy 
difpleafure  :  and  are  afi'aid  at  thy 
wrathful  indignation. 

8  Thou  haft  fet  our  mifdeeds 
before  thee  :  and  our  fecret  fins  in 
the  light  of  thy  countenance. 

9  For  when  thou  art  angiy  all 
our  days  are  gone  :  we  bring  our 
years  to  an  end,  as  it  were  a  tale 
that  is  told. 

10  The  days  of  our  age  are 
threefcore  years  and  ten ;  and 
though  men  be  fo  ftrong  that  they 
come  to  fourfcore  years  :  yet  is 
their  ftrength  then  but  labour  and 
forrow;  fo  foon  paffeth  it  away, 
and  we  are  gone. 

1 1  But  who  regardeth  the  power 
of  thy  wrath  :  for  even  thereafter 
as  a  man  feareth,  fo  is  thy  dif- 
pleafure. 

12  O  teach  us  to  number  our 


Day  18. 

days  :  that  we  may  apply  om*  hearts 
unto  wifdom. 

13  Turn  thee  again,  O  Lord,  at 
the  laft  :  and  be  gracious  vmto  thy 
fei'vants. 

14  O  fatisfy  us  with  tliy  mercy, 
and  that  foon  :  fo  fliall  we  rejoice 
and  be  glad  all  the  days  of  our  life. 

15  Comfort  us  again  now  after 
the  time  that  thou  haft  plagued  us  : 
and  for  the  years  wherein  we  have 
fuifered  adverlity. 

16  Shew  thy  fervants  thy  work  : 
and  their  children  thy  glory. 

17  And  the  glorious  Majefty  of 
the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  us  : 
profper  thou  the  work  of  our  hands 
upon  us,  O  profper  thou  our  han- 
dy-work. 

Psalm  xci.    Qui  habitat. 

WHOSO  dwelleth  under  the 
defence  of  the  moft  High  : 
fliall  abide  under  the  fliadow  of 
the  Almighty. 

2  I  will  fay  unto  the  Lord,  Thou 
art  my  hope,  and  my  ftrong  hold  : 
my  God,  in  him  will  I  truft. 

3  For  he  fliall  deliver  thee  from 
the  fnare  of  the  hunter  :  and  from 
the  noifome  peftilence. 

4  He  fliall  defend  thee  under  his 
wings,  and  thou  flialt  be  fafe  under 
his  feathers  :  his  faithfulnefs  and 
truth  fliall  be  thy  fliield  and  buckler. 

5  Thou  flialt  not  be  afraid  for 
any  terror  by  night  :  nor  for  the 
arrow  that  flietli  by  day; 

6  For  the  peftilence  that  walk- 


THE    PSALMS. 


Dmj  18. 


eth  in  darknefs  :  nor  for  the  ficknefs 
that  deftroyeth  in  the  noon-day. 

7  A  thoufand  fliall  fall  befide 
thee,  and  ten  thoufand  at  thy  right 
hand  :  but  it  fliall  not  come  iiish 
thee. 

8  Yea,  with  thine  eyes  flialt  thou 
behold  :  and  fee  the  reward  of  the 
ungodly. 

9  For  thou.  Lord,  art  my  hope  : 
thou  haft  fet  thine  houfe  of  defence 
veiy  high. 

10  There  fliall  no  evil  happen 
unto  thee  :  neither  fliall  any  plague 
come  nigh  thy  dwelling. 

1 1  For  he  fliall  give  his  angels 
charge  over  thee  :  to  keep  thee  in 
all  thy  ways. 

12  They  fliall  bear  thee  in  their 
hands  :  that  thou  hurt  not  thy  foot 
againft  a  ft  one. 

13  Thou  flialt  go  upon  the  lion 
and  adder  :  the  young  lion  and 
the  dragon  flialt  thou  tread  under 
thy  feet. 

14  Becaufe  he  hath  fet  his  love 
upon  me,  therefore  will  I  deliver 
him  :  I  will  fet  him  up,  becaufe  he 
hath  known  my  Name. 

15  He  fliall  call  upon  me,  and  I 
will  hear  him  :  yea,  1  am  with  him 
in  trouble;  1  will  deliver  him,  and 
bring  him  to  honour. 

1(>  With  long  life  will  I  fatisfy 
him  :  and  fhew  hlin  my  ftdvation. 
Psalm  xcii.    Bo/mm  ejl  conjitcri. 

IT   is    a    good    thing    to    give 
thanks  unto  the  Lord  :  and  to 


Bay  18. 


THE    PSALMS. 


fing   praifes   unto  thy  Name,   O 
moll  Ilig'heft; 

2  To  tell  of  thy  loviiig-kindnefs 
early  in  the  morning  :  and  of  thy 
truth  in  the  night-feafon ; 

3  Upon  an  inftrument  of  ten 
firings,  and  upon  the  lute  :  upon 
a  loud  inftrument,  and  upon  the 
harp. 

4  For  thou.  Lord,  haft  made 
me  glad  through  thy  works  :  and 
I  will  rejoice  in  giving  praife  for 
the  operations  of  thy  hands. 

5  O  Lord,  how  glorious  are  thy 
works  :  thy  thoughts  are  very  deep. 

6  An. un wife  man  doth  not  well 
confider  this  :  and  a  fool  doth  not 
undei*ftand  it. 

7  When  the  ungodly  are  green 
as  the  grafs,  and  when  all  the 
workers  of  wickednefs  do  flou- 
rifti  :  then  fliall  they  be  deftroyed 
for  ever ;  but  thou.  Lord,  art  the 
moft  Higheft  for  evermore. 

8  For  lo,  thine  enemies,  O  Lord, 
lo,  thine  enemies  (hall  perilh  :  and 
all  the  workers  of  wickednefs  Ihall 
be  deftroyed. 

9  But  mine  horn  fliall  be  exalted 
like  the  horn  of  an  unicorn  :  for  I 
am  anointed  with  fi'efli  oil. 

10  Mine  eye  alfo  fliall  fee  his 
luft  of  mine  enemies  :  and  mine 
ear  fliall  hear  his  defire  of  the 
wicked  that  arife  up  againft  me. 

11  The  righteous  fliall  flourifli 
like  a  palm-tree  :  and  fliall  fpread 
abroad  like  a  cedar  in  Libanus. 


Bay  18. 

12  Such  as  are  planted  in  the 
houfe  of  the  Lord  :  fliall  flourifli 
in  the  courts  of  the  houfe  of  our 
God. 

13  They  alfo  fliall  bring  forth 
more  fruit  in  their  age  :  and  fliall 
be  fat  and  well-liking. 

14  That  they  may  fliew  how  true 
the  Lord  my  ftrength  is  :  and  that 
there  is  no  unrighteoufnefs  in  him. 

Psalm  xciii.    Dominus  regnamt. 

THE  Lord  is  King,  and  hath 
put  on  glorious  apparel  :  the 
Lord  hath  put  on  his  apparel,  and 
girded  himfelf  with  ftrength. 

2  He  hath  made  the  round  world 
fo  fure  :  that  it  cannot  be  moved. 

3  Ever  fince  the  world  began 
hath  thy  feat  been  prepared  :  thou 
art  from  everlafting, 

4  The  floods  are  rifeii,  O  Lord, 
the  floods  have  lift  up  their  voice  : 
the  floods  lift  up  their  waves. 

5  The  waves  of  the  fea  are 
mighty,  and  rage  horribly  :  but 
yet  the  Lord,  who  dwelleth  on 
high,  is  mightier. 

6  Thy  teftimonies,  O  Lord,  are 
very  fure  :  holinefs  becometh  thine 
houfe  for  ever. 

Psalm  xciv.    Deus  ultiomim. 

OLord  God,  to  whom  venge- 
ance belongeth  :  thou  God, 
to  whom  vengeance  belongeth, 
fliew  thyfelf. 

2  Arife,  thou  Judge  of  the  world  • 
Ss 


Dmj  18. 

and  rewai'd  the  proud  after  their 
deferving. 

,  3  Lord,  how  long  Ihall  the  un- 
godly :  how  long  Ihall  the  ungodly 
triumph  ? 

4  How  long  fliall  all  wicked 
doers  fpeak  fo  difdainfully  :  and 
make  fuch  proud  boafting? 

5  Tliey  fniite  down  thy  peo- 
ple, O  Lord  :  and  trouble  thine 
heritage. 

6  They  murder  the  widow,  and 
the  ftranger  :  and  put  the  father- 
lefs  to  death. 

'^^7  And  yet  they  fay,  Tufli,  the 
Lord  Ihall  not  fee  ;  neither  lliall 
the  God  of  Jacob  regard  it. 

8  Take  heed,  ye  unwife  among 
the  people  :  O  ye  fools,  when  will 
ye  underftand? 

9  He  that  planted  the  ear,  fliall 
he  not  hear  :  or  he  that  made  the 
eye,  Ihall  he  not  fee? 

10  Or  he  that  nurtureth  the  hea- 
then :  it  is  he  that  teacheth  man 
knowledge,  fliall  not  he  punifli? 

11  The  Lord  knoweth  the 
thoughts  of  man  :  that  they  are 
but  vain. 

12  Blefled  is  the  man  whom 
thou  chaftenell,  O  Lord  :  and 
teachcil  him  in  thy  law; 

13  That  thou  mayeft  give  him 
patience  in  time  of  adverfity  :  until 
the  pit  be  digged  up  for  the  ungodly. 

14  For  the  Lord  will  not  fail  his 
peopk;  :  neither  will  he  forfake  his 
inheritance ; 

-:  ■■5 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bay  19. 

15  Until  righteoufnefs  turn  a- 
gain  unto  judgement  :  all  fuch  as 
are  true  in  heart  fliall  follow  it. 

1 6  Who  will  rife  up  with  me  a- 
gainfl;  the  wicked  :  or  who  will  take 
my  part  againfl;  the  evil-doers? 

17  If  the  Lord  had  not  helped 
me  :  it  had  not  failed  but  my  foul 
had  been  put  to  filence. 

18  But  when  I  faid.  My  foot 
hath  llipt  :  thy  mercy,  O  Lord, 
held  me  up. 

19  In  the  multitude  of  the  for- 
rows  that  I  had  in  my  heart  : 
thy  comforts  have  refreflied  my 
foul. 

20  Wilt  thou  have  any  thing  to 
do  with  the  ftool  of  wickednefs  : 
which  imagineth  mifchief  as  a  law? 

21  They  gather  tliem  together 
ag-ainfl;  the  foul  of  the  rio-hteous  : 
and  condemn  the  innocent  blood. 

22  But  the  Lord  is  my  refuge  : 
and  my  God  is  the  ftrength  of  my 
confidence. 

23  He  fliall  recompenfe  them 
their  wickednefs,  and  deftroy  them 
in  their  own  malice  :  yea,  the  Lord 
our  God  fliall  defl;roy  them. 

iHorntng  iBraper, 

Psalm  xcv.    Venite,  eciultemiis. 

OCome,  let  us  fing  unto   the 
Lord  :  let  us  heartily  rejoice 
in  the  ilrength  of  our  falvation. 

2  Let  us  come  before  his  pre- 
fence  with  thankfoivina" :  and  (hew 
ourfelves  glad  in  him  with  pfahns. 


Bay  19. 

3  For  the  Lord  is  a  great  God  : 
and  a  great  King  above  all  gods. 

4  In  his  hand  are  all  the  corners 
of  the  earth  :  and  the  ftrength  of 
the  hills  is  his  alfo. 

5  The  fea  is  his,  and  he  made 
it  :  and  his  hands  prepared  the 
dry  land. 

6  O  come,  let  us  worlhip  and 
fall  down  :  and  kneel  before  the 
Lord  our  Maker. 

7  For  he  is  the  Lord  our  God  : 
and  we  are  the  people  of  his  paf- 
ture,  and  the  Iheep  of  his  hand. 

8  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his 
voice,  harden  not  your  hearts  :  as 
in  the  provocation,  and  as  in  the 
day  of  temptation  in  the  wildernefs; 

9  When  your  fathers  tempted 
me  :  proved  me,  and  faw  my  works. 

10  Fijrty  years  long  was  I  griev- 
ed with  this  generation,  and  faid  : 
It  is  a  people  that  do  err  in  their 
hearts,  for  they  have  not  known 
my  ways ; 

1 1  Unto  whom  I  fware  in  my 
wrath  :  that  they  ftiould  not  enter 
into  my  reft. 

Psalm  xcvi.    Cantate  Domino. 

OSing  unto  the  Lord  a  new 
fong  :  fing  unto  the  Lord, 
all  the  whole  earth. 

2  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  and  praife 
his  Name  :  be  telling  of  his  falva- 
tion  from  day  to  day. 

3  Declare  his  honour  unto  the 
heathen  :  and  his  wonders  unto  all 
people. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  19. 


4  For  the  Lord  is  great,  and 
cannot  worthily  be  praifed  :  he  is 
more  to  be  feared  than  all  gods. 

5  As  for  all  the  gods  of  the  hea- 
then, they  are  but  idols  :  but  it  is 
the  Lord  that  made  the  heavens. 

6  Glory  and  worfliip  are  before 
him  :  power  and  honour  are  in  his 
fandluary.  ^ '  - ';, 

7  Afcribe  unto  the'Lord,  O  ye 
kindreds  of  the  [)eople  :  afcribe  un- 
to the  Lord  worlhip  and  power. 

8  Afcribe  unto  the  Lord  the  ho- 
nour due  unto  his  Name  :  bring 
prefents,  and  come  into  his  courts. 

9  O  worfliip  the  Lord  in  the 
beauty  of  holinefs  :  let  the  whole 
earth  ftand  in  awe  of  him. 

10  Tell  it  out  among  the  hea- 
then that  the  Lord  is  King  :  and 
that  it  is  he  who  hath  made  the 
round  world  fo  faft  that  it  cannot 
be  moved ;  and  how  that  he  fliall 
judge  the  people  righteoufly. 

1 1  Let  the  heavens  rejoice,  and 
let  the  earth  be  glad  :  let  the  fea 
make  a  noife,  and  all  that  therein  is. 

12  Let  the  field  be  joyful,  and 
all  that  is  in  it  :  then  fliall  all  the 
trees  of  the  wood  rejoice  before 
the  Lord. 

13  For  he  cometh,  for  he  com- 
eth  to  judge  the  earth  :  and  with 
righteoufnefs  to  judge  the  world, 
and  the  people  with  his  ti-utli. 

Psalm  xcvii.  Dominus  regnavit. 

THE  Lord  is  King,  the  earth 
may  be  glad  thereof  :  yea, 

SS2 


Day  19. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bmj  19. 


the  multitude  of  the  ifles  may  be 
glad  thereof. 

2  Clouds  and  darknefs  are 
round  about  him  :  righteoufnefs 
and  judgement  are  the  habitation 
of  his  feat. 

3  There  Ihall  20  a  fire  before 
1  • 

him  :  and  bum  up  his  enemies 

on  every  fide. 

4  His  lightnings  gave  ftiine  un- 
to the  world  :  the  earth  faw  it,  and 
was  afraid. 

5  The  hills  melted  like  wax  at 
the  prefence  of  the  Lord  :  at  the 
prefence  of  the  Lord  of  the  whole 
earth. 

6  The  heavens  have  declared 
his  righteoufnefs  :  and  all  the  peo- 
ple have  feen  his  gloiy. 

7  Confounded  be  all  they  that 
worfliip  carved  images,  and  that 
delight  in  vain  gods  :  worfliip  him, 
all  ye  gods. 

8  Sion  heard  of  it,  and  rejoiced  : 
and  the  daughters  of  Judah  were 
glad,  becaufe  of  thy  judgements, 
O  Lord. 

9  For  thou.  Lord,  art  higher 
than  all  that  are  in  the  earth  : 
thou  art  exalted  far  above  all  gods. 

10  O  ye  that  love  the  Lord,  fee 
that  ye  hate  the  thing  which  is  evil : 
the  Lord  preferveth  the  fouls  of 
his  faints ;  he  Ihall  deliver  them 
from  the  hand  of  the  ungodly. 

1 1  There  is  fprung  up  a  light 
for  the  righteous  :  and  joyful  glad- 
nefs  for  fuch  as  are  true-hearted. 


12  Rejoice  in  the  Lord,  ye  right- 
eous :  and  give  thanks  for  a  re- 
membrance of  his  holhiefs. 

Ctjenms  draper* 

Psalm  xcviii.    Cantate  Domino. 

OSing  unto  the  Lord  a  new 
fong  :  for  he  hath  done  mar- 
vellous things. 

2  With  his  own  right  hand,  and 
with  his  holy  arm  :  hath  he  gotten 
himfelf  the  vidlory. 

3  The  Lord  declared  his  falvation : 
his  righteoufnefs  hath  he  openly 
fliewed  in  the  fight  of  the  heathen. 

4  He  hath  remembered  his  mer- 
cy and  truth  toward  the  houfe  of  If- 
rael :  and  all  the  ends  of  the  world 
have  feen  the  falvation  of  our  God. 

5  Shew  yourfelves  joyful  unto 
the  Lord,  all  ye  lands  :  Ijng,  re- 
joice, and  give  thanks. 

6  Praife  the  Lord  upon  the 
harp  :  fing  to  the  harp  with  a 
pfalm  of  thankfgiving. 

7  With  trumpets  alfo,  and 
fliawms  :  O  Ihew  yourfelves  joy- 
ful before  the  Lord  the  King. 

8  Let  the  fea  make  a  noife,  and 
all  that  therein  is  :  the  round  world, 
and  they  that  dwell  therein. 

9  Let  the  floods  clap  their  hands, 
and  let  the  hills  be  joyful  together 
before  the  Lord  :  for  he  is  come 
to  judge  the  earth. 

10  With  righteoufnefs  ftiall  he 
judge  the  world  :  and  the  people 
with  equity. 


Day  19. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Psalm  xcix.    Dominus  regnavit. 

THE  Lord  is  King,  be  the  peo- 
ple never  fo  impatient  :  he 
fitteth  between  the  cheriibinis,  be 
the  earth  never  fo  unquiet. 

2  The  Lord  is  great  in  Sion  :  and 
high  above  all  people. 

3  They  Ihall  give  thanks  unto 
thy  Name  :  which  is  great,  won- 
derful, and  holy. 

4  The  King's  power  loveth  judge- 
ment ;  thou  haft  prepared  equity  : 
thou  haft  executed  judgement  and 
righteoufnefs  in  Jacob. 

5  O  magnify  the  Lord  our  God  : 
and  fall  down  before  his  footftool, 
forifhe  is  holy. 

6  Mofes  and  Aaron  among  his 
priefts,  and  Samuel  among  fuch  as 
call  upon  his  Name  :  thefe  called 
upon  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  them. 

7  He  fpake  unto  them  out  of 
the  cloudy  pillar  :  for  they  kept  his 
teftimonies,  and  the  law  that  he 
gave  them. 

8  Tliou  heardeft  them,  O  Lord 
our  God  :  thou  forgaveft  them, 
O  God,  and  punifliedft  their  own 
inventions. 

9  O  magnify  the  Lord  our  God, 
and  worlhip  him  upon  his  holy  hill : 
for  the  Lord  our  God  is  holy. 

Psalm  c.    Jubilate  Deo. 

OBe  joyful  in  the  Lord,  all  ye 
lands  :  ferve  the  Lord  with 
gladnefs,  and  come  before  his  pre- 
sence with  a  fono-. 

2  Be  ye  fure  that  the  Lord  he  is 


Daij  19. 

God  :  it  is  he  that  hath  made  us, 
and  not  we  ourfelves  ;  we  are  his 
people,  and  the  flieej)  of  his  pafture. 

fi  ()  go  your  way  into  his  gates 
with  thankfgiving,  and  into  his 
courts  with  praife  :  be  thankful  unto 
him,  and  fpeak  good  of  his  Name. 

4  For  the  Lord  is  gracious,  his 
mercy  is  everlafting  :  and  his  truth 
endureth  from  generation  to  ge- 
neration. 

Psalm  ci.    Mifericordiam  et 
judicium. 

MY  fong  fliall  be  of  mercy  and 
judgement  :  unto  thee,  O 
Lord,  will  I  fing.  j» 

2  O  let  me  have  underftand- 
ing  :  in  the  way  of  godlinefs. 

3  When  wilt  thou  come  unto 
me  :  I  will  walk  in  my  houfe  with 
a  perfe6t  heart. 

4  I  will  take  no  wicked  thing  in 
hand ;  I  hate  the  fins  of  unfaith- 
fulnefs  :  there  fliall  no  fuch  cleave 
unto  me. 

5  A  froward  heart  fliall  depart 
from  me  :  I  will  not  know  a  wick- 
ed perfon. 

6  Whofo  privily  flandereth  his 
neighbour  :  him  will  I  deftroy. 

7  Whofo  hath  alfo  a  proud  look 
and  high  ftomach  :  I  will  not  fuf- 
fer  him. 

8  Mine  eyes  look  upon  fuch  as 
are  faithful  in  the  land  :  that  they 
may  dwell  with  me. 

9  Whofo  leadeth  a  godly  life  : 
he  fliall  be  my  fervant. 


Day  20. 

10  There  fliall  no  deceitful  per- 
fon  dwell  in  my  houfe  :  he  that 
telleth  lies  fliall  not  tariy  in  my 
fight. 

Ill  fliall  foon  defl;roy  all  the 
ungodly  that  are  in  the  land :  that 
I  may  root  out  all  wicked  doers 
from  the  city  of  the  Lord. 

£Pormns  draper. 

Psalm  cii.    Dombie,  eocmidi. 

HEAR  my  prayer,  O  Lord  : 
and  let  my  crying  come  un- 
to thee. 

2  Hide  not  thy  face  from  me  in 
the  time  of  my  trouble  :  incline 
thine  ear  unto  me  when  I  call ; 
O  hear  me,  and  that  right  foon. 

3  For  my  days  are  confumed  a- 
way  like  fmoke  :  and  my  bones  are 
burnt  up  as  it  were  a  fire-brand. 

4  My  heart  is  fmitten  down, 
and  withered  like  grafs  :  fo  that  I 
forget  to  eat  my  bread. 

5  For  the  voice  of  my  groan- 
ing :  my  bones  will  fcarce  cleave 
to  my  flefli. 

6  I  am  become  like  a  pelican  in 
the  wildeniefs  :  and  like  an  owl 
that  is  in  the  defert. 

7  I  have  watched,  and  am  even 
•  as  it  were  a  fparrow  :  that  fitteth 

alone  upon  the  houfe-top. 

8  Mine  enemies  revile  me  all 
the  day  long  :  and  they  that  are 
mad  upon  me  are  fworn  together 
againfi;  me. 

9  For  I  have  eaten  alhes  as  it 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bay  20. 

were  bread  :  and  mingled  my  drink 
with  weeping ; 

10  And  that  becaufe  of  thine 
indignation  and  wrath  :  for  thou 
haft  taken  me  up,  and  caft  me 
down. 

11  My  days  are  gone  like  a 
fliadow  :  and  I  am  withered  like 
grafs. 

12  But,  thou,  O  Lord,  flialt  en- 
dure for  ever  :  and  thy  remem- 
brance throughout  all  generations. 

13  Thou  flialt  arife,  and  have 
mercy  ujion  Sion  :  for  it  is  time 
that  thou  have  mercy  upon  her, 
yea,  the  time  is  come. 

14  And  why?  thy  fei'vants  think 
upon  her  Hones  :  and  it  pitieth 
them  to  fee  her  in  the  duft. 

15  The  heathen  fliall  fear  thy 
Name,  O  Lord  :  and  all  the  kings 
of  the  earth  thy  Majefty; 

16  When  the  Lord  fliall  build 
up  Sion  :  and  when  his  glory  fliall 
appear ; 

17  When  he  turneth  him  unto 
the  prayer  of  the  poor  deftitute  : 
and  defpifeth  not  their  defire. 

18  This  fliall  be  written  for 
thofe  that  come  after  :  and  the 
people  which  fliall  be  bom  fliall 
praife  the  Lord. 

19  For  he  hath  looked  down 
from  his  fan^hiaiy  :  cut  of  the 
heaven  did  the  Lord  behold  the 
earth ; 

20  That  he  might  hear  the 
mournings  of  fuch  as  are  in  cap- 


Day  20. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bay  20. 


tivity   :   and   deliver   tlie   children 
appointed  unto  death ; 

21  That  they  may  declare  the 
Name  of  the  Lord  in  Sion  :  and 
his  worfliip  at  Jeriifalem  ; 

22  When  the  people  are  ga- 
thered together  :  and  the  king- 
doms alfo,  to  ferve  the  Lord. 

23  He  brought  down  my  ftrength 
in  my  journey  :  and  ihortened  my 
days. 

24  But  I  faid,  O  my  God,  take 
me  not  away  in  the  midft  of  mine 
age  :  as  for  thy  years,  they  endure 
throughout  all  generations. 

25  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  begin- 
ning haft  laid  the  foundation  of 
the  earth  :  and  the  heavens  are 
the  work  of  thy  hands. 

26  They  ftiall  perilh,  but  thou 
ihalt  endure  :  they  all  fliall  wax 
old  as  doth  a  garment ; 

27  And  as  a  vefture  (halt  thou 
change  them,  and  they  lliall  be 
changed  :  but  thou  art  the  fame, 
and  thy  years  Ihall  not  fail. 

28  The  children  of  thy  fervants 
fliall  continue  :  and  their  feed  fliall 
ftand  faft  in  thy  fight. 

Psalm  ciii.   Henedic,  anima  meet. 

PRAISE  the  Lord,  O  my  foul  : 
and  all  that  is  within  me  praife 
his  holy  Name. 

2  Praife  the  Lord,  O  my  foul  : 
and  forget  not  all  his  benefits ; 

3  Who  forgiveth  all  thy  fin  :  and 
healeth  all  thine  infirmities  ; 

4  Who    faveth    thy   life    from 


(lellru(^lion  :  and  crowneth  thee 
with  mercy  and  loving-kindnefs  ; 

5  Who  fatisfieth  thy  mouth  with 
good  things  :  making  thee  young 
and  lufty  as  an  eagle. 

0  The  Lord  executeth  right- 
eoufnefs  and  judgement  :  for  all 
them  that  are  opprefl'ed  with  wrong. 

7  He  fliewed  his  ways  unto 
Mofes  :  his  works  unto  the  chil- 
dren of  Ifrael. 

8  The  Lord  is  full  of  com- 
paflion  and  mercy  :  long-fuffer- 
ing,  and  of  great  goodnefs. 

9  He  will  not  alway  be  chid- 
ing :  neither  keepeth  he  his  anger 
for  ever. 

10  He  hath  not  dealt  with  us 
after  oiu*  fins  :  nor  rewarded  us 
according  to  our  wickednefles. 

1 1  For  look  how  high  the  hea- 
ven is  in  companion  of  the  earth  : 
fo  great  is  his  mercy  alfo  toward 
them  that  fear  him. 

12  Look  how  wide  alfo  the  eaft 
is  from  the  weft  :  fo  far  hath  he 
fet  our  fins  from  us. 

13  Yea,  like  as  a  father  pitieth 
his  own  children  :  even  fo  is  the 
Lord  merciful  unto  them  that  feai* 
him. 

14  For  he  knoweth  whereof  we 
are  made  :  he  remembereth  that 
we  are  but  duft. 

15  The  days  of  man  are  but  as 
grafs  :  for  he  flouriflieth  as  a  flower 
of  the  field. 

16  For  as  foon  as  the  wind  go- 


Bay  20. 

eth  over  it,  it  is  gone  :  and  the  place 
thereof  (hall  know  it  no  more. 

17  But  the  merciful  goodnefs 
of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever 
and  ever  upon  them  that  fear 
him  :  and  his  lighteoufnefs  upon 
children's  children ; 

18  Even  upon  fuch  as  keep 
his  covenant  :  and  think  upon 
his  commandments  to  do  them. 

19  The  Lord  hath  prepared 
his  feat  in  heaven  :  and  his  king- 
dom ruleth  over  all. 

20  O  praife  the  Lord,  ye  angels 
of  his,  ye  that  excel  in  ftrength  : 
ye  that  fulfil  his  commandment, 
and  hearken  unto  the  voice  of 
his  words. 

21  O  praife  the  Lord,  all  ye 
his  hofts  :  ye  fervants  of  his  that 
do  his  pleafure. 

22  O  fpeak  good  of  the  Lord, 
all  ye  works  of  his,  in  all  places 
of  his  dominion  :  praife  thou  the 
Lord,  O  my  foul. 

Psalm  civ.   Benedic,  anima  mea. 

PRAISE  the  Lord,  O  my  foul  : 
O  Lord  my  God,  thou  art  be- 
come exceeding  glorious;  thou  art 
clothed  with  majefty  and  honour. 

2  Thou  deckeft  thyfelf  with  light 
as  it  were  with  a  garment  :  and 
fpreadeft  out  the  heavens  like  a 
curtain. 

3  Who  layeth  the  beams  of  his 
chambers    in    the   waters    :    and 


THE    PSALMS.  Day  ^0. 

maketh  the  clouds  his  chariot,  and 


walketh    upon    the   wings  of  the 
wind. 

4  He  maketh  his  angels  fpirits  : 
and  his  minifters  a  flaming  fire. 

5  He  laid  the  foundations  of 
the  earth  :  that  it  never  ftiould 
move  at  any  time. 

6  Thou  coveredft  it  with  the 
deep  like  as  with  a  garment  :  the 
waters  Hand  in  the  hills. 

7  At  thy  rebuke  they  flee  :  at 
the  voice  of  thy  thunder  they  are 
afraid. 

8  They  go  up  as  high  as  the 
hills,  and  down  to  the  valleys  be- 
neath :  even  unto  the  place  which 
thou  haft  appointed  for  them. 

9  Thou  haft  fet  them  their 
bounds  which  they  fliall  not  pafs  : 
neither  turn  again  to  cover  the 
earth. 

10  He  fendeth  the  fprings  into 
the  rivers  :  which  run  among  the 
hills. 

11  All  beafts  of  the  field  drink 
thereof  :  and  the  wild  afl'es  quench 
their  thirft. 

12  Befide  them  ftiall  the  fowls 
of  the  air  have  their  habitation  : 
and  fing  among  the  branches. 

13  He  watereth  the  hills  from 
above  :  the  earth  is  filled  with  the 
fruit  of  thy  works. 

14  He  bringeth  forth  grafs  for 
the  cattle  :  and  green  herb  for  the 
fervice  of  men ; 

15  "^That  he  may  bring  food  out 


Day  20. 


THE    PSALMS. 


of  the  earth,  and  wine  that  mak- 
eth  olad  the  lieart  of  man  :  and 
oil  to  make  him  a  cheerful  coun- 
tenance, and  bread  to  llrcngthen 
man's  heart. 

16  The  trees  of  the  Lord  alfo 
are  full  of  fap  :  even  the  cedars  of 
Libanus  which  he  hath  planted  ; 

1 7  Wherein  the  birds  make  their 
nefts  :  and  the  fir-trees  are  a  dwell- 
ing for  the  ftork. 

18  The  high  hills  are  a  refuge 
for  the  wild  goats  :  and  fo  are  the 
ftony  rocks  for  the  conies. 

19  He  appointed  the  moon  for 
certain  feafons  :  and  the  fun  know- 
eth  his  going  down. 

20  Thou  makell  darknefs  that 
it  may  be  night  :  wherein  all  the 
beafts  of  the  foreft  do  move. 

21  The  lions  roaring  after  their 
prey  :  do  feek  their  meat  from  God. 

22  The  fun  arifeth,  and  they 
get  them  away  together  :  and  lay 
them  down  in  their  dens. 

23  Man  goeth  forth  to  his  work, 
and  to  his  labour :  until  the  evening. 

24  O  Lord,  how  manifold  are 
thy  works  :  in  wifdom  haft  thou 
made  them  all;  the  earth  is  full  of 
thy  riches. 

25  So  is  the  great  and  wide  fea 
3,lfo  :  wherein  are  things  creeping 
innumerable,  both  fmall  and  great 
beafts. 

26  There  go  the  ftiips,  and  there 
is  that  Leviathan  :  whom  thou  haft 
made  to  take  his  paftime  therein. 


Day  2L 

27  Thefe  wait  all  uj)on  thee  : 
that  thou  mayeft  give  them  meat 
in  due  feafon. 

28  When  thou  giveft  it  them 
they  gatlier  it  :  and  when  thou 
openell  thy  liand  they  are  filled 
with  good. 

29  When  thou  hideft  thy  face 
they  are  troubled  :  when  thou  tak- 
eft  away  their  breath  they  die,  and 
are  turned  ajjain  to  their  duft. 

30  When  thou  letteft  thy  breath 
go  forth  they  (hall  be  made  :  and 
thou  flialt  renew  the  face  of  the 
earth. 

31  The  glorious  Majefty  of  the 
Lord  fliall  endure  for  ever  :  the 
liOrd  fliall  rejoice  in  his  works. 

32  The  earth  fliall  tremble  at 
the  look  of  him  :  if  he  do  but 
touch  the  hills,  they  fliall  fmoke. 

33  I  will  fing  unto  the  Lord 
as  long  as  I  live  :  I  will  praife  my 
God  while  I  have  my  being. 

34  And  fo  fliall  my  words  pleafe 
him  :  my  joy  fliall  be  in  the  Lord. 

35  As  for  finners,  they  fliall  be 
confumed  out  of  the  earth,  and  the 
ungodly  fliall  come  to  an  end  : 
praife  thou  the  Lord,  O  my  foul, 
praife  the  Lord. 

Psalm  cv.    Conjitemini  Domino. 

OGive  thanks  unto  the  Lord, 
and  call  upon  his  Name  : 
tell  the  people  what  things  he 
hath  done. 

Tt 


Bay  21 


THE    P 


2  O  let  your  fongs  be  of  him, 
and  praife  him  :  and  let  your  talk- 
ino-  be  of  all  his  wondrous  works. 

3  Rejoice  in  his  holy  Name  ;  let 
the  lieai't  of  them  rejoice  that  feek 
the  Lord. 

4  Seek  the  Lord  and  his  ftrength : 
feek  his  face  evermore. 

5  Remember  the  marvellous 
works  that  he  hath  done  :  his 
wonders,  and  the  judgements  of 
his  mouth, 

6  O  ye  feed  of  Abraham  his 
fervant  :  ye  children  of  Jacob  his 
chofen. 

7  He  is  the  Lord  our  God  :  his 
judgements  are  in  all  the  world. 

8  He  hath  been  alway  mindful  of 
his  cov'Cnant  and  promife  :  that  he 
made  to  a  tlioufand  generations ; 

9  Even  the  covenant  that  he 
made  with  Abraham  :  and  the 
oath  that  he  fware  unto  Ifaac ; 

10  And  appointed  the  fame  un- 
to Jacob  for  a  law  :  and  to  Ifrael 
for  an  everlafting  teftament ; 

11  Saying,  Unto  thee  will  I 
give  the  land  of  Canaan  :  the  lot 
of  vour  inheritance ; 

12  When  there  were  yet  but  a 
few  of  them  :  and  they  Ilrangers 
in  the  land  ; 

13  What  time  as  they  went  from 
one  nation  to  another  :  from  one 
kingdom  to  another  people  ; 

14  He  futfered  no  man  to  do 
them  wrong  :  but  reproved  even 
kings  for  their  fakes; 


SALMS.  Day  21, 

15  Touch  not  mine  Anointed  : 
and  do  my  prophets  no  harm. 

10  Moreover,  he  called  for  a 
dearth  upon  the  land  :  and  de- 
ftroyed  all  the  provifion  of  bread. 

17  But  he  had  fent  a  man  be- 
fore them  :  even  Jofeph,  who  was 
fold  to  be  a  bond-fervant ; 

18  Whofe  feet  they  hurt  in  the 
Hocks  :  the  iron  entered  into  his 
foul ; 

19  LTntil  the  time  came  that  his 
caufe  was  known  :  the  word  of  the 
Lord  tried  him. 

20  The  king  fent,  and  delivered 
him  :  the  prince  of  the  people  let 
him  go  free. 

21  He  made  him  Lord  alfo  of 
his  houfe  :  and  ruler  of  all  his 
fubilance ; 

22  That  he  might  inform  his 
princes  after  his  will  :  and  teach 
his  fenators  wifdom. 

23  Ifrael  alfo  came  into  Egypt : 
and  Jacob  was  a  llranger  in  the 
land  of  Ham. 

24  And  he  increafed  his  peo- 
ple exceedingly  :  and  made  them 
llronger  than  their  enemies  ; 

25  Whofe  heart  turned  fo,  that 
they  hated  his  people  :  and  dealt 
untruly  with  his  fervants. 

20  Then  fent  he  Mofes  his  fer- 
vant :  and  Aaron  whom  he  had 
chofen. 

27  vVnd  thcfe  fliewed  his  tokens 
among  them  :  and  wonders  in  the 
land  of  Ham. 


Daij  21, 

28  He  fent  darknefs,  and  it  was 
dark  :  and  they  were  not  obedient 
unto  his  word. 

29  He  turned  their  waters  into 
blood  :  and  flew  their  fi(h. 

30  Their  land  l)rought  forth 
frogs  :  yea,  even  in  their  kings' 
chambers. 

31  He  fpake  the  word,  and  there 
came  all  manner  of  flies  :  and  lice 
in  all  their  quarters. 

32  He  gave  them  hail-fl;ones 
for  rain  :  and  flames  of  fire  in 
their  land. 

33  He  fmote  their  vines  alfo  and 
fig-trees  :  and  deftroyed  the  trees 
that  were  in  their  coafl;s. 

34  He  fpake  the  word,  and  the 
grafshoppers  came,  and  caterpillars 
innumerable  :  and  did  eat  up  all 
the  grafs  in  their  land,  and  devour- 
ed the  fruit  of  their  ground. 

35  He  fmote  all  the  firft-born 
in  their  land  :  even  the  chief  of  all 
their  ftrength. 

36  He  brought  them  forth  alfo 
w^tli  filver  and  gold  :  there  was 
not  one  feeble  perfon  among  their 
tribes. 

37  Egypt  was  glad  at  their  de- 
parting :  for  they  were  afraid  of 
them. 

38  He  fpread  out  a  cloud  to  be 
a  covering  :  and  fire  to  give  light 
in  the  night-feafon. 

39  At  their  defire  he  brought 
quails  :  and  he  filled  them  with  the 
bread  of  heaven. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Dajj  21. 


40  He  opened  the  rock  of  fl^one, 
and  the  waters  flowed  out :  fo  that 
rivers  ran  in  the  dry  places. 

41  For  whv?  he  remembered 

ml 

his  holy  promife  :  and  Abraham 
his  fervant. 

42  And  he  brought  forth  his 
people  with  joy  :  and  liis  chofen 
with  gladnefs  ; 

43  And  gave  them  the  lands  of 
the  heathen  :  and  they  took  the  la- 
bours of  the  people  in  pofleflion  ; 

44  That  they  might  keep  his 
ftatutes  :  and  obferve  his  laws. 

ClJening  draper. 

Psalm  cvi.    Conjitemini  Domino. 

OGive  thanks   unto  the  Lord, 
for  he  is  gracious  :  and  his 
mercy  endureth  for  ever. 

2  Who  can  exprefs  the  noble 
acfts  of  the  Lord  :  or  fliew  forth 
all  his  praife? 

3  Bleflcd  are  they  that  ahvay 
keep  judgement  :  and  do  right- 
eoufnefs. 

4  Remember  me,  O  Lord,  ac- 
cording to  the  favour  that  thou 
beared  unto  thy  people  :  O  vifit 
me  with  thy  falvation  ; 

5  That  I  may  fee  the  felicity  of 
thy  chofen  :  and  rejoice  in  the 
gladnefs  of  thy  people,  and  give 
thanks  with  thine  inheritance. 

6  We  have  finned  with  our  fa- 
thers :  we  have  done  amifs,  and 
dealt  wickedly. 

7  Our  fathers  regarded  not  thy 

Tt  a 


Daij  21. 


THE    PSALMS. 


wonders  in  Egypt,  neither  kept 
they  thy  great  goodnefs  in  remem- 
brance :  but  were  difobedient  at 
the  fea,  even  at  the  Red  fea. 

8  Neverthelefs,  he  helped  them 
for  his  Name's  fake  :  that  he  might 
make  his  power  to  be  known. 

9  He  rebuked  the  Red  fea  alfo, 
and  it  was  dried  up  :  fo  he  led 
them  through  the  deep,  as  through 
a  wildernefs. 

10  And  he  faved  them  from  the 
adverfary's  hand  :  and  delivered 
them  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy. 

11  As  for  thofe  that  troubled 
them,  the  waters  ovenvhelmed 
them  :  there  was  not  one  of  them 
left. 

1 2  Then  believed  they  his  words : 
and  fang  praife  unto  him. 

13  But  within  a  while  they  for- 
gat  his  works  :  and  would  not 
abide  his  counfel. 

14  But  lull  came  upon  them  in 
the  wildernefs  :  and  they  tempted 
God  in  the  defert. 

15  And  he  gave  them  their  de- 
fire  :  and  fent  leannefs  withal  into 
their  foul. 

1(5  They  angered  Mofes  alfo  in 
the  tents  :  and  Aaron  the  faint  of 
the  Lord. 

17  So  the  earth  opened,  and 
fwallowed  up  Dathan  :  and  cover- 
ed the  conurepation  of  Abiram. 

18  And  the  fire  was  kindled  in 
their  company  :  the  flame  burnt 
up  the  ungodly. 


Day  21. 

19  They  made  a  calf  in  Horeb  : 
and  worfliipped  the  molten  image. 

20  Thus  they  turned  their  glory  : 
into  the  fimilitude  of  a  calf  that 
eateth  hay. 

21  And  they  forgat  God  their 
Saviour  :  who  had  done  fo  oreat 
things  in  Egypt ; 

22  Wondrous  works  in  the  land 
of  Ham  :  and  fearful  things  by 
the  Red  fea. 

23  So  he  faid,  he  would  have 
deftroyed  them,  had  not  Mofes 
his  chofen  fl^ood  before  him  in 
the  gap  :  to  turn  away  his  wrath- 
ful indignation,  left  he  fliould  de- 
ftroy  them. 

24  Yea,  they  thought  fcorn  of 
that  pleafant  land  :  and  gave  no 
credence  unto  his  word ; 

25  But  murmured  in  their  tents  : 
and  hearkened  not  unto  the  voice 
of  the  Lord. 

26  Then  lift  he  up  his  hand 
aii'ainft  them  :  to  overthrow  them 
in  the  wildernefs ; 

27  To  call  out  their  feed  among 
the  nations  :  and  to  fcatter  them 
in  the  lands. 

28  They  joined  themfelves  unto 
Baal-peor  :  and  ate  the  offerings  of 
the  dead. 

29  riuis  they  provoked  him  to 
anger  with  their  own  inventions  : 
and  the  plague  was  great  among 
them. 

30  Then  ftood  up  Phinees  and 
prayed  :  and  fo  the  [)lague  ceafetl. 


Day  21.  THE    P 

31  And  that  was  counted  uiito 
him  for  riohteoufnefs  :  amono;  all 
pofterities  for  evermore. 

32  riiey  angered  him  alfo  at  the 
waters  of  llrife  :  fo  that  he  punifli- 
ed  Mofes  for  their  fakes  ; 

33  Becaufe  they  provoked  his 
fpirit  :  fo  that  he  fpake  unadvifed- 
\y  with  his  lips. 

34  Neither  deftroyed  they  the 
heathen  :  as  the  Lord  command- 
ed them ; 

35  But  were  mingled  among  the 
heathen  :  and  learned  their  works. 

36  Infomuch  that  they  wor- 
fliipped  their  idols,  which  turned 
to  their  own  decay  :  yea,  they 
offered  their  fons  and  their  daugh- 
ters unto  devils ; 

37  And  (hed  innocent  blood, 
even  the  blood  of  their  fons  and  of 
their  daughters  :  whom  they  offered 
unto  the  idols  of  Canaan  ;  and  the 
land  was  defiled  with  blood. 

38  Thus  were  they  ftained  with 
their  own  works  :  and  went  a  whor- 
ing with  their  own  inventions. 

39  Therefore  was  the  wrath  of 
the  Lord  kindled  againft  his  peo- 
ple :  infomuch  that  he  abhorred 
his  own  inheritance. 

40  And  he  gave  them  over  in- 
to the  hand  of  the  heathen  :  and 
they  that  hated  them  were  lords 
over  them. 

41  Their  enemies  oppreffed 
them  :  and  had  them  in  fubjecftion. 

42  Many  a  time  did  he  deliver 


SALMS. 


Da2j  22. 


them  :  but  they  rebelled  againft  him 
with  their  own  inventions,  and  were 
brought  down  in  their  wickednefs. 

43  Neverthelefs,  when  he  faw 
their  adverfity  :  he  heard  their 
complaint. 

44  He  thought  upon  his  cove- 
nant, and  pitied  them,  according 
unto  the  multitude  of  his  mercies  : 
yea,  he  made  all  thofe  that  led 
them  away  captive  to  pity  them. 

45  Deliver  us,  O  Lord  our  God, 
and  gather  us  from  among  the 
heathen  :  that  we  may  give  thanks 
unto  thy  holy  Name,  and  make 
our  boall  of  thy  praife. 

46  Blelled  be  the  Lord  God  of 
Ifrael  from  everlafting,  and  world 
without  end  :  and  let  all  the  peo- 
ple fay.  Amen. 

;0tormng  lara^et. 

Psalm  cvii.    Confitemini Domino. 

OGive  thanks  unto  the  Lord, 
for  he  is  gracious  :  and  his 
mercy  endureth  for  ever. 

2  Let  them  give  thanks  whom 
the  Lord  hath  redeemed  :  and  deli- 
vered from  the  hand  of  the  enemy ; 

3  And  gathered  them  out  of  the 
lands,  from  the  eaft,  and  from  the 
weft  :  from  the  north,  and  from 
the  fouth. 

4  They  went  aftray  in  the  wil- 
dernefs  out  of  the  way  :  and  found 
no  city  to  dwell  in ; 

5  Hungry  and  thirfty  :  their 
foul  fainted  in  them. 


THE    PSALMS 


Day  '1± 

6  So  they  cried  unto  the  Lord 
in  their  trouble  :  and  he  delivered 
them  from  their  diflrefs. 

7  He  led  them  forth  by  the  right 
way  :  that  they  might  go  to  the 
city  where  they  dwelt. 

8  O  that  men  would  therefore 
praife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs  : 
and  declare  the  wonders  that  he 
doeth  for  the  children  of  men ! 

9  For  he  fatisfieth  the  empty 
foul  :  and  filleth  the  hungiy  foul 
with  goodnefs. 

10  Such  as  fit  in  darknefs,  and 
in  the  fliadow  of  death  :  being  fail 
bound  in  mifery  and  iron; 

1 1  Becaufe  they  rebelled  againft 
the  words  of  the  Lord  :  and  lightly 
regarded  the  counfel  of  the  moft 
Higheft ; 

12  He  alfo  brought  down  their 
heart  through  heavinefs  :  they  fell 
down,  and  there  was  none  to  help 
them. 

13  So  when  they  cried  unto  the 
Lord  in  their  trouble  :  he  deliver- 
ed them  out  of  their  dillrefs. 

1-4  For  he  brought  them  out  of 
darknefs,  and  out  of  the  fliadow 
of  death  :  and  brake  their  bonds 
in  funder. 

1 5  O  that  men  would  therefore 
[)raife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs  : 
and  declare  the  wonders  that  he 
doeth  for  the  children  of  men ! 

16  For  he  hath  broken  the  gates 
of  brafs  :  and  fmitten  the  bars  of 
iron  in  funder. 


Bay  22. 

17  Foolifli  men  are  plagued  for 
their  offence  :  and  becaufe  of  their 
wickednefs. 

18  Their  foul  abhorred  all  man- 
ner of  meat  :  and  they  were  even 
hard  at  death's  door. 

1 9  So  when  they  cried  unto  the 
Lord  in  their  trouble  :  he  delivered 
them  out  of  their  diilrefs. 

20  He  fent  his  word,  and  healed 
them  :  and  they  were  faved  from 
their  deftru6tion. 

21  O  that  men  would  therefore 
praife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs  : 
and  declare  the  wonders  that  he 
doeth  for  the  children  of  men ! 

22  That  they  would  offer  unto 
him  the  facrifice  of  thankfgiving  : 
and  tell  out  his  works  with  gladnefs! 

23  They  that  go  down  to  the 
fea  in  fliips  :  and  occupy  their  bufi- 
nefs  in  great  waters ; 

24  Thefe  men  fee  the  works  of 
the  Lord  :  and  his  wonders  in 
the  deep. 

25  For  at  his  word  the  ftormy 
wind  arifeth  :  which  lifteth  up  the 
waves  thereof. 

2()  They  are  carried  up  to  the 
heaven,  and  down  aijain  to  the 
deep  :  their  foul  melteth  away  be- 
caufe of  the  trouble. 

27  1  hey  reel  to  and  fro,  and 
tlaii'2'er  like  a  drunken  man  :  and 
are  at  their  wit's  end. 

28  So  when  they  cry  unto  the 
Lord  in  their  trouble  :  he  deliver- 
eth  them  out  of  their  dilh-efs. 


Bay  2^. 


THE    PSALMS. 


29  For  he  maketh  the  ftorm  to 
ceafe  :  fo  that  the  waves  thereof 
are  IHll. 

30  Then  are  they  glad,  becaiife 
they  are  at  reil  :  and  fo  he  bring- 
eth  them  unto  the  haven  where 
they  would  be. 

3 1  O  that  men  would  therefore 
praife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs  : 
and  declare  the  wonders  that  he 
doeth  for  the  children  of  men ! 

32  That  they  would  exalt  him 
alfo  in  the  congregation  of  the 
people  :  and  praife  him  in  the  feat 
of  the  elders ! 

33  Who  turneth  the  floods  into 
a  wildernefs  :  and  drieth  up  the 
water-fprings. 

34  A  fruitful  land  maketh  he 
barren  ;  for  the  wickednefs  of  them 
that  dwell  therein. 

35  Again,  he  maketh  the  wil- 
dernefs a  Handing  water  :  and 
water-fprings  of  a  dry  ground. 

36  And  there  he  fetteth  the 
hungry  :  that  they  may  build 
them  a  city  to  dwell  in ; 

37  That  they  may  fow  their 
land,  and  plant  vineyards  :  to 
yield  them  fruits  of  increafe. 

38  He  blefleth  them,  fo  that 
they  multiply  exceedingly  :  and 
fuffereth  not  their  cattle  to  de- 
creafe. 

39  And  again,  when  they  are  mi- 
niflied,  and  brought  low  :  through 
oppreflion,  through  any  plague,  or 
trouble ; 


Bay  22. 

40  4  hough  he  fuffer  them  to 
be  evil  intreated  through  tyrants  : 
and  let  them  wander  out  of  the 
way  in  the  wildernefs ; 

41  Yet  helpeth  he  the  jjoor  out 
of  mifery  :  and  maketh  him  houfe- 
holds  like  a  flock  of  fheep. 

42  The  righteous  will  confider 
this,  and  rejoice  :  and  the  mouth  of 
all  wickednefs  fliall  be  flopped. 

43  Whofo  is  wife  will  ponder 
thefe  things  :  and  they  fliall  un- 
derftand  the  loving- kindnefs  of 
the  Lord. 

6bemns  i^raper. 

Psalm  cviii.    Paratiim  cor  meitm. 

OGod,  my  heart  is  ready,  my 
heart  is  ready  :  I  will  fing 
and  give  praife  with  the  beft  mem- 
ber that  I  have. 

2  Awake,  thou  lute,  and  harp  : 
I  myfelf  will  awake  right  early. 

3  I  will  give  thanks  unto  thee, 
O  Lord,  among  the  people  :  I  will 
fing  praifes  unto  thee  among  the 
nations. 

4  For  thy  mercy  is  greater  than 
the  heavens  :  and  thy  truth  reach- 
eth  unto  the  clouds. 

5  Set  up  thyfelf,  O  God,  above 
the  heavens  :  and  thy  gloiy  above 
all  the  earth. 

6  That  thy  beloved  may  be 
delivered  :  let  thy  right  hand 
fave  them,  and  hear  thou  me. 

7  God  hath  fpoken  in  his  holi- 
nefs  :  I  will  rejoice  therefore,  and 


Bay^^  THE    P 

divide  Sichem,  and  mete  out  the 
valley  of  Succotli. 

8  Gilead  is  mine,  and  Manaffes 
is  mine  :  Epliraim  alfo  is  the 
ftrength  of  my  head. 

9  Judah  is  my  law-giver,  IMoab 
is  my  wafh-pot  :  over  Edom  will  I 
caft  out  my  flioe ;  upon  Philiftia 
will  I  triumph. 

10  \\^ho  will  lead  me  into  the 
ftrong  city  :  and  who  will  bring 
me  into  Edom? 

11  Hail  not  thou  forfaken  us, 
O  God  :  and  wilt  not  thou,  O 
God,  go  forth  with  our  hofts? 

12  O  help  us  againft  the  enemy  : 
for  vain  is  the  help  of  man. 

13  Through  God  we  Ihall  do 
great  a6ls  :  and  it  is  he  that  Ihall 
tread  down  our  enemies. 

Psalm  cix.    T>eus  laudum. 

HOLD  not  thy  tongue,  O  God 
of  my  praife  :  for  the  mouth 
of  the  ungodly,  yea,  the  mouth  of 
the  deceitful  is  opened  upon  me. 

2  And  they  have  fpoken  againft 
me  with  falfe  tongues  :  they  com- 
pafl'ed  me  about  alfo  with  words 
of  hatred,  and  fought  againft  me 
without  a  caufe. 

3  For  the  love  that  I  had  unto 
them,  lo,  they  take  now  my  con- 
traiy  part  :  but  I  give  myfelf  un- 
to j)rayer. 

4  Thus  have  they  rewarded  me 
evil  for  good  :  and  hatred  for  my 
good  will. 

5  Set  thou  an  ungodly  man  to 


SALMS. 


Day  22. 


be  ruler  over  him  :  and  let  Satan 
ftand  at  his  right  hand. 

()  When  fentence  is  given  upon 
him,  let  him  be  condemned  :  and 
let  his  prayer  be  turned  into  iin. 

7  Let  his  days  be  few  :  and 
let  another  take  his  office. 

8  Let  his  children  be  father- 
lefs  :  and  his  wife  a  widow. 

9  Let  his  children  be  vagabonds, 
and  beg;  their  bread  :  let  them  feek 
it  alfo  out  of  defolate  places. 

10  Let  the  extortioner  confume 
all  that  he  hath  :  and  let  the  ftran- 
ger  fpoil  his  labour. 

1 1  Let  there  be  no  man  to  pity 
him  :  nor  to  have  compaffion  upon 
his  fatherlefs  children. 

12  Let  his  pofterity  be  de- 
ftroyed  :  and  in  the  next  gene- 
ration let  his  name  be  clean  put 
out. 

13  Let  the  wickednefs  of  his 
fathers  be  had  in  remembrance 
in  the  fight  of  the  Lord  :  and  let 
not  the  fin  of  his  mother  be  done 
away. 

14  Let  them  alway  be  before 
the  Ijord  :  that  he  may  root  out 
the  memorial  of  them  from  off 
the  earth ; 

15  And  that,  becaufe  his  mind 
was  not  to  do  good  :  but  per- 
fecuted  the  poor  helplefs  man, 
that  he  might  flay  him  that  was 
vexed  at  the  heart. 

16  His  delight  was  in  curfing, 
and    it  fliall   happen  unto  him   : 


Day  22. 


THE    PSALMS. 


he    loved    not   blefling,   therefore 
fliall  it  be  fur  from  him. 

17  He  clothed  himfelf  with  cmf- 
ing,  Uke  as  with  a  raiment  :  and  it 
fliall  come  into  his  bowels  like  wa- 
ter, and  like  oil  into  his  bones. 

18  Let  it  be  unto  him  as  the 
cloke  that  he  hath  upon  him  : 
and  as  the  girdle  that  he  is  al- 
way  girded  withal. 

19  Let  it  thus  happen  from 
the  Lord  unto  mine  enemies  : 
and  to  thofe  that  fpeak  evil  a- 
gainft  my  foul. 

20  But  deal  thou  with  me,  O 
Lord  God,  according  unto  thy 
Name  :  for  fweet  is  thy  mercy. 

21  O  deliver  me,  for  I  am 
helplefs  and  poor  :  and  my  heart 
is  wounded  within  me. 

22  I  go  hence  like  the  fliadow 
that  departeth  :  and  am  driven 
away  as  the  grafshopj^er. 

23  My  knees  are  weak  through 
fading  :  my  flefli  is  dried  up  for 
want  of  fatnefs. 

24  I  became  alfo  a  reproach 
unto  them  :  they  that  looked  upon 
me  flaaked  their  heads. 

25  Help  me,  O  Lord  my  God  : 
O  fave  me  according  to  thy  mercy ; 

26  And  they  fliall  know,  how 
that  this  is  thy  hand  :  and  that 
thou,  Lord,  haft  done  it. 

27  Though  they  curfe,  yet  blefs 
thou  :  and  let  them  be  confound- 
ed that  rife  up  againft  me ;  but  let 
thy  fervant  rejoice. 


Bay  28. 

28  Let  mine  adveifaries  be 
clothed  with  fliame  :  and  let  them 
cover  themfelves  with  their  own 
confiifion,  as  with  a  cloke. 

29  As  for  me,  I  will  give  great 
thanks  unto  the  Lord  with  my 
mouth  :  and  praifc  him  among 
the  multitude ; 

30  For  he  fliall  ftand  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  poor  :  to  fave 
his  foul  from  unrighteous  judges. 

Psalm  ex.    Divit  Domhiua.     ^ 

THE  Lord  faid  unto  my  Lord  : 
Sit  thou  on  my  right  hand, 
until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy 
footftool. 

2  The  Lord  fliall  fend  the  rod 
of  thy  power  out  of  Sioii  :  be  thou 
ruler,  even  in  the  midft  among 
thine  enemies. 

3  In  the  day  of  thy  power  fliall 
the  people  oft'er  thee  free-will  of- 
ferings with  an  holy  worfliip  :  the 
dew  of  thy  birth  is  of  tlie  womb 
of  the  morning. 

4  The  Lord  fware,  and  will  not 
repent  :  Thou  art  a  Prieft  for  ever 
after  the  order  of  Melchifedech. 

5  The  Lord  upon  thy  right 
hand  :  fliall  wound  even  kings  in 
the  day  of  his  wrath. 

6  He  fliall  judge  among  the 
heathen ;  he  fliall  fill  the  places 
with  the  dead  bodies  :  and  finite 
in  funder  the  heads  over  divers 
countries. 

Uu 


Day^Q.  THE    P 

7  He  fliall  drink  of  the  brook  in 
the  way  :  therefore  Ihall  he  Hft  up 
his  head. 
y  Psalm  cxi.    Conjitchor  tihi. 

T  Will  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord 
A  with  my  whole  heart  :  fecretly 
amono:  the  faithful,  and  in  the 
congregation. 

2  The  works  of  the  Lord  are 
great  :  fought  out  of  all  them  that 
have  pleafure  therein. 

3  His  work  is  worthy  to  be 
praifed,  and  had  in  honour  :  and 
his  riffhteoufnefs  endureth  for  ever. 

4  The  merciful  and  gracious 
Lord  hath  fo  done  his  marvellous 
works  :  that  they  ought  to  be  had 
in  remembrance. 

5  He  hath  given  meat  unto  them 
that  fear  him  :  he  fliall  ever  be 
mindful  of  his  covenant. 

6  He  hath  fliewed  his  people 
the  power  of  his  works  :  that  he 
may  give  them  the  heritage  of  the 
heathen. 

7  The  works  of  his  hands  ai'e 
verity  and  judgement :  all  his  com- 
mandments are  true. 

8  They  Hand  fall  for  ever  and 
ever  :  and  are  done  in  truth  and 
ecjuity. 

1)  He  fent  redemption  unto  his 
people  :  he  hath  connnanded  his 
covenant  for  ever ;  holy  and  reve- 
rend is  his  Name. 

10  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  tlie 
beginning  of  wifdom  :  a  good  un- 
deHbmding  have  all  they  that  do 


SALMS.  Day  03, 

thereafter ;  the  praife  of  it  endur- 
eth for  ever. 

Psalm  cxii.    Beatiis  vir. 

BLESSED  is  the  man  that  fear- 
eth  the  Lord  :  he  hath  great 
delight  in  his  commandments. 

2  His  feed  fliall  be  mighty  upon 
earth  :  the  generation  of  the  faith- 
ful fliall  be  blefled. 

3  Riches  and  plenteoufnefs  fliall 
be  in  his  houfe  :  and  his  righteouf- 
nefs  endureth  for  ever. 

4  Unto  the  godly  there  arifeth 
up  light  in  the  darknefs  :  he  is 
merciful,  loving,  and  righteous. 

5  A  good  man  is  merciful,  and 
lendeth  :  and  will  guide  his  words 
with  difcretion. 

6  For  he  fliall  never  be  moved  : 
and  the  righteous  fliall  be  had  in 
everlafting  remembrance. 

7  He  will  not  be  afraid  of  any 
evil  tidings  :  for  his  heart  fi;andetli 
faft,  and  believeth  in  the  Lord. 

8  His  heart  is  efl:abliflied,  and 
Avill  not  flirink  :  until  he  fee  his 
delire  upon  his  enemies. 

9  He  hath  difperfed  abroad,  and 
given  to  the  poor  :  and  his  right- 
eoufiiefs  remaineth  for  ever ;  his 
horn  fliall  be  exalted  with  honour. 

1 0  The  ungodly  fliall  fee  it,  and 
it  fliall  grieve  him  :  he  fliall  gnafli 
with  his  teeth,  and  coiifume  away; 
thedefireof  the  ungodly  fliall  perilh. 

Ps  A  L  M  cxiii .    Landitti',  pueri. 

PRAISE  the  Lord,  ye  fervants  : 
()  praife  the  Name  of  the  Lord. 


Day  23. 

2  BlelTed  be  the  Name  of  the 
Lord  :  from  this  time  forth  for 
evermore. 

3  The  Lord's  Name  is  praifed  : 
from  the  rifing  up  of  the  fun  unto 
the  going  down  of  the  fame. 

4  The  Lord  is  high  above  all 
heathen  :  and  his  glory  above  the 
heavens. 

5  Who  is  like  unto  the  Lord 
our  God,  that  hath  his  dwelling 
fo  high  :  and  yet  humbleth  him- 
felf  to  behold  the  things  that  are 
in  heaven  and  earth? 

6  He  taketh  up  the  (imple  out 
of  the  duft  :  and  lifteth  the  poor 
out  of  the  mire ; 

7  That  he  may  fet  him  with  the 
princes  :  even  with  the  princes  of 
his  people. 

8  He  maketli  the  ban'en  woman 
to  keep  houfe  :  and  to  be  a  joyful 
mother  of  children. 

Ctjening  j^rapet* 

Psalm  cxiv.    In  exitu  Ifrael. 

WHEN  Ifrael  came  out  of 
Egypt  :  and  the  houfe  of 
Jacob  from  among  the  ftrange 
people, 

2  J  udah  was  his  fandtuaiy  :  and 
Ifrael  his  dominion. 

3  The  fea  faw  that,  and  fled  : 
Jordan  was  driven  back. 

4  The  mountains  fkipped  like 
rams  :  and  the  little  hills  like 
young  Iheep. 

5  What  aileth  thee,  O  thou  fea, 


THE    PSALMS 


Day  28. 

that  thou  Heddeft  :  and  thou  Jor- 
dan, that  thou  wall  driven  back? 

0  Ye  mountains,  that  ye  flvipped 
like  rams  :  and  ye  little  hills,  like 
young  Iheep? 

7  Tremble,  thou  earth,  at  the 
prefence  of  the  Lord  :  at  the  pre- 
fence  of  the  God  of  Jacob  ; 

8  Who   turned   the  hard  rock 
into   a  ftandino;  water  :   and  the 
flint-ftone  into  a  fpringing  well. 
Psalm  cxv.    Noii  nobis,  Domine. 

NOT  unto  us,  O  Lord,  not 
unto  us,  but  unto  thy  Name 
give  the  praife  :  for  thy  loving 
mercy,  and  for  thy  truth's  fake. 

2  Wherefore  lliall  the  heathen 
fay  :  Where  is  now  their  God? 

3  As  for  our  God,  he  is  in 
heaven  :  he  hath  done  whatfo- 
ever  pleafed  him. 

4  Their  idols  are  filver  and  gold  : 
even  the  work  of  men's  hands. 

5  They  have  mouths,  and  fpeak 
hot :  eyes  have  they,  and  fee  not. 

6  They  have  ears,  and  hear  not : 
nofes  have  they,  and  fmell  not. 

7  They  have  hands,  and  han- 
dle not ;  feet  have  they,  and  walk 
not  :  neither  fpeak  they  through 
their  throat. 

8  They  that  make  them  are 
like  unto  them  :  and  fo  are  all 
fuch  as  put  their  truft  in  them. 

9  But  thou,  houfe  of  Ifrael, 
truft  thou  in  the  Lord  :  he  is 
their  fuccour  and  defence. 

10  Ye  houfe  of  Aaron,  put  your 

Uu  a 


Day  24. 


THE    PSALMS. 


triift   in    the  Lord   :   he   is   their 
helper  and  defender. 

1 1  Ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  put 
your  trull  in  the  Lord  :  he  is  their 
helper  and  defender. 

12  The  Lord  hath  been  mindful 
of  us,  and  he  fliall  blefs  us  :  even 
he  (hall  blefs  the  houfe  of  Ifrael,  he 
ihall  blefs  the  houfe  of  Aaron. 

13  He  fliall  blefs  them  that  fear 
the  Lord  :  both  fmall  and  great. 

14  The  Lord  fliall  increafe  you 
more  and  more  :  you  and  your 
children. 

15  Ye  are  the  blefled  of  the 
Lord  :  who  made  heaven  and  earth. 

16  All  the  whole  heavens  are 
the  Lord's  :  the  earth  hath  he 
given  to  the  children  of  men. 

17  The  dead  praife  not  thee, 
O  Lord  :  neither  all  they  that  go 
down  into  filence. 

1 8  But  we  will  praife  the  Lord  : 
from  this  time  forth  for  evermore. 
Praife  the  Lord. 


iHorntng  iara^ct. 

Psalm  cxvi.    Diliui,  qnoniam. 

I  Am    well    })leafed    :    that    the 
Lord  hath  heard  the  voice  of 
my  prayer  ; 

2  riiat  he  hath  inclined  his  ear 
unto  me  :  therefore  w^ill  I  call 
upon  him  as  long  as  I  live. 

3  The  fnares  of  death  com- 
paffed  me  round  about  :  and  the 
pains  of  hell  gat  hold  upon  me. 

4  I  fliall  find  trouble  and  heavi- 


Day  24. 

nefs,  and  I  will  call  upon  the 
Name  of  the  Lord  :  O  Lord,  I  be- 
feech  thee,  deliver  my  foul. 

5  Gracious  is  the  Lord,  and 
righteous  :  yea,  our  God  is  mer- 
ciful. 

6  The  Lord  preferveth  the  fim- 
ple  :  I  was  in  mifeiy,  and  he  help- 
ed me. 

7  Turn  again  then  unto  thy  reft;, 

0  my  foul  :  for  the  Lord  hath  re- 
warded thee. 

8  And  why?  thou  haft  delivered 
my  foul  from  death  :  mine  eyes 
from  tears,  and  my  feet  from  falling. 

9  I  will  w^alk  before  the  Lord  : 
in  the  land  of  the  living. 

10  1  believed,  and  therefore  will 

1  fpeak ;  but  I  was  fore  troubled  :  I 
faid  in  my  hafte,  All  men  are  liars. 

11  What  reward  fliall  I  give 
unto  the  Lord  :  for  all  the  benefits 
that  he  hath  done  unto  me? 

12  1  will  receive  the  cup  of  fal- 
vation  :  and  call  upon  the  Name 
of  the  Lord. 

13  I  will  pay  my  vows  now  in 
the  prefence  of  all  his  people  : 
right  dear  in  the  light  of  the  Lord 
is  the  death  of  his  faints. 

14  Behold,  O  Lord,  how  that 
I  am  thy  fervant  :  I  am  thy  fer- 
vant,  and  the  Ion  of  thine  hand- 
maid ;  thou  haft  broken  my  bonds 
in  funder. 

IT)  1  will  ofl'er  to  thee  the  facri- 
fice  of  thankfgiving  :  and  will  call 
upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord. 


Day  24. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  24. 


16  1  will  pay  my  vows  unto  the 
Lord,  in  the  fight  of  all  his  peo- 
ple :  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's 
houfe,  even  in  the  niidll  of  thee, 

0  Jerufalem.     Praife  the  Lord. 
Psalm  cxvii.    luimdate  Dominum. 

O  Praife  the  Lord,  all  ye  hea- 
then :  praife  him,  all  ye  na- 
tions. 

2  For  his  merciful  kindnefs  is 
ever  more  and  more  towards  us  : 
and  the  truth  of  the  Lord  endur- 
eth  for  ever.     Praife  the  Lord. 
Psalm  cxviii.  Conjitemini  Domino. 

OGive  thanks  unto  the  Lord, 
for  he  is  gracious  :  becaufe  his 
mercy  endureth  for  ever. 

2  Let  Ifrael  now  confefs,  that 
he  is  gracious  :  and  that  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever. 

3  Let  the  houfe  of  Aaron  now 
confefs  :  that  his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever. 

4  Yea,  let  them  now  that  fear 
the  Lord  confefs  :  that  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever. 

5  I  called  upon  the  Lord  in 
trouble  :  and  the  Lord  heard  me 
at  large. 

6  The  Lord  is  on  my  fide  :  I  will 
not  fear  what  man  doeth  unto  me. 

7  The  Lord  taketh  my  part  with 
them  that  help  me  :  therefore  fliall 

1  fee  my  defire  upon  mine  enemies. 

8  It  is  better  to  trufl;  in  the 
Lord  :  than  to  put  any  confidence 
in  man. 

9  It  is  better  to  truft  in  the 


Lord  :  than  to  put  any  confidence 
in  princes. 

10  All  nations  compalfed  me 
round  about  :  but  in  the  Name 
of  the  Lord  will  I  dellroy  theuL 

11  They  kept  me  in  on  eveiy 
fide,  they  kept  me  in,  I  fay,  on 
every  fide  :  but  in  the  Name  of 
the  Lord  will  1  dellroy  them. 

12  They  came  about  me  like 
bees,  and  are  extin6l  even  as  the 
fire  among  the  thorns  :  for  in  the 
Name  of  the  Lord  I  will  defl;roy 
them. 

13  Thou  hafl;  thrufi;  fore  at  me, 
that  I  mio-ht  fall  :  but  the  Lord 
was  my  help. 

14  The  luord  is  my  fl;rength, 
and  my  fong  :  and  is  become  my 
falvation. 

15  The  voice  of  joy  and  health 
is  in  the  dwellings  of  the  right- 
eous :  the  riglit  hand  of  the  Lord 
bringeth  mighty  things  to  pafs. 

16  The  riffht  hand  of  the  Lord 
hath  the  pre-eminence  :  the  right 
hand  of  the  Lord  bringeth  mighty 
things  to  pafs. 

17  1  fliall  not  die,  but  live  :  and 
declare  the  works  of  the  Lord. 

18  The  Lord  hath  challened 
and  corrected  me  :  but  he  hath 
not  given  me  over  unto  death. 

19  Open  me  the  gates  of  right- 
eoufnefs  :  that  I  may  go  into  them, 
and  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord. 

20  This  is  the  gate  of  the  Lord  : 
the  righteous  fliall  enter  into  it. 


Day  M. 


THE    PSALMS 


211  will  thank  thee,  for  thou 
haft  heard  me  :  and  art  become 
my  falvation. 

22  The  fame  ftone  which  the 
builders  refufed  :  is  become  the 
head-ftone  in  the  corner. 

23  This  is  the  Lord's  doing  : 
and  it  is  man^ellous  in  our  eyes. 

24  This  is  the  day  which  the 
Lord  hath  made  :  we  will  rejoice 
and  be  glad  in  it. 

25  Help  me  now,  O  Lord  :  O 
Lord,  fend  us  now  profperity. 

26  Blefled  be  he  that  cometh  in 
the  Name  of  the  Lord  ;  we  have 
wilhed  you  good  luck,  ye  that  are 
of  the  houfe  of  the  Lord. 

27  God  is  the  Lord  who  hath 
fliewed  us  light :  bind  the  facrifice 
with  cords,  yea,  even  unto  the 
horns  of  the  altar. 

28  Thou  art  my  God,  and  I 
will  thank  thee  :  thou  art  my 
God,  and  I  will  praife  thee. 

29  O  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord, 
for  he  is  gracious  :  and  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever. 


Psalm  cxix.  Bead  immaculati. 

BLESSED  are  thofe  that  are 
uudefiled  in   the  way  :   and 
walk  in  the  law  of  the  Lord. 

2  Blefled  are  they  that  keep 
his  teftimonies  :  and  feek  him  with 
their  whole  heart. 

3  For  they  who  do  no  wicked- 
iiefs  :  walk  in  his  ways. 


Day  24. 

4  Thou  haft  charged  :  that  we 
(hall  diligently  keep  thy  command- 
ments. 

5  O  that  my  ways  were  made 
fo  direct  :  that  I  might  keep  thy 
ftatutes ! 

()  So  fliall  I  not  be  confounded  : 
while  I  have  refpedt  unto  all  thy 
commandments . 

7  I  will  thank  thee  with  an  un- 
feigned heart  :  when  I  lliall  have 
learned  the  judgements  of  thy 
riohteoufnefs. 

8  I  will  keep  thy  ceremonies  : 

0  forfake  me  not  utterly. 

In  quo  corri^et? 

WHEREWITHAL  fliall  a 
young  man  cleanfe  his  way : 
even  by  ruling  himfelf  after  thy 
word. 

10  With  my  whole  heart  have 

1  fought  thee  :  O  let  me  not  go 
^vi'ong  out  of  thy  commandments. 

1 1  Thy  words  have  I  hid  with- 
in my  heart  :  that  I  ftioidd  not 
(in  againft  thee. 

12  Blefled  art  thou,  O  Lord  : 
O  teach  me  thy  ftatutes. 

13  With  my  lips  have  I  been 
telling  :  of  all  the  judgements  of 
thy  mouth. 

14  I  have  had  as  great  delight 
in  the  way  of  thy  teftimonies  :  as 
in  all  manner  of  riches. 

15  1  will  talk  of  thy  command- 
ments :  and  have  refpedl  unto 
thy  ways. 

16  My  delight  fliall  be  in  thy 


Dmj  24. 


THE    PSALMS. 


ftatutes   :   and  1   will    not  forget 
thy  word. 

Hetrihue  fervo  ttio. 

ODo  well  unto  thy  fervant :  that 
I  may  live,  and  keep  thy  word. 

18  Open  thou  mine  eyes  :  that 
I  may  fee  the  wondrous  things  of 
thy  law. 

19  1  am  a  flranger  upon  earth  : 
O  hide  not  thy  connnandments 
from  me. 

20  My  foul  breaketh  out  for 
the  very  fervent  defire  :  that  it 
hath  alway  unto  thy  judgements. 

21  Thou  haft  rebuked  the 
proud  ;  and  curfed  are  they  that 
do  err  from  thy  commandments. 

22  O  turn  from  me  ftiame  and 
rebuke  :  for  I  have  kept  thy 
teftimonies. 

23  Princes  alfo  did  fit  and  fpeak 
againft  me  :  but  thy  fervant  is  oc- 
cupied in  thy  ftatutes. 

24  For  thy  teftimonies  are  my 
delight  :  and  my  counfellors. 

Adha'Jit  pammento. 

MY  foul  cleaveth  to  the  duft  : 
O    quicken    thou    me,    ac- 
cording to  thy  word. 

26  I  have  acknowledged  my 
ways,  and  thou  heardeft  me  :  O 
teach  me  thy  ftatutes. 

27  Make  me  to  underftand  the 
Avay  of  thy  commandments  :  and  fo 
fliall  I  talk  of  thy  wondrous  works. 

28  My  foul  melteth  away  for 
very  heavinefs  :  comfort  thou  me 
according  unto  thy  word.     ' 


Day  25. 

29  Take  from  me  the  way  of 
lying  :  and  caufe  thou  me  to  make 
nuich  of  thy  law. 

30  1  have  chofen  the  way  of 
truth  :  and  thy  jutlgements  have 
I  laid  before  me. 

31  1  have  ftuck  unto  thy  tefti- 
monies :  O  Lord,  confound  me 
not. 

32  I  will  run  the  way  of  thy 
commandments  :  when  thou  haft 
fet  my  heart  at  liberty. 

flgorniits  |)raper» 

Legem  pone. 

TEACH  me,  O  Lord,  the  way 
of  thy  ftatutes  :  and  I   lliall 
keep  it  unto  the  end. 

34  Give  me  underftanding,  and 
I  fliall  keep  thy  law  :  yea,  I  fliall 
keep  it  with  my  whole  heart. 

35  Make  me  to  go  in  the  path 
of  thy  commandments  :  for  therein 
is  my  defire. 

36  Incline  my  heart  unto  thy 
teftimonies  :  and  not  to  covet- 
oufnefs. 

37  O  turn  away  mine  eyes,  left 
they  behold  vanity  :  and  quicken 
thou  me  in  thy  way. 

38  O  ftablifli  thy  word  in  thy 
fervant  :  that  I  may  fear  thee. 

39  Take  away  the  rebuke  that 
I  am  afraid  of  :  for  thy  judge- 
ments are  good. 

40  Behold,  my  delight  is  in  thy 
commandments  :  O  quicken  me  in 
thy  righteoufnefs. 


Day  25. 

Et  veniat  fuper  me. 

LET  thy  loving'  mercy  come 
alfo  unto  me,  O  Lord  :  even 
thy  falvation,  according  unto  thy 
M'ord. 

42  So  lliall  I  make  anAver  unto 
my  blafphemers  :  for  my  trull  is 
in  thy  word. 

43  O  take  not  the  word  of  thy 
truth  utterly  out  of  my  mouth  : 
for  my  hope  is  in  thy  judge- 
ments. 

44  So  Ihall  I  alway  keep  thy 
law  :  yea,  for  ever  and  ever. 

45  And  I  will  walk  at  liberty  : 
for  I  feek  thy  commandments. 

46  I  will  fpeak  of  thy  teftimo- 
nies  alfo,  even  before  kings  :  and 
will  not  be  alliamed. 

47  And  my  delight  Ihall  be  in 
thy  commandments  ;  which  I  have 
loved. 

48  IMy  hands  alfo  will  I  lift  up 
unto  thy  commandments,  which 
I  have  loved  :  and  my  ftudy  tliall 
be  in  thy  ilatutes. 

Memor  ejlo  fervi  tui. 

O  Think  upon  thy  fervant,  as 
concerning  thy  word  :  where- 
in thou  haft  caufed  me  to  put  my 
truft. 

50  The  fame  is  my  comfort  in 
my  trouble  :  for  thy  word  hath 
quickened  me. 

5 1  riie  proud  have  had  me  ex- 
ceedingly in  derifion  :  yet  have  I 
not  ihrinkc.'d  from  thy  law. 

52  For    1    remembered    thine 


THE    PSALMS. 


Daij  25. 


everlafting  judgements,  O  Lord  : 
and  received  comfort, 

53  I  am  horribly  afraid  :  for  the 
ungodly  that  foifake  thy  law. 

54  Thy  ftatutes  have  been  my 
fongs   :  in  the  houfe  of  my  pil- 


rrimage. 


55  I  have  thought  upon  thy 
Name,  O  Lord,  in  the  night- 
feafon  :  and  have  kept  thy  law. 

56  This  I  had  :  becaufe  I  kept 
thy  commandments. 

Portio  mea,  Domine. 

THOU     art    my    portion,    O 
Lord   :   I   have   promifed  to 
keep  thy  law. 

58  I  made  my  humble  petition 
in  thy  j^refence  with  my  whole 
heart  :  O  be  merciful  unto  me, 
according  to  thy  word. 

59  I  called  mine  own  ways  to 
remembrance  :  and  turned  my  feet 
unto  thy  teftimonies. 

60  I  made  hafte,  and  prolonged 
not  the  time  :  to  keep  thy  com- 
mandments. 

61  The  congregations  of  the 
ungodly  have  robbed  me  :  but  I 
have  not  forgotten  thy  law. 

62  At  midnight  I  w\\\  rife  to 
give  thanks  unto  thee  :  becaufe  of 
thy  righteous  judgements. 

63  I  am  a  companion  of  all 
them  that  fear  thee  :  and  keep 
thy  commandments. 

64  The  earth,  O  Lord,  is  full 
of  thy  mercy  :  O  teach  me  thy 
ftatutes. 


Day  ^25. 

Bonitatem  fecijli. 

OLord,   thou    haft  dealt  gra- 
cioufly  with  thy  fervaiit  :  ac- 
cording unto  thy  word. 

6G  O  learn  me  true  underftand- 
ing  and  knowledge  :  for  1  have 
believed  thy  commandments. 

67  Before  I  was  troubled,  I 
went  wrong  :  but  now  have  I 
kept  thy  word. 

68  Thou  art  good  and  gracious  : 
O  teach  me  thy  ftatutes. 

69  The  proud  have  imagined  a 
lie  againft  me  :  but  I  will  keep 
thy  commandments  with  my  whole 
heart. 

70  Their  heart  is  as  fat  as 
brawn  :  but  my  delight  hath  been 
in  thy  law. 

71  It  is  good  for  me  that  I 
have  been  in  ti'ouble  :  that  I  may 
learn  thy  ftatutes. 

72  The  law  of  thy  mouth  is 
dearer  unto  me  :  than  thoufands 
of  gold  and  filver. 

Manns  tuoe  fecerunt  me. 

THY  hands  have  made  me  and 
fafhioned  me  :  O  give  me 
underftanding,  that  I  may  learn 
thy  commandments. 

74  They  that  fear  thee  will  be 
glad  when  they  fee  me  :  be- 
caufe  I  have  put  my  truft  in  thy 
word. 

75  I  know,  O  Lord,  that  thy 
judgements  are  right  :  and  that 


THE    PSALMS. 


thou  of  very  faithfulnefs  haft  cauf- 
ed  me  to  be  troubled. 

76  O  let  thy  merciful  kindnefs 
be  my  comfort  :  according  to  thy 
word  unto  thy  fervant. 

11  O  let  thy  loving  mercies 
come  unto  me,  that  I  may  live  : 
for  thy  law  is  my  delight. 

78  Let  the  proud  be  confound- 
ed, for  they  go  wickedly  about  to 
deftroy  me  :  but  I  will  be  occupied 
in  thy  commandments. 

79  Let  fuch  as  fear  thee,  and 
have  known  thy  teftimonies  :  be 
turned  unto  me. 

80  O  let  my  heart  be  found  in 
thy  ftatutes  :  that  I  be  not  afliamed. 

Defecit  anima  mea. 

MY  foul  hath  longed  for  thy 
falvation    :    and    I    have    a 
good  hope  becaufe  of  thy  word. 

82  Mine  eyes  long  fore  for  thy 
word  :  faying,  O  when  wilt  thou 
comfort  me? 

83  For  I  am  become  like  a  bot- 
tle in  the  fmoke  :  yet  do  I  not 
forget  thy  ftatutes. 

84  How  many  are  the  days 
of  thy  fervant  :  when  wilt  thou 
be  avenged  of  them  that  pei*fe- 
cute  me? 

85  The  proud  have  digged  pits 
for  me  :  which  are  not  after  thy 
law. 

86  All  thy  commandments  are 
true  :  they  perfecute  me  falfly;  O 
be  thou  my  help. 

87  They  had  almoft  made  an 

Xx 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  25. 

end  of  me  upon  earth  :  but  I  for- 
fook  not  thy  commandments. 

'^S  O  quicken  me  after  thy  lov- 
ing-kindnefs  :  and  fo  Ihall  I  keep 
the  teftimonies  of  thy  mouth. 
In  ceternum,  Domine. 

OLord,   thy  word  :  endureth 
for  ever  in  heaven. 

90  Thy  truth  alfo  remaineth 
fi'om  one  g-eneration  to  anotlier  : 
thou  haft  laid  the  foundation  of 
the  earth,  and  it  abideth. 

91  They  continue  this  day  ac- 
cordine:  to  thine  ordinance  :  for 
all  things  ferve  thee. 

92  If  my  delight  had  not  been 
in  thy  law  :  I  fliould  have  periftied 
in  my  trouble. 

93  I  will  never  forget  thy  com- 
mandments :  for  with  them  thou 
haft  quickened  me. 

94  I  am  thine,  O  fave  me  :  for  I 
have  fought  thy  commandments. 

95  The  imgodly  laid  wait  for 
me  to  deftroy  me  :  but  I  ^vill  con- 
fider  thy  teftimonies. 

3^,  96  I  fee  that  all  things  come  to 
an  end  :  but  thy  commandment  is 
exceeding  broad. 

Qiiomodo  dilexil 

LORD,  what  love  have  I  unto 
thy  law  :  all  the  day  long  is 
my  ftudy  in  it. 

98  Thou  through  thy  command- 
ments haft  made  me  wifer  than 
mine  enemies  :  for  they  are  ever 
with  me. 

99  I  have  more  underftandinj>- 


Bay  26. 

than  my  teachers  :  for  thy  teftimo- 
nies are  my  ftudy. 

100  I  am  Avifer  than  the  aged  : 
becaufe  I  keep  thy  command- 
ments. 

101  I  have  refrained  my  feet 
from  eveiy  evil  way  :  that  I  may 
keep  thy  word. 

102  I  have  not  flirunk  from  thy 
judgements  :  for  thou  teacheft  me. 

1 03  O  how  fweet  are  thy  words 
imto  my  throat :  yea,  fweeter  than 
honey  unto  my  mouth. 

104  Through  thy  command- 
ments I  get  underftanding  :  there- 
fore I  hate  all  evil  ways. 

iHorning  f^rapet* 

Liicerna  pedihus  meis. 

THY  word  is   a  lantern   unto 
my  feet  :   and  a  light  unto 
my  paths. 

106  I  have  fworn,  and  am  fted- 
faftly  purpofed  :  to  keep  thy  right- 
eous judgements. 

107  1  am  troubled  above  mea- 
fure  :  quicken  me,  O  Lord,  ac- 
cording to  thy  word. 

108  Let  the  free-will  offerings 
of  my  mouth  pleafe  thee,  O  Lord  : 
and  teach  me  thy  judgements. 

109  My  foul  is  alway  in  my 
hand  :  yet  do  I  not  forget  thy  law. 

110  The  ungodly  have  laid  a 
fnare  for  me  :  but  yet  I  fweiTcd 
not  from  thy  commandments. 

111  Thy  teftimonies  have  I 
claimed  as  mine  heritajre  for  ever : 


and  why?  they  are  the  very  joy  of 
my  heart. 

112  I  have  appHed  my  heart  to 
fiilfil  thy  ftatutes  alway  :  even  im- 
to  the  end. 

Im'quos  odio  hahui. 

IHate   them  that  imagine  evil 
things  :  but  thy  law  do  I  love. 

114  Thou  art  my  defence  and 
fliield  :  and  my  truft  is  in  thy  word. 

115  Away  from  me,  ye  wicked  : 
I  will  keep  the  commandments  of 
my  God. 

116  O  ftablifli  me  according  to 
thy  word,  that  I  may  live  :  and  let 
me  not  be  difappointed  of  my  hope. 

117  Hold  thou  me  up,  and  I 
Ihall  be  fafe  :  yea,  my  delight  fliall 
be  ever  in  thy  ftatutes. 

118  Thou  haft  trodden  down  all 
them  that  depart  from  thy  ftatutes  : 
for  they  imagine  but  deceit. 

119  Thou  putteft  away  all  the 
ungodly  of  the  earth  like  drofs  : 
therefore  I  love  thy  teftimonies. 

120  My  flefti  trembleth  for  fear 
of  thee  :  and  I  am  afraid  of  thy 
judgements. 

Feci  judimmi. 

IDeal  with  the  thing  that  is  law- 
ful and  right  :  O  give  me  not 
over  unto  mine  oppreflbrs. 

122  Make  thou  thy  fervant  to 
delight  in  that  which  is  good  : 
that  the  proud  do  me  no  wrong. 

123  Mine  eyes  are  wafted  away 
with  looking  for  thy  health  ;  and 
for  the  word  of  thy  righteoufnefs. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bay  26. 

1 24  O  deal  with  thy  fervant  ac- 
cording unto  thy  loving  mercy  : 
and  teach  me  thy  ftatutes. 

125  I  am  thy  fervant,  O  grant 
me  undei'ftanding  :  that  I  may 
know  thy  teftimonies. 

120  It  is  time  for  thee,  Lord, 
to  lay  to  thine  hand  :  for  they 
have  deftroyed  thy  law. 

127  For  I  love  thy  command- 
ments :  above  gold  and  precious 

128  Therefore  hold  1  ftraight 
all  thy  commandments  :  and  all 
falfe  ways  I  utterly  abhor.  "? 

Mh'abilia. 

THY  teftimonies   are  wonder- 
ful :  therefore  doth  my  foul 
keep  them. 

130  When  thy  word  goeth 
forth  :  it  giveth  light  and  under- 
ftanding  unto  the  fimple. 

131  I  opened  my  mouth,  and 
drew  in  my  breath  :  for  my  de- 
light was  in  thy  commandments. 

132  O  look  thou  upon  me,  and 
be  merciful  unto  me  :  as  thou  ufeft 
to  do  unto  thofe  that  love  thy 
Name. 

133  Order  my  fteps  in  thy  word : 
and  fo  fliall  no  wickednefs  have 
dominion  over  me. 

134  O  deliver  me  from  the 
^vrongful  dealings  of  men  :  and  fo 
fliall  I  keep  thy  commandments. 

135  Shew  the  light  of  thy  coun- 
tenance upon  thy  fervant  :  and 
teach  nie  thy  ftatutes. 

XX2 


Day  m. 

136  IMine  eyes  giifli  out  with 
water  :  becaufe  men  keep  not  thy 
law. 

Juftiis  es,  Domine. 

RIGHTEOUS    art    thou,    O 
Lord  :  and  true  is  thy  judge- 
ment. 

138  The  teflimonies  that  thou 
haft  commanded  :  are  exceeding 
rio-hteous  and  true. 

139  My  zeal  hath  even  con- 
fumed  me  :  becaufe  mine  enemies 
have  forgotten  thy  words. 

140  Thy  word  is  tried  to  the 
uttermoft  :  and  thy  fervant  lov- 
eth  it. 

141  I  am  fmall,  and  of  no  re- 
putation :  yet  do  I  not  forget  thy 
commandments. 

142  Tliy  righteoufnefs  is  an 
everlafting  righteoufnefs  :  and  thy 
law  is  the  truth. 

143  Trouble  and  heavinefs  have 
taken  hokl  upon  me  :  yet  is  my 
delight  in  thy  commandments. 

144  The  righteoufnefs  of  thy 
teftimonies  is  everlaftin«- :  O  ijrant 
me  underftanding,  and  1  lliall  live. 

€\)ening  draper* 

Clamavi  in  toto  corde  mco. 

ICall    with    my  whole    heart   : 
hear  me,  O  Lord,  I  will  keep 
thv  ftatutes. 

146  Yea,  even  unto  thee  do  I 
call  :  help  me,  and  I  fliall  keep 
thy  teftimonies. 

147  Early  in  the  morning  do  1 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  26. 

cry  unto  thee  :  for  in  thy  word  is 
my  truft. 

148  Mine  eyes  prevent  the 
night-watches  :  that  I  might  be 
occupied  in  thy  words. 

149  Hear  my  voice,  O  Lord, 
according  unto  thy  loving-kind- 
nefs  :  (juicken  me,  according  as 
thou  art  wont. 

150  They  draw  nigh  that  of 
malice  perfecute  me  :  and  are  far 
from  thy  law. 

151  Be  thou  nigh  at  hand,  O 
liOrd  :  for  all  thy  commandments 
are  true. 

152  As  concerning  thy  teftimo- 
nies, I  have  known  long  fince  : 
that  thou  haft  grounded  them  for 
ever. 

Vide  humilitatem. 

OConfider  mine  adverfity,  and 
deliver    me   :   for  I   do  not 
forget  thy  law. 

154  Avenge  thou  my  caufe,  and 
deliver  me  :  quicken  me,  according 
to  thy  word. 

155  Health  is  far  from  the  un- 
godly :  for  they  regard  not  thy 
ftatutes. 

15G  Great  is  thy  mercy,  O  Lord : 
quicken  me,  as  thou  art  wont. 

157  Many  there  are  that  trou- 
ble me,  and  perfecute  me  :  yet  do 
1  not  fwerve  from  thy  teftimonies. 

158  It  grieveth  me  when  1  fee 
the  tranfgrelibrs  :  becaufe  they 
keep  not  thy  law. 

159  Confider,  O  Lord,  how  I 


Day  26. 

love  thy  commandments :  O  quick- 
en me,  according  to  thy  loving- 
kindnefs. 

KJO  Thy  word  is  true  from  ever- 
lafting  :  all  the  judgements  of  thy 
righteoufnefs  endure  for  evermore. 
Principes  perfeciiti  funt. 

PRINCES  have  perfecuted  me 
without  a  caufe  :  but  my  heart 
ftandeth  in  awe  of  thy  word. 

162  I  am  as  glad  of  thy  word  : 
as  one  that  lindeth  great  fpoils. 

163  As  for  lies,  I  hate  and  ab- 
lior  them  :  but  thy  law  do  I  love. 

164  Seven  times  a  day  do  I 
praife  thee  :  becaufe  of  thy  right- 
eous judgements. 

1 65  Great  is  the  peace  that  they 
have  who  love  thy  law  ;  and  they 
are  not  offended  at  it. 

166  Lord,  I  have  looked  for 
thy  faving  health  :  and  done  after 
thy  commandments. 

167  My  foul  hath  kept  thy  tefti- 
monies  :  and  loved  them  exceed- 
ingly. 

168  I  have  kept  thy  command- 
ments and  teftimonies  :  for  all  my 
ways  are  before  thee. 

Appropinquet  deprecatio. 

LET  my  complaint  come  be- 
fore thee,  O  Lord  :  give  me 
underftanding,  according  to  thy 
word. 

170  Let  my  fupplication  come 
before  thee  :  deliver  me,  according 
to  thy  word. 

171  My  lips  ihaU  fpeak  of  thy 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bay  <m. 

praife  :  when  thou  haft  taught  me 
thy  ftatutes. 

172  Yea,  my  tongue  fliall  fing 
of  thy  word  :  for  all  thy  command- 
ments are  righteous. 

173  Let  thine  hand  help  me  : 
for  I  have  chofen  thy  command- 
ments. 

174  I  have  longed  for  thy  faving 
health,  O  Lord  :  and  in  thy  law 
is  my  delight. 

175  O  let  my  foul  live,  and  it 
fliall  praife  thee  :  and  thy  judge- 
ments fliall  help  me.  « 

176  I  have  gone  aftray  like  a 
flieep  that  is  loft  :  O  feek  thy 
fervant,  for  I  do  not  forget  thy 
commandments . 

£0omtn5  i^raper,    i 

Psalm  cxx.    Ad  Doinimim. 

WHEN   I  was   in  trouble  I 
called  upon  the  Lord  :  and 
he  heard  me. 

2  Deliver  my  foul,  O  Lord, 
from  lying  lips  ;  and  from  a  de- 
ceitful tongue.  '^ 

3  What  reward  fliall  be  given  or 
done  unto  thee,  thou  falfe  tongue  ; 
even  mighty  and  fliarp  arrows, 
with  hot  burning  coals. 

4  Wo  is  me,  that  I  am  con- 
ftrained  to  dwell  with  Mefech  : 
and  to  have  my  habitation  among 
the  tents  of  Kedar. 

5  My  foul  hath  long  dwelt  a- 
mong  them  :  that  are  enejiiies 
unto  peace. 


Day  27. 


THE    PSALMS. 


6  I  labour  for  j^eace,  but  when 
I  fpeak  unto  them  thereof  :  they 
make  them  ready  to  battle. 

Psalm  cxxi.    Levavi  oculos. 

I  Will    lift    up  mine  eyes   unto 
the  hills  :  from  whence  cometh 
my  help. 

2  My  help  cometh  even  from 
the  Lord  :  who  hath  made  heaven 
and  earth. 

3  He  will  not  fuffer  thy  foot  to 
be  moved  :  and  he  that  keepeth 
thee  will  not  fleep. 

4  Behold,  he  that  keepeth  If- 
rael  :  fliall  neither  flumber  nor 
fleep. 

5  The  Lord  himfelf  is  thy  keep- 
er :  the  Lord  is  thy  defence  upon 
thy  right  hand ; 

6  So  that  the  fun  fliall  not  burn 
thee  by  day  :  neither  the  moon 
by  night. 

7  llie  Lord  fliall  preferv^e  thee 
from  all  evil  :  yea,  it  is  even  he 
that  fliall  keep  thy  foul. 

8  The  Lord  fliall  preferve  thy 
going  out,  and  thy  coming  in  : 
from  this  time  forth  for  evermore. 

PsALAi  cxxii.    Lcetatns  Jum. 

IWas  glad  when  they  faid  unto 
me  :  We  will  go  into  the  houfe 
of  the  Lord. 

2  Our  feet  fliall  ftand  in  thy 
gates  :  O  Jeiiifalem. 

3  Jerufalem  is  built  as  a  city  : 
that  is  at  unity  in  itfelf. 

4  For  thither  the  tribes  go  up, 
even  the  tribes  of  the  Lord  :  to 


teftify  unto  Ifrael,  to  give  thanks 
unto  the  Name  of  the  Lord. 

5  For  there  is  the  feat  of  judge- 
ment :  even  the  feat  of  the  houfe 
of  David. 

6  O  pray  for  the  peace  of  Je- 
rufalem :  they  fliall  profper  that 
love  thee. 

7  Peace  be  within  thy  walls  :  and 
plenteoufnefs  within  thy  palaces. 

8  For  my  brethren  and  com- 
panions' fakes  :  I  will  wifli  thee 
profperity. 

9  Yea,  becaufe  of  the  houfe  of 
the  Lord  our  God  :  I  will  feek  to 
do  thee  good. 

Psalm  cxxiii.    Ad  te  levavi  oculos 
meos. 

UNTO  thee  lift  I  up  mine  eyes  : 
O  thou  that  dwellefi;  in  the 
heavens. 

2  Behold,  even  as  the  eyes  of 
fervants  look  unto  the  hand  of 
their  mafters,  and  as  the  eyes  of 
a  maiden  imto  the  hand  of  her 
miftrefs  :  even  fo  our  eyes  wait 
upon  the  Lord  our  God,  until  he 
have  mercy  ujion  us. 

3  Have  mercy  upon  us,  O 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us  :  for 
we  are  utterly  defpifed. 

4  Our  foul  is  filled  with  the 
fcornful  rejiroof  of  the  wealthy  : 
and  with  the  defpitefulnefs  of  the 
proud. 

rsALM  cxxiv.    Niji  quid  Domirms. 

IF  the  Lord  himfelf  had  not  been 
on   our  fide,   now  may  Ifrael 


Dmj  27. 

fay  :  if  the  Lord  himfelf  had  not 
been  on  our  fide,  when  men  rofe 
up  againft  us ; 

2  They  had  fwallowed  us  up 
quick  :  when  they  were  fo  wrath- 
fully  difpleafed  at  us. 

3  Yea,  the  waters  had  drowned 
us  :  and  the  ftreani  had  gone  over 
our  foul. 

4  The  deep  waters  of  the  proud  : 
had  gone  even  over  our  fouL 

5  But  praifed  be  the  Lord  :  who 
hath  not  given  us  over  for  a  prey 
unto  their  teeth. 

6  Our  foul  is  efcaped  even  as  a 
bird  out  of  the  fnare  of  the  fowler  : 
the  fnare  is  broken,  and  we  are 
delivered. 

7  Our  help  ftandeth  in  the  Name 
of  the  Lord  :  who  hath  made  hea- 
ven and  earth. 

Psalm  cxxv.    Qui  conjidimt. 

THEY  that  put  their  truft  in 
the  Lord  Ihall  be  even  as  the 
mount  Sion  :  which  may  not  be  re- 
moved, but  ftandeth  faft  for  ever. 

2  The  hills  ftand  about  Jerufa- 
lem  :  even  fo  ftandeth  the  Lord 
round  about  his  people,  from  this 
time  forth  for  evermore. 

3  For  the  rod  of  the  ungodly 
Cometh  not  into  the  lot  of  the  right- 
eous :  left  the  righteous  put  their 
hand  unto  ^vickednefs. 

4  Do  well,  O  Lord  :  unto  thofe 
that  are  good  and  true  of  heart. 

5  As  for  fuch  as  turn  back  unto 
their  own  wickednefs  :  the  Lord 


THE    PSALMS.  Day<^7. 

fliall    lead    them    forth    with    the 
evil-doers ;  but  peace  ftiall  be  up- 


on Ifrael. 


€t)enin0  draper. 

Psalm  cxxvi.    In  conmrtendo. 

WHEN  the  Lord  turned  a- 
gain  the  captivity  of  Sion  : 
then  were  we  like  unto  them  that 
dream. 

2  Then  was  our  mouth  filled 
with  laughter  :  and  our  tongue 
with  joy. 

3  Then  faid  they  among  the 
heathen  :  the  Lord  hath  done 
great  things  for  them. 

4  Yea,  the  I^ord  hath  done  great 
things  for  us  already  :  whereof  we 
rejoice. 

5  Turn  our  captivity,  O  Lord  : 
as  the  rivers  in  the  fouth. 

6  They  that  fow  in  tears  :  ftiall 
reap  in  joy. 

7  He  that  now  goeth  on  his 
way  weeping,  and  beareth  forth 
good  feed  :  fliall  doubtlefs  come 
again  with  joy,  and  bring  his 
Iheaves  with  him. 

Psalm  cxxvii.    I^iji  Dominus. 

EXCEPT  the  Lord  build  the 
houfe  :  their  labour  is  but  loft 
that  build  it. 

2  Except  the  Lord  keep  the 
city  :  the  watchman  waketh  but 
in  vain. 

3  It  is  but  loft  labour  that  ye 
hafte  to  rife  up  early,  and  fo  late 
take  reft,   and  eat   the  bread   of 


Day  27. 

carefuliiefs  :  for  fo  he  givetli  his 
beloved  deep. 

4  Lo,  children  and  the  fruit  of 
the  womb  :  are  an  heritage  and 
gift  that  Cometh  of  the  Lord. 

5  Like  as  the  arrows  in  the 
hand  of  the  giant :  even  fo  are  the 
young  children. 

6  Happy  is  the  man  that  hath 
his  quiver  full  of  them  :  they  ftiall 
not  be  aihamed  when  they  fpeak 
with  their  enemies  in  the  gate. 

Psalm  cxxviii.    Beati  oumes. 

BLESSED  are  all  they  that  feai- 
the  Lord  :  and  walk  in  his 


THE    PSALMS. 


9  *  ^  ., A  3 


ways, 

2  For  thou  (halt  eat  the  labours 
of  thine  hands  :  O  well  is  thee, 
and  happy  (halt  thou  be. 

3  Thy  wife  fhall  be  as  the 
fruitfiil  vine  :  upon  the  walls  of 
thine  houfe. 

4  Thy  children  like  the  olive- 
branches  :  round  about  thy  table. 

5  Lo,  thus  Ihall  the  man  be 
blefled  :  that  feareth  the  Lord. 

6  The  Ijord  from  out  of  Sion 
fliall  fo  blefs  thee  :  that  thou  flialt 
fee  Jerufalem  in  profperity  all  thy 
life  long. 

7  Yea,  that  thou  (halt  fee  thy 
children's  children  :  and  peace  up- 
on Ifrael. 

PsA  LM  cxxix.  Scepe  ea'pngnaverunt 

MANY  a  time  have  they  fought 
againjft  me  from  my  youth 
up  :  may  Ifrael  now  fay. 

2  Yea,  many  a  time  have  they 


Day  27. 

vexed  me  from  my  youth  up  : 
but  they  have  not  prevailed  a- 
gainft  me. 

3  The  plowers  plowed  upon  my 
back  :  and  made  long  furrow  vs. 

4  But  the  righteous  Lord  :  hath 
hewn  the  fnares  of  the  ungodly 
in  pieces. 

5  Let  them  be  confounded  and 
turned  backward  :  as  many  as 
have  evil  will  at  Sion. 

6  Let  them  be  even  as  the 
grafs  growing  upon  the  houfe- 
tops  :  which  withereth  afore  it 
be  plucked  up ; 

7  Whereof  the  mower  fiUeth 
not  his  hand  :  neither  he  that 
bindeth  up  the  flieaves  his  bofom. 

8  So  that  they  who  go  by  fay 
not  fo  much  as,  The  Lord  profper 
you  :  we  Avifti  you  good  luck  in 
the  Name  of  the  Lord. 

Psalm  cxxx.   De  profundis. 

OUT  of  the  deep  have  I  called 
unto  thee,  O  Lord  :  Lord, 
hear  my  voice. 

2  O  let  thine  ears  confider  well : 
the  voice  of  my  com])laint. 

3  If  thou,  Lord,  wilt  be  ex- 
treme to  mark  what  is  done  a- 
mifs  :  O  Lord,  who  may  abide 
it? 

4  For  there  is  mercy  with  thee  : 
therefore  flialt  thou  be  feai'ed. 

5  I  look  for  the  Lord;  my 
foul  doth  wait  for  him  :  in  his 
word  is  my  truft. 

6  My  foul  fleeth  unto  the  Lord : 


before  the  morning  watch,  I  fay, 
before  the  morning  watch. 

70  Ifrael,  truil  in  the  Lord, 
for  with  the  Lord  there  is  mer- 
cy :  and  with  him  is  plenteous 
redemption. 

8  And  he  fliall  redeem  Ifrael  : 
from  all  his  fins. 
Psalm  cxxxi.   Dominc,  non  eft. 

LORD,  I  am  not  high-minded  : 
I  have  no  proud  looks. 

2  I  do  not  exercife  myfelf  in 
great  matters  :  which  are  too  high 
for  me. 

3  But  I  refrain  my  foul,  and 
keep  it  low,  like  as  a  child  that 
is  weaned  from  his  mother  :  yea, 
my  foul  is  even  as  a  weaned  child. 

4  O  Ifrael,  truft  in  the  Lord  : 
from  this  time  forth  for  evermore. 

Psalm  cxxxii.   3Iemento,  Domine. 

LORD,  remember  David  :  and 
all  his  trouble ; 

2  How  he  fware  unto  the  Lord  : 
and  vowed  a  vow  unto  the  Al- 
mighty God  of  Jacob ; 

3  I  will  not  come  within  the 
tabernacle  of  mine  houfe  :  nor 
climb  up  into  my  bed ; 

4  I  will  not  fuffer  mine  eyes 
to  fleep,  nor  mine  eye-lids  to 
{lumber  :  neither  the  temples  of 
my  head  to  take  any  reft; 

5  Until  I  find  out  a  place  for 
the  temple  of  the  Lord  :  an  habita- 
tion for  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Dai/  28. 


6  Lo,  we  heard  of  the  fame  at 
Ephrata  :  and  found  it  in  the  wood. 

7  We  will  go  into  his  taber- 
nacle :  and  fall  low  on  our  knees 
before  his  footftool. 

8  Arife,  O  I^ord,  into  thy  reft- 
ing- place  :  thou,  and  the  ark  of 
thy  llrength. 

9  Let  thy  priefts  be  clothed 
with  righteoufnefs  :  and  let  thy 
faints  fing  with  joyfulnefs. 

10  For  thy  fervant  David's  fake  : 
turn  not  away  the  prefence  of 
thine  Anointed. 

1 1  The  Lord  hath  made  a  faith- 
ful oath  unto  David  :  and  he  ftiall 
not  flirink  from  it ; 

12  Of  the  fruit  of  thy  body  : 
fliall  I  fet  upon  thy  feat. 

13  If  thy  children  Avill  keep  my 
covenant,  and  my  teftimonies  that  I 
fliall  learn  them  :  their  children  alfo 
fliall  fit  upon  thy  feat  for  evermore. 

14  For  the  Lord  hath  chofen 
Sion  to  be  an  habitation  for  hiin- 
felf :  he  hath  longed  for  her. 

15  This  fliall  be  my  reft  for 
ever  :  here  will  I  dwell,  for  I  have 
a  delight  therein. 

16  1  will  blefs  her  vi6luals  with 
increafe  :  and  will  fatisfy  her  poor 
with  bread. 

17  I  will  deck  her  priefts  with 
health  :  and  her  faints  fliall  rejoice 
and  fing. 

18  There  fliall  I  make  the  horn 
of  David  to  flourifli :  I  have  ordain- 
ed a  lantern  for  mine  Anointed. 

Yy 


Day  28. 


^19  As  for  his  enemies,  I  fliall 
clothe  them  with  ftiame  :  but  upon 
himfelf  ftiall  his  crown  flourifti. 
Psalm  cxxxiii.  Ecce^qiiambomtm! 

BEHOLD,  how  good  and  joy- 
ful a  thing  it  is  :  brethren,  to 
dwell  together  in  unity! 

2  It  is  like  the  precious  oint- 
ment upon  the  head,  that  ran 
down  unto  the  beard  :  even  unto 
Aaron's  beard,  and  went  down  to 
the  flvirts  of  his  clothing. 

3  Like  as  the  dew  of  Hermon  : 
which  fell  upon  the  hill  of  Sion. 

4  For  there  the  Lord  promifed 
his  blefling  :  and  life  for  evermore. 

Psalm  cxxxiv.   Ecce  nunc. 

BEHOLD  now,  praife  the  Lord : 
all  ye  fervants  of  the  Lord  ; 

2  Ye  that  by  night  ftand  in  the 
houfe  of  the  Lord  :  even  in  the 
courts  of  the  houfe  of  our  God. 

3  Lift  up  your  hands  in  the 
fandluary  :  and  praife  the  Lord. 

4  The  Lord  that  made  heaven 
and  earth  :  give  thee  blefling  out 
of  Sion. 

Psalm  cxxxv.    Laudntc  Nomen. 

O  Praife  the  Lord,  laud  ye  the 
Name  of  the  Lord  :  praife  it, 
O  ye  fervants  of  the  Lord; 

2  Ye  that  Hand  in  the  houfe  of 
the  Lord  :  in  the  courts  of  the 
houfe  of  our  (iod. 

3  O  praife  tlie  Lord,  for  the 
Lord  is  gracious  :  O  fitig  praifcs 
unto  liis  Name,  for  it  is  lovely. 

4  For  why?  the  Lord  hath  cho- 


THE    PSALMS.  Day  Q8. 

fen  Jacob  unto  himfelf  :  and  Ifrael 
for  his  own  pofleflTion. 

5  For  I  know  that  the  Lord  is 
great :  and  that  our  Lord  is  above 


all  gods. 

6  Whatfoever  the  Lord  pleafed, 
that  did  he  in  heaven,  and  in  earth  : 
and  in  the  fea,  and  in  all  deep 
places. 

7  He  bringeth  forth  the  clouds 
from  the  ends  of  the  world  :  and 
fendeth  forth  lightnings  with  the 
rain,  bringing  the  winds  out  of 
his  treafures. 

8  He  fmote  the  firft-born  of 
Egy])t  :  both  of  man  and  beaft. 

9  He  hath  fent  tokens  and  won- 
ders into  the  midft  of  thee,  O  thou 
land  of  Egypt :  upon  Pharaoh,  and 
all  his  fervants. 

10  He  fmote  divers  nations  : 
and  flew  mighty  kings ; 

1 1  Sehon  king  of  the  Amorites, 
and  Op-  the  kino*  of  Bafan  ;  and  all 
the  kingdoms  of  Canaan  ; 

12  And  gave  their  land  to  be 
an  heritage  :  even  an  heritage  un- 
to Ifrael  his  people. 

13  Thy  Name,  O  Lord,  endur- 
eth  for  ever  :  fo  doth  thy  memo- 
rial, O  Lord,  from  one  generation 
to  another. 

14  For  the  Lord  will  avenge  his 
people  :  and  be  gracious  unto  his 
fervants. 

15  As  for  the  images  of  the 
heathen,  they  ai-e  but  filver  and 
gold  :  the  work  of  men's  hands. 


Day  28. 

16  They  have  mouths,  and  fpeak 
not  :  eyes  have  they,  but  they 
fee  not. 

1 7  They  have  ears,  and  yet  they 
hear  not  :  neither  is  there  any 
breath  in  their  mouths. 

18  They  that  make  them  are 
like  unto  them  :  and  fo  are  all 
they  that  put  their  truft  in  them. 

19  Praife  the  Lord,  ye  houfe  of 
Ifrael  :  praife  the  Lord,  ye  houfe 
of  Aaron. 

20  Praife  the  Lord,  ye  houfe  of 
Levi :  ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  praife 
the  Lord. 

21  Praifed  be  the  Lord  out  of 
Sion  :  who  dwelleth  at  Jerufalem. 

Psalm  cxxxvi.    Conjitemini. 

OGive  thanks  unto  the  Lord, 
for  he  is  gracious  :  and  his 
mercy  endureth  for  ever. 

2  O  give  thanks  unto  the  God  of 
all  gods  :  for  his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever. 

3  O  thank  the  Lord  of  all 
lords  :  for  his  mercy  endureth  for 
ever. 

4  Who  only  doeth  great  won- 
ders :  for  his  mercy  endureth  for 
ever. 

5  Who  by  his  excellent  wifdom 
made  the  heavens  :  for  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever. 

6  Who  laid  out  the  earth  above 
the  waters  :  for  his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  28. 


7  Wlio  hath  made  great  lights  : 
for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever ; 

8  The  fun  to  rule  the  day  :  for 
his  mercy  endureth  for  ever ; 

9  The  moon  and  the  liars  to 
govern  the  night  :  for  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever. 

10  Who  fmote  Egypt  with  their 
firft-born  :  for  his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever ; 

1 1  And  brought  out  Ifrael  from 
among  them  :  for  his  mercy  en- 
dureth for  ever ; 

12  With  a  mighty  hand,  and 
ftretched  out  arm  :  for  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever. 

13  Who  divided  the  Red  fea  in 
two  parts  :  for  his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever ; 

14  And  made  Ifrael  to  go 
through  the  midft  of  it  :  for  his 
mercy  endureth  for  ever. 

15  But  as  for  Pharaoh  and  his 
hoft,  he  overthrew  them  in  the 
Red  fea  :  for  his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever. 

16  Who  led  his  people  through 
the  wildernefs  :  for  his  mercy  en- 
dureth for  ever. 

17  Who  fmote  great  kings  :  for 
his  mercy  endureth  for  ever ; 

18  Yea,  and  flew  mighty  kings  : 
for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever  • 

19  Sehon  king  of  the  A  mo- 
rites  :  for  his  mercy  endureth  for 
ever ; 

20  And  Og  the  king  of  Bafan  : 
for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever ; 

Yy  2 


Day  28. 

21  And  gave  away  their  land 
for  an  heritage  :  for  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever ; 

22  Even  for  an  heritage  unto 
Ifrael  his  fervant  :  for  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever. 

23  Who  remembered  us  when 
we  were  in  trouble  :  for  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever ; 

24  And  hath  delivered  us  from 
our  enemies  :  for  his  mercy  endur- 
eth for  ever. 

25  Who  giveth  food  to  all  flefli : 
for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever. 

26  O  give  thanks  unto  the  God 
of  heaven  :  for  his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever. 

27  O  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord 
of  lords  :  for  his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever. 

Psalm  cxxxvii.    Super  JJumina. 

BY  the  waters  of  Babylon  we 
fat  down   and  wept  :   when 
we  remembered  thee,  O  Sion. 

2  As  for  our  harps,  we  hanged 
them  up  :  upon  the  trees  that  are 
therein. 

3  For  they  that  led  us  away  cap- 
tive required  of  us  then  a  fong,  and 
melody,  in  our  heavinefs  :  Sing  us 
one  of  the  fonffs  of  Sion. 

4  How  fhall  we  ling  the  Lord's 
fong  :  in  a  llrange  land? 

5  If  I  fori>*et  thee,  O  .Jerufalem  : 
let  my  right  hand  forget  her  cun- 
ning. 

()  If  I  do  not  remember  thee, 
let  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof 


THE    PSALMS. 


Dmj  28. 

of  my  mouth  :  yea,  if  I  prefer  not 
Jeruialem  in  my  mirth. 

7  Remember  the  children  of 
Edom,  O  Lord,  in  the  day  of 
Jerufalem  :  how  they  faid,  Down 
with  it,  down  with  it,  even  to 
the  o-round. 

8  O  daughter  of  Babylon,  waft- 
ed with  mifeiy  :  yea,  happy  Ihall 
he  be  that  rewardeth  thee,  as  thou 
haft  ferved  us. 

9  Blefled  Ihall  he  be  diat  taketh 
thy  children  :  and  throweth  them 
againft  the  ft  ones. 

Psalm  cxxxviii.    Conjitehor  tibi. 

I  Will  give  thanks  unto  thee,  O 
Lord,  with  my  whole  heart  : 
even  before  the  gods  will  I  fing 
praife  unto  thee. 

2  I  will  worfliip  toward  thy 
holy  temple,  and  praife  thy  Name, 
becaufe  of  thy  loving-kindnefs  and 
truth  :  for  thou  haft  magnified 
thy  Name,  and  thy  Word,  above 
all  things. 

3  When  I  called  upon  thee, 
thou  heardeft  me  :  and  enduedft 
my  foul  with  nuich  ftrength. 

4  All  the  kings  of  the  earth  ftiall 
praife  thee,  ()  Lord  :  for  they  have 
heard  the  words  of  thy  mouth. 

5  Yea,  they  lliall  fmg  in  the 
ways  of  the  Lord  :  that  great  is 
the  glory  of  the  Lord. 

()  For  though  the  Lord  be  high, 
yet  hath  he  refpecft  unto  the  lowly  : 
as  for  the  ])roud,  he  beholdeth 
them  afar  oft". 


11. 


Bay  29. 

7  Though  I  walk  in  the  iiiidft 
of  trouble,  yet  ftialt  thou  refreih 
me  :  thou  fhalt  ilretch  forth  thy 
hand  upon  the  furioufnefs  of  mine 
enemies,  and  thy  right  hand  fliall 
fave  me. 

8  The  Lord  fliall  make  good 
his  loviug-kindnefs  toward  me  : 
yea,  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  endur- 
eth  for  ever ;  defpife  not  then  the 
works  of  thine  own  hands. 

JHormns  |Draper« 

Psalm  exxxix.   Domine,  prohafii. 

OLord,  thou  haft  fearched  me 
out,  and  known  me  :  thou 
knoweft  my  doAvn-fitting,  and  mine 
up-rifing;  thou  underftandeft  my 
thoughts  long  before. 

2  Thou  art  about  my  path,  and 
about  my  bed  :  and  fpieft  out  all 
my  ways. 

3  For  lo,  there  is  not  a  word  in 
my  tongue  :  but  thou,  O  Lord, 
knoweft  it  altogether. 

4  Thou  haft  faftiioned  me  be- 
hind and  before  :  and  laid  thine 
hand  upon  me. 

5  Such  knowledge  is  too  won- 
derful and  excellent  for  me  :  I 
cannot  attain  unto  it. 

6  Whither  fliall  I  go  then  from 
thy  Spirit  :  or  whither  fliall  1  go 
then  from  thy  prefence? 

7  If  I  climb  up  into  heaven, 
thou  art  there  :  if  I  go  down  to 
hell,  thou  art  there  alfo. 

8  If  I  take  the  wings  of  the 


THE    PSALMS. 


Bay  29. 


morning  :  and  remain  in  the  ut- 
termoft  parts  of  the  fea  ; 

9  Even  there  alfo  fliall  thy  hand 
lead  me  :  and  thy  right  hand  fliall 
hold  me. 

10  If  I  fay,  Peradventure  the 
darknel's  fliall  cover  me  :  then  fliall 
my  night  be  turned  to  day. 

1 1  Yea,  the  darknefs  is  no  dark- 
nefs  with  thee,  but  the  night  is  as 
clear  as  the  day  :  the  darknefs  and 
lijjht  to  thee  are  both  alike.  -^ 

1 2  For  my  reins  are  thine  :  thou 
"haft  covered  me  in  my  mother's 

womb. 

13  1  will  give  thanks  unto  thee, 
for  I  am  fearfully  and  wonderfully 
made  :  marvellous  are  thy  works, 
and  that  my  foul  knoweth  right 
well. 

14  My  bones  are  not  hid  from 
thee  :  thous-h  I  be  made  fecret- 
ly,  and  fafliioned  beneath  in  the 
earth. 

15  Tliine  eyes  did  fee  my  fub- 
ftance,  yet  being  imperfedl  :  and 
in  thy  book  were  all  my  mem- 
bers written ; 

16  Which  day  by  day  were 
fafliioned  :  when  as  yet  there  was 
none  of  them. 

17  How  dear  are  thy  counfels 
unto  me,  O  God  :  O  how  great  is 
the  fum  of  them ! 

18  If  I  tell  them,  they  are 
more  in  number  than  the  fand  : 
when  I  ^\^ake  up  I  am  prefent 
with  thee. 


Daij  29. 

19  Wilt  thou  not  flay  the  wick- 
ed, O  God  :  depart  from  me,  ye 
blood- thirfty  men. 

20  For  they  fpeak  unrighteoufly 
asrainft  thee  :  and  thine  enemies 
take  thy  Name  in  vain. 

21  Do  not  I  hate  them,  O 
Lord,  that  hate  thee  :  and  am 
not  I  grieved  with  thofe  that  rile 
up  againll  thee? 

22  Yea,  I  hate  them  right  fore  : 
even  as  though  they  were  mine 
enemies. 

23  Try  me,  O  God,  and  feek 
the  ground  of  my  heart  :  prove 
me,  and  examine  my  thoughts. 

24  Look  well  if  there  be  any 
way  of  wickednefs  in  me  :  and 
lead  me  in  the  way  everlaft;ing. 

Psalm  cxl.    Kripe  me,  Domine. 

DELIVER  me,  O  Lord,  from 
the  evil  man  :  and  preferve 
me  from  the  wicked  man. 

2  Who  imagine  mifchief  in  their 
hearts  :  and  ilir  up  llrife  all  the 
day  long. 

3  They  have  fliarpened  their 
tongues  like  a  ferpent  :  adder's 
poifon  is  under  their  lips. 

4  Keep  me,  O  Lord,  from  the 
hands  of  the  ungodly  :  preferve 
me  from  the  wicked  men,  who 
are    purpofed    to    overthrow    my 


THE    PSALMS.  Day  ^d. 

(i  I  faid  uiito  the  Lord,  Thou 


gomgs. 


5  The  proud  have  laid  a  fnare 
for  me,  and  fpread  a  net  abroad 
with  cords  :  yea,  and  fet  traps  in 
my  way. 


art  my  God  :  hear  the  voice  of 
my  prayers,  O  Lord. 

7  O  Lord  God,  thou  ftrength  of 
my  health  :  thou  haft  covered  my 
head  in  the  day  of  battle. 

8  Let  not  the  ungodly  have  his 
delire,  O  Lord  :  let  not  his  mif- 
chievous  imagination  profper,  left 
they  be  too  proud. 

9  Let  the  mifchief  of  their  own 
lips  fall  upon  the  head  of  them  : 
that  compafs  me  about. 

10  Let  hot  burning  coals  fall 
upon  them  :  let  them  be  caft  into 
the  fire,  and  into  the  pit,  that  they 
never  rife  up  again. 

11  A  man  full  of  words  ftiall 
not  ])rofper  upon  the  earth  :  evil 
fliall  hunt  the  wicked  perfon  to 
overthrow  him. 

12  Sure  I  am  that  the  Lord 
will  avenge  the  poor  :  and  main- 
tain the  caufe  of  the  helplefs. 

13  The  righteous  alfo  fliall  give 
thanks  unto  thy  Name  :  and  the 
juft  fliall  continue  in  thy  fight. 

Psalm  cxli.    Domine,  clamavi. 

LORD,  I  call  upon  thee,  hafte 
thee  unto  me  :  and  confider 
my  voice  when  I  cry  unto  thee. 

2  Let  my  prayer  be  fet  forth  in 
thy  fight  as  the  incenfe  :  and  let 
the  lifting  up  of  my  hands  be  an 
evening  facrifice. 

3  Set  a  watch,  O  Lord,  before 
my  mouth  :  and  keep  the  door  of 
my  lips. 


Day  29. 


THE    PSALMS. 


4  O  let  not  mine  heart  be  in- 
clined to  any  evil  thing  :  let  me 
not  be  occupied  in  ungodly  works 
with  the  men  that  work  \vicked- 
nefs,  left  I  eat  of  fuch  things  as 
pleafe  them. 

5  Let  the  righteous  rather  finite 
me  friendly  :  and  reprove  me. 

6  But  let  not  their  precious 
balms  break  my  head  :  yea,  I  will 
pray  yet  againft  their  wickednefs. 

7  Let  their  judges  be  over- 
thrown in  ftony  places  :  that  they 
may  hear  my  words,  for  they  are 
fweet. 

8  Our  bones  lie  fcattered  be- 
fore the  pit  :  like  as  when  one 
breaketh  and  heweth  wood  upon 
the  earth. 

1)  But  mine  eyes  look  unto  thee, 
O  Lord  God  :  in  thee  is  my  truft, 
O  caft  not  out  my  foul. 

10  Keep  me  from  the  fnare  that 
they  have  laid  for  me  :  and  from 
the  traps  of  the  wicked  doers. 

11  Let  the  ungodly  fall  into 
their  own  nets  together  :  and  let 
me  ever  efcape  them. 

Psalm  cxlii.  VocemeaadDomimim. 

1  Cried  unto  the  Lord  with  my 
voice  :  yea,  even  unto  the  Lord 
did  I  make  my  fupplication. 

2  I  poured  out  my  complaints 
before  him  :  and  Ihewed  him  of 
my  trouble. 

3  When  my  fpirit  was  in  hea- 


Day  29. 

vinefs  thou  kneweft  my  path  :  in 
the  way  wherein  I  walked  have 
they  privily  laid  a  fnare  for  me. 

4  I  looked  alfo  upon  my  right 
hand  :  and  faw  there  was  no  man 
that  would  know  me. 

5  I  had  no  place  to  flee  unto  : 
and  no  man  cared  for  my  foul. 

6  I  cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord, 
and  faid  :  Thou  art  my  hope,  and 
my  portion  in  the  land  of  the  living. 

7  Confider  my  complaint  :  for 
I  am  brought  very  low. 

8  O  deliver  me  from  my  per- 
fecutors  :  for  they  are  too  ilrong 
for  me. 

9  Bring  my  foul  out  of  prifon, 
that  I  may  give  thanks  unto  thy 
Name  :  which  thing  if  thou  wilt 
grant  me,  then  fliall  the  righteous 
refort  unto  my  company. 

Psalm  cxliii.    Domine,  exaudi. 

HEAR  my  prayer,  O  Lord, 
and  confider  my  defire  : 
hearken  unto  me  for  thy  truth 
and  righteoufnefs'  fake. 

2  And  enter  not  into  judgement 
with  thy  fervant  :  for  in  thy  fight 
fliall  no  man  living  be  juftified. 

3  For  the  enemy  hath  pei-fe- 
cuted  my  foul ;  he  hath  fmitten 
my  life  down  to  the  ground  : 
he  hath  laid  me  in  the  darknefs, 
as  the  men  that  have  been  long 
dead. 

4  Therefore  is  my  fpirit  vexed 
within  me  :  and  my  heart  within 
me  is  defolate. 


Day  30. 


THE    PSALMS. 


5  Yet  do  I  remember  the  time 
paft ;  I  mufe  upon  all  thy  works  : 
yea,  I  exercife  myfelf  in  the  works 
of  thy  hands. 

6  I  ftretch  forth  my  hands  unto 
thee  :  my  foul  gafpeth  unto  thee 
as  a  thirlly  land. 

7  Hear  me,  O  Lord,  and  that 
foon,  for  my  fpirit  waxetli  faint  : 
hide  not  tliy  face  from  me,  left  I 
be  like  unto  them  that  go  down 
mto  the  pit. 

8  O  let  me  hear  thy  loving- 
kindnefs  betimes  in  the  morning, 
for  in  thee  is  my  truft  :  fliew  thou 
me  the  way  that  I  Ihould  walk  in, 
for  I  lift  up  my  foul  unto  thee. 

9  Deliver  me,  O  Lord,  from 
mine  enemies  :  for  I  flee  unto 
thee  to  hide  me. 

10  Teach  me  to  do  the  thing 
that  pleafeth  thee,  for  thou  art  my 
God  :  let  thy  loving  Spirit  lead 
me  forth  into  the  land  of  right- 
eoufnefs. 

1 1  Quicken  me,  O  Lord,  for 
thy  Name's  fake  :  and  for  thy 
righteoufnefs'  fake  bring  my  foul 
out  of  trouble. 

12  And  of  thy  goodnefs  flay 
mine  enemies  :  and  deftroy  all 
them  that  vex  my  foul ;  for  I  am 
thy  fei*vant. 

£©orning  draper, 

PsAi.M  cxliv.   BenediSius  Domiiius. 

BLESSED  be   the  Lord  my 
ftrength  :  who  teacheth  my 


Day  80. 

hands  to  war,  and  my  fingers  to 
fight ; 

2  My  hope  and  my  fortrefs,  my 
caftle  and  deliverer,  my  defender 
in  whom  I  truft  :  who  fubdueth 
my  people  that  is  under  me. 

3  Lord,  what  is  man,  that  thou 
haft  fuch  refpe^t  unto  him  :  or  the 
fon  of  man,  that  thou  fo  regard- 
eft  him? 

4  Man  is  like  a  thing  of  nought : 
his  time  palfeth  away  Uke  a  flia- 
dow. 

5  Bow  thy  heavens,  O  Lord, 
and  come  down  :  touch  the  moun- 
tains, and  they  fliall  fmoke. 

6  Caft  forth  thy  lightning,  and 
tear  them  :  flioot  out  thine  arrows, 
and  confume  them. 

7  Send  down  thine  hand  from 
above  :  deliver  me,  and  take  me 
out  of  the  great  waters,  from  the 
hand  of  ftrange  children  ; 

8  Whofe  mouth  talketh  of  va- 
nity :  and  their  right  hand  is  a 
right  hand  of  wickednefs. 

9  I  will  fing  a  new  fong  unto 
thee,  O  God  :  and  fing  j)raifes  un- 
to thee  upon  a  ten-ftringed  lute. 

10  Thou  haft  given  victory  un- 
to kings  :  and  haft  delivered  Da- 
vid thy  fervant  from  the  peril  of 
the  fword. 

11  Save  me,  and  deliver  me 
from  the  hand  of  ftrange  children  : 
whofe  mouth  talketh  of  vanity, 
and  their  right  hand  is  a  right 
hand  of  iniquity. 


Bay  30. 

12  That  our  fons  may  grow  up 
as  the  young  plants  :  and  that  our 
daughters  may  be  as  the  poHlhed 
corners  of  the  temple. 

13  That  our  garners  may  be  full 
and  plenteous  with  all  manner  of 
ftore  :  that  our  Iheep  may  bring 
forth  thoufands  and  ten  thoufands 
in  our  ftreets. 

14  That  our  oxen  may  be  ftrong 
to  labour,  that  there  be  no  decay  : 
no  leading  into  captivity,  and  no 
complaining  in  our  ftreets. 

15  Happy  are  the  people  that 
are  in  fuch  a  cafe  :  yea,  blefled 
are  the  people  who  have  the  Lord 
for  their  God. 

Psalm  cxlv.    Ea^altaho  te,  Deus. 

IWill  magnify  thee,  O  God,  my 
King  :   and  I  will  praife  thy 
Name  for  ever  and  ever. 

2  Eveiy  day  will  I  give  thanks 
unto  thee  :  and  praife  thy  Name 
for  ever  and  ever. 

3  Great  is  the  Lord,  and  mar- 
vellous, worthy  to  be  praifed :  there 
is  no  end  of  his  greatnefs. 

4  One  generation  ftiall  praife 
thy  works  unto  another  :  and  de- 
clare thy  power. 

5  As  for  me,  I  ^vill  be  talking 
of  thy  worlhip  :  thy  glory,  thy 
praife,  and  wondrous  works ; 

6  So  that  men  fhall  fpeak  of  the 
might  of  thy  marvellous  a6ts  :  and 
1  will  alfo  tell  of  thy  greatnefs. 

7  The  memorial  of  thine  abun- 
dant kindnefs  fliall  be  fliewed   : 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  30. 

and  men  fliall  fing  of  thy  right- 
eoufnefs. 

8  The  I^ord  is  gracious,  and 
merciful  :  long-fuffering,  and  of 
great  goodnefs. 

9  The  Ijord  is  loving  unto  eve- 
ry man  :  and  his  mercy  is  over  all 
his  works. 

10  All  thy  works  praife  thee,  O 
Lord  :  and  thy  faints  give  thanks 
unto  thee. 

11  They  fliew  the  gloiy  of  thy 
kingdom  :  and  talk  of  thy  power ; 

12  That  thy  power,  thy  glory, 
and  mightinefs  of  thy  kingdom  : 
might  be  known  unto  men. 

13  Thy  kingdom  is  an  everlaft- 
ing  kingdom  :  and  thy  dominion 
endureth  throughout  all  ages. 

14  The  Lord  upholdeth  all  fuch 
as  fall  :  and  lifteth  up  all  thofe 
that  are  down. 

15  The  eyes  of  all  wait  upon 
thee,  O  Lord  :  and  thou  giveft 
them  their  meat  in  due  feafon. 

16  Thou  openeft  thine  hand  : 
and  filleft  all  things  living  with 
plenteoufnefs. 

17  The  Lord  is  righteous  in 
all  his  ways  :  and  holy  in  all  his 
works. 

18  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  all 
them  that  call  upon  him  :  yea,  all 
fuch  as  call  upon  him  faithfully. 

19  He  will  fulfil  the  defire 
of  them  that  fear  him  ;  he  alfo 
will  hear  their  cry,  and  will  help 

them. 

Zz 


Day  80. 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  80. 


20  The  Lord  preferveth  all  them 
that  love  him  :  but  fcattereth  a- 
broad  all  the  ungodly. 

21  My  mouth  fliall  fpeak  the 
praife  of  the  Lord  :  and  let  all 
flelli    give    thanks   unto  his  holy 
Name  for  ever  and  ever. 
Psalm  cxlvi.    Lauda,  anima  meet. 

PRAISE  the  Lord,  O  my  foul ; 
while  I  live  vnW  I  praife  the 
Lord  :  yea,  as  long  as  I  have 
any  being,  1  will  ling  praifes  unto 
my  God. 

2  O  put  not  your  truft  in  prin- 
ces, nor  in  any  child  of  man  :  for 
there  is  no  help  in  them. 

3  For  when  the  breath  of  man 
goeth  forth  he  fliall  turn  again 
to  his  earth  :  and  then  all  his 
thoughts  perifh.     ' 

4  Blelled  is  he  that  hath  the 
God  of  Jacob  for  his  help  :  and 
whofe  hope  is  in  the  Lord  his  God ; 

5  Who  made  heaven  and  earth, 
the  fea,  and  all  that  therein  is  : 
who  keepeth  his  promife  for  ever; 

6  Who  helpeth  tliem  to  right 
irtiat  fuffcr  AATong  :  \\\\o  feedeth 
the  hungiy. 

;  7  The  Lord  loofeth  men  out  of 
prifon  :  the  Lord  giveth  fight  to 
the  blind. 

8  The  Lord  helpeth  them  that 
are  fallen  :  the  Lord  careth  for 
the  righteous.     ^        '    ^^ 

9  riie  Lord  caretli  for  the 
11  rangers  ;  he  defendeth  the  fa- 
therlefs   and  widow  :  as  for  the 


way  of  the  ungodly,  he  turneth 
it  upfide  down. 

1 0  The  Lord  thy  God,  O  Sion, 
Ihall  be  King  for  evermore  :  and 
throughout  all  generations. 

Psalm  cxlvii.   Laudate  Domimim. 

O  Praife  the  Lord,  for  it  is  a 
good  thing  to  fing  praifes 
unto  our  God  :  yea,  a  joyful  and 
pleafant  thing  it  is  to  be  thankful. 

2  The  Lord  doth  build  up  Je- 
rufalem  :  and  gather  together  the 
out-cafts  of  Ifrael. 

3  He  healeth  thofe  that  are 
broken  in  heart  :  and  giveth  me- 
dicine to  heal  their  ficknefs. 

4  He  telleth  the  number  of 
the  ftars  :  and  calleth  them  all  by 
their  names. 

5  Great  is  our  Lord,  and  great 
is  his  power  :  yea,  and  his  wifdom 
is  infinite. 

6  The  Lord  fetteth  up  the 
meek  :  and  bringeth  the  ungodly 
down  to  the  ground. 

7  O  fing  unto  the  Lord  with 
thankfgiving  :  fing  praifes  upon 
the  harp  unto  our  God ; 

8  Who  covereth  the  heaven 
with  clouds,  and  prepareth  rain 
for  the  earth  :  and  maketh  the 
grafs  to  grow  upon  the  moun- 
tains, and  herb  for  the  ufe  of  men; 

9  W  ho  giveth  fodder  unto  the 
cattle  :  and  feedeth  the  young  ra- 
vens that  call  upon  him. 


Day  30. 

10  He  hath  no  pleafiire  in  the 
ftreng'th  of  an  horfe  :  neither  de- 
lig'hteth  he  in  any  man's  legs. 

1 1  But  the  Lord's  dehght  is  in 
them  that  fear  him  :  and  put  their 
truft  in  his  mercy. 

12  Praife  the  Lord,  O  Jerufa- 
lem  :  praife  thy  God,  O  Sion. 

13  For  he  hath  made  faft  the 
bars  of  thy  gates  :  and  hath  blefled 
thy  children  within  thee. 

14  He  maketh  peace  in  thy 
borders  :  and  fiUeth  thee  with  the 
flour  of  wheat. 

15  He  fendeth  forth  his  com- 
mandment upon  earth  :  and  his 
word  runneth  very  fwiftly. 

16  He  giveth  fnow  hke  wool  : 
and  fcattereth  the  hoar-froft  like 
aflies. 

17  He  cafteth  forth  his  ice  like 
morfels  :  who  is  able  to  abide  his 
froft? 

18  He  fendeth  out  his  word, 
and  melteth  them  :  he  bloweth 
with  his  wind,  and  the  waters 
flow. 

19  He  flieweth  his  word  unto 
Jacob :  his  ftatutes  and  ordinances 
unto  Ifrael. 

20  He  hath  not  dealt  fo  with 
any  nation  :  neither  have  the  hea- 
then knowledge  of  his  laws. 
Psalm  cxlviii.  Lmidate  Dominum. 

O  Praife  the  Lord  of  heaven  : 
praife  him  in  the  height. 
2  Praife  him,  all  ye  angels  of 
his  :  praife  him,  all  his  hoft. 


THE    PSALMS 


Bay  30. 

3  Praife  him,  fun  and  moon  : 
praife  him,  all  ye  ftars  and  light. 

4  Praife  hun,  all  ye  heavens  : 
and  ye  waters  that  are  above  the 
heavens. 

5  Let  them  praife  the  Name  of 
the  Lord  :  for  he  fpake  the  word, 
and  they  were  made ;  he  com- 
manded, and  they  were  created. 

6  He  hath  made  them  fall  for 
ever  and  ever  :  he  hath  given  them 
a  law  which  fhall  not  be  broken. 

7  Praife  the  Lord  upon  earth  : 
ye  dragons,  and  all  deeps; 

8  Fire  and  hail,  fnow  and  va- 
pours :  wind  and  ftorm,  fulfilling 
his  word; 

9  Mountains  and  all  hills  :  fruit- 
ful trees  and  all  cedars ; 

10  Beafts  and  all  cattle  :  worms 
and  feathered  fowls ; 

11  Kings  of  the  earth  and  all 
people  :  princes  and  all  judges  of 
the  world ; 

12  Young  men  and  maidens, 
old  men  and  children,  praife  the 
Name  of  the  Lord  :  for  his  Name 
only  is  excellent,  and  his  praife 
above  heaven  and  earth. 

13  He  Ihall  exalt  the  horn  of 
his  people ;  all  his  faints  fliall 
praife  him  :  even  the  children  of 
Ifrael,  even  the  people  that  ferveth 
him. 

Psalm  cxlix.    Cantate  Domino. 

OSing  unto  the  Lord  a  new 
fong  :  let  the  congregation 
of  faints  praife  him. 

Z  Z  2 


THE    PSALMS. 


Day  80. 

2  Let  Ifrael  rejoice  in  him  that 
made  him  :  and  let  the  children  of 
Sion  be  joyful  in  then-  King. 

3  Let  them  praife  his  Name  in 
the  dance  :  let  them  ling  praifes 
unto  liim  with  tabret  and  harp. 

4  For  the  Lord  hath  pleafure 
in  his  people  :  and  helpeth  the 
meek-hearted. 

5  Let  the  faints  be  joyful  with 
glory  :  let  them  rejoice  in  their 
beds. 

6  Let  the  praifes  of  God  be  in 
their  mouth  :  and  a  two-edged 
fword  in  their  hands ; 

7  To  be  avenged  of  the  hea- 
then :  and  to  rebuke  the  people ; 

8  To  bind  their  kings  in  chains  : 
and  their  nobles  with  links  of  iron. 

9  That  they  may  be  avenged  of 


Day  80. 


them,  as  it  is  written  :  Such  ho- 
nour have  all  his  faints. 
Psalm  cl.    Laudate  Domimim. 

O  Praife  God  in  his  holinefs  : 
praife  him  in  the  firmament 
of  his  power. 

2  Praife  him  in  his  noble  a6ls  : 
praife  him  according  to  his  excel- 
lent greatnefs. 

3  Praife  him  in  the  found  of 
the  trumpet  :  praife  him  upon  the 
lute  and  harp. 

4  Praife  him  in  the  cymbals 
and  dances  :  praife  him  upon  the 
firings  and  pipe. 

5  Praife  him  upon  the  well- 
tuned  cymbals  :  praife  him  upon 
the  loud  cymbals. 

6  Let  every  thing  that  hath 
breath  :  praife  the  Lord. 


FORMS    OF    PRAYER 


TO    BE 

USED    AT   SEA. 


^  The  Morning  and  Evening  Service  to  be  iifed  daily  at  SeaJJiall  he  the 
fame  ivhich  is  appointed  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer. 


U  These  two  folloiving  Prayers  are  to  be  also  used  in 
his  Majesty's  Navy  every  day. 

O  Eternal  Lord  God,  who  alone 
fpreadeft  out  the  heavens,  and 
ruleft  the  raging  of  the  fea ;  who 
haft  compafled  the  waters  with 
bounds  until  day  and  night  come 
to  an  end ;  Be  pleafed  to  receive 
into  thy  Almighty  and  moft  gra- 
cious protection  the  peirfons  of  us 
thy  fervants,  and  the  Fleet  in  which 
we  ferve.  Preferve  us  from  the 
dangers  of  the  fea,  and  fi-om  the 
violence  of  the  enemy ;  llml,  wt 
luny  ItP  'A  fMfHgiiHi-d  iiii(n  iiiir  iimfl 

grHrioiiK  Sitvt^rrign  TiOril,  King 
GEORGE,  and  his  Duiniiiioiis, 
and  a  fecurily  fur  fucli  as  pafs  on 
the  feas  upon,  their  lawful  occa=- 
fiuns ;  ihiU  l]w  iiiliMliilaiU^i  uf  our 
['fland  iiJiiy  in  ph'arn  and  iimgUirrs 


amiiliiiE 
;  aiKlTtha 


lat  we 

may  return  in  fafety  to  enjoy  the 
bleffings  of  the  land,  with  the  fruits 
of  our  labours,  and  with  a  thank- 
ful remembrance  of  thy  mercies  to 
praife  and  glorify  thy  holy  Name ; 
through  Jefus  Chr&l  our  Lord. 
Amen. 


The  ColleB. 

PREVENT  us,  O  Lord,  in  all 
our  doings,  with  thy  moft  gra- 
cious favour,  and  further  us  with 
thy  continual  help  ;  that  in  all  our 
works  begun,  continued,  and  end- 
ed in  thee,  we  may  glorify  thy  holy 
Name,  and  finally  by  thy  mercy 
obtain  everlafting  life ;  through  Je- 
fus Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

1  Prayers  to  be  used  in  Storms  at  Sea. 

OMoft  powerful  and  glorious 
Lord  God,  at  whofe  com- 
mand the  winds  blow,  and  lift  up 
the  waves  of  the  fea,  and  who  ftill- 
eft  the  rage  thereof;  We  thy  crea- 
tures, but  miferable  linners,  do 
in  this  our  great  diftrefs  cry  unto 
thee  for  help :  Save,  Lord,  or  elfe 
we  perifli.  We  confefs,  when  we 
have  been  fafe,  and  feen  all  things 
quiet  about  us,  we  have  forgot  thee 
our  God,  and  refufed  to  hearken 
to  the  ftill  voice  of  thy  word,  and 
to  obey  thy  commandments :  But 
now  we  fee,  how  terrible  thou  art 
in  all  thy  works  of  wonder;   the 


Forms  of  Prayer  to  he  ufed  at  Sea. 


great  God  to  be  feared  above  all : 
And  therefore  we  adore  thy  Di- 
^-ine  Majefty,  acknowledghig  thy 
power,  and  imploring  thy  good- 
nefs.  Help,  Lord,  and  fave  us  for 
thy  mercy's  fake  in  Jefus  Chrift 
thy  Son,  our  Lord.    Amen. 

Or  this. 

O^Ioft  glorious  and  gracious 
Lord  God,  who  dwelled  in 
heaven,  but  beholdeft  all  things 
below ;  Look  down,  we  befeech 
thee,  and  hear  us,  calling  out  of 
the  depth  of  mifery,  and  out  of 
the  jaws  of  this  death,  which  is 
ready  now  to  fwallow  us  up :  Save, 
Lord,  or  elfe  we  perifli.  The  liv- 
ing, the  living,  ftiall  praife  thee. 
O  fend  thy  word  of  command  to 
rebuke  the  raging  winds,  and  the 
roaring  fea ;  that  we,  being  deli- 
vered from  this  diftrefs,  may  live 
to  ferve  thee,  and  to  glorify  thy 
Name  all  the  days  of  our  life. 
Hear,  Lord,  and  fave  us,  for  the 
infinite  merits  of  our  blelfed  Savi- 
our, thy  Son,  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift. 
Amen. 

%  Tlie  Prayer  to   be  said  before  a  Fight  at   Sea 
against  any  Enemt/. 

OMoft  powerful  and  glorious 
Lord  God,  the  Lord  of  hofts, 
that  ruleft  and  commandeft  all 
thino-s  :  Thou  fitteft  in  the  throne 
judging  right,  and  therefore  we 
make  our  addrefs  to  thy  Divine 
Majefty  in  this  our  neceffity,  that 
thou  wouldeft  take  the  caufe  into 


thine  own  hand,  and  judge  be- 
tween us  and  our  enemies.  Stir 
up  thy  ftrength,  O  Lord,  and  come 
and  help  us ;  for  thou  giveft  not 
alway  the  battle  to  the  ftrong,  but 
canft  fave  by  many  or  by  few.  O 
let  not  our  (ins  now  ciy  againft  us 
for  vengeance;  but  hear  us  thy 
poor  fervants  begging  mercy,  and 
imploring  thy  help,  and  that  thou 
wouldeft  be  a  defence  unto  us  a- 
gainft  the  face  of  the  enemy.  Make 
it  appear  that  thou  art  our  Saviour 
and  mighty  Deliverer,  through  Je- 
fus Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

^  Short  Prayers  for  single  persons,  that  cannot  meet 
to  join  in  Prayer  with  others,  by  reason  of  the 
Fight,  or  Storm. 

General  Prayers. 

LORD,  be  merciful  to  us  fin- 
ners,  and  fave  us  for  thy  mer- 
cy's  fake. 

Thou  art  the  great  God,  that 
haft  made  and  ruleft  all  things  : 
O  deliver  us  for  thy  Name's  fake. 
Thou  art  the  great  God  to  be 
feared  above  all  :  O  fave  us,  that 
we  may  praife  thee. 

Special  Prayers  tvith  respect  to  the 
•        Enemy. 

THOU,  O  Lord,  art  juft  and 
powerful :  O  defend  our  caufe 
againft  the  face  of  the  enemy. 

O  God,  thou  art  a  ftrong  tower 
of  defence  to  all  that  flee  unto 
thee  :  O  fave  us  from  the  violence 
of  the  enemy. 


Forms  of  Prayer  to  he  ufed  at  Sea. 


O  Lord  of  hofts,  fight  for  us, 
that  we  may  glorify  thee. 

O  fuffer  us  not  to  fink  under 
the  weight  of  our  fins,  or  the  vio- 
lence of  the  enemy. 

O  Lord,  arife,  help  us,  and  de- 
liver us  for  thy  Name's  fake. 

Short  Prayers  in  respect  of  a  Storm. 

THOU,  O  Lord,  that  ftillefl; 
the  raging  of  the  fea,  hear, 
hear  us,  and  fave  us,  that  we  pe- 
rifli  not. 

O  bleffed  Saviour,  that  didfl; 
fave  thy  difciples  ready  to  perilh 
in  a  llorm,  hear  us,  and  fave  us, 
we  befeech  thee. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Chrifl;,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

O  Lord,  hear  us. 

O  Chrifi;,  hear  us. 

God  the  Father,  God  the  Son, 
God  the  Holy  Ghoft,  have  mercy 
upon  us,  fave  us  now  and  ever- 
more.   Amen. 

OUR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven, Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpaffes.  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainfl;  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil :  For  thine  is  the  kingdom. 
The  power,  and  the  gloiy.  For 
ever  and  ever.    Amen. 


f  When  there  shall  be  imminent  danger,  as  many  as 
ean  be  spared  from  neces.wri/  service  in  the  Ship 
shall  be  called  together,  and  make  an  humble  Con- 
fession of  their  sin  to  God:  In  which  every  one 
ought  seriously  to  reflect  upon  those  particular  sins 
of  which  his  conscience  shall  accuse  him ;  saying  as 
followeth, 

The  Confession, 

ALMIGHTY  God,  Father  of  > 
our  Lord  ,Jefus  Chrifi,  Maker 
of  all  things.  Judge  of  all  men;  We 
acknowledge  and  bewail  our  ma- 
nifold fins  and  wickednefs,  Which 
we,  from  time  to  time,  moft  griev- 
oufly  have  committed,  By  thought, 
word,  and  deed,  Againil  thy  Di- 
vine Majefty,  Provoking  moll  juftly 
thy  wrath  and  indignation  againil 
us.  We  do  earneftly  repent,  And 
are  heartily  foriy  for  thefe  our  mif- 
doings ;  The  remembrance  of  them 
is  grievous  unto  us ;  The  burden 
of  them  is  intolerable.  Have  mer- 
cy upon  us.  Have  mercy  upon  us, 
moft  merciful  Father ;  For  thy  Son 
our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift's  fake.  For- 
give us  all  that  is  paft ;  And  grant 
that  we  may  ever  hereafter  Serve 
and  pleafe  thee  In  newnefs  of  life. 
To  the  honour  and  glory  of  thy 
Name ;  Through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

1[  Then  shall  the  Priest,  if  there  he  any  in  the  Ship, 
pronounce  this  Absolution. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  our  heavenly 
-  Father,  who  of  his  great  mer- 
cy hath  promifed  forgivenefs  of 
fins  to  all  them  that  with  hearty 
repentance  and  true  faith  turn  un- 
to him ;  Have  mercy  upon  you ; 


Forms  of  Prayer  to  he  ufed  at  Sea 

pardon  and  deliver  you  from  all 
your  fins  ;  confirm  and  ftrengthen 
you  in  all  goodnefs,  and  bring  you 
to  everlafl;ing  life ;  through  Jefiis 
Chrifl;  our  Lord.    Amen. 


Thank/giving  after  a  Storm. 

Juhikite  Deo.    Pfalm  Ixvi. 

O  Be  joyful  in  God,  all  ye  lands  : 
fing  praifes  unto  the  honour 
of  his  Name,  make  his  praife  to 
be  glorious. 

Say  unto  God,  O  how  wonderfiil 
art  thou  in  thy  works  :  through 
the  greatnefs  of  thy  power  fliall 
thine  enemies  be  found  liars  unto 
thee. 

'  For  all  the  world  fliall  worfliip 
thee  :  fing  of  thee,  and  praife  thy 
Name. 

O  come  hither,  and  behold  the 
works  of  God  :  how  wonderful  he 
is  in  his  doing  toward  the  chil- 
dren of  men. 

He  turned  the  fea  into  dry  land : 
fo  that  they  went  throuorh  the  wa- 
ter  on  foot ;  there  did  we  rejoice 
thereof. 

He  ruletli  with  his  ])ower  for 
ever ;  his  eyes  behold  the  people  : 
and  fuch  as  will  not  believe  fliall 
not  be  able  to  exalt  themfelves. 

O  j)raife  our  God,  ye  people  : 
and  make  the  voice  of  his  praife 
to  be  heard ; 

Who  holdeth  our  foul  in  life  : 
and  fuffereth  not  our  feet  to  flip. 


For  thou,  O  God,  hafl;  proved 
us  :  thou  alfo  haft  tried  us,  like 
as  filver  is  tried. 

Thou  broughteft  us  into  the 
fnare  :  and  laideft  trouble  upon 
our  loins. 

Thou  fufleredft  men  to  ride  over 
our  heads  :  we  went  througch  fire 
and  water,  and  thou  broughteft  us 
out  into  a  wealthy  place. 

I  will  go  into  thine  houfe  ^vith 
burnt-oiferings  :  and  will  pay  thee 
my  vows,  which  I  promifed  with 
my  lips,  and  fpake  with  my  mouth, 
when  I  was  in  trouble. 

I  will  oft'er  unto  thee  fat  burnt- 
facrifices,  with  the  incenfe  of  rams  : 
I  will  offer  bullocks  and  goats. 

0  come  hither,  and  hearken, 
all  ye  that  fear  God  :  and  I  will 
tell  you  what  he  hath  done  for  my 
foul. 

1  called  unto  him  with  my 
mouth  :  and  gave  him  praifes  with 
my  tongue. 

If  I  incline  unto  ^vickednefs  with 
mine  heart  :  the  Lord  will  not 
hear  me. 

But  God  hath  heard  me  :  and 
confidered  the  voice  of  my  prayer. 

Praifed  be  God  who  hath  not 
caft  out  my  prayer  :  nor  turned 
his  mercy  from  me. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  fliall  be  :  world 
without  end. 


Forms  of  Prayer 

Con/itemini  Domino.    Pfalm  cvii. 

OGive  thanks  unto  the  Lord, 
for  he  is  gracious  :  and  his 
mercy  endureth  for  ever. 

Let  them  give  thanks  whom  the 
Lord  hath  redeemed  :  and  deliver- 
ed from  the  hand  of  the  enemy ; 

And  gathered  them  out  of  the 
lands,  from  the  eaft,  and  from  the 
weft  :  from  the  north,  and  from 
the  fouth. 

They  went  aftray  in  the  wilder- 
nefs  out  of  the  way  :  and  found 
no  city  to  dwell  in ; 

Hungry  and  thirfty  :  their  foul 
fainted  in  them. 

So  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in 
their  trouble  :  and  he  delivered 
them  from  their  diftrefs. 

He  led  them  forth  by  the  riglit 
way  :  that  they  might  go  to  the 
city  where  they  dwelt. 

O  that  men  would  therefore 
praife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs  : 
and  declare  the  wonders  that  he 
doeth  for  the  children  of  men ! 

For  he  fatisfieth  the  empty  foul : 
and  filleth  the  hungry  foul  with 
goodnefs. 

Such  as  fit  in  darknefs,  and  in 
the  fhadow  of  death  :  beinor  faft 
bound  in  mifeiy  and  iron ; 

Becaufe  they  rebelled  againft 
the  words  of  the  Lord  :  and  lightly 
regarded  the  counfel  of  the  moft 
Higheft ; 

He  alfo  brought  down  their 
heart  through  heavinefs  :  they  fell 


to  be  vjed  at  Sea. 

down,  and  there  was  none  to  lielp 
them. 

So  when  they  cried  unto  the 
Lord  in  their  trouble  :  he  deliver- 
ed them  out  of  their  diftrefs. 

For  he  brouo-ht  them  out  of 
darknefs,  and  out  of  the  fliadow 
of  death  :  and  brake  their  bonds 
in  funder. 

O  that  men  would  therefore 
praife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs  : 
and  declare  the  wonders  that  he 
doeth  for  the  children  of  men ! 

For  he  hath  broken  the  gates 
of  brafs  :  and  fmitten  the  bars  of 
iron  in  funder. 

Fooliili  men  are  plagued  for 
their  oflence  :  and  becaufe  of  their 
wickednefs. 

Their  foul  abhorred  all  manner 
-of  Uieat :  and  they  were  even  hard 
at  death's  door. 

J50  when  they  cried  unto  the 
Lord  in  tiieir  trouble  :  he  delivered 
them  out  of  their  diftrefs. 

He  fent  his  word,  and  healed 
them  :  and  they  were  faved  from 
their  deftru6lion. 

O  that  men  would  therefore 
praife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs  : 
and  declare  the  wonders  that  he 
doeth  for  the  children  of  men ! 

That  they  would  offer  unto  him 
the  facrifice  of  thankfgiving  :  and 
tell  out  his  works  with  gladnefs! 

They  that  go  down  to  the  fea 
in  fliips  :  and  occupy  their  bufinefs 
in  great  waters ; 

3A 


Forms  of  Prayer  to  be  iifed  at  Sea. 


Tliefe  men  fee  the  works  of 
the  Lord  :  and  his  wonders  in 
the  deep. 

For  at  his  word  the  ftormy  wind 
arifeth  :  which  lifteth  np  the  waves 
thereof. 

They  are  carried  up  to  the  hea- 
ven, and  down  again  to  the  deep  : 
their  foul  nielteth  away  becaiife  of 
the  trouble. 

They  reel  to  and  fro,  and  ftag- 
ger  like  a  drunken  man  :  and  are 
at  their  wit's  end. 

So  when  they  ciy  unto  the  Lord 
in  their  trouble  :  he  delivereth 
them  out  of  their  diftrefs. 

For  he  maketh  the  ftorm  to 
ceafe  :  fo  that  the  waves  thereof 
are  ftill. 

Then  are  they  glad,  becaufe 
they  are  at  rell  :  and  fo  he  biing- 
eth  them  unto  the  haven  where 
they  would  be. 

O  that  men  would  therefore 
praife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs  : 
and  declare  the  wonders  that  he 
doeth  for  the  children  of  men ! 

That  they  would  exalt  him  alfo 
in  the  congregation  of  the  people  : 
and  praife  him  in  the  feat  of  the 
elders ! 

Who  turneth  the  floods  into  a 
wildernefs  :  and  drieth  up  the  wa- 
ter-fprings. 

A  fruitful  land  maketh  he  bar- 
ren :  for  the  wickednefs  of  them 
that  dwell  therein. 

Again,  he  maketh  the  wilder- 


nefs a  Handing  water  :  and  water- 
fprings  of  a  diy  ground. 

And  there  he  fetteth  the  hun- 
gry :  that  they  may  build  them  a 
city  to  dwell  in ; 

That  they  may  fow  their  land, 
and  plant  vineyards  :  to  yield  them 
fruits  of  increafe. 

He  blelfeth  them,  fo  that  they 
multiply  exceedingly  :  and  fu|fereth 
not  their  cattle  to  decreafe. 

And  again,  when  they  are  mi- 
nilhed,  and  brought  low  :  through 
oppreflion,  through  any  plague,  or 
trouble ; 

Though  he  fuffer  them  to  be 
evil  intreated  through  tyrants  :  and 
let  them  wander  out  of  the  way  in 
the  wildernefs ; 

Yet  helpeth  he  the  poor  out 
of  mifery  :  and  maketh  him  houfe- 
holds  like  a  flock  of  flieep. 

The  righteous  will  conflder  this, 
and  rejoice  :  and  the  mouth  of 
all  wickednefs  fliall  be  flopped. 

Whofo  is  wife  mil  ponder  thefe 
things  :  and  they  fliall  undei*fi;and 
the  loving-kindnefs  of  the  Lord. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 

the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 

now,   and  ever  fliall  be   :   world 

without  end. 

Colie&s  of  Thankfginng. 

OMoftblefled  and  glorious  Lord 
God,  who  art  of  infinite  good- 
nefs   and    mercy;    We  thy  poor 


Forms  of  Prayer 

creatures,  whom  thou  haft  made 
and  preferved,  holding  our  fouls 
hi  life,  and  now  refcuing  us  out 
of  the  jaws  of  death,  humbly  pre- 
fent  ourfelves  again  before  thy  Di- 
vine Majefty,  to  ofter  a  facrifice  of 
praife  and  thankfgiving,  for  that 
thou  heardeft  us  when  we  called 
in  our  trouble,  and  didft  not  caft 
out  our  prayer,  which  we  made 
before  thee  in  our  great  diftrei's  : 
Even  when  we  gave  all  for  loft, 
our  fliip,  our  goods,  our  lives,  then 
didft  thou  mercifully  look  upon  us, 
and  wonderfully  command  a  deli- 
verance ;  for  which  we,  now  being 
in  fafety,  do  give  all  praife  and 
glory  to  thy  holy  Name ;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

Or  this. 

OMoft  mighty  and  gracious 
good  God,  thy  mercy  is  over 
all  thy  works,  but  in  fpecial  man- 
ner hath  been  extended  toward 
us,  whom  thou  haft  fo  powerfully 
and  wonderfully  defended.  Thou 
haft  fliewed  us  terrible  things,  and 
wonders  in  the  deep,  that  we  might 
fee  how  powerful  and  gracious  a 
God  thou  art ;  how  able  and  rea- 
dy to  help  them  that  truft  in  thee. 
Thou  haft  ftiewed  us  how  both 
winds  and  feas  obey  thy  com- 
mand ;  that  we  may  learn,  even 
from  them,  hereafter  to  obey  thy 
voice,  and  to  do  thy  will.  We 
therefore  blefs  and  glorify  thy 
Name,  for  this  thy  mercy  in  fav- 


to  be  ufed  at  Sea, 

ing  us,  when  we  were  ready  to 
perifli.  And,  we  befeech  thee, 
make  us  as  truly  fenfible  now  of 
thy  mercy,  as  we  were  then  of 
the  danger :  and  give  us  hearts 
always  ready  to  exprefs  our  thank- 
fulnefs,  not  only  by  words,  but 
alfo  by  our  lives,  in  being  more 
obedient  to  thy  holy  command- 
ments. Continue,  we  befeech  thee, 
this  thy  goodnefs  to  us ;  that  we, 
whom  thou  haft  faved,  may  ferve 
thee  in  holinefs  and  righteoufnefs 
all  the  days  of  our  life ;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  om-  Lord  and  Savi- 
our.   Allien, 

An  Hymn  of  Praise  and  Thanksgiv- 
ing after  a  dangerous  Tempest. 

Come,  let  us  give  thanks  un- 
to the  Lord,  for  he  is  gra- 
cious :  and  his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever. 

Great  is  the  Lord,  and  greatly 
to  be  praifed ;  let  the  redeemed 
of  the  Lord  fay  fo  :  whom  he  hath 
delivered  from  the  mercilefs  rage 
of  the  fea. 

The  Lord  is  gracious  and  full 
of  compaffion  :  flow  to  anger,  and 
of  great  mercy. 

He  hath  not  dealt  with  us  ac- 
cording to  our  fins  :  neither  re- 
warded us  according  to  our  ini- 
quities. 

But  as  the  heaven  is  high  above 
the  earth  :  fo  great  hath  been  his 
mercy  towards  us. 
3  A  a 


Forms  of  Prayer 

We  found  trouble  and  heavi- 
nefs  :  we  were  even  at  death's 
door. 

The  waters  of  the  fea  had  well- 
nigh  covered  us  :  the  proud  wa- 
ters had  well-nigh  gone  over  our 
foul. 

The  fea  roared  :  and  the  ftonny 
wind  lifted  up  the  waves  thereof. 

We  were  carried  up  as  it  were 
to  heaven,  and  then  down  again 
into  the  deep  :  our  foul  melted 
within  us,  becaufe  of  trouble ; 

Tiien  cried  we  unto  thee,  O 
Lord  :  and  thou  didft  deliver  us 
out  of  our  diftrefs. 

Blefled  be  thy  Name,  who  didft 
not  defpife  the  prayer  of  thy  fer- 
vants  :  but  didft  hear  our  cry,  and 
haft  faved  us. 

Thou  didft  fend  forth  thy  com- 
mandment :  and  the  windy  ftorm 
ceafed,  and  was  turned  into  a 
calm. 

O  let  us  therefore  praife  the 
Lord  for  his  goodnefs  :  and  de- 
clare the  wonders  that  he  hath 
done,  and  ftill  doeth  for  the  chil- 
dren of  men. 

Praifed  be  the  Lord  daily  : 
even  the  Lord  that  helpeth  us, 
and  poureth  his  benefits  upon  us. 

He  is  our  God,  even  the  God 
of  whom  Cometh  falvation  :  God 
is  the  Lord  by  whom  we  have 
efcaped  death. 

Thou,  Lord,  haft  made  us  glad 
through     the    operation    of    thy 


to  be  ufed  at  Sea. 

hands  :  and  we  will  triumph  in 
thy  praife. 

Bleffed  be  the  Lord  God  :  even 
the  Lord  God,  who  only  doeth 
wondrous  things ; 

And  blefled  be  the  Name  of  his 
JMajefty  for  ever  :  and  let  every 
one  of  us  fay,  Amen,  Amen. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  Ihall  be  :  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

2  Cor.  xiii. 

THE  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  and  the  love  of  God, 
and  the  fellowftiip  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  be  with  us  all  evermore. 
Amen. 


After  Vidioj'y  or  Deliverance  fj'om 
an  Enemy. 

A  Psahn  or  Hymn  of  Praise  and 
Thanksgiving  after  Victory. 

F  the  Lord  had  not  been  on 
our  fide,  now  may  we  fay  : 
if  the  Lord  himfelf  had  not  been 
on  our  fide,  when  men  rofe  up 
againft  us  ; 

They  had  fwallowed  us  up  quick: 
when  they  were  fo  wrathfully  dif- 
pleafed  at  us. 

Yea,  the  waters  had  drowned 
us,  and  the  ftream  had  gone  over 
our  foul  :  the  deep  waters  of  the 
proud  had  gone  over  our  foul. 


Forms  of  Prayer 

But  praifed  be  the  Lord  :  who 
hath  not  given  us  over  as  a  prey 
unto  them. 

The  Lord  hath  wrought  :  a 
mighty  falvation  for  us. 

We  gat  not  this  by  our  own 
fword,  neither  was  it  our  own 
arm  that  faved  us  :  but  thy  right 
hand,  and  thine  arm,  and  the  Hght 
of  thy  countenance,  becaufe  thou 
hadil  a  favour  unto  us. 

The  Lord  hath  appeared  for  us  : 
the  Lord  hath  covered  our  heads, 
and  made  us  to  Hand  in  the  day 
of  battle. 

The  Lord  hath  appeared  for  us  : 
the  Ijord  hath  overthrown  our  ene- 
mies, and  daflied  in  pieces  thofe 
that  rofe  up  againft  us. 

Therefore  not  unto  us,  O  Lord, 
not  unto  us  ;  but  unto  thy  Name 
be  given  the  glory. 

The  Lord  hath  done  great 
things  for  us  :  the  Lord  hath 
done  great  things  for  us,  for  which 
we  rejoice. 

Our  help  ftandeth  in  the  Name 
of  the  Lord  :  who  hath  made  hea- 
ven and  earth. 

Bleffed  be  the  Name  of  the 
I^ord  :  from  this  time  forth  for 
evermore. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghoft; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  fliall  be  :  world 
without  end.    Amen. 


to  be  ufed  at  Sea. 

1  After  this  Hymn  may  be  sung  the 
Te  Deum.  ^ 

^  Then  this  Collect. 

O  Almighty  God,  the  Sovereign 
Commander  of  all  the  world, 
in  whofe  hand  is  power  and  might 
which  none  is  able  to  withftand ; 
We  blefs  and  magnify  thy  great 
and  glorious  Name  for  this  happy 
Vi6lory,  the  whole  glory  whereof 
we  do  afcribe  to  thee,  who  art 
the  only  giver  of  Vi6tory.  And, 
we  befeech  thee,  give  us  grace  to 
improve  this  great  mercy  to  thy 
glory,  the  advancement  of  thy  Gof- 
pel,  the  honour  of  our  Sovereign, 
and,  as  much  as  in  us  lieth,  to 
the  good  of  all  mankind.  And, 
we  befeech  thee,  give  us  fuch  a 
fenfe  of  this  great  mercy,  as  may 
eno-ao-e  us  to  a  true  thankfulnefs, 
fuch  as  may  appear  in  our  lives 
by  an  humble,  holy,  and  obedient 
walking  before  thee  all  our  days, 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord ; 
to  whom  with  thee  and  the  Holy 
Spirit,  as  for  all  thy  mercies,  fo  in 
particular  for  this  Vi6toiy  and  De- 
liverance, be  all  glory  and  honour, 
world  without  end.    Amen. 

2  Co7\  xiii. 

THE  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrill,  and  the  love  of  God, 
and  the  fellowfliip  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  be  with  us  all  evermore. 
Amen. 


Forms  of  Frayer  to  he  ufed  at  Sea. 


At  the  Burial  of  tJieir  Dead  at 
Sea. 

%  The  Office  in  the  Common  Prayer-book  may  be 
used;  only  instead  of  these  zmrds  [We  there- 
fore commit  his  body  to  the  ground,  earth  to 
earth,  &c.]  say, 

WE  therefore  commit  his  body 
to  the  deep,  to  be  turned 
into  corruption,  looking  for  the 
refuiTcdtion  of  the  body,    (when 


the  Sea  fliall  give  up  her  dead,) 
and  the  life  of  the  world  to  come, 
through  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift ; 
who  at  his  coming  fliall  change 
our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  like 
his  glorious  body,  according  to 
the  mighty  working,  whereby  he 
is  able  to  fubdue  all  things  to 
himfelf. 


I 


THE 


FORM    AND     MANNER 


OF 


MAKING,  ORDAINING,  AND  CONSECRATING 


OF 


BISHOPS,  PRIESTS,  AND  DEACONS, 


ACCORDING   TO   THE  ORDER 


OF 


THE     UNITED    CHURCH 


OF 


ENGLAND  AND  IRELAND. 


TH£     PREFACE 


Urn 


J.  T  is  evident  unto  all  men  dilis^ently  reading  the  holy  Scripture  and 
ancient  Authors,  that  from  the  Apoftles  time  there  have  been  thefe  Orders 
of  Minifiers  in  Chriji's  Church;  Bijhops,  Priejis,  and  Deacons.  Which 
Offices  ivere  evermore  had  infuch  reverend  EjUmation,  that  no  man  might 
prefume  to  execute  any  of  them,  except  he  were  frjl  called,  tried,  examined^ 
and  known  to  have  fuch  qualities  as  are  requijite  for  the  fame ;  and  alfo 
by  piiblick  Prayer,  with  Impojition  of  Hands,  were  approved  and  ad- 
mitted thereunto  by  lawful  Authority.  And  therefore,  to  the  intent  that 
thefe  Orders  may  be  continued,  and  revo'ently  ufed  and  ejleemed,  in  the 
United  Church  o/' England  and  Ireland;  no  man  fliall  be  accounted  or 
taken  to  "he  a  lawful  Bijhop,  Prieji,  or  Deacon  in  the  United  Church  of 
England  and  Ireland,  or  fuffered  to  execute  any  of  the  faid  Funbtions, 
except  he  be  called,  tried,  examined,  and  admitted  thereunto,  according  to 
the  Form  hereafter  following,  or  hath  had  formerly  Epifcopal  Confe- 
cration,  or  Ordination. 

And  none  fliall  be  admitted  a  Deacon,   except  he  be   Twenty-three 

years  of  age,   unlefs  he  have  a  Faculty.     And  every  man  which   is 

to  be  admitted  a  Prieji  Jhall  be  full  Four-and-twenty  years  old.     And 

every  man  which  is  to  be  ordained  or  confecrated  Bijhop  fhall  be  full 

Thirty  years  of  age. 

And  the  BiJJiop,  knowing  either  by  himfelf  or  by  fufficient  tejlimony, 
any  Perfon  to  be  a  man  of  virtuous  converfation,  and  ivithout  crime ;  and, 
after  examination  and  trial,  fnding  him  learned  in  the  Latin  Tongue, 
and  fufficiently  injlrudied  in  holy  Scripture,  may  at  the  times  appointed 
in  the  Canon,  or  elfe,  on  urgent  occafon,  upon  fome  other  Sunday  or 
Holy-day,  in  the  face  of  the  Church,  admit  him  a  Deacon,  in  fuch  man- 
nei'  and  form  as  hereafter  followeth. 


THE  FORM   AND  MANNER 

MAKING     OF     DFACON8. 


%  JVhen  the  day  appointed  by  the  Bishop  is  cuvie,  after  Morning  Prayer  is  ended,  there  shall  be  a 
Sermon  or  Exhortation,  declaring  the  Duty  and  Office  of  such  us  come  to  he  admitted  Deacons; 
how  necessary  that  Order  is  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  'and  also,  how  the  people  ought  to  aiteem 
them  in  their  Oj/ice. 


^  First  the  Archdeacon,  or  his  Deputy,  shall  present 
unto  the  Bishop  {sitting  in  his  chair  near  to  the  holy 
Table)  such  as  desire  to  be  ordained  Deacons,  {each 
of  them  being  dccerilli/  habited,)  saying  these  teords, 

REVEREND  Father  in  God,  I 
prefeiit  unto  you  thefe  perfons 
prefent,  to  be  admitted  Deacons. 

The  Bishop. 

TAKE  heed  that  the  perfons, 
whom  ye  prefent  unto  us,  be 
apt  and  meet,  for  their  learning 
and  godly  converfation,  to  exercife 
their  Miniftry  duly,  to  the  honour 
of  God,  and  the  edifying  of  his 
Church. 

^  The  Archdeacon  shall  answer, 

I  Have  enquired   of  them,  and 
alfo  examined  them,  and  think 
them  fo  to  be. 

5[  Then  the  Bishop  shall  sai/  unto  the  people: 

BRETHREN,  if  there  be  any 
of  you  who  knoweth  any  Im- 
pediment, or  notable  Crime,  in 
any  of  thefe  perfons  prefented  to 
be  ordered  Deacons,  for  the  which 
he  ought  not  to  be  admitted  to 
that  Office,  let  him  come  forth  in 
the  Name  of  God,  and  (hew  what 
the  Crime  or  Impediment  is. 

^  And  if  ant/  great  Crime  or  Impediment  be  objected, 
the  Bishop  shall  surcease  from  ordering  that  person, 
until  such  time  as  the  party  accused  shall  be  found 
clear  oftlmt  Crime. 


%  Then   the   Bishop  (commending    such  as  shall   be 
found  meet  to  be  Ordered  to  the  Prayers  of  the 
congregation)  shall,  with  the  Clergy  and  people  pre- 
sent, sing  or  say  the  Litany,  with  the  Prayers  as 
followeth. 

The  Litany  and  Sujfrages. 

OGod  the  Father,  of  heaven  : 
have  mercy  upon  us  mifer- 
able  linners. 

O  God  the  Father,  of  heaven  : 
have  mercy  upon  us  miferahle Jinners, 

O  God  the  Son,  Redeemer  of 
the  world  :  have  mercy  upon  us 
miferable  linners. 

O  God  the  Son,  Redeemer  of  the 
tvorld :  have  mei'cy  upon  us  vnijer- 
able  Jinners. 

O  God  the  Holy  Ghoft,  pro- 
ceeding from  the  Father  and  the 
Son  :  have  mercy  upon  us  mifer- 
able linners. 

O  God  the  Holy  Ghojl,  proceed- 
ing from  the  Father  and  the  Son  : 
have  mercy  upon  us  miferable  Jinners. 

O  holy,  bleffed,  and  glorious 
Trinity,  three  Perfons  and  one 
God  :  have  mercy  upon  us  mifer- 
able linners. 

O  holy,  blejfed,  and  glorious  Tri- 
nity, three  Perjons  and  one  God : 
have  mercy  upon  us  miferable  Jinners. 

Remember  not,  Lord,  our  of- 
3B 


Tlie  Ordenng 

fences,  nor  the  offences  of  our  fore- 
fathers; neither  take  thou  venge- 
ance of  our  (ins  :  fpare  us,  good 
Lord,  fpare  thy  people,  whom  thou 
haft  redeemed  witli  thy  moft  pre- 
cious blood,  and  be  not  angiy  with 
usjfpr  ever.  ■        ^^  ,^ , 

oj  {v     Spare  uSy  good  Lord/  Avr 

;Frpm  all  evil  and  mifchief ;  from 
fin>  from  the  crafts  and  affaults  of 
the  devil;   from  thy  wTath,   and 
from  eyerlafting  damnation, 
. !  Good  Lord,  deliver  its. 
VvFrom  all  blindnefs  of  heart;  from 
pridcj  vain^gloiy,  and  hypocrify; 
from  envy,  hatred,  and  malice,  and 
all  uncharitablenefs, 
;  ^         Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
/,;  From  fornication,  and  all  other 
deadly  fin ;  and  from  all  the  deceits 
of  die  world,  the  flefli,  and  the  devil, 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us.  '  ^' 
From    liglitning    and   tempeft ; 
from   plague,   peltilence,   and   fa- 
mine; from  battle  and  murder,  and 
from  fudden  death,  .S-^'^V 

■iin     Good  Lord,  deliver  2/*,  d  i 

From  all  fedition,  privy  confpi- 
racy,  and  rebellion ;  from  all  falfe 
doctrine,  herefy,  and  fchifm;  from 
hardnefs  of  heart,  and  contempt 
of  thy  Word  and  Commandment, 
Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
By  the  myllery  of  thy  holy  In- 
carnation ;  by  thy  holy  Nativity 
and  C  ircumciiion ;  by  thy  Baptifm, 
Fafting,  and  remj)tation, 

Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 


of  Deacons. 

By  thine  Agony  and  bloody 
Sweat ;  by  thy  Crofs  and  Paflion  ; 
by  thy  precious  Death  and  Burial ; 
by  thy  glorious  Refurre6tion  and 
Afcenfion  ;  and  by  the  coming  of 
the  Holy  Ghoft, 

Good  Lord,  deliver  us. 
In  all  time  of  our  tribulation ;  in 
all  time  of  our  wealth;  in  the  hour  of 
death,  and  in  the  day  of  judgement, 
V^Qk^  Good  Lord,  deliver  tis.  ^^^ 
We  linners  do  befeech  thee  to 
hear  us,  O  Lord  God ;  and  that  it 
may  pleafe  thee  to  rule  and  govern 
thy  holy  Church  univCrfal  in  the 
right  way;   auj  J,  .;;    ,  ><-.i- 

PVe  hefeecli  thee  to^efh'iis,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  keep 
and  ftrengthen  in  the  true  wor- 
fliipping  of  thee,  in  righteoufnefs 
and   hoUnefs   of  life,   thy  Servant 
GEORGE   our   moft   gracious 
King  and  Governour ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  rule 
his  heart  in  thy  faith,   fear,   and 
love,  and  that  he  may  evermore 
have  affiance  in  thee,  and  ever  feek 
thy  honour  and  glory; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  be  his 
defender,  and  keeper,  giving  him 
the  vi(^loiy  over  all  his  enemies ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  blefs 
and  preferve  our  gracious  Queen 
Charlotte,  their  Royal  llighneffes 
George  Prince  of  Wales,  tlie  Frin- 


eefs  of  Wales,  and  all  the  Royal 

Family ; 

We  be/'cech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  illu- 
minate all  Bifhops,  Priefts,  and 
Deacons,  with  true  knowledge  and 
nnderftaiiding  of  thy  Word ;  and 
that  both  by  their  preaching*  and 
living-  they  may  fet  it  forth,  and 
fhew  it  accordingly ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  blefs 
thefe  thy  fervants,  now  to  be  ad- 
mitted to  the  Order  of  Deacons, 
[or  Priejls,^  and  to  pour  thy  grace 
upon  them ;  that  they  may  duly 
execute  their  Office,  to  the  edify- 
ing of  thy  Church,  and  the  glory 
of  thy  holy  Name  ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  en- 
due the  Lords  of  the  Council,  and 
all  the  Nobility,  with  grace,  wif- 
dom,  and  underftanding ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  blefs 
and  keep  the  Magiftrates,  giving 
them  grace  to  execute  juftice,  and 
to  maintain  truth  ;  ariofi  yil 

We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  blefs 
and  keep  all  thy  people ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  give 
to   all  nations   unity,   peace,  and 
concord ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  giv6 


The  Orderkigof  iTeacms. 

us  an  heart  to  love  and  dread  thee, 
and  diligently  to  live  after  thy  com- 
mandments ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  give  to 
all  thy  people  increafe  of  grace  to 
hear  meekly  thy  Word,  and  to  re- 
ceive it  with  pure  affection,  and  to 
bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  bring 
into  the  way  of  truth  all  fuch  as 
have  erred,  and  are  deceived ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to 
ftrengthen  fuch  as  do  ftand  ;  and 
to  comfort  and  help  the  weak- 
hearted  ;  and  to  raife  up  them  that 
fall;  and  finally  to  beat  down  Satan 
under  our  feet ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  fuc- 
cour,  help,  and  comfort,  all  that 
are  in  danger,  neceffity,  And  tri- 
bulation ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  pre- 
ferve  all  that  travel  by  land  or  by 


water,    all   women    labouring    of 
child,  all  fick  perfons,  and  youuff 
children;  and  to  fliew  thy  pity  up- 
on all  prifoners  and  captives  ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  de- 
fend, and  provide  for,  the  father- 
lefs  children  and  widows,  and  all 
that  are  defolate  and  opprefl'ed ; 
We  hefeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 
3B2 


Th^  Ordering 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  have 
mercy  upon  all  men  ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  ii^,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  for- 
give our  enemies,  perfecutors,  and 
ilanderers,  and  to  turn  their  hearts; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  give 
and  prefene  to  our  ufe  the  kindly 
fi-uits  of  the  eaith,  fo  as  in  due 
time  we  may  enjoy  them ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  us,  good  Lord. 

That  it  may  pleafe  thee  to  give 
us  true  repentance ;  to  forgive  us 
all  our  fins,  negligences,  and  igno- 
rances; and  to  endue  us  with  the 
grace  of  thy  Holy  Spirit  to  amend 
our  lives  according  to  thy  holy 
Word ; 
We  befeech  thee  to  hear  i(s,  good  Lord. 

Son  of  God  :  we  befeech  thee 
to  hear  us. 

Son  of  God  :  we  befeech  thee  to 
hear  u^. 

O  Lamb  of  God  :  that  takeft 
away  the  fins  of  the  world ; 
Qrant  ns  thy  peace. 

O  Lamb  of  God  :  that  takeft 
away  the  fins  of  the  world  ; 
Have  mercy  upon  us. 
O  Chrift,  hear  us. 
0  (Jhrif,  hear  us. 

liOrd,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  hare  mercy  upon  us. 

Chrift,  have  mercy  uj)on  us. 
Chrijl,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 


of  Deacons. 


o 


^  Then  shall  the  Priest,  and  the  people  with  him,  $ay 
the  Lord's  Prayer. 

UR  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven. Hallowed  be  thy  Name. 
Tliy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be 
done  in  earth.  As  it  is  in  heaven. 
Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread. 
And  forgive  us  our  trefpafl*es.  As 
we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  a- 
gainft  us.  And  lead  us  not  into 
temptation;  But  deliver  us  from 
evil.    Amen. 

Priejf.  O  Lord,  deal  not  with 
us  after  our  fins. 

Anficer.  Neither  reward  us  after 
our  iniquities. 

OGod,  merciful  Father,  that 
defpifeft  not  the  fighing  of 
a  contrite  heart,  nor  the  defire  of 
fuch  as  be  foiTowful ;  Mercifully 
alfift  our  prayers  that  we  make 
before  thee  in  all  our  troubles  and 
adverfities,  whenfoever  they  op- 
prefs  us ;  and  gracioufly  hear  us, 
that  thofe  evils,  which  the  craft  and 
fubtilty  of  the  devil  or  man  worketh 
againft  us,  be  brought  to  nought ; 
and  by  the  providence  of  thy  good- 
nefs  thev  may  be  difperfed;  that 
we  thy  fervants,  being  hurt  by  no 
peifecutions,  may  evermore  give 
thanks  unto  thee  in  thy  holy  Church; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 

O  Lord,  arife,  help  us,  and  deli- 
ver us  for  thy  Name's  fake. 

OGod,  we  have  heard  with  our 
ears,  and  our  fathers  have  de- 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons. 

clared  unto  us,  the  noble  works 
that  thou  dicHl  in  their  days,  and 
in  the  old  time  before  them.    ^    • 

O  Lord,  arife,  help  us,  and  deli- 
ver us  for  thine  honour. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

Anfwer.  As  it  was  in  the  begin- 
ning, is  now,  and  ever  (hall  be  : 
world  without  end.    Amen.    ^ 

From  our  enemies  defend  us, 
O  ChrilL 

*'  Gracioujly  look  upon  our  afflic- 
tions. 

Pitifully  behold  the  forrows  of 
our  hearts. 

Mercifully  forgive  the  fins  of  thy 
people. 

Favourably  with  mercy  hear  our 
prayers. 

O  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  up- 
on us. 

Both  now  and  ever  vouchfafe 
to  hear  us,  O  Chrift. 

Gracioii/ly  hear  us,  O  Chrifi ; 
gracioufiy  hear  us,  O  Lord  Chrijl. 

Priejl.  O  Lord,  let  thy  mercy 
be  Ihevved  upon  us  ; 

Anfiver.  As  we  do  put  our  truft 


in  thee. 


Let 


us 


pray. 


WE  humbly  befeech  thee,  O 
Father,  mercifully  to  look 
upon  our  infirmities ;  and  for  the 
glory  of  thy  Name  turn  from  us  all 
thofe  evils  that  we  moft  righteoufly 
have  deferved ;  and  grant,  that  in 
all  our  troubles  we  may  put  our 


whole  truft  and  confidence  in  thy 
mercy,  and  evermore  fei-ve  thee  in 
holinels  and  purenefs  of  living,  to 
thy  honour  and  gloiy ;  through  our 
only  Mediator  and  Advocate,  Jca^ 
fus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen.  ' 


If  Then  shall  be  sung  or  said  the  Service  for  the  Com- 
munion, with  the  Collect,  Epistie,  and  Gospel,  as 

followeth.  ^  rv>;^i.u 

The  Colledi.      ~     * 


")'>j->i 
J  •}.. 


/nil 


ALMIGHTY  God,  who  by  thy 
Divine  Providence  haft  ap^i 
pointed  divers  Orders  of  Minifters 
in  thy  Church,  and  didft  infpire 
thine  Apoftles  to  choofe  into  the 
Order  of  Deacons  the  firft  Maityr 
Saint  Stephen,  with  others ;  Mer^ 
cifully  behold  thefe  thy  fervants 
now  called  to  the  like  Office  and 
Adminiftration  ;  repleniih  them  fo 
with  the  truth  of  thy  Doctrine,  and 
adorn  them  with  innocency  of  life, 
that,  both  by  word  and  good  ex- 
ample, they  may  faithfully  ferve 
thee  in  this  Office,  to  the  gloiy  of 
thy  Name,  and  the  edification  of 
thy  Church ;  through  the  merits  of 
our  Saviour  Jefus  Chrift,  who  liv- 
eth  and  reigneth  with  thee  and 
the  Holy  Ghoft,  now  and  for  ever. 
Amen. 

The  Epiftle.    1  Tim.  iii.  8. 

IKEWISE  muft  the  Dea- 
cons be  grave,  not  dou])le 
tongued,  not  given  to  much  wine, 
not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre,  holding 
the  myftery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure 
confcience.    And  let  thefe  alfo  fii-ft 


L 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons, 


be  proved;  theu  let  them  life  the 
Office  of  a  Deacon,  being  found 
blamelefs.  Even  fo  muft  their  wives 
be  gi'ave,  not  flanderers,  fober, 
faithfiil  in  all  things.  Let  the  Dea- 
cons be  the  hulbands  of  one  mfe, 
ruling  their  children  and  their  own 
boufes  well.  For  they  that  have 
ufed  the  Office  of  a  Deacon  well 
pufchafe  to  themfelves  a  good  de- 
gree, and  great  boldnefs  in  the 
faiti^  which  is  in  Chrift  Jefus. 

Or  eke  this,  out  of  the  Sixth  of  the  Acts  of  the 
.cTjipostles. 

:}(^iiQ  x^^nsAas  vi.  2.    ^^^ 

^REN  the  twelve  called  the 
multitude  of  the  difciples  unto 
them,  and  faid,  It  is  not  reafon 
that  we  fliould  leave  the  Word  of 
God,  and  fei-ve  tables.  Wherefore, 
brethren,  look  ye  out  among  you 
feven  men  of  honeft  report,  full  of 
the  holy  Ghoft  and  wifdom,  whom 
we  may  appoint  over  this  bufinefs. 
But  we  will  give  ourfelves  continu- 
ally to  prayer,  and  to  the  minilliy 
of  the  Word.  And  the  faying 
pleafed  the  whole  multitude.  And 
they  chofe  Stephen,  a  man  full  of 
faith,  and  of  the  holy  Gholl,  and 
Philip,  and  Prochorus,  and  Nica- 
nor,  and  I'imon,  and  Parnienas, 
and  Nicolas  a  profelyte  of  Antioch; 
whom  they  fet  before  the  7\poftles ; 
and,  when  they  had  prayed,  they 
laid  their  hands  on  them.  And 
the  Word  of  God  increafed,  and 
the  number  of  the  difciples  multi- 


plied in  Jerufalem  greatly,  and  a 
great  company  of  the  Priefts  were 
obedient  to  the  faith. 

^  And  before  the  Gospel,  the  Bishop,  sitting  in  his 
chair,  shali  cause  the  Oath  of  the  King's  Supremacy, 
and  against  the  power  and  authority  of  all  foreign 
Potentates,  to  be  ministered  unto  every  one  of  them 
that  are  to  be  Ordered. 

The  Oath  of  the  King's  Sovereignty. 

I  A.  B.  do  fwear,  that  I  do  from 
my  heart  abhor,  deteft,  and  ab- 
jure, as  impious  and  heretical,  that 
damnable  Do6lrine  and  Pofition, 
That  Princes  excommunicated  or 
deprived  by  the  Pope,  or  any  Au- 
thority of  the  See  of  Rome,  may 
be  depofed  or  murdered  by  their 
Subjects,  or  any  other  whatfoever. 
And  I  do  declare,  that  no  foreign 
Prince,  Peifon,  Prelate,  State,  or 
Potentate,  hath,  or  ought  to  have, 
any  Jurifdi6tion,  Power,  Superi- 
ority, Pre-eminence,  or  Authority, 
Ecclefiaftical  or  Spiritual,  within 
this  Realm.     So  help  me  God. 

%  Then  shall  the  Bishop  examine  every  one  of  them 
thai  are  to  be  Ordered,  in  the  presence  of  the  people, 
after  this  manner  following. 

DO  you  truft  that  you  are  in- 
^vardly  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghoft  to  take  upon  you  this  Office 
and  Miniftration,  to  ferve  God  for 
the  promoting  of  his  glory,  and 
the  edifying  of  his  people? 
AnJ'wer.    1  truft  fo. 

'■'''  The  Bishop. 

DO  you  think  that  you  are  truly 
called,  according  to  the  will 
of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  and  the 


I 


due  order  of  this  Realm,  to 
Miniftry  of  the  Church?i(rKj: 
Anfwer.   I  think  fo. 

The  Bishop.  -^A^  9w\' 

DO  you  unfeignedly  believe  all 
the  Canonical  Scriptures  of 
the  Old  and  New  Teftament? 
Anfwer.   I  do  believe  them. 
The  Bishop. 

WILL  you  diligently  read  the 
fame   unto   the  people  af- 
fembled  in  the  Church  where  you 
fliall  be  appointed  to  ferve? 
^Anfwer.   I  will. 

The  Bishop, 

IT  appertaineth  to  the  Office  of 
a  Deacon,  in  the  Church  where 
he  fliall  be  appointed  to  ferve,  to 
affifl  the  Prieft  in  Divine  Service, 
and  fpecially  when  he  minillereth 
the  holy  Communion,  and  to  help 
him  in  the  diftribution  thereof,  alid 
to  read  holy  Scriptures  and  Homi- 
lies in  the  Church ;  and  to  inftru6t 
the  youth  in  the  Catechifm ;  in  the 
abfence  of  the  Prieft  to  baptize 
Infants,  and  to  preach,  if  he  be 
admitted  thereto  by  the  Bifliop. 
And  furthermore,  it  is  his  Office, 
where  provifion  is  fo  made,  to 
fearch  for  the  fick,  poor,  and  im- 
potent people  of  the  parifli,  to  in- 
timate their  eftates,  names,  and 
places  where  they  dwell,  unto  the 
Curate,  that  by  his  exhortation  they 
may  be  relieved  with  the  alms  of 
the  Pariftiioners,  or  others.  Will 
you  do  this  gladly  and  willingly? 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons. 

the 


Anfwer.  I  will  fo  do,  by  the  help 
of  God. 

The  Bishop, 

WILL  you  apply  all  your  dili-> 
gence  to  frame  and  fafliion 
your  own  lives,  and  the  lives  of 
your  families,  according  to  the 
Dodlrine  of  Chrift ;  and  to  make 
both  yourfelves  and  them,  as  much 
as  in  you  lieth,  wholefome  exam- 
ples of  the  flock  of  Chrift? 

Anfwer,   I  will  fo  do,  the  Lord 
being  my  helper. 

The  Bishop. 

WILL  you  reverently  obey 
your  Ordinary,  and  other 
cliief  Minifters  of  the  Church,  and 
them  to  whom  the  charge  and  gOr 
vernment  over  you  is  committed, 
following  with  a  glad  mind  and 
will  their  godly  admonitions? 

Anfwer.    I  will  endeavour  my-j 
felf,  the  Lord  being  my  helper.     » 

5f  Then  the  Bishop  laying  his  Hands  severally  upon 
the  Head  of  every  one  of  them,  humbly  kneeling 
before  him,  shall  say, 

TAKE  thou  Authority 'to~e5c& 
cute  the  Office  of  a  Deacon  in 
the  Church  of  God  committed  un-- 
to  thee ;  In  the  Name  of  the  Fa- 
ther, and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft.   Amen. 

51  Then  shall  the  Bishop  deliver  to  every  one  of  them 

,'f,-,  , ,  ^       the  New  Testament,  saying, 

TAKE  thou  Authority  to  read 
the  Gofpel  in  the  Church  of 
God,  and  to  preach  the  fame,  if 
thou  ben  thereto  licenfed  by  the 
Bifliop  himfelf.  , 


The  Ordering  of  Deacons. 


%  Then  one  of  them,  appointed  by  tlie  Bishop,  shall 
read  the  Gospel. 

St.  Luke  xii.  35. 

LET  your  loins  be  girded  about, 
and  your  lights  burning;  and 
ye  yourfelves  like  unto  men  that 
wait  for  their  Lord,  when  he  will 
return  from  the  wedding ;  that, 
when  he  cometh  and  knocketh, 
they  may  open  unto  him  immedi- 
ately. Blelfed  are  thofe  fervants, 
whom  the  Lord  when  he  cometh 
fliall  find  watching.  \  erily  I  fay 
unto  you,  that  he  fliall  gird  him- 
felf,  and  make  them  to  (it  down  to 
meat,  and  will  come  forth  and  ferve 
them.  And  if  he  fliall  come  in 
the  fecond  watch,  or  come  in  the 
third  watch,  and  find  them  fo, 
blefled  are  thofe  fervants. 

^  Then  shall  the  Bishop  proceed  in  the  Communion, 
and  all  that  are  Ordered  shall  tarry,  and  receive  the 
holy  Commitnion  the  same  day  withithe  Bishop. 

*|f  The  Ctimmnnion  ended,  after  the  last  Collect,  and 
immediately  before  the  Benediction,  shall  be  said 
these  Collects  following. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  giver  of  all 
good  things,  who  of  thy  great 
goodnefs  haft  vouchfafed  to  accept 
and  take  thefe  thy  Serv^ants  un- 
to the  Office  of  Deacons  in  thy 
Church ;  Make  them,  we  befeecli 
thee,  O  Lord,  to  be  modeft,  hum- 


ble, and  conftant  m  their  Minif- 
tration,  to  have  a  ready  will  to 
obferve  all  fpiritual  DifcipUne;  that 
they  having  always  the  teftimony 
of  a  good  confcience,  and  continu- 
ing ever  ftable  and  ftrong  in  thy 
Son  Chrift,  may  fo  well  behave 
themfelves  in  this  inferior  Office, 
that  they  may  be  found  worthy  to 
be  called  unto  the  higher  IMiniftries 
in  thy  Church  ;  through  the  fame 
thy  Son  our  Saviour  Jefus  Chrift,  to 
whom  be  glory  and  honour  world 
without  end.    Amen. 

PREVENT  us,  O  Lord,  in  all 
our  doings  with  thy  molt  gra- 
cious favour,  and  further  us  with 
thy  continual  help ;  that  in  all  our 
works  begun,  continued,  and  end- 
ed in  thee,  we  may  glorify  thy 
holy  Name,  and  finally  by  thy  mer- 
cy obtain  everlafting  life;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

THE  peace  of  God,  which  pafl*- 
eth  all  underftanding,  keep 
your  hearts  and  minds  in  the  know- 
ledge and  love  of  God,  and  of  his 
Son  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord :  And 
the  Blefling  of  God  Almighty,  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  be  amongft  you,  and  remain 
with  you  always.    Amen. 


%  And  here  it  must  be  declared  unto  the  Deacon,  that  he  must  continue  in  that  Office  of  a  Deacon  the  space  of 
a  whole  year  {except  for  reasonable  causes  it  shall  otherwise  seem  good  unto  the  Bishop)  to  the  intent  he  may 
be  perfect,  and  well  expert  in  the  things  appertaining  to  the  Ecclesiastical  Administration.  In  executing 
whereof  if  he  be  found  faithful  and  diligent,  he  may  be  admitted  by  his  Diocesan  to  the  Order  of  Priesthood, 
at  the  times  appointed  in  the  Canon ;  or  else,  on  urgent  occasion,  upon  some  other  Sunday,  or  Iloly-day,  in  the 
face  of  the  Church,  in  such  manner  and  form  as  hereafter  followeth. 


THE  FORM  AND  MANNER 

OHBERING     OF     PRIESTS. 


H  fr/ien  the  (lay  appointed  hy  the  Bis/iop  is  come,  after  Morning  Prayer  is  ended,  there  shall  he  a 
Sermon  or  Exhortation,  declaring  the  Duty  and  Office  oj'  such  as  come  to  he  admitted  Priests; 
how  necessary  that  Order  is  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  also  horv  the  people  ought  to  esteem 
them  in  their  Ojjice. 


%  First,  the  Archdeacon,  or,  in  his  absence,  one  ap- 
pointed in  his  stead,  shall  present  unto  the  Bishop 
{sitting  in  his  clinir  near  to  the  holy  Tabic)  all  ihem 
that  shall  receive  lite  Order  of  Priesthood  that  day 
(each  of  them  being  decently  habited)  and  say, 

REVEREND  Father  in  Gocl, 
I  prefent  unto  you  thefe  per- 
fons  prefent,  to  be  admitted  to  the 
Order  of  Priefthood. 

The  Bishop. 

TAKE  heed  that  die  perfons, 
whom  ye  prefent  unto  us,  be 
apt  and  meet,  for  their  learning 
and  godly  converfation,  to  exercife 
their  Miniftry  duly,  to  the  honour 
of  God,  and  the  edifying  of  his 
Church. 

5[  The  Archdeacon  shall  answer, 

I  Have  enquired  of  them,   and 
alfo  examined  them,  and  think 
them  fo  to  be. 

11  Then  the  Bishop  shall  say  unto  the  people ; 

GOOD  people,  thefe  are  they 
whom  we  purpofe,  God  will- 
ing, to  receive  this  day  unto  the 
holy  Office  of  Priefthood :  For  after 
due  examination  we  find  not  to 
the  contrary,  but  that  they  be  law- 
fully called  to  their  Fundlion  and 
Miniftiy,  and  thafe  they  be  perfons 
meet  for  the  fame.  But  yet  if  there 
be  any  of  you,  who  knoweth  any 


Impediment,  or  notable  Crime,  in 
any  of  them,  for  the  which  he  ought 
not  to  be  received  into  this  holy 
Miniftry,  let  him  come  forth  in 
the  Name  of  God,  and  fliew  what 
the  Crime  or  Impediment  is. 

If  And  if  any  great  Crime  or  Impediment  he  objected, 
the  Bishop  shall  surcease  from  Ordering  that  per- 
son, until  such  time  as  the  party  accused  shall  be 
found  clear  of  that  Crime. 

^  Then  the  Bishop  {commending  such  as  shall  be 
found  meet  to  be  Ordered  to  the  Prayers  of  the 
congregation)  shall,  nith  the  Clergy  and  people  pre- 
sent, sing  or  say  the  IJtany,  tcith  the  Prai/ers,  as  is 
befoi-e  appointed  in  the  Form  of  Ordering  Deacons; 
save  only,  that,  in  the  proper  Suffrage  there  added, 
the  word  [Deacons]  shall  be  omitted,  and  the  word 
[Priests]  inserted  instead  of  it. 

^  Then  shall  be  sung  or  said  the  Service  for  the  Com- 
munion, with  the  Collect,  Epistle,  and  Gospel,  as 
followeth. 

The  ColleM. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  giver  of  all 
good  things,  who  by  thy  Holy 
Spirit  haft  appointed  divers  Orders 
of  Minifters  in  the  Church  ;  x^Ier- 
cifully  behold  thefe  thy  fervants 
now  called  to  the  Office  of  Prieft- 
hood ;  and  replenifli  them  fo  with 
the  truth  of  thy  do6lrine,  and  adorn 
them  with  innocency  of  life,  that, 
both  by  word  and  good  example, 
they  may  faithfully  ferve  thee  in 
this  Office,  to  the  glory  of  thy 
Name,  and  the  edification  of  thy 
3C 


The  Ordering  of  Priejh. 


Church ;  through  the  meiits  of  our 
Saviour  Jefus  Chrift,  who  liveth  and 
reigneth  with  thee  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  world  without  end.  Amen. 
The  Epijile.   Ephef.  iv.  7. 

UNTO  eveiy  one  of  us  is  given 
grace,  according  to  the  mea- 
fure  of  the  gift  of  Chrift.  A^liere- 
fore  he  faith.  When  he  afcended 
up  on  high,  he  led  captivity  captive, 
and  gave  gifts  unto  men.  (Now 
that  he  afcended,  what  is  it  but 
that  he  alfo  defcended  fii-ft  into 
the  lower  parts  of  the  earth?  He 
that  defcended,  is  the  fame  alfo 
that  afcended  up  far  above  all  hea- 
vens, that  he  might  fill  all  things.) 
And  he  gave  fome  Apoftles,  and 
fome  Prophets,  and  fome  Evangel - 
ifts,  and  fome  Paftors  and  Teach- 
ers; for  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints, 
for  the  work  of  the  Miniftry,  for 
the  edifying  of  the  Body  of  Chrift ; 
till  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the 
faith,  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Son  of  God,  unto  a  perfect  man, 
unto  the  meafure  of  the  ftatiu'e  of 
the  fulnefs  of  Chrift. 

%  After  this  shall  he  read  for  the  Gospel  part  of  the 
ninth  Chapter  of  Saint  Matthew,  asfolloueth. 

St.  Matth.  ix.  36. 

WIH^N  Jefus  faw  the  multi- 
tudes, he  was  moved  with 
companion  on  them,  becaufe  tliey 
fainted,  and  were  fcattered  abroad 
as  Iheep  having  no  lh(;pherd.  Then 
faith  he  unto  his  difciples,  Fhe 
hai-vcft  tnily  is  plenteous,  but  the 


labourers  are  few.  Pray  ye  there- 
fore the  Lord  of  the  harveft,  that 
he  will  fend  forth  labourers  into 
his  harveft. 

^  Or  else  this  thatfolloxceth,  out  of  the  tenth  Chapter 
of  Saint  John. 

St.  John  X.  1. 
"¥^ERILY,  verily  I  fay  unto  you, 
▼  He  that  entereth  not  by  the 
door  into  the  flieep-fold,  but  climb- 
eth  up  fome  other  way,  the  fame 
is  a  thief  and  a  robber.  But  he 
that  entereth  in  by  the  door  is  the 
Shepherd  of  the  Iheep.  To  him 
the  porter  openeth,  and  the  flieep 
hear  his  voice ;  and  he  calleth  his 
own  fheep  by  name,  and  leadeth 
them  out.  And  when  he  putteth 
forth  his  own  flieep  he  goetli  be- 
fore them,  and  the  flieep  follow 
him ;  for  they  know  his  voice.  And 
a  ftranger  will  they  not  follow, 
but  will  flee  from  him ;  for  they 
know  not  the  voice  of  ftranoers. 
This  parable  fpake  Jefus  unto 
them,  but  they  underftood  not 
what  things  they  were  Avhich  he 
fpake  unto  them.  Then  faid  Jefus 
unto  them  again,  Verily,  verily  I 
fay  unto  you,  I  am  the  door  of  the 
flieep.  AH  that  ever  came  before 
me  are  thieves  and  robbers ;  but 
the  flieep  did  not  heai*  them.  I  am 
the  door ;  by  me  if  any  man  enter 
in,  he  fliall  be  faved,  and  fliall  go 
in  and  out,  and  find  paflure.  J'he 
thief  Cometh  not  but  for  to  fteal, 
and  to  kill,  and  to  deftroy :  I  am 


come  that  they  might  have  life, 
and  that  they  might  have  it  more 
abimdaiitly.    I  am  the  good  Shep- 
herd :   the  good  Shej)herd  giveth 
his  life  for  the  flieep.    But  he  that 
is  an  hireling,  and  not  the  Shep- 
lierd,  whofe  own  the  flieep  are  not, 
feeth  the  wolf  coming,  and  leaveth 
the  flieep,  and  fleeth ;  and  the  wolf 
catcheth  them,  and  fcattereth  the 
flieep.  The  hireling  fleeth,  becaufe 
he  is  an  hireling,  and  careth  not 
for  the   flieep.     I   am    the   good 
Shepherd,  and  know  my  Iheep,  and 
am  known  of  mine.    As  the  Father 
knoweth  me,  even  fo  know  I  the 
Father;  and  I  lay  down  my  life 
for  the  flieep.     And  other  flieep  I 
have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold  : 
them  alfo  I  niufl;  bring,  and  they 
fliall  hear  my  voice ;  and  there  fliall 
be  one  fold,  and  one  Shepherd. 

1[  Then  the  Bishop,  sitting  in  his  chair,  shall  minister 
unto  every  one  of  them  the  Oath  concerning  the 
King's  Supremacy,  as  it  is  before  set  forth  in  the 
Form  for  the  Ordering  of  Deacons. 

^  And  that  done,  he  shall  say  unto  them  as  hereafter 
followeth. 

YOU  have  heard,  Brethren,  as 
well  in  your  private  examina- 
tion, as  in  the  exhortation  which 
was  now  made  to  you,  and  in  the 
holy  Leflbns  taken  out  of  the  Gof- 
pel,  and  the  writings  of  the  Apo- 
ft;les,  of  what  dignity,  and  of  how 
great  importance  this  Office  is, 
whereunto  ye  are  called.  And 
now  again  we  exhort  you,  in  the 
Name  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift, 


The  Ordering  of  Priefts. 

that    you   have 


into  how  hioh 

f5 


in  remembrance, 
a  Dignity,  and  to 
how  weighty  an  Office  and  Charge 
ye  are  called  :  that  is  to  fay,  to  be 
Meffengers,  Watchmen,  and  Stew- 
ards of  the  Lord  ;  to  teach,  and 
to  premonifli,  to  feed  and  provide 
for  the  Lord's  family ;  to  leek  for 
Chrift's  flieep  that  are  difperfed 
abroad,  and  for  his  children  who 
are  in  the  midft  of  this  naughty 
^vorld,  that  they  may  be  faved 
through  Chrifl;  for  ever. 

Have  always  therefore  printed 
in  your  remembrance,  how  great 
a  treafure  is  committed  to  your 
charge.     For  they  are  the  flieep 
of  Chrift,  which  he  bought  with 
his  death,  and  for  whom  he  flied 
his  blood.     The  Church  and  Con- 
gregation whom  you  muft  ferve,  is 
his  Spoufe,  and  his  Body.     And 
if  it  fliall  happen  the  fame  Church, 
or  any  Member  thereof,  to  take 
any  hurt  or  hindrance  by  reafon 
of  your  negligence,  ye  know  the 
greatnefs  of  the  fault,  and  alfo  the 
horrible  punifliment  that  will  enfue. 
Wherefore  coiilider  with  yourfelves 
the  end  of  your  Miniftry  towards 
the  children  of  God,  towards  the 
Spoufe  and  Body  of  Chrift ;  and 
fee  that  you  never  ceafe  your  la- 
bour, your  care  and  diligence,  until 
you  have  done  all  that  lieth  in  you, 
according  to  your  bounden  duty, 
to  bring  all  fuch  as  are  or  fliall  be 


committed 


to  your 
3C2 


charj 


ge, 


unto 


The  Ordering  of  Priejts. 


that  agreement  in  the  faith  and 
knowledge  of  God,  and  to  that 
lipenefs  and  perfe^tnefs  of  age  in 
Chrift,  tliat  there  be  no  place 
left  among  you,  either  for  error 
in  religion,  or  for  vicioufnefs  in 
life. 

Forafmuch  then  as  your  Office 
is  both  of  fo  great  excellency,  and 
of  fo  great  difficulty,  ye  fee  Avith 
how  great  care  and  lludy  ye  ought 
to  apply  yourfelves,  as  well  that  ye 
may  Ihew  yourfelves  dutiful  and 
thankfid  unto  that  Lord,  who  hath 
placed  you  in  fo  high  a  Dignity ; 
as  alfo  to  beware,  that  neither  you 
yourfelves  offend,  nor  be  occalion 
that  others  offend.  Howbeit,  ye 
cannot  have  a  mind  and  will  there- 
to of  yourfelves ;  for  that  will  and 
ability  is  given  of  God  alone :  there- 
fore ye  ought,  and  have  need,  to 
pray  earnellly  for  his  holy  Spirit. 
And  feeing  that  you  cannot  by  any 
other  means  compafs  the  doing  of 
fo  weighty  a  work,  pertaining  to 
the  falvation  of  man,  but  with  doc- 
trine and  exhortation  taken  out  of 
the  holy  Scriptures,  and  with  a  life 
agreeable  to  the  fame ;  confider 
how  ftudious  ye  ought  to  be  in 
reading  and  learning  the  Scrip- 
tures, and  in  framing  the  manners 
both  of  yourfelves,  and  of  them 
that  fpecially  pertain  unto  you, 
according  to  the  rule  of  the  fame 
Scri])tures :  and  for  this  felf-fame 
caufe,  how  ye  ought  to  forfake  and 


fet  afide  (as  much  as  you  may)  all 
worldly  cares  and  ftudies. 

We  have  good  hope  that  you 
have  well  weighed  and  pondered 
thefe  things  with  yourfelves  long 
before  this  time ;  and  that  you  have 
clearly  determined,  by  God's  grace, 
to  give  yourfelves  wholly  to  this 
Office,  whereunto  it  hath  [)leafed 
God  to  call  you  :  fo  that,  as  much 
as  lieth  in  you,  you  will  apply  your- 
felves wholly  to  this  one  thing, 
and  draw  all  your  cares  and  ftu- 
dies this  way;  and  that  you  will 
continually  pray  to  God  the  Fa- 
ther, by  the  Mediation  of  our  only 
Saviour  Jefus  Chrift,  for  the  hea- 
venly affiftance  of  the  Holy  Ghoft; 
that,  by  daily  reading  and  weighing 
of  the  Scriptures,  ye  may  wax  riper 
and  ftronger  in  your  Miniftry ;  and 
that  ye  may  fo  endeavour  your- 
felves, from  time  to  time,  to  fanc- 
tify  the  lives  of  you  and  yours,  and 
to  falhion  them  after  the  Rule  and 
Doctrine  of  Chrift,  that  ye  may  be 
wholefome  and  godly  examples  and 
patterns  for  the  people  to  follow. 

And  now,  that  this  prefent  Con- 
gregation of  Chrift  here  aflembled 
alfo  underftand  your  minds 
thefe  things,  and  that 
this  your  promife  may  the  more 
move  you  to  do  your  duties,  ye 
ftiall  anfwer  plainly  to  thefe  things, 
which  we,  in  the  Name  of  God, 
and  of  his  Church,  fliall  demand 
of  you  touchhig  the  fame. 


may 
and  wills 


The  Ordering  of  Priejls. 


\0  you  think  in  your  heart, 
that  you  be  truly  called,  ac- 
cording to  the  will  of  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift,  and  the  order  of  this 
United  Church  of  Knuland  and 
Ireland,  to  the  Order  and  Miniftry 
ofPriefthood? 

Anfwer.   I  think  it. 
The  Bishop. 

ARE  you  perfuaded  that  the 
holy  Scriptures  contain  fuffi- 
ciently  all  Doctrine  required  of  ne- 
ceflity  for  eternal  falvation  through 
faith  in  Jefus  Chrift?  and  are  you 
determined,  out  of  the  faid  Scrip- 
tures to  inftrudl  the  people  com- 
mitted to  your  charge,  and  to  teach 
nothing,  as  required  of  neceflity  to 
eternal  falvation,  but  that  which 
you  fliall  be  perfuaded  may  be  con- 
cluded and  proved  by  the  Scriptiu'e? 
Anfwer.  I  am  fo  perfuaded,  and 
have  fo  determined  by  God's  grace. 
The  Bishop. 

WILL  you  then  give  your 
foithful  diligence  always  fo 
to  minifter  the  Doctrine  and  Sacra- 
ments, and  the  Difcipline  of  Chrift, 
as  the  Lord  hath  commanded,  and 
as  this  Church  and  Realm  hath  re- 
ceived the  fame,  according  to  the 
Commandments  of  God ;  fo  that 
you  may  teach  the  people  commit- 
ted to  your  Cure  and  Charge  with 
all  diligence  to  keep  and  obferve 
the  fame? 

Anj'wer.  I  will  fo  do,  by  the  help 
of  the  Lord. 


▼  ▼     rra 


The  Bishop. 
ILL  you  l)e  ready,  with  all 
faithful  diligence,  to  baniili 
and  drive  away  all  erroneous  and 
ftrange  dod^trines  contrary  to  God's 
Word ;  and  to  ufe  both  publick 
and  private  monitions  and  exhor- 
tations, as  well  to  the  fick  as  to 
the  whole,  within  your  Cures,  as 
need  Ihall  require,  and  occafion 
fliall  be  given? 

Anfwer.  I  will,  the  Lord  being 
my  helper. 

The  Bishop. 
L  you  be  diligent  in 
ayers,  and  in  reading  of 
the  holy  Scriptures,  and  in  fucli 
ftudies  as  help  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  fame,  laying  afide  the  ftudy 
of  the  world  and  the  flefli? 

Anfwer.  I  will  endeavour  myfelf 
fo  to  do,  the  Lord  being  my  helper. 
The  Bishop. 
ILL  you  be  diligent  to  frame 
and  fafliion  your  own  felves, 
and  your  families,  according  to  the 
Doctrine  of  Chrift ;  and  to  make 
both  yourfelves  and  them,  as  much 
as  in  you  lieth,  wholefome  exam- 
ples and  patterns  to  the  flock  of 
Chrift? 

Anfwer.  I  will  apply  myfelf  there- 
to, the  Lord  being  my  helper. 
The  Bishop. 

WILL  you  maintain  and  fet 
forwards,  as  much  as  lieth 
in  you,  quietnefs,  peace,  and  love, 
among  all  Chriftian  people,  and 


The  Ordering  of  Priejls. 


efpecially  among  them  that  are  or 
fliail  be  committed  to  your  charge? 
Anficer.   I  will  fo  do,  the  Lord 
being  my  helper. 

The  Bishop. 

WILL  you  reverently  obey 
your  Ordinary,  and  other 
chief  Minifters,  unto  whom  is  com- 
mitted the  charge  and  government 
over  you ;  following  with  a  glad 
mind  and  vnW  their  godly  admo- 
nitions, and  fubmitting  youifelves 
to  their  godly  judgements? 

Anfwer.   I  will  fo  do,  the  Lord 
being  my  helper. 

%  Then  shall  the  Bishop,  standing  up,  say, 

A  LMIGHTY  God,  wlio  hath 


J\ 


given 


you 


this  will  to  do  all 


thefe  things  ;  Grant  alfo  unto  you 
ftrength  and  power  to  perform  the 
fame ;  that  he  may  accomplilh  his 
work  which  he  hath  begun  in  you ; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

%  After  this,  the  Congregation  shall  be  desired,  secretly 
in  their  Prayers,  to  make  their  hiimhle  supplications 
to  God  for  all  these  things:  for  the  which  Prayers 
there  shall  be  silence  kept  for  a  space. 

If  After  Tihich  shall  be  sung  or  said  by  the  Bishop 
(the  persons  to  be  ordained  Priests  all  kneeling) 
Veni,  Creator  Spiritus;  the  Bishop  beginning,  and 
the  Priests,  and  others  that  arc  present,  answering 
by  rerses,  asfolloueth. 

COME,  Holy  Ghoft,  our  fouls 
infpire, 
And  lighten  with  celejlialjire. 
Thou  the  anointing  Spirit  art, 
Who  doft  thy feven-f old  gifts  impart. 
Thy  blefled  Un6tion  from  above, 
/*  comfort,  life,  and  fire  of  love. 


Enable  with  perpetual  light 
TJie  dulnefs  of  our  blinded  jight. 
Anoint  and  cheer  our  foiled  face 
With  the  abundance  of  thy  grace. 
Keep  far  our  foes,  give  peace  at 

home : 
Where  thou  art  guide,  no  ill  can  come. 
Teach  us  to  know  the  Father,  Son, 
And  thee,  of  both,  to  be  but  One. 
That,  through  the  ages  all  along, 
This  may  be  our  endlefsfong; 
Praife  to  thy  eternal  merit, 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit. 

Or  this : 

COME,  Holy  Ghoft,  eternal  God, 
Proceeding  from  above. 
Both  from  the  Father  and  the  Son, 

The  God  of  peace  and  love ; 
Vifit  our  minds,  into  our  hearts 

Thy  heavenly  grace  infpire; 
That  truth  and  godlinefs  we  may 

Purfue  with  full  dejire. 
Thou  art  the  very  Comforter 

In  grief  and  all  diftrefs ; 
The  heavnly  gift  of  God  mojl  high. 

No  tongue  can  it  eaprefs; 
The  fountain  and  the  living  fpring 

Of  joy  celeftial; 
The  fire  fo  bright,  the  love  fo  fweet. 

The  Undiion  fpiritual. 
Thou  in  thy  gifts  art  manifold, 

By  themChrill's  Church  doth  ftand: 
In  faithful  hearts  thou  wrifjithy  laWy 

The  finger  of  God's  hand. 
According  to  thy  promife.  Lord, 

Thou  giveft  fpeech  with  grace ; 
That  thro'  thy  help  God\spraifes  may 

Kefound  in  every  place. 


O  Holy  Glioft,  into  our  minds 

Send  down  thy  heavenly  light; 
Kindle  our  hearts  icith  fervent  zeal, 

To  ferve  God  day  and  night. 
Our  weaknefs  ftrengthen  and  con- 
firm, 

(For,  Lord,  thou  know'ft  us  frail;) 
That  neither  devil,  world,  nor  jlejh, 

Againji  ns  may  prevail. 
Put  back  our  enemy  far  from  us, 

And  help  us  to  obtain 
Peace  in  our  hearts  with  God  and 
man, 

[The  heji,  the  truejl gain;) 
And  grant  that  thou  being,  O  Lord, 

Our  leader  and  our  guide, 
We  may  efcape  the  fnares  of  Jin, 

And  never  from  thee  Jlide. 
Such  meafures  of  thy  powerful  grace 

Grant,  Lord,  to  us,  we  pray; 
That  thou  may'Ji  be  our  Comforter 

At  the  lajl  dreadful  day. 
Of  ftrife  and  of  diffention 

Diflblve,  O  Lord,  the  bands. 
And  knit  the  knots  of  peace  and  love 

Throughout  all  Chrijlian  lands. 
Grant  us  the  grace  that  wemay  know 

The  Father  of  all  might, 
That  we  of  his  beloved  Son 

May  gain  the  blifsful  Jight ; 
And  that  we  may  with  perfect  faith 

Ever  acknowledge  thee, 
The  Spirit  of  Father,  ajid  of  Son, 

One  God  in  Perfons  Three. 
To  God  the  Father  laud  and  praife. 

And  to  his  bleffed  Son, 
And  to  the  Holy  Spirit  of  grace, 
Co-equal  Three  in  One. 


The  Ordering  of  Priejis. 

And  pray  we,  that  our  only  Lord 
Would  pleafe  his  Spirit  to  fend 

On  all  that  Jhall  prof efs  his  Name, 
From  hence  to  the  xvorUVs  end.  Amen. 


\  That  done,  the  Bishop  shall  pray  in  this  wise,  and 
sai/, 

Let  us  pray. 

ALMIGHTY (lod,  and  heavenly 
-  Father,  who,  of  thine  infinite 
love  and  goodnefs  towards  us,  haft 
given  to  us  thy  only  and  moft 
dearlv  beloved  Son  Jefus  Chrift,  to 
be  our  Redeemer,  and  the  Author 
of  everlafting  life ;  who,  after  he 
had  made  perfect  our  redemption 
by  his  death,  and  was  afcended  into 
heaven,  fent  abroad  into  the  world 
his  Apoftles,  Prophets,  Evangelifts, 
Do6lors,  and  Paftors ;  by  whofe 
labour  and  miniftry  he  gathered 
together  a  great  flock  in  all  the 
parts  of  the  world,  to  fet  forth  the 
eternal  praife  of  thy  holy  Name : 
For  thefe  fo  great  benefits  of  thy 
eternal  goodnefs,  and  for  that  thou 
haft  vouchfafed  to  call  thefe  thy 
fervants  here  prefent  to  the  fame 
Office  and  Miniftry  appointed  for 
the  falvation  of  mankind,  we  ren- 
der unto  thee  moft  hearty  thanks, 
we  praife  and  worfhip  thee ;  and 
we  humbly  befeech  thee,  by  the 
fame  thy  blefled  Son,  to  grant  un- 
to all,  which  either  here  or  elfe- 
where  call  upon  thy  holy  Name, 
that  we  may  continue  to  ihew  our- 
felves  thankful  unto  thee  for  thefe 


The  Ordering  of  Priefls 

and  all  other  thy  benefits ;  and 
that  we  may  daily  increale  and  go 
forwards  in  the  knowledae  and 
faith  of  thee  and  thy  Son,  by  the 
Holy  Spirit.  So  that  as  well  by 
thefe  thy  Minifters,  as  by  theiii 
over  whom  they  fliall  be  apjjointed 
thy  Minifters,  thy  holy  Name  may 
be  for  ever  glorified,  and  thy  blell- 
ed  kingdom  enlarged ;  through 
the  fame  thy  Son  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord,  who  liveth  and  reign- 
eth  with  thee  in  the  unity  of  the 
fame  Holy  Spirit,  world  -without 
end.    Amen. 


If  Wten  this  Prayer  is  done,  the  Bishop  zcith  the 
Priests  present  shall  /ai/  their  hands  severalh/  upon 
the  head  of  every  one  that  receiveth  the  Order  of 
Priesthood;  the  Receivers  humb/i/  kneeling  upon 
their  knees,  and  the  Bishop  sai/in^, 

RECEH^E  the  holy  Ghoft  for 
the  Office  and  Work  of  a 
Prieft  in  the  Church  of  God,  now 
committed  unto  thee  by  the  impo- 
fition  of  our  hands.  Whofe  fins 
thou  doft  forgive,  they  are  for- 
given ;  and  whofe  fins  thou  doft 
retain,  they  are  retained.  And  be 
thou  a  faithful  Difpenfer  of  the 
Word  of  God,  and  of  his  holy  Sa- 
craments ;  In  the  Name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft.    Amen. 

U  Then  the  Bishop  shall  deliver  to  every  one  of  them 
kneeling,  the  Bible  into  his  hand,  saying, 

TAKE  thou  Authority  to  preach 
the  Word  of  God,  and  to  mi- 


nifter  the  holy  Sacraments  in  th§ 
Congregation,  where  thou  (halt  be 
lawfully  appointed  thereunto. 

%  When  this  is  done,  the  Nicene  Creed  shall  he  sung 
or  said;  and  the  Bishop  shall  after  that  go  on  in  the 
Service  of  the  Communion,  tchich  all  they  that  re- 
ceive Orders  shall  tale  together,  and  remain  in  the 
same  place  where  Hands  were  laid  upon  them,  until 
such  time  as  they  have  received  the  Communion. 

^  The  Communion  being  done,  after  the  last  Collect, 
and  immcdii.tely  before  the  Benediction,  shall  be  said 
these  Collects. 


OST  merciful  Father,  we  be- 
feech  thee  to  fend  upon  thefe 
thy  fervants  thy  heavenly  blefl*- 
ing ;  that  they  may  be  clothed  with 
righteoufnefs,  and  that  thy  Word 
fpoken  by  their  mouths  may  have 
iuch  fuccefs,  that  it  may  never  be 
fpoken  in  vain.  Grant  alfo,  that 
we  may  have  grace  to  hear  and 
receive  what  they  fliall  deliver  out 
of  thy  moft  holy  Word,  or  agree- 
able to  the  fame,  as  the  means  of 
our  falvation ;  that  in  all  our  words 
and  deeds  we  may  feek  thy  glory, 
and  the  increafe  of  thy  kingdom  ; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

PREVENT  us,  O  Lord,  in  all 
our  doings,  with  thy  moft  gra- 
cious favour,  and  finther  us  with 
thy  continual  help  ;  that  in  all  our 
works  begun,  continued,  and  end- 
ed in  thee,  we  may  glorify  thy  holy 
Name,  and  finally  by  thy  mercy 
obtain  everlafting  life ;  through  Je- 
fus Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 


The  Ordering  of  Priejls. 


THE  peace  of  God,  which 
pafTetli  all  ii  n  d  c  rllanding', 
keep  your  hearts  and  minds  in 
the  knowledge  and  love  of  God, 
and  of  his  Son  Jefus  Chrift  our 


Lord  :  And  the  blefling  of  God 
Alniighty,  the  Fatlier,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Gholl,  be  amongft 
you,  and  remain  with  you  always. 
Amen. 


%  And  if  on  the  same  day  the  Order  of  Deacons  be  given  to  some,  and  the  Order  of  Priesthood  to  others ;  the 
Deacons  shall  be  first  presented,  and  then  the  Priests ;  a?id  it  shall  suffice  that  the  Litany  be  once  said  for 
both.  The  Collects  shall  both  be  used;  first,  that  for  Deacons,  then  that  for  Priests.  The  Epistle  shall  be 
Eplics.  iv.  7 — 13,  as  before  in  this  Office.  Immediately  after  which,  they  that  are  to  be  made  Deacons 
shall  take  the  Oath  of  Supremacy,  he  examined,  and  Ordained,  as  is  above  prescribed.  Then  one  of  them  hav- 
ing read  the  Gospel  (which  shall  be  either  out  of  St.  Matth.  ix.  3G — 38,  «.s  before  in  thin  Office;  or  else 
St.  Luke  xii.  35 — 38,  as  before  in  the  Form  for  the  Ordering  of  Deacons,)  they  that  are  to  be  made  Priests 
shall  likewise  take  the  Oath  of  Supremacy,  be  examined,  and  Ordained,  as  is  in  this  Office  before  appointed. 


3D 


THE 


FORM  OF  ORDAINING  OR  CONSECRATING 


OF    AN 


ARCHBISHOP     OR     BISHOP; 

Which  is  always  to  be  performed  upon  some  Sunday  or  Holy-day. 


fl  W/ien  all  things  are  dulj/  prepared  in  the  Church, 
and  set  in  order,  after  Morning  Prayer  is  ended, 
the  Archbishop  (or  some  other  Bishop  appointed) 

,  shall  begin  the  Communion  Service;  in  which  this 
shall  be 

The  Colledi. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  by  thy 
Son  Jefus  Chrift  didft  give  to 
thy  holy  Apoftles  many  excellent 
gifts,  and  didft  charge  them  to  feed 
thy  flock;  Give  grace,  we  befeech 
thee,  to  all  Bifliops,  the  Paftors  of 
thy  Church,  that  they  may  dili- 
gently preach  thy  Word,  and  du- 
ly adminifter  the  godly  Difcipline 
thereof;  and  grant  to  the  people, 
that  they  may  obediently  follow 
the  fame ;  that  all  may  receive  the 
crown  of  everlafting  glory;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  l^ord.    Amen. 

5[  And  another  Bishop  shall  read  the  Epistle. 

1  Tim.  iii.  1. 

THIS  is  a  true  faying,  If  a  man 
defire  the  Oflice  of  a  Bifliop, 
he  defireth  a  good  work.  A  Bi- 
fliop then  muil  be  blamelefs,  the 
hulband  of  one  wife,  vigilant,  fo- 
ber,  of  good  behaviour,  given  to 
hofpitality,  apt  to  teach ;  not  given 
to  wine,  no  ftriker,  not  greedy  of 
filthy  lucre,  but  patient,  not  a 
brawler,  not  covetous ;  one  that 
ruleth  well  his  own  houfe,  having 


his  children  in  fubjedlion  with  all 
gravity ;  (For  if  a  man  know  not 
how  to  rule  his  own  houfe,  how 
ihall  he  take  care  of  the  Church  of 
God?)  Not  a  novice,  left  being 
lifted  up  with  pride  he  fall  into  the 
condemnation  of  the  devil.  More- 
over, he  muft  have  a  good  report 
of  them  which  are  without ;  left 
he  fall  into  reproach,  and  the  fnare 
of  the  devil. 

Or  this. 

For  the  Epijile.    A6ts  xx.  17. 

FROM  Miletus  Paul  fent  to 
Ephefus,  and  called  the  elders 
of  the  Church.  And  when  they 
were  come  to  him,  he  faid  unto 
them,  Ye  know,  from  the  fii-ft  day 
that  I  came  into  Alia,  after  what 
manner  I  have  been  with  you  at 
all  feafons,  ferving  the  Lord  with 
all  humility  of  mind,  and  W\t\\  ma- 
ny tears  and  temptations  which 
befel  me  by  the  lying  in  wait  of 
the  Jews :  and  how  I  kept  back 
nothing  that  was  profitable  unto 
you,  but  have  fliewed  you,  and 
have  taught  you  publickly,  and 
from  houfe  to  houfe,  teftiiying  both 
to  the  Jews,  and  alfo  to  the  Greeks, 
repentance  toward  God,  and  faith 
toward  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift.  And 


The  Confecration  of  BiJIiops. 


now  behold,  I  go  hound  in  the 
fpirit  unto  Jerul'aleni,  not  know- 
inff  the  thing's  that  lliall  befal  me 
there ;  fave  that  the  Holy  Gholl 
witnefleth  in  every  city,  faying, 
That  bonds  and  affli6tions  abide 
me.  But  none  of  thefe  things  move 
me,  neither  count  I  my  life  dear 
unto  myfelf,  fo  that  I  might  finirti 
my  courfe  with  joy,  and  the  mi- 
nillry  which  I  have  received  of  the 
Lord  Jefus,  to  teftify  the  Gofpel 
of  the  erace  of  God.     And  now 

c5 

behold,  I  know  that  ye  all,  among 
whom  I  have  gone  preaching  the 
kingdom  of  God,  Ihall  fee  my  face 
no  more.  Wherefore  I  take  you 
to  record  this  day,  that  I  am  pure 
from  the  blood  of  all  men.  For  I 
have  not  ftiunned  to  declare  unto 
you  all  the  counfel  of  God.  Take 
heed  therefore  unto  yourfelves,  and 
to  all  the  flock  over  the  which  the 
Holy  Ghoft  hath  made  you  Over- 
feers,  to  feed  the  Church  of  God, 
which  he  hath  purchafed  with  his 
own  blood.  For  I  know  this,  that 
after  my  departing  fliall  grievous 
wolves  enter  in  among  you,  not 
fparing  the  flock.  Alfo  of  your 
own  felves  fliall  men  arife  fpeak- 
ing  perverfe  things,  to  draw  away 
difciples  after  them.  Therefore 
watch,  and  remember,  that  by  the 
fpace  of  three  years,  I  ceafed  not 
to  warn  eveiy  one  night  and  day 
with  tears.  And  now,  brethren,  I 
commend  you  to  God,  and  to  the 


word  of  his  grace,  which  is  able  to 
build  you  up,  and  to  give  you  an 
inheritance  among  all  them  which 
are  fanctified.  1  have  coveted  no 
man's  iilver,  or  gold,  or  apparel ; 
yea,  ye  yourfelves  know,  that  thefe 
hands  have  miniftered  unto  my 
neceflities,  and  to  them  that  were 
with  me.  I  have  Ihewed  you  all 
things,  how  that  fo  labouring  ye 
ought  to  fupport  the  weak ;  and  to 
remember  the  words  of  the  Lord 
Jefus,  how  he  faid,  It  is  more 
blefled  to  give  than  to  receive. 

^  Then  another  Bishop  shall  read  the  Gospel. 

St.  John  xxi.  15. 

JESUS  faith  to  Simon  Peter,  Si- 
mon, fon  of  Jonas,  loveft  thou 
me  more  than  thefe?  He  faith  un- 
to him.  Yea,  Lord,  thou  knowefl 
that  I  love  thee.  He  faith  unto 
him.  Feed  my  lambs.  He  faith  to 
him  again  the  fecond  time,  Simon, 
fon  of  Jonas,  loveft  thou  me?  He 
faith  unto  him.  Yea,  Lord,  thou 
knoweft  that  I  love  thee.  He  faith 
unto  him.  Feed  my  flieep.  He  faith 
unto  him  the  third  time,  Simon, 
fon  of  Jonas,  loveft  thou  me?  Peter 
was  grieved  becaufe  he  faid  unto 
him  the  third  time,  Loveft  thou 
me?  And  he  faid  unto  him,  Lord, 
thou  knoweft  all  things ;  thou 
knoweft  that  I  love  thee.  Jefus 
faith  unto  him,  Feed  my  ilieep. 
Or  elfe  this.  St.  John  xx.  19. 

THE  fame  day  at  evening,  be- 
ing the  flrft  day  of  the  week, 
3D2 


The  Confecration  of  Bifliops. 


when  the  doors  were  fliut  where 
the  difciples  were  affembled  for 
fear  of  tlie  Jews,  came  Jefus,  and 
flood  in  the  midft,  and  faith  unto 
them,  Peace  be  unto  you.  And 
when  he  had  fo  faid,  he  fliewed 
unto  them  his  hands  and  his  fide. 
Then  were  the  difciples  glad,. when 
they  faw  the  Lord.  Then  faith 
Jefus  to  them  again,  Peace  be  un- 
to you :  as  my  Father  hath  fent  me, 
even  fo  fend  I  you.  And  when  he 
had  faid  this,  he  breathed  on  them, 
and  faith  unto  them,  Receive  ye 
the  holy  Ghoft.  Whofefoever  fins 
ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  imto 
them ;  and  whofefoever  fins  ye  re- 
tain, they  are  retained. 

Or  this.    St.  Matth.  xxviii.  18. 

JESUS  came  and  fpake  unto 
them,  faying.  All  power  is  giv- 
en unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth. 
Go  ye  therefore  and  teach  all  na- 
tions, baptizing  them  In  the  Name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghofi; ;  teaching  them 
to  obferve  all  things  whatfoever  I 
have  commanded  you :  and  lo,  I 
am  \vith  you  alway,  even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world. 

U  After  the  Gospel,  and  the  Nicene  Creed,  and  the 
Sermon  are  ended,  the  Elected  Bishop  (vested  rcith 
hi.1  Rochet)  shall  he  presented  by  tno  Bishops  unto 
the  Archbishop  of  that  province  (or  to  some  oilier 
Sishop  ajipointed  by  luuful  commission')  the  Arch- 
bishop sitting  ill  his  chair  near  the  holy  Table,  and 
the  Bishops  that  present  him  saying, 

MOST   Reverend    Father    in 
God,  we  prefent  unto  you 


this  godly  and  well-learned  man 
to  be  Ordained  and  Confecrated 
Bifliop. 

%  Then  shall  the  Archbishop  demand  the  King's  Man- 
date for  the  Consecration,  and  cause  it  to  be  read. 
And  the  Oath  touching  the  acknowledgement  of  the 
King's  Supremacy,  shall  be.ministered  to  the  persons 
elected,  as  it  is  set  down  before  in  the  Form  for  the 
Ordering  of  Deacons.  And  then  shall  also  be  mi- 
nistered unto  them  the  Oath  of  due  Obedience  to  the 
Archbishop,  asfolloweth. 

The  Oath  of  due  Obedience  to  the 
Archbishop. 

IN  the  Name  of  God.  Amen.  I 
N.  chofen  Bilhop  of  the  Church 
and  See  of  A'^  do  profefs  and  pro- 
mife  all  due  reverence  and  obedi- 
ence to  the  Arch  bifliop  and  to  the 
Metropolitical  Church  of  N.  and 
to  their  Succeflbrs :  So  help  me 
God,  through  Jefus  Chrift. 

TJ  This  Oath  shall  not  be  made  at  the  Consecration  of 
an  Archbishop. 

^  Then  the  Archbishop  shall  move  the  Congregation 
present  to  pray,  saying  thus  to  them : 

BRETHREN,  it  is  written  in 
the  Gofpel  of  Saint  Luke,  That 
our  Saviour  Chrifi;  continued  the 
whole  night  in  prayer,  before  he 
did  choofe  and  fend  forth  his  twelve 
Apollles.  It  is  written  alfo  in  the 
A6ls  of  the  Apollles,  That  the 
Difciples  who  were  at  Antioch  did 
fail  and  pray,  before  they  laid  hands 
on  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  fent 
them  forth.  Let  us  therefore,  fol- 
lowing the  example  of  our  Saviour 
Chriil,  and  his  Apollles,  firll  fall 
to  prayer,  before  we  admit,  and 


The  Coiifecration  of  Bipiops. 


fend  forth  this  perfoii  prefented 
unto  us,  to  the  work  whereunto 
WG  truft  the  Holy  Ghoft  hath  call- 
ed him. 

If  And  then  shall  he  said  the  hitany,  as  before  in  the 
Form  of  Ordering  Deacons,  save  only,  that  after  this 
place  That  it  may  please  thee  to  illuminate  all  Bi- 
shops, <5)('.  the  proper  Stiff  rage  there  following  shall 
be  omitted,  and  this  inserted  instead  of  it ; 

THAT  it  may  pleafe  thee  to 
blefs  this  our  Brother  elected, 
and  to  fend  thy  grace  upon  him, 
that  he  may  duly  execute  the 
Office  whereunto  he  is  called,  to 
the  edifying  of  thy  Church,  and 
to  the  honour,  praife  and  glory  of 
thy  Name ; 

Anfwer.    TFe  hefeech  thee  to  hear 
us,  good  Lord. 

^  Then  shall  be  said  this  Prayer  following. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  giver  of  all 
good  things,  who  by  thy  Holy 
Spirit  hall  appointed  divers  Orders 
of  Minillers  in  thy  Church  ;  Mer- 
cifully behold  this  thy  fervant  now 

called  to  the  Work  and  Miniftry  of 

.1 

a  Billiop ;  and  replenifli  him  fo 
with  the  truth  of  thy  do6lrine,  and 
adorn  him  with  innocency  of  life, 
that,  both  by  word  and  deed,  he 
may  faithfully  ferve  thee  in  this 
Office,  to  the  glory  of  thy  Name, 
and  the  edifying  and  well  govern- 
ing of  thy  Church ;  through  the 
merits  of  our  Saviour  Jefus  Chrift, 
who  liveth  and  rcio-neth  with  thee 
and  the  Holy  Ghoft,  world  with- 
out  end.    Amen. 


1[  Then  the  Archbishop,  sitting  in  his  chair,  sliall  say 
to  him  that  is  to  be  Consecrated. 


VSlJ 


BROTHER,  forafmuch  as  the 
holy  Scripture  and  the  ancient 
Canons  conunand,  tliat  we  fliould 
not  be  hafty  in  laying  on  hands, 
and  admitting  any  perfon  to  (io- 
vernment  in  the  Church  of  Chrift, 
which  he  hath  purchafed  with  no 
lefs  price  than  the  effiiliou  of  his 
own  blood;  before  1  admit  you  to 
this  Adminiftration,  I  will  examine 
you  in  certain  Articles,  to  the  end 
that  the  Congregation  prefent  may 
have  a  trial,  and  bear  witnefs,  how 
you  be  minded  to  behave  youifelf 
in  the  Church  of  God. 

ARE  you  jDcrfuaded  that  you  be 
truly  called  to  this  Minift ra- 
tion, according  to  the  will  of  our 
Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  and  the  order 
of  this  Realm? 

Anfwer.   I  am  fo  perfuaded. 

'  The  Archbishop. 

ARE  you  perfuaded  that  the 
holy  Scriptures  contain  fuffi- 
ciently  all  Do6trine  required  of  ne- 
ceffity  for  eternal  falvation  through 
faith  in  Jefus  Chrift?  And  are  you 
determined  out  of  the  fame  holy 
Scriptures  to  inftru6t  the  people 
committed  to  your  charge ;  and  to 
teach  or  maintain  nothing  as  re- 
quired of  neceflity  to  eternal  fal- 
vation, but  that  which  you  fliall  be 
perfuaded  may  be  concluded  and 
proved  by  the  fame? 


The  Co7ifecration  of  Bijhops. 


Anfwer.   I  am  fo  perfuaded,  and 
determined,  by  God's  grace. 
The  Archbishop. 

WILL  you  then  faithfully  ex- 
ercife  yourfelf  in  the  fame 
holy  Scriptures,  and  call  upon  God 
by  prayer,  for  the  true  undei-ftand- 
ing  of  the  fame ;  fo  as  you  may  be 
able  by  them  to  teach  and  exhort 
with  wholefome  Do(ftrine,  and  to 
wathftand  and  convince  the  gain- 
fay  ers  ? 

Anfwer.    I  will  fo   do,   by  the 
help  of  God. 

The  Archbishop. 

ARE  you  ready,  with  all  faithful 
diligence,  to  banifli  and  drive 
away  all  erroneous  and  llrange 
dodVi'ine  contraiy  to  God's  Word  ; 
and  both  privately  and  openly  to 
call  upon  and  encourage  others  to 
the  fame? 

Anfwer.    I  am  ready,  the  Lord 
being  my  helper. 

The  Archbishop. 

WILL  you  deny  all  ungodli- 
nefs  and  worldly  lufts,  and 
live  foberly,  righteoully,  and  god- 
ly, in  this  prefent  world ;  that  you 
may  fliew  yourfelf  in  all  things  an 
example  of  good  works  unto  others, 
that  the  adverfaiy  may  be  alhamed, 
liaving  nothing  to  fay  againft  you? 
Anftcer.  I  will  fo  do,  the  Lord 
being  my  helper. 

The  Archbishop. 

WILL  you  maintain  and  fet 
forward,  as  much   as  fliall 


lie  in  you,  quietnefs,  love,  and 
peace  among  all  men ;  and  fuch  as 
be  unquiet,  difobedient,  and  cri- 
minous, within  your  Diocefe,  cor- 
rect and  punifli,  according  to  fuch 
authority  as  you  have  by  God's 
Word,  and  as  to  you  fliall  be 
committed  by  the  Ordinance  of 
this  Realm? 

Anfwer.    I  will  fo  do,   by  the 
help  of  God. 

The  Archbishop. 

WILL  you  be  faithful  in  Or- 
daining, fending,  or  laying 
hands  upon  others? 

Anfwer.    I  will  fo  be,   by  the 
help  of  God. 

The  Archbishop. 

WILL  you  Ihew  yoiirfelf  gen- 
tle, and  be  merciful  for 
Chrift's  fake  to  poor  and  needy 
people,  and  to  all  ilrangers  defti- 
tute  of  help? 

Anfwer.    I  will  fo  fliew  myfelf, 
by  God's  help. 

%  Then  the  Archbishop  standing  np  shall  sat/, 

ALMIGHTY  God,  our  heaven- 
-  ly  Father,  who  hath  given  you 
a  good  will  to  do  all  thefe  things. 
Grant  alio  unto  you  ftreno-th  and 
power  to  perform  the  fame ;  that, 
he  accomplifliing  in  you  the  good 
work  which  he  hath  begun,  you 
may  be  found  perfec^t  and  irrepre- 
henlible  at  the  latter  day ;  through 
Jefus  Chriil  our  Lord.    Amen. 


The  Confecration  of  .B'ljhoin. 


^  Then  sha/l  the  Bishop  elect  put  on  l/ie  rest  i^'  the 
Episcopal  habit;  and  kneeling  doicn,  Vciii,  Creator 
Spii-itus,  shall  be  sung  or  said  over  him,  the  Arch- 
bishop beginning,  and  the  Hislwps,  with  others  that 
are  present,  anszeering  by  verses,  as  followeth. 

COME,  Holy  Ghoft,  our  fouls 
infpire, 
And  lighten  with  celejlialjire. 
Tliou  the  anointing  Spirit  art, 
Who  dojl  thy  feven-f old  gifts  impart. 
Thy  bleired  Un6tion  from  a}3ove. 
Is  comfort,  life,  and  fire  of  love. 
Enable  with  perpetual  light 
The  dulnefs  of  our  blinded  fight. 
Anoint  and  cheer  our  foiled  face 
With  the  abundance  of  thy  grace. 
Keep  far  our  foes,  give  peace  at 

home : 
Where  thou  art  guide,  no  ill  can 

come. 
Teach  us  to  know  the  Father,  Son, 
And  thee,  of  both,  to  be  but  One. 
That,  through  the  ages  all  along. 
This  may  be  our  endlefs  fong  ; 
Praife  to  thy  eternal  merit, 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit. 

Or  this. 

COME,    Holy   Ghoft,    eternal 
God,  ^c. 

As  before  in  the  Form  for  Ordering  Priests. 
^  That  ended,  the  Archbishop  shall  sai/, 

Lord,  hear  our  prayer. 
Anfwer.   And  let  our  cry  come 
unto  thee. 

Let  us  pray. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  and  moft 
merciful  Father,  who  of  thine 
infinite  goodnefs  haft  given  thine 
only  and  dearly  beloved  Son  Jefus 


Chrift,  to  be  our  Redeemer,  and 
the  Author  of  everlafting  life;  who, 
after  that  he  had  made  perfect  our 
Redemption  by  his  death,  and  was 
afcended  into  heaven,  poured  down 
his  gifts  abundantly  upon  men, 
making  fonie  Apoftles,  Ibme  Pro- 
phets, fome  Evangelifts,  fome  Paf- 
tors  and  Doctors,  to  the  edifying 
and  making  perfect  his  Church ; 
Grant,  we  befeech  thee,  to  this 
thy  fervant  fuch  grace,  that  he 
may  evermore  be  ready  to  fpread 
abroad  thy  Gofpel,  the  glad  tidings 
of  reconciliation  with  thee;  and  ufe 
the  authority  given  him,  not  to 
deftru6lion,  but  to  falvation ;  not 
to  hurt,  but  to  help :  fo  that  as  a 
wife  and  faithful  fervant,  giving  to 
thy  family  their  portion  in  due  fea- 
fon,  he  may  at  laft  be  received  in- 
to everlafting  joy ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord,  who,  with  thee 
and  the  Holy  Ghoft  liveth  and 
reigneth,  one  God,  world  without 
end.    Amen. 

%  Then  the  Archbishop  and  Bishops  present  shall  latf 
their  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  elected  Bishop 
kneeling  before  them  upon  his  knees,  the  Archbishop 
saying, 

RECEIVE  the  holy  Ghoft,  for 
the  Office  and  Work  of  a 
Biftiop  in  the  Church  of  God,  now 
committed  unto  thee  by  the  Impo- 
fition  of  our  hands  ;  In  the  Name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  Amen.  And 
remember  that  thou  ftir  up  the 
grace  of  God  which  is  given  thee 


The  Confecration  of  Bi/hops. 


by  this  Impofition  of  our  hands  : 
for  God  hath  not  given  us  the 
fpii'it  of  fear,  but  of  power,  and 
love,  and  fobernefs. 

f  Thfn  the  Archbishop  shall  dtUver  him  the  Bible, 
saj/iiig, 

GIVE  heed  unto  reading,  ex- 
hortation, and  doctrine.  Think 
upon  the  things  contained  in  this 
Book.  Be  dihgent  in  them,  that 
the  increafe  coming  thereby  may 
be  raanifeft  unto  all  men.  Take 
heed  unto  thyfelf,  and  to  do6lrine, 
and  be  diligent  m  doing  them  : 
for  by  fo  doing  thou  fbalt  both 
fave  thyfelf  and  them  that  hear 
thee.  Be  to  the  flock  of  Chrift  a 
ihepherd,  not  a  wolf;  feed  them, 
devour  them  not.  Hold  up  the 
weak,  heal  the  fick,  bind  up  the 
broken,  bring  again  the  out-calls, 
feek  the  loll.  Be  fo  merciful,  that 
you  be  not  too  remifs ;  fo  minifter 
difcipline,  that  you  forget  not  mer- 
cy: that  when  the  chief  Shepherd 
(hall  appear  you  may  receive  the  ne- 
ver-fading crown  of  glory;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

^  Then  the  Archbishop  shall  proceed  in  the  Commii- 
mon-Servire ;  zcilh  whom  the  new  Consecrated  Bishop 
(with  others)  shall  also  communicate. 

IT  And  for  the  last  Colled,  immediately  before  the  Be- 
nediction, shall  be  said  these  Prayers. 

Mi  )ST  merciful  Father,  we  be- 
I'eech  thee  to  fend  down  up- 
on tliis  thy  fervant  thy  heavenly 


bleffing ;  and  fo  endue  him  with 
thy  holy  Spirit,  that  he,  preaching 
thy  Word,  may  not  only  be  earneft 
to  reprove,  befeech,  and  rebuke 
with  all  patience  and  doctrine ;  but 
alfo  may  be  to  fuch  as  believe  a 
wholefome  example,  in  word,  in 
converfation,  in  love,  in  faith,  in 
chaftity,  and  in  purity;  that,  faith 
fully  fulfilling  his  courfe,  at  the  lat- 
ter day  lie  may  receive  the  crown 
of  righteoufnefs  laid  up  by  the 
Lord  the  righteous  Judge,  who 
liveth  and  reigneth  one  God  with 
the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghoft, 
world  without  end.    Amen. 

PREVENT  us,  O  Lord,  in  all 
our  doings,  with  thy  moft  gra- 
cious favour,  and  further  us  with 
thy  continual  help ;  that  in  all  our 
works  begun,  continued,  and  end- 
ed in  thee,  we  may  glorify  thy 
holy  Name,  and  finally  by  thy  mer- 
cy obtain  everlafting  life;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.    Amen. 

THE  peace  of  God,  which  paff- 
eth  all  underllanding,  keep 
your  hearts  and  minds  in  the  know- 
ledge and  love  of  God,  and  of  his 
Son  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord :  And 
the  Blefling  of  God  Almighty,  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft  be  amongll  you,  and  remain 
with  you  always.    Amen. 


A  FORM  OF 

PllAYEH    WITH    THANKSGIVING, 

To  be  used  yearly  upon  the  Fifth  Day  of  November^ 

For  the  happy  DeHveraiice  of  King  JAMES  I.  and  the  three  Eftates 
of  England,  from  the  moft  traitorous  and  bloody-intended  Maflacre 
by  Gunpowder :  And  alfo  for  the  happy  Arrival  of  his  Majefty  King 
William  on  this  Day,  for  the  Deliverance  of  our  Church  and  Nation. 

iT  The  JM'nnstcr  of  cveri/  Parish  shall  give  warning  to  his  Parishio7iers  puhlicldy  in  the  Church 

at  Morning  Prayer,  the  ^Sunday  before,  for  the  due  Observation  of  the  said  Day.     And  after 

Morning  Prayer,  or  Preaching,  upon  the  said  Fifth  Day  o/'  November,  shall  read  puhlickly, 

distinctly,  and  plainly,  the  Act  of  Parliament,  made  in  the  third  Year  of  King  James  the  First, 

for  the  Observation  of  it. 

f  The  Service  shall  be  the  same  with  the  usual  Office  for  Holy-days  in  all  things;  except  where 
it  is  hereafter  otherwise  appointed. 

IF  If  this  Day  shall  happen  to  be  Sunday,  only  the  Collect  proper  for  that  Sunday  shall  be  added 
to  this  Office  in  its  place. 


%  Morning  Prayer  shall  begin  with 
these  Sentences. 

THE  Lord  is  full  of  compaffion, 
and  mercy  :  long-fuft'ering,  and 
of  great  goodnefs.    Pfalm  ciii.  8. 

He  will  not  alway  be  chiding  : 
neither  keepeth  he  his  anger  for 
ever.    Ver.  9. 

He  hath  not  dealt  with  us  after 
our  fins  :  nor  rewarded  us  accord- 
hig  to  our  wickednefs.    Ver.  10. 

IT  Instead  of  Venite  exultemus  skaH  this  Hymn  fol- 
lowing he  used;  one  Verse  by  the  Priest,  and  another 
by  the  Clerk  arid  people. 

OGive  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  for 
he  is  gracious  :  and  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever.    Pfalm  cvii.  1 . 

Let  them  give  thanks,  whom  the 

Lord  hath  redeemed  :  and  delivered 

from  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  Ver.  2. 

Many  a  time  have  they  fought 

againft  me  from  my  youth  up  :  may 

Ifrael  now  fay.   Pfalm  cxxix.  1. 


Yea,  many  a  time  have  they  vexed 
me  from  my  youth  vp  :  hut  they  have 
not  prevailed  againji  me.   Ver.  2. 

They  have  privily  laid  their  net 
to  deftroy  me  without  a  caufe  :  yea, 
even  without  a  caufe  have  they 
made  a  pit  for  my  foul.  Pf.  xxxv.  7. 

They  have  laid  a  net  for  my  feet y 

and  prefj'ed  down  my  foul:  they  have 

digged  a  pit  before  me,   and  are 

fallen  into  the  midjl  of  it  themfelves. 

Pfalm  Ivii.  7. 

Great  is  our  Lord,  and  great  is 
his  power :  yea,  and  his  wifdom  is 
infinite.    Pfalm  cxlvii.  5. 

The  Lord  fetteth  up  the  meek  : 
and  hringeth  the  ungodly  down  to 
the  fl-round.  Ver.  6. 

Let  thy  hand  be  upon  the  man 
of  thy  right  hand  :  and  upon  the 
fon  of  man  whom  thou  madefl;  fo 
fi;rong  for  thine  own  felf.  Pfalm 
Ixxx.  17. 

3E 


And  Jo  ivill  not  we  go  hack  from 
thee  :  O  let  us  live,  and  we  Jhall  call 
upon  thy  Name.   Ver.  18. 

Gloiy  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 
^  As  it  teas  in  the  hegijuiing,  is 
note,  and  ever  Jhall  he  :  tvorld  with- 
out end.  Amen. 

Proper  PJalms.    Ixiv,  cxxiv,  cxxv. 

Proper  Lemons. 

The  Firji.  2  Sam.  xxii. 

Te  Deum. 

The  Second.  A6ls  xxiii. 

Juhilate. 

%  In  the  Suffrages  after  the  Creed  these  shall  be  in- 
serted and  used  for  the  King. 

Prieji.  O  I^ord,  fave  the  King ; 

People.  Who  putteth  his  tiufl 
in  thee. 

Prieji.  Send  him  help  from  thy 
holy  place. 

People.  And  evermore  mightily 
defend  him. 

,     Prieji.  Let  his  enemies  have  no 
advantage  againft  him. 

People.  Let  not  the  wicked  ap- 
proach to  hurt  him. 

^  Instead  of  thefrst  Collect  at  Morning  Praj/er  shall 
these  tzc'o  lie  used. 

ALMIGHTY  God,  who  haft  in 
all  ages  fliewed  thy  Power  and 
Mercy  in  the  miraculous  and  gra- 
cious deliverances  of  thy  Church, 
and  in  the  protection  of  righteous 
and  religious  Kings  and  States  pro- 
fefliug  thy  holy  and  eternal  truth, 
from  the  wicked  confpiracics,  and 
malicious  i)ra6tices  of  all  the  ene- 


Gunpoxaler  Treafon. 

mies  thereof:  We  yield  thee  our 
unfeigned  thanks  and  praife,  for  the 
wonderful  and  mighty  Deli\'erance 
of  our  gracious  Sovereign  King 
James  the  Firft,  the  Queen,  the 
Prince,  and  all  the  Royal  Branch- 
es, with  the  Nobility,  Clergy,  and 
Commons  oi  England,  then  aflem- 
bled  in  Parliament,  by  Popilli  trea- 
chery appointed  as  ftieep  to  the 
flaughter,  in  a  moft  barbarous  and 
favage  manner,  beyond  the  exam- 
ples of  former  ages.  From  this 
imnatural  Confpiracy,  not  our  me- 
rit, but  thy  mercy ;  not  our  fore- 
light,  but  thy  providence  delivered 
us :  And  therefore  not  unto  us, 
O  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto 
thy  Name  be  afcribed  all  honour 
and  glory,  in  all  Churches  of  the 
faints, 
ration 


gene- 
our 


glory 

from  generation   to 
through  Jefus  Chrifl 
Lord.    Amen. 

ACCEPT  alfo,  moft  gracious 
God,  of  our  unfeigned  thanks 
for  filling  our  hearts  again  with  joy 
and  gladnefs,  after  the  time  that 
thou  hadft  affliCled  us,  and  putting 
a  new  fong  into  our  mouths,  by 
bringing  His  MajeftyKingiFF?7//w//, 
upon  this  Day,  for  the  Deliverance 
of  our  Church  and  Nation  from 
Poj)ifli  1  yranny  and  arbitrary  Pow- 
er. We  adore  the  wifdom  and 
jufticc  of  thy  Providence,  which  fo 
timely  interpofed  in  our  extreme 
danger,  and  difappointed  all  the 
defigns  of  our  enemies.     Wc  be- 


Gunpowde 

feech  thee,  give  us  fucli  a  lively 
and  lalUnir  fenfe  of  what  thou  didil 
then,  and  hail  fince  that  time  done 
for  us,  that  we  may  not  grow  fe- 
cure  and  carelefs  in  our  obedience, 
by  prefuming  upon  thy  great  and 
undeferved  goodnefs ;  but  that  it 
may  lead  us  to  repentance,  and 
move  us  to  be  the  more  diligent 
and  zealous  in  all  the  duties  of  our 
Religion,  which  thou  haft  in  a  mar- 
vellous manner  preferved  to  us. 
Let  truth  and  juftice,  brotherly 
kindnefs  and  charity,  devotion  and 
piety,  concord  and  unity,  with  all 
other  virtues,  fo  flouriiii  among  us, 
that  they  may  be  the  liability  of 
our  times,  and  make  this  Church 
a  praife  in  the  earth.  All  which 
we  humbly  beg  for  the  fake  of  our 
bleffed  Lord  and  Saviour.    Amen. 

%  In  the  end  of  the  Litani/  {which  shall  akcai/s  this 
■     Day  be  used)  after  the  Collect  [We  humbly  be- 
seech thee,  O  Father,  &)C.']  shall  this  be  said  which 
followcth. 

ALMIGHTY  God  and  heaven- 
ly Father,  who  of  thy  gracious 
Providence,  and  tender  mercy  to- 
wards us,  didft  prevent  the  malice 
and  imaginations  of  our  enemies, 
by  difcovering  and  confounding 
their  horrible  and  wicked  Enter- 
prize,  plotted  and  intended  this 
day  to  have  been  executed  againft 
the  King,  and  the  whole  State  of 
England,  for  the  fubverfion  of  the 
Government  and  Religion  eftablilh- 
ed  among  us ;  and  didft  likewife 
upon  this  day  wonderfully  coududt 


r  Treafon. 

thy  Senant   King    William,    and 
bring  him  fafely  into  England,  to 
preferve  us  from  the  attempts  of 
our  enemies  to  bereave  us  of  our 
Relimon  and  Laws:  We  moil  hum- 
bly  praife   and  magnify  thy  moft 
glorious  Name  for  thy  imfpeakable 
goodnefs  towards  us,  expreifed  in 
both  thefe  a6ts  of  thy  mercy.    We 
confefs  it  has  been  of  thy  mercy 
alone,  that  we  are  not  confumed : 
For  our  fins  have  cried  to  heaven 
againft  us;  and  our  iniquities  juftly 
called  for  vengeance  upon  us.   But 
thou  haft  not  dealt  with  us  after 
our  fins,   nor  rewarded   us   after 
our  iniquities  ;  nor  given  us  over, 
as  we  dei'erved,  to  be  a  prey  to 
our  enemies  ;   but   hail  in  mercy 
delivered  us  from  their  malice,  and 
preferved  us  from  death  and  de- 
ftru6lion.    Let  the  confideration  of 
this  thy  repeated  goodnefs,  O  Lord, 
work  in  us  true  repentance,  that 
iniquity  may  not  be  our  ruin.   And 
increafe  in  us  more  and  more  a 
lively  faith  and  love,  fruitful  in  all 
holy  obedience ;  that  thou  mayeft 
ftill  continue  thy  favour,  with  the 
light  of  thy  GofjDcl,  to  us  and  our 
pofterity  for  evermore ;   and  that 
for  thy  dear  Son's  fake,  Jefus  Chrift 
our  only  Mediator  and  Advocate. 
Amen. 

^  Instead  of  the  Praijer  [In  time  of  War  and  Tu- 
mults] shall  he  used  this  Prayer  following. 

Lord,  who  didft  this  day  dif- 
cover  the  fnares  of  death  that 
3E2 


o 


Strengthen  the  hands 
Sovereign  Kini>' 


were  laid  for  us,  and  didft  wonder- 
fully deliver  us  fi'om  the  fame ;  Be 
thou  ftill  our  mighty  Prote($lor,  and 
fcatter  our  enemies  that  delight  in 
blood :  Infatuate  and  defeat  their 
counfels,  abate  their  jjride,  af- 
fwage  their  malice,  and  confound 
their  devices 
of  our   ffracious 

GEORGE,  and  all  that  are  put  in 
authority  under  him,  \\Ai\v  judge- 
ment and  jullice  to  cut  off  all  iiich 
workers  of  iniquity,  as  turn  Reli- 
gion into  Rebellion,  and  Faith  in- 
to Faction  ;  that  they  may  never 
prevail  againft  us,  or  triumph  in 
the  ruin  of  thy  Church  among  us : 
but  that  our  gracious  Sovereign, 

i-efei^ved 


and  his  Realms,  being  pr 
in  thy  true  Religion,  and  by  thy 
merciful  goodnefs  protected  in  the 
fame,  we  may  all  duly  ferve  thee, 
and  give  thee  thanks  in  thy  holy 
congregation ;  through  Jefus  Chrilt 
our  Lord.    Amen. 

%  In  the  Communion  Service,  instead  of  the  Collect 
for  the  Day,  shall  this  rchich  folluweth  be  used. 

ETERNAL  God,  and  our  moft 
mighty  Protestor,  we  thy  un- 
worthy fervants  do  humbly  prefent 
ourfelves  before  thy  Majeliy,  ac- 
knowledging thy  power,  wifdom, 
and  goodnefs,  in  preferving  the 
King,  and  the  Three  Eftates  of 
the  Realm  of  Eni(lanfl  affembled 
in  Parliament,  from  the  dellru^tion 
this  day  intended  againll  them. 
Make  us,  we  befeecl)  thcc,  truly 


Gmipoivder  T'reafon, 

thankful  for  this,  and  for  all  other 
thy  great  mercies  towards  us ;  par- 
ticularly for  making  this  day  again 
memorable,  by  a  frelh  inltance  of 
thy  loving- kindnefs  towards  us. 
We  blefs  thee  for  giving  his  late 
Majefly  King  William  a  fafe  arrival 
here,  and  for  making  all  oppofition 
fall  before  him,  till  he  became  our 
King  and  Governour.  We  befeech 
thee  to  protect  and  defend  our 
Sovereign  King  GEORGE,  and 
all  the  Royal  Family,  from  all  trea- 
fons  and  confpiracies ;  Preferve  him 
in  thy  faith,  fear,  and  love ;  Prof- 
per  his  Reign  with  long  hap])inefs 
here  on  earth ;  and  crown  him  with 
everlafting  glory  hereafter;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  only  Saviour  and 
Redeemer.    Amen. 


The  Epijlle.    Rom.  xiii.  L 

LET  every  foul  ])e  fubje(51;  unto 
the  higher  powers  ;  for  there 
is  no  power,  but  of  God :  the  pow- 
ers that  be  are  ordained  of  God. 
Whofoever  therefore  relifteth  the 
power  relifteth  the  ordinance  of 
(lod ;  and  tliey  that  reiift  (hall  re- 
ceive to  themfelves  damnation.  For 
rulers  are  not  a  terror  to  good 
works,  but  to  the  evil.  Wilt  thou 
then  not  be  afraid  of  the  power? 
do  that  which  is  good,  and  thou 
flialt  have  ])raife  of  the  fame :  for  he 
is  the  minifter  of  Ciod  to  thee  for 
a'oo(k  But  if  thou  do  that  which 
is  evil,  be  afraid ;  for  he  bcareth 


not  the  fword  in  vain 
the  miniller  of  God,  a  revenger  to 
execute  wrath  upon  him  that  doeth 
evil.  Wherefore  ye  mull  needs  be 
fubjecft,  not  only  for  wrath,  but 
alfo  for  confcience  fake.  For  for 
this  caufe  pay  ye  tribute  alfo ;  for 
they  are  God's  minillers,  attending 
continually  upon  this  very  thing. 
Render  therefore  to  all  their  dues ; 
tribute  to  whom  tribute  is  due, 
cullom  to  whom  cuftom,  fear  to 
whom  fear,  honour  to  whoni  ho- 
nour.* 

The  Gofpel.  St.  Luke  ix.  51. 

AND  it  came  to  pafs,  when  the 
time  was  come  that  he  fliould 
be  received  up,  he  ftedfaftly  fet 
his  face  to  go  to  .Terufalem,  and 
fent  meffengers  before  his  face ; 
and  they  went  and  entered  into  a 
village  of  the  Samaritans,  to  make 
ready  for  him  :  And  they  did  not 
receive  him,  becaufe  his  face  was 
as  though  he  would  go  to  Jerufa- 
lem.  And  when  his  difciples  James 
and  John  faw  this,  they  faid.  Lord, 
wilt  thou  that  we  command  fire  to 
come  down  from  heaven,  and  con- 
fume  them,  even  as  Elias  did?  But 
he  turned  and  rebuked  them,  and 
faid,  Ye  know  not  what  manner  of 
fpirit  ye  are  of:  For  the  Son  of 
man  is  not  come  to  dellroy  men's 
lives,  but  to  fave  them.  And  they 
went  to  another  villao-e. 

^  After  the  Creed,  if  there  he  no  Sermo7i,  shall  be 
read  one  of  the  six  Homilies  against  Rebellion. 


Gunpowder  Trea/bn. 

:  for  he  is 


*[[  This  Sentence  is  to  be  read  at  the  Ofertori/. 

WllATSOEVEll  ye  would 
that  men  fliould  do  to  you, 
do  ye  even  fo  to  them ;  for  this  is 
the  Law  and  the  Prophets.  St. 
Matth.  vii.  12. 

^  Jfler  the  Pratfer  for  the  Church  militant  this  fol- 
loK'inii  Pr/ii/cr  is  to  he  used. 

God,  whofe  Name  is  excellent 
in  all  the  earth,  and  thy  gloiy 
above  the  heavens ;  who  on  this 
day  didft  miraculoully  preferve  our 
Church  and  State  from  the  fecret 
contrivance  and  hellifli  malice  of 
Popifli  confpirators ;  and  on  this 
day  alfo  didll  begin  to  give  us  a 
mighty  deliverance  from  the  open 
tyranny  and  oppreffion  of  the  fame 
cruel  and  blood-thirlly  enemies : 
We  blefs  and  adore  thy  glorious 
Majelly,  as  for  the  former,  fo  for 
this  thy  late  marvellous  loving- 
kindnefs  to  our  Church  and  Na- 
tion, in  the  prefervation  of  our 
Relio'ion  and  Liberties.  And  we 
humbly  pray,  that  the  devout  fenfe 
of  this  thy  repeated  mercy  may 
renew  and  increafe  in  us  a  fpirit 
of  love  and  thankfulnefs  to  thee  its 
only  Author ;  a  fpirit  of  peaceable 
fubmiflion  and  obedience  to  our 
gracious  Sovereign  i^ord.  King 
GEORGE;  and  a  fpirit  of  fer- 
vent zeal  for  oui*  holy  Religion 
which  thou  hail  fo  ^wonderfully 
refcued,  and  ellabliflied,  a  blefllng 
to  us  and  our  poflerity.  And  this 
we  beg  for  Jefus  Chrill  his  fake. 
Amen. 


A    FORM    OF 

PRAYER     WITH     FASTING, 

To  be  used  yearly  on  the  Thirtieth  of  January, 

Being  the  Day  of  the  JMartyrdom  of  the  Blefled  King  CHARLES  the 
Firft ;  to  implore  the  mercy  of  God,  that  neither  the  Guih  of  that 
facred  and  innocent  Blood,  nor  thofe  other  fins,  by  which  God  was 
provoked  to  deliver  up  both  us  and  our  King  into  the  hands  of  cruel 
and  unreafonable  men,  may  at  any  time  hereafter  be  vifited  upon  us 

or  our  ])ofterity. 

.^ 

!1  If  this  Day  shall  happen  to  be  Suiiday,  this  Form  of  Prayer  shall  be  used  and  the  Fast  kept  the 
ne.vfDayfollvuing.  And  upon  the  Lord's  Day  next  before  the  Day  to  be  kept,  at  Morning  Prayer^ 
immediately  after  the  Niceiie  Creed,  notice  shall  be  given  for  the  due  Observation  uj'the\said  Day. 

If  The  Service  of  the  Day  shall  be  the  same  with  the  usual  Office  for  Holy-days  in  all  things;  ex- 
cept where  it  is  in  this  Office  otherrvise  appointed. 


THE  ORDER  FOR 

If  He  that  ministereth,  shall   begin 
ivith  one  or  more  of  these  Sentences. 

TO  the  Lord  our  God  belong 
mercies  and  forgivenefles, 
though  we  have  rebelled  againft 
him  :  neither  have  we  obeyed  the 
voice  of  the  Lord  our  God,  to  walk 
in  his  laws  w^iich  he  fet  before  us, 
Daniel  ix.  9,  10. 

Con'e(ft  us,  O  Lord,  but  with 
judgement  :  not  in  thine  anger, 
left  thou  bring  us  to  nothing.  Jer. 
X.  24. 

Enter  not  into  judgement  with 
thy  fervants,  O  Lord  :  for  in  thy 
fight  fliall  no  man  living  be  juiti- 
fied.   Pfabn  cxliii.  2. 

^  Instead  of  Venite  exultemus  the  Hymn  follozciug 
shall  he  said  or  sinig;  one  Verse  by  the  Priest,  an- 
other by  the  Clerk  a7id  people. 

RIGHTEOUS  art  thou,0  Lord: 
and  juft  are  thy  judgements ! 
PJalm  cxLx.  137. 


MORNING  PRAYER. 

T/tou  art  juji,  O  Lord,  in  all 
that  is  hronght  upon  lis  :  for  thou 
haji  done  right,  but  ice  have  done 
wicliedly.  Neh.  ix.  33. 

Neverthelefs,  our  feet  were  al- 
moft  gone  :  our  treadings  had  well- 
nigh  Hipped.   Pfabn  Ixxiii.  2. 

For  ichy  ?  tee  icere  grieved  at  the 
wicked :  we  did  alfofee  the  ungodly 
in  fuch  proj'perity.  Verfe  3. 

The  people  ftood  up,  and  the  ru- 
lers took  counfel  together  :  againft 
the  Lord,  and  againft  his  Anoint- 
ed.   Pfabn  ii.  2. 

They  cajl  their  heads  together  tvith 
one  conj'ent  :  and  were  confederate 
againji  him.    Pfalm  Ixxxiii.  5. 

He  heard  the  blafphemy  of  the 
multitude,  and  fear  was  on  eveiy 
fide  :  while  they  confpired  together 
againft  him,  to  take  away  his  life, 
Pfabn  xxxi.  15. 


King  Chaiie. 

They /poke  againfi  Mm  unth  falfe 
toiigiiea,  and  compajjhd  Jiim  ahout 
with  words  of  hatred  :  and  fought 
againjl  hwi  without  a  caufe.  Pfalm 
cix.  2. 

Yea,  his  own  familiar  friends, 
whom  he  trufted  :  they  that  eat  of 
his  bread  laid  o-reat  wait  for  him. 
If  aim  xh.  9. 

They  rewarded  him  evil  for  good : 
to  the  great  dif comfort  of  his  foul. 
Pfalm  XXXV.  12. 

They  took  their  counfel  toge- 
ther, faying,  God  hath  forfaken 
him  :  perfecute  him,  and  take  him, 
for  there  is  none  to  deliver  him. 
Pfalm  Ixxi.  9. 

The  breath  of  our  nojlrils,  the 
Anointed  of  the  Lord  teas  taken  in 
their  pits  :  of  whom  we  f aid,  Under 
his  Jhadow  we  fJiall  he  fafe.  Lam. 
iv.  20. 

The  adverfary  and  the  enemy 
entered  into  the  gates  of  Jerufa- 
lem  :  faying,  When  fliall  he  die, 
and  his  Name  perifli?  Ver.  12. 
Pfalm  xli.  5. 

Let  thefentence  of  guiltinefs  pro- 
ceed againjl  him  :  and  now  that  he 
lieth,  let  him  rife  up  no  more.  Ver.  8. 

Falfe  witnefles  alfo  did  rife  up 
againft  him  :  they  laid  to  his  charge 
things  that  he  knew  not.    Pfalm 

XXXV.   1 1 . 

For  the  Jins  of  the  people,  and 
the  iniquities  of  the  priejis  ;  they 
filed  the  Mood  of  the  jujl  in  the  midji 
of  Jerufalem.    Lam.  iv.  13. 


v  the  Martijr. 

O  my  foul,  come  not  thou  into 
their  fecret ;  unto  their  aifembly, 
mine  honour,  be  not  thou  united  : 
for  in  their  anger  they  flew  a  man ; 
Gen.  xlix.  6. 

Rven  the  man  of  thy  right  hand : 
the  Son  of  man,  whom  thou  hadjl 
made  fo  ftrong  for  thine  own  felf 
Pfalm  Ixxx.  17. 

In  the  fight  of  the  unwife  he 
feemed  to  die  :  and  his  dej^arture 
was  taken  for  mifery.    Wifd.  iii.  2. 

They  fools  counted  his  life  mad- 
nefs,  and  his  end  to  he  without  ho- 
nour :  but  he  is  in  peace.  Wifd. 
V.  4.  &  iii.  3. 

For  though  he  was  puniflied  in 
the  fight  of  men  :  yet  was  his  hope 
full  of  immortality.    Wfd.  iii.  4. 

Uow  is  he  numbered  with  the  chil- 
dren of  God  :  and  his  lot  is  among 
the  faints!  Wifd.  v.  5. 

But,  O  Lord  God,  to  whom  ven- 
geance belongeth,  thou  God,  to 
whom  vengeance  belongeth  :  be 
favourabla  and  gracious  unto  Sion. 
Pfalm  xciv.  1.  &  li.  18. 

Be  merciful,  O  Lord,  unto  thy 
people,  whotn  thou  hajl  redeemed  : 
and  lay  not  innocent  blood  to  our 
charge.   Deut.  xxi.  8. 

O  fliut  not  up  our  fouls  with 
finners  :  nor  our  lives  with  the 
blood- thirfty.   Pfalm  xxvi.  9. 

Deliver  us  from  blood-guiltinefs, 
O  God,  thou  that  art  the  God  of  our 
falmition  :  and  our  tongues  /hall  fng 
of  thy  righteoufnefs.   Pfalm  H.  14. 


King  Charles 

■  For  tlioii  art  the  God  that  haft 
no  pleafure  in  wickednefs  :  neither 
fliall  any  evil  dwell  with  thee. 
Pfalm  V.  4. 

77^0?^  wilt  defiroy  them  that  fpeah 
leajing  :  the  Lord  abhors  hoth  the 
hlood-thirjiy  and  deceitful  man.  Ver. 
6. 

O  how  fuddenly  do  they  con- 
fume  :  perilh,  and  come  to  a  fearful 
end!   Pfalm  Ixxiii.  18. 

Yea,  even  like  as  a  dream,  lehen 
one  awaketh  :  fo  didji  thou  make 
their  image  to  vanifli  out  of  the  city. 
Ver.  19. 

Great  and  marvellous  are  thy 
works,  O  Lord  God  Almighty  : 
juft  and  tiiie  are  thy  ways,  O  King 
of  faints.   Kev.  xv.  3. 

Righteous  art  thou,  O  Lord :  and 
jujl  are  thy  judgements.  Pfalm  cxix. 

137. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 
As  it  teas  in  the  beginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  fliall  be  :  icorld  with- 
out end.   Amen. 

Proper  Pfalms.  ix,  x,  xi. 

Proper  Leffons. 

The  Firjl,  2  Sam.  i. 

The  Second,  St.  Matth.  xxvii. 

^  Instead  of  the  First  Collect  at  Morning  Praj/er 
shall  these  tno  zchich  7ie.it  follow  be  used. 

OMoft  mighty  God,  terrible  in 
thy  judgements,  and  wonder- 
ful in  thy  doings  toward  the  chil- 
dren of  men ;  who  in  thy  heavy  dif- 
pleafure  didft  fuft'er  the  life  of  our 


the  Martyr. 

gracious  Sovereign  King  Charles 
the  Fii-ft,  to  be  (as  this  day)  taken 
away  by  the  hands  of  cruel  and 
bloody  men :  We  thy  finful  crea- 
tures here  affembled  before  thee, 
do,  in  the  behalf  of  all  the  people 
of  this  land,  humbly  confefs,  that 
they  were  the  ciying  fins  of  this 
Nation,  which  brought  down  this 
hea\y  judgement  upon  us.  But, 
O  gracious  God,  when  thou  mak- 
eft  inquifition  for  blood,  lay  not 
the  guilt  of  this  innocent  blood, 
(the  Ihedding  whereof  nothing  but 
the  blood  of  thy  Son  can  expiate,) 
lay  it  not  to  the  charge  of  the  peo- 
ple of  this  land ;  nor  let  it  ever  be 
required  of  us,  or  our  pofterity. 
Be  merciful,  O  Lord,  be  mercifnl 
unto  thy  people,  whom  thou  haft 
redeemed  ;  and  be  not  angry  with 
us  for  ever  :  But  pardon  us  for  thy 
mercies  fake,  through  the  merits 
of  thy  Son  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

BLESSED  Lord,  in  whofe  fight 
the  death  of  thy  faints  is  pre- 
cious ;  We  magnify  thy  Name  for 
thine  abundant  grace  beftowed 
upon  our  martyred  Sovereign  ;  by 
which  he  was  enabled  fo  cheerfiilly 
to  follow  the  fteps  of  his  blelfed 
Mafter  and  Saviour,  in  a  conftant 
meek  fufl*ering  of  all  barbarous  in- 
dignities, and  at  laft  refifting  unto 
blood;  and  even  then,  according 
to  the  fame  pattern,  praying  for 
his  murderers.    Let  his  memory, 


King  Charle 

O  Lord,  be  ever  bleirecl  among- 
us;  that  we  may  follow  the  example 
of  his  courage  and  conftancy,  his 
meeknefs  and  ])atience,  and  great 
charity.  And  grant,  that  this  our 
land  may  be  freed  from  the  venge- 
ance of  his  righteous  blood,  and 
thy  mercy  glorilied  in  the  forgive- 
nefs  of  our  iins  :  and  all  for  Jefus 
Chrift  his  fake,  our  only  Mediator 
and  Advocate.   Amen. 

%  In  the  end  of  the  Litany  (which  shall  always  on  this 
Day  be  used)  immediately  after  the  Collect  [Wc 
humbly  beseech  thee,  O  Father,  ^c]  the  three  Col- 
lects next  following  are  to  be  read. 

Oljord,  we  befeech  thee  mer- 
cifully hear  our  prayers,  and 
fpare  all  thofe  who  confefs  their 
fins  unto  thee ;  that  they  whofe 
confciences  by  lin  are  accufed,  by 
thy  mercifiil  pardon  may  be  abfolv- 
ed;  through  Chrift  our  Lord.  Amen. 

OMoft  mighty  God,  and  mer- 
ciful Father,  who  haft  com- 
paflion  upon  all  men,  and  hateft 
nothing  that  thou  haft  made ;  who 
wouldeft  not  the  death  of  a  finner, 
but  that  he  fliould  rather  turn  from 
his  fin,  and  be  faved  :  Mercifully 
forgive  us  oin*  trefpafles ;  receive 
and  comfort  us,  who  are  grieved 
and  wearied  Avith  the  burden  of 
our  fins.  Thy  property  is  always 
to  have  mercy ;  to  thee  only  it  ap- 
pertaineth  to  forgive  fins.  Spare 
us  therefore,  good  Lord,  fpare  thy 
people,  whom  thou  haft  redeemed ; 
enter  not  into  judgement  with  thy 
feiTants,  who  are  vile  earth  and 


s  tJte  Martyr. 

miferable  finners :  but  fo  turn  thine 
anger  from  us,  who  meekly  ac- 
knowledge our  vilenefs,  and  truly 
repent  us  of  our  faults ;  and  fo 
make  hafte  to  help  us  in  this  world, 
that  we  may  ever  live  with  thee  in 
the  world  to  come  ;  through  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord.   Amen. 

TURN  thou  us,  O  good  Lord, 
and  fo  fliall  we  be  turned. 
Be  favourable,  O  Lord,  be  favour- 
able to  thy  people.  Who  turn  to 
thee  in  weeping,  falling,  and  pray- 
ing. For  thou  art  a  merciful  God, 
Full  of  compaflion,  Long-fiiffering-, 
and  of  great  pity.  Thou  fpareft 
when  we  deferve  punilliment,  And 
in  thy  wrath  thinkeft  upon  mercy. 
Spare  thy  j3eople,  good  Lord,  fpare 
them.  And  let  not  thine  heritage 
be  brought  to  confufion.  Hear 
us,  O  Lord,  for  thy  mercy  is  great. 
And  after  the  multitude  of  thy 
mercies  look  upon  us,  Through 
the  merits  and  mediation  of  thy 
bleffed  Son  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

%  In  the  Communion  Service,  after  the  Prayer  for 
the  King  [Almighty  God,  whose  kingdom  is  ever- 
lasting, iSfc]  instead  of  the  Collect  for  the  Day  shall 
these  two  be  used. 

O  moft  mighty  God,  ^  c. 
Bleffed  Lord,  in  whofe 

fight,  ^-c.  ^  ^'"y''' 

TJie  Epiftlc.    1  St.  Peter  ii.  13. 

SUBMIT  yourfelves  to  every  or- 
dinance of  man  for  the  Lord's 
fake ;  whether  it  be  to  the  King, 
as  fupreme ;  or  unto  governours,  as 
3F 


\ 


As  in  the 
Morning 


King  Charles 

unto  tliem  that  are  fent  by  liiin,  | 
for  the  punillnnent  of  evil-doers, 
and  for  the  praife  of  them  that  do 
welh  For  lb  is  the  will  of  God, 
that  with  well-doing-  ye  may  put 
to  lilence  the  ionorance  of  foolifli 
men  :  as  free,  and  not  ufing  your 
liberty  for  a  cloke  of  malicioufnefs, 
but  as  the  fervants  of  God.  Ho- 
nour all  men.  Love  the  brother- 
hood. Fear  God.  Honour  the 
King.  Servants,  be  fubje6l  to  your 
joaafters  with  all  fear,  not  only  to 
the  good  and  gentle,  but  alfo  to 
the  fro  ward.  For  this  is  thank- 
worthy, if  a  man  for  confcience 
toward  God  endure  grief,  fuifering 
wrongfullv.  For  what  glory  is  it, 
if  when  ye  be  buffeted  for  your 
faults  ye  ftiall  take  it  patiently?  but 
if  when  ye  do  well,  and  fuft'er  for  it, 
ye  take  it  patiently ;  this  is  accept- 
able with  God.  For  even  here- 
unto were  ye  called ;  becaufe  Chrift 
alfo  fuffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an 
example,  that  ye  fliould  follow  his 
fteps ;  who  did  no  (in,  neither  was 
guile  found  in  his  mouth. 
The  Go/pel.   St.  Matth.  xxi.  33. 

THERE  was  a  certain  houfe- 
holder  which  ])lanted  a  vine- 
yard, and  hedged  it  round  about, 
and  digged  a  wine-prefs  in  it,  and 
built  a  tower,  and  let  it  out  to 
huibandmen,  and  went  into  a  far 
country.  And  Avhen  the  time  of 
the  fruit  drew  near,  he  fent  his 
fervfuats  to  the  huibandmen,  that 


the  Martyr. 

thev  mii^ht  receive  the  fi'uits  of  it. 
And  the  huibandmen  took  his  fer- 
vants, and  beat  one,  and  killed  an- 
other, and  ftoned  another.  Again 
he  fent  other  feiTants,  more  than 
the  lii*ft :  and  they  did  tmto  them 
likewife.  But  lait  of  all  he  fent 
unto  them  his  fon,  faying,  They 
will  reverence  my  fon.  But  when 
the  huibandmen  faw  the  fon,  they 
laid  among  themfelves.  This  is  the 
heir,  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  let 
us  feize  on  his  inheritance.  And 
they  caught  him,  and  call  him  out 
of  the  vineyard,  and  flew  him. 
When  the  lord  therefore  of  the 
vineyard  cometh,  what  will  he  do 
unto  thofe  hufcandmen?  They  fay 
unto  him.  He  will  miferably  dellroy 
thofe  wicked  men,  and  will  let  out 
his  vineyard  unto  other  huiband- 
men, which  fliall  render  him  the 
fruits  in  their  feafons. 

^  After  the  Tsicene  Creed,  shall  he  read,  instead  of 
the  Sermon  for  that  Day,  thejirst  and  second  parts 
oj" the  Homilj/  against  Disobedience  and  zcilftil  Re- 
bellion, set  forth  In/  Authority;  or  the  Minister  who 
officiates  shall  preach  a  Sermon  of  his  own  composing 
upon  the  same  argument. 
^  //;  the  Oflertori/  shall  this  Sentence  be  read. 

WHATSOEVER  ye  would 
that  men  fliould  do  unto 
you,  even  fo  do  unto  them ;  for 
this  is  the  Law  and  the  Prophets. 
St.  J/rt//.  vii.  12. 

^  After  the  Prayer  [For  the  whole  state  of  Christ's 
Cliurch  Sfc]  these  two  Collects  follozdng  shall  be 
used. 

OLord,   our  heavenly  Father, 
who  didll  not  punifli  us  as 
our  fins  have  deferved,  but  haft  in 


the  midft  of  judgement  reiiiem- 
bered  mercy;  We  acknowledge  it 
thine  efpecial  favour,  that,  though 
for  our  many  and  great  provoca- 
tions, thou  didll  fuffer  thine  an- 
ointed blefled  King  Charles  the 
Firft  (as  on  this  day)  to  fall  into 
the  hands  of  violent  and  blood- 
thirfty  men,  and  barbarouily  to  be 
murdered  by  them,  yet  thou  didft 
not  leave  us  for  ever,  as  flieep 
without  a  fliejiherd ;  but  by  thy 
gracious  providence  didft  miracu- 
loufly  preferve  the  imdoubted  Heir 
of  his  Crowns,  our  then  gracious 
Sovereign  King  Charles  the  Se- 
cond, from  his  bloody  enemies, 
hiding  him  under  the  fliadow  of 
thy  mngs,  until  their  tyranny  was 
overpaft ;  and  didft  bring  him  back, 
in  thy  good  appointed  time,  to  fit 
upon  the  throne  of  his  Father ;  and 
together  with  the  Royal  Family 


King  Charles  the  Martyr. 

didft  rcftore  to  us  our  ancient  Go- 
vernment in  Church  and  State. 
For  thefe  thy  great  and  unfpeak- 
able  mercies  we  render  to  thee  our 
moft  humble  and  unfeigned  thanks; 
befeeching  thee,  ftill  to  continue 
thy  gracious  prote6tion  over  the 
whole  Royal  Family,  and  to  grant 
to   our  gracious   Sovereign   King 


GEORGE^  a  long  and  a  happy 
Reign  over  us :  So  we  that  are  thy 
people  will  give  thee  thanks  for 
ever,  and  will  alway  be  (hewing 
forth  thy  praife  from  generation  to 
generation ;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  Lord  and  Saviour.   A  men. 

AND  grant,  O  Lord,  we  befeech 
thee,  that  the  courfe  of  this 
world  may  be  fo  peaceably  ordered 
by  thy  governance,  that  thy  Church 
may  joyfully  ferve  thee  in  all  godly 
quietnefs ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Ijord.    Amen. 


THE  ORDER  FOR  EVENING  PRAYER. 


•^  The  Hymn  appointed  to  be  used  at  Morning  Prayer 
instead  of  Venite  exultemus  shall  here  also  be  used 
before  the  Proper  Psalms. 

Righteous  art  thou,  O  I^ord,  S^c. 

Proper  Pfalms.  Ixxix,  xciv,  Ixxxv. 

Proper  Lejfons. 
The  Firji,  Jer.  xii.  or  Dan.  ix.  to 

verfe  22. 

The  Seco?id,  Hebrews  xi.  verfe  32. 

and  xii.  to  verfe  7. 

%  Instead  of  the  first  Collect  at  Evening  Prayer  shall 
these  two  which  next  follow  be  used. 


O  Almighty  Lord  God,  who  by 
thy  wifdom  not  only  guideft 
and  ordereft  all  things  moft  fuit- 
ably  to  thine  own  juftice;  but  alfo 
performeft  thy  pleafure  in  fuch  a 
manner,  that  we  cannot  but  ac- 
knowledge thee  to  be  righteous  in 
all  thy  ways,  and  holy  in  all  thy 
works  :  We  thy  finful  people  do 
here  fall  down  before  thee,  con- 
fefling  that  thy  judgements  were 
right,  in  permitting  cruel  men,  fons 

3F  2 


King  Charles 

of  Belial  (as  on  this  day)  to  imbrue 
their  hands  in  the  blood  of  tlihie 
A-nointed ;  we  having  dra^\^i  down 
the  fame  upon  ourfeives,  by  the 
great  and  long  provocations  of  our 
fins  againft  thee.  For  which  we 
do  therefore  here  humble  ourfeives 
before  thee;  befeeching  thee  to 
deliver  this  Nation  from  blood- 
guiltinefs,  (that  of  tliis  day  efpe- 
cially,)  and  to  turn  from  us  and 
our  pofterity  all  thofe  judgements, 
which  we  by  our  fins  have  wor- 
thily deferved  :  Grant  this,  for  the 
all-fufficient  merits  of  thy  Son  our 
Saviour  Jefus  Chrift.   Amen. 

BLESSED  God,  juft  and  pow- 
erful, who  didll  permit  thy 
dear  Servant,  our  dread  Sovereign 
King  CJmrles  the  Firft,  to  be  (as 
upon  this  day)  given  up  to  the  vio- 
lent outraoes  of  ^\'icked  men,  to  be 
defpitefully  ufed,  and  at  the  lafl; 
murdered  by  them :  Though  we 
cannot  reflect  upon  fo  foul  an  adl, 
but  with  horror  and  aftonilhment; 
yet  do  we  moft  gratefully  comme- 
morate the  glories  of  thy  grace, 
which  then  fliined  forth  in  thine 
Anointed;  whom  thou  waft  pleafed, 
even  at  the  hour  of  death,  to  en- 
due with  an  eminent  meafure  of 
exemplaiy  patience,  meeknefs,  and 
charity,  before  the  face  of  his  cruel 
enemies.  And  albeit  thou  diclil 
fuffer  them  to  proceed  to  fuch  an 
height  of  violence,  as  to  kill  him, 
and  to  take  j)oncflion  of  his  Throne; 


As  before  at 
Morning 
Prai/er. 


the  Martyr. 

yet  didft  thou  in  great  mercy  ])re- 
ferve  his  Son,  wliofe  right  it  was, 
and  at  length  by  a  wonderful  pro- 
vidence bring  him  back,  and  fet 
him  thereon,  to  reftore  thy  true 
Religion,  and  to  fettle  peace  a- 
mongft  us :  For  tliefe  thy  great 
mercies  we  glorify  thy  Name, 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  blelfed 
Saviour.  Amen. 

51  Immediatelii  iifter  the  Collect  [Lighten  our  dark- 
ness, cSc]  shall  these  three  next  follouiiig  be  used. 

O  Lord,  we  befeech  ^t.  ^ 
O  moft  mighty  God,  S^c.  r 
Turn  thou  us,  Sj-c.  ^ 

%  Immediateh/  before  the  Prayer  of  St.  Chrysostom 
shall  this  Collect  tchirh  next  follozceth  be  used. 

ALMIGHTY  and  everlafting 
God,  whofe  righteoufnefs  is 
like  the  ftrong  mountains,  and  thy 
judgements  like  the  great  deep ; 
and  who,  by  that  barbarous  mur- 
der (as  on  this  day)  connnitted 
upon  the  facred  Perfon  of  thine 
Anointed,  haft  taught  us,  that  nei- 
ther the  greateft  of  Rings,  nor  the 
beft  of  men,  are  more  fecure  fi-om 
violence  than  from  natural  death  : 
Teach  us  alfo  hereby  fo  to  number 
our  days,  that  we  may  apply  our 
hearts  unto  wifdom.  And  grant, 
that  neither  the  fplendour  of  any 
thino^  that  is  PTcat,  nor  the  conceit 
of  any  thing  that  is  good  in  us, 
may  withdraw  oiu*  eyes  from  look- 
ing upon  ourfeives  as  finful  duft 
and  alhes ;  but  that,  according  to 
the  example  of  this  thy  blelfed 
Martyr,  wc  may  ])rcl's  forward  to 


The  Refioration  of  the  Royal  Family. 

vVnd  all  tliis  tor  tliy  Son  our  Lord 
.Jefiis  Chrift  his  i'ake ;  to  whom 
Avith  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghofl  he 
all  honour  and  glory,  world  with- 
out end.   Amen. 


the  prize  of  the  high  calling  that 
is  before  us,  in  faith  and  patience, 
hmnility  and  meeknefs,  mortifica- 
tion and  felf-denial,  charity  and 
conftant  perfeverance  unto  the  end: 


A  FORM   OF 

PRAYER   \¥ITH   THANKSGIVING 

TO    ALMIGHTY   GOD, 

For  having  put  an  end  to  the  Great  Rebellion,  by  the  Reftitution  of  the 
King  and  Royal  Family,  and  the  Reftoration  of  the  Government  after 
many  years  interruption;  which  imlpeakable  Mercies  were  wonder- 
fully completed  upon  the  Twenty-ninth  o^  May,  in  the  Year  IGfiO. 
And  in  Memory  thereof  that  Day  in  every  Year  is  by  A61  of  Parlia- 
ment appointed  to  be  for  ever  kept  holy. 


f  Tlie  Act  of  Parliament  made  in  the  Tzoelfth,  and  conjinned  in  the  Thirteenth  Year  of  King  Charles 
the  Second,  for  the  Observation  of  the  Ttventy-ninth  Day  of  May  i/eaiij/,  as  a  Day  of'  Public  k 
Thanksgiving,  is  to  be  read  publickli/  in  all  Charches  at  Morning  Prayer,  immediately  after  the 
Nicene  Creed,  on  the  Lord's  Day  next  before  every  such  Txventy-ninth  of  May,  and  notice  to  be 
given  for  the  due  Observation  of  the  said  Day. 

f  The  Service  shall  be  the  same  with  the  usual  Office  for  Holy-days ;  eaxept  where  it  is  in  this 
Office  otherwise  appointed. 

^  If  this  Day  shall  happen  to  be  Ascension-Day,  or  Whit-Suntlay,  fbe  Collects  of  this  Office  are 
to  be  added  to  the  Offices  of  those  Festivals  in  their  proper  places :  If  it  be  Monday  or  Tuesday 
in  Wliitsun-week,  or  Trinity-Sunday,  the  Proper  Psalms  appointed  for  this  Day,  instead  of 
those  of  ordinary  Course,  shall  be  also  used,  and  the  Collects  added  as  before  ;  ajid  in  all  these 
cases  the  rest  of  this  Office  shall  be  omitted:  But  if  it  shall  happen  to  be  any  other  Sunday,  this 
whole  Office  shall  be  used,  as  it  followeth,  entirely.  And  xshat  Festival  soever  shall  happen  to 
fall  upon  this  solemn  Day  of  Thanksgiving,  the  following  Hymn,  appointed  instead  o/' Venite 
exultemus,  shall  be  constantly  used. 


1  Morning  Prayer  shall  begin  with 
these  Sentences. 

TO  the  Lord  our  God  belong 
mercies  and  forgivenelfes, 
though  we  have  rebelled  againft 
him  :  neither  have  we  obeyed  the 


voice  of  the  Lord  our  God,  to  walk 
in  his  laws  which  he  fet  before  us. 
Daniel  ix.  9,  10. 

It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  that 
we  were  not  confumed  :  becaufe  his 
compaflions  fail  not.  Lam. 


iii.  22. 


The  Rcftoration  of  the  Royal  Family. 


%  Instead  of  Venite  exultemus  shall  be  sung  or  said 
this  Hymn  following ;  one  Verse  by  the  Priest,  and 
another  by  the  Clerk  and  People. 

MY  fong  flialJ  be  alway  of  the 
loving-kindnefs  of  the  Lord  : 
with  my  mouth  \vill  I  ever  be  fliew- 
iiig  forth  his  truth  from  one  gene- 
ration to  another.  Pfalm  Ixxxix.  1 . 

The  merciful  and  gracious  Lord 
hath  Jo  done  his  marvellous  works  : 
that  theif  ought  to  he  had  in  remem- 
hrance.   Pfahii  cxi.  4. 

Who  can  exprefs  the  noble  adls 
of  the  Lord  :  or  Ihew  forth  all  his 
praife?   Pfalm  cvi.  2.  , 

Tlie  works  of  the  Lord  are  great : 
fought  out  of  all  them  that  have 
pleafure  therein.    Pfalm  cxi.  2. 

The  Lord  fetteth  up  the  meek  : 
and  bringeth  the  ungodly  dowii  to 
the  ground.    Pfalm  cxlvii.  6. 

The  Lord  ewecuteth  righteonfnefs 
and  judgement  :  for  all  them  that 
are  opprcfjed  with  wrong.   Pf.  ciii.  6. 

For  he  will  not  alway  be  chid- 
ing :  neither  keepeth  he  his  anger 
for  ever.    Ver.  9. 

Me  hath  not  dealt  with  us  after 
our  fins  :  nor  rewarded  us  according 
to  our  wickednefs.  Ver.  10. 

For  look  how  high  the  heaven 
is  in  comparifon  of  the  earth  :  fo 
great  is  his  mercy  toward  them 
that  fear  him.    Ver.  11. 

y<?a,  like  as  a  father  pitieth  his 
own  children  :  even  fo  is  the  Lord 
merciful  unto  them  that  fear  him. 
Ver.  13. 

Tliou,  O  God,  haft  proved  us  : 


thou   alfo  haft  tried   us,  even  as 
lilver  is  tried.   Pfalm  Ixvi.  9. 

Thou  f(fferedji  men  to  ride  over 
our  heads,  ive  went  through  fir e  and 
water  :  hut  thou  haft  hrought  us  out 
into  a  wealthy  place.   Ver.  1 1 . 

O  how  great  troubles  and  ad- 
verfities  haft  thou  fliewed  us!  and 
yet  didft  thou  turn  and  refrefli  us  : 
yea,  and  broughteft  us  from  the 
deep  of  the  earth  again,  Pfalm 
Ixxi.  18. 

Thou  didft  rememhei'  us  in  our 
low  eftate,  and  redeem  us  from  our 
enemies  :  for  thy  mercy  endureth  for 
ever.   Pfalm  cxxxvi.  23,  24. 

I^ord,  thou  art  become  gracious 
unto  thy  land  :  thou  haft  turned 
away  the  captivity  of  Jacob.  Pfalm 
Ixxxv.  1. 

God  hath  f hewed  us  his  goodnefs 
plenteoufty  :  and  God  hath  let  us 
fee  our  defire  upon  our  enemies. 
'Pllilmlix.'lO. 

They  are  brought  down  and 
fallen  :  but  we  are  rifen  and  ftand 
upright.    Pfalm  xx.  8. 

"^Tlwre  are  they  fallen^  all  that 
work  wickednefs :  they  are  caft  down, 
andjhall  not  he  ahle  tp  ftand.  Pfalm 
xxxvi.  12. 

The  Lord  hath  been  mindful  of 
us,  and  he  fliall  blefs  us  :  even  he 
fliall  blefs  the  houfe  of  Ifrael,  he 
ftiall  blefs  the  houfe  of  Aaron. 
Pfalm  cxv.  12. 

lie  f hall  hlefs  them  that  fear  the 
Lord-.hothf nail  and  great.  Ver.  13. 


The  Rcftoration  of  the  Royal  Family. 


O  that  men  would  therefore 
praife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs  : 
and  dedare  the  wonders  tliat  he 
doeth  for  the  children  of  men! 
PJ'alm  cvii.  21. 

That  they  would  offer  unto  him 
the  J'acrijice  of  thankfgwing  :  and 
tell  out  his  tvorks  with  gladnefs! 
Ver.  22. 

And  not  hide  them  from  the  chil- 
dren of  the  generations  to  come  : 
but  (liew  the  honour  of  the  Lord, 
his  mighty  and  wonderful  works 
that  he  hath  done!  Pfalm  Ixxviii.  4. 

That  our  pojlerity  may  alfo  know 
them,  and  the  children  that  are  yet 
iinhorn  :  and  not  he  as  their  forefa- 
thers a  faithlefs  and  Jluhhorn  gene- 
ration.  Ver.  6,  9. 

Give  thanks,  O  Ifrael,  unto  God 
the  Lord  in  the  conoreiJ-ations  : 
from  the  ground  of  the  heart. 
Pfalm  Ixviii.  26. 

Praifcd  he  the  Lord  daily  :  even 
the  God  ivho  helpetJi  us,  and  pour eth 
his  henefits  upon  us.   Ver.  19. 

O  let  the  wickednefs  of  the 
wicked  come  to  an  end  :  but  efta- 
blifli  thou  the  righteous.   Pf.  vii.  9. 

Let  all  thofe  that  feek  thee  he 

joyful  and  glad  in  thee  :  and  let  all 

fuch  as  love  thy  falvation  fay  alway, 

The  Lord  he  praifed.  Pfalm  xl.  19. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to 
the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  heginning,  is 
now,  and  ever  Jliall  he  :  world  with- 
out end.  Amen. 


Proper  If  alms,  cxxiv,  cxxvi, 
cxxix,  cxviii. 

Proper  Lef'ons. 

Thefirjl,  2  Sam.  xix.  verfe  9. 

or  Numb.  xvi. 

Te  Deum. 

The  feeond.  The  Kpillle  of  St.  Jude. 

Jubilate  Deo. 

U  The  Siifiages  next  after  the  Creed,  s/inll  sland  thus, 

Priefl.  O  Lord,  (hew  thy  mercy 
upon  us. 

Anfwer.  And  grant  us  thy  fal- 
vation. 

Prieft.  O  Lord,  fave  the  King; 

Anfwer.  Who  putteth  his  trujl 
in  thee. 

Priejl.  Send  him  help  from  thy 
holy  place. 

Anfwer.  And  evermore  mightily 
defend  him. 

Prieft.  Let  his  enemies  have  no 
advantage  ao-ainft  him. 

Anfwer.  Let  not  the  wicked  ap- 
proach to  hurt  him. 

Priejl.  Endue  thy  Minifters  with 
righteoufnefs. 

Anfwer.  And  make  thy  chofen 
people  joy  fid. 

Priejl.  Give  peace  in  our  time, 
O  Lord. 

Anfwer.  Becaife  there  is  none 
other  that  fghteth  for  us,  hut  only 
thou,  O  God. 

Prieft.  Be  unto  us,  O  Lord,  a 
ftrong  tower, 

Anfwer.  From  the  face  of  our 
enemies. 

Prieft.  O  Lord,  hear  our  prayer. 


The  Rejloration  of  the  Royal  Family. 

And  let  our  cry  come 


Aiifwer 
unto  thee. 

51  Instead  of  the  first  Collect  at  Morning  Prater  sltall 
these  two  which  follow  be  used. 

O  Almighty  God,  who  art  a 
ftrong  tower  of  defence  unto 
thy  fervants  againft  the  face  of 
their  enemies;  We  yield  thee  praife 
and  thankfgiving  for  the  wonder- 
ful deliverance  of  thefe  Kingdoms 
from  THE  GREAT  REBEL- 
LION, and  all  the  iVIiferies  and 
Oppreflions  confequent  thereup- 
on, under  which  they  had  fo  long- 
groaned.  We  acknowledge  it  thy 
goodnefs,  that  we  were  not  utterly 
delivered  over  as  a  prey  unto  them; 
befeechino'  thee  ftill  to  continue 
fucli  thy  mercies  towards  us,  that 
all  the  world  may  know  that  thou 
art  our  Saviour  and  mighty  Deli- 
verer ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.    Amen. 

OLord  God  of  our  falvation, 
who  haft  been  exceedingly 
gracious  unto  this  land,  and  l)y 
thy  miraculous  providence  didft 
deliver  us  out  of  our  miferable  con- 
fufions ;  by  reftoring  to  us,  and  to 
his  own  juft  and  undoubted  Rights, 
our  then  moft  gracious  Sovereign 
Lord,  King  Charles  the  Second, 
uotwithftanding  all  the  power  and 
malice  of  his  enemies ;  and,  by 
placing  him  on  the  Throne  of  thel'e 
Kingdoms,  didll  reftore  alfo  unto 
us  the  publick  and  free  profeflion 
of  thy  true  Religion  and  Worfliip, 
together  with  our  former  Peace 


and  Profperity,  to  the  great  com- 
fort and  joy  of  our  hearts :  Wfe  are 
here  now  before  thee,  with  all  due 
thankfulnefs,  to  acknowledge  thine 
unfpeakable  goodnefs  herein,  as 
upon  this  day  Ihewed  unto  us,  and 
to  offer  unto  thee  our  facrifice  of 
praife  for  the  fame ;  humbly  be- 
feeching  thee  to  accept  this  our 
unfeigned,  though  unwortliy  obla- 
tion of  ourfelv^es  ;  vowing  all  holy 
obedience  in  thought,  word  and 
work,  unto  thy  Divine  Majefty ; 
and  promifing  all  loyal  and  dutiful 
Allegiance  to  thine  Anointed  Ser- 
vant now  fet  over  us,  and  to  his 
Heirs  after  him ;  whom  we  befeech 
thee  to  blefs  with  all  increafe  of 
grace,  honour  and  happinefs,  in 
this  world,  and  to  crown  him  with 
immortality  and  glory  in  the  w^orld 
to  come,  for  Jefus  Chrift  his  fake 
our  only  Lord  and  Saviour.  Amen. 


A' 


^  ///  the  end  of  the  Litam/  (which  shall  ahmifs  this 
Day  be  used)  after  the  Collect  [We  humbly  be- 
seecli  tliee,  O  Father,  iSc]  shall  this  be  said  which 
nextfolloiceth. 

L MIGHTY  God,  who  haft 
in  all  ages  ftiewed  forth  thy 
power  and  mercy  in  the  miraculous 
and  gracious  deliverances  of  thy 
Church,  and  in  the  protedfion  of 
riohteous  and  reliijious  Kings  and 
States,  profefting  thy  holy  and 
eternal  truth,  from  the  malicious 
Confpiracies  and  wicked  Practices 
of  all  their  enemies ;  We  yield  un- 
to thee  our  unfeigned  thanks  and 
praife,  as  for  thy  many  other  great 


? 


The  Reftoratmi  of  the  Royal  Family. 


and  piiblick  mercies,  fo  efpecially 
for  tliat  iignal  and  wonderful  De- 
liverance, by  diy  wife  and  good 
Providence  as  upon  this  day  com- 
pleted, and  vouchfafed  to  our  then 
moll  gracious  Sovereign  King 
Charles  the  Second,  and  all  the 
Royal  Family,  and  in  them,  to 
this  whole  Church  and  State,  and 
all  orders  and  degrees  of  men  in 
both,  from  the  unnatural  Rebel- 
lion, Ufurpation,  and  Tyranny  of 
ungodly  and  cruel  men,  and  from 
the  fad  confulions  and  ruin  there- 
upon enfuing.  From  all  thefe,  O 
gracious  and  merciful  Lord  God, 
not  our  merit,  but  thy  mercy ;  not 
our  forefight,  but  thy  Providence; 
not  our  own  arm,  but  thy  right 
hand,  and  thine  arm,  did  refcue 
and  deliver  us.  And  therefore, 
not  unto  us,  O  Lord,  not  unto  us, 
but  unto  thy  Name  be  afcribed  all 
Honour,  and  Glory,  and  Praife,  with 
moft  humble  and  hearty  thanks,  in 
all  Churches  of  the  Saints :  Even 
fo  bleffed  be  the  Lord  our  God, 
who  alone  doeth  wondrous  things, 
and  bleffed  be  the  Name  of  his 
Majefty  for  ever;  through  Jefus 
Chrijft  our  Lord  and  only  Saviour. 
Amen. 

^  In  the  Communion  Service,  immediateh/  before  the 
reading  of  the  Epistle,  shall  these  tzm  Collects  be 
used,  instead  of  the  Collect  for  the  King  and  the 
Collect  of  the  Day. 

O  Almighty  God,  S^c.      J  j^  j,^- ,,  „, 
O  Lord  God  of  our  fal-   r    Morning 
vation,  ^c.  '     ^'"•'^''^• 


T7ie  Epijilc.  1  St.  Peter  ii.  11. 

DEARLY  beloved,  I  befeech 
you  as  Ihangers  and  pilgrims, 
abftain  from  lleflily  lulls,  which  war 
againft  the  foul ;  having  your  con- 
vei*fation  honell  among  the  Gen- 
tiles :  that,  whereas  they  fpeak  a- 
gainft  you  as  evil-doers,  they  may, 
by  your  good  works  which  they 
fliall  behold,  glorify  God  in  the 
day  of  vilitation.  Submit  your- 
felves  to  eveiy  ordinance  of  man 
for  the  Lord's  fake;  whether  it  be 
to  the  King,  as  fupreme ;  or  unto 
Governours,  as  unto  them  that  are 
fent  by  him  for  the  punifliment  of 
evil-doers,  and  for  the  praife  of 
them  that  do  well.  For  fo  is  the 
Avill  of  God,  that  ^vith  well-doing 
ye  may  put  to  lilence  the  igno- 
rance of  foolifli  men  :  as  free,  and 
not  ufing  your  liberty  for  a  cloke 
of  malicioufnefs,  but  as  the  fervants 
of  God.  Honour  all  men.  Love 
the  brotherhood.  Fear  God.  Ho- 
nour the  King. 
The  Gofpel.  St.  Matth.  xxii.  16. 

AND  they  fent  out  unto  him 
their  difciples,  with  the  He- 
rodians,  faying.  Mailer,  we  know 
that  thou  art  true,  and  teacheft 
the  way  of  God  in  truth,  neither 
carell  thou  for  any  man ;  for  thou 
regardell  not  the  perfon  of  men. 
Tell  us  therefore,  what  thinkell 
thou?  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute 
unto  Ca^far,  or  not?  But  Jefus  per- 
ceived their  wickednefs,  and  laid, 
3G 


The  Rejloration  of  the  Royal  Family. 


Why  tempt  ye  me,  ye  hypocrites? 
Shew  me  the  tribute-money.  And 
they  brought  unto  him  a  peny. 
And  he  faith  unto  them,  Whofe  is 
this  image  andfuperfcnption?  They 
fay  unto  him,  Caefar's.  Then  faith 
he  imto  them,  Render  therefore 
unto  Caefar  the  things  whicli  are 
Caefar's  ;  and  unto  God  the  things 
that  are  God's.  When  they  had 
heard  thefe  words,  they  marvelled, 
and  left  him,  and  went  their  way. 

5[  /;/  the  Offertory  shall  this  Sentence  be  read. 

NOT  every  one  that  faith  unto 
me,  Lord,  Lord,  lliall  enter  in- 
to the  Kingdom  of  heaven  :  but  he 
that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father 
which  is  in  heaven.  St.  Matth. 
vii.  2i. 

IF  After  the  Prayer  [For  the  whole  state  of  Christ's 
Church  4t.]  this  Collect  following  shall  be  used. 

ALMIGHTY  God  and  heavenly 
-  Father,  who,  of  thine  infinite 
and  unfpeakable  goodnefs  towards 
us,  didft  in  a  moll  extraordinary 
and  wonderful  manner  difappoint 
and  overthrow  the  wicked  defigns 
of  thofe  traiterous,  heady,  and  high- 
minded  men,  who,  under  the  pre- 
tence of  Religion  and  thy  moll  ho- 
ly Name,  had  contrived,  and  well- 
nigh  eflfedted  the  utter  dellru6lion 
of  this  Chm'ch  and  Kingdom :  As 
we  do  this  day  mofl  heartily  and 
devoutly  adore  and  magnify  thy 
glorious  Name  for  this  thine  in- 
finite goodnefs  already  vouchfafed 
to  us ;  fo  do  we  moll  humbly  be- 


feech  thee  to  continue  thy  grace 
and  favour  towards  us,  that  no  fuch 
difmal  calamity  may  ever  again  fall 
upon  us.  Lifatuate  and  defeat  all 
the  fecret  counfels  of  deceitful  and 
wicked  men  againll  us:  Abate  their 
pride,  affwage  their  mahce,  and 
confound  their  devices.  Strength- 
en the  hands  of  our  gracious  So- 
vereign King  GEORGE,  and  all 
that  are  put  in  authority  under  him, 
with  judgement  and  juftice  to  cut 
off  all  fuch  workers  of  iniquity,  as 
turn  Religion  into  Rebellion,  and 
Faith  into  Faction ;  that  they  may 
never  again  prevail  againll  us,  nor 
triumph  in  the  ruin  of  the  Mo- 
narchy and  thy  Church  among  us. 
Protedl  and  defend  our  Sovereign 
Lord  the  King,  with  the  whole 
Royal  Family,  from  all  Treafons 
and  Confpiracies.  Be  unto  him  an 
helmet  of  falvation,  and  a  llrong 
tower  of  defence  againll  the  face 
of  all  his  enemies ;  clothe  them 
with  fliame  and  confufion,  but  up- 
on Himfelf  and  his  Pofterity  let  the 
Crown  for  ever  flourifli.  So  we 
thy  people,  and  the  Iheep  of  thy 
patlure,  will  give  thee  thanks  for 
ever,  and  will  always  be  fliewing 
forth  thy  praife  from  generation  to 
generation ;  through  Jefus  Chrift 
our  only  Saviour  and  Redeemer, 
to  whom,  with  thee,  O  Father,  and 
the  Holy  Gliofl,  be  glory  in  the 
Church  throughout  all  ages,  world 
without  end.    Amen. 


A  FORM  OF 

PRAYER   WITH   THANKSGIVING 

TO   ALMIGHTY   GOD; 

To  he  ufed  in  all  Churches  and  Chapels  within  this  Realm,  eveiy  Year, 
upon  the  Twenty-fifth  Day  of  Oblober;  being  the  Day  on  which  Mis 
Majefty  began  his  liap])y  Reign. 


•H  The  Service  shall  be  the  same  xcith  the  usual  Office  for  Holy-days  in  all  things;  except  xcherc  it 

is  in  this  Office  otherwise  appointed.  ■  Ijllf; 

U  If  this  Day  shall  happen  to  be  Sunday,  this  xchole  Office  shall  be  used,  as  it  j'ollaweth,  entirely. 
f 


^  Morning  Prayer  shall  begin  with 
these  Sentences. 

Exhort  that  firft  of  all,  Suppli- 
cations, Prayers,  Interceflions, 
and  giving  of  Thanks,  be  made  for 
all  men ;  for  Kings,  and  for  all 
that  are  in  Authority ;  that  we  may 
lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life,  in 
all  godlinefs  and  honefty :  For  this 
is  good  and  acceptable  unto  God 
our  Saviour.    1  Tim.  ii.  1,  2,  3. 

If  we  fay  that  we  have  no  fin, 
we  deceive  ourfelves,  and  the  truth 
is  not  in  us ;  but,  if  we  confefs  our 
fins,  he  is  faithful  and  juft  to  for- 
give us  our  fins,  and  to  cleanfe 
us  from  all  unrighteoufnefs.  1  St. 
John  i.  8,  9. 

%  Instead  of  Venite  exultemus  the  Hymn  following 
shall  be  said  or  sung ;  one  Verse  by  the  Priest,  and 
another  by  the  Clerk  and  people. 

OLord  our  Governour  :  how 
excellent  is  thy  Name  in  all 
the  world !    Pfalm  viii.  1 . 

Lord,  what  is  man,  that  thou  haji 
fuch  refpedi  unto  him  :  or  the  f on  of 
man,  that  thou  Jo  regardefi  him? 
Pfalm  cxhv.  3. 


The  merciful  and  gracious  Lord 
hath  fo  done  his  marvellous  works  : 
that  they  ought  to  be  had  in  re- 
membrance.  Pfalm  cxi.  4. 

O  that  men  would  therefore  praife 
the  Lord  for  his  goodmfs  :  and  de- 
clare the  wonders  that  he  doeth  for 
the  children  of  men!  Pfalm  cvii.  2L 

Behold,  O  God  our  Defender  : 
and  look  upon  the  face  of  thine 
Anointed.    Pfalm  Ixxxiv.  9. 

O  hold  thou  up  his  goings  in  thy 
paths  :  that  his  footjleps  flip  not. 
Pfalm  xvii.  5.       uj  a 

Grant  the  King  a  long  life  :  and 
make  him  glad  with  the  joy  of  thy 
countenance.  Pfalm  Ixi.  G.&xxi.  6. 

Let  him  dwell  before  thee  for  ever: 
O  prepare  thy  loving  mercy  and 
faithfulnefs,  that  they  may  preferve 
him.   Pfalm  Ixi.  7. 

In  his  time  let  the  righteous 
flourifli  :  and  let  peace  be  in  all 
our  borders.  Pfalm  Ixxii.  7.  & 
cxlvii.  14. 

As  for  his  enemies,  clothe  them 
with  fhame  :  hut  upon  himfelf  let 
3Ga 


A  Form  of  Prayer  for  the  Twenty-ffth  of  OSloher. 
his  crown  flourijii.    Pfalm  cxxxii. 


19. 

Bleffed  be  the  Lord  God,  even 
the  God  of  Ifrael  :  which  only  do- 
eth  wondrous  thmgs.  Pfalm  Ixxii. 
18. 

And  hlcjfed  he  the  Name  of  his 
Majejiy  for  ever  :  and  all  the  earth 
fhall  be  filled  with  his  MajeJly.  Amen, 
Amen.   Ver.  19. 

Glory  be  \o  the  Father,  and  to 

the  Son  :  and  to  the  Holy  Ghoft ; 

As  it  was  in  the  hegi?ining,  is 

now,  and  ever  fhall  be  :  ivorld  ivith- 

oiit  end.  Amen. 

Proper  P films,  xx,  xxi,  ci. 

Proper  LefJ'ons. 

The  fir Jl,  Jolliua  i.  to  the  end  of 

the  ninth  verfe. 

Te  Deum. 

The  feco7id,  Romans  xiii. 

Jubilate  Deo. 

%  The  Suffrages  next  after  the  Creed  shall  stand  thus. 

Priefl.  O  Lord,  Ihew  thy  mercy 
uj3on  us. 

Anfwer.  And  grant  ns  thy  fal- 
vation. 

Priefl.  O  Lord,  fave  the  King; 

Anfwer.  Who  putteth  his  triifl 
in  thee. 

Priefl.  Send  him  help  from  thy 
holy  place. 

Anfwer.  And  evermore  mightily 
defend  him. 

Priefl.  Let  his  enemies  have  no 
advantage  againft  him. 

Anfwer.  Let  not  the  wicked  ap- 
proach to  hurt  him. 


Priefl.  Endue  thy  Minifters  with 
righteoufnefs. 

Anfwer.  And  make  thy  chofen 
people  joyful. 

Priejl.  O  Lord,  fave  thy  people. 

Anfwer.  And  blefs  thine  inherit- 
ance. 

Priejl.  Give  peace  in  our  tune, 
O  Lord. 

Anfwer.  Becaufe  there  is  none 
other  that  fghteth  for  us,  but  only 
thou,  O  God. 

Priefi.  Be  unto  us,  O  Lord,  a 
ftrong  tower;  ^ 

Anfwer.  From  the  face  of  our 
enemies. 

Priejl.  O  Lord,  hear  our  prayer; 

Anfwer.  And  let  our  cry  come 
unto  thee. 

U  Instead  of  the  first  Collect  at  Morning  Prayer  shall 
be  used  this  following  Collect  of  Thanksgiving  for 
His  Majesti/s  Accession  to  the  Throne. 

A  LMIGHTY  God,  who  ruleft 
-^^  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
World,  and  difpofeft  of  them  ac- 
cording to  thy  good  pleafure;  We 
yield  thee  unfeigned  thanks,  for 
that  thou  waft  pleafed,  as  on  this 
day,  to  place  thy  fervant  our  Sove- 
reign Lord,  King  GKORGE  up- 
on the  throne  of  this  Realm.  Let 
thy  wifdom  be  his  guide,  and  let 
thine  arm  ftrengthen  him;  let  juf- 
tice,  truth,  and  holinefs,  let  peace 
and  love,  and  all  thofe  virtues  that 
adorn  the  Chrillian  Profeffion,  flou- 
rifli  in  his  days ;  diredt  all  his  coun- 
fels  and  endeavours  to  thy  glory, 
and  the  welfare  of  his  people;  and 


A  Form  of  Prayer  for  the  Twenty-fifth  of  October. 


give  us  grace  to  obey  liim  cheer- 
fully and  willingly  for  conlbience 
fake ;  that  neither  our  finful  pafli- 
ons,  nor  our  private  intereils,  may 
difappoint  his  cares  for  the  puhlick 
good ;  let  him  always  j)oH°efs  the 
hearts  of  his  people,  that  they  may 
never  be  wanting  in  honour  to  his 
Pei-fon,  and  dutiful  fubmiflion  to 
his  Authority;  let  his  Reign  be 
long  and  profperous,  and  crown 
him  with  immortality  in  the  life 
to  come ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.   Amen. 

%  In  the  end  of  the  Litany  (which  shall  always  be 
used  upon  this  Dai/)  after  the  Collect  [We  humbly 
beseech  thee,  O  Father,  ^c]  shall  the  following 
Prayer,  for  the  King  and  Royal  Family,  be  used. 

OLord  our  God,  who  uphold- 
eft  and  governeft  all  things 
in  heaven  and  earth  ;  receive  our 
humble  prayers,  with  our  hearty 
thankfgivings,  for  our  Sovereign 
Lord  GEORGE,  as  on  this  day, 
fet  over  us  by  thy  grace  and  pro- 
vidence to  be  our  King;  and  fo 
together  with  him  blefs  our  gra- 
cious Queen  Charlotte,  their  Royal 
Highnefles  GeorgeVrince  oilVales, 
the  Princefs  of  Wales,  and  all  the 
Royal  Family ;  that  they  all,  ever 
trufting  in  thy  goodnefs,  protected 
by  thy  power,  and  crowned  with 
thy  gracious  and  endlefs  favour, 
may  continue  before  thee  in  health, 
peace,  joy,  and  honour,  and  may 
live  long  and  happy  lives  upon 
earth,  and  after  death  obtain  ever- 
lafting  life  and  glory  in  the  kmg- 


dom  of  heaven,  by  the  Merits  and 
Mediation  of  Chrift  Jefus  our  Sa- 
viour, who  with  the  Father  and 
the  Floly  Spirit,  liveth  and  reign- 
eth  ever  one  God,  world  without 
end.   Amen. 

%  Then  shall  follow  thin  Colled,  for  GocTs  protection 
of  the  King  against  all  his  enemies. 

MOST  gracious  God,  who  haft 
fet  thy  fei-vant  GEORGE 
our  King  upon  the  Throne  of  his 
Anceftors,  we  nioft  humbly  befeech 
thee  to  prote6t  him  on  the  fame 
from  all  the  dangers  to  which  he 
may  be  expofed;  Hide  him  from 
the  gathering  together  of  the  fro- 
ward,  and  from  the  infurre6tion  of 
Avicked  doers ;  Do  thou  weaken 
the  hands,  blaft  the  deligns,  and 
defeat  the  enterprizes  of  all  his 
enemies,  that  no  fecret  confpira- 
cies,  nor  open  violences,  may  dif- 
quiet  his  Reign ;  but  that,  being 
fafely  kept  under  the  ftiadow  of 
thy  wing,  and  fupported  by  thy 
power,  he  may  triumph  over  all 
oppolition  ;  that  fo  the  Avorld  may 
acknowledge  thee  to  be  his  de- 
fender and  mighty  deliverer  in  all 
difficulties  and  adverfities ;  through 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.  Amen. 

*([  Then  the  Prayer  for  the  High  Court  of  Parliament 
(if  sitting.) 

5[  In  the  Communion  Service,  immediately  before  the 
reading  of  the  Epistle,  instead  of  the  Collect  for 
the  King,  and  that  of  the  Day,  shall  be  used  this 
Prai/erfor  the  King,  as  supreme  Governour  of  this 
Church. 

BLESSED  Lord,  who  haft  caU- 
ed  Chriftian  Princes  to  the 


A  Form  of  Prayer  for  the  Tu'enty-Jifth  of  06loher, 


defence  of  thy  Faith,  and  haft  made 
it  their  duty  to  promote  the  fpi- 
ritiial  welfare,  together  with  the 
temporal  intereft  of  their  people ; 
We  acknowledge  ^vith  humble  and 
thankful  hearts  thy  great  good- 
nefs  to  us,  in  fetting  thy  Servant 
our  moft  gracious  Ring  over  this 
Church  and  Nation;  Give  him,  Ave 
befeech  thee,  all  thofe  heavenly 
graces  that  are  requilite  for  fo  high 
a  truft ;  Let  the  work  of  thee  his 
God  profper  in  his  hands ;  Let  his 
eyes  behold  the  fuccefs  of  his  de- 
ligns  for  the  fervice  of  thy  true 
Religion  eftabliflied  amongft  us ; 
And  make  him  a  blefled  inftrument 
of  protedling  and  advancing  thy 
Truth,  wherever  it  is  perfecuted 
and  opprelfed;  Let  Hypocrify  and 
Profanenefs,  Superftition  and  Idol- 
atry, fly  before  his  face ;  Let  not 
Herefies  and  falfe  Doctrines  dif- 
turb  the  peace  of  the  Church,  nor 
Schifms  and  caufelefs  Divifions 
weaken  it ;  But  grant  us  to  be  of 
one  heart  and  one  mind  in  ferving 
thee  our  God,  and  obeying  him 
according  to  thy  will :  And  that 
thefe  bleffings  may  be  continued 
to  after- ages,  let  there  never  be 
one  wanting  in  his  houfe  to  fucceed 
him  in  the  government  of  this 
United  Kingdom,  that  our  polie- 
lity  may  fee  his  children's  children, 
and  peace  upon  Ifrael.  So  we  that 
are  thy  people,  and  Iheep  of  thy 
pafture,  Ihall  give  thee  thanks  for 


ever,  and  w'\\\  always  be  (hewing 
forth  thy  praife  from  generation 
Amen. 


to  generation. 


The  Epijile.   1  St.  Peter  ii.  IL 

DEARLY  beloved,  I  befeech 
you  as  ftrangers  and  pilgrims, 
abftain  from  flelhly  lufts,  which  war 
againft  the  foul;  having  your  con- 
verfation  honeft  among  the  Gen- 
tiles :  that,  whereas  they  fpeak  a- 
gainft  you  as  evil-doers,  they  may, 
by  your  good  works  which  they 
fliall  behold,  glorify  God  in  the 
day  of  vilitation.  Submit  your- 
felves  to  eveiy  ordinance  of  man 
for  the  Lord's  fake ;  whether  it  be 
to  the  King,  as  fupreme ;  or  unto 
governours,  as  unto  them  that  are 
fent  by  him  for  the  punifliment  of 
evil-doers,  and  for  the  praife  of 
them  that  do  well.  For  fo  is  the 
Avill  of  God,  that  with  well-doinff 
ye  may  put  to  filence  the  igno- 
rance of  foolifli  men  :  as  fi-ee,  and 
not  uiing  yoin*  liberty  for  a  cloke 
of  malicioufnefs,  but  as  the  fervants 
of  God.  Honour  all  men.  I^ove 
the  brotherhood.  Fear  God.  Ho- 
nour the  King. 

The  Go/pel.  St.  Matth.  xxii.  IG. 

AND  they  fent  out  unto  him 
their  difciples,  with  the  He- 
rodians,  faying,  Mafter,  we  know 
that  thou  art  true,  and  teacheft 
the  way  of  (lod  in  truth,  neither 
carell  thou  for  any  man  :  for  thou 
regardeft  not  the  perlon  of  men. 


A  Form  of  Prayer  for  the 

Tell  us  therefore,  What  thhikeft 
thou?  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute 
unto  Caefar,  or  not?  But  Jefu«  per- 
ceived their  wickednefs,  and  faid, 
Why  tempt  ye  me,  ye  hypocrites? 
fliew  me  the  tribute- money.  And 
they  brought  unto  him  a  peny. 
And  he  faith  unto  them,  Whofe  is 
this  image  and  fuperfcription?  They 
fay  unto  him,  Caefar's.  Then  faith 
he  unto  them.  Render  therefore 
unto  Ca3far  the  things  which  are 
Caefar's ;  and  unto  God  the  things 
that  are  God's.  When  they  had 
heard  thefe  words,  they  marvelled, 
and  left  him,  and  went  their  way. 


1[  After  the  Nicene  Creed  shall  follow  the  Sermon. 
51  In  the  Offertory  shall  this  Sentence  be  read: 

LET  your  light  fo  fliine  before 
men,  that  they  may  fee  your 
good  works,  and  glorify  your  Fa- 
ther which  is  in  heaven.  St.  Matth. 
V.  16. 

%  After  the  Praj/er  [For  the  whole  State  of  Christ's 
Church  ij'c-]  these  Collects  following  shall  be  used. 

A  Prayer  Jbr  Unity. 

OGod  the  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift,  our  only  Saviour, 
the  Prince  of  Peace ;  Give  us  grace 
ferioufly  to  lay  to  heart  the  great 
dangers  we  are  in  by  our  unhappy 
divifions.  Take  away  all  hatred 
and  prejudice,  and  whatfoever  elfe 
may  hinder  us  from  godly  Union 
and  Concord :  that,  as  there  is  but 
one  Body,  and  one  Spirit,  and  one 
Hope  of  our  Calling,  one  Lord, 


T'wenty-rjifth  of  October. 

one  Faith,  one  Baptifm,  one  God 
and  Father  of  us  all,  fo  we  may 
henceforth  be  all  of  one  heart,  and 
of  one  foul,  united  in  one  holy 
bond  of  Truth  and  Peace,  of  Faith 
and  Charity,  and  may  with  one 
mind  and  one  mouth  glorify  thee; 
through  Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

GRANT,  O  Lord,  we  befeech 
thee,  that  the  courfe  of  this 
world  may  be  fo  peaceably  ordered 
by  thy  governance,  that  thy  Church 
may  joyfully  ferve  thee  in  all  godly 
quietnefs,  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.   Amen. 


GRANT,  we  befeech  thee.  Al- 
mighty God,  that  the  words, 
which  we  have  heard  this  day  with 
our  outward  ears,  may  through  thy 
grace  be  fo  grafted  inwardly  in 
our  hearts,  that  they  may  bring 
forth  in  us  the  fruit  of  good  living, 
to  the  honour  and  praife  of  thy 
Name ;  through  Jefus  Chrift  our 
Lord.   Amen. 


ansv" 


ALMIGHTY  God,  the  fountain 
-  of  all  wifdom,  who  knoweft 
our  neceflities  before  we  alk,  and 
our  ignorance  in  aflving ;  We  be- 
feech thee  to  have  compaflion  up- 
on our  infirmities;  and  thofe  things, 
which  for  our  unworthinefs  we 
dai'e  not,  and  for  our  blindnefs 
we  cannot  alk,  vouchfafe  to  give 
us  for  the  worthinefs  of  thy  Son 
Jefus  Chrift  our  Lord.  Amen. 


A  Form  of  Prayer  for  the  Twenty-fifth  of  OSioher. 


THE  peace  of  God  which 
palfeth  all  underftandiiig, 
keep  your  hearts  and  minds  in 
the  knowledge  and  love  of  God, 
and  of  his  Son  Jefus  Chrift  our 


Lord :  And  the  bleffing  of  God 
Almighty,  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghoft,  be  amongft 
yon,  and  remain  with  you  always. 
Amen. 


<< 


**  GEORGE  R. 

OUR  Will  and  Pleafure  is,  That  thefe  four  Forms  of  Prayer  and 
Service,  made  for  the  Fifth  of  November,  the  Thirtieth  of  Ja- 
nuaiy,  the  Twenty-ninth  of  May,  and  the  Twenty-fifth  of  October, 
be  forth\vith  printed  and  publilhed,  and  annexed  to  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  and  Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England ;  to  be  ufed 
yearly  on  the  faid  Days,  in  all  Cathedral  and  Collegiate  Churches 
and  Chapels,  in  all  Chapels  of  Colleges  and  Halls  within  both  our 
Univerfities,  and  of  our  Colleges  of  Eaton  and  Wincheller,  and  in 
all  Parifh-Churches  and  Chapels  within  that  part  of  our  Kingdom 
of  Great  Britain  called  England,  the  Dominion  of  Wales,  and  Town 
of  Berwick  upon  Tweed. 

'*  Given  at  our  Court  at  St.  James's  the  feventh  Day  of  October, 
"  1761,  in  the  fiiil  Year  of  our  Reign. 

*'  By  his  Majelly's  Command, 

-BUTE." 


ARTICLES 

Agreed  upon  by  the  Archbishops  and  Bishops  of  both  Proyinces,  and  the 
whole  Clergy,  in  the  Convocation  holden  at  London  in  the  Year  1562,  for 
the  avoiding  of  Diversities  of  Opinions,  and  for  the  establishing  of  Consent 
touching  true  Religion :  Reprinted  by  His  Majesty's  Commandment,  with 
his  Royal  Declaration  prefixed  thereunto. 


HIS  MAJESTY'S  DECLARATION. 

TiEING  by  God't;  Ordinance,  according  to  Our  just  'rule,  Defender  of  the  Faith,  and  Supreme  Governour 
of  the  Cliurch,  witl^in  these  our  Dominions,  We  hold  it  most  agreeable  to  th'ts  our  Kingly  Officey  and, 
our  own  religious  Zeal,  to  consei've  and  maititain  the  Church  committed  to  Our  Cliarge,  in  Unity  of  true  Re- 
ligion, and  in  the  Bond  of  Peace;  and  not  to  suffer  unnecessary  Disputations,  Altercations,  or  Qucsti^ms  to  be 
raised,  which  may  nourish  Faction  both  in  the  Church  and  Commonwealth.  We  have  therefore,  upon  mature 
Deliberation,  and,  with  the  advice  of  so  many  of  our  Bishops  as  might  conveniently  be  called  together,  thought 
fit  to  make  this  Declaration  following  : 

That  tJie  Articles  of  the  Church  f»/' England  (tvhicli  have  been  allowed  and  authorized  heretofore,  and  which 
Our  Clergy  generally  have  subscribed  7inlo)  do  contain  the  true  Doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England  agreeable 
to  God's  Word:  which  We  do  therefore  ratify  and  confirm,  requiring  all  our  loving  Subjects  to  continue  in  thfi 
uniform  Profession  thereof,  and  prohibiting  the  least  difference  from  the, said  Articles;  which  to  tltut  end  Wjt 
command  to  be  new  printed,  and  thi^  Our  Declaration  to  be  published  therewith. 

Tliat  We  are  Supreme  Governour  of  the  Church  of  England :  And  that  if  any  difference  arise  about  the 
external  Policy,  concerning  the  Injunctions,  Canons,  and  other  Constitutions  whatsoever  thereto  belonging, 
the  Clergy  in  their  Convocation  is  to  order  and  settle  them,  having  first  obtained  leave  under  Our  Broad  Seal  so 
to  do :  and  We  approving  their  said  Ordiiiances  and  Constitutions ;  providing  that  none  be  made  contrary  to 
tlie  Laws  and  Customs  of  the  Land. 

Tliat  out  of  Our  Princely  Care  that  the  Churchmen  may  do  the  Work  which  is  proper  unto  them,  the  Bishops 
and  Clergy,  from  time  to  time  in  Convocation,  upon  their  humble  Desire,  shall  have  Licence  under  Our  Broad 
Seal  to  deliberate  of,  and  to  do  all  such  Tilings,  as,  being  made  plain  by  them,  and  assented  unto  by  Us,  shall 
concern  the  settled  Continuance  of  the  Doctrine  and  Discipline  of  the  Church  of  England  now  established ; 
from  which  We  will  not  endure  any  varying  or  departing  in  the  least  Degree. 

That  for  the  present,  thottgh  some  differences  have  been  ill  raised,  yet  we  take  comfort  in  this,  that  all 
Clergymen  within  Our  Realm  have  always  most  willingly  subscribed  to  the  Articles  establistied;  which  is  an  ar- 
gument to  Us,  that  they  all  agree  in  the  true,  usual,  literal  meaning  of  the  said  Articles;  and  that  even  in  those 
curious  points,  in  which  the  present  differences  lie,  men  of  all  sorts  take  the  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England 
to  be  for  them;  which  is  an  argument  again,  that  none  of  them  intend  any  desertion  oj  the  Articles  established. 

That  therefore  in  these  both  curious  and  unhappy  differences,  which  have  for  so  many  hundred  years,  in  dif- 
ferent times  and  places,  exercised  the  Church  of  Christ,  We  will,  that  all  further  curious  search  be  laid  aside, 
and  tliese  disputes  shut  up  in  God's  promises,  as  they  be  generally  set  forth  to  vs  in  the  holy  Scrijttures,  and  the 
general  meaning  of  the  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England  according  to  them.  And  that  no  man  hereafter  shall 
either  print,  or  preach,  to  draw  the  Article  aside  any  way,  but  shall  submit  to  it  in  the  plain  and  full  meaning 
thereof:  and  .^hall  not  put  his  own  sense  or  comment  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  Article,  but  shall  take  it  in  the 
literal  and  grammatical  sense. 

That  if  any  publick  Reader  in  either  of  Our  Universities,  or  any  Head  or  Master  of  a  College,  or  any  other 
person  respectively  in  either  of  them,  shall  affix  any  new  sense  to  any  Article,  or  shall  publickly  read,  determine, 
or  hold  any  publick  Disputation,  or  suffer  any  such  to  be  held  either  icay,  in  either  the  Universities  or  Colleges 
respectively;  or  if  any  Divine  in  the  Universities  shall  preach  or  print  any  thing  either  way,  other  than  is 
already  established  in  Convocation  with  our  Royal  Assent;  he,  or  they  the  Offenders,  shall  be  liable  to  Our 
Displeasure,  and  the  Church's  censure  in  Our  Commission  Ecclesiastical,  as  ivell  as  any  other:  And  We  will 
see  there  shall  be  due  Execution  upon  them, 

3H 


Articles  of 

•■  ■  1.  Of  Faith  in  the  Holy  Trinity. 

ni^HERE  is  but  one  living  and  true  God,  ever- 
■*-  lasting,  without  body,  parts,  or  passions;  of 
infinite  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness ;  the  Maker, 
and  Preserver  of  all  things  both  visible  and  invisi- 
ble. And  in  unity  of  this  Godhead  there  be  three 
Persons,  of  one  substance,  power,  and  eternity ; 
the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost. 

II.  Of  the  TVord  or  Son  of  God,  zihich  was  made 
very  Man. 

'T^  H  E  Son,  which  is  the  Word  of  the  Father, 
■^  begotten  from  everlasting  of  the  Father,  the 
very  and  eternal  God,  and  of  one  substance  with 
the  Father,  took  Man's  nature  in  the  womb  of  the 
blessed  Virgin,  of  her  substance  :  so  tiiat  two  whole 
and  perfect  Natures,  that  is  to  say,  the  Godhead 
and  Manhood,  were  joined  together  in  one  Person, 
never  to  be  divided,  whereof  is  one  Christ,  very 
God,  and  very  Man ;  who  truly  suffered,  was  cruci- 
fied, dead  and  buried,  to  reconcile  his  Father  to  us, 
and  to  be  a  sacrifice,  not  only  for  original  guilt, 
but  also  for  actual  sins  of  men. 

■v!<  ■  III.  Of  the  going  dozen  of  Christ  into  Hell. 

A  ^  Christ  died  for  us,  and  was  buried,  so  also  is 
-^^  it  to  be  believed,  that  he  w  ent  down  into  Hell. 

IV.  Of  the  Resurrection  of  Christ. 

/CHRIST  did  truly  rise  again  from  death,  and 
^^took  again  his  body,  with  flesh,  bones,  and  all 
things  appertaining  to  the  perfection  of  Man's  na- 
ture; wherewith  he  ascended  into  Heaven,  and 
there  sitteth,  until  he  return  to  judge  all  Men  at 
the  last  day. 

V.  Of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

nnilE  Holy  Ghost,  proceeding  from  the  Father 
-*-    and  the  Son,  is  of  one  substance,  majesty,  and 
glory,  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  very  and  eter- 
nal God. 

VI.    Of  the  Siijjiciency  of  the  holy   Scriptures  for 
salvation. 

XTOLY  Scripture  containeth  all  things  necessary 
-^  to  salvation :  so  that  whatsoever  is  not  read 
therein,  nor  may  be  proved  tiiereby,  is  not  to  be 
required  of  any  man,  that  it  should  be  believed  as 
an  Article  of  the  Faith,  or  be  thought  requisite  or 
necessary  to  salvation.  In  the  name  of  the  holy 
Scripture  we  do  understand  those  canonical  Books 
of  the  Old  and  New  'I'cslanient,  of  whose  authority 
was  never  any  doubt  in  the  Church. 


Religio7i. 

Of   the    Names    and    Number   of    the    Canonical 
BOOKS. 


/GENESIS, 

Exodus, 
Leviticus, 
Numbers, 
Deuteronomy, 
Joshua, 
Judges, 
Ruth, 

The  1  Book  of  Samuel, 
The  2  Book  of  Samuel, 
The  1  Book  of  Kings, 
The  2  Book  of  Kings, 
The  \  Book  of  Chronicles, 


The  2  Book  of  Chronicles, 
The  1  Book  of  Esdras, 
The  2  Book  of  Esdras, 
The  Book  of  Esther, 
The  Book  of  Job, 
The  Psalms, 
The  Proverbs, 
Ecctesiastes,  or  Preacher, 
Cantica,  or  Songs  of  So- 
lomon, 
Four  Prophetsthe  greater, 
Tzcelve  Prophets  the  less. 


And  the  other  Books  (as  Hierome  saith)  the 
Church  doth  read  for  example  of  life  and  instruc- 
tion of  manners;  but  yet  doth  it  not  apply  tliem  to 
establish  any  doctrine ;  such  are  these  following : 


The  3  Book  of  Esdras, 
The  4  Book  of  Esdras, 
The  Book  of  Tobias, 
The  Book  of  Judith, 
The  rest  of  the  Book  of 

Esther, 
The  Book  of  Wisdom, 
Jesus  the  Son  of  Sirach, 


Baruch  the  Prophet, 
The  Song  of  the  three 

Children, 
The  Story  of  Susanna, 
Of  Bel  and  the  Dragon, 
The  Prayer  of  Manasses, 
The  1  Book  of  Maccabees, 
The  2  Book  of  Maccabees. 


All  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament,  as  they 
are  commonly  received,  we  do  receive,  and  account 
them  Canonical. 

VII.  Of  the  Old  Testament. 

T^HE  Old  Testament  is  not  contrary  to  the  New: 
-^  for  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament  ever- 
lasting life  is  oflered  to  Mankind  by  Christ,  who  is 
the  only  Mediator  between  God  and  Man,  being 
both  God  and  Man.  VVherclbre  they  are  not  to 
be  heard,  which  feign  that  the  Old  Fathers  did  look 
only  for  transitory  promises.  Although  the  Law 
given  from  God  by  Moses,  as  touching  Ceremonies 
and  Rites,  do  not  bind  Christian  men,  nor  the  Civil 
precepts  thereof  ought  of  necessity  to  be  received 
in  any  common-wealth;  yet  notwithstanding,  no 
Christian  man  whatsoever  is  free  from  the  obedience 
of  the  Commandments  which  are  called  Moral. 

VIII.  Of  the  Three  Creeds. 

^^  1 1 1'^  Three  Creeds,  Nicene  Creed,  Atha?iasius's 
■*-  Creed,  and  that  which  is  commonly  called  the 
Aposllcs  Creed,  ought  thoroughly  to  be  received 
and  believed  :  for  they  may  be  proved  by  most 
certain  warrants  of  holy  Scripture. 


Articles  of  Iteligion 

IX.    ()/'  Original  or  Birlk-sin. 


^^RIGINAL  Sin  stantleth  not  in  the  following 
^■^  of  Adam,  (as  the  Pe/agians  do  vainly  talk;) 
but  it  is  the  fault  and  conuption  of  the  nature  of 
every  man,  that  naturally  is  ingendered  of  the  off- 
spring of  Adam ;  whereby  man  is  very  far  gone 
from  original  righteousness,  and  is  of  liis  own  nature 
inclined  to  evil,  so  that  the  flesh  lustelh  always 
contrary  to  the  spirit;  and  therefore  in  every  person 
born  into  this  world,  it  dcsrrvetii  God's  wrath  and 
damnation.  And  this  infection  of  naturb  doth  re- 
main, yea  in  them  that  are  regenerated ;  whereby 
the  lust  of  the  flesh,  called  in  the  Greek,  $fovnjiAai 
(fOL^ws,  which  some  do  expound  the  wisdom,  some 
sensuality,  some  the  affection,  some  the  desire,  of 
the  flesh,  is  not  subject  to  the  Law  of  God.  And 
although  there  is  no  condemnation  for  them  that 
believe  and  are  baptized,  yet  the  Apostle  doth  con- 
fess, that  concupiscence  and  lust  hath  of  itself  the 
nature  of  sin. 

X.   Of  Free-Will: 

^1  ^HE  condition  of  Man  after  the  fall  of  Adam 
is  such,  that  he  cannot  turn  and  piepare  him- 
self, by  his  own  natural  strength  and  good  works,  to 
faith,  and  calling  upon  God:  Wherefore  we  have 
no  power  to^do  good  works  pleasant  and  acceptable 
to  God,  without  the  grace  of  God  by  Christ  pre- 
venting us,  that  we  may  have  a  good  will,  and 
working  with  us,  when  we  have  that  good  will. 

XI.  Of  the  Justification  of  Man. 

"VM/^E  are  accounted  righteous  before  God,  only 
'  for  the  merit  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ  by  Faith,  and  not  for  our  own  works  or  de- 
servings  :  Wherefore,  that  we  are  justified  by  Faith 
only  is  a  most  wholesome  Doctrine,  and  very  full  of 
comfort,  as  more  largely  is  expressed  in  the  Homily 
of  Justification. 

XII.  Of  Good  Works. 

A  LBEIT  that  Good  Works,  which  are  the  fruits 
'^^*-  of  Faith,  and  follow  after  Justification,  cannot 
put  away  our  sins,  and  endure  the  severity  of  God's 
Judgement;  yet  are  they  pleasing  and  acceptable 
to  God  in  Christ,  and  do  spring  out  necessarily  of  a 
true  and  lively  Faith;  insomuch  that  by  them  a 
lively  Faith  may  be  as  evidently  known  as  a  tree 
discerned  by  the  fruit. 

XIII.  Of  Works  before  Justification. 

"V^T^ORKS  done  before  the  grace  of  Christ,  and 

the  Inspiration  of  his  Spirit,  are  not  pleasant 

to  God,  forasmuch  as  they  spring  not  of  faith  in 


Jesus  Christ,  neither  do  they  make  meii  meet  to 
receive  grace,  or  (as  the  School-authors  say)  deserve 
grace  of  congruity  :  ya.  rather,  for  that  they  are 
not  done  as  God  hath  willed  and  commanded  them 
to  be  done,  we  doubt  not  but  they  have  the  nature 
of  sin. 

XIV.  Of  Works  of  Supererogation. 

^OLUNTARY  Works  besides,  over  and  above, 
God's  Connnandrnenls,  which  they  call  Works 
of  Supererogation,  cannot  be  taught  without  arro- 
gancy  and  impiety:  for  by  them  men  do  declare, 
that  they  do  not  only  render  unto  God  as  much  as 
they  are  bound  to  do,  but  that  they  do  more  for  his 
sake,  than  of  bounden  duty  is  required :  whereas 
Christ  saith  plainly.  When  ye  have  done  all  that 
are  commanded  to  you,  say,  We  are  unprofitable 
servants. 

XV.  Of  Christ  alone  without  Sin. 

/^HRIST  in  the  truth  of  our  nature  was  made 
^^  like  unto  us  in  all  things,  sin  only  except,  from 
which  he  was  clearly  void,  both  in  his  flesh,  and  in 
his  spirit.  He  came  to  be  the  Lamb  without  spot, 
who,  by  sacrifice  of  himself  once  made,  should  take 
away  the  sins  of  the  woild,  and  sin,  as  Saint  John 
saith,  was  not  in  him.  But  ail  we  the  rest,  although 
baptized,  and  born  again  in  Christ,  yet  oflfend  in 
many  things;  and  if  we  say  we  have  no  sin,  we  de- 
ceive ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us. 

XVI.  Of  Sin  after  Baptism. 

I^TOT  every  deadly  sin  willingly  committed  after 
Baptism  is  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
unpardonable.  Wherefore  the  grant  of  repentance 
is  not  to  be  denied  to  such  as  fall  into  sin  after 
Baptism.  After  we  have  received  the  Holy  Ghost, 
we  may  depart  from  grace  given,  and  fall  into  sin, 
and  by  the  grace  of  God  we  may  arise  again,  and 
amend  our  lives.  And  therefore  they  are  to  be 
condemned,  which  say,  the}'  can  no  more  sin  as 
long  as  they  live  here,  or  deny  the  place  of  forgive- 
ness to  such  as  truly  repent. 

XVII.  Of  Predestination  and  Election. 

T>REDESTINATION  to  Life  is  the  everlasting 
purpose  of  God,  whereby  (before  the  founda- 
tions of  the  world  were  laid)  he  hath  constantly  de- 
creed by  his  counsel  secret  to  us,  to  deliver  from^ 
curse  and  damnation  those  whom  he  hath  chosen 
in  Christ  out  of  mankind,  and  to  bring  them  by 
Christ  to  everlasting  "salvation,  as  vessels  made  to 
honour.  Wherefore,  they  which  be  endued  with 
so  excellent  a  benefit  of  God  be  called  accordir|f' 
3H2 


Articles  of  Religion. 


to  God's  purpose  by  his  Spirit  working  in  due  sea- 
son :  rhey  through  Grace  obey  the  calling :  they  be 
justified  freely:  they  be  made  sons  of  God  by  adop- 
tion :  they  be  made  like  the  image  of  his  only- 
begotten  Son  Jesus  Christ:  they  walk  religiously 
in  good  works,  and  at  length,  by  God's  mercy,  they 
attain  to  everlasting  felicity. 

As  the  godly  consideration  of  Predestination,  and 
our  Election  in  Christ,  is  full  of  sweet,  pleasant, 
and  uii-peakable  comfort  to  godly  persons,  and  such 
as  feel  in  themselves  the  working  of  the  Spirit  of 
Christ,  mortifying  the  works  of  the  flesh,  and  their 
earthly  members,  and  drawing  up  their  mind  to 
high  and  heavenly  things,  as  well  because  it  doth 
greatly  establish  and  confirm  their  faith  of  eternal 
Salvation  to  be  enjoyed  through  Christ,  as  because 
it  doth  fervently  kindle  their  love  towards  God:  So, 
for  curious  and  carnal  persons,  lacking  the  Spirit 
of  Christ,  to  have  continually  before  their  eyes  the 
sentence  of  God's  Predestination,  is  a  most  danger- 
ous downfal,  whereby  the  Devil  doth  thrust  them  ei- 
ther into  desperation,  or  into  wretchlessness  of  most 
unclean  living,  no  less  perilous  than  desperation. 

Furthermore,  we  must  receive  God's  promises  in 
Such  wise,  as  they  be  generally  set  forth  to  us  in 
holy  Scripture:  and,  in  our  doings,  that  will  of  God 
is  to  be  followed,  which  we  have  expressly  declared 
onto  us  in  the  Word  of  God. 

XVIII.    Of  obtaining  eternal  Salvation  only  bj/  the 
Name  of  Christ. 

T^HEY  also  are  to  be  had  accursed  that  presume 
to  say.  That  every  man  shall  be  saved  by  the 
Law  or  Sect  which  he  professeth,  so  that  he  be 
diligent  to  frame  his  life  according  to  that  Law, 
and  the  light  of  Nature.  For  holy  Scripture  doth 
set  out  unto  us  only  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ, 
whereby  men  must  be  saved. 

XIX.  Of  the  Church. 

nr^HE  visible  Church  of  Christ  is  a  Congregation 
-^  of  faithful  men,  in  the  which  the  pure  Word 
of  God  is  preached,  and  the  Sacraments  be  duly 
ministered  according  to  Christ's  ordinance  in  all 
those  things  that  of  necessity  are  requisite  to  the 
same. 

As  the  Church  of  Jerusalem,  Alexandria,  and 
Aniioch,  have  erred;  so  also  the  Church  of  Rome 
hath  erred,  not  only  in  their  living  and  manner  of 
Ceremonies,  but  also  in  matters  of  Faith. 

XX.  Of  the.  Authority  of  the  Church. 

nr^HE  Church   hath   power  to  decree   Rites  or 

•      Ceremonies,  and  authority  in  Controversies  of 

Faith :  And  yet  it  is  Hot  lawful  for  the  Church  lu 


ordain  any  thing  that  is  contrary  to  God's  Word 
written,  neither  may  it  so  expound  one  place  of 
Scripture,  that  it  be  repugnant  to  another.  Where- 
fore, although  the  Church  be  a  witness  and  a  keeper 
of  holy  Writ,  yet,  as  it  ought  not  to  decree  any 
thing  against  the  same,  so  besides  the  same  ought 
it  not  to  enforce  any  thing  to  be  believed  for  neces- 
sity of  Salvation. 

XXI.  Of  the  Authority  of  General  Councils. 

M^^  ENERAL  Councils  may  not  be  gathered  toge- 
^-^  ther  without  the  commandment  and  will  of 
Princes.  And  when  they  be  gathered  together, 
(forasmuch  as  thfey  be  an  assembly  of  men,  whereof 
all  be  not  governed  with  the  Spirit  and  Word  of 
God,)  they  may  err^  and  sometimes  have  erred, 
even  in  things  pertaining  unto  God.  W^herefore 
things  ordained  b}'  them  as  necessary  to  salvation 
have  neither  strength  nor  authority,  unless  it  may 
be  declared  that  they  be  taken  out  of  holy  Scrip- 
ture. 

XXII.  Of  Purgatory. 

nr^HE  Romish  Doctrine  concerning  Purgatory, 
-^  Pardons,  Worshipping  and  Adoration,  as  well 
of  Images  as  of  Reliques,  and  also  invocation  of 
Saints,  is  a  fond  thing  vainly  invented,  and  ground- 
ed upon  no  warranty  of  Scripture,  but  rather  re- 
pugnant to  the  Word  of  God. 

XXIII.   Of  Ministering  in  the  Congregation. 

XT  is  not  lawful  for  any  man  to  take  upon  him 
-"-  the  office  of  publick  preaching,  or  ministering 
the  Sacraments  in  the  Congregation,  before  he  be 
lawfully  called,  and  sent  to  execute  the  same.  And 
those  we  ought  to  judge  lawfully  called  and  sent, 
which  be  chosen  and  called  to  this  work  by  men 
who  have  publick  authority  given  unto  them  in  the 
Congregation,  to  call  and  send  Ministers  into  the 
Lord's  vineyard. 

XXIV.  Of  speaking  in  the  Congregation  in  such  a 
tongue  as  the  people  underslandeth. 

TT  is  a  thing  plainly  repugnant  to  the  Word  of 
-*-  God,  and  the  custom  of  the  Primitive  Church, 
to  have  publick  Prayer  in  the  Church,  or  to  mini- 
ster the  Sacraments  in  a  tongue  not  understanded 
of  the  people. 

XXV.  Of  the  Sacraments. 

t^ACRATVIENTS  ordained  of  Christ  be  not  only 
^^  i)adges  or  tokens  of  Christian  men's  profession, 
but  rather  they  be  certain  surtv witnesses,  and  etlic- 
lual  signs  of  grac«,  antl  'God's  'giJod  will  toworfls 


Articles  of  Religion. 


us,  by  the  which  he  dotli  work  invisibly  in  us,  .-inil 
doth  not  only  quicken,  but  also  strengthen  and 
confirm  our  Faith  in  him. 

There  are  two  Sacraments  ordained  of  Christ  our 
Lord  in  the  Gospel,  that  is  to  say,  Baptism,  and  the 
Supper  ot"  the  Lord. 

Those  five  commonly  called  Sacraments,  that  is 
to  say.  Confirmation,  Penance,  Orders,  Matrimony, 
and  extreme  Unction,  are  not  to  be  counted  for 
Sacraments  of  the  Gospel,  being  such  as  have  grown 
partly  of  the  corrupt  following  of  the  Apostles, 
partly  are  states  of  life  allowed  in  the  Scriptures ; 
but  yet  have  not  like  nature  of  Sacraments  with 
B^iptism,  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  for  that  they  have 
not  any  visible  sign  or  ceremony  ordained  of  God. 

The  Sacraments  were  not  ordained  of  Christ  to 
be  gazed  upon,  or  to  be  carried  about,  but  that  we 
should  duly  use  them.  And  in  such  only  as  worthily 
I'eceive  the  same  they  have  a  wholesome  effect  or 
operation:  but  they  that  receive  them  unworthily 
purchase  to  themselves  damnation,  as  Saint  Faul 
saith. 

XXVL  Of  the  Unworthiness  of  the  Ministers,  which 
hinders  not  the  effect  of  the  Sacrament. 

A  LTHOUGH  in  the  visible  Church  the  evil  be 
-^^  ever  mingled  with  the  good,  and  sometimes 
the  evil  have  chief  authority  in  the  Ministration  of 
the  Word  and  Sacraments,  yet  forasmuch  as  they 
do  not  the  same  in  their  own  name,  but  in  Christ's, 
and  do  minister  by  his  commission  and  authority, 
we  may  use  their  Ministry,  both  in  hearing  the 
Word  of  God,  and  in  receiving  of  the  Sacraments. 
Neither  is  the  effect  of  Christ's  ordinance  taken 
away  b^'  their  wickedness,  nor  the  grace  of  God's 
gifts  diminished  from  such  as  by  faith  and  rightly 
do  receive  the  Sacraments  ministered  unto  them ; 
which  be  efl'ectual,  because  of  Christ's  institution 
and  promise,  although  they  be  ministered  by  evil 
men. 

Nevertheless,  it  appertaineth  to  the  discipline  of 
the  Church,  that  enquiry  be  made  of  evil  Ministers, 
and  that  they  be  accused  by  those  that  have  know- 
ledge of  their  offences ;  and  finally  being  found 
guilty,  by  just  judgement  be  deposed. 

XXVIL  Of  Baptism. 

TD  APTISM  is  not  only  a  sign  of  profession,  and 
'^'^  mark  of  difference,  whereby  Christian  men  are 
discerned  from  others  that  be  not  christened,  but  it 
is  also  a  sign  of  Regeneration  or  new  Birth,  where- 
by, as  by  an  instrument,  they  that  receive  Baptism 
rightly  are  grafted  into  the  Church ;  the  promises 
of  forgiveness  of  sin,  and  of  our  adoption  to  be  the 


sons  of  God  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  visibly  signed 
and  sealed;  Faith  is  confirmed,  and  Grace  increased 
by  virtue  of  prayer  unto  God.  Tlie  Baptism  of 
young  Cliildreu  is  in  any  wise  to  be  retained  in  tlie 
Church,  as  most  agreeable  with  the  institution  of 
Christ. 

XXVIIL  Of  th£  Lord's  Supper. 

T^HE  Supper  of  the  Lord  is  not  only  a  sign  of 
the  love  that  Christians  ought  to  have  among 
themselves  one  to  another ;  but  rather  is  a  Sacra- 
ment of  our  Redemption  by  Christ's  death :  inso- 
much that  to  such  as  rightly,  worthily,  and  with 
faith,  receive  the  same,  the  Bread  which  we  break 
is  a  partaking  of  the  Body  of  Christ;  and  likewise 
the  Cup  of  Blessing  is  a  partaking  of  the  Blood  of 
Christ. 

Transubstantiation  (or  the  change  of  the  sub- 
stance of  Bread  and  Wine)  in  the  Supper  of  the 
Lord,  cannot  be  proved  by  holy  Writ ;  but  is  repug- 
nant to  the  plain  words  of  Scripture,  overthroweth 
the  nature  of  a  Sacrament,  and  hath  given  occasion 
to  many  superstitions. 

The  bod}'  of  Christ  is  given,  taken,  and  eaten,  in 
the  Supper,  only  after  an  heavenly  and  spiritual 
manner.  And  the  mean  whereby  the  Body  of 
Christ  is  received  and  eaten  in  the  Supper  is  Faith. 

The  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  was  not  by 
Christ's  ordinance  reserved,  carried  about,  lifted  up, 
or  worshipped. 

XXIX.    Of  the  wicked  rchich  eat  not  the  Body  ef 
Christ  in  the  use  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

''■"'HE  Wicked,  and  such  as  be  void  of  a  liveJy 
faith,  although  they  do  carnally  and  visibly 
press  with  their  teeth  (as  Saint  Augustine  saith)  the 
Sacrament  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ,  yet  in 
no  wise  are  they  partakers  of  Christ :  but  rather,  to 
their  condemnation,  do  eat  and  drink  the  sign  or 
Sacrament  of  so  great  a  thing. 

XXX.  Of  both  kinds. 

nr^HE  Cup  of  the  Lord  is  not  to  be  denied  to  the 
^    Lay-people :  fbr  both  the  parts  of  the  Lord's 
Sacrament,  by  Christ's  ordinance  and  commandment^ 
ought  to  be  ministered  to  all  Christian  men  alike. 

XXX  L  Of  the  one  Oblation  of  Christ  finished  upon 
the  Cross. 

T^HE  Offering  of  Christ  once  made  is  that  perfect 

'*-    redemption,  propitiation,  and  satisfaction,  for 

all  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  both  original  and 


Articles  of  Religioti. 


actual ;  and  there  is  none  other  satisfaction  for  sin, 
but  that  alone.  Wherefore  the  sacrifices  of  Masses, 
in  the  which  it  was  commonly  said,  that  the  Priest 
did  offer  Christ  for  the  quick  and  the  dead,  to  have 
remission  of  pain  or  guilt,  were  blasphemous  fables, 
and  dangerous  deceits. 

XXXII.  Of  the  Marriage  of  Priests. 

TDISHOPS,  Priests,  and  Deacons,  are  not  com- 
-*-^  manded  by  God's  Law,  either  to  vow  the  estate 
of  single  life,  or  to  abstain  from  marriage:  therefore 
it  is  lawful  for  them,  as  for  all  other  Christian  men, 
to  marry  at  their  own  discretion,  as  they  shall  judge 
the  same  to  serve  better  to  godliness. 

XXXIII.  Of  excommunicate  Persons,  how  they  are 
to  be  avoided. 

^THHAT  person  which  by  open  denunciation  of 
■*•  the  Church  is  rightly  cut  off  from  the  unity  of 
the  Church,  and  excommunicated,  ought  to  be 
taken  of  the  whole  multitude  of  the  faithful,  as  an 
Heathen  and  Publican,  until  he  be  openly  reconcil- 
ed by  penance,  and  received  into  the  Church  by  a 
Judge  that  hath  authority  thereunto. 

XXXIV.  Of  the  Traditions  of  the  Church. 

TT  is  not  necessary  that  Traditions  and  Ceremonies 
be  in  all  places  one,  and  utterly  like;  for  at  all 
times  they  have  been  divers,  and  may  be  changed 
according  to  the  diversities  of  countries,  times,  and 
men's  manners,  so  that  nothing  be  ordained  against 
God's  Word.  Whosoever  through  his  private 
judgement,  willingly  and  purposely,  doth  openly 
break  the  traditions  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church, 
■which  be  not  repugnant  to  the  Word  of  God,  and 
be  ordained  and  approved  by  common  authority, 
ought  to  be  rebuked  openly,  (that  othei's  may  fear 
to  do  the  like,)  as  he  that  offendeth  against  the 
common  order  of  the  Church,  and  hurteth  the  au- 
thority of  the  Magistrate,  and  woundeth  the  consci- 
ences of  the  weak  brethren. 

Every  particular  or  national  Church  hath  autho- 
rity to  ordain,  change,  and  abolish,  ceremonies  or 
rites  of  the  Church  ordained  only  by  man's  autho- 
rity, so  that  all  things  be  done  to  edifying. 

XXXV.  Of  the  Homilies. 

^T^HE  second  Book  of  Homilies,  the  several  titles 
whereof  we  have  joined  under  this  Article,  doth 
contain  a  godly  and  wholesome  Doctrine,  and  ne- 
cessary for  these  times,  as  doth  the  former  Book  of 
Homilies,  which  were  set  forth  in  the  time  of  Edward 
the  Sixth;  and  therefore  we  judge  them  to  be  read 
in  Churcijes  by  the  Ministers,  diligently  and  dis- 


tinctly, that  they  may  be  understanded  of  the  peo- 
ple. 

Of  the  Names  of  the  Homilies. 


Of  the  right  Use  of  the  Church. 

Against  peril  of  Idolatry. 

Of  repairing  and  keeping  clean  of  Churches. 

Of  good  Works :  first  of  Fasting. 

Against  Gluttony  and  Drunkenness. 

Against  Excess  of  Apparel. 

Of  Prayer. 

Of  the  Place  and  Time  of  Prayer. 

That  Common  Prayers  and  Sacraments  ought  to 

be  ministered  in  a  known  tongue. 

Of  the  reverend  estimation  of  God's  Word. 

Of  Alms-doing. 

Of  the  Nativity  of  Christ. 

Of  the  Passion  of  Christ. 

Of  the  Resurrection  of  Christ. 

Of  the  worthy  receiving  of  the  Sacrament  of  the 

Body  and  Blood  of  Christ. 
Of  the  Gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
For  the  Rogation-days. 
Of  the  state  of  Matrimony. 
Of  Repentance. 


10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 

16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 


Against  Idleness. 
Against  Rebellion. 


XXXVI.  Of  Consecration  of  Bishops  and  Ministers. 

'T^HE  Book  of  Consecration  of  Archbishops  and 
Bishops,  and  Ordering  of  Priests  and  Deacons, 
lately  set  forth  in  the  time  of  Edward  the  Sixth, 
and  confirmed  at  the  same  time  by  authority  of 
Parliament,  doth  contain  all  things  necessary  to 
such  Consecration  and  Ordering :  neither  hath  it 
any  thing,  that  of  itself  is  superstitious  and  ungodly. 
And  therefore  whosoever  are  consecrated  or  ordered 
according  to  the  Rites  of  that  Book,  since  the  se- 
cond year  of  the  forenamed  King  Edifard  unto  this 
time,  or  hereafter  shall  be  consecrated  or  ordered 
according  to  the  same  Rites;  we  decree  all  such  to 
be  rightly,  orderly,  and  lawfully  consecrated  and 
ordered. 

XXXVII.  Of  the  Civil  Magistrates. 

T^HE  King's  Majesty  hath  the  chief  power  in 
-^  this  Realm  of  England,  and  other  his  Domini- 
ons, unto  whom  the  chief  Government  of  all  Estates 
of  this  Realm,  whether  thoy  be  Ecclesiastical  or 
Civil,  in  all  causes  doth  ap|>ertain,  and  is  not,  nor 
ought  to  be,  subject  to  any  foreign  Jurisdiction. 

Where  we  attribute  to  the  King's  Majesty  the 
chief  government,  by  which  Titles  we  understand 
the  minds  of  some  slanderous  folks  to  be  offended ; 


Articles  of  lleligion. 


We  give  not  to  our  Princes  the  ministering  either  of 
God's  Word,  or  of  tiie  Sacninients,  the  wliicli  thing 
tlie  Injunctions  also  lately  set  forth  by  Elizabeth 
our  Queen  do  most  plainly  testily ;  but  tliat  only 
prerogative,  which  we  see  to  have  been  given  al- 
ways to  all  godly  Princes  in  holy  Scriptures  by  God 
himself;  that  is,  that  they  should  rule  all  states 
and  degrees  committed  to  their  charge  by  God, 
whether  they  be  Ecclesiastical  or  Temporal,  and 
restrain  with  the  civil  sword  the  stubborn  and  evil- 
doers. 

The  Bishop  of  Rome  hatli  no  jurisdiction  in  this 
Realm  oi  England. 

The  Laws  of  the  Realm  may  punish  Christian 
men  with  death,  for  heinous  and  grievous  oflences. 

It  is  lawful  for  Christian  men,  at  the  command- 
ment of  the  Magistrate,  to  wear  weapons,  and  serve 
in  the  wars. 


XXXVIII.  Of  Christian  men's  Goods,  which  are  noi 
common. 

^^IIE  Riches  and  Goods  of  Christians  are  not 
common,  as  touching  the  right,  title,  and  pos- 
session of  the  same,  as  certain  Anabaptists  do  falsely 
hoast.  Notwithstiinding,  every  man  ought,  of  such 
things  as  he  posscsseth,  liberally  to  give  alms  to  the 
poor,  according  to  his  ability. 

XXXIX.  Of  a  Christian  man's  Oath. 
/4  S  we  confess  that  vain  and  rash  .Swearing  is 
-^^  forbidden  Christian  men  by  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  James  his  Apostle,  so  we  judge,  tliat 
Christian  Religion  doth  not  prohibit,  but  that  a 
man  may  swear  when  tlie  Magistrate  requireth,  in 
a  cause  of  faith  and  charity,  so  it  be  done  according 
to  the  Prophet's  teaching,  in  justice,  judgement, 
and  truth. 


THE    RATIFICATION. 


^nmS  Book  of  Articles  before  rehearsed,  is  again  approved,  and  allowed  to  be  holden  and  executed  within 
the  Realm,  by  the  assent  and  consent  of  our  Sovereign  Lady  ELIZABETH,  by  the  grace  of  God,  of  Eng- 
land, France,  and  Ireland,  Queen,  Defender  of  the  Faith,  &c.     Which  Articles  tvere  deliberately  read,  and 
confirmed  again  by  the  subscription  of  the  hands  of  the  Archbishops  and  Bishops  of  the  Upper-house,  and  by  the 
subscription  of  the  whole  Clergy  of  the  Nether-house  in  their  Convocation,  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord  1571. 


A    TABLE    OF 


1.  f^F  Faith  in  the  Holy  Trinity. 

2.  ^  Of  Christ  the  Son  of  God. 

3.  Of  his  going  down  into  Hell. 

4.  Of  his  Resurrection. 

5.  Of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

6.  Of  the  Sufficiency  of  the  Scripture. 

7.  Of  the  Old  Testament. 

8.  Of  the  Three  Creeds. 

9.  Of  Original  or  Birth-sin. 

10.  OfFree-Will. 

1 1 .  Of  Justification. 

12.  Of  Good  Works. 

13.  Of  Works  before  Justification. 

14.  Of  Works  of  Supererogation. 

15.  Of  Christ  alone  without  Sin. 

16.  Of  Sin  after  Baptism. 

17.  Of  Predestination  and  Election. 

18.  Of  obtaining  Salvation  by  Christ. 

19.  Of  the  Church. 

20.  Of  the  Authority  of  the  Church. 


THE    ARTICLES. 

21.  Of  the  Authority  of  General  Councils. 

22.  Of  Purgatory. 

23.  Of  Ministering  in  the  Congregation. 

24.  Of  Speaking  in  the  Congregation. 

25.  Of  the  Sacraments. 

26.  Of  the  Unworthiness  of  Ministers. 

27.  Of  Baptism. 

28.  Of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

29.  Of  the  Wicked  which  eat  7iot  the  Body  of  Christ. 

30.  Of  both  kinds. 

31.  Of  Christ's  one  Oblation. 

32.  Of  the  Marriage  of  Priests. 

33.  Of  Excommunicate  Persons.  * 

34.  Of  the  Traditions  of  the  Church. 

35.  Of  the  Homilies. 

36.  Of  Consecrating  of  Ministers. 

37.  Of  Civil  Magistrates. 

38.  Of  Christian  men's  Goods. 

39.  Of  a  Christian  man's  Oath. 
The  Ratification. 


A    TABLE 

OF 

KINDRED    AND    AFFINITY, 

WHEREIN  WHOSOEVER  ARE  RELATED  ARE  FORBIDDEN  IN  SCRIPTURE 
AND  OUR  LAWS  TO  MARRY  TOGETHER. 


A  Man  may  not  marry  his 

1  I^RANDMOTHER, 

2  VX  Grandfather's  Wife, 

3  Wife's  Grandmother. 

4  Father's  Sister, 

5  Mother's  Sister, 

6  Father's  Brother's  Wife. 

7  Mother's  Brother's  Wife. 

8  Wife's  Father's  Sister, 

9  Wife's  Mother's  Sister. 

10  Mother, 

11  Step-Mother, 

12  Wife's  Mother. 


13 


Daughter, 


14  Wife's  Daughter, 

15  Son's  Wife. 

16  Sister, 

17  Wife's  Sister, 

18  Brother's  Wife. 

19  Son's  Daughter, 

20  Daughter's  Daughter, 

21  Son's  Son's  Wife. 

22  Daughter's  Son's  Wife, 

23  Wife's  Son's  Daughter, 

24  Wife's  Daughter's  Daughter. 

25  Brother's  Daughter, 

26  Sister's  Daughter, 

27  Brother's  Son's  Wife. 

28  Sister's  Son's  Wife, 

29  Wife's  Brother's  Daughter, 

30  Wife's  Sister's  Daughter. 


A  IVoman  may  not  marry  with  her 


I  ^GRANDFATHER, 


Grandmother's  Husband, 

3  Husband's  Grandfather. 

4  Father's  Brother, 

5  Mother's  Brother, 

6  Father's  Sister's  Husband. 

7  Mother's  Sister's  Husband, 

8  Husband's  Father's  Brotlier, 

9  Husband's  Mother's  Brother. 

10  Father, 

1 1  Step-Father, 

12  Husband's  Father. 

13  Son, 

14  Husband's  Son, 

15  Daughter's  Husband. 

16  Brother, 

17  Husband's  Brother, 

18  Sister's  Husband. 

19  Son's  Son, 

20  Daughter's  Son, 

21  Son's  Daughter's  Husband. 

22  Daughter's  Daughter's  Husband, 

23  Husband's  Son's  Son, 

24  Husband's  Daughter's  Son. 

25  Brother's  Son, 

26  Sister's  Son, 

27  Brother's  Daughter's  Husband. 

28  Sister's  Daughter's  Husband, 

29  Husband's  Brother's  Son, 

30  Husband's  Sister'^  Son. 


THE     END. 


J, 


^'r^ 


Fchi^w 


iM.   ^, 


/*-» 


¥ 


'A. 


^«r 


t.    :    r 


"m 


i'A.'Tit  St.:-!       :\  .'.  ■i*,':i'' 


sm 


I 


