3rnia 
al 


»:•: 


LIBRARY 

UNiv^.Rsrrr  op 

C*L'FORN'A 

SAN  DIEGO 


THE  BOOK  OF 
THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

AND  OTHER  EARLY  ENGLISH  TRACTS 
CONCERNING  DEATH 


Digitized  by-tlie  internet  Archive 
in  2007  witli- funding  from 
IVI  icrosoft;  Co  rpo  ratio  n    . 


http://www.arcliive.org/details/bookofcraftofdyiOOcaxtiala 


(From  the  block-book  of  the  An  Moriendi 
in  the  British  Museum.) 


THE  BOOK  OF 
THE  CRAFT  OF   DYING 

AND  OTHER  EARLY  ENGLISH  TRACTS 
CONCERNING  DEATH 

TAKEN  FROM   MANUSCRIPTS  AND  PRINTED  BOOKS  IN  THE 
BRITISH   MUSEUM  AND   BODLEIAN  LIBRARIES 

NOW  FIRST  DONE  INTO  MODERN  SPELLING 
AND  EDITED  BY 

FRANCES  M.  M.  COMPER 

WITH  A  PREFACE  BY  THE 

REV.  GEORGE  CONGREVE,  S.S.J.E. 


LONGMANS,     GREEN,     AND    GO. 

39  PATERNOSTER  ROW,  LONDON 

NEW  YORK,  BOMBAY  AND  CALCUTTA 

1917 

All  rights  reserved 


ALL  THAT  IS  MINE  IN  THIS  BOOK 

I  DEDICATE 

TO  THE  LOVED  MEMORY 

OF  ONE  WHO  HAS  ALREADY 

LEARNT  THIS  CRAFT 


CONTENTS 


I'AGB 


Preface  by  the  Rev.  G.  Congreve,  S.S.J.E.   .  ix 

Introductory  Note,  by  the  Editor  .     xxxix 

The  Book  of  the  Craft  of  Dying  .  i 

An  Abridgment  of  the  same  ;  translated  from 

the  French  by  W.  Caxton  .  .  55 

A  further  Abridgment         .  ,  .93 

A  Chapter  from  the  Orot.ogium  SAPiENTiAiy  by 

Henry  Suso     .  .  .  .105 

A  Chapter  from  the  Toure  of  all  Toures  .  127 
A  Fragment  from  MS.   Bod.  423     .  .        131 

A  Chapter  from  The  Form  of  Living,   by 

Richard  Rolle .  .  .  .132 

The  Lamentation  of  the  Dying  Creature  137 
Glossary    .  .  .  .  .171 


PREFACE 

These  short  treatises  on  the  never-worn-out  subject 
of  Death  are  rescued  from  the  shelves  of  the  British 
Museum  and  Bodleian  libraries. 

The  first,  The  Craft  of  Dying,  is  a  translation  of 
a  very  popular  mediaeval  work  De  arte  Moriendi,  of 
which  many  versions  exist,  both  in  Latin  and  English. 
It  offers  to  the  Christian  reader  "  A  Commendation 
of  Death,"  followed  by  chapters  on  the  Temptations 
to  which  the  last  hours  are  subject,  certain  questions 
to  ask  in  helping  those  that  are  near  the  end,  certain 
suitable  prayers  for  them,  and  an  instruction  for  those 
that  shall  die. 

There  follows  an  early  English  translation  of  a 
chapter  on  Death  from  Henry  Suso's  Horologium 
Sapienttce,  which  he  himself  translated  from  his  earlier 
work  The  little  book  of  Eternal  IVisdom.  It  became 
a  favourite  book  in  the  cloisters  at  the  close  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  not  only  in  Germany,  but  also  in  the 
Netherlands,  France,  Italy,  and  England. 

The  short  chapter  that  follows  is  taken  from  a 
book  entitled  The  Toure  of  all  Toures,  about  which 
very  little  seems  to  be  known. 

The  last  treatise  is  The  Lamentation,  or  comblaint  of 


X  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

the  Dying  Creature,  on  the  day  when  the  Sergeant-of- 
arms,  whose  name  is  '  Cruelty,'  comes  from  the  Judge 
to  arrest  and  to  warn  her  to  be  ready  at  any  moment 
to  die,  and  to  call  to  remembrance  her  sins  and  the 
goodness  of  God.  In  her  fear  and  distress  she 
appeals  to  her  good  Angel  Guardian  to  answer  for 
her,  who  replies  that  having  counselled  her  too 
long  in  vain,  she  cannot  help  her  now.  Next  she 
summons  Reason,  Dread,  and  Conscience  to  answer 
for  her,  but  they  dare  not.  Upon  that  she  makes 
her  complaint  to  her  servants,  the  five  senses,  to  say 
on  her  behalf  the  best  they  can  ;  but  they  decline, 
reproaching  her  with  having  always  failed  to  discipline 
and  control  them.  Upon  this  she  sorrowfully  betakes 
herself  to  Faith  and  Hope  to  be  her  advocates,  and 
makes  a  belated  appeal  also  to  Charity,  whom  she  had 
forgotten,  that  they  would  together  bring  her  sad 
case  before  the  Queen  of  Heaven  for  her  intercession. 
Encouraged  by  these  three  friends  she  makes  suppli- 
cation to  the  Mother  of  Mercy,  Mary,  helper  of 
succourless  sinners.  The  little  drama  ends  with  the 
prayer  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  to  her  Son  for  pardon 
for  the  sinful  soul,  and  reconciliation  with  the  Church 
before  Death  comes. 

This  presentation  of  death  as  mediaeval  Christianity 
saw  it,  and  as  it  appears  in  the  treatises  here  pre- 
served, is  naTvely  sincere,  full  of  awful  anticipations 
of  judgment,  and  of  hope  in  the  Divine  mercy.  It 
is  interesting  to  compare  it  with  the  pagan  representa- 
tion of  death  found  in  classical  literature.  Lucian's 
adventures  among  the  Shades  are  as  entertaining  as 


-       '      PREFACE  xi 

Gulliver's  travels :  he  never  pretends  for  a  moment  to 
be  in  earnest.     For  example  :  Nireus, 

Comeliest  of  all  that  came  'neath  Trojan  walls, 

contends  there  with  Thersites  for  the  palm  of  beauty, 
before  Menippus  the  philosopher,  who  decides  that 
between  two  skulls  there  is  no  distinction  as  to 
beauty,  and  sums  up  with,  "  Hades  is  a  democracy  ; 
one  man  is  as  good  as  another  here." 

But  this  ironical  and  insolent  tone  is  naturally 
exceptional.  When  men  thought  of  death  in  the 
classical  ages,  they  thought  generally  with  what 
resignation  they  could  of  a  state  of  gloom  and 
unreality,  in  which  life  and  hope  were  left  behind. 
Their  prevailing  impression  is  expressed  by  Newman 
in  his  song  "  Heathen  Greece  "  : 

What  the  low  beach  and  silent  gloom, 
And  chilling  mitts  of  that  dull  river, 
Along  whose  banks  the  thin  ghosts  shiver, — 
The  thin  wan  ghosts  that  once  were  men^ — ^ 

And  yet  if  death  for  pagan  imagination  implied 
nothing  certain  but  emptiness  and  gloom,  it  is  never- 
theless generally  referred  to  in  the  literature  and 
inscriptions  of  those  times  with  reverent  awe,  and 
tender  memory,  with  the  human  pathos  of  bitter 
separation,  and  sometimes  also  with  k  manly  spirit 
that  faces  the  inevitable. 

^  F'trjes  OH  F'arious  Occasions,  p.  305  (Longmans,  Green  & 
Co.,  1890). 


Hi  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

.    Here  is  Catullus'  farewell  at  his  brother's  tomb  : 

Nunc  tamen  interea  prisco  quae  more  parentiiin 
Tradita  sunt  trictes  munera  ad  inferias, 

Accipe,  fraterno  multum  manantia  fletu  : 
Atque  in  perpetuum,  irater,  ave,  atque  rale. 

Or  here  is  the  Emperor  Hadrian's  address  to  his  own 
soul  about  to  depart  this  life  : 

Animula  ragula,  blandula, 
Hospes  comesque  corporis, 
Quz  nunc  abibis  in  ioca, 
'^  Pallidula,  rigida,  nudula? 

Theocritus  gives  us  this  brave  inscription  on  a  sea- 
man's tomb  by  the  seashore  : 

A  shipwrecked  sailor  buried  on  this  coast 

Bids  you  set  sail ; 
For  many  a  gallant  ship,  when  we  were  lost 

Weathered  the  gale. 

There  is  the.  same  vagueness  as  in  the  classical  ages 
in  what  is  written  of  death  by  Non-Christian  authors 
of  to-day  ;  but  they  seem  to  have  unconsciously 
absorbed  some  sweetness,  and  stray  notes  from  the 
melody  of  Christian  hope.  The  pathos  and  grace  of 
the  Hindu  poet  Tagore  in  his  contemplation  of  death 
are  irresistible. 

**  On  the  day  when  death  will  knock  at  thy  door 
what  wilt  thou  offer  him  ? 

Oh,  I  will  set  before  my  guest  the  full  vessel  of  my 
life — I  will  never  let  him  go  with  empty  hands. 

All  the  sweet  vintage  of  all  my  autumn  days  and 
summer  nights,  all  the  earnings  and  gleanings  of  my 


PREFACE  xiii 

busy  life  will  I  place  before  him  at  the  close  of  my 
days  when  death  will  knock  at  my  door. 

I  have  got  my  leave.  Bid  me  farewell,  my  brothers  i 
I  bow  to  you  all  and  take  my  departure. 

Here  I  give  back  the  keys  of  my  door — and  I  give 
up  all  claims  to  my  house.  I  only  ask  for  last  kind 
words  from  you. 

We  were  neighbours  for  long,  but  I  received 
more  than  I  could  give. 

Now  the  day  has  dawned  and  the  lamp  that  lit  my 
dark  corner  is  out. 

A  summons  has  come  and  I  am  ready  for  my 
journey.^ 

At  this  time  of  my  parting  wish  me  good  luck,  my 
friends !  The  sky  is  flushed  with  the  dawn  and  my 
path  lies  beautiful. 

Ask  not  what  I  have  with  me  to  take  there.  I 
start  on  my  journey  with  empty  hands  and  expectant 
heart. 

I  shall  put  on  the  wedding  garland.  Mine  is  not 
the  red- brown  dress  of  the  traveller,  and  though  there 
are  dangers  in  the  way  I  have  no  fear  in  my  mind. 

The  evening  star  will  come  out  when  my  voyage  is 
done  and  the  plaintive  notes  of  the  twilight  melodies 
be  struck  up  from  the  King's  gateway. 

I  was  not  aware  of  the  moment  when  I  first  crossed 
the  threshold  of  this  life. 

'  GitanJaJi,  by  Rabindranath  Tagore,  Nos.  90,  93  (Mac- 
millan  &  Co.). 


jdY  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

What  was  thje  power  that  made  me  open  out  into 
this  vast  mystery  like  a  bud  in  the  forest  at  midnight  i 

When  in  the  morning  I  looked  upon  the  light  I 
felt  in  a  moment  that  I  was  no  stranger  in  this  world, 
that  the  inscrutable  without  name  and  form  had  taken 
me  in  its  arms  in  the  form  of  my  own  mother. 

Even  so,  in  death  the  same  unknown  will  appear  as 
ever  known  to  me.  And  because  I  love  this  life,  I 
know  I  shall  love  death  as  well. 

The  child  cries  out  when  from  the  right  breast  the 
mother  takes  it  away,  in  the  very  next  moment  to  find 
in  the  left  one  its  consolation."  * 

W.  Pater  gives  us  an  impression  of  the  strangely 
new  attitude  towards  death  which  Christianity  brought 
to  men  as  Marius  the  Epicurean  caught  a  glimpse 
of  it  on  visiting  a  Christian  cemetery  :  "  *  Januarius, 
Agapetus,  Felicitas  ;  Martyrs  !  refresh,  I  pray  you, 
the  soul  of  Cecilius,  of  Cornelius  ! '  said  an  inscription. 
...  *  Peace  !  Pax  tecum  !  *  —  the  word,  the 
thought,  was  put  forth  everywhere,  with  images  of 
hope.  .  .  .  The  shepherd  with  his  sheep,  the 
shepherd  carrying  the  sick  Iamb  upon  his  shoulders. 
Yet  these  imageries  after  all,  it  must  be  confessed, 
formed  but  a  slight  contribution  to  the  dominant 
effect  of  tranquil  hope  there — a  kind  of  heroic  cheer- 
fulness and  grateful  expansion  of  heart,  as  with  the 
sense,  again,  of  some  real  deliverance,  which  seemed 
to  deepen  the  longer  one  lingered  through  these 
strange  and  awful  passages."  • 

'  Gitanjali,  by  Rabindranath  Tagore,  Nos.  94.  95. 
^Marius  the  Epicurean,  vol.  ii.  p.   103  (Macmillan,  I909). 


.;     .PREFACE    .      ..  XV 

The  Christian  revelation  in  regard  to  the  signifi- 
cance of  death,  and  the  awful  change  to  which  it 
opens,  is  the  same  for  Christians  of  every  age  ;  .but  in 
the  way  death  is  felt  and  spoken  of  by  Christians  df 
different  ages  one  is  conscious  of  some  change  of  tone. 
In  the  New  Testament  references  to  the  subject  there 
is  a  very  clear  view  of  the  victory  which  Christ  won 
for  every  Christian  by  dying  ;  as  in  the  Gospel  story 
of  His  raising  several  persons  to  life  ;  in  our  Lord's 
words  "I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life"  ;  and 
in  Saint  Paul's  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ. 

A  very  tender,  hopeful  and  thankful  tone  prevails 
in  the  hymn  for  the  dead  by  Prudentius  in  the  fourth 
century  : 

There  let  the  sad  complaint  be  dumb  ; 

O  Mothers,  stay  the  falling  tears  ; 

Weep  not  your  children's  too  brief  years. 
Death  but  prepares  ior  life  to  come. 

So  burled  seeds  repair  our  store, 

Reorient  from  the  parched  earth. 

And  teeming  with  their  promised  birth 

Blossom  and  burgeon  as  of  yore. 

Take,  Mother  Earth,  to  sleep  in  dust, 
Cherish  in  no  unfruitful  rest, 
Quicken  to  life  in  thy  soft  breast, 

These  noble  relics  I  entrust. 


Take,  Earth,  contigned  to  thee  this  loan 
To  be  redeemed  from  sheltering  sod, 
Not  unremembered  by  its  God, 

Who  stamped  His  image  on  His  own. 


xvi  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

Redeemer,  we  Thy  word  obey, 

Who  dyin^  mad'st  black  death  Thy  thrall, 
And  didst  Thy  Cross'*  partner  call 

To  follow  Thee  along  the  way. 

These  bones  we'll  guard  with  honour  due, 
With  violets  deck  the  hallowed  mould, 
I'he  graven  name,  the  marble  cold. 

With  leaves  and  perfumes  let  us  strew. ^ 

The  graver  and  more  severe  tone  of  the  mediaeval 
funeral  rite  appears  in  Saint  Bernard's  hymn  "  Cum 
sit  omnis  homo  foenum."  ; 

Homo  dictus  es  ab  humo, 
Cito  transis,  quia  fumo 

Similis  efficeris.  ... 
O  sors  gravis  !  O  sors  dura  ! 
O  lex  dira,  quam  natura 

Promulgavit  miseris  t 
Homo  nascens  cum  mocrore 
Vitam  ducis  cum  dolore- 

£t  cum  metu  moreris. 

But  this  characteristic  is  nowhere  so  nobly  ex- 
pressed as  in  the  majestic  sadness  of  Notker's  anti- 
phon  in  the  ninth  century,  Medi^  vitdy  translated 
by  the  English  Prayer-book  as  follows,  in  the 
service  *  at  the  Burial  of  the  Dead':  "In  the 
midst  of  life  we  are  in  death  :  of  whom  may  we 
seek  for  succour,  but  of  Thee,  O .  Lord,  Who  for 
our  sins  art  justly  displeased  ? 

Yet,  O  Lord  God  most  holy,  O  Lord  most  mighty, 

^  Jam  ma:  la  quieter  querela,  etc.,  transl.  by  F.  St  John 
Thackeray  (Bell  &  Sons,  189c). 


PREFACE  xvii 

O  holy  and  most  merciful  Saviour,  deliver  us  not 
into  the  bitter  pains  of  eternal  death. 

Thou  knowest,  Lord,  the  secrets  of  our  hearts  ; 
shut  not  Thy  merciful  ears  to  our  prayer ;  but 
spare  us.  Lord  most  holy,  O  God  most  mighty,  O 
holy  and  merciful  Saviour,  Thou  most  worthy  Judge 
eternal,  suffer  us  not,  at  our  last  hour,  for  any  pains 
of  death  to  fall  from  Thee."  ^ 

The  mediaeval  instruction  for  the  priest  attending 
a  dying  person  naturally  aims  at  the  awaking  in  him 
a  disposition  of  conformity  to  the  will  of  God,  and 
maintaining  in  him  a  penitential  spirit.  He  is  to 
be  prepared  to  receive  the  sacraments  worthily. 
Absolution  on  his  confession,  his  Viaticum,  the  last 
Communion,  and  holy  Anointing.  The  commenda- 
tion of  the  parting  soul,  "  Proficiscere  anima  Christi- 
ana de  hoc  mundo,"  expresses  the  profound  solem- 
nity of  the  preparation  for  death  as  it  was  felt  in 
the  middle  ages.  In  accordance  with  this  note  we 
read  of  Saint  Hugh  of  Lincoln  *  that  as  his  end 
drew  near  "  he  bade  his  chaplain  make  a  cross  of 
ashes  on   the   floor  of  his  room,  lift  him  from  his 

^  Media  vita  in  morte  sutnus,  qiietn  quserimus  adjutorem 
nisi  te,  Domine,  qui  pro  peccatis  nostris  juste  irasceris? 
Sancte  Deus :  Sancte  Fortis,  Sancte  et  misericors  Salvator, 
amarce  morti  ne  tradas  not. 

V.  Ne  projicias  nos  in  tempore  senectutis  cum  defecerit 
virtus  nostra.     Ne  dereiinquas  nos  Domine,  Sancte  Deus. 

V.  Noli  ciaudere  aures  tuas  ad  preces  nostras.  Sancte 
Fortis. 

V.  Qui  cognoscis  occulta  cordis :  parce  peccatis  nostris. 

•  1135-1200. 

b 


xviii  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

bed  at  the  moment  of  his  departure,  and  place  him 
upon  it.  It  was  a  November  afternoon.  The 
Choristers  of  St  Paul's  were  sent  for  to  sing  Com- 
pline for  him  for  the  last  time.  He  gave  a  sign 
when  they  were  half  through.  They  lifted  him, 
and  laid  him  upon  the  ashes.  The  Choristers  sang 
on,  and  as  they  began  the  Nunc  Dimittis,  he  died."  * 

Yet  through  the  more  characteristic  tone  of  pene- 
tential  sorrow,  and  fear  of  the  last  things,  there 
may  be  caught  also,  throughout  the  middle  ages, 
the  note  of  victory  over  death.  Thus  we  read  of 
""  The  Passing  of  Saint  Francis "  :  "  As  the  time 
of  his  death  *  drew  nigh,  the  Blessed  Francis 
caused  himself  to  be  stripped  of  all  his  clothing,  and 
to  be  laid  upon  the  ground,  that  he  might  die  in 
the  arms  of  the  Lady  Poverty.  This  done  they 
laid  him  again  on  his  bed,  and  as  he  desired  they 
sang  to  him  once  more  the  Canticle  of  the 
Sun  : 

"  *  O  most  high,  almighty,  and  good  Lord  God, 
to  Thee  belong  praise,  glory,  honour,  and  all 
blessing. 

Praised  be  my  Lord  for  all  His  creatures  ;  and 
especially  for  our  brother  the  sun,  who  brings  us 
the  day,  and  brings  us  the  light  ;  fair  is  he  and 
shining  with  a  very  great  splendour  ;  O  Lord  he 
signifies  to  us  Thee. 

Praised  be  my  Lord  for  our  sister  the  moon,  and 

*  Froude's  Short  Studiet,  toI.  ii.  p.  99  (Longmans, 
1884). 

2  A.D.   1Z26. 


PREFACE  xix 

for  the  stars,  the  which  He  has  set  clear,  and  lovely 
in  heaven. 

Praised  be  my  Lord  for  our  brother  the  wind,  and 
for  air,  and  cloud,  and  all  weather  ;  by  the  which 
Thou  upholdest  life  in  all  creatures.  Praised  be  my 
Lord  for  our  sister  water,  and  our  brother  fire. 

Praised  be  my  Lord  for  our  mother  the  earth,  the 
which  doth  sustain  us,  and  keep  us  ;  and  bringeth 
forth  diverse  fruits,  and  flowers  of  many  colours,  and 
grass. 

Praised  be  my  Lord  for  all  those  who  pardon  one 
another  for  His  love's  sake,  and  who  endure  weakness 
and  tribulation  :  blessed  are  they  who  peaceably  shall 
endure,  for  Thou,  O  most  Highest,  shalt  give  them  a 
crown. 

Praised  be  my  Lord  for  our  sister  the  death  of  the 
body,  from  whom  no  man  escapeth.  Woe  to  him 
that  dieth  in  mortal  sin  !  Blessed  are  they  who  are 
found  walking  by  Thy  most  holy  will  ;  for  the 
second  death  shall  have  no  power  to  do  them  harm. 

Praise  ye,  and  bless  the  Lord  ;  and  give  thanks  to 
Him  with  great  humility.' 

On  the  morrow  when  his  pains  were  some  little 
abated,  he  bade  call  all  the  brethren  that  were  in  the 
place,  and  beholding  them  as  they  sat  before  him,  he 
set  his  right  hand  upon  the  head  of  each,  and  gave 
his  blessing  unto  all  the  Order  present,  absent,  and  to 
come,  even  unto  the  world's  end. 

Then  as  the  sun  was  setting,  there  was  a  great 
silence.  As  the  brethren  were  gazing  on  his  face, 
desiring  to  see  some  sign  that  he  was  still  with  them. 


XX  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

behold  a  great  multitude  of  birds  came  about  the 
house  wherein  he  lay,  and  flying  a  little  way  off  did 
make  a  circle  round  the  roof,  and  by  their  sweet 
singing  did  seem  to  be  praising  the  Lord  with  him." 

A  writer  of  to-day  illustrates  this  trait  of  joy  in 
death  by  the  history  of  Saint  Catherine  of  Siena  * 
attending  a  condemned  prisoner  at  his  execution. 

Nicolas  Tuldo,  condemned  to  death  by  the  magis- 
trates of  Siena  for  political  offences,  was  on  his  way  to 
die  on  the  scaffold  outside  his  native  town  Perugia. 
One  can  imagine  his  despair,  the  natural  revolt  of  his 
youth  against  his  fate,  his  bitter  regret  for  all  he  was 
going  to  lose.  Catherine's  visit  to  him  was  all  that 
was  needed  to  change  those  regrets  into  hope,  that 
hope  into  joy.  "  Stay  by  me,"  he  said,  "  and  all  will 
be  well,  and  I  shall  be  willing  to  die."  Catherine 
promised  to  attend  him  to  the  place  of  execution, 
and  Nicolas  replied,  "  Whence  comes  so  great  a 
grace  to  me  ?  What,  will  the  comfort  of  my  soul 
attend  me  to  the  dread  place  of  justice  ?  Yes,  then 
I  will  go  there  gladly  and  in  good  heart  ;  it  seems  to 
me  as  if  I  had  yet  a  thousand  years  to  wait  before  my 
death,  when  I  think  that  you  will  be  with  me  there." 
"  At  last  he  arrived,"  continues  the  saint,  "  as  gentle 
as  a  lamb,  and  seeing  me  began  to  smile.  He  would 
have  make  me  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  his  forehead, 
and  when  he  had  received  it,  I  said  to  him  in  a  low 
voice,  *  My  dear  brother  go  thou  forth  to  the 
marriage  feast  to  rejoice  in  the  life  that  never  ends.' 
He  leaned  forward  with  great  gentleness,  and  I 
1  1347-1380. 


PREFACE  xxi 

uncovered  his  neck  ready  for  the  blow  of  the  axe. 
I  had  bent  down  to  whisper  him,  and  remind  him  of 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the 
sin  of  the  world.  His  lips  only  replied  *  Jesus, 
Catherine,'  and  as  he  said  the  words  I  received  his 
head  into  my  hands."  Upon  this  the  saint  sees  in 
vision  our  Lord  receiving  the  blood,  the  soul  of  the 
penitent,  and  the  fire  of  holy  longing  that  grace  had 
hidden  in  his  heart, — sees  Him  welcome  His  penitent 
in  the  treasury  of  Mercy,  His  wounded  Side  ;  thus 
showing  that  it  was  by  grace  alone  and  not  for  any 
merit  of  his  own  that  the  Lord  received  the  forgiven 
sinner.  "  O  ineffable  happiness,"  she  adds,  "  to  see 
how  sweetly  and  lovingly  the  goodness  of  God 
welcomed  the  soul  separated  from  the  body.  .  .  . 
The  unction  of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  possessed  this 
penitent  overflowed  him  with  joy  enough  to  gladden 
a  thousand  hearts.  It  is  no  surprise  to  me  for  Tuldo 
tasted  already  the  gentleness  of  God."  ^ 

Another  example  of  joy  in  view  of  death  in  the 
middle  ages  is  given  in  the  account  of  the  last  days  of 
Saint  John  of  the  Cross.^  We  read  there  that  "  on 
December  7th  the  surgeon  in  attendance  told  him  on 
that  day  he  had  but  few  days  to  live.  The  saint 
answered  with  a  joyful  face  in  the  words  of  the 
Psalmist.  *  Latatus  sum,  etc'  *  I  was  glad  when 
they  said  unto  me  we  will  go  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord.'     Then   after  a    momentary   pause,  he  added, 

^  Vers  la   Joye,    by    Lucie    Felix-Faure    Goyau,    p.    276 
(Perrin  et  Cie). 
«  1542-1591. 


zzit  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

*  Since  I  have  heard  these  good  tidings,  I  feel  no 
pain  whatever.* "  ^ 

We  recognise  instinctively  that  the  saint's  joy 
could  not  be  in  the  contemplation  of  the  fact  of 
dying,  of  dissolution.  A  later  voice  denies  that  in 
death  itself  there  can  be  anything  to  desire  : 

No  man  ever  truly  longed  for  death 
Tis  life,  not  death,  for  which  we  pant, 
Tis  life  whereof  our  nerves  are  scant, 
More  life  and  fuller  than  we  want. 

The  saint's  joy  was  in  the  attainment  through 
death  of  that  which  made  Saint  Paul  "  desire  to 
depart,  and  be  with  Christ."  As  Saint  John  of  the 
Cross  says  elsewhere,  "  A  principal  reason  why  the  soul 
desires  to  be  released  and  to  be  with  Christ,  is  that 
it  may  see  Him  face  to  face,  and  penetrate  to  the 
depth  of  His  ways,  and  the  eternal  mysteries  of  His 
Incarnation."  • 

The  more  modern  attitude  towards  death  may  be 
illustrated  by  John  Bunyan  (1684.).  He  gives  us  in 
the  Pilgrim's  Progress  his  own  individual  and  inde- 
pendent view,  unhampered  by  Catholic  tradition. 
He  tells  how  the  Pilgrims  address  themselves  one 
after  another  to  enter  the  river  that  separates  them 
from  the  heavenly  city, — the  river  that  has  no 
bridge. 

Mr  Despondency  is  one  of  the  humblest  of  the 

^  V.  Ufe  of  St  John  tf  thi  Crttt,  \>j  David  Lewis,  ch.  xxL 

t%o. 
*A  Spiritual  Canticle,  trans,  by  David   Lewis,  xnd  edit., 

380  (Baker,  1S91). 


PREFACE  xxiii 

company.  "When  days  had  many  of  them  passed 
away  Mr  Despondency  was  sent  for.  For  a  post  was 
come  and  brought  this  message  to  him  :  Trembling 
man,  these  are  to  summon  thee  to  be  ready  with  thy 
King  by  the  next  Lord's  day,  to  shout  for  joy  for  thy 
Deliverance  from  all  thy  Doubtings. 

And  said  the  Messenger  :  That  my  Message  is. 
true  take  this  for  a  Proof;  so  he  gave  him  the 
Grasshopper  to  be  a  Burden  unto  him.  Now  Mr 
Despondency* s  Daughter,  whose  name  was  Much-afraid, 
said,  when  she  heard  what  was  done,  that  she 
would  go  with  her  Father.  Then  Mr  Despondency 
said  to  his  Friends  ;  *  Myself  and  my  Daughter,  you 
know  what  we  have  been  and  how  troublesomely 
we  have  behaved  ourselves  in  every  Company.  My 
will  and  my  Daughter's  is  that  our  Desponds  and 
slavish  Fears  be  by  no  man  ever  received  from  the 
Day  of  our  Departure  for  ever.'  .  .  .  When  the 
time  was  come  for  them  to  depart,  they  went  to 
the  Brink  of  the  River.  The  last  words  of  Mr 
Despondency  were  :  Farewell  Night,  welcome  Day.  His 
Daughter  went  through  the  River  singing,  but  none 
could  understand  what  she  said." 

Our  thoughts  of  the  last  stage  of  the  journey  of 
life  are  enriched  by  the  description  of  the  wayfarers  in 
the  Pilgrim's  Progress  as  one  by  one  they  prepare 
to  pass  out  of  this  world.  The  book  is  a  treasury 
of  peculiarly  English  modern  Christianity,  its  poetry, 
feeling,  thought,  and  humour  ;  but  how  much 
nearer  to  the  height  and  depth  of  Gospel  mysteries, 
to    the    solemnity   of  Holy   Scripture  dealing   with 


xxiv  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

the  last  things,  and  to  its  awful  silence,  does  New- 
man attain  throughout  in  his  Dream  of  Gerontius. 
I  do  not  refer  to  the  details,  or  to  the  setting  of 
the  drama,  but  to  the  spirit  of  holy  fear,  of  con- 
trition, and  of  humble  hope,  that  pervades  it. 

TuE  Soul. 

Take  me  away,  and  in  the  lowest  deep 

There  let  me  be, 
And  there  in  hope  the  lone  night-watches  keep, 

Told  out  for  me. 
There  motionless  and  happy  in  my  pain, 

Lone,  not  forlorn, — 
There  will  I  sing  my  sad  perpetual  strain, 

Until  the  morn. 
There  will  I  sing,  and  soothe  my  stricken  heart, 

Which  ne'er  can  cease 
To  throb,  and  pine,  and  languish,  till  possest 

Of  its  Sole  Peace. 
There  will  I  sing  my  absent  Lord  and  Lover- 
Take  me  away. 
That  sooner  I  may  rise,  and  go  above. 
And  see  Him  in  the  truth  of  everlasting  day.* 

I  doubt  whether  there  is  anything  in  these 
mediaeval  counsels  for  the  dying  more  character- 
istically reverent  and  tender  than  the  few  lines  that 
follow  from  chapter  ii.  of  The  Craft  of  Dying. 

"Therefore  against  despair,  for  to  induce  him 
that  is  sick  and  laboureth  in  his  dying,  to  very 
trust  and  confidence  that  he  should  principally 
have  to  God  at  that  time,  the  disposition  of  Christ 
on   the    Cross    should    greatly  draw    him  ;    of    the 

*  Veriet  on  Variout  Oc(aii»in,  pp.  366-7. 


PREFACE  JDW 

which  Saint  Bernard  saith  thus :  *  What  man  is 
he  that  should  not  be  ravished  and  drawn  to  hope, 
and  have  full  confidence  in  God,  if  he  take  heed 
■diligently  of  the  disposition  of  Christ's  body  on  the 
Cross.  Take  heed  and  see  :  His  head  is  inclined 
to  salve  thee  ;  His  mouth  to  kiss  thee  ;  His  arms 
stretched  out  to  embrace  thee  ;  His  hands  pierced 
to  give  thee  ;  His  side  opened  to  love  thee  ;  His 
body  along  strait  to  give  all  Himself  to  thee.  There- 
fore no  man  should  despair  of  forgiveness,  but  fully 
have  hope  and  confidence  in  God  ;  for  the  virtue 
of  hope  is  greatly  commendable,  and  of  great  merit 
before  God.  As  the  Apostle  said  and  exhorted  us  : 
Nolite  amittere  confidentiam  vestram,  qua  magnam  habet 
remunerat'ionem.  Lose  not  your  hope  and  confi- 
dence in  God,  the  which  hath  great  reward  of 
God."'i 

The  following  passage  from  Pere  Gratry  gives 
us  the  Christian  Faith  in  regard  to  death  with  the 
inimitable  refinement  of  expression  that  distinguishes 
a  saint  of  the  most  modern  type  in  France. 

The  Master 

I  come  without  hesitation  to  the  conclusion  that 
above  these  multitudes  that  are  for  ever  passing 
and  disappearing,  above  that  crowd  of  little  stars, 
of  souls  intelligent  and  free,  but  as  yet  without 
form  and  veiled,  God  beholds,  and  is  at  work  to 
gather    out    of    that    fluctuating    mass    an    enduring 

^  -V.  p.  14. 


xm  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

heaven,  firm  and  serene,  where  all  that  we  have 
ever  dreamed  of  good  shall  be  found.  And  why  ? 
Because  that  eager  reaching  out  towards  God  of 
the  living  reason,  the  soul's  prayer,  is  but  the 
effect  of  God  Himself  who  beholds  it, — of  the 
attractive  power  of  God,  the  working  of  God. 

Dijcij>/e 

Yes.  .  .  .  But  one  cannot  deny  either  that  those 
eager  impulses  of  the  soul  and  of  reason  are  arrested 
and  repressed  by  the  spectacle  of  death. 

TAe  Master 

The  contrary  would  follow  if  one  knew  what 
death  really  is.  Death  is  precisely  that  great  force 
which  sets  us  free  to  pass  from  earth  to  heaven,^ 
that  is  to  say  from  a  state  of  life  that  is  uncertain, 
obscure,  without  form,  to  the  new  state  for  which 
we  look.  Death  is  the  principal  process  of  life. 
What  is  called  life  is  the  process  that  develops  the 
starting  point  of  the  present.  Death  brings  the 
new  starting  point. 

Disciple 

I  understand.  They  are  the  two  vital  processes 
which  the  two  processes  in  logic  represent.  The 
process  of  identity,  which  develops  what  one 
possesses  already,  corresponds  with  life  :  the  process 
of  transcendence,  which  lifts  us  up  to  higher 
principles,  corresponds  with  death.     By  death  there 


PREFACE  xxvii 

is  a  passing  from  life  to  a  new  and  larger  life.  This 
is  what  in  the  bosom  of  earth  appears  by  analogy  in 
the  succession  of  kinds  that  die,  and  are  replaced  by 
more  perfect  kinds. 

Yes,  death  is  the  principal  process  in  life, — its- 
process  of  transcendence.  It  is  the  operation  which,, 
if  it  is  not  sadly  mismanaged,  will  carry  us  on  to 
God,  and  realise  that  wonderful  word,  "  forsake 
thyself,  and  pass  on  to  thy  place  in  God  and  the 
infinite." 

The  Master 

Very  well.  Death  is  then  the  supreme  process  ot 
life,  since  it  delivers  up  the  soul  to  God.  It  anni- 
hilates distance,  the  difference  between  its  real  and  its 
ideal  condition.  In  one  sense  it  projects  life  from 
the  finite  to  the  infinite,  not  as  if  our  created  life 
could  ever  become  infinite,  but  in  the  sense  that 
death  reunites  it  to  its  infinite  source,  and  renders  it 
established,  full,  and  eternal. 

So  that  the  hideous  dissolution  of  the  body,  and 
disappearance  of  the  whole  man  which  is  called  death,, 
is  in  fact  the  annihilating  of  the  obstacle  that 
separated  the  real  from  the  ideal  life  in  God.  .   .  . 

Death,  then,  is  no  longer  that  incomprehensible 
enemy,  that  frightful  phantom  that  the  senses  see  in 
it.  Death  when  well  considered  is  for  the  real  life 
of  man  what  ...  for  the  life  of  the  world  is  the 
true  religion,  and  the  working  of  the  God  Man,  Who- 
unites  heaven  and  earth.^ 

^  La  ctnnctttianct  di  Fame.     Epilogue,  p.  407.     5th  Edition. 


Kviii  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

When,  as  in  old  age,  the  approaching  end  is  long 
foreseen,  could  anything  be  more  reverent  and  tender 
than  Tennyson's  welcome  to  death  in  "The  silent 
Voices  "  ? 

When  the  dumb  Hour,  clothed  in  black, 
Brings  the  Dreams  about  my  bed, 
Call  me  not  so  often  bacli, 
Silent  Voices  of  the  dead, 
Toward  the  lowland  ways  beliind  me, 
And  the  sunlight  that  is  gone ! 
Call  me  rather,  silent  Voices, 
Forward  to  the  starry  track 
Glimmering  up  the  heights  beyond  me 
On  and  always  on  I 

Or  in  his  "  Crossing  the  Bar  "  : 

Sunset  and  evening  star, 

And  one  clear  call  for  me  ! 
And  may  there  be  no  moaning  of  the  bar, 

When  I  put  out  to  sea, 

But  such  a  tide  as  moving  seems  asleep 

Too  full  for  sound  and  foam. 
When  that  which  drew  from  out  the  boundless  deep 

Turns  again  home. 

Twilight  and  evening  bell, 

And  after  that  the  dark  ! 
And  may  there  be  no  sadness  of  farewell. 

When  I  embark ; 

For  tho'  from  out  our  bourne  of  Time  and  Place 

The  flood  may  bear  me  far, 
I  hope  to  see  my  Pilot  face  to  face 

When  I  have  crost  the  bar. 

But  when  death  comes  in  the  most  tragical  guise. 


PREFACE  xxix 

as  when  helpless  crowds  sink  in  a  torpedoed  ship,  see 
how  Christian  character  ennobles  what  is  merely 
horrible  : 

"  Father  Maturin's  end  was  that  of  a  hero.  And 
by  a  happy  chance  we  know  some  of  its  details. 
After  luncheon  on  that  fated  Friday,  May  7  th,  at 
about  two  o'clock  he  was  seen  on  the  deck  saying  his 
office.  The  torpedo  struck  the  ship  soon  after  two. 
How  long  it  took  him  to  realise  to  the  full  what  had 
happened,  we  do  not  know,  but  we  do  know  from  a 
lady  who  survived  that  shortly  before  the  ship  went 
down  twenty  minutes  later,  he  was  seen  striving  to 
keep  people  calm,  giving  absolution  to  those  who 
asked  for  it,  fastening  on  life-belts,  and  helping  women 
and  children  into  the  boats.  The  lady  who  relates 
this  was  herself  helped  into  a  boat  by  Father  Maturing 
and  just  as  the  boat  was  putting  off  he  threw  a  little 
child  into  her  arms,  with  the  injunction  *  try  to  find 
its  mother.'  Then  he  stood  waiting  for  the  end 
quite  calm,  but  as  white  as  a  sheet.  With  his  keen 
sense  of  the  drama  of  life  he  probably  realised  vividly 
the  approaching  end.  He  put  on  no  life-belt.  He 
did  not  take  off  his  coat.  He  made  no  attempt  to 
escape,  but  simply  awaited  death.  We  can  picture 
him  then,  as  ever,  intensely  human,  and  intensely 
spiritual — realising  keenly  that  his  own  death  was 
now  a  matter  of  minutes,  yet  eager  to  the  last  to  do 
good  and  help  others,  and  throwing  himself  on  God 
for  strength  and  support."  ^ 

1  Introduction  by  Wilfrid  Ward  to  sermons  by  Father 
Maturin  (Longmans). 


THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

Among  the  prophets  of  our  time  Browning  goes  to 
meet  death,  as  our  men  in  France  to-day  spring  from 
their  trench  at  a  signal,  and  cross  the  deadly  space 
between  them  and  the  enemy's  first  line. 

I  was  ever  a  fighter,  so — one  fight  more, 

The  best  and  the  last  I 
I  would  hate  that  death  bandaged  my  eyes  and  forebore, 

And  bade  me  creep  past. 
No  !  let  me  tasre  the  whole  of  it,  fare  like  my  peers 

The  heroes  of  old, 
Bear  the  brunt,  in  a  minute  pay  glad  life's  arrears 

Of  pain,  darkness,  and  cold." 

Or 

.  .  .  There  they  ^  stood,  ranged  along  the  hill-sides, — met 
To  view  the  last  oi  me,  a  living  frame 
For  one  more  picture  !  in  a  sheet  of  flame 

I  saw  them  and  I  knew  them  all.     And  yet 

I'auntless  the  slug-horn  to  my  lips  I  set 

And  blew,  ' '  ChilJe  Roland  to  the  Dark  Toiver  came. " 

Or  if  all  natural  powers  are  outlived  in  old  age, 
and  nothing  remains  but  the  remembrance  of  things 
past,  death  is  contemplated  only  as  the  end  of  weari- 
ness and  a  door  of  hope. 

So,  at  the  last  shall  come  old  age, 
Decrepit  as  befits  that  stage; 
How  else  wouldst  thou  retire  apart 
With  the  hoarded  memories  of  thy  heart. 
And  gather  all  to  the  very  least 
Of  the  fragments  of  life's  earlier  feast, 
Let  fall  through  eagerness  to  find 
The  crowning  dainties  yet  behind  ? 

*  i.e.  the  dead  leaders  of  lost  causes. 


PREFACE  xxxi 

Ponder  on  the  entire  past 

Laid  together  thus  at  last, 

When  the  twilight  helps  to  fuse 

The  first  fresh  with  the  faded  hues, 

And  the  outline  of  the  whole, 

As  round  eve's  shades  their  framework  roll. 

Grandly  fronts  for  once  thy  soul  1 

And  then  as,  'mid  the  dark  a  gleam 

Of  yet  another  morning  breaks, 

And  like  the  hand  that  ends  a  dream, 

Death  with  the  might  of  his  sunbeam 

Touches  the  flesh  and  the  soul  awakes, 

Then— » 

Mrs  Browning  refuses  to  contemplate  death  :  "  I 
cannot  look  on  the  earthside  of  death.  When  I  look 
deathwards  I  look  over  death,  and  upwards,  or  I  can't 
look  that  way  at  all."  And  has  she  not  some  ground 
for  this  in  the  Lord's  word  :  "  I  am  the  Resurrection 
and  the  Life.  .  .  .  Whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in 
JVIe  shall  never  die  "  ? 

And  some  there  are  who  seem  to  be  carried  through 
death  a»  a  babe  fast  asleep  in  his  mother's  arms. 

Thus  in  "  A  Death  in  the  Desert." 

We  had  him,  bedded  on  a  camel-skin, 

And  waited  for  his  dying  all  the  while; 

This  did  not  happen  in  the  outer  cave 

But  in  the  midmost  grotto  :   since  noon's  light 

Reached  there  a  little,  and  we  would  not  lose 

The  last  of  what  might  happen  on  his  face. 

.   .  .  We  laid  him  in  the  light  where  we  might  see  ; 

For  certain  smiles  began  about  his  mouth, 

And  his  lids  moved,  presageful  of  the  end. 

But  he  was  dead  .  .   . 

1  The  Flight  of  the  Duchtsi. 


xxxii  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

Ye  will  not  tee  him  any  more 
About  the  world  with  his  divine  regard  ! 

and  now  the  man 

Lie*  as  he  lay  once,  breast  to  breast  with  God. 

But  the  present  war  with  its  unprecedented!}- 
numerous  casualties  seems  not  seldom  to  invade  and 
lay  bare  the  inscrutable  mystery  of  death  as  never  be- 
fore. How  often  of  late  we  have  had  our  revelations  ? 
How  often  we  have  seen  the  light  that  dawns  as  this 
world's  light  dies  ? 

The  Abbe  Klein  finds  a  young  French  officer,  a 
boy  of  twenty,  brought  into  hospital  desperately 
wounded  ;  half  of  the  brain  laid  bare,  and  a  paralysis 
setting  in.  He  could  not  question  him  much,  but 
elicited  his  parents'  address,  and  "  I  communicated  at 
Easter  and  after  I  was  wounded."  "  Your  sufferings 
are  great,  resign  yourself  to  them." — "  God's  will  be 
done."  "  Then,"  writes  the  Abbe,  "  I  knew  enough. 
I  suggested  to  him  an  act  of  love  to  God,  and  gave 
him  absolution  without  confessing  him  again,  and 
then  the  Blessed  Sacrament.  He  received  the  sacra- 
ment with  a  joyous  light  in  his  eyes,  usually  so  dim, 
and  afterwards  at  each  visit  while  I  held  his  hand,  our 
eyes  would  meet  in  a  long  look.  When  I  came  the 
nurse  would  often  tell  me  that  he  no  longer  seemed 
conscious  of  anything.  AH  the  same  I  would  suggest 
to  him,  *  My  friend  let  us  pray '  :  *  My  God  I  love 
Thee.*  And  always  he  would  stir  from  his  apparent 
torpor  long  enough  to  repeat,  *  My  God  I  love 
Thee.'  The  first  day  he  added  of  his  own  accord 
after  a  moment's  pause  this  one  little  word,  which 


PREFACE  xxxiii 

shed  a  ray  of  pure  light  on  the  depths  of  his  silence. 

*  My  God  I  love  Thee — dearly.' 

The  last  morning  unable  to  speak,  he  made  the  sign 
of  the  Cross. 

What  precious  times  we  had  together.  I  would 
not  have  exchanged  them  for  all  the  lessons  of  the 
greatest  teachers  in  the  world. 

Atonement,  it  was  indeed  there  in  all  its  sadness 
and  all  its  beauty  in  the  person  of  this  gentle,  wounded 
boy  of  twenty,  who  had  endured  this  terrible  wound 
without  complaint,  and  from  the  first  had  offered  up 
all  his  sufferings  to  God,  and  now  was  passing  to  his 
death  so  slowly  through  the  long  days  and  longer 
nights    without    breaking  his    silence    except   to    say 

*  My  God  I  love  Thee.'  It  is  through  such 
sacrifices  that  the  salvation  of  races  is  won,  and 
our  iniquities  redeemed.  .   .  . 

Death  our  benefactor,  our  deliverer,  working  our 
perfection  not  our  destruction  !     Thou  who  art  the 
supreme  victory,  pardon    the  folly  that  calls  thee  a 
calamity.     And  praised  and  blessed  for  ever  be  Atone- 
ment, the  greatest  work  of  the  Love  of  God,  which 
blots  out  all  the  stain  of  evil,  and,  not  content  with 
adding  lustre  to  the  crown  of  the  Blessed,  opens  a  way 
into  heaven  for  the  very  sinners  themselves."  ^ 
Or  read  a  French  soldier's  letters  to  his  mother  : 
"  I  had  often  enough  known  the  joy  of  seeing  a 
spring  come  like  this,  but  never  before  had  I  been 
given  the  power  of  living  in  every  instant.     So  it  is 
that  one  wins,  without    the   help  of  any  science,  a 
^  Hope  in  Suffering.  Abb6  Klein,  pp.  245-6. 


xxxiv  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

vague,  but  indisputable  intuition  of  the  Absolute.  .  .  . 
These  are  hours  of  such  beauty  that  he  who  embraces 
them  knows  not  what  death  means.  I  was  well  in 
advance  of  the  front  line,  but  I  never  felt  better 
protected. 

This  morning  the  sun  rose  red  and  green  over  the 
snow  that  was  ruddy  and  blue  ;  there  was  a  wide 
expanse  of  fields  and  woods  recovered  into  life,  and 
far  away  the  distance  in  which  the  silver  of  the 
Meuse  died  away.  Oh  Beauty  !  Beauty  quand 
mime." 

"  I  have  just  lost  my  dearest  friend,"  he  writes. 
"  Dear,  dear  mother  ;  there  is  only  one  feeling  left, 
— love."  To  the  end  he  keeps  this  stern  faith. 
"  The  regiment  next  to  ours  has  but  forty  men  left  to 
it.  I  dare  not  speak  any  more  of  hope.  What  one 
can  demand  is  that  one  should  have  grace  to  exhaust 
all  that  the  instant  holds  of  good." 

He  was  lost  in  his  last  fight :  and  was  never  heard 
of  more.     His  last  message  had  been  : — 

"  Dearest  Mother, — It  is  mid-day,  and  we  are 
at  the  last  moment  before  the  assault.  I  send  you 
all  my  love.  Whatever  happens  life  has  had  its 
beauty.  ...  I  leave  you  to  God.  I  kiss  you  with- 
out any  further  word.  All  my  being  is  bent  on  its 
hard  task.  Good-bye.  Hope  against  hope,  but 
above  all,  hold  by  wisdom  and  love."  ^ 

So  day   after  day   mothers  and   sons   part   in   the 
1  V.  H.  S.  H.  in  the  Commeiiiveultk,  Jan.  191 7. 


PREFACE  XXXV 

dark,  separated  by  death,  never  to  meet  again  in  this 
world.  Their  last  words  imply  the  great  obscurity, 
the  unspoken  question,  what  will  death  be  ?  to  which 
no  answer  ever  comes.  But  the  Christian  soldier 
does  not  stop  to  seek  replies.  "  I  leave  you  to  God," 
he  says  in  his  good-bye.  "  Hope  against  hope,  holdfast 
by  love"  and  goes  forward  in  the  way  of  duty  right  into 
the  cloud.  His  hope  has  a  sure  intuition  that  the 
cloud  hides  the  divine  Love,  that  it  is  Love  he  will 
meet  in  death,  that  we  cannot  know  death's  secret 
beforehand,  because  it  is  too  good  to  be  known  till 
the  day  dawn.  But  as  he  goes  straight  on  to  face 
whatever  may  be  before  him,  love  reveals  more  than 
hope  can,  for  love  is  a  mystical  possessing  now  of  all 
that  hope  looks  for  in  the  future,  love  is  a  personal 
fellowship  of  the  soul  with  God  in  Christ  enjoyed 
already. 

The  obscurity  remains  for  us  all  while  we  sit  still 
and  wait  for  it  to  lift. 

There  lives  no  record  of  reply 
That  telling  what  it  is  to  die 
Had  surely  added  praise  to  praise. 

We  stoutly  refuse  belief  to  the  adventures  of  mediums 
in  the  spiritual  world.  But  the  Christian  listens 
intently  to  the  high  thoughts  of  our  noblest  teachers 
who  have  spoken  to  us  of  death,  not  with  certainty 
or  by  revelation,  but  as  Saint  Paul  when  he  gave  us 
his  best  convictions  as  his  own,  and  added,  "5«/  / 
think  I  have  the  spirit  of  God."  Who  of  us  does  not 
desire  to  know  what  the  poet  Wordsworth's  thoughts 


xxxvi  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

were  about  death  ?     We  listen  keenly  as  his  sonnet 
sings  them  : 

Methought  I  saw  the  footstep*  of  a  throne 

Which  mists  and  vapours  from  mine  eyes  did  shroud — 

Nor  view  of  who  might  sit  thereon  allowed  ; 

But  all  the  steps  and  ground  about  were  strown 

With  sights  the  ruefullest  that  flesh  and  bone 

Ever  put  on  :  a  miserable  crowd, 

Sick,  hale,  old,  young,  who  cried  before  that  cloud, 

*'  Thou  art  our  king,  O  Death  !  to  thee  we  groan." 

I  seem'd  to  mount  those  steps  ;  the  vapours  gave 

Smooth  way :  and  I  beheld  the  face  of  one 

Sleeping  alone  within  a  mossy  cave. 

With  her  face  up  to  heaven  ;  that  seemed  to  have 

Pleasing  remembrance  of  a  thought  foregone  ; 

A  lovely  Beauty  in  a  summer  grave  ! 

We  are  touched  and  cheered  indeed,  but  the 
noblest  guesses  leave  the  secret  of  death  undisclosed. 
We  leave  it  without  anxiety,  for  we  leave  it  with 
God,  Who  is  not  merely  the  Arbiter,  but  the  Father 
and  lover  of  souls  ;  sure  at  least  of  this  that  the 
revelation  when  the  cloud  lifts,  will  be  lovelier  than 
our  loveliest  thoughts  about  it  ;  for  we  are  convinced 
that  it  is  not  merely  some  benevolent  purpose  of  God 
that  death  has  to  reveal  to  the  loyal  soul  that  goes 
forward  into  the  dark  to  seek  Him,  but  God 
Himself. 

We  may  take  a  last  word  on  the  art  of  dying  well 
from  Henry  Suso,  in  his  Orologium  Sapientice  :      "c-to 

"  That  is  a  sovereign  gift  of  God  ;  soothly  for 
a  man  to  con  to  die  is  for  to  have  his  heart  and  his 
soul  at  all  times  upward  to  those  things  that  be  above  ; 
that  is  to  say  that  what  time  death  cometh  it   find 


PREFACE  xxxvii 

him  ready,  so  that  he  receive  it  gladly,  without  any 
withdrawing  ;  right  as  he  that  bideth  the  desired 
coming  of  his  well-beloved  fellow."  ^ 

Prayer  for  Happy  Death." 

Oh,  my  Lord  and  Saviour,  support  me  in  that 
hour  in  the  strong  arms  of  Thy  Sacraments,  and  by 
the  fresh  fragrance  of  Thy  consolations.  Let  the 
absolving  words  be  said  over  me,  and  the  holy  oil 
sign  and  seal  me,  and  Thy  own  Body  be  my  food, 
and  Thy  Blood  my  sprinkling  ;  and  let  my  sweet 
Mother,  Mary,  breathe  on  me,  and  my  Angel 
whisper  peace  to  me,  and  my  glorious  saints  .  .  . 
smile  upon  me  ;  that  in  them  all  and  through  them 
all,  I  may  receive  the  gift  of  perseverance,  and  die,  as 
I  desire  to  live,  in  Thy  faith,  in  Thy  Church,  in  Thy 
service,  and  in  Thy  love.     Amen. 

GEORGE  CONGREVE,  S.S.LE. 

1  V.  p.  io6. 

^  Cardinal  Newman's  MeJitations  and  Dtvetioiu, 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE 
TO  THE  BOOK 

Death  is  the  greatest  fact  in  life.  It  faces  us  from 
our  earliest  consciousness.  There  is  nothing  startling 
in  it  to  the  child's  mind.  As  children  many  of  our 
happiest  moments  were  centred  round  the  funerals  of 
our  pet  animals. 

A  wedding  or  a  festival, 
A  mourning  or  a  funeral; 

And  this  hath  now  his  heart, 
And  unto  this  he  frames  his  tongue. 

And  it  was  the  same  in  the  childhood  of  the  race. 
In  mediaeval  times  death  was  a  favourite  theme.  The 
Mystery  plays  nearly  all  ended  in  heaven  or  hell,  for 
which  there  were  special  pageants  ;  and  the  influence 
of  these  plays  is  very  great  on  these  writings  on  death. 
We  have  only  to  compare  Everyman — perhaps  the  best 
known  of  these  early  plays — with  the  last  tract  in  this 
book  to  see  how  close  is  the  resemblance.  In  the 
latter  the  Dying  Creature  summons  to  his  aid  reason, 
dread,  conscience,  his  five  wits,  faith,  hope,  charity, 
and  last  of  all  our  Lady,  by  whose  aid  he  is  delivered  ; 
in  Everyman   when    Fellowship,  his   cousin  and    his 


xl  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

kindred  fail  him,  Good-Deeds  brings  him  to  Know- 
ledge, who  in  turn  leads  him  to  Confession.  Then 
his  friends  gather  round  him — Discretion,  Strength, 
Five-wits,  and  Beauty — but  only  to  desert  him  when 
they  find  that  his  pilgrimage  is  to  the  grave.  But 
Knowledge,  Good-Deeds,  and  his  Angel  remain  with 
him  unto  the  end,  and  the  Doctor  draws  a  moral. 

It  is  worth  reading  the  two  together  to  sec  how  the 
play  has  helped  to  shape  the  treatise,  and  yet  how 
much  less  crude,  and  finer  in  thought  is  the  latter. 

And  that  is  to  be  expected,  for  not  only  are  these 
treatises  of  later  date,  but  they  were  not  popular  in 
the  sense  in  which  the  Plays  were  popular,  but  were 
the  grave  and  thoughtful  writings  of  men  of  authority 
and  weight,  and  translated  and  printed  so  frequently 
during  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries  that  we 
can  only  conclude  that  they  were  of  real  service  and 
help.  The  view  of  death  is  the  same  in  both,  as  was 
natural.  In  the  Mystery  Plays  the  spiritual  life  of 
the  soul  had  to  be  depicted  as  a  contest  for  Everyman 
between  his  good  and  evil  angels ;  and  at  death  this 
struggle,  as  they  thought,  was  at  its  fiercest.  The 
death-bed  was  the  great  battlefield  where  man's 
enemy,  the  devil,  staked  his  last  throw,  and  drew  up 
all  his  strongest  forces  for  one  final  and  bitter  assault. 
Every  temptation  to  which  the  soul  had  been  sub- 
jected in  the  long  days  of  its  pilgrimage  on  earth  was 
now  arrayed  against  it  ;  but  against  each  diabolical 
temptation  was  set  the  Inspiration  of  the  Good  Angel, 
as  we  see  in  the  pictures  of  the  old  block-book. 

Since  then  our  whole  attitude  of  mind  in  regard  to 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  xli 

death  has  changed.  Until  lately  we  were  inclined  to 
put  the  thought  of  death  aside  as  something  of  which 
it  was  not  good  manners  to  speak,  even  in  illness. 
Then  more  especially  the  thought  of  death  must  be 
banished.  In  the  old  days  it  was  commanded  that 
the  leech  and  physician  of  the  body  should  give  no 
help  to  the  sick  man's  body  until  they  had  admonished 
and  warned  him  to  take  first  the  spiritual  medicine, 
which  the  Church  has  always  ready  in  her  keeping. 
To-day  it  is  not  infrequent  to  meet  with  those  who 
think  it  unlucky  to  send  for  a  priest  or  minister.  "  Is 
he  as  bad  as  that  ?"  is  the  question  often  asked. 
With  many  there  is  less  attempt  than  there  used  to 
be  to  prepare  for  death  as  the  last  great  sacrament 
of  life  ;  the  outward  sign  of  a  new  birth,  a  second 
baptism. 

But  the  grim  reality  of  death,  which  has  become  to 
most  of  us  during  these  three  years  a  household  word, 
a  constant  companion,  has  brought  back  quite  simply 
and  naturally  many  outward  signs  which  for  long  we 
have  been  content  without.  Calvaries  and  wayside 
crosses  are  again  becoming  familiar  in  our  streets. 
Rogation  processions  are  more  frequent.  Before  long 
may  we  not  hope  that  other  processions  also  may  be 
restored,  even  as  Mystery  Plays  are  already  resuming 
their  old  office  of  teaching  the  young  and  the  ignorant. 
And  since  we  have  been  made  to  realise  more  than 
ever  before  the  inevitableness  of  death,  is  it  not  well 
to  "  learn  to  die  "  as  this  book  would  teach  us  ?  Shall 
we  learn  to  greet  it  as  a  friend  for  whose  coming  we 
have  long   looked  "  in    thought  and   desiring "  and 


xlii  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

welcome,  when  it  comes  as  we  should  welcome  one 
who  rids  us  of  a  heavy  burden  ;  or  shall  we  dread 
it  because  it  takes  from  us  that  by  which  we  have  set 
most  store  ?  Shall  we  look  upon  it  as  the  beginning 
of  life,  or  as  the  end  ?  "  For  this  death  they  clepen 
life,  and  the  death,  that  these  good  men  (clepen  the) 
beginning  of  life,  they  clepen  the  end." 

Or  shall  it  remain  to  us  something  which  we  re- 
fuse to  think  of  until  we  must.  Men  die  none  the 
less  bravely  for  that  refusal.  The  spirit  of  the  French 
Noblesse  who  met  the  guillotine  with  a  mocking  jest 
is  still  with  us.  We  will  scorn  death  as  we  scorn  our 
enemy. 

Perhaps  these  old  writings  will  at  least  rouse  us  to 
think.  They  may  seem  too  far  remote  from  our 
present  outlook  to  be  of  any  practical  value.  Shelley, 
dead  nearly  ninety  years  ago  and  yet  the  most  modern 
of  our  poets,  likens  death  to  sleep,  and  the  scientist 
to-day  would  use  the  same  simile.  To  all  appearances 
we,  for  the  most  part,  slip  out  of  life  unconsciously 
with  little  fear,  so  doctors  tell  us.  As  we  were  born 
so  we  die.  "The  child  cries  out  when  from  the 
right  breast  the  mother  takes  it  away,  in  the  very  next 
moment  to  find  in  the  left  one  its  consolation." 

All  this  seems  far  removed  from  the  thought  of 
death  as  a  hand  to  hand  conflict  of  the  soul  with  the 
powers  of  evil. 

Is  it  because  we  have  lost  sight  of  the  fact  that 
death  is  far  more  than  a  natural  process.  It  is  but 
the  outward  sign  of  a  much  greater  reality.  The 
last  great  sacrament  of  which  we  can  only  partake 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  xliii 

once  ;  for  which  all  life  should  be  a  preparation: 
And  therefore  when  it  comes  we  do  not  need  to  be 
brave,  as  in  the  presence  of  a  foe,  but  we  stretch  out 
our  hands  in  welcome  as  to  a  friend  we  have  "  long 
abideth  and  looked  after."  "  For  love  is  stalworth 
as  death  ;  and  love  is  hard  as  hades." 

And  in  death  we  meet  the  Conqueror  of  death  ; 
we  meet  Love. 

F.  M.  M.  C. 

Feast  of  St  Mary  Magdalene,  191 7 


THE  BOOK 

OF  THE  CRAFT 

OF  DYING 


TABLE  OF  CHAPTERS 

PACB 

I.  The  First  Chapter  is  of  Commendation  of  death  : 

and  of  cunning  to  die  well      ....  5 

II.  The  Second  Chapter  is   of  Men's  Temptations 

that  die ........  9 

III.  The  Third  Chapter  containeth  the  Interrogations 

that  should  be  asked  of  them  that  be  in  their 
death  bed :  while  they  maj  speak  and 
understand      .......         zz 

IV.  The  Fourth  Chapter  containeth  an  Instruction : 

with  certain  Obsecrations  to  them  that  shall 

die 27 

V.  The  Fifth  Chapter  containeth  an  Instruction  onto 

them  that  shall  die  .         .         .         .         .         32 

VI.  The  Sixth  Chapter  containeth  Prayers  that 
should  be  said  unto  them  that  be  a-dying 
of  some  man  that  is  about  them       ...  39 


HERE  BEGINNETH  THE  BOOK  OF 
THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

Forasmuch  as  the  passage  of  death,  of  the  wretched- 
ness of  the  exile  of  this  world,  for  uncunning  ^  of 
dying — not  only  to  lewd  men  '  but  also  to  religious 
and  devout  persons — seemeth  wonderfully  hard  and 
perilous,  and  also  right  fearful  and  horrible  ;  there- 
fore in  this  present  matter  and  treatise,  that  is  of 
the  Craft  of  Dying,  is  drawn  and  contained  a  short 
manner  of  exhortation,  for  teaching  and  comforting 
of  them  that  be  in  point  of  death.  This  manner 
of  exhortation  ought  subtly  to  be  considered,  noted, 
and  understood  in  the  sight  of  man's  soul  ;  for 
doubtless  it  is  and  may  be  profitable  generally,  to 
all  true  Christian  men,  to  learn  and  have  craft  and 
knowledge  to  die  well. 

This  matter  and  treatise  containeth  six  parts  of 
chapters  : 

The  first  is  of  commendation  of  death ;  and 
cunning  to  die  well. 

The  second  containeth  the  temptations  of  men 
that  die. 

The  third  containeth  the  interrogations  that  should 

^  i.e.  ignorance.  ^  laymen. 

3 


4  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

be  asked  of  them  that  be  in  their  death  bed,  while 
they  may  ^  speak  and  understand. 

The  fourth  containeth  an  information,  with 
certain  obsecrations  to  them  that  shall  die. 

The  fifth  containeth  an  instruction  to  them  that 
shall  die. 

The  sixth  containeth  prayers  that  should  be  said 
to  them  that  be  a-dying,  of  some  men  that  be 
about  them. 

*  '  may'  is  generally  equivalent  to  modern  'can.' 


CHAPTER  I 

THE  FIRST  CHAPTER  IS  OF  COMMENDATION  OF  DEATH 
AND  OF  CUNNING  TO  ^  DIE  WELL 

Though  bodily  death  be  most  dreadful   of  all  fear- 
ful   things,   as    the    Philosopher^    saith   in    the    third 
book  of  Ethics,  yet  spiritual  death  of  the  soul  is  as 
much  more  horrible  and  detestable,   as  the  soul  is 
more  worthy  and  precious  than  the  body  ;    as  the 
prophet  Z)jf/</ saith  :  Mors  peccatorum  pessima.    The  Pg.  xxxiii. 
death  of  the  sinful  man  is  worst  of  all  deaths.     But  2*- 
as  the  same  prophet  saith  :  Preciosa  est  in  conspectu  Ps.  cxv. 
Domini  mors  sanctorum    eius.      The  death   of  the  'S* 
good    man   is  ever    precious   in   the   sight   of  God, 
what  manner  of  bodily  death   that   ever    they  die. 
And  thou  shalt  understand  also  that   not  only  the 
death  of  holy  martyrs  is  so  precious,  but  also  the  death 
of  all  other  rightful  and  good  Christian  men  ;   and 
furthermore  the  death,  doubtless,  of  all  sinful  men  : 
how  long,  and  how  wicked,  and  how  cursed  they  have 
been  all  their  life  before,  unto  their  last  end  that  they 
die  in — if  they  die  in  the  state  of  very  '  repentance 
and  contrition,  and  in  the  very  faith,  and  virtue,  and 

'  i.e.  knowing  how  to.  2  Aristotle. 

3  Always  means  '  true,'  '  real.' 


6  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

charity  of  Holy  Church — is  acceptable  and  precious 
in  the  sight  of  God.  As  Saint  John  saith  in  the 
Rev.  xiv.  Apocalypse  :  Beati  mortui  qui  in  Domino  mori- 
*3'  UNTUR.     Blessed  be  all  dead  men  that  die  in  God. 

And  therefore  God  saith  in  the  fourth  chapter  of 
Wis.  iv.  7.  the  Boole  of  Sapience  :  Justus  si  morte  pr^ocupatus 
FUERiT,  IN  refrigerio  erit.  A  rightful  man  though 
he  be  hasted,  or  hastily  or  suddenly  dead,  he  shall 
be  had  to  a  place  of  refreshing.  And  so  shall  every 
man  that  dieth,  if  it  be  so  that  he  keep  himself  stably, 
and  govern  him  wisely  in  the  temptations  that  he 
shall  have  in  [the]  agony  or  strife  of  his  death  ;  as 
it  shall  be  declared  afterwards.  And  therefore  of 
the  commendation  of  death  of  good  men  only  a 
wise  man  saith  thus  :  Death  is  nothing  else  but  a 
going  [out]  of  prison,  and  an  ending  of  exile  ;  a 
discharging  of  an  heavy  burden,  that  is  the  body  ; 
finishing  of  all  infirmities  ;  a  scaping  of  all  perils  ; 
destroying  of  all  evil  things  ;  breaking  of  all  bonds  ; 
paying  of  [the]  debt  of  natural  duty  ;  turning  again 
into  his  country  ;  and  entering  into  bliss  and  joy. 

And  therefore  it  is  said  in  the  seventh  book  of 
Eccl«(.  Ecclesiastes  :  Melior  est  dies  mortis  die  nativitatis. 
vu.  I.  'pjjg  jjjy  Qf  man's  death  is  better  than  the  day  of 
man's  birth.  And  this  is  understood  only  of  good 
men  and  the  chosen  people  of  God.  For  of  evil 
men  and  reprovable,  neither  the  day  of  their  birth, 
neither  the  day  of  their  death,  may  be  called  good. 
And  therefore  every  good  perfect  Christian  man,  and 
also  every  other  man  though  he  be  imperfect  and 
late  converted  from  sin,  so  he  be  verily  contrite  and 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING      7 

believe  in  God,  should  not  be  sorry  nor  troubled, 
neither  dread  death  of  his  body,  in  what  manner 
wise  or  for  what  manner  cause  that  he  be  put  thereto  ; 
but  gladly  and  wilfully,  with  reason  of  his  mind  that 
ruleth  his  sensuality,^  he  should  take  his  death  and 
suffer  it  patiently,  conforming  and  committing  fully 
his  will  to  God's  will  and  to  God's  disposition  alone, 
if  he  will  go  hence  and  die  well  and  surely  :  witness- 
ing the  wise  man  that  saith  thus  :  Bene  mori,  est  lib- 
enter  MORI.  To  die  well  is  to  die  gladly  and  wilfully. 
And  therefore  he  addeth,  and  saith  thereto  :  Ut 

SATIS     VIXERIM,     NEC      ANNI,      NEC      DIES      FACIUNT,     SED 

ANIMUS.  Neither  many  days,  nor  many  years,  cause 
me  to  say  and  feel  that  I  have  lived  long  [enough,] 
but  only  the  reasonable  will  of  mine  heart  and  of 
my  soul.  Sith  more  than  that,  of  duty  and  natural 
right  all  men  must  needly  die  ;  *  and  that  how,  when, 
and  where  that  Almighty  God  will  ;  and  God's  will  is 
evermore  good,  and  over  all  good,  in  all  things  good, 
and  just,  and  rightful.  For  as  John  Cassian  saith 
in  his  Collations  :  Almighty  God  of  His  wisdom  and  Collat. 
goodness,  all  things  that  fall,  both  prosperity  and  ••  5- 
adversity,  disposeth  ever  finally  for  our  profit,  and 
for  the  best  for  us  ;  and  more  provideth,  and  is 
busier  for  the  heal  and  salvation  of  His  chosen 
children,  than  we  ourselves  may  or  can  be. 

And  sith,  as  it  is  aforesaid,  we   may  not,  in   no 
wise,    neither    flee    nor   escape,  neither   change    the 

1  i.e.  his  bodily  nature. 

2  Cum  igitur  ex  dcbito  atque  jure  natarali  cmnes  homines  m^ri  tit 
neatse. 


«  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

inevitable  necessity  and  passage  of  death,  therefore 
we  ought  to  take  our  death  when  God  will,  wilfully 
and  gladly,  without  any  grutching  ^  or  contradiction, 
through  the  might  and  boldness  of  the  will  of  our 
soul  virtuously  disposed  and  governed  by  reason  and 
very  discretion  ;  though  the  lewd »  sensuality  and 
frailty  of  our  flesh  naturally  grutch  or  strive  there 
against.     And    therefore  Seneca   saith  thus  :    Feras, 

NON     CULPES,     QUOD      IMMUTARE      NON     VALES.  SufFef 

easily  and  blame  thou  not,  that  thou  mayst  not 
change  nor  void.  And  the  same  clerk  added  to, 
and  saith :  Si  vis  ista  cum  quibus  urgeris  effucere, 

NON    UT    ALIBI    SIS    OPORTEAT,  SED    ALIUS.        If  thoU  wilt 

escape  that  thou  art  straitly  be-wrapped  *  in,  it 
needeth  not  that  thou  be  in  another  place,  but 
that  thou  be  another  man. 

Furthermore,  that  a  Christian  man  may  die  well 
and  seemly,*  him  needeth  that  he  con '  die,  and 
as  a  wise  man  saith :  Scire  mori  est  paratum 
cor   suum    habere,    et    animam    ad   superna  :    UT 

QUANDOCUNQUE  MORS  ADVENERIT,  PARATUM  CUM  IN- 
VENIAT  UT  ABSQUE  OMNI  RETRACTIONE  EAM  RECIPIAT, 
QUASI    QUI    SOCII    SUI    DILECTI    ADVENTUM    DESIDERATUM 

EXPECTAT.  To  con  die  is  to  have  an  heart  and  a 
soul  every  ready  up  to  Godward,  that  when-that- 
cver  death  come,  he  may  be  found  all  ready  ;  with- 
outen  any  retraction  •  receive  him,  as  a  man  would 

^  murmuring.  2  jyJL 

'  The  other  MSS.  have  « trapped.' 

*  The  other  MSS.  have  '  surelj.'  •  learn  to. 

*  /'.«.  withdrawal. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING      9 

receive  his  well-beloved  and  trusty  friend  and  fellow, 
that  he  had  long  abideth  and  looked  after. 

This  cunning  is  most  profitable  of  all  cunnings, 
in  the  which  cunning  religious  men  specially,  more 
than  other,  and  every  day  continually,  should  study 
more  diligently  than  other  men  that  they  might 
apprehend  it ;  namely  ^  for  the  state  of  religion 
asketh  and  requireth  it  more  in  them  than  in  others. 
Notwithstanding  that  every  secular  man,  both  clerk 
and  layman,  whether  he  be  disposed  and  ready  to 
die  or  no,  yet  nevertheless  he  must  needs  die  when 
God  will.  Therefore  ought  every  man,  not  only 
religious,  but  also  every  good  and  devout  Christian 
man  that  desireth  for  to  die  well  and  surely,  live  in 
such  wise  and  so  have  himself  alway,  that  he  may 
safely  die,  every  hour,  when  God  will.  And  so  he 
should  have  his  life  in  patience,  and  his  death  in 
desire,  as  Saini  Paul  had  when  he  said  :  Cupio  Philip,  i. 
DissoLvi  ET  ESSE  CUM  Christo.  I  dcsirc  and  covet  ^3- 
to  be  dead,  and  be  with  Christ.  And  thus  much 
sufficeth  at  this  time,  shortly  said,  of  [the]  craft  and 
science  of  dying. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE    SECOND    CHAPTER    IS    OF    MEn's    TEMPTATIONS 
THAT    DIE 

Know  all  men  doubtless,  that  men  that  die,  in  their 

last  sickness  and  end,  have  greatest  and  most  grievous 

^  '  namely '  generally  means  (as  here) '  especially,' '  chiefly.' 


lo  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

temptations,  and  such  as  they  never  had  before  in  all 
their  life.  And  of  these  temptations  five  be  most 
pnncipu. 

I.  The  First  is  of  the   faith,  forasmuch  as  faith 

is   fundament    of  all    men's    soul's-heal  ;    witnessing 

I  Cor.  Hi.  the  Apostle  that  saith  :    Fundamentum  aliud  nemo 

>*•  POTEST  PONERE.     Other  fundament  may  no  man  put. 

And  therefore  Saint  jiustin  saith  :  Fides  est  bonorum 

OMNIUM    fundamentum,    ET  HUMANE    SALUTIS    INITIUM. 

Faith  is  fundament  of  all  goodness,  and  beginning 
Heb,  xi.  6.  of  man's  heal.  And  therefore  saith  Saint  Paul : 
Sine  fide  est  impossibile  placere  Deo.  It  is  im- 
possible to  please  God  without  faith.  And  Saint 
Justin  saith  :  Qui  non  credit  jam  iudicatus  est. 
He  that  believeth  not  is  now  deemed.  And  for- 
asmuch as  there  is  such  and  so  great  strength  in 
the  faith  that  withouten  it  there  may  no  man  be 
saved. 

Therefore  the  devil  with  all  his  might  is  busy  to 
avert  fully  a  man  from  the  faith  in  his  last  end  ;  or, 
if  he  may  not,  that  he  Liboureth  busily  to  make  his 
doubt  therein,  or  somewhat  draw  him  out  of  the 
way  or  deceive  him  with  some  manner  of  super- 
stitious and  false  errors  or  heresies.  But  every  good 
Christian  man  is  bound  namely  habitually,  though  he 
may  not  actually  and  intellectually  apprehend  them, 
to  believe,  and  full  faith  and  credence  give,  not  only 
to  the  principal  articles  of  the  faith,  but  also  to  all 
holy  writ  in  all  manner  things  ;  and  fully  to  obey 
the  statutes  of  the  church  of  Rome,  and  stably  to 
abide  and  die  in  them.     For  as  soon  as  he  beginneth 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     1 1 

to  err  or  doubt  in  any  of  them  all,  as  soon  he 
goeth  out  of  the  way  of  life,  and  his  soul's  heal. 
But  wit  thou  well  without  doubt,  that  in  this 
temptation,  and  in  all  other  that  follow  after,  the 
devil  may  not  noy  thee,  nor  prevail  against  no  man, 
in  no  wise,  as  long  as  he  hath  use  of  his  free  will, 
and  of  reason  well  disposed,  but  if*  he  will  wilfully 
consent  unto  his  temptation. 

And  therefore  no  very  Christian  ^  man  ought  (not) 
to  dread  any  of  his  illusions,  or  his  false  threatenings,' 
or  his  feigned  fearings.  For  as  Christ  himself  saith 
in  the  gospel  :  Diabolus  est  mendax  et  pater  eius.  S.  John 
The  devil  is  a  liar,  and  a  father  of  all  leasings.  But  ^'"'  4+* 
manly,  therefore,  and  stiffly  and  steadfastly  abide 
and  persevere  ;  and  die  in  the  very  faith  and  unity 
and  obedience  of  our  mother  Holy  Church. 

And  it  is  right  profitable  and  good,  as  it  is  used  in 
some  religious,  when  a  man  is  in  agony  of  dying,  with 
an  high  voice  oft  times  to  say  the  Creed  before  him, 
that  he  that  is  sick  may  be  mortified  in  stableness 
of  the  faith  ;  and  fiends  that  may  not  suffer  to  hear 
it  may  be  voided  and  driven  away  from  him.  Also 
to  stableness  of  very  faith  should  strengthen  a  sick 
man  principally  the  stable  faith  of  our  holy  Fathers, 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  Also  the  perseverant 
abiding  faith  of  Job,  of  Raab  the  woman,  and  Achor, 
and  such  other.  And  also  the  faith  of  the  Apostles, 
and  other  martyrs,  confessors,  and  virgins  innumerable. 

*  Always  means  '  unless.' 

^  bonus  CathoUcus  Chrisiiantit. 

•  The  othtr  MSS.  have  '  persuasions.' 


It  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

For  by  faith  all  they  that  have  been  of  old  time  before 
us — and  all  they  be  now  and  shall  be  hereafter — 
they  all  please,  and  have  [pleased]  and  shall  please 
God  by  faith.  For  as  it  is  aforesaid  :  Withouten 
faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God. 

Also  double  profit  should  induce  every  sick  man  to 
be  stable   in  faith.     One  is  :  For  faith  may  do  all 
things  ;    as    our    Lord    Himself  witnesseth    in    the 
S.  Mark  gospel,  and  saith  :    Omnia  possibilia  sunt  credenti. 
ix.  j2,  All  things  are   possible  to  him  that  believeth  stead- 
fastly.    Another  is  :  For  faith  getteth  a  man  all  things. 
S.  Mark  As    our    Lord     saith  :     Quicquid    orantes    petitis, 
*'•  •4-  credite  quia  accipietis,  et  fiet  vobis,  etc.     What- 
ever it  be  that  ye  will  pray  and  ask,  believe  verily 
that  [ye]  shall  take  ^  it,  and  ye  shall  have  it  ;  though 
that    ye  would   say   to   an    hill   that   he  should    lift 
himself  up    and   fall    into    the  sea,   as   the    hills    of 
Capsye   by  prayer  and   petition  of  King  Alexander, 
the  great  conqueror,  were  closed  together. 

n.  The  Second  Temptation  is  Desperation  ;  the 

which  is  against  [the]  hope  and  confidence  that  every 

man  should  have  unto  God.     For  when  a  sick  man 

is  sore  tormented  and  vexed,  with  sorrow  and  sickness 

of  his  body,  then  the  devil  is  most  busy  to  superadd 

sorrow  to  sorrow,  with  all  [the]  ways  that  he  may, 

objecting  his  sins  against  him  for  to  induce  him  into 

despair. 

De  Tilitate      Furthermore    as  Innocent  the    Pope,  in   his  third 

^^"Vh'""  ^^ooV.  of  the  wickedness   of  mankind,  saith  :    Every 

'  ^'  man  both  good  and  evil,  or  *  his  soul  pass  out  of  his 

*  *.-.  receive.  •  before. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     13 

body,  he  seeth  Christ  put  on  the  cross  :  the  good 
man  to  his  consolation,  the  evil  man  to  his  confusion, 
to  make  him  ashamed  that  he  hath  lost  the  fruit  of 
his  redemption. 

Also  the  devil  bringeth  again  into  a  man's,  mind 
that  is  in  point  of  death  specially  those  sins  that  he 
hath  done,  and  was  not  shriven  of,  to  dravv^  him 
thereby  into  despair.  But  therefore  should  no  man 
despair  in  no  wise.  For  though  any  one  man  or 
woman  had  done  as  many  thefts,  or  manslaughters, 
or  as  many  other  sins  as  be  drops  of  water  in  the  sea, 
and  gravel  stones  in  the  strand,  though  he  had 
never  done  penance  for  them  afore,  nor  never  had 
been  shriven  of  them  before — neither  then  might 
have  time,  for  sickness  or  lack  of  speech,  or  shortness 
of  time,  to  be  shriven  of  them — ^yet  should  he  never 
despair  ;  for  in  such  a  case  very  contrition  of  heart 
within,  with  will  to  be  shriven  if  time  sufficed,  is 
sufficient  and  accepted  by  God  for  to  save  him  ever- 
lastingly :  as  the  Prophet  saith  in  the  psalm  :  Cor  Ps.  1.  19. 

CONTRITUM     ET     HUMILITATUM,     DeUS,     NON     DESPICIES. 

Lord  God,  Thou  wilt  never  despise  a  contrite  heart 

and  a  meek.     And  Exechiel  saith  also  :  In  quacunque  Ezech. 

HORA     CONVERSUS     FUERIT     PECCATOR,     ET     INGEMUERIT,  xxxiii.    12. 

SALVus  ERiT.  In  what  hour  that  ever  it  be  that  the 
sinful  man  is  sorry  inward,  and  converted  from  his 
sins,  he  shall  be  saved. 

And  therefore  ^a'lnt  Bernard  saith  :  The  pity  and 
mercy  of  God  is  more  than  any  wickedness.  And 
Austirty  upon  John,  saith  :  We  should  never  despair  of 
no  man  as  long  as  he  is  in  his  bodily  life,  for  there 


14  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

is  no  sin  so  great  but  it  may  be  healed,  outake* 
despair  alone.  And  Saint  Justin  saith  also  :  All  sins 
that  a  man  hath  done  afore  may  not  noy  nor  damn 
a  man,  but  if  he  be  well  payd '  in  his  heart  that  he 
hath  done  them.  Therefore  no  man  should  despair, 
though  it  were  so  that  it  were  possible  that  he  alone 
had  done  all  manner  of  sins  that  might  be  done  in 
the  world.  For  by  despair  a  man  getteth  nought 
else  but  that  God  is  much  more  offended  thereby  ; 
and  all  his  other  sins  be  more  grievous^  in  God's 
sight,  and  everlasting  pain  thereby  increased  infinitely 
to  him  that  so  dcspaireth. 

Therefore  against  despair,  for  to  induce  him  that 
is  sick  and  laboureth  in  his  dying  to  very  trust  and 
confidence  that  he  should  principally  have  to  God  at 
that  time,  the  disposition  of  Christ  in  the  cross 
should  greatly  draw  him.  Of  the  which  Saint  Bernard 
saith  thus :  What  man  is  he  that  should  not  be 
ravished  and  drawn  to  hope,  and  have  full  confidence 
in  God,  and  he  take  heed  diligently  of  the  disposition 
of  Christ's  body  in  the  cross.  Take  heed  and  see  : 
His  head  is  inclined  to  salve  thee  ;  His  mouth  to  kiss 
thee  ;  His  arms  spread  to  be-clip  *  thee  ;  His  hands 
thrilled  *  to  give  thee  ;  His  side  opened  to  love  thee  ; 
His  body  along  strait  to  give  all  Himself  to  thee. 

Therefore  no  man  should  despair  of  forgiveness,  but 
fully  have  hope  and  confidence  in  God  ;  for  the 
virtue  of  hope  is  greatly  commendable,  and  of  great 

^  i.e.  except.  «  pleased. 

'  The  other  MSS.  have  '  augmented.' 

*  embrace.  »  pierced. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     15 
merit  before  God.     As  the  Apostle  saith,  and  exhorted 

us:      NOLITE    AMITTERE    CONFIDENTIAM     VESTRAM     QUjE  Heb.  V.  35. 
MAGNAM     HABET     REMUNERATIONEM.         LoSe     nOt     yOUr 

hope  and  confidence  in  God,  the  which  hath  great 
reward  of  God. 

Furthermore,  that  no  sinful  man  should  in  no 
wise  despair — have  he  sinned  never  so  greatly,  nor 
never  so  sore,  nor  never  so  oft,  nor  never  so  long 
continued  therein — we  have  open  ensample  in  Peter 
that  denied  Christ  ;  in  Paul  that  pursued  Holy 
Church  ;  in  Matthew  and  Zaccheus,  the  publicans ;  in 
Mary  Maudeleyn,  the  sinful  woman,  [in  the  woman  ^] 
that  was  taken  in  avoutry  ;  in  the  thief  that  hung  on 
the  cross  beside  Christ  ;  in  Mary  Egyptian  ;  and  in 
innumerable  other  grievous  and  great  sinners. 

III.  The  Third  Temptation  is  Impatience  ;  the 
which  is  against  charity,  by  the  which  we  be  bound 
to  love  God  above  all  things.  For  they  that  be  in 
sickness,  in  their  death  bed  suffer  passingly  '  great  pain 
and  sorrow,  and  woe  ;  and  namely  they  that  die  not 
by  nature  and  course  of  age — that  happeth  right 
seldom,  as  open  experience  teacheth  men — but  die 
often  through  an  accidental  sickness  ;  as  a  fever,  a 
postune,*  and  such  other  grievous  and  painful  and 
long  sickness.  The  which  many  men,  and  namely 
those  that  be  undisposed  *  to  die  and  die  against  their 
will  and  lack  very  charity,  maketh  so  impatient  and 
grutching,  that  other  while,*  through  woe  and  im- 

1  Insertions  in  square  brackets,  here  and  elsewhere,  are 
from  the  Douce  MS.  (D).  ■  i.e.  surpassingly, 

•tumour.  *  unprepared.  'at  times. 


i6  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

patience,  they  become  wood  *  and  witless,  as  it  hath 
been  seen  in  many  men.  And  so  by  that  it  is  open 
and  certain  that  they  that  die  in  that  wise  fail  and 
lack  very  charity.  Witnessing  Saint  Jerome^  that  saith 
thus  :  Si  quis  cum  dolore  egritudinem  vel  mortem 

SUSCEPERIT,  SIGNUM    EST   QUOD    DEUS    SUFFICIENTER    NON 

DiLiGiT.  That  is :  Whoso  taketh  sickness  or  death 
with  sorrow  or  displeasure  of  heart,  it  is  an  open  and 
a  certain  sign  that  he  loveth  not  God  sufficiently. 
Therefore  that  man  that  will  die  well,  it  is  needful 
that  he  grutch  not  in  no  manner  of  sickness  that 
falleth  to  him  before  his  death,  or  in  his  dying — be 
it  never  so  painful  or  grievous — long  time  [or  short 
time]  dying  ;  for  as  Saint  Gregory  witnesseth  in  his 
Morals  :    Justa   sunt  cuncta  que  patimur,  et  ideo 

VALDE  INJUSTUM   EST  SI   DE  JUSTA  PASSIONE  MURMURAMUS. 

All  things  that  we  suffer,  we  suffer  then  rightfully 
[and  therefore  we  be  greatly  unrightful  if  we  grutch 
S.  Luke  of  that  we  suffer  rightfully].  Then  every  man  should 
XXI.  19.  be  patient,  as  Saint  Luke  saith  :  In  patientia  vestra 
possiDEBiTis  ANIMAS  VESTRAS.  In  your  patience  ye 
shall  possess  ■  your  souls.  For  by  patience  man's  soul 
is  surely  had  and  kept,  so  by  impatience  and  mur- 
muration  it  is  lost  and  damned.  Witnessing  Saint 
Gregory  in    his    Homily,  that    saith    thus :   Regnum 

CCELORUM     NULLUS     MURMURANS     ACCIPIT,     NULLUS     QUI 

ACCiPiT  MURMURARE  POTEST.  There  shall  no  man 
have  the  kingdom  of  heaven  that  grutcheth  and  is  im- 
patient ;  and  there  may  no  man  grutch  that  hath  it. 
But  as  the  great  Clerk  Albert  saith,  speaking  of  very 
imad.  "D.  'welde.' 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     17 

contrition  :  If  a  very  contrite  man  ofFereth  himself 
gladly  to  all  manner  afflictions  of  sickness  and  punish- 
ing of  his  sins,  that  he  may  thereby  satisfy  God 
worthily  for  his  offences,  much  more  then  every  sick 
man  should  suffer  patiently  and  gladly  his  own  sickness 
alone,  that  is  lighter  without  comparison  than  many 
sicknesses  that  other  men  suffer  ;  namely  ^  that  sick- 
ness before  a  man's  death  is  as  a  purgatory  to  him, 
when  it  is  suffered  as  it  ought  ;  that  is  to  understand, 
if  it  be  suffered  patiently,  gladly,  and  with  a  free  and 
a  kind  will  of  heart.  For  the  same  clerk  Albert  saith  : 
We  have  need  to  have  a  free,  kind  will  to  God,  not 
only  in  such  things  as  be  to  our  consolation,  but  also 
in  such  things  as  be  to  our  affliction.  And  ^aint 
Gregory  saith  :  Divina  dispensatione  agitur,  ut  pro- 

LIXIORI    VICIO    PROLIXIOR  EGRITUDO    ADHIBEATUR.        It   is 

done  by  the  disposition  and  rightful  ordinance  of  God 
that  to  the  longer  sin  is  ordained  the  longer  sickness. 
And  therefore  let  every  sick  man,  and  namely  he  that 
shall  die,  say  as  Saint  Justin  said  to  God  :  Hic  seca, 

HIS    URE,    UT    IN    ETERNAM    MICHI    PARCAS.         Here    CUt, 

here  burn,  so  that  Thou  spare  me  everlastingly.  And 
Saint   Gregory  saith  :    Misericors    deus  temporalem 

ADHIBET  SEVERITATEM,  NE  ETERNAM    INFERAT  ULTIONEM. 

God  that  is  merciful  giveth  His  chosen  children  tem- 
poral punition  here,  lest  He  give  them  everlasting 
vengeance  elsewhere. 

This    temptation    of    impatience    fighteth    against 
charity,  and  without  charity  may  no  men  be  saved. 
And  therefore,  as  Saint  Paul  saith  :   Caritas  paciens  i  Cor. 
1  The  other  MSS.  have  '  sithen.'  '^'"-  4- 


1 8  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

EST,  OMNIA  suFFERT.  Very  charity  is  patient,  and 
sufFereth  all  things.  And  in  these  words  it  is  notable 
to  be  marked  that  he  spake  of  suffering  of  all  things, 
and  outake  ^  nothing.  Then  should  all  sicknesses  of 
the  body  by  reason  be  suffered  patiently,  without 
murmuration  and  difficulty.  And  therefore,  as  Saint 
jiustin  saith  :  Amanti  nichil  impossibile,  nichil  diffi- 
cile. To  him  that  loveth  there  is  nothing  hard,  nor 
nothing  impossible. 

IV.  The  Fourth  Temptation  is  Complacence,  or 
pleasance  of  a  man  that  he  hath  in  himself ;  that  is 
spiritual  pride,  with  the  which  the  devil  tempteth  and 
beguileth  most  religious,  and  devout  and  perfect  men. 
For  when  the  devil  seeth  that  he  may  not  bring  a 
man  out  of  faith,  nor  may  not  induce  him  into 
despair,  neither  to  impatience,  then  he  assaileth  him 
by  complacence  of  himself,  putting  such  manner 
temptations  in  his  heart  :  O  how  stable  art  thou  in 
the  faith  !  how  strong  in  hope  !  how  sad  in  patience  ! 
O  how  many  good  deeds  hast  thou  done  !  and  such 
other  thoughts.  But  against  these  temptations  Isidore 
saith  thus  :  NoN  te  arroges,  non  te  jactes,  non  te 

INSOLENTER  EXTOLLAS,  VEL  DE  TE  PRESUMAS,  NICHIL  BONI 

TIB!  TRiBUAS.  Nor  boast  thou  not,  nor  avaunt  thee 
not  proudly,  not  make  not  much  of  thyself  wantonly, 
nor  arret '  not  goodness  to  thy  self ;  for  a  man  may 
have  so  much  delectation  in  such  manner  of  com- 
placence of  himself  that  a  man  should  be  damned 
everlastingly  therefore. 

And  therefore  saith  Saint  Gregory  :  Quis  reminisc- 

*  i.e.  excepts.  2  ascribe. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     19 

ENDO   BONA  QUE   GESSIT,   DUM    SE    APUD    SE   ERIGIT,   APUD 

AUCTOREM  HUMiLiTATis  CADiT.  A  man  that  thinketh 
on  (the)  good  deeds  that  he  hath  done,  and  is  proud 
thereof  of  himself  within  himself,  he  falleth  down 
anon  ^  before  Him  that  is  author  of  meekness.  And 
therefore  he  that  shall  die  must  beware  when  he 
feeleth  himself  tempted  with  pride,  that  then  he  [low 
and]  meek  himself  thinking  on  his  sins  :  and  that  he 
wot  never  whether  he  be  worthy  everlasting  love  or 
hate,  that  is  to  say,  salvation  or  damnation.  Never- 
theless, lest  he  despair,  he  must  lift  up  his  heart  to 
God  by  hope,  thinking  and  revolving  '  stably  that  the 
mercy  of  God  is  above  all  His  works,  and  that  God  is 
true  in  all  His  words,  and  that  He  is  truth  and  righteous- 
ness that  never  beguileth,  neither  is  beguiled,  which 
be-hight  *  and  swore  by  Himself,  and  said  by  the 
Prophet  :  Vivo  ego,  digit  dominus,  nolo  mortem  Ezech. 
PECCATORis,  etc.  God  Almighty  saith  :  By  my  self  I  xxxiii.  11. 
will  not  the  death  neither  the  damnation  of  no  sinful 
man,  but  that  he  convert  himself  to  Me  and  be  saved. 
Every  man  should  follow  Saint  Antony  to  whom  the 
devil  said  :  Antony,  thou  hast  overcome  me  ;  for 
when  I  would  have  thee  up  by  pride,  thou  keptest 
thyself  a-down  by  meekness ;  and  when  I  would 
draw  thee  down  by  desperation,  thou  keptest  thyself 
up  by  hope.  Thus  should  every  man  do,  sick  and 
whole,  and  then  is  the  devil  overcome. 

V.     The  Fifth  [Temptation]  that  tempteth   and 
grieveth  most  carnal  men  and  secular  men,  that  be  in 

^  i.e.  at  once,  immediately. 

'  The  other  MSS.  have  '  remembering.'  ^  vowed. 


ao  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

overmuch  occupation,  and  business  outward  about 
temporal  things ;  that  is  their  wives,  their  children, 
their  carnal  friends,  and  their  worldly  riches,  and 
other  things  that  they  have  loved  inordinately  before. 
For  he  that  will  die  well  and  surely  must  utterly  and 
fully  put  away  out  of  his  mind  all  temporal  and  out- 
ward things,  and  plenerly  ^  commit  himself  all  to 
God.  And  therefore  the  great  clerk  Dons  [Scotus] 
saith  thus,  in  the  fourth  book  of  sentences :  What 
man  that  is  sick,  when  he  seeth  that  he  shall  die,  if 
he  put  his  will  thereto  to  die  wilfully,  and  consenteth 
fully  unto  death,  as  though  he  hath  chose  himself  the 
pain  of  death  voluntarily,  and  so  suflereth  death 
patiently,  he  satisfieth  to  God  for  all  venial  sins  ; 
and  therefore  •  he  taketh  away  a  parcel  of  satis- 
faction that  he  ought  to  do  for  deadly  sins.  And 
therefore  it  is  right  profitable,  and  full  necessary  in 
such  a  point  of  need,  that  a  man  conform  his  will  to 
God's  will  in  all  things,  as  every  man  ought,  both  sick 
and  whole.  But  it  is  seldom  seen  that  any  secular  or 
carnal  man — or  religious  either — will  dispose  himself 
to  death  ;  or  furthermore,  that  is  worse,  will  hear 
anything  of  the  matter  of  death  ;  [though  indeed  he 
be  labouring  fast  to  his  endward,  hoping  that  he 
shall  escape  the  death  and]  that  is  the  most  perilous 
thing,  and  most  inconvenient  that  may  be  in  Christian 
man,  as  saith  the  worthy  clerk  Cantor  Pariensis  :  * 

But  it  is  to  be  noted  well  that  the  devil  in  all  these 
temptations  abovesaid  may  compel  no  man,  nor  in  no 

1  fully.         2  The  other  MSS.  have  •  furthermore.' 

*  Petrus Cantor  Paris (d.  1 197.    Opp.  inMigne,vol.  J05). 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     zi 

manner  of  wise  prevail  against  him  for  to  consent  to 
him — as  long  as  a  man  hath  the  use  of  reason  with 
him — but  if  he  will  wilfully  consent  unto  him  ;  that 
every  good  Christian  man,  and  also  every  sinful  man — 
be  he  never  so  great  a  sinner — ought  to  beware  of 
above  all  things.  For  the  Apostle  saith  :  Fi delis  i  Cor.  x. 
Deus  qui  non  patietur  vos  temptari  supra  id  quod  'S- 
potestis,  sed  faciet  etiam  cum  temptatione  pro- 
VENTUM  UT  possiTis  susTiNERE.  God,  he  saith,  is 
true,  and  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  more  than 
ye  may  bear  ;  but  He  will  give  you  such  support  in 
your  temptations  that  ye  may  bear  them. 

Whereupon  saith  the  gloss :  God  is  true  in  His 
promises,  and  giveth  us  grace  to  withstand  mightily, 
manly,  and  perseverantly  ;  giving  us  might  that  we  be 
not  overcome,  grace  to  get  us  merit,  steadfastness  to 
overcome  with.  He  giveth  such  increase  of  virtue 
that  we  may  suffer  and  not  fail  nor  fall  ;  and  that  is 
by  meekness.  For  as  Saini  Austin  saith  :  They  break 
not  in  the  furnace  that  have  not  the  wind  of  pride. 
Therefore  (let)  every  man,  rightful  and  sinful,  bow 
himself,  and  submit  himself  fully  unto  the  mighty 
hand  of  God  ;  and  with  His  help  he  shall  surely  get 
and  have  the  victory  in  all  manner  of  temptations, 
evils,  and  sorrows,  and  of  death  thereto. 


as  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 


CHAPTER  III 

THE  THIRD  CHAPTER  CONTAINETH  THE  INTERROGATIONS 
THAT  SHOULD  BE  ASKED  OF  THEM  THAT  BE  IN  THEIR 
DEATH  BED,  WHILE  THEY  MAT  SPEAK  AND  UNDER- 
STAND 

Now  follow  the  interrogations  of  them  that  draw  to 
the  death,  while  they  have  reason  with  them  and 
their  speech.  For  this  cause  if  any  man  is  not  fully 
disposed  to  die,  he  may  the  better  be  informed  and 
comforted  [thereto].  And  as  Satnt  Anselm  the  bishop 
saith  and  teacheth,  these  interrogations  should  be  had 
unto  them  that  be  in  that  plight. 
First  ask  him  this  : 

Brother,  art  thou  glad  that  thou  shalt  die  in 
the  faith  of  Christ  ?  The  sick  man  answereth  : 
Yea. 

Knowest  thou  well  that  thou  hast  not  done 
as  thou  shouldst  have  done  ?  He  answereth  : 
Yea. 

Repentest  thee  thereof?  He  answereth  : 
Yea. 

Hast  thou  full  will  to  amend  thee,  if  thou 
mightest  have  full  space  of  life  ?  He  answereth  : 
Yea. 

Believest  thou  fully  that  Our  Lord  Jesu 
Christ,  God's  Son,  died  for  thee  ?  He  sayeth  : 
Yea. 

Thankest  thou  Him  thereof  with  all  thine 
heart  ?     He  answereth  :  Yea. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     23 

Believest  thou  verily  that  thou  mayest  not  be 
saved  but  by  Christ's  [death  and  His]  passion  ? 
He  answereth  :  Yea. 

Then  thank  Him  thereof  ever,  while  thy  soul  is  in 
thy  body,  and  put  all  thy  trust  in  His  passion  and  in 
His  death  only,  having  trust  in  none  other  thing. 
To  this  death  commit  thee  fully.^  In  His  death  wrap 
all  thyself  fully  ;  and  if  it  come  to  thy  mind,  or  by 
thine  enemy  it  be  put  into  thy  mind,  that  God  will 
deem  thee,  say  thus  : 

Lord,  I  put  the  death  of  Our  Lord  Jesu  Christ 
between  me  and  mine  evil  deeds,  between  me  and  the 
judgment  ;  otherwise  will  I  not  strive  with  Thee. 

If  He  say  :  Thou  hast  deserved  damnation  ;  say 
thou  again  :  The  death  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  I 
put  between  me  and  mine  evil  merits,  and  the  merits 
of  His  worthy  passion  I  offer  for  merits  I  should  have 
had,  and  alas  I  have  not.  Say  also  :  Lord,  put  the 
death  of  my  Lord  Jesu  Christ  between  me  and  Thy 
righteousness. 

Then  let  him  say  this  thrice.  In  manus  tuas, 
DoMiNE,  etc.  Into  thine  hands.  Lord,  I  commit  my 
soul.  And  let  the  covent '  say  the  same.  And  if  he 
may  not  speak,  let  the  covent — or  they  that  stand 
about — say  thus  :  In  manus  tuas,  Domine,  commen- 
DAMus  spiRiTUM  Eius,  etc.  luto  Thine  hands,  Lord, 
we  commend  his  soul.  And  thus  he  dieth  surely ;  and 
he  shall  not  die  everlastingly. 

But  though  these  interrogations  abovesaid  be  com- 

1  The  other  MSS.  have  '  with  His  death  cover  thee  fully.' 

•  i.e.  convent. 


a4  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

petent  and  sufficient  to  religious  and  devout  persons, 
nevertheless  all  Christian  men,  both  secular  and 
religious,  after  the  doctrines  of  the  noble  Clerk  the 
Chancellor  of  Paris  y  in  their  last  end  should  be  examined, 
enquired,  and  informed,  more  certainly  and  clearly,  of 
the  state  and  the  health  of  their  souls. 

I.  And  First  thus :  Believest  thou  fully  all  the 
principal  articles  of  the  faith  ;  and  also  all  Holy 
Scripture  in  all  things,  after  the  exposition  of  the 
holy  and  true  doctors  of  Holy  Church  ;  and  forsakest 
all  heresies  and  errors  and  opinions  damned  by  the 

_^Church  ;  and  art  glad  also  that  thou  shalt  die  in  the 
faith  of  Christ,  and  in  the  unity  and  obedience  of 
Holy  Church  ? 

The  sick  man  answering  :  Yea. 

II.  The  Second  Interrogation  shall  be  this : 
Knowledgest  thou  that  often  times,  and  in  many 
manner  wises,  and  grievously,  thou  hast  offended  thy 
Lord  God  that  made  thee  of  nought  ?  For  Saint 
Bernard saith  upon  Cantica  canticorum  :  I  know  well 
that  there  may  no  man  be  saved  but  if  he  know 
himself;  of  which  knowing  waxeth  in  a  man 
humility,  that  is  the  mother  of  his  health,  and  also 
the  dread  of  God,  the  which  dread,  as  it  is  the 
beginning  of  wisdom,  so  it  is  the  beginning  of  health 
of  man's  soul. 

He  answereth  :  Yea. 

III.  The  Third  Interrogation  shall  be  this  :  Art 
thou  sorry  in  heart  of  all  manner  of  sins  that  thou 
hast  done  against  the  high  Majesty,  and  the  Love  of 
God,  and   the   Goodness  of  God  ;    and   of  all   the 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     25 

goodness  that  thou  hast  not  done,  and  mightest  have 
done  ;  and  of  all  graces  that  thou  hast  slothed^  — not 
only  for  dread  of  death,  or  any  other  pain,  but  rather  ' 
more  for  love  of  God  and  His  righteousness — and  for 
thou  hast  displeased  His  great  goodness  and  kindness ; 
and  for  the  due  order  of  charity,  by  the  which  we  be 
bound  to  love  God  above  all  things  ;  and  of  all 
these  things  thou  askcst  the  forgiveness  of  God  ? 
Desirest  thou  also  in  thine  heart  to  have  very  know- 
ing of  all  thine  offences  and  forgets  that  thou  hast 
done  against  God,  and  to  have  special  repentance  of 
them  all  ? » 

He  answereth  :  Yea. 

IV.  The  Fourth  Interrogation  shall  be  this : 
Purposeth  thou  verily,  and  art  in  full  will,  to  amend 
thee  if  thou  mightest  live  longer  ;  and  never  to  sin 
more,  deadly,  wittingly,  and  with  thy  will  :  and 
rather  than  thou  wouldest  offend  God  deadly  any 
more,  to  leave  and  lose  wilfully  all  earthly  things, 
were  they  never  so  lief  to  thee,  and  also  the  life  of 
thy  body  thereto  ?  And  furthermore  thou  prayest 
God  that  He  give  thee  grace  to  continue  in  this 
purpose  ? 

He  answereth  :  Yea. 

V.  The  Fifth  Interrogation  shall  be  this  :  For- 
givest  thou  fully  in  thine  heart  all  manner  men  that 
ever  have  done  thee  any  manner  harm  or  grievance 
unto  this  time,  either  in  word  or  in  deed,  for  the 

*  i.e.  delayed,  neglected.  *  i.e.  sooner. 

•  Optat  insuper  cor  tuum  illuminari  ad  oblitorum  cognilionem  ut  de 
tit  iptdaliter  valtas  peniltre. 


26  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

love  and  worship  of  Our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  of  Whom 
thou   hopest  of  forgiveness  thyself;    and   askest  also 
thyself  to   have   forgiveness  of  all   [them   thou   hast 
offended  in  any]  manner  wise  ? 
He  answereth  :  Yea. 

VI.  The  Sixth  Interrogation  shall  be  this  :  Wilt 
thou  that  all  manner  things  that  thou  hast  in  any 
manner  wise  misgotten,  be  fully  restored  again, — so 
much  as  thou  mayst,  and  art  bound,  after  the  value 
of  thy  goods  ;  and  rather  leave  and  forsake  all  the 
goods  of  the  world,  if  thou  mayst  not  in  none  other 
wise  ? 

He  answereth  :  Yea. 

VII.  The  Seventh  Interrogation  shall  be  this : 
Believest  thou  fully  that  Christ  died  for  thee,  and 
that  thou  mayst  never  be  saved  but  by  the  mercy  of 
Christ's  passion  ;  and  thankest  thou  God  thereof 
with  all  thine  heart,  as  much  as  thou  mayst  ? 

He  answereth  :  Yea, 

Whoso  may  verily,  of  very  good  conscience  and 
truth,  withouten  any  feigning,  answer  yea  to  the  fore- 
said seven  interrogations,  he  hath  an  evident  argument 
enough  of  health  of  his  soul,  that,  and  he  died  so, 
he  shall  be  of  the  number  of  them  that  shall  be 
saved. 

Whosoever  is  not  asked  of  another  of  these  seven 
interrogations  when  he  is  in  such  peril  of  death — for 
there  be  right  few  that  have  the  cunning  of  this 
craft  of  dying — he  must  remember  himself  in  his 
soul,  and  ask  himself,  and  subtly  feel  and  consider, 
whether  he  be  so  disposed  as  it  is  above  said,  or  no. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     27 

For  without  that  a  man  be  disposed  in  such  wise 
finally,  he  may  not  doubtless  ^  be  saved  everlastingly. 
And  what  man  that  is  disposed  as  is  abovesaid,  let 
him  commend  and  commit  himself,  all  in  fear,  fully 
to  the  passion  of  Christ  ;  and  continually — as  much 
as  he  may,  and  as  his  sickness  will  suffer  him — think 
on  the  passion  of  Christ  ;  for  thereby  all  the  devil's 
temptations  and  guiles  be  most  overcome  and  voided. 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE  FOURTH  CHAPTER  CONTAINETH  AN  INSTRUCTION  :  WITH 
CERTAIN  OBSECRATIONS  '    TO  THEM  THAT  SHALL  DIE 

Furthermore,    forasmuch   as    Saini   Gregory    saith : 
Every  doing  of  Christ  is  our  instruction  and  teach- 
ing ;    therefore  such  things  as  Christ  did  dying  on 
the  cross,  the  same  should  every  man  do  at  his  last 
end,  after  his  cunning  ^  and  power.     And  Christ  did 
five    things  on  the  cross.     He  prayed,  for  He  said 
these  psalms  :   Deus,  Deus  meus,  respice  in  me  ;  and  Ps.  xxiv. 
all  the  psalms  following  unto  that  verse  :  In  manus  '^• 
TUAS,  Domine.     Also  He  cried  on  the  cross,  as  the  ^  •  ^*^ 
apostle  witnesseth.     Also  He  wept  on  the  cross.    Also 
He  committed  His  soul  to  the  Father  on  the  cross. 
Also  wilfully  He  gave  up  the  ghost  on  the  cross. 

First  He  prayed  on  the  cross.  So  a  sick  man, 
that  is  in  point  of  death,  he  should  pray  ;  namely 
in  his  heart,   if  he  may  not  with  his  mouth.     For 

^  i.e.  without  doubt,  certainly. 

2  supplications.  '  knowledge. 


«8  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

Saint  Isidore  saith  :  That  it  is  better  to  pray  still  in 
the  heart,  without  any  sound  of  voice  outward,  than 
to  pray  with  word  alone,  without  devotion  of  heart. 

The  second  was  He  cried.  So  should  every  man 
in  his  dying  cry  strongly  with  the  heart,  not  with 
the  voice.  For  God  taketh  more  heed  of  the  desire 
of  the  heart  than  of  the  crying  of  the  voice.  The 
crying  of  the  heart  to  God  is  nought  else  but  the 
great  desiring  of  man  to  have  forgiveness  of  his  sins, 
and  to  have  everlasting  life. 

The  third  was  He  wept.  With  His  bodily  eyes 
and  with  tears  of  the  heart,  in  token  that  so  should 
every  man  in  His  dying  weep  with  tears  of  his 
heart,  that  is  to  say,  verily  repenting  of  all  his 
misdeeds. 

The  fourth  He  commendeth  His  soul  to  God.  So 
should  every  man  in  his  end,  saying  thus  in  heart 
and  mouth,  if  he  may,  and  (if  not)  else  in  heart : 
Lord  God,  into  Thine  hands  I  commend  my  spirit ; 
for  truly  Thou  boughtest  me  dear. 

The  fifth  was  He  gave  up  wilfully  His  spirit. 
So  should  every  man  in  his  death  ;  that  is  to  say,  he 
should  die  wilfully,  conforming  fully  therein  his  own 
will  to  God's  will,  as  he  is  bound. 

Therefore  as  long  as  he  that  is  in  point  of  death 
may  speak,  and  have  the  use  of  reason  with  him,  let 
him  say  these  prayers  following  : 

ORATIO 

O  Thou  High  Godhead,  and  endless  Good- 
ness, most  merciful  and  glorious  Trinity,  that 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     29 

art  highest  Love  and  Charity  ;  have  mercy  on 
me,  wretched  and  sinful  man,  for  to  Thee  I 
commend  fully  my  soul. 

ORATIO 

My  Lord  God,  most  benign  Father  of 
MERCY,  do  Thy  mercy  to  me  Thy  poor  creature. 
Help  now  Lord  my  needy  and  desolate  soul  in 
her  last  need,  that  hell  hounds  devour  me  not. 
Most  sweetest  and  most  lovely  Lord,  my  Lord 
Jesu  Christ,  God's  own  dear  Son,  for  the  wor- 
ship and  the  virtue  of  Thy  most  blessed  passion, 
admit  and  receive  me  within  the  number  of 
Thy  chosen  people.  My  Saviour  and  my 
Redemptor,  I  yield  all  myself  fully  unto  Thy 
grace  and  mercy,  forsake  me  not  ;  to  Thee 
Lord  I  come,  put  me  not  away.  Lord  Jesu 
Christ,  I  ask  Thy  paradise  and  bliss,  not  for  the 
worthiness  of  my  deserving  that  am  but  dust 
and  ashes  and  a  sinful  wretch,  but  through  the 
virtue  and  effect  of  Thine  holy  passion,  by  the 
which  Thou  vouchest  safe,  and  wouldest  buy 
me,  sinful  wretch,  with  Thy  precious  blood, 
and  bring  me  into  Thy  paradise. 

And  let  him  say  often  also  this  verse  :   Dirupisti 

DOMINE  VINCULA  MEA,  TIBI  SACRIFICABO  HOSTIAM  LAUDIS 

et  nomen  Domini  invocabo.  Lord  Thou  hast  broken 
my  bonds,  and  therefore  I  shall  thank  Thee  with  the 
sacrifice  and  the  oblation  of  worship.  For  this  verse,^ 
as  Cassiodorus  saith,  is  of  great  virtue  that  a  man's  sins  be 


30  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

forgiven  him,  if  it  be  said  thrice  with  good  true  faith  at 

a  man's  last  end. 

ORATIO 

Lord   Jesus  Christ,  for  the    bitterness    that 

Thou  sufferedest  for  me  on  the  cross,  and  most 

in  that  hour  when  Thy  most  blessed  soul  passed 

out  of  Thy  body,  have  mercy  on  my  soul  in  her 

strait  passing. 

Also  afterw.ird,  with  all  the  instance  and  devotion 

that  he  may,  with  heart  and  mouth  let  him  cry  to 

Our  Lady,  Saint  Mary,  that  is  most  speedful,  and  most 

remedious  speed  and  help  of  all  sinful  men   to  God, 

saying  thus  : 

ORATIO 

O  GLORIOUS  Queen  of  Heaven,  Mother  of 
mercy,  and  refuge  of  all  sinful  men  ;  reconcile  me 
to  thy  sweet  Son,  my  Lord  Jesu,  and  pray  for  me 
sinful  wretch,  to  His  great  mercy,  that  for  love 
of  thee,  sweet  Lady,  He  will  forgive  me  my  sins. 

Then  let  him  pray  to  angels,  saying  thus : 

Holy  Angels  of  Heaven,  I  beseech  you  that 

ye  will  assist  to  me  that  shall  now  pass  out  of 

this  world,  and  mightily  deliver  me  and  keep  me 

from  all  mine  enemies,  and  take  my  soul  into 

your  blessed    company  ;    and  namely  thou   my 

good  angel,  that  hast  been  my  continual  keeper, 

ordained  of  God. 

Then  let  him  pray  the  same  wise,  devoutly,  to  all 

the  apostles,  martyrs,  and  confessors,  and  virgins — and 

specially  to  those  saints  which  he  loved  and  worshipped 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     31 

most  specially  in  his  heal — that  they  would  help  him 
then  in  his  last  end  and  most  need.  Afterwards  let 
him  say  thrice,  or  more,  these  words,  or  like  in 
sentence,^  the  which  be  ascribed  unto  Saint  Justin  : 

The  peace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  and 
the  virtue  of  His  passion  ;  and  the  sign  of  the 
holy  cross  ;  and  the  maidenhead  of  Our  Lady, 
Saint  Mary  ;  and  the  blessing  of  all  Saints  ;  and 
the  keeping  of  all  Angels  ;  and  the  suffrages  of 
all  the  chosen  people  of  God  ;  be  between  me 
and  mine  enemies,  visible  and  invisible,  in  this 
hour  of  my  death.     Amen. 

Afterward  let  him  say  this  verse  : 

Largire  clarum  vespere 
Quo  vita  nusquam  decidat, 
Sed  premium  mortis  sacre, 
Perennis  instet  gloria. 

Grant  me  Lord  a  clear  end,  that  my  soul  fall  never 
downwards  ;  but  give  me  everlasting  bliss,  that  is  the 
reward  of  holy  dying. 

And  if  he  that  is  sick  can  not  *  all  these  prayers,  or 
may  not  say  them  for  grievousness  or  sickness,  let  some 
man  that  is  about  him  say  them  before  him,  as  he 
may  clearly  hear  him  say  them,  changing  the  words 
that  ought  to  be  changed  in  his  saying.  And  he  that 
is  dying,  as  long  as  he  hath  use  of  reason,  let  him 
pray  devoutly  within  himself,  with  his  heart  and  his 
desire,  as  he  can  and  may,  and  so  yield  the  ghost  up 
to  God  ;  and  he  shall  be  safe. 

*  meaning,  ^/.f,  knows  not. 


32 


THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 


CHAPTER  V 


[Gratian] 
De  pent- 
ttnlia, 
"  Cum  in- 
firmitaie. ' ' 


THE  FIFTH  CHAPTER  CONTAINETH  AN  INSTRUCTION 
UNTO  THEM  THAT  SHALL  DIE 

But  it  is  greatly  to  be  noted,  and  to  be  taken  heed 
of,  that  right  seldom  (that)  any  man — yea  among 
religious  and  devout  men — dispose  themselves  to 
death  betimes  as  they  ought.  For  every  man 
weeneth  himself  to  live  long,  and  troweth  not  that 
he  shall  die  in  short  time;  and  doubtless  that  cometh 
of  the  devil's  subtle  temptation.  And  often  times 
it  is  seen  openly  that  many  men,  through  such  idle 
hope  and  trust,  have  for-slothed  themselves,^  and 
have  died  intestate,  or  unavised,  or  undisposed,'  sud- 
denly. And  therefore  every  man  that  hath  love  and 
dread  of  God,  and  a  zeal  of  [the  heal  of]  man's 
soul,  let  him  busily  induce  and  warn  every  of  his 
even  christians  that  is  sick,  or  in  any  peril  of  body 
or  of  soul,  that  principally  and  first,  over  all  other 
things,  and  withouten  delays  and  long  tarrj'ings, 
he  diligently  provide  and  ordain  for  the  spiritual 
remedy  and  medicine  of  his  soul. 

For  often  times,  as  a  certain  decretal  saith,  bodily 
sickness  cometh  of  the  sickness  of  the  soul  ;  and 
therefore  the  Pope  in  the  same  decretal  chargeth 
straitly  every  bodily  leech  that  he  give  no  sick  man 
no  bodily  medicine  unto  the  time  that  he  hath 
warned  and  induced  him  to  seek  his  spiritual  leech. 

^  i.e.  lost  themselves  through  sloth.  *  i.e.  unprepared. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     33 

But  this  counsel  is  now  for-slothed  almost  of  all 
men,  and  is  turned  into  the  contrary  ;  for  men 
seek  sooner  and  busier  after  medicines  for  the  body 
than  for  the  soul.  Also  all  our  evils  and  adversities, 
by  righteous  doom  of  God,  cometh  evermore  to  men 
for  sins  ;  as  the  Prophet  witnesseth,  that  saith  thus  : 

NoN    EST    MALUM    IN    CIVITATE,  QUOD  DeUS    NON    FECIT. 

There  is  none  evil  in  the  city,  but  God  do  it. 
Thou  shalt  not  understand  that  God  doeth  the  evil 
of  the  sin,  but  yieldeth  the  punishing  for  sin. 

Therefore  every  sick  man,  and  every  other  man 
that  is  in  any  peril,  should  be  diligently  induced 
and  ^  exhorted  that  he  maketh  himself,  before  all 
other  things,  peace  with  God  ;  receiving  spiritual 
medicines,  that  is  to  say  the  sacraments  of  Holy 
Church  ;  ordaining  and  making  his  testament  ;  and 
lawfully  disposing  for  his  household,  and  other  needs, 
if  he  hath  any  to  dispose  for.  And  there  should  not 
be  given  first  to  no  man  too  much  hope  of  bodily 
heal.  But  the  contrary  thereof  is  now  often  times 
done  of  many  men,  into  great  peril  of  souls  ;  and 
namely  of  them  that  actually  and  openly  be  drawing 
and  in  point  hastily  to  die,  for  none  of  them  will 
hear  nothing  of  death. 

And  so  as  the  great  Clerk,  the  Chancellor  of  Paris 
saith  :  Often  times  by  such  a  [vain  and  a]  false 
cheering  and  comforting,  and  feigned  behoting  * 
of  bodily  heal,  and  trusting  thereupon,  men  run 
and  fall  into  certain  damnation  everlastingly.  And 
therefore  a  sick  man  should  be  counselled  and  ex- 
*  promising. 


34  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

horted  to  provide  and  procure  himself  his  soul's 
heal  by  very  contrition  and  confession — and  if  it  be 
expedient  for  him,  that  shall  greatly  avail  to  his 
bodily  heal  ;  and  so  he  shall  be  most  quiet  and 
sure. 

And  forasmuch,  witnessing  Saint  Gregory^  as  a 
man  hath  seldom  very  contrition,  and  as  Sainf  Jtut'tn 
saith  also,  in  the  fourth  Book  of  Sentences,  the 
twentieth  distinction,  and  other  doctors  also  :  Re- 
pentance that  is  deferred,  and  had  in  a  man's  last 
end,  unneth  ^  is  very  repentance  or  penance  suf- 
ficient to  everlasting  heal.  And  specially  in  them  that 
all  their  time  before  neither  the  commandments  of 
God  nor  their  voluntary  avows  kept  not  effectually 
nor  truly,  but  only  feignedly  and  to  the  outward 
seeming. 

Therefore  to  every  such  man  that  is  in  such  case 
and  is  come  to  his  last  end,  is  to  be  counselled  busily 
that  he  labour,  with  reason  of  his  mind  after  his 
power,  to  have  ordinate  and  very  repentance  ;  that  is 
to  mean — notwithstanding  the  sorrow  and  grievance 
of  sickness,  and  dread  that  he  hath  of  hasty  death — 
that  he  use  reason  as  much  as  he  may,  and  enforce 
himself  to  have,  wilfully,  full  displeasing  of  all  sin,  for 
the  due  end  and  perfect  intent  that  is  for  God  ;  and 
withstand  his  evil  natural  inclining  to  sin,  though  he 
might  live  longer,  and  also  the  delectations  of  his  sins 
before  ;  and  labour  as  much  as  he  may  to  have  a  very 
displeasure  of  them,  though  it  be  never  so  short.  And 
lest  he  fall  into  despair  tell  him,  and  arm  him  with 
^  seldom. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     35 

such  things  as  be  said  above,  in  the  second  part,  of 
temptation  of  Desperation.  Exhort  him  also  that 
he  be  strong  in  his  soul  against  other  temptations 
that  be  put  and  told,  also  mightily  and  manly 
withstand  them  all ;  for  he  may  not  be  compelled  by 
the  devil  to  consent  to  none  of  them  all.  Let  him 
also  be  charged  ^  and  counselled  that  he  die  as  a  very 
true  Christian  man,  and  in  full  belief. 

Also  it  is  to  be  considered  whether  he  be  involved 
with  any  censures  of  Holy  Church  ;  and  if  he  be  let 
him  be  taught  that  he  submit  himself  with  all  his 
might  to  the  ordinance  of  Holy  Church,  that  he  may 
be  assoiled.  Also,  if  he  that  shall  die  have  long  time 
and  space  to  be-think  himself,  and  be  not  taken  with 
hasty  death,  then  may  be  read  afore  him,  of  them 
that  be  about  him,  devout  histories  and  devout  prayers, 
in  the  which  he  most  delighted  in  when  he  was  in 
heal  ;  or  rehearse  to  him  the  commandments  of  God, 
that  he  may  be-think  him  the  more  profoundly  if  he 
may  find  in  himself  that  he  hath  negligently  tres- 
passed against  them. 

And  if  the  sick  man  hath  lost  his  speech,  and  yet  he 
hath  full  knowledge  of  the  interrogations  that  be  made 
to  him,  or  the  prayers  that  be  rehearsed  before  him, 
then  only  with  some  outer  sign,  or  with  consent  of 
heart,  let  him  answer  thereto.  Nevertheless  it  is 
greatly  to  be  charged  and  hasted  *  that  the  interroga- 
tions be  made  to  him  or  he  lose  his  speech  ;  for  if  his 
answers  be  not  likely,  and  seemeth  not  in  all  sides  to 
be  sufficient  to  full  heal  and  perpetual  remedy  of  his 

^  The  other  MSS.  have  '  monished.*  ^  /  ,^  urged. 


36  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

soul,  then  must  he  put  thereto  remedy  and  counsel  in 
the  best  manner  that  it  may  be  done. 

Then  there  shall  be  told  unto  him  plainly  the 
peril  that  he  should  fall  in,  though  he  should  and 
would  be  greatly  a-feared  thereof.  It  is  better  and 
more  rightful  that  he  be  compunctious  and  repentant, 
with  wholesome  fear  and  dread,  and  so  be  saved,  than 
that  he  be  damned  with  flattering  and  false  dissimula- 
tion ;  for  it  is  too  inconvenient  ^  and  contrary  to 
Christian  religion,  and  too  devil-like,  that  the  peril 
of  death  and  of  soul — for  any  vain  dread  of  a  man, 
lest  he  were  anything  distroubled  thereby — shall  be 
hid  from  any  Christian  man  or  woman  that  should 
die.  But  Isaye  the  Prophet  did  the  contrary  ;  for  when 
the  King  Ezcchiel  lay  sick  and  upxjn  the  point  of 
death,  he  glosed  *  him  not,  nor  used  no  dissimulation 
unto  him,  but  plainly  and  wholesomely  a-ghasted  him,* 
saying  that  he  should  die  ;  and  yet  nevertheless  he  died 
not  at  that  time.  And  Saint  Gregory  also  wholesomely 
a-ghasted  the  monk  that  was  approprietarj',*  as  it  is 
read  in  the  fourth  Book  of  his  Dialogues. 

Also  present  to  the  sick  the  image  of  the  crucifix  ; 
the  which  should  evermore  be  about  sick  men,  or  else 
the  image  of  our  Lady,  or  of  some  other  saint  the 
which  he  loved  or  worshipped  in  his  heal.  Also  let 
there  be  holy  water  about  the  sick  ;  and  spring  •  often 
times  upon  him,  and  the  others  that  be  about  him, 
that  fiends  may  be  voided  from  him. 

^  inconsistent  '  flattered.  ^  i.e.  frightened  him. 

*  i.e.  who  had  appropriated  what  belonged  to  another. 

•  sprinkle. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     37 

If  all  things  abovesaid  may  not  be  done,  for  hasti- 
ness ^  and  shortness  of  time,  then  put  forth  prayers  ; 
and  namely  such  as  be  directed  to  our  Saviour, 
specially  Our  Lord  Jesu  Christ.  When  man  is  in 
point  of  death,  and  hasteth  fast  to  his  end,  then  should 
no  carnal  friends,  nor  wife,  nor  children,  nor  riches, 
nor  no  temporal  goods,  be  reduced  *  unto  his  mind, 
neither  be  communed  of  before  him  ;  only  as  much 
as  spiritual  health  and  profit  of  the  sick  man  asketh 
and  requireth. 

In  this  matter  that  is  of  our  last  and  most  great 
need,  all  manner  of  points  and  sentences  ^  thereof, 
and  adverbs  also  that  be  put  thereto,  should  most 
subtly  and  diligently  be  charged  and  considered  of 
every  man  ;  *  forasmuch  as  there  shall  no  man  be  re- 
warded for  his  words  alone,  but  for  his  deeds  also 
joined  and  according  to  his  words.  As  it  is  said  in  the 
book  cleped  Compendium  of  the  Truth  of  Divinity, 
the  second  book,  the  tenth  chapter  :  That  what  man 
that  lusteth,  and  will  gladly  die  well  and  surely  and 
meritorily,  without  peril,  he  must  take  heed  visibly, 
and  study  and  learn  diligently  this  craft  of  dying,  and 
the  dispositions  thereof  abovesaid,  while  he  is  in  heal  ; 
and  not  abide  till  the  death  entereth  in  him. 

For  sooth,  dear  sister  or  brother,  I  tell  thee  sooth, 
believe  me  thereof,  that  when  death  or  great  sickness 

^  i.f.  suddenness         */'.;.  brought  back.         *  meanings. 

*  Porto  in  materia  ista  .  .  ,  penderenlur  singula  puncta  etium 
tenteticie  quiliuj  aitjecta  tunt  adveriia,  eo  quod  non  in  verbis  ted 
adverbis  meremur  {i.e.  it  is  not  only  what  we  do,  but  how 
we  do  it). 


38  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

falleth  upon  thee,  devotion  passeth  out  from  thee  ; 
and  the  more  near  they  take  thee  and  grip  thee,  the 
further  fleeth  devotion  from  thee.  Sicker  this  is  sooth, 
I  know  it  by  experience  ;  for  in  sooth  thou  shalt  have 
little  devotion  if  thou  be  sore  touched  with  sickness.* 
Therefore  if  thou  wilt  not  be  deceived  or  err — if  thou 
wilt  be  sure — do  busily  what  thou  mayst  while  thou 
art  in  heal,  and  hast  the  use  and  freedom  of  thy  five 
wits  and  reason  well  disposed,  and  while  thou  mayst 
be  master  of  thyself  and  of  thy  deeds. 

O  Lord  God  how  many,  yea  without  number, 
(that)  have  abiden  so  to  their  last  end  have  for- 
slothed  and  deceived  themselves  everlastingly.  Take 
heed,  brother  or  sister,  and  beware,  if  ye  list,  lest  it 
happen  thee  in  the  same  wise.  But  let  no  man 
wonder,  nor  think  that  it  is  inconvenient  that  so  great 
charge  and  diligence  and  wise  disposition  and  provi- 
dence, and  busy  exhortation  should  be  had  and 
ministered  to  them  that  be  in  point  of  death,  and  in 
their  last  end — as  it  is  abovesaid — for  they  be  in  such 
peril  and  in  so  great  need  at  that  time,  that,  and  it 
were  possible,  all  a  city  should  come  together  with  all 
haste  to  a  man  that  is  nigh  to  the  death  or  dying  ;  as 
the  manner  is  in  some  religious,*  in  which  it  is 
ordained  that  when  a  sick  man  is  nigh  the  death, 
then  every  of  the  brothers  shall,  when  they  hear  the 
table  *  smitten — what  hour  that  ever  it  be,  and  where 
that  ever  they  be — all  things  being  left,  hastily  come 

1  Only  in  this  MS.  (Bod.  423). 

^i.t.  religious  houses. 

s  A  flat  board  which  was  struck  instead  of  a  bell. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     39 

to  him  that  is  a-dying.  Therefore  it  is  read  that  re- 
ligious people  and  women — for  the  honesty  of  estate 
— should  not  run  but  to  a  man  that  is  a-dying  and 
for  fire.* 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE  SIXTH  CHAPTER  CONTAINETH  PRAYERS  THAT  SHOULD 
BE  SAID  UPON  THEM  THAT  BE  A-DYING  OF  SOME 
MAN  THAT  IS  ABOUT  THEM 

Last  of  all  it  is  to  be  known  that  the  prayers  that 
follow  may  be  conveniently  said  upon  a  sick  man  that 
laboureth  to  his  end.  And  if  it  is  a  religious  person, 
then  when  the  covent  is  gathered  together  with  smit- 
ing of  the  table,  as  the  manner  is,  then  shall  be  said 
first  the  litany,  with  the  psalms  and  orisons  that  be 
used  therewith.  Afterward,  if  he  live  yet,  let  some 
man  that  is  about  him  say  the  orisons  that  follow  * 
hereafter,  as  the  time  and  opportunity  will  suffer. 
And  they  may  be  often  rehearsed  again  to  excite  the 
devotion  of  the  sick  man — if  he  have  reason  and 
understanding  with  him. 

But  nevertheless  this  ought  not  to  be  done  of 
necessity,  as  though  he  might  not  be  saved  but  if  it 
were  done  ;  but  for  the  profit  and  devotion  of  the 
sick  that  laboureth  to  his  endward  it  may,  and  it  is 
well  done,  that  it  be  done  so.  But  among  seculars 
that  be  sick  let  these  prayers  be  said  ;  as  the  devotion 
and  disposition,  and  the  profit  of  them  and  others 
*MS.  kn=ignfm.  2  MS.  suen. 


40  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

that  be  about  them  ask  and  require,  and  as  the  time 
will  suffice. 

But  alas  there  be  full  few,  not  only  among  seculars 
but  also  in  diverse  religious  that  have  the  cunning 
of  this  craft,  and  will  be  nigh  and  assist  to  them  that 
be  in  point  of  death  and  departing  out  of  this  world  ; 
asking  them,  and  exhorting  and  informing  and  pray- 
ing for  them,  as  it  is  abovesaid — namely  when  they 
that  be  in  dying  would  not,  or  hope  not,  to  die  yet, 
and  so  the  sick  men's  souls  stand  in  great  peril. 

In  these  prayers,  if  thou  say  them  thyself,  turn 
the  words  that  should  be  turned,  as  thou  shouldest 
do  to  say  them  thyself;  for  I  write  them  as  another 
should  say  them  for  thee.^ 

For  that  love  that  made  Thee  to  be  wounded 
and  die  for  the  heal  and  salvation  of  mankind, 
that  were  most  worthy  and  most  delicate,*  Son  ' 
of  God,  of  Thy  blessed  Father  of  Heaven,  and 
for  our  sake  made  Man  ;  sweet  Lord  Jesu,  full 
of  mercy,  forgive  Thy  servant  that  he  hath  tres- 
passed in  thought,  word,  and  deed,  in  all  his 
affections,  desires,  motions,  strengths,  and  wits 
of  his  soul  and  his  body  ;  and  in  very  remission 
of  them  all  forgive  thy  servant  that  he  hath 
trespassed,  give  him  that  most  sufficient  amend- 
ment, by  the  which  Thou  washest  away  all  the 
sins  of  the  world,  and  in  supplicion  •  of  all 
his  negligences,  and  put  to  him  that  holy  con- 

1  Only  in  this  MS.  '  i.e.  lovely. 

• 'loue,*  probably  a  mis-writing  for  'sone'  since 
it  =fiJiitm.  *  i  e.  in  supply  of. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     41 

versation  that  Thou  haddest  from  the  hour  of 
Thy  conception,  unto  the  hour  of  Thy  death  ; 
and  furthermore  the  fruit  of  all  good  deeds,  the 
which  have  pleased  Thee,  and  shall  please  Thee, 
in  all  Thy  chosen  people  from  the  beginning  of 
the  world  unto  the  end  thereof.  Sweet  Lord 
Jesu,  which  livest  and  reignest  with  Thy  Father 
and  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  one  very  God 
withouten  end.     Amen. 

For  the  union  of  the  most  fervent  love  that 
stirred  and  made  Thee — life  of  all  things  that  is 
living — to  be  incarnate  of  our  Lady,  and  with 
great  anguish  of  Thy  spirit  to  die  for  charity  and 
the  love  of  us ;  we  cry  to  the  root  of  Thy  most 
benign  heart  ^  that  Thou  forgive  the  soul  of  Thy 
servant  all  his  sins  ;  and  with  Thy  most  holy 
conversation  and  most  worthy  merit  of  Thy 
passion  fulfil  all  his  negligences  and  omissions, 
and  make  him  to  feel  by  experience  the  most 
superabundant  greatness  of  Thy  mercies,  and  us 
all  ;  and  specially  this  person,  our  brother,  the 
which  Thou  hast  disposed  hastily  •  to  be  called 
before  Thy  gloriousMajesty — in  the  most  pleasant 
manner  to  Thee,  and  most  profitable  to  him  and 
us  all.  Make  him  to  be  presented  to  You  with 
sweet  patience,  very  repentance,  and  full  remis- 
sion ;  with  rightful  faith,  stable  hope,  and  perfect 
charity  ;  that  he  may  die  blessedly,  in  perfect 
state,  between  Thy  most  sweetest  clipping  '  and 

*  ad  medullam  ben  •gnitsimi  cor  Jit  tui. 

•  i.e.  hast  made  ready  suddenly.  '  embracing. 


42  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

most  sweetest   kissing,  in  to  Thine   everlasting 
worship  and  praising.     Amen. 

ORATIO 

Into  the  hands  of  Thine  endless  and  un- 
quenchable mercy,  holy  Father,  rightful  *  and 
most  beloved  Father,  we  commend  the  spirit 
of  our  brother,  Thy  servant,  after  the  greatness 
of  love  that  the  holy  soul  of  Thy  Blessed  Son 
commended  Himself  to  Thee  on  the  cross ; 
praying  entirely  •  that  for  thilk  inestimable 
charity  that  Thine  Holy  Godhead  drew  fully 
into  Thyself  that  blessed  soul  of  Thy  Son, 
that  now  in  his  last  hour  Thou  receive  sweetly 
the  spirit  of  our  brother,  Thy  servant,  in  the 
same  love.     Amen. 

Saint  Michael,  the  Archangel  of  our  Lord 
Jesu  Christ,  help  us  at  *  our  high  Judge.  O 
thou  most  worthy  giant  and  protector,  that 
mayst  never  be  overcome,  be  nigh  to  our 
brother,  thy  servant,  labouring  now  sore  in  his 
end  ;  and  defend  him  mightily  from  the  dragon 
of  hell,  and  from  all  manner  guile  of  wicked 
spirit.  Furthermore  we  pray  thee,  that  art  so 
clear  *  and  so  worthy  a  minister  of  God,  that 
in  the  last  hour  of  the  life  of  our  brother 
thou  wilt  receive  the  soul  of  him  easily  and 
benignly  into   thine    holy '  bosom  ;    and  bring 

^  i.e.  righteous.      ^  sincerely.       •  with.       *  pr^clarum, 
*  '  whoTecome,'  but  the  other  MSS.  hare  <  holy.' 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     43 

her  into  (the)  place  of  refreshing  and  of  peace, 
and  of  rest.     Amen. 

Ever  clean  and  blessed  maiden  Mary,  singu- 
Lir  help  and  succour  in  every  anguish  and 
necessity,  help  us  sweetly,  and  show  to  our 
brother,  thy  servant,  thy  glorious  visage  now 
in  his  last  end.  And  void  ^  all  his  enemies 
from  him,  through  the  virtue  of  thy  dear 
beloved  Son,  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and  of  the 
holy  Cross  ;  and  deliver  him  from  all  manner 
disease  of  body  and  soul,  that  he  may  thank 
and  worship  God  withouten  end.     Amen. 

My  most  sweet  Redemptor,  most  merciful 
Jesu,  and  most  benign  Lord,  for  that  sorrowful 
voice  that  Thou  haddest  in  Thy  manhood 
when  Thou  shouldest  die  for  us,  and  were  so 
consumed  with  sorrows  and  travails  of  Thy 
passion  that  Thou  crydest  *  Thee  forsaken  of 
Thy  Father ;  be  not  far  from  Thy  brother, 
Your  servant,  but  give  him  Thine  help,  of  Thy 
mercy,  in  the  hour  of  his  death  ;  and  have  mind 
of  the  grievous  affliction  and  pain  of  his  soul, 
the  which  in  his  last  hour  of  passing,  for  fail- 
ing of  his  spirits,  hath  no  might  to  call  upon 
Thee  for  help  :  but  by  the  victory  of  the  cross, 
and  by  virtue  of  Thine  holy  passion  and  Thine 
amorous  death,  think  upon  her  thoughts  of 
peace  and  not  of  affliction,  but  of  mercy  and 
comfort  ;  and  deliver  her  fully  from  all  manner 
1  i.e.  expel.  ^  /,,.  proclaimed  by  loud  crying. 


44  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

of  anguishes.  With  the  same  hands  that  Thou 
didst  suffer  to  be  nailed  on  the  cross  for  her  sake 
with  sharp  nails,  good  Jesu  and  sweet  Father, 
deliver  her  from  the  torments  ordained  for  her, 
and  bring  her  to  everlasting  bliss  and  rest,  with 
a  voice  of  exaltation  and  knowlcdging  of  Thy 
mercy.     Amen. 

Most  mkrciful  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  God's 
Son,  for  the  union  of  the  recommendation 
that  Thou  commendest  Thine  holy  soul  to 
Thine  heavenly  Father,  dying  on  the  cross, 
we  commend  to  Thine  innumerable  ^  pity  the 
soul  of  our  brother,  Thy  servant,  praying  Thy 
most  merciful  goodness  that  for  all  the  worship 
and  merit  of  Thy  most  holy  soul,  by  the  which 
all  souls  be  saved  and  delivered  from  the  debt 
of  death.  Thou  have  mercy  upon  the  soul  of 
our  dear  brother,  Thy  servant  ;  delivering  her 
mercifully  from  all  miseries  and  pains,  and  for 
the  love  and  mediation  of  Thy  sweet  Mother, 
bring  her  to  contemplation  of  the  joy  of  Thy 
most  sweet  and  merciful  -  sight  everlastingly. 
Amen. 

Merciful  and  benign  God,  That  for  the 
mickelness  of  Thy  mercy  docst  away  the  sins  of 
them  that  be  verily  repentant,  and  voidest  the 
blames  of  sins  that  be  passed  and  done  before 
through  grace  of  Thy  forgiveness,  we  beseech 
that  Thou  look  mercifully  upon  our  brother, 
1  i.e.  incapable  of  being  reckoned  or  uttered  =  iitej^a6i/h. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     45 

Thy  servant,  and  graciously  hear  him  asking, 
with  all  confession  of  his  heart,  remission  of  all 
his  sins.  Renew  in  him,  most  merciful  Father, 
all  thing  that  is  corrupt  in  him  by  bodily 
frailty,  or  defouled  with  the  fraud  of  the  devil, 
and  gather  him  to  the  unity  of  the  body  of 
Holy  Church,  and  make  him  a  member  of  Holy 
Redemption.  Have  mercy.  Lord,  upon  his 
wailings,  have  mercy  upon  his  tears,  and  admit 
to  the  sacrament  of  Thy  reconciliation  him 
that  hath  no  trust  but  upon  Thy  mercy  ;  by 
Our  Lord  Jesu  Christ.     Amen, 

Dear  Brother,  I  commend  thee  to  Almighty 
God,  and  commit  thee  to  Him,  Whose  creature 
thou  art,  that  when  thy  manhood  hath  paid 
his  debt  by  the  mean  of  death,  that  thou  turn 
again  to  God  thy  creature.  That  made  thee 
of  the  slime  of  the  earth.  When  thy  soul 
passeth  out  of  thy  body,  glorious  companies  of 
angels  come  against  thee  :  the  victorious  host, 
worthy  judges,  and  senators  of  the  holy  apostles 
meet  with  thee  :  the  fair,  white,  shining  com- 
pany of  holy  confessors,  with  the  victorious 
number  of  glorious  martyrs,  come  about  thee  : 
the  joyful  company  of  holy  virgins  receive  thee  : 
and  the  worthy  fellowship  of  holy  patriarchs 
open  to  thee  the  place  of  rest  and  joy,  and 
deem  thee  to  be  among  them  that  they  be 
among,  everlastingly. 

Know  thou  never  that  (which)   is  horrible  in 


46  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

darkness,  that  grlnteth  ^  in  flaming  fire.  They 
that  punish  in  torments  give  place  to  thee,  and 
grieve  thee  not.  They  that  follow  Sathanas  with 
all  his  servants,  in  the  coming  against  thee,  be 
a-ghast  at  the  presence  of  holy  angels,  and  flee 
into  darkness  of  everlasting  night  ;  into  the  great 
tribulous  sea  of  hell.  Our  lord  ariseth  and 
His  enemies  be  dispartled  •  about  ;  and  flee, 
Ps.  Ixviii.  they  that  hate  Him,   from  His   visage.      Fail 

s.  they    as    the    smoke    faileth,    and    as    the    wax 

melteth  against  '  the  fire,  so  perish  sinners  from 
the  face  of  God  ;  and  let  rightful  men  eat  and 
rejoice  in  the  sight  of  God.*  All  the  contrary 
legions  and  ministers  of  Sathanas  be  not  hardy 
to  let  thy  journey.  Christ  deliver  thee  from 
torment,  that  vouchsafed  to  die  for  thee. 
Christ,  God's  Son,  bring  thee  to  the  merry  joys 
of  Paradise,  and  the  very  Shepherd  know  thee 
among  His  sheep.  He  assoil  thee  from  all  thy 
sins,  and  put  thee  on  His  right  side  ;  in  the 
sort  •  of  His  chosen  children,  that  thou  may  see 
thy  Redemptor  visage  to  visage,  and  prescnti- 
ally  •  assisting  to  Him,  see  with  (thine)  eyes  the 
blessed  everlasting  truth  openly  ;  and  among  the 
blessed  company  of  the  children  of  God  have 
thou,  and  rejoice  in  the  joy  of  the  contempla- 
tion of  God  without  end.     Amen. 

>  i.e.  grindeth  liii  teeth.  *  sctttered. 

*  i.e.  exposed  to. 

*  tt  juti  etulentur  et  exutlent  in  conipec'um  Pei,      *  lot, 

*  i.e.  as  being  present. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     47 

ORATIO 

Go  Christian  Soul  out  of  this  world,  in  the 
Name  of  the  Almighty  Father  that  made  thee 
of  nought  ;  in  the  Name  of  Jesu  Christ,  His  Son, 
that  suffered  His  passion  for  thee  ;  and  in  the 
Name  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  was  infounded  ^ 
into  thee.  Holy  angels.  Thrones  and  Domina- 
tions, Princehoods,  Protestates  and  Virtues, 
Cherubim  and  Seraphim,  meet  with  thee. 
Patriarchs  and  prophets,  apostles  and  evangelists, 
martyrs,  confessors,  monks  and  hermits,  maidens 
and  widows,  children  and  innocents,  help  thee. 
The  prayers  of  all  priests  and  deacons,  and  all 
the  degrees  of  Holy  Church,  help  thee  ;  that  in 
peace  be  thy  place,  and  thy  dwelling  in  heavenly 
Jerusalem  everlastingly  ;  by  the  mediation  of 
Our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  that  is  Mediator  between 
God  and  man.     Amen. 

EXPLICIT  TRACTATUS  UTILISSIMUS 
DE  ARTE  MORIENDl 


1  shed. 


NOTE  ON  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

TiiiRE  are  three  manuscripts  of  this  treatise  in  the  Bodleian 
Library;  the  Douce  MS.  322,  the  Rawlinsun  MS.  C.  894,  and 
the  Bodleian  MS.  4x3.'  This  transcription  has  been  taken 
from  the  last  of  these,  since  it  appears  to  be  the  earliest.^  It 
is  to  be  found  in  a  large  brown  volume  containing  five  differ- 
ent manuscripts  bound  together  by  Sir  I'homas  Bodlcy.  Some 
are  written  on  paper,  and  some  on  parchment.  Our  book  is 
the  fourth  in  order,  written  on  parchment  in  a  clear  and 
careful  hand,  and  dating  probably  from  the  middle  of  the 
fifteenth  century.  The  headings  to  the  chapters  are  in 
red,  the  capitals  are  in  blue  and  red,  and  on  the  first  page 
a  border  is  outlined  which  has  never  been  finished. 

Like  so  many  other  English  writings  of  this  date  Tht 
Craft  of  Dying  hi%  been  ascribed  to  Richard  Rolle.  It  may 
possibly  have  been  translated  by  him  into  English,  but  the 
author  of  the  older  Latin  original  is  unknown.  It  has  been 
suggested  that  it  was  written  by  Jean  le  Charlier  de  Gerson, 
the  famous  Chancellor  of  Paris — known  to  us  in  connection 
with  De  Imitaiione  Christi,  which  some  have  attributed  to 
him.  Gerson  certainly  compiled  a  long  treatise  in  Latin 
and  French  which  he  named  the  Opyiculum  Tiipariitum  de 
Prietpttt  Decalogi,  de  Confettione,  et  de  Arte  Moricndi.*  But 
this  book  is  very  much  shorter  than  the  Engli-h  rersion 
of  The  Croft  of  Dying,  and  there  is  nothing  in  it  which  corre- 
sponds to  the  first  two  chapters  of  the  Craft;  moreover,  the 

^  1  have  collated  these  three  MSS.,  and  have  drawn  atten- 
tion to  differences  of  any  interest  in  the  footnotes. 

2  Ft  is  not  mentioned  by  Dr  Horstman.  Besides  the  Douce 
and  Rawl.  MSS.  his  list  contains:  C.C.C.  Oxfd.  220,  Harl. 
1706,  Reg.  17  C.  xviii.,  Addit.  10596,  Ff.  v.  45;  cf  Tht 
Library  of  Engtith  Wtilers,  vol.  ii.  p.  406. 

•  Published  at  Cologne  c.  1470. 
48 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     49 

references  in  Chapters  III.  and  V.  of  the  Craft  to  "  the 
noble"  and  "great  clerk,  the  Chancellor  of  Paris,"  ^  must 
be  to  Gerson.* 

Indeed  the  whole  question  of  the  authorship  and  the  various 
versions  of  the  treatises  which  are  in  the  catalogues  generally 
included  under  the  title  Ars  Mor'undi  is  one  of  some  difficulty 
and  obscurity.  I'here  seem  to  be  at  the  least  three  distinct 
books  :  the  Latin  treatise,  of  which  this  is  a  translation  ;  the 
very  popular  block-books  of  the  Art  Moritndl,  of  which  many 
copies  exist ;  and  a  rarer  French  book,  L'Art  de  bien  Vi-ure  et 
bien  Mourlre,  which  seems  to  be  related  to  the  block-books. 

The  Latin  treatise  is  found  under  three  titles :  De  Arte 
Moriendi ;  Tractatus  de  Arte  MorUndi ;  and  Speculum  Artit 
Morlendl.  Many  printed  versions  exist,  the  oldest  of  which 
is  ascribed  to  Mathieu  de  Cracovie,  Bishop  of  Worms,  the 
date  given  being  1470  or  1472.  Another  edition  was  printed 
at  Venice  in  1478,  and  called:  Tractatui  brevit  ac  vaUe  utilis  de 
arte  et  tcientia  bene  moriendi.  it  seems  to  be  a  compendium  of 
the  older  version,  and  was  attributed  to  Dom  Caprianica, 
Cardinal  de  Fermo.  Most  of  the  later  editions  were  printed 
at  Paris,  and  contain  additional  prayers  and  admonitions, 
and  in  some  cases  verses,  which  are  not  found  in  any  of  the 
manuscripts  nor  in  the  earlier  printed  versions,  and  which  I 
have  not  included  here  since  they  are  of  no  special  interest. 
When  it  has  been  necessary  to  refer  to  the  Latin  original  I 
have  had  recourse  to  a  beautiful  manuscript  in  Magdalen 
College,  Oxford,  from  which  I  have  made  an  occasional 
quotation  in  a  footnote. 

I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  trace  the  French  versions  from 
which  Caxton  telis  us  he  has  translated  his  tract  "abridged 
of  the  art  to  learn  well  to  die."  L'Art  de  bien  Vi-ore  et  bien 
Mourire  is  quite  another  book.  It  was  published  by  Verard 
in  Paris  in  1493,  ^"^  translated  into  very  bad  English  in 
1503,  this  translation  being  also  issued  by  Verard.  There 
are  copies  of  both  these  in  the  Bodleian  ;  and  written  on  the 
cover  of  the  English  translation  is  a  note  stating  that  <*  Thi» 

»*/.  pp.  24,  33. 

^  cf.  mj  note  on  Caxton's  Abridgment,  p.  88. 
D 


50  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

was  reproduced  by  Wynken  de  Worde,  '  The  craft  to  live  and 
dye  well, — made  parfyte  in  our  moder  tongue  ;  the  21st  day 
of  January  1505.'" 

There  is  a  copy  of  this  reproduction  of  de  Worde's  in  the 
John  Rylands  Library  at  Manchester,  the  only  one  as  far 
as  is  known.  Through  the  kind  courtesy  of  the  librarian 
there,  who  has  sent  me  the  transcription  of  a  short  passage, 
1  have  been  able  to  compare  them,  and  find  that  de  Worde's 
reproduction  is  an  improvement,  both  in  spelling  and  English, 
upon  the  translation  of  1505. 

VArt  de  hien  Vivre  et  bitn  Mourire  seems  to  have  more  in 
common  with  Gerson's  Opuiculum  Tripartitum,  for  both 
contain  discourses  on  the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  Ten  Command- 
ments, the  Creed,  the  Sacraments,  etc.  Mr  Bullen  states 
that  it  also  comprises  <<a  complete  translation  into  French 
of  the  letterpress  of  the  block-book,  accompanied  by  copies  of 
all  the  wood  engravings,  "i 

The  block-books  of  the  Ars  Moriendi  are  very  numerous 
and  interesting,  and  need  really  a  volume  to  themselves. 
They  seem  to  have  been  most  popular  in  England,  Germany 
and  France,  though  we  find  copies  in  almost  every  European 
language.  They  generally  contain  eleven  illustrations 
depicting  the  five  great  temptations  which  beset  the  soul  at 
death.  These  temptations  are  embodied  in  the  forms  of 
hideous  demons,  which  are  repelled  by  angels  and  saints, 
and  by  Our  Lady,  who  is  the  great  interceder  and  last  re- 
source of  the  Dying  Creature. 

Our  frontispiece  is  taken  from  the  famous  block-book  in 
the  British  Museum,  which  was  published  at  Cologne  c  1450. 
The  artist  probably  belonged  to  the  Lower  Rhenish  School. 
It  represents  the  Good  Angel  coming  to  strengthen  and 
console  the  dying  man  when  tempted  by  the  devil  of 
Avarice.  His  Guardian  Angel  stands  in  front  of  him  with 
his  hand  raised  in  exhortation,  bearing  a  scroll  with  the 
woids  Non  jii  auarus.  At  the  head  of  the  bed  stands  Our 
Lady,  beside  her  Blessed  Son  outstretched  upon  the  cross. 

'  See  his  Introduction  to  the  "  Art  Moriendi"  pub,  by  the 
Holbein  Society,  1851,  p.  21. 


BOOK  OF  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING     51 

On  the  other  side  of  the  crucifix  is  a  figure  which  may 
represent  the  Good  Shepherd,  as  close  beside  him  there  art- 
three  sheep,  and  he  holds  a  staf!°  in  his  hand.  Behind  this 
figure  stand  three  women,  and  the  head  of  a  man  is  seen  at 
the  back.  It  is  difficult  to  conjecture  what  they  are  meant 
to  typify,  unless  those  "other  saints  which  the  sick  man 
may  most  have  loved  and  honoured  in  his  life,"  for  they  all 
look  compassionately  on  him.  Below  is  another  angel,  half 
hidden  by  a  cloth  which  he  holds  in  lus  hands,  apparently 
trying  to  shield  the  figures  of  a  man  and  woman  from  the 
sick  man's  gaze.  On  a  scroll  encircling  his  head  are  the 
words :  "  AV  inUnde  amicis.  Do  not  concern  thyself  with  thy 
friends."  Mr  Bullen  suggests  that  both  may  possibly  be 
"disappointed  expectants  of  sharing  the  dying  man's 
wealth  ;  or  else  the  female  figure  representing  his  wife,  and 
the  male  figure  that  of  his  physician."^  But  the  words  ol 
the  scroll  lead  us  to  suppose  they  symbolise  the  relations  of 
the  sick  man,  whom  he  has  been  exhorted  to  forget  at  the 
hour  of  his  death,  that  he  may  give  his  mind  more  intently  to 
the  things  which  are  not  seen.  In  the  other  illustrations  of 
the  block-book  hideous  demons  are  depicted  howling  round 
the  bed,  or  fleeing  under  it,  but  here  (and  partly  this  is  the 
reason  for  its  choice)  only  one  impotent  and  angry  devil  is 
seen,  ejaculating  in  despair  Quidfaclam? 

In  conclusion  I  can  only  say  how  sadly  I  am  conscious  of 
the  inadequacy  of  these  notes;  but  the  longer  one  works 
among  manuscripts  and  old  reprints  the  more  there  seems 
left  to  be  discovered,  and  my  hope  is  that  I  may  at  least  have 
cleared  the  ground  so  as  to  help  another  on  the  same  quest. 


*  Introduction  to  the  "  An  Moriendi,"  p.  i6. 


THE  ART  AND  CRAFT 
TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE 


HERE  BEGINNETH  A  LITTLE  TREATISE 
SHORT  AND  ABRIDGED:  SPEAKING 
OF  THE  ART  AND  CRAFT  TO  KNOW 
WELL  TO  DIE 

When  it  is  so  that  what  a  man  maketh  or  doeth,  it  is 
made  to  come  to  some  end,  and  if  the  thing  be  good 
and  well  made,  it  must  needs  come  to  good  end  ; 
then  by  better  and  greater  reason  every  man  ought 
to  intend  in  such  wise  to  live  in  this  world,  in  keeping 
the  commandments  of  God,  that  he  may  come  to  a 
good  end  ;  and  that  out  of  this  world — full  of 
wretchedness  and  tribulations — he  may  go  to  heaven, 
unto  God  and  His  saints,  into  joy  perdurable. 

But  now  in  these  days  few  there  be  that  advise  ^ 
them  of  their  end  so  much  as  they  ought  to  do, 
though  they  be  sick,  ancient  or  old  ;  and  to  them 
cometh  this  folly  by  a  foolish  hope  that  every  man, 
in  what  estate  he  be,  hath  an  hope  to  live  long.  And 
therefore  hath  this  present  treatise  been  made ; 
composed  in  short  terms  for  to  teach  every  man  well 
to  die  whilst  he  hath  understanding,  health  and 
reason,  to  the  end  that  it  is  needful  to  him  to  be 
the  better  warned,  informed  and  taught. 

^  i.e.  consider,  ponder  on. 

55 


56  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

The  which  treatise  is  divided  into  six  parts  :  of 
which  the  first  treateth  of  the  praising  of  death,  and 
how  one  ought  to  die  gladly. 

The  second  treateth  of  the  temptations  that  they 
have  which  be  or  lie  in  the  article  ^  of  death. 

The  third  treatise  is  of  the  questions  that  ought 
[to]  be  made  to  them  then. 

The  fourth  containeth  a  manner  of  instructions 
and  of  teaching  that  ought  to  be  made  to  them. 

The  fifth  of  the  remembrance  that  God  hath  won 
and  suffered  for  us. 

The  sixth  and  last  treateth  of  certain  orisons  and 
devout  prayers  that  they  ought  to  say  if  they  may  ; 
or  else  ought  to  be  said  before  them,  by  some  that 
be  assistant  or  present. 


CHAPTER  I 

OF  THE  ALLOWING  OR  PRAISING  OF  THE  DEATH  : 
AND    HOW  ONE  GLADLY  OUGHT  FOR  TO  DIE 

As  then  the  bodily  death  is  the  most  fearful  thing  of 
all  other  things,  so  yet  is  the  death  of  the  soul  of  as 
much  more  terrible  and  reproachable,"  as  the  soul  is 
more  noble  and  more  precious  than  the  body.  And 
the  death  of  sinners  is  right  cursed  and  evil  ;  but  the 
death  of  just  and  true  people  is  precious  before  God  ; 

*  i.e.  the  very  moment. 

*  i.f,  deserving  of  reproach,  censurable. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    57 

for  the  dead  men  be  well  happy  that  die  in  our 
Lord. 

To  this  purpose  saith  Flato  :  That  continual 
remembrance  of  the  death  is  sovereign  wisdom. 
Also  for  truth  the  bodily  death  of  good  people  alway 
is  none  other  thing  but  the  issue,  or  going  out,  of 
prison  and  of  exile,  and  discharging  of  a  right  griev- 
ous burden,  that  is  to  wit  of  the  body  ;  finishing  of 
all  things,  and  end  of  all  maladies  and  sicknesses,  and 
also  of  all  other  strifes  mortal.  It  is  the  voiding  of 
this  present  wretchedness  ;  it  is  consumption  of  all 
evils,  and  the  breaking  of  all  the  bonds  of  this  cursed 
and  evil  world  ;  it  is  the  payment  of  the  debt  of 
nature,  return  into  the  country,  and  entry  into  joy  and 
glory.  Therefore  saith  the  wise  man  :  That  the  day 
of  the  death  is  better  than  the  day  of  the  birth.  But 
this  word  ought  to  be  understood  for  them  that  be 
good  only. 

And  therefore  every  good  Christian  man,  and  also 
every  sinner  verily  contrite,  ought  not  to  be  sorrow- 
ful nor  trouble  him  of  the  temporal  or  bodily  death, 
nor  he  ought  not  to  fear  nor  doubt  ^  it,  for  what- 
somever  matter  or  cause  be  laid  to  him,  but  he  ought 
to  suffer  and  receive  it  patiently  and  in  thanks  and 
gladly  ;  in  conforming  himself  plainly,*  and  in 
committing  wholly  his  proper  *  will  to  God's  will, 
like  as  (he)  is  bounden  to  him. 

For  well  to  die  is  gladly  to  die  :  and  to  con  die  is 
to  have  in  all  times  his  heart  ready  and  apparelled  to  * 

*  dread.  *  i.t,  yielding  himself  fully. 

•  i.e.  own.  *  prepared  for. 


58  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

things  heavenly  and  supernal.  And  that  at  every 
hour,  when  the  death  shall  come  to  the  person,  that 
he  be  found  ready  ;  and  that  he  receive  it  without 
any  contradiction,  but  also  joyfully,  as  he  should 
abide  the  coming  of  his  good  friend.  To  this 
purpose  saith  the  Philosopher  :  That  natural  reason 
well  counselled  judgeth  that  the  good  death  ought 
better  to  be  chosen  than  the  evil  life,  and  that  one 
ought  sooner  to  choose  the  bodily  death  than  do 
anything  against  the  weal  of  virtue. 

Thus  then  it  appeareth  of  the  praising  of  the 
death  ;  and  that  every  good  person  and  religious 
ought  to  desire  departing  of  the  body  and  soul  for  to 
be  with  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and  for  to  leave  this 
present  world  for  the  better  to  live  in  the  world  to 


CHAPTER   II 

THE  TEMPTATIONS  THAT  THE  PERSON  HATH 
AT  THE  HOUR  OF  THE  DEATH 

It  ought  to  be  known  and  be  believed  certainly  that 
they  that  be  in  the  article  of  death  have  many 
grievous  and  strong  temptations  ;  verily  such  that  in 
their  life  they  never  had  like.  And  of  these  tempta- 
tions there  be  five  principal. 

I,  The  First  is  of  the  Faith  ;  for  because  that  faith 
is  foundation  of  all  health,  and  that  without  faith 
it  is  impossible  to  please  God.  Therefore  it  is  that 
then  in  this  point  the  devil  with  all  his  might  en- 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    59 

forceth  ^  him  to  trouble  the  person  from  his  faith 
wholly,  or  at  the  least  to  make  him  to  go  out  of  the 
way  from  his  faith  ;  and  laboureth  then  much 
strongly  for  to  deceive  him  by  some  errors,  super- 
stitions, or  heresy.  And  because  every  good  Christian 
person  is  bound  to  believe,  not  only  in  the  articles  of 
the  faith  Catholic,  but  all  the  holy  scripture  ;  and 
ought  to  be  subjugate  and  submit  himself  to  all  the 
statutes  of  the  church  of  Rome,  and  firmly  to  abide 
and  die  in  the  same  creance  and  belief.  For  else,  if 
he  should  begin  to  err  in  any  of  the  things  above- 
said,  then  incontinent  *  he  should  go  out  of  the  faith 
of  life  and  way  of  health. 

Always  [it]  ought  to  be  known  certainly  that  in 
this  temptation  of  the  faith — or  in  other  things 
following — the  devil  may  not  overcome  the  person 
as  long  as  he  shall  have  the  usage  of  his  free  will  well 
disposed,  if  by  his  own  agreement  he  will  not 
consent  to  the  devil.  And  therefore  it  is  good,  and  a 
thing  much  profitable,  that  about  them  that  travail  in 
the  article  of  death  be  repeated  with  an  high  voice 
the  Credo  and  symbol  of  the  faith,  to  the  end  that 
by  that  means  the  person  dying  be  the  more  hearted 
and  encouraged  in  the  constancy  of  the  faith.  To 
the  end  also  that  the  devils,  which  have  horror  to 
hear  it,  be  put  aback  and  driven  away.  [So]  cer- 
tainly [was]  the  faith  of  the  true  ancient  men,  as 
sometime  were  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob  ;  also  of 
some  paynims  and  gentiles  as  were  Job,  Raab,  Ruth, 
Achior,  and  other  semblable.  And  also  they  of  the 
^  striveth.  "  straightway. 


6o    -  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

apostles  and  of  the  innumerable  martyrs,  confessors 
and  virgins.  The  faith  of  such  people  ought  much 
to  comfort  *  the  sick  man  to  the  constancy  and  stead- 
fastness of  the  faith.  For  by  faith  all  they  of  time 
past,  and  of  this  present  time,  have  pleased  God  ; 
and  it  is  impossible  to  please  God  without  faith. 
For  faith  may  all,  and  very  faith  getteth  all  that  it 
requireth. 

II.  The  Second  Temptation  is  against  Hope,  by 
Despair.  For  a  person  ought  to  have  all  hope  and 
confidence  in  God.  And  it  happeth  then,  when 
a  person  being  sick  in  his  body  is  tormented  with 
great  pain  and  sorrows,  that  the  devil  enforceth  to 
bring  to  him  sorrow  upon  sorrow,  in  bringing  before 
his  remembrance  all  his  sins,  by  all  the  ways  that  he 
may — at  least  them  that  he  never  confessed  him  of — 
t;o  the  end  that  by  that  means  he  draw  him  into 
desperation.  Upon  this  purpose  saith  Innocent :  That 
every  Christian  person — be  he  good  or  evil — before 
that  his  soul  issueth  out  of  his  body  seeth  our  Lord 
Jesu  Christ  set  in  the  cross.  That  is  to  wit  :  the  evil 
to  their  confusion,  to  the  end  that  they  have  shame 
and  displeasure  that  they  have  not  gotten  in  their  life 
the  fruit  of  the  Redemption  ;  and  the  good  to  their 
honour  and  pleasure. 

Natheless  none  ought  to  have  despair  in  no  wise, 
how  much  felon  and  evil  he  hath  been.  Though 
that  he  had  commiscd  as  many  murders  and  thefts 
as  there  be  drops  of  water  and  small  gravel  in  the  sea, 
yet  were  it  so  that  of  them  he  had  never  done 
*  i.e.  strengthen. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    6i 

penance  nor  confessed  them,  as  long  as  the  patience 
of  our  Lord  holdeth  him  in  this  mortal  life,  and  that 
he  have  power  and  might  to  repent  him  ; — notwith- 
standing that  then  by  force  of  malady  and  sickness 
he  may  not  confess  him.  For  contrition  only,  within 
forth,  may  suffice  in  such  a  case.  For  God  despiseth 
never  a  contrite  heart  and  humble  ;  and  also  the  pity 
and  mercy  of  God  is  much  more  than  any  iniquity 
or  wickedness. 

And  therefore  the  sin  and  crime  of  desperation  is 
to  him  that  only  by  which  he  may  not  be  saved  nor 
guarished  ;  ^  for  by  this  sin  God,  which  is  right 
piteous,  is  overmuch  offended,  and  the  other  sins  be 
so  much  more  aggrieved  ;  *  and  also  the  pain  eternal 
is  by  so  much  more  augmented  into  the  infinite. 
The  evils  and  sins  commiscd  and  passed  grieve  not 
so  much  but  despair  displeaseth  more.  And  there- 
fore none  ought  to  despair  of  the  mercy  of  God, 
though  that  he  only  had  commised  all  the  sins  of  the 
world  ;  though  yet  he  suppose  [himself]  to  be  of  the 
number  of  [those]  that  be  damned. 

In  truth  the  disposition  of  the  body  of  our  Lord  Jesu 
Christ  hanging  on  the  cross  ought  much  to  induce  a 
sick  person,  paining  to  the  death,  to  have  very  hope  and 
confidence  in  God.  For  He  hath  the  head  inclined 
and  bowed  to  kiss  us  ;  the  arms  stretched  abroad  for 
to  embrace  us  ;  the  hands  pierced  and  opened  for  to 
give  us  ;  the  side  open  for  to  love  us  ;  and  all  His 
body  stretched  for  to  give  Himself  all  to  us.     Hope 

'  i.e.  that  one  sin  of  which  he  cannot  be  saved  or  cured. 
*  aggravated. 


^ 


y 


62  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

then  is  a  virtue  much  lowable  ^  and  of  great  merit 
before  God. 

To  this  purpose  come  many  examples :  as  of  Saint 
Peter,  which  renyed  and  forsook  Jesu  Christ  ;  of 
Saint  Paul  which  persecuted  Holy  Church  ;  of  Saint 
Matthew  and  of  Zacchaeus,  which  were  publicans  ; 
of  Mary  Magdalene  the  sinner  ;  of  the  woman  that 
was  taken  in  adultery ;  of  the  thief  that  hanged 
on  the  right  side  of  Jesu  Christ  ;  of  Saint  Mary 
Egyptian.  And  of  many  more  other,  which  were 
great  sinners  and  horrible,  which  alway  set  all  their 
hope  in  God  and  were  saved. 

III.  The  Third  Temptation  that  the  devil  maketh 
to  them  that  die  is  by  Impatience  ;  that  is  against 
Charity.  For  by  charity  we  be  holden  to  love  God 
above  all  things.  Now  is  it  thus  that  to  them  that 
die  cometh  right  great  sorrow  and  pain  of  heart  and  of 
body,  be  it  that  the  death  come  naturally,  or  that  it 
come  by  any  other  evil  accident.  For  by  pain  and 
sorrow  many  there  be  that  [have]  been  impatient  and 
grutching,  and  die  in  such  wise  as  they  seem  mad,  or 
out  of  their  wit,  as  it  appeareth  oft.  Wherefore  it  is 
certain  that  such  people  be  out  of  very  love  and 
charity,  and  that  they  love  not  God  sufficiently.  And 
therefore  it  is  necessary  to  every  man  that  will  die, 
that  in  what  sickness  be  it,  short  or  long,  that  he 
murmur  nor  grutch  not,  but  suffer  it  patiently.  For 
we  suffer  by  good  right  all  the  evils  that  come  to  us, 
and  yet  be  not  the  passions  of  this  world  condign  nor 
worthy  to  the  glory  to  come.  This  is  then  a  thing 
'  i.t.  to  be  praised. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELD  TO  DIE    63 

much  unjust  if  of  the  just  passions  we  murmur  or 
grutch  ;  for  like  as  the  soul  is  possessed  in  patience, 
and  by  murmurs  the  soul  is  lost  and  damned.  Ought 
not  then  our  Lord  thus  [to]  enter  into  His  glory  : 
and  know  ye  that  the  infirmity  before  the  death  is 
like  as  a  purgatory,  so  that  it  be  suiFered  like  as  it 
appertaineth,  that  is  to  say  patiently,  gladly,  and 
agreeably.  And  it  cometh  by  divine  dispensation  that 
to  the  longest  vice  and  sin  is  given  the  longest 
malady  ;  and  that  God  mercifully  sendeth  temporal 
tarrying,  to  the  end  that  he  go  not  to  eternal  pain. 

It  appeareth  then  that  all  maladies  and  sicknesses 
of  the  body,  whatsoever  they  be,  ought  by  reason  to 
be  suffered  without  grutching ;  for  he  that  well 
loveth,  to  him  is  nothing  impossible. 

IV.  The  Fourth  Temptation  of  them  that  die  is 
the  Complacence  or  pleasing  of  himself ;  and  that  is 
a  spiritual  pride  by  the  which  the  devil  assaileth  most 
them  that  be  devout.  And  it  happeth  when  the 
devil  hath  not  mowe,^  nor  can  not  induce  the  man 
to  go  out  of  the  faith,  nor  to  make  him  fall  into 
desperation  or  into  impatience,  that  then  he  assaulted 
him  by  complacence,  or  pleasing  of  himself;  to  him 
presenting  in  his  heart  such  things  :  O  how  thou  art 
firm  and  steadfast  in  the  faith  !  O  how  thou  art  sure 
in  hope  !  O  how  thou  art  strong  and  patient  !  O 
how  thou  hast  done  many  good  deeds  !  or  such 
things  semblable,  for  to  put  him  in  vainglory.  But 
against  this  let  none  give  to  himself  no  manner  prais- 
ing, nor  avaunt  him  ;  nor  none  glorify  himself  of  his 
^  i.e.  hath  not  power,  or  might. 


64  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

good  deeds,  nor  presume  nothing  of  himself,  nor 
not  attribute  himself  to  do  nothing  well  ;  for  this 
complacence  is  vainglory,  and  it  may  be  so  great  that 
by  it  a  man  might  be  damned. 

A  man  nigh  his  death  ought  to  be  well  advised 
when  by  such  pride  he  feels  himself  tempted,  that 
then  he  humble  and  meek  himself  so  much  the  more  ; 
that  he  withdraw  him  in  thinking  [on]  his  wretched- 
ness and  his  sins.  For  none  is  certain  if  he  be  digne 
or  worthy  to  have  deserved  the  love  of  God,  or  the 
hate  of  God.  Natheless  none  ought  to  despair  ;  but 
right  always  to  address  his  heart  to  God  by  good 
hope,  in  thinking  and  considering  the  mercy  of  God 
to  be  above  all  his  works. 

V.  The  Fifth  Temptation  that  most  troubleth  the 
secular  and  worldly  men  is  the  over  great  occupation 
of  outward  things  and  temporal  :  as  toward  his  wife, 
his  children  and  his  friends  carnal  ;  toward  his 
riches  or  toward  other  things  which  he  hath  most 
loved  in  his  life.  And  therefore  whomsoever  will 
well  and  surely  die,  he  ought  to  set  simply  and  all 
from  him  all  outward  things  and  temporal,  and  ought 
all  to  commit  to  God  fully.  And  if  he  so  do,  in 
suffering  patiently  the  pain  of  death  he  satisfieth  for 
all  his  venial  sins  ;  and,  what  more  is,  he  bringeth 
something  for  to  satisfy  for  the  deadly  sins.  But  it 
happeth  not  oft  that  any  be  found — be  he  secular  or 
regular — that  hopeth  not  but  to  escape  from  death  ; 
and  always  this  foolish  hope  is  a  thing  right  perilous 
and  much  disordered  *  in  every  Christian  man,  and 
*  i.e.  disorderly  or  unruly. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    65 

that  oft  Cometh  by  instinction  ^  of  the  devil  ;  the 
which  may  not  surmount  the  man  in  none  of  the 
said  temptations,  nor  in  none  other  whatsomever  they 
be,  but  if  the  man,  having  the  usage  of  reason,  will 
by  his  own  agreement  consent  to  him.  For  our 
enemy  is  so  feeble  that  he  may  not  overcome  but  him 
that  will  be  vanquished  ;  and  God  is  so  good  and 
just  that  He  shall  not  suffer  us  to  be  tempted  above 
that  which  we  may  not  withstand  ;  but  He  shall  do 
to  us  aid  and  profit  with  the  temptation,  to  the  end 
that  we  may  sustain  it. 

And  every  man  ought  to  know  that  the  victory  of 
temptations  cometh  alway  by  humility  and  meekness  ; 
for  they  that  have  not  in  them  the  wind  of  pride 
fall  never  into  the  furnace.  And  therefore  every 
sinner  oughfr  wholly  to  meek  himself  under  the 
mighty  hand  of  God,  to  the  end  that  by  the  help 
of  our  Lord  he  may  obtain  victory  in  all  temptations, 
in  ■  all  sicknesses,  and  in  all  tribulations  of  pain  and 
of  sorrow,  unto  the  death  inclusively. 


CHAPTER  III 

OF  THE   DEMANDS  AND  QUESTIONS  THAT  OUGHT 
TO  BE  MADE  TO  THE  SICK  PERSON 

Then  ought  to  be  made  askings  and  demands  of  them 

that  be  in   the  article  of  death,  as  long  as  they  have 

the  usage  of  reason  and  of  speech  ;  to  the  end  that  if 

^  instigation.  2  except. 


66  THE  CRArr  OF  DYING 

they  be  less  or  worse  disposed  than  it  appertaineth  ;  ^ 
and  that  they  be  by  that  moyen  •  the  better  informed 
and  comforted.  After  [the  saying  of]  Saint  Anselm 
these  manners  of  demands  ought  to  be  said  thus,  as 
here  followeth  : 

Thou,  brother  or  sister,  (in  naming  the 
name)  art  thou  joyful  that -thou  diest  in  the 
faith  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  ?  And  he  or 
she  ought  to  answer  yea. 

Repentest  thee  of  that  (or  such  thing) 
whereto  thou  wert  inclined  ?     Answer  :  Yea, 

Hast  thou  will  to  amend  thee  if  thou  haddest 
space  to  live  ?     Answer  :  Yea. 

Believest  thou  that  thou  mayst  not  be  saved 
but  by  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  and 
by  His  passion  ?     Answer  :  Yea. 

Yield  to  Him  thankings  with  all  thine  heart  whiles 
that  thy  soul  is  in  thee,  and  constitute  and  set  all  thy 
trust  in  His  death  that  thou  abidest  now  presently,' 
and  have  no  trust  in  any  other  thing.  Give  thyselt 
over,  cover  thee  all  and  wrap  thee  in  this  death  ;  and 
if  God  will  judge  thee,  say  thus  to  Him  : 

Lord,  I  put  Thy  death  between  Thy  judgment 
and  me  ;  other  wise  I  will  not  debate  nor  strive 
against  Thee.  I  offer  Thee  the  merits  of  Thy  right 
worthy  passion,  by  the  merit  that  I  ought  to  have 
gotten — which  I  have  nothing  done,  and  woe  is  me 

^  i.t,  is  befitting  or  proper.  •  mean*. 

'  i.e.  without  delay,  immediately. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    S-j 

therefore  now  ;  and  [I]  recommend  at  this  time  my 
^irit  into  Thy  hands. 

These  demands  and  questions  beforesaid  ought  to 
be  said,  as  well  to  religious  as  to  seculars,  to  the  end 
that  in  the  pain  of  death  they  be  the  better  informed 
of  their  estate.  And  if  the  time  suffer  it,  men  ought 
yet  to  say  this  that  followeth  : 

Believest  thou  all  the  principal  articles  of 
the  faith  of  Holy  Church,  and  all  the  Holy 
Scripture  in  all  things  ;  and  the  exposition  of 
the  catholic  and  all  holy  doctors,  of  our 
Mother,  Holy  Church  ?     Answer  :  Yea. 

Despisest  thou  and  reprovest  all  heresies, 
errors  and  superstitions,  which  be  reproved  of 
Holy  Church  ?     He  ought  to  answer  :  Yea. 

Knowledgest  thou  that  oft,  and  in  many 
manners,  thou  hast  right  grievously  offended  thy 
Maker  ?     Answer  :  Yea. 

As  saith  ^aint  Bernard  there  is  none  saved  without 
(to  have)  knowledge  of  himself;  for  of  this  know- 
ledge groweth  humility  which  is  mother  of  health. 

Yet  ought  to  be  demanded  : 

Brother  or  sister,  sorrowest  thou  for  all  thy 
sins  which  thou  hast  commised  against  the 
majesty,  the  love,  the  goodness  of  God  ;  and  of 
the  good  deeds  that  thou  hast  not  done  ;  and 
of  the  graces  of  God  of  which  thou  hast  been 
negligent  ?     He  ought  to  answer  :  Yea. 

Thou  oughtest  not  only  to  sorrow  for  doubt 
of  the  death  which  thou  attendest,  or  for  any 


68  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

pain,  but  for  the  love  of  God  or  of  justice  ; 
and  thou  requirest  pardon  with  all  thy  heart. 
Answer  :  Yea. 

Desirest  thou  also  that  thy  heart  may  be 
meeked  to  the  knowledge  of  the  defaults  of 
which  thou  art  not  remembered  presently,^  to 
the  end  that  thou  mayst  duly  repent  them  ? 
He  ought  to  answer  :  Yea. 

Purposest  thou  veritably  to  amend  thee,  if 
thou  mightest  live  and  be  whole,  and  that  thou 
wouldest  never  sin  deadly  in  earnest ;  and  haddest 
liever  to  lose  the  best  thing  that  thou  lovcst — 
yea  the  bodily  life — before  thou  wouldest  offend 
thy  Maker  ;  and  to  pray  God  with  good  heart 
that  He  will  give  thee  grace  for  to  continue  in 
this  purpose  ?     Answer  :  Yea. 

Forgivest  and  pardonest  thou  with  good  heart, 
for  the  love  of  God,  all  that  have  been  tres- 
passed to  thee  in  word  or  in  deed  r  He  ought 
to  answer  :  Yea. 

Requirest  •  thou  also  for  the  love  of  God,  of 
whom  thou  hopest  to  receive  forgiveness,  that 
that  thou  hast  trespassed  ever  to  any  other,  [of] 
that  thou  mayst  be  quit  and  forgiven  ?  Answer  : 
Yea. 

Wilt  thou  the  things  that  thou  hast  taken  and 
holden  unduly  be  by  thee  restored  wholly,  like 
as  thou  art  bounden,  and  after  the  value  of 
thy  faculty,"  unto  the  renunciation  of  all  thy 

*  now.  •  requestejt  or  desirest. 

*  resources  or  possessions. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    69 

goods,    if  otherwise    thou    mightest    not    make 
satisfaction  ?     He  ought  to  answer  :  Yea. 

Believest  thou  that  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  be 
dead  for  thee  ;  and  that  otherwise  thou  mightest 
not  be  saved,  but  by  the  merit  of  His  precious 
passion  ;  and  thankest  Him  therefore  with  all 
thy  heart  ?     Answer  :  Yea. 

In  truth  whosomever  shall  mowe  ^  affirmatively 
to  answer  these  askings  beforcsaid,  with  good  con- 
science and  very  faith  without  feigning,  he  shall  have 
evident  sign  and  argument  of  health  ;  and  (that)  he 
shall  be  of  the  number  of  them  that  thall  be  saved,  if 
he  die  in  this  point.* 

And  if  there  be  none  to  demand  him  he  ought  to 
return  to  himself  and  to  demand  himself,  in  consider- 
ing the  most  subtly  that  he  shall  con  mowe  '  if  he  be 
disposed  like  as  is  said  ;  for  without  this  disposition 
may  no  man  by  any  manner  be  saved.  And  whom- 
soever shall  feel  himself  thus  well  disposed,  he  ought 
to  commend  him  all  to  the  passion  of  our  Lord  Jesu 
Christ  ;  and  to  put  himself  all  in  remembrance  and 
in  meditation  of  the  same,  as  he  shall  mowe,  and  that 
as  his  infirmity  shall  suffer  him.  And  by  this  moyen 
be  surmounted  and  overcome  all  the  temptations  of 
the  devil,  and  his  right  subtle  awaits  and  fallacies.* 

*  i.e.  be  able.  •  this  moment  of  time. 

•  be  able  to  have  power  to.         *  i.e.  snares  and  delusions. 


70  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 


CHAPTER  IV 
[an  instruction  with  certain  obsecrations 

TO  THEM  THAT  SHALL  DIe] 

Saint  Gregoty  saith  that  all  the  action  and  work 
of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  ought  to  be  our  instruction^ 
^nd  therefore  every  good  Christian  person  disposed 
well  to  die  ought  to  do,  after  his  manner  and  possi- 
bility, in  his  last  end  like  as  did  our  Lord  when  He 
died  on  the  cross. 

Now  it  is  so  that  our  Lord  did  five  things  princi- 
pally hanging  on  the  cross.  He  adored  and  prayed. 
He  wept,  He  cried.  He  commended  His  soul  to  God,. 
and  He  yielded  to  Him  His  spirit.  Thus  semblably 
every  sick  man,  constituted  in  the  article  of  ^  death, 
ought  to  adore  and  pray  ; — at  least  in  his  heart,  if  he 
may  not  speak.  For  as  saith  Saint  Isidore  :  It  availeth 
more  to  pray  with  heart,  in  silence  and  without  speak- 
ing, than  by  words  only  without  taking  heed  of  the 
thought. 

Secondly  he  ought  to  weep,  not  with  his  bodily 
eyes  only,  but  with  the  tears  of  his  heart,  in  repenting 
verily  himself. 

Thirdly  he  ought  strongly  to  cry  from  the  depths 
of  his  heart,  and  not  by  voice.  For  God  beholdeth 
more  the  desire  of  the  heart  than  the  sound  of  the 
voice.     Also  to  cry  with  the  heart  is  none  other  thing,. 

^  placed  at  the  point  of. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE     71 

but  strongly  to  desire  remission  of  his  sins  and  to  come 
to  everlasting  life. 

Fourthly  he  ought  to  commend  his  soul  to  God^ 
saying  :  In  manus  tuas,  etc. 

Fifthly  he  ought  to  yield  his  spirit  to  God  volun- 
tarily, in  conforming  him  all  to  the  will  of  God  like 
as  it  appertaineth,  and  in  saying,  if  he  may,  the  obse- 
crations that  follow  : 

'  To  THE  Trinity 

Sovereign  Deity,  right  great  Bounty,  ex- 
cellent and  glorious  Trinity,  Sovereign  Dilec- 
tion,^  Love,  and  Charity,  have  mercy  on  me, 
sinner,  for  I  commend  to  Thee  my  spirit,  my 
God,  Father  right  piteous.  Father  of  mercy 
give  Thy  mercy  to  this  poor  creature.  Help  me 
now  in  my  last  necessity.  Lord,  succour  my 
poor  soul,  helpless  now  and  desolate,  to  the  end 
'--  that  it  be  not  devoured  by  the  hounds  infernal. 
My  right  sweet  and  best  beloved.  Lord  Jesu 
Christ,  Son  of  the  living  God,  for  the  love  and 
;  ;■  •  honour,  and  by  the  virtue  of  Thy  precious 
passion,  command  Thou,  I  Thee  pray,  that  I  be 
now  received  among  the  number  of  Thy  chosen 
blessed  souls.  My  Saviour  and  my  Redeemer, 
I  yield  me  all  to  Thee  ;  refuse  me  not.  I 
come  to  Thee  ;  put  me  not  from  Thee. 

Lord  Jesu  Christ,  I  ask  of  Thee  heaven  ; 
nothing  for  the  love  of  my  merits,  for  I  am 

*  i.e.  spiritual  love.    . 


72  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

nothing  but  dust  and  ashes,  and  a  sinner  right 
miserable  ;  but  I  demand  of  Thee,  in  the  virtue 
and  in  the  value  of  Thy  right  holy  passion,  by 
the  which  Thou  hast  willed  to  redeem  me  which 
am  a  right  miserable  sinner  with  Thy  much 
precious  blood.  Lord  Jcsu  Christ,  Son  of  the 
living  God,  I  Thee  supplicate  meekly,  by  that 
bitterness  of  death  which  for  me  Thou  sufferedst 
in  the  tree  of  the  cross,  and  in  especial  at  that 
hour  when  Thy  right  holy  soul  issued  out  of 
Thy  precious  holy  body,  that  Thou  have  mercy 
on  my  most  wretched  soul  at  his  departing. 

Also,  if  he  may,  he  ought  to  say  three  times  the 
Ps.cKv.i6.  verse  that  foUoweth.     Dirupisti  domine  vincula  mea, 

TIBI  SACRIFICABO  HOSTIAM   LAUDIS,  ET  NOMEN   DOMINI   IN- 

vocABo.  That  is  to  say  :  Lord  Thou  hast  broken  my 
bonds  ;  I  shall  sacrifice  to  Thee  an  host  of  praising, 
and  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord.  For  Saint 
Isidore  saith  that  this  verse  is  believed  to  be  of  so 
much  virtue  that  if  a  man  by  very  confession  saith 
[it]  in  the  end  of  his  life,  his  sins  be  to  him  forgiven. 
After  these  things  the  sick  man  ought,  if  he  may, 
much  entirely,  with  heart  and  mouth,  the  best  wise 
that  he  shall  mowe,  require  and  call  unto  his  help  the 
right  glorious  Virgin  Mary,  which  is  the  very  mean  * 
of  all  sinners,  and  she  that  addresseth  •  them  in  their 
necessity  ;  saying  to  her  in  this  manner  : 

Queen    of    Heaven,  Mother  of  mercy,  and 
Refuge  of  sinners,  I   meekly  beseech  thee  that 

1  mediator.  • />.  redresieth. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    73 

thou  wilt  reconcile  me  to  thy  dear  Son,  in  call- 
ing His  worthy  goodness  for  me,  unworthy 
sinner,  that  for  the  love  of  thee  He  will  pardon 
and  forgive  me  my  sins,  and  bring  me  into  His 
glory. 

He  ought  afterward,  if  he  may,  call  on  the  holy 
Angels,  in  saying  : 

Ye  Spirits  of  Heaven,  Angels  much  glorious, 
I  beseech  you  that  ye  will  be  assistant  ^  with  me 
that  now  beginneth  to  depart,  and  that  ye  deliver 
me  mightily  from  the  awaits  and  fallacies  of  mine 
adversaries  ;  and  that  it  please  you  to  receive  my 
soul  into  your  company.  The  principal,  my 
leader  and  my  good  angel,  which  by  our  Lord 
art  deputed  to  be  my  warden  and  keeper,  I  pray 
and  require  thee  that  thou  now  aid  and  help  me. 

And  after  he  ought  to  require  the  apostles,  the 
martyrs,  the  confessors  and  the  virgins,  and  in  especial 
all  the  saints  that  he  most  loved  ever. 

After  all  these  things  he  ought  to  say  three  times, 
if  he  may,  these  words  that  follow  ;  which  is  said  to 
be  made  and  composed  by  Saitii  Justin  : 

The  Peace  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  ;  the 
virtue  of  His  holy  passion  ;  the  sign  of  the  holy 
cross  ;  the  entireness  of  the  humility  of  the 
Virgin  Mary  ;  the  blessing  of  all  the  saints  ;  the 
keeping  of  the  angels ;  and  the  suffrages  of  all 
the  chosen  of  God  ;  be  between  me  and  all 
^  i.e.  present. 


74  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

mine  enemies,  visible  and  invisible,  in  the  hour 
,•  -    of  my  death.     Amen. 

And  if  the  sick  man  or  woman  may,  nor  can 
not,  say  the  orisons  and  prayers  beforesaid,  some  of 
the  assistants  ^  ought  to  say  them  before  him  with  a 
loud  voice,  in  changing  the  words  there  as  they  ought 
to  be  changed.  And  the  sick  person,  as  far  as  he 
hath  the  usage  of  reason,  ought  to  hearken  and  pray 
with  his  heart,  and  desire  as  much  as  he  shall  mowe  ;. 
and  so  praying,  render  and  yield  his  soul  to  God 
and  without  fail  he  shall  be  saved. 


CHAPTER  V 

[an  instruction  unto  them  that  shall  die] 

Yet  ought  it  to  be  known  that  every  person  having 
the  love  and  dread  of  God  in  himself,  and  also  the 
cure  of  souls,  ought  much  busily  and  diligently  induce 
and  admonish  the  sick  person  constituted  in  peril  of 
body  or  of  soul,  that  first,  hastily  and  principally,  he 
purvey  for  him,  without  any  delay,  for  remedy  of 
medicine  ghostly  and  spiritual.  For  it  happeth  oft 
that  the  infirmity  and  sickness  of  the  body  taketh  his 
beginning  of*  the  languor  of  the  soul.  And  therefore 
the  pope  commanded  straitly  to  all  leeches  and 
physicians  of  the  body  that  to  no  manner  sickness 
they  minister  nor  give  bodily  medicine  till  that  they 
have  admonished  and  warned  them  to  get  and  take 
*  i.t.  bystanders.  '  i.e.  from. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    75 

first  the  spiritual  medicine  ;  that  is,  to  wit,  in  receiv- 
ing devoutly  the  sacraments  of  Holy  Church,  in 
ordaining  his  testament,  and  in  disposing  lawfully  his 
house  and  other  goods  and  needs.  And  there  ought 
not  to  be  given  to  any  sick  person  over  much  hope 
of  recovering  his  bodily  health.  Howbeit  oft  times 
many  do  the  contrary,  in  prejudice  of  their  souls, 
yea,  to  them  otherwhile  ^  that  draw  to  their  death. 
And  it  happeth  oft  that  they  will  not  hear  of  death, 
and  so  by  such  false  comfort,  and  by  such  faint  trust 
of  health,  the  sick  person  falleth  into  damnation. 
And  therefore  the  sick  person  ought  to  be  exhorted 
and  desired  that  by  very  contrition  and  by  very 
confession  he  procure  the  health  of  his  soul. 

Also  that  same  may  much  avail  for  the  health  of 
the  body,  if  it  be  to  him  expedient,  and  he  shall  be 
better  appeased  and  more  assured.  For  it  seldom 
happeth,  saith  Saini  Gregory,  that  very  contrition  be 
in  the  end,  and  that  the  penance  that  the  sick  men 
or  women  have  then  be  very  and  sufficient  to  their 
health  ;  and  they  in  especial, — as  it  is  known  in  all 
the  time  of  their  life  they  never  kept  the  command- 
ments of  God,  or  their  vows  voluntarily,  but  only 
faintly  and  by  semblance. 

Yet  ought  every  man  to  induce  him  that  is  in  the 
article  of  death  that,  after  the  possibility,  and  by 
reason  of  thought,  he  do  pain  and  labour  to  have 
very  and  ordered  patience  ;  that  is  to  say,  that, 
notwithstanding  [the]  sorrow  and  dread  which 
then  languish,  he  use  reason  as  much  as  he  shall 
■•I'fii.f  ■•  ^  at  times. 


76  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

mowe  ;  and  that  he  enforce  him  to  have  voluntary 
displeasure  for  his  sins  for  the  love  of  God  ;  and  that 
he  resist  his  evil  inclination  used,  in  which  he  hath 
before  taken  delectation  ;  and  that  he  do  pain  to 
have  displaisance  as  much  as  he  shall  mowe,  howbcit 
that  it  be  short.  But  to  the  end  that  he  run  not 
into  despair  [there]  ought  to  be  proposed  to  him  and 
laid  before  [him]  the  things  that  were  said  in  the 
second  part  of  this  present  treatise  upon  the  tempta- 
tion of  desperation.  He  ought  also  to  be  admonished 
to  be  couraged  and  strong  against  all  other  temptations 
there  declared.  Also  be  he  admonished  to  die  as  a 
very  and  true  Christian  man  (or  woman)  ;  and  that 
he  take  heed  that  he  be  not  bound  in  the  bond  of 
excommunication  ;  and  that  with  all  his  might  he 
submit  him  to  the  ordinance  of  our  Mother,  Holy 
Church,  to  the  end  that  he  be  saved. 

Item  ^  if  the  sick  man  have  long  space  of  time, 
and  that  he  be  not  oppressed  of  hasty  death,*  the 
assistants  ought  to  read  before  him  histories  and 
devout  orisons,  which  before  he  delighted  and  took 
pleasure  in  ;  and  men  ought  to  remember  him  of 
God's  commandments,  to  the  end  that  he  think  the 
more  profoundly  if  he  could  find  anything  in  himself 
that  he  hath  against  the  said  commandments  commised 
and  trespassed.  And  if  he  be  so  sick  that  he  hath 
lost  the  usage  of  speech,  and  hath  his  knowledge 
whole  and  entire,  he  ought  to  answer  to  these  things 
by  some  sign  outward,  or  by  whole  consenting  of 
heart,  for  that  sufficeth  to  his  salvation. 

^  Also.  *  i.e.  surprised  by  sudden  death. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    77 

Alway  ought  [it]  to  be  taken  heed  that  the  in- 
terrogations be  made  before  or  that  the  sick  man  lose 
the  usage  of  speech  ;  and  if  the  answers  of  the  sick 
person  appear  not  sound  nor  sufficient  to  his  salvation, 
let  there  be  put  thereto  remedy — by  necessary 
information — by  the  best  manner  that  may  be. 

And  also  [it]  ought  to  be  showed  to  the  sick 
person  the  great  peril  that  might  fall  and  come  to 
him,  notwithstanding  though  he  thereby  should  be 
afeared.  For  better  it  is  that  by  fear  and  wholesome 
dread  he  have  compunction  and  be  saved,  than  by 
blandishing  dissolution,^  or  by  noyous  comfort,  he  be 
damned.  In  truth  this  thing  is  much  strange  and  over 
perilous,  and  contrary  to  the  faith  and  Christian 
religion,  but  it  is  a  thing  diabolical,  that  to  a  Christian 
man,  being  in  the  article  of  death,  for  to  hide  from 
him  the  peril  of  the  death  of  his  soul,  and  that  by 
human  dread  men  dare  not  trouble  him. 

Contrary  to  this  did  Isa-^e  the  prophet  when  he 
feared  *  wholesomely  the  King  Ezechias,  lying  sick 
unto  the  death,  saying  to  him  that  he  should  die  of 
that  sickness  ;  and  nevertheless  yet  he  died  not.  In 
like  wise  did  ^aint  Gregory,  when  he  feard  whole- 
somely his  monk — which  was  constituted  in  the 
article  of  death — for  his  propriety.^ 

Item  [there]  ought  to  be  presented  to  the  sick 
person  the  image  of  the  crucifix,  which  alway  should 
be  among  the  sick  people,  and  also  the  image  of  our 
Blessed  Lady,  and  of  other  saints  which  the  sick  man 

1  softening.  •  i.t.  made  to  fear. 

'  appropriation  of  goods. 


78  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

hath  most  loved  and  honoured  in  his  life.  Also 
(there)  ought  to  be  about  them  holy  water,  and  oft 
cast  upon  them  and  about  them  to  the  end  that  the 
devils  be  put  a-back  from  them.  And  if  because  of 
shortness  of  time  all  these  things  aforesaid  may  not  be 
done,  yet  they  ought  at  least  to  purpose  to  them  *  the 
orisons  and  prayers  which,  [are]  addressed  unto  our 
Lord  Jesu  Christ.  And  there  ought  never  to  be 
brought  to  their  remembrance  the  carnal  friends, 
nor  wife,  nor  children,  nor  riches,  nor  other  goods 
temporal,  but  only  as  much  as  the  spiritual  health  of 
the  sick  person  demanded  and  requireth. 

Whosomever  then  will  learn  to  die  let  him  come 
and  learn  all  the  things  foresaid  before,  or  he  have 
need  in  the  article  of  necessity.  For  in  truth  in 
grievous  infirmity  the  devotion  of  the  person  goeth 
away  and  passeth  ;  and  as  much  more  as  the  sickness 
approacheth  or  increaseth,  so  much  more  the  devotion 
fleeth  from  him.  If  thou  wilt  not  then  err  nor  be 
deceived,  and  that  thou  wilt  be  sure,  do  instantly  all 
that  thou  mayst  good,  whiles  that  thou  art  whole 
and  sound,  and  that  thou  hast  the  usage  of  reason 
and  [art]  well  disposed,  and  that  thou  mayst  be  lord 
of  all  thy  feats.* 

O  how  much  people,  truly  without  number,  have 
deceived  themselves  and  bound  themselves  in  abiding 
the  last  necessity  !  And  always  it  ought  not  to  seem 
to  none  incongruous  nor  marvellous,  (but)  that  it 
ought    to   [be]    shown   to   them   that    die    by   some 

*  i.e.  present  to  their  mind. 

*  'faytte '  =  actions,  conduct. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    79 

diligent  cure,  by  busy  disposition  and  also  by  studious 
exhortation  ;  for  without  doubt  such  force  and 
necessity  runneth  upon  them  suddenly,  that  if  it 
were  possible  all  a  whole  city  ought  [to]  run  hastily 
to  a  person  that  dieth. 


CHAPTER   VI 

THE  ORISONS  AND  PRAYERS  THAT  OUGHT  TO  BE  SAID 
UPON  THE  SICK  PERSON  IN  THE  ARTICLE  OF  DEATH 

Finally  it  ought  to  be  known  that  the  orisons  which 
follow  ought  to  be  said  upon,  or  over,  a  sick  person, 
above  the  prayers  that  our  Mother,  Holy  Church, 
hath  accustomed  to  say  over  the  sick  persons  labouring 
to  the  death. 

And  if  the  sick  person  be  [a]  religious  the  covent 
ought  to  be  assembled  by  the  table  ^  as  it  is 
accustomed  ;  and  after  they  ought  to  say  the  litany 
with  the  orisons,  and  the  psalms  ordinary  and 
accustomed.  After  the  which  may  be  said  the 
prayers  that  follow,  as  long  as  the  time  shall  suffice  ; 
and  [they]  may  be  rehearsed  again  divers  times  for 
to  move  the  sick  person  the  more  to  devotion,  if  he 
hath  yet  the  usage  of  reason.  And  this  is  not  done 
for  necessity,  but  for  the  profit  and  devotion  of  the 
sick  person. 

And  as  touching  the  sick  persons,  seculars  [there] 
1  A  flat  board  which  was  struck  in  place  of  a  bell. 


8o  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

ought  to  be  said  the  orisons  that  follow  ;  after  that 
the  disposition  and  devotion  of  the  sick  person,  and 
the  commodity  ^  of  the  time,  and  if  the  assistants 
rcquireth.  But  few  people  or  none  be  at  this  day 
that  have  the  knowledge  of  this  art. 

Lord  Jesu  Christ,  son  of  the  fatherly 
CHARITY,  I  beseech  Thee  by  the  Love  that 
Thou,  right  much  worthy,  right  innocent  and 
most  delicate,  madest  Thyself  to  be  as  man,  to  be 
wounded  and  die  for  the  health  of  man,  that  Thou 
wilt  pardon  and  forgive  this  Thy  servant  N. 
Jesus  right  merciful,  forgive  him  all  that  by 
thought,  by  word  or  by  deed,  by  affections 
or  movings,*  by  his  strength  and  by  his  wit,  of 
body  and  of  soul,  he  hath  trespassed.  And  for 
remission,  give  to  him.  Lord,  that  right  sufficient 
emendation  by  the  which  Thou  unboundest 
the  sins  of  all  the  world  ;  and,  for  the  fulfilling 
of  all  negligences,  join  to  him  that  right  ready 
and  valiant  conversation '  that  Thou  haddest, 
sith  and  from  the  hour  of  Thy  conception  unto 
the  hour  of  Thy  death. 

And  moreover  give  to  him  the  fruit  of  all  the 
good  works  made  and  done  by  all  the  chosen  saints, 
sith  the  beginning  of  the  world  unto  the  end. 
Qui  viv'ts  et  regnas  Deus  per  omnia  secula  seculorum. 

In  the  honour  of  the  right  fervent  love  by 

^  coriTcnience  or  supply  of. 

•  either  *  emotions '  or  '  motires.' 

'  i.e.  behaviour  or  manner  of  life. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    8i 

the  which  the  Life  of  all  living  constrained 
Thee  to  be  incarnate,  and  in  anguish  of  spirit  * 
to  die  on  the  cross,  we  remember  on,"  anew, 
(of)  Thy  right  benign  heart  to  the  end  that  to 
this  Thy  servant,  N.  our  brother,  Thou  put 
away  all  his  sins,  and  that  Thou  forgive  him 
all,  by  Thy  right  holy  conversation  and  by  the 
merit  of  Thy  right  holy  passion  ;  that  Thou 
make  him  to  experiment  the  superabundant 
multitude  of  Thy  miserations  ;  '^  and  that  Thou 
make  ready  us  all,  and  in  especial  this  person 
our  brother,  N.,  whom  Thou  hast  disposed 
hastily  to  call  to  Thee  by  right  pleasant  manner  ; 
and  that  it  be  to  him  right  profitable  by  Thy 
sweet  patience,  by  very  penance,  by  plain  * 
remission,  by  rightful  faith,  by  steadfast  hope, 
and  by  right  perfect  charity  ;  in  such  wise  that 
in  right  perfect  state  he  may  blessedly  depart 
and  expire  between  Thy  right  sweet  embrace- 
ments  and  company,  to  Thy  praising  eternal. 
Amen. 

To  God  the  Father 

Into  the  hands  of  Thy  mercy  inestimable, 
holy  Father,  just  Father,  and  much  beloved, 
we  commend  the  soul  of  Thy  servant,  N.  our 
brother.  In  praising  Thee  humbly  after  the 
greatness  of  the  love  by  the  which  the  right 
holy  soul  of  Thy  Son  commended  Him  to  Thee 

^  '  anguysshous  esperyte.'   ^  remind,  or  recall  to. 

^  i  I.  compassion.  ,  *  complete. 


Bz  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

on  the  cross  ;  that  by  the  inestimable  charity 
of  dilection,^  by  the  which  Thou,  which  art 
Divine  Paternity,  drewest  to  Thee  the  same 
right  holy  soul,  Thou  wilt  at  this  last  hour  of 
(the)  death  of  this  Thy  servant,  N.  our  brother, 
receive  in  the  same  love  his  spirit.     Amen. 

To  God  the  Son 

O  MY  MUCH    JLOVED    REDEEMER,  right  piteOUS,* 

Jesus  right  benign,  we  pray  Thy  lacrimable ' 
voice,  by  the  which  in  Thy  humanity,  when 
Thou  shouldest  for  us  die.  Thou  wert  con- 
sumed by  labours  and  sorrows,  in  such  wise  that 
Thou  wert  left  of  Thy  Father,  that  Thou  with- 
draw not  the  help  and  aid  of  Thy  mercy  from 
this  N.  Thy  servant,  our  brother,  unto  this  hour 
and  moment  of  his  affliction  ;  and  the  con- 
sumption of  his  spirit  suffer  not  in  this  extreme 
hour  of  his  death  :  but  by  the  triumph  of 
Thine  holy  cross,  and  by  virtue  of  Thine 
healthful  passion,  and  of  Thy  bitter  death, 
think  on  him.  Think  of  peace  and  not  of 
affliction,  and  deliver  his  soul  from  all  anguishes  ; 
and  with  the  same  hands  the  which,  for  love  of 
him.  Thou  didst  suffer  to  be  fixed  and  nailed 
to  the  cross  with  right  sharp  nails,  good  Jesus, 
much  sweet  Father  and  Lord,  deliver  his  soul 
from  the   torments  which  be  deputed  to  him, 

i  I  e.  spiritual  love,— of  Cod. 
i.e.  pitiful.  3  itf.  voice  of  lamentation. 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    83 

and  bring  him    to   eternal  rest  with   voice   of 
exultation  and  of  confession.     Amen. 

O  SWEET  Jesu,  Son  of  the  living  God,  right 
merciful  Lord,  in  union  with  that  commenda- 
tion by  the  which,  in  dying  on  the  cross.  Thou 
commendest  Thy  right  holy  soul  to  Thy 
heavenly  Father,  we  commend  to  Thine  ineffable 
pity  the  soul  of  this  Thy  servant,  N.,  our 
brother  ;  (in)  requiring  and  praying  Thy  right 
merciful  bounty  that  by  the  merit  and  honour 
of  Thy  much  holy  soul,  by  the  which  all  souls 
be  saved  and  from  (the)  death  duly  delivered, 
that  it  may  please  Thee,  merciful  Lord,  to 
deliver  this  soul  from  all  pains  and  miseries  ; 
and  that  for  the  love  and  intercession  of 
Thy  right  sweet  Mother,  thou  wilt  conduct 
and  lead  it  to  behold  the  glory  of  this  glorious 
vision.      Amen. 

God  right  mighty,  debonair  and  merciful, 
which  that,  after  the  multitude  of  Thy  mercy, 
effacest  and  puttest  away  the  sins  of  them  that 
be  repentant,  and  that  by  pardon  and  remission 
voidest  the  culpe  and  blame  of  all  sins  ;  behold 
with  pity  (upon)  this  Thy  servant,  N.,  our 
brother,  which  with  all  confession  of  heart 
requireth  of  Thee  pardon  and  remission  of  all 
his  sins.  Accord  and  grant  it  to  him,  we  pray 
Thee,  and  renew  in  him,  much  piteous  Father, 
all  that  which  by  worldly  frailty  hath  been  in 
him     corrupt,    and    all     that    which    by    fraud 


84  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

diabolic  hath  been  in  him  violated  and  despoiled, 
and  assemble  him  in  the  unity  of  our  Mother, 
Holy  Church,  as  one  of  the  number  of  Redemp- 
tion. Lord  have  mercy  on  his  wailings,  have 
mercy  on  his  tears,  and  bring  him  to  the 
sacrament  of  Thine  holy  reconciliation  ;  for 
he  hath  no  trust  but  in  Thine  infinite 
mercy. 

To  Our  Blessed  Lady 

O  RIGHT  ENTIRE,  AND  ETERNAL  BLESSED  ViRGIN, 

glorious  Maid,  aideress  and  helper  of  all  anguish 
and  necessity,  succour  us  sweetly  now  ;  and  show 
to  thy  servant  here,  N.,  our  brother,  thy 
gracious  visage  in  this  last  necessity.  Withdraw 
and  put  from  him  all  his  enemies,  by  the  virtue 
of  thy  right  dear  Son,  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ, 
and  by  His  holy  cross  and  passion  ;  and  deliver 
him  from  all  anguish  of  body  and  soul,  to  the 
end  that  to  God  our  Lord  he  yield  praising 
without  end.     Amen. 

To  Saint  Michael 

Saint  Michael  Archangel  of  God,  succour 
us  now  before  the  right  high  Judge.  O  champion 
invincible,  be  thou  present  now  and  assist  to 
this,  N.,  our  brother,  which  strongly  laboureth 
towards  his  end,  and  defend  him  mightily  from 
the  dragon  infernal,  and  from  all  the  frauds  of 
the  evil  spirits.  O  yet  furthermore,  we  pray 
thee,  which  art  the  right  clear  and  much  fair 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    85 

shower  of  the  divinity,  to  the  end  that  in  this 
last  hour  of  the  life  of  this  N.  our  brother,  thou 
wilt  benignly  and  sweetly  receive  his  soul  into 
thy  right  holy  bosom  ;  and  that  thou  wilt 
bring  him  in  the  place  of  refreshing,  of  peace 
and  rest.     Amen. 

To  THE  Sick  Person  at  his  End 

Right  dear  brother,  or  sister,  I  commend  thee 
to  God  Almighty,  and  commit  thee  to  Him  of 
whom  thou  art  creature,  to  the  end  when,  by 
thy  death,  thou  shalt  have  paid  the  duty  of 
human  nature,  thou  mayst  return  to  thy  Maker, 
which  of  the  slime  of  the  earth  formed  thee, 
[and]  thy  soul  issue  and  go  out  of  thy  body 
when  it  shall  please  God. 

The  right  splendant  company  of  angels  be  at 
thy  departing  and  meet  thee  ;  the  right  clear 
senate  of  apostles  will  diftend  thee  ;  the  victories 
of  martyrs  may  meet  thee  ;  the  company  adorned 
with  shining  confessors  will  environ  thee  ;  the 
assembly  of  the  right  joyous  virgins  take  and  re- 
ceive thee  ;  and  the  bosom  of  the  blessed  rest  of 
patriarchs  will  open  to  thee,  and  join  them  with 
thee,  and  make  thee  to  deserve  to  be  among  the 
assistants  with  thee  :  that  thou  avoid  all  that  in 
darkness  is  horrible,  all  that  in  flames  burneth 
and  straineth,  and  all  that  which  travaileth  in 
torments.  So  depart  from  thee  right  black 
Sathanas,  with  all   his  cruel  satellites,  and   the 


86  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

good  angels  of  God  may  accompany  thee  in  thy 
coming  to  glory.  Flee  from  thee  that  felon 
Sathanas,  and  flee  he  into  that  stinking  prison  of 
darkness  eternal. 

So  grant,  God,  that  his  enemies  be  dissipated, 
and  they  that  hate  him  flee  before  his  face. 
Defail  they  like  as  smoke  faileth,  and  as  the 
sinners  perish  before  the  face  of  God  ;  and  the 
just  persons  come  and  enjoy  them  in  the  sight  of 
God,  and  delight  them  in  gladness.  All  the 
legions  of  hell  and  the  ministers  of  satan  be  con- 
founded in  the  fire,  and  be  they  ashamed  and 
confounded  ;  nor  have  they  none  hardiness  to 
let  nor  hinder  ^  thy  way.  Jesu  Christ  deliver 
thee  from  torment,  which  for  thee  deigned  to 
die  on  the  cross,  and  constitute  thee  among  the 
sweet  and  flowering  places  of  paradise.  The 
same  very  Pastor  and  Herdman  know  thee 
among  His  sheep  ;  which  forgive  to  thee  all  thy 
sins,  and  set  thee  on  His  right  side  and  in  the 
party  of  His  chosen  people,  and  that  thou  may 
see  face  to  face  thy  Creator  and  Maker.  And 
that  being  with  Him  present  and  assistant,  thou 
mayst  behold  His  right  manifest  verity,  and  con- 
stituted without  end  among  the  companies  well 
blessed,  thou  mayst  joy  in  divine  contemplations, 
world  without  end.     Amen. 

Christian  Soul,  depart  thee  from  this  world 
when  it  shall  please  God,  in  the  Name  of  the 

I'empeshe.' 


THE  CRAFT  TO  KNOW  WELL  TO  DIE    87 

Father,  which  thee  created  ;  in  the  Name  of 
Jesu  Christ,  His  son,  which  for  thee  suffered 
death  ;  and  in  the  Name  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  hath  shed  in  thee  His  grace.  Come  to 
thy  meeting  and  succour  thee  the  holy  Angels  of 
God,  the  Archangels,  the  Virtues,  the  Potest- 
ates,  the  Dominations,  the  Thrones,  the  Cheru- 
bins,  the  Seraphins.  Come  to  thine  help  and 
aid  the  patriarchs  and  prophets,  the  apostles  and 
evangelists,  the  matrons  and  confessors,  the 
monks  and  hermits,  the  virgins  and  widows,  the 
children  and  innocents.  Also  help  thee  the 
prayers  and  visions  of  all  priests  and  deacons, 
and  of  them  of  all  degrees  of  the  Church 
Catholic  ;  to  the  end  that  thy  place  be  in  peace, 
and  that  thine  habitation  be  in  celestial  Jerusalem. 
Per  Christum  Dominum  nostrum.     Amen. 

Like  as  the  health  of  every  man  consisteth  in  the 
end,  [let]  every  man  then  much  busily  take  heed  to 
purvey  him  for  to  come  to  a  good  end,  whiles  that  he 
hath  time  and  leisure.  To  this  might  much  well 
serve  a  fellow  and  true  friend,  devout  and  comendable, 
which  in  his  last  end  [may]  assist  him  truly  ;  and  that 
he  comfort  and  courage  him  in  steadfastness  of  the 
faith,  with  good  patience  and  devotion,  with  good 
confidence  and  perseverance.  And  that  over  him 
[they]  say  all  these  said  orisons,  well  entently  and  de- 
voutly, whiles  that  he  is  in  travail  of  death.  But 
always,  for  to  come  to  the  effect  of  these  prayers,  is 
all  necessary  the  disposition  of  him  that  dieth,  like  as  it 


88  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

hath  been  said  heretofore.  And  therefore  to  every 
person  that  well  and  surely  will  die  [it]  is  of  necessity 
that  he  learn  to  die,  or  the  death  come  and  prevent 
him. 

Thus  endeth  the  tract  abridged  of 
the  art  to  learn  well  to  die  : 
translated  out  of  the  French  into 
English,  by  William  Caxton.  The  xv. 
day  of  June,  the  year  of  our  Lord  a 
M  iiij  C  Ixxxx. 


NOTE  ON  CAXTON'S  ABRIDGMENT 

Not  many  copies  of  this  book  exist.  There  is  a  perfect 
copy  in  the  British  Museum^— of  which  this  is  a  transcription, 
another  belonging  to  Lord  Spencer  of  Althorp,  besides  one 
in  the  National  Library  at  Paris,  and  a  copy  in  the  Bodleian 
from  which  the  last  page  is  missing. 

Judging  from  the  colophon  Caxton  has  evidently  had  some 
French  translation  of  the  Speculum  Ariis  Moriendi  before  him  ; 
which  he  has  abridged,  all  save  the  prayers.  The  date  given 
is  1490,  that  is  to  say  the  year  before  his  death,  and  it  is  of 
interest  to  find  that  a  year  later,  the  actual  year  of  his  death, 
he  is  making  a  still  further  abridgment  of  this  same  treatise.* 
There  is  no  title  page,  and  his  No.  6  type  is  the  only  one 
used. 

It  is  worth  noting  that  in  the  complete  version  of  The 
Craft  of  Di/ing  there  is  no  exhortation  which  quite  corre- 
sponds to  the  one  which  Caxton  places  at  the  end  of  this 
abridgment,  and  at  the  beginning  of  his  shorter  tract.  It 
occurs,  however,  both  in  the  block-book,  and  in  Gerson.  In 
the  block-book  it  is  found,  as  here,  at  the  end,  and  runs 
thus :  '« Sed  heu,  pauci  sunt  qui  in  morte  proximis  suis 
fideliter  assistunt,  interrogando,  monendo,  et  pro  ipsis 
orando;  prjEsertim  cum  ipsi  morientes  nondum  mori  velin, 
et  anima:  morientum  saepe  miserabiliter  periclitantur." 

Gerson's  exhortation  is  longer,  and  he  places  it  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  third  part  of  his  Opusculum  iripartltum  de  frecepth 
deealoni,  de  confetsione,  et  icientia  mortis  (or  as  some  versions 
have  it  de  arte  moriendi^. 

It  is  as  follows:  "Si  veraces  fidelesque  amid  cujuspiam 
egroti,  curam    diligentium  agant  pro  ipsius    vita  corporal! 

iC.  II,  c.  8.  ^v.  p.  102. 

S9 


9©  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

fragili  et  defectibiii  conservanda,  exigunt  a  nobis  multo 
fortius  Deus  et  caritas  pro  salute  sua  spiritual!  soUicitudinem 
gererespecialem.  In  hacextremanecessitatemortisfidelispro. 
batur  amicus.  Quippe  nullum  est  opus  misercordie  majus 
sive  commodius.  Quod  et  tanti  apud  Deum  merit!  et  ampli- 
oris  frequenter  estimatur,  quemadmodum  persone  nostri 
Salvatoris  Jesu  Christi,  si  in  terris  nobiscum  degeret  impen- 
•um  serTitium  corporate.  Quamobrem  cura  fuit  present! 
scripto  componere  brevem  quemdam  exhortationis  modum 
habendum  circa  eos  qui  sunt  in  mortis  articulo  constituti. 
Valentem  etiam  generaliter  omnibus  catholicis  ad  artem  et 
Dotitiam  bene  moriendi  conquirendam.  Continet  autem  hoc 
opusculum  breve  quatuor  particulas ;  scilicet  exhortationes» 
interrogationes,  orationes  et  obsecrationes." 


THE  CRAFT  FOR  TO  DIE 
TO  THE  HEALTH  OF  MAN'S  SOUL 


HERE  BEGINNETH  A  LITTLE  TREATISE 
SHORTLY  COMPILED  AND  CALLED 
JRS  MORIENDI :  THAT  IS  TO  SAY, 
THE  CRAFT  FOR  TO  DIE  FOR  THE 
HEALTH  OF  MAN'S  SOUL 

When  any  of  likelihood  ^  shall  die,  then  it  is  most 
necessary  to  have  a  special  friend,  the  which  will 
heartily  help  and  pray  for  him,  and  therewith  counsel 
the  sick  for  the  weal  of  his  soul  ;  and  moreover  to  see 
that  all  others  so  do  about  him,  or  else  quickly  for  to 
make  them  depart. 

Then  is  to  be  remembered  the  great  benefits  of 
God  done  for  him  unto  that  time,  and  specially  of 
the  passion  of  our  Lord  ;  and  then  is  to  be  read  some 
story  of  saints  or  the  vii  psalms  with  the  litany  or 
our  Lady's  psalter,  in  part  or  whole,  with  other. 
And  ever  the  image  of  the  crucifix  is  to  be  had  in 
his  sight,  with  other.  And  holy  water  is  oftimes  to 
be  cast  upon  and  about  him  for  avoiding  of  evil 
spirits,  the  which  then  be  full  ready  to  take  their 
advantage  of  the  soul  if  they  may. 

And  then  and  ever  make  him  cry  for  mercy  and 
grace,  and  for  the  help  of  our  Blessed  Lady  and  of 
^  «.<■.  is  likely  to. 

93 


94  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

other  saints  in  whom  afore  he  had  a  singular  trust 
and  love,  and  thereupon  to  make  his  prayers  if  he 
may. 

When  death  cometh  or  any  grievous  pangs,  or 
other  great  sickness,  then  prayer  or  devotion  assuageth  ; 
wherefore  it  is  wisdom  for  one  to  pray  afore  any 
sickness  come,  and  also  when  one  may  in  his  sickness, 
if  he  will  not  be  deceived.  So  he  is  happy  and  may 
be  glad  that  [at]  such  a  time  of  most  need  [he]  hath 
a  faithful  friend  ;  and  that  will  say  beside  the  prayers 
afore  rehearsed,  and  cause  other  also  to  say  devoutly 
in  remembrance  of  the  charity  of  Jesu  Christ  and  of 
His  passion,  and  for  to  have  the  rather  ^  His  mercy 
and  help,  iij  Paternosters  and  iij  Aves,  with  a  Credo  ; 
and  therewith  to  exhort  him,  by  a  priest,  or  for  need 
by  another,  in  the  manner  as  followeth  : 

Brother,  or  sister,  remember  well  that  God  saith 
by  His  prophet  and  evangelist  :  Blessed  be  those  that 
die  and  depart  in  our  Lord,  that  is  to  say  from  the 
world  and  his  pleasures,  and  die  in  the  true  faith  of 
the  church,  and  repentance  for  their  sins.  Sir,  ye  have 
great  cause  to  be  glad  for  to  depart  from  this  wretched 
world,  and  full  of  all  misery  ;  and  think  that  thee 
needs  must  depart,  and  desire  heartily  to  be  with  Jesu 
Christ  your  Maker,  Redeemer  and  Lord  God,  for  He 
shall  give  to  you  now  your  inheritance  that  He  did 
buy  for  you  with  His  precious  passion  and  blood. 
Wherefore  this  time  of  your  departing  shall  be  better 
to  you  than  the  time  of  your  birth,  for  now  all  sick- 
ness, sorrow,  and  trouble  shall  depart  now  from  you 
*  i.f.  sooner. 


TO  THE  HEALTH  OF  MAN'S  SOUL    95 

for  ever.  Therefore  be  not  aggrieved  with  your 
sickness  and  take  it  not  with  grutching,  but  take  it 
rather  by  all  gladness. 

See  at  all  times  that  ye  be  stable  in  your  faith,  and 
believe,  and  say  your  Credo,  if  that  ye  may — or  else 
desire  another  heartily  to  do  it  for  you  here  afore  us 
openly.  And  arm  you  ever  with  the  sign  of  the 
cross  ►J*  as  a  Christian  man,  for  your  defence  against 
your  ghostly  enemies  ;  in  the  which  doing  God  will 
be  greatly  pleased,  and  the  rather  take  you  for  one  of 
His  folk,  by  protection  and  grace,  and  as  His  child  of 
salvation. 

Have  ever  a  good  and  true  belief,  and  nothing 
may  be  impossible  unto  you.  And  ever  beware  that 
ye  fall  not  in  despair,  for  that  greatly  would  displease 
God,  and  can  not  be  remedied.  And  remember  the 
sins  done  aforetime  shall  never  hurt  you  as  to  damna- 
tion, if  they  please  you  not  now  and  that  ye  be  sorry 
for  them.  Saint  Jerome  saith  :  If  one  should  take  his 
sickness  or  his  death  with  grutching  it  is  a  token  that 
he  loveth  not  God  sufficiently  ;  all  is  righteous  that 
we  suffer.  Desire,  with  Saint  Austin,  of  our  Lord 
here  to  be  cut  with  tribulation  and  to  be  burned  with 
sickness  and  sorrow,  so  that  ye  may  be  saved  hereafter 
for  ever. 

Now  meek  yourself  and  be  sorry  that  ye  have  been 
so  unkind  to  please  and  to  keep  His  commandments, 
and  presume  not  as  of  yourself  any  goodness,  and 
say  with  all  meekness  thus  :  Good  Lord,  Jesu 
Christ,  I  knowledge  that  I  have  sinned  grievously 
and    by  Thy    grace   I   will    gladly  amend   me    if  I 


96  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

should  live.     Have  mercy  now  of  me  for  Thy  bitter 
passion. 

Then  ask  him  these  questions  following  afore  his 
death. 

Be  ye  glad  that  ye  shall  die  in  Christian 
belief?     Let  him  answer  :  Yea. 

Know  thee  that  ye  hath  not  so  well  lived  as 
ye  should  ?     Yea. 

Have  ye  will  to  amend  if  that  ye  should 
live  ?     Yea. 

Believe  ye  that  Jesu  Christ,  God  Son  of 
heaven,  was  born  of  Blessed  Mary  ?     Yea. 

Believe  ye  also  that  Jesu  Christ  died  upon 
the  cross  to  buy  man's  soul  on  Good  Friday  ? 
Yea. 

Do  ye  thank  God  therefore  ?     Yea. 

Believe  ye  that  ye  may  not  be  saved  but  by 
His  passion  and  death  ?     Yea. 

As  long  as  the  soul  is  in  your  body  thank  God  for 
His  death,  and  have  a  sure  trust  by  it  and  His  passion 
to  be  saved.  And  counsel  him  to  say  if  he  may  these 
following  words  of  great  virtue  : 

Put  Christ's  passion  betwix  me  and  mine 
evil  works,  and  betwix  me  and  His  wrath. 
Now  Lord  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner. 

The  praise  of  Our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and  the 
virtue  of  His  passion,  with  the  sign  of  the  holy 
cross,  and  the  undefiled  virginity  of  Blessed 
Mary,  His  Mother,  and  the  blessing  of  all  saints, 
and  the  protection  of  all  holy  angels,  with  the 


TO  THE  HEALTH  OF  MAN'S  SOUL    97 

help  and  prayers  of  all  saints,  be  betwix  me  and 

all  mine  enemies,  now  and  in  the  hour  of  my 

death  and  departing.  .  Amen. 

Also  these  verses  following  be  of  great  virtue  in  the 

time  of  death,  and  to  be  said  by  the  sick  if  he  may, 

or  by  another  for  him. 

Dirupisti  Domine  vincula  mea,  tibi  sacrificabo 
hostiam  laudis,  et  nomen  Domini  invocabo. 
Deus  propitius  esto  michi  peccatori.  Domine 
Jhesu  Christe  ego  cognosco  me  graviter  peccasse, 
et  libenter  volo  me  emendare  per  graciam  tuam. 
Miserere  mei  propter  amaram  passionem  tuam. 
Domine  Jhesu,  redemisti  nos  in  sanguine  tuo. 
Laus  sit  tibi  pro  amare  passione  tua.  Largire 
clarum  vespere,  quo  vita  nusquam  decidat  :  sed 
praemium  mortis  sacre  perennis  instet  gloria. 
Also  to  Our  Lady  : 

Maria   plena  gracie.   Mater  misericordie,   tu 
nos  ab  hoste  protege,  et  in  hora  mortis  suscipe. 
And  at  last : 

In  manus  tuas  Domine  commendo  spiritum 
meum.  In  nomine  patris,  et  filii,  et  spiritus 
sancti.     Amen. 

Here  followeth  a  short  and  sweet  Remembrance  of 
THE  Sacrament  of  the  Altar  or  that  it  be  re- 
ceived OF  THE  Sick  Person,  or  any  other,  afore 
their  Communing 

Welcome  Blessed  Jesu,  my  Lord  God  and 
Saviour,  to  whom  is  appropried  all  mercy  and 

G 


98  THE  CRAFF  OF  DYING 

pity.  Remember  good  Lord  how  frail  my 
nature  and  substance  is,  and  have  mercy  and 
pity  on  me,  great  sinner,  after  Thy  great  mercies 
and  for  Thy  bitter  passion.  For  I  knowledge 
and  believe  faithfully,  as  a  Christian  child  of 
Thine,  that  Thou  here  in  form  of  bread  is  the 
same  my  Lord  God  that  of  Thy  goodness  came 
down  from  heaven,  and  was  born  and  took  my 
nature  of  Blessed  Virgin  Mary,  and  died  for  me, 
and  rose  the  third  day,  and  after  ascended  in  to 
heaven,  and  there  reigneth  with  the  Father  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  all  saints,  for  ever  immortal  : 
the  which  for  our  great  health,  frailty,  and 
daily  transgression,  and  in  remembrance  of  Thy 
great  love  and  passion,  hast  ordained  this  Thy 
blessed  Body  in  this  wise  to  be  taken  of  me,  and 
of  all  other  willing  to  be  saved. 

I  know  well  that  I  am  far  unworthy  to  be 
called  Thy  child  or  servant,  for  the  great,  multi- 
tude of  my  sins  ;  howbeit  Thou  mayst  make 
me  rightful  and  able  the  which  only  of  sinners 
hast  made  great  saints  of  heaven.  By  that  Thy 
great  power  and  might  grant  me  now  to  take 
Thee  meekly,  in  all  fear,  and  with  wailing  for 
my  sins,  and  with  a  spiritual  gladness.  Come 
now,  good  Lord,  into  my  heart  and  cleanse  it  of 
all  sins.  Enter  into  my  soul  and  make  it  whole, 
and  therewith  sanctify  me  within  and  without, 
and  be  my  defence  for  body  and  soul,  rebuking 
and  putting  aside  .ill  mine  enemies  far  from  the 
presence  of  Thy  power  ;  that  I  then  so  defended 


TO  THE  HEALTH  OF  MAN'S  SOUL    99 

by  Thee,  may  have  a  free  and  sure  passage  to  Thy 
kingdom,  where  I  shall  not  see  Thee  in  This 
form  by  mystery,  but  I  shall  see  Thee  face  to 
face  ;  where  I  shall  never  hunger  nor  thirst,  but 
ever  be  in  joy  with  Thee  and  Thine,  there  to 
glorify  Thee  and  to  worship  Thee,  to  laud  and 
to  praise  Thee,  world  without  end.     Amen. 

By  these  following  are  Venial  Sins  taken  away  ; 
if  they  be  done  devoutly 

In  taking  holy  water  [and]  holy  bread  ;  also 
by  saying  of  the  Paternoster,  spiritually,  for  this 
clause  and  petition  :  Dimitte  nobis  debita  nostra 
sicut  et  nos  dimittimus  debitoribus  nostris ;  and 
also  by  knocking  of  the  breast  for  one's 
sins  ;  and  also  for  saying  of  Detis  propicius  esto 
in  peccatori  ;  and  by  saying  of  the  common  Con- 
Jiteor  at  mass  or  at  other  time.  Also  by  receiving 
of  any  of  the  sacraments  of  the  church,  and 
specially  of  the  Body  of  our  Lord.  Also  by 
hearing  of  mass,  and  by  the  sight  of  the  sacrament 
of  the  altar,  there  or  elsewhere.  By  the  blessing 
of  a  bishop  or  of  a  priest  at  his  mass.  By  any 
of  the  deeds  of  mercy  ;  by  pardons  ;  by  martyr- 
doms and  penance  ;  by  forgiveness  to  a  trespass- 
our  ;  by  good  ensample  giving,  or  by  converting 
of  others  to  good  life  ;  by  patient  thanking  in 
trouble,  and  by  contrition  for  sins,  with  dis- 
pleasure of  them.  And  for  every  good  deed 
doing  with  good  entent  and  devotion.     Amen. 


loo  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

The  Famous  Doctor  Johan  Gerson,  Chancellor 
OF  Paris,  taking  his  ground  from  Holy  Scripture,  and 
according  with  holy  doctors,  saith  thus  : 

Our  most  merciful  Father,  Lord  God,  know- 
ing our  frailty  and  readiness  to  all  sin,  is  ever 
ready  during  this  wretched  and  mortal  life,  by 
many  and  diverse  ways  to  forgive  us  ever  our 
trespass  and  to  grant  and  give  us  His  grace  ;  if  so 
be  that  truly  we  do  ordain  unto  Him  these  iii 
virtues  following,  so  that  they  be  said  and  done 
with  all  the  heart  devoutly. 

The  first  is  that  thou  shalt  say :  Blessed  Lord, 
I  knowledge  that  I  have  sinned  grievously 
against  Thy  goodness  thus  and  thus — rehearsing 
thy  sins, — and  I  am  displeased  therewith,  by 
reason  of  the  which  I  do  penance  and  will  do  ; 
for  I  know  well  that  I  have  grieved  the  merciful 
Lord  and  broken  Thy  commandments,  in  the 
which  Thou  only  ought  to  be  worshipped. 

The  second,  say  this  :  Good  Lord,  I  have  a 
good  purpose  and  desire  with  Thy  help  to  be 
right  ware  hereafter  that  I  fall  not  into  sin,  and 
I  entend  to  flee  the  occasions  after  the  possi- 
bility of  my  power. 

The  third  is  this  :  Gracious  Lord,  I  have 
good  will  to  make  an  whole  confession  of  all 
my  sins,  when  place  and  time  convenient  may 
be  had,  according  to  Thy  commandments  and 
all  holy  church. 

These    three   verities    or    truths   whosoever 


TO  THE  HEALTH  OF  MAN'S  SOUL    loi 

sayeth  with  his  heart  unfeigningly,  in  what  place 
that  ever  he  be,  he  may  be  sure  that  he  is  in 
the  state  of  grace  and  salvation,  and  that  he  shall 
have  everlasting  life,  though  all  he  had  done  all 
the  sins  of  the  world.  And  if  he  deceased 
without  any  other  confession  for  lack  of  a  priest, 
as  sleeping,  or  sudden  death,  he  should  be  saved 
suffering  and  sore  hard  pain  in  purgatory. 
Wherefore  it  is  good  counsel  that  every  Christian 
man  once  or  twice  on  the  day,  early  or  late,  or 
else  at  least  on  holy  days,  examine  his  con- 
science and  remember  if  that  he  may  with  all 
his  heart  unfeigningly  say  these  iij  truths. 
And  if  he  can  so  do  he  may  be  sure  that  he  is 
in  the  state  of  grace  ;  and  if  he  may  not,  but  is 
in  will  to  sin  again,  and  to  have  his  delectation 
with  deed,  and  will  not  flee  the  occasions  of 
mortal  sins,  and  so,  drowned  in  sin,  will  not 
arise,  such  one  may  be  certain  that  the  Pope 
may  not  assoil  him.  Not  for  thy  good  it  is 
that  such  one  use  much  prayer  and  give  alms, 
and  (to)  do  other  good  deeds  after  their  power, 
that  God  the  rather  may  lighten  their  hearts 
and  the  sooner  turn  to  goodness.     Amen. 


NOTE  ON  CAXTON'S  TRACT 

This  tract  of  Caxton'a  was  found  in  the  middle  of  a 
volume  of  black  letter  tracts  in  the  Bodleian  Library,  and 
Mr  Blades  avers  that  "  no  other  copy  in  any  language,  in 
print  or  manuscript,  appears  to  be  known."  ^  It  has  no 
date,  printer's  name,  or  place,  but  it  is  in  Caxton's  No.  6  type, 
with  a  few  lines  in  the  No.  i  type  of  Wynkyn  de  Worde, 
who  was  Caxton's  workman  and  successor.  We  may  there- 
fore infer  that  it  was  one  of  the  last  books  printed  by 
Caxton,  or  one  of  the  first  printed  by  de  Worde.  In 
either  case  it  was  probably  issued  from  Caxton's  House  at 
Westminster,  in  1491,  the  year  of  his  death.  Mr  Nicholson 
the  late  librarian  of  Bodley's  Library  says  "  it  does  not 
answer  to  any  of  the  three  printed  Latin  treatises  known  as 
Ars  iVfor/VW*  which  the  Bodleian  possesses,"  but  that  "the 
heading  of  the  treatise  suggests  that  it  was  a  translation  of 
a  work  already  known  by  a  particular  name ;  the  name 
given  is  in  Latin ;  and  occasional  turns  of  expression  .  .  . 
suggest  a  Latin  original  for  parts  at  least."* 

1  think  it  will  be  evident  to  anyone  who  reads  these  two 
tracts  of  Caxton's,  after  reading  the  longer  version  of  The 
Craft  of  Dyin^i  that  Mr  Nicholson  was  right  about  the  Latin 
original,  and  that  the  latter  must  have  been  the  Speculum  or 
Tractatus  de  arte  Moriendi ;  and  also  that  this  particular  tract 
appears  to  be  a  further  abridgment  of  Caxton's  own  already 
abridged  version. 

Only  those  parts  of  the  Tract  which  have  any  reference 
to  death  are  given  here.  The  last  pages  contain :  A 
singular  prayer  to  be  said  at  the  Feast  of  the  Dedication  of 
any  church,  or  at  any  other  time  ;  The  twelve  degrees  of 
Humility ;  The  seven  degrees  of  Obedience ;  The  seven 
degrees  of  Patience ;  and  The  fifteen  degrees  of  Charity. 

^  Biography  and  Typography  of  William  Caxton  (1582),  p.  350; 
but  see  appendix,  p.  170.  ■* 

*  See  Introductory  Note  to  the  facsimile  issued  by  E.  W.  B. 
Nicholson,  M.A.,  p.  5. 

103 


A  CHAPTER  TAKEN  FROM  THE 
OROLOGIUM  SAPIENTI^ 


OROLOGIUM  SAPIENTI^ 
Her   showeth  the   Fifth   Chapter   of  a  Treatise 

CALLED     OrOLOGIUM    ^APIliNClE    IN     MANNER     OF    A 

Dialogue  :     and     treateth     how     we    shall 
learn  to  die 

how  the  disciple  of  everlasting  wisdom  shall 

CON  ^    LEARN    TO    DIE    FOR    THE    LOVE    OF    JeSU 

Since  it  is  that  death  nought  to  man,  but  rather 
from  him,  taketh,  and  priveth  him  of  that  he  hath, 
whereof  profiteth  this  doctrine  of  death  ?  Say  me 
it  seemeth  wonderful,  and  therefore  teach  me  heavenly 
master. 

Wisdom 

Thou  shalt  understand  that  it  is  a  science  most 
profitable,  and  passing  all  other  sciences,  for  to  con  * 
die.  For  a  man  to  know  that  he  shall  die,  that  is 
common  to  all  men  ;  as  much  as  there  is  no  man 
that  may  ever  live  or  he  hath  hope  or  trust  thereof ; 
but  thou  shalt  find  full  few  that  have  this  cunning  to 
con  to  die.  For  that  is  a  sovereign  gift  of  God  ; 
sothly  for  a  man  to  con  to  die  is  for  to  have  his  heart 
and  his  soul  at  all  times  upward  to  those  things  that  be 
above  ;  that  is  to  say  that  what  time  xleath  cometh 
^  be  able  to.  '  learn  to. 

105 


io6  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

it  find  him  ready,  so  that  he  receive  it  gladly,  without 
any  withdrawing  ;  right  as  he  that  bideth  the  desired 
coming  of  his  well-beloved  fellow.  But  alas,  for 
sorrow  thou  shalt  find  among  some  religious,  as  well 
as  in  vain  seculars,  full  many  that  hate  so  much  the 
death  that  unneth  *  they  will  have  it  in  mind,  or 
hear  speak  thereof ;  for  they  would  not  go  from  this 
world.  And  the  cause  is  for  they  learn  not  to  con 
die.  For  they  spend  much  of  their  time  in  vain 
speaking,  playings,  and  in  vain  occupations  and 
curiosities  ;  and  other  such  vain  things.  And  there- 
fore what  time  death  cometh  suddenly,  for  as  much 
as  he  findeth  them  unready,  he  draweth  out  of  the 
body  the  wretched  soul  and  leadeth  it  to  hell  ;  as  he 
would  oftentimes  have  done  to  thee,  had  not  the 
great  mercy  of  God  withstood  him. 

Wherefore  leave  you  vain  things  to  them  that  be 
vain,  and  give  good  intent  to  my  doctrine  ;  the 
which  shall  profit  thee  more  than  choice  gold,  and 
than  the  books  of  all  the  philosophers  that  have  been. 
And  [that]  this  doctrine  of  me  may  more  fervently 
move  thee,  and  that  it  be  alway  dwelling  and  fixed  in 
thy  mind,  (and)  therefore  under  a  fellowable  ensamplc, 
I  shall  give  thee  the  mystery  of  this  doctrine  ;  the 
which  shall  profit  thee  greatly  to  the  beginning  of 
ghostly  health,  and  to  a  stable  fundament  of  all 
virtues. 

See  now  therefore  the  likeness  of  a  man  dying 
and  therewith  speaking  with  thee. 

And  then  the  disciple  hearing  this  began  to  gather 
^  scarcely. 


OROLOGIUM  SAPIENTIiE  107 

all  his  wits  from  outward  things,  and  in  himself 
busily  to  consider  and  behold  that  likeness  set  before 
him  ;  for  then  there  appeared  before  him  the  likeness 
of  a  fair  young  man,  the  which  was  suddenly  over- 
come with  death  in  hasty  time  for  to  die,  and  had 
not  disposed  for  the  health  of  his  soul  before  :  the 
which    with    a    careful  ^    voice    cried,    and    said  : 

CiRCUMDEDERUNT       ME       GENITUS       MORTIS  :        DOLORES  Ps.  xvii. 

iNFERNi  CIRCUMDEDERUNT  ME.  That  is  :  the  way- 
menting  ■  of  death  hath  umbelapped  me,^  and  the 
sorrows  of  hell  have  environed  me. 

Alas,  my  God  Everlasting,  whereto  was  I  born 
into  this  world,  and  why,  after  that  I  was  born,  had 
I  not  perished  anon  ?  For  the  beginning  of  my  life 
was  weeping  and  sorrow,  and  now  the  end  and  the 
passing  is  with  great  care  and  mourning.  O  death 
how  bitter  is  thy  mind  *  to  a  liking  heart,  and 
nourished  up  in  delights  !  O  how  little  trowed  I 
that  I  should  so  soon  die  !  But  now  thou,  wretched 
death,  suddenly  lying  in  wait  as  a  thief,  hast  fallen 
upon  me.  Now  for  sorrow,  wringing  mine  hands, 
I  yield  out  my  groaning  and  yelling,  desiring  to  flee 
death.  But  there  is  no  place  to  flee  from  it.  I  look 
on  every  side  and  I  find  no  counsellor  nor  comforter  ; 
for  death  is  utterly  fixed  and  set  in  me,  and  therefore 
it  may  not  be  changed.  I  hear  that  horrible  voice 
of  death  saying  to  me  in  this  manner  :  "  Thou  art 
the  son  of  death  ;  neither  riches,  nor  reason,  nor 
kinsmen,   nor    friends,   may    deliver    thee    from    my 

1  sorrowful.  •  i.e.  sighing,  lamenting. 

•  enwrapped.  *  «>.  memory. 


io8  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

hand  ;  for  thy  end  is  come,  and  it  is  deemed,  and 
therefore  it  must  be  done." 

O  my  God  shall  I  now  needs  die  ?  May  not  this 
sentence  be  changed  ?  Shall  I  now  so  soon  go  from 
this  world  ?  O  the  great  cruelty  of  death.  Spare, 
I  pray  thee,  to  the  youth,  spare  to  the  age  that  is 
not  yet  fully  ripe.  Do  not  so  cruelly  with  me. 
Withdraw  me  not  so  unpurveyed  ^  from  the  light 
of  life. 

The  Disciple,  hearing  these  words,  turned  to  him 
and  said  : 

Disciple 

Friend  thy  words  seem  to  me  not  savouring  of 
discipline.  Wot  thou  not  that  the  doom  of  death  is 
given  to  all  men,  for  it  taketh  no  person  afore  other 
and  it  spareth  no  man  ;  and  it  hath  no  mercy 
neither  of  young  nor  old.  It  slayeth  as  well  the 
rich  as  the  poor  ;  and  sooth  it  is  that  right  many, 
before  the  perfect  fulfilling  of  their  years,  be  drawn 
away  from  this  life.  Trowest  thou  that  death  should 
have  shared  thee  alone  ?  Nay,  for  the  prophets  be 
dead. 

The  Likness,  or  Image  of  Death, 

answered  and  said 

Soothly,  he  said,  thou  art  an  heavy  comforter  for 
my  words  sound  not  to  wisdom,  but  rather  they  be 
like  to  fools  ;  the  which  have  lived  evil  unto  their 
death,  and  have  wrought  those  things  that  be  worthy 

1  i.e.  unprovided.  . 


OROLOGIUM  SAPIENTI^  109 

death,  and  yet  they  dread  not  death  when  it 
nigheth  them.  They  be  blind,  and  like  to  unreason- 
able beasts  that  see  not,  before  their  last  end,  nor  that 
that  is  to  come  after  death.  And  therefore  I  weep 
not  all  for  sorrowing  of  the  doom  of  death,  but  I 
weep  for  the  harms  of  undisposed  death  ;  I  weep  not 
for  I  shall  pass  hence,  but  I  am  sprry  for  the  harms 
of  those  days  that  be  passed,  the  which  unprofitably 
dispendeth    without    any    fruit.      Erravimus    a   via 

VERITATIS    ET   JUSTITI^    LUMEN    NON    LUXIT    NOBIS,  etC.  :  I"  lil>ro 

Alas,  how  have  I  lived.     I  have  erred  from  the  way  ^ff'."i'"'> 

•  •  W  isii    V 

of  soothfastness,  and  the  light  of  righteousness  hath  g  * 
not  shined  into  me,  nor  the  truth  of  understanding 
was  not  received  in  my  soul.  Alas  what  profiteth 
to  me  pride,  or  the  boast  of  riches  ;  what  hath  that 
holpen  me  ?  All  those  be  passed  as  shadows  and  as 
the  mind  ^  of  gests  *  of  one  day  passing  forth.  And 
therefore  is  now  my  word  and  my  speech  in  bitter- 
ness to  my  soul,  and  my  words  full  of  sorrow,  and 
mine  eyes  deceived. 

0  why  had  not  I  been  ware  in  my  youth  of  this 
that  falleth  me  in  my  last  days,  when  I  was  clothed 
with  strength  and  beauty,  and  had  many  years  before 
me  to  come  ;  that  I  might  have  known  the  evils  that 
have  suddenly  fallen  upon  me  in  this  hour. 

1  took  no  force  *  to  the  worthiness  of  time,  but 
-freely  [have]  given  me  to  lost  and   to  wretched  life, 

and   spent  my  days  all   in  vanities.     And  therefore, 
right  as  fishes  be  caught  with  the  hook,  and  as  birds 

1  i.e.  memory.  *  deeds  or  actions. 

^  Le.  gave  no  heed  to. 


no  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

be  taken  with  the  grin,"^  so  am  I  taken  with  cruel 
death  that  hath  come  upon  me  suddenly  ;  and  my 
time  of  life  is  passed  and  slidden  away,  and  may  not 
be  cleped  again  "  of  no  man.  There  was  none  hour 
so  short  but  therein  I  might  have  gotten  ghostly 
winnings  that  pass  in  value  all  earthly  goods  with- 
outen  comparison.  Alas,  I  wretched,  why  have  I 
dispended  so  many  gracious  days  in  most  vain  and 
long  speaking,  and  so  little  force  have  taken  ot 
myself ! 

O  the  unspeakable  sorrow  of  mine  heart  !  Why 
have  I  so  given  me  to  vanities,  and  why  in  all  my 
life  learned  I  not  to  die  !  Wherefore  all  ye  that  be 
here  and  see  my  wretchedness,  ye  that  be  jocund  in 
the  flower  of  youth,  and  have  yet  time  able  to  live, 
behold  me  and  take  heed  of  mymischieves '  and  sorrows, 
and  eschew  *  your  harm  by  my  peril.  Spend  ye  in 
God  the  flower  of  your  youth,  and  occupy  ye  the 
time  that  is  given  you  in  holy  works  ;  lest  that  if  ye 
do  like  to  me,  ye  suffer  the  pains  that  I  suffer. 

O  everlasting  God,  to  Thee  I  knowledge,  com- 
plaining the  great  wretchedness  that  I  feel  of  the 
wanton  youth  in  which  I  hated  words  of  blaming  for 
my  trespasses.  I  would  not  obey  to  him  that  taught 
me,  and  turned  away  the  ear  from  them  that  would 
goodly  counsel  me.  And  I  hated  discipline,  and 
mine  heart  would  not  assent  to  blaming.  And  there- 
fore now  am  I  fallen  into  a  deep  pit,  and  am  caught 
with  the  grin  of  death.     It  had  been  better  to  me  if 

*  snare.  2  ,_,_  re-called, 

'  distresses  or  needs.  *  avoid,  confess. 


OROLOGIUM  SAPIENTIiE  in 

I  had  never  been  born,  or  else  that  I  had  perished  in 
my  mother's  womb,  than  I  had  so  unprofitably  spent 
the  time  that  was  granted  to  me  to  do  penance,  and 
misused  it  so  wretchedly  in  pride. 

Disciple 

Lo,  we  all  die  :  as  water  falleth  down  into  the 
earth,  and  turneth  not  again.  And  God  will  not 
that  man's  soul  perish,  but  withdraweth  from  him, 
that  he  be  not  fully  lost  that  is  of  himself  abject. 
Wherefore  hear  now  my  counsel.  Repent  ye  of  all 
thine  offences,  and  do  penance  for  thy  misdeeds  that 
be  passed,  and  turn  ye  to  thy  Lord  God  by  good 
deeds.  For  He  is  full  benign  and  merciful  :  and  if 
it  so  be  that  the  end  be  good,  it  sufficeth  to  heal  of 
soul. 

The  Image  of  Death  answered 

What  word  is  this  that  thou  speakest  ?  Shall  I 
turn  me  and  do  penance  ?  Seest  thou  not  the 
anguish  of  death  that  overlieth  me  ?  Lo,  1  am  so 
greatly  feared  with  the  dread  and  horror  of  death, 
and  so  bounden  with  the  bonds  of  death,  that  I  may 
not  see  nor  know  what  I  shall  do.  But  right  as  the 
partridge  constrained  under  the  claws  and  nails  of  the 
hawk  is  half  dead  for  dread,  right  so  all  vice  ^  is  gone 
from  me  ;  thinking  not  else  but  how  I  might  in  any 
wise  escape  this  peril  of  death,  the  which  neverthe- 
less I  may  not  escape. 

O  that  blessed  penance  and  turning  from  sin 
'  Douce  114  reads  '  witte.' 


112  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

bc-times,  fbr  that  is  [the]  sicker  way.  Forsooth  he 
that  hath  late  turned  him  and  givcth  him  to 
penance,  he  shall  be  in  doubt  and  uncertain,  for  he 
wot  not  whether  his  penance  be  true  or  feigned. 
Woe  to  me  that  hath  so  long  suffered  for  to  amend  - 
my  life.  Alas  I  have  too  long  tarried  for  to  get  me 
heal.  Lo  all  my  days  be  passed  and  lost,  and 
wretchedly  been  perished  and  gone  so  negligently 
that  I  wot  not  whether  I  have  spent  one  day  of  them 
all  in  the  will  of  God  ;  and  the  exercises  of  all 
virtues  not  done  so  worthily  and  so  perfectly  as 
peraventure  I  might  and  should  have  done,  or  else 
if  I  ever  did  to  my  Maker  so  pleasant  service  and 
acceptable  as  mine  estate  asketh.  Alas,  for  sorrow 
thus  it  is,  wherefore  all  mine  inward  affections  [have] 
been  sore  wounded.  O  God  everlasting,  how 
shameful  shall  I  stand  at  the  doom  before  Thee  and 
all  Thy  saints,  when  I  shall  be  compelled  to  give 
answer  and  reason  of  all  that  I  have  done  and  let 
undone.  And  what  shall  I  say  hereto,  but  at  next  * 
is  my  tribulation,  then  [when]  I  pass  forth  from  this 
world.  Take  now  heed  of  me  I  pray  you  busily. 
Lo,  in  this  hour  I  would  have  more  joy  of  a  little 
short  prayer,  as  of  an  Ave  Maria,  said  devoutly  of 
me,  than  a  thousand  pounds  of  silver  or  gold. 

O  my  God,  how  many  goods  have  I  negligently 
lost.  Soothly  now  know  I  that  as  [to]  the  greatness 
of  heavenly  needs,  it  should  more  have  availed  me  a 
busy  keeping  of  mine  heart,  and  all  my  wits  with 
cleanness  of  heart,  than  that  I  lost,  or  by  inordinate 
'  i.e.  the  nearest  or  first  thing. 


OROLOGIUM  SAPIENTI^E  113 

affection  defouled  and  defected,^  that  any  other 
man  thirty  years  had  made  him  by  prostrations,  for 
to  get  me  reward  of  God  here  or  in  bliss. 

O  ye  all  that  see  my  wretchedness,  have  compassion 
on  me,  and  have  mercy  on  yourself;  and  while  your 
strength  suffices  and  have  time,  help  and  gather  to 
heavenly  barns  heavenly  treasures,  the  which  may 
receive  you  into  everlasting  tabernacles,  what  time 
that  ye  fail  ;  and  that  ye  be  not  left  void  in  such  an 
hour  that  is  to  come  to  you,  as  ye  see  me  void  now 
and  of  all  goods  dispoiled. 

Disciple 

My  loved  friend  I  see  well  that  thy  sorrow  is  full 
great,  and  therefore  I  have  compassion  of  thee  with 
all  mine  heart  ;  adjuring  thee  by  God  Almighty  that 
thou  give  me  counsel  whereby  that  I  may  be  taught, 
that  I  fall  not  in  such  peril  of  undisposed  death. 

Hereto  said  the  Image  of  Death 

The  counsel  of  sovereign  prudence  and  most  pro- 
vidence standeth  in  this  point,  that  thou  dispose 
thee,  while  thou  art  whole  and  strong,  by  true 
contrition  and  clean  and  whole  confession,  and  by 
due  satisfaction  ;  and  all  wicked  and  noyous  things, 
that  should  withdraw  or  let  thee  from  everlasting 
health,  that  thou  cast  away  from  thee  ;  and  that  thou 
keep  thee  so  in  all  times  as  [though]  thou  should 
pass  out  of  this  world,  this  day,  or  to-morrow,  or  at 
i  i.e.  made  defective  or  dishonoured. 


114  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

the  uttermost  within  this  sen'night.  Put  ^  in  thine 
heart  as  though  thy  soul  were  in  purgatory  and  had 
in  penance  for  thy  trespass  ten  years  in  the  furnace  of 
the  burning  fire,  and  only  this  year  is  granted  thee 
for  thine  help  ;  and  so  behold  often  sithes  thy  soul 
among  the  burning  coals,  crying  : 

"O  Thou  best  beloved  of  all  Friends,  help  Thy 
wretched  soul  !  Have  mind  on  me,  that  am  now 
in  so  hard  prison.  Have  mercy  on  me  that  stand  • 
all  desolate,  and  suffer  me  no  longer  to  be  tormented 
in  this  dark  prison.  For  I  am  forsaken  of  this 
world.  There  is  none  that  showeth  me  kindness,  or 
that  would  put  to  [a]  hand  to  help  me,  needy.  All 
men  seek  their  own  profit  and  have  forsaken  me,  and 
left  me  in  this  painful  burning  flame  and  desolate." 

[The]  Disciple  answered 

Soothly  this  doctrine  of  thine  were  most  profitable, 
whoso  hath  it  by  experience  as  thou  hast.  But 
though  it  so  be,  that  thy  words  be  seen  full  stirring 
and  biting,  nevertheless  they  profit  little  as  to  many 
folk,  for  they  turn  away  their  face  that  they  will  not 
see  unto  their  end.  Their  eyes  see  not,  nor  their 
ears  hear  not.  They  weened  to  live  long,  and  that 
deceiveth  them  ;  and  for  they  dread  not  undisposed  • 
death,  therefore  they  take  no  keep  of  seeing  to-fore 
the  harms  thereof,  what  time  that  the  messenger  of 
death  cometh  ; — that  is  to  say  hard  and  great  sickness. 

^  i.t.  consider  or  ponder.  '  i.e.  remain,  or  am. 

•  i.e.  unprepared. 


OROLOGIUM  SAPIENTI^  115 

Then  come  friends  and  fellows  to  the  sick  man  for  to 
visit  him  and  comfort  him.  And  then  all  proffer  and 
behote  ^  good  things  ;  and  that  him  need  not  to 
dread  the  death,  and  that  there  is  no  peril  thereof, 
and  that  it  is  but  a  running  of  humours  unkindly,  or 
stopping  of  the  sinews  or  the  veins,  that  shall  soon 
pass  over. 

Thus  the  friends  of  (the)  bodies  be  enemies  to 
(the)  souls.  For  what  time  the  sickness  continually 
increaseth,  and  he  that  is  sick  trusteth  ever  of  amend- 
ment, at  the  last  suddenly  he  falleth  and  without 
fruit  of  heal  yieldeth  up  the  wretched  soul  ;  right  so 
these  that  hear  thy  words — the  which  beleven  •  all 
together  to  man's  prudence  and  worldly  wisdom — 
they  cast  behind  their  backs  thy  words,  and  will  not 
obey  (to)  thy  healthful  counsel. 

The  Image  of  Death  said 

Therefore  what  time  they  be  taken  with  the  grin 
of  death,  when  there  falleth  upon  them  suddenly 
tribulation  and  anguish,  they  shall  cry  and  not  be 
heard  ;  forasmuch  as  they  had  Wisdom  in  hate,  and 
despised  to  hear  my  counsel.  And  right  as  now  full 
few  be  found  that  be  compunctious  through  my 
words  for  to  amend  them  and  turn  their  life  into 
better,  so  forsooth — for  the  malice  of  the  fiend  in 
this  time,  and  default  of  ghostly  fervour,  and  the 
wickedness  of  the  world,  now  in  his  eld,'  letteth 
him — so  that  there  be  but  few  so  perfectly  disposed  * 
to  death  :  the  which  for  great  abstraction  from  the 
^  promise,  *  i.e.  trust.  ^  old  age.  *  prepared. 


ii6  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

world  and  devotion  of  heart,  coveting  to  die  for 
the  desire  of  everlasting  life,  and  within  all  his 
inward  affection  desiring  to  be  with  Christ  ; — but 
rather  the  contrary.  And  for  the  most  part  of 
people, — they  be  suddenly  with  bitter  death  overcome 
that  they  be  found  at  that  time  all  undisposed  in 
manner  ;  as  I  am  now  overcome. 

And  if  thou  wilt  know  the  cause  of  so  great  and 
so  common  a  peril,  lo,  it  is  the  inordinate  desire 
of  worship  ^  and  the  superfluous  care  of  the  body. 
Earthly  love,  and  too  much  busyness  about  worldly 
living,  blinds  many  hearts  of  the  commonalty,  and 
brings  them  at  the  last  to  these  mischieves.  But 
soothly  if  thou,  with  few,  desirest  to  be  saved  from 
the  peril  of  undisposed  death  hear  my  counsel,  and 
oft  sithes  set  before  thine  eyes  this  that  thou  seest 
now  in  my  sorrowful  person,  and  busily  bring  it  to 
thy  mind  ;  and  thou  shalt  find  soon  that  my  doctrine 
is  to  thee  most  profitable.  For  thou  hast  so  [much] 
profit  thereby  that,  not  only  thou  shalt  not  dread  to 
die,  but  also  (the)  death — that  is  to  all  living  men 
dreadful, — thou  shalt  abide  and  receive  with  desire  of 
thine  heart,  in  that  it  is  the  end  of  travail  and  the 
beginning  of  the  felicity  of  everlasting  joy.  This 
thing  look  thou  do  :  that  thou  every  day  bring  me 
inwardly  to  thy  mind,  and  busily  take  tent  *  to  my 
words,  and  sadly  '  write  them  in  thy  heart.  Of  the 
sorrows  and  anguish  that  thou  seest  in  me  take  heed, 
and  think  upon  those  things  that  be  to  come  in  hasty  • 

'  i.e.  honour.  ^care  or  heed. 

*  constantly.  */.*.  sudden. 


OROLOGIUM  SAPIENTIiE  117 

time  upon  thee.  Have  mind  of  my  doom,  for  such 
shall  be  thy  doom. 

O  how  blessed  art  thou,  Arsenie,  that  ever  had  this 
hour  of  death  before  thine  eyes  !  And  so  blessed  is 
he,  the  which  wot  what  time  his  Lord  cometh  and 
knocketh  on  the  gate,  and  findeth  him  ready  to  let 
Him  in.  For  by  what  manner  of  death  he  be  over- 
laid, he  shall  be  purged  and  brought  to  the  sight  of 
Almighty  God  ;  and,  in  the  passing  of  his  spirit,  it 
shall  be  received  into  the  blessed  palace  of  everlasting 
bliss. 

But  woe  is  me,  wretched  !  Where  trowest  thou 
shalt  abide  this  night  my  spirit  ?  Who  shall  receive 
my  wretched  soul,  and  where  shall  it  be  harboured 
at  night  in  that  unknown  country  ?  Oh  how  desolate 
thou  shalt  be,  my  soul,  and  abject,  passing  all  other 
souls  !  Therefore,  having  compassion  on  myself 
among  these  bitter  words,  I  shed  out  tears  as  the 
river.  But  what  helpeth  it  to  weep  or  to  multiply 
many  bitter  words  ?  It  is  concluded  and  may  not 
be  changed. 

O  my  God,  now  I  make  an  end  of  my  words.  I 
may  no  longer  make  sorrow,  for  lo,  now  is  the  hour 
come  that  will  take  me  from  the  earth.  Woe  is  me 
now  !  I  see  and  know  that  I  may  no  longer  live, 
and  that  death  is  at  next.^  For  lo,  the  hands  un- 
wieldy begin  to  rancle,*  the  face  to  pale,  the  sight  to 
'deceive,  and  the  eyes  to  go  in.  The  light  of  the 
world  I  shall  no  more  see,  and  the  estate  of  another 
world,  before  the  eyes  of  my  soul,  in  my  mind,  I 
1  i.e.  directly  at  hand.     O. E.D.  *  fester. 


ii8  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

begin  to  hold.  O  my  God,  how  dreadful  a  sight  is 
this  !  Lo,  the  cruel  beasts  and  the  horrible  faces  of 
devils,  and  black  forshapen  things  withouten  number 
have  environed  me,  a-spying  and  abiding  my  wretched 
soul — that  shall  in  haste  pass  out — if  peradventurc  it 
shall  be  taken  to  them  for  to  be  tormented,  as  for  her 
bote.i 

O  thou  most  righteous  Doomsman,  how  strait  and 
hard  be  thy  dooms  ;  charging  •  and  hard  deeming  me, 
wretched,  in  those  things  the  which  few  folk  charge  or 
dread,  forasmuch  as  they  seem  small  and  little.  Q 
the  dreadful  sight  of  the  righteous  Justice,  that  is  now 
present  to  me  by  dread,  and  suddenly  to  come  in 
deed.  Lo,  (the)  death,  swift  perishing  '  the  members^ 
is  come,  that  witnesseth  the  kind  *  of  the  flesh  th'at 
perisheth  and  overcometh  the  spirit. 

Now  farewell,  fellows  and  friends  most  dear  :  for 
now  in  my  passing  I  cast  the  eyes  of  my  mind  into- 
purgatory,  whither  that  I  shall  now  be  led,  and  out 
thereof  I  shall  not  pass  till  I  have  yielded  the  last 
farthing  of  my  debt  for  sin.  There  I  behold  with 
the  eye  of  mine  heart  wretchedness  and  sorrow,  and 
manifold  pain  and  tormenting.  Alas,  me  wretched  ! 
There  I  see — among  other  pains  that  longen  to  that 
place — rising  up  flames  of  fire,  and  the  souls  of 
wretched  folk  cast  therein  ;  up  and  down,  to  and  fro, 
that  run  as  sparks  of  fire  in  midst  of  that  burning 
fire  :  right  as  in  a  great  town,  all  one  fire.  And  in 
the  fire  and  in  the  smoke  the  sparks  be  borne  up  and 

1  remedy.  ^  accusing. 

3  i.e.  causing  to  perish,  destroying.  *  nature. 


OROLOGIUM  SAPIENTIiE  119 

down.  So  the  souls,  waymenting  for  sorrow  of  their 
pains,  cry  everyone  and  say  these  words  :  Miseremini 
MEi,  MISEREMINI  MEi,  SALTUM  vos,  ETC.  Have  mercy 
on  me,  have  mercy  on  me,  at  the  last,  ye  that  be 
my  friends.  Where  is  now  the  help  of  my  friends  ? 
Where  be  now  the  good  behests  of  our  kinsmen  and 
others  ;  by  whose  inordinate  affection  we  took  no 
force  ^  of  ourselves,  and  so  increased  we  this  pain  to 
ourselves.  Alas,  why  have  we  done  so  ?  Lo  the 
least  pain  of  this  purgatory  that  we  now  feel  passeth 
all  manner  of  Jewesses  ■  of  that  temporal  world  ;  the 
bitterness  of  pain  that  we  now  feel  in  one  hour, 
seemeth  as  great  as  all  the  sorrows  of  the  passing 
world  in  an  hundred  years.  But  passing  ^  all  other 
torments  and  pains,  it  grieveth  me  most  the  absence 
of  that  blessed  Face  of  God. 

These  words  that  I  have  here  now  said  in  my  last 
passing  I  leave  to  thee  as  a  mind  :  and  so  passing  I 
die. 

At  this  vision  the  disciple  made  great  sorrow, 
and  for  dread  all  his  bones  quaked.  And  then 
turning  him  to  God  he  said  : 

Disciple 

Where  is  everlasting  Wisdom  ?  Now  Lord  hast 
Thou  forsaken  me.  Thy  servant.  Thou  wouldest 
teach  me  wisdom  enough,  but  I  am  almost  brought 
to  the  death.  O  my  God,  how  much  bindeth  me 
the  presence  of  death  that  I  have  seen  !     Now  the 

^  i.e.  heed.  ^  /,,,  extortioners.  ^  i.e.  surpassing. 


ito  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

Image  of  Death  hath  so  overlaid  all  my  mind  that  un- 
nethes  ^  wot  I  whether  I  have  seen  the  Image  of  Death 
or  not  ;  for  I  am  so  greatly  astonicd  that  unnethes 
wot  I  whether  this  that  I  have  seen  be  so  in  deed,  or 
in  likeness.  O  Lord  of  Lords,  dreadful  and  merciful, 
I  thank  Thee  with  all  mine  heart  of  Thy  special 
grace,  and  I  behote  •  amendment,  for  I  am  made 
afeared  with  passing  great  dread. 

Ah  forsooth  !  I  never  perceived  in  my  life  the 
perils  of  undisposed  death  so  openly  as  I  have  now  in 
this  hour.  I  believe  for  certain  that  this  dreadful 
sight  shall  avail  to  my  soul  for  ever.  For  certain  now, 
I  know,  that  we  have  not  here  none  everlasting  city, 
and  therefore  to  the  unchangeable  state  of  the  soul 
that  is  to  come,  I  will  dispose  me  with  all  my  might. 
And  I  purpose  me  to  learn  to  die.  And  I  hope  by 
God's  grace  to  amend  my  life  withouten  any  with- 
drawing or  differing  ; '  for  sithen  I  am  made  so  sore 
afeared  so  only  to  the  mind,  what  should  be  to  me 
the  presence  thereof?  Wherefore  now  do  away  for 
me  the  softness  of  bedding,  and  the  preciosity  of  cloth- 
ing, and  the  sloth  of  sleep,  and  all  that  letteth  me 
from  my  Lord  Jesu  Christ. 

O  Thou  Holy  and  merciful  Saviour  put  *  me  not 
to  bitter  death.  Lo,  I  falling  down  before  Thee, 
with  weeping  tears  ask  of  Thee  that  Thou  punish  me 
here  at  Thy  will,  so  that  there  Thou  receive  '  not  my 
wicked  deeds  into  the  last  end  ;  for  soothly  in  that 

•  scarcely.  *  promistr.  '  /.*.  disputing. 

*  :  e.  give.  */.«■.  admit. 


OROLOGIUM  SAPIENTI.E  121 

horrible  place  there  is  so  great  sorrow  and  pain  that 
no -tongue  may  suffer  to  tell. 

..  jO  how^eat  a  fool  have  I  been  unto  this  time,  in- 
so-much  as  I  have  so  little  force  taken  of  undisposed 
death,  and  the  pain  of  purgatory  that  is  so  great. 
And  how  great  wisdom  it  is  to  have  these  things  oft 
before  thine  eyes.  But  now  that  I  am  so  ferdly  * 
monished  and  taught,  I  open  mine  eyes  and  dread  it 
greatly. 

Wisdom  answering  and  said 

,  These  things  that  be  said,  my  Son,  in  all  times  have 
in.  mind,  while  thou  art  whole,  young,  and  mighty, 
and  mayst  amend  thyself.  But  what  time  thou 
comest  to  that  hour,  in  soothness  and  none  otherwise 
may  thou  help  thyself ;  then  is  there  none  other 
remedy  but  that  thou  commit  thee  to  the  mercy  of 
God  only  ;  and  that  thou  take  My  passion  betwixt 
thee  and  My  doom,  lest  that  thou  dread  My  right- 
eousness more  than  needeth — for  so  thou  might  fall 
down  from  thine  hope.  And  now,  forasmuch  as  thou 
art  afeard  with  a  passing  dread,  be  of  good  comfort  ; 
understanding  that  the  dread  of  God  is  the  beginning 
of  wisdom.  Seek  thy  books,  and  thou  shalt  find  how 
many  goods  and  profits  the  mind  of  death  bringeth  to 
man.  Wherefore  have  mind  of  thy  Creator  and  Ecd.  xii  i. 
Maker  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  or  that  the  powder 
turn  again  into  his  earth,  whence  he  came  from,  and 
the  spirit  turn  again  to  the  Lord  that  gave  it  him. 
And  bless  thou  God  of  Heaven  with  all  thine  heart, 

'  fearfully. 


122  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

and  be  kind  to  him  that  giveth  thee  grace  to  see  this. 
For  there  be  full  few  that  perceive  with  their  heart 
the  unstableness  of  this  time  ;  nor  [the]  deceit  of  death, 
that  in  all  times  lieth  in  a-wait,  nor  the  everlasting 
felicity  of  that  country  which  is  to  come.  Lift  up 
your  eyes  and  look  about  thee  busily,  and  see  how 
many  there  be  blind  in  their  souls,  and  close  their 
eyes,  that  they  look  not  unto  their  last  end,  and  stop 
their  ears,  that  they  hear  not  for  to  be  converted  and 
healed  of  sin.  And  therefore  their  loss  and  damna- 
tion shall  not  long  tarry,  but  if  they  amend. 

Also  behold  the  company  without  number  of  them 
that  be  now  lost  through  the  mischief  of  undisposed 
death.  Number  the  multitude  of  them,  if  thou  may, 
and  take  heed  how  many  there  be  the  which  in  thy 
time,  dwelling  with  thee,  now  be  dead  and  passed 
hence  from  this  earth.  How  great  a  multitude  of 
brethren  and  fellows,  and  others  of  thy  knowledge,  in 
so  few  years  be  gone  before  thee — that  art  yet  a  young 
man  and  left  yet  on  life — and  they  be  dead.  Ask  of 
them  all,  and  seek  of  everyone  ;  and  they  shall  teach 
thee  and  answer  to  thee,  weeping  and  moaning,  saying 
thus  :  O  how  blessed  is  he  that  seeth  before,  and  pur- 
veyeth  for  these  last  things ;  and  keepeth  him  from  sin, 
and  doeth  after  thy  counsel  ;  and  in  all  time  disposeth 
him  to  kis  last  home. 

Wherefore  putting  a-back  all  things  that  shall  with- 
draw thee  here-from,  ordain  for  thine  house,  and 
make  thee  ready  to  that  last  way  of  every  man,  and 
to  the  hour  of  death  ; — for  in  certain  thou  wottest  not 
in  what  hour  it  shall  come,  and  how  nigh  it  is.     And 


OROLOGIUM  SAPIENTI^  123 

therefore,  right  as  a  travelling  man,  standing  in  the 
haven,  beholdeth  busily  a  ship  that  swiftly  saileth 
toward  far  countries  that  he  should  go  to,  lest  that  it 
should  overpass  him  he  standeth  still  and  removeth 
not  thence  till  it  come  to  him  ;  right  so  stand  thou 
stably  in  virtues,  and  more  for  love  and  for  dread,  so 
that  thy  life  and  all  thy  working  be  dressed  and  set  to 
that  intent  :  ever  principally  to  love  and  please  thy 
Lord  God,  turning  to  His  mercy  so  that  thou  have  a 
blessed  obit.^  By  the  which  thou  mayst  at  the  last 
come  to  thy  place  of  immortality  and  everlasting 
felicity.     Amen. 


NOTE  ON  THE  OROLOGIUM  SAPIENT!^ 

This  chapter  is  a  transcription  from  the  Douce  MS.  322 
(fol.  20)  and  is  also  found  in  MS.  Harl.  1706  (fol.  20); — these 
two  manuscripts  being  in  many  respects  very  similar, 
although  the  Harleian  MS.  contains  much  that  is  not  in  the 
Douce  MS.  Another  translation  of  this  chapter — which  I 
have  not  seen  noted  elsewhere — is  in  MS.  Bod.  789  (fol.  123) 
under  the  heading:  "The  most  profitable  sentence  to 
deadly  men  in  the  which  they  may  learn  to  know  to  die." 
It  begins  :  "To  kunne  deie  is  to  have  the  herte  and  the 
soule,"  etc.  This  manuscript  dates  from  the  beginning 
of  the  fourteenth  century  and  is  therefore  earlier  than 
the   Douce    MS.       Another  more  complete   version  of  the 

^  i.e.  death. 


124  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

Horologium,  containing  seven  chapteri,  is  found  in  the 
Douce  MS.  ii4(lol.  117).*  This  was  printed  by  Caxton  in 
1490,  under  the  title:  The  seuen  points  of  the  Wisdom,  or 
Orologium  Sapientiz."  There  is  also  a  French  translation 
of  these  "  seuen  chapters,"  in  a  fifteenth-century  manuscript 
in  the  British  Museum  (Harl  MS.  43869),  which  is  nearly 
twice  as  long  as  the  English  text. 

The  Orologium  Sapitntitg  has  frequently  and  quite  mistalienly 
been  ascribed  to  Kichard  KoUe.  It  is  of  course  by  Henry 
Suso,  although  Dr  Horstmann's  statement  that  it  is  an 
'•  English  reproduction  of  Heinrich  Suso's  Buck  von  der  gott- 
lieltH  IVthheit  is  also  misleading.^  In  reality  Suso  translated 
his  own  Biichlein  der  e-uigen  fVeuheit  into  Latin  under  the 
title  Horologium  Sapienti^,  and  in  thus  doing  added  to  it  so 
considerably  as  to  maice  it  almost  a  new  book. 

Suso,  who  took  his  mother's  name,  his  father  being  Herr 
von  Berg,  was  born  in  1300  at  tJberlingen  near  Lalie  Con- 
stance. He  came  under  Eckart's  influence  when  studying 
theology  at  Cologne,  where  he  wrote  his  most  mystical 
treatise,  Daj  biichlein  der  Wahrheit.  After  wandering 
through  Suabia  as  a  preacher  he  settled  at  Ulm  about  1348. 
It  was  there  that  he  wrote  these  later  books  in  which  he  dis- 
cusses the  more  practical  aspects  of  mysticism.  Suso  has 
been  called  the  poet  of  the  early  mystic  movement,  the 
**  Minnesinger  of  Gotiesminne  " ;  he  is  purely  medieval  in  tone, 
though  inspired  by  the  romanticism  of  the  age  of  chivalry. 
He  died  at  Ulm  in  1366. 


1  cf.  Anglia,  vol.  x.  p.  323. 

"^cj.  Library  of  English  Writers,  vol.  ii.  p.  xliii. 


THREE  FRAGMENTS  WHICH 
TEACH   A    MAN    FOR   TO   DIE 


HERE  SHOWETH  A  CHAPITLE  TAKEN 
OUT  OF  A  BOOK  CLEPED  TOURE  OF 
ALL  TOURES:  AND  TEACHETH  A 
MAN  FOR  TO  DIE 

Against  his  will  he  dieth  that  hath  not  learned  to 
die.  Learn  to  die  and  thou  shalt  con  ^  to  live,  for 
there  shall  none  con  to  live  that  hath  not  learned  to 
die  ;  and  he  shall  be  cleped  a  wretch  that  cannot 
live  and  dare  not  die. 

If  thou  wilt  live  freely  learn  to  die  wilfully  ;  *  and 
if  thou  ask  of  me  how  many  it  learneth,  I  shall  tell  it 
thee  anon. 

Thou  shalt  understand  that  this  life  is  not  else  but 
death  ;  for  death  is  a  passing  as  every  man  knoweth 
well.  Wherefore  men  say  of  a  man  when  he  dieth 
that  he  passeth  ;  and  when  he  is  dead  he  is  passed. 
This  life  is  not  but  only  a  passing,  yea,  forsooth,  and 
that  a  full  short  passing.  For  all  the  life  of  a 
man's  youth — if  he  lived  a  thousand  year — were  not 
as  a  moment  in  regard  to  the  other  life  that  ever  shall 
last  ;  other  in  joy  withouten  end,  other  in  torment 
everlasting.  This  witnesseth  to  us  well  earls,  kings, 
and  emperors,  which  some  time  had  the  joy  of  this 

1  i.e.  learn.  *  i.e.  willingly. 

127 


128  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

world,  and  now  in  hell  wallowing  and  weeping,  crying 
and  saying  :  Alas,  what  is  now  worth  to  us  our  power, 
honour,  noblesse,  joy,  and  boasts  !  Sooner  it  is  passed 
than  the  shadow.  For  as  the  shot  of  an  arblaster  ^ 
passeth,  right  so  passeth  our  life.  Now  be  we  born, 
and  now  be  we  dead  anon  ;  and  all  our  life  is  not  a 
moment.  Now  we  be  in  torment  everlasting  :  our 
joy  is  turned  into  weeping,  carols  to  sorrow,  garlands, 
robes,  games,  feasts,  and  all  goods  to  us  be  fallen. 
Such  be  the  songs  of  hell.  And  Holy  Writ  telleth 
us  that  this  life  is  not  but  a  passage,  and  for  to  live  is 
not  but  for  to  pass.  Then  for  to  live  is  not  but 
for  to  die,  and  that  is  sooth  as  the  Paternoster. 
For  when  thou  beginnest  for  to  live,  anon  thou 
shalt  begin  for  to  die  :  and  all  thine  age  and  thy 
time  that  is  passed,  death  hath  it  conquered  and 
holdeth. 

Thou  sayest  that  thou  hast  now  forty  years.  That 
is  not  sooth.  The  death  hath  them,  and  never  shall 
they  thee  hold. 

Therefore  is  the  wit  of  this  world  folly.  These 
clerks  see  not  this  thing  ;  and  yet  day  and  night 
they  do  this  thing.  And  the  more  that  they  [have]  it 
done,  the  less  they  it  know  :  for  alway  they  die,  and 
yet  con  they  not  die.  For  day  and  night  diest  thou, 
as  I  have  to  thee  said  ;  yet  in  another  manner  I  shall 
teach  thee  this  clergy,*  that  thou  con  die  well  and 
live  well. 

Now  hearken  and  understand.  Death  is  not  else 
but  a  departing  of  the  body  and  of  the  soul,  as  every 

^  cross-bowman.  '  i.e.  clerical  learning  or  skill. 


TOWER  OF  ALL  TOWERS  129 

man  knoweth.  Now  teacheth  us  the  wise  man, 
Caton.  Learn  we,  he  sayeth,  for  to  die.  Depart  we 
the  spirit  from  the  body.  Oft  so  die  the  great 
philosophers,  that  this  life  so  much  hated,  and  this 
world  so  much  dispraised — and  so  much  desired  the 
death,  that  they  fell  down  by  their  own  will  :  but 
that  was  to  them  little  worth  for  they  had  not  the 
grace  nor  the  truth  of  Jesu  Christ. 

But  these  holy  men,  that  loved  and  dreaded  God, 
that  out  of  three  deaths  hath  passed.  Twain,  for  they 
be  dead  unto  sin,  and  dead  unto  the  world  ;  and 
they  abiden  the  third  death,  that  is  departing  of  the 
body  and  the  soul.  Betwix  them  and  paradise  is  not 
but  a  little  wall,  which  they  pass  through  thought  and 
desiring.  And  if  the  body  be  on  this  half,  the  heart 
and  the  spirit  is  on  the  other  half.  There  they  have 
(the)  conversation,  as  Saint  Paul  saith  :  their  place, 
their  joy,  their  comfort  and  their  desiring.  And 
therefore  they  hate  this  life  that  is  but  death,  and 
desire  the  bodily  death. 

Death  unto  the  good  man  is  end  of  all  evils,  and 
entry  and  gates  of  all  goods.  Death  is  the  running 
brook  that  departed  from  (the)  life.  Death  is  on 
this  half,  and  life  is  on  the  other  half.  But  the  wise 
men  of  this  world  (that)  on  this  half  on  the  running 
brook  see  so  clearly,  and  on  that  other  half  see  not — 
and  therefore  Holy  Writ  clepeth  them  fools  and  blind. 
For  this  death  they  clepen  life,  and  the  death  that 
these  good  men  beginning  of  life,  they  clepen  the 
end.  And  therefore  they  hate  so  much  (the)  death 
that  they  wot  not  what  it  is ;  nor  beyond  the  run- 


I30  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

ning  brook  they  have  not  dwelled.  And  he  can 
nought  *  that  goeth  not  out. 

Then,  if  thou  wilt  wit  what  is  good  and  what  is 
evil,  [cast  out  the  world  and  learn  to  die.  Depart 
thy  body  from  thy  soul  through  thought,  send  thine 
heart  into  that  other  world,  that  is  into  heaven,  into 
hell,  and  into  purgatory.  And  then  thou  shalt  see 
what  is  good  and  what  is  evil].* 

In  hell  thou  shalt  see  more  sorrow  than  man  may 
devise.  In  purgatory  more  torment  than  man  may 
endure.  In  paradise  more  joy  than  man  may  desire. 
Hell  will  teach  thee  how  God  shall  venge  deadly  sin. 
Purgatory  will  show  thee  how  God  shall  venge 
venial  sin.  In  paradise  thou  shalt  see  aptly  virtues 
and  good  works  rewarded  highly. 

In  these  three  things  standeth  what  behovcth  for 
to  con  well  for  to  live,  and  well  for  to  die. 


^  i.e.  knows  nothing. 

*  Omitted  in  Harl.  1706,  probably  because  of  the  repetition 
of  'what  is  CTil.' 


THIS  FOLLOWS  THE  CRAFT  OF  DTING 
IN  MS.  BOD.  423 

Have  in  mind  that  thou  hast  one  God  that  made 
thee  of  nought  ;  which  hath  given  thee  thy  right 
wits,  thy  right  limbs,  and  other  worldly  ease,  more 
than  to  another,  as  thou  mayst  see  all  day — which 
live  in  much  disease  and  great  bodily  mischief.^ 

Think  also  how  sinful  thou  art,  and  were  [it] 
not  the  keeping  of  that  good  Lord  God,  thou 
shouldst  fall  into  all  manner  of  sin,  by  thine  own 
wretchedness  ;  and  then  thou  mayst  think  soothly  as 
of  thyself  there  is  none  more  sinful  than  thou  art. 

Also  if  thou  have  any  virtue  or  grace  of  good 
living,  think  it  cometh  of  God's  fonde  '  and  nothing 
of  thyself.  Think  also  how  long  and  how  oft  God 
hath  suffered  thee  in  sin.  He  would  not  take  thee 
into  damnation  when  thou  had  deserved  it,  but 
gladly  hath  abiden  thee  till  thou  wouldst  leave  sin 
and  turn  thee  to  goodness  ;  for  loth  Him  were  to 
forsake  that  He  bought  full  sore  with  bitter  pains. 
And,  for  He  would  not  lose  thee.  He  became  man, 
born  of  a  maiden,  suffering  great  passion  and  death 
to  save  thee. 


^  ill,  or  need.  ^  /,,_  source. 

131 


HERE  FOLLOW  FOUR  PROFITABLE 
THINGS  TO  HAVE  IN  MIND  :  WHICH 
BEEN  HAD  OUT  OF  THE  THIRD 
CHAPTER  OF  A  DEVOUT  TREATISE 
AND  A  FORM  OF  LIVING ;»  THAT 
RYCHARDE  HAMPOLE  WROTE  TO  A 
DEVOUT  PERSON  IN  THIS  MANNER 
WISE 

The  first  is  the  measure  of  thy  life  here  ;  that  is  so 
short  that  unnethes  it  is  nought  ;  •  for  we  live  in  a 
point — that  is  the  least  thing  that  may  be — and 
soothly  our  life  is  less  than  a  point  if  we  liken  it  to 
the  life  that  lasteth  ever. 

Another  is  uncertainty  of  our  ending  ;  for  we  wit 
never  when  we  shall  die,  nor  how  we  shall  die,  nor 
whither  we  shall  go  when  we  be  dead  ;  and  that 
God  will  that  it  be  uncertain  to  us,  for  He  wills 
that  we  alway  be  ready  to  die. 

The  third  is  that  we  shall  answer  before  the 
righteous  Judge  of  all,  the  time  that  we  have  been 
here.  How  we  have  here  lived,  what  our  occupation 
hath  been,  and  why  ;  and  what  good  we  might  have 

^  It   is   from   chap.    iv.   of  The  Form   of  Living.     Cf.  Dr 
Hodgson'i  edit.,  p.  24,  or  Horstman,  i.  19. 
'  i.e.  scarcely  is  it  anything. 
IBS 


FOUR  PROFITABLE  THINGS         133 

done,  while  we  have  been  idle.  Therefore  the 
prophet  said  :  He  hath  cleped  the  time  against  me  ; 
that  is,  each  day  He  hath  lent  us  here,  for  to  spend 
in  good  use  here,  and  in  penance,  and  in  God's 
service.  If  we  waste  it  in  earthly  love  and  vanities, 
full  grievously  may  we  be  deemed  and  punished. 
Therefore  it  is  one  of  the  most  sorrows  that  may  be, 
but  ^  we  enforce  us  namely  in  the  love  of  God,  and 
do  good  to  all  that  we  may,  the  while  that  our  short 
time  lasteth.  And  each  time  that  we  think  not  on 
God,  we  may  account  it  as  the  time  that  we  have 
lost. 

The  fourth  is  that  we  think  how  much  that  the 
joy  is  that  they  shall  have  which  last  and  endure  in 
God's  love  into  their  ending ;  for  they  shall  be 
brethren  and  fellow  with  angels  and  holy  men,  loving 
and  having  praising,  and  seeing  the  King  of  Joy,  in 
the  fairhead  and  the  shining  of  His  majesty  ;  the 
which  sight  shall  be  meat  and  all  delights  that  any 
creature  may  think,  and  more  than  any  man  may 
tell  to  all  his  lovers  withouten  end.  It  is  much 
lighter  to  come  to  that  bliss  than  to  tell  it. 

Also  think  what  sorrow,  and  what  pain  and  what 
torment,  that  they  shall  have  the  which  loved  not 
God  over  all  other  things  that  men  see  in  this  world ; 
but  fill  their  body  and  their  souls  in  lust  and  liking 
of  this  life,  in  pride  and  covetuousness  and  other 
sins.  They  shall  burn  in  the  fire  of  hell  with  the 
devil  whom  thy  serve,  as  long  as  God  is  in  heaven 
with  His  servants  :  that  is  evermore. 
*  unless. 


NOTE  ON  THE  TOWER  OF  ALL  TOWERS 

This  fragment  is  taken  from  the  Douce  MS.  322  (fol. 
X5»).  It  follows  the  Orelogium  Sapientia,  and  immediatelj 
precedes  The  Craft  of  Dij'ing.  I  have  not  been  able  to 
trace  the  book  "  cleped  toure  of  all  toures."  Tower  of  all 
towers  is  probably  a  name  for  Heaven,  and  it  may  possibly 
be  a  translation  from  some  Latin  original.  Perhaps  some- 
one  who  reads  this  may  be  able  to  throw  light  upon  it. 
The  Harleian  MS.  1706  also  contains  a  copy  of  the  same 
fragment. 

The  other  two  fragments  are  from  the  Bodleian  MS.  423. 
They  are  not  contained  in  either  the  Douce  or  Rawlinson 
manuscripts. 


184 


THE  LAMENTATION  OF  THE 
DYING  CREATURE 


THE  LAMENTATION  OF  THE 
DYING  CREATURE 

The  Dying  Creature  enset  with  Sickness  incurable 
sorrowfully  complaineth  him  thus 

Alas  that  ever  I  sinned  in  my  life.  To  me  is  come 
this  day  the  dreadfullest  tidings  that  ever  I  heard. 
Here  hath  been  with  me  a  sergeant  of  arms  whose 
name  is  Cruelty,^  from  the  King  of  all  Kings,  Lord 
of  all  Lords,  and  Judge  of  all  Judges  ;  laying  on  me 
the  mace  of  His  office,  saying  unto  me  :  I  arrest  thee 
and  warn  thee  to  make  thee  ready,  and  that  thou 
fail  not  to  be  ready  in  every  hour  when  thou  be 
called  on  ;  thou  shalt  not  wit  when.  And  call  sadly 
to  thine  remembrance  thine  old  and  [long]  *  continued 
offences  ;  and  the  goodness  of  God,  how  largely  He 
hath  departed '  with  thee  the  gifts  of  nature,  the 
gifts  of  fortune,  and  the  gifts  of  grace.  And  how 
He  hath  departed  with  thee  largely  and  ordained 
thee  at  thy  baptism  three  borrows,*  that  thou 
shouldest  safely  and  surely  be  kept  in  thy  tender  age 

1  All  words  printed   in    capitals   are  written    in   red   in 
the  MS. 

•  Additions   in   square    brackets    are    from   Wynkyn   de 
Worde's  printed  version. 

'  divided.  *  i.e.  sureties. 

137 


138  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

as  well  from  vices  as  bodily  peril  ;  and  ordained  thee 
a  good  angel  to  keep  and  counsel  thee — if  thou  have 
been  counselled  by  him,  bethink  thee — and  when 
thou  camest  to  years  of  discretion  he  ordained  thee 
three  sad  counsellors ;  Reason,  Diead,  and  Conscience^ 
If  thou  have  ruled  thee  by  their  counsel,  call  that  to- 
thy  remembrance. 

He  ordained  thee  also  five  [Wits]  servants,  that 
thou  shouldest  be  master  of,  and  rule  them  after  thy 
discretion  ;  that  is  to  say,  thy  sight,  thy  hearing,  thy 
speech,  thy  feeling,  and  thy  taste.  How  hast  thou 
ruled  those  that  be  under  thine  obedience  ?  Me 
seemeth  thou  hast  much  things  to  answer  for.  The 
Judge  that  shall  sit  upon  thee.  He  will  not  be  partial,^ 
nor  He  will  not  be  corrupt  with  goods,  but  He 
will  minister  to  thee  justice  and  equity  certainly  as 
well  as  these  three  were.  Certain  things  He  forbade 
thee,  and  those  things  thou  shouldest  flee  in  every 
wise.  There  is,  to  wit,  the  seven  deadly  sins;  and  all 
things  that  should  provoke,  move,  or  stir  thereto.  He 
bade  thee  flee.  Hast  thou  done  so  ?  Hast  thou 
kept  His  commandments  ten  :  and  yet  that  is  but 
a  little  thing. 

The  Lamentation  of  the  Dying  Creature 

Alas !  alas  !  Excuse  me  I  can  not,  and  whom 
I  might  desire  to  speak  for  me  I  wot  not.  The  day 
and  time  is  so  dreadful  ;  the  Judge  is  so  rightful  ; 
mine  enemies  be  so  evil  ;  my  kin,  my  neighbours, 
my  friends,  my  servants,  be  not  favourable  to  me  ; 
and  I  wot  well  they  shall  not  be  heard  there. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    139 

The  Complaint  of  the   Dying   Creature 
TO  THE  -Good  Angel 

O  my  Good  Angel,  to  whom  our  Lord  took  me 
to  keep,  where  be  thee  now  ?  Me  thinketh  ye 
should  be  here,  and  answer  for  me  ;  for  the  dread  of 
death  distroubleth  me,  so  that  I  cannot  answer  for 
myself.  Here  is  my  bad  angel  ready,  and  is  one  of 
my  chief  accusers,  with  legions  of  fiends  with  him. 
I  have  no  creature  to  answer  for  me.  Alas  it  is  an 
heavy  case  ! 

The   Answer  of  the  Good  Angel 
TO  the   Dying  Creature 

As  to  your  bad  deeds,  I  was  never  consenting. 
I  saw  your  natural  inclination  more  disposed  to  be 
ruled  by  your  bad  angel  than  by  me.  Howbeit,  ye 
cannot  excuse  you,  but  when  ye  were  purposed  to  do 
anything  that  was  contrary  to  the  commandments  of 
God,  I  failed  not  to  remember  lyou  that  it  was  not 
well  ;  and  counselled  thee  to  flee  the  place  of  peril, 
and  the  company  that  should  stir  or  move  you 
thereto.  Can  ye  say  nay  hereto  ?  How  can  ye 
think  that  I  should  answer  for  you  ? 

The  Complaint  of  the  Dying  Creature 
TO  Reason,  Dread,  and   Conscience 

O  ye  Reason,  Dread,  and  Conscience,  ye  were 
assigned  to  be  of  my  counsel.     Now  come,  I  require 


14©  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

you,  and  help  me  to  answer  for  me.  For  my 
defaults  be  so  many,  and  so  abominable  in  the 
sight  of  Him  that  shall  be  my  Judge,  and  mine 
accusors  so  many  and  so  unfriendly,  that  they  leave 
not  one  fault  behind.  Now  come,  I  require  you, 
and  help  to  answer  for  me,  for  it  was  never  so  great 
need.  The  fear  and  the  dread  that  I  am  in  dis- 
troubleth  me  so  that  one  word  I  cannot  speak  for  my 
life.     Alas  that  ever  I  saw  this  day  ! 

The  Answer  of  Reason  to  the  Dying  Creature 

Be  not  ye  remembered  that  Our  Lord  ordaineth 
you  a  good  angel  and  a  bad  angel  ;  and  He  ordained 
you  reason  and  discretion  to  know  good  from  evil. 
He  put  you  in  free  choice  whether  ye  would  do  well 
or  evil  ;  and  also  commanded  you  to  do  good  and  leave 
the  evil.  Ye  ought  to  call  to  your  remembrance  how 
well  God  hath  done  for  you,  and  holpen  you  in  every 
danger  and  peril  :  He  would  have  been  beloved, 
dreaded,  and  served,  according  to  the  manifold  mercies 
and  kindnesses  that  He  hath  showed  unto  you.  How 
to  answer  for  you  I  wot  not.  Loth  I  am  to  accuse 
you,  and  excuse  you  I  can  not. 

The  Complaint  of  the  Dying  Creature 
TO  Dread 

O  Dread,  where  be  ye  ?  Is  there  none  help  and 
succour  with  you  to  speak  for  me  when  I  shall  come 
to  judgment  i 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    141 

The  Answer  of  Dread 

No  certainly.  For  when  ye  were  set  on  pleasure 
and  delectation  of  the  world,  Reason  put  in  your 
mind  that  ye  did  not  well,  and  I,  Dread,  was  with 
you  at  all  times  and  in  every  place  ;  and  failed  not 
to  speak  to  you  and  to  put  you  in  mind  of  the 
shame  of  the  world,  dread  of  damnation,  and  of  the 
peril  that  would  follow — as  well  here  as  elsewhere — 
remembering  ^  unto  you  the  punishments  that  our 
Lord  ordained  for  sin  ;  saying  to  you  :  See  ye  not 
how  graciously  our  Lord  hath  called  you  away  from 
sin  and  wretchedness,  if  ye  would  understand  it. 
How  hath  He  long  kept  you  in  worship,  estate,  and 
in  prosperity,  and  (ye)  coude  not  *  know  the  good- 
ness of  God.  How  hath  He  chastised  you,  and  how 
oft  ;  by  loss  of  your  children,  loss  of  your  kin, 
friends,  and  goods,  and  loss  of  all  those  things  that 
ye  be  not  pleased  with  ;  and  set  you  in  the  indigna- 
tion of  high  and  mighty  princes,  and  holp  you  out  of 
the  dangers  and  perils  that  ye  have  been  in  at  all 
times  ;  and  yet  have  ye  not  loved  Him  and  served 
Him,  that  in  all  these  perils  hath  preserved  and  kept 
you,  and  hath  been  so  gracious  and  good  Lord  to  you. 
Who  should  speak  for  you.     I  ?     Nay  certainly. 

The  Complaint  of  the  Dying  Creature 
TO  Conscience 

Alas,  Conscience,  is  there  no  help  with  you  ?     I 
have  heard  say,  long  ago,  the  world  was  evil  to  trust, 
^  de  Worde,  *  rehearsing.'  *  /e  were  not  able  to. 


141  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

but  I  would  hope  that  Conscience  would  have 
compassion  of  my  distress ;  and  much  the  more  that 
I  am  friendless. 

The  Answer  of  Conscience  to  the  Dying  Creature 

I  am  sorry  to  accuse  you,  and  excuse  you  I  cannot. 
For  Conscience  and  Dread  have  been  full  seldom 
from  you  in  every  time  and  place  of  peril,  and  bad 
you  flee  the  occasions  of  sin.  Ye  might  have  fled  at 
that  time,  and  would  not.  Now  ye  would  flee 
Death,  and  can  not.  We  should  speak  for  you,  and 
dare  not  ;  and  though  we  would,  it  availeth  not. 
Ye  must  sorrowfully  and  meekly  suffer  the  judgments 
that  ye  have  deserved. 

The  Complaint  of  the  Dying  Creature 
TO  THE  Five  Wits 

O  ye  Five  that  were  ordained  to  be  my  servants, 
and  under  mine  obedience,  and  to  have  been  ruled 
at  all  times  as  I  would  have  you  ;  is  there  no  good 
word  that  ye  may  say  for  me,  and  record  my 
demeaning  ^  to  you,  and  report  how  I  have  ruled 
and  governed  you  that  were  taken  •  me  to  keep, 
rule,  and  govern.  Me  seemeth  ye  should  say  for  me 
now.  Who  might  say  so  well  for  me  as  ye  Five  ? 
Ye  have  been  continually  with  me  ever  sith  I  was 
born,  night  and  day,  and  never  at  no  time  from  me. 
Me  thinketh  of  your  kindness  ye  should  have  com- 
passion on  me,  and  say  the  best  that  ye  coude  say  for 
*  demeanour.  ■  /.*.  given. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    143 

me.  I  have  been  friendly  to  you,  and  brought  you 
in  every  place  of  pleasaunce  and  disport.  Now  show 
your  kindness  again  to  me  and  speak  to  Faith  and 
Hope  for  me,  that  they  would  charitably  do  my 
message  unto  the  most  glorious  Prince  that  ever  was, 
is,  or  ever  shall  be. 

The  Answer  of  the  Five  Wits 

Certainly  we  marvel  that  ye  will  desire  us  to  speak, 
for  you  understand  those  worshipful  people  hath 
denied  and  refused  to  speak  for  you  ;  your  Good  Angel, 
Reason,  Dread,  and  Conscience.  How  should  ye  be 
heard  ?  Or  what  credence  will  be  given  unto  us 
that  have  been  your  servants  and  under  your  obeisance, 
and  nothing  done  all  times  but  as  ye  have  commanded 
us  to  do  ?  Call  to  your  remembrance  how  you 
ruled  us  Five,  Sight,  Hearing,  Feeling,  Tasting 
and  Smelling.  Ye  have  at  all  times  brought  us 
in  places  of  pleasance  and  disport  ;  and  though  it 
were  disport  and  pleasance  for  the  time,  it  is  now 
sorrow,  weeping,  and  wailing  for  your  sake,  that  we 
cannot  excuse  you  nor  anything  say  for  you  that 
might  be  your  weal  or  to  your  ease.  For  we  have 
been  privy  and  partners  to  all  that  hath  been  mis-done 
in  any  wise,  and  in  every  place.  And  our  offence  in 
all  things  is  in  your  default.  For,  and  ye  had  sadly  ^ 
ruled  us  as  a  sovereign  should,  ye  should  have 
restrained  in  us  every  vice.  For  we  should  have  been 
ruled  by  you  in  every  thing  ;  and  otherwise  than  ye 

^  wisely. 


144  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

would  have  had  us  do,  we  would  not  have  done. 
Therefore  of  your  necessity  your  defaults  must  be 
laid  upon  you,  for  we  have  done  as  servants  should  do  ; 
and  obeyed  you  in  every  thing,  and  disobeyed  you 
in  nothing.  Wherefore  of  right  the  peril  must  be 
yours.  What  credence  then  would  be  given  to  us  if 
we  should  say  well  for  you  ?  The  people  would  say 
that  we  were  false  dissimulers,^  and  favourers  of  sin. 

The  Lamentation  of  the  Dying  Creature 

Alas,  there  is  no  creature  that  I  can  complain  me 
to  but  utterly  rcfuseth  to  say  anything  that  might  be 
to  my  comfort. 

The  Complaint  of  the  Dying  Creature 
TO  Faith  and  Hope 

O  holy  Faith  and  Hope,  in  you  is  all  my  trust. 
For  how  grievously,  how  mischievously  •  that  ever 
I  offended  God,  you  displeased  I  never.  I  have 
alway  believed  as  the  Church  of  Christendom  hath 
taught  me  ;  and  specially  of  the  most  holy  Incarna- 
tion I  was  never  in  doubt.  I  have  believed  in  the 
most  holy  and  glorious  Trinity,  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  three  Persons  ;  and  They  three 
but  one  God.  I  have  believed  in  the  second  Person 
of  the  Trinity,  descended  into  the  bosom  of  the  most 
pure,  glorious,  chaste,  and  meek  Virgin,  that  ever 
was,  is,  or  shall  be  ;  and  medled  *  His  very  Godhead 
with  her  pure,  chaste,  virginity  and  maidenhead  ;  and 
^  /.*.  dissemblers.  •  wickedly.  »  i.e.  mingled. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    145 

in  her  bosom  was  perfectly  contained  very  God  and 
Man,  by  the  great  mystery  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
without  knowledge  and  company  of  any  earthly  man, 
and  she  a  pure,  chaste,  virgin,  flowering  in  virginity, 
and  by  hearing  of  the  holy  Archangel  Gabriel,  which 
brought  unto  her  the  most  gracious  and  good  tidings 
that  ever  came  to  mankind. 

Now  holy  Faith,  take  with  you  Hope,  and  ye 
twain,  of  your  perfect  charity,  be  mine  advocates  in 
the  High  Court,  and  refuse  me  not;  nor  disdain  me  for 
mine  horrible  and  abominable  sins  that  I  have  done, 
which  asketh  vengeance  in  this  world,  and  damnation 
eternal,  without  the  mercy  of  Him  that  is  Almighty. 
What  mean  ^  might  I  have  thereto  ?  I  pray  you 
counsel  me,  for  ye  know  well  that  my  reason  never 
discorded  from  the  faith. 

And  as  to  you  Hope,  I  hope  that  ye  will  say  for 
me  that  I  have  hoped  always  to  the  mercies  of 
Almighty  God  ;  and  that  I  should  be  one  of  the 
children  of  salvation,  and  one  of  those  that  should  be 
redeemed  by  the  precious  and  bitter  painful  passion, 
as  other  sinners  have  been.  And  certainly  other  plea 
or  resistance  I  can  not  make.  But,  and  ye  twain 
would  be  mean  for  me  to  that  most  glorious  and  pure 
chaste  Virgin,  that  chosen  was  by  the  one  assent  of 
the  whole  glorious  Trinity  to  do  the  most  glorious 
and  worshipfuUest  act  that  ever  was  done.  For  her 
chastity,  her  pure  virginity,  her  meekness,  her  virtue 
and  her  constancy,  was  cause  that  she  was  chosen  by 
all  the  whole  glorious  Trinity  to  be  the  Daughter,. 
1  mediator. 


146  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

Mother,  and  Spouse  to  the  most  glorious  Trinity  ; 
and  that  she  should  bear  Him  that  should  redeem  all 
mankind  from  damnation.  Who  may  so  well  (be) 
advocatrice  to  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  she  ?  And  ye  will  be  mean  to  her  for 
me,  I  hope  she  will  not  refuse  me.  For  I  understand 
and  know  well  that  she  hath  holpen  many  a  sinner 
that  hath  right  grievously  offended  ;  and  in  the  holy 
psalm  that  was  made  between  her  and  her  cousin, 
Saint  Elizabeth,  it  was  said  that  all  generations  should 
bless  her.  I  hope  at  the  beginning  of  the  world  Our 
Lord  put  not  me  out  of  His  number  of  those  that 
should  bless  His  most  holy  Mother,  and  record  her 
mercy,  pity,  and  grace  that  she  showeth  to  sinners 
when  they  have  none  other  succour  nor  help. 

She  is  Mother  of  orphans,  and  she  is  Consolation 
of  those  that  be  desolate.  She  is  Guide  to  those  that 
be  out  of  the  way,  to  set  them  in  the  right  way.  I 
am  an  orphan.  I  am  desolate.  I  am  out  of  the  way. 
I  wot  not  where  to  cry  and  call  after  succour  and 
help,  but  only  to  her  that  bare  our  aller  ^  Redemptor. 
Who  may  so  well  be  mean  to  the  Son  as  the  Mother  ? 
And  ye  twain.  Faith  and  Hope,  would  be  mean  to 
the  Mother  of  mercy  for  me.  Now  gracious  Faith 
and  Hope,  do  your  part,  and  disdain  not  my  request 
though  I  desire  you  to  this  occupation.  For,  and  ye 
twain  would  deny  me,  to  say  for  me,  I  doubt  I  should 
fall  in  despair.  For  on  whom  to  call  for  after  succour 
I  wot  not  ;  and  to  put  myself  in  press "  as  a  poor 
naked  beast,  unclothed  in  virtue  and  repleted  with 
1  if.  of  us  all.  -  i.r.  exert  myself. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    147 

vices,  naked  of  grace  and  in  mine  own  default  ;  and 
to  come  to  the  presence  of  the  King  of  all  Kings, 
(and)  unpurveyed  of^  all  things  that  would  accord 
with  His  most  royal  and  imperial  estate ; — I  dare  not 
take  it  upon  me.  I  should  be  in  such  dread  and  fear 
that  I  should  not  come,  nor  dare  speak  for  myself. 
For  I  have  prayed  my  Good  Angel  to  speak  for  me, 
and  he  hath  denied  it.  I  have  called  upon  Reason, 
Dread,  and  C0NSCIEN9E,  and  they  have  answered  me 
full  heavily  that  they  be  loth  to  accuse  me,  but  excuse 
me  they  can  not ;  and  alledgeth  many  a  great,  reason- 
able cause  why,  that  I  cannot  say  nay  thereto.  I  have 
called  upon  my  servants  which  were  taken  ^  me  to 
rule  and  govern,  and  if  they  would  answer  for  me 
[as  I  would  answer  for  them,]  and  they  answer  me 
right  shortly,  and  say  :  If  they  should  say  any  good 
word  for  me  they  should  not  say  truth  of  me,  and 
casteth  to  me  that  peril,  that  nobody  would  give  cre- 
dence unto  them  if  they  would  say  well  of  me  ;  but 
call  them  flatterers,  false  dissimulers  and  favourers  of 
sin. 

Alas  !  alas  !  I  have  heavily  dispended  my  long  life 
that,  in  all  this  long  time  (I)  have  not  purchased  me 
one  friend  to  speak  for  me.  Had  our  Lord,  of  His 
most  ample  grace,  ordained  me  immediately  after  my 
Christendom  to  have  died  forthwith,  I  might  say  I  had 
been  born  in  a  blessed  hour.  But  would  it  please 
your  goodness  to  speak  for  me,  and  understand  * 
whether  I  shall  have  hardiness  to  make  a  bill  to  the 

^  i.e.  unprovided  with.  *  i.e.  given. 

3  i.e.  make  me  understand. 


148  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

Blessed  Lady,  and  most  holy  Virgin  that  ever  was  ; 
and  she  that  disdaineth  not,  nor  denieth  sinners  when 
they  call  after  grace,  notwithstanding  her  chastity 
and  her  pure  virginity  excelleth  all  other  virgins. 

Now  good,^  go  your  way  and  let  me  wit  how  I 
shall  speed.  For  all  this  time  I  live  in  such  dread 
and  fear  that  me  were  better  to  die  anon  than  live 
any  longer  in  [the  dread  that  I  am  in.  And  also  I 
have  so  great]  dread  and  fear  of  the  righteousness  of 
Almighty  God  that  I  am  almost  dead  for  fear.  For 
Reason,  Dread,  and  Conscience  said  to  me  shortly  that 
the  high  Judge  would  not  be  partial,  nor  He  would 
not  be  corrupted  with  goods,  but  He  will  minister  to 
me  justice  certainly.  But,  and  He  intend  to  minister 
to  me  justice  without  favour,  I  would  appeal  to  His 
mercies  certainly;  for  other  remedy  is  there  none  pardie. 
Origen  our  Blessed  Lady  hath  holpen,  Theophil  and 
Sir  Emory;'  how  should  they  have  done  ne '  the 
Mother  of  mercy  had  been  ?  And  many  another 
sinner  that  her  grace  hath  holpen.  She  is  Queen  of 
Heaven,  Lady  of  the  World,  and  Empress  of  Hell  ; 
and  sithen  her  own  Son,  Our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  hath 
died  and  suffered  so  tormentuous  a  death,  and  in  her 
own  sight,  to  her  great  sorrow  and  motherly  com- 
passion, I  hope  that  she  would  be  loth  that  thillc 
precious  passion  should  be  lost  in  any  creature  that 
her  Blessed  Son  suffered  so  patiently. 

^  i.e.  good  Faith  and  Hope. 

•  de  Worde,  'Thyophyle  and  Sir  Emery. 

'  i.e.  lest. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    149 

The  Answer  of  Faith  to  the  Dying  Creature 

Have  ye  none  acquaintance  with  our  brother 
Charity  ?  We  marvel  that  ye  have  not  spoken  of 
him  in  all  this  time  ;  for,  and  he  were  joined  with 
us  twain,  your  message  should  be  more  acceptably 
heard  many  fold. 

The  lamentable  Complaint  of  the  Dying 
Creature  to  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity 

Certainly  I  have  but  little  dealed  with  him.  I 
ivas  never  conversant  with  him.  That  me  repenteth 
now,  for  I  feel  by  you  twain  that  he  may  do  much 
in  the  High  Court.  I  have  more  dealed  with  venge- 
ance than  I  have  with  charity.  For  I  would  have 
been  avenged  upon  every  man  by  my  will.  When 
the  people  had  slain  my  children,  my  kin,  my 
friends,  and  robbed  and  spoiled  myself ;  and  cer- 
tainly I  would  have  been  a-wroke  ^  right  fain,  and  I 
had  had  power  to  my  will.  But  though  my  power 
•were  little,  certainly  I  have  hated  them,  and  willed 
them  to  have  been  done  to  as  they  have  done  to  me. 
And  well  I  wot  that  is  not  the  order  of  charity. 
But  now  heartily  I  cry  God  mercy,  and  our  Blessed 
Lady,  and  you,  holy  Charity  ;  and  here,  afore  God, 
Our  Blessed  Lady,  and  you  three,  I  forgive  them  all 
—and  all  mine  enemies — that  they  have  done  against 
me,  and  will  not  be  avenged  though  I  might.  And 
I  pray  you  holy  Charity,  though  it  were  long  or  I 

^  avenged. 


I50  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

were  acquainted  with  you,  be  not  the  lother  to  do 
for  me.  I  sore  repent  me  that  I  have  thus  un- 
reasonably and  unwittingly  absented  me  from  you, 
and  heartily  I  cry  you  mercy,  and  pray  you  of 
your  charity  to  put  out  of  your  mind  my  presumptu- 
ous folly.  For  certainly  I  shall  never  do  so  more 
again,  but  in  every  thing  that  I  have  to  do  I  shall 
desire  your  favour,  succour,  and  counsel.  And  I 
utterly  deny  and  defy  Vengeance,  and  never  to  deal 
with  him  more,  howsoever  I  be  done  to  ;  but  take 
it  in  patience  and  think,  as  me  ought  of  right,  that 
worse  than  I  have  been  done  to,  I  have  deserved  to 
be  done  to.  But  that  is  not  the  World,  for  him 
have  I  served  and  pleased,  and  displeased  Almighty 
God,  that  is  Maker  of  all  things,  and  His  Holy 
Begotten  Son,  that  conceived  was  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  born  of  the  pure  and  chaste  Virgin,  and  died  for 
our  redemption.  And  I  have  grievously  offended 
and  broken  His  commandments  in  all  things,  know- 
ing that  I  did  not  well  ;  wherefore  my  peril  is  the 
more.  Nor  I  have  not  called  after  the  blessed  Holy 
Ghost's  grace,  mercy,  succour,  and  His  help,  when  I 
have  been  in  places  of  peril  of  deadly  sin.  Nor  upon 
that  most  holy,  pure,  chaste,  and  excellent  Virgin, 
and  besought  her  of  grace.  And  she  turned  her 
visage  from  me  not  from  lack  of  faith,  but  that  me- 
thought  that  her  most  excellent  [charity  and] 
chastity  must  of  very  right  abhor  my  sins,  and  all 
things  that  I  pleased  the  world  with. 

I    know    well    that    I   have   displeased   Him   that 
redeemed  me  with  His  precious  passion  ;  and  this,, 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    151 

I  wot  well,  deserved  a  greater  punishment  than  I 
have  yet  suffered.  And  there,  as  me  lacked  suffisance 
and  boldness  to  come  in  the  presence  of  them  that  I 
have  so  grievously  offended,  will  it  please  your  good- 
ness. Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  charitably  to  go 
before  and  be  mean  for  me  to  the  Mother  of  mercy 
and  pity,  that  she  will  go  for  me  to  the  glorious 
Trinity,  and  take  you  three  with  her.  For  well  I 
wot  the  glorious  Trinity  will  nothing  deny  that  she 
desireth.  They  understand  her  perfect  charity  is 
such  that  every  creature  that  calleth  after  grace,  she 
hath  pity  upon  them  ;  have  they  never  so  grievously 
offended.  I  should  fall  in  despair  and  I  had  not 
perfect  trust  in  her  grace,  mercy,  and  pity.  And  so 
I  have  great  cause,  for  I  have  brought  my  seely  ^  soul 
to  great  bondage,  and  in  such  adversity  without 
remedy,  that  it  passeth  my  power  to  ease  him  or  help 
him,  nor  *  the  great  nor  special  trust  that  I  have  in 
that  most  blessed  Lady,  and  in  you,  holy  Faith,  Hope, 
and  Charity. 

How    THE     SORROWFUL     SoUL     COMPLAINETH     HIM    TO 

THE  Dying  Creature  :   saying  right  thus 

How  much  hast  thou  done  with  thy  master,  the 
World  ?  How  nigh  be  ye  twain  departed  ?  Under- 
standest  thou  not  how  unsure  he  is,  and  at  thy  most 
need  will  fail  thee  ?  Hast  thou  not  seen,  afore  this 
time,  in  the  times  of  great  adversities  and  troubles, 

1  Here  means  '  poor,'  "  often  used  of  the  soul  as  in  danger 
of  divine  judgment."     O.E.D. 
•  except  for. 


152  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

what  hath  he  eased  or  profited  thee  ?  Certainlj 
little  or  nought.  For,  and  he  hath  flattered  or 
dissimuled  with  thee  one  day  or  one  hour,  he  hath 
loured  and  grutched  with  thee  *  an  whole  year  there- 
fore. Hast  thou  not  understood  him  in  all  this  time, 
but  hanged  upon  him  always,  so  long  as  thou  mightest ; 
and  longer  wouldest  if  thou  might  ?  But  now  the 
season  [and  time]  is  come  he  will  depart  from  thee  ; 
and  what  distress  that  ever  thou  art  in,  little  will 
he  savour,  succour  or  help  thee.  Such  as  thou 
thinkest  be  thy  friends  will  show  thee  a  feigned 
favour,  till  they  know  the  certainty  of  thy  riches  ;  and 
if  thou  have  goods  they  will  cherish  and  favour  thee 
for  a  season,  and  complain  and  wail  thy  death.  And 
yet  they  would  right  fain  thou  were  a-gone,  and  be 
right  glad  of  thy  death.  And  when  thine  eyes  be 
closed,  thine  hearing  a-gone,  thy  speech  withdrawn 
and  may  not  speak,  then  shalt  thou  see  what  thy 
master  the  World  will  do  for  thee.  Seek  thy  coffers 
he  will,  and  every  corner  by  the  way  of  likelihood 
where  any  goods  is  in.  And  little  will  thy  worldly 
friends  depart  with*  to  thee  then,  and  little  com- 
passion will  they  have  on  thy  poor  soul.  And  if 
they  find  little  or  nought  in  thy  coffers,  what  will 
they  say  then  ?  They  will  say  thou  were  a  fool,  a 
waster ;  thou  couldest  not  keep ;  thou  spendest 
more  than  thou  haddest.  Thus  will  they  say  by 
thee.  And  though  they  find  much,  thou  shalt  have 
but  a  little  thereof,   and  fare   but  little  the  better. 

^  i.e.  frowned  upon  and  complained  of  thee. 
-  i.e.  divide. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    153 

And  if  they  find  but  little,  they  will  grudge  with 
thee  ^  and  say  thee  never  a  good  word. 

Think  thereon  betimes,  and  be  thine  own  friend  ; 
for,  and  thou  canst  not  love  thyself,  who  will  love 
thee  ?  Canst  thou  love  every  ^  creature  better  than 
thyself?  If  thou  do  so,  I  wis  thou  art  not  wise. 
Remember  (what  I  say  now,  for  thou  shalt  find  this 
true,  every  word.  And  though  I  speak  thus  grievously 
and  straitly  unto  thee,  marvel  not  for  it ;  for  he  am  I 
that  shall  abide  and  suffer,  and  endure  the  pains  of 
thy  distress.  Alas  that  ever  I  was  coupled  with  thee  ! 
And  so  have  I  cause  to  say,  for  I  shall  be  punished 
without  favour  for  thy  deeds.  How  hastily,  how 
soon  [I  cannot  say.  How  unadvisedly  and  how  un- 
readily thou  purveyeth  for  me  ;]  I  wot  never.  How 
should  any  other  creature  have  compassion  on  me 
when  thou  hast  not,  that,  sith  that  thou  were  first 
formed  a  creature,  I  have  always  been  with  thee  and 
never  from  thee  ;  and  in  the  age  of  thine  innocency 
was  kept  full  virtuously  to  my  great  comfort  ;  and  in 
thy  middle  age  was  kept  full  viciously  and  sinfully  to 
my  great  sorrow  ;  and  in  thine  old  age  little  or  nought 
remedied  ^  thy  wretched  living. 

Alas  !  Alas  !  Alas  !  that  ever  thou  and  I  were 
coupled  together  !  For  the  season  hasteth  fast  that  I 
must  go  to  pains  for  thy  misrule,  and  endure  pain — 
whether  it  be  eternal  or  for  a  long  season.  I  wot  not 
what  remedy  thy  worldly  friends  will  find  to  ease  me. 
I  am  in  great  dread.     I  trow  they  will  have  little  com- 

'  complain  of  thee.  •  de  Worde,  '  any.' 

'  de  Worde,  '  remembered.* 


15+  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

passion  on  me  that  am  thy  poor  soul,  but  give  their 
attendance  to  bury  thee  richly  and  worshipfully,  and 
make  thy  house  cleanly  and  thy  purse  empty  ;  and 
little  compassion  or  remembrance  have  on  thee  and  me 
certainly,  but  let  me  burn  eternally,  but  if  ^  (by)  the 
mercies  of  Him  that  is  Almighty,  (and)  by  the  mean  • 
of  His  most  holy  Mother  ;  that  pure,  chaste,  maiden 
that  helpeth  every  sinner  that  calleth  after  grace  when 
there  is  none  other  remedy. 

Now  farewell  Body.  Thou  shalt  to  the  Earth, 
and  lie  and  rot,  and  worms  eat  thee  ;  and  I  shall  to 
pains  long,  or  else  eternal.  Mercy,  blessed  Lady,  that 
bare  Christ  Jesu,  Our  aller  Redemptour  :  for  in  none 
other  help  I  assure  me. 

The  lamentable  Lamentation  of  the  Dying 
Body  to  the  Soul 

Alas,  seely  soul,  the  torments  and  pains  of  mine 
offences  shall  ye  suffer.  I  am  so  sorry.  There  can  no 
tongue  tell  the  sorrow  that  I  endure  that  have  brought 
you  in  such  bondage,  peril,  danger  and  adversity,  with- 
out remedy  ;  nor  the  high  and  mighty  mercies  of 
Almighty  God,  whose  mercies  cannot  be  had  but  by 
the  mean  of  His  Blessed  Mother.  And  if  she  that  is 
so  chaste,  so  pure,  and  so  holy,  would  abhor  the 
abomination  of  our  sins,  what  should  we  do  ?  I  have 
desired  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  to  be  mine  advo- 
cates to  her  that  bare  Christ  Jesu,  and  when  I  am 
answered  again,  such  answer  as  I  have  I  shall  let  you 
wit. 

*  i.e.  except.  •  i.e.  mediation. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE     155 

How  THE  Dying  Creature  complaineth  Him 
TO  Faith,  Hope,  and   Charity 

O  ye  holy  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  where  have 
ye  been  so  long  ?  I  have  lived  in  great  dread  how  ye 
have  sped.  Have  ye  been  with  the  Queen  of  Heaven, 
Lady  of  the  world,  and  Empress  of  hell  ?  That  most 
glorious,  pure,  chaste  virgin,  that  bare  the  Son  of  God 
that  should  redeem  all  mankind.  How  will  her  chaste 
and  pure  virginity  receive  me  that  am  a  sinner,  and 
suiFer  me  to  come  in  her  presence,  and  put  a  suppli- 
cation to  her  most  high,  glorious,  and  excellent 
Prince,  that  have  so  grievously  offended  her  blessed 
Son  and  her.  Will  she  not  abhor,  nor  disdain  to  look 
on  me  that  am  of  all  sinners  the  most  horrible  and 
abominable,  and  have  so  done  that  I  cannot,  without 
her  most  abundant  grace,  find  a  mean  how  to  make 
aseth.^  But  I  have  heard  say  of  old  antiquity  that  she 
is  so  merciful  and  so  gracious  to  sinners  [when  they 
call  after  grace,  and  hath  holpen  so  many  sinners]  that 
of  right  must  have  perished  n'ere  her  grace  had  been. 
But  what  comfort  ye  have  of  her  most  abundant  grace 
I  pray  you  let  me  wit,  for  certainly  I  live  in  great 
despair.  For  here  hath  been  with  me,  sith  ye  went, 
my  Soul,  and  complained  that  he  must  perish  eternally 
in  my  default,"  and  crieth  and  waileth  the  time  that 
ever  he  was  coupled  with  thilk  ungracious  body,  that 
so  hath  ruled  him  ;  and  I  can  give  him  no  comfort 
without  you  three. 

^  satisfaction.  ^ ;_,,  for  my  failure* 


156  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

The  answer  of  Faith,  Hope,  and  Chawtv 
TO  THE  Dying  Creature 

We,  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  have  done  your 
message,  and  found  that  Princess  full  graciously  dis- 
posed ;  and  saith  that  she  remembereth  well  how 
the  glorious  Trinity  chose  her  of  one  assent  to  be 
mediatrix  and  mean  between  God  and  man.  And 
that  her  great  worship  and  joy  was  caused  for  our  re- 
demption,— which  she  cannot  put  in  oblivion  ;  and 
also  the  great  sorrows,  not  one  but  many,  that  she  had 
at  her  blessed  Son's  passion,  and  saw  her  blessed  and 
well-beloved  Child  die  so  tormcntously  for  the  re- 
demption of  sinners,  and  He  guiltless  Himself  in  every- 
thing, but  of  His  great  and  most  ample  grace,  mercy, 
and  charity  that  He  showeth  to  all  sinners.  And  so 
precious,  so  glorious,  and  so  tender  was  never  none  as 
He  was.  For  He  was  the  very  pure  Godhead,  medled 
with  her  pure,  chaste,  virginity  and  maidenhood  ;  and 
in  her  precious  body  made  His  holy  habitation  nine 
months  ;  and  in  her  soul  eternally.  And  when  she  un- 
derstood the  prophecy,  of  her  great  meekness  desired 
that  she  might  be  one  of  those  and  simplest  servant, 
to  her  that  should  bare  the  Son  of  God  and  Him 
that  should  redeem  all  mankind  :  and  her  great  meek- 
ness thought  herself  not  worthy  to  that  most  holy 
occupation. 

And  therefore  be  of  good  chere,  for  we  three. 
Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  will  bring  you  there,  and 
not  leave  you  till  ye  be  answered.  And  sith  ye  have 
put  your  special  trust  in  us  to  be  your  advocates,  and 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    157 

laid  apart  all  temporal  and  worldly  trust,  we  three 
will  not  fail  you.  And  therefore  put  your  soul  in 
comfort,  and  arm  you  with  the  armour  of  a  sure  and 
holy  Confession,  with  a  sorrowful  Contrition,  pur- 
posing to  do  very  Satisfaction  ;  and  be  out  of  doubt. 
We  hope  ye  shall  speed  right  well,  if  it  be  in  your 
heart  as  ye  speak  with  your  mouth, — and  else  trust 
not  to  our  friendship  in  no  wise.  But  go  and  labour 
your  supplication  as  effectually  as  ye  can  devise,  and  be 
out  of  all  despair  ;  for  we.  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity, 
will  believe  ^  you  for  the  trust  that  ye  have  had  alway 
in  us. 

How  THE  Dying  Body  calleth  after  the  Soul 

AGAIN 

Where  be  ye,  dear  Soul,  that  here  was  with  me  but 
late,  complaining  that  ye  must  to  pain  for  a  long 
while  or  else  eternally,  and  in  my  default  and  without 
remedy  ?  I  have  been  in  such  dread,  sorrow,  and 
fear  for  you  that  nothing  could  comfort  me  till 
Faith  and  Hope  came  to  me  and  asked  me  if  I  were 
not  acquainted  with  Charity.  And  I  have  answered 
them  simply  that  I  was  never  acquainted  with  him^ 
and  that  me  repenteth  sore  now.  But  Faith  and 
Hope  have  brought  me  with  him,  and  I  have  lowly 
and  humbly  submitted  myself  to  him,  and  meekly 
cried  him  mercy  of  my  presumptious  folly  ;  pro- 
mising that  I  will  never  offend  him  more,  denying 
all   such   as  be   his  enemies,  and  as  he  loveth  not 

^  de  Worde,  '  not  leave  you.' 


158  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

vengeance,  hatred,  and  cruelty,  and  promised  him 
faithfully  that  I  will  never  deal  with  them  more  ; 
and  I  hope  ^  he  hath  pardoned  me.  And  (he)  hath 
been  in  the  company  of  Faith  and  Hope  to  the 
Mother  of  mercy  for  me,  and  brought  me  (a)  right 
gracious  answer  again  :  That  she  cannot  put  in 
oblivion  the  great  joy,  worship,  and  comfort  that 
she  had  of  the  Son  of  God  for  the  redemption  of  us 
sinners,  neither  the  maidenly  and  motherly  com- 
passion that  she  suffered  for  Him  in  the  time  of  the 
most  precious,  painful,  and  bitter  passion  ;  and  that 
I  shall  have  •  hardiness  to  come  to  the  presence  of 
that  most  royal  and  imperial  Princess,  and  put  a 
supplication  to  her. 

And  therefore  be  of  good  cheer  and  suffer  your 
pains  patiently,  for  though  it  be  long  I  hope  it  shall 
not  be  eternally.  And  good,  dear  Soul,  while  ye  and 
I  be  together,  or  that  we  depart,  purvey*  in  your 
wisdom  some  remedy — what  can  be  to  your  ease — and 
I  will  be  agreeable  thereto.  For  were  we  twain  once 
divided  and  departed,  few  or  none  would  have  com- 
passion on  your  pain.  See  ye  not  how  the  World 
loureth  upon  us  now  every  day,  and  is  ready  to 
depart  from  us  every  day,  for  little  thing  or  nought  ? 
And  less  would  they  do  for  us  and  we  twain  were 
departed.  Therefore,  dear  Soul,  the  remedies  that 
may  be  found  through  your  wisdom  I  pray  you  find 
them,  and  I  shall  be  right  fain  to  execute  them. 
For  I  am  at  this  hour  as  sorry  as  it  is  possible  any 

^  i.e.  trust  -  i.e.  must  have. 

'  foresee  or  provide. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    159 

wretch  to  be,  that  have  brought  you  in  the  peril  and 
danger  that  ye  be  in,  and  as  fain  would  be  to  do 
that  (that)  might  ease  you,  and  gladder  than  ever 
I  was  to  do  anything  that  hath  hurt  you. 

How  THE  Dying  Creature  putteth  his  Supplica- 
tion TO  THE  Mother  of  Mercy,  Mary,  re- 
plete WITH  Grace  :  Princess  of  Ruth,  Mercy, 
AND    Pity,    to    whom    all    Sinners   resorteth 

WHEN    they    be    SUCCOURLESS 

Meekly  beseecheth  and  sorrowfully  complaineth 
your  dreadful  ^  suppliant,  that  all  my  life  long  unto 
my  last  age  have  lived  and  not  obeyed  the  com- 
mandments of  Almighty  God  in  nothing  ;  but 
misruled  myself  and  my  life  in  all  the  seven  deadly 
sins,  and  sinfully  and  simply  have  occupied  [my  five 
wits,  and  set  aside  all  virtues  and  used  and  occupied] 
all  vices,  and  served  the  devil,  the  world  and  the  flesh, 
having  very  knowledge  both  of  good  and  evil  :  and 
knew  well  that  what  pleased  them  displeased  God, 
but  I  dreaded  to  displease  them.  And  now  hath 
been  a  servant-of-arms  with  me,  and  laid  upon  me 
the  mace  of  his  office  cruelly,  and  hath  commanded 
me  to  make  me  ready  every  hour ;  for  I  shall  not  wit 
when  I  shall  be  called  to  my  judgment. 

The  certainty  of  death  hath  brought  me  into  so 
grievous  an  infirmity  that  none  earthly  medicine  can 
cure  me.  Mine  enemies  be  great  in  multitude,  and 
have  environed  •  me  and  all  my  defaults  brought  with 

^  i.e.  full  of  dread.  *  de  Worde,  '  overcome.' 


i6o  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

them,  and  I  wot  well  they  will  accuse  me.  My 
worldly  friends  have  forsaken  me.  I  have  cried  and 
called  after  them  to  answer  for  me  ;  and  they  have 
answered  me  full  straitly  and  unfriendly  that  they 
neither  dare  nor  can,  nor  will  answer  for  me,  nor 
excuse  me  ;  and  shortly  they  be  departed  from  me. 
My  Good  Angel  first.  Reason,  Dread,  and  Conscience 
and  my  Five  Wits,  hasteth  them  from  me-ward,  and 
leaveth  me  destitute  and  alone :  and  where  to  have 
succour  I  wot  not,  nor  help.  But  as  it  fortuneth  me 
in  good  time,  may  I  say,  I  met  with  Faith,  Hope,  and 
Charity  ;  and  they  have  promised  me  that  they  will 
speak  to  your  most  excellent  benign  grace  and  mercy 
for  me  :  and  so  I  trust  they  have.  For  certainly  of 
your  most  pure,  chaste  virginity,  and  un-wemmed  ^ 
maidenhead  was  I  never  in  doubt,  and  I  have  hoped 
and  trusted  to  your  mercies  always.  I  have  heard 
say  that  ye  be  Mother  of  orphans,  and  I  wis  I  am  a 
very  orphan,  fatherless  and  motherless.  Yc  be  com- 
fort and  succour  to  all  those  that  be  destitute,  desolate^ 
and  succourless.  I  wis  Lady,  that  am  I.  For  I  have 
neither  help,  succour,  nor  comfort  of  no  creature,  but 
only  the  trust  that  I  have  in  your  benign  grace.  Ye 
be  guide  to  them  that  be  out  of  the  way  and  seek  the 
means  to  come  to  the  right  way.  Ah,  blessed  Lady, 
I  have  been  so  long  out  of  the  right  way  that  I  sore 
dread  and  fear  to  call  upon  you  for  grace  :  but  as 
Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity  have  put  me  in  comfort 
how  loth  ye  be  to  sec  your  Son's  precious  passion  lost 
in  any  creature,  and  they  have  given  me  hardiness  to 
*  i.e.  unstained. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    i6i 

call  upon  your  most  noble  and  benign  grace.  And  so 
Lady,  with  humble,  sorrowful,  and  dreadful  heart  and 
mind,  I  beseech  your  most  benign  grace,  mercy,  and 
pity,  to  set  me  in  the  right  way  of  salvation  and  make 
me  one  of  the  partners  of  your  Blessed  Son's  precious 
passion,  and  of  your  maidenly  and  motherly  com- 
passions. And  as  ye  became  borrow^  for  Mary 
Egyptian  to  your  Blessed  Son,  so  good  Lady  be  my 
borrow,  that  I  shall  never  from  henceforth  wilfully 
offend  your  Blessed  Son  or  you,  but  sore  repent  that 
ever  I  have  heard  or  did  anything  that  hath  displeased 
your  Blessed  Son  or  you  ;  being  in  will  never  to 
return  to  sin  and  wretchedness  again,  but  rather  to 
die  than  wilfully  to  do  anything  that  would  displease 
my  Lord  Christ  Jesu,  or  you. 

Now  Princess,  excelling  in  might  and  worthiness 
all  creatures,  as  in  dignity  ;  mine  heart's  Lady,  my 
worldly  chief  Goods,  pray  your  Son  to  have  mercy 
upon  me,  sith  in  all  my  greatest  mischief*  to  your 
grace  I  fly.  I  can  no  further  resort  to  find  any  con- 
solation. And  sith  my  hope  and  trust  is  only  set  in 
you,  be  my  refuge  now  in  this  great  tribulation,  and 
cover  my  sinful  Soul  with  the  mantle  of  your  mercies, 
and  set  your  Son's  precious  passion  between  me  and 
eternal  damnation.     Amen. 

The  Supplication  of  Our  Lady  to  Our  Lord  Jesu 
HER  Son  for  the  Sick  Creature 

O  Jesu,  my  Lord  and  God,  and  my  most  Blessed 
Son,  in  whom  is  all  plenty  of  grace  and  of  undoubted 
^  i.e.  pledge.  '  i.e.  need. 


1 62  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

mercy  to  and  for  all  sinners  that  with  steadfast  faith 
and  assured  hope  devoutly  call  unto  God  for  help 
and  grace,  and  humbly  beseech  mercy  and  forgiveness 
of  their  misfaults  and  offences.  To  You  ^  I  come  as  a 
solicitor  and  beseecher  for  this  sick  creature,  which  right 
humbly  and  with  sorrowful  and  contrite  heart  sueth 
continually  for  Your  grace  and  pardon,  that  it  may 
like  You  to  incline  You  of  Your  wonted  pity  to  his 
request  and  complaints,  and  graciously  to  consider 
his  needs  and  causes.'  He  is  sore  abashed  and  dis- 
comforted '  in  himself,  and  as  who  saith  utterly  con- 
founded ;  considering  his  grievous  and  deep  sins  by 
the  which  he  hath  provoked  Your  wrath  and  indigna- 
tion, by  the  which  he  is  also  sore  encumbered  and 
standeth  in  great  danger  of  his  enemies  ; — and  namely 
he  feareth  him  of  Your  dreadful  judgment.  For  well 
he  witteth  that  if  Ye  do  him  justice  he  is  but  lost  for 
ever. 

Yet  for  all  this  he  despaireth  not  of  Your  mercy, 
for  he  is  in  good  opinion,*  and  trusteth  to  rejoice  ' 
Your  pardon,  and  be  reconciled  to  grace.  Where- 
upon he  sueth  continually  to  You  as  he  may  and 
dare.  For  he  knoweth  himself  deeply  drenched  in 
sin,  and  so  sore  elonged  •  from  grace  by  sin  that  he 
thinketh  himself  unworthy  to  approach  to  offer  his 
prayer.     And    therefore    he    sueth    by    means,'    and 

^  The  plural  form  you  and  your  is  often  used  in  address- 
ing God  as  sovereign. 

*  <  cause  '  here  means  sickness  or  disease. 

•  grieved. 

*  i.e.  in  good  hope,  or  expectation. 

•  enjoy.  •  removed.  '  i.t,  mediators. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    163 

especially  by  me  to  whom  he  calleth  importunately, 
with  piteous  and  elenge  ^  voices  ;  and  ceaseth  not, 
but  continueth  in  sobbing  and  weeping  so  lamentably 
that  my  heart  rueth  to  hear.  And  certes  I  can  no 
longer  me  contain,  but  to  instant  *  his  prayers  and  to 
put  in  *  Your  grace  for  him.  For  he  clepeth  me  the 
Mother  of  mercy,  for  encheson  *  that  I  bare  You, 
which  be  the  very  Well  and  Fountain  of  mercy,  and 
have  it  of  unseverable  property  to  be  merciful  to  all 
sinners.  And  for  this  he  challengeth  me  in  manner,  as 
though  I  should  [owe]  of  duty  to  enterpart "  my 
labours  and  prayers  in  this  behalf  with  him  and  for 
him,  and  to  sue  for  the  hasty  speed  of  his  reconcilia- 
tion ;  and  that  he  letteth  "  not  to  put  me  in  mind 
that  I  was  ordained  of  God  to  be  mean  atwixt  Him 
and  man.  And  certes  I  allow  well  his  mind  therein, 
for  true  it  is  that  I  ought  so  to  be  ;  that  likewise  as 
Ye,  my  dear  Lord  and  Son,  descended  from  heaven 
to  earth  by  me,  and  became  partner  of  man's  nature 
by  me,  so  that  all  sinners  that  be  not  in  state  of  grace 
should  be  reconciled  and  restored  to  grace  by  me, 
and  be  made  partners  of  joy  by  me. 

This  is  well  signified  in  the  figure  of  Aaron's  rod 
which  bare  a  flower  miraculously,  as  Scripture 
witnesseth  :  the  which  rod  signifieth  me,  like  as  the 
flower  betokeneth  You.  For  as  a  rod  groweth 
directly  upward  and  is  the  straight  mean  betwixt  the 
root  and  the  flower,  and  he  that  will  climb  to  gather 

^  miserable  ;  de  Worde  has  '  waylinge  voyces.' 

*  urge  or  press.  ^  ;,,_  claim.  *  for  reason. 

'  i.e.  share,  '  here  =  ceaseth. 


1 64  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

the  flower  must  ascend  by  the  rod,  [or  else  bow  the 
rod]  and  cause  the  flower  to  stoop  ;  so  he  that  willeth 
to  arise  from  sin  must  rise  by  me,  and  he  that  will 
accline  ^  Your  grace  and  rejoice  Your  pardon,  must 
bow  me  by  prayer,  that  I  may  cause  You  to  stoop  ; 
that  is  to  say  to  incline  to  their  prayers. 

Lo  thus,  my  dear  Lord  and  Son,  it  is  open  and 
evident  that  I  am  ordained  to  reconcile  man,  and  that 
it  is  in  manner  my  duty  and  office  for  to  do.  Where- 
fore, sith  this  sick  creature  thus  continually  and 
undefatigably  crieth  to  me  with  piteous  and  doleful 
complaint,  and  requireth  me  so  straitly  that  I  can  no 
less  do  than  put  me  in  endeavour  for  him  [and 
enterpart  my  labours  with  him  for  him] — and  certes 
not  only  for  his  importunate  suit  and  prayer,  but 
also  for  other  considerations  reasonable  and  charitable 
that  move  me  to  tender  and  instant  his  causes. 

The  First  Consideration 

One  is  that  he  is  allied  right  nigh  to  me  by 
spiritual  cognation  ;  •  for  both  we  have  one  Father, 
that  is  God  Which  is  our  Father  by  creation  and  one 
Mother,  the  Church,  which  is  our  Mother  by  re- 
generation. Thus  is  he  my  brother,  and  I  his  sister. 
And  now,  my  Lord,  me  seemeth  right  unfitting,  me 
being  a  Queen,  to  see  my  brother  a  prisoner.  I  at 
liberty,  and  he  in  thraldom.  I  in  bliss,  and  he  in 
torment.  Wherefore  I  am  constained,  as  who  saith 
by  nature,  to  sue   for  his  delivery  and  reconciling. 

1  i.t.  bend  towards.  •  i.e.  kindred. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    165 

And  this  is  one  of  the  considerations  that  reasonably 
move  me  to  sue  for  his  pardon. 

The  Second  Consideration 

Another  is  this  :  That  sith  it  liked  You,  of  Your 
great  bounty  and  inestimable  charity,  for  the  reconcil- 
ing of  man,  to  taice  [of  me  Your  handmaiden]  flesh 
and  blood  to  offer  in  sacrifice  for  the  redemption  of 
me  and  this  creature, — and  all  other  whom  it  hath  and 
shall  like  You  to  call  to  Your  faith  ;  me  seemeth  I 
ought  not,  forasmuch  as  in  me  lieth,  to  see  that 
thing  miscarry  which  Ye  have  so  preciously  redeemed 
and  bought,  as  dearly  as  Ye  bought  me  and  with  the 
same  flesh  and  blood  which  Ye  took  of  me,  Your 
humble  creature  and  handmaiden. 

The  Third  Consideration 

Another  is  this  :  I  and  every  each  (of)  Your  other 
creatures  be  for  Your  part  bound  to  sue  ^  the  means  to 
honour,  worship,  and  glorify  You, — in  that  we  can  or 
may.  But  so  it  is  that  in  justifying  this  sinner,  great 
honour  and  glory  shall  be  to  You  and  to  Your  saints  : 
for  Your  Scripture  saith  :   Gaudium    est  angelis  dei  st  Luke 

SUPER   UNO   PECCATORE    PCENITENTIAM    AGENTE.       That  is  XV.   10. 

to  say  :  Joy  and  gladness  is  to  Your  angels  the  con- 
version of  one  sinner  contrite  and  penitent.  And  in 
another  place  Your  Scripture  saith  :  Magis  gaudium  st  Luke 

EST  super  PECCATORE  PCENITENTIAM  AGENTE,  QUAM  SUPER  XV.  7. 

nonaginta    novem    justis.     That    is   to    say   and    to 

signify   that    more  joy   and   honour    is    to    God    in 

1  i.e.  pursue. 


1 66  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

reconciling  a  sinner  that  is  in  full  and  assured  purpose 
to  persevere  in  grace,  than  in  (a)  great  multitude  of 
other  righteous  that  never  offended. 

Wherefore  my  Lord  as  I  am  bound  to  glorify  and 
honour  You,  so  am  I  in  manner  bound  to  make 
instance  ^  for  reconciling  of  this  Your  creature  ;  in 
the  which  thing  Ye  shall  be  greatly  honoured  and 
glorified.  And  these  be  the  things  that  move  me  to 
instant  and  solicit  his  causes,  and  to  endeavour  •  me 
for  him.' 

The  Fourth  Consideration 

Furthermore  I  see  in  him  great  ability  and  likeli- 
hood to  be  that  creature  that  may  serve  You,  honour 
and  glorify  You.  For  he  is  entirely  displeased  with 
himself  that  he  hath  so  grievously  sinned  and  offended 
Your  grace,  and  he  is  right  heavy  and  contrite  there- 
fore ;  and  he  remembereth  him  many  sithes  of  his 
old  sins — not  as  delighting  nor  having  pleasure  in 
them,  but  to  his  shame  and  great  remorse — and  he 
hath  them  in  perfect  hatred,  insomuch  that  he  would 
not  offend  again  in  the  least  of  them  for  all  the 
world  ;  and  he  hath  fastened  his  intent  and  purpose 
to  be  hereafter  all  of  other  demeanour,  through  Your 
help  and  grace  ;  and  he  will  gladly  do  penance  for 
that  he  trespassed  ;  and  he  lowly  submitteth  him  to 
the  correction  of  Holy  Church,  and  wilfully  assenteth 
to  pay  the  finance  and  suffer  the  penance  attached  by 
Your   Church,   and   to   do   satisfaction   as  is  for  his 

^  urgent  entreaty.  *  de  Worde,  '  submit.' 

*  Here  the  handwriting  in  the  MS.  changes. 


LAMENTATION  OF  THE  CREATURE    167 

frailties  possible.  And  where,  as  he  saith  himself^ 
(he  is)  not  of  ability  nor  power  to  do  satisfaction  as 
him  ought,  in  that  behalf  he  putteth  himself  wholly 
in  Your  grace,  and  remitteth  him  to  Your  great  mercy 
and  to  the  merits  of  Your  passion  ;  which  counter- 
vaileth  and  prevaileth  all  the  penances  and  satisfaction 
that  might  [be]  possible  [for  to]  be  done  by  all  the 
world,  from  Adam  to  the  last  creature  that  shall  be 
born.  And  he  piteously  crieth  to  me  and  beseecheth 
me  to  enterpose  my  merits  atwixt  Your  judgment  and 
him,  and  to  offer  in  sacrifice  for  him  the  sobbings 
and  sighings  and  sorrowful  and  lamentable  tears  that 
I  wept  for  You  in  Your  tender  young  age  and  child- 
hood, when  Simeon  prophesied  to  me  Your  passion, 
and  when  I  had  lost  You  in  Jerusalem  ;  and  the 
sorrows  that  I  suffered  for  You  in  time  of  Your 
painful  and  grievous  passion,  when  the  sword  of 
sorrow  pierced  my  heart.  And  certain  I  am  right 
well  content  and  glad  so  to  do  ;  and  I  beseech  You 
so  to  accept  my  merits  for  his,  as  his,  as  he  goodly 
deserveth,  and  to  set  my  sorrows  and  tears  of  pity  in 
place  of  his  penances  and  contrition. 

Furthermore  it  might  like  you  to  consider  the 
great  labour  and  business  of  Faith,  Hope,  and 
Charity  :  and  namely  of  Charity,  which  sueth  for 
him  continually  and  never  is  idle,  but  busy  in  labour 
for  him.  And  she  clepeth  and  calleth  on  me  for 
him  incessantly  to  see  the  expedition  of  his  causes, 
and  she  undertaketh  for  his  a-bearing.^  And  well 
Ye  wot  that  her  desire  and  prayer  may  not  be  void 
^  behaviour  or  endurance. 


i68  THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 

jior  frustrate,  but  she  must  be  graciously  heard  in  all 
her  goodly  requests  and  desires.  She  hath  also 
retained  Faith  and  Hope  on  her  part  for  this  sick 
creature  ;  and  he  hath  professed  to  keep  Your  faith 
inviolably,  and  hath  put  him  in  full  assurance  of 
Your  mercy.  For  though  it  so  be  that  he  see  not  in 
himself  whereof  he  may  trust  to  rejoice  Your  pardon, 
yet  she  showeth  him  that  in  You  is  so  great  prompt- 
ness of  mercy  and  continual  custom,  that  Ye  be 
[wont]  and  used  alway  to  forgive,  and  have  of  natural 
property  to  be  merciful  to  all  sinful,  that  it  maketh 
him  bold  to  fasten  the  anchor  of  his  hope  in  You  ; 
and  (he)  trusteth  finally  to  make  a  voyage  in  the  port 
of  Your  mercy. 

The  Conclusion  of  Our  Lady's  Supplication 

Now  my  Lord,  sith  all  the  good  abilities  and 
dispositions  to  grace  be  in  this  creature  by  Your 
sufferance,  there  is  no  more  to  do  but  that  Ye  let 
descend  Your  grace  to  the  vessel  so  disposed  ;  and 
that  Ye  vouchsafe  to  suffer  him  rejoice  Your  pardon, 
and  reconcile  him  to  Your  Church,  and  make  him  a 
member  thereof,  the  sooner  and  speedier  for  this  my 
prayer  and  bequest.  I  You  beseech,  my  most  dear 
Lord  and  Son,  whom  it  hath  liked  You  alway  to 
hear  graciously,  and  never  sufler  to  depart  [boteless] 
but  lievcr  ^  of  my  petition  :  for  which  be  to  You  and 
Your  most  honourable  and  dread  Father,  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  Your  equal  Peer,  everlasting  joy,  honour, 
and  glory.     Amen. 

^  i.e.  gladder. 


NOTE  ON  THE  LAMENTATION  OF  THE 
DYING  CREATURE 

This  is  copied  from  the  MS.  Harl.  1706  (fol.  96).  The 
author  is  unknown.  The  catalogue  says  "perhaps  by 
Hampole,"  but  I  think  Jittle  heed  need  be  taken  to  the 
suggestion  since  most  of  the  longer  treatises  in  this  manu- 
script are  ascribed  to  Rolle  of  Hampole;  such  for  example 
as  The  Orotogium  Sapientia,  The  Craft  of  Dicing,  The  Treatise  of 
Ghostly  Battle,  and  The  Ladder  of  Four  Rungs ;  all  of  which 
hare  been  proved  not  to  be  his. 

The  Lamentation  of  the  Dying  Creature  is  in  a  different  and 
later  hand  than  the  first  part  of  the  manuscript,  and  its  style 
leads  us  to  think  that  it  is  of  later  date  than  the  other 
treatises  collected  together  in  this  volume.  It  is  more 
nearly  related  to  the  Mystery  Plays  than  any  of  the  former. 
4n  the  old  printed  edition  of  Wynkyn  de  Worde's  which  is 
in  the  Bodleian  Library  (Tanner  193)  there  is  a  rough 
wood-cut — repeated  curiously  on  the  reverse  side  of  the  same 
leaf — which  is  evidently  a  reproduction  of  the  one  chosen 
from  the  block-book  Ars  Moriendi  as  the  frontispiece  for 
this  volume.  In  de  Worde's  illustration,  however,  the 
scrolls  are  left  blank,  and  the  demon  wears  a  more  revenge- 
ful expression  on  his  face.  There  is  also  a  tower  in  the 
-background  behind  the  ciucifix  (can  this  have  any  con- 
nection with  the  "  toure  of  all  toures"?)  and  a  latticed 
window  is  seen  in  the  corner  of  the  picture.  In  other 
respects  it  follows  the  illustration  from  the  block-book  ; 
Our  Lady  stands  beside  the  bed,  and  the  same  figure,  with 
a  staff  in  his  hand  and  sheep  by  his  side,  is  depicted  as  in 
■our  frontispiece. 


ie» 


APPENDIX 

(See  note  to  p.    loz) 

Since  writing  the  above  note  I  have  heard  from  the  Librarian 
of  the  John  Ryiands  Library  that  they  possess  a  copy  of  this, 
tract  reprinted  by  Wynkyn  de  Worde  in  1496,  under  the 
same  title,  viz. :  "  A  iytell  treatyse  shortely  compyled  and 
called  ars  moriendi,  that  is  to  saye  the  craft  for  to  deye 
for  the  helthe  of  mannes  solile."  Mr  Guppy  tells  me  it  is 
"identically  the  same  text  as  that  contained  in  the  unique 
copy  in  the  Bodleian,  which  is  without  printer's  name,  date 
or  place,  but  which  is  printed  in  Caxton  type  No,  6." 


170 


GLOSSARY 


(JVhen  a  ■word  only  occur »  once  in  the  tixt  it  tvill  not  be  Joundin 
the  glossary.^ 


advite,  ponder,  think  on. 

aggrieve,  aggravate,  make 
heavy. 

alloxving,  praising,  hallowing. 

anon,  immediately. 

apparelled  to,  prepared  to. 

article,  a  critical  point  or 
moment ;  chiefly  used  of 
the  moment  of  death. 

asjittant.  Standing  by,  present. 

he-clip,  embrace. 
be-hest,  a  promise. 
be-hight,  promised. 
he-hote,  promised,  vowed. 
bote,  remedy. 
busy,  careful,  diligent. 
but  if,  unless. 

can,  often  means  'know.' 
careful,  sorrowful. 
charging,  accusing. 
chere,  countenance,  face. 
clepe,  clepen,  call. 
clip,  embrace,  clasp. 
comfort  («.),  to  strengthen. 
commodity,  convenience,  supply 
of. 


con  (v.),  to  learn,  be  able  to, 
conversation,  behaviour,  life. 
coude,  knew. 
covent,  convent. 
cunning,  knowledge. 

default,  failure. 

default  of,   lack  of,  absence 

of. 
depart,  divide,  separate. 
dilection,  spiritual  love. 
dis-partle,  scatter. 
dispoted,  prepared. 
dispose  to  (v.),  prepare  for. 
doubt,  dread. 
dress  («.),  prepare,  direct. 

enforce  (w.),  strive,  exert. 

faculty,  resource. 

fonde,  foundation,  source. 

force,  to  give,   to  take  heed 

to. 
for-sloth,     to    lose    through 

sloth. 


glose  («.),  flatter. 
grin,  a  snare. 


171 


172 


THE  CRAFT  OF  DYING 


grimi  (v.),  to  gnash  with  the    ofuUhtt,  oft-times. 

teeth.  or,  before. 

grutch,  i.  complain,  grumble ;    othertvhile,  at  times. 


ii.  grudge. 
grutching,  murmuring. 

hatttd,  pressed,  urged. 


out-take,  except. 

pat  sing,  surpassing. 

pai^,  pajfd,  to  please,  pleased. 


hasty,    hattili/,     sudden,     sud-    perish,  perishing,  destroy,    de- 


denly. 

incontinent.  Straightway. 
inconvenient,  incongruous. 
infounde,  to  shed  into. 
instance,  entreaty. 


,       stroying. 
I  plain,  absolute. 
;  plainly,  fully,  entirely. 
point   (in   a),  point    of  time, 

moment. 
presently,  without  delay. 
instant     («.),     to     urge,     eu-     proper,  own. 

treat.      ,        . .-  purvey,  foresee,  provide. 

put,  i.  give,  place  ;  ii.  ponder, 
iinJ,  nature.    ,  consider. 

put  in,  urge,  claim. 


let,  letted,  hinder,  hindred. 
letting,  hindering,  ceasing. 
leivi/,  ignorant. 
letvd  man,  layman. 
lotoable,  deserving  of  praise. 

may,  generally  equivalent  to 
'can.' 

mean,  mediator,  mediation. 

medled,  mingled. 

mischief,  i.  need,  want ; 
ii.   misfortune,  evil. 

miserations,  mercy,  compas- 
sion. 

mutv^  (/.),  power,  might. 

moTue  (f.),  to  be  able. 

movings,  emotions,  impulses. 

namely,  especially^,  particu- 
larly.  ,:  ,.•  -i-  ~  •.- 


rather,  soon,  earlier. 
rejoice,  enjoy, 

reproachable,  deserving  of  re- 
proach. 
require,  request,  desire. 

sad,  wise. 

.(ai//y,i.  wisely;  ii.  constantly. 

seely,  i.  holy,  blessed;  ii.  poor, 

wretched. 
sentence,  meaning. 
sith,  sithen,  since. 
sithe,  time. 
slothed,  delayed. 
sort,  lot. 

spring,  sprinkle. 
suddenly,  without  delay,  lorth- 

with. 
sue,  parsue,  follow. 


GLOSSARY 


tate,  often   means    <  receive,' 

'  give.' 
thili,  the  same. 
thirl,  thrill,  pierce, 

unbelapped,  enwrapped. 
uncunning,  ignorance. 
undispoiid,  unprepared. 
unkindly,  unnatural. 


unnelh,        unnethes, 
scarcely. 

very,  real,  true. 


seldom, 


•waymeniing,  lamenting. 
•wilfully,  willingly. 
•wood,  mad. 
•worship,  honour. 


Printed  in  G*xat  Britain 
6y  Tumbuli^  Shears,  Edinburgh 


1157i 


University  of  Callfomla 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hllgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


-  a  OCT  1  a 


m 


SEP  2 1  2004 


unr 
S 


