Lalande 


^» 
T = Library 


http:/ /lalandelibrary.org 


Saint Jean de Lala 1100, 


pray for us! 


If you appreciate 
this book, please 
consider making 

a tax-deductible 
donation to 
Corpus Christi 
Watershed, 

a 501(c)3 

Catholic Artist 
Institute, located in 
Corpus Christi, TX. 


For more information, please visit: 


http:/ / ccwatershed.ore/ 


CORPUS CHRISTI 


K 


ORDINARY. OF MASS 
PROPER OF THE SEASON 
PROPER OF THE SAINTS 
COMMON OF THE SAINTS _ 
VOTIVE MASSES 

MARRIAGE CEREMONY 
NUPTIAL MASS 

MASSES FOR THE DEAD 
FORTY HOURS’ DEVOTION 
PROPER FOR UNITED STATES 
MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a7. 3e. lj: ii) 


a Zi 
" | 


Copyright, 1936, by Benriger Brothers 


WE ADORE THEE, MOST HOLY LORD JESUS CHRIST, HERE AND IN 
ALL THY CHURCHES THROUGHOUT THE WORLD, AND WE BLESS THEE; 
BECAUSE BY THY HOLY CROSS THOU HAST REDEEMED THE WORLD. 
(Indulgence of seven years, if this act of adoration is said on 
ones knees upon entering or leaving a church. Plenary, under. 
usual condition if said daily for one month. S. Ap. Penit. 
Aug, 3, 1917; March 18, 1932.) 


wy p 


-= 


APEROBRTIONS 


Goprright by Benziges Brothers 


Hope that it will be widely used. . . . Everyone who 
uses it will be able to pray with the priest.” 
WW Most Rev. AMLETO GIOVANNI CICOGNANI, D.D. 
Apostolic Delegate to the United States. 


e copy of your volume should be in the hands of 
every Catholic." 


Denis CARDINAL DOUGHERTY, 
Archbishop. of Philadelphia, 
e Is quite complete as a missal prayer book and is 
elegantly made up." 
HH Mosr REV. JOHN J. GLENNON, S.T.D., 
Archbishop of St. Louis. 


HE fine workmanship throughout makes the new 

Missal, entirely produced in the United States, de- 
serving of the highest commendation. I trust Religious and 
devout members of the laity will everywhere make use of 
your ‘New Roman Missal.’ ” 


Hi Most Rev. JOHN T. MeNiczroxas, O.P., S.T-M., 
Archbishop of Cincinnatt. 
MARVELED at the attractive appearance and exquisite 
beauty of this Latin-English Missal.” 
*h Most REV. ARTHUR J. Drossarrts, D.D., LL.D., 
Archbishop of San Antonio. 
ou have done so much by popularizing prayer books 
and now you crown your work by giving us a Missal.” 
& Most Rev. JOHN J. CANTWELL, D.D. 
Archbishop of Los Angeles, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


e ROM a brief examination there is abundant evidence 
that it has been prepared with great care.” 
4 Most REV. ALEXANDER J. McGavIcx, D.D., LL.D., 
Bishop of La Crosse. 


BU Is really a splendid book.” 


H Most Rev, VINCENT WEHRLE, O.S.B. D.D, 
Bishop of Bismarck, 


HAVE gone over it very carefully and I think that it is 
one of the most excellent books of devotion that has 
ever -appeared on the American, market.” i . 
E MosT.REV. JOSEPH Scuremss, D.D., 
Bishop of Cleveland. 
AM happy to recommend it very cordially for its prac- 
tical and pleasing make up.” 
* Mosr REV. Henry ALTHOFF, D.D., 
Bishop of Belleville. 
HAVE no hesitation in recommending the use of this 
Missal by the laity." 
i Most REV. Jonn Marx Gannon, D.D., D.C.L., LLD., 
Bishop of Erie. 
es OUR long experience . . . has served you in good stead 
v in this particular work, as is evidenced by its rich 
practical contents, its attractive format and its appeal to 
the laity.” : 
tH Most REV. JULES B. JEANMARD, D.D., 
Bishop of Lafayette. 


es IS in my estimation a literary as Well as a Iiturgical 
L, gem and cannot but be of inestimable value to the 


laity.” 
% Most REV. EDMOND HEELAN, D.D., 


Bishop of Sioux City. 

"t AM certain that its use by the laity will be a source 

I of personal sanctification and stimulate greater in- 
terest and devotion to the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.” 


bg MosT REV. THOMAS E. MOLLOY, 8.T.D., 
Bishop of Brocklyn. 
" AM greatly pleased with it, both with the convenient 
T arrangement and with the many explanations and 
instructions." 
Á Most Rev, JOHN J. Swint, D.D., LL.D., 
Bishop of Wheeling. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Fy A 


Lu CONGRATULATE you on the publication of your ‘New 
Roman Missal' I wish for your new book every suc- 


cess." 
hi Mosr REV. GERALD SHAUGHNESSY, S.M., S.T.D., 


Bishop of Seattle. 
"E IS a splendid piece of work.” 


WA Most Rev. James H. Ryan, S.T.D., PH.D. 
Bishop of Omaha. 


e HENEVER opportunity arises, I shall be only too 
happy to recommend the New Roman Missal.” 
H Most Rev. CHRISTIAN J. WINKELMANN, S.T.D., 
. Auxiliary Bishop of St. Louis. 


e wisH to congratulate you on the work that has been 
accomplished.” 
Most REV. STEPHEN J. DONAHUE, D.D., 
` Auxiliary Bishop of New York. 


LU HE make-up of the Missal is attractive and the ar- 
rangement such as to invite its use by the faithful.” 

HB Mosr Rev. A. J. MoENcH, D.D., 
Bishop of Fargo. 


se SPECIALLY useful and practical are the introductory 

g chapters on the liturgy and the instructions for the 
use of the Missal. I express the hope that this Missal may 
enjoy the widest use among the laity.” 


Ht Most REV. JOSEPH M. GILMORE, D.D., 
Bishop of Helena. 


bed wOULD be gratifying indeed if this book could be 
Placed in the hands of every lay person.” 


4 Most Rev. JAMES E. Warsa, M.M. 
. Titular Bishop of Siene. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


wre, 


e HE Volume is splendidly prepared and contains every- 
thing necessary for an up-to-date prayer book." 
4 Mosr Rey. JAMES A. GRIFFIN, D.D. 
Bishop of Springfield (1Il.). 
4T IS & very wonderful book and you are to be con- 
gratulated on the work." 


Most Rev. T. J. ToorEN, D.D., 
Bishop of Mobile. 
i HE language is simple, direct and appealing. It will, 
I am sure, satisfy the needs.of many of our people 
of today." 
*H Most Rev. Henry P. ROHLMAN, D.D. 
Bishop of Davenport. 


« OU &re to be congratulated on this very valuable 
: contribution to the Church's literature." 


A Most REV. GERALD P. O'Hara, D.D., J.C.D., 
Bishop of Savannah-Atlanta. 
IM C) e question, the Latin-English Missal will 
supply a need that many of us have felt for a long 
period of time." 
. Hf Most Rev. L. B. Kucera, D.D., 
Bishop of Lincoln. 
^ HE editorial work has been excellently done and the 
book itself is a marvel of printing." 
ha Most Rev. Epwiw V. O'Hara, D.D., 
Bishop of Great Falls. 
ae (D AY we not take this occasion to wish the. reverend 


and zealous author a most deserving and wide- 
spread success in this latest production of his priestly mind. 


i’ Mosr REV. JOSEPH E. McCartTHy, D.D., 
Bishop of Portland. 


aid STUDY shows how excellently your work will help 
to a greater appreciation of the Mass." 


m Mosr REV. JAMES A. MCFADDEN, D.D., 
Auxiliary Bishop of Cleveland. 


“ HE ‘New Roman Missal’ is of course a beautiful thing 
and both you and the publisher are to be congratu- 


lated.” 
H Mosr Rev. JosepH E. Rirrer, D.D., 


Bishop of Indianapolis. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Introduction 
by 
Reb. F. X. Lasante 


HIcH is the best way of assisting at Mass? In his in- 

troduction to "Prayers for Holy Communion from the 

Sarum Missal" Bishop Riddell of Northampton makes the 
following reply to this question: 

"Of the many ways of assisting at Mass, the best way 1s 
that in which each person, by saying the words of the 
Missal more closely, allies and associates himself with the 
priest who is celebrating. 'To identify one's self thus with 
him is to unite with our divine Lord Himself, Who is there and 
then acting as the Priest according to the order of Melchise- 
dech. 

“When the faithful thus act with the celebrant, and with 
the High Priest, Jesus Christ, then, indeed, is it true that 
they are, as St. Peter says, a holy priesthood to offer up spir- 
itual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 

“If so, what a pity it is so few make use of the Missal! 

“All books of devotion are good at Mass; it is quite right to 
say the rosary at Mass; but the Missal is preferable, being 
pre-eminently the product of the mind and heart of the 
Church, filled &nd expressed with reverence and love for the 
divine Victim, Who day by day, in every part of the. world, 
sacrifices Himself again for the glory of His Father, and for 
the salvation of souls. 

"It is pre-eminently the Book for Mass, as its name implies, 
and nothing can exceed the beauty of the Collects and other 
prayers. 

“Qladly, therefore, would I see the Missal more frequentiy 
in the hands of the faithful. The young should be taught 
how to use it. The hearing of daily Mass, the love of the 
Church's liturgy, and the use of the Missal, will all help to a 
more thorough Catholic piety.” 


The HMlass-Book Par Excellence 


There are, indeed, many excellent Mass-books, but the 
Mass-book par excellence is the Mass-book of the Church, 
the Roman Missal. Its regular use is to be recommended for 
this reason, also, that we are thereby made familiar with and 
almost imperceptibly led to make devout reflections upon the 
inspired writings, notably the Psalms, of which it contains so 
Many apt and beautiful citations, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


`, 


v 


INTRODUCTION 9 


The Psalms. How well adapted to every festival, and every 
occasion of joy and thanksgiving, are the numerous psalms of 
praise! As we read in the Crown of Jesus: “The Psalms have 
a three-fold claim to our veneration—as the prayer of David— 
the prayer of Jesus Christ—and the prayer of the Church. 
Even, humanly speaking, the prayer of David would be the 
prayer of every grade of life, of every spiritual necessity. The 
Shepherd's youngest Son, 'small in stature, ruddy and beautiful 
to behold, and of a comely face, becomes the champion, the 
hero, and the sovereign of the chosen people. The changing 
Scenes of his life display the beauty and constancy of friend- 
Ship, the pangs of ingratitude, the grandeur of piety, the.sim- . 
plicity of its manifestation, the loss of virtue, the agony of 
remorse, and the fervor of that contrition which, amidst the 
plaintive melodies of the psaltery, poured itself forth in those 
deep, thrilling accents of sorrow which, to the end of our 
wayward history, must form the sad language of penance. 
Therefore, in the prayer of David, every one who suffers, 
every one wbo rejoices, every one who is tempted, or falls, 
or repents, will be able to breathe forth his thoughts, his hopes, 
his praises, his desires, in strains of inspired poetry. But, as 
we learn from the New Testament, David is both a prophet 
and a type of Jesus Christ, and the ‘prayer of David’ is there- 
fore also the Prayer of Jesus Christ. Our Lord quoted the 
Psalms and applied them to Himself, He used them as His own 
prayers, He sung them with His apostles, and on the cross, just 
before He gave up the ghost, He cried with a loud voice those 
words of the Compline Psalm, which in His sacred childhood 
He had heard chanted in the temple of Jerusalem, “In manus 
tuas commendo spiritum meum.— Into Thy hands I commend 
My spirit.’ " 


“It.is nearly three thousand years," writes Frederick Oza- 
nam, in reference to the Psalms, “since a king composed those 
songs in his days of repentance and desolation; and we still 
find in them the expression of our deepest anguish, and the 
consolation of our sorrows. ‘The priest recites them daily; 
thousands of monasteries have been founded, in order that 
these psalms might be chanted at every hour, and that this 
voice of supplication might never be silent. The Gospel alone 
is superior to the hymns of David, and this only because it 
is. their fulfilment, because all the yearnings, all the ardors, 
all the holy impatience of the prophet find their accomplish- 
ment in the Redeemer,” 


The Liturgical Books. In her admirable little work, 
Ideals in Practice, the Countess Zamoyska very earnestly in- 
culcates the use of the Roman Missal and greater familiarity 
with the liturgical books of the Church: “As children of the 
Catholic Church we must endeavor to lead her life, not as 


http://ccwatershed.org 


10 INTRODUCTION 


passing guests, but as members of the family, understanding 
her ceremonies and functions, united with her in mind and in 
spirit, We should know the day of the celebration of each of 
her feasts, and all that relates to it, understand each part of 
the Mass and the meaning of the objects of our worship, and 
use the prayers of the liturgy. 


*In that great treasury, in which the wise householder has 
Stored up for her children things new and old, we find 
prayers for every occasion and for every moment—prayers of 
adoration, of thanksgiving, of contrition, and of impetration.” 


His Holiness, Pius X on the use of the Missal. In con- 
nection with the work of the reform of the various liturgical 
books, Pope Pius X of blessed memory most earnestly and 
repeatedly expressed his hope and his desire that the Roman 
Missal be used more commonly by the faithful of all classes in 
their attendance at Mass. Religious, and in particular Re- 
ligious teachers, can do much to make this saintly Pope's 
recommendation a reality, not only by using the Missal them- 
Selves, in their daily attendance at Mass, but also by explaining 
it to those under their charge, and by opportunely urging its 
use upon all who come under their influence. 


The Liturgy 


The prayers and canticles of the Church are prompted 
by the Holy Spirit. The Divine Spirit dwells in the Church 
ever since the day of Pentecost, and He it is that prompts 
her prayers and her canticles. As Dom Prosper Guéranger 
says in The Liturgical Year: “Under the impulse of that 
Spirit which animated the admirable Psalmist and the 
prophets, the holy Church, at one time, takes the subject of 
her canticles from the Books of the Old Testament; at an- 
other time, showing herself to be the daughter of and sister 
of the holy apostles, she intones the canticles written in the 
Books of the New Covenant; and finally, remembering that 
she, too, has had.given to her the trumpet and harp, she at 
times gives way to the Spirit which animates her, and sings 
her own new Canticle. From these three sources comes the 
divine element which.we call the liturgy. 


“The prayer of the Church is, therefore, the most pleasing 
to the ear and heart of God, and consequently the most ef- 
cacious of all prayers. Happy, then, is he who prays with 
the Church, and unites his own petitions with those of this 
Bride, who is so dear to her Lord that He gives her all she 
asks. It was for this reason that our blessed Saviour taught 
us to say: ‘Our Father,’ and not ‘My Father’; ‘give us, forgive 
us, deliver us,’ and not ‘give me, forgive me, deliver me,’ 


http://ccwatershed.org 


EH a 


mb desi 


INTRODUCTION 1i 


“The spirit of prayer—even prayer itself—has been sought 
for in methods and prayer-books, which contain, it is true, 
laudable, yea, pious thoughts, but, after all, only human 
thoughts. By asserting the immense superiority of liturgical 
over individual prayer we do not say that individual methods 
should be suppressed; we would only wish them to be kept 
in their proper place." 

Apropos of this a pious author writes: “For the laity 
assisting at holy Mass, the use of any particular form of prayer 
is not of obligation. Each one may read from such approved 
books of devotions, or recite such prayers as most appeal to 
him. Or, again, if he please, he may pass the time of holy 
Mass in purely mental prayer. Or, in fine, he may in a special 
sense make his own, by reverently listening to them, or re- 
peating them over, the very words put by Holy Church into 
the mouths of her ministers standing at the altar and of the 
singers and others charged in her name to respond to them. 

“Nevertheless, from all alike, devout attention is required; 
while hearing holy Mass each one should diligently heed the 
chief moments in its celebration, and never forget that the 
Sacrifice is his own, as well as the priest/s, together with whom 
it is his privilege to offer and pray. 

“There are many excellent manuals of prayer in the English 
language containing appropriate and varied methods of hear- 
ing holy Mass. 'The Missalis intended for those whose devo- 
tion leads them to prefer to follow the Sacred Rite, as it 
were, step by siep, and word by word." 


The Mass and its Folklore 


A very interesting and instructive little book on the Most 
Holy Sacrifice and its ceremonies is The Mass and Its Folk- 
lore, by John Hobson Matthews. In the Preface of this 
fascinating volume we read as follows: 

“There are many good and popular English books on the 
Mass. Some of them treat the subject after the manner of a 
Rationale, explaining the significance of the prayers and 
ceremonies of the eucharistic rites; others are historical and 
antiquarian, and elucidate the origin and evolution of the 
ceremonial—while of devotional works there is no end. It 
appeared, however, that there was room for a short treatise 
on the folklore and minor antiquities of the Mass; by which 
are meant the various aspects and the numerous details of 
the Holy Sacrifice which have so impressed the minds of 
Catholics in the past as to leave permanent traces in the 
popular traditions and speech. The aim of this little book 
is to stimulate love for the Mass by showing how it was 
valued by our ancestors in the ages of faith, and what our 
predecessors in the penal times willingly suffered for its sake.” 


http://ccwatershed.org 


12 INTRODUCTION 


We read in the Introductory: “The Mass is the liturgical 
rite whereby the Catholic Church from the last supper, until 
this very morning, has celebrated throughout the world the 
divine mystery of the passion and death of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ. It is His perpetuation of the one sacrifice of the cross, 
It is the great act of worship of historic Christianity, the 
mainspring of the Church's mechanism, the throbbing heart 
of the Bride ef Christ, Whether celebrated.by mitred prelate 
amid the clustered columns and tinted lights of some Gothic 
cathedral, with all. the splendid accessories of ecclesiastical 
pomp, or by a poor blackrobe missionary in a wigwam. of the 
far West, the Mass is the supreme and central Catholic wor- 
ship—the one great reality—as Carlyle deemed it, which yet 
survives in an age of unsubstantial insincerities. As a still 
more modern thinker, Mr. Augustine Birrell, has pithily said: 
‘It is the Mass that matters? It was for the Mass that the 
ancient Briton constructed his wattled eglwys, the Gael his 
drystone oratory. For this the Norman baron built the parish 
church hard by his manor-house, and the lord abbot erected 
his stately minster. For the sake of the Mass the painter, 
the goldsmith, the scribe, and the limner produced the mas- 
terpieces of art which are the despair of our artistically de- 
generate age. 


“The Mass left upon the English language marks which 
centuries of Protestantism have not been able to efface. Our 
greatest festival is called Christmas, ie. ‘the Christ-Mass.’ 
An attempt was made, in the age of Puritan ascendency, not 
only to abolish Christmas, but also to eradicate its name by 
substituting the term ‘Christ-tide’; but ancient custom proved 
too strong for the innovators, and the Mass conquered once 
more. We have also Candlemas, Lammas, Martinmas, 
Michaelmas Childermas, and other words of similar forma- 
tion—which is one almost peculiar to the English tongue. 
The earliest Mass in our old churches was called the Morrow- 
Mass. There were also the Jesus-Mass and the Lady-Mass, 
In the same manner were formed the old English words ‘Mass- 
priest’ and ‘Mass-penny.’ In a later age the Protestants 
dubbed our poor chapels ‘Mass-houses’; and we still some- 
times call a Missal a 'Mass-book." ”?” : 


There is in this little book an illuminating chapter on the 
Elevation in which we are informed that the act of homage 
which has become so popular since Pius X—the Pope of the 
Eucharist—attached to it an indulgence of seven years and 
seven quarantines, namely, the act of looking on the sacred 
host at the Elevation of the Mass, was quite a common prac- 
tice in the ages of faith. To gain the above-mentioned indul- 
gence it was requisite to say with faith, piety, and love. the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a O a ae 


MB. d N70 


Pad 


INTRODUCTION 13 


words, “My Lord and My God,” while looking upon the sacred 
host at the Elevation in the Mass. (At present the condition 
of looking upon the sacred host is no longer required. The 
indulgence is of seven years. Plenary once a Week, under 
usual conditions if this pious practice is observed daily for 
an entire week. Pius X, May 18, 1907; S. Pen. Ap., June 
21, 1927 and Jan, 28, 1937). 

On this subject The Mass and Its Folklore says: “In the 
Middle Ages the faithful were accustomed to look at the up- 
lifted host before bending in prayer, and there is abundant 
evidence that importance was attached to this observance— 
so much so, indeed, that attendance at Mass was often spoken 
of as ‘seeing God’.” 


A Welsh bard, Morys ap Hywel, about the year 1530 com- 
posed a certain ode which begins: “Let us go over yonder 
to the church in three hosts on Sunday to see Jesus”—‘Awn 
draw i'r lan yn dri llu Dydd Sul i weled Iesu” (MS Cardiff 
Free Library). 'The allusion is certainly to the Elevation at 
Mass. 


Dan Lydgete, in his Vertue of the Masse, thus counsels his 
readers, in his Renaissance style: 


“First every morrow, or Phebus shine bright 
Let pale Aurora conduct you and dress 
To holy church, of Christ to have a sight . 
For chief preservative against all ghostly sickness. 


We have also noticed similar phraseology in the ancient 
Welsh treatise entitled The Merits (or Virtues) of Seeing the 
Body of Christ. 


The best known medieval manual of devotions, The Lay- 
Folks Mass-Book (composed by an unknown author in the 
thirteenth century) says: 


“When time is nigh of sacring 

A little bell men use to ring, 

Then shalt thou do reverence 

To Jesus Christ’s own presence, 

That may lose all sinful bands. 

Kneel and hold up both thy hands, 
And so the Elevation Do Thou Behold; 
For that is He that Judas sold, 

And then was scourged, and set on Rood, 
And for mankind there shed His blood, 
And died, and rose, and went to heaven, 
And thence shall come to judge us, even 
Every man after that he has done. 

That same is He thou lookst upon: 

This is the truth of Holy Kirk.” 


In reference to the virtue of the Mass we read: 


“The worthiest thing, most of goodness, 
In all this world, it is the Mass. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


14 INTRODUCTION 


If a thousand clerks did nought else 
(According as St. Jerome tells) 

But told the virtues of Mass-singing 
And the profit of Mass-hearing, 

Yet should they never the fifth part, 
For all their wit and all their art, 
Tell the virtue, meeds, and pardon 
To them that with devotion, 

In cleanness and with good intent, 
Do worship to this sacrament.” 


How the Mass was esteemed in the ages of faith. “Much as 
devout Catholics of the present day revere the Holy Sacrifice, 
it is only with difficulty that we can form an adequate notion 
of the profound and enthusiastic devotion felt toward the 
Mass by the people of this country in the ages of faith. One 
is amazed in reading ancient manuscripts at the rapturous 
sentiments and language of their writers on this subject. To 
say that the Mass was the center and heart of our ancestors’ 
religion is to employ an inadequate phrase; it was their very 
life and breath. It is to the point to mention that the com- 
monest oath in England was ‘by the Mass’—for people swear 
by what they regard as most sacred. 


“No one who has read the old Welsh and English tales, on 
which Tennyson founded his Arthurian idylls, can have failed 
to be struck with their frequent. allusions to the Mass: King 
Arthur's knights, good, bad, and indifferent, all turn in to 
wayside chapels to hear Mass, as naturally as in the present 
day their descendants would enter the newsrooms of their 
various clubs. ‘It would seem, too, that the hearing of Mass 
always preceded the taking of the morning meal: *And on the 
morrow he heard Mass, and brake his fast,’ is one of the com- 
monplaces of the chronicles of the Round Table. ‘And Sir 
Launcelot awoke, and went and took his horse, and rode all 
day and all that night in a forest; and at the last he was aware 
of a hermitage, and a chapel that stood between two cliffs. 
And then he heard a little bell ring to Mass; and thither he 
rode, and alighted, and tied his horse to the gate, and heard 
m And he that sang the Mass was the Bishop of Canter- 

ury.' 


“Dom John Lydgate, a Benedictine monk and the contem- 
porary of Chaucer, wrote an edifying set of verses entitled 
The Vertue of the Masse, by way of instruction tor the laity. 
He tells his readers of the countless benefits they gain by 
hearing Mass, for which he cites the testimony of the Fathers 
and tradition. 

* ‘Alban for England, St. Denis for France, 
Blessed King Edmund for royal governance, 


"Thomas of Canterbury for his meek sufferance, 
At Westminster St. Edward shall not fail, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INTRODUCTION 16 


That none enemy shall hurt nor prevail, 

But that St. George shall make you freely pass, 
Hold up your banner, in peace and in battail, 
Each day when ye devoutly hear Mass.’ 


“Lydgate makes allusion to certain pious beliefs which pre- 
vailed in England, as probably they still do in some Catholic 
countries. The first of these beliefs is that devout attendance 
at Mass brings a signal blessing upon temporal concerns in 
general: 


“Hearing of Mass giveth great reward, 
Ghostly health against all sickness . . .: 
And unto folk that goen on pilgrimage, 
It maketh them strong, getteth them secureness 
Graciously to complete their voyage. 
The mighty man, it maketh him more strong, - 
Recomforteth the sick in his languor, 
Giveth patience to them that suffer wrong, 
The labourer beareth up in his labour; 
To thoughtful folks, refreshing and succour, 
Gracious counsel to folk disconsolate; 
Good speed, good hap, in city, town and house, 
To all that hear devoutly Mass at morrow; 
Hearing of Mass doth passing great avail.’” 


“It is, perhaps, little wonder that our forefathers, pro- 
foundly impressed as they were with the mystic sanctity and 
power of the eucharistic rite, should have early come to look 
upon the Mass as an invincible weapon against malignant 
spirits. St. Augustine mentions the laying of ghosts by the 
mention of Mass in a haunted house. The writer of an old 
Welsh manuscript, (Cardiff Free Library, MS. 17,119, sixteenth 
century), citing this instance, moralizes thus: ‘You may see - 

.the fruit of the Mass in the driving out of devils, who are 
unable to endure the precious Sacrifice, On the other hand, 
the ancient Fathers, as is well known, are fond of insisting 
that angels surround the altar at the moment of the Conse- 
cration." 


A very eloquent tribute to the virtues of the Holy Sacrifice 
is embodied in the Irish proverb: ^Ni luach go h-Aiffrionn Dé 
éisteachd"—'""T'here is no reward like hearing God's Mass." 


In thoroughly Catholic lands at the present day, as in 
England before the Reformation, every undertaking, every 
anxious aspiration is commended to almighty God and His 
Saints by the hearing of Mass. Mass is heard daily by the 
devout in those countries, as it is, indeed, in this. Our an- 
cesters could no more dispense with it than with their bodily 
food. ‘They realized the full significance of the petition: 
“Panem mostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie—Give us this 
day our Daily Bread. " 


Cardinal Newman on the sublimity of the Mass. Glowing 
words of praise in reference to the Holy Sacrifice are those 


http://ccwatershed.org 


16 INTRODUCTION 


which Cardinal Newman speaks by the mouth of his hero in 
his book Loss and Gain: "I declare, to me nothing is so con- 
soling, so piercing, so thrilling, so overcoming, as the Mass, 
said as it is among us. I could attend Masses forever and 
not be tired. It is not a mere form of words, it is a great 
ACTION—the greatest action that can be on earth. Tt is 
not the invocation merely, but, if I dare use the word, the 
evocation of the Eternal He becomes present on the altar in 
flesh and blood, before Whom angels bow and devils tremble. 
This is that awful event which is the end and is the interpreta- 
tion of every part of the solemnity. Words are necessary, 
but as means, not as ends; they are not mere addresses to 
the throne of grace, they are instruments of what is far 
higher, of consecration, of sacrifice. They hurry on, as if 
impatient to fulfil their mission. Quickly they go—the whole 
is quick; for they are all parts of one integral action. Quickly 
they pass, for the Lord Jesus goes with them, as He passed 
along the lake in the days of His flesh, quickly calling first 
one and then another. Quickly they pass, because as the 
lightning which shineth from one part of the heaven unto 
the other, so is the coming of the Son of man. Quickly they 
pass; for they are as the words of Moses, when the Lord came 
down in the cloud, calling on the name of the Lord as He 
passed by: ‘The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, 
long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth.’ And 
as Moses on the mountain, so we, too, ‘make haste and bow 
our heads to the earth, and adore.’ So we, ail around, each 
in his place, looking out for the great Advent, ‘waiting for 
the moving of the water,’ each in his place, with his own 
heart, with his own wants, with his own thoughts, with his 
own intentions, with his own prayers, separate but concordant, 
watching what is going on, watching its progress, uniting in 
its consummation; not painfully and hopelessly following a 
hard form of prayer from beginning to end, but like a concert 
of musical instruments, each differing but concurring in a 
sweet harmony, we take our part with God’s priest, supporting 
him, yet guided by him. There are little children there, and 
old men, and simple laborers, and students in seminaries, 
priests preparing for Mass, priests making their thanksgiving; 
there are innocent maidens, and there are penitent sinners; 
but out of these many minds rises one eucharistic hymn, and 
the great Action is the measure and the scope of it.” 


The Four Ends of Sacrifice: 
Adoration, Thanksgiving, Reparation, Praper 


In that excellent work, The Holy Mass Popularly Explained 
by the Very Reverend Eugene Vandeur, D.D.,O.S.B., we read 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INTRODUCTION 17 


as follows on this subject:. “The liturgy is the official and pub- 
lic expression of thé worship we pay to God. Now the heart 
of the liturgy is the holy sacrifice of the Mass. The Hours of 
the Divine Office serve as a crown and an extension to it; the 
sacraments themselves are most closely connected with it; 
it is the completing of all solemnities, so much so that it sums 
up in itself the worship which we owe to God.. 

“Sacrifice has four ends. It is offered to God—first, to 
adore Him; secondly, to thank Him for His favors; thirdly, to 
obtain the pardon of our sins; and. fourthly, to ask for the 
graces we need. 

“All these things (adoration, thanksgiving, reparation, and 
prayer) express the sovereign dominion of God. Such is the 
notion of sacrifice. The Christian religion was to have a 
sacrifice of its own. 

" "This is the sublime sacrifice of the Mass—the continua- 
tion of that of the cross. On Calvary the sacrifice was offered 
by Christ in a bloody manner; on the altar it is still Christ 
Who offers it by the ministry of His priests, but in an unbloody 
manner. The sacrifice of the cross merited our redemption; 
that of the altar applies the fruits of it to our souls. —— 

“It is hardly necessary, after what we have said, to insist 
upon the value. of the holy sacrifice of the Mass. It is God 
Who immolates—God Who is immolated. What mysteries 
have we here! The value of this sacrifice is infinite; its glory 
is reflected upon the saints in heaven; it benefits the dead as 
well as the living; it is the only holocaust truly worthy of the 
Lord Who in it sacrifices Himself—‘always living to make 
intercession for us.’ Ah, if we could but fully realize this gift 
of God.” 


The first end for which the Mass is offered i is to give God 
honor and glory. This is the one great end of our existence— 
to give God honor and glory, and thereby to save our souls. 
“Man was created,” says St. Ignatius Loyola, at the beginning 
of his Spiritual Exercises, “to praise, reverence, and serve God, 
and thereby save his soul.” For this we were sent by God into 
the world. Now, in the Mass we fulfil, in a supreme degree, 
our function on the earth, as rational beings, of praising and 
reverencing: God. 

1“*The homage that we pay to God,’ says Sanchez, ‘the 
glory that we give Him in the Mass, is so great that no greater 
service, no greater honor, could be shown Him upon earth. 
Por thereby we testify that in His sovereign majesty He is 
worthy that, not the blood of caives and goats, but the most 
precious blood of His first-born Son should be offered to Him 
in sacrifice.’ 


iVide: “Daily Mass, or, The Me Treasures of the Holy 
Sacrifice, " by Rev. J. McDonnell, ` 


http://ccwatershed.org 


18 INTRODUCTION 


“What is holy Mass,’ asks Marchantius, ‘but an embassy 
sent to the ever blessed Trinity with a gift of priceless value, 
which we present to the three divine Persons, in recognition 
of their dominion over all creatures, and of our dependence 
upon them?" 

“St. Lawrence Justinian says: ‘It is certain that nothing 
gives God greater glory than the spotless Victim of the altar, 
which Christ ordained to be sacrificed in order that His 
Church might offer praise to God.’ 


“In the Mass,’ says Molina, ‘the first-born Son of God is 
Offered to the Father with all the praise and glory which He 
rendered Him on earth.’ 


“This praise was infinite and absolutely worthy of the divine 
Majesty, inasmuch as it was offered by the Man-God; there- 
fore, it is clear that one Mass gives more honor and praise to 
God than all the efforts of all creatures to the end of time and 
through. eternity. 


“To this effect a learned writer of the seventeenth century 
speaks as follows: ‘If all the powers of heaven should unite 
to form a solemn procession.in honor of the Holy Trinity, at 
the head of which would be the Mother of God, the chief of all 
creatures, surrounded by the nine choirs of angels, followed. 
by innumerable companies of the saints and blessed singing 
with the sweetest voices, playing on the most melodious in- 
struments, this triumphant procession would doubtless be to 
the praise and glory of God, and would be pleasing in His 
sight. But if at the close of the procession the Church mili- 
tant were to commission one single priest to say one Mass in 
honor of the ever blessed Trinity, this one priest, with his one 
Mass, would offer an incomparably higher tribute of praise 
than that glorious procession had done. Nay, it would be as 
far superior in glory and sublimity as the Son of God is 
exalted above all created things,’ ”’ 


Hence we learn how transcendent is the praise and glory 
that we offer to God, even by a single Mass, and how supremely 
great a happiness we should esteem it to be able to assist so 
often at the Holy Sacrifice. 


The second end for which the Mass is offered is to give 
thanks to God for His benefits. "Put in one heap,” says St. 
Leonard of Port Maurice, “all the gifts, all the graces, you 
have received from God-—so many gifts of nature and of 
grace; yes, the very life, too, of His Son Jesus, and His death 
suffered for us, which in themselves immeasurably swell the 
great debt which we owe to God—and how shall we ever be 
able sufficiently to thank Him? The law of gratitude is 
observed by the very beasts, who.sometimes change their cruel 
anger into gentle homage to their benefactors; and how much 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INTRODUCTION 19 


more, of course, has this law not to be observed by man, gifted 
88 he is with reason and so nobly endowed by the divine liber- 
ality! Now, the way most fully to thank our good God—our 
supreme benefactor—is taught us by the Royal Psalmist, holy 
David, who, led by divine inspirations to speak with mysterious 
references to this divine sacrifice, indicates that nothing can 
sufficiently render the thanks which are due to God, excepting 
holy Mass. ‘Quid retribuam Dómino pro ómnibus que 
retribuit mihi? ‘What return shall I offer to the Lord for all 
the benefits which He hath bestowed upon me’? And answer- 
ing himself he says, ‘Calicem salutaris accipiam’; or, accord- 
ing to another version, ‘Calicem levabo’ ‘I will uplift on high 
the chalice of the Lord,’ that is, I will offer a sacrifice most 
grateful to Him, and with this alone I shall satisfy the debt 
of so many and such signal benefits. Add to this that the 
sacrifice was instituted by our Redeemer principally in recog- 
nition of the divine beneficence, and as thanks to Him; and 
therefore it bears as its most special and worthy name the 
Eucharist, which signifies an offering of thanks. He Himself 
also gave us the example when, in the last supper, before the 
act of consecration in that first Mass, He raised His eyes to 
heaven, and gave thanks to His heavenly Father: ‘Elevatis 
oculis in coelum, Tibi grátias agens fregit’ O divine thanks- 
giving, disclosing why this tremendous Sacrifice was insti- 
tuted and calling upon us to conform ourselves to the exaniple 
of our Head, so that in every Mass at which we assist we may 
know how to avail ourselves of so great a treasure, and offer 
it in thanksgiving to our supreme Benefactor! And all the 
more, since the Blessed Virgin, and the angels, and the saints 
Tejoice to witness this, our tribute of ee to so great a 
Bing—or, better, King of kings.” 


“Would to God,” exclaims a spiritual writer, “that we ap- 
preciated aright the immense treasure we possess in holy 
Mass! How happy we should then be! How attentively we 
should hear Mass! In holy Mass we have the noblest burnt- 
offering, the sublimest sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. 
It is the believer's greatest treasure, and the devout Chris- 
tian’s dearest joy." 


“Consider, O Christian,” writes Father Segneri, S.J., “how 
indebted we are to our Saviour for the institution of holy 
Mass, for without it we can never thank God rightly for His 
benefits. It was the superabundance of His love that induced 
Him not only to load us with so many benefits, but to place 
within our reach the means of giving Him abundant thanks 
for these game benefits. Would that we appreciated our privi- 
leges and turned them to good account! When we hear Mass, 
Christ, Who is immolated to His Father for our sake, becomes 
our own, and with Him we become possessed of all His infinite 


http://ccwatershed.org 


20 INTRODUCTION 


merits and are able to offer them to God the Father, thus to 
lighten the heavy load of our indebtedness that well nigh 
crushes us to earth.” 

The third end for which the Mass is offered to God is to 
obtain the remission of our sins. The Council of Trent says 
in reference to this subject: “The Holy Synod teaches that 
this sacrifice is truly propitiatory, and if one draws nigh unto 
God, contrite and penitent, He will be appeased by the offer- 
ing thereof, and, granting the grace and gift of penitence, will 
forgive even heinous crimes and sins.” (Sess. xxii, ch. 2.) 


“If anyone saith that the Sacrifice of the Mass is not a pro- 
Pitiatory sacrifice, let him be anathema.” (Sess. xxii, ch. 3.) 


As we read in that commendable little book already referred 
to, The Mystic Treasures of ihe Holy Sacrifice: 


“The Mass does not, in-the case of mortal sin, — 
the necessity of going to confession, but, owing to the effica- 
cious grace it gives, it may become the means of procuring 
perfect contrition, which, when united with the firm resolution 
of going to confession, suffices us remit the guilt even of 
mortal sin. 

“The action of the priest at Mass shows that it is a veritable 
sacrifice of atonement. He begins by saying the Confiteor or 
general confession, which is then recited by the server in the 
name of all tbe congregation, after which the priest pro- 
nounces the absolution: ‘May the almighty God have mercy 
upon you, forgive you your sins, and bring you to life everlast- 
ing.’ Then making the sign of the cross, he says: ‘May the 
almighty and merciful Lord grant us pardon, absolution, and 
remission of our sins.’ Again and again he invokes the divine 
mercy in the Kyrie Eleison, and in other prayers throughout 
the Mass, notably the Agnus Dei, in which he calls aloud for 
mercy, saying, ‘Lamb of God; Who takest away the sins of the 
world, have mercy on us.’ 


* "The special effect of the holy sacrifice of the Mass,' says 
St. Thomas Aquinas, ‘is that it operates our reconciliations 
with God,’ and he explains this doctrine by the following 
illustration: ‘Just as a man will forgive the wrong done him 
by his fellow-men in consideration of a valuable gift which 
is presented to him, so the anger of God may be appeased by 
the acceptable service thou dost render Him when thou hear- 
est Mass, and by the priceless gift which thou dost offer Him 
in the oblation of thé body and blood of Jesus Christ.’ To the 
Same effect St. Albertus Magnus writes: ‘By this inestimable 
gift (of the Mass) the divine indignation and anger are fully 
&ppeased' St. Bonaventure places the following words on 
the lips of the priest at the moment of the elevation of. the 
aacred. host: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INTRODUCTION 21 


= We, miserable sinners, have transgressed and grievously 
offended Thee, O heavenly Father; but look upon the face of 
Thy Christ, Whom we here present to Thee, hoping to change 
Thy anger into mercy. Turn not away Thy face from Thy 
Son, of Whom Thou hast said, “This is My beloved Son, in 
Whom I am well pleased.” For His sake turn us to Thee, and 
be not angry with us any more.’ 

“In all this we find a strong motive for unbounded confi- 
dence in-the power of the Mass to save sinners and procure our 
own sanctification and salvation. 


“The Mass not merely secures the forgiveness of mortal sin, 
but also blots out venial sin. This is expressly stated by the 
Council of Trent: ‘Christ instituted the Mass at the last 
supper that its salutary power might be applied to the remis- 
sion of those sins which we daily commit.’ (Sess. xxii, ch. 2.) 


“Speaking of this effect of the Mass, Suarez says: ‘Christ in- 
stituted this divine oblation, and attached to it the virtue of 
His death, which is applied to us for the remission of our daily 
sins.’ ` 


“It is related in the Life of St. Gertrude that at the elevation 
of the sacred host she used to say: ‘Holy Lord God! I offer to 
Thee the sacred host for the remission of my sins, and that 
our Lord made known to her that in answer to her prayers her 
goul was cleansed from all its stains. and she was rendered 
worthy to be admitted to the embrace of her beloved Spouse,” 


The fourth end for which we offer to God the Holy Sacri- 
fice of the Mass is to obtain for ourselves, as well as for others» 
graces and favors, both temporal and spiritual, through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. “The Holy Mass," says Gihr, “has 
always and everywhere been regarded as the most efficacious 
means to obtain assistance in all the necessities and concerns 
of life. .. . The Mass draws down upon the soul the light and 
the dew of heaven, so that all the gifts of the Holy Ghost 
therein attain their most beautiful bloom and ripeness. 'The 
Mass obtains grace, strength, and courage to perform good 
Works, to overcome the flesh and its concupiscence, to despise 
the world with its allurements and threats, to resist the at- 
tacks of Satan, to endure not only patiently, but with joy and 
thanksgiving to God, the hardships and troubles, the sufferings 
and evils, of this life, to fight the good fight, to finish our 
course, and to persevere in the way of salvation unto the end, 
and thus to bear off the crown of life and of eternal glory. ... 
Thus the holy sacrifice of the Mass is the most profound and 
significant expression of all our petitions and intercessions in 
spiritual and temporal concerns.” 

Father Anthony Molina, in his work on the Priesthood, says: 
“There is nothing so profitable to mankind, so efficacious for 


http://ccwatershed.org 


22 INTRODUCTION 


the relief of the suffering souls, nothing so helpful for the 
attaining of spiritual riches as the most holy sacrifice of the 
Mass." 

St. Leonard of Port Maurice in his treatise on the Mass 
urges to hear Mass frequently and to have many Masses offered 
not only for their own good in life and in death, but also and 
especially for the relief of the holy souls in purgatory. He 
says: "It is the invariable opinion of theologians that there 
is no more efficacious means than Mass for obtaining a good 
and holy death." “Christ our Lord is said to have revealed to 
St. Mechtilde (Lib. iii, Grat. Spir. c. 27) that he who in life 
is in the habit of devoutly hearing holy Mass shall in death 
be consoled by the presence of the angels and saints, his advo- 
cates, who shall bravely defend him from all the snares of 
infernal spirits. Oh, how beautiful the death which is des- 
tined to succeed your life if you shall have striven to hear 
with devotion as many Masses as you could! As to the efficacy 
of the holy sacrifice of the Mass for accelerating the remission 
of the pains of purgatory, I do not doubt that holy Mass not 
only shortens the pains of the poor souls, but also extends great 
immediate relief to them. We may well believe, at least, that 
at every Mass many issue forth from purgatory and fly to 
holy paradise.” 

“The example and authority of that great servant of God, 
John of Avila, the oracle of Spain, should suffice. Being asked 
on his deathbed what he had most at heart, and what kind- 
ness he most longed for after death, he answered: ‘Masses! 
Masses!’ " 

We have the authority of the Council of ‘Trent for the asser- 
tion that the Holy Sacrifice is the great means to assist the 
suffering souls, “This Ecumenical Synod,” we read, “teaches 
that the souls detained in purgatory are helped by the suf- 
frages of the faithful, but principally by the acceptable sacri- 
fice of the altar.” 

It behooves us all to reflect well upon the words of the 
Apostle in his letter to the Hebrews: “We have not here a 
lasting city, but we seek one that is to come" (Heb. xiii. 14); 
and to heed the admonition of Our Saviour: “Lay up to your- 
selves treasures in heaven” (Matth. vi, 20); “Make to your- 
selves bags which grow not old—a treasure in heaven which 
faileth not, where no thief approacheth, nor moth corrupteth” 
(Luke xii, 33). 


Let us gather flowers that do not wither but will bloom for- 
ever; fruits that do not decay but will retain their savor and 
their sweetness throughout eternity; jewels that no thief can 
steal from us, nor death deprive us of, but which shall be our 
ornament and happiness in our eternal Father’s house—the 
flowers, the fruits, the jewels of the Mass. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INTRODUCTION 23 


“Oh, unbounded riches of holy Mass!" exclaims St. Leonard. 
“Grasp well this truth, one and all: It is possible for you to 
gain more favor with God by attending or celebrating one 
single Mass, considered in itself, and in its intrinsic worth, 
than by opening the treasure of your wealth, and distributing 
the whole to the poor, or by going on a pilgrimage over the 
whole world, and visiting with the utmost devotion the most 
famous sanctuaries, such as Rome, Compostella, Loretto, and 
Jerusalem;.and this, indeed, follows most reasonably from the 
proposition laid down by the Angelic Doctor, St. Thomas, 
when he says that in Mass are contained all the fruits, all the 
graces—yea, all those immense treasures which the Son of 
God poured out so abundantly upon the Church, His Spouse, in 
‘the bloody sacrifice of the cross: In qualibet Missa invenitur 
omnis fructus et utilitas quam Christus in die Parasceves 
operatus est in cruce (“De Consec.,” dist. 2). 


“Why do you not run to the churches, there to hear with holy 
hearts all the Masses in your power? Why not imitate the 
holy angels, who, according to the saying of St. Chrysostom, 
when holy Mass is being celebrated, descend in squadrons 
from the empyrean, and stand before our altars, covered with 
the wings of reverential awe, waiting the whole of that blessed 
time, in order that they may intercede for us the more effec- 
tively, well knowing this to be the time most opportune, the 
conjuncture, above every other, propitious for obtaining favors 
from heaven. Sink down, then, in confusion, for having in 
time past so little appreciated holy Mass, for perhaps having 
even many times profaned an act so dread and holy; much 
more so, if you are of the number of those who have recklessly 
dared to utter: ‘A Mass more or less is of little importance.’ 
Yes; let us heed it as the voice of heaven calling us to Mass, 
when the solemn sound of church bells reverberating through 
the fresh and fragrant morning air falls upon our ear.” 


“All Catholics,” writes the author of Jewels of the Masses, 
“unfortunately, do not regard this Great Act, as we call it, 
with the same awe or attention—and yet it should be ap- 
proached much as some of the old writers have put it. ‘If the 
Holy Sacrifice,’ they tell us, ‘were to be celebrated but once 
since the death of Our Saviour, it would be an event of such 
tremendous significance as to excite the awe and reverence of 
the whole world." 


* And, indeed, we might conceive for ourselves what would be 
our feelings if it were announced for the first time that Our 
Saviour would descend from heaven upon an altar, and that 
there and then the sacrifice of Calvary would be renewed. 

"Beside such an event all historical events would become tame 
and insignificant. It would be next in interest only to the 
original coming of Our Lord. Yet most Catholics, from habit 


http://ccwatershed.org 


24 INTRODUCTION 


and familiarity, ‘go to Mass,’ as it is called, in à languid, ir- 
responsible fashion, for the most part once in the week. How 
often do we see the rear of the church crowded with men, 
standing for the necessary twenty minutes, and then hurrying 
away With impatience, almost before it is concluded! How 
few make it a practice of attending on week-days, on the 
ground of there being ‘no obligation'—a curious delusion! It 
surely ought to be a wonderful feeling for the Catholic to 
think, during the day, that he has actually witnessed this 
Great Act, the change of bread and wine into the Lord’s body, 
and His descent upon the altar of men! ‘The day that follows 
may be considered hallowed, or even; in a lower sense, & lucky 
one. Indeed, those who have gained the habit of hearing 
Mass 'every day' will own that when they have been hindered 
by some casualty there has been a sense of incompleteness 
&nd discomfort, as though the whole day had been thrown out 
of gear. One of the most picturesque, but, alas! heterodox 
of our writers—Thomas Carlyle—has given a striking account 
of the impression left on him by the Mass (which he attended 
in the old Dom at Bruges, and again at Ghent). The im- 
pression leads him later on to the striking admission—for him, 
Thomas of Chelsea—that the Mass was the only genuine thing 
of our time.” 


“Many run to sundry places,” says Thomas 4 Kempis, in the 

* fourth book of the Imitation, “to visit the relics of the saints, 

and are astonished to hear their wonderful works; they be- 

hold the noble church buildings and kiss their sacred bones, 
wrapt up in silk and gold. 


“And behold I have Thee here present on the altar, my God, 
the Saint of saints, the Creator of men, and the Lord of angels. 


“Oftentimes in seeing these things men are moved with 
curiosity, and the novelty of the sight, and but little fruit of 
amendment is reaped thereby; especially when persons lightly 
run hither and thither, without true contrition for their sins. 


“But here, in the Sacrament of the Altar, Thou art wholly 
present, my God, the man Christ Jesus; where also the fruit 
of eternal salvation is plentifully reaped, as often as Thou art 
worthily and devoutly received. 


“And to this we are not drawn by any levity, curiosity, or 
sensuality; but by a firm faith, a devout hope, and a sincere 
charity. 


“O God, the invisible Maker of the world, how wonderfully 
. dost Thou deal with us! How sweetly and graciously dost 

Thou order all things in favor of Thy elect, to whom Thou 
offerest Thyself to be received in this sacrament” 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INTRODUCTION 25 


Daily Mass 

In his admirable little treatise on Daily Mass, Father McDon- 
nell writes: "The earnest wish of the Pope (Pius X) that the 
faithful should receive the Blessed Eucharist daily is an obvi- 
ous and implicit expression of his desire that they should 
assist at Mass daily. The connection between daily Mass and 
daily communion is clear. Moreover, for such as have not as 
yet taken up the practice of daily communion, daily Mass will 
be a step, and a very important step, in the right direction. 


"Many persons urge that they have not time to go to Mass 
every day. I am afraid in the vast majority of cases this is 
a mere excuse. They have time to read the newspapers, time 
to visit their friends, time to amuse themselves, to go to places 
of public entertainment, to spend, perhaps, hours together in 
useless or idle conversation, and yet, they say, they have not 
time to give one Balf-hour in the day to what is immeasura- 
bly the most important occupation it could possibly be devoted 
to! . 


"Others assert, and with some show of reason, that domes- 
tic duties render it impossible for them to leave their homes 
in order to hear Mass. No doubt there are cases where this 
is true; a mother must see after her husband and children, 
and attend to the breakfast arrangements at home. Yet, in 
cities, at least, there is Mass to be had at a late hour, when, 
it may be presumed these morning duties are over; or, failing 
that, might not a little more energy and diligence in rising 
secure an early Mass at a neighboring church without the 
smallest dereliction of duty? ‘The old saying, ‘Where there's 
a will, there's a way,’ applies here. 


“Again, it is a common excuse to say: ‘Well I should be 
only. too happy to go to Mass every day, if I could; but really 
it is beyond my power. I have to earn my bread, to support 
my family, and, even, as it is, it is as much as I can do, by 
constant attention to business, to make ends meet, without 
sacrificing an hour, or half an hour, of my day to hearing 
Mass.’ To this I reply: ‘What about the help that God would 
give you, my friend, and the grace and blessing that would go 
with your work in return for the little sacrifice you make in 
going to daily Mass? Do you think God will allow Himself 
to be outdone in generosity, or that He is not able, by the 
blessing and the success He will grant to your efforts, to make 
up to you, a hundredfold, for the hour or. half hour that you 
give to His service? You are in business, or in a profession, 
or otherwise occupied; can not and will not God, in return for 
the homage you do Him, by hearing daily Mass, make your 
business or your profession or occupation a thousand times 
more Successful than your own unaided efforts could possibly 


http://ccwatershed.org 


26 INTRODUCTION 


make it, even if you were to slave from morning till night? 
Can not He ward off a thousand sources of failure? Is He 
likely, in return for your fidelity in His service, to allow you 
and your family to starve or fall into penury? Listen to His 
own words on the subject: ‘Be not solicitous, therefore, say- 
ing, What shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith 
shall we be clothed? . . . For your Father knoweth you have 
need of all these things. Seek ye therefore, first the kingdom 
of God, and His justice, and all these things shali be added 
unto you' (Matth. v. 31-39). 


“Our one and only real business on earth is to ‘seek the 
kingdom of God and His justice,’ and we may assume that, if 
we do so, God will never allow us to suffer, even in temporal 
affairs; on the contrary, He will bless us and give us a cer- 
tain measure of prosperity even in these temporal matters. 
However, even granting that you did suffer some small diminu- 
tion of earthly prosperity by devoting an hour to Mass, or did 
gain some advantage by the saving of time, yet "What doth it 
profit a man to gain the whole world if he suffer the loss of 
his own soul?’ Against this awful misfortune there is, with 
the exception of daily communion, no greater safeguard than 
the hearing of daily Mass.” - 


In olden times the faithful ran to Mass for strength in 
trial and comfort in affliction. We find in The Mass and Its 
Folklore the following interesting reference to the manner 
in which the Catholics of England viewed the Mass and valued 
its mystic treasures in ancient times: “During the course of 
the religious revolution of the sixteenth century, a German 
Protestant named Naogeorgus wrote in Latin a doggerel satire 
on Catholic faith and practice. This was translated by an 
English Reforming rhymester called Barnaby Googe. His 
translation, printed in 1570 and entitled “The Popish King- 
dom,” was immensely popular among the English Puritans, 
both Anglican and Nonconformist. In 1880 this was reprinted; 
and the book, originally intended and used as a means of 
pouring contempt upon the Church, is now exceedingly valu- 
able to antiquaries of all creeds from its minute description 
of the religious ceremonies and usages of our Catholic fore- 
fathers. This is how it describes the way in which the Mass 
was regarded in ancient times: 


""Their trust is always in the Mass, to this they only fly 
In everything that toucheth them and every jeopardy. 
And is not this a goodly crew? They are persuaded still, 
Whar day they hear or see a Mass to have no kind of 


Mass opens heaven's gates, and doth deliver men from hell; 
Mass healeth all diseases, and doth sicknesses expel. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


nito um 


INTRODUCTION 27 
Mass doth relieve the burdened mind, and sins defaceth 
quite. ... 


Mass plucks the sinful soul from out the purgatory fire, 
Mass comforteth th’ afficted sort, and makes them to 
aspire. 


' Mass washeth clean the mind, and makes the guilty con- 
science clear; 


Mass doth obtain the grace of God, and keeps His favour 
ere; 


Mass driveth wicked devils hence, and overthrows the flends; 


Mass bringeth angels good from high, and. makes them 
faithful friends. 


Mass doth defend the traveler from danger and disease; 
Mass doth preserve the sailing ship amid the raging seas. 
Mass giveth store of corn and grain, and helpeth husbandry; 
Mass blesseth every such as seeks in wealthy state to be. . 


Mons gets a man a pleasant wife, and gets the maid her 
mate; 


kun helps the captain in the field, and furthereth de- 
bate. , .. 


Mass helps the hunter with his horn, and makes the dogs 
to run; 


Mass sendeth store of sport and game into their nets to 
come. 


Mass mollifieth angry minds, and driveth rage away; 
Mass brings the woeful lovers to their long-desired day. 


Mass doth destroy the witches’ works, and makes their 
charmings vain... . 


Mass makes thy prayers be heard, and giveth thy request; 


Mass drives away the greedy wolf that doth the sheep 
molest. 


. Mass makes the murrain for to cease, and stock to thrive 


apace; 
Mass makes thy journey prosper well, where’er thou turn’ st 
thy face. 


Mass n eu. thine en'my's force, and doth resist his 
mig 


ane IRIURE out Robin Goodfellow, and bugs! that walk by 
nig. 
Mass plague and hunger doth expel, and civil mutiny; 


MESH makes & man with quiet mind and conscience clear to 
ie. 


In Mass. is all their trust and strength, all things through 
Mass are done; 


In all their griefs and miseries, to Mass they straightways 
run.” . 


“We must do Master Googe the justice of saying that these 
stanzas hardly exaggerate the sentiments of Catholics toward 
ihe Mass—at all events where the full current of ancient feel- 
ing has not been slackened by exposure to the freezing tem- 
perature of indifference and skepticism, 


1 Bogies, ghosts, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


-28 INTRODUCTION 


“Googe, writing of the processions of Corpus Ohristi has 
these lines: 


“The people flat on faces fall, their hands. held up on high. 
Believing that they see their God and sovereign Majesty; 
The like at, Mass they do, while as the bread is lifted well 
And „ghalice shewed aloft, when as the sexton rings the 

ell." 


In Notes and Queries for July 19, 1902, is a communication 
by A. H. Baverstock, under the heading “Merry England and 
the Mass,” to the following effect: 


“A passage in Becon—I have not the reference—seems to 
indicate a prevailing idea in England that the sight of. the 
host at the Elevation brought joy to the heart. Becon de- 
scribes how at this moment in the service a man would jostle 
his neighbor in his eagerness to look on the Holy Sacrament, 
exclaiming that he ‘could not be blithe until he had seen his 
Lord God that day,’ or words to that effect. 

Another work of Lydgate's, a set of verses entitled “How the 
.Good Wife Taught Her Daughter," has these lines: 


“Look lovely and in good life, 

Thou love God and Holy Church, 

Go to church when thou may— 
Look thou spare for no rain— 

For thou farest the best that ilke day 
When thou has God y-seen," 


The Morning Offering and the Holp 
Sacrifice of the Mass 

To one ‘more point: we wish to call the attention of our 
readers, viz., to the importance of making the Morning Offer- 
tng of the Apostleship of Prayer: 

“O Jesus, through the immaculate heart of Mary, I offer 
Thee my prayers, works, and sufferings of this day for all the 
intentions of Thy sacred Heart, in union with the holy sacri- 
fice of the Mass throughout the world, in reparation for my 
sins, for the intentions of all our associates, and in particular 
for the general intention recommended this month.”. 


“This devotion of the Morning Offering,” says Father Rick- 
aby, S.J., “rests on the main and essential principles of 
Christianity; namely, that in Christ we have access to the 
Father (Eph. ii, 18); that there is no salvation in any other, 
‘no other name under heaven given to man, whereby we are to 
be saved (Acts iv, 12); that this salvation was wrought out by 
the death of Christ on the cross, Who made peace through 
the blood of His cross, blotted out the handwriting that was 
against us, and took it away, nailing it to the cross (Col. i, 20; 
ti, 14); that this redeeming sacrifice and death of our Saviour 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INTRODUCTION 29 


is continually. shown forth and re-enacted in His own very 
body and blood, made present at the Consecration in holy Mass 
(1 Cor. xi, 24; Luke xxii, 19); that the most efficacious prayer 
is that which goes up in closest union with Christ crucified, 
pleading in sacrifice for us. Christ crucified thus pleads in 
every Mass, In every Mass, as the Church says, ‘the memory of 
His passion is celebrated anew.’ I can spend my day in hear- 
ing Mass, traveling from altar to altar. It is not God's pur- 
pose that I should do that. But the Morning Offering of the 
Apostleship of Prayer, as sanctioned by the Holy See, puts me 
in relation with every Mass that is said that day, and lays 
upon every Christian altar my work and my play, my words 
and thoughts, my pains and sorrows, my delights and joys, 
and every conscious action of my will—always excepting that 
which is sinful, and so unacceptable, incapable of entering into 
holy union with the oblation of the body and blood of ‘my 
Saviour. When I lie down to rest-at night, I may ask myself: 
‘Of all that I have done to-day, of all my goings and comings, 
what shall endure to my eternal good? What have I laid up 
in the form of treasure for heaven’? And, provided I have 
spent the day in the state of grace I may answer: ‘All and 
every one of my deliberate acts of will that were right in them- 
selves, and, very signally and specially, all that has received 
the consecration of my morning offering.’ Of my strivings 
after the good things of this life, some: will succeed, others wil] 
fail; but alike in success and failure, practising the Apostle- 
ship of Prayer, I. may take to myself the Apostle’s consoling 
words: ‘Be ye steadfast and immovable, always abounding 
in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not vain 
in the Lord’ (1 Cor. xv, 58) .—''Ye Are Christ's," 


*@n the Devotion with which tue are to assist at 
the Sacrifice of the Altar 


Consider that those heavenly mysteries which we celebrate 
in the sacrifice of the altar, and the real presence of Jesus 
Christ the Son of God, whom we believe to be truly there both 
as priest and victim, require that we should assist thereat 
with all possible devotion, but especially with a lively faith, 
€ most profound reverence, and a heart inflamed with love 
for that Lamb of God who there offers Himself in sacrifice 
for us. The servants of God have sometimes seen angels assist- 
ing round the altar and adoring their Lord—open thou thy 
eyes, MY soul, as often as thou art present at the sacred mys- 
teries, to contemplate with a lively faith this Lord of angels 
upon our altars, acconipanied with.these heavenly spirits, and 


* Challoner's Meditations. ` 


http://ccwatershed.org 


30 INTRODUCTION 


see thou worship Him there with that awful reverence and 
tender affection which His infinite majesty and His infinite 
love for thee require at thy hands, Reflect that profound 
respect with which the people of God in ancient times rever- 
enced the sanctuary in which the ark of the covenant was 
deposited, so that no one but the high priest, and he but once 
a year, was allowed to enter within the veil. O how much 
more profoundly oughtest thou to reverence this true sanctu- 
ary of God, and the Lord Himself of the covenant, present in 
our tremendous mysteries. 

The memorial and representation of Christ’s Passion. 
Consider that as this sacrifice has an especial relation to the 
passion and death of the Son of God, in such manner as to 
be in effect the same sacrifice, the same victim, and the same 
priest, so the devotion with which we are to assist at the altar 
should have a particular relation to the sufferings of Jesus 
Christ. As Our Saviour Himself here officiates in person, and 
acts as in a sacred tragedy, His whole Passion and death, we 
ought to accompany Him in this action with suitable affection 
and devotion. Had we been present, with a true belief in Him, 
when He was offering upon the cross the sacrifice: of our re- 
demption, with what sentiments of love and gratitude, with 
what deep sense of sorrow and repentance for our sins, with 
what fervor of devotion should we have waited upon Him there, 
meditating upon His infinite goodness and love for us, mani- 
fested in His passion, and on the heinous enormity of our sins. 
With the like sentiments of devotion ought we to assist at this 
solemn memorial and representation of His Passion in the 
Eucharistic Sacrifice. 


We are to offer up ourselves with the whole Church which 
is the Mystical Body of Christ. Consider that as often as we 
assist at this sacrifice we are not only to commemorate by 
meditation the passion and death of the Son of God, but also 
to take along with us as it were to God the Father His Son 
slain for us, and His precious blood shed for us, and this in 
such a manner as to offer up ourselves also to Him, with the 
whole church, which is the Mystical Body of His Son by His 
hands, and in union with the offering which He, Who is our 
head, there makes of Himself. We are also at the same time 
to join our intentions with His, as He is our chief priest and 
principal offerer, and with those of the whole people of God, 
according to the four great ends of the sacrifice, going as it 
Were in a body, with Christ Jesus at our head; and with Him 
We are to offer adoration, praise, and thanksgiving to Giod, and 
to pray and beg mercy through Him both for ourselves and 
for allthe world. 'Thus the whole chürch of God daily joins 
herself with Christ Jesus her head, both as the offerer and the 
offering, in these divine mysteries, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INTRODUCTION 31 


Conclude with a resolution of doing thy best to assist daily 
at this great sacrifice with a suitable devotion. Go thither in 
the same spirit as if thou wert going to mount Calvary, to 
contemplate there thy divine Redeemer offering Himself a 
bleeding sacrifice for the sins of the world. And see thou re- 
member to join thy offering of thyself with the offering He 
there makes of Himself, and thy intentions with His inten- 
tions. f 


"The Mass 
The Sacrifice of the Mystical Body : 
The Social Character of The Mass 
The Liturgy of The Mass 


The Mystical Body of Christ is one, living reality, born of 
the Redemption wrought for us by the Incarnate Word. It 
is that Society formed of Christ and the Church, of which One 
is the Head, the other, the Body. 


In the writings of St. Paul, this doctrine of the Mystical 
Body holds a most high place. We might refer to the very 
frequent use of such expressions as in Christ, in Christ Jesus, 
texts the ordinary sense of which tells the relations of the 
faithful with Christ and of the faithful with one another. 
Such texts speak of us as clothed with Christ, freed from the 
bonds of the old Adam by Baptism and united to Jesus, in 
Whom all Christians are not the one thing, but are made as 
one person with Christ, all with Christ forming the one Mys- 
tical Christ. Besides such texts are numerous passages where- 
in this doctrine is explicitly affirmed. Thus in the First Epistle 
to the Corinthians our bodies are called the members of 
Christ (vi, 15). The bread we eat, the wine we drink in the 
celebration of the Eucharist are a sharing in the body and 
the blood of Jesus Christ, and all who thus feast are thereby 
made the one body (xi, 3). 


“St. Paul does not emphasize at length his statement. He 
draws from it immediately most practical moral lessons: the 
Statement itself being evidently & truth with which his audi- 
ence is already familiar.” Chapters XII, XIII and XIV 
(1 Cor.) might well be termed a summary of Christian soci- 
ology, founded upon the union of the faithful in one sole 
body, the Mystical Body of Christ. Therein the doctrine of 
the Mystical Body is clearly expressed (xii, 12, 13, 27), illus- 
trated at length by a comparison with the human body (12, 
14-26). The soul of that Mystical Body, the vital principle 
animating all its members, vivifying and making specific their 


*From “The Doctrine of the Mystical Body of Christ" 
(Anger-Burke). ` 


http://ccwatershed.org 


32 INTRODUCTION 


acts and their functions is the Holy Spirit (xii, 3-11, 28-30). 
The bond uniting all the members is charity (xiii. 13). Thence 
flow the diverse duties of. Christians, one to another. Every- 
thing that is received ought to be looked upon in relation to 
its social usefulness for the entire Body. Even the gifts of 
the Holy Ghost are subordinated to the common good, to the 
upbuilding of the whole (xii. 13 and 14). 

The sacrifice of the Church, the sacrifice of the Mystical 
Body is wholly worthy of the divine character of that society. 
It is in no way inferior to.that Immolation which gave her to 
the world; for in very truth, under the consecrated species of 
bread and of wine, according to the rite instituted by the 
Saviour, we offer to God Christ, Victim upon the Altar, as He 
was Victim in His Passion. i 

‘Thanks to the Mass, the Christians of all ages and of all 
nations may gather about Calvary renewed and perpetuated 
and, borrowing the all-effective voice of Christ immolated 
(Heb. v, 7), speak their repentance, their adoration, their de- 
votion to the service of God. 

An attentive reading of the prayers of the Mass suffices to 
show tbe social character of the sacrifice offered by the Mys- 
tical Body and for its benefit. 'The entire Church of Christ 
takes part in this drama, which is, indeed, that of Calvary, 
only that the actors have been vastly multiplied. 

The Liturgy of the Mass gives the full teaching, the unin- 
terrupted application, of the dogma of the Communion of 
Saints. A brief glance will reveal this. 

Priest and people are gathered around the altar. “The altar,” 
says St. Thomas, “represents Christ; the sacred edifice, the 
entire Church.” Altar and edifice have been set aside from 
things mundane by consecration or blessing. For Christ is 
holy, and holy is the Universal Church. The priest is the 
principal visible actor. The people assisting, sharing through 
Baptism in the sacerdotal power, have also part in the action. 

At the foot of the Altar priest and people purify them- 
selves of sin by a public confession. By this very first act, 
priest and people show themselves intimately united. The 
priest accuses himself to the people; the people accuse them- 
selves to the priest. Both ask that divine pardon which the 
absolution pronounced by the priest carries to hearts well 
disposed. ‘This union of priests and of people, representing the 
Church, will continue during the entire sacrificial action. 
‘The priest will recall it to the minds of the faithful from time 
to time by addressing to them the liturgical salutation: Domi- 
mus Vobiscum. . Certain prayers are reserved to the celebrant 
exclusively. Some of these he recites in & loud voice because 
they concern both priest and people; for example, the common 
orations. In some cases he carries on the rite in a very low 
voice, as the Offertory and the Consecration, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a 


INTRODUCTION 38 


Here:also the people are not put apart but are invited to 
unite their prayers to those of the priest. Thus, before the 
opening of the-most/ mysterious part of the drama, the people 
are called upoh to do so in the urgent, solemn appeal of the 
Preface. ' os : i 

Co-operation need not always be evident to eye and ear. 
To read the prayers of the Offertory and the Canon, to follow 
the rites therein, is proof that in the silence our union is. 
unbroken. The host is offered not only for the celebrant, for 
all those assisting, but also for all faithful Christians and for 
their eternal salvation: "that it may avail both me and them 
unto salvation for life everlasting.” Mixing. a little water 
with the wine, the priest asks God to make us sharers in the 
divinity of Him. Whom the Incarnation has made our Head. 
Then. the priest elevates the chalice: toward heaven, “for our 
salvation and that of the whole world.” At solemn Mass the 
altar and all gathered about it are incensed. “The incense,” 
says St. ‘Thomas, “symbolizes the order of the grace of which 
Christ is the plenitude, and from Christ it flows to the people 
by. way of the ministers.” When the altar which represents 
Christ has been incensed, the ministers and the faithful aré 
incensed in turn. Shortly afterwards, the priest recalls to 
those assisting that this sacrifice is theirs as it is his, “my 
sacrifice and yours,” and the people ask that the offering be 
to the glory of the Divine Name, to their personal benefit and 
that of the entire holy Church. 


After the Preface the silence grows more solemn. Neverthe- 
less, not for an instant is prayer merely individualistic. The 
priest speaks in the name of the many. All is done in union 
with the people and in their name. Together priest and. peo- 
ple-ask that the peace and unity of the holy Catholic Church 
be extended over the whole earth. The sacrifice they celebrate 
is. tne sacrifice of the whole Christian society. They name 
its visible head, “thy servant N. our Pope,” and also the head 
of the limited society—the diocese, “and N. our bishop." It 
is the sacrifice of every one of the faithful, “and all true be- 
lievers of the Catholic and ‘Apostolic Faith.” These catholic 
Petitions do not exclude particular intentions. They are 
voiced at the memento for the living. Immediately after- 
wards the note of universality is again taken up. All ask God 
to accept this offering of all His servants, of His entire family: 
“this oblation of our servitude as also of Thy whole family.” 


The moment of the Consecration and the Elevation comes. 
The sacramental words. are pronounced. At last Jesus is 
&mong His own, offering Himself and praying with them. It 
is upon Him now that all the action is concentrated. The 
Prayer, remaining humble, now grows more confident, yea, 
Seeks the very throne of God, . 


http://ccwatershed.org 


34 INTRODUCTION 


“Command these things to be carried up by the hands of 
Thy holy Angel to Thine Altar on nigh, in the sight of Thy 
Divine Majesty.” The priest’s petition is in relation to the 
Mystical Body, signified in this sacrament, and it asks that the 
prayers of priest and people have the honor of being presented 


to God. 


The Angel mentioned “is Christ Himself, the Angel of the 
Great Council, Who unites His Mystical Body to God the 
Father, and to the Church Triumphant.” Then the Head 
and members—the one only Son and the children of adoption 
—"qmake bold to say” that prayer in which they address God 
as their Father. ' 


It would be a mistake to suppose that the two other branches 
of the. Church ‘are strangers to this sacrifice. From the mo- 
ment the Mass began, all the saints were asked to obtain the 
pardon from. God of the sins staining the souls of the faith- 
ful All Masses are offered to the Most Holy Trinity in mem- 
ory of the Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of Our Lord 
Jesus Christ; offered also in honor of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary, of St. John the Baptist, of the Apostles Peter and Paul, 
&nd of all the Saints, for their glory, and for our salvation 
through their intercession, E 


The Church of heaven and the Church of earth unite in 
one voice to sing “Sanctus . . . Hosanna in. Excelsis.” Before 
the Consecration, whereat our common Head will come to be 
sacramentally visible to the faithful of earth as He is cor- 
porally visible to the blessed in heaven, the Church here below 
again declares its oneness with the Church of heaven in that 
moving prayer the first word of which sums up its meaning, 
Communicantes—‘communicating.” The Church here asks, 
through the merits and intercession of the saints, that she re- 
ceive in every circumstance the help of the divine protection 
through Him, Christ Jesus, Who is the common bond of all 
three parts of the Church, ` ` Too i 


The Consecration, which brings Jesus Christ to earth, in- 
creases the confidence of His militant members. It is not alone 
the grace necessary for the present life for which they ask. 
They beg for heaven itself, for their share in the inheritance; 
their entrance into the society of the holy Apostles and 
martyrs, in the name of Christ Who speaks for them and is 
the Source and the Giver of all good gifts. 


The Church Suffering is not forgotten. Frequently it is 
for that Church or for one of its members that the sacrifice is 
offered. Liturgical prayers at the beginning and end of 
Masses for the dead implore relief for the souls in purgatory, 
but at every Mass special prayer is offered for thé same end, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


cramer mee NIRE PU RAND 


INTRODUCTION 36 


When he presents the bread at the Offertory, the priest asks 
God for all the faithful living and also for the dead, “for all 
faithful Christians living and dead.” There is a memento for 
the living. There is a memento for the dead, whereat our 
Baviour, as the Victim of Calvary and now ours, is entreated 
to grant refreshment, light and peace to those who have gone 
before us, signed with the sign of faith, and who, in Christ, 
sleep the sleep of peace. . 


The Church Suffering is included also in the final prayer of 
the Placeat, Therein the priest asks the Most Blessed Trinity 
that this sacrifice may be acceptable and propitiatory for all 
for whom it is offered. ‘To one who would express astonish- 
ment at the fact that the Mass holds thus in remembrance the 
souls in purgatory, St. Thomas gives this answer: “The Holy 
Eucharist is the sacrament of the unity of the entire Church. 
It demands in its celebration that nothing touching the salva- 
tion of the entire Church be forgotten.” 


Thus, the Holy Eucharist shows itself to be the true sacrifice 
of the society of the Church, the Mystical Body’s own sacrifice, 
In the Mass, Jesus Christ our Head, Priest for all eternity, with 
His Body offered and His Blood poured forth, comes under the 
appearances of bread and wine that He may be, by this Mysti- 
cal or sacramental immolation of Self in this unbloody repre- 
sentation of His bloody Passion, the Victim of the Cross offered 
anew by us, for us, with us, in pledge of our own self-immola- 
tion to the service of God, and of our hatred of sin. 


The faithful should ever remember that they are sharing 
in a priestly function and should answer the invitation which 
the priest addresses to them at the Orate, fratres. 


Orate, fratres: ut meum ac 
vestrum. sacrifícium accepta- 
bile fiat apud Deum Patrem 
omnipoténtem. DN 

R. Suscípiat Dóminus sac- 
rifícium de mánibus tuis, ad 
laudem, et glóriam nóminis 
sui, ad utilitatem quoque 
nostram, totiüsque Ecclésie 
sue sancte, 


Brethren, pray that my sac- 
rifice and yours may be well 
pleasing to God, the Father 
almighty... 

Jy. May the Lord receive this 
sacrifice at thy hands, to the 
praise and glory of His name, 
to our own benefit, and to that 
of all His holy Church. 


‘Offerings 


1. At the Beginning of the Day 
O Lord God almighty, behold me prostrate before Thee in 


order to appease Thee, and to honor Thy divine majesty, in 
the name of all creatures. But how can I do this who am my- 
self but a poor sinner? Nay, but I both can and will, knowing 


http://ccwatershed.org 


36 INTRODUCTION 


that Thou dost make it Thy boast to be called Father of 
mercies, and for love of us hast given Thy only-begotten Son, 
Who sacrificed Himself upon the cross, and for our sake doth 
continually renew that sacrifice of Himself upon our altars. 
And therefore do I—sinner, but penitent; poor, but rich in 
Jesus Christ—present myself before Thee, and with the love 
of angels and of all Thy saints, and with the tender affection 
of the immaculate heart of Mary, I offer to Thee in the name 
of all creatures the Masses which are now-being celebrated, 
together with all thóse which have been celebrated, and which 
shall be celebrated to the end of the worid. Moreover, I intend. 
to renew the offering of them every moment of this day and of 
all my life, that I may thereby render to Thy infinite majesty 
an honor and a glory worthy of Thee, thus to appease Thy in- 
dignation, to satisfy Thy justice for our many sins, to render 
Thee thanks in proportion to Thy benefits, and to implore Thy 
mercies for myself and for all sinners, for all the faithful, liv- 
ing and dead, for Thy whole Church, and principally for its 
visible Head, the Sovereign Pontiff, and lastly for all poor 
schismatics, heretics, and infidels, that they also may be con- 
verted and save their souls. (Indulgence of three years.—Pius 
IX, April 11, 1860.). l7 


2. During, or (In the Case of Priests) Before Mass 

Eternal Father, I offer to Thee the sacrifice which Thy be- 
loved Son Jesus made of Himself upon the cross, and which 
He now renews upon this altar; I offer it to Thee in the name 
of all creatures, together with the Masses which have been 
celebrated, and which shall be celebrated in the whole world, 
in order to adore Thee, and to give Thee the honor which Thou 
dost deserve, to render to Thee due thanks for Thy innumer- 
able benefits, to appease Thy anger, which our many sins 
have provoked, and to give Thee due satisfaction for them; to 
entreat Thee also for myself, for the Church, for the whole 
world, and for the blessed souls in purgatory. Amen. (Indul- 
gence of three years—Pius IX, April 11, 1860.) 


3. Offering for Sinners Who Are In Their Agony 

My God, I offer Thee all the Masses that are celebrated 
throughout the world today, for sinners who are in their 
agony and who must die this day. May the Precious Blood of 
Jesus, their Redeemer, obtain mercy for them. (Indulgence 
of 300 days.—Pius X, Dec. 18; 1907.) 


The Prophecy of Malachias Realised 


The following pen-picture by an anonymous writer will help 
us to realize more vividly the truth of the prophecy contained 
in the first chapter of Malachias: “From the rising of the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INTRODUCTION 3" 


sun, even to the:going down, My name is great among the 
Gentiles; and in every place there is sacrifice, and there is 
offered to My. name a clean.obíation: for My name is great 
among the Gentiles, saith the Lord of hosts." 

` “Tt is not an exaggeration to say that the Massi isofferedsome- 
where in the world at every moment of the twenty-four hours 
of the day. The offering of the Mass travels with the sun, 
and seems like one continuous and uninterrupted act of wor- 
ship, which the devout Catholic at any moment by day or by 
night can join in spirit. When it is midnight in New York 
Masses are beginning in the churches of Italy. 


“There ancient altars, at. which saints have knelt, are lit 
up with tapers, and the Vicar of Christ ahd thousands of 
priests are lifting holy hands up to heaven in the sacrifice 
of adoration, thanksgiving, reparation, and supplication. A 
Httie later and the bells of a thousand towers in France begin 
to fill the air with holy sounds, and in every city, town, and 
hamlet kneeling crowds adore the chastening hand of God and 
pray. for sinners who despise His ordinances, Chivalric and 
religious Spain catches the echoes, and, when it is one o‘clock 
in New York, offers the great sacrifice in countless splendid 
churches. And then Catholic Ireland, the Island of Saints, 
which during centuries has suffered for the Faith, rallies anew 
around the altars it would never forsake, despite the most 
cruel persecutions. : 

“At. two o'clock and after, the priests of the islands of the 
Atlantic—perhaps the Cape Verde—white-robed and stoled 
&nd wearing the great cross on their shoulders, bend before 
the tabernacle. An hour later a courageous missionary lifts 
up the chalice of salvation on the ice-bound coast of 
Greenland. 


“At half-past four the sacred lamps twinkle through the fogs 
of Newfoundiand, and at five Nova Scotia’s industrious popu- 
lation begins the day by attending Mass. And now all the 
Canadian churches and chapels grow radiant as the faithful 
people—the habitant of the country, the devout citizen, the 
consecrated nun, and the innocent—hasten to unite their 
prayers around the sanctuary where the priest is awaiting 
them. At six how many souls are flocking to the churches of 
New York, eager to begin the day of labor with the holiest act 
of religion! Many young people, too, gather around the altar 
at a later hour, just as the fresh flowers open with the morning, 
and offer their dewy fragrance to heaven. An hour later, the 
bells of Missouri and Louisiana are ringing, and at eight Mex- 
ico, true to her faith, bends before her glittering altars, At nine 
the devout tribes of Oregon follow their beloved black-gown 
to their poor but gayly-decorated chapels, and California 
awhile loosens its grasp on its gold to think of the treasure that 


http://ccwatershed.org 


B8 INTRODUCTION 


rust doth not corrupt. And when the Angelus-bell is ringing 
at noon in New York, the unbloody sacrifice is being offered 
in the islands of the Pacific, where there are generous souls 
laboring for our dear Lord; and so the bells are ringing on, 
on over the waters, and one taper after another catches the 
light of faith, making glad all the isles of the sea. At two 
o'clock the zealous missionaries of Australia are hastening to 
the altar, and whispering in their eagerness for the coming 
of Our Lord, Introibo ad altare Dei, And all the spicy islands 
of the East catch the sweet sounds one after another, till at 
four in the afternoon China proves there are many souls who 
are worthy of the name of celestial by their rapt devotion at 
the early rite. Then in Tibet there is many a modest chapel 
where the missionary distributes the Bread of Life to a crowd 
of hungry souls. 

“At six the altars of Hindustan, where Bt. Francis Xavier 
ministered, are arrayed with their flowers and Jamps and the 
sacred vessels, and unwearied priests are hastening to fortify 
their souls before Him who is their life and their strength. 
At nine in Siberia, where many a poor Catholic exile from 
Poland has no other solace from his woes but the foot of the 
altar and the bread of heaven, During the hours when New 
York is gay with parties and balls and theatrical amusements 
ihe holiest of rites is going on in the Indian Ocean and 
among the sable tribes of Africa, whose souls are so dear to 
the Saviour who once died for all At eleven in Jerusalem, 
the Holy City over which Jesus wept, where He wrought so 
many miracles, where He suffered and offered Himself a sacri- 
fice for the whole world. 


“When midnight sounds again in New York the silver bells 
&re tinkling again in every chancel in Rome. And so it goes 
on; the divine host is constantly rising like the sun in its 
course around the earth. Thus are fulfilled the words of the 
prophet: Malachias: ‘From the rising of the sun even to the 
going down thereof, My name is great among the Gentiles; 
and in every place there is sacrifice, and there is offered to My 
name a clean oblation.’ All day long—at any hour—we can 
assist at Mass spiritually; let us frequently unite ourselves to 
the Masses going on in some part of the world, thus adding 
new brightness to God’s glory, atoning for the neglect of 
others making reparation for our offenses, in thanksgiving 
for our blessings, and thus effectually promoting our sancti- 
fication.” 

“Oh, what a gift is the holy Mass!” exclaims Father Baker, 
C.S.P., in his stirring sermon on “The Mass the Highest Wor- 
Ship.'! “How full an utterance has humanity found therein 


lVide: “Sermons of the Rev. Francis A, Baker, with 
Memoir of His Life," by Rev. A. F. Hewit. , ä 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Low 


INTRODUCTION 39 


for all its woes, its aspirations, its hopes, its affections! How 
completely is the distance bridged over, that separated the 
creature and the Creator! The Mass supplies the want of 
the human soul for an adequate mode of approaching God, 
As a creature before its Creator, you are oppressed with your 
own inability to worship Him worthily. Do you want a better 
worship than that which His eternal Son offers? In the 
Mass the Son of God in His human nature worships the Father 
for us, He prays for us; asks pardon for us; gives thanks for 
us; adores for us. As He is perfect man, He expresses:every 
human feeling; as He is perfect. God, His utterances have a 
complete perfection, an infinite acceptableness. Thus, when 
we offer Mass, we worship the Father with Christ's worship. 
It seems to me that the Catholic can have a certain kind of 
pride in this. He may say, ‘I know I am weak and as nothing 
before God, yet.I possess a treasure that is worthy to offer to 
Him. I have a prayer to present to Him all perfect and all 
powerful, the prayer of His onjy-begotten Son, in Whom He 
is well pleased.’ 


Come to Mase! Come to Mass! 


“Come to Mass! Come, children, come to Mass, and bring 
your merry hearts with you. Come, you that are young and 
happy, and rejoice before the Lord. Come, you that are old 
and weary, and tell your loneliness to God. Come, you that 
are sorely tempted, and ask the help of heaven. Come, you 
that have sinned, and weep between the porch and the altar. 
Come, you that are bereaved, and pour out here your tears. 
Come, you that are sick, or anxious, or unhappy, and com- 
plain to God. Come, you that are prosperous and successful, 
and give thanks, Christ will sympathize with you. He will 
rejoice with you, and He will mourn with you. He will gather 
up your prayers. He will join to them His own almighty sup- 
plications, and that concert of prayer shall enter heaven, 
louder than the music of angelic choirs, sweeter than the 
voice of those who sing the song of Moses and the Lamb, more 
piercing than the cry of the living creatures who rest not day 
or night, and more powerful and prevailing than the inter- 
cession of the Blessed Virgin and all the saints of paradise 
together. The Mass a formalism! The Mass an unmeaning 
service! Why, it is the most beautiful, the most spiritual, the 
most sublime, the most satisfying worship which the heart of 
man can even conceive. 


* And here, too, in this idea of the Mass, we have the answer 
to another perplexity of Protestants. They can not under- 
stand why we make such a point of attending Mass. They see 
us go to Mass in ell weathers. They see us so particular nob 


http://ccwatershed.org 


40 INTRODUCTION 


to be late at Mass, and they ask what it all means! Is it not 
superstition? Do we not, like the pharisees, give an undue 
value to outward observances? . May we not worship God at 
home just as Well? Ah, if it were really only an outward 
observance! But there is just the difference. There stands 
one among us whom you know not. We believe that the Sav- 
iour is with us, and you do not. We believe this with a cer- 
tein, simple faith. Come to our churches and look at our 
people—the poorest and most ignorant—and see if we do not. 
It is written on their faces. They may not know how to ex- 
press themselves, but this is in their hearts. You think we 
come to Mass because the Church is so strict in requiring us to 
do so, but the true state of the case is that the law of the 
Church is.so.strict because Christ is present in the Mass. You 
think it is the pomp and glitter of our altars that draws the 
crowds. Little you know of human nature if you think it can 
long be held by such things alone. No; we adorn our altars 
because we believe Christ is present. This is our faith. It 
is no new thing with us. It is as old as Christianity. It was 
the comfort of the Christians in the Catacombs. It was the 
glory of St. Basil and St. Ambrose and St. Augustine. It was 
the meaning of all the glory and magnificence of the Middle 
Ages. ‘And it is our stay and support in this century of knowl- 
edge, labor, and disquiet. Yes; strip our altars; leave us only 
the Corn and the Vine, and a rock for our altar, and we will 
worship with posture as lowly and hearts as loving as in the 
grandest cathedral. Let persecution rise; let us be driven 
from our churches; we will say Mass in the woods and caverns, 
as the early Christians did. We know that God is everywhere. 
We know that Nature is His temple, wherein pure hearts can 
find Him and adore Him; but we know that it is in the Holy 
Mass alone that He offers Himself to His Father as the Lamb 
that was slain. How can we forego that sweet and solemn 
action? How can we deprive ourselves of that heavenly con- 
solation? The sparrow hath found her an house and the turtle 
a nest where she may lay her young, even thy altars, O Lord 
of hosts, my King and my God! Man’s heart has found a home 
and resting-place in this vale of tears. To us the altar is the 
vestibule of heaven, and the host its open door. 

“It is our delight now to think that, as the sun in its course 
brings daylight to each successive spot on earth, it ever finds 
some priest girding himself to go up to the holy altar; that 
thus the earth is belted, from the rising of the sun unto the 
going down of the same, with a chain of Masses; that as the 
din of the world commences each day, the groan of the op- 
pressed, the cry of the fearful and troubled, the boast of sin 
and pride, the wail of sorrow—the voice of Christ ascends at 
the same time to heaven, supplicating for pardon and peace. 

“Such be our thoughts about the Holy Mass. Come to Mass, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


[ 
| 
5 


INTRODUCTION 41 


and come and pray. When the Lord drew near to Elias on 
the mount the prophet wrapped his face in his mantle; so, 
when we come to Mass, let us wrap our souls in a holy recol- 
lection of spirit. Remember what is going on. Now pray; now 
praise; now ask forgiveness; now rest before God in quiet love. 
So will the Mass be a marvelous comfort and refreshment, to 
you. Yoü know the smell of the incense lingers about the 
sacred vestments worn at the altar long, after. the service is 
over; so your souls shall carry away with them as you leave the 
church a celestial fragrance, a breath of the odors of Paradise, 
the token that you have received a blessing from Him whoss 
‘fingers drop with sweet-smelling myrrh.'" 


http://ccwatershed.org 


A fibeeo ot Praise 
bp 
Reb. F. X. Lasante 


o NICHOLAS C. BENZIGER of blessed memory belongs the 
credit of having suggested the preparation ànd publica- 
tion of The Néw Missal for Every Day nearly twenty years 
ago, and therefore we are justified in calling him a pioneer, 
indeed an enthusiastic leader, in the liturgical movement of 
the present day. The work was an immediate success. And 
the New Missal has been kept “new,” that is to say, absolutely 
up-to-date, by its publishers, the firm of Benziger Brothers. 
They likewise prepared and energetically carried out the pro- 
ject of transforming this English Missal into a Latin-English 
Missal, the present work which is offered to the public with the 
positive assurance that it is still entitled to its old name: The 
New Missal (adding the word “Roman” to signify that it now 
is in Latin and English) inasmuch as it is complete, thoroughly 
up-to-date, and calculated to meet the requirements of the 
Most exacting critic. 


We take this occasion to offer a slight tribute of praise to 
Nicholas C. Benziger, whom we have loved with the love of a 
brother, and whose passing has left a wound that never will be 
healed. 


He won our esteem and affection not only by the uniform 
courtesy, kindness, and generosity displayed toward us per- 
sonally in an association which began nearly forty years ago, 
but also by the strength and uprightness of his character, his 
sterling worth, his integrity, honesty, sincerity, humility, 
Serenity and cheerfulness. He was a man of deep, religious 
convictions, with a faith like that of a Breton peasant, and 
was ever ready to second the efforts of Bishops and Priests in 
the dissemination of Catholic literature and to foster every 
enterprise for the welfare of the Church and for the propaga- 
tion of the faith. He enjoyed the respect and loyalty of his 
employees by his just and kindly treatment of them, and by 
the genuine interest he took in their temporal and eternal 
welfare. Eternal rest give unto him, O Lord, and let per- 
petual light shine upon him, May he rest in peace. Amen. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Ed 


Read (Dass With tbe Priest 


AN EXPOSITION OF THE SIMPLE 
CHARACTER OF THE MISSAL 


BY . , 
Reb. William R. Kellp 


A. Sropy PLAN Basen ON “THE New Roman MISSAL IN LATIN 
AND ENGLISH” By REV. F. X. LASANCE AND REV; FRANCIS 
AUGUSTINE Warsa, O.S.B. 


Introduction 


HE Holy Sacrifice of the Mass was instituted by Our Lord 

at the Last Supper, when He pronounced the words that 

caused bread to be changed into His adorable Body, and wine 
to be changed into His Precious Blood. 


In these words are the very heart and core of Holy Mass. 
They are the treasure itself of Catholic Faith. 


Receiving this treasure as à pearl of great price, the Church 
sought through the centuries to give it a setting worthy of 
its divine Donor. And so she enshrined the sacred words or 
consecration in a liturgy of overwhelming majesty, uniting 
the inspired utterance of psalmist and prophet with the fer- 
vent outpourings of her own saints and pontiffs. 


How beautiful this liturgy really is, the reader of the Missay 
will quickly see. And once acquainted with the Church’s 
own prayers, he will heartily agree with: the sentiments ex- 
presesd in the Introduction to Father Tasance: s “New Missal 
for Every Day.” 


To facilitate the use of this particular Missal for all who 
desire to follow the liturgy and ceremonies of Holy Mass in 
harmony with the celebrant of the Mass, is the purpose of 
this guide. The exercises aim to make the student familiar 
with the parts of the Missal by actually following the Mass. 


An understanding of a few outstanding points wil be 
enough at first; later on, the student will learn for himself 
the minor variations of the liturgy. 


An appreciation of the Mass as the most, sublime act of 
man’s homage to God, and a knowledge of the principal ves- 
sels, vestments and ceremonies are expected of every educated 
Catholic, . 


43 


http://ccwatershed.org 


4à READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


PARTI 
A Studp Plan 


Exercise 1 


The teacher will do well to assign an analysis of pages 
8-16 of the “Introduction to the Missal.” From the quota- 
tions of the author the student wil make a brief synopsis in 
his own words, showing the advantages of reading the 
Missal. The following points are illustrative: 


(A) The Missal associates one more intimately with the 
-celebrant and therefore more closely with Christ; 
for the priest represents Our Lord. (Page 8.) 


(B) The Missal contains many apt and beautiful citations 
from the Psalms of David. Now, these prayers of 
David are indeed the prayers of Christ, for David is 

„a. type of Christ.- (Page 9.) 23 

(C) In the Missal are found prayers for every occasion and 
for every moment; prayers of adoration, of thanks- 
giving, of contrition, and of petition. (Page 1494.) 


(D) Books of Piety are often very good and useful; at 
the best, however, they are never so good as the 
prayers of Holy Scripture, or those of the Fathers of 


the ‘Church, (Page 10.) , . 
(E) The Prayer of the Church contained in the Missal 
is the most efficacious of all prayers. Page 10.). 


Exercise 2 l 
l Ehe Contents of this Missal 


This Missal contains the following matter in the order as 
here given: 


Introduction: A devotional treatise of Holy Mass. 

Editor’s Preface: It explains the character of this Missal. 

Read Mass with the Priest: A Study Plan, how to use this 
Missal and containing instructions about the different 
. parts of this Missal, the Sanctuary, Altar, Requisites for 
Holy Mass (Sacred Vessels, Vestments, their color, etc.), 
and a detailed explanation of the different parts of Holy 
Mass and how the priest.says Mass. ' 

The Proper of the Season. . 

: The Ordinary of the Mass. i 

The Additional Prayers and the Prefaces. 

The Proper of the Saints. a 

The Common of the Saints, whe Votive Masses, the Occa- 
sional Prayers, the Forty Hours’ Devotion and the Masses 

tous toner of Cert in Moo peg. jal to V. 

The Proper o: erta: asses ec: Oo Vario Religious 
Orders and Localities, p bei igi 

The Proper Masses Special to the United States. 

An Appendix of General Prayers (Devotions in preparation 
and thanksgiving for Holy Mass and Communion, etc.) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a S 


Pd 


A STUDY PLAN 45 


In the exercises that follow, we shall be concerned with 
the four main sections of the Missal as enumerated below for 
the purpose of demonstration, but the principles governing 
their use may also be applied to the Masses contained in the 
other sections of this Missal. 


Note: The instructions and directions for the use of this 
Missal contained in this section, “Read Mass with the Priest" 
are sufficient for general use. If more detailed rubrieal in- 
formation is desired for. a closer adherence to liturgical re- 
quirements the study of the matter set in smaller type is 
advisable. 


Marking the Parts of the Missal 


Note: For a better understanding of the structure of the 
Missal and the exercises that follow, it is advisable to read the 
instruction on the ecclesiastical year and its-divisions, page 1622. 


Open the Missal, Place ribbons or cards in the following 
pages: - ` 

1. Page 756: The Ordinary of the Mass 

2. Page 103: The Proper of the Season 

3. Page 830: The Proper of the Saints 
` 4. Page 1299: The Common of the Saints 


Turning now from one section to another, the student will see 
the four important parts of the Missal. 


Exercise 3 


The Major Parts of the Missal Explained 


(QD The Ordinary of the Mass is made up of those prayers 
and rites which remain unchanged throughout the year. It 
includes the familiar prayers that are found in most prayer- 
books of the people. i 


(II) The Proper of the Mass on the other hand consists of 
the Introit, Prayer (sometimes called Collect), Epistle (some- 
times called Lesson) with the Gradual or Tract or Sequence 
that follows it, Gospel, Offertory, Secret, Communion and 
Postcommunion (A) special to the season, as for instance 
the Tenth Sunday after Pentecost; or (B) special to some 
Saint's feast. Hence there are two divisions of the Proper, 
viz., (A) the Proper of the Season, and (B) the Proper of the 
Saints. The latter is further supplemented by the Common 
of the Saints as described in the following paragraph (C). 


(A) The Proper of the Season has its place in the Missa? 
from page 103 to page 752, Here are to be found 
ihe Masses for each Sunday of the year, beginning 
‘with the First Sunday of Advent and ending with the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


46 


READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


Last Sunday after Pentecost. This section also in- 
cludes the principal solemnities of Our Lord and 
some other feasts which are kept Without regard for 
the day of the month on which they may fall and the 
week-day or as they are called the Ferial Masses. 


(B) The Proper of the Saints: Pages 830 to 1298. It fol- 


lows the order of the Calendar, month by month, day 
by day. Here one finds tbe special Introits, Prayers, 
Epistles, Gospels, Offertories, Secrets, Communions 
and Postcommunions suited to the saint who is being 
honored. 


(C) The Common of the Saints: Now to print an n Introit, 


Prayer, Epistle, Gospel, etc. for each saint would 
make the Missal extremely bulky. Besides, there 
would be no end of repetition, for the same Epistle 
or other proper part often recur. For this reason 
& special section appears in the Missal containing 
the Introits, Prayers, Epistles, Gospels, Offertories, 
Secrets, Communions, and Postcommunions, that are 
Common to many of the Saints. This section is called 
the Common of the Saints. 


In the Common will be found those Prayers that 
may not be printed in the Proper. If, for example, 
the student turns to the feast of St. Isidore on page 
974, he will find no Prayer at all for this saint. In 
other words, there is no Proper for the feast of St. 
Isidore. Consequently he will go to the Common. 
The Missal refers him to the page, which in this 
case is 1344 and from that place he will take the 
Introit, Prayer, Epistle, Gospel, etc. 

At times some parts will be printed in the Proper, 
while the remainder must be drawn from the Com- 
mon, e.g., the feast of St. Vincent Ferrer, page 975. 
Here the Prayer of St. Vincent is all that is given; 
the rest therefore is sought in the Common. 

The same page, 975, shows an example of a feast 
that has all its Proper in one place. In this instance 
there is no occasion for using the Common. 

Concluding Principle: When any part or parts 
are not found in the Proper of the. Season or the 
Proper of the Saints, they will be found in the 
Common. 


The Relation between the Ordinary and the 


“Proper of the Mass” 


Every Mass is made up of an Ordinary part and a Proper 


vart, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


A STUDY PLAN 4 


Take, for example, the Fourth Sunday of Lent, page 327. 
The Ordinary is on page 756; the Proper is on page 327. To 
follow the Mass, begin on page 756. Read on to page 760. 
Here one is told to say the Introit. Turn back to page 327 to 
find it. This done, return to page 761 to read the Kyrie, etc. 
as far as top of page 762. After this the Missal tells one to 
Say the Prayers (or Collects). 

To put the matter very briefly: there are eight places in 
the Ordinary where one is going to be directed to the Proper. 
In this book, in the Ordinary of the Mass, (page 756) so that 
they may be easily recognized, Proper parts are indicated by 
a %. However, for his own convenience and practice the 
reader may mark those eight places. Take a pen and write 
Clearly, or, better yet, print plainly on the margin of your 
Missal the name of the part to which reference is made ts 
Shown in the following diagram. 


Page Location Print in Margin 
760 Bottom ‘Introit” 

162 . Bottom "Prayer" 

763 Middle “Epistle” 

T64 Middle * Gospel" 

167 Middle “Offertory” 

772 Middle “Secret” 

792 . Top “Communion” 
"93 Top “Postcommunion” 


When the reader comes to one of these signals he should 
not hesitate an instant. He is to turn immediately to the 
Proper that has previously been marked out. 

The following diagram will indicate the manner in which 
one prayer follows another. This order may be called the 
sequence of prayers. It is important that the student get 
practice in going rapidly from the Ordinary to the Proper 
without losing his bearings. A card may be made similar 
in style to the diagram, which will serve the double purpose 
of a Missal-marker and a guide, in the event that one does not 
know “what prayer comes next.” 


Sequence of 3orapers 


PRAYERS AT FOOT OF ALTAR 
Introit 

KYRIE ELEISON . 

GLORIA 

Prayer. 

Commemoration (if any) 

Epistle 

Gospel 

CREED 

Offertory 


http://ccwatershed.org 


48 READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


OBLATION PRAYERS 


LAVABO 
Secret 
PREFACE 
SANCTUS 


CANON OF THE MASS 


Communion 


Postcommunion 
LAST GOSPEL 
In the aforegoing diagram '"The Ordinary" is indicated 
in capital letters while “The Proper" is shown in italics. 


Exercise 5 


3Aeritatíon of a Sunday Mass, 3illustrating 
“The Proper of the Season” 
Take the Mass for the Tenth Sunday after Pentecost. 


Place a marker (using the ribbons in book) in the Proper 
on page 673—open the Missal at the Ordinary, page 756. 


Prayers at beginning of Mass, 
p.756. . 

Introit, p. 760. 

Kyrie Eleison, p. 761. 

Gloria, p. 762. 

Prayer, p. 762. 

Second prayer, p. 827, "A 
cunctis," ie. "For the in- 

' tercession of Saints". 

Third Prayer, “At choice of 
Priest.” Therefore select 

' any one passage from 
those on pp. 1494 to 1500. 

Epistle, p. 673. 

Gradual, p. 674. 

Prayer, “cleanse my heart,” 
p. 763. 

Gospel, p. 674. 

Credo, p. 763. 

Offertory, p. 675. 

Prayer, p. 767, “Receive, O 
Holy Father,” and the 
four prayers that follow. 

Lavabo, ie. “I wil wash my 
hands," p. 770. 

Prayer, "Receive, O Holy 
Trinity," p. 771, and the 
following prayer. 


Secret, p. 772. 

Second Secret, p. 828, "For 
the intercession of Saints". 

Third Secret, “At choice of 
Priest.” Therefore select 
any one Secret from those 
on pp. 1494 to 1500. 

Preface, p. 772. 

Sanctus, p. 774. 

The Canon of the Mass, p 
771. This is the fixed and 
unchangeable part of the 
Mass. 


‘Read straight on to p. 192. 


Communion, p. 675. 

Postcommunion, p. 676. 

Second Postcommunion, p. 
828. ; 

Third Postcommunion, “At 
choice of Priest.” There- 
fore select any one Post- 
communion from those on 
Pp. 1494 to 1500. 

Prayer, “Placeat,” p. 793. 

Blessings, p.. 793. 

Last Gospel, p. 795. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


+ - A STUDY:PLAN 49 


. There is no.need to memorize the order of the foregoing 
prayers. - By reading the Mass several times one will become 
familiar with the sequence. i 

'As the student goes on through: Exercise 5 he will get 
accustomed to, turning back -and forth from. Ordinary to 
Proper and vice-versa.. The latter has been made easy for 
the user- of this book as in referring from the “Proper” to the 
“Ordinary”, the part that is required in the last named is 
given after each prayer in the "Proper" with the page on 
which it will be found. 


How to Use the Ribbons in Father Lasances 
The New Roman Missal - 


Method of Following the Mass 
Begin at the Ordinary of the Mass. 
Read until you come to X 
Turn to. Proper, as you have marked it by Ribbon . 
Read until referred back to the’ Ordinary marked by yellow Ribbon 
Read up to next * 
Turn again to Proper marked by Ribbon then continue as before. 


Before Mass Insert Ribbong as follows: 


For the Ordinary of the Mass 
Yellow. ( (gold) Ribbon at page 753 for High Mass; at.756 for Low 


ass, 
"For the Mass of ‘the Dag. (Called the " Proper") 
Green Ribbon on Sundays After Pentecost; also Sundays from 
~ "Epiphany to Septuagesima 
White Ribbon on Feasts of Our Lord, except on.those of the Passion; 
on Feasts of Our Lady; on Feasts of Saints not Martyrs 
Red Na on Pentecost; on Feasts of the Passion; on Feasts of 
art: 
Purple Ribbon in -Advent and Lent; on Vigils of Greater Feasts 
Black Ribbon in Masses for the Dead. 
The Priest at the Altar Wears Vestments Showing the Day’s 
Color—The Ribbon Color Corresponds 


AR ARR. 


Exercise 6 : : 
The Proper of Saints 
The. previous exercise has dealt. with the Proper of the 
Season, and has been illustrated by the recitation of a 
Sunday Mass. In the present exercise we shall consider the 
Mass as said on the feast days of the saints, in order to 
illustrate the Proper of the Saints, 


Example A—Feasts that have a "Proper" 
Feast of The Immaculate Conception, page 851 
The Ordinary begins as usual on page 756, while all the 
parts Proper to this feast, viz.: Introit, Prayer, Epistle, 
Gospel, Offertory, Secret, Communion, and Postcommunion 
are found together on pages 851 to 854. Hence no difficulty 
will be experienced in going from the Ordinary to Proper and 
vice-versa, an exercise which the teacher should now assign. 
Example. B—Feasts that have no "Proper" 
.. Feast of St. Eusebius, page 859 
On turning to page 859, one finds that there is no Introit, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


50 READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


Prayer, Epistle, etc. Recalling the principle that where there 
is no Proper, recourse is had to the Common, he will place 
his marker at page 1306, the Common of a Martyr-Bishop. 
From this page he will then get the Introit, Prayer, Epistle, 
Gradual, Gospel, Offertory, Seeret, Communion and Post- 
communion. With the special parts thus marked out for 
him on page 1306, the student may now read the whole Mass 
beginning with the Ordinary on page 756. 


Exercise 7 


The Rank of Feasts and Sundays 


The rank or dignity of a feast is stated immediately below 
its title. 


Example 1. The feast of St. Silverius, Pope and Martyr, 
page 1054; here the rank is “Simple.” 
Example 2, The Feast of St. Leo, page 1091; here the rank 
is "Semi-Double." : : 
Example 3. Feasts of “Double” rank. The greatest 
feasts, like Christmas and Easter, are marked as Doubles 
of the First Class; next in importance come the Doubles 
of the Second Class, and the Double Majors. Lowest in 
the class of Doubles is the Double Minor, which never gets 
its full name, but is called “Double” for short. 

The order of importance of the feasts occurring during the 

Ecclestastical Year is designated by the Church as follows: 


First: Those relating to our Lord and the mysteries of His 
life. Then follow the feasts in honor of the Blessed Virgin, 
the Holy Angels, St. John the Baptist, St. Joseph, Saints 
Peter and Paul and the other Apostles, the feasts of Na- 
tional Saints, Holy Patrons of dioceses and parishes, feasts 
of the dedication of churches, of the martyrs, holy Popes 
or Bishops, Doctors and Fathers of the-Church, Confessors 
of the Faith, Holy Virgins and other Holy Women. 


: CLASSIFICATION OF FEASTS 
ACCORDING TO RANK 


OF THE FIRST CLASS 
OF THE SECOND CLASS 
DOUBLE MAJORS - 
DOUBLE (MINORS) 


Pi | SEMI-DOUBLES l 


I | SIMPLES | 


All feasts, therefore, are either Simple, Semi-Double, or 
Double, and the Doubles are sub-divided as noted in following 
d'agram. This distinction is essential before the reader may 
go on to consider the Votive and the Requiem Masses. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


A STUDY PLAN 51 


Sundays are ranked as follows. . 


I. Privileged or Major Sundays of the first class, which never 
yleld precedence to any feast, viz., the first Sunday of Advent, 
all the Sundays of Lent, Easter, Low Sunday, and Pentecost. 


Il. Privileged or Major Sundays of the second class, 
which yield only to double feasts of the first class, are Sep- 
tuagesima, Sexagesima, and Quinquagesima, besides the sec- 
ond, third, and fourth Sundays of Advent. 


III. Common or Minor Sundays (the remaining Sundays of 
the year) which yield only to a double feast of the first or 
second class. When a festival Mass (of a double of the first 
or second class) is celebrated on a Sunday, a commemora- 
tion of the Sunday is made; i.e., the Collect, Secret, and Post- 
communion of the Sunday Mass are added to the Mass of the 
feast and the last Gospel is that of the Sunday. 


The Church Week 


The Church week is made up of a Sunday and six week 
days. The Sunday is called “Dies Dominica,” i.e., the Lord's 
Day. Saturday is called Sabbatum. The other week-days are 
called “Ferial” days or simply Feric. The week-days of 
Advent are called “Advent Feriz.” The week days of Lent 
are “Lenten Feriz.” Thus, Monday is Feria II, Tuesday, 
Feria III, etc. . 


Feric or week-days are divided into two classes, major and 
common. The former comprise all days of Advent and Lent, 
the Ember-days, and Monday (feria secunda) of the Rogation- 
days. All other feric belong to the second class. Major feria 
must always be commemorated. A few, called privileged feric, 
viz., Ash Wednesday and the first three days of Holy Week 
are celebrated to the exclusion of all feasts. 


On Masses Buring Lent 


Each Feria in Lent has its own Mass. Keep the marker in 
Dlace during Lent and advance it day by day. The priest may 
choose either the Lenten Mass or the Mass of the saint whose 
feast falls on that day. Should he say the Lenten Mass his 
second Prayer will be from the Mass of the saint: on the 
other hand, if he reads the Mass of the saint his second Prayer 
will be of the Lenten Feria and the Gospel of the Feria is 
said.at the end of Mass. It is easy to tell when he reads the 
Lenten. Mass, for then the vestments are violet in color. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


52 READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 
On Masses During Advent 


The Ferie of Advent have no special Mass; hence, the 
Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion of the Sunday are re- 
peated for each of the Ferie that follow. Thus, when the 
priest says the Mass of a saint during this season, the second 
Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion will be taken from the 
Mags of the Sunday before. These additional prayers are 
designated in the Missal “Commemoration of the Feria.” 


- The Motive Masses 
Page 1410 to Page 1494 


A Mass other than that of the day is called a Votive Mass, 
or Mass of Devotion. . These Masses are usually offered for 
some special intention, such as a thanksgiving, page 1494, to 
ask for peace, page 1468, etc. í 


It is permissible to say a Votive Mass only on a Simple or 
on a Semi-Double. 


For the Marriage ceremony page 1449 and on certain special 
occasions, e.g., the First Friday of the month page 646, the 
Church permits a Votive Mass on feasts even higher than a 
Semi-Double,. but this is by way of exception, 


Masses for the Bead 
Page 1501 to Page 1534 


There are various Masses for the Dead, page 1501. Pope 
Benedict XV granted priests permission to say three Masses on 
All Souls’ Day. Then there is a Mass for the Day of Death 
or Burial, another for the third, seventh and thirtieth day 
after burial, one for the Anniversary of the Day of Death, and 
lastly one called the Common or Daily Mass for the Dead. 
The “Ordinary of the Mass” is said as usual and the “Proper” 
ls taken from one of the Masses here noted. 


While the priest js reading the prayers, taken from page 
1501 and. following, which may be suited to his particular 
intention, the reader may join charitably in that intention, 
and also remember his own dead with a, prayer taken from the 
same section of the Missal. f 

Low Masses for the dead when said in black vestments are 
not allowed on feasts which are of double rite, nor on any 
Bunday, nor within any privileged octave, nor during Lent, on 
the Ember-days, or Rogation Monday and all vigils; nor on the 
day on which a Sunday is anticipated, or on which the Mass 


of the preceding Sunday, whi 
9 ep g y. ch was rubrically impeded, is 


http://ccwatershed.org 


nw 


A STUDY PLAN 53 


However, when the body of a deceased person has been 
brought into. the. church to await burial, greater liberty is 
permitted. Any Mass and on any day can be offered up for 
the faithful departed in general, or for any particular de- 
ceased person or persons: and, indeed, Holy Church seems to 
prefer to act upon this principle, rather than delay a Mass 
for the dead until a day on which. it can be said in black 
vestments, and with the rites proper to requiem Masses. 

The solemn or sung funeral Mass is prohibited on the last 
three days of Holy Week, Christmas Day, Epiphany (Jan. 6), 
Easter Sunday, Ascension Day, Pentecost, Trinity Sunday, 
Corpus Christi, the feasts of the Annunciation (March 25), 
Assumption (August 15), and Immaculate Conception of our 
Lady (Dec. 8); the feast of the Solemnity of St. Joseph (Wed- 
nesday before the third Sunday after Easter). feast of the 
Nativity of St. John Baptist (June 24), and of Sts. Peter and 
Paul (June 29), All Saints’ Day (Nov. 1), and the anniversary 
of the title and dedication of the church in which the Masą 
1s to be celebrated. 

On the third, seventh, thirtieth, and anniversary days of & 
person's death or burial, it is permitted by the rubrics 
throughout the year to celebrate a high Mass of requiem, 
except on ` . 

1. Sundays and holy-days of obligation; n 

2. Double feasts of the first and second class; 

:8. Vigils of the Nativity and of Pentecost; 

4. Within the octaves of Christmas, Epiphany, Easter, Pente- 
cost, Ascension, and Corpus Christi; 

5. Ash Wednesday; 

6. Holy Week; 

7. During solemn exposition of the Blessed Sacrament; 

3, CEHGUABODSORES having but one parochial Mass with pro- 
cession. 

When thus prevented, this high Mass may be anticipated or 
transferred to the nearest day free from the above rubrical 
impediments. 

A low Mass is not allowed on the third, seventh, thirtieth, 
and anniversary days, if these fall on 

1. A feast of double rite (except by special indult); 

2. Days during Lent, except the first day of each week free 
from a feast of double rite; : 

3. Ember-days; 

. Rogation Monday; . 

Vigils; ; D. 

. The day on which a Sunday is anticipated or on which 
the Mass of the preceding Sunday which was rubrically im- 
peded, is resumed. . 

Requiem Masses are strictly forbidden during the time in 
which the Blessed Sacrament is exposed publicly for Forty 
Hours’ Devotion or for Perpetual Adoration. : ` 


Supplementary Hotes 


. Octaves. Some feasts of high degree have an octave, which 
means a period of eight days. Thus, the celebration of the 
feast continues for a week. The days following the feast are 
called days within the octave (dies infra octavam); the eighth 
day is known as the octave-day (dies octava). The octave-day 
Of a feast of the first class is always a double major. 

Octaves are privileged, common, or simple. 

Privileged octaves are of the first, second, or third order. 

First Order: The octaves of Easter and Pentecost. No other 

feast may be celebrated during that time. 


oun 


http://ccwatershed.org 


54 READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


Second Order: The octaves of Epiphany and Corpus Christi. 
No other feast, except it be a double of the first class, may 
be celebrated during that time. The octave-day itself 
may be replaced only by feasts of the Universal Church if 
they are doubles of the first class. i 


Third Order: The octaves of Christmas, Ascension and the 
Feast of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. During this time the 
celebration of all occurring feasts except those of simple 
yank is permitted. But the octave-day itself may be re- 

placed only by feasts, doubles of the first aud second class. 


Note: When an octave day is replaced by another feast, a 
commemoration is always made of the octave. 


Common octaves.—Al feasts of the first class having a com- 
mon octave are indicated in the Universal Calendar, as well 
as on the feast itself. During their octaves, it is permitted to 
celebrate a feast having a higher rank than simple with a 
commemoration of the octave, except that on doubles of the 
first and second class the commemoration is omitted. But the 
octave day itself gives way only to doubles of the first and 
second class. i 


Simple octaves.—These are such feasts of which only the 
octave day is celebrated as a simple rank feast. 


Vigils.—Vigils (from vigilare, to watch), or days liturgically 
observed, immediately preceding certain feasts, are found in 
the Roman rite to the number of seventeen, divided into 
privileged and common. Of the former there are three. The 
vigils of Christmas and Pentecost do not yield to any feast; 
but the vigil of Epiphany yields to double feasts of Our Lord 
of the first or second class. All other vigils belong to the non- 
privileged class, and are excluded by any office of higher rite. 


Vigils are also divided into those on which there is or was 
an obligation of fasting and abstinence and those which do 
not carry with them this obligation. The vigil of Epiphany, 
because of the Christmas joy, the vigil of Ascension, because 
of the joy of Christ’s resurrection, and the vigil of the Im- 
maculate Conception, because it was instituted without this 
obligation, are without fast or abstinence. To all other vigils 
the obligation of fasting and abstinence is attached per se, 
though in many cases it has been abrogated. 


Occurrence of Feasts.—Two (or more) feasts may occur on 
the same day; of these only one is observed. The other is 
transferred, if liturgical rules permit; otherwise it is reduced 
to a simple (festum simplificatum) and commemorated, or at 
times rejected entirely, according to definite laws. 


Special Feasts.—The feast of a titular of a church, ie., of 
the saint in whose honor the church is erected, and the anni- 
versary of the consecration (strictly so called, not the simple 
blessing) of a church, are doubles of the first class with an 
octave for all the clergy attached to the church. 


The feast of the titular of the cathedral, as well as the anni- 
versary of the consecration of the cathedral, is a double 
of the first class, and with an octave, when permitted, for 
the secular clergy (for regulars, too, who use the diocesan 
Ordo) throughout the whole diocese, Religious, male or 
female, who use a special Ordo, Observe these feasts of the 
cathedral as first-class doubles, but without an octave. 

The day on which a church is consecrated is a double of 
the first class (from tierce) with an octave for the clergy 
of the church: the office is that of the dedication of a 
church. The day on which the cathedral is consecrated 
is observed as a double of the first class. likewise with a» 


http://ccwatershed.org 


REQUISITES AND PRAYERS FOR HOLY MASS 55 


octave, throughout the diocese. The feast of the dedica- 
tion or consecration of a church is a feast of Our Lord. 
The feast of the consecration of the cathedral and its an- 
niversary, as Well as the feast of the titular of the cathe- 
dral, is a primary feast even for the clergy of the diocese 
who are not attached to the cathedral. This is true, too, 
of the octaves of these feasts, 


Preparing the Missal for Next Day's Holy Mass 

The beginner is urged to prepare the Missal before com- 
ing to Mass, A few moments given to this task on the evening 
before, will be repaid in ease of reading at Church. 

In choosing the Mass to read, consult first the Universal 
Calendar (see index). It shows what Mass is to be said 
on any particular day. If closer adherence to the special 
calendar of a particular diocese is desired, consult the Ordc 
annually published in the locality. 

If the day is a feast day, mark the Missal at the feast 
given. If there is any difficulty in finding the place at once, 
then look up the name of the saint, or of the feast, in the 
Index at the end of the Missal. If no feast is given, then 
read the Mass of the preceding Sunday, or if the priest is 
vested in black a Mass for the Dead. 

If the day is a day within the Octave of some feast, read 
the Mass of the feast. (Certain great festivals are kept for 
eight days; i.e., they have an octave and therefore the Prayer, 
Secret and Postcommunion are repeated each Octave day). 

If the day is a Sunday, read the Mass of Sunday. Your 
Catholic Calendar at home will tell you what Sunday it is. 

If some saint’s feast happens to fall on that Sunday, add 
the prayer of the saint to the prayer of the Sunday Mass. 

Remember that the Sunday Mass takes precedence over all 
ordinary feasts. 

It is only when a Double of the First or Second Class 
falls on a Sunday that the Sunday Mass gives way to the 
feast. (The Patronal Feast of the Parish is a Double of the 
First Class). In this case the Mass is of the feast, the second 
Prayer is of the Sunday, and the Gospel of the Sunday is read 
at the end of the Mass. 


PART II 


An Explanation of the Requisites and Prapers of Boly Mass 
Furniture and Articles on Altar and in Sanctuary 

. Crucifix. 

. Reredos. 

. Tabernacle covered by a veil which is either white or of 
the color of the vestments worn that day, but at Requiem 
Masses the veil is purple. 

4-9. Large Candlesticks for High Mass and Benediction. At 

& High Mass at least six candles are lighted. 

10,11. Small Candlesticks for Low Mass. There are usually 

two but sometimes four. However, only two candles are 


QNEM 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Liam — vmm! — [ 
ih — — rT 
ARAN Dm — — — m FUR 


DIAGRAM OF AN ALTAR AND A SANCTU. 
(For st 0f articles numbered. see docompany inp. schedule) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


99 


Leatud SHL HIIA ssvN AVAN 


REQUISITES AND PRAYERS FOR HOLY MASS 57 


lighted for a Low Mass said by a priest, but when & 

pens says a low Mass four candies must be lighted. 

13, 14. Altar Cards. (The larger in the center contains 

prayers read at the Offertory and Canon. The smaller one 

on the Epistle side has the prayers which the priest reads 
when washing his hands. The other smaller one on the 

Gospel side has the Gospel of St. John, usually read at 

the end of Mass.) 

15. Mensa or Alter Table. 

16. Altar Table Coverings. (One wax &nd three linen cloths 
cover the altar table. The fourth or top one of linen 
hangs down over the side of the altar to the floor.) 

17. Antependium or Frontal. (A cloth which sometimes hanga 
down in front of the altar. Like the tabernacle veil, it 
takes the color of the Vestments.) 

18. Gospel Side of the Altar. 

19, Epistle Side of the Altar. 

20.. Sanctuary Floor. 

21. First Altar Step. 

22. Second Altar Step. : 

23. Predella or Altar Platform. 

24. Credence Table. 

25. Water and Wine Cruets. 

26. Finger Basin. ` 

21. Towel. 

28. Communion Paten. 

29. Sedilia or Priests' Bench. 

30. Bell. 

31. Communion Rail. 


d 


The Altar 


The form of the Catholic altar has always been a table or 
atomb. This double form has perpetuated through the ages 
the remembrance of the institution of the Eucharist and of 
the burial of Our Lord. The cloth that covered the table at 
the last supper, the winding-sheet of the Saviour’s embalming, 
are recalled to our love by the white linens spread upon it. 
The altar, the eucharistic table, the mystical tomb, is, above 
all, the holy mountain where Jesus transfigures and immo- 
lates Himself at the same time; raised as it is above the 
ground, it appears to us always as a Thabor and. & Calvary. 
Happier we than the apostle, for we can make for ourselves 
there a perpetual dwelling-place, even in the heart of the 
divine Saviour. t 

Church law prescribes an altar of stone for thè Holy 
Sacrifice. If the altar be made of wood or of materials other 
than stone the Holy Sacrifice must be offered on an altar- 
Stone set therein. : : 


The little rectangle in the front center of the Altar Stone ts 
the sepulcher or tomb, a hollowed part in which are contained 
the relics of Saints and Martyrs. 


-The Sacred Stone.—During the.Mass the priest Often kisses 
the middle of the altar. In this spot is a stone become, by 
the consecration of the bishop, a figure of Jesus Christ. Like 
the Word of God, it has received the sacred unction; like Him, 
it bears the mark of five wounds (five crosses are cut in the 
stone), and these are also made by the hammer and tron; 
like the Lamb of God, of Whom “not one of the bones was 


http://ccwatershed.org 


55 READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


TABLE OF THE ALTAR 


n È 


ALTAR | = | STONE 


+ Oy 


ight, 1936,-by Benziger Brothers 
ALTAR STONE IN PLACE 


broken" (Er. xil, 46), the sacred stone is entire, cut from a 
single piece. He who loves Our Lord will understand these 
kisses so often repeated; the Church wishes to make reparation 
during the Holy Sacrifice for all:the outrages of the passion 
—the derisive genuflections of the Jews replaced by the genu- 
flections of the priest; the perfidious kiss of treason, by the 
respectful kiss of love. In the sacred stone is enclosed a little 
tomb, sealed by the arms of the bishop; berein with the relics 
of the saints are laid three grains of incense. Here again is 
& reminder of the burial and the different perfumes which 
Jesus Christ then received from the piety of His disciples—the 
aromatic herbs of Joseph of Arimathea, of Magdalen, and the 
holy women. 

The Relics in the Altar.—In his marvelous vision St. John 
saw “under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the 
Word of God" (Apoc. 6, 9). The Church militant, heir of. their 
holy relics, has placed them under the altar of sacrifice. This 
custom, observed from the earliest days of Christianity, teaches 
us how we should receive Jesus Christ in holy communion. 

Our heart becomes an altar where Our Lord consummates 
His sacrifice, and upon this living altar He wishes to see the 
blessed wounds of a martyr. The saints have tasted in com- 
munion ineffable sweetness; recompense, we may be sure, of 
the immolation which they made of themselves each day. 
is easy for us to experience this; let us prepare ourselves for 
such a solemn act by the sacrifice of our tastes, of our pas- 
sions, as the Hebrews ate the paschal lamb with bitter herbs. 
The Eucharist will then bear.in us the most abundant fruit; 
it will. be the grain of wheat sown in our hearts, to grow 
there tili the resurrection, the day of blossoming and of har- 
vest, the heavenly wine, which maketh virgin those hearts in- 
clined to evil; the divine fire, which will give to the weak the 
courage of the lion. : 

The Tabernacle—The rich materials which cover the place 
where the Blessed Sacrament rests, even the name given it, 
recall the tabernacle of the Old Law, in which the ark of the 
covenant was kept, one of the prophetic figures of the sacra- 
ment of our altars. Its most ordinary form is that of a tower; 
this symbol of strength could not be more suitably employed 
than in sheltering Him Whom St. Augustine so well calls “the 
bread of the strong.” 

The Cross.—Above the tabernacle is the cross. Its presence 
alone in this place speaks simply and eloquently: “It is here 

t Jesus Christ renews the sacrifice of Calvary. The cross 
raised by deicidal hands remains always laden; love forever 
fastens to it the divine Victim. His arms extended call the 
sinner to return and to pardon; His lips never cease to utter 
vhe great prayer of mercy, ‘Father, forgive them’; grace flows 


http://ccwatershed.org 


REQUISITES AND PRAYERS FOR HOLY MASS $69 


from His heart in torrents.” Christian souls, all these things 
the crucifix, by its wounds, says to you each day. 

The Candles.—Doubtless they recall to us that the catacombs 
were the cradle of the Cburch and her first temple; that the 
divine mysteries were there celebrated by the light of torches. 
This touching reminder of the persecuted Church should not 
be lost sight of. 

But if it were merely as a reminder of the bloody period of 
the Church’s martyrdom that candles were used, why demand 
Wax for the altar-lights? The anxiety of the Church on this 

oint shows us that there is here some mystery. “Wax,” says 

gr. de Cony, summing up the teaching of all the liturgists, 
“ig one of the most expressive symbols furnished the Church 
by nature to express allegorically the holy humanity of Jesus 
Christ. The earliest Doctors dwell on the virginity of the dees, 
and the purity of that substance drawn from the nectar of 
the most exquisite flowers, and compare these things to the 
conception of the Saviour in the pure womb of Mary. The 
whiteness of the wax, laboriously obtained, signifies again the 
glory of Jesus Christ, the result of His sufferings; then the 
flame, mounting from that column of wax which it consumes, 
18 the divinity of Jesus Christ, manifesting itself by the sacri- 
fice of His humanity, and illuminating the world.” (Cérém. 
Rom., 50, 1 c, 6) It is not, then, to lighten the darkness of 
the sanctuary, let us say with St. Isidore, that the altar- 
candles are lighted, because the sun is shining, but this light 
is a sign of joy, and it represents Him of Whom the Gospel 
says: "He is the true light.” (Orig., 50, 1 co, 12.) 

During the holy mysteries, when thick darkness clouds our 
souls, let us beg God, the eternal light, to scatter this gloomy 
night. If at the foot of this new Calvary our heart is indiffer- 
ent and frozen, let us pray God, infinite love, to melt it in 
His fires. There wil come a day when this blessed light will 
be, for those who have despised it, the fire of Justice. O Lord, 
inspire my heart with such a profound horror of sin that I 
may escape the flames of Thy vengeance. 

The Sanctuary Lamp —In honor of Jesus Christ a lamp 
burns perpetually before the altar. The Christian soul longs 
to remain in constant adoration at the feet of Our Lord, there 
to be consumed by gratitude and love. In heaven alone will 
this happiness be given to us, but here below, as an expres- 
sion of our devout desires, we place a lamp in the sanctuary 
to take our place. In this little light St. Augustine shows us 
an image of the three Christian virtues. Its clearness ts faith, 
which enlightens our mind; its warmth is love, which fills our 
heart; its flame, which, trembling and agitated, mounts up- 
ward till it finds rest in its center, is hope, with its aspirations 
toward, preven, and its troubles outside of God. (Serm. 67, 

e Script. i 

May our heart watch in the sanctuary under the eye of God! 
During the labors of the day nothing is easier than to fly 
there in thought, to offer to Jesus Christ our pain, our wearl- 
néss, our actions. : 

At night let us place ourselves at the feet of Jesus, and say: 
While I sleep I h to love Thee and bless Thee always; here 
would I take my rest. If many Christians were faithful to 
this pious practice it would not.be merely a faint and solitary 
Jamp which would illumine the holy place, but_thousands of 
hearts Would shed there their sparkling rays of light. 

The Altar Candlesticks——The heavenly Jerusalem has her 
sacrifice and also her altar. St. John thus describes it: “The 
altar of gold had seven golden candlesticks, and in the. midst 
was the Son of man, shining like the snow by the whitenesg 
of His garments, and more brilliant than the sun by reason 
of the splendor of His face,” (Apoc. 1.) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


60 READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


It is, then, reminders of heaven which the Church con- 
stantly places before the eyes of her children; how can we hel 
thinking of it when all around us speaks of it: the altar, the 
candlesticks, the Eucharist? 

The Missal.—Upon the altar in heaven was also a mysterious 
book, sealed with seven seals, and which no man could open, 
The lion of the tribe of Juda, Jesus Christ, came, and His 
triumphant hand broke the seals. The resemblance here ig 
easily traced. The book which contains the prayers of the 
liturgy is placed upon the altar before the sacrifices, but it 
remains closed; only the priest, representing Jesus Christ, has 
the right to open it. 

In the West, Latin is the language of the liturgy of the 
Church. However, certain Greek words, such as Kyrie eleison, 
and some Hebrew expressions, like alleluia, amen, sabaoth, 
have been enshrined in this rich casket, that the language 
of the Christian sacrifice may recall the inscription placed 
above the Saviour's cross, which was written, says the evan- 
gelist, in Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin. : 


The Chalice and its Appurtenances 


The Chalice: is a cup made of gold or silver, but if of silver, 
the interior must be gold-plated. It holds the wine for 
the Holy Sacrifice, and is a striking figure of the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus. f 

The Paten: is a plate of gold or silver upon which the large 
bread for consecration rests until the offertory. If it is 
of silver, the upper side, at least, must be gold-plated. 
Of old it was necessarily larger than now, for it held all 
the breads to be consecrated. 


“To seal an alliance the ancients at the end of the banquet 
caused to be passed from one to another of the guests 2 cup 
to which each touched his lips. Our Lord followed this cus- 
tom at the last supper. The chalice used at the altar is made 
upon the model of the one from which Jesus Christ drank 
on the eve of His death. While the chalice receives the blood 
of Jesus Christ, the paten is reserved for His divine body. Jt 
is a large plate, of gold or silver like the chalice, but always 
golden in that portion which comes in contact with the holy 
species. Like the chalice, before it is used in the sacred 
mysteries it is consecrated by chrism and special prayers said 
by the bishop. Let us receive from the gold, the holy chrism, 
and the particular benediction of the prelate given to those 
vessels upon which the Holy of holies rests but an instant, 
the lesson which the Church teaches us. In communion our 
hearts become living chalices; our tongue is another paten 
upon which the priest lays Jesus Christ. May Our Lord al- 
ways find our tongue and heart bright with the gold’ of 
charity; let us consecrate this mystical chalice and paten with 
the unction of Christian sweetness and the perfume of prayer. 


The Pall: A square pocket-shaped piece of linen with a card- 
board inserted in order to stiffen it. It is placed over the 
chalice to prevent dust or other matter falling into it. 

The Purificator: A linen cloth used for wiping the chalice, and 
the fingers and mouth of the celebrant after Communion. 

It is spread over the cup of the chalice at the beginning and 
end of Mass, . 


http://ccwatershed.org 


REQUISITES AND PRAYERS FOR HOLY MASS 601i 


re Es 


"Copyright by Benziger Brothers 


The Chalice Chalice and Chalice, Purifica- 
x Purificator tor and Paten 
i with host 


mziger Brothers A 
Chalice, Purifica- — . All now covered by Chalice Veil— 
tor, Paten and note the diferent, parts under the 


Jarntrernsnerennnteiy 
Copyright’ by Benziger Brothera 


The Burse and — The Chalice completely covered 


the Corporal ff 
http://ccwatershed.org cA 


62 READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


The Corporal: A square piece of linen, In size and appearance 
it resembles à small napkin. It is spread out on the altar, 
and the chalice is placed upon it. During the Mass the 
Sacred Host rests for a time on the Corporal. 

The Burse: is a square container for the Corporal. It is made 
of the same material and color as the vestments. 

The Chalice Veil: is the cloth which covers the chalice until 
the Offertory, and again after the Communion. It also 
is made of the same material and color as the vestments. 
(If one is not present at Sunday Mass before the veil 
is removed from the chalice, one is obliged to.hear an- 
other Mass). 


The Sacred "Vestments 


The Vestments of the Celebrant 


By God's command the Jewish priests wore a distinctive 
garb when they ministered in the Temple. The Bible tells 
us they were vested in violet and purple, scarlet twice dyed, 
and fine linen. Gold and precious stones were also used to 
give the person of the priest that dignity demanded by his 
exalted office. 

No special dress was at first prescribed for the Christian 
priesthood. During the early days the garments worn at 
the Holy Sacrifice were not dissimilar in form to the clothing 
of civilians. They were distinguished, however, from profane 
&pparel in richness and beauty of decorations; and of course, 
their use was restricted to divine worship. 

Secular fashion changed, but the Church clung to the old 
Style. Thus it was that garments once common to all, pres- 
ently became the privileged dress of the clergy. Faith then 
saw in each particular vestment a symbol relating to the 
Passion of Our Lord, and a reminder of some Christian duty. 

The priest’s vestments may be considered now: 

(a) According to their present use. 

(b) According to their historical origin. 

(c) According to their symbolism. 
THE AMICE 

The amice is a piece of fine linen in the form of an oblong. 
The priest places it for a moment on his head, and then allows 
it to rest upon his shoulders. As he does so he prays: “Place, 
O Lord, on my head the helmet of salvation, that so I may 
resist the assaults.of the devil.” 

Historical Origin: 

A covering for the head and neck worn like a hood. 
When indoors it was lowered and thrown over the 
‘shoulders. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


UNE Qr al 


r 


REQUISITES AND PRAYERS FOR HOLY MASS 63 


Symbolic Reference: 

(a) The linen cloth that the soldiers put over Our Lord’s 
head; when thus blindfolded He was mockingly asked 
who struck Him. 

(b) The helmet of Salvation. Cf. Ephes. vi, 17. 


THE ALB 
A wide linen robe reaching to the feet and covering the 
whole body. The word “Alb” is derived from the Latin, alba 
(vestis understood), or white vestment. The vesting prayer 
is: “Make me white, O Lord, and cleanse my heart; that being 
made white in the Blood of the Lamb I may deserve an 
eternal reward." 
Historical: Origin: 
The alb, or tunic, was worn in ancient times by all who 
enjoyed any dignity. The lace alb is a 17th century 
development. 
Symbolic Reference: 
(a) The garment with which Herod clothed Our Lord. 
(b) Signifies the purity of conscience demanded of God's 
priest. 


THE CINCTURE 
The cincture, or girdie, is a cord of linen fastened about the 
waist to confine the alb. 'The vesting prayer is: ''Gird me, 
O Lord, with the cincture of purity, and quench in my heart 
the fire of concupiscence, that the virtue of continence and 
chastity may abide in me." 
Historical Origin: 
Walking and active exertion made it necessary for one to 
gird up a long garment like the alb. Hence the cincture 
was an essential article of dress. 
Symbolic Reference: 
(a) The cord that bound Our Lord to the pillar when He 
Was being scourged. 
(b) Symbolizes modesty, and also readiness. for hard 
work in God's service. 


THE MANIPLE 
A strip of silken cloth worn on the left arm of the priest. 
The vesting prayer is: “May I deserve, O Lord, to bear the 
maniple of weeping and sorrow in order that I may joyfully 
reap the reward of my labors.” 
Historical Origin: 
Originally a strip of linen worn over the arm. During 
the long services, and in the intense heat of southern 
countries its use was frequently necessary to wipe the 
perspiration from the face and brow. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


64 à READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


à n Coop by pue ed 
Priest in Alb Priest adjusting 
the Cincture 


M 


Priest. putting Priest with Priest in Chasuble 
Maniple on left the Stole is now completely 
arm : Vested. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


REQUISITES AND PRAYERS FOR HOLY MASS 65 


Symbolic Reference: 
(a) The rope whereby Our Lord was led, and the chains 
which bound His sacred hands. 
) An emblem of the tears of penance, the fatigue of 
the priestly office and its joyful reward in heaven. 


THE STOLE 

A long band of silk of the same width as the maniple, but 
three times its length. It is worn around the neck and 
crossed on the breast.: The vesting prayer is: “Restore to me, 
O Lord, the state of immortality which I lost through the sin 
of my first parents and, although unworthy to approach Thy 
Sacred Mysteries, may I deserve nevertheless eternal joy.” 

Historical Origin:. 

A kind of neck-piece or kerchief; ; a part of the dress of the 

upper classes. It gradually became the distinctive mark 

of spiritual authority in the higher clerics, viz., the priest 
and deacon. 
Symbolic Reference: 

(a) The cords with which Jesus was tied. Worn as it is 
over the shoulders, it reminds us, too, of the Cross 
Our Lord carried. 

(b) A reminder of the Yoke of Christ. ‘The priest’s bur- 
den is a heavy one, which Christ nevertheless makes 
sweet and light. 

THE CHASUBLE 

The chasuble is the outer and chief vestment of the priest. 
It is essentially tie Mass vestment and is now exclusively 
reserved to the priest. The vestment is familiar to all by 
reason of thé. cross usually embroidered on it. The word 
“chasuble” is derived from the Latin, casula, a little house. 
The ancient vestment completely enveloped the priest, and 
was somewhat like a tent. The vesting prayer is: “O Lord, 
who hast said, ‘My yoke is sweet and My burden light,’ grant 
that I may so carry it as to merit Thy grace." 

Historical Origin: 

Imagine a large circular cloth with a hole eut in the 
center for the head. This will help one to visualize the 
ancient chasuble, which was an immense cloak, without 
opening in front, and without sleeves, It was put on over 
the head and completely enveloped the body. When it 
was necessary to use the hands, the garment had to be 
folded up on each side over the arms. Because of its 
inconvenience (for two assistants were needed to manipu- 
late it), the vestment was gradualy cut and altered until 
it now has its present shape. 


Symbolic Reference: 
(a) The purple cloak worn by Our Lord when He stood 


http://ccwatershed.org 


66 f READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


before Pilate. 

(b) An emblem of love. When the ordaining bishop gives 
jt to the new priest, he says: “Receive the priestly 
garment, for the Lord is powerful to increase in you 
love and perfection." 


Vestments of the Deacon and Subdeacon and. 
Their Office 


The Deacon:—This word means servitor. One of the prin- 
cipal duties of this sacred minister js to assist the priest 
during Solemn High Mass and other solemn ceremonies. He 
is always at his side, and, by the place of honor which he occu- 
pies, he reminds us of the Beloved Disciple leaning on the 
Heart of Jesus during the Last Supper, and standing under 
ihe cross of Calvary. 

The deacon chants the Gospel, and dismisses the people 
at the end of Mass by intoning: “Ite, Missa est.” 

His vestments are the amice, alb, cincture, stole, and dal- 
matic; except the latter, all have already been explained. 

The Dalmatic: This vestment was originally worn at Dal- 
matia, whence it was brought to Rome. It is a long and ample 
garment, with very large but short sleeves, descending only to 
the elbow, From the second century among the Romans it 
was the vestment of the emperors: the Church adopted it 
for the Sovereign Pontiff and the bishops. 'The deacons re- 
ceived it from Pope Sylvester, but the privilege of wearing it 
was confined to the deacons of the Church at Rome, and for 
them only granted on festival-days as a sign of joy; conse- 
quently, it was laid aside during Advent, Lent, and fast-days, 
periods of sadness and mourning in the Church. 

e dalmatic is of the same color as the chasuble of the 
priest. ; 

The deacon does not wear the stole in the same manner 8s 
the priest; he places it on the left shoulder, and brings the 
extremities under the right arm. 

The Subdeacon.—This minister is charged with the prepa- 
ration of the sacred vessels, the bread and wine of the sacri- 
fice, giving the water to the celebrant when he washes hls 
hands, and reading the Epistle. His vestments are the amice, 
alb, girdle, maniple, and tunic. The tunic was formerly dis- 
tinguished from the dalmatic by its form and material; now 
: i in all respects like it, The Subdeacon does not wear the 
stole. 

From the “offertory” until the “Pater Noster" at Solemn 
Mass he wears the humeral veil like a shawl over his shoul- 
ders, in the folds of which he holds the paten. This veil is 
&n oblong piece of silk of the color of the vestments of the day. 
It has strings to tie it in front. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


REQUISITES AND PRAYERS FOR HOLY MASS 67 


"MP Te 
Cupseni bh Binger Brahe Tus Humen Ven. 


The Vestments Worn at Benediction 

The Cope.—It is a large semi-circular cloak, reaching to 
the feet and having a small cape in the back. It is clasped 
in front at the breast. The cope is worn by the officiating 
priest at Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament and in pro- 
cessions. It is likewise used at the "Asperges" before High 
Mass, at funeral services, and in solemn blessings connected 
with Mass,—like the blessing of the ashes on Ash-Wednesday 
and of the palms on Palm Sunday. The humeral vell as 
described above, but in white, is worn by the priest when hold- 
ing the Monstrance to give Benediction, 


The Colors of the Vestments 

There are five liturgical colors: White, Green, Red, Purple, 

and Black. 

"White: is the symbol of purity. It is used on all feasts of 
Our Lord except those relating to His sufferings; on 
feasts of Our Lady; on the feasts of saints that are not 
martyrs. 

Red: is the figure of blood and fire. The Church assigns it 
to the feasts of the martyrs and apostles; to Pentecost 
Sunday; to feasts connected with the Passion of Our 

Ord. 
Green: is the symbol of hope. It is used on the Sundays 


from Epiphany to Septuagesima and on the Sundays 
after Pentecost. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


68 READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


(The Sacred Congregation of Rites permits the use 
of gold vestments instead of red, white or green, pro- 
vided the material be of pure cloth of gold.) 

Violet: the penitential color, is used during Advent and 
Lent and on the Vigils of the greater feasts. (Vest- 
ments of rose color may be worn in place of violet on 
two days during the year: the third Sunday of Advent, 
Gaudete Sunday; and the fourth Sunday of Lent, 
Letare Sunday). 

Black: the sign of mourning, is used on Good Friday, and in 
Masses of the Dead. 


High Mass and Low Mass 


High Mass: that which is celebrated by a priest, assisted by 
deacon and subdeacon, with ali the solemnity of chant, 
incense and full ceremonial. 


Low Mass: is said by a priest alone, with one or two servers, 
and is a shortened or simplified form of the High Mass, 

Missa Cantata: The so-called sung Mass, or Missa Cantata, 
is & modern compromise between a Low and a High Mass. 
At a Missa Cantata the ceremonies are somewhat abbre- 
viated because of the absence of the sacred ministers; 
incense is not permitted, and the celebrant himself sings 
the Gospel in the deacon’s stead. : 


- The Asperges 


-The Asperges, from the Latin aspergere, to wash or sprinkle, 
1s a rite at least fifteen centuries old, which precedes the prin- 
cipal Mass on Sunday. It is performed by the celebrant of 
the Mass, who sprinkles the congregation with holy water 
while reciting a verse from Psalm 50: “Thou shalt sprinkle 
me with hyssop; and I shall be cleansed; Thou shalt wash me 
and I shall be made whiter than snow” (verse 8). At Easter- 
tide there is substituted for this versicle the Church’s anti- 
phon, “Vidi Aquam." The ceremony of sprinkling the con- 
gregation grew out of an old custom of blessing water for the 
faithful on Sunday mornings. In a ninth-century document 
we read: “Every Sunday, before the celebration of Mass, the 
priest shall bless water in his church and, for this holy pur- 
pose he shall use a clean and suitable vessel, The people, 
when entering the church, are to be sprinkled with this water, 
and those who so desire may carry some away,” 


Ceremonies for the Laity 


The following is a summary of ceremonies to be observed b 
the faithful at Mass and the liturgical functions connecte] 


http://ccwatershed.org 


REQUISITES AND PRAYERS.FOR HOLY MASS 69 


with it. Uniformity in this matter would greatly add to the 
edification of the people and tend to enhance the sacred 
functions. 


Loto Mass 


HEN the celebrant enters the sanctuary . the laity rise 

and remain standing till he descends to the foot of 

the altar to begin Mass. They then kneel and remain so 

throughout the Mass, except during the two Gospels, during 

which they stand. (Rubricæ Generales Missalis, Tit. 17, n. 2.) 

De Herdt (Vol. 1, n. 146) says that this rubric is not preceptive 
but directive only. 

Note.—When the last Gospel is that of St. John they make 

a simple genufiection with the priest. at the words “Et 


Verbum," etc. then rise and remain standing until the priest 
reaches the foot of the altar, 


Asperges 


1. Stand when the celebrant enters the sanctuary and 
remain standing until the end of the Asperges. Do not kneel 
when the celebrant kneels and: intones the Asperges or Vidi 
Aquam. 

2. Sit whilst the celebrant is removing the cope and putting 
on the chasuble. 


3. Stand when the celebrant goes to the altar. 


: High Mass 

The rubrics give no direction. Gavantus (Pars I, Tit. 17) 
and Pouget (Institutiones Catholice in modum Catecheseos, 
Pars 3, Sect. 2, cap 7, § 20) say that the people may conform 
to the rules given for those who are in choir. Hence the 
people— 

1. Stand—from the time the celebrant enters the sanctuary 
to the beginning of the Mass. 

2. Kneel—-from the beginning of the Mass until the cele- 
brant ascends the altar after the Confiteor. 

3. Stand—from the time the celebrant ascends the altar 
until he goes to the bench after the intonation of the Gloria, 
During the singing of the Kyrie eleison the people sit if the 
celebrant sits. 

4, Sit—while the choir sings the Gloria. 

5. Stand—from the time the celebrant rises from the bench 
to the end of the Orations. 

6. Sit—from the beginning of the Epistle to the Dominus 
vobiscum before the Gospel. 

7. Stand—during the Gospel and the recitation of the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


70 READ MASS WITH THE PRIEST 


Credo; during the latter they make a genuflection on one knee at 
Et incarnatus est. 

8. Sit - when the celebrant takes his seat, and whilst the Credo 
is being sung by the choir, except at the Et incarnatus est...et 
homo factus est, when they kneel on both knees. 

9. Stand - when the celebrant rises to return to the altar and 
remain standing whilst he sings Dominus vobiscum and Ore- 
mus. A 

10. Sit - from the Oremus to the beginning of the Preface - Per 
omnia saecula saeculorum. 

Nore. - During solemn Mass when incense is used the people stand 
during the incensing of the congregation. Remain standing for the 
Preface. : 

11. Stand - From the beginning of the Preface until the 
celebrant begins the Sanctus. 

12. Kneel - from the Hosanna, etc., until the Per omnia saecula 
saeculorum before the Pater Noster. 

Nore. - The S. C. Indulg. issued a decree June 12, 1907, according to 
which all who look at the Sacred Host when it is elevated at Mass or 
when the Blessed Sacrament is solemnly exposed and recite the 
ejaculation “My Lord and My God.” may gain an indulgence of seven 
years and seven times forty days, besides a plenary indulgence once a 
week if this is done daily and the sacraments are received. Hence the 
laity should bow when the celebrant genuflects, look at the Sacred Host 
when the celebrant elevates it, and bow again when the celebrant 
genuflects after elevating it. 

13. Stand - from the Pater Noster until the Agnus Dei. 

14. Kneel - from the Agnus Dei until the Dominus vobiscum 
before the Postcommunion. 

15. Stand - during the Postcommunion and remain standing 
until the celebrant gives the Blessing. 

16. Kneel - during the Blessing. 

17. Stand - during the Last Gospel and remain standing until 
the celebrant has left the sanctuary. 

Note. - When the Last Gospel is that of St. John, the people should 
make a simple genuflection with the priest at the words "Et Verbum, " 
etc., then rise and remain standing until the celebrant has left the 
sanctuary. 


Requiem and Ferial filagses 


The rules given above are to be observed, except - 

1. Kneel during the prayers before the Epistle and after the 
Communion. 

2. Kneel from the Benedictus through to the Last Gospel. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


REQUISITES AND PRAYERS FOR HOLY MASS 71 


Note I—If, whilst sitting, the celebrant doffs his biretta, 
the people should make a bow by bending the head and to 
some extent the shoulders also, 

Note IIL—When the celebrant bows or makes the sign of the 
cross in those parts of the Mass which he recites in a clear 
&nd intelligible tone of voice, the people should do the same. 

Note III.—As often as the celebrant makes a genuflection or 
kneels, because the rubrics prescribe it, between the begin- 
ning of Mass and the Offertory (e.g., at the Adjuva nos in the 
Trect on Ash Wednesday and at Emisit spiritum during the 
reading of the Passion on Palm Sunday) the people do the 
em If they be sitting at the time they first rise and then 

neel. 


Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament 


1. Kneel—from the beginning to the end of the service, ex- 
cept when the Te Deum is chanted, when all stand; but all 
should kneel on both knees when the verse Te ergo quesumus 
of the Te Deum is being sung. 

2. Stand—as soon as the Blessed Sacrament is replaced in 
the tabernacle. ' 


Note I.—When the Blessed Sacrament is exposed the people 
make a double genufiection on both knees and a bow when 
entering and leaving the church. 

Note IL—In answering the public prayers and litanies every 
one in the church should answer in a loud tone of voice. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHEN TO KNEEL, STAND OR SIT 
AT LOW, HIGH, REQUIEM OR SOLEMN MASS: 


1 According to custom in American churches when there is no 
canonical choir, and no one to give a sign for standing, kneel. 
. ing, etc., the following procedure may be observed: 


Parts Or THE Mass 
When Priest enters Sanctuary 
Beginning of Mass 


| GLORIA 
DOMINUS VOBISCUM—COLLECTS | k 
EPISTLE (Priest at right side) — 
DIES IRAE (at Mass for the Dead) 
GOSPEL (Priest at left side) 
CREDO 

| OFFERTORY (Oremus) 

| PREFACE — 


2nd ABLUTION Cwhen Priest drinks 


Y from chalice second time) | 
| DOMINUS VOBISCUM é7 POSTCOM.| k 
| ITE MISSA EST and BLESSING 


LAST GOSPEL (Priest at left side) 
PRAYERS AFTER LOW MASS 

| When Priest leaves Sanctuary 
ABSOLUTION OF THE DEAD 


x) 
R 
4$ 
Du 
FE 
E 
SANCTUS till) COMMUNION ES 
k 
n 
2 
Ea 
k 
Fi 
n 


i Key: 1—Low Mass not sung; 2— High Mass sung by one 

| priest; 3—-Requiem or Funeral Mass sung by one priest; 
4—Solemn High Mass sung by three priests; 5—Solemn Requiem 
or Funera! Mass sung by three priests; s—sit; st—stand; 
k—kneel; n—none. 


Note: 1For Ferial Masses (Masses said on weekdays) said 

by priest in purple vestments, follow directions of No. 3 
(Requiem Mass). 2—Also sit when priest sits, %—Also genu- 
flect or sit when priest genuflects or sits. *— When people are ji 

B incensed by thurifer, stand 


http://ccwatershed.org 


The Ordinary ano tbe Proper Patts 
of the Mass 


"The English form of the Ordinary of the Mass is given here 
for study purposes only. The Latin has been omitted since it 
is in the “Ordinary of the Mass" for regular use on page 756 
Thus the beginner may have at hand the copious notes and 
instructions interspersed throughout which were provided by 
Father Lasance, and readily familiarize himself with the order 
of Holy Mass and the sequence of the prayers. This will be 
so much easier of accomplishment as the reading and study 
of this form is correlated with the explanation of “The Parts 
of the Mass” taken from “Read Mass with the Priest" by Rev. 
William R, Kelly. After this knowledge has been acquired the 
“Ordinary of the Mass” in Latin and English as contained for 
practical purposes on page 756 should be used because it per- 
mits smoothly progressive reading. 

To find what Mass ts to be celebrated on any given day, 
consult “The Universal Calendar” at the end of this book 
and then turn to the alphabetical index to ascertain the page 
on which the Mass for the celebration of the designated feast 
is contained. 


The Parts of the Mass 


Each Mass contains certain prayers and rites which are 
fized, i.e., they do not change and this is called the Ordinary 
of the Mass. But it also contains other prayers which vary 
according to the feast and this portion of the Mass is called 
the Proper of the Mass. These variable parts are the Introit, 
the Prayer or Collect, the Epistle or Lesson with their Gradual 
Tract or Sequence, the Gospel, the Offertory, Antiphon, the 
Secret, the Communion Antiphon and the Postcommunion 
These parts are indicated by a y so they may readily be 
recognized. 


The following table wil give & comprehensive view of the 
structure of the Mass and its various parts. 


Part 1. The Mass of tbe Catechumens 


A. The Preparation. 


1. The Preparatory Prayers for Mass; 2. The "Asperges Me;" 
3. The i: at the foot of the altar; 4. The incensing of 
the altar; 5. The Introit; 6. The Gloria. 


B. The Instruction. 


1. The Prayers or Collects; 2. The Epistle, Gradual (Tract, 
Sequence); 3. The Gospel; 4. The Credo. 


Part 2. Whe Mass of the faithful 


A. The Offertory. 
1. Offertory Prayer (Antiphon); 2. Prayers for tbe offering 


73 


http://ccwatershed.org 


14 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


‘of the bread and the wine; Incensing of offerings and altar; 
3. The Lavabo or Washing of the hands; 4. The second prayers 
for the offering; 5. The Secrets. 


B. The Canon. 


1. The Preface and Sanctus; 2. The three Commemorations 
of the. Church, of the living, of the Saints, (the Communi- 
cantes); 3. Prayers before the Consecration; 4. Consecration 
and Elevation; 5. The Prayers after the Consecration: Com- 
memoration of the Passion, Death, Resurrection and.Ascension 
of our Lord; the two oblation prayers; the commemorations 
of the dead, ourselves and the Saints; 6. The Minor Elevation 
(The end of the Canon). 

C. The Communion. 

(a.) Preparation, . 

1. The Pater Noster; 2. The Prayer for Peace; 3. The breaking 
of the Host; 4. The Agnus Dei; 5. Second prayer for peace. 
The Kiss of Peace; : 

_ (b.) Reception of Holy Communion.. 

1. Prayers of preparation for Holy Communion; 2. The 
Domine non sum dignus; 3. The Communion of the Priest 
under both species; 

(c) The Thanksgiving. 

1. Two prayers of thanksgiving (The Ablution Prayers); 
2. Communion Antiphon; 3. The Postcommunion. 

(d.) Conclusion. 

1. The Dismissal (Ite Missa Est); 2. The Blessing; 3. The 
Last Gospel. 


The Drapers and Ceremonies of tbe 
Ordinary of the Mass 


The Mass of the Catechumens 


The Mass of the Catechumens extends from the prayers at 
the foot of the altar until the Offertory. It is a kind of 
prelude to the great act of sacrifice which begins with the 
Offertory and concludes with the end of the Mass. It is 
called “The Mass of the Catechumens" because in the early 
Church, the Catechumens, who were those under instruction 
and had not yet been baptized and admitted to the Church, 
were allowed to attend only this first part of the Mass, 


Whe Preparation 


As the first step in his preparation to say Mass the priest 
recites certain prayers privately before vesting. These prayers 
will be found at the end of this book and are recommended 
to the laity as a special preparation for the reception of Holy 
Communion. Indulgence, one year. Leo XIII, Feb. 17, 1883. 

When the priest enters the Sanctuary, stand until he begins 
the prayers at the foot of the altar. Then kneel. 

Standing at the foot of the altar steps, and signing himself 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 16 


with the sign of the holy cross, the priest begins, the acolytes 
or other ministers responding: 1 

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost. Amen. 

The priest, folding his hands, says the Antiphon. 

P. I will go in to the altar of God. 

Hf. To God, Who giveth joy to my youth. 

Now the priest recites the 42nd Psaim, "Judge me, O God, 
etc." and immediately adds the Confiteor, Therein expressed 
are the sentiments which. ought to animate both priest and 
people at this sacred time. (The priest humbled at the foot 
of the altar represents Jesus in the Garden of Olives.) (See 
Mass Picture, “The Beginning of Mass—The Confiteor," page 
791). 


Psalm 42 


From Passion Sunday till Holy Saturday exclusively, and 
in Masses for the dead, the following psalm is omitted. In 
this event continue at the Confiteor. 

Judge me, O God, and distinguish my cause from the nation 
that is not holy; deliver me from the unjust and deceitful man. 

I. For Thou art, God, my strength: why hast Thou cast 
me off? and why do I go sorrowful whilst the enemy afilicteth 
me? 

P. Send forth Thy light and Thy truth: they have con- 
ducted me, and brought me unto Thy holy hill, and into Thy 
tabernacles. 

RY. And I will go in to the altar of God; to God, Who giveth 
joy to my youth. 

P. To Thee, O God, my God, I will give praise upon the 
harp: why art thou sad, O my soul, and why dost thou dis~ 
quiet me? 

BY. Hope in God, for I will still give praise to Him, the 
salvation of my countenance and my God. 

P. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy 
Ghost. 

Bí. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, 
world without end. Amen. 

P. I will go in to the altar of God. 

RY. To God, Who giveth joy to my youth. 


The Confiteor or Public Confession 


The priest makes the sign of the cross and says: 


1The directions given throughout this Ordinary of the 
Mass when to kneel, stand or sit are the general customs for 
Low Mass, Consult the “Ceremonies for the Laity,” page 68. 
However, frequently it is the rule to kneel all through Low 
Mass and stand at the two Gospels. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


76 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


P. Our help is in the name of the Lord. 

RY. Who made heaven and earth. 

Joining his hands and bowing profoundly, the priest con- 
tinues: 

I confess to almighty God, to blessed Mary, ever virgin, to 
blessed Michael the archangel, to blessed John the Baptist, to 
the holy apostles Peter and Paul, to all the saints, and to you, 
brethren, that I have sinned exceedingly in thought, word, and 
deed: (Here the priest strikes his breast three times) through 
my fault, through my fault, through my most grievous fault. 
Therefore I beseech the blessed Mary, ever virgin, blessed 
Michael the archangel, blessed John the Baptist, the holy 
apostles Peter and Paul, all the saints, and you, brethren, to 
pray to the Lord our God for me. 

B. May almighty God have mercy on thee and, having 
forgiven thee thy sins, bring thee to life everlasting. 

P. Amen. 

The priest rises and the ministers or the acolytes bowing 
down, recite the Confiteor. 


The priest now says: 

P. May almighty God have mercy on you and, having 
forgiven you your sins, bring you to life everlasting. 

B. Amen. 

Signing himself with the sign of the cross he continues: 

P. May the almighty and merciful God grant us pardon, 
absolution, and remission of our sins. 

RY. Amen. 

Bowing moderately the priest continues: 

P. Thou wilt turn again, O God, and quicken us. 

RY. And Thy people shall rejoice in Thee. 

P. Show us, O Lord, Thy mercy. 

K. And grant us Thy salvation. 

P. O Lord, hear my prayer. 

BY. And let my cry come unto Thee. 

P. The Lord be with you. 

RB. And with thy spirit. 

P. Let us pray. 

Then going up to the altar the- priest prays silently: 

Take away from us our iniquities, we beseech Thee, O Lord; 
that, being made pure in heart, we may be worthy to enter 
into the Holy of holies, Through Christ our Lord. Amen. 

Bowing down over the altar, he kisses it anq says: 

We beseech Thee, O Lord, by the merits of those of Thy 
saints whose relics are here, and of all the saints, that 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 77 


Thou wouldst. vouchsafe to pardon me all my sins. Amen. 


- Á The Jntroit ; 

In the ancient days the Introit (from the Latin “he enters”) 
usually a selection from Holy Scripture, was chanted while 
the priest and his attendants were going in procession to the 
altar, Often, but not always, the Introit sounds the keynote 
of the Mass, for instance, rejoicing on Letare Sunday, (4th 
Bunday. of Lent, page 327). (See Mass Picture—The Introit, 

age E 
E Saniko to the left or Epistle side of the altar, he reads the 
Introit, which varies according to the Mass that is being cele- 
brated, and which will be found in its place in the order of 
proper Masses, page 103 to page 752, in this book. (In this 
connection attention is called to the directions for finding the 
Proper Part of a Mass in “Read Mass with the Priest, page 43.) 

Then alternately with his ministers and with folded hands 
he says: v ; 

The Kprie Eleison 

Kyrie Eleison: These are Greek words. Kyrie Eleison—Lord 
have mercy. Christe Eleison—Christ have mercy. “The Kyrie 
Eleison, that cry for mercy .. . seems introduced as if to give 
grander effect to the outburst of joy and praise which suc- 
ceeds: it in the Gloria in Excelsis” (Cardinal Wiseman). 

P. Lord, have mercy on us. 

Hf. Lord, have mercy on us. 

P. Lord, have mercy on us. 

BY. Christ, have mercy on us. 

P. Christ, have mercy on us. 

W. Christ, have mercy on us. 

P. Lord, have mercy on us. 

K. Lord, have mercy on us. 

P. Lord, have mercy on us. 

He now moves to the center of the altar, and recites: 


g The Gloria in Exrelsig? 

This is omitted in Lent and Advent, and in Masses for the 
dead. 1 

The Gloria is the Church's greatest hymn of praise. Its first 
words are from the angels hymn on the night of the Divine 
Saviour’s birth. In the Gloria the Church renders honor, and 
glory, and thanksgiving, to the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost. (See Mass Picture “The Gloria in Excelsis," page 761). 


1At high Mass the priest, before reading the Introit, blesses 
incense, saying: 

Mayest thou be blessed by Him in Whose honor thou art to 
be burnt. Amen. . 

He then incenses the altar and, is himself incensed. by his 
deacon. 

2In high Masses the celebrant sings the first words of the 
Gloria in excelsis Deo, which is then taken up by the choir; 
the celebrant and ministers being seated until it is finished. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


78 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace to men of 
good will. We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we adore 'Thee, we 
glorify Thee. We give Thee thanks for Thy great glory. O 
Lord God, heavenly king, God the Father almighty. O Lord 
Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son, O Lord God, Lamb of 
God, Son of the Father. Who takest away the sins of the 
world, have mercy on us. Who takest away the sins of the 
world, receive our prayer. Who sittest at the right hand of 
the Father, have mercy on us. For Thou alone art holy; Thou 
alone art the Lord; Thou alone, O Jesus Christ, together 
(he makes the sign of the Cross) with the Holy Ghost, art 
most high in the glory of God the Father. Amen. 

After his recitation of the Gloria the priest kisses the altar. 
The significance of the act is obvious, since the altar stands 
for Christ Himself. Turning to the people and with arms 
extended, the priest then says or sings: 

P. The Lord be with you. 

To which the server responds: 

Bí. And with thy spirit. 

This greeting of the celebrant is a sacramental and there- 


fore a means of grace for those hearers who are properly dis- 
posed. 


* The Praper or Collect 


Here follow the Prayers (also called “Collects”) appointed 
for the day which will be found in their proper places for 
each Mass in the book. The priest says or sings them at the 
Tight or Epistle side of the altar. 


After his greeting the priest says “Oremus,” "Let us pray," 
exhorting the congregation to join him in the prayer of the 
Mass. This prayer is found in the Missal immediately after 
the Introit. The number of prayers varies according to the 
day. On the greater feasts there is only one prayer; the 
second and third prayers said on other days are called Com- 
memorations, The prayer usually begins with an address to 
the Almighty, is followed by an appeal expressed very briefly 
and fervently, and always ends with mention of the Three 
Divine Persons. God Himself seems to have inspired the com- 
poser of these ancient petitions. No prayers can compare 
with them in simplicity and unction. 


The endings of the Prayers vary according to the nature of 
the Prayer. For explanation see page 819. 


* ' The Epistle or Lesson 

The priest next reads the Epistle, or Lesson, from the Mass 
he is celebrating, with the Gradual, or Tract or Sequence 
ar ee ESSEN, 


1At Solemn High Mass the Epistle is sung by the subdeacon, 
the choir afterwards singing the Gradual. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 79 


which will be found in their proper place for each Mass in 
the book. At the end the server answers “Thanks be to God” 
(Deo Gratias). 

The Epistle is a passage from the Bible read after the last 
Prayer, It is also called *Lectio"—lesson or reading. It may 
be a reading from the Epistles of the New Testament. The 
custom of reading parts of the Bible in public is very ancient. 
It is quite likely that the early Church followed the Temple 
tradition in this respect. At the end of the Epistle the people 
were wont to answer “Deo Gratias, “Thanks be to God." 
The Epistle is generally read aloud to the people along with 
the Gospel. (See Mass Picture, "The Epistle," page 763). 

The Gradual, as we now have it, is composed of only two 
psalm verses. Originally a whole psalm was sung by the 
deacon between the Epistle and Gospel. It was introduced 
to keep up the interest of the falthful during the very long 
ceremonies of the ancient Church. There is evidence to show 
that the people liked good singing. 

The Alleluia: a Hebrew expression meaning “Praise ye the 
Lord,” is repeated twice after the Gradual. It is omitted 
during the penitential season, its place then being taken by 
the Tract. The Sequence is a hymn used on certain occasions. 
Five Sequences are found today in the Roman Missal; there 
were many others in the Middle Ages. These are found on 
pages 540, 599, 636, 969, 1503. 

The priest, returning to the center, bows down over the 
altar and says silently the prayer of preparation for the read- 
ing of the holy Gospel: 


The Munda Cor Meum 

Cleanse my heart and my lips, Who didst cleanse with a 
burning coal the lips of the prophet Isaias; and vouchsafe in 
Thy loving-kindness so to purify me that I may be enabled 
worthily to announce Thy holy Gospel. Through Christ our 
Lord. Amen. ] 

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to bless me. 

The Lord be in my heart and on my lips, that I mey 
worthily and becomingly announce His Gospel. Amen. 


* The Gospel * 


The Gospel is an extract from one of the four Evangelists. 


1At Solemn High Mass, after the celebrant has read the 
Gospel, in a low tone, the deacon, taking the book of the Holy 
Gospels from the altar, kneels before the celebrant and asks 
his blessing: 

Pray, sir, a blessing. 

The Lord be in thy heart and on thy lips, that worthily 
and becomingly thou mayest announce His Gospel: In the 
pate of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 

en, 

Then the deacon goes to the place appointed, and sings the 
Gospel to the end. The celebrant kisses the Sacred Text as 
above, and ts then incensed by the deacon, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


80 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


Our English word gospel from the Anglo-Saxon god (good) 
spell (speak), signifies good news, In apostolic days the sacred 
text was read at some length during the liturgical services 
of the Church. Later on, Pope St. Damasus (A.D. 304-384) 
selected definite passages, bound them in a book called the 
Evangeliarium and appointed them to be read on certain days. 
In another~ Volume, the Epistolarium, were gathered the 
Epistles; in the Psalterium, the psalms; and in the Sacra- 
mentarium, the rites and prayers for the celebrant. These 
four books were duly arranged and combined in one volume 
centuries later. This volume is the Roman Missal. The por- 
tion of the Gospel read in Mass is chosen for the useful lesson 
it imparts. Before the priest reads, he signs himself with the 
cross upon the forehead, lips and heart, the symbolism of the 
act being at cnce apparent. A homily or sermon followed the 
public reading of the Gospel. The catechumens and penl- 
tents were then excluded, so that the Mass up to this point 
was called fhe Mass of the Catechumens. Only the faithful 
might remain for the Sacred Mystery, hence the Mass from 
the Offertory to the end was called the Mass of the Faithful. 
(See Mass Picture, “The Priest Reads the Gospel,” page 764). 

Passing to the right or Gospel corner of the altar, the priest 
says: 

P, The Lord be with you. 

Bí. And with thy spirit. 

P. The continuation (or beginning) of the holy Gospel 
according to N. (Here he announces the name of the 
Evangelist.) . 

Jy. Glory be to Thee, O Lord. 

The Gospel ended, the acolyte answers: 

W. Praise be to Thee, O Christ. 

Kissing the words of the Sacred Text, the priest says: 


May our sins be blotted out by the words of the Gospel. 


The Ricene Creed 


The Creed is the public and solemn profession of the Faith, 
Its text was not made known to the catechumens of early 
times until they had been tried and approved. For more than 
three centuries the Apostles’ Creed alone was in use. Then in 
the fourth century. a more explicit statement of belief, the 
Nicene Creed, was formulated against the errors of the time, 
and it is this creed that is recited in. the Mass. (See Mass 
Picture, “The Credo,” page 765). 

The priest returns to the middle of the altar and recites 
the Creed, if it is to be said. (For the text of the Nicene 
Creed see page 765). It is said or sung at Mass on all Sun- 
days, on other days whenever indicated. 


The Mass of the Faithful 


This portion of the Mass has three principal parts: (a.) The 
Offertory, beginning with the verse called “The Offertory" to 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 81 


the "Preface" during which time the bread and wine are pre- 
Dared for the Sacrifice. This verse is a portion of the "Long 
Psalm” which used to be sung at this point while the people 
Walked to the altar to present, or offer their gifts. (b.) The 
Canon of the Mass, introduced by the “Preface” and extend- 
ing to just before the “Pater Noster” (The Our Father) and 
including, therefore, the “Consecration” which is the sacri- 
ficial act of. the Mass, known sometimes as the "Action." 
(c.) The. Communion, prefaced by. the “Pater Noster" and ex- 
tending to the conclusion of the Mass. The "Communion" 
consists of first the preparation. for the reception of Holy 
Communion and secondly of the Thanksgiving after reception 
of Holy Communion. 'The entire part is called Mass of ihe 
Faithful because in the early church the Catechumens were 
excluded before the Offertory, while the Faithful, who were 
baptized in good standing, remained also for the sacrifice of 
the Mass and partook of Holy Communion. 


The priest now proceeds to the Offertory. He kisses the 
altar; then turning to the people, he salutes them: 
P. The Lord be with you. : 
BY. And with thy spirit. 
P. Let us pray. 


ISE) x - Uhe Offertory! 


Now he reads the Psalm-verse appointed which will be found 
in its proper place for each Mass in this book. At high Mass 
it is to be sung by the choir. This verse was originally a 
whole psalm, which was chanted while the people walked up 
to the sanctuary with their offerings. The Offertory, as an 
act, is accomplished as the priest offers the bread and wine 
while reciting the prayer “Receive, O holy Father,” and the 
four oblation prayers that follow. (See Mass Picture, “The 
Offering of the Host," page 767). : 


The priest now uncovers the chalice, 


Offering of the Wost 

Taking the host to be consecrated, which is lying on the 
paten solemnly consecrated for the holding of the body of 
Christ, he makes the oblation, saying ‘silently: . 

Receive, O holy Father, almighty and eternal God, this 
spotiess host, which I, Thine unworthy servant, offer unto 
Thee, my living and true God, for my countless sins, tres- 
passes, and omissions; likewise for all here present, and for 
all faithful Christians, whether living or dead, that it may 
avail both me and them to salvation, unto life everlasting. 
Amen. 


1 Here at Solemn High Mass the subdeacon proceeds to the 
eredence table and putting on the Humeral Veil he takes the 
covered chalice to the altar, giving it to the deacon who hands 
the paten with the host to the celebrant. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


82 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


Making the sign of the cross with the paten he places the 
host upon the corporal. He proceeds to the Epistle side and 
pours wine.and water into the chalice, blessing the ‘water 
before pouring it (but in Masses for the Dead the blessing of 
the water is omitted). While doing this, he recites the prayer 
below: “O God, Who in creating man" (Deus qui humane). 

This is a telling Mlustration of the perfect and indissoluble 
union of the divinity with the humanity of Jesus through 
the Incarnation of the Word; and, according to the prayer 
of the Church, it is likewise & touching symbol of the union 
of Jesus with all Christians and especially with every single 
one who assists at Holy Mass; for the priest petitions the 
heavenly Father to unite our poor human nature so closely 
with the divinity of Jesus that nothing may ever be abie to 
separate it. And even as these few drops of water lose them- 
selves in the wine, so may also we lose ourselves in the 
divinity of Christ.—Herbst, Holy Mass. 


O God, Who in creating man didst exalt his nature very 
wonderfully and yet more wonderfully didst establish it anew; 
by the mystery signified in the mingling of this water and 
wine grant us to have part in the Godhead of Him Who hath 
vouchsafed to share our manhood, Jesus Christ Thy Son, Our 
Lord, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee in the unity of the 
Holy Ghost; God, world without end. Amen. 


Offering of the Chalice 

The celebrant offers the chalice with the words: 

We offer unto Thee, O Lord, the chalice of salvation, be- 
seeching Thy clemency that it may ascend as a sweet odor 
before Thy divine majesty, for our own salvation, and for that 
of the whole world. Amen. 

Making the sign of the cross with the chalice, and placing 
it on the corporal, he covers it with the pali? 

Bowing down over the altar the celebrant goes on: 

Humbled in mind, and contrite of heart, may we find favor 
with Thee, O Lord: and may the sacrifice we this day offer up 
be well-pleasing to Thee, Who art our Lord and our God. 

Raising his eyes to heaven he invokes the Holy Ghost upon 
the oblation, over which he makes the sign of the cross, say- 
ing: : l 


1 Here at Solemn High Mass the deacon pours the wine into 
the chalice, the subdeacon afterwards adding a jew dropa of 
the water which the celebrant has blessed, 

2 Here at Solemn High Mass the subdeacon receives from the 
deacon the paten, which he covers with the extremity of the 
veil worn over his shoulders; he then proceeds to the foot of 
the altar-steps, and takes his stand behind the priest. He 
holds the paten before his eyes until the conclusion of the 
Pater Noster. In Masses for the.dead the paten is not removed 
from the altar nor is the humeral veil worn by the subdeacon. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 83 


Come, Thou, the sanctifier, God almighty and everlasting; 
bless Hi this sacrifice which is prepared for the glory of Thy 
holy name; 


TOUN N 


The arrangement of the altar-table immediately after the 
Offertory: 1. The Corporal. 2. The Host. 3. The Chalice. 
4. The Pall. 5. The Burse. 6. The Purificator. 7. The Paten. 
8. The Chalice Vell. 


The Lababo 


Following the offering of the bread and wine water is 
poured over the fingers of the celebrant. 

When the people had made their offerings in kind, that 1s, 
bread, wine, fruits, etc., the priest’s hands were perhaps a bit 
soiled. Practical reasons would thus require an ablution. 
And, of course, the external washing symbolized the inward 
purity expected of God's minister at the sublime Sacrifice. 
While washing his hands, the priest recites the second half 
of Psaim 25. (See Mass Picture, “The Lavabo—The Priest 
Washes His Hands,” page 770). 

I will wash my hands among the innocent: and will com- 
pass Thine altar, O Lord. 


That I may hear the voice of praise: and tell of all Thy 
wondrous works. 
. - 
'1At Solemn High Mass incense is them blessed. The full 
ceremony is given in the "Ordinary of the Mass," page 769. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


84 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


I have loved, O Lord, the beauty of Thy house, and the 
where Thy glory dwelleth. 


Take not away my soul, O God, with the wicked: nor my 
life with men of blood. 


-In whose hands are iniquities: their right hand is filled with 
gitts. 

put as for me, I have walked in my Innocence: redeem me, 

&nd have mercy on me. i 


My foot hath stood in the direct way: in the churches I will 
bless Thee, O Lord. . E . 

In Masses for the Dead, and in Passiontide, omit the follow- 
ing Glory be to the Father as far as "Receive, O holy Trinity." 

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy 
Ghost. . 7 ' 


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be; world 
without end. Amen. ` 


Bowing down over the middle of the altar the priest con- 
tinues the prayer of oblation: 


Receive, O holy Trinity, this oblation offered up by us to 
Thee, in memory of the passion, resurrection, and ascension 
of Our Lord Jesus Christ, and in honor of blessed Mary, ever 
& virgin, of blessed John the Baptist, of the holy apostles 
Peter and Paul, of these, and of all the saints, that it may 
be available to their honor and to our salvation: and may 
they whose memory we celebrate on earth vouchsafe to inter- 
cede for us in heaven. 'Through the same Christ our Lord. 
Amen. 


The Orate Fratres 
Feeling his unworthiness, the priest, after he kisses the 
altar, turns to the people imploring them with raised voice: 

(See Mass Picture, “The Orate Fratres," page 772). 

Brethren, pray (and turning back to the altar continues 
silently) that my sacrifice and -yours may be well pleasing to 
God the Father almighty. 

To which they answer through the server: 

. May the Lord receive this sacrifice at thy hands, to the 
praise and glory of His name, to our own benefit, and to that 
of all His holy Church. 

To this the priest adds Amen. 


* The Secret Praper 

Then with hands extended, the priest says the Secret prayers. 
Their order and number are the same as the Prayers said. at 
the beginning of Mass, and will be found in the proper place 
in each Mass. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 85 


The Secret was originally the one prayer of oblation re- 
cited by the priest over the bread and wine he. was to con- 
Secrate. It is said inaudibly, for here the priest is acting as a 
mediator speaking directly to God on behalf of man. 

As he finishes the last of the Secret prayers he raises his 
voice, saying, or singing: 

World without end. 


And the server answers, Amen. 


The Preface 


Next follows the Preface which for high Mass is set to an 
impressive chant.. The Preface said or sung on Sundays which 
includes Trinity Sunday is the so-called “Sunday Preface,” also 
named “Preface of the Blessed Trinity" (page 773). The 
“Common Preface,” also named “Ferial or Weekday Preface” 
(page 775), is said throughout the year on all weekdays and 
feasts that have no special Preface, For days that have a 
Special Preface directions are given in the respective Masses, 
These Special Prefaces are found on pages 798 to 818. i 

The Preface, or introduction to the Canon, is a hymn of 
thanksgiving and praise. It is preceded by an invitation to 
the people to raise their hearts to God, and ends with the 
words of the seraphim incessantly sung before the throne of 
God. We should humbly acknowledge our unworthiness and 
seek to unite our praises with their acceptable Song of Tri- 
umph—the Trisagion (thrice holy). (See Mass Picture, “The 
Preface," page 773). 


The Sanctus 


Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts. The heavens and the 
earth are full of Thy glory. Hosanna in the highest. Blessed 
is He-Who cometh in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the 
highest 

Here a bell is rung to give notice to the people of the be» 
ginning of the Canon. or sacrificial part of the Mass, while the. 
priest in a lower tone of voice recites the hymn: (See Mass 
Picture, “The Sanctus," page 774). 


The Canon of the Mass 


Having with those present, after the example of our blessed 
Lord at the last supper, given solemn thanks to God, the 
Father almighty, for all His blessings, the priest alone and 
silently, enters upon the rite proper to the offering up of the 
unbloody sacrifice of the New Testament, called the Canon of 
of the Mass. ' 

It is the. most solemn—the most mysterious--portion of the 
Holy Sacrifice. St. Gregory and St. Augustine refer to the 
Canon as "the prayer par excellence.” Other early writers on 
the liturgy of the Mass allude to the Canon as “The Action,” 
or “The Mystery of the Most Holy Action,” “because,” as 
Father Gavin, S.J. explains “the body and blood of Jesus 
SE SE A RS EET ETO I RE LE ESI 


1''The Sacrifice of the Mass.” 


http://ccwatershed.org 


86 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


Christ in the Mass is wrought or made (conficitur) by the 
greatest ‘action’ or act in this world." 

"It has been called the Action," writes another liturgist, 
Father Vandeur, 0.8.B. “from the Latin expression agere 
causam, ‘to plead a cause.’ Indeed, what is the priest about 
to do but to plead in the person of Christ the cause of the 
universal Church? The word Canon is derived from the Greek, 
and signifies rule. It is, in other words, the formula which 
must invariably be followed in the consecration of the ele- 
ments of bread and wine.” 


The Canon, strictly speaking, comprises the fixed forms of 
prayer in the Mass, from the Sanctus to the Pater Noster. It 
has not been changed, or added to, since the time of Pope 
St. Gregory the Great, who lived in the sixth century. 


Father M. C. Nieuwbarn, O. P., in his admirable treatise on 
the Holy Sacrifice? says in reference to the Canon: “This 
selection of liturgical prayers is of unparalleled beauty. They 
seem to give utterance to the feelings of our great High Priest, 
Jesus Christ, and the mind can not fail to be impressed by 
the accents of persevering prayer, and by the spirit of hu- 
mility, love and adoration, which pervade these confident ap- 
peals to the omnipotent. God, as well as by the impressive 
ceremonies which set them forth. 


“Sayings of Christ and apostolic traditions form the ground- 
work of the Canon, and to this the devotion of Popes has 
made additions. Thus the Canon is in the truest sense the 
prayer of God’s Church. 

“Silence now reigns at the altar. In the Old Law the high 
priest entered alone into the Holy of holies. Like Moses, he 
spoke alone with God, and the Lord answered him. (Cf. Ez. 
19, 10.) Thus, too, the priest recites in silence the wonderful 
prayers of the Canon, and renews the mysterious sacrifice of 
Christ’s infinite love. The ceremony proceeds in absolute 
silence; the priest’s voice no longer alternates in prayer with 
that of the people, for he alone is ordained to offer the sacri- 
fice in the name of the Church, he alone can come into close 
contact with his Lord and his God. Silence envelopes, like a 
mysterious veil, the ‘enclosed garden’ (Cant. 4, 12), the ‘sealed 
source’ of the divine mysteries. For we are truly in presence 
of the mysteries of religion. It is the prayer of prayers which 
we are saying, a secret holy action which we are performing. 
Silence becomes the representative of the divine high priest 
when celebrating the divine mystery. Truly, ‘the Lord is in 
His holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before Him’ 
{Hab, 2, 20). 

“The priest first addresses himself to God the Father. Jesus 
Christ, however, the divine High Priest, is his intermediary; 
through Him he offers the prayers of sacrifice. He redoubles 
the fervor of his prayer; he raises his hands and eyes to 
heaven, lowers them again, and with a profound inclination 
joins his hands in the form of prayer, and rests them upon 
the altar. Raising them once more, he blesses the offering. 


+“The Holy Mass Popularly Explained.” 
2“The Holy Sacrifice and Its Ceremonies.” 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 87 


All these actions represent in a visible manner the spirit of 
the Church's prayer, and the sanctifying power of her bless- 
ings. During the opening prayer (Te igitur) the priest, be- 
fore blessing the offering, Kisses the altar as a sign of rever- 
ence and love to Our Lord. This is the last time he kisses the 
altar before the solemn moment when the consecrated stone 
shal] become the throne of the divine Victim—Jesus Christ. 
Introduced by the Preface—that beautiful Prayer of Thanks- 
giving—the Canon is pre-eminently a Prayer of Impetration. 

The first prayer of the Canon begins with the words: 
“Wherefore we humbly pray." The word “Wherefore” con- 
nects the Canon with the Preface. Having offered our thanks 
to our heavenly Father, we now come to Him and humbly 
present our petitions. , 


The Commemoration of the Church 


Wherefore, we humbly pray and beseech Thee, most merci- 
ful Father, through Jesus Christ, Thy Son, our (Here the 
priest kisses the altar) Lord, to receive and to bless these Hm 
gifts, these presents, these holy unspotted sacrifices, 
which we offer up to Thee, in the first place, for Thy holy 
Catholic Church, that it may please Thee to grant her peace, 
to guard, unite, and guide her throughout the world; as also 
for Thy servant N., our Pope, and N., our bishop, and for all 
who are orthodox in belief and who profess the Catholic and 
apostolic faith. 

The priest while saying the aforegoing prayer makes the 
sign of the cross three times over the holy offerings—"'ihree 
times; for these oblations are first, gifts, which have come 
from God; secondly, presents, which we give back to Him; 
and, thirdly, holy unspotted sacrifices, which have been set 
apart from every profane use, and which are destined to 
become the body of the immaculate Lamb."—Vandeur. 


“The bread and wine are called by three names—gifts, things 
which we receive from God; presents, which we offer to Him; 
holy and unspotted sacrifice, in anticipation of the words of 
consecration so soon to be pronounced when these gifts will 
be changed into the body and blood of Our Lord.’’-—Gavin, 
The Sacrifice of the Mass. 


The Commemoration for the Living 


Be mindful, O Lord, of Thy servants N. and N. 


Pausing for a moment, and joining his hands, the priest 
prays silently by name for those whom he desires to remember 
especially, 


And of all here present, whose faith and devotion are 
known to Thee, for whom we offer, or who offer up to Thee, 
this sacrifice of praise, for themselves, thelr families, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


88 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


their friends, for the salvation of their souls and the health 
and welfare they hope for, and who now pay their vows to 
Thee, God eternal, living and true. 


The Communicantes. 


This is the beginning of the Action or most solemn part of 
the Sacrifice. In the following prayer the memory of the 
Blessed Virgin and the Saints is venerated and their help im- 
plored. ] 

The varying forms of this prayer will be found following the 
Special Prefaces as indicated on page 798. Directions when to 
say these are given in the Masses for certain feasts. .. 


Having communion with and venerating the memory, first, 
of the glorious Mary, ever a virgin, Mother of Jesus Christ, 
our God and our Lord; likewise of Thy blessed apostles and 
martyrs, Peter and Paul, Andrew, James, John, Thomas, 
James, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon, and Thad- 
deus; of Linus, Cletus, Clement, Xystus, Cornelius, Cyprian, 
Lawrence, Chrysogonus, John and Paul, Cosmas and Damian, 
and of all Thy saints: for the sake of whose merits and 
prayers do Thou grant that in all things we may be defended 
by the help of Thy protection. Through the same Christ our 
Lord. Amen. . d 

The priest joins his hands at “Through the same Christ," 
etc. Then spreading his hands over the oblation, he prays 
that almighty God may graciously accept it. This is a cere- 
mony akin to that in the Old Law, when the priest held his 
hands extended over the victim he was about to offer as a 
sacrifice. (See Mass Picture “The Hanc Igitur. The priest 
extends his hands over the host and chalice, page 779.) 


The “Iane Igitur” ---3Brapers Before the Consecration . 


The sanctuary bell is now usually rung to give notice to 
the faithful of the Consecration which is about to take place. 

Wherefore, we beseech Thee, O Lord, graciously to receive 
this oblation which we Thy servants, and with us Thy whole 
family, offer up to Thee: dispose our.days in Thy peace; com- 
niand that we be saved from eternal damnation and numbered 
among the flock of (The priest joins his hands) Thine elect: 
Through Christ our Lord. Amen. 

While reciting the following prayer the priest makes the 
sign of the cross five times: thrice over the host and the 
chalice together; then, once over the host; and once over the 
. chalice, 

And do Thou, O God, vouchsafe in all respects to bless. "B, 
consecrate "B, and approve +X this our oblation, to perfect it, 
and to render it well pleasing to Thyself, so that it may be- 
come for us the body & and blood of Thy most beloved 
Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. : 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 89 


The Consecration and Elevation 


The Consecration begins with the faithful gathered, so to 
Speak, in the Upper Room on the eve of Our Lord's Passion. 
How touchingly the scene is re-enacted! Another Christ takes 
bread into his hands, raises his eyes to heaven, and blesses 
the bread with the sign of the cross. 


The priest continues: 


Who the day before He suffered took bread into His holy 
&nd venerable hands (The priest takes the host into his hands, 
holding it with the thumbs and index fingers) and having 
lifted up His eyes to heaven, (The priest raises his eyes to 
heaven) to Thee God, His almighty Father, giving (The priest 
makes the sign of the cross over the host) thanks to Thee, 
blessed it 1, broke it, and gave it to His disciples, saying, 
Take ye, and eat ye all of this, 


Now he bends low over the altar. The words are uttered by 
which the God of heaven and earth becomes present under 
the appearance of bread and wine. Before that adorable 
Presence he bends in love and reverence. Like sentiments 
inspire the people, who behold their Eucharistic King raised 
by priestly hands. How divinely simple; a few whispered 
words, and what a stupendous result. (See Mass Pictures 
“The Consecration of the Host," page 781, and “The Consecra- 
tion of the Wine,” page 782). : 


The Consecration of the Bread 
FOR THIS IS MY BODY 


‘The Elevation of the Sacred Host 


The Elevation of the Consecrated Host and Chalice is & re 
minder of the Saviour raised on the Cross. This ceremony 
made a most profound impression on the people of the Middle 
Ages. Their eagerness to look upon the Blessed Sacrament 
sometimes caused jostling. Everyone present wanted “to see 
Jesus.” Indeed, the very attendance at Mass was spoken of as 
“seeing God.” (See Mass Picture “The Elevation of the Sacred 
Host,” page 781, and “The Elevation of the Chalice,” page 
82). In an instruction published by. Pope Gregory X about 
the year 1275, the priest’s assistants are directed to lie pros- 
trate on the ground at the Elevation, worshipping in this wise 
until the Pater Noster. The people were warned of the solemn 
moment by the tinkling of a little bell, while for the consola- 
tion of the brethren at home and in the fields, a great bell 
tolled from the church tower. 


The priest makes a genuflection, and then elevates the sacred 
host that all present may adore it. At the elevation the 
sanctuary bell is rung. 


His Holiness, Pope Pius X, on May 18, 1907, granted an in- 
dulgence of seven years and seven quarantines, to all the faith- 
ful, who, at the Elevation during Mass, or at public exposition 


http://ccwatershed.org 


90 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


of the Blessed Sacrament, look at the sacred host &nd de- 
voutly say: “My Lord and my God!" 


The Consecration of the Wine 


Having placed the sacred host upon the corporal the priest 
again makes a genufiection. 


Uncovering the chalice, he says: 


In like manner, after He had supped, taking also into His 
holy and venerable hands this goodly chalice, (The priest 
takes the chalice into his hands) again giving thanks to Thee, 
He blessed H« it, (The priest makes the sign of the cross over 
the chalice) and gave it to His disciples, saying: Take ye, 
and drink ye all of this. 


For this is the chalice of My blood, of the new and ever- 
lasting testament, the mystery of faith, which for you and 
for many. shall be shed unto the remission of sins. 


The priest places the chalice on the corporal and says: 


As often as ye shall do these things, ye shall do them in 
memory of Me. 


The Elevation of the Chalice 
The priest makes a genuflection in adoration of the precious 
blood of Christ and then elevates the chalice. At the elevation 
the sanctuary bell is rung. Having placed the chalice on the 
corporal, and covered it with the pall, the priest again makes 
a genuflection. He. proceeds with, 


Whe Prayers after the Consecration 
In the following prayer the word Wherefore refers to Our 
Lord's command “As often as ye shall do these things, ye shall 
do them in memory of Me.” Only because Christ so com- 
manded does the priest dare celebrate the holy Mysteries. _ 


. Wherefore, O Lord, we, Thy servants, as also Thy holy 
people, calling to mind the blessed passion of the same 
Christ, Thy Son, our Lord, His resurrection from the grave, 
and His glorious ascension into heaven, offer up to Thy most 
excellent majesty of Thine own gifts bestowed upon us, a 
victim 4K which is pure (the priest makes the sign of the cross 
five times: thrice over the host and the chalice together; once 
over the host; and once over the chalice), a victim hk which is 
holy, a victim 4% which is stainless, the holy bread H of life 
everlasting, and the chalice & of eternal salvation. 


The meaning of these five crosses is variously explained. 
They can not mean a blessing conferred by the priest, who is 
a sinner, on Jesus Christ, infinitely holy. The signs of the 
Cross before the Consecration really bless the bread and wine 
and prepare them for transubstantiation; after the Consecra- 
tion they are to be considered as commemorations—they are in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


/ 
j PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 91 


memory of Christ's passion. The five crosses may be con- 
sidered to refer to the five wounds of Our Lord. (Benedict 
XIV, De Miss. sect. 1. c. 277.)—Gavin: "The Sacrifice of the 
Mass.” 


In the following prayer we ask that God may receive our 
Sacrifice as He received other sacrifices in the Old Law. Men- 
tion is therefore made of those sacrifices in the Old Dispensa- 
tion that were especially pleasing to the Almighty. Abel, 
Abraham and Melchisedech were types of the Saviour. Abel 
was killed by his envious brother; through the jealousy of 
His own brethren was Our Lord’s Blood shed. Abraham, ready 
to sacrifice his son, Isaac, prefigures the Heavenly Father im- 
molating his Only-Begotten Son. Melchisedech the priest- 
King, who offered a clean sacrifice of bread and wine, bears a 
strong resemblance to Jesus Christ, the Eternal High Priest 
and King of Glory, Who offers Himself daily under the appear- 
ance of bread and wine. 


Extending his hands, the priest proceeds 


Vouchsafe to look upon them with a gracious and tranquil 
countenance, and to accept them, even as Thou wast pleased 
to accept the offerings of Thy just servant, Abel, and the 
sacrifice of Abraham, our patriarch, and that which Mel- 
chisedech, Thy high priest, offered up to Thee, a holy sacri- 
fice, a victim without blemish. 


Bowing low with his hands joined and placed upon the altar, 
the priest prays thus: 


We humbly beseech Thee, almighty God, to command that 
these our offerings be borne by the hands of Thy holy angel, 
to Thine altar on high, in the presence of Thy divine 
majesty, (Here the priest kisses the altar) that as many of 
us as shall receive the most (The priest makes the sign of the 
cross once over the host and once over the chalice and then 
signs himself) sacred FB body and blood of Thy Son by 
partaking thereof from this altar may be filled with every 
heavenly blessing and grace. (Now. he joins his hands). 
Through the same Christ our Lord. Amen. 


“In order to understand the essence of the aforegoing pray- 
er, ‘We humbly beseech Thee, etc.,’" says Bossuet in his 
“Explanation of the Prayers of the Mass,” "and to clear up 
all the difüculties connected with it, we must ever bear in 
mind these things (haec) of which it speaks are truly the body 
and blood of Jesus Christ, that with Our Lord's body and 
blood are included ourselves, along with our desires and pray- 
ers, and that all taken together compose one and the same 
oblation which we desire to render in every respect pleasing 
to God, not only so far as Jesus Christ is concerned, Who is 
offered, but also as regards those who offer Him and with Him 
themselves. For this end what can we do better than ask 
again the companionship of the holy angel, who presents the 
prayer Of the faithful to God (Tob. rii. 12), and with him the 
feliowship of all his companions in bliss, in order that our 


http://ccwatershed.org 


92 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 4 


gift may rise more promptly and more agreeably before the 
heavenly altar, when it is offered in that blessed society. 


“Those who will partake of the sacrament of the earthly 
altar—that is, those who are going to communicate—will 
share also in the blessings of the heavenly altar, whence flows 
the source Of divine grace. Let us note, by the way, how 
salutary it is to communicate during Holy Mass."—Vandeur: 
“The Holy Mass Popularly Explained.” 


“The Church here commemorates in a special manner those 
who communicate with the priest during Mass: for they are 
in the strict sense offerers with him of the Holy Sacrifice.” 
—Nieuwbarn. 


The Commemoration of the Departed 


Now the priest appeals in a special way for certain souls. 
He implores of God, for all the souls in purgatory: A place of 
refreshment, for they are in suffering; A place of light, for, 
as yet, deprived of God’s vision, they are in darkness; A place 
of peace, because they are enduring the purging flames. These 
very words, refreshment, light and peace, are to be found in 
thousands of inscriptions appearing in the Catacombs, or 
cemeteries of the first Christians. 


Be mindful, also, O Lord, of Thy servants, N. and N., who 
have gone before us with the sign of faith and who sleep the 
sleep of peace. 


Whilst saying the aforegoing, the priest slowly joins his 
hands and, pausing for a few moments, prays silently by 
name for those departed souls whom he desires to remember 
especially. Then extending his hands, he continues: 


To these, O Lord, and to all who rest in Christ, grant, we 
beseech Thee, 2 place of refreshment, light and peace. (The 
priest joins his hands and bows). Through the same Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


The first three words of the following prayer, “To us Sin- 
ners,” are the only words in the Canon which the priest pro- 
nounces in a somewhat elevated tone of voice; then he con- 
tinues the prayer inaudibly. At the same time, the rubric bids 
him strike his breast, as did the publican of old, who cried 
out in all humility: “O God, be merciful to me a sinner.” 
Thus in word and gesture the priest acknowledges his un- 
worthiness. He asks for himself, and for those present, some 
part and fellowship with the saints, naming in particular 
fifteen holy martyrs. Into this blessed company, he beseeches 
God to admit us through Christ Our Lord. 


To us sinners, also Thy servants, who put our trust in the 
muititude of Thy mercies, vouchsafe to grant some part and 
fellowship with Thy holy apostles and martyrs: with John, 
Stephen, Matthias, Barnabas, Ignatius, Alexander, Marcel- 
linus, Peter, Felicitas, Perpetua, Agatha, Lucy, Agnes, Cecilia, 
Anastasia, and with all Thy saints. Into their company de 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 98 


Thou, we beseech Thee, admit us, not weighing our merits, 
but freely pardoning our offenses. Through Christ our Lord. 


By whom, O Lord, Thou dost always create, (The priest here 
makes the sign of the cross three times over the host and the 
chalice together) sanctify, * quicken, 5% bless, and bestow 
upon us all these good things. 


The Minor Elevation 


Now he uncovers the chalice, cnd makes a genuflection; 
then, with the thumb and index finger of his right hand he 
takes the host, also holding the chalice with the left hand, 
and makes, with the host, the sign of the cross thrice over 
the chalice, meanwhile saying: 


Through HK Him, and with H Him, and in & Him, (and 
now twice between the chalice and himself, continuing) is to 
‘Thee, God the Father *K almighty, in the unity of the Holy HÀ: 
Ghost (finally, he holds the host over the chalice and slightly 
elevates both together, saying while so doing) all honor and 
glory. 

In order to notify the congregation that the prayer is ended, 
the priest says or sings the concluding words in a louder voice: 


World without end. 


The choir or the acolyte answers, Amen, as proof that the 
faithful in heart and mind join with the priest in the act of 
sacrifice and prayer. 


“This aforementioned act is now called the minor elevation; 
at one time it was the only elevation, and then the sacred 
species were raised sufficiently high to be seen by all present. 
But after Berengarius denied the Real Presence, about 1050, 
a more decided elevation of each species was made immedi- 
ately after the consecration, as à protest against his heresy, 
and as an act of reparation and of faith. Strictly speaking, 
the Canon ends here."—' The Mass Companion.” 


As to the character of the aforesaid prayer we must bear 
in mind the two natures, divine and human, in Jesus Christ. 
Through Him, Ñ that is through Jesus Christ, the Father and 
Holy Ghost are infinitely glorified, first, by the sacrifice of 
the Man-God, secondly, because the homage of creatures is 
only acceptable when presented through Christ, the one medi- 
ator. HH With Him—the Father and Holy Ghost receive all 
honor and glory with the Son, for Christ is true God. Fm In 
Him—the Father and Holy Ghost are glorified in Jesus Christ 
because the three Persons of the Blessed Trinity, by their 
one essence and nature, must necessarily receive the same 
honor and glory. The Canon ends in a burst of praise —Gavin: 
“The Sacrifice of the Mass.” 


. The Communion 


This part of the Mass, "The Communion,” begins with the 
praying or singing by the priest of the “Our Father” (Pater 
Noster) as a preparation for Holy Communion. It ts said 


http://ccwatershed.org 


94 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


aloud that tbe people may join in its several petitions. From 
the earliest time it has been a part of the Mass. It occurs 
here “as a link between the sacrificial act, which has for its 
purpose the glory of God, ‘Hallowed be Thy name,’ and the 
Holy Communion, whose purpose is our sanctification, ‘Give 
us this day our daily bread." (The Missal and Holy Mass, 
Rev. William J. Lallou, D.D., and Sister Josefita Maria, S.S.J., 
Ph.D.) (See Mass Picture "The Pater Noster," page 786), 


The Pater Moster 
The priest joining his hands, prays or sings: 
Let us pray. 


Admonished by salutary precepts, and following divine di- 
rections, we presume to say (He extends his hands): 


Our Father, Who art in heaven: hallowed be Thy name., 
Thy kingdom come: Thy wil be done on earth as it is in 
heaven. Give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us 
Our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. 

Here at Solemn High Mass the subdeacon goes up to the 
altar and gives the paten to the deacon. The subdeacon then 
divests himself of the humeral veil. 

And lead us not into temptation. 


The choir or acolytes answer 


But deliver us from evil. 

The priest says Amen. He takes the paten between his first 
and middle fingers, and, says the following prayer: 

This prayer is a very ancient appendix to the Our Father. 
Its earnest plea for deliverance from evils, and its yearning 
for peace, suggest the early days of persecution. 

Deliver us, we beseech Thee, O Lord, from all evils, past, 
present, and to come: and by the intercession of the blessed 
and glorious Mary, ever a virgin, mother of God, and of Thy 
holy apostles Peter and Paul, of Andrew, and of all the saints, 

The priest makes the sign of the cross on himself with the 
paten; then he kisses the paten, and continues: 

Graciously grant peace in our days, that through the help 
of Thy bountiful mercy we may always be free from sin, and 
Secure from all disturbance. 


The Breaking of the Bost 


The gospel narrative speaks of Our Lord breaking the bread 
before He gave it to His disciples: “Jesus took bread, and 
blessed and broke, and gave to His disciples.” “And taking 
bread, He gave thanks and brake, and. gave to them" (Matt. 
26, 36). So, too, in the account of the apostles at Emmaus: 
“whilst He was at table with them, He took bread, and blessed 
and brake” (Luke 22, 19). The expression “breaking of bread” 
tame to have a special meaning among the first Christians. 
Wt was the term for.the Lord's Supper. There is an interest- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


iti 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 95 


ing reference to Sunday Mass in the Acts (20, 7): “And on the 
first day of the week, when we were assembled to break 
bread, ete.” (Luke 24, 30 also of Catholic Encyclopedia, vol, 
VI, p. 165, article on “Fractio Panis.’’) 

“The breaking of bread may be mystically connected closely 
with the ceremony which immediately follows the com- 
mingling of the two species. This is effected by the priest 
putting a particle of the sacred. host into the chalice. It 
means that the one Christ, whole and undivided, is present 
under both species, and exists in every particle of each species, 
For although they are both mystically separated, the whole 
person of Christ is living and glorious under each separate 
form. ‘Thus, by way of concomitance, the Precious Blood is 
united with the Body of Christ in the sacred host, while the 
sacred Body exists with the Blood of the Lord in the chalice. 

“As the separate consecrations of the sacred Body and Blood 
signify the death of Christ, so the uniting of the two sacred 
species represents His resurrection. Bellarmine translates con- 
secratio as “the union of the consecrated Body and Blood." 
~Nieuwbarn, “The Holy Sacrifice and its Ceremonies." 

The priest puts the paten under the host; he then uncovers 
the chalice, makes a genuflection, takes the host and breaks 
it in two over the chalice, saying: 

‘Through the same Jesus Christ, Thy Son, our Lord. 

He puts the portion which is in his right hand on the 
paten; he then breaks off a particle from the portion which 
is in his left hand, saying: 

Who liveth and reigneth with Thee in the unity of the 
Holy Ghost, God, 

He places on the paten the portion that remains in his left 
hand; then, holding over the chalice the particle in his right 
hand, he says aloud: 

FN. World without end. 

BY. Amen. 

Then with the same particle of the sacred host he makes 
the sign of the cross three times over the chalice, saying in a 
raised voice: 

V. May the peace ®© of the Lord be *& always with you. 

W. And with thy spirit. . 

He then drops the particle into the chalice, saying silently: 

May this commingling and;consecrating of the Body and 
Blood of Our Lord Jesus Christ avail us who receive it unto 
life everlasting. Amen. 

He covers the chalice, and makes a genuftection; then, bow- 
ing down and striking his breast three times, he says aloud: 


The Agnus Bei 


There is infinite tenderness in this triple appeal to our slain 
Lord. He is the Lamb of God of Whom the prophets spoke so 
vividly: “I was as a meek lamb that is carried to be a vic- 
tim" (Jer. 11, 19). “He was offered because it was His own 


http://ccwatershed.org 


96 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


will, and He opened not His mouth. He shall be led as a 
sheep to the slaughter, and shall be dumb as a Jamb before 
his shearer, and He shall not open His mouth" (Is. 53, 7). 

He is the Lamb Whom John the Baptist pointed out: “Be- 
hold the Lamb of God, behold Him Who taketh away the sin 
of the world" (John 1,29). Christ is called here the Lamb of 
God. In the Old Law the lamb was one of the ordinary vic- 
tims offered; it was a figure of Jesus Christ, the only true 
Lamb, who satisfied for sin by dying for sinners. The lamb 
is the figure of innocence, of -meekness, of submission ‘and 
of willing sacrifice, since it lets itself be led to slaughter 
without resistance. All these qualities apply to Jesus con- 
sidered as. the Supreme Sacrifice. The third time that this 
formula of prayer is repeated it concludes with “Grant us 
peace.” The Lamb of God is soon to become the food of our 
souls. Full of goodness and mildness, gladly forgiving and for- 
getting all the injury done It through our sinfulness, Jesus 
the Lamb of God comes to us laden with mercy and bringing 
us the heavenly peace we beg for. 


In Masses for the dead the following supplications are 
slightly changed; see second form below. 

Lamb of God, Who takest away the sins of the world: have 
mercy on us. 

Lamb of God, Who takest away the sins of the world: have 
mercy on us. 

Lamb of God, Who takest away the sins of the world: grant 
us peace, 

In Masses for the dead 


Lamb of God, Who takest away the sins of the world: give 
unto them rest. 


Lamb of God, Who takest away the sins of the world: give 
unto them rest. 


Lamb of God, Who takest away the sins of the world: give 
unto them rest for evermore. 


After the Agnus Del the priest, bowing low his head, and 
resting his folded hands on the altar, recites in silence the 
three prayers of immediate preparation for holy communion. 

The Three Communion Prayers which follow the Agnus Det 
were originally of private devotion. During the Middle Ages 
they were made official. Since the priest addresses himself to 
Our Lord, the rubric tells him to fasten his gaze on the Con- 
secrated Host. He asks for the Church peace and unity, for 
himself pardon of his sins and the grace of fidelity to the 
commandments, and finally he implores that the Communion 
he is about to receive may be a safeguard for soul and body 
and not the cause of his condemnation. This closing prayer 
is evidently inspired by 1 Cor. xi, 28-29. 


O Lord Jesus Christ, Who didst say to Thine apostles: 
Peace I leave you, My peace I give you; look not upon my sins 
but upon the faith of Thy Church: and vouchsafe to grant 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 97 


her peace and unity according to Thy will: Who livest and 
reignest, God, world without end. Amen. 


Here at Solemn High Mass the Kiss of Peace is given. Dur- 
ing the previous prayer the deacon has been kneeling at the 
right of the Priest: he now rises, and both he and the priest 
kiss the alter. Formerly the priest kissed the Blessed Sacra- 
ment itself, The deacon by an inclination salutes the priest. 
who places his hands upon the shoulders of the deacon, bends 
forward over his right shoulder, and says, "Pax tecum"—"peace 
be to thee.” The deacon replies, "Et cum spiritu tuo"; and 
after having again saluted the priest by an inclination, which 
is acknowledged in like manner, he imparts the kiss of peace 
mi the subdeacon in the manner in which he himself received 
t. 


In early times the actual kiss of peace was received and 
given by all, for all who were present intended to receive holy 
communion, Formerly the sexes were separated in the church, 
and the kiss of peace was given throughout the whole as- 
sembly. This practice continued till the time of Pope Inno- 
cent III, 1216.—Morrall, “The Mass Companion.” 


The kiss of peace exchanged at Mass is simply the symbol of 
that charity which should unite all who approach the Holy 
T&ble.—Vandeur, “The Holy Mass Popularly Explained." 


In Masses for the dead, the kiss of peace is omitted; neither 
does the priest recite the foregoing prayer. 


Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, Who, according 
to the will of the Father, through the co-operation of the 
Holy Ghost, hast by Thy death given life to the world; de- 
liver me by this Thy most sacred Body and Blood from all my 
iniquities, and from every evil. Make me always cleave to 
Thy commandments and never suffer me to be separated from 
Thee, Who with the same God the Father and the Holy Ghost 
livest and reignest God, world without end. Amen. 


Let not the partaking of Thy Body, O Lord Jesus Christ, 
which I, all unworthy, presume to receive, turn to my judg- 
ment and condemnation; but through Thy loving kindness 
may it be to me a safeguard and remedy for soul and body; 
Who, with God the Father, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, 
livest and reignest, God, world without end. Amen. 


The Communion of the Priest 


Before receiving his Divine Master, the priest cries out in 
words that all can hear: “O Lord, I am not worthy, etc.” 
These words are full of faith and humility. When first spoken 
by the humble centurion they merited the admiration of 
Christ Himself, They betoken the contrite and humble heart 
that God will not despise. And so when the priest has re- 
ceived the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, he turns to the 
people, blesses them, and repeats in their name, “O Lord, i 
am not worthy, etc," whereat they beat their breasts in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


98 PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


acknowledgment. (See Mass Picture “The Priest Receives Com- 
munion," page 790) 

The priest makes a genuftection, then he says: 

I will take the bread of heaven and will call upon the name 
of the Lord. 

He takes both parts of the host between the thumb and 
forefinger of his left hand, and the paten between the same 
forefinger and the middle one; then, bowing a little, he strikes 
his breast with his right hand, and, slightly raising his voice, 
says three times very humbly and reverently: 

Lord, I am not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under my 
roof; but only say the word and my soul shall be healed. 

Here it is customary to ring ihe sanctuary bell, warning 
those present of the time of communion which is approaching. 

The priest now makes the sign of the cross with the sacred 
host, and reverently receives the communion of the Body of 
the Lord, saying before doing so: 

May the Body of Our Lord Jesus Christ keep my soul unto 
life everlasting. Amen. 

The priest joins his hands and remains & short time in 
meditation on the Most Holy Sacrament; he next uncovers the 
chalice and makes a genufiection; he then gathers onto the 
paten any fragments that may have fallen from the Sacred 
Host upon the corporal and puts them into the chalice. He 
recites meanwhile some verses from Holy Scripture. 

What shall I render unto the Lord for all the things that 
He hath rendered unto me? I will take the chalice of salva- 
tion and will call upon the name of the Lord. With high 
praises will I call upon the Lord, and I shall be saved f-om all 
mine enemies. 

Taking the chalice into his right hand he makes therewith 
the sign of the cross, and reverently receives the communion 
of the Blood of the Lord, saying before drinking from the 
chalice: 


. May the Blood of Our Lord Jesus Christ keep my soul unto 
life everlasting. Amen. 


The Communion of the Faithful 


Here holy communion is administered to those of the faith- 
ful who desire to receive it. 

In the name of the communicants who kneel at the sanc- 
tuary rails an acolyte recites the Confiteor, the priest respond- 
ing with the Misereatur and Indulgentiam as at the beginning 
oj Mass. Facing the people with the Ciborium and holding up 
one of the Sacred Particles before the communicants the priest 
Says: 

Behold the Lamb of God: behold Him Who taketh away 
the sins of the world. 


He then repeats the Domine non sum dignus three times as 
before his own communion, and going to the Communion rail 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 99 


places a consecrated Host in the mouth of each communicant, 
saying at the same time: 

May the Body of Our Lord Jesus Christ keep thy soul unto 
life everlasting. Amen. 


The Thanksgiving 

The priest returns to the altar, replaces the ciborium in the 
tabernacle, and then rinses the chalice with a small quantity 
of wine that the acolyte pours into it the priest saying the 
following prayers. 

In these Prayers God is implored that He may permit His 
gifts to have enduring effects in our souls and that the sacra- 
mental power and grace may remain, so that we may be able 
to say in truth with St. Paul: “And I live, now not I, but 
Christ liveth in me” (Gal. 2, 20). 


Into a pure heart, O Lord, may we receive the heavenly 
food which has passed our lips; bestowed upon us in time, 
may it be the healing of our souls for eternity. 

Having received the ablution the priest saus the following 


prayer, while a little wine and some water are poured over 
his fingers into the chalice. 


May Thy Body, O Lord, which I have received, and Thy 
Blood, which I have drunk, cleave to mine inmost parts: and 
do Thou grant that no stain of sin remain in me, whom pure 
and holy mysteries have refreshed. Who livest and reignest 
world without end. Amen. 

Having received the contents of the chalice, the priest care- 
fully wipes the chalice and rearranges it and its appurtenances, 
covering gi with a silken veil, and leaving it in the center of 
the altar. 


* The Communion---Antiphon 


The Communion, so called, is a vestige of a chant formerly 
rendered while the people were being communicated. 

The priest at the Epistle side recites the Communion, which 
will be found in its proper place in each Mass, then returning 
to the middle of the altar, he faces the people, saying: 

P. The Lord be with you. 

To which the answer is returned 


Hf. And with thy spirit. 


* The Postconmumion 


The Postcommunion is the Church’s official thanksgiving 
after Communion. (See Mass Picture “The Postcommunion,” 
page 792.) 


e 
1At Solemn High Mass the subdeacon takes the chalice from 


the celebrant for cleansing. Then he arranges the coverings 
and removes the chalice to the Credence table. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


lov PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 


Going to the Epistle side he says the prayers called Post- 
communions. They correspond to the Prayers and Secrets 
already read, and are to be found in their proper places in 
the Missal. 

Then the priest going back to the middle, kisses the altar, 
and turning toward the people says: 


The “Ite Missa Est” 


Literally Ite Missa est means “Go, it is the dismissal.” These 
words were used until the 12th Century to conclude the Mass. 
The beautiful prayer "May the lowly homage, etc." which fol- 
lows immediately was originally of private devotion. Its peti- 
tion to God to make the Sacrifice useful for priests and 
people, became in time official. 

P. The Lord be with you. 

BY. And with thy spirit. 

Should the Mass be one in which the Gloria in excelsis is 
omitted, then, in place of “Go the Mass is ended” (Ite, missa 
est), the priest says or sings “Let us bless the Lord” (Benedi- 
eamus Domino). But in Masses for the dead is substituted 
the prayer, May they rest in peace (Requiescant in pace), to 
which is answered, Amen. 


P. Go, the Mass is ended.* 

BY. Thanks be to God. 

Bowing down over the altar, the priest prays: 

May the lowly homage of my service be pleasing to Thee, O 
most holy Trinity: and do Thou grant that the sacrifice which 
I, all unworthy, have offered up in the sight of Thy majesty, 
may be acceptable to Thee, and, because of Thy loving-kind- 
ness, may avail to atone to Thee for myself and for all those 
for whom I have offered it up. Through Christ our Lord. 
Amen. 


The Blessing 


The blessing was introduced about the 10th Century but 
the older custom of not blessing the people at all is yet kept 
up in Masses for the Dead. (See Mass Picture “The Blessing,” 
page 794.) . 

The priest, having kissed the altar, stands erect, raises his 
eyes to heaven, extending, raising, and then joining his hands; 
he inclines his head and says: 

May almighty God bless you— 

Turning to the people, he blesses them saying: 


The Father, and the Son, '& and the Holy Ghost. RY. Amen. 


14t Solemn High Mass the Ite, missa est or Benedicamus 
Domino is chanted’ by the deacon, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYERS AND CEREMONIES OF MASS 101 


The priest now goes to the Gospel side of the altar; he 
makes the sign of the cross, first upon the altar, and then 
upon his forehead, lips and heart, and reads a passage from 
the Gospel—as 4 rule, the first verses of that according to 
St. John, as below. But if because of the occurrence of a 
festival day, the Gospel proper to a Sunday has not been read 
in its proper place, it must be read here. In this case he signs 
the book, not the altar. 


'The Last Gospel 


No nobler words could be found to close the Sacrifice of 
the Mass than the sublime and inspired expression of the 
Disciple whom Jesus loved. From the earliest days of the 
Faith, this Gospel has been held in the highest veneration. 
Pius V, in the 16th Century, realizing how very much the 
people cherished it, inserted it in the Missal which was drawn 
up by his orders. 

P. The Lord be with you. 

RY. And with thy spirit. ' 

P. The beginning of the holy Gospel according to St. John. 

RY. Glory be to Thee, O Lord. 

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with 
God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning 
with God. All things were made'/by Him: and without Him 
was made nothing that was made. In Him was life, and the 
life was the light of men: and the light shineth in darkness, 
&nd the darkness did not comprehend it. There was a man 
sent from God, whose name was John. This man came for a 
witness, to give testimony of the light, that all men might 
believe through him. He was not the light, but was to give 
testimony of the light. 'That was the true light which en- 
lighteneth every man that cometh into this world. He was in 
the world, and the world was made by Him, and the world 
knew Him not. He came unto His own, and His own received 
Him not. But as many as received Him, to them He gave 
power to become the sons of God, to them that believe in His 
name. Who are born, not of blood, nor of the will of the 
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. (Here all kneel 
Gown.) LN 1 l 

And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and 
we Saw His glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the 
Father), full of grace and truth. 

RY. Thanks be to God. 

At the end of the Gospel, the server responds: "Thanks be: 
to God." 'The last words of the Gospel of St. John declare: 
"The Word was made Flesh and dwelt among us;" whereupon 
priest and people bend in adoration. In very deed has the 
Word been made Flesh in the Mass. He dwells among us in 
the Sacrament of the Altar. How meet it is, then, that We 
breathe this fervent Deo Gratias, this thanksgiving from the 
bottom of our hearts for the unspeakably holy privilege of 
being present at the new Bethlehem and the new Calvary. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


102 PROPER OF THE SEASON 


Copyright. by Bensiger Brothers 
AND THERE SHALL COME FORTH A ROD OUT OF THE ROOT OF JESSE: 


AND A FLOWER SHALL RISE UP OUT OF HIS ROOT, AND THE SPIRIT 
OF THE LORD SHALL REST UPON HIM: THE SPIRIT OF WISDOM AND 
OF UNDERSTANDING, THE SPIRIT OF COUNSEL AND OF FORTITUDE, 
YHE SPIRIT OF KNOWLEDGE AND OF GODLINESS. (Isaias 11, 1, 2.) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ne 


Propet of tbe Season 
First Sunday of Advent (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. Mary MAJOR 
Sunday of the First Class 
An explanation of Masses designated as Stational Masses 


will be found 1n the Supplement “The Meanin, 


of the Sacred 


Liturgy,” where also the directions for gaining Indulgences on 


such days are given, 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Intro. Ps. 24, 1-3 ` 


D TE levávi ánimam 

meam: Deus meus, in 
te confído, non erubéscam: 
neque irrideant me inimíci 
mei: étenim. univérsi qui te 
exspéctant, non confundén- 
tur. Ps. 24, 4. Vias tuas, 
Dómine, demónstra mihi: et 
sémitas tuas édoce me. y. 
Glória Patri, et Filio, et 
Spiritui Sancto. Sicut erat in 
principio, et nunc, et semper, 
et in ssecula  seculórum. 
Amen, Ad te levávi, etc, 


o THEE, O Lord have i 

lifted up my soul: in 
Thee, O my God, I put my 
trust; let me not be ashamed. 
Neither let my enemies laugh 
at me; for none of them that 
wait on Thee shall be con- 
founded. Ps. 24, 4. Show, O 
Lord, Thy ways to me, and 
teach me Thy paths. Y. Glory 
be to the Father, and to the 
Son, and to the Holy Ghost. AS 
it was in the beginning, is now, 
&nd ever shall be, world with- 
out end. Amen. To Thee, O 
Lord, etc. 


The Introit is repeated to the Psalm-verse: and so in all 


Masses throughout the year. 
Kyrie, page 761. 


Gloria is omitted in Advent except on Feasts. 


Prayer 


XCITA quesumus Dómine 

poténtiam tuam, et 

veni: ut ab imminéntibus 

peccatérum nostrórum períc- 

ulis, te mereámur protegénte 

éripi, te liberánte salvári. 
Qui vivis, 


ESTIR, O Lord, Thy might, 

we pray Thee and come; 

That, defended by Thee, we 

may deserve rescue from ap- 

proaching dangers brought on 

by our sins, and being set free 

by Thee, obtain our salvation. 
Who livest.! 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third Prayer 
for the Church, or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. E 


1The endings of the Prayers, Secrets, and Postcommunions 
vary. The directions showing which ending to use in the case 
of & given keyword are on page 819. 


103 


http://ccwatershed.org 


104 


FIRST SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


Epistle. Rom. 13, 11-14 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the apostle to the 
Romans. 

RETHREN, knowing the 

time, that it is now the 
hour for us to rise from sleep; 
for now our salvation 1s nearer 
than when we believed. The 
night is past, and the day is at 
hand; let us therefore cast off 
the works of darkness, and put 
on the armor of light. Let us 
walk honestly as in the day; 
not in rioting and drunken- 
ness, not in chambering and 
impurities, not in contention 
and envy; but put ye on the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pault 
apéstoli ad Romános, 


ratres: Sciéntes, quia 

hora est jam nos de 
somno sürgere. Nunc enim 
propior est nostra salus, 
quam cum credidimus. Nox 
preecéssit, dies autem appro- 
pinquávit. Abjiclamus ergo 
Ópera tenebrárum, et induá- 
mur arma lucis. Sicut in die 
honéste ambulémus: non in 
comessatiónibus, et ebrietáti- 
bus, non in cubílibus, et im- 
pudicitiis, non in contentióne, 
et emulatiéne: sed induimini 
Dóminum Jesum Christum. 


During the week, should the Mass of the Sunday be resumed, 
the alleluias and verse following are omitted, and only the 


Gradual is said. 


This is to be observed throughout Advent, 


Gradual. Ps. 24, 3, 4 


None of them that wait on 
Thee shall be confounded. Y. 
Show, O Lord, Thy ways to me, 
and teach me Thy paths. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 84, 8. 
Show us, O Lord, Thy mercy: 
and grant us Thy salvation. 
AHeluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Univérsi, qui te exspéctant, 
non confundéntur Dómine. 
Yy. Vias tuas Dómine notas 
fac mihi: et sémitas tuas 
édoce me. 

' Allelüia, allelüia. Y. Ps. 84, 
8. Osténde nobis Dómine mis- 
ericórdiam tuam: et salutáre 
tuum da nobis. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 21, 25-33 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, Jesus said 

to His disciples: There 

&hall be signs in the sun, and 
in the moon, and in the stars: 
&nd upon the earth distress of 
nations, by reason of the con- 


HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gelii secandum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit 
Jesus discípulis suis: 
Erunt signa in sole, et luna, 
et stellis, et in terris pressüra. 
géntium pre confusióne sóni- 
tus maris, et fláctuum: ares- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIRST SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


céntibus homínibus pre ti- 
móre, et exspectatióne, quse 
supervénient univérso orbi: 
nam virtütes cælórum move- 
büntur: et tunc vidébunt 
Fílium hóminis veniéntem in 
nube cum potestáte magna, 
et majestáte. His autem fíeri 
incipiéntibus,  respícite, et 
leváte cápita vestra: quó- 
niam appropinquat redémp- 
tio vestra. Et dixit illis simili- 
tüdinem: Vidéte ficülneam, 
et omnes árbores: cum pro- 
dücunt jam ex se fructum, 
scitis quóniam prope est æs- 
tas. Ita et vos cum vidéritis 
hsec fieri, scitóte quóniam 
prope est regnum Dei. Amen 
dico vobis, quia non preeterí- 
bit generátio hsec, donec óm- 
nia fiant. Celum, et terra 
transfbunt: verba autem mea 
non transíbunt. 


Creed, page 765. 
Offertory. 


Ad te levavi ánimam 
meam: Deus meus in te con- 
fido, non erubéscam: neque 
irrídeant me inimici mei: 
étenim univérsi, qui te ex- 
spéctant, non confundéntur. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


105 


fusion of the roaring of the sea 
and of the waves, men wither- 
ing away for fear and expecta- 
tion of what shall come upon 
the whole world. For the pow- 
ers of heaven shall be moved; 
and then they shall see the Son 
of man coming in & cloud with 
great power and majesty. But 
when these things begin to 
come to pass, look up and lift 
up your heads, because your 
redemption is at hand. And He 
spoke to them a similitude: See 
the fig-tree, and all the trees: 
when they now shoot forth 
their fruit, you know that sum- 
mer is nigh; so you also, when 
you shall see these things come 
to pass, know that the kingdom 
of God is at hand. Amen I say 
to you, this generation shall 
not pass away, till all things be 


fulfilled. Heaven and earth 


shall pass away, but My words 
shall not pass away. 


Ps. 24, 1-3 


To Thee have I lifted up my 
soul: in Thee, O my God, I put 
my trust; let me not be 
ashamed: neither let my ene- 
mies laugh at me: for none of 
them that wait on Thee shall 
be confounded. 


Secret 


IC sacra nos Dómine 

potenti virtüte mundá- 

tos, ad suum fáciant purióres 

veníre princípium. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Second Secret of our Blessed Lady, 


LEANSING us by their 

mighty power, may these 

Holy Mysteries, O Lord, make 

us come more pure before Thee 

who art their author. Through 
our Lord. 


page 823; third for the 


Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


106 SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


Communion. Ps. 84, 13 


The Lord will give goodness: Dóminus dabit benigni- 
and our earth shall yield her tátem: et terra nostra dabit 


fruit. fructum suum, 
Postcommunion ` 
Ax. we receive Thy mercy, UscrPIÁMUS Dómine mis- 
O Lord, in the midst of ericórdam tuam in 


'Thy temple, that with due rev- médio templi tul: ut repara- 
erence we may prepare for the tlónis nostre ventüra solém- 
coming festival of our redemp- nia céngruis honóribus præ- 
tion. Through our Lord. cedamus. Per Déminum. 
Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third 
Prayer for the Church or for the Pope, page 826. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. f 


The Benedicamus Domino (Let us praise the Lord) 14s sa 
instead of the Ite, missa est (Go, the Mass has been sald) 
whenever the Gloria in excelsis is not said. 


On Weekdays tn. Advent the Mass of the preceding Sunday ta 
said, omitting the Alleluias and the Verse after the Gradual, 
and also the Credo. The Common Preface is said. However, 
1j a Feast is appointed for the day, the Mass of the day 18 
said and the second Prayer is that of the preceding Sunday. 
For the Ember Days there ts a special Mass. 


Second Hundap of Advent (Purple) 
STATION AT THE CHURCH OF THE HOLY CROSS IN JERUSALEM 
Sunday of the Second Class 
'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Is. 30, 30 


EOPLE of Sion, behold the oputus Sion, ecce Dómi- 
P Lord shall come to save P nus véniet ad salván- 
the nations; and the Lord shall das gentes: et auditam fáciet 
make the glory of His voice to Dóminus glóriam vocis suæ 
be heard in the joy of your in lætítia cordis vestri. Ps. 79, 
heart, Ps. 79, 2. Give ear, O 2. Qui regis Israel, inténde: 
Thou that rulest Israel: Thou qui dedücis, velut ovem, Jo- 
that leadest Joseph like a seph. Y. Glória Patri. 
sheep, JJ. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


TIR up our hearts, O Lord, XciA Dómine corda 
to prepare the ways of nostra ad preparándas 
Thine only-begotten Son, that Unigéniti tui vias: ut per ejus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


po v 


l 


SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


&dvéntum purificátis tibi 
méntibus servíre mereámur. 
Qui tecum. 


107 


through His coming we may be 
worthy to serve Thee with 
purified minds. Who livest. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third for the 
Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Epistle. Rom. 15, 4-13 


Léctio Epistole beati Pauli 
apéstoli ad Romanos. 


RATRES: Quæcúmque 

scripta sunt, ad no- 
stram doctrinam scripta 
sunt: ut per patiéntiam, et 
eonsolatiónem Scripturarum, 
spem habeámus. Deus autem 
patiéntie et solatii, det vobis 
idipsum sápere in altérutrum 
secindum Jesum Christum; 
ut unánimes, uno ore honor- 
ificétis Deum, et Patrem Dó- 
mini nostri Jesu Christi. 
Propter quod suscípite ínvi- 
cem, sicut et Christus sus- 
cépit vos in honórem Dei. 
Dico enim Christum Jesum 
minístrum fuísse circum- 
cisiónis propter  veritátem 
Dei, ad confirmándas promis- 
siédnes patrum: gentes autem 
super misericórdia honoráre 
Deum, sicut scriptum est: 
Preptérea confitébor tibi in 
géntibus Dómine, et nómini 
tuo cantábo. Et iterum dicit: 
Letamini gentes cum plebe 
ejus. Et iterum: Laudáte om- 
nes gentes Dóminum: et 
maghificáte eum omnes póp- 
uli. Et rursus Isaías ait: Erit 
radix Jesse, et qui exsürget 
régere gentes, in eum gentes 
sperébunt. Deus autem spei 
répleat vos omni gáudio, et 
pace in credéndo: ut abun- 
détis in spe, et virtute 
Spíritus Sancti. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the apostle to the 
Romans. 


Bnew what things so- 
ever were written, were 
written for our learning; that 
through patience and the com- 
fort of the Scriptures we might 
have hope. Now the God of pa- 
tience and of comfort ‘grant 
you to be of one mind one to- 
ward another, according to 
Jesus Christ: that with one 
mind, and with one mouth, 
you may glorify God and the 
Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Wherefore receive one 
another; as Christ also hath 
received you, unto the honor 
of God. For I say that Christ 
Jesus was minister of the cir- 
cumcision for the truth of God, 
to confirm the promises made 
unto the fathers. But that the 
Gentiles are to glorify God for 
His mercy, as it is written: 
Therefore will I confess to 
Thee, O Lord, among the Gen- 
tiles, and will sing to Thy 
name. And again He saith: Re- 
joice, ye Gentiles, with His 
people. And again: Praise the 
Lord, all ye Gentiles; and mag- 
nify Him, all ye people. And 
again, Isaias saith: There shall 
be a root of Jesse; and He that 
shall rise up to rule the Gen- 
tiles, in Him the Gentiles shall 
hope. Now the God of hope fill 
you with all joy and peace in 


« http://ccwatershed.org 


108 


SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


believing; that you may abound in hope, and in the power of 


the Holy Ghost. 


During the week, should the Mass of the Sunday be resumed, 
the alleluias and verse following are omitted, and only the 


Gradual is said. 


Gradual. Ps. 49, 2, 3, 5 


Out of Sion the loveliness of 
His beauty: God shall come 
manifestly. Y. Gather ye to- 
gether His saints to Him; who 
have set His covenant before 
sacrifices. 

Alleluia, alleluia. y. Ps. 121, 
1. I rejoiced at the things that 
were said to me: we shall go 
into the house of the Lord. 
Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ex Sion spécies decóris 
ejus: Deus maniféste véniet. 
X. Congregáte illi sanctos 
ejus, qui ordinavérunt testa- 
méntum ejus super sacrifícia. 


Allelüja, alleluja. Jy. Ps. 
121, 1. Letátus sum in his, 
que dicta sunt mihi: in do- 
mum Dómini íbimus. Alle- 
Tája. 


Gospel. Matt. 11, 2-10 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mai- 
thew. 

T THAT time when John 

had heard in prison the 
works of Christ: sending two of 
his disciples, he said to Him: 
Art Thou He that art to come, 
5r do we look for another? and 
Jesus making answer, said to 
them, Go and relate to John 
what you have heard and seen. 
The blind see, the lame walk, 
the lepers are cleansed, the 
deaf hear, the dead rise again, 
the poor have the gospel 
preached to them; and blessed 
is he that shall not be scan- 
dalized in Me. And when they 
went their way, Jesus began to 
say to the multitudes concern- 
ing John, What went you out 
into the desert to see? a reed 
shaken with the wind? But 
what went you out to see? a 
man clothed in soft garments? 


H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii, secindum Matthzum. 


N ILLO témpore: Cum 
T audisset Joánnes in vin- 
culis ópera Christi, mittens 
duos de discípulis suis, ait 
ili: Tu es, qui ventürus es, 
an álium exspectámus? Et 
respóndens Jesus, ait illis: 
Eüntes renuntiáte  Joánni, 
que audistis, et vidístis, Ceci 
vident, claudi ámbulant, lep- 
rósi mundántur, surdi áudi- 
unt, mórtui resürgunt, páu- 
peres  evangelizántur: et 
beátus est, qui non füerit 
scandalizatus in me. Illis au- 
tem abeüntibus, cepit Jesus 
dícere ad turbas de Joánne: 
Quid exístis in desértum vidé- 
re? aründinem vento agi- 
tátam? Sed quid  exístis 
vidére? hóminem  móllibus 
vestítum? Ecce qui móllibus 
vestiüntur,in dómibus regum 


http://ccwatershed.org 7 


SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


sunt. Sed quid exístis vidére? 
prophétam? Etiam dico Vvo- 
bis, et plus quam prophétam. 
Hic est enim, de quo scrip- 
tum est: Ecce ego mitto 
Angelum meum ante fáciem 
tuam, qui preparábit viam 
fuam ante te. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 

Deus, tu convérsus vivifi- 

cábis nos, et plebs tua letab- 

itur in te; osténde nobis 

Dómine misericérdiam tuam, 
et salutáre tuum da nobis. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


109 


Behold they that are clothed 
in soft garments are in the 
houses of kings. But what 
went you out fo see? a pro- 
phet? yea, I tell you, and 
more than a prophet. For this 
is He of whom it is written, 
Behold I send My angel before 
Thy face, who shall prepare 
Thy way before Thee. 


Ps. 84, 7, 8 

O God, turning, Thou wilt 
bring us life; and Thy people 
shall rejoice in Thee: show us, 
O Lord, Tby mercy, and grant 
us Thy salvation. 


Secret 


LACÁRE, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, humilitátis nos- 

précibus et hóstiis: et 
ubi nulla süppetunt suffrá- 
gia meritórum, tuis nobis 
Succürre presídiis. Per Dó- 
minum nostrum. 


E APPEASED, We beseech 

Thee, O Lord, by the 
prayers and offerings of our 
lowliness, and where no sup- 
port of merits is at hand, do 
Thou hasten to us with Thine 
aid. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third for ihe 
Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Preface, page 773. 


Communion. 
Jerüsalem surge, et sta in 
excélso, et vide jucundi- 
tátem, que véniet tibi a Deo 
tuo. 


Bar. 5, 5; 4, 36 


Arise, O Jerusalem, and 
stand on high: and behold the 
joy that cometh to thee from 
thy God. 


Postcommunion 


EPLÉTI cibo spiritualis 

aliménie, süpplices te, 
Dómine, deprecámur: ut hu- 
jus participatióne mystérii, 
dóceas nos terréna despicere 
et amáre czléstia. Per Dó- 
minum nostrum. 


ILLED With the food of 
H Spiritual nourishing, we 
humbly beseech Thee, O Lord, 
that by our partaking of this 
mystery Thou wouldst teach 


us to contemn earthly and 


love heavenly things. Through 
our Lord, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


110 THIRD SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third 
for the Church or for the Pope, page 826. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Third Sundap of Adbent (Purple or Rose) 


STATION AT ST. PETER'S 


Sunday of the Second Class 


This being mid-Advent or Gaudete Sunday flowers are al- 
lowed on the altar, and the organ is played as on feast-days. 
For the purple or violet vestments obligatory during Advent, 
others, rose-colored in hue, may be substituted. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Philip. 4, 4-6 


EJOICE in the Lord al- 

ways; again I say, re- 
joice. Let your modesty be 
known to all men: for the 
Lord is nigh. Be nothing so- 
licitous; but in everything by 
prayer let your requests be 
made known to God. Ps. 84, 2. 
Lord, Thou hast blest Thy 
land; Thou hast turned away 
the captivity of Jacob. y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


AUDÉTE in Dómino sem- 

per: íterum dico, gau- 
déte. Modéstia vestra nota 
sit ómnibus homínibus: Dó- 
minus enim prope est. Nihil 
Sollíciti sitis: sed in omni 
oratióne petitiónes vestre in- 
notéscant apud Deum. Ps. 
84, 2. Benedixisti, Domine, 
terram tuam: avertisti cap- 
tivitátem Jacob. Y. Gloria 
Patri. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


NCLINE Thine ear to our 
I prayers, O Lord, we be- 
seech Thee; and make bright 
the darkness of our minds by 
the grace of Thy visitation. 
Who livest. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed 


UREM tuam, quæsumus, 
Dómine, précibus nos- 
ris accómmoda: et mentis 
nostre ténebras, grátia tue 
visitatiónis illustra: Qui 
vivis. 
Lady, page 823; third for the 


Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Epistle. Philip. 4, 4-7 


Lesson from the Epistle of 


Léctio Epistole. beati Pauli 


blessed Paul the apostle to apóstoli ad Philippénses. 


the Philippians. 


RETHREN: Rejoice in the 
again I 


Lord always: 


RATREs: Gaudéte in Dó- 
mino semper: íterum 


say, rejóice. Let your modesty dico, gaudéte. Modéstia ves- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THIRD SUNDAY OF ADVENT 111 


tra nota sit ómnibus homíni- 
bus: Dóminus prope est. Ni- 
hil sollíciti sitis: sed in omni 
oratióne, et obsecratidne, 
cum graitiárum actióne, peti- 
tiónes vestre innotéscant a- 
pud Deum. Et pax Dei, que 
exsüperat omnem sensum, 
custódiat corda vestra; et in- 
telligéntias vestras, in Christo 
Jesu Dómino nostro. 


be known to all men. The Lord 
is nigh, Be nothing solicitous; 
but in. everything. by prayer 
and supplication with thanks- 
giving let your requests be 
made known to God. And the 
peace of God, which surpasseth 
all understanding, keep your 
hearts and minds in Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 


"During the week, should the Mass of the Sunday be resumed, 
the alleluias and verse following are omitted, and only the 


Gradual is said. 


Gradual. 


Qui sedes, Dómine, super 
Chérubim, éxcita poténtiam 
iuam, et veni. Y. Qui regis 
Israël, inténde: qui dedücis, 
velut ovem, Joseph. 


Allelüja, allelija. V. Excita, 
Dómine, poténtiam tuam, et 
veni, ut salvos fácias nos. 
Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ps. 79, 2, 3 


Thou, O Lord, that sittest 
upon the cherubim, stir up Thy 
might, and come. V. Give ear, 
O Thou that rulest Israel: 
Thou that leadest Joseph like 
2, sheep. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Stir up 
Thy might, O Lord, and come: 
ihat 'Thou mayest save us. 
Alleluia. 


Gospel. John 1, 19-28 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Misérunt 
Judei ab  Jerosólymis 
sacerdótes et levítas ad Joán- 
nem, ut interrogárent eum: 
Tu quis es? Et conféssus est, 
et non negávit: et conféssus 
est: Quia non sum ego Chris- 
tus. Et  interrogavérunt- 
eum: Quid ergo? Elias es tu? 
Et dixit: Non sum. Prophéta 
es tu? At respóndit: Non. 
Dixérunt ergo ei: Quis es, ut 
respónsum demus his, qui 
misérunt nos? quid dicis de te 
ipso? Ait: Ego vox clamántis 
in desérto: Dirígite viam Dó- 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime: the Jews 

sent from Jerusalem 

priests and Levites to John, to 
ask him, Who art thou? And he 
confessed, and did nob deny; 
and he confessed, I am not the 
Christ. And they asked him, 
What then? Art thou Elias? 
And he said, I am not. Art thou 
the prophet? And he answered, 
No. They said therefore unto 
him, Who art thou, that we 
may give an answer to them 
that sent us? what sayest thou 
of thyself? He said, I am the 
voice of one crying in the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


112 


wilderness, Make straight the 
way of the Lord, as said the 
prophet Isaias. And they that 
were sent were of the pharisees. 
And they asked him, and said 
to him, Why, then, dost thou 
baptize, if thou be not Christ, 
nor Elias, nor the prophet? 
John answered them, saying, I 
baptize with water; but there 
hath stood one in the midst of 
you, Whom you know not; the 
same is He that shall come 
after me, Who is preferred be- 
fore me, the latchet of Whose 
Shoe I am not worthy to loose. 
These things were done in 
Bethania beyond the Jordan, 
where John was baptizing. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 
Lord, Thou hast blest Thy 
land: Thou hast turned away 
the captivity of Jacob: Thou 
hast forgiven the iniquity of 
Thy people. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


THIRD SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


mini, sicut dixit Isafas pro- 
phéta. Et qui missi füerant, 
erant ex Pharismis. Et inter- 
rogavérunt eum, et dixérunt 
ei: Quid ergo baptízas, si tu 
non es Christus, neque Elías, 
neque prophéta? Respdéndit 
eis Joannes, dicens: Ego bap- 
tizo in aqua: medius autem 
vestrum stetit, quem vos nes- 
citis. Ipse est, qui post me 
ventürus est: cujus ego non 
sum dignus ut solvam ejus 
corrigiam calceaménti. Hec 
in Bethánia facta sunt trans 
Jordánem, ubi erat Joánnes 
baptizans, 


Ps. 84, 2 


Benedixístl, Dómine, ter- 
ram tuam: avertísti captivi- 
tátem Jacob: remisísti ini- 
quitátem plebis tue. 


Secret 


AY the sacrifice of our 
@M devotion, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, be continually 
offered to Thee, both to carry 
out Thy designs in this holy 
Mystery and wonderfully to 
work in us Thy salvation. 
Through our Lord. 

Second Secret of our Blessed 


EVOTIONIS nostre tibi, 
D quesumus Dómine, 
hóstia  jügiter immolétur: 
que et sacri péragat insti- 
tüta mystérii, et salutáre 
tuum in nobis mirabiliter 
operétur. Per Dóminum. 


Lady, page 823; third for the 


Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. 


Say, ye faint-hearted, take 
courage, and fear not, behold 
our God will come and will 
Save us. 


Is. 35, 4 


Dicite: pusillanimes, con- 
fortámini, et nolite timére: 
ecce Deus noster véniet, et 
salvábit nos. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 


11$ 


Postcommunion 


MPLORÁwmus, Dómine, 
T cleméntiam tuam: ut hec 
divína subsídia, a Vitiis ex- 
piátos, ad festa ventüra nos 
preparent. Per Dóminum. 


E IMPLORE Thy clemen- 
a cy, O Lord, that 
cleansed from our sins, these 
divine aids may prepare us for 
the coming festival. Through 


our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third 
for the Church or for the Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Wednesday in Ember-Week (Purple) 


STATION AT St. Mary MAJOR 


Major Feria, not Privileged 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Is. 45, 8 
ORÁTE, czli, désuper, et ROP down dew, ye heavens, 
nubes pluant justum: from above, and let the 
aperiátur terra, et gérminet clouds rain the just: let the 
Salvatórem. Ps. 18, 2. Celi earth be opened, and bud forth 
enárrant glóriam Dei: et a Saviour. Ps. 18, 2. The heav- 
ópera mánuum ejus annün- ens show forth the glory of 
tiat firmaméntum. Glória God, and the firmament de- 
Patri. i 'clareth the work of His hands. 


X. Glory. 


After the Kyrie eleison, page 761, is said: 


Orémus. Let us pray. 

Flectámus génua. Let us kneel. 

Ij. Leváte. B. Arise. 
Prayer 


RESTA, quaesumus, omni- 

potens Deus: ut redemp- 
tiónis nostre ventüra solémn- 
itas, et preséntis nobis vite 
subsidia cónferat, et stérne 
beatitüdinis premia largiá- 
tur. Per Dóminum. 


Lesson. 
Léctio Isai Prophéte. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Dixit Isaías 
prophéta: Erit in novis- 


RANT us, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, that the coming 
solemnity of our redemption 
may both bring us help for our 
present life and bestow on us 
the rewards of everlasting 
blessedness. Through our Lord. 


Is. 2, 2-5 


Lesson from Isaias the Pro- 
phet. 

N THOSE days, the prophet 

Isaias said: In the last 


http://ccwatershed.org 


114 


days, the mountain of the 
house of the Lord shall be pre- 
pared on the top of mountains, 
and it sball be exalted above 
the hills, and all nations shall 
flow unto it. And many people 
shall go and say: Come and 
let us go up to the mountain 
of the Lord, and to the house 
of the God of Jacob, and He 
will teach us His ways, and we 
will walk in His paths: for the 
law shall come forth from 
Sion, and the word of the 
Lord from Jerusalem. And He 
Shall judge the Gentiles, and 
rebuke many people; and they 
shall turn their swords into 
ploughshares and their spears 
into sickles: nation shall not 
lift up sword against nation, 
neither shall they be exercised 
any more to war. O house of 


WEDNESDAY IN 


EMBER-WEEK 


simis diébus preparatus mons 
domus Dómini in vértice 
móntium, et elevábitur super 
colles, et fluent ad eum om- 
nes gentes. Et ibunt pópuli 
multi, et dicent: Veníte et 
ascendámus ad montem Dó- 
mini, et ad domum Dei Ja- 
cob, et docébit nos vias suas, 
et ambulábimus in sémitis 
ejus: quia de Sion exíbit lex, 
et verbum Dómini de Jerü- 
Salem. Et judicábit gentes, et 
árguet pópulos multos: et 
conflábunt gládios suos in 
vómeres, et lánceas suas in 
falces. Non levabit gens con- 
tra gentem gladium: nec ex- 
ercebüntur ultra ad prelium. 
Domus Jacob veníte, et am- 
bulémus in lümine Dómini 
Dei nostri. 


Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord our 


God. 


Gradual. Ps. 23, 7, 3, 4 


Lift up your gates, O ye 
princes: and be ye lifted up, O 
eternal gates, and the King of 
glory shall enter in. Y. Who 
shall ascend into the moun- 
tain of the Lord, or who shall 
stand in His holy place? the 
innocent in hands, and clean 
of heart. 


Tollite portas, principes, 
vestras: et elevámini porte 
eterndles: et introíbit Rex 
glórie. Y. Quis ascéndet in 
montem Dómini? aut quis 
stabit in loco sancto ejus? 
Innocens mánibus et mundo 
corde. 


Here is said: Dominus vobiscum. 


Prayer 


ASTEN, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, and delay not; 
and bestow upon us the help 
of Thy heavenly power, that 
they who trust in Thy good- 
ness may be helped by the con- 
solations of Thy coming. Who 
livest. 


ESTINA, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, ne tardáveris, et 
auxilium nobis supérne vir- 
tütis impénde: ut advéntus 
tui consolatiónibus sublevén- 
tur, qui in tua pietáte confi- 
dunt: Qui vivis et regnas. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 


115 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third for the 
Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Lesson. 
Léctio Isafe Prophéte. 


N DIEBUS illis: Locütus est 

Dóminus ad Achaz, 
dicens: Pete tibi signum a 
Dómino Deo tuo in profün- 
dum inférni, sive in excél- 
sum supra. Et dixit Achaz: 
Non petam, et non tentabo 
Dóminum. Et dixit: Audíte 
ergo domus David: Numquid 
parum vobis est, moléstos 
esse homínibus, quia molésti 
estis et Deo meo? Propter 
hoc dabit Dóminus ipse vobis 
Signum. Ecce virgo concípiet, 
et páriet fílium, et vocábitur 
nomen ejus Emmanuel. Bu- 
tyrum et mel cómedet, ut 
Sciat reprobáre malum, et 
eligere bonum. 


Is. 7, 10-15 


Lesson from Isaias the Pro- 
phet. 


N THOSE days: ihe Lord 
I spoke to Achaz, saying: 
Ask thee a sign of the Lord 
thy God, either unto the depth 
of hell or unto the height 
above. And Achaz said, I will 
not ask, and I will not tempt 
the Lord. And he said, Hear ye 
therefore, O house of David: Is 
it a small thing for you to be 
grievous to men, that you are 
grievous to my God also? 
Therefore the Lord Himself 
shall give you a sign. Behold, a 
virgin shall conceive, and bear 
@ son, and His name shall be 
called Emmanuel. He shall eat 
butter and honey, that He may 
know to refuse the evil, and to 
choose the good. 


Gradual. Ps. 144, 18, 21 


Prope est Dóminus ómni- The Lord is nigh unto all 
bus invocántibus eum: ómni- them that call upon Him to 
bus qui invocant eum in all that call upon Him in 
veritáte. Y. Laudem Dómini truth. y. My mouth shall speak 
loquétur os meum: et bene- ihe praise of the Lord: and let 
dicat omnis, caro nomen all flesh bless His holy name. 
Sanctum ejus. 


Munda Cor. Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Luke 1, 26-38 


®© Seqüentia sancti Evan- Continuation of the holy 
gélii secundum Lucam. Gospel according to St. Luke. 

N ILLO témpore: Missus T THAT time, the angel 
I est Angelus Gabriél Gabriel was sent from 
Deo in civitátem Galilee, cui God into a city of Galilee, 
nomen Nazareth, ad Virgi- called Nazareth, to a virgin 
nem desponsátam viro, cui espoused to a man, whose 
nomen erat Joseph, de domo name was Joseph, of the house 


http://ccwatershed.org 


116 


of David; and the virgin's 
name was Mary. And the 
angel, being come in, said unto 
her: Hail, full of grace, the 
Lord is with thee; blessed art 
thou among women. Who, hav- 
ing heard, was troubled at his 
saying, and thought with her- 
self what manner of salutation 
this should be. And the angel 
Said to her: Fear not, Mary, for 
thou hast found grace with 
God. Behold, thou shalt con- 
ceive in thy womb, and shalt 
bring forth a son; and thou 
shalt call His name Jesus. He 
shall be great, and shall be 
called the Son of the Most 
High, and the Lord God shall 
give unto Him the throne of 
David His father; and He shall 
reign in the house of Jacob for 
ever. And of His kingdom there 
shall be no end. And Mary said 
to the angel, How shall this be 
done, because I know not man? 
And the angel, answering, said 
to her: The Holy Ghost shall 
come upon thee, and the power 
of the Most High shall over- 
shadow thee. And therefore 
also the Holy which shall be 
born of thee shall be called the 
Son of God. And behold thy 
cousin Elizabeth, she also hath 
conceived a son in her old age; 
and this is the sixth month 
with her that is called barren: 
because no word shall be im- 
possible with God. And Mary 


WEDNESDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 


David, et nomen Virginis 
Maria, Et ingréssus Angelus 
ad eam, dixit: Ave, grátia 
plena: Dóminus tecum; 
benedicta tu in muliéribus. 
Que cum audisset, turbáta 
est in sermóne ejus: et cog- 
itábat qualis esset ista sa- 
lutátio. Et ait Angelus el: 
Ne tímeas María, invenisti 
enim grátiam apud Deum: 
ecce concípies in útero, et 
páries fílium, et vocábis no- 
men ejus Jesum. Hic erit 
magnus, et Fílius Altíssimi 
vocábitur, et dabit ili Dó- 
minus Deus sedem David 
patris ejus: et regnábit in 
domo Jacob in etérnum, et 
regni ejus non erit finis, 
Dixit autem María ad An- 
gelum: Quómodo fiet istud, 
quóniam virum non cog- 
nósco? Et respóndens An- 
gelus, dixit ei: Spíritus Sanc- 
tus supervéniet in te, et vir- 
tus Altíssimi obumbrábit tibi. 
Ideóque et quod nascétur ex 
te Sanctum, vocábitur Fílius 
Dei. Et ecce Elisabeth cog- 
náta tua, et ipsa concépit 
filium in senectüte sua: et 
hic mensis sextus est illi, 
que vocatur stérilis:; quia 
non erit impossíble apud 
Deum omne verbum. Dixit 
autem María: Ecce ancílla 
Dómini, fiat mihi sectndum 
verbum tuum. 


said: Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it done to me 


according to thy word. 
The Creed is omitted. 


Offertory. 

Take courage, and fear not: 
for behold our God will bring 
tbe revenge of recompense: He 


Is. 35, 4 


Confortémini, et jam nolite 
timére: ecce enim Deus nos- 
ter retvíbuut judícium: inse 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FRIDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 111 
véniet, et salvos nos fáclet, Himself will come and will save 
us, 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


JA s tibi sint, qu&- 
A, sumus, Dómine, nos- 
a jejünia: que et expiándo 
nos tua grátia dignos effíci- 
ant, et ad sempitérna prom- 
issa perdücant. Per Dómi- 
num. 


AY our fasting, we be- 
D seech Thee, O Lord, be 
acceptable to Thee, so that by 
expiation they may make us 
worthy of Thy grace and bring 
us to eternal joys according to 
Thy promises. Through our 
Lord. 


Second Secret of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third for the 
Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826, 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Is. 7, 14 


Ecce virgo concipiet, et 
páriet fílium: et vocábitur 
nomen ejus Emmánuel. 


Behold, a virgin shall con- 
ceive, and bring forth a son: 
and His name shall be called 


Emmanuel. 


Postcommunion 


ALUTÁRIS tui, Dómine, 

münere satiáti, súp- 
plices deprecámur: ut, cujus 
lætámur gustu, renovémur 
efféctu. Per Dóminum. 


ILLED with the bounty of 

Thy salvation, O Lord, 

we humbly beseech Thee, that 

we may be renewed by the ef- 

fect of that of which we re- 

joice to partake. Through our 
Lord. ` 


Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third 
Jor the Church or for the Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Sridayp in Ember-Week (Purple) 
STATION AT THE CHURCH OF THE TWELVE HoLy APOSTLES 
Major Feria, not Privileged 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit, Ps. 118, 151-152 


T" es tu, Dómine, et HOU art near, O Lord, and 
omnes vie tue véritas: all Thy ways are truth: 
inftio cognóvi de testimóniis, I have known from the begin- 
quia in etérnum tu.es. ning concerning Thy testi- 
monies, and Thau art forever. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


118 


Ps. 118, 1. Blessed are the 
undefiled in the way; who 
walk in the way of the Lord. 
y. Glory. 

Kyrie, page 761. 


FRIDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 


Ps. 118,1. Beáti immacu- 
láti in via: qui ámbulant in 
lege Dómini. y. Glória Patri. 


The Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


ESTIR, O Lord, Thy might, 

we pray Thee, and 
come; that these who trust in 
Thy kindness and love, may 
the more speedily be delivered 
from all adversity. Who liv- 
est. 


XCITA, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, poténtiam tuam, 
et veni: ut hi, qui in tua 
piétáte confídunt, ab omni 
cítius adversitáte liberénter: 
Qui vivis. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third for the 
Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Lesson. Is. 11, 1-5 


Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 


Hus saith the Lord God: 

There shall come forth a 
rod out of the root of Jesse, 
and a flower shall rise up out 
of his root. And the Spirit of 
the Lord shall rest upon Him: 
the spirit of wisdom and of 
understanding, the spirit of 
counsel and of fortitude, the 
spirit of knowledge and of 
godliness, and He shall be 
filled with the spirit of the 
fear of the Lord. He shall not 
judge according to the sight 
of the eyes, nor reprove ac- 
cording to the hearing of the 
ears. But He shall judge the 
poor with justice, and shall re- 
prove with equity for the meek 
of the earth: and He shall 
Strike the earth with the 
rod of His mouth, and with 
the breath of His lips He shall 


Léctio Isai» Prophéte. 


AEC dicit Dóminus 

Deus: Egrediétur virga 
de radíce Jesse, et flos de ra- 
dice ejus ascéndet. Et re- 
quiéscet super eum spíritus 
Dómini: spíritus sapiéntie, 
et intelléctus, spíritus con- 
Síliij et fortitüdinis, spfritus 
sciéntiz, et pietátis; «t re- 
plébit eum spíritus timóris 
Dómini. Non secündum vis- 
iónem oculérum  judicábit: 
neque secündum  audítum 
éurium árguet: sed judicábit 
in justitia páuperes, et ar- 
guet in zquitáte pro man- 
suétis terre: et percütiet ter- 
ram vírga oris sul, et spíritu 
labiórum suórum interfíciet 
fmpium. Et erit justitia cín- 
gulum lumbórum ejus: et 
fides cinctérium renum ejus. 


Slay the wicked. And justice shall be the girdle of His loins: 
and faith the girdle of His reins. 


Gradual. Ps. 84, 8, 2 


Show us, O Lord, Thy mercy, 
and grant us Thy salvation. Y. 


Ostende. nobis, Dómine, 
misericórdiam tuam: et salu- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


BE 


"T 


FRIDAY IN EMBER-WEEK: 


táre tuum da nobis. Y. Bene- 
dixisti, Dómine, terram tu- 
am: avertisti captivitátem 
Jacob. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


119 


Lord, Thou hast blessed Thy 
land: Thou hast turned away 
the captivity of Jacob, 


Gospel. Luke 1, 39-47 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 


N ILLO iémpore: Exsür- 

gens María ábiit in mon- 
tána cum  festinatióne in 
civitatem Juda: et intrávit 
in domum Zacharis, et sa- 
lutavit Elisabeth. Et factum 
est, ut audívit salutatiónem 
Marie Elisabeth, exsultávit 
infans in utero ejus: et re- 
pléta est Spiritu Sancto Elí- 
sabeth: et exclamávit voce 
magna, et dixit: Benedicta 
tu inter mulíeres, et benedic- 
tus fructus ventris tui. Et 
unde hoc mihi, ut véniat 
mater Dómini mei ad me? 
Ecce enim, ut facta est vox 
Salutatiónis tue in áuribus 
meis, exsultávit in gáudio in- 
fans in ütero meo. Et beáta, 
que credidisti, quóniam per- 
ficiéntur ea, que dicta sunt 
tibi a Démino. Et ait Marfa: 
Magnificat anima mea Dó- 
minum: et exsultavit spiritus 
meus in Deo salutari meo. 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, Mary ris- 

ing up, went into the 
hill country with haste, into a 
city of Juda. And sbe entered 
into the house of Zachary, 
and saluted Elizabeth. And it 
came to pass that when Eliz- 
abeth heard the salutation of 
Mary, the infant leaped in her 
womb. And Elizabeth was 
filled with the Holy Ghost: 
and she cried out with a loud 
voice, and said, Blessed art 
thou among women, and 
blessed is the fruit of thy 
womb. And whence is this to 
me, that the mother of my 
Lord should come to me? For 
behold, as soon as the voice of 
thy salutation sounded in my 
ears, the infant in my womb 
leaped for joy. And blessed 
art thou that hast believed, 
because those things shall be 
accomplished that were 
spoken to thee by the Lord. 
And Mary said, My soul doth 


magnify the Lord; and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my 


Saviour. 
The Creed is omitted. 
Offertory. 
Deus, tu convérsus vivi- 


flcábis nos, et plebs tua leta- 
bitur in te: osténde nobis, 
Dómine, misericórdiam tuam, 
et salutáre tuum da nobis. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 84, 7-8 
Turning, O God, Thou wilt 
bring us to life: and Thy peo- 
ple shall rejoice in Thee; show 
us, O Lord, Thy mercy, and 
grant us Thy salvation. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


120 


SATURDAY IN EMBER-WEEEK 


Secret 


E beseech Thee, O Lord, 

that having accepted 
our prayers and offerings, 
Thou wouldst cleanse us by 
the heavenly mysteries and 
harken unto us in Thy mercy. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Secret of our Blessed 


UNÉRIBUS nostris, que- 

sumus, Dómine, pre- 
cibüsque suscéptis: et cælés- 
tibus nos munda mystériis, 
et cleménter exáudi. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Lady, page 823; third for ihe 


Church. or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Zach. 14, 5, 6 


"Behold the Lord shall come, 
and all His saints with Him: 
and there shall be in that day 
8 great light. 


Ecce Dóminus véniet, et 
omnes sancti ejus cum eo: et 
erit in die illa lux magna. 


Postcommunion 


ay the holy receiving of 
D Thy sacrament, O Lord, 
restore us, purge us of the 
past, and insure for us & par- 
ticipation in the mystery of 
salvation. Through our Lord. 


vui nos, Dómine, sacra- 

ménti libátio sancta 
restauret: et a  vetustáte 
purgátos, in mystérii salutá- 
ris fáciat transíre, Per Dó- 
minum. 


Second, Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third 
Jor the Church. or for the Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Saturdap in Ember-Week (Purple) 
STATION at ST. PETER'S 
Major Feria, not Privileged 
'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps.79,4,2 


oms, O Lord, and show 

Thy face to us, Thou 
that sittest upon the cheru- 
bim: and we shall be saved. 
Ps. 79, 2. Give ear, O Thou 
that rulest Israel: Thou that 
leadest Joseph like a Sheep. 
X. Glory. 


ENI, et osténde nobis 

iáciem tuam, Dómine, 
qui sedes super Cherubim: 
et salvi érimus. Ps. 79, 2. Qui 
regis Israël, inténde: qui de- 
dücis, velut ovem, Joseph. 
¥. Gloria Patri. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 


Kyrie, page 761. 


121 


The Gloria is omitted. 


After the Kyrie eleison, is said: 


Orémus. Let us pray. 

Flectamus génua. Let us kneel. 

By. Levate. BY. Arise. 
Prayer 


Eus, qui cónspicis, quia 

ex nostra pravitate 
afflígimur: concéde propítius; 
ut ex tua visitatióne consolé- 
mur: Qui vivis. 


cop, Who dost behold 

how we are afflicted by 
reason of our wickedness, mer- 
cifully grant that we may be 
consoled by reason of 'Thy 
visitation. Who livest. 


Lesson. Is. 19, 20-22 


Léctio Isaíe Prophéte. 


N diébus ilis: Clamábunt 

&d Dóminum a facie 
tribulántis, et mittet eis sal- 
vatórem et propugnatórem, 
qui líberet eos. Et cognoscé- 
tur Dóminus ab ZEgypto, et 
cognóscent Aegyptii Dómi- 
num in die ila, et colent 
eum in hóstiis et in munéri- 
bus: et vota vovébunt Dómi- 
no, et solvent. Et percütiet 
Dóminus Aegyptum plaga, et 
Sanábit eam, et reverténtur 
ad Dóminum, et placábitur 
eis, et sanábit eos Dóminus 
Deus noster. 


Gradual. 


Asummo czlo egréssio ejus: 
et occürsus ejus usque ad 
summum ejus. V. Celi enárr- 
ant glóriam Dei: et ópera 
mánuum ejus annüntiat fir- 
maméntum. 

Orémus, 

Flectámus génua. 

B . Leváte. 


Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 
T. THOSE days, they shall 
cry to the Lord because of 
the oppressor, and He shall 
send them a Saviour and a 
defender to deliver them. And 
the Lord shall be known by 
Egypt, and the Egyptians shall 
know the Lord in that day, 
&nd shall worship Him with 
Sacrifüices and offerings; and 
they shall make vows to the 
Lord, and perform them. And 
the Lord shall strike Egypt 
with a scourge, and shall heal 
it: and they shall return to 
the Lord, and He shall be 
pacified towards them, and the 
Lord our God shall heal them. 


Ps. 18, 7, 2 


His going out is from the end 
of heaven, and His circuit even 
to the end thereof. V. The 
heavens show forth the glory 
of God, and the firmament de- 
clareth the work of His hands. 

Let us pray. 

Let us kneel. 

Hf. Arise. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


122 


SATURDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 


Prayer 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
G almighty God, that we, 
who, by reason of our ancient 
servitude, are bowed down 
under the yoke of sin, may be 
delivered by the long-awaited 
and new birth of Thine only- 
begotten Son, Who with Thee. 


ONCEDE, quaesumus, om- 
a nípotens Deus: ut, qui 
sub peccáti jugo ex vetüsta 
Servitüte deprimimur; €x- 
spectata unigénti Fili tui 
nova nativitate liberémur: 
Qui tecum, 


Lesson. Is. 35, 1-7 


- Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 

Hus said the Lord: The 

land that was desolate 
and impassable shall be glad, 
and the wilderness shall re- 
joice, and shall flourish like the 
lily. It shall bud forth and blos- 
som, and shall rejoice with joy 
and praise: the glory of 
Libanus is given to it: the 
beauty of Carmel, and Saron, 
they shall see the glory of the 
Lord, and the beauty of our 
God. Strengthen ye the feeble 
hands, and confirm the weak 
knees. Say to the faint-hearted, 
Take courage, and fear not: be- 
hold your God will bring the 
revenge of recompense: God 
Himself will come and will 
save you. Then shall the eyes 
of the blind be opened, and the 
ears of the deaf shall be un- 
Stopped. Then shall the lame 
man leap as a hart, and the 
tongue of the dumb shall be 
free: for waters are broken out 
in the desert, and streams in 
the wilderness. And that which 


Léctio Isaie Prophetis. 


EC dicit Dóminus: 

Letábitur desérta, et 
invia, et exsultábit solitüdo, 
et fiorébit quasi lilium. Gér- 
minans germinabit, et exsul- 
tabit letabünda et laudans: 
glória Libani data est ei: 
decor Carméli, et Saron, ipsi 
vidébunt glóriam Dómini, et 
decórem Dei nostri. Confor- 
tate manus  dissolütas, et 
génua debilia roboráte. Dicite 
pusilánimis:  Confortámini, 
et nolíte timére: ecce Deus 
vester ultiónem addücet retri- 
butiónis: Deus ipse véniet, et 
salvábit vos. Tunc aperiéntur 
óculi cecérum, et aures sur- 
dórum patébunt. Tunc sáliet 
Sicut cervus claudus, et apérta 
erit lingua mutórum: quia 
scisse sunt in desérto aque, 
et torréntes in solitüdine. Et 
que erat árida, erit in stag- 
num, et sitiens in fontes aquá- 
rum: ait Dóminus omnípo- 
tens. 


was dry land shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs 
of water, saith tbe Lord almighty. 


Gradual. Ps. 18, 6,7 


He hath set His tabernacle 
in thé sun: and He as a bride- 


In sole pósuit tabernácu- 
lum suum: et ipse tamquam 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 123 

Sponsus procédens de thá- groom coming out of His bride- 
lamo suo. Y. A summo c#lo chamber. Y. His going out is 
egréssio ejus: et occtirsus from the end of heaven, and 
ejus usque ad summum ejus. His circuit even to the end 


thereof. 
Orémus. Let us pray. 
Flectámus$ génua. Let us kneel, 
RY. Leváte. BY. Arise, 
Prayer 
ND{IGNOS Nos, quesu- LADDEN, we beseech Thee, 
mus, Dómine, fámulos O Lord, with the coming 
fuos, quos actiónis próprie of Thine only-begotten Son, us, 
culpa  contrístat, unigéniti Thy unworthy servants, who 


Fíli tui advéntu letífica: Qui 
tecum vivit. 


Lesson. 
Léctio Isaie Prophéte. 


Ec dicii Dóminus: 
Super montem excél- 
sum ascénde tu, qui evangel- 
ízas Sion: exálta in forti- 
tüdine vocem tuam, qui evan- 
gelizas Jerúsalem: exalta, 
noli timére. Dic civitátibus 
Juda: Ecce Deus vester: ecce 
Dóminus Deus in fortitüdine 
véniet, et bráchium ejus do- 
minábitur: ecce merces ejus 
cum eo, et opus illíus coram 
illo. Sicut pastor gregem 
suum pascet: in bráchio suo 
congregábit agnos, et in sinu 
Suo levábit, Dóminus Deus 
noster. 


Gradual. 


Dómine Deus virtütum, 
convérte nos: et osténde 
fáciem tuam, et salvi érimus. 
y. Excita, Dómine, potén- 
tiam tuam, et. veni, ut salvos 
fácias nos. 


are saddened by the guilt of 
our own deeds. Who with Thee. 


Is. 40, 9.11 


Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet, 
HUS saith the Lord: Get 
thee up upon a high 
mountain, thou that bringest 
good tidings to Sion: lift up thy 
voice with strength, thou that 
bringest good tidings of Jerusa- 
Jem: lift it up, fear not. Say 
to the cities of Juda, Behold 
your God: behold the Lord God 
shall come with strength, and 
His arm shall rule: behold His 
reward is with Him and His 
work is before Him. He shall 
feed His flock like a shepherd. 
He shall gather together the 
lambs with His arm, and shall 
take them up in His bosom, the 
Lord our God. 


Ps. 79, 20, 3 


O Lord God of hosts, convert 
us: and show Thy face and we 
shall be saved. Y, Stir up Thy 
might, O Lord, and come to 
Save us. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


124 SATURDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 
Let us pray. Orémus. 
Let us kneel. Flectamus génua. 
RY. Arise. Bf. Leváte. 
Prayer 
RESTA, Quesumus, om- 


RANT, We beseech, Thee, O 
G almighty God, that the 
coming festival of Thy Son 
may bring us both the healing 
of the present life and give us 


nipotens Deus: ut Fílii 
tui ventüra solémnitas, et 
preséntis nobis vite remédia 
cónferat, et premia etérna 


the rewards that are eternal. concédat. Per eümdem D6- 
Through the same. minum. 
Lesson. Is. 45, 1-8 


Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 
mus said the Lord to my 
anointed Cyrus, whose 
right hand I have taken hold 
of, to subdue nations before his 
face, and to turn the back of 
kings, and to open the doors 
before him, and the gates shall 
not be shut: I will go before 
thee, and will humble the great 
ones of the earth: I will break 
in pieces the gates of brass, 
and will burst the bars of iron. 
And I will give thee hidden 
treasures, and the concealed 
riches of secret places; that 
thou mayest know that I am 
the Lord Who call thee by thy 
name, the God of Israel. For 
the sake of My servant Jacob, 
and Israel, My elect. I have 
even called thee by thy name: 
I have made a, likeness of thee, 
and thou hast not known Me, 
I am the Lord, and there is 
none else: there is no God be- 
sides Me: I girded thee, and 
thou hast not known Me: that 
they may know who are from 
the rising of the sun, and they 
who. are from the west, that 
there is none besides Me. I 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Léctio Isaiæ Prophéte. 


Ec dicit Dóminus chris- 

to meo Cyro, cujus ap- 
prehéndo déxteram, ut sub- 
jíciam ante fáciem ejus gen- 
tes, et dorsa regum vertam, 
et apériam coram eo jánuas, 
et porte non claudéntur. Ego 
ante te ibo: et gloriósos ter- 
re humiliábo: portas sreas 
cónteram, et vectes férreos 
confringam. Et dabo tibi 
thesáuros abscónditos, et ar- 
cana secretérum: ut scias 
quia ego Dóminus, qui voco 
nomen tuum, Deus Israël. 
Propter servum meum Jacob, 
et Israël eléctum meum, et 
vocávi te nómine tuo: assi- 
milávi te, et non cognovisti 
me. Ego Dóminus, et non est 
ámplius: extra me non est 
Deus: accinxi te, et non cog- 
novisti me: ut sciant hi, qui 
ab ortu solis, et qui ab occi- 
dénte, quéniam absque me 
non est. Ego Déminus, et non 
est alter, formans lucem, et 
creans ténebras, fáciens pa- 
cem, et creans malum: ego 
Dóminus fáciens ómnia hec. 
Roráte cxli désuper, et nubes 


0 


SATURDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 


pluant justum: aperiátur ter- 
ra, et gérminet Salvatórem: 
et justitia orlátur simul: ego 
Dóminus creávi eum. 


128 


am the Lord, and there is none 
else; I form the light, and cre- 
ate darkness; I make peace, 
and create evil: I the Lord that 
do ali these things. Drop down 


dew, ye Beavens, from above, and let the clouds rain the just: 
let the earth be opened, and bud forth a Saviour: and let 
justice spring up together: I the Lord have created Him. 


Gradual. Ps.79,3,2,3 


Excita, Dómine, potentiam 
tuam, et veni, ut salvos fácias 
nos. JV. Qui regis Israël, in- 
ténde: qui dedücis, velut ov- 
em, Joseph: qui sedes super 
Chérubim, appáre coram 
Ephraim, Bénjamin, et Ma- 
násse. 


Stir up Thy might, O Lord, 
and come to save us. Y. Give 
ear, O Thou that rulest Israel: 
Thou that leadest Joseph like 
a sheep: Thou that sittest upon 
the cherubim: appear before 
Ephraim, Benjamin, and Ma- 
nasses. 


Orémus. .Let us pray. 

Flectámus génua. Let us kneel. 

FY. Leváte. Hy. Arise. 
Prayer 


RECES pópuli tui, quesu- 

mus, Dómine, cleménter 
exáudi: ut, qui juste pro pec- 
cátis nostris affiigimur, pietá- 
tis tue visitatióne consolé- 
mur: Qui vivis. 


F THY clemency, harken, 

we beseech Thee, O Lord, 

to the prayers of Thy people, 

that we, who are justly afflicted 

for our sins, may be consoled 

by the visitation of Thy loving- 
kindness. Who livest. 


Lesson. Dan. 3, 47-51 


Léctio Daniélis Prophétz. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Angelus 

Dómini descéndit cum 
Azaria, et séciis ejus in for- 
nácem: et eXcüssit flummam 
ignis de fornáce, et fecit mé- 
dium fornácis quasi ventum 
roris flantem. Flamma autem 
effundebátur super fornácem 
cübitis quadraginta novem: 
et erüpit, et incéndit quos ré- 
perit juxta  fornácem de 
Chaldels minístros regis, qui 


Lesson from Daniel the 
Prophet. 
N THosE days, the angel of 
the Lord went down with 
Azarias and. his companions 
into the furnace: and he drove 
the flame of the fire out of the 
furnace, and made the midst of 
the furnace like the blowing of 
a wind bringing dew. (And the 
flame mounted up above the 
furnace nine and forty cubits: 
and it broke forth, and burnt 
such of the Chaldeans as it 


http://ccwatershed.org 


126 


found near the furnace, the 
king’s servants, who heated it.) 
And the fire touched them not 
at all nor troubled them, nor 
did them any harm. Then 
these three, as with one mouth, 
praised and glorified, and 
blessed God in the furnace, 
saying: 


SATURDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 


eam incendébant. Et non té- 
tigit eos omnino ignis, neque 
contristavit, nec quidquam 
moléstie íntulit. Tunc hi tres 
quasi ex uno ore laudábant, 
et glorificábant, et benedicé- 
bant Deum in fornáce, di- 
céntes: 


Deo gratias is not answered, but the priest and choir con- 


tinue, 


Canticle. Dan. 3, 52-56 


Blessed art Thou, O Lord, 
the God of our fathers: and 
worthy to be praised and glori- 
fied for ever. 

And blessed is the holy name 
of Thy glory: and worthy to 
be praised and glorified for 
ever. 

Blessed art Thou in the holy 
temple of Thy glory: and 
worthy to be praised and glori- 
fied for ever. 

Blessed art Thou on the holy 
throne of Thy kingdom: and 
worthy to be praised and glori- 
fied for ever. 

Blessed art Thou on the 
scepter of Thy. divinity: and 
worthy to be praised and glori- 
fied for ever. 

Blessed art Thou that sittest 
upon the cherubim, beholding 
the depths: and worthy to be 
praised and glorified for ever. 

Blessed art Thou Who walk- 
est on the wings of the wind, 
and on the waves of the sea: 
and worthy to be praised and 
glorified for ever. 

Let all Thy angels and saints 
bless Thee. And praise Thee 
and glorify Thee for ever. 

Let the heavens, the earth, 
the sea, and all things that are 
in them, bless Thee. And praise 
Thee and glorify Thee for ever. 


Benedictus es, Dómine 
Deus patrum nostrórum. Et 
laudábilis, et gloriósus in sæ- 
cula. 

Et benedíctum nomen gló- 
rie tue, quod est sanctum. 
Et laudábile et gloriósum in 
secula, 

Benedictus es in templo 
sancto glórie tue. Et laudá- 
bilis, et gloriósus in secula. 


Benedictus es super thro- 
num sanctum regni tui, Et 
laudábilis, et gloriósus in 
secula. 

Benedíctus es super scept- 
rum divinitátis tue. Et laud- 
abilis, et gloridsus in secula. 


Benedictus es, qui sedes 
super Chérubim, intuens 
abyssos, Et laudabilis, et glo- 
riósus in secula. 

Benedictus es, qui ámbulas 
super pennas ventórum, et 
super undas maris. Et lau- 
Gábilis, et gloriósus in secula; 


Benedícant te omnes An- 
geli, et Sancti tui. Et laudent 
te, et gloríficent in secula. 

Benedicant te cxli, terra, 
mare, et ómnia que in eis 
sunt. Et laudent te, et glorí- 
ficent in secula, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 


Glória Patri et Fílio, et 
Spiritui Sancto. Et laudábili, 
et glorióso in ssecula. 


Sicut erat in princípio, et 
nunc, et semper et in secula 
seculédrum. Amen. Et laudá- 
bili, et glorióso in ssecula. 


Benedíctus es, Dómine 
Deus patrum nostrórum. Et 
Jaudábilis, et gloriósus in sæ- 
cula. 


127 


Glory be to the Father, and 
to the Son, and to the Holy 
Ghost: Who is worthy to be 


praised and glorified for ever. 


As it was in the beginning, 
is now, and ever shall be, world 
without end, Amen: Who is 
worthy to be praised and glori- 
fied for ever. 

Blessed art Thou, O Lord, 
the God of our fathers. And 
worthy to be praised and glori- 
fied for ever. 


Here is said Dominus vobiscum. 


Prayer 


EUs qui tribus püeris 

mitigásti flammas ig- 
nium: .concéde propítius; ut 
nos fámulos tuos non exürat 
flamma vitiórum. Per Dómi- 
num. 


O cop, Who didst mitigate 
the flames of fire for the 
three young men, mercifuly 
grant that the flames of vices 
may not burn us, Thy servants. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 823, third for the 
Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Epistle. 2 Thess. 2, 1-8 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Thessalonicénses. 


ATRES: Rogámus vos per 

advéntum Dómini nos- 
tri Jesu Christi, et nostre 
congregatiónis in ipsum: ut 
non cito moveámini a vestro 
sensu, neque terreámini, ne- 
que per spíritum, neque per 
sermónem, neque per epísto- 
lam tamquam per nos mis- 
sam quasi instet dies Dómini. 
Ne quis vos sedücat ullo mo- 
do: quóniam nisi vénerit 
discéssio primum, et revelá- 
tus füerit homo peccáti, tilius 
perditiónis, qui adversátur, et 
extóllitur supra omne, quod 
dicitur Deus, aut quod cóli- 
tur, ita ut in templo Dei sé- 
deat osténdens se tamquam 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Thessalonians, 


RETHREN, we beseech you, 

by the coming of our 

Lord Jesus Christ and of our 
gathering together unto Him: 
that you be not easily moved 
from your mind, nor be 
frighted, neither by spirit, nor 
by word, nor by epistle, as sent 
from us, as if the day of the 
Lord were at hand. Let no man 
deceive you by any means: for 
unless there come a revolt first, 
and the man of sin be revealed, 
the son of perdition who op- 
poseth and is lifted up above 
all that is called God or that is 
worshipped, so that he sitteth 
in the temple of God, showing 
himself as if he were God. Re- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


128 SATURDAY IN 
member you not that, when I 
was yet with you, I told you 
these things? And now you 
know what withholdeth, that 
he may be revealed in his time. 
For the mystery of iniquity al- 
ready worketh: only that he 
who now. holdeth do hold, un- 
til he be taken out of the way. 
And then that wicked one shall 
be revealed, whom the Lord 
Jesus shall kill with the spirit 
of His mouth; and shall destroy 


EMBER-WEEK 


sit Deus. Non retinétis, quod 
cum adhuc essem apud vos, 
hec dicébam vobis? Et nunc 
quid detíneat scitis, ut revelé- 
tur in suo témpore. Nam my- 
stérium jam operátur iniqui- 
tátis; tantum ut qui tenet 
nunc, téneat, donec de médio 
fiat. Et tune revelábitur ille 
jníquus, quem Dóminus Jesus 
interfíciet spíritu oris sui, et 
déstruet illustratióne advén- 
tus sui. 


with the brightness of His com- . 


ing. 


Tract. Ps. 79, 2, 3 


Give ear, O Thou that rulest 
Israel: Thou that  leadest 
Joseph like a sheep. y. Thou 
that sittest upon the cherubim, 
appear before Ephraim, Ben- 

‘Jamin, and Manasses. Jy. Stir 
up Thy might, O Lord, and 
come to save us. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 

i 


Qui regis Israél, inténde: 
qui dedücis, velut ovem, Jo- 
seph. Y. Qui sedes super 
Chérubim, appáre coram 
Ephraim, Bénjamin, et Man- 
ásse. V. Excita, Dómine, po- 
tentiam tuam, et veni: ut 
salvos fácias nos. 


Gospel. Luke 3, 1-6 


PH Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 

N THE fifteenth year of the 
T reign of Tiberius Cesar, 
Pontius Pilate being governor 
of Judea, and Herod being te- 
trarch of Galilee, and Philip his 
brother tetrarch of Iturea and 
the country of Trachonitis, 
and Lysanias tetrarch of Abi- 
lina, under the high priests 
Annas and Caiphas; the word 
of the Lord came to John the 
son of Zachary, in the desert. 
And ne came into all the coun- 
try about the Jordan, preach- 
ing the baptism of penance for 
the remission of sins; as it is 
written in the book of the say- 
ings of Isaias the prophet: A 


®© Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secándum Lucam. 
NNO quintodécimo im- 
périi Tibérii Cesaris, 
procuránte Póntio Piláto Ju- 
deam, tetrárcha autem Gali- 
lee Heróde, Philippo autem 
fratre ejus tetrarcha Ituree, 
et Trachonítidis regiónis, et 
Lysánia Abiline tetrárcha, 
Sub principibus sacerdótum 
Anna et Cáipha: factum est 
verbum Dómini super Joán- 
nem, Zacharie fílium, in de- 
sérto. Et venit in omnem re- 
giónem Jordánis, predicans 
baptismum peniténtiz in re- 
missiónem peccatórum, sicut 
scriptum est in libro sermó- 
num isaíe prophéte: Vox 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY IN EMBER-WEEK 


clamántis in desérto: Paráte 
viam Dómini: rectas fácite 
sémitas ejus: omnis vallis 
implébitur: et omnis mons, 
et collis npumiliábitur: et 
erunt prava in dirécta, et 
áspera in vias planas: et vi- 
débit omnis caro salutáre Dei. 


The Creed is omitted. 


Offertory. 

Exsulta satis, filia Sion, 

predica, filia Jerusalem: ecce 

rex tua venit tibi sanctus, et 
salvátor. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


129 


voice of one crying in the 
wilderness: Prepare ye the way 
of the Lord, make straight His 
paths. Every valley shall be 
filled; and every mountain and 
hil shall be brought low: the 
crooked shall be made straight, 
and the rough ways plain, and 
all flesh shall see the salva- 
tion of God. 


Zach. 9, 9 

Rejoice greatly, O daughtex 
of Sion; shout for joy, O 
daughter of Jerusalem: behold 
thy King comes to thee, the 
holy and the Saviour. 


Secret 


AcRIFÍCIIS preséntibus, 

quesumus, Dómine, 
placátus inténde: ut et de- 
votióni nostre profíclant, et 
salúti. Per Dóminum. 


ook with favor, we be. 

seech Thee, O Lord, upon 
the sacrifices here before Thee, 
that they may profit both 
our devotion and our salvation. 
‘Through our Lord. 


Second Secret of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third for the 
Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Exsultavit ut gigas ad cur- 
réndam viam: a summo celo 
egréssio ejus, et occürsus ejus 
usque ad summum ejus. 


Ps. 18, 6,7 

He hath rejoiced as a giant 
to run the way; His going out 
is from the end of heaven, and 
His circuit even to the end 
thereof. 


Postcommunion 


VÆSUMUS Dómine Deus 
Q noster: ut sacrosáncta 
mystéria, que pro repara- 
tiónis nostre munímine con- 
tulísti; et præsens nobis rem- 
édium esse fácias, et futürum. 
Per Dominum. 


AKE, we beseech Thee, O 

Lord, our God, the most 

holy mysteries, which Thou 

hast given as the bulwark of 

our atonement, to be a remedy 

poth here and hereafter. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third 
for the Church or for the Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


130 


FOURTH SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


Fourth Sunday of Adbent (Purple) 


STATION AT THE CHURCH OF THE TWELVE HOLY APOSTLES 
Sunday of the Second Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 1s. 45,8 


ROP down dew, ye heavens, 
from above, and let the 
clouds rain the just; let the 
earth be opened and bud forth 
a Saviour. Ps. 18, 2. The 
heavens show forth the glory 
of God, and the firmament de- 
clareth the work of His Hands. 
Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


orATE, Cmli, désuper, et 

nubes pluant justum: 
aperiatur terra, et gérminet 
Salvatórem. Ps. 18,2. Celi 
enárrant glóriam Dei: et 
ópera mánuum ejus annün- 
tiat firmaméntum. VY. Glória 
Patri. 


The Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


ESTIR, O Lord, Thy might, 
we beseech thee, and 
come; and with great power 
come to our aid, that, by the 
help of Thy grace, that which 
is hindered by our sins may be 
hastened by Thy merciful for- 
giveness. Who livest. 


XciTA, quesumus, Dó- 
g mine, poténtiam tuam, 
et veni: et magna nobis vir- 
túte succürre; ut per auxíli- 
um grátie tue, quod nostra 
peccáta prepédiunt, indul- 
géntia tue  propitiatiónis 
accéleret: Qui vivis. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third for the 
Church or for ihe Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 4, 1-5 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, let à man so ac- 
B count of us as of the 
ministers of Christ, and the 
dispensers of the mysteries of 
God. Here now it is required 
among the dispensers, that a 
man be found faithful. But 
to me it is a very small thing 
to be judged by you, or by 
man’s day: but neither do I 
judge my own self. For I am 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Sic nos existi- 

met homo ut minístros 
Christi, et dispensatóres mys- 
ieriórum Dei. Hic jam que- 
ritur inter dispensatóres, ut 
fidélis quis inveniátur. Mihi 
autem pro mínimo est, ut a 
vobis jüdicer, aut ab humáno 
die: sed neque meípsum jú- 
dico. Nihil enim mihi cón- 
scius sum: Sed non in hoc 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FOURTH SUNDAY OF ADVENT 131 
not conscious to myself of any 
thing, yet am I not hereby 
justified: but He that judgetn 
me is the Lord. Therefore 
judge not before the time, un- 
til the Lord come; Who both 
wil bring to light the hidden 
things of darkness, and will 
make manifest the counsels of 
the hearts: and then sball every 
man have praise from God. 


During the week, should the Mass of the Sunday be resumed, 
the alleluias and verse following are omitted, and only the 


justifüicátus sum: qui autem 
judicat me, Dóminus est. 
Itaque nolite ante tempus 
judicáre, quoadüsque véniat 
Dóminus: qui et illuminábit 
&bscóndita  tenebrárum, et 
manifestábit consília córdi- 
um: et tunc laus erit unicuí- 
que a Deo, 


Gradual is said. 
Gradual. 


Prope est Dóminus ómni- 
bus invocántibus eum: ómni- 
bus qui ínvocant in veritáte. 
y. Laudem Dómini loquétur 
os meum: et benedicat omnis 
caro nomen sanctum ejus. 

Allelija, allelüja. y. Veni, 
Dómine, et noli tardáre: re- 
laxa  facínora plebis tuse 
Israël.  Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ps. 144, 18, 21 


The Lord is nigh unto all 
ihem that call upon Him, to all 
that call upon Him in truth. 
y. My mouth shall speak the 
praise of the Lord; and let all 
flesh bless His holy name. 


Alleulia, alleluia. VY. Come, 
O Lord, and do not delay; for- 
give the sins of Thy people 
Israel, Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 3, 1.6 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
NNO quintodécimo im- 
pérli Tibérii Cesaris, 
procuránte Póntio Pilato 
Judeam, tetrarcha autem 
Galilee Heróde, Philippo au- 
tem fratre ejus tetrarcha Itu- 
ree, et Trachonitidis regió- 
nis, et Lysánia Abiline te- 
trarcha, sub princípibus sa- 
cerdótum Anna et-Cáipha: 
factum est yerbum Dómini 
super Joánnem, Zacharie fíl- 
ium, in desérto. Et venit in 
omnem reglónem Jordanis, 
predicans baptísmum peni- 


H6 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


N THE fifleenth year of the 

reign of Tiberius Cesar, 
Pontius Pilate being governor 
of Judea, and Herod being tetr- 
arch of Galilee, and Philip his 
brother tetrarch of Iturea and 
the country of Trachonitis, 
and Lysanias tetrarch of Abi- 
lina, under tbe high priests 
Annas and Caiphas; the word 
of the Lord came to John the 
son of Zachary, in the desert. 
And he came into all the coun- 
try about the Jordan, preach- 
ing the baptism of penance for 


http://ccwatershed.org 


132 


the remission of sins; as it is 
written in the book of the say- 
ings of Isaias the prophet: A 
voice of one crying in the 
wilderness: Prepare ye the way 
of the Lord, make straight His 
paths. Every valley shall be 
filled; and every mountain and 
hil shall be brought low: the 
crooked shall be made straight, 
and the rough ways plain: and 
all flesh shall see the salvation 
of God. 


Creed, page 765. 


FOURTH SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


téntie in remissiónem pecca- 
tórum, sicut scriptum est in 
libro sermónum Isafe proph- 
ét»: Vox clamántis in desér- 
to: Paráte viam Dómini: 
rectas facite sémitas ejus: 
omnis vallis implébitur: et 
omnis mons, et collis humili- 
abitur: et erunt prava in di- 
récta, et áspera in vias plan- 
&s: et vidébit omnis caro 
salutare Det. 


Offertory. Luke 1, 28 


Hail, Mary, full of grace; the 
Lord is with thee: blessed art 
thou àmong women, and 


Ave María, grátia plena: 
Dóminus tecum: benedicta 
tu in muliéribus, et benedíc- 


blessed is the fruit of thy tus fructus ventris tui. 
womb. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


oog with favor, we be- 
Ti seech Thee, O Lord upon 
these offerings here before 
Thee, that they may profit 
both for our devotion and for 
our salvation. Through our 
Lord. 


Second Secret of our Blessed 


ACRIFÍCIIS preséntibus, 
quaesumus, Dómine, pla- 
cátus inténde: ut et devotióni 
nostre profíciant, et salüti. 
Per Dóminum. 


Lady, page 823; third for the 


Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


^. Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. 


Behold a virgin shall con- 
ceive, and bring forth a son; 
and His name shall be called 
Emmanuel. 


Is. 7, 14 


Ecce Virgo concipiet, et 
pariet filium; et vocábitur no- 
men ejus Emmánuel. 


Postcommunion 


AviNG received Thy gifts, 

O Lord, we pray that the 

saving effect of the mystery 

may increase as we frequent it. 
Through our Lord. 


UMPTIS munéribus, quze- 

sumus, Dómine: ut cum 
frequentatióne mystérii, cres- 
cat nostre salütis efféctus. 
Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


CHRISTMAS EVE 


183 


. Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, page 823; third 
for the Church or for the Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


‘Christmas Ebe (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. MARY MAJOR 


Privileged Vigil of the First Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 

ODIE Sciétis, quia véniet 

Dóminus, et salvabit 
nos: et mane vidébitis glóri- 
am ejus. Ps. 23, 1. Dómini 
est terra, et plenitüdo ejus: 
Orbis terrárum, et umivérsi, 
qui hábitant in eo. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui nos redemp- 

tiónis nostre ánnua ex- 
spectatione letificas: praesta; 
ut Unigénitum tuum, quem 
Redemptórem læti suscípi- 
mus, veniéntem quoque jüdi- 
cem secüri videAmus, Dómin- 
um nostrum Jesum Christum 
Filium tuum, Qui tecum. 


Ex. 16, 6, 7 


ms day you shall know 
ihat the Lord wil come, 
and save us: and in the morn- 
ing you shallsee His glory. Ps. 
23, 1. The earth is the Lord's 
and the fulness thereof, the 
world, and aM they that dwell 
therein. Y. Glory. 


'The Gloria is omitted. 


cop, Who dost gladden us 
year by year with the ex- 
pectation of our redemption, 
grant that we, who now with 
joy receive Thine only begotten 
Son as our Redeemer, may be- 
hold Him also without fear, 
when He cometh as our judge, 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Who 
with ihee. 


If ihe vigil falls on a Sunday, a commemoration is made 
Mere from the preceding Mass, otherwise one Prayer only 1s 
said. 


Epistle. Rom. 1, 1-6 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Romanos. 


AULUS, Servus Jesu 

L- Christi, vocátus Apósto- 
lus, segregátus in Evangéli- 
um Dei, quod ante promiserat 
per prophétas suos in Scrip- 
türis sanctis de Fílio suo, qui 
factus est ei ex sémine David 
secindum carnem: qui præ- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 


AUL, a servant of Jesus 

Christ, called to be an 
apostle, separated unto the 
gospel of God, Which He had 
promised before by His proph- 
ets in the Holy Scriptures, con- 
cerning His Son, Who was 
made to Him of the seed of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


134 


David according to the flesh, 
Who was predestinated the 
Son of God in power, according 
to the spirit of sanctification, 
by the resurrection of our Lord 
Jesus Christ from the dead: by 
Whom we have received grace 
and apostieship for obedience 
to the faith, in all nations, for 
His name, among whom are 
you also the called of Jesus 
Christ. 


CHRISTMAS EVE 


destinátus est Fílius Del in 
virtite secundum  spíritum 
sanctificationis ex resurrec- 
tióne mortuórum Jesu Christi 
Dómini nostri: per quem ac- 
cépimus grátiam et apostolá- 
tum ad ohediéndum fidei in 
ómnibus géntibus pro nómine 
ejus, in quibus estis et vos vo- 
cáti Jesu Christi Dómini 
nostri. 


Gradual. Ex.16,6,7 


This day you shall know that 
ihe Lord will come, and save 
us; and in the morning you 
Shall see His glory. Y. Ps. 79, 2, 
3. Give ear, O Thou that rulest 
Israel: Thou that  leadest 
Joseph like a sheep; Thou that 
sittest upon the cherubim, ap- 
pear before Ephraim, Ben- 
jamin, and Manasses. 


Hódie sciétis, quia véniet 
Dóminus, et salvábit nos: et 
mane vidébitis glóriam ejus. 
X. Ps. 79, 2, 3. Qui regis 
Israël, inténde: qui dedücis, 
velut ovem, Joseph: qui sedes 
super Chérubim, appáre co- 
ram Ephraim, Benjamin, et 
Manasse. 


If this pigi falls on a Sunday, the following alleluia and y. 


are added. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Tomor- 
row shall the iniquity of earth 
be wiped out; and the Saviour 
of the world shall reign over 
us. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Crás- 
tina die delébitur iníquitas 
terre: et regnábit super nos 
salvátor mundi. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Matt. 1,18-21 


f Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Matt- 
hew. 

HEN Mary, the mother of 

Jesus, was espoused to 
Joseph, before they came to- 
gether, she was found with 
child, of the Holy Ghost. 
Whereupon Joseph her hus- 
band, being a just man, and 
not willing publicly to expose 
her, was minded to put her 
away privately. But while he 


H« Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii Secündum Matthkum. 


UM esset desponsáta 

mater Jesu María Jo- 
Seph, ántequam convenírent, 
invénta est in ütero habens 
de Spiritu Sancto. Joseph 
autem vir ejus, cum esset ju- 
Stus, et nollet eam tradücere, 
vóluit occülte dimíttere éam. 
Hec autem eo cogitánte, ecce 
Angelus Dómini appáruit in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


x 


y 


x 


CHRISTMAS EVE 


somnis ei, dicens: Joseph, fili 
David, noli timére accípere 
Maríam cónjugem tuam; 
quod enim in ea natum est, 
de Spíritu Sancto est. Páriet 
autem fílium: et vocábis no- 
men ejus Jesum: ipse enim 
salvum fáciet pópulum suum 
& peccátis eórum. 


135 


thought on these things, be~- 
hold the angel of the Lord ap- 
peared to him in his sleep, say- 
ing: Joseph, son of David, fear 


not to take unto thee Mary thy 


wife, for that Which is con- 
ceived in her is of the Holy 
Ghost. And she shall bring 


forth a son; and thou shalt call 


His name Jesus. For He shall 
save His people from their sins. 


Creed, is omitted (unless the vigil falls on a Sunday; then the 


Creed is said, page 765). 


Offertory. Ps.23,7 


Tollite portas, príncipes, 
vestras, et elevámini porte 
æternáles: et introíbit Rex 
glórim. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Lift up your gates, O ye 
princes, and be ye lifted up, O 
eternal gates: and the King of 
glory shall enter in. 


Secret 


A nobis, quesumus, om- 

nípotens Deus: ut, sicut 
adoránda Fili tui natalitia 
prevenimus, sic ejus minera 
capiamus sempitérna gau- 
déntes: Qui tecum. 


RANT US, we beseech Thee, 

O almighty God, that, as 

in anticipation we come to 

celebrate the adorable birthday 

of Thy Son, so we may joyously 

lay hold upon His everlasting 
rewards. Who with Thee. 


If the vigil falls.on a Sunday, a commemoration of the pre- 


ceding Mass is made. 


Preface for Weékdays, page 775. 
Communion. Is. 40, 5 


Revelábitur glória Dómini: 
et vidébit omnis caro salutáre 
Dei nostri. 


The glory of the Lord shall 
be revealed; and all flesh shall 
see the salvation of our God. 


Postcommunion 


A NOBIS, quesumus, Dó- 

mine: unigéniti Filii 
tui recensita nativitáte respi- 
ráre; cujus celésti mystério 
pascimur et potámur. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, that we may be- 
gin a new life with this festival 
of the Nativity of Thine only- 
begotten Son, Who, in these 
mysteries, feeds us with the 
meat and drink of that life 


which is eternal. Through the same. 
If the. vigil falls on à Sunday, a commemoration of the pre- 


ceding Mass is made. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


\ 


http://ccwatershed.org 


136 CHRISTMAS DAY 


Copyright, 1936, by Benziger Brothers 


FOR THIS DAY IS BORN TO YOU A SAVIOUR, WHO 1s CHRIST THE 
LORD, IN THE CITY OF DAVID. AND THIS SHALL BE A SIGN UNTO 
YOU: YOU SHALL FIND THE INFANT WRAPPED IN SWADDLING CLOTHES, 
AND LAID IN A MANGER. (Luke 2, 11, 12.) 


selz- 


Y 


( 


CHRISTMAS DAY 


137 


Christmas Dap 
The Nativity o£ Our Lord anb Saviour Yesus Christ 


Double of the First Class with a Privileged Octave 
of the Third Order 


The First or Midnight Mass (White) 


STATION at ST. Mary AT THE CRIB 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 2,7 


ÓMINUS dixit ad me: 

J Filius meus es tu, ego 

hódie génui te. Ps. 2, 1. Quare 

fremuérunt gentes: et pópuli 

meditáti sunt inánia? y. 
Glória patri. 


HE Lord hath said to Me: 

Thou art My Son, this 

day have I begotten Thee. Ps. 

2, 1. Why have the Gentiles 

raged, and the people devised 
vain things? Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui hanc sacratissi- 
mam noctem veri lüm- 
inis fecísti illustratióne claré- 
scere: da, quesumus; ut, cu- 
jus lucis mystéria in terra 
cognóvimus, ejus quoque gáu- 
diis in celo perfruámur: Qui 
tecum. 


Gop, Who hast bright~ 

ened this most holy night 
with the shining of the true 
light, grant, we beseech Thee, 
that we may enjoy in heaven 
the delights of Him whose 
mystical light we have known 
on earth. Whe with Thee. 


Epistle. Titus 2, 11-15 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Titum. 


‘arissime: Appáruit grá- 

tia Dei Salvatoris nostri 
ómnibus homínibus, erüdiens 
nos, ut abnegántes, impieta- 
tem, et sxculéria desidéria, 
sóbrie, et juste, et pie vivámos 
in hoc seculo, exspectántes 
beátam spem, et advéntum 
glórie magni Dei, et Salvató- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 


blessed Paul the Apostle to 


Titus. 
EARLY beloved, the grace 
of God our Saviour hath 
appeared to all men, instruct- 
ing us, that, denying ungodli- 
ness and worldly desires, we 


should live soberly, and justly, 


and godly in this world, look- 
ing for the blessed hope and 
coming of the glory of the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


138 


great God and our Saviour 
Jesus Christ, Who gave Him- 
self for us, that He might re- 
deem us from all iniquity, and 
might cleanse to Himself & 
people acceptable, & pursuer of 
good works. These things 
speak, and exhort: in Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 


CHRISTMAS DAY 


ris nostri Jesu Christi: qui 
dedit semetípsum pro nobis: 
ut nos redímeret ab omni ini- 
quitáte, et mundáret sibi 
pópulum acceptábilem, secta- 
tórem bonórum óperum. Hee 
lóquere, et exhortére: in 
Christo Jesu Dómino nostro. 


Gradual. Ps. 109, 3, 1 


With 'Thee is the principality 
in the day of Thy strength; in 
the brightness of the saints, 
from the womb before the 
day-star I begot Thee. J.'The 
Lord said to my Lord: Sit 
Thou at My right hand, until 
I make Thy enemies Thy foot- 
stool. 

Alleluia, alleluia. YW. Ps. 2, 
7. The Lord hath said to Me: 
Thou art My Son, this day 
have I begotten Thee. Alleluia, 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Tecum princípium in die 
virtütis tue: in solendóribus 
sanctórum, ex Utero ante lu- 
cíferum génui te. Jy. Dixit 
Dóminus Dómino meo: Sede 
a dextris meis: donec ponam 
inimícos tuos scabéllum ped- 
um tuórum. 


Allelija, allelüja. YW. Ps. 2, 
7. Dóminus dixit ad me: 
Fílius meus es tu, ego hódie 
génui te. Allelája. 


Gospel. Luke 2, 1-14 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, there 

went out a decree from 

Cesar Augustus, that the whole 
world should be enrolled. This 
enrolling was first made by 
Cyrinus, the governor of Syria. 
And all went to be enrolled, 
every one into his own city. 
And Joseph also went up from 
Galilee out of the city of Naz- 
areth, into Judea to the city of 
David, which is called Bethle- 
hem, because he was of the 
house and family of David, to 
be enrolled with Mary his es- 
poused wife, who was with 
child. And it came to pass, 


HK Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
ILLO tempore: Exiit 
JY tetas a Cesare Au- 
gusto, ut describerétur uni- 
vérsus orbis. Hec descriptio 
prima facta est a preside 
Syrie Cyríno: et ibant omnes 
ut profiteréntur sínguli in 
suam civitátem. Ascéndit 
autem et Joseph a Galilæa de 
civitáte Nazareth, in Judeam 
in civitátem David, que vocá- 
tur Béthlehem: eo quod esset 
de domo, et família David, ut 
profiterétur eum María de- 
sponsáta sibi uxóre præ- 
gnánte. Factum est autem, 
cum essent ibi, impléti sunt 


http://ccwatershed.org 


CHRISTMAS DAY 


dies ut páreret. Et péperit 
Filium suum primogénitum, 
et pannis eum invólvit, et 
reclinavit eum in presépio: 
quia non erat eis locus in 
diversório. Et pastóres erant 
in regióne eádem vigilántes, 
et custodiéntes vigílias noctis 
Super gregem suum. Et ecce 
Angelus Dómini stetit juxta 
illos, et cláritas Dei circum- 
fülsit illos, et timuérunt 
timóre magno. Et dixit illis 
Angelus: Nolíte timére: ecce 
enim evangelízo vobis gáu- 
dium magnum, quod erit 
omni pópulo: quia natus est 
vobis hódie Salvátor, qui est 
Christus Dóminus, in civitáte 
David. Et hoc vobis signum: 
Inveniétis infántem pannis 
involitum, et pdsitum in 
presépio. Et sübito facta est 
cum Angelo multitüdo mili- 
tie celéstis laudántium De- 
um, et dicéntium: Glória in 
altíssimis Deo, et in terra pax 
homínibus bone voluntátis. 


139 


that when they were there, her 
days were accomplished, that 
she should be delivered. And 
she brought forth her first- 
born Son, and wrapped Him 
up in swaddling clothes, and 
laid Him in a manger, because 
there was no room for them in 
the inn. And there were in 
the same country shepherds 
watching, and keeping the 
night watches over their flock. 
And behold an angel of the 
Lord stood by them, and the 
brightness of God shone round 
about them, and they feared 
with a great fear. And the 
angel said to them: Fear not; 
for behold I bring you good 
tidings of great joy, that shall 
be to all the people; for this 
day is born to you a Saviour, 
Who is Christ the Lord, in the 
city of David. And this shall 
be a sign unto you: You shail 
find the infant wrapped in 
swaddling clothes, and laid in 
a manger. And suddenly there 
was with the angel a multitude 


of the heavenly army, praising God, and saying: Glory to God 
in the highest; and on earth peace to men of good will. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory, Ps. 95, 11, 13 


Leténtur celi, et exsultet 
terra ante fáciem Dómini: 
quóniam venit. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Let the heavens rejoice, and 
let the earth be glad before the 
face of the Lord, because He 
cometh. 


Secret 


ccÉPTA tibi sit, Dó- 
mine, quesumus, ho- 

érnæ festivitatis oblátio: ut, 
tua grátia largiénte, per hec 
Sacrosáncta commércia, in 


illius inveniámur forma, in this sacred intercourse, 


AY the oblation of this 
day's festivity, we pray 

'Thee, O Lord, find acceptance 
with Thee; that, by the bounty 
of Thy grace, we may, through 
be 


http://ccwatershed.org 


140 


found made like unto Him in 
Whom our substance is united 
with Thee. Who with Thee. 


CHRISTMAS II MASS 


quo tecum est nostra sub- 
stantia. Qui tecum. 


Preface No. 1, Canon and Special Communicantes, page 798. 


Communion. Ps. 109, 3 


In the brightness of the 
saints, from the womb before 
the day-star I begot Thee. 


In splendóribus sanctérum, 
ex útero ante luciferum génul 
te. 


Postcommunion 


RANT, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord our God, that we, 

who rejoice to celebrate with 

these mysteries the nativity of 

our Lord Jesus Christ, may de- 

serve by worthy living to attain 

His companionship. Who with 
"hee. | 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


A NOBIS, quesumus, 
Dómine, Deus noster: 
ut, qui Nativitátem Dómini 
nostri Jesu Christi mystériis 
nos írequentáre gaudémus; 
dignis conversatiónibus ad 
ejus mereámur perveníre 
consórtium; Qui tecum. 


Whe Second ot Day-Break Mass 


STATION AT ST. ANASTASIA 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Is. 9, 2,6 


LIGHT shall shine upon 

us this day: for Our 
Lord is born to us; and He 
shall be called wonderful, God, 
ihe prince of peace, the Father 
of the world to come; of 
Whose reign there shall be no 
end. Ps.92,1. The Lord hath 
reigned, He is clothed with 
beauty: the Lord is clothed 
with strength, and hath girded 
Himself. Y. Glory. 


vx fulgébit hódie super 

nos: quia matus est 
nobis Dóminus: et vocábitur 
Admirábilis, Deus, Princeps 
pacis, Pater futüri seculi: cu- 
jus regni non erit finis. Ps. 
92, 1. Dóminus regnávit, de- 
cérem indütus est: indütus 
est Dóminus fortitüdinem, et 
precínxit se, Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


RANT, we beseech 'Thee, O 
almighty God, that we 


A NOBIS, quesumus, om- 
nípotens Deus: ut, qui 


who are filled with the new nova incarnáti Verbi tui luce 
light of Thine Incarnate Word, perfündimur; hoc in nostro 
may show forth in our deeds respléndeat ópere, quod per 


http://ccwatershed.org 


CES 


' 


CHRISTMAS II MASS 


fidem fulget in mente. Per 
eümdem. 


141 


that which by faith shineth 1n 
our minds. Through the same. 


Commemoration of St. Anastasia. 


Prayer 


A, QUZSUMUS, omnipo- 
Divas Deus: ut qui 
eate  Anastásie  Mártyris 
tue solémnia cólimus; ejus 


apud te patrocínia sentiámus. 
Per Dóminum nostrum. 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that we 
who honor the solemnity of 
Thy blessed martyr Anastasia 
may experience the effect of 
her intercession with 'Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


Epistle. Titus 3, 4-7 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Titum. 


ARÍSSIME: Appáruit be- 

nígnitas, et humánitas 
Salvatóris nostri Dei: non ex 
opéribus justitie, que féci- 
mus nos, sed secündum suam 
misericórdiam salvos nos 
fecit per lavacrum regenera- 
tiónis, et renovatiónis Spiri- 
tus Sancti, quem efrüdit in 
nos abünde per Jesum Chris- 
tum Salvatórem nostrum: ut 
justificáti grátia ipsíus, heré- 
des simus secündum spem 
vite xtérne, in Christo Jesu 
Dómino nostro. 


Gradual. Ps. 


Benedíctus qui venit in 
nómine Dómini: Deus Dó- 
minus, et illúxit nobis. Y. A 
Dómino factum est istud; et 
est mirábile in óculis nostris. 


Allelája, allelüja. V. Ps. 
92, 1. Dóminus regnávit, de- 
córem índuit: induit Dómi- 
nus fortitüdinem, et prze- 
cínxit se virtüte. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
Titus. 

EARLY beloved, the good- 

ness and kindness of 
God our Saviour hath ap- 
peared: not by the works of 
justice, which we have done, 
but according to His mercy He 
Saved us by the laver of regen- 
eration, and renovation of the 
Holy Ghost, Whom He hath 
poured forth upon us abun- 
dantly through Jesus Christ 
our Saviour: that, being justi- 
fied by His grace, we may be 
heirs according to hope of life 
everlasting: in Christ Jesus 
our Lord. 


117, 26, 27, 23 

Blessed is He that cometh 
in the name of the Lord; the 
Lord is God, and He hath 
shone upon us. V. This is the 
Lord’s doing; and it is wonder- 
ful in our eyes. . 

Alleluia, alleluia. y. Ps. 92, 
1. The Lord hath reigned, He 
is clothed with beauty; the 
Lord is clothed with strength, 
and hath girded Himself with 
power, Alleluia, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


142 


CHRISTMAS II MASS 


Gospel. Luke 2, 15-20 


© Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, the shep- 
herds said one to an- 

other, Let us go over to Bethle- 
hem, and let us see this word 
that is come to pass, which the 
Lord hath showed to us. And 
they came with haste; and 
they found Mary and Joseph, 
and the infant lying in a 
manger. And seeing, they un- 
derstood of the word that had 
been spoken to them concern- 
ing this child. And all that 
heard wondered: and at those 
things that were told them by 
the shepherds. But Mary kept 
all these words, pondering 
them in her heart. And the 
shepherds returned, glorifying 
and praising God, for all the 
things they had heard and 
seen, as it was told unto them. 


Creed, page 765. - 


"M Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Pastóres 

loquebántur ad invicem: 
Transeémus usque Béthle- 
hem, et videámus hoc ver- 
bum, quod factum est, quod 
Dóminus osténdit nobis. Et 
venérunt festinántes: et in- 
venérunt Maríam, et Joseph, 
et infántem pósitum in præ- 
sépio. Vidéntes autem cog- 
novérunt de verbo, quod dic- 
tum erat illis de püero hoc. 
Et omnes, qui audiérunt, mi- 
ráti sunt: et de his, que dicta 
erunt a pastóribus ad ipsos. 
Maria autem  conservábat 
ómnia verba hec, cónferens 
in corde suo. Et revérsi sunt 
pastóres glorificántes, et lau- 
déntes Deum in ómnibus, 
que. audierant, et viderant, 
sicut dictum est ad illos. 


Offertory. Ps. 92, 1, 2 


God hath established the 
world, which shall not be 
moved: Thy throne, O God, is 
prepared from of old; Thou art 
from everlasting. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Deus firmávit orbem terre, 
qui non commovébitur: pa- 
ráta sedes tua, Deus, ex tunc, 
a seculo tu es. 


Secret 


ay our gifts, we pray 

Thee, O Lord, come 
forth agreeable to the mys- 
teries of this day's nativity, 
and may they shower upon us 
peace; that as He who was be- 
gotten as man shone forth also 
as God, so also may this 


UNERA nostra, quesu- 

mus, Dómine, Nativi- 
tátis hodiérne mystériis apta 
provéniant, et pacem nobis 
semper infündant: ut, sicut 
homo génitus idem refülsit et 
Deus, sic nobis terréna sub- 
stántia cónferat quod diví- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


CHRISTMAS III MASS 148 


num est. Per eümdem. 


earthly substance bring us thar 


which is divine. Through the same. 
Commemoration of St. Anastasia. 


Secret 


CCIPE, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, münera dig- 
nanter obláta: et beátæ Ana- 
stásiæ Mártyris tuæ suffra- 
gántibus méritis, ad nostre 
salitis auxílium provenire 
concéde. Per Dóminum. 


CCEPT, we pray Thee, O 
^ AL Lord, the gifts duly of- 
ered to Thee, and, by the 
interceding merits of blessed 
Anastasia, Thy martyr, grant 
them to be profitable for the 
furtherance of our salvation- 
Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 1, Canon and Special Communicantes, page 798. 


Communion. 


Exsulta, filia Sion, lauda, 
filia Jerstisalem: ecce rex tuus 
venit sanctus, et Salvator 
mundi. 


Zach. 9, 9 


Rejoice greatly, O daughter 
of Sion, shout for joy, O 
daughter of Jerusalem; behold, 
thy King comes, holy and the’ 
Saviour of the world. 


Postcommunion 


vsus nos, Dómine, sac- 

raménti semper novitas 
natális instáuret: cujus Na- 
tivitas singuláris humánam 
répulit vetustátem. Per eüm- 
dem. 


Av the Christmas renewal 
(D of this sacrament ever 
restore us, O Lord, Whose mir- 
aculous birth did put away the 
ancient things of mankind. 
Through ihe same. 


Commemoration of St. Anastasia. 


Postcommunion 


ATIÁSTI, Dómine, famíl- 

iam tuam muneribus 
Sacris: ejus, quesumus, sem- 
per interventióne nos réfove, 
cujus solémnia celebrámus. 
Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


HoU hast filled Thy house- 
hold, O Lord, with sacred 
gifts; ever cherish us by the 
intercession of her whose feast 
we celebrate. Through our 
Lord. 


The Third Mass 


STATION AT St. Mary MAJOR 
'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


144 


Introit. 


CHILD is born to us, and 

a Son is given to us; 
Whose government is upon His 
Shoulder; and His name shall 
be called the angel of great 
counsel Ps. 97,1. Sing ye to 
the Lord a new canticle; for He 
hath done wonderful things. 
NX. Glory. 


CHRISTMAS III MASS 


Is. 9, 6 

UER natus est nobis, et 

fífllus datus est nobis: 
cujus impérium Super hume- 
rum ejus: et vocábitur nomen 
ejus magni consílii Angelus. 
Ps. 97, 1, Cantáte Dómino 
cánticum novum: quia mira- 
bilia fecit. V. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that the 
new birth, in ihe flesh, of 
Thine only-begotten Son may 
deliver us whom slavery from 
old doth keep under the yoke 
of sin, Through the same. 


ONCÉDE, quesumus, om- 

nípotens Deus: ut nos 
Unigéniti tul nova per car- 
nem Nativitas líberet; quos 
Sub peccáti jugo vetüsta sér- 
vitus tenet. Per eümdem. 


Epistle. Heb. 1, 1-12 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Hebrews. 

op, Who diversely and 
many ways spoke in times 

past to the fathers by the 
prophets, last of all, in these 
days hath spoken to us, by His 
Son, Whom He hath appointed 
heir of all things, by Whom 
also He made the world. Who 
being the brightness of His 
glory, and the figure of His 
Substance, and upholding all 
things by the word of His 
power, making purgation of 
sins, sitteth on the right hand 
of the majesty on high; being 
made so much better than the 
angels, as He hath inherited a 
more excellent name than they. 
For to which of the angels 
hath He said at any time: 
N Thou art My Son, to-day have 


Léctio Epístolæ beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Hebraéos. 


ULTIFARIAM, multisque 

modis olim Deus lo- 
quens pátribus in prophétis: 
novíssime diébus istis locütus 
est nobis in Fílio, quem con- 
stituit herédem universórum, 
per quem fecit et secula: qui 
cum sit splendor glórim, et 
figúra substántie ejus, por- 
tánsque ómnia verbo virtütis 
sue, purgatiónem  peccató- 
rum faciens sedet ad déx- 
teram majestátis in excélsis: 
tanto mélior Angelis efféctus, 
quanto differéntius pre illis 
nomen hereditávit. Cui enim 
dixit aliquándo Angelórum: 
Filius meus es tu, ego hódie 
génui te? Et rursum: Ego 
ero illi in patrem, et ipse erit 
mihi in fiium? Et cum 


http://ccwatershed.org 


p — 


CHRISTMAS III MASS 


fterum introdücit primogéni- 
tum in orbem terrz, dicit: Et 
&dórent eum omnes Angeli 
Dei. Et ad Angelos quidem 
dicit: Qui facit Angelos suos 
Spíritus, et ministros suos 
flammam ignis. Ad Fílium 
autem: Thronus tuus, Deus, 
in seculum seculi: virga 
equitatis, virga regni tui. 
Dilexísti justítiam, et odísti 
iniquitátem: proptérea unxit 
te Deus, Deus tuus, óleo ex- 
sultatiónis pre particípibus 
tuis. Et: Tu in princípio, 
Dómine, terram fundásti: et 
ópera mánuum tuárum sunt 
celi. Ipsi perfbunt, tu autem 
permanébis; et omnes ut ves- 
timéntum veteráscent: et ve- 
lut amictum mutábis eos, et 
mutabüntur: tu autem idem 
ipse es, et anni tui non defi- 
cient. 


145 


I begotten Thee? And again: 
I will be to Him a father, and 
He shall be to Me a son? And 
again, when He bringeth in the 
first-begotten into the world, 
He saith, And let all the angels 
of God adore Him. And to the 
angels indeed He saith, He that 
maketh His angels spirits, and 
His ministers a flame of fire. 
But to the Son: Thy throne, O 
God, is for ever and ever; a 
scepter of justice is the scepter 
of Thy kingdom. Thou hast 
loved justice, and hated in- 
iquity; therefore God, Thy 
God, hath anointed Thee with 
the oil of gladness above Thy 
fellows. And: Thou in the 
beginning, O Lord, didst found 
the earth; and the works of 
Thy hands are the heavens. 
They shall perish, but Thou 
shalt continue: and they shall 
all grow old as a garment; and 


as a vesture shalt Thou change them, and they shall be 
changed; but Thou art the self-same. and Thy years shall 


not fail. 


Gradual. Ps. 97, 3, 2 


Viderunt omnes fines terre 
salutáre Dei nostri: jubilate 
Deo, omnes terra. V. Notum 
fecit Dóminus salutare suum: 
ante conspéctum  géntium 
revelávit justítiam suam. 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Dies 
Sanctificétus illixit nobis: 
veníte, gentes, et adoráte Dó- 
minum: quia hódie descéndit 
lux magna super terram. 
Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


All the ends of the earth 
have seen the salvation of our 
God: sing joyfully to God all 
the earth. VY. The Lord hath 
made known His salvation; He 
hath revealed His justice in 
the sight of the Gentiles. 

Alleluia, alleluia. JV. A hal- 
lowed day hath dawned for us: 
come, ye Gentiles, and adore 
the Lord; for this day a great 
light hath descended upon the 
earth. Alleluia. 


The Gospel 
The Gospel according to St. John, page 795. 


Creed, page 765. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


146 DEC. 26—ST. STEPHEN 


Offertory. Ps. 88, 12, 15 


Thine are the heavens, and Tui sunt cæli, et tua est 
Thine is the earth: the world terra: orbem terrarum, et 
and the fulness thereof Thou plenitüdinem ejus tu fun- 
hast founded: justice and dásti: justítia et judicium 
judgment are the preparation preparátio sedis tue. 
of Thy throne. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
ANCTIFY our oblations, O BLÁTA, Dómine, münera, 
Lord, by the new birth ' nova Unigéniti tui na- 


of Thy only-begotten Son, and tivitáte sanctifica: nosque a 
cleanse us from the stains of peccatórum nostrórum má- 
our sins. Through the same. culis emünda. Per eümdem. 


Preface No. 1, Canon and Special Communicantes, page 798. 


Communion. Ps. 97, 3 


Al the ends of the earth Viderunt omnes fines terre 
have seen the salvation of our salutáre Dei nostri. 
God. 


Postcommunion 
Gu we beseech 'Thee, O RESTA, Qugesumus, omni- 
almighty God, that, as potens Deus: ut natus 


the Saviour of the world, born hódie Salvátor mundi, sicut 
this day, is unto us the author divine nobis generatiónis est 
of divine generation, so He auctor; ita et immortalitatis 
may also be the bestower of sit ipse largitor: Qui tecum. 
immortality. Who with Thee. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793; Last Gospel, of the Epiphany, page 


Dec. 26—$5t. Stephen, the First Martyr (Red) 
Station AT ST. STEPHEN’S ON THE COELIAN HILL 
Double of the Second Class with a Simple Octave 


When this Feast falls on a Sunday it displaces the Mass of 
the Sunday. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 118, 23, 86, 23 


RINCES sat, and spoke EDERUNT príncipes, et ad- 
against me; and the vérsum me loquebán- 
wicked persecuted me: help tur: et iníqui persecütl sunt 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEC. 26—ST. STEPHEN 


me: ádjuva me, Dómine Deus 
meus, quia servus tuus exer- 
cebátur in tuis justificatiónes. 
Ps. 118, 1. Beáti immaculati 
in via, qui ámbulant in lege 
Dómini. Glória Patri. 


147 


me, O Lord my God, for Thy 
servant was employed in Thy 
justifications. Ps. 118, 1. 
Blessed are the undefiled in 
the way: who walk in the Jaw 
of the Lord. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


A NOBIS, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, imitári quod 
cólimus: ut discámus et in- 
imícos diligere; quia ejus 
natalitia  celebrámus, qui 
novit étiam pro persecutó- 
ribus exoráre Dóminum nos- 
trum Jesum Christum Fílium 
tuum: Qui tecum. 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, to imitate what 

we venerate, that we may learn 

to love even our enemies; for we 

celebrate the birth to life ever- 

lasting of him who knew how 

to pray even for his persecutors 

to our Lord Jesus Christ, Who 
with Thee. 


Second, Prayer of the octave of Christmas, page 144. 


Lesson. Acts. 6, 8-10; 7, 54-59 


Léctio Actuum  Apostólo- 
rum. 
N DrÉBUS illis: Stéphanus, 
plenus grátia et forti- 
tüdine, faciébat prodígia, et 
Signa magna in pópulo. Sur- 
rexérunt autem quidam de 
synagóga, que  appellátur 
Libertinórum, et Cyrenén- 
sium, et Alexandrinórum, et 
eórum qui erant a Cilicia, et 
Asia, disputántes cum Sté- 


phano: et non póterant resís- 


tere sapiéntie et Spiritui, qui 
loquebátur. Audiéntes autem 
hee, dissecabántur córdibus 
suis, et stridébant déntibus in 
eum. Cum autem esset Sté- 
phanus plenus Spíritu Sanc- 
to, inténdens in celum, vidit 
glóriam Dei, et Jesum stan- 
tem a dextris Dei. Et ait: 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 

N THOSE days, Stephen, full 
T of grace and fortitude, did 
great wonders and signs among 
the people. Now there arose 
some of that which is called 
the synagogue of the Liber- 
tines, and of the Cyrenians, 
and of the Alexandrians, and 
of them that were of Cilicia 
and Asia, disputing with Ste- 
phen. And they were not able 
to resist the wisdom and spirit 
that spoke. Now hearing these 
things they were cut to the 
heart, and they gnashed with 
their teeth at him. But he 
being full of the Holy Ghost, 
looking up steadfastly to 
heaven, saw the glory of God, 
and Jesus standing on the 


Ecce video cælos apértos, et right hand of God. And he 
Fílium hóminis stantem a said, Behold I see the heavens 
dextris Dei.  Exclamántes opened, and the Son of man 


http://ccwatershed.org 


148 


Standing on the right hand of 
God. And they crying out with 
@ loud voice, stopped their ears, 
and with one accord ran vio- 
lently upon him. And casting 
him forth without the city, 
they stoned him; end the wit- 
nesses laid down their gar- 
ments at the feet of a young 
man whose name was Saul. 
And they stoned Stephen, in- 
voking and saying, Lord Jesus, 
receive my spirit. And falling 
on his knees, he cried with a 
loud voice, saying: Lord, lay 
not this sin to their charge. 


And when he had said this, he 


fell asleep in the Lord. 


DEC. 26—ST. STEPHEN 


autem voce magna continu- 
érunt aures suas, et impetum 
fecérunt unanimiter in eum. 
Et ejiciéntes eum extra civi- 
tátem lapidadbant: et testes 
deposuérunt vestiménta sua 
Secus pedes adolescéntis, qui 
vocabatur Saulus. Et lapidá- 
bant Stéphanum invocántem, 
et dicéntem: Dómine Jesu, 
süscipe spíritum meum. Pósi- 
tis autem génibus clamávit 
voce magna, dicens: Dómine, 
ne státuas illis hoc peccátum, 
Et cum hoc dixísset, obdormí- 
vit in Dómino. 


Gradual. Ps. 118, 23, 86, 117 


Princes sat, and spoke 
against me; and the wicked 
persecuted me. Y. Help me, O 
Lord, my God: save me for Thy 
mercy's sake. 


Alleluia, Alleluia. Y. Acts 7, 
56. I see the heavens opened, 
and Jesus standing at the right 
hand of the power of God. 
Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Sedérunt príncipes, et ad- 
versum me loquebántur: et 
infqui persecüti sunt me. Jy. 
Adjuva me, Dómine Deus 
meus: salvum me fac propter 
misericórdiam tuam. 

Allelüja, allelija. Jy. Act. 
7,56. Video celos apertos, et 
Jesum stantem a dextris vir- 
tátis Dei. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Matt. 23, 34-39 


H* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus said 

to the scribes and phar- 

isees. Behold I send to you 
prophets, and wise men, and 
scribes; and some of them you 
will put to death and crucify, 
and some you will scourge in 
your synagogues, and persecute 
from city to city: that upon 
you may come all the just blood 
that hath been shed upon the 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gelii secundum Matthdeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dicébat 

Jesus scribis et phari- 
seis: Ecce ego mitto ad vos 
prophétas, et sapiéntes, et 
scribas, et ex illis occidétis, et 
crucifigétis, et ex eis flagellá- 
bitis in synagógis vestris, et 
persequémini de  civitáte 
in civitátem: ut véniat 
super vos omnis sanguis 
justis, qui effüsus est super 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEC. 26—ST. STEPHEN 


terram, a sanguine Abel justi 
usque ad sánguinem Zach- 
arie, fíli Barachie2, quem 
occidistis inter templum et 
altáre. Amen dico vobis, vé- 
nient hec ómnia super gen- 
eratiónem istam. Jerúsalem, 
Jerüsalem, que occídis pro- 
phétas, et lápidas eos, qui ad 
te missi sunt, quóties vólui 
congregáre fílios tuos, que- 
mádmodum gallina cóngre- 
gat pulos suos sub alas, et 
nolufsti? Ecce relinquétur 
vobis domus vestra desérta. 
Dico enim vobis, non me 
vidébitis áàmodo, donec dicá- 
tis: Benedíctus, qui venit in 
nómine Dómini. 


Creed, page 765. 


149 


earth, from the blood of Abel 
the just, even unto the blood 
of Zacharias the son of Bara- 
chias, whom you killed between 
the temple and the altar. 
Amen I say to you, all these 
things shall come upon this 
generation. Jerusalem, Jeru- 
salem, thou that kilest the 
prophets, and stonest them that 
are sent unto thee, how often 
would I have gathered together 
thy children, as the hen gath- 
ereth her chickens under her 
wings, and thou wouldest not? 
Behold, your house shall be 
left to you, desolate. For I say 
to you, you shall not see Me 
henceforth till you say, Blessed 
is He that cometh in the name 
of the Lord. 


Offertory. Acts 6, 5; 7, 59 


Elegérunt  Apóstoli Sté- 
phanum  Levítam, plenum 
fide et Spíritu Sancto: quem 
Jlapidavérunt Judei orántem, 
et dicéntem: Dómine Jesu, 
&ccipe spíritum meum, alle- 
lája. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


The apostles chose Stephen, 
a levite, full of faith and of the 
Holy Ghost, whom the Jews 
stoned, praying and saying: 
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. 
Alleluia. 


Secret 


Uscirzr, Dómine, münera 

pro tuórum commem- 
oratióne Sanctórum: ut, sicut 
illos pássio gloriósos effécit; 
ita nos devótio reddat innó- 
cuos, Per Dóminum. 


ECEIVE OUT gifts, O Lord, 

for the commemoration 
of Thy saints, that, as suffering 
hath made them glorious, so 
devotion may render us blame- 
less. Through our Lord. 


Second, Secret of the octave of Christmas, page 146. 
Preface No. 1, Canon and Special Communicantes, page 798. 


Communion. 
Video cælos apértos, et 


Acts 7, 56, 59, 60 


I see the heavens opened, 


Jesum stantem a dextris vir- and Jesus standing on the 
tütis Dei: Dómine Jesu, ác- right hand of the power of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


150 


God: Lord Jesus, receive my 
spirit, and lay not this sin to 
their charge. 


DEC. 27—ST. JOHN EVANGELIST 


cipe spíritum meum, et ne 
státuas illis hoc peccatum, 


Postcommunion 


Av the mysteries we have 
4D received aid us, O Lord; 
and by the intercession of 
blessed Stephen, Thy martyr, 
may they confirm us in Thine 
everlasting protection. Through 
our Lord, 


'UXILIÉNTUR nobis, Dó- 

mine, sumpta mys- 

éria: et intercedénte beáto 

Stéphano Mártyre tuo, sem- 

pitérna protectióne confir- 
ment. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion of the octave of Christmas, page 146. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Dec. 27—$»t. Jobn, Apostle and Evangelist (White) 


STATION AT ST. 


Mary MAJOR 


Double of the Second Class with a Simple Octave 
When this Feast falls on a Sunday it displaces the Mass of 


the Sunday. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 15, 5 


N THE midst of the church 

the Lord opened his mouth: 
and filled him with the spirit 
of wisdom and understanding: 
end clothed him with a robe of 
glory. Ps.91,2. It is good to 
give praise to the Lord: and to 
sing to Thy name, O Most 
High. Jy. Glory. 


N MÉDIO Ecclésie apéruit 
I os ejus: et implévit eum 
Dóminus spíritu sapiéntiz, et 
intelléctus: stolam glóriæ ín- 
duit eum. Ps.91,2. Bonum 
est confitéri Dómino: et psál- 
lere nómini.tuo, Altíssime. 
y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


F THY loving-kindness, O 
Lord, shed light upon Thy 


benígnus illústra: ut 


g ccLÉSIAM tuam, Dómine, 


Church; that, being enlight- beáti Joánnis Apóstoli tui et 
ened by the teachings of Evangeliste illumináta doc- 
blessed John, Thine apostle trinis, ad dona pervéniat 
and evangelist, it may attain sempitérna. Per Dóminum. 
to Thine everlasting gifts. 

Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer of the octave of Christmas, nage 144. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEC. 27—9T. JOHN EVANGELIST 


151 


Lesson. Ecclus. 15, 1-6 


Lécto libri Sapiéntiz. 


vui timet Deum, fáciet 

-bona: et qui continens 
est justitie, apprehéndet il- 
lam, et obviábit ili quasi 
mater honorificáta.  Cibábit 
illum pane vite et intelléctus, 
et aqua sapiéntie salutáris 
potabit illum: et firmábitur 
in illo, et non flectétur: et 
continébit illum, et non con- 
fundétur: et exaltábit illum 
apud próximos suos, et in 
médio Ecclésie apériet os 
ejus, et adimplébit illum spi- 
ritu sapiéntie et intelléctus, 
et stola glérie véstiet illum. 
Jucunditátem, et exsulta- 
tiónem  thesaurizábit super 
ilum, et nómine ætérno here- 
ditábit illum, Dóminus Deus 
noster. 


Lesson from the Book of 


Wisdom. 

E THAT feareth God, will 

do good: and he that pos- 
sesseth justice, shall lay hold 
on her, and she will meet him 
as an honorable mother. With 
the bread of life and under- 
standing she will feed him, and 
give him the water of whole- 
some wisdom to drink: and she 
shall be made strong.in him, 
and he shall not be moved; and 
she shall hold him fast, and 
he shall not be confounded; 
and she shall exalt him among 
his neighbors, and in the midst 
of the church she shall open 
his mouth, and shall fill him 
with the spirit of wisdom and 
understanding, and shall clothe 
him with a robe of glory. The 
Lord our God shall heap upon 
him a treasure of joy and glad- 


ness, and shall cause him to inherit an everlasting name. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. John 21, 23, 19 


Exiit sermo inter fratres, 
quod discípulus ille non móri- 
tur: et non.dixit Jesus: Non 
móritur. JY. Sed: Sic eum 
volo manére, donec véniam: 
tu me séquere. 


Lesser 


Allelüja, allelaja. Y.21,24. 
Hie est discípulus ille, qui 
testimónium pérhibet de his: 
et scimus, quia verum est 
testimónium ejus.  Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


A saying went abroad among 
the brethren, that that disciple 
should not die: and Jesus did 
not say, he should not die. y. 
But: So I will have him remain 
till I come: follow thou Me, 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. 21, 24. 
This is that disciple who giveth 
testimony of these things: and 
we know that his testimony 1s 
irue. Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


152 


DEC. 27—ST. JOHN EVANGELIST 


Tract. Ps. 140, 1-3 


Blessed is the man that fear- 
eth the Lord: he shall delight 
exceedingly in His command- 
ments. JY. His seed shall be 
mighty upon earth: the gener- 
ation of the righteous shall be 
blessed. Y. Glory and wealth 
shall be in his house: and his 
justice remaineth for .ever 
and ever. 


Beátus vir, qui timet Dó- 
minum: in mandátis ejus 
cupit nimis. Jy. Potens in 
terra erit semen ejus: generá- 
tio rectórum benedicétur.. V. 
Glória et divítie in domo 
ejus: et. justitia ejus manet in 
Siculum seculi. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia: .Y. This is 
that disciple who giveth testi- 
mony of these things: and we 
know that his testimony is 
true. Alleluia. Y. The just man 
Shall flourish like the palm 
tree: like the cedar of Libanus 
shall he be multiplied. 


Allelüja, allelija: Y. Hic 
est discípulus ille, qui testi- 
mónium pérhibet de his: et 
Scimus, quia verum est testi- 
mónium ejus. Allelija. JY. 
Justus ut palma florébit: si- 
cut cedrus Libani multipli- 
cábitur. Allelija. 


Gospel. John 21, 19-24 


HH Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, Jesus said to 
A. Peter, Follow Me. Peter, 
urning about, saw that dis- 
ciple whom Jesus loved follow- 
ing, who also leaned on His 
breast at supper, and said, 
Lord, who is he that shall be- 
tray 'Thee? Him therefore 
when Peter had seen, he saith 
to Jesus, Lord, and what shall 
this man do? Jesus said to 
him, So I will have him to re- 
main till I come, what is it to 
Thee? follow thou Me. This 
Saying therefore went abroad 
among the brethren, that that 
disciple should not die. And 
Jesus did not say to him, He 
should not die; but, So I will 
have him to remain till I come, 
what is it to thee? This is that 
disciple who giveth testimony 
of these things, and hath 


HH Sequentia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Dixit 
Jesus Petro: Séquere me. 
Convérsus Petrus vidit illum 
discípulum, quem  diligébat 
Jesus, sequéntem, qui et recü- 
buit in cena super pectus 
ejus, et dixit: Dómine, quis 
est qui tradet te? Hunc ergo 
non móritur. -Et non dixit 
Jesu: Dómine, hic autem 
quid? Díxit ei Jesus: Sic eum 
volo manére, donec véniam, 
quid ad te? tu me séquere. 
Éxiit ergo sermo iste inter 
fratres, quia discípulus ille 
non móritur. Et non dixit 
ei Jesus: Non móritur; sed: 
Sic eum volo manére, donec 
véniam. quid ad te? Hic est 
discípulus ille, qui testimóni- 
um pérhibet de his, et scripsit 
hec: et scimus quia verum 
est testimónium ejus. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEC. 28—HOLY INNOCENTS 


153 


written these things: and we know that his testimony is true. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 91, 13 


Justus ut palma florébit: 
sicut cedrus, que in Líbano 
est, multiplicábitur. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


The just man shall flourish, 
like the palm-tree: he shall 
grow up like the cedar of 
Libanus. 


Secret 


ÜscieE, Dómine, münera, 

que in ejus tibi solem- 
nitáte deférimus, cujus nos 
confidimus patrocínio liber- 
åri. Per Dóminum. 


ECEIVE, O Lord, the gifts 
which we bring to Thee 
on the solemnity of him by 
whose patronage we trust to 


be delivered. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret of the octave of Christmas, page 146. 
Preface No. 1, Canon and Special Communicantes, page 798. 


Communion. John 21, 23 


Exiit sermo inter fratres, 
quod discfpulus ille non mó- 
ritur; et non dixit Jesus: Non 
móritur; sed: Sic eum volo 
manére, donec véniam. 


A saying went abroad among 
the brethren that that disciple 
should not die: and Jesus did 
not say, he should not die: but, 
So I will have him remain till 
I come. 


Postcommunion 


EFÉCTI cibo potüque cæ- 
lésti, Deus noster, te 
supplices deprecamur: ut, in 
cujus hec commemoratióne 
percépimus, ejus muniamur 
et précibus. Per Dóminum. 


EFRESHED With heavenly 
food and drink, we 
humbly beseech Thee, our God, 
that as we have partaken of 
them, so by the prayers of Him 
Whom we thereby commemo- 
rate, we may also be fortified. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion of the octave of Christmas, page 146. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Dec. 28— The olp Innocents 
(Purple but Red if a Sunday) 
STATION AT ST. PAUL'S 
Double of the Second Class with a Simple Octave 
When this feast falls on Sunday it displaces the Mass of the 


Sunday. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


154 


Introit. 


uT of the mouth of in- 

fants and of sucklings, 
O God, Thou hast perfected 
praise because of Thine ene- 
mies. Ps. 8, 2. O Lord, our 
Lord, how admirable is Thy 
name in the whole earth. Jy. 
Glory. 


DEC. 28—HOLY INNOCENTS 


Ps. 8, 3 


X ore infántium, Deus, 
g et lacténtium perfecisti 
laudem propter inimicos tuos. 
Ps. 8, 2. Dómine Dóminus 
noster: quam admirábile est 
nomen tuum in univérsa 
terra! y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria is omitted unless it be on Sunday or 


the octave day. 


Prayer 


cop, Whose praise the 

martyred innocents did 
this day proclaim, not by 
speaking, but by dying, do to 
death in us all the malice of 
sinfulness, that our lives may 
also proclaim Thy faith, which 
our tongues profess. Through 
our Lord. 


precónium Innocentes 
Mártyres non loquéndo, sed 
moriéndo conféssi sunt: óm- 
nia in nobis vitiórum mala 
mortifica; ut fidem tuam, 
quam lingua nostra lóquitur, 
étiam móribus vita fateátur. 
Per Dóminum. 


T cujus hodiérna die 


Second Prayer of the octave of Christmas, page 144. 


Lesson. John 14, 1-5 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed John the Apostle, 
N THOSE days I saw upon 
Mount Sion à Lamb stand- 
ing, and with Him a hundred 
forty-four thousand having 
His name, and the name of His 
Tather, written on their fore- 
heads. And I heard a noise 
from heaven, as the noise of 
many waters, and as the voice 
of great thunder; and the voice 
which I heard was as the voice 
of harpers, harping on their 
harps. And they sung as it 
were a new canticle, before the 
throne, and before the four liv- 
ing creatures, and the ancients; 
and no man could say the can- 
ticle, but those hundred forty- 


Léctio libri Apocalypsis. 
beáti Joánnis Apóstoli 
N DIÉBUS illis; Vidi supra 
montem Sion Agnum 
Stantem, et cum eo centum 
quadragínta quátuor millia, 
habéntes nomen ejus, et no- 
men Patris ejus scriptum in 
fróntibus suis. Et audivi vo- 
cem de czlo, tamquam vocem 
&quárum multárum, et tam- 
quam vocem tonítrui magni: 
et vocem, quam audívi, sicut 
citharedórum citharizántium 
in cítharis suis, Et cantá- 
bant quasi cánticum novum 
ante sedem, et ante quátuor 
animélia, et  senióres: et 
nemo péterat dícere cánti- 
cum, nisi illa centum quadra- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WET 


DEC. 28—HOLY INNOCENTS 158 


gínt&. quátuor  mília, qui 
empti sunt de terra. Hi sunt, 
qui cum muliéribus non sunt 
coinquináti: vírgines enim 
sunt. Hi sequüntur Agnum, 
quocümque ierit, Hi empti 
sunt ex hominibus primitie 
Deo, et Agno: et in ore eórum 
non est invéntum mendá- 
cium: sine mácula enim sunt 
ante thronum Dei, 


four thousand who were pur- 
chased from the earth. These 
are they who were not defiled 
with women, for they are vir- 
gins. These follow the Lamb 
whithersoever He goeth. These 
were purchased from among 
men, the first-fruits to God 
and to the Lamb; and in their 
mouth there was found no lie; 
for they are without spot be- 
fore the throne of God. 


Gradual. Ps. 123, 7, 8 


Anima nostra, sicut passer 
erépta est de láqueo venanti- 
um. Y. Láqueus contritus 
est, et nos liberáti sumus: 
adjutérium nostrum in nó- 
mine Dómini, qui fecit celum 
et terram, 


Our soul hath been delivered 
as @ sparrow out of the snare 
of the fowlers. YW. The snare 
is broken, and we are deliv- 
ered; our help is in the name 
of the Lord, Who hath made 
heaven and earth. 


When the feast falls on a Sunday and always on the octave 
day, the Tract is replaced by the alleluias following it. 


Tract. Ps. 78,3, 10 


Effudérunt sánguinem 
sanctórum, velut aquam, in 
circüitu Jerúsalem. V. et 
non erat qui sepélíret. y. 
Vindica, Dómine, sanguinem 
sanctérum tuórum, qui effü- 
sus est super terram. 


Allelüja, allelüja. | Y. Ps. 
112, 1. Laudate püeri, Dó- 
minum, laudáte nomen Dó- 
mini. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


They have poured out the 
blood of the saints, as water, 
round about Jerusalem. YF. 
And there was none to bury 
them. Y. Revenge, O Lord, the 
blood of Thy saints, which 
hath been poured out upon the 
earth. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 112, 
1. Praise the Lord, ye chil- 
dren, praise the name of the 
Lord. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 2, 13-18 


"B Sequéntie sancti Evan- 
gélii secandum Matthzeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Angelus 
Dómini appáruit in som- 
nis Joseph, dicens. Surge, et 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT lime an angel of 
the Lord appeared in 
Sleep to Joseph, saying: Arise, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


156 


and take the child and His 
mother, and fly into Egypt; and 
be there until I tell thee: for 
it will come to pass that Herod 
will. seek the child to destroy 
Him. Who arose, and took the 
child and His mother by night, 
and retired into Egypt; and He 
was there until the death of 
Herod: that it might be ful- 
filled which the Lord spoke 
by the prophet, saying: Out of 
Egypt have I called My Son. 
Then Herod, perceiving that he 
was deluded by the wise men, 
was exceeding angry; and 
sending, killed all the men- 
children that were in Bethle- 
hem,:and in all the borders 
thereof, from two years old and 
under, according to the time 
which he had diligently in- 
quired of the wise men. Then 
was fulfilled that which was 
spoken by Jeremias the 
prophet, saying: A voice in 
Rama was heard, lamentation 
and great mourning; Rachel 
bewailing her children, and 


DEC. 28—HOLY INNOCENTS 


áccipe püerum, et matrem 
ejus, et fuge in ZEgyptum, et 
esto ibi usque dum dicam tibi. 
Futürum est enim, ut Heró- 
des querat püerum ad per- 
déndum eum. Qui consür- 
gens accépit püerum, et ma- 
trem ejus nocte, et secéssit in 
ZEgyptum: et erat ibi usque 
ad obitum Heródis: ut adim- 
plerétur quod dictum est a 
Dómino per Prophétam di- 
céntem, Ex JZEgypto vocávi 
Fílium meum. Tunc Heródes 
videns quóniam illisus esset 
@ Magis, irátus est valde, et 
mittens occidit omnes püeros, 
qui erant in Béthlebem, et in 
ómnibus fínibus ejus,.a bi- 
mátu et infra, secindum 
tempus quod exquisíerat a 
Magis. Tunc adimplétum est 
quod dictum est per Jeremí- 
am prophétam dicéntem: Vox 
in Rama audita est, plorátus, 
et ululáts multus: Rachel 
plorans fílios suos, et nóluit 
consolári, quia non sunt. 


would not be comforted, because they are not. 


Creed, page.765. 


Offertory. Ps. 123,7 


Our soul hath been delivered 
as a Sparrow out of the snare of 
the fowlers: the snare is 
broken, and we are delivered, 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Anima nostra sicut passer 
erépta est de láqueo venanti- 
um: laqueus contritus est, et 
nos liberáti sumus. 


Secret 


12. not the gracious prayer 
of Thy saints fail us, O 
Lord, both to render our offer- 
ings acceptable to Thee and 
ever to obtain Thy pardon for 
us. Through our Lord. 


ANCTÓRUM  tuórum, 

Dómine, nobis pia non 
desit orátio: que et münera 
nostra concíliet, et, tuam no- 
bis indulgéntiam semper ob- 
tíneat. Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret of the octave of Christmas, page 146. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEC. 29—ST. THOMAS 


157 


Preface No. 1, Canon and Special Communicantes, page 798. 


Communion. 


vox in Rama audíta est, 
plorátus, et ululátus: Rachel 
plorens fílios suos, et nóluit 
consolári, quia non sunt. 


Matt. 2, 18 


A voice in Rama was heard, 
lamentation and mourning: 
Rachel bewailing her children: 
and would not be comforted 
because they are not. 


Postcommunion 


OTrfvA, Dómine, dona 

percépimus: que. Sanc- 
tórum nobis précibus et pre- 
séntis, quesumus, vite páriter 
et ætérnæ tribue conférre 
Subsídium. Per Dóminum. 


AY the votive glfts, O 
Lord, of which we have 
partaken, through the inter- 
cession of the Saints gain for us 
help, both for this life and life 
eternal. Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion of the octave of Christmas, page 146. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Dec. 29—St. 


Thomas, Bishop and filactpr, (Red) 


Double 
When this Feast falls on a Sunday, the Mass for the Sunday 


within the octave of Christmas, page 160, is said, 


with com- 


memoration of St. Thomas and Of Christmas, page 144, 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 


AUDEÁMUS omnes in Dó- 

mino, diem testum ce- 
lebrántes sub honóre beáti 
Thome Mártyris: de cujus 
passióne gaudent Angeli, et 
colláàudant Fílium Dei. Ps. 
32, 1. Exsultáte, justi, in Dó- 
mino: rectos decet collaudá- 
tio. V. Glória Patri. 


ET us all rejoice in the 
Ti Lord, celebrating a fes- 
tival-day in honor of the 
blessed martyr Thomas: at 
whose martyrdom the angels 
rejoice, and give praise to the 
Son of God. Ps. 32, 1. Re- 
joice in the Lord, ye just; 
praise becometh the upright. 
Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUs, pro cujus Ecclésia 
gloriésus Póntifex 
Thomas gládiis impiórum oc- 
cübuit: presta, quesumus; ut 


cop, for Whose Church the 
glorious Bishop Thomas 
fell by the swords of wicked 
men, grant, we beseech Thee, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


158 


that all who implore his help 
may obtain the effect of their 
petition leading to salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


DEC. 29—ST. THOMAS 


omnes, qui ejus implórant 
auxilium, petitiónis sue salu- 
tárem  consequántur effec- 
tum. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer of the octave of Christmas, page 144. 


Epistle. Heb. 5, 1.6 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Hebrews. 


RETHREN, every high priest 

taken from among. men 
is ordained for men in the 
things that appertain to God, 
that he may offer up gifts and 
Sacrifices for sins: who can 
have compassion on them that 
are ignorant and that err, be- 
cause he himself also is com- 
passed with infirmity; and 
therefore he ought, as for the 
people, so also for himself, to 
offer for sins. Neither doth 
any man take the honor to 
himself, but he that is called 
by God, as Aaron was. So 
Christ also did not glorify 
Himself that He might be 
made a high priest; but He 
that said unto Him, Thou art 
My Son, this day have I be- 
gotten Thee. As He saith also 
in another place, Thou art a 
priest forever, according to the 
order of Melchisedech. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Hebraeos. 


RATRES: Omnis Póntifex 

eá homínibus assümp- 
tus, pro homínibus constitü- 
itur in iis, que sunt ad Deum, 
ut ófferat dona, et sacrifícia 
pro peccátis: qui condolére 
possit iis, qui ignórant, et er- 
rant: quóniam et ipse cir- 
cümdatus est infirmitáte: et 
proptérea debet, quemádmo- 
dum pro pópulo, ita étiam et 
pro semetípso offérre pro pec- 
cátis. Nec quisquam sumit 
Sibi hondrem, sed qv: vocátur 
& Deo tamquam Aaron. Sic 
et Christus non semetípsum 
clarificávit ut póntifex fíeret: 
sed qui locütus est ad eum: 
Fílius meus es tu, ego hódie 
génui. te. Quemádmodum et 
in alio loco dicit: Tu es sacér- 
dos in etérnum secündum 
érdinem Melehísedech. 


Gradual, Ecclus. 44, 16 


Behold a great priest, who in 
his days pleased God. V. There 
was not found the like to him, 
who kept the law of the Most 


High. 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. John 
10, 14. I am the good shep- 


herd: and I know My sheep, 
and Mine know Me. Alleluia. 


‘Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ecce sacérdos magnus, qui 
in diébus suis placuit Deo. Y. 
Non est invéntus similis ili, 
qui conserváret legem Ex- 
célsi. 

Allelája, allelüja. Y. Joann. 
10, 14. Ego sum pastor bonus: 
et cognósco oves meas, et 
cognóscunt me mese. Allelija. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


£ 


DEC. 29—ST. THOMAS 


159 


Gospel. John 10, 11-16 


W Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joannem. 
N ILLO témpore: Dixit 
Jesus phariseis: Ego 
sum pastor bonus. Bonus 
pastor ánimam suam dat pro 
óvibus suis. Mercenárius au- 
tem, et qui non est pastor, cu- 
jus non sunt oves prdéprie, 
videt lupum veniéntem, et di- 
mittit oves, et fugit: et lupus 
rapit et dispérgit.oves: mer- 
cenárius autem fugit, quia 
mercenárius est, et non pérti- 
net ad eum de óvibus. Ego 
sum pastor bonus: et cog- 
nósco meas et cognóscunt me 
mez. Sicut novit me Pater, et 
ego agnósco Patrem: et áni- 
mam meam pono pro óvibus 
meis. Et álias oves hábeo, 
que non sunt ex hoc ovili: 
et illas opórtet me addücere, 
et vocem meam áudient, et 
fiet unum ovile, et unus 
pastor. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


Posuísti, Dómine, in capite 
ejus corónam de lápide preti- 
óso: vitam pétiit a te, et tri- 
buisti ei, allelüja. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT lime, Jesus said 

to the pharisees, I am 
he good shepherd. The good 
shepherd giveth his life for the 
sheep, But the hireling, and 
he that is not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, 
seeth the wolf coming and 
leaveth the sheep and flieth; 
and the wolf catcheth and scat- 
tereth the sheep: and the hire- 
ling flieth, because he is a hire- 
ling, and he hath no care for 
the sheep. I am the good 
Shepherd; and I know Mine, 
and Mine know Me. As the 
Pather knoweth Me, and I 
know the Father; and I lay 
down My life for My sheep. 
And other sheep I have, that 
are not of this fold; them also 
I must bring, and they shall 
hear My voice, and there shall 
be one fold and one shepherd. 


Ps. 20, 4, 5 


Thou hast set on his head, O 
Lord, a crown of precious 
stones: he asked life of thee, 
and thou hast given it to him. 
Alleluia. 


Secret 


ÜNERA tibl, Dómine, di- 

cáta sanctífica et, in- 
tercedénte beáto Thoma 
Mártyre tuo atque Pontífice, 
Der éadem nos placátus in- 
ténde. Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret of the octave 


anctıFy, O Lord, the offer- 

ings dedicated. to Thee, 
and, by the intercession of 
blessed Thomas, Thy martyr 
and bishop, look upon us with 
mercy for the sake of them. 
Through our Lord. 


of Christmas, page 146. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


160 


SUNDAY WITHIN OCTAVE 


Preface No. 1, Canon and Special Communicantes, page 798. 


Communion. 


Iam the good shepherd, and 
I know My sheep, and Mine 
know Me. 


John 10, 14 


Ego sum pastor bonus: et 
cognósco oves meas, et cog- 
nóscunt me meg. 


Postcommunion 


Av this communion, O 

Lord, cleanse us from 
guilt and, by the intercession 
of blessed Thomas, Thy martyr 
and bishop, make us the com- 
panions of Him Who is our 
heavenly healing. Through our 
Lord. — 


EC nos commünio, Dó- 

mine purget a crimine: 
et, intercedénte beáto Thoma 
Martyre tuo atque Pontifice, 
celéstis remédii fáciat esse 
consórtes; Per Dóminum. ` 


Second Postcommunion of the octave of Christmas, page 146. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. . 


Hundap Within tbe Octave of Christmas 
(White) 


If the Feasts of Christmas, St. Stephen, St. John, Apostle 
and Evangelist, or the Holy Innocents fall on Sunday, the fol- 
lowing Mass is said on Dec. 30. If Dec. 30 be a Monday or a 
Saturday, the Mass of the day within the octave of Christmas. 
(This is the same as the third Mass on Christmas, but Epistie 
and Gospel are from the second Mass.) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Wis. 18, 14, 15 


HILE all things were in 

quiet silence, and the 
night was in the midst of her 
course, Thy almighty word, O 
Lord, came from heaven, from 
Thy royal throne. Ps. 92, 1, 
The Lord hath reigned, He is 
clothed with beauty: the Lord 
is clothed with strength, and 
hath girded Himself. V. Glory. 


UM MEDIUM siléntium 

tenérent ómnia, et nox 
n suo cursu médium iter ha- 
béret, omnípotens sermo tuus, 
Dómine de celis a regálibus 
sédibus venit. Ps. 92, 1. Dó- 
minus regnavit, decórem in- 
dütus est: indütus est Dó- 
minus fortitüdinem, et præ- 
cínxit se. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
O ALMIGHTY and eternal MNÍPOTENS . Sempitérne 
God, direct our actions in Deus, dírige actus nos- 


conformity with Thy good tros in beneplácito tuo: ut in 
pleasure, that in the name of nómine dilécti Fílii tui mere- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SUNDAY WITHIN OCTAVE 


4mur bonis opéribus abun- 
dáre: Qui tecum. 


Second G Prayer of the octave 


Epistle. 


Léctio Epístole beati Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Gálatas. 


RATRES: Quanto témpore 

-| heres párvulus est, ni- 
hil ert a servo, cum sit dó- 
minus ómnium: sed sub tutó- 
ribus, et actóribus est usque 
ad prefinitum tempus a pat- 
re: ita et nos cum essémus 
párvuli, sub eleméntis mun- 
di erámus serviéntes. At ubi 
venit plenitüdo témporis, mi- 
sit Deus Fílium suum, factum 
éx mulfere, factum sub lege, 
ut eos, qui sub lege erant, 
redímeret, ^ut  adoptiónem 
filórum reciperémus.  Quó- 
niam autem estis fíli, misit 
Deus Spfritum Filii sui in 
corda vestra clamántem: 
Abba, ‘Pater. Itaque jam non 
est servus, sed fílius: quod si 
fílius, et heres per Deum. 


Gradual. 
. Speciésus forma pre fíliis 
hominum: diffüsa est grátia 
in lábüs tuis. V. Eructávit 
cor meum verbum bonum, 
dico ego ópera mea Regi: lin- 
gua mea cálamus scribe, ve- 
lóciter scribentis. 

Allelája, allelija. Y. Ps. 
92, 1. Dóminus regnavit, de- 
córem induit: induit Dómi- 
nus fortitüdinem, et precin- 
xit se virtüte, Allelüja.. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


161 


Thy beloved Son we may be 
worthy to abound in good 
works. Who with Thee. 

of Christmas, page 144. 


Gal. 4, 1-7 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Galatians. 


RETHREN, aS long as the 

heir is a child, he differ- 
eth nothing from a servant, 
though he be lord of all: but 
is under tutors and governors 
until the time appointed by the 
father: so we also, when we 
were children, were serving 
under the elements of the 
world. But when the fulness 
of the time was come, God sent 
His Son, made of & woman, 
made under the law: that He 
might redeem them who were 
under the law; that we might 
receive the adoption of sons. 
And because you are sons, God 
hath sent the Spirit of His Son 
into your hearts, crying: Abba, 
Father. Therefore now he is 


. not a servant, but a son; and 


if a son, an heir also through 
God, 


Ps. 4, 3, 2 


Thou art beautiful above the 
sons of men: grace is poured 
abroad in Thy lips. V. My 
heart hath uttered a good 
word, I speak my works to the 
King: my tongue is the pen of 
a scrivener that writeth swiftly. 

Alleluia, alleluia. XY. Ps. 92, 
1. The Lord hath reigned, He 
is clothed with beauty: the 
Lord is clothed with strength, 
and hath girded Himself with 
power. Alleluia, : 


http://ccwatershed.org 


162 


SUNDAY WITHIN OCTAVE 


Gospel. Luke 2, 33-40 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel, according to St. Luke. 
q THAT time, Joseph and 
Mary, the mother of 
esus, were wondering at these 
things which were spoken con- 
cerning Him. And Simeon 
blessed them, and said to Mary 
His mother: Behold this child 
is set for the fall, and for the 
resurrection of many in Israel, 
and for a sign which shall be 
contradicted: and thy own 
soul a sword shall pierce, that 
out of many hearts thoughts 
may be revealed. And there 
was one Anna, a prophetess, 
the daughter of Phanuel, of the 
tribe of Aser; she was far ad- 
vanced in years, and had lived 
with her husband seven years 
from her virginity. And she 
was a widow until fourscore 
and four years; who departed 
not from the temple, by fast- 
ings and prayers serving night 
and day. Now she at the same 
hour coming in, confessed to 
the Lord; and spoke of Him to 
all that looked for the redemp- 
tion of Israel. And after they 
had performed all things ac- 
cording to the law of the Lord, 
they returned into Galilee, to 
their city Nazareth. And the 
child grew and waxed strong, 
full of wisdom and the grace of 
God was in Him. — 


Creed, page 765. 


© Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Erat Jo- 
I seph et María mater 
Jesu, mirántes super his, que 
dicebántur de illo. Et bene- 
díxit illis Simeon, et díxit ad 
Mariam matrem ejus: Ecce 
pósitus est hic in ruínam, et 
in resurrectiónem multórum 
in Israél: et in signum cui 
contradicétur: et tuam ipsíus 
ánimam pertransibit gládi- 
us, ut reveléntur ex multis 
córdibus cogitatiónes. Et erat 
Anna prophetissa, filia Phá- 
nuel, de tribu Aser: hsc 
procésserat in diébus multis, 
et vixerat cum viro suo annis 
Septem a virginitáte sua. Et 
hac vídua usque ad annos oc- 
toginta quátuor: que non 
discedébat de templo, jejü- 
niis et obsecratiónibus sérvi- 
ens nocte ac die, Et hsc, ipsa 
hora supervéniens, confitebá- 
tur Dómino, et loquebátur de 
illo ómnibus, qui exspectá- 
bant redemptiónem Israél. Et 
ut perfecérunt ómnia secün- 
dum legem Dómini, revérsi 
sunt in Galileam in civitá- 
tem suam Nazareth. Puer 
autem crescébat, et. confor- 
tabátur plenus sapiéntia: ex 
grátia Dei erat in illo, 


Offertory. Ps. 92, 1, 2 


God hath established the 
world, which shall not be 
moved: Thy throne, O God, is 
prepared from of old; Thou art 
from everlasting. 


Deus firmávit orbem ter- 
re, qui non commovébitur: 
paráta sedes tua, Deus, eá 
tunc, a szculo tu es. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEC. 31—ST. SYLVESTER 168 


Offettory Prayets, page 767. 
Secret 
ONCÉpE, qusesumus, om- qu we beseech Thee, O 
nípotens Deus: ut óculis almighty God, that the 
tue majestátis munus oblá- gift present before the eyes of 
tum, et gratiam nobis pie de- Thy majesty may both obtain 
votiónis obtineat, et effectum for us the grace of godly devo- 
beáte perennitátis aequírat. tion and win its effect in a 
Per Dóminum. blessed eternity. Through our 
] Lord. 
Second Secret of the octave of Christmas, page 146. 
Preface No. 1, page 798. 


Communion. Matt. 2, 20 
Tolle püerum, et matrem Take the child and His 
ejus, et vade in terram Israél: mother, and go into the land 
defüncti sunt enim, qui que- of Israel: for they are dead 
rébant ánimam püeri. that sought the life of the child. 


Postcommunion 
ER HUJUS, Dómine, ope- Y THE operation of this 
ratiónem mystérii, et mystery, O Lord, may 
vítia nostra. purgéntur, et our sins be purged, and our 
justa desidéria compleántur. just desires fulfilled. Through 
Per Dóminum. our Lord. 
Second Postcommunion of the octave of Christmas, page 146. 


diiass of the C rtate of Christmas (White) 


If December 30 is Monday or Saturday, the third Mass of 
Christmas, page 143, is celebrated, but the Epistle and Gospel 
are taken from the second, Mass of Christmas, page 140. 


Dec. 31—St. Sploester, Pope (White) 


Double 


STATION AT THE CEMETERY oF PRISCILLA 


When this Feast falls on a Sunday the Mass within the octave 
of Christmas, Page 160, is said, with commemoration of St. 
Sylvester and Of Christmas, page 144, 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Iutroit. John 21, 15-17 


x níLicis Me, Simon Pe- F. THOU lovest Me, Simon 
tre, pasce agnos meos, Peter, feed My lambs, feed 
pasce oves meas, Ps, 29, 1. My sheep. Ps. 29, 1. I will ex- 
Exaltabo te, Dómine, quóni- tol Thee, O Lord, for 'Thou hast 
am suscepísti me, nec dele- upheld me: and hast not made 


http://ccwatershed.org 


164 


my enemies to rejoice over Me. 
me, y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


Prayer 


ETERNAL Shepherd, do 

Thou look favorably up- 
on Thy flock, which we be- 
seech Thee to guard and keep 
for evermore through the 
blessed Sylvester, Thy Supreme 
Pontiff, whom Thou didst 
choose to be the chief shep- 
herd of the whole Church. 
Through our Lord, 


DEC. 31—ST. SYLVESTER 


ctásti inimicos. meos super 
me. Y. Glória Patri, 


Gu tuum, Pastor 
. stérne, placátus in- 
ténde: et per beátum Sylvés- 
trem Summum  Pontíficem, 
perpétua protectióne custódi; 
quem totíus Ecclésie presti- 
tisti esse pastórem. Per Dé- 
minum. 


Second Prayer of the octave of Christmas, page 144. 


Epistle. 1 Peter 5, 1-4, 10-11 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle. 
RETHREN: The ancients 
therefore that are 
among you, I beseech, who 
am myself also an ancient and 
a witness of the sufferings of 
Christ: as also a partaker of 
that glory: which is to be re- 
vealed in, time to come: Feed 
the flock of God which is 
among you, taking care of it 
not by constraint, but willingly 
according to God: not for filthy 
lucre’s sake, but voluntarily: 
Neither as lording it over the 
clergy, but being made a pat- 
tern of the flock from the heart. 
And when the prince of pastors 
shall appear, you shall receive 
a never-fading crown of glory. 
But the God of all grace, Who 
hath called us unto His eternal 
glory in Christ Jesus, after you 
have suffered a little; will Him- 
self perfect you, and confirm 
you and establish you. To Him 
be glory and empire for ever 
and ever. Amen. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Petri 
Apóstoli. . : 
ARÍssrMI: Senióres, qui 
in vobis sunt, óbsecro 
consénior et testis Ohristi 
passiónum, qui et ejus, que 
in futüro revelánda est, gló- 
rie communicátor: páscite 
qui in vobis est gregem Dei, 
providéntes non coácte, sed 
spontánee secündum Deum, 
neque turpis lucri grátia, sed 
voluntarie; neque ut domi- 
nántes in cleris, sed forma 
facti gregis ex ánimo. Eit, 
cum apparüerit princeps pa- 
stórum, percipiétis immarce- 
scibilem X glórim | corónam. 
Deus autem omnis gratia, qui 
vocávit nos in ætérnam suam 
glóriam in Christo Jesu, mó- 
dicum passos ipse perfíciet, 
confirmábit solidabítque. Tpsi 
glória et impérium in stecu- 
Ja sæculórum, Amen. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


» 


DEC. 31—ST. SYLVESTER 


165 


Gradual. Ps. 106, 32, 31 


Exáltent eum in Ecclésia 
plebis: et in cathedra senió- 
rum laudent eum. Y. Confi- 
teántur Dómino misericórdie 
ejus; et mirabília ejus fíliis 
hóminum. 


Alleltija, allelüja. Matth. 
16, 18. 'Tu es Petrus, et super 
hane petram sdificábo Ec- 
clésiam meam. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Let them exalt him in the 
Church of the people, and 
praise him in the chair of the 
ancients. V. Let the mercies of 
the Lord give glory to him and 
his wonderful works to the 
children of men. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Matth. 16, 
18. Thou art Peter and upon 
this rock I wil build My 
Church. 


Gospel. Matt. 16, 13-19 


"Y Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Mattheum. 


PN ILLO témpore: Venit Je- 
sus in partes Cesarése 
Philippi, et interrogábat di- 
Scipulos suos, dicens: Quem 
dicunt hómines esse Fílium 
hóminis? At ill dixérunt: 
Alii Joánnem Baptistam, alii 
autem Eliam, alii vero Jere- 
miam, aut unum ex prophé- 
tis. Dicit illis Jesus: Vos au- 
tem quem me esse dicitis? 
Respóndens Simon Petrus, 
dixit: Tu es Christus, Fílius 
Dei vivi. Respóndens autem 
Jesus, dixit ei: Beátus es, 
Simon Bar Jona: quia caro 
et sanguis non revelavit tibi, 
sed Pater meus, qui in celis 
est. Et ego dico tibi, quia tu 
es Petrus, et super hanc pe- 
tram 2dificébo Ecclésiam 
meam, et porte ínferi non 
prevalébunt advérsus eam. 
Et tibi dabo claves regni cæ- 
lórum. Et quodcümque ligá- 
veris super terram, erit ligá- 
tum et in celis: et quodcüm- 


H* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus came 

into the quarters of 
Caesarea Philippi, and He asked 
His disciples, saying, Whom do. 
men say that the Son of man 
is? But they said, Some, John 
the Baptist, and other some, 
Elias, and others, Jeremias, or 
one of the prophets. Jesus 
saith to them, But whom do 
you say that I am? Simon 
Peter answered, Thou art 
Christ, the Son of the living 
God. And Jesus answering, 
said to him, Blessed art thou, 
Simon Bar-Jona, because flesh 
and blood hath not revealed it 
to thee, but My Father Who is 
in heaven: and I say to thee, 
that thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I will build My 
Church, .and the gates of hell 
shall not prevail against it: 
and to thee I will give the keys 
of the Kingdom of heaven: and 
whatsoever thou shalt bind 
upon earth, it shall be bound 


http://ccwatershed.org 


166 


also in heaven; and whatso- 
ever thou shalt loose on earth, 
it shell be loosed also in 


heaven. 
Creed, page 765. 


DEC. 31—ST. SYLVESTER 


que sólveris super terram, 
erit solütura et in celis, 


Offertory. Jerem. 1, 9.10 


Behold, I have given My 
words in thy mouth: Lo, I 
have set thee this day over the 
nations and over the kingdoms, 
to waste and to destroy, and to 
build and to plant. i 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ecce dedi verba mea in ore 
tuo: ecce constítui te super 
gentes et super regna, ut 
evéllas et déstruas, et edifices 
et plantes. 


Secret 


N THY loving kindness, we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, be 
moved by the offering of our 
gifts and enlighten Thy 
Church: that Thy flock may 
prosper everywhere and the 
shepherds, under Thy guid- 
ance, may be rendered accept- 
able to Thee, Through our 
Lord. 


BLATIS munéribus, qué- 

sumus Dómine, Ecclé- 
siam tuam benignus illámina: 
ut, et gregis tui profíciat ubi- 
que succéssus, et grati fiant 
nómini tuo, te gubernánte, 
pastéres. Per Dóminum. i 


Second Secret of the octave of Christmas, page 146. 
Preface No. 1, Canon and Special Communicantes, page 798. 


Communion. 


Thou art Peter and upon this 
rock I wil build My Church. 


Matt. 16, 18 


Tu es Petrus, et super hanc 
petram :dificábo Ecclésiam 
meam. 


Postcommunion 


Ince Thy Church has been 
nourished by the sacred 
repast, govern her in Thy 
clemency, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, so that under the guid- 
ance of Thy mighty rule she 
may enjoy greater freedom and 
abiding integrity of religion. 
Through our Lord. 


EFECTIONE sancta enu- 

tritam gubérna, qu&- 
sumus Dómine, tuam placátus 
Ecclésiam: ut poténti mode- 
ratióne dirécta, et incremén- 
ta libertátis accipiat et in re- 
ligiénis integritáte persistat, 
Per Dóminum, 


Second Postcommunion of the octave of Christmas, page 146. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


CIRCUMCISION OF OUR LORD 


Copyright.by Deruiger Brother." 


The Circumcision of Our Lord Jesus Christ 
(White) 


STATION AT ST. MARY'S IN TRASTEVERE 
‘Double of the Second Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


. Introit. Is. 9, 6 


UER natus est nobis, et 

fílius datus est nobis: 
cujus impérium super.hüme- 
rum ejus: et vocábitur nomen 
ejus, magni consílii Angelus. 
Ps. 97, 1.. Cantáte Dómino 
cánticum novum: quia mira- 
bília fecit. V. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


cHILp is born to us, and 
.9 son is given to us: 
Whose government is upon His 
Shoulder: and His name shall 
be called the angel of great 
counsel Ps. 97, 1. Sing ye to 
the Lord a new canticle: be- 
cause He hath done wonderful 
things. V. Glory. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui salütis ætérnæ, 

beáte Marie virginitáte 
fecinda, humáno géneri 
premia  prestitísti: tribue, 
quesumus; ut ipsum pro no- 
bis intercédere sentiámus, per 
quem merüimus auctórem vi- 
te suscfpere Dóminum nos- 
trum Jesum Christum Fílium 
tuum: qui tecum. 


cop, Who, by the fruitful 

virginity of blessed Mary, 
hast bestowed upon mankind 
the rewards of eternal salva- 
tion, grant, we beseech Thee, 
that we may evermore experi- 
ence the intercession in our be- 
half of her through whom we 
have been found worthy to re- 
ceive the author of life, Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, Thy Son, 
Who with Thee. 


Epistle. Titus 2, 11-15 . 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Titum. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
Titus. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


168 


EARLY beloved, the grace 
. of God our Saviour hath 
‘appeared to all men, instruct- 
ing us, that, denying ungodii- 
ness and worldly desires, we 
Should live soberly, and justly, 


‘and godly in this world, looking” 


for the blessed hope and com- 
ing of the glory of the great 
God and our Saviour Jesus 
Christ, Who gave Himself for 
us, that He might redeem us 
from all iniquity, and might 
cleanse to Himself a people ac- 
ceptable, a pursuer of good 
works, These things speak, 
and exhort: in Christ Jesus our 
Lord. 


CIRCUMCISION OF OUR LORD 


ARÍSSIME: Appáruit grá- 

‘tia Dei Salvatéris nostri 
ómnibus homínibus, erüdiens 
nos, ut abnegántes impietá- 
tem, et secularia desidéria: 
sóbrie, et juste, et-pie vivámus 
in hoc seculo, exspectántes 
beátam spem, et advéntum 
glórie magni Dei, et Salva- 
tóris nostri Jesu Christi; qui 
dedit semetípsum pro nobis, 
ut nos redímeret ab omni ini- 
quitáte, et mundáret sibi pó- 
pulum acgeptabilem, sectató- 
rem bondérum óperum. Hec 


lóquere, et exhortgre, in 
Christo Jesu Dómino nostro. 
NOSSA 


Gradual. Ps.97,3,4,2 


All the ends of the earth 
have seen the salvation of our 
God: sing joyfully to God all 
the earth. Y. The Lord hath 
made known his salvation: He 
hath revealed His justice in 
the sight of the gentiles. 

Alleluia, alleluia. V. Heb. 1, 
1-2. God, Who diversely spoke 
in times past to the fathers by 
the prophets, last of all in these 
days hath spoken to us by His 
Son. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Vidérunt omnes fines terre 
salutére Dei nostri: jubiláte 
Deo, omnis terra. Y. Notum 
fecit Dóminus salutáre suum: 
ante conspéctum géntium re- 
velávit justítiam suam. 

Allelüja, allelija. Y. Hebr. 
1,1-2. Multifárie olim Deus 
loquens pátribus in prophétis, 
novíssime diébus istis locütus 
est nobis in Fílio. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Luke 2, 21 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT lime, after eight 

days were accomplished 

&t the child should be cir- 

cumcised, His name was called 

Jesus, which was called by the 

angel, before He was conceived 
in the womb. 


Creed, page 765. 


"m Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 


T. ILLO témpore: Postquam 
consummati sunt dies 
octo, ut circumciderétur pu- 
er: vocátum est nomen ejus 
Jesus, quod vocátum est ab 
Angelo, priüsquam in útero 
conciperétur. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MOST HOLY NAME OF JESUS 169 


Offertory. Ps. 88, 12, 15 


Tui sunt celi; et tua est ‘Thine are the heavens and 
terra: "orbem terrárum, et Thine is the earth: the world 
PDlenitúdinem ejus tu fundás- and the fulness thereof Thou 
ti: justitia et judíclum præ- hast founded; justice and judg- 
parátio sedis tus. ment are the. preparation - of 

] Thy throne. 


‘Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret p 

(Ou nostris, que- “~ ccEPT our offerings and 
sumus, Dómine, pre- prayers, we  beseech 
cibüsque suscéptis: et celésti-- Thee, O Lord; cleanse us by 


bus nos munda mystériis, et Thy heavenly mysteries and 
cleménter exáudi. Per Dó- graciously hear us. Through 


minum. our Lord. 
Preface No. 1, Canon and Special Communicantes, page 798. 
Communion. Ps. 97, 3 


Vidérunt omnes fines terre 
Salutáre Dei nostri. 


All the ends of the earth 
have seen the salvation of our 
God. 


Postcommunion 


IC nos communio, Dó- 

mine, purget a crimi- 
ne: et intercedénte  beáta 
Vírgine Dei Genitrice María, 
celéstis remédii fáciat esse 
consórtes. Per eümdem Dó- 
minum. 


Av this communion, O 

Lord, cleanse us from 
sin and, by the intercession of 
the Blessed Virgin Mary, 
Mother of God, make us par- 
takers of the heavenly remedy. 
Through the same. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Sunday between the Circumcision anb the Epiphany 
(White) 
Feast of the Most Holp Mame of Jesus (White) 


Double of the Second Class 


By a decree of the S. Congr. of Rites, Oct. 28, 1913, this feast 
is to be celebrated on the Sunday between the Circumcision 
pee Epiphany, If no Sunday occur, it is celebrated.on Jan- 
DT i 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


170 


MOST HOLY NAME OF JESUS 


Introit. Philip. 2, 10, 11 


N THE name of Jesus let 

every knee bow of those 
that are in heaven, on earth, 
and under the earth; and let 
every tongue confess that the 
Lord Jesus Christ is in the 
glory of God the Father. Ps. 
8, 2. O Lord, our Lord, how 
wonderful is Thy name in the 
whole earth! JJ. Glory: 


N NÓMINE Jesu omne genu 

flectátur czléstium, ter- 
réstrium, et infernórum: et 
omnis lingua  confiteátur, 
quia Dóminus Jesus Christus 
in glória est Dei Patris. Ps. 8, 
2. Dómine Dóminus noster, 
quam admirábile est nomen 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst appoint 

Thine only-begotten Son 
to be the Saviour of the human 
race, and didst command that 
He be called Jesus, mercifully 
grant that we may enjoy in 
teaven the vision of Him 
"Whose holy name we venerate 
sm earth. Through the same. 


tuum in univérsa terra! JY. 
Glória Patri. 
EUS, qui. unigénitum 


j Fílium tuum constitu- 
ísti humáni géneris Salva- 
tórem, et Jesum vocári jus- 
sísti: concéde propítius; ut, 
cujus sanctum nomen vene- 
rámur in terris, ejus quoque 
aspéctu perfruámur in calis. 
Per eümdem Dóminum nos- 
irum. 


In Low Masses a commemoration of the particular Octave- 
tay is added, thus: Jan. 2, of St. Stephen, Prayer, page 173, 
Secret and, Postcommunion, pages 149, 150; Jan. 3, of St. John, 


page 150; Jan. 4, of the Holy Innocents, page 154. 
Lesson. Acts 4, 8-12 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles, 


N THOSE days, Peter, filled 

with the Holy Ghost, said, 
Ye princes of the people and 
ancients, hear: If we this day 
are examined concerning the 
good deed done to the infirm 
man, by what means he hath 
been made whole, be it known 
to you all, and to all the people 
of Israel, that by the name of 
Our Lord Jesus Christ of Naz- 
areth, Whom ye _ crucified, 
Whom God hath raised from 
the dead, even by Him this 
man standeth here. before you 
whole. This is the stone which 


Léctio Actuum  Apóstolo- 
rum. 


N DIÉBUS ilis: Petrus replé- 
tus Spíritu Sancto, dixit: 
Principes pópuli, et senióres 
audite: Si nos hódie dijudicá- 
mur in benefácto hóminis in- 
firmi, in quo iste salvus factus 
est, notum sit ómnibus vobis 
et omni plebi Israël: quia in 
nómine Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi Nazaréni, quem vos 
crucifixístis, quem Deus sus- 
citávit a mórtuis, in hoc iste 
astat coram vobis sanus. Hic 
est lapis, qui reprobátus est & 
vobis zdificántibus, qui fac- 


tus est in caput ánguli: et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MOST HOLY NAME OF JESUS 


non est. in lio áliquo salus. 
Nec enim áliud nomen est 
sub celo datum hominibus, 
in quo opórteat nos salvos 
fieri, 


171 


was rejected by you the build- 
ers; which is become the head 
of the corner: neither is there 
salvation in any other. For 
there is no other name under 
heaven given to men, whereby 
we must be saved. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed, by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. 


Salvos fac nos, Dómine, 
Deus noster, et cóngrega nos 
de natiónibus: ut confiteá- 
mur nómini sancto tuo, et 
gloriémur in glória tua. JY. 
Isai. 63, 16. 'Tu, Dómine, pa- 
ter noster, et redémptor nos- 
ter: & seculo nomen tuum. 


Lesser 
^ Allelüja, allelüja. JY. Ps. 
144, 21. Laudem Dómini lo- 
quétur os meum, et benedícat 
omnis caro nomen sanctum 
ejus. Allelhija. 


Ps. 105, 47 


Save us, O Lord, our God, 
and gather us from among the 
nations: that we may give 
thanks to Thy holy name, and 
may glory in Thy praise. y. 
Is. 63, 16. "Thou, O Lord, art 
our Father and Redeemer, Thy 
name is from eternity. 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. y. Ps. 144, 
21. My mouth shall speak the 
praise. of the Lord, and let all 
flesh bless His holy name. 


` Alleluia, 


Tract. Ps. 79, 20 


Dómine, Deus virtütum, 
convérte nos: et osténde fá- 
ciem tuam, et salvi érimus: 
sonet vox tua in áuribus meis. 
y. Cant. 2, 4, Vox enim tua 
dulcis, et fácies tua decóra 
nimis. Y. Cant. 1, 2. Oleum 
effüsum nomen tuum, Jesu: 
ídeo adolescéntule dilexérunt 
te. 


O Lord, God of hosts, convert 
us; and show Thy face, and we 
shall be saved; let Thy voice 
Sound in my ears. JV. Cant. 2, 
4. For Thy voice is sweet, and 
Thy face exceedingly beautiful. 
V. Cant. 1, 2. Thy name, O 
Jesus, is oil poured out, there- 
fore the maidens have loved 
Thee. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alllüja, allelüja. 'Y. Ps. 
144, 21. Laudem Dómini lo- 
quétur os meum, et benedícat 
omnis caro nomen sanctum 
ejus. Allelija. Y. Ps. 144, 1. 
Exaltábo te, Deus meus Rex: 
et benedícam nómini Sancto 


Alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 144, 21. 
My mouth shall speak the 
praise of the Lord: and let all 
fiesh bless His holy name for 
ever. Alleluia. JY. Ps. 144, 1. 
I will extol Thee, O God, my 
King, and I will bless Thy hol 


http://ccwatershed.org 


172 


name, Jesus, for ever; yes, for 
ever and ever. Alleluia. 


' Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


MOST HOLY NAME OF JESUS 


tuo, Jesu, in seculum et in 
Seculum seculi. Allelüja. 


_Gospel.. Luke 2, 21 


®© Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 

T THAT time, after eight 

days were accomplished 

that the child should be cir- 

cumcised, His name was called 

Jesus, which was called by the 

angel, before He was conceived 

in the womb. 


Creed, page 765. 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 

N.ILLO témpore: Postquam 
I consummáti sunt dies 
octo ut cireumciderétur puer: 
vocátum est nomen ejus Je- 
sus, quod vocátum est ab 
Angelo. priüsquam in útero 
conciperétur. 


Offertory. . Ps. 85, 12, 5 


I will praise Thee, O Lord my 
God, with my whole heart, and 
I wil glorify Thy name for 
ever; for Thou, O Lord, art 
sweet and mild, and plenteous 
in mercy to all that call upon 
Thee. Alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Confitébor tibi, Dómine 
Deus meus, in toto corde meo, 
et glorificábo nomen tuum in 
ztérnum:. quóniam tu, Dó- 
mine, suávis et mitis es: et 
multe misericérdie. ómnibus 
invocántibus te. Allelüja. 


Secret 


AY Thy blessing, O most 

merciful God, by which 
the whole creation hath life, 
sanctify this our sacrifice, 
which we offer Thee to the 
glory of the name of Thy Son, 
Our Lord Jesus Christ, that it 
may be pleasing to Thy 
majesty as an act of praise and 
be profitable to us for. our sal- 
vation, Through the same. 


Preface No. 1, page 798. 


Communion. 


All the nations Thou hast 
made shall come and adore be- 


ENEDÍCTIO tua, clemen- 
B tissime Deus, qua 
omnis viget creatüra, sanctí- 
ficet, quesumus, hoc sacrifi- 
cium nostrum, quod ad glóri- 
am nóminis Fílii tui, Dómini 
nosiri Jesu Christi offérimus 
tibi: ut majestáti tue placére 
possit ad laudem et nobis pro- 
ficere ad salütem. Per eüm- 
dem Dóminum. 


Ps. 85, 9, 10 


Omnes gentes quasciimque 
fecísti, vénient, et adorábunt 


http://ccwatershed.org 


"1 


ES 


\ 


OCTAVE OF ST. STEPHEN, ST. JOHN 


coram te, Dómine, et glorifi- 
cébunt nomen tuum: quóni- 
am magnus és tu, et fáciens 
mirabília: tu es Deus solus. 
Allelüja. 


178 


fore Thee, O Lord; and they 
shall glorify Thy name: for 
Thou art great, and dost won- 
derful things, Thou art God 
alone. Alleluia. - 


Postcommunion 


MNÍPOTENS ætérne Deus, 

qui creásti et redemísti 
nos réspice propitius vota 
nostra; et sacrifícdium salu- 
taris hóstie, quod in honór- 
em nóminis Fílii tui, Dómini 
nostri Jesu Christi Majestáti 
tus obtülimus, plácido et be- 
nígno vultu suscípere digné- 
ris: ut grátia tua nobis in- 
füsa, sub gloriédso nómine 
Jesu, ztérne predestinatiénis 
titulo, gaudeámus nómina 
nostra scripta esse in celis. 
Per eümdem Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

Who hast created and 
redeemed us, graciously regard 
our desires, and deign to re- 
ceive with kind and peaceful 
countenance the sacrifice of 
the saving victim, which we 
have offered to Thy majesty, 
in honor of the name of Thy 
Son, Our Lord Jesus Christ, 
that, Thy grace being poured 
out upon us, we may rejoice in 
the glorious name of Jesus, the 
title of eternal predestination, 
because our names are written 
in heaven. Through the same. 


GQrtabe-3Dap of St. Stephen (Red) 
Simple 


Mass of the feast, page 146. 
Prayer, as below. 


Second Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion of our Blessed 


Lady, page 824. 


Third Prayer, Secret and Posteommunion for the Church or 


for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Prayer . 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 


Deus, qui primítias . 


Mártyrum in beáti Levite 
Stéphani sánguine dedicásti: 
iríbue, quesumus; ut pro no- 
bis intercéssor exsístat, qui 
pro suis étiam persecutóribus 
exorávit Dóminum nostrum 
Jesum Christum Fílum tu- 
um; qui tecum vivit. 


LMIaHTY, eternal God, 

Who didst dedicate the 
first-fruits of the martyrs in 
the blood of the blessed levite 
Stephen, grant, we beseech 
‘Thee, that he may ever stand 
as our intercessor who prayed 
even for his persecutors to Our 
Lord, Jesus Christ, Thy Son, 
Who with Thee, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


\ 


174 


VIGIL OF EPIPHANY 


@rtave-Dap of St. John (white) 
Simple 


Mass of the feast, page 150, 


Second: Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion of our ened 


Lady, page 824. 


Third Prayers for the Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


@ctave-Dayp of Holp Innocents (Red) 
Simple 


Mass of the feast, page 153. 


Second Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion of our Blessed 


Lady, page 824. 


Third Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion for the Church or 


for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Wigil of the Epipbany (white) 
STATION AT Sr. PETER'S 
Privileged Vigil of the Second Class 
Mass of Sunday within the octave of Christmas, page 160. 


Gospel as below. 


Commemoration of St. Telesphorus, from i^e Common of 

One or More Supreme Pontiffs, page 1302. 

Third Prayer of our Blessed Lady (O God Who by the fruit- 
ful), page 824, with, its Secret and, Postcommunion. 


Gospel. Matt. 2, 19-23 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, when Herod 

was dead, behold an 

angel of the Lord appeared in 
Sleep to Joseph in Egypt, say- 
ing: Arise, and take the child 
and His mother, and go into 
the land of Israel: for they are 


dead that sought the life of the 


child. Who arose, and took the 
child and His mother and came 
into the land of Israel. But 
hearing that Archelaus reigned 
in Judea in the room of Herod 
his father, he was afraid to go 
thither: and, being warned in 
sleep, retired into the quarters 
of Galilee. And coming he 
dwelt in a city called Nazareth: 


"Hi Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Defüncto 
Heróde, ecce Angelus Dó- 
mini appáruit in somnis Jos- 
eph in ZEgypto, dicens: Surge 
et áccipe püáerum, et matrem 
ejus, et vade in terram Israél: 
defüncti sunt enim, qui que- 
rébant ánimam püerl Qui 
consürgens, accépit püerum, 
et matrem ejus, et venit in 
terram Israél. Audiens au- 
tem, quod Archélaus regnáret 
in Judæa pro Heróde patre 
suo, timuit illo ire: et admó- 
nitus in somnis, secéssit in 
partes Galilee. Et véniens 
habitávit in civitáte, quie vo- 
cátur Nazareth: ut adimple- / 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
| 
| 


THE EPIPHANY 


rétur quod dictum est per 
Prophétas:  Quóniam Na- 
zargus vocábitur. 


Creed, page 765. 


175 


that it might be fulfilled which 
was said by the prophets: That 
He shall.be called a Nazarite. 


The Epiphany of Our Lord Jesus Christ (white: 
STATION AT St. PETER'S 


Double of the First Class with a Privileged Octave 
of the Second Order 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


cce advénit dominator 

Dominus: et regnum in 
manu ejus, et potéstas, et im- 
périum. Ps. 71, 1. Deus judi- 
cium tuum regi da: et justi- 
tiam tuam Filio Regis. JV. 
Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Mal. 3, 1 


EHOLD the Lord the Rulet 

is come: and a kingdom 
in His hand, and power and 
dominion. Ps. 71, 1. Give ta 
the king thy judgment, O 
God: and to the king's son Th» 
justice. Y. Glory. 


Prayer 


Eus, qui hodiérna die 

Unigéntum tuum génti- 
bus stella duce revelásti: 
concéde propitius; ut, qui jam 
te ex fide cognóvimus, usque 
ad contemplándam spéciem 
tue celsitüdinis perducámur. 
Per eümdem Dóminum. 


cop, Who by the guidance 

of a star didst this day 
reveal Thine  only-begotten 
Son to the Gentiles, mercifully 
grant that we, who know 'Thee 
now by faith, may be so led ae 
to behold with our eyes the 
beauty of Thy majesty. Through 
the same. 


Lesson. Is. 60, 1-6 


Léctio Isaís Prophéte. 


URGE, illumináre, Jerusa- 
lem: quia venit lumen 
uum, et glória Dómini super 
te orta est. Quia ecce ténebre 
opérient terram, et caligo pó- 
pulos: super te autem oriétur 
Dóminus, et glória ejus in te 
vidébitur.. Et ambulábunt 
gentes in IJámine tuo, et reges 


Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 
RISE, be enlightened, O 
Jerusalem; for thy light 
is come, and the glory of the 
Lord is risen upon thee. For 
behold darkness shall cover the 
earth, and a mist the people; 
but the Lord shall arise upon 
thee, and His glory shall be 
seen upon thee. And the Gen- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


176 


tiles shall walk in thy light, 
and kings in the brightness of 
thy rising. Lift up thy eyes 
round about, and see; all these 
are gathered together, they are 
come to thee: thy sons shall 
come from afar, and thy 
daughters shall rise up at thy 
side. Then shalt thou see, and 
abound, and thy heart shall 
wonder and be enlarged, when 
the multitude of the sea shall 
be converted to thee, the 
strength of the Gentiles shall 
come to thee. The multitude 
of camels shall cover thee, the 
dromedaries of Madian and 


THE EPIPHANY 


in splendóre ortus tui. Leva 
in circhitu óculos tuos, et 
vide: omnes isti congregáti 
sunt, venérunt tibi: filil tui 
de longe vénient, et fflie tue 
de látere surgent. Tunc vi- 
débis, et áfflues, mjrábitur et 
dilatábitur cor tuum, quando 
convérsa fuerit ad te multi- 
tudo maris, fortitido géntium 
vénerit tibi. Inundátio came- 
lórum opériet te, dromedárii 
Mádian et Epha: omnes de 
Saba vénient, aurum et thus 
deferéntes, et laudem Démi- 
no annuntiántes. 


Epha; all they from Saba shall come, bringing gold and 
frankincense, and showing forth praise to the Lord. . 


Gradual. 


All they from Saba shall 
come, bringing gold and frank- 
incense, and showing forth 
praise to the Lord. Y. Arise 
and be enlightened, O Jerusa- 
lem, for the glory of the Lord 
is risen upon thee. 

Alleluia, alleluia. JY. Matt. 
2, 2. We have seen His star in 
the east: and are come with 
gifts to adore the-Lord. Alleluia, 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Is. 60, 1 


Omnes de Saba vénient, 
aurum et thus deferéntes et 
laudem Dómino ennuntián- 
tes. Y. Surge, et illumináre, 
Jerúsalem: quia glória Dó- 
mini super te orta est. 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Matth. 
2, 2. Vidimus stellam ejus in 
Oriénte, et vénimus cum mu- 
néribus adoráre. Dóminum 
Allelija, 


Gospel. Matt. 2, 1-12 


44 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

HEN Jesus was born in 
Bethlehem of Juda, in 

the days.of King Herod, behold 
there came wise men from the 
east to Jerusalem; saying, 
Where is He that is born king 
of the Jews? for we have seen 
His star in the east, and are 


1H Sequéntia sancti: Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 


UM. NATUS esset Jesus in 

Béthlehem Juda in dié- 
bus Heródis regis, ecce Magi 
ab Oriénte venérunt Jerosó- 
lymam, dicéntes: Ubi est qui 
natus est rex Judeórum? Vi- 
dimus enim stellam ejus in 
Oriénte, et vénimus adoráre 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE EPIPHANY 


eum. Audiens autem Heródes 
rex, turbátus est, et omnis Je- 

rüsalem cum illo. Et congré- 
gans omnes principes sacer- 
dótum, et scribas pópuli, scis- 
citabátur ab eis ubi Christus 
nascerétur. At illi dixérunt 
ei: In Béthlehem Jude: sic 
enim scriptum est per Pro- 
phétam: Et tu Béthlehem, 
terra Juda, nequáquam mí- 
nima es in princípibus Juda; 
ex te enim éxiet dux, qui re- 
gat pópulum meum Israël. 
Tunc Heródes, clam vocátis 
Magis, diligénter  didicit ab 
eis tempus stelle, que appá- 
ruit eis: et mittens illos in 
Béthlehem, dixit: Ite, et in- 
terrogáte ditigénter de püero: 
et cum invenéritis, renuntiáte 
mihi, ut et ego véniens adó- 
rem eum. Qui cum audíssent 
regem abiérunt. Et ecce stel- 
la, quam vidérant in Oriénte, 
antecedébat eos, usque dum 
véniens, staret supra, ubi erat 
puer. Vidéntes autem stel- 
lam, gavísi sunt gáudio mag- 
no valde. Et intrántes 
domum, invenérunt. Puerum 
cum Maria matre ejüs, (hic 
genuflectitur) et procidentes 
adoravérunt eum. Et apértis 
thesáuris suis obtulérunt ei 
münera, aurum, thus, et 
myrrham. Et respónso ac- 
cépto in somnis ne redírent 
ad Heródem, per áliam viam 
revérsi sunt in  regiónem 
suam. 


ivi 


come to adore Him. And King 
Herod, hearing this, was 
troubled, and all Jerusalem 

with him. And assembling to- 
gether all the chief priests and 
the scribes of the people, he 
inquired of them where Christ 
should be born. But they said 
to him: In Bethlehem of Juda; 
for so it is written by the 
prophet; And thou Bethlehem, 
the land of Juda, art not the 
least among the princes of 
Juda; for out of thee shall-come 
forth the ruler that shall rule 
my people Israel. Then Herod 
privately calling the wise men, 
learned diligently of them the 
time of the star which ap- 
peared to them; and sending 
them into Bethlehem, said, Go 
and diligently inquire after the 
child, and when you have 
found Him bring. me word 
again, that I also may come 
and adore Him. Who having 
heard the king, went their 
way; and behold the star which 
they had seen in the east went 
before them, until it came and 
stood over where the child was. 
And seeing the star, they re- 
joiced with exceeding great 
joy. And entering into the 
house, they’ found the child 
with Mary His mother (here 
all kneel down), and falling 
down they adored Him. And 
opening their treasures, they 
offered Him gifts: gold, frank- 
incense, and myrrh. And hav- 
ing received an answer in sleep 


that they should not return tò Herod, they went back another 


way into their own country. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 71, 10, 11 


Reges Tharsis, et insule 
múnera ófferent: reges Ara- 


The kings of Tharsis and the 
islands shall offer presents: the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


L78 HOLY FAMILY 

kings of the Arabians and of bum et Saba dona addücent: 
Saba shall bring gifts: and all et adorábunt eum omnes re- 
kings of the earth shall adore ges terre: omnes gentes sér- 


Him: all nations shall serve 
Him. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


vient ei. 


Secret 


AVORABLY regard the gifts 
~t of Thy Church, O Lord, 
wherein no longer gold is of- 
fered, nor frankincense, nor 
myrrh, but He who by these 
gifts is signified is become our 
Sacrifice and our food, Jesus 
Christ, our Lord, Who with 
Thee. 


ccLisiz tue, quesumus 

Démine, dona propitius 
intuére: quibus non jam au- 
rum, thus et myrrha profér- 
tur; sed quod eísdem munéri- 
bus declarátur, immolátur et 
sümitur, Jesus Christus, .Fí- 
Hus tuus, Dóminus noster: 
Qui tecum vivit. 


Prefáce No. 2, Canon and Special Communicantes, page 800. 


Communion. Matt. 2, 2 


We have seen His star in the 
east, and are come with gifts 
to adore the Lord. 


Vidimus stellam ejus in 
Oriénte, et vénimus cum mu- 
néribus adoráre Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


Gu. we beseech Thee O 
) almighty God, by tbe un- 
derstanding of hearts made 
pure we may comprehend that 
which by solemn rite we cele- 
brate. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


RESTA Quaesumus, omní- 

potens Deus: ut que 
Solémni celebrámus  offício, 
purificáte mentis intelligén- 
tia consequámur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


This Mass is said daily during the octave, with a commemo- 
ration of our Blessed Lady, page 824, and a third prayer for 
the Church or for the Pope, page 826. 


Sunday Within tbe Octave of the Epiphanp 
. The Holp Family, Jesus, Mary, Joseph (White) 
Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Prov. 23, 24, 25 


Ti the father of the Just 
rejoice greatly; let thy 
father and thy mother be joy- 


XSÜLTAT  gáudio pater 
Justi, gáudeat Pater 
tuus et Mater tua, et exsültet 


http://ccwatershed.org 


' que genuit te. Ps. 82, 2, 3. ful, and let her rejoice that 
Quam  dilécta tabernácula bore thee. Ps. 82, 2, 3. How 
tua, Dómine virtütum! con- lovely are Thy tabernacles O 
cupiscit, et déficit anima mea Lord of hosts; my soul longeth 
in átria Dómini V. Glória and fainteth for the courts of 
Patri. the Lord. ¥. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


HOLY FAMILY 179 


Prayer 


ÓwiNE Jesu Christe, qui 

Mariz et Joseph süb- 
ditus, domésticam vitam in- 
effabilibus virtütibus conse- 
crásti: fac nos, utritisque 
auxilio, Familie sancte tue 
exémplis ínstrui; et consór- 
tium cónsequi sempitérnum: 
Qui vivis. 


LoRD Jesus Christ, Who, 

in the days of Thy. sub- 
jection to Mary and Joseph, 
didst consecrate home life by 
ineffable acts of virtue; by the 
intercession of Thy holy 
Mother and of Thy foster- 
Father, make us so to profit by 
the example they with Thee 


have set us, that we may be 
counted members of Thy household for evermore. Who livest. 
Second Prayer of the Sunday within the octave of the 
Epiphany, page 182; third Prayer of Epiphany, page. 175. 
Epistle, Put ye on, page 196. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is yeydüdnd 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 26, 4 


nati pétii a Dómino, hane One thing I have asked of 

. requiram, ut inhábitem in the Lord: this. will I seek after: 
domo Dómini ómnibus diébus that Y may dwell in the house 
vite mex. JV. Ps. 83,5. Be&ti, of the Lord ail the days of my 
qui hábitant in domo tua, life. Y. Ps. 83,5. Blessed are 
Dómine: in secula seculórum they who dwell in Thy house, 
laudábunt te. O Lord; they shall praise Thee 

for ever and ever. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelája, allelüja. V. Is. 45, ^ Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Isaias 
15. Vere tu es Rex abscóndi- 45, 15. Truly Thou art a hidden 
tus, Deus Israël Salvator. King, the God of Israel, the 
Allelüja. Saviour. Alleluia. 


Tract. Heb. 10, 5 
Hóstiam et oblatiónem no- Sacrifice and oblation Thou 


luísti, corpus autem 'aptásti wouldst not, but a body Thou 
mihi V. Holocáustum et pro has fitted unto me.” Y. Burni- 


* 
3 


N http://ccwatershed.org 


180 


Offering and sin-offering Thou 
didst not require: then said I: 
Behold I come. J.In the head 
of the book it is written of Me 
that I.should do Thy will. 


HOLY FAMILY 


dixi: Ecce vénio. Y. In cá- 
pite libri scriptum est de 
me: Ut fáciam, Deus, volun- 
tátem tuam. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. VY. Blessed 
is the man that heareth Me 
and that watcheth daily at My 
gates, and waiteth at the post 
of My doors, Alleluia. V. Our 
life is hidden with Christ in 
God. ; 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelüja. y. Be- 
átus homo qui áudit me, et 
qui vígilat ad fores meas 
quotídie, et obsérvat ad pos- 
tes óstii mei. Allelüja. . y. 
Vita nostra est abscóndita 
cum Christo in Deo. Allelaja. 


Gospel. Luke 2, 42-52 


H Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
'ND When Jesus was twelve 
years old, they going up 
to Jerusalem according to 
ihe custom of the feast, and 
having fulfilled the days, when 
they returned, the child Jesus 
remained in Jerusalem; and 
His parents knew it not. And 
thinking that He was in tbe 
company, they came a day's 
journey, &nd sought Him 
among their kinsfolks and ac- 
guaintance. And not finding 
Him, they returned into Jeru- 
salem, seeking Him. And it 
came to pass, that after three 
days they found Him in the 
temple sitting in the midst. of 
the doctors, hearing them and 
asking them questions. And all 
that heard Him were aston- 
ished at His wisdom and His 
answers. And seeing Him, 
they wondered. And His 
mother said to Him, Son, why 
hast Thou done so to us? be- 
hold Thy father and I have 
sought Thee sorrowing, And 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secimdum Lucam. 
UM FACTUS esset Jesus 
annórum duódecim,.as- 
cendéntibus illis Jerosóly- 
mam secündum consuetüdi- 
nem diél festi, consummatis- 
que diébus, cum redírent, re- 
mánsit puer Jesus in Jerüsa- 
lem, et non cognovérunt pa- 
réntes ejus. Existimántes au- 
tem illum esse in comitátu, 
venérunt iter diéi, et requi- 
rébant eum inter cognátos, et 
notos. Et non inveniéntes, 
regréssi -sunt in Jerusalem, 
requiréntes eum. Et factum 
est, post triduum invenérunt 
illum in templo sedéntem in 
médio doctórum, audiéntem 
illos, et interrogántem eos, 
Stupébant autem omnes, qui 
eum audiébant, super pru- 
déntia et respónsis ejus. Et 
vidéntes admiráti sunt. Et 
dixit Mater ejus ad illum: 
Fili, quid fecísti nobis sic? 
ecce pater tuus, et ego dolén- 
tes qug&rebámus te. Et ait ad 
illos: quid est quod me quere- 


http://ccwatershed.org "2 


M 
peccáto non postulásti: tune 


| 


AV 


HOLY FAMILY 


bátis? nesclebátis quia in his, 
que Patris mei sunt, opórtet 
me esse? Et ipsi non intel- 
lexérunt verbum, quod locü- 
tus est ad eos. Et descéndit 
cum eis, et venit Názareth: et 
erat sübditus illis, Et mater 
ejus conservábit ómnia verba 
hec in corde suo. Et Jesus 
proficiébat sapiéntia, et ætá- 
te et grátia apud Deum, et 
hómines. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 
Tulérunt Jesum paréntes 


ejus in Jerúsalem, ut sisterent 
eum Dómino. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


181 


He said to them, How is it that 
you sought Me? did you not 
know that I must be about My 
Father’s business? And they 
understood not the word that 
He spoke unto them. And He 
went down with them, and 
came to Nazareth; and was 
subject to them. And His 
mother kept all these words in 
her heart. And. Jesus advanced 
in wisdom, and age, and grace 
with God and man. 


Luke 2, 22 
The parents of Jesus carried 
Him to the temple, to present 
Him to the Lord. 


Secret 


LACATIONIS hóstiam offé- 

rimus tibi, Dómine, sup- 
pliciter deprecántes: ut, per 
intercessiónem Deiparz. Vir- 
ginis cum beáto Joseph, fami- 
lias nostras, in pace et grátia 
tua firmiter constítuas. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


YE Yo apprase Thee, O Lord, we 

In offer the Victim of Salva- 
tion, humbly beseeching 'Thee 
that, through the prayers of 
ihe Virgin Mother of God and 
of St. Joseph, Thou wouldst 
establish our households in 
Thy peace and favor. Through 
the same. 


Second Secret of the Sunday within the octave of the 
Epiphany, page 184; third Secret of the Epiphony, page 178. 


Preface No. 2, Canon and SpecialyCommunicantes, page 800. 


Communion. 


Descéndit Jesus cum eis, et 
venit Názareth, et erat süb- 
ditus illis. 


Luke 2, 51 

Jesus. went down with them, 
and came to Nazareth and was 
Subject to them. 


Postcommunion: 


vos celéstibus  réficis 
sacraméntis, fac, Dó- 
mine, Jesu sancte Familie 
tue exémpla jügiter imitári: 
ut, in hora mortis nostra, 
occurrénte gloriósa Virgine 


o TROU, O Lord, bring us 
whom Thou hast re- 
reshed with heavenly mys- 
teries to imitate the example of 


Thy holy Family, that at the 
hour of our death, with the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


182 SUNDAY WITHIN THE OCTAVE 

Virgin Mother and blessed Jos- Matre tua cum beáto Joseph; 
eph at hand, we may be re- per te in etérna tabernácula 
ceived by Thee into our ever- récipi mereámur: Qui vivis. 

lasting home.. Who livest. 


d Postcommunion of the Sunday within the octave of 
io Gooner, page 184; third Postcommunion of the Epiphany, 


page 178. 


Sundap Within the Octave (white) 
STATION aT THE TITLE OF PAMMACHIUS 
Semi-Double 
When the Epiphany falls on a Sunday, this Mass is said on 


the following Saturday. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 


e a high throne I saw 
@ man sitting, whom & 
multitude of angels adore 
singing together: Behold Him 
the name of Whose empire is 
to eternity. Ps. 99, 1. Sing 
joyfully to God, all the earth: 
serve the Lord with gladness. 
y. Glory. 


N EXCÉLSO throno vidi se- 

dére virum, quem adórat 
multitüdo angelórum psal- 
léntes in unum: Ecce cujus 
impérii nomen est in etér- 
num. Ps. 99, 1. Jubiláte Deo 
omnis terra: servíte Dómino 
in letitia. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyzie, page 761; Gloria; page 762. 


Prayer 


o THOU, O Lord, out of Thy 
heavenly goodness foster 

the holy desires of Thy people; 
that they may both see what 
iney ought to do and have the 
Strength to accomplish what 


Ven quaesumus Dómine 
supplicantis pópuli ce- 
lésti pietate proséquere: ut et 
que agénda sunt, videant; et 
ad implénda que viderint, 
convaléscant. Per Dóminum. 


they have seen. Through our Lord. 
Second Prayer of the octave of the Epiphany, page 184. 


Epistle. Rom. 12, 1-5 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 


RETHREN, I beseech you 

by the mercy of God, 

at you present your bodies, 
& living sacrifice, holy, pleas- 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Romános. 


RATRES: Obsecro vos per 
H misericérdiam Dei, ut 
exhibeátls córpora vestra 
hóstiam vivéntem, sanctam, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SUNDAY WITHIN THE OCTAVE 188 


Deo placéntem, rationábile 
obséquium vestrum. Et nolite 
conformári huic seculo, sed 
feformámini in novitáte sen- 
sus vestri: ut probétis que 
sit volüntas Dei bona, et be- 
néplacens, et perfécta. Dico 
enim per grátiam que data 
est mibi, ómnibus qui sunt 
inter vos: Non plus sápere, 
quam . opóriet sapere, sed 
sapere ad sobrietatem: et 
unicuique sicut Deus divisit 
mensüram fidei. Sicut enim 
in uno cérpore multa membra 
habémus, ómnia autem mem- 
bra non etimdem actum 
habent: ita multi unum cor- 
pus sumus in Christo, singuli 
autem alter altérius membra: 
in Christo Jesu Dómino 
nostro, 


ing unto God, your reasonable 
service. And be not conformed 
to this world; but be reformed 
in the newness of your mind; 
that you may prove what is the 
good, and the acceptable, and 
the perfect will of God. For I 
say, by the grace that is given 
me, to all that are among you, 
not to be more wise than it 
behooveth to be wise, but.to be 
wise unto sobriety: and ac- 
cording as God hath divided to 
every one the measure of faith. 
For as in one body we have 
many members, but all the 
members have not the same 
office: so we, being many, are 
one body in Christ, and every 
one members one of another in 
Christ Jesus our Lord. 


Gradual. Ps. 71, 18, 3 


Benedictus Déminus Deus 
Israël, qui facit mirabília 
magna solus a seculo. y. 
Suscípiant montes pacem pó- 
pulo tuo: et colles justitiam. 


Allelüja, allejüja. JV. Ps. 
99, 1. Jubiláte Deo omnis ter- 
ra: servíte Dómino in letitia. 
Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Blessed be the Lord, the 
God of Israel, Who alone doth 
wonderful things from the be- 
ginning of the world. JY. Let 
the mountains receive peace 
for Thy people: and the hills 
justice. 

Alleluia, alleluia. P. Ps. 99, 
1. Sing joyfully to God, all the 
earth: serve the Lord with 
gladness. Alleluia, 


. Gospel, And when Jesus, page 180. B 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 

Jubilate Deo omnis terra, 

Servíte Dómino in letitia: in- 

tráte in conspéctu ejus in ex- 

sultatióne, quia Dóminus ipse 
est Deus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 99, 1, 2 


Sing joyfully to God, all the 
earth, serve ye the Lord with 
gladness; come in before His 
presence with exceeding great 
joy: for the Lord He is God. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


184 OCTAVE-DAY OF EPIPHANY 


l Secret 

AY the sacrifice offered to sLÁTUM tibi Dómine sac- 

Thee, O Lord, ever vivify rificilum vivificet nos 
and fortify us. Through our semper, et müniat. Per Dó- 
Lord, minum. f 


Second Secret of the octave of the Epiphany, page 185. 
Preface No. 2, Canon and Special Communicantes, page 800. 


Communion. Luke 2, 48, 49 


Son, wny hast Thou done so Fili quid fecisti nobis sic? 
to us? Thy father and I have ego et pater tuus doléntes 
sought Thee sorrowing. And querebémus te. Et quid est 


how is it that you sought Me? 
did you not know.that I must 
be about My Father's business? 


quod me querebaétis? nescie- 
bátis, quia in his que Patris 
mei sunt, opórtet me esse? 


Postcommunion 


RANT, we humbly beseech 

Thee, almighty God, that 
those whom Thou refreshest 
with Thy sacraments may 
serve Thee worthily by a life 
well pleasing to Thee. Through 
our Lord. 


ÜPPLICES te rogámus om- 

nipotens Deus: ut quos 
uis réficis sacraméntis, tibi 
étiam plácitis móribus dig- 
nánter deservire concédas. 
Per Dóminum. 


P ias Postcommunion of the octave of the Epiphany, page 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Octabe-Bap of the Epiphany (White) 
Double Major 
Mass as on the feast, page 175, except the following: 


Prayer 


cop, Whose only-begotten 

Son, hath appeared in the 
substance of our flesh, grant, 
we beseech Thee, that we may 
be inwardly made in a new 
form by Him Whose form we 
have known to be outwardly 
like ours, Who with Thee. 


EUS, cujus Unigénitus 

in substántia nostre 

carnis appáruit: presta, que- 

sumus; ut per eum, quem si- 

milem nobis foris agnóvimus, 

intus reformári mereámur: 
Qui tecum vivit. 


Gospel. John 1, 29-34 


44 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


*B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCTAVE-DAY OF EPIPHANY 


N rro témpore: Vidit 
Joánnes Jesum venién- 


tem ad se, et alt: Ecce Agnus: 


Dei, ecce qui tollit peccdtum 
mundi. Hic est, de quo dixi: 
Post me venit vir, qui ante 
me factus est: quia prior me 
erat. Bt ego nesciébam eum, 
sed ut manifestétur in Israél, 
proptérea, veni ego in aqua 
baptízans. Et testimónium 
perhibuit Joánnes, dicens: 
Quia vidi Spíritum descen- 
déntem quasi colümbam de 
czlo, et mansit super eum. Et 
ego nesciébam eum; sed qui 
misit me baptizare in aqua 
ile mihi dixit: Super quem 
víderis Spiritum descendén- 
tem, et manéntem super eum, 
hic est, qui baptizat in Spiritu 
Sancto. Et ego vidi: et testi- 
mónium perhibuit quia hic 
est Fílius Del. 


185 


T THAT time, John saw 
Jesus coming to him, 


and he saith, Behold the Lamb 


of God, behold Him Who tak- 
eth away the sins of the world. 
This is He of Whom I said, 
After me there cometh a man, 
Who is preferred before me, 
because He was before me. 
And I knew Him not, but that 
He may be made manifest in 
Israel, therefore am I come 
baptizing . with water. And 
John gave testimony, saying, I 
saw the Spirit coming down as 
a dove from heaven, and He 
remained upon Him. And I 
knew Him not; but’ He who 
Sent me to baptize with water 
said to me, He upon Whom 
thou shalt see the Spirit de- 
scending and remaining upon 
Him, He it is that baptizeth 
with the Holy Ghost. And I 
saw: and I gave testimony that 
this is the Son of God. 


Secret 


ésrras tibi, Dómine, pro 

nati Filii tui appariti- 

óne deférimus, suppliciter ex- 
orantes: ut, sicut ipse nos- 
trórum auctor est minerum, 
ita sit ipse miséricors et sus- 
céptor, Jesus Christus Dómi- 
nus noster: Qui tecum vivit. 


E BRING Thee offerings, O 

Lord, for the epiphany 
of Thy Son that is born, hum- 
bly beseeching Thee that, as 
He is the author of our gifts, 
so also He, Jesus Christ Our 
Lord, may mercifully receive 
them. Who with Thee. 


Postcommunion 


ÆLÉSTI lümine, quzsu- 
mus, Dómine, semper et 
ubíque nos preveni: ut mys- 
térium, cujus nos partícipes 
esse volufsti, et puro cerná- 
mus intüitu, et digno percipi- 
amus afféctu. Per Dóminum. 


E PRAY Thee, O Lord, at 

all times and in all 
places go before us with Thy 
heavenly light, that we may 
with clear sight discern the 
mystery of which Thou hast 
willed that we should partake 
and partake of it with fitting 
devotion. Through our Lord. 


‘From this day to the Purification, on all days that are not 
doubles, after the Prayer of the day, are said those of our 


http://ccwatershed.org 


186 SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 
Blessed Lady, page 824, and for the Church or for the Pope, ja 


page 826. j 
If Septuagesima, Sunday falls on the second Sunday after the 


epiphany, the following Mass is celebrated on the preceding 
Baturday. 


Second Hundap After the Epiphanp (Green) 
Sration AT ST. EUSEBIUS 


Semi-Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit, Ps. 65,4 


Er all the earth adore munis terra adóret te, 
Thee, O God, and sing Deus, et psallat tibi: 
+o Thee: let it sing a psalm to psalmum dicat nómini tuo, 
Thy name, O Thou most bigh. Altissime. Ps. 65, 1, 2. Jubi- 
Ps, 65, 1, 2. Shout with joy láte Deo, omnis terra, psal- 
to God all the earth, sing ye a mum dicite nómini ejus, date 
psalm to His name, give glory glóriam laudi ejus. Y. Gloria 
to His praise. JY. Glory. Patri. 
When the Mass of this Sunday, or of the following Sundays 


before Septuagesima is resumed, during the week on ferias, the 
Gloria in excelsis is omitted. ` 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


1MIGHTY, eternal God, 

Who dost govern ail 

things in heaven and on earth, 

of Thy mercy hear the suppli+ 

cations of Thy people, and 

grant Thy peace in our times. 
Through our Lord. 


MNIPOTENS Sempitérne 

Deus, qui ezléstia simul 

et terréna moderaris: suppli- 

catiónes pópuli tui cleménter 

exaudi; et pacem tuam. nos- 

tris concéde tempóribus, Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 824; third for the 
Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Epistle. Rom. 12, 6-16 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostie to the 
Romans. 

RETHREN, having different 

: gifts, according to the 
grace that is given us; either 
Prophecy, to be used according 
to the rule of faith; or min- 
istry, in ministering; or he 


Léctio Epistole beáti Paull 
Apéstoli ad Romanos. 


RATRES: Habéntes dona- 
tiónes secindum grá- 
tiam, que data est nobis, 
differéntes: sive prophetiam 
secündum ratiónem fidei, sive 
ministérium in ministrándo, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Meu fA I a 


i 


SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 


sive qui docet in doctrina, qui 
exhortátur in exbortándo, qui 
tribuit in simplicitáte, qui 
praeest in sollicitüdine, qui 
miserétur in hilaritate. Di- 
jéctio sine simulatióne. Odi- 
éntes malum, adheréntes bo~ 
yo: Caritáte fraternitátis in- 
vicem diligéntes: Honóre ín- 
yicem preveniéntes: Sollici- 
tüdine non pigri: Spíritu fer- 
véntes: Dómino serviéntes: 
Spe gaudéntes: In tribula- 
tióne patiéntes: Oratióni in- 
Stántes: Necessitátibus sanc- 
tórum communicántes: Hos- 
pitalitátem sectántes. Bene- 
dicite persequéntibus vos: 
benedícite, et nolíte maledí- 
cere. Gaudére cum gaudén- 
tibus, flere cum fléntibus: Id- 
ipsum  ínvicem  sentiéntes: 
Non aita sapiéntes, sed humí- 
libus consentiéntes. 


187 


that teacheth in doctrine; he 
that exhorteth in exhorting; he 
that giveth with simplicity; he 
that ruleth with carefulness; 
he that showeth mercy with 
cheerfulness. Let love be 
without dissimulation. Hating 
that which is evil, cleaving to 
that which is good. Loving one 
another with the charity of 
brotherhood, in honor pre- 
venting one another. In care- 
fulness, not slothful: in spirit 
fervent: serving the Lord: re- 
joicing in hope: patient in trib- 
ulation: instant in prayer: 
communicating to the necessi- 
ties of the saints; pursuing hos- 
pitality. Bless them that per- 
secute you: bless, and curse 
not. Rejoice with them that 
rejoice, weep with them that 
weep. Being of one mind one 
towards another; not minding 
high things, but consenting to 
the humble. 


Gradual. Ps. 106, 20, 21 


Mısır Dóminus verbum 
suum, et sanávit eos: et erí- 
puit eos de intéritu eórum. Y. 
Confiteántur Dómino miseri- 
córdie ejus: et mirabília ejus 
fíliis hóminum. 

Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 
148, 2. Laudáte Dóminum, 
omnes Angeli ejus: laudáte 
eum, omnes virtütes ejus. 
Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


The Lord sent His word, and 
healed them: and delivered 
them out of their distresses. V. 
Let the mercies of the Lord 
give glory to Him; and His 
wonderful works to the chil- 
dren of men. 

Alleluia, alleluia, V. Ps. 148, 
2. Praise ye the Lord, all His 
angels: praise ye Him, all His 
hosts. Alleluia. 


Gospel. John 2, 1-11 


WA Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Nüptie 
facte sunt in Cana Gali- 
lee: et erat mater Jesu ibi. 
Vocátus est autem et Jesus, et 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, there was a 
Marriage in Cana of 
Galilee: and the mother of 
Jesus Was there. And Jesus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


188 


also was invited, and His dis- 
ciples, to the marriage. And 
the wine failing, the mother of 
Jesus saith to Him, They have 
no wine. And Jesus saith to 
her, Woman, what is it to Me 
and to thee? My hour is not 
yet come. His mother saith to 
the waiters, Whatsoever He 
Shall say to you, do ye. Now 
there were set there six water- 
pots of stone, according to the 
manner of the purifying of the 
Jews, containing two or three 
measures apiece. Jesus saith 
to them, Fill the waterpots 
with water. And they filled 
them up to the brim. And 
Jesus saith to them, Draw out 
now, and carry to the chief 
steward of the feast: and they 
carried it. And when the chief 
steward had tasted the water 
made wine, and knew not 
whence it was, but the waiters 
knew who had drawn the 
water: the chief steward call- 
eth the bridegroom, and saith 
to him, Every man at first set- 
teth forth good wine, and when 
men have well drank, then that 
which is worse: but thou hast 
kept the good wine until now. 
This beginning of miracles did 


SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 


discípuli ejus ad nüptias. Et 
deficiénte vino, dicit mater 
Jesu ad eum: Vinum non ha- 
bent. Et dicit ei Jesus: Quid 
mihi et tibi est, mülier? non- 
dum venit hora mea. Dicit 
mater ejus minístris: Quod- 
cümque díxerit vobis, fácite. 
Erant autem ibi lapídeæ hy- 
Qrie sex pósite secündum 
purificatiónem Jud e órum, 
capiéntes síngula metrétas 
binas vel ternas. Dicit eis 
Jesus: Impléte hydrias aqua. 
Et implevérunt eas usque ad 
summum. Et dicit eis Jesus: 
Háurite nunc, et ferte archi- 
triclino. Et tulérunt. Ut au- 
tem gustavit architriclinus 
aquam vinum factam, et non 
sciébat unde esset, ministri 
autem sciébant, qui háuser- 
ant aquam: vocat sponsum 
architriclinus, et dicit ei: 
Omnis homo primum bonum 
vinum ponit: et cum inebriáti 
füerint, tunc id, quod detérius 
est. Tu autem servásti bo- 
num vinum usque adhuc. Hoc 
fecit initium signórum Jesus 
in Cana Galilex: et manifes- 
tavit glóriam suam, et credi- 
dérunt in eum discipuli ejus. 


Jesus in Cana of Galilee; and manifested His glory, and His 


disciples believed in Him. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 65, 1, 2, 16 


Shout with joy to God, all 
the earth: sing ye a psalm to 
His name: come and hear, and 
I will tell you, all ye that fear 
God, what great things the 
Lord hath done for my soul. 
Alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Jubiláte Deo, univérsa ter- 
ra: psalmum dicite nómini 
ejus: venite, et audíte, et nar- 
rábo vobis, omnes qui timétis 
Deum, quanta fecit Dóminus 
anime mes, allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THIRD SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 


189 


Secret 


BLÁTaA, Dómine, münera 
sanctifica: mosque a 
peccatérum nostrórum mác- 
ulis emünda. Per Dóminum. 


we offer, and purify us 
m the stains of our sins. 
Through our Lord. 


B O Lord, the gifts 
TO 


Second Secret of our Blessed Lady, page 824; third for the 
Chureh or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. John 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 


Dicit Dóminus: Impléte 
hydrias aqua, et ferte archi- 
triclino. Cum gustásset ar- 
chitriclinus aquam vinum 
factam, dicit sponso: Servásti 
bonum vinum usque adhuc. 
Hoc signum fecit Jesus pri- 
mum coram discípulis suis. 


The Lord saith: Fill the 
waterpots with water, and 
carry to the chief steward of 
the feast. When the chief 
steward had tasted the water 
made wine, he saith to the 
bridegroom: thou hast kept the 
good wine until now; this first 
miracle did Jesus before His 
disciples. 


Postcommunion 


UGEÁTUR in nobis, que- 

sumus, Dómine, tuse 
virtütis operátio: ut divínis 
vegetati sacraméntis, ad eór- 
um promissa capiénda, tuo 
münere preparémur. Per 
Dóminum. 


‘ay the working of Thy 

power, we beg Thee, O 
Lord, be increased in us, that, 
being nourished by divine 
sacraments, we may by Thy 
grace be prepared to obtain 
that which. they promise. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, page 824; third 
for the Church or for the Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Third Sunday After the Epiphany (Green) 
Semi-Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Tutroit. Ps. 96, 7, 8 


OoRÁTE Deum, omnes 


Angeli ejus: audívit, 
et letata est Sion: et exsulta- 
vérunt fílie Jude. Ps. 96, 1. 


Dóminus regnávit, exsultet 


terra: teténtur insule multe. 
¥. Glória Patri. 


pore God, all you His 

angels: Sion heard, and 

was glad; and the daughters of 

Juda rejoiced. Ps. 96,1. The 

Lord hath reigned; let the 

earth rejoice: let many islands 
be glad. Y. Glory. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


190 


THIRD SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

Jook With mercy upon 
our infirmities, and stretch 
forth the right hand of Thy 
majesty to protect us. Through 
our Lord. 


MNíPOTENS  sempitérne 

Deus, infirmitátem nos- 
tram propítius réspice: atque 
ad protegéndum nos, déxter- 
am iue majestátis exténde. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 824; third for the 


Church or Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Epistle. Rom. 12, 16-21 


. Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
the Romans. 


RETHREN, be not wise in 
your own conceits. To 
no man rendering evil for evil: 
providing good things not only 
in the sight of God, but also in 
the sight of men. If it be pos- 
sible, as much as it is in you, 
having peace with al men. 
Revenge not yourselves, my 
dearly beloved; but give place 
unto wrath, for it is written, 
Revenge is mine; I will repay, 
saith the Lord. But if thy 
enemy be hungry, give him to 
eat; if he thirst, give him to 
drink, for doing this, thou shalt 
heap coals of fire upon his 
head. Be not overcome by evil, 
but overcome evil by good. 


Gradual. 


The Gentiles shall fear Thy 
name, O Lord, and all the kings 
of the earth Thy glory. Y. For 
the Lord hath built up Sion, 
and He shall be seen in His 
majesty. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. 
Ps. 96, 1. 'The Lord hath 
reigned, let the earth rejoice: 


Ps. 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Romános. 


RATRES: Nolíte esse pru- 

déntes apud vosmetíp- 
Sos: nulli malum pro malo 
reddéntes: providéntes bona 
non tantum coram Deo. Sed 
étiam coram ómnibus homí- 
nibus. Si fíeri potest, quod 
ex vobis est, cum ómni- 
bus homínibus pacem 
habéntes: Non  vosmetíp- 
sos defendéntes, carissimi, 
sed date locum ire. Scrip- 
tum est enim: Mihi vindicta: 
ego retríbuam, dicit Dóminus. 
Sed si esurierat inimicus 
tuus, ciba illum: si sitit, po- 
tum da ilii: hoc enim fáciens, 
carbónes ignis cóngeres super 
caput ejus. Noli vinci a malo, 
sed vince in bono malum. 


101, 16, 17 
Timébunt gentes nomen 
tuum, Dómine, et omnes 


reges terre glóriam tuam, J. 
Quóniam edificavit Dóminus 
Sion, et vidébitur in majes- 
tate sua.  Allelüja, allelija. 
X. Ps. 96, 1. Dóminus regná- 
vit, exsültet terra: leténtu: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


P an 


192 THIRD SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 


I say to you, that many shall ténebras exterióres: ibi erit 
come from the east and the fletus, et stridor déntium, Et 
west, and shall Sit down with dixit Jesus centurióni: Vade 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in et sicut credidísti flat tibi. 
the kingdom of heaven; but Et sanátus est puer in illa 
the children of the kingdom hora, 

shall be cast into the exterior 

darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.. And 
Jesus said to the centurion, Go, and as thou hast believed, 
so be it done to thee: and the servant was healed at the same 
hour. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 117, 16, 17 


The right hand of the Lord — Déxtera Dómini fecit vir- 
hath wrought strength, the tütem, déxtera Dómini exalt- 
right hand of the Lord hath ávit me: non móriar, sed 
exalted me: I shall not die, but vivam, et narrábo ópera Dó- 
live, and shali declare the mini. 
works of the Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 757. 


Secret 


ay this offering, we be- * æc hóstia, Dómine, quæ- 
@M seech Thee, O- Lord, , }Ẹ sumus, emündet nostra 
wipe out our sins, and sanctify delícta: et ad sacrifícium cel- 
the bodies and minds of Thy ebrándum, subditórum tibi 
servants for the celebration of córpora, mentésque sancti- 
the sacrifice. Through our ficet. Per Dóminum. 
Lord. 


: Second Secret of our Blessed Lady, page 824; third for the 
Church or Pope, pages 825, 826. i 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Luke 4, 22 
They all wondered at these ^ Mirabántur omnes de his, 
things, which proceeded from que procedébant de ore Dei. 
the mouth of God. 


Postcommunion 
LorD, Who dost give vos tantis, Domine, lar- 
freely the enjoyment of gíris uti mystériis: quæ- 


SO great mysteries, we beseech sumus; ut efféctibus nas eór- 
Thee that Thou wouldst um veráciter aptáre dignéris. 
vouchsafe to render us truly Per Dóminum. 

worthy to receive their effects. 

Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 


193 


Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, page 824; third 


for the Church or Pope, page 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Fourth Sunday After the €piphanp (Green) 
Semi-Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 96, 7, 8 


DORATE Deum omnes 

angeli ejus: audivit et 
letáta est Sion: et exsulta- 
vérünt fílie Jude. Ps. 96, 1. 
Dóminus regnavit, exsültet 
terra: leténtur insule multe. 
y. Gloria. 


DORE God, all you His 

angels: Sion heard, and 
was glad; and the daughters of 
Juda rejoiced. -Ps. 96, 1. The 
Lord hath reigned; let the 
earth rejoice: let many islands 
be glad. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie,. page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUs qui nos in tantis 
periculis constitütos, 
pro humana scis fragilitáte 
non posse subsístere: da no- 
bis salitem mentis et córpo- 
ris: ut ea, que pro peccátis 
nostris pátimur, te adjuvánte 
vincámus. Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who knowest that 

we are beset by perils so 
great as to be unendurable be- 
cause of our human frailty, 
grant us health of mind and 
body, so that by Thine assist- 
ance we may conquer the 
things with which we are 
afflicted because of our sins. 
Through our Lord. 


Before the feast of the Purification, Feb. 2. 

Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 824, 

Third Prayer for the Church or Pope, pages 825, 826. 
After the feast of the Purification: 

Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827. 

Third Prayer at choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Rom. 13, 8-10 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
ad Romanos. 


RATRES: Némini quid- 
quam debeátis, nisi ut 
invicem diligátis: qui enim 
diligit próximum, legem im- 
plévit. Nam: Non adulte- 
rábis: Non occides: Non fu- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 

RETHREN, OWe no man any 
thing, but to love one 
another; for he that loveth his 
neighbor hath fulfilled the law. 
For thou shalt not commit 
adultery, thou shalt not kill, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


194 FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 

thou shalt not steal, thou shalt ráberis: Non falsum testimó- 
not bear false witness, thou nium dices: Non concupísces: 
Shait not covet, and if there be et si quod est aliud mandá- 
any other commandment, it is tum, in hoc verbo instaurá- 
comprised in this word, thou tur: Díliges próximum tuum 
shalt love thy neighbor as thy- sicut teípsum. Diléctio próx- 
self. The love of our neighbor imi malum non operátur. 
worketh no evil Love, there- Plenitüdo ergo legis est di- 
fore, is the fulfilling of the léctio. 

law. 


Gradual. Ps. 101, 16, 17 


The Gentiles shall fear Thy Timébunt gentes nomen 
name, O Lord, and all the tuum Dómine, et omnes reges 
kings of the earth Thy glory. terre glóriam tuam. JV. Quó- 
Y. For the Lord hath built up niam ædificávit Dóminus 
Sion, and He shall be seen in Sion: et vidébitur in majes- 
His majesty. Alleluia, alleluia. tate sua. Allelija, allelüja. V. 
V. Ps. 96, 1. The Lord hath Ps. 96, 1. Dóminus regnávit, 
reigned, let the earth rejoice: exsultet terra: leténtur Ínsule 
let many islands be glad. multe, Allelüja. 


Alleluia. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 8, 23-27 


© Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, when Jesus 
A entered into the ship, 
is disciples followed Him. And 
behold a great tempest arose in 
the sea, so that the ship was 
covered with waves, but He was 
asleep. And they came to Him 
and awaked Him, saying, Lord, 
save us, we perish. And Jesus 
saith to them, Why are ye fear- 
ful, O ye of little faith? Then 
rising up, He commanded the 
winds and the sea, and there 
came a great calm. But the 
men wondered, saying, What 
manner of man is this, for the 
winds and the sea obey Him? 


Creed, page 765» 


4 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Matthæum. 


N ILLO témpore: Ascen- 

dénte Jesu in naviculam, 
secüti sunt eum  discípuli 
ejus: et ecce motus magnus 
factus est in mari, ita ut 
navícula operirétur fiuctibus, 
ipse vero dormiébat. Et ac- 
cessérunt ad eum discípuli 
ejus, et suscitavérunt eum, 
dicéntes: Dómine, salva nos, 
perímus. Et dicit eis Jesus: 
Quid tímidi estis, módicae 
fidei? Tunc surgens, im- 
perávit ventis, et mari, et 
facta est tranquíllitas magna, 
Porro hómines mirdti sunt, 
dicéntes: Qualis est hic, quia 
venti, et mare obédiunt ei? 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 195 


Offertory. Ps. 117, 16, 17 


Déxtera Dómini fecit vir- The right hand of the Lord 
tütem, déxtera Dómini ex- hath wrought strength, the 
altavit me: non móriar, sed right hand of the Lord hath 
vivam, et narrabo Ópera Dó- exalted me: I shall not die, but 
mini, live, and shall declare the 

works of the Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
ONCÉDE, quaesumus, om- RANT, we beseech Thee, al- 
nípotens Deus: ut hujus mighty God, that this 


sacrificii munus  oblátum, sacrifice offered to Thee, may 
fragilitátem nostram ab omni purge us of all evil and fortify 
malo purget semper, et mü- our weak nature. Through our 
niat. Per Dóminum. Lord. 


Second and third Secrets as directed in the foregoing for the 
Prayers. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Luke 4, 22 


Mirabántur omnes de his They all wondered at these 
que procedébant de ore Dei. things, which proceeded from 
the mouth of God. 


Postcommunion 


ÜNERA tua nos, Deus, a AY Thy gifts, O God, free 

delectatiónibus terré- (D us from the allurements 

nis expédiant: et c#léstibus of earthly things, and ever re- 

semper instáurent aliméntis. store us with heavenly nour- 
Per Dóminum. ishment. Through our Lord. 


Second and third Postcommunions as directed in the fore- 
going for the Prayers. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Fitth Sundap After the Epiphanp (Green) 
Semi-Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 96, 7,8 


poRÁTE Deum omnes DORE God, all you His 
Angeli ejus: audívit, et angels; Sion heard, and 
letáta est Sion: et exsulta- was glad; and the daughters 
Verunt filie Jude. Ps. 96. 1, of Juda rejoiced. Ps. 96, 1. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


196 


The Lord hath reigned; let the 
earth rejoice: let many islands 
be glad. JV. Glory. 


FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 


Dóminus regnávit, exsültet 
terra: leténtur ínsule multe, 
Y. Glória. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EEP Thy family, we be- 

seech Thee, O Lord, 
with Thy continual mercy 
that, leaning only upon the 
hope of Thy heavenly grace, it 
may ever be defended by Thy 
protection. Through our Lord. 


AMILIAM tuam, quesu- 

mus, Dómine, contínua 
pietáte custódi: ut que in 
sola spe grátie celéstis inníti- 
tur, tua semper protectióne 
muniátur. Per Dóminum. 


Before the feast of the Purification, Feb. 2. 

Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 824. 

Third Prayer for ihe Church or Pope, pages 825, 828. 
After the feast of the Purification. 

Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827. 

Third Prayer at choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Col. 3, 12-17 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Colossians. 

RETHREN, put ye on, as 
the elect of God, holy 


and beloved, the bowels of 
mercy,  benignity, humility, 
modesty, patience; bearing 


with one another, and forgiv- 
ing one another, if any have a 
complaint against another, 
even as the Lord hath forgiven 
you, So you also. But above all 
these things, have charity, 
which is the bond of perfec- 
tion: and let the peace of 
Christ rejoice in your hearts, 
wherein also you are called in 
one body: and be ye thankful. 
Let the word of Christ dwell in 
you abundantly, in all wisdom; 
teaching and admonishing one 
another, in psalms, hymns, and 
spiritual canticles, singing in 
grace in your hearts to God. 
All whatsoever you do in word 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Colossénses. 


RATRES: Indüite vos sicut 

elécti Dei, sancti, et 
dilécti, viscera misericórdiz, 
benignitátem, humilitatem, 
modéstiam, patiéntiam: sup- 
portántes ínvicem, et do- 
nantes vobismetipsis si quis 
advérsus dliquem habet que- 
rélam: sicut et Dóminus do- 
návit vobis, ita et vos. Super 
ómnia autem hzc, caritátem 
habéte, quod est vínculum 
perfectiónis et pax Christi ex- 
sültet in córdibus vestris, in 
qua et vocáti estis in uno cór- 
pore: et gratiestóte. Verbum 
Christi hábitet in vobis abun- 
dánter, in omni sapiéntia 
docéntes, et commonéntes 
vosmetípsos, psalmis, bymnis, 
et cánticis spirituálibus, in 
grátia cantántes in córdibus 
vestris Deo. Omne quodcüm- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 197 
que fácitis in verbo aut in or in work, all things do ye in 
Ópere, ómnia in nómine Dó- the name of the Lord Jesus 
mini Jesu Christi, grátias Christ, giving thanks to God 
agéntes Deo et Patri per and the Father through Jesus 


Jesum Christum. 


Christ our Lord. 


Gradual as on Fourth Sunday, page 194. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 13, 24-30 


JH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Matthzum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit 

Jesus turbis parábolam 
hanc; Simile factum est reg- 
num cælórum hómini, qui 
seminávit bonum semen in 
agro suo. Cum autem dor- 
mírent hómines, venit inimí- 
cus ejus, et superseminávit 
zizánia, in médio trítici, et 
ábiit. Cum autem crevisset 
herba, et fructum fecisset, 
tunc apparuérunt et zizánia. 
Accedéntes autem servi pat- 
risfamílias, dixérunt ei: Dó- 
mine, nonne. bonum semen 
seminástiin agro tuo? Unde 
ergo habet zizánia? Et ait 
ilis: Inimícus homo hoc 
fecit. Servi autem dixérunt 
ei: Vis, imus, et collígimus 
ea? Et ait: Non: ne forte 
colligéntes zizánia, eradicétis 
simul cum eis et triticum. 
Sinite ütraque créscere usque 
&d messem et in témpore 
messis dicam  messóribus: 
Collígite primum zizania, et 
aligáte ea in fascículos ad 
comburéndum, triticum aù- 
tem congregate in horreum 
meum. 


Creed, page 765. 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
ihew. 

T THAT time, Jesus spoke 
this parable to the mul- 
titudes: The kingdom. of 
heaven is likened to a man 
that sowed good seed in his 
field. But while men were 
asleep, his enemy came, and 
oversowed cockle among the 
wheat, and went his way. And. 
when the blade was sprung up, 
and had brought forth fruit, 
then appeared also the cockle. 
And the servants of the good 
man of the house coming, said 
to him, Sir, didst thou not sow 
good seed in thy field? whence 
then hath it cockle? . And he 
said to them, An enemy hath 
done this. And the servants 
said to him, Wilt thou that we 
go and gather it up? And he 
said, No: lest perhaps gather- 
ing up the cockle you root up 
the wheat also together with it. 
Suffer both to grow until the 
harvest; and in the time of the 
harvest, I will say to the reap- 
ers, Gather up first the cockle, 
and bind it into bundies to 
burn, but the wheat gather ye 
into my barn. 


Offertory. Ps. 117, 16, 17 


Déxtera Dómini fecit vir- The right hand of the Lord 
tütem, déxter& Dómini ex- hath wrought strength, the 
altávit me: non móriar, sed right hand of the Lord hath 


http://ccwatershed.org 


198 SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 


exalted me: I shall not die, but vivam, et narrábo ópera Dó- 
live, and shall declare the mini. 
works of the Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
E OFFER Thee, O Lord, ostras tibl, Dómine, pla- 
the sacrifice of recon- catiónis offérimus: ut 


ciliation, that Thou mayest et delicta nostra miserátus 
mercifully forgive our sins and absólvas, et mutántia corda 
direct our wavering hearts. tu dirigas. Per Dóminum. 
Through our Lord. 

Second. and third Secrets as directed in the foregoing for the 
Prayers. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Luke 4, 22 
They al wondered at these ^ Mirabántur omnes de his, 
things, which proceeded from que procedébant de ore Dei. 
the mouth of God. 


Postcommunion 
E PRAY Thee, O almighty UZSUMUS, omnipotens 
God, that we may re- Deus: ut illíus salutáris 


ceive the effect of that salva- capiámus efféctum, cujus per 
tion of which we have received hec mystéria pignus accépi- 
the pledge in these mysteries. mus. Per Dóminum. 
Through our Lord. 

Second and third Postcommunions as directed in the fore- 
going for the Prayers. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Sixth Sundap After the Epiphany (Green) 
Semi-Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. . 


Introit. Ps. 96, 7, 8 


DORE God, all you His DORÁTE Deum omnes 

angels: Sion heard, and Angeli ejus: audivit, 
was glad; and the daughters of et latata est Sion: et exsulta- 
Juda rejoiced. Ps, 96, 1. The vérunt fílie Jude. Ps. 96, 1. 
Lord hath reigned; let the Dóminus regnávit, exsultet 
earth rejoice: let many islands terra: leténtur ínsul& multe. 
be glad. Y. Glory. Y. Gloria. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 


199 


Prayer 


RESTA, quesumus, omní- 

potens Deus: ut semper 
rationabília meditántes, que 
tibi sunt plácita, et dictis ex- 
sequámur, et factis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


RANT, We beseech Thee, al- 

mighty God, that, ever 
fixing our thoughts on reason- 
able things, we may both in 
word and in deed do what is 
Pleasing to Thee. Through our 
Lord, 


Before the feast of the Purification, Feb. 2. 

Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 824. 

Third Prayer for the Church or Pope, pages 825, 826. 
After the feast of the Purification. 

Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827. 

Third Prayer at choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. 1 Thess. 1, 2-10 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Thessalonicénses. 


RATRES: Gratias ágimus 

Deo semper pro ómni- 
bus vobis, memóriam vestri 
faciéntes in oratiónibus nos- 
tris sine intermissióne, mé- 
mores óperis fídei vestre, et 
labóris, et caritátis, et susti- 
néntie spei Dómini nostri 
Jesu Christi, ante Deum et 
Patrem nostrum:  sciéntes 
fratres, dilécti a Deo, elec- 
tiónem vestram: quia Evan- 
gélium nostrum non fuit ad 
vos in sermóne tantum, sed et 
in virtüte, et in Spiritu Sanc- 
to, et in plenitüdine multa, 
sicut scitis quales fuérimus in 
vobis propter vos. Et vos 
imitatóres nostri facti estis, 
et Dómini, excipiéntes ver- 
bum in tribulatióne multa, 
cum gáudio Spíritus Sancti: 
Ita ut facti sitis forma ómni- 
bus credéntibus in Mace- 
dónia, et in Achája. A vobis 
enim diffamátus est sermo 
Dómini, non solum in Mace- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Thessalonians. 


RETHREN, we give thanks 

to God for you all, 
making a remembrance of you 
in our prayers without ceas- 
ing; being mindful of the work 
of your faith, and labor, and 
charity, and of the enduring 
of the hope of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ before God and our 
Father: knowing, brethren, be- 
Joved of God, your election; for 
our gospel hath not been unto 
you in word only, but in power 
also, and in the Holy Ghost, 
and in much fulness, as you 
know what manner of men we 
have been among you for your 
sakes. And you became fol- 
lowers of us and of the Lord; 
receiving the word in much 
tribulation, with joy of the 
Holy Ghost: so that you were 
made a pattern to all that be- 
lieve, in Macedonia and in 
Achaia. For from you was 
spread abroad the word of the 
Lord, not only in Macedonia 


http://ccwatershed.org 


200 SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 


&nd Achaia, but also in every 
place, your faith which is 
towards God, is gone forth; so 
that we need not to speak any 
thing. For they themselves 
relate to us, What manner of 
entering in we had unto you; 
and how ye turned to God from 
idols, to serve the living and 
true God, and to wait for His 
Son from heaven (whom He 
raised from the dead), Jesus, 
Who hath delivered us from 
the wrath to come. 


dénia, et in Acháfja, sed et in 
omni loco fides vestra, que 
est ad Deum, profécta est, ita 
ut non sit nobis necésse quid- 
quam loqui. Ipsi enim de 
nobis annüntiant qualem in- 
tróitum habuérimus ad vos: 
et quómodo convérsi estis ad 
Deum as simulácris, servíre 
Deo vivo, et vero, et expectáre 
Fílium ejus de czlis (quem 
suscitávit ex mórtuis) Jesum, 
qui erfpuit nos ab ira ven- 
türa. 


Gradual as on Fourth Sunday, page 194. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 13, 31-35 


9 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus spoke 
this parable to the mul- 
titudes: The kingdom of 
heaven is like to a grain of 
mustard-seed, which a man 
took and sowed in his field: 


 Seqtientia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit 
Jesus turbis parábolam 
hanc: Simile est regnum cœ- 
Jérum grano sinápis, quod ac- 
cipiens homo seminévit in 
agro suo: quod minimum 


which is the least indeed of all quidem est ómnibus semini- 
seeds; but when it is grown up, bus: cum autem créverit, ma- 
itis greater than allherbs, and jus est ómnibus oléribus, et 
becometh a tree; so that the fit arbor ita ut vólucres coli 
birds of the air come, and dwell véniant, et hábitent in ramis 
in the branches thereof. An- ejus. Aliam parábolam loct- 
other parable he -spoke to tus est eis: Simile est regnum 
them: The kingdom of heaven celérum ferménto, quod ac- 
is like to leaven, which a céptum mülier abscóndit in 
woman took and hid in three farine satis tribus, donec fer- 
measures of meal, until the mentátum est totum. Hec 
whole was leavened. Allthese ómnie locütus est Jesus in 
things Jesus spoke in parables parábolis ad turbas: et sine 
to the multitudes, and without parábolis non loquebáütur eis: 
parables He did not speak to ut implerétur quod dictum 
them; that it might be fulfilled erat per Prophétam dicén- 
which was spoken by the tem: Apériam in Parábolis os 
prophet, saying, I will open my meum, eructábo abscóndita a 
mouth in parables, I will utter constitutiéne mundi. 

things hidden from the foun- 

dation of the world. 


Creed, page 765, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY 201 


Offertory. Ps. 117, 16, 17 
Déxtera Dómini -fecit vir- The right hand of the Lord 
tütem, déxtera Dómini ex- hath wrought strength, the 
altávit me: non móriar, sed right hand of the Lord hath 
vivam, et narrábo ópera Dó- exalted me: I shall not die, but 
mini. live, and shall declare the 
works of the Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
EC nos oblátio, Deus, AY this oblation, O God, 
mundet, quesumus, et we beseech Thee, 
rénovet, gubérnet, et próte- cleanse, renew, govern, and 
gat. Per Dóminum. protect us. Through our Lord. 


Second and third Secrets as directed in the foregoing for the 
Prayers. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Luke 4, 22 


Mirabantur omnes de his, They all wondered at these 
que procedébant de ore Dei. things, which proceeded from 
the mouth of God. 


Postcommunion 
ÆLÉSTIBUS, Dómine, pasti EING fed with celestial de- 
delíciis: quesumus; ut lights, we beseech Thee, 


semper éadem, per que verá- O Lord, that we may ever hun- 

citer vivimus, appetamus. ger after those things by which 

Per Dóminum. we truly live. Through our 
Lord. 


Second and third Postcommunions as directed in the fore- 
going for the Prayers, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


202 


Copyright. by Bennger Brothers 


SEPTUAGESIMA SUNDAY 


Septuagesima Sunday (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. LAWRENCE WITHOUT THE WALLS 


Sunday of the Second Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 17,5, 6,7 


HE groans of death sur- 

round me, the sorrows of 
heil encompassed me: and in 
my affliction I called upon the 
Lord, and He heard my voice, 
from His holy temple. Ps. 17, 
2, 3. I will love Thee, O Lord, 
my strength: the Lord is my 
firmament, and my refuge and 
my deliverer. JV. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


IRCUMDEDÉRUNT me gé- 

mitus mortis, dolóres 
inférni circumdedérunt me: 
et in tribulatióne mea invo- 
cávi Dóminum, et exaudívit 
de templo sancto suo vocem 
meam. Ps. 17, 2-3. Díligam 
te, Dómine, fortitüdo mea: 
Dóminus firmaméntum me- 
um, et refügium meum, et 
liberator meus. ¥. Gloria 
Patri. 


Gloria is emitted. 


The Gloria in Excelsis is not said from this day till Easter, 
except on Holy Thursday and Holy Saturday, and when the 


Mass is that of a feast. 


Prayer 


O THOU, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, graciously hear 

the prayers of ‘Thy people, that 

we, who are justly afflicted for 

our sins, may be mercifully de- 

livered for the glory of Thy 
name, Through our Lord. 


RECES pópuli tui, quesu- 

mus, Dómine, cleménter 
exáudi: ut, qui juste pro pec- 
cátis nostris affiigimur, pro 
tui nóminis glória miseri- 
córditer liberémur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Before the feast of the Purification, Feb 2. 

Second. Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 824. 

Third Prayer for the Church or Pope, pages 825, 826. 
After the feast of the Purification. 

Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827. 

Third Prayer at choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEPTUAGESIMA SUNDAY 203 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 9, 24-27; 10, 1-5 


Léctio Epistole beati Pauli 
Apéstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Nescitis quod ii 

qui in stadio currunt, 
omnes quidem currunt, sed 
unus áccipit bravium? Sic 
cürrite, ut comprehendátis, 
Omnis autem, qui in agóne 
conténdit, ab ómnibus se áb- 
stinet; et illi quidem ut cor- 
ruptibilem corónam  accípi- 
ant: nos autem incorrüptam. 
Ego ígitur sic curro, non quasi 
in incértum: sic pugno, non 
quasi áérem vérberans: sed 
castigo corpus meum, et in 
servitütem rédigo: ne forte 
cum áliis predicáverim, ipse 
réprobus effíciar. Nolo enim 
vos ignoráre, fratres, quóni- 
am patres nostri omnes. sub 
nube fuérunt, et omnes mare 
transiérunt, et omnes in Mó- 
yse baptizáti sunt in nube, et 
in mari: et omnes eámdem 
escam spiritálem manduca- 
vérunt, et omnes eümdem 
potum spiritalem bibérunt: 
(bibébant autem de spiritali, 
consequénte eos, petra: petra 
autem erat Christus), sed 
non in plüribus eórum, bene- 
plácitum est Deo. 


Gradual. Ps. 


Adjütor in opportunitáti- 
bus, in tribulatióne: sperent 
in te, Qui novérunt te: quó- 
niam non derelínquis quæ- 
réntes te, Dómine. V. Quó- 
niam non in finem oblivio erit 
páuperis; patiéntig páupe- 
rum non peribit in etérnum: 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 


RETHREN, know you not 

that they that run in the 
race, all run indeed, but one 
receiveth the prize? So run, 
that you may obtain. And 
every one that striveth for the 
mastery, refraineth himself 
from all things: and they in- 
deed that they may receive a 
corruptible crown, but we an 
incorruptible one. I therefore 
so run, not as at an uncer- 
tainty; I so fight, not as one 
beating the air: but I chastise 
my body, and bring it into sub- 
jection: lest perhaps, when I 
have preached to others, I my- 
self should become a castaway. 
For I would not have you ig- 
norant, brethren, that our 
fathers were all under the 
cloud, and all passed through 
the sea; and all in Moses were 
baptized, in the cloud and in 
the sea; and all did eat the 
same spiritual food, and all 
drank the same spiritual drink; 
(and they drank of the spirit~ 
ual rock that followed them; 
and the rock was Christ). But 
with the most of them God 
was not well pleased. 


9, 10, 11, 19, 20 


The helper in due time, in 
tribulation: let them trust in 
Thee, who know Thee: for 
Thou dost not forsake them 
that seek Thee, O Lord. Y. For 
the poor man shall not be for- 
gotten to the end: the pa- 
tience of the poor shall not 


http://ccwatershed.org 


404 


perish for ever: arise, O Lord, 
let not man be strengthened. 


SEPTUAGESIMA SUNDAY 


exsürge, Dómine, non prgvá- 
leat homo. 


From this Sunday until Ash Wednesday when the Mass of 
the preceding ‘Sunday is resumed on ferias, the tract 1s Omitted, 


Tract. 


From the depths I have 
cried to Thee, O Lord; 
Lord, hear my voice. ¥. Let 
Thine ears be attentive to the 
prayer of Thy servant. Y. If 
Thou shalt observe iniquities, 
O Lord, Lord, Who shall en- 
dure it? V. For with Thee is 
propitiation, and by reason of 
Thy law I have waited for 
Thee, O Lord. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ps. 129, 1-4 


De profundis clamávi ad 
te, Dómine; Domine, exáudi 
vocem meam. V. Fiant aures 
tue intendéntes in oratiónem 
servi tui. Y. Si iniquitátes 
observáveris Dómine: Dómi- 
ne, quis sustinébit? Y. Quia 
&pud te propitiatio est, et 
propter legem tuam sustinui 
te, Dómine. 


Gospel. Matt. 20, 1-16 


H4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus spoke 

to His disciples this 
parable: The kingdom of 
heaven is like to a householder, 
who went out early in the 
morning to hire laborers into 
his vineyard. And having 
agreed.with the laborers for a 
penny a day, he sent them into 
his vineyard. And going out 
&bout the third hour, he saw 
others standing in the market- 
place idle, and he said to them, 
Go you also into my vineyard, 
and I wil give you what shall 
be just: and they went their 
way. And again he went out 
about the sixth and the ninth 
hour, and did in like manner. 
But about the eleventh hour, 
he went out, and found others 
standing; and he saith to them, 
Why stand you here all the 
day idle? They say to him, 
Because.no man hath hired us. 
He saith to them, Go you also 


4K Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit 

Jesus discípulis suls pa- 
rábolam hanc: Simile est 
regnum celérum hómini pat- 
rifamilias, qui exiit primo 
mane condücere operários in 
vineam suam. Conventióne 
autem facta cum operáriis ex 
denário diürno, misit eos in 
vineam suam. Et egréssus 
circa horam iértiam, vidit 
alios stantes in foro otiósos, 
et dixit illis: Ite et vos in ví- 
neam meam, et quod justum 
füerlt, dabo vobis, Illi autem 
abiérunt. Xterum autem exiit 
circa sextum et nonam ho- 
ram: et fecit simíliter. Circa 
undécimam vero éxiit, et in- 
vénit áBos stantes, et dicit 
illis: Quid hic statis tota die 
otidsi? Dicunt ei: Quia nemo 
nos conduxit, Dicit ills: Ite 
et vos in vineam meam. Cum 
sero autem factum esset, dicit 
dóminus vines procuratori 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 


SEPTUAGESIMA SUNDAY 205 


suo: Voca operários, et redde 
illis mercédem, incípiens a 
novissimis usque ad primos. 
Cum veníssent ergo qui circa 
undécimam horam vénerant, 
accepérunt síngulos denários. 
Veniéntes autem et primi, ar- 
bitráti sunt quod plus essent 
acceptiri: accepérunt autem 
et ipsi singulos denários, Et 
accipiéntes murmurábant ad- 
vérsus patremfamilias, di- 
céntes: Hi novissimi una 
hora fecérunt, et pares illos 
nobis fescisti, qui portavimus 
pondus diéi, et estus. At ille 
respóndens uni eórum, dixit: 


Amíce non facio tibi in-. 


jüriam: nonne ex denário 
convenísti mecum? Tolle 
quod tuum est, et vade: volo 
autem et huic novíssimo dare 
sicut et tibi. Aut non licet 
mihi, quod volo, fácere? an 
éculus tuus nequam est, quia 
ego bonus sum? Sic erunt 
novíssimi primi, et primi no- 
vissimi. Multi enim sunt 
vocati, pauci vero elécti, 


into my vineyard. And when 
evening was come, the lord of 
the vineyard saith to his stew- 
ard, Call the laborers, and pay 
them their hire, beginning 
from the last even to the first. 
When therefore they were 
come that came about the 
eleventh hour, they received 
every mana penny. But when 
the first also came, they 
thougbt that they should re- 
ceive more; and they also re- 
ceived every man a penny. And 
receiving it, they murmured 
against the master of the 
house, saying, These last have 
worked but one hour, and thou 
hast made them equal to us 
that have borne the burden of 
the day and the heats. But he 
answering, said to one of them, 
Friend, I do thee no wrong; 


.didst thou not agree with me 


for a penny? Take what is 
thine, and go thy way: I will 
also give to this last even as 
to thee. Or, is it not lawful for 
me to do what I will? is thy eye 
evil, because I am good? So 


shall the last be first, and the first last. For many are called, 


but few rre chosen. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 91, 2 


Bonum est confitéri Dó- 
mino, et psállere nómini tuo, 
Altissime. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


It is good to give praise to 
the Lord, and to sing to Thy 
name, O Most High. 


Secret 


unéarsus nostris, que- 

sumus, Démine, preci- 
bisque suscéptis: et cxlésti- 
bus nos münda mystériis, et 
cleménter exáudii, Per Dómi- 
num, 


ITH our gifts and prayers 

accepted, We beseech 
‘Thee, O Lord, both cleanse us 
by these heavenly. mysteries 
and graciously hear us. 
Through our Lord. 


The second and third Secrets as directed above for the 


Prayers, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


206 SEXAGESIMA SUNDAY 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Ps. 30, 17, 18 


Make Thy face to shine upon 
Thy servant, and save me in 
Thy mercy: Let me not be con- 
founded, O Lord, for I have 
called upon Thee. 


Illümina fáciem tuam su- 
per servum tuum, et salvum 
me fac in tua misericórdia: 
Dómine, non  contündar, 
quóniam. invocávi ie, 


Postcommunion 


AY Thy faithful, O God, 

be strengthened by 'Thy 

gifts, that receiving them they 
may stil desire them and de- 
siring them may constantly re- 
ceive them. Through our Lord. 


ipÉLES tui, Deus, per tua 

dona, firméntur: ut éa- 

dem et percipiéndo requirant, 

et queréndo sine fine percí- 
piant. Per Dóminum. 


The second and third Postcommunions as directed above for 


the Prayers. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Sexagesima Hundap (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. PAUL 
Sunday of the Second Class 


-~ The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 43, 23-26 


RISE, Why sleepest Thou, 

O Lord? arise, and cast 
us not off to the end: why 
turnest Thou Thy face away, 
and forgettest our trouble? 
Our belly hath cleaved to the 
earth: arise, O Lord, help us 
and deliver us. Ps. 43, 2. O 
God, we have beard with our 
ears; our fathers have declared 
tous. Y. Glory. 


XSURGE, Quare obdórmis, 
Dómine? exsürge, et ne 
repéllas in finem: quare fá- 
ciem tuam avértis, oblivísce- 
ris iribulatiónem nostram? 
adhesit in terra venter nos- 
ter; exsürge, Dómine, ádjuva 
nos, et libera nos. Ps. 43, 2. 
Deus, áuribus nostris audivi- 
mus: paires nostri annuntia- 
vérunt nobis, Y. Gloria Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


cap, Who seest that we 
put nob our trust in any 
deed of our own, mercifully 
grant that by the protection of 


EUs, qui cénspicis quia 
ex nulla nostra actióne 
confidimus: concéde propiti- 
Us; ut contra advérsa ómnia, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Jy, Lt ee en sa 


SEXAGESIMA SUNDAY 


Doctóris géntium protectióne 
muniamur. Per Dóminum. 


207 


the Teacher of the gentiles we 
may be defended against all 
adversities. "Through our Lord. 


Before the feast of the Purification, Feb. 2. 
Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, page 824. 
Third Prayer for the Church or Pope, pages 825, 826. 
After the feast of the Purification, : 
Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827. 
Third Prayer at choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. 2 Cor. 11, 19-23; 12, 1-9 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios, 


RÁTRES: Libénter suffér- 

tis insipiéntes: cum 
sitis ipsi sapiéntes. Sustinétis 
enim si quis vos in servitütem 
rédigit, si quis dévorat, si quis 
Accipit, si quis extólitur, si 
quis in fáciem vos cedit, Se- 
cindum ignobilit&átem dico, 
quasi nos infirmi fuérimus in 
hac parte. In quo quis audet 
(in insipiéntia dico) áudeo et 
ego: Hebrei sunt, et ego: Is- 
raélite sunt, et ego: Semen 
Abrahz sunt, et ego: Ministri 
Christi sunt, (ut minus så- 
piens dico) plus ego: in la- 
bóribus plürimus, in carcéri- 
bus abundántius, in plagis 
supra modum, in mórtibus 
frequénter. A Judæis quin- 
quies quadragénas, una mi- 
nus, accépi. Ter virgis cesus 
sum, semel lapidátus sum, ter 
naufrágium fecl, nocte et die 
in profündo maris fui: in iti- 
néribus sepe, periculis fiú- 
minum, periculis latronum, 
perículis ex génere, periculis 
ex géntibus, perículis in civi- 
táte, periculis in solitüdine, 
periculis in mari, periculis in 
falsis frátribus: in labóre et 
:rümna, in vigiliis multis, in 
fame, in siti, in jejüniis mul- 
tis, in frigóre, et nuditáte: 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, you gladly suffer 

the foolish; whereas 
yourselves are wise, For. you 
suffer if a man bring you into 
bondage, if a man devour you, 
if a man take from you, if a 
man be lifted up, if a man 
strike you in the face. I speak 
according to dishonor, as if we 
had been weak in this part. 
Wherein if any man dare (1 
speak foolishly), I dare also. 
They are Hebrews; so am I. 
They are Israelites: so am X. 
They are the seed of Abraham; 
so am I. They are the minis- 
ters of Christ (I speak as one 
less wise); Iam more: in many 
more labors, in prisons more 
frequently, in stripes above 
measure, in deaths often. Of 
the Jews five times did I re- 
ceive forty stripes save one, 
Thrice was I beaten with rods; 
once I was stoned; thrice I suf- 
fered shipwreck; a night and a 
day I was in the depth of the 
sea. In journeying often, in 
perils of waters, in perils of 
robbers, in perils from my own 
nation, in perils from the gen- 
tiles, in perils in the city, in 
perils in the wilderness, in 
perils in the sea, in perils from 
false brethren. In labor and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


208 


painfulness, in much watch- 
ings, in hunger and thirst, in 
fastings often, in cold and 
nakedness; besides those 
things which are without, my 
daily instance, the solicitude 
for all the churches. Who is 
weak, and I am not weak? 
Who is scandalized, and I am 
not on fire? If I must needs 
glory, I will glory of the things 
that concern my infirmity. 
The God and Father of Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, Who is 
blessed for ever, knoweth that 
t He not. At Damascus the 
governor of the nation under 
Aretas the king, guarded the 
sity of the Damascenes to ap- 
prehend me; and through a 
window in a basket was I let 
down by the wall and so es- 
caped his hands. If I must 
glory (it is not expedient in- 
deed): but I will come to the 
visions and revelations of the 
Lord. I know a man in Christ 
above fourteen years ago 
(whether in the body, I know 
not, or out of the body, I know 
not; God knoweth): such an 
one rapt even to the third 
heaven. And I know such a 
man (whether in the body, or 
out of the body, I cannot tell; 
God knoweth); that he was 
caught up into paradise; and 
heard secret words, which it is 
not granted to man to utter. 
For such an one I will glory; 
but for myself I wil glory 
nothing, but in my infirmities. 
For though I should. have a 
mind to glory, I shall not be 
foolish; for I will say the truth, 
But I forbear, lest any man 
should think of me above that 
which he seeth in me, or any 
thing he ‘heareth from me. 


SEXAGESIMA SUNDAY 


preter illa que extrinsecus 
sunt, instántia mea quotidi- 
ana, sollicitüdo ómnium Ec- 
clesiàrum, Quis infirmátur, 
et ego non infírmor? quis 
scandalizitur, et ego non 
uror? Si gloriéri opórtet: que 
infirmitátis mex sunt, gloriá- 
bor. Deus et Pater Dómini 
nostri Jesu Christi, qui est 
benedíctus in secula, scit 
quod non méntior. Damásci 
prepositus gentis Aréte regis, 
custodiébat  civitátem Da- 
mascenórum, ut me compre- 
hénderet: et per fenéstram in 
sporta dimissus sum per mu- 
rum, et sic effügi manus ejus. 
& gloriári opórtet (non éx- 
pedit quidem), véniam autem 
&d visiónes et revelatiónes 
Dómini. Scio hóminem in 
Christo ante annos quatuór- 
decim, sive in córpore néscio, 
sive extra corpus néscio, Deus 
scit, raptum hujüsmodi us~- 
que ad tértium celum, Et 
scio hujismodi  hóminem, 
sive in córpore, sive extra cór- 
pus néscio, Deus scit: quéni- 
am raptus est in paradisum: 
et audivit arcana verba, que 
non licet hómini loqui. Pro 
hujüsmodi gloriábor: pro me 
autem nihil gloriábor, nisi in. 
infirmitátibus meis, Nam, et 
si volüero gloridri, non ero 
insfpiens: veritátem enim di- 
cam: parco autem, ne quis 
me existimet supra id quod 
videt in me, aut aliquid audit 
ex me. Et ne magnitüdo re- 
Velatiónem extollat me, datus 
est mihi stímulus carnis me- 
te, Angelus sátans, qui me co- 
laphízet. Propter quod ter 
Dóminum rogávi, ut discéde- 
ret a me: et dixit mihi: Süf- 
ficit tibi grátia mea: nam 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEXAGESIMA SUNDAY 


virtus in infirmitáte perfici- 


209 
And lest the greatness of the 


tur. Libénter ígitur gloriábor revelations should exalt me, 


in infirmitátibus meis, ut in~ 
hábitet in me virtus Christi, 


there was given me a sting of 
my flesh, an angel of Satan, 


to buffet me. For which thing 
thrice I besought the Lord, that it might depart from me. And 
He said to me, My grace is sufficient for thee; for power is 
made perfect in infirmity, Gladly therefore will I glory in my 
infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me. 


Gradual. Ps. 82, 19, 14 


Sciant gentes quóniam Let the gentiles know that 
nomen tibi Deus: tu solus God is Thy name: Thou alone 
Altissimus super omnem ter- art the Most High over all the 
ram. Y. Deus meus, pone il- earth, JY. O my God, make 
los ut rotam, et sicut stipulam them like a wheel, and as 
ante fáciem venti. Stubble before the face of the 

wind. 


Tract. Ps. 59, 4,6 


Commovísti, Dómine, ter- Thou hast moved the earth, 
ram, et conturbásti eam. Y. O Lord, and hast troubled it. 
Sana contritiónes ejus, quia Y. Heal Thou the breaches 
mota est, V. Ut füglant a fa- thereof, for it hath been moved. 
cle arcus: ut liberéntur eléctl Y. That Thy elect may flee 
tui, from before the bow: that they 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


may be delivered. 


Gospel. Luke 8, 4-15 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Cum tur- 
ba phirima convenirent, 
et de civitátibus properárent 
ad Jesum, dixit per similitü- 
dinem: Exiit, qui séminat, se- 
mináre semen suum: et dum 
séminat, áliud cécidit secus 
viam, et conculcátum est, et 
vólucres celi comedérunt il- 
lud. Et áliud cécidit supra 
petram: et natum áruit, quia 
non habébat humórem. Et 
$lud cécidit inter spinas, et 
simul exórte spine suffoca- 
vérunt illud. Et áliud cécidit 
in terram bonam: et ortum 
fecit fructum  céntuplum, 


XA Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, when a very 

great multitude was 
gathered together and hast- 
ened out of the cities unto Him, 
He spoke by a similitude; The 
sower went out to sow his seed. 
And as he sowed, some fell by 
the wayside; and it was trod- 
den down, and the fowls of the 
air devoured it. And other 
some fell upon a rock; and as 
soon as it was sprung up, it 
withered away, because it had 
no moisture. And other some 
fell among thorns; and the 
thorns growing up with it, 
choked it. And other some 


http://ccwatershed.org 


210 


fell upon good ground; and 
being sprung up, yielded fruit 
2 hundred fold. Saying these 
things, He cried out, He that 
hath ears to hear, let him hear. 
And His disciples asked Him 
what this parable might be. 
To whom He said, To you it is 
given to know the mystery of 
the kingdom of God, but to the 
rest in parables; that seeing 
they may not see, and hearing 
may not understand. Now the 
parable is this: The seed is the 
word of God. And they by the 
wayside are they that hear; 
ihen the devil cometh, and 
taketh the word out of their 
heart, lest believing they should 
be saved. Now they upon the 
rock are they who when they 
hear, receive the word with 
joy; and these have no roots, 
for they believe for a while, and 
in time of temptation they fall 
away. And that which fell 
among thorns are they who 
have heard, and going their 
way, are choked with the cares 
and riches and pleasures of 
this life, and yield no fruit. 
But that on the good ground 
are they who in a good and 


SEXAGESIMA SUNDAY 


Hec dicens, clamábat: Qui 
habet aures audiéndi, áudiat. 
Interrogábant autem eum 
discipuli ejus, que esset hec 
parábola. Quibus ipse dicit: 
Vobis datum est nosse mysté- 
rium regni Dei, céteris autem 
in parábolis: ut vidéntes non 
vídeant, et audiéntes non in- 
téligant. Est autem hec pa- 
rábola: Semen est verbum 
Dei. Qui autem secus viam, 
hi sunt qui áudiunt: deínde 
venit diábolus, et tollit ver- 
bum de corde eórum, ne cre- 
déntes salvi fiant, nam qui 
supra petram qui cum 
audierint, cum gáudio 
suscípiunt verbum: et hi ra- 
dices non habent: qui ad 
tempus credunt, et in tém- 
pore tentationis recédunt. 
Quod autem in spinas cécidit: 
hi sunt, qui audiérunt, et a 
sollicitudinibus, et divitiis, et 
voluptátibus vite eúntes, 
suffocantur, et non réferunt 
fructum. Quod autem in bo- 
nam terram: hi sunt, qui in 
corde bono et óptimo audi- 
éntes verbum rétinent, et 
fructum afferunt in patiéntia. 


very good heart, hearing the word, keep it, and briag forth fruit 


in patience. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps.16,5,6,7 


Perfect Thou my goings in 
Thy paths, that my footsteps 
be not moved: incline Thine 
ear, and hear my words: show 
forth Thy wonderful mercies, 
Thou Who savest them that 
trust in Thee, O Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767, 


Pérfice gressus meos in sé- 
mitis tuis, ut non moveántur 
vestigia mea: inclína aurem 
tuam, et exáudi verba mea: 
mirífieg misericórdias tuas, 
qui salvos facis sperántes in 
te, Dómine. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


QUINQUAGESIMA SUNDAY 211 


Secret 
sLÁTUM, tibi, Dómine, AY the sacrifice we offer 
sacrificium, vivificet Thee, O Lord, ever viv- 


nos semper, et müniat. Per 
Déminum, 


ify and defend us. Through 
our Lord. 


Second and third Secrets as directed above for the Prayers. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. 


Introibo ad altare Dei, ad 
Deum qui letificat juventü- 
tem meam. 


Ps. 42, 4 


I wil go in to the altar of 
God: to God Who giveth joy to 
my youth. 


Postcommunion 


ÓPPLICES te  rogámus, 

omnipotens Deus: ut, 
quos tuis réficis sacraméntis, 
tibi étiam placitis móribus 
dignántur deservíre concédas. 
Per Dóminum. 


RANT, we humbly beseech 

Thee, almighty God, that 
those whom Thou refreshest 
with Thy sacraments may 
Serve Thee worthily by a life 
well pleasing to Thee. Through 
our Lord. 


The second and third Postcommunions as directed above for 


the Prayers. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Quínquagesima Sundap (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. PETER 
Major Sunday of the Second Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 30,3,4 


sto mihi in Deum pro- 

tectorem, et in locum 
refugii, ut salvum me fácias, 
quóniam firmaméntum 
meum, et refügium meum es 
tu: et propter nomen tuum 
Qux mihi eris, et enütries me. 
Ps. 30, 2. In te, Dómine, 
Sperávi non confündar in 
teternum: in justitia tua libera 
me et éripe me. Y. Glória 
Patri, 


Kyrie, page 761. 


E THOU unto me a God, & 
protector, and a place of 
refuge, to save me: for Thou 
art my strength, and my 
refuge; and for Thy name’s 
sake Thou wilt be my leader, 
and wilt nourish me. Ps. 30, 2. 
In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped, 
let me never be confounded: 
deliver me in Thy justice, and 
set me free. V. Glory, 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


RÉCES nostras, quesumus, 
Dómine cleménter exáu- 


F THY clemency harken 
unto our prayers, O Lord, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


212 


loose us from the bonds of sin, 
&nd keep us from all adversity. 
'Through our Lord. 


QUINQUAGESIMA SUNDAY 


di: atque & peccatórum vín- 
culis absolütos, ab omni nos 
adversitate custódi. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Before the feast of the Purification, Feb. 2. 

Second, Prayer of our Blessed, Lady, page 824. 

Third Prayer for the Church or Pope, pages 825, 826. 
After the feast of the Purification. 

Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827. 

Third, Prayer at choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 13, 1-13 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, if I speak with 

the tongues of men, and 
of angels, and have not charity, 
I am become as sounding brass 
or a tinkling cymbal. And if 
I should have prophecy, and 
know all mysteries, and all 
knowledge, and if I should 
have all faith, so that I could 
remove mountains, and have 
not charity; I am nothing. And 
if I should distribute all my 
goods to feed the poor, and if 
I should deliver my body to 
be burned, and have not char- 
ity, it profiteth me nothing. 
Charity is patient, is kind: 
charity envieth not; dealeth 
not perversely; is not puffed 
up; is not ambitious; seeketh 
not her own; is not provoked 
to anger; thinketh no evil; re- 
joiceth not in iniquity, but re- 
joiceth in the truth; beareth 
all things, believeth all things, 
hopeth all things, endureth all 
things. Charity never falleth 
away: whether prophecies shall 
be made void, or tongues shall 
cease or knowledge shall be de- 
Stroyed. For we know in part, 
and We prophesy in part. But 
when that which is perfect is 
come, that which is in part 


Léctío Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


RÁTRES: Si linguis hómi- 

num loquar, et Ange- 
lórum, caritátem autem non 
hábeam, factus sum velut es 
sonans, aut cymbalum tínni- 
ens. Et si habüero prophéti- 
am, et nóverim mystéria om- 
nia et omnem sciéntiam: et 
si habüero omnem fidem, ita 
ut montes tránsferam, cari- 
tátem autem non habüero, 
nihll sum. Et si distribüero 
in cibos páuperum omnes fa- 
cultátes meas, et si tradídero 
corpus meum, ita ut árdeam, 
caritátem autem non habüe- 
ro, nihil mihi prodest. Cári- 
tas pátiens est, benígna est: 
Cáritas non zmulátur, non 
agit pérperam, non inflatur, 
non est ambitiósa, non quæ- 
rit que sua sunt, non irritá- 
tur, non cógitat malum, non 
gaudet super iniquitáte, con- 
gáudet autem veritáti: ómnia 
suffert, ómnia credit, ómnia 
sperat, ómnia süstinet. Cári- 
tas nunquam éxcidit: sive 
prophetiz evacuabüntur, sive 
linguæ cessábunt, sive scién- 
tia destruétur. Ex parte enim 
cognóscimus, et ex parte pro- 
phetámus. Cum autem vé- 
nerit guod perféctum est, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


QUINQUAGESIMA SUNDAY 


evacuábitur quod eX parte est. 
Cum essem párvulus, loqué- 
bar ut párvulus, sapiébam ut 
párvulus, cogitábam ut pár- 
vulus. Quando autem factus 
sum vir, evacuávi que erant 
párvuli. Vidémus nunc per 
spéculum in enigmate: tunc 
autem fácie ad fáciem. Nunc 
cognósco ex parte: tunc au- 
tem cognóscam sicut et cóg- 
nitus sum. Nunc autem ma- 
nent, fides, spes, cáritas, tria 
hec: major autem horum est 
cáritas. 


213 


Shall be done away. When I 
was a child, I spoke as a child, 
I understood as a child, I 
thought as a child: but when I. 
became a man, I put away the 
things of a child. We see now 
through a glass in a dark man- 
ner; but then face to face. Now 
I know in part; but then I shall 
know even as Iam known. And 
now there remain, faith, hope, 
charity, these three; but the 
greatest of these is charity. 


Gradual. Ps. 76, 15, 16 


Tu es-Deus qui facis mira- 
bília solus: notam fecísti in 
géntibus virtütem tuam. JF. 
Liberásti in bráchio tuo pó- 
pulum tuum, fílios Israél, et 
Joseph. 


Thou art the God that alone 
dost wonders: Thou hast made 
Thy power known among the 
nations. V. With Thy arm 
Thou hast redeemed Thy peo- 
ple, the children of Israel and 
of. Joseph. . 


Tract. Ps. 99, 1, 2 


Jubilate Deo, omnis terra: 
servíte Dómino in letitia. Y. 
Intráte in conspéctu ejus in 
exsultatióne:  scitóte, quod 
Dóminus ipse est Deus. Y. 
Ipse fecit nos, et non ipsi 
nos: nos autem pópulus ejus, 
et oves páscus ejus. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Sing joyfully to: God all the 
earth: serve ye the Lord with 
gladness. Y. Come in before 
His presence with exceeding 
great joy: know ye that the 
Lord He is God. Y. He made 
us, and not we ourselves: but 
we are His people, and the 
sheep of His pasture. 


Gospel. Luke 18, 31-43 


W..Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
géli secündum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Assümp- 
sit Jesus duódecim, et ait 
illis: Ecce ascéndimus Jero- 
sólymam, et consummabin- 
tur ómnia, que scripta sunt 
per prophétis de Fílio hómi- 
nis. Tradétur enim Géntibus, 
et illudétur, et flagellábitur, 


* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus took 

unto Him the twelve, 

and said to them, Behold we 
go up to Jerusalem, and all 
things shall be accomplished 

which were written by the 

prophets concerning the Son of 
man: for He shall be delivered 


http://ccwatershed.org 


214 


to the gentiles, and shall be 
mocked, and scourged, and spit 
upon; and after they have 
scourged Him, they wil put 
Him to death; and the third 
day He shall rise again. And 
they understood none of these 
things, and this word was hid 
from them, and they under- 
stood not the things that were 
said. Now it came to pass, 
when He drew nigh to Jericho, 
that & certain blind man sat 
by the wayside, begging. And 
when he beard the multitude 
passing by, he asked what this 
meant. And they told him that 
Jesus of Nazareth was passing 
by. And he cried out, saying, 
Jesus, Son of David, have 
mercy on me. And they that 
went before, rebuked him, that 
he should hold his peace: but 
he cried out much more, Son of 
David, have mercy on me. And 
Jesus standing, commanded 
him to be brought unto Him: 
and when he was come near, 
He asked him, saying, What 
wilt thou that I do to thee? 
But he said, Lord, that I may 
see. And Jesus said to him, 
Receive thy sight: thy faith 
hath made thee whole. 


QUINQUAGESIMA SUNDAY 


et conspuétur: et postquam 
flagelláverint, occident eum, 
et tértia die resürget. Et ipsi 
nihil horum intellexérunt, et 
erat verbum istud abscóndi- 
tum ab eis, et non intelligé- 
bant que dicebántur. Fac- 
tum est autem, cum appro- 
pinquáret Jéricho, czcus qui- 
dam  sedébat secus viam, 
mendicans. Et cum audiret 
turbam przetereüntem, inter- 
rogábat quid hoc esset. Dixé- 
runt autem ei, quod Jesus 
Nazarénus transiret. Et cla- 
mávit, dicens: Jesu, Fili Da- 
vid, miserére mei, Et qui 
prefbant, increpábant eum ut 
tacéret. Ipse vero multo ma- 
gis clamábat: Fili David, mi- 
Serére mei. Stans autem Je- 
sus, jussit illum addüci ad se. 
Et cum appropinquásset, in- 
terrogávit illum, dicens: Quid 
tibi vis fáciam? At ille dixt: 
Dómine, ut vídeam. Et Jesus 
dixit ili: Réspice, fides tua 
te salvum fecit. Et confés- 
tum vidit, et sequebátur il- 
lum, magníficans Deum. Et 
omnis plebs ut vidit, dedit 
laudem Deo. 


And immediately ke saw, and fol- 


lowed Him, glorifying God: and all the people when they saw 


it, gave praise to God. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 118, 12, 13 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, Benedictus es, Démine, 
teach me Thy justifications: doce me justiflcatiónes tuas: 
with my lips I have pronounced in labiis meis pronuntiávi 
all the judgments of Thy omnia judicia oris tui. 
mouth. . 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
(D this offering, we be- EC hóstia, Dómine, que 
seech Thee, O Lord, sumus, emündet nostra 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ASH WEDNESDAY 215 


délicta: et ad sacrificum ce- cleanse away our sins, sanctify 

Jebrándum, subditórum tibi usin soul and body, and fit us, 

cérpora, mentésque sanctifi- Thy servants, for the celebra- 

cet. Per Dóminum. tion of the sacrifice. Through 
` our Lord. 

Second and third Secrets as directed above for the Prayers. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Ps. 77, 29, 30 
Manducavérunt, et saturáti They did eat, and were filled 
sunt nimis, et desidérium eó- exceedingly, and the Lord gave 
rum áttulit eis Dóminus: non them their desire; they were 
sunt fraudáti a desidério suo. not defrauded of that which 
they craved. 


Postcommunion 
UxsUMUS, omnipotens E BESEECH Thee, O al- 
Deus: ut, qui celéstia mighty God, that we, 


aliménta: pereépimus, per who have partaken of heavenly 
hsec contra ómnia advérsa nourishment, may be fortified 
muniamur. Per Dóminum by it against all adversities. 
nostrum. Through our Lord. 

Second and third Postcommunions as directed above for the 
Prayers. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


DUST TROU SRALT RETURN 


Copyright. by Dentiger Brothers 


Ash Wednesday (Purple) 


STATION AT ST. SABINA 
Privileged Major Feria 


The Blessing of the Ashes 

The priest, wearing over his alb and stole a cope of purple 
color, stands at the Epistle corner of the altar, having near 
him the vessel of ashes to be blessed, while the choir sings the 

following antiphon: ; ; 
XÁUDI nos, Dómine, quó- EAR us, O Lord, for ‘Thy 
niam benigna est mise- mercy is kind: according 
ricérdia tua: secündum mul- to the multitude of Thy mer- 
titüdinem miseratiónum tua- cies have regard to us, O Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


216 ASH WEDNESDAY 

Ps. 68, 2. Save me, O God, for rum réspice nos, Dómine. Ps. 
the. waters have come in even 68, 2. Salvum me fac, Deus: 
unto my soul. ¥. Glory. Hear quóniam intravérunt aque 


Us, 


usque ad ánimam meam. VY. 
Glória Patri. Exáudi nos. 


The chant being terminated, the priest, without either turn- 


in 
follows: 


FK. The Lord be with you. 
H. And with thy spirit. 


LMiGHTY, eternal God, 


spare them that are ' 


penitent, be merciful to Thy 
suppliants, and vouchsafe to 
send Thy holy angel from 
heaven to bless H.and sanctify 
"KW these ashes, that they may 
be a wholesome remedy to all 
who humbly. call upon Thy 
holy name, and who, accusing 
themselves of their sins as their 
consciences accuse them, de- 
plore their crimes before the 
face of Thy divine clemency or, 
eagerly and humbly entreat 
Thy excellence and goodness; 
and grant, by the invocation 
of Thy most holy name, thet 
all who shall be sprinkled with 
these ashes, for the remission 
of their sins, may receive 
health of body and salvation of 
soul, ‘Through Christ our Lord. 


toward the people or extending his hands, proceeds as 


¥. Dóminus vobíscum. 
KR. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


Let us pray 


, RÉMUS. Omnípotens 
sempitérne Deus, parce 
peniténtibus, propitiáre sup- 
plicántibus: et mittere dig- 
néris sanctum Angelum tu- 
um de celis, qui bene Hdicat, 
et sanctificet hos cineres, ut 
sint remédium salibre émni- 
bus nomen sanctum tuum 
humílter implorántibus, ac 
semetípsos pro conseléntia 
delictórum suórum accusán- 
tibus, ante conspéctum dívi- 
ne cleméntie tuse facinora 
sua deplorántibus, vel sere- 
níssimum  plietátem tuam 
suppliciter obnixéque fiagi- 
iántibus: et presta per invo- 
catiónem sanctissimi nómi- 
nis tui; ut, quicümque per eos 
aspérsi füerunt, pro redemp- 
tione peccatérum  suórum, 
córporis sanitátem, et anime 


H. Amen. tutélam percipiant. Per 
Christum Dóminum nostrum, 
R. Amen. 
Let us pray 
God, Who desirest not the RÉMUS, Deus, qui non 


death of sinners, but 
their repentance, most. gra- 
ciously regard the frailty of 
human nature; and, of Thy 
loving-kindness, deign to bless 
%& these ashes, which we. im- 
tend to put upon our heads to 
express our lowliness and win 
Thy pardon, that we, who 


mortem, sed pteniténti- 
am desideras peccatérum: 
fragilitátem conditiónis hu- 
máne benignissima réspice; 
et hos cíneres, quos causa 
proferénde numilitátis, atque 
Promerénde vénis, capítibus 
nostris impóni decérnimus, 
bene?kdícere pro tua pietáte 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ot 


ASH WEDNESDAY 217 


dignáre: ut, qui nos cinerem 
esse, et ob pravitátis nostre 
deméritum in pülverem re- 
versüros cogndéscimus; pec- 
catórum Omnium véniam, et 
premía Peniténtibus repro- 
missa, misericérditer conse- 
qui mereámur. Per Christum 
Dóminum nostrum. W. Amen. 


know that we are but ashes and 
for the guilt of our fall shall 
return to dust, may be worthy 
to obtain, through Thy mercy, 
the forgiveness of all our sins 
&nd the rewards promised to 
the penitent. Through Christ 
our Lord. BY. Amen. 


Let us pray 


RÉMUS. Deus, qui humi- 

liatióne flécteris et sa- 
tisfactióne placáris: aurem 
tue pletátis inclína précibus 
nostris; et capítibus servó- 
rum tuorum, horum cínerum 
aspersióne contáctis, effünde 
propitius grátiam tus bene- 
dictiónis: ut eas et spíritu 
compunctiónis répleas, et que 
juste postuláverint efficáciter 
iríbuas; et concéssa perpétuo 
stabilita, et intácta manére 
decérnas. Per Christum Dó- 
minum nostrum. R. Amen. 


cop, Who art moved by 

humiliation and appeased 
by penance, incline the ear of 
Thy goodness to our prayers, 
and when the heads of 'Thy ser- 
vants are touched with these 
ashes, graciously pour forth 
the grace of Thy blessing, that 
Thou mayest fill them with the 
spirit of compunction and 
mayest effectually grant what 
they righteously ask, and or- 
dain that what Thou grantest 
may remain forever estab- 
lished and unmoved. Through 
Christ our Lord. W. Amen. 


Let us pray 


REMUS. Omnipotens 
O sempitérne Deus, qui 
Ninivítis in cínere et cilfcio 
pæniténtibus, indulgéntiæ 
tus remédia prestitísti: con- 
céde propítius; ut sic eos imi- 
témur hábitu, quátenus vénie 
prosequámur  obténtu. Per 
Dóminum. W. Amen. 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

Who didst bestow the 
healing of Thy pardon upon 
the Ninivites when they re- 
pented in ashes and sackcloth, 
mercifully grant that we may 
so imitate them in behavior as 
to be like them in obtaining 
pardon. Through our Lord. 

B. Amen. 


He sprinkles the ashes thrice with holy water, saying the 


Asperges me. 


Then he incenses them, afterwards sprinkling 


them in the figure of a cross, on his own head, and on the 
heads of the clergy and people, admonishing each one in these 


words: 
EMÉNTO, homo, quia 


pulvis es, et in pülve- 
rem revertéris. 


EMEMBER, O man, that 
thou art dust and unto 
dust thou shalt return. 


Meanwhile the choir chants one or more of the following 


antiphons: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


218 ASH WEDNESDAY 


Anthem. Joel 2, 13 


ET us change our garments 

for ashes and sackcloth: 

let us fast and lament before 

the Lord: for our God is plen- 

teous in mercy to forgive our 
sins, 


MMUTEMUR hábitu, in cín- 

ere et cilicio: jejunémus 
et plorémus ante Dominum 
quia multum miséricors est 
dimittere peccáta nostra 
Deus noster. 


Anthem. Joel 2, 17 


altar, the priests, the 
Lord’s ministers, shall weep, 
and shall say: Spare, O Lord, 
spare Thy people; and shut 
not the mouths of them that 
sing to thee, O Lord. 


Tue the porch and the 


NTER vestíbulum et altáre 
plorábunt sacerdótes mi- 
nístri Dómini, et dicent: 
Parce, Dómine, parce pópulo 
tuo: et ne claudas ora canén- 
tium ie Dómine. 


Esth. 13, Joel 2 


K. ET us amend and do 

better for those things 
in which we have sinned 
through ignorance lest, sud- 
denly prevented by the day of 
death, we seek time for pen- 
2nce, and be not able to find it. 
Attend, O Lord, and have 
mercy: for we have sinned 
against Thee. Y. Ps. 78, 9. Help 
us, O God, our Saviour: and 
for the honor of Thy name, O 
Lord, deliver us. Attend, O 
Lord. Y. Glory be to the Father, 
and to the Son, and to the Holy 
Ghost. Attend. 


K. MENDÁMUS in mélius, 

que ignoránter pec- 
cávimus: ne sübito preoccu- 
pati die mortis, queramus 
spátium poniténtie, et inve- 
níre non possímus. Attén- 
de, Dómine, et miserére: quia 
peccávimus tibi. Y. Ps. 78, 9. 
Adjuva nos, Deus salutáris 
noster: et propter honórem 
nóminis tui, Dómine, líbera 


nos. Atténde, Dómine. Y. 
Glória Patri. Atténde, Dó- 
mine. 


Returning to the altar the priest recites a concluding Prayer 


as follows: 
Y. The Lord be with you. 
RY. And with thy spirit. 


Y. Dóminus vobíscum. 
BY. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


Let us pray 


Gu us, O Lord, to enter 
upon the duties of our 
Christian warfare with holy 
fasts, that, being about to fight 
against the spirits of wicked- 
ness, we may be fortified by 
the help of self-denial. Through 
Christ our Lord. W. Amen. 


ONCEDE, nobis, Démine, 

presídia militiz chris- 
tiánz sanctis inchoáre jeju- 
niis: ut contra spiritáles ne- 
quítias pugnatüri, continén- 
tie muniámur auxiliis. Per 
Christum Dóminum nostrum. 
RY. Amen. 


Mass is then celebrated. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ato 


T7999 bea 


ASH WEDNESDAY 219 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Wis. 11, 24, 25, 27 


ISERÉRIS Ómnium, Dó- 
XD mine, et nihil odísti 
eórum que fecísti, dissímu- 
lans peccáta hóminum prop- 
ter peniténtiam, et parcens 
illis: quia tu es Dóminus De- 
us noster. Ps. 56, 2. Miserére 
mei, Deus, miserére mei: 
quóniam in te confídit ánima 
mea. XY. Glória Patri. 


HOU hast mercy upon all, 

O Lord, and hatest none 

of the things which Thou hast 
made, winking at the sins of 
men for the sake of repentance, 
and sparing them: for Thou art 
the Lord our God. Ps. 56, 2. 
Have mercy on me, O God, 
have mercy on me; for my 
soul trusteth in Thee. . Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


R&sta, Dómine, fidélibus 

tuis: ut jejuniórum ve- 
neránda solémnia, et cóngrua 
pietáte suscípiant, et secüra 
devotióne perctrrant. Per 
Déminum nostrum. 


RANT to Thy faithful, O 

Lord, that they may both 
undertake the venerable sol- 
emnities of fasting with piety 
and carry them through with 
unwavering devotion. Through 
our Lord. 


Then is said (until Passion Sunday): Second Prayer, A cunctis, 
page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, page 828. 


Lesson. Joel 2, 12-19 


Léctio Joélis Prophéte. 


ZEC dicit Dóminus: Con- 
vertímini ad me in toto 

corde vestro, in jejünio, et in 
fletu, et in planctu. Et scín- 
dite corda vestra, et non ves- 
timénta vestra, et convertí- 
mini ad Dóminum Deum ves- 
trum: quia benignus et mi- 


Séricors est, pátiens et multe 


misericórdie, et prestabilis 
super malitia. Quis scit, si 
convertátur, et ignóscat, et 
relinquat post se benedictió- 
nem, sacrifícium, et libàmen 
Dómino Deo vestro?. Cánite 
tuba in Sion, sanctificáte je- 
jünium, vocáte cetum, con- 
gregáte pópulum, sanctificáte 
ecclésiam, coadunáte senes, 
Ccongregáte párvulos, et su- 


Lesson from Joel the Pro- 
phet. 
Hus saith the Lord, Be 
converted to Me with all 
your heart, in fasting, and in 
weeping, and in mourning. And 
rend your hearts and not your 
garments, and turn to the 
Lord your God; for He is graci- 
ous and merciful, patient and 
rich in mercy, and ready to re- 
pent of the evil. Who knoweth 
but He will return, and forgive, 
and leave a blessing behind 
Him, sacrifice and libation to 
the Lord your God? Blow the 
trumpet in Sion; sanctify # 
fast; call a solemn assembly; 
gather together the people; 
sanctify the church; assemble 
the ancients; gather togethey’ 
the little ones, and them tha¢ 


http://ccwatershed.org 


220 


suck at the breasts: let the 
bridegroom go forth from his 
bed, and the bride out of her 
bridechámber. Between the 
porch and the altar the priests, 
the Lord's ministers, shall 
weep; and shall say, Spare, O 
Lord, spare Thy people; and 
give not Thine inheritance to 
reproach, that the heathens 
should rule over them. Why 
Should they say among the na- 
tions, Where is their God? The 
Lord hath been zealous for His 
land, and hath spared His peo- 
ple. And the Lord answered, 
and said to His people, Behold 
I will send you corn, and wine, 
and oil, and you shall be filled 
with them; and I will no more 
make you a reproach among 
the nations; saith the Lord al- 
mighty. 


ASH WEDNESDAY 


géntes úbera: egredidtur 
sponsus de cubíl suo, et 
sponsa de thálamo suo. Inter 
vestíbulum et altáre plorá- 
bunt sacerdótes minístri Dó- 
mini, et dicent: Parce, Dó- 
mine, parce pépulo tuo: et 
ne des hereditátem tuam in 
oppróbrium, ut dominéntur 
eis natiónes. Quare dicunt in 
pópulis: Ubi est Deus eórum? 
Zelátus est Dóminus terram 
suam, et pepércit pópulo suo. 
Et respóndit Dóminus, et dix- 
it pópulo suo: Ecee ego mit- 
tam vobis fruméntum, et vi- 
num, et óleum, et replebimini 
eis: et non dabo vos ultra op- 
próbrium in géntibus: dicit 
Dóminus omnípotens. 


Gradual. Ps. 56, 2, 4 


Have mercy on me, O God, 
have mercy on me: for my soul 
trusteth in Thee. V. He hath 
sent from heaven, and delivered 
me; He hath made them a re- 
proach that trod upon me. 


Miserére mei, Deus, mise- 
rére mei: quóniam in te con- 
fidit ánima mea. V. Misit de 
celo, et liberávit me: dedit in 
oppróbrium conculcántes me. 


Tract. Ps. 102, 10 


O Lord, repay us not accord- 
ing to the sins we have com- 
mitted, nor according to our 
iniquities. V. Ps. 78, 8, 9. O 
Lord, remember not our former 
iniquities: let Thy mercies 
speedily prevent us, for we are 
become exceeding poor. VF. 
(Here all kneel down.) Help 
us, O Lord our Saviour: and 
for the glory of Thy. name, O 
Lord, deliver us: and forgive us 
our sins for Thy name’s sake. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Dómine, non secündum 
peccáta nostra, que fécimus 
nos: neque secündum iniqui- 
tates‘nostras retribuas nobis. 
V. Ps. 78, 8-9. Dómine, ne 
memíneris iniquitátum nos- 
trárum antiquárum: cito an- 
ticipent nos  misericórdie 
tue, quia páuperes facti su- 
mus nimis. Y. Adjuva nos, 
Deus salutaris noster: et 
propter glóriam nóminis tui, 
Dómine, lfbera nos: et propí- 
tius esto peccátis nostris, 
propter nomen tuum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ASH WEDNESDAY 


221 


Gospel. Matt. 6, 16-21 


H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélji secündum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
T sus discípulis suis: Cum 
jejunátis, nolite fieri sicut 
hypocrite, tristes, Extérmi- 
nant enim facies suas, ut ap- 
páreant homínibus jejunán- 
tes. Amen dico vobis, quia 
recepérunt mercédem suam. 
Tu autem, cum jejünas, unge 
caput tuum, et fáciem tuam 
lava, ne videáris homínibus 
jejünans, sed Patri suo, qui 
est in abscóndito: et Pater 
tuus, qui videt in abscóndito, 
reddet tibi. Nolíte thesauri- 
z&re vobis thesáuros in terra: 
ubi erugo, et tínea demolítur: 
et ubi fures effódiunt, et fur- 
ántur. 'Thesaurizáte autem 
vobis theséuros in. celo: ubi 
neque zrugo, neque tinea de- 
molftur; et ubi fures non ef- 
fódiunt, nec furántur. Ubi 
enim est thesáurus tuus, ibi 
est et cor tuum. 


Offertory. 


Exaltábo te, Dómine, quó- 
niam suscepísti me, nec de- 
lectásti inimícos meos super 
me: Dómine, clamávi ad te, 
et sanásti me. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time: Jesus said to 

his disciples, When you 
fast, be not as the hypocrites, 
sad. For they disfigure their 
faces, that they may appear 
unto men to fast. Amen, I say 
to you, they have received their 
reward. But thou, when thou 
fastest, anoint thy head and 
wash thy face; that thou ap- 
pear not to men to fast, but to 
ihy Father Who is in secret, 
and thy Father Who seeth in 
secret will repay thee. Lay not 
up to yourselves treasures on 
earth, where the rust and moth 
consume, and where thieves 
break through and steal. But 
lay up to yourselves treasures 
in heaven, where neither the 
rust nor moth doth consume, 
and where thieves do not break 
through nor steal. For where 
thy treasure is, there is thy 


. heart also. 


Ps. 29, 2, 3 


I will extol Thee, O Lord, for 
'Thou hast upheld me; and hast 
not made my enemies to re- 
joice over me: O Lord, I have 
cried to Thee, and Thou hast 
healed me. 


Secret 


AC NOS, quesumus, Dó- 
H mine, his munéribus 
offeréndis conveniénter ap- 
tári: quibus ipsíus venerábilis 


sacraménti celebrámus exór- 
dium. Per Dóminum. 


ake us duly fit, we be- 

Seech Thee, O Lord, for 
the offering of these gifts, with 
which we celebrate the begin- 
ning of the august sacrament 
itself. Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


222 


THURSDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, O 


God to Whom alone, page 829. 
Preface No- 3, page 802. 


Communion. 


He who shall meditate upon 
the law of the Lord, day and 
night, shall bring forth his 
fruit in due season. 


Ps. 1, 2, 3 
Qui meditábitur in lege Dó- 
mini die ac nocte, dabit fruc- 
tum suum in témpore suo. 


Postcommunion 


Av the sacraments we 

have received, O Lord, 

give us help, that our fasts may 

be pleasing to Thee and profit- 

able to us as a healing remedy. 
Through our Lord. 

Second Postcommunion, May 


ERCEPTA nobis, Dómine, 
praebeant sacraménta 
subsidium: ut tibi grate sint 
nostra jejünia, et nobis pro- 
ficiant ad medélam. Per Dó- 
minum. 
the gift, page 828; third, Al- 


mighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Then on this and. all other weekdays of Lent tit the ferial 
Mass. has been celebrated), is said a prayer of blessing over the 


people. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


ow down your heads be- 
fore God, 

Look with favor, O Lord, on 
those who bow before Thy 
majesty, that they who have 
been refreshed with the divine 
gift may ever be strengthened 
with heavenly aids. Through 
our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


UMILIATE cápita vestra 
Deo. 

Inclinantes Dómine, 
majestáti tue,  propitiátus 
inténde: ut qui divino mü- 
nere sunt refécti, celésti- 
bus semper nutriántur auxí- 
lis. Per Dóminum. 


se, 


During Lent at the end of ferial Masses Benedicamus 
Domino is said instead of Ite, Missa est. 


Thursday After Ash Wednesday (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. GEORGE IN VELABRO 
'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 54, 17, 19, 20, 23 


HEN I cried to the Lord, 

He heard my voice from 

them that draw near to me; 
and He humbled them, Who is 
before all ages, and remains 


vM clamárem ad Dó- 
minum exaudivit vo- 
cem meam ab his, qui appro- 
pinquant mihi: et humiliávit 
eos, qui est ante sæcula, et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THURSDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 


Manet in ztérnum:' jacta 
cogitatum tuum in Dómino, 
et ipse te enütriet. Ps. 54, 2, 
3. Exáüdi, Deus, oratiónem 
meam, et ne despéxeris de- 
precatiónem meam: intende 


mihi, et exáudi me. JY. Glória: 


Patri. 


223 


forever: cast thy care upon the 
Lord, and He shall sustain thee, 
Ps. 50, 2, 3. Hear, O God, my 
prayer, and despise not my sup- 
Plication; be attentive to me 
and hear me. y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui culpa offén- 

deris, peniténtia plac- 
aris: preces pópuli tui suppli- 
cantis propítius réspice; et 
flagélla tus iracündi», que 
pro peccátis nostris merémur, 
&vérte, Per Dóminum. 


O cop, Who art. offended by 

sin, and appeased by pen- 
nance, graciously regard the 
prayers of Thy people making 
supplication to Thee, and turn 
aside the scourge of Thy anger, 
which we deserve for our sins. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


Lesson. | Is. 38, 1-6 


page 828. 


Léctio Isaiæ Prophéte. 


pniÉBUS ills: ZEgrotávit 
Ezechías usque ad mor- 
tem: et introivit ad eum 
Isaías fílius Amos prophéta, 
et dixit ei: Hec dicit Dómi- 
nus: Dispóne dómui tue, quia 
moriéris tu, et non vives. Et 
convériit  Ezechías faciem 
suam ad paríetem, et orávit 
ad Dóminum, et dixit: Ob- 
secro, Dómine, meménto que- 
so, quómodo ambulaverim 
coram te in veritate, et in 
corde perfécto, et quod bo- 
num est in óculis tuis fécerim. 
Et flevit Ezéchias fletu mag- 
no. Et factum est verbum 
Dómini ad Isafam, dicens: 
Vade, et dic Ezechíe: Hec 
dicit Dóminus Deus David 
patris tui: Audívi oratiónem 
tuam, et vidi lacrimas tuas: 
ecce ego adjiciam super dies 
tuos quíndecim annos: et de 


Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 

N THOSE days, Ezechias, was 
T even to death; and 
Isaias the son of Amos the 
prophet came unto him, and 
said to Him, Thus saith 
the Lord, Take order with 
thy house, for thou shalt die, 
and not live. And Ezechias 
turned his face toward the 
wall, and prayed to the Lord, 
and said, I beseech Thee, O 
Lord, remember how I bave 
walked before Thee in truth, 
and with a perfect heart, and 
have done that which is good 
in thy sight. And Ezechias wept 
with great weeping. And the 
word of the Lord came to 
Isaias, saying, GO, and say to 
Ezechias, Thus saith the Lord, 
the God of David thy father: 
I have heard thy prayer and I 
have seen thy tears: behold I 
will add to thy days fifteen 


http://ccwatershed.org 


224 


years; and I will deliver thee 
&nd this city out of the hand 
of the king of the Assyrians, 
and I will protect it; said the 
Lord almighty. 


THURSDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 


manu regis  Assyriórum 
éruam te, et civitátem istam, 
et prótegam eam, ait Dómin- 
us omnípotens. 


Gradual. Ps. 54, 23, 17, 18, 19 


Cast thy care upon the Lord, 
and He shall sustain thee. V. 
When I cried to the Lord, He 
heard my voice from them that 
draw near. to me. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Jacta cogitátum tuum in 
Dómino, et ipse te enütriet. 
Y. Dum clamárem ad Dó- 
minum,  exaudívit vocem 
meam ab his, qui appropin- 
quant mihi, 


Gospel. Matt. 8, 5-13 


A Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Matt- 
hew. | 

T THAT lime, when Jesus 

had entered into Ca- 
pharnaum, there came to Him à 
centurion, beseeching Him, and 
saying, Lord, my servant lieth 
at home sick of the palsy, and 
is grievously tormented. And 
Jesus said to him; I will come 
and heal bim. And the cen- 
turion making answer said: 
Lord, I am not worthy that 
Thou shouldst enter under my 
roof: but only say the word, 
and my servant shall be healed. 
For I also am a man. subject 
to authority, having under me 
Soldiers; and I say to this man, 
Go, and he goeth, and to an- 
other, Come, and he cometh, 
and to my servant, Do this, and 
he doeth it. And Jesus hearing 
this marvelled; and said to 
them that followed. Him: 
Amen I say to you, I have not 
found so great faith in Israel. 
And I say to you that many 
Shall come from the east and 
from the west, and shall sit 
down with Abraham, and Isaac, 


Seqüentia sancti Evangélii 
secándum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Cum in- 

troisset Jesus Caphár- 
naum, accéssit ad eum cen- 
türio, rogans eum, et dicens: 
Dómine, puer meus jacet in 
domo paralyticus et male tor- 
quétur. „Et ait illi Jesus: Ego 
véniam, et curábo eum. Et 
respóndens  centürlo, ait: 
Dómine, non sum dignus, ut 
intres sub tectum meum: sed 
tantum dic verbo, et sanábi- 
tur puer meus. Nam et ego 
homo sum sub potestáte con- 
stitutus, habens sub me mí- 
lites, et dico huic: Vade, et 
vadit; et álii; Veni, et. venit; 
et servo meo: Fac hoc, et 
facit, Audiens autem Jesus 
mirátus est, et sequéntibus se 
dixit: Amen dico vobis, non 
invéni tantam fidem in Israél, 
Dico autem vobis, quod multi 
ab Oriénte, et Occidénte vé- 
nient, et recümbent cum 
Abraham, et Isaac, et Jacob 
in regno czlórum: fílii autem 
regni ejiciéntur jn ténebras 
exterjóres: ibi erit fletus, et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


E 


t PN 


THURSDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 225 


stridor déntium. Et dixit and Jacob in the kingdom of 
Jesus centurióni: Vade, et heaven: but the children of the 
sicut credidisti, fiat tibi. Et kingdom shail be cast out into 
sanátus est puer in illa hora. exterior darkness: there shall 

be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth. And Jesus said to the centurion: Go, and as thou hast 
believed, so be it done to thee. And the servant was healed 
at the same hour. 


Offertory. Ps. 24, 1-3 


Ad te, Dómine, levávi áni- To Thee, O Lord, have I lifted 
mam meam: Deus meus, in te up my soul: In Thee, O my God, 
confido, non erubéscam: ne- I put my trust: let me not be 
que irrideant me inimici mei: ashamed: neither let my ene- 
étenim univérsi, qui te ex- mies laugh at me: for none of 
Spéctant, non confundéntur. them that wait on Thee shall 

be confounded. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


S ecret 


ACRIFÍCIS preséntibus, E APPEASED, O Lord, we 

S Dómine, quesumus, in- beseech Thee, and look 

nde placátus: ut et devo- upon the sacrifices here before 

tióni nostre proficiant, et Thee, that they may profit both 

salüti. Per Dóminum. : our devotion and our salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, O 
God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No, 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps. 50, 21 


Acceptabis sacrifícium jus- Thou wilt accept the sacrifice 
titie, oblatiénes, et holo- of justice, oblations, and holo- 
cáusta, super altare tuum, causts, upon Thy altar, O Lord. 
Dómine. 


Postcommunion 
mLÉsri; doni benedic- AVING received the bless- 
tióne percépta: súp- ing of the heavenly gift, 


plices te, Deus omnípotens, we beseech and supplicate 

deprecámur; ut hoc idem Thee, O almighty God, that the 

nobis et sacraménti causa same may be the cause both of 

sit, et salütis. Per Dóminum. the sacrament and of salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Poste 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


226 


FRIDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


ow down your heads to 
God. 

Spare, O Lord, spere Thy 
people, that while chastened 
with merited scourgings it may 
find Solace in Thy pity. 
Through our Lord. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


UMILIATE capita vestra 
Deo. 

Parce, Dómine, parce póp- 

ulo tuo: ut dignis flagella- 


tiónibus castigátus, in tua 
miseratióne  respiret. Per 
Dóminum. 


Friday After Ash Wednesdap (Purple) 
STATION at Ss. JOHN AND PAUL 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 

HE Lord hath heard and 

hath had mercy upon 

me: the Lord became my 

helper. Ps. 29, 2. I will extol 

Thee, O Lord, for Thou hast 

upheld me: and hast not made 

my enemies to rejoice over me. 
¥. Glory. 

_ Kyrie, page 761. 


Ps. 29, 11 


upivit Dóminus, et 

misértus est mihi: 
Dóminus factus est adjütor 
meus. Ps. 29, 2. Exaltábo 
te, Dómine, quóniam suscep- 
isti me: nec delectásti inimí- 
cos meos super me. Y, Glória 
Patri. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


AY Thy kindly favor, we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, 
accompany the fast we have 
begun, that we may be able 
to practise with a single heart 
the observance which we bodily 
perform. Through our Lord. 


NCHOÁTA jejünia, quaesu- 

mus, Dómine, benigno 
favóre proséquere: ut obser- 
vántiam, quam corporáliter 
exhibémus, méntibus étiam 
Sincéris exercére valeámus. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 


Hus saith the Lord God: 
Cry, cease not, lift up thy 

voice like & trumpet, and show 
My people their wicked doings, 
and the house of Jacob their 
sins. For they seek Me from 
day to day, and desire to know 
My ways, as a nation that hath 


Is. 58, 1-9 


Léctio Isaie Prophéte. 


EC dicit Dóminus Deus: 
Clama, ne cesses: quasi 

tuba exálta vocem tuam: et 
annuntia pópulo meo scélera 
eórum, et dómui Jacob pec- 
cáta eórum. Me étenim de 
die in diem querunt, et scire 
vias meas volunt: quasi gens, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FRIDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 


que  justítiam fécerit, et 
judicium Dei sui non dere- 
liquerit: rogant me judicia 
justítie appropinquare Deo 
volunt. Quare jejunámus, et 
non aspexísti: humiliávimus 
ánimas nostras, et nescísti? 
Ecce in die jejünii vestri in- 
venítur volüntas vestra, et 
omnes debitóres vestros repé- 
titis. 
tentiónes jejünátis, et per- 
cütitis pugno ímpie.  Nolíte 
jejunáre sicut usque ad 
hanc diem, ut audiátur in ex- 
célso clamor vester. Num- 
quid tale est jejünium, quod 
elégi, per diem aftligere hómi- 
nem ánimam suam? numquid 
contorquére quasi circulum 
caput suum, et saccum et cí- 
nerem stérnere? numquid 
istud vocábis jejünium, et 
diem acceptábilem Dómino? 
Nonne hoc est magis jejüni- 
um, quod elégi? dissólve col- 
ligatiónes impietatis, solve 
fascículos depriméntes: di- 
mitte eos, qui confrácti sunt, 
liberos, et omne onus dir- 
ümpe. Frange esuriénti 
panem tuum, et egénos, Va~ 
gósque induc in domum tu- 
am: cum videris nudum, 
éperi eum, et carnem tuam 
ne despéxeris. Tunc erüm- 
pet quasi mane lumen tuum, 
et sánitas tua cítius oriétur, 
et anteibit fáciem tuam jus- 
titia tua, et glória. Dómini 
cólliget te. 'Tunc invocábis, 
et Dóminus exáudiet: clama- 
bis, et dicet: Ecce adsum. 


Quia miséricors sum, Dó- 
minus Deus tuus. 

Gradual. 

Unam pétii a Dómino, 


hane requiram, ut inhábitem 


Ecce ad lites, et con- 


227 


done justice, and hath not for- 
saken the judgment of their 
God: they ask of Me the judg- 
ments of justice: they are will- 
ing to approach to God. Why 
have we fasted, and Thou hast 
not regarded: have we humbled 
our souls, and Thou hast not 
taken notice? Behold in the 
day of your fast your own will 
is found, and you exact of all 
your debtors. Behold you fast 
for debates and strife, and 
strike with the fist wickedly. 
Do not fast as you have done 
until this day to make your cry 
to be heard on high. Is this 
such a fast as I have chosen: 
for a man to afflict his soul for 
a day? Is this it, to wind his 
head about like a circle, and to 
spread sackcloth and ashes? 
Wilt thou call this a fast, and 
a day acceptable to the Lord? 
Is not this rather the fast that 
I have chosen? Loose the bands 
of wickedness, undo the bundles 
that oppress, let them that are 
broken go free, and break 
asunder every burden. Deal thy 
bread to the hungry, and bring 
the harborless into thy house; 
when thou shalt see one naked, 
cover him, and despise not thy 
own flesh. Then shall thy light 
break forth as the morning and 
thy health shall speedily arise, 
and thy justice shall go before 
thy face, and the glory of the 
Lord shall gather thee up. 
Then shalt thou call, and the 
Lord shall hear: thou shalt 
cry, and He shall say: Here I 
am. Because I the Lord thy 
God am merciful. 


Ps. 26, 4 


One thing I have asked of 
the Lord, this will I seek after: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


228 


that I may dwell in the house 
of the Lord. V. That I may see 
the delight of the Lord, and be 
protected from His holy temple. 


FRIDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 


in domo Dómini. y. Ut vi- 
deam voluptátem Dómini, et 
prótegar a templo sancto ejus. 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 5, 43-48; 6, 1-4 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel, according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus said to 

His disciples: You have 
heard that it hath been said, 
Thou shalt love thy neighbor, 
and hate thy enemy. But I say 
to you Love your enemies: do 
good to them that hate you: 
and pray for them that perse- 
cute and calumniate you: that 
you may be the children of 
your Father Who is in heaven, 
Who maketh His sun to rise 
upon the good and bad, and 
raineth upon the just and the 
unjust. For if you love them 
that love you, what reward 
shall you have? Do not even 
the publicans this? And if you 
salute your brethren only, what 
do you more? Do not also the 
heathens this? Be ye therefore 
perfect, as also your heavenly 
Father is perfect. Take heed 
that you do not your justice 
before men, to be seen by them: 
otherwise you shall not have 
a reward of your Father Who 
is in heaven. Therefore when 
thou dost an almsdeed, sound 
not a trumpet before thee, as 
the hypocrites do in the syn- 
agogues and in the streets, 
that they may be honored by 
men. Amen, 1 say t» you, they 
have received their reward. But 
when thou dost alms, let not 
thy left hand know what thy 


H* Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit 

Jesus discípulis suis: Au- 
dístis quia dictum est: Diliges 
próximum tuum, et ódio 
habébis inimícum tuum. Ego 
autem dico vobis: Diligite 
inimícos vestros, benedicite 
his, qui odérunt vos: et oráte 
pro persequéntibus, et calum- 
niántibus vos: ut sitis fílii 
Patris vestri, qui in celis est: 
qui solem suum oríri facit 
super bonos et malos: et pluit 
super justos et injüstos. Si 
enim dilígitis eos, qui vos 
díligunt, quam mercédem ha- 
bébitis? nonne et publicáni 
hoc fáciunt? Et si saluta- 
véritis fratres vestros tantum, 
quid ámplius fácitis? Nonne 
et éthnici, hoc fáciunt? Es- 
tóte ergo vos perfécti, sicut et 
Pater vester, celéstis perféc- 
tus est. Atténdite ne justí- 
tiam vestram faciátis coram 
homínibus, ut videámini ab 
eis; alióquin mercédem non 
habébitis apud Patrem ves- 
trum, qui in celis est. Cum 
ergo facis eleemósynam, noli 
tuba cánere ante te, sicut 
hypocrite fáciunt in syna- 
gógis, et in vicis, ut honori- 
ficéntur ab homínibus: Amen 
dico vobis, recepérunt mer- 
cédem suam. Te autem fa- 
ciénte eleemósynam, nésciat 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FRIDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 


sinfstra tua, quid faciat déx- 
tera tua, ut sit eleemósyna 
tua in abscóndito, et Pater 
tuus, qui videt, in abscóndito, 
reddet tibi, 


229 


right hand doth, that thy alms 
may be in secret, and thy 
Father Who seeth in secret will 
repay thee. 


Offertory. Ps.118,154,125 


Dómine, vivifica me se- 
cündum elóquium tuum: ut 
sciam testimónia tua. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Quicken me, O Lord, accord- 
ing to Thy word: that I may 
know Thy testimonies, 


Secret 


AcRIFÍCIUM, Dómine, ob- 
servantie quadragesi- 
mális, quod offérimus, presta 
quesumus: ut tibi et mentes 
nostras reddat accéptas, et 
continéntie promptióris no- 
bis tribuat facultátem. Per 
Dóminum. 


RANT, We pray Thee, O 

Lord, that the sacrifice 
of the Lenten observance, 
which we offer, may both 
render our souls acceptable 
and give us the power of 3 
readier self-denial, Through 
our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 


God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps. 2, 11,12 


Servite Dómino in timóre, 
et exsultáte ei cum tremóre: 
apprehéndite disciplinam, ne 
pereátis de via justa. 


Serve ye the Lord with fear: 
and rejoice unto Him with 
trembling. Embrace discipline, 
lest you perish from the just 
way. 


Postcommunion 


Prritum nobis, Dómine, 

tuére caritátis Infünde: 
ut, quos uno pane czlésti 
satiásti, tua fácias pietáte 
concórdes, Per Dóminum. 


OUR upon us, O Lord, tbe 

spirit of Thy love, to make 
us of one mind, as Thou hast 
filled us with one heavenly 
bread. Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful ‘God page 839. 


- Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


UMILIÁTE capita vestra 
Deo. . 
' Tuére, Dómine, pópulum 


ow down your heads to 
God. T 
‘Watch over Thy people, O 


tuum et ab ómnibus peecátis Lord, and of Thy clemency 
cleménter emuünda: quia purge it of all its sins; for no 
nulla ei nocébit advérsitas, si adversity shall harm it, if no 


http://ccwatershed.org 


230 


iniquity dominate it. Through 
our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


SATURDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 


nulla ei dominétur iníquitas. 
Per Dóminum. 


S»atutbap After Ash Wednesday (Purple) 
Sration AT ST. TRYPHON 
The Deginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 29, 11 


Mags Lorp hath heard, and 


hath had mercy on me: 
the Lord became my helper. 
Ps. 29, 2. I will extol Thee, O 
Lord, for Thou hast upheld me; 
and hast not made my enemies 
to rejoice over me. yY. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


ubivir Dóminus, et 

misértus est mihi: 
Dóminus factus est adjütor 
meus. Ps. 29, 2. Exaltábo 
te, Dómine, quóniam sus- 
cepisti me: nec delectasti in- 
imícos meos super me. y. 
Glória Patri. 


The Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


IVE ear to our supplica- 

tions, O Lord, and grant 

that we may keep with devout 

service this solemn fast, whole- 

somely instituted for the cure 

of soul and body. Through our 
Lord. 


page 


nÉsro, Dómine, suppli- 

catiónibus nostris: et 
concéde; ut hoc solémne jejü- 
nium, quod animábus corpo- 
ribüsque curándis salübriter 
institütum est, devóto servítlo 
celebrémus. Per Dóminum. 


SEM Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


Lesson. Is. 58, 9-14 


Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 


HUS saith the Lord God: 

If thou wilt take away the 
chain out of the midst of thee, 
and cease to stretch out the 
finger, and to speak that which 
profiteth not. When thou shalt 
pour out thy soul to the hungry, 
and shalt satisfy the afflicted 
soul, then shall thy light rise 
up in darkness, and thy dark- 
ness Shall be as the noon-day. 
And the Lord will give thee rest 
continually, and fill thy soul 
with brightness, and deliver 


Léctio Isaie Prophéte. 


ic dicit Dóminus Deus: 

Si abstüleris de médio 
tui caténam, et desíeris ex- 
téndere digitum, et loqui 
quod non prodest. Cum effü- 
deris esuriénti ánimam tuam, 
et ánimam affíclam replé- 
veris, oriétur in ténebris lux 
tua, et ténebre tue sicut 
merídies. Et réquiem tibi 
dabit Dóminus semper, et im- 
plébit splendóribus ánimam 
tuam et osse tua liberábit, et 
eris quasi hortus irríguus, et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 


sicut fons aquárum, cujus 
non deficient aquse. Et zdi- 
ficabüntur in te desérta sæ- 
culórum: fundaménta gener- 
aiiónis et generatiónis sus- 
citabis: et vocáberis edificá- 
tor sépium, avértens sémi- 
tas in quiétem. Si avérteris a 
sábbato pedem tuum, fácere 
voluntátem tuam in die sanc- 
to meo, et vocáveris sábbatum 
delicátum et sanctum Dómini 
gloriósum, et glorificáveris 
eum dum non facis vias tuas, 
et non invenitur volüntas tua, 
ut loquáris sermónem tunc 
delectáberis super Dómino: 
et sustóllam te super altitü- 
dines terre, et cibábo te her- 
editáte Jacob patris tui. Os 
enim Dómini loctitum est. 


231 


thy bones; and thou shalt be 
like a watered garden, and like 
a fountain of water, whose 
waters shall not fail. And the 
Places that have been desolate 
for ages shall be built in thee; 
thou shalt raise up the founda- 
tions of generation and gener- 
ation; and thou shalt be called 
the repairer of the fences, turn- 
ing the paths into rest. If thou 
turn away thy foot from the 
sabbath, from doing thy own 
will in. My holy day, and call 
the sabbath delightful, and the 
holy of the Lord glorious, and 
glorify Him, while thou dost 
not thy own ways, and thy own 
will is not found, to speak a 
word; then shalt thou be de- 
lighted in the Lord, and I will 
lift thee above the high places 


of the earth, and will feed thee with the inheritance of Jacob 
thy father. For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. 


Gradual. Ps. 26,4 


Unam pétii a Démino, hanc 


One thing I have asked of 


requiram, ut inhábitem in the Lord, that will I seek after, 
domo Dómini. Y. Ut vídeam that I may dwell in the house 
voluptatem Dómini, et próte- of the Lord. Y. That I may see 


gar a templo sancto ejus. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


the delight of the Lord, and be 
protected by His holy temple. 


Gospel. Mark 6, 47-56 


A Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Marcum. 
N ILLO témpore: Cum sero 
esset, erat navis in médio 
mari, et Jesus solus in terra. 
Xt videns discípulos suos lab- 
orántes in remigándo, (erat 
enim ventus contrárius eis), 
et circa quartam vigiliam 
noctis venit ad eos ámbulans 
supra mare: et volébat præ- 
teríre eos. At illi, ut vidérunt 
eum ambulántem supra mare, 
putavérunt phantásnia esse, 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel. according to St. Mark. 


T THAT time, when it was 

late, the ship was in the 
midst of the sea, and Jesus 
alone on the land. And seeing 
them laboring in rowing (for 
the wind was against them), 
and about the fourth watch of 
the night He cometh to them 
walking upon the sea: and He 
would have passed by them. 
But they seeing Him walking 
upon the sea, thought it was an 


http://ccwatershed.org 


232 SATURDAY AFTER 
apparition; and they cried out: 
for they all saw Him, and were 
troubled. And immediately He 
spoke with tbem, and said to 
them, Have a good heart, it is 
I, fear ye not. And He went up 
to them into the ship, and the 
wind ceased: and they were far 
more astonished within them- 
selves; for they understood not 
concerning the loaves, for thelr 
heart was blinded. And when 
they had passed over, they. came 
into the land of Genesareth, 
and set to the shore. And when 
they were gone out of the ship, 
immediately they knew Him. 
And running through that 
whole country, they began to 
carry about in beds those that 
were Sick, where they heard He 
was. And withersoever He en- 
tered, into towns, or into vil- 
lages, or cities, they laid the 
Sick in the streets, and be- 
sought Him that they might 
touch but the liem of His gar- 
ment: and as many as touched 
Him were made whole. 


Offertory. Ps. 


O Lord, enliven me according 
to Thy word, that I may know 
Thy testimonies. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


ASH WEDNESDAY 


et exclamavérunt, Omnes 
enim vidérunt eum, et con- 
turbáti sunt, Et statim lo- 
cütus est cum eis, et dixit 
eis: Confídite, ego sum, no- 
lite timére. Et ascéndit ad 
ilos in navim, et cessávit 
ventus. Et plus magis intra 
se stupébant: non enim in- 
tellexérunt de pánibus: erat 
enim cor eórum obczcátum. 
Et cum transfretássent, vené- 
runt in terram Genésareth, et 
applicuérunt. Cumque egréssi 
essent de navi, continuo cog- 
novérunt eum: et percur- 
réntes univérsam regiónem 
illam, cepérunt in grabátis 
eos, qui se male habébant, 
circumférre ubi audiébant 
eum esse. Et quocümque in- 
troíbat, in vicos, vel in villas, 
aut civitates, in platéis poné- 
bant infírmos, et deprecabán- 
tur eum, ut vel fímbriam ves- 


timénti ejus tángerent, et 
quotquot tangébant eum, 
Salvi fiébant. 


118, 154, 125 


Dómine, vivífica me secün- 
dum .elóquium tuum: ut 
sciam testimónia tua. 


Secret 


i ECEIVE, O Lord, the sacri- 

fice with the immolation 
of which it hath been Thy will 
to be graciously appeased; 
grant, we beseech Thee, that, 
being purified by its operation, 
‘we may present such a spiritual 
affection as shall be well pleas- 
ing to Thee. Through our Lord. 


ÜscrPE, Dómine, sacrifí- 

cium, cujus te voluísti 
dignánter immolatióne plac- 
ári: preste, quesumus; ut, 
hujus operatióne mundáti, 
beneplácitum tibi nostre 
mentis offerámus afféctum. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret, Graciousiv hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIRST SUNDAY OF LENT 233 


Communion. Ps. 2, 11, 12 


Servite Dómino in timóre, Serve ye the Lord with fear, 
$ exsultáte ei cum tremóre: and rejoice unto Him with 
pprehéndite disciplinam, ne trembling; embrace discipline, 
3ereátis de via justa. lest you perish from the just 

way. 


Postcommunion 


ELÉSTIS vite | münere OURISHED with the gift of 

vegetati, quesumus, Dó- the Bread of Life, we beg, 

mine: ut, quod est nobis in O Lord, that that which is a 

presénti vita mystérium, fiat mystery to us in the present 

æternitátis auxilium. Per life may become an aid of the 
Dóminum. eternal. Through our Lord. 

Second. TOs On, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 

communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 82 26. 
Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 


uwrLIÁTE capita vestra ow down your heads to 
Deo. God. 
Fidéles tui, Deus, per tua Let Thy faithful, O God, be 
piona firméntur: ut éadem et confirmed through Thy gifts, 
ercipiéndo requirant, et that, receiving the same, they 
uæréndo sine fine percipiant. may still seek them and, seek- 
er Dóminum. ing them, may receive them 
rca end. Through our 
Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


First Sundap of Lent (Purple) 
STATION at ST. JOHN LATERAN 
Sunday of the First Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 90, 15, 16 


wvocApir me, et ego ex- E SHALL call upon Me, and 
áudiam eum: eripiam I will hear him; I will 
eum, et glorificdbo eum: lon- deliver him, and glorify him; 
gitüdine dierum f adimplébo I will fill him with length of 
eum. Ps. 90,1. Qui hábitat days. Ps. 90, 1. He that dwelleth 
in adjutério Altissimi: in in the aid of the Most High, 
protectióne Dei cæ com- shall abide under the protec- 
morábitur. V. Glória Patri. um of the God of heaven. y. 
lory. 
Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


284 


FIRST SUNDAY OF LENT 


Prayer 


cop, Who dost purify Thy 
O Church with the annual 
observance of Lent, grant to 
Thy household that what it 
strives to obtain from Thee by 
abstinence it may secure with 
good works. Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui Ecclésiam tua 

annua quadragesimé 
Observatióne puríficas: pri 
sta familie tue; ut, quod 
te obtinére abstinéndo nit 
tur, hoc bonis opéribus exs 
quátur. Per Dóminum. 


Secong Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipoter 


page 828. 


Epistle. 2 Cor. 6, 1-10 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, we exhort you 
that you receive not the 

grace of God in vain. For He 
saith, In an accepted time have 
I heard thee, and in the day of 
salvation have I helped thee. 
Behold now is the acceptable 
time, behold now is the day of 
Salvation. Giving no offense 
to any man, that our ministry 
be not blamed: but in all things 
let us exhibit ourselves as the 
ministers of God; in much pa- 
tience, in tribulations, in neces- 
sities, in distresses, in stripes, 
in prisons, in seditions, in la- 
bors, in watchings, in fastings, 
in chastity, in knowledge, in 
long-suffering, in sweetness, in 
the Holy Ghost, in charity un- 
feigned, in the word of truth, 
in the power of God; by the 
armor of justice on the right 
hand and on the left, by honor 
and dishonor, by evil report and 
good report; as deceivers, and 
yet irue; as unknown, and yet 
known; as dying, and behold 
we live; as chastised, and not 
killed; as sorrowful, yet always 
rejoicing; as needy, yet enrich- 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pai 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Exhortamur vc 

ne in vácuum grátia 
Dei recipiátis. Ait enin 
Témpore accépto exaudivi 1 
et in die salitis adjuvi i 
Ecce nunc tempus accept 
bile, ecce nunc dies saluti 
Némini dantes ullam offei 
Ssiónem, ut non vituperéti 
ministérium nostrum: sed : 
ómnibus exhibeámus nosmi 
típsos sicut Dei minístros : 
multa patiéntia, in tribul 
tiónibus, in necessitátibus, : 
angustiis, in plagis, in ca 
céribus, in seditidnibus, 
labóribus, in vigíliis, in jeji 
niis, in castitáte, in sciénti 
in longanimitáte, in suav 
tate, in Spíritu Sancto, : 
caritáte non ficta, in vert 
veritatis, in virtüte Dei, p 
arma justitie a dextris, et 
sinístris: per glóriam, et ij 
nobilitatem: per infámia: 
et bonam famam: ut sedu 
tóres, et veráces: sicut qui is 
nóti, et cógniti: quasi mor 
éntes, et ecce vívimus: ut ca 
tigati, et non  mortificát 
quasi tristes, semper aute 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIRST SUNDAY OF LENT 


gaudéntes: sicut egéntes, 
multos autem locupletantes: 
tamquam nibil habéntes, et 
ómnia possidéntes. 


285 


ing many; as having nothing, 
and possessing all things. 


Gradual. Ps. 90, 11, 12 


Angelis suis Deus mandavit 
de te, ut custódiant te in 
ómnibus viis tuis. VY. In má- 
nibus portábunt te, ne um- 
quam offendas ad Jlápidem 
pedem tuum. 


Tract. 

Qui hábitat in adjutório 
Altíssimi in protectióne Dei 
celi commorábitur. Y. Dicet 
Dómino: Suscéptor meus es 
tu, et refügium meum: Deus 
meus, sperábo in eum. Y. 
Quóniam ipse liberávit me de 
láqueo venántium et a verbo 
áspero. Y. Scapulis suis 
obumbrábit tibi, et sub pennis 
ejus sperábis. JV. Scuto cir- 
cümdabit te véritas ejus: non 
timébís a timóre noctürno. 
V. A sagítta volánte per diem, 
& negótio perambulánte. in 
ténebris: a ruína et dz:mónio 
meridiáno. JY. Cadent a lá- 
tere tuo mille, et decem míllia 
& dextris tuis: tibi autem 
non appropinquábit. Y. Quo- 
niam Angelis suis mandávit 
de te, ut custódiant te in 
ómnibus viis tuis. Y. In mán- 
ibus portábunt te, ne un- 
quam offendas ad lápidem 
pedem tuum. Y. Super áspi- 
dem et basiliscum ambulabis, 
et conculcábis leónem et dra- 
cónem. JY. Quóniam in me 
speravit, liberábo eum: pró- 
tegam eum, quóniam cog- 
nóvit nomen meum. VY. In- 
vocábit me, et ego exáudiam 
eum: cum ipso sum in tribu- 
latióne. Y. Erípiam eum, et 


God hath given His angels 
charge over thee, to keep thee 
in all thy ways. Y. In their 
hands they shall bear thee up, 
lest thou dash thy foot against 
a stone. 


Ps. 90, 1-7, 11-16 


He that dwelleth in the aid 
of the Most High, shall abide 
under the protection of the God 
of heaven. Y. He shall say tc 
the Lord, Thou art my pro- 
tector and my refuge: my God, 
in Him will I trust. Y. For He 
hath delivered me from the 
Snare of the hunters, and from 
the sharp word. Y. He will 
overshadow thee with His 
shoulders, and under His wings 
thou shalt trust. Y. His truth 
shall compass thee with a 
shield: thou shalt not be 
afraid of the terror of the 
night. Y. Of the arrow that 
flieth in the day; of the busi- 
ness that walketh about in the 
dark: of ruin and the noonday 
devil. V. A thousand shall fall 
at thy side, and ten thousand 
at thy right hand: but it shall 
not come nigh to thee. V. For 
He hath given His angels 
charge over thee, to keep thee 
in all thy ways. V. In their 
hands they shall bear thee up, 
lest thou dash thy foot against 
a stone. V. Thou shalt walk 
upon the asp and the basilisk, 
and thou shalt trample under 
foot the lion and the dragon. 
¥. Because he hath hoped. in 
Me, I will deliver him; I will 


http://ccwatershed.org 


236 


protect him, because he hath 
known My name. J. He shall 
call upon me, and I will hear 
him: I am with him in tribula- 


FIRST SUNDAY OP LENT 


glorificábo eum: longitüdine 
diérum adimplébo eum, et 
osténdam illi salutáre meum. 


tion. y. I will deliver him, and I will glorify him; I will fill 
him with length of days, and I will show him My salvation. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 4, 1-11 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus was 

led by the Spirit into the 

desert, to be tempted by the 
devil. And when He had fasted 
forty days and forty nights, 
afterwards He was hungry. And 
the tempter coming said to 
Him, If Thou be the Son of 
God, command that these 
Stones be made bread. Who 
answered and said: It is writ- 
ten, Not in bread alone doth 
man Jive, but in every word 
that  proceedeth from the 
mouth of God. Then the devil 
took Him up into the holy city, 
and set Him upon the pinnacle 
'of the temple, and said to Him, 
If Thou be the Son of God, cast 
Thyself down: for it is written, 
'That He hath given His angels 
charge over Thee, and in their 
hands shall they bear Thee up, 
lest perhaps Thou dash ‘Thy 
foot against a stone. Jesus said 
to Him, It is written again, 
Thou shalt not tempt the Lord 
thy God. Again the devil took 
Him up into a very high moun- 
tain; and showed Him all the 
kingdoms of the world, and the 
glory of them; and said to Him, 
All these will I give Thee, if 
falling down Thou wilt adore 
me. Then Jesus said. to him, 
Begone, Satan, for it is written, 


& Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 


LT ILLO témpore: Ductus 
est Jesus in desértum a 
Spíritu, ut tentarétur a di- 
ábolo. Et cum jejunasset 
quadraginta diébus, et quad- 
raginta nóctibus, póstea esü- 
riit. Et accédens tentátor, 
dixit ei: Si Fílius Dei es, dic 
ut lápides isti panes fiant. 
Qui respóndens, dixit: Scrip- 
tum esi: Non in solo pane 
vivit homo: sed in omni 
verbo, quod procédit de ore 
Dei. Tunc assümpsit eum 
diábolus in sanctam civitá- 
tem, et státuit eum super pin- 
náculum templi, et dixit el: 
Si Fílius Dei es mitte te deór- 
sum. Scriptum est enim: 
Quia Angelis suis mandávit 
de te, et in mánibus tollent 
te, ne forte offéndas ad lápi- 
dem pedem tuum. Ait ill 
Jesus: Rursum scriptum est: 
Non tentábis Dóminum De- 
um. tuum. Iterum assümp- 
sit eum diábolus in montem 
excélsum valde: et osténdit: ei 
ómnia regna mundi, et gló- 
riam eórum, et dixit ei: Hec 
ómnia tibi dabo, si cadens 
adoráveris me. Tune dicit ei 
Jesus: Vade, Sátana: scrip- 
tum est enim: Dóminum 
Deum tuum adorábis, et illi 
Soli sérvies. | Tunc reliquit 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIRST SUNDAY OP LENT 


eum diábolus: et ecce Angeli 
accessérunt, et ministrábant 
el. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


Scápulis suis obumbrábit 
tibi Dóminus, et sub pennis 
ejus sperábis: scuto circüm- 
dabit te véritas ejus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


287 


The Lord thy God shalt thou 
adore, and Him only shalt thou 
serve. Then the devil left Him; 
and behold angels came, and 
ministered to Him. 


Ps. 90, 4, 5 


"The Lord, wil overshadow 
thee with His shoulders, and 
under His wings thou shalt 
trust: His truth shall compass 
thee with a shield. 


Secret 


máls inítii solémniter 
immolámus, te, Dómine, dep- 
recántes: ut, cum epulárum 
resirictióne — carnálium, a 
nóxiis quoque voluptátibus 
temperémus, Per Dóminum. 


Sane int quadragesi- 


QU SOLEMNLY offer the sac- 
rifice at the beginning 
of Lent, beseeching Thee, O 
Lord, that, while we restrict 
ourselves in. the use of bodily 
food, we may also refrain from 
indulgence in harmful pleas- 
ures, Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. 


Scápulis suis obumbrábit 
tibi Dóminus, et sub pennis 
ejus sperábis: scuto circüm- 
dabit te véritas ejus. 


Ps. 90, 4, 5 


The Lord will overshadow 
thee with His shoulders, and 
under His wings thou. shalt 
trust: His truth shall compass 
thee with a shield. 


Postcommunion 


nos, Dómine, sacra- 

ménti ]libátio sancta 

restáuret: et à vetustáte pur- 

gátos, in mystérii salutáris 

fáciat transíre consórtium. 
Per Dóminum. 


AY the holy partaking 

of Thy sacrament 
strengthen us, O Lord, and 
purify us from the old life, and 
make us sharers in the mystery 
of salvation. Through our Lord. 


Second, Postcommunion, May the gift, page ^ a Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, -page 829. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


238 


MONDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


PMlondayp, First Week of Lent (Purple) 


STATION AT ST. PETER'S CHAINS 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 

S THE eyes of servants 
A. are on the hands of 
heir masters, so are our eyes 
unto the Lord our God, until 
He have mercy on us: have 
mercy on us, O Lord, have 
mercy on us. Ps. 12, 1. To Thee 
have I lifted up my eyes: Who 
dwellest in heaven. JY. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


Ps. 122, 2 


ICUT Óculi servórum in 

mánibus dominórum 
suórum: ita óculi nostri ad 
Dóminum Deum nostrum, 
donec misereátur nobis: mis- 
erére nobis, Dómine, miserére 
nobis. Ps. 122, 1. Ad te 
levávi óculos meos: qui háb- 
itas in czlis. Y. Glória Patri. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


ONVERT us, O God, our 
salvation, and, that the 


ONVÉRTE nos, Deus salu- 
táris noster: et, ut no- 


Lenten fast may profit us, in- bis jejünium quadragesimále 
struct our minds with Thy proficiat, mentes nostras cæ- 
heavenly instruction. Through léstibus ínstrue  disciplínis. 


our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A — page 
page 829. 


Per Dóminum. 
827; third. Prayer, Omnipotens, 


Lesson. Ez. 34, 11-16 


Lesson from Ezechiel the 
Prophet. 


Hus saith the Lord, Be- 

hold, I Myself will seek 
My sheep, and will visit them. 
As the shepherd visiteth his 
flock, in the day when he shall 
be in the midst of his sheep 
that were scattered; so will I 
visit My sheep, and will de- 
liver them out of all the places 
where they have been scattered 
in the cloudy and dark day. 
And I will bring them out from 
the peoples, and will gather 
them out of the countries, and 
will bring them to their own 
land; and I will feed them in 
the mountains of Israel, by 
the rivers, and in all the habi- 
tations of the land. I will feed 


http://ccwate 


Léctio Ezechiélis Prophéte. 


æc dicit Dóminus Deus: 

Ecce ego ipse requiram 
Oves meas, et visitábo eas. 
Sicut visitat pastor gregem 
suum in die, quando füerit in 
médio óvium suárum dissi- 
patárum: sic visitábo oves 
meas, et liberábo eas de óm- 
nibus locis, in quibus dispér- 
se füerant, in die nubis et 
calíginis. Et edücam eas de 
pópulis, et congregábo eas de 
terris, et indücam eas in ter- 
ram suam: et pascam eas in 
móntibus Israël, in rivis, et in 
cunctis sédibus terre. In 
pascuis  ubérrimis pascam 
eas, et in móntibus excélsis 
Israël erunt páscua eárum: 


rshed.org 


MONDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


ibi requiéscent in herbis vir- 
éntibus, et in páscuis pingui- 
bus pascéntur super montes 
Israël. Ego pascam oves 
meas, et ego eas accubáre 
fáciam, dicit Dóminus Deus. 
Quod perferat; requíram; et 
quod abjéctum erat, redúc- 
am; et quod confráctum fú- 
erat, alligábo, et quod infírm- 
um fúerat, consolidábo; et 
quod pingue et forte, custó- 
diam: et pascam illas in ju- 
dício dicit Dóminus omnípo- 
tens. 


239 


them in the most fruitful pas- 
tures, and their pastures shall 
be in the high mountains of 
Israel: there sball they rest on 
the green grass, and be fed in 
fat pastures upon the moun- 
tains of Israel. I will feed my 
sheep, and I will cause them to 
lie down, saith the Lord God. 
Y will seek that which was lost: 
and that which was driven 
away I will bring again; and 
I will bind üp that which was 
broken: and I will strengthen 
that which was weak; and that 
which was fat and strong I 


will preserve: and I will feed them in judgment, saith the 


Lord almighty. 


Gradual. Ps.83,10,9 


Protéctor noster  áspice, 
Deus, et réspice super servos 
tuos. JY. Dóminus Deus vir- 
tütum, exáudi preces servó- 
rum tuórum. 


Behold, O God, our protector, 
and look upon Thy servants. 
y. O Lord God of hosts, graci- 
ously hear the prayers of Thy 
servants. 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 25, 31-46 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit 

Jesus  discípulis suis: 
Cum vénerit Fílius hóminis 
in majestáte sua, et omnes 
Angeli cum eo, tunc sedébit 
super sedem. majestátis suz: 
et congregabüntur ante eam 
omnes gentes, et separábit 
eos ab invicem, sicut pastor 
Ségregat oves ab hedis: et 
státuet oves quidem a dextris 
suis, hedos autem a sinítris. 
Tunc dicet rex his, qui a dex- 
tris ejus erunt: Veníte bene- 
dícti Patris mei, possidéte 
parátum vobis regnum a con- 


* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus said 
4H. to His disciples, When 
e Son of man shall come in 
His majesty, and all the ange!s 
with Him, then shall He sit 
upon the seat of His majesty; 
and all nations shall be gath- 
ered together before Him, and 
He shall separate them one 
from another, as the shepherd 
separateth the sheep from the 
goats; and He shall set the 
sheep on His right hand, but 
the goats on His left. Then 
shall the King say to them that 
shall be on His right hand, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


240 


Come, ye blessed of My Father, 
possess you the kingdom pre- 
pared for you from the foun- 
dation of the world. For I was 
hungry, and you gave Me to 
eat; I was thirsty, and you gave 
Me to drink; I was a stranger, 
and you took Me in; naked, and 
you covered Me; sick, and you 
visited Me: I was in prison, 
and you came to Me. Then shall 
the just answer Him, saying, 
Lord, when did we see Thee 
hungry, and fed Thee; thirsty, 
&nd gave Thee drink; and 
when did we see Thee a2 
stranger, and took Thee in; 

and naked, and covered Thee: 
or when did we see Thee sick 
or in prison, and came to 
Thee? And the King answering, 
shall say to them, Amen I say 
to you, as long as you did it to 
one of these My least brethren, 
you did it to Me. Then He shall 
say to them also that shall be 
‘on His left hand, Depart from 
Me, you cursed, into everlasting 
fire, which was prepared for 
the devil and his. angels. For I 
was hungry, and you gave Me 
not to eat; I was thirsty, and 
you gave Me not to drink; I 
was a Stranger, and you took 
Me not in; naked, and you cov- 
ered Me not; sick, and in pris- 
on, and you did not visit Me. 
Then they also shall. answer 
Him, saying, Lord, when did 
we see Thee hungry, or thirsty, 
or a stranger, or naked, or sick, 
or in prison, and did not minis- 
ter to Thee? Then He shall 
answer them, saying, Amen I 
say to you, as long as you did 
it not to one of these least, 
neither did you it to Me. And 


MONDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


stitutióne mundi. Esurivi 
enim, et dedistis mihi man- 
ducáre: sitivi, et dedistis mihi 
bíbere: hospes eram, et col- 
legistis me; nudus, et cooper- 
uístis me: infirmus, et visi- 
tástis me: in cárcere eram, et 
venistis ad. me. "Tunc re- 
spondébunt ei justi, dicéntes: 
Dómine, quando te vidimus 
esuriéntem, et pávimus te: 
sitiéntem, et .dédimus | tibi 
potum? quando autem te vi- 
dimus héspitem, et collégi- 
mus te: aut nudum, et coop- 
eruimus te? aut quando te 
vidimus infirmum, aut in 
cárcere, et vénimus ad te? Et 
respóndens rex, dicet illis: 
Amen dico vobis, quámdiu 
fecistis uni ex his frátribus 
meis mínimis, mihi fecístis. 
Tune dicet et his, qui a sinís- 
tris erunt: Discédite a me, 
maledicti, in ignem ztérnum, 
qui parátus est. diábolo, et 
angelis ejus. Esurívi enim, et 
nos dedístis mihi manducáre: 
sitivi, et non dedistis mihi 
potum: hospes eram, et non 
collegistis me: nudus, et non 
cooperuístis me: infirmus, et 
in cárcere, et non visitástis 
me. Tunc respondébunt ei 
et. ipsi, dicéntes: Dómine, 
quando te vídimus esurién- 
tem, aut sitiéntem, aut hóspi- 
tem, aut nudum, aut infír- 
mum, aut in cárcere et non 
ministrávimus tibi? Tunc re- 
spondébit. illis, dicens: Amen 
dico vobis: quámdiu non fe- 
cístis uni de minóribus his, 
nec mihi fecístis. Et ibunt hi 
in supplícium etérnum: justi 
autem in vitam etérnam. 


these shall go into everlasting punishment; but the just, into 


life everlasting. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MONDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 241 


Offertory. Ps. 118, 18, 26, 73 


Levabo óculos meos, et con- 
Siderábo mirabília tua, Dó- 
mine, ut dóceas me justítias 
tuas: da mihi intelléctum, et 
discam mandata tua. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


I will lift up my eyes, and 
consider Thy wonders, O Lord, 
that Tnou mayest teach me 
Thy justices: give me under- 
standing, and I will learn Thy 
commandments, 


Secret 


ÚNERA tibi, Dómine, 

obláta sanctífica: nos- 
que a peccatórum nostrórum 
máculis emünda. Per Dómi- 
num. 


ancriry the gifts offered to 

Thee, O Lord, and cleanse 

us from ‘the stains of our sins. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 


O God to Whom alone, page 82. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


9. 


Communion. Matt. 25, 40, 34 


‘Amen dico vobis: quod uni 


' Amen I say to you: what you 


ex mínimis mels fecistis, mihi did to one of My least ones, you 
fecistis: . veníte, benedicti did to Me: come ye blessed of 
Patris mei, possidéte parátum My Father, possess the king- 
vobis regnum ab inítio seculi. dom prepared for you from the 
beginning of the world. 


Postcommunion 
ALUTÁRIS tui, Dómine, EGALED With the gift of 
münere  satiáti, súp- Thy salvation, O Lord, 


plices exorámus: ut, cujus we, Thy suppliants, pray to be 
letámur gustu, renovémur ef- renewed by the effect of that 
féctu. Per Dóminum. by the taste of which we are 
gladdened. Through our Lord. 
Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 
Prayer over the people. 


Let ws pray 
UMILIATE cápita vestra ow down your heads to 
Deo. God. . 
Absólve, quesumus, Dó- Loose the bonds of our sins, 


mine, nostrórum vincula pec- we beseech Thee, O Lord, and 
catérum: et quidquid pro eis whatever we deserve for them, 
merémur, propitiátus avérte. do Thou mercifully avert it. 
Per Dóminum, Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


242 


TUESDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


Tuesday, First Geek of Lent (Purple) 


STATION AT GT. ANASTASIA 


Introit. Ps. 89,1, 2 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
orp, Thou hast been our 
Ti refuge from generation 
to generation: from eternity 
and to eternity Thou art. Ps. 
89, 2. Before the mountains 
were made, or the earth and 
the world was formed: from 


eternity and to eternity Thou 
art God. Y. Glory. 


ÓMINE, refugium factus 

es nobis a generatióne 
et progénie: a seculo et in 
seculum tu es. Ps. 89, 2. Pri- 
usquam montes fíerent, aut 
formarétur terra, et orbis: a 
seculo, et usque in seculum 
tu es, Deus. V. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


ook down upon Thy 

household, O Lord, and 
grant that our minds may be 
made glow by the desire of 
Thee, which have been chas- 
tened by the tormenting of 
their bodies. Through our Lord. 


ÉsPICE, Dómine, fami- 

liam tuam: et presta; 
ut apud te mens nostra tuo 
desidério fülgeat, que se car- 
nis maceratióne castígat. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, page 
829. 


Lesson. 
Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 


N THOSE days the prophet 
Isaias spoke, saying, Seek 

ye the Lord while He may be 
found, call upon Him while He 
is near. Let the wicked forsake 
his way, and the unjust man 
his thoughts, and let him re- 
turn to the Lord, and He will 
have mercy on him; and to our 
God, for He is bountiful to for- 
give, For My thoughts are not 
your thoughts: nor your ways 
My ways, saith the Lord. For as 
the heavens are exalted above 
the earth, so are My ways ex- 
alted above your ways, and My 
thoughts above your thoughts. 


Is. 55, 6-11 


Léctio Isaiz Prophéte. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Locütus est 

Isaias prophéta, dicens: 
Quzrite Dóminum, dum in- 
veniri potest: invocáte eum, 
dum prope est. Derelínquat 
impius viam suam, et vir in- 
iquus cogitatiónes suas, et re- 
vertátur ad Dóminum: et 
miserébitur ejus, et ad Deum 
nostrum: quóniam multus est 
ad ignoscéndum. Non enim 
cogitatiónes mee, cogita- 
tiónes vestre: neque vit ve- 
sire, vie mex, dicit Dóminus. 
Quia sieut exaltántur c#li a 
terra, sic exaltáte sunt vie 
mee a viis vestris, et cogita- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TUESDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


tiónes mee a cogitatiónibus 
vestris. Et quómodo descén- 
dit imber, et nix de czlo, et 
illuc ultra non revértitur, sed 
inébriat terram, et infündit 
eam, et germináre eam facit, 
et dat semen serénti, et pa- 
nem comedénti: sic erit ver- 
bum meum, quod egrediétur 
de ore meo: non revertétur 
ad me vácuum, sed fáciet 
quacümque vólui, et posperá- 
bitur in his, ad qus misi 
ilud: aif Dóminus omni- 


potens. 
Gradual. 


Dirigátur orátio mea sicut 
incénsum in conspéctu tuo, 


Dómine. Y. Elevátio má- 
nuum meárum, sacrificium 
vespertínum. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


243 


And as the rain and the snow 
come down from heaven, and 
return no more thither, but 
soak the earth and water it, 
and make it to spring, and give 
seed to the sower and bread to 
the eater; so shall My word be 
which shall go forth from My 
mouth: it shall not return to 
Me void, but it shall do what- 
Soever 1 please, and shall pros- 
per in the things for which I 
sent it; saith theLordalmighty. 


Ps. 140, 2 


Let my prayer be directed as 
incense in Thy sight, O Lord. 
The lifting up of my hands as 
evening sacrifice. 


Gospel. Matt. 21, 10-17 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Cum in- 

trasset Jesus  Jerosóly- 
mam, commóta est univérsa 
cívitas, dicens: Quis est hic? 
Populi autem dicébant: Hic 
est Jesus prophéta a Náza- 
reth Galilee. Et intravit 
Jesus in templum Dei, et eji- 
ciébat omnes vendéntes, et 
eméntes in templo; et men- 
sas nummulariórum, et cá- 
thedras vendéntium colüm- 
bas evértit: et dicit eis: 
Scriptum est: Domus mea 
domus oratiónis vocábitur: 
vos autem fecístis illam spe- 
lancam latrónum. Et acces- 
sérunt ad eum czci, et claudi 
in templo: et sanávit eos. 
Vidéntes autem príncipes 
Sacerdótum, et Scribe mira- 


. "f Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, when Jesus 
A. was come into Jerusa- 
em, the whole city was moved, 
saying, Who is this? And the 
people said, This is Jesus the 
prophet, from Nazareth of 
Galilee. And Jesus went into 
the temple of God, and cast out 
all them that sold and bought 
in the temple, and overthrew 
the tables of the money- 
changers, and the chairs of 
them that sold doves, and He 
saith to them, It is written, My 
house shall be called the house 
of prayer, but you have made 
iv à den of thieves. And there 
came to Him the blind and the 
lame, in the temple; and He 
healed them. And the chief 
priests and scribes secing the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


244 


wonderful things that He did, 
and the children crying in the 
temple, and saying, Hosanna to 
the son of David, Were moved 
with indignation, and seid to 
Him, Hearest Thou what these 
Say? And Jesus said to them, 
Yea, have you never read, Out 
of the mouth of infants and of 
sucklings Thou hast perfected 
praise? And leaving them, he 
went out of the city in Beth- 
ania and remained there. 


TUESDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


bilia, que fecit, et pteros 
clamántes in templo, et di- 
centes; Hosánna, fílio David: 
indignáti sunt, et dixérunt 
ei: Audis quid isti dicunt? 
Jesus autem dixit eis: Utique. 
Numquam legístis: Quia ex 
ore infántium et lacténtium 
perfecísti laudem? Et relíc- 
tis illis, ábiit foras extra civi- 
tátem in Bethániam: ibíque 
mansit. 


Offertory. Ps. 30, 15, 16 


In Thee, O Lord, have I 
hoped: I said: Thou art my 
God, my times are in Thy 
hands. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Tn te sperávi, Dómine, dixi: 
Tu es Deus meus: in mánibus 
tuis témpora mea. 


Secret 


E APPEASED, We beseech 
Thee, O Lord, with the 
gifts we offer, and defend us 


from all dangers. Through our 
Lord. 


BLÁTIS, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, placáre munéri- 
bus: et a cunctis nos defénde 
perículis. Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret 


O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps. 4, 2 


When I called upon Thee, 
Thou didst hear me, O God of 
my justice: when I was in dis- 
tress, Thou hast enlarged me: 
have mercy on me, O Lord, and 
hear my prayer. 


Cum invocarem te, ex- 
audísti me, Deus justitie 
mee: in tribulatióne dilatasti 
me: miserére mihi, Démine, 
et exáudi oratiónem meam. 


Postcommunion 


E BEG, O almighty God, 
that we may lay hold 
upon the effect of that salva- 
tion whose pledge we have re- 


UESUMUS, omnípotens 
Deus: ut illfus salutáris 
capiámus efféctum, cujus per 


hec mystéria pignus accépi- 


ceived through these mysteries. mus. Per Dóminum. 


‘Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


245 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
Deo. 

Ascéndant ad te, Dómine, 
preces nostre: et ab Ecclésia 
tua cunctam repélle nequit- 
jam. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Práyers, page 793. 


ow down your heads to 
God. E 
Let our prayers ascend unto 


Thee, O Lord, and repel all evil 


from Thy Church. Through our 


Lord, 


Wednesday, Hirst Week of Lent (Purple) 


STATION AT ST. Mary MAJOR 
(Ember-day) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 24, 6, 3, 22 


EMINÍSCERE miseration- 

um tuárum, Dómine, et 
misericórdiæ tue que a sæ- 
culo sunt: ne umquam do- 
minéntur nobis inimíci nos- 
tri: libera nos, Deus Israël 
ex ómnibus angüstiis nostris. 
Ps. 24, 1-2. Ad te, Dómine, 
l vavi ánimam meam: Deus 
meus, in te confido, non eru- 
béscam. VY. Gloria Patri. 


bowels .of compassion, 
and Thy mercies that are from 
the beginning of the world; iest 
at any time our enemies rule 
over us: deliver us, O God of 
Israel, from ‘all our” tribula- 
tions. Ps. 24, 1, 2. To Thee, ʻO 
Lord, have I lifted up my soul: 
in Thee, O my God, I put my 
trust; Let me not be ashamed. 
Y. Glory. 


AR oves" O Lord, Thy 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 
Tour After Kyrie eleison, is said: 


Orémus. 
~ Flectamus génua. 
BY. Leváte. 
RECES nostras, quæsu- 
mus, Dómine, clemén- 
ter exáudi: et contra cuncta 
nobis .adversantia, déxteram 
tue májestátis extende.. Per 
Dóminum. 


Let us pray. - 

Let us kneel. 

W. Arise. 
F THY mercy hear our 
prayers, O Lord, and 


Stretch forth the right hand of 
Thy majesty against all things 
that work against us. Through 
our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


246 WEDNESDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


Lesson. Ex. 24, 12-18 


Lesson from the Book of 
Exodus. 
N THOSE days, the Lord said 
to Moses, Come up to Me 
into the mount, and be there; 
and I will give thee tables of 
Stone, and the law, and the 
commandments which I bave 
written that thou mayest teach 
them. Moses rose up, and his 
minister Josue; and Moses go- 
ing up into the mount of God, 
said to the ancients, Wait ye 
here till we return to you. You 
have Aaron and Hur with you; 
if any question shall arise, you’ 
shall refer it to them. And 
when Moses was gone up, & 
cloud covered the mount; and 
the glory of the Lord dwelt 
upon Sinai, covering it with & 
cloud six days: and the seventh 
day He called him out of the 
midst of the cloud. And the 
sight of the glory of the Lord 
was like & burning fire upon 
the top of the mount, in the 
eyes of the children of Israel. 
&nd Moses entering into the 
midst of the cloud, went up 
into the mountain: and he was 
there forty days and forty 
nights, 


. Gradual. 


The troubles of my heart 
are multiplied: deliver me from 
my necessities, O Lord. Y. See 
my abjection and my labor, 
and forgive me all my sins. 


Here Let us kneel is not said; 


Léctio libri Exodi. 


N DIEBUS illis: Dixit Dom- 

ins ad Móysen: 
Ascénde ad me in mon- 
tem, et esto ibi: dabóque tibi 
tábulas lapídeas, et legem ac 
mandata que scripsi: ut dó- 
ceas fílios Israél. Surrexér- 
unt Móyses et Jósue miníster 
ejus: ascendénsque Móyses in 
montem Dei, senióribus ait: 
Exspectáte hic donec revert- 
amur ad vos. Habétis Aaron 
et Hur vobíscum: si quid na- 
tum füerit questionis, referé- 
tis ad eos. Cumque ascendís- 
set Móyses, opéruit nubes 
montem, et habitávit glória 
Dómini super Sinai, tegens 
ilum nube sex diébus: sép- 
timo autem die vocávit eum 
de médio calíginis. Erat au- 
tem spécies glórie Dómini, 
quasi ignis ardens super vér- 
ticem montis, in conspéctu 
fíliórum Israél. Ingressüsque 
Móyses médium .nébule, 
ascéndit in montem: et fuit 
ibi quadragínta diébus, et 
quadraginta nóctibus. 


Ps. 24 

Tribulatiónes cordis met 
dilatáte sunt: de necessitati- 
bus meis éripe me, Dómine. 
¥. Vide humilitátem meam, 
et labérem meum: et dimítte 
ómnia peccáta mea. 
but the prayer is preceded by 


the salutation: The Lord be with you. 
Prayer 


EHOLD with kindness, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, 
the devotion of Thy people, 


EVOTIÓNEM pópuli tul, 
quzsumus, Dómine, be- 
níenus inténde: ut, qui per 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 247 
abstinéntiam macerántur in that they, who now are morti- 
córpore, per íructum boni fled in body by abstinence, may 
óperis reficiántur in mente. be refreshed in soul by the 


Per Dóminum. 


fruit of their good work. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson. 3 Kings 19, 3-8 


Léctio libri Regum. 


N DIEBUS illis: Venit Elias 

in Bersabée Juda, et di- 
mísit ibi püerum suum, et 
perréxit in desértum, viam 
uníus diéi. Cumque venísset, 
et sedéret subter unam juní- 
perum, petivit anime sue ut 
morerétur, et ait: Sufficit 
mihi, Dómine, tolle ánimam 
meam; neque enim mélior 
sum, quam patres mei. Pro- 
jecítque se, et obdormívit in 
umbra juníperi: et ecce An- 
gelus Dómini tétigit eum, et 
dixit illi: Surge, et cómede. 
Respéxit, et ecce ad caput 
suum subcinerícius panis, et 
vas aque: comédit ergo, et 
bibit, et rursum obdormivit. 
Revers" sque est Angelus Dó- 
mini secündo, et tétigit eum, 
dixitque illi: Surge, cómede: 
grandis enim tibi restat via. 
Qui cum surrexísset, comédit 
et bibit, et ambulávit in forti- 
tüdine cibi illius quadraginta 
diébus, et quadragínta nócti- 
bus, usque ad montem Dei 
Horeb. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Kings. 
N THOSE days Elias came to 
Bersabee of Juda, and left 
his servant there, and he went 
forward, one day’s journey into 
the desert. And when he was 
there, and sat under a ju- 
niper-tree, he requested for 
his soul that he might die, and 
said, It is enough for me, Lord, 
take away my soul, for I am no 
better than my fathers. And he 
cast himself down, and slept 
in the shadow of the juniper- 
tree; and behold an angel of 
the Lord touched him, and said 
to him, Arise and eat. He 
looked, and, behold, there was 
at his head a hearth-cake and 
a vessel of water, and he ate 
and drank, and fell asleep 
again. And the angel of the 
Lord came again the second 
time, and touched him, and 
said to him, Arise, eat, for thou 
hast yet a great way to go. And 
he arose, and ate and drank, 
and walked in the strength of 
that food forty days and forty 
nights, unto the mount of God, 
Horeb. 


Tract. Ps. 24, 17, 18, 1, 2, 3, 4 


De necessitátibus meis 
eripe me, Dómine: vide hu- 
militátem meam, et labórem 
meum: et dimítte ómnia pec- 
cáta mea. Y. Ad te, Dómine, 


Deliver me from my neces- 
sities, O Lord: see my abjection 
and my labor, and forgive me 
all my sins. Y. To. Thee, O Lord, 
have I lifted up my soul; in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


248 


Thee, O my God, I put my trust, 
let me not be ashamed: neither 
let my enemies laugh at me. 
Y. For none of them that wait 
on Thee shall be confounded: 
let all them be confounded that 
do vain things. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


WEDNESDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


levávi ánimam meam: Deus 
meus, in te confído, non eru- 
béscam: neque irrídeant me 
inímici mei. JY. Etenim uni- 
vérsi qui te exspéctant, non 
confundéntur: confundántur 
omnes faciéntes vana. 


Gospel. Matt. 12, 38-50 


IR Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT lime, some of the 

scribes and pharisees 
answered Him, saying, Master, 
we would see a sign from Thee. 
Who answering, said to them, 
An evil and adulterous genera- 
tion seeketh a sign; and a 
sign shall not be given it, but 
the sign of Jonas the. prophet. 
For as Jonas was in the whale’s 
belly three days and three 
nights, so shall the Son of man 
be in the heart of the earth 
three days and three nights. 
The men of Ninive shall rise in 
judgment with this generation, 
and shall condemn it; because 
they did pennance at the 
preaching of Jonas: and behold 
a greater than Jonas here. The 
queen of the south shall rise in 
judgment with this generation, 
and shall condemn it; because 
she came from the ends of the 
earth to hear the wisdom cf 
Solomon: and behold a greater 
than Solomon here. And when 
an unclean spirit is gone out 
of a man, he walketh through 
dry places, seeking rest, and 
findeth none. Then he saith, 
I will return into my house 
from whence I came out: and 
coming he findeth it empty, 
swept, and garnished. Then he 
goeth, and taketh with him 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Respon- 

dérunt Jesu quidam de 
Ecribis et phariszis, dicéntes: 
Magister, vólumus a te sig- 
num vidére. Qui respóndens, 
ait ilis: Generátio mala et 
adúltera signum querit: et 
signum non dábitur ei, nisi 
signum Jonz prophéte. Sicut 
enim fuit Jonas in ventre ceti 
tribus diébus, et tribus nécti- 
bus; sic erit Fílius hóminis in 
corde terre tribus diébus, et 
tribus nóctibus. Viri. Nini- 
vite surgent in judicio cum 
generatióne ista, et condem- 
nábunt eam: quia penitén- 
tiam egérunt in predicatiéne 
Jone. Et ecce plus quam 
Jonas hic. Regina Austri 
surget in Judício cum gener- 
&tióne ista, et condemnabit 
eam: quia venit a finibus ter- 
re audire sapiéntiam Salo- 
mónis, et ecce plus quam 
Sálomon hic. Cum autem 
immündus spíritus exíerit ab 
hómine, ámbulat per loca 
árida, querens réquiem, et 
non invenit. Tunc dicit: Re- 
vértar in domum meam, unde 
exivi. Et véniens invenit eam 
vacántem, scopis mundátam, 
et ornátam. Tunc vadit, et 
assümit septem álios spíritus 
secum nequióres se, et in- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 249 


trántes hábitant ibi: et fiunt seven other spirits more wicked 
novíssima hóminis illius pe- than himself, and they enter 
jóra prióribus. Sic erit et in and dwell there: and the 
generatióni huie péssime. last state of that man is made 
Adhuc eo Loquénte ad turbas, worse than the first. So shall it 
ecce mater ejus; et fratres be also to this wicked genera- 
Stabant foris, queréntes loqui tion. As He was yet speaking 
ei. Dixit autem ei quidam: to the multitudes, behold His 
Ecce mater tua, et fratres tuj mother and His brethren stood 
foris stant queréntes te. At without, seeking to speak to 
ipse respóndens dicénti sibi, Him. And one said unto Him, 
ait: Que est mater mea, et Behold Thy mother and Thy 
qui sunt fratres mei? Et ex- brethren stand without, seek- 
téndens manum in discípulos, ing Thee. But He answering 
suos, dixit: Ecce mater mea, him that told Him, said, Who 
et fratres mei  Quicümque is My mother, and who are My 
enim fécerit voluntátem Pa- brethren? And stretching forth 
tris mei, qui in calis est: ipse His hands towards His disciples, 
meus frater, et soror, et mater He said, Behold My mother and 
est. My brethren: for whosoever 

shall do the will of My Father, 
that is in heaven, He is My brother, and sister, and mother. 


Offertory. Ps. 118, 47, 48 


Meditáborin mandátis tuis, I will meditate on Thy com- 
que diléxi valde: et levábo mandments, which I have 
manus meas ad mandáta tua, loved exceedingly: and I will 
que diléxi. lift up my hands to Thy com- 

mandments, which I have 
loved. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


éstias tibi, Dómine, pla- E OFFER Thee, O Lord, 
catiónis offérimus: ut the sacrifice of recon- 
et delícta nostra miserátus ciliation, both that Thou may- 
absólvas, et nutántia corda tu est take pity and pardon our 
dirigas. Per Dóminum. sins, and that Thou mayest 
direct our wavering hearts. 

Through our Lord. 
Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 

O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps. 5, 2, 4 


Intéliige clamérem meum: Understand my cry: harken 
inténde voci oratiónis meæ,to the voice of my prayer, my 


http://ccwatershed.org 


250 THURSDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


King, and my God: for to Thee 
will I pray, O Lord. 


Rex meus, et Deus meus: 
quóniam ad te orábo, Dómine. 


Postcommunion 


Y THE reception of Thy 
B sacrament, O Lord, may 
we both be cleansed of our 
Secret sins and delivered from 
the snares of the enemy. 
Through our Lord. 


vi, Dómine, perceptióne 
sacraménti, et a nostris 
mundémur occültis, et ab hó- 
Stium liberémur insídiis. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and mercitul God, page.829. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


ow down your heads to 
' God. 

Enlighten our minds, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, with the 
light of Thy brightness, that 
we may be able to see what 
things ought to be done and 
have strength to perform the 
things that are just. Through 
our Lord. 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
Deo. 

Mentes nostras quesumus, 
Dómine, lümine tue claritá- 
tis illustra: ut vidére possi- 
mus, que agénda sunt; et, 
que recta sunt, ágere valea- 
mus. Per Dóminum. 


Thursday, First Week of Lent (Purple) 


STATION AT ST. LAWRENCE'S IN PANISPERNA 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps.95,6 


RAISE and beauty are be- 

fore Him: holiness and 
majesty in His sanctuary. Ps. 
95, 1. Sing ye to the Lord a new 
canticle: sing to the Lord all 
the earth. Y. Glory. 


owrÉssio et pulchritüdo 

in conspéctu ejus: 
Sánctitas, et magnificéntia in 
sanctificatione ejus. Ps. 95, 1. 
Cantate Dómino canticum 
novum : cantáte Dómino, 
omnis terra, Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


EHOLD With kindness, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, 
the devotion of Thy people, 


BB en popul tui, 
quesumus, Dómine, 
benígnus inténde: ut, qui per 


http://ccwatershed.org 


se 


BALMS 


THURSDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


251 


abstinéntiam macerántur in that they, who are now morti- 
córpore, per fructum boni fied in body by abstinence, may 


éperis reficiàntur in mente. 
Per Dóminum. 


be refreshed in soul by the 
fruit of their good work. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson. Ezech. 18, 1-9 


Léctio Ezechiélis Prophétz. 


sermo Dómini ad me, 
dicens: Quid est, quod inter 
vos parábolam vértitis in pro- 
vérbium istud in terra Israél, 
dicénies: Patres comedérunt 
uvam acérbam, et dentes fili- 
órum  obstupéscunt! Vivo 
ego, dicit Dóminus Deus, si 
erit ultra vobis parábola hec 
in provérbium in Israél. Ecce 
omnes ánime, mez sunt: ut 
anima patris, ita et anima 
fflil mea est: anima, que 
peccáverit, ipsa moriétur. Et 
vir si füerit justus, et fécerit 
judicium, et justitiam, in 
méntibus non coméderit, et 
6culos suos non leváverit ad 
idóla domus Israël: et uxórem 
próximi sui non violáverit, et 
ad mulferem menstruátam 
non accésserit: et hóminem 
non contristaverit: pignus 
debitórl reddíderit, per vim 
nihil rapüerit: panem suum 
esuriénti déderit, et nudum 
operüerit vestiménto: ad 
usüram. non commodáverit, 
et amplius non accéperit: ab 
iniquitáte avérterit manum 
suam, et judícium verum féce- 
rit inter virum et virum: in 
precéptis meis ambulá erit, 
et judícia mea custodíertt, ut 
fáciat veritátem: hic justus 


I. DiÉpUS illis: Factus est 


Lesson from Ezechiel the 
Prophet. 


N THOSE days, the word of 

the Lord came to me, say- 
ing, What is the meaning that 
you use among you this parable 
as a proverb in the land of 
Israel, saying, The fathers have 
eaten sour grapes, and the 
teeth of the children are set 
on edge? As I live, saith tbe 
Lord, this parable shall be no 
more to you a proverb in Israel. 
Behold all souls are Mine: as 
the soul of the father, so also 
the soul of the son is Mine: 
the soul that sinneth, the same 
shall die. And if a man be just, 
and do justice, and hath not 
eaten upon the mountains, nor 
lifted up his eyes to the idols 
of the house of Israel; and hath 
not defiled his neighbor’s wife, 
nor come near to a menstruous 
woman; and hath not wronged 
any man, but hath restored the 
pledge to the debtor; hath 
taken nothing away by vio- 
lence; hath given his bread to 
the hungry, and hath covered 
the naked with & garment; 
hath not lent upon usury, nor 
taken any increase; hath with- 
drawn his hand from iniquity, 
and hath executed true judg- 
ment between man and man; 
hath walked in My command- 
ments, and kept My judgmentn, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


262 THURSDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


to do truth; he is just, he shall 
surely live, saith the Lord 
almighty. 


est, vita vivet, ait Déminus 
omnipotens, 


Gradual. Ps. 16, 8, 2 


Keep me, O Lord, as the 
apple of Thy eye; protect me 
under the shadow of Thy wings. 
Y. Let my judgment come forth 
from Thy countenance; let Thy 
eyes behold the things that are 
equitable. : 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Custódi me, Dómine, ut 
pupillam óculi: sub umbra 
alárum tuárum prétege me. 
FJ. De vultu tuo judícium 
meum  pródeat: óculi tul 
videant squitátem, 


Gospel. Matt. 15, 21-28 


*B8 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


met THAT time, Jesus went 
forth, and retired into 
the coasts of Tyre and Sidon. 
And behold & woman of Ca- 
naan who came out of those 
coasts, crying out, said to Him, 
Have mercy on me, O Lord, 
Thou son of David: my daugh- 
ter is grievously troubled by a 
devil. Who answered her not a 
word. And His disciples came 
and besought Him, saying, 
Send her away, for she crieth 
after us: and He answering, 
said, I was not sent but to the 
sheep that are lost of the house 
of Israel. But she came and 
adored Him, saying, Lord, help 
me, Who answering, said, It is 
not good to take the bread of 
the children, and to cast it to 
the dogs. But she said, Yea, 
Lord: for the whelps also eat 
of the crumbs that fall from 
the table of their masters. Then 
Jesus answering, said to her, O 
woman, great is thy faith; be 
it done to thee as thou wilt: 
and her daughter was cured 
from that hour. 


fH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 


N YLLO témpore: Egréssus 

Jesus secéssit in partes 
Tyri et Sidónis. Et ecce mülier 
Chanana a finibus illis 
egréssa clamávit, dicens ei: 
Miserére mei, Dómine, fili 
David: filia mea. male a 
dæmónio vexátur. Qui non 
respóndit ei verbum. Et ac- 
cedéntes discipuli ejus rogá- 
bant eum, dicéntes: Dimitte 
eam; quia clamat post nos. 
Ipse autem respóndens, ait: 
Non sum missus nisi ad oves, 
que periérunt domus Israël. 
At illa venit, et adorávit eum, 
dicens: Dómine, ádjuva me. 
Qui respóndens, ait: Non est 
bonum sümere panem fi- 
Hórum, et mittere cánibus. At 
illa dixit: Etiam Dómine: 
nam et catélli edunt de micis, 


que cadunt de mensa do- 


iminórum suérum. Tune re- 
spóndens Jesus, ait ili: O 
mülier, magna est fides tua: 
fiat tibi sicut vis: Et sanáta 
est filia ejus ex illa hora. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


q 


THURSDAY, FIRST WEEE OF LENT 253 


Offertory. Ps. 33, 8, 9 


Immittet Angelus, Dómini The angel of the Lord shall 
in circüitu timéntium eum, et encamp round about them that 
erfpiet e0S: gustáte, et vidéte, fear Him, and shall deliver 
quóniam Suávis est Dóminus. them: taste and see that the 

Lord is sweet 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


AcRIFÍCIA, Dómine, que- ERCIFULLY grant, we be- 

sumus propénsius ista ®M seech Thee, O Lord, that 

nos salvent, que medicináli- these sacrifices, offered up with 

bus sunt institüta jejuniis. wholesome fasting, may insure 

Per Dóminum. our salvation. Through our 
Lord. : 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 
‘Communion. John 6, 52 


Panis, quem ego dédero, The bread that I will give, is 
caro mea est pro seculi vita. My flesh for the life of the 


world. 
Postcommunion 
voRUM nos Dómine Y THE plenteous bestowal 
largitáte donórum, et of Thy gifts, O Lord, sus- 


temporálibus attólle presidiis, tain us by temporal aids and 
et rénova sempitérnis. Per renew us by those that are 
Déminum. i . eternal. Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra ow down your heads to 
Deo. E God. . 

Da, quesumus, Dómine, Grant unto the Christian 
pópulis christianis; et que peoples, we beseech Thee, O 
profiténtur agnóscere, et cel- Lord, both to acknowledge the 
éste munus dilígere, quod things they profess and to Jove 
frequéntant. Per Dóminum. heavenly mysteries which they 

frequent. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FRIDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


jfribap, First Week of Lent (Purple) 
STATION AT THE TWELVE HOLY APosTLES 
(Ember-day) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 24, 17,18 


ELIVER me from my neces- 
sities O Lord: see my 
abjection and my labor, and 
forgive me all my sins. Ps. 
24, 1, 2, To Thee, O Lord, have 
I lifted up my soul: in Thee, O 
my God, I put my trust, let me 
not be ashamed, Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


E NECESSITATIBUS meis 

eripe me, Démine: vide 
humilitátem meam et labó- 
rem meum, et dimítte ómnia 
peccáta mea. Ps. 24, 1-2. Ad 
te, Dómine, levávi ánimam 
meam Deus meus, in te con- 
fido, non erubéscam. JY. 
Glória Patri. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


E THOU, O Lord, gracious 

to Thy people, and as 
Thou dost make them devoted 
to Thee, mercifully cherish 
them with Thy benign assist- 
ance. Through our Lord. 


€N sto, Dómine, propitius, 

plebi tuz: et, quam tibi 
facis esse devótam, benígno 
réfove miserátus auxílio. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, nisse 


Lesson. Ezech. 18, 20-28 


page 828. 


Lesson from Ezechiel the 
Prophet. 
Hus saith the Lord God: 
The soul that sinneth, 
the same shall die: the son shall 
not bear the iniquity of the 
father, and the father shall not 
bear the iniquity of the son: 
the justice of the just shall be 
upon him, and the wickedness 
of the wicked shall be upon 
him. But if the wicked do pen- 
ance for all his sins which he 
hath committed, and keep all 
My commandments, and do 
judgment, and justice, living he 
shall live, and shall not die. I 
will not remember all his in- 
iquities that he hath done: in 
his justice which he hath 
wrought, he shall live. Is it My 


Léctio Ezechielis Prophéte. 


EC dicit Dóminus Deus 
Anima, que peccáverit, 

ipsa moriétur: fílius non por- 
tábit iniquitátem patris, et 
pater non portábit iniquitá- 
tem fili; justitia justi super 
eum .erit, et impietas impii 
erit super eum. Si autem 
impius égerit peniténtiam ab 
ómnibus peccátis suis, que 
operátus est, et custodierit 
ómnia precépta mea, et fécer- 
it judícium et justítiam: vita 
vivet, et non moriétur. Omni- 
um iniquitátum ejus, quas 
operátus est, non recordábor: 
in justitia sua, quam operátus 
est, vivet. Numquid voluntátis 
mez, est mors impil, dicit Dó- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FRIDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


minus Deus, et non ut con- 
vertátur a viis suis, et vivat? 
Si autem avérterit se justus 
& justítia sua, et fécerit ini- 
quitátem  secündum omnes 
abominatiénes, quas operári 
solet impius, numquid vivet? 
omnes justitie ejus, quas 
fécerat non recordabuntur: 
in prevaricatióne, qua præ- 
varicátus est, et in peccáta 
suo, quod peccávit, in ipsis 
moriétur Et dixistis: Non est 
equa via Dómini. Audíte er- 
go domus Israél: Numquid 
via mea non est equa, et non 
magis vie vestre prave sunt? 
Cum enim avérterit se justus 
& justítia sua, et fécerit in- 
iquitátem, moriétur in eis: in 
injustitia, quam operátus est 
moriétur. Et cum avérterit 
se impius ab impietáte sua, 
quam operátus est, et fécerit 
judícium et justitiam: ipse 
ánimam suam  vivificábit. 
Consíderans enim, et avértens 
se ab ómnibus iniquitátibus 
suis, quas operátus est, vita 
vivet, et non moriétur, ait Dó- 
minus omnípotens. 


256 


will that a sinner should die, 
saith the Lord God, and not 
that he should be converted 
from his ways, and live? But if 
the just man turn himself away 
from his justice, and do in- 
iquity according to all the 
abominations which the wicked 
man useth to work, shall he 
live? All his justices which he 
hath done, shall not be remem- 
bered: in the prevarication, by 
which he hath prevaricated, 
and in his sin, which he hath 
committed, in them he shall 
die. And you have said: The 
way of the Lord is not right. 
Hear ye, therefore, O house 
of Israel: Is it My way 
that is not right, and are not 
rather your ways perverse? For 
when the just turneth himself 
away from his justice, and 
committeth iniquity, he shall 
die therein; in the injustice 
that he hath wrought he shall 
die. And when the wicked 
turneth himself away from his 
wickedness, which he hath 
wrought, and doeth judgment, 
and ‘justice: he shall save his 
soul alive. Because he con- 


sidereth and turneth away himself from all his iniquities 
which he hath wrought, he shall surely live, and not die, saith 


the Lord almighty. 


Gradual. Ps. 85, 2,6 


Salvum fac servum tuum, 
Deus meus sperántem in te. 
Y. Auribus pércipe, Dómine, 
oratiónem meam. 


Save Thy servant, O my God, 
that trusteth in Thee. JV. Give 
ear, O Lord, to my prayer. 


Tract as on, Ash, Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 5, 1-15 


HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Erat dies 
festus Judzórum, et as- 


"8 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT lime there was & 
festival-day of the Jews, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


256 


and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, 
Now there is at Jerusalem a 
pond called Probatica, which 
in Hebrew is named Bethsaida, 
having five porches. In these 
lay a great multitude .of slck, 
of blind, of lame, of withered, 
waiting for the moving of the 
water. And an angel of the 
Lord descended at certain 
times into the pond, and the 
water was moved: and he that 
went down first into the pond 
after the motion of the water, 
was made whole of whatsoever 
infirmity he lay under.. And 
there was a certain man there, 
that had been eight and thirty 
years under his infirmity. Him 
when Jesus had seen lying, and 
knew that he had been now & 
long time, He saith to him, 
‘Wilt thou be made whole? The 
infirm man answered Him, Sir, 
Ihave no man, when the water 
is troubled, to put me into the 
pond; for whilst I am coming, 
another goeth down before me. 
Jesus saith to him, Arise, take 
up thy bed and walk: and im- 
mediately the man was made 
whole, and he took up his bed 
and walked. And it was the 


sabbath that day. The Jews D 
sandtus ferat: Sábbatum est, 


therefore said to him that was 
healed, It is the sabbath; it Ís 
not lawful for thee to take up 
thy bed. He answered them, He 
that made me whole, He said 
to me, Take up thy bed and 
walk. They asked him there- 
fore, Who is that man who said 
to thee, Take up thy bed and 
Walk? But he who was healed 
knew not who it was:*for Jesus 
went aside from the multitude 
standing in the place. After- 
wards Jesus findeth him in the 
temple, and saith to him, Bes 


'suum, 


FRIDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


céndit Jesus Jerosólymam. Est 
&utem Jerosólymis Probática 
piscina, que cognominátur 
hebráice Bethsáida quinque 
pórticus habens. In his jacé- 
bat multitido magna lan- 
guéntium, cecérum, claudó- 
rum, aridórum exspectántium 
aque motum. Angelus autem 
Dómini descendébat secün- 
dum tempus in piscinam, et 
movebátur aqua. Et qui prior 
descendísset in piscinam post 
motiónem aque, sanus fiébat 
& quacümque detinebátur in- 
firmitáte. Erat autem quidam 
homo ibi, triginta et octo 
annos habens in infirmitáte 
sua. Hunc cum vidísset Jesus 
Jacéntem, et cognovisset quia 
jam multum tempus habéret, 
dicit ei; Vis sanus fieri? Re- 
spóndit ei lánguidus: Domine, 
hóminem non hábeo, ut cum 
turbata füerit aqua mittat me 
in piscínam: dum vénio enim 
ego, álius ante me descéndit. 
Dicit ei Jesus: Surge, tolle 
grabátum tuum, et ámbula. Et 
Statim sanus factus est homo 
ille: et süstulit grabátum 
et ambulábat. Erat 
autem sábbatum in die illo. 
Dicébant ergo Judei ili qui 


non licet tibi tóllere grabatum 
tuum. Respóndit eis: Qui me 
sanum fecit, ile mihi dixit: 
Tolle grabátum tuum, et 
&mbula. Interrogavérunt ergo 
eum: Quis est ille homo; qui 
dixit tibi: Tolle grabátum 
tuum et ámbula? Is autem, 
qui sanus füerit efféctus ne- 
Sclébat quis esset. Jesus enim 
declinavit a turba constitüta, 
in loco. Péóstea invénit eum 
Jesus in templo et dixit illi. 
Ecce sanus factus es; jam 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Fi 
hn 


FRIDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


noli peccáre, ne detéribus tibi 
aliquid. Contingat abiit ille 
homo, et nuntiávit Judæis, 
quia Jesus esset, qui fecit 
eum sanum. 


Offertory. 

Bénedic, anima mea, Dó- 

mino, et noli oblivisci, omnes 

retributiónes ejus: et renova- 

bitür, sicut áquile. juvéntus 
tua. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


257 


hold thou art made whole: sin 
no more, lest some worse thing 
happen to thee. The man went 
his way, and told the Jews that 
it was Jesus Who had made 
him whole. 


Ps. 102, 2, 5 

Bless the Lord, O my soul, 
and never forget all He hath 
done for thee, and thy youth 
shall be renewed like the 
eagle's. 


Secret 
USCIPE, quaesumus, Dó- ECEIVE, We beseech 'Thee, 
mine, münera nostris O Lord, the offerings of 


Obláta servítiis: et tua pro- 
pítius dona sanctífica. Per 
Dóminum nostrum. 


our homage, 
sanctify our gifts. 
our Lord. 


and graciously 
Through 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
© God to Whom alone, page 829. à 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. 


Erubéscant, et conturbéntur 
omnes inimíci mei: a vertan- 
tur retrórsum, et erubéscant 
valde velóciter. 


Ps. 6, 11 


Let all my enemies be 
ashamed, and be very much 
troubled: let them be turned 
back, and be ashamed very 
speedily. Og 


| Postcommunion 


ER HUJUS, Dómine, oper- 
T9 atiónem  mystérii, et 
vítia nostra purgéntur, et 
justa desidéria compleántur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second, Postcommunion, May the 
communion, Almighty and merciful 


Y THE Operation of this 

mystery, O Lord, may 
our sins be purged, and our 
righteous desires be' accom- 
plished. Through our Lord. 


gift, pagé 828; third Post- 
od, page 8. 


Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 


UMILIATE capita vestra 
Deo. Exáudi nos, misé- 
ricors Deus: et méntibus 
nostris grátie tue lumen 
osténde. Per Dóminum. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ow down your heads to 
God. Harken unto us, O 
merciful God, and show to our 
minds the light of Thy grace, 
Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


258 SATURDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


Saturday, First Week of Lent (Purple) 
STATION AT St. PETER 


(Ember-day) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 87, 3 


ET My prayer come in be- 

fore Thee: incline Thy 

ear to my petition, O Lord. Ps. 

87, 2. O Lord, the God of my 

salvation: I have cried in the 

day, and in the night before 
Thee. V. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 
. After the Kyrie 
Let us pray. : 
Let us kneel. 
W. Arise. 
OooK favorably upon Thy 
people, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, and of Thy mercy turn 
aside from it the scourges of 
Thy wrath. Through our Lord. 


NTRET Orátlo mea in con- 

Spéctu tuo: inclína aurem 
tuam ad precem meam, Dó- 
mine. Ps. 87, 2. Dómine, Deus 
salutis mee: in die clamávi, 
et nocte coram te. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


eleison is said: 
Orémus. 
Flectámus génua, 
RY. Leváte. 


óPULUM tuum, quesu- 

mus. Dómine, propítius 
réspice: atque ab eo flagélla 
tue iracündie  cleménter 
avérte. Per Dóminum. 


Lesson. Deut. 26, 12-19 


Lesson from the Book of 
Deuteronomy. 


N THOSE days, Moses spoke 

to the people, saying, 
When thou hast made an end 
of tithing all thy fruits, thou 
shalt speak thus in the sight of 
the Lord thy God: I have 
taken that which was sancti- 
fled out of my house, and I 
have given it to the levite and 
to the stranger, and to the 
fatherless and to the widow, as 
Thou hast commanded me: I 
have not transgressed Thy 
comMendments, nor forgotten 
Thy precepts. I have obeyed 
the voice of the Lord my God, 
and have done all things as 
Thou . hast commanded me. 
Look from Thy sanctuary, and 


Léctio libri. Deuteronémil, 


N DIÉBUS illis: Lócutus est 

Móyses ad  pópulum, 
dicens: Quando compléveris 
décimam cunctárum frugum 
tuárum, loquéris in conspé- 
ctu Dómini Dei tui: Abstuüll 
quod sanctificatum est de 
domo mea, et dedi illud levite, 
et ádvenz, et pupíllo, ac ví- 
due et sicut jussísti mihi: 
non preterivi mandáta tua, 
nec sum oblítus impérii tui, 
Obedivi voci Dómini Dei mei, 
et feci ómnia sicut precepísti 
mihi. Réspice de sanctuário 
tuo, et de excélso celérum 
habitáculo, et bénedic pópulo 
tuo Israél, et terre, quam 
dedisti nobis, sicut jurásti 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY, PIRST WEEK OF LENT 


. D&tribus nostris, terre lacte 


et melle manánti. Hódie Dó- 
minus Deus tuus precépit tibi, 
ut fácias mandáta hec atque 
judicia: et custódias, et ím- 
pleas ex toto corde tuo, et ex 
tota ánima tua. Dóminum 
elegísti nódie, ut sit tibi Deus, 
et ámbules in viis ejus, et 
custódias ceremónias illíus, 
et mandáta atque judícia, et 
obédias ejus império. Et Dó- 
minus elégit te hódie, ut sis 
ei pópulus peculiáris, sicut. 
loctitus est tibi, et custódias 
ómnia precépia illíus; et 
fáciat te excelsiórum cunctis 
géntibus, quas creávit in lau- 
dem, et nomen, et glóriam 
suam: ut sis pópulus sanctus 
Dómini Dei tui, sicut locütus 
est. 


209 


Thy habitation of heaven, and 
bless Thy people Israel, and the 
land which Thou hast glven 
us, as Thou didst swear to our 
fathers, & land flowing with 
milk and honey. This day the 
Lord thy God hath com- 
manded thee to do these com- 
mandments and judgments; 
and to keep and fulfill. them 
with all thy heart and with all 
thy soul. Thou hast chosen 
the Lord this day to be thy 
God and to walk in His ways, 
and keep His ceremonies, and 
precepts and judgments, and 
obey His command. And the 
Lord hath chosen thee this day, 
to be His peculiar people, as He 
hath spoken to thee, and tt 
keep all His commandments, 
and to make thee higher than 


all nations which He hath created, to His own praise, and 


name, and glory: that thou 


mayest be a holy people of the 


Lord thy God; as He hath spoken. 
Gradual. Ps. 78, 9, 10 


Propftius esto, Dómine, 
peccátis nostris: ne quando 
dicant gentes: Ubi est Deus 
eórum? Y. Ádjuva nos, Deus 
salutáris noster: et propter 
honórem nóminis tui, Dó- 
mine, libéra nos. 


Orémus. 

Fléctamus génua. 

N. Levate. 

Protéctor noster  áspice, 
Deus: ut, qui  malórum 


nostrórum póndere prémimur, 
percépta misericórdia, líbera 
tibi mente famulémur. Per 
Dóminum. 


Forgive us our sins, O Lord: 
Lest the gentiles should say, 
Where is their God? Y. Help 
us, O God our Saviour; and, 
for the honor of Thy name, O 
Lord, deliver us. 


Let us pray. 

Let us kneel. 

Hj. Arise. 

Look upon us, O God, our 
protector; that we, who are 


weighed down by the bur- 
den of our own sins, having 
received Thy mercy with 
free minds may serve 'Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Deut. 11, 22.25 


Léctio libri Deuteronómii. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Deuteronomy. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


260 


N THOSE days, Moses said to 
I the children of Israel, if 
you keep the commandments 
which I command you, and do 
them, to love the Lord your 
God, and walk in all His ways, 
cleaving unto Him; the Lord 
wiM destroy all these nations 
before your face, and you shall 
possess them, which are 
greater and stronger than you. 
Every place that your foot shall 
tread upon, shall be yours. 
From the desert, and from Li- 
banus, from the great river 
Euphrates unto the western 
sea shall be your borders, None 
shall stand against you: The 
Lord your God shall lay the 
dread and fear of you upon all 
the land that you. shall tread 
upon, as He hath spoken to 
you: the Lord your God. 


SATURDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 
N DiÉBUs illis: Dixit Méyses | .. 


filiis Israël: Si custo- 
diéritis mandata, que ego 
pracipio vobis, et fecéritis ea, 
ut dilligátis Dóminum Deum 
vestrum, et ambulétis in 
ómnibus viis ejus, adharéntes 
ei, dispérdet Dóminus omnes 
gentes istas ante fáciem ve- 
Stram, et possidébitis eas, que 
majóres et fortidres vobis 
sunt. Omnis locus quem cal- 
céverit pes vester, vester erit. 
A desérto, et a Líbano, a 
flmine magno Euphráte 
usque ad mare Occiden- 
tale erunt términi vestri, 
Nullus stabit contra vos: ter- 
rórem vestrum et formídinem 
dabit Dóminus Deus vester 
super ómnem terram, quam 
calcatüri estis, sicut locütus 
est vobis Dóminus Deus 
vester. 


Gradual. Ps. 83, 10, 9 


Behold, O God, our protec- 
tor, and look upon Thy ser- 
vants. O Lord-God of hosts, 
graciously hear the prayers of 
Thy servants. 

Let us pray. 

Let us kneel. 

W. Arise. 

Give ear to our. supplica- 
tions, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, that we may have the 
grace to be humble in pros- 
perity and calm in adversity. 
Through our Lord, 


Protéctor noster aspice, Deus, 
et réspice super servos tuos. 
F. Dómine Deus virtütum, 
exáudi preces servórum tuó- 


, rum. 


Orémus. 
: Flectámus génua. ` 

HB. Leváte. 
Adésto, quesumus, Dómine, 
supplicationibus nostris ut 
esse, te largiénte, mereámur 
et inter próspera hümiles, et 
inter advérsa secürl Per 
Dóminum. 


Lesson. 2 Mach. 1, 23-27 


Lesson from the Book of 
Machabees. 


N THOSE days all the priests 
made prayer, while the 
Sacrifice was consuming, Jona- 
than beginning, and the rest 


Léctio Ifbri Machabeérum, 


N DIÉBUS illis: Oratiónem 
faciébant omnes sacer- 
dótes, dum consummarétur 
sacrificium, Jónatha incho- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY, FIRST WEEK OP LENT 


nte, céteris autem respon- 
déntibus. Et Nehemie erat 
orátio hunc habens modum: 
Dómine, Deus ómnium cre- 
átor,  terríbilis, et fortis, 
justus et miséricors, qui solus 
es bonus rex, solus prestans, 
solus justus, et omnipotens, et 
ætérnus, qui liberas Israël de 
omni malo, qui fecísti patres 
eléctos, et sanctificasti eos: 
accipe sacriffcium pro univér- 
80 pópulo tuo Israël, et custódi 
partem tuam, et sanctífica: 
ut sciant gentes, quia tu es 
Deus noster. 


fathers, 


261 


answering. And the prayer of 
Nehemias was after this man- 
ner: O .Lord God, creator of 
all things, dreadful and strong, 
just and merciful, Who alone 
art the good King, Who alone 
art gracious, Who alone art 
just, and almighty, and eternal, 
Who deliverest Israel from all 
evil, Who didst. choose the 
and didst sanctify 
them; receive the sacrifice for 
all Thy people Israel, and pre- 
serve Thy own portion, and 
sanctify it; that the gentiles 
may know that Thou art our 


God. 


Gradual. Ps. 89, 13, 2 


Convértere, Dómine, ali- 
quántulum, et deprecáre super 
servos tuos. V. Dómine, re- 
fügium factus es nobis, a gen- 
eratióne et progénie. 


Orémus. 
Flectámus génua. 
BY. Levate. 


Preces populi tui, quesu- 
mus Dómine, cleménter ex- 
audi: ut, qui juste pro pec- 
cátis nostris affligimur, pro 
tui nóminis glória misericór- 
diter liberémur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Return, O Lord, how long? 
and be entreated in favor of 
Thy servants. Y. Lord, Thou 
hast been our refuge from gen- 
eration to generation. 

Let us pray. 

Let us kneel. 

RY. Arise. 

Of Thy cemsüsy; O Lord, 
we beseech Thee, harken to 
the prayers of. Thy people, 
that we, who are justly afflicted 
for our sins, may be mercifully 
delivered for the glory of Thy 
name. Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 36, 1-10 


Léctio líbri Sapiéntia. 


ISERÉRE nostri Deus 
ómnium, et réspice nos, 

et osténde nobis Iucem miser- 
atiónum tuárum: et immítte 
timórem tuum super. gentes, 
que non exquisiérunt te, ut 
cognóscant, quia non est Deus 
nisi tu, et enárrent magnália 
tua. Alleva manum tuam. su- 
per gentes aliénas, ut vídeant 


Lesson fróm the Book of 
Wisdom. 

AvE mercy upon us, O God 

of all and behold us, 

and show us the light of Thy 

mercies: and send Thy fear 

upon the nations, that have 


not sought after Thee; that 


they may know that there is no 
God beside Thee, and that they 
may. Show forth 'Thy wonders. 
Lift up Thy hand over the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


262 


strange nations, that they may 
See Thy power. For as Thou 
hast been sanctified in us in 
their sight, so Thou shalt be 
magnified among them in our 
presence, that they may know 
Thee, as we also have known 
that there is no God beside 
Thee, O Lord. Renew Thy 
signs, and work new miracles. 
Glorify Thy hand, and Thy 
right arm. Raise up indigna- 
tion, and pour out wrath. Take 
away the adversary, and crush 
the enemy. Hasten the time, 
and remember the end, that 
they may declare Thy wonder- 
ful works, O Lord our God. 


SATURDAY, FIRST WEEK OF LENT 


poténtiam tuam. Sicut enim 
in conspéctu eórum sancti- 
ficátus es in nobis, Sic in con- 
spéctu nostro magnificaberis 
in eis, ut cognóscant te, sicut 
et nos cognóvimus, quóniam 
non est Deus preter te, Dómi- 
ne. Innova signa, et immüta 
mirabília. Glorifica manum, 
et bráchium dextrum. Ex- 
cita, furórem, et effünde iram. 
Tolle adversárium, et afflíge 
inimícum. Festina tempus, et 
meménto finis, ut enarrent 
mirabília tua, Dómine Deus 
noster. 


Gradual. Ps. 140, 2 


Let my prayer be directed as 
incense in Thy sight, O Lord. 
FK. The lifting up of my hands 
as even sacrifice. 


Let us pray. 

Let us kneel, 

R. Arise. 

Be at hand, O Lord, we be- 
seech Thee, before our actions 
with the movements of Thy 
grace and in their doing. fol- 
low them with Thy help, that 
every prayer and wish of ours 
may begin in Thee, and begun 
in Thee, through Thee we may 
finish them. Through our Lord. 


Dirigátur orátio mea sicut 
incénsum in conspéctu tuo, 
Dómine. Y. Elevátio mánuum 
mearum sacrifícium vesperti- 
num. 


Orémus. 

Flectámus génua. 

W. Leváte. 

Actiónes nostras,  que- 
sumus, Dómine, aspir- 


ando preveni, et adjuvándo 
proséquere: ut cuncta nostra 
orátio et operátio a te semper 
incípiat, et per te cepta fini- 
átur. Per Dóminum. 


Lesson, Dan. 3, 47-51; Canticle, Dan. 3, 52-56: Saturday in 
Ember-week of Advent, pages 125, 126. 


Prayer, O God Who didst subdue, page 127. : 
Second. Prayer, ^. cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Epistle. 1 Thess. 5, 14-23 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Thessalonians. 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Thessalonicénses. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY, FIRST WEEK.OF LENT 


RATRES: Rogamus vos, 

corripite inquiétos, con- 
solámini pusillánimes, suscí- 
pite infirmos, patiéntes estóte 
ad omnes. Vidéte ne quis mal- 
um pro malo alicui reddat: 
sed semper quod bonum est 
sectámini in invicem, et in 
omnes. Semper gaudéte. Sine 
intermissióne oráte. In ómni- 
bus grátias ágite: hec est 
enim volüntas Dei in Christo 
Jesu in ómnibus vobis. Spíri- 
tum nolíte exstinguere. Pro- 
phetías nolíte spérnere. 
Omnia autem probáte: quod 
bonum est tenéte. Ab omni 
Spécle mala abstinéte vos. 
Ipse autem Deus pacis sanc- 
tificet vos per ómnia: ut 
integer spiritus vester, et 
&nima, et corpus sine queréla, 
in advéntu Dómini nostri 
Jesu Christi servétur. 


268 


RETHREN, We beseech you, 

rebuke the unquiet, com- 
fort the feeble-minded, support 
the weak, be patient towards 
all men. See that none render 
evil for evil to any man; but 
ever follow that which is good 
toward each other, and toward 
&ll men. Always rejoice. Pray 
without ceasing. In all things 
give thanks: for this is the 
will of God in Christ Jesus con- 
cerning you all. Extinguish not 
the spirit. Despise not prophe- 
cies. But prove all things; hold 
fast that which is good. From 
all appearance of evil refrain 
yourselves. And may the God 
of peace Himself sanctify you 
in all things that your whole 
spirit, and soul, and body, may 
be preserved blameless, for the 
coming of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


Tract. Ps. 116, 1,2 


Laudáte Dóminum, omnes 
gentes: et collaudáte eum, 
omnes pópuli, Y. Quóniam 
confirmáta est super nos 
misericórdia ejus: et véritas 
Dómini manet in etérnum. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 
Gospel, Matt. 17, 1-9. 


Offertory. 


Dómine, Deus salutis mee, 
in die clamávi, et nocte coram 
te: intret orátio mea in con- 
spéctu tuo. Dómine. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


O praise the Lord, all ye na- 
tions: and praise Him together, 
&ll ye people. Y. For His mercy 
is confirmed upon us: and the 
truth of the Lord remaineth 
for ever. 


Second Sunday of Lent, page 266. 


Ps. 87, 2, 3 


O Lord, the God of my salva- 
tion, I have cried in the day, 
and in the night before Thee: 
let my prayer come in before 
Thee, O Lord. 


Secret 


RESENTIBUS 
quesumus, Dómine, je- 
jünia nostre sanctífica: ut 


sacrifíciis, 


ANcTIFY our fasts by the 
Sacrifices here before 
‘Thee, we beseech Thee, O Lord, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


264 SECOND SUNDAY OF LENT 


that what our observance doth quod, observántia nostra pro- 
outwardly profess may be in- fitétur extrinsecus, intérius 
wardly accomplished. Through operétur. Per Dóminum. 
our Lord. 

Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps.7,2 
O Lord, my God, in Thee Démine Deus meus, in te 
have I put my trust; save me sperávi: líbera me ab ómnibus 
from all them that persecute persequéntibus "me, et éripe 


me, and deliver me. me. 
Postcommunion 

x THY sanctifying power, YN ANCTIFICATIÓNIBUS tuis, 

O almighty God, let our omnípotens Deus, et 


evil dispositions be cured, and vítía nostra curéntur, et remé- 
let the eternal remedies profit dia nobis ætérna provéniant. 
us. Through our Lord. Per Dóminum. 

Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page FP third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 8. 

Prayer over the people. : 
Let us pray 
ow down your heads to UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
God. Deo. 

May the desired blessing Fidéles tuos, Deus, benedíc- 
strengthen Thy faithful, O tio desideráta confirmet: que 
God. May it keep them from eos et, a tua voluntáte num- 
sinful transgressions and grant quam fáciat diserepáre, et tuis 
them ever to rejoice in thy semper indülgeat benefíciis 
gifts, Through our Lord. gratulári. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Seconds Hundap of Lent (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. Mary’s IN DOMINICA 
Sunday of the First Class 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756.. 


Introit. Ps. 24, 6, 3, 22 
EMEMBER, O Lord, Thy EMINiÍsCERE miseratién- 
bowels of compassion, um tuarum, Dómine, 
and Thy mercies that are from et misericórdim tue, que a 
the beginning of the world, seculo sunt: ne umquam do- 
lest at any time our enemies minéntur nobis inimici no- 
rule over us: deliver us, O God stri: libera nos, Deus Israël, 
of Israel, from all our tribula- ex ómnibus angustiis nostris, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SECOND SUNDAY OF LENT 265 
Ps. 24, 1-2. Ad te, Dómine, tions. Ps. 24, 1-2. To Thee, O 
levávi ánimam meam: Deus Lord, have I lifted up my soul: 
meus, in te confído, non eru- in Thee, O my God, I put my 


béscam. Y. Gloria Patri. 


trust; let me not be ashamed. 
¥. Glory. 


Kyrie, Page 761. Gloria.is omitted. 


. Prayer 


EUS, qui cOnspicis omni 

nos virtüte destitui: 
intérius exteriüsque custódi; 
ut ab ómnibus adversitátibus 
muniámur in córpore, et a 
pravis cogitatiónibus mun- 
démur in mente. Per Dómi- 
num. E 


Gop, Who seest how we 

are destitute of all 
strength, keep us inwardly and 
outwardly, that in body we 
may be defended from all ad- 
versities, and in mind cleansed 
of evil thoughts. Through our 
Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 823. 


Epistle. 1 Thess. 4, 1-7 


Léctio Epistole béati Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Thessalonicénses, 


RATRES: Rogamus vos, 

et obsecrámus in Dómi- 
no Jesu: ut, quemadmodum 
&ccepístis a ‘nobis, quómodo 
opórteat vos ambuláre et 
placére Deo, sic et ambulétis, 
ut abundétis magis. Scitis 
enim que precépta déderim 
vobis per Dóminum Jesum. 
Hec est enim volüntas 
Dei, sanctificátio vestra: ut 
&bstineátis vos a fornicatióne, 
ut sciat unusquísque vestrum 
vas suum possidére in sancti- 
ficatióne, et honóre: non in 
passióne desidérii, sicut et 
gentes, que ignórant Deum: 
et ne quis supergrediátur 
neque circumvéniat in negótio 
fratrem suum: quóniam vin- 
dex est Dóminus de his ómni- 
bus, sicut prediximus vobis, 
et testificáti sumus. Non 
enim vócavit nos Deus in im- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Thessalonians. 


Bas we pray and be- 
seech you in the Lord 
Jesus, that as you have re- 
ceived of us, how you ought to 
walk, and to please God, so also 
you would walk, that you may 
abound the more. For you know 
what precepts I have given to 
you by the Lord Jesus. For this 
is the will of God, your sancti- 
fication; that you should ab- 
stain from fornication, that 
every one of you should know 
how to possess his vessel in 
sanctification and honor; not 
in the passion of lust, like the 
gentiles that know not God: 
and that no man overreach, 
nor deceive his brother in busi- 
ness; because the Lord is the 
avenger of all these things, as 
we have told you before, and 
have testifed. For God hath not 
called us unto uncleanness, but 


http://ccwatershed.org 


266 SECOND SUNDAY OF LENT 


unto sanctification; in Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 


munditiam, sed in sanctifí- 
cationem in Christo Jesu Dó- 
mino nostro. 


Gradual. Ps. 24, 17, 18 


The troubles of my heart are 
multiplied; deliver me from 
my necessities, O Lord. Y. See 
my abjection and my labor, 
&nd forgive all my sins. 


Tract. 


Give glory to the Lord, for 
He is good: for His mercy en- 
dureth forever. Y. Who shall 
declare the powers of the Lord? 
Who shall set forth all His 
praises? Y. Blessed are they 
that keep judgment, and do 
justice at all times. Y. Remem- 
ber us, O Lord, in the favor of 
Thy people: visit us with Thy 
salvation. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Tribulatiónes cordis mei 
dilatáte sunt: de necessi- 
tátibus meis éripe me, Dómi- 
ne. Jf. Vide humilitatem 
meam, et labórem meum: et 
dimítte ómnia peccáta mea. 


Ps. 105, 1-4 


Confitémini Dómino, quó- 
niam bonus: quóniam in 
seculum misericórdia ejus. V. 
Quis loquétur poténtias Dó- 
mini: audítas fáciet omnes 
laudes ejus? Y. Beati qui 
custódiunt judícium, et fá- 
ciunt justítiam in omni tem- 
pore. Y. Meménto nostri, Dó- 
mine, in beneplácito pópuli 
tui: visita nos in salutári tuo. 


Gospel. Matt. 17, 1-9 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
chew. 


T THAT time, Jesus took 

Peter and James, and 
John his brother, and bringeth 
them up into & high mountain 
apart: and He was trans- 
figured before them. And His 
face did shine as the sun, and 
His garments became white as 
Snow. And behold there ap- 
peared to them Moses and 
Elias talking with Him. And 
Peter answering, said to Jesus, 
Lord, it is good for us to be 
here: if Thou wilt, let us make 
here three tabernacles, one for 
Thee, and one for Moses, and 
one for Elias. And as he was 


& Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Matthaeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Assumpsit 
Jesus Petrum, et Jacób- 
um, et Joánnem fratrem ejus, 
et duxit illos in montem ex- 
célsum seórsum: et trans- 
figurátus est ante eos. Et re- 
splénduit fácies ejus sicut sol: 
vestiménta autem ejus facta 
sunt alba sicut nix. Ecce ap- 
paruérunt ills Méyses, et 
Elías cum eo loquéntes. Re- 
spóndens autem Petrus, dixit 
&d Jesum: Dómine, bonum 
est nos hic esse: si vis, facia- 
mus hic tria tabernácula, tibi 
unum, Móysi unum, et Eliz 
unum. Adhuc eo loquénte, ec- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SECONL SUNDAY OF LENT 


ce nubes lúcida obumbrávit 
eos, Et ecce vox de nube, di- 
cens:. Hic est Fílius meus 
diléctus, in quo mihi bene 
complácul: ipsum audíte. Et 
audiéntes discípuli cecidérunt 
in fáciem suam et timuérunt 
valde. Et accéssit Jesus, et 
tétigit eos, dixitque eis: Sur- 
gite, et nolite timére. Levantes 
autem oculos suos, néminem 
vidérunt, nisi solum Jesum. 


Et descendéntibus illis de 
monte, precépit eis Jesus, 
dicens: Némini  dixéritis 


visiónem, donec Filius hó- 
minis a mórtuis resürgat. 
Creed, page 765. 


267 


yet speaking, behold a bright 
cloud overshadowed them; and 
lo, a voice out of the cloud, 
saying, This is My beloved Son, 
in Whom I am well pleased; 
hear ye Him. And the disciples 
hearing, fell upon their face 
and were very much aíraid. 
And Jesus came and touched 
them, and said to them, Arise 
and fear not. And they lifting 
up their eyes saw no one, but 
only Jesus. And as they came 
down from the mountain, Jesus 
charged them, saying, Tell the 
vision to no man, till the Son 
of man be risen from the dead. 


Offertory. Ps. 118, 47, 48 


Meditábor in mandátis tuis, 
que diléxi valde: et levábo 
manus meas ad mandáta tua, 
que diléxi. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


I will meditate on Thy com- 
mandments, which I have 
loved exceedingly: and I will 
lift up my hands to Thy com- 
mandments, which I have 
loved. 


Secret 


AcRIFÍOUS preséntibus, 


Domine, quesumus, in- - 


ténde placatus: ut et devo- 
tióni nostre proficiant, et sa- 
lúti. Per Dóminum. 


oox graciously, we beg, O 

; Lord, upon the sacri- 
fices here before Thee, that 
ihey may profit both our de- 
votion and our salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to ‘Whom alone, page 829, 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. 


Intélige clamórem meum: 
inténde voci oratiónis mes, 
Rex meus, et Deus meus: quó- 
niam ad te orábo, Dómine. 


Ps. 5, 2, 4 


Understand my cry: harken 
to the voice of my prayer, O 
my King and my God: for to 
Thee will I pray, O Lord. 


Postcommunion 


ÜPPLICES te rogámus, om- 
nípotens Deus: ut quos 


Go we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


268 MONDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 

whom Thou refreshest with tuis réficis Sacraméntis, tibl 
Thy: sacraments, may also étiam placitis móribus dig- 
serve Thee worthily with con- nánter deservire concédas. 


duct to Thy liking. Through Per Dóminum. 


our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Monday, Second Week of Lent (Purple) 
STATION aT ST. CLEMENT 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 25, 11, 12 


EDEEM me, O Lord, and 

have mercy on me; for 
my foot hath stood in the di- 
rect way: in the churches I will 
bless the Lord. Ps. 25, 1. Judge 
me, O Lord, for I have walked 
in my innocence; and hoping 
in the Lord, I shall not be 
weakened. F. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


EDIME me, Dómine, et 

miserére mei: pes enim 
meus stetit in via recta: in 
ecclésiis benedicam  Dómi- 
num. Ps. 25, 1. Jádica me, Dó- 
mine, quóniam ego in inno- 
céntia mea ingréssus sum: et 
in Dómino sperans, non in- 
firmábor. Y. Glória Patri. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that Thy 
household, which, to afflict the 
flesh, abstains from food, may, 
by following justice, fast from 
sin. Through our Lord. 


- RESTA, quaesumus, omní- 

potens Deus: ut família 

tua, que se, affligéndo carnem, 

ab aliméntis ábstinet; sectán- 

do justítiam, & culpa jejünet. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson. Dan. 9, 15-19 


Lesson from Daniel the 
Prophet. 


N THOSE days, Daniel prayed 


to the Lord, saying, O 
Lord, our God, Who hast 
brought forth Thy people out 
of the land of Egypt with a 
Strong hand, and hast made 
Thee a name as at this day; 
we have sinned, We haye com- 


Léctio Daniélis Prophéte. 


N ovrésus illis: Orávit 

Dániel Dóminum, dicens: 
Dómine, Deus noster, qui 
eduxisti pópulum tuum de 
terra ZEgypti in manu forti, 
et fecísti tibi nomen secün- 
dum diem hane: peccávimus, 
iniquitátem fécimus, Dómine, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MONDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


in omnem justitiam tuam: 
avertátur, óbsecro, ira tua, et 
furor tuus a civitate tua, Je- 
rüsalem, in monte sancto tuo. 
Propter peccáta enim nostra, 
et iniquitátes patrum nos- 
trórum, Jerüsalem, et pópulus 
tuus in oppróbrium sunt óm- 
nibus per circüitum nostrum. 
Nunc ergo exdudi, Deus 
noster, oratiónem servi tui, et 
preces ejus: et osténde faciem 
tuam super  sanctuárium 
tuum, quod desértum est, 
propter temetípsum. Inclina, 
Deus meus, aurem tuam, et 
audi: áperi óculos tuos, et 
vide desolatiónem nostram, et 
civitátem, super quam in- 
vocátum est nomen tuum: 
neque enim in justificatióni- 
bus nostris prostérnimus pre- 
ces ante fáciem tuam, sed in 
miseratiénibus tuis multis. 
Exáudi, Dómine, placáre, Dó- 
mine: atténde et fac: ne 
moréris propter temetípsum 
Deus meus: quia nomen tuum 
invocátum est super civitá- 
tem, et super pópulum tuum 
Dómine Deus noster. 


Gradual. 


Adjütor meus, et liberator 
meus esto: Dómine, ne tardá- 
veris. Y. Confundántur, et re- 
vereántur inimici mei, qui 
querunt ánimam meam. 


269 


mitted iniquity, O Lord, against 
al Thy justice: let Thy wrath 
and Thy indignation be turned 
away, I beseech Thee,- from 
Thy city Jerusalem, and from 
Thy holy mountain. For by 
reason of our sins, and the 
iniquities of our fathers, Jeru- 
salem and Thy people are a re- 
proach to all that are round 
about us. Now, therefore, O our 
God, hear the supplication of 
Thy servant, and his prayers; 
and show Thy face upon Thy 
sanctuary which is desolate, 
for Thy own sake. Incline, O 
my God, Thy ear, and hear; 
open Thine eyes, and see our 
desolation, and the city upon 
which Thy name is called: for 
it is not for our justifications 
that we present our prayers be- 
fore Thy face; but for the mul- 
titude of Thy tender mercies. 
O Lord, hear; O Lord, be ap- 
peased; harken and do; delay 
not for Thy own sake, O my 
God: ‘because Thy name is in- 
vocated upon Thy city and 
upon Thy people, O Lord our 
God. 


Ps. 69, 6, 3 ` 


Be Thou my helper and my 
deliverer; O. Lord, make no 
delay. Let my enemies be con- 
founded and ashamed, that 
seek my soul, 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 8, 21-29 


HK Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 
N ILo témpore: Dixit 
Jesus turbis Judæórum: 
Ego vado, et querétis. me, et 


"B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John, 

WT THAT lime, Jesus said 

to the multitudes of the 

Jews, I go and you shall seek 


http://ccwatershed.org 


270 


me, and you shall die in your 
sin. Whither I go, you can not 
come. The Jews therefore said, 
Will He kill Himself? because 
He said, Whither I go, you can 
not come. And He said to them, 
You are from beneath, I am 
from above; you are of this 
world, I am not of this world. 
Therefore I say to you, that you 
shall die in your sins; for if 
you believe not that I am He, 
you shall die in your sin. They 
said therefore to Him, Who art 
thou? Jesus said to them, The 
beginning, Who also speak to 
you. Many things I have to 
speak and judge of you; but 
he that sent Me is true, and the 
things I have heard of him, 
these same I speak in the 
world. And they understood 
not that He called God His 
Father. Jesus therefore said to 
them, When you shall have 
lifted up the Son of man, then 
shall you know that I am He, 
and that I do nothing of My- 
self, but as the Father hath 
taught Me, these things I 
speak: and He that sent Me is 
with Me, and He hath not left 
Me alone: for I do always the 
things that please Him. 


MONDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


in peccáto vestro moriémini. 
Quo ego vado, vos non po- 
téstis veníre. Dicébant ergo 
Judei: Numquid interficiet 
Semetípsum, quia dixit: Quo 
ego vado, vos non potéstis 
veníre? Et dicébat eis: Vos de 
Geórsum estis, ego de supérnis 
sum, Vos de mundo hos estis, 
ego non sum de hoc mundo. 
Dixit ergo vobis quia mo- 
riémini in peccátis vestris: si 
enim non, credidéritis quia 
ego sum, moriémini in pec- 
cáto vestro. Dicébant ergo el: 
Tu quis es? Dixit eis Jesus: 
Principium, qui et loquor 
vobis. Multa hábeo de vobis 
loqui, et judicáre. Sed qui me 
misit, verax est: et ego que 
&udívi ab eo, hec loquor in 
mundo. Et non cognovérunt 
quia Patrem ejus dicébat De- 
um. Dixit ergo eis Jesus: Cum 
exaltavéritis Filium hóminis, 
tunc cognoscétis quia ego sum, 
et a meípso fácio nihil: sed 
sicut dócuit me Pater, hzc lo- 
quor: et qui me misit, mecum 
est, et non relíquit me solum: 
quia ego que plácita sunt ei, 
fácio semper. 


Offertory. Ps. 15,7,8 


I wiil bless the Lord Who 
hath given me understanding: 
I set the Lord always in my 
sight; for He is at my right 
hand, that I be not moved. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Benedícam Dóminum, qui 
trfbuit mihi intelléctum: pro- 
vidébam Dóminum in con- 
spéctu meo semper: quóniam 
a dextris est mihi, ne com- 
móvear. 


Secret 


x this sacrifice of recon- 
ciliation and praise, O 
Lord, render us worthy of Thy 
protection. Through our Lord. 


ze hóstia, Dómine, 

placatiónis et laudis, 
tua nos protectióne dignos 
efficiat. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TUESDAY, SECOND WEEK. OF LENT 211 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


' Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps.8,2 


Dómine, Dóminus noster,  O Lord, our Lord, how won- 
quam admirábile est nomen derful is Thy name in all the 
tuum in univérsa terra! earth! 


Postcommunion 


ic nos commünio, Dó- AY this communion, O 
mine, purget a crímine: Lord, purge us of guilt 
et cxléstis remédii fáciat esse and make us to be the par- 
consórtes. Per Dóminum. takers of Him Who is our 
heavenly healing. Through our 
Lord. 

_Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 

communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 
UMILIÁTE cápita vestra ow down your heads tc 
Deo. God. 

Adésto supplicatiónibus Be present to our supplica- 
nostris, omnípotens Deus: et, tions, O almighty God, and 
quibus fidüciam sperande kindly grant the effect of Thy 
pietátis indülges: consüéte wonted mercy to those whom 
misericórdi? tríbue benígnus Thou dost permit confidently 
efféctum. Per Dóminum. to rely on Thy goodness, 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Tuesdap,. Second Week of Lent (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. BALBINA 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 26, 8, 9 


IBI dixit cor meum, que- v HEART hath said to 
IH sivi vultum tuum, vul- Thee, I have sought Thy 
um tuum, Dómine, requír- face; Thy face, O Lord, will I 


&m: ne avértas fáciem tuam seek: turn not away Thy face 
a mé. Ps. 26, 1. Dóminus from me. Ps. 26, 1. The Lord is 
llluminátio mea, et salus my light and my salvation: 
Sopa quem timébo? Y. Glória whom shall I fear? Y. Glory. 

B 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


272 


TUESDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


Prayer 


F THY kindness, we be- 
O seech Thee, O Lord, to 
perfect the support of Thy holy 
observance in us, that what we 
know by Thy authority should 
be done, may be fulfilled by 
Thy operation. Through our 
Lord. 


ERFICE, qusesumus, Dó- 
mine, benígnus in nobis 
Observántie sancte subsid- 
ium: ut, que te auctóre fa- 
ciénda cognóvimus, te ope- 
ránte impleámus. Per Dó- 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson. 3 Kings 17, 8-16 


Lesson from the Book of 
Kings. 
N THOSE days the word of 
the Lord came to Elias the 
Thesbite, saying, Arise and go 
to Sarephta of the Sidonians, 
and dwell there; for I have 
commanded & widow-woman 
there to feed thee. He arose, 
and went to Sarephta: and 
when he was come to the gate 
of the city, he saw the widow- 
woman gathering sticks, and 
he called her, and said to her, 
Give me.a little water in a ves- 
sel, that I may drink. And 
when she was going to fetch 
it, he called after her, saying, 
Bring me also, I beseech thee, 
a morsel of bread in thy hand; 
and she answered, As the Lord 
thy God liveth, I have no 
bread, but only a handful of 
meal in a pot, and a little oil in 
a cruse; behold I am gathering 
two sticks, that I may go in 
and dress it, fof me and my 
Son, that we may eat it, and 
die. And Elias said to her, Fear 
not, but go and do as thou hast 
said; but first make for me of 
the same meal a little hearth- 
cake, &nd bring it to me; and 
after make for thyself and thy 
son. For thus saith the Lord 


Léctio libri Regum. 


sermo Démini ad Eliam 
Thesbiten, dicens: Surge et 
vade in Saréphta Sidoniórum, 
et manébis ibi: precépi enim 
ibi mulieri vidue, ut pascat 
te. Surréxit, et ábiit in Sar- 
éphta.. Cumque venísset ad 
portam civitátis, appáruit ei 
inüler vidua cólligens ligna, 
et vocávit eam, dixítque ei: 
Da mihi páululum aquse in 
vase, ut bibam. . Cumque illa 
pérgeret ut afférret, clámávit 
post tergum ejus, dicens: 
Affer mihi, Óbsecro, et buc- 
céllam panis in manu tua. 
Que respóndit: Vivit Dó- 
minus Deus tuus, quia non 
hábeo panem, nisi quantum 
pugíllus cápere potest farine 
in hydria, et páululum ólei in 
lécytho: en cólligo duo ligna, 
ut ingrédiar, et fáciam illum 
mihi, et fílio meo, ut comedá- 
mus, et moriámur. Ad quam 
Elías ait: Noli timére, sed 
vade, et fac sicut dixísti: ve- 
rümiamen mihi primum fac 
de ipsa farínula subcineric- 
jum panem  párvulum, et 
affer ad me: tibi autem et 
filio tuo facies póstea. Hec 


I: DiÉBUS illis: Factus est 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TUESDAY, SECOND WEEK. OF LENT 


autem dicit Dóminus Deus 
Israël: Hydria farine non 
defíciet,. nec lécythus ólei 
minuétur usque ad diem, in 
qua Dóminus dattirus est 
plüviam super fáciem terra. 
Que ábiit, et fecit juxta ver- 
bum Eliz: et comédit ipse, et 
illa, et domus ejus: et ex illa 
die hydria farínz non defécit, 
et lécythus dlei non est im- 
minütus, juxta verbum, Dó- 
mini, quod locütus füerat in 
manu Elie. 


273 


the God of Israel, The pot of 
meal shall not waste, nor the 
cruse.of oil be diminished, until 
the day wherein the Lord will 
give rain. upon the face of the 
earth. She went, and did ac- 
cording to the word of Elias; 
and he ate, and she, and her 
house; and from that day the 
pot of meal wasted not, and 
the cruse of oil was not dimin- 
ished, according to the word of 
the Lord, which He spoke in 
the hand of Elias, 


Gradual. Ps. 54, 23, 17, 18, 19 


Jacta cogitátum tuum in 


Cast thy care upon the Lord, 


Dómino, et ipse te enütriet. Y. and He shall sustain thee. JV. 
Dum clamárem ad Dómin- When I cried to the Lord, He 
um, exaudivit vocem meam heard my voice from them that 


ab his, qui appropínquant 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


draw near to me. 


Gospel. Matt. 23, 1-12 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secándum Matthzum. 


“N ILLO témpore: Locütus 
AL, est Jesus ad turbas, et ad 
discípulos suos, dicens: Super 
cáthedram  Móysi sedérunt 
scribe, et pharisei. Omnia 
ergo  quaecümque dixerint 
vobis, serváte, et fácite: se- 
cündum ópera vero eórum 
nolite fácere: dicunt enim, et 
non faciunt. Alligant enim 
ónera grávia, et importabilia, 
et impónunt in himeros hó- 
minum: dígito autem suo 
nolunt ea movére. Omnia 
vero ópera sua fáciunt, ut 
videántur ab homínibus: dil- 
atant enim phylactéria sua, 
et magníficant fímbrias. 
Amant autem primos recübi- 


" Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
ihew. 


T THAT time, Jesus spoke 

to the multitudes and 

His disciples, saying, The 
scribes and the pharisees have 
sitten on the chair of Moses, 
All things therefore whatsoever 
they shall say to you, observe 
and do; but according to their 
works do ye not: for they say 
and do not. For they bind 
heavy and insupportable bur- 
dens, and lay them on men’s 
shoulders; but with a finger of 
their own they. will not move 
them. And all their works they 
do for to be seen of men; for 
they make their phylacteries 
broad, and enlarge their 
fringes; and they love the first 


http://ccwatershed.org 


274 


places at feasts, and the first 
chairs in the synagogues and 
salutations in the market- 
place, and to be called by men 
Rabbi. But be not you called 
Rabbi; for one is your master, 
and all you are brethren; and 
call none your father upon 
earth, for one is your Father, 
Who is in heaven; neither be 
ye Called masters; for one is 
your master, Christ. He that is 
the greatest. among you shall 
be your servant. And whosoever 
Shall exalt himself shall be 
humbled; and he that shall 
humble himself shall be 
exalted. 


Offertory. 


Have mercy on me, O Lord, 
according to Thy great mercy: 
O Lord, blot out my iniquity. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


TUESDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


tus in cenis, et primas cáthe- 
dras in synagóÓgis, et saluta- 
tiónes in foro, et vocári ab 
homínibus Rabbi. Vos au- 
tem nolíte vocári Rabbi: unus 
est enim Magíster vester, om- 
nes autem vos fratres estis. 
Et patrem nolíte vocáre vobis 
Super terram, unus est enim 
Pater vester, qui in celis est. 
Nec vocémini magistri: quia 
Magíster vester unus est, 
Christus. Qui major est ves- 
trum, erit miníster vester. 
Qui autem se exaltáverit, hu- 
miliábitur: et qui se humiliá- 
verit, exaltábitur. 


Ps. 50, 3 


Miserére mei, Dómine, se- 
cündum magnam misericór- 
diam tuam: dele, Dómine, in- 
iquitátem meam. 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY Work Thy sanc- 

tification in us, O Lord, 
by these mysteries, both to 
purge us of earthly wickedness 
&nd to bring us to heavenly 
gifts. Through our Lord. 


ANCTIFICATIÓNEM iuam 
nobis, Dómine, his mys- 
tériis operáre placátus: que 
nos et a terrénis purget vitiis, 
et ad celéstia dona perdücat. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 


O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps. 9, 2, 3 


I will relate all Thy wonders: 
I wil be glad and rejoice in 
Thee: I will sing praise to Thy 
name, O 'Thou Most High. 


Narrábo ómnia mirabília 
tua: letabor, et exsultabo in 
te: psallam nómini tuo, AI- 
tíssime. 


Postcommunion 


HAT we, O Lord, may be 
made worthy of Thy 


T SACRIS, Dómine, reddá- 
mur digni munéribus- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 275 

fac nos tuis, quæsumus, sem- sacred gifts, make us, we be- 

per obedíre mandátis. Per seech Thee, ever to obey Thy 

Dóminum nostrum. commandments. Through our 
Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 
UMILIÁTE cápita vestra ow down you heads to 
Deo. ` God. 

Propitiare Dómine, suppli- ^ Mercifully listen to our sup- 
catíonibus nostris et animár- plications, O Lord, and heal 
um nostrárum medére lan- the maladies of our souls, that, 
guóribus: ut, remissióne per- having received remission, we 
cépta, in tua semper bene- may ever rejoice in Thy bless- 
dictióne letémur. Per Dó- ing. Through our Lord. 
minum. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Wednesday, Second Week of Lent (Purple) 


STATION AT ST. CECILIA 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 37, 22, 23 


E DERELÍNQUAS mé, Dó- ORSAKE me not, O Lord my 
mine, Deus meus, ne God, do not Thou depart 
discédas a me: inténde in ad- from me; attend unto my help, 
jutórium | meum, Dómine, O Lord, the power of my sal- 
virtus salütis mez. Ps. 29, 2. vation. Ps. 29, 2. Rebuke me 
Dómine, ne in furóre tuo not, O Lord, in Thy indigna- 
árguas me: neque in ira tua tion: nor chastise me in Thy 
corrípias me. V. Glória Patri. wrath. Y. Glory. 
Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 

ÓPULUM tuum, quesum- 

us, Dómine, propitius 

réspice: et quos ab escis car- 

nálibus precipis abstinére, a 

nóxiis quoque vitiis cessáre 
concéde. Per Dóminum. 


ook upon Thy people 

with favor, we beseech 
'Thee, O Lord, and grant that 
they whom Thou dost com- 
mand to abstain from food may 
also cease from baneful vices. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 
page 828. 


Lesson. Esther 13, 8-11; 15-17 


Léctio libri Esther. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Orávit Mar- 
docheus ad Dóminum, 


Lesson from the Book of 
Esther. 

N THOSE days Mardochai 

prayed to the Lord, saying, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


276 


© Lord, Lord, almighty King, 
for all things are in Thy power; 
and there is none that can re- 
sist Thy will, if Thou deter- 
mine to save Israel. Thou hast 
made heaven and earth, and 
all things that are under the 
cope of heaven. Thou art Lord 
of all, and there is none that 
can resist Thy majesty. And 
now, O Lord, O King, O God of 
Abraham, have mercy on Thy 
people, because our enemies 
resolve to. destroy us, and ex- 
tinguish Thy inheritance. Des- 
pise not Thy portion, which 
Thou hast redeemed for Thy- 
self out of Egypt. Hear my sup- 
plication and be merciful to 
Thy lot and inheritance, and 
turn our mourning into joy, 
that we may live and praise 
Thy name, O Lord: and shut 
not the mouths of them that 
sing to Thee, O Lord our God. 


WEDNESDAY, SECOND WEEK OP LENT 


dicens: Dómine, Dómine rex 
omnipotens, in ditlóne enim 
tua cuncta sunt pósite, et non 
est qui possit tue resístere 
voluntáti si decréveris 
Salváre Israël. Tu fecísti cæ- 
lum et terram, et quidquid 
celi ámbitu continétur. Dó- 
minus ómnium es, nec est qui 
resistat majestáti tue. Et 
nunc, Démine rex, Deus 
Abraham, miserére pópuli tui, 
quia volunt nos inimíci nos- 
tri pérdere, et hereditátem 
tuam delére. Ne despicias 
partem tuam, quam redem- 
ísti tibi de ZEgybpto. Exáudi 
deprecatiónem meam, et pro- 
pítius esto sorti et funiculo 
tuo, et convérte luctum nos- 
irum in gáudium, ut vivéntes 
laudémus nomen tuum, Dó- 
mine, et ne claudas ora te 
canéntium, Dómine, Deus 
noster. 1 


Gradual. Ps. 27, 9,1 


Save Thy people, O Lord, 
and bless thy inheritance. Y. 
Unto Thee have I cried, O Lord 
my God; be not Thou silent to 
me, lest I become like to them 
that go down into the pit. 


Salvum fac pópulum tuum, 
Dómine, et bénedic hereditáti 
tus. JV. Ad te, Dómine, cia- 
mavi, Deus meus, ne síleas a 
me, et ero similis descendén- 
tibus in lacum, 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 20, 17-28 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
ew. 


T THAT lime, Jesus going 
up to Jerusalem, took the 


elve disciples apart, and said 
to them, Behold, we go up to 
Jerusalem, and the Son of man 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Ascén- 
dens Jesus Jerosólymam, 
assümpsit duódecim discípu- 
los secréto, et ait illis Ecce 
ascéndimus Jerosólymam, et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


fílius hóminis tradétur prin- 
cípibus sacerdótum, et scribis, 
et condemnábunt eum morte, 
et tradent eum géntibus ad 
illudéndum, et flagellándum, 
et crucifigéndum, et tértia die 
resürget. Tunc accéssit ad 
eum mater filiórum Zebedei 
cum filiis suis, adórans et 
petens áliquid ab eo. Qui 
dixit ei: Quid vis? Ait illi: 
Dic ut sédeant hi duo. filii 
mei, unus ad déxteram tuam, 
et unus ad sinístram in regno 
tuo. Respóndens autem 
Jesus, dixit: Nescitis quid 
petátis. Potéstis bíbere cáli- 
cem quem ego bibitürus sum? 
Dicunt ei: Póssumus. Ait 
illis: Cálicem quidem meum 
bibétis: sedére autem ad déx- 
teram meam vel sinístram, 
rion est meum dare vobis, sed 
quibus parátum est a Patre 
meo. Etaudiéntes decem, in- 
dignáti sunt de duóbus frátri- 
bus. Jesus autem vocávit eos 
ad se, et ait: Scitis quia prín- 
cipes géntium dominantur 
eórum: et qui majóres sunt, 
potestátem exércent in eos. 
Non ita erit inter vos: sed 
quicümque volüerit inter vos 
major fieri, sib vester min- 
ister: et qui volüerit inter vos 
primus esse, erit vester ser- 
vus. Sicut Filius hóminis 
non venit ministrári, sed 
ministráre, et dare ánimam 
Suam, redemptiénem pro 
multis. ' " 


Offertory. 


Ad te, Dómine, levávi ani- 
mam meam: Deus meus, in 
te confído, non erubéscam: 


277 


shall be betrayed to the chief 
priests and the scribes, and 
they shall condemn Him to 
death, and shall deliver Him 
to the gentiles to be mocked, 
and scourged, and crucified: 
and the third day He shall rise 
again. Then came to Him the 
mother of the sons of Zebedee 
with her sons, adoring and ask- 
ing something of Him. Who 
said to her, What wilt thou? 
She saith to Him, Say thai 
these my two sons may sit, the 
one.on Thy right hand, and 
the other on Thy left, in Thy 
kingdom. And Jesus answering, 
said, You know not what you 
ask. Can you drink the chalice 
that I shall drink? They say 
to Him, We can. He saith to 
them, My chalice indeed you 
shall drink: but to sit. on My 
right or lett hand, is not Mine 
to give to you, but to them for 
whom it is prepared by My 
Father. And the ten hearing it, 
were moved with indignation 
against the two brethren. But 
Jesus called them to Him, and 
said, You know -that the 
princes of -the gentiles lord it 
over them; and they that are 
the greater, exercise power 
upon them. It shall not be so 
among you: but whosoever will 
be the greater among you, let 
him be your minister; and he 
that will be first among you, 
shall be your servant. Even as 
the Son of man is not come to 
be ministered unto, but to min- 
ister, and to give His life a re- 
demption for many. ' 


Ps. 24, 1-3 


To Thee, O Lord, have I 
lifted up my soul; in Thee, O 
my God, I put my trust, let me 


http://ccwatershed.org 


278 WEDNESDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 

not be ashamed: neither let neque irrídeant me inimici 
my enemies laugh at me; for mei: étenim univérsi qui te 
none of them that wait on exspéctant, non. confundén- 


Thee shall be confounded. tur. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 
Tiu propitiously, O Lord, éstras, Dómine, quas 
upon the sacrifiees we tibi offérimus, propítius 


offer Thee, and through these réspice: et per hsc sancta 
holy dealings loose the bonds commércia, vincula pecca- 
of our sins. Through our Lord. tórum nostrórum absólve. Per 
Dóminum, 
Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps. 10,8 


The Lord is just, and hath Justus Dóminus, et justiti- 
loved justice: His countenance am diléxit: squitátem vidit 
hath beheld righteousness. vultus ejus. 


Postcommunion 


AY we derive profit unto (CX UMPTIs, Dómine, sacra- 
the increase of our ever- méntis: ad redemp- 
lasting salvation, O Lord, from tiónis etérne, quesumus, 
Thy sacrament which we have proficiámus augméntum. Per 
received. Through our Lord. Dóminum nostrum. | 
Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


ow down your heads to 
God. à Deo. 

O God, the restorer and lover Deus, innocéntie restitütor 

of innocence, direct the hearts et amátor, dirige ad te tuór- 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 


of Thy servants unto Thee, 
that, being filled with the fer- 
vor of Thy spirit, they may be 
found steadfast in faith and 
efficacious in works. Through 
our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


um corda servórum: ut, spí- 
ritus tui fervóre concépto, et 
in fide inveniántur stábiles, 
et in ópere efficáces. Per Dó- 
minum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THURSDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


279 


Thursday, Second Week of Lent (Purple) 


STATION AT St. Mary IN TRASTEVERE 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 69, 2, 3 


EUS in adjutérium me- 

um inténde, Dómine 
&d adjuvándum me festína: 
confundántur et revereántur 
inimíci mei qui querunt 
ánimam meam. Ps. 69. Aver- 
tántur retrósum et erubés- 
cant, qui cógitant mihi mala. 
y. Glória. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


GoD, come to my assist- 
O ance; O Lord, make haste 
to help me: let my enemies be 
confounded and ashamed that 
seek my soul, Ps. 69. Let them 
be turned backward and blush 
for shame, that desire evils to 
me. ¥. Glory. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


RÆSTA nobis, qusesumus, 

Dómine, auxilium grátie 
ius: ut jejüniis et oratióni- 
bus  conveniénter  inténti, 
liberémur ab hóstibus mentis 
et cérporis. Per Dóminum. 


RANT US, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the assistance of 
Thy grace, that, being intent, 
as becometh us, upon fasting 
and prayer, we may be deliv- 
ered from the enemies of soul 
and of body. Through our Lord. 


second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson. Jer. 17, 5-10 


Léctio Jeremíæ Prophétæ. 


zc dicit Dóminus Deus: 
Maledíctus homo, qui 
confídit in hómine, et ponit 
carnem bráchium suum, et à 
Dómino recédit cor ejus. Erit 
enim quasi myrice in desérto, 
et non vidébit cum vénerit 
bonum: sed habitábit in sic- 
citáte in desérto, in terra sal- 
suginis, et inhabitábili. Bene- 
díctus vir, qui confídit in Dó- 
mino, et erit Dóminus fidü- 
cia ejus. Et erit quasi lig- 
num : quod  transplantátur 
super aquas, quod ad. humór- 
em mittit radíces suas: et non 


Lesson from Jeremias the 
Prophet. 


HUS saith the Lord God: 

Cursed be the man thai 
trusteth in man, and maketh 
flesh his arm, and whose heart 
departeth from the Lord. For 
he shall be like tamaric in the 
desert, and he shall not see 
when good shall come: but he 
shall dwell in dryness in the 
desert, in a salt land, and not 
inhabited. Blessed be the man 
that trusteth in the Lord, and 
the Lord shall be his confi- 
dence. And he shall be as a 
tree that is planted by the 
waters, that spreadeth out its 


http://ccwatershed.org 


280 THURSDAY, SECOND WEEK OP LENT 


roots towards moisture; and it 
Shall not fear when the heat 
cometh. And the leaf thereof 
shall be green, and in the time 
of drought it shall not be solici- 
tous, neither shall it cease at 
any time to bring forth fruit. 
The heart, is perverse above all 
things, and unsearchable; who 
can know it? I.am. the Lord 
Who search the heart, and 
prove the reins: Who give to 
every one according to his way, 
and according to the fruit of 
his devices: saith the Lord al- 
mighty. 


timébit cum vénerit estus. Et 
erit fólium ejus viride, et in 
témpore siccitátis non erit 
sollicitum, nec  aliquándo 
désinet fácere fructum. Prav- 
um est cor ómnium, et in- 
Scrutábile: quis . cognóscet 
ilud? Ego Dóminus scrutans 
cor, et probans renes: qui do 
unicuique juxta viam suam, 
et juxta fructum , adinven- 
tiónem suárum: dicit Dó- 
minus omnípotens. 


Gradual. Ps. 78, 9, 10 


Forgive us our sins, O Lord, Propitius esto, Dómine, 
lest the Gentiles should say, peccátis nostris, ne quando 
Where is their God? Y. Help dicant gentes: Ubi est Deus 
us, O God, our Saviour; and eórum? yY. Adjuva nos, Deus 
for the honor of Thy name, O salutáris noster: et propter 


Lord, deliver us. 


- Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


honórem nóminis tui, Dó- 
mine, líbera nos. 


Gospel. Luke 16, 19-31 


H* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus said to 

the pharisees, There was 

& certain rich man, who was 
clothed in purple and fine 
linen, and feasted sumptu- 
ously every day. And there was 
& certain beggar, named Laz- 
arus, who lay at his gate full 
of sores; desiring to be filled 
with the crumbs that fell from 
the rich man's table: and no 
one did give him: moreover, 
the dogs came and licked his 
sores. And it came to pass that 
the beggar died, and was car- 
ried by the angels into Abra- 
ham’s bosom. And the rich 
man also died, and he was 


Hs Sequéntia sancti Evan- 


‘gélii secindum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit 

Jesus phariseis: Homo 
quidam erat dives, qui indue- 
bátur pürpura et bysso: et 
epulabátur quotídie splén- 
dide. Et erat quidam men- 
dícus, nómine Lazarus, qui 
jacébat ad jánuam ejus, ul- 
céribus plenus, cüpiens satu- 
rari de micis, que cadébant 
de mensa dívitis, et nemo illi 
dabat: sed et canes venié- 
bant, et lingébant ülcera ejus. 
Factum est autem ut moreré- 
tur mendícus, et portarétur 
ab Angelis in sinum Abrahe. 
Mórtuus est autem et dives, 
et sepültus est in inférno. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THURSDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


Elevans autem óculos suos, 
cum esset in torméntis, vidit 
Abraham a longe, et Lázarum 
in sinu ejus: et ipse clamans, 
dixit: Pater Abraham, mise- 
rére mei, et mitte Lázarum 
ut intingat extrémum digiti 
sui in aquam, ut refrígeret 
linguam meam, quia crücior 
in hac flamma. Et dixit illi 
Abraham: Fili, recordáre 
quia recepisti bona in vita 
tua, et Lazarus similiter 
mala: nunc autem hic con- 
solatur, tu vero cruciaris. Et 
in his ómnibus, inter nos et 
vos chaos magnum firmátum 
est: ut hi, qui volunt hinc 
transíre ad vos, non possint, 
neque inde huc transmeáre. 
Et ait: Rogo ergo te, pater, ut 
mittas eum in domum patris 
mei  Hábeo enim quinque 
fratres, ut testétur illis, ne et 
ipsi véniant in hunc locum 
tormentórum. Et ait ill 
Abraham: Fili, recordáre 
prophétas: &udiant illos. At 
ille dixit: Non, pater Abra- 
ham: sed si quis ex mórtuis 
derit ad eos, peniténtiam 
agent. Ait autem ill: Si 
Móysen et prophétas non au- 
diant, neque si quis ex mór- 
tuis resurréxerit, credent. 


281 


buried in hell. And lifting up 
his eyes, when he was in tor- 
ments, he saw Abraham afar 
off, and Lazarus in his bosom. 
And he cried and said, Father 
Abraham, have mercy on me, 
and send Lazarus that he may 
dip the tip of his finger in 
water, to cool my tongue; for 
I am tormented in this flame. 
And Abraham saíd to him, Son, 
remember that thou didst re- 
ceive good things in thy life- 
time, and likewise Lazarus 
evil things: but now he is com- 
forted, and thou art tormented. 
And besides all this, between 
us and you there is fixed a 
great chaos: so that they who 
would pass from hence to you, 
cannot, nor from thence come 
hither. And he said; 'Then, 
father, I beseech thee that 
thou wouldst send him to my 
father's house, for I have five 
brethren, that he may testify 
unto them, lest they also come 
into this place of torments. 
And Abraham said to him, 
They have Moses and the 
prophets: let them hear them. 
But he said, No, father Abra- 
ham, but if one shall go to 
them from the dead, they will 
do penance. And he said to 
him, if they hear not Moses 
and the prophets, neither will 
they believe if one rose again 
from the dead. ` 


Offertory. Ex. 32, 11, 13, 14 


Precatus est Móyses in con- 
spéctu Dómini Dei sui, et 
. dixit: Quare, Dómine, irásce- 
ris in pópulo tuo? parce ire 
&nime tue: meménto Abra- 
ham, Isaac, et Jacob, quibus 
Jurásti.dare terram fluéntem 
lac et mel Et placátus est 


Moses prayed in the sight of 
the Lord his God, and seid: 
Why, O Lord, art Thou angry 
with Thy people? let the anger 
of Thy soul be appeased: re- 
member Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob, to whom Thou sworest 
that -Thou wouldst give the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


282 THURSDAY, SECOND WEEK. OF LENT 


land flowing with milk and 
honey. And the Lord was ap- 
peased from the evil which He 
had threatened to do to His 
people. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Dóminus de malignitáte, 
quam, dixit fácere pópulo suo. 


Secret 


Y THE Sacrifice here be- 
fore Thee, O Lord, may 
the fasts dedicated to Thy 
name sanctify us, and inwardly 
effect that which it outwardly 
professeth. Through our Lord. 


RESÉNTI sacrificio, nő- 
mini tuo nos, Dómine, 
jejünia dicáta sanctificent: 
ut, quod observántia nostra 


profitétur extérius, intérius 
operétur efféctu. Per Dó- 
minum, 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 


O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. 


He that eateth My flesh, 
and drinketh My blood, abideth 
in Me, and I in him, saith the 
Lord. 


John 6, 57 


Qui mandücat meam car- 
nem, et bibit meum sánguin- 
em, in me manet, et ego in eo, 
dicit Dóminus. 


Postcommunion 


AY Thy grace, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, not de- 


RÁTIA tua nos, quesumus, 
Dómine, non derelín- 


part from us, but render us quat: que et sacre nos dédi- 
devoted to Thy sacred service tos fáciat servitüti, et tuam 
and ever obtain for us Thine nobis opem semper acquirat. 
aid. Through our Lord. Per Dóminum. 

Second, Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 


communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 
$ Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray. 


ow down your heads to 
God. 

Be present with Thy ser- 
vants, O Lord, and shower per- 
petual kindness upon those 
who ask it; that to those, who 
glory in Thee, their creator and 
ruler, Thou mayest restore 
good things heaped up, and 
preserve what Thou dost re- 
store. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
Deo. 
Adésto, Dómine, fámulis 


tuis, et perpétuam benigni- 
tátem largíre poscéntibus: ut 
Jis, qui te auctóre et guberna- 
tóre gloriántur, et congregáta 
restáures, et restauráta con- 
sérves, Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


LR os enn 


OI um 


FRIDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 283 


jftibap, Second Week of Lent (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. VITALIS 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 16, 15 


Go autem cum justitia 
apparébo in conspécto 
tuo: satiábor dum manifestá- 


bitur glória tua. Ps. 16, 1. 
Exáudi, Dómine, justítiam 
meam:  inténde  depreca- 


tióni mez. Y. Glória Patri. 


UT as for me, I will ap- 

pear before Thy sight in 
justice: I shall be satisfied 
when Thy glory sball appear. 
Ps. 16, 1. Hear, O Lord, my 
justice: attend to my suppH- 
cation. V. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


A, QUIESSUMUS, omnipo- 

tens Deus: ut, sacro nos 
purificánte jejünio, sincéris 
méntibus ad sancta ventüra 
fácias perveníre. Per Dó- 
minum. 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that, with 

the sacred fast to purify us, 

Thou mayest cause us to come 

with sincere minds to the holy 

things that are before us. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson. Gen. 37, 6-22 


Léctio libri Génesis. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Dixit Jos- 

eph frátribus suis: Au- 
díte sómnium meum, quod 
vidi: Putabam nos ligáre 
manípulos in agro: et quasi 
consürgere manípulum me- 
um, et stare, vestrósque ma- 
nipulos circumstantes ador- 
ére manípulum meum. Re- 
spondérunt fratres ejus: 
Numquid rex noster eris? aut 
Subjiciémur ditióni tue? Hec 
ergo causa somniórum atque 
Sermónum, invídie et ódii fó- 
mitem  ministrávit. Aliud 
quoque vidit sómnium, quod 
narrans fráiribus, ait: Vidi 
per.sómnium quasi solem, 


Lesson from the Book of 
Genesis. ` 
N THOSE days Joseph said 
to his brethren: Hear my 
dream which I dreamed. I 
thonght we were binding 
sheaves in the field: and my 
sheaf rose as it were, and 
Stood, and your sheaves stand- 
ing about, bowed down before 
my sheaf. His brethren an- 
swered: Shalt thou be our 
king? or shall we be subject to 
thy dominion? Therefore this 
matter of his dreams and 
words ministered nourishment 
to their envy and hatred. He 
dreamed also another dream, 
which he told to his brethren 
saying: I saw in a dream, as it 


http://ccwatershed.org 


284 


were the sun, and the moon, 
and eleven stars worshipping 
me, And when he had tola this 
to his father, and brethren, his 
father rebuked him, and said: 
What meaneth this dream that 
thou hast dreamed? shall I 
and thy mother, and thy 
brethren worship thee upon 
the earth? His brethren there- 
fore envied him: but his father 
considered the thing with him- 
self. And when his brethren 
abode in Sichem, feeding their 
father’s flocks, Israel said to 
him: Thy brethren feed the 
sheep in Sichem: come, I will 
send thee to them. And when 
he had answered: I am ready; 
he said to him: Go, and see if 
all things be well with thy 
brethren, and the cattle: and 
bring me word again what is 
doing. So being sent from the 
vale of Hebron, he came to 
Sichem: and a man found him 
there wandering in the field, 
and asked what he sought. But 
he answered: I seek my 
brethren, tell me where they 
feed the flocks. And the man 
said to him: They are de- 
parted from this place: for I 
heard them say: Let us go 
down to Dothain. And Joseph 
went forward after his breth- 
ren, and found them in Do- 
thain. And when they saw him 
afar off, before he came nigh 
them, they thought to kill him. 
And said one to another: Be- 
hold the dreamer cometh. 
Come, let us kill him, and cast 
him into some old pit; and we 
will say: Some evil beast hath 
devoured him: and then it 
shall appear what his dreams 
shall avail him: and Ruben 
hearing this, endeavored to de- 
liver him out of their hands, 


FRIDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


et lunam, et stellas undecim 
adorare me. Quod cum patri 
suo et frátribus retulisset, in- 
crepávit eum pater suus, et 
dixit: Quid sibi vult hoc sóm- 
nium, quod vidisti? Num ego 
et mater tua et fratres tui 
adorábimus te super terram? 
Invidébant et igitur fratres 
sui; pater vero rem tácitus 
considerábat. Cumque fra- 
tres illius in pascéndis grégi- 
bus patris moraréntur in 
Sichem, dixit ad eum Israél: 
Fratres tui pascunt oves in 
Sichimis: veni, mittam te ad 
eos. Quo respondénte: Pre- 
sto sum, ait ei: Vade, et vide 
si cuncta próspera sint erga 
fratres tuos, et pécora: et re- 
nüntia mihi quid agatur. 
Missus de valle Hebron, venit 
in Sichem: invenítque eum 
vir errántem in agro, et in- 
terrogávit quid quaereret. At 
ille respóndit: Fratres. meos 
quaro: indica mihi ubi pas- 
cant greges. Dixítque ei vir: 
Recessérunt de loco isto: au- 
divi autem eos dicéntes: 
Eámus in Dóthain. Perréxit 
ergo Joseph post fratres suos, 
et invénit eos in Déthain, 
Qui cum vidissent eum pro- 
cul ántequam accéderet ad 
eos, cogitavérunt illum occí- 
dere: et mütuo loquebántur: 
Ecce somniátor venit: veníte, 
occidámus eum, et mittámus 
in cistérnam véterem, dicem- 
üsque: Fera péssima devorá- 
vit eum: et tunc apparébit 
quid illi prosint sómnia sua. 
Audiens autem hoc Ruben, 
nitebátur liberáre eum de 
mánibus eórum, et dicébat: 
Non interficiátis ánimam 
ejus, nec effundátis sángui. 
nem: sed projicite eum in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FRIDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 285 
cistérnam hanc, que est in and said: Do not take away his 
solitudine, manüsque vestras life, nor shed his blood: but 
Serváte innóxias: hoc autem cast him into this pit, that is 
dicébat, volens erípere eum de in the wilderness, and keep 
mánibus eórum, et réddere your hands harmless: now he 


patri suo. 


said this, being desirous to de- 
liver him out of their hands 
and to restore him to his andi 


Gradual, Ps. 119, 1,2 


Ad Déminum cum tribu- 
larer clamávi, et exaudivit 
me. V. Dómine, líbera áni- 
mam meam a lábiis iníquis, et 
a lingua dolósa. 


. In my trouble I cried to the 
Lord: and He heard me. Y. O 
Lord, deliver my soul from 
wicked lips,: and a deceitful 
tongue. 


Tract aë on Ash Wednésday, page 220. 


Munda, Cor Meum, page 763: 


Gospel. Matt. 21, 33-46 


"m Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélli secindum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit 

Jesus turbis Judedrum, 
et princípibus sacerdétum 
parábolam hanc: Homo erat 
paterfamilias, qui’ ‘plantavit 
vineam, et sepem circümdedit 
ei, et fodit in ea tórcular, et 
zdificávit turrim, et locávit 
eàm agrícolis, et péregre pro- 
féctus est, Cum autem tem- 
pus früctuum appropinquás- 
set, misit servos suos ad.agrí- 
colas, ut accíperent fructus 
ejus. Et agricole, appre- 
hénsis servis ejus, álium ce- 
cidérunt, álium occidérunt, 
&lium vero lapidavérunt. 
Iterum misit Hos servos 
plures prióribus, et fecérunt 
illis simíliter. Novíssime au- 
tem misit ad eos fílium suum, 
dicens:  Verebüntur filium 
meum. Agricole autem vi- 
déntes filium; dixérunt intra 
5e: Hic est heres, veníte, occi- 


"Hk Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus spoke 

this parable to the mul- 
titude of the Jews and the 
chief priests: ‘There was a cer- 
tain householder who planted a 
vineyard, and made a hedge 
round aboutt, and dug inita 
press, and built a tower, and 
let it out to husbandmen, and 
went into a strange country. 
And when the time of the 
fruits drew nigh, he sent his 
servants to the husbandmen, 
that they might receive the 
fruits thereof: and the hus- 
bandmen laying hands on the 
servants, beat one, and killed 
another, and stoned another. 
Again he sent other servants 
more'than the former, and 
they did to them in like man- 
ner; and last of all he sent to 
them his son, saying, They will 
reverence my son. But the hus- 
bandmen seeing the son, said 


http://ccwatershed.org 


286 


among themselves, This is the 
heir: come, Jet us kill him, and 
we shall have his inheritance; 
and taking him, they cast him 
forth out of the vineyard, and 
killed bim. When therefore the 
Jord of the vineyard shall come, 
what will he do to those hus- 
bandmen? They say to Him, He 
wil bring those evil men to 
an evil end, and will let out his 
vineyard to other husbandmen, 
that shall render him the fruit 
in due season. Jesus saith to 
them, Have you never read in 
ihe Scriptures, 'The stone 
which the builders rejected, 
the same is become the head 
of the corner? By the Lord this 
hath been done, and it is won- 
derful in our eyes. Therefore I 
say to you, that the kingdom 
of God shall be taken from you, 
&nd shall be given to a nation 
yielding the fruits thereof. 
And whosoever shall fall on 
this stone shall be broken; but 
on whomsoever it shall fall, it 
shall grind him to powder. 
And when the chief priests and 
pharisees had heard His par- 
ables, they knew that He spoke 


FRIDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


dámus eum, et habébimus 
hereditátem ejus. Et appre- 
hénsum eum ejecérunt extra 
vineam, et occidérunt. Cum 
ergo vénerit dóminus vínes, 
quid fáciet agricolis illis? 
Aiunt illi; Malos male per- 
det: et víneam suam locábit 
áliis agricolis, qui reddant ei 
fructum tempéribus suis. 
Dicit illis Jesus: Numquam 
legístis in Scriptüris: Láp- 
idem, "quem  reprobavérunt 
tedificántes, hic factus est in 
caput anguli? A .Dómino 
factum est istud, et est mirá- 
bile in óculis nostris. Ideo 
dico vobis, quia auferétur a 
vobis regnum Dei, et dábitur 
genti faciénti fructus ejus. 
Et qui cecíderit super lápidem 
istum, confringétur: super 
quem vero ceciderit, cénteret 
eum. Et cum audissent prin- 
cipes sacerdótum, et phariset 
parábolas ejus, cognovérunt 
quod de ipsis díceret. Et qua- 
réntes eum tenére, timuérunt 
turbas: quóniam sicut proph- 
étam eum habébant. 


of them; and seeking to lay hands on Him, they feared the 
multitudes, because they held Him as a prophet. 


Offertory. Ps. 39, 14, 15 


Look down, O Lord, to heip 
me: let them be confounded 
and ashamed together, that 
seek after my soul to take it 
away: look down, O Lord, to 
help me. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Démine, in auxilium me- 
um réspice: confundántur et 
revereántur, qui querunt ani- 
mam meam, ut duferant 
eam: Dómine, in auxilium 
meum réspice. 


Secret 


ay this sacrifice, O God, 
both remain in us by its 


Ec in nobis sacrificia, 
Deus, et actióne per- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 287 


máneant, et operatióne fir- action and be made strong in 
méntur. Per Dóminum. operation. Through our. Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps.11,8 


Tu Dómine, servábis nos,  'Thou, O Lord, wilt preserve 
et custódies nos a genera- us: and keep us from this 
tióne hac in etérnum. generation for ever. 


Postcommunion 


AC nos, quesumus, Dó- 
mine: accépto pígnore 
Salütis ætérnæ, sic téndere 
congruénter; ut ad eam per- 


AKE us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, direct our course 

so that we who have received 

the pledge of eternal salvation 

veníre possímus. Per Dó- may be able to attain it. 
minum. Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 
UMILIÁTE cápita vestra ow down your heads to 
Deo. God. 
Da, qusesumus, Dómine, Grant unto Thy people, we 


pópulo tuo salütem mentis et beseech Thee, O Lord, health 

cérporis: ut bonis opéribus in- of soul and body, that, by per- 

heréndo, tue semper virtütis severing in good works, we may. 

mereátur  protectióne de- deserve to be defended by the 

féndi. Per Dóminum. protection of Thy power. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Saturday, Second Week of Lent (Purple) 


Station AT Sts. MARCELLINUS AND PETER 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Ps. 18, 8 


BE law of the Lord is un- 
Spotted, converting souls; 


Introit. 


EX Dómini irreprehensi- 
bilis, convértens áni- 


mas: testimónium Dómini 
fidéle, sapiéntiam  prestans 
párvulis. Ps. 18,2. Celi en- 
árrant glóriam Dei: et ópera 


the testimony of the Lord is 
faithful, giving wisdom to little 
ones. Ps, 82, 2, The heavens 
Show forth the glory of God; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


288 


SATURDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


and the firmament declareih mánuum ejus annüntiat 
the work of His hands. V. firmaméntum. J. Gloria Patri. 


Glory. m 
Kyrie, page 761: 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


Gu salutery effect to our 

fasts, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, that the chastising of 
our bodies which we have un- 
dertaken may be transformed 
into the growth of our souls. 
Through our Lord. 


A, QuusUMUS, Dómine, 

-nostris efféctum je- 
júniis salutárem: ut casti- 
gátio carnis assúmpta, ad 
nostrárum vegetatiónem 
tránseat animárum. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Genesis, . 
N THOSE days, Rebecca said 
to her son Jacob, I heard 
thy father talking with Esau 
thy brother, and saying to him, 
Bring me of thy hunting, and 
make me meats, that I may eat, 
and bless thee in the sight of 
the Lord, before I die, Now, 
therefore, my son, follow my 
counsel; and go thy way 
to the flock, bring me 
two kids of the best, that I may 
make of them meat for thy 
father, such as he gladly eat- 
eth; which when thou hast 
brought in, and he hath eaten, 
he may bless thee before he 
die. And he answered her, 
Thou knowest that Esau my 
brother is a hairy man, and I 
am smooth: if my father shall 
feel me, and perceive it, I fear 
lest he will think I would have 
mocked him, and I shall bring 
upon me a curse instead of a 
blessing. And his mother said 
to him, Upon me be this curse, 
my son: only hear thou my 


Lesson. Gen. 27, 6-40 


Léctio libri Génests. 


xN DiÉBUS illis: Dixit Re- 

bécca filio suo Jacob: 
Audivi patrem tuum loquén- 
tem cum Esau fratre tuo, et 
dicéntem ei: Affer mihi de 
venatióne tua, et fac cibos ut 
cómedam, et benedícam tibi 
coram Dómino  ántequam 
móriar. Nunc ergo, fill mi, 
acquiésce consílis meis: et 
pergens ad gregem, affer mihi 
duos hedos óptimos, ut fáci- 
am ex els escas patri tuo, qui- 
bus libénter véscitur: quas 
cum intüleris, et coméderit, 
benedícat tibi priüsquam mo- 
riátur. Cui ille. respóndit: 
Nosti quod Esau frater meus 
homo pilósus sit, et ego lenis: 
Si attrectaverit me pater 
meus, et sénserit, timeo ne 
putet me sibi volufsse illudere, 
et indticam super me male- 
dictiónem pro benedictióne. 
Ad quem mater: In me sit, 
ait, ista maledíctio, fili mi: 
tantum audi vocem meam, et 
pergens affer que dixi, Abiit, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


et Attulit, dedítque matri. 
Parávit illa cibos, sicut velle 
nóverat patrem illius. Et 
véstibus Esau valde bonis, 
quas apud se habébat domi, 
induit eum: pelliculásque hæ- 
dórum circümdedit mánibus, 
et colli. nuda protéxit, De- 
dítque pulméntum, et panes, 
quos cóxerat, trádidit. Qui- 
bus illátis, dixit: Pater mi! 
At ille respóndit: Audio. Quis 
es tu, fili mi? Dixítque Jacob: 
Ego sum primogénitus tuus 
Esau: feci sicut precepisti 
mihi: surge, sede, et cómede 
de venatióne mea, ut bene- 
dícat mihi ánima tua. Rur- 
sümque Isaac ad  fílium 
suum: Quómodo, inquit, tam 
cito inveníre potuísti, fli mi? 
Qui respóndit: Volüntas Dei 
fuit, ut cito occürreret mihi 
quod volébam. Dixitque 
Isaac: Accéde huc, ut tangam 
te, fili mi, et probem utrum 
tu sis fílius meus Esau, an 
non. Accéssit ille ad patrem, 
et palpáto eo, dixit Isaac: Vox 
quidem, vox Jacob est, sed 
manus, manus sunt Esau. Et 
non cognóvit eum, quia pilése 
manus  similitüdinem ma- 
jóris exprésserant. Bene- 
dicens ergo illi, ait: Tu es 
filius meus Esau? Respóndit: 
Ego sum. At ille: Affer mihi, 
Inquit, cibos de venatióne tua, 
fili mi, ut benedícat tibi 
ánima mea. Quos cum oblátos 
comedísset óÓbtulit ef étiam 
vinum. Quo hausto, dixit ad 
eum: Accéde ad me, et da 
mihi ósculum, fili mi. Accés- 
sit, et osculátus est. eum. 
Statímque ut sensit vestimen- 
tórum illfus fragrántiam, ben- 
edícens illi; ait: Ecce odor 
fílii mei sicut odor agri pleni, 


288 


voice, and go, fetch me the 
things which I have said. He 
went, and brought, and gave 
them to his mother. She 
dressed meats, such as she 
knew his father liked; and she 
put on him very good garments 
of Esau, which she had at 
home with her; and the little 
skins of the kids she put about 
his hands, and covered the bare 
of his neck; and she gave him 
the savory meat, and delivered 
him bread, that she had baked. 
Which when he had carried in, 
he said, My father! But he 
answered, I hear. Who art 
thou, my son? And Jacob said, 
I am Esau thy first-born: I 
have done as thou didst com- 
mand me: arise, sit, and eat of 
my venison, that thy soul may 
bless me. And Isaac said to his 
son, How couldst thou find it 
so quickly, my son? He an- 
swered, It was the will of God, 
that what I sought came 
quickly in my way: and Isaac 
said, Come hither, that I may 
feel thee, my..son, and may 
prove whether thou be my son 
Esau or not. He came near to 
his father, and when he had 
felt him, Isaac said, The volce 
indeed is the voice of Jacob, 
but the hands are the hands of 
Esau; and he knew him not, 
because his hairy hands made 
him like to the elder; then 
blessing him, he said, Art thou 
my son Esau? He answered, I 
am. Then he said, Bring me 
the meats of thy hunting, my 
son, that my soul may bless 
thee: and when they were 
brought, and he had eaten, he 
offered him wine also, which 
after he had drunk, he said to 
him, Come near me, and give 


http://ccwatershed.org 


290 


me a kiss, my son. He came 
near, and kissed him; and im- 
mediately as he smelled the 
fragrant smell of his garments, 
blessing him, he said, Behold 
the smell of my son is as the 
smell of a plentiful field which 
the Lord hath blessed. God 
give thee of the dew of heaven, 
and of the fatness of the earth, 
abundance of corn and wine; 
and let people serve thee, and 
tribes worship thee: be thou 
lord of thy brethren, and let 
thy mother'schildren bow down 
before thee. Cursed be he that 
curseth thee, and let him that 
blesseth thee be filled with 
blessings. Isaac had scarce 
ended his words, when Jacob 
being now gone out abroad, 
Esau came, and brought in to 
his father meats made of what 
he had taken in hunting, say- 
ing, Arise, my father, and eat 
of thy son's venison, that thy 
Soul may bless me. And Isaac 
said to him, Why! who art 
thou? He answered, I am thy 
first-born son, Esau. Isaac was 
struck with fear, and aston- 
ished exceedingly; and won- 
dering beyond what can be be- 
lieved, said, Who is he then 
that even now brought me ven- 
ison that he had taken, and I 
ate of all before thou camest? 
and I have blessed him, and he 
shall be blessed. Esau having 
heard his father’s words, 
roared out with a great cry; 
and being in a great consterna~ 
tion, said, Bless me also, my 
father: and he said, Thy 
brother came deceitfully, and 
got thy blessing. But he said 
again, Rightly is his name 
called Jacob, for he hath sup- 
planted me lo this second time; 


SATURDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LEN? 


cui benedixit Déminus. Det 
tibi Deus de rore celi, et de 
pinguédine terre abundán- 
tiam fruménti et vini. Et 
sérviant tibi pópuli, et adó- 
rent te tribus: esto dóminus 
fratrum tuórum, et incurvén- 
tur ante te filii matris tue. 
Qui maledíxerit tibi, sit iMe 
maledíctus: et qui benedix- 
erit tibi benedictiónibus re- 
pleátur. Vix Isaac sermónem 
impléverat: et egrésso Jacok- 
foras, venit Esau, coctósque de 
venatióne cibos íntulit patri, 
dicens: Surge, pater mi, et 
cómede de venatióne fílii tui, 
ut benedicat mihi ánima tua. 
Dixítque illi Isaac: Quis enim 
es tu? Qui respóndit: Ego 
sum filius tuus primogénitus 
Esau. Expavit Isaac stupóre 
veheménti, et ultra quam 
credi potest, admírans, ait: 
Quis ígitur ille est, qui dudum 
captam  venatiónem  áttulit 
mihi, et comédi ex ómnibus 
priüsquam tu veníres? Bene- 
dixique ei, et erit benedictus. 
Auditis Esau sermónibus 
patris, irrügiit clamóre mag- 
no, et consternátus, ait: Bén- 
edic étiam, et mihi pater mi. 
Qui ait: Venit germánus tuus 
fraudulénter, et accépit ben- 
edictiónem tuam. At ille 
subjünxit: Juste vocátus est 
nomen ejus Jacob: supplan- 
távit enim me in áltera vice: 
primogénita mea ante tulit, 
et nune secündo surrípuit 
benedictiónem meam. Rur- 
Sümque ad patrem: Numquid 
non reservásti, ait, et mihi 
benedictiónem? Respéndit 
Isaac: Dóminum tuum illum 
consiítui, et omnes fratres 
ejus servitüti illius subjugávi: 
fruménto et vino stabilívi 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 291 


eum, et tibi post hzc, fili mi, 
ultra quid fáciam? Cul Esau: 
Num unam, inquit, tantum 
benedictiónem habes, pater? 
mihi quoque óbsecro ut bene- 
dicas. Cumque ejulátu mag- 
no fieret, motus Isaac, dixit 
ad eum: In pinguédine terre, 
et in rore cxli désuper erit 
benedictio tua. 


my first birthright he took 
away before, ànd now this sec- 
ond time he hath stolen away 
my blessing. And again he said 
to his father, Hast thou not re- 
served me also a blessing? 
Isaac answered, I have ap- 
pointed him thy lord, and have 
made all his brethren his ser- 
vants: I have established him 
with corn and wine, and after 
this, what shall I do more for 


thee, my son? And Esau said to him, Hast thou only one bless- 
ing, father? I beseech thee, bless me also; and when he wept 
with a loud cry, Isaac being moved, said to him, In the fat of 
ihe earth, and in the dew of heaven from above, shall thy 


blessing be. 


Gradual. 


Bonum est confitéri Dó- 
mino, et psállere nómini tuo 
Altíssime. V. Ad annuntián- 
dum mane misericórdiam tu- 
am, et veritátem tuam per 
noctem. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ps. 91, 2, 3 


It is good to give praise to the 
Lord, and to sing to Thy name, 
O Most High. ¥. To show forth 
Thy mercy in the morning, and 
Thy truth in the night. 


` Gospel. Luke 15, 11-32 


Hà Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit 

Jesus phariszis, et scribis 
parábolam ístam: Homo qui- 
dam habuit duos fílios: et 
dixit adolescéntior ex illis 
patri: Pater, da mihi portió- 
nem substántie, que me con- 
tingit. Et divísit ilis sub- 
stántiam. Et non post mul- 
tos dies, congregátis ómnibus, 
adolescéntior fílius péregre 
proférus est in regiónem lon- 
ginquam, et ibi dissipávit 
substantiam suam  vivéndo 
luxurióse. Et postquam óm- 
nia consummásset, facta est 
fames válida in regióne illa. 


"HK Continuation of the holy 
Gospel aecording to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus spoke 
to the pharisees and 
scribes this parable: A certain 
man had two sons; and the 
younger of them said to his 
father, Father, give me the 
portion of substance that fall- 
eth to me: and he divided unto 
them his substance. And not 
many days after, the younger 
son gathering -all together, 
went abroad into a far coun- 
try, and there wasted his sub- 
stance, living riotously. And 
after he had spent all, there 
came a mighty famine in that 
country, and he began to be 


http://ccwatershed.org 


292 


in want; and he went, and 
cleaved to one of the citizens 
of that country, and he sent 
him into his farm to feed 
swine; and he would fain have 
filled his belly with the husks 
the swine did eat, and no man 
gave unto him. And returning 
to himself, he said, How many 
hired servants in my father’s 
house abound with bread, and 
I here perish with hunger? I 
will arise, and will go to my 
father, and say to him, Father, 
I have sinned against heaven, 
and before thee: I am not now 
worthy to be called thy son, 
make me as one of thy hired 
servants. And rising up, he 
came to his father: and when 
he was yet a great way off, his 
father saw him, and was moved 
with compassion, and running 
to him fell upon his neck and 
kissed him; and the son said 
to him, Father, I have sinned 
against heaven, and before 
ihee, I am not now worthy to 
be called thy son. And the 
father said to his servants, 
Bring forth quickly the first 
robe, and put it on him, and 
put a ring on his hand, and 
shoes on his feet; bring hither 
the fatted calf, and kill it, and 
let us eat and make merry: be- 
cause this my son was dead, 
&nd is come to life again; he 
was lost, snd is found, And 
they began to be merry. Now 
his elder son was in the field; 
and when he came, and drew 
nigh to the house, he heard 
music and dancing: and he 
called one of the servants, and 
asked what these things meant. 
And he said to him, Thy 
brother is come, and thy father 
hath killed the fatted calf, be- 


SATURDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


et ipse cepit egére. Et ábit, 
et adhaesit uni civium regiónis 
ilífus. Et misit ilum in vil- 
Jam suam, ut pásceret porcos. 
Et cupiébat implére ventrem 
suum de síliquis, quas porci 
manducábant: et nemo illi 
dabat. In se autem revérsus, 
dixit: Quanti mercenarii in 
domo patris mei abündant 
panibus, ego autem hic fame 
péreo! Surgam, et ibo ad 
patrem meum, et dicam ei: 
Pater, peccávi in cælum, et 
coram te: jam non sum dig- 
nus vocári fílius tuus: fac me 
sicut unum de mercenariis 
iuis. Et surgens venit ad pa- 
irem suum. Cum autem ad- 
huc longe esset, vidit illum 
pater ipsius, et misericórdia 


motus est, et accürrens cé- ~ l 


cidit super collum ejus, et os- 
culátus est eum. Dixítque ei 
fílius: Pater, peccávi in cæ- 
lum, et coram te, jam non 
sum dignus vocári fílius tuus. 
Dixit autem pater ad servos 
Suos: Cito proférte stolam 
primam, et indüite illum, et 
date ánnulum in manum 
ejus, et calceaménta in pedes 
ejus: et addücite vítulum 
saginátum, et occidite, et 
manducémus, et epulémur, 
quia hic fílius meus mórtuus 
erat, et revixit: períerat, et 
invéntus est. Et cepérunt 
epulári. Erat autem fílius 
ejus sénior in agro: et cum 
veniret, et. appropinquáret 
dómui, audivit symphóniam, 
et chorum: et vocávit unum 
de servis, et interrogávit, quid 
hee essent. Isque dixit illi: 
Frater tuus venit, et occídit 
pater tuus vítulum saginüt- 
um, quia salvum illum re- 
cépit. Indignátus est autem. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY, SECOND WEEK OF LENT 


et nolébat introire. Pater 
ergo illius egréssus, cepit ro- 
gáre illum. At ille respón- 
dens, dixit patri suo: Ecce tot 
annis sérvio tibi, et num- 
quam’ mandátum tuum præ- 
terívi. et numquam dedisti 
mihi hedum, ut cum amicis 
meis epulárer: sed postquam 
filius tuus hic, qui devorávit 
substantiam suam cum mere- 
trícibus, venit, occidísti illi 
vítulum saginátum. At ipse 
dixit illi: Fili, tu semper me- 
cum es, et ómnia mea tua 
sunt: epulari autem, et gau- 
dére oportébat, quia frater 
tuus bic mórtuus erat, et re- 
víxit: períerat, et invéntus 
est. 


Offertory. 
Illümina óculos meos, ne 
umquam  obdórmiam in 
morte: ne quando dicat inim- 
{cus meus: Preválui advérsus 
eum. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


293 


cause he hath received him 


safe. And he was angry, and 
would not go in. His father 
therefore coming out, began to 
entreat him: and he answer- 
ing, said to hls father, Behold, 
for so many years do I serve 
thee, and I have never trans- 
gressed thy commandment, 
and yet thou hast never given 
me a kid to make merry with 
my friends. But as soon as this 
thy son is come, who hath de- 
voured his substance with har- 
lots, thou hast killed for him 
the fatted calf. But he said to 
him, Son, thou art always with 
me, and all I have is thine; but 
it was fit that we should make 
merry and be glad, for this thy 
brother was dead, and is come 
to life again; he was lost, and 
is found. 


Ps. 12,4, 5 


Enlighten my eyes, that I 
never sleep in death: lest at 
any time my enemy say, I have 
prevailed against him. 


. Secret 


1S sacrificiis, Dómine, 
concéde placátus: ut, 
qui própriis orámus absólvi 
delíctis, non gravémur ex- 
ternis, Per Dóminum. 


E APPEASED, O Lord with 
this sacrifice and grant 
that we, who pray to be par- 
doned our own sins, may not 


` guffer for those of others. 


Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Luke. 15, 32 


- Opórtet te, filij, gaudére, 
quia frater tuus mórtuus fü- 
erat, et revixit: perferat, et 
invéntus est. 


Thou oughtest to rejoice, my 
son, because thy brother was 
dead, and is come to life again: 
he was lost, and 1s found. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


294 THIRD SUNDAY OF LENT 


Postcommunion 


AY the divine outpouring 
XD of Thy sacrament, O 


ACRAMÉNTI tui, Dómine, 
divína  libátio, pene- 


Lord, flow unto the recesses of tralia nostri cordis infündat: 


our hearts and make us sharers 
thereof in strength. Through 
our Lord. 


et sui nos participes poténter 
effíclat. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


ow down your heads to 
God. 

Keep Thy household, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, with con- 
tinual loving-kindness that, as 
it leans only on the hope of 
heavenly grace, it may also be 


UMILIÁTE capita vestra 
Deo. 

Familiam tuam, quesumus, 
Dómine, continua  pietáte 
custódi: ut, que in sola spe 
grátie celéstis innítitur, cæ- 
lésti étiam protectióne muni- 


fortified by heavenly protec- átur. Per Dóminum. 
tion. Through our Lord. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Third Sunday of Lent (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. LAWRENCE WITHOUT THE WALLS 
Sunday of the First Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. i 


Introit. Ps. 24,15, 16 


Y EYES are ever towards cuLI mei semper ad Dó- 

the Lord: for He shall Q minum, quia ipse evéllet 
pluck my feet out of the snare: de láqueo pedes meos: ré- 
look. Thou upon me, and have spice in me, et miserére mei, 
mercy on me, for I am alone quóniam  ünicus et pauper 
and poor. Ps. 24, 1-2. To Thee, sum ego. Ps. 24, 1-2. Ad te, 
O Lord, have I lifted up my Dómine, levávi ánimam me- 
soul: in Thee, O my God, I am: Deus meus, in te con- 
put my trust; let me not be fído, mon  erubéscam. y. 
ashamed. Y. Glory. Gloria Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 
Lay regard to the desires UzsUMUS, Omnipotens 
of the lowly, O almighty Deus, vota humilium 


God, we beseech Thee, and réspice: atque ad defensién- 
stretch forth the right hand of em nostram, déxteram tue 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THIRD SUNDAY OF LENT 295 


majestátis exténde. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Thy majesty in our cefense. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Epistle. Ephes. 5, 1-9 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Ephésios. 


RATRES:  Estóte imita- 

tóres Dei, sicut fílii 
caríssimi: et ambuláte in di- 
lectióne, sicut et Christus 
diléxit nos, et trádidit seme- 
típsum pro nobis oblatiónem, 
et hóstiam Deo in odórem 
suavitátis. Fornicátio autem, 
et omnis immunditia, aut 
avaritia, nec nominétur in 
vobis, sicut decet sanctos: aut 
turpitüdo, aut stultilóquium, 
&ut scurrílitas, que ad rem 
non pértinet: sed magis gra- 
tiárum  áctio. Hoc enim 
scitéte intelligéntes, quod 
omnis fornicátor, aut im- 
mundus, aut avárus, quod est 
idolérum sérvitus, non habet 
hereditátem in regno Chri- 
Sti, et Dei. Nemo vos sedücit 
inánibus verbis: propter hee 
enim venit ira Dei in fílios 
diffidéntiz. Nolíte ergo éffici 
participes eórum. Erátis enim 
aliquando ténebrse: nunc au- 
tem lux in Dómino. Ut filii 
lucis ambuláte: fructus enim 
Jucis est in omni bonitáte, et 
justitia, et veritáte. 


Gradual. 
Exsürge, Dómine, non præ- 
valeat homo:  judicéntur 


gentes in conspéctu tuo. Y. 
In converténdo inimicum 
meum  retrórsum, infirma- 
büutur, et períbunt a facie 
tua. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians. 

RETHREN, be ye followers 

of God, as most dear 
children; and walk in love, as 
Christ also hath loved us, and 
hath delivered Himself for us, 
an oblation and a sacrifice to 
God, for an odor of sweetness. 


-But fornication, and all un- 


cleanness, or covetousness, let 
it not so much as be named 
among you, as becometh 
saints; nor obscenity, nor fool- 
ish talking, nor scurrility, 
which is to no purpose; but 
rather giving of thanks: for 
know ye this, and understand, 
that no fornicator, nor un- 
clean, nor covetous person, 
which is a serving of idols, 
hath any inheritance in the 
kingdom of Christ and of God. 
Let no man deceive you with 
vain words; for because of 
these things cometh the anger 
of God upon the children of 
unbelief. Be ye not therefore 
partakers with them. For you 
were heretofore darkness; but 
now light in the Lord. Walk ye 
as children of the light: for the 
fruit of the light is in all good- 
ness, and justice, and truth. 


Ps. 9, 20, 4 


Arise, O Lord, let not man be 
strengthened; let the gentiles 
be judged in Thy sight. J. 
When my enemy shal be 
turned back, they shall be 
weakened and perish before 
Thy face. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


296 THIRD SUNDAY OP LENT 


Tract. Ps. 122,1,3 


To Tbee have I lifted up my 
eyes, Who dwellest in heaven. 
Y. Behold as the eyes of ser- 
vants are on the hands of their 
masters. Y. And as the eyes of 
the hendmaid are on the hands 
of her mistress: so are our eyes 
"unto the Lord our God, until He 
have mercy on us. Y. Have 
mercy on us, O- Lord, have 
mercy on us. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ad te levávi óculos meos, 
qui habitas in cælis. Y. Ecce 
Sicut óculi servórum in 
mánibus dominórum suérum. 
¥...Et. sicut óculi ancille in 
mánibus démine sus: ita 
éculi nostri ad Dóminum De- 
um, nostrum, donec miser- 
eétur nostri. Y. Miserére no- 
bis, Démine, miserére nobis. 


Gospel. Luke 11, 14-28 


H8 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, Jesus was 
A, casting out a devil, and 


e same was dumb; and when 
He had cast out the devil the 
dumb spoke, and the multitude 
were in admiration at it, but 
some of them said, He casteth 
out devils by Beelzebub the 
prince of devils, And others 
tempting, asked of Him a sign 
from heaven. But He seeing 
their thoughts, said to them, 
Every kingdom divided against 
itself shall be brought to des- 
olation, and house upon house 
Shall fall; and if Satan also be 
divided against himself,.how 
shall his kingdom stand? be- 
cause you say, that through 
Beelzebub 1 cast out devils. 
Now if Icast out devils by Beel- 
zebub, by whom do your chil- 
dren cast them out? Therefore 
they shall be your judges. But 
if I by tne finger of God cast 
out devils, doubtless the:king- 
dom of God is come upon you. 
When a strong man armed 
keepeth his court, those things 
which he possesseth are in 
peace: but if a stronger than 


n Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
T; ILLO témpore: Erat Jesus 

jíciens ` demónium, et 
illud erat mutum. Et cum 
ejecísset deménium, locütus 
est mutus, et admiráte sunt 
turbe. Quidam autem ex eis 
dixérunt: In Beélzebub prín- 
cipe demoniórum éjicit de- 
mónia. Et àlii tentántes, sig- 
num de czlo quzrébant ab eo. 
Ipse autem, ut vidit cogita- 
tiónes eórum, dixit eis: Omne 
regnum in seipsum divísum 
desolabitur, et domus supra 
domum cadet. Si autem. et 
Sátanas in seipsum divisus 
est, quómodo stabit regnum 
ejus? quia dícitis, in Beélze- 
bub me ejícere dæmónia. Si 
autem ego in Beélzebub ejíció 
demónia: filii vestri in. quo 
ejíciunt? Ideo ipsi judices 
vestri erunt. Porro si in dígito 
Dei ejício demónia proféc- 
to pervénit in vos regnum Dei. 
Cum fortis armátus custódit 
atrium suum, in pace sunt ea, 
quae. póssidet, Si autem 
fórtior eo supervéniens vícerit 
eum, univérsa arma ejus 
&uferet, in quibus confidébat, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Red: 


THIRD SUNDAY OF LENT 


et spólia ejus distríbuet. Qui 
non est mecum, contra me 
est: et qui non cólligit me- 
cum, dispérgi Cum jim- 
mündus spíritus exíerit de 
hómine, ámbulat per loca in- 
aquésa, querens réquiem: et 
non invéniens, dicit; Revértar 
in domum meam, unde exfyi. 
Et cum vénerit, invenit eam 
Scopis mundátam, et orná- 
tam. Tunc vadit, et assümit 
Septem álios spíritus secum 
nequióres se, et  ingréssi 
hábitant ibi. Et fiunt novís- 
sima hóminis ilíus pejóra 
prióribus. Factum est autem, 
cum hec díceret: extóllens 
vocem qusedam  mülier de 
turba, dixit illi: Beátus ven- 
ter, qui te portávit, et übera 
que suxisti. At ille dixit: Qui- 
nímmo beáti, qui áudiunt ver- 
bum Dei, et custódiunt illud. 


297 


he come upon him, and over- 
come him, he will take away all 
his armor wherein he trusted, 
and will distribute his spoils. 
He that is not with Me, is 
against Me: and he that gath- 
ereth not with Me, scattereth. 
When the unclean spirit ts gone 
out of a man, he walketh 
through places without water, 
seeking rest: and not finding, 
he saith, I will return into my 
house whence I came out: and 
when he is come, he findeth it 
swept and garnished. Then he 
goeth, and taketh with him 
seven other spirits more wicked 
than himself, and entering in 
they dwell there; and the last 
state of that man becometh 
worse than the first. And it 
came to pass, as He spoke these 
things, that a certain woman 
from the crowd, lifting up her 
voice, said to Him, Blessed is 


the womb that bore Thee, and the breasts that gave Thee 
suck. But He said, Yea, rather blessed are they who hear the 


word of God, and keep it. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 

Justitie ^ Dómini recte 

letificantes corda, et judicia 

ejus dulcióra super mel et fa- 

vum: nam et servus tuus cus- 
tódit ea. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 18, 9-12 

The justices of the Lord are 
right, rejoicing hearts, and His 
judgments are sweeter than 
honey and ihe honeycomb; for 
Thy servant keepeth them. 


Secret 


&c hóstia, Dómine, que- 
n sumus, emundet nostra 
delicta: et ad sacrifícium 
celebrándum, subditórum tibi 
corpora, mentésque sancti- 


ficet. Per Déminum. 


ay this offering, O Lord, 

we beseech Thee, wipe 
out our sins, and sanctify the 
bodies and minds of Thy ser- 
vants for the celebration of the 
sacrifice. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


298 


Communion. 


The sparrow hath found her- 
Self a house, and the turtle a 
nest, where she may lay her 
young ones: Thy altars, O Lord 
of hosts, my King, and my God: 
blessed are they that dwell in 
Thy house, they shall praise 
Thee forever and ever. 


MONDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


Ps. 83, 4,5 

Passer invénit sibi domum, 
et turtur nidum, ubi repónat 
pullos suos: altaria tua, Dó- 
mine virtütum, Rex meus, et 
Deus meus: beáti qui hábitant 
in domo tua in seculum 
szculi laudábunt te. 


Postcommunion 


E MERCIFUL, O Lord, we 
beseech Thee, and free us 


CUNCTIS nos, quesu- 
mus, Dómine, reáti- 


from all sins and dangers, as bus et perículis propitiátus 
Thou dost grant us to be shar- absólve: quos tanti mystérii 
ers in this great mystery. tríbuis esse partícipes. Per 
Through our Lord. Dóminum. 

Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 


communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Monday, Third Week of Lent (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. MARE 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps.55,5 


N cop I wil praise the 
word, in the Lord 1 will 
praise His speech: in God I will 
trust, I will not fear what man 
can do against me. Ps. 55, 2. 
Have mercy on me, O God, for 
man hath trodden me under 
foot: all the day long he hath 
afflicted me, fighting against 
me. V. Glory. 


N DEO laudábo verbum, in 

Dómino laudabo ser- 
mónem: in Deo sperábo, non 
timébo quid fáciat mihi ho- 
mo. Ps. 55, 2. Miserére mei. 
Deus, quóniam conculcavit 
me homo: tota die bellans 
tribulavit me. Y. Gloria 
Patri, 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


Kyrie, page 761. 

LORD, we beseech Thee, 
O pour Thy grace into our 
hearts, that, as we abstain 
from carnal food, so also we 
may withdraw our senses from 
harmful excesses. Through our 
Lord. 


ÓRDIBUS - nostris, quæ- 

sumus, Démine, gratiam 
tuam bénignus infünde: ut, 
sicut ab escis carnálibus 
abstinémus; ita sensus quoque 
nostros & nóxiis retrahámus 
excéssibus. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens. 


page 828. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MONDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


299 


Lesson. 4 Kings 5, 1-15 


Léctio libri Regum. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Náaman 
IT princeps militie regis 
Syrie, erat vir magnus apud 
dóminum suum, et honorátus: 
per illum enim dedit Dóminus 
Salütem Syrie: erat autem vir 
fortis et dives, sed leprósus. 
Porro de Syria egréssi füerant 
latrünculi, et captívam düx- 
erant de terra Israél puéllam 
párvulam, que erat in obsé- 
quio uxoris Naaman, que ait 
ad dóminam suam: Utinam 
fuisset dóminus meus ad 
prophétam, qui est in Sama- 
ria: profécto curásset eum & 
lepra quam habet. Ingréssus 
est itaque Naaman ad dómi- 
num suum, et nuntiávit ei, 
dicens: Sic et sic locüta est 
puélla de terra Israél. Dixít- 
que ei rex Syrie. Vade, et 
mittam litteras ad regem Is- 
raél. Qui cum proféctus esset, 
et tulisset secum decem 
talénta argénti, et sex míllia 
áureos, et decem mutatória 
vestimentórum,  détulit lít- 
teras ad regem Israël in hec 
verba: Cum accéperis epísto- 
lam hanc, scito quod miserim 
ad te Naaman servum meum, 
ut cures eum a lepra sua. 
Cumque legisset rex Israél 
lítteras, scidit vestiménta sua, 
et ait: Numquid Deus ego 
sum, ut Occidere possim, et 
vivificare, quia iste misit ad 
me, ut curem hóminem a lepra 
sua? animadvértite, et vidéte 
quod occasiónes querat ad- 
vérsum me. Quod cum audís- 
set Eliséus vir Dei, scidísse 
vidélicet regem Israél vesti- 
ménta sua, misit ad eum, 


Lesson from the Book of 
Kings. 

N THOSE days, Naaman, gen- 
I eral of the army of the 
king of Syria, was a great man 
with his master, and honor- 
able; for by him the Lord gave 
deliverance to Syria: and he 
was a Valiant man and rich, 
but a leper. Now there had gone 
out robbers from Syria, and 
had led away captive out of 
the land of Israel a little maid, 
and she waited upon Naaman’s 
wife: and she said to her mis- 
tress, I wish my master had 
been with the prophet that is 
in Samaria; He would cer- 
tainly have healed him of the 
leprosy which he hath. Then 
Naaman went in to his lord, 
and told him saying, Thus and 
thus said the girl from the land 
of Israel: and the king of Syria 
said to him, Go, and I will send 
& letter to the king of Israel; 
and he departed, and took with 
him ten talents of silver, and 
six thousand pieces of gold, and 
ten changes of raiment; and 
brought the letter to the king 
of Israel, in these words: 
When thou shalt receive this 
letter, know that I have sent to 
thee Naaman my servant, that 
thou mayest heal him of his 
leprosy. And when the king of 
Israel had read the letter, he 
rent his garments, and said, 
Am I God, to be able to kill, 
and give life, that this man 
hath sent to me, to heal a man 
of his leprosy? mark and see 
how he seeketh occasions 
against me. And when Eliseus 
the man of God had heard this, 
to wit, that the king of Israel 


http://ccwatershed.org 


300 


had rent his garments, he sent 
to him, saying, Why hast thou 
rent thy garments? let him 
come to me, and let him know 
that there is & prophet in 
Israel. So Naaman came with 
his borses and chariots, and 
stood at the door of the house 
of Eliseus: and Eliseus sent a 
messenger to him, saying, Go, 
and wash seven times in the 
Jordan, and thy flesh shall re- 
cover health, and thou shalt be 
clean, Naaman was angry, and 
went away saying, I thought he 
would have come out to me, 
and standing would have in- 
voked the name of the Lord his 
God, and touched with his 
hand the place of the leprosy, 
and healed me. Are not the 
Abana, and the Pharphar riv- 
ers of Damascus, better than 
all the waters of Israel, that I 
may wash in them, and be 
made clean? So as he turned, 
and was going away with in- 
dignation, his servants came to 
him, and said to him, Father, 
if the prophet had bid thee do 
some great thing, surely thou 
shouldst have done it: how 
much rather what he now hath 
said to thee, Wash, and thou 
shalt be clean? Then he went 
down, and washed in the Jor- 
dan seven times according to 
the word of the man of God; 
and his flesh was restored, like 
the flesh of a little child, and 


MONDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


dicens: Quare scidísti vestl- 
ménta tua? véniat ad me, et 
sciat esse prophétam in Is- 
raél Venit ergo Naaman 
cum equis, et cürribus, et 
Stetit ad óstium domus Elisél: 
misítque ad eum Eliséus nün- 
tium, dicens: Vade, et laváre 
sépties in Jordáne et recípiet 
sanitatem caro tua, atque 
mundáberis. Irátus Náaman 
recedébat, dicens: Putábam 
quod egrederétur ad me, et 
stans invocáret nomen Dómi- 
ni Dei sui, et tángeret manu 
sua locum lepre, et curáret 
me. Numquid non melióres 
sunt Abana et Pharphar 
fiivii Damásci, ómnibus aquis 
Israél, ut laver in eis, et mun- 
der? Cum ergo vertisset se, et 
abiret indignans, accessér- 
unt ad eum servi sul, et 
lécuti sunt ei: Pater, et si 
rem grandem dixisset tibi 
prophéta, certe fácere de- 
büeras: quanto magis quia 
nunc dixit tibi: Laváre, et 
mundáberis? Descéndit, et 
lavit in Jordáne sépties, juxta 
sermónem viri Dei, et resti- 
túta est caro ejus, sicut caro 
püeri parvuli, et mundátus 
est. Reversüsque ad virum Del 
cum univérso comitátu suo, 
venit, et stetit coram eo, et 
ait: Vere scio, quod non sit 
élius Deus in univérsa terra, 
nisi tantum in Israél. 


he was made clean: and returning to the man of God with 
&ll his train, he came, and stood before him, and said, In 
truth, I know there is no other God in all the earth, but only 


in Israel. 


Gradual. Ps. 55, 9, 2 


O God, I have declared to 
Thee my life: Thou hast set my 


Deus, vitam meam an- 
nuntiávi tibi: posuisti lácri- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MONDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


mås meas in conspéctu tuo. Y. 
Miserére mei, Dómine, quó- 
niam conculcávit me homo: 
tota die bellans tribulávit me. 


301 


tears in Thy sight. Y. Have 
mercy on me, O Lord, for man 
hath trodden me under foot: 
al the day long he hath af- 
flicted me, fighting agalnst me. 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


. Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Luke 4, 23-30 


E: Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam... 


N ILLO témpore: 

Jesus pharisæis: Utique 
dicétis mihi hanc similitüdi- 
nem: Médice, cura teípsum: 
quanta aüdivimus facta in 
Caphárnaum, fac et hic in 
pátria tua. Ait autem: Amen 
dice vobis, quia nemo prop- 
héta ‘accéptus est in patria 
sua. In. veritáte dico. vobis, 
multe vidus erant in diébus 
Eliz in Israël, quando claus- 
um est celum annis tribus, 
€t ménsibus sex, cum facta 
esset fames magna in omni 
terra: et ad nullam illárum 
missus -est Elías, nisi, in Sa- 
répta Sidónis, ad mulíerem 
viduam: Et multi leprósi erant 
jn Israél sub Eliséo prophéta: 
et nemo eórum mundatus est 
nisi Náamanu Syrus. Et re- 
pléti sunt omnes in synagóga 
ira, hec audiéntes. Et sur- 
rexérunt et ejecérunt illum 
extra civitátem et duxérunt 
idum usque. ad supercilium 
montis, super quem cívitas 
illórum erat zdificáta ut præ- 
cipitarent eum. Ipse autem 
tránsiens per médium. illór- 
um, ibat. . 


Offertory. 


Yvxáudi, oratiónem, 


Deus, 


Dixit. 


. m Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, Jesus said 

to the pharisees, Doubt- 
less you will say to Me this 
similitude; ^ Physician, heal 
Thyself: as great things as we 
have heard done in Caphar- 
naum, do.also here in Thy own 
country. And He said, Amen I 
say. to you, that no prophet ts 
accepted in his own country. 
In truth I-say to you, there 
were many widows in the days 
of Elias in Israel, when heaven 
was shut up three years and six 
months, when there was & 
great famine throughout all 
the land: and to none of them 
Was Elias sent, but to a widow 
at Sarepta of Sidon. And there 
were many lepers in Israel in 
the time of Eliseus the prophet; 
and none.of them was cleansed 
but Naaman the Syrian. And 
all they in the synagogue hear- 
ing these things were filled with 
anger: and they rose up and 
thrust Him out of the city; and 
they brought Him to the brow 
of the hill, whereon their city 
was built, that they might cast 
Him down headiong. But He 
passing through the midst of 
them, went His way. 


Ps. 54, 2, 3 : 
Hear, O God, my prayer, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


802 MONDAY, .THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


despise not my supplication: be meam, et ne despéxeris de- 
attentive to me, and hear me. precatiónem meam: inténde 
in me, et exáudi me, 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret : 


HE gift of our homage unus, quod tibi, Dómi- 

we offer Thee, O Lord, do (D ne, nostre servitütis 
Thou make it unto us the sac- offérimus, tu salutáre nobis 
rament of salvation. Through pérfice sacraméntum. Per 
our Lord. : "^. Dóminum. ; 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. i ` 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps.13,7 


Who shall give out of Sion Quis dabit ex Sion salutáre 
the salvation of Israel: Israël? cum avérterit Dómi- 
when the Lord shall have nus captivitátem plebis suæ, 
turned away the captivity of exsultábit Jacob, et lætábitur 
His people, Jacob shall rejoice Israël. 
and Israel shall be glad. 


Postcommunion 
Guz we beseech Thee, O RESTA, quesumus, omní- 
almighty and merciful potens et miséricors 


God, that what we touch with Deus: ut, quod ore contingi- 
our mouths we may receive mus, pura mente capiámus. 
with minds undefiled. Through Per Dóminum. 
our Lord. 

Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 


ow down your heads to — UMILIÁTE capita vestra 
God. Deo. 

Let Thy mercy, O Lord, suc- ^ Subvéniat nobis, Dómine, 
cor us, that we may be worthy misericórdia tua: ut ab im- 
to be snatched by Thy protec- minéntibus peccatórum nos- 
tion from the dangers that trórum perículis te mereámur 
threaten and to be saved by protegénte éripi, et liberánte 


T deliverance. Through our salvári. Per Dóminum. 
ord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


= 


TUESDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


303 


` Tuesday, Third Week of Lent (Purple) 
Station AT ST. PUDENTIANA 
. The Beginniag of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 16, 6, 8 


quóniam 
me, Deus: 


co clamávi, 
.exaudísti 


inclina aurem tuam, et exdudi_ 


verba mea: custódi me, Dó- 
mine, ut pupíllam óculi: sub 
umbra alárum tuárum pró- 
tege me. Ps. 16, 1. Exáudi, 
Dómine, justítiam meam: in- 
ténde deprecatiónem meam. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


HAVE cried, for Thou, O 

God, hast heard me: O in- 
cline Thine ear and hear my 
words: keep me, O Lord, as the 
apple of Thy eye: protect me 
under the shadow. of Thy 
wings. Ps. 16, 1. Hear, O Lord, 
my justice: attend to .my 
prayer. Y. Glory. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


xAUDI nos, omnipotens 

et miséricors Deus: et 
continéntie  salutáris pro- 
pítius nobis dona concéde. 
Per Dóminum. 


ARKEN unto us, O almighty 

and merciful God, and 

favorably grant us the gifts of 

saving self-denial. Through our 
Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828, 


Lesson. 4 Kings 4, 1-7 


Léctio libri Regum. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Mülier que- 

dam clamabat ad Eliséum 
prophétam, dicens: Servus 
tuus vir meus mórtuus est, 
et tu nosti, quia servus tuus 
fuit timens Dóminum: et 
ecce créditor venit, ut tollat 
duos fílios meos ad servién- 
dum sibi. Cui dixit Eliséus: 
Quid vis ut fáciam tibi? Dic 
mihi, quid habes in domo tua? 
At illa respóndit: Non hábeo 
ancilla tua quidquam in do- 
mo mea, nisi parum ólei, quo 
ungar. Cui ait: Vade, pete 
mútuo ab ómnibus vicínis tuis 
vasa vacua non pauca. Et 
ingrédere, et claude óstium 


Lesson from the Book of 
Kings. 
N THOSE days, a certain wo- 
man cried to the prophet 
Eliseus, saying, Thy servant my 
husband is dead, and thou 
knowest that thy servant was 
one that feared God; and be- 
hold the creditor is come to 
take away my two sons to serve 
him: and Eliseus said to her. 
What wilt thou have me do for 
thee? Tell me, what hast thou 
in thy house? And she an- 
Swered, I thy handmaid have 
nothing in my house but a lit- 
tle oil, to anoint me: and he 
said to her, Go borrow of all 
thy neighbors empty vessels not 
a few: and go in and shut thy 


http://ccwatershed.org 


304 


door, when thou art within, 
and thy sons; and pour out 
thereof into all those vessels, 
and when they are full take 
them away. So the woman 
went, and shut the door upon 
her, and upon her sons; they 
brought her the vessels, and 
she poured in; and when the 
vessels were full, she said to 
her son, Bring me yet a ves- 
sel; and he answered, I have no 
more: and the oil stood. And 
she came, and told the man of 
God; and he said, Go, sell the 
oil, and pay thy creditor; and 
thou and thy sons live of the 
rest. 


TUESDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


tuum, cum intrinsecus fueris 
tu, et filii tui: et mitte inde 
in ómnia vasa hec: et cum 
pleba  füerint, tolles, Ivit 
itaque _ mülier, et clausit 
éstium super se, et super filios 
suos: ili offerébant vasa, et 
ila . infundébat. Cumque 
plena fuíssent vasa, dixit ad 
filium suum: Affer mihi ad- 
huc vas. Et ille respóndit: 
Non hábeo. Stetique óleum. 
Venit autem illa, et inclinávit 
hómini Dei. Et ille: Vade, in- 
quit, vende óleum, et redde 
creditóri tuo: tu autem, et 
filii tul vívite de réliquo. 


Gradual. Ps, 18, 13, 14 


From my secret sins cleanse 
me, O Lord; and from those of 
others spare Thy servant. V. If 
they shall bave no dominion 
over me, then shall I be with- 
out spot; and I shall be 
cleansed from the greatest sin. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ab occültis meis munda me, 
Dómine: et ab aliénis parce 
servo tuo. Y. Si mei non 
füerint domináti, tunc im- 
maculátus ero: et emundábor 
a delícto máximo. 


Gospel. Matt. 18, 15-22 


-Œ Continuation-.of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus said 

to His disciples, If thy. 
brother shall offend thee, go, 
and rebuke him between thee 
and him alone. If he shall hear 
thee, thou shalt gain thy 
brother; but if he will not hear 
thee, take with thee one or 
iwo more, that in the mouth of 
two or three witnesses every 
word may stand; and if he will 
not hear them, tell the Church; 
and if he will not hear the 
Church, let him: be to thee as 
the heathen and the publican. 


®© Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Matthaeum. 


N. ILLO témpore: Dixit 

. Jesus discípulis suis: Si 
peccáverit in te frater tuus, 
vade, et córripe eum inter te 
et ipsum solum. Si te audíerit, 
lucrátus eris fratrem tuum. 
Si autem te non audferit, 
adhibe tecum adhuc unum, 
vel duos, ut in ore duórum, 
vel trium téstium stet omne 
verbum. Quod si non audierit 
eos: dic ecclésie. Si autem 
ecclésiam non audíerit: sit 
tibi sicut. éthnicus et publi- 
cánus. Amen dico vobis, que- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TUESDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


cümque  alligavéritis super 
terram, erunt ligáta et in 
celo: et quecümque solvéri- 
tis super terram, erunt solüta 
et in cxlo. Iterum dico vobis, 
quia si duo ex vobis consénse- 
rint super terram, de omni 
re quamcümmque petierint, fiet 
ilis a Patre meo, qui in celis 
est. Ubi enim sunt dud vel 
tres congregáti in nómine 
meo, ibi sum in médio eórum. 
Tunc accédens Petrus ad eum, 
dixit: Dómine, quóties pec- 
cábit in me frater meus, et 
dimittam ei? usque sépties? 
Dicit illi Jesus: Non dico tibi 
usque sépties, sed usque sep- 
iuágies séptles. 


305 


Amen I say to you, whatsoever 
you shall bind upon earth, shall 
be bound also in heaven; and 
whatsoever you shall loose upon 
earth, shall be loosed also in 
heaven. Again I say to you, that 
if two of you shall agree upon 
earth, concerning anything 
whatsoever they shall ask, it 
shall be done for them by My 
Father Who is in heaven: for 
where there are two or three 
gathered in My name, there am 
I in the midst of them. Then 
came Peter unto Him and said, 
Lord, how often shall my 
brother offend against me, and 
I forgive him? till seven times? 
Jesus saith to him, I say not to 
thee, till seven times; but till 
seventy times seven times. 


Offertory. Ps. 117, 16, 17 


Déxtera Dómini fecit vir- 
tütem, déxtera Dómini exal- 
tavit me: non móriar, sed 
vivam, et narrábo ópera Dó- 
mini. 


The right hand of the Lord 
hath wrought strength, the 
right hand of the Lord hath ex- 
alted me: I shall not die, but 


live, and shall declare the 
Works of the Lord. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


ER hæc véniat, quesumus, 

Dómine,sacraménta 
nosire redemptiónis efféctus: 
qui nos et ab humánis rétra- 
hat semper excéssibus, et ad 
salutaria dona perdücat. Per 
Dóminum. 


HROUGH this sacrament, we 

beg Thee, O Lord, may the 
effect of our redemption come, 
ever to withdraw us from hu- 
man excesses, and to lead us 
on to the gifts of salvation. 
Through our Lord. , 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 


O God to Whom alone, page 829. 
Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps.14,1,2 
Dómine quis habitábit in Lord, who shall dwell in Thy 
tabernáculo tuo? aut quis re- tabernacle? or who shall rest 
quiéscet in monte sancto tuo? in Thy holy hill? He that walk- 
Qui ingréditur sine macula, eth without blemish, and work- 
et operátur justítiam. eth justice. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


306 


WEDNESDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


Postcommunion 


URIFIED by these sacred 
mysteries, O Lord, we ask 


AcRIS, Dómine, mysteriis 
expiáti: et véniam, que- 


that we may obtain pardon and sumus, consequámur, et grá- 


grace. Through our Lord. 


tiam. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 82: 9. 


Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 


ow down your heads to 
God. - 

Defend us, O Lord, with Thy 
protection, and keep us for- 
ever from all iniquity. Through 
our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


UMILIÁTE capita vestra 
Deo. 

Tua nos, Dómine, protec- 
tione defénde: et ab omni 
semper  iniquitáte — custódi. 
Per Dóminum. 


Wednesday, Third Week of Lent (Purple) 


STATION AT St. SIXTUS 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 30,7, 8 


UT I will hope in the Lord: 

1 will be glad, and re- 
joice in Thy mercy; for Thou 
hast regarded my humility. 
Ps. 30, 2. In Thee, O Lord, have 
I hoped, let me never be con- 
founded: deliver me in Thy 
justice, and rescue me. Y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


Go autem in Dómino 
Sperábo: exsultabo, et 
letábor in tua misericórdia: 
quia respexísti humilitátem 
meam. Ps. 30, 2. In te, Dó- 
mine, sperávi, non confündar 
in etérnum: in justítia tua 
lbera me, et éripe me. y. 
Glória: Patri. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


Gus us, we beseech Thee, 


O Lord, that, being taught 


RESTA nobis quaesumus, 
Dómine: ut salutaribus 


by salutary fasts, abstaining jejuniis eruditi, a nóxiis quo- 
also from baneful vices, we que vitiis abstinéntes, propi- 
may the more easily obtain Thy tiatiónem tuam facílius im- 
merciful forgiveness. Through petrémus. Per Dóminum. 
our Lord. 


wee Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


307 


Lesson. Ex. 20, 12-24 


Léctio libri Exodi, 


ze dicit Dóminus Deus: 

Honóra patrem tuum 
et matrem tuam, ut sis Jonge- 
yus super terram, quam Dó- 
minus Deus tuus dabit tibi. 
Non occídes. Non mechaberis. 
Non furtum fácies. Non loqué- 
ris contra próximum tuum 
falsum  testimónium. Non 
concupisces domum próximi 
iui: nec desiderábis uxórem 
ejus, non servum, non ancíl- 
lam, non bovem, non ásinum, 
nec ómnia, que ilius sunt. 
Cunctus autem pópulus vi- 
débat voces, et lámpades, et 
sónitum büccine, montémque 
fümántem: et pertérriti ac 
pavóre  concüssi, stetérunt 
procul, dicéntes Móysi: Ló- 
quere tu nobis, et audiémus: 
non loquátur nobis Dóminus, 
ne forte moriámur. Et ait 
Móyses ad pópulum: Nolite 
timére: ut enim probáret vos, 
venit Deus, et ut terror illfus 
esset in vobis, et non peccaré- 
tis. Stetitque  pópulus de 
longe, Móyses autem accéssit 
ad caliginem, in qua erat 
Deus. Dixit pretérea Dóminus 
ad Moysen: Hec dices fíliis 
Israél: Vos vidistis, quod de 
celo locütus sim vobis. Non 
faciétis deos argénteos, nec 
deos áureos faciétis vobis. 
Altáre de terra faciétis mihi, 
et offerétis super eo holo- 
cáusta et pacífica vestra, oves 
vestras, et boves in omni loco, 
in quo meémória füerit nómi- 
nis mel. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Exodus. 


aus saith the Lord God, 

Honor thy father and thy 
mother, that thou mayest be 
long-lived upon the land which 
the Lord thy God will give thee. 
Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt 
not commit adultery. Thou 
shalt not steal. Thou shalt not 
bear false witness against thy 
neighbor. Thou shalt not covet 
thy neighbor’s house; neither 
shalt thou desire his wife, nor 
his servant, nor his handmaid, 
nor his ox, nor his ass, nor 
anything that is his. And all 
the people saw the voices, and 
the flames, and the sound of 
the trumpet, and the mount 
smoking: and being terrified 
and struck with fear, they 
stood afar off, saying to Moses, 
Speak thou to us, and we will 
hear; let not the Lord speak to 
us, lest we die. And Moses said 
to the people, Fear not, for God 
is come to prove you, and.that 
the dread of Him might be in 
you, and you should not sin. 
And the people stood afar off, 
but Moses went to the dark 
cloud ‘wherein God was: and 
the Lord said to Moses, Thus 
shalt thou say to the children 
of Israel, You have seen that I 
have spoken to you from 
heaven. You shall not make 
gods of silver, nor shall you 
make to yourselves gods of 
gold. You shall make an altar 
of earth unto Me, and you shall 
Offer upon it your holocausts 
and peace offerings, your sheep 
and oxen, in every place where 
the memory of My name 
shall be. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


Gradual. Ps.6,3,4 


Have mercy on me, O Lord,  Miserére mei, Dómine, 
for I am weak: heal me, O quóniam infírmus sum: sana 
Lord. y. Ali my bones are trou- me, Dómine. y. Conturbata 
bled: and my soul is troubled sunt ómnia ossa mea: et 


308 


exceedingly. 


anima mea turbátà est valde. 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 15, 1-20 


®© Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew... ` 
T THAT lime, the scribes 
and pharisees came to 
Jesus from Jerusalem, saying, 
Why do Thy disciples trans- 
gress the tradition of the an- 
cients? for they wash not thelr 
hands when they eat bread. 
But He answering, said to them, 
Why do you also transgress the 
commandment of God for your 
tradition? For God said, Honor 
thy father and mother; and he 
that shall. curse father or 
mother, let him die the death 
But you say, Whosoever shall 
say to father or mother, The 
gift whatsoever  proceedeth 
from me, shall profit thee; and 
he shall not honor his father 
or his mother: and you have 
made void the commandment 
of God for your tradition. Ye 
hypocrites, well hath Isaias 
prophesied of you, saying, This 
people honoreth Me with their 
lips, but their heart is far 
from Me; and in vain do they 
worship Me, teaching doctrines 
and commandments of men. 
And having called together the 
multitudes unto Him, He said 
to them, Hear ye and under- 
stand: not that which goeth 
into the mouth defileth a man, 


"H8 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 

N ILLO témpore: Acces- 
BR ad Jesum ab 
Jerosólymis scribe et phar- 
isei, dicéntes: Quare disci- 
puli tui transgrediüntur tra- 
ditiónem  seniórum? Non 
enim lavant manus suas, cum 
panem mandücant. Ipse au- 
tem  respóndens, ait illis: 
Quare et vos transgredímini 
mandátum Dei propter tradi- 
liónem vestram? Nam Deus 
dixit: Honóra patrem, et 
matrem. Ei: Qui maledíxerit. 
patri, vel matri, morte mo: 
riátur. Vos autem dicitis: 
Quicümque dixerit patri, vel 
matri: munus quodcümque 
est ex me, tibi próderit: et 
non honorificábit patrem su- 
um, aut matrem suam: et 
frritum fecistis mandátum 
Dei propter traditiónem ves- 
tram. EHypócrite, bene pro- 
phetávit de vobis Isaias, di- 
cens: Pópulus hic lábiis me 
honórat: cor autem. eórum 
longe est a me. Sine causa au- 
tem colunt me, docéntes doc- 
trinas et mandáta hóminum. 
Et convocátis ad se turbis, 
dixit eis: Audite, et intelligite. 
Non quod intrat in os, coín- 
quinat hóminem: sed cuod 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


procédit: ex ore, hoc coínqui- 
nat hóminem. Tunc acce- 
déntes discípuli ejus, dixérunt 
ei: Scis quia phariszi, audito 
verbo hoc, scandalizáti sunt? 
At ille respóndens, ait: Omnis 
plantétio, quam non plantá- 
vit Pater meus czléstis eradi- 
cábitur. Sinite illos: cæci sunt, 
et duces cecérum. Cecus au- 
tem si ceco ducátum prestet, 
ambo in fóveam cadunt. Res- 
póndens autem Petrus, dixit 
ei: Edíssere nobis parábolam 
istam. At ille dixit: Adhuc 
et vos sine intelléctu estis? 
Non intellígitis, quia omne, 
quod in os intrat, in ventrem 
vadit, et in secéssum emitti- 
tur? Que autem procédunt de 
ore, de corde éxeunt, et ea 
coínquinant hóminem: de 
corde enim éxeunt cogita- 
tiónes male, homicídia, adul- 
téria, fornicatiónes, furta, 
falsa testimdnia, blasphémie. 
Hec sunt, que coinquinant 
hóminem. Non lotis autem 
mánibus manducáre, non co- 
inquinat hóminem. 


Offertory. 

Dómine, fac mecum miseri- 

córdiam tuam, propter nomen 

tuum: quia suávis est miseri- 
córdia tua. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


$09 


but what cometh out of the 
mouth, this defileth a man. 
Thcn came His disciples and 
said to Him, Dost Thou know 
that the pharisees, when they 
heard this word were scandal- 
ized? But He answering, said, 
Every plant which My heavenly 
Father hath not planted shall 
be rooted up. Let them alone, 
they are blind and leaders of 
the blind; and if the blind lead 
the blind, both fall into the pit. 
And Peter answering, said to 
Him, Expound to us this para- 
ble. But He said, Are you also 
yet without understanding? do 
you not understand, that what- 
Soever entereth into the mouth 
goeth into the belly, and is cast 
into the privy? but the things 
which proceed out of the mouth 
come forth from the heart, and 
those things defile a man: for 
from the heart proceed evil 
thoughts, murders, adulteries, 
fornications, thefts, false tes- 
timonies, blasphemies. These 
are. the things that defile a 
man: but to eat with un- 
washed hands doth not defile & 
man. 


Ps. 108, 21 

O Lord, be merciful to me 
for Thy name's sake, because 
Thy mercy is sweet. 


Secret 


^A(USCIPE, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, preces pópuli tui 
cum oblatiónibus hostiárum: 
et tua mystéria celebrántes, 
ab ómnibus nos defénde perí- 
culis. Per Dóminum. 


ECEIVE, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the prayers of 
Thy people, with offerings of 
sacrifices, and defend from all 
dangers them that celebrate 
Thy mysteries. Through our 
Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


310 THURSDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 
Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps. 15, 10. 


Thou hast made known to Notas mihi fecisti vias vite: 
me the ways of life: Thou shalt adimplébis me letitia cum 
fill me. with joy with Thy coun- vultu tuo, Dómine. 
tenance, O Lord. 


Postcommunion 
ay the heavenly banquet, ANCTÍFICET nos, Dómine, 
with which we have qua pasti sumus, mensa 


been regaled, sanctify us, O celéstis: et a cunctis erróribus 
Lord, and render us, forgiven expiátos, supérnis promis- 
all our. errors, fit subjects for siónibus reddat accéptos. Per 
the promises of heaven. Dóminum. 

Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 8. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 
ow down your heads to UMILIÁTE capita vestra 
God. Deo. 

Grant, we beseech Thee, O Concéde, quaesumus, omní- 
almighty God, that we, who potens Deus: ut, qui protec- 
Seek the favor of Thy protec- tiónis tue grátiam quaerimus, 
tion, may be delivered from all liberati a malis ómnibus, 
evil and serve Thee with a secüra tibi mente serviámus. 
quiet mind. Through our Lord. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Thursday, Third Week of Lent (Purple) 


Station AT Sts. Cosmas AND DAMIAN 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 
AM the salvation of the ALUS pópuli ego sum, dicit 
people, saith the Lord: Dóminus: de quacümque 


from whatever tribulation they tribulatióne clamáverint ad 
Shall cry to Me, I wil hear me, exáudiam eos: et ero 
them; and I will be their Lord illórum Dóminus in perpé- 
forever. Ps. 77, 1. Attend, O My tuum. Ps. 77, 1. Atténdite, 
people, to My law; incline your pópule meus legem meam: 
ear to the words of My mouth. inclináte aurem vestram in 
FK. Glory. verba oris mel, JY. Glória 
Patri. 
Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THURSDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


311 


Prayer 


AGN{FICET te, Dómine, 
@M sanct6érum  tuórum 
Cosme et Damiani beáta sol- 
émnitas: qua et illis glóriam 
sempitérnam, et opem nobis 
ineffábili providéntia contu- 
listi. Per Dóminum. 


page 
Lesson. 
Léctio Jeremiz Prophéte. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Factum est 
T verbum Dómini ad me, 
dicens: Sta in porta domus 
Dómini: et predica ibi ver- 
bum istud, et dic: Audíte 
verbum Dómini omnis Juda, 
qui ingredímini per portas 
has, ut adorétis Dóminum. 
Hsc dicit Dóminus exercítu- 
um Deus Israél: Bonas fácite 
vias vestras, et stüdia vestra: 
et babitábo vobiscum in loco 
isto. Nolite confidere in ver- 
bis mendácii, dicéntes: Temp- 
lum Dómini, templum Dó- 
mini, templum Dómini est. 
Quóniam si bene direxéritis 
vias vestras, et stüdia vestra: 
si fecéritis judicium inter 
virum et próximum ejus, 
ádvenæ, et pupíllo, et vidue 
non fecéritis calàmniam, nec 
Sánguinem innocéntem ef- 
fudéritis in loco hoc et post 
deos aliénos non ambulavéri- 
tis in malum vobismetipsis: 
habitabo vobiscum in loco 
isto: in terra, quam dedi pat- 
ribus vestris a seculo et usque 


in seculum: ait Déminus om-. 


nipotens, - 


ET the blessed feast of 

Thy saints, Cosmas and 
Damian, magnify Thee, O Lord, 
for on this day Thou didst, in 
Thine ineffable providence, 
confer on them everlasting 
glory, and on us the resource 
of their help. Through our 
Lord. 


DUE Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


Jer. 7, 1-7 


Lesson from Jeremias ihe 
Prophet. 
N THOSE days, the word of 
the Lord came to me, say- 
ing, Stand in the gate of the 
house of the Lord; and pro- 
claim there this word, and say, 
Hear ye the word of the Lord, 
all ye men of Juda, that enter 
in at these gates, to adore the 
Lord. Thus saith the Lord of 
hosts, the God of Israel, Make 
your ways and your doings 
good; and I will dwell with you 
in this place. Trust not in lying 
words, saying, The temple of 
the Lord, the temple of the 
Lord, it is the temple of the 
Lord. For if you will order well 
your ways.and your doings; if 
you will execute judgment be- 
tween a man and his neighbor; 
if you oppress not the stranger, 
the fatherless, and the widow, 
and shed not innocent blood in 
this place, and walk not after 
strange gods to your own hurt; 
I will dwell with you in this 
place; in the land which I gave 
to your fathers from the begin- 
ning, and forevermore: saith 
the Lord almighty. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


812 


THURSDAY, THIRD WEEK. OF LENT 


Gradual. Ps. 144, 15, 16 


The eyes of all hope in 
Thee, O Lord; and Thou givest 
them meat in due season. J. 
Thou openest Thy band, and 
fillest every, living creature with 
blessing. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Oculi ómnium in te sperant, 
Dómine: et tu das illis escam 
in témpore opportuno. P. 
Aperis tu manum tuam: et 
imples.omne ánimal irc 


. tióne. 


Gospel. Luke 4, 38-44 


53 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, Jesus, rising 
up out of the synagogue, 
went into Simon's house: and 
Simon's wife's mother was 
taken with a great fever, and 
they besought Him for her. And 
Standing over her, He com- 
manded the fever, and it left 
her: and immediately rising, 
She ministered to them. And 
when the sun was down, all 
they that had any sick with 
divers diseases, brought them 
to Him: but He laying His 
hands on every one of them, 
healed them. And devils went 
out from many, crying out, and 
saying, Thou art the Son of 
God. And rebuking them, He 
suftered them not to speak, for 
they knew that He was Christ. 
And when it was day, going out 
He went into a desert place; 
and the multitudes sought Him, 
and came unto Him; and they 
stayed Him that He should not 
depart from them. To whom He 
said, To other cities also I must 
preach the kingdom of God, for 
therefore am I sent. And He 
was preaching in the syna- 
gogues of Galilee, 


Offertory. 


If I shall walk in the midst 
of tribulation, Thou wilt 


H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Surgens 
Jesus de synagóga in- 
troífvit in domum Siménis. 
Bocrus autem Simónis tene- 
bátur magnis fébribus: et 
rogavérunt illum pro ea. Et 
stans super illam, imperavit 
febri: et dimísit illam. Et 
continuo surgens, ministrábat 
inis. Cum autem sol occidís- 
set, omines, qui habébant in- 
firmos  váriis languóribus, 
ducébant illos ad eum. At 
Ille singulis manus impónens, 
curábat eos. Exíbant autem 
deménia a multis clamántia, 
et dicéntia: Quia tu es Filius 
Dei: et increpans non sinébat 
ea loqui, quia sciébant ipsum 
esse Christum. Facta autem 
die egréssus ibat in desértum 
locum, et turbe requirébant 
eum, et venérunt usque ad 
ipsum: ‘et detinébant ilum 
ne discéderet ab eis. Quibus 
ille ait? Quia et áliis civitati- 
bus opórtet me evangelizare 
regnum Dei: quia ideo missus 
sum. Et erat predicans in syn- 
agógis Galilee, 


Ps. 137,7 
Si ambulávero in média 
tribulatiónis, vivificabis me, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


gre 


| 


| 


FRIDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


Dómine: et super iram in- 
imicórum meórum exténdes 
manum tuam, et salvum me 
Íáciet déxtera tua. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


313 


quicken me, O Lord: and Thou 
wilt stretch forth Thy hand 
against the wrath of my ene- 
mies; and Thy right hand shall 
save me, 


Secret 


TUÓRUM, Dómine, pretiosa 

morte justórum sacrifí- 
clum illud offérimus, de quo 
martyrium sumpsit omne 
princípium. Per Dóminum. 


E OFFER Thee, O Lord, in 

the meritorious death of 

Thy saints, this sacrifice, from 

which alone martyrdom hath 
sprung. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. 


Tu mandásti, mandáta tua 
custodíri nimis: útinam di- 
rigántur vie mese, ad custo- 
diéndas justificatiónes tuas. 


Ps. 118, 4, 5 


Thou hast commanded Thy 
commandments to be kept ex- 
ceedingly: O that my ways 
may be directed to keep Thy 
justifications. 


Postcommunion 


ir nobis, Dómine, sacra- 

ménti tui certa salvátio: 

que cum beatórum Mártyrum 

tuórum Cosme et Damiáni 

méritis Nagiarógums Per Dómi- 
num. 


AY We be allotted, O Lord, 

the salvation pledged by 

Thy sacrament, which we im- 

plore by the merits of Thy 

blessed martyrs Cosmas and 
Damian. Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page gae; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829 


Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
Deo. 

Subjéctum tibi pópulum, 
quesumus, Dómine, propi- 
tidtio cæléstis amplíficet: et 
tuis semper fáciat servire 
mandátis. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ow down your heads. to 
God. - 

May heavenly favor increase 
the people that is subject to 
Thee, O Lord, and ever make 
it to serve "Thy bidding. 
Through our Lord. 


Friday, Third Week of Went (Purple) 
Srarion AT ST. LAWRENCE IN LUCINA 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


314 


FRIDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


Introit. Ps. 85, 17 


How me, O Lord, a token 

for good: that they who 

hate me may see, and be con- 
founded because Thou, O Lord, 
hast helped me and hast com- 
forted me. Ps. 85, 1. Incline Thy 
ear, O Lord, and hear me: for 
I am needy and poor, Y. Glory. 


Ac mecum, Dómine, sig- 

num in bonum: ut 
videant, qui me odérunt, et 
confundántur: quóniam tu, 
Dómine, adjuvísti me, et con- 
solatus es me. Ps. 85, 1, In- 
clina, Dómine, aurem tuam, 
et exáudi me: quóniam inops 
et pauper sum ego. J. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


CCOMPANY Our fasts, we 

beseech, O Lord, with 
Thy benignant favor, that, as 
in the body we abstain from 
food, so in spirit we may re- 
frain from sin. Through our 
Lord. 


EJUNIA nostra, quesumus, 

Dómine, benígno favóre 
proséquere: ut, sicut ab ali- 
méntis abstinémus in córpo- 
re; ita & vítiis jejunémus in 
mente. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson. Numbers 20, 1, 3; 6-13 


Lesson from the Book of 
Numbers. 
N THOSE days: The children 
of Israel came together 
against Moses and Aaron 
and making a sedition, said: 
Give us water that we may 
drink. And Moses and Aaron 
leaving the multitude, went 
into the tabernacle of the 
covenant, and fell flat upon the 
ground, and cried to the 
Lord, and said: O Lord 
God, hear the cry of this peo- 
ple, and open to them Thy 
treasure, a fountain of living 
water, that being satisfied, 
they may cease to murmur, 
And the glory of the Lord ap- 
peared over them. And the 
Lord spoke to Moses saying: 
Take the rod, and assemble the 
people together, thou and 


Léctio libri Nümeri. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Convenérunt 
filii Israël  advérsum 
Moysen et Aaron: et versi in 
Sseditiónem, dixérunt: . Date 
nobis aquam, ut bibamus. In- 
gressisque Móyses et Aaron, 
dimíssa multitüdine, taber- 
náculum, federis, corruérunt, 
proniin terram, clamaverünt- 
que ad Dóminum, atque 
dixérunt: Dómine Deus, audi 
clamórem hujus pópuli et 
áperi eis thesáurum tuum, 
fontem aque vive, ut satiati, 
cesset murmurátio eórum. Et 
appáruit glória Dómini sv- 
per eos. Locutüsque est Dó- 
minus ad Móysen, dicens: 
Tolle virgam et cóngrega 
pópulum, tu et Aaron frater 
tuus, et loquímini ad petram 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TF 


FRIDAY, THIRD WEEK Of LENT 


coram eis, et illa, dabit aquas. 
Cumque edüxeris aquam de 
petra, bibet omnis multitüdo 
et juménta ejus. Tulit igitur 
Móyses virgam, que erat in 
conspéctu Dómini, sicut pre- 
céperat ei, congregáta mul- 
titüdine ante petram dixitque 
eis: Audite, rebélles et incré- 
uli: Num de petra hac vobis 
aquam  potérimus  ejícere? 
Cumque:elevásset Móyses ma- 
num, percütiens virga bis 
Silicem, egrésse sunt aque 
largissime, ita ut pópulus 
biberet, et juménta. Dixitque 
Dóminus ad Móysen et Aaron: 
Quia non credidistis mihi, ut 
sanctificarétis me coram filiis 
Israël, non introducétis hos 
pópulos in terram, quam dabo 
eis. Hzc est agua contradic- 
tiónis, ubi jurgáti sunt fili 
Israël contra Dóminum, et 
sanctificétus est in eis. 


315 


Aaron thy brother, and speak 
to the rock before them, and it 
shall yield waters. And when 
thou hast brought forth water 
out of the rock, all the multi- 
tudes and their cattle shall 
drink. Moses therefore took the 
rod, which was before the Lord, 
as He had commanded him, 
and having gathered together 
the multitude before the rock, 
he said to them: Hear, ye re- 
bellious and incredulous: Can 
we bring forth water out of this 
rock? And when Moses. had 
lifted up his hand, and struck 
the rock twice with the rod, 
there came forth water in 
great abundance, so that the 
people and their cattle drank, 
2nd the Lord said to Moses and 
Aaron: Because you have not 
believed me, to sanctify Me be- 
fore the children of Israel, you 
Shall not bring these people 
into the land, which I will give 


them. This is the water of contradiction, where the children 
of Israel strove with words against the Lord, and He was sanc- 


tified in them, 
Gradual. 


In Deo speravit cor meum, 
et adjütus sum: et reflóruit 
caro mea, ét ex voluntáte mea 
confitébor illi, V. Ad te, Dó- 
mine, clamávi: Deus meus, ne 
Síleas, ne discédas a me. : 


Ps.27,7,1 . 

In God hath my heart con- 
fided and I have been helped: 
and my flesh hath flourished 
again, and with my wil I will 
give praise to Him. Y. Unto 
Thee will I cry; O Lord: -O my 
God, be not Thou silent to me. 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 4, 5-42 


H| Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joannem, .. 
N ro témpore: Venit 
Jesus in civitátem Sa- 
marie, que dicitur Sichar: 
juxta predium, quod dedit 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 

T THAT time, Jesus came 

to a city of Samaria 

which is called Sichar, near the 

land which Jacob gave to his 


http://ccwatershed.org 


316 


Son Joseph. Now Jacob's well 
was there. Jesus therefore being 
wearled with His journey, sat 
thus on the well. It was about 
the sixth hour. There cometh a 
woman of Samaria to draw 
water. Jesus said to her, Give 
Me to drink, (For His disciples 
were gone into the city to buy 
meats). Then that Samaritan 
woman saith to Him, How dost 
Thou, being a Jew, ask of me 
to drink, who am a Samaritan 
woman? For the Jews do not 
communicate with the Samari- 
tans. Jesus answered and said 
to her, If thou didst know the 
gift of God, and Who He is 
that saith to thee, Give Me to 
drink; thou perhaps wouldst 
have asked of Him, and He 
would have given thee living 
water. The woman saith to 
Him, Sir, Thou hast nothing 
wherein to draw, and the well 
is deep; from whence then hast 
Thou living water? Art thou 
greater than our father Jacob, 
who gave us the well, and 
drank thereof himself, and his 
children, and his cattle? Jesus 
answered and said to her, Who- 
soever drinketh of this water 
shall thirst again; but he that 
shall drink of the water that I 
will give him shall not thirst 
forever; but the water that I 
will give him shall become in 
him a fountain of water, 
springing up into life everlast- 
ing. The woman saith to him, 
Sir, give me this water, that I 
may not thirst, nor come hither 
to draw. Jesus saith to her, 
Go, call thy husband and come 
hither. The woman answered 
and said, I have no husband. 
Jesus said to her, Thou hast 
said well, I have no husband, 


FRIDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


Jacob Joseph fílio suo. Erat 
autem ibi fons Jacob. Jesus 
ergo fatigátus ex itfnere, 
sedébat sic ‘supra fontem. 
Hora erat quasi sexta. Venit 
mulier de Samaria haurire 
aquam. Dicit ei Jesus: Da 
mihi bíbere. (Discípuli enim 
ejus abíerant in civitátem, ut 
cibos émerent). Dicit ergo ei 
mülier illa Samaritána: Quó- 
modo tu, Judaeus cum sis, 
bíbere a me poscis, que sum 
mülier Samaritana? non enim 
coutüntur Judei Samaritá- 
nis. Respóndit Jesus, et dixit 
ei: Si scires donum Dei, 
et quis est, qui dicit tibi: 
Da mihi bibere: tu fórsitan 
petísses ab eo, et dedísset tibi 
aquam vivam. Dicit ei mülier: 
Dómine, neque in quo háurias 
habes, et püteus altus est: 
unde ergo habes aquam 
vivam? Numquid tu major es 
patre nostro Jacob, qui dedit 
nobis püteum, et ipse ex eo 
bibit, et fílii ejus, et pécora 
ejus? Respóndit Jesus, et 
dixit ei: Omnis, qui bibit ex 
aqua hac, sítiet iterum: qui 
autem bíberit ex aqua quam 
ego dabo ei, non sitiet in 
etérnum: sed aqua, quam ego 
dabo ei, fiet in eo fons aque 
saliéntis in vitam extérnam. 
Dicit ad eum mülier: Dómine, 
da mihi hanc aquam, ut non 
sitiam, neque véniam huc 
hauríre, Dicit ei Jesus: Vade, 
voca virum tuum, et veni huc. 
Respóndit mülier, et dixit: 
Non hábeo virum. Dicit ei 
Jesus: Bene dixisti, quia non 
hábeo virum: quinque enim 
viros habuisti, et nune, quem 
habes, non est tuus vir: hoc 
vere dixisti. Dicit ei mülier: 
Dómine, vídeo quia prophéta 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FRIDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


es tu, Patres nostri in monte 
hoc: adoravérunt, et vos dícitis, 
quia Jerosólymis est locus, 
ubi adoráre opórtet. Dicit ei 
Jesus: Müller, crede mihi, 
quia venit hora, quando ne- 
que in monte hoc, neque in 
Jerosólymis adorabitis Pa- 
irem. Vos  adorátis quod 
nescítis: nos adorámus quod 
Scimus, quia salus ex Judaeis 
est. Sed. venit hora, et nunc 
est, quando veri adoratóres 
adorábunt Patrem in spiritu 
et veritáte. Nam et Pater tales 
querit, qui adórent eum. Spír- 
itus est Deus: et eos, qui 
adórant eum, in spíritu ef 
veritáte opórtet adoráre. Dicit 
ei mülier: Scio, quia Messías 
venit (qui dicitur Christus). 
Cum ergo vénerit: ille, nobis 
annuntiabit ómnia. Dicit ei 
Jesus: Ego sum, qui loquor 
tecum. Et contínuo venérunt 
discípuli ejus: et mirabántur 
quia cum muliere loguebátur. 
Nemo tamen dixit: Quid 
quzris, aut quid l6queris cum 
ea? Relíquit ergo hydriam 
suam mülier, et ábiit in civitá- 
tem, et dicit illis hominibus: 
Venite, et vidéte hóminem, 
qui dixit mihi ómnia que- 
cümque feci: numquid ipse 
est Christus? Exiérunt ergo 
de civitáte, et véniébant ad 
eum. Intérea rogabant eum di- 
scipuli,  dicéntes: ^ Rabbi, 
mandüca. Ille autem dicit eis: 
Ego cibum hábeo manducáre, 
quem vos nescítis. Dicébant 
ergo discípuli ad invicem: 
Numquid áliquis áttulit ei 
manducáre? Dicit eis Jesus: 
Meus cibus est, ut fáciam 
voluntátem ejus, qui misit 
me, ut perfíciam opus ejus. 
Nonne vos dícitis, quod adhuc 


317 


for thou hast had five hus- 
bands and he whom thou now 
hast is not thy husband. This 
thou hast said truly. The wo- 
man said to Him, Sir, I perceive 
that Thou art a prophet. Our 
fathers adored on this moun- 
tain; and You say that at Jeru- 
salem is the place where men 
must adore, Jesus saith to her, 
Woman, believe Me, that the 
hour cometh, when you shall 
neither on this mountain nor 
in Jerusalem adore the Father. 
You adore. that which you 
know not; we adore that which 
we know; for salvation is of the 
Jews. But the hour cometh, 
and now is, when the true 
adorers shall adore the Father 
in spirit and in truth. For the 
Father also seeketh: such to 
adore Him. God is a spirit; and 
they. that adore Him, must 
adore Him in spirit and in 
truth. The woman saith to 
Him, I know that the Messias 
cometh (Who is called Christ) ; 
therefore when He is come, He 
will tell us all things. Jesus 
saith to her, Iam He Who am 
speaking with thee. And imme- 
diately His disciples came: and 
they wondered that He talked 
with the woman; yet no man 
said, What seekest Thou, or 
why talkest Thou’ with her? 
The woman therefore left her 
waterpot and went her way into 
the city, and saith to the men 
there, Come, and see a man 
who has told me all. things 
whatsoever I have done: Is not 
He the Christ? They went 
therefore out of the: city, and 
came unto Him. In the mean- 
time, the disciples prayed Him 
saying, Rabbi, eat, But He said 
to them, I have meat to eat 


http://ccwatershed.org 


318 


which you know not, The dis- 
ciples therefore said one to an- 
other, Hath any man brought 
Him to eat? Jesus saith to 
them, My meat is to do the will 
of him that sent me, that 
I may perfect His work. Do 
you not say, there are yet 
four months, and then the 
harvest cometh? Behold I say 
to you, lift up your eyes, 
and see the countries, for they 
are white already to harvest. 
And he that reapeth receiveth 
Wages, and gathereth fruit unto 
life everlasting; that both he 
that soweth and he that reap- 
eth may rejoice together. For 
in this is the saying irue, thiat 
it is one man that soweth, and 
it is another that reapeth. I 
have sent you to reap that in 
which you did not labor: others 
have labored, and you have en- 
tered into their labors. Now of 
that city many of the Samari- 
tans believed in Him, for the 
word of the woman giving tes- 
fimony, He told me all things 
whatsoever I have done. So 
when. the Samaritans were 
come to Him, they desired Him 
ihat He would tarry there. And 


FRIDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


quátuor menses sunt, et 
messis venit? Ecce dico vobis: 
Leváte óculos vestros, et 
vidéte regiónes, quia alb» 
sunt jam ad messem. Et qui 
metit, mercédem. áccipit, et 
cóngregat fructum in vitam 
ætérnam: ut, et qui séminat, 
simul gáudeat, et qui metit. 
In hoc enim est verbum ver- 
um: quia álius est qui sémi- 
nat, et álius est qui metit. Ego 
misi vos métere quod vos non 
laborastis: alii laboravérunt, 
et vos in labóres eórum in- 
troístis, Ex civitáte autem illa 
credidérunt in eum Samari- 
tanórum, propter verbum 
mulieris testimónium perhi- 
béntis: Quia dixit mihi ómnia 
quecümque feci. Cum venís- 
sent ergo ad illum Samaritáni, 
rogavérunt eum, ut ibi 
manéret. Et mansit ibi duos 
dies. Et multo plures credidé- 
runt in eum propter ser- 
mónem ejus. Et mulieri di- 
cébant: Quia jam non propter 
tuam loquélam crédimus: ipsi 
enim audivimus, et scimus 
quia hic est vere Salvátor 
mundi. . 


He abode there two days. Andmany more believed in Him, 
because of His own word. And they said to the woman, We 
now believe, not for thy saying: for we ourselves have heard 
Him, and know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world. 


Offertory. Ps. 5, 3, 4 


Harken to the voice of my Inténde voci  oratiónis 
prayer, O my King and my mez, Rex meus, et Deus meus: 
God: for to Thee will I pray, quóniam ad te orábo, Dómine. 
O Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


EGARD with favor, we be- SPICE quesumus, Dó- 
LM, seech Thee, O Lord, the 


mine,  propítius ad 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


múnera, qui sacramus: ut 
tibi grata sint, et nobis salu- 
tária semper exsistant. Per 
Dóminum. 


318 


gifts which we consecrate, that 
they may be pleasing to Thee, 
and ever continue conducive to 
our salvation. Through our 
Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; th Secret, 
© God to Whom alone, page 829. pag third 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. 


Qui biberit aquam, quam 
ego dabo ei, dicit Dóminus, 
fiet in eo fons aque saliéntis 
in vitam ætérnam. 


John 4, 13, 14 


He that shall drink of the 
water that I will give him, it 
shall become in him a fountain 
of water springing up into life 
everlasting. 


Postcommunion 


UJUS nos, Dómine, per- 
céptio sacraménti 
mundet a crímine: et ad 
cmléstia regna perdücat. Per 
Dóminum. 


AY the receiving of this 
D sacrament, O Lord, puri- 
fy us from sin and bring us to 
the heavenly realms. Through 


our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page rr third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829 


Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
Deo. 

Presta, quesumus, omní- 

potens Deus: ut, qui in tua 


protectióne confídimus. 


cuncto nohis adversántia, te 
adjuvante, vincámus. Per 
Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ow down your heads to 
God. . 

Grant, we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we, who 
trust in Thy protection, may 
overcome by Thine assistance 
all those things which contend 
against us. Through our Lord. 


Saturday, Third Week of Lent (Purple) 
m STATION AT ST. SUSANNA 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. | 
Ps. 5, 2, 3 


ERBA mea áuribus pér- IVE ear, O Lord, to my 
cipe, Dómine, intéllige Words, understand my 
clamórem meum: inténde voci cry: barken to the voice of my 


Introit. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


320 


prayer. O my King and my 
God. Ps. 5, ¢. For to Thee will 
I pray: O Lord, in the morning 
Thou shalt hear my voice. Y. 
Glory. 


SATURDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


oretiónis mese, Rex meus, et 
Deus meus. Ps. 5, 4. Quén- 
jam ad te orábo, Dómine: 
mane exáudies vocem meam. 
¥. Glória Patri. 


: Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that we, 
who, afflicting ourselves, ab- 
stain from food, may, observing 
justice, refrain from sin. 
Through our Lord. 


RÆSTA, quaesumus, omni- 

potens Deus: ut, qui se, 
affligéndo carnem, ab ali- 
méntis' ábstinent; sectándo 
justitiam, a culpa jejünent. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson. Dan. 13, 1-9; 15-17; 19-30; 33-62 


Lesson from Daniel the 
Prophet. 
N THOSE days, there was a 
man that dwelt in Baby- 
lon, and his name was Jóakim; 
and he took a wife whose name 
was Susanna, the daughter of 
Helcias, & very beautiful wo- 
man, and one that feared God; 
for her parents, being just, had 
instructed their daughter ac- 
cording to the law of Moses. 
Now Joakim was very rich, and 
had an orebard near his house; 
and the Jews resorted to him, 
because he was the most hon- 
orable of them all, And there 
were two of the ancients of the 
people appointed judges that 
year, of whom the Lord said, 
Iniquity came out from Baby- 
lon from the ancient judges, 
that seemed to govern the peo- 
ple. These men frequented the 
house of Joakim, and all that 
had any matters of judgment 
came to them. And when the 
people departed away at noon, 
Susanna went in and walked in 


Léctio Daniélis Prophétz. 


N présus illis: Erat vir 

hábitans in Babylóne, et 
nomen ejus Jóakim: et accép- 
it uxórem nómine Susánnam, 
filiam Helciz, pulchram 
nimis, et timéntem Deum: 
paréntes enim illius, cum es- 
sent justi, erudiérunt fíliam 
suam secündum legem Móysi. 
Erat autem Jóakim divés 
valde, et erat ei pomárium, 
vicinum dómui suæ: et ad ip- 
sum confiuébant Judæi, eo 
quod esset honorabílior ómni- 
um. Et constituti sunt de 
pópulo duo senes jüdices in 
illo anno: de quibus locütus 
est Dóminus: Quia egréssa 
est iníquitas de Babylóne a 
senióribus judicibus, qui 
videbántur régere pópulum. 
Isti frequentabant domum 
Jóakim, et veniébant ad eos 
omnes, qui habébant judícia. 
Cum autem pópulus revertís- 
set per merídiem, ingrediebá- 
tur Susánna, et deambulábat 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
| 
| 


í 


) 


SATURDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


in pomário viri sui, Et vidé- 
bant eam senes quotídie in- 
grediéntem, et  deambulán- 
tem: et exarsérunt in con- 
cupiscéntiam ejus: et ever- 
térunt sensum suum, et de- 
clinavérunt óculos suos, ut 
non vidérent celum, neque 
recordaréntur judiciédrum 
justórum. Factum est autem, 
cum observárent diem aptum, 
ingréssa est aliquándo sicut 
heri et nudiustértius, cum du- 
ébus solis puéllis, voluftque 
lavári in pomario: stus 
quippe erat, et non erat ibi 
quisquam, preter duos senes 
abscénditos, et contem- 
plántes eam. Dixit ergo puél- 
lis: Afférte mibi óleum et 
smígmata, et óstia pomárii 
cláudite, ut laver. Cum au- 
tem egrésse essent puéll», 
surrexérunt duo senes, et ac- 
currérunt ad eam, et dixé- 
runt: Ecce (óstiaà pomárii 
clausa sunt, et nemo nos 
videt, et nos in concupis- 
céntia tui sumus: quam ob 
rem assentire nobis, et com- 
miscére nobiscum. Quod si 
nolüeris, dicémus contra te 
testimónium, quod füerit te- 
cum jüvenis, et ob hanc cau- 
sam emíseris puéllas a te. In- 
gémuit Susánna, et ait: An- 
güstie sunt mihi üándique: si 
enim hoc égero; mors mihi 
est: s) autem non égero, non 
effügiam manus vestras. Sed 
mélius est mihi absque ópere 
incídere in marnus vestras, 
quam peccáre in conspéctu 
Dómini. Et exclamávit voce 
magna Susinna: exclama- 
vérunt autem et senes advér- 
sus eam, Et cucürrit unus ad 
éstia pomárii, et apérüit. Cum 
ergo audissent clamórem 


821 


her husband's orchard. And the 
old men saw her going in every 
day, and walking; and they 
were inflamed with lust to- 
wards.her: and they perverted 
their own mind, and turned 
away: their eyes, that they 
might not look unto heaven, 
nor remember just judgments, 
And it fell out, as they 
watched a fit day, she went in 
on a time, as yesterday. and the 
day before, with two maids 
only, and was desirous to wash 
herself in the orchard, for it 
was hot weather. And tbere 
was nobody there, but the two 
old men that had hid them- 
selves and were beholding her. 
So she said to the maids, bring 
me oil and washing-balls, and 
shut the doors of the orchard, 
that I may wash me. Now when 
the maids were gone forth, the 
two elders arose and ran to her 
and said, Behold the doors of 
the orchard are shut, and no- 
body seeth us, and we are in 
love with thee; wherefore con- 
sent to us and lie with us. But 
if thou wilt not, we will bear 
witness against thee, that a 
young man was with thee, and 
therefore thou didst send away 
thy maids from thee. Susanna 
sighed, and said, I am strait- 
ened on every side: for if I da 
this thing, it is death to me; 
and if I do it not, I shall not 
escape your hands. But it is 
better for me to fall into your 
hands without doing it, than to 
sin in the sight of the Lord. 
With that Susanna cried out 
with a loud voice; and the eld- 
ers also cried out against her. 
And one of them ran to the door 
of the orchard and opened 1t. 
So when the servants of tha 


http://ccwatershed.org 


322 


house beard the cry in the or- 
chard, they rushed in by the 
back door to see what was the 
matter. But after the old men 
had spoken, the servants were 
greatly ashamed; for never had 
ihere been any such word said 
of Susanna. And on the next 
day, when the people were 
come to Joakim her husband, 
the two elders,.also came full 
Of wicked device against Su- 
Sanna, to put her to death. 
And they said before the peo- 
ple: Send to Susanna, daugh- 
ter of Helcias the wife of Joa- 
kim. And presently they sent; 
and she came with her parents, 
&nd children, and all her kin- 
dred. Now her friends and all 
her acquaintance wept. But the 
two elders rising up in the 
midst of the people, laid their 
hands upon her head; and she 
weeping looked up to heaven, 
for her heart had confidence tn 
the Lord. And the elders said: 
As we walked in the orchard 
alone, this woman came in with 
two maids, and shut the doors 
of the orchard, and sent away 
the maids from her. Then a 
young man that was there hid 
came to her, and lay with her. 
But we that were in a corner of 
the orchard, seeing this wick- 
edness, ran up to them, and we 
saw them lie together; and him 
indeed we could not take, be- 
cause he was-stronger than we, 
and. opening the doors he 
leaped out; but having taken 
this woman, we asked who the 
young man was, but she would 
not tell us: of this thing we are 
witnesses. The multitude be- 
lieved them as being the elders 
and the judges of the people, 
and they condemned her to 


SATURDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


fámuli domus in pomário, ir- 
ruérunt per postícum, ut vid- 
érent quidnam esset. Post- 
quam autem senes locúti 
sunt, erubuérunt servi vehe- 
ménter: quia numquam dic- 
tus fúerat sermo hujuscé- 
modi de Susánna. Et facta 
est dies crástina. Cumque 
venisset pópulus ad Joakim 
virum ejus, venérunt et duo 
Senióres pleni iníqua cogita- 
tióne advérsus Susánnam, ut 
interficerent eam. Et dix- 
érunt coram pópulo: Mittite 
ad Susannam filiam Helcíe, 
uxórem Jóakim. Et statim 
misérunt. Et venit cum par- 
éntibus, et filiis, et univérsis 
cognátis suis. Flebant ígitur 
sui, ef omnes qui nóverant 
eam. Consurgéntes autem duo 
senióres in médio pópuli, po- 
suérunt manus suas super 
caput ejus. Que flens sus- 
péxit ad celum: erat enim 
cor ejus fidáciam habens in 
Dómino. Et dixérunt sen- 
ióres: Cum deambularémus 
in pomario soli, ingréssa est 
hec cum duábus puéllis: et 
clausit éstia. pomárii, et dimi- 
sit a se puéllas. Venítque ad 
eam adoléscens, qui erat ab- 
scénditus, et concübuit cum 
ea. Porro nos, cum essémus in 
&ugulo pomárii, vidéntes in- 
iquitatem, cucürrimus ad eos, 
et vidimus eos páriter com- 
miscéri. Et illum quidem non 
quívimus comprehéndere, 
quia £fórtior nobis erat, et 
apértis éstiis exsilivit: hanc 
autem cum apprehendiss¢é- 
mus, interrogávimus, quis- 
nam esset adoléscens, et nó- 
luit indicáre nobis: nujus rei 
testes sumus.  Crédidit eis 
multitüdo quasi sénibus, et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY, THIRD WEEK OP LENT 


judicibus pópuli, et condem- 
navérunt eam ad mortem. 
Exclamávit autem voce mag- 
na Susanna, et dixit: Deus 
etérne, qui absconditórum es 
cégnitor, qui nosti ómnia án- 
tequam fiant, tu scis quóniam 
falsum testimónium tulérunt 
contra me: et ecce mórior, 
cüm nihil horum fécerim, 
quae isti malitióse composu- 
érunt advérsum me. Exau- 
dívit autem Dóminus vocem 
ejus. Cumque ducerétur ad 
mortem, suscitávit Dóminus 
spfritum sanctum püeri jun- 
iéris, cujus nomen Daniel. Et 
exclamávit voce magna: 
Mundus ego sum a sanguine 
hujus. Et convérsus omnis 
pópulus ad eum, dixit: Quis 
est iste sermo, quem tu locü- 
tus es? Qui cum staret in 
médio eórum, ait: Sic fátui, 
filii Israël, non judicantes, 
neque quod verum est cog- 
noscéntes, condemnástis ffi- 
jam Israél? Revertimini ad 
judicium, quia falsum testi- 
mónium locüti sunt advérsus 
eam. Revérsus est ergo póp- 
ulus cum festinatiéne, Et 
dixit ad eos Dániel: Separáte 
illos ab invicem procul, et di- 
judicábo eos. Cum ergo di- 
visi essent alter ab dltero, vo~ 
cávit unum de eis, et dixit ad 
eum: Inveteráte diérum ma- 
lórum, nunc venérunt peccáta 
tua, qui operabáris prius: jú- 
dicans judícia injüsta, inno- 
céntes ópprimens, et dimít- 
tens nóxios, dicénte Dómino: 
Innocéntem et justum non 
interfícies. Nunc ergo si vi- 
disti eam, dic sub qua árbore 
víderis eos colloquéntes sibi. 
Qui ait: Sub schino. Dixit 
putem Daniel: Recte mentí- 


823 


death. Then Susanna cried out 
with a loud voice, and said: O 
eternal God, Who knowest hid- 
den things, Who knowest all 
things before they come to 
pass: Thou knowest that they 
have borne false witness 
against me, and behold I 
must die, whereas I have done 
none of these things which 
these men have maliciously 
forged against me. And the 
Lord heard her voice. And 
when she was led to be put to 
death, the Lord raised up the 
holy spirit of a young boy, 
whose name was Daniel. And 
he cried out with a loud voice, 
I am clear from the blood of 
this woman. Then the people 
turning themselves towards 
him, said, What meaneth this 
word that thou hast spoken? 
But he standing in the midst 
of them, said, Are ye so fool- 
ish, ye children of Israel, that 
without examination or knowl- 
edge of the truth, you have 
condemned a daughter of Is- 
rael? Return to judgment; for 
they have borne false witness 
against her. So all the people 
turned again in haste. And 
Daniel said to them, Separate 
these two far from one another, 
and I wil examine them. So 
when they were put asunder 
one from the other, he called 
one of them, and said to him, 
O thou that art grown old in 
evil days, now are thy sins 
come out, which thou hast 
committed before, in judging 
unjust judgments, oppressing 
the innocent; and letting the 
guilty to go free, whereas the 
Lord saith, The innocent and 
the just, thou shalt not kill. 
Now then, if thou sawest her. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


324 


tell me under what tree thou 
Sawest them conversing to- 
gether. He said: Under a mas- 
tic-tree. And Daniel said, Well 
hast thou lied against thy own 
head, for behold the angel of 
God having received the sen- 
tence of Him, shall cut thee in 
two. And having put him aside, 
he commanded that the other 
should come, and he said to 
him: O thou seed of Chanaan 
and not of Juda, beauty hath 
deceived thee, and lust hath 
perverted thy heart. Thus did 
you to the daughters of Israel, 
and they for fear conversed 
with you; but a daughter of 
Juda would not abide your 
wickedness. Now therefore teli 
me, under what tree didst thou 
take them conversing together? 
And he answered, Under a 
holm-tree. And Daniel said to 
him, Well hast thou also. lied 
against thy own head, for the 
angel of the Lord waiteth with 
a sword to cut thee in two, and 
to destroy you. With that all 
the assembly cried out with & 
loud voice, and they blessed 
God, Who saveth them that 
trust in Him. And they rose up 
against the two elders (for 


SATURDAY THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


tus es in caput tuum, Ecce 
enim Angelus Dei, accépta 
senténtia ab eo, scindet te 
médium. Et, amóto eo, jus- 
sit veníre álium, et dixit ei: 
Semen Chánaan, et non Juda, 
Species decépit te, et con- 
cupiscéntia  subvértit cor 
tuum: sic: faciebátis filiábus 
Israël, et ille timéntes loque- 
bántur vobis: sed fília Juda 
non  sustínuit  iniquitátem 
vestram. Nunc ergo dic mihi, 
sub gua árbore comprehén- 
deris eos loquéntes sibi. Qui 
ait: Sub prino. Dixit autem 
ei Dániel: Recte mentítus es 
et tu in caput tuum: manet 
enim Angelus Dómini, gládi- 
um habens, ut secet te mé- 
dium, et interfíciat vos.: Ex- 
clamávit itaque omnis. cetus 
voce magna, et benedixérunt 
Deum, qui salvat sperántes in 
se. Et consurrexérunt ad- 
vérsus duos senióres (convic- 
erat enim eos Dániel ex ore 
dixísse suo falsum testimóni- 
um) = fecertintque eis ‘sicut 
male égerant advérsus proxi- 
mum: et interfecérunt eos, et 
salvatus est sanguis innóxius 
in die illa. 


Daniel had convicted them of false witness by their own 
mouth), and they did to them as they had maliciously dealt 
with their neighbor, to fulfil] the law of Moses; and they put 
them to death, and innocent blood was saved in that day. 


Gradual. Ps. 22, 4 


If I should walk in the midst Si ámbulem in médio um- 
of the shadow of death I will bre mortis, non timébo mala: 
fear no evils; for Thou art with quóniam tu mecum es, Dó- 
me, O Lord. Y. Thy rod and mine. JY. Virga tua, et bácu- 
Thy staff they have comforted lus tuus, ipsa me consoláta 
me. sunt, 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY, THIRD WEEK OF LENT 


325 


Gospel. John 8, 1-11 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
£élii secundum Joánnem. ` 
N ILLO témpore: Perréxit 
Jesus in montem Olivéti: 
et dilüculo íterum venit in 
templum, et omnis pópulus 
venit ad eum, et sedens docé- 
bat eos.  Addücunt autem 
scribe, et pharisei mulíerem 
in adultério deprehénsam: et 
Statuérunt eam in médio, et 
dixérunt ei: Magister hec 
mülier modo deprehénsa est 
in adultério. In lege autem 
Móyses mandávit nobis hu- 
jüsmodi lapidáre. Tu ergo 
quid dicis? Hoc autem dicé- 
bant tentántes eum, ut pos- 
sent accusáre eum. Jesus au- 
tem inclinans. se deórsum, 
digito scribébat in terra. Cum 
ergo perseverárent interro- 
gántes eum, eréxit se, et dixit 
eis: Qui sine peccáto est ves- 
trum, primus in illam lápi- 
dem mittat. Et íterum se in- 
clinans, scribébat in terra. 
Audiéntes autem unus post 
unum exíbant, incipiéntes & 
Senióribus: et remánsit solus 
Jesus, et mülier in médio 
stans.  Erigens autem se 
Jesus, dixit ei: Mülier, ubi 
sunt, qui te . àccusábant? 
nemo te condemnávit? Que 
dixit: Nemo, Dómine. Dixit 
autem Jesus: Nec ego te con- 
demnábo: Vade, et jam ám- 
plius noli peccáre. 


Offertory. 

Gressus meos dírige secün- 

dum elóquium tuum: ut non 

dominétur mei omnis injustí- 
tia, Dómine. 


. Offertory Prayers, page 767. | 


*& Continuation -of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John, 
T. THAT time, Jesus 
went to Mount Olivet; 
and early in the morning He 
came again into the temple, 
and all the people came to 
Him, and sitting down He 
taught them. And the scribes 
and pharisees bring unto Him 
a woman taken in adultery; 
and they set her in the midst, 
and said to Him, Master, this 
woman was even now taken in 
adultery. Now Moses in the law 
commanded us to stone such an 
one. But what sayest Thou? 
And this they said tempting 
Him, that they might accuse 
Him. But Jesus bowing Himself 
down, wrote with: His finger on 
the ground. When therefore 
they continued asking.Him, He 
lifted up Himself, and said to 
them, He that is without sin 
among you, let him first cast 
a stone at her; and again stoop- 
ing down, He wrote on the 
ground. But they hearing this, 
went out one by one, beginning 
at the eldest; and Jesus alone 
remained, and the woman 
standing in the midst. Then 
Jesus lifting up Himself, said to 
her, Woman, where are they 
that accuse thee? Hath no man 
condemned thee? Who said, No 
man, Lord. And Jesus said, 
Neither wil I condemn thee. 
Go, and now sin no more, 


Ps. 118, 133 

Direct my steps according to 
Thy word: that no iniquity may 
have dominion over me, O Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


326 FOURTH SUNDAY OF LENT 


Secret 
RANT, we beseech thee, O ONCÉDE, quesumus, om- 
almighty God, that the nípotens Deus: ut hu- 


gift of this sacrifice, offered to jus sacrificii munus oblátum, 
Thee, may ever purge us of all fragilitatem nostram ab omni 
evil and fortify us. Through our malo purget semper, et mün- 
Lord. iat. Per Dóminum. 

Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. 

Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. John 8, 10, 11 
Hath- no man condemned Nemo te condemnávit, mü- 
thee, woman? No man, Lord: lier? Nemo, Dómine. Nec 
Neither will I condemn thee: ego te condemnábo: Jam ám- 
now sin no more. plius noli peccáre. 


Postcommunion 


E BESEECH Thee, O al- UXSUMUS,  omnípotens 

mighty God, that we Deus: ut inter ejus 
may be numbered among the membra numerémur, cujus 
members of Him with whose córpori communicámus, et 
body and blood we enjoy com- sánguini. Qui tecum vivit. 
munion. Who with Thee liveth. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 
ow down your heads to UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
God. Deo. 

Stretch forth to Thy faith- ^ Preténde, Dómine, fidéli- 
ful, O Lord, the right hand of bus tuis déxteram cæléstis 
Thy heavenly aid, that they auxilii: ut te toto corde per- 
may seek Thee with all their quírant; et que digne póstu- 
hearts, and may be worthy to lant, consequi mereántur. Per 
obtain what they ask. Through Dóminum. 
our Lord. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Fourth Sunday of Lent (Purple or Rose) 
STATION AT Hoty Cross IN JERUSALEM 
Sunday of the First Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Is. 66, 10, 11 


EJOICE, O Jerusalem, and ÆTÁRE, Jerúsalem: et 
come together all you convéntum fácite, om- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FOURTH SUNDAY OF LENT 327 


hes qui diligitis eam: gaudéte 
cum letitia, qui in tristitia 
fuistis: ut exsultétis, et satié- 
mini ab ubéribus consola- 
tionis vestre. Ps. 121, 1. Læ- 
tatus sum in his, que dicta 
sunt mihi: in domum Dó- 
mini fbimus. Y. Glória Patri. 


that love her; rejoice with joy, 
you that have been in sorrow: 
that you may exult and be 
filled from the breasts of your 
consolation. Ps. 121, 1. I re- 
joiced at the things that were 
said to me: We shall go into 
the house of the Lord. J. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. Glória is omitted. 


Prayer 


ONCÉDE, quaesumus, om- 

nípotens Deus: ut, qui 
ex mérito nostre  actiónis 
affligimur, tue grátie conso- 
latióne respirémus. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Gu we beseech Thee, C 
almighty God, that we, 
Who justly suffer for our deeds, 
may be relieved by the conso- 
lation of Thy grace. Through 
our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Epistle. Gal. 4, 22-31 


Léctio Epístole beáti Paull 
Apóstoli ad Gálatas. 


RATRES: Scriptum est: 

Quóniam Abraham du- 
os filios hábuit; unum de 
ancilla, et unum de líbera. 
Sed qui de ancílla, secándum 
carnem natus est: qui autem 
de líbera, per repromissión- 
em: que sunt per allegoríam 
dicta. Hec enim sunt duo 
testaménta. Unum quidem 
in monte Sina, in servitütem 
génerans: que est Agar: Sina 
enim mons est in Arabia, qui 
conjünctus est ei, que hunc 
est Jerüsalem, et servit cum 
filiis suis. Illa autem, que 
sursum est Jerüsalem, libera 
est, que est mater nostra. 
Scriptum est enim: Lætáre, 
stérilis, que non paris: erüm- 
pe, et clama, que non pár- 
turis: quia multi filii desérte, 
magis quam ejus, que habet. 


Lesson from ihe Epistle of 


blessed Paul the Apostle to the 


Galatians. 
RETHREN: It is written 
that Abraham had two 
sons; the one by a bond-wo- 
man, and the other by a free- 
woman, But he who was of the 


bond-woman was born accord- 


ing to the flesh; but he of the 
free-woman was by promise. 
Which things are said by an 
allegory. For these are the two 
testaments: the one from 
Mount Sina, engendering unto 
bondage, which is Agar: for 
Sina is a mountain in Arabia, 
which hath affinity to that Je- 
rusalem which now is, and is 
in bondage with her children: 
but that Jerusalem which is 
above is free, Which is our 
mother, For it is written, Re- 


joice, thou barren that bearest 


not; break forth and cry, thou 
that travailest not; for many 


http://ccwatershed.org 


828 


are the children of the deso- 
late, more than of her that 
hath a husband. Now we, breth- 
ren, as Isaac was, are the chil- 
dren of promise. But as then 
he that was born according to 
the fiesh persecuted him that 
was after the spirit, so also it is 
now. But what saith the Scrip- 
ture? Cast out the bond-woman 
and her son; for the son of the 
bond-woman shall not be heir 
with the. son of the free-wo- 
man. So then, brethren, we-are 
not the children of the bond- 


FOURTH SUNDAY OF LENT 


virum. Nos autem, fratres, 
gecündum, Isaac promissiónis 
filii sumus. Sed quómodo 
tunc is, qui secündum carnem 
natus füerat, persequebátur 
eum, qui secündum spíritum: 
ita et nunc. Sed quid dicit 
Scriptura? Ejice ancíllam, et 
filium ejus: non enim.heres 
erit fílius ancílle cum fílio 
lbere. Itaque, fratres, non 
sumus ancille fíli, sed líb- 
ere: qua libertáte. _ Christus 
nos liberávit. 


woman, but of the free; by the ffesdom wherewith Christ hath 


made us free. 


Gradual. : Ps. 121,1,7 


I rejoiced at the things that 


Letatus sum in his, que 


were said to me: We shall go dicta sunt mihi: in domum 
into the house of the Lord. Dómini fbimus. V. Fiat pax 
X. Let peace be in thy strength, in virtáte tua: et abundéntia 
and abundance in thy towers. in turribus tuis. 


Tract. Ps. 124, 1, 2 


They that trust in the Lord Qui confidunt in Dómino, 
shall be as Mount Sion: he sicut mons Sion: non com- 
shall not be moved forever that movébitur in ztérnum, qui 
dwelleth' in Jerusalem. Y. hábitat in Jerúsalem.  J. 
Mountains are round about it: Montes in circüitu ejus: et 
so thé Lord is round about His Dóminus in circüitu pópuli 
people, from henceforth now sui ex hoc nunc, et usque in 


and for ever. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


seculum. 


Gospel. John 6, 1-15 


& Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime, Jesus went 

over the Sea of Galilee, 

which is that of Tiberias; and 
a great multitude followed Him, 
because they saw the miracles 
which He did on them that 


"B Sequéhtia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joannem, 
N ILLO témpore: Ablit Je- 
sus trans mare Galiles, 
quod est Tiberiadis: et seque- 
bátur eum multitádo magna, 
quia vidébant signa, que fa- 
ciébat super his, qui infirma- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FOURTH SUNDAY OF LENT 329 


bántur. Sübiit ergo in mon- 
tem Jesus: et ibi sedébat cum 
discípulis suis. Erat autem 
próximum Pascha, dies fes- 
tus Judeórum. Cum suble- 
vásset ergo óculos Jesus, et 
vidísset quia multitüdo máx- 
ima venit ad eum, dixit ad 
Philippum: Unde emémus 
panes, ut mandücent hi? Hoc 
autem dicébat tentans eum: 
ipse enim sciébat quid esset 
facturus. Respdndit ei Phil- 
ippus: Ducentórum denarior- 
um panes non sufficiunt eis, 
ut unusquísque módicum quid 
accipiat. Dicit ei unus ex 
discípulis ejus, Andréas fra- 
ter Simónis Petri: Est puer 
unus hic, qui habet quinque 
panes hordeáceos, et duos 
pisces: sed hzc quid sunt in- 
ter tantos? Dixit ergo Jesus: 


Fácite hómines discümbere. 


Erat autem fenum multum 
in loco. Discubuérunt ergo 
viri, número quasi quinque 
millia.  Accépit ergo Jesus 
panes: et cum grátias egísset, 
distríbuit discumbéntibus; 
simíliter et ex píscibus quan- 
tum volébant. Ut autem im- 
pléti sunt, dixit discípulis 
suis: Collígite que superav- 
érunt fragménta, ne péreant. 
Collegérunt ergo, et implev- 
érunt  duódecim — cóphinos 
fragmentórum ex quinque 
panibus hordeáceis, que sup- 
erfuérunt his, qui manducá- 
verant. Illi ergo hómines cum 
vidíssent quod Jesus fécerat 
signum, dicébant: Quia hic 
est vere Prophéta, qui ven- 
türus est in mundum. Jesus 
ergo cum cognovisset quia 
ventüri essent ut ráperent 
eum, et fácerent eum regem, 


were diseased. Jesus therefore 
went up into à mountain, and 
there He sat with His disciples. 
Now the pasch, the festival- 
day of the Jews, was near at 
hand. When Jesus therefore 
had lifted up his eyes, and seen 
that a very great multitude 
cometh to Him, He said to 
Philip Whence shall we buy 
bread that these may eat? And 
this He said to try him; for He 
Himself knew what He would 
do. Philip answered, Two hun- 
dred pennyworth of bread is 
not sufficient for them, that 
every one may take a little. One 
of His disciples, Andrew, the 
brother of Simon Peter, saith 
to Him, There is a boy here 
that hath five barley loaves and 
two fishes; but what are these 
among so many? Then Jesus 
said, Make the men sit down. 


‘Now there was much grass in 


the place. The men therefore 
sat down, in number about five 
thousand, And Jesus took the 
loaves; and when He had given 
thanks, He distributed to them 
that’ were set down. In like 
manner also of the fishes, as 
much as they would. And when 
they were filled, He said to His 
disciples, Gather up the frag- 
ments that remain, lest they be 
lost. They gathered up there- 
fore, and filled twelve baskets 
with the fragments of the five 
barley loaves, which remained 
over and above to them that 
had eaten. Now those men, 
when they had seen what a 
miracle Jesus had done, said, 
This is of a truth the prophet 
that is to come into the world. 
Jesus therefore, when He knew 
that they would come to take 


http://ccwatershed.org 


330 FOURTH SUNDAY OF LENT 


Him by force and make Him fugit fterum in montem ipse 
king, fled again into the moun- solus. 
tain Himself alone. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 134, 3, 6. 


Praise ye the Lord, for He — Laudáte Dóminum, quia 
is good: sing ye to His name, benignus est: psállite nómini 
for He is sweet: whatsoever He ejus, quóniam suávis est: óm- 
pleased He hath done in nia quecümque vóluit, fecit 
heaven and in earth. in celo et in terra. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
E BESEECH Thee, O Lord, AcRIFÍCIS preséntibus, 
look favorably upon the Dómine, quesumus, in- 


Sacrifices here before Thee, ténde placátus: et devotióni 
that they may profit us both nostre profíciant, et salüti. 
for devotion and for salvation. Per Dóminum. 

Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps. 121, 3, 4 


Jerusalem, which is built as Jerúsalem, que zdificátur 
& city, which is compact to- ut cívitas, cujus participátio 
gether; for thither did the ejus in idípsum: illuc enim 
tribes go up, the tribes of the ascendérunt tribus, tribus Dó- 
Lord, to praise Thy name, O mini, ad confiténdum. nóm- 
Lord. : ini tuo, Dómine. 


Postcommunion 


RANT US; We beseech Thee, A NOBIS, quesumus, mis- 
O merciful God, that we D éricors Deus: ut sancta 
may treat with unfeigned ven- tua, quibus incessánter explé- 
eration and ever receive with mur, sincéris tractémus obse- 
heartfelt faith Thy holy rites quiis, et fidéli semper mente 
Which we constantly celebrate, sumámus. Per Dóminum. 
Through our Lord. 


‘Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MONDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


Monday, Fourth Week of Lent (Purple) 
STATION AT THE FOUR HOLY CROWNED MARTYRS 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


332 


Introit. Ps. 53, 3, 4 


EUS, in nómine tuo sal- 

vum me fac, et in vir- 

tate tua libera me: Deus, ex- 

audi oratiónem meam: áuri- 

bus pércipe verba oris mei. 

Ps. 53, 5. Quóniam aliéni in- 

surrexérunt in me: et fortes 

quesiérunt ánimam meam. 
¥. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


AvE me, O God, by Thy 

name, and in Thy 
strength deliver me: O God, 
hear my prayer, give ear to the 
words of my mouth. Ps. 53, 5. 
For strangers have risen up 
against me: and the miglity 
have sought after my soul. V. 
Glory. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


RESTA, quaesumus, omní- 

potens Deus: ut ob- 
&ervatiónes sacras 4nnua de- 
votióne recoléntes, et córpore 
tibi placeámus, et mente. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, pa 
page 828. 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that, keep- 

ing the sacred observances with 
devotion year by year, we may, 
both in body and soul, be pleas- 
ing to Thee. Through our Lord. 


page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


Lesson. 3 Kings 3, 16-28 


Léctio líbri Regum. 


N DIÉBUS ills: Venérunt 

duse mulíeres meretríces 
ad regem Salomónem, stet- 
erüntque coram eo, quarum 
una ait: Obsecro, mi dómine: 
ego et mülier hzc habitabá- 
mus in domo una, et péperi 
apud eam in cubículo. Tértia 
autem die postquam ego pé- 
pri, péperit et hzc: et erámus 
simul, nullisque álius nobis- 
cum in domo, excéptis nobis 
duábus. Mórtuus est autem 
fílius mulíeris hüjus nocte: 
dórmiens quippe oppréssit 
cum. Et consürgens intem- 
Béstz noctis siléntio, tulit ffl- 
ium meum de látere meo an- 
cílle tus dormiéntis, et col- 


Lesson from the Book of 
Kings. 
N THOSE days, there came 
two women that were har- 
lots, to King Solomon, andstood 
before him: and one of them 
said, I beseech thee, my lord, 1 
and this woman dwelt in one 
house and I was delivered of a 
child with her in the chamber; 
and the third day after that I 
was delivered, she also was de- 
livered: and we were together, 
and no other person with us in 
the house, only we- two; and 
this woman’s child died in the 
night, for in her sleep she over- 
laid him; and rising in the dead 
time of the night, she took my 
child from my side, while I thy 
handmaid was asleep, and laid 


http://ccwatershed.org 


332 


it in her bosom, and laid her 
dead child in my bosom. And 
when I rose in the morning to 
give my child suck, behold it 
was dead: but considering him 
more diligently when it was 
clear day, I found that it was 
not mine which I bore. And the 
other woman answered, It is 
not so as thou sayest, but thy 
child is dead and mine is alive. 
On the contrary, she said, Thou 
liest, for my child liveth and 
thy child is dead: and in this 
manner they strove before the 
king. Then said the king, the 
one saith, My child is alive, 
and thy child is dead; and the 
other answereth, Nay, but thy 
child is dead and mine liveth. 
The king therefore said, Bring 
me a sword; and when they 
had brought a sword before the 
king, Divide, said he, the liv- 
ing child in two, and give half 
to the one, and half to the 
other. But the woman whose 
child was alive said to the king 
(for her bowels were. moved 
upon her child) , 1 beseech thee, 
my lord, give her the child alive, 
and do not kill it. But the other 
said, Let it be nelther mine nor 
thine, but divide it. The king 
answered and said, Give the 
living child to this woman, and 
let it not be killed; for she is 
the mother thereof. And all 
Israel heard the judgment 
which the king had judged, and 
they feared the king, seeing 
that the wisdom of God was in 
him to do judgment, 


MONDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


locávit in sinu suo: suum au- 
tem fílium, qui erat mórtuus, 
pósuit in sinu meo. Cumque 
surrexissem mane, ut darem 
lac filio. meo, appáruit mór- 
tuus: quem diligéntius ín- 
tuens clara luce, deprehéndi 
non esse meum, quem. genü- 
eram. Responditque Altera 
mülier: Non est ita ut dicis, 
sed fílius tuus mórtuus est, 
meus autem vivit. E contrá- 
rio illa dicébat: Mentiris: fíl- 
ius quippe meus vivit, et fílius 
tuus mórtuus est. Atque in 
hune modum contendébant 
coram rege. Tunc rex ait: 
Hzc dicit: Fílius meus vivit, 
et fílius tuus mórtuus est. Et 
ista respóndit: Non, sed fílius 
tuus mórtuus est, meus autem 
vivit. Dixit ergo rex: Afférte 
mihi gládium. Cumque aitu- 
líssent gládium coram rege: 
Divídite, inquit, infántem vi- 
vum in duas partes, et date 
dimídiam partem uni, et dim- 
ídiam partem  álteri. Dixit 
autem mülier, cujus fílius 
erat vivus, ad regem (com- 
móta sunt quippe viscera ejus 
super fílio suo) : Obsecro, dó- 
mine, date illi infántem vi- 
vum, et nólite interfícere 
eum. Et contrário illa dicé- 
bat: Nec mihi, nec tibi sit, 
sed dividátur. Respóndit rex, 
et alt: Date huic infántem, 
vivum, et non occidátur: hec 
est enim mater ejus. Audívit 
itaque omnis Israél judícium 
quod judicásset rex, et timu- 
érunt regem, vidéntes sapién- 
tiam Dei esse in eo ad facíen- 
dum judícium. à 


Gradual. Ps. 30, 3 


Be Thou unto me.a God, a 
protector, and a place of refuge, 


Esto mihi in Deum protec- 
tórem, et in locum refügii: nt 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MONDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


Salvum me fácias. V. Ps. 70. 
Deus, in te sperávi: Dómine, 
non confündar in seternum. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


833 


to save me. V. Ps. 70..0 God, 
I have hoped in Thee: O Lord, 
let me never be confounded. 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 
Gospel. John 2, 13-25 


fH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Prope 
T erat Pascha Judzérum et 
ascéndit Jesus Jerosólymam: 
et invénit in templo vendén- 
tes boves, et. oves, et colüm- 
bas, et nummulários.sedéntes. 
Et cum fecísset quasi flagél- 
Jum de funículis, omnes, 
ejécit de templo, oves quoque, 
et boves, et nummulariórum 
effüdit ws, et mensas sub- 
vértit. Et his, qui colümbas 
vendébant, dixit: Auférte ista, 
hinc, et nolíte fácere domum 
Patris mei, domum negotia- 
tiónis. Recordáti sunt vero 
discípuli ejus, quia scriptum 
est: Zelus domus tue comédit 
me. Respondérunt ergo Judai, 
et dixérunt ei: Quod signum 
osténdis nobis quia hec facis? 
Respóndit Jesus, et dixit eis: 
Sólvite templum hoc, et in 
iribus diébus excitábo illud. 
Dixérunt ergo Judei: Quad- 
raginta et sex annis zdificá- 
tum est templum hoc, et tu 
in tribus diébus excitábis il- 
lud? Ille autem dicébat de 
templo córporis sui. Cum ergo 
resurrexisset a mórtuis, re- 
cordáti sint discípuli ejus, 
quia hoc dicébat, et credid- 
érunt. Scripture, et sermóni, 
quem dixit Jesus. Cum autem 
esset Jerosólymis in Pascha 
in die festo, multi credidérunt 
in nómine ejus, -vidéntes 
signa ejus, que faciébat. Ipse 


4. Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, the pasch of 

the Jews was at hand, 
and Jesus went up. to Jerusa- 
lem: and He found in the tem- 
ple them that sold oxen and 
Sheep. and .doves, and the 
changers of money sitting; and 
when He had made as it were 
a scourge of little cords, He 
drove them all out of the tem- 
ple, the sheep also and the 
oxen, and the money of the 
changers He poured out, and 
the tables He overthrew; and 
to them that sold doves He said, 
‘Take these things hence, and 
make not the house of My 
Father a house of traffic. And 
His disciples remembered that 
it was written, The zeal of Thy 
house hath eaten Me up. The 
Jews therefore answered and 
said to Him, What sign dost 
Thou show unto us, seeing 
Thou dost these things? Jesus 
answered and said to them, De- 
stroy this temple, and in three 
days I will raise it up. The Jews 
then said, Six and forty years 
was this temple in. building; 
and wilt Thou raise it up in 
three days? But He spoke of the 
temple of His body. When 
therefore. He was risen again 
from the dead, His disciples re- 
membered that He had said 
this and they believed the 
Scripture, and the word that 
Jesus had said. Now when He 


http://ccwatershed.org 


334 


was at Jerusalem at the pasch, 
upon the festival-day, many be- 
lieved in His name, seeing His 
Signs which He did. But Jesus 
did not trust Himself unto 
them, for that He knew all 
men, and because He needed 
not that any should give tes- 
timony of man, for He knew 
what was in man. 


MONDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


autem Jesus non credébat 
semetipsum eis, eo quod ipse 
nosset omnes, et quia opus ei 
non erat, ut quis testimónium 
perhibéret de hémine: ipse 
enim sciébat, quid esset in 
homine. . 


Oferty. Ps. 99, 1,2 


Sing joyfully to God, all 
the earth, serve ye the Lord 
with gladness: come in before 
His presence with exceeding 
great joy: for the Lord He is 
God. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Jubiláte Deo, omnis terra, 
servíte Dómino in lætítia: in- 
tráte in conspéctu ejus in ex- 
sultatióne: quia Dominus 
ipse est Deus. 


Secret 


AY the sacrifice offered to 

Thee, O Lord, ever vivify 

and fortify us. Through our 
Lord. 


BLÁTUM tibi, Dómine, 

sacrificium vivificet nos 
semper, et múniat. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 


O God to Whom alone, page 829 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. 
"From my secret sins cleanse 
me, O Lord and from those 
of others spare Thy servant. 


Ps. 18, 13, 14 


Ab occültis meis munda 
me, Dómine: et ab aliénis 
parce servo tuo. 


Postcommunion 


AVING received the sacra- 

-Q ment of salvation, -O 
Lord, may we be profited unto 
the increase of our everlasting 
redemption. Through our Lord. 


vxPTIS, Dómine, saluta- 

ribus sacraméntis: ad 
redemptiónis etérne, que- 
sumus, proficlámus. augmén- 
tum. Per Dóminum. 


Second. Posteommunton, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


ow down your heads to 
God. 


Graciously harken to our 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
Deo. 


Deprecatiónem nostram, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TUESDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


quaesumus, Dómine, benígnus 
exáudi: et quibus supplicándi 
prestas afféctum, tribue de- 
fensiónis auxílium. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


335 


supplication, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, and grant the help of 
Thy defence to those to whom 
Thou dost give the spirit of 
prayer. Through our Lord. 


Tuesday, Fourth Week of Lent (Purple) 


STATION aT ST. LAWRENCE IN DAMASO 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 54, 2, 3 


xAvpr, Deus, oratiónem 
meam, et ne despéxeris 
deprecatiónem meam:  in- 
ténde in me et exáudi me. Ps. 
54, 3, 4. Contristátus sum in 
exercitatióne mea, et contur- 
batus sum a voce inimici, et a 
iribulatióne  peccatóris. Y. 
Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


EAR, O God, my prayer, 
and despise not my sup- 
plication: be attentive to me, 
and hear me. Ps. 54, 3, 4. I am 
grieved in my exercise; and am 
troubled at the voice of the en- 
emy, and at the tribulation of 
the sinner. V. Glory. 


Gloria is omitted. 


_ Prayer 
ACRES. nobis, quesumus, ay the fasts of the sacred 
Dómine, observatiénis observance, we beseech 


jejünia: et pie conversatiónis 
augméntum, et tue propitia- 
tiónis continuum  prestent 
auxílium. Per Dóminum. 


'Thee, O Lord, make us to grow 
in holiness and procure for us 
the continual help of Thy 
favor. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828, 


Lesson. Ex. 32, 7-14 


Léctio líbri Exodi. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Locüstus est 

Dóminus ad Móysen, di- 
cens: Descénde de monte: 
peccávit pópulus tuus, quem 
eduxísti de terra, ZEgypti. Re- 
cessérunt cito de via, quam 
ostendísti eis: fecerüntque 


Lesson from the Book oi 
Exodus. 
N THOSE days, the Lord 
Spoke to Moses, saying, Gc 
down from the mountain; thy 
people, which thou hasi 
brought out of the land of 
Egypt, hath sinned. They have 
quickly strayed from the way 


http://ccwatershed.org 


336 


which thou didst show them; 
and they have made to them- 
selves a molten calf, and have 
adored it, and, sacrificing vic- 
tims to it, have said, These are 
thy gods, O Israel that have 
brought thee out of the land of 
Egypt. And again the Lord said 
to Moses, I see that this people 
is stiffnecked: let Me alone, 
that My wrath may be kindled 
against them, and that I may 
destroy them, and I will make 
of thee a great nation. But 
Moses besought the Lord. his 
God, saying, Why, O Lord, is 
Thy indignation . enkindled 
against Thy people, whom Thou 
hast brought out of the land 
of Egypt, with great power 
and with a mighty hand? Let 
not the Egyptians say, I be- 
seech Thee, He craftily brought 
them out, that He might kill 
them in the mountains and 
destroy them from the earth; 
let Thy anger cease, and be ap- 
peased upon the wickedness of 
Thy people: remember Abra- 
ham, Isaac, and Israel, Thy 
servants, to whom Thou swor- 
est by Thy own self, saying, I 
will multiply your seed as the 
stars of heaven, and this whole 
land that I have spoken of I 
will give to your seed, and you 
shall possess it forever. And 


TUESDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


sibi vítulum confiátilem, et 
adoravérunt, atque immo- 
lantes ei hóstias, dixérunt: 
Isti sunt dii tui Israël, qui te ' 
eduxérunt de terra Ægypti. 
Rursimque ait Dóminus ad 
Móysen: Cerno quod pópulus 
iste dure cervicis sit: dimitte 
me, ut irascátur furor meus 
contra eos, et déleam eos, fa- 
ciamque te in gentem mag- 
nam. Móyses autem orábat 
Dóminum Deum suum, di- 
cens: Cur, Dómine, iráscitur 
furor tuus contra pópu- 
Jum tuum, quem eduxísti de 
terra ZEgypti, in fortitüdine 
magna, et in manu robüsta? 
Ne queso, dicant JZEgypti: 
Cállide edüxit eos, ut inter- 
fíceret in móntibus, et de- 
léret e terra: quiéscat ira tua, 
et esto placábilis super ne- 
quítia pópuli tui. Recordáre 
Abraham, Isaac, et Israël ser- 
vórum tuórum, quibus jurásti 
per temetípsum, dicens: Mul- 
tiplicábo semen vestrum sicut 
Stellas cali; et univérsam 
terram hanc, de qua locütus 
sum, dabo sémini vestro, et 
possidébitis eam semper. 
Placatüsque est Dóminus ne 
fáceret malum quod locütus 
füerat  advérsus  pópulum 
suum. 


ihe Lord was appeased from doing the evil which He had 


spoken against His people. 


Gradual. Ps. 43, 26,2 


Arise, O Lord, bríng help to 
us, and deliver us for Thy 
name's sake. Y. O God, we 
have heard with our ears; and 
our fathers have declared to us 
the work which Thou didst 


Exsurge, Dómine, fer opem 
nobis: et líbera nos propter 
nomen tuum. Y. Deus, áuri- 
bus nostris audívimus: et 
patres nostri annuntiavérunt 
nobis opus, quod opératus es 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ne "We 


TUESDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 337 


in diébus eórum, et in diébus 
antíquis. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


work in their days, in the days 
of old. 


Gospel. John 7, 14-31 


m Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Jam die 

festo mediánte, ascéndlt 
Jesus in templum, et docébat. 
Et mirabántur Judzi, di- 
céntes: Quómodo hic ?itteras 
Scit, cum non didícerit? Re- 
spondit eis Jesus, et dixit: 
Mea doctrína non est mea, 
Sed ejus, qui misit me. Si quis 
volüerit voluntátem ejus fá- 
cere, cognóscet de doctrina, 
utrum. ex Deo sit, an ego a 
meípso loquar. Qui a seme- 
tipso lóquitur, glóriam pró- 
priam quaerit. Qui autem 
querit: glóriam ejus, qui misit 
eum, hic verax est, et injustí- 
tia in illo non est. Nonne 
Móyses dedit vobis legem: et 
nemo ex vobis facit legem? 
quid me quaritis interficere? 
Respóndit turba, et dixit: 
Demónium habes: quis te 
querit interfícere? Respóndit 
Jesus, et dixit eis: Unum 
opus feci, et omnes mirámini. 
Proptérea Móyses dedit vobis 
circumcisiónem (non quia ex 
Móyse est, sed ex pátribus): 
et in sábbato circumcíditis 
hóminem. Si circumcisiénem 
accipit homo in sabbáto, ut 
non solvátur lex Móysi: mibi 
indignámini, quia totum hó- 
minem sanum feci in sábbato? 
Nolíte judicáre secündum fá- 
ciem, Sed justum judicium 
judicáte. Dicébant ergo qui- 
dam eX Jerosólymis: Nonne 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, about the 
middle of the feast, 

Jesus went up into the temple, 
and taught. And the Jews won- 
dered, saying, How doth this 
man know letters, having never 
learned? Jesus answered them, 
and said, My doctrine is not 
Mine, but His that sent Me. If 
any man will do the will of 
Him, He shall know of the doc- 
trine, whether it be of God, or 
whether I speak of Myself. He 
that speaketh of himself, seek- 
eth his own glory: but he that 
seeketh the glory of Him that 
sent him, he is true, and there 
is no injustice in him. Did not 
Moses give you the law, and yet 
none of you keepeth the law? 
Why seek you to kill Me? The 
multitude answered and said, 
Thou hast a devil: who sse&- 
eth to kill Thee? Jesus an- 
swered and said to them, One 
work I have done, and you all 
wonder. Therefore Moses gave 
you circumcision (not because 
it is of Moses, but of the fath- 
ers), and on the sabbath-day 
you circumcise a man. If a man 
receive circumcision on the 
sabbath-day, that the law of 
Moses may not be broken, are 
you angry at Me because I 
have healed the whole man on 
the sabbath-day? Judge not 
according to the appearance, 
but judge just judgment. Some 


http://ccwatershed.org 


338 


therefore of Jerusalem said, Is 
not this He whom they seek to 
kill? and behold He speaketh 
openly, and they say nothing to 
Him. Have the rulers known 
for & truth that this is the 
Christ? But we know this man 
whence He is; but when the 
Christ cometh, no man know- 
eth whence He is. Jesus there- 
fore cried out in the temple, 
teaching, and saying, You both 
know Me, and yóu know whence 
I am: and I am not come of 
Myself, but He that sent Me 
is true, Whom you know not. 
I know Him, because I am 
from Him, and He hath sent 
Me. They sought therefore to 
apprehend Him: and no man 
laid hands on Him because His 


TUESDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


hic est, quem querunt inter- 
ficere? Et ecce palam lóqui- 
tur, et nihil ei dicunt. Num- 
quid vere cognovérunt prin- 
cipes quia hic est Christus? 
Sed hunc scimus, unde sit: 
Christus autem, cum vénerit, 
nemo scit unde sit. Clamábat 
ergo Jesus in templo docens, 
et dicens: Et me scitis, et 
unde sim, scitis, et a meípso 
non veni, sed est verus, qui 
misit me, quem vos nescítis. 
Ego scio eum: quia ab ipso 
sum, et ipse me misit. Queré- 
bant ergo eum apprehéndere: 
et nemo misit in illum ma- 
nus, quia nondum vénerat 
hora ejus. De turba autem 
multi credidérunt in eum. 


hour was not yet come. But of the people many believed in 


Him. 


Offertory. Ps. 39, 2, 3,4 


With expectation I have 
waited for the Lord, and 
He looked upon me: and He 
heard my prayer: and He put 
a new canticle into my mouth, 
a song to our God. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Exspéctans exspectávi Dó- 
minum, et respéxit me: et 
exaudívit deprecatiónem me- 
am: et immisit in os meam 
cánticum novum, hymnum 
Deo nostro. 


Secret 


AY this offering, we be- 
@M seech Thee, O Lord, 
wipe out our sins, and sanctify 
the bodies and minds of Thy 
servants for the celebration of 
the sacrifice. Through our 
Lord. 


Ec hóstia, Dómine, que- 
sumus, emündet nos- 

tra delicta: et ad sacrifícium 
celebrándum, subditórum tibi 


córpora mentésque sancti- 
ficet. Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 


O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


Preface No..3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps.19,6 


We will rejoice in thy sal- 
vation, and in the name of our 
God we shall be exalted. 


Letábimur in salutari tuo: 
et in nómine Dómini Dei no- 
tri magnificábimur. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ORA am cT S 


WEDNESDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 339 


Postcommunion 
usus nos, Dómine, per- AY the reception of this 
Bays sacraménti mun- XD sacrament, O Lord, 
det à crimine: et ad celéstia cleanse us from guilt and bring 
regna perdücat. Per Dó- us to the kingdom of heaven. 
minum. Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 
UMILIATE capita vestra ow down your heads to 
Deo. God. 

Miserére, Dómine, pópulo Have mercy on Thy people, 
tuo: et continuis tribulatión- O Lord, and from the unceas- 
ibus laborántem, propitius ing tribulation under which 
respiráre concéde. Per Dó- they labor grant them relief in 
minum. Thy mercy. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Wednesday, Fourth Week of Lent (Purple) 


STATION AT ST. PAUL WITHOUT THE WALLS 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ezech. 36, 23-26 


UM sanctificátus füero in 

vobis, congregábo vos de 
univérsis terris: et effündam 
super vos aquam muridam, et 
mundabímini ab ómnibus in- 
quinaméntis vestris: et dabo 
vobis spiritum novum. Ps. 33,2. 
Benedícam Dóminum in om- 
ni témpore: semper laus ejus 
in ore meo. Y. Glória Patri. 


HEN I shall be sanctified 

in you, 1 will gather you 

from every land: and I will 

pour upon you clean water, and 

you shall be cleansed from all 

your filthiness: and I will give 

you a new spirit. Ps. 33, 2. I 

wil bless the Lord at all times: 

His praise shall be ever in my 
mouth.. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 
After Kyrie eleison, is said: 


Orémus. 
Flectámus génua. 
W. Leváte. 


Deus qui et justis premia 
meritórum, et peccatéribus 
per jejunium véniam prebes:. 
miserére supplicibus tuis; ut 
reátus nostri conféssio, in- 
dulgéntiam váleat pércípere 


Let us pray. 

Let us kneel. 

W. Arise. ‘ 

© God, Who dost vouchsafe 
to the just the reward of their 
merits, and to sinners pardon 
through fasting, have mercy 
upon Thy suppliants, that the 
confession of our guilt may 


http://ccwatershed.org 


340 


have power to obtain for us for- 
giveness of our misdoings. 
Through our Lord. 


WEDNESDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


delictérum. Per Dóminum. 


Lesson. Ezech. 36, 23-28 


Lesson from Ezechiel the 
Prophet, 


HUs saith the Lord God, I 


wil sanctify My great 
name, which was profaned 
among the gentiles which you 
have profaned in the midst of 
them; that the gentiles may 
know that I am the Lord, saith 
the. Lord of hosts, when I shall 
be sanctified in you before their 
eyes. For I will take you from 
&mong the gentiles, and will 
gather you together out of all 
countries, and will bring you 
into your own land; and I will 
pour upon you clean water, and 
you shall be cleansed from all 
your filthiness, and I will 
cleanse you from all your idols, 
and will give you a new heart, 
and put a new spirit within you; 
and I will take away the stony 
heart out of your flesh, and will 
give you a heart of flesh. And 
I will put My spirit in the midst 
of you, and I will cause you to 
walk in My commandments, 
and to keep My judgments, and 
do them, and you shall dwell in 
the land which I gave to your 
fathers, and you shall be My 
people, and I will be your God; 
saith the Lord almighty. 


Léctio Ezechiélis Prophéte. 


EC dicit Dóminus Deus: 

Sanctificabo nomen 
meum magnum, quod pollü- 
tum est inter gentes, quod 
polluístis in médio eárum: 
ut sciant gentes quia ego Dó- 
minus, cum sanctificatus 
füero in vobis coram eis. Tol- 
lam quippe vos de géntibus, 
et congregábo vos de univérsis 
terris, et addücam vos in ter- 
ram vestram. Et effündam 
super vos aquam mundam, et 
mundabímini ab ómnibus in- 
quinaméntis vestris, et ab 
univérsis idólis vestris mun- 
dábo vos. Et dabo vobis cor 
novum, et spiritum novum 
ponam in médio vestri: et 
áuferam cor lapideum de 
carne vestra, et dabo. vobis 
cor cárneum. Et spíritum 
meum ponam in médio ves- 
tri: et fáciam ut in precéptis 
meis ambulétis, et judícia 
mea custodiátis, et operémini, 
Et habitábitis in terra, quam 
dedi pátribus vestris: et éritis 
mihi in pópulum, et ego vero 
vobis in Deum: dicit Dóminus 
omnípotens. 


Gradual. Ps. 33, 12, 6 


Come, children, harken to Venite, fílii, audite me: ti- 
me: I will teach the fear of the mórem Dómini docébo vos. 
Lord. Y. Come ye to Him, and Y. Accédite ad eum, et illu- 
be enlightened; and your faces minámini: et fácles vestre 
shall not be confounded. non confundéntur. 

¥. The Lord be with you. ¥. Dóminus vobíscum. 

RY. And with thy spirit. W. Et cum spíritu tuo, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


341 


Prayer 


jos quzsumus, omni- 
» potens Deus: ut quos 
jejünia votíva, castigant, ipsa 
quoque devótio sancta lætí- 
ficet; ut, terrénis afféctibus 
mitigátis, facílius celéstia 
capiámus. Per Dóminum. 


Gs we beseech Thee, O 
J almighty God, that we 
who have undertaken to chas- 
tise our bodies by fasting may, 
even in this devotion, find cause 
for rejoicing: forasmuch as 
earthly passions being thereby 
subdued, we are the better able 
to fix our hopes on the delights 
of heaven. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


.Lesson. 1s.1,16-19 | ; 


page 828. 


zc dicit Dóminus Deus: 

-Lavamini, mundi es- 
tóte, auférte malum cogita- 
tiónum vestrárum. ab óculis 
meis: quiéscite ágere per- 
vérse,  díscite ^ benefácere: 
quaerite: judicium, .subvenite 
opprésso, judicáte pupíllo, de- 
féndite víduam. . Et veníte, et 
argüite me, dicit Dóminus: si 
füerint peccáta vestra ut cóc- 
cinum, quasi nix dealbabün- 
tur: et si füerint rubra quasi 
vermiculus, velut lana alba 
erunt. Si voluéritis, et audi- 
éritis me, bona terre comedé- 
tis: dicit Dóminus omnípo- 
tens. 


Beáta gens, cujus est Dó- 
minus Deus eórum: pópulus, 
quem elégit Dóminus in he- 
reditátem sibi. Y. Verbo Do- 
mini celi firmáti sunt: et 
Spíritu oris ejus omnis virtus 
eórum, 


HUS saith the. Lord God, 

Wash yourselves, be clean, 
fake away the evil of your de- 
vices from My eyes; cease to do 
perversely, learn to do well; 
seek judgment, relieve the op- 
pressed, judge for the father- 
less, defend the widow, and 
then come, and accuse Me, 
saith the Lord: if your sins be 
as scarlet, they shall be made 
as white as snow: and if they 
be red as crimson, they shall be 
white as wool, If you be willing 
and will harken to Me, you shall 
eat the good things of the land; 
saith the Lord almighty. i 


Gradual. Ps. 32, 12, 6 


Blessed is the nation whose 
God is the Lord: the people 
whom He hath chosen for His 
inheritance. Y. By the word of 
the Lord the heavens were es- 
tablished; and all the. power 
of them by the. spirit of His 
mouth. 


Tract as:on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 9, 1-38 


H* Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélli secindum Joénnem. 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St, John. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


342 


T THAT lime, Jesus pass- 

JL, ing by, saw a man who 
Was blind from his birth: and 
His disciples asked Him, Rabbi, 
who hath sinned, this man or 
his parents, that he should be 
born blind? Jesus answered, 
Neither hath this man sinned 
nor his parents, but that the 
works of God should be made 
manifest in him. I must work 
the works of Him that sent 
Me, Whilst it is day; the night 
cometh when no man can work. 
As long as I am in the world I 
am the light of the world. 
When He had said these things, 
He spat on the ground, and 
made clay of the spittle, and 
spread the clay upon his eyes; 
and said to him, Go, wash in 
the pool of Siloe, (which is in- 
terpreted, Sent). He wentthere- 
fore, and washed, and he came 
Seeing. The neighbors therefore, 
and they who had seen him 
before that he was a beggar, 
Said, Is not this he that sat and 
hegged? Some said, This is he. 
But others said, No, but he is 
like him. But he said, I am he. 
They said therefore to him, 
How were thy eyes opened? He 
answered, That man that is 
called Jesus, made clay, and 
anointed my eyes, and said to 
me, Go to the pool of Siloe, and 
wash: and I went, I washed, 
and I see. And they said to 
him, Where is He? He saith, I 
know not. They bring him that 
had been blind to the pharisees. 
Now it was the Sabbath when 
Jesus made the clay, and 
opened his eyes. Again there- 
fore the pharisees asked him 
how he had received his sight. 
But he said to them, He put 
clay upon my eyes, and I 


WEDNESDAY, FOURTH WEEK OP LENT 


N ILLO témpore: Pretér- 

jens Jesus vidit hóminem 
cecum a nativitáte: et inter- 
rogavérunt eum discipuli 
ejus: Rabbi, quis peccavit, 
hic, aut paréntes ejus, ut cæ- 
cus nascerétur? Respdndit 
Jesus: Neque hic peccávit, 
neque paréntes ejus: sed ut 
manifesténtur ópera Dei in 
ilo. Me oportet operari 
ópera ejus, qui misit me, do- 
nec dies est: venit nox, quan- 
do nemo potest operari. 
Quámdiu sum in mundo, lux 
sum mundi. Hee cum dixis- 
Set, éxspuit in terram, et fecit 
lutum ex sputo, et linivit lu- 
tum super óculos ejus, et 
dixit ei: Vade, lava in nata- 
tória Siloé (quod interpretá- 
tur Missus). Abiit ergo, et 
lavit, et venit videns. Itaque 
vicini, et qui viderant eum 
prius quia mendicus erat, di- 
cébant: Nonne hic est, qui 
Sedébat, et mendicábat? Alii 
üicébant: Quia hic est. Alii 
auiem: Nequáquam, sed sím- 
ilis est ei. Ille vero dicébat: 
Quia ego sum. Dicébant ergo 
ei: Quómodo apérti sunt tibi 
ócul? Respóndit: Ille homo, 
qui dícitur Jesus, lutum fecit, 
et unxit óculos meos, et dixit 
mihi: Vade ad natatéria 
Siloé, et lava. Et Abii, lavi, et 
vídeo. Et dixérunt ei: Ubi est 
ile? Ait: Néscio. Addücunt 
eum ad phariseos, qui cecus 
füerat. Erat autem sábbatum 
quando lutum fecit Jesus, et 
apéruit óculos ejus. Iterum 
ergo interrogábant eum phar- 
isei, quómodo vidisset. Ille 
autem dixit eis: Lutum mihi 
pósuit super óculos, et lavi, et 
video. Dicébant ergo ex phar- 
isis quidam: Non est hic 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 343 


homo a Deo, qui sábbatum 
non custódit. Alii autem dicé- 
bant: Quómodo potest homo 
peccátur hee signa fácere? 
Et schisma erat inter eos. 
Dicunt ergo cæco iterum: Tu 
quid dicis de illo, qui apéruit 
óculos tuos? Ille autem dixit: 
Quia prophéta est. Non credi- 
dérunt ergo Judei de illo, 
quia czcus fuisset, et vidísset, 
donec vocavérunt paréntes 
ejus, qui viderat: et interro- 
gavérunt eos, dicéntes: Hic 
est filius vester, quem vos 
dicitis, quia cecus natus est? 
Quómodo ergo nunc videt? 
Respondérunt eis paréntes 
ejus, et dixerunt: Scimus quia 
hic est filius noster, et quia 
cxcus natus est: quómodo 
autem nunc vídeat, nescímus: 
aut quis ejus apéruit óculos, 
nos nescímus: ipsum interro- 
gate, xtatem habet, ipse de 
se loquatur. Hec dixérunt 
paréntes ejus, quéniam timé- 
bant Judzos: jam enim con- 
spiravérunt Judzi, ut si quis 
eum confiterétur esse Chris- 
tum, extra synagógam fíeret. 
Proptérea paréntes ejus dixé- 
runt: Quia etátem habet, ip- 
sum interrogáte. Vocavérunt 
ergo rursum hóminem, qui 
füerat cecus, et dixérunt ei: 
Da glóriam Deo. Nos scimus 
quia hic homo peccátor est. 
Dixit ergo eis ille: Si peccá- 
tor est, néscio: unum scio, 
quia cæcus cum essem, modo 
vídeo. Dixérunt ergo illi: 
Quid fecit tibi? Quómodo 
apéruit tibi óculos? Respón- 
dit eis: Dixi vobis jam, et au- 
distis: quid íterum vultis au- 
dire? Numquid et vos vultis 
discípul ejus fieri? Maledix- 
érunt ergo ei, et dixérunt: Tu 


washed, and I see. Some there- 
fore of the pharisees said, This 
man is not of God, who keepetn 
not the Sabbath. But others 
said, How can a man that is a 
sinner do such miracles? And 
there was a division among 
them. They say therefore to the 
blind man again, What sayest 
thou of Him that hath opened 
thy eyes? And he said, He is a 
prophet. The Jews then did not 
believe concerning him, that 
he had been blind and had re- 
ceived his sight, until they 
called the parents of him that 
had received his sight and 
asked them, saying, Is this your 
son, who you say was born 
blind? How then doth he now 
see? His parents answered 
them and said, We know that 
he is our son, and that he was 
born blind: but how he seeth 
we know not, or -who hath 
opened his eyes we know not: 
ask himself; he is of age, let 
him speak for himself. These 
things his parents said, be- 
cause they feared the Jews: for 
the Jews had already agreed 
among themselves, that if any 
man should confess Him to 
be Christ, he should be put out 
of the synagogue. Therefore 
did his parents say, He is of 
age, ask him. They therefore 
called the man again that had 
been blind, and said to him, 
Give glory to God. We know 
that this man is a sinner. He 
said therefore to them, If He be 
2 sinner, I know not; one thing 
I know, that whereas I was 
blind, now I see. They then 
said to him, What did He to 
thee? How did He open thine 
eyes? He answered them, I 
have told you already and you 


http://ccwatershed.org 


344 


have heard; why would you 
hear it again? will you also be- 
come His disciples? They re- 
viled him therefore, and said, 
Be thou His disciple: but we 
are the disciples of Moses. We 
know that God spoke to Moses; 
but as to this man, we know 
not from whence He is, The 
man answered and said to 
them, Why, herein is a wonder- 
ful thing that you know not 
from whence He is, andHehath 
opened my eyes. Now we know 
that God doth not hear sinners; 
but if a man be a server of 
God, and doth His will, him He 
heareth. From the beginning 
of the world it hath not been 
heard, that any man hath 
opened the eyes of one born 
blind. Unless this man were 
of Goa, "ie could not do any- 
thing. They answered and said 
to him, Thou wast wholly born 
in sins, and dost thou teach us? 
And they.cast him out. Jesus 
heard that they had cast him 
out; and when He had found 
him, He said to him, Dost thou 
believe in the Son of God? He 
answered and said, Who is He, 


WEDNESDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


discipulus illíus sis: nos au- 
tem Móysi discípuli sumus. 
Nos scimus quia Móysi locü- 
tus est Deus: hunc autem ne- 
scímus unde sit. Respóndit 


ille homo, et dixit eis: In hoc 


enim mirábile est, quia vos 
nescítis unde sit, et apéruit 
meos óculos: scimus autem 
quia peccatóres Deus non au- 
dit: sed, si quis Dei cultor est, 
et voluntátem ejus facit, 
hunc exáudit. A seculo non 
est audítum, quia quis apér- 
uit óculos czci nati. Nisi esset 
hic a Deo, non póterat fácere 
quidquam. Respondérunt, et 
dixérunt ei: In peccátis natus 
es totus, et tu doces nos? Et 
ejecérunt eum foras. Audívit 
Jesus quia ejecérunt eum 
foras, et cum invenisset eum, 
dixit ei: Tu credis in Fílium 
Dei? Respóndit ille, et dixit: 
Quis est, Dómine, ut. credam 
in eum? Et dixit ei Jesus: Et 
vidisti eum, et qui lóquitur 
tecum, ipse est. At ille ait: 
Credo Dómine. (Hic genu- 
flectitur). Et précidens ador- 
avit eum. 


Lord, that I may believe in Him?. And Jesus said to ‘him, 


Thou hast both seen Him, and 


it is He that. talketh with 


thee. And he said, I believe, Lord: (Here all kneel down) and 


falling down he adored. Him. 


Offertory. Ps. 65, 8, 9, 20 


O ye gentiles, bless the Lord 
our God, and make the voice of 
His praise to be heard; Who 
hath set my soul to live, and 
hath not suffered my feet to 
be moved: blessed be the Lord, 
Who hath not turned away 
my prayer nor His mercy from 
me. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Benedicite gentes Dómin- 
um Deum nostrum, et obau- 
dite vocem laudis ejus: qui 
pósuit ánimam meam ad vi- 
tam, et non dedit commovéri 
pedes meos: benedíctus Dó- 
minus, qui non amóvit depre- 
catiónem meam, et miseri- 
córdiam suam.a me. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THURSDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 345 
Secret 
GPPLices te rogámus, om- E HUMBLY entreat Thee, 


nipotens Deus: ut his 
sacrificiis peccata nostra 
mundéntur: quia tunc veram 
nobis tríbuis et mentis et cór- 
poris sanitatem, Per Dómin- 
,um. 


O almighty God, that 
our sins may be purged by 
these sacrifices; for so dost 
Thou grant us health of body 
and soul. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 


O God to Whom alone, page 829. 


‘Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. 


Lutum fecit ex sputo Dó- 
minus, et  linivit óculos 
meos: abii et lavi, et vidi, 
et crédidi Deo. 


John 9, 11 

'The Lord made clay of spittle, 
and anointed my eyes; and I 
went, and I washed, and I saw, 
and I have believed in God. 


Postcommunion 


ACRAMÉNTA, que sümpsi- 

mus, Dómine Deus nos- 
ter: et spirituálibus nos ré- 
pleant aliméntis, et corpo- 
rálibus tueántur auxfliis. Per 
Dóminum. 


ay the sacrament we 

have received, O Lord, 

our God, both fill us with spiri- 

tual nourishment and keep us 

with bodily assistance. Through 
our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 
Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
Deo. 

Pateant aures misericórdie 
tue, Dómine, précibus sup- 
plicántium: et, ut peténtibus 
desideráta concédas; fac eos 
que tibi sunt plácita postu- 
láre. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ow down your heads to 
God. 

May the ears of Thy mercy, 
O Lord, be open to the prayers 
of. Thy suppliants, and, that 
Thou mayest grant their de- 
sires to them that seek Thee, 
make them to ask the things 
that are pleasing to Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


Thursday, Fourth Week of Lent (Purple) 
STATION AT THE CHURCH OF STS. SYLVESTER AND Mark 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


ETÉTUR cor queréntium 
Dóminum: querite Dó- 


http://ccwatershed.org / 


Ps. 104, 3, 4 


ET the heart of them re- 
joice that seek the Lord: 


/ 


/ 


846 


Seek the Lord, and be strength- 
ened; seek His face evermore. 
Ps. 104, 1. Give glory to the 
Lord, and call upon His name; 
declare His deeds among the 
gentiles. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


THURSDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


minum, et  confirmámini: 
quaerite fáciem ejus semper. 
Ps. 104, 1. Confitémini Dó- 
mino, et invocáte nomen 
ejus: annuntidte inter gentes 
ópera ejus. Y. Glória Patri. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God,that,chas- 
tened by the fasts of our devo- 
tion, the devotion itself may 
also gladden us, so that, with 
our earthly affections subdued, 
we may the more easily lay 
hold upon heavenly things. 
Through our Lord. 


RÆSTA, quæsumus, omni- 

potens Deus: ut quos 
jejúnia votíva, castígant, ipsa 
quoque devótio sancta letifi- 
cet; ut, terrénis afféctibus 
mitigátis, facilius  celéstia 
capiámus. Per Dóminum. 


Seconda Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson. 4 Kings 4, 25-38 


Lesson from the Book of 
Kings. 
N THOSE days, a Sunamite 
woman came to Eliseus to 
Mount Carmel: and when the 
man of God saw her coming 
towards, he said to Giezi his 
servant, Behold that Suna- 
mitess. Go therefore to meet 
her, and say to her, Is all well 
with thee, and with thy hus- 
band, and with thy son? And 
she answered, Well. And when 
she came to the man of God 
to the mount, she caught hold 
on his feet: and Giezi came to 
remove her. And the man of 
God said, Let her alone, for her 
Soul is in anguish, and the 
Lord hath hid it from me and 
hath not told me. And she said 
to him, Did I ask a son of my 
Lord? did I not say to thee, Do 
not deceive me? Then he said 
to Giezi, Gird up thy Joins, and 


Léctio libri Regum. 


N DiÉBUS illis: Venit mú- 

lier Sunamítis ad Eliséum 
in montem Carméli: cumque 
vidísset eam vir Dei e con- 
tra, ait ad Giézi püerum 
suum: Ecce Sunamitis illa. 
Vade ergo in occürsum ejus, 
et dic ei: Recte ne ágitur cir- 
ca te, et circa virum tuum, et 
circa fílium tuum? Qus re- 
Spóndit: Recte. Cumque ven- 
ísset ad virum Dei in mon- 
tem, apprehéndit pedes ejus, 
et accéssit Giézi ut amovéret 
eam. Et ait homo Dei: Di- 
mítte illam: ánima enim ejus 
in amaritüdine est, et Dó- 
minus celávit a me, et non 
indicávit mihi, Que dixit illi: 
Numquid petívi fílium a dó- 
mino meo? Numquid non dixi 
tibi: Ne illüdas me? Et ille 
ait ad Giézi: Accínge lumbos 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THURSDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


tuos, et tolle baculum Meum 
in manu tua, et vade. Si oc- 
cürrerit tibi homo, non salü- 
tes eum et si salutaverit te 
quíspiam, non  respóndeas 
illi: et pones baculum meum 
Super fáciem püeri Porro 
mater püeri ait: Vivit Dó- 
minus, et vivit ánima tua, 
non dimíttam te. Surrexit 
ergo, et secütus est eam. 
Giézi autem precésserat ante 
eos, et postierat baculum 
super fáciem pteri, et non 
erat: vox, neque sensus: re- 
versüsque est in occürsum 
ejus, et nuntiavit ei, dicens: 
Non surréxít puer. Ingréssus 
est ergo Eliséus domum, et 
ecce puer mórtuus jacébat in 
léctulo ejus:  ingressüsque 
clausit óstium super se, et 
Super püerum: et orávit ad 
Dóminum. Et ascéndit, et in- 
cúbuit super püerum: posuít- 
que os suum super os ejus, et 
óculos suos super óculos ejus, 
et manus suas super manus 
ejus: et incurvávit se super 
eum: et calefácta est caro 
püeri. At ille revérsus, deam- 
bulávit in domo, semel huc 
atque illuc: et ascéndit, et in- 
cübuit super eum: et oscitá- 
vit puer sépties, aperuítque 
óculos. At ille vocávit Giézi, 
et dixit ei: Voca Sunamíti- 
dem hane. Que vocáta, in- 
gréssa est ad eum, Qui ait: 
Tolle fílium tuum. Venit illa, 
et córruit ad pedes ejus, et 
adoravit super terram: tulít- 
que fílium suum, et egréssa 
est, et Eliséus revérsus est in 
Galgala. 


347 


take my staff in thy hand and 

o. If any man meet thee, sa- 
Jute him not; and if any man 
salute thee, answer him not; 
and lay my staff upon the face 
of the child. But the mother 
of the child said, As the Lord 
liveth, and as thy soul liveth 
I will not leave thee. He arose, 
therefore, and followed her. 
But Giezi was gone before 
them, and laid the staff upon 
the face of the child, and there 
was no voice nor sense; and he 
returned to meet him, and told 
him, saying, The child is not 
risen. Eliseus therefore went 
into the house, and behold the 
child lay dead on his bed; and 
going in he shut the door upon 
him, and upon the child, and 
prayed to the Lord; and he 
went up and lay upon the child: 
and he put his mouth upon his 
mouth, and his eyes upon his 
eyes, and his hands upon his 
hands: and he bowed himself 
upon him, and the child’s flesh 
grew warm, Then he returned 
and walked in the house, once 
to and fro; and he went up, 
and lay upon him; and the 
child gaped seven times, and 
opened his eyes. And he called 
Giezi, and said to him, Call 
this Sunamitess. And she being 
called,. went in to him, and he 
said, Take up thy son. She 
came and fell at his feet, and 
worshipped upon the ground; 
and took up her son, and went 
out, and Eliseus returned to 
Galgal d 


Gradual. Ps. 73, 20, 19, 22 


Réspice, Dómine, in testa- 
mentum tuum: et Animas 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Have regard, O Lord, to Thy 
covenant, and forget not to the 


"/ 


348 


end the souls of Thy Poor. P. 
Arise, O Lord, judge Thy own 
cause: remember the re- 
proaches of Thy servants, 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


THURSDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


pauperum tuórum ne obli- 
viscáris in finem. y. Ex- 
sürge, Dómine, jüdica causam 
tuam: memor esto oppróbrii 
Servórum tuórum. 


Gospel. Luke 7, 11-16 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, Jesus went 
into & city called Naim; 
and there went with Him His 
disciples, and a great multitude. 
And when He came nigh to the 
city, behold a dead man was 
carried out, the only son of his 
mother; and she was a widow, 
and much people of the city 
were with her. And when the 
Lord saw her, He had compas- 
sion on her, and said to her, 
Weep not. And He came near, 
and touched the bier. (And they 
that carried it stood still). And 
He said, Young man, I say to 
thee arise: and he that was 
Gead sat up, and began to speak. 
And He delivered him to his 
mother. And there came a fear 
on them all and they glorified 
God, saying, A great prophet 
is risen up amongst us, and God 
hath visited His people. 


% Sequéntia sancti Evan- ; 

gélii secandum Lucam. 

N ILLO témpore: Ibat. 

Jesus in civitatem, que 
vocátur Naim: et ibant cum 
eo discípuli ejus, at turba co- 
piósa. Cum autem appropin- 
quáret porte civitátis, ecce 
Gefinctus efferebátur fílius 
ünicus matris sue: et hzc 
vídua erat, et turba civitátis 
multa cum illa. Quam cum 
vidísset Dóminus, miseri- 
córdia motus super eam, dixit 
ili: Noli flere. Et accéssit, et 
tétigit lóculum. (Hi autem, 
qui portábant, stetérunt) Et 
ait: Adoléscens, tibi dico, 
surge. Et resédit qui erat mór- 
tuus, et cepit loqui. Et dedit 
ilum matri sue. Accépit au- 
tem omnes timor: et magni- 
ficábant. Deum,  dicéntes: 
Quia. prophéta magnus sur- 
réxit in nobis: et quia Deus 
visitávit plebem suam. 


Offertory. Ps.69,2,3,4 


O Lord, make haste to help 
me: let all those be confounded 
that desire evils to Thy ser- 
vants. - 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Dómine, ad adjuvándum 
me festina: confundántur 
omnes, qui cógitant servis 
tuis mala. 


Secret 


vRiFy US, O merciful God, 
that the prayers of Thy 


uririca nos, miséricors 
Deus: ut Ecclésie tue 


Church, which are pleasing to preces, que tibi grate sunt, 
Thee, may become the more pia münera deferéntes, fiant 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FRIDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 349 


expidtis .méntibus gratióres. pleasing from the purified 
Per Déminum. hearts with which they bring 

i the gìfts of devotion. Through 
our Lord. f 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829, 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Ps, 70, 16, 17, 18 


Dómine, memorábor justi- ^ O Lord, I will be mindful of 
tie tue solíus: Deus, docuísti Thy justice alone; Thou hast 
me a juventüte mea: et us- taught me, O God, from. my 
que in senéctam et sénium, youth; and unto old age and 
Deus, ne derelínquas me. gray hairs, O God, forsake me 

f not. 


Postcommunion 
æLésTIA dona capiénti- UFFER not Thy heavenly 
bus, quesumus, D6- gifts, we pray Thee, O 
mine: non ad judicium pro- Lord, to become the occasion 
venire patidris, que fidélibus of judgment to those who re- 
tuis ad remédium providisti. ceive them, for Thou hast pro- 
Per Dóminum. vided them unto the healing of 
: Thy faithful. Through our 
i ; Lord. . 
Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829, 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


UMILIÁTE capita vestra ow down your heads to 
LẸ Deo. God. 


' Pópuli tui, Deus, institütor 
er rector, peccáta, quibus im- 
pugnátur, expélle: ut semper 
tibi plácitus, et tuo munímine 


O God, the teacher and ruler 
of Thy people, put to flight the 
sins that assail them, that they 
may be pleasing to Thee and 


Secure in Thy protection. 
Through our Lord. 


sit secürus. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Friday, Fourth Week of Lent (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. EUSEBIUS 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 18, 15 


(qx cordis mei in HE meditation of my heart 
conspéctu tuo semper: is always in Thy sight: O 


http://ccwatershed.org 


350 


Lord, my helper, and my re- 
deemer. Ps. 18, 2. The heavens 
show forth the glory of God, 
and the firmament declareth 
the work of His hands. y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


Prayer 


Gop, Who dost renew the 

world with ineffable sac- 
raments, grant, we beseech 
Thee, that Thy Church may 
both be profited by the eternal 
institutions and not left 
without temporal assistance. 
Through our Lord. 


FRIDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


Dómine, adjütor meus, et re- 
démptor meus. Ps. 18,.2. Celi 
enárrant glóriam Dei: et 
ópera mánuum ejus annün- 
tiat férnmaméntum. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Eus, qui ineffabflibus 

mundum rénovas sac- 
raméntis: presta, quesumus; 
ut Ecclésia tua et etérnis pro- 
fíciat institütis, et tempor- 
álibus non destituátur aux- 
íllis. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 


page 828. 


Lesson. 3 Kings 17, 17-24 


Lesson from the Book of 
Kings. 
N THOSE days: The son of 
ihe woman of.the house 
fell sick, and the sickness was 
very grievous, so that there was 
no breath left in him. And she 
Said to Elias: What have I to 
do with thee, thou man of 
God? art thou come to me that 
my iniquities should be re- 
membered, and that thou 
Shouldst kill my son? And Elias 
Said to her: Give me thy son. 
And he took him out of her 
bosom, and carried him into 
the upper chamber where he 
abode, and laid him upon his 
own bed. And he cried to the 
Lord, and said: O Lord my God, 
hast Thou also affiicted the 
widow, with whom I am after 
a sort maintained, so as to kill 
her son? And he stretched, and 
measured himself upon the 
child three times, and cried to 
the Lord, and said: O Lord my 


Léctio libri Regum. 


N DIÉBUS ills: ZEgrotávit 

fílius mulíeris matris- 
famílias, et erat languor for- 
tissimus, ita ut non reman- 
éret in eo halitus. Dixit ergo 
ad Eliam: Quid mihi et tibi, 
vir Dei? Ingréssus es ad me, 
ut rememoraréntur iniqui- 
tates mez, et interfíceres fíl- 
ium meum? Et ait ad eam 
Elias: Da mihi filium tuum. 
Tulitque eum de sinu ejus, et 
portávit in cenaculum ubi 
ipse manébat, et pósuit super 
léctulum suum. Et clamávit 
ad Dóminum, et dixit: Dó- 
mine, Deus meus, étiam ne 
víduam, apud quam ego ut- 
cümque susténtor, afflixisti, 
ut interficeres filium ejus? 
Et expandit se atque mensus 
est super püerum tribus víci- 
bus, et clamávit ad Dóminum, 
et ait: Dómine, Deus meus, 
revertátur, dbsecro, Anima 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FRIDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


püeri hujus in viscera ejus. 
Et exaudívit Dóminus vocem 
Elie: et revérsa est ánima 
peri intra eum, et revixit. 
Tulitque Elías püerum, et 
depósuit eum de cenaculo in 
inferiórem domum, et trádidit 
matri sue, et ait illi: En vivit 
fílius tuus. Dixitque mülier 
ad Elíam: Nunc in isto cog- 
novi, quóniam vir Dei es tu, 
et verbum Dómini in ore tuo 
verum est. 


351 


God, let the soul of this child, 
I beseech Thee, return into his 
body. And the Lord heard the 
voice of Elias: and the soul of 
the child returned unto him, 
and he revived. And Elias took 
the- child, and brought him 
down from the upper chamber 
to the house below, and deliv- 
ered him to his mother, and 
Said to her: Behold thy son 
liveth. And the woman said to 
Elias: Now, by this I know that 
thou art a man of God, and the 


word of the Lord in thy mouth is true. 
Gradual. Ps.117,8,9 


Bonum est confídere in 


It is good to confide in the 


Domino, quam confidere in Lord, rather than to have con- 
hómine. V. Bonum estsperáre fidence in man: Y. It is good 
in Dómino, quam speráre in to trust in the Lord rather than 


princípibus. 


to trust in princes. 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 
LJ 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. 


% Sequéntía sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Erat qui- 
dam languens Lázarus a 
Bethánia, de castéllo Mariæ, 
et Marthæ soróris ejus. (Ma- 
ria autem erat, quæ unxit Dó- 
minum unguénto et extérsit 
pedes ejus capillis suis: cujus 
frater Lázarus infirmabátur. 
Misérunt ergo soróres ejus ad 
eum, dicéntes: Dómine, ecce 
quem amas infírmátur. Au- 
diens autem Jesus dixit eis: 
Infírmitas hee non est ad 
mortem, sed pro glória Dei, ut 
gloritícétur FíliusDeipeream. 
Diligébat autem Jesus Mar- 
tham, et sordrem ejusMariam, 
et Lazarum. Ut ergo audivit, 
quia infírmabátur, tunc qui- 
dem mansit in eódem loco 


11, 1-45 

"B Continuation of the holy 

Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, there was 2 
certain man sick, named 
Lazarus, of Bethania, of the 
town of Mary and of Martha 
her sister. (And Mary was she 
that anointed the Lord with 
ointment, and wiped His feet 
with her hair; whose brother 
Lazarus was sick). His sisters 
therefore sent to Him, saying, 
Lord, behold he whom Thou 
lovest is sick. And Jesus hear- 
ing it said to them, This sick- 
ness is not unto death, but for 
the glory of God, that the Son 
of God may be glorified by it. 
Now, Jesus loved Martha, and 
her sister Mary, and Lazarus. 
When He had heard therefore 
that he was sick, He still re- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


$52 FRIDAY, FOURTH 
mained in the same place two 
days. Then after that, He said 
to His disciples, Let us go into 
Judea again. The disciples say 
to Him, Rabbi, the Jews but 
now sought to stone Thee; and 
goest Thou thither again? Jesus 
answered, Are there not twelve 
hours of the day? If a man 
walk in the day he stumbleth 
not, because he seeth the light 
of this world: but if he walk in 
the night he stumbleth, because 
the light js not in him. These 
things He said, and after that 
He said to them, Lazarus our 
friend sleepeth; but I go that 
I may awake him out of sleep. 
His disciples therefore said, 
Lord, if he sleep he shall do 
well; but Jesus spoke of his 
death, and they thought that 
He spoke of the repose of sleep. 
Then therefore Jesus said to 
them plainly, Lazarus is dead; 
and I am glad for your sakes 
that I was not there, that you 
may believe: but let us go to 
him. Thomas therefore, who is 
called Didymus, said to his 
fellow-disciples, Let us also go 
that we may die with Him. 
Jesus therefore came, and 
found that he had been four 
days already in the grave. 
(Now Bethania was near Jerus- 
alem, about fifteen furlongs 
off). And many of the Jews 
were come to Martha and Mary, 
to comfort them concerning 
their brother. Martha, there- 
fore, as soon as she heard that 
Jesus was come, went to meet 
Him: but Mary sat at home. 
Martha therefore said to Jesus, 
Lord, if Thou hadst been here, 
my brother had not died. But 
now also I know that whatso- 
ever Thou wilt ask of God, God 


WEEK OF LENT 


duóbus diébus. Deinde post 
bec dixit discípulis suis: 
Eámus in Judeam íterum. 
Dicunt ei discípuli: Rabbi, 
nunc querébant te Judei lapi- 
dáre, et íterum vadis illuc? 
Respóndit Jesus: Nonne duó- 
decim sunt hore diéi? Si quis 
ambuláverit in die, non of- 
féndit, quia lucem hujus mun- 
di videt: si autem ambuláverit 
in nocte, offendit, quia lux 
non est in eo. Hzc ait, et post 
hac dixit eis: Lazarus amicus 
noster dormit: sed vado, ut a 
somno éxcitem eum. Dixérunt 
ergo discípuli ejus: Dómine, si 
dormit, salvus erit. Díxerat 
autem Jesus de morte ejus: 
illi autem putavérunt, quia de 
dormitióne somni diceret. 
Tunc ergo Jesus dixit eis 
maniféste: Lázarus mórtuus 
est: et gáudeo propter vos, ut 
credátis, quóniam non eram 
ibi: sed eámus ad eum. Dixit 
ergo Thomas, qui dicitur Dí- 
dymus, ad  condiscípulos: 
Eámus et nos, ut moriámur 
cum eo. Venit ítaque Jesus: 
et invénit eum quátuor dies 
jam in monuménto habéntem. 
(Erat autem Bethánia juxta 
Jerosólyman quasi  stádiis 
quindecim). Multi autem ex 
Judzis vénerant ad Martham 
et Mariam, ut consolaréntur 
eas de fratre suo. Martha ergo 
ut audívit quia Jesus venit, oc- 
cürrit illi: María autem domi 
sedébat. Dixit ergo Martha ad 
Jesum: Dómine, si fuisses hic, 
frater meus non fuisset mór- 
tuus: sed et nunc scio, quia 
quæcúmque popósceris a Deo, 
dabit tibi Deus. Dicit illi Je- 
sus: Resürget frater tuus. 
Dicit ei Martha: Scio quia 
resürget in resurrectióne in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


—] 


FRIDAY, FOURTH WEEK. OF LENT 


novíssimo die. Dixit ei Jesus: 
Ego sum resurréctio, et vita: 
qui.credit in me, étiam si 
mórtuus füerit, vivet: et om- 
nis, qui Vivit et credit in me, 
non moriétur in etérnum. 
Credis hoc? Ait illi: Utique, 
Dómine, ego crédidi, quia tu 
es Christus Fílius Dei vivi, 
qui in hunc mundum venísti. 
Et cum hzc dixisset, ábiit, et 
vocávit Mariam sorórem suam 
siléntio, dicens: Magister 
adest, et vocat te. Illa ut au- 
divit, surgit cito, et venit ad 
eüm: nondum enim vénerat 
Jesus in castéllum: sed erat 
adhuc in illo loco, ubi occür- 
rerat ei Martha. Judei ergo, 
qui erant cum ea in domo et 
consolabantur eam, cum vi- 
dissent Mariam, quia cito 
surréxit, et éxiit, secüti sunt 
eam, dicéntes: Quia vadit ad 
monuméntum, ut ploret ibi. 
María ergo cum venísset ubi 
erat Jesus, videns eum, cécidit 
ad pedés ejus, et dicit ei: Dó- 
mine, si fuísses hic, non esset 
mórtuus frater meus. Jesus 
ergo, ut vidit eam plorántem, 
et Judæos, qui vénerant cum 
ea, plorántes, infrémuit spi- 
ritu, et turbávit sefpsum, et 
dixit: Ubi posuístis eum? Di- 
cunt ei: Dómine, veni, et vide. 
Et lacrimátus est Jesus. Dixé- 
runt ergo Judei: Ecce quó- 
modo amábat eum. Quidam 
autem ex ipsis dixerunt: Non 
póterat hic, qui apéruit ócu- 
los ceci nati, fácere ut hic 
non morerétur? Jesus ergo 
rursum fremens in semetípso, 
venit ad monuméntum. Erat 
autem Spelinca, et lapis su- 
perpésitus erat ei. Ait Jesus: 
'Tóllite lápidem. Dicit ei Mar- 
tha Soror ejus, qui mórtuus 


353 


will give it Thee. Jesus saith to 
her, Thy brother shall rise 
again. Martha saith to Him, I 
know that he shall rise again 
in the resurrection at the last 
day. Jesus said to her, I am the 
resurrection and the life: he 
that believeth in Me, although 
he be dead, shall live; and every 
one that liveth and believeth 
in Me, shall not die forever. 
Believest thou this? She saith 
to Him, Yea, Lord, I have be- 
lieved, that Thou are Christ, 
the Son of the living God, 
Who art come into this world. 
And when she had said these 
things she went, and called her 
sister Mary secretly, saying, 
‘The Master is come, and calleth 
for thee. She, as soon as she 
heard this, riseth quickly, and 
cometh to Him. For Jesus was 
not yet come into the town, but 
He was still in that place where 
Martha had met Him. The 
Jews therefore, who were with 
her in the house and com- 
forted her, when they saw 


-Mary that she rose up speedily, 


and went out, followed her, say- 
ing, She goeth to the grave to 
weep there. When Mary there- 
fore was come where Jesus was, 
seeing Him, she fel down at 
His feet, and saith to Him, 
Lord, if Thou hadst been here, 
my brother had not died. Jesus 
therefore, when He saw her 
weeping, and the Jews that 
were come with her, weeping, 
groaned in the spirit, and 
troubled Himself; and said, 
Where have you laid him? 
They say to Him, Lord, come 
and see. And Jesus wept. The 
Jews therefore said, Behold 
how He loved him! But some of 
them said, Could not He that 


http://ccwatershed.org 


354 


opened the eyes of the man 
born blind, have caused that 
this man should not die? Jesus 
therefore again groaning in 
Himself, cometh to the sepul- 
chre. Now it was a cave: and à 
stone was laid over it. Jesus 
saith, Take away the stone. 
Martha, the sister of him that 
was dead, saith to Him, Lord, 
by this time he stinketh; for 
he is now of four days. Jesus 
saith to her, Did not I say to 
thee that if thou believe, thou 
Shalt see the glory of God? 
They took therefore the stone 
away: and Jesus lifting up His 
eyes, said, Father, I give Thee 
thanks that Thou hast heard 
Me; and I knew that Thou 
hearest Me always, but because 
of the people who stand about 
have I said it, that they may 
believe that Thou hast sent Me. 
When He had said these things, 
He cried with a loud voice, 


FRIDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


füerat: Dómine, jam fetet, 
quatriduánus est enim. Dicit 
ei Jesus: Nonne dixi tibi quó- 
niam si credíderis vidébis gló- 
riam Dei? Tulérunt ergo láp- 
idem: Jesus autem elevátis 
sursum óculis, dixit: Pater, 
grátias ago tibi, quóniam au- 
dísti me. Ego autem sciébam 
quia semper me audis, sed 
propter populum qui circüm- 
Stat, dixi; ut credant quia tu 
me misisti. Hæc cum dix- 
ísset, voce magna clamá- 
vit: Lazare, veni foras. Et sta- 
tim pródiit qui füerat mór- 
tuus, ligátus pedes et manus 
institis, et fácies illius su- 
dario erat ligáta. Dixit eis Je- 
sus: Sólvite eum, et sinite 
abire. Multi ergo ex Judzis, 
qui vénerant ad Maríam, et 
Martham, et víderant que fe- 
cit Jesus credidérunt in eum. 


Lazarus, come forth. And presently he that had been dead 
came forth, bound feet and hands with winding-bands, and 
his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus said to them. 
Loose him, and let him go. Many therefore of the Jews who 
were come to Mary and Martha, and had seen the things that 
Jesus did, believed in Him. 


Offertory. Ps. 17, 28, 32` 
Thou wilt save the humble Pópulum, hümilem salvum 
people, O Lord, and wilt bring facies, Dómine, et óculos: su- 
down the eyes of the proud: perbórum humiliábis: quóni- 
for who is God, but Thou, O am quis Deus præter te, Dó- 
Lord? mine? 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


ay the gifts we offer 

purify us, O Lord, we 
pray, and continually appease ficent: et te nobis júgiter fá- 
Thee in our regard. Through ciant esse placátum. Per Dó- 
our Lord. minum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; ird Secret, 
O God to Whom alone, page 829. ee dad , 


Preface No. 3, page 802. 


ÜNERA nos, Dómine, 
quesumus obláta puri- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


E dii 


SATURDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 355 


Communion. John 11, 33, 35, 43, 44, 39 


The Lord seeing the sisters 
of Lazarus weeping at the tomb, 
wept before the Jews, and cried 
out, Lazarus, come forth: and 
he that had been dead four 
days came forth bound hands 
and feet. 


Videns Dóminus flentes sor- 
Ores Lázari ad monuméntum, 
Jacrimatus est coram Ju- 
dxis, et exclamavit: Lazare, 
veni foras: et pródiit ligátis 
mánibus et pédibus, qui füerat 
quatriduánus mórtuus. 


Postcommunion 


Æc NOS, qusesumus, Dó- Ax the participation of 
mine, participátio sac- this sacrament, we pray, 
raménti: et a própriis reáti- O Lord, unceasingly keep us 
bus indesinénter expédiat, et free from sins of our own and 
ab ómnibus tueátur advérsis. guard us from all hostile pow- 
Per Dóminuum. ers. Through our Lord. 
Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty and merciful God, page 829. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
Deo. 

Da nobis, quesumus, omní- 
potens Deus: ut, qui infírmi- 
tátis nostre cónscii, de tua 
virtüte confídimus sub tua 
semper pietate gaudeámus. 
Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ow down your heads to 
God. 

Grant us, we beseech 'Thee, 
O almighty God, that, being 
conscious of our own infirmity, 
and confiding in Thy power, 
we may ever rejoice under Thy 
tender care. Through our Lord. 


Saturday, Fourth Week of Lent (Purple) 


STATION AT ST. NICHOLAS IN CARCERE 


The ‘Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


ITIÉNTES, Veníte ad aquas, 

dicit Dóminus: et qui 
non habétis prétium, venite, 
et bibite cum letitia. Ps. 77, 
1. Atténdite, pópule meus, le- 
gem meam: inclináte aurem 
vestram in verba oris mei. 
¥. Gloria Patri. 


Kyrie. page 761. 


Is. 55, 1 
ou that thirst come to 
the waters, saith the 


Lord; and you that have no 
money, come and drink with 
joy. Ps. 77, 1. Attend, O My 
people, to My law: incline yout 
ears to the words of My mouth. 
Y. Glory. 


Gloria is omitted. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


856 SATURDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


Prayer 


ba O Lord, by Thy IAT, Dómine, quaesumus, 
grace to make fruitful per grátiam tuam fruc- 
the fervor of our devotion; for tuósus nostre devotiónis af- 
the fasts we have undertaken féctus: quia tunc nobis pró- 
shall profit us only if they be derunt suscépta jejunia, si 
pleasing to Thy goodness. tue sint plácita pietati. Per 
Through our Lord. f Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third Prayer, Omnipotens, 
page 828. 


Lesson. Is. 49, 8-15 


Lesson from Isaias the Pro- 
phet. : : 
Hus saith the Lord, In an 

acceptable time I have 
heard thee, and in the day of 
salvation I have helped thee: 
and I have preserved thee, and 
given thee to be a covenant of 
the people that thou mightest 
raise up the earth, and possess 
the inheritances that were de- 
Stroyed; that thou mightest say 
to them that are bound. Come 
forth; and to them that are in 
darkness, Show . yourselves. 
They shall feed in the ways, 
and their pastures shall be in 
every plain. They shall not 
hunger, nor thirst, neither shall 
the heat nor the sun strike 
them; for He that is merciful 
to them shall be their Shepherd, 
and at the fountains of waters 
He shall give them drink, And 
I wil make all My mountains 
a way, and. My paths shall be 
exalted. Behold these shall 
come from afar, and behold 
these from the north and from 
the sea, and these from the 
South country. Give praise, O 
ye heavens, and rejoice, O 
earth; ye mountains give praise 
with jubilation: because tlie 
Lord hath comforted His peo- 


Léctio Isaiz Prophéto. 


C, dicit Dóminus: In 
témpore plácito exau- 

divi te, et in die salütis aux- 
iliátus sum tui: et servávi te, 
et dedi te in fedus pópuli, ut 
suscitáres terram, et possidé- 
res hereditátes dissipátas: ut 
diceres his, qui vincti sunt: 
Exite: et his, qui in ténebris: 
Revelámini, Super vias pas- 
céntur, et in ómnibus planis 
páscua eórum. Non esürient, 
neque sítient, et non percü- 
tiet eos estus et sol: quia mis- 
erátor eórum reget eos, et ad 
fontes aquárum potábit eos. 
Et ponam omnes montes meos 
in viam, et sémitz mex exalt- 
abuntur. Ecce isti de longe 
vénient, et ecce illi ab Aqui- 
lóne et mari, et isti de terra 
austráli. Laudáte, cæli, et ex- 
súlta, terra, jubiláte, montes, 
laudem: quia consolátus est 
Dóminus pópulum suum, ‘et 
péuperum suórum miserébi- 
tur. Et dixit Sion: Dereliquit. 
me Dóminus, et Dóminus ob- 
litus est mei. Numquid ob- 
livisci potest mülier infántem 
suum, ut non misereátur filio 
üteri sui? et si illa oblita 
füerit, ego tamen non obliví- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 357 
scar tui, dicit Dóminus omni- ple, and will have mercy on 
potens. His poor ones. And Sion said, 

The Lord hath forsaken me, 
and the Lord hath forgotten me. Can a woman forget her 
infant, so as not to have pity on the son of her womb? and 
if she should forget, yet will not I forget thee: saith the 


Lord almighty. 


Gradual. Ps.9, 14, 12 


Tibi Dómine, derelíctus est 
pauper: pupillo tu eris adjü- 
tor. J. Ut quid, Dómine, re- 
cessisti longe, déspicis in op- 
portunitátibus, in  tribula- 
tióne? dum supérbit impius, 
incénditur pauper. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


'To Thee, O Lord, is the poor 
man left: Thou wilt be a help 
to the orphan. Y. Why, O Lord, 
hast Thou retired afar off; why 
dost Thou slight us in our 
wants in time of trouble? 
whilst the wicked man is 
proud, the poor is set on fire. 


Gospel. John 8, 12-20 


m Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Locütus 

est Jesus turbis Judzór- 
um, dicens: Ego sum lux 
mundi: qui séquitur me, non 
ámbulat in ténebris, sed ha- 
bébit lumen vite. Dixérunt 
ergo et phariszi: Tu de te ipso 
testimónium pérhibes: testi- 
mónium tuum non est verum. 
Respóndit Jesus, et dixit eis: 
Et si ego testimónium perhí- 
beo de meípso, verum est tes- 
timónium meum: quia scio 
unde veni, et quo vado: vos 
autem nescítis unde vénio, 
aut quo vado. Vos secándum 
carnem judicátis: ego non jü- 
dico quemquam: et si judico 
ego, judícium meum verum 
est, quia solus non sum: sed 
ego, et qui misit me, Pater. Et 
in lege vestra scriptum est, 
quia duórum hóminum testi- 
mónium verum est. Ego sum, 
aui testimónium perhíbeo de 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT lime, Jesus spoke 

to the multitudes of the 

Jews, saying, I am the light of 
the world: he that followeth 
Me, walketh not in darkness, 
but shall have the light of life. 
The pharisees therefore said to 
Him, Thou givest testimony of 
Thyself; Thy testimony is not 
irue. Jesus answered and said 
to them. Although I give testi- 
mony of Myself, My testimony 
is true, for I know whence I 
come, and whither I go; but 
you know not whence I come, 
or whither I go. You judge ac- 
cording to the flesh: I judge 
not any man. And if I do judge, 
My judgment is true; because 
I am not alone, but I and the 
Father that sent Me. And in 
your law it is written, that the 
testimony of two men is true. 
I am one that giveth testi- 
mony of Myself; and the Father 


http://ccwatershed.org 


858 


that sent Me giveth testimony 
of Me. They said therefore to 
Him, Where is Thy Father? 
Jesus answered, Neither Me do 
you know, nor My Father: if 
you did know Me, perhaps you 
would know My Father also. 
These Words Jesus spoke in the 
treasury, teaching in the tem- 
ple: and no man laid hands on 
Him; because His hour was not 
yet come. 


Offertory. 


The Lord is become my firm- 
ament, and my refuge, and my 
deliverer: and in Him will I 
put my trust. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


SATURDAY, FOURTH WEEK OF LENT 


meipso: et testimónium per- 
hibet de me, qui misit me, 
Pater. Dicébant ergo ei: Ubi 
est Pater tuus? Respóndit 
Jesus: Neque me scitis, neque 
Patrem meum: si me scirétis, 
fórsitan et Patrem meum 
Scirétis. Hzc verba locütus est 
Jesus in gazophylácio, docens 
in templo: et nemo apprehén- 
dit eum, quia necdum vénerat 
hora ejus. 


Ps. 17, 3 


Factus est Dóminus firma- 
méntum meum, et refügium 
meum, et liberátor meus: et 
sperábo in eum. 


Secret 


ECEIVE Our offerings, we 

beseech 'Thee, O Lord, 
&nd be appeased, and in kind- 
ness turn our wills towards 
Thee, even though they resist 
Thee. Through our Lord. 


O BLATIÓNIBUS nostris, quæ- 

sumus, Dómine, placáre 
suscéptis: et ad te nostras 
étiam rebélles compélle pro- 
pitius voluntátes. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Second Secret, Graciously noar us, page 828; third Secret, 


O God to Whom alone, page 82 
Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. 


The Lord ruleth me, and I 
shall want nothing: He hath 
set me in a place of pasture: 
He hath brought me up on the 
water of refreshment. 


Ps.22,1,2 


Dóminus, regit me, et nihil 
mihi déerit: in loco pascue 
ibi me  collocávit: super 
aquam refectiónis educávit 
me. 


Postcommunion 


(D Thy holy things, we 
pray Thee, O Lord, 
purify us and, by their opera- 
tion, make us pleasing to Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


UA nos, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, sancta purificent: 

et operatióne sua tibi plácitos 
esse perfíciant, Per Dóminum, 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third Post- 
communion, Almighty end merciful God. vage 829. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PASSION SUNDAY 


389 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


UMILIÁTE capita vestra 
Deo. 

Deus, qui sperántibus in te 
miseréri pótius éligis quam 
irásci: da nobis digne flere 
mala, que fécimus; ut tue 
consolatiónis grátiam invení- 
re mereámur. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Copyright by Bennger Brothen. 


ow down your heads to 
God. 

O God, Who dost choose 
rather to have pity on them 
that hope in Thee than to be 
angry, grant us to weep, as be- 
comes us, for the evils we have 
done, that we may deserve to 
find the favor of Thy consola- 
tion. Through our Lord. 


Passion Sunday (Purple) 
STATION AT BT. PETER 
Sunday of the First Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 42, 1, 2 


única me, Deus, et discérne 
causam meam de gente 
non sancta: ab hómine iníquo, 
et dolóso éripe me: quia tu es 
Deus meus, et fortitüdo mea. 
Ps. 42, 3. Emítte lucem tuam, 
et veritátem tuam: ipsa 
me deduxérunt, et adduxérunt 
jn montem sanctum tuum, et 
in tabernácula tua. Jüdica me. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


UDGE me, O God, and dis- 
tinguish my cause from the 
nation that is not holy: deliver 
me from the unjust and deceit- 
ful man. For Thou art my 
God and my strength. Ps. 42, 3. 
Send forth Thy light and Thy 
iruth: they have conducted 
me, and brought me unto Thy 
holy hill and into Thy taber- 
nacles. Judge me. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


UzsUMUS, omnipotens 
Deus, famíliam tuam 


oox with favor upon Thy 
household, we beseech 


http://ccwatershed.org 


360 PASSION SUNDAY 

Thee, O almighty God, that, propitius réspice: ut, te lar- 
by Thy gift, it may be governed giénte, regátur in córpore; et, 
in body and, by Thy preserva- te servante, custodiátur in 


tion, may be guarded in spirit. 
Through our Lord. 


‘mente. Per Dóminum. 


On this day and until Saturday after Easter Sunday, inclusive, 
one other Prayer only is added, that for the Church, Ecclesiae 


tue, page 825, or 
page 826. 


that for the Pope, Deus omnium fidelium, 


Epistle. Heb. 9, 11-15 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Hebrews. 


Du. Christ being 
come, à high priest of 
the good things to come, by a 
greater and more perfect tab- 
ernacle, not made with hands, 
that is, not of this creation, 
neither by the blood of goats 
or of calves, but by His own 
blood, entered once into the 
Holies, having obtained eter- 
nal redemption. For if the blood 
of goats and of oxen, and the 
ashes of an heifer being 
sprinkled sanctify such as are 
defiled, to the cleansing of the 
flesh, how much more shall the 
blood of Christ, Who, through 
the Holy Ghost, offered Him- 
self without spot to God, 
cleanse our conscience from 
dead works, to serve the living 
God? And therefore He is the 
mediator of the New Testa- 
ment: that by means of His 
death, for the redemption of 
those  transgressions which 
were under the former testa- 
ment; they that are called may 
receive the promise of eternal 
inheritance; in Christ Jesus 
our Lord. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Hebreos. 


RATRES: Christus assís- 

tens póntifex futurd- 
rum bonórum, per ámplius et 
perféctius tabernáculum non 
manufáctum, id est, non hu- 
jus creatiónis: neque per san- 
guinem hircórum, aut vitu- 
lórum, sed per próprium sán- 
guinem 1introívit semel in 
Sancta, xtérna redemptióne 
invénta. Si enim sanguis hir- 
córum, et taurórum, et cinis 
vitule aspérsus, inquinátos 
sanctificat ad emundatiónem 
carnis: quanto magis sanguis 
Christi, qui per Spiritum 
Sanctum semetipsum ébtulit 
immaculatum Deo, emundá- 
bit consciéntiam nostram ab 
opéribus mórtuis, ad servién- 
dum Deo vivénti? Et ídeo 
novi testaménti mediátor est: 
ut morte intercedénte, in re- 
demptiónem eárum prevari- 
catiónum, qus erant sub 
prióri testaménto, repromis- 
siónem accipiant, qui vocáti 
sunt etérne hereditatis: in 
Christo Jesu Démino nostro, 


Gradual. Ps. 142, 9, 10 


Deliver me from my enemies, 
O Lord, teach me to do Thy will. 


Erípe me, Dómine, de ini- 
mícis meis: doce me fácere 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PASSION SUNDAY 


voluntátem tuam. V. Ps. 17, 
48, 49. Liberator meus, Dó- 
mine, de géntibus iracündis: 
ab insurgéntibus in me exal- 
tábis me: a viro iníquo erípie: 
me. ‘ 


Tract. 


Sepe expugnavérunt me 2 
juventüte mea. Y. Dicat nunc 
Israél: sepe expugnavérunt 
me a juventüte mea. Y. Ete- 
nim non potuérunt mihi: 
supra dorsum meum fabrica- 
vérunt peccatóres. Y. Prolon- 
gavérunt iniquitates suas: 
Déminus justus concidit cer- 
vices peccatórum. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


961 


Y. Ps. 17, 48, 49. My deliverer, 
O Lord, from the angry na- 
tions: Thou wilt lift me up 
above them that rise up against 
me: from the unjust man Thou 
wilt deliver me. 


Ps. 128, 1-4 


Often have they fought 
against me from my youth. y. 
Let Israel now say: often have 
they fought against me from 
my youth. Y. But they could 
noi prevail over me: the wicked 
have wrought upon my back. 
V. They have lengthened their 
iniquities: the Lord Who is 
just will cut the necks of sin- 
ners. 


Gospel. John 8, 46-59 


JB Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Dicébat 

Jesus turbis Judseórum: 
Quis ex vobis árguet me de 
peccáto? Si veritátem dico 
vobis, quare non créditis mi- 
hi? Qui ex Deo est, verba Dei 
&udit. Proptérea vos non au- 
dítis, quia ex Deo non estis. 
Respondérunt ergo Judei, et 
dixérunt ei: Nonne bene dí- 
cimus nos, quia Samaritánus 
es tu, et demónium habes? 
Respóndit Jesus: Ego demé- 
nium non hábeo: sed honorí- 
fico Patrem meum, et vos in- 
honorástis me. Ego autem 
non quero glóriam meam: est 
qui querat, et jüdicet. Amen, 
&men dico vobis: si quis ser- 
mónem meum  serváverit, 
mortem non vidévit in ætér- 
num. Dixérunt ergo Judel: 
Nunc cogóvimus quia dæmó- 


*H Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
l T THAT time, Jesus said 
to the multitudes of the 
Jews, Which of you shall con- 
vince Me of sin? If I say the 
truth to you, why do you not 
believe Me? He that is of God, 
heareth the words of God. 
Therefore. you hear them not, 
because you are not of God, 
The Jews therefore answered 
and said to Him, Do not we say 
well, that Thou art a Samari- 
tan, and hast a devil? Jesus 
answered, I have not a devil: 
but I honor My Father, and you 
have dishonored Me. But I 
seek not my own glory; there is 
one that seeketh and judgeth. 
Amen, amen, I say to you, If 
any man keep My word, he 
Shall not see death for. ever. 
The Jews therefore said, Now 
We know that Thou hast a 


http://ccwatershed.org 


362 


devil. Abraham is dead, and 
the prophets; and Thou sayest, 
If any man keep My word, he 
shall not taste death forever. 
Art Thou greater than our 
father Abraham, who is dead? 
and the prophets are dead. 
Wnom dost Thou make Thy- 
self? Jesus answered, If I 
glorify Myself, My glory is 
nothing. It is My Father that 
glorifieth Me, of Whom you say 
that He is your God. And you 
have not known Him; but I 
know Him. And if I shall say 
that I know Him not, I shall be 
like to you, a liar. But I do 
know Him, and do Keep His 
word. Abraham your father re- 
joiced that he might see My 
day: he saw it, and was glad. 
The Jews therefore said to 
Him, Thou are not yet fifty 
years old and hast Thou seen 
Abraham? Jesus said to them, 
Amen, amen, I say to you, be- 
fore Abraham was made, I am. 
They took up stones therefore 
to cast at Him; but Jesus hid 
Himself, and went out of the 
temple. 


Creed, page 765. 


PASSION SUNDAY 


nium habes. Abraham mór- 
tuus est, et prophétse: et tu 
dicis: Si quis sermónem 
meum serváverit, non Bustá- 
bit mortem in etérnum. Num- 
quid tu major es patre nostro 
Abraham, qui mórtuus est? et 
prophéte mórtui sunt. Quem 
teípsum facis? Respóndit Je- 
sus: Si ego glorífico meípsum, 
glória mea nihil est: est Pater 
meus, qui gloríficat me, quem 
vos: dícitis quia Deus vester 
est, et non cognovístis eum: 
ego autem novi eum: et si 
díxero, quia non scio eum, ero 
similis vobis, mendax. Sed 
scio eum, et sermónem ejus 
servo. Abraham pater vester 
exsultávit ut vidéret diem 
meum: vidit, et gavísus est. 
Dixérunt ergo Jude ad eum: 


Quinquaginta annos nondum 


habes, et Abraham vidisti? 
Dixit eis Jesus: Amen, amen 
dico vobis, ántequam Abra- 
ham fíeret, ego sum. Tulérunt 
ergo lápides, ut jácerent in 
eum: Jesus autem abscóndit 
se, et exívit de templo. 


Offertory. Ps.118, 17, 107 

I will confess to Thee, O Lord, — Confitébor tibi, Dómine, in 
with my whole heart: render to toto corde meo: retríbue ser- 
Thy servant: I shall live and vo tuo: vivam, et custódiam 
keep Thy words: enliven me ac- sermónes tuos: vivifica me se~- 
cording to Thy word, O Lord. | cündum verbum tuum, Dó- 

mine. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret . 


AY these offerings, we mc munera, quesumus, 

pray Thee, O Lord, both Dómine, et víncula nos- 
loose the bonds of our sins, and tre pravitátls absólvant, et 
win for us the gifts of Thy tus nobis misericórdie dona 
mercy. Through our Lord. concilient. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MONDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


363 


Second Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 
826, 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


Communion. 
Hoc corpus, quod pro vobis 
tradétur: hic calix novi testa- 
ménti est in meo sanguine, 
dicit Dóminus: hoc facite, 
quotiescimque  sümitis, in 
meam commemoratiónem. 


1 Cor. 11, 24, 25 


This is My body which shall 
be delivered for you: this is 
the chalice of the New 'Testa- 
ment in My blood, saith the 
Lord: do this, as often as you 
receive it, in commemoration 
of Me. 


Postcommunion 


DEsTO nobis, Dómine 
Deus noster: et quos 
tuis mystériis recreásti, per- 


RAW near to us, O Lord, 
our God, and with Thy 
perpetual succor defend those 


pétuis defénde subsídiis. Per whom Thou hast refreshed with 


Dóminum. 


Thy mysteries. Through our 


Lord. 


Second Postcommunion for the Chureh, page 825; or for the 


Pope, page 826. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Monday in Passion Week (Purple) 
STATION AT St. CHRYSOGONUS 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 
ISERÉRE mihi, Dómine, 
(D quóniam — conculcávit 


me homo: tota die bellans 
tribulávit me, Ps. 55, 3. Con- 
culeavérunt me inimíci mei 
tota die: quóniam multi bell- 
&ntes advérsum me. Miserére, 


Kyrie, page 761. 


Ps. 55,2 


AVE mercy on me, O Lord, 

for man hath trodden 

me under foot: all the day long 

he hath afflicted me, fighting 

against me. Ps. 55, 3. My en- 

emies have trodden on me all 

the day long: for they are many 

that make war against me. 
Have mercy. — ` 


Gloria is omitted, 


Prayer 


ANCTÍFICA, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, nostra jejünia: et 
cunctérum nobis indulgén- 
tam propitius largíre culpá- 
rum. Per Dóminum. 


seech Thee, O Lord, and 
mercifully grant us the for- 
giveness of all our sins. 
Through our Lord. 


S'en" our fasts, we be- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


364 


MONDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


Second Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


page 826. 


Lesson. Jonas 3, 1-10 


Lesson from Jonas the Pro- 
phet. 
N THOSE days, the word of 
the Lord came to Jonas the 
second time, saying: Arise, and 
go to Ninive the great city; and 
preach in it the preaching that 
I bid thee. And Jonas arose 
and went to Ninive according 
to the word of the Lord. Now 
Ninive was 2 great city of three 
days' journey. And Jonas be- 
gan to enter into the city one 
day's journey, and he cried, 
and said, Yet forty days, and 
Ninive shall be destroyed. And 
the men of Ninive believed in 
God, and they proclaimed a 
fast, and put on sackcloth 
from the greatest to the least. 
And the word came to the king 
of Ninive: and he rose up out 
of his throne, and cast away 
his robe from him, and was 
clothed with sackcloth, and sat 
in ashes; and he caused it to 
be proclaimed and published in 
Ninive from the mouth of the 
king and of his princes, saying, 
Let neither men, nor beasts, 
nor oxen, nor sheep, taste any 
thing; let them not feed, nor 
drink water, and let men and 
beasts be covered with sack- 
cloth, and cry to the Lord with 
all their strength, and let 
them turn everyone from his 
evil way, and from the iniquity 
that is in their hands. Who can 
tell if God will turn and for- 
give, and will turn away from 
His fierce anger, and we shall 
not perish? And God saw their 
works, that they were turned 


Léctio Jone Prophéte. 


N DIÉBUS ILLIS: Factum est 
T verbum Dómini ad Jo- 
nam prophétam secündo, di- 
cens: Surge, et vade in Níni- 
ven civitatem magnam: et 
predica in ea predicatiénem, 
quam ego loquor ad te. Et sur- 
réxit Jonas, et ábiit in Nini- 
ven juxta verbum Dómini. Et 
Nínive erat cívitas magna 
ltínere trium diérum. Et coepit 
Jonas introfre in civitátem 
itinere diéi uníus: et clamávit, 
et dixit: Adhuc quadraginta 
dies, et Nínive subvertétur. 
Et credidérunt viri Ninivite in 
Deum: et predicavérunt je- 
jünium, et vestíti sunt saccis 
a majóre usque ad. minórem. 
Et pervénit verbum ad regem 
Nínive: et surréxit de sólio 
suo, et abjécit vestiméntum 
suum a se, et indütus est sac- 
co, et sedit in cinere. Et cla- 
mávit, et dixit in Nínive ex 
ore regis, et príncipum ejus, 
dicens: Hómines, et juménta, 
et boves, et pécora non gus- 
tent quidquam: nec pascán- 
tur, et aquam non bibant. Et 
operiántur, saccis hómines, et 
juménta, et clament ad Dó- 
minum in fortitüdine, et con- 
vertátur vir a via sua mala, et 
ab iniquitáte, quz est in má- 
nibus eórum. Quis scit, si con- 
vertátur, et ignéscat Deus: et 
revertatur a furóre ire sue, et 
non peribimus? Et vidit Deus 
ópera eórum, quia convérsi 
sunt de via sua mala: et mis- 
értus est pópulo suo. Dómi- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


e 


MONDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


nus Deus noster. 


Gradual. 


Deus, exáudi, oratiónem 
meam: áuribus pércipe verba 
oris mel. V. Deus, in nómine 
tuo salvum me fac, et in vir- 
iüte tua líbera me. 


365 


from their evil way; and the 
Lord our God had mercy upon 
His people. 


Ps. 53, 4. 3 


O God, hear my prayer: give 
ear to the words of my mouth. 
¥. Save me, O God, by Thy 
name: and in Thy power de- 
liver me. 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 7, 32-39 


"4 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Misérunt 
principes, et phariszi 
ministros ut apprehénderent 
Jesum. Dixit ergo eis Jesus: 
Adhuc módicum tempus vo- 
bíscum sum: et vado ad eum 
qui me misit. Querétis me, et 
non inveniétis: et ubi ego 
sum, vos non potéstis venire. 
Dixérunt ergo Judzi ad seme- 
tipsos: Quo hic itürus est, 
quia non inveniémus eum? 
numquid in dispersiónem gén- 
tium itürus est, et doctürus 
gentes? Quis est hic sermo 
quem dixit: Querétis me, et 
non inveniétis: et ubi sum 
ego, vos non potéstis. venire? 
In novissimo autem die mag- 
no festivitátis stabat Jesus, et 
elamábat, dicens: Si quis sitit, 
véniat ad me, et bibat. Qui 
credit in me, sicut dicit Scrip- 
túra, flümina de ventre ejus 
fluent aque vive. Hoc autem 
dixit de Spiritu, quem accep- 
türi erant credéntes in eum. 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, the rulers 
2nd pharisees sent min- 
isters to apprehend Jesus. Jesus 
therefore said to them, Yet a 
little while and I am with you; 
and then I go to Him that sent 
Me. You shall seek Me, and 
shall not find. Me; and where 
Iam, thither you can not come. 
The Jews therefore said among 
themselves, Whither wil He 
£o, that we shall not find Him? 
wil He go to the dispersed 
among the gentiles, and teach 
the gentiles? What is this say- 
ing that He hath said: You 
shall seek Me, and shall not 
find Me; and where I am, you 
can not come? And on the last 
and great day of the festivity, 
Jesus stood and cried, saying, 
If any man thirst, let him come 
to Me, and drink. He that be- 
lieveth in Me, as the Scripture 
saith, Out of his belly shall flow 
rivers of living water. Now this 
He said of the Spirit which 
they should receive who be- 
lieved in Him. 


Offertory. Ps.6, 5 


Dómine, convértere, et éripe 


Turn to me, O Lord, and de- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


866 TUESDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


liver my soul; O save me for ánimam meam: salvum me 
Thy mercy's sake. fac propter  misericórdiam 
tuam. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
RANT uS, O Lord, our God, g-YONcEpE nobis, Dómine 
that this saving victim Deus noster: ut hzc hós- 


may become the satisfaction tia salutaris, et nostrórum fiat 
for our sins and the propitia- purgátio delictórum et tue 
tion of Thy majesty. Through propitiátio majestatis. Per 
our Lord. Dóminum. 

poe Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Preface No. 4, page 803, 


Communion. Ps. 23, 10 


The Lord of hosts, He is the Dóminus virtütum ipse est 
King of glory. m Rex glorie. 


Postcommunion 
AY the participation of ACRAMÉNTI tui, quesumus, 
@ Thy sacrament, we be- Dómine, participátio sal- 
seech Thee, O Lord, bring us utáris, et purificatiónem nobis 
both purification and healing. tribuat, et medélam. Per Dó- 
Through our Lord. minum. 
Second Postcommunion for the Church, page 825; or for the 
Pope, page 826. : 
Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 
ow down your heads to UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
God. Deo. 

Give Thy people, we beseech Da, qusesumus, Dómine, 
Thee, O Lord, health of soul pópulo tuo salütem mentis et 
and body, that, by persevering córporis: ut. bonis opéribus 
in good works, we may ever de- inheréndo, tua semper mere- 
serve to be defended by Thy átur protectióne deféndi. Per 
protection. Through our Lord. Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Tuesday in Passion Week (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. CYRIACUS 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 26, 14 
XPECT the Lord, do man- XPÉCTA Dóminum viri- 


fully: and let thy heart liter age: et confortétur 
take courage, and wait thou cor tuum, et süstine Dómin- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TUESDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


um. Ps. 26, 1. Dóminus illum- 
indtio mea, et salus mea: 
quem timébo? Exspécta Dó- 
minum. 

Kytie, Page 761. 


367 


for the Lord. Ps. 26, 1. The 
Lord is my light and my sal- 
vation: whom shall I fear? 


Expect. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


OSTRA libi, Dómine, 
qusesumus, sint accép- 
ta jejünia: que nos et ex- 
piándo grátia tua dignos ef- 
ficiant: et ad remédia per- 
Gücant ætérna. Per Dóminum. 


AY our fasts be acceptable 
(D to Thee, O Lord; may 
they atone for our sins and 
render us worthy of Thy grace; 
and may they lead us to eternal 
remedies. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


page 826. 


Lesson. Dan. 14, 17; 28-42 


Léctio Daniélis Prophéte. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Congregati 
I sunt Babylónii ad regem, 
et dixérunt ei: Trade nobis 
Daniélem, qui Bel destruxit, 
et dracónem interfécit, alió- 
quin interficiémus te, et do- 
mum tuam. Vidit ergo rex 
quod irrüerent in eum vehe- 
ménter: et necessitáte com- 
pülsus trádidit eis Daniélem. 
Qui misérunt eum in lacum 
leónum, et erat ibi diébus 
Sex. Porro in lacu erant leó- 
nes septem, et dabántur eis 
duo córpora quotídie, et due 
oves: et tunc non data sunt 
eis, ut devorárent Daniélem, 
Erat autem Hábacuc proph- 
éta in Judæa, et ipse cóxerat 
pulméntum, et  intríverat 
penes in alvéolo: et ibat in 
campum, ut ferret messóribus. 
Dixitque Angelus Dómini ad 
Hábacuc: Fer  prándium, 
quod habes, in Babylónem 
Daniél qui est in lacu leó- 
num. Et dixit Hábacuc: Dó- 
mine, Babylónem non vidi, et 
lacum néscio. Et apprehén- 
dit eum Angelus Domini in 


Lesson from Daniel the 


Prophet. 


N THOSE days, the Baby- 

lonians.came to the king 
and said to him, Deliver us 
Daniel, who hath destroyed 
Bel, and slain the dragon; or 
else we will destroy thee and 
thy house. And the king saw 
that they pressed upon him 
violently; and, being con- 
strained by necessity he deliv- 
ered Daniel to them: and they 
cast him into the den of lions, 
and he was there six days. 
And in the den there were 
seven lions, and they had given 
to them two carcasses every 
day, and two sheep; but then 
they were not given unto them, 
that they might devour Dan- 
iel. Now there was in Judea a 
prophet called Habacuc: and 
he had boiled pottage, and had 
broken bread in a bowl, and 
was going into the field to carry 
it to the reapers. And the angel 
of the Lord said to Habacuc, 
Carry the dinner which thou 
hast into Babylon, to Daniel 
who is in the lion's den. And 
Habacuc said, Lord, I never 


http://ccwatershed.org 


368 


saw Babylon, nor do I know 
the den. And the angel of the 
Lord took him by the top of 
his head and carried him by 
the hair of his head, and set 
him in Babylon, over the den, 
in the force of his spirit. And 
Habacuc cried, saying, O Dan- 
iel, thou servant of God, take 
the dinner that God hath sent 
thee. And Daniel said, Thou 
hast remembered me, O God, 
and Thou hast not forsaken 
them that love Thee. And Dan- 
iel arose, and ate. And the 
angel of the Lord presently set 
Habacuc again in his own 
place. And upon the seventh 
day the king came to bewail 
Daniel: and he came to the 
den, and looked in, and behold 
Daniel was sitting in the midst 
of the lions. And the king cried 
out with a loud voice, saying, 
Great art Thou, O Lord, the 
God of Daniel. And he drew 
him out of the lion's den; but 
those that had been the cause 
of his destruction, he cast into 
the den, and they were de- 
voured in a moment before 
him. Then the king said, let all 


TUESDAY IN PASSION WEEE 


vértice ejus, et portávit eum 
capílo cápitis sui, posuítque 
eum in Babylóne supra lacum 
1n impetu spíritus sui. Et cla- 
mávit Habacuc, dicens: Dán- 
jel, serve Det, tolle prándi- 
um, quod misit tibi Deus. Et 
ait Dániel: Recordátus es 
mei, Deus, et non dereliquísti 
diligéntes te.  Surgénsque 
Daniel comédit. Porro Ange- 
lus Démini restituit Habacuc 
conféstim in loco suo. Venit 
ergo rex die séptimo, ut lu- 
géret Daniélem: et venit ad 
lacum, et introspéxit, et ecce 
Dániel sedens in médio leó- 
num. Et exclamávit voce 
magna rex, dicens: Magnus 
es, Dómine Deus Daniélis. Et 
extráxit eum de lacu leónum. 
Porro illos, qui perditiónis 
ejus causa füerant, intromísit 
in lacum, et devoráti sunt in 
moménto coram eo. Tunc rex 
ait: Páveant omnes habi- 
tantes in  univérsa terra 
Deum Daniélis: quia ipse est 
salvator, fáciens signa, et mi- 
rabilia in terra: qui liberávit 
Daniélem de lacu Jeónum. 


the inhabitants of the whole earth fear the God of Daniel; 
for He is the Saviour, working signs and wonders in the earth, 
Who hath delivered Daniel out of the lion's den. 


Gradual. Ps. 42, 1,3 


Distinguish my cause O 
Lord; deliver me from the un- 
just and deceitful man. Y. 
Send forth Thy light, and Thy 
truth: they have conducted 
me, and brought me unto Thy 
holy hill. 
` Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Discérne causam meam, 
Dómine: ab hómine iníquo, et 
dolóso éripe me. V. Emítte lu- 
cem tuam, et veritátem tuam: 
ipsa me deduxérunt, et ad- 
duxérunt in montem sanctum 
tuum. 


Gospel. John 7, 1-13 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


H& Sequéntia sancti Eyan- 
gélii secóndum Joánnem. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TUESDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


"N XLLO témpore: Ambulá- 
bat Jesus in Galileam, 
non enim volébat in Judeam 
ambuláre, quia querébant 
eum Judei interfícere. Erat 
autem in próximo dies festus 
Judeórum, Scenopégia. Dixé- 
runt autem ad eum fratres 
ejus: Transi hinc, et vade in 
Judeam, ut et discípuli tui 
vídeant ópera tua, que facis. 
Nemo quippe in occülto quid 
facit, et querit ipse in palam 
esse: si hec facis, manifésta 
tefpsum mundo. Neque enim 
fratres ejus credébant in eum, 
Dicit ergo eis Jesus: Tempus 
meum nondum advénit: tem- 
pus autem vestrum semper 
est par&tum. Non potest mun- 
Gus odísse vos: me autem 
odit: quia ego testimónium 
perhíbeo de illo, quod ópera 
ejus mala sunt. Vos ascéndite 
ad diem festum hunc, ego au- 
tem non ascéndo ad diem 
festum istum: quia meum 
tempus nondum implétum 
est. Hee cum dixísset, ipse 
mansit in Galilea. Ut autem 
ascendérunt fratres ejus, tunc 
et ipse ascéndit ad diem fes- 
tum non maniféste, sed quasi 
in occülto. Judei ergo que- 
rébant eum in die festi et 
dicébant: Ubi est ille? Et 
murmur multum erat in 
turba de eo. Quidam enim di- 
cébant: Quia bonus est. Alii 
autem dicébant. Non, sed se- 
dücit turbas. Nemo tamen pa- 
lam loquebátur de illo, prop- 
ter metum Judeórum. 


369 


T THAT time, Jesus 

walked in Galilee, for 
He would not walk in Judea, 
because the Jews sought to kill 
Him. Now the Jews' feast of 
Tabernacles was at hand: and 
His brethren said to Him, De- 
part from hence, and go into 
Judea that Thy disciples also 
may see Thy works. which Thou 
dost: for there is no man that 
doth any thing in secret, and 
he himself seeketh to be 
known openly. If Thou do these 
things, manifest Thyself to the 
world. For neither did His 
brethren believe in Him. Then 
Jesus said to them, My time is 
not yet come; but your time is 
always ready. The world can- 
not hate you; but Me it hateth, 
pecause I give testimony of it, 
that the works thereof are evil. 
Go you up to this festival-day, 
but I go not up to this festival- 
day; because My time is not 
accomplished. When He had 
said these things, He Himself 
stayed in Galilee, But after His 
brethren were gone up, then He 
also went up to the feast, not 
openly, but as it were in secret. 
The Jews therefore sought Him 
on the festival-day, and said, 
Where is He? And there was 
much murmuring among the 
multitude concerning Him: for 
some said, He is a good man; 
and others said, No, but He se- 
duceth the people. Yet.no man 
spoke openly of Him, "d fear 
of the Jews, 


Offertory. Ps. 9, 11, 12, 13 


Sperent in te omnes, qui 
novérunt nomen tuum, Dó- 
mine: quóniam non derelin- 


Let all those trust in 'Thee 
who know Thy name, O Lord: 
for Thou dost not forsake them 


http://ccwatershed.org 


370 TUESDAY IN PASSION WEEK 

that seek Thee: sing ye to the quis querénies te: psállite 
Lord Who dwelleth in Sion: for Dómino, qui hábitat in Sion: 
He hath not forgotten the quóniam non est oblitus ora- 


prayers of the poor. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


tiónes pauperum. 


Secret 


E BRING ‘Thee, O Lord, to 

be immolated, the vic- 
tims which signify the com- 
forts of this life, that we may 
not despair of the eternal 
promises. Through our Lord. 


ostras tibi, Dómine, de- 

férimus immolandas: 
que temporálem consolatió- 
nem signíficent; ut promissa 
non desperémus etérna. Per 
Dóminum. 


P add Seeret for the Church, page 825; or for ihe Pope, page 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


Communion. Ps. 24, 22 


Redeem me, O God of Israel, 
from all my tribulation. 


Rédime me, Deus Israél, ex 
ómnibus angüstiis meis. 


Postcommunion 


RANT US, We beseech Thee, 
O almighty God; that, by 


constantly following those 
things which are divine, we 
may be worthy to approach the 
heavenly gifts. Through our 
Lord. 


A, qusesumus, omnipo- 

tens Deus: ut que diví- 
na sunt, jügiter exsequéntes, 
donis mere&mur czléstibus 
propinquáre. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion for the Church, page 825; or for the 


Pope, page 826. 


Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 


God. 

Grant us, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, persevering service in 
Thy will, that in our time the 
people that obeyeth Thee may 
increase both in merit and in 
number. Through our Lord. 


Tx down your heads to 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
Deo. 

Da nobis, quesumus, Dó- 
mine: perseverántem in tua 
voluntate famulátum; ut in 
diébus nostris, et mérito et 
nümero, pópulus tibi sérviens 
augeátur. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


} 


—— 


aw 


yal Wap Wy 


WEDNESDAY IN PASSION WEEE 371 


Wednesday in Passion Week (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. MARCELLUS 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 17, 48, 49 


IBERÁTOR meus de génti- 
bus iracündis: ab in- 
surgéntibus in me exaltábis 
me: a viro iníquo erípies me, 
Dómine, Ps. 17, 2, 3. Diligam 
te, Dómine, virtus mea: Dó- 
minus firnaméntum meum, 
et refügium meum, et liberá- 
tor meus. Liberátor meus. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


angry nations: Thou wilt 
lift me up above them that rise 
up against me: from the un- 
just man Thou wilt deliver me, 
O Lord, Ps. 17, 2, 3. I will love 
Thee, O Lord, my strength: the 
Lord is my firmament, and my 
refuge, and my deliverer. My 
deliverer. 


Q DELIVERER from the 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


ANCTIFICÁTO hoc jejünio, 

Deus, tuórum corda fidé- 
lium miserátor illistra: et 
quibus devotiónis prestas af- 
féctum, prebe supplicántibus 
pium benígnus audítum. Per 
Dóminum. 


NLIGHTEN the hearts of 
Thy faithful, by this 
sanctified fast, O God of mercy, 
and of Thy kindness turn a 
pitying ear to the suppliants to 
whom Thou givest the spirit of 
devotion. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


page 826. 


Lesson. Lev. 19, 1, 2; 11-19, 25 


Léctio libri Levitici. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Locütus est 
Dóminus ad Moysen, di- 
cens: Lóquere ad omnem ce- 
tum filiórum Israél, et dices 
&d eos: Ego Dóminus Deus ve- 
ster. Non faciétis furtum. Non 
mentiémini, nec decípiet un- 
usquisque préximum suum. 
Non perjurábis in nómine 
meo, nec póllues nomen Dei 
tui. Ego Dóminus. Non fácies 
calimniam próximo tuo, nec 
vi ópprimes eum. Non morá- 
bitur opus mercenárii tui 
apud te usque mane. Non ma- 
ledíces surdo, nec coram cæco 
pones offendiculum: sed timé- 
bis Dóminum Deum tuum, 


Lesson from the Book of 


Leviticus. 

N THOSE days, the Lord 
T Spoke to Moses, saying, 
Speak to all the multitude of 
the children of Israel, and thou 
shalt say to them, I am the 
Lord your God, You shall not 
steal. You shall not lie: neither 
Shal any man deceive his 
neighbor. Thou shalt not swear 
falsely by My name, nor pro- 
fane the name of Thy God: I 
am the Lord. Thou shalt not 
calumniate thy neighbor, nor 
oppress him by violence. The 
wages of him that has been 
hired by thee shall not abide 
with thee until the morning. 
Thou shalt not speak evil of the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


372 


deaf, nor put a stumbling- 
block before the blind; but 
thou shalt fear the Lord thy 
God, because I am the Lord. 


Thou shalt not do that which. 


is unjust, nor judge unjustly. 
Respect not the person of the 
poor, nor honor the counte- 
nance of the mighty; but.judge 
thy neighbor according to jus- 
tice. Thou shalt not be a de- 
tractor, nor a whisperer among 
the people: Thou shalt not 
Stand against the blood of thy 
neighbor. I am the Lord. Thou 
shalt not hate thy brother in 
thy heart; but reprove him 
openly, lest thou incur sin 
through him. Seek not re- 
venge, nor be mindful of the 


WEDNESDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


quia ego sum Dóminus. Non 
facies quod iníquum est, nec 
injüste judicábis. Non con- 
sideres persónam  páuperis, 
nec, honóres vultum poténtis. 
Juste jüdica próximo tuo. Non 
eris criminátor, nec susürro 
in.pópulo. Non stábis contra 
sánguinem próximi tui. Ego 
Dóminus. Non óderis fratrem 
tuum in corde tuo, sed püb- 
lice argue eum, ne habeas 
super illo peccátum. Non qu&- 
ras ultiónem, nec memor eris 
injürie cívium tuórum. Díl- 
iges amícum tuum sicut teip- 
sum. Ego Dóminus. Leges 
meas custodíte. Ego enim sum 
Dóminus Deus vester. 


injury of thy citizens. Thou shalt love thy friend as — 
I am the Lord. Keep ye My laws: for I am the Lord your God. 


Gradual. Ps. 29, 2, 3, 4 


I will extol Thee, O Lord, for 
Thou hast upheld me and hast 
not made my enemies to re- 
joice over me. V. O Lord, my 
God, I have cried to Thee, and 
Thou hast healed me: Thou 
hast brought forth, O Lord, my 
soul from hell; Thou hast 
saved me from them that go 
down into the pit. 


Exaltábo te, Dómine, quóniam 
suscepisti me: nec delectásti 
inimícos meos super me. VY: 
Dómine Deus meus, clamávi 
ad te, et sanásti me: Dómine, 
abstraxisti ab inferis ánimam 
meam, salvásti me a descen- 
déntibus in lacum. 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 10, 22-38 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 

T THAT lime, it was the 

feast of the Dedication 

at Jerusalem, and it was win- 

ter. And Jesus walked in the 
temple, in Solomon's porch. 

The Jews therefore came round 
about Him, and said to Him, 

How long dost Thou hold our 


*R Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secándum Joánnem. 


I5 ILLO témpore: Facta 
; sunt Encenia in Jerosóly- 
mis: et hiems erat. Et ambu- 
lábat Jesus in templo, in pór- 
ticu Salomónis. Circumdedé- 
runt ergo eum Judi, et dicé- 
bant ei: Quotsque ánimam 
nostram tollis? Si tu es Chris- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY IN PASSIUN WEEK 373 


tus, dic nobis palam. Respón- 
dit eis Jesus: Loquor vobis, et 
non créditis. Opera, que ego 
fácio in nómine Patris mei, 
pec testimónium pérhibet de 
me: sed vos non créditis, quia 
non estis ex óvibus meis. Oves 
mes vocem meam áudiunt: 
et ego cognósco eas, et sequ- 
untur me; et ego vitam zter- 
nam do eis: et non peribunt 
in etérnum, et non rápiet eis 
quisquam de manu mea: Pater 
meus quod dedit mihi, majus 
ómnibus est: et nemo potest 
rápere de manu Patris mei. 
Ego, et Pater, unum sumus. 
Sustulérunt ergo lápides Ju- 
dæi, ut lapidárent eum. Re- 
spóndit eis Jesus: Multa bona 
ópera osténdi vobis ex Patre 
meo, propter quod eórum opus 
me lapidátis? Respondérunt 
ei Judei: De bono ópere non 
lapidamus te, sed de blas- 
phémia: et quia tu, homo 
cum sis, facis teípsum Deum. 
Respóndit eis Jesus: Nonne 
Scriptum est in lege vestra: 
quia Ego dixi, dii estis? 
Si illos dixit deos, ad quos 
Sermo Dei factus est, et non 
potest solvi Scriptüra: quem 
Pater sanctificávit, et misit in 
mundum, vos dícitis: Quia 
blasphémas: quia dixi Fílius 
Dei sum? Si non fácio ópera 
Patris mei, nolíte crédere mi- 
hi. Si autem fácio, et si mihi 
non vultis crédere, opéribus 
crédite, ut cognoscátis, et cre- 
dátis, quia Pater in me est, et 
ego in Patre. 


Souls in suspense? If Thou be 
the Christ, tell us plainly. Jesus 
answered them, I speak to.you, 
and you believe not: the works 
that I do in the name of My 
Father they give testimony of 
Me; but you do not believe, be- 
cause you are not of My sheep. 
My sheep hear My voice, and I 
know them, and they follow 
Me. And I give them life ever- 
lasting, and they shall not per- 
ish forever, and no man shall 
pluck them out of My hand. 
That which My Father hath 
given Me is greater than all, 
and no one can snatch them 
out of the hand of My Father. 
I and the Father are one. The 
Jews then took up stones to 
Stone Him. Jesus answered 
them, Many good works I have 
showed you from My Father; 
for which of those works do 
you stone me? The Jews an- 
swered Him. For a good work 
we stone Thee not, but for blas- 
phemy; and because that Thou, 
being à man, makest Thyself 
God. Jesus answered them, Is it 
not written in your law, I said, 
You are gods? If He called 
them gods to whom the word cf 
God was spoken, and the Scrip- 
ture can not be broken, do you 
say of Him, Whom the Father 
hath sanctified, and sent into 
the world, Thou blasphemest, 
because I said, I am the Son of 
God? If X do not the works of 
My Father, believe Me not: but 
if I do, though you will not be- 
lieve Me, believe the works, 
that you may know and believe 
that the Father is in Me, and 
I in the Father. 


Offertory. Ps.58,2 


Eripe me de inimícis meis, 


Deliver me from my enemles, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


374 WEDNESDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


O my God, and defend me from 
them that rise up against me, 
O Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Deus meus, et ab insurgénti- 
bus in me lfbera me, Dómine. 


Secret 


AKE it Thy will, O merci- 

ful God, that in earnest 

tribute we may bring the of- 

ferings of reparation and 
praise. Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


Communion. 


I will wash my hands among 
the innocent, and will compass 
Thy altar, O Lord: that I may 
hear the voice of Thy praise, 
and tell of all Thy wondrous 
works, 


NNUE, miséricors Deus: 
A. ut hóstias placatiónis 
et laudis, sincéro tibi deferá- 
mus obséquio. Per Dóminum. 


gene Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Ps. 25, 6, 7 


Lavabo inter innocéntes 
manus meas, et cireufbo al- 
tare tuum, Dómine: ut áudi- 
&m vocem laudis tuz, et enár- 
rem univérsa mirabília tua. 


Postcommunion 


AVING received the bless- 

ing of the heavenly gift, 
we, Thy suppliants, implore 
Thee, O God, that the same 
may be the cause both of the 
sacrament and of our salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


RLESTIS doni benedic- 
tiónis percépta: súp- 
plices te, Deus omnípotens, 
deprecámur; ut hoc idem no- 
bis et sacraménti causa sit, et 
salütis. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion for the Church, page 825; or for the 


Pope, page 826. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


ow down your heads to 
God. 


Give ear unto our supplica- 
tions, O almighty God, and be- 
nignly grant the effect of Thy 
accustomed mercy to those 
whom Thou hast allowed to be 
confident in the hope of Thy 
good will Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
Deo. 


Adésto supplicatiónibus 
nostris, omnípotens Deus: et 
quibus fidüciam speránde pi- 
etátis indulges: consuét2 mi- 
Sericórdie tribue  benígnus 
efféctum. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THURSDAY IN PASSION WEEK 375 


Thursday in Passion Week (Purple) 


STATION AT ST. APOLLINARIS 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


MNIA, que fecísti nobis, 

Dómine, in vero judício | 
fecísti: quia peccávimus tibi, 
et mandátis tuis non obe- 
dívimus: sed da glóriam nó- 
mini tuo, et fac nobíscum se- 
cündum multitüdinem miser- 
icórdie tue. Ps. 118, 1. Beáti 
immaculáti in via: qui ám- 
bulant in lege Dómini. 
Omnia, 


Dan. 3, 31 


LL that Thou hast done 
E A. to us, O Lord, Thou hast 
one in: true judgment: be- 
cause we have sinned against 
Thee, and have not obeyed Thy 
commandments: but give 
glory to Thy name, and deal 
with us according to the multi- 
tude of Thy mercy. Ps. 118, 1. 
Blessed are the undefiled in 
ihe way: who walk in the law 
of the Lord, All that Thou. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


RESTA, quzsumus, omní- 

potens Deus: ut digni- 
tas conditiónis humane per 
immoderántiam sauciáta, 
medicinális parsimónise stü- 
dio reformétur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


page 


RANT, We beseech, O al- 

mighty God, that the dig- 
nity of humanity, impaired by 
excessive indulgence, may be 
restored by the earnest prac- 
tice of healing restraint. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


Lesson. Dan. 3, 34-45 


Léctio Daniélis Prophétæ. 


N niÉBUs illis: Orávit 

Azarías Dóminum, di- 
cens: Dómine Deus noster: 
ne, quesumus, tradas nos in 
perpétuum propter nomen 
tuum, et ne díssipes testa- 
méntum tuum: neque áuferas 
misericórdiam tuam a nobis 
propter Abraham diléctum 
tuum et Isaac servum tuum, 


Lesson from Danie 1 the 
Prophet. 


N THOSE days Azarias 
prayed to the Lord, say- 

ing, O Lord our God, deliver us 
not up forever, we beseech 
‘Thee, for Thy name’s sake, and 
abolish not Thy covenant, and 
take not away Thy mercy from 
us, for the sake of Abraham, 
Thy beloved, and Isaac Thy ser- 
vant, and Israel Thy holy one; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


376 


to whom Thou hast spoken, 
promising that Thou wouldst 
multiply their seed as the stars 
of heaven, and as the sand 
that is on the seashore: for 
we, O Lord, are diminished 
more than any nation, and are 
prought low in all the earth 
this day, for our sins. Neither 
is there at this time prince, or 
leader, or prophet, or holo- 
caust, or sacrifice, or oblation, 
or incense, or place of first- 
fruits before Thee, that we may 
find Thy mercy; nevertheless in 
a contrite heart and humble 
spirit let us be accepted. As in 
holocausts of rams, and bul- 
locks, and as in thousands of 
fat lambs, so let our sacrifice 
be made in Thy sight this day, 
that it may please Thee; for 
there is no confusion to them 
that trust in Thee. And now we 
follow Thee with all our heart, 
and we fear Thee, and seek Thy 
face. Put us not to confusion, 
but deal with us according to 
Thy meekness and according 
to the multitude of Thy mercies 
and deliver us according to 
Thy wonderful works, and give 
glory to Thy name, O Lord; 
and let all them be confounded 
that show evils to Thy ser- 
vants; let them be confounded 
in all Thy might, and let their 
strength be broken and let 
them know that Thou art the 
Lord the only God, and glori- 
ous over all the world. O Lord 
our God, 


THURSDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


et Israël sanctum tuum: qui- 
bus locütus es, póllicens quod 
multiplicáres semen eórum 
sicut stellas celi, et sicut 
arénam, que est in littore 
maris: quia, Dómine, immin- 
úti sumus plus quam omnes 
gentes, sumüsque hümiles in 
univérsa terra hódie propter 
peccáta nostra. Et non est 
in témpore hoc princeps, et 
dux, et prophéta, neque holo- 
caustum, neque sacrificium, 
neque oblátio, neque incéns- 
um, neque locus primitiarum 
coram te, ut possimus inve- 
níre misericórdiam tuam: sed 
in ánimo contrito, et spiritu 
humilitátis suscipidmur. Si- 
cut in holocausto, arietum, et 
taurórum, et sicut in míllibus 
agnórum pínguium: sic fiat 
sacrificium nostrum in con- 
spéctu tuo hódie, ut pláceat 
tibi: quóniam non est con- 
füsio confidéntibus in te. Et 
nunc séquimur te in toto 
corde, et timémus te, et que- 
rimus fáciem tuam. Ne con- 
fündas nos: sed fac nobíscum 
juxta mansuetüdinem tuam, 
et secundum  multitüdinem 
misericórdie tue: Et érue nos 
in mirabílibus tuis, et da 
glóriam nómini tuo, Dó- 
mine: et confundántur om- 
nes, qui osténdunt servis tuis 
mala, confundántur in omni 
poténtia tua: et robur eórum 
conterátur: et sciant quia tu 
es Dóminus Deus solus et glo- 
riósus super orbem terrárum, 
Dómine Deus noster. 


Gradual. Ps. 95, 8,9 


Bring the sacrifices, and 
come into His courts: adore the 
Lord.in His holy court, Y. Ps. 
28, 9. The Lord will discover 


Téllite héstias, et introfte in 
atria ejus: adoráte Dóminum 
in aula sancta ejus. Y. Ps. 
28, 9. Revelábit Dóminus con- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THURSDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


dénsa: et in templo ejus om- 
nes dicent glóriam. 


` Munda Cor Meum, Page 763. 


377 


the thick woods: and in His 
temple all shall speak His 
glory. : 


Gospel. Luke 7, 36-50 


" Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 
'N ILLO témpore: Rogábat 
Jesum quidam de phari- 
seis, ut manducáret cum illo. 
Et ingréssus. domum pharisei, 
discübuit. Et ecce mülier, 
que erat in civitáte peccátrix, 
ut cognóvit quod accubuísset 
in domo pharisaei, áttulit ala- 
bástrum unguénti: et stans 
retro secus pedes ejus, lácry- 
mis ccepit rigáre pedes ejus, 
et capíllis cápitis sui tergébat, 
et osculabátur pedes ejus, et 
unguénto ungébat. Viden“ 
autem phariseus, qui vVocáYe- 
rat eum, ait intra se, dicens: 
Hic si esset prophéta, sciret 
ütique, que et qualis est mú- 
lier, que tangit eum: quia 
peccátrix est. Et respóndens 
Jesus, dixit ad illum: Simon, 
hábeo tibi aliquid dicere. At 
lle ait: Magister, dic. -Duo 
debitéres erant cuidam fene- 
ratéri: unus debébat denários 
quingéntos, et álius quinqua- 
gínta. Non habéntibus illis 
unde rédderent, donávit 
utrísque. Quis ergo eum plus 
diligit? -Respéndens Simon, 
Dixit: Agstimo quia is, cui 
plus donávit. At ille dixit ei: 
Recte judicásti. Et convér- 
sus ad mulferem, dixit Si- 
móni: Vides hanc mulíerem? 
Intrávi in domum tuam, 
&quam pédibus meis non de- 
disti: hae autem lácrimis 
rigávit pedes meos, et capíllis 
Suis tersit. Osculum mihi 


= 


m Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, one of the 

pharisees desired Jesus 
to eat with him; and He went 
into the house of the pharisee, 
and sat down to meat. And 
behold a woman that was in 
the city, a sinner, when she 
knew that He sat at meat 
in the pharisee's house, brought 
an alabaster box of oint- 
ment; and standing behind 
at ‘His feet, she began to 
wash His feet with tears, and 
wiped them with the hairs of 
her head, and kissed his feet, 
and anointed them with the 
ointment. And the pharisee, 
who had invited Him, seeing 
it, spoke within himself, say- 
ing, This man, if he were a 


.prophet, would know surely 


who and what manner of wo- 
man this is that toucheth Him, 
that she is & sinner. And Jesus 
answering, said to him, Simon, 
I have somewhat to say to thee: 
but he said, Master, say it. A 
certain. creditor had two debt- 
ors, the one owed five hundred 
pence, and the other fifty. And 
whereas they had not where- 
with to pay, he forgave them 
both. Which therefore of the 
two loveth him most? Simon 
answering, said, I suppose that 
he to whom he forgave most. 
And He said to him, Thou hast 
judged rightly. And turning 
to the woman, He said unto 
Simon, Dost thou see this wo- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


378 


man? I entered into thy house: 
thou gavest me no water for 
My feet; but she with tears 
hath washed My feet, and with 
her hairs hath wiped them. 
Thou gavest me no kiss; but 
she, since she came in, hath 
not ceased to kiss my feet. My 
head With oil thou didst not 
anoint; but she with ointment 
hath anointed My feet. Where- 
for I say to thee, Many sins 
are forgiven her, because she 
hath loved much: but to whom 
less is forgiven, he loveth less. 
And He said to her, Thy sins 
are forgiven thee. And they 
that sat at meat with Him be- 
gan to say within themselves, 
Who is this that forgiveth sins 


THURSDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


non dedisti: hee autem, ex 
quo intrávit, non cessávit os- 
culári pedes meos. Oleo 
caput meum non unxísti: hee 
autem unguénto unxit pedes 
meos. Propter quod dico tibi: 
Remittüntur ei peccáta mul- 
ta, quóniam diléxit multum. 
Cui autem minus dimittitur, 
minus díligit. Dixit autem 
&d illam: Remittüntur tibi 
peccáta. Et cepérunt, qui 
simul accumbébant  dícere 
intra se: Quis est hic, qui 
étiam peccáta dimíttit? Dixit 
autem ad mulierem: Fides 
tua te salvam fecit; vade in 
pace. 


also? And He said to the woman, Thy faith has made thee 


safe; go in peace. 


Offertory. 
Upon the rivers of Babylon, 
there we sat and wept, when we 
remembered thee, O Sion. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 136, 1 


Super flümina Babylonis 
illic sédimus, et flévimus, dum 
recordarémur tui, Sion. 


Secret 


LORD, our God, Who hast 

especially commanded 
that these creatures, which 
Thou hast made for the sup- 
port of our frailty, be also used 
as offerings to be dedicated to 
Thy name, grant, we beseech 
Thee, that they may provide 
for us both help for the present 
life and a sacrament for eter- 
nity. Through our Lord. 


ÓMINE, Deus noster, qui 

in his pótius creatüris, 

quas ad fragilitatis nostre 

Subsídium ^ condidísti, tuo 

quoque nómini münera jus- 

sisti dicánda constitui: trí- 

bue, qusesumus; ut et. vite 

nobis preséntis auxilium, et 

eternitatis efficiant sacra- 
méntum. Per Dóminum. 


cond Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


Communion. Ps. 118, 49, 50 


Remember Thy word to Thy 
Servant, O Lord, in which Thou 


Meménto verbi tui servo 
tuo, Démine, in quo mihi 


http://ccwatershed.org 


uius qup NE 


FRIDAY IN PASSION WEEK 379 


spem dedisti: hec me conso- 
láta est in humilitáte mea. 


gavest me hope: this consoled 
me in my humiliation. 


Postcommunion 


vop ore simpsimus, Dó- 
mine, pura mente capi- 
ámus: et de münere tempor- 
4li, fiat nobis remédium sem- 
pitérnum. Per Dóminum. 


mar we have taken with 

our mouth, O Lord, may 

we receive with a pure mind, 

and from a temporal gift may 

it become to us an eternal rem- 
edy. Through our Lord. 


Second, Postcommunion for the Church, page 825; or for the 


Pope, page 826. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 


UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 


Deo. 


Esto, quæsumus, Dómine, 
propítius plebi tu»: ut, que 
tibi non placent, respuéntes; 
tuórum pótius repleántur de- 
lectatiónibus mandatórum. 
Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ow down your heads to 
God. 

Be merciful, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, to Thy people, 
that, rejecting the things which 
please Thee not, we may rather 
be filled with the delights of 
Thy commandments, Through 
our Lord. 


Friday in Passion Week (Purple) 
| STATION AT ST. STEPHEN ON MOUNT COELIUS 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 30, 10, 16, 18 


ISERERE mihi, Dómine, 

quóniam tribulor: lib- 
era me, et éripe me de mani- 
bus inimicórum meórum, et a 
persequéntibus me: Dómine, 
non confündar, quóniam in- 
vocávi te. Ps. 30, 2. In te, 
Dómine, sperdvi, non con- 
fündar in etérnum: in jus- 
títia tua libera me. Miserére 
mihi. 


AVE mercy on me, O Lord, 

for I am afflicted: de- 
liver me, and save me out of 
ihe hands of my enemies, and 
from them that persecute me; 
let me not be confounded, O 
Lord, for I have called upon 
Thee. Ps.. 30, 2. In Thee, O 
Lord, have I hoped, let me 
never be confounded: deliver 
me in Thy justice. Have mercy. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


ÓnpIBUS nostris, quesu- 
mus, Dómine, grátiam 


Fr THY loving-kindness 
pour Thy grace into our 


http://ccwatershed.org 


380 FRIDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


hearts, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, that, curbing our sinful 
propensities with voluntary 
chastisement, we may suffer in 
this life and not be condemned 
to eternal punishments. 
Through our Lord. 


tuam benignus infünde: u 
peccáta nostra castigatióne 
voluntária cohibéntes, tem- 
poráliter pótius macerémur, 
quam suppliciis deputémur 
etérnis, Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


page 826. 


Lesson. Jer. 17, 13-18 


Lesson from Jeremias the 
Prophet. 


N THOSE days, Jeremias said: 

O Lord, all that forsake 
Thee shall be confounded: they 
that depart from Thee, shall be 
written in the earth: because 
they have forsaken the Lord, 
the vein of living waters. Heal 
me, O Lord, and I shall be 
healed, save me, and I sball 
be saved: for Thou art my 
praise. Behold they say to me: 
Where is the word of the 
Lord? let it come. And I am 
not troubled, following Thee 
for my pastor, and I have not 
desired the day of man, Thou 
knowest. That which went out 
of my lips, had been right in 
Thy sight. Be not Thou a ter- 
ror unto me, Thou art my hope 
in the day of affliction. Let 
them be confounded that per- 
secute me, and let not me be 
confounded: let them be afraid, 
and let not me be afraid; bring 
upon them the day of affliction, 
and with a double destruction 
destroy them, O Lord our God. 


Léctio Jeremie Prophéte, 


N DIÉBUS ilis: Dixit Jere- 

mías: Dómine, omnes qui 
te derelínquant, confundén- 
tur: recedéntes a te, in terra 
scribéntur: quóniam dereli- 
quérunt venam aquárum vi- 
véntium, Dóminum. Sana 
me, Dómine, et sanábor: sal- 
vum me fac, et salvus ero: 
quóniam laus mea tu es. 
Ecce ipsi dicunt ad me: Ubi 
est verbum Dómini? Véniat. 
Et ego non sum turbátus, te 
pastórem sequens: et diem 
hóminis non desiderávi tu 
Scis. Quod egréssum est de 
lábiis meis, rectum in con- 
spéctu tuo fuit. Non sis tu 
mihi formídini, spes mea tu 
in die aflictiónis. Confun- 
dántur qui me persequüntur, 
et non confündar ego: páve- 
ant ili, et non páveam ego. 
Induc super eos diem afic- 
tiónis, et düplici contritióne 
cóntere eos, Dómine Deus 
noster. 


Gradual. Ps. 34, 20, 22 


My enemies spoke peaceably 
to me, and in anger they were 
troublesome to me. V. Thou 
hast seen, O Lord, be not Thou 
silent: depart not from me. 


Pacifice loquebántur mihi 
inimíci mei: et in ira molésti 
erant mihi. Y. Vidisti, Dó- 
mine, ne sfleas: ne discédas a 
me. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FRIDAY IN PASSION WEEK 3881 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


. Gospel. John 11, 47-54 


TH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélil secündum Joánnem. 

N ILLO témpore: Colle- 

gerunt pontífices et pha- 


risei concílium advérsus 
Jesum, et dicébant: Quid 
fácimus, quia hic homo multa 


signa facit? Si dimíttimus 
eum sic, omnes credent in 
eum: et vénient Románi, et 
tollent nostrum locum, et 
gentem. Unus autem ex ipsis, 
Cáiphas nómine, cum esset 
póntifex anni illius, dixit eis: 
Vos nescitis quidquam, nec 
cogitátis quia éxpedit vobis, 
ut unus moridtur homo pro 
pópulo, et non tota gens 
péreat.. Hoc autem a seme- 
tipso non dixit: sed cum esset 
póntifex anni ilíus, prophe- 
távit, quod Jesus moritürus 
erat pro gente, et non tantum 
pro gente, sed ut filios Dei, 
qui erant dispérsi, congre- 
gáret in unum. Ab illo ergo 
die cogitavérunt ut interfícer- 
ent eum. Jesus ergo jam 
non ín palam ambulábat 
apud Judeos: sed ábiit in 
regiónem juxta desértum, in 
civitátem, que dícitur Eph- 
rem, et ibi morabátur cum 
discípulis suis, 


- W Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 

T THAT time, the chlef 

priests and the phari- 
Sees gathered a council against 
Jesus, and said, What do we; 
for this man doth many mira- 
cles? If we let Him alone so, 
all will believe in Him, and tht 
Romans will come, and take 
away our place and nation. 
But one of them, named Cai- 
phas, being the high-priest that 
year, sald to them, You know 
nothing; neither do you con- 
sider that it is expedient for 
you that one man should die 
for the people, and that the 
whole nation perish not. And 
this he spoke not of himself, 
but being the high priest of 
that year, he prophesied that 
Jesus should die for the nation; 


and not only for the nation, 


but to gather together in one 
the children of God that were 
dispersed. From that day 
therefore they devised to put 
Him to death, Wherefore Jesus 
walked no more openly among 
the Jews; but He went into a 
country near the desert, unto a 
city that is called Ephrem, and 
there He abode with His disci- 
ples. 


Offertory. Ps..118, 12, 121, 42 


Benedictus es, Dómine, 
doce me justificatiónes tuas: 
et non tradas calumniantibus 
me supérbis: et respondébo 
exprobrantibus mihi verbum. 


Blessed art Thou, O Lord, 
teach me Thy justifications: 
give; me not up to my proud 
calumniators, and so shall I 
answer them that reproach me. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


382 SATURDAY IN PASSION WEEK 
Secret 
RANT us, O merciful God, RISTA nobis miséricors, 
ihat we may ever have Deus: ut digne tuis ser- 


the grace of serving Thine al- víre semper altáribus mereá- 
tars worthily and may be mur: et eórum perpétua par- 
saved by constantly partaking ticipatióne salvári Per Dómi- 
of the sacrifices offered thereon. num. 

Through our Lord. 

P dn Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


Communion. Ps. 26, 12 
O Lord, deliver me not to Ne tradideris me, Dómine, 
the desires of them that perse- in ánimas persequéntium me: 
cute me; for false witnesses quóniam insurrexérunt in me 
have risen up against me. testes iníqui, et mentita est 
iníquitas sibi. 


Postcommunion 
(D the protection of the uMPTI sacrificii, Dó- 
sacrifices we have par- mine, perpétua nos tuí- 


taken of never leave us, and tio non derelínquat: et nóxia 
may it ever ward off from us semper a nobis cuncta de- 
all things harmful 'Through péllat. Per Dóminum. 

our Lord. : 


Second Postcommunion for the Church, page 825; or for the 
Pope, page 826. 
Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 
ow down your heads to UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
B God. Deo. 

Grant, we beseech Thee, O Concéde, qusesumus, omní- 
almighty God, that we, who potens Deus: ut, qui protec- 
seek the favor of Thy protec- tiónis tue grátiam querimus, 
tion, being delivered from all liberáti a malis ómnibus, 
evils, may serve Thee with a secüra tibi mente serviámus. 
quiet mind. Through our Lord. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Saturday in Passion Week (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. JOHN BEFORE THE LATIN GATE 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 30, 10, 16, 18 


AVE mercy on me, O Lord, ISERÉRE mihi, Dómine, 
for I am afflicted: de~ quóniam tríbulor: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


——Ó— Sy 


SATURDAY IN PASSION WEEK 383 


libera me, et éripe me de liver me out of the hands of 
mánibusinimicórum meórum, my enemies, and from them 


et a persequéntibus me: Dó- 
mine, non confündar, quóni- 
am invocávi te. Ps. 30, 2. In 
te, Dómine, sperávi, non con- 
fündar in etérnum: in justi- 
tia tua libera me. Miserére 
mihi. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


that persecute me: let me not 
be confounded, O Lord, for I 
have called upon Thee. Ps. 30, 2. 
In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped, 
let me never be confounded: 
deliver me in Thy justice. Have 
mercy. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


ROFÍCIAT, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, plebs tibi dicáta 
pie devotiónis afféctu: ut 
Sacris. actiónibus erudita, 
quanto majestati tue fit grá- 
tior, tanto donis potióribus 
augeátur. Per Dóminum. 


ET the people consecrated 
to Thee, O Lord, we be- 
Seech, grow unceasingly in the 
spirit of loving devotion, that, 
being taught by sacred observ- 
ances, it may feel the increase 
of more precious gifts as it in- 
creaseth in favor with Thy 
majesty. Through our Lord. 


p Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


page 826. 


Lesson. Jer.18,18-23 


Léctfo Jeremie Prophéte. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Dixérunt 

impii Judei ad invicem: 
Venite, et cogitémus contra 
justum  cogitatiónes: non 
enim períbit lex à sacerdóte, 
neque consílium. à sapiénte, 
nec sermo 2 prophéta: veníte, 
et percutiamus eum lingua, 
et non attendámus, ad uni- 
vérsos sermónes ejus. At- 
ténde, Dómine, ad me, et audi 
vocem adversariórum meór- 
um. Numquid rédditur pro 
bono malum, quia fodérunt 
fóveam ánime mex? Recor- 
dáre quod stéterim in con- 
spéctu tuo, ut lóquerer pro 
eis bonum, et avérterem in- 


Lesson from Jeremias the 
Prophet. 
N THOSE days, the wicked 
Jews said one to another, 
Come, and let us invent devices 
against the just; for the law 
shall not perish from the priest, 
nor counsel from the wise, nor 
the word from the prophet: 
come, and let us strike him 
with the tongue, and let us 
give no heed to all his words. 
Give heed to me, O Lord, and 
hear the voice of my adversar- 
ies. Shall evil be rendered for 
good; because they have digged 
a pit for my soul? Remember 
that I have stood in Thy sight, 
to speak good for them, and to 
turn away 'Thy indignation 


http://ccwatershed.org 


384 SATURDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


from them. Therefore deliver 
up their children to famine, 
and bring them into the hands 
of the sword: let their wives be 
bereaved of children, and wid- 
ows; and let their husbands he 
slain by death: let their young 
men be stabbed with the sword 
in battle. Let a cry be heard 
out of their houses; for Thou 
shalt bring the robber upon 
them suddenly, because they 
have digged a pit to take me, 
and have hid snares for my 
feet. But Thou, O Lord, know- 
est all their counsel against me 
unto death: forgive not their 
iniquity, and let not their sin 
be blotted out from Thy sight; 
let them be overthrown before 
Thy eyes; in the time of Thy 
wrath do Thou destroy them, 
O Lord, our God. 


dignatiónem tuam. ab eis. 
Proptérea da fílios eórum in 
famem, et deduc eos in manus 
gládii: fiant uxóres eórum 
absque XMberis, et vídum: et 
viri  eárum  interficiántur 
morte: jüvenes eórum con- 
Ófodiántur gládio in prelio. 
Audiátur clamor de dómibus 
eórum: addüces enim super 
eos latrónem repénte: quia 
fodérunt fóveam, ut cáperent 
me, et láqueos abscondérunt 
pédibus meis. Tu autem, 
Dómine, scis omne consílium 
eórum advérsum me in mor- 
tem: ne. propitiéris iniquitáti 
eórum, et peccátum eórum a 
facie tua non deleátur. Fiant 
corruéntes in conspéctu tuo, 
in témpore furóris tui abütere 
eis, Dómine Deus noster. 


Gradual. Ps. 34, 20, 22 


My enemies spoke peaceably ^ Pacífice loquebántur mihi 
to me: and in anger they were inimíci mei: et in ira molésti 
troublesome to me. Y. Thou erant mihi Y. Vidisti Dó- 
hast seen, O Lord, be not Thou mine ne síleas: ne discédas 


silent: depart not from me. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


a me. 


Gospel. John 12, 10-36 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, the chief 
JH priests thought to kill 
zarus also; because many of 
the Jews, by reason of him, 
went away and believed in Je- 
Sus. And on the next day, a 
great multitude that was come 
to the festival-day, when they 
had heard that Jesus was com- 
ing to Jerusalem, took branches 
of palm-trees, and went forth 
to meet Him, and cried, Ho- 
sanna, blessed is He that com- 


"RH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 
T ILLO témpore: Cogita- 

vérunt príncipes sacer- 
dótum ut et Lázarum inter- 
fícerent: quia multi propter 
illum abíbant ex Judais, et 
credébant in Jesum, In crás- 
tinum autem turba multa, 
que vénerat ad diem festum, 
cum audissent quia venit 
Jesus Jerosólymam, accepé- 
runt ramos palmárum, et 
processérunt óbviam ei, et 
clamábant: Hosanna, bene- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY IN 


Actus qui venit in nómine Dó- 
mini, Rex Israël. Et invénit 
Jesus aséllum, et sedit super 
eum, sicut scriptum est: Noli 
timére, fflia Sion: ecce Rex 
tuus venit sedens super pul- 
lum ásin&;. Hec non cogno- 
vérunt discípuli. ejus prim- 
um: sed quando glorificátus 
est Jesus, tunc recordáti sunt 
quia hec erant scripta de eo: 
et hee fecérunt ei. Testi- 
mónium ergo perhibébat 
turba, qua erat cum eo quan- 
do Lázarum vocávit de mon- 
uménto, et suscitávit eum a 
mórtuis. Proptérea et óbviam 
venit ei turba: quia audié- 
runt eum fecísse hoc signum. 
Pharisei ergo dixérunt ad 
semetipsos: Vidétis quia nihil 
proficimus? ecce mundus to- 
tus-post eum ábiit. Erant au- 
tem quidam gentíles ex his, 
qui ascénderant ut adorárent 
in die festo. Hi ergo acces- 
sérunt ad Philfppum, qui erat 
a Bethsáida Galilee: et ro- 
&ábant eum, dicéntes: Dómi- 
ne, vólumus Jesum vidére. 
Venit Philíppus, et dicit An- 
dréæ: Andréas rursum, et 
Philippus dixérunt Jesu. 
Jesus autem: respóndit eis, 
dicens: Venit hora, ut clari- 
ficétur Filius hóminis. Amen, 
amen dico vobis, nisi granum 
fruménti cadens in terram, 
mértuum füerit, ipsum solum 
manet: si autem mórtuum 
füerit, multum fructum affert. 
Qui amat ánimam suam, per- 
det eam: et qui odit ánimam 
suam in hoc mundo, in vitam 
fiérnam custódit eam. Si 
quis. mihi minístrat, me se- 
quátur: et ubi sum ego, illic et 
miníster meus erit. Si quis 
mihi ministráverit, honorifi- 


PASSION WEEK 385 
eth in the name of the Lord, 
the king of Israel. And Jesus 
found a young ass, and sat upon 
it; as it is written, Fear not, 
daughter of Sion; behold thy 
king cometh, sitting on an ass's 
colt. These things His disciples 
did not know at the first; but 
when Jesus was glorified, then 
they remembered that these 
things were written of Him, 
and that they did these things 
to Him. The multitude there- 
fore gave testimony which was 
with Him when He called Laz- 
arus out of the grave, and 
raised. him from the dead. For 
which reason also the people 
came to meet Him; because 
they heard that He had done 
this miracle. The pharisees 
therefore said among. them- 
themselves: Do you see that we 
prevail nothing? behold, the 
whole world is gone after Him. 
Now there were: certain gen- 
tiles among them, who came 
up to adore on the festival-day. 
These therefore came to Philip, 
who was of Bethsaida of Gali- 
lee, and desired him, saying: 
Sir, we would see Jesus. Philip 
cometh and telleth Andrew. 
Again Andrew and Philip told 
Jesus, But Jesus answered 
them, saying, The hour is come 
that the Son of man should be 
glorified. Amen, amen, I say to 
you, unless the grain of wheat 
falling into the ground die, it 
remaineth alone: but if it die, 
it bringeth forth much fruit. 
He that loveth his life shall 
lose it; and he that hateth his 
life in this world keepeth it 
unto life eternal. If any man 
minister to Me, let him follow 
Me; and where I am, there also 
shall My minister be, If any 


http://ccwatershed.org 


386 


man minister to Me, him will 
My Father honor. Now is My 
soul troubled. And what shall I 
say? Father, save Me from this 
hour. Father, glorify Thy 
name, A voice therefore came 
from heaven, I have both glori- 
fied it, and will glorify it again. 
The multitude therefore that 
stood and heard, said that it 
thundered, Others said, An an- 
gel spoke to Him. Jesus an- 
swered and said, 'This voice 
came not because of Me, bur 
for your sakes. Now is the judg- 
ment of the world: now shall 
the prince of this world be cast 
out. And I, if I be lifted up 
trom the earth, wil draw all 
things to Myself. (Now this He 
said, signifying what death He 
should die). The multitude an- 
swered Him, We have heard out 
of the law, that Christ abideth 
for ever: and how sayest Thou, 
The Son. of man must be lifted 
up? Who is this Son of man? 
Jesus therefore said to them, 
Yet a little whiie, the light is 
among you. Walk whilst you 
have the light, that the dark- 
ness overtake you not. And he 
that walketh in darkness know- 
eth not whither he goeth. 
‘Whilst you have the light be- 
Neve in the light; that you 
may be the children of light. 
"These things Jesus spoke, and 
He went away, and hid Him- 
Self from them. 


SATURDAY IN PASSION WEEK 


cábit eum Pater meus, Nunc 
ánima mea turbáta est. Et 
quid dicam? Pater, salvíficà 
me ex hac.hora. Sed prop- 
térea veni in horam hanc. 
Pater, clarifica nomen tuum. 
Venit ergo vox de czlo: Et 
clarificávi, et iterum clari- 
ficábo. Turba ergo, que stabat, 
et audíerat, dicébat tonítru- 
um esse factum. Alii dicébant: 
Angelus ei locütus est. Re- 
spóndit Jesus, et dixit: Non 
propter me hzc vox venit, sed 
propter vos. Nunc judícium 
est mundi, nunc princeps 
hujus mundi ejiciétur foras. 
Et ego si exaltátus füero & 
terra, ómnia traham ad meip- 
sum. (Hoc autem dicébat, 
significans. qua morte esset 
moritürus). Respóndit ei tur- 
ba: Nos audivimus ex lege, 
quia Christus manet in etér- 
num, et quómodo tu dicis; 
Opórtet exaltári Fílium hó- 
minis? Quis est iste Filius 
hóminis? Dixit ergo eis Jesus: 
Adhuc módicum lumen. in 
vobis est, Ambuláte dum lu- 
cem habétis, ut non vos téne- 
bre comprehéndant: et qui 
ambulat ténebris, nescit quo 
vadat. Dum lucem habétis, 
crédite in lucem: ut fílii lucis 
sitis. Hee locütus est Jesus: 
et ábiit, et abscóndit se ab eis, 


Offertory. Ps. 118, 2, 121, 42 


Blessed art Thou, O Lord, 
teach me Thy justifications: 
&nd deliver me not up to the 
proud who calumniate me: and 
I wil answer a word to those 
who upbraid me. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Benedictus es, Dómine, doce 
me justificatiónes tuas: et 
non tradas calumniántibus 
me supérbis: et respondébo 
exprobrántibus mihi verbum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Neue aE 


SATURDAY IN PASSION WEEK 387 


Secret 
CUNCTIS Nos, quesumus, ;E PROPITIATED, We beg 
Dómine, reátibus et Thee, O Lord, and par- 


Derículis propitiátus absólve: don all our offenses, whom 

quos tanti mystériitríbuis esse Thou dost grant to be sharers 

consortes. Per Dóminum. in so great a mystery. Through 
our Lord. 


4,0006 Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


Communion. Ps. 26, 12 


Ne tradíderis me, Dómine, O Lord, deliver me not over 
in ánimas persequéntium me: to the souls of them that per- 
quóniam insurrexérunt in me secute me: for unjust witnesses 
testes iníqui, et mentita est have risen up against me, and 
iniquitas sibi. iniquity hath lied to itself. 


Postcommunion 


Ivint müneris largitáte ILLED With the bounty of 

satiati, quesumus, Do- Thy divine gift, we be- 

mine Deus Noster: ut hujus seech, O Lord, our God, that 

Semper participatione vivá- we may ever find life by par- 

mus. Per Dóminum. ticipating in the same. Through 
our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion for the Church, page 825; or for the 
Pope, page 826. 


Prayer over the people. 
Let us pray 
UMILIÁTE cápita vestra ow down your heads to 
Deo. God. 


Tueátur, quesumus, Dó- Let Thy right hand, we be- 
mine, déxtera tua pópulum seech, O Lord, guard the peo- 
deprecántem: et purificátum ple that calleth upon Thee, 
dignánter erüdiat; ut con- and let it teach the people that 
solatióne presénti, ad futüra they may be fittingly purified; 
bona profíciat. Per Dómi- that by the consolation of the 
num. present they may profit for the 

good things that are to come, 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Copyright: by Benziger Brothers 


Palm Sunday (Purple) 
Sunday of the First Class 


Blessing of the Palms 


After the usual Asperges, or solemn sprinkling with holy water, 
before Beginning Mass, the officiating priest, wearing a cope of 
purple color over his alb and stole, and attended by deacon, 
subdeacon, and other ministers, stands at the Epistle corner of 
the altar, with the palms that are to be blessed near him, while 
the choir sings the following Antiphon:? : 


Antiphon. Matt. 21,9 


OSANNA to the Son of osanwa filio David: bene- 
David! Blessed is He that ~Q dictus qui venit in 
cometh in the name of the nómine Dómini. O Rex Is- 
Lord! O King of Israel! Hos- raél: Hosánna in excélsis. 
anna in the highest! 
¥. The Lord be with you. ¥. Dóminus vobíscum. 
W. And with thy spirit. - Hf. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


The chant being terminated the priest sings the Collect. 
Let us pray 


cop, Whom to hold dear EUS, quem dilígere et a- 

and to love is righteous- máre justítia est ineffá- 
ness, multiply in us the gifts of bilis grátiz tue in nobis dona 
Thine ineffable grace; and do multíplica: et qui fecisti nos 
Thou, Who hast made us, by the in morte Fílii tui speráre que 
death of Thy Son, to hope for crédimus; fac nos eódem re- 
the things we believe, make us surgénte perveníre quo téndi- 
by His resurrection to attain to mus: Qui tecum vivit. Jy. 
the end for which we strive. Amen. ] 
Who with Thee. W. Amen. 


Next follows a Lesson to be sung by the subdeacon as if it 
were the Epistle at Mass. 


Jin churches, in which s&cred ministers can not be had, the 
functions of this day are carried out according to the Memoriale 
Rituum. The officiant recites all the prayers in a loud voice and 
in a manner befitting the sacred character of the ceremonies, 
and the choir remains silent. However, where the custom pre- 
vails, they may be performed with chant. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


eas ae NES 


PALM SUNDAY 389 


Lesson. Ex. 15, 27; 16,7 


Léctio líbri Éxodi. 


N vrésus ills: Venérunt 

filii Israél in Elim, ubi 
erant duódecim fontes aquar- 
um, et septuaginta palmz: et 
castrametáti sunt juxta 
aquas. Protectíque sunt de 
Elim, et venit omnis multi- 
tudo filiórum Israël in desért- 
um Sin, quod est inter Elim 
et Sinai: quintodécimo die 
mensis  secündi, postquam 
egréssi sunt de terra ZEgypti. 
Et murmurávit omnis congre- 
gatio filióorum Israél contra 
Móysen et Aaron in soli- 
tüdine. Dixerüntque fílii Is- 
raél ad eos: Utinam mórtui 
essémus per manum Dómini 
in terra ZEgypti, quando sede- 
bámus super ollas cárnium, et 
comedebámus panem . in 
saturitate: cur eduxístis nos 
in desértum istud, ut oc- 
ciderétis omnem  multitüdi- 
nem fame? Dixit autem Dó- 
minus ad Móysen: Ecce, ego 
pluam vobis panes de czlo: 
egrediatur pópulus, et cólligat 
que sufficiunt per singulos 
dies: ut tentem eum, utrum 
ámbulet in lege mea, an non. 
Die autem sexto parent quod 
ínferant: et sit duplum, quam 
collígere solébant per síngulos 
dies. Dixerüntque Moyses et 
Aaron ad omnes fílios Israél: 
Véspere sciétis quod Dóminus 
edüxerit vos de terra ZEgypti: 
et mane vidébitis glóriam Dó- 


Lesson from the. Book of 
Exodus. 


N THOSE days, the children 
T of Israel came unto Elim, 
where there were twelve foun- 
tains of water, and seventy 
palm-trees; and they encamped 
by the waters. And they set for- 
ward from Elim, and all the 
multitude of the children of 
Israel came into the desert of 
Sin, which is between Elim and 
Sinai; the fifteenth day of the 
second month after they came 
out of the land of Egypt. And 
all the congregation of the chil- 
Gren of Israel murmured 
against Moses and Aaron in 
the wilderness. And the chil- 
dren of Israel said to them, 
Would to God we had died by 
the hand of the Lord in the 
land of Egypt, when we sat 
over the flesh-pots, and ate 
bread to the full. Why have you 
brought us into this desert, that 
you might destroy all the mul- 
titude with famine? And the 
Lord said to Moses, Behold I 
will rain bread from heaven for 
you: let the people go forth, 
and gather what is sufficient 
for every day, that I may prove 
them whether they will walk in 
My law or not. But the sixth 
day let them provide for to 
bring in; and let.it be double 
to that they were wont to 
gather every day. And Moses 
2nd Aaron seid to the chil. 
dren of Israel, In the evening 
you shall know that the Lord 
hath brought you forth out of 


the land of Egypt; and in the morning you shall see the glory 


of the Lord, 


In place of the Gradual the choir chants one or other of the 


following resnonsories. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


390 PALM SUNDAY 


W. 1. John, 11, 47, 48, 49, 50, 
53. The chief priests and phar- 
isees gathered a council and 
said: What do we; for this man 
doth many miracles? If we let 
Him alone so, all men will be- 
lieve in Him: * And tbe Ro- 
mans will come, and take away 
our place and nation. Y. But 
one of them named Caiphas, 
being the high-priest that year, 
prophesied, saying: It is expe- 
dient for you, that one man 
should die for the people, and 
that the whole nation perish 
not. From that day therefore 
they devised to put Him to 
death, saying: 

* And the Romans will come, 
etc. 

RY. 2. Matt. 26, 39, 44. On 
Mount Olivet He prayed to His 
Father; Father, if it be possi- 
ble, let this chalice pass from 
Me, * The spirit indeed is will- 
ing, but the flesh is weak: Thy 
wil be done. Y. Watch, and 
pray, that ye enter not into 
temptation. 

* The spirit indeed, etc. 


BY. 1. Joan, 11, 47, 48, 49, 
50, 53.  Collegérunt pon. 
tifices et pharisei concilium, 
et dixérunt: Quid fácimus, 
quia hic homo multa signa 
facit? Si dimíttimus eum sic, 
omnes credent in eum: ^ Et 
vénient Romani, et tollent 
nostrum locum, et gentem. 
Y. Unus autem ex ills, Cái- 
phas nómine, cum esset pón- 
tifex anni illius, prophetávit 
dicens: Expedit vobis ut unus 
moriátur homo pro pópulo, et 
non tota gens péreat. Ab illo 
ergo die cogitavérunt inter- 
ficere eum, dicéntes: 


* Et venient. 


Rr. 2. Matt. 26, 39, 41. In 
monte Olivéti orávit ad Pa- 
trem: Pater, si fieri potest, 
tránseat a me calix iste. 
* Spiritus quidem promptus 
est, caro autem infírma: fiat 
volüntas tua. V. Vigiláte, et 
oráte, ut non intrétis in ten- 
tatiónem. 

* Spíritus quidem. 


With all the customary ceremonies at high Mass, the Gospel tg 


now sung by the deacon. 


Gospel. Matt. 21, 1-9 


"B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Matth. 
T THAT lime, when Jesus 

drew nigh to Jerusalem, 

and was come to Bethphage, 
unto Mount Olivet; He sent two 
disciples, saying to them, Go 
ye into the village that 1s over 
against you, and immediately 
you shall find an ass tied, and 
a colt with her; loose them, and 
bring them to Me. And if any 
man shall say anything to you, 


*R. Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Matthseum. 
N ILLO témpore: Cum ap- 
propinquásset Jesus Jero- 
sólymis, et venísset Béth- 
phage ad montem Olivéti: 
tunc misit duos discípulos 
suos, dicens eis: Ite in castél- 
lum, quod contra vos est, et 
statim inveniétis ásinam al- 
ligátam, et pullum cum ea; 
Sólvite, et addácite mihi: et 
Si quis vobis áliquid dixerit, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


y ee N 


ST L- EC" 


PALM SUNDAY 391 


dícite, quia Dóminus his opus 
habet, et conféstim dimíttet 
eos. Hoc autem totum factum 
est, ut adimplerétur quod dic- 
tum est per Prophétam, di- 
céntem: Dicite fílie Sion: 
Ecce rex tuus venit tibi man- 
suétus, sedens super ásinam 
et pullum, fílium subjugális. 
Eüntes autem discipuli, fecé- 
runt sicut precépit illis Jesus. 
Et adduxérunt  ásinam, et 
pullum: et imposuérunt su- 
per eos vestiménta sua, et 
eum désuper sedére fecérunt. 
Plárima autem turba stra- 
vérunt vestiménta sua in vla: 
alii autem cedébant ramos 
de arbóribus, et sternébant in 
via: turbe autem, que pre- 
cedébant, et que sequebántur, 
clamábant,  dicéntes: Ho- 
sánna fílio David: benedíctus, 
qui venit in nómine Dómini. 


say ye that the Lord hath need 
of them, and forthwith he will 
let them go. Now all this was 
done that it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by the 


‘prophet, saying, Tell ye the 


daughter of Sion, Behold thy 
king cometh to thee, meek, and 
sitting upon an ass, and a colt 
the foal of her that is used to 
the yoke. And the disciples go- 
ing, did as Jesus commanded 
them: and they brought the ass 
and the colt, and laid their 
garments upon them, and 
made Him sit thereon. And 2 
very great multitude spread 
their garments in the way; and 
others cut boughs from the 
trees, and strewed them in the 
way: and the multitudes that 
went before, and that followed, 
cried, saying, Hosanna to the 
Son of David; blessed is He 
that cometh in the name of 
the Lord. 


The priest now proceeds to bless the palma. 


¥. Dóminus vobiscum. 
W. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


Orémus. 


UGE fidem in te sperán- 

tium Deus, et süppli- 
cum preces cleménter exáudi: 
véniat super nos mültiplex 
misericórdia tua: benedi- 
cántur et hl pálmites pal- 
márum, seu olivárum: et 
sicut in figúra Ecclésie multi- 
plicástà Noë egrediéntem de 
arca, et Móysen exeüntem de 
ZEgypto cum filiis Israël: ita 
nos portántes palmas, et 
ramos olivárum, bonis áctibus, 
occurrámus óbviam Christo: 
et per ipsum in gáudium in- 
troéimus etérnum. Qui tec- 


¥. The Lord be with you. 
RY. And with thy spirit. 


Let us pray. 


NCREASE the falth of them 

that hope in Thee, O God, 
and give ear to our humble pe- 
titions; let Thy manifold mercy 
come upon us; let these 
branches, whether of palm or 
of olive, be blessed HB, and, as, 
in the antetype of the Church, 
Thou didst multiply Noe, when 
he went forth from the ark, 
and Moses, when he went out 
of Egypt with the children of 
Israel so may we, who bear 
palms and olive branches, go 
forth with good works to meet 
Christ, and, through Him, may 


http://ccwatershed.org 


892 PALM SUNDAY 


we enter into everlasting joy. 
Who, with Thee, liveth and 
reigneth in the unity of the 
Holy Spirit, God. 


um vivit et regnat in unitáte 
Spíritus Sancti Deus. 


After the words “in the unity of the Holy Spirit, God” 
(in unitate Spiritus sancti Deus), the priest intones the Preface 


as at high Mass. 
y. For ever and ever. 


RY. Amen. 

FY. The Lord be with you. 

W. And with thy spirit. 

y Lift up your hearts. 

Hf. We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 

Y. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord, our God. 

AY. It is fitting and right. 


y. Per omnia secula secu- 
lorum. 
: BY. Amen. 

Y. Dóminus vobiscum. 

AY. Et cum spíritu tuo. 

Y. Sursum corda. 

H. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


y. Grátias agámus Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
B. Dignum et justum est. 


Preface 


T 1s truly meet and just, 
I right and profitable for us, 
at all times and in all places 
to give thanks to Thee, holy 
Lord, almighty Father, eternal 
God, Who dost glory in the 
wisdom of Thy saints. For Thee 
do Thy creatures serve, because 
they know Thee, their only au- 
thor and God: and all the 
things that Thou hast made 
join in praising Thee; and Thy 
saints bless Thee, in that. they 
confess with unfaltering voice 
before kings and powers.of this 
world that great name, the 
name of ‘Thine only-begotten 
Son. Before Whom stand an- 
gels and archangels, thrones 
and dominations; and, with all 
the array of the heavenly host, 
sing together the hymn of Thy 
glory, and unceasingly repeat: 


be dignum et justum 
est, equum et salutáre, 
nos tibi semper, et ubíque 
grátias ágere: Dómine sancte, 
Pater  omnípotens, etérne 
Deus: Qui gloriáris in consílio 
sanctérum tuórum. Tibi enim 
sérviunt creature tus: quia 
te solum auctórem et. Deum 
cognóscunt, et omnis factüra 
tua te colláudat, et bene- 
dícunt te sancti tui. Quia illud 
magnum Unigéniti tui nomen 
coram régibus et potestátibus 
hujus seculi libera voce con- 
fiténtur. Cui assistunt Angeli 
et Archángeli, Throni et Do- 
minatiónes: cumque omni 
militia celéstis exércitus 
hymnum. glérie tue cóncin- 
unt, sine fine dicéntes: 


The chois sings the Sanctus, the priest pausing till it is ter- 


minated. 


Tm holy, holy, Lord God 
of Hosts. The heavens 
and the earth are full of Thy 


ANCTUS, Sanctus, Sanctus, 
Dóminus Deus Sábaoth. 
Pleni sunt cali, et terra 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PALM SUNDAY 393 
glória tua. Hosánna in excél- glory. Hosanna in the highest 
sis. Benedíctus qui venit in Blessed is He that cometh in 
nómine Dómini. Hosanna in the name of the Lord. Hosanna 


excélsis. 


in the highest. 


He resumes: 


X. Dóminus vobíscum. 
Ij. Et cum spíritu tuo. 
Orémus. 
ÉTrrwUs, Dómine sancte, 
Pater omnípotens, 
felérne Deus: ut hanc crea- 
tiram olive, quam ex ligni 
matéria prodíre jussístiquam- 
que colimba  rédiens ad 
arcam próprio pértulit ore, 
beneifidícere, et sancti/ficáre 
dignéris: ut, quieümque ex 
ea recéperint, accipiant sibi 
protectiónem anime et cór- 
poris: fiàtque, Dómine, nos- 
tre salitis remédium, tue 
grátie sacraméntum. Per Dó- 
minum nostrum. RY. Amen. 


Orémus. 

Deus, qui dispérsa cón- 
gregas, et congregáta con- 
Sérvas: qui pópulis óbviam 
Jesu ramos portántibus bene- 
dixísti: béneHdic étiam hos 
ramos palme et olíve, quos 
tui fámuli ad honórem nómi- 
nis tui fidéliter suscípiant; ut, 
in quemcümque locum intro- 
dücti füerint, tuam benedic- 
tiénem habitatóres loci illfus 
consequantur: et omni adver- 
sitate effugáta, déxtera: tua 
prótegat quos redémit Jesus 
Christus Fflius tuus Déminus 
noster: Qui tecum vivit et 
regnat. lY. Amen. 


Orémus. 
Deus, qui miro disposi- 


¥. The Lord be with you. 

B. And with thy spirit. 

Let us pray. 
. ory Lord, almighty Father, 

eternal God, this olive 

branch, a created thing, which 
Thou hast commanded to issue 
forth from the substance of the 
wood, and which the dove, re- 
turning to the ark, carried in 
its own beak, we ask that Thou 
wouldst vouchsafe to bless Hà 
and sanctify H it, so that all 
who shall receive any of it may 
recelve to themselves protec- 
tion of soul and body; and let 
it become, O Lord, a saving 
remedy to us and a sacred sign 
of Thy grace. Through our 
Lord. B/. Amen. 


Let us pray. 

O God, Who dost gather dis- 
persed things and preserve 
what Thou hast gathered, Who 
didst bless the people bearing 
branches to meet Jesus, bless 
*& also these branches of palm 
and of olive which Thy ser- 
vants take up in the spirit of 
faith, that, into whatsoever 
place they shall be brought, 
the dwellers in that place may 
obtain Thy blessing, and that, 
putting to flight all evil, Thy 
right hand may protect those 
who have been redeemed by 
Jesus Christ, Thy Son, our 
Lord, Who with Thee liveth 
and reigneth. W. Amen. 


Let us pray. 
O God, Who in the marvelous 


http://ccwatershed.org 


394 


order of Thy providence hast 
been pleased to show forth the 
manner of our salvation even 
by means of material things, 
grant, we beseech Thee, that 
the devout hearts of Thy faith- 
ful may understand, to their 
profit, the mystical significa- 
tion of the fact that on this 
day the populace, filled with 
heavenly enlightenment, went 
out to meet the Redeemer, and 
strewed under His feet branches 
of olive and of palm. The palm 
branches, therefore, look to 
His triumph over the prince of 
death, but the sprigs of olive 
proclaim that in a certain man- 
ner the spiritual unction is al- 
ready come. For that favored 
throng even then understood 
that our Redeemer, condoling 
with the sorrows of mankind, 
was to battle with the prince of 
death for the life of the whole 
world, and was to triumph by 
dying. And for this they waited 
upon Him with such observ- 
ance as should declare both the 
triumph of His victory and the 
richness of His mercy. Re- 
membering which fact and its 
signification with full faith, we, 
too, beseech and supplicate 
Thee, O holy Lord, almighty 
Father, eternal God, through 
the same Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that in Him, and 
through Him, Whose members 
Thou hast willed us to be, we 
may be worthy to gain the vic- 
tory over the empire of death 
and to partake in His glorious 
resurrection. Who with thee 
liveth and reigneth. H. Amen. 


Let us pray, 


O God, Who didst appoint a 
dove to bring its message of 


PALM SUNDAY 


tiónis órdine, ex rebus étiam 
insensibilibus, dispensa- 
tiónem nostre salátis ostén- 
dere voluísti: da, quaesumus; 
ut devóta tudrum corda 
fidelium — salübriter intél- 
ligant, quid mystice desígnet 
in facto, quod hódie c#lésti 
lümine affldta, Redemptori 
óbviam procédens, palmárum 
atque olivárum ramos vesti- 
giis ejus turba substrávit. 
Palmárum ígitur rami de 
mortis príncipe triümphos 
exspéctant; sürculi vero oli- 
várum, spirituálem unctión- 
em advenisse quodámmodo 
clamant. Intelléxit enim, jam 


‘tunc illa hóminum beáti mul- 


titüdo prefigurari: quia Re- 
démptor noster humánis cón- 
dolens misériis, pro totíus 
mundi vita cum mortis prín- 
cipe esset pugnatürus, ac mo- 
riéndo triumphatürus. Et 
ídeo tália óbsequens adminis- 
trávit, que in illo, et triüm- 
phos victóriæ, et misericérdie 
pinguédinem declarárent. 
Quod nos quosque plena fide, 
et factum et significátum re- 
tinéntes, te Dómine sancte 
Pater ómnípotens, etérne 
Deus, per eümdem Démin- 
um nostrum Jesum Chris- 
ium  supplíciter exorámus: 
ui in ispo, aique per 
ipsum, cujus nos membra 
fieri voluísti, de mortis im- 
pério victóriam reportántes, 
ipsíus gloridse ressurrectiónis 
participes esse mereámur: 
Qui tecum vivit et regnat. RY. 
Amen. 


Orémus. 


Deus, qui per olive ramum, 
pacem terris colümbam nun- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


er m 


PALM 


tiáre jussísti: presta, quesu- 
mus; ut hos olive, ceterarüm- 
que árborum ramos, cælésti 
bene?Edictióne sanctífices: ut 
cuncto pópulo tuo profíciant 
ad salütem. Per Christum Dó- 
minum nostrum. R. Amen. 


Orémus. 


Béne/Hdic, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, hos palmárum, seu 
oliváàrum ramos: et presta; 
ut, quod pópulus tuus in iui 
veneratiónem  hodiérna die 
corporáliter agit, hoc spiri- 
tuáliter summa de devotióne 
perfíciat, de hoste victóriam 
reportándo, et opus misericór- 
die summópere  diligéndo. 
Per Dóminum nostrum. E. 
Amen. 


After sprinkling the palms 
antiphon Asperges me whilst 
them, he proceeds: 


X. Dóminus vobiscum. 
BH. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


Orémus. 


Deus, qui Fílium tuum Je- 
sum Christum Dóminum nos- 
trum, pro salüte nostra in 
hunc mundum misísti, ut se 
humiliáret ad nos, et nos re- 
vocáret ad te: cui étiam, dum 
Jerüsalem veníret, ut adim- 
pléret Scriptüras, credéntium 
populórum turba, fidelíssima 
devotiéne vestiménta sua cum 
ramis palmárum in via ster- 
nébant: presta, quaesumus; ut 
illi fidei viam preparémus, 
de qua, remóto lápide offen- 
sidnis, et petra scándali frón- 
deant apud te ópera nosira 
justítie ramis: ut ejus ves- 
tígia sequi mereámur. Qui 


SUNDAY 895 
peace to the earth by means 
of an olive branch, grant, we 
‘beseech Thee, that Thou may- 
est sanctify with heavenly 
benediction + these branches 
of olive and of other trees, so 
that they may profit all Thy 
people unto salvation. Through 
Christ our Lord. B. Amen. 


Let us pray. 


Bless 4H, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, these branches, whether 
Olive or palm, and grant that 
what Thy people this day doeth 
in the flesh in Thy honor it 
may do in spirit with uttermost 
devotion, winning the victory 
over the enemy, and loving 
with all its heart the exercise 
of mercy. Through our Lord. 

H. Amen. 


with holy water (he recites the 
sprinkling them) and incensing 


y. The Lord be with you. 
BY. And with Thy spirit. 


Let us pray. 


O God, Who didst send Thy 
Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, into 
this world for our salvation, 
that He might humble Himself 
to our level and recall us to 
Thee; for Whom, also, as He 
came to Jerusalem, to fulfil the 
Scriptures, the throng of be- 
lieving people, with the most 
heartfelt devotion,  strewed 
their garments in His way, to- 
gether with. palm branches; 
grant, we beseech Thee, that 
we may prepare for Him the 
way of faith, upon which the 
Stone of offense and the rock 
of scandal being removed, our 
works of justice may put forth 


http://ccwatershed.org 


396 PALM SUNDAY 


leaves upon their branches be- tecum vivit. W. Amen. 
fore Thee, so that we may be 
worthy to follow His footsteps. Who with Thee liveth. 3’. Amen. 


If another priest is present the officiant goes to the middle of 
the altar, where, facing the people, he receives the palm from 
the priest. Both stand during the ceremony and kiss the palm. 
If no other priest assists at the ceremony the server places the 
palm intended for the officiant upon the altar immediately after 
the palms have been blessed; the officiant proceeds to the middle, 
kneels on both knees, takes his palm from the altar, kisses it, 
and returns it to the server. If the ceremony is carried on 
without chant the officiant then goes to the Missal at the Epistle 
corner, reads the two antiphons, found below, returns to the 
middle of the altar, hands the palms to the-servers, and then 
distributes them to the people. 


At the solemn blessing the officiant now gives each of the 
clergy and laity present a palm or olive branch, or a twig of 
whatever tree or shrub was blessed in place of these. Each one 
on receiving his palm reverently kisses it and the hand of the 
officiating priest. Meanwhile the choir sings the following 


antiphons: 


The children of the Hebrews, 
bearing olive branches, went to 
meet the Lord, crying aloud 
and saying, Hosanna in the 
highest. 

The children of the Hebrews 
strewed their garments in the 
way, and cried aloud, saying, 
Hosanna to the Son of David; 
blessed is He that cometh in 
the name of the Lord. 


Returning to the altar 


X. The Lord be with you. 

W. And with thy spirit. 

Let us pray. 

Almighty, eternal God, Who 
didst cause Our Lord Jesus 
Christ to sit upon an ass’s foal, 
and didst teach the crowds of 
the people to strew branches of 
trees in His way and sing Ho- 
sanna in His praise, grant, we 
beseech Thee, that we may. be 
able to imitate their innocence 
and worthily to acquire their 
merit. Through the same 
Christ our Lord. RY. Amen. 


Pieri Hebreérum portántes 
ramos olivárum, obviavérunt 
Dómino, clamántes, et di- 
céntes: Hósanna in excélsis. 


Püeri Hebreérum vesti- 
ménta prosternébant in via, 
et clamábant dicéntes: Ho- 
sánna fílio David: benedíctus 
qui venit in nómine Dómini. 


the celebrant chants: 


Y. Dóminus vobíscum. 
Hf. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


Orémus. 


Omnípotens sempitérne 
Deus, qui Dóminum nostrum 
Jesum Christum, super pul- 
Jum ásinz sedére fecisti, et 
turbas populórum vestiménta, 
vel ramos árborum in via 
stérnere, et Hosanna decan- 
tare in laudem ipsíus docuisti: 
da, quesumus; ut illórum in- 
nocéntiam imitári possímus, 
et eórum méritum cónsequi 
mereamur. Per  eümdem 
Christum Déminum nostrum. 
H. Amen. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PALM SUNDAY 


The deacon, or the officiant ot the ordinary 
notice of the procession in the e-words: 


procedámus in pace. 


897 
blessing, now gives 


Let us go forward in peace. 


The choir responds: 


In némine Christi. Amen. 


In the name of Christ. 


‘Amen, 


During the procession some of the following chants are sung: 


Antiphon. Matt. 21- 


,Cum appropinquáret Dó- 
minus Jerosólymam, misit 
duos ex discípulis suis, dicens: 
Ite in castéllum quod contra 
vos est: et inveniétis pullum 
asine: alligátum, super quem 
nullus hóminum sedit: sólvite, 
et addücite mihi. Si quis vos 
interrogaverit dicite: Opus 
Dómino est. Solvéntes ad- 
duxérunt ad Jesum: et im- 
posuérunt illi vestiménta sua, 
et sedit super eum: álii ex- 
pandébant vestiménta sua in 
via: álii ramos de arbóribus 
sternébant: et qui sequebán- 
tur, clamábant:  Hosánna, 
benedíctus qui venit in nó- 
mine Dómini: benedictum 
regnum patris nostri David: 
Hosánna in excélsis: miserére 
nobis, fili David. i 


Antiphon. 


Cum audisset pópulus, quia 
Jesus venit  Jerosólymam, 


accepérunt ramos palmérum: 
et exiérunt ei óbviam, et 
clamábant püeri, dicéntes: 
Hic est, qui ventürüs est in 
salütem pópuli. Hic est salus 
nostra, et redémptio Israél. 
Quantus est iste, cui Throni, 
et Dominatiónes occürrunt! 
Noli timére, fília Sion: ecce 
Rex luus venit tibi, sedens 
super pulum ásin; sicut 


. When the Lord drew nigh 
unto Jerusalem, He sent two 
of His disciples, saying to them, 
Go ye into the village that is 
over. against you, and you shall 
find, the colt of an ass tied, 
upon which no man hath yet 
sat: loose it and bring if unto 
me. And if any man shall ques- 
tion you, say: The Lord hath 
need of it. And they loosed it 
and brought it to Jesus. And 
They laid their garments upon 
it and He sat thereon. And 
some spread their garments, 
and other strewed branches of 
trees in His path. And those 
who followed cried out: Ho- 
sanna: Blessed is He that com- 
eth in the name of the Lord. O 
happy the kingdom of David 
our father! Hosanna in the 
highest. Thou, Son of David, 
have mercy on us. ` 


John 12,13 


When the people had heard 
that Jesus was.coming to Jeru- 
Salem, they took branches of 
palm-trees and went forth to 
meet Him, and the children 
cried aloud, saying: This is He 
that was to come for the sal- 
vation of the people. He is our 
salvation and the redemption 
of Israel. How great is He 
Whom thrones and domina- 
tions serve! Fear not, O daugh- 
ter of Sion, behold thy King 


http://ccwatershed.org 


398 


cometh to thee sitting upon an 
ass’s foal, as it is written. Hail, 
King, Creator of the world, 
Who hast come to redeem us! 


PALM SUNDAY 


scriptum est. Salve, Rex, fab- 
ricátor mundi, qui venfsti 
redimere nos. 


Antiphon 


Six days before the solemn 
pasch, when the Lord came 
into the city of Jerusalem, the 
children ran to meet Him; and 
in their hands they carried 
palm branches, and they cried 
aloud, saying: Hosanna, in the 
highest; blessed art Thou Who 
hast come in the abundance of 
Thy mercy. Hosanna in the 
highest. f 


Ante sex dies solémnis 
Paschæ, quando venit Dómi- 
nus in civitátem Jerúsalem, 
occurrérunt ei püeri: et in 
mánibus .portábant ramos 
palmárum, et clamábant voce 
magna, dicéntes: Hosánna in 
excélsis: benedictus qui vení- 
sti in multitüdine miseri- 
córdie tue: Hosánna in ex- 
célsis. ] 


Antiphon 


With flowers and palms the 


Occürrunt turbe cum flóri- 


multitudes run to meet the Re- bus et palmis Redemptóri 
deemer, and they give becom- óbviam: et victóri trium- 
ing honors to the triumphant phánti digna dant obséquia: 
victor; the nations utter the Fílium Dei ore gentes pre- 
praises of the Son of God, and dicant: et in laudem Christi 
their voices thunder through voces tonant per nübila: Hó- 
the clouds in praise of Christ: sánna in excélsis. 

Hosanna in the highest. 


Antiphon 
With the angels and the chil- Cum Angelis et pueris 
dren, let us be found faithful, fidéles inveniamur, trium- 
&cclaiming Him Who doth tri- phatóri mortis cloamántes: 


umph over death: Hosanna in Hosánna in excélsis. 
the highest. . 

The great crowd gathered for Turba multa, que convén: 
the feast-day acclaimed the erat ad diem festum, clamábat 
Lord: Blessed is He that com- Dómino: Benedíctus qui venit 
eth in the name of the Lord. in nómine Dómini: Hosánna 
Hosanna in the highest. in excélsis. à 

If possible, the:procession should leave the Church, so that on 
its return it may stop before the chief door, which it must find 
closed. Then two cantors, inside the Church, sing the hymn 


Gloria laus, after each verse of which the choir, from outside, 
repeats the first verse as a chorus or refrain. 


Gloria, Laug, et Honor 
Gu praise, and honor to LÓRIA, laus, et honor, tibi 


Thee, O Christ, our 
King! 


Sit, Rex Christe Re- 
démptor: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PALM SUNDAY 


Cui pueríle decus prompsit 

Hosánna pium. 

H. Glória, laus. 

Israél es tu Rex, Davídis et 
ínclyta proles: 

Nómine qui in Dómini, 
Rex benedícte, venis. 


W. Gloria, laus. 

Cetus in excélsis te laudat 
ctelicus omnis, 

Et mortális homo, et cuncta 
creáta simul. 

W. Glória, laus. 

Plebs Hebræa tibi 
palmis óbvia venit: 


cum 


Cum prece, voto hymnis, 
ádsumus ecce tibi. 


Hf. Glória, laus. 

Hi tibi passüro solvébant 
münia laudis: 

Nos tibi regnánti pángimus 
ecce melos. 

Hf. Glória, laus. 

Hi placuére tibi, pláceat 
devótio nostra: 


Rex bone, Rex clemens, cui 
bona cuncta placent. 


W. Gloria, laus. 


399 


Hosanna, children winsome 
to Thee, Redeemer, sing. 

RY. Glory, etc. 

Thou art the King of Israel, 
of David’s glorious line, 

In the name of God Thou 
comest, Thou blessed King di- 
vine. 

B. Glory, ete, 

Thy praises loud in heaven 
each host angelic sings, 

And mortal man in unison 
with all created things. 

W. Glory, etc. 

With palms the Hebrew peo- 
ple went forth to meet their 
King: 

Behold, we, too, our homage 
and prayers and anthems 
bring. 

RH. Glory, etc. 

To Thee about to suffer, they 
paid their debt of praise; 

To Thee on throne exalted 
we now our voices raise. 

RY. Glory, etc. 

Their homage Thou ‘accept- 
edst: accept the hearts we 
bring, 

Who all that's good approv- 
est, Thou good and gracious 
King. 

RY. Glory, etc. 


When the hymn is ended the subdeacon (or the server at the 
ordinary blessing) who has carried a processional cross at the 
head of the procession, strikes the door of the church with the 


foot of the cross. 


The doors are then opened from the inside 


and clergy and people enter singing. 


Ingrediénte Dómino in 
sanctam civitátem, Hebreó- 
rum  püeri resurrectiónem 
vite promuntiantes, * Cum 
ramis Dpalmárum: Hosanna, 
clamábant, in excélsis. y. 
Cum audisset pópulus, quod 
Jesus veníret Jerosólymam, 
exierunt óbviam ei. * Cum 
Tomis. 


When the Lord entered the 
Holy City the children of the 
Hebrews, foretelling the resur- 
rection of life, * carrying palm 
branches, cried out, Hosanna in 
the highest. Y. When the popu- 
lace had heard that Jesus was 
coming to Jerusalem, they 
went out to meet Him. * Carry- 
ing palm branches. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


400 


PALM SUNDAY 


The Mass 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 21, 20, 22 


ronp, remove not Thy 

help to a distance from 
me, look toward my defence; 
deliver me from the lion's 
mouth, and my lowness from 
the horns of the unicorns. Ps. 
21, 2. O God, my God, look 
upon me: why hast Thou for- 
saken me? far from my salva- 
tion are the words of my sins. 
O Lord. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


ÓMINE, ne longe facias 

auxílium tuum a me, 
&d defensiónem meam áspice: 
libera me de ore leónis, et a 
córnibus  unicórnium ` hu- 
militátem meam. Ps. 21, 2. 
Deus Deus meus, réspice in 
me: quare me dereliquísti? 
longe a salüte mea verba de- 
lictórum meórum. Dómine, 
ne longe. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY and eternai 

God, Who, in order to 
give mankind an example of 
humility, didst will that our 
Saviour should assume our 
flesh and suffer on the cross; 
grant in Thy mercy that we 
be found worthy of the heri- 
tage of His patience and the 
fellowship of His resurrection. 
Through the same. 


MNÍPOTENS | sempítérne 
Deus, qui humáno gén- 

eri ad imitándum humilitátis 
exémplum, Salvatórem no- 
strum carnem stimere, et cru- 
cem subíre fecisti: concéde 
propitius; ut et patiéntie ip- 
sius habére documénta et res- 
urrectiónis consórtia mereá- 
mur, Per eümdem Dóminum. 


No other Prayer is said. 
Epistle. Phil. 2, 5-11 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Philippians. 

RETHREN, Let this mind be 

-in you, which was also in 
Christ Jesus; Who being in the 
form of God, thought it not 
robbery. to be equal with God; 
but made Himself as nothing, 
taking the form of a servant, 
being made in the likeness of 
men, and in habit found as a 
man. He humbled Himself, be- 
coming obedient unto death, 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Philippenses. 


RATRES: Hoc enim sentíte 

in vobis, quod et in 
Christo Jesu: qui cum in 
forma Dei esset, non rapínam 
arbitratus est esse se squál- 
em Deo: sed semetipsum ex- 
inanivit formam servi ac- 
cípiens, in similitüdinem hó- 
minum factus, et hábitu in- 
véntus ut homo. Humillavit 
semetipsum factus obédiens 


http://ccwatershed.org 


T1 


PALM SUNDAY 401 


usque ad mortem, mortem au- even the death of the cross. For 
tem crucis. Propter quod et which cause God also hath ex- 
Deus exaltávit illum, et doná- alted Him, and hath given Him 
vit ili nomen, quod est super a name which is above all 
omne nomen: (Hic genuflec- names (here all kneel): that in 
titur), ut in nómine Jesu the name of Jesus every knee 
omne genuflectátur celésti- should bow, of those that are 
um, terréstrium, et infer- in heaven, on earth, and under 
nórum: et omnis lingua con- the earth; and that every 
fiteátur, quia Dóminus Jesus tongue should confess that the 
Christus in ele est Dei Lord Jesus Christ is in the 
Patris. glory of God the Father. 


Gradual. Ps. 72, 24,1, 3 


Tenuisti manum dexteram Thou hast held me in Thy 
meam: et'in voluntáte tua right hand, and by Thy will 
deduxisti me: et cum glória Thou hast conducted me; and 
assumpsísti me. VY. Quam with glory Thou hast assumed 
bonus Israël Deus rectis me. Y. How good is God ‘to 
corde! mei autem pene moti Israel, to them that are of a 
sunt pedes: pene effüsi sunt right heart! But my feet were 
gressus mei: quia zelávi in almost moved, my steps had 
peccatóribus, pacem pecca- well nigh slipped; because I 
tórum videns. had a zeal on occasion of sin- 

: ners, seeing mp peace of sin- 
ners, 


Tract. Ps. 21, 2-9; 18, 19, 22; 24, 32 


Deus, Deus meus, réspicein | O God, my God, look upon 
me: quare me dereliquisti? me: why hast Thou forsaken 
Y. Longe a salüte mea verba me? Y. Far from my salvation 
delictórum meórum. Y. Deus are the words of my sins. Y. 
meus, clamábo per diem, nec O my God, I shall cry by day, 
exáudies: in nocte, et non ad and Thou wilt not hear: and 
insipiéntiam mibi. V. Tu au- by night, and it shall not be re- 
tem in sancto hábitas, laus puted as folly in me. Y. But 
Israël. J. In te speravérunt Thou dwellest in the holy 
patres nostri: speravérunt, et place, the praise of Israel y. 
liberásti eos. Y. Ad te clama- In Thee have our fathers 
vérunt et salvi facti sunt: in hoped: they have hoped, and 
te speravérunt, et non sunt Thou hast delivered them. V. 
confüsi. Y. Ego autem sum They cried to Thee, and they 
vermis et non homo: oppró- were saved: they trusted in 
brium hóminum, et abjéctio Thee, and were not confound- 
plebis. Y. Omnes qui vidébant ed. Y. But Iam a worm and no 
me, aSDernabántur me, locüti man: the reproach of men, and 
sunt lébtis, et movérunt caput. the outcast of the people. V. 
Y: Bberávitin Dómino, erfpiat All they that saw Me have 


http://ccwatershed.org 


402 


laughed Me to scorn: they have 
spoken with the lips, and 
wagged the head. Y. He hoped 
in the Lord, let Him deliver 
Him: let Him save Him, seeing 
He delighteth in Him. V. But 
they have looked and stared 
upon Me: they parted My gar- 
ments amongst them, and upon 
my vesture they cast lots. Y. 
Deliver me from the lion's 
mouth: and my lowness from 
the horns of the unicorns. y. 
Ye that fear the Lord, praise 
Him: all ye the seed of Jacob, 
glorify Him. P. There shall be 
declared to the Lord a genera- 
tion to come: and the heavens 


PALM SUNDAY 


eum: salvum fYaciat eum, 
quóniam vult eum. JV. Ipsi 
vero consideravérunt, et con- 
spexérunt me, divisérunt sibi 
vestiménta mea, et super 
vestem meam misérunt sor- 
tem. Y. Libera me de ore 
leónis, et à córnibus unicórni- 
um humilitátem meam. JF. 
Qui timétis Dóminum, lau- 
dáte eum: univérsum semen 
Jacob, magnificate eum. J. 
Annuntiábitur Dómino gene- 
ratio ventüra: et annuntiá- 
bunt coli justítiam ejus. J. 
Pópulo, qui nascétur, quem 
fecit Dóminus. 


shall show forth His justice. Y. To a people that shall be 
born, which the Lord hath made. 

The usual preparatory prayer Munda cor meum is not said be- 
fore the recital of the Passion, as at high Mass, and the deacons 
do not ask the priest’s blessing mor salute the people with 
Dominus vobiscum when beginning their chant. Nor are they 
attended as at other high Masses by thurifer and acolytes. 


In order to enable the faithful to realize more fully the sad 
events of our Lord’s Passion and Death, the church provides in 
the liturgy for the singing of the Passion, in three voices, which 
are indicated in the text below. C (standing for Chronista) rep- 
resents the narrator; S (standing for Synagoga), the Jewish 
People; Hm (Christus) the divine Victim, our Lord. During the 
chanting or reading of the Passion, clergy and laity hold the 
palms in their hands. 


When the Passion is sung by three deacons the celebrant te- 
cites the Passion, down to the words “And the next day," stand- 
ing at he Epistle corner of the altar. On other occasions he 
reads the Passion at the Gospel corner. 


The Passion 


Matt. 26, 1-753 27, 1-66 


The Passion of Our Lord Pa&ssio Dómini nostri Jesu 
Jesus Christ according to St. Christi secündum Matthee- 
Matthew: um, 


The Plot to Betray Jesus 


T THAT time, Jesus said N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
to His disciples, & You sus discípulis suis: mH 
te) 


w that after two days shall Scitis quia post biduum 
be the pasch, and the Son of Pascha fíet, et Filius hóminis 
man shall be delivered up to tradétur ut crucifigátur. C. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PALM SUNDAY 


Tunc congregáti sunt princi- 
pes sacerdótum, et senióres 
pópuli in átrium príncipis sa- 
cerdótum qui dicebátur Cái- 
phas: et consílium fecérunt 
ut Jesum dolo tenérent, et oc- 
cíderent. Dicébant autem: S. 
Non in die festo, ne forte tu- 
mültus fíeret in pópulo. C. 
Cum autem Jesus esset in Be- 
thánia in domo Simónis lepró- 
si, accéssit ad eum mülier ha- 
bens alabástrum  unguénti 
pretiósi, et effüdit super caput 
ipsíus recumbéntis. Vidéntes 
autern  discípuli . indignáti 
sunt, dicéntes: S. Ut quid 
perdítio haec? pótuit enim is- 
tud venümdari multo, et da- 
ri paupéribus. C. Sciens autem 
Jesus, ait illis: Fk Quid mo- 
lésti estis huic mulíeri? opus 
enim bonum opérata estin me. 
Nam semper páuperes habé- 
tis vobiscum: me autem non 
semper habétis. Mittens enim 
hee unguéntem hoc in cor- 
pus meum, ad sepeliéndum 
me fecit. Amen dico vobis, 
ubicümque predicatum füerit 
hoc Evangélium in toto mundo, 
dicétur et quod hzc fecit in 
memoriam ejus. C. Tunc áblit 
unus de duódecim, qui dicebá- 
tur Judas Iscariótes, ad prín- 
cipes sacerdótum, et. ait illis: 
S. Quid vultis mihi dare, et 
ego vobis eum tradam? C. 
At illi constituérunt ei tri- 
ginta argénteos. Et exínde 
querébat opportunitátem. ut 
eum tráderet. 


403 


be crucified. C. Then there 
were gathered together the 
chief priests and the ancients 
of the people, into the court of 
the high priest, who was called 
Caiphas; and they consulted 
together that by subtilty they 
might apprehend Jesus, and 
put Him to death. But they 
sald, S. Not on the festival- 
day, lest there should be a 
tumult among the people. C. 
And when Jesus was in Beth- 
ania, in the house of Simon the 
leper, there came to Him a 
woman having an alabaster box 
of precious ointment, and 
poured it on His head, as He 
was at table. And the disciples 
seeing it, had indignation, 
saying, S. to what purpose is 
this waste? for this might have 
been sold for much, and given 
to the poor. C. And Jesus know- 
ing it, said to them, 5} Why do 
you trouble this woman? for - 
she hath wrought a good work 
upon Me. For the poor you have 
always with you; but Me you 
have not always. For she, in 
pouring this ointment upon my 
body, hath done it for My 
burial. Amen I say to you, 
wheresoever this gospel shall be 
preached in the whole world, 
that also which she hath done 
shall be told, for a memory of 
her. C, Then went one of the 
twelve, who was called Judas 
Iscariot, to the chief priests; 
and he said to them, S. What 
will you give me, and I will de- 
liver Him unto you? C. bu. 


they appointed Him thirty pieces of silver. And from thence. 
forth he sought opportunity to betray Him. 


The Preparation of the Pasch 


Prima, autem die azymó- 
Tum  &ecessérunt  discípuli 


And on the first day of 
the azymes the disciples came 


http://ccwatershed.org 


404 


to Jesus, saying, S. Where 
wilt Thou that we prepare 
for Thee to eat the pasch? 
But Jesus said ri Go ye into the 
city to a certain man, and say 
to him, The Master saith, My 
time is near at hand, I will 
keep the pasch at thy house 
with My disciples. C. And the 
disciples did as Jesus had ap- 
pointed them; and they pre- 
pared the pasch. Now when it 
was evening, He sat down with 
His twelve disciples: and whilst 
they were eating, He said, Hk 
Amen I say to you, that one 
of you is about to betray Me. 
C; And they, being very much 
troubled, began every one to 
say, S. Is it I, Lord? C. But 
He answering, said, 1 He that 
dippeth his hand with Me in 
the dish, he shall betray Me. 
The Son of man indeed goeth, 
as it is written of Him; but 
woe to that man by whom the 
Son of man shall be betrayed: 
it were better for him, if that 
man had not been born. C. And 
Judas that betrayed Him, an- 
swering, said, S. Is it I, Rabbi? 


PALM SUNDAY 


ad Jesum, dicentes: S. Ubi 
vis parémus tibi comédere 
pascha? C. At Jesus dixit: "HR 
Ite in civitátem ad quemdam, 
et dícite ei: Magister dicit: 
‘Tempus meüm prope est, apud 
te facio pascha cum discipulis 
meis. C. Et fecérunt discípuli 
sicut constituit illis Jesus, et 
paravérunt pascha. Véspere 
auteni facto, discumbébat cum 
duódecim discípulis suis. Et 
edéntibus illis, dixit: 44 Amen 
dico vobis, quia unus vestrum 
me traditürus est. C. Et con- 
tristáti valde, cepérunt síngu- 
H dicere: S. Numquid ego 
sum, Dómine? C. At ipse re- 
spóndens, ait: 44 Qui intíngit 
mecum manum in parópside, 
hic me tradet. Fílius quidem 
hóminis vadit, sicut scriptum 
est de illo: ve autem hómini 
illi, per quem Fílius hóminis 
iradétur:. bonum erat ei, si 
natus non fuisset homo ille. 
C: Respóndens autem Judas, 
qui trádidit eum, dixit: S. 
Numquid ego sum, Rabbi? C. 
Ait illi: " Tu dixisti. : 


C. He saith to him. & Thou hast said it. 
. Institution of the Holy Eucharist 


C. And whilst they were 
at supper, Jesus took bread, 
and blessed, and broke, and 
gave to His disciples, and 
said, H4 Take ye, and eat: this 
is My body. C. And taking the 
chalice He gave thanks: and 
gave to them, saying, Œ Drink 
ye all of this. For this is My 
blood of the new testament, 
which shall be shed for many 
unto the remission of sins. And 
I say unto you, I will not drink 
from henceforth of the fruit of 
the vine, until that day when 


C. Cenántibus autem eis, 
accépit. Jesus panem et bene- 
díxit, ac fregit, deditque di- 
scipulis suis et. ait: 5H Ac- 
cípite, et comédite: hoc est 
corpus meum. C. Et acci- 
piens cálicem, grátias egit: 
et dedit ilis, dicens: 1 Bi- 
bite ex hoc omnes. Hic est 
enim sanguis meus novi te- 
staménti, qui pro multis ef- 
fundétur in remissiónem pec- 
eatérum. Dico autem vobis: 
non bibam ámodo de hoc ge- 
nímine vitis, usque in diem 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PALM SUNDAY 


illum, cum illud bibam vobís- 
cum novum in regno Patris 
mei. C. Et hymno dicto, exié- 
runt in montem Olivéti. Tunc 
dicit illis Jesus: 44 Omnes vos 
Scándalum patiémini in me, 
in ista nocte. Scriptum est 
enim: Percütiam pastórem, et 
dispergéntur oves gregis. 
Postquam autem resurréxero, 
precédam vos in Galileam. 
C. Respóndens autem Petrus, 
ait illi: S. Et si omnes scan- 
dalizáti füerint in te, ego 
numquam scandalizábor. C. 
Ait ili Jesus: 4 Amen dico 
tibi, quia in hac nocte ánte- 
quam gallus cantet, ter mie 
negábis. C. Ait illi Petrus: S. 
Etiam si oportüerit me mori 
tecum, non te negábo. C. Si- 
míliter et omnes discípuli dix- 
érunt. : 


405 


1 shall drink it with you in the 
kingdom of My Father. C. And 
a hymn being said, they went 
out unto Mount Olivet. Then 
Jesus saith to them, 4 All you 
shall be scandalized in Me, this 
night; for it is written, I will 
strike the shepherd, and the 
sheep of the flock shall be dis- 
persed: but after I shall be 
risen again, I will go before you 
into Galilee. C. And Peter an- 
swering, said to Him, S. Al- 
though all shall be scandalized 
in Thee, I will never be scan- 
dalized. C. Jesus said to him, 
"* Amen I say to thee, that in 
this night, before the cock 
crow, thou wilt deny Me thrice. 
C. Peter saith to Him, -S. Yea, 
though I should die with Thee; 
I will not deny Thee: C. and 
in like manner said all the dis- 
ciples. 


Jesus Prays in Gethsemani 


Tune venit Jesus cum 
Wis in villam, que dicitur 
Gethsémani, et dixit discipu- 
lis suis: © Sedéte hic, donec 
vadam illuc, et orem. C. Et 
assimpto Petro, et duóbus 
fílis Zebedei, cepit contris- 
tari et mestus esse. Tunc ait 
ills: 4 Tristis est ánima mea 
usque ad mortem: sustinéte 
hic, et vigiláte mecum. C. Et 
progressus pusílum, prócidit 
in fáciem suam, orans, et di- 
cens: "B Pater mi, si possible 
est, tránseat a me calix iste. 
Verümtaemen non sicut ego 
volo, sed sicut tu. C. Et venit 
ad discípulos suos, et invénit 
eos dormiéntes: et dicit Pe- 
iro: 5H Sic non potuístis una 
hora vigiláàre mecum? Vigi- 
láte, et oráte, ut non intrétis 
in tentatiónem: Spíritus qui- 


Then Jesus came with them 
into a country place which 
is called Gethsemani; and 
He said to His disciples, . 
Sit you here, till I go yonder 
and pray: C. and taking with 
Him Peter and the two sons of 
Zebedee; He began to grow sor- 
rowful and to be sad. Then He 
saith to them, m My soul is 
sorrowful even unto death: 
stay you here and watch with 
Me. C. And going a little far- 
ther, He fell upon His face, 
praying and saying, % My 
Father, if it be possible, let this 
chalice pass from Me: never- 
theless not as I will but as 
Thou wilt. C. And He cometh 
to His disciples and findeth 
them asleep: and He saith to 
Peter, XH What? Could you not 
watch one hour with Me? 


http://ccwatershed.org 


406 


Watch ye, and pray, that ye 
enter not into temptation. Tbe 
spirit indeed is willing, but the 
fiesh is weak. C. Again the 
second time, He went, and 
prayed, saying, 4 My Father, if 
this chalice may not pass away 
but I must drink it, Thy will be 
done. C. And He cometh again, 
and findeth them sleeping; for 
their eyes were heavy. And 
leaving them, He went agoin: 
and He prayed the third time, 
saying the self-same word. 
Then He cometh to His dis- 
ciples, and saith to them, "K 
Sleep ye now, and take your 
rest; behold the hour is at 
hand, and the Son of man shall 
be betrayed into the hands of 


PALM SUNDAY 


dem promptus est, caro autem 
infirma. C. Iterum secündo 
Abiit, et orávit, dicens: Fm 
Pater mi, si non potest hic 
calix transíre, nisi bibam il- 
lum, fiat volüntas tua. C, Et 
venit iterum, et invénit eos 
dormiéntes: erant enim óculi 
eórum graváti. Et relíctis il- 
lis, fterum ábiit, et orávit 
tértio, eürodem  sermónem 
dicens. Tunc venit ad discí- 
pulos suos, et dicit illis: H* 
Dormíte jam, et requiéscite: 
ecce appropinquávit hora, et 
Fílius hóminis tradétur in 
manus peccatórum. Surgite, 
eámus: ecce appropinquávit 
qui me tradet. 


sinners. Rise, let us go; behold he is at hand that will betray 


Me. 


Judas Approaches to Apprehend Jesus 


C. As He yet spoke, be- 
hold Judas, one of the twelve, 
came; and with him a great 
multitude with swords and 
clubs, sent from the chief 
priests and the ancients of the 
people. And he thai betrayed 
Him gave them a sign, saying, 
S. Whomscever I shall kiss, 
that is He; hold him fast. C. 
And forthwith coming to Jesus, 
he said, S. Hail, Rabbi: C. and 
he kissed Him. And Jesus said 
to him, ! Friend, whereto art 
thou come? C. Then they came 
up, and laid hands on Jesus, 
and held Him. And behold one 
of them that were with Jesus, 
Stretching forth his hand, drew 
out his sword, and striking the 
Servant of the high priest, cut 
Off his ear. Then Jesus saith 
to him, !K Put up again thy 
Sword into its place; for all 
that take the sword shall per- 
ish by the sword. Thinkest thou 


C. Adhuc eo loquénte, ecce 
Judas unus de duódecim ve- 
nit, e& cum eo turba multa 
cum gládiis, et füstibus, mis- 
si & princípibus sacerdótum, 
et senióribus pépuli. Qui au- 
tem trádidit eum, dedit illis 
signum dicens: S. Quem- 
cümque osculátus füero, ipse 
est, tenéte eum. C. Et con- 
féstim accédens ad Jesum, 
dixit: S. Ave. Rabbi. C. Et 
osculátus est eum. Dix- 
itque illi Jesus: 4h Amice, ad 
quid venísti? C. Tunc acces- 
sérunt, et manus injecérunt 
jin Jesum, et tenuérunt eum. 
Et ecce unus ex his, qui erant 
cum Jesu, exténdens manum, 
exémit gládium suum, et per- 
cütiens, servum príncipis sac- 
erdótum, amputavit auricu- 
lam ejus. Tunc ait illi Jesus: 
H8 Convérte gládium tuum in 
locum suum. Omnes enim, qui 
accéperint glAdium, gladio 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PALM SUNDAY 


Deríbunt. An putas, quia non 
Possum rogáre Patrem meum. 
et exhibébit mihi modo plus 
quam duódecim legiónes An- 
g£elórum? Quómodo ergo im- 
Plebúntur Scriptura, quia sic 
Opórtet fíeri? C. In illa hora 
dixit Jesus turbis: H4 Tan- 
quam ad latrónem exístis cum 
gládiis, et füstibus compre- 
héndere me: quotídie apud 
vos sedébam docens in templo, 
et non me tenuístis. C. Hoc 
autem totum factum est, ut 
adimpleréntur Scriptire 
prophetarum. Tunc discipuli 
omnes, relicto eo, fugérunt. 
At illi tenéntes Jesum, dux- 
érunt ad Cáipham príncipem 
sacerdétum, ubi scribe, et se- 
nióres convénerant. 


407 


that I cannot ask My Father, 
and He will give Me presently 
more than twelve legions of 
angels? How then shall the 
Scriptures be fulfilled, that so 
it must be done? C, In that 
same hour Jesus said to the 
multitudes, You are come 
out, as it were to a robber, with 
swords and clubs to apprehend 
Me. I sat daily with you teach- 
ing in the temple, and you laid 
not hands on Me. C. Now all 
this was done that the Scrip- 
tures of the prophets might be 
fulfilled. Then the disciples, all 
leaving Him, fled. But they 
holding Jesus led Him to Cai- 
phas the high priest, where the 
scribes and ancients were as- 
sembled. 


Peter Denies Jesus 


` Petrus autem sequebatur 
eum a longe, usque in atri- 
um principis sacerdétum. Et 
ingréssus intro, sedébat cum 
minístris, ut videret fínem. 
Príncipes. autem  sacrerdó- 
tum, et omne concilium, que- 
rébant falsum testiménium 
conira Jesum, ut eum morti 
tráderent: et non invené- 
runt, cum multi falsi testes 
accessissent. . Novíssime au- 
tem venerunt duo falsi tes- 
tes, et dixérunt: S. Hic dixit: 
Possum destrüere templum 
Dei, et post triduum re- 
tedificáre illud. C. Et surgens 
princeps sacerdótum, ait illi: 
S. Nihil respóndes ad ea, 
que isti advérsum te testifi- 
cántur? C. Jesus autem tacé- 
bat. Et princeps sacerdótum 
ait illi: S, Adjüro te per Deum 
vivum, ut dicas nobis, si tu es 
Christus Filius Dei. C. Dicit 
{li Jesus: E Tu dixisti. Ve- 


And Peter followed Him 
afar off, even to the court 
of the high priest, And going 
in, he sat with the servants, 
that he might see the end. And 
the chief priests and the whole 
council sought false witness 
against Jesus, that they might 
put Him to death. And they 
found noi; whereas many 
false witnesses had come in. 
And last of all, there came two 
false witnesses. And they said, 
S. This man said, I am able to 
destroy the temple of God and 
in three days to rebuild it. C. 
And the high priest, rising up, 
said to Him, S. Answerest Thou 
nothing to the things which 
these witness against 'Thee? C. 
But Jesus held His peace. And 
the high priest said to Him, S. 
I adjure Thee by the living 
God, that Thou tell us if Thou 
be the Christ the Son of God. 
C. Jesus saith to him, Thou 


http://ccwatershed.org 


408 


hast said it. Nevertheless I 
Say to you, hereafter you shall 
see the Son of man sitting on 
the right hand of the. power 
of God, and coming in the 
clouds of heaven. C. Then the 
high priest rent his garments, 
saying, S. He hath blasphemed, 
what further need have we of 
witnesses? Behold, now: you 
have heard the blasphemy. 
What.think you? C. But they 
answering, said, S. He is guilty 
of death. C. Then did they spit 
in His face and buffeted Him; 
and others struck His face with 
the palms of their hands, say- 
ing, S. Prophesy unto us, O 
Christ, who is he that.struck 
Thee? C. But Peter sat with- 
out in tbe court, and there 


came to him a servant-maid, 


saying, S. Thou also wast with 
Jesus the. Galilean: C. but he 
denied before them all, saying, 
S. I know not what thou say- 
est. C. And as. he went out of 
the gate, another maid saw 
him, and she saith to them 
that were there, S. This man 
also was with Jesus of Nazar- 
eth. C. And again be denied, 
with an. oath, I do not know 
the man. And after a little 
while, they: came that stood by, 
and said to Peter, S. Surely 
thou also art one of them; for 
even thy speech doth discover 
thee. C. Then he began to 
curse and to swear that he 
knew not the man; and imme- 
diately the cock crew. And 
Peter remembered the word of 
Jesus which He had said, Be- 
fore the cock crow, thou wilt 
deny Me thrice. And going 
forth, he wept bitterly. And 


PALM SUNDAY 


rumtamen dico vobis, ámodo 
vidébitis Fílium hóminis se- 
déntem a dextris virtütis Dei, 
et veniéntem in nübibus ceili. 
C. Tunc princeps sacerdétum 
scidit vestiménta sua, dicens: 
S. Blasphemábit: quid adhuc 
egémus téstibus? Ecce nunc 
audistis blasphémiam: quid 
vobis vidétur? C. At illi re- 
spondéntes dixérunt: S. Reus 
est mortis. C. Tunc exspué- 
runt in fáciem ejus, et cóla- 
phis eum cecidérunt, álii au- 
tem palmas in fáciem ejus 
dedérunt, dicéntes: S. Prophe- 
tiza nobis Christe, quis est qui 
te.percüssit? C. Petrus vero 
sedébat foris in átrio: et ac- 
céssit ad eum una ancilla, 
dicens: S. Et tu cum Jesu Gal- 
ileo eras. C. At ille negávit 
coram omnibus, dicens: S. 
Néscio. quid dicis. C. Exeünte 
autem illo jánuam, vidit eum 
alia ancílla, et ait his, qui 
erant ibi: S. Et hic erat cum 
Jesu Nazaréno. C. Et íterum 
negávit cum juraménto: Quia 
non novi hóminem. Et post 
pusíllum accessérunt qui sta- 
bant, et dixérunt Petro: S. 
Vere et tu ex illis es: -nam et 
loquéla tua maniféstum te 
facit. C. Tune cepit detestari, 
et jurére quia non. novisset 
hominem. Et continuo gallus 
cantávit. Et recordátus est Pe- 
trus verbi Jesu, quod díxerat: 
Priüsquam gallus cantet, ter 
me negábis. Et egréssus foras, 
flevit amare. Mane autem fac- 
to, consílium iniérunt. omnes 
príncipes sacerdótum, et se- 
nióres pópuli advérsus Jesum, 
ut eum morti tráderent. 


when morning was come, all the chief priests and ancients 
of the people took counsel against Jesus, to. put Him to death. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PALM SUNDAY 


409 


Jesus Brought Before Pilate 


Et vinctum adduxérunt 
eum, et tradidérunt Póntio 
Piláto presidii. Tunc videns 
Judas, qui eum trádidit, quod 
damnátus esset: peniténtia 
ductus, rétulit trigínta argén- 
teos princípibus sacerdótum, 
et senióribus, dicens: S. Pec- 
cávi, tradens sanguinem jus- 
tum. C. At illi dixérunt: S. 
Quid ad nos? Tu videris. C. Et 
projéctis argénteis in templo, 
recéssit; et ábiens, láqueo se 
suspéndit. Principes autem 
S&cerdótum, accéptis argén- 
teis, dixérunt: S. Non licet 
eos mittere in córbonam: 
quia prétium sánguinis est. C. 
Consílio autem ínito, emérunt 
ex ilis agrum figuli, in 
sepultüram  peregrinórum. 
Propter hoc vocátus est ager 
ille, Hacéldama, hoc est, ager 
sánguinis, usque in hodiér- 
num diem. Tunc impiétum 
est, quod dictum est per Jere- 
míam prophétam, dicéntem; 
Et accepérunt trigínta argén- 
teos prétium appretiáti, quem 
appretiavérunt a fíliis Israël: 
et dedérunt eos in agrum fí- 
guli, sicut constítuit mihi Dó- 
minus. Jesus autem stetit ante 

- presidem, et interrogávit eum 
præses, dicens: S. Tu es Rex 
Judeérum? C. Dixit illi Je- 
sus i Tu dicis. C. Et cum 
&ccusarétur a princípibus sa- 
cerdótum, et seni. ribus, nihil 
respóndit. Tunc dicit illi Pi- 
látus: S. Non audis quanta 
adversum te dicunt testimó- 
nia? C. Et non respóndit ei 
ad ullum verbum, ita ut mira- 
rétur pr&ses veheménter. 


And they brought Him 
bound, and delivered Him to 
Pontius Pilate, the governor. 
Then Judas, who betrayed 
Him, seeing that He was con- 
Gemned, repenting himself, 
brought back the thirty pieces 
of silver to the chief priests and 
the ancients, saying, S. I have 
sinned, in betraying innocent 
blood; C. but they said, S. 
What is that to us? look thou 
to it. C. And casting down the 
pieces of silver in the temple, 
he departed; and went, and 
hanged himself with a halter. 
But the chief priests having 
taken the pieces of silver, said, 
S. It is not lawful to put them 
into the corbona; because it is 
the price of blood. C. And after 
they had consulted together, 
they bought with them the pot- 
ter’s field, to be a burying- 
place for strangers. Where- 
fore that field was called 
Haceldama, that is, the field 
of blood, even to. this day. 
Then was fulfilled that which 
was spoken by Jeremias the 
prophet, saying, And they took 
the thirty pieces of silver, the 
price of Him that was prized, 
whom they prized of the chil- 
dren of Israel; and they gave 
them unto the potter’s fleld, as 
the Lord appointed to me. And 
Jesus stood before the gov- 
ernor, and the governor asked 
Him, saying, S. Art Thou the 
king of the Jews? C. Jesus said 
to him, Thou sayest it. C. 
And when He was uccused by 
the chief priests and ancients, 
He answered nothing. Then 
Pilate saith to Him, S. Dost 


not Thou hear how great testimonies they allege against Thee? 


http://ccwatershed.org 


410 


PALM SUNDAY 


C. And He answered to him never a word; so that the governor 


wondered exceedingly. 


Pilate Endeavors to Save Jesus 


Now upon the solemn day 
ibe governor was accustomed 
to release to the people one 
prisoner, whom they would: 
and he had then a notorious 
prisoner, that was called Bar- 
abbas. They therefore being 
gathered together, Pilate said, 
S. Whom will you that I re- 
lease to you, Barabbas, or Jesus 
thatis called Christ? C. For he 
knew that for envy they had 
delivered Him. And as he was 
Sitting in the place of judg- 
ment, his wife sent to him, 
saying, S. Have you nothing to 
do with that just man, for I 
have suffered many things this 
day in & dream because of Him. 
C. But the chief priests and 
ancients persuaded the people 
that they should ask Barabbas, 
and make Jesus away. And the 
governor, answering, said to 
them, S. Whetber wil you of 
the two to be released: unto 
you? C. But they said, S. Bar- 
abbas. C. Pilate saith to them, 
S. What shall I do then with 
Jesus that is called Christ? C. 
They say all, S. Let Him be 
crucified. C. The governor said 
to them, S. Why, what evil 
hath He done? C. But they 
cried out the more, saying, S. 
Let Him be crucified. C. And 
Pilate seeing that he prevailed 
Nothing, but that rather a 
tumult was made, taking water, 
washed his hands before the 
people, saying, S. 1 am innocent 
of the blood of this just man; 
look you to it. C. And the whole 


Per diem autem solémnem 
consuéverat præses pópulo di- 
mittere unum vinctum, quem 
voluíssent. | Habébat autem 
tunc vinctum insígnem, qui 
dicebátur Barábbas. Congre- 
gátis ergo illis, dixit Pilátus? 
S. Quem vultis dimíttam vo- 
bis: Barábbam, an Jesum, qui 
dicítur Christus? C. Sciebat 
enim quod per invídiam tradi- 
dissent eum. Sedénte autem 
ilo pro tribunáli, misit ad 
eum uxor ejus, dicens; S, 
Nihil tibi, et justo illi: multa 
enim passa sum hddie per vi- 
sum propter eum. C. Príncipes 
autem, sacerdótum, et se- 
nióres persuasérunt pópulis, 
ut péterent Barábbam, Jesum 
vero pérderent. Respóndens 
autem præses ait ilis: S. 
Quem vultis vobis de duóbus 
dimítti? C. At ili dixérunt: 
S. Barábbam. C. Dicit illis 
Pilátus: S. Quid igitur fá- 
ciam de Jesu, qui dícitur 
Christus? C. Dicunt omnes: 
S. Crucifigátur. C. Ait illis 
preses: S. Quid enim mali fe- 
cit? C. At illi magis clamá- 
bant.dicéntes: S. Crucifigéí- 
tur. C. Videns autem Pilátus 
quia nihil profíceret, sed ma- 
gis tumültus fíeret: accépta 
aqua, lavit manus coram 
pópulo, dicens: S. Innocens 
ego sum a sanguine justi hu- 
jus: vos vidéritis. C. Et re- 
Spóndens univérsus pópulus 
dixit: S. Sanguis ejus Super 
nos, et super filios nostros. 


people answering, said, S. His blood be upon us, and upon our 


children. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ie See es 


AL ae all 


cL RS, 


we 


PALM SUNDAY 


411 


Pilate Consents to the Crucifixion 


C. Tune dimisit illis Baráb- 
bam: Jesum autem flagellá- 
tum tradidit eis, ut crucifigé- 
tur. Tunc mílites presidis su- 
scipiéntes Jesum in pretéri- 
um, congregavérunt ad eum 
univérsam cohórtem: et ex- 
uéntes eum, chlámydem cóc- 
cineam circumdedérunt ei, et 
plecténtes corónam de spinis, 
posuérunt super caput ejus, et 
artiindinem in déxtera ejus. 
Et genu flexo ante eum, illu- 
débant ei, dicéntes: S. Ave, 
rex Judeórum. C. Et exs- 
puéntes in eum, accepérunt 
&ründinem, et percutiébant 
caput ejus. Et postquam illu- 
sérunt ei, exuérunt eum chlá- 
myde, et induérunt eum ves- 
timéntis ejus, et duxérunt 
eum ut crucifígerent. Exeün- 
tes autem invenérunt hómi- 
nem Cyreneum, nómine Si- 
mónem: hunc angariavérunt, 
ut tólleret crucem ejus. 


C. Then he released to them 
Barabbas; and having scourg- 
ed Jesus, delivered Him unto 
them to be crucified. Then the 
soldiers of the governor taking 
Jesus into the hall, gathered 
together unto Him the whole 
band; and stripping Him, they 
put a scarlet cloak about Him. 
And platting a crown of thorns, 
they put it upon His head, and 
a reed in His right hand. And 
bowing the knee before Him, 
they mocked Him, saying, S. 
Hail, king of the Jews. C. 
And spitting upon Him, they 
took the reed and struck His 
head. And after they had 
mocked Him, they took off the 
cloak from Him, and put on 
Him His own garments, and 
led Him away to crucify Him. 
And going out they found a 
man of Cyrene, named Simon; 
him they forced to take up His 
cross. 


The Crucifixion 


Et venérunt in locum, qui 
dícitur Golgotha, quod est 
Calvárie locus. Et' dedérunt 
ei vinum bíbere cum felle 
mixtum. Et cum gustásset, 
nóluit bíbere. Postquam au- 
tem crucifixérunt eum, divi- 
sérunt vestiménta ejus, sor- 
tem  mitténtes: ut imple- 
rétur quod dictum est per 
Prophétam, dicéntem: Divisé- 
runt sibi vestiménta mea, et 
super vestem meum misérunt 
Sortem. Et -sedéntes, ser- 
vábant eum. Et imposuérunt 
super caput ejus causam ipsí- 
us scriptam: Hic est Jesus 
Rex Judmórum. Tunc cruci- 
fixi sunt cum eo duo latrónes: 
unus a dextris, et unus 2 sin- 


And they came to the place 
that is called: Golgotha, 
which is, the place of Calvary. 
And they gave Him wine to 
drink mingled with gall: and 
when He had tasted He would 
not drínk. And after they hac 
crucified Him, they divided His 
garments, casting lots; that it 
might be fulfilled which was 
spoken by the prophet, saying, 
They divided my garments 
among them, and upon My 
vesture they cast lots. And they 
sat, and watched Him. And 
they put over His head His 
cause, written: This is Jesus 
the King of the Jews. Then 
were crucified with Him two 
thieves, one on the right hand, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


412 


and one on the left. And they 
that passed by, blasphemed 
Him, wagging their heads, and 
saying, S. Vah, Thou that de- 
stroyest the temple of God, and 
in three days dost rebuild it; 
save Thy own self: if Thou be 
the Son of God, come down 
from the cross. C. In like man- 
ner also the chief priests with 
the scribes and ancients mock- 
ing, said, S. He saved. others, 
Himself He cannot save: if He 
be the King of Israel, let Him 


now come down from the cross, 


and we will believe Him: He 


irusted in God, let Him now 


deliver Him if He wil have 
Him; for He said, I am the Son 
of God. C. And the selfsame 
thing the thieves also, that 
were crucified with Him, re- 
proached Him with. Now from 
the sixth hour there was dark- 
ness over the whole earth, un- 


til the ninth hour. And about 


the ninth hour, Jesus cried 
with à loud voice, saying, FB 


Eli, Eli, lamma sabacthani? C. 


ihat is, My God, My God, why 
hast Thou forsaken Me? C. 
And some that stood there, and 
heard, said, S. This man calleth 


Elias. C. And immediately one 
took a 


of them running, 
sponge, and filled it with vine- 
gar, and put it on a reed and 
gave Him to drink. And the 
others said, S. Let be, let us 
see whether Elias will come to 


PALM SUNDAY 


istris. Preteréuntes autem 
blasphemábant eum movéntes 
capita sua, et dicéntes; S. 
Vah, qui déstruis templum 


‘Dei, et in tríduo illud rezdí- 


ficas; salva temetípsum. Si 
Fílius Dei es, descénde de 
cruce. C. Simíliter et príncipes 
Sacerdótum  illudéntes cum 
scribis, et seniórbus, dicébant: 
S. Alios salvos fecit, seípsum 
non potest salvum facere: si 
Rex Israël. est, descéndat 
nunc de cruce, et crédimus ei: 
confidit in Deo: líberet nunc, 
si vult eum dixit enim: Quia 
Fílius Dei sum. C. Idípsum 
autem et latrónes, qui cru- 
cifíxi erant cum eo, improper- 
Abant ei. A sexta autem hora 
ténebre facte.sunt super uni- 
vérsam terram, usque ad hor- 
am nonam. Et circa horam 
nonam clamávit Jesus voce 
magna, dicens: H4 Eli, Eli, 
lamma sabactháni? C. Hoc 
est: 4 Deus meus, Deus meus, 
ut quid dereliquisti me? C. 
Quidam autem illis stantes, et 
audiéntes, dicébant: S. Elíam 
vocat iste. C. Et continuo cur- 
rens unus ex eis, accéptam 
spéngiam implévit acéto, et 
impósuit aründini, et dabat 
ei bíbere. Céteri vero dicé- 
bant: S. Cine, videámus an 
véniat Elias liberans eum. C. 
Jesus autem íterum clamans 
voce magna, emísit spíritum. 


deliver Him. C. And Jesus again crying with e loud voice, 


yielded up the ghost. 


Here all kneel, and pause 2 little while. 


And behold the veil of the 
temple was rent in two from 
the top even to the bottom; 
and the earth quaked, and the 
rocks were rent; and the 


Et ecce velum templi scis- 
sum est in duas partes a 
summo usque deórsum: et 
terra mota est, et petre scis- 
sæ sunt, et monuménta apér- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


c 


PALM. SUNDAY 


ta sunt: et multa córpora 
sanctorum, qui dormiérant, 
surrexérunt. Et exéuntes de 
monuméntis post resurrec- 
tiónem ejus, venérunt in sanc- 
tam civitátem, et. apparué- 
runt multis. Centürio autem, 
et qui cum eo erant, custodi- 
éntes Jesum, viso terremótu, 
et his quæ fiébant, timuérunt 
valde dicéntes: S. Vere Fílius 
Dei erat iste. C. Erant autem 
ibi mulíeres multe a longe, 
que secüte erant Jesum a 
Galilea, ministrantes ei: in- 
ter quas erat Maria Magda- 
léne, et Maria Jacóbi, et Jo- 
seph mater, et mater filiorum 
Zebedai, Cum autem sero fac- 
tum esset, venit quidam homo 
dives ab Arimathea, nómine 
Joseph, qui et ipse discipulus 
erat Jesu. Hic accéssit ad Pi- 
látum, et pétiit corpus Jesu. 
Tunc Pilatus jussit reddi cor- 
pus. Et accépto córpore, Jo- 
seph invólvit illud in sindone 
munda. Et pósuit illud in 
monuménto suo novo, quod 
excíderat in petra. Et advólvit 
saxum magnum ad óstium 
monuménti, et ábiit. Erat au- 
tem ibi María Magdaléne, et 
éltera Maria sedéntes contra 
sepülcrum. 


413 


graves were opened, and many 
bodies of the saints that had 
slept, arose, and coming out of 
ihe tombs after His resurrec- 
tion, came into tbe holy city, 
and appeared to many. Now 
the centurion and they: that 
were with him watching Jesus, 
having seen the earthquake 
and the things that were. done, 
were greatly afraid, saying, S. 
Indeed this was the Son of 
God. C. And there were many 
women afar off, who had fol- 
lowed Jesus from Galilee, min- 
istering unto Him; among 
whom was Mary Magdalen, 
and Mary the mother of James 
and Joseph, and the mother of 
the sons of Zebedee. And when 
it was evening, there came a 
certain rich man of Arimathea, 
named Joseph, who also him- 
self was a disciple of Jesus. He 
went to Pilate, ‘and asked the 
body of Jesus. Thén Pilate 
commanded that the body 
should be delivered. And Joseph 
taking the body, wrapt it up in 
a, clean linen cloth, and laid 
it in his own new monument, 
which he had hewn out in a 
rock; and he rolled a great 
stone to the door of the monu- 
ment, and went his way. And 
there was there Mary Mag- 


dalen, and the other Mary, sitting over against the sepulchre. 


l The deacon of the Mass, taking the book of the Gospels, now 
says the prayer Munda cor meum, page 763, and asks the priests 
blessing, incensing the Sacred Text before beginning to read 


from i 


If three deacons do not sing the Passion, the celebrant now 


goes to the middle of the altar, recites the Munda cor meum, 
returns to the Gospel corner, and reads in a-loud tone of voice, 
or sings the following passage; 


Altera autem die, que est And the next day, which fol- 
post Parascéven, convenérunt lowed the day of the prepara- 
príncipes sacerdótum, et pha- tion the chief priests and the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


414 PALM SUNDAY 


Pharisees came together to 
Pilate, saying, Sir, we have re- 
membered that that seducer 
said, while He was yet alive, 
After three days I will rise 
again: command therefore the 
Sepulehre to be guarded until 
the third day, lest His disciples 
come and steal Him away, and 
Say to the people, He is risen 
from the dead; and the last 
error shall be worse than the 
first. Pilate said to them, You 
have a guard; go, guard it as 
you know. And they, depart- 
ing, made the sepulchre sure, 
sealing the stone, and setting 
the guards. 


Creed, page 765. 


risei ad Pilátum dicéntes: 
Dómine, recordati .sumus, 
quia sedüctor ille dixit adhuc 
vivens: Post tres dies resür- 
gam. Jube ergo custodíri se- 
pülerum usque in diem tér- 
tium: ne forte véniant discí- 
puli ejus, et furéntur eum, et 
dicant plebi: Surrexit a mór- 
tuis: et erit novíssimus error 
pejor priore. Ait illis Pilátus: 
Habétis custódiam, ite, custo- 
díte sicut scitis. Illi autem 
abetintes, muniérunt sepül- 
crum,  signántes  lápidem, 
cum custódibus. 


Offertory. Ps. 68, 21, 22 


My heart hath expected re- 
proach and misery; and I 
looked for one that would 
grieve together with Me, and 
there was none: I sought for 
one to comfort Me, and I 
found none; and they gave me 
gall for My food, and in My 
thirst they gave Me vinegar to 
drink. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Impropérium  exspectávit 
cor meum, et misériam: et 
sustinui qui simul mecum 
contristarétur, et non fuit: 
consolantem me quesivi, et 
non invéni: et dedérunt in es- 
cam meam fel, et in siti mea 
potavérunt me acéto. 


Secret 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 

Lord, that the gift pre- 
sented to ihe eyes of Thy 
majesty may both obtain for 
us the grace of devotion and 
acquire for us the effect of a 
blessed immortality. Through 
our Lord. 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


Communion. 

Father, if this chalice may 

not pass away, but I must drink 
it, Thy will be done. 


ONCÉDE, quesumus, Dó- 

mine: ut óculis tue ma- 
jestátis munus oblátum, et 
grátiam nobis devotiónis ob- 
tineat, et effectum beátze pe- 
rennitátis acquirat. Per Dé- 
minum. 


Matt. 26, 42 

Pater, si non potest hic ca- 
lix transire, nisi bibam illum; 
fíat voluntas tua. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


aa cc 


re N/A 


MONDAY IN HOLY WEEK 415 


. Postcommunion 
ER hujus, Dómine, opera- v THE operation of this 
tiónem mystérii: et vitia mystery, O Lord, may 


nostra purgéntur, et justa de- our vices be purged away, and 
sidéria. compleántur. Per Dó- our righteous desires have ful- 
minum. fillment. Through our Lord. 

In low Masses the Gospel At that time when Jesus drew nigh, 


page 390, found, above in the blessing of the palms, is said, at 
the end instead of the Gospel according to St. John, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Miondap in Holp Week (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. PRAXEDES 
Privileged Major Feria 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps.34,1,2 


Spica, Dómine, nocéntes uncE Thou, O Lord, them 

me, expügna impugnantes that wrong me; overthrow 
me: apprehénde arma, etscu- them that fight against me: 
tum, et exsürge in adjutórium take hold of arms and shield, 
meum, Dómine, virtus salütis and rise up to help me, O Lord, 
mes. Ps. 34, 3. Effünde frá- the strength of my salvation. 
meam, et conclüde advérsus Ps. 34, 3. Bring out the sword, 
eos, qui persequüntur me: dic and shut up the way against 
anime mex: Salus tua ego those who persecute me: say to 
sum. Jüdica, Dómine. . my soul I am thy salvation. 

Judge. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 
A, QUISUMUS, omnipo- RANT, we beseech Thee, 
tens Deus: ut, qui in O almighty God, that we, 


tot advérsis ex nostra infimi- who, in the great mass of ad- 

táte defícimus: intercedénte versities, faint through our 

unigéniti Filii tui passióne re- own weakness, may take heart 

spirimus: Qui tecum vivit. anew through the pleading of 
the passion of Thy only be- 
gotten Son. Who with Thee 
liveth. 


Second Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for ihe Pope, 
page 826. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


416 MONDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


Lesson. Is. 100, 5-10 


Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. . 
N THOSE days, Isaias said, 
The Lord God hath opened 
my ear, and I do not resist; I 
have not gone back. I have 
given my body to the strikers, 
and my cheeks to them that 
plucked them: I have not 
turned away my face from 
them that rebuked me, and spit 
upon me. The Lord God i$ my 
helper, therefore am I. not 
confounded; therefore have 1 
set my face as a most hard 
rock, and I know that I shall 
not be confounded. He is near 
that justifieth me: who will 
contend with me? Let us stand 
together: who is my adversary? 
Jet him come near to me: Be- 
hold the Lord God is my 
helper: who is he that shall 
condemn me? Lo, they shall all 
be destroyed as a garment, the 
moth shall eat them up. Who 
is there among you that fear- 
eth the Lord, that heareth the 
voice of His servant; that hath 
walked in darkness, and hath 
no light? let him hope in the 
name of the Lord, and lean 
upon his God. 


Léctio Isaíe Prophéte. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Dixit Isaías: 

Dóminus Deus apéruit 
mihi aurem, ego autem non 
contradico: reirórsum non 
abii. Corpus meum dedi per- 
cutiéntibus, et genas meas 
velléntibus: fáciem meam non 
avérti ab increpántibus, et 
conspuéntibus in me. Dómi- 
nus Deus auxiliátor meus, 
ideo non sum confüsus: ideo 
pósui fáciem meam, ut pe- 
tram durissimam, et scio, 
quóniam non confündar. Jux- 
ta est, qui justíficat me, quis 
contradícet mihi? stemus si- 
mul, quis est adversárius 
meus? accédat ad me. Ecce 
Dóminus Deus auxiliátor me- 
us: quis est qui condémnet 
me? Ecce omnes quasi vesti- 
méntum conteréntur, tinea 
cémedet eos. Quis ex vobis ti- 
mens Dóminum, áudiens vo- 
cem servi tui? qui ambulávit 
in ténebris, et non est lumen 
ci, speret in nómine Dómini, 
et innitátur super Deum 
suum. 


Gradual. Ps. 34, 23, 3 


Arise, O Lord, and be atten- 
tive to my judgment, to my 
cause, my God, and my Lord. 
F. Bring out the sword, and 
shut up the way against those 
who persecute me. 


Exsürge Dómine, et inténde 
judicio meo, Deus meus et 
Dóminus .meus, in causam 
meam. V. Effünde frameam, 
et conclüde advérsus eos, qui 
me persequuntur, 


Tract as on Ash Wednesday, page 220. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


pr^ 


MONDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


417 


Gospel. John 12, 1-9 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 
NTE sex- dies Pasche 
venit Jesus Bethániam, 
ubi Lazarus füerat mórtuus, 
quem suscitávit Jesus. Fecé- 
runt autem ei cenam ibi: et 
Martha ministrábat, Lázarus 
vero unus erat ex discumbén- 
tibus cum eo. Maria ergo ac- 
cépit libram unguénti nardi 
písticl pretiósi, et unxit pedes 
Jesu, et extérsit pedes ejus cá- 
pillis suis: et domus im- 
pléta est ex odóre unguénti. 
Dixit ergo unus ex discípulis 
ejus, Judas Iscariótes, qui 
erat eum traditürus: Quare 
hoc unguéntum non. véniit 
trecentis denáriis, et datum 
est egénis? Dixit autem hoc, 
non quia de egénis pertinébat 
ad eum, sed quia fur erat, et 
lóculos habens, ea, que mitte- 
bántur, portábat. Dixit ergo 
Jesus: Sínite illam, ut in 
diem sepultüre mez servet il- 
lud. Páuperes enim semper 
habétis vobiscum: me autem 
non semper habétis. Cognóvit 
ergo turba multa ex Judæis, 
quia illic est: et venérunt, 
non propter Jesum tantum, 
sed uf Lázarum vidérent, quem 
suscitávit a mórtuis. 


Offertory. 


Eripe me de inimícis meis, 
Dómine: aq te confügi, doce 
me fácere voluntátem tuam: 
quia Deus meus es tu. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


H* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
1x days before the pasch, 
Jesus came to Bethanla, 
where Lazarus had been dead, 
whom Jesus raised to life. And 
they made Him a supper there: 
&nd Martha served, but Laz- 
&rus was one of them that were 
at table with Him. Mary there- 
fore took a pound of ointment 
of right spikenard, of great 
price, and anointed. the feet of 
Jesus, and wiped His feet with 
her hair; and the house was 
filled. with the .odor. of the 
ointment. Then one of His dis- 
ciples, Judas Iscariot, he that 
was about to betray Him, said, 
Why was not this ointment 
sold for three hundred pence, 
and given to the poor? Now, he 
said this, not because he cared 
for the poor, but because he 
was a thief, and having the 
purse, carried what was put 
therein. But Jesus said, Let her 
alone, that she may keep it 
against the day of My burial: 
for the poor you have always 
with you; but Me you have not 
always. A great multitude 
therefore of the Jews knew that 
He was there; and they came, 
not for Jesus’ sake only, but 
that they might see Lazarus, 
whom He had raised from the 
dead. 


Ps. 142, 9, 10 


Deliver me from my enemies, 
O Lord: to Thee have I fled, 
teach me to do Thy will; for 
Thou art my God. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


418 TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


Secret 


AY these sacrifices, O al- 

mighty God, cleanse us 
by their mighty favor and 
make us to approach their di- 
vine author in greater purity. 
Through our Lord. 


ce, sacrificia nos, omni- 

potens Deus, poténti 
virtüte mundátos, ad suum 
faciant purióres veníre prin- 
cípium, Per Dóminum, 


oe Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


Communion. 


Let them blush and be 
ashamed together, who rejoice 
at my evils: let them be clothed 
with shame and fear, who 
speak malignant things against 
me. 


Ps. 34, 26 


Erubéscant, et revereántur 
simul, qui gratulántur malis 
meis: induántur pudóre et re- 
veréntia, qui maligna loqu- 
üntur advérsus me. 


Postcommunion 


AY Thy holy rites, O Lord, 

fill us with divine fervor, 

whereby we may receive de- 

light both from that which we 

do and from its effect. Through 
our Lord. 


REBEANT, nobis, Dómine, 

divínum tua sancta fer- 
vórem: quo eórum páriter et 
actu delectémur, et fructu. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion jor the Church, page 825; or for the 


Pope, page 826. 


Prayer over the people. 


Let us 


T down your heads to 
God. 

Help us, O God, our salva- 
tion, and grant us to come with 
joy to the commemoration of 
the benefits with which Thou 
hast deigned to restore us. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


pray - 
UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
Deo. 

Adjuva nos, Deus salutáris 
nostér: et ad benefícia reco- 
lénda, quibus nos instauráre 
dignátus es, tribue veníre gau- 
déntes. Per Dóminum. 


Tuesday in Holp Week (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. PRISCA 
Privileged Major Feria 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ms 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


Introit. 


os autem gloriári opór- 

tet in cruce Dómini 
nostri Jesu Christi: in quo est 
salus, vita, et resurréctio no- 
Stra: per quem salváti, et lib- 
eráti sumus. Ps. 66, 2. Deus 
miseredtur nostri, et benedí- 
cat nobis: illiminet vultum 
suum super nos, et misereátur 
nostri. Nos autem. 


419 


Gal. 6, 14. 


ur it behooves us to glory 

in the cross of Our Lord 
Jesus Christ: in Whom is our 
salvation, life, and resurrec- 
tion; by Whom we are saved 
and delivered. Ps. 66, 2. May 
God have mercy on us, and 
bless us: may He cause the 
light of His countenance to 
shine upon us, and may He 
have mercy on us. But it. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer . 
MNÍPOTENS  Sempitérne LMIGHTY and eternal 
Deus: da nobis ita do- God, grant that we may 


minice passiónis sacraménta 


perágere; uf indulgéntiam 
percipere  mereámur. Per 


eümdem Dóminum. 


Second Prayer 
page 826, 


So celebrate the mysteries of 
the Lord's passion that we 
may deserve to obtain Thy 
pardon. Through the same.. 


for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


Lesson. Jer. 11, 18-20 


Léctio Jeremiz Prophéte, 


N DiÉBUS illis: Dixit Jere- 

mías: Dómine, demon- 
strasti mihi, et cognóvi: tunc 
ostendísti mihi stüdia eórum. 
Et ego quasi agnus mansué- 
ius, qui portátur ad vícti- 
mam: et non cognóvi, quia 
cogitavérunt super me con- 
sflia, dicéntes: Mittámus li~ 
gnum in panem ejus, et era- 
dámus eum de terra vivén- 
tium, et nomen ejus non me- 
morétur ámplius. Tu autem, 
Dómine Sábaoth, qui jüdicas 
juste, et probas renes et cor- 
da, vídeam ultiónem tuam ex 
eis: tibl enim revelávi cau- 
sam Meam, Dómine Deus 
meus. 


Lesson from Jeremias the 
Prophet, 

N THOSE days, Jeremias said, 
A, O Lord, Thou hast showed 
me, and I have known: then 
Thou showedst me their do- 
ings. And I was as a meek 
lamb that is carried to be a 
victim: and I knew not that 
they had devised counsels 
against me, saying, Let us put 
wood on his bread, and cut him 
off from the land of the living, 
and let his name be remem- 
bered no more. But Thou, O 
Lord of Sabaoth, Who judgest 
justly, and triest the reins and 
the hearts, let me see Thy re- 
venge on them: for to Thee 
have I revealed my cause, O 
Lord my God. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


420 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


Gradual. Ps. 34, 13, 1-2 


But as for me, when they 
were troublesome to me, I was 
clothed with haircloth, and I 
humbled my soul with fasting: 
and my prayer shall be turned 
into my bosom: Y. Judge Thon, 
O Lord, them that wrong me; 
overthrow them that. fight 
against me: take hold of arms 
and shield, and rise up to help 
me. 


Ego autem, dum mihi mo- 
lésti essent, induébam me cili- 
cio, et bumiliábam in jejünio 
ánimam meam: et orátio með 
in sinu meo: convertétur. Y. 
Jüdica, Dómine, nocéntes me, 
expügna impugnántes me: 
apprehénde arma, et scutum, 
et exsürge in adjutórium mihi, 


The Passion 
Mark 14, 1-72; 15, 1-46 


The Passion of Our Lord 
Jesus Christ, according to St. 
Mark, . 


Pássio Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi secindum Marcum. 


The Plot to Betray Jesus 


T THAT time the feast of 

the pasch and of the 
azymes was after two days: and 
the chief priests and the 
scribes sought how they might 
by some wile lay hold on Jesus 
and kill Him. But they said, S. 
Not on the festival-day, lest 
there should be a tumult 
among the people C. And 
when He was in Bethania, in 
the house of Simon the leper, 
and was at meat; there came a 
woman having. an alabaster 
box of ointment, of precious 
spikenard: and. breaking the 
alabaster box, she poured it out 
upon His head. Now there were 
some who had. indignation 
within themselves, and said, 
S. Why was this waste of the 
ointment. made? For this oint- 
ment might have been sold for 
more than three hundred 
pence, and given to the poor. C. 
And they murmured against 
her. But Jesus said, Let her 


N ILLO lémpore: Erat Pas- 
cha, et ázyma post bídu- 
um, et querébant summi sa- 
cerdótes et scríbe quómodo 
Jesum dolo tenérent et occí- 
derent. Dicébant autem: S. 
Non in die festo, ne forte 
tumültus fieret in pópulo. C. 
Et cum esset Jesus Bethania 
in domo Simónis leprósi, et 
recümberet: venit mülier ha- 
bens alabástrum  unguénti 
nardi spicáti pretiósi et fracto 
alabástro, effüdit super ca- 
put ejus. Erant autem quidam 
indígne feréntes intra seme- 
tipos, et dicéntes: S. Ut quid 
perdítio ista unguénti facta 
est? Póterat enim unguéntum 
istud venümdari plus quam 
íxecéntis denáriis, et dari 
paupéribus. C. Et fremébant 
in eam. Jesus autem dixit: 5 


Sinite eam: quid illi molésti 


estis? Bonum opus operáta 
est, in me. Semper enim páu- 
peres habétis vobíscum: et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


lc ra 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


eum voluéritis, potéstis illis 
benefácere: me autem non 
semper habétis. Quod hábuit 
hsc, fecit: prevénit üngere 
corpus meum in sepultüram. 
Amen dico vobis: Ubicümque 
Ppredicátum füerit Evangéli- 
um istud in univérso mundo, 
et quod fecit hsc, narrábitur 
in memóriam ejus. C. Et Ju- 
das Iscariótes, unus de duó- 
decim, ábiit ad summos sa- 
cerdótes, ut próderet eum illis. 
Qui audiéntes, gavísi sunt: et 
promisérunt ei pecüniam se 
datüros, Et querébat quómo- 
do inum opportüne tráderet. 


421 


alone: why do you molest her? 
She hath wrought a good work 
upon Me. For the poor you have 
always with you; and when- 
Soever you will, you may do 
them good: but Me you have 
not always. She hath done 
what she could; she is come 
beforehand to anoint my body 
for the burial Amen I say to 
you, Wheresoever this gospel 
Shall be preached in the whole 
world, that 21so which she hath 
done shall be. told, for a mem- 
orial of her. C. And Judas Is- 
cariot, one of the twelve, went 
io the chief priests, to betray 
Him to them. And they hearing 


it were glad; and promised to give him money; and he sought 
how he might conveniently betray Him. 


The Preparation of the Pasch 


Et primo die azymórum 
quando pascha immolábant, 
dicunt ei discípuli: S. Quo vis 
eámus, et parémus tibi, ut 
mandüces pascha? C. Et mit- 
tit duos ex discípulis suis, ét 
dicit eis: HH Ite in civitátem: 
et occürret vobis homo lagé- 
nam aque bájulans, sequímini 
eum: et quocümque introferit, 
dícite dómino domus, quia 
Magíster dicit: Ubi est reféc- 
tio mea, ubi pascha cum dis- 
cípulis meis mandücem? Et 
ipse vobis demonstrábit cená- 
culum grande, stratum: et il- 
lic paráte nobis. C. Et abié- 
runt discfpuli ejus, et‘ vené- 
runt in civitátem: et invené- 
runt sicut dixerat illis, et pa- 
ravérünt pascha. 


Now on the first day of the 
unleavened bread, when they 
Sacrificed the pasch, the dis- 
ciples say to Him. S. Whither 
wilt Thou that we go and pre- 
pare for Thee to eat the 
pasch? C. And He sendeth two 
of His disciples, and saith to 
them, "M Go ye into the city, 
and there shall meet you a man 
carrying & pitcher of water; 
follow him; and whithersoever 
he shall go in, say to the master 
of the house: The Master saith, 
Where is My refectory, where 
I may eat the pasch with My 
disciples? And he will show 
you a large dining-room fur- 
nished: and there prepare ye 
for us. C. And His disciples 
went their way, and came to 
the city; and they found as He 


had told them: and they prepared the pasch. 
The Last Supper 


Véspere autem facto, venit 
cum duódecim. Et discum- 
béntibus eis, et manducán- 


And when evening was come, 
He cometh with the twelve: 
and when they were at table, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


442 


and eating, Jesus saith, HH 
Amen I say to you, one of you 
that eateth with Me shall be- 
tray Me. C. But they began to 
de sorrowful, and said to Him 
one by one, S. Is it I? C. And 
He saith to them, FK One of the 
twelve who dippeth his hand in 
the dish with Me. And the Son 
of man indeed goeth, as it is 
written of Him; but woe to that 
man by whom the Son of man 
Shall be betrayed. It were bet- 
ter for him, if that man had 
not been: born. C. And whilst 
they were eating, Jesus took 
bread and blessing, broke, and 
gave to them, and said, B Take 
ye, This is My body. C. And 
having taken the chalice; giv- 
ing thanks, He gave it to them, 
and they all drank of it, And 
He said to them +H This is My 
blood of the new testament, 
which shall be shed for many. 
Amen I say unto you, that I 
will drink no more of this fruit 
of the vine, until that day when 
I shall drink it new in the 
kingdom of God. C. And when 
they had sung a hymn, they 
went forth to the Mount of 
Olives. And Jesus saith to 
them, 4 You will all be scan- 
dalized in My regard, this 
night; for it is written, I will 
strike the shepherd, and the 
sheep shall be dispersed. But 
after I shall be risen again, I 
will go before you into Galilee. 
C. But Peter saith to Him, S. 
Although all shall be scandal- 
ized in Thee, yet not I. C. And 
Jesus saith to him, 4 Amen I 
say to thee, To-day, even in 
this night, before the cock 
crow twice, thou shalt deny Me 
thrice. C. But he spoke the 
more vehemently, S. Although 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


tibus ait Jesus: 44 Amen dico 
vobis, quia unus ex vobis 
tradet me qui mandücat 
mecum. C. At illi cepérunt 
contristárl, et dícere ei 
singulátum: S. Numquid 
ego? C. Qui ait illis; m 
Unus ex duódecim, qui intín- 
git mecum mánum in catíno. 
Et Filius quidem hóminis 
vadit, sicut scriptum est de 
eo: ve autem hómini illi, per 
quem Fílius hóminis tradétur: 
Bonum erat ei, si non esset 
natus homo ille. C. Et mandu- 
cántibus illis, accépit Jesus 
panem: et benedícens fregit, 
et dedit eis, et ait: rH Sümite, 
hoc est corpus meum. C. Et 
&ccépto cálice, grátias agens 
dedit eis: et bibérunt ex illo 
omnes. Et ait illis; 4 Hic est 
sanguis meus novi testaménti, 
qui pro multis effundétur. 
Amen dico vobis, quia jam 
non bibam de hoc genímine, 
vitis, usque in diem illum, 
cum ilud bibam novum in 
regno Dei. C. Et hymno dicto 
exiérunt in. montem Olivá- 
rum. Et ait eis Jesus: FH 
Omnes scandalizabimini in 
me nocte ista: quia scriptum 
est: Percütiam pastórem, et 
dispergéntur oves. Sed post- 
quam resurréxero, precedam 
vos in Galileam. C. Petrus au- 
tem ait illi: S. Et si omnes 
scandalizati füerint in te: sed 
non ego. C. Et ait illi Jesus: 
% Amen dico tibi, quia tu hó- 
die in nocte hac, priüsquam 
gallus vocem bis déderit, ter 
me es negatürus. C. At ille 
ámplius loquebátur: S. Et si 
oportüerit me simu] cómmori 
tibi, non te negábo. C. Simili- 
ter autem et omnes dicébant. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a 
pe 


Seg" 


in ei 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


423 


I should die together with Thee, I wil not deny Thee; C 
and in like manner also said they all. 


Jesus Prays in Gethsemani 


Et véniunt in. predium, cui 
nomen .Gethsémani. Et. ait 
discípuls suis. 14 Sedéte hic 
donec orem. C. Et assümit Pe- 
trum et Jacóbum, et Joannem 
Secum: et cepit pavére et tæ- 
dére. Et ait illis: 14 Tristis est 
ánima mea usque ad mortem: 
sustinéte hic, et vigiláte. C. 
Et cum processisset páululum, 
prócidit super terram: et orá- 
bat, ut si fíeri posset, transí- 
ret ab eo. hora: et dixit: H4 
Abba, Pater, ómnia tibi possi- 
bília sunt, transfer cálicem 
hunc a me, sed non quod ego 
volo, sed quod tu. C. Et venit, 
et invénit eos dormiéntes. Et 
ait Petro: E Simon, dormis? 
non potuísti una hora vigi- 
láre? Vigiláte, et oráte, ut non 
intrétis in tentatiónem. Spír- 
itus quidem. promptus est, 
caro vero infirma. C. Et íte- 
rum ábiens orávit, eümdem 
sermónem. dicens. Et revér- 
sus, dénuo invénit eos dor- 
miéntes, (erant enim déculi 
eórum graváti) et ignorábant 
quid respondérent ei. Et ve- 
nit tértio, et ait illis: 44 Dor- 
míte jam, et requiéscite. Süf- 
ficit: venit hora: ecce Fílius 
hóminis tradétur in manus 
peccatórum. Surgite, eámus: 
ecce qui me tradet, prope est. 


And they came to a farm 
called Gethsemani; and He 
saith to His disciples, FR Sit 
you here, while I pray. C. And 
He taketh Peter and James, 
and John with Him; and He 
began to fear, and to be heavy: 
and He saith to them, My 
soul is sorrowful even unto 
death; stay you here, and 
watch. C. And when He had 
gone forward a little, He fell 
flat on the ground; and He 
prayed that if it might be, the 
hour might pass from Him. 
And He said, FR Abba, Father, 
all things are possible to Thee; 
take away this chalice from 
Me: but not what I will, but 
what Thou wilt. C. And He 
cometh, and findeth them 
sleeping. And He saith te 
Peter, 11 Simon, sleepest thou? 
couldst thou not watch one 
hour? Watch ye, and pray, that 
you enter not into temptation. 
The spirit indeed is willing, but 
the flesh is weak. C. And go- 
ing away again, He prayed, 
Saying the same words. And 
when He returned, He found 
them again asleep (for their 
eyes wete heavy), and they 
knew not what to answer Him. 
And He cometh the third time, 
and saith to them, HK Sleep ye 
now, and take your rest. It is 


enough; the hour is come: behold the Son of man shall be 
betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise up, let us go; behold 
he that will betray Me is at hand. ` 


Judas Approaches to Apprehend Jesus 


C. Et, adhuc eo loquénte, 
venit Judas Iscariótes, unus 
de duódecim, et cum eo turba 


C. And while He was yet 
Speaking, cometh Judas Iscar- 
jot, one of the twelve, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


424 TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


with him a great multitude multa cum gládiis, et lignis, a 
with swords and staves, from summis sacerdótibus, et scri- 
the chief priests and the bis, et senióribus. Déderat au- 
Scribes and the ancients. And tem tráditor ejus signum eis, 
he that betrayed Him had dicens: S. Quemcümque oscu- 
given them a sign, saying, S. látus füero, ipse est, tenó- 
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that te eum, et dücite caute, C. 
is He; lay hold on Him, and Et cum venísset, statim ac- 
lead Him away carefully. C. cédens ad eum, ait: S. Ave, 
And when he was come, imme- Rabbi. C. Et osculátus est 
diately going up to Him, he eum. At illi manus injecérunt 
saith, S. Hail, Rabbi: C. and in eum, et tenuérunt eum. 
he kissed Him. But they laid Unus autem quidam de cir- 
hands on Him, and held Him. cumstántibus, edücens glá- 
And one of them that stood by, dium, percüssit servum summi 
drawing a sword, struck a ser- sacerdótis; et amputavit illi 
vant of the chief priest, and aurículam. Et respondens Je- 
cut off his ear. And Jesus an- sus, ait illis: H4 Tamquam ad 
swering, said to them, © Are latrónem existis cum gládiis, 
ye come out, as to a robber, et lignis comprehéndere me? 
with swords and staves to ap- Quotídie eram apud vos in 
prehend Me? I was daily with templo docens, et non me te- 
you in the temple teaching, nuístis. Sed ut: impleántur 
and you did not lay hands on Scripture, C. Tunc discípuli 
Me. But that the Scriptures ejus relinquéntes eum, omnes 
may be fulfilled. C. Then His fugérunt. Adoléscens autem 
disciples leaving Him, all fied quidam sequebátur cum a- 
away. And a certain young míctus sindone super nudo: et 
man followed Him, having & tenuérunt eum. At ille, rejéc- 
linen cloth cast about. his ta sindone, nudus profugit ab 
naked body: and they laid hold eis. 

on him; but he, casting off the 

linen cloth, fied from them 

naked. 


Jesus Before the High Priest 


And they brought Jesus to . Et adduxérunt Jesum ad 
the high priest; and all the summum sacerdótem: et con- 
priests and the scribes and the venérunt omnes sacerdótes, et 
ancients assembled together. scribe, et senióres. Petrus au- 
And Peter followed Him afar tem a longe sectitus est eum 
off, even into the court of the usque intro in atrium summi 
high priest; and he sat with sacerdótis: et sedébat cum 
the servants at the fire, and . ministris ad ignem, et calefa- 
warmed himself. And the chief ciébat se. Summi vero sacer- 
priests and all the council détes, et omne concilium, 
sought for evidence against querébant advérsus Jesum 
Jesus, that they might put testimónium, ut eum morti 
Him to death, and found none; tráderent, nec invehiébant. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


Multi enim testimónium fal- 
sum dicébant advérsus eum: 
et conveniéntia testimónia 
non erant. Et quidam surgén- 
tes, falsum testimónium. fe- 
rébant advérsus eum, dicén- 
tes: S. Quóniam nos audivi- 
mus eum dicéntem: Ego dis- 
Sólvam templum hoc manu- 
factum, et per tridum áliud 
non manufáctum zdificábo. C. 
Et non.erat convéniens testi- 
mónium illórum. Et exsürgens 
summus sacérdos in médium, 
interrogávit Jesum, dicens: 
S. Non respóndes quid- 
quam ad ea, quae tibi objici- 
üntur ab his? C.. Ille autem 
tacébat, et nihil respóndit. 
Rursum summus sacérdos in- 
terrogábat eum, et dixit ei: 
S. Tu es Christus Fílius Dei 
benedícti? C. Jesus autem 
dixit illi: 4 Ego sum: et vidé- 
bitis Filium hóminis sedén- 
tem & dextris virtütis Dei, et 
veniéntem cum nübibus c&li. 
C. Summus autem sacérdos 
&cindens vestiménta sua, ait: 
S. Quid adhuc desiderámus 
testes? Audistis blasphémi- 
am: quid vobis vidétur? C. 
Qui omnes condemnavérunt 
eum esse reum mortis, Et cœ- 
pérunt quidam  conspüere 
eum, et veláre fáciem ejus, 
et. cólaphis eum  cedere, 
et dícere ei: S. Prophetiza. C. 
Et minístri álapis eum czdé- 
bant. 


Et cum esset Petrus in 
átrio deórsum, venis una ex 
ancillis summi sacerdótis; et 
cum vidísset Petrum calefa- 
ciéntem se, aspíciens illum, 
ait: S. Et tu cum Jesu Naza- 
réno eras, C. At ille negávit, 
dicens; S, Neque scio, neque 


425 


for many bore false witness 
against Him, and their evi- 
dences were not agreeing. And 
some rising up, bore false wit- 
ness against Him, saying, S. 
We heard Him say, I will de- 
stroy this temple made with 
hands, and within three days 
I wil build another not made 
with hands: C. and their wit- 
ness did not agree. And the 
high priest rising up in the 
midst, asked Jesus, saying, S. 
Answerest thou nothing to the 
things that are laid to 'Thy 
charge by these men? C. But 
He held. His. peace, and an- 
swered nothing. Again the high 
priest asked Him, and said to 
Him, S. Art thou the Christ, 
the Son of the blessed God? C. 
And Jesus said to him, & I 
am: and you shall see the Son 
of man sitting on the right 
hand of the power of God, and 
coming with the clouds of 
heaven. C. Then the high 
priest rending his garments, 
saith, S. What need we any 
further witnesses? You have 
heard the blasphemy. What 
think you? C. Who all cans 
demned Him to be guilty of 
death. And some began to spit 
on Him, and to cover His face, 
and to buffet Him, and to say 
unto Him, S. Prophesy; C. and 
the servants struck Him with 
the palms of their hands. 


. Peter Denies Jesus 


Now when Peter was in the 
court below, there cometh one 
of ihe maid-servants of the 
high priest; and when she had 
seen Peter warming himself, 
looking on him she said, S. 
Thou also wast with Jesus of 
Nazareth. C, But ne denied, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


426 


saying, S. I neither know, nor 
understand what thou sayest: 
C. and he went forth before the 
court; and the cock crew. And 
again a maid-servant seeing 
him, began to say to the stand- 
ers-by, This is one of them. 
But he denied again. And after 
a, while, they that stood by said 
again to Peter, S. Surely thou 
art one of them, for thou art 
also a Galilean. C. But he be- 
gan to curse, and to swear, say- 
ing, I know not this man of 
whom you.speak. And immedi- 
ately the cock crew again. And 
Peter remembered the word 
that Jesus had said unto him, 
Before the cock crow twice 
thou shalt deny Me thrice. 
And he began to weep. And 
straightway in the morning 
the chief priests holding a con- 
sultation with the ancients and 
the scribes and the whole 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


novi quid dicas, C. Et éxiit 
foras ante atrium, et gallus 
cantavit. Rursus autem cum 
vidisset illum ancílla, cepit 
dicere circumstantibus: Quia 
hic ex illis est. At ille fterum 
negávit. Et post pusíllum rur- 
sus qui astábant, dicébant Pe- 
iro: S. Vere ex illis es: nam 
et.Galileus es. C. Ille autem 
cepit anathematizáre, et ju- 
ráre: Quia néscio hóminem is- 
tum, quem dícitis. Et statim 
gallus iterum cantávit. Et re- 
cordátus est Petrus verbi, 
quod díxerat ei Jesus: Priüs- 
quam gallus cantet bis, ter 
me negábis. Et cepit flere. Et 
conféstim mane consílium fa- 
ciéntes summi  sacerdótes, 
cum senióribus, et scribis, et 
univérso concílio, vinciéntes 
Jesum, duxérunt, et Se 
runt Pilato. 


council, binding Jesus, led him away, and delivered Him to 


Pilate. 


Pilate Endeavors to Save Jesus 


And Pilate asked Him, S. 
Art Thou the king of the 
Jews? but He answering, saith 
to him, "& Thou sayest it. C. 
And the chief priests accused 
Him in many things. And Pi- 
late again asked Him saying, 
S. Answerest Thou nothing? 
behold in how many things 
they accuse Thee. C. But Jesus 
still answered nothing: so that 
Pilate wondered. Now on the 
festival-day he was wont to re- 
lease unto them one of the 
prisoners, whomsoever they de- 
manded. And there was one 
called Barabbas, who was put 
in prison with some seditious 
men, who in the sedition had 
committed murder. And when 


Et interrogávit eum Pi- 
látus. S. Tu es rex Judsmór- 
um? C. At ille respóndens, 
ait ili: "HM Tu dicis C. 
Et 2accusábant eum summi 
sacerdótes in multis. Pilatus 
autem. rursum  interrogávit 
eum, dicens: S. Non respón- 
des quidquam? vide in quantis 
te accüsant. C. Jesus autem 


4&mplius nihil respóndit, ita ut ` 


mirarétur Pilátus. Per diem 
autem festum solébat dimítte- 
re ilis unum ex vinctis, 
quemcümque petiíssent. Erat 
autem qui dicebátur Baráb- 
bas, qui cum seditiósis erat 
vinctus, qui in seditióne féce- 
rat homicidium, Et cum as- 
cendísset turba, cepit rogáre, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Am 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


Sicut semper. faciébat illis. 
Pilátus eutem respóndit eis, 
et dixit: S. Vultis dimíttam 
vobis Regem Judaeórum? C. 
Sciépat enim quod per inví- 
diam tradidissent eum summi 
Sacerdótes. Pontifices autem 
concitavérunt turbam, ut ma- 
gis Barábbam dimítteret eis. 
Pilátus autem íterum respón- 
dens, ait ilis: S. Quid ergo 
vultis fáciam Regi Judæó- 
rum? C. At illi fterum clama- 
vérunt: S. Crucifíge eum. C. 
Pilátus vero dicébat illis. 
S. Quid enim mali fe- 
cit? C. At illi magis clamá- 
bani: S. Crucifíge eum. 


azi 


the multitude was come up, 
they began to desire that he 
would do as he had ever done 
unto them. And Pilate an- 
swered them, and said, S. Will 
you that I release to you the 
king of the Jews? C. For he 
knew that the chief priests had 
delivered Him up out of envy. 
But the chief priests moved the 
people, that he should rather 
release Barabbas to them. And 
Pilate again answering, saith 
to them, S. What will you then 
that I do to the king of the 
Jews? C. But they again cried 
out, S. Crucify Him. C. And 
Pilate saith to them, S. Why, 
what evil hath he done? C. 


But they cried out the more, S. Crucify Him. 
Pilate Consents to the Crucifixion 


C. Pilátus autem volens 
pópulo satisfácere, dimísit illis 
Barábbam, et trádidit Jesum 
flagéllis cesum, ut crucifigeré- 
tur. Mílites autem duxérunt 
eum in átrium prztórii, et 
cónvocant totam cohórtem, et 
induunt eum purpura, et im- 
pónunt et plecténtes spíneam 
corénam. Et cepérunt. salu- 
tare eum: Ave, Rex Judæó- 
rum. Et percutiébant caput 
ejus arundine: et conspué- 
bant eum, et ponéntes génua, 
&dorábant eum. Et postquam 
illusérunt ei exuérunt ilum 
pürpura, et induérunt eum 
vestiméntis suis: et edücunt 
ilum ut crucifígerent eum. 
Et angariavérunt pretereün- 
tem quémpiam. Simónem Cy- 
reneum veniéntem de villa, 
patrem Alexándri, et Rufi, ut 
tólleret crucem ejus. Et per- 
dücunt illum in Gólgotha lo- 
cum: quod est interpretátum 
fislvárie locus. Et dabant ei 


C. So Pilate, being willing to 
Satisfy the people, released to 
them Barabbas, and delivered 
up Jesus, when he had 
Scourged Him, to be crucifed. 
And the soldiers led Him 
into the court of the palace, 
and they call together the 
whole band: and they clothe 
Him with purple; and platting 
a crown of thorns, they put it 
upon Him. And they began to 
salute Him, Hail, king of the 
Jews. And they struck His head 
with a reed; and they did spit 
on Him; and bowing their 
knees, they worshipped Hin. 
And after they had mocked 
Him, they took off the purple 
from Him, and put His own 
garments on Him; and they 
led Him out to crucify Him: 
and they forced one Simon, a 
Cyrenean, who passed by, com- 
ing out of the country, the 
father of Alexander and of 
Rufus, to take up His cross. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


428 


And they bring Him into the 
place called Golgotha, which, 
being interpreted, is, The place 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


bíbere myrrhátum vinum: et 
non accépit. 


of Calvary. And they gave Him to drink wine mingled with 


myrrh; but He took 1t not. 


Jesus Is Crucified 


And crucifying Him, they di- 
vided His garments, casting 
lots upon them, what every 
man should take. And it was 
the third hour, and they cruci- 
fied Him: and the inscription 
of His cause was written over, 
The King of the Jews. And 
with Him they crucify two 
thieves, the one on His right 
hand, and the other on His 
left; and the Scripture was 
fulfilled which saith, And with 
the wicked He was reputed. 
And they that passed by, blas- 
phemed Him wagging their 
heads, and saying. S. Vah, 
Thou that destroyest tbe temple 
of God, and in three days 
buildest it up again; save Thy- 
self, coming down from the 
cross. C. In like manner also 
the chief priests with the 
scribes, mocking, said to one 
another, S. He saved others, 
Himself He cannot save. Let 
Christ the king of Israel come 
down from the cross, that. we 
may see, and believe. C. And 
they that were crucified with 
Him reviled Him. And when 
the sixth hour was come, there 
was darkness over the whole 
earth, until the ninth hour; 
and at the ninth hour, Jesus 
cried out with a loud voice, 
saying, & Eloi, Eloi, lamma 
sabacthani? C. which is, being 
interpreted, & My God, My 
God, why hast Thou forsaken 
Me? C. And some of the stand- 
ers-by. hearing, said, S. Behold 


Et crucifigentes eum, divis- 
érunt vestiménta ejus, mit- 
téntes sortem super eis, quis 
quid tólleret. Erat autem hora 
tértia et crucifixérunt eum. 
Et erat titulus cause ejus 
inscriptus: Rex Judedérum. 
Et cum eo crucifigunt duos 
latrónes: unum a dextris, 
et álium a sinistris ejus. 
Et impléta est Scriptüra, 
que dicit: Et cum iníquis rep- 
utátus est. Et preteréuntes 
blasphemabant eum, movén- 
tes cápita sua, et dicéntes: S. 
Vah, qui déstruis templum 
Dei, et in tribus diébus rezdí- 
ficas: salvum fac temetípsum 
descéndens de cruce. C. Simil- 
iter et summi sacerdótes illu- 
déntes, ad. altérutrum cum 
Scribis dicébant: S. Alios sal- 
vos fecit, seipsum non potest 
salvum íácere. Christus rex 
Israël descéndat nunc de 
cruce, ut videámus, et credá- 
mus. C. Et qui cum eo cruci- 
fixi erant, convitiabantur ei. 
Et facta hora sexta, ténebrez 
facte sunt per totam terram 
usque in horam nonam. Et 
hora nona. exclamavit Jesus 
voce magna, dicens: %H Eloi, 
Eloi lamma sabactháni? C. 
Quod est interpretátum: m 
Deus meus, Deus meus, ut 
quid dereliquísti me? C. Et 
quidam de circumstántibus 
audiéntes, dicébant: S. Ecce, 
Elíam vocat. C, Currens au- 
tem unus, et implens spóngi- 
am acéto, circumponénsque 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


célamo, potum dabat ei, di- 
cens: S. Sínite, videámus si 
véniat Elías ad deponéndum 
um. C. Jesus autem emissa 
voce magna exspiravit. 


429 


He calleth. Elias. C. And one 
running, and filling a sponge 
with vinegar and putting it 
upon a reed, gave him to drink, 
saying, S. Stay, let us see if 
Elias wil come to take Him 


down; C. And Jesus, having cried out with a loud voice, gave 


up the ghost. 


Here all kneel, and pause a little while. 


Et velum templi scissum est 
in duo, a summo usque deór- 
sum, "Videns autem centürio, 
qui ex advérso stabat, quia sic 
clamans exspirásset, ait: S. 
Vere hic homo Fílius Dei erat. 
C. Erant autem et mulíeres de 
longe aspiciéntes: inter quas 
erat María Magdaléne, et 
María Jacóbi minóris, et Jo- 
seph mater, et Salóme: et 
cum esset in Galilea, seque- 
bántur eum, et ministrábant 
ei et álie multe, que simul 
cum e0 ascénderant Mee 
mam. 


And the veil of the temple 
was rent in two, from the top 
to the bottom. And the cen- 
turion who stood over against 
Him, seeing. that crying out in 
this manner He had given up 
the ghost, said, S. Indeed this 
man was the Son of God. C 
And there were also women 
looking on afar off; among 
whom was Mary Magdalen, 
and Mary the mother of James 
the less and of Joseph, and 
Salome; who also when He was 
in Galilee followed Him, and 
ministered to Him; and many 
other women that came up 
with Him to Jerusalem. í 


Here is said the Munda cor meum, page 763. 


Et cum jam sero esset fac- | 


tum (quia erat Parascéve, 
‘quod est ante sábbatum) venit 
Joseph ab Arimathea nóbilis 
decürio, qui et ipse erat ex- 
spéctans regnum. Dei, et au- 
dácter introivit ad Pilátum, 
et pétiit corpus Jesu. Pilatus 
autem mirabátur si jam obís- 
set. Et accersito centurióne, 
interrogávit eum si jam mór- 
"tuus esset. Et cum cognovísset 
a centurióne, donávit corpus 
Joseph. Joseph autem mercá- 
tus síndonem, et depónens 
eum invólvit síndone, et pó- 
suit eum in monuménto, quod 
erat excisum de petra, et ad- 
vólvit lápidem ad ostium 
monuménti, . 


And when evening was now 
come (because it was the Para- 
Sceve, that is, the day before 
ine Sabbath), Joseph of Ari- 
mathea, a noble counsellor, 
who was also himself looking 
for the kingdom of God, came, 
and went in boldly to Pilate, 
and begged the body of Jesus. 
But Pilate wondered that He 
should be already dead: and 
sending for the centurion, he 
asked him if He were already 
dead; and when he had under- 
stood it by the centurion, he 
gave the body to Joseph. And 
Joseph buying fine linen, and 
taking Him down, wrapped 
Him up in the fine linen, and 
laid Him in a sepulchre which 


http://ccwatershed.org 


430 TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


Was hewn out of a rock. And he rolled a stone to the door of 
the sepulchre. 
Offertory. Ps. 139, 5 


Keep me, O Lord, from the Custódi me, Dómine, de 
hand of the sinner; and from manu peccatóris: et ab homí- 
wicked men deliver me. nibus iníquis éripe me. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
ay these sacrifices, we be- ACRIFÍCIA Nos, quxsumus, 
Seech Thee, O Lord, the Dómine, propénsius ista 


more speedily restore us for in restáurent; que medicináli- 
health-giving fasting they have bus sunt. institüta jejüniis. 
been made ready. Through our Per Dóminum. 

Lord. 


P odia Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


Communion. Ps. 68, 13, 14 


They that sat in the gate ^ Advérsum me exercebántur, 
were busied against Me; and qui sedébant in porta: et in 
they that drunk wine made Me me psallébant, qui bibébant 
their song;. but as for Me, my vinum: ego vero, oratiónem 
prayer is to Thee, O Lord; for meam ad te, Démine: tempus 
the time of Thy good pleasure, beneplaciti, Deus, in multi- 
O God, in the multitude of tüdine misericórdle tue. 
Ihy mercy. ` 


. Postcommunion 


Y THESE holy mysteries, ANCTIFICATIONIBUS tuis, 

' O almighty God, may S omnipotens Deus: et vitia 

e evil of our passions be nostra curéntur, et remédia 

subdued, and a lasting remedy nobis sempitérna provéniant. 
be provided. Through our Lord. Per Dóminum. 

Second Postcommunion jor the Church, page 825; or for the 

Pope, page 826. 
Prayer over the people. 


Let us pray 
ow down your heads to UMILIÁTE cápita vestra 
- God. Deo. 
May Thy mercy, O God, Tua nos misericórdia, Deus, 


purge us from every remnant et ab omni subreptióne vetus- 
of that which is past and make tatis expürget. et capóczs 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 431 


sanete novitátis effíciat. Per us ready to receive a holy 
Dóminum. : renovation. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Wednesday in Holp. Week (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. Mary MAJOR 


Privileged Major Feria 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Phil. 2, 10, 8, 11 


N NÓMINE Jesu omne genu N THE name of Jesus ler 

flectatur caléstium, ter- T every knee bow, of things 
réstrium, et infernórum: quia in heaven, on earth, and under 
Dóminus factus est obédiens the earth: for the Lord became 
usque ad mortem, mortem au- obedient unto death, even the 
tem crucis: ideo Dóminus Je- death of the cross: therefore 
sus Christus in glória est Dei the Lord Jesus Christ is.in the 
Patris. Ps. 101, 2. Dómine, glory of God the Father. Ps. 
exáudi oratiónem meam: et 101,2. O Lord, hear my prayer; 
clamor meus ad te veniat. In and let my cry come to Thee. 
nomine. In the name, etc. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 
After the Kyrie Eleison is said: 


5 Let us pray 
Y. Flectámus génua. y. Let us kneel. 
W. Leváte. W. Arise. 
Prayer 
RÆSTA, quesumus, omni- RANT, We beseech Thee, O 
potens Deus: ut qui nos- almighty God, that we, 


iris excéssibus incessánter af- who are incessantly afflicted by 
fligimur, per unigéniti Fílii our transgressions, may be de- 
tui passiónem liberémur. Qui livered through the passion of 


tecum vivit. 'Thy Son. Who with Thee. 
Lesson. Is. 62, 11; 63,7 
Léctio Isaie Prophéte. Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 
Ec dicit Dóminus Deus: mus saith the Lord God, 
Dicite filie Sion: Ecce Tell the daughter of Sion, 


Salvator tuus venit: ecce Behold thy Saviour cometh, be- 
merces ejus cum eo. Quis est hold His reward is with Him. 
iste, qui venit de Edom, tinc- Who is this that cometh from 
tis véstibus de Bosra? iste for- Edom, with dyed garments 
mósus in stola sua, grádiens from Bosra; this beautiful one 
in multitúdine fortitüdinis in His robe, walking in the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


432 


greatness of His strength? I 
that speak justice, and am & 
defender to save. Why then is 
Thy apparel red, and Thy gar- 
ments like theirs that tread in 
the wine-press? I have trodden 
the wine-press alone, and of 
the gentiles there is not à man 
witn Me: I have trampled on 


them in My indignation, and 


have trodden them down in 
My wrath; and their blood is 
sprinkled upon My garments, 
and I have stained all My ap- 
parel. For the day of vengeance 
is in My heart, the year of My 
redemption is come. I looked 
about, and there was none to 
help; I sought, and there was 
none to give aid: and My own 
arm hath saved for Me, and My 
indignation itself hath helped 
Me, And I have trodden down 
the people in My wrath, and 
have made them drunk in My 
indignation; and have brought 
down their strength to the 
earth. I will remember the ten- 
der mercies of the Lord, the 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


sux. Ego, qui loquor justitiam, 
et propugnator sum ad sal- 
vandum. Quare ergo rubrum 
est induméntum tuum, et ves- 
timénta tua, sicut calcántium 
in torculári? Tórcular calcávi 
solus, e£ de géntibus non est 
vir mecum: calcávi eos in fu- 
róre meo, et conculcávi eos 
in ira mea: et. aspérsus est 
sanguis eórum super vesti- 
ménta méa, et ómnia indu- 
ménta ‘mea: inquinávi. Dies 
enim. ultiónis in corde meo, 
annus redemptiónis mes ve- 
nit. Circumspéxi, et non erat 
auxiliator: quæsívi, et non 
fuit qui adjuvaret: et salvavit 
mihi bráchium meum, et in- 
dignátio mea. ipsa auxiliáta 
est mihi. Et conculcávi pópu- 
los in furóre meo, et inebriávi 
eos in indignatióne mea, et 
detraxi in terram virtütem 
eórum, Miseratiónum Dómini 
recordábor, laudem Dómini 
super ómnibus, que réddidit 
nobis Dóminus Deus noster. 


praise of the Lord for all the things that the Lord our God 


hath bestowed on us, 


Gradual. Ps. 68, 18, 2, 3 


Turn not away Thy face 
from Thy servant, because I 
am in trouble: hear me speed- 
ily. V. Save me, O God, for the 
waters are come in even unto 
my soul: I stick fast in the 
mire of the deep, and there is 
no Sure standing. 


Ne avértas fáciem tuam & 
püero tuo, quóniam tribulor: 
velóciter exáudi me. Y. Sal- 
vum me fac, Deus, quóniam 
intravérunt aque usque ad 
ánimam meam: infíxus sum 
in limo profündi, et non est 
substántia. 


Here is said, without the Flectamus genua: 


¥. The Lord be with you. 
JY. And with thy spirit. 


` Y. Dóminus vobiscum. 
W. Et cum spiritu tuo, 


Prayer 


cop, Who hast willed 


that Thy Son should for . 


EUS, qui pro nobis Fílium 
tuum crucis patfbulum 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


subire voluísti, ut inimici a 
nobis expélleres potestátem: 
concéde nobis fámulis tuis; 
utresurrectiónis grátiam con- 
Sequámur. Per eümdem Dó- 
minum., 


433 


our sakes undergo the torment 
of the cross, that Thou might- 
est drive out of us the power of 
the enemy, grant to us, Thy 
servants, that we may attain 
the grace of the resurrection. 
Through the same. 


Second Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope 


page 826. 


Lesson. Is. 53, 1-12 


Léctio Isaiz Prophéte. 


N DiÉBUS illis: Dixit Isaiás: 
Dómine, quis crédidit 
auditui nostro? et bráchium 
Dómini cui revelátum est? Et 
ascéndet sicut virgültum co- 
ram eo, et sicut radix de terra 
sitiénti; non est spécies ei, 
neque decor: et vídimus eum, 
et non erit aspéctus, et 
desirávimus eum:  despéc- 
tum, et novíssimum virórum, 
virum dolórum, et sciéntem 
infirmitátem: et quasi ab- 
scénditus vultus ejus et de- 
spéctus, unde nec reputávi- 
mus eum. Vere languóres nos- 
tros ipse tulit, et dolóres nos- 
tros ipse portávit: et nos pu- 
távimus eum quasi leprósum, 
et percüssum a Deo, et humil- 
iátum. Ipse autem vulnerátus 
est propter iniquitátes est 
propter iniquitátes nostras, 
attritus est propter scélera 
nostra: disciplina pacis nos- 
ire super eum, et livóre ejus 
sanéti sumus. Omnes nos 
quasi oves errávimus, unus- 
quísque in viam suam decli- 
návit: et pósuit Dóminus in 
eo iniquitatem ómnium no- 
strum. Oplátus est, quia ipse 
vóluit, et non apéruit os 
suum: Sicut ovis ad occisió- 
nem ducétur, et quasi agnus 


Lesson from Isaias th. 
Prophet. 


N THOSE days, Isaias said, 
Lord, who hath believed 

our report? and to whom is the 
arm of the Lord revealed? And 
He shall grow -up as a tender 
plant before Him, and. as a 
root.out of a thirsty ground; 
there is no beauty in Him, nor 
comeliness; and we have seen 
Him, and there was no sight- 
liness, that we should be desir- 
ous of Him. Despised and the 
most abject of men, a man of 
sorrows, and acquainted with 
infirmity, and His look was es 
it were hidden and despised, 
whereupon we esteemed. Him 
not. Surely he hath borne our 
infirmities, and carried our 
sorrows; and we have thought 
Him as it were a leper, and as 
one struck by God and aí- 
flicted. But He was wounded 
for our iniquities, He was 
bruised for our sins: the chas- 
tisement of our peace was upon 
Him, and by His bruises we are 
healed. All we like sheep have 
gone astray, every one hath 
turned aside into his own way, 
and the Lord bath laid on Him 
the iniquity of us all. He was 
offered, because it was His own 
wil, and He opened not His 
mouth; He shall be led as a 


http://ccwatershed.org 


434 


sheep to the slaughter, and 
Shall be dumb as a lamb before 
His shearer, and He shall not 
open His mouth. He was taken 
away from distress and from 
judgment; who shall declare 
His generation? because He is 
cut off out of the land of the 
living; for the wickedness of 
My people have I struck Him. 
And He shall give the ungodly 
for His burial, and the rich for 
His death: because He hath 
done no iniquity, neither was 
there deceit in His mouth. 
And the Lord was pleased to 
bruise Him in infirmity: if He 
shall lay down His life for sin, 
He shall see a long-lived seed, 
and the will of the Lord shall 
be prosperous in His hand. Be- 
cause His soul hath labored. He 
shall see and be filled: by His 
knowledge: shall this My just 
servant justify many, and He 
shall bear their  iniquities. 
Therefore will I distribute to 
Him very many, and He shall 
divide the spoils of the strong, 
because He hath delivered His 
soul unto death, and was re- 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


coram tondénte se obmuté- 
scet, et non apériet os suum. 
De angústia, et de judicio 
sublátus est: generatiónem 
ejus quis enarrábit? quia ab- 
scissus est de terra vivénti- 
um: propter scelus pópuli mei 
perciissi eum. Et dabit ímpios 
pro sepultüra, et dívitem pro 
morte sua: eo quod iniquitá- 
tem non fécerit, neque dolus 
füerlt in ore ejus. Et Dóminus 
vóluit contérere eum in in- 
fimitáte: si posüerit pro pec- 
cálo ánimam suam, vidébit 
semen longzvum, et volüntas 
Dómini in manu ejus dirigé- 
tur. Pro eo quod laborévit 
ánima ejus, vidébit, et saturá- 
hitur: in sciéntia sua justifi- 
cábit ipse justus servus meus 
multos, et iniquitátes eórum 
ipse portábit. Ideo dispértiam 
et plürimos: et fórtium dívi- 
det spólia, pro eo quod trádidit 
in mortem ánimam suam, et 
eum scelerátis reputátus est: 
et ipse peccáta multórum tu- 
lit, et pro unen Dus ro- 
gávit. . 


puted with the wicked: and He hath borne the sins of many, 
and hath prayed for the transgressors. 


Tract. Ps. 101, 2.5, 14 


o Lord, hear my prayer; and 
let my cry come to Thee. J. 
Turn not away Thy face from 
me; in whatever day I am in 
trouble, incline Thine ear to 
me. Y. In whatever day I shall 
call upon Thee, hear me speed- 
ily. V. For my days ere van- 
ished like smoke, and my bones 
are burnt up as in an oven... 
Iam struck like grass, and my 
heart is withered: because I 
forgot to eat my bread. y. Thou 
arising, O. Lord. shalt have 


Dómine, exaudi oratiónem 
meam, et clamor meus ad te 
véniat. V. Ne avértas fáciem 
tuam a me: in quacümque die 
tribulor, inclina ad me aurem 
tuam. Y. In quacümque die 
invocavéro te, velóciter exáudi 
me. Y. Quia defecérunt sicut 
fumus dies mei: et ossa, méa 
sicut in frixório confrixa sunt. 
FN. Percüssus sum sicut fæ- 
num, et áruit cor meum: quia 
oblitus sum manducére pa- 
nem meum. Y. Tu exsürgens, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 435 


Dómine, miseréberis Sion: mercy on Sion; for the time is 
quia venit tempus miseréndi come to have mercy on it, 
ejus. 


The Passion 


Luke 22, 1-71; 23, 1-53 


Passio Démini nostri Jesu The Passion of Our Lord 
Christi secindum Lucam. Jesus Christ, according to St, 
: Luke. 


The Plot to Betray Jesus 


N ILEO témpore: Appropin- fL THAT lime, the feast of 
quábat dies festus azy- unleavened bread, which 
mórum, qui dicitur Pascha: et Is called the pasch, was at 
querébant príncipes sacerdó- hand; and the chief priests and 
tum, et scribe, quómodo Je- the seribes sougbt how they 
sum interfícerent: timébant might put Jesus to death: but 
vero plebem. Intrávit autem they feared the people. And 
sátanas in Judam, qui cogno- Satan entered into Judas, who 
minabatur Iscariótes, unum was surnamed Iscariot, one of 
de duódecim. Et ábiit, et lo- the twelve: and he went and 
cütus est cum princípibus sa- discoursed with the chief 
cerdótum, et magistrátibus, priests and the magistrates, 
quemádmodum illum tráderet how he might betray Him to 
eis. Et gavisi sunt, et pacti them. And they were glad, and 
sunt pecüniam illi dare. Et covenanted to give him money: 
spopóndit. Et querébat oppor- and he promised. And he 
tunitátem ut tráderet illum sought opportunity to betray 
sine turbis. - Him, in tbe absence of the mul- 
titude, ' 
The s Trenite of the Pasch 

Venit autem dies azymór- And the day of the un- 
um, in qua necésse erat leavened bread came, on. which 
occídi pascha. Et misit Pe- it was necessary that the 
trum, et Joánnem,; dicens: pasch should be killed. And He 
*H Eüntes paráte nobis pa- sent Peter and John, saying, Hk 
scha, ut manducémus. C. At Go and prepare us the pasch, 
ili dixérunt: C. Ubi vis paré- that we may eat. C. But they 
mus? S. Et dixit ad eos: 4% said, S, Where wilt Thou that 
Ecce introeüntibus vobis in we prepare? S. And He said to 
civitatem, occúrret vobis ho- them, . Behold, as you go 
mo quidam ámphoram aque into the city, there shall meet 
portans: sequimini cum in do- you a man carrying a pitcher 
mum, in quam intrat, et di- of water. Follow him into the 
cétis patrifamilias domus: Di- house where he entereth in; 
cit tibl Magister: Ubi est di- and you shall say to the gow! 
versérium, ubi pascha cum man of the house, The Master 


\ 


http://ccwatershed.org 


` 436 


Sgith : to thee, Where is the 
guest-chamber, where I may 
eat the pasch with My dis- 
ciples? And he will show you 
a large dining-room fur- 
nished; and there prepare. C. 
And they going, found, as He 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


discípulis meis mandücem? 
Et ipse osténdet vobis cená- 
culum magnum stratum, et 
ibi paráte. C. Eüntes autem 
: invenérunt sicut dixit illis, et 
paravérunt pascha. 


had said to them; and they made ready the pasch. 
s The Last Supper 


And when the hour was come, 
He sat down, and the iwelve 
apostles with Him. And He 
said to them, '* With. desire I 
have desired to eat this pasch 
with you, before I suffer. For 
I-say to you, that from this 
time I will not eat it, till it be 
fulfilled. in the kingdom of 
heaven. C. And having taken 
the chalice, He gave thanks, 
and said, $ Take and divide 
it among you; for I say to you, 
that I wil not drink of the 
fruit of the vine, till the king- 
dom of God come. C. And tak- 
ing bread, He gave thanks, and 
broke, and gave to them, say- 
ing, Œ This is My body which 
is given for you: Do this for a 
commemoration of Me. C. In 
like manner the chalice also, 
after He had supped, saying, ?H 
This is the chalice, the new 
testament in My blood, which 
shall be shed for you. But yet 
behold, the hand of him that 
betrayeth Me is with Me on 
the table. And the Son of man 
indeed goeth, according to that 
which is determined; but. woe 
to that man by whom He shall 
be betrayed. C. And they began 
to inquire among themselves, 
which of them it was that 
should do this thing. And there 
was also a strife among them, 
which of them should seem to 
be greater. And He said to 


Et cum facta esset hora, 
disctibuit, et duódecim Após- 
toli cum eo. Et ait illis: 
% Desidério desiderávi hoc 
Pascha manducáre vobiscum, 
ántequam pátiar. Dico. enim 
vobis, quia ex hoe non 
manducábo illud, donec im- 
pleátur in regno Dei. C. Et 
accépto. cálice, grátias egit, 
et dixit:  Accipite, et divi- 
dite inter vos. Dico enim vobis, 
quod non bibam de genera- 
tióne vitis donec regnum Dei 
véniat..C. Et accépio pane, 
grátias, egit, et fregit, et de- 
dit eis, dicens: 44 Hoc est cor- 
pus meum, quod pro vobis da- 
tur: hoc fácite in meam com- 
memoratiónem. C, Similiter 
et cálicem, postquam cenavit, 
dicens: 14 Hic est calix no- 
vum testaméntum in sánguine 
meo, qui pro vobis fundétur. 
Verümtamen ecce manus tra- 
déntis me, mecum est in men- 
£a, Et quidem Fílius hóminis, 
secindum quod definitum est, 
vadit: verümtamen ve hó- 
mini illi, per quem tradétur. 
C. Et ipsi eeperunt querere 
inter se, quis esset ex eis, qui 
hoe factürus esset. Facta est 
autem et conténtio inter eos, 
quis eórum viderétur esse ma- 
jor. Dixit autem eis: 14 Reges 
géntium dominántur eórum: 
et qui potestátem habent su- 
per eos, benéfici vocántur. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


/ 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


Vos autein non sic: sed qui 
major est in vobis, fiat Sicut 
minor: et qui precéssor est, 
sicut ministrátor. Nam quis 
major est, qui recümbit, an 
qui minístrat? nonne qui re- 
cümbit? Ego autem in médio 
vestrum sum, sicut qui miní- 
strat: vos autem estis, qui 
permansístis mecum in tenta- 
tiónibus meis. Et ego dispóno 
Vobis; sicut dispósuit mihi Pa- 
ter meus regnum, ut edá- 
tis, et bibátis. super, men- 
Sam meam in regno meo: et 
Sedeátis super thronos, judi- 
cántes duódecim tribus Is- 
raél. C. Ait autem Dóminus: 
44 Simon, Simon, ecce sátanas 
expetívit vos, ut cribráret si- 
cut triticum: ego autem ro- 
gávi pro te, ut non deficiat 
fides tua: et tu aliquándo con- 
vérsus, confirma fratres tuos. 
C. Qui dixit ei: S. Dómine, 
tecum parátus sum et in cár- 
cerem, et in mortem ire. C. 
At ile dixit: ."H Dico tibi, 
Petre: Non. cantábit hódie 
gallus, donec .ter abneges 
nosse me. C. Et dixit eis: HK 
Quando misi vos sine sáccu- 
lo, et pera, et calceaméntis, 
numquid áliquid défuit vobis? 
C. At illi dixérunt: S. Nihil. 
C. Dixit ergo eis: 1 Sed nunc, 
qui habet sácculum, tollat 
simfliter et peram: et qui non 
habet, vendat tünicam suam, 
et emat gládium. Dico enim 
vobis, quóniam adhüc hoc, 
quod scriptum est, opórtet im- 
pléri in me: Et cum iníquis 
deputátus est. -Etenim ea, 
que sunt de me, finem habent. 
C. At illi dixérunt: S. Dómine, 
ecce duo gládii hic. C. At ille 
dixit eis: 4H Satis est. 


437 


them, "f The kings of the gen- 
tiles lord it over them, and 
they that have power over 
them are called beneficent. But 
you not so: but he that is the 
greater among you, let him be 
as the younger; and he that is 
the leader, as he that serveth. 
For which is greater, he that 
Sitteth at table, or he that 
Serveth? Is not he that sitteth 
at table? but I am in the midst 
of you as he that serveth. And 
you are they who have contin- 
ued with.Me in My tempta- 
tions: and I appoint to you, as 
my. Father hath appointed to 
Me, a kingdom; that you may 
eat and drink at My table in 
My kingdom, and may sit upon 
thrones, judging the twelve 
tribes of Israel. C. And the 
Lord said, FK Simon, Simon, be- 
hold Satan hath desired to 
have you, that he may sift you 
as wheat: but I have prayed 
for thee, that thy faith fail 
not; and thou, being once con- 
verted confirm thy brethren. 
C. And he said to Him, S. Lord, 
I am ready to go with Thee 
both into prison and to death. 
C. And He said, "4 I say to 
thee, Peter, the cock shall not 
crow this day till thou thrice 
deniest that thou knowest. Me. 
S. And He said to. them, K 
When I sent you without purse 
and scrip, and shoes, did you 
want anything? C. But they 
said, S. Nothing. C. Then said 
He to them, X4 But now he that 
hath a purse, let him take it, 
and likewise a scrip; and he 
that hath no sword, let him 
sell his coat, and buy one. For 
I say to you, that this that is 
written must be fulfilled in Me, 
And He was reckoned among 


http://ccwatershed.org 


438 WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


the wicked: for the things concerning Me have an end. C. But 
they said, S. Lord, behold here are two swords. C. And He said 


to them, Hs It is enough. 


Jesus Prays in Gethsemani 


C, And going out He went, ac- 
cording to His custom, to the 
Mount of Olives: and His dis- 
ciples also followed Him. And 
when He was come to the 
place, He said to them, 98 Pray, 
lest ye enter into temptation. 
C. And He was withdrawn 
away from them a stone's cast; 
and kneeling down, He prayed, 
saying, 1 Father, if Thou wilt, 
remove this chalice from Me; 
but yet not My will, but Thine, 
be done. C. And there appeared 
to Him an angel from heaven, 
strengthening Him: and being 
in an agony, He prayed the 
longer; and His sweat became 
as great drops of blood, trick- 
ling down upon the ground. 
And when He arose up from 
prayer, and was come to His 
disciples, He found them sleep- 
ing for sorrow. And He said to 
them, * Why sleep you? arise, 
pray, lest you enter into temp- 
tation, 


C. Et egréssus ibat secün- 
dum consuetüdinem in mon- 
tem Olivárum. Secüti sunt 
autem ilum et discípull Et 
cum pervenisset ad locum, 
dixit illis: Œ- Orate, ne in- 
irétis in tentatiónem. C. Et 
ipse avülsus est ab eis quan- 
tum jactus est lápidis: et 
pósitis génibus orábat, dì- 
cens: H3 Pater, si vis, trans- 
fer cálicem istum a me: 
verümtamen non mea volün- 
tas, sed tua fiat. C. Appáruit 
autem ili Angelus de czlo, 
confórtans eum. Et factus in 
agonía profixius orábat. Et 
factus est sudor ejus, sicut 
gutte sánguinis decurréntis 
in terram. Et cum surrexisset 
ab oratióne, et venísset ad 
discípulos suos, invénit eos 
dormiéntes pre tristítia. Et 
ait illis: & dormitis? sürgite, 
orate, ne intrétis in tentatió- 
nem. ` 


Judas Approaches to Apprehend Jesus 


C. As He was yet speak- 
ing, behold a multitude; and 
he that was called Judas, one 
of the twelve, went before 
them, and drew near to Jesus 
to kiss Him. And Jesus said to 
him, 5H Judas, dost thou be- 
tray the Son of man with a 
kiss? C. And they that were 
about Him, seeing what would 
follow, said to Him, S. Lord, 
shall we strike with the sword? 
C. and one of them struck the 
3ervant of the high priest, and 


C. Adhuc eo loquénte, ecce 
turba: et qui vocábitur Ju- 
das, unus de duódecim, an- 
tecedébat eos: et appropin- 
quávit Jesu, ut oscularétur 
eum. Jesus autem dixit illi: 
HH Juda, ósculo Fílium hó- 
minis tradis? C. Vidéntes au- 
tem hi, qui circa ipsum erant, 
quod futürum erat, dixérunt 
ei: S. Dómine, si percütimus 
in gládio? C. Et perctissit unus 
ex illis servum principis sa- 
cerdétum, et amputávit aurí- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK. 438 


culam ejus déxteram, Respón- 
dens autem Jesus, ait: Sínite 
usque huc. C. Et cum tetigis- 
set auriculum ejus, sanábit 
eum, Dixit autem Jesus ad 
eos, qui vénerant ad se, prin- 
cipes sacerdótum, et magis- 
trátus templi, et senlóres: +H 
Quasi ad latrónem exístis cum 
gládiis, et füstibus? Cum 
quotídie vobiscum füerim in 
templo, non extendístis ma- 
nus in me: sed hac est hora 
vestra, et potéstas tenebrá- 
rum. 


cut off his right ear. But Jesus 
answering, said, Suffer ye thus 
far: C. and when He had 
touched his ear, He healed him, 
And Jesus said to the chief 
priests and magistrates of the 
temple, and the ancients that 
were come to Him: Are you 
come out, as it were against a. 
thief, with swords and clubs? 
When I was daily with you in 
the temple, you did not stretch 
forth your hands against Me: 
but this is your hour, and the 
power of darkness. ‘ 


Jesus Before the High Priest 


C. Comprehendéntes au- 
tem eum, duxérunt ad domum 
príncipis sacerdótum: Petrus 
vero sequebátur a longe. Ac- 
cénso autem igne in médio 
4trii, et circumsedéntibus il- 
lis, erat Petrus in médio eó- 
rum. Quem cum vidísset an- 
cilla quzdam sedéntem ad lu- 
men, et eum fuísset intüita, 
dixit: S. Et hic cum illo erat. 
C. At ille negávit eum, dicens: 
S. Mülier, non novi illum.. C. 
Et post pusillum álius videns 
eum, dixit: S. Et tu de illis es. 
C. Petrus vero ait: S. O homo, 
non sum. C. Et intervállo fac- 
to quasi hore uníus, álius qui- 
dam affürmábat, dicens: S. 
Vere et hic cum illo erat: 
nam et Galileus est. C. Et 
ait Petrus: S. Homo, néscio 
quid dicis. C. Et continuo ad- 
huc illo loquénte cantávit gal- 
lus. Et convérsus Dóminus re- 
Spéxit Petrum, Et recordátus 
est Petrus verbi Dómini, sicut 
díxerat: Quia priüsquam gal- 
lus cantet, ter me negábis. Et 
egréssus foras Petrus flevit 
amare. Et viri, qui tenébant 
eum, illudébant ei, cedéntes, 


C. Then they laid hold on 
Him, and led Him to the high 
priest’s house; but Peter fol- 
lowed afar off. And when they 
had kindled a fire in the midst 
of the hall, and were sitting 
about it, Peter was in the 
midst of them. And when a 
certain servant-maid had seen 
him sitting at the light, and 
had earnestly looked upon him, 
she said, S. This man also 
was with Him. C. But he 
denied Him, saying, C. Woman, 
I know Him not. C. And after 
a little while, another, seeing 
him, said, S. Thou also art one 
of them. C. But Peter said, S. 
O man, I am not. C. And 
about the space as it were 
of one hour, another certain 
man affirmed, saying, S. Of 
a truth, this man was also 
with Him, for he is also a 
Galilean. C. And Peter said, S. 
Man, I know not what thou 
sayest. C. And immediately as 
he was yet speaking, the cock 
crew. And the Lord, turning, 
looked on Peter. And Peter re- 
membered tbe word of the 
Lord, as He said, Before the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


440 


cock crow, thou shalt deny Me 
thrice; and Peter going out 
wept bitterly. And the men that 
held Him mocked Him and 
struck Him; and they blind- 
folded Him, and smote His 
face; and they asked Him, say- 
ing, S. Prophesy, who is it that 
struck Thee? C. And blasphem- 
ing, many other things they 
said against Him. And, as 
Soon as it was day, the an- 
cients. of the people, and the 
chief priests and scribes came 
together, and they brought 
Him into their council, saying, 
S. If Thou be the Christ, tell 
us, C. And He said to them, & 
If I.shall tell you, you will not 
believe Me; and if I shall also 
&sk you, you will not answer 
Me, nor let Me go: but here- 
after the. Son of man shall be 
sitting on the right hand of 
the power of God. C. Then said 
they all, S. Art Thou then the 
Son of God? C. Who said, H 
You say, that I am. C. And they 
Said, S. What need we any fur- 
ther testimony?. for we our- 
selves have heard it from His 
own mouth. C. And the whole 
multitude of- them, rising up, 
led Him to Pilate: and they 
began to accuse Him, saying, 
We have found this man per- 
verting our nation, and forbid- 
ding to give tribute to Cesar, 
and saying that:.He is Christ 
the king. 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


Et velavérunt eum, et percu- 
tiébant faciem ejus? et inter- 
rogábant eum, dicéntes: $$. 
Prophetiza, quis est, qui te 
percüssit? C. Et ália multa 
blasphemántes. dicébant in 
eum. Et ut factus est dies, 
convenérunt senióres plebis, 
et principes sacerdétum, et 
Scribe, et duxérunt illum in 
concilium suum, dicéntes: S. 
Si tu es Christus, dic. nobis. 
C. Et ait ilis: 0H Si vobis dix- 
ero, non credétis mihi: si au- 
tem et interrogávero, non re- 
spondébitis mihi, neque di- 
mittétis, Ex hoc autem erit 
Filius hóminis sedens a dex- 
iris virtütis dic nobis. C. Et 
ait ilis: H.Si vobis díxero, 
non credétis mihi: si autem 
et interrogávero, non respon- 
débitis:mihi, neque dimetté- 
tis. Ex hoc autem erit Fílius 
hóminis sedens a textris virtü- 
tis Dei. C. Dixérunt autem 
omnes: S. Tu ergo es. Fílius 
Dei? C. Qui ait: 4 Vos dicitis, 
quia ego sum. C. At illi dixé- 
runt: S. Quid adhuc desiderá- 
mus testímonium?. ipsi enim 
audivimus de ore ejus. C. 
Et surgens omnis multitüdo 
eórum, duxérunt ilum ad Pi- 


S. látum. Cepérunt autem illum 


&ceusáre, dicéntes: S. Hunc 
invénimus subverténtem gen- 
tem nostram, et prohibéntem 
tribütaà dare Cesari, et dicén- 
tem se Christum regem esse. 


Pilate Endeavors to Save Jesus 


C. And Pilate asked Him, 
saying, S. Art Thou the king 
of the Jews? C. But He 
answering, said, 7H ‘Thou say- 
est it. C. And Pilate said to the 
chief: priests and to the multi- 
tudes, S. I find no cause in this 


C. Pilátus autem interrogá- 
vit eum, dicens: S. Tu es rex 
Judzórum? C. At ille respón- 
dens, ait: & Tu dicis. C. Ait 
autem Pilátus ad príncipes 
Ssacerdótum, et turbas: S. Ni- 
hil invénio cause in hoc hó- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


$ mine. C. At illi invalescébant, 
$$ dicéntes: S. Cómmovet pópu- 
im, docens per univérsam 
"yleam, incipiens a Galilea 
Que huc. C. Pilatus autem 
Wiens Galileam, interrogá- 
S si homo Galileus esset. 
ut cognóvit quod. de 
Merédis potestáte esset, re- 
."mísit eum ad  Heródem, 
qui et ipse  Jerosólymis 
erat ills diébus. Heródes 
&utem viso Jesu gavísus est 
valde. Erat enim cüpiens ex 

: multo témpore vidére eum, eo 
# quod audíerat multa de eo, et 
Sperábat signum aliquod vi- 
dére ab eo fieri. Interrogábat 
autem eum multis sermóni- 
bus. At ipse nihil illi respon- 
débat. Stabant autem prín- 
cipes sacerdótum, et scribe 
tonstánter accusántes eum. 
Sprevit autem illum Heródes 
cum exércitu suo:. et illüsit 
indütum veste alba, et remísit 
ad Pilátum. Et facti sunt amí- 
ci Heródes et Pilátus in ipsa 
die: nam ántea inimíci erant 
ad invicem. Pilátus autem 
convocátis principibus sacer- 
dótum, et magistrátibus, et 
plebe, dixit ad illos: S. Ob- 
tulistis mihi hunc hóminem, 
quasi averiéntem pópulum, et 
ecce ego coram vobis intérro- 
gans, nullam causam invéni 
in hómine isto ex his, in qui- 
bus eum accusátis. Sed neque 
Heródes: nam remísi vos ad 
illum, et ecce nihil dignum 
morte actum est ei. Emendá- 
tum ergo illum dimittam. C. 
Necésse autem habébat di- 
mittere eis per diem festum, 
unum. Exclamáyit autem si- 
mul univérsa turba, dicens: 
S. Tolle hunc, et dimítte nobis 
Barábbam. C. Qui erat propter 


à 
n 


T 


) 


~ 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


441 


man. C. But they were more 
earnest, saying, S. He stirreth 
up the people teaching 
throughout all Judea, begin- 
ning from Galilee to this place. 
C. But Pilate hearing Galilee, 
asked if the man were of Gali- 
lee? and when he understood 
that He was of Herod's juris- 
diction, he sent him away to 
Herod, who was also himself at 
Jerusalem in those. days. And 
Herod, seeing Jesus, was very 
glad; for he was desirous of a 
long-time to see Him, because 
he had heard many things of 
Him, and he hoped to see some 
sign wrought by Him: and. he 
questioned Him in many 
words; but He answered him 
nothing. And the chief priests 
and the scribes stood by, earn- 
estly accusing Him, And Herod 
with his. army set Him at 
naught; and mocked Him, put- 
ting on Him a white garment; 
and sent Him back to Pilate. 
And Herod and Pilate were 
made friends that. same day; 
for before they were enemies 
one to another. And Pilate call- 
ing together the chief priests, 
and the magistrates, and the 
people, said to them, S. You 
have presented unto me this 
man as one that perverteth the 
people, and behold I, having 
examined Him before you, find 
no cause in this man in those 
things wherein you accuse 
Him; no, nor Herod neither, 
for I sent you to him, and. be- 
hold nothing worthy of death 
is done to Him: I will chastise 
Him therefore, and release 
Him. C. Now of necessity he 
was io release unto them one 
upon the .feast-day: but the 
whole multitude together cried 


http://ccwatershed.org 


442 


out, saying, S. Away with this 
man, and release unto us Bar- 
abbas; C. who, for a certain 
sedition made in the city, and 


for à murder, was cast into prison. 
Pilate Consents to the Crucifixion 


And Pilate again spoke to 
them, desiring to release Je- 
sus. But they cried again, say- 
ing, S. Crucify Him, crucify 
Him. C. And he said to them a 
third time, S. Why, what evil 
hath He done? I find no cause 
of death in Him: I will chas- 
tise Him therefore; and let 
Him go. C. But they were in- 
stant with loud voices requir- 
ing that He might be crucified: 
and their voices prevailed. And 
Pilate gave sentence, that it 
should be as they required. And 
he released unto them him, 
who, for murder and sedition, 
had been cast into prison, 
whom they had desired; but 
Jesus he delivered over to their 
will. And as they led Him away, 
they laid hold on one Simon of 
Cyrene, that was coming out 
of the country; and they laid 
the cross on him to carry after 
Jesus. And there followed Him 
a great multitude of people, 
and of women, who bewailed, 
and lamented Him. But Jesus 
turning to them, said, & 
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep 
not over Me, but weep for 
yourselves, and for your chil- 
dren: for behold the days shall 
come, wherein they will say, 
Blessed are the barren, and the 
wombs that have not borne, 
and the breasts that have not 
given suck. Then shall they be- 
gin to say to the mountains, 
Fall upon us; and to the hills, 
Cover us. For if in the green 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


seditiónem quamdam factam 
in civitáte et ia 
missus in cárcerem. d 


Iterum autem Pilátus 1 
cütus est ad eos, voleni 
dimittere Jesum. At illi suc- 
clamabant, dicéntes: S. Cru- 
cifige, crucifíge eum. C. Ille 
&utem tértio dixit ad illos. 
S. Quid enim mali fecit 
iste? Nullam causam mortis: 
invénio in eo: corripiam 
ergo illum, et dimíttam. 
C. At ill instábant vócibus 
magnis postulántes ut cruci- 
figerétur. Et invalescébant 
voces eórum. Et Pilatus adju- 
dicávit fíeri petitiónem eó- 
rum. Dimisit autem illis eum, 
qui propter homicídlum, et se- 
ditiónem missus füerat in cár- 
cerem, quem petébant: Jesum 
vero trádidit voluntáti eórum. 
Et cum dücerent eum, appre- 
hendérunt Simónem quem- 
dàm Cyrenénsem veniéntem 
de villa: et imposuérunt illi 
crucem portáre post Jesum. 
Sequebátur autem illum mul- 
ta turba populi, et mulierum, 
que plangéhant, et lamenta- 
bántur eum, Convérsus at- 
tem ad illas Jesus dixit: 9M 
Filie Jerúsalem, nolíte flere 
super me, sed super vos ipsas 
fiete, et super fílios vestros 
Quóniam ecce vénient dies, 1n 
quibus dicent: Beate stfriles, 
et ventres, qui nori genuérunt, 
et übera, que non lactavé- 
runt. Tunc incipient dicet. 
montibus: Cádite supernos; € 
cólibus: Operite nos. 
si in víridi ligno hac faciuxat, 
in árido quid fiet? C. Duce- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


í 
j 


A 


€ 
po 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


bántur autem et álli duo ne- 
quam cum eo; ut interficerén- 
a. tur. : 


vil 

Ei Et postquam venérunt in 

Flocum, qui vocátur Calvarie, 
ibi crucifixérunt eum: et la- 
trónes, unum a dextris, et ál- 
terum a sinístris. Jesus autem 
dicébat: /* Pater, dimitte, il- 
lis: non enim sciunt, quid fá- 
ciunt, C. Dividéntes vero ves- 
timénta ejus, misérunt sortes. 
Et stabat pópulus spectans, et 
deridébant eum  príncipes 
cum eis, dicéntes: S. Alios 
salvos fecit: se salvum fáciat, 
si hic est Christus Dei eléctus. 
C. Illudébant autem ei et 
milites accedéntes, et acé- 
tum offeréntes ei, et dicéntes: 
S. Si tu es rex Judedrum, sal- 
vum te fac. C. Erat autem et 
superscriptio scripta super 
eum litteris grecis, et latínis, 
et hebráicis: Hic est Rex Ju- 
deórum. Unus autem de his, 
qui pendébant, latrónibus, 
bláspheinábat eum, diceris: S. 
Bi tu es Christus, salvum fac 
temetípsum, et nos. C. Re- 
spondens autem alter increpá- 
bat eum, dicens: S. Neque tu 
times Deum, quod.in eádem 
damnatióne es. Et nos quidem 
juste, nam digna factis re- 
cípimus: hic vero nihil mali 
gessit. C. Et dicébat ad Je- 
sum: S. Dómine, meménto 
mei, cum véneris in regnum 
tuum. C. Et dixit ill Je- 
sus: 44 Amen dico tibi: Ho- 
die mecum eris in paradiso. 
C. Erat autem fere hora sexta, 
et ténebre facte sunt in uni- 
vérsam terram usque in ho- 


443 


wood they do these things, 
what shall be done in the dry? 
C. And there were also two 
others, malefactors, led with 
Him to be put to death. 


Jesus Is Crucified 


And when they were come to 
the place, which is called Cal- 
vary, they crucified Him there: 
and the robbers, one on the 
right hand, and the other on 
the left. And Jesus said, ® 
Father, forgive them; for they 
know not what they do. C. But 
they divided His garments, and 
cast lots: and the people stood 
beholding, and the rulers with 
them derided Him, saying, S. 
He saved others, Jet Him save 
Himself, if He be Christ, the 
elect of God. C. And the sol- 
diers also mocked. Him, coming 
to Him, and offering Him vine- 
gar, and saying, S. If Thou be 
the king of the Jews, save 
Thyself. C. And there was also 
a superscription written over 
Him in letters of Greek, and 
Latin, and Hebrew, This is the 
King of the Jews. And one of 
those robbers, who were 
hanged blasphemed Him, say- 
ing, S. if Thou be Christ, save 
Thyself, and us. C. But the 
other answering him, rebuked 
him, saying, S. Neither dost 
thou fear God, seeing that art 
under the same condemnation: 
and we indeed justly, for we 
receive the due reward of our 
deeds, but this man hath done 
no evil. C. And he said to Jesus, 
S. Lord, remember me, when 
Thou shalt come into Thy 
kingdom. C, And Jesus said to 
him, 4 Amen I say to thee, 
this day thou shalt be with Me 
in paradise. C. And it was al- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


444 


most the sixth hour; and there 
was darkness over all the earth 
until the ninth hour; and the 
sun was darkened; and the 
veil of the temple was rent in 
the midst: and Jesus crying 
with a loud voice, said, 1H 
Father, into Thy hands I com- 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


ram nonam. Et obscurátus est 
Sol: et velum templi scissum 
est médium. Et clamans voce 
magna Jesus, ait: 4 Pater, in 
manus tuas comméndo spiri- 
tum meum. C. Et hzc dicens, 
exspirávit. 


mend My spirit. C. And saying this, He gave up the ghost. 
Here all kneel and pause a little while. 


Now. the centurion seeing 
what was done glorified God, 
saying, S. Indeed this was a 
just man. C. And ail the mul- 
titude of them tbat were come 
together to that sight, and saw 
the things that were done, re- 
turned, striking their breasts. 
And all His acquaintance, and 
the women that had followed 
Him from Galilee, stood afar 
off, beholding these things. 


Videns autem  centürio 
quod factum fuerat, glorifi- 
cávit Deum, dicens: S. Vere 
hic homo justus erat. C. Et 
omnis turba eórum, qui simul 
áderant ad spectáculum istud, 
et vidébant que flébant, per- 
cutiéntes péctora sua reverte- 
bántur. Stabant autem omnes 
noti ejus a longe: et mulíeres, 
que secütase eum erant a Gal- 
ilea, hac vidéntes, 


Here is said the Munda cor meum, page 763. 


And behold there was a man 
named Joseph, who was a 
counsellor, à good and a just 
man (the same had not con- 
rentad tn thair namncal ^od d^ 


——' A! TS 


Judea, who also himself looked 
for the kingdom of God. This 
man went to Pilate, and begged 
tbe body of Jesus: and taking 
Him down, he wrapped Him in 
‘fine linen, and laid Him in a 
sepulchre that was hewed in 
stone, wherein never yet any 
man had been laid. 


Et ecce vir nómine Joseph, 
qui erat decürio, vir bonus, et 
justus: (hic non. consénserat 
consílio, et áctibus eórum), 
«uua cA»ptcutU4L ev 1pse reg- 
num Dei. Hic accéssit ad Pi- 
latum, et pétiit corpus Jesu: 
et depósitum invólvit sindone, 
et pósuit eum in monuménto 
excíso, in quo nondum quis- 
quam pósitus füerat. 


Offertory. Ps. 101, 2, 3 


O Lord, hear my prayer, and 
let my cry come to Thee: turn 
not away Thy face from me. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Dómine exáudi oratiónem 
meam, et clamor meus ad te 
pervéniat: ne avértas fáciem 
tuam a me. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY THURSDAY 447 


Copyright. by Beniiger Bro:za 


Maundy ot Holp Thursday  (Purple-White) 
STATION AT ST. JOHN LATERAN 


On Maundy Thursday the Church commemorates the in- 
stitution of the Blessed Eucharist. On this day one Mass only 
can be said in the same church and that must be a public 
one. White vestments are worn by the priest, the altar is 
decked with flowers, and even the purple veil, which covers 
the cross during Passion-tide, is replaced by one of white. 
The celebrant consecrates two hosts, one for the priest who 
oficiates on Good Friday, when there is no consecration. This 
host is carried in procession to a place known as the Reposi- 
tory Gr Sepulchre, where it remains until the following ‘day. 
After the Mass on Maundy Thursday the signs of mourning 
proper to Passion-tide are resumed: the altar is stripped of 
tts coverings and of ornaments of all kinds, the lights in the 
sanctuary are extinguished, and the door of the empty taber- 
nacle is left open. In Rome the Pope washes the feet of 
thirteen poor persons, all of them priests. On Maundy Thurs- 
day the yearly consecration of the holy oils takes place, each 
bishop consecrating a sufficient quantity of these oils for the 
wants of his diocese during the ensuing year. These oils are 
three in number: the oil for the sacrament of Extreme Unc- 
tion; that for anointing those who are_to be baptized, and also 
for anointing the priest’s hands at his ordination; and the 
Sacred chrism, a mixture of oil and balsam used in the sacra- 
ment of Confirmation and at the consecration of bishops. 


The Mass of Maundy Thursday 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Gal. 6, 14 


OS autem gloriári opór- vT it behooves us to glory 

tet in cruce Dómini in the cross of Our Lord 
nostri Jesu Christi: in quo est Jesus Christ: in Whom is our 
salus, vita, et resurréctio no- salvation, life, and resurrec- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


448 HOLY THURSDAY 


tion; through Whom we are stra: per quem salváti, et li- 
saved and delivered. Ps. 66, 2. beráti sumus. Ps. 66, 2. Deus 
May God have mercy on us, misereátum nostri, et benedí- 
and bless us; may He cause the cat nobis: illüminet vultum 
light of His countenance to suum super nos, et misereátur 
shine upon us, and may He nostri. Nos autem. . 

have mercy on us. But it be- : 

hooves. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


This being a festival Mass the Gloria in excelsis is sung, the 
ohurch bells are rung and the organ is played, all to be silent 
until the Gloria in the Mass of Holy Saturday. 


Prayer 


Go», from Whom Judas EUS, à quo et Judas reá- 

received the punishment D tus sui penam, et con- 
of his crime, and the thief the fessiónis sue latro premium 
reward of his confession, grant sumpsit, concéde nobis tus 
us the effect of Thy clemency, propitiatiónis efféctum: ut, si- 
that, as Jesus Christ, our Lord, cut in passióne sua Jesus 
in His passion dealt according Christus Dóminus noster di- 
to their deserts with the one vérsa utrísque íntulit stipén- 
and the other, so, putting away dia meritérum; ita nobis, 
from us the error of the past, abláto vetustátis erróre, re- 
He may bestow upon us the surrectiónis sue grátiam lar- 
grace of His resurrection. Who giátur. Qui tecum vivit. 
with Thee liveth, 


wee ^A, MIG 


Lesson from the Epistle of Léctio Epistole beati Pauli 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, When you come RATRES: Conveniéntibus 

together therefore into vobis in unum, jam non 
one place, it is not now to eat est Dominicam cenam man- 
the Lord's supper; for every ducare. Unusquisque enim 
one taketh, before, his own suam coenam presumit ad 
supper to eat: and one indeed manducándum. Et álius qui- 
is hungry, and another is dem ésurit: álius autem ébrius 
drunk, What, have you not est. Numquid domos non ha- 
houses to eat and drink in? Or bétis ad manducándum, et bi- 
despise ye the church of God, béndum? aut Ecclésiam Dei 
and put them to shame that contémnitis, et confünditis 
have not? What shall I say to eos, qui non habent? Quid di- 
you: Do I praise you? In this cam vobis? Laudo vos? in hoc 
I praise you not; for I have re- non laudo. Ecce enim accépi a 
ceived of the Lord, that which Dómino, quod et trádidi vo- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


: 


zd 


HOLY THURSDAY 


bis, quóniam Dóminus Jesus, 
in qua nocte tradebátur, ac- 
cépit panem, et grátias agens 
fregit, et dixit: Accipite, et 
manducáte: hoc est corpus 
meum, quod pro vobis tradé- 
tur: hoc fácite in meam com- 
memoratiónem. Similiter et 
Cálicem, postquam cendavit, 
dicens: Hic calix novum tes- 
taméntum est in meo sán- 
guine: hoc facite, quoties- 
cümque bibétis, in meam com- 
memoratiónem. Quotiescüm- 
que enim. manducábitis pa- 
nem hunc, et cálicem bibétis : 
mortem Dómini annuntiábi- 
tis donec véniat. Itaque qui- 
cümque manducáverit pa- 
nem hunc, vel bíberit cálicem 
Dómini indigne, reus erit.cór- 
poris et sánguinis Dómini. 
Probet autem sefpsum homo, 
et sic de pane illo edat, et de 
cálice bibat. Qui enim man- 
dücat et bibit indígne judí- 
cium sibi manducat et bibit: 
non dijüdicans corpus Dó- 
mini. Ideo inter vos multi 
infírmi. et imbecilles, et dór- 
miunt multi. Quod si nos- 
metípsos dijudicarémus, non 
ttique judicarémur. Dum ju- 
dicámur autem, a Dómino 
corripimur, u£ non cum hoc 
mundo damnémur. 


Gradual. 


Christus factus est pro no- 
bis obédiens usque ad mortem, 
mortem autem Crucis. J. 
Propter quod et Deus exaltá- 
vit illum: et'dedit illi nomen, 
quod est super omne nomen. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


449 


also I delivered to you, that the 
Lord Jesus, the same night in 
which He was betrayed, took 
bread, and giving thanks, 
broke, and said, Take ye, and 
eat; this is My body which 
Shall be delivered for you; this 
do for the commemoration of 
Me. In like manner also the 
chalice, after He had supped, 
saying, 'This chalice is the new 
testament, in My blood; this 
do ye, as often as you shall 
drink, for the commemora- 
tion of Me. For as often 85 you 
shall eat this bread, and drink 
the chalice, you shall show the 
death of the Lord until He 
come, Therefore, whoscever 
shall eat this bread, or drink 
the chalice of the Lord un- 
worthily, shall be guilty of the 
body and of the blood of the 
Lord. But let a man prove him- 
self; and so let him eat of that 
bread, and drink of the chalico. 
For he that eateth and drink- 
eth unworthily, eateth and 
drinketh judgment to himself; 
not discerning the body of the 
Lord, Therefore are.there many 
infirm and weak among ycu, 
and many sleep. But if we 
would judge ourselves, we 
should not be judged: but 
whilst we are judged,. we are 
chastised by the Lord, that we 
be not. condemned with this 
world. 


Phil.2,8,9. 


Christ became obedient for 
us unto death, even the death 
of the cross. Y. Wherefore God 
also hath exalted Him, and 
hath given Him a name which 
is above every name. | 


http://ccwatershed.org 


450 


HOLY THURSDAY 


Gospel. John 13, 1-15 


H Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


EFORE the festival-day of 

the pasch, Jesus know- 

ing that His hour was come 
that He should pass out of this 
world to the Father, having 
loved His own who were in the 
world, He loved them unto the 
end. And when supper was 
done (the devil having now put 
into the heart of Judas Iscar- 
lot, the son of Simon, to betray 
Him), knowing that the 
Father had given Him all 
things into His hands, and that 
He came from God, and goeth 
to God; He riseth from supper, 
and layeth aside His garments, 
and having taken a towel, He 
girdeth Himself; and after that 
He putteth water into a basin, 
and began to wash the feet of 
the disciples, and to wipe them 
with the towel wherewith He 
was girded. He cometh there- 
fore to Simon Peter. And Peter 
was my teet? Jesus answered; 
and said to him, What I do 
thou knowest not now, but thou 
shalt know hereafter. Peter 
saith to Him, Thou shalt never 
wash my feet. Jesus answered 
him, If I wash thee not, thou 
shalt have no part with Me. 
Simon Peter saith to Him, 
Lord, not only my feet, but also 
my hands, and my head. Jesus 
saith to him, He that is washed, 
needeth not but to wash his 
feet, but is clean wholly. And 
you are clean, but. not all. For 
He knew who he was. that 
would betray Him: therefore 
He said, You are not all clean. 
Then after He had washed 


& Sequéntia. sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joánnem. 
NTE diem festum Pas- 
che, sciens Jesus, 
quia venit hora ejus, ut tran- 
seat ex hoc mundo ad Pa- 
trem: cum dilexisset suos, qui 
erant in mundo, in finem di- 
léxit eos. Et cena facta, cum 
diabolus jam misisset in eor, 
ut traderet eum Judas .Si- 
mónis Iscariéte: sciens quia 
ómnia dedit ei Pater in ma- 
nus, et quia a Deo exívit, et 
ad Patrem vadit: surgit a 
cena, et ponit vestiménta 
sua: et cum accepísset lin- 
teum, precinxit se. Deínde 
mittit aquam iu pelvim, et 
ccepit laváre pedes disci- 
pulórum, et extérgere linteo, 
quo erat precinctus, Venit er- 
go ad Simónem Petrum, Et 
dicit ei Petrus: Dómine, tu 
mihi lavas pedes? Respóndit 
Jesus, et dixit ei: Quod ego 
Farin ^ --- 
imos prunuca. 17X15 et Petrus: 
Non lavabis ‘mihi pedes in 
etérnum. Respóndit ei Jesus: 
81 non lávero te, non habébis 
partem mecum. Dicit ei Si- 
mon Petrus: Dómine, non 
tantum pedes meos, sed et 
manus, et caput. Dicit ei Je- 
sus: Qui lotus est, non ín- 
diget nisi ut pedes lavet, sed 
est mundus totus. Et vos mun- 
di estis, sed non omnes. Scié- 
bat enim quisnam esset qui 
traderet eum: — proptérea 
dixit: Non estis mundi omnes. 
Postquam ergo lavit pedes 
eórum, et accépit vestiménta 
sua: cum recubuísset fterum, 
dixit eis: Scitis quid fécerim 
vabis? Vos vocátis me Magis- 


\ 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
| 


HOLY THURSDAY 451 


fer, et Dómine: et bene díci- 
tis: sum étenim. Si ergo ego 
lavi pedes vestros, Dóminus, 
et Magister: et vos debétis al- 
ter alteríus laváre pedes. Ex- 
emplum enim dedi vobis, ut 
quemadmodum ego feci vo- 
bis, ita et vos faciátis. 


their feet, and taken His gar- 
ments, being sat down again, 
He said to them, Know ye 
what I have done to you? You 
call Me Master and Lord: and 
you say well, for so I am: if 
then I, being your Lord and 
Master, have washed your feet, 
you also ought to wash one 


&nother's feet; for I have given you an example, that as I 
have done to you, so you do also. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. .Ps..117, 16, 17 


Déxtera Dómini fecit vir- The right hand of the Lord 
tütem, déxtera Dómini exal- hath wrought strength, the 
távit me: non móriar, sed vi- right hand of the Lord hath 
vam, et narrábo ópera Dó- exalted me; I shall not die, 
mini. but live, and shall declare the 

works of the Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


PSE tibi, quesumus, Dó- E BESEECH Thee, O holy 
mine sancte, Pater omní- Lord, almighty Father, 
potens, ztérne Deus, sacri- eternal God, that He may ren- 
fícium nostrum reddat ac- der our sacrifice acceptable to 
céptum, qui discípulis suis in Thee, Who, by giving it to His 
sui cómmemoratiónem hoc disciples on this day, taught 
fferi hodiérna traditióne món- them that it'is dóne in com- 
stravit, Jesus Christus Filius memoration of Him, Jesus 
tuus Dóminus noster: Qui te- Christ, Thy Son, our Lord, 
cum. Who with Thee. ` 
Preface No. 4, page 803. 
The Canon of the Mass for this day is as follows: 


The Canon of the Mass 


HEREFORE, We humbly 
pray and beseech Thee, 


E farton clementissime 
Pater, per Jesum Chris- 


tum Fílium tuum Dóminum 
nostrum, süpplices rogámus 
&c'pétimus, uti accépta há- 
beas, et benedicas hec  do- 
na, hzc  minera, hee sanc- 
ta & sacrifícia illibáta, in 
primis que tibi offérimus pro 


most merciful Father, through 
Jesus Christ Thy Son, Our 
Lord, to receive and to bless 
these ®© gifts, these "I presents, 
these holy unspotted sacri- 
fices, which we offer up to 
Thee, in the first place. for 


http://ccwatershed.org 


452 HOLY THURSDAY 


Thy holy Catholic Church, that 
it may please Thee to grant 
her peace, to guard, unite, and 
guide her, throughout the 
world; as also for Thy servant 
N. our Pope, and N. our 
Bishop, and for all who are 
orthodox in belief and who 
profess the Catholic and apos- 
tolic faith. 


Be mindful, O Lord, of Thy 
servants, N. and N., and of all 
here present, whose faith and 
devotion are known to Thee, 
for whom we offer, or who offer 
up to Thee, this sacrifice of 
praise, for themselves, their 
families, and their friends, for 
the salvation of their souls and 
the health and welfare they 
hope for, and who now pay 
their vows to Thee, God eter- 
nal, living, and true. 


Having communion with, 
and celebrating that most 
sacred day on which Our Lord 
Jesus Christ was for us be- 
trayed; venerating, moreover. 
tha 2- = 
«rsa gaurlous Virgin Mary, 
mother of the same our God 
and Lord Jesus. Christ, as also 
of Thy blessed apostles and 
martyrs, Peter and Paul, An- 
drew, James, John, Thomas, 
James, Philip, Bartholomew, 
Matthew, Simon and Thad- 
deus, of Linus, Cletus, Clement, 
Xystus, Cornelius, Cyprian, 
Lawrence, Chrysogonus, John 
and Paul, Cosmas and Damian, 
and of all Thy saints; to whose 
merits and prayers do Thou 
grant that in all things we may 
be fortified by the aid of Thy 
protection. Through tbe same 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Ecclésia tua sancta Cathól- 
ca; quam pacificáre, custo- 
dire, adunáre, et régere dig- 
néris toto orbe terrárum: un& 
cum fámulo tuo Papa nostro 
N. et Antístite nostro N. et 
ómnibus orthodóxis, atque 
Cathólice et Apostélice fídei 
cultóribus. 


Meménto Dómine famuló- 
rum, famularümque tuárum 
N. et N. et ómnium circum- 
stántium, quorum tibi fídes 
cógnita est, et nota devótio, 
pro quibus tibi offérimus: vel 
qui tibi ófferunt hoc sacrifí- 
cium laudis pro se, suisque 
ómnibus: pro redemptióne 


&nimárum suárum, pro spe ^ 


salütis et incolumitátis sue: 
tibique reddunt vota sua 
ztérno Deo vivo et vero. 


Communicántes, et diem 
sacratissimum celebrantes, 
quo Dóminus noster .Jesus 
Christus pro nobis est trádi- 
ins; cand ne wee - 

—---, ae ramis gloriósæ 
semper Vírginis Marie, Gen- 
itrícis ejüsdem Dei et Dó- 
mini nostri Jesu Christi, sed 
et beatérum Apostolórum ac 
Mártyrum tuórum Petri et 
Pauli, Andrée, Jacobi, Joán- 
nis, Thome, Jacóbi, Philippi, 
Bartholomei, Matthei, Si- 
mónis, et Thaddai; Lini, Cleti. 
Cleméntis, Xysti, Cornélii, 
Cypriani, Lauréntii, Chrysó- 
goni, Joannis, et Pauli, Cos- 
mæ et. Damiani, et ómnium 
Sanctórum tuórum: quorum 
méritis precibüsque concédas, 
ut in ómnibus protectiónis 
tue muniámur auxílio. Per 
eümdem Christum Dóminum 
nostrum. Amen. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


$ 


HOLY THURSDAY 


Hanc ígitur oblatiónem ser- 
vitütis nostre, sed et cuncte 
famílie tuz, quam tibi offéri- 
mus ob diem, in qua Dóminus 
noster Jesus Christus trádi- 
dit discípulis suis Córporis et 
Sánguinis sui mystéria cele- 
bránda: quesumus, Dómine, 
ut placátus accípias: diésque 
nostros in tua pace dispónas, 
atque ab etérna damnatióne 
nos éripi, et in electórum tuó- 
rum jübeas grege numerari. 
Per Christum Dóminum no- 
strum. Amen. 


Quam oblationem tu, Deus, 
in ómnibus, quzsumus bene- 
 dictam, adscrip A tam, ra- 
*H tam, rationábilem, accep- 
tabilémque fácere dignéris: 
ut nobis Cor & pus, et San- 
® guis, fiat dilectissimi Filii 
tu Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi. 

Qui pridie, quam pro nos- 
tra omniümque salúte pateré- 
tur, hoc est, hódie: accépit 
panem in sanctas ac venerá- 
hiles manus suas, et elevátis 
óculis in celum ad te Deum 
Patrem suum omnipoténtem, 
tibi grátias agens, bene'R- 
díxit, fregit, deditque discípu- 
lis suis, dicens: Accípite et 
manducáte ex hoc omnes: 


Hoc CORPUS 


MEUM. 


EST ENIM 


483 


This oblation, therefore, of 
our servitude, as also of all 
Thy household’s, which we 
offer Thee for the day on which 
Our Lord Jesus Christ com- 
mitted to His disciples the mys- 
teries of His body and blood 
to celebrate, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, graciously to accept, 
and to dispose our days in Thy 
peace, and command us to be 
snatched away from eternal 
damnation and numbered in 
the fold of Thine elect. 
Through Christ our Lord. 
Amen, 

Which oblation, we beseech, 
O God, do Thou vouchsafe to 
make in all ways blessed &, 
ascribed "M, ratified, reason- 
able H4, and acceptable, that it 
may become unto us the body 
% and blood 7B of Thy most 
beloved Son, Our Lord Jesus 
Christ. ; 

Who, on the day before He 
suffered for our salvation and 
the salvation of all, that is on 
this day, took bread into His 
holy and venerable hands and 
having lifted: up His eyes to 
heaven, to Thee God, His al- 
mighty Father, giving thanks 
to Thee, blessed it 4 broke it, 
and gave it to His disciples, 
saying, Take ye, and eat ye all 
of this: : 

FOR THIS IS MY BODY. 


The remainder of the Canon, Wherefore O Lord, etc., as on 


page 783. 


From this day until Easter Sunday morning the kiss of peace 


is not given. 


Communion. John 13, 12; 13, 15 


Déminus Jesus, postquam 
cenavit cum discipulis suis, 
lavit pedes eórum, et ait illis: 
Scitis quid fécerim vobis ego 


The Lord Jesus, after He had 
supped with His disciples, 
washed their feet, and saith to 
them, Do you know what I, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


464 


your Lord and Master, have 
done for you? I have given you 
an example, that so you do 
also. 


HOLY THURSDAY 


Déminus, et Magister? Ex- 
emplum dedi vobis, ut et vos 
ita faciátis, 


Postcommunion 


EFRESHED with life-giving 

nourishment, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, our God, 
that what we perform in the 
time of our mortality, we may 
attain by the gift of Thine im- 
mortality. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


At the conclusion of Mass the celebrant removes his chasuble 
and is robed in a white cope; and carries the Blessed Sacra- 


EFÉCTI vitálibus alimén- 

tis, quesumus, Dómine 

Deus noster: ut quod témpcre 

nostr? mortalitatis exsequi- 

mur, immortalitatis tue mú- 

nere consequámur. Per Dé- 
minum. 


ment to the repository. During the procession to the reposi- 
tory the hymn Pange lingua is sung. 


Pange Lingua 


Sing, my tongue, the Saviour’s 
glory, 
Of His flesh, the mystery 


sing; 
Of His blood, all price exceed- 
ing. 
v vee ausa bdl KING. 
Destin'd for the world’s re- 
demption, 
From a noble womb to spring. 


Of a pure and spotless virgin 
Born for us on earth below, 
He, as man with man convers- 

ing, 
Stay'd the seeds of truth to 
sow; 
Then He closed in solemn order 
Wondrously His life of woe. 


On the night of that Last 
Supper, 
Seated with His chosen band, 
He the paschal victim eating, 
First fulfills the Lord's com- 
mand; 


Pange, linqua, gloriósi, 


Córporis mystérium, 


nemus 


Sanguinisque prétiósi 


Quem in mundi prétium 
Fructus ventris generósi 


Rex effüdit Géntium. 


Nobis datus, nobis natus 
Ex intácta Vrgine, 
Et in mundo conversátus, 


Sparso verbi sémine, 


Sui moras incolátus, 
Miro clausit órdine. 


In suprémz nocte cene, 
Recümbens cum frátribus, 


Observáta lege plene 
Cibis in legálibus, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY THURSDAY 


Cibum turbe duodéne 


: Se dat suis mánibus. 


Verbum caro, panem verum 
Verbo carnem éfficit: 


Fitque sanguis Christi merum, 
Et si sensus déficit, 


Ad firméndum cor sincérum 
Sola fides süfficit. 


Tantum ergo Sacraméntum 
Venerémur cérnui: 
Et antiquum documéntum 


Novo cedat rítui: 
Prestet fides suppleméntum 

Sénsuum deféctui. 
Genitóri, Genitóque 

Laus et jubilátio, 


Salus, honor, virtus quoque 
Sit et benedíctio; 


Procedénti ab utróque 
Compar sit laudátio. Amen. 


455 
Then as food to all His breth- 


ren, 
Gives Himself with His own 
hand. ` 
Word made flesh, the bread of 
nature 
By His word to fiesh He 
turns; 
Wine into His blood He 
changes; 
What though sense no 
change discerns! 
Only be the heart in earnest, 
Faith her lessons quickly 
learns. 


Down in adoration falling, 
Lo! the sacred host we hall! 
Lo! o'er ancient forms depart- 
ing 
Newer. rites of grace prevail; 
Faith for all defects supplying, 
Where the feebler senses fail. 


To the everlasting Father, 
And the Son who reigns on 
high, 
With the Holy Ghost proceed- 
ing 
Forth from each eternally, 
Be salvation, honor, blessing, 
Might and. endless. majesty. 
Amen. ` 


The clergy return to their places in the choir, and begin to 


recite Vespers, 


"Pespets 
The Our Father and Hail Mary, in silence. 
Antiphon. 


Cálicem salutáris accípiam 
et nomen Dómini invocábo. 


I will take the chalice of sal- 
vation, and wil call upon the 
name of the Lord. 


Psalm 115 


Credidi, propter quod locü- 
tus sum: ego autem humiliá- 
ius sum nimis. 


I have believed, therefore 
bave I spoken: but I have been 
humbled exceedingly. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


456 


I said in my excess: Every 
man is a liar. 

"What shall I render to the 
Lord for all the things that He 
hath rendered to me? 

I will take the chalice of sal- 
vation; and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord. 

I will pay my vows to the 
Lord before all His people: 
precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of His saints. 

O Lord, for I am Thy ser- 
vant: I am Thy servant, and 
the son of Thy handmaid. 

Thou hast broken my bonds: 
I will sacrifice to Thee the 
sacrifice of praise, and I will 
call upon the name of the Lord. 

I wil pay my vows to the 
Lord in the sight of all His 
people: in the courts of the 
house of the Lord, in the midst 
of thee, O Jerusalem. 

Ant. wil take the chalice 
of salvation and will call upon 
the name of the Lord. 

Ant. With them that hated 
peace I was peaceable; when I 


eT 


«geaisv we Wilnout cause. 


HOLY THURSDAY 


Ego dixi in excéssu meo: 
Omnis homo mendax. 

Quid retribuam Dómino, 
pro ómnibus, que retribuit 
mihi? 

Cálicem salutáris accipiam: 
et nomen Dómini invocábo, 


Vota mea Dómino reddam 
coram omni pópulo ejus: pre- 
tlóso in conspéctu Dómini 
mors Sanctórum ejus. 

O Dómine, quia ego servus 
tuus: ego servus tuus, et fílius 
ancílle tue. : 

Dirupísti vincula mea: tibi 
Sacrificáho hóstiam laudis, et 
nomen Dómini invocábo. 


Vota mea Dómino reddam 
in conspéctu omnis pópuli 
ejus: in átriis domus Dómini, 
in médio tui Jerüsalem. 


Ant, Cálicem salutáris acci- 
piam, et nomen Dómini invo- 
cabo. i 

Ant. Cum his qui odérunt 
pnarem eres ~- lod 

^ 49, anpugnabant 


me gratis. 


Psalm 119 


In my trouble I cried to the 
Lord: and He beard me. 


O Lord, deliver my soul from 
wicked lips, and a deceitful 
tongue. 

What shall be given to thee, 
or What shall be added to thee: 
to a deceitful tongue? . 

The sharp arrows of the 
mighty, with! coals that. lay 
waste. 

Woe is me, that my sojourn- 
ing is prolonged! I have dwelt 
with the inhabitants of Cedar: 


Ad Dóminum cum tribu- 
lárer, clamávi: et exaudivit 
me. 

Dómine, líbera ánimam me- 
am a labiis iniquis et a lingua 
dolósa. 

Quid detur tibi, aut quid ap- 
ponátur tibi ad linguam do- 
lósam? ` 

Sagittz poténtis  acütz, 
cum carbónibus desolatóriis. 


Heu mihi, quia incolátus 
meus prolongátus est: habi- 
távi cum habitantibus Cedar: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY THURSDAY 


multum incola fuit anima 
mea. 

` Cum his qui odérunt pacem 
eram pacificus: cum loquébar 
illis, impugnábant me gratis. 


Ant. Cum his qui odérunt 
pacem eram pacificus: dum 
loquébar illis impugnábant 
me gratis. 

Ant. Ab homínibus iníquis 
libera me, Dómine. 


457 


my soul hath been long a so- 
journer. 

With them that hated peace 
I was peaceable: when I spoke 
to them, they fought against 
me without cause, 

Ant. With them that hated 
peace I was peaceable; when I 
spoke to them they fought 
against me without cause. 

Ant. Deliver me, O Lord, 


from unjust men. 


Psalm 139 


Eripe me, Dómine, ab hó- 
mine malo, a viro iníquo éripe 
me. 

Qui cogitavérunt iniquitátes 
jn corde, tota die constitué- 
bant przlia. 

Acuérunt linguas suas sicut 
serpéntis, venénum aspidum 
sub lábiis eórum. 


Custódi me, Dómine, de ma- 
nu peccatóris, et ab homini- 
bus iníquis, éripe me. 

Qui cogitavérunt supplan- 
tare gressus meos, abscondé- 
runt supérbi láqueum mihi; 

Et funes extendérunt in lá- 
queum, juxta iter scándalum 
posuérunt mihi. 


Dixi Dómino: Deus meus. es 
tu: exáudi, Dómine, vocem 
deprecatiónis meg. 

Dómine, Domine virtus sa- 
lútis mez, obumbrásti super 
caput meum in die belli. 


Ne tradas me, Dómine, a 
desidério meo peccatóri; cogi- 
tavérunt contra me, ne dere- 
linquas me, ne forte exaltén- 
tur. 

Caput circüitus eórum: la- 


Deliver me, O Lord, from the 
evil man: rescue me from the 
unjust man. 

Who have devised iniquities 
in their hearts, all the day long 
they designed battles. 

They have sharpened their 
tongues like a serpent: the 
venom of asps is under their 
lips. 

Keep me, O Lord, from the 
hand of the wicked: and from 
unjust men deliver me. 

Who have proposed to sup- 
plant my steps: the proud have 
hidden a net for me. 

And they have stretched cut 
cords for a snare: they have 
laid for me a stumbling-block 
by the wayside. 

I said to the Lord, Thou art 
my God: hear, O Lord, the 
voice of my supplication. 

O Lord, Lord, the strength of 
my salvation: Thou hast over- 
shadowed my head in the day 
of battle. 

Give me not up, O Lord, from 
my desire to the wicked: they 
have plotted against me; do not 
thou forsake me, lest they 
should triumph. 

The head of them compass- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


458 HOLY THURSDAY 


ing me about: the labor of their 
lips shall overwhelm them. 

Burning coals shall fall upon 
them: Thou shalt cast them 
down into the fire: in miseries 
they shall not be able to stand. 

A man full of tongue shall 
not be established in the earth: 
evils Shall catch the unjust 
man unto destruction. 

I know that the Lord will do 
justice to the needy: and will 
revenge the poor, 

But as for the just, they shall 
give glory to Thy name: and 
the upright shall dwell with 
Thy countenance. 

Ant. Deliver me, 
from unjust men. 


O Lord, 


Ant. Keep me from the snare 
which they have laid for me, 
and from the stumbling-blocks 
of them that work iniquity. 


bor labiórum ipsórum opériet 
eos. 

Cadent super eos carbónes, 
in ignem dejícies eos, in misé- 
riis non subsistent. 


Vir linguósus non dirigétur 
in terra, virum injüstum mala 
cáplent in intéritu. 


Cognóvi qua fáciet Dómi- 
nus judícium fnopis, et vindíc- 
tam páuperum. 

Verümtamen justi confíte- 
büntur nómini tuo; et habi- 
tábunt recti cum vultu tuo. 


Ant. Ab hominibus iníquis 
lberg me, Dómine. 


Ani. Custódi me a láqueo 
quem statuérunt mihi, et a 
Scándalis operántium iniqui- 
tatem. 


Psalm 140 


T have cried to Thee, O Lord, 
hear me: harken to my voice, 
when T erv ta Than 

cy ae VA we MALCULUUCU UN 
incense, in Thy sight; the lift- 
ing up of my hands, as evening 
Sacrifice, 

Set à watch, O Lord, before 
my mouth: and a door round 
about my lips. ‘ 

Incline not, my heart to evil 
words: to make excuses in sins. 


With men that work in- 
iquity: and I will not commun- 
icate with the choicest of them. 

The just man shall correct 
me in mercy, and shall reprove 
me: but let not the oil of the 
sinner fatten my head. 

For my prayer also shall still 
be against the things with 


Dómine, clamávi ad te ex- 
áudi me; inténde voci mez. 


wvirigatur orátio mea sicut 
incénsum in conspéctu tuo, 
elevátio mánuum meárum sa- 
eriffcium vespertínum. 

Pone, Dómine, custódiam 
ori meo, et óstium circum- 
stántie lábiis meis. | 

Non declines cor meum in 
verba malítie, ad excusándas 
excusatiónes in peccatis, 

Cum homínibus operántibus 
iniquitátem: et non commu- 
nicábo cum eléctis eórum. 

Corripiet me justus in mise- 
ricórdia, et increpábit me; 
óleum autem peccatóris non 
impinguet caput meum. 

Quóniam adhuc et orátio 
mea in beneplácitis eórum; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY THURSDAY 


absérpti sunt juncti petre jú- 
dices eórum. 


Audient verba mea quóni- 
&m potuérunt: sicut crassitü- 
do terre erüpta est super ter- 
ram. 


Dissipáta sunt ossa nostra 
Secus inférnum: quia ad te, 
Dómine, Dómine, óculi mei: 
in te sperávi, non áuferas 
ánimam meam. 

Custódi me a Jáqueo quem 
statuérunt mihi: et a scánda- 
lis operántium iniquitátem. 


459 


which they are well pleased: 
their judges faling upon the 
rock have been swallowed up. 

They shall hear my words, 
for they have prevailed: as 
when the thickness of the 
earth is broken up upon the 
ground: 

Our bones are scattered by 
the side of hell. But to Thee, O 
Lord, Lord, are my eyes: in 
Thee have I put my trust, take 
not away my soul. 

Keep me from the snare, 
which they have laid for me: 
and from the stumbling-blocks 


. of them that work iniquity. 


Cadent in retiáculo ejus 
peccatéres: singuláriter sum 
ego donec tránseam. 

Ant. Custódi me a láqueo, 
quem statuérunt mihi et a 
&cándalis operántium iniqui- 
tátem. 


Ant. Considerábam ad déx- 
teram, et vidébam, et non erat 
qui cognósceret me. 


The wicked shall fall in his 
net: I am alone until I pass. 


Ant. Keep. me from the 
snare which they have laid for 
me, and from the stumbling 
blocks of them that work in- 
iquity. 

Ant. I looked on my right 
hand, and beheld: and there 
was no one that would know 
me. i . 


Psalm 141. 


Voce mea ad Dóminum cla- 
mávi, voce mea ad Dóminum 
deprecátus sum. 

Effúndo in conspéctu ejus 
oratónem meam, et tribula- 
tiónem meam ante ipsum pro- 
nüntio. 

In deficiéndo ex me spíri- 
fum meum, et tu cognovísti 
sémitas meas.: 

In via hac qua ambulábam 
&bscondérunt láqueum mihi. 
. Considerábam ad déxteram, 
et vidébam, et non. erat qui 
cognósceret me. 

Périit fuga a me, et non 
est qui requirat ánimam 
meam. 


I cried to` the Lord with my 
voice: with my voice I made 
supplication to the Lord. 

In His sight I pour out my 
prayer, and before Him I de- 
clare my trouble. 


When my spirit failed me, 
then Thou knewest my paths. 


In this way wherein I walked, 
they have hid a snare for me. 

I looked on my right hand, 
and beheld: ‘and there was no 
one that would know me. 

Flight hath perished from 
me: and there is no one that 
hath regard to my soul. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


460 


I cried to Thee, O Lord; I 
said: Thou arb my hope, my 
portion in the land of the liv- 
ing. 
Attend to my supplication: 
for I am brought very low. 


Deliver me from my perse- 
cutors: for they are stronger 
than I, 

Bring my soul out of prison, 
that I may praise Thy name: 
the just wait for me, until Thou 
reward me. : 

Ant. I looked on my right 
hand, and beheld: and there 
was no one that would know 
me. 
Ant, While they were at sup- 
per, Jesus took bread, and 
blessed, and broke, and gave 
to His disciples. 


HOLY THURSDAY 


Clamávi ad te, Dómine, 
dixi: Tu es spes mea, pórtio 
mea in terra vivéntium. 


Inténde ad deprecatiónem 
meam: quia humiliátus sum 
nimis 


Libera me a persequéntibus 
me: quia confortáti sunt su- 
per me. 

Educ de custódia ánimam 
meam ad confiténdum nómini 
tuo: me exspéctant justi, do- 
nec retríbuas mihl. 

Ant. Considerábam ad déx- 
teram, et vidébam, et non erat 
qul cognósceret me. 


Ant. Cenántibus autem il- 
lis, accépit Jesus panem, et 
benedíxit, ac fregit, dedítque 
discípulis suis. 


Canticle. of B. V. M. Luke 1, 46-55 


My soul doth magnify: the 
Lord. 

And my spirit hath rejoiced 
in God my Saviour. 

Because He hath regarded 
the hime ae vr + x 

2o weaves 24 UII). LICLICOIOT UD. all 
generations shall cal me 
blessed. 

Because He that is mighty 
hath done great things to me: 
and holy is His name. 

And His mercy is from gen- 
eration unto generations, to 
ihem that fear Him. 

He hath showed might in His 
arm: He hath scattered the 
proud in the conceit of their 
heart. " k . 

He hath put down the 
mighty from their seat, and 
hath exalted the humble. 

He hath filled the hungry 
with good things: and the rich 
He hath sent empty away. 


Magnificat ánima mea Dó- 
minum. i 

Et exsultávit spíritus meus 
in Deo, salutári meo. 

Quia resnéxit hnmiNtát-—- 

ewe ALAAAA. CA 

hoc beátaim me dicent omnes 
generatiónes. 


Quia fecit mihl magna qui 
potens est: et sanctum no- 
men ejus. 

Xt misericórdia ejus a pro- 
génie in progénies timéntibus 
eum. 

Fecit poténtiam in bráchio 
Suo: dispérsit supérbos mente 
cordis sui. 


Depósuit poténtes de sede, 
et exaltavit hümiles. 


Esuriéntes implévit bonis: 
et dívites dimísit inánes. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY THURSDAY 


Suscépit Israel,  püerum 
suum, recordátus misericór- 
die sue. 

Sicut locütus est ad patres 
nostros, Abraham, et sémini 
ejus in secula. 

Ant. Cenantibus antem il- 
lis accépit Jesus panem et 
benédixit, ac fregit, deditque 
discipulis suis. 


461 


He hath received Israel His 
Servant: being mindful of His 
mercy. 

As He spoke to our fathers: 
to Abraham and to his seed for 
ever. 

Ant. While they were at sup- 
per, Jesus took bread, and 
blessed, and broke, and gave 1t 
to his disciples. 


Then is said, kneeling: 


Y. Christus factus est pro 
nobis obédiens usque ad mor- 
tem. Pater noster. 


y. Christ became for us obe- 
dient, even unto death. 


Our Father, in silence. 
Psalm 50 


Miserere mei, Deus, secün- 
dum magnam misericórdiam 
tuam. 

Et. secundum multitidinem 
miseratiónum tuárum dele in- 
iquitátem meam. 

Amplius lava me ab iniqui- 
táte mea, et & peccáto meo 
munda me. 

Quóniam iniquitátem me- 
am ego cognósco, et peccátum 
meum contra me est semper. 
.. Tibi soli peccávi et malum 
coram te feci, ut justificéris in 
sermónibus tuis et vincas cum 
judicáris. 


Ecce enim in iniquitátibus 
concéptus sum, et in peccátis 
concípit me mater mea. . 

Ecce enim veritátem dile- 
xisti: incérta et occülta sa- 
piéntie tue manifestásti 


Aspérges me hyssópo, et 
mundábor; lavábis me, et su- 
per nivem dealbábor. 


Have mercy on me, O God, 
according to Thy great mercy. 


And according to the multi- 
tude of Thy tender mercies, 
blot out my iniquity. 

Wash. me yet more from my 
iniquity, and cleanse me from 
my sin. 

For I know my iniquity, and 
my sin is always before me. 


To Thee only have I sinned, 
and have done evil before 
Thee: that Thou mayst be jus- 
tified in Thy words, and mayst 
overcome when Thou art 
judged. 

For behold I was conceived 
in iniquities, and in sins did 
my mother conceive me. 

For behold Thou hast loved 
truth: the uncertain and hid- 
den things of Thy wisdom 
Thou hast made manifest to 
me. 

Thou shalt sprinkle me with 
hyssop, and I shall be cleansed: 
Thou shalt wash me, and I 
shall be made whiter than 
Snow. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


462 


' To my hearing Thou shalt 
give joy and gladness, and the 
bones that have been humbled 
shall rejoice. 


Turn away Thy face from my ` 


sins, and blot out all my in- 
iquities. 

Create a Clean heart in me, 
O God: and renew a right spirit 
within my bowels. 

Cast me not away from Thy 
face, and take not Thy holy 
Spirit from me. 

Restore unto me the joy of 
Thy salvation: and strengthen 
me with a perfect spirit. 

I wil teach the unjust Thy 
ways: and the wicked shall be 
converted to Thee. 

Deliver me from blood, O 
God, Thou God of my salva- 
tion: and my tongue shall ex- 
tol Thy justice. 

O Lord, Thou wilt open my 
lips: and my mouth shall de- 
clare Thy praise. 

For if Thou hadst desired 
Sacrifice, I would indeed have 
given it: with burnt-offerings 
Thou wilt not be delighted. 


aiticted spirit:.a contrite and 
humbled heart, O God, Thou 
wilt not despise. 

Deal favorably, O Lord, in 
Thy good will with Sion, that 
the walls of Jerusalem may be 
built up. 

Then shalt Thou accept the 
sacrifice of justice, oblations, 
and whole  burnt-offerings: 
then shall they lay calves upon 
Thy altar. 


Our Father, 


HOLY THURSDAY 


Auditui meo dabis gaüdium 
et letítiam, et exsultábunt 
ossa humiliáta. 


Averte fáciem tuam a pec- 
cátis meis et omnes iniquitá- 
tes meas dele. 

Cor mundum crea in me, 
Deus; et spíritum rectum in- 
nova in viscéribus meis. 

Ne projícias me a fácie tua, 
et spiritum sanctum tuum ne 
áuferas a me. 

Redde mihi letitiam salu- 
taris tui, et spíritu principáli 
confírma me. 

Docébo iníquos vias tuas, 
et impii ad te converténtur. 


Libera me de sanguínibus, 
Deus, Deus salütis mez et ex- 
ultábit linqua mea justitiam. 
tuam. 

Dómine, lábia mea apéries, 
et os meum annuntiábit lau- 
dem tuam. 

Quóniam si voluísses sacri- 
ficium, dedíssem titique; ho- 
locaustis non delectáberis. 


wpe aun 


contribulatus; cor contritum. 
et humiliatum, Deus, non de- 
spicies. 

Benigne fac, Domine, in 
bona. voluntate tua Sion, ut 
eedificéntur muri Jerúsalem. 


Tunc acceptábis sacrifícium 
justítie, oblatiónes et holo- 
césta; tunc impónent super 
altáre tuum vítulos. 


in silence. 


Prayer 


ook down, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, upon this 


ÉSPICE, Quaesumus, Dó- 
mine, super hanc famí- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY THURSDAY 


liam tuam, pro qua Dóminus 
noster Jesus Christus non du- 
bitavit mánibus tradit nocén- 
tium et crucis subire tormén- 
tum. 


463 


Thy household, for which Our 
Lord Jesus Christ. did not hesi- 
tate to be delivered into the 
hands of wicked men and to 
suffer the torment of the cross. 


The concluding words of the prayer—Who with Thee—are 
silently added by all. Before retiring, the clergy remove from each 
altar its coverings of fine Linen, and, all other ornaments, and 
see that all lights are extinguished. While doing this, they 
recite, with an antiphon, the Twenty-first Psalm, which i8 a 
prophecy of Our Lord’s passion, and in which mention ts made 


of His being stripped of His garments. 


Antiphon 


Divisérunt sibi vestiménta 
mea: et super vestem meam 
misérunt sortem. 


They parted my garments 
amongst them, and upon my 
vesture they cast lots. 


Psalm 21 


Deus, Deus meus, réspice in 
me: quare me dereliquisti? 
longe a salüte méa verba de- 
lictórum meórum. 

Deus meus, clamábo per 
diem, et non exáudies: et 
nocte, et non ad insipléntiam 
mihi. 

Tu autem in sancto hábi- 
tas, laus Israël. ` 

In te speravérunt patres 
nostri: speravérunt, et libe- 
rásti eos. 

Ad te clamavérunt, et salvi 
facti sunt: in te speravérunt, 
et non sunt confusi, 

Ego autem sum vermis, et 
non homo: oppróbrium hó- 
minum, et abjéctio plebis. 

Omnes vidéntes me, derisé- 
runt me: lócuti sunt lábiis, 
et movérunt caput. 


Bperávit in Dómino, erípiat 
eum: salvum faciat eum, 
quóniam vult eum. 


O God, my God, look upon 
Me, why hast Thou forsaken 
Me? Far from my salvation are 
the words of my sins. 

O my God, I shall cry by 
day, and Thou wilt not hear: 
and by night, and it shall not 
be reputed as folly in me. 

But Thou dwellest in the holy 
place: the praise of Israel. 

In Thee have our fathers 
hoped: they have hoped, and 
Thou hast delivered them. 

They eried to Thee, and They 
were saved: they trusted in 
Thee, and were not confounded. 

But I am & worm, and no 
man: the reproach of men, and 
ihe outcast of the people. 

All they that saw me have 
laughed me to scorn: they have 
Spoken with the lips, and 
wagged the head. 

He hoped in the Lord, let 
Him deliver Him: let Him save 
Him, seeing He delighted in 
Bim, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


464 


For Thou art He that hast 
drawn me out of the womb: my 
hope from the breasts of my 
mother; I was cast upon Thee 
from the womb. 

From my mothers womb 
Thou art my God: depart not 
from me. 

For tribulation is very near: 
for there is none to help me. 


Many calves have surrounded: 


me: fat bulls have besieged me. 


They have opened their 
mouths against me: as a Hon 
ravening and roaring. 

I am poured out like water: 
and all my bones are scattered. 


My heart is become like wax 
melting in the midst of my 
bowels. 

My strength is dried up like 
a potshord, and my tongue hath 
cleaven to my jaws: and Thou 
hast brought me down into the 
dust of death. 

For many dogs have encom- 
nassed me: the conneil of the 


They have dug my hands and 
feet: they have numbered all 
my bones. 

And they have looked and 
stared upon me: they parted 
my garments amongst them, 
and upon my vesture they cast 
lots. 

But Thou, O Lord, remove 
not Thy help to a distance from 
me: look towards my defence. 


Deliver, O God, my soul from 
the sword: my only one from 
the hand of the dog. 

Save me from the lion's 
mouth: and my lowness from 
the horns of the unicorns. 


HOLY THURSDAY 


Quóniam tu es, qui extraxi- 
sti me de ventre: spes mea ab 
ubéribus matris mez. In te 
projéctus sum ex ütero: 


De ventre matris mez Deus 
meus es tu: ne discésseris & 
me: ` 

Quóniam tribulátio próxi- 
ma est, quóniam non est qui 
ádjuvet. 

Circumdedérunt me, vítuli 
multi: tauri pingues obsedé- 
runt me. 

Aperuérunt super me os su- 
um, Sicut leo rápiens et rú- 
giens. 

Sicut aqua effüsus sum; et 
dispérsa sunt ómnia ossa 
mea. 

Factum est cor meum tam- 
quam cera liquéscens, in mé- 
dio ventris mei. 

Aruit tamquam testa virtus 
mea, et linqua mea adhesit 
faucibus meis: et in pülverem 
mortis deduxísti me. 


Quéniam circumdedérunt 


me canes mnlti: eaneilinm 


Fodérunt manus meas, et 
pedes meos: dinumeravérunt 
ómnia ossa mea. 

Ipsi vero consideravérunt, 
et inspexérunt me: divisérunt 
sibi vestiménta mea, et super 
vestem meam misérunt sor- 
tem. 

Tu autem, Dómine, ne alon- 
gáveris auxílium tuum a me; 
ad defensiónem meam cón- 
spice. 

Erue a frámea, Deus, áni- 
mam meam: et de manu canis 
ünicam meam. 

Salva me ex ore leónis: et a 
córnibus unicórnium humili- 
iótem meam. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY THURSDAY 


Narrábo nomen tuum fré- 
tribus meis: in médio ecclé- 
Siw laudábo te. 


Qui timétis Dóminum, lau-- 


dáte eum: univérsum semen 
Jacob glorificáte eum. 

` Timeat eum omne semen 
Israél, quóniam non sprevit, 
neque despéxit deprecatiónem 
páuperis. 

Nec avértit fáciem suam. a 
me: et cum clamárem ad eum, 
exaudívit me. 

Apud te laus mea in ecclé- 
sia magna: voce mea reddam 
in conspéctu timéntium eum. 


Edent páuperes, et satura- 
büntur: et laudábunt Dómi- 
num, qui requírunt eum: vi- 
vent corda eórum in seculum 
seculi. 

Reminiscéntur et conver- 
téntur ad Dóminum univérsi 
fines terre. 

Et adorábunt in conspéctu 
ejus univérse famílie gén- 
tium. 

Quóniam Dómini est reg- 
num; et ipse dominábitur 
géntlum. ` 

Manducavérunt, et m 
vérunt omnes pingues terre: 
in conspéctu ejus cadent óm- 
nes qui descéndunt in terram. 

Et ánima mea illi vivet: et 
semen meum sérviet ipsi. 


Annuntiábitur Dómino ge- 
nerátio ventüra: et annuntiá- 
bunt celi justítiam ejus, pó- 
pulo qui nascétur, quem fecit 
Dóminus. 


Divisérunt sibi vestiménta 
mea: et super vestem meam 
misérunt sortem. 


465 


I wil declare Thy name to 
my brethren: in the midst of 
the church will I praise Thee. 

Ye that fear the Lord praise 
Him: all ye the seed of Jacob, 
glorify Him. 

Let all the seed of Israel fear 
Him:. because He hath not 
slighted. nor despised the sup- 
plication of the poor man. 

Neither hath He turned away 
His face from me: and when I 
cried to Him He heard me. 

With Thee is my praise in the 
great church: I will pay my 
vows in the sight of them that 
fear Him. 

The poor shall eat and shall 
be filled: and they shall praise 
the Lord that seek Him: thetr 
hearts shall live forever and 
ever. 

All the ends of the earth shall 
remember, and shall be con- 
verted to the Lord. 

And all the kindreds of the 
Gentiles shall adore in His 
sight. 

For the kingdom is the 
Lord’s: and He shall have do- 
minion over the nations. © ` 

All the fat ones of the earth 
have eaten and have adored: 
all they that go down to the 
earth shall fall before Him. 

“And to Him my soul shall 
live: and my seed shall serve 
Him. 

There shall be declared to the 
Lord a generation to come: and 
the heavens shall show forth 
His justice to a people that 
shall be born, which the Lord 
hath made. 

Ant. They parted my gar- 
ments amongst them, and upon 
my vesture they cast lots. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY THURSDAY 


The Mandatum or Washing of feet 


When this ceremony is to take place the clergy meet either 
in the church or other appointed place where the persons 
whose feet are to be washed are awaiting them. The Church 
dignitary who is to officiate wears a purple cope over his alb 
and stole, but his deacon and subdeacon are in white. A 
cleric holds a processional cross and acolytes carry lights and 
incense. The passage of the Gospel that relates how our 
blessed Lord washed His disciples’ feet, and that was sung 
earlier at the high Mass, is then chanted, after which the 
officiating prelate removes his cope, and, putting on an apron, 
kneels and washes the feet of those who are waiting, wipes 
them, and then humbly kisses the tight foot of each person 
he has waited on. The deacon and subdeacon assist him when 
necessary, The choir in the meanwhile chants the following: 


466 


1 Antiphon. John 13, 34 


A new commandment I give 
unto you: That you love one 
another as I have loved you, 
saith the Lord. Ps. 118, 1. Bless- 
ed are the undefiled in the 
way: who walk in the law of 
the Lord. A new command- 
ment. 


Mandátum novum do vo- 
vobis, ut diligátis invicem, si- 
cut dilexi vos, dicit Dóminus. 
Ps. 118, 1. Beáti immaculáti 
in via: qui ámbulant in lege 
dómini Mandátum novum. 


The first verse only of the psalm is sung, after which the 


antiphon is repeated, A new commandment, etc. 


And in like 


manner are sung the antiphons and verses which follow: 


Antiphon. John 13, 14, 5,15 


When the Lord rose from 


basin and began to wash the 
feet of His disciples: this was 
the example He gave unto 
them. Ps. 47, 2. Great is the 
Lord and exceedingly to be 
praised in the city of our God 
in His holy mountain. When 
the Lord rose. 


Postquam surréxit Dóminus 


vim, et ccepit laváre pedes 
discipulórum  suórum: hoc 
exémplum relíquit eis, Ps. 47, 
2. Magnum Dóminus, et lau- 
dábilis nimis: in civitáte Dei 
nostri, in monte sancto ejus. 
Postquam surréxit. 


` Antiphon. John 13, 12, 13, 15 


The Lord Jesus after He had 
supped with His disciples 
washed their feet and said unto 
them: know ye what I have 
done unto you. I have given you 
an example that so you do also. 
Ps. 84, 2. Lord, Thou hast bless- 


Dóminus Jesus postquam 
cenávit cum discipulis suis, 
lavit pedes eórum, et ait illis: 
Scitis quid fécerim vobis ego 
Dóminus et Magíster? Exém- 
plum dedi vobis: ut et vos ita 
faciátis. Ps. 84, 2. Benedixísti 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY THURSDAY 


Dómine terram tuam: aver- 
tisti captivitátem Jacob. Dó- 
minus Jesus. 


Antiphon. 
Dómine, tu mihi lavas pe- 
des? Respóndit Jesus, et dixit 
el: si non lávero tibi pedes, 
non habébis partem mecum. 
X. Venit ergo ad Simónem 
Petrum, et dixit ei Petrus. Dó- 
mine, tu mihi lavas pedes? 
Respoéndit Jesus et dixit ei: 
si non lávero tibi pedes, non 
habébis partem mecum. X. 
Quod ego fácio, tu nescis mo- 
do: scies autem póstea. Dó- 
mine, tu mihi lavas. 


Antiphon. 
Si ego Dóminus et Magís- 
ter vester. lavi vobis pedes: 
quanto magis debétis alter al- 
térius laváre pedes? Ps. 48, 1. 
Audíte hec omnes gentes: 
áuribus percípite qui habita- 
tis orbem. Si ego. 


Antiphon. 


In hoc cognóscent ómnmnes, 
quia, discipuli mei estis, si-di- 
lecti6nem habuéritis ad ínvi- 
cem. Y. Dixit Jesus discípulis 
suis. In hoc. 


467 


ed Thy land, Thou hast. turned 
away the captivity of Jacob. 
The Lord Jesus. 


John 13, 6-8 


Lord, dost Thou wash my 
feet? Jesus answered and said 
to him: If I wash. not thy feet, 
ihou shalt have no part with 
Me. Y. He cometh therefore to 
Simon Peter: and Peter saith 
to Him: Lord, dost Thou wash 
my feet? Jesus answered and 
said to him: If I wash not thy 
feet thou shalt have no part 
with me. Y. What I do, Thou 
knowest not now; but Thou 
shalt know hereafter. Lord, 
dost Thou wash. 


John 13, 14 


If I, being your Lord and 
Master, have washed your feet: 
how much the more ought you 
to wash one another’s feet? Ps. 
48, 1. Hear these things, all ye 
nations; give ear, all ye inbabi- 
tants of the world. If I. 


John 13, 35 


By this shall all men know 
that ye:are My disciples, if you 
have love one for another. Y. 
Jesus said to His disciples. By 
this. 


Antiphon. 1 Cor. 13, 13 


Máneant. in vobis fides, 
Spes, cáritas, tria hxc: major 
autem horum est cáritas. V. 
Nunc autem manent fides, 
Spes, cáritas, tria hec: major 
autem horum est cáritas. Má- 
neant. i 


Ever may there remain in 
you, faith, hope, charity, these 
three things; but the greater 
of these is charity. V. And 
now there remain faith, hope, 
charity, these three things; 
but the greater of these is 
charity. Ever may. 


Antiphon 


Benedicta sit sancta Trini- 
tas. atque indivisa Unitas: 


Blessed be the holy Trinity 
and undivided Unity; we will 


http://ccwatershed.org 


468 HOLY THURSDAY 


give praise to Him, for unto us 
He hath shown His mercy. V. 
Let us bless the Father and the 
Son with the Holy Ghost. Ps. 
83, 2, 3. How lovely are Thy 
tabernacles, O Lord of hosts: 
my soul longetn and fainteth 
for the courts of the Lord. 
Blessed be. 


confitébimur ei, quia fecit no- 
bíscum misericórdiam suam. 
y. Benedicámus Patrem, et 
Fílium, cum Sancto Spiritu. 
Ps. 83, 2; 3. Quam dilécta tab- 
ernacula tua, Dómine virtü- 
tum! concupíscit, et déficit 
ánima mea in átria Dómini. 
Benedicta sit. 


Antiphon. 1 John 2, 3, 4 


Where are charity and love, 
God is there. V. The love of 
Christ hath gathered us to- 
gether. V. Let us exult and be 
joyful in Him. Y. Let us fear 
and love the living God. Y. And 
Jet us love one another with 
sincere hearts. 

Ant. Where are charity and 
love, God is there. Y. Being, 
therefore, assembled together. 
¥. Let us beware of being di- 
vided in mind. Y. Let mali- 
cious upbraidings cease, let 
wranglings cease. Y. And may 
Christ, our God, be in the midst 
ot us. 

Ant. Where are charity and 


with the blessed, too, may we 
see. Y. Thy face. in glory, O 
Christ, God. Y. Which is in- 
finitely noble joy. Y. Through 
endless ages of ages. Amen. 


Ubi cáritas et amor, Deus 
ibi est. Y. Congregávit nos in 
unum Christi amor. Y. Ex- 
sultémus, et in ipso jucundé- 
mur. Y. Timeámus et amémus 
Deum vivum. Y. Et ex corde 
diligámus nos sincéro. 


Ant. Ubi cáritas et amor, 
Deus ibi est. V. Simul ergo 
cum in unum congregámur. 
¥. Ne nos mente dividámur 
caveámus.. Y. Cessent jürgia 
maligna cessent lites. Y. Et 
in médio nostri sit Christus 
Deus. 


Ant. Ubi cáritas et amor, 


cum beatls viaeamnus. y . wiu- 
rianter vultum tuum, Chris- 
te Deus. Y. Gáudium quod 
est imménsum, atque pro- 
bum. Y. Secula per ínfinita 
seculérum. Amen. 


Having completed the Mandatum or Washing the dignitary 
who has officiated washes his hands and resumes his cope. 


He then begins: 


“Our Father.” 


And all say the Lord’s Prayer in Silence. 


y. And lead us not into 
temptation. 

W. But deliver us from evil. 

y. Thou hast given us Thy 
commandments, O Lord. 

BY. To be kept most faithfully. 

¥. Thou. didst wash the feet 
of Thy disciples, 


y. Et ne nos indücas in ten- 
tatiónem. 

BY. Sed libera nos a malo. 

f. Tu mandásti mandáta 
tua, Dómine. 

RY. Custodíri nimis. 

y. Tu lavásti pedes discipu- 


lórum tuórum. . 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GOOD FRIDAY 469 


BY. Opera mánuum tuárum 
ne despícias. : 

FJ. Dómine, exáudi oratió- 
nem meam. 
. FY. Et clamor meus ad te 
véniat. ` =, 

V. Dóminus vobíscum. 

BY. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


R. Despise not the works of 
Thy hands. 
Y. O Lord, hear my prayer. 


FY. And let my cry come unto 
Thee. i 

y. The Lord be with you. 

K. And with thy spirit. 


Let us pray ; : 


Adésto, Dómine, quesumus, 
Offício servitütis nostre: et 
quia tu discípulis tuis pedes 
laváre dignátus es, ne despí- 
cias ópera mánuum tuárum, 
que nobis retinénda mandás- 
ti: ut, sicut hic nobis, et a 
nobis exterióra abluüntur in- 
quinaménta; sic à te ómnium 
nostrum, interióra lavéntur 
peccáta. Quod ipse prestáre 
dignéris, qui vivis et regnas 
Deus: per ómnia secula sæ- 
culórum. RY. Amen. 


Be present, O Lord, we be- 
seech Thee, at the office of our 
Service, ‘and, because Thou 
didst deign to wash the feet 
of Thy disciples, despise not 
the work Thine own hands per- 
formed, and which ‘Thou didst 
command us to perpetuate, so 
that, as external defilements 
are here washed away for us 
and by us, the inward sins of 
us all may be washed by 'Thee. 
Which do Thou Thyself 
vouchsafe to do for us, Who 
livest and reignest, God for- 
ever and ever. RY. Amen. 


Good Friday (Black) 
STATION AT HOLY CROSS IN JERUSALEM 
On this day the Church commemorates the Passion of 


Christ, so that it is the saddest and, most solemn day in Holy 
Week.. The officiating clergy enter the sanctuary vested in 
black and prostrate themselves before the altar, which is still 
stripped. The candles are not lighted, the organ is not played, 
nor are.the bells rung. The most striking and singular feature 
of the Good Friday liturgy is the omission of holy Mass. In its 
place is the Mass of the Presanctified in which the priest re- 
ceives in holy communion a host previously consecrated. The 
Blessed .Sacrament is borne from the repository or chapel 
where it was placed the previous day, while the choir sings the 
hymn Vexilla Regis (“The Banners of the King"), page 490. 
The priest places the host on the altar and the candles are 
lighted, The Blessed Sacrament is elevated and adored, while 
a wooden clapper is sounded. All this and what follows, ap- 
pears here in the Missal. Good Friday is not a holy-day of 
obligation; the Church forbids the giving of holy communion 
to the faithful, except as Viaticum to the dying. 

The clergy and people assemble at en appointer time. The 
officiating priest, with his deacon and subdeacon, enter the 
sanctuary and prostrate themselves before the altar. The 
acolytes spread a linen cloth on the altar and put the Missal 
in place. The priest goes to the Epistle corner, amd, the first 
Lesson is chanted. t 

In the absence of sacred ministers all the prayers are recited 

or sung, if the custom prevails), at the Epistle corner. The 
essons and the Passion are read at the same place. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


470 


Copyrighi, by Denziger Brothers 


Lesson. 


'HUS saith the Lord, In their 
affliction they will rise 

early to Me: Come, and let us 
return to the Lord; for He hath 
taken us, and He will heal us: 
He will strike, and He will cure 
us. He will revive us after two 
days; on the third day He will 
raise us up, and we shall live in 
His sight. We shall know, and 
we shall follow on, that we may 
know the Lord. His going forth 
is prepared as the morning 
light, and He will come to us 


to the earth. Wnat snaiu 1 ao 
to thee, O Ephraim? what shall 
I do to thee, O Juda? Your 
mercy is as a morning cloud, 
and as the dew that goeth 
away in the morning. For this 
reason have I hewed them by 
the prophets. I have slain them 
by the words of My mouth: and 
Thy judgments shall go forth 
as the light. For I desired mer- 
cy and not sacrifice; and the 
knowledge of God more than 
holocausts. 


GOOD FRIDAY 


Osee 6, 1-6 


EC dicit Dóminus: In 

tribulatióne sua mane 
consürgent ad me: Veníte, et 
revertamur ad Dóminum: 
quia ipse cepit, et sanábit nos: 
percütiet, et curábit nos. Vi- 
vificábit nos post duos dies: 
in die tértia suscitábit nos, et 
vivémus in conspéctu ejus. 
sciémus sequemurque, ut cog- 
noscámus Dóminum: quasi 
dilüculum preparatus est eg- 
réssus ejus, et véniet quasi 
imber nobis temporáneus, et 


iU) rzpluainr WU saeiass 
tibi, Juda? Misericórdia ves- 
tra quasi nubes matutina: et 
quasi ros mane pertransiens. 
Propter hoc dolávi in pro- 
phétis, occidi eos in verbis 
oris mei: et judícia tua quasi 
lux egrediéntur. Quia mise- 
ricórdiam vólui, et non sacri- 
ficium, et sciéntiam Dei plus 
quam holocáusta. 


The choir sings the Tract: 


Tract. 


O Lord, I have heard Thy 
hearing, and was afraid; I con- 


Hab. 3 


Dómine, audívi audítum 
tuum, et timui: considerávi 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GOOD FRIDAY 


ópera tua, et expávi. V. In 
médio duórum animálium in- 
notescéris: dum  appropin- 
quáverint anni, cognoscéris: 
dum advénerit tempus, osten- 
déris. Y. In eo, dum contur- 
bata füerit ánima mea: in ira, 
misericórdie. memor eris. Y. 
Deus a Líbano véniet, et Sanc- 
tus de monte umbróso et con- 
dénso. Y. Opéruit celos ma- 
jéstas ejus: et laudis ejus 
plena est terra. i 


471 


sidered Thy works, and trem- 
bled. Y. In the midst of two 
animals Thou shalt be made 
known; when the years shall 
draw nigh, Thou shalt be 
known; when the time. shall 
come, Thou shalt be shown. J. 
In the time when my soul shall 
be troubled: in anger Thou 
shalt be mindful of mercy. y. 
God shall come from Libanus, 
and the holy one from the 
Shady | and  thick]ly-covered 
mountain. Y. His majesty hath 
covered the heavens; and the 
earth is full of His praise. 


Omitting the usual salutation, Dominus vobiscum, the priest 
chants the Prayer, which is that of yesterday’s Mass. : 


Let us pray 
Y. Flectámus génua. Y. Let us kneel. 
K. Leváte. R. Arise. 


Deus, a quo et Judas reátus 
sui poenam, et confessiónis 
sue latro premium sumpsit, 
concéde nobis tus propitia- 
tiónis efféctum: ut, sicut in 
passióne sua Jesus Christus 
Dóminus noster divérsa utris- 
que: intulit- stipéndia. meritó- 
rum; ita nobis, ablato vetusta- 
tis erróre, resurrectiónis. sue 
grátiam largiátur: Qui tecum. 


O God, from Whom Judas 
received the punishment of his 
crime and the thief the reward 
of his confession, grant us the 
effect of Thy clemency, that, as 
Jesus Christ, our Lord, in His 
passion dealt according to their 
deserts with the one and the 
other, so, putting away from us 
the error of the past, He may 
bestow upon us the grace of 
His resurrection. Who with 
Thee. 


The subdeacon now chants the second Lesson in the manner 


of an Epistle. 


Lesson. 


N DIÉBUS ills: Dixit Dó- 

minus ad Méysen, et 
Aaron in terra ZEgypti: Men- 
sis iste, vobis princípium mén- 
sium: primus erit in ménsi- 
bus anni. Loquimini ad uni- 
vérsum cotum filiórum Israél, 


Ex. 12, 1-11 


N THOSE days, the Lord seid 

to Moses and Aaron in the 
land of Egypt, This month shall 
be to you the beginning of 
months; it shall be the first 
in the months of the year. 
Speak ye to the whole assembly 


http://ccwatershed.org 


472 


of the children of Israel, and 
say to them, On the tenth day 
of this month let every. man 
take a lamb by their families 
and houses. But if the number 
be less than may suffice to eat 
the lamb, he shall take unto 
him his neighbor that joineth 
to his house, according to the 
number of souls which may be 
enough to eat the lamb. And 
it shall be a lamb without blem- 
ish, a male of one year; ac- 
cording to which rite also you 
shall take a kid. And you shall 
keep it until the fourteenth 
day of this month; and the 
whole multitude of the children 
of Israel shall sacrifice it in the 
evening. And they shail take 
of the blood thereof, and put it 
upon both the side-posts and 
on the upper door-posts of the 
houses, wherein they shall eat 
it. And they shall eat the flesh 
that night roasted at the fire, 
and unleavened bread, with 
wild lettuce. You shall not eat 
thereof any thing raw, nor 
boiled in water, but only roasted 


head with the feet and en- 
trails thereof. Neither shall 
there remain any ‘thing of it 
until the morning. If there be 
any thing left, you shall burn 
it with fire. And thus you shall 
eat it: you shall gird your reins, 
and you shall have shoes on 
your feet, holding staves in 


GOOD FRIDAY 


et dicite eis: Décima die men- 
sis hujus tollat unusquisque 
agnum per familias, et domos 
suas. Sin autem minor est nü- 
merus, ut sufficere possit ad 
vescéndum agnum, assümet 
vicínum suum, qui junctus est 
dómui sue, juxta númerum 
animárum que sufficere pos- 
sunt ad esum agni. Erit autem 
agnus absque mácula, máscu- 
lus, annículus: juxta quem 
ritum tollétis et hedum. Et 
servabitis eum usque ad quar- 
tam décimam diem mensis 
hujus: immolabítque eum 
univérsa multitüdo filiórum 
Israël ad vésperam. Et sument 
de sánguine ejus, ac ponent 
super utrümque postem, et in 
superlimináribus domérum, 
in quibus cómedent illum. Et 
edent carnes nocte illa assas 
igni, et ázymos panes cum 
lactücis ‘agréstibus. Non co- 
medétis ex eo crudum quid, 
nec coctum aqua, sed tantum 
assum igni: caput cum pédi- 
bus ejus, et intestinis vorábi- 
tis. Nec remanébit quidquam 


residuum fuerit, igne combu- 
rétis. Sic autem comedétis il- 
lum: Renes vestros accirigétis, 
et calceaménta habébitis in 
pédibus, tenéntes báculos in 
mánibus, et comedétis festi- 
nánter: est enim Phase (id 
est tránsitus) Dómini. 


your hands, and you shall eat in haste: for it is the Phase 
(that is the passage) of the Lord. 


Another Tract follows: 


Tract. Ps. 139, 2-10, 14 


Deliver me, O Lord, from the 
evil man; rescue me from the 
unjust man. Y. Who haye de- 


Eripe me, Dómine, ab hó- 
mine malo: a viro iníquo lí- 
bera me. Y. Qui cogitavérunt 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GOOD FRIDAY 473 


Malitias in corde: tota die 
constituébant praelia. Y.. Acué- 
runt linguas suas sicut ser- 
Péntis:. venénum áspidum sub 
lábiis eórum. Y. Custódi me, 
Dómine, de manu peccatéris: 
et ab homínibus iniquis li- 
bera me. Y. Qui cogitavérunt 
supplantáre gressus meos: 
&bscondérunt supérbi láque- 
um mihi, pédibus meis. Y. Et 
funes extendérunt. in láque- 
um juxta iter scándalum 
posuérunt mihi. J. Dizi 
Dómino: Deus meus es tu: 
exáudi, Dómine, vocem ora- 
tiónis mez. Y. Dómine, Dó- 
mine, virtus salitis mez, 
obümbra caput meum in die 
belli. Y. Ne tradas me a de- 
sidério meo peccatóri: cogita- 
vérunt advérsus me: ne dere- 
línquas me, ne umquam exal- 
téntur. Y. Caput circüitus eó- 
rum: labor labiórum ipsórum 
opériet eos. Y. Verumtamen 
justi confitebüntur nómini 
tuo et habitábunt recti cum 
vultu tuo. . 


n 


vised wickedness in their heart; 
all the day long they designed 
battles. Y. They have sharpened 
their tongues like a serpent; the 
venom of asps is under their 
lips. Y. Keep me, O Lord, from 
the hand of the sinner; and 
from unjust men deliver me. V. 
Who have proposed to supplant 
my steps; the proud have hid 
& net for me. Y. And they have 
stretched out cords for a snare 
for my feet; they have laid for 
me a stumbling-block by the 
wayside. Y. I said to the Lord, 
Thou art my God; hear, O 
Lord, the voice of my supplica- 
tion. ¥Y..O Lord, Lord, the 
strength of my salvation, over- 
shadow my head in the day of 
battle. V. Give me not up, from 
my desire to the wicked: they 
have plotted against me: do not 
Thou forsake me, lest at any 
time they should triumph. y. 
The head of them compassing 
me about: the labor of their 
lips shall overwhelm them. y. 
But tbe just shall give glory 
to Thy name; and the upright 
shall dwell with Thy coun- 


: tenance. 


Then the Passion is sung as on Palm Sunday. 


The Passion 
John 18, 1-40; 19, 1-42 


Pássio Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi secundum Joánnem, 


I ILLO témpore: Egréssus 
est Jesus cum discípulis 
suis trans torréntem Cedron, 
ubi erat hortus, in quem in- 
troivit ipse, et discipuli ejus. 
Sciébat autem et Judas, qui 
tradébat eum, locum: quia 


The Passion of Our Lord 
Jesus Christ according to St. 
John. 

T THAT time, Jesus went 
forth with His disci- 

ples. over the brook Cedron, 
where there was a garden, into 
which He entered with His dis- 
ciples. And Judas also, who be- 
trayed Him, knew the place; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


474 


because Jesus had often re- 
sorted thither together with His 
disciples. Judas therefore, hav- 
ing received a band of soldiers, 
and servants from the chief 
priests and the pharisees, com- 
eth thither with lanterns, and 
torches, and weapons. Jesus 
therefore knowing all things 
that should come upon Him, 
went forth, and said to them 
‘#Whom seek ye? C. They an- 
swered Him, S. Jesus of Naz- 
‘areth. C. Jesus saith to them, H4 
I am He. C. And Judas also, 
who betrayed Him, stood with 
them. As soon therefore as He 
had said to them, I am He, they 
went backward, and fell to the 
ground. Again therefore He 
asked them, "* Whom seek ye? 
C. And they said, S. Jesus of 
Nazareth. C. Jesus answered, Ht 
I have told you that I am He: 
{f therefore you seek Me, let 
these go their way. C. That the 
word might be fulfilled which 
He said, Of them whom Thou 
hast given Me, I have not lost 
anv one. Then Simon Peter 


struck the servant of the high 
priest, and cut off his right ear. 
And the name of the servant 
was Malchus. Jesus therefore 
said to Peter, "PH Put up thy 
sword into the scabbard. The 
chalice which My Father hath 
given Me, shall I not drink it? 
C. Then the band, and the tri- 
bune, and the servants of the 
Jews, took Jesus, and bound 
Him; and led Him away to An- 
nas first, for he was father-in- 
law io Caiphas, who was the 
high priest of that year. Now 
Caiphas was he who had given 


GOOD FRIDAY 


frequénter Jesus convénerat 
illuc cum discípulis suis. Ju- 
das ergo cum accepísset co- 
hórtem, et a pontificibus et 
phariszis minístros, venit il- 
luc cum latérnis, et fácibus, et 
armis. Jesus ítaque sciens 
ómnia, quz ventüra erant su- 
per eum, procéssit, et dixit eis: 
Quem quaeritis? C. Re- 
spondérunt ei: S. Jesum Naz- 
arénum. C. Dixit eis Jesus: 
KK Ego sum. C. Stabat autem 
et Judas, qui tradébat eum, 
cum ipsis. Ut ergo dixit els: 
Ego sum: abiérunt retrór- 
sum, et cecidérunt in terram. 
Iterum ergo interrogávit eos: 
"B Quem quaeritis? C. Illi au- 
tem dixérunt: S. Jesum Naz- 
arénum. C. Respóndit Jesus: 
4H Dixi vobis, quia ego sum: 
si ergo me quaritis, sinite hos 
abfre. C. Ut implerétur sermo, 
quem dixit: Quia quos dedísti 
mihi, non pérdidi ex eis quem- 
quam. Simon ergo Petrus 
habens gládium edüxit eum: 
et percüssit pontifices servum: 
et abscídit aurículam ejus 


servo Malchus. Dixit ergo Je- 
sus Petro: "HR Mitte gládium 
tuum in vagínam. Cálicem, 
quem dedit mihi Pater, non 
bibam illum? C. Cohors ergo, 
et tribünus, et ministri Jude- 
érum comprehendérunt Je- 
sum, et ligavérunt eum: et ad- 
duxérunt eum ad Annam pri- 
mum, erat enim socer Cái- 
phz, qui erat póntifex anni 
illus. Erat autem Cáiphas, 
qui consílium déderat Judzis: 
Quia expedit unum hóminem 
more pro pópulo. 


the counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man 


should die for the people. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GOOD FRIDAY 


475 


Peter Denies Jesus 


Sequebátur autem Jesum 
Simon Petrus, et álius discí- 
pulus. Discipulus autem ille 
erat notus pontifici, et introí- 
vit cum Jesu in átrium pon- 
tificis, Petrus autem sta- 
bat ad óstium foris. Exívit 
ergo discípulus álius, qui erat 
notus pontífici, et dixit ostiá- 
rie: et introdüxit Petrum. 
Dixit ergo Petro ancílla ostiá- 
ria: S. Numquid et tu ex disci- 
pulis es hóminis istífus? C. 
Dixit ille: S. Non sum. C. 
Stabant autem servi, et min- 
Ístri ad prunas, quia frigus 
erat, et calefaciébant se: erat 
autem cum eis et Petrus 
stans, et calefaciens se. Pén- 
tifex ergo interrogávit Je- 
sum de discípulis suis, et de 
doctrina ejus. Respóndit ei 
Jesus: H* Ego autem locütus 
sum mundo, ego semper dócui 
in synagóga, et in templo 
qo omnes Judei convéniunt: 
et in occülto locitus sum 
nihil: Quid me intérrogas? 
intérroga eos, qui audiérunt 
quid loctitus sim ipsis: ecce 
hi seiunt que dixerim ego. 
C. Hec autem cum digis- 
set, unus  assístens mini- 
Strórum dedit álapam Jesu, 
dicens: S. Sic respóndes pon- 
tífici? C. Respóndit ei Jesus: 
*& Si male locütus sum, testi- 
mónium pérhibe de malo: si 
autem bene, quid me caedis? 
C. Et misit eum Annas ligá- 
tum ad Cáipham pontíficem. 
Erat autem Simon Petrus 
stans, et calefáciens se. Dixé- 
runt ergo ei: S, Numquid et tu 
ex discípulis ejus es? C. Negá- 
vit ille, et dixit: S. Non sum. 
C. Dicit ei unus ex servis pon- 
tificis, cognátus ejus, cujus 


And Simon Peter followed Je- 
sus, and so did another dis- 
ciple; and that disciple was 
known to the high priest, and 
went in with Jesus into the 
court of the high priest. But Pe- 
ter stood at the door without. 
The other disciple therefore, 
who was known to the high 
priest, went out and spoke to 
the portress, and brought in 
Peter. The maid therefore that 
was portress, saith to Peter. S. 
Art not thou also one of this 
man’s disciples? C. He saith. S. 
I am not. C. Now the servants 
and ministers stood at a fire of 
coals, because it was cold, and 
warmed themselves; and with 
them was Peter also standing, 
and warming himself, The high 
priest therefore asked Jesus of 
His disciples, and of His doc- 
trine. Jesus answered him, mH I 
have spoken openly to the 
world; I have always taugbt in 
the synagogue, and in the tem- 
ple, whither all the Jews re- 
Sort; and in secret I have 
Spoken nothing. Why askest 
thou Me? ask them who have 
heard what I have spoken unto 
them: behold they know what 
things I have sald. C. And when 
He had said these things, one 
of the servants standing by 
gave Jesus a blow, saying, S. 
Answerest Thou the high priest 
so? C. Jesus answered him, 9" 
If I have spoken evil, give tes- 
timony of the evil; but if well, 
why strikest Thou Me? And 
Annas sent Him bound to Cai- 
phas, the high priest. And Si- 
mon Peter was standing and 
warming himself. They said 
therefore to him, S. Art not 
thou also one of His disciples? 


http://ccwatershed.org 


176 


C. He denied it and said, S. Tam 
not. C, One of the servants of 
the high priest (a kinsman to 
him whose ear Peter cut off) 
saith to him, S. Did not I see 
thee in the garden with Him? 
C. Again therefore Peter de- 
nied; and immediately the cock 
crew. Then they led Jesus from 
Caiphas to the governor’s hall. 
And it was morning: and they 
went not into the hall, that 
they might not be defiled, but 
that they might eat the pasch. 
Pilate therefore went out to 
them, and said, S. What accu- 
sation bring you against this 
man? C. They answered, and 
said to him, S. If He were not à 
malefactor, we would not have 
delivered Him up to thee. C. 
Pilate therefore said to them, 
S. Take him you, and judge 
Him according to your law. C. 
The Jews therefore said to him, 
S. It is not lawful for us to put 
any man to death. C. That the 
word of Jesus might be ful- 
filled which He said, signify- 
ing what death He should die. 
c^ therefore went into the 
iiia ee, 

and said to him, S. Art ‘Lnou 
: the king of the Jews? C. Jesus 
answered,  Sayest thou this 
thing of thyself, or have others 
told it thee of Me? C. Pilate an- 
swered, S. Am I a Jew? Thy 
own nation and the chief 
priests have delivered Thee up 
to me; what hast Thou done? 
C. Jesus answered FK My king- 
dom is not of this world. If My 
kingdom were of this world, My 
servants would certainly strive 
that I should not be delivered 
to the Jews; but now My king- 
dom is not from hence. C. Pi- 
late therefore said to Him, Art 


GOOD FRIDAY 


abscidit Petrus aurículam: S. 
Nonne ego te vidi in horto 
cum illo? C. Iterum ergo ne- 
gávit Petrus: et statim gallus 
cantávit. Addücunt ergo Je- 
sum a Caípba in pretórium. 
Erat autem mane: et ipsi non 
introlérunt in pretérium, ut 
non contaminaréntur, sed ut 
manducárent pascha. Exívit 
ergo Pilátus ad eos foras, et 
dixit: S. Quam accusatiónem 
affértis  advérsus . hóminem 
hunc? C. Respondérunt, et 
dixérunt el: S. Si non esset 
hic malefáctor, non tibi tra- 
didissémus eum. C. Dixit ergo 
eis Pilátus: S. Accípite eum 
vos, et secündum legem ves- 
tram judicáte eum. C. dixé- 
runt ergo ei Judei: S. Nobis 
non licet interfícere quem- 
quam. C. Ut sermo Jesu im- 
plerétur, quem dixit, signífi- 
cans qua morte esset mori- 
türus. Introívit ergo fterum in 
pretérium Pilatus, et vocávit 
Jesum, et dixit ei: S. Tu es 
Rex Judeórum? C. Respón- 
dit Jesus: 4 A temetípso hoc 
dicis, an álii dixérunt tibi de 
^^ ^ Decnándit Pilátus: S. 
ANU wo ~ 
Gens tua, et pontífices tradi- 
dérunt te mihi: quid fecisti? 
C. Respóndit Jesus: 1 Reg- 
num meum nonu est de hoc 
mundo. Si ex hoc mundo esset 
regnum meum, minístri mei 
Gtique decertárent ut non 
tráderer Judeis: nunc autem 
regnum meum non est hine. 
C. Dixit itaque ei Pilatus: S. 
Ergo Rex es tu? C. Respóndit 
Jesus: Tu dicis, quia Rex 
sum ego. Ego in hoc natus 
sum, et ad hoc veni in mun- 
dum, ut testimónium perhí- 
beam veritáti: omnis, qui est 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GOOD FRIDAY 


ex  veritáte, -audit vocem 
meam. C. Dicit ei Pilátus: S. 
Quid est véritas? 


alt 


thou a. king then? C. Jesus an- 
swered, * Thou sayest, that I 
am a king. For this was I born, 
and for this came I into the 


world; that I should give testimony to the truth. Every one 
that:is of the truth, heareth My voice. C. Pilate saith. to Him, 


S. What is truth? 


Pilate Endeavors to Save Jesus 


C. E cum noc dixisset, ite- 
rum, exivit ad Judzos, et dicit 
eis: S. Ego nullam invénio in 
eo causam. Est autem consue- 
tüdo vobis ut unum dimíttam 
vobis in Pascha: vultis ergo 
dimíttam vobis regem Judæó- 
rum? C. Clamavérunt ergo 
rursum omnes, dicéntes: S. 
Non hunc, sed Barábbam. 
C. Erat autem Barábbas la- 
tro. Tunc ergo apprehén- 
dit Pilátus Jesum, et flagel- 
lávit. Et milites plecténtes 
corónam de spinis, impo- 
suérunt cápiti ejus: et veste 
purpürea circumdedérunt 
eum. Et veniébant ad eum, et 
dicébant: S. Ave, Rex Judæó- 
rum. C. Et dabunt ei álapas. 
Exívit: ergo iterum Pilátus 
foras, et dicit eis: S. Ecce ad- 
düco vobis eum foras, ut cog- 
noscátis quia nullam invénio 
in eo causam. C. (Exívit ergo 
Jesus portans corónam spine- 
am, et purpüreum vestimén- 
tum). Et dicit eis: S. Ecce 
homo. C. Cum ergo vidíssent 
eum pontífices et ministri, 
clamábant, dicéntes: S, Cru- 
cifige, crucifige eum. C. 
Dicit eis Pilátus: S. Accí- 
pite eum vos, et crucifi- 
gite: ego enim non invénio 
in. eo causam. C. Respondé- 
runt ei Judei. S. Nos legem 
habémus, et secundum legem 
debet mori, quia Fílium Dei se 
fecit, C. Cum ergo audisset 


C. And when he had said 
this, he went out again to the 
Jews, and saith to them, S. J 
find no cause in Him. But you 
have & custom that X should 
release one unto you at the 
pasch: will you therefore that 
I release unto you the king of 
the Jews? C. Then cried they 
all again, saying, S. Not this 
man, but Barabbas. C. Now 
Barabbas was a robber. Then 
therefore Pilate took Jesus and 
scourged him. And ‘the soldiers 
platting a crown of thorns, put 
it upon His head; and they put 
on Him a purple garment. And 
they.came to Him, and said, S. 
Hail, king of the Jews: C. and 
they. gave Him blows. Pilate 
therefore went forth again,:and 
said to them, S. Behold I bring 
Him forth unto.you,.-that.you 
may know that I find no cause 
in Him. C. (Jesus therefore 
came forth, bearing the crown 
of thorns and the purple gar- 
ment). And he saith to them, S. 
Behold the man. C. When the 
chief priests therefore and the 
servants had seen Him, they 
cried out, saying, S. Crucify 
Him, crucify Him. C. Pilate 
saith to them, S. Take Him you, 
and crucify Him; for I find no 
cause in Him. C. The Jews an- 
swered Him, S. We have a law, 
and according to the.law He 
ought to die, because He made 
Himself the Son of God. C. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


478 


When Pilate therefore had 
heard this saying, he feared the 
more. And he entered into the 
hall again, and he said to Jesus, 
S. Whence art Thou? C, But 
Jesus gave him no answer, Pi- 
late therefore saith to him, S. 
Speakest Thou not to me? 
knowest Thou not that I have 
power to crucify Thee, and I 
have power to release Thee? C. 
Jesus answered, ‘4 Thou 
shouldst not have any power 
against Me, unless it were given 
thee from above. Therefore he 
that hath delivered Me to thee 
hath the greater sin. C. And 
from thenceforth Pilate sought 
to release Him. But the Jews 
cried out, saying, S. If thou re- 
lease this man, thou art not 
Cesar’s friend. For whosoever 
maketh himself a king, speak- 
eth against Cesar. C. Now when 
Pilate had heard these. words, 
he brought Jesus forth, and sat 
down in the judgment-seat, in 
the place that is called Litho- 
strotos; and in Hebrew, Gab- 
batha. And it was the parasceve 
24 thn --eeh  ohant the sixth 


ALUMA o QUAM dw iubes vw omm u m., 


S. Behold your king. C. But 
they cried out, S. Away with 
Him, away with Him, crucify 
Him. C. Pilate saith to them, S. 
Shall I crucify your king? C. 


The chief priests answered, S. 


GOOD FRIDAY 


Pilatus hunc sermónem, ma- 
gis timuit. Et ingréssus est 
pretérium fterum: et dixit ad 
Jesum: S. Unde es tu? C. Je- 
sus autem respónsum non de- 
dit ei. Dicit ergo ei Pilatus: S. 
Mihi non Jóqueris? nescis quia 
potestátem habeo crucifígere 
te, et potestátem hábeo dimit- 
tere te? C. Respóndit Jesus: 
44 Non habéres potestátem 
advérsum me ullam nisi tibi 
datum esset désuper, Proptér- 
ea qui me trádidit tibi, majus 
peccátum habet. C. Et exínde 
querébat Pilátus dimittere 
eum. Judai autem clamábunt, 
dicéntes: S. Si hunc dimíttis, 
non es amícus Cæsáris. Omnis 
enim, qui se regem facit, con- 
tradicit Cesari. C. Pilatus au- 
tem cum audísset hos ser- 
mónes, addüxit foras Jesum: 
et sedit pro tribunáli, in loco, 
qui dicitur Lithóstrotos, he- 
bráice autem Gábbatha. Erat 
autem  Parascéve Pasche, 
hora quasi sexta, et, dicit Ju- 
dais: S. Ecce rex vester. C. 
Ili autem clamábant: S. 
Tolle. tolle. crucifíge eum. C. 


vestrum crucifígam? C. Re- 
spondérunt pontífices: S. Non 
habémus regem, nisi Cesa- 
rem. 


We have no king but Cesar. 


Pilate Consents to the Crucifixion 


C. Then therefore he deliver- 
ed Him to them to be crucified. 
And they took Jesus, and led 
Him forth; and bearing His 
own cross, He went forth to 
that place which is called Cal- 
vary, but in Hebrew, Golgotha: 
where they crucified Him, and 
with Him two others, one on 


C. Tune ergo trádidit eis 
illum ut crucifigerétur. Sus- 
cepérunt autem Jesum, et 
eduxérunt. Et bájulans sibi 
crucem exívit in eum, qui dí- 
citur Calvarie, locum, hebrá- 
ice autem Golgotha: ubi cru- 
cifixérunt eum, et cum eo 
álios duos, hinc et hine, mé- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


) 


GOOD 


dium autem Jesum. Scripsit 
autem et títulum Pilátus: et 
posuit super crucem. Erat au- 
tem scriptum: Jesus Nazaré- 
nus, Rex Judzeórum. Hunc 
ergo titulum multi Judzórum 
legérunt, quia prope civitá- 
tem erat locus, ubi crucifíxus 
est Jesus. Et erat scriptum he- 
bráice, grace, et latine, Dicé- 
bant ergo Piláto pontífices 
Judeórum: S. Noli scribere, 
Rex Judzeórum, sed quia ipse 
dixit: Rex sum Judæórum. C. 
Respóndit Pilatus: S. Quod 
Scripsi, scripsi. C. Mílites ergo 
cum crucifixíssent eum, ac- 
cepérunt vestiménta ejus (et 
fecérunt quátuor partes: uni- 
cüíque míliti partem), et tü- 
nicam. Erat autem tünica in- 
consütilis, désuper contéxta 
per totum. Dixérunt ergo ad 
ínvicem: S. Non scindámus 
eam, sed sortiámur de illa cu- 
jus sit. C. Ut Scriptüra imple- 
rétur, dicens: Partíti sunt 
vestiménta mea sibi: et in 
vestem meam misérunt sor- 
tem. Et mílites quidem hxc 
fecérunt. Stabant autem jux- 
ta crucem Jesu mater ejus, et 
soror matris ejus, María Clé- 
ophe, et María Magdaléne. 
Cum vidísset ergo Jesus ma- 
irem, et discípulum stantem, 
quem diligébat, dicit matri 
sue:  Mulier, ecce fílius 
tuus, C. Deínde dicit discipu- 
lo: & Ecce mater tua. C. Et 
ex illa hora accépit eam discí- 
p lis in sua. Póstea sciens Je- 
sus quia ómnia consummáta 
sunt, ut  consummarétur 
Scriptara, dixit: Œ Sitio. C. 
Vas ergo erat pósitum acéto 
plenum. Illi autem spóngiam 
plenam acéto, hyssópo cir- 
cumponéntes, obtulérunt ori 


FRIDAY 479 


each side, and Jesus in the 
midst. And Pilate wrote a title 
also, and he put it upon the 
cross: and the -writing was, 
Jesus of Nazareth, the King of 
the Jews. This title therefore 
many of the Jews did read, be- 
cause the place where Jesus was 
crucified was nigh to the city: 
and it was written in Hebrew, 
in Greek, and in Latin. Then 
the chief priests of the Jews 
said to Pilate, S. Write not the 
King of the Jews, but that He 
said, I am the King of the Jews. 
C. Pilate answered, S. What I 
have written I have written. 
C. Then the soldiers, when they 
had crucified Him, took His 
garments (and they made four 
parts, to every soldier a part), 
and also His coat. Now the 
coat was without seam, woven 
from the top throughout. They 
said then one to another, S. 
Let us not cut it, but let us cast 
lots for it, whose it shall be; 
C. that the Scripture might be 
fulfilled which saith, They have 
parted My garments among 
them, and upon My vesture 
they have cast lots. And the 
soldiers indeed did these things. 
Now there stood by the cross of 
Jesus, His mother, and His 
mother’s sister Mary of Cleo- 
phas, and Mary Magdalene. 
When Jesus therefore saw His 
mother, and the disciple stand- 
ing whom He loved, He saith to 
His mother, X Woman, behold 
thy son. C. After that, He saith 
to the disciple, & Behold thy 
mother. C, And from that hour 
the disciple took her to his own. 
Afterwards, Jesus knowing 
that all things were now ac- 
complished, that the Scripture 
might be fulfilled, said = I 


http://ccwatershed.org 


480 GOOD FRIDAY 

thirst. C. Now there was a ves- ejus. Cum ergo accepísset Je- 
sel set there full of vinegar: sus acétum, dixit: 5 Con- 
and they put 2 sponge full of summátum est. C. Et incli- 
vinegar about hyssop, and put náto cápite trádidit spíritum. 
it to His mouth. When Jesus 

therefore had taken the vinegar, He said 5X It is consummated. 


C. And bowing His head He gave up the ghost. 


Here all kneel, and pause a little while. - 


When the Jews (because it 
was ihe Parasceve), that the 
bodies might not remain upon 
the cross on the sabbath-day 
(for that was a great sabbath- 
Gay), besought Pilate that their 
legs might be broken, and that 
they might be taken away. The 
soldiers therefore came; and 
they broke the legs of the first, 
and of the other that was cru- 
cified with him. But after they 
were come to Jesus, when they 
saw that He was already dead, 
they did not break His legs. But 
one of the soldiers opened His 
side with & spear, and immedi- 
ately there came out. blood and 
water. And he that saw it hath 
given testimony, and his tes- 
timony is true: and he know- 


also may believe. For these 
things were done that the 
Scripture might be fulfilled, 
You shall not break a bone of 
Him. And again another Scrip- 


Judei ergo (quóniam Para- 
scéve erat), ut non remané- 
rent in cruce córpora sábba- 
to, (erat enim magnus dies 
ile sábbati), rogavérunt Pi- 
látum, ut frangeréntur eó- 
rum crura, et tolleréntur. Ve- 
nérunt ergo mílites: et primi 
quidem fregérunt crura, et 
altérius, qui crucifíxus est 
cum eo. Ad Jesum autem cum 
veníssent, ut vidérunt eum 
jam mórtuum, non fregérunt 
ejus crura sed unus mílitum 
láncea latus ejus apéruit, et 
contínuo exívit sanguis, et 
aqua. Et qui vidit, testimóni- 
um perhíbuit: et verum est 
testimónium ejus. Et ille scit 
quia vera dicit: ut et vos cre- 
datis Warta cunt onim hma 


a eame eee pew e e| MA a WA 


non comminuétis ex eo. Et 
íterum alia Scriptüra dicit: 
Vidébunt in quem transfix- 
érunt. 


ture saith, They shall look on Him Whom they pierced. 


The deacon takes into his hands the book of the Gospels, 
and, having knelt to say the prayer Munda cor meum, page 
763, subjoins the concluding verses of the Passion Gospel. 


And after these things, Jo- 
Seph of Arimathea (because he 
was a disciple of Jesus, but se- 
cretly, for fear of the Jews) 
besought Pilate that he might 
take away the body of Jesus. 
And Pilate gave leave, He came 
therefore, and took away the 
body of Jesus. And Nicodemus 


Post hsc autem rogávit 
Pilátum Joseph ab Arima- 
thea, (eo quod esset discipu- 
lus Jesu, occültus autem 
propter metum Judaeórum), 
ut tólleret corpus Jesu. Et per- 
mísit Pilátus. Venit ergo, et 
tulit corpus Jesu. Venit autem 
et Nicodémus, qui vénerat ad 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GOOD FRIDAY 


Jesum nocte primum, ferens 
mixtüram myrrhe, et aloés, 
quasi libras centum. Accepé- 
runt ergo corpus Jesu, et liga- 
vérunt illud línteis eum aro- 
mátibus sicut mos est Ju- 
dais sepelire. Erat autem in 
loco, ubi crucifixus est, hor- 
tus; et in horto monuméntum 
novum, in quo nondum quis- 
quam pósitus erat. Ibi ergo 
propter Parascéven Judeó- 
rum, quia juxta erat monu- 
méntum, posuérunt Jesum, 


481 


also came, he who at the first 
came to Jesus by night: bring- 
ing a mixture of myrrh and 
aloes, about an hundred pounds 
weight. They took therefore the 
body of Jesus, and bound it in 
linen cloths, with the spices, as 
the manner of the Jews is to 
bury. Now there was, in the 
place where He was crucified, 
2 garden; and in the garden a 
new sepulchre, wherein no man 
had yet been laid. 'There, there- 
fore, because of the Parasceve 
of the Jews, they laid Jesus, 


because the sepulchre was nigh at hand. 


Then follow the so-called “Solemn Prayers,” or supplications 
for all conditions of men; their use is now restricted to Good 


Friday. 


Orémus, dilectissimi nobis, 
pro Ecclésia sancta Dei: ut 
eam Deus et Dóminus noster 
pacificáàre, adunáre, et custo- 
dire dignétur toto orbe ter- 
rárum: subjiciens et princi- 
pátus, et potestátes: detque 
nobis quiétam et tranquíllam 
vitam degéntibus glorificáre 
Deum Patrem omnipoténtem. 


Let us pray, dearly beloved, 
for God's boly Church, that 
our Lord and God may vouch- 
safe to give it peace, unity, and 
protection throughout all the 
earth, making principalities 
and powers subject unto it, and 
may grant us to lead a quiet 
and tranquil life and glorify 
God the Father almighty. 


Afier this, which i$ termed a Bidding Prayér, thë priest 


repeats: 


Let us pray 
The deacon subjoins: 


V. Flectámus génua. 


y. Let us kneel. 


All kneel; then the subdeacon at once gives the sign to stand 


up again, 
W. Leváte. 


RB. Arise. 


The celebrant then proceeds to intone, in the ferial tone, 


the Collect or Prayer. 


Omnipotens sempitérne 
Deus, qui glóriam tuam ómni- 
bus in Christo géntibus reve- 
lásti: custódi ópera miseri- 
córdie tue; ut Ecclésia tua 
toto orbe diffüsa, stábili fide 


Almighty, eternal God, Who 
hast revealed in Christ Thy 
glory to all the nations, guard 
the works of Thy mercy that 
Thy Church, spread through- 
out the whole earth, may with 


http://ccwatershed.org 


482 GOOD FRIDAY 


Steadfast faith persevere in the 
confession of Thy name. 
"Through the same. 

H. Amen. 


in confessióne tui nóminis 
persevéret. Per eümdem. 
BY. Amen. 


The same order is observed in the supplications that follow. 


Let us pray, also, for our most 
blessed Pope N., that our Lord 
and God, Who hath chosen him 
in the order of the episcopacy, 
may preserve him safe and un- 
harmed to His holy Church, to 
rule God’s holy people. 


Orémus et pro beatíssimo 
Papa nostro N. ut Deus et 
Dóminus noster, qui elégit 
eum in órdine episcopátus, 
salvum, atque incólumen cus- 
tédiat Ecclésie suse sancte, 
ad regéndum pópulum sanc- 
tum Dei. 


Let us pray 


¥. Let us kneel. 
BY. Arise. 


Almighty, eternal God, in 
Whose judgment ali things are 
founded, look propitiously upon 
our prayers and, of Thy loving- 
kindness, preserve unto us our 
chosen bishop, that the Chris- 
tian people, who are governed 
by Thine authority, may, under 
so great a pontiff, be increased 
in the merits of their belief. 
Through mir Tord Rf Amen 


UCU US Play, aidVU, LULA Bll PIDIL 
ops, priests, deacons, subdea- 
cons, acolytes, exorcists, lec- 
tors, doorkeepers, confessors, 
virgins, widows, and for all the 
holy people of God. 


Yy. Flectámus génua. 
W. Leváte. 


Omnípotens sempitérne De- 
us, cujus judício univérsa fun- 
dántur: réspice propítius ad 
preces nostras, et eléctum no- 
bis Antístitem tua pietate 
consérva: ut christiána plebs, 
que te gubernátur auctóre 
sub tanto Pontífice, creduli- 
tátis sue méritis augeátur. 
Per Dóminum nostrum. KW. 


Aman 

wes cu PIU VIOUS 
Epíscopis, Presbyteris, Diacó- 
nibus, Subdiacónibus, Acóly- 
this, Exorcístis, Lectóribus, 
Ostiáriis, Confessóribus, Vir- 
gínibus, Víduis: et pro omni 
pópulo sancto Dei. 


Let us pray 


V. Let us kneel. 

W. Arise. 

Almighty, eternal God, by 
Whose Spirit the whole body 
of the Church is ruled, harken 
unto us while we make our sup- 
Plications for all its orders, 
that, by the gift of Thy grace, 
Thou mayest be faithfully 


Y. Flectámus génua. 
W. Leváte. 


Omnípotens sempitérne De- 
us, cujus spíritu totum corpus 
Ecclésie sanctificétur et ré- 
gitur: exáudi nos pro uni- 
vérsis ordinibus supplicántes; 
ut gratie tue münere, ab óm- 
nibus tibi gradibus fidéliter 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GOOD FRIDAY 483 


Berviátur. Per Dóminum nos- 
trum. H. Amen. . 

Orémus et pro catechüme- 
nis nostris: ut Deus et Dómi- 
nus noster adapériat aures 
precordiórum ipsórum, jan- 
uámque misericórdie; ut per 
lavácrum regeneratiónis ac- 
cépta remissióne ómnium 
peccatórum, et ipsi invenián- 
tur in Christo Jesu Dómino 
nostro. 


Served by all conditions of men. 
Through our Lord. AY. Amen. 

Let us pray, also, for our 
catechumens, that our Lord 
and God may open the ears 
of their hearts, and the door 
of mercy, so that, having re- 
ceived remission of all their sins 
through the laver of regenera- 
tion, they, too, may be found 
in Christ Jesus our Lord, 


Let us pray 


¥. Flectámus génua. 

R. Leváte. 

Omnipotens  sempitérne 
Deus, qui Ecclésiam tuam no- 
va semper prole fectndas: 
auge fidem et intelléctum 
catechümenis nostris; ut re- 
náti fonte baptísmatis, adop- 
tiónis tue fíliis aggregéntur. 
Per Dóminum nostrum. BH. 
Amen. 


Orémus, dilectíssimi nobis, 
Deum Patrem omnipoténtem, 
ut cunctis mundum purget er- 
rórlbus: morbos aüferat: fa- 
mem depéllat: apériat cár- 
ceres: víncula dissólvat: pere- 
grinántibus réditum: infirm- 
antibus sanitátem; navigán- 
"ous portum salütis indul- 
geat. 


¥. Let us kneel. 

H. Arise. f 

Almighty, eternal God, Who 
dost continually render Thy 
Church fruitful with new pro- 
geny, increase the faith and 
understanding of our catechu- 
mens, that, being born again 
in the font of baptism, they 
may be numbered with the chil- 
dren of Thine adoption. 
Through our Lord. R. Amen, 

Let us pray, dearly beloved, 
to God the Father almighty, 
that He purge the world of all 
its errors, banish diseases, drive 
away famine, open the prisons, 
loose the shackles, grant to 
those that journey to be re- 
stored to their homes; to the 
Sick, health; to those at sea, a 
haven of safety. 


Let us pray 
V. Flectémus génua. V. Let us kneel. 
W. Levate. K. Arise. 


Omnípotens sempitérneDe- 
us, mostórum consolátio, la- 
borántium fortitüdo: pervé- 
niant ad te preces de qua- 
cümque tribulatióne clam- 
4ntium; ut omnes sibi in ne- 
cessltátibus suis misericórdi- 
am tuam gaüdeant affuísse. 


Almighty, eternal God, the 
consolation of them. that 
mourn, the strength of them 
that labor; let the prayers of 
those who cry out from what- 
soever tribulation come unto 
Thee, that all may rejoice be- 
cause Thy mercy hath been 


http://ccwatershed.org 


484 


with them in their necessities. 
Through our Lord. W. Amen. 

Let.us pray, also, for hereties 
and schismatics, that our Lord 
and God may deliver them from 
all their errors, and vouchsafe 
to recall them to their holy 
mother, the catholic and apos- 
tolic Church. 


GOOD FRIDAY 


Per Dóminum nostrum. y. 
Amen. 

Orémus et pro heréticis et 
Schismáticis: ut Deus et Dó- 
minus noster éruat eos ab 
erróribus univérsis; et ad 
sanctam matrem Ecclésiam 
Cathólicam, atque Apostólic- 
am revocáre dignétur. 


Let us pray - 


V. Let us kneel. 
Hf. Arise. 


Almighty, eternal God, Who 
dost save all, and willest not 
that any should perish, look 
upon the souls deceived by dia- 
bolical fraud, that, abandoning 
all heretical depravity, the 
hearts of the erring may regain 
sanity and return to the unity 
of truth. Through our Lord. W. 
Amen. 

Let us pray, also, for the un- 
faithful Jews, that our Lord 
and God may take away the 
veil from their hearts, so that 
they, too, may acknowledge 
Jesus Christ our Lord. 


V. Flectámus génua. 
FY. Leváte. 


Omnípotens sempitérne De- 
us, qui salvas omnes, et né- 
minem vis períre réspice ad 
ánimas diabólica fraude de- 
céptas; ut omni herética pra- 
vitáte X depósita,  errántium 
corda resipíscant, et ad veri- 
tátis tue rédeant unitátem. 
Per Dóminum nostrum. 

IH. Amen. 

Orémus et pro pérfidis Ju- 
deis: ut Deus et Dóminus 
noster á&uferat velámen de 
córdibus eórum; ut ipsi agnó- 
scant Jesum Christum Dómi- 
num nostrum. 


The celebrant now chants the Collect or Prayer: 


repellest not even Jewish faith- 
lessness from Thy mercy, hear- 
ken to our prayers which we 
make in behalf of the blind- 
ness of that people, that, rec- 
ognizing the light of 'Thy 
truth, which is Christ, they 
may be delivered from their 
darkness. Through the same. 
IH. Amen. 

Let us pray, also, for the 
pagans, that almighty God may 
remove iniquity from their 
hearts, so that they may leave 
their idols and be converted to 
the living and true God and 
His only Son, Jesus Christ, our 
Lord and Goa. 


us, qui étiam judáicam per- 
fidiam a tua misericórdia non 
repéllis: exáudi preces nos- 
tras, quas pro illfus pópuli ob- 
cæcatióne deférimus; ut ágni- 
ta veritatis tue luce, que 
Christus est, a suis ténebris 
eruántur. Per eümdem. W. 
Amen. 


Orémus et pro pagánis: ut 
Deus omnípotens áuferat ini- 
quitatem a córdibus eórum; 
ut relíctis idólis suis, conver- 
tántur ad Deum vivum et ve- 
rum, et ünicum Fílium ejus 
Jesum Christum Deum et Dó- 
minum nostrum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GOOD FRIDAY 


485 


Let us pray 


Y. Flectámus génua. 

R. Leváte. 

Omnípotens sempitérne De- 
us, qui non mortem peccató- 
rum, sed vitam semper in- 
quiris: süscipe propítius ora- 
tiónem nostram, et líbera eos 
ab idolórum cultüra; et ág- 
grega Ecclésie tue sancte, 
ad laudem, et glóriam nomi- 
nis tui. Per Dóminum. 

BY. Amen. 


y. Let us kneel. 

W. Arise. ! 

Almighty, eternal God, Who 
dost ever seek not the death of 
sinners, but their life, favor- 
ably receive our prayer, and de- 
liver these from the worship of 
idols, and gather them unto 
Thy holy Church, to the praise 
and glory of Thy name. 
Through our Lord. R. Amen. 


The solemn prayers being ended, the officiating priest disests 


himself of his black chasuble, and having received from the 
Geacon the altar cross, which was veiled at the beginning of 
Passion-tide, he uncovers, before all the people, first, the head 
of the crucifiz, next, the right arm, and lastly the entire cross. 
While doing this, he goes from the Epistle corner to the centre 
of the altar, lifting the cross higher at each step and thrice 
chanting, each time on a higher note: 


Ecce lignum crucis. In quo Behold the wood of the cross, 
salus mundi pepéndit. on which has hung the Salva- 
tion of the world. 


And each time kneeling, the choir and people answer. 
Venite, adorémus. Come, let us adore. 


The priest now lays the unveiled cross on a cushion, in the 
centre of the sanctuary. Then he removes his shoes and, 
genuflecting three times, humbly kisses the feet of the cruci- 
fi. The deacon and subdeacon, followed by the rest of the 
clergy, do likewise, and then the deacon carries the cross to a 
place outside the sanctuary, where the laity approach to vene- 
rate it. The following words may be said while doing reverence 
to the holy cross: "We adore Thee, O Christ, and: we bless 
Thee; because by thy holy cross Thou hast redeemed the 
world.” 


Meanwhile the choir sings the Improperia, or Reproaches, as 
follows: 


y. Pópule meus, quid feci 
tibi? aut in quo contristávi 
te? respónde mihi. Y. Quia 
eduxi te de terra Atgypti: 
parásti crucem Salvatóri tuo. 


X. O My people, what have I 
done unto thee? or in what 
have I offended thee? Answer 
Me. Y. Because I led thee out 
of the land of Egypt, thou hast 


prepared a cross for thy Sa- 
viour. 


Then in Greek and Latin is sung the Sanctus hymn of the 
Eastern Church: 


Bf. Agios o Theos. BY. O holy God. 
W. Sanctus Deus. Bf. O holy God. 
BY. Agios ischyros. Hf. O holy, O mighty One. 
K. Sanctus fortis. Bf. O holy, O mighty One. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


486 


RY. O holy, immortal One, 
have mercy upon us. 

RY. O holy, immortal One, 
have mercy upon us. 


GOOD FRIDAY 


R. Agios athánatos, eléison 
imas. 

B. Sanctus 
miserére nobis. 


immortális, 


The choir continues: 


Y. Because I led thee out 
through the desert in forty 
years, and fed thee with man- 
na, and brought thee into & 
very good land, thou hast pre- 
pared a cross for thy Saviour. 


V. Quia edüxi te per desér- 
tum quadraginta annis, et 
manna cibávi te, et introdüxi 
te in terram satis bonam: pa- 
rásti Crucem Salvaiéri tuo. 


The hymn of the Eastern Church as above is repeated: 


Y. What more should I have 
done, and did it not? Behold I 
have planted thee as My fair- 
est vine, and thou hast become 
very bitter unto Me, for thou 
hast quenched My thirst with 
vinegar, and with a lance hast 
thou pierced thy Saviour's side. 


V. Quid ultra débui fácere 
tbi, et non feci? Ego quidem 
plantavi te víneam meam 
speciosissimam: et tu facta es 
mihi nimis amara: acéto 
namque sitim meam potásti: 
et Jáncea perforásti latus Sal- 
vatóri tuo, 


The hymn of the Eastern Church is again repeated. 


V. For thee did I scourge 
Egypt and its firstborn, and 
thou hast given Me over to be 
scourged. 


¥. Ego propter te flagellávi 
JEgyptum cum primogénitis 
suis: et tu me flagellátum tra- 
didfsti. 


The choir 


y. O My people, what have I 
done to thee, or in what have 
I offended thee? Answer Me. 


overwhelming Pharao in. the 
Red Sea, and thou hast deliv- 
ered Me to the chief priests. 


Pópule meus, quid feci tibi? 
Aut in quo contristávi te? re- 
spónde mihi. 


demérso Pharaóne in Mare 
Rubrum: et tu me tradidísti 
princípibus sacerdótum. 


The choir, Popule Meus (O My People) as before. 


y. X opened the sea before 
thee, and thou hast opened My 
side with a lance. 


V. Ego ante te apérul 
mare: et tu aperuísti lancea 
latus meum. 


The choir, Popule Meus (O My people). 


y. I went before thee in a 
pillar of cloud, and. thou hast 
haled Me to the judgment hall 
of Pilate. 


¥. Ego te ante preívi in 
colümna nubis: et tu me dux- 
fsti ad pretérium Pilati. 


The choir, Popule Meus (O My people). 


y. I fed thee with manna 
through the desert and thou 
hast smitten Me with buffets 
and with lashes, 


y. Ego te pavi manna per 
desértum: et tu me cecidísti 
álapis et flagéllis, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GOOD FRIDAY 


487 


The choir, Popule Meus (O My people). 


F. Ego te potávi aqua sa- 
lütis de petra: et tu me po- 
tásti felle, et acéto. 


Y. I gave thee the water of 
Salvation to drink from the 
rock, and thou hast given Me 
gall and vinegar to drink. 


The choir, Popule Meus (O My people). 


y. Ego propter te Chana- 
næórum reges percüssi: et tu 
pereussísti aründine caput 
meum. 


FJ. For thee I smote the 
kings of the Chanaanites, and 
thou hast smitten My head with 
a reed. 


The choir, Popule Meus (O My people). 


y. Ego dedi tibi sceptrum 
regále, et tu dedísti cápiti meo 
spíneam corónam. 


¥.I gave thee a royal sceptre, 
and thou hast given My head a 
crown of thorns. 


The choir, Popule Meus (O My people). 


Y. Ego te exltáóvi magna 
virtüte: et tu me suspendísti 
in patíbulo Crucis. ` 


Y. With great power I lifted 
thee up, and thou hast hung 
Me upon the gibbet of the cross. 


The choir, Popule Meus (O My people). 
The following Antiphon is now sung: 


Crucem tuam  adorámus 
Dómine, et sanctam resurrec- 
tiónem tuam laudamus et 
glorificámus; ecce enim prop- 
ter lignum venit gáudium in 
univérso mundo. Ps. 66. Deus 
misereátur nostri, et benedí- 
cat nobis: illüminet vultum 
suum super nos, et miseréa- 
tur nostri. Repetitur Crucem 
tuam, etc. 


We adore Thy cross, O Lord; 
we praise and glorify Thy holy 
resurrection. For behold, by 
reason of that wood, joy hath 
come in all the world. Ps. 66. 
May God have mercy on us and 
bless us: may He cause the 
light of His countenance to 
shine upon us, and have mercy 
on us. Repeat: We adore Thy 
cross, O Lord, etc. 


Lastly is sung the Hymn of the Passion: ` 


W. Crux fidélis inter omnes 


Arbor una nobilis: 
Nulla silva talem profert 


Fronde, flore, gérmine. 


Dulce lignum, dulces clavos, 


Dulce pondus süstinet. 


y. Pange lingua gloríosi 


Láuream Certáminis, 


Hí. Faithful cross, amidst all 
others, 

Noble tree alone art thou! 

There's no forest that hath 
yielded 

Flower as thine, or leaf or 
bough. 


Sweet thy wood, thy nails still 
sweeter, 

Sweetest weight thou bearest 
now. 


y. Sing, my tongue, the crown- 
ing guerdon 
Of a glorious combat fought! 


http://ccwatershed.org 


488 


Sing above the cross's trophy 

Hymns with strains triumphal 
fraught! ` 

How the Saviour’s blood-obla- 
tion 

Won the victory earth had 
sought. 

W. Faithful cross, etc. 

y. God, our Maker, led to pity 

By the guile which led astray 

Adam when he ate the apple, 

Bringing death no man can 
Stay, 

Marked this tree to crush the 
other, 

And the ills it bore allay. 

BY. Sweet thy wood, etc. 

Y. This, the plan of our salva- 
tion, 

Preordained by God had been, 

That the arts of wily Satan, 

Should be foiled by Him un- 
seen, 

Whence the foeman’s tool He 
fashioned, 

As our race's healing mean. 


W. Faithful cross, etc. 


Y. Therefore, when there came 
the fulness, 


He, His Son, the world's Cre- 
ator, 

Sent to earth in man’s dire 
need, 

Who from womb of Virgin 
peerless, 

Did endued with flesh proceed. 

H'. Sweet thy wood, etc. 

Y. Closed within a narrow man- 
ger, 

Lo! the wailing Infant lies. 

Round His limbs the Maiden 
Mother : 

Bands and wrappings gently 
ties: 

Fair the hands and feet she 
swaddles 


GOOD FRIDAY 


Et super crucis trophzo 
Dic triümphum nóbilem: 


Quáliter Redémptor orbis 


Immolátus vícerit. 


Hf. Crux fidélis, etc. 
¥. De paréntis protoplásti 


Fraude factor cóndolens, 
Quando pomi noxiélis 
In necem morsu ruit: 


Ipse lignum tunc notávit, 


Damna ligni ut sólveret 
B. Dulce lignum, etc. 
Y. Hoc opus nostra. salütis 


Ordo depopóscerat, 
Multifórmis proditóris 
Ars ut artem fálleret; 
Et medélam ferret inde, 


Hostis unde leserat. . 
W. Crux fidélis, etc. 
Y. Quando venit ergo sacri 


Missus est ab arce Patris 
Natus, orbis Cónditor; 
Atque ventre virgináli 
Carne amíctus pródiit. 

RY. Dulce lignum, etc. 

¥. Vagit infans inter arctg 


Cónditus presépia: 
Membra pannis involüte 


Virgo mater álligat: 


Et Dei manus, pedésque 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GOOD FRIDAY 


Stricte cingit fascia. 
Bf. Crux fidélis, etc. 


Y. Lustra sex qui jam perégit, 


Tempus implens córporis, 


Sponte líbera Redémptor 
Passióni déditus, 

Agnus in Crucis levátur 
Immolándus stípite. 


Hf. Dulce lignum, etc. 
Y. Felle potus ecce languet: 


Spina, clavi, láncea 
Mite corpus perforárunt, 


Unda manat, et cruor: 
Terra, pontus, astra, mundus, 


Quo lavántur flümine! 
Bí. Crux fidélis, etc. 
Y. Flecte ramos arbor alta, 


Tensa laxa viscera, 
Et rigor lentéscat ille, 


Quem dedit nativitas: 
Et supérni membra Regis 
Tende miti stípite. 


R. Dulce lignum, etc. 
F. Sola digna tu fuisti 


Ferre mundi victimam: 
Atque portum preparáre 
Arca mundo náufrago; 


Quem sacer cruor perünxit, 
Fusus Agni Córpore. 


BY. Crux fidélis, etc. 
V. Sempitérna sit beáte 
Trinitati glória: 


489 


Of the Lord that rules the skies, 
Hy. Faithful cross, etc. 


Y. When the thirty years were 
run, 

And His life approached its 
close. 

Freely yielding our Redeemer 

To His passion’s deathly throes, 

On a Rood a Victim lifted, 

There atones for human woes, 

RY. Sweet thy wood, etc. 

Y. Bitter gall become His po- 
tion, ` 

Failing limbs His languorshow: 

Thorns and nails and spear 
now open 

Founts whence blood and wa- 
ter flow: 

By this flood is cleansed crea- 
tion, 

Starry orb, as earth below. 

H. Faithful cross, etc. 

X. Lofty tree, bow down thy 
branches, 

And thy sinews tense unstring: 


: Soften, ay! thy native hard- 


ness, 
Smooth the knots that to thee 
cling: 
‘Then, thy gentle arms extend- 


ing, 
Greet the limbs of heaven's 
own King. 
Bf. Sweet thy wood, etc. 
y. Thou alone wast deemed 
worthy 
Thus to be the Saviour’s bed: 
Thou, the ark in mercy chosen, 
doe A port the shipwrecked 
Thou it is who wast anointed 
By the sacred blood He shed. 
Hf. Faithful cross, etc. 
Y. To the Trinity be glory, 
Through eternal length of 
days! 


http://ccwatershed.org 


490 GOOD FRIDAY 


To the Father, Son, and Spirit, 

Be to each the self-same praise! 

Let the voice of all creation 

Hymns to triune God upraise. 
Amen. 


RY. Sweet thy wood, etc. 


The cross having been again set up on the altar, and candles 
lit as for high Mass, the clergy move to the chapel or reposi- 
tory, from which, after a pause f, 

don, with lights and incense/ to the high altar, the cele- 


cess 


brant bearing the chalice containing the Sacred Host, and the 
choir singing the hymn Vexilla Regis (“The Banners of the 


King") 

The royal banners now un- 
furled, 

The mystic cross illumes the 
world, 

For life the sting of death hath 
borne, 

And death of all its poison 
shorn, 

Thereon with steel of cruel 
spear, 


His side is pierced, whence 
there appear 

Of blood and water hallowed 
streams, 

To cleanse the souls He now 
redeems. 


Hereon fulfilled is David’s 

"'nat wandering nations deeply 
stirred, 

When crying in prophetic 
strain, 

"The Lord our God from tree 
doth reign." ` 

O comely tree! thou radiant 
pride! 

By kingly purple sanctified, 

Thou chosen from a high-born 
race, 

God's hallowed members to em- 
brace. 

O happy tree! to thee doth 
cling 

The sinful world's redeeming 
King, 


ZEqua Patri, Filióque: 

Par decus Paraclito: 
Uníus Triníque nomen 
Laudet univérsitas. Amen. 


Hf. Dulce lignum, etc. 


Vexílla Regis pródeunt: 
Fulget Crucis mystérium, 
Qua vita mortem pértulit, 


Et morte vitam prótulit. 


Quz, vulneráta lancer 
Mucróne diro, críminum 
Ut nos laváret sórdibus, 
Manávit unda, et sánguine. 
Impléta sunt que cóncinit 
David fidéli cármine, 
Dicéndo natiónibus: 
Regnávit a ligno Deus. 
Arbor decóra, et fülgida, 


Ornáta Regis pürpura, 
Elécta digno stipite 


Tam sancta membra tángere. 


Beáta, cujus bráchiis 


Prétium pepéndit sæculi, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


prayer, they return in pro- 


GOOD FRIDAY 


Btatéra facta córporis, 


Tulítque predam tartari. 


O Crux ave, spes ünica, 
Hoc Passiónis témpore: 


Pils adáuge gratiam, 
Reísque dele crímina. 


Te, fons salütis, Trínitas, 
Colláudet omnis spíritus: 


Quibus Crucis victóriam 


Largiris, adde premium. 
Amen. 


491 
Thou, balance, where His 
body lies, 
To snatch from hell its stolen 
prize. 


O cross, our only hope, all hailt 

This passion-tide, thy balm ex- 
hale: 

In loving hearts, augment thy 
grace, 

The sinner’s stains entire ef- 
face. 


O Trinity, Thou loving fount, 

To praise Thee every spirit 
mount! 

The cross's victory to those 
who share, 

O grant reward without com- 
pare. Amen. 


The chalice is placed on the altar, the Sacred Host lying 


before it on the corporal, the small linen altar-cloth. Wine 
mired with a little water is poured into the chalice and the 
altar is incensed as at high Mass. The priest washes his fingers, 


but does not recite the Psalm Lavabo. 


Returning to the 


middle of the altar he silently prays: 


In spiritu humilitatis, et in 
ánimo contrito suscipiamur 
a te, Dómine: et sic sacrifíci- 
um nostrum in conspéctu tuo 
hódie, ut pláceat tibi, Dómi- 
ne Deus. 
usual: i : 

Oráte, fratres: ut meum ac 
vestrum sacrifícium acceptá- 
bile fiat apud Deum Patrem 
omnipoténtem. 


In the spirit of humility and 
in a contrite mind may we be 
accepted by Thee, O Lord, and 
may our sacrifice become in 
Thy sight such as to please 
'Thee, O Lord God. 


He now turns to the people, saying the Orate fratres, as 


Brethren, pray that my sac- 
rifice and yours may become 
acceptable before God the 
Father almighty. 


No answer is made, and the celebrant proceeds to rectte the 


Lord’s Prayer. 


Let us pray 


Precéptis, salutáribus mó- 
niti, et divína institutióne 
formáti, audémus dícere. 

Pater noster: 


Admonished by salutary pre- 
cepts and instructed by divine 
teaching, we presume to say: 

Our Father, etc. 


The choir answers: 


Sed líbera nos a malo. 


The priest subjoins Amen, 
aloud. 


But deliver us from evil. 
in a low voice, and continues 


http://ccwatershed.org 


192 


Deliver us, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, from al evils, past 
present, and to come, and by 
the intercession of the blessed 
and glorious Mary, ever a vir- 
gin, mother of God, and of Thy 
holy apostles, Peter and Paul, 
of Andrew, and of all the saints, 
graciously grant peace in our 
days, that, through the help of 
Thy bountiful mercy, we may 
always be free from sin and se- 
cure from all disturbance. 
Through the same Jesus Christ, 
Thy Son, our Lord, Who liveth 
and reigneth with Thee in the 
unity of the Holy Ghost, God, 
world without end. BY. Amen. 


GOOD FRIDAY 


Libera nos, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, ab ómnibus malis, prz- 
téritis, preséntibus: et futü- 
ris: et intercedénte beáta, et 
gloriósa semper Virgine Dei 
Genitríce María, cum beátis 
Apóstolis tuis Petro et Paulo, 
atque Andréa, et ómnibus 
Sanctis, da propitius pacem 
in diébus nostris: ut ope mi- 
Sericórdie tum adjüti, et a 
peccáto simus semper liberi, 
et ab ómni perturbatiéne se- 
cüri Per eümdem Dóminum 
nostrum Jesus Christum Fili- 
um tuum: Qui tecum vivit et 
regnat in unitate Spiritus 
Sancti Deus. Per omnia szcu- 
la seculorum. RY. Amen. 


The reds genufects, then rising he raises the Sacred Host 


on. higi 


hat all present may see it 


and adore it. Then 


breaking it, ie lets fall a particle into the unconsecrated wine 


contained in the chalice, 


The Agnus Dei is not said, and of 


the three prayers before Communion the last only. 


Let not the partaking of 
Thy Body, O Lord Jesus Christ, 
which I, all unworthy, presume 
to receive, turn to my judg- 
ment and condemnation: but 
through Thy loving-kindness 
may it be to me a safeguard 
wau, wiu WOU Lue raner, m 
the unity of the Holy Ghost, liv- 
est and reignest, God, world 
without end. JY. Amen. 


Percéptio Corpóris tui, Dó- 
mine Jesu Christe, quod ego 
indígnus súmere præsumo, 
non mihi provéniat in judi- 
cium et condemnatiónem: sed 
pro tua pietáte prosit mihi ad 
tutaméntum mentis et cór- 


endam: Qui vivis et regnzs 
cum Deo Patre in unitát? 
Spíritus sancti Deus, per óm- 
nia secula seculórum. y. 
Amen. 


He continues: 


I wil take the bread of 
heaven and will call upon the 
name of the Lord. 


Panem celéstem accipiam, 
et nomen Dómini invocábo. 


He then repeats three times: 


Lord, I am not worthy that 


Dómine, non sum dignus, 


Thou shouldst enter under my ut intres sub tectum meum: 
roof: but say only the word sed tantum dic verbo et saná- 
and my soul shall be healed. bitur ánima mea. 


He receives the Sacred Body of the Lord, with the customary 
prayer: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 493 


_Corpus Dómini nostri Jesu May the body of Our Lord 
Christi custédiat ánimam Jesus Christ keep my soul unto 
meam in vitam etérnam. life everlasting. Amen. 

Amen. 


‘Having drunk the wine in the chalice with the consecrated 
particle dropped therein, he purifies it with the customary 
ablutions, Saying in the last place the prayer: 


Quod ore sümpsimus, Dó- Into a pure heart, O Lord, 
mine, pura mente capiamus: may we receive the heavenly 
et de münere temporáli fiat food which has passed our lips. 
nobis remédium sempitérnum. Bestowed upon us in time, may 

it be to us the healing of our 
souls for eternity. 


The ceremony is now ended and the priest and his ministers 
leave the sanctuary, the acolytes removing the altar-cloth and 
extinguishing the candles. The altar of the repository is also 
dismantled, and, until the Mass of the Resurrection on the 
following morning, Catholic churches remain without the 
Real Presence, which is their glory, So that the dying may 
not be deprived of Holy Viaticum, some consecrated particles 
are kept in à tabernacle, with a lamp burning before it; either 
in the sacristy or in some nearby chapel. 


Before retiring, the clergy recite the Vesper Psalms as on 
Maundy Thursday, page 455, using the following antiphon 
before and after the Magnificat: _ 


Cum  accepísset acétum, When He had received the 
dixit: Consummátum est: et vinegar, He said, It is finished. 
inclináto cápite, emísit spíri- And, bowing His head, He gave 
tum. up the ghost. 


Holp Saturdap (Purple-White) 
Station AT ST. JOHN LATERAN. .. * 


The ceremonies of this day begin early in the morning with 
the blessing of a new fire that has been kindled with flint and 
steel. From this fire a candle with three stems, and placed on 
a reed, is lighted and carried up the church by a deacon, who 
three times chants the words "Lumen Christi.” The paschal 
candle is blessed by the deacon, who. fizes in it five grains of 
blessed incense in memory of the wounds of Christ and the 
precious spices with which He was anointed in the tomb, and 
afterwards lights it from the candle on the reed. The bless 
ing of the candle is followed by the reading of the twelve 
prophecies, and after that the priest goes in procession to bless 
the font. The water in the font is scattered toward the four 
quarters of the world, to indicate the catholicity of the Church 
and the world-wide efficacy of her sacraments; the priest 
breathes on the water in the form of a cross and plunges the 

aschal candle into the water, for the Spirit of God is to 

allow it, and the power of Christ is to descend on it; lastly, 
a few drops of the oil of catechumens and. of the chrism are 
poured into the font, im order to signify the union of Christ, 
our anointed King, with His people. On the way back from 
the font the Litany of the Saints is begun, and when it is 
ended the altar is decked with flowers and the Mass is begun 


http://ccwatershed.org 


494 


in white vestments. 


HOLY SATURDAY 


The pictures and statues in the church 


that have been veiled since Passion Sunday are uncovered. The 
organ and bells are heard again and the joyful Alleluia is 


resumed, 


In the absence of sacred ministers the oficiant recites (or 
Sings, if the custom prevails) all the prayers and lessons and 
performs all the ceremonies allotted to the sacred ministers 


in the functions of this day. 

The officiating priest blesses 
follows: 

y. The Lord be with you. 

BR And with thy spirit. 

: Let us 

O God, Who through Thy 
Son, the cornerstone, hast given 
to Thy faithful the fire of Thy 
brightness. sanctify 4 this new 
fire, produced out of a flint- 
stone, to be serviceable for our 
uses; and grant unto us to be 
so fired with heavenly aspira- 
tions through these paschal 
festivities, that with pure 
hearts we may be able to attain 
to the festivities of perpetual 
brightness. Through the same 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


Let us 

Lord God, Father almighty, 
light unfailing, Who art the 
Creator of all lights. bless FH 


sanctified and blessed by Thee, 
Who dost enlighten the whole 
world, that we may be kindled 
by that light and enlightened 
by the fire of Thy brightness; 
and as Thou didst enlighten 
Moses when he went forth out 
of Egypt, so do Thou enlighten 
our hearts and our senses, that 
we may be worthy to come to 
the light. eternal. Through 
Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 


Let. us 

Holy Lord, eternal Father, 
almighty God, vouchsafe Thy 
co-operation with us while we 
bless this. fire in Thy name, 


the new fire and incense as 
Y. Dóminus vobíscum., 
BY. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


pray 

Deus, qui per Filium tuum, 
angularem scilicet lapidem, 
claritátis tue ignem fidélibus 
contulisti: prodüctum e sílice, 
nostris profutürum  üsibus, 
novum hunc ignem sancti HH 
fica: et concéde nobis, ita per 
hec festa paschália celésti- 
bus desidériis inflammari: ut 
ad perpétue claritátis, puris 
méntibus, valeámus festa per- 
tingere. Per eümdem Chris- 
tum Dóminum nostrum. BH. 
Amen. 


pray 

Dómine Deus. Pater om- 
nípotens, lumen indefíciens, 
ani es eánditor Amninm mM- 
lumen, quod a te sanctificá- 
tum atque benedíctum est, qui 
illuminásti omnem mundum: 
ut ab eo lumine accendámur 
atque illuminémur igne clari- 
tátis tue: et sicut illuminásti 
Moysen exetintem de ZEgypto, 
ita illümines corda, et sensus 
nostros; ut ad vitam et lucem 
etérnam per Christum do- 
minum nostrum, . W. Amen. 


pray 

Dómine sancte, Pater om- 
nípotens, etérne Deus: bene- 
dicéntibus nobis hunc legem 
in nómine tuo, et unigéniti. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 


Filii tui Dei ac Dómini nos- 
tri Jesu Christi, et Spíritus 
Sancti, cooperári dignéris; 
et ádjuva nos contra ignita 
tela inimíci, et illüstra grátia 
cælésti: Qui vivis et regnas 
cum eódem Unigénito tuo, 
et Spiritu Sancto, Deus: per 
ómnia secula szeculórum, K. 
Amen. 


495 


and the name of Thine only- 
begotten Son, our God and 
Lord Jesus Christ, and of the 
Holy Spirit; and aid us against 
the fiery darts of the enemy, 
and illuminate us with Thy 
heavenly grace. Who livest and 
reignest with the same, Thine 
Only-begotten and the Holy 
Spirit, God, forever and ever. 
RY. Amen. 


Saying the following prayer the celebrant blesses the five 
grains of incense which are to be inserted in the wax of the 
paschal candle and afterwards sprinkles with holy water and 
incenses both the fire and the grains of incense: 


Véniat, qusesumus, omní- 
potens Deus, super hoc incén- 
sum larga tuae bene/dictió- 
nis infüsio: et hunc noctür- 
num splendórem  invisíbilis 
regenerátor accénde; ut non 
solum sacrifícium, quod hac 
nocte litátum est, arcána lü- 
minis tui admixtióne refül- 
geat; sed in quocümque loco 
ex hujus sanctificatiónis mys- 
tério áliquid füerit deportá- 
tum, expülsa diabdlice frau- 
dis nequitia, virtus tue ma- 
jestátis assístat. Per Christum 
Dóminum nostrum. H. Amen. 


Upon this incense, we be- 
seech Thee, O almighty God, 
may there come a plenteous 
outpouring of Thy benediction 
Hf; and do Thou, O invisible 
Regenerator, kindle this splen- 
dor of the night, that not only 
the sacrifice, happily consum- 
mated this night, may be re- 
fulgent with the secret min- 
gling of Thy light, but into 
whatsoever place anything be 
brought from the mystery of 
this sanctification, the malice 
of the diabolical deceits may be 
driven thence, and the power 


' of Thy majesty may be present. 


Through Christ our Lord. B. 
Amen. 


The deacon now puts on a white dalmatic, and taking in his 


hand a war candle, so moulded as to end in three separate 
branches (a symbol of the Holy Trinity), enters the church ac- 
companied by the officiating priest and the rest of the clergy. 
While going toward the sanctuary he stops three times, so 
that the wax branches he is carrying may be successively 
lighted; chanting each time the words: 


Lumen Christi. Light of Christ. 
At each announcement all present kneel and answer. 
W. Deo grátias. BY. We thank thee, O God. 


On reaching the altar steps the deacon kneels and prays as 
when about to read the holy Gospel at Mass. 

Munda cor meum, ac labia Cleanse my heart and my 
mea, omnipotens Deus, qui lips, O almighty God, Who 
labia Isaie prophéte cál- didst cleanse the lips of Thy 
culo mundásti ignito: ita me prophet Isaias with a burning 


http://ccwatershed.org 


496 


coal; so deign to cleanse me 
with Thy tender compassion 
ihat I may be able to declare 
worthily Thy paschal procla- 
mation. Through Christ our 
Lord. R. Amen. 


HOLY SATURDAY 


tua grata miseratióne dignáre 
mundáre, ut sanctum Evan- 
gélium tuum digne váleam 
nuntiáre. Per Christum Dó- 
minum nostrum. FY. Amen. 


He asks the priests blessing: 


Pray, Sir, a blessing. 


The Lord be in thy heart and 
on thy lips, that thou mayest 
worthily and competently de- 
Clare His pàschal proclamation, 
in the name of the Father, and 
of the Son "H, and of the Holy 
Ghost. Amen. 


Jube domne, benedícere. 


Dominus sit in corde tuo, 
et in lábiis tuis: ut digne, et 
competénter annünties suum 
paschále preeconium: In nó- 
mine Patris, et Fílii, 1H et 
Spíritus Sancti. Amen. 


He then chants the following ancient song of praise, known 


as the Paschale Preconium, or 


Easter Laud, in which the 


hallowing of the paschal candle is embodied. 


Now, let the angelic host of 
heaven exult, exult the mys- 
teries divine; and for the vic- 
tory of so great a King sound 
the trumpet of salvation. Let 
earth rejoice, irradiated by 
such mighty beams, and, being 
lighted up with the splendor 
of the eternal King, let her feel 
the shadows gone from all her 
sphere. Let Mother Church also 
reioice. adarned with tha af- 
&nd let this place ring with 
the voices of many. Wherefore, 
do ye here present, O most dear 
brethren, in the wondrous 
brightness of this holy light, 
join me, I pray, in invoking the 
mercy of almighty God, that 
He, Who, for no merits of mine 
own, hath deigned to number 
me among the levites, may shed 
upon me the brightness of His 
light and make me perfectly 
Perform the praise of this can- 
dle. Through Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, His Son, Who with Him 
liveth and reigneth in the unity 
of the Holy Spirit, God, forever 
and ever. IY. Amen. 


Exsuitet jam Angélica tur- 
ba celérum: exsültent divina 
mystéria: et pro tanti Regis 
victória, tuba ínsonet salu- 
táris. Gáudeat et tellus tantis 
irradiata fulgóribus: et ætérni 
Regis splendóre illustráta, to- 
tius orbis se séntiat amisísse 
calíginem. Laetétur et mater 
Ecclésia, tanti lúminis ador- 
náta fulgóribus: et magnis 
emi skalle. * - 
^vuxavuev. Wud PluUpLCL adSlan- 
tes vos, fratres carissimi, ad 
tam miram hujus sancti lü- 
minis claritátem, una mecum, 
queso, Dei omnipoténtis mi- 
Sericórdiam invocáte. Ut qui 
me non meis méritis, intra 
Levitárum nümerum dignátus 
est aggregáre: lüminis sui 
claritatem infündens, Cérei 
hujus laudem implére perfí- 
ciat. Per Dóminum nostrum 
Jesum Christum Fílium su- 
um: qui cum eo vivit et regnat 
in unitáte Spíritus Sancti 
Deus. Per ómnia saecula Sae- 
culórum. RY. Amen. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ud 


HOLY SATURDAY 497 


Y. Dóminus vobiscum. 
B. Et cum spíritu tuo. 
Y. Sursum corda. 

RY. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


Y. Grátias agámus Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
Hf. Dignum et justum est. 


Vere dignum et justum est, 
invisíbilem Deum Patrem om- 
nipoténtem, Fíliümque ejus 
unigénitum, Dóminum nos- 
trum Jesum Christum, toto 
cordis ac mentis afféctu, et 
vocis ministério personáre. 
Qui pro nobis etérno Patri 
Ade débitum solvit: et véte- 
ris piáculi cautiónem pio cru- 
ére detérsit. Hec sunt enim 
festa paschália, in quibus ve- 
rus ille Agnus occíditur, cujus 
sanguine postes fidélium con- 
secrántur. Hec nox est, in 
qua primum patres nostros 
fílios Israél edüctos de ZEgyp- 
to, mare Rubrum sicco vestí- 
gio transíre fecisti. Hec igi- 
tur nox est, que peccatórum 
ténebras, colümnae illumina- 
tióne purgávit. Hee nox est, 
que hódie rer univérsum 
mundum, in Christo credén- 
tes, a vítiis seculi, et calígine 
peccatórum segregátos, reddit 
gratie, sóciat sanctitáti. Hec 
nox est, in qua destrüctis vin- 
culis mortis, Christus ab ín- 
feris victor ascéndit. Nihil 
enim nobis nasci prófuit, nisi 
rédimi profuísset. O mira cir- 
ca nos tue pietátis dignátio! 
O insstimábilis diléctio ca- 
ritátis: ut servum redímeres, 
Filium tradidísti! O certe ne- 
cessárium Ade peccátum, 
quod Christi morte delétum 
est! O felix culpa, que talem 
ac tantum méruit habére Re- 
demptórem! O vere beáta nox, 


Y. The Lord be with you. 

K. And with thy spirit. 

Y. Lift up your hearts. 

B. We have them lifted up 
to the Lord. E 

F. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord, our God. 

W. It is meet and just. 

It is truly meet and just, that 
with all the powers of heart and 
mind, uplifting, too, our voices, 
we sing the God invisible, the 
Father almighty, and His only- 
begotten Son, Our Lord Jesus 
Christ; Who hath paid for us 
unto the eternal Father the 
debt of Adam, and hath wiped 
out with His dear blood the 
reckoning of the ancient of- 
fence. For these are the paschal 
rites wherein the true Lamb is 
slain with Whose blood the 
door-posts of the faithful are 
consecrated. This the night on 
which Thou didst cause our 
fathers, the children of Israel, 
to cross dryshod the Red Sea, 
leading them out of the land of 
Egypt. This, then, is the night 
that hath purged away the 
darkness of sins with the illu- 
mination of the pillar of fire. 
This is the night which now, 
throughout all the world, doth 
separate believers in Christ 
from the iniquities of the world 
and the gloom of sins, doth re- 
store them to grace, and join 
them unto holiness. 'This is the 
night on which, bursting the 
bonds of death, Christ came 
victorious from the grave. For 
it profited us nothing to be born 
except that we might be re- 
deemed. O wondrous conde- 
scension of Thy great kindness 
in our regard! O inestimable 
affection of charity: to redeem 
the slave, Thou didst give up 


http://ccwatershed.org 


498 


the Son! O truly necessary sin 
of Adam, that is wiped out by 
the death of Christ! O happy 
fault, that was worthy to have 
such and so great a redeemer! 
O truly blessed night, that 
alone Was worthy to know the 
time and the hour when Christ 
rose again from the dead. This 
is the night of which it is writ- 
ien: And the night shall be 
enlightened like day; and the 
night is my enlightening in my 
pleasures. 


HOLY SATURDAY 


qua sola méruit scire tempus 
et horam, in qua Christus ab 
inferis resurréxit! Hee nox 
est, de qua scriptum est: Et 
nox sicut dies illuminábitur: 
Et nox illuminátio mea in de- 
líciis meis. Hujus ígitur sanc- 
tificátio noctis fugat scélera, 
culpas lavat: et reddit inno- 
céntiam lapsis, et mestis læ- 
títiam, Fugat ódia, concórdi- 
am parat, et curvat impéria. 


'The sanctification of this night, therefore, driveth 


away evil deeds, cleanseth offences, restoring innocence to 
the fallen and gladness to the mournful. It driveth out hatred, 
it produceth concord and curbeth tyrannies. 


Here the deacon fixes the five grains of blessed incense into 
the paschal candle, in the form of a cross. 


In thanksgiving, then, for 
this night, O holy Father, re- 
ceive the evening sacrifice of 
this incense, which most holy 
Church rendereth to Thee by 
the hands of her ministers, in 
this solemn oblation of wax, 
from the labors of the bees. And 
now we know the glories of 
this column which the flicker- 


inr Rea dev cct 


e 


In hujus ígitur noctis grá- 
tia, süscipe, sancte Pater, in- 
cénsi hujus sacrifícium ves- 
pertínum: quod tibi in hac 
Cérei oblatióne sólémni, per 
ministrórum manus de opéri- 
bus apum, sacrosancta reddit 
Ecclésia. Sed jam colümne 
hujus  precónia  nóvimus, 
quam in hondrem Not -e1-—- 


Here the deacon lights the paschal candle with one of the 


lights of the triple candle, 


Which fire, though it be di- 
vided into parts, yet knoweth 
no diminution of its light. For 
it is nourished by the fluid wax 
which the mother bee hath pro- 
duced for the material of this 
precious torch. 


Qui licet sit dívisus in par- 
tes, mutuáti tamen liminis 
detriménta non novit. Alitur 
enim liquántibus ceris, quas 
in substántiam pretióse hu- 
jus lámpadis, apis mater edü- 
xit. 


Here the lamps in the church are lighted from the holy fire, 


O truly blessed night that 
despoiled the Egyptians and 
enriched the Hebrews! Night 
in which heavenly are joined 
with earthly things, divine with 
human! We therefore pray 
Thee, O Lord; that this candle, 


O vere beáta nox, que ex- 
spoliavit JEgyptios, ditavit 
Hebreos! Nox, in qua terré- 
nis eeléstia, humánis divina 
jungüntur. Orámus ergo te, 
Dómine: ut Céreus iste in 
honórem tui nóminis conse- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Lii. acl 


HOLY SATURDAY 499 


Crátus, ad noctis hujus calig- 
inem destruéndam, indefici- 
ens persevéret. Et in odórem 
Suavitátis accéptus, supérnis 
lumináribus misceátur. Flam- 
mas ejus lücifer matutínus 
invéniat, Ille, inquam, lücifer, 
qui nescit occásum. Ille, qui 
regréssus ab ínferis, humáno 
géneri serénus illuxit. Pre- 
cámur ergo te, Dómine: ut 
nos fámulos tuos, omnémque 
clerum, et. devotissimum póp- 
ulum: una cum beatíssimo 
Papa nostro N. et Antistite 
nostro N., quiéte témporum 
concéssa, in his paschálibus 
gáudiis, assídua protectióne 
régere, gubernáre, et conser- 
váre dignéris. Per eümdem 
Dóminum nostrum Jesum 
Christum Fílium tuum: Qui 
tecum vivit et regnat in uni- 
táte Spíritus Sancti Deus: 
per ómnia secula sæculór- 
um. Jj. Amen. 


consecrated to the honor of 
Thy name, may persevere with- 
out failing in breaking up the 
gloom of this night. And, being 
accepted for an odor of sweet- 
ness, may it be mingled with 
the heavenly luminaries. May 
the daystar of the morning 
come upon its flame: that day- 
star which knoweth no setting: 
He Who, returning from the 
grave, hath shed His serene 
light upon the human race. We 
therefore beseech Thee, O Lord, 
ihat, granting peace in these 
paschal joys to us Thy ser- 
vants, and all Thy clergy, and 
Thy most devout people, to- 
gether with our most blessed 
Pope N. and our bishop N., 
Thou wouldst deign to direct 
us with Thy watchful protec- 
tion, to govern and preserve us. 
Through the same Our Lord 
Jesus Christ, Thy Son, Who 
with Thee liveth and reigneth 
in the unity of the Holy Spirit, 
God, world without end. B. 
Amen.: 


The deacon now. lays aside his festival robes and, with the 
subdeacon, attends the officiating priest who reads the follow- 
ing twelve prophecies in a low voice: while they are chanted 


by others of the clergy: 


Prophecy 1. Gen. 1, 1-31; 2, 1, 2 


In princípio creávit Deus 
celum, et terram. Terra au- 
tem erat inánis, et vácua, et 
ténebre erant super fáciem 
abyssi: et Spíritus Dei fere- 
bátur super aquas. Dixítque 
Deus: Fiat lux. Et facta est 
lux. Et vidit Deus lucem quod 
esset bona: et divisit lucem a 
ténebris. Appellavítque lucem 
Diem, et ténebras Noctem: 
factimque est véspere, et 
mane, dies unus, Dixit quoque 
Deus: Fiat firmaméntum in 


In the beginning God cre- 
ated heaven and earth: and the 
earth was void.and empty, and 
darkness was upon the face of 
the deep, and the Spirit of God 
moved over the waters. And 
God said, Be light made; and 
light was made. And God saw 
the light that it was good: and 
He divided the light from the 
darkness; and He called the 
light.day and the darkness 
night: and there was evening 
and morning, one day. And 


http://ccwatershed.org 


500 


God said, Let there be a firma- 
ment made amidst the waters, 
and let it divide the waters 
from the waters. And God made 
a firmament, and divided the 
waters that were under the 
firmament from those that were 
above the firmament: and it 
was so. And God called the 
firmament Heaven; and the 
evening and morning were the 
second day. God also said, Let 
the waters that are under the 
heavens be gathered together 
into one place, and let the dry 
land appear: and-it was so 
done. And God called the dry 
land Earth, and the gathering 
together of the waters He call- 
ed Seas: and God saw that it 
was. good. And He said, Let the 
earth bring forth the green 
herb, and such as may seed, 
and the fruit-tree yielding 
fruit after its kind, which may 
have seed in itself upon the 
earth; and it was so done. And 
the earth brought forth the 
green herb, and such as yield- 
ed seed anannainn ta to 7 

son ve 9 ves MGALCUL LEULD, 
having seed each one according 
to its kind: and God saw that 
it was good; and the evening 
and the morning were the third 
day. And God said, Let there be 
lights made in the firmament 
of heaven to divide the day and 
the night, and let them be for 
signs, and for seasons, and for 
days, and years; to shine in the 
firmament of heaven, and to 
give light upon the earth: and 
it was so done. And God made 
two great lights, a greater light 
to rule the day, and a lesser 
light to rule the night; and tne 
stars; and He set them in tbe 
firmament of heaven to shine 


HOLY SATURDAY 


médio aquárum: et dívidat 
aquas ab aquis. Et fecit Deus 
firmaméntum, divisitque a- 
quas, que erant sub firma- 
mento, ab his que erant su- 
per firmaméntum. Et factum 
est ita. Vocavítque Deus fir- 
maméntum Calum: et fac- 
tum est véspere, et mane, dies 
Secündus. Dixit vero Deus: 
Congregéntur aque, que sub 
celo sunt, in locum unum: et 
appáreat árida. Et factum est 
ita. Et vocávit Deus áridam, 
'Terram: congregationésque a- 
quárum appellávit Mária. Et 
vidit Deus quod esset bonum. 
Et ait: Gérminet terra herb- 
am viréntem, et faciéntem se- 
men, et lignum pomíferum 
fáciens fructum juxta genus 
suum, cujus semen in semet- 
ipso sit super terram. Et fac- 
tum est ita. Et prótulit terra 
herbam: viréntem, et facién- 
tem semen juxta genus suum, 
lignümque fáciens fructum, et 
habens unumquódque semén- 
tem secándum spéciem snam 


num. Et factum est véspere 
et mane, dies tértius. Dixit 
autem Deus: Fiant lumináris 
in firmaménto ceeli, et divi- 
dant diem ac noctem, et sint 
in signa et témpora, et dies et 
annos: ut lüceant in firma- 
ménto celi, et illiminent ter- 
ram. Et factum est ita. Fecit- 
que Deus duo luminária mag- 
na: luminare majus, ut præ- 
ésset diéi: et luminare minus, 
ut preeésset nocti: et stellas. 
Et pósuit eas in firmaménto 
cxli ut lucérent super ter- 
ram, et preéssent diél ac 
nocti, et divíderent lucem, ac 
ténebras. Et vidit Deus quod 
esset bonus. Et factum est 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 


véspere et mane, dies quartus. 
Dixit étiam Deus: Prodücant 
aque réptile anime vivén- 
tis, et volatile super ter- 
ram sub firmaménto cali. 
Creavítque Deus cete grándia, 
et omnem ánimam vivéntem 
atque motábilem, quam pro- 
düxerant aquae in spécies su- 
as, et omne volatile secándum 
genus suum. Et vidit Deus 
quod esset bonum. Benedixit- 
que eis, dicens: Créscite, et 
muliplicámini, et repléte a- 
quas maris: avésque multipli- 
céntur super terram. Et fac- 
tum est véspere, et mane, dies 
quintus. Dixit quoque Deus: 
Prodücat terra ánimam vi- 
véntum in génere suo: jumén- 
ta, et reptília, et béstias ter- 
re secündum spécies suas. 
Factümque est ita. Et fecit 
Deus béstias terre juxta spé- 
cies suas, et juménta, et omne 
réptile terre in génere suo. 
Et vidit Deus quod esset 
bonum, et ait: Faciamus hó- 
minem ad imáginem, et simi- 
litudinem nostram: et presit 
piscibus maris, et volatílibus 
csl, et béstiis, universeque 
terre, omníque réptili, quod 
movétur in terra. Et creávit 
Deus héminem ad imáginem 
suam: ad imáginem Dei cre- 
avit illum, másculum et fémi- 
nam creávit eos. Benedixítque 
ilis Deus, et ait: Créscite, et 
multiplicámini, et repléte ter- 
ram, et subjícite eum, et do- 
minámini píscibus maris, et 
volatílibus celi, et univérsis 
animántibus, que movéntur 
Super terram. Dixítque Deus: 
Ecce dedi vobis omnem her- 
bam afferéntem semen super 
terram, et univérsa ligna que 
habent in semetipsis semén- 


501 


upon the earth, and to rule the 
day and íhe night, and to di- 
vide the light and the dark- 
ness; and God saw that it was 
good; and the evening and the 
morning were the fourth day. 
God also said, Let the waters 
bring forth the creeping crea- 
ture baving life, and the fowl 
that may fly over the earth 
under the firmament of heaven. 
And God created the great 
whales, and every living and 
moving creature, which the 
waters brought forth, according 
to their kinds, and every winged 
fowl according to its kind: and 
God saw that it was good. And 
He blessed them, saying, In- 
crease and multiply, and fill 
the waters of the sea, and let 
the birds be multiplied upon 
the earth: and the evening and 
morning were the fifth day. And 
God said, Let the earth bring 
forth the living creature in 
its kind, cattle and creeping 
things, and beasts of the earth, 
according to their kinds: and 
it was so done. And God made 


-the-beasts of the earth accord- 


ing to their kinds, and cattle, 
and every thing that creepeth 
on the earth after its kind: and 
God saw that it was good. And 
He said, Let us make man to 
our image and likeness: and let 
him have dominion over the 
fishes of the sea, and the fowls 
of the air, and the beasts, and 
the whole earth, and every 
creeping creature that moveth 
upon the earth. And God cre- 
ated man to His own image; to 
the image of God He created 
him; male and female He cre- 
ated them. And God blessed 
them, saying, Increase and 
multiply, and fill the earth, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


502 


subdue it, and rule over the 
fishes of the sea, and the fowls 
of the air, and all living crea- 
tures that move upon the earth. 
And God said, Behold, Y have 
given you every herb bearing 
seed upon the earth, and all 
trees that have in themselves 
seed of their own kind, to be 
your meat; and to all the beasts 
of the earth, and to every fowl 
of the air, and to all that move 
upon the earth and wherein 
there is life, that they may have 
to feed upon: and it was so 
done. And God saw all the 
things that He had made, and 
they were very good: and the 


HOLY SATURDAY 


tem géneris sui, ut sint vobis 
in escam: et cunctis animan- 
tibus terre, omnique vólucri 
cxli et univérsis, que mo- 
véntur in terra, et in quibus 
est ánima vivens, ut hábeant 
ad vescéndum; Et factum est 
ita. Viditque Deus cuncta, 
que fécerat: et erant valde 
bona. Et factum est véspere, 
et mane, dies sextus. Igitur 
perfécti sunt cali, et terra, et 
ómnia ornátus eórum. Com- 
plevítque Deus die séptimo 
opus suum quod fécerat: et 
requiévit die séptimo ab uni- 
vérso ópere quod patrárat. 


evening and morning were the sixth day. So the heavens and 
the earth were finished, and all the furniture of them. And 
on the seventh day God ended His work which He had made; 
and He rested on the seventh day from all His work which He 
had done. 


At the end of each Prophecy, before the Prayer, the priest 
says, Oremus; the deacon subjoins, Flectamus genua, to which 
the subdeacon replies, Levate. 


Let us pray 


FJ. Let us kneel. 
BY. Arise. 


JV. Flectámus génua. 
Hf. Leváte. 


rrayer 


Gov, Who hast wonder- 

fully created man and 
more wonderfully redeemed 
him, grant us, we beseech Thee, 
to withstand by strength of 
spirit the allurements of sin, 
that we may be worthy to 
reach everlasting joys. Through 
our Lord. 


EUS, qui mirabíliter cre- 

Asti hóminem, et mira- 
bílius redemísti: da nobis, 
quaesumus, contra oblecta- 
ménta peccáti, mentis ratióne 
persístere; ut mereámur ad 
etérna gáudia perveníre. Per 
Dóminum. 


Prophecy 2. Gen. 5, 6,7, 8 


And Noe, when he was five 


Noé vero cum quingentórum 


hundred years old, begot esset annórum, génuit Sem, 
Sem, Cham, and Japheth. Cham, et Japheth. Cumque 
And after that men began to be cepíssent hómines multipli- 
multiplied upon the earth, and cari super terram, et filias 
deughters were born to them, procreássent, vidéntes fílii Dei 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 


filias hóminum, quod essent 
pulchre, gCcepérunt sibi ux- 
éres ex ómnibus, quas elége- 
rant. Dixítque Deus: Non per- 
manébit spíritus meus in hó- 
mine in setérnum, quia caro 
est: erüntque dies illíus cen- 
tum viginti annórum. Gigán- 
tes autem erant super terram 
in diébus illis. Postquam enim 
ingréssi sunt fili Dei ad fílias 
hóminum, illeque genuérunt, 
isti sunt poténtes a seculo 
viri famósi Videns autem 
Deus, quod multa malítia hó- 
minum esset in terra, et cun- 
cta cogitátio cordis inténta 
esset ad malum omnitémpore, 
poenítuit eum quod hóminem 
fecisset in terra. Et factus 
dolore cordis intrinsecus: De- 
lébo, inquit, hóminem, quem 
creavi, a facie terrae, ab hó- 
mine usque ad animantia, a 
réptili usque ad vólucres cae- 
li: poenitet enim me fecísse 
eos. Noé vero invénit grátiam 
coram Dómino. He sunt ge- 
neratiónes Noé: Noé vir jus- 
tus atque perféctus fuit in 
generatiénibus suis, cum Deo 
ambulavit. Et génuit tres ffli- 
os, Sem, Cham, et Japheth. 
Corrüpta est autem terra co- 
ram Deo, et repléta est iniqui- 
tate. Cumque vidisset Deus 
terram esse corrüptam (om- 
nis quippe caro occüperat vi- 
am suam super terram), dixit 
ad Noé: Finis univérse car- 
nis venit coram me: repléta 
est terra iniquitáte a facie 
eórum, et ego dispérdam eos 
cum terra, Fac tibi arcam de 
lignis levigdtis: mansiüncu- 
Jas in arca fácies, et bitümine 
línies intrinsecus, et extrínse- 
cus. Et sic facies eam: Tre- 
centérum cubitérum erit lon- 


503 


the sons of God seeing the 
daughters of men, that they 
were fair, took to themselves 
wives of all which they chose. 
And God said, My spirit shall 
not remain in man forever, 
because he is flesh; and his 
days shall be a hundred and 
twenty years. Now giants were 
upon the earth in those days. 
For after the sons of God went 
in to ihe daughters of men, and 
they brought forth children, 
these are the mighty men of 
old, men of renown. And God 
seeing that the wickedness of 
men was great on the earth, 
and that all the thought of 
their heart was bent upon evil 
at all times, if repented Him 
that He had made man on the 
earth. And being touched in- 
wardly with sorrow of heart, 
He said, I. will destroy man, 
whom I have created, from the 
face of the earth, from man 
even to beasts, from the creep- 
ing thing even to the fowls of 
the air; for it repenteth Me 
that I have made them. But 
Noe found grace before the 
Lord. 'These àre the generations 
of Noe; Noe was a just and per- 
fect man in his generations, he 
walked with God. And he be- 
got three sons, Sem, Cham, and 
Japheth. And the earth was 
corrupted before God, and was 
filed with iniquity. And when 
God had seen that the earth 
was corrupted (for all flesh had 
corrupted its way upon the 
earth), He said to Noe, the end 
Of all flesh is come before Me; 
the earth is filled with iniquity 
through them, and I will de- 
Stroy them with the earth. 
Make thee an ark of timber 
planks: thou shalt make little 


http://ccwatershed.org 


504 HOLY SATURDAY 


rooms in the ark, and thou 
shalt pitch it within and with- 
out, And thus shalt thou make 
it: The length of the ark shall 
be three hundred cubits, the 
breadth of it fifty cubits, and 
the height of it thirty cubits. 
Thou shalt make a window in 
the ark, and in a cubit shalt 
thou finish the top of it; and 
the door of the ark. thou shalt 
set in the side; with lower, mid- 
dle chambers, and third stories, 
shalt thou make it. Behold X 
will bring the waters of a great 
flood upon the earth, to destroy 
all fiesh wherein is the breath 
of life under heaven: all things 
that are in the earth shall be 
consumed. And I will establish 
My covenant with thee: and 
thou shalt enter into the ark; 
thou and thy sons, and thy wife, 
and the wives of thy sons, with 
thee. And of every living crea- 
ture of all flesh, thou shalt 
bring two of a sort into: the 
ark, that they may live with 
thee, of the male sex and the 
female. Of fowls according ta 


uneir Kind, and of every thing 
that creepeth on the earth ac- 
cording to its kind; two of 
every sort shall go in with thee 
that they may live. Thou shalt 
take unto thee of all food that 
may be eaten, and thou shalt 
lay it up with thee: and it shall 
be food for thee and them. And 
Noe did all things which God 
had commanded him. And he 
Was six hundred years old when 
the waters of the flood over- 
flowed the earth. All the foun- 
tains of the great. deep were 
broken up, and the floodgates 
of heaven were opened, and the 
rain fell upon the earth forty 


gitido arc®, quinquaginta 
cubítorum latitido, et triginta 
cubitórum ajtitüdo illíus. Fe- 
néstram. in arca fácies, et in 
cúbito consummabis summi- 
tátem ejus: óstium autem ar- 
cæ pones ex látere: deórsum 
cenácula, et tristega. facies 
in ea. Ecce ego addücam 
aquas dilüvii super terram, ut 
interfícdiam omnem carnem, 
in qua spiritus vite est sub- 
ter celum. Univérsa quse in 
terra sunt, consuméntur. Po- 
námque fedus meum tecum: 
et ingrediéris arcam tu, et fí1ii 
tui, uxor tua, et uxóres fili- 
órum tuórum tecum. Et ex 
cunctis animántibus univér- 
sæ carnis bina indüces in ar- 
cam, ut vivant tecum: mascu- 
Kini sexus, et feminíni. De vo- 
lücribus juxta genus suum et 
de juméntis in génere suo, et 
ex omni réptili terre secün- 
dum genus suum: bina de 
ómnibus ingrediéntur tecum, 
ut possint vivere. Tolles ígitur 
tecum ex ómnibus escis, que 
mandi eA $ d 

-~ upuu uc. ev erunt tam tibi, 
quam illis in cibum. Fecit igi- 
tur Noé ómnia, qum przcé- 
perat ili Deus. Erátque sex- 
centórum annérum, quando 
diláviü aque inundavérunt 
super terram. Rupti sunt om- 
nes fontes abyssi magne, et 
cataracte czli apérte sunt: 
et facta est plüvia super ter- 
ram quadragínta diébus et 
quadraginta nóctibus. In ar- 
tículo diéi illius ingréssus est 
Noé, et Sem, et Cham, et Ja- 
pheth fílii ejus, uxor illius, et 
tres uxores filiórum ejus cum 
eis in arcam: ipsi, eb omne 
ánimal secündum genus su- 
um, univers&gue juménta in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ü atop agam à 
sna aici ON ue lm po 


HOLY SATURDAY 


génere suo, et omne, quod mo- 
vétur super terram in génere 
suo, cunetümque volatile se- 
7 cündum genus suum. Porro 
W arca ferebátur super aquas. 
Et aquse preevaluérunt nimis 
Super terram: opertique sunt 
omnes montes excélsi sub uni- 


~  vérso c&lo. Quindecim cübi- 


tis áltior fuit aqua super mon- 
tes, quos operüerat. Consümp- 
taque est omnis caro quz mo- 
vebátur super terram, vülu- 
crum, animántium, bestiár- 
um, omniümque reptílium, 
que reptant super terram. 
Remansit autem solus Noé, et 
qui cum eo erant in arca. Ob- 
tinuerüntque aque terram 
centum quinquagínta diébus. 
Recordátus autem Deus Noë, 
cunctorümque  animántium, 
et ómnium jumentórum, que 
erant cum eo in arca, adduxit 
Spiritum super terram, et im- 
minute sunt aque. Et clausi 
sunt fontes abyssi, et catarac- 
te celi: et prohfbite sunt 
plüvie de celo. Reverseque 
sunt aquae de terra eüntes, et 
redeüntes: et cepérunt mí- 
nue post-centum quinquagin- 
ta dies. Cumque tránsíssent 
quadraginta dies, apériens 
Noé fenéstram arce, quam 
fécerat, dimisit corvum: qui 
egrediebatur, et non reverte- 
bátur, donec siccaréntur a- 
que super terram.  Emísit 
quoque colümbam post eum, 
ut vidéret si jam cessássent 
aque super faciem terre. 
Quae cum non invenísset ubi 
requiésceret pes ejus, revérsa 
est ad eum in arcam: aque 
enim erant super univérsam 
terram: extenditque manum, 
et apprehénsam intulit in ar- 
cam, Exspectáre autem ultra 


505 


days and forty nights. In the 
selfsame day Noe, and Sem and 
Cham and Japheth, his sons, 
his wife, and the three wives of 
his sons with them, went into 
the ark; they and. every beast 
according to its kind, and all 
the cattle in their kind, and 
every thing that moveth upon 
the earth according to its kind, 
and every fowl according to its 
kind. And the ark was carried 
upon the waters: and the wa- 
ters prevailed beyond measure 
upon the earth, and all the high 
mountains under the whole 
heaven were covered; the water 
was fifteen cubits higher than 
the mountains which it: cov- 
ered. And all flesh was de- 
stroyed that moved upon the 
earth, both of fowl, and of cat- 
tle, and of beasts, and of all 
creeping things that creep upon 
the earth. And Noe only re- 
mained, and they that were 
with him in the ark. And the 
waters prevailed upon the earth 
a hundred and fifty days. And 
God remembered Noe, and all 
the living creatures, and all the 
cattle-which were with him in 
the ark, and brought a wind 
upon the earth, and the waters 
were abated; the fountains also 
of the deep and the floodgates 
of heaven were shut up, and the 
rain from heaven was re- 
Strained. And the waters re- 
turned from off the earth, going 
and coming; and they began 
to be abated after a hundred 
and fifty days. And after that 
forty days were passed, Noe 
opened the window of the ark, 
which he had made, sent forth 
a raven, which went forth, and 
did not return till the waters 
were dried up upon the earth. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


$06 


He sent forth also a dove after 
him, to. see if the waters had 
ceased upon the face of the 
earth: but she not finding 
where her foot might rest, re- 
turned to him into the ark, for 
the waters were upon the whole 
earth; and he put forth his 
hand, and caught her, and 
brought her into the ark. And 
having waited yet seven other 
days, he again sent forth the 
dove out of the ark. And she 
came to him in the evening 
carrying a bough of an olive- 
tree with green leaves in her 
mouth, Noe therefore under- 
stood that the waters were 
ceased upon the earth. And he 
stayed yet another seven days; 
and he sent forth the dove, 
which returned not any more 
unto him. And God spake to 
Noe, saying, Go out of the ark, 
thou and thy wife, thy sons, 
and the wives of thy sons with 
thee. All living things that are 
with thee of all flesh, as well in 
fowls as in beasts, and all 
creeping things that creep upon 
thin NM eee meod él. 21. ma 
WA, BY YU Upuss WIG CAL Ulis ALL” 
crease and multiply upon it. 
So Noe went out, he and his 
sons, his wife, and the wives of 
his sons with him. And all liv- 
ing things, and cattle, and 


HOLY SATURDAY 


septum diébus 4liis, rursum 
dimísit coláümbam ex arca. At 
ila venit ad eum ad véspe- 
ram, portans ramum olive 
viréntibus fóliis in ore suo. 
Intelléxit ergo Noë, quod ces- 
Sássent aquse super terram. 
Exspectavitque ^ nihilóminus 
Septem alios dies: et emísit 
colümbam, quae non est re- 
vérsa, ultra ad eum. Locütus 
est autem Deus ad Noé, di- 
cens: Egrédere de. arca, tu et 
uxor tua, fílii tui, et uxóres 
filiórum tuórum tecum Cunc- 
ta animántia, que sunt apud 
te, ex omni carne, tam in 
volatilibus, quam in béstiis, et 
univérsis reptílibus, quee rep- 
tant super terram, edu- te- 
cum, et ingredímini super ter- 
ram: créscite, et multiplicá- 
mini super eam. Egréssus est 
ergo Noë, et filii ejus, uxor 
illius, et uxores filiórum ejus 
cum eo. Sed et ómnia eniman- 
tia, juménta, et reptília, que 
reptant super terram, sécun- 
dum genus suum, egréssa sunt 
de arca. ZEdificávit autem 


Tai LARÍL.ICENEILINIIG oh tr. 


uc LUD jpjuUULAMUS, CU vuu- 
cribus mundis, óbtulit holo- 
cáusta super altáre. Odora- 
tüsque est Dóminus odórem 
suavitátis. 


creeping things that creep upon the earth, according to their 
kinds, went out of the ark. And Noe built an altar unto the 
Lord, and taking of all cattle and fowls that were clean, 


offered holocausts upon the altar. 


Sweet savor. 


And the Lord smelled a 


Let us pray 


V. Let us kneel, 
W. Arise. 


Y. Flectámus génua. 
Hf. Leváte. 


Prayer 


Gop, unchangeable virtue, 
and light eternal, look 


O 


EUS, incommutabilis vir- 
tus, et lumen eternum: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 


respíce propítius ad totíus Ec- 
clésie tuz mirábile sacramén- 
tum, et opus salütis humáns, 
perpétue dispositiónis efféctu 
tranquillius operáre; totüsque 
mundus experiátur et. videat, 
dejécta érigi, inveteráta reno- 
vári, et per ipsum redíre óm- 
nia in integrum, a quo sump- 
sére principium: Dóminum 
nostrum Jesum Christum Fi- 
lium tuum: Qui tecum vivit et 
regnat. .. 


Prophecy 3. 


In diébus illis: Tentavit 
Deus Abraham, et dixit ad 
eum: Abraham, Abraham. At 
ille respóndit: Adsum. At illi: 
Tolle fílium tuum unigéni- 
tum, quem díligis, Isaac, et 
vade in terram visiónis: atque 
ibi ófferes eum in holocáus- 
tum super. unum montium, 
quem monstrávero tibi. Igitur 
Abraham .de nocte consür- 
gens, stravit ásinum suum: 
ducens secum duos jüvenes, et 
Isaac fílium suum. Cumque 
concidísset ligna in holocáus- 
tum, abiit ad locum, quem 
precéperat ei Deus. Die: au- 
tem tértio, elevátis óculis, vi- 
dit Jocum procul: dixítque ad 
pueros suos: Exspectáte hic 
cum ásino: ego, et puer illuc 
usque properántes, postquam 
adoravérimus, revertémur ad 
vos. Tulit quoque ligna holo- 
cáusti, et impósuit super Isaac 
fílium suum: ipse vero portá- 
bat in mánibus ignem, et glá- 
dium. Cumque duo pérgerent 
simul, dixit Isaac patri suo: 
Pater mi. At ille respóndit: 
Quid vis, fili? Ecce, inquit, 
ignis, et ligna: ubi est víctima 
holocáusti? Dixit autem A- 


507 


mercifully upon the wonderful 
sacrament of Thy whole 
Church, and perform in peace 
ihe work of human salvation, 
and let the whole world feel 
and see the things lifted up that 
were cast down, the worn out 
things renewed, and that all 
things are made whole through 
Him from Whom they had 
their origin, Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, Thy Son, Who with 
Thee liveth and reigneth. 


Gen. 22, 1-19 


In those days, God tempt- 
ed Abraham, and said to him, 
Abraham,. Abraham: and he 
answered, Here I am. He 
said to him, Take thy only-be- 
gotten son Isaac, whom thou 
lovest, and go into the land of 
vision; and there thou shalt 
offer him for an holocaust upon 
one of the mountains which I 
will show thee. So Abraham 
rising up in the night, saddled 
his ass, and took with him two 
young men, and Isaac his son; 
and when he had cut wood for 
the holocaust, he went his way 
to the place which God ‘had 
commanded him. And on the 
third day, lifting up his eyes, 
he saw the place afar off; and 
he said to his young men, Stay 
you here with the ass: I and 
the boy will go with speed as 
far as yonder, and, after we 
have worshipped will return 
to you. And he took the wood 
for the holocaust, and laid 
it upon Isaac his son: and 
he himself carried in his hands 
fire and a sword. And as they 
two went-on together, Isaac 
said to his father, My father; 
and he answered, What wilt 


http://ccwatershed.org 


508 


thou, son? Behold, saith he, 
fire and wood; where is the vic- 
tim for the holocaust? And 
Abraham said, God will provide 
Himself a victim for a holo- 
caust, my son. So they went on 
together; and they came to the 
place Which God had showed 
him, where he built an altar, 
and laid the wood in order upon 
it; and when he had bound 
Isaac his son, he laid him on 
the altar upon the pile of wood; 
and he put forth his hand, and 
took the sword to sacrifice his 
son. And behold an angel of 
the Lord from heaven called 
to him, saying, Abraham, Abra- 
ham; and he answered, Here I 
am. And he said to him, Lay 
not thy hand upon the boy, 
neither do thou anything to 
him; now I know that thou 
fearest God, and hast not 
spared thy only-begotten son 
for My sake. Abraham lifted 
up his eyes, and saw behind his 
back a ram amongst the briars, 
sticking fast by the horns, 
which he took and offered for 
o halneanust instead of his son. 
place, The Lord Seeth: Where- 
upon even to this day it is said, 
In the mountain the Lord will 
see. And the angel of the Lord 
called to Abraham a second 
time from heaven, saying, By 
My own self have I sworn, saith 
the Lord; because thou hast 
done this thing, and hast not 
spared thy only-begotten son 
for My sake, I will bless thee, 
and I will multiply thy seed as 
the stars of heaven, and as the 
sand that is by the seashore; 
thy seed shall possess the gates 
of their enemies, and in thy 


HOLY SATURDAY 


braham: Deus providébit sibi 
víctimam holocausti, fili mi. 
Pergébant ergo páriter: et 
venérunt ad locum, quem os- 
ténderat ei Deus, in quo edi- 
ficávit altáre, et désuper ligna 
compósuit: cumque alligásset 
Isaac fílium suum, pósuit 
eum in altáre super struem 
lignórum. Extendítque ma- 
num, et arrípuit gládium, ut 
immoláret filium suum. Et 
ecce Angelus Dómini de c&lo 
clamávit, dicens: Abraham, 
Abraham. Qui respóndit: Ad- 
sum. Dixítque ei: Non extén- 
das manum tuum super püer- 
um, neque fácias illi quid- 
quam: nunc cognóvi quod ti- 
mes Deum, et non pepercísti 
unigénito fílio tuo propter me. 
Levávit Abraham óculos suos. 
vidítque post tergum aríetem 
inter vepres heréntem córni- 
bus, quem. assümens óbtulit 
holocáustum pro fílio. Appel- 
lavítque nomen loci illíus, Dó- 
minus Videt. Unde usque hó- 
die dícitur: In monte Dómi- 
nus vidébit. Vocávit autem 
Angelus Dómini Abraham se- 


memetípsum jurávi, dicit Dó- 
minus: quia fecísti hanc rem, 
et non pepercisti fílio tuo uni- 
génito propter me: benedícam 
tibi, et multiplicábo semen 
tuum sicut stellas celi, et velut 
arénam, qus est in líttore 
maris: possidébit semen tu- 
um portas inimicórum suó- 
rum, et benedicéntur in sémi- 
ne tuo omnes gentes terre, 
quia obedísti voci mez. Re- 
vérsus est Abraham ad püeros 
suos, abierüntque Bersabée si- 
mul, et habitávit ibi. 


seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed, because thou 


http://ccwatershed.org 


bee 


HOLY SATURDAY 


509 


hast obeyed My voice. Abraham returned to his young men, 
ana they went to Bersabee together, and he dwelt there. ` 


Let us pray 
Y, Flectámus génua. ¥. Let us kneel. 
Hf. Levate. ee W. Ariše. 
Prayer ` 


EUS, fidélium Pater sum- 

me, qui in toto orbe 
terrárum, promissidnis tue 
filios diffusa adoptiónis grátia 
multíplicas: et per. paschále 
sacraméntum, Abraham pú- 
erum. tuum universárum, si~ 
cut jurasti, géntium éfficis 
patrem; da pópulis tuis digne 
ad grátiam tue vocatiónis 
introire. Per Dóminum. 


O cop, the supreme Father 
of the faithful, Who dost 
multiply Thy children through- 
out the world by spreading 
&broad ihe grace of adoption, 
and Who, through the paschal 
sacrament, dost make Thy ser- 
vant Abraham the father of all 
ihe nations, as 'Thou didst 
swear, grant that Thy people 
may worthily. enter into the 
grace of Thy vocation. Through 
Our Lord. i 


Prophecy 4. Ex. 14, 24-31; 15,1 


In diébus illis: Factum est 
in vígilia matutina, et ecce 
respíciens Dóminus super ca- 
stra ZEgyptiórum per colüm- 
nam ignis , et nubis, interfécit 
Exércitum eórum: et subvértit 
rotas cürruum, ferebántürque 
in profündum. Dixérunt ergo 
Ægypti: Fugiámus Isreélem: 
Dóminus enim pugnat pro eis 
contra nos, Et ait Dóminus 
ad Móysen: Extende manum 
iuam super mare, ut rever- 
tantur aque ad ZEgyptios su- 
per currus, et équites eórum. 
Cumque extendísset Móyses 
manum conira mare, revér- 
sum est primo diliculo ad 
priórem locum: fugientibüs- 
que ZEgyptiis occurrérunt a-~ 
qui, et invólvit eos Dóminus 
in médiis flüctibus. 
S#que sunt aque, et operué- 
TUnt currus, et équites cuncti 
exércitus Pharaónis, qui se- 
quéntes ingréssi füerant ma- 


Rever- 


In those days, the morning 
watch was come, and behold 
the Lord, looking upon the 
Egyptian army through the pil- 
lar of fire and of the cloud, 
slew their host, and overthrew 
the wheels of the chariots, and 
they were carried into the deep. 
And the Egyptians said, Let us 
flee from Israel, for the Lord 
fighteth for them against us. 
And the Lord said to Moses, 
Stretch forth thy hand over the 
sea, that the waters may come 
again upon the Egyptians, upon 
their chariots and horsemen. 
And when Moses had stretched 
forth his hand toward the sea, 
it returned, at the first break 
of day, to the former place; 
and as the Egyptians were flee- 
ing away, the waters came upon 
them, and the Lord-shut them 
up.in the middle of the waves. 
And the waters returned, and 
covered the chariots and the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


510 HOLY SATURDAY 


horsemen of all the army of 
Pharao, who had come into the 
sea after them, neither did 
there so much as one of them 
remain. But the children of Is- 
rael marched through the midst 
of the sea upon dry land, and 


the waters were to them as a 


wall on the right hand and on 
the left: and the Lord delivered 
Israel in that day out of the 
hand of the Egyptians. And 
they saw the Egyptians dead 
upon the seashore, and the 
mighty hand that the Lord had 
used against them: and the 
people feared the Lord, and 


re: nec unus quidem supérfuit 
ex eis. Fílii autem Israël per- 
rexérunt per médium sicci 
maris, et aque eis erant quasi 
pro muro a dextris et a sinis- 
tris: liberavítque Dóminus in 
die illa Israël de manu ZEgyp- 
tiórum. Et vidérunt ZEgyptios 
mórtuos super littus maris, et 
manum magnum, quam ex- 
ercüerat Dóminus contra eos: 
timuítque pópulus Dóminum, 
et credidérunt Dómino, et 
Móysi servo ejus. Tunc cécinit 
Móyses et filii Israël carmen 
hoc Dómino, et dixérunt: 


they believed the Lord, and Moses His servant. Then Moses 
and the children of Israel sung this canticle to the Lord and 


said: 


Tract. 


Let us sing to the Lord, for 
He is gloriously magnified: the 
horse and the rider He hath 
thrown into the sea: He is be- 
come my helper. and protector 
unto salvation. Y. He is my 
God, and T win tee 77 

ay «vci, and i 
will exalt Him. y. The Lord 
crushing wars; the Lord is His 
name. 


Ex. 15, 1, 2 


Cantémus Dómino: glorióse 
enim honorificatus est: egu- 
um, et ascensórem projécit in 
mare: adjütor et protéctor 
factus est mihi in salütem. 
Y. Hic Deus mene of wa- 

2 ree d LCL, 
et exaltábo eum. J. Dóminus 
cónterens bella: Dóminus no- 
men est illi. 


Let us pray 
Y. Let us kneel. Y. Flectamus génua. 
W. Arise. By. Leváte. 
Prayer 


O Gop, of Whose wondrous 
works of old we feel the 
splendor even in our days, 
when Thou dost perform for 
the salvation of all peoples, 
through the water of regenera- 
tion, that which Thou didst for 
one people, delivering it from 
the Egyptian persecution by the 
power of Thy right hand, grant 


EUS, cujus antiqua mirá- 

cula étiam nostris sæ- 

culis coruscáre  sentímus: 
dum quod uni pópulo, a per- 
secutióne ZEgyptíaca, liberán- 
do, déxtere tue poténtia con- 
tulísti, id in salütem géntium 
per aquam  regeneratiónis 
operáris: presta; ut in Abra- 
hz fílios, et in Israéliticam 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
| 
2 


S 


HOLY SATURDAY 


dignitátem, totíus mundi 
tránseat plenitüdo. Per Dó- 
minum. 


511 


that the fulness of all the 
world be shared by the sons of 
Abraham and with the dignity 
of Israel "Through Our Lord. 


Prophecy 5. Is. 54, 17; 55, 1-11 


Hæc est heréditas servó- 
rum Dómini: et justítia eó- 
rum apud me, dicit Dóminus. 
Omnes sitiéntes veníte ad 
aquas:.et qui non habétis ar- 
géntum, properáte, émite, et 
comédite: veníte, emíte abs- 
que argénto, et absque ulla 
commutatióne, vinum, et lac. 
Quare appénditis argéntum 
non in pánibus, et labórem 
vestrum non in saturitate? 
Audite audiéntes me, et comé- 
dite bonum, et delectábitur in 
crassitüdine ánima vestra. In- 
clináte autem vestram, et ve- 
nite ad me: audite, et vivet 
ánima vestra, et fériam vobís- 
cum pactum sempitérnum, 
misericórdias David fidéles. 
Ecce testem pópulis dedi eum, 
ducem, ac praeceptórum gén- 
tibus, Ecce gentem, quam ne- 
Sciébas, vocábis: et gentes, 
que te non cognovérunt, ad te 
current’ propter  Dórninum 
Deum tuum, et sanctum Is- 
raél, quia glorificávit te. Que- 
rite Dóminum, dum inveníri 
potest: invocáte eum, dum 
prope est. Derelínquat impius 
viam suam, et vir iniquus co- 
gitatiónes suas, et revertátur 
ad Dóminum, et miserébitur 
ejus, et ad Deum nostrum: 
quóniam multus est ad igno- 
scéndum. Non enim cogita- 
tiónes mez, cogitatiónes ves- 
tre: neque vie vestre, vim 
meg, dicit Dóminus. Quia si~ 
cut exaltántur celi a terra, 
Sic exaltóte sunt vie mee a 
vlis vestris, et cogitatiónes 


This is the inheritance of the 
servants of the Lord, and their 
justice with Me, saith the Lord, 
All you that thirst, come to the 
waters: and you that have no 
money, make haste, buy and 
eat; come ye, buy wine and milk 
without money, and without 
any price. Why do you spend 
money for that which is not 
bread, and your labor for that 
which doth not satisfy you? 
Harken diligently to Me, and 
eat that which is good, and 
your soul shall be delighted in 
fatness. Incline your ear, and 
come to Me: hear, and your 
soul shall live, and I will make 
an everlasting covenant with 
you, the faithful mercies of 
David. Behold I have given 
him for a witness to the people, 
for a leader and a master to the 
gentiles. Behold thou shalt call 
a nation, which thou knewest 
not; and the nations that knew 
not thee, shall run to thee, be- 
cause of the Lord thy God, and 
for the holy One of Israel, for 
He hath glorified thee. Seek ye 
the Lord while He may be 
found, call upon Him while He 
is near. Let the wicked forsake 
his way, and the unjust man 
his thoughts, and let him re- 
turn to the Lord, and He will 
have mercy upon him, and to 
our God, for He is bountiful to 
forgive. For My thoughts are 
not your thoughts, nor your 
ways My ways, saith the Lord. 
For as the heavens are exalted 
above the earth, so are My ways 


http://ccwatershed.org 


512 HOLY SATURDAY 


exalted above your ways, and 
My thotights above your 
thoughts. And as the rain and 
the snow come down from 
heaven, and return no more 
thither, but soak the earth, and 
water it, and make it to spring, 
and give seed to the sower, and 
bread to the eater; so shall My 
word be, which shall go forth 
from My mouth; it shall not 
return. to Me void, but it shall 
do whatsoever I please, and 
shall prosper in the things for 
which I sent it; saith the Lord 
almighty. 


meæ a cogitatiónibus vestris. 
Et quómodo descéndit imber, 
et nix de celo, et illuc ultra 
non revértitur, sed inébriat 
terram, et infündit eam, et 
germináre eam facit, et dat 
semen serénti, et panem co- 
medénti: sic erit verbum me- 
um, quod egrediétur .de ore 
meo: non revertétur ad: me 
vacuum, sed fáciet quecum- 
que vülui, et prosperábitur in 
his, ad que misi illud: dicit 
Dóminus omnípotens. 


Let us pray 
V. Let us kneel. Y. Flectámus génua. 
Bí. Arise. RY. Leváte. 
Prayer 


LMIcHry, eternal God, for 
the honor of Thy name 
multiply what Thou didst 
promise to the faith of the 
fathers, and increase by holy 
adoption the sons of promise, 
that, what the saints of old 
did not Aauht mesda ha m--- 
(^ mm mA oem wy BAL Y NECA 
already in great part fulfilled. 
Through Our Lord, 


Prophecy 6. 


Hear, O Israel, the com- 
mandments of life: give ear, 
that thou mayest learn wisdom. 
How happeneth it, O Israel, 
that thou art in thy enemies’ 
land? Thou art grown old in 
a strange country: thou art 
defiled with the dead; thou art 
counted with them that go 
down into hell. Thou hast for- 
saken the fountain of wisdom; 
for if thou hadst walked in the 
way of God thou hadst surely 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 
Deus, multiplica in ho- 
nórem nóminis tui, quod pa- 
trum fidei spopondisti: et 
promissíonis fílios sacra adop- 
tióne diláta; ut, quod prióres 
sancti non dubitavérunt fu- 


Jat. ex parte cognoscat im- 
plétum. Per Dóminum. 


Bar. 3, 9-38 


Audi Israël mandata vite: 
auribus pércipe, ut scias pru- 
déntiam. Quid est, Israël, 
quod in terra inimicórum es? 
Inveterásti in. terra aliéna, 
coinquinátus es cum mórtuis; 
deputátus es cum descendén- 
tibus in inférnum. Dereliquísti 
fontem sapiéntie. Nam si in 
via Dei ambulásses, habitás- 
ses ütique in pace sempitérna. 
Disce ubi sit prudéntia, ubi 
sit virtus, ubi sit intelléctus: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


5 


Me dh 


lab m don iln 


HOLY SATURDAY 513 


ut scias Simul ubi sit longi- 
türnitas vite, et victus, ubi sit 
lumen oculórum et pax. Quis 
invénit locum ejus? et quis 
intrávit jn thesáuros ejus? 
Ubi sunt príncipes géntium, 
et qui dominántur super bés- 
tias, que sunt super terram? 
qui in ávibus czli ludunt, qui 
argéntum thesaurízant, et au- 
rum, in quo confídunt hómi- 
nes, et-non est finis acquisi- 
tiónis eórum? qui argéntum 
fábricant et solliciti sunt, nec 
est invéntio óperum illórum? 
Extermináti sunt, et ad ínfe- 
ros descendérunt, et álii loco 
córum surrexérunt. Jüvenes 
vidérunt lumen, et habitavé- 
runt super terram: viam au- 
tem discipline ignoravérunt, 
neque intellexérunt sémitas 
ejus, neque fílii eórum, susce- 
pérunt eam, a fácie ipsórum 
longe facta est: non est au- 
dita in terra Chánaan, neque 
visa est in Theman. Fílii quo- 
que Agar, qui exquírunt pru- 
déntiam, que de terra est, 
negotiatóres Merrhz, et The- 
man,:et fabulatóres, et exqui- 
sitéres prudéntie, et intelli- 
géntie: viam autem sapiéntise 
nesciérunt, neque comemoráti 
sunt sémitas ejus. O Israél, 
quam magna est domus Dei, 
et ingens locus possessiónis 
ejus! Magnus est, et non ha- 
bet finem: excélsus,et immén- 
sus. Ibi fuérunt gigántes no- 
mináti illi, qui ab inítio fué- 
runt, státura magna, sciéntes 
bellum. Non hos elégit Dómi- 
nus, neque viam discípline 
invenérunt: proptérea perié- 
runt. Et quóniam non babu- 
érunt sapiéntiam, interiérunt 
propter suam  insipiéntiam. 
Quis ascéndit in eelum, et ac- 


dwelt in peace forever. Learn 
where is wisdom, where is 
strength, where is understand- 
ing, that thou mayest know also 
where is length of days and life, 
where is the light of the eyes, 
and peace. Who hath found out 
her place? and who hath gone 
into her treasures? Where are 
the princes of the nations and 
they that rule over the beasts 
that are upon the earth? that 
take their pastime with the 
birds of the air, that hoard up 
Silver and gold, wherein men 
trust; and there is no end of 
their getting? who work in sil- 
ver and are solicitous, and their 
works are unsearchable? They 
are cut off, and are gone down 
to hell, and others are risen up 
in their place. Young men 
have seen the Jight, and dwelt 
upon the earth, but the way ot 
knowledge they have not 
known; nor have they under- 
stood the paths thereof, neither 
have their children received it; 
it is far from their face. It 
hath not been heard of in the 
land of Chanaan,-neither hath 
it been seen in ‘Theman. The 
children of Agar also, that 
search after the wisdom that 
is of the earth, the merchants 
of Merrha, and of Theman, and 
the tellers of fables, and search- 
ers of prudence and under- 
standing; but the way of wis- 
dom they have not known, nei- 
ther have they remembered her 
paths. O Israel, how great is 
the house of God, and how vast 
is the place of His possession! 
It is great, and hath no end; 
it is high and immense. There 
were the giants, those renowned 
men that were from the begin- 
ning, of great stature, expert 


"9 http://ccwatershed.org 


514 


in war. The Lord chose not 
them, neither did they find the 
way of knowledge; therefore 
did they perish. And because 
they had not wisdom they per- 
ished through their folly. Who 
hath gone up into heaven, and 
taken her, and brought her 
down from the clouds? Who 
hath passed over the sea, and 
found her, and brought her 
preferably to chosen gold? 
There is none that is able to 
know her ways, nor that can 
search out her paths. But He 
that knoweth all things know- 
eth her, and hath found her 
out with His understanding: 
He that prepared the earth for- 
evermore, and filled it with 
cattle and four-footed beasts: 
He that sendeth forth light, 
and it goeth, and hath called 
it, and it obeyeth Him with 
trembling. And the stars have 
given light in their watches, 
and rejoiced. They were called, 
and they said, Here we are; and 


HOLY SATURDAY 


cépit eam, et edüxit eam de 
nübibus? Quis transfretávit 
mare, et invénit illam? et át- 
tulit illam super aurum eléc- 
tum? Non est qui possit scire 
vias ejus, neque qui exquírat 
sémitas ejus: sed qui scit uni- 
vérsa, novit eam, et adinvénit 
eam prudéntia sua: qui pre- 
parávit terram in etérno tém- 
pore, et replévit eam pecüdi- 
bus, et quadrupédibus: qui 
emíttit lumen, et vadit: et 
vocávit illud, et obédit illi in 
tremóre. Stelle autem. dedé- 
runt lumen in custódiis suis, 
et letate sunt: vocáte sunt, 
et dixérunt: Adsumus: et lux- 
érunt ei cum jucunditáte, qui 
fecit illas. Hic est Deus noster, 
et non estimabitur álius ad- 
vérsus eum. Hic adinvénit 
omnem viam discipline, et 
trádidit illam Jacob püero 
Suo, et Israél dilécto suo. Post 
hec in terris visus est, et cum 
homínibus conversátus est. 


with cheerfulness they have shined forth ta Him that mana 


«1 in comparison with Him. He found out all the way of 
knowledge, and gave it to Israel His servant, and to Israel His 
beloved. Afterwards He was seen upon earth and conversed 


with men. 


Let us pray 
Y. Let us kneel. Y. Flectámus génua. 
B. Arise. Bf. Leváte. 
Prayer 


O cop, Who dost ever mul- 
tiply Thy Church by the 
calling of the nations, merci- 
fully grant that those whom 
Thou dost wash with the water 
of baptism may be guarded 
by Thy continual protection. 
Through Our Lord. 


EUS, qui Ecclésiam tuam 
D semper géntium voca- 
tióne  multíplicas: concéde 
propitius: ut, quos aqua bap- 
tismatis ábluis, continua 
protectióne tueáris. Per Dó- 
minum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 515 


Prophecy 7. Ezech. 37, 1-14 


In diébus illis: Facta est 
Super me manus Dómini, et 
edüxit me in spíritu Dómini: 
et dimísit me in médio campi, 
qui erat plenus óssibus: et cir- 
cumduxit me per ea in gyro: 
erant autem multa valde su- 
per fáciem campi, síccaque 
veheménter. Et dixit ad me: 
Fili hóminis, putásne vi- 
vent ossa ista! Et dixi: Dó- 
mine Deus, tu nosti. Et Dixit 
ad me: Vaticináre de óssibus 
istis: et dices eis: Ossa 
árida audite verbum Dómini. 
Hee dicit Dóminus Deus óssi- 
bus his: Ecce ego intromít- 
tam in vos spiritum, et vivé- 
tis. Et dabo super vos nervos, 
et succréscere fáciam super 
vos carnes, et superexténdam 
in vobis cutem: et dabo vobis 
Spíritum, et vivétis, et sciétis 
quia ego Dóminus. Et pro- 
phetávi sicut precéperat mi- 
hi: factus est autem sónitus, 
prophetánte me, et ecce com- 
mótio: et accessérunt ossa ad 
ossa, unumquódque ad junc- 
türam suam. Et vidi, et ecce 
Supper ea nervi et carnes as- 
cendérunt: et exténta est in 
eis cutis désuper, et spiritum 
non habébant. Et dixit ad 
me: Vaticináre ad spíritum, 
vaticináre fili hóminis, et 
dices ad spiritum: Hec dicit 
Dóminus Deus: A quatuor 
ventis veni spíritus, et insüffla 
super interféctos istos, et re- 
vivíscant. Et prophetávi sicut 
precéperat mihi: et ingrés- 
sus est in ea spíritus, et vix- 
érunt: steterüntque super pe- 
des suos exércitus grandis 
nimis valde. Et dixit ad me: 
Fili hóminis, ossa hec uni- 


In those days, the hand of 
the Lord was upon me, ana 
brought me forth in the spirit 
of the Lord, and set me down 
in the midst of a plain that was 
full of bones; and He led me 
about through them on every 
side: now there were very many 
upon the face of the plain, and 
they Were exceeding dry. And 
He said to me, Son of man, dost 
thou think these bones shall 
live? And I answered, O Lord 
God, Thou knowest. And He 
said to me, Prophesy concern- 
ing these bones, and say to 
them, Ye dry. bones, hear the 
word of the Lord. Thus saith 
the Lord God to these bones, 
Behold, I wil sen spirit into 
you, and you shall live, ana I 
will lay sinews upon you, aud 
will cause flesh to grow over 
you, and will cover you with 
skin; and I will give you spirit, 
and you shall live, and you shall 
know that I am the Lord. And 
I prophesied as He had com- 
manded me; and as I prophe- 
sied there was a noise, and be- 
hold a commotion; and the 
bones came together, each one 
to its joint. And I saw, and be- 
hold the sinews and the flesh 
came up upon them, and the 
skin was stretched out over 
them, but there was no spirit 
in them: And He said to me, 
Prophesy to the spirit; proph- 
esy, O son of man, and say to 
the spirit, Thus saith the Lord 
God, Come, spirit from the four 
winds, and blow upon these 
slain, and let them live again. 
And I prophesied as He had 
commanded me; and the spirit 
came into them, and they lived; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


516 HOLY SATURDAY 


and they stood up upon their 
feet, an exceeding great army. 
And He said to me, Son of man, 
all these bones are the house of 
Israel. They say, Our bones are 
dried up, and our hope is lost, 
and we are cut off. Therefore 
prophesy, and say to them, 
Thus saith the Lord God, I will 
open your graves, and 
bring you out of your sepul- 
chres, O My people, and will 
bring you out into the land of 
Israel; and you shall know that 
I am the Lord, when I shall 
have opened your sepulchres, 
and shall have brought you out 
of your graves, O My people; 
and shall have put My spirit in 
you, and you shall live, and I 


vérso, domus Israél est: ipsi 
dicunt: Aruérunt ossa nostra, 
et périit spes nostra, et ab- 
Scíssi sumus, Proptérea vati- 
cináre, et dices ad eos: Hec 
dicit Dóminus Deus: Ecce ego 
&périam tümulos vestros, et 
edücam vos de sepülcris ves- 
tris, pópulus meus: et indü- 


will cam vos in terram Israël. Et 


Sciétis, quia ego Dóminus, 
cum aperüero sepülcra ves- 
tra, et edüxero vos de tümu- 
lis vestris, pópule meus: et 
dédero spíritum meum in vo- 
bis, et vixéritis, et requiés- 
cere vos fáciam super hu- 
mum . vestram: dicit Dó- 
minus omnípotens. 


shall make you rest upon your own land; saith the Lord 


almighty. 
Let us pray 
Y. Let us kneel. ¥. Flectámus génua. 
Bf. Arise. BY. Leváte. 
Prayer 


O cop, Who dost instruct us 


in the nacese nf hoth testa- 
paschal sacrament, grant us to 
understand Thy mercy, that by 
the reception of the present 
gifts, our expectation of those 
to come may be confirmed. 
‘Through Our Lord. 


Prophecy 8. 


In that day, seven women 
shall take hold of one man, 
saying, We will eat our own 
bread, and wear our own ap- 
parel only let us be called by 
thy name; take away our re- 
proach. In that day, the bud of 
the Lord shall be in magnifi- 
cence and glory, and the fruit 
of the earth shall be high, and 


EUS, qui nos ad cele- 
brándum paschále sac- 


ménti páginis ínstruis: da 
nobis intelligere misericórdi- 
am tuam; ut ex perceptióne 
preséntium münerum, firma 
sit exspectatio . futurórum. 
Per Dóminum. . 


Is. 4, 1-6 

Apprehéndent septem mu- 
lieres virum unum in die illa, 
dicéntes: Panem nostrum 
comedémus, et vestiméntis 
nostris operiémur: tantüm- 
modo invocétur nomen tuum 
super nos, aufer oppróbrium 
nostrum. In die illa erit ger- 
men Dómini in magnificén- 
tia, et glória, et fructus ter- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 


re sublimis, et exsultátio his, 
qui ‘salvati 'füerint de Israël. 
Et.erit: Omnis qui relíctus 
füerit in Sion, et resíduus in 
Jerúsalem, sanctus vocábitur, 
omnis qui scriptus est in vita 
in Jerúsalem. Si ablüerit 
Dóminus sordes  filiárum 
Sion, et sánguinem Jerüsa- 
Jem láverit de médio ejus, in 
spíritu judícii, et spíritu ar- 
dóris. Et creábit Dóminus su- 
per omnem locum montis 
Sion, et ubi invocátus est, 
nubem per diem, et fumum 
et spendórem ignis flam- 
mántis in nocte: super om- 
nem enim glóriam protéctio. 
Et tabernáculum erít in um- 
bráculum diéi ab æstu, et in 
securitatem, et absconsión- 
em a turbine, et a plüvia. 


517 


& great joy. to them that shall 
have escaped of Israel. And it 
shall come to pass, that every 
one that shall be left in Sion, 
and that shall remain in Jeru- 
salem, shall be, called holy, 
every one that is written in life 
in Jerusalem. If the Lord shall 
wash away the filth of the 
daughters of Sion, and shall 
wash away the blood of Jeru- 
salem out of the midst thereof, 
by the spirit of judgment, and 
by the spirit of burning. And 
the Lord will create upon every 
place of Mount Sion, and where 
He is called upon, a cloud by 
day, and a smoke and the 
brightness of a flaming fire in 
the night; for over all the glory 
shall be a protection. And there 
shall be a tabernacle for a 
shade in the daytime from the 


heat, and for a security and covert from the whirlwind and 


from rain. 


' Tract. 


Vínea facta est dilécto in 
cornu, in loco überi. JY. Et 
macériam circümdedit, et cir- 
cumfédit: et plantávit vín- 
eam Sorec, et xdificavit tur- 
rim in médio ejus. Y. et Tór- 
cular fodit in ea: vínea enim 
Dómini Sábaoth, domus 
Israél est. 


Is. 5,1,2 


The beloved had a vineyard 
on a hill, in a fruitful place. 
Yy. And he surrounded it with 
& wall and dug round about 
it, and he planted the vine of 
Soree, and built a tower in the 
midst of it. Y. And he dug a 
wine-press therein: for the 
vineyard of the Lord of hosts 
is the house of Israel. 


er Let us pray 
Y. Flectámus génua. Y. Let us kneel. 
RY. Leváte. JH. Arise. 
Prayer 


EUs, qui in ómnibus Ec- 
clésie tue filiis, sanc- 
tórum  prophetárum voce 
manifestasti, in omni loco 
dominatiónis tus, satórem te 


Gop, Who by the voice of 
the holy prophets hast 
manifested, in all the sons of 
the Church and in every region 
where Thou dost hold sway, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


518 HOLY SATURDAY 


that Thou art a sower of good 
Seed and dost make choice 
branches to grow, grant unto 
Thy peoples, who are reckoned 
before Thee both as vines and 
as cornfields, that, the disorder 
of thorns and brambles being 
cleared away, they may be made 
to bring forth worthy fruit. 
Through our Lord. 


bonórum séminum, et electó- 
rum pálmitum esse cultórem: 
tríbue pópulis tuis, qui et vin- 
eárum apud te nómine cen- 
séntur, et ségetum; ut, spin- 
árum, et tribulórum squalóre 
resecáto, digna  efficiàntur 
fruge fecindi. Per Dóminum. 


Prophecy 9.- Ex. 12, 1-11 
See Second Lesson for Good Friday, page 471. 


Let us pray 
V. Let us kneel. ¥. Flectámus génua. 
RY. Arise. RY. Leváte. 
Prayer 
LMIGHTY, eternal God, MNIPOTENS sempitérne 


Who art wonderful in 
the ordering of all Thy works, 
let them Thou hast redeemed 
understand that to have made 
the world in the beginning was 
no greater work that to have 
immolated in the end of the 
ages Christ, our pasch, Who 
with Thee. 


n 4 


In those days the word of 
the Lord came to Jonas the sec- 
ond time, saying, Arise, and go 
to Ninive the great city, and 
preach in it the preaching that 
I bid thee. And Jonas arose, 
and went to Ninive according 
to the word of the Lord. Now 
Ninive was a great city of three 
days' journey. And Jonas began 
to enter into the city one day's 
journey; and he cried, and said, 
Yet forty days, and Ninive shall 
be destroyed. And the men of 
Ninive believed in God, and 
they proclaimed a fast, and put 
on sackcloth from the greatest 


Deus, qui in ómnium 
óperum  tuórum dispensa- 
tióne mirábilis es: intélligant 
redémpti tui, non fuisse ex- 
celléntius quod inítio factus 
est mundus, quam quod in 
fine seculórum Pascha nos- 
trum immolátus est Christus: 
Qui tecum vivit. 


In diébus illis: Factum est 
verbum Dómini ad Jonam 
prophétam secündo, dicens: 
Surge, et vade in Níniven 
civitátem magnam: et pre- 
dica in ea predicatiónem, 
quam ego loquor ad te. Et 
surréxit Jonas, et ábiit in 
Níniven juxta verbum Dó- 
mini Et Nínive erat cívitas 
magna itínere diérum trium. 
Et cepit Jonas introire in civ- 
itatem itínere diéi uníus: et 
clamávit, et dixit: Adhuc 
quadraginta dies, et Ninive 
subvertétur. Et credidérunt 
viri Ninivite in Deum: et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FW 


HOLY SATURDAY 519 


predicavérunt jejünium, et 
vestiti sunt saccis a majóre 
usque ad minórem. Et per- 
vénit verbum ad. regem Ní- 
nive: et surréxit de sólio suo, 
et abjécit vestiméntum suum 
a se, et indtitus est sacco, et 
sedit in cínere. Et clamávit, 
et dixit in Nínive ex ore regis, 
et príncipum ejus, dicens: 
Hómines, et juménta, et 
boves, et pécora non gustent 
quidquam: nec pascántur et 
aquam non bibant. Et operi- 
ántur saccis hómines, et ju- 
ménta, et clament ad Dó- 
minum in fortitüdine, et con- 
vertátur vir a via sua mala, 
et ab iniquitáte, que est in 
mánibus eórum. Quis scit si 
convertátur et ignoscat Deus: 
et revertátur a furóre ire sue, 
et non períbimus? Et vidit 
Deus ópera eórum, quia con- 
vérsi sunt de via sua mala: 
et misértus est pópulo suo, 
Dóminus Deus noster. 


to the least. And the word 
came to the king of Ninive: and 
he arose up out of his throne, 
and cast away his robe from 
him, and was clothed with 
sackcloth, and sat in ashes; 
and he caused it to be pro- 
claimed and published in Ni- 
nive from. the mouth of the 
king and of his princes, saying, 
Let neither men, nor beasts, 
nor oxen, nor sheep, taste any 
thing; let them not feed, nor 
drink water, and let men and 
beasts be. covered with sack- 
cloth, and cry to the Lord with 
all their strength, and let them 
turn every one from his evi] 
Way, and from the iniquity that 
is in their hands. Who can tell 
if God will turn and forgive, 
and wil turn away from his 
fierce anger, and we shall not 
perish? And God saw their 
works, and they were turned 
from their evil way; and the 
Lord our God had mercy upon 
His people. 


Let us pray 
V. Flectámus génua.. X. Let us kneel. . 
RY. Levate. © W. Arise. ' 
Prayer 


EUS, qui diversitatem 

géntium in confessióne 
tui nóminis &dunásti: da no- 
bis, et velle, et posse que præ- 
cipis; ut pópulo ad æternitá- 
tem  vocáto, una sit fides 
méntium, et piétas actiónum. 
Per Dóminum nostrum. 


Prophecy 11. 

In Diébus ilis: Scripsit 
Móyses cánticum, et dócuit 
filios Israël. Precepitque Dó- 


cop, Who hast joined to~ 

gether the diversity of the 
peoples in the confession of 
Thy name, grant us both to de- 
sire what Thou commandest 
and the power to perform it, 
that there may be one faith in 
the hearts, and one piety in the 
deeds, of the people called to 
eternal life. Through our Lord. 


Deut. 31, 22-30 


In those days, Moses wrote 
the canticle and taught it the 
children of Israel And the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


520 HOLY SATURDAY 


Lord commanded Josue the son minus Jósue fílio Nun, et ait: 
of Nun, and said, Take courage, Confortáre, et esto robüstus: 
and be valiant; for thou shalt tu enim  introdüces filios 
bring the children of Israel into Israël in terram quam pollí- 
the land which I have promised, citus sum, et ego ero tecum. 
and I will be with thee. There- Postquam ergo scripsit Móy- 
fore after Moses had wrote the ses verba legis hujus in volü- 
words of this Jaw in a volume, mine, atque complévit: præ- 
and finished it; he commanded cépit Levitis, qui portábant 
the levites, who carried the ark arcam federis Dómini, di- 
of the covenant of the Lord, cens: Tóllite librum istum, et 
saying, Take this book, and put pónite eum In látere arce fe- 
it in the side of the ark of the deris Dómini Dei vestri: ut 
Covenant of the Lord your God, sit ibi contra te in testimóni- 
that it may be there for a testi- um. Ego enim scio conten- 
mony against thee, Por I know tiónem tuam, et cervícem 
thy obstinacy, and thy most tuam duríssimam. Adhuc vi- 
stiff neck. While I am yet liv- vénte me, et ingrediénte vo- 
ing, and going in with you, biscum, semper contentióse 
you have always been rebellious egistis contra Dóminum: 
against the Lord; how much quanto magis cum. mórtuus 
more when I shall be dead? füero? Congregáte ad me om- 
Gather unto me all the ancients nes majóres natu per tribus 
of your tribes, and your doctors, vestras, atque doctóres, et 
and I will speak these words in loquar audiéntibus eis ser- 
their hearing, and will call mónes istos, et invocábo con- 
heaven and earth to witness tra eos colum et terram. 
against them. For I know that, Novi enim quod post mortem 
after my death, you will do meam iníque agétis, et de- 


aside from the way that X have precépi vobis: et occtrrent 
commanded you: and evils vobis mala in extrémo tém- 
shall come upon you in the lat- pore, quando fecéritis malum 
ter times, when you shall do in conspéctu Dómini, ut ir- 
evil in the sight of the Lord, to ritétis eum per Opera má- 
provoke Him by the works of nuum: vestrárum.  Locütus 
your hands. Moses therefore est ergo  Móyses, audiénte 
Spoke, in the hearing of the univérso cotu Israél, verba 
whole assembly of Israel, the cárminis hujus, et ad finem 
words of this canticle, and fin- usque complévit. 

ished it even to the end. 


Tract. Deut. 32, 1-4 


Hear, O heaven, and I wil Atténde ccelum et loquar: 
speak: and let the earth give et áudiat terra verba ex ore 
ear to the words out of my meo. Y. Exspectétur sicut 
mouth. Y. Let my speech be plüvia elóquium meum: et 
expected like rain; and: my descéndant sicut ros verba 
words descend like dew. Y. As mea. Y. Sicut imber super 


http://ccwatershed.org 


P ORAM RIC RR 


HOLY SATURDAY 


gramen, et sicut nix super fæ- 
num: quia nomen Dómini in- 
vocábo. Y. Date magnitüdin- 
em Deo nostro: Deus, vera 
Ópera ejus, et omnes vie ejus 
judicià. V. Deus fidélis, in 
quo non est iniquitas: justus, 
et sanctus Dóminus. 


521 


a shower upon the grass, and 
like snow upon hay: because 
I will invoke the name of the 
Lord. Y. Give ye magnificence 
to our God: God's works are 
true, and all His ways are judg- 
ments. Y. God is faithful, in 
whom there is no iniquity: the 
Lord is just and holy. 


Let us pray 
V. Flectámus génua. Y. Let us kneel. 
W. Leváte. RY. Arise. 
Prayer 


EUS, celsitüdo humilium, 

et fortitüdo rectórum, 
qui per sanctum Móysen pü- 
erum tuum, ita erudire pópu- 
lum tuum sacri cárminis tui 
decantatióne voluísti, ut illa 
legis iterátio fíeret étiam nos- 
tra diréctio: éxcita in om- 
nem justificatárum géntium 
plenitidinem poténtiam tu- 
am, et da letitiam, mitigando 
terrórem; ut ómnium peccá- 
tis tua remissióne delétis, 
quod denuntijiátum est in ul- 
tiónem, tránseat in salütem. 
Per Dóminum. 


GO», the exaltation of the 

lowly and the strength of 
the just, Who wast pleased so 
to teach Thy people, through 
Moses, Thy holy servant, by the 
chanting of Thy sacred hymn, 
that this repetition of the law 
might become our instruction 
also, put forth Thy power upon 
the whole body of the justified 
nations, and give them joy by 
allaying their fear, so that all 
their sins being wiped out by 
Thy forgiveness, that which 
was proclaimed for vengeance 
may turn into salvation. 
Through our Lord, ud 


Prophecy 12. Dan. 3, 1:24. 


In diébus illis: Nabuchodó- 
nosor rex fecit státuam áu- 
ream, altitüdine cubitórum 
Sexagínta, latitüdine cubitó- 
rum sex, et státuit eam in 
campo Dura provincie Baby- 
lónis. Itaque Nabuchodónosor 
rex misit ad congregandos 
satrapas, magistrátus, et jú- 
dices, duces, et tyránnos, et 
preféctos, omnésque prin- 
cipes regiónum, ut convenír- 
ent.ad dedicatiónem statue, 
quam eréxerat Nabuchodóno- 
sor rex. Tunc congregáti sunt 


In those days, King Nabu- 
chodonosor made a statue of 
gold, of sixty cubits high, and 
sixty cubits broad, and he set 
it up in the plain of Dura, in 
the province of Babylon. Then 
Nabuchodonosor the king sent 
to call together the nobles, the 
magistrates, and the judges, 
the captains, the rulers, and 
governors, and all the chief 
men of the provinces, to come 
to the dedication of the statue, 
which Xing Nabuchodonosor 
had set up. Then the nobles, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


522 HOLY SATURDAY 


the magistrates, and the judges, 
the captains, and rulers, and 
the great men that were placed 
in authority, and all the princes 
of the provinces were gathered 
together to come to the dedica- 
tion of the statue which King 
Nabuchodonosor had set up. 
And they stood before the sta- 
tue which King Nabuchodono- 
sor had set up. Then a herald 
cried with a strong voice, To 
you it is commanded, O na- 
tions, tribes, and languages, 
that in the hour that you shall 
hear the sound of the trumpet, 
and of the fiute, and of the 
harp, of the sackbut, and of 
the psaltery, and of the sym- 
phony, and of all kind of music, 
ye fall down and adore the 
golden statue which King Na- 
buchodonosor hath set up. But 
if any man shall not fall.down 
and adore, he shall the same 
hour be cast into a furnace of 
burning fire. Upon this, there- 
fore, at the time when all the 
péople heard the sound of the 
trumpet, the flute, and the 
psaitery, oi une syimpuuuy, atu 
of all kind of music, all the na- 
tions, tribes, and languages, fell 
down and adored the golden 
Statue which King Nabuchodo- 
nosor had set up. And presently, 
at that very time, some Chal- 
deans.came, and accused the 
Jews; and said to King Nabu- 
chodonosor, O king, live for- 
ever. Thou, O king, hast made 
a decree that every man that 
Shall hear the sound of the 
irumpet, the flute, and the 
harp, of the sackbut, and tne 
psaltery, of the symphony, and 
of all kind of music, shall pros- 
trate himself, and adore the 


satrap2, magistratus, et jú- 
dices, duces, et tyránni, et 
optimátes, qui erant in po- 
testátibus constitüti, et uni- 
vérsi principes regiónum, ut 
convenírent ad dedicatiónem 
statue, quam eréxerat Nabu- 
chodónosor rex, Stabant au- 
tem in conspéctu státuæ, 
quam posüerat Nabuchodón- 
osor rex, et preco clamábat 
valénter: Vobis dicitur pópu- 
lis, tríbubus, et linguis: In 
hora, qua audiéritis sónitum 
tube, et fistule, et cithare, 
sambtce, et psaltérii, et sym- 
phónig, et univérsi géneris 
musicérum, cadéntes adoráte 
Státuam áuream, quam con- 
stituit Nabuchodónosor rex. 
Si quis autem non prostrátus 
£&doráverit, e&dem hora mit- 
tétur in fornácem ignis ar- 
déntis. Post hec ígitur sta- 
tim ut audiérunt omnes póp- 
uli sónitum tuba, fistule, et 
cíthare, sambúcæ, et psal- 
térii, et symphónie, et omnis 
géneris musicórum, cadéntes 
omnes pópuli, tribus, et lin- 


-—— ^deserAmint  ctáttiam 


€» AR PCUAAA, ween vemm eee ee 
Nabuchodónosor rex. Statim- 
que in ipso témpore acce- 
déntes viri Chaldei accusa- 
vérunt Judzos, dixerüntque 
Nabuchodónosor regi: Rex in 
ztérnum vive: tu rex posuisti 
decrétum, ut omnis homo, qui 
audierit sónitum tube, fístu- 
le, et citharz, sambuce, et 
psaltéri, et symphdnie, et 
univérsi géneris musicórum, 
prostérnat se, et adóret stá- 
tuam áuream: si quis autem 
non  prócidens  adoráverit, 
mittátur in fornácem ignis 
ardéntis, Sunt ergo viri Ju- 
dæi, quos constituisti super 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 


Ópera regiónis Babylónis, Sid- 
rach, Misach, et Abdénago: 
viri isti contempsérunt, rex, 
decrétum tuum: deos tuos 
non colunt, et státuam áu- 
ream, quam erexisti, non 
&dórant. Tunc Nabuchodóno- 
sor in furóre et in ira pre- 
cépit ut adduceréntur Sid- 
rach, Misach, et Abdénago: 
qui conféstim adducti sunt in 
conspéctu regis. Pronuntians- 
que Nabuchodónosor rex, ait 
eis: Veréne Sidrach, Misach, 
et Abdénago deos meos non 
colitis, et státuam dauream, 
quam constítui, non adorátis? 
Nune ergo si estis paráti, 
quacümque hora audiéritis 
sónitum tube, fistule, cíth- 
are, sambuce, et psaltérii, et 
symphónie, omnísque gén- 
eris musicórum, ` prostérnite 
vos, et adoráte státuam quam 
feci: quod si non adoravér- 
itis, e&dem hora mittémini in 
fornácem ignis erdéntis; et 
quis est Deus, qui eripiet vos 
de manu mea? Respondéntes 
Bidrach, Misach, et Abdén- 
ago, dixérunt regi Nabucho- 
dónosor: Non opórtet nos de 
hac re respondére tibi.. Ecce 
enim Deus noster, quem có- 
limus, potest eripere nos de 
camino ignis ardéntis, et de 
mánibus tuis, o rex, liberáre. 
Quod si nolüerit, notum sit 
tibi, rex quia deos tuos non 
cólimus, et státuam áuream, 
quam erexisti, non adorámus. 
Tunc Nabuchodónosor replé- 
tus est furóre, et aspéctus fa- 
ciéi illíus immutátus est super 
Sidrach, Misach, et Abdén- 
ago, et precépit ut succen- 
derétur fornax  séptuplum, 
quam succéndi consuéverat. 
Et viris fortíssimis de exér- 


523 


golden statue; and that if any 
man shall not fall down and 
adore, he should be cast into g 
furnace of burning fire. Now 
there are certain Jews, whom 
thou hast set over the works of 
the province of Babylon; Sid- 
rach, Misach, and Abdenago; 
these men, O king, have 
slighted thy decree: they wor- 
ship not thy gods; nor do they 
adore thy gold statue which 
thou hast set up. Then Nabu- 
chodonosor in fury and in 
wrath commanded that Sid- 
rach, Misach, and Abdenago, 
should be brought; who imme- 
diately. were brought before the 
king. And Nabuchodonosor the 
king spoke to them, and said, 
It it true, O Sidrach, Misach, 
and Abdenago, that you do not 
worship my gods, nor adore the 
golden statue that I have. set 
up? Now therefore if you be 
ready, at what hour soever you 
shall hear the sound of the 
trumpet, flute, harp, sackbut, 
and psaltery, and symphony, 
and of all kind of music, pros- 
trate yourselves and adore the 
statue which I have made; but 
if. you do not adore-you shall 
be cast in the same hour into 
the furnace of burning fire: 
and who is the god that shall 
deliver you out of my hand? 
Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago 
answered, and said to King Na- 
buehodonosor, We have no oc- 
casion to answer thee concern- 
ing this matter; for behold our 
God,.Whom we worship, is able 
to save us from the furnace of 
burning fire, and to deliver us 
out of thy hands, O king. But 
if He will not, be it known to 
thee, O king, that we will not 
worship thy gods, nor adore the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


524 


golden statue which thou hast 
set up. Then was Nabuchodo- 
nosor filled with fury; and the 
countenance of his face was 
changed against Sidrach, Mi- 
sach, and Abdenago; and he 
commanded tbat ihe furnace 
should be heated seven times 
more than it had been accus- 
tomed to be heated. And he 
commanded the strongest men 
ihat were in his army, to bind 
the feet of Sidrach, Misach, and 
Abdenago, and to cast them 
into the furnace of burning fire. 
And immediately these men 
were bound, and were cast into 
the furnace of burning fire, 
with their coats, and their caps, 
and their shoes, and their gar- 
ments. For the kings command- 
ment was urgent: and the fur- 


HOLY SATURDAY 


citu suo jussit, ut ligátis pé- 
dibus Sidrach, Misach, et 
Abdénago, mitterent eos in 
fornácem ignis ardéntis. Et 
conféstim viri illi vincti, cum 
braccis suis, et tiáris, et cal- 
ceaméntis, et véstibus, missi 
sunt in médium fornacis ignis 
ardéntis: nam jussio regis ur- 
gébat: fornax autem suc- 
cénsa erat nimis. Porro viros 
illos, qui miserant Sidrach, 
Misach, et Abdénago, inter- 
fécit flamma ignis. Viri au- 
tem hi tres, id est, Sidrach, 
Misach, et Abdénago, cecidé- 
runt in médio carmino ignis 
ardéntis colligáti. Et ambula- 
bant in médio flamme lau- 
dántes Deum, et benedicéntes 
Dómino. 


nace was heated exceedingly. And the flame of the fire slew 
those men that had cast in Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago. 
But these three men, that is, Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, 
fell down, bound, in the midst of the furnace of burning fire. 
And they walked in the midst of the flame, praising God, and 


blessing the Lord. 


The Flectamus genua (“Let us kneel’) is not said here. 


Let us 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 
A. only hopé of the world, 
Who, by the mouth of Thy 
prophets hast shown forth the 
mysteries of the present time, 
be pleased to give increase to 
the desires of Thy people, for 
in none of the faithful do any 
virtues bear fruit but by Thy 
inspiration. Through our Lord. 


pray 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 
Deus, spes única mundi, 
qui propħetárum tuórum 
precónio,: preséntlum tém- 
porum declarásti mystéria: 
auge pópuli tui vota placátus; 
quia in nullo fidélium, nisi ex 
tua inspiratióne, provéniunt 
quarümlibet increménta vir- 
tütum. Per Dóminum. 


If there is a baptismal font in the church it is now blessed. 
The clergy, bearing with them the paschal candle, move 
towards the baptistery. Meanwhile the choristers chant a 


Tract. 
Tract. 


As the hart panteth after the 
fountains of waters; so my soul 


Ps. 41, 2-4 


Sicut cervus desiderat ad 
fontes aquárum: ita desiderat 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 


ánima mea ad te, Deus. y. 
Sitivit ánima mea ad Dó- 
minum vivum: quando vén- 
iam, et apparébo ante fáciem 
Dei? V. Fuérunt mihi lácry- 


mz mee panes die ac nocte,. 


dum dícitur mihi per singu- 
los dies: Ubi est Deus tuus? 

Drawin, 
prays as follows: 


y. Dóminus vobíscum. 
K. Et cum.spíritu tuo. 


525 


parteth after Thee, O God. 
¥. My soul hath thirsted after 
the strong living. God; when 
shall I come and appear before 
the face of God? My tears have 
been my bread day and night, 
whilst it is said to me daily: 

Where is thy God? 


near the font all pause, and the officiating priest 


Y. The Lord be with you. 
RY. And with thy spirit. 


Let us pray 


Prayer 


MNÍPOTENS 'sempitérne 

Deus, réspice. propítius 
ad devotiónem pópuli renas- 
céntis, qui sicut cervus, aquá- 
rum tuárum éxpetit fontem: 
et concéde propítius; ut fídei 
ipsíus sitis, baptísmatis mys- 
tério ánimam, | corpüsque 
sanctificet. Per Dóminum. 


RY. Amen. 


ALMIGHTY, eternal God, 

favorably regard the de- 
votion of Thy people, who are 
to be born again in Thee, and 
who, even as the hart, seeketh 
after the fountain of Thy wa- 
ters, grant propitiously that the 
thirst of faith itself may, by the 
mystery of baptism, sanctify 
soul and body. Through ‘our 
Lord. 

BY. Amen. 


Entering into the baptistery, the priest prays over the font. 


Y. Dóminus vobiscum. : 
W. Et cum spíritu tuo.. . 


` Y.The Lord be with you. ~ 
B. And with thy spirit. 


Let us pray 


Prayer. 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 

Deus, adésto magne pi- 
etátis tue mystériis, adésto 
sacraméntis: et ad recreándos 
novos pópulos, quos tibi fons 
baptismatis párturit, spírit- 
um adoptiónis emítte; ut, 
quod nostre humilitátis ger- 
éndum est ministério, virtü- 
tis tue impleátur efféctu. Per 
Dóminum nostrum Jesum 
Christum Filium tuum: Qui 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, be 

Thou. present in the 
mysteries of Thy great good- 
ness; be Thou present in the 
Sacraments; and send forth the 
Spirit of adoption to create 
anew the new. peoples which 
the font of baptism beareth 
unto Thee; that what is to be 
done by the ministry of our 
lowliness may be fulfilled by 
the effect of 'Thy power. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


526 HOLY SATURDAY 


Through our Lord Jesus Christ, tecum vivit et regnat in uni- 
Thy Son, Who with Thee liveth tate Spíritus sancti Deus, 


and reigneth in the unity of 
the Holy Spirit, God, 


‘He raises his voice and continues in the solemn chant ap- 
pointed for the Eucharistic Preface: 


World without end. 


BY. Amen. 

¥. The Lord be with you. 

R. And with thy spirit. 

Y. Lift up your hearts. ` 

RY. We have them lifted up to 
the Lord. 

Y. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our God. 

W. It is meet and just. 


It is truly meet and just, 
right and. profitable for us, at 
all times, and in all places, to 
give thanks to Thee, O Lord, 
the holy One, the Father al- 
mighty, the everlasting God: 
Who by a power unseen by man 
dost wonderfully work the ef- 
fect of Thy sacraments. And 
although we be unworthy for 
the performance of so great 


Serting tne gius Ui any Biacc, 
Thou dost incline the ear of 
Thy pity even to the prayers of 
such as we. O God, Whose 
Spirit was borne upon the wa- 
ters in the very first beginning 
_of the world, that even then the 
nature of the waters might be 
impregnated with sanctifying 
power; O God, Who, washing 
ous with Thy waters the guilt 
of an offending world, didst ex- 
hibit the form of regeneration 
in the very pouring forth of the 
flood, that by the mystery of 
one and the same element there 
might be both an end to sin 
and a beginning of righteous- 
ness; look, O Lord, upon the 


Per ómnia secula szculó- 
rum. 
. Amen. 
Dóminus vobíscum. 
. Et cum spíritu tuo. 
Sürsum corda. - 
. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


SUMGUSA 


Yy. Grátias agámus Dó- 
mino Deo nostro. 
JH. Dignum et justum est. 


Vere dignum et justum est, 
equum et salutáre, nos tibi 
semper, et ubíque grátias 
ágere: Dómine sancte, Pater 
omnípotens, etérne Deus. Qui 
invisibili poténtia, sacramen- 
tórum tuórum mirabíliter op- 
eráris efféctum: Et licet nos 
tantis mystériis exsequéndis 
simus indígni: Tu tamen grá- 
tie tue dona non déserens, 
Lud Pituauio MAULLA. 
cujus Spíritus super aquas, 
inter ipsa mundi primórdia 
ferebátur: ut jam tunc vir- 
tütem senctificatiónis aquá- 
rum, natüra conciperet. Deus, 
qui nocéntis mundi crímina 
per aquas ábluens, regenera- 
tiónis spéciem in ipsa dilüvii 
effusióne signásti: ut uníus 
ejusdémque eleménti mysté- 
rio, et finis esset vítiis, et 
orígo virtütibus. Réspice, Dó- 
mine, in fáciem Ecclésie tue, 
et multíplica in ea regenera- 
tiónes tuas, qui grátie tue 
affluéntis impetu letificas civ- 
itatem tuam: fontémque bap- 
tismatis áperis toto orbe ter- 


aeta), 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 527 


rárum géntibus innovándis: face of Thy Church, and mul- 
ut tue majestatis império, su- tiply Thy regenerations in her, 
mat Unigéniti tui gratiam de Thou Who dost gladden Thy 
Spiritu Sancto. city with the tide of Thine af- 

fluent grace, and dost open the 
fountain of baptism for the renewal of the nations throughout 
all the world, that, by the command of Thy majesty, she may 
receive from the Holy Spirit the grace of Thine only-begotten 


Son. 


With his hand the priest divides the water in the form of «a 


cross. 

Qui hanc aquam regener- 
andis homínibus .prepará- 
tam, arcana sui nüminis ad- 
mixtióne fecündet: ut sanc- 
tificatióne concépta, ab im- 
maculato divini fontis ütero, 
in novam renáta creatüram, 
progénies celéstis emérgat: 
et quos aut sexus in córpore, 
aut ætas discérnit in témpore, 
omnes in unam páriat grátia 
mater infántiam. Procul ergo 
hinc, jubénte te, Dómine, om- 
nis spíritus immündus ab- 
scédat: procul tota nequitia 
diabdlice fraudis  absístat. 
Nihil hic loci hábeat con- 
trarie virtütis admixtio: non 
insidiando circimvolet: non 
laténdo subrépat: non in- 
ficiéndo corrümpat. 


And may that same holy 
Spirit, by the hidden virtue of 
His Godhead, make fruitful this 
water prepared for the regene- 
ration of men, that a heavenly 
offspring, conceived in sancti- 
fication, may emerge from the 
immaculate womb of this di- 
vine font, reborn to newness of 
life, and that grace as a mother 
may bring forth every one, how 
different so ever in age or sex, 
into a like spiritual infancy. 
At Thy bidding, therefore, O 
Lord, may every unclean spirit 
depart from hence; far be re- 
moved all malice of diabolical 
deceit, Here let no admixture 
of the enemy’s power have any 
place; let it not hover in am- 
bush; let it not creep in unper- 
ceived; Jet it not corrupt with 
infection. 


The priest touches the water with his hand. 


Sit hec sancta, et innocens 
creatüra, libera ab omni im- 
pugnatóris incürsu, et totíus 
nequítie  purgáta  discéssu. 
Sit fons vivus, aqua regéner- 
ans, unda puríficans: ut om- 
nes hoc lavácro salutifero dil- 
uéndi, operánte in eis Spíritu 
Sancto, perfécte purgatiónis 
indulgéntiam consequántur. 


May this holy and innocent 
creature be free from every as- 
sault of the adversary and 
purged of every flaw of wicked- 
ness. May it be a living foun- 
tain, a regenerating water, a 
purifying tide, that all who 
shall be washed in these waters 
of salvation may, by the work- 
ing of the Holy Spirit in them, 
obtain ‘the favor of perfect 
cleansing. 


. He makes a threefold sign of the cross over the water, says 
ing: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


528 HOLY SATURDAY 


Wherefore, I bless thee, O 
creature of water, in the name 
of the living 74 God, of the 
true *& God, of the holy | God, 
of the God Who, in the begin- 
ning, by His word divided Thee 
from the dry land; Whose 
Spirit was borne upon thee. 


Unde benedicto te, creatüra 
aque, per Deum "5 vivum, per 
Deum 78 verum, per Deum H 
sanctum: per Deum, qui te 
in princípio, verbo separávit 
ab árida: cujus Spíritus super 
te ferebátur. 


Parting the water with his hand, he casts of it to the north, 


south, east and west. 

He it was Who bade thee to 
fiow from the fountain of para- 
dise and commanded thee to 
Water all the earth in four riv- 
ers, Who, when thou wast bit- 
ter in the desert, put sweetness 
into thee, made thee good to 
drink, and drew thee from the 
rock for the tbirsty people. I 
bless 4 thee also in the name 
of Jesus Christ, His only Son, 
our Lord, Who, by a wonderful 
miracle in Cana of Galilee con- 
verted thee into wine, Who 
with His feet walked upon thee, 
and was baptized in thee by 
John in Jordan, Who gave thee 
forth together with blood from 
His side, and ordered His dis- 
ciples that those who believed 


mln meet en hamtinnd in theo gar. 


AAA. NAM UWIAA waa mane hte) ne ange 


tizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost. 


Qui te de ‘paradísi fonte ma- 
náre fecit, et in quátuor flu- 
minibus totam terram rigáre 
præcépit. Qui te in desérto 
amáram, suavitate índita fe- 
cit esse potábilem, et sitiénti 
pópulo de petra prodüxit. 
Bene m dico te et per Jesum 
Christum Fílium ejus úni- 
cum, Dóminum nostrum: qui 
te in Cana Galilee signo ad 
mirábilij sua poténtia con- 
vértit in vinum. Qui pédibus 
super te ambulávit: et a Jó- 
énne in Jordáne in te bap- 
tizátus est. Qui te una cum 
sánguine de látere suo pro- 
düxit: et discípulis suis jussit, 
ut credéntes baptizaréntur in 
te, dicens: Ite, docéte omnes 
ventac  hantivántes ens in 


Spíritus Saneti. 


In a lower tone of voice, he continues: 


Do thou, O almighty God, of 
Thy clemency be with us while 
we keep these precepts; do 
Thou benignly inspire us. 


Hec nobis precépta ser- 
vántibus, tu, Deus omnipo- 
tens, clemens adésto: tu be- 
nignus aspíra. 


Here he breathes on the water three times in the form of a 


cross. 

These pure waters Thou wilt 
bless with Thy mouth, that, be- 
Sides the natural cleansing 
Which they can perform in the 
washing of bodies, they may 
also be efficacious for the puri- 
fying of souls. 


Tu has simplices aquas tuo 
ore benedicito: ut preter nat- 
urálem emundatiónem, quam 
lavándis possunt adhibére 
corpóribus, sint étiam purifi- 
cándis méntibus efficáces. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 


529 


He immerses the paschal candle three times in the water of 
the font, each time more deeply, saying: 


Descéndat in hanc plenitü- 
dinem fontis, virtus Spíritus 
Sancti. 


May the virtue of the Holy 
Spirit descend upon all the 
contents of this font. 


He breather thrice upon the water, forming the Greek letter 
V, the initial of the word in that language signifying “spirit.” 


Totaémque hujus aque sub- 
Stántiam regenerándi fecün- 
dei effétu. 


And may it render the sub- 
stance of this water fruitful 
with the quality of regenera- 
tion. 


He withdraws the paschal candle from the water. . 


Hic ómnium peccatérum 
mácule deleántur: hic na- 
türa ad imáginem tuam cón- 
dita, et ad honórem sui re- 
formáta princípii, cunctis ve- 
tustátis squalóribus emundé- 
tur: ut omnis homo sacra- 
méntum hoc regeneratiónis 
ingréssus, in vere innocéntie 
novam infántiam renascátur. 


Here may the stains of all 
Sins be washed away; here may 
nature, created to Thine image, 
and reformed to the honorable 
estate of its origin, be cleansed 
of all the foulness of the past, 
that every human being, by en- 
tering into this sacrament of 
regeneration, may be born 
again into a new infancy of 
true innocence. 


The following conclusion is tead: 


Per Déminum nostrum Je- 


Through Our. Lord Jesus 


sum Christum Filium tuum: Christ, Thy Son, Who shall 
Qui ventürus est judicáre vi- come to judge the living and 
vos et mórtuos, et seculum the dead, and the world, by fire. 
per ignem. à 
RY. Amen. B. Amen. 
.He now. pours some of the oil.of catechumens. into. the font, 
saying: » = E " > d 
Sanctificétur, et fecundé- May this font be sanctified 
tur fons iste Oleo salütis re- and made fruitful of the oil of 
nascéntibus ex eo, in vitam salvation to those who are 


ætérnam. born again from it unto ever- 
lasting life. 
HB. Amen. BY. Amen. 


And of the consecrated chrism, saying: 

Infúsio Chrismatis Dómini May the infusion of the 
nostri Jesu Christi, et Spíri- chrism of Our Lord Jesus 
tus Sancti Parácliti, fiat in Christ and of the Holy Spirit, 
nómine sanctis Trinitatis. the Paraclete, be made in the 

name of the Holy Trinity. 

Hf. Amen. BY. Amen. 

At last, he pours at the same time, from one and the other 
0f the sacred vessels, oil and, chrism, into the water, saying: 

Commixtio Chrismatis May the mixture of the 
Sanctificatiónis, et Olei unc- chrism of sanctification, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


530 HOLY SATURDAY 


the oil of unction, and the wa- tiónis, et aque Baptismatis, 
ter of baptism, be all made in páriter fiat in nómine PaH- 
the name of the Father, and of tris, et FíHlii, et Spíritus HK 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Sancti. 

BY. Amen. FY. Amen. 


If there are any to be baptized, the sacrament is now ad- 
ministered. 


During the return of the procession from the baptistery to 
the sanctuary, the following shorter form of the Litany of the 
Saints is sung. When he reaches the altar-steps, the cele- 
brant, with his deacon and subdeacon, remain prostrate on the 
ground until the cantors intone the invocation beginning, 
Peccatores (“We sinners, beseech Thee, hear us”). They then 
rise, and going to the sacristy they lay aside their purple vest- 
ments, and robe in the richer ones of white appointed for 
Easter. They return before the altar at such time as will 
enable them to recite the Psalm and Confession (the Con- 
fiteor), with which holy Mass begins, while the choir is clos- 
ing the litany with the chant of the Kyrie eleison. During 
their absence the candles on the altar are lighted, flowers are 
placed upon it, and the pictures and statues in the church 
are unveiled, 


Litanp of the Saints 


The following litany is intoned by two chanters and the choir 


answers, i.e., repeats all the words of the two chanters: 


orD, have mercy on us. 
Christ have mercy on us. 
Lord, have mercy on us. 
Christ, hear us. 
Christ, graciously hear us. 
God, the Father of heaven, 


Th ann am nenas Amn arn 


world, have mercy on us. 

God, the Holy Ghost, have 
mercy on us. 

Holy Trinity, one God, have 
mercy on us. 

Holy Mary, pray for us. 


Holy Mother of God, 

Holy Virgin of virgins, 

St. Michael, 

St. Gabriel, 

St. Raphael, 

All ye holy angels and arch- 
angels, 

All ye holy orders of blessed 
spirits, 

St. John Baptist, 

St. Joseph, 


YRIE, Eléison. 
Christe, eléison. 
Kyrie, eléison 
Christe, audi nos. 
Christe, exáudi nos. 
Pater de celis, Deus, miserére 


manhin 


dishes aU RA PUUA aiias ao aus 
miserére nobis. 

Spiritus Sancte, Deus, miser- 
ére nobis. 

Sancta Trínitas, unus Deus, 
miserére nobis. 

Sancta Maria Ora (pl. Orate) 
pro nobis. 

Sancta Dei Génitrix, 

Sancta Virgo Virginum, 

Sancte Michael, 

Sancte Gábriel, 

Sancte Ráphael, 

Omnes sancti Angeli et Arch- 
ángeli, 

Omnes sancti beatórum spir- 
{tuum Ordines, 

Sancte Joánnes Baptista, 

Sanete Joseph, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 531 
Omnes sancti Patriárchæ et All ye holy patriarchs and 
Prophétz, prophets, 
Sancte Petre, St. Peter, 
Sancte Paule, St. Paul, 
Sancte Andréa, St. Andrew, 
Sancte Joánnes, St. John, 


Omnes sancti Apéstoli et 
Evangelist2, 

Omnes sancti Discípuli Dó- 
mini, 

Sancte Stéphane, 

Sancte Laurénti, 

Sancte Vincénti, 

Omnes sancti Martyres, 

Sancte Sylvéster, 

Sancte Grégori, 

Sancte Augustine, 

Omnes sancti Pontífices et 
Confessóres, 

Omnes sancti Doctóres, 

Sancte Antóni, 

Sancte Benedícte, 

Sancte Domínice, 

Sancte Francísce, 

Omnes sancti Sacerdótes et 
Levite, 

Omnes sancti Mónachi et 
Eremite, 

Sancta María Magdaléna, 

Sancta Agnes, 

Sancta Caecilia, eM 

Sancta Agatha, 

Sancta Anastásia, 

Omnes sancte Virgines et 
Vidue, 

Omnes Sancti et Sancte Dei, 
intercédite pro nobis. 


Propítius esto, parce nobis, 
Dómine, 

Propítius esto, 
Dómine. 


exdudi mos, 


` Ab omni malo, libera nos, 


Dómine. 

Ab omni peccáto, 

A morte perpétua, 

Per mystérium sanctæ incar- 
natiónis tuæ, 


All ye holy apostles and evan~ 
gelists, 

All ye holy disciples of Our 
Lord, 

St. Stephen, 

St. Lawrence, 

St. Vincent, 

AII ye holy martyrs, 

St. Silvester, 

St. Gregory, 

St. Augustine, 

All ye holy bishops and confes- 

Sors, | 

All ye holy doctors, 

St. Antony, 

St. Benedict, 

St. Dominic, 

St. Francis, 

All ye holy priests and levites, 


All ye holy monks and hermits, 


St. Mary Magdalen, 

St. Agnes, 

St. Gecily, 

St. Agatha, 

St. Anastasia, 

All ye holy virgins and widows, 


All ye holy men and women, 
saints of God, Intercede for 
us. 

Be merciful to us, Spare us, O 
Lord. 

Be merciful to us, Hear us, O 

Lord. 

From all evil, O Lord, deliver 
us. : 

From all sin, 

From everlasting death, 

Through the mystery of Thy 
holy incarnation, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


$32 


Through Thy coming, 

"Through Thy nativity, 

Through Thy baptism and holy 
fasting, 

Through Thy cross and passion, 


‘Through Thy death and burial, 
‘Through Thy holy resurrection, 


Through Thine admirable as- 
cension, 

Through the coming of the 
Holy Ghost the. Comforter 

In the day of judgment, 

We sinners, beseech Thee, hear 
us. 

‘That Thou spare us, 

That Thou vouchsafe to rule 
and preserve ‘Thy holy 
Church, 

That Thou vouchsafe to pre- 
serve our apostolic prelate 
and all ecclesiastical orders 
in holy religion. 

That Thou vouchsafe to hum- 
ble the enemies of Thy holy 
Church, 

That Thou vouchsafe to grant 


Cnrisuan KINS aiu pLiucca, 


That Thou vouchsafe to con- 
firm and preserve us in Thy 
holy service. 

That Thou render eternal good 
things to all our benefactors, 


That Thou vouchsafe to give 
and preserve the fruits of the 
earth, 

That Thou vouchsafe to. give 
eternal rest to all the faithful 
departed. 

That Thou vouchsafe gra- 
ciously to hear us. 


Lamb of God, Who takest.away 


HOLY SATURDAY 


Per advéntum tuum, 

Per nativitátem tuam, 

Per baptismum, et sanctum 
jejunium tuum, 

Per crucem et passiónem 
tuam, 

Per mortem et sepultüram 
iuam, 

Per sanctam resurrectiónem 
tuam, 

Per admirábilem ascensión- 
em tuam, 

Per advéntum Spíritus Sancti 
Parácliti, 

In die judicii, 

Peccatóres, te rogámus, audi 
nos, 

Ut nobis parcas, 

Ut Ecclésiam tuam sanctam 
régere et conserváre dig- 
néris, 

Ut domnum. apostólicum, et 
omnes ecclesidsticos ór- 
dines in sancta religióne 
conserváre dignéris, 

Ut inimícos sancte Ecclésie 
.humiliáre dignéris, 


Ut régibus et principibus 


ce InFiAnvis nanam ot varam 


MAMAS A seassa 


néris, 

Ut nosmetípsos in tuo sancto 
servitio confortáre et con- 
Serváre dignéris, 

Ut ómnibus benefactóribus 
nostris sempitérna bona re- 
tribuas, 

Ut fructus terre dare et con- 
Serváre dignéris, 


Ut ómnibus fidélibus defünc- 
tis réquiem etérnam do- 
náre dignéris, 

Ut nos exaudíre dignéris, 


Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccáta 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 


mundi, parce nobis, Dó- 
mine, 

Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccáta 
mundi, exdudi nos, Dó- 
mine. 

Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccáta 
mundi, míserére nobis. 


Christe, audi nos. 
Christe, exáudi nos. 


533 


the sins of the world, spare 
us,-O Lord. ` BE 
Lamb of God, Who takest away 
the sins of the world, gra- 
ciously hear us, O Lord. 
Lamb of God, Who takest away 
the sins of the world, have 
mercy on us. 
Christ, hear us. i 
Christ, graciously hear us. 


The Mass of Holy Saturday has no Introit, the litany being 
sung in its place. After the Confession (Confiteor) the priest, 
having incensed the altar and recited the Kyrie eleison, in- 
tones the Gloria in excelsis, to the ringing of the bells and the 


playing of the organ. 


Y. Dóminus vobíscum. 
Hf. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


Y. The Lord be with you. 
RY. And with thy Spirit. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui hanc sacratíssi- 
D mam noctem glória 
omínice Resurrectiónis il- 
lustras: consérva in nova fa- 
milie tuz progénie adop- 
tiónis spfritum, quem dedisti; 
ut córpore et mente renováti, 
puram tibi exhíbeant servi- 
tütem. Per eümdem Dómin- 
um nostrum. 


cop, Who dost illuminate 
this most sacred night 
with the glory of the Lord’s 


resurrection, preserve in the 


new offspring of Thy family 
the spirit which Thou hast 
given, that, being renewed in 
body and mind, they may ren- 
der Thee pure service. Through 
the same. 


Epistle. Col. 3, 1-4 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Colossénses. 


RATRES: Si consurrexís- 

tis cum Christo: que 
sursum sunt querite, ubi 
Christus est in déxtera Dei 
sedens: que sursum sunt sá- 
pite, non que super terram. 
"Mortui enim estis, et vita ves- 
tra est. abscéndita cum 
Christo in Deo. Cum Christus 
apparüerit, vita vestra: tunc 
et vos apparébitis cum ipso 
in glória. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Colossians. . 

,RETHREN, if you be risen 
with Christ, seek the 
things that are above, where 
Christ is sitting at the right 
hand of God. Mind.the things 
that are above, not the things 
that are upon the earth. For 
you are dead, and your life is 
hid with Christ in God. When 
Christ shall appear, Who is 
your life, then you also shall 
appear with Him in glory. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


534 


HOLY SATURDAY 


When the Epistle is ended the celebrant intones the Alleluia, 
which Holy Church has omitted since Septuagesima, the first 


of her days 
mencing à 


after him, each time in the same tone. 


of penitential rite. He sings it three times, com- 
tone higher each time, and the choir repeats it 


The choir then takes 


up the following Verse and Tract: 


Ps. 117, 1 


Give praise to the Lord, for 
He is good: for His mercy en- 
dureth for ever. 


Tract. 


O praise the Lord, all ye na- 
tions; and praise Him together, 
all ye people. Y. For His mercy 
is confirmed upon us; and the 
truth of the Lord remaineth 
forever. 


Confitémini Dómino quó- 
niam bonus: quóniam in sæ- 
culum misericórdia ejus. 


Ps. 116, 1, 2 


Laudáte Dóminum omnes 
gentes: et collaudáte eum 
omnes pópuli. Quóniam con- 
firmáta est super nos miseri- 
córdia ejus: et véritas Dó- 
mini manet in etérnum. 


Candles are not carried by the acolytes when the following 
Gospel is sung. All the other ceremonies are observed, as dur- 


ing a high Mass. 


Gospel. Matt. 28, 1-7 


*B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

ND in the end of the sab- 
bath, when it began to 


b © le thn Runt dew af 


wc woon, 
len and the other Mary to see 
the sepulchre. And behold there 
was a great earthquake. For 
an angel of the Lord descended 
from heaven; and coming, 
rolled back the stone, and sat 
upon it: and his countenance 
was as lightriing and his rai- 
ment as snow. And for fear of 
him, the guards were struck 
with terror, and became as 
dead men. And the angel an- 
swering, said to the women, 
Fear not you, for I know that 
you seek Jesus, Who was cru- 
cified. He is not here: for He 
is risen, as He said. Come and 


Vanin ariway arawu 


% Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Mattheum. 


ÉSPERE autem sábbati, 
qui lucéscit in prima 


aábhhati wanit Morin Manda. 


BUA, vu wavua areira ar 


sepülcrum. Et ecce terræmó- 
tus factus est magnus. Ange- 
lus enim Dómini descéndit de 
celo; et accédens revólvit 
lápidem, et sedébat super 
eum: erat autem aspéctus 
ejus siċut fulgur: et vesti- 
méntum ejus sicut nix. Præ 
timóre aurem ejus extériti 
sunt custódes, et facti sunt 
velut mórtui. Respóndens au- 
tem Angelus, dixit muliéri- 
bus: Nolite timére vos: scio 
enim, quod Jesum, qui cruci- 
fixus est, quserítis: non est 
hic: surréxit enim, sicut dixit. 
Veníte, et vidéte locum. ubi 


http://ccwatershed.org 


HOLY SATURDAY 535 


pósitus erat Dóminus. Et cito 
eüntes, dícite discipulis ejus 
quia surrexit; et ecce pre- 
cédit vos in Galileam: ibi 
eum vidébitis, Ecce predíxi 
Vobis, S 


see the place where the Lord 
was laid. And going quickly, 
iell ye His disciples that He is 
risen; and behold He will go 
before you into Galilee: there 
you shall see Him, Lo, I have 
foretold it to you. 


During the chant of the Gospel the paschal candle burns bes 


fore t 


e deacon, and his acolytes carry no lighted tapers. The 


Creed is not sung, neither is the Psalm-verse known as the 


Offertory. 


Secret 


ÜÉscrPE, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, preces pépuli tui, 
cum oblatiónibus hostiárum: 
ut paschálibus initiátà mys- 
tériis, ad eternitatis nobis 
medélam, te operánte, pro- 
ficíant. Per Dóminum. 


ECEIVE, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the prayers of 

Thy people, with the offerings 
of sacrifices, that the sacred 
mysteries begun with these sac- 
raments of Easter may avail us 
under grace a remedy unto life 
everlasting. Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 5, special Communicantes and Hanc igitur, page 804, 


The Agnus Dei is not said nor is the kiss of 
the Communion the following short form of 


eace given. Instead of 
espers is sung: 


Antiphon : 


Allelija, allelája, allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 


Psalm 116 


Laudáte Dóminum omnes 
gentes. Laudáte eum omnes 
pópuli. 

.Quóniàáni confirmáta est 
super nos misericórdia ejus: 
et véritas Dómini manet in 
etérnum, ` 

Glória Patri, et Filio, et 
Spirítui Sancto. 

Sicut erat in princípio, et 
nunc, et semper, et in ssecula 
seculórum. Amen. 

Ant. Allelüja, allelija, al- 
lelüja. 


O praise the Lord, all ye na- 
tions: praise Him, all ye peo- 
pe. ./ .,. " m 
"For His mercy is confirmed 
upon us; and the truth of the 
Lord remaineth forever. 

Glory be to the Father, and 
to the Son, and to the Holy 
Ghost. 

As it was in the beginning, 
is now, and ever shall be; world 
without end, Amen. 

Ant, Alleluia, alleluia, alle- 
luia. 


Antiphon, to be intoned by the celebrant. 


Véspere autem sábbati que 


But, in the evening of the 


lucéscit in prima sábbati: sabbath, when it began to 

venit María Magdaléne, et dawn, towards the first day of 

áltera Maria, vidére sepül- the week, came Mary Magda- 

crum. Allelüja. : len, and the other Mary, to see 
the sepulchre, Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


536 


HOLY SATURDAY 


Canticle. Magnificat. (Luke 1, 46-55) 


My soul doth magnify the 
Lord. 

And my spirit hath rejoiced 
in God my Saviour. 

Because He hath. regarded 
the humility of His handmaid: 
for behold from henceforth all 
generations shall call me 
blessed. 

Because He that is mighty 
hath done great things to me: 
and holy is His name. 

And His mercy is from gen- 
eration unto generations: to 
them that fear Him.. 

He hath shown might in His 
arm; He hath scattered the 
proud in the conceit of their 
heart. . 

He hath put down the mighty 
from their seat: and hath ex- 
alted the humble. 

He hath filled the hungry 
with good things: and the rich 
He hath sent empty away. 

He hath received Israel His 
Servant: being mindful of His 


As he spoke to our r'auuers: 
to Abraham and to his seed 
forever. . 

Glory be to the Father, etc. 

Ant. But in the evening, etc. 


y. The Lord be with you. 
Bf. And with thy spirit. 


Magnificat ánima mea Dé- 
minum. 

Et exsultávit spíritus meus 
jn Deo, salutári meo. 

Quia respexit humilitátem 
ancille sue: ecce enim ex 
hoc beátam me dicent omnes 
generatiónes. 


Quia fecit mihi magna qui 
potens, est: .et sanctum no- 
men ejus. 

Et misericórdia ejus a pro- 
génie in progénies timéntibus 
eum. : 

Fecit poténtiam in bráchio 
suo: dispérsit supérbos mente 
cordis sui. 


Depósuit poténtes de sede, 
et exaltavit hümiles. - 


Esuriéntes implévit bonis: 
et divites dimisit inánes. 


Suscépit Israël, puerum 
suum, réecordátus misericór- 


dia enm 


DIGUL iULUULLD CU wu gera we 


nostros, Abraham, et sémini 
ejus in secula. 

Gloria Patri etc. | 

.Ant. Véspere autem sáb-. 
bati ut supra. 

¥. Dóminus vobíscum. 

Bí. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


Let us pray 


Postcommunion 


PX upon us, O Lord, the 
spirit of Thy love, to make 


pinitum nobis, Dómine, 
tue caritátis infünde: ut, 


us of one heart, whom, by Thy quos sacraméntis Paschálibus 
tender mercy, Thou hast filled satiásti, tua facias pietáte 


http://ccwatershed.org 


! 


HOLY SATURDAY 537 


concérdes. Per Dóminum in with Thy paschal sacrament. 
unitate ejüsdem. Through Our Lord Jesus Christ, 

Thy Son, Who with Thee liveth 
and reigneth in the unity of the same Holy Spirit, God, world 
Without end. 


BR. Amen, > H. Amen, | 

Y. Dóminus vobiscum. . Y. The Lord. be with you. 

W. Et cum spíritu tuo. W. And with thy spirit. 

Y. Ite Missa est, allelija, ¥. Go, the Mass is ended. 
allelija. Alleluia, alleluia. 

FY. Deo. graétias, allelija ^ BH. Thanks be to God. Alle- 
allelüja. luia, alleluia. 


Throughout the octave of Easter the Ite, Missa est is thus 
sung. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


COPTRIGHT BY DEN2IGER BROTHERS 


http://ccwatershed.org 


538 EASTER SUNDAY 


R 


THE FIRST DAY OF THE WEEK, CAME MARY MAGDALEN AND THE 
OTHER MARY, TO SEE THE SEPULCHRE. AND BEHOLD THERE WAS A 
GREAT EARTHQUAKE. FOR AN ANGEL OF THE LORD DESCENDED FROM 
HEAVEN AND COMING ROLLED BACK THE STONE. AND THE ANGEL 
ANSWERING, SAID TO THE WOMEN: FEAR NOT YOU; FOR I KNOW YOU 
SEEK, JESUS WHO WAS CRUCIFIED. HE IS NOT HERE. FOR HE IS 
EISEN. (Matthew 28, 1, 2, 5, 6.) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


EASTER SUNDAY 


Easter Sunday (White) 


The Resurrection of Our Lord 
STATION aT ST. Mary MAJOR 


Privileged Octave of the First Order 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


ESURREXI, et adhuc te- 
R cum sum, allelúja: po- 
suísti super me manum tuam, 
allelúja: mirábilis facta est 
sciéntia tua, allelüja, ale- 
lüja. Ps. 138, 1, 2. Domine, 
probásti me, et cognovisti me: 
tu cognovísti sessiónem me- 
am, et resurrectiónem meam. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


Ps. 138, 18, 5, 6 


AROSE, and am Still with 

Thee, alleluia: ‘Thou hast 
laid Thy hand upon Me, alle- 
luia: Thy knowledge is become 
wonderful, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 
138, 1, 2. Lord, Thou hast 
proved Me, and known Me: 
Thou hast known My sitting 
down, and My rising up. Y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui hodiérna die 

per Unigénitum tuum, 
teternitátis nobis áditum de- 
vícta morte reserásti: vota 
nostra, que preveniéndo as- 
píras, étiam adjuvándo pro- 
séquere. Per eümdem D6- 
minum. 


Epistle. 1 


RATRES: Expurgáte vetus 

ferméntum, ut sitis 
nova conspérsio, sicut estis 
ázymi. Etenim Pascba nos- 
irum immolátus est Christus. 
Itaque epulémur: non in fer- 
ménto véteri, neque in fer- 
ménto malitiz, et nequitie: 
sed in ázymis sinceritátis, et 
veritátis. 


cop, Who, this day by 

Thine only-begotten Son, 
vanquishing death, hast un- 
locked for us the gate of eter- 
nity, help us to attain the de- 
sires to which Thou hast led 
us by Thine inspirations. 


‘Through the same. 


Cor. 5, 7, 8. 


RETHREN, ‘purge out the 

old leaven, that you may 
be a new paste, as you are un- 
leavened: for Christ our pasch 
is sacrificed. Therefore, let us 
feast, not with the old leaven, 
nor with the leaven of malice 
and wickedness, but with the 
unleavened bread of sincerity 
and truth. 


Gradual. Ps. 117, 24, 1 
Hee dies, quam fecit Dó- This is the day which the 
minus: exsultémus, et leté- Lord hath made: Let us be 
mur in ea. V. Confitémini glad and rejoice therein. Y. 
Dómino, quóniam bonus: Give praise to the. Lord, for 
quóniam in seculum miseri- He is good: for His mercy en- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


2 AM DTI o 


540 


dureth forever. Alleluia, alle- 
luia. V. 1 Cor. 5, 7. Christ our 
pasch is sacrificed. 


EASTER SUNDAY 


córdia ejus. Allelija, allelija. 
Y. 1 Cor. 5, 7. Páscha nos- 
trum immolátus est Christus. 


Sequence 
This sequence is said daily during Easter week. 


To the Paschal Victim, hymns 
of praise, 

Come, ye Christians, . joyous 
raise! 

Lamb unstained, unmeasured 
price hath paid 

Ransom for the sheep that 
Strayed. 

To a Father kind, rebellious 
men 

Sinless Son hath led again: 

Life and death in combat fierce 
engage, 

Marvel dazzling every age. 

Prince of life, by hellish mon- 
ster slain, 

Liveth now, shall ever reign. 

Tell us, Mary, thou our herald 
hg 


What in passing thou didst see? 

Empty tomb, where Christ, 
now living, lay, 

Angels saw I in bright array, 

Shroud and vesture loosely cast 


=la 


TIUVG vive. 


fied 

Yea! my hope hath snapped the 
fatal chain, 

Death has smote and risen 

again: 

Quick before you, sped to Gali- 
lee. 

Christ in glory haste to see. 

Know we now that Christ hath 
truly risen, 

Wrenched the gates of hell's 
dark prison. 

Hail Thou Victor! Hail, Thou 
glorious King, 

Help and save us while we sing. 
Amen. Alleluia. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


daw ee mamuen qs 


Victime Pascháli Jaudes. 
Immolent Christiani. 
Agnus redémit oves. 
Christus ínnocens Patri. 
Reconciliávit. 


Peccatóres. 
Mors et vita duéllo. 


Conflixére mirándo. 
Dux vite mórtuus. 


Regnat vivus. 
Dic nobis María. 


Quid vidísti in via? 
Sepülchrum Christi vivéntis: 


Et glóriam vidi, resurgéntis. 
Angélicos testes. 


Surréxit Christus, 
Spes mea: 
Precédet vos. 


In Galilzam 
Scimus Christum surrexisse. 


A mórtuis vere: 
Tu nobis victor Rex. 


Miserére. 
Amen. Allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


EASTER SUNDAY 


541 


Gospel. Mark 16, 1-7 


HR Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Marcum. 
N mxo témpore: Maria 
Magdaléne, et María Ja- 
cébi, et Salóme emérunt aró- 
mata, ut veniéntes üngerent 
Jesum. Et valde mane una 
sabbatérum, vénient ad mon- 
uméntum, orto jam sole. Et 
dicébant ad invicem: Quis re- 
vólvet nobis lápidem ab óstio 
monuménti? Et respiciéntes, 
vidérunt revolitum lápidem. 
Erat quippe magnus valde. 
Et introéüntes in monumént- 
um vidérunt jüvenem sedén- 
tem in dextris, coopértum 
Stola cándida, et obstupué- 
runt, Qui dicit illis: Nolíte 
expavéscere: Jesum quzritis 
Nazarénum, crucifizum: sur- 
réxit, non est hic, ecce locus 
ubi posuérunt eum. Sed ite, 
dicite discípulis ejus, et Petro, 
quia precédit vos in Galile- 
am: ibi eum vidébitis, sicut 
dixit vobis. 


Creed, page 765. i 
2205 +: 57 Offertory.. 
Terra trémuit, et quiévit, 
dum resürgeret in judício De- 
us, allelüja. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


HK Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 


T THAT time, Mary Mag- 
dalen, and Mary, the 
mother of James, and Salome 
bought sweet spices, that com- 
ing they might anoint Jesus. 
And very early in the morning, 
the first day of the week, they 
come to the sepulchre, the sun 
being now risen; and they said 
one to another, Who shall roll 
back the stone from the door of 
the sepulchre? And looking, 
they saw the stone rolled back: 
for it was very great. And en- 
tering into the sepulchre, they 
saw a young man sitting on the 
right side, clothed with a white 
robe, and they were astonished: 
who saith to them, Be not af- 
frighted; you séek Jesus of Naz- 
areth, Who was crucified: He is 
risen, He is not here; behold 
the place where they laid Him: 
but go, tell His disciples, and 
Peter, that He goeth before you 
into Galilee: there you shall 
see Him, as He told you. — . 


Ps. 75, 9, 10 

‘The earth trembled and was 
still, when God arose in judg- 
ment. Alleluia. 


Secret 


ÜOsciPE, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, preces pópuli tui 
cum oblatiónibus hostiárum: 
ut paschálibus initiáta mys- 
tériis, ad eternitatis nobis 
medélam, te operánte, pro- 
ficiant. Per Dóminum. 


ECEIVE, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the prayers of 
‘Thy people with the offerings of 
Sacrifices, that the things be- 
gun in the paschal mysteries 
may, by Thy operation, avail 
us for a healing remedy unto 
life everlasting. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface No. 5, special Communicantes and Hanc igitur, page 804. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


542 MONDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


Communion. 1 Cor. 5,7, 8 
Christ, our pasch is immo- Pascha nostrum immolátus 
lated, alleluia: therefore let us est Christus, allelüja: itaque 
feast in the unleavened bread epulémur in ázymis sinceritá- 
of sincerity and truth. Alleluia, tis, et veritatis, allelüja, alle- 
alleluia, alleluia. je, allelüja. 


Postcommunion 

OUR upon us, O Lord, the œN Pinirum nobis, Dómine, 

Spirit of Thy love, to tum caritátis infünde: 
maké us of one mind, whom, ut quos sacraméntis Paschá- 
by Thy tender mercy, Thou libus satiásti tua fácias pi- 
hast filled with the paschal etáte concórdes. Per Démin- 
sacrament. Through our Lord. um. 

‘Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


.At the end of Mass, Alleluia, twice repeated, follows the 
words Ite, Missa est, and Alleluia is again twice sung after the 
response Deo gratias. And so throughout ihe week, during 
which no saint’s day may be kept; but all Masses must be of 
the Resurrection of Our Lord. 


Monday in Easter Week (white) 


- STATION AT ST. PETER 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ex. 13, 5, 9 
rr Lord hath brought you NTRODÜXIT vos Dóminus in 


into a land flowing with terram fiuéntem lac et 
litisin een. 'o 774 mel allelüja: et ut lex Dô- 
that the law of the Lora iua, neonu. S MANA 


be ever in your mouth, alleluia, allehija, allelüja. £s. v=, .. 
alleluia. Ps. 104, 1. Give glory Confitémini Dómino, et invo- 
to the Lord, and call upon His cate nomen ejus: annuntiáte 
name: declare His deeds among inter gentes ópera ejus. 
the gentiles. Y. Glory. ¥. Glória Patri, 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
cop, Who by the paschal EUS, qui solemnitáte 
solemnity hast blessed pascháli, mundo rem- 


the world with remedies, let édia contulísti: pópulum tu- 
Thy heavenly gift, we beseech um, quaesumus, c#lésti dono 
Thee, go with Thy people that proséquere; ut et perféctam 
it may both be worthy to attain libertátem  cónsequi mereá- 
perfect liberty and may profit tur, et ad vitam proficiat 
by the same unto life everlast- sempitérnam. Per Dóminum. 
ing. Through our Lord, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


aea, 


[TN m 


MONDAY IN EASTER WEEK 543 


Lesson. Acts 10, 37-43 
Léctio Áctuum Apostoló- Lesson from the Acts of the 


rum. Apostles. 
'N piÉBUS illis: Stans Pe- N THOSE days, Peter stand- 
trus in médio plebis, ing in the midst of the peo- 


dixit: Viri fratres, vos scitis ple, said: Men, brethren, you 
quod factum est verbum per know the word which hath been 
univérsam Judzam: incíp- published through al Judea; 
iens enim a Galilea post bap- for it began from Galilee, after 
tísmum, quod predicávit Jo- the baptism which John 
ánnes, Jesum a Nazareth: preached, Jesus of Nazareth; 
quómodo unxit eum Deus how God anointed Him with 
Spíritu Sancto, et virtüte, qui the Holy Ghost, and with 
pertransiit benefaciéndo, et power, who went about doing 
Ssanándo omnes oppréssos a good and healing all that were 
diabolo quóniam Deus erat oppressed by the devil, for God 
cum illo. Et nos testes su- was with Him. And we are wit- 
mus ómnium, que fecit in re- nesses of all things that He did 
gióne Judzdrum, et Jerüsa- in the land of the Jews, and in 
lem quem occidérunt suspen- Jerusalem; Whom they killed, 
déntes in ligno. Hunc Deus hanging Him upon a tree. Him 
suscitávit tértia die,. et God raised up the third day, 
dedit eum maniféstum andgave Him to be made man- 
fieri non omni pópulo, sed tés- ifest, not to all the people, but 
tibus preordinátis a Deo: no- to witnesses preordained by 
bis, qui manducávimus, et bi- God; even to us, who did eat 
bimus cum illo postquam re- and drink with Him after He 
surréxit a mortuis. Et præ- arose again from the dead. And 
cépit nobis predicáre pópulo, He commanded us to preach to 
et -testificari, quia ipse est, the people, and to testify that 
qui constitütus est a Deo ju- itis He Who was appointed by 
dex vivórum, et mortuórum. God to be judge of the living 
Huic omnes prophéte testi- and of the dead. To Him all 
mónium  pérhibent, remis- the prophets gave testimony, 
siónem peccatórum accípere that by His name all receive 
per nomen ejus omnes, qui remission of sins who believe in 
credunt in eum. Him. 


Gradual. Ps. 117, 24, 2 


Hee dies, quam fecit Dó- This is the day which the 
minus: exsultémus, et leté- Lord hath made: let us be glad 
mur in ea. V. Dicat nunc and rejoice therein. V. Let Is- 
Israël, quóniam bonus: quóni- rael now say that He is good, 
am in seculum misericórdia that His mercy endureth for- 
ejus. Allelüja, allelija. JY. ever. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Matt. 
Matth. 28,2. Angelus Dómini 28, 2. An angel of the Lord de- 
descéndit de celo: etaccédens scended from heaven, and, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


544 MONDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


coming, rolled back the stone, revólvit lápidem, et sedébat 
and sat upon it. Super eum. 

The Sequence 48 on Easter Sunday, page 540. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 

Gospel. Luke 24, 13.35 

Ó Continuation of the holy Œ Sequéntia sancti Evan- 

Gospel according to St. Luke. gélii secündum Lucam. 
T THAT time, two of the N ILo témpore: Duo ex 
disciples of Jesus went discípulis Jesu ibant ipsa 

that same day to a town which die in castéllum, quod erat in 
was sixty furlongs from Jeru- spátio stadiórum  sexagínta 
salem, named Emmaus. And ab Jerúsalem, nómine Emma- 
they talked together of all these us. Et ipsi loquebántur ad ín- 
things which had happened. vicem de his ómnibus, que 
And it came to pass that while acciderant. Et [factum est, 
they talked and reasoned with dum fabularéntur, et secum 
themselves, Jesus Himself also, quererent: et ipse Jesus ap- 
drawing near, went with them. propínquans ibat cum illis: 
But their eyes were held that óculi autem illórum tenebán- 
they should not know Him. And tur ne eum agnóscerent. Et 
He said to them; What are ait ad illos: Qui sunt hi ser- 
these discourses that you hold mónes quos confértis ad in- 
one with another as you walk, vicem ambulántes, et estis 
&nd are sad? And the one of tristes? Et respóndens unus, 
them, whose name was Cleo- cui nomen Cléophas, dixit ei: 
phas, answering, said to Him: Tu solus peregrinus es in 
Art Thou only a stranger in Je- Jerúsalem, et non cognovísti 
salem, and hast not known the que facta sunt in illa his dié- 
things that have been done bus? Qnihne in^ ae = 
tharo in f i 2-2. - VEDU INAZAI= 
2 e. wuab things? And éno, qui fuit vir prophéta po- 
they: said: Concerning Jesus of tens in ópere et sermóne cor- 
Nazareth, Who was a prophet, am Deo, et omni pópulo: et 
mighty in work and word before quómodo eum  tradidérunt 
God and all the people; and summi sacerdótes, et prin- 
how our chief priests and cipes nostri in damnatiónem 
princes delivered Him to be mortis, et crucifixérunt eum. 
condemned to death, and cru- Nos autem sperabámus quia 
cified Him. But we hoped that it ipse esset redemptürus Israel: 
was He that should have re- et nunc super hee ómnia, 
deemed Israel: and now, be- tértia dies est hódie, quod hec 
sides all this, to-day is the third facta sunt. Sed et mulíeres 
day since these things were quedam ex nostris terruérunt 
done. Yea, and certain women nos, que ante lucem fuérunt 
also of our company affrighted ad monuméntum, et, non in- 
us, ‘who, before it was light, vénto cérpore ejus, venérunt, 
were at the sepulchre, and, not dicéntes se étiam  visiónem 
finding His body, came, saying Angelórum vidisse, qui dicunt 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MONDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


eum vivere. Et abiérunt qui- 
dam ex nostris ad monumén- 
tum: et ita invenérunt sicut 
mulíeres  dixérunt, ipsum 
vero non invenérunt. Et ipse 
dixit ad eos: O stulti, et tardi 
corde ad credéndum in ómni- 
bus, quz locüti sunt prophé- 
te! Nonne hzc opórtuit pati 
Christum, et ita intráre in 
glóriam suam? Et incípiens a 
Móyse, et ómnibus prophétis, 
interpretabátur illis in ómni- 
bus Scriptüris, que de ipso 
erant. Et appropinquavérunt 
castéllo, quo ibant: et ipse se 
finxit lóngius ire. Et coégé- 
runt illum, dicéntes: Mane 
nobiscum, quóniam  adves- 
peráscit, et inclináta est jam 
dies. Et intrávit cum illis. Et 
factum est, dum recümberet 
cum eis, accépit panem, et 
benedíxit, ac fregit, et por- 
rigébat ilis. Et apérti sunt 
éculi eórum, et cognovérunt 
eum: et ipse evánuit ex óculis 
eórum. Et dixérunt ad invi- 
cem: Nonne cor nostrum ar- 
dens erat in nobis, dum lo- 
querétur in via, et aperiret 
nobis Scriptüras? Et surgén- 
tes eádem hora regréssi sunt 
in Jerúsalem: et invenérunt 
congregátos ündecim, et eos, 
qui cum illis erunt, dicéntes: 
Quod surrexit Dóminus vere, 
et appáruit Simóni, Et ipsi 
narrábant, que gesta erant in 
via: et quómodo cognovérunt 
eum in fractióne panis. 


545 


that they had also seen a vision 
of angels, who say that He is 
alive. And some of our people 
went to the sepuichre, and 
found it so as the women had 
said, but Him they found not. 
Then He said to them: O fool- 
ish, and slow of heart to be- 
lieve in all things which the 
prophets have spoken! Ought 
not Christ to have suffered 
these things, and so to enter 
into His glory? And,. beginning 
at Moses and all the prophets, 
He expounded to them in all 
the Scriptures the things that 
were concerning Him. And they 
drew nigh to the town whither 
they were going; and He made 
as though He would go farther. 
But they constrained Him, say- 
ing: Stay with us, because it is 
toward evening, and the day is 
now far spent. And He went in 
with them, And it came to pass, 
whilst He was at table with 
them, He took bread, and 
blessed, and broke, and gave to 
them; and their eyes were 
opened, and they knew Him, 
and He vanished out of their 
sight. And they said one to the 
other, Was not our heart burn- 
ing within us whilst He spoke 
in the way, and opened to us 
the Scriptures? And, rising up 
the same hour, they went back 


-to Jerusalem, and they found 


ihe eleven gathered together, 
and those that were with them, 
Saying, the Lord is risen in- 
deed, and hath appeared to Si- 


mon. And they told what things were done in the way, and how 
they knew Him in the breaking of bread. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Matt. 28, 2, 5, 6 


Angelus Dómini descéndit 
de cmlo, et dixit muliéribus: 


An angel of the Lord de- 
scended from heaven, and said 


http://ccwatershed.org 


546 


TUESDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


to the women, He whom you Quem quzritis, surréxit, sicut 
Seek is risen as He said. Alleluia. dixit, allelüja. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Preface No. 5, special Communicantes and Hanc igitur, page 804. 


Secret 


Secret same as on Easter Sunday, page 541. 


Communion. Luke 24, 34 


The Lord is risen, and hath 
appeared to Peter. Alleluia. 


Surréxit Dóminus, et ap- 


páruit Petro, allelüja. 


Postcommunion 
Postcommunion same as on Easter Sunday, page 542. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Tuesday in Easter Week (White) 
STATION AT ST. PETER 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 15, 3, 4 


E GAVE them the water of 


wisdom to drink, alleluia: 


she shall be made stre-7 ` 
ad wee aav Y CU, 


QUA sapiéntie potávit 
eos, alleliia: 9-—^4** 
m 


seiuja: et exaltábit eos in 


aueia: and He shall exalt #térnum, allelija, allelüja, Ps. 


them forever, alleluia, alleluia. 


104, 1. Confitémini Dómino, et 


Ps. 104, 1. Give glory to the invocáte nomen ejus: annun- 


Lord, and call upon His name: 
declare His deeds among the 
gentiles. Y. Glory. 


tiáte inter gentes Ópera ejus. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who dost contin- 

ually enrich Thy Church 
with new increase, grant to 
Thy people that they may by 
their good life hold fast to the 
sacrament which they have re- 
ceived by faith. Through our 
Lord. 


Evs qui Ecclésiam tuam 
D novo semper fetu mul- 
iplicas: concéde famulis tu- 
is; ut sacraméntum vivéndo 
téneant, quod fide percepé- 
runt, Per Déminum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TUESDAY IN 


Lesson. 
Léctio Actuum Apostolór- 
um. 
N DIÉBUS ills: Surgens 
Paulus, et manu silénti- 
um indícens, ait: Viri fratres, 
filii géneris Abraham, et qui 
in vobis timent Deum, vobis 
verbum salútis hujus missum 
est. Qui enim habitábant 
Jerüsalem, et príncipes ejus 
lgnorántes Jesum, et voces 
prophetarum, que per omne 
sábbatum legüntur, judicán- 
tes implevérunt: et nullam 
causam mortis inveniéntes in 
eo, petiérunt a Piláto, ut in- 
terficerent eum. Cumque 
consummássent ómnia, que 
de eo scripta erant, depon- 
éntes eum de ligno, posuérunt 
eum in monuménto. Deus 
vero suscitávit eum. a mórtuis 
tértia die: qui visus est per 
dies multos his, qui simul 
ascénderant cum eo de Gali- 
læa in Jerúsalem: qui usque 
nunc sunt testes ejus ad ple- 
bem. Et nos-vobis annuntiá- 
mus eam, que ad patres nos- 
tros repromíssio facta est: 
quóniam hanc Deus adimplé- 
vit fíllis nostris, resüscitans 
Jesum Christum Dóminum 
nostrum. 


Gradual. 

Hec dies, quam fecit Démi- 
nus: exsultémus, et letémur 
in ea. V. Ps. 106, 2. Dicant 
nunc, qui redémpti sunt a Dó- 
mino: quos redémit de manu 
inimíci, et de regiónibus con- 
gregávit eos. Allelüja, allelüja. 
¥. Surréxit Dóminus de sepül- 
cro, qui pro nobis pepéndit in 
ligno. 


EASTER WEEK 547 


Acts 13, 16, 26-33 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 

N THOSE days, Paul standing 
T up, and with his hand be- 
speaking silence, said, Men, 
brethren, children of the stock 
of Abraham, and whosoever 
among you fear God, to you 
the word of this salvation is 
sent. For they that inhabited 
Jerusalem, and the rulers 
thereof, not knowing Him, nor 
the voices of the prophets 
which are read every sabbath, 
judging Him have fulfilled 
them; and finding no cause of 
death in Him, they desired of 
Pilate that they might kill 
Him. And when they had ful- 
filed all things that were 
written of Him, taking Him 
down from the tree, they 
laid Him in a sepulchre. But 
God raised Him up from the 
dead the third day; Who was 
seen for many days by them 
who came up with Him from 
Galilee to Jerusalem, who to 
this present time are His wit- 
nesses to- the people. And we 
declare unto you that the prom- 
ise which was made to our 
fathers, the same God hath ful- 
filled to our children, raising up 
Our Lord Jesus Christ. 


Ps. 117, 24 

This is the day which the 
Lord hath made: let us be glad 
and rejoice therein. Y. Ps. 106, 
2. Let those now speak who have 
been redeemed by Our Lord: 
whom He hath redeemed out 
of the hand of the enemy, and 
gathered out of the nations. 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. The Lord 
is risen from the sepulchre, 
who for us hung upon a tree. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


548 TUESDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


Sequence as on Easter Sunday, page 540. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Luke 24, 36.47 


& Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus stood 
in the midst of His dis- 
ciples, and saith to them, Peace 
be to you, it is I, fear not. But 
they being troubled and fright- 
2d, supposed that they saw a 
spirit. And He said to them, 
Why are you troubled, and why 
do thoughts arise in your 
hearts? See My hands, and My 
feet, that it is I Myself; handle 
‘Me, and see: for a spirit hath 
ot flesh and bones, as yow see 
Me to have. And when He had 
said this, He showed them His 
hands, and His feet. But while 
they yet believed not, and won- 
dered for joy, He said, Have you 
here anything to eat? And they 
offered Him a plece of broiled 
fish, and a honeycomb; and 
when He had eaten before 
thom tt 
ove ov wem. And He said to 
them, These are the words 
which I spoke to you while I 
was yet with you, that all 
things must needs be fulfilled 
which are written in the law of 
Moses, and in the prophets, and 
in the psalms, concerning Me. 
Then He opened their under- 
standing, that they might un- 
derstand the Scriptures. And 
He said to them, Thus it is 
written, and thus it behooved 
Christ to suffer, and to rise 
again from the dead the third 
day; and that penance and re- 
mission of sins should be 


"m Sequéntia sancti. Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Stetit Je- 

sus in médio discipulór- 
um suórum, et dicit eis: Pax 
vobis: ego sum, nolíte timére. 
Conturbáti vero, et contérriti, 
existinábant se spfritum vi- 
dére, Et dixit eis: Quid tur- 
báti estis, et cogitatiénes 
ascéndunt in corda vestra? 
Vidéte manus meas, et pedes, 
quia ego ipse sum: palpáte, et 
vidéte: quia spíritus carnem, 
et ossa non habet, sieut me 
vidétis habére. Et cum hoc 
dixísset, osténdit eis manus, 
et pedes. Adhuc autem illis 
non credéntibus, et miránti- 
bus pre gáudio, dixit: Habé- 
tis hic áliquid, quod mandu- 
cétur? At illi obtulérunt ei 
partem piscis assi, et favum 
malin Y" 
--.-4 vas, Sumens reliquias, 
dedit eis. Et dixit ad eos: Hiec 
sunt verba, qua locütus sum 
&d vos, cum adhuc essem vo- 
bíscum, quóniam necésse est 
impléri ómnia, que scripta 
sunt in lege Móysi, et Pro- 
phétis, et Psalmis de me. 
Tunc apéruit ilis sensum ut 
intelligerent Scripturas. Et 
dixit eis: Quóniam sic scrip- 
tum est, et sic oportébat 
Christum pati, et resürgere a 
mórtuis tértia die: et predi- 
cári in nómine ejus penitén- 
tiam, et remissiónem pecca- 
tórum in omnes gentes. 


preached in His name among all nations. 


Creed, page 765. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


estamos P ^m = NE ON uf hg pO 


ae 


WEDNESDAY IN EASTER WEEK 549 


Offertory. Ps. 17, 14, 16 
Intónuit de celo Dóminus, The Lord thundered from 
et Altissimus dedit vocem heaven, and the Most High 
Suam: et apparuérunt fontes gave His voice: and the foun- 


aquárum, allelüja. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


tains of water appeared, v ale- 
uia. 


Secret 


ÜÓscrePE, Dómine, fidélium 

preces cum oblatiónibus 
hostiárum: ut per hsec pie 
devotiónis offícia, ad celés- 
tem glóriam transeámus. Per 
Dóminum. 


ECEIVE, O Lord, the pray- 

ers of the faithful with 

the offerings of sacrifices, that 
through these offices of pious 
devotion we may pass to hea- 
venly glory. Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 5, special Communicantes and Hanc igitur, page 804. 


Communion. 


Si consurrexistis cum 


Col. 3, 1, 2 
If you be risen with Christ, 


Christo, quse sursum sunt seek the things that are above, 
quzrite, ubi Christus est.in where Christ is sitting at the 
déxtera Dei sedens, allelüja: right hand of God, alleluia; 
que sursum sunt sápite, al- mind the things that are above, 


lelija. alleluia. 
: Postcommunion 
ONCÉDE, qusesumus, omní- RANT, We beseech Thee, O 


potens Deus: ut paschá- 
lis percéptio sacraménti, con- 
tinua in nostris méntibus per- 
sovéret, Per Dóminum. , 


Concluding pou page 793. 


Sacrament may 


almighty God, that our 
participation in the paschal 
continually 
abide in our souls. Through our 
Lord. 


Wednesday in Easter Week (White) 
STATION AT ST. LAWRENCE WITHIN THE WALLS 
The Beginning of Mass,. page 756. 


Introit. 
bro benedicti Patris 
mei, percípite regnum, 
allehija: quod vobis parátum 
est ab orígine mundi, allelüja, 
allelija, allelüja. Ps. 95, 1. 
Cantáte, Dómino cánticum 
novum: cantáte, Dómino om- 
nis terra. Y. Glória Patri. 


Matt. 25, 34 


OME, ye blessed of My 

Father, receive the king- 
dom, alleluia: which was pre- 
pared for you from the founda- 
tion of the world, alleluia, alle- 
luia, alleluia. Ps. 95, 1. Sing 
ye to the Lord a new canticle; 
sing to the Lord all the earth. 
y. Glory. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


550 WEDNESDAY IN EASTER WEEK. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
EUs, qui nos Resurrec- 


Prayer 
cop, Who dost gladden us 

O with the yearly solemnity tiónis Dominice annua 
of the Lord's resurrection, grant solemnitáte letificas: concéde 
in Thy loving-kindness that propitius; ut per temporália 
through the temporal feast festa que ágimus, perveníre 
which we keep we may be wor- ad gaudia ztérna mereámur. 
thy to reach eternal joys. Per eümdem Dóminum. 
Through the same. 


Today and to the end of Easter week, unless a feast is com- 
memorated, the second Prayer is jor the Church, page 825, 


or for the Pope, page 826. 


Lesson. 
Lessons from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 


N THOSE days, Peter open- 
ing his mouth, said, Ye 
men of Israel, and ye that fear 
God, hear. The God of Abra- 
ham, and the God of Isaac, and 
the God of Jacob, the God of 
our fathers hath glorified His 
Son Jesus, Whom you indeed 
delivered up and denied before 
the face of Pilate, when he 
judged he should be released. 
Bnt you denied the Holy One 
snd the Just, and desired e 
you. But the Author of life you 
killed, Whom God hath raised 
from the dead, of which we 
are witnesses. And now, breth- 
ren, I know that you did it 
through ignorance, as did also 
your rulers. But those things 
which God before had showed 
by the mouth of all the proph- 
ets, that His Christ should suf- 
fer, He hath so fulfilled. Repent 
therefore, and be converted, 
that your sins may be blotted 
out. 


Acts 3, 13-15, 17-19 


Léctio Áctuum Apostoló- 
rum, 

N DIÉBUS ilis: Apériens 

Petrus os suum, dixit: 

Viri Israélíte, et qui timétis 
Deum, audíte. Deus Abraham, 
et Deus Isaac, et Deus Jacob, 
Deus patrum nostrórum glori- 
ficávit Fílium suum Jesum, 
quem vos quidem tradidístis, 
et negástis ante fáciem Piláti, 
judicánte illo dimítti Vos 
autem sanctum, et justum 
negástis, et Petistis virum 
haminsase~ 24 
--2va vesu Viu snterrecistis, 
quem Deus suscitávit a mór- 
tuis, cujus nos testes sumus. 
et, nunc, fratres, scio quia per 
ignorantiam fecístis, sicut et 
príncipes vestri, Deus autem, 
que prenuntiávit per os óm- 
nium Prophetárum, pati 
Christum suum, sic implévit. 
Ponitémini ígitur et conver- 
tímini, ut deleántur peccáta 
vestra. : 


Gradual. Ps. 117, 24, 16 


This is the day which the 
Lord hath made: let us be glad 


Hee dies, quam fecit Dómi- 
nus: exsultémus, et letémur 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WEDNESDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


in es. V. Dextera Dómini 
fecit virtütem, déxtera Do- 
mini exaltávit me. Allelüja, 
allelija. V. (Luc. 24, 34). 
Surréxit Dóminus vere, et ap- 
péruit Petro. 


551 


and rejoice therein. Y. The 
right hand of the Lord hath 
wrought strengtb: the right 
hand of the Lord hath exalted 
me, Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Luke 
24, 34. The Lord is risen in- 
deed; and hath appeared to 


' Peter. 
Sequence as on Easter Sunday, page 540. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 21, 1-14 


"f Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 
N 1LLO témpore: Manifes- 
távit se iterum Jesus dis- 
cípulis ad mare Tiberiadis. 
Manifestavit autem sic. Erant 
simul Simon Peirus, et 
Thomas, qui dicitur Didymus, 
et Nathanaél, qui erat a Cana 
Galilee, et filii Zebedæi, et 
alii ex discípulis ejus duo. 
Dicit eis Simon Petrus: Vado 
piscari. Dicunt ei: Venímus 
et nos tecum. Et exiérunt, et 
ascendérunt in navim: et illa 
nocte nihil prendidérunt. 
Mane autem facto, stetit Jesus 
in lMttore: non tamen cogno- 
vérunt discipuli quia Jesus 
est. Dixit ergo eis Jesus: Pu- 
eri, numquid pulmentarium 
habétis? Respondérunt ei: 
Non. Dicit eis: Mittite in déx- 
teram navigii rete: et inve- 
niétis. Misérunt ergo: et jam 
non valébant illud tráhnere 
pre  multitüdine piscium. 
Dixit ergo discípulus ille, 
quem diligébat Jesus, Petro: 
Dóminus est. Simon Petrus 
cum audísset quia Dóminus 
est, túnica succínxit se (erat 
enim nudus) et misit se in 
mare, Alii autem discipuli 
navígio venérunt: (non enim 
Jonge erant a terra, sed quasi 


TH Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT lime, Jesus showed 

Himself again to His 
disciples at the sea of ‘Tiberias. 
And He showed Himself after 
this manner. There were to- 
gether Simon Peter, and 
Thomas, who is called Didy- 
mus, and Nathanael, who was 
of Cana in Galilee, and the sons 
of Zebedee and two others of 
His disciples. Simon Peter 
saith to them, I go & fishing. 
They say to him, We also come 
with thee. And they went forth, 
and entered into the ship: and 
that night they caught nothing. 
But when the morning was 
come, Jesus stood on the shore; 
yet the disciples knew not that 
it was Jesus. Jesus therefore 
said to them, Children, have 
you any meat? They answered 
Him: No. He saith to them, 
Cast the net on the right side 
of the ship, and you shall find. 
They cast therefore, and now 
they were not able to draw it, 
for the multitude of fishes. 
That disciple therefore whom 
Jesus loved, said to Peter, it is 
the Lord. Simon Peter, when he 
heard that it was the Lord, 
girt his coat about him (for he 
was naked) and cast himself 


http://ccwatershed.org 


652 


into the sea, But the other dis- 
ciples came in the ship (for 
they were not fer from. the 
land, but as it were two hun- 
dred cubits) dragging the net 
with fishes. As soon then as 
they came to land, they saw 
hot coals lying, and a fish laid 
thereon, and bread. Jesus saith 
to them, Bring hither of the 
fishes which you now have 
caught. Simon Peter went up, 
and drew the net to land, full 
of great fishes, one hundred and 
fifty-three. And although there 
were so many, the net was not 
broken. Jesus saith to them, 
Come, and dine. And none of 
them who were at meat durst 
ask Him, Who art Thou? know- 
ing that it was the Lord. And 
Jesus cometh and taketh bread, 
and giveth them, and fish in 
like manner. 


WEDNESDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


cübitis ducéntis), trahéntes 
rete píscium. Ut ergo descen- 
dérunt in terram, vidérunt 
prunas pósitas, et piscem su- 
perpósitum, et panem, Dicit 
eis Jesus: Afférte de píscibus, 
Quos prendidístis nune. As- 
céndit Simon Petrus, et traxit 
rete in terram, plenum mag- 
nis piscibus centum quin- 
quagínta tribus. Et cum tanti 
essent, non est scissum rete. 
Dicit eis Jesus: Veníte, pran- 
déte. Et nemo audébat dis- 
cumbéntium interrogáre eum: 
Tu quis es? sciéntes, quia Dó- 
minus est. Et venit Jesus, ef 
áccipit panem, et date eis, et 
piscem similiter. Hoc jam 
tértio manifestátus est Jesus 
discípulis suis, cum resurrex- 
isset a mórtuis, 


This is now the third time that Jesus was 


manifested to His disciples, after He was risen from the dead. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 77, 23-25 


The Lord opened the doors 
af heaven ~e 
a rw vt tO eat: He 
gave them the bread of heaven: 
man ate the bread of angels, 
alleluia, 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Partar net 
s -v puu 4445 Manna, ut 
éderent: panem celi dedit eis: 
panem Angelórum manducá- 
vit homo, allelüja. 


Secret 


ITH the joys of Easter, O 

Lord, we offer to Thee 

the sacrifice by which Thy 
Church is wonderfully fed and 
nourished, Through our Lord. 


ACRIFÍCIA, Dómine, pasch- 
élibus gáudiis immolá- 
mus: quibus Ecclésia tua mi- 
rabiliter et páscitur et nutrí- 
tur. Per Dóminum. 


P eond Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Preface No. 5, special Communicantes and Hanc igitur, page 804. 


Communion. Rom. 6, 9 


Christ rising again from the 
dead, dieth now no more, alle- 


Christus resürgens ex mór- 
tuis, jam non móritur, alle- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THURSDAY IN EASTER WEEK 55a 


lüja: mors illi ultra non do- luia; death shall no more have 
minábitur, allelija, allelija. dominion over Him, alleluia, 


alleluia, 
Postcommunion 
B OMNI nos, quesumus, URGED thoroughly of the 
Dómine, vetustáte pur- old leaven, we beseech, O 


gatos: sacraménti tui vene- Lord, that the reception of Thy 
Tanda percéptio in novam sacrament may transform us 
íránsferat creatüram: Qui into a new creation. Who livest. 
vivis. f 


Second Postcommunion jor the Church, page 825; or for the 
Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Thursday in Caster Week (White) 
STATION AT THE TWELVE HOLY APOSTLES 
"Tbe Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Wis. 10, 20-21 


ICTRiICEM manum tuam, | HEY praised with one ac- 
` Dómine, laudavérunt ri cord Thy victorious hand, 
páriter, allelája: quia sapién- O Lord, alleluia; for wisdom 
tia apéruit os mutum, et lin- opened the mouth of the dumb, 
guas infántium fecit disértas, and made the iongues of in- 
allelüja, allelája. Ps. 97, 1. fants eloquent, alleluia, alle- 
Cantáte Dómino cánticum luia. Ps. 97, 7. Sing ye to the 
novum: quia mirabilia fecit. Lord a new canticle; for He 
¥. Glória Patri. hath done wonderful things. Y. 
NCMO Glory. > 
Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. _ 
Prayer = 
EUS, qui diversitatem Gov, Who hast united a 
géntium in confessiéne diversity of the people in 
tui nóminis adunásti: da, ut the confession of Thy name, 
renátis fonte baptismatis, una grant that there may be one 
sit fides méntium, et píetas faith in the minds and one 
&ctiónum. Per Dóminum. piety in the deeds of those born 
' again in the waters of baptism. 
Through our Lord. 
Second Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


page 826. 
Lesson. Acts 8, 26-40 


Léctio Áctuum  Apostoló- Lesson from the Acts of the 
rum. Apostles. 


N DiÉpus ilis: Angelus N THOSE days, an angel of 
Dómini locütus est ad ihe Lord spoke to Philip, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


554 


saying: Arise, go toward the 
south, to the way that goeth 
down from Jerusalem to Gaza: 

this is desert. And rising up, 
he went; and behold a man of 
Ethiopia, an eunuch, of great 
authority under Candace, the 
queen of the Ethiopians, who 
had charge over all her treas- 
ures, had come to Jerusalem to 
adore. And he was returning, 
Sitting in his chariot, and read- 
ing Isaias the prophet. And the 
Spirit said to Philip, Go near, 
and join thyself to this chariot. 
And Philip running thither, 
heard him reading the prophet 
Isaias; and he said, Thinkest 
thou that thou understandest 
what thou readest? Who said, 
And how ean I, unless some 
man show me? and he desired 
"Philip that he would come up, 
and sit with him, And the place 
of tbe Scripture which he was 
reading was this: He was led 
as a sheep to the slaughter; and 
like a lamb without voice pe- 
fore His shearer, so opened He 
not His mouth: in humility His 


mp 


— wuu, WO Shall declare; 


for His life shall be taken from. 


the earth? And ihe eunuch an- 
swering Philip, said, I beseech 
thee, of whom doth the prophet 
speak this; of himself, or of 
some other man? Then Philip 
opening his mouth, and begin- 
ning at this Scripture, preached 
unto him Jesus. And as they 
went on their way, they came 
to a certain water: and the eu- 
nuch said, See here is water, 
what doth hinder me from be- 
ing baptized? And Philip said, 
If thou believest with all thy 
heart, thou mayest: and he an- 
swering, said, I believe that 


THURSDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


Philippum, dicens: Surge, et 
vade contra meridiánum ad 
viam, que descéndit ab Jerü- 
salem in Gazam: hec est de- 
sérta. Et surgens ábiit. Et ecce 
vir Æthiops, eunúchus, potens 
Candácis regine JEthíopum, 
qui erat super omnes gazas 
ejus, vénerat adoráte in Jerü- 
Salem: et revertebátur sedens 
Super currum suum, legénsque 
Isaiam prophétam. Dixit au- 
tem Spiritus Philippo: Ac- 
céde, et adjünge te ad currum 
istum. Accürrens autem Phi- 
lippus, audívit eum legéntem, 
Isaiam propbétam, et dixit: 
Putásne intélligis, que legis? 
Qui ait: Et quómodo possum, 
si non áliquis osténderit mihi? 
Rogavítque Philíppum ut as- 
cénderet, et sedéret secum. 
Locus autem Scriptire, quam 
legébat, erat hic: Tamquam 
ovis ad oceisiónem ductus est: 
et sicut agnus coram tondénte 
se, sine voce, sic non apéruit 
os suum. In humilitáte judi- 
cium ejus sublátum est. Gene- 
rafiónnve at=- 

oneness w)utuur ae terra vita, 
ejus? Respóndens autem eu- 
nüchus Philíppo, dixit: Obse- 
Cro te, de quo Prophéta dicit 
hoc? de se, an de.álio áliquo? 
Apériens autem Philippus os 
suum, et incipiens a Scriptira 
ista, evangelizávit illi Jesum. 
Et dum irent per viam, vené- 
runt ad quamdam aquam: et 
ait eunüchus: Ecce aqua, quid 
próhibet me baptizári? Dixit 
autem Philippus: Si credis ex 
tota corde, licet. Et respón- 
dens ait: Credo, Fílium Dei 
esse Jesum Christum. Et jus- 
Sit stare currum: et descen- 
dérunt utérque in aquam, 
Philfppus, et eunüchus, et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THURSDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


baptizávit eum. Cum autem 
ascendissent de aqua. Spiritus 
Dómini rápuit Philippum, et 
ámplius non vidit eum eu- 
nüchus. Ibat autem per viam 
Suam gaudens. Philíppus au- 
tem invéntus est in Azóto, et 
pertránsiens evangelizábat ci- 
vitátibus cunctis (donec vení- 
ret Cesaréam) nomen Dómi- 
ni Jesu Christi. : 


555 


Jesus Christ is the Son of God. 
And he commanded the chariot 
to stand still; and they went 
down into the water both Philip 
and the eunuch, and he bap- 
tized him. And when they were 
come out of the water, the 
Spirit of the Lord took away 
Philip, and the eunuch saw 
him no more: and he went on 
his way rejoicing. But Philip 
was found in Azotus, and pass- 


ing through, he preached the Gospel to all the cities, till he 
came to Cæsarea; the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. . 


Gradual. Ps. 117, 24, 22, 23 


Hec dies, quam fecit Démi- 
nus: exsultémus, et letémur 
in ea. Y. Lapidem, quem re- 
probavérunt edificántes, hic 
factus est in caput ánguli: a 
Dómino factum est istud, et 
est, mirábile in óculis nostris. 
Allelüja, allelija. V. Surréxit 
Christus, qui creávit ómnia: 
et misértus est humáno gé- 
neri. ; 


This is the day which the 
Lord hath made: let us be glad 
and rejoice therein. Y. The 
stone which the builders. re- 
jected is become the head of the 
corner: this is the work of the 
Lord, and it is wonderful in our 
eyes. Alleluia, alleluia. y. 
Christ is risen, Who created all 
things, and Who has had pity 
upon mankind. 


Sequence as on Easter Sunday, page 540. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John.20, 11-18 


© Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secándum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Maria 
stabat ad monuméntum 
foris, plorans. Dum ergo fle- 


ret, inclinávit se, et prospéxit: 


in monuméntum: et vidit 
duos Angelos in albis, sedén- 
tes, unum ad caput, et unum 
ad pedes, ubi pósitum füerat 
corpus Jesu. Dicunt ei illi: 
Mülier, quid ploras? Dicit eis: 
Quia tulérunt Dóminum me- 
um: et néscio ubi posuérunt 
eum. Hee cum dixisset, con- 
vérsa est retrórsum, et vidit 
Jesum stantem: et non scié- 


i Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime, Mary stood 
at the sepulchre with- 
out, weeping. Now as she was 
weeping, she stooped down, and 
Jooked into the sepulchre; and 
She saw two angels in white, 
sitting, one at the head and one 
at the feet, where the body of 
Jesus had been laid. They say 
to her, Woman, why weepest 
thou? She saith to them, Be- 
cause they have taken away my 
Lord, and I know not where 
they have laid Him. When she 
had thus said, she turned her- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


556 


self back, and saw Jesus stand- 
ing; and she knew not that it 
was Jesus. Jesus saith to her, 
Woman, why weepest thou? 
whom seekest thou? She think- 
ing it was the gardener, saith 
to Him, Sir, if thou hast taken 
Him hence, tell me where thou 
hast laid Him; and I will take 
Him away. Jesus saith to her, 
Mary. She turning, saith to 
Him, Rabboni (which is to say, 
Master). Jesus saith to her, Do 
not touch Me; for I am not yet 
ascended to My Father: but go 
to My brethren, and say to 
them, I ascend to My Father, 
and to your Father; to My God, 
and your God. Mary Magdalen 
cometh and telleth the disci- 
ples, I have seen the Lord, and 
these things He said to Me. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 

In the day of your solemnity, 

saith the Lord, I will bring you 

into à land that floweth with 
milk and honey, alleluia. 
Offertory Prayers, pave 7^7 


THURSDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


bat quia Jesus est. Dicit ei 
Jesus: Mülier, quid ploras? 
Quem quaris? Illa existimans 
quia, hortulánus esset, dicit 
ei: Dómine, si tu sustulísti 
eum, dícito mihi ubi posuísti 
eum: et ego eum tollam, Dicit 
ei Jesus: María. Convérsa illa, 
dicit ei: Rabbóni (quod díci- 
tur Magíster). Dicit ei Jesus: 
Noli me tángere, nondum 
enim ascéndi ad Patrem me- 
um: vade autem ad fratres 
meos, et dic eis: Ascéndo ad 
Patrem meum, et Patrem ves- 
trum, Deum meum, et Deum 
vestrum. Venit María Mag- 
daléne annüntians discípulis: 
Quia vidi Dóminum, et hec 
dixit mihi. 


Ex. 13, 5 


In die solemnitátis vestre, 
dicit Dóminus, indücam vos 
in terram fluéntem lac et mel, 
allelüja. 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY receive, we be- 
seech ‘Thee, O Lord, the 
gifts of Thy people, that, being 


ÜsciPE, quisumus, Dó- 
mine, münera populó- 
rum tuórum propitius: ut 


renewed by the confession'of confessióne tui nóminis et 
Thy name and by baptism, they baptísmate renováti, sempi- 
may attain eternal happiness, térnam beatitüdinem conse- 
Through our Lord. quántur. Per Dóminum. 

gnome Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Preface No. 5, special Communicentes and Hane igitur, page 804. 


Communion. 1 Pet. 2, 9 
Purchased people, declare Pépulus acquisitidnis, an- 
His virtues, alleluia: Who hath nuntidte virtütes ejus, alle- 
called you out of darkness into Hija: qui vos de ténebris vo- 
His admirable light, alleluia. cávit in admirábile lumen 
suum, allelija. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


w / 


FRIDAY IN EASTER WEEK 557 


Postcommunion . 
xávpr, Dómine, preces IVE ear unto our prayers, 
nostras: ut redempti- O Lord, that the most 


Ónis nostr? sacrosincta com- holy dealings of our redemp- 
mércia, et vite nobis cónfe- tion may obtain help for us in 
rant preséntis auxflium, et the present life and purchase 
géudia sempitérna concflient, everlasting joys, Through our 
Per Déminum. Lord. À 

Second Postcommunion for. the Church, page 825; or for the 
Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Fridap in Easter Week (White) 
STATION AT ST. MARY OF THE MARTYRS 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 77, 53 


pnóxir eos Dóminus in HE Lord brought them out 

Spe, allelija: et inimí- in hope, alleluia: and the 
cos eórum opéruit mare, al- sea overwhelmed their enemies, 
lelüja, allelüja, allelija. Ps. alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 
7?, 1. Atténdite, pópule meus, 77, 1. Attend, O my people, to 
legem meam: inclináte aurem My law: incline your ears to the 
vestram in verba oris mei. words of My mouth. F. Glory. 
y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
MNÍPOTENS sempitérne Py’iuicuty, eternal God; 
Deus, qui paschále sac- L, Who in the covenant 


raméntum in reconciliatiónis of man’s atonement hast be- 

humane federe contulisti: da stowed the paschal sacrament, 

méntibus nostris; ut, quod grant unto our spirits that 

professióne celebrámus, imi- what we outwardly celebrate 

témur efféctu. Per Dóminum. we may imitate effectually, 
` Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 
page 826. 


Epistle, 1 Pet. 3, 18-22 
Léctio Epístole beáti Petri ^ Lesson from the Epistle of 


Apóstoli, blessed Peter the Apostle, 
ARÍssmMI: Christus semel EARLY beloved, Christ died 
pro peccatis nostris mór- 3 once for our sins, the 


tuus est, justus pro injustis, ut just for the unjust, that He 
nos offérret Deo, mortificátus might offer us to God, being 


http://ccwatershed.org 


558 FRIDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


put io death indeed in the 
flesh, but enlivened in the 
Spirit. In which also coming, 
He preached to those spirits 
that were in prison, which had 
been some time incredulous, 
when they waited for the pa- 
tience of God in the days of 
Noe, when the ark was build- 
ing; wherein a few, that is, 
eight souls, were saved by 
water. Whereunto baptism be- 
ing of the like form, now sav- 
eth you also; not the putting 
away of the filth of the flesh, 
but the examination of a good 
conscience toward God, by the 
resurrection of Jesus Christ, 
our Lord, Who is on the right 
hand of God. 


quidem carne, vivificátus au- 
tem spíritu. In quo et his, qui 
in cárcere erant, Spirítibus 
véniens predicavit: qui in- 
créduli füerant aliquando, 
quando exspectábant Dei pa- 
tiéntiam in diébus No&, cum 
fabricarétur arca: in qua 
pauci, id est octo anime sal- 
ve facte sunt per aquam. 
Quod et vos nunc símilis for- 
me salvos facit baptísma: non 
carnis depositio sórdium, sed 
consciéntie bonz interrogátio 
in Deum per resurrectiónem 
Jesu Christi Dómini nostri, 
qui est in déxtera Dei. 


Gradual. Ps. 117, 24, 26, 27 


This is the day which the 
Lord hath made: let us be 
glad and rejoice therein. y. 
Blessed is He that cometh in 
the name of the Lord; the Lord 
is God, and He hath shone 
forth unto us. Alleluia, alleluia. 
X. Ps. 95, 10. Say ye among the 
gentiles, the Lord hath reigned 
from a tree. i 


Hæc dies, quam fecit Dó- 
minus: exsultémus, et læté- 
mur in ea. Y. Benedictus, qui 
venit in nómine Dómini: Deus 
Dóminus, et illáxit nobis. Al- 
lelája, allelüja. Y. Ps. 95, 10. 
Dícite in géntibus: quia Dó- 
minus regnávit a ligno. 


Sequence as on Easter Sunday, page 540. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 28, 16-20 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, the eleven 
disciples went into Gal- 

ilee, unto the mountain where 
Jesus had appointed them: and 
seeing Him they adored; but 
some doubted. And Jesus com- 
ing, spoke to them, saying, All 
power is given to Me in heaven 
ann in earth, Going, therefore, 


Sequéntia sancti Evangélii 
secündum Matthdéum. 


N ILLO témpore: Undecim 

discípuli abiérunt in Ga- 
lileam, in montem, ubi con- 
stitüerat illis Jesus. Et vidén- 
tes eum adoravérunt: quidam 
autem dubitavérunt, Et ac- 
cédens Jesus locütus est els, 
dicens: Data est mihi omnis 
potéstas in cælo, et in terra. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Lf 


w-T +s 


FRIDAY IN EASTER WEEK 559 


Eüntes ergo, docéte omnes 
gentes, baptizintes eos in 
nómine Patris, et Fílii, et Spí- 
ritus Sancti: docéntes eos, 
Serváre ómnia que cümque 
mandávi vobis, Et ecce ego 
vobíscum sum ómnibus dié- 
bus, üque ad consummatió- 
nem seculi, 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


Erit vobis hzc dies memo- 
riálís, allelija: et diem festum 
celebrábitis solémnem Dó- 
mino in progénies vestras: 
legítimum sempitérnum 
diem, allelaja, allelüja. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


ÓsTras, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, placátus assüme: 

quas et pro renatórum expia- 

tióne peccáti deférimus, et 

pro  acceleratióne czléstis 
auxílii, Per Dóminum. 


teach ye all nations, baptizing 
them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost; teaching them 
to observe all things whatso- 
ever I have commanded you. 
And behold I am with you all 
days, even to the consumma- 
tion of the world. 


Ex. 12, 14 


This day shall be for a mem- 
orial to you, alleluia: and you 
shall keep it a solemn feast to 
the Lord: in your generations, 
an everlasting legal day, alle- 
luia, alleluia. 


E APPEASED, We beseecn 
Thee, O Lord, and ac- 
cept the sacrifices we bring 
both for the expiation of the 
sin of those born again in 'Thee, 
and for the hastening of heave 
enly aid. Through our Lord, 


ign Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Preface No. 5, special Communicantes and Hanc igitur, page 804. 


Communion. 


Data est mihi omnis potés- 
tas in czlo, et in terra, alle- 
lüja: eüntes, docéte omnes 
gentes, baptizántes eos in nó- 
mine Patris, et Fílii, et Spíri- 
tus Sancti, allelája, allelüja. 


Matt. 28, 18, 19 


All power is given to Me in 
heaven and on earth, alleluia: 
going, teach all nations, bap- 
tizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and 
of the Holy Ghost: alleluia, 
alleluia. 


Postcommunion 


ÉsPICE, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, pópulum tuum: 
et quam etérnis dignátus es 
renováre mystériis, a tempo- 


AVE regard to Thy people, 

we beseech Thee, O 

Lord, and graciously absolve of 
their temporal sins those whom 


http://ccwatershed.org 


560 


Thou hast deigned to refresh 
with eternal mysteries. 
Through our Lord. 


SATURDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


rálibus culpis dignánter ab- 
sólve. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion for the Church, page 825; or for the 


Pope, page 826. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Saturday in Easter Week (White) 


STATION AT ST. JOHN LATERAN 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


HE Lord brought forth His 

people with joy, alleluia: 
2nd His chosen with gladness, 
alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 104, 1. 
Give glory to the Lord, and 
cal upon His name: declare 
His deeds among the gentiles. 
y. Glory. 


Ps. 104, 43 


pnóxir Dóminus pópu- 

lum suum in exsulta- 
tióne, allelija: et eléctos suos 
in letítia, allelaja, alleluja. 
Ps. 104, 1. Confitémini Dó- 
mino, et invocáte nomen ejus: 
annuntiáte inter gentes ópera 
ejus. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 

almighty. God, that we, 

who have kept the Easter fes- 

tivities with veneration, may 

by them be found worthy to 

come unto eternal joys. 
Through our Lord. 


ONCEDE, quesumus, omni- 

potens Deus, ut, qui 
festa  paschália  venerándo 
égimus, per hzc contingere ad 
gaudia etérna mereámur. Per 
Dóminum. 


Sesona Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


page 826 


Epistle. 1 Peter 2, 2-10 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle. 


EARLY beloved, laying 

away all malice, and all 
guile, and dissimulations, and 
envies, and all detractions, as 
newborn babes desire the ra- 
tional milk without guile, that 
thereby you may grow unto 
salvation; if so be you have 
tasted that the Lord is sweet. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Petri 
Apóstoli. . 


AnÍssrwi: Deponéntes igi- 

tur omnem malítiam, et 
omnem dolum, et simulatió- 
nes,.et invídias, et omnes de- 
iractiónes, sicut modo géniti 
infántes, rationábile sine dolo 
lac concupíscite: ut in eo cres- 
cátis in salütem: si tamen 
gustástis, quóniam dulcis est 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SATURDAY IN EASTER WEEK 561 


Dóminus. Ad quem accedén- 
tes lápidem vivum, ab homíni- 
bus quidem reprobátum, a Deo 
autem eléctum, et honorifi- 
cátum: et ipsi tamquam lápi- 
des vivi superzdificámini, do- 
mus spirituális, sacerdótium 
sanctum, offérre spirituáles 
hóstias, acceptábiles Deo per 
Jesum Christum. Propter 
quod cóntinet Scriptüra: Ec- 
ce pono in Sion Jápidem sum- 
mum  angulárem, eléctum, 
pretiósum: et qui credíderit 
in eum, non confundétur. Vo- 
bis ígitur honor credéntibus: 
non credéntibus autem lapis, 
quem reprobavérunt edifican- 
tes, his factus est in caput 
ánguli, et lapis offensiónis, et 
petra scándali his, qui offén- 
dunt verbo, nec credunt in quo 
et pósiti sunt, Vos autem ge- 
nus eléctum, regále sacerdó- 
tium, gens sancta, pópulus ac- 
quisitiónis, ut virtütes annun- 
tiétis ejus, qui de ténebris vos 
vocávit in admirábile lumen 
suum. Qui aliquándo non 
pópulus, nunc autem pópulus 
Dei: qui-non.consecuti miseri- 
córdiam; nunc autem miseri< 
córdiam consecüti. 


Unto Whom coming, as to a 
living stone, rejected indeed by 
men, but chosen and made 
honorable by God: be you also 
as living stones built up, a 
Spiritual house, a holy priest- 
hood, to offer up spiritual sac- 
rifices, acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ. Wherefore it is 
contained in the Scripture, Be- 
hold 1 lay in Sion a chief cor- 
nerstone, elect, precious; and 
he that shall believe in Him, 
Shall not be confounded. To 
you therefore that believe, He 
is honor: but to them that be- 
lieve not, the stone which the 
builders rejected, the same is 
made the head of the corner: 
and a stone of stumbling and 
& rock of scandal to them who 
Stumble at the word, neither 
do believe, whereunto also 
they are set. But you are a 
chosen generation, a kingly 
priesthood, à holy nation, & 
purchased people: that you 
may declare His virtues, Who 
hath called you out of dark- 
ness into His admirable light, 
Who in time past were not a 
people; but are now the people 
of God. Who had not obtained 
mercy; but now have obtained 
mercy. 


From this. day to the Saturday before Trinity Sunday, which 


is the end of the 


aschal time in all Masses, the Gradual is 


replaced by the following Alleluia, 


Allelüja, allelija. V. Ps. 
117, 24. Hee dies, quam fecit 
Dóminus: exsultémus, et leté- 
mur in ea. Allelija. VY. Ps. 
112, 1.. Laudáte, püeri, Dómi- 
num, laudáte nomen Dómini. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 117, 
24, This is the day which the 
Lord hath made, let us be glad 
and rejoice therein, alleluia. 
y. Ps. 112, 1. Praise the Lord 
ye children, praise the name 
of the Lord. 


Sequence as on Easter Sunday, page 540. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


562 SATURDAY IN EASTER WEEK 


Gospel. John 20, 1-9 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime, on the first 

day of the week, Mary 
Magdalen cometh early, when 
it was yet dark, unto tbe sepul- 
chre, and she. saw the stone 
taken away from the sepulchre. 
She ran therefore, and cometh 
to Simon Peter, and to the 
other disciple whom Jesus 
loved, and saith to them: They 
have taken away the Lord out 
of the sepulchre, and we know 
not where tbey have laid Him. 
Peter therefore went out, and 
that other disciple, and they 
came to the sepulchre; and 
they both ran together, and 
that other disciple did outrun 
Peter, and came first to the 
sepulchre. And when he 
stooped down, he saw the 
linen cloths lying, but yet he 
went not in. Then cometh 
Simon Peter, following him, 
and went into the sepulchre, 
and saw the linen cloths lying, 
and the napkin that had been 
about His head, not lying with 
the’ linen cloths, but apart, 
wrapt up into one place. Then 
that other disciple also went 
in, who came first to the sepul- 
chre: and he saw, and be- 
lieved: for as yet they knew 
not the Scripture, that He 
must rise again from the dead. 

Creed, page 765. 


YW Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Una sáb- 
bati, María Magdaléne 
venit mane, cum adhuc téne- 
bre essent, ad monuméntum: 
et vidit lJápidem sublátum a 
monuménto. Cucürrit ergo, 
et venit ad Simónem Petrum, 
et ad álium disefpulum, quem 
amábat Jesus, et dicit illis: 
Tulérunt Dóminum de onu- 
ménto, et nescímus ubi posu- 
érunt eum. Exíit ergo Petrus, 
et ille álius discípulus, et ve- 
nérunt ad monuméntum. Cur- 
rébant autem duo simul, et 
ille álius discipulus precurrit 
cítius Petro, et venit primus 
ad monuméntum. Et cum se 
inclindsset, vidit pósita lin- 
teámina, non tamen introívit. 
Venit ergo Simon Petrus se- 
quens eum, et introívit in mo- 
numéntum, et vidit linteá- 
mina pósita, et sudárium, 
quod füerat super caput ejus, 
non cum .linteamínibus-pósi- 
tum, sed separátim involütum, 
in unum locum. Tunc ergo 
introívit et ille discípulus, qui 
vénerat primus ad monumén- 
tum: et vidit, et crédidit: 
nondum enim sciébant Scrip- 
türam, quia oportébat eum a 
mórtuis resürgere. 


Offertory. Ps. 117, 26, 27 


Blessed is He that cometh in 
the name of the Lord: we have 
blessed you out of the house of 
the Lord: the Lord is God, and 
He hath shone upon us, alle- 
luia, alleluia. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Benedictus, qui venit in nó- 
mine Dómini: benedíximus 
vobis de domo Dómini: Deus 
Dóminus, et illáxit nobis, al- 
Jelája, allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


LOW SUNDAY 562 


Secret 
ONCÉDE, quesumus, Dó- RANT us, We beseech Thee, 
mine, semper nos per O Lord, ever to rejoice 


hasc mystéria paschália gratu- through these Easter mysteries, 

lari, ut continua nostre re- that the continual working out 

paritiónis operdtio, perpétue of our redemption may become 

nobis fiat causa letitie. Per unto us the cause of never- 

Dóminum. ending gladness. Through our 
Lord. 

ene Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Preface No. 5, special Communicantes and Hanc igitur, page 804. 


Communion. Gal. 3, 27 


Omnes qui in Christo bap- All you who have been bap- 
tizáti estis, Christum induís- tized in Christ, have put on 


tis, allelüia. Christ, alleluia. 
Postcommunion 
EDEMPTIÓNIS nostre mú- UICKENED by the gift of 
nere vegeláti, quæsu- our redemption, we be- 


mus, Dómine: ut hoc perpé- seech Thee, O Lord, that the 
tue salütis auxílio, fides sem- true faith may ever profit by 
per vera profíciat. Per Dómi- this help of eternal salvation. 
num. R Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion jor the Church, page 825; or for the 
Pope, page 826. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


n Low Sunday (White) ^ 5 ~ 
' STATION at ST. PANCRAS UU 
Majer Sunday of the First Class (Octave of Easter) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 1 Pet. 2, 2 


vast modo géniti infán- S NEWBORN babes, alle- 
tes, allelája: rationábi- luia, desire the rational 
les, sine dolo lac concupíscite, milk without guile, alleluia, al- 
allelija, allelüja, allelija. Ps. leluia, alleluia. Ps. 80, 2. Re- 
80, 2. Exsultáte Deo adjutóri joice to God our helper: sing 
nostro: jubiláte Deo Jacob. aloud to the God of Jacob. Y. 
Y. Glória Patri. Glory. 
Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
RESTA, quesumus, omní- RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
potens Deus: ut, qui almighty God, that we, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


564 


who have completed the ob- 
servance of the paschal fes- 
tival, may Keep it, by Thy 
bounty, in our life and be- 
havior. Through our Lord. 


LOW SUNDAY 


paschália festa perégimus, 
hzc, te largiénte, móribus et 
vita teneámus. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. 1 John 5, 4-10 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed John the Apostle. 


EARLY beloved, Whatso- 
D ever is born of God, over- 
cometh the world; and this is 
the victory which overcometh 
the world, our faith. Who is 
he that overcometh the world, 
but he that believeth that 
Jesus is the Son of God? 
This is He that came by 
water and blood, Jesus Christ; 
not by water only, but by 
water and blood. And it is the 
spirit which testifieth that 
Christ is the truth. And there 
are three who give testimony 
in heaven; the Father, the 
Word, and the Holy Ghost: and 
these three are one. And there 
are three that give testimony 
on earth; the spirit, the water, 
and the blood: and these three 
are one. If we receive the tes- 
timony of men, the testimony 
of God is greater: for this is 
the testimony of God which is 
greater, because He hath tes- 
tified of His Son. He that be- 


lieveth in the Son of God hath in 


the testimony of God in him- 
self. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Matt. 
28, 7. In the day of My resur- 
rection, saith the Lord, I will go 
before you into Galilee. Alle- 
luia. Y. John 20, 26. Eight days 
after, the doors being shut, 
Jesus stood in the midst of His 
disciples and said, Peace be 
unto you. Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Joán- 
nis Apóstoli. 
ARISSIMI: Omne, quod na- 
tum est ex Deo, vincit 
mundum: et hzc est victória, 
que vincit mundum, fides nos- 
tra. Quis est, qui vincit mun- 
dum, nisi qui credit, quóniam 
Jesus est Fílius Dei? Hic est, 
qui venit per aquam, et sán- 
guinem, Jesus Christus; non 
in aqua solum, sed in aqua 
et sánguine. Et Spíritus est, 
qui  testificátur, | quóniam 
Christus est véritas. Quóniam 
tres sunt, qui testimónium 
dant in celo: Pater, Verbum, 
et Spíritus Sanctus; et hi tres 
unum sunt. Et ires sunt, qui 
testimónium dant in terra: 
Spíritus, et aqua, et sanguis: 
et hi tres unum sunt. Si tes- 
timónium hóminum accípi- 
mus, testimónium Dei majus 
est: quóniam hoc est testimó- 
nium Dei, quod majus est: 
quóniam testificátus est de 
Fíliosuo. Qui credit in Fílium 
Dei, habet testimónium Dei 
se. 


Allelüja, allelüja. y. 
Matth. 28, 7. In die resur- 
rectiónis mes, dicit Dóminus, 
precédam vos in Galileam. 
Allelüja. V. Joan. 20, 26. Post 
dies octo, jánuis clausis, stetit 
Jesus in médio discipulórum 
suórum, et dixit: pax vobis. 
Allelija. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


j 


LOW SUNDAY 


565 


Gospel. John 20, 19-31 


H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joánnem, 
"W"N iLLo témpore: Cum sero 
esset die illo, una sab- 
batórum, et fores essent clau- 
sæ, ubi erant discipuli con- 
gregáti propter metum Judæ- 
érum: venit Jesus, et stetit in 
médio, et dixit eis: Pax vobis. 
Et cum hoc dixísset, osténdit 
eis manus, et latus. Gavisi 


sunt ergo discipuli, viso Dé-. 


mino. Dixit ergo eis iterum: 
Pax vobis. Sicut misit me 
Pater, et ego mitto vos, Hac 
cum dixisset, insuffiàvit: et 
dixit eis: Accfpite Spiritum 
Sanctum: quórum remiséritis 
peccáta, remittüntur eis: et 
quorum retinuéritis, reténta 
sunt. Thomas autem unus ex 
duódecim, qui dicitur Didy- 
mus, non erat cum eis, quando 
venit Jesus. Dixerunt ergo 
et alii discipuli: Vídimus Dó- 
minum. Ille autem dixit eis: 
Nisi vídero in mánibus ejus 
fixüram clavórum, et mittam 
digitum meum in locum cla- 
yérum, et míttam manum me- 
am in latus ejus non credam. 
Et post dies octo, iterum erant 
discípuli ejus intus: et Tho- 
mas cum eis. Venit Jesus já- 
nuis clausis, et stetit in médio, 
et dixit: Pax vobis. Deinde 
dicit Thome: Infer dígitum 
tuum huc, et vide manus 
meas, et affer manum tuam, 
et mitte in latus meum: et 
noli esse incrédulus, sed fidé- 
lis.. Réspondit Thomas, et 
dixit ei; Dóminus meus, et 
Deus meus. Dixit ei Jesus: 
quia vidisti me, Thoma, cre- 
didísti: beáti, qui non vidé- 
runt, et credidérunt. Multa 


8 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT lime, when it was 

late that same day, the 

t of the week, and the doors 
were shut, where the disciples 
were gathered together, for 
fear of the Jews, Jesus came, 
and stood in the midst, and 
said to them, Peace be to you. 
And when He had said this, He 
showed them His hands and 
His side. The disciples there- 
fore were glad, when they saw 
ihe Lord. He said therefore ta 
them again, Peace be to you: 
as the Father hath sent Me, 
I also send you. When He had 
said this, He breathed on them; 
and He said to them, Receive 
ye the Holy Ghost: whose sins 
you shall forgive, they are for- 
given them, and whose sins you 
shall retain, they are retained. 
Now Thomas, one of the 
twelve, who is called Didymus, 
was not with them, when Jesus 
came. The other disciples 
therefore said to him, We have 
seen the Lord. But he said to 
them, Except‘T'see in His hands 
the print of the nails, and put 
my finger into the place of the 
nails, and put my hand into 
His side, I will not believe. 
And after eight days, again His 
disciples were within, and 
Thomas with them, Jesus com- 
eth, the doors being shut, and 
stood in the midst, and said, 
Peace. be to you. Then He said 
to Thomas, Put in thy finger 
hither, and see My hands, and 
bring hither thy hand, and put 
it into My side; and be not 
faithless, but believing. 
Thomas answered, and said to 


http://ccwatershed.org 


566 


Him, My Lord, and my God. 
Jesus saith to him, Because 
thou hast seen Me, Thomas, 
thou hast believed: blessed are 
they that have not seen, and 
have believed. Many other 
signs also did Jesus in the sight 
of His disciples, which are not 
written in this book. But these 


LOW SUNDAY 


quidem, et ália signa fecit 
Jesus in conspéctu discipuló- 
rum suórum, que non sunt 
Scripta in libro hoc. Hzc au- 
tem scripta sunt ut credátis, 
quia Jesus est Christus Fílius 
Dei: et ut credéntes, vitam 
hábeátis in nómine ejus, 


are written, that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ the 
Son of God; and that, believing, you may have life in His name. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Matt. 28, 2, 5, 6 


An angel of the Lord de- 
scended from heaven, and said 
to the women: He Whom you 
seek is risen as He said, alle- 
Iuda. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Angelus Dómini descéndit 
de czlo, et dixit muliéribus: 
Quem quaeritis, surréxit sicut 
dixit, allelija. 


Secret 


ECEIVE, We pray Thee, O 

Lord, the gifts of Thine 
exultant Church, and, as Thou 
hast afforded her cause for 
such great joy, grant her the 
fruit of unending gladness. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 5, page 804. 


Communion. 

Put in thy hand, and know 

the place of the nails, alleluia; 

&nd be not incredulous, but be- 
lieving, alleluia, alleluia. 


tscrr—E münera, Dómine, 

quaesumus,  exsultántis 
Ecclésie: et cui causam tanti 
gáudil praestitisti, perpétue 
fructum concéde letitie, Per 
Dóminum. 


John 20, 27 


Mitte manum tuam, et cog- 
nósce loca clavórum, allelüja: 
et noli esse incrédulus, sed 
fidélis, allelüja, allelüja. 


Postcommunion 


E BESEECH, O Lord our 

God, that Thou make 
the sacred mysteries which 
Thou hast given for the bul- 
wark of our redemption, to be 
unto us a healing both in the 
present and in the future. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


vzsumus, Dómine Deus 
Q roster: ut sacrosáncta 
mystéria, que pro reparatió- 
nis nostre munímine contu- 
listi; et presens nobis remé- 
dium esse fácias, et futürum. 
Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


eer > 


SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


567 


Second Hundap after Easter (White) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


isERICÓRDIA Dómini 
@M plena est terra, alle- 


lüja: verbo Dómini celi fir- 
máti sunt, allelija, allelija. 
Ps, 32, 1. Exsultáte, justi, in 
Démino: rectos decet collau- 
dátio. Y. Glória Patri. 


Ps. 32, 5, 6 


we earth is full of the 

mercy of tbe Lord, alle- 
luia: by the word of the Lord 
the heavens were established, 
alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 32, 1. Re- 
joice in the Lord, ye just: 
praise becometh the upright. 
X. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


REUS, qui in Fílii tui hu- 
militáte jacéntem mun- 
dum erexisti: fidélibus tuis 
perpétuam concéde letitiam; 
ut, quos perpétue mortis eri- 
puísti cásibus, gáudiis fácias 
pérfrui sempitérnis. Per eüm- 
dem Dóminum. 


cop, Who by the humility 
of Thy Son hast lifted 
up a fallen world, grant that 
to those whom Thou hast de- 
livered from the misfortunes 
of eternal death, Thou mayest 
insure everlasting happiness, 
Through the same. 


If no commemorations are to be made from the Proper of 
Saints on this and the following Sundays of paschal time, 


the second Prayer is in honor 


for the Pope, page 826. 


of our Blessed Lady Grant 


us, page 824; and the third either for the Church, page 825, or 


Epistle. 1 Peter 2, 21-25 


Léctio Epistole beáti Petri 
Apóstoli, ` 


ARÍSSIMI: Christus passus 


est pro nobis, vobis re- . 


linquens exémplum, ut sequá- 
mini vestígia ejus. Qui pec- 
cátum non fecit, nec invéntus 
est dolus in ore ejus: qui cum 
maledicerétur, non maledicé- 
bat: cum paterétur, non com- 
minabátur: tradébat autem 
judicánti se injüste: qui pec- 
cáta nostra ipse pértulit in 
córpore suo super lignum: ut 
peccátis mértui, justitie vivá- 
mus: cujus livóre sanáti estis. 
Erátis enim sicut oves er- 
rantes, sed convérsi estis nunc 
&d pastórem et epíscopum 
&nimárum vestrárum. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle. _ 
EARLY beloved, Christ suf- 

fered for us, leaving vou 
an example that you shoul 
follow His steps. Who did ny 
sin, neither was guile found in 
His mouth. Who when He was 
reviled, did not revile; when He 
suffered, He threatened not; 
but delivered Himself to him 
that judged Him unjustly: 
Who His own self bore our sins 
in His body upon the tree; that 
we being dead to sins, should 
live to justice: by whose stripes 
you were healed. For you were 
as sheep going astray: but you 
are now converted to the shep- 
herd and bishop of your souls, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


568 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Luke 24, 
35. The disciples knew the 
Lord Jesus in the breaking of 
bread. Alleluia. Y. John 10, 14. 
I am the good shepherd: and 
I know My sheep, and Mine 
know Me. Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


Allehija, allelija. Y. Luc. 
24, 35. Cognovérunt discípuli 
Dóminum Jesum in fractióne 
penis, Allelüja. Y. Joann. 
10, 14. Ego Sum Pastor bonus: 
et cognósco oves meas, et cog- 
nóscunt me mee. Alleluja, 


Gospel.. John 10, 11-16 


*B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, Jesus said 

to the pharisees, I am 

e good shepherd. The good 
Shepherd giveth His life for 
His sheep; but the hireling, 
and he that is not the shep- 
herd, whose own the sheep are 
not, seeth the wolf coming, and 
leaveth the sheep, and fiieth; 
and the wolf catcheth, and 
scattereth the sheep: and the 
hireling flieth because he is a 
hireling, and he bath no care 
for the sheep. I am the good 
Shepherd; and I know Mine, 
and Mine know Me. As the 
Father knoweth Me, and I 
know the Father, and I lay 
down My life for My sheep. 
And other sheep I have, that 
are not of this fold; them also 
I must bring, and they shall 
hear My voice, and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd. 


Creed, page 765. 


H* Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Dixit 
Jesus phariseis: Ego sum 
pastor bonus, Bonus pastor 
ánimam suam dat. pro óvibus 
suis. Mercenárius autem, et 
qui non est pastor, cujus non 
sunt oves próprie, videt lu- 
pum veniéntem, et dimíttit 
oves, et fugit: et lupus rapit, 
et dispérgit oves: mercenárius 
autem fugit, quia mercenárius 
est, et non pértinet ad eum de 
óvibus. Ego sum pastor bo- 
nus: et cognósco meas, et cog- 
nóscunt me me. Sicut novit 
me Pater, et ego agnósco Pat- 
rem; et ánimam meam pono 
pro óvibus meis, Et álias oves 
hábeo, que non sunt ex hoc 
Ovíli: et illas opórtet me ad- 
dücere, et vocem meam audi- 
ent, et fiet unum ovíle, et un- 
us pastor. 


Offertory. Ps. 62, 2, 5 


O God, my God, to Thee do 
I watch at break of day: and 
in Thy name I will lift up my 
hands, alleluia. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Deus, Deus meus, ad te da 
luce vigilo: et in nómine tuo 
levábo manus meas, allelüja. 


Secret 


ET the sacred offering, O 
Lord, ever confer salu- 


ENEDICTIÓNEM nobis, Dó- 
mine cónferat salutá&- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


— — 


THIRD SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 569 


rem sacra semper oblátio: ut, tary benediction upon us, per- 

quod agit mystério,. virtúte fecting in power what it doeth 

perficiat, Per Dóminum. in symbol. Tbrough our Lord. 
Second, Prayer of our Blessed Lady, By Thy mercy, page 825; 

third for ihe Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 826. 
Preface No. 5, page 804. 


Communion. John 10, 14 


Ego sum pastor bonus, al- Iam the good shepherd, alle- 
lelüja: et cognósco oves meas, luia: and I know My sheep, 
et cognóscunt me mes, alle- and Mine know Me, alleluia, 
lúja, alleluja. — - aleluia. 


. Postcommunion 


RÆSTA nobis, quesumus, RANT US, we beseech Thee, 
omnípotens Deus: ut vi- O almighty God, that, 
vificatiónis fue grátiam con- quickened by Thy grace, we 
sequéntes, in tuo semper mú- may ever glory in Thy gifts. 
nere gloriémur: Per Dómi- Through our Lord. — 
num. 


Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, Grant O Lord, 
page 825; third for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 
page 826. : 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Third Sunday after Easter (White) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 65, 1, 2 

UBILÁTE Deo, omnis terra, | Hour With joy to God, all 

_allelúja: psalmum dicite the earth, alleluia; sing 
nómini ejůš;“ állēlúja: date ye a psalm to. His name, alle- 
glóriam laudi ejus, allelija, luia: give glory to- His praise. 
allelúja, allelija. Ps. 65, 3. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 
Dicite Deo, quam terribilia 65, 3. Say unto God, how ter- 
sunt ópera tua, Dómine! in rible. are Thy works, O Lord! 
multitüdine virtütis tue men- in the multitude of Thy 
tiéntur tibi inimici tui. VY. strength Thy enemies shall lie 
Glória Patri. : to Thee. Y. Glory. 

Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
xus, qui errántibus, ut 4 cop, Who dost show the 
in viam possint redfre light of Thy truth to 
justitie, veritatis tue lumen them that go astray, that they 
osténdis: da cunctis qui may be able to return to the 
hristlána professióne censén- path of justice, grant unto all 
tur, et illa respüere, que huic who profess themselves and 
inimica sunt nómini; et ea are reckoned Christians, both 


http://ccwatershed.org 


570 


to reject the things that are 
opposed to that name and to 
follow after the things that be- 
fit it. Through our Lord. 


THIRD SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


quae sunt apta, sectári. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Prayer ef our Blessed Lady, Grant us, page 824; 
third for the Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. ! 


Epistle. 1 Pet. 2, 11-19 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle. 


EARLY beloved, I beseech 

you as strangers and pil- 
grims, to refrain yourselves 
from carnal desires which war 
against the soul, having your 
conversation good among the 
gentiles: that whereas they 
speak against you as evil-do- 
ers, they may by the good 
works, which they shall behold 
in you, glorify God in the day 
of visitation. Be ye subject 
therefore to every human crea- 
ture for God’s sake: whether 
it be to the king as excelling: 
or to governors as sent by him 
for the punishment of evil- 
doers, and for the praise of 
the. good: for so is the will of 
God, that by .doing -well you 
may put to silence the ignor- 
ance of foolish men. As free, 
and not as making liberty a 
cloak for malice, but as the 
servants of God. Honor all 
men. Love the brotherhood. 
Fear God. Honor the king. Ser- 
vants, be subject to your 
masters with all fear, not only 
to the good and gentle, but also 
to the froward. For this is 
thankworthy in Christ Jesus 
our Lord. 

Alleluia, alieluia. Y. Ps. 110, 
9. The Lord hath sent redemp- 
tion to His people. Alleluia. Y. 
Luke 24, 46. It behooved Christ 
‘o suffer these things, and so 


Léctio Epistole beáti Petri 
Apóstoli. 
ARÍssSMI: Obsecro vos 
tamguam  ádvenas, et 
peregrínos abstinére vos a 
carnálibus desidériis, que mí- 
litant advérsus animam, con- 
versatiónem vestram inter 
gentes habéntes bonam: ut in 
eo, quod detréctant de vobis 
tamquam de malefactóribus, 
ex bonis opéribus vos consi- 
derántes, glorificent Deum in 
die visitatiónis. Subjécti fgi- 
tur estóte omni humane crea- 
ture propter Deum: sive regi, 
quasi precellénti: sive düci- 
bus, tamquam ab eo missis ad 
vindíctam malefactórum, lau- 
dem vero bonórum: quia sic 
est volüntas Dei, ut benefacl- 
éntes obmutéscere faciátis im- 
prudéntium hóminum igno- 
rántiam: quasi liberi, et non 
quasi velamen habéntes malf- 
tie libertátem, sed sicut servi 
Dei. Omnes honoráte: frater- 
nitátem dilígite: Deum ti- 
méte: regem  honorificáte. 
Servi, sübditi estóte in omni 
timóre dóminis, non tantum 
bonis, et modéstis, sed etiam 
dyscolis. Hec est enim grátia: 
jn Christo Jesu Dómino nos- 
iro. : 
Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps.; 
110, 9. Redemptiónem misit 
Dóminus pópulo suo. Allelája. 
V. Luc. 24, 46. Oportébat pati 
Christum, et resürgere a mór- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THIRD SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


tuis: et ita initráre in glóriam 
suam. Allelija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


571 


to enter into His glory. Alle- 
luia. 


Gospel. John 16, 16-22 


*H Sequénliia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 


N QiLLo témpore: Dixit Je- 
IL sus discípulis suis: Módi- 
cum, et jam non vidébitis me: 
et iterum módicum, et vidé- 
bitis me: quia vado ad Pat- 
rem. Dixérunt ergo ex discí- 
pulis ejus ad ínvicem: Quid 
est hoc, quod dicit nobis: Mó- 
dicum, et non vidébitis me: et 
iterum módicum, et vidébitis 
me, et quia vado ad Patrem? 
Dicébant ergo: Quid est hoc, 
quod dicit: Módicum? nescí- 
mus, quid lóquitur. Cognóvit 
&utem Jesus, quia volébant 
eum interrogáre, et dixit eis: 
De hoc quzritis inter vos, 
quia dixi: Módicum, et non 
vidébitis me: et {terum módi- 
cum, et vidébitis me. Amen, 
amen dico vobis: quia plorá- 
bitis, et; flébitis vos, mundus 
autem gaudébit: vos autem 
contristabímini, sed tristitia 
vestra vertétur in gáudium. 
Müller cum parit, tristítiam 
habet, quia venit hora ejus: 
cum autem pepérerit püerum, 
jam non méminit pressüre 
propter gáudium, quia natus 
est homo in mundum. Et vos 
ígitur nunc quidem tristitiam 
habétis, iterum autem vidébo 
vos, et gaudébit cor vestrum: 
et gáudium vestrum nemo tol- 
let & vobis. 


A Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT lime, Jesus said 
: to His disciples, A little 
while, and now you shall not 
see Me; and again a little 
while, and you shall see Me; 
because I go to the Father. 
'Then some of His disciples said 
one to another, What is this 
that He saith to us, A little 
while, and you shall not see 
Me; and again a little while, 
and you shall see Me; and be- 
cause I go to the Father? They 
said therefore, What is this 
that He saith, A little while? 
we know not what He speak- 
eth. And Jesus knew that they 
had & mind to ask Him: and 
He said to them, Of this do 
you inquire among yourselves 
because I said, A little while, 
and you shall not see Me; and 
again a Httle while, and’ you 
shall see Me? Amen, amen, T 
say to you, that you shall la- 
ment and weep, but the world 
shall rejoice; and you shall 
be made sorrowful, but your 
sorrow shall be turned into 
joy. A woman when She is in 
labor hath sorrow, because her 
hour is come; but when she 
hath brought forth the child, 
she remembereth no more the 
anguish, for joy that a.man is 
born into the world. So also 
you now indeed have Sorrow, 


but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, aNd your 
joy no man shall take from you. : 


Creed, page 765. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


572 FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


Offertory. Ps. 145, 2 
Praise the Lord, O my soul Lauda, ánima mea, Démi- 
in my life I will praise the num: laudábo Dóminum in 
Lord: I will sing to my God as vita mea: psallam Deo meo, 
long as I shall be. Alleluia. quámdiu ero, allelüja. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
Y. THESE mysteries, O 1s nobis, Dómine, mysté- 
Lord, may grace be given riis conferátur, quo ter- 


us so that, chastening our réna desidéria mitigantes, dis- 
earthly desires, we may learn cámus amare celéstia. Per 
to love heavenly things. Dóminum. 

"Through our Lord. 


Second Secret of our Blessed Lady, By. Thy mercy, page 825; 
third for the Church or for the Pope, capes 825, 826. 


Preface No. 5, page 804. 


Communion. : John 16, 16 


A little while, and now you . Médicum, et non vidébitis 
shall not see Me, alleluia: and me, allelija, fterum módicum, 
again a little while, and you et vidébitis me, quia vado ad 
shall see Me: because I go to Patrem, alleluja, allelija.. 
the Father. Alleluia, alleluia. 


Postcommunion 
AY the sacrament we ACRAMÉNTA que sümpsi- 
have received, O Lord, mus, quesumus, Dómi- 


we beseech Thee, both restore ne;- e&-spirituálibus nos in- 
us-with its spiritual nourish- stáurent aliméntis, et corpo- 
ment and protect us with its rálibus tueántur auxiliis. Per 
help for our bodies. Through Dóminum. 

our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, Grant O Lord, 
mage 825, third for the Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Fourth Sundap after Caster (White) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 97, 1, 2 

Inc ye to the Lord a new ANTATE Démino cánticum 
canticle, alleluia; for the novum, allelija: quia 

ri hath done wonderful mirabilia fecit Dóminus, al- 
things, alleluia; He. bath re- lelúja: ante conspéctum gén- 
vealed His justice in the sight tium revelávit justítiam suam, 
Of ihe gentiles, alleluia, alle- allelija, allelüja, allelája. Ps. 
luia. Ps. 97, 1. His right hand 97, 1. Salvábit sibl déxtera 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


ejus: et bráchium sanctum 
ejus. V. Gloria Patri. 


573 


hath wrought for Him salva- 
tion: and His arm is holy. me 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
- Prayer 


xus, qui fidélium men- 

tes uníus éfficis volun- 
tátis: da pópulis tuis id amáre 
quod precipis, id desideráre 
quod promíttis; ut inter mun- 
danas varietátes ibl. nostra 
fixa sint corda, ubi vera sunt 
gáudia. Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who dost make the 

minds of the faithful to 
be of one accord, grant Thy 
peoples that they may love 
what Thou commandest and 
desire what Thou dost promise, 
so. that, amid the changing 
things of this world, our 
hearts may be set where true 
joys abide. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, Grant us, page 824; 
third for the Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Epistle. 1 James 1, 17-21. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Jacóbi 
Apóstoli. 
arissimz: Omne datum 
óptimum, et omne do- 
num perféctum desürsum est, 
descéndens a Patre himinum, 
apud quem non est transmu- 
tátio, nec vicissitüdinis obum- 
bratio. Voluntárie enim génuit 
rios verbo. veritátis, ut simus 
jnitium &liquod'creatürs ejus. 
Scitis, fratres mei dilectíssimi. 
Bit autem omnis homo velox 
&d audiéndum: tardus autem 
&d loquéndum, et tardus ad 
iram. Ira enim viri, justitiam 
Dei non operátur. Propter 
quod abjiciéntes omnem im- 
mundítiam et abundántiam 
malítis, in mansuetüdine sus- 
cípite insitum verbum, quod 
potest salváre ánimas vestras. 


AllelGja, allelüja. JV. Ps. 
117, 16. Déxtera, Dómini fecit 
virtütem, déxtera: Dómini ex- 
altávit me. Allelija. Y. Rom. 
6, 9. Christus resürgens ex 
mórtuis jam non méóritur: 


Lesson from. the Epistle of 

blessed James the Apostle. 

EARLY beloved, Every best 

gift, and every perfect 
gift is from above; coming 
down from the Father of 
lights, with Whom there is no 
change, nor shadow of altera- 
tion. For of His own will hath 
He begotten us by the word of 
truth; that we might be some 
be#inning of His creatures. 
You know, my dearest breth- 
tren; and let every man be 
swift to hear, but slow to 
speak, and slow to anger. For 
the anger of man worketh not 
the justice of God. Wherefore, 
casting away all uncleanness, 
and abundance of naughtiness, 
with meekness receive the en- 
grafted word, which is able to 
save your souls; 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 117, 
16. The right hand of the Lord 
hath wrought power; the right 
hand of the Lord hath exalted 
me, Alleluia. V. Rom. 6, 9. 
Christ, rising from the dead, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


574 


now dieth not; death shall no 
more have dominion over Him. 
Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


mors illi ultra non dominábi- 
tur. Allelája. 


Gospel. John 16, 5-14 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time Jesus said to 


His disciples, I go to 
Him that sent Me; and none 
of you asketh Me, Whither go- 
est Thou? But because I have 
spoken these things to you, sor- 
row hath filled your heart. But 
I tell you the truth: it is ex- 
pedient to you that I go; for 
if I go not, the Paraclete will 
not come to you, but if I go, I 
wil send Him to you. And 
when He is come, He will con- 
vince the world of sin, and of 
justice, and of judgment. Of 
sin, because they believed not 
in Me; and of justice, because 
I go to the Father, and you 
shall see Me no longer; and of 
judgment, because the prince 
of this world is already judged. 
I have yet many things to say 
to you, but you cannot bear 
them now; but when He, the 
Spirit of truth, is come, He will 
teach you all truth; for He 
shall not speak of Himself; 
but what things soever He shall 
hear, He shall speak, and the 
things that are to come He 
shall show you. He shall glorify 
Me because He shall receive of 
Mine, and shall show it to you. 


Creed, page 765. 


W Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 


T iLLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus discípulis suis: Vado 
ad eum, qui misit me: et 
nemo ex vobis intérrogat me: 
Quo vadis? Sed quia h&c lo- 
cütus sum vobis, tristítia im- 
plévit cor vestrum. Sed ego 
veritátem dico vobis: éxpedit 
vobis ut ego vadam: si enim 
non abíero, Paráclitus non 
véniet ad vos: si autem abíero, 
mittam eum ad vos. Et cum 
vénerit ille, 4rguet mundum 
de peccáto, et de justítia, et de 
judicio. De peccáto, quidem, 
quia non credidérunt in me: 
de justítia vero, quia ad Pat- 
rem vado, et jam non vidé- 
bitis me: de judício autem, 
quia princeps hujus mundi 
jam  judicátus est. Adhuc 
multa hábeo vobis dícere: sed 
non potéstis portáre modo. 
Cum autem vénerit ille Spí- 
ritus veritátis, docébit vos 
omnem veritátem. Non enim 
loquétur a semetipso: sed 
quaecümque áudiet, loquétur, 
et que ventura sunt annunti- 
ábit vobis. Ille me clarificá- 
bit: quia de meo accípiet, et 
ennuntiábit vobis. 


Offertory. Ps. 65, 1, 2, 16 


Shout with joy to God, all Jubilate Deo, univérsa ter- 
the earth, sing ye a psalm to ra, psalmum dicite nómini 
His name: come, and hear, and ejus: venite, ei audíte, et nar- 
I will tell you, all you that fear rábo vobis, omnes qui timétis 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 55 
Deum, quanta fecit Dóminus God, what great things the 
anime mez, allelüja. Lord hath done for my soul, 
alleluia. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 
EUs, Qui nos per hujus 
sacrificii veneránda 
commércia, uníus summe di- 
vinitátis partícipes effecísti: 
presta, qusesumus; ut, sicut 
tuam cognóscimus veritátem, 


cop, Who, through the 

holy relationship of this 
sacrament, hast made us par~ 
takers of one supreme divinity, 
grant, we beseech Thee, that, 
as we know Thy truth, so we 
sic eam dignis móribus asse- may follow it with worthy be- 
quamur. Per Déminum. haviour. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret of our Blessed Lady, By Thy mercy, page 825; 
third for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 826. 
Preface No. 5, page 804. 


Communion. John 16, 8 


Cum vénerit Paráclitus Spí- When the Paraclete shall 
ritus veritatis, ille arguet come, the Spirit of truth, He 
mundum de peccato, et de shall convince the world of sin, 
justitia, et de judicio, allelája, and of justice, and of judg- 


allelüja. ment, alleluia, alleluia. 
Postcommunion 
DESTO nobis, Dómine E NEAR us, O Lord, our 


God, that, through those 
things which we have faith- 
fully received, we may both be 
cleansed of sin and rescued 
from all dangers. Through our 
Lord. 


‘Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, Grant O Lord, 
page 825; third jor the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 
page 826. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Fifth Sunday after Easter (White) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Is. 48, 20 


oceM jucunditátis an- ECLARE the voice of joy, 
nuntiate, et audiátur, and let it be heard, al- 


Deus. noster: ut per 
hzc, que fidéliter simpsimus, 
et purgémur a vitiis, et a 
perículis ómnibus eruámur. 
Per Dóminum. 


allelija: annuntiáte usque ad 
extrémum terre:  liberávit 
Dóminus pópulum suum, alle- 
lája, allelüja. Ps. 65, 1-2. Ju- 
biláte Deo, omnis terra, psal- 


leluia: declare it even unto the 
ends of the earth; the Lord 
hath delivered His people, al- 
leluia, alleluia. Ps. 65, 1-2. 
Shout with joy to God all the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


576 FIFTH SUNDAY 


earth: sing ye a psalm to His 
name, give glory to His praise, 


¥. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762 


AFTER EASTER 


mum dicite nómini ejus: date 
glóriam laudi ejus. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Prayer 


cop, from Whom all good 

things come, generously 
grant to us who beseech Thee 
that we may, by Thy inspira- 
tion, think those things which 
are right and, that we perform 
them under Thy guidance. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, a quo bona cuncta 

procédunt, largire sup- 

` plicibus tuis: ut cogitémus, te 

inspiránte, que recta sunt; et, 

te gubernante, éadem faciá- 
mus. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, Grant us, page 824; 


third jor the Church, page 825; 


; or for the Pope, page 826. 


Epistle. James 1, 22-27 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed James the Apostle. 


EaRLY beloved, Be ye do- 

ers of the word, and not 
hearers only, deceiving your 
own selves. For if a man be 
a hearer of the word, and not 
& doer, he shall be compared 
to & man beholding his own 
countenance in a glass. For he 
beheld bimself, and went his 
way, and presently forgot 
what manner of man he was. 
But he that hath looked into 
the perfect law of liberty and 
hath continued therein, not 
becoming a forgetful hearer, 
but a doer of the work, this 
man shall be blessed in his 
deed. And if any man think 
himself to be religious, not 
bridling his tongue, but deceiv- 
ing his own heart, this man’s 
religion is vain. Religion clean 
and undefiled before God. and 
the Father is this: to visit the 
fatherless and widows in their 
tribulation, and to keep one’s 
self unspotted from this world. 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Christ 
is risen, and hath shone His 


Léctio Epístole beáti Ja- 
cóbi Apóstoli, 
ARÍssrMI: Estóte factóres 
verbi, et non auditóres 
tantum: falléntes vosmetípsos 
Quia si quis audítor est verbi, 
et non factor: hic compará- 
bitur viro consideránti vultum 
nativitátis sue in spéculo: 
considerávit enim se, et abiit, 
et statim oblítus est qualis 
füerit. Qui autem perspéxerit 
in legem perféctam libertá- 
tis, et permánserit in ea, non 
auditor obliviósus factus, sed 
factor óperis: hic beátus in 
facto suo erit. Si quis autem 
putat se religiósum esse, non 
refrenans linguam suam, sed 
sedücens cor suum, hujus 
vana est relígio. Religio 
munda, et immaculáta apud 
Deum et Patrem, hec est: 
Visitáre pupilios, et víduas in 
tribulatióne eórum, et imma- 
culátum se custodire, ab hoc 
seculo, 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Sur- 
rexit Christus, et illüxit nobis, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 


quos redémit sánguine suo. 
Allelüja. V. Joann. 16, 28. 
Exívi a Patre, et veni in mun- 
dum: íterum relínquo mun- 
dum, et vado ad Patrem. Al- 
lelija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


577 


light upon us whom He hath 
redeemed with His blood. Al- 
leluia. Y. John 16, 28. I went 
out from the Father and came 
into the world; again, I leave 
the world and go to the Father. 
Alleluia. 


Gospel. John 16, 23-30 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
géli secundum Joánnem. 
T ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 

sus discípulis suis: Amen, 
amen dico vobis: si quid peti- 
éritis Patrem in nómine meo, 
dabit vobis. Usque modo non 
petístis quidquam in nómine 
meo: Pétite, et accipiétis, ut 
gáudium vestrum sit plenum. 
Hee in provérbiis locütus sum 
vobis. Venit hora, cum jam 
non in provérbiis loquar vobis, 
sed palam de Patre annunti- 
ába vobis. In illo die in nó- 
mine meo petétis: et non dico 
vobis, quia ego rogábo Patrem 
de vobis: ipse enim Pater 
amat vos, quia vos me amas- 
tis, et credidistis, quia ego a 
Deo exivi. Exívi a: Patre, et 
veni in mundum: iterum re- 
língua mundum, et vado ad 
Patrem. Dicunt ei discípuli 
ejus: Ecce nunc palam lóque- 
ris, et provérbium nullum 
dicis. Nunc scimus, quia scis 
ómnia, et non opus est tibi, ut 
quis te intérroget: in hoc 
crédimus, quia a Deo exísti. _ 


Æ% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, Jesus saith’ 

to His disciples, Amen, 
amen I say to you, if you ask 
the Father anything in My 
name, He will give it you. 
Hitherto you have not asked 
anything in My name: ask and 
you shall receive, that your joy 
may be full. These things I 
have spoken to you in pro- 
verbs: the hour cometh when I 
will no more speak to you in 
proverbs, but will show you 
plainly of the Father. In that 
day, you shall ask in My name; 
and I say not to you that I 
will ask the Father for you, for 
the Father Himself loveth you, 
because you have loved Me, and 
have believed that I came out 
from God. I came forth from 
the Father, and am come into 
the world: again I leave the 
world, and go to the Father. 
His disciples say to Him, Be- 
hold, now Thou speakest 
plainly, and speakest no pro- 
verb. Now we know that Thou 
knowest all things, and Thou 


needest not that any man should ask Thee: by this we believe 
that Thou camest forth from God. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 65, 8,9, 26 


Benedicite, gentes, Démin- 
um Deum nostrum, et obau- 


O bless the Lord our God, ye 
gentiles, and make the voice 


http://ccwatershed.org 


678 


of His praise to be heard: Who 
hath set my soul to live, and 
hath not suffered my feet to 
be moved: blessed be the Lord, 
Who hath not turned away my 
prayer, and His mercy from 
me, alleluia, 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


ROGATION DAYS 


díte vocem laudis ejus: qui 
pósuit ánimam meam ad vi- 
tam, et non dedit commovéri 
pedes meos: benedíctus Dó- 
minus, qui non amóvit depre- 
catiónem meam, et miserj- 
córdiam suam a me, allelija. 


Secret 


ECEIVE, O Lord, the pray- 

ers of the faithful, with 

offerings of sacrifices, that 

through these offices of pious 

devotion we may pass to heav- 
enly glory. Through our Lord. 


úscıre, Dómine, fidélium 

preces cum oblatiónibus 
hostiárum: ut per hec pie 
devotiónis offícia, ad celés- 
tem glóriam transeámus. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second, Secret of our Blessed Lady, By Thy mercy, page 825; 


ihird for the Church, page 825; 


Preface No. 5, page 804. 


Communion. 


Sing ye to the Lord, alleluia; 
sing ye to the Lord, and bless 
His name; show forth His sal- 
vation from day to day, alleluia, 
alleluia. 


or for the Pope, page 826. 


Ps. 95, 2 

Cantáte Dómino, allelija: 
cantáte Dómino, et benedícite 
nomen ejus: bene nuntiáte de 
die in diem salutáre ejus, al- 
lelija, allelüja. 


Postcommunion 


RANT, O Lord, unto us, who 

have been regaled with 

the virtue of the heavenly table, 

both to desire what is right and 

to obtain what we desire. 
Through our Lord. 


RÍBUE nobis, Dómine, cæ- 
léstis mense  virtüte 
satiatis: et desideráre que 
recta sunt, et desideráta per- 
cípere. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, Grant O Lord, 
page 825; third for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


page 826. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


The Rogation Daps 
Mass of the Rogation Bays (Purple) 


STATIONS: MONDAY, AT ST. Mary MAJOR; 'TUESDAT, 
AT ST. JOHN LATERAN; WEDNESDAY, AT ST. PETER 


The following Mass is said during or after the Procession. 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps.17,7 


E HEARD my voice from His 
holy temple, alleluia; and 


xaupivir de templo 
sancto suo vocem me- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ROGATION DAYS 


am, allelüja: et clamor meus 
in conspéctu ejus, introivit in 
aures ejus, allelája, allelüja. 
Ps. 17, 2, 3. Díligam te, Dó- 
mine, virtus mea: Dóminus 
firmaméntum meum, et re- 
fügium meum, et liberátor 
meus. ¥. Gloria Patri, 


579 


my cry before Him came into 
His ears, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 
17, 2, 3. I will love Thee, O Lord, 
my strength; the Lord is my 
firmament, and my refuge, and 
my deliverer. y, Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


RÆsTA, quæsumus, omní- 

potens Deus: ut, qui in 
afflictióne nostra de tua pie- 
tate confidimus; contra ad- 
vérsa ómnia, tua semper 
protectióne muniámur. Per 
Dóminum. 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that. we, 
who in our affliction trust in 
Thy loving-kindness, may by 


Thy protection ever be defended 


against all adversities. Through 
our Lord. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, Grant us, page 824; 
third for the Church, page 825; or. for the Pope, page 826. 


Epistle. James 5, 16-20 


Léctio Epístolæ beáti Ja- 
cóbi Apóstoli. 


ARÍss1MI: Confitémini al- 

térutrum peccáta ves- 
tra, et oráte pro ínvicem, ut 
salvémini: multum enim va- 
let deprecátio justi assídua. 
Elías homo erat símilis nobis 
passíbilis: et oratióne orávit 
ut non plüeret super terram, 
et non pluit annos tres, et 
menses sex, Et rursum orávit: 
et. celum dedit plüviam, et 
terra dedit fructum suum. 
Fratres mei, si quis ex vobis 
erráverit a veritáte, et con- 
vérterit quis eum: scire debet, 
quóniam qui convérti fécerit 
peccatórem ab erróre vie suz, 
salvabit ánimam ejus & 
morte, et opériet multitüdin- 
em peccatórum. 


Allelüja. Y. Ps. 117,1.Con- 
fitémini Démino, quóniam 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed James the Apostle. 


EARLY beloved, Confess 
D your sins one to another, 
and pray for one another, that 
you may be saved. For the con- 
tinual prayer of a just man 
availeth much. Elias was 2 man 
passible like unto us; and with 
prayer he prayed that it might 
not rain upon the earth, and it 
rained not for three years and 
six months: and he prayed 
again, and the heaven gave 
rain, and the earth brought 
forth her fruit. My brethren, 
if any of you err from the truth, 
and one convert him, he must 
know that he. who causeth a 
sinner to be converted from the 
error of his way shall save his 
soul from death, and shall cover 
a multitude of sins. 

Alleluia. Y. Ps. 117, 1. Con- 
fess ye to the Lord, for He is 


http://ccwatershed.org 


580 ROGATION DAYS 


good, for His mercy endureth 
forever. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


bonus: quóniam in seculum 
misericórdia ejus. 


Gospel. Luke 11, 5-13 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus said to 
His disciples, Which of 
you shall have a friend, and 
shall go to him at midnight, 
and shall say to him, Friend, 
lend me three loaves, because 
& friend of mine is come off his 
journey to me, and I have not 
what to set before him; and he 
from within should answer and 
Say, Trouble me not, the door 
is now shut, and my children 
are with me in bed; I cannot 
rise and give thee. Yet if he 
Shall continue knocking, I say 
to you, although he will not rise 
and give bim because he is his 
friend, yet because of his im- 
portunity he will rise, and give 
him as many as he needeth. 
And I say to you, Ask, and it 
shall be given you; seek, and 
you shall find; knock, and it 
Shall be opened to you. For 
every one that asketh, receiv- 
eth; and he that seeketh, find- 
eth; and to him that knocketh 
jt shall be opened. And which of 
you if he ask his father bread, 
will he give him a stone? or a 
fish, will he for a fish give him 
& serpent? Or if he shall ask 
an egg, will he reach him a 
scorpion? If you then being evil, 
know how to give good gifts to 
your children, how much more 
will your Father from heaven 
give the good Spirit to them 
that ask. Him? 


HR Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
géli secündum Lucam, 
I. ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
. Sus discípulis suis: Quis 
vestrum habébit amícum, et 
ibit ad illum média nocte, et 
dicet illi: Amíce, cómmoda 
mihi tres panes, quóniam 
amicus meus Venit de via ad 
mé, et non hábeo quod ponam 
ante illum: et ille deíntus re- 
spéndens, dicat: Noli mihi 
moléstus esse, jam óstium 
clausum est, et püeri mei me- 
cum sunt in cubíli: non pos- 
sum sürgere, et dare tibi. Et 
si ile perseveráverit pulsans: 
dico vobis, etsi non dabit illi 
surgens, eo quod amícus ejus 
sit, propter improbitátem ta- 
men ejus surget, et dabit illi 
quotquot habet necessários. 
Et ego dico vobis: Pétite, et 
dábitur vobis: querite, et in- 
veniétes: pulsáte, et aperiétur 
vobis. Omnis enim, qui petit, 
accipit: et qui querit, Invenit: 
et pulsánti aperiétur. Quis 
autem ex vobis patrem petit 
panem, numquid  lápidem 
dabit illi? Aut piscem: num- 
quid pro pisce serpéntem 
dabit iMi: Aut si petierit 
ovum: numquid pórriget illi 
Scorpiónem? Si ergo vos cum 
sitis mali, nostis bona data 
dare filiis vestris: quanto 
magis Pater vester de celo 
dabit spfritum bonum peténti- 
bus se? : 


Offertory. Ps. 108, 30, 31 


I will give thanks to the Lord 


Confitébor Dómino nimis 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Amna. 


ROGATION DAYS 581 


in ore meo: et in médio mul- exceedingly with my mouth, 
tórum laudaébo eum, quia and in the midst of many I will 
Astitit a dextris pauperis: ut praise Him, because He hath 
salvam faceret a persequén- stood at the right hand of the 
tibus ánimam meam, alle- poor, to save my soul from per- 
lúja. secutors. Alleluia. 


_ Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


zc münera, quaesumus, AY these offerings, we be- 

Dómine, et  víncula @M seech Thee, O Lord, both 
nostre pravitátis absólvant, loose the bonds of our sinful 
et tue nobis misericórdie dispositions and win for us the 
dona concilient. Per Démin- gifts of Thy mercy. Through 
um. our Lord. 


Second Secret of our Blessed Lady, By Thy mercy, page 825; 
third for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 826. 


Preface No. 5, page 804. 


Communion. Luke 11, 9, 10 


Petite, et accipiétis: que- Ask, and you shall receive; 
rite, et inveniétis: pulsáte, et seek, and you shall find; knock, 
aperiétur vobis: omnis enim and it shall be opened to you: 
qui petit, áccipit: et qui que- for every one that asketh re- 
rit, Ínvenit: et pulsánti aperi- ceiveth; and he that seeketh 
étur, allelija. findeth; and to him that knock- 

l eth, it shall be opened. Alleluia. 


Postcommunion 
^ ‘OTA nostra, quasumus, ET Thy kind favor, O Lord, 
Dómine, pio  favóre follow our petitions, that, 


proséquere: ut, dum dona receiving Thy gifts in our tri- 
tua in tribulatióne percípi- bulation, we may be consoled 
mus, de consolatióne nostra and increase in Thy love. 
in tuo amóre creseámus. Per Through our Lord. 

Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, Grant O Lord, 
Pe 825; third for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, page 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


582 


ASCENSION EVE 


Ascension Eve (white) 


The Mass for Ascension Eve is the same as that for the fifth 
Sunday after Easter, page 575; except as follows: 
Second Prayer of Rogation day, page 579; third of our Blessed 


Lady, Grant us, page 82 


Epistle. Eph. 4, 7-13 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians. 


RETHREN, to every one of 
B us is given grace ac- 
cording to the measure of the 
giving of Christ. Wherefore He 
saith, Ascending on high, He 
led captivity captive; He gave 
gifts to men. Now, that He 
ascended, what is it, but be- 
cause He also descended first 
into the lower parts of the 
earth? He that descended is 
the same also that ascended 
above all the heavens, that He 
might fill all things, And He 
gave some apostles, and some 
prophets, and other some evan- 
gelists, and other some pastors 
and doctors, for the perfecting 
of the saints, for the work of 
the ministry, for the edifying 
of the body of Christ; until we 
all meet into the unity of faith, 
and of the knowledge of the 
Son of God, unto a perfect man, 
unto the measure of the age of 
the fulness of Christ, 


Léctio Epistole beati Paull 
Apóstoli ad Ephésios. 


RATRES: Unicuique no- 

strum data est gratia 
secindum mensüram dona- 
tiónis Christi. Propter quod 
dicit: Ascéndens in altum, 
captívam duxit captivitátem: 
dedit dona hominibus. Quod 
autem ascéndit, quid est, nisi 
quia et descéndit primum in 
inferióres partes terre? Qui 
descéndit, ipse est qui et 
ascéndit super omnes celos, 
ut impléret ómnia. Et ipse 
dedit quosdam quidem após- 
tolos, quosdam autem pro- 
phétas, álios vero evange- 
listas, álos autem pastóres, 
et doctóres ad consumma- 
tiónem sanctórum in opus 
ministérii, in zdificatiónem 
córporis Christi: donec oc- 
currámus omnes in unitá- 
tem fidei, et agnitiónis Fílii 
Dei, in virum perféctum, in 
mensüram etatis plenitüdinis 
Christi. 


Gospel. John 17, 1-11 


H8 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, Jesus lifting 

up His eyes to heaven, 

said, Father, the hour is come; 
glorify Thy Son, that Thy Son 
may glorify Thee. As Thou hast 
given Him power over all flesh, 
that He may give eternal life to 
all whom Thou hast given Him. 


4H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Suble- 
T vatis Jesus óculis in cæ- 
lum, dixit: Pater, venit hora, 
clarifica Fílium tuum, ut 
Filius tuus claríficet te: sicut 
dedisti ei potestátem omnis 
carnis, ut omne, quod dedisti 
ei, det eis vitam ætérnam. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ASCENSION. EVE 


Hee est autem vita etérna: 
Ut cognéscant te, solum De- 
um verum, et quem misísti 
Jesum Christum. Ego te clar- 
ifüicávi super terram: opus 
consummavi, "quod  dedísti 
mihi ut fáciam: et nunc clar- 
ifica me tu, Pater, apud teme- 
típsum, claritáte, quam hábui 
pritsquam mundus esset, 
apud te. Manifestavi nomen 
tuum hominibus, quos dedísti 
mihi de mundo. Tui erant, et 
mihi eos dedisti: et. sermónem 
tuum servavérunt. Nunc cog- 
novérunt quia ómnia, que de- 
dísti mihi, abs te sunt: quia 
verba, que dedisti mihi, dedi 
eis: et ipsi accepérunt, et cog- 
novérunt vere quia a te exivi, 
et credidérunt quia tu me 
misisti. Ego pro eis rogo: non 
pro mundo rogo, sed pro his, 
quos dedisti mihi: quia tui 
sunt: et mea ómnia tua sunt, 
et tua mea sunt: et clarificá- 
tus sum in eis. Et jam non 
sum in mundo, et hi in mun- 
do sunt, et ego ad te vénio. 


583 


Now this is eternal life, That 
they may know Thee, the only 
true God, and Jesus Christ 
Wnom Thou hast sent. I have 
glorified Thee on the earth; I 
have finished the work which 
Thou gavest Me to do; and now 
glorify Thou: Me, O Father, 
with Thyself, with the glory 
which I had, before the. world 
was, with Thee. I have mani- 
fested Thy name to the men 
whom Thou hast given Me out 
of the world. Thine they were, 
and to Me Thou gavest them, 
and they have kept Thy word. 
Now they have known that all 
things which Thou hast given 
Me are from Thee; because the 
words which Thou gavest Me 
I have given to them and they 
have received them, and have 
known in very deed that I 
came out from Thee, and they 
have believed that Thou didst 
send Me. I pray for them; I 
pray not for the world, but for 
them whom Thou hast given 
Me; because they are Thine: 

and all My things are Thine, 


and Thine are Mine; and I am glorified in them. And now I 
am not in the world, and these are in the world, and I come 


to thee. 


. Second Secret of the Rogation day, page 581; third of our 
Blessed Lady, By Thy mercy, page 8 

Second, Postcommunion of the ee NN ou page 581; third 
of our Blessed Lady, Grant O Lord, page 825. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


584 ASCENSION DAY 


AND HE LED THEM OUT AS FAR AS BETHANIA: AND LIFTING HIS 
HANDS, HE BLESSED THEM. AND IT CAME TO PASS, WHILST HE BLESSED 


ED 
THEM, HE DEPARTED FROM THEM AND WAS CARRIED UP TO HEAVEN. 
(Luke 24, 50, 51.) 


ASCENSION DAY 


585 


Ascension Dap (White) 
STATION AT Sr. PETER 


Double of the First Class with a Privileged Octave 
‘of the Third Order 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 

‘TRI GALILEI quid ad- 

' mirámini aspiciéntes in 
cælum? allelija: quemádmo- 
dum vidistis eum ascendén- 
tem in calum, ita véniet, al- 
lelüja, allelája, allelüja. Ps. 
46, 2. Omnes gentes, pláudite 
mánibus: jubilate Deo in 
voce exsultatiónis, V. Glória 
Patri. 


Acts 1, 11 

E MEN of Galilee, why 

wonder you, looking up to 
heaven? alleluia: He shall so 
come as you have seen Him 
going up. into heaven, alleluia, 
alleluia, allelula, Ps, 46, 2. O 
clap your hands, all ye nations; 
shout unto God with the voice 
of joy, V. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ONCEDE, quesumus, om- 

nípotens Deus: ut, qui 
hodiérna die Unigéntum tu- 
um Redemptérem nostrum 
ad cælos ascendísse crédimus; 
ipsi quoque mente in cælésti- 
bus habitémus, Per eümdem 
Dóminum. 


Lesson. 


Léctio Actuum Apostol- 
órum. 
Par quidem sermón- 
em feci de ómnibus, o 
Theóphile, que cepit Jesus 
fácere, et docére usque in 
diem,.qua, precipiens Apósto- 
lis per Spiritum Sanctum, 
quos elégit, asstimptus est: 
quibus et prebuit seipsum vi- 
vum post passiónem suam in 
multis arguméntis, per dies 
quadraginta appárens eis, et 
loquens de regno Dei. Et con- 
véscens, precépit eis ab Jero- 
sólymis ne discéderent, sed 
exspectárent promissiónem 
Patris, quem audístis (inquit) 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that, be- 
lieving ‘Thine only-begotten, 
our Redeemer, to have ascended 
to heaven on this day, we, too, 
may spiritually dwell in heav- 
enly places, Thrcugh the same. 


Acts 1, 1-11 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 
HE former treatise I made, 
O Theophilus, of all 
things which Jesus began to do 
and to teach, until the day on 
which, giving commandments 
by the Holy Ghost to the apos- 
tles whom He had chosen. He 
was taken up. To whom also He 
showed Himself alive after His 
passion, by many proofs, for 
forty days appearing to them. 
and speaking of the kingdom of 
God. And eating together with 
them, He commanded them 
that they should not depart 
from Jerusalem, but should 


http://ccwatershed.org 


586 


wait for the promise of the 
Father, which you have heard 
(saith He) by My mouth: for 
John indeed baptized with wa- 
ter, but you shall be baptized 
with the Holy Ghost, not many 
days hence, They therefore who 
were come together asked Him, 
saying, Lord, wilt Thou at this 
time restore the kingdom to 
Israel? But He said to them, 
It is not for you to know the 
times or moments which the 
Father hath put in His own 
power; but you shall receive the 
power of the Holy Ghost com- 
ing upon you, and you shall be 
witnesses to Me in Jerusalem 
and in all Judea, and Samaria, 
and even to the uttermost part 
of the earth. And when He had 
said these things, while they 
looked on He was raised up, and 
a cloud received Him out of 
their sight. And while they 
were beholding Him going up 
to heaven, behold two men 
stood by them in white gar- 
‘ments, who also said, Ye men of 
Galilee, why stand you look- 
ing up to heaven? This Jesus 


ASCENSION DAY 


per os meum: quia Joánnes 
quidem baptizávit aqua, vos 
autem baptizabímini Spíritu 
Sancto non post multos hos 
dies. Igitur qui convénerant, 
interrogábant eum, dicéntes: 
Dómine, si in témpore hoc 
restitues regnum Israél? Dixit 
autem ejus: Non est vestrum 
nosse témpora vel moménta, 
que Pater pósuit in sua po- 
testate: sed accipiétis vir- 
tütem superveniéntis Spíritus 
Sancti in vos, et éritis mihi 
testes in Jerúsalem, et in 
omni Judea, et Samaría, et 
usque ad ültimum terre. Et 
cum hec dixísset, vidéntibus 
ilis, elevátus est, et nubes 
suscépit eum ab óculis eórum. 
Cumque intueréntur in cæ- 
Jum eüntem illum, ecce duo 
viri astitérunt juxta illos in 
véstibus albis, qui et dix- 
érunt: Viri Galilei, quid sta- 
tis aspiciéntes in celum? Hic 
Jesus, qui assümptus est a 
vobis in celum, sic véniet 
quemádmodum vidistis eum 
eüntem in celum. 


Who is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, as you 
have seen Him going into heaven. 


: Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 46, 6. 
God hath ascended in jubila- 
tion, and the Lord with the 
sound of the trumpet. Alleluia. 
y. Ps. 67, 18, 19. The Lord is 
in Sina, in His holy place; as- 
cending on high, He hath led 
captivity captive. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps..46, 
6. Ascéndit Deus in jubilati- 
óne, et Dóminus in voce tube. 
Allelija. Y. Ps. 67, 18-19. Dó- 
minus in Sina in sancto, 
ascéndens in altum, captivam 
duxit captivitátem. Allelája. 


Gospel. Mark 16, 14-20 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 


T THAT lime, Jesus ap- 
peared to the eleven as 


4H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Marcum. 

N ILLO témpore: Recum- 

béntibus ündecim dis- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ASCENSION DAY . 587 
cipulis, appáruit illis Jesus: they were at table: and He up- 
et exprobr4vit incredulitatem braided them with their in- 
eórum et duritiam cordis: credulity and hardness of heart, 


quia iis, qui viderant eum 
resurrexisse, non credidérunt. 
Et dixit eis: Eüntes in mun- 
dum  univérsum predicate 
Evangélium omni creature. 
Qui credíderit, et baptizátus 
füerit, salvus erit: qui vero 
non credíderit, condemná- 
bitur. Signa autem eos, qui 
crediderint, hsc sequéntur: 
In nómine meo demónia 
ejícient: linguis loquéntur 
novis: serpéntes tollent: et si 
mortíferum quid biberint, 
non eis nocébit: super ægros 
manus impónent, et bene 
habébunt. Et Dóminus qui- 
dem Jesus postquam locütus 
est eis, assümptus est in 
celum, et sedet a dextris Dei. 
Illi autem profécti predica- 
vérunt ubíque, Dómino co- 
operante, et serménem con- 
firmánte, sequéntibus signis. 


because they did not believe 
them who had seen Him after 
He was risen again. And He 
said to them, Go ye into the 
whole world, and preach the 
gospel to every creature. He 
that believeth and is baptized 
shall be saved, but He that be- 
lieveth not shall be condemned. 
And these signs shall follow 
them that believe. In My name 
they shall east out devils; they 
shall speak with new tongues; 
ihey shall take up serpents; 
and if they shall drink any 
deadly thing, it shall not hurt 
them; they shail lay their 
hands upon the sick, and they 
Shall recover. And the Lord 
Jesus, after He had spoken to 
them, was taken up into 
heaven, and sitteth on the right 
hand of God. But they going 
preached everywhere, the Lord 
working withal, and confirming 
the word with the signs that 
followed. 


(The paschal candle is now extinguished.) 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 46, 6 


Ascéndit Deus in jubila- 
tióne, et Dóminus in voce 
tube, allelúja. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


God is ascended in jubilee, 
and the Lord with the sound of 
trumpet. Alleluia. 


Secret 


Üscreg, Dómine, münera, 
S que pro Fílii tui gloriésa 
Ascensióne, deférimus: et 
concéde propítius; ut a pre- 
séntibus perículis liberémur, 
et ad vitam pervenidmus 
wtérnam. Per eümdem Dó- 
minum. 


Preface No. 6, page 807. 


ECEIVE, O Lord, the offer- 

ings which we bring for 
the glorious ascension of Thy 
Son, and grant in Thy mercy 
that we may be delivered from 
present dangers and may attain 
unto life everlasting. Through 
the same. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


588 


SUNDAY WITHIN OCTAVE OP ASCENSION 


Communion. Ps. 67, 33, 34 


Sing ye to the Lord, Who 
mounteth above the heaven of 
heavens to the east. Alleluia. 


Psállite Dómino, qui ascén- 
dit super celos celérum ad 
Oriéntem, allelüja. 


Postcommunion 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 

almighty and merciful 
God, that what we have re- 
ceived in visible mysteries, we 
may also obtain in their in- 
visible effect. Through our 
Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


RÆSTA nobis, quaesumus, 
P omnípotens et miséri- 
cors Deus: ut, quz visibilibus 
mystériis suménda percépi- 
mus, invisibili consequámur 
efféctu. Per Dóminum... . 


During the Octave of Ascension: Om weekdays, with mo 
other feast, Mass of Ascension as above with second Prayers of 
our Blessed Lady, page 824; third for the Chureh, page 825; 
or for the Pope, page 826. On simple feasts, second Prayers of 
the Feast, third of our Blessed Lady; om doubles, or semi- 
doubles, the Mass of the feast, second Prayers as in Mass of 


Ascension Day. 


Sunday Within the Crtabe of the Ascension 


STATION AT ST. MARY OF THE MARTYRS 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 

EAR, O Lord, my voice 
with which I have cried 

to Thee, alleluia: my heart 
hath said to Thee, I have 
sought Thy face, Thy face, O 
Lord, I will seek: turn not away 
Thy face from me, alleluia, 
alleluia. Ps. 26, 1. The Lord is 
my light and my salvation; 
whom shall I fear? Y. Glory. 


Ps. 26, 7, 8, 9 


xáuni Dómine, vocem 

meam, qua clamavi ad 
ie, allelüja: tibi dixit cor 
meum, quesivi vultum tuum; 
vultum tuum, Dómine, re- 
quiram: ne avértas fáciem 
tuam a me, allelüja, allelüja. 
Ps. 26, 1. Dóminus illuminatio 
mea, et salus mea: quem 
timébo? Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY and eternal 

God, make us ever bear 

& devout affection toward Thee, 

and with sincere heart to serve 

Thy majesty. Through our 
Lord. 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 
Deus: fac nos tibi sem- 
per et devétam gérere volun- 
iátem; et majestáti tue sin- 
céro corde servíre. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Second Prayer of the Ascension, page 585, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SUNDAY WITHIN OCTAVE OF ASCENSION 


589 


Epistle, 1 Peter 4, 7-11 


Léctio Epistole beáti Petri 
Apéstoli. 
ARissIMI: . Estéte pru- 
déntes, et vigiláte in 
oratiónibus. Ante ómnia au- 
tem, mütuam in vobismetip- 
Sis .caritátem continuam 
habéntes: quia cáritas óperit 
multitüdinem peccatórum. 
Hospitáles invicem sine mur- 
muratióne: unusquísque, si- 
cut accépit.grátiam, in altér- 
utrum illam administrántes, 
Sicut boni dispensatóres mul- 
tifórmis gratie Dei. Si quis 
lóquitur, quasi sermónes Dei: 
si quis ministrat, tamquam 
ex virtüte, quam adminístrat 
Deus: ut in ómnibus honor- 
ificétur Deus .per Jesum 
Christum Dóminum nostrum. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 
46, 9. Regnávit . Dóminus 
super omnes gentes: Deus 
sedet super sedem sanctam 
suam. Allelüja. V. Joan. 14, 
18. Non vos relinguam or- 
phanos: vado, et vénio ad vos, 
et gaudébit cor vestrum. Alle- 
lája. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle. 
EARLY beloved, be prudent, 
and watch in prayers. 
But before all things have a 
constant mutual charity among 
yourselves; for charity cover- 
eth & multitude of sins. Using 
hospitality one toward another 
without murmuring. As every 
man hath received grace, min- 
istering the same one to an- 
other; as good stewards of the 
manifold grace of God. If any 
man speak, let him speak as 
the words of God: If any 
man minister, let him do-it as 
of the power which God admin- 


Astereth; that in all things God 


may be honored through Jesus 
Christ, our Lord. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 46, 9. 
The Lord hath reigned over all 


the nations; God sitteth on His 


holy throne. Alleluia. Y. John 
14, 18. I will not leave you or- 
phans; I go and I come to you, 
and your heart shall rejoice. 
Alleluia. 


Gospel. John 15, 26, 27; 16, 1-4 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit 

Jesus discipulis suis: 
Cum vénerit Paráclitus, quem 
ego mittam vobis a Patre, 
Spiritum veritatis, qui a 
Patre procédit, ille testimóni- 
um perhibébit de me: et vos 
testimónium perhibébitis, 
quia ab inítio mecum estis. 
Hec locütus sum vobis, ut 
non scandalizémini. Absque 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John, 


T THAT time Jesus said to 

His disciples, When the 
Paraclete cometh, Whom I will 
send you from the Father, the 
Spirit of truth, Who proceedeth 
from the Father, He shall give 
testimony of Mé: and you shall 
give testimony, because you are 
with Me from the beginning. 
These things have I spoken to 
you, that you may not be scan- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


590 


dalized. They will put you out 
of the Synagogues: yea, the 
hour cometh, that whosoever 
killeth you will think that he 
doth & service to God. And 
these things will they do to you, 
because they have not known 
the Father, nor Me. But these 
things I have told you, that, 
when the hour shall come, you 
may remember that I told you. 


Creed. page 765. 
Offertory. 
God is ascended with jubilee; 


and the Lord with the sound 
of trumpet. Alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


SUNDAY WITHIN OCTAVE OF ASCENSION 


synagógis, facient vos: sed 
venit hora, ut omnis, qui in- 
térficit vos, arbitrétur obsé- 
quium se præstáre Deo. Et 
hee fácient vobis, quia non 
novérunt Patrem, neque me. 
Sed hzc locütus sum vobis: 
ut, cum vénerit hora eórum, 
reminiscámini, quia ego dixi 
vobis. 


Ps. 46, 6 

Ascéndit Deus in jubila- 
tióne, et Dóminus in voce 
tube, allelüja. 


Secret 


ET This immaculate sacri- 

fice purify us, O Lord, 
and impart to our souls the 
vigor of supernal grace. 
Through our Lord. 


ACRIFÍCIA nos, Dómine, 

immaculáte purificent: 
et méntibus nostris supérne 
grátie dent vigórem. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Secret of the Ascension, page 587. 


Preface No. 6, page 807. 


Communion. John 17, 12, 13, 15 


Father, while I was with 
them, I kept them whom Thou 
gavest Me, alleluia; but now I 
come to Thee; I pray not that 
Thou shouldst take them out 
of the world, but that Thou 
shouldst keep them from evil, 
alleluia, alleluia. 


Pater, cum essem cum eis, 
ego servábam eos, quos de- 
dísti mihi, allelija: nunc 
autem ad te vénio: non rogo, 
ut tollas eos de mundo, sed 
ut serves eos a malo, allelüja, 
allelüja. 


Postcommunion 


S WE have been filled 

with heavenly gifis, O 

Ord, grant, we beseech Thee, 

ihat we may constantly perse- 

vere in thanksgiving. Through 
our Lord. 


EPLÉTI, Dómine, mu- 
néribus sacris, da, que- 
sumus; ut in gratiárum sem- 


per actióne manedmus, Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion of the Ascension, page 588. 


Concluding Prayets, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHITSUN-EVE 


Qübitsun-Cbe (Purple, Red) 
STATION AT St. JOHN LATERAN 


Privileged Vigil of the First Class 


On this Saturday before Whitsunday the ceremonies are 
Similar to those on Holy Saturday. The holy water font is 
blessed and the Litany of the Saints sung exactly as on Holy 
Saturday; afterwards the clergy change their purple or violet- 
hued vestments for others of red, assigned to Masses of the 
Holy Ghost, in allusion to the fiery tongues of Pentecost. As 
on Holy Saturday, the Introit is omitted from the high Mass 
a Wit Re and the church bells are rung at the Gloria 

excelsis. 


Before high Mass the officiating priest, attended by his 
deacon and subdeacon, vested in purple chasubles, the altar- 
candles remaining unlighted, reads six prophecies of those 
which were read on Holy Saturday. At the end of each he 
chants a Prayer. But after the word Oremus (“Let us pray") 
the deacon does not say Flectamus genua (“Let us kneel"). 


591 


Prophecy 1. In those days, God tempted Abraham, page 507 


Prayer 


EUS, qui in Abrahe 

famuli tui ópere, hu- 
mano géneri obediéntie ex- 
émpla, prebuisti: concéde 
nobis, et nostre voluntátis 
pravitátem frángere, et tuó- 
rum preceptérum rectitüdin- 
em in ómnibus adimplére, 
Per Dóminum. 


Prophecy 2. 


cop, Who, in the work of 

Thy servant Abraham 
hast set before mankind ex- 
amples of obedience, grant us 
both to break the evil disposi- 
tion of our own will and in all 
things to fulfill the observance 
of Thy commands. Through 
our Lord. 


In those days, the morning watch, with the 


Tract, Let us sing to the Lord, page 509. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui primis tempóri- 


bus impiéta mirácula 
novi testaménti luce reserásti, 
ut et Mare rubrum forma 
sacri fontis exsisteret, et lib- 
eráta plebs ab Atgyptiaca 
servitute, christiáni pópuli 
sacraménta preférret: da, ut 
omnes gentes Israélis privi- 
légium mérito fídei consec- 
tite, Spiritus tui participa- 
tióne regeneréntur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Prophecy 3. 
Hear, O heaven, page 519. 


Gop, Who by the light of 

the New Testament hast 
explained the miracles per- 
formed in the first ages, so that 
the Red Sea should be a type 
of the sacred font, and the 
people delivered from Egyptian 
bondage should signify the sac- 
raments of the Christian com- 
monwealth, grant that all the 
nations, which by faith have 
merited the privilege of Israel, 
may be regenerated by partak- 
ing of Thy Spirit. Through our 
Lord. 3 


In those days, Moses wrote, with the Tract. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHITSUN-EVE 


Prayer 


cop, the glory of the 
O faithful and the life of 
the just, Who through Thy ser- 
vant Moses hast taught us also 
sacred songs to sing in Thy 
praise, do Thou spread abroad 
over all the earth Thy mercy, 
giving happiness, taking away 
fear, that what was declared 
unto punishment may be ap- 
plied to an everlasting remedy. 
Through our Lord. 


Eus, glorificátio fidéli- 

um, et vita justérum, 
qui per Móysen fámulum tu- 
um nos quoque modulatióne 
sacri cárminis erudisti: uni- 
vérsis géntibus misericérdie 
tue munus operáre, tribuéndo 
beatitüdinem, auferéndo ter- 
rórem; ut, quod pronuntiá- 
tum est ad supplicium, in 
remédium transferátur wtér- 
num. Per Dóminum. 


Prophecy 4. In that day, seven women, with the Tract, The 


beloved had & vineyard, page 516. 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

Who through Thine 
only Son hast shown to Thy 
Church that Thou art the Hus- 
bandman, gently tending every 
branch that bringeth forth 
fruit in the same Thy Christ, 
Who is the true vine, that it 
may bring forth more fruit, let 
no thorns of sin prevail against 
Thy faithful, whom, through 
the font of baptism, Thou hast 
transplanted like a vine, out of 
Egypt; so that, being strength- 
ened and sanctified by Thy 
Spirit, they may be enriched 
with perpetual fruit. Through 
the same. 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 

Deus, qui per ünicum 
Fílium tuum, Ecclésie: tue 
demonstrásti te esse cultór- 
em, omnem pálmitem, fruc- 
tum in eódem Christo tuo, 
qui vera vitis est, afferéntem, 
cleménter éxcolens, ut fruc- 
tus áfferat amplióres: fidéli- 
bus tuis, quos velut víneam 
ex Afgypto per fontem bap- 
tismi transtulísti, null pec- 
catórum spine preváleant; 
ut Spíritus tui sanctifica- 
tióne muníti, perpétua fruge 
diténtur. Per eümdem Dó- 
minum. 


Prophecy 5. Hear O Israel, page 512. 


Prayer 


GOD, Who by the mouths 
Q of the prophets hast in- 
structed us to turn aside from 
temporal things and hasten to 
the things that are eternal, 
grant to Thy servants that we 
may have the strength, by Thy 
heavenly inspiration, to fulfill 
what we have learned to be 
Thy commands. Through our 
Lord. 


EUS, qui nobis per Pro- 

phetárum ora prece- 
pisti temporália relínquere, 
atque ad etérna festináre: da 
fámulis tuis; ut, que a te 
juss& cognévimus, implére 
celésti inspiratióne valeámus. 
Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHITSUN-EVE 


Prophecy 6. 
In churches that have mo 


593 


In those days, the hand of the Lord, page 515. 


baptismal font, the Litany of 


Saints, page 531, is sung immediately after the 6th Prophecy. 


Prayer 


ÓwriNE, Deus virtütum, 
qui collápsa réparas, et 
reparáta consérvas: auge pó- 
pulos in tui nóminis sanctifi- 
catióne renovandos; ut omnes, 
qui sacro baptísmate diluün- 
tur, tua semper inspiratióne 
dirigántur. Per Dóminum. 


LORD, God of yirtues, Who 

dost restore what is 
ruined and preserve what is 
restored, increase the peoples 
who shall be renewed by the 
sanctification of Thy name, 
that all those who are washed 
in holy baptism may. be con- 
tinually guided by Thy inspira- 
tion. Through our Lord. 


The Blessing of the Font 


The Prophecies being ended, 


the purple cope. Then he an 


the officiating priest puts on 
d his ministers go towards the 


font, the choir singing the Tract, As the hart panteth, page 
e 


525. 
Jollowing Prayer. 


Y. Dóminus vobíscum. 
FY. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


Before entering the baptistery the celebrant chants: 


Y. The Lord be with you. 
R. And with thy spirit. 


Let us pray 


ONCÉDE, quesumus omní- 

: potens Deus: ut qui so- 
lemnitátem doni Sancti Spir- 
itus cólimus, c#léstibus desi- 
dériis accénsi, fontem vite 
sitiámus. Per Dóminum. 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that we, 
who keep with veneration the 
festival of the coming of the 
Holy Spirit, may be kindled 
with heavenly desires and 
thirst after the fountain of life. 
‘Through our Lord. 


The font is then blessed as on-Holy Saturday, page 524, and 
the Litany of the Saints, page 530, is sung; the altar candles 
are lighted and holy Mass is celebrated. i 


. The Mass 


The. Beginning of. Mass, page 756. 
` When ihe baptismal font is not blessed on Whitsun-Eve the 
following Introit is used; otherwise there is no Introit, but 
after the Confiteor, the celebrant intones the Gloria in excelsis, 
page . . 


Introit. Ez. 36 . 
vM sanctificátus füero in HEN I shall be sanctified 
1 vobis, congregábo vos in you, I will gather you 


de. univérsis terris: et effün- 
dam super vos aquam mun- 


together out of all the coun- 
tries; and I will pour upon you 


http://ccwatershed.org 


$94 WHITSUN-EVE 


clean water, and you shall be 
cleansed from all your filthi- 
ness; and I will give you a new 
spirit, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 33, 
2, I will bless the Lord at all 
times: His praise shall be ever 
in my mouth. V. Glory. 


dam, et mundabimini ab óm- 
nibus inquinaméntis vestris: 
et dabo vobis spíritum no- 
vum, allelija, allelüja. Ps. 33, 
2. Benedícam Dóminum in 
omni témpore: semper laus 
ejus in ore meo. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Prayer 


RANT, We beseech, O al- 

mighty God, that the 
splendor of Thy brightness may 
shine upon us, and that the 
light of Thy light may 
strengthen with the enlighten- 
ment of the Holy Spirit the 
hearts of those who, through 
Thy grace, have been born 
again. Through...in the unity 
of the same. 


RESTA, quæsumus ommní- 

potens Deus: ut clari- 
tatis tuse super nos splendor 
effülgeat; et lux tue lucis 
corda eórum, qui per grátiam 
tuam renáti sunt, sancti Spír- 
itus ilustratióne confírmet. 
Per . . . in unitate ejüsdem. 


Lesson. Acts 19, 1-8 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles, 
N THOSE days it came to pass, 
while Apollo was at Cor- 
inth, that Paul, having passed 
through the upper coasts, came 
to Ephesus, and found certain 
disciples; and he said to them, 
Have you received the Holy 


Ghost, since you believed? But. 


they said to him, We have not 
so much as heard whether there 
be a Holy Ghost. And he said, 
In what then were you bap- 
tized? Who said, In John's 
baptism. Then Paul said, John 


baptized the. people with tbe 


baptism of penance, saying, 
That they should believe in Him 
Who was to come after him, 
that is to say in Jesus. Having 
heard these things, they were 
baptized in the name of the 
Lord Jesus. And when Paul 
had imposed his hands on 


Léctio Áctuum Apostolór- 
um. x 
T DiÉBUS illis: Factum est, 

cum Apóllo esset Cor- 
inthi, ut Paulus peragrátis 
superióribus pártibus veníret 
Ephesum, et inveníret quos- 
dam discípulos: dixítque ad 
eos: Si Spiritum Sanctum 
accepistis credéntes? At illi 
dixérunt ad eum: Sed neque 
si Spíritus Sanctus est, au- 
dívimus. Ille vero ait: In quo 
ergo baptizáti estis? Qui dix- 
érunt: In Joánnis baptis- 
mate. Dixit autem Paulus: 
Joánnes baptizávit baptísmo 
peniténtie pópulum, dicens: 
In eum, qui ventürus esset 
post ipsum, ut créderent, hoc 
est, in Jesum. His audítis, 
baptizáti sunt in nómine Dó- 
mini Jesu. Et cum imposuís- 
set illis manus Paulus, venit 
Spíritus Sanctus super eos, et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHITSUN-EVE 


loquebántur linguis, et pro- 
phetábant. Érant autem om- 
nes viri fere duódecim. In- 
trogréssus autem synagógam, 
cum fidücia loquebátur per 
tres menses, dísputans, et su- 
Adens de regno Dei. 


Allelija. V. Ps. 106, 1. Con- 
fitémini Démino, quóniam 
bonus: quóniam in seculum 
misericórdia ejus. 


595 


them, the Holy Ghost came 
upon them; and they spoke 
with tongues, and prophesied. 
And all the men were about 
iwelve. And entering into the 
synagogue, he spoke boldly for 
the space of three months, dis- 
puting, and persuading con- 
cerning the kingdom of God. 

Alleluia. Y. Ps. 106, 1. Give 
praise to the Lord, for He is 
good; for His mercy endureth 
forever. 


Tract. Ps. 116, 1, 2 


Laudáte Dóminum omnes 
gentes: et colaudáte eum 
omnes pópuli. JE. Quóniam 
confirmáta est super nos 
misericórdia ejus: et véritas 
Dómini manet in etérnum. 


Praise the Lord, all ye na- 
tions; and praise Him together 
all ye people. Because His 
mercy is confirmed upon us; 
and the truth of the Lord re- 
maineth forever. 


During this Mass the acolytes do not carry their candles at 
the Gospel; all other ceremonies are observed as at high Mass. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 14, 15-21 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Dixit 
Jesus discípulis suis: Si 
diligitis me: mandáta mea 
Serváte. Et ego rogábo Pa- 
trem, et álium Paráclitum 
dabit vobis, et máneat vo- 
bíscum in setérnum, Spiritum 
veritátis, quem mundus non 
potest accípere, quia non vi- 
det eum, nec scit eum. Vos 
autem cognoscétis eum; quia 
apud vos manébit, et in vobis 
erit. Non relínquam vos ór- 
phanos; veniam ad vos. 
Adhuc módicum: et mundus 
me jam non videt. Vos autem 
vidétis me, quia ego vivo, et 
vos vivétis. In illo die vos 
cognoscétis quia ego sum in 
Patre meo, et vos in me, et 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, Jesus said to 
His disciples, If you love 
Me, keep My commandments; 
and I will ask the Father, and 
He shall give you another Para- 
clete, and He may abide with 
you forever, the Spirit of truth, 
Whom the world cannot re- 
ceive, because it seeth Him not, 
nor knoweth Him; but you shall 
know Him, because He shall 
abide with you, and shall be in 
you. I will not leave you or- 
phans; I will come to you. Yet 
a little while, and the world 
seeth Me no more; but you see 
Me, because I live, and you 
shall live. In that day you shall 
know that I am in My Father, 
and you in Me, and I in you. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


596 


He that hath My command- 
ments, and keepeth them, he it 
is that loveth Me. And he that 
loveth Me shall be loved of My 
Father; and I will love him, 
end will manifest Myself to 
him. 


WHITSUN-EVE 


ego in vobis. Qui habet man- 
dáta mea, et servat ea: ille 
est, qui diligit me. Qui autem 
díligit me, diligétur à Patré 
meo: et ego diligam eum, et 
manifestábo ei meipsum. 


Offertory. Ps. 103, 30, 31 


` Send forth Thy Spirit, and 
they shall be created; and Thou 
shalt renew the face of the 
earth; may the. glory of the 
Lord endure for ever, alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Emitte spfritum tuum, et 
creabüntur, et renovábis fá- 
clem terre: sit glória Dó- 
mini in secula, allelija. 


Secret 


ANCTIFY, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the gifts we offer, 

and cleanse our hearts with the 

enlightenment of the Holy 

Spirit. Through. ..in the unity 
of the same. 


Preface No. 7, page 809. 


ÜNERA, quesumus, Dó- 

‘mine, obláta sanctí- 
fica: et corda nostra Sancti 
Spíritus illustratióne emun- 
da. Per Dóminum ...in uni- 
táte ejüsdem. 


Communion. John 7, 37, 39 


On the last day of the fes- 
tivity, Jesus said, He that be- 
lieveth in Me, out of his belly 
shall flow rivers of living water: 
but this He said of the Spirit, 
which they should receive who 
Yelieved in Him, alleluia, alle- 
Aula. 


Ultimo  festivitátis die 
dicébat Jesus: Qui in me 
credit, flümina de ventre ejus 
fluent aque vive: Hoc autem- 
dixit de Spiritu, quem accep- 
türi erant credéntes in eum, 
allelija, allelüja. 


Postcommunion 


AY. the infusion of the 
@M Holy -Spirit cleanse our 
hearts, O Lord, and make them 
fruitful by the inward water- 
ing with His heavenly dew. 
Through,..in the unity of the 
same. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ANCTI Spíritus, Dómine, 

corda nostra mundet 
nfüsio: et sui roris intima 
aspersióne fecündet. Per Dó- 
minum ... in unitáte ejüs- 
dem. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


597 


SAAS 


ars: 


v 


2d 


APP) TO A! 
AT UPON EVERY ONE OF THEM; AND 


E , A 8. 
THEY WERE ALL FILLED WITH THE HOLY GHOST. (Acts 2, 2, 3, 4) 


PN O 


WHITSUNDAY 


http://ccwatershed.org 


598 


WHITSUNDAY 


Whitsunday 


` STATION AT 


ST. PETER 


Double of the First Class with a Privileged Octave 
of the First Order 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


. . - Introit. 
BE Spirit of the Lord hath 
filled the whole earth, al- 
eluia; and that which contain- 
eth all things hath knowledge 
of the voice, alleluia, alleluia, 
aleluia. Ps. 67, 2. Let God 
arise, and His enemies be scat- 
tered; and let them that hate 
Him fly before His face. JV. 
Glory. 


Wis. 1, 7 


pirirus Dómini replévit 
orbem terrárum, allelü- 
ja: et hoc quod cóntinet óm- 
nia, sciéntiam habet vocis, al- 
leluja, allelüja, allelüja. Ps. 
67, 2. Exsürgat Deus, et dissi- 
péntur inimíci ejus: et fügi- 
ant, qui odérunt eum, a fácie 
ejus. V. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


O coD, Who on this day 
didst instruct the hearts 
of the faithful by the light of 
the Holy Spirit, grant us, by 
the same Spirit, to relish what 
is right and ever to rejoice in 
His consolation. Through...in 
the unity of the same. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 


HEN the days of Pente- 

cost were accomplished, 

they were all together in one 
place; and suddenly there came 
a sound from heaven as of a 
mighty wind coming, and it 
filled the whole house where 
they were sitting. And there 
appeared to them parted 
tongues as it were of fire, and 
it sat upon every one of them; 
and they were all filled with the 
Holy Ghost, and they began to 
speak with divers tongues, ac- 
cording as the Holy Ghost gave 


Eus, qui hodiérna die 
J corda fidélium Sancti 
Spiritus illustratióne docuísti: 
da nobis in eódem Spiritu 
recta sápere; et de ejus sem- 
per consolatióne gaudére. Per 
Dóminum ... in unitate e- 
jusdem. 


Acts 2, 1-11 


Léctio Áctuum Apostolór- 
um. 
UM compleréntur dies 
Pentecóstes, erant om- 
nes discípuli páriter in eódem 
loco: et factus est repénte de 
celo sonus, tamquam adve- 
niéntis spiritus veheméntis: 
et replévit totam domum ubi 
erant sedéntes. Et apparué- 
runt ills dispertite lingue 
tamquam ignis, sedítque su- 
pra Singulos eórum; et repléti 
sunt omnes Spíritu Sancto, et 
cepérunt loqui váriis linguls, 
prout Spíritus Sanctus dabat 
éloqui ilis. Erant autem in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHITSUNDAY 


Jerúsalem habitantes Judei, 
viri religiósi ex omni natióne, 
que sub celo est. Facta au- 
tem hac voce, convénit multi- 
tudo, et mente confüsa est, 
quóniam audiébat unusquis- 
que lingua sua illos loquéntes. 
Stupébant autem omnes, et 
mirabantur, dicéntes: Nonne 
ecce omnes isti, qui loquüntur, 
Galilei sunt? et quómodo nos 
audivimus unusquísque lín- 
guam nostram, in qua nati su- 
mus? Parthi, et Medi, et ZEla- 
mite, et qui hábitant Mesopo- 
támiam, Judzam, et Cappa- 
dóciam, Póntum, et Asiam, 
Phrygiam, et Pamphyliam, 
ZEgyptum, et partes Libye, 
que est circa Cyrénen, et 
advene Romani, Judei 
quoque, et Prosélyti, Cretes, et 
Arabes: audivimus eos lo- 
quénies nostris linguis mag- 
nália Dei. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 
103, 30 Emítte Spíritum tuum, 
et creabüntur: et renovábis 
fáciem terrm. (Hic genuflec- 
titur.) Y. Veni, Sancte Spíri- 
tus, reple tuórum corda fidé- 
lium: et tui amóris in eis ig- 
nem accénde. 


599 


them to speak. Now there were 
dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, 
devout men out of every nation 
under heaven. And when this 
was noised abroad, the multi- 
tude came together, and were 
confounded in mind, because 
that every man heard them 
speak in his own tongue: and 
they were all amazed, and won- 
dered, saying, Behold are not 
all these that speak, Galileans? 
And how have we heard every 
man our own tongue wherein 
we were born? Parthians, and 
Medes, and Elamites, and in- 
habitants of Mesopotamia, Ju- 
dea and Cappadocia, Pontus 
and Asia, Phrygia and Pam- 
phylia, Egypt and the parts of 


Lybia about Cyrene, and 


Strangers of Rome, Jews also, 
and proselytes, Cretes and Ara- 
bians: we have heard them 
speak in our own tongues the 
wonderful works of God. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 103, 
30. Send forth Thy Spirit, and 
they shall be created: and Thou 
shalt renew the face of the 
earth. Alleluia. Y. (here all 
kneel). Come, O Holy Spirit, 
fill the hearts of Thy faithful: 
and kindle in them the fire of 
‘Thy love. 


Sequence’ 


Veni, Sancte Spfritus, 
Et emitte celitus 
Lucis tue radium. 


Veni, pater páuperum. 
Veni, dator münerum, 


Veni, Iumen córdium. 


Holy Spirit! Lord of light! 

From thy clear celestial height, 

Thy pure, beaming radiance 
give: 


Come, Thou, Father of the 
poor! 

Come, with treasures which 
endure! : 
Come, Thou light of all that 

live! 


http://ccwatershed.org 


600 


Thou of all consolers best, 
Visiting the troubled breast, 
Dost refreshing peace’ bestow: 
Thou in toil art comfort sweet; 
Pleasant coolness in the heat; 
Solace in the midst of woe. 
Light immortal! Light divine! 
Visit Thou these hearts of 
Thine, 
And our inmost being fill. 


If Thou take Thy grace away, 

Nothing pure in man will stay; 

All his good is turn'd to ill. 

Heal our wounds—our strength 
renew; : 

On our dryness pour Thy dew; 

Wash the stains of guilt away: 


Bend the stubborn heart and 


will; 
Melt the frozen, warm the chill; 
Guide the steps that go astray. 
‘Thou, on those who evermore 
Thee confess and Thee adore, 
In Thy sevenfold gifts descend. 
Give them comfort when they 
die; ` nd 
Give them life with Thee on 
high; . 
Give them joys which never 
end. Amen. Alleluia. 


WHITSUNDAY 


Consolátor óptime, 
Dulcis hospes ánime, 
Dulce refrigérium. 

In labóre réquies, 

In estu tempéries, 

In fletu solátium. 

O lux beatissima,  . 
Reple cordis intima 


Tuérum fidélium. 

Sine tuo nümine, 

Nihil est in hómine, 
Nihil est innoxium. 
Lava quod est sórdidum, 


Riga quod est áridum, 
Sana quod. est sáucium. 
Flecte quod est rígidum, 


Fove quod est frígidum, 
Rege quod est dévium. 
Da tuis fidélibus, ^ 
In te confidéntibus, 
Sacrum septenárium, 


Da virtütis méritum, 
Dasalütiséxitum, ` 


Da perénne gáudium. 
Amen. Allelüja. . 


This Sequence is said every day until the following Saturday 


inclusively. _ . 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 14, 23-31 


FR Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime, Jesus said to 
His disciples, If any one 
love Me, he will keep My word, 
and My Father will love him, 
and we will come to him, and 
will make our abode with bim. 
He that loveth Me not, keepeth 
not My words: and the word 
which you have heard is not 
Mine, but the Fathers Who 


®© Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Dixit 
Jesus discipulis suis: Si 
quis diligit me, sermónem 
meum servábit, et Pater meus 
díligit eum, et ad eum venié- 
mus, et mansiónem apud eum 
faciémus: qui non díligit me, 
sermónes meos non servat. Et 
sermónem quem audístis, non 
est meus: sed ejus qui misit 


http://ccwatershed.org 


 WHITSUNDAY 


me, Patris, Hic locütus sum 
vobis, apud vos manens, Pará- 
clitus autem Spíritus Sanctus, 
quem mittet Pater in nómine 
meo, ille vos "docébit ómnia, et 
suggeret vobis omnia, que- 
cumque dixero vobis. Pacem 
relinquo vobis, pacem meam 
do vobis: non quómodo mun- 
dus dat, ego do vobis. Non tur- 
bétur.cor vestrum, neque for- 
mídet. Audístis quia ego dixi 
: vobis: Vado, et vénio ad vos. 
Bi diligerétis me, gauderétis 
tique, quia vado ad Patrem: 
quia Pater major est me. . Et 
nunc dixi vobis priüsquam 
fiat: ut cum factum füerit, 
credátis. Jam non multa lo- 
quar vobíscum. Venit enim 
princeps mundi hujus, et in 
me non habet quidquam. Sed 
ut cognóscet mundus quia dí- 
ligo Patrem, et sicut mandá- 
tum dedit mihi Pater, sic fácio. 


601 


Sent Me. 'These things have I 
Spoken to you, abiding with 
you: but the Paraclete, the Holy 
Ghost, Whom the Father will 
send in My name, He will teach 
you all things, and bring all 
things to your mind, whatsoever 
I shall have said to you..Peace 
I leave with you, My peace I 
give unto you; not as the world 
giveth, do I give unto you. Let 
not your heart be troubled, nor 
let it be afraid. You have heard 
that I said to you, I go away, 
and I come unto you. If you 
lovéd Me, you would indeed be 
glad, because I go to the Father, 
for the Father is greater than 
I. And now I have told you be- 
fore it come to pass, that, when 
it shall come to pass, you may 
believe. I will not now speak 
many things with you; for the 
prince of this world cometh, 
and in Me he hath not any- 
thing. But that the world may 


know that I love the Father, anda as the Father hath given Me 


commandments, so do I. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 67, 29, 30 


Confirma hoc Deus, quod 
operatus es in nobis: a templo 
tuo, quod est in Jeruüsalem, 
tibi offerent reges münera, al- 
lelüja. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Confirm this O God, which 
‘Thou hast wrought in us: from 
Thy temple, which is in Jeru- 
salem, kings shall offer pres- 
ents to Thee, alleluia. 


Secret 


ÜNERA, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, obláta sanctífi- 
ca: et corda nostra Sancti 
Spíritus illustratióne emünda. 
Per Dominum ... in unitate 
ejüsdem. 


Preface No. 7, page 809. 


ANCTIFY, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the gifts offered, 

and cleanse our hearts with the 

light of the Holy Spirit. 

Through ...in the unity of the 
same, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


602 


Communion. 


There came suddenly a sound 
from heaven as of a mighty 
wind coming, where they were 
sitting, alleluia; and they were 
all filled with the Holy Ghost, 
speaking the wonderful works 
of God, alleluia, alleluia. 


WHIT-MONDAY 


Acts 2, 2, 4 

Factus, est repénte de cælo 
adveniéntis, ubl erant sedén- 
tes, allelija: et repléti sunt 
omnes spíritu Sancto, lo- 
quéntes magnalia Dei, alle. 
lúja, allelája. 


Postcommunion 


ay our hearts be cleansed, 

O Lord, by the inpouring 

of the Holy Spirit; may He 

render them fruitful by water- 

ing them with His heavenly 

dew. Through.. .in the unity of 
the same. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ANCTI Sptritus, Dómine, 
S corda nostra mundet in- 
iüsio: et sui roris intima as- 
persióne fecündet. Per Dó- 
minum ... in unitate ejus- 
dem. 3 


Wihit-Moandayp (Red) 
STATION AT St. PETER'S CHAINS 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 80, 17 


E FED them with the fat 

of wheat, alleluia; and 
filled tbem with honey out of 
the rock, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 
80, 3. Rejoice to God our helper; 
sing aloud to the God of Jacob. 
X. Glory. 


YiBÁvrr eos ex ádipe fru- 
ménti, allelija: et de 
petra, melle saturávit eos, al- 
lelája, allelája. Ps. 80, 3. Ex- 
&ultáte Deo adjutóri nostro: 
jubiláte Deo Jacob. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761;. Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst give the 

Holy Spirit to Thine 
apostles, grant to Thy people 
the effect of their pious peti- 
tion, and, aS Thou hast given 
us faith, bestow also upon us 
peace, Through. ..in the unity 
of the same. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles, 


N THOSE days, Peter opening 


his mouth, said: Men, 


EUS, qui Apóstolis tuis 

Sanctum dedísti Spíri- 
tum: concéde plebi tue pie 
petitiónis efféctum; ut, qui- 
bus dedísti fidem, largiáris et 
pacem. Per Dóminum... 
in unitate ejüsdem. 


Acts 10, 42-48 


Léctio Áctuum Apostolór- 
um. 

pniÉBUS illis: Apériens Pe- 

trus os suum, dixit: Viri 


http://ccwatershed.org 


e m 


/ 
xf 
» 


yy 
] 


WHIT-MONDAY 


fratres, nobis pracépit Démi- 
nus .predicáre pdpulo, et 
testificári quia ipse est, qui 
constitütus.est a Deo judex vi- 
vérum, et mortudrum. Huic 
omnes prophéte testimónium 
pérhibent, remissiónem pec- 
catórum accipere per nomen 
ejus. omnes, qui credunt in 
eum. Adhuc loquénte Petro 
verba hsec, cécidit Spíritus 
Banctus super omnes, qui au- 
diébant verbum. Et obstupué- 
runt ex circumcisióne fidéles, 
qui vénerant cum Petro: quia 
et in natiónes grátia Spíritus 
Sancti. effúsa est. Audiébant 
enim ilios loquéntes linguis, 
et magnificántes Deum. Tunc 
respóndit Petrus: Numquid 
aquam quis prohibére potest 
ut non baptizéntur hi, qui 
Spiritum Sanctum accepté- 
runt sicut et nos? Et jussit eos 
baptizári.in nómine Dómini 
Jesu Christi. 


Allelüja, allehija Y. Act 2, 4. 
Loquebántur  váriis linguis 
Apóstoli magnália Dei. Alle- 
lúja. (Hic genufiectitur). Y. 
Veni, Sancte, Spíritus, reple 
tuórum corda fidélium: et tui 
amóris in eis ignem accénde. 


603 


brethren, the Lord commanded 
us to preach to the people, and 
to testify that itis He Who was 
appointed by God to be judge 
of the living and of the dead: 
to Him all the prophets give 
testimony, that through His 
name all receive remission of 
sins, who believe in Him. While 
Peter was yet-speaking these 
words, the Holy Ghost fell on 
all them that heard the word; 
and the faithful of the circum- 
cision, who came with. Peter, 
were astonished, for that the 
grace of the Holy Ghost was 
poured: out upon the gentiles 
also: for they heard them 
speaking with tongues, and 
magnifying God. Then Peter 
answered, Can any man forbid 
water, that these men should 
not be baptized, who have re- 
ceived the Holy Ghost as. well 
as we? And he commanded 
them to be baptized.in the 
name of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Alleluia, alleluia. V. Acts 2, 4. 
'The apostles spoke in divers 
tongues the wonderful works of 
God. Alleluia. Y. (here all 
kneel). Come, O Holy Spirit, 
fill the hearts of Thy faithful; 
and kindle in them the fire of 
Thy love. ' 


Sequence as on Pentecost, page 599. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 3, 16-21 


Hi Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus Nicodémo: Sic Deus 
diléxit mundum, ut Fílium 
suum unigénitum daret: ut 
omnis, qui credit in eum, non 
péreat, sed hábeat vitam ætér- 
nam. Non enim misit Deus 


f Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St, John. 

zT THAT time, Jesus said to 

4 Nicodemus, God so loved 

the world, as to give His only- 

begotten Son; that whosoever 
believeth in Him may not per- 

ish, but may have life ever- 

lasting. For God sent not His 


http://ccwatershed.org 


604 


Son into the world to judge the 
world, but that the world may 
be saved by Him. He that be- 
lieveth in Him is not judged, 
but be that doth not believe is 
already judged, because he be- 
lieveth not in the name of the 
only-begotten Son of God, And 
this.js the judgment: because 
the light is come into the world, 
and men loved darkness rather 
than the light, for their works 
were evil: for every one that 
doth evil hateth the light, and 
cometh not to the light, that his 
Works may not be reproved: but 
he that doth truth cometh to 
the light, that his works may 
be made manifest, because they 
are done in God. 
Creed, page 765. 


WHIT-MONDAY 


Fílium suum in mundum, ut 
jüdicet mundum, sed ut salvé- 
tur mundus pet ipsum. Qui 
credit in eum, non judicátur; 
qui autem non credit, jam ju- 
dicátus est: quia non credit in 
nómine unigéniti Filii Dei. 
Hoc est autem judicium: quia 
lux venit in mundum, et di- 
lexérunt hómines magis té- 
nebras, quam lucem: erant 
enim eórum mala. ópera. Om- 
nis enim qui male agit, odit 


lucem, et non venit ad lucem, ` 


ut non arguántur ópera ejus: 
qui autem facit veritátem, ve- 
nit ad lucem, ut manifestén- 
tur ópera ejus quia in Deo 
sunt facta. 


Offertory. Ps. 17, 14, 16 


The Lord thundered from 
heaven, and the Highest gave 
His voice; and the fountains 
of waters appeared, alleluia. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Intónuit de celo Dóminus, 
et Altíssimus dedit vocem su- 
am: et apparuérunt fontes 
aquárum, allelija. 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY sanctify these 

gifts, we beseech Thee, O 

Lord, and, accepting the offer- 

ing of the spiritual sacrifice, 

perfect us as an eternal offer- 

ing to Thee. Through.. .in the 
unity of the same. 

Preface No. 7, page 809. 


Communion. 


The Holy Ghost shall teach 
you, alleluia, whatsoever I shall 
have said to you, alleluia, alle- 
luia. 


ROPÍT:Us, Dómine, que- 
P sumus, hzc dona sancti- 
fica: et hóstiæ spiritalis obla- 
tióne suscépta, nosmetípsos 
tibi pérfice munus ætérnum. 


Per Dóminum ...in unitáte 
ejüsdem. 
John 14, 26 

Spíritus sanctus  docébit 
vos, allelija: quecumque 


dixero vobis, allelüja, allelu- 
ja. 


Postcommunion 


E PRESENT, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, with Thy 


DÉSTO, quesumus, Do- 
mine, pópulo tuo: et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHIT-TUESDAY 605 
quam mystériis celéstibus im- people and defend against the 
buísti, ab hóstium furóre de- fury of the enemy those whom 
fénde, Per Dóminum . .. in Thou hast imbued with heay- 


unitáte ejüsdem. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


enly mysteries, Through...in 
the unity of the same. 


Whit-Tuesdap (Red) 
STATION AT ST. ANASTASIA 
‘Nhe Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 4 Esdras 2, 37 


CccíPITE — jucunditátem 

glórie vestre, allelüia: 
grátias agéntes Deo, allelija: 
qui vos ad czléstia regna vo- 
cávit, allelüja, allelija, alle- 
lija. Ps. 77, 1. Atténdite, pó- 
pule meus, legem meam: in- 
clináte aurem vestram in ver- 
ba oris mei. Y. Glória Patri. 


EcEIVE the joy of your 

glory, alleluia; giving 
thanks to God, alleluia; Who 
hath called you to a heavenly 
kingdom, alleluia, alleluia, al- 
leluia. Ps. 77, 1. Attend, O My 
people, to My law; incline your 
ears to the words of My mouth. 
X. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


psit nobis, quesumus, 

a Dómine, virtus Spiri- 
tus Sancti: que et corda nos- 
tra cleménter expürget, et ab 
ómnibus tueátur advérsis. Per 
. . . in unitate ejüsdem. 


ET the power of the Holy 

Spirit be present with us, 

O Lord, both graciously cleans- 

ing our hearts and guarding 

us from all dangers. Through 
...in tbe unity of the same. 


Lesson. Acts 8, 14-17 


Léctio Áctuun 
rum. 
T: piÉBUS illis: Cum audis- 


Apostoló- 


sent Apóstol, qui erant 
Jerosólymis, quod recepíssent 
Samaria verbum Dei, misé- 
runt ad eos Petrum, et Joán- 
nem. Qui cum veníssent, ora- 
vérunt pro ipsis ut accíperent 
Spíritum Sanctum: nondum 
enim in quemquam illórum 
vénerat, sed baptizáti tan- 
tum erant in nómine Dómini 
Jesu. Tunc imponébant ma- 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 


I* THOSE days, when the 
apostles that were in Jeru- 
salem had heard that Samaria 
had received the word of God, 
they sent unto them Peter and 
John; who, when they were 
come, prayed for them, that 
they might receive the Holy 
Ghost: for He was not as yet 
come upon any of them; but 
they were only baptized in the 
name of the Lord Jesus. Then 


http://ccwatershed.org 


606 WHIT-TUESDAY 


ihey leid their hands upon 
them, and they received the 
Holy Ghost. 

Alleluia, alleluia. X. John 
14, 26. The Holy Ghost shall 
teach you whatsoever Y shall 
have said to you. Alleluia. 
(Here all kneel). Y. Come, O 
Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of 
Thy faithful; and kindle in 
them the fire of Thy love. 


nus super illos, et accipiébant 
Bpíritum Sanctum. 


Allelija, allelüja. V. Joan, 
14, 26. Spiritus Sanctus docé- 
bit vos quecümque díxero vo- 
bis. Allelüja. (Hic genufiécti- 
tur). Y. Veni, Sancte Spíri- 
tus, reple tuórum corda fidéli- 
um: et tui amóris in eis ignem 
&ccénde. 


The Sequence as on Pentecost, page 599. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


"Gospel. John 10, 1-10 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. - 


T THAT time, Jesus said 


to the pharisees, Amen, 
amen, I say to you, he that en- 
tereth not by the door into the 
sheepfold, but climbeth up an- 
other way, the same is a thief 
and & robber. But he that en- 
tereth in by the door is the 
shepherd of the sheep. 'To him 
the porter openeth, and the 
sheep hear his voice, and he 
calleth his own sheep by name, 
and leadeth them out. And 
when he hath let out his own 
sheep, he goeth before them; 
and the sheep follow him, be- 
cause they know his voice; but 
a stranger they follow not, but 
fly from him, because they 
know not the voice of strangers. 
This proverb Jesus spoke to 
them: but they understood not 
what He spoke to them. Jesus 
therefore said to them again, 
Amen, amen, I say to you, I 
am the door of the sheep. All 
others, as many as have come, 
are thieves and robbers; and 
the sheep hear them not. Iam 
the door. By Me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved; and 


HB Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii seciindum. Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus- pharisæis: Amen, 
amen dico vobis: qui non in- 
trat per óstium in ovíle óvium, 
sed ascéndit aliünde, ille fur 
est, et latro. Qui autem intrat 
per óstium, pastor est óvium. 
Huic ostiárius áperit, et oves 
vocem ejus áudiunt, et pró- 
prias oves vocat nominátim, 
et edücit eas. Et cum próprias 
oves emíserit, ante eas vadit: 
et oves illum sequüntur, quia 
sciunt vocem ejus. Aliénum 
autem non seqüuntur, sed fü- 
giunt ab eo; quia non nové- 
runt vocem alienórum. Hoc 
provérbium dixit eis Jesus. 
ili autem non cognovérunt 
quid loquerétur eis. Dixit ergo 
eis iterum Jesus: Amen, amen 
dico vobis, quia ego sum ós- 
tium óvium. Omnes quotquot 
venérunt fures sunt, et la- 
trónes, et non audiérunt eos 
oves. Ego sum éstium. Per me 
si quis introferit, Salvábitur: 
et ingrediétur, et egrediétur, 
et páscua invéniet. Fur non 
venit nisi ut furétur, et mac- 
tet, et perdat. Ego veni ut 


http://ccwatershed.org 


po a REPRE 


WHIT-WEDNESDAY 607 


vitam hábeant, et abundán- he shall go in, and go out, and 
tius hábeant. shall find pastures. The thief 
à cometh not but to steal, and to 
kill, and to destroy. I am come that they may have life, and 
may have it more abundantly. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 77, 23.25 

Portas celi apéruit Dómi- The Lord opened the doors 
nus:: et pluit illis manna, ut of heaven, and rained down 
éderent: panem czli, dedit eis, manna upon them to eat: He 
panem Angelórum manducá- gave them the bread of heaven, 
vit homo, allelija. man did eat the bread of angels, 

alleluia. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
URÍFICET nos, quesumus, av the offering of the gift 
Dómine, müneris præ- here before Thee, we be- 
séntis oblátio: et dignos sacra seech Thee, O Lord, purify us 
participatióne efficiat. Per and render us worthy of its 
... in unitate ejüsdem. sacred participation. Through 
-. in the unity of the same. . 
Preface No. 7, page 809. 


Communion. John 15, 26; 16, 14; 17, 1, 5 
Spfritus qui a Patre procé- The Spirit Who proceedeth 
dit, allelija: ille me clarifi- from the Father, alleluia. He 
cábit, alleluja, aleüja. shall glorify Me, alleluia, alle- 
luia. | 


Postcommunion 

P ENTES nostras, quæsu- ay the Holy Spirit, we þe- 

mus, Dómine, Spíritus (D seech Thee, O Lord, re- 
Sanctus divínis réparet sacra- new our minds with the divine 
méntis: quia ipse est remís- sacrament, for He is the remis- 
sio ómnium peccatórum. Per sion of all sins. Through...in 
... in unitate ejüsdem. the unity of the same. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


hit-Wednesdap (Red) 
Station AT St. Mary MAJOR 
(Ember-day) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 67, 8, 9 


EUS, dum egrederéris co- cop, when Thou didst go 
ram pópuo tuo, iter fá- forth in the sight of Thy 
ciens eis, hábitans in illis, al- people, making a passage for 


http://ccwatershed.org 


608 


them, dwelling in the midst of 
them, alleluia; the earth was 
moved, tbe heavens dropped, 
alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 67, 2. Let 
God arise, and let His enemies 
be scattered: and let them that 
hate Him flee from before His 
face. Y. Glory, 


WHIT-WEDNESDAY 


lelúja: terra mota est celi 
distillavérunt, allelija, allelü- 
ja. Ps. 67, 2. Exsürgat Deus, et 
dissipéntur inimíci ejus: et 
fügiant, qui odérunt eum, & 
fácie ejus. Y. Glória Patri. 


After the Kyrie eletson is immediately said the Prayer: 


Prayer - 


AY ihe Paraclete Who 

proceedeth from Thee 
enlighten our minds, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, and lead 
us into all truth, as Thy Son 
hath promised. Who liveth and 
reigneth with Thee in the unity 
of the same Holy Spirit. 


ENTES nostras, quæsu- 
XD mus, Dómine, Parácli- 
tus, qui a te procédit, illámi- 
net: et indücat in omnem, si- 
cut tuus promísit Fílius, veri- 
tátem: Qui tecum vivit et res- 
nat in unitáte ejüsdem. 


Lesson. Acts 2, 14-21 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 
N THOSE days, Peter stand- 
ing up with the eleven, 
lifted up his voice and spoke to 
them: Ye men of Judea, and all 
you that dwell in Jerusalem, be 
this known to you, and with 
your ears receive my words. For 
these are not drunk, as you 
suppose, seeing it is but the 
third hour of the day; but this 
is that which was spoken of 
by the prophet Joel, And it 
Shall come to pass in the last 
days (saith the Lord), I will 
pour out My spirit upon all 


flesh; and your sons and your 


daughters shall prophesy, and 
your young men shall see vi- 
sions, and your old men shall 
dream dreams. And upon My 
servants indeed, and upon My 
handmaids, will I pour out, in 
those days, of My spirit; and 
they shall prophesy. And I will 
show wonders in the heaven 


Léctio Áctuum  Apostoló- 
rum, 

N DIÉBUS illis: Stans Petrus 
I cum ündecim, levávit vo- 
cem suam, et locütus est eis: 
Virl Judei, et qui habitatis 
Jerüsalem. univérsi, boc vobis 
notum sit, et duribus percípte 
verba mea. Non enim, sicut 
vos sstimátis, hi ébrii sunt, 
cum sit hora diéi tértia: sed 
hoc est quod dictum est per 
prophétam Joél: Et erit in 
novíssimis diébus (dicit Dó- 
minus) effündam de Spíritu 
meo super omnem carnem, in 
prophetábunt fílii vestri et fi- 
lie vestra et jüvenes vestri vi- 
siones videbunt et senióres 
vestri somnia somniábunt. Et 
quidem super servos meos, et 
Super ancíllas meas in diébus 
illis effündam de Spíritu meo, 
et prophetábunt: et dabo pro- 
digia in cxlo sursum, et signa 
in terra deórsum sánguilnem, 
et ignem, et vapórem fumi. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHIT-WEDNESDAY 


Sol convertétur in ténebras, 
et luna in: sánguinem, ante- 
quam  véniat dies Dómini 
magnus et maniféstus. Et erit: 
omnis quicümque invocáverit 
nomen Dómini, salvus erit. 


609 


above, and signs on the earth 
beneath; blood, and fire, and 
vapor of smoke. The sun shall 
be turned into darkness, and 
the moon into blood, before the 
great and manifest day of the 
Lord come. And it shall come 


to pass, that whosoever shali call upon the name of the Lord, 


Shall be saved, 


Allelüja. Y. Ps. 32, 6. Verbo 
Dómini Celi firmati sunt, et 
spiritu oris ejus omnis virtus 
eórum. 


, Alleluia. Y. Ps, 32, 6. By the 
word of the Lord the heavens 

were established: and ali the 
power of them by the spirit 
of His mouth, 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


RESTA, quesumus, omní- 

potens et miséricors 
Deus: ut Spíritus Sanctus ad- 
véniens, templum nos glórie 
suz dignánter inhabitando 
perficiat. Per ...in unitate 
ejüsdem. 


RANT, We beseech Thee, al- 

. mighty and most merci- 
ful God, that the Holy Spirit, 
coniing to us, may perfect us as 
a temple worthy the indwelling 
of His glory. Through .. . in 
the unity of the same. 


Second. Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


page 826. 


Lesson. Acts 5, 12-16 


Léctio Áctum Apostolórum. 


N DniÉBUS illis: Per manus 
Apostolórum fiébant si- 
gnà et prodigia multa in 
plebe, Et erant unanímiter 
umhes in pórticu Salomónis. 
Ceterórum autem nemo au- 
débat se conjüngere illis: sed 
magnificdbat eos  pópulus. 
Magis autem augebátur cre- 
déntium in Dómino multitüdo 
virórum ac mulierum, ita ut 
iñ platéas ejicerent infírmos, 
et pónerent in léctulis ac gra- 
bátis, ut, veniénte Petro, sal- 
tem umbra illfus obumbráret 
quemquum illérum, et libera- 
réntur ab infirmitátibus suis. 
Concurrébat autem et multi- 


Lesson from.the Acts of the 
Apostles. 

N THOSE days, By the hands 
I of the apostles, were many 
Signs and wonders wrought 
among the people. And they 
were all with one accord in 
Solomon's porch. But of the 
rest no man durst join himself 
with them: but the people mag- 
nified them. And the multi- 
tude.of men and women that 
believed in the Lord was more 
increased; insomuch that they 
brought forth the sick into the 
streets, and laid them on beds 
and couches, that when Peter 
came, his shadow at least might 
overshadow any of them, and 
they might be delivered from 


http://ccwatershed.org 


610 


their. infirmities.. And there 
came also together to Jerusalem 
a multitude out of the neigh- 
boring cities, bringing sick per- 
Sons, and such as were troubled 
with unclean spirits, who were 
all healed. 

Alleluia, alleluia. (Here all 
kneel). Y. Come, O Holy Spirit, 
fill the hearts of Thy faithful; 
and kindle in them the fire of 
Thy love. 


WHIT-WEDNESDAY 


tudo vicinárum civitátem Je- 
rüsalem, afferéntes ægros, et 
vexátos a spiritibus immun- 
dis: qui curabantur omnes, 


Allehija, allelüja. (Hic. gen- 
ufiéctitur). Y. Veni Sancte 
Spíritus reple tuórum corda 
fidélium: et tui amóris in eis 
ignem accénde. 


Sequence as om Pentecost, page 599. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 6, 44-52 


H$ Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, Jesus said to 
the Jews, No man can 
come to Me, except the Father, 
Who hath sent Me, draw him; 
and I will raise him up in the 
last day. It is written in the 
prophets, And they shall all be 
taught of God. Every one that 
hath heard of the Father, and 
hath learned, cometh to Me. 
Not that any man hath seen the 
Father, but He who is of God, 
He bath seen the Father. Amen, 
amen, I say unto to you, he that 
believeth in Me hath everlast- 
ing life. I am the bread of life. 
Your fathers did eat manna in 
the desert, and are dead. This 
is the bread. which cometh 
down from heaven, that, if any 
man eat of it, he may not die. 
I am the living bread which 
came down from heaven. If 
any man eat of this bread, he 
shall live for ever; and the 
bread that I will give, is My 
flesh for the life of the world. 


` Creed, page 765. 


% Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gelii secündum Joánnem. 


I: ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus turbis Judeérum: Ne- 
mo potest veníre ad me, nisi 
Pater, qui misit me, traxerit 
eum: et ego resuscitábo eum 
in novíssimo die. Est scriptum 
in prophétis: Et erunt omnes 
docíbiles Dei. Omnis, qui au- 
divit a Patre, et dídicit, venit 
&d me. Non quia Patrem vidit 
quisquam, nisi is, qui est a 
Deo, hic vidit Patrem. Amen, 
amen dico vobis: qui credit in 
me, habet vitam etérnam. 
Ego sum panis vite. Patres 
vestri manducavérunt manna 
in desérto, et mórtui sunt. Hic 
ést panis de cxlo descéndens: 
ut siquis ex ipso manducábe- 
rit, non moriátur. Ego sum 
panis vivus, qui de celo de~ 
Scéndi. Si quis manducáverit 
ex hoc pane, vivet in ætér- 
num: et panis, quem ego da- 
bo, caro mea est pro mundi 
vita, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHIT-THURSDAY 611 


Offertory. Ps. 118, 47, 48 
Meditábor in mandatis tuis, I will meditate on Thy com- 
que diléxi valde: et levábo mandments, which I have loved 
manus meas ad mandáta tua, exceedingly: and I will lift up 
que diléxi, allelija. my hands to Thy command- 
ments, which I have loved, al- 
leluia. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


CCIPE, quesumus, Dó- ECEIVE, we beseech Thee, 
mine, munus oblátum: O Lord, the gifts we of- 
et dignánter operáre; ut, fer: and graciously bring about 
quod mystériis, agimus, piis that, what we here do in these 
efféctibus celebrémus. Per mysteries, we may hereafter by 
Déminum. ‘their holy consequences hold in 
honor, Through our Lord. 
m Peso Secret for ihe Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 
age 
Preface No. 7, page 809. 


Communion. John 14, 27 
Pacem, relínguo vobis, alle- My peace I leave you, alle- 


lúja: pacem meam do vobis, luia: My peace I give you, alle- 
alleluja, allelüja.. luis, alleluia. 


Postcommunion 
UMÉNTES, Dómine; ctelés- .EcEIVING Thy heavenly 
tia sacraménta, quesu- sacrament, we beg Thy 
mus cleméntiam tuam: ut, clemency, O Lord, that what 
quod temporáliter, gérimus, we do in this life we may follow 
tetérnis gaudiis consequamur. in the joys of eternity. Through 
Per Déminum. . our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion for thé Church, page 825 or for the 
Pope, page 826. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793; 


 Ulbit-urstay (Red) 


Sration aT ST. LAWRENCE. WITHOUT THE WALLS 
'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. : 


Introit, Wisdom 1,7 
PÍRfYrus Dómini replévit HE Spirit of the Lord hath 
KO orbem terrárum, allelü- filled the. whole earth, al- 
la: et hoc quod cóntinet om- leluia: and that which contain- 
nia, sciéntiam habet vocis, al- eth all things hath knowledge 
leldia, allelüia, alleliia. Ps. of the voice, alleluia, alleluia, 
87, 2. Exsürgat Deus, et dis- alleluia. Ps. 67, 2. Let God arise, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


612 


and His enemies be scattered, 
and let them that hate Him fly 
before His face. J. Glory.” 


WHIT-THURSDAY 


sipéntur inimici ejus: et 
fügiant, qui odérunt. eum, a 
facie ejus. Y. Glória Patri. 


Prayer 


cop, Who on this day 

didst teach the hearts of 
the faithful by the light of the 
Holy Spirit, grant us in the 
same Holy Spirit ever to delight 
in those. things which are right 
and to rejoice.in His consola- 
tion. Through . . . in the unity 
of the same. ` 


Second 
page 826. 


gus, qui hodiérna die 

-corda fidélium Sancti 

Spiritus illüstratióne docuisti: 

. da nobis in eódem Spiritu rec- 

ta sapere; et de ejus semper 

consolatióne gaudére.Per . .. 
in unitate ejüsdem. 


Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


Lesson. Acts 8, 5-8 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. _ . 
N THOSE days, Philip going 
down to the city of Sa- 
maria, preached Christ to them. 
And the people with one accord 
were attentive to those things 
which were said by Philip; 
hearing, and seeing the mira- 
cles which he did. For many 
of them who had unclean spi- 
rits, crying with a loud. voice 
went oub And many taken 
with the palsy, and that were 
lame, were healed; and there 
was therefore great joy in that 
city. : x 
Alleluia, alleluia, Y. Ps. 103, 
30. Send forth Thy Spirit, and 
they shall be created; and Thou 
shalt renew the face of the 
earth. Alleluia. Y. (here all 
kneel). Come, O Holy Spirit, 
fill the hearts of Thy faithful; 
and kindle in them the fire of 
‘Thy love. 


Sequence as on Pentecost, pag 


Léctio Actuum  Apostoló- 
N prÉsus ilis: Philippus 
descéndens in civitátem 
Samaríe, praedicabat illis 
Christum. Intendébant au- 
tem turbz his que a Philippo 
dicebantur, unanimiter au- 
diéntes, et vidéntes signa que 
faciébat. Multi enim eórum, 
qui habébant spíritus immün- 
dos, clamantes voce magna 
exibant. Multi autem paraly- 
tici, et claudi curati sunt. 
Factum est ergo gáudium 
magnum in illa civitáte. 


Allehija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 103, 
30. Emitte Spíritum tuum, et 
creabüntur, et  renovábis 
faciem terre, Allelüja. Y. 
(Hic  genuflectitur). Veni, 
sancte Spíritus reple tuórum 
corda fidélium: et tui amóris 
in eis ignem accénde. 


e 599. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHIT-THURSDAY 618 


Gospel. Luke 9, 1-6 
WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- "5 Continuation of the holy 


gélii secundum Lücam. Gospel according to St. Luke.' 
N ILLO témpore: Convocá- T THAT time, Jesus calling 
tis Jesus duódecim Após- « together the twelve 


folis, dedit illis virtütem, et apostles gave them power and 
potestatem super ómnia authority over all devils, and 
demonia, et ut ljanguóres cu- to cure diseases. And He sent 
rárent. Et misit ills pre- them to preach the kingdom of 
dicare regnum Dei, et sanáre God, and to heal the sick. And 
infirmos. Et ait ad illos: He said to them, Take nothing 
Nihil tuléritis in via, neque for your journey; neither staf, 
virgam, neque peram, neque nor scrip, nor bread, nor mon- 
panem, heque ^pecüniam, ey: neither have two coats: and 
neque duas tünicas habeátis. whatsoever house you shall en- 
Et in  quamcümque do- ter into, abide there, and de- 
mum intravéritis, ibi ma- part not from thence. And 
nente et inde exéatis. Et whosoever will not receive you, 
quicümqgue non recéperint when ye go out of that city, 
vos: exeüntes de civitáte illa, shake off even the dust of your 
étiam pülverem pedum ves- feet for & testimony against 
trérum excütite in testimó- them. And going out, they 
nium supra illos.  Egréssi went about through the towns 
autem circuibant per castélla preaching the gospel, and heal- 
evangelizantes, et curántes ing everywhere. 

ubíque. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 67, 29, 30 


Confirma hoc, Deus, quod Confirm this, O God, which 
operátus es in nobis: & templo Thou hast wrought in us; from 
tuo, quod est in Jerüsalem, tibi Thy temple, which is in Jeru- 
ófferent reges münera, alle- salem, kings shall offer presents 
láia. to Thee, alleluia. 


Offertory Prayets, page 767. 


Secret 


ÜNERA, quesumus, Dó- ANCTIFY, We beseech Thee, 
mine, obláta sanctifi- O Lord, the gifts offered, 


ea: et corda nostra Sancti and cleanse our hearts witb 

Spiritus illustratióne emünda. the light of the Holy Spirit. 

Per ...in unitate ejusdem. Through .. . in the unity of 
ihe same. 


Second Secret for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope. 
page 826, 


Preface No. 7, page 809. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


614 WHIT-FRIDAY 


Communion. 


Suddenly there came a sound 
from heaven as of a mighty 
wind coming where they were 
sitting, alleluia; and they were 
all filled with the Holy Ghost, 
speaking the wonderful works 
of God, alleluia, alleluia. 


Acts 2, 2, 4 

Factus est repénte de coelo 
sonus, tamquam adveniéntis 
spíritus veheméntis, ubi erant 
sedéntes, allelüia: et repjéti 
sunt omnes Spíritu Sancto, 
loquéntes magnália Dei, alle- 
lóia, allelüia. 


Postcommunion 


Av the infusion of the 
@M Holy Spirit cleanse our 
hearts, O Lord, and make them 
fruitful inwardly by His dew 
watering them. Through...in 
the unity of the same. 


ANCTI Spiritus, Dómine, 

corda nostra mundet in- 
üsio: et sui roris intima as- 
pérsióne foecündet. Per Dó- 
minum... in unitate ejás- 
dem. 


Second Postcommunion for the Church, page 825; or for the 


Pope, page 826. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Whit-Friday (Red) 
STATION AT THE CHURCH OF THE TWELVE HOLY APOSTLES 
(Ember-day) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 70, 8, 23 


ET my mouth be filled with 

Thy praise, alleluia: that 

I may sing, alleluia: my lips 
shall rejoice, when I shall sing 
to Thee, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 
70, 1, 2. In Thee, O Lord, have 
X hoped, let me never be put 
to confusion: deliver me in Thy 
Justice, and rescue me. Y. Glory. 


EPLEÁTUR OS meum laude 

tua, alleluja: ut pos- 
sim cantare, allelája: gaudé- 
bunt lábia mea, dum canta- 
vero tibi, allelüja, allelüja. Ps. 
70, 1-2. In te, Dómine, sperá- 
vi non confündar in etér- 
num: in justítia tua líbera 
me, et éripe me. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 


RANT to Thy Church, we 


beseech Thee, O merciful 


God, that, being gathered in 
the Holy Spirit, it may be no- 
wise molested by any assault 
of the enemy. Through .. 
the unity of the same. 


A, QUIESUMUS, Ecclésie 
tug, miséricors Deus: 
ut Sancto Spíritu congregáta, 
hostili nullátenus incursióne 
iurbétur. Per Dóminum ... 


.in in unitáte ejüsdem. 


Second Prayer jor the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


page 826. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


o m ÀÀ 


WHIT-FRIDAY 615 


Lesson. Joel, 2, 23, 24, 26, 27 


Léctio Joélis Prophéte. 


zo dicit Dóminus Deus: 
Exsultáte, filii Sion, et 
letámini in Dómino Deo ves- 
tro: quia dedit vobis doctórem 
justitiz, et descéndere fáciet 
&d vos imbrem matutínum et 
serótinum sicut in princípio. 
Et implebüntur dree frumén- 
to, et redundábunt torculária 
vino et oleo. Et comedétis ve- 
scéntes, et saturabimini, et 
laudábilis nomen Dómini Dei 
vestri, qui fecit mirabília vo- 
bíscum: et non confundétur 
pópulus meus in sempitér- 
num. Et sciétis quia in médio 
Israel ego sum: et ego Dómi- 
nus Deus vester, et non est 
ámplius: et non confundétur 
pópulus meus in etérnum: ait 
Dóminus omnipotens. 


Allelüja, allelija. V. Sap. 
12, 1. O quam bonus et suávis 
est, Dómine, spíritus tuus in 
nobis. Allelija. Y. (Hic genu- 
flectitur). Veni, Sancte Spiri- 
tus, reple tuórum corda fidé- 
lium; et tui amóris in eis ig- 
nem accénde. 


. Lesson from Joel the 
Prophet. 

HUS saith the Lord God: O 

children of Sion, rejoice, 
and be joyful in the Lord your 
God; because He bath given 
you a teacher of justice, and He 
wil make the early and the 
latter rain to come down to 
you, as in. the beginning: and 
the floors shall be filled with 
wheat, and the presses shall 
overflow with wine and oil. And 
you shall eat in plenty, and 
shall be filled; and you shall 
praise the name of the Lord 
your God, Who hath done 
wonders with you: and My 
people shali not be confounded 
for ever. And you shall know 
that I am in the midst of Is- 
rael: and I am the Lord your 
God, and there is none besides; 
and My people shall not be con- 
founded forever; said the Lord 
almighty. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Wis. 12, 
1. O how good and sweet, O 
Lord, is Thy spirit within us. 
Alleluia. V. (here all kneel) 
Come, O Holy Spirit, fill the 
hearts of Thy faithful; and 
kindle in them the fire of Thy 
love. 


Sequence as on Pentecost, page 599. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Luke 5, 17-26 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore Factum est 

in una diérum, et Jesus 
sedébat docens. Et erant Pha- 
risæi sedéntes, et legis doc- 
tóres, qui vénerant ex omni 
castéllo Galilee, et Jude, et 
Jerüsalem: et virtus Dómini 


"V Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT lime, it came to 

pass, on a certain day, 
that Jesus sat teaching; and 
there were pharisees and doc- 
tors of the law sitting by that 
were come out of every town of 
Galilee, and Judea, and Jeru- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


616 WHIT-FRIDAY 


Salem, and the power of the 
Lord was to heal them. And 
behold men brought in a bed 
& man who had the palsy, and 
they sought means to bring him 
1n, and to lay him before Him; 
and when they could not find 
by what way they might bring 
him in, because of the multi- 
tude, they went up upon the 
roof, and let him down through 
the tiles with his bed into the 
midst before Jesus, And when 
He saw their faith, He said, 
Man, thy sins are forgiven thee: 
and the scribes and pharisees 
began to think, saying, Who is 
this who speaketh blasphemies? 
Who can forgive sins, but God 
atone? And when Jesus knew 
their thoughts, answering, He 
saith to them, What is it you 
think in your hearts? Which is 
easier to say? Thy sins are 
forgiven thee, or to say, Arise 
and walk? But that you may 
know that the Son of man hath 
power on earth to forgive sins 
(He saith to the sick of the 
palsy), I say to thee, Arise, take 
up thy bed, and go into thy 
house. And immediately rising 
up before them, he took up the 
bed on which he lay and he 
went away to his own house, 
glorifying God. And all were 
astonished, and they glorified 
God; and they were filled with 
fear, saying, We have seen won- 
derful things today. 


Creed, page 765. 
Offertory. 
Preise the Lord, O my soul, 
in my life I will praise the Lord; 
I will sing to my God, as long 
as I shall be, alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


erat ad sanándum eos, Et ecce 
viri portántes in lecto hómi- 
nem, qui erat paralyticus: et 
querébant eum inférre, et pó- 
nere ante eum. Et non inve- 
niéntes qua parte illum infér- 
rent pre turba, ascendérunt 
supra tectum, et per tégulas 
summisérunt eum cum lecto 
in médium ante Jesum. Quo- 
rum fidem ut vidit. dixit: 
Homo remittüntur tibi peccá- 
ta tua, Et cepérunt cogitáre 
scribe et phariszi, dicéntes: 
Quis est hic, qui lóquitur blas- 
phémias? Quis potest dimít- 
tere peccáta, nisi solus Deus? 
Ut cognóvit autem Jesus co- 
gitatiónes eórum respóndens, 
dixit ad illos: Quid cogitátis 
in cordibus vestris? Quid est 
facílius dícere: Dimittüntur 
tibi peccáta, an dícere: Surge, 
et ámbula? Ut auiem sciátis 
qui Filius hóminis habet po- 
testátem in terra dimitténdi 
peccáta (ait paralytico) : Tibi 
dico, surge, tolle lectum tu- 
um, et vade in domum tuam. 
Et conféstim consürgens co- 
ram illis, tulit lectum, in quo 
jacébat: et ábiit in domum 
suam, magníficans Deum. Et 
stupor apprebéndit omnes, et 
magnificábant Deum, Et re- 
pléti sunt timóre, dicéntes: 
Quia vídimus mirabilia hódie. 


Ps. 145,2 


Lauda, dnima mea, Dómin- 
um: laudábo Dóminum in 
vita mea; psallam Deo meo 
quámdiu ero, allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


p 


—S 


WHIT-SATURDAY 617 


Secret 
AcRIFÍCIA, Dómine, tuis AY the sacrifices offered 
oblata conspéctibus, ig- in Thy sight, O Lord, 


nis ille divínus absümat, qui be consumed by that divine fire 
discipulórum Christi Fílii tui which the Holy Spirit enkindled 
per Spífritum Sanctum corda in the hearts of the disciples of 
Succéndit. Per eümden Dó- Christ, Thy Son. Through the 
minum ... in unitáte ejüs- same...in the unity. 
dem. 

penc Secret for the Church, page 825; or for ine Pope, 
page 8. 

ab No. 7, page 809. 


Communion. John 14, 18 


Non vos relínquam érpha- Y will not leave you orphans; 
nos: véniam ad vos iterum, al- I will come to you again, alle- 
lelüja: et gaudébit cor ves- luia: and your heart shall re- 
trum, allelija. joice, alleluia. 


Postcommunion 

úmrsmus, Dómine, sacri E HAVE received, O Lord, 
dona mystérii: humíli- Thy sacred and myste- 
ter deprecántes; ut quz in tui rious gifts, humbly imploring 
commemoratiónem nos fácere that what Thou hast taught us 
precepisti, in nostre profí- to do in commemoration of 
ciant infirmitátis auxílium. 'Thee may profit for the help 

Qui vivis. of our infirmity. Who livest. 


Second Postcommunion for the Church, page 825; or for 
the Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Whit-Saturdap (Red) 
STATION AT DT. PETER 
(Ember-day) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Rom. 5, 5 

ÁnrrAS Dei diffüsa est in HE charity of God is poured 

córdibus nostris, allelü- forth in our hearts, alle- 
ja: per inhabitantem Spíri- luia: by His Spirit dwelling 
tum ejus in nobis, allelaja, al- within us, alleluia, alleluia, Ps. 
leiája. Ps. 102, 1. Bénedic áni- 102, 1. Bless the Lord, O my 
ma mea, Dómino: et ómnia soul; and let all that is within 
que intra me sunt, nómini me bless His holy name. F. 
Sancto ejus. Y. Glória Patri. Glory. 

Kyrie, page 761. 
After the Kyrie eleison the priest says: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


618 


WHIT-SATURDAY 


Let us pray 


Prayer 


RACIOUSLY pour into our 
souls, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, Thy Holy Spirit, by 
Whose Wisdom we are created 
and by Whose providence we 


are governed. Through...in mur. Per .. 


the. unity of the same. 


ÉNTIBUS, nostris, quesu- 

mus, Dómine, Spíritum 

Sanctum benígnus infünde: 

cujus et.sapiéntia cónditi su- 

mus, et providéntia guberná- 

. in unitáte ejüs- 
dem. 


Lesson. Joel 2, 28-32 


Lesson from Joel the 
Prophet. 


mus saith the Lord God: I 
I will pour out My spirit up- 
on all flesh, and your sons and 
your daughters shall prophesy; 
your old men shall dream 
dreams, and your young men 
shall see visions. Moreover, 
upon My servants and hand- 
maids in those days I will 
pour forth My spirit. And I 
will show wonders in heaven; 
and in earth blood, and fire, 
and vapor of smoke. The sun 
shall be turned into darkness, 
and the moon into blood, before 
the great and dreadful day of 
the Lord doth come. And it 
shall come to pass, that every 
one that shall call upon the 
name of the Lord shall be saved. 

Alleluia. Y. John 6,64. It is 
the spirit that quickeneth: but 


Léctio Joélis Prophéte. 


zc dicit Dóminus Deus: 
EffündamSpíritum me- 
um super omnem carnem: et 
prophetábunt ííli vestri, et 
filie vestre: senes vestri sóm- 
nia somniábunt, et jüvenes 
vestri visiónes vidébunt. Sed 
et super servos meos, et an- 
cíllas in diébus illis effündam 
Spíritum meum. Et dabo pro- 
dígia in cælo, et in terra, sán- 
guinem, et ignem, et vapórem 
fumi. Sol convertétur in téne- 
bras; et luna in sánguinem; 
ántequam véniat dies Dómini 
magnus, et horríbilis. Et erit, 
omnis qui invocáverit nomen 
Dómini, salvus erit. 


Allelüja. Y. Joann. 6, 64, 
Spíritus est qui vivíficat: caro 


the flesh profiteth nothing. autem non prodest, quid- 
quam. 
Prayer 


(D the Holy Spirit, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, in- 
flame us with that fire which 
Our Lord Jesus Christ sent 
upon the earth and earnestly 
wished to be enkindled. Who 
with 'Thee...in the unity of 
the same. 


LLO nos igne, qusesumus, 

Dómine, Spíritus Sanctus 
inflammet: quem Dóminus 
noster Jesus Christus misit in 
terram, et vóluit veheménter 
accéndi: Qui tecum vivit et 
regnat in unitate ejüsdem. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHIT-SATURDAY 


Lessons 
Léctio líbri Leviticus. 


N DIéBUS illis: Locütus est 

Dóminus ad Móysen, di- 
Cens; Lóquere filiis Israël, et 
dices ad eos: Cum ingréssi 
fuéritis terram, quam ego 
dabo vobis, et messuéritis sé- 
getem, ferétis manípulos spi- 
cárum, primítias messis ves- 
tre adsacerdótem: qui elevá- 
bit fasciculum coram Dómi- 
no ut acceptabile sit pro vobis, 
altero die sabbati, et sancti- 
ficábit illum. Numerábitis er- 
go ab áltero die sábbati, in 
quo obtulístis manípulum pri- 
mitiárum, septem hebdóma- 
das plenas, usque ad álteram 
diem expletiónis hebdémade 
séptima, id est quinquaginta 
dies: et sic offerétis sacrifí- 
cium novum Dómino ex óm- 
nibus  habitáculis vestris, 
penes primitiárum duos de 
duábus décimis simile fer- 
mentáte, quos coquétis in pri- 
mítias Dómini. Et vocábitis 
hunc diem  celebérrimum, 
atque sanctissimum: omne 
opus servíle non faciétis in eo. 
Legítinum sempitérnum erit 
in cünctis habitáculis, et ge- 
neratiónibus vestris: dicit 
Dóminus omnípotens. 


Allelüja. Y. Job 26, 13. Spí- 
ritus ejus ornávit colos. 


619 


Levit. 23, 10-21 


Lesson from the Book of 
Leviticus. 


N vHosE days: the Lord 
I Spoke to Moses, saying, 
Speak to the children of Israel, 
and thou shalt say to them, 
When you shall have entered 
into the land which Y will give 
you, and shall reap your corn, 
you shall bring sheaves of ears, 
the first-fruits of your harvest, 
to the priests, who shall lift up 
ihe sheaf before the Lord, the 
next day after the sabbath, that 
it may be acceptable for you, 
and shall sanctify it.. You shall 
count therefore from the mor- 
row after the sabbath, wherein 
you offered the sheaf of the 
first-fruits, seven full weeks, 
even unto the morrow after the 
seventh week to be expired, 
that is to say, fifty days; and so 
you shall offer a new sacrifice 
to the Lord, out of all your 
dwellings, two loaves of the 
first-fruits, of two tenths of 
flour leavened, which you shall 
bake for the first-fruits of the 
Lord. And you shall call this 
day most solemn and most holy. 
You shall do no servile work 
therein. It shall be an ever- 
lasting ordinance in all your 
dwellings and generations; said 
the Lord almighty. 

Alleluia. V. Job 26, 13. His 
spirit hath adorned the heav- 
ens. 


Prayer 


EUs, qui ad animórum 
medélam, jejünii devo- 
tióne castigári córpora præ- 
cepísti: concéde nobis propí- 
iius; et mente, et córpore tibi 


cop, Who hast com- 
manded that our bodies 
should be chastened by the de- 
votion of fasting for the heal- 
ing of our souls, propitiously 


http://ccwatershed.org 


620 


grant us to be ever devout 
toward Thee both in mind and 
in body. Through our Lord. 


WHIT-SATURDAY 


semper esse devótos. Per Dó- 
minum nostrum. 


Lesson. Deut. 26, 1-11 


Lesson from the Book of 

Deuteronomy. 
N THOSE days, Moses said to 
the children of Israel, 
Hear, O Israel, what I com- 
mand thee this day. When thou 
art come into the land which 
the Lord Thy God will give 
Thee to possess, and hast con- 
quered it, and dwellest in it, 
thou shalt take the first of all 
thy fruits, and put them in a 
basket, and shalt go to the place 
which the Lord thy God shall 
choose, that His name may be 
invocated there; and thou shalt 
go to the priest that shall be 
in those days, and say to him, 
I profess this day before the 
Lord thy God, Who heard us, 
and looked down upon our at- 
fliction, and labor, and dis- 
tress; and brought us out of 
Egypt with a strong hand, and 
a stretched-out arm, with great 
terror, with signs and wonders, 
and brought us into this place, 
and gave us this land flowing 
with milk and honey. And 
therefore now I offer the first- 
fruits of the land which the 
Lord hath given me. And thou 
shalt leave them in the sight 
of. the Lord thy God, adoring 
the Lord thy God; and thou 
shalt feast in all the good 
things which the Lord thy God 
hath given thee. 

Alleluia. Y. Acts 2-1. When 
the days of Pentecost were ac- 
complished, they were all sit- 
ting together. 


Léciio bri Deuteronómis. 


DIÉBUS illis: Dixit Móyses 

filiis Israel; Audi, Israël, 
qua ego precípio tibi hódie. 
Cum intráveris terram, quam 
Dóminus Deus tuus tibi da- 
turus est possidéndam, et 
obtinüeris eam, atque habi- 
taveris in ea: tolles de cunctis 
frigibus tuis. primitias, et 
pones in cartallo, pergés- 
que ad locum, quem Dó- 
minus Deus tuus elégerit, ut 
ibi invocétur nomen ejus: ac- 
cedésque ad sacerdótem, qui 
füerit in diébus illis, et dices 
ad eum: Profiteor hódie co- 
ram Démino Deo tuo, qui ex- 
audivit nos, et respéxit humil. 
itátem nostram, et labórem, 
atque angüstiam: et edüxit 
nos de ZEgypto in manu forti, 
et bráchio exténto, in ingénti 
pavóre, in signis atque por- 
téntis: et introdúxit ad locum 
istum, et tradidit nobis ter- 
ram lacte et melle manántem. 
Et idcífrco nunc óffero primí- 
tias frugum terre, quam Dó- 
minus dedit mihi. Et dimít- 
tes eas in conspéctu Dómini 
Dei tui, et adoráto Dómino 
Deo tuo. Et epuláberis in óm- 
nibus bonis, que Dóminus 
Deus tuus déderit tibi. 


Allelája. Y. Act 2, 1. Cum 
compleréntur dies Pentecóstes, 
erant omnes páriter sedéntes. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHIT-SATURDAY 


621 


Prayer 


RÆSTA, quesumus omni- 

potens Deus: ut salutá- 
ribus jejüniis eruditi, ab óm- 
nibus étiam vitiis abstinéntes, 
Propitiatliónem tuam facílius 
impetrémus. Per Dóminum. 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that, be- 

ing taught by salutary fastings, 

abstaining also from all wrong- 

doing, we may the more easily 

obtain Thy forgiveness. 
Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Levit. 26, 3-12 


Léctio libri Levitici. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Dixit Démi- 
nus ad Móysen: Lóquere 
filiis Israël, et dices ad eos: Si 
in precéptis meis ambulavé- 
ritis, et mandáta mea custo- 
diéritis, et fecéritis ea, dabo 
vobis plüvias tempóribus suis, 
et terra gignet germen suum, 
et pomis árbores replebüntur. 
Apprehéndet méssium tritüra 
vindémiam, et vindémia occu- 
pabit seméntem: et comedétis 
panem vestrum in saturitáte, 
et absque pavóre habitábitis 
in terra vestra. Dabo pacem in 
ffnibus vestris: dormiétis, et 
non erit qui extérreat. Aufe- 
ram malas béstias: et gládius 
non transíbit términos ves- 
tros. Persequémini inimícos 
vestros, et córruent coram vo- 
bis. Persequéntur quinque de 
vestris centum aliénos, et cen- 
tum de vobis decem míllia: 
cadent inimíci vestri gládio 
in conspéctu vestro. Respíci- 
&m vos, et créscere fáciam: 
multiplicabímini et firmábo 
pactum meum vobíscum. Co- 
medétis vetustíssima véterum 
et vétera novis superveniénti- 
bus projiciétis. Ponam taber- 
náculum meum in médio ves- 
tri, et non abjíciet vos ánima 
mea. Ambulábo inter vos, et 
ero Deus vester, vosque éritis 


Lesson from the Book of 
Leviticus. 


N THOSE days, the Lord said 

to Moses, Speak to the chil- 
dren of Israel, and thou shalt 
Say to them, If you walk in My 
precepts and keep My com- 
mandments, and do them, I 
will give you rain in due season; 
and the ground shall bring 
forth its increase, and the trees 
shall be filled with fruit. The 
threshing of your harvest shall 
reach unto the vintage, and the 
vintage shall reach unto the 
sowing time; and you shall eat 
your bread to the full, and dwell 
in your land without fear. I 
will give peace in your coasts: 
you shall sleep, and there shall 
be none to make you afraid. I 
will take away evil beasts; and 
the sword shall not pass 
through your quarters. You 
shall pursue your enemies, and 
they shall fall before you. Five 
of yours shall pursue a hundred 
others, and & hundred of you 
ten thousand: your enemies 
shall fall before you by the 
Sword. I willlook on you, and 
make you increase: you shall be 
multiplied, and I will establish 
My covenant with you. You 
Shall eat the oldest of the old 
store, and new coming on, you 
Shall cast away the old. I will 
set My tabernacle in the midst 


http://ccwatershed.org 


622 WHIT-SATURDAY 

of you, and My soul shall not pópulus meus: dicit Dóminus 
cast you off. I will walk among omnipotens. 

you, and will be your God, and . 

you shall be My people; saith the Lord almighty. 


Alleluia. V. (here all kneel). — Allelüja. V. (Hic genufiecti- 
Come, O holy Spirit, fill the tur.), Veni, sancte Spiritus, 
hearts of Thy faithful; and reple tuórum corda fidélium: 
kindle in them the fire of Thy et tui amóris in eis ignem ac- 


cénde. 


Prayer 


love. 

Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we 

may so abstain from carnal de- 

licacies as to fast likewise from 

the sins that beset us. Through 

our Lord. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from Daniel the 
Prophet. 
N THOSE days, the angel of 
the Lord went down with 
Azarias and his companions 
into the furnace, and he drove 
the flame of the fire out of the 
furnace, and made the midst of 
the furnace like the blowing of 
& wind bringing dew. But the 
fiame mounted up above the 
furnace nine and forty cubits: 
and it broke forth, and burnt 
such of the Chaldeans the 
king’s servants as it found 
heating it. And the fire 
touched them not at all, nor 
troubled them, nor did them 
any harm. Then these three, as 
with one mouth, praised, and 
glorified, and blessed God in 
the furnace, saying: 
The choir continues 
Alleluia. Y. Dan. 3, 52. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, the 
God of our fathers, and worthy 
to be praised for ever. 


Gloria, page 762, 


RÆSTA, quesumus, omní- 

potens Deus: sic nos ab 
épulis carnálibus abstinére; 
ut a vítiis irruéntibus páriter 
jejunémus. Per Dóminum. 


Dan. 3, 49-51. 


Léctio Daniélis Prophétæ. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Angelus Dó- 

mini descéndit cum Aza- 
ria, et séciis ejus, in forná- 
cem; et excüssit flammam 
ignis de fornáce, et fecit mé- 
dium fornácis quasi ventum 
roris fiantem. Flamma autem 
effundebátur super fornácem 
cübitis quadraginta novem: 
et erüpit, et incéndit quos ré- 
perit juxta fornácem de Chal- 
deis ministros regis, qui eam 
incendébant. Et non tétigit 
eos omníno ignis, neque con- 
tristavit, nec quidquam mo- 
léstie íntulit. Tunc hi tres 
quasi ex uno ore laudábant, 
et glorificábant, et benedicé- 
bant Deum in fornáce, di- 
céntes: 
the sacred words: 

Allelája. V. Dan. 3,52. Ben- 
edíctus es, Dómine Deus pa- 
trum nostrórum, et laudábilis 
in secula. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHIT-SATURDAY 623 


Y. Dóminus vobíscum. 
AY. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


Y. The Lord be with you. 
K. And with thy spirit. 


Prayer 
Eus qui tribus püeris Gop, Who didst mitigate 
D mitigósti flammas íg- the flames of fire for the 
nium: concéde propítius; ut three children, grant propiti- 
nos fámulos tuos non exürat ously that the flame of sin may 
flamma vitilórum. Per Dómi- not consume us Thy servants. 


num. 


Through our Lord. 


Sen Prayer for the Church, page 825; or for the Pope, 


page 8. 


Epistle. Rom. 5, 1-5 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoll ad Romanos. 


RATRES: Justificdti ex 

fide, pacem habeámus 
&d Deum per Dóminum nos- 
trum Jesum Christum: per 
quem et habémus accéssum 
per fidem in grátiam istam, 
in qua stamus, et gloriámur in 
spe glórie filiórum Dei. Non 
solum autem, sed et gloriámur 
in tribulatiónibus: sciéntes 
quod tribulátio patiéntiam 
operátur patiéntia autem 
probatiónem, probatio vero 
spem, spes autem non con- 
fündit: quia cáritas Dei dif- 
füsa est in córdibus nostris 
per Spíritum Sanctum, qui 
datus est nobis, 


Tract. 


Laudáte Dóminum, omnes 
gentes: et collaudáte eum, 
omnes pópuli. Y. Quóniam 
confirmáta est super nos mis- 
ericórdia ejus: et véritas Dó- 
mini manet in ztérnum. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 


RETHREN: Being justified 

by faith, let us have 
peace with God, through Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom 
also we have access through 
faith into this grace wherein 
we stand, and glory in the hope 
of the glory of the sons of 
God. And not' only so, but we 
glory also in tribulations; 
knowing that tribulation work- 
eth patience, and patience trial, 
and trial hope, and hope con- 
foundeth not; because the 
charity of God is poured forth 
in our hearts by the Holy 
Ghost, Who is given to us. 


Ps. 116, 1, 2 


O praise the Lord, all ye na- 
tions, and praise Him together, 
all ye people. Y. For His mercy 
is confirmed upon us: and the 
truth of the Lord remaineth 
for ever. 


Sequence as on Pentecost, page 599; but the alleluia is not 


said at the end. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


624 WHIT-SATURDAx 


Gospel. Luke 4, 38-44 


% Continuation of the holy ‘HK Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
Gospel according to St. Luke. gélii secundum Lucam. 


T THAT lime, Jesus rising N ILLO lempore: Surgens 

up out of the syna- Jesus de synagóga introi- 
gogue, went into Simon’s vit in domum Simónis, Socrus 
house: and Simon’s wife's autem Simdnis  tenebátur 
mother was taken with a great magnis fébribus: et rogavé- 
fever, and they besought Him runt illum pro ea. Et stans 
for her. And standing over her, super illam, imperávit febri: 
He commanded the fever, and et dimísit illam. Et continuo 
it left her: and, immediately surgens,  ministrábat illis. 
rising, she ministered to them. Cum autem sol occidísset, 
And when the sun was down, omnes, qui habébant infirmos 
all they that had any sick with váriis languóribus, ducébant 
divers diseases, brought them illos ad eum. At ille síngulis 
to Him: but He laying His manus impónens, curábat eos. 
hands on every one of them, Exíbant autem dzemónia a 
healed them. And devils went multis clamántia, et dicéntia: 
out from many, crying out, Quia tu es Filius Dei: et in- 
and saying, Thou art the Son crepans non sinébat ea loqui, 
of God. And rebuking them, quia sciébant ipsum esse 
He suffered them not to speak, Christum. Facta autem .die 
for they knew that He was egréssus ibat in desértum lo- 
Christ. And when it was day, cum, et turbe requirébant 
going out He went. into & eum, et venérunt usque ad ip- 
desert place; and the multi- sum: et detinébant illum ne 
tudes sought Him, and came discéderet ab eis. Quibus ille 
unto Him; and they stayed aft: Quia et áliis civitatibus 
Him that He should not depart opórtet me evangelizáre reg- 
from them. To whom He said, num Dei: quia ideo missus 
To other cities also I must sum. Et erat praedicans in 
preach the kingdom of God, for synagógis Galilex. 
therefore am I sent. And He 
was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee, 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 87, 2, 3 
O Lord, the God of my sal- Dómine, Deus salütis mes, 
vation, I have cried in the day in die clamávi, et nocte co- 
and in the night before Thee: ram te: intret orátio mea in 
let my prayer come in before conspéctu tuo, Dómine, alles 
Thee, O Lord, alleluia. laja. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
HAT our fasts may be ac- ACCEPTA tibi sint, Démi- 
cepted by Thee, O Lord, ne, nostra jejania: pre- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WHIT-SATURDAY 625 


sta. nobis qusesumus, hujus grant us, we beseech Thee, by 
mürjere -sacraménti purificá- the grace of this sacrament, to 
tum tibi pectis: -offérre. Per offer. Thee. @ ‘clean heart. 
Déminum. ‘, Through our Lord. 

Second: Secret for the Church, page. 825; « or. -Jor the ‘Pope, 
page $26. ^ R pe 

Preface No. 7, page 809... 


Communion. John 3, 8 


Spiritus ubi vult spirat: et The spirit breatheth where 
vocem ejus audis, allelüja, al- He will: and Thou hearest His 
Jelája; sed nescis unde vé-' voice, alleluia, alleluia: but 
niat, aut quo vadat, allelija, Thou knowest not whence He 
allelája, allelüja. . cometh, nor whither He goeth, 

:  allelüla, alleluia, alleluia. 


Postcommunion 
REBEANT nobis, Dómine, ay Thy holy things, o 
; divínum tua sancta fer- Lord, fill us with divine 


vórem: quo eórum páriter et fervor, so that we may have 
actu delectémur, et fructu. pleasure ` alike :in their per- 
Per. Dóminum. ; formance and in their effect. 
Through our Lord. 
Second Postcommunion for the Church, page 825; or for the 
Pope, page 826. 
With the principal Mass of this day the Paschal time ends. 


The time for the Easter Duty performance ends on Trinity 
Sunday. A 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Copyright. by Beruiger Brothers 


‘Trinity Sunday (White) 
Double of the First Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Tob. 12,6 


LESSED be the holy Trin- 
ity,and undivided Unity: 
we will give glory to Him, be- 
cause He hath shown His 
mercy to us. Ps. 8, 2. O Lord our 
Lord, how wonderful is Thy 
name in all the earth. y. 
Glory. : 


ENEDÍCTA sit sancta Tri- 
B nitas, atque indivisa 
únitas: confitébimur ei, quia 
fecit nobíscum misericórdiam 
suam. Ps. 8, 2. Dómine Dó- 
minus noster, quam admirá- 
bile est nomen tuum in uni- 
vérsa terra. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

by Whose gift Thy ser- 
vants, in the confession of the 
true faith, acknowledge the 
glory of the eternal Trinity, 
and adore the Unity in the 
power of His majesty, we be- 
seech Thee that in the firm- 
ness of the same faith we may 
ever be defended from all ad- 
versities. Through our Lord. . 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 
Deus, qui dedísti fámu- 
lis tuis in confessióne vere fi- 
dei, etérne Trinitátis glóriam 
agnóscere, et in poténtia ma- 
jestátis adoráre  unitátem: 
quesumus; ut ejüsdem fidei 
firmitáte, ab ómnibus semper 
muniámur advérsis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Commemoration of ihe first. Sunday after Pentecost as fol- 


Prayer 


ws: 
O cop, the strength of them 

that hope in Thee, gra- 
clously be present with us 
when we invoke Thee, and, be- 
cause mortal infirmity can do 
nothing without 'Thee, grant 
us the assistance of Thy grace 


EUS, in te sperántium 

fortitüdo, adésto pro- 
pítius invocatiónibus nostris: 
et quia sine te nihil potest 
mortális infírmitas, presta 
auxilium grátie tue; ut in 
exsequéndis mandátis tuis, et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TRINITY SUNDAY 


voluntáte tibi et actióne pla- 
ceámus, Per Dóminum. 


627 


that, in executing Thy .com- 
mands, we may be pleasing to 
Thee both in our desires and 
in our deeds. Through our 
Lord. 


Epistle. Rom. 11, 33.36 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apostoli ad Romános. 


ALTITÜDO divitiárum sa- 

piéntie et sciéntis Dei: 
quam incomprehensibflia sunt 
judicia ejus, et investigábiles 
vie ejus! Quis enim cognóvit 
sensum Domini? Aut quis 
consiliárius ejus fuit? Autquis 


prior dedit illi, et retribuétur - 


ei? Quóniam ex ipso, et per 
ipsum, et in ipso sunt ómnia: 
ipsi glória in secula. Amen. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Aposile to the 
Romans. 


O THE depth of the riches 
of the wisdom and of the 
knowledge of God! How in- 
comprehensible are His judg- 
ments, and how unsearchable 
His ways! For who hath known 
the mind of the Lord? Or who 
hath been His counsellor? Or 
who hath first given to Him, 
and recompense shall be made 
Him? For of Him, and by Him, 
and in Him, are all things: to 
Him be. glory for ever, Amen. 


Gradual. Dan. 3, 55, 56 


Benedictus es, Dómine, 
qui  intuéris abyssos, et 
sedes super Chérubim. Y. 
Benedíctus es, Dómine, in fir- 
maménto cali, et laudábilis in 
Stecula. Allelüja, allelüja. y. 
Benedíctus es, Dómine, Deus 
patrum nostrórum, et laudá- 
bilis in secula. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 765. 


Blessed art Thou, O Lord, 
Who beholdest the depths, and 
sittest upon the cherubim. y. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, in 
ihe firmament of heaven, and 
worthy of praise for ever. Al- 
leluia, alleluia. Y. Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord God of our 
fathers, and worthy of praise 
for ever. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 28, 18-20. 


E Sequéntia . sancti Evan- 
e secindum Mattheum. -.- 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus discipulis suis: Data 
est mihi omnis potéstas in 
celo, et in terra. Eüntes ergo 
‘docéte omnes gentes, ‘baptiz- 
ántes eos in nómine Patris, et 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to. St. Mats 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus said 
to His disciples, All 
power is given to Me. in heaven 
and in earth, Going, therefore, 
teach. all nations, baptizing 
them in the name of. the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


628 


Father, and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost. Teaching 
them to observe all things 
whatsoever I have commanded 
you; and behold I am with you 
all days, even to the consum- 
mation of the world. 


Creed, page 765. 


TRINITY SUNDAY 


Filii, et Spíritus Sancti: do- 
céntes €0S serváre ómnia que- 
cümque mandávi vobis. Et 
ecce ego vobíscum sum ómni- 
bus diébus, usque ad consum- 
matiónem seculi. 


Offertory. ` Tob. 12, 6. 


Blessed be God the Father, 
and the only-begotten Son of 
God, and also the Holy Spirit; 
because He hath shown His 
mercy toward us. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Benedíctus sit Deus Pater, 
unigenitüsque Dei . Filius, 
Sanctus quoque Spiritus: quia 
fecit nobiscum misericérdiam 
suam. 


Secret 


T THE invocation of Thy 
holy name, O Lord, our 
God, sanctify, we. beseech 
Thee, the matter of this obla- 
tion, and through it make us 
ourselves a perfect offering 
forever. Through our Lord. 


ANCTÍFICA, quesumus, Dó- 

mine Deus noster, per 
tui sancti nóminis invocatió- 
nem, hujus oblatiónis hósti- 
am: et per eam nosmetípsos 
tibi pérfice munus etérnum. 
Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of the Sunday as follows: 


Secret 

E PLEASED, We beseech ÓsTIAs nostras, quesu- 

Thee, O Lord, to accept mus, Dómine, tibi dicá- 
the offerings dedicated to tas placátus assüme; et, ad 


Thee, and grant that they may 
profit us for perpetual help. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. 


We bless the God of heaven, 
and before all living we will 
praise Him; because He has 
shown His mercy to us. 


perpétuum nobis tríbue pro- 
veníre subsidium. Per Dómi- 
num. . 


Tob. 12, 6 

Benedicimus Deum czli, et 
coram ómnibus  vivéntibus 
confitébimur ei: quia fecit 


nobíscum misericórdiam suam. 


Postcommunion 


sacrament, O-Lord, our 
God, and the confession of our 
faith in the eternal, holy 


(D the receiving of this 


ROFÍCIAT nobis ad salu- 
tem corporis et anime, 
Démine Deus noster, hujus 
sacraménti suscéptio: et sem- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


f 


TRINITY SUNDAY 


pliérne  sanote  Trinitátis, 
ejusdémque individue unitá- 
tis conféssio, Per Dóminum. 


629 


Trinity and undivided Unity, 
profit us for the health of body 
and soul, Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the Sunday as follows: 


Postcommunion 


ANTIs, Dómine, repléti 
TIT munéribus: presta, que- 
Sumus; ut et salutária dona 
capiámus, et a tua numquam 
laude cessémus. Per Dómi- 
num. 


ILLED with so great offer- 

ings, O Lord, we beseech 
Thee to grant that we may both 
lay hold upon Thy salutary 
gifts and never cease from 
praising Thee. Through our 
Lord. 


At the end of Mass the Gospel of the Sunday is read in place 
of that from the first chapter of St. John. 


Gospel. Luke 6, 36-42 


"8 Sequéntia sancti Evangé- 
lii secindum Lucam. 
'N ILLO témpore, dixit Jesus 
discípulis suis:  Estóte 
misericórdes, sicut et Pater 
vester miséricors est. Nolite 
judicáre, et non judicabimini: 
nolite condemnáre, et non 
condemnabimini. Dimittite et 
dimittémini. Date, et dabitur 
vobis: mensüram bonam, et 
confértam, et, coagitátam, et 
supereffluéntem dabunt in si- 
num vestrum. Eádem quippe 
mensüra, qua mensi fuéritis, 
remetiétur vobis. Dicébat au- 
tem ilis et similitüdinem: 
Numquid potest egcus cecum 
dücere? nonne ambo in fóve- 
am cadunt? Non est discípu- 
lis super magistrum: . perféc- 
tus autem omnis erit, si sit 
sicut magister ejus. Quid au- 
tem vides festicam in óculo 
fratris tui, trabem autem, 
qua in óculo tuo est, non con- 
sideras? Aut quómodo potes 
dícere fratri tuo: Frater, sine, 
ejiclam :festücam de óculo 
tuo: ipse in óculo tuo trabem 
Anon yidens?. Hypócrita, éjice 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus said 
to His disciples, Be ye 
merciful, as your Father also 
is merciful. Judge not, and you 
shall not be judged. Condemn 
not, and you shall not be con- 
demned. Forgive, and you shall 
be forgiven. Give, and it shall 
be given to you: good measure 
and pressed down, and shaken 
together and running over, 
shall be given into your bosom. 
For with the same measure 
that you shall mete withal it 
shall be measured to you 
again. And He spoke also to 
them a similitude: Can the 
blind lead the blind? do they 
not both fall into the ditch? 
The disciple is not above his 
master; but every one shall be 
perfect, if he be as his master. 
And why seest thou the mote in 
thy brother’s eye, but the beam 
thet is. in thy own eye thou 
considerest not? or how canst 
thou say to thy brother, 
Brother, let me pull the mote 
out of thy eye, when thou thy- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


630 FIRST SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 

self seest not the beam in thy primum trabem de óculo tuo: 
own eye? Hypocrite, cast first et tunc perspicies, ut edücas 
the beam out of thy own eye, festücam de óculo fratris tui. 


and then shalt thou see clearly 
to take out the mote from thy 
brother's eye. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


First Sundap after Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 12, 6 


LORD, I have trusted in 

Thy mercy. My heart 
shall rejoice in Thy salvation; 
I will sing to the Lord, Who 
giveth me good things. Y. Ps. 
12, 1, How long, O Lord, wilt 
Thou forget me unto the end? 
how long dost Thou turn away 
Thy face from me? Yy. Glory. 


ÓMINE, in tua misericór- 

dia sperávi: exsultávit 

cor meum in salutári tuo: 

cantábo Dómino, qui bona trí- 

buit mihi. Y. Ps. 12, 1. Usque- 

quo, Dómine, oblivisceris me 

in finem? usquequo avértis 

fáciem tuam a me? V. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
' Prayer 


On this, and. on all other Sundays, until Advent, on which 
the Mass of the Sunday is celebrated, two other Prayers, 
Secrets and Postcommunions at least are said, unless com- 
memorations of occurring saints’ days, or octaves, have to be 


made. The 


the second one at the choice o, 


1494-1500. 


first A cunctis (“Defend us," etc.), page 827; and 


the celebrating priest, pages 


Epistle. 1 John 4, 8-21 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed John the Apostle. 
EARLY beloved, God is 
charity. By this hath the 
charity of God appeared 
toward us, because God hath 
sent His only-begotten Son 
into the world, that we may 
live by Him. In this is charity; 
not as though we had loved 
God, but because He hath first 
loved us, and sent His Son to 
be a propitiation for our sins. 
My dearest, if God hath so 
loved us, we also ought to love 
one another. No man hath 


Léctio Epistole beáti Joán- 
nis Apostoli. 
AníÍssmMI: Deus cáritas 
est. In hoc appáruit cá- 
ritas Dei in nobis, quóniam 
Filium suum unigénitum mi- 
sit Deus in mundum, ut vivá- 
mus per eum. In hoc est cári- 
tas: non quasi nos dilexéri- 
mus Deum, sed quóniam ipse 
prior diléxit nos, et misit Fí- 
Hum suum propitiatiónem 
pro peecátis nostris, Caríssi- 
mi, si sic Deus diléxit nos: et 
nos debémus altérutrum dili- 
gere. Deum nemo yidit um- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIRST SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


quam, Si diligámus ínvicem, 
Deus in nobis manet et cári- 
tas ejus in nobis perfécta est. 
In hoc cognóscimus, quóniam 
in eo manémus, et ipse in no- 
bis: quóniam de Spíritu suo 
dedit nobis, Et nos vídimus, et 
testificátur, quóniam Pater 
misit Fílium suum Salvató- 
rem mundi. Quisquis confés- 
sus füerit, quóniam Jesus est 
Fílius Dei, Deus in eo manet, 
et ipse in Deo. Et nos cognóvi- 
mus, et credídimus caritáti, 
quam habet Deus in nobis. 
Deus cáritas est: et qui ma- 
net in caritáte, in Deo manet, 
et Deus in eo. In hoc perfécta 
est cáritas Dei nobíscum, ut 
fidiiciam habeámus in die ju- 
dicii: quia sicut ille est, et nos 
sumus in hoc mundo. Timor 
non est in caritáte: sed per- 
fécta cáritas foras mittit ti- 
mórem, quóniam timor pe- 
nam habet. Qui autem timet, 
non est perféctus in caritáte. 
Nos ergo diligamus Deum, 
quóniam Deus prior diléxit 
nos. Se quis dixerit, quo- 
niam díligo Deum, et fra- 
trem suum óderit, mendax est. 
Qui enim. non díliget fratrem 
suum quem videt, Deum,quem 
non videt, quómodo potest 
diligere? Et hoc mandátum 
habémus a Deo: ut qui diligit 
Deum, díligat etfratrem suum. 


Gradual. 


Ego dixi: Dómine, miserére 
mei: sana ánimam meam, 
quia peccávi tibi. Y. Beátus 
qui intélligit super egénum et 
pauperem: in die mala libe- 
rábit eum Dóminus. Allelija, 
allelija. Y. Ps. 5, 2. Verba mea 
auribus péreipe, Dómine: in- 


631 


Seen God at any time. If we 
love one another, God abideth 
in us, and His charity is per- 
fected in us. In this we know 
that we abide in Him, and He 
in us; because He hath given 
us of His spirit, And we have 
Seen, and do testify, that the 
Father hath sent His Son to be 
the Saviour of the World. 
Whosoever shall confess that 
Jesus is the Son of God, God 
abideth in Him, and he in 
God. And we have known, and 
have believed the charity which 
God hath to us. God is charity: 
and he that abideth in charity 
abideth in God, and God in 
him. In this is the charity of 
God perfected with us, that we 
may have confidence in the 
day of judgment: because, as 
He is, we also are in the world, 
Fear is not in charity, but per- 
fect charity casteth out fear: 
because fear hath pain; and 
he that feareth is not perfected 
in charity. Let us therefore 
love God, because God first 
hath loved us. If any man say, 
I love God, and hateth his 
brother, he is a liar. For he 
that loveth not his brother 
whom he seeth, how can he 
love God, Whom he seeth not? 
And this commandment we 
have from God, that he who 
loveth God love also his neigh- 
bor. 


Ps. 40, 5, 2 

Isaid: O Lord, be Thou mer- 
ciful to me: heal my soul, for 
I have sinned against Thee. V. 
Blessed is he that understand- 
eth concerning the needy and 
the poor: the Lord will deliver 
him in the evil day. Alleluia, 
alleluia. Y. Ps. 5, 2. Give ear, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


983 


O Lord, to my Words; under- 
stand my cry. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


FIRST SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


télige clamórem meum. Alle- 
lája. 


Gospel. Luke 6, 36-42 


9 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time Jesus said 

to His disciples: Be ye 
therefore merciful, as your 
Father also is merciful. Judge 
not and you shall not be 
judged. Condemn not, and you 
shall not be condemned. For- 
give, and you shall be forgiven. 
Give, and it shall be given to 
you: good measure and pressed 
down and shaken together and 
running over shall they give 
into your bosom. For with the 
Same measure that you shall 
mete withal, it shall be meas- 
ured to you again. And He 
spoke to them a similitude: 
Can the blind lead the blind? 
do they not both fall into the 
ditch? The disciples is not 
above his master: but every 
one shall be perfect if he be as 
his master. And why seest 
thou the mote in thy brother’s 
eye: but the beam that is in thy 
own eye thou considerest not? 
Or how canst thou say to thy 
brother: Brother, let me pull 
the mote out of thy eye, when 
thou thyself seest not the beam 
in thy own eye? Hypocrite, cast 
first the beam out of thy own 
eye; and then shalt thou see 
clearly to take out the mote 
from thy brother’s eye. 


Creed, page 765. 


%& Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gelil secándum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus discipulis suis: Estóte 
misericórdes, sicut et Pater 
vester miséricors est. Noiíte 
judicáre, et non judicabimi- 
ni: nolíte condemnáre, et non 
condemnabímini. Dimíttite, et 
dimittémini. Date, et dábi- 
tur vobis: mensüram bo- 
nam, et confértam, et coagi- 
tátem, et superffluéntem da- 
bunt in sinum vestrum. 
Eádem quippe mensüra, qua 
mensi  fuéritis, remetiétur 
vobis. Dicébat autem illis 
et similitidinem: Numquid 
potest cecus cecum dú- 
cere? nonne ambo in fóveam 
cadunt? Non est discípulus 
super magístrum: perféctus 
autem omnis erit, si sit sicut 
magíster ejus. Quid autem 
vídes festücam in óculo frat- 
ris tui, trabem autem, que in 
óculo tuo est, non consideras? 
^at quómodo potes, dícere 
iratri tuo: Frater, sine, ejic- 
iam festücam de óculo tuo: 
ipse in óculo tuo trabem non 
videns? Hypócrita, éjice pri- 
mum trabem de óculo tuo; et 
tunc, perspicies ut edücas fes- 
tücam de óculo fratris tui. 


Offertory. Ps.5,3,4 


Harken to the voice of my 
prayer, O my king and my 


Inténde voci oratiónis meg, 
Rex meus, et Deus meus: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIRST SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 633 


quóniam .ad te orábo, Dó- God: for to Thee will I pray, O 
mine. Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


. | Secret 


Secret, Be pleased, we beseech Thee, page 628. 
Second Secret, Gr&ciously hear us; page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 6 . 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Ps. 9 
Narrábo ómnia mirabilia I will relate all Thy wonders, 
tua: letabor et exsultábo in I will be glad and rejoice in 
te: psallam nómini tuo, Al- Thee; I will sing to Thy name, 
tíssime. O Thou most high. 


Postcommunion 


Postcommunion, Filed with so great offerings, page 628. 
Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 825; third at 
choice of priest, pages 1494-1500. f 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


634 CORPUS CHRISTI 


Copyright, 1956, by Benziger Brothers 


For MY FLESH IS MEAT INDEED: AND MY BLOOD IS DRINK INDEED. 
He THAT EATETH MY FLESH AND DRINKETH MY BLOOD ABIDETH IN 
ME: AND I IN HIM. AS THE LIVING FATHER HATH SENT ME AND 
I LIVE BY THE FATHER: SO HE THAT EATETH ME, THE SAME SHALL 
LIVE BY ME. (John 6, 56-59.) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


CORPUS CHRISTI 


635 


Feast of Corpus Christi (White) 


Double of the First Class with a Privileged Octave 
of the Second Order 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


IBAVIT eos ex ádipe fru- 

ménti, allelija: et de 

. petra, melle saturávit eos, 

allelája, allelüja, allelüja. Ps. 

80, 2. Exsutáte Deo adjutóri 

nostro: jubiláte Deo Jacob. 
Y. Gloria Patri, 


Ps. 80, 17 


E FED them with the fat 

of wheat, alleluia; and 
filled them with honey out of 
ihe rock, alleluia, alleluia, alle- 
luia. Ps. 80, 2. Rejoice to God 
our helper; sing aloud to the 
God of Jacob. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui nobis sub Sac- 

raménto mirábili pas- 
siónis tue memóriam reli- 
quisti: tríbue, quesumus, ita 
nos córporis et sánguinis tui 
sacra mystéria venerári: ut 
redemptiónis tuse fructum in 
nobis jügiter sentiámus: Qui 
vivis. 


Gop, Who in this wonder- 

ful sacrament hast left 
us a memorial of Thy passion, 
grant us, we beseech 'Thee, so 
to venerate the sacred mys- 
teries of Thy body and blood 
that we may constantly expe- 
rience in ourselves the fruit of 
Thy redemption. Who livest. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 11, 23-29 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pawi 
Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Ego enim accépi 

a Dómino quod et 
trádidi vobis, quóniam Dó- 
minus Jesus in qua nocte 
tradebátur, accépit panem, et 
grátias agens fregit, et dixit: 
Accípite, et manducate: hoc 
est corpus meum, quod pro 
vobis tradétur: hoc fácite in 
meam commemoratiónem. 
Simíliter et cálicem, post- 
quam cenavit, dicens: Hic 
calix novum testaméntum est 
in meo sánguine. Hoc facite, 
quotiescimque bibétis, in 
meam commemoratiónem. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, I have received 
B of the Lord, that which 
also I delivered to you, that 
the Lord Jesus, the same night 
in which He was betrayed, took 
bread, and giving thanks, 
broke, and said, Take ye and 
eat; this is My body which 
shall be delivered for you; this 
do for the commemoration of 
Me. In like manner also the 
chalice, after He had supped, 
saying, This chalice is the new 
testament in My blood; this do 
ye, as often as you shall drink, 
for the commemoration of Me. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


636 


For as often as you shall eat 
this bread, and drink this 
chalice, you Shall show the 
death of the Lord until He 
come. Therefore whosoever 
shall eat this bread, or drink 
of the chalice of the -Lord un- 
worthily, shall be guilty of the 
body and of the blood of the 
Lord. But let a man prove him- 
self; and so Jet him eat of that 
bread, and drink of the chalice. 
For he that eateth and drink- 
eth unworthily, eateth and 
drinketh judgment to himself, 
not discerning the body of the 
Lord. 


Gradual. Ps. 


The eyes of all hope in Thee, 
O Lord, and Thou givest them 
meat in due season. Y. Thou 
openest Thy hand, and fillest 
every living creature with Thy 
blessing. Alleluia, alleluia. yY. 
John 6, 56, 57. My flesh is meat 
indeed, and My blood is drink 
indeed: He that eateth My 
flesh and drinketh My blood, 
abideth in Me, and I in him. 


CORPUS CHRISTI 


Quotiescimque enim man- 
ducdbitis panem hunc, et 
calicens bibétis, mortem Dó- 
mini. annuntidbitis, donec 
véniat. Itaque  quicümque 
manducaverit panem hunc, 
vel biberit cálicem Dómini in- 
digne, reus erit córporis et 
sánguinis Dómini. Probet au- 
tem seipsum.homo: et sic de 
pane illo edat, et de cálice 
bibat. Qui enim mandücat et 
bibit indigne, judícium sibi 
mandücat, et bibit: non di- 
jüdicans corpus Dómini. 


144, 15, 16 


Oculi ómnium in te sper- 
ant, Dómine: et tu das illis 
escam in témpore oppórtuno. 
¥. Aperis tu manum tuam: 
et imples omne ánimal bene- 
dictióne. Allelája, allelüja. V. 
Joann, 6, 56, 57. Caro mea 
vere est cibus, et sanguis me- 
us vere est potus: qui man- 
dacat meam carnem, et bibit 
meum  sánguinem, in me 
manet, et ego in eo, 


Sequence 


O Sion, thy Redeemer praising, 

Songs of joy to Him upraising, 

Laud thy pastor and thy guide: 

Swell thy notes most high and 
daring; 

For His praise is past declaring, 

And thy loftiest powers beside. 


"Tis a theme with praise that 
gloweth, 

For the bread that life bestow- 
eth 


Lauda, Sion Salvatórem, 

Lauda ducem et pastórem 

In hymnis et canticis. 

Quantum potes tantum 
aude: 

Quia major omni laude, 

Nec laudáre süfficis. 


Laudus thema speciális, 


Panis vivus ei vitális 


http://ccwatershed.org 


CORPUS CHRISTI 


Hódie propónitur. 
Quem in sacre mensa cene, 
Turbe fratrum duodéne 


Datum non ambigitur. 


Sit laus plena, sit sonóra, 
Sit jucünda, sit decóra 
Mentis jubilátio. 


Dies enim solémnis ágitur, 
In qua mense prima recólitur 
Hujus institütio. 


In hac mensa novi Regis, 
Novum Pascha nove legis 
Pbase vetus términat. 
Vetustátem nóvitas, 


Umbram fugat véritas, 


Noctem lux elíminat. 


Quod in cena Christus gessit, 
Faciéndum hoc expréssit 

In sui memóriam. 

Docti sacris institütis, 
Panem, vinum in salütis 


Consecrámus hóstiam. 


Dogma datur Christiánis: 


Quod in carnem transit panis, 

Et vinum in sánguinem. 

Quod non capis, quod non 
vides, 

Animósa firmat fides, 


Preter rerum órdinem. 


Sub divérsis speciébus, 
Signis tantum, et non rebus, 


637 


Goes this day before us out; 

Which, His holy supper taking, 

To the brethren twelve His 
breaking 

None hath ever called in doubt. 


Ful, then, be our praise and 
sounding, 

Modest and with joy abound- 

. ing 

Be our mind's triumphant 
state; 

For the festal’s prosecution, . 

When the first blest institution 

Of this feast we celebrate. 


In the new king's new libation, 

In the new law's new oblation, 

Ends the ancient paschal rite; 

Ancient forms new substance 
chaseth, 

Typic shadows truth displac- 
eth, 

Day dispels the gloom of night. 


What He did at supper seated, 

Christ enjoined to be repeated, 

When His love we celebrate: 

Thus, obeying His dictation, 

Blood and wine of our salva- 
tion, 

We the victim consecrate. 


"Tis for Christian faith assert- 
ed, 

Bread is into flesh converted, 

Into blood the holy wine: 

Sight and intellect transcend- 
ing, 

Nature’s laws to marvel bend- 


ing, : 
"Tis confirmed by faith divine. 
Under either kind remaining, 


Form, not substance, still re- 
taining. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


638 

Wondrous things our spirit 
sees: 

Flesh and blood thy palate 
staining, 

Yet still Christ entire remain- 
ing, 


Under either species. 


All untorn for eating given, 

Undivided and unriven, 

Whole He’s taken and unrent; 

Be there one, or crowds sur- 
rounding, 

He is equally abounding, 

Nor, though eaten, ever spent. 


Both to good and bad ’tis 
broken, 

But on each a different token 

Or of life, or death attends: 

Life to.good, to bad damnation; 

Lo, of one same manducation 

How dissimilar the ends. 


When the priest the victim 
breaketh, 

See thy faith in nowise shak- 
eth, 

Know that every fragment tak- 
eth 

All that 'neath the whole there 
lies: 

This in Him no fracture mak- 
eth: 

"Tis the figure only breaketh, 

Form, or state, no change there 
taketh 

Place in what it signifies. 


Bread, that angels eat in 

. heaven, 

Now becomes the pilgrim’s 
leaven, 

Bread in truth to children 
given, 

That must ne’er to dogs be 
"thrown. 

He, in ancient types disguised, 

Was the Isaac sacrificed, 


CORPUS CHRISTI 


Latent res eximiz. 

Caro cibus, sanguis potus: 

Manet tamen Christus totus, 

Sub utráque spécie. i 
A suménte non concísus, 

Non confráctus, non divísus: 
Integer accípitur. 

Sumit unus, sumunt mille: 


Quantum isti, tantum ille: 
Nec sumptus consümitur. 


Sumunt boni, sumunt mali: 
Sorte tamen insequáli, 

Vite, vel intéritus. 

Mors est malis, vita bonis: 
Vide paris sumptiónis 
Quam sit dispar éxitus. 
Fracto demum Sacraménto, wl 
Ne vacílles, sed meménto, 


Tantum. esse sub fragménto, 


i... 


Quantum toto tégitur. i 
Nulla rei fit scissüra: 


Signi tantum fit fractüra: 
Qua nec status, nec statura, 


Signáti minüitur. 

Ecce panis Angelórum, 
Factus cibus viatórum: 
Vere panis filiórum, 
Non mitténdus cánibus. 


In figüris presignátur, 
Cum Isaac immolátur: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


CORPUS CHRISTI 


Agnus pasche depuiatur: 
Datur manna pátribus. 


Bone pastor, panis vere, 
Jesu, nostri miserére: 
Tu nos pasce, nos tuére: 
Tu nos bona fac vidére 


In terra vivéntium. 
Tu, qui cuncta scis et vales: 


Qui nos pascis hic mortáles: 
Tuos ibi commensáles, 


Coherédes et sodáles 
Fac sanctórum cívium. 
Amen. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


639 


For the feast a lamb devised, 
Manna to the Fathers shown. 


Bread, whose shepherd-care 
doth tend us, 

Jesu Christ, Thy mercy send 
us, 

Do Thou feed us, Thou defend 
us, 

Lead us where true joys attend 
us, ` 

In the land where life is given: 

Thou all ken and might pos- 
sessing, 

Mercies aye to us largessing, 

Make us share Thy cup of 
blessing, 

Heritage and love’s caressing 

With the denizens of heaven. 

Amen. Aleluia. 


Gospel. John 6, 56-59 


"RW Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Joánnem, 


I. ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus turbis Judeórum: 
Caro mea vere est cibus, et 
sanguis meus vere est potus. 
Qui mandücat meam carnem, 
et bibit meum sánguinem, in 
me manet, et ego in illo. Sicut 
misit me vivens Pater, et ego 
vivo propter Patrem: et qui 
mandücat me, et ipse vivet 
propter me. Hic est panis, qui 
de celo descéndit. Non sicut 
manducavérunt patres vestri 
manna, et mórtui sunt. Qui 
mandücat hunc panem, vi- 
vet in etérnum. 


Creed, Page 765. 


Offertory. 


Sacerdótes Dómini incen- 
sum et panes ófferunt Deo: et 


TÉ Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, Jesus said 

to the multitudes of 
the Jews: My flesh is meat in- 
deed, and My blood is drink 
indeed. He that eateth My 
flesh, and drinketh My blood, 
abideth in Me, and I in him. 
As the living Father hath sent 
Me, and I live by the Father, 
so he that eateth Me, the same 
also shall live by Me. This is 
the bread that came down 
from heaven. Not as your 
fathers did eat manna and are 
dead. He that eateth this 
bread shall live for ever. 


Lev. 21, 6 


The priests of the Lord offer 
incense and loaves to God, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


640 


therefore they shall be holy to 
their God, and shall not defile 
His name. Alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


CORPUS CHRISTI 


ideo sancti erunt Deo suo, et 
non póluent nomen ejus, 
alleluja. 


Secret 


F THY goodness, we be- 

Seech Thee, O Lord, 
grant to Thy Church the gifts 
of unity and peace which are 
mystically represented under 
the gifts we offer. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface No. 1, page 798. 


Communion. 


As often as you shall eat this 
bread, and drink the chalice, 
you shall show forth the death 
of the Lord, until He come; 
therefore whosoever shall eat 
this bread or drink the chalice 
of the Lord unworthily, shail 
be guilty of the body and blood 
of the Lord. Alleluia, 


CCLESIZ iue, quaesumus, 
Dómine, unitátis et 
pacis propítius dona concéde: 
que sub oblátis munéribus 
mystice designántur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


1 Cor. 11, 26, 27 


Quotiescimque manducá- 
bitis panem hunc, et cálicem 
bibétis, mortem Dómini an- 
nuntiábitis, donec  véniat: 
itaque quicumque manducá- 
verit panem, vel bíberit cáli- 
cem Dómini indígne, reus erit 
córporis et sánguinis. Dó- 
mini, allelája. 


Postcommunion 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, to be filled with 

the everlasting enjoyment of 

Thy divinity, which the tem- 

poral partaking of Thy pre- 

cious body and blood doth fore- 
show. Who livest. 


AC nos, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, divinitátis tue 
sempitérna fruitióne repléri: 
quam  pretiósi córporis et 


sánguinis tui  temporális, 
perceptio  praefigürat. Qui 
vives. 


On days within this octave the Mass of Corpus Christi will 
be celebrated and if no other feast occurs the second Prayer is 
Concede nos, page 824; with its corresponding Secret and 
Postcommunion and ihe third for the Church or for Pope, 
pages 825, 826. If there is a feast occurring, à commemoration 
of the same only is made. But if the occurring feast be a double 
of the first class, the Mass of that feast will be celebrated with 
the second Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion of the Mass of 
Corpus Christi. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SUNDAY WITHIN OCTAVE OF CORPUS CHRISTI 64i 
Sunday Within the Octave of Corpus Christi white, 


Which is the Second after Pentecost 
_. The Beginning of Mass, page 756. : 


Introit. 


ACTUS est Dóminus pro- 

téctor meus, et edüxit 
me in latitüdinem: sajvum 
me facit, quóniam vóluit me. 
Ps. 17, 2-3. Diligam te, Dó- 
mine, virtus mea: "Dóminus 
refügium meum, et liberátor 
meus. y. Glória Patri. 


Ps. 17, 19, 20 


HE Lord became my pro- 

tector, and He brought 
me forth into a large place: 
He saved me, because He was 
well pleased with me. Ps. 17, 
2, 3. I will iove Thee, O Lord 
my strength: the Lord is my 
firmament, and my refuge, and 
my deliverer, FK. Glu. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ANCTI nóminis tui, Dó- 
mine, timórem páriter 


*et amórem fac nos habére 


erpétuum: quia nunquam 


ytua gubernatióne  destítuis, 


quos in solicitáte tue dilec- 
tiónis instítuis. Per Dómin- 
um. i 


e. 


RANT us, O Lord, an abid- 

ing fear and love of Thy 

holy name; for Thou never 

failest to govern those whom 

Thou dost firmly establish in 
Thy love. Through our Lord. 


OH MORIMON of the octave of Corpus Christi, Prayer, page 


Epistle. 1 John 3, 13-18 


Léctio Epistole beáti Jo- 
énnis Apóstoli. 


: err? Nolíte mirári, 


si odit vos muundus. Nos 
Scimus, quóniam  transláti 
sumus de morte ad vitam, 
quóniam diligimus fratres. 
Qui non diligit, manet in 
morte: omnis, qui odit frat- 
rem suum, homicida est. Et 
scitis quóniam omnis homi- 
cida non habet vitam etér- 
nam in semetípso manéntem. 
In hoc cognévimus caritátem 
Dei, quóniam ille ánimam su- 
am pro nobis pósuit: et nos 
debémus pro frátibus áni- 
mas pónere, Qui habüerit 
substántiam hujus mundi, et 


21 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed John the Apostle. 


EARLY beloved, Wonder 

' not if the world hate 
you. We know that we have 
passed from death to life, be- 
cause we love the brethren. He 
that loveth not, abideth in 
death. Whosoever hateth his 
brother is a murderer: and you 
know that no murderer hath 
eternal life abiding in himself. 
In this we have known the 
charity of God, because He 
hath leid down His life for us: 
and we ought to lay down our 
lives for the brethren. He that 
hath the substance of this 
world, and shall see his brother 


http://ccwatershed.org 


642 


in need, and shut up his bowels 
from him, how doth the char- 
ity of God abide in him? My 
little children, let us not love 
in word nor in tongue, but in 
deed and in truth. 


SUNDAY WITHIN OCTAVE OF CORPUS CHRISTI 


viderit fratrem, suum neces- 
sitatem habére, et cláuserit 
viscera, sua ab €o: quómodo 
cáritas Dei manet in eo? 
Filioli mei, non diligámus 
verbo, neque lingua, sed 
ópere, et veritáte. 


Gradual. Ps. 119, 1, 2 


In my trouble I cried to the 
Lord, and He heard me. V. O 
Lord, deliver my soul from 
wicked lips and a deceitful 
tongue. Alleluja, alleluia. Y. Ps. 
7, 2. O Lord my God, in Thee 
have I put my trust; save me 
from all them that persecute 
me, and deliver me. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ad Dóminum cum tribu- 
lárer clamávi, et exaudívit 
me. Y. Dómine, libera áni- 
mam meam, a lábiis iníquis, 
et a lingua dolésa. Allelija, 
allelija. V. Ps. 7, 2. Domine 
Deus meus, in te sperávi: sal- 
vum me fac ex 6mnibus per- 
sequéntibus me, et libera me. 
Allelüja. 


Gospel. Luke 14, 16-24 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus spoke 

to the pharisees this 
parable: A certain man made 
a great supper, and invited 
many. And he sent his servant, 
at the hour of supper, to say 
to them that were invited, that 
they should come, for now all 
things.are ready. And they be- 
gan all at once to make ex- 
cuse. The first said to him, 
I have bought a farm, and 
must needs go out, and see it; 
I pray thee hold me excused. 
And another said, Y have 
bought five yoke of oxen, and 
I go to try them; I pray thee 
hold me excused. And another 
said, I have married a wife, 
and therefore I cannot come. 
And the servant returning, 
told these things to his lord. 
'Then the master of the house 
being angry, said to his ser- 


HH Sequéntia sancti ui 


gélii secundum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit 

Jesus phariseis parábo- 
lam hanc: Homo quidam 
fecit cenam magnam, et vo- 
cávit multos. Et misit servum 
suum hora cene dícere in- 
vitatis ut venirent, quia jam 
parata sunt ómnia. Et cepé- 
runt simul omnes excusáre. 
Primus dixit ei: Villam emi, 
et necésse hábeo exíre, et 
vidére illam: rogo te, habe 
me excusátum. Et alter dixit: 
Juga boum emi quinque, et 
eo probáre illa:.rogo te, habe 
me excusátum. Et álius dixit: 
Uxórem duxi, et ideo non 
possum veníre. Et revérsus 
servus nuntiávit haec dómino 
suo. Tunc irátus paterfamil- 
ias, dixit servo suo: Exi cito 
in pláteas, et vicos civitátis: 
et páuperes, ac débiles, et cæ- 
cos, et claudos introduc huc. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


V 


| 


SUNDAY WITHIN OCTAVE OP CORPUS CHRISTI 643 


Et ait servus: Dómine, fac- vant, Go out quickly into the 
tum est uf imperásti, et ad- streets and lanes of the city, 
huc locus est. Et ait dóminus and bring in hither the poor, 
servo: Exi in vias, et sepes: and the feeble and the blind, 
et compélle intráre, ut im- and the lame. And the servant 
pleátur domus mea. Dico au- said, Lord, it is done as Thou 
tem vobis, quod nemo virórum hast commanded, and yet there 
ilórum, qui vocáti sunt, gus- is room. And the lord seid to 
tábit cenam meam. the servant, go out into the 
highways and hedges, and 
compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. But I 
Say unto you, that none of these men that were invited shall 
taste of my supper. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 6, 5 
Dómine,  convértere, et  'Turn to me, O Lord, and đe- 
éripe ánimam meam: salvum liver my soul, O save me for 
me fac propter misericérdiam Thy mercy's sake. 
tuam. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
BLÁTIO nos, Dómine, tuo ET the oblation about to 
nómini dicánda purífi- be offered to Thy holy 


cet: et de die in diem ad name, O Lord, purify us and 
celéstis vite tránsferat ac- day by day change us to the 
tiónem. Per Dóminum. living of the heavenly life. 
Through our Lord. 4 
Second Secret of the octave of Corpus Christi, page 640. 
Preface No. 1, page 798. 


Communion. Ps. 12 
Cantábo Dómino, qui bona T will sing to the Lord, Who 
iríbuit mihi: et psallam nó- giveth me good things: and I 
mini Dómini altisimi. . will sing to the name of the 
Lord the most high. 


Postcommunion 


UMPTIS munéribus sacris, AVING received Thy sacred 
quesumus, Dómine: ut gifts, we pray, O Lord, 
cum frequentatiéne mystérii, that, as we now frequently 
crescat nostre salütisefféctus. assist at this mystery so may 
Per Dóminum. it cause to increase the grace 
of our salvation. Through our 

Lord. 


P nudis Postcommunion of the octave of Corpus Christi, page 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


844 i SACRED HEART OF JESUS 


, by Benziger Brothe: 


THE LORD IS SWEET AND RIGHTEOUS, THEREFORE HE WILL GIVE A 

LAW TO SINNERS IN THE WAY. HE WILL GUIDE THE MILD IN JUDG- 

, HE WILL TEACH THE MEEK HIS WAYS. (Ps. 24, 8,9.) ‘TAKE 

UP MY YOKE UPON YOU AND LEARN OF ME, BECAUSE I AM MEEK 

AND HUMBLE OF HEART, AND YOU SHALL FIND REST TO YOUR SOULS. 
(Matt. 11, 29.) i 


SACRED HEART OF JESUS 


645 


Friday after the Ortave-Dap of Corpus Christi 
Feast of the Sacred Beart of Jesus (White) 


Double of the First Class with a Privileged Octave 
i of the Third Rank 


` The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 32, 11, 19 


4 N ocIraTIónes cordis ejus in 

generatióneetgeneratió- 
‘nem: ut éruat a morte ánimas 
eórum et alat eos in fame Ps. 
32, 1. Exsultáte, justi, in Dó- 
mino, rectos decet collau- 
dátio. Y. Glória Patri. 


HE thoughts of his heart 

to all generations: to de- 

ver their souls from death and 

feed them in famine, Ps. 32, 1. 

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye just, 

praise becometh the upright. Y. 
Glory. : 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


rus qui nobis in Corde 

Fílii tui, nostris vul- 
neráto ^ peccátis,  infinítos 
dilectiónis thesáuros miseri- 
córditer largiri dignáris; 
concéde, qusesumus, ut illi 
devótum pietátis nostre præ- 
stantes  obséguium, digne 
quoque satisfactiónis exhibe- 


ámus officium. Per eümdem. 


Dóminum. 


cop, who, in the Heart of 

of thy Son, wounded by 
our sins, hast deigned merci- 
fully to bestow infinite treas- 
ures of love upon us; grant, we 
beseech Thee, that as we offer 
him the faithful service of our 
devotion, we may also make 
worthy reparation. Through 
the same. 


Epistle. Eph. 3, 8:19 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Ephésios. 


RATRES: Mihi ómnium 

sanctórum minimo 
data est grátia hzc, in génti- 
bus evangelizáre investigá- 
biles divítias Christi: et illu- 
mináre omnes, que sit dis- 
pensátio sacraménti abscón- 
diti a seeulis in Deo qui óm- 
nia creávit: ut. innotéscat 
principátibus et potestátibus 
in celéstibus per Ecclésiam 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians, ; 

RETHREN: To me, the least 

of all the saints, is given 
this grace, to preach among the 
gentiles the unsearchable 
riches of Christ; and to en- 
lighten all men, that they may 
see what is the dispensation 
of the mystery which hath 
been hidden from. eternity in 
God, who created ali things: 
that the manifold wisdom of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


646 


God may be made known to the 
principalities and powers in the 
heavenly places through the 
Church: according to the eter- 
nal purpose, which he made in 
Christ Jesus our Lord, in 
whom We have boldness and 
access With confidence by the 
faith of him. For this cause I 
bow my knees to the Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, of 
whom all paternity in heaven 
and earth is named; that he 
would grant you, according to 
the riches of his glory, to be 
strengthened by his Spirit with 
might unto the inward man; 
that Christ may dwell by faith 
in your hearts; that being 
rooted and founded in charity, 
you may be able to compre- 
hend, with all the saints, what 
is the breadth, and length, and 
height, and depth: to know 
also the charity of Christ, 
which surpasseth all under- 


SACRED HEART OF. JESUS 


mulifórmis sapiéntia Dei: 
Secündum przfinitiónem sæ- 
culórum quam fecit in Christo 
Jesu Dómino nostro, in quo 
habémus fidüciam et accés- 
sum in confidéntia per fidem 
ejus. Hujus rei grátia flecto 
génua mea ad Patrem Dó- 
mini nostri Jesu Christi, ex 
quo omnis patérnitas in calis 
et in terra nominátui. ut.det 
vobis secündum divitias gló- 
rim sus, virtüte corroboráriper 
Spíritum ejus in interiórem 
hóminem: Christum habitare 
per fidem in córdibus vestris: 
in caritáte radicáti et fun- 
dáti: ut possítis comprehén- 
dere, cum ómnibus sanctis, 
que sit latitüdo, et longitüdo, 
et sublímitas et profündum: 
Scire etiam supereminéntem 
sciéntie caritátem Christi, ut 
impleámini in omnem pleni- 
tüdinem Dei. 


standing, that you may be filled unto all the fulness of God. 
In Paschal time the Gradual and Tract are replaced by the 


Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 24, 8-9 


The Lord is sweet and right- 
eous, therefore he will give a 
law to sinners in the way. Y. 
He will guide the mild in judg- 
ment, he will teach the meek 
his ways. 


Dulcis et rectus Dóminus, 
propter hoc legem dabit de- 
linquéntibus in via. Y. Diriget 
mansuétos in judicio, docébit 
mites vias suas. 


In Votive Masses after Septuagesima the Lesser Alleluia is re- 


placed by the Tract. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Matt. 11, 
29. Take up my yoke upon you 


and learn of me, because I am. 


meek and humble of heart, 
and you shall find rest to your 
souls. Alleluia, 


Allelüja, allelúja. Matt. 11, 
29. Tóllite jugum meum super 
vos et; díscite a me, quia mitis 
sum et hümilis corde, et in- 
veniétis réquiem animébus 
vestris. Allelija. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


A 


` fíciam vos. Allelüja. 


SACRED HEART OF JESUS 


Ps. 102, 8-10 


Tract. 


Miséricors et miserátor Dó- 
minus, longánimis et multum 
miséricors. Y. Non in per- 
pétuum irascétur, neque in 
ztérnum comminábitur. Y. 
Non secündum peccáta nos- 
tra fecit nobis, neque secün- 
dum iniquitátes noties re- 
tribuit nobis. 


647 


The Lord is merciful and 
compassionate, long-suffering 
and plenteous in mercy. V. He 
will not always be angry, nor 
wil he threaten for ever. Y. 
He hath not dealt with us ac- 
cording to our sins, nor re- 
warded us according to our in- 
iquities. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allelüja. Matt. 11, 
29, 28. Tólite jugum meum 
super vos et díscite a me, quia 
mitis sum et humilis corde 
et inveniétis réquiem anima- 
bus vestris. Allelija. Y. Ve- 
nite ad me omnes qui labor- 
atis et oneráti estis et ego re- 


y Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Matt 11, 
29, 28. Take up my yoke upon 
you and learn of me, because 
I am meek and humble of 
heart, and you shall find rest 
to your souls. Alleluia. Y. Come 
to me, all you that labor and 
are burdened, and I will re- 
fresh you. Alleluia, 


Gospel. John 19, 31-37 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Judi, 
(quóniam Parascéve erat 

ut non remanérent in cruce 
corpora, sabbato, (erat enim 
magnus dies ille sábbati), rc- 
gavérunt Pilatum ut frange- 
éntur eórum crura et toller- 
éntur. Venérunt ergo milites, 
et primi quidem fregérunt 
crura et altérius qui cruci- 
fíxus est cum eo. Ad Jesum 
autem cum veníssent, ut vi- 
dérunt eum jam mórtuum, 
non fregérunt ejus crura: sed 
unus militum láncea latus 
ejus apéruit, et contínuo ex- 
ivit sanguis et aqua. Et qui 
vidit testimónium perhibuit: 
et verum est testimónium 
ejus. Et ille scit quia vera di- 
cit, ut et vos credátis. Facta 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, the Jews 
(because it was the 
Parasceve) that the bodies 
might. not remain upon the 
cross on the Sabbath-day (for 
that was a great Sabbath-day) 
besought Pilate that their legs 
might be broken, and that 
they might be taken away. The 
soldiers therefore came, and 
they broke the legs of the first, 
and of the other that was cru- 
cified with him. But after they 
were come to Jesus, when they 
saw that he was already dead, 
they did not break his legs, 
but one of the soldiers with a 
spear opened his side, and im- 
mediately there came out 
blood and water. And he that 
saw it hath given testimony: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


648 SACRED HEART OF JESUS 


and his testimony is true. And 
he knoweth that he saith true, 
that you also may believe. For 
these things were done that the 
Scripture might be fulfilled: 
You shall not break a bone of 


sunt enim hee ut Scriptura 
implerétur: Os non commin- 
uétis ex eo. Et fterum ália 
Scriptura dicit: Vidébunt in 
quem transfixérunt. 


him. And again another Scripture saith: They shall look on 


him whom they pierced. 
Creed, page 765. 


In Paschal-time, in Votive Masses, the following Offertory is 


replaced by the second one. 


Offertory. Ps. 68, 21 


My heart hath expected re- 
proach and misery, and I 
looked for one that would 
grieve together with me and 
there was none; and I sought 
one that would console me and 
Y found none. 


Offertory. 


Burnt-offering and sin-offer- 
ing Thou didst not require; 
then said I: behold I come. In 
the head of the book it is writ- 
ten of me that I should do thy 
wil: O my God, I have desired 
it, and thy law in the midst of 
my Heart. Alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Impropérium  exspectávit 
cor meum ei misériam, et 
sustinui qui simul mecum 
contristarétur et non fuit; 
consolántem me quaesivi et 
non invéni. 


Ps. 39,7 


Holocáustum et pro pec- 
cáto non. postulasti: tunc 
dixi: Ecce vénio. In cápite 
libri scriptum est de me ut 
fácerem  voluntátem tuam: 
Deus meus, vólui et legem tu- 
am in médio cordis mei. Alle- 
lüja. 


Secret 


OOK, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, on the unspeakable 
charity of the Heart of thy be- 
loved Son: that what we offer 
up may be in your sight an 
accepted gift and the expiation 
of our sins. Through the same. 


Preface No. 9, page 812. 


ÉsPICE, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, ad ineffábilem 
Cordis dilécti Fílii tui caritá- 
tem: ut, quod offérimus sit 
tibi munus accéptum et no- 
Strórum expiátio delictórum. 
Per eümdem Dóminum. 


In Paschal-time, in Votive Masses, the following Communion 


is replaced by the second one. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


au 


| 


THIRD SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


649 


Communion. John 19, 34 


Unus militum láncea latus 


One of the soldiers with a 


ejus apéruit, et continuo exf- spear opened his side, and im- 


vit sanguis et aqua. . 


mediately there came out blood 


and water. 


Communion. John 7, 37 


Si quis sitit véniat ad me 
et bibat, Allelija, alleluja. 


If any man thirst, let him 
come to me, and drink. Alle- 
luia, alleluia. 


Postcommunion 


RÆBEANT nobis, Dómine 

Jesu, divinum tua sanc- 
ta fervórem; quo dulcissimi 
Cordis tui suavitate percépta, 
discámus terréna despicere, 
et amare celéstia: Qui vivis. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


AY thy holy mysteries, O 

Lord Jesus, give us holy 
fervor; that by it perceiving 
the sweetness of thy most 
loving Heart, we may learn to 
despise earthly things and to 
love those of heaven, Who 
livest. 


Third Sunday After Pentecost (White) 
(Sunday within the Octave of the Sacred Heart) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 24, 16, 18 


ESPICE in me, et miser- 

ére mei, Dómine; quó- 

njam ünicus, et pauper sum 

ego: vide humilitatem meam, 

et labórem meum: et dimítte 

ómnia peccáta, mea, Deus me- 

us. Ps. 24, 1, 2. Ad te, Dómine, 

levávi ánimam meam: Deus 

meus, in te confído, non eru- 
béscam. V. Glória Patri, 


w ook Thow upon me, O 
Lord, and have mercy on 
me; for I am alone and poor. 
See my abjection and my la- 
bor; and forgive me all my sins, 
O my God, Ps. 24, 1, 2. To Thee, 
O Lord, have I lifted upmy soul: 
in Thee, my God, I put my 
trust; let me not be ashamed. 
FK. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. - 


Prayer 


rotéctor in te sperán- 
tium, Deus, sine quo 
nihil est válidum, nihil sanc- 


cop, the protector of all 
who hope in Thee, 
without Whom nothing is 


http://ccwatershed.org 


650 


Strong, nothing is holy, 
multiply Thy mercy upon us, 
that, with Thee for our ruler 
and leader, we may so pass 
through the good things of this 
life as not to lose those which 
are eternal. Through our Lord. 


THIRD SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


tum: multíplicà super nos 
misericórdiam tuam, ut, te 
rcctóre, te duce, sic transeá- 
mus per bona temporália, ut 
non amittámus etérna. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Prayer of the Sacred Heart, page 645. 


Epistle. 1 Peter 5, 6-11 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle, 
EARLY beloved, Be you 
humbled | under the 
mighty band of God, that He 
may exalt you in the time of 
visitation: casting all your care 
upon him, for he hath care of 
you. Be sober and waich, be- 
cause your adversary the devil, 
as a roaring lion, goeth about 
seeking whom he may devour. 
Whom resist ye, strong in faith; 
knowing that the same afflic- 
tion befalls your brethren who 
are in the world. But the God of 
all grace, Who hath called us 
unto His eternal glory in Christ 
Jesus, after you have suffered 
2 little, will Himself perfect 
you, and confirm you, and es- 
tablish you. To Him be glory 
and empire for ever and ever. 
Amen, 


Gradual. Ps. 


Cast thy care upon the Lord 
and He shall sustain thee. Y. 
When I cried to the Lord He 
heard my voice, from them that 
draw near to me. Alleluia, alle- 
luia. Y. Ps. 7, 12. God is a just 
judge, strong and patient; is 
He angry every day? Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Petri 
Apóstoli. 


ARISSIMI: | Humiliámini 
sub poténti manu Dei, 
ut vos exáltet in témpore 
visitatiónis: omnem sollicitu- 
dinem vestram projiciéntes in 
eum, quóniam ipsi cura est 
de vobis. Sóbrii estóte, et vigi- 
láte: quia adversdrius vester 
diabolus tamquam leo rügiens 
circuit, guærens quem dévor- 
et: cui resístite fortes in fide: 
Sciéntes eámdem passiónem 
el, que in mundo est, vestre 
fraternitáti fíerl. Deus autem 
omnis grátie, qui vocávit nos 
in etérnam suam glóriam in 
Christo Jesu, médicum passos 
ipse perficiet, confirmábit, 
solidabitque. Ipsi gloria, et 
impérium in secula seculdr- 
um. Amen. 


54, 23, 17, 19 


Jacta, cogitátum tuum in 
Dómino: et ipse te entitriet. 
¥. Dum clamárem ad Dómin- 
um exaudivit vocem meam 
ab his, qui appropínquant 
mihi, Allehija, alleluja: Ps. 7, 
12. Deus judex justus, fortis 
et pátiens, numquid iráscitur 
per singulos dies? Allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THIRD SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


651 


Gospel. Luke 15, 1-10 


HH sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
yN r410 témpore: Erant ap- 
propinguántes ad Jesum 
publicáni, et peccatóres, ut 
audirent ilum. Et murmurá- 
bant pharisaei et scribe, di- 
céntes: Quia hic peccatóres 
récipit, et mandücat cum illis. 
Et ait ad illos parábolam is- 
tam, dicens: Quis ex vobis 
homo, qui habet centum oves: 
et si perdíderit unam ex illis, 
nonne dimittit nonagintanó- 
vem in desérto, et vadit ad 
illam, que perierat, donec in- 
véniat eam? Et cum invénerit 
eam, impónit in hümeros suos 
gaudens: ei véniens domum, 
cónvocat amícos, et vicínos, 
dicens illis: . Congratulámini 
mihi, quia invéni ovem meam, 
que períerat? Dico vobis, quod 
ita gáudium erit in coelo super 
uno peccatóre . poeniténtiam 
agénte, quam super nonagin- 
tanóvem justis, qui non ín- 
digent poeniténtia, Aut que 
mülier habens drachmas de- 
cem, si perdiderit drachmam 
unam, nonne accéndit lucér- 
nam, et evérrit domum, ef 
quaerit diligénter, donec in- 
véniat? Et cum invénerit, 
eénvocat amícas et vicínas, 
dicens: Congratulámini mihi, 
quia invéni drachmam, quam 
perdíderam? Ita dico vobis: 
géudium erit coram Angelis 
Dei super uno peccatóre peni- 
téntiam agénte. 


Creed, page 765. 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St, Luke. 
T THAT time, ihe publi- 
cans and sinners drew 
near unto Jesus to hear Him: 
and the pharisees and scribes 
murmured, saying, This man 
receiveth sinners and eateth 
with them. And He spoke to 
them this parable, saying, 
What man is there of you that 
hath a hundred sheep, and if 
he shall lose one of them, doth 
he not leave the ninety-nine in 
the desert, and go after that 
which was lost, until he find it? 
And when he hath found it, 
lay it upon his shoulders re- 
joicing, and coming home, call 
together his friends and neigh- 
bors, saying to them, Rejoice 
with me, because I have found 
my sheep that was lost? I say 
to you, that even so there shall 
be joy in heaven upon one sin- 
ner that doth penance, more 
than upon ninety-nine just who 
need not penance. Or what 
woman having wen groats, if 
she lose one groat, doth not 
light a candle, and sweep the 
house, and seek diligently until 
she find it? And when she hath 
found it, call together her 
friends and neighbors, saying, 
Rejoice with me, because I have 
found the groat which I had 
lost? So I say to you, there 
Shall be joy before the angels 
of God upon one sinner doing 
penance. 


Offertory. Ps. 9, 11, 12, 13 


Sperent in te omnes, qui 
novérunt nomen tuum, Dó- 


Let them trust in Thee wha 
know Thy name, O Lord: for 


http://ccwatershed.org 


652 FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 

Thou hast not forsaken them mine: quóniam non derelin- 
that seek Thee: sing ye to the quis queréntes te: psállite 
Lord, Who dwelleth in Sion: Dómino, qui hábitat in Sion: 
for He hath not forgotten the quóniam non est oblítus ora- 


ery of the poor, 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. i 


tiónem påuperum. 


Secret 


ook upon the offerings of 

Thy suppliant Church, 

we beseech Thee, O Lord, and 
grant that, by Thy continual 
sanctification, they may con- 
duce to the salvation of those 


y ESPICE, Dómine, munera 

|, supplicántis Ecclésie: 
et salüti credéntium perpétua 
sanctificatióne suménda con- 
céde. Per Dóminum. 


who partake of them with faith. Through our Lord, 


Second Secret of ihe Sacred Heart, page 648. 
Preface No. 9, page 812; if commemoration is omitted, preface 


for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. 


I say to you: there is joy 
before the angels of God upon 
one sinner doing penance. 


Luke 15, 10 


Dico vobis: gáudium est 
Angelis Dei super uno pecca- 
tóre peniténtiam agénte, 


Postcommunion. 
AY Thy holy things which ANCTA tua nos, Dómine, 
XD we have received, O sumpta  vivífücent: et 


Lord, fill us with life, and pre- 
pare for Thine everlasting mer- 
cies those whom Thou hast pur- 
ified. Through our Lord. 


misericórdie sempitérne præ- 
parent expiátos, Per Dómi- 
num. 


Second Postcomsiunion of the Sacred Heart, page 649. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Fourth Surdap after Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 26, 1, 2 


HE Lord is my light and my 

Salvation: whom shall I 
fear? The Lord is the protec- 
tor of my life: of whom shall I 
be afraid? My enemies that 
trouble mehave themselves been 
weakened and have fallen. Ps. 


é6minvs illuminátio mea, 

et salus mea, quem ti- 
mébo? Dóminus defénsor vi- 
te mex, a quo trepidábo? qui 
tribulant me inimici mei, ipsi 
infirmáti sunt, et cecidérunt. 
Ps. 26, 3. Si consístant ad- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


vérsum me castra: non timé- 
bit cor meum. V. Glória Patri, 


653 


26, 3, If armies in camp should 
stand together against me, my 
heart shall not fear. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


A NOBIS, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, ut et mundi cur- 
sus pacífice nobis tuo órdine 
dirigátur; et Ecclésia tua 
tranguilla devotióne lætétur. 
Per Dóminum. 


RANT US, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, that the course 
of the world may be directed 
for us, and that Thy Church 
may rejoice in peace, Through 
our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Rom. 8, 18-23 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
ad Romanos. 


BATRES: Existimo, quod 

non sunt condigne pas- 
sidnes hujus témporis ad fu- 
tiram glóriam, qu revelábi- 
tur in nobis. Nam exspectatio 
creatiire, revelatiónem filió- 
rum Dei exspéctat. Vanitati 
enim creatura subjécta est 
non volens, sed propter eum, 
qui subjécit eam in spe: quia 
et ipsa creattra liberábitur a 
servitüte corruptiónis, in lib- 
ertátem glórie filiórum Dei. 
Scimus enim. quod omnis 
creatüra ingemíscit, et pár- 
turit usque adhuc. Non solum 
autem illa, sed et nos ipsi 
primitias spíritus habéntes: 
et ipsi intra nos gémimus, 
adoptiónem filiórum Dei ex- 
spectantes, redemptiónem 
eérporis nostri: in Christo 
Jesu Dómino nostro, 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 

RETHREN, I reckon that the 

£ sufferings of this time are 
not worthy to be compared with 
the glory to come, that shall be 
revealed in us. For the expecta- 
tion of the creature waiteth 
for the revelation of the sons 
of God. for the creature was 
made. subject to vanity, not 
willingly, but by reason of him 
that made it subject in hope; 
because the creature also it- 
self shall be delivered from the 
servitude of corruption, into 
the liberty of the glory of the 
children of God. For we know 
that every creature groaneth, 
and travaileth in pain, even till 
now; and not only it, but our- 
selves also, who have the first- 
fruits of the spirit, even. we 
ourselves, groan within our- 
selves, waiting for the adoption 
of the sons of God, the re- 


demption of our body; in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
Gradual. Ps. 78, 9, 10 


Propitius esto, Dómine, pec- 
cátis nostris: ne quándo di- 


Forgive us our sins, O Lord, 
lest the gentiles should at any 


http://ccwatershed.org 


654 


time say, Where is their God? 
Y. Help us, O God our Saviour; 
and for the honor of Thy name, 
O Lord, deliver us, Alleluia, al- 
leluia. Y. Ps. 9, 5, 10. O God, 
Who sittest upon the throne, 
and judgest justice, be Thou 
the refuge of the poor in tribu- 
lation. Alleluia, 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


cant gentes: Ubi est Deus eó- 
rum? Y. Adjuva nos, Deus 
salütáris noster: et propter 
honórem nóminis tui, Dómine, 
XMbera nos, Allelüja, alleluja. 
FW. Ps. 9, 5, 10. Deus, qui 
Sedes super thronum, et jüdi- 
cas equitatem: esto refugium 
páuperum in tribulatióne. Al- 
lelája. 


Gospel. Luke 5, 1-11 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, when the 
multitude pressed upon 

Jesus to hear the word of God, 
He stood by the lake of Gene- 
sareth. And He saw two ships 
standing by the lake; but the 
fishermen were gone out of 
them, and were washing their 
nets; and going up into one of 
the ships that was Simon’s, He 
aosired him to draw back a lit- 
tle from the land: and sitting 
He taught the multitudes out 
of the ship. Now when He had 
ceased to speak, He said to Si- 
mon, Launch out into the deep, 
and let down your nets for a 
draught. And Simon, answer- 
ing, said to Him, Master, we 
have labored ail the night, and 
have taken nothing, but at Thy 
word I will let down the net. 
And when they had done this, 
they enclosed a very gréat mul- 
titude of fishes; and their net 
broke: and they beckoned to 
their partners that were in the 
other ship, that they should 
come and help them; and they 
came, and filled both the ships, 
so that they were almost sink- 
ing. Which when Simon Peter 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Cum tur- 
bæ irrúerent in Jesum, ut 
audirent verbum Dei, et ipse 
Stabat secus stagnum Gené- 
sareth. Et vidit duas naves 
Stantes secus stagnum: pis- 
catóres autem descénderant, 
et lavábant rétia. Ascéndens 
autem in unam navim, que 
erat Simonis, rogávit eum a 
terra redücere pusíllum. Et 
Sedens docébat de navicula 
turbas. Ut cessávit autem 
loqui, dixit ad Stmónem: Duc 
in altum, et laxáte rétia ves- 
tra in captüram. Et respón- 
dens Simon, dixit illi: Pracép- 
tor, per totam noctem labo- 
rántes, nihil cépimus: in 
verbo autem tuo Jaxábo rete. 
Et cum hoc fecíssent, conclu- 
sérunt píscium multitüdinem 
copiósam, rumpebátur autem 
rete eórum. Et annuérunt só- 
ciis, qui erant in ália navi, ut 
venirent, et adjuvarent, eos. 
Et venérunt, et implevérunt 
ambas navículas, ita ut pene 
mergeréntur. Quod cum vi- 
déret Simon Petrus, prócidit 
ad génua Jesu, dicens: Exi a 
me, quia homo preccátor sum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


372287 agis 


FOURTH SUNDAY 


Domine. Stupor enim circum- 
déderat eum, et omnes, qui 
cum illo erant, in captüra pí- 
scium quam céperant: símili- 
ter autem Jacóbum et Joán- 
nem, fílios Zebedzi, qui erant 
Sócii Siménis. Et alt ad Si- 
mónem Jesus: Noli timére: ex 
hoc jam hómines eris cáplens. 
Et subdüctis ad terram návi- 
bus, relíctis ómnibus, secüti 
sunt eum. 


AFTER PENTECOST 655 


saw, he fell.down at Jesus's 
knees, saying, Depart from me, 
for I am a sinful man, O Lord. 
For he was wholly astonished, 
and all that were with him, at 
the draught of fishes which 
they had taken: and so were 
also James and John the sons 
of Zebedee, who were Simon’s 
partners. And Jesus saith to 
Simon, Fear not: from hence- 
forth thou shalt catch men. 
And having brought their ships 


to land, leaving all things they followed Him. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 

Ilúmina óculos meos, ne 

umquam obdórmiam in mor- 

te: ne quando dicat inimicus 

meus: Praválui advérsus eum. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 12, 4, 5 

Enlighten my eyes, that I 
never sleep in death; lest at 
any time my enemy say, I have 
prevailed against him. 


Secret 


BLATIÓNIBUS nostris, que- 
sumus, Dómine, placáre 
suscéptis: et ad te nostras 
étiam rebélles compélle propí- 
ius voluntátes. Per Dóminum. 


choice of the priest. 


ECEIVING our oblations, be. 

appeased, we pray Thee, 

O Lord, and in Thy kindness 

constrain our wills toward 

Thee, even when resisting. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, nd cad hear us, page 828; third at the 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Ps. 17, 3 


Dóminus firmaméntum me- 
um, et refügium meurn, et li- 
berátor meus: Deus meus, ad- 
jütor meus. 


The Lord is my firmament, 
and my refuge, and my deliv- 
erer, my God is my helper. 


Postcommunion 


YSTERIA nos, Dómine, 

quasumus, sumpta pu- 

ríficent: et suo münere tueán- 
tur. Per Dóminum. 


ay the mysteries we have 
(D received purify us, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, and by 
their virtue protect us. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommuüunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


656 FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


Filth Sundap after Pentecost (Green) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


EAR, O Lord, my voice with 
which I have cried to 
Thee: be Thou my helper, for- 
sake me not, nor do Thou 
despise me, O God my Saviour. 
Ps. 26, 1. The Lord is my light, 
and my salvation: whom shall 
I fear? Y. Glory. 


Ps. 26, 7-9 


xáÁupi, Dómine, vocem 

meam, qua clamávi ad 
te: adjütor meus esto, ne.dere- 
línguas me, neque despicias 
me, Deus salutáris meus. Ps. 
26, 1. Dóminus illuminátio 
mea, et salus mea, quem ti- 
mébo? Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who hast prepared 
‘good things unseen for 
them that love Thee, pour into 
our hearts the fervor of Thy 
love, that, loving Thee in all 
things and above all things, we 
may aitein Thy promises, which 
surpass all desire. Through our 
Lord. 


EUS, qui diligéntibus te 

bona invisibilia prepa- 
rasti: infünde córdibus nostris 
tui amóris afféctum; ut te in 
ómnibus et super ómnia dili- 
géntes, promissiónes tuas, 
que omne desidérium süper- 
ant, consequámur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Second Prayer, A. cunctis, page 827; third. at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle. 


EARLY beloved, Be ye all 

of one mind, having 
compassion one of another, 
being lovers of the brother- 
hood, merciful, modest, hum- 
ble: not rendering evil for evil, 
nor railing for railing, but con- 
trariwise, blessing: for unto 
this are you called, that you 
may inherit a blessing. For he 
that will love life and see good 
days, let him refrain his tongue 
from evil, and his lips that they 
speak no guile. Let him de- 
cline from evil, and do good; 


1 Peter 3, 8-15 


Léctio Epístole beáti Petri 
Apóstoli. 
ARÍSsIMI: Omnes unáni- 
mes in oratióne estóte, 
compatiéntes,  fraternitátis 
amatóres, misericórdes, mo- 
désti, hümiles: non redéntes 
malum pro malo, nec maledíc- 
tum pro maledícto, sed e con- 
trário benedicéntes: quia in 
hoc vocáti estis, ut benedic- 
tiónem hereditáte possideátis, 
Qui enim vult vitam dilígere, 
et dies vidére bonos, coerceat 
linguam suam a malo, et labia 
ejus ne loquántur dolum. De- 
clinet a malo, et fáciat bo- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


num: inquírat pacem, et se- 
quátur eam. Quia óculi Dó- 
mini super.justos, et aures 
ejus in preces eórum: vultus 
autem Dómini super faciéntes 
mala, Et quis est qui vobis 
nóceat, si boni zmulatéres fu- 
éritis? Sed et si quid patímini 
propter justítiam, beáti..Ti- 
mórem autem eórum ne timu- 
éritis, et non conturbémini. 
Dóminum autem Christum 
sanctificáte in córdibus ves- 
tris, 


657 


let him seek after peace, and 
pursue it: because the eyes of 
the Lord are upon the just, and 
His ears unto their prayers, but 
the countenance of the Lord 
upon them that do evil things. 
And who is he that can hurt 
you, if you be zealous of good? 
But if also you suffer anything 
for justice' sake, blessed are ye. 
And.be not afraid of their fear, 
and be not troubled; but sanc- 
tify the Lord Christ in your 


hearts, 


Gradual. Ps. 83, 10, 9 


Protéctor noster, (spice, 
Deus, et réspice super servos 
tuos. V. Dómine Deus virtü- 
tum, exáudi preces servórum 
iuórum. Allelüja, allelija. y. 
Ps. 20, 1. Dómine, in virtüte 
tua letabitur rex: et super 
salutáre tuum exsultábit ve- 
heméntur. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Behold, O God our protector, 
and look on Thy servants. Y. O 
Lord God of hosts, give ear to 
the prayers of Thy servants. 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 20, 1. In 
Thy strength, O Lord, the king 
shall joy; and in Thy salva- 


tion he shall rejoice exceed- 


ingly. Alleluia. 


. Gospel. Matt. 5, 20-24 


"P Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Mattheum, 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Jes- 
T sus discípulis suis: Nisi 
abundáverit justítia vestra 
plus quam scribarum et pha- 
xiseórum, non intrabitis in 
regnum czelórum. Audistis, 
quia dictum est antíquis: Non 
occides: qui autem occíderit, 
reus erit judicio. Ego autem 
dico. vobis: quia omnis, qui 
iráscitur fratri suo, reus erit 
judício.. Qui autem dixerit 
fratri suo, raca: reus erit con- 
cílio. Qui autem dixerit, fá- 


HK Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
ihew. 

T THAT time, Jesus said to 

His disciples, Except 
your justice abound more than 
that of the scribes and phari- 
Sees, you shall not enter into 
ihe kingdom of heaven. You 
have heard that it was said to 
them of old, Thou shalt not kill; 
and whosoever shall kill, shall 
be in danger of the judgment. 
But I say to you, that whoso- 
ever is angry with his brother, 
Shall be in danger of the judg- 
ment; and whosoever shall say 


http://ccwatershed.org 


658 


to his brother, Raca, shall be 
in danger of the council; and 
whosoever shall say, Thou fool, 
shall be in danger of hell fire. If 
therefore thou offer thy gift at 
the altar, and there thou re- 
member that thy brother hath 
anything against thee, leave 
there thy offering before the 
altar, and go first to be recon- 


FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


tue: reus erit gehénne ignis. 
Si ergo offers munus tuum ed 
altáre, et ibi recordátus füe- 
ris quia frater tuus habet áli- 
quid advérsum te: relínque ibi 
munus tuum ante altdre, et 
vade prius reconciliári fratri 
tuo: et tunc véniens ófferes 
munus tuum. 


ciled to thy brother; and then coming thou shalt offer thy gift. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 15, 7, 8 


I will bless the Lord, Who 
hath given me understanding: 
I set God always in my sight; 
for He is at my right hand, that 
I be not moved. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Benedicam Dóminum, qui 
tríbuit mihi  intelléctum: 
providébam Deum in con- 
spéctu meo semper: quó- 
niam a dextris est mihi, ne 
commóvear. 


Secret 


E PROPITIATED, O Lord, by 

our supplications, and 
graciously accept these obla- 
tions of Thy servants and Thy 
handmaidens, that what each 
has offered to the honor of Thy 
name may profit for the salva- 
tion of all. Through our Lord. 


ROPITIARE, Dómine, sup- 

plicatiénibus nostris: 
et has oblatiónes famuló- 
rum facularümque tuárum 
benignus assüme; ut, quod 
singuli obtulérunt ad honó- 
rem nóminis tui, cunctis pro- 
fíciat ad salütem. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Second Secret, Graclously hear us, page 828; third at choice 


‘of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 
Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. 


One thing I have asked of 
the Lord, this will I seek after; 
that I may dwell in the house 
of the Lord all the days of. my 
life. 


| Ps. 26, 4 


Unam pétii a Dómino, hanc 
requiram: ut inhábitem in 
domo Dómini ómnibus diébus 
vite mem. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


659 


Postcommunion 


vos celésti, Dómine, 
dono satiásti: presta, 
quesumus; ut a nostris mun- 
démur occültis, et ab hóstium 
liberémur insidiis, Per Dómi- 
num. 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, whom Thou hast 

filled with the heavenly gift, 

that we be cleansed of our hid- 

den sins and delivered from the 

snares of our enemies. Through 
our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Sixth Sundap after Pentecost (Green) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 27, 8,9 


ÓwiNUs fortitüdo plebis 
sue, et protéctor salu- 
tárium Christi sui est: salvum 
fac pópulum tuum, Dómine et 
bénedic hereditáti tua, et rege 
eos, usque in seculum. Ps. 27, 
1. Ad te, Dómine, clamábo, 
Deus meus, ne síleas a me: 
ne quando táceas a me, et as- 
similábor descendéntibus in 
lacum.Y. Glória Patri. 


HE Lord is the strength of 
His people, and the pro- . 
tector of tee salvation of His 
anointed: save, O Lord, Thy 
people, and bless Thy inheri- 
tance, and rule them for ever. 
Ps. 27, 1. Unto Thee will I cry, 
O Lord: O my God, be not Thou 
silent to me, lest if Thou be 
silent to me, I become like them 
that go down into the pit. V. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS virtütum, cujus est 

totum quod est ópti- 
mum: ínsere pectóribus nos- 
tris amdérem tui nóminis, et 
presta in nobis religiónis aug- 
mentum; ut, que sunt bona, 
nütrias, ac pietatis stüdio, que 
sunt nutrita, custódias. Per 
Dóminum. 


Gop of virtues, to Whom 

belongeth every excellent 
thing, implant in our hearts the 
love of Thy name, and bestow 
upon us the increase of reli- 
gion, fostering what things are 
good, and, by Thy loving care, 
guarding what Thou hast fos- 
tered. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500 


http://ccwatershed.org 


660 


SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


Epistle. Rom. 6, 3-11 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. E 


RETHREN, all we who are 

baptized in Christ Jesus 
are baptized in His death. For 
we are buried together with 
Him by. baptism unto death; 
that as Christ is risen from the 
dead by the glory of the Father, 
so we also may walk in new- 
ness of life. For if we have been 
planted together in the likeness 
of His death, we shall also be 
in the likeness of His resurrec- 
tion. Knowing this, that our 
old man is crucified with Him, 
that the body of sin may be de- 
stroyed, and that we may serve 
sin no longer. For He that is 
dead is justified from sin. Now 
if we be dead with Christ, we 
believe that we shall live also 
together. with Christ. Knowing 
that Christ, rising again from 
the dead, dieth now no more, 
death shail no more. have do- 
minion over Him. For in that 
He died to sin He died once; 
but in that He liveth, He liveth 
unto God. So do you also reckon 
yourselves to be dead indeed to 
sin, but alive to God; in Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apéstoli ad Romanos. 


RATRES: Quicümque bap- 
: tizáti sumus in Christo 
Jesu, in morte ipsíus baptizáti 
sumus. Consepülti enim su- 
mus cum illo per baptismum 
in mortem: ut quómodo 
Christus surréxit a mórtuis, 
per glóriam Patris, ita et nos 
in novitáte vite ambulémus. 
Si enim complantáti facti su- 
mus similitüdini mortis ejus: 
simul et resurrectiónijs érimus. 
Hoc sciéntes, quia vetus homo 
noster simul crucifíxus est: ut 
destruátur corpus peccáti, et 
ultra non serviáàmus peccáto. 
Qui enim mórtuus est, justi- 
ficátus est a peccáto. Si au- 
tem mórtui sumus. cum 
Christo: crédimus quia simul 
étiam vivémus cum Christo: 
sciéntes quod Christus resür- 
gens ex mórtuis, jam non mó- 
ritur, mors illi ultra non dom- 
inábitur. Quod enim mórtuus 
est peccáto, mórtuus est se- 
mel: quod autem vivit, vivit 
Deo. Ita et vos existimáte, vos 
mórtuos quidem esse peccáto, 
vivéntes autem Deo, in 
Christo Jesu Dómino nostro. 


Gradual. Ps. 89, 13,1 


Return, O Lord, a little; 
and be entreated in favor of 
Thy servants. Y. Lord, Thou 
hast been our refuge from gen- 
eration to generation. Alleluia, 
alleluia. Y. Ps. 30, 2, 3. In Thee, 
O Lord, have I hoped, let me 


never be confounded: deliver. 


sae in Thy justice, and release 


Convértere Dómine, ali- 
quántulum, et deprecáre super 
Servos tuos. V. Dómine, re- 
fügium factus es nobis, a ge- 
neratióne et progénie. Alle- 
luja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 30, 2, 3. 
In te, Dómine, sperávi, non 
confündar in ætérnum: in 
justitia tua libera me, et erípe 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


me: inclína ad me aurem tu- 
am, accélera, ut erípias me. 
Allelüja. - 


Murida Cor Meum, page 763. 


661 


me; bow down Thy ear to me, 
make haste to deliver me, Alle- 
luia. 


Gospel. Mark 8, 1-9 


HR Sequéntia sancti Evan-. 
gélii secündum Marcum. 


N ILLO témpore: Cum 
turba multa esset cum 
Jesu, nec habérent quod man- 
ducárent: convocátis discípu- 
lis, ait illis Miséreor super 
turbam: quia ecce jam triduo 
süstinent me. nec habent quod 
mandücent: est si dimísero 
eos jejános in domum suam, 
deficient in via: quídam enim 
ex eis de longe venérunt. Et 
respondérunt ei discípuli sui: 
Unde illos quis póterit hic 
saturére pánibus in solitü- 
dine? Et interrogávit eos: 
Quot panes habétis? Qui dix- 
érunt: Septem. Et precépit 
turbz discümbere super ter- 
ram. Et accípiens septem pa- 
nes grátias agens fregit, et 
dabat discípulis suis ut appó- 
nerent; et apposuérunt tur- 
be. Et habébant pisciculos 
páucos: et ipsos benedixit, et 
jussit appóni. Et manducavé- 
runt, et saturdti sunt, et sus- 
tulérunt quod superáverat de 
fragméntis, septem sportas. 
Erant autem qui manducavé- 
runt, quasi qu&tuor míllia: et 
dimisit eos. 


HK Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 


T THAT time, when there 

was a great multitude 

with Jesus, and had nothing to 
eat, calling. His disciples to- 
gether He saith to them, I 
have compassion on the multi- 
tude, for behold they have now 
been with Me three days, and 
have nothing to eat; and if I 
Shall send them away fasting 
to their home they will faint 
in the way: for some of them 
came from afar off. And His 
disciples answered Him, Prom 
whence can any one fil them 
here with bread in the wilder- 
ness? And He asked them, How 
many loaves have ye? who said 
Seven. And He commanded the 
people to sit down on the 
ground. And taking the seven 
loaves, giving thanks He broke, 
and gave to his disciples to set 
before them; and they set them 
before the people. And they had 
a few little fishes, and He 
blessed them, and commanded 
them. tó be set before them. 
And they did eat, and were 
filled, and they took up that 
which was left of the frag- 
ments, seven baskets: and they 


that had eaten were about four thousand: and He sent them 


away. 
Creed, page. 765. 


Offertory. . Ps. 16, 5, 6,7 


Pérfice gressus meos in sé- 
mitis tuis, ut non moveantur 


Perfect Thou my goings in 
Thy paths, that my footsteps 


http://ccwatershed.org 


862 SEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 

be not moved: incline Thy ear, vestigia mea: inclína aurem 
and hear my words: show forth tuam, et exáudi verba mea: 
Thy wonderful mercies, Thou mirífica misericordias tugs, 
Who savest them that trust in qui salvos facis.sperántes in 


Thee, O Lord. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


te, Dómine. 


Secret . 


E PROPITIOUS to our suppli- 
cations, O Lord, and gra- 
ciously accept these offerings 
of Thy people; and, that the 
prayer of none may be without 
effect, the petition of none 
vain, grant that what we ask 
in faith we may effectually ob- 
tain. Through our Lord. 


RoPITIÁRE, Dómine, sup- 

plicatiónibus nostris, et 
has pópuli tui oblatiónes be- 
nígnus assüme: et ut nullius 
sit írritum votum, nullíus 
vácua postulátio, presta; ut, 
quod fidéliter pétimus, efficá- 
citer consequámur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at choice 


of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 
Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. 


I will go round, and offer up 
in His tabernacle a sacrifice of 
jubilation; I will sing, and re- 
cite a psalm to the Lord. 


Ps. 26, 6 


Circuíbo, et immolábo in 
tabernáculo ejus hóstiam ju- 
bilatiónis: cantábo, et psal- 


mum dicam Dómino. 


Postcommunion 


E HAVE been filled with 

Thy gifts, O Lord; 
grant we beseech Thee, that by 
their effect we may be both 
cleansed and fortified. Through 
our Lord. 


EPLÉTI sumus, Dómine, 

munéribus tuis: trfbue, 
quaesumus; ut eórum et mun- 
démur efféctu, et muniámur 
auxilio, Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Seventh Sunday after Pentecost (Green) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 46, 2 
O CLAP your hands, all ye MNES gentes, pláudite 
nations: shout unto God mánibus: jubiláte Deo 
with the voice of joy. Ps. 46, 3. in voce exsultatiónis. Ps. 46, 
For the Lord is most high, He 3. Quóniam Dóminus excél- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


Sus, terríbilis: Rex magnus 
super omnem terram. Y. Gló- 
ria Patri, 


663 


is terrible; He is a great king 
over all the earth. y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


. Prayer 


sui dispositióne non 
fálitur: te süpplices exorá- 
mus; ut noxia cuncta sub- 
móveas, et ómnia nobis pro- 
futüra .concédas. Per Dó- 
minum. 


D EUS, cujus providéntia in 


cop, Whose providence 

faileth not in setting 
things in order, we, Thy sup- 
pliants, beseech ‘Thee, that 
Thou wouldst remove from us 
ali things harmful and grant us 
all that makes for our welfare. 
‘Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A oe page 827; third. at the choice or 


the priest, pages 1494-150 


Epistle. Bom. 6, 19-23 


Léctio Epístolæ beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Romános. 


RATRES: Humánum dico, 

propter  infirmitátem 
carnis vestre: sicut enim ex- 
hibuístis membra vestra ser- 
vire iminundítiæ, et iniquitáti 
ad iniquitátem, ita nunc ex- 
hibéte membra vestra servíre 
justítie in sanctificatiónem. 
Cum enim servi essétis pec- 
cáti, líberi fuístis justitie. 
Quem ergo fructum habuístis 
tunc in illis, in quibus nunc 
erubéscitis? Nam finis illórum 
mors est. Nune vero liberáti 
a peccáto, servi autem facti 
Deo, habétis fructum vestrum 
in sanctificatiónem, finem 
vero vitam eternam. Stipén- 
dia enim peccáti, mors. Grá- 
tia autem Dei, vita etérna, in 
Christo Jesu Dómino nostro. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 


RETHREN, I speak a human 
thing, because of the in- 
firmity of your flesh; for as 
you have yielded your members 
to serve uncleanness and in- 
iquity unto iniquity, so now 
yield your members to serve 
justice, unto sanctification. For 
when you were the servants of 
sin, you were free from justice. 
What fruit therefore had you 
then in those things, of which 
you are now ashamed? For the 
end of them is death. But now 
being made free from sin, and 
become servants to God, you 
have your fruit unto sanctifica- 
tion, and the end life everlast- 
ing. For the wages of sin is 
death. But the grace of God, 
life everlasting; in Christ Jesus 
our Lord. 


Gradual. Ps. 33, 12, 6 


Venfte, fflii, audíte me: ti- 
mórem Dómini docébo vos. 


Come, children, harken to 
me; I will teach you the fear 


http://ccwatershed.org 


664 


of the Lord. Y. Come ye to 
Him and be enlightened; and 
your faces shall not be con- 
founded. Alleluia, alleluia. y. 
Ps. 46, 2. O clap. your hands, all 
ye nations; shout unto God 
with the volce of joy. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


SEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


FV. Accédite ad eum, et illu- 
minámini: et facies vestre 
non confundéntur. Allelija, 
allelüja. Y. Ps. 46, 2. Omnes 
gentes, pléudite manibus: 
jubiláte Deo in voce exsulta- 
tiónis. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Matt. 7, 15-21 


"B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus said to 

His disciples, Beware of 
false prophets, who come to you 
in the clothing of sheep, but 
inwardly they are ravening 
wolves. By their fruits you shall 
know them. Do men gather 
grapes of thorns, or figs of 
thistles? Even so, every good 
tree bringeth forth good fruit, 
and the evil tree bringeth forth 
evil fruit. A good tree can not 
bring forth evil fruit, neither 
can an evil tree bring forth 
good fruit. Every tree that 
bringeth not forth good fruit 
shall be cut down, and shall be 
cast into the fire. Wherefore by 
their fruits you shall know 
them. Not every one that saith 
to Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter 
into the .kingdom of heaven; 
but he that doth the will of My 
Father Who is in heaven, he 
shall enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. 


Creed, page 765. 


HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Matthsum. 


I^ ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus discípulis suis: At- 
téndite a falsis prophétis, qui 
véniunt ad vos in vestiméntis 
óvium, intrínsecus autem sunt 
lupi rapáces: a früctibus eó- 
rum cognoscétis eos. Numquid 
cólligunt de spinis uvas, aut 
de tríbulis ficus? Sic omnis 
arbor bona fructus bonos fa- 
cit: mala autem arbor malos 
fructus facit. Non potest. ar- 
bor bona malos fructus fá- 
cere: neque arbor mala bonos 
fructus fácere. Omnis arbor, 
que non facit fructum bo- 
num, excidétur, et in ignem 
mittétur. Igitur ex früctibus 
eórum cognoscétis eos. Non 
omnis, qui dicit mihi, Dómine, 
Dómine, intrábit in regnum 
celérum: sed qui facit volun- 
tátem Patris mei, qui in celis 
est, ipse intrábit in regnum 
celérum. í 


Offertory. Dan. 3, 40 


As in holocausts of rams and 
bullocks, and as in thousands of 
fat lambs; so let our sacrifice 


Sicut in holocáustis arie- 
tum et taurórum, et si- 
cut in mfllibus agnórum pín- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


EIGHTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 665 


guium: sic fiat sacriffcium be made in Thy sight this day, 
nostrum in conspéctu tuo hó- that it may please Thee: for 
die; ut pláceat tibi: quia non there is no confusion to them 
est confüsio confidéntibus in that trust in Thee, O Lord. 

te, Dómine. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
EUS, qui legálium differ- cop, Who hast sanctioned 
éntiam hostiárum uní- the diversity of offerings 


us sacrifícii perfectióne san- by the perfection of one sacri- 
Xísti: áccipe sacrifícium a de- fice, receive the sacrifice of- 
vótis tibi famulis, et pari ben- fered Thee by Thy devoted ser- 
edictióne, sicut münera Abel, vants, and sanctify it as Thou 
sanctifica; ut, quod sínguli didst sanctify the gifts of Abel, 
obtulérunt ad majestátis tue that what each one hath of- 
honórem, cunctis profíciat ad fered to the glory of Thy ma- 
salütem. Per Dóminum. jesty may profit for the salva- 
tion of all. Through our Lord. 
Second, Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Ps. 30, 3 


Inclína aurem tuam, accé- Bow down Thy ear, make 
lera, ut erípias me. haste to deliver me. 


Postcommunion 


UA nos, Dómine, medici- AY Thy health-giving op- 
Ti élis operátio, et a nos- (D eration, O Lord, merci- 
iris perversitábus cleménter fully rid us of our evil inclina- 
expédiat, et ad ea que sunt tions and unto rightful ways 
recta, perdicat. Per Dómi- strongly lead us. Through our 
num, Lord. 


Second Posteommunion, May the gift, page 828, third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Eighth Sundap after Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 47, 10, 11 


UscÉPIMUS, Deus, miseri- E HAVE received Thy 
cérdiam tuam in.médio mercy, O God, in the 
templi tui:.secündum nomen midst of Thy temple; accord- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


666 


ing to Thy name, O God, so 
also 15 Thy praise unto the 
ends of the earth: Thy right 
hand is full of justice. Ps. 47, 2. 
Great is the Lord and exceed- 
ingly to be praised, in the city 
of our God, in His holy moun- 
tain. Y. Glory. 


EIGHTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


tuum, Deus, ita et laus tua in 
fines terre: justítia plena est 
déxtera tua. Ps. 47, 2. Magnus 
Dóminus, et laudábilis nimis: 
in civitáte Dei nostri, in 
monte sancto ejus. V. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


VER graciously bestow upon 

us in abundance, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, the spirit 
of thinking and doing what 
things are right, that we, who 
cannot exist without Thee, may 
have the strength to live in 
conformity with Thee. Through 
our Lord. 


Second, Prayer, 
the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


ARGÍRE nobis, quesumus, 

Dómine, semper spíri- 

tum cogitándi que recta sunt, 

propítius et agéndi: ut, qui 

sine te esse non póssumus, 

secündum te vívere valeámus. 
Per Dóminum. 


A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


Epistle. Rom. 8, 12-17 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 


RETHREN, we ore debtors, 

not to the flesh, to live 
&ccording to the flesh; for if 
you live according to the flesh, 
you shall die, but if by the 
spirit you mortify the deeds of 
the flesh, you shall live. For 
whosoever are led by the Spirit 
of God, they are the sons of 
God. For you have not received 
the spirit of bondage again in 
fear, but you have received the 
spirit of adoption of sons, where- 
by we cry Abba (Father). For 
the Spirit Himself giveth testi- 
mony to our spirit, that we are 
the sons of God; and if sons, 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Romános. 


RATRES: Debitóres sumus 

non carni, ut secundum 
carnem vivámus. Si enim 
Secündum carnem  vixéritis, 
moriémini: si autem spíritu 
facta carnis mortificavéritis, 
vivétis. Quicümque enim spí- 
ritu Dei agüntur, ii sunt fílii 
Dei. Non enim accepístis spí- 
ritum servitütis fterum in ti- 
móre, sed accepístis spíritum 
adoptiónis filiórum, in quo 
clamámus: Abba (Pater). 
Ipse enim Spíritus testimóni- 
um reddit spirítui nostro, 
quod sumus filii Dei. Si au- 
tem fílii, et herédes: herédes 


http://ccwatershed.org 


EIGHTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


quidem Dei, conerédes autem 
Christi, : 


Gradual. 


Esto mihi in Deum protec- 
tórem, et in locum refügil, ut 
Salvum me fácias. Y. Ps. 70, 1. 
Deus, in te sperávi: Dómine, 
non confündar in stérnum. 
Allelüja, allelüja. V. Ps. 47, 2. 
Magnus Dóminus, et laudá- 
bilis valde, in civitáte Dei nos- 
tri, in monte sancto ejus, Al- 
lelüja. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


667 


heirs, also; heirs indeed of 
God, and joint heirs with 
Christ. 


Ps. 30, 3 


Be Thou unto me a God, a 
protector, and a place of refuge, 
to save me. Y. Ps. 70, 1. In Thee, 
O God, have I hoped: O Lord, 
let me never be confounded. 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 47, 2. 
Great is the Lórd, and exceed- 
ingly to be praised; in the city 
of our God, in His holy moun- 
tain, Alleluia, 


Gospel. Luke 16, 1-9 


H$ Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 


T: ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus discípulis suis pará- 
bolam hanc: Homo quidam 
erat dives, qui habébat vílli- 
cum: et hic diffamátus est 
apud illum, quasi dissipásset 
bona ipsíus. Et vocávit illum, 
et ait illi: Quid hoc áudio de 
te? redde ratiónem villicatió- 
nis tuz: Jam enim non póteris 
villicáre. Ait autem víllicus 
intra se: Quid fáciam, quia 
dóminus meus aufert a me 
villicatiónem? fódere non vá- 
leo, mendicáre erubésco. Scio 
quid fáciam, ut, cum amótus 
füero a villicatióne, recípiant 
me in domos suas. Convocátis 
{taque singulis debitóribus dó- 
mini sui, dicébat primo: 
Quantum debes dómino, meo? 
At ille dixit: Centum cados 
ólei, Dixítque illi: Accipe cau- 
tiónem tuam: et sede cito, 
Scribe quinquaginta. Deínde 
álii dixit: Tu vero quantum 


_ Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke, 


T THAT time, Jesus spoke 

to His disciples this par- 

able: There was a certain rich 
man who had a steward; and 
the same was accused unto him 
that he had wasted his goods; 
and he called him, and said to 
him, How is it that I hear this 
of thee? give an account of thy 
stewardship, for now thou canst 
be steward no longer. And the 
steward said within himself, 
What shall I do, because my 
lord taketh away from me the 
stewardship? To dig I am not 
able: to beg I am ashamed, I 
know what I will do, that when 
I shall be put out of the stew- 
ardship, they may receive me 
into their houses. ‘Therefore 
calling together every one of his 
lord’s debtors, he said to the 
first, How much dost thou owe 
my lord? But he said. A hun- 
dred barrels of oil. And he said 
to him, Take thy bill, and sit 


http://ccwatershed.org 


'ees 


down quickly and write fifty. 
Then he said to another, And 
how much dost thou owe? Who 
said, A hundred quarters of 
wheat. He said to him, Take thy 
bill, and write eighty. And the 
lord commended the unjust 
steward, for as much as he had 
done wisely; for the children of 
this world are wiser in their 
generation than the children of 
light. And I say to you, Make 
unto you friends of the mam- 


EIGHTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


debes? Qui ait: Centum coros 
tritici. Ait illi: Accipe lítteras 
tuas, et scribe octoginta. Et 
laudávit dóminus víllicum .ni- 
quitátis, quia prudénter fecís- 
set: quia fíli hujus seculi 
prudentióres fíliis lucis in ge- 
neratióne sua sunt. Et ego 
vobis dico: Fácite vobis amí- 
cos de mamóna iniquitátis: 
ut, cum defecéritis, recípiant 
vos in eterna tabernácula. 


mon of iniquity, that when you shall fail, they may receive 


you into everlasting dwellings. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 17, 28, 32 


Thou wilt save the humble Pópulum hümilem salvam 
people, O Lord; and wilt bring facies Dómine, et óculos su- 
down the eyes of the proud; perbórum humiliábis: quóni- 
for Who is God but Thee, O am quis Deus preter te, Dó- 


Lord? 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


mine? 


Secret. 


ECEIVE, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the gifts which 

out of Thine own bounty we 

bring to Thee, that these most 

holy mysteries may, by the op- 

eration of the power of Thy 

grace, both sanctify us in the 

conduct of our present lives and 

lead us unto everlasting joys. 
Through our Lord. 


ÜscrPE, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, miinera, que tibi 
de tua largitáte deférimus: ut 
haec sacrosáneta mystéria, 
grátie tue operánte virtüte, 
et preséntis vitz nos conver- 
Satióne sanctificent, et ad 
gáudia sempitérna perdücant. 
Per Dominum. 


Second Secret, Graclously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. 


- Taste and see that the Lord 
is sweet: blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him. 


Ps. 33, 9 


Gustáte et vidéte, quóniam 
Suávis est, Dóminus; beátus 
vir, qui sperat in eo. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NINTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


669 


Postcommunion 


Ir nobis, Dómine, repará- 
tio mentis et córporis 
cmléste mystérium:. ut, cujus 
exséquimur cultum, sentiá- 
müs eftéctum, Per Dóminum. 


ET the heavenly mystery 

be to us, O Lord, the re- 

storation of soul and body, that, 

as we perform its worship, we 

may experience its effect. 
Through our Lord, 


Second Fostodmeinion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Aint) Sunday after Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 53, 6,7 © 


CCE 2 Deus ádjuvat me, et 

Dóminus suscéptor est 
ánime mes: avérte mala ini- 
mícis meis, et in veritáte tua 
dispérde illos, protéctor meus, 
Dómine: Ps. 53, 3. Deus, in 
nómine. tuo salvum me fac: 
et in virtüte tua libera. me. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


EHOLD, God is my ‘helper, 
and the Lord is the pro- 
tector of my soul: turn back 
the evils upon my enemies, and 
cut them off in Thy truth, O 
Lord, my protector. Ps. 53, 3. 
Save me, O God, by Thy name, 
and deliver me in Thy strength. 
¥. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ATEANT aures misericór- 

die tug, Dómine, préci- 

bus supplicántum: et, ut pe- 

téntibus desideráta concédas; 

fac eos, que tibi sunt plácita, 
postuláre. Per Dóminum. . 


ET the ears of Thy mercy, 

O Lord, be open to the 
prayers of Thy suppliants, and, 
that Thou mayest grant their 
Gesires to them that seek, make 
them to ask only for those 
things that please Thee. 


' ‘Through our Lord. 
Second Prayer, n cunctis, page 827; third at the "choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 10, 6-13 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
ad Corínthios. 


cupiscéntes malérum, 
sicut et illi concupiérunt. Ne- 
que idolólatrz efficiámini, si- 


Tre Nos simus con- * 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, let us not covet 
evil things, as they also 
coveted. Neither become ye 
idolaters, as some of them: as 


http://ccwatershed.org 


670 


it is written: The people sat 
down to eat and drink, and rose 
up to play. Neither let us com- 
mit fornication, as some of 
them committed fornication, 
and there fell in one day three 
&nd twenty thousand. Neither 
let us tempt Christ, as some of 
them tempted, and perished by 
the serpents. Neither do you 
murmur, as some of them mur- 
mured, and were destroyed by 
the destroyer. Now all these 
things happened to them in fig- 
ure, and they are written for 
our correction, upon whom the 
ends of the world are come. 
Wherefore he that thinketh 
himself to stand, let him take 
heed lest he fall. Let no temp- 
tation take hold on you, but 
such as is human: and God is 
faithful, Who will not suffer 
you to be tempted above that 
which you are able; but will 
make also with temptation is- 
sue, that you may be able to 
bear it. 


Gradual. 


O Lord our Lord, how ad- 
mirable is Thy name in 
the whole.earth. Y. For Thy 
magnificence is elevated above 
"he heavens. Alleluia, alleluia. 
V. Ps. 58, 2. Deliver me from 
my enemies, O my God: and 
defend me from them that rise 
up against me. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


NINTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


cut quidam ex ipsis: quem- 
ádmodum scriptum est: Sedit 
pópulus manducáre et bíbere, 
et surrexerunt iüdere. Neque 
fornicémur, sicut quidam ex 
ipsis fornicati sunt, et cecidé- 
runt una die vigínti tria míl- 
lia. Neque tentémus Chris- 
tum, sicut quidam eórum ten- 
tavérunt et a serpéntibus pe- 
riérunt. Neque murmuravéri- 
tis, sicut quidam eórum mur- 
muravérunt, et periérunt ab 
exterminatóre. Hec autem 
ómnia in figüra contingébant 
ilis: scripta sunt autem ad 
correptiónem nostram, in quos 
fines seculérum devenérunt. 
Itaque qui se exífstimat stare, 
vídeat ne cadat. Tentatio vos 
non apprehéndat, nisi hu- 
mana: fidélis autem Deus est, 
qui non patiétur vos tentári 
supra id quod potéstis, sed fá- 
ciet étiam cum  tentatióne 
provéntum, ut possítis susti- 
nére. 


Ps. 8,.2 

Dómine Dóminus noster, 
quam admirábile est nomen 
tuum in univérsa terra! Y. 
Quóniam eleváta est magni- 
ficéntia tua super czlos. Alle- 
lüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 58, 2. 
Erípe me de inimícis meis, 
Deus meus: et ab insurgénti- 
bus in me libera me. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Luke 19, 4-47 


"HB Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, when Jesus 

, drew near to Jerusalem, 
Seeing the city, He wept over it 
saying, If thou also hadst 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secüóndum Lucam. 
I" ILLO témpore: Cum ap- 
propinquáret Jesus Jerü- 
salem, videns civitátem, flevit 
super illam, dicens: Quia # 


http://ccwatershed.org 


0 SES TS Ser O 00€ 


NINTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 671 


cognovisses et tu, et quidem 
in hac die tua, que ad pacem 
tibi, nunc autem abscóndita 
sunt ob óculis tuis. Quia véni- 
ent dies in te: et.circümda- 
bunt te inimíci tui vallo, et 
circumdabunt te: et coangus- 
tabunt te ündique: et ad ter- 
ram prostérnent te, et fílios 
tuos, qui in te sunt, et non re- 
linquent in te lápidem super 
lápidem: eo quod non cognó- 
veris tempus visitatiónis tue. 
Et ingréssus in tempium cepit 
ejicere vendéntes in illo, et 
2méntes, dicens illis: Scrip- 
*$um est: Quia domus mea do- 
mus Oratiónis est. Vos autem 
fecístis illam spelüncam la- 
trónum. Et erat docens quo- 
tidie in templo. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 


Justitie Dómini rectz, læti- 
ficántes corda, et judícia ejus 
dulcióra super mel et favum: 
nam et servus tuus custódit 
ea. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


known, and that in this thy 
day, the things that are to thy 
peace: but now they are hid- 
den from thy eyes. For the days 
shall come upon thee, and thy 
enemies shall cast a trench 
about thee, and compass thee 
round, and straiten thee on 
every side, and beat thee flat 
to the ground, and thy children 
who are in thee; and they shall 
not leave in thee a stone upon 
a stone, because thou hast not 
known the time of thy visita- 
tion. And entering into the 
temple, He began to cast out 
ihem that sold therein, and 
they that bought, saying to 
them, It is written, My house is 
ihe house of prayer, but you 
have made it à den of thieves. 
And he was teaching daily in 
the temple. 


18, 9, 10, 11, 12 


The justices of the Lord are 
right, rejoicing hearts, and His 
judgments sweeter than honey 
and the honeycomb: for Thy 
servant keepeth them. 


Secret 


ONCEDE nobis, quesumus, 
Dómine, hee digne fre- 
quentáre mystéria: quia, quó- 
ties hujus hóstie commemo- 
rátio celebrátur, opus nostre 
redemptiónis exercétur. Per 
Dóminum. 


RANT US, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, worthily to fre- 

quent these mysteries, for as 

often as the commemoration of 

ihis victim is celebrated, the 

work of our redemption is per- 
formed. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page $28; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


672 TENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


Communion. John 6, 57 
He that eateth my flesh, and Qui mandücat meam car- 
drinketh my blood, abideth in nem, et bibit meum sángui- 
Me, and I in him; saith the nem, in me manet, et ego in 


Lord. 


€0, dicit Dóminus. 


Postcommunion 


Ti. the communion of Thy 
Sacrament, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, both cleanse us 
from sin and make us of one 
mind and one heart in Thy 
service. Through our Lord. 


UI nobis, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, commünio sacra- 
ménti, et purificatiónem cón- 
ferat, et tribuat unitátem. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the glft, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Tenth Sounbap after Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 54, 17, 18, 20, 23 


HEN I cried to the Lord 

He heard my voice, 
from them that draw near to 
me; and He humbled them, 
Who is before all ages, and re- 
mains for ever: cast thy care 
upon the Lord, and He shall 
.sustain thee. Ps. 54, 2. Hear, O 
God, my prayer, and despise 
not my supplication; be atten- 
tive to me and hear me. F. 
Glory. 


um clamárem ad Dómi- 

num, exaudívit vocem 
meam, ab his, qui appropín- 
quant mihi: et humiliávit eos 
qui est ante secula, et manet 
in stérnum: jacta cogitátum 
tuum in Dómino, et ipse te 
enttriet. Ps. 54, 2. Exáudi, 
Deus, oratiónem meam, et ne 
despéxeris deprecatiónem me- 
am: inténde mihi, et exáudi 
me. ¥. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who dost chiefly 

manifest Thy power in 
forbearance and mercy, mul- 
tiply upon us Thy pity, that, 
hastening on to Thy promises, 
we may be made partakers of 
the blessings of heaven. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui omnipotentiam 
tuam parcéndo máxime 
et  miserándo  maniféstas: 
multíplica super nos miseri- 
córdiam tuam; ut ad tua pro- 
míssa curréntes, celéstium 
bonórum fácias esse consórtes. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


‘the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


eS 


TENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


673 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 12, 2-11 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 


A Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Scitis quóniam 

cum gentes essétis, ad 
Simulácra muta prout duce- 
bámini eüntes. Ideo notum 
vobis fácio, quod nemo in 
Spíritu Dei loquens, dicit aná- 
thema Jesu. Et nemo potest 
dicere, Dóminus Jesus, nisi in 
Spíritu Sancto,  Divisiónes 
vero gratiárum sunt, idem 
autem Spiritus. Et divisiónes 
ministratiónum sunt, idem 
autem Dóminus. Et divisiónes 
operatiónum sunt, idem vero 
Deus, qui operátur ómnia in 
ómnibus.. Unicuique autem 
datur manifestátio Spíritus ad 
utilitátem.. Alii quidem per 
Spíritum datur sermo sapi- 
éntie: Alii autem sermo sci- 
éntie secindum eündem Spí- 
ritum: Alteri fides in eódem 
Spfritu: alii grátia sanitátum 
in.uno Spíritu, álii operátio 
virtütum, áli prophetía, alii 
Giscrétio spirituum, alii gé- 
nera linguárum, alii inter- 
pretátio sermónum. Hec au- 
tem ómnia operátur unus at- 
que idem Spíritus, dívidens 
singulis prout vult. 


Gradual. 
Custódi me, Dómine, ut 
pupillam  ócul: sub um- 


bra elárum tuárum prótege 
me. ¥. De vultü tuo judícium 
meum pródeat: óculi tui ví- 
deant æquitátem. Allelüja, al- 
lelüja. V. Ps. 64, 2. Te decet 
hymnus, Deus, in Sion; et 


Lesson from ihe Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 


RETHREN, you know that, 
when you were heathens, 
you went to dumb idols, accord- 
ing as you were led. Wherefore 
I give you to understand, that 
no.man speaking by the Spirit 
of God, saith Anathema to Jesus; 
and no man can say, The. Lord 
Jesus, but by the Holy Ghost. 
Now. there are diversities of 
graces, but the same. Spirit; 
and there are diversities of 
ministries, but the same Lord; 
and there are diversities of op- 
erations, but the same God, 
Who worketh all in all. And the 
manifestation of the Spirit is 
given to every man unto ewe 
To one indeed, by the Spirit, is 
given the word of. wisdom; and 
to another, the word of knowl- 
edge, according to the same 
Spirit; to anotber, the grace of 
healing in one Spirit; to an- 
other, the working of miracles; 
to another, prophecy; to an- 
other the discerning of spirits; 
to another, divers kinds of 
tongues; to another, interpre- 
tation of speeches. But all these 
things one and the.same Spirit 
Worketh, dividing to every one 
according as He will - . 


Ps. 16, 8, 2 


Keep me, O Lord, as the ap- 
ple of Thy eye: protect me un- 
der the shadow of Thy wings. 
Y. Let my judgment come forth 
from Thy countenance: let Thy 
eyes behold the things that are 
equitable. Alleluia, alleluia. V. 
Ps, 64, 2.. A hymn, O God, be- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


674 
cometh Thee in Sion: and a 


vow shall be paid to Thee in 
Jerusalem. Alleluia, 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


TENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


tibi reddétur votum in Jerü- 
Salem. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Luke 18, 9-14 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke.. 
T THAT lime, Jesus spoke 
this parable to some who 
trusted in themselves as just, 
and despised others: Two men 
went up into the temple to 
pray; the one was a pharisee, 
and the other a publican. The 
pharisee standing, prayed thus 
with himself: O God, I give 
Thee thanks that I am not as 
the rest of men, extortioners, 
unjust, adulterers; as also is 
this publican. I fast twice in 
the week; I give tithes of all 
that I possess. And the publi- 
can standing afar off, would not 
so much as lift up his eyes to- 
wards heaven, but struck his 
breast, saying, O God, be mer- 
ciful to me a sinner, I say to 
you, this man went down to 
his house justified rather than 
the other: because every one 
that exalteth himself shall be 
humbled, and he that humbleth 
himself shall be exated. 


Creed, page 765. 


W Sequéntia saneti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 
I. ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus ad quosdam, qui in se 
confidébant tamquam justi, et 
aspernabantur céteros, pará- 
bolam istam: Duo hómines 
ascendérunt in templum ut 
Orárent: unus phariszus, et 
alter publicánus. Phariszus 
Stans, hec apud se orabat 
Deus, grátias ago tibi, quia 
non sum sicut céteri hómi- 
num: captóres, injüsti, adül- 
teri: velut étiam hic publicá- 
nus. Jejüno bis in sábbato: 
décimas do ómnium, que pos- 
Sídeo. Et publicánus a longe 
Stans, nolébat nec óculos ad 
celum leváre: sed percutiébat 
pectus suum, dicens: Deus, 
propítius esto mihi peccatéri. 
Dico vobis descéndit hic jus- 
tiücátus in domum suam ab 
illo: quia omnis, qui se exál- 
tat, humiliabitur: et qui se 
humíliat, exaltabitur, 


Offertory. Ps. 24, 1, 3 


"To Thee, O Lord, have I 
lifted up my soul: in Thee, O my 
God, I put my trust, let me not 
be ashamed: neither let my en- 
emies laugh at me: for none 
of them that wait on Thee shall 
be confounded, 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ad te, Dómine, levávi áni- 
mam meam: Deus meus, in te 
confído, non erubéscam: ne- 
que irrídeant me inimíci mel; 
étenim univérsi qui te exspéc- 
tant, non confundéntur. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ELEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST O75 


Secret 


rr, Dómine, sacrificia di- 

cata reddantur: que sic 
ad honórem nóminis tui de- 
ferénda tribuisti, ut éadem 
remédia fíeri nostra prestá- 
res. Per Dóminum. 


ET the sacrifices dedicated 

to Thee, O Lord, be ren- 

dered back, since Thou hast 
given them to be presented for 
the honor of 'Thy name, so that 


in them Thou mightest afford 
us & remedy for all our ills, 
Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Ps. 50, 21 


Acceptabis sacrifícium jus- Thou wilt accept the sacrifice 
titie, oblatiónes, et holocáus- of justice, oblations, and holo- 
ta, super altáre tuum, Dómine. causts, upon Thy alter, O Lord. 


Postcommunion 


vuEsuMUs, Dómine Deus 

noster: ut, quos divínis 
reparáre non désinis sacra- 
méntis, tuis non destituas be- 
nígnus auxílis. Per Dómi- 
num. 


LORD, our God, we pray 

that in Thy loving-kind- 
ness Thou wilt not deprive of 
Thine assistance those whom 
Thou ceasest not to restore with 
divine sacraments. 'Through our 
Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Eleventh Sunday after Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 67, 6, 7, 36 


EUs in loco sancto suo: op in His holy place; God 
Deus qui inhabitáre fa- Who maketh men of one 


cit unánimes in domo: ipse 
dabit virtütem, et fortitüdi- 
nem plebi sue. Ps. 67, 2. Ex- 
sürgat Deus, et dissipéntur 
inimíci ejus. et fügiant, qui 
odérunt eum, a facie ejus. 
¥. Glória Patri. 


mind to dwell in & house: He 
Shall give power and strength 
to His people. Ps. 67, 2. Let God 
arise, and let His enemies be 
Scattered: and let them that 
hate Him flee from before His 
face. ¥. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


676 


ELEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

Who, in the abundance 
of Thy loving-kindness, dost 
exceed both the deserts and the 
hopes of Thy suppliants, pour 
forth Thy mercy upon us, to 
take away from us those things 
which our conscience feareth, 
and to add that which our 
prayer presumeth not to ask. 
Through our Lord. 


MNIPOTENS sempitérne 

Deus, qui .abundantia 
pietátis tue, et mérita súp- 
plicum excédis et vota: ef- 
fünde super nos misericór- 
diam tuam; ut dimittas que 
consciéntia métuit, et adjicias 
quod orátio non pete. 
Per Dóminum. , 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third. at the ahiatoe of 


ihe priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 4, 1-10: 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle. 


RETHREN, I make known 

P unto you the gospel 
which I preached to you, which 
also you have received, and 
wherein you stand; by which 
also you are saved, if you hold 
fast after what manner I 
preached unto you, unless you 
have believed in vain. For I 
delivered unto you first of all, 
which I also received, how that 
Christ died for our sins accord- 
ing to the Scriptures; and that 
He was buried, and that He 
rose again the third day ac- 
cording to the Scriptures; and 
that He was seen by Cephas, 
and after that by the eleven. 
Then was He seen by more than 
five hundred brethren at once; 
of whom many remain until 
this present, and some are 
fallen asleep. After that He was 
seen by James, then by all the 
apostles. And last of all He was 
seen also by me, as by one born 
out of due time. For I am the 
least of the apostles, who am 
not worthy to be called an apos- 


Léctio Epistole beáti Paull 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Notum vobis fá- 
H cio Evangélium, quod 
predicávi vobis, quod et ac- 
cepistis, in quo et statis, per 
quod et salvamini: qua rati-- 
óne predicaverim vobis, si 
tenétis, nisi frustra credidís- 
tis. Tradidi enim vobis in pri- 
mis, quod et accépi: quóniam 
Christus mórtuus est pro pec- 
catis nostris secündum Scrip- 
türas: et quia  sepültus 
est, et quia resurréxit tértia 
die secündum Scriptüras: et 
quia visus est Cephe, et post 
hoc uündecim. Deinde visus 
est plus quam quingéntis frá- 
tribus simul, ex quibus multi 
manent usque adhuc, quidam 
autem .dormiérunt. Deinde 
visus est Jacóbo, deínde Após- 
tolis ómnibus: novíssime au- 
tem ómnium tamquam abor- 
tívo, visus est et mihi. Ego 
enim sum mínimum Aposto- 
lórum, qui non.sum dignus 
vocári Apéstolus, quóniam 
persecütus sum  Ecclésiam 
Dei. Gráiia autem Dei sum 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ELEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 677 


id quod sum, et gratia ejus in 
me vacua non fuit, 


Gradual. 


In Deo, sperávit cor meum, 
et adjütus sum: et reflóruit 
caro mea: et ex voluntáte mea 
confitébor illi. Y. Ad te, Do- 
mine, clamávi: Deus meus, ne 
sileas: ne discédas a me. Al- 
lelüja, allelája. V. Ps. 80, 2, 3. 
Exsultáte Deo adjutóri nostro, 
jubiláte Deo Jacob: sümite 
psalmum jucündum cum cí- 
thara. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


tle, because I persecuted the 
Church of God; but by the 
grace of God I am what I am; 
&nd His grace in me hath not 
been void. 


Ps. 27, 7- 1 


In God hath my heart con- 
fided, and I have been helped; 
and my flesh bath flourished 
again; and with my will I will 
give praise to Him. Y. Unto 
Thee will I cry, O Lord: O my 
God, be not Thou silent; depart 
not from me. Alleluia, alleluia. 
y. Ps. 80, 2, 3. Rejoice in God 
our helper; sing aloud to the 
God of Jacob: take a pleasant 
psalm with the harp. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Mark 7, 31-37 


HR Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Marcum. 
N ILLO témpore: Exiens 
Jesus de finibus Tyri, ve- 
nit per Sidónem ad mareGali- 
lew, inter médios fines Deca- 
póleos. Et addücunt et sur- 
dum et mutum, ei depreca- 
bántur eum, ut impónat illi 
manum. -Et apprehéndens 
eum de turba seórsum, misit 
dígitos suos in aurículas ejus: 
et éxspuens, tétigit linguam 
ejus: et suspíciens in celum, 
ingémuit, et ait illi: Eph- 
pheta, quod est adaperíre. Et 
statim apérte sunt aures ejus, 
et solátum est vinculum lin- 
gue ejus, et loquebátur recte. 
Et precépit illis, ne cui dí- 
cerent. Quanto autem eis 
precipiébat, tanto magis plus 
predicábant: et eo ámplius 
admirabantur, dicéntes: Bene 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 


T THAT time, Jesus going 

out to the coasts of 

e, came by Sidon to the sea 

of Galilee, through the midst 
of the coasts of Decapolis. And 
they bring to Him one deaf 
and dumb, and they besought 
Him that He would lay. His 
hand upon him. And taking 
him from the multitude apart, 
He put His fingers into his ears, 
and spitting, He touched his 
tongue; and looking up to 
heaven, He groaned and said to 
him, Ephpheta, that is, Be 
thou opened: and immediately 
his ears were opened, and the 
string of his tongue was loosed, 
and he spoke right. And He 
charged them that they should 
tell no man: but the more He 
charged them so much the more 


http://ccwatershed.org 


678 ELEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


a great deal did they publish ómnia fecit: et surdos fecit 
it; and so much the more did audíre, et mutos loqui. 

they wonder, saying, He hath 

done all things well; He hath made both the deaf to hear, and 
the dumb to speak. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 29, 2, 3 


I will extol Thee, O Lord, for ^ Exaltábo te, Dómine, quo- 
Thou hast upheld me; and hast niam suscepisti me, nec delec- 
not made my enemies to re- tasti inimícos meos super me: 
joice over me: O Lord, I have Dómine, clamávi ad te, et 
cried to Thee, and Thou hast sanásti me. 
healed me. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


oox with mercy, we be- ÉsPICE, Dómine, quesu- 
Ti seech Thee, O Lord, upon mus, nostram propítius 
our homage, that the gift we servitütem: ut, quod offéri- 
Offer may be accepted by thee mus, sit tibi munus accéptum, 
and be the support of our et sit nostre fragilitátis sub- 
frailty. Through our Lord. sidium. Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 
= Communion. Prov. 3, 9, 10 

Honor the Lord with thy sub- Hondédra Dóminum de tua 
stance, and with the first of all substantia, et de primitiis 
thy fruits: and thy barns shall frugum tuérum: et implebun- 
be filled with abundarice, and tur hórrea tua saturitáte, et 
thy presses shall run over with vino torculdria redundábunt. 


wine. 


Postcommunion 


Y RECEIVING Thy sacra- 

ment, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, may we experience help 
in soul and body, that, being 
saved in both, we may glory in 
the fulness of our heavenly 
remedy. Through our Lord. 


ENTIÁMUS, quisumus, Dó- 
mine, tui perceptióne 
sacraménti, subsidium mentis 
et córporis: ut in utróque sal- 
váti, czléstis remédii pleni- 
tüdine gloriémur, Per Dómi- 
num. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. , 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Ln auttm dd 


TWELFTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 678 


Twelfth Sundap after Pentecost (Green) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


gus, in adjutórium me- 

um inténde: Démine, 

ad adjuvandum me festina: 

confundántur et revereántur 

inimici mei, qui querunt áni- 

mam meam. Ps. 69, 4. Aver- 

tántur retrórsum, et erubés- 

cant: qui cógitant mihi mala. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


Ps. 69, 2, 3 


NCLINE unto my aid, O God: 

O Lord, make haste to help 
me: let my enemies be con- 
founded and ashamed, who seek 
my soul. Ps. 69, 4.. Let them be 
turned backward and blush for 
shame, who desire evils to me. 
y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


MNÍPOTENS et miséricors - 


Deus, de cujus münere 
venit, ut tibi & fidélibus tuis 
digne et laudabíliter serviá- 
tur: tríbue, quesumus, nobis; 
ut ad promissiónes tuas sine 
offensióne currámus. Per Dó- 
minum. 


LMIGHTY and eternal God, 
Whose gift it is that Thy 
althful serve Thee worthily 
and rightly, grant us, we be- 
seech Thee, that we may with- 
out offense hasten on to the 
fulfilment of Thy promises. 
‘Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. 2 Cor. 3, 4-9 


Lectio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Fidüclam talem 

habémus per Christum 
ad Deum: non quod suffici- 
éntes simus cogitáre áliquid 
& nobis, quasi ex nobis: sed 
sufficiéntia nostra ex Deo est: 
qui et idéneos nos fecit minís- 
tros novi testaménti: non lit- 
tera sed spíritu: littera enim 
occídit, spíritus autem viví- 
ficat. Quod si ministrátio 
mortis, lítteris deformáta in 
lapídibus, fuit in glória; ita 
ut non possent inténdere filii 
Israël in fáciem Méysi, prop- 
ter glóriam vultus ejus, que 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle. 


RETHREN, Such confidence 

wé have through Christ 
toward God. Not that we are 
sufficient to think any thing of 
ourselves, as of ourselves; but 
our sufficiency is from God. 
Who also hath made us fit min- 
isters of the new testament, not 
in the letter, but in the spirit: 
for the letter killeth, but the 
spirit quickeneth. Now if the 
ministration of death, engraven 
with letters upon stones, was 
glorious, so that the children of 
Israel could not steadfastly be- 
hold the face of Moses, for the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


680 TWELFTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


glory of his countenance; which 
is made void: how shall not the 
ministration of the spirit be 
rather in glory? For if the min- 
istration of condemnation be 
glory, much more the ministra- 
‘tion of justice aboundeth in 
glory. 


evacuátur: quómodo non ma- 
gis ministrátio Spíritus erit 
in glória? Nam si ministrátio 
damnatiónis glória est: multo 
magis abünde&t ministérium 
justitie in glória. 


Gradual. Ps. 33, 2, 3 


I will bless the Lord at all 
times; His praise shall be ever 
in my mouth. V. In the Lord 
Shall my soul be praised: let 
the meek hear, and rejoice. Al- 
leluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 87, 2. O 
Lord, the God of my salvation, 
I have cried in the day, and in 
the night, before Thee. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Benedicam, Dóminum in 
omni témpore: semper laus 
ejus in ore meo. Y. In Dómino 
laudábitur ánima mea: áudi- 
ant mansuéti, et laténtur. Al- 
lelija, allelija. Y. Ps. 87, 2. 
Démine Deus salitis mez, in 
die clamavi et nocte coram te, 
Allelája. 


Gospel. Luke 10, 23-37 ` 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, Jesus said to 

~An His disciples, Blessed 
are the eyes that see the things 
which you see. For I say to you, 
that many prophets and kings 
have desired to see the things 
that you see, and have not seen 
them; and to hear the things 
that you hear, and have not 
heard them. And behold a@ cer- 
tain lawyer stood up, tempting 
Him, and saying, Master, what 
must I do to possess eternal 
life? But He said to him, What 
is written in the Jaw? How 
readest thou? He answering, 
said, Thou shalt love the Lord 
ihy God with thy whole heart, 
and with thy whole soul, and 
with all thy strength, and with 
all thy mind; and thy neigh- 
bor as thyself. And He said to 
him, Thou hast answered 


H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Dixit 
Jesus discfpulis suis: Be- 
ati óculi, qui vident que vos 
vidétis. Dico enim vobis, 
quod multi prophéte et reges 
voluérunt vidére que vos vi- 
détis, et non vidérunt: et au- 
dire que audítis, et non audi- 
érunt. Et ecce quidam legis- 
peritus surrexit, tentans il- 
lum, et dicens:. Magister, quid 
faciéndo vitam ætérnam pos- 
sidébo? At ille dixit ad eum: 
In lege quid scriptum est? 
quómodo legis? Ille respón- 
dens, dixit: Díliges Dóminum 
Deum tuum ex tota anima 
tua, et ex ómnibus víribus 
tuis, et ex omni mente tua: et 
próximum tuumsicuttefpsum. 
Dixítque illi; Recte respon- 
disti: hoc fac, et vives. Ille 
autem volens  justificáre 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TWELFTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


Seipsum, dixit ad Jesum: 
Et quis est meus próximus? 
Suscípiens autem Jesus, dixit: 
Homo quidam descendébat ab 
Jerüsalem in Jéricho, et ínci- 
dit in latrénes, qui étiam des- 
polviavérunt eum: et plagis 
impésitis abiérunt, - semivívo 
relícto..Accidit autem ut sa- 
cérdos quidam descénderet 
eádem via: et viso illo pre- 
terívit.. Simíliter et levíta, 
cum esset secus locum, et vi- 
déret eum, pertransiit, Sa- 
maritanus autem quidam iter 
fáciens, venit secus eum: et 
videns eum, misericórdia mo- 
tus est. Et apprópians alligá- 
vit vülnera ejus, infündens 
oleum et vinum: et impónens 
ium in juméntum suum, 
duxit in stábulum, et curam 
ejus egit. Et áltera die pró- 
tulit duos denários, et dedit 
stabulario, et ait: Curam illfus 
habe: et quodcümque super- 
erogáveris, ego cum rediero, 
reddam tibi. Quis horum tri- 
um vidétur tibi próximus fu- 
ísse illi, qui íncidit in la- 
trónes? At ille dixit: Qui fecit 
misericórdiam in illum. Et ait 
ill Jesus: Vade, et tu fac si- 
militer. 


Creed, page 765. 


681 


rightly: this do, and thou shalt 
live.. But he, willing to justify 
himself, said to Jesus, And who 
is my neighbor? And Jesus an- 
Swering said, A certain man 
went down from Jerusalem to 
Jericho, and fell among robbers, 
who also stripped-him, and 
having wounded him, went 
away, leaving him half dead: 

and it chanced that a certain 
priest went down the same way, 
and seeing him, passed by, In 
like manner also a levite, when 
he was near the place and saw 


him, passed by. But a certain 


Samaritan being on his jour- 
ney, came near him, and seeing 
him, was moved with compas- 
sion; and going up to him, 
bound up his wounds, pouring 
in oil and wine; and, setting 
him upon his own beast, 
brought him to an inn, and 
took care of him: and the next 
day he took out two pence, and 
gave to the host, and said, Take 
care of him, and whatsoever 
thou shalt spend over and 
above, I, at my return, will re- 
pay thee. Which of these three, 
in thy opinion, was neighbor 
to him that fell among robbers? 
But he said, He that showed 
mercy to him, And Jesus said 
to him, Go, and do thou in like 
manner. 


Offertory. Ex. 32, 11, 13,14 


Precátus est Móyses 1n con- 
spéctu Dómini Dei sui, et 
dixit: Quare, Dómine, irásce- 
ris in pópulo tuo? Parce ire 
anime tus: meménto Abra- 
ham, Isaac et Jacob, quibus 
jurásti dare terram fluéntem 
lac et mel. Et Dlacdtus factus 


Moses prayed in the sight of 
the Lord his God, and said, 
Why, O Lord, is Thy indigna- 
tion enkindled against Thy peo- 
ple? Let the anger of Thy mind 
cease; remember. Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob, towhom Thou 
didst swear to give a land flow- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


682 


ing with milk and honey: and 
the Lord was appeased from do- 
ing the evil, which He had 


THIRTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


est Dóminus de malignitáte, 
Quam dixit mens pópulo suo. 


spoken of doing against the people. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY behold, we pray 
Thee, O Lord, the sac- 
rifices which we lay upon Thy 
Sacred altars, that, in bringing 
us plentiful forgiveness, they 
may give honor to Thy name. 
Through our Lord. 


Ósrras, qusesumus Dó- 

mine, propítius inténde, 

quas sacris altáribus exhibé- 

mus: ut nobis indulgéntiam 

largiéndo, tuo nómini dent 
honórem. Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Ps. 103, 13, 14, 15 


The earth shall be filled 
with the fruit of Thy works, O 
Lord, that Thou mayest bring 
bread out of the earth, and that 
wine may cheer the heart of 
man; that he may make the 
face cheerful with oil; and that. 
bread may strengthen man’s 
heart. 


De fructu óperum tuórum, 
Dómine, satiábitur terra: ut 
edücas panem de terra, et 
vinum letíficet cor hóminis: 
us exhílaret faciem in óleo, et 
panis cor hóminis confírmet. 


Postcommunion 


AY the holy partaking of 
Xo this mystery, we pray 
Thee, O Lord, vivify us, bring- 
ing us at once forgiveness and 
strengthening. Through our 
Lord. 


IVÍFICET nos, quesumus, 
Dómine, hujus partici- 
sancta mystérii: et 
páriter nobis expiatiónem 
tríbuat, et munímen. Per 
Dóminum. 


pátio 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Thirteenth Sunday after Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


i aye regard, O Lord, to Thy 
covenant, and. forsake 
not to the end the souls of Thy 


Ps. 73, 20, 19, 23 


£sPice, Dómine, in tes- 
taméntum tuum, et 
ánimas. páuperum tuórum ne 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THIRTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


derelinquas in finem: ex- 
surge, Dómine, .et jüdica 
causam tuam: et ne oblivis- 
cáris voces queréntium te. 
Ps, 73, 1. Ut quid, Deus, re- 
pulfsti in finem: irátus est 
Furor tuus super oves pascue 
tum? Y. Glória Patri. 


683 


poor: arise, O Lord, and judge 
Thy cause, and forget not the 
voices of them that seek Thee. 
Ps. 73, 1. O God, why hast Thou 
cast us off unto the end: why is 
Thy wrath enkindled against 
the sheep of Thy dd y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


Ot sempitérne 
Deus, da nobis fídei, 


‘ LMIGHTY, eternal God, 
grant us the increase of 


spei, et caritátis augméntum: faith, hope, and charity; and, 
et, ut mereámur ássequi quod that we may deserve to attain 
promíttis, fac nos amáre quod what Thou dost promise, make 


precipis. Per Dóminum. 


us to love what Thou dost com- 
mand. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Gal. 3, 16-22 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Gálatos. 


RATRES: Abrahe dicte 

sunt promissiónes, et 
sémini ejus. Non dicit: Et 
semínibus, quasi in multis; 
sed quasi in uno: Et sémini 
tuo, qui est Christus. Hoc au- 
tem dico: testaméntum con- 
firmátum a Deo, que post 
quadringéntos et trigínta an- 
nos facta est lex, non irritum 
facit ad evacuándum promis- 
siónem. Nam si ex lege her- 
éditas, jam non ex promis- 
sióne. Abrahe autem per re- 
promissiónem donávit Deus. 
Quid ígitur lex? Propter 
transgressiónes pósita est do- 
nec veníret semen, cui prom- 
fserat; ordináta per Angelos 
in manu mediatóris. Mediá- 
tor autem Un{ys non est: De- 
‘us autem unus est, Lex ergo 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Galatians. 

RETHREN, To Abraham 
were the promises made, 

and to his seed. He saith not, 
And to his seeds, as of many; 
but as of one, And to thy seed, 
which is Christ. Now this I 
say, that the testament whick 
was confirmed by God, the lav 
which was made after four 
hundred and thirty years, doth 
not disannul; to make the 
promise of no effect. For if the 
inheritance be of the law, it is 
no more of promise. Why then 
was the law? It was set be- 
cause of transgressions, until 
the seed should come, to whom 
He made the promise: being or- 
dained by angels in the hand 
of a mediator. Now a mediator 
is not of one: but God is one. 
Was the law then against the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


684 THIRTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


promises of God? God forbid. 
For if there had been a law 
given, which could give life, 
verily justice should have been 
by the law. But the Scripture 
hath concluded all under sin, 
that the promise by the faith of 
Jesus Christ might be given to 
them that believe. 


advérsus promissa Dei? Ab- 
Sit. Si enim data esset lex, 
que posset vivificáre, vere ex 
lege esset justitia. Sed con- 
clúsit Scriptura ómnia sub 
peccáto, ut promfssio ex fide 
Jesu Christi darétur credén- 
tibus. $ 


Gradual. Ps. 73, 20, 19, 22 


Have regard, O Lord, to Thy 
covenant, and forsake not to 
the end the souls of Thy poor. 
¥. Arise, O Lord, and judge Thy 
cause: remember the reproach 
of Thy servants. Alleluia, alle- 
lula. V. Ps. 89, 1.. Lord, Thou 
hast been our refuge, from gen- 
eration to generation. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Réspice, Dómine, in testa- 
méntum tuum: et ánimas 
páuperum tuórum ne oblivis- 
cáris in finem. Y. Exsürge, 
Dómine, et jüdica causam 
tuam: memor esto oppróbril 
Servórum tuórum. Allelija, 
allelija. V. Ps. 89, 1. Dómine, 
refügium factus es nobis a 
generatióne, et progénie, Al- 
lelüja. 


Gospel. Luke 17, 11-19 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, As Jesus Was 

going to Jerusalem, He 

passed through the midst of 
Samaria and Galilee: and as 
He entered into a certain town, 
there met Him ten men that 
were lepers, who stood afar off, 
and lifted up their voice, say- 
ing, Jesus, master, have mercy 
on us. Whom when He saw, He 
said, Go, show yourselves to the 
priests. And it came to pass, 
that, as they went, they were 
made clean. And one of them, 
when he saw that he was made 
clean, went back, with & loud 
voice, glorifying God: and he 
fell on his face before His feet, 
giving thanks: and this was a 
Samaritan. And Jesus answer- 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secándum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Dum iret 

Jesus in Jerüsalem, tran- 
sibat per médiam Samariam 
et Galileam. Et cum ingrede- 
rétur quoddam castéllum, oc- 
currérunt ei decem viri lep- 
rósi, qui stetérunt a longe: et 
levavérunt vocem, dicéntes: 
Jesu precéptor, miserére no- 
stri. Quos.ut vidit, dixit: Ite, 
osténdite vos sacerdótibus. Et 
factum est, dum irent, mun- 
dáti sunt. Unus autem ex illis, 
ut. vidit quia mundátus est, 
regréssus est, cum magna 
voce magnificans Deum, et 
cécidit in fáciem ante pedes 
ejus, grátias agens: et hie erat 
Samaritánus. Respóndens au- 
tem Jesus, dixit: Nonne de- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THIRTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


cem mundáti sunt? et novem 
ubi sunt? Non est invéntus 
qui redíret, et daret glóriam 
Deo, nisi hic alienígena. .Et 
ait illi: Surge, vade; quia fides 
tua te salvum fecit. 


‘Creed, page 765. 


685 


ing, said, Were not ten made 
clean? And where are the nine? 
There is no one found to re- 
turn, and give glory to God, but 
this stranger. And He said to 
him, Arise, go thy way; for thy 
faith hath made thee whole. 


Offertory. Ps. 30, 15, 16 


In te sperávi Dómine dixi: 
Tu es Deus meus, in mánibus 
tuis témpora mea. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


- In Thee, O. Lord, have 1 
hoped: I said, Thou art my 
God, my times are in Thy 
hands. 


Secret 


— Dómine, póp- 
ulo tuo, propitiare mu- 
néribus: ‘ut hac oblatiéne 
plácatus, et indulgéntiam no- 
bis tribuas, et postuláta con- 
cédas. Per Dóminum. 


oox with favor upon Thy 
people, O Lord, look with 

favor upon their gifts; that, 
being appeased by this obla- 
tion, Thou mayest give us par- 


- don and grant us what we ask. 


Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. E 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. 


Sumptis, Dómine, cælésti- 
bus sacraméntis: ad redemp- 
tiónis ætérnæ, quæsumus, pro- 
ficiámus àugméntum. 


Wis. 16, 20 


Thou hast given us, O Lord, 
bread from heaven, having in it 
all that is delicious, and the 
sweetness of every taste. 


Postcommunion 


ANEM de cælo dedísti no- 

bis, Dómine, habéntem 
omne delectaméntum, et om- 
nem sapórem suavitátis. Per 
Dóminum. 


enly sacraments, O Lord, 
we beseech Thee that we may 
profit unto the increase of ever- 
lasting salvation. Through our 
Lord. 


Ds received Thy heav- 


` second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


686 


FOURTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


Fourteenth Sundap after Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. i 


Introit. Ps. 83, 10, 11 


EHOLD, O God, our protec- 

tor, and look on the face 

of Thy Christ: for better is one 

day in Thy courts above thou- 

sands. Ps. 83, 2, 3. How lovely 

are Thy tabernacles, O Lord of 

hosts! my soul longeth and 

fainteth for the courts of the 
Lord. Y. Glory. — 


ROTÉCTOR hoster, áspice, 

Deus, et réspice in fá- 
ciem Christi tui: quia mélior 
est dies una in átriis tuis su- 
per míllía, Ps. 83, 2, 3. Quam 
dilécta tabernácula tua, Dó- 
mine virtütum! -concupíscit, 
et déficit ánima mea in átria 
Dómini. Y. Glória Patri. ` 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


UVARD Thy Church, we be- 

seech Thee, O Lord, with 
Thy continual kindness; and, 
because without Thee human 
frailty falleth, let it, by Thine 
assistance, ever be both with- 
held from harm and guided to 
what is salutary. Through our 
Lord. 


ustép1, Dómine, quesu- 

mus, .Ecclésiam. tuam 
propitiatióne perpétua: et 
quia sine te lábitur humána 
mortálitas: tuis semper auxí- 
lis et abstrahátur a nóxiis, 
et ad salutária dirigátur. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, rages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Gal. 5, 16-24 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostie to the 
Galatians. 

RETHREN: Walk in the 
spirit, and you shall not 

fulfil the lusts of the flesh: for 
the flesh lusteth against the 
spirit, and the spirit against 
the fiesh; for these are contrary 
one to another; so that you do 
not the things that you would. 
But if you are led by the spirit, 
you are not under the law. 
Now the works of the flesh are 
manifest; which are, fornica- 
tion, uncleanness, immodesty, 
luxury, idolatry, withcrafts, en- 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad. Gálatas. 


RATRES: Spíritu ambu- 

láte, et desidéria car- 
nis non perficiétis. Caro enim 
concupiscit advérsus spírit- 
um, spíritus autem. advérsus 
carnem: hee enim sibi in- 
vicem adversántur, ut ,non 
quaecümque vultis, illa faciá- 
tis. Quod si spíritu ducímini, 
non estis sub lege. Manifésta 
sunt autem ópera carnis, que 
sunt fornicátio, immunditia, 
impuditcitla, luxúria, ido- 
lórum sérvitus, venefícia, in- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Ce eee 


FOURTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 687 


imicitie, contentiónes, mu- 
Jatiónes, ire, rixe, dissen- 
siónes, secte, invidie, homi- 
cídia,  ebrietátes, comessa- 
tiónes, et his simília: que 
predíco vobis, sicut predixi: 
quóniam, qui tália agunt, reg- 
num Dei non consequéntur. 
Fructus autem Spíritus est: 
cáritas, gáudium, pax, pa- 
tiéntia, benígnitas, bónitas, 
longanímitas, mansuetüdo, 
fides, modéstia, continéntia, 
cástitas. Advérsus hujüsmodi 
non est lex. Qui autem 
sunt Christi, carnem suam 
crucifixérunt cum vítiis, et 
concupiscéntiis, 


mities, contentions, emulations, 
wraths, quarrels, dissensions, 
sects, envies, murders, drunk- 
enness, revellings, and such 
like; of the which I foretell 
you, as I have foretold to you, 
that they who do such things 
shall not obtain the kingdom of 
God. But the fruit of the spirit 
is, charity, joy, peace, patience, 
benignity, goodness, longanim- 
ity, mildness, faith, modesty, 
continency, chastity. Against 
such there is no law. And they 
that are Christ's have crucified 
their flesh with the vices and 
concupiscences, 


Gradual. Ps. 117, 8,9 


Bonum, est confidere in 
Démino, quam confidere in 
hómine. Y. Bonum est sper- 
are in Dómino, quam sperare 
in princípibus. Allelija, alle- 
Jüja. V. Ps. 94, 1. Venite, ex- 
sultémus Dómino, jubilémus 
Deo salutári nostro. Allelija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


It is good to confide in ine 
Lord, rather than to have con- 
fidence in man. V. It is good to 
trust in the Lord, rather than 
to trust in princes. Alleluia, al- 
leluia. V. Ps. 94, 1. Come, let us 
praise the Lord with joy; let us 
joyfully sing to God our Sa- 
viour. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 6, 24-33 


*M Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Matthaeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus discípulis suis: Nemo 
potest duóbus dóminis ser- 
vire: aut enim unum ódio 
habébit, et alterum diliget: 
aut unum sustinébit, et álter- 
um contémnet. Non potéstis 
Deo servíre, et mammónz. 
Ideo dico vobis, ne sollíciti 
sitis Anime vestre quid man- 
ducétis, neque córpori vestro 


quid induámini. Nonne ánima: 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. ` 


T THAT lime, Jesus said 

to His disciples, No man 
can serve two masters; for 
either he will hate the one and 
love the other, or he will sus- 
tain the one and despise the 
other. You cannot serve God 
and mammon. Therefore I say 
to you, be not solicitous for 
your life, what you shall eat, 
nor for your body, what you 
shall put on. Is not the life 


http://ccwatershed.org 


688 


more than the meat, and the 
body more than tbe raiment? 
Behold the birds of the air; for 
they neither sow, nor do they 
reap, nor gather into barns, and 
your heavenly Father feedeth 
them. Are not you of much 
more value than they? And 
which of you, by taking 
thought, can add to his stature 
one cubit? And for raiment 
why are you solicitous? Con- 
sider the lilies of the field, how 
they grow; they labor not, 
neither do they spin; but I say 
to you, that not even Solomon 
in all his glory was arrayed as 
one of these. Now if God so 
clothe the grass of the field, 
which is to-day, and to-morrow 
is cast into the oven, how much 
more you, O ye of little faith! 
Be not solicitous therefore, say- 
ing, what shall we eat, or what 
shall we drink, or wherewith 
shall we be clothed? for after 
all these things do the heathen 
seek. For your Father knoweth 
that you Have need of all these 
things. Seek ye therefore first 
the kingdom of God, and His 
justice; and all these things 
shall be added unto you. 


Creed, page 765. 


FOURTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


plus est quam esca: et cor- 
pus plus quam vestiméntum? 
Respicite volatília celi, quó- 
niam. non serunt, neque me- 
tunt, neque cóngregant in 
hórrea: et Pater vester cæ- 
léstis pascit illa. Nonne vos 
magis pluris estis illis? Quis 
autem vestrum cógitans po- 
test adjícere ad statüram su- 
am cübitum unum? Et de 
vestiménto quid sollíciti estis? 
Consideráte lília agri quó- 
modo crescunt; non labórant, 
neque nent. Dico autem vo- 
bis, quóniam nec Sálomon in 
omni glória sua coopértus est 
Sicut unum ex istis. Si autem 
fenum agri, quod hódie est, 
et cras in clíbanum mittitur, 
Deus, sic vestit: quanto ma- 
gis vos médice fídei? Nolíte 
ergo solliciti esse, dicéntes: 
Quid manducábimus, aut quid 
bibémus, aut quo operiémur? 
Hec enim ómnia gentes in- 
quírunt. Scit enim Pater ves- 
ter, quia his ómnibus indigé- 
tis. Querite ergo primum 
regnum Dei, et justítiam ejus: 
et hec. ómnia adjiciéntur 
vobis. 


Offertory. Ps. 33, 8,9 


The angel of the Lord shall 
encamp round about them that 
fear Him, and shall deliver 


Immíttet. Angelus Dómini 
in circüitu timéntium eum, 
et erípiet eos: gustáte, et vi- 


them. O taste, and see that the déte, quóniam  suávis est 
Lord is sweet! Dóminus. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


; RANT us, we. beseech Thee, 
O Lord, that this saving 
Victim may become both the 


ONCEDE nobis, Démine, 
quaesumus, ut hec hó- 
Stia salutáris, et nostrórum 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIFTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 689 
flat purgátio delictórum, et cleansing of our sins, and the 
tue  propitiátio  potestátis. propitiation of Thy might. 
Per Dóminum. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest; pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Matt. 6, 33. 


Primum quærite regnum Seek first the kingdom of 
Dei, et ómnia adjiciéntur vo- God; and all things shall be 
bis, dicit Dóminus. added unto you, saith the Lord. 


Postcommunion 


ay Thy Sacraments, O 

. niant tua sacraménta God, ever purify and 
nos, Deus: et ad perpétue fortify us, and bring us to the 
ducant salvatiónis efféctum. effect of everlasting salvation. 
Per Déminum. Through our Lord. 


Second, Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Gonchidiag Prayers, page 793. 


URÍFICENT semper et mú- 


Fifteenth Sundap atter Pentecost € (Green) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 85, 1, 2, 3 


NCLÍNA, Dómine, aurem 

tuam ad me, et exáudi 
me: salvum fac servum tu- 
um, Deus meus, sperántem in 
te: miserére mihi, Dómine, 
quóniam ad te clamávi tota 
die. Ps. 85, 4. Letifica ánimam 
servi tui: quia ad te, Dómine, 
ánimam meam levavi. V. 
Gloria Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloría, page 762. 


ow down Thy ear,O Lord, 

to me, and hear me: save 
Thy servant, O- my God, that 
trusteth in Thee: have mercy 
on me, O Lord, for I have cried 
to Thee all day. Ps. 85, 4. Give 
joy to the soul of Thy servant; 
for to. Thee, O Lord, have I 
lifted up my soul. Y. Glory. 


Prayer 


gess tuam, Dómine, rr Thy continual pity, O 


miserátio continudta Lord, cleanse and fortify 


mundet et. miniat: et quia 
sine te non potest salva con- 


Thy .Church; and, because 
without Thee it can not be 


http://ccwatershed.org 


690 


safely established, let it ever 
be governed by Thy grace. 
Through our Lord. - 


FIFTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


sistere; tuo Semper münere 
gubernétur. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Gal. 5, 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Patil the Apostle to the 
Galatians. l 

RETHREN, if we live in the 

spirit, let us also walk in 
the spirit. Let us not be made 
desirous of vainglory, provok- 
ing one another, envying one 
another. Brethren, and if a 
man be overtaken in any fault, 
you, who are spiritual, instruct 
such a one in the spirit of 
meekness, considering thyself, 
lest thou also be tempted. Bear 
ye one another’s burdens, and 
so you shall fulfil the law of 
Christ. For if any man think 
himself to be something, 
whereas he is nothing, he de- 
ceiveth himself. But let every 
one prove his own work, and so 
he shall have glory in himself 
only, and not in another. For 
every one shall bear his own 
burden: And let him that is 
instructed in the word, com- 
municate to him that instruct- 
eth him, in all good things. Be 
not deceived; God is not 
mocked: for what things a man 
shall sow, those also shall he 
reap. For he that soweth in his 
flesh, of the flesh also shall reap 
corruption: but he that soweth 
in the spirit, of the spirit shall 
reap life everlasting. And in 
doing good, let us not fail; for 
in due time we shall reap, not 
failing. Therefore, whilst we 


25, 26; 6, 1-10 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstol ad Gálatas. 


RATRES: Si spíritu vívi- 

mus, spíritu et ambulé- 
mus. Non efficiàmur inánis 
glórie cüpidi, ínvicem provo- 
cántes, ínvicem  invidéntes. 
Fratres, et si praeoccupátus 
füerit homo in áliquo delícto, 
vos, qui spirituáles estis, hu- 
jüsmodi instrüite in spíritu 
lenitátis, considerans  teíp- 
sum, ne et tu tentéris. Alter 
altérius ónera portáte, et sic 
adimplébitis legem Christi. 
Nam si quis existimat se áli- 
quid esse, cum nihil sit, ipse 
se sedücit. Opus autem suum 
probet unusquísque, et sic in 
semetipso tantum glóriam 
habébit, et non in áltero. Un- 
usquísque enim onus suum 
portábit. Commünicet autem 
is, qui catechizátur verbo, ei, 
qui se catechizat, in ómnibus 
bonis. Nolíte erráre: Deus 
non irridétur. Que enim sem- 
ináverit homo, h&c et metet. 
Quóniam .qui séminat in 
carne sua, de carne et metet 
corruptiónem: qui autem sé- 
minat in spíritu, de spíritu 
metet vitam xtérnam. Bonum 
autem faciéntes, non deficiá- 
mus: témpore enim suo meté- 
mus non deficiéntes. Ergo 
dum tempus habémus, operé- 
mur bonum ad omnes máx- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FIFTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


ime autem ad domésticos 
fidei. 


Gradual. 


Bonum est confitéri. Dó- 
mino: et psállere nómini tuo, 
Altíssime. Y. Ad annuntián- 
dum mane misericórdiam tu- 
am, et veritáàbem tuam per 
noctem. Allelüja, allelája. Y. 
Ps. 94, 3. Quéniam Deus mag- 
nus Dóminus, et Rex magnus 
Super omnem terram. Alle- 
lúja. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


691 


have time, let us work good to 
all men, but especially to those 
who are of the household of 
the Faith. 


Ps. 91, 2, 3 


It is good to give praise to the 
Lord; and to sing to Thy name, 
O most High. Y. To show forth 
Thy mercy in the morning, and 
Thy truth in the night. Alleluia, 
alleluia. Y. Ps. 94, 3. For the 
Lord is a great God, and a great 
king above all the earth. Al- 
leluia. 


Gospel. Luke 7, 11-16 


"M Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 


EI témpore: Ibat Je- 
4, sus in civitatem, que 
vocatur Naim: et ibant cum 
eo discípuli ejus, et turba co- 
piósa. Cum autem appropin- 
quáret porte civitátis, ecce 
defünctus efferebátur fílius 
ünicus matris sue: et hzc 
vidua erat: et turba civitátis 
multa cum illa. Quam . cum 
vidisset Dóminus, miseri- 
córdia motus super eam, 
dixit illi: Noli fiere. Et accés- 
sit, et tétigit lóculum. Hi 


autem, qui portábant, steté-' 


runt. Et ait: Adoléscens, tibi 
dico, surge. Et resédit qui 
erat mórtuus, et ccpit loqui. 
Et dedit illum matri sus. 
Accépit autem omnes timor: 
et magnificábant Deum, di- 
céntes: Quia prophéta mag- 
nus surréxit in nobis: et quia 
Deus visitávit plebem suam. 


Creed, page 765. 


*B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke: 


T THAT lime, Jesus went 
into a city called Naim; 
and there went with Him His 
disciples, and a great multi- 
tude. And when He came nigh 
to the city, behold a dead man 
was carried out, the only son 
of his mother; and she was a 
widow, and much people of the 
city were with her. And when 
the Lord saw her, He had com- 
passion on her, and said to her, 
Weep not. And He came near, 
and touched the bier. And they 
that carried it stood still. And 
He said, Young man, I say to 
thee, Arise: and he that was 
dead sat up, and began to 
Speak. And He delivered him to 
his mother. And there came & 
fear on them all: and they 
glorified God, saying, A great 
prophet.is risen up amongst us 
and God hath visited His 
people. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


692 


SIXTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


Offertory. Ps. 39, 2, 3, 4 


With expectation I have 
waited for the Lord, and He 
had regard to me; and He 
heard my prayer, and He put 
.& new canticle into my mouth, 
:& song to our God. . 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Exspéctans exspectávi Dé- 
minum, et respéxit me: et 
exaudivit deprecatiónem me- 
am: et immísit in os meum 
cánticum novum, hymnum 
Deo nostro. 


Secret 


Av Thy sacraments, O 
Lord, keep us.and guard 
us always from the assaults 
of the devil. Through our Lord. 


UA nos, Dómine, sacra- 

ménta custódiant: et 
contra diabólicos semper tue- 
ántur incürsus. Per Dómin- 
um. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
‘choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


. Communion. John.6, 52 


. The. bread that I will give is 
"My flesh for the life of the 
"world. s 


Panis, quem ego dédero, 
caro mea est pro seculi vita. 


`- Posicommunion - 


ET the operation of the 

heavenly gift, O Lord, 
‘possess our souls and bodies, 
that, its holy grace, not our own 
impulses, may continually be 
our guide. Through our Lord. 


ENTES nostras, et cór- 
XD pora possideat, que- 
sumus, Dómine, doni celéstis 
operátio: ut non noster 
sensus in nobis, sed jügiter 
ejus prevenisti efféctus, Per 
Dóminum. - i 


Second, Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
.choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Sixteenth Sounbap after Pentecost (Green) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 85, 3, 5. 


AVE mercy on me, O Lord, 
for I have cried to Thee 
'all the day; for Thou, O Lord, 


IsERÉRE mihi, Dómine, 
quóniam ad te clamávi 
tota die: quia tu, Dómine, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SIXTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


Suávis ac mitis es, et copidsus 
in misericórdia ómnibus in- 
vocántibus te. Ps. 85, 1. In- 
clina, Dómine, aurem tuam 
mihi, et exáudi me: quóniam 
inops et pauper sum ego. y. 
Gloria Patri. 


693 


art sweet and mild, and plente- 
ous in mercy. to all that call 
upon Thee. Ps. 85, 1. Bow down 
Thy ear to me, O Lord, and 
hear me; for I am needy and 
poor. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


UA nos, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, grátia semper et 


ET Thy grace, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, ever go be- 


prevéniat et sequátur: ae fore us and follow us, and may 

bonis opéribus jügiter prestet it make us to be continually 

esse inténtos. Per Dóminum. zealous in doing good Works. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at. the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Eph. 3, 13-21 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Ephésios. 


RATRES: Obsecro vos, ne 
deficiátis in  iribula- 
tiénibus meis pro vobis: que 
est glória vestra, Hujus rei 
gfátia flecto génua mea ad 
Patrem Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi, ex quo omnis patérn- 
itas in celis et in terra nom- 
inátur, ut det vobis secüándum 
divítias glérie sue, virtüte 
eorroborári per Spíritum ejus 
in interiórem hóminem, 
Christum habitáre per fidem 
in córdibus vestris: in cari- 
tate radicáti, et fundáti, ut 
possítis comprebéndere cum 
ómnibus sanctis, que sit lati- 
tüdo, et longitüdo, et sublimi- 
tas et profündum: scire étiam 
supereminéntem sciéntie 
cáritátem Christi, ut imple- 
ámini in omnem plenitüdin- 
em Dei. Ei autem, qui potens 
est ómnia fácere 'superabun- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians. 


RETHREN, I pray you not to 
faint at my tribulations 

for you, which are your glory. 
For this cause I bow my knees 
to the Father of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, of Whom all paternity, 
in heaven and earth is named, 
that He would grant you, ac- 
cording: to the riches of His 
glory, to be strengthened by His 
Spirit with might unto the in- 
ward man. That Christ may 


dwell by faith in . your 
hearts; that: being rooted 
and founded in charity, 


you may be able to com- 
prehend with all the saints, 
what is the breadth, and length, 
and height, and depth. To 
know also the charity of Christ, 
which ‘surpasseth all knowl- 


‘edge; that you may be filled 


unto all the fulness of God. 
Now to Him Who is able to do 


http://ccwatershed.org 


694 SIXTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


all things more abundantly 
than we desire or understand, 
according to the power that 
Worketh in us: to Him be glory 
in the Church, and in Christ 
Jesus, unto all generations, 
world without end. Amen. 


dánter quam pétimus, aut 
intelligimus, secindum virtü- 
tem, que operátur in nobis: 
ipsi glória in Ecclésia, et in 
Christo Jesu, in omnes gen- 
eratiónes seculi seculórum. 
Amen. 


Gradual. Ps. 101, 16, 17 


The gentiles shall fear Thy 
name, O Lord, and all the kings 
of the earth Thy glory. V. For 
the Lord hath built’ up Sion, 
and He shall be seen in His 
majesty. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. 
Ps, 97, 1. Sing ye to the Lord 
a new canticle, because the 
Lord hath done wonderful 
things. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Timébunt gentes nomen 
tuum, Dómine, et omnes 
reges terre glóriam tuam. Y. 
Quóniam zedificávit Dóminus 
Sion: et vidébitur in majes- 
tate sua. Alleluja, alleluja. y. 
Ps. 97, 1. Cantáte Dómino 
cánticum novum: quia mira- 
bilia fecit Dóminus. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Luke 14, 1-11 


H8 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


: T THAT time, when Jesus 
e went into the house of 
one of the chief of the pharisees 
on the sabbath-day to eat 
bread, they watched Him. And 
behold, there was a certain man 
before Him that had the 
dropsy: and Jesus answering, 
spoke to the lawyers and Phari- 
sees, saying, Is it lawful to heal 
on the sabbath-day? But they 
held their peace: but He taking 
him, healed him, and sent him 
away. And answering them, He 
‘said, Which of you shall have 
an ass or an ox fall into a pit, 
and will not immediately draw 
him out on the sabbath-day? 
And they could not answer Him 
these things. And He spoke a 
parable also to them that were 
invited, marking how. they 
chose the first seats at the table, 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Cum in- 
tráret Jesus in domum 
cujüsdam príncipis pharise- 
órum  sábbato  manducáre 
panem, et ipsi observábant 
eum. Et ecce homo quidam 
hydrópicus erat ante illum. 
Et respóndens Jesus dixit wł 
legisperítos et phariszos, di- 
cens: Si licet sábbato curáre? 
At ili tacuérunt. Ipse vero 
apprehénsum sanávit eum, ac 
dimísit. Et respóndens ad il- 
los, dixit: Cujus . vestrum 
asinus, aut bos in püteum 
cadet, et non continuo éx- 
trahet illum die sábbati? Et 
non póterant ad hxc respon- 
dére illi. Dicébat autem et ad 
invitátos parábolam, intén- 
dens quómodo primos accü- 
bitus eligerent, dicens ad 
illos: Cum invitátus füeris ad 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ea om 


SIXTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 698 


nüptias, non disciimbas in 
primo loco, ne forte honorá- 
tior te sit invitátus ab illo, et 
véniens is, qui te, et illum 
vocávit, dicat tibi: Da huic 
locum: et tunc incípias cum 
rubóre novíssimum . locum 
tenére. Sed cum vocátus fü- 
eris, Vade, recúmbe in novis- 
Simo loco: ut, cum vénerit qui 
te invitávit, dicat tibi: Amíce, 
ascénde supérius. Tunc erit 
tibi glória coram simul dis- 
cumbéntibus: quia omnis, qui 
se exáltat, humiliábitur: et 
qui se humíliat, exaltábitur. 


saying to them, When thou art 
invited to a wedding, sit not 
down in the first place, lest 
perhaps one more honorable 
than thou be invited by him; 
and he that invited thee and 
him, come and say to thee, Give 
this man place; and then thou 
begin with shame to take the 
lowest place. But when thou 
art invited, go, sit down in the 
lowest place: that when he whe 
inviteth thee cometh, he may 
say to thee, Friend, go up 
higher: then shalt thou have 
glory before them that sit at 
table with thee: because every 


one that exalteth himself shall be humbled, and he that 
humbleth himself shall be exalted. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 39, 14, 15 


.Dómine, in auxilium me- 
um réspice: confundántur et 
revereantur, qui querunt ani- 
mam meam, ut áuferant eam: 
Dómine, in auxílium meum 
réspice. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Look down, O Lord, to help 
me; let them be. confounded 
and ashamed that seek after 
my soul to take it away; look 
down, O Lord, to help me. 


Secret 


, UNDA nos, quesumus, 

Dómine, sacrifícii præ- 
séntis efféctu: et pérfice mis- 
erátus in nobis; ut ejus mere- 
ámur esse participes. Per 
Dóminum. 


LEANSE Us, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, by the effect of 

the present sacrifice, and in 
Thy mercy bring to pass in us 
that we may deserve to be par- 
takers of it.. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Ps. 70, 16, 17, 18 


Dómine, memorábor justi- 
tie tue solius: Deus, docuísti 


O Lord, I will be mindful of 
Thy justice alone: Thou hast 


http://ccwatershed.org 


696 


taught me, O God, from my 
youth, and unto old age and 
gray hairs, O God, forsake me 
not. . 


SEVENTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


me a juventüte mea: et usque 
in senéctam et sénium. Deus, 
ne derelínquas me. 


osa 


w TRY loving-kindness, pu- 

rify our souls, we beseech 
'Thee, O Lord, and renew them 
with the heavenly sacrament, 
that we may receive bodily as- 
sistance thereby, both for this 
life and for the life to come. 
Through our Lord. 


vníricA, Guesumus, Dó- 
mine, mentes nostras 
benígnus, et rénova czléstibus 
Sacraméntis: ut consequénter 
et. c6rporum: præsens páriter, 
et futürum capiámus auxíli- 
um. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Sebenteenth Sundap After Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 118, 137, 124 


mov art just, O Lord, and 

Thy judgment is right; 

deal with Thy servant accord- 

ing to Thy mercy. Ps. 118, 1. 

Blessed are the undefiled in 

the way: who walk in the law 
of the Lord. Y. Glory. 


UsTUS es, Dómine, et rec- 

tum judícium tuum: fac 
cum servo tuo secündum 
misericórdiam tuam. Ps. 118, 
1. Beáti immaculáti in via: 
qui ámbulant in lege Dómini. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


Gu Thy people, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, to 
shun the defilements of the 
devil, and with pure hearts to 
follow Thee, the only God. 
Through our Lord. 


A, QUIESUMUS, Dómine, 

pópulo tuo diabólica 
vitáre contágia: et te solum 
Deum pura mente .sectári. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, . A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Eph. 4, 1.6 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians. 

RETHREN, I, a prisoner of 
the Lord, beseech you 
that you walk wortny of the 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Ephésios. 


RATRES: Obsecro vos, 
€go vinctus in Dómino, 
ut. digne ambulétis vocatióne, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


) 


Cer ON 


SEVENTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 607 


qua vocáti estis, cum omni 
humilitáte, et mansuetüdine, 


cum patiéntia, supportántes 


invicem in caritáte, solliciti 
Berváre unitátem spíritus in 
vínculo pacis. Unum corpus, 
et unus spíritus, sicut vocáti 
estis in una. spe vocatiónis 
vestire. Unus Dóminus, una 
fides, unum baptisma. Unus 
Deus, et Pater ómnium, qui 
əst super omnes, et per ómnia, 
et in ómnibus nobis. Qui est 
benedíctus in secula sæculó- 
rum. Amen. 


Beáta gens, cujus est Dó- 
minus Deus eórum: pópulus, 
quem elégit Dóminus in here- 
ditátem sibi. Y. Verbo Dé- 
mini celi firmati sunt: et 
spíritu oris ejus omnis virtus 
eórum. Allelija, allelija. V. 
Ps. 101, 2. Dómine, exáudi 
oratiónem meam, et clamor 
meus ad te pervéniat. Alle- 
lája. . 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


vocation in which you are 
called. With all humility and 
mildness, with patience, sup- 
porting one another in charity, 
careful to keep the unity of the 
Spirit.in the bond of peace. One 
body and one spirit, aS you are 
called in one hope of your call- 
ing. One Lord, one faith, one 
baptism. One God and Father 
of all, Who is above all and 
through all, and in us all, Who 
is- blessed for ever and ever. 
Amen, 


Gradual. Ps. 32, 12, 6 


Blessed is the nation whose 
God is the Lord: the people 
whom He hath chosen for His 
inheritance. J. By the word of 
the Lord the heavens were es- 
tablished; and all the power of 
them by the Spirit of His 
mouth, Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 
101, 2. O Lord, hear my prayer: 
and let my cry come to Thee. 
Alleluia. - 


Gospel. Matt. 22, 35-46 


H* Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Matthsum. 


N ILLO témpore: Accesser- 

unt ad Jesum pharisei: 
et interrogávit eum unus ex 
eis legis doctor, tentans eum: 
Magister, quod est mandétum 
magnum in lege? Ait illi Je- 
sus: Díliges Dóminum: Deum 
tuum ex toto corde tuo, et in 
tota anima tua, et in tota 
mente tua. Hoc est máximum, 
et primum mandátum. Se- 
cündum autem simile est 
huic: Díliges próximum tu- 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, the pharisees 

came to Jesus, and one 
of them, a doctor of the law, 
asked Him, tempting Him, 
Master, which is the great com- 
mandment of the law? Jesus 
Said to him, Thou shalt love 
the Lord thy God with thy 
whole heart, and with thy 
whole soul, and with thy whole 
mind. This is the greatest and 
the first commandment. And 
the second is like to this; Thou 


http://ccwatershed.org 


698 


shalt love thy neighbor as thy- 
self. On these two command- 
ments dependeth the whole law 
and the prophets. And the 
pharisees being, gathered to- 
gether, Jesus asked them, say- 
ing, What think you of Christ; 
Whose son is He? They say to 
Him, David's. He saith to them, 
How then doth David, in spirit, 
call Him Lord; saying, The 
Lord said to My Lord, Sit on 
My cight hand until I make 
Thy enemies Thy footstool? If 
David then call Him Lord, how 
is He his son? And no man was 
able to answer Him a word; 
neither durst any man, from 
that day forth, ask Him any 
more questions. 


Creed, page 765. 


SEVENTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


um,. sicut teípsum. In his 
duóbus mandatis univérsa 
lex pendet, et prophétæ. Con- 
gregátis autem phariseis, in- 
terrogávit eos Jesus, dicens: 
Quid vobis vidétur de 
Christo? «cujus fílius est? 
Dicunt. ei: David. Ait illis: 
Quómodo ergo David in spír- 
itu vocat eum Dóminum, 
dicens: Dixit Dóminus Dó- 
mino meo, sede a dexiris 
meis, donec ponam inimícos 
tuos scabéllum pedum tuó- 
rum? Si ergo David vocat 
eum Dóminum, quómodo 
fílius ejus est? Et nemo pó- 
terat ei respondére verbum: 
neque ausus fuit quisquam ex 
illa die eum ámplius interro- 
gáre. 


Offertory. Dan. 9, 17,18, 19 


I, Daniel, prayed to my God, 
saying, Hear, O Lord, the pray- 
ers of Thy servant; show Thy 
face upon Thy sanctuary, and 
favorably look down upon this 
people upon whom Thy name is 
invoked, O God. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Orávi Deum meum ego 
Dániel, dicens: Exáudi, Dó- 
mine, preces servi tui: illü- 
mina fáciem tuam super 
Sanctuárium tuum: et pro- 
pítius inténde pópulum istum, 


. Super quem invocátum est 


nomen tuum, Deus. 


Secret 


E IMPLORE Thy majesty, 

O Lord, that the holy 
mysterles which we are cele- 
brating may free us of past and 
save us from future sins. 
"Through our Lord. 


AJESTÁTEM tuam, Dò- 
mine, suppliciter de- 
precámur: ut hee sancta, 
quæ gérimus, et a prætéritis 
nos delictis éxuant, et futúris. 
Per Dóminum. f 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Meme. ~~ 


SEPTEMBER 


Communion. 


Vovéte, et réddite Dómino 
Deo vestro omnes, qui in cir- 
cúito ejus affértis münera: 
terríbili, et ei qui aufert spir- 
itum principum:  terríbili 
apud omnes reges terre. 


EMBER-DAYS 


Ps. 75, 12, 13 


Vow ye, and pay to the Lord 
your God, all you that round 
about Him bring presents: to 
Him that is terrible, even to 
Him Who taketh away the 
spirit of princes; to the terrible 
with all the kings of the earth. 


699 


Postcommunion 


ANCTIFICATIÓNIBUS tuis, 

omnípotens Deus, et 

vítia nostra curéntur, et rem- 

édia nobis etérna provéniant. 
Pér Dóminum. 


x THY grace, O almighty 
God, let our wicked pro- 
pensities be cured and ever- 
lasting remedies be forthcom- 
ing. Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


September Ember-Dayps* 
. STATION AT ST. Mary MAJOR 
| Major Ferias not Privileged 


€mber-Üülebmesbap (Purple) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 80, 2, 3, 4, 5 


nostro:  jubiláte Deo 
Jacob: sümite psalmum ju- 
cündum cum cithara: cánite 
in initio mensis tuba, quia 
precéptum in Israél est, et 
judicium. Deo Jacob. Ps. 80, 6. 
Testimónium in Joseph pósuit 
ilud, cum exíret de terra 
4Egypti: linguam, quam non 


g XSULTÁTE Deo adjutóri 


.EJOICE to God our helper: 

sing aloud to the God of 
Jacob: take a pleasant psalm 
with the harp; blow the trum- 
pet in the beginning of the 
month, for it is a command- 
ment in Israel, and a judgment 
to the God of Jacob. Ps. 80, 6. 
He ordained it for & testimony 
in Joseph, when he came out of 


1The ember-days of the autumn season, though here placed 
as next following the seventeenth Sunday after Pentecost, are 
invariably kept on the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday next 
following the fourteenth day of September, which is the feast 
of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


700 


the land of Egypt: he heard a 
tongue which he knew not. Y. 
Glory. 


EMBER-WEDNESDAY 


nóverat, audivit. V. Glória 
Patri, 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria i is omitted. 
arter the Kyrie eleison the- ii aaya; 


Let us pray 
y. Let us kneel. y. Flectámus génua. 
W. Arise: : RY. Leváte. 
Prayer 


ET our frailty, we beseech 

Thee, O Lord, be helped 

by the remedies of Thy mercy, 

that, whereas it is wasted by its 

own nature, it may be repaired 

by Thy clemency. Through our 
Lord. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from Amos the 
Prophet. 
Hus saith the Lord God, 
Behold the days come, 
when the ploughman shall 
overtake the reaper, and the 
treader of grapes him that 
soweth seed, and the mountains 
shall drop sweetness, and every 
hill shall be tilled. And I will 
bring back the captivity of My 
people Israel, and they shall 
build the abandoned cities, and 
inhabit them; and they shall 
plant vineyards, and drink the 
wine of them; and shall make 
gardens, and eat the fruits of 
them: and I will plant them 
upon their own land; and I will 
no more pluck them out of thelr 
land which I have given them; 
saith the Lord thy God. 


ISERICÓRDUE tum reme- 
@M diis, quesumus, D6- 
mine, fragilitas nostra sub- 
sistat: ut, que sua conditióne 
attéritur, tua cleméntia rep- 
arétur. Per Dóminum. 


Amos 9, 13-14 


Léctio libri 
phéte. 


EC dicit Dóminus Deus: 

Ecce dies véniunt: et 
comprehéndet arátor messór- 
em, et calcátor uve mittén- 
tem semen et stillabunt 
montes dulcédinem, et omnes 
colles culti erunt. Et con- 
vértam captivitátem pdpuli 
mei Israël: et edificabunt 
civitátes desértas, et inhab- 
itébunt: et plantábunt vín- 
eas, et bibent vinum eárum: 
et facient hortos, et c6medent 
fructus eórum. Et plantábo 
eos super humum suam: et 
non evéllam eos ultra de terra 
sua, quam dedi eis: dicit Dó- 
minus Deus tuus. 


Amos Pro- 


Gradual. Ps. 112, 5,7 


Who 1s as the Lord our God, 
Who dwelleth on high; and 


Quis sicut Déminus Deus 
noster, qui in altis habitat: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


WM xp 


E cd 


EMBER-WEDNESDAY 


et humilia réspicit in clo, 
et in terra? Y. Süscitans a 
terra inopem:, et de stercore 
érigens páuperem. 


y. Dóminus vobíscum. 
HB, Et cum spíritu tuo. 


701 


looketh down on the low. things 
in heaven. and in earth? PV. 
Raising up the needy from the 
earth; and lifting up the poor 
out of the dunghill. 

Y. The Lord be with you. 

RY. And with thy spirit. 


Prayer 


RÆSTA, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, famílie tue sup- 
plicánti: ut, dum a cibis 
corporálibus se abstinet, a 
vitlis quoque mente jejünet. 
Per Dóminum, 


RANT to Thy suppliant 
household, we  beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that, as it ab- 
Staineth from bodily food, it 
may spiritually also fast from 
wrongdoing. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice o) 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Lesson. 2 Esd. 81, 1-10 


` Léctio libri Esdra. 


N DpIÉBUS illis: Congregá- 

tus est omnis pópulus 
quasi vir-unus ad. platéam, 
que est ante portam aquárum 
et dixérunt Esdre scribe ut 
afféret librum legis Móysi, 
quam precéperat Dóminus 
Israëli. Attülit ergo Esdras 
sacérdos legem coram multi- 
tüdine virórum et mulíerum, 
cunctisque qui póterant in- 
telligere, in die prima mensis 
séptimi. Et legit in eo apérte 
in platéa, que erat ante por- 
tam aquárum, de mane usque 
ad médiam diem, in conspéctu 
virórum, et mulíerum, et sa- 
piéntium: et aures omnis 
pópuli erant eréct? ad librum. 
Stetit autem Esdras scriba 
super gradum ligneum, quem 
fécerat ad loquéndum. Et 
&péruit librum coram omni 
pópulo: super univérsum 
quippe bópulum eminébat: 
et cum aperuísset eum, stetit 


Lesson from the Book of 
Esdras. 


“N THOSE days, all the people 

were gathered together as 
one man, to the street which is 
before the water-gate, and they 
spoke to Esdras the scribe, to 
bring the book of the law of 
Moses, which the Lord had 
commanded to Israel. Then 
Esdras the priest brought the 
law before the multiude of men 
and women, and all those that 
could understand, on the first 
day of the seventh month. And 
he read it plainly in the street 
that was before the water-gate, 
from the morning until mid- 
day. before the men and wo- 
men, and all those that could 
understand; and the ears of 
all the people were attentive 
to the book. And Esdras the 
scribe stood upon a step of 
wood, which he made..to speak 
upon. And he opened the book 
before all the people, for he was 
above all the people; and when 


http://ccwatershed.org 


702 


he had opened it, all the people 
stood. And Esdras blessed the 
Lord the great God, and all the 
people answered, Amen, Amen, 
lifting up their hands; and they 
bowed down, and adored God, 
with their faces to thé ground. 
Now ihe levites made silence 
among the people to hear the 
law; and the people stood in 
their place: and they read in 
the book of the law of God dis- 
tinetly and plainly to be under- 
stood; and they understood 
when it was read. And Nehe- 
mias, and Esdras, the priest 
and scribe, and the levites who 
interpreted to all the people, 
said, This is a holy day to the 
Lord our God: do not mourn 
nor weep. And he said to them, 
Go, eat fat meats, and drink 
sweet wine, and send portions 
to them that have not prepared 
for themselves; - because it is 
the holy day of the Lord, and 
be not sad, for the joy of the 
Lord is our strength. 


EMBER-WEDNESDAY 


omnis pópulus. Et benedixit 
Esdras Démino Deo magno: 
et respóndit omnis pópulus: 
Amen, Amen: élevans manus 
suas: et incurváti sunt et 
adoravérunt Deum proni in 
terram. Porro levite siléntium 
faciébant in pópulo ad audi- 
éndam legem: pópulus autem 
Stabat in gradu suo. Et legé- 
runt in libro legis Dei Dis- 
tincte, et apérte ad intelli- 
géndum: et intellexérunt cum 
legerétur. Dixit autem Nehe- 
mías, et Esdras sacérdos et 
Scriba, et levite interpre- 
tantes univérso: pópulo: Dies 
sanctificátus est Dómino Deo 
nostro, nolite lugére, et nolite 
flere. Et dixit eis: Ite, comé- 
dite pinguia, et bibite mulsum, 
et mittite partes his, qui non 
preparavérunt sibi: quia 
sanctus dies Dómini est, et 
nolite contristari: gáudium 
étenim Dómini est fortitüdo 
nostra, 


Gradual. Ps. 32, 12, 6 


Blessed is the nation whose 
God is the Lord: the people 
whom the Lord hath chosen for 
His inheritance. Y. By the word 
of the Lord the heavens were 
established: and all the power 
of them by the spirit of His 
mouth. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Beata gens, cujus est Dó- 
minus Deus eórum: pópulus, 
quem élégit Dóminus in here- 
ditátem sibi Y. Verbo Dómini 
celi firmáti sunt: et spíritu 
oris ejus omnis virtus eórum. 


Gospel. Mark 9, 16-28 


*H Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 


T THAT time, One of the 
multitude, answering, 
said to Jesus, Master, I have 
brought to Thee my son, having 
a dumb spirit; who, whereso- 


"M Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Marcum. 


N ILLO témpore: Respón- 
dens unus de turba, dixit 
ad Jesum: Magister, áttuli 
filium meum ad te, habéntem 
Spíritum mutum: qui ubi- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


i 


Tl 


es 


EMBER-WEDNESDAY 


cümque eum apprehénderit, 
allidit illum, et spumat, et 
Stridet déntibus, et aréscit: 
et dixi discipulis tuis ut ejice- 
rent illum, et non potuérunt. 
Qui respéndens eis, dixit: O 
generátio incrédula, quámdiu 
apud vos ero? quámdiu vos 
pátiar? Afférte illum ad me. 
Et attulérunt eum. Et cum 
vidisset eum, statim spíritus 
conturbávit illum: et elísus in 
terram, volutabátur spumans. 
Et interrogávit patrem ejus: 
Quantum témporis est, ex quo 
ei hoc accidit? At ille ait: Ab 
infántia: et frequénter eum 
in ignem, et in aquas misit, 
ut eum pérderet. Sed si quid 
potes, ádjuva nos, misértus 
nostri. Jesus autem ait illi: 
Si potes crédere, ómnia pos- 
sibílią sunt credénti. Et con- 
tinuo exclámans pater pueri, 
cum lácrimis ajébat: Credo, 
Dómine: ádjuva incredulitát- 
em meam. Et cum vidéret 
Jesus concurréntem turbam, 
comminátus est spirítui im- 
mündo, dicens illi: Surde et 
mute spíritus, ego precipio 
tibi, exi ab eo: et ámplius ne 
intrééas in eum. Et exclá- 
mans, et multum discérpens 
eum, éxiit ab eo, et factus est 
sicut mórtuus, ita ut multi 
dícerent: Quia mórtuus est. 
Jesus aulem tenens manum 
ejus, elevávit eum, et sur- 
rexit. Et cum introísset in 
domum, discípuli ejus secréto 
interrogsbant eum: Quare 
nos non potiimus ejícere 
eum? Et dixit illis: Hoc genus 
in nullo potest exíre, nisi in 
oratióne, et jejünio. 


703 


ever he taketh him, dasheth 
him, and he foameth, and 
gnasheth with the teeth, and 
pineth away; and I spoke to 
Thy disciples to cast him out, 
and they could not. Who an- 
swering them, said, O incredu- 
lous generation, how Jong shall 
I be with you? how long shall 
I suffer you? bring bim unto 
Me: and they brought him; 
and when He had seen him, im- 
mediately the spirit troubled 
him, and being thrown down 
upon the ground, herolledabout 
foaming. And He asked his 
father,How long time is it since 
this happened unto him? But 
he said, From his infancy: and 
oftentimes hath he cast him 
into the fire and into the waters 
to destroy him. But if Thou 
canst do anything, help us, 
having compassion on us. And 
Jesus saith to him, If thou 
canst believe, all things are 
possible to him that believeth. 
And immediately the father of 
the boy crying out, with tears, 
said, I do believe, Lord; help 
my unbelief. And when Jesus 
saw the multitude running to- 
gether, He threatened the un- 
clean spirit, saying to him, 
Deaf and dumb spirit, I com- 
mand thee, go out of him, and 
enter not any more into bim: 
and crying out and greatly tear- 
ing him, he went out of him; 
and he became as dead, so that 
many said, He is dead. But 
Jesus taking him by the hand, 
lifted him up, and he arose. 
And when He was come into the 
house, His disciples secretly 
asked Him, Why could not we 
cast him out? And He said to 


them. This kind can go out by nothing, but by prayer and 


fasting. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


104 EMBER-WEDNESDAY 


Offertory. Ps. 118, 47 48 


I will meditate on Thy com- 
mandments, which I have loved 
exceedingly: and lift up my 
hand to Thy commandments, 
which I have loved: 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Meditábor in mandátis tuis, 
que diléx valde: et levábo 
manus meas ad mandáta 
tua, que diléxi. 


Secret 


seech Thee, O Lord, 
cleanse. our Sins away, and 
sanctify the bodies and minds 
of them that serve Thee 
unto celebrating the ‘sacrifice. 
Through our Lord. 


(D ihis sacrifice, we be- 


ce hóstia, Dómine, que- 
sumus, emundet nostra 
delicta: et ad sacrificium 
celebrandum, subditérum tibi 
córpora, mentésque sanctifi- 
cet. Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; ee at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 775- 


Communion, 


Eat fat meats, and drink 
sweet wine, and send portions 
to them that have not prepared 
for themselves; because it is the 
holy day of the Lord; be not 
sad, for the joy of the Lord is 
our strength, 


2 Esd. 8, 10 


Comédite pinguia, et bibite 
mulsum, et mittite partes his, 
qui non preparavérunt sibi; 
sanctus enim dies Démini est, 
nolite contristári: gáudium 
étenim Dómini est fortitüdo 
nostra. 


Postcommunion 


sacrament, we supplicate 
Thee, O Lord, that what, of Thy 
bounty, we perform in diligent 
service, we may, by Thy grace, 
become more and more worthy 
to share in this heavenly gift. 
Through our Lord. 


I: RECEIVING. Thine adorable 


vMÉNTEs, Dómine, dona 

exléstia, suppliciter de- 
precámur: ut, que sédula 
servitüte donánte te gérimus, 
dignis sénsibus tuo münere 
capiámus. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gif h 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500" ones 8263 Tira at the 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


aa 


EMBER-FRIDAY 705 


Ember-Fridap (Purple) - 
STATION AT THE TWELVE APOSTLES 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 104, 3, 4 


ÆTÉTUR cor queréntium 

Déminum: et confirm- 
amini: querite fáclem ejus 
semper. Ps. 104, 1. Confité- 
mini Dómino, et invocáte no- 
men ejus; annuntiáte inter 
gentes Ópera ejus. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


ET the heart of them re- 
joice that seek the Lord: 
Seek ye the Lord and be 
strengthened: seek His face 
evermore. Ps. 104, 1. Give glory 
to the Lord, and call upon His 
name: declare His deeds among 
the gentiles. Y. Glory. 


Prayer 


RÆSTA, quzsumus, omní- 

potens Deus ut observa- 
tiónes sacras annua devo- 
tióne recoléntes, et córpore 
tibi placeámus, et mente. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, 
the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that, ven- 
erating the sacred yearly ob- 
Servances with devotion, we 


may be pleasing to Thee both 


in body and in soul Through 
our Lord. 


page 827; third at the choice of 


Lesson. Osee 14, 2-10 


Léctio Osée Prophéte. 


xc dicit Dóminus Deus: 
Convértere Israél ad 
Dóminum Deum tuum: quó- 
niam corruísti in iniquitáte 
tua. Téllite vobíscum verba, 
et convertímini ad Dóminum: 
et dicite ei: Omnem aufer in- 
iquitátem, áccipe bonum: et 
reddémus vitulos labiórum 
nostrórum. Assur non salvá- 
bit nos, super equum non 
ascendémus, nec dicémus ul- 
tra: Dii nostri ópera mánuum 
nostrórum: quia ejus, qui in 
te . est, miseréberis pupilli. 
Sanábo contritiónes eórum, 
díligam eos spontánee: quia 


Lesson from Osee, the 
Prophet. i 
Hus saith the Lord God: 
Return, O Israel, to the 
Lord thy God; for thou hast 
fallen down by thy iniquity. 
Take with you words, and re- 
turn to the Lord, and say to 
Him, Take away all iniquity, 
and receive the good, and we 
will render the calves of our 
lips. Assyria shall not save us, 
we will not ride upon horses, 
neither will we say any more, 
The works of our hands are our 
gods; for thou wilt have mercy 
on the fatherless that is in thee. 
I will heal their breaches I 
will love them freely; for My 


http://ccwatershed.org 


706 


wrath is turned away from 
them. I will be as the dew: 
Israel shall spring as the lily, 
and his root shall shoot forth as 
that of Libanus. His branches 
shall spread, and his glory shall 
be as the olive-tree, and his 
smell as that of Libanus. They 
shall be converted that sit un- 
der his shadow; they shall live 
upon wheat, and they shal 
blossom as a vine: his memorial 
shall be as the wine of Libanus. 
Ephraim shall say, What have 
I to do any more with idols? 
I will hear him, and I will make 
him flourish like a green fir- 
tree: from me is thy fruit 
found. -Who is wise, and he 
shall understand these things? 
prudent, and he shall know 


EMBER-FRIDAY 


avérsus est furor meus ab eis. 
Ero quasi ros, Israél germin- 
Abit sicut Mlium, et erümpet 
radix ejus ut Líbani. Ibunt 
rami ejus, et erit quasi olíva 
glória ejus: et odor ejus ut 
Líbani. Converténtur sedéntes 
in umbra ejus: vivent trítico, 
et germinábunt quasi vínea: 
memoriále ejus sicut vinum 
Líbani. Ephraim quid mihi 
ultra idóla? ego exáudiam, et 
dírigam eum ego ut abíetem 
viréntem: ex me fructus tuus 
invéntus est. Quis sápiens, et 
intélliget ista? intélligens, et 
sciet hec? quia recte vie 
Dómini, et justi ambulábunt 
in eis, prevaricatóres vero 
córruent in eis. 


these things? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just 
shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall in them. 


Gradual. Ps. 89, 13, 1 


Return, O Lord, a little, and Convértere, Dómine, ali- 
be entreated in favor of Thy quántulum, et deprecáre su- 
servants. Y. Lord, Thou hast per servos tuos. Y. Dómine, 
been our refuge, from genera- refügium factus es nobis, a 
tion to generation. generatióne et progénie. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Luke 7, 36-50 


"5 Continuation of the holy ®© Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
Gospel according to St. Luke. — gélii secündum Lucam. 


T THAT lime, one of the N ILLO témpore: Rogábat 
pharisees desired Jesus 


Jesum quidam de pharí- 

eat with him; and He went sis, ut manducáret cum illo, 

into the house of the pharisee, Et ingréssus domum pharisei, 

and sat down to meat. And be- discübuit. Et ecce mülier, 

hold a woman that was in the que erat in civitáte peccátrix, 

city, a sinner, when she knew ut cognóvit, quod accubuisset 
that He sat at meat in the 


in domo pharisszi, áttulit ala- 
pharisee's house, brought an 


bástrum unguénti: et stans 
alabaster box of ointment; and 


retro secus pedes ejus, lácri- 
standing behind at His feet,she mis cepit rigáre pedes ejus, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ee y 


Ly 


EMBER-FRIDAY 107 


et capíllis capitis sui tergebat, 
et osculabátur pedes ejus, et 
unguénto ungébat. Videns 
autem Phariseus, qui vocá- 
verat eum, ait intra se, di- 
cens: Hic si esset prophéta, 
Sciret ütique, que et qualis est 
mülier, quz tangit eum: quia 
peccátrix est. Et respóndens 
Jesus, dixit ad illum: Simon, 
hábeo tibi áliquid dicere. At 
ile ait: Magíster, dic. Duo 
debitóres erant cuídam fe- 
neratóri: unus debébat dená- 
rios quingéntos, et álius quin- 
quagínta. Non habéntibus illis 
unde rédderent, donávit utrís- 
que. Quis ergo eum plus díli- 
git? Respóndens Simon, 
dixit: Aestimo quia is, cui 
plus donávit. At ille dixit ei: 


Recte judicásti. Et convérsus. 


ad mulíerem, dixit Simóni: 
Vides hane mulierem? In- 
trávi in domum tuam, aquam 
pédibus meis non  dedísti: 
hzc autem lácrimis rigávit 
pedes meos, et capíllis suis 
tersit. Osculum mihi non de- 
disti; hec autem, ex quo in- 
trávit, non cessávit osculári 
pedes meos. Oleo caput meum 
non unxísti: hec autem un- 
guénto unxit pedes meos. 
Propter quod dico tibi: Re- 
mittüntur ei peccáta multa, 
quóniam diléxit multum. Cui 
autem minus dimittitur, min- 
us díligit. Dixit autem ad 
ilam: Remittüntur tibi pec- 
cáta. Et cepérunt, qui simul 
&ccumbébant, dicere intra se: 
Quis est hic, qui étiam pec- 
cáta dimíttit? Dixit autem 
ad mulierem: Fides tua te 
salvam fecit: Vade in pace. 


began to Wash His feet with 
tears, and wiped them with the 
hairs of her head, and kissed 
His feet, and anointed them 
with the ointment. And ‘the 
pharisee, who had invited Him, 
Seeing it, spoke within himself, 
saying, This man, if He were a 
prophet, would know surely who 
and what manner of woman 
this is that toucheth Him, that 
she is a.sinner. And Jesus an- 
swering,. said to him, Simon, I 
have somewhat to say to thee: 
but he.said, Master, say it. A 
certain creditor had two debt- 
ors, the one owed five hundred 
pence, and the other fifty. And 
whereas they had not where- 
with to pay, he forgave them 
both. Which therefore of the 
two loveth him most? Simon 
answering, said, I suppose that 
he, to whom he forgave most. 
And He said to him, Thou hast 
judged rightly. And turning to 
the women, He said unto Simon, 
Dost thou see this woman? I 
entered into thy house: thou 
gavest Me no water for My feet; 
but she with tears hath washed 
My feet, and with her hair hath 
wiped them. Thou gavest Me 
no kiss; but she, since she came 
in, hath not ceased to kiss My 
feet. My head with oil thou 
didst not anoint; but she with 
ointment hath anointed My 
feet. Wherefore I say to thee, 
Many sins are forgiven her, be- 
cause she hath loved much: 
but to whom less is forgiven, he 
loveth less. And He said to her, 
Thy sins are forgiven thee. And 
they that sat at meat with Him 
began to say within themselves, 
Who is this that forgiveth sins 


also? And He said to the woman, Thy faith hath made thee 


safe; go in peace. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


708 EMBER-SATURDAY 


Offertory. Ps. 102, 2, 5 
Bless the Lord, O my soul, Bénedic ánima mea, Dó- 
and never forget all He hath mino, et noli oblivisci omnes 
done for thee: and thy youth retributiónes ejus: et renová- 
shall be renewed like the bitur, sicut dauile, juvéntus 
eagle's. tua. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret | -"— 
ET the offerings of our ccÉPTA tibi sint, Dó- 
fast be accepted by Thee, mine, quesumus no- 


we pray Thee, O Lord, that by stri dona jejünii: que et ex- 
iheir expiation they may make piándo nos tua grátia dignos 
us worthy of Thy grace and effíciant, et ad sempitérna 
lead: us to Thine everlasting promíssa perdücant. Per D6- 
promises. Through our Lord. minum. 

Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Ps. 118, 22, 24 


Remove from me reproach Aufer a me oppróbrium et 
and contempt, because I have contémptum, quia mandáta 
sought out Thy command- tua exquisivi, Dómine: nam 
ments, O Lord: for Thy testi- et testiménia tua meditátio 


monies are my meditation. mea est. 
/. Postcommunion “ 
E BESEECH Thee, O al- UXSUMUS, omnipotens 
mighty God, that, show- Deus: ut de. percéptis 


ing gratitude for the gifts we munéribus grátias exhibéntes, 
have ‘received, we may receive benefícia potióra sumámus. 
more especial benefits. Through Per Dóminum. 

our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


. Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


€mber-S»aturbap (Purple) 
STATION AT ST. PETER 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 94, 6,7 


ome, let us adore God, and ENÍTE, adorémus Deum, 
fall down before the Lord: et procidámus ante Dó- 
let us weep before Him Who minum, plorémus ante eum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


EMBER-SATURDAY 709 
qui fecit nos: quia ipse est made us; for He is tbe Lord 
Dóminus Deus noster. Ps. 94, our God. Ps. 94, 1. Come let us 
1. Veníte, exsultémus Dó- praise the Lord with joy; let us. 
mino: jubilémus Deo salutári joyfully sing to God our Savior. 
nostro. V. Glória Patri. ¥. Glory. 
Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. E 
After the Kyrie eleison is said: 


Let us pray 
Y. Flectámus génua. Y. Let us kneel. 
HB. Leváte. Hf. Arise. 
Prayer 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 

Deus, qui per contin- 
éntiam salutárem corpóribus 
medéris et méntibus: maje- 
Státem tuam süpplices exorá- 
mus; ut pia jejunántium de- 
precatióne placátus, et præ- 
séntia nobis subsídia tríbuas, 
et futüra. Per Dóminum. 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

Who dost heal bodies 
and souls through wholesome 
continence, we supplicate 'Thy 
majesty that, being appeased 
by the devout prayer of those 
who fast, Thou wouldst grant 
us help both for the present 
and for the future. Through 
our Lord. 


Lesson. Lev. 23, 27-32 


Léctio libri Levítici. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Locütus est 
Dóminus ad Móysen, di- 
cens: Décimo die mensis hu- 
jus séptimi, dies expiatiónum 
erit celebérrimus, et vocábitur 
sanctus: affligetisque ánimas 
vestras in eo, et offerétis holo- 
cáustum Dómino. Omne opus 
servile non faciétis témpore 
diéi hujus: quia dies propitia- 
tiónis est, ut propitiétur vobis 
Dóminus Deus vester. Omnis 
ánima, quz afflícta non füerit 
die hac, períbit de pópulis 
suis: et que óperis quídpiam 
fécerit, delébo eum de pópulo 
Suo. Nihil ergo óperis faciétis 
in eo: legítimum sempitér- 
num erit vobis in cunctis gen- 
eratiónibus, et habitatiónibus 


Lesson from the Book of Le- 
viticus. 
N THOSE days the Lord spoke 
to Moses, saying, Upon the 
tenth day of this seventh month 
shall be the day of atonement, 
it shall be most solemn, and 
shall be called holy; and you 
shall afflict your souls on that 
day, and shall offer a holocaust 
to the Lord. You shall do no 
servile work in the time of this 
day; because it is a day of pro- 
pitiation, that the Lord your 
God may be merciful unto you. 
Every soul that is not afflicted 
on this day, shall perish from 
among his people: and every 
soul that shall do any work, the 
same willI destroy from among 
his people. You shall do no 
work therefore on that day: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


710 


it shall be an everlasting ordi- 
nance unto you in all your gen- 
erations and dwellings. 1t is 
a Sabbath of rest: and you shall 
afflict your souls; beginning on 
the ninth day of the month; 
from evening until evening you 
shall celebrate your sabbaths; 


EMBER-SATURDAY 


vestris. Sábbatum requietiónis 
est, et affigétis ánimas ves- 
tras die nono mensis: a vés- 
pera usque ad vésperam cele- 
brábitis sábbata vestra: dicit 
Dóminus omnípotens. 


saith the Lord almighty. 


Gradual. Ps. 78, 9, 10 


Forgive us our sins, O Lord; 
lest they should say at any 
time among the gentiles, Where 
is their God? Y.Help us, O God 
our Saviour, and for the glory 
of Thy name, O Lord, deliver us. 


Propítius esto, Dómine, pec- 
catis nostris: ne quando di- 
cant gentes: Ubi est Deus 
eórum? Y. Adjuva nos, Deus 
salutaris noster: et propter 
honórem nóminis tui, Dómini, 
libera nos. 


Let us pray 
Y. Let us kneel. Y. Fléctamus génua. 
HÀ. Arise. BY. Levate. 
Prayer 


Gu us, we pray Thee, O 
almighty God, that by 


A NOBIS, quesumus, om- 
nipotens Deus: ut jeju- 


fasting we may be filled with nando, tua gratia satiémur; et 
Thy grace, and by abstaining abstinéndo, cunctis efficidmur 
may be made stronger than all hóstibus fortióres. Per Démi- 


our enemies, Through our Lord. 


num. 


Lesson. Lev. 23, 39-43 


Lesson from the Book of Le- 
viticus. 
'N THOSE days, the Lord spoke 
te Moses, saying: From the 
fifteenth day of the seventh 
month, when you shali have 
gathered in all the fruits of 
your land, you shall celebrate 
the feast of the Lord seven 
days; on the first day and the 
eighth shall be a sabbath, that 
is, a day of rest. And you shall 
take to you, on the first day, 
the fruits of the fairest tree, 
and branches of palm-trees, 
and boughs of thick trees, and 
willows of the brook and you 


Léctio libri Levítici. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Locütus est 

Dóminus ad Moysen, di- 
cens: A quintodécimo . die 
mensis séptimi, quando con- 
gregavéritis omnes fructus 
terre vestre, celebrabitis fé- 
rias Dómini septem diébus: 
die primo et die octávo erit 
sábbatum, id est réquies. Su- 
metísque vobis die primo fruc- 
tus árboris pulchérrime, spa- 
tulásque palmárum, et ramos 
ligni densárum fróndium, et 
Sálices de torrénte, et letabi- 
mini coram Dómino Deo ve- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


EMBER-SATURDAY 


stro. Celebrabitisque solemni- 
tátem ejus septem diébus per 
annum. Legítimum sempitér- 
num erit in generatiónibus 
vestris. Mense séptimo festa 
celebrábitis, et habitábitis in 
umbráculis septem diébus. 
Omnis, qui de génere est Is- 
raéli, manébit in tabernácu- 
lis: ut discant pósteri vestri, 
quod in tabernáculis habitáre 
fécerim fílios Israél, cum edü- 
cerem eos de terra ZEgypti, 
Ego Dóminus. Deus vester. 


711 


shall rejoice before the Lord 
your God; and you shall keep 
the solemnity thereof seven 
days in the year: it shall be 
an everlasting ordinance in 
your generations. In the sev- 
enth month shall you celebrate 
this feast; and you shall dwell 
in bowers seven days: every one 
that is of the race of Israel shall 
dwell. in tabernacles; that your 
posterity may know, that I 
made the children of Israel to 
dwell in tabernacles, when I 
brought them out of the land 
of Egypt. I am the Lord your 
God. 


Gradual. Ps. 83, 10, 9 


Protéctor noster spice, 
Deus, et réspice super servos 
tuos. Y. Dómine Deus virtü- 
tum, exáudi preces servórum 
tuórum. 


Behold, O God our protector; 
and look on Thy servants. Y. O 
Lord God of hosts, graciously 
hear the prayers of Thy ser- 
vants. 


Let us pray 
y. Flectámus génua. Y. Let us kneel. 
RY. Leváte. BY. Arise. 
Prayer 


UERE, quesumus, Dómine, 

famíliam tuam: ut salú- 

tis etérne remédia, que te in- 

spirante requirimus, te lar- 

giénte consequámur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


warp Thy household, we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, 

that we may obtain by Thy gift 

those remedies of eternal health 

which we seek by Thine inspi- 
ration. Through our Lord. 


Lesson, Mich. 7, 14-20 


Léctio Michés Prophéte. 


OMINE Deus noster, pasce 
pópulum tuum in virga 

tua, gregem hereditátis tus, 
habitántes solos in saltu, 
juxta dies antíquos. Vidébunt 
gentes, et confundéntur super 
omni fortitüdine sua. Quis 


Lesson from Micheas the 
Prophet. 
Lorp our God, feed Thy 
people with Thy rod, the 
flock of Thy inheritance, them 
that dwell alone in the forest, 
according to the days of old. 
The nations shall see, and shall 
be confounded at all their 


http://ccwatershed.org 


712 


strength. Who is a God like to 
Thee, Who taketh away iniquity 
and passeth: by the sin of the 
remnant of Thy inheritance? 
He will send His fury in no 
more, because He delighteth in 
mercy. He will turn again, and 
have mercy on us: He will put 
away our iniquities, and He will 
cast all our sins into the bot- 
tom of the sea. Thou wilt per- 
form the truth to Jacob, the 
mercy to Abraham, which Thou 
hast sworn to our fathers from 
the days of old, O Lord our 
God, 


EMBER-SATURDAY 


Deus similis tui, qui aufers 
iniquitátem, et transis peccá- 
tum .reliquiárum hereditatis 
tuz? Non immittet ultra furó- 
rem suum, quóniam volens 
misericórdiam est. Reverté- 
tur, et miserébitur nostri: de- 
pónet iniquitátes nostras, et 
projíciet in profündum maris 
ómnia peccáta nostra. Dabis 
veritátem Jacob, misericór- 
diam Abraham: que jurásti 
pátribus nostris a diébus an- 
tíquis: Dómine Deus noster. 


Gradual. Ps. 89, 13, 1 


. Return, O Lord, a little; and 


Convértere, Dómine, ali- 


be entreated in favor of Thy quántulum, et deprecáre su- 
servants. Y. Lord, Thou hast per servos tuos. Y. Dómine, 
been our refuge, from genera- refügium factus es nobis, a 


tion to generation. 


generatióne et progénie. 


Let us pray 
V. Let us kneel. V. Flectámus génua. 
HB. Arise. RY. Leváte. 
Prayer 


O Lord, so to abstain 
from carnal delicacies that we 


G's" us, we beseech Thee, 


RÆSTA qusesumus, Dómi- 
ne, sic nos ab épulis ab- 
stinére carnálibus: ut a vítiis 


may likewise fast from the sins irruéntibus páriter jejunémus. 


that overwhelm us. Through 
our Lord. 


Per Dóminum. 


Lesson. Zach. 8, 14-19 


Lesson from Zacharias ihe 
Prophet. 
N THOSE days, the word of 
the Lord came to me, say- 
ing, Thus saith the Lord of 
hosts: As I purposed to afflict 
you when your fathers had pro- 
voked Me to wrath, and I had 
no mercy; so turning again, I 
have thought in these days to 


Léctio Zacharie Prophéte. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Factum est 
verbum Dómini ad me, 
dicens: Hec dicit Domi- 
nus excercituum: Sicut co- 
gitávi, ut affligerem vos, cum 
ad iracündiam provocássent 
patres vestri me, dicit Dómi- 
nus, et non sum misértus: sic 


http://ccwatershed.org 


“A 


EMBER-SATURDAY "18 


convérsus cogitóvi in diébus do good to the house of Juda, 
istis, ut benefáciam dómui and Jerusalem: fear not. These 
Juda et Jerúsalem: nolite ti- then are the things which you 
mére. Hec sunt ergo verba, shall do, Speak ye truth every 
que faciétis: Loquimini veri- one to his neighbor; judge ye 
tátem, unusquísque cum próx- truth and judgment of peace in 
imo suo: veritatem, et judi- your gates; and let none of you 
cium pacis judicáte in portis imagine evil in your hearts 
vestris. Et unusquisque ma- against his friend; and love not 
lum contra amícum suum ne a false oath; for all these are 
cogitétis in córdibus vestris: the things that I hate, saith the 
ligátis: ómnia enim hzc sunt, Lord. And the word of the 
que odi, dicit Dóminus. Et Lord of hosts came to me, say- 
factum est verbum Dómini ing, Thus saith'tbe Lord of 
exercituum ad me, dicens: hosts, The fast of the fourth 
Hac dicit Dóminus, exercitu- month, and the fast of the fifth, 
um: jejünium quarti, et je- and the fast of the seventh, and 
jünium quinti, et jejünium the fast of the tenth, shall be to 
septími, et jejünium décimi the house of Juda joy and glad- 
erit domui Juda in gáudium, ness, and great solemnities; 
et letitiam, et in solemnitátes only love ye truth and peace: 
precláres: veritatem tantum, saith the Lord of hosts. 

et pacem dilígite: dicit Dómi- 

nus exercítuum. 


Gradual. Ps. 140, 2 
Dirigátur orátio mea sicut Let my prayer be directed 
incénsum in conspéctu tuo, like incense in Thy sight, O 
Dómine. Y. Elevátio manuum Lord. Y. The lifting up of my 
meárum sacrifícium vesperti- hands as even sacrifice. 
num. : 


Let us pray 
Y. Flectámus génua. . ¥. Let us kneel. 
B. Leváte. Bf. Arise. 
Prayer 
a’ NoBIs, Dómine, tríbuis s THOU dost give us the 
solémne tibi deférre je- grace to offer Thee, O: 


jünium: sie nobis, quesumus, Lord, a solemn fast, so grant 

indulgéntig presta subsidium. us, we beseech Thee, the assis- 

Per Dóminum. - tance of Thy pardon. Through 
- i our Lord. 


Lesson. Dan. 3, 40 


Lesson and Canticle of Daniel as on Ember Saturday in 
Advent, page 125. 


Y. Dóminus vobiscum. ¥. The Lord be with you, 
W. Et cum spíritu tuo. A. And with thy spirit. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


"14 EMBER-SATURDAY 
Prayer 
cop, Who didst subdue the evs, qui tribus püeris mi~ 
flames of fire for the three tigasti flammas igni- 


children, mercifully grant that 
the flames of our sins may not 
consume us Thy servants. 
Through our Lord. 


um: concéde propítius; ut pos 
fámulos tuos non exürat flam- 
ma vitiórum. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Heb. 9, 2-12 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Hebrews. 

RETHREN, There was a tab- 
ernacle made the first, 
wherein were the candlesticks, 
and the table, and the setting 
forth of loaves, which is called 
the Holy. And after the second 
veil, the tabernacle which is 
called the Holy of Holies, hav- 
ing the golden censer, and the 
ark of the testament covered 
about on every part with gold, 
in which was a golden pot that 
had manna, and the rod of 
Aaron that had blossomed, and 
the tables of the testament, and 
over it were the cherubims of 
glory overshadowing the propi- 
tiary: of which it is not needful 
to speak now particularly. 
Now these things being thus 
ordered; into the first taber- 
nacle the priests indeed always 
entered, accomplishing the offi- 
ces of sacrifices. But into the 
Second the high priest alone, 
once a year, not without blood, 
which he offereth for his own 
and the people's ignorance; the 
Holy Ghost signifying this, that 
the way into the Holies was not 
yet made manifest, whilst the 
former tabernacle was yet 
standing: which is a parable 
of the time present, according 


. Léctio Epistole béati Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Hebrzeos. 


RATRES:  T'abernáculum 
factum est primum, in 

quo erant candelábra, et men- 
sa, et proposítio panum, que 
dícitur Sancta. Post vela- 
méntum autem secündum, ta- 
bernáculum, quod  dícitur 
Sancta sanctórum: áureum 
habens thuríbulum, et arcam 
testaménti circumtéctam ex 
omni parte auro, in qua urna 
áurea habens manna, et vir- 
ga Aaron, que frondüerat, et 
tabule testaménti, supérque 
eam erant Chérubim glóriæ 
obumbrántia propitiatórium: 
de quibus non est modo dicén- 
dum per síngula. His vero ita 
compositis; in prióri quidem 
tabernáculo semper introi- 
bant sacerdótes, sacrifició- 
rum officia consummántes: 
in secündo autem semel in 
&nno solus póntifex, non sine 
sánguine, quem offert pro sua, 
et pópuli ignorántia; hoc sig- 
nificánte — Spíritu Sancto, 
nondum  propalátam esse 
sanctórum viam, adhuc prióre 
tabernáculo habénte statum. 
Quz parábola est témporis in- 
Stántis: juxta quam münera, 
et hóstim offerüntur, que non 
possunt juxta consciéntiam 


http://ccwatershed.org 


( 


EMBER-SATURDAY 


perféctum fácere serviéntem, 
Solümmodo in cibis, et in pó- 
tibus, et váriis baptismátibus, 
et justítiis carnis usque ad 
tempus correctiónis impósitis. 
Christus autem assístens Pón- 
tifex futurórum bonórum, per 
ámplius et perféctius taber- 
náculum non manufáctum, id 
est, non hujus -creatiénis; 
néque per sánguinem hircó- 
rum aut vitulórum, sed per 
próprium sánguinem introívit 
semel in Sancta, etérna re- 
demptióne invénta. 


T15 


to which gifts and sacrifices are 
offered, which can not, as to the 
conscience, make him perfect 
that serveth, only in meats and 
in drinks, and divers washings, 
and justices of the flesh, laid 
on them until the time of cor- 
rection. But Christ being come, 
a high priest of the good things 
to come, by a greater and more 
perfect tabernacle, not made 


with hands, that is, not of this 


creation, neither by the blood 
of' goats nor of calves, but by 
His own blood, entered once 
into the Holies having obtained 
eternal redemption. 


Tract. Ps. 116, 1, 2 


Laudáte Dóminum omnes 
gentes: et collaudáte eum, 
omnes pópuli. Y. Quóniam 
confirmáta est super nos mi- 
sericérdia ejus: et véritas Dó- 
mini manet in etérnum. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


O praise the Lord, all ye na- 
tions: and praise Him together, 
all ye people. V. For His mercy 
is confirmed upon us: and the 
truth of the Lord remaineth for 
ever. 


Gospel. Luke 13, 6-17 . 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 


N iLLO témpore: Dicébat 

Jesusturbishanc similitu- 
dinem: Arborem fici habébat 
quidam plantátam in vinea 
sua, et venit quaerens fructum 
in illa, et non invénit. Dixit 
autemadcultórem vinee: Ecce 
anni tres sunt ex quo vénio 
querens fructum in ficülnea 
hac, et non invénio: succide 
ergo illam: ut quid étiam ter- 
ram óccupat? At ille respón- 
dens, dicit illi; Dómine, di- 
mitte illam et hoc anno, usque 
dum fódiam circa illam, et 
mittam stércora: et si quidem 
fécerit fructum: sin autem, in 
futürum succídes eam. Erat 


"B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT lime, Jesus spoke 

to the multitude this 
parable: A' certain man had a 
fig-tree planted in his vineyard, 
and he came seeking fruit on it, 
and found none; and he said to 
the dresser of the vineyard, Be- 
hold, for these three years I 
come seeking fruit on this fig- 
iree, and I find none. Cut it 
down, therefore: why cumber- 
eth it the ground? But he an- 
swering, said to him, Lord, let 
it alone this year also, until I 
dig about it, and dung it; and 
if happily it bear fruit; but if 
not, then after that thou shalt 
cut it down. And He was teach- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


“716 


ing in their synagogue on. the 
sabbath: and behold there was 
a woman who had a spirit of 
infirmity eighteen ‘years: and 
she was.bowed together, neither 
could she look upwards at all. 
Whom when Jesus saw, He 
called her unto Him, and said 
to her, Woman, thou art de- 
livered from thy infirmity; and 
He laid His hands upon ‘her, 
and immediately she was made 
straight, and glorified God.: And 
the ruler of the synagogue (be- 
ing angry that Jesus had healed 
on the sabbath) answering, 
said to the multitude, Six days 
there are wherein you ought to 
work. In them therefore come, 
and be healed, and not on the 
sabbath day. And the Lord an- 
Swering him, said, Ye hypo- 
crites, doth not every one of 
you on the sabbath day loose 
his ox or his ass from the man- 
ger, and lead them to water? 
And ought not this daughter of 
Abraham, whom Satan hath 
bound, lo, these eighteen years, 
to be loosed from this bond on 
the sabbath day? And when He 
said these things, all His ad- 
versaries were ashamed; and 
all the people rejoiced for all 


EMBER-SATURDAY 


autem. docens in synagóga eó- 
rum sábbatis. Et ecce mülier, 
que habébat spiritum infirmi- 
tátis annis decem et octo: et 
erat inclináta, nec omníno 
póterat. sursum  respícere. 
Quam cum vidéret Jesus, vo- 
cávit eum ad se, et ait illi: 
Mülier, dimíssa es ab infirmi- 
táte tua. Et impósuit illi ma- 
nus, et conféstim erécta .est, 
et glorificabat Deum. Re- 
Spóndens autem archisyna- 
gógus, indígnans quia sábbato 
curásset Jesus, dicébat turbe: 
Sex dies sunt, in quibus opór- 
tet operári: in his ergo veníte, 
et curámini, et non in die 
sábbati. Respóndens autem 
ad illum Dóminus, dixit: Hy- 
pócrite, unusquísque vestrum 
sábbato non solvit bovem 
suum, aut ásinum a presépio 
et ducit adaquáre? Hanc au- 
tem filiam Abrahz, quam alli- 
gavit sátanas, ecce decem et 
octo annis, non opórtuit solvi 
2, vínculo isto die sábbati? Et 
cum hzc diceret, erubescé- 
bant omnes adversárii ejus: et 
omnis pópulus gaudébat in 
univérsis, que glorióse fiébant 
ab eo. 


the things that. were gloriously done by Him, 
Offertory. Ps. 87, 2, 3 


O Lord, the God of my salva- 
tion, I have cried in the day, 
and in the night before Thee; 
let my prayer come in before 
Thee, O Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Dómine, Deus salitis mez, 
in die clamávi, et nocte co- 
ram te: intret orátio mea in 
conspéctu tuo, Dómine. 


Secret 


Gu We beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that the 
gift offered in the sight of Thy 


ONCÉDE, quesumus omni- 
potens Deus: ut óculis 
tue majestátis munus oblá- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


EIGHTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER.PENTECOST 717 


tum, et grátiam nobis devo- majesty may obtain for us both 
tiónis obtineat, et efféctum the grace of- devotion and win 
bedte perenitétis acquirat. the effect of a blessed eternity. 
Per Dóminum. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at choice 
of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface fos Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Lev. 23, 41, 43 
Mense séptimo festa cele- In the seventh month shall 
brábitis, cum in tabernáculis you celebrate this feast, as I 
habitáre fécerim filios Israël, made the children of Israel to 
cum edücerem eos de terra dwell in tabernacles, when I 
JEgypti, ego Dóminus Deus brought them out of the land of 
vester. : Egypt: Y am the Lord your God. 


Postcommunion 
Pieri in nobis, Dó- er Thy sacrament, O Lord, 
— Mine, qusesumus, tua - we beseech Thee, perfect 
sacraménta quod.cóntinent: in us that which it contains, 
ut, que nune specie gérimus, that what we now perform in 
rerum veritáte capiámus. Per outward appearance we may 
Dóminum. apprehend in inward truth. 
! ud our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages "o gt 1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page. 793. 


Eighteenth Sunday after Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 36, 18 


[X4 Pacem, Dómine, susti- give peace, O Lord, to them 
néntibus te, ut prophé- .that patiently wait for 
tuifidéles inveniántur: ex- Thee, that Thy prophets may 


áudi preces servi tui, et ple- be found faithful: hear the 

bis tuse Israel Ps, 121, 1. Læ- prayers of Thy servant, and of 

tátus sum in his, que dicta Thy people Israel. Ps. 121, 1. 

sunt mihi: in domum Dómini I rejoiced at the things that 

ibimus. Y. Glória Patri. were said to me: We shall go 
into the house of the Lord. y. 
Glory. 

EIE page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


inicAT corda nostra, “pC er the operation of Thy 
quaesumus, Dómine, tue mercy, we beseech Thee, 
iniseratiónis operátio: quia O Lord, direct our hearts, for 


http://ccwatershed.org 


718 


without Thee we can not please 
Thee. Through our Lord. 


EIGHTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


tibi sine te placére non póssu- 
mus. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 1, 4-6 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, I give thanks to 
my God always for you, 
for the grace of God that is 
given you in Jesus Christ, that 
in all things you are made rich 
in Him, in all utterance and 
in all knowledge, as the testi- 
mony of Christ was confirmed 
in you, so thàt nothing is want- 
ing to you in any grace, waiting 
for the manifestation of Our 
Lord Jesus Christ. Who also 
will confirm you unto the end 
without crime, in the day of the 
coming of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


Léctio Epístole béati Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Grálias ago Deo 
T semper pro vobis 
in gratia Dei, que data est vo- 
bis in Christo Jesu: quod in 
ómnibus divites: facti estis 
in illo, in omni verbo, et 
in omni  sciénta: sicut 
testimónium Christi con- 
firmátum est in vobis: ita ut 
nihil vobis desit in ulla grátia, 
exspectántibus revelatiónem 
Dómini nostri Jesu Christi, 
qui et confirmábit vos usque 
in finem sine crímine, in die 
advéntus Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi. 


Gradual. Ps. 121,1,7 


I rejoiced at the things that 
were said to me: We shall go 
into the house of Our Lord. Y. 
Let peace be in thy strength, 
and abundance in thy towers. 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 101, 16. 
The gentiles shall fear Thy 
name, O Lord: and all the kings 
of the earth Thy glory. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Letátus sum in his, que 
dicta sunt mihi: in domum 
Dómini fbimus. Y. Fiat pax 
in virtüte tua, et abundántia 
in türribus tuis. Alleljja, alle- 
lija. V. Ps. 101, 16.. Timébunt 
gentes nomen tuum, Dómine, 
et omnes reges terre glóriam 
tuam. Allelája. 


Gospel. Matt. 9, 1-8 


3X Continuation of the holy 

Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus enter- 

ing into a ship, passed 

over the water and came into 

His own city. And behold they 

brought to Him one sick of the 

palsy lying in a bed; and Jesus 


4 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 


'N ILLO témpore: Ascéndens 
Jesus in  navículam, 
transfretávit, et venit in civi- 
tátem suam. Et ecce offeré- 
bant ei paralyticum jacéntem 
in lecto. Et videns Jesus fidem 


http://ccwatershed.org 


y 


EIGHTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


illórum, dixit paralytico: Con- 
fide, fili, remittüntur tibi pec- 
Cáta tua, Et ecce quidam de 
Scribis dixérunt intra se: His 
blasphémat. Et cum vidísset 
Jesus  cogitatiónes eórum, 
dixit: Ut quid cogitátis mala 
in córdibus vestris? Quid est 
facílius dícere: Dimittüntur 
tibi peccáta tua: an dícere: 
Surge, et ámbula? Ut autem 
Sclátis, quia Filius hóminis 
habet potestátem in.terra di- 
mitténdi peecáta, tunc ait 
paralytico: Surge, tolle lec- 
tum tuum, et vade in domum 
tuam. Et surréxit, et ábiit in 
domum suam. Vidéntes autem 
turbe timuérunt, et glorifi- 
cavérunt Deum, qui dedit po- 
testátem talem homínibus. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


Sanctificábit Móyses altáre 
Dómino, ófferens super illud 
holocáusta, et immolans vícti- 
mas: fecit sacrificium vesper- 
tinum in odórem suavitatis 
Dómino Deo, in conspéctu fil- 
iórum Israél. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


719 


Seeing their faith, said to the 
man sick of the palsy, Be of 
good heart, son, thy sins are 
forgiven thee. And behold some 
of the scribes said within them- 
selves, He blasphemeth. And 
Jesus seeing their thoughts, 
said, Why do you think evil in 
your hearts? whether is it easier 
to say, Thy sins are forgiven 
Thee; or to say, Arise and 
walk? But that you may know 
that the Son of man hath 
power on earth to forgive sins 
(then said He to the man sick 
of the palsy). Arise, take up 
thy bed, and go into thy house. 
And he arose, and went into his 
house. And the multitude see- 
ing it, feared, and glorified God 
Who had given such power to 
men. 


Ex. 24, 4, 5 


Moses consecrated an altar to 
the Lord, offering upon it holo- 
causts, and sacrificing victims: 
he made an evening sacrifice 
to the Lord God for an odor cf 
sweetness, in the sight of the 
children of Israel. 


Secret 


EUS, qui nos per hujus 
D sacrificii veneranda 
commércia, unius summe di- 
vinitátis participes  éfücis: 
presta, quesumus; ut, sicut 
tuam cognóscimus veritátem, 
sic eam dignis móribus asse- 
quamur, Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who, through the 

august communication of 
this sacrifice, dost make us par- 
takers of the one supreme di- 
vinity, grant, we beseech Thee, 
that, as we know Thy truth, so 
we may ever follow it with 
worthy actions. Through our 
Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


720 NINETEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


. Communion. 
Bring up sacrifices, and come 


inte His courts: adore ye the 
Lord in His holy court. 


Ps. 95, 8, 9 

Tóllite hóstias, et introíte 
in atria ejus: adordte Dómi- 
num in aula sancta ejus, 


Postcommunion 


TRENGTHENED by the sacred 
gift, we render thanks to 
Thee, O Lord, beseeching Thy 
mercy that Thou make us en- 
tirely worthy to partake thereof. 
Through our Lord. 


RÁTIiAS tibi, reférimus, 
Dómine, sacro münere 
vegetáti: tuam misericórdiam 
deprecántes; ut dignos nos 
ejus particípatióne perficias. 


: Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Rineteenth Sunday after Pentecost (Green) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 


I AM the salvation of the 
people, saith the Lord: in 
whatever tribulation they shall 
cry to Me I will hear them; and 
I will be their Lord for ever. Ps. 
77, 1. Attend, O My people, to 
My law; incline your ears to the 
words of My mouth. Y. Glory. 


ALUS pópuli ego sum, dicit 

Dóminus: de quacüm- 
que iribulstióne clamáverint 
ad me, exáudiam eos: et ero 
ilórum Dóminus in perpé- 
tuum. Ps. 77, 1. Atténdite, pó- 
pule meus, legem meam: in- 
clináte aurem vestram in ver- 
ba oris mei, V. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY. and merciful 
God, in Thy loving- 
indness do Thou keep us from 
all things that war against us, 
that, being unhampered alike 
in soul and in body, we may 
with free minds perform the 
works that are Thine, Through 
our Lord. 


MNÍPOTENS..et miséricors 

Deus, univérsa nobis 
&dversántia propitiátus ex- 
clüde: ut mente. et córpore 
páriter expedíti, que tua sunt, 
liberis méntibus éxsequámur. 
Per Dóminum, 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 82; third at the choice oj 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 


NINETEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


1721 


Epistle. Eph. 4, 23-28 


Léctió Epistéle beáti Pauli 
Apostoli ad Ephésios. 


RATRES: Renovámini spí- 

ritu mentis vestre, et 
indüite novum hóminem, qui 
secindum Deum creátus est in 
justitia, et. sanctitáte verita- 
tis. Propter quod deponéntes 
mendacium, loquímini veri- 
tátem unusquísque cum próx- 
imo suo: quóniam sumus fn- 
vicem membra, Irascimini, et 
nolíte peccáre: sol non occi- 
dat super iracündiam ves- 
tram. Nolíte locum dare diá- 
bolo: qui furabátur, jam non 
furétur; magis autem labóret, 
operándo mánibus suis, quod 
bonum est, ut hábeat unde 
tribuat necessitátem patiénti. 


Gradual. 


Dirigátur orátio mea, sicut 
incénsum in conspéctu tuo, 
Dómine. Y. Elevátio mánuum 
meárum sacrifícium vespertí- 
num. Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 
104, 1. Confitémini Dómino, et 
invocáte nomen ejus: annun- 
tiáte inter gentes Ópera ejus. 
Allelüja. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians. ` 

RETHREN, Be ye renewed in 
the spirit of your mind, 
and put on the new man, who 
according to God is created in 
justice and holiness of truth. 
Wherefore, putting away lying, 
speak ye the truth every man 
with his neighbor, for we are 
members one of another. Be 
angry, and sin not. Let not the 
sun go down upon your anger. 
Give not place to the devil. 
He that stole, let him now steal 
no moré; but rather let him 
labor, working with his hands 
the thing which is good, that he 
may have somthing to give to 
him that suffereth need. 


Ps. 140, 2 

Let my prayer be directed as 
incense in Thy sight, O Lord. 
Y. The lifting up of my hands 
as evening sacrifice. Alleluia, 
alleluia. Y. Ps. 104, 1. Give 
glory to the Lord, and call upon 
His name: declare: His. deeds 
among the gentiles, Alleluia. : 


Gospel. Matt. 22, 2-14 


"R Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secandum Mattheeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Loquebá- 

tur Jesus princípibus sa- 
cerdétum et phariseis in pa- 
rábolis, dicens: Simile factum 
est. regnum cel6rum hómini 
regi qui fecit nuptias fílio 
sug. Et misit servos suos vo- 
cáre invitátos ad nüptias, et 
nolébant veníre. Iterum misit 
alios servos, dicens: Dícite in- 


P$ Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT lime, Jesus spoke 

to the chief priests and 

he pharisees in parables, say- 
ing, The kingdom of heaven is 
likened to a king, who made & 
marriage for his son; and he 
sent his servants, to call them 
that were invited to the mar- 
riage, and they would not come. 
Again he sent other servants, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


722 


saying, Tell them that were in- 
vited, Behold, I have prepared 
my dinner; my beeves and fat- 
lings are killed, and all things 
are ready; come ye to the mar- 
riage. But they neglected: and 
went their ways, one to his 
farm, and another to his mer- 
chandise; and the rest laid 
hands on his servants, and hav- 
ing treated them contumeli- 
ously, put them to death. But 
when the king had heard of it, 
he was angry; and sending his 
armies, he destroyed those mur- 
derers, and burnt their city. 
Then he saith to his servants, 
The marriage indeed is ready, 
but they that were invited were 
not worthy. Go ye therefore 
into the highways, and as many 
as you shall find, call to the 
marriage. And his servants go- 
ing forth into the ways, gath- 
ered together all that they 
found, both bad and good; and 
the marriage was filled with 
guests. And the king went in 
to see the guests; and he saw 
there a man who had not on a 
wedding garment: and he saith 
to him, Friend, how camest 
thou in hither, not having on a 
wedding garment? but he was 
silent. Then the king said to 
the waiters, Bind his hands and 
feet, and cast him into the ex- 


NINETEENTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


vitátis: Ecce prándium meum 
parávi, tauri mei, et. aliilia 
occísa sunt, et ómnia paráta: 
veníte ad nuptias. Illi autem 
neglexérunt: et  abiérunt, 
álius in villam suam, álius 
vero ad negoltiatiónem suam: 
réliqui vero tenuérunt servos 
ejus et contuméliis afféctos 
occidérunt. Rex autem cum 
audísset, irátus est: et missis 
exercitibus suis, pérdidit ho- 
micídas illos, et civitátem illó- 
rum succéndit. T'unc ait ser- 
vis suis: Núptiæ quidem pará- 
tæ sunt, sed qui invitáti erant, 
non füérunt digni. Ite ergo ad 
éxitus viárum, et quoscümque 
invenéritis, vocáte ad nüp- 
tlas. Et egréssi servi ejus in 
vias, congregavérunt omnes, 
quos invenérunt, malos et 
bonos: et impléte sunt nüptie 
discumbéntium. Intrávit au- 
tem rex, ut vidéret discum- 
béntes, et vidit ibi hóminem 
non vestítum vesti nuptiáli. 
Et ait ili: Amíce, quómodo 
huc intrásti non habens ves- 
tem nuptiálem? At ille obmii- 
tuit. Tunc dixit rex ministris: 
Ligátis mánibus et pédibus 
ejus, míttite eum in ténebras 
exterióres: ibi erit fletus, et 
stridor déntium. Multi enim 
sunt vocáti, pauci vero elécti. 


terior darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. 
For many are called, but few are chosen. 


Creed, page 765. ` 


Offertory. 

If I shall walk in the midst of 
tribulation, Thou wilt quicken 
me, O Lord; and Thou wilt 
stretch forth Thy hand against 
the wrath of my enemies: and 
Thy right hand shall save me. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 137, 7. 


Si ambulávero in médio 
tribulatiónis, vivificábis me, 
Dómine: et super iram in- 
imicórum meórum exténdes 
manum tuam, et salvum me 
fáciet déxtera tua. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TWENTIETH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 723 


Secret 
Ec münera, quesumus, RANT, We beseech. Thee, O 
Dómine, que óculis tux, Lord, that these gifts, 


majestátis offérimus, salutá- which we offer up in the sight 
ria nobis esse concéde. Per of Thy majesty, máy be salu- 
Dóminum. - tary unto us; Through our 
Lord. 
Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 3494-1500. i 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Ps. 118, 4, 5 
Tu mandásti mandáta tua Thou hast commanded Thy 
custodiri nimis: ütinam diri- commandments to be kept most 
gántur vie mex, ad custo- diligently: O that my ways may 
diéndas justificatiónes tuas. ^ be directed to keep Thy justi- 
fications. 


Postcommunion 
va nos, Dómine, medici- ' ET Thy healing power, O 
nális operátio, et a: nos- Lord, in mercy deliver us 
tris perversitatibus clemén- from our -waywardness and 
ter expédiat, et tuis semper cause us ever to cleave to Thy 
fáciat inherére mandatis. commandments. Through our 
Per Dóminum. Lord. ` 
Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


` Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Twentieth Sunday After Pentecost (Green) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. . 


Introit. Dan. 3, 31, 29, 35 


MN1A, que fecisti nobis, LL that Thou hast done 

Dómine, in vero judício to us, O Lord, Thou hast 
fecisti, quia peccávimus tibi, done in true judgment; because 
et mandátis tuis non obedívi- we have sinned against Thee, 
mus: sed da glóriam nómini and we have not obeyed Thy 
tuo, et fac nobíscum secün- commandments: but give glory 
dum multitüdinem misericór- to Thy name, and deal with us 
diz tux. Ps. 118, 1. Beáti im- according to the multitude of 
maculati in via: qui ámbu- 'Thy mercy. Ps. 118, 1. Blessed 
Jant in lege Dómini. Y. Glória are the undefiled in the way; 
Patri. who walk in the law of the 

Lord. ¥. piii 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


724 TWENTIETH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


Prayer 
EING appeased, O Lord, AnGínE, Quesumus, Dó- 
B grant to Thy faithful in À mine, fidélibus tuis in- 
abundance, we beseech Thee, dulgéntiàm placátus et pa- 
both: forgiveness. and peace, cem: ut páriter ab ómnibus 
that they may both be cleansed mundéntur offénsis, et secü- 
from all offenses and with a ra tibi mente desérviant, Per 


quiet mind give themselves io 
thy service. Through our Lord. 


Dóminum, 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Eph. 5, 15-21 


Tenson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians. 

RETHREN, See how you 
walk circumspectly, not 
as unwise, but as wise; redeem- 
ing the time, ‘because the days 
are evil. Wherefore, become not 
unwise, but. understanding 
what is the will of God.. And be 
not drunk with wine, wherein 
is luxury: but be ye filled with 
the holy Spirit,. speaking to 
yourselves in psalms and 
hymns, and spiritual canticles, 
singing and making melody in 
your hearts to the Lord: giving 
thanks always for all things, in 
the name of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, to God and the Father; 
being subject one to another in 
the fear of Christ. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Ephesios, 


RATRES; Vidéte qdniods 

caute ambulétis: non 
quasi insipiéntes, sed ut sa- 
piéntes, rediméntes tempus, 
quóniam dies mali sunt, Prop- 
térea nolite fieri imprudéntes, 
sed intelligéntes, que sit vo- 
lüntas Dei. Et nolite inebriári 
vino, in quo est luxuria: sed 
implémini Spíritu Sancto, lo- 
quéntes vobismetipsis . in 
psalmis, et hymnis, et cánticis 
Spirituálibus, cantántes, et 
psalléntes in córdibus vestris 
Dómino: grátias agéntes sem- 
per pro ómnibus in nómine 
Dómini nostri Jesu Christi, 
Deo et Patri. Subjécti invi- 
cem in timóre Christi, 


Gradual. Ps. 144, 15, 16 

The eyes of all hope in Thee, Oculi ómnium in te sperant, 
O Lord; and Thou givest them Dómine: et tu das illis escam 
meat in due season. V. Thou in témpore opportüno. Y. Ape- 
openest Thy hand, and fillest ris tu manum tuam: et imples 
every living creature with Thy omne. ánimal benedictióne. 
blessing. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 107, 
Ps. 107, 2. My heart is ready, O 2. Parátum cor meum, Déus, 
God, my heart is ready: I will parátum cor meum: cantábo, 
Sing, and will give preise to et psallam tibi, glória mea. 
Thee, my glory, Alleluia. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TWENTIETH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


725 


Gospel. John 4, 46-53 


HM Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Joánnem. 
Nitto témpore: Erat qui- 
dam régulus, cujus fílius 
infirmabátur Caphárnaum. 
Hic cum audisset, quia Jesus 
&dveniret a Judæa in Galile- 
am, ábiit ad eum, et rogábat 
eum ut descénderet, et saná- 
ret filium ejus; incipiébat 
enim mori. Dixit ergo Jesus 
ad eum: Nisi signa et prodigia 
vidéritis, non créditis. Dicit 
ad eum régulus: Dómine, de- 
Scénde priüsquam moriétur 
fílius meus. Dicit ei Jesus: 
Vade fílius tuus vivit. Crédidit 
homo sermóni, quem dixit ei 
Jesus et ibat. Jam autem eo 
descendénte servi occurrérunt 
ei, et nuntiavérunt dicentes, 
quia fílius ejus víveret. Inter- 
rogábat ergo horam ab eis, 
in qua mélius habüerit. Et 
Dixérunt ei: Quia heri hora 
séptima relíquit eum febris. 
Cognóvit ergo pater, quia illa 
hora erat, in qua dixit ei Je- 
sus: Filius tuus vivit: et cré- 
didit ipse, et domus ejus tota. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


Super flümina Babylónis il- 
lic sédimus, et flévimus: dum 
recordarémur tui, Sion. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, There was a 
A. certain ruler whose son 
was sick at Capharnaum. He 
having heard that Jesus was 
come from Judea into Galilee, 
went to Him, and prayed Him 
to come down, and heal his son; 
for he was at the point of death. 
Jesus therefore said to him, Un- 
less you see signs and wonders, 
you believe not. The ruler saith 
to Him, Lord, come down before 
that my son die. Jesus saith to 
him, Go thy way, thy son liveth. 
The man believed the word 
which Jesus said to him, and 
went his way. And as he was 
going down, his servants met 
him, and they brought word, 
saying, that his son lived. He 
asked therefore of them the 
hour wherein he grew better. 
And they said to him, yester- 
day at the seventh hour the 
fever left him. The father 
therefore knew that it was at 
the same hour that Jesus said 
to him, Thy son liveth; and 
himself believed, and his whole 
house. 


Ps. 136, 1 


Upon the rivers of Babylon, 
there we sat and wept; when we 
remembered Thee, O Sion. 


Secret 


ILÉSTEM nobis prebeant 
hee mysiria, Qussu- 
mus, Dómine, medicínam: et 


ET these mysteries, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, be 
our heavenly medicine and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


726 TWENTY-FIRST SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


purge the evil from our hearts. 
Through our Lord. 


vitia, nostri cordis expurgent. 
Per Déminum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Ps. 118, 49, 50 


Be thou mindful of Thy word 
to Thy servant, O Lord, in 
which 'Thou hast given me 
hope: this hath comforted me 
in my humiliation. 


Meménto verbi tui servo 
tuo, Dómine, in quo mihi 
spem dedisti: hec me conso- 
láta est in humilitáte mea. 


Postcommunion 


HAT we may be rendered 

worthy of Thy sacred 
gifts, O Lord, grant us, we be- 
seech Thee, ever to obey Thy 
commandments. Through our 
Lord. 


T SACRIS, Dómine, reddá- 

mur digni munéribus: 

fac nos, quesumus, tuis sem- 

per obedíre mandátis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Twenty-first Sunday after Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Esther 13, 9, 10, 11 


LL things are in Thy will, 

O Lord, and there is 

none that can resist Thy will: 
for thou hast made all things, 
heaven and earth, and all 
things that are under the cope 
of heaven: Thou art Lord of all. 
Ps. 118, 1, Blessed are the un- 
defiled in the way; who walk 
jin the law of the Lord. Y. Glory. 


N VOLUNTÁTE tua, Dómine, 

univérsa sunt pósita, et 
non est qui possit resístere 
voluntáti tue: tu enim fecisti 
ómnia, celum et terram, et 
univérsa que cceli ámbitu con- 
tinéntur: Dóminus universó- 
rum tu es. Ps. 118, 1. Beáti im- 
maculáti in via: qui ámbu- 
lant in lege Dómini. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EEP 'Thy household, we 
, beseech Thee, O Lord, 
with continual loving-kindness, 
that by Thy protection it may 


AMÍLIAM tuam, quéesu- 
mus, Dómine, contínua 
pietáte custódi: ut a cunctis 
adversitátibus, te protegénte, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ae ee eee 


| 


TWENTY-FIRST SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST "727 


Sit líbera: et in bonus áctibus, 
tuo némini sit devóta. Per Dó- 
minum. 


be free from all adversities and 
devoted to Thy name in well- 
doing. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Eph. 6, 10-17 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apéstoli ad Ephésios. 


RATRES: Confortámini in 

Domino, et in poténtia 
virtutis ejus. Indüite vos. ar- 
matüram Dei, ut possítis stare 
advérsus insidias ^ diáboli. 
Quóniam non est nobis col- 
luctátio advérsus carnem et 
sánguinem: . sed advérsus 
príncipes, et potestátes, ad- 
vérsus mundi rectóres tene- 
brárum harum, contra spiri- 
tuália nequítiæ, in celéstibus. 
Proptérea accipite armatü- 
ram Dei, ut possítis resistere 
in die malo, et in ómnibus 
perfécti stare. State ergo suc- 
cíncti lumbos vestros in veri- 
táte, et indüti lorícam justi- 
tie, et calceáti pedes in pre- 
paratióne Evangélii pacis; in 
omnibus suméntes scutum fí- 
dei, in quo possítis ómnia tela 
nequissimi ignea exstínguere: 
et gáleam salitis assümite: et 
gládium spíritus, quod est ver- 
bum Dei. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians. 

RETHREN, be strengthened 

in the Lord, and in the 
might of His power. Put you on 
the armor of God, that you may 
be able to stand against the de- 
ceits of the devil For our 
wrestling is not against flesh 
and blood, but against princi- 
palities and powers, against the 
rulers of the world of this dark- 
ness, against the spirits of wick- 
edness in the high places. 
Therefore, take unto you the 
armor of God, that you may be 
able to resist in the evil day, 
and to stand in all things per- 
fect. Stand therefore having 
your loins girt about with truth, 
and having on the breast plate 
of justice, and your feet shod 
with the preparation of . the 
gospel of peace; in all things 
taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith you may be able to 
extinguish all the fiery darts of 
the most wicked one. And take 
unto you the helmet of salva- 


tion, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. 


Gradual. 


Dómine, refúgium factus es 
nobis, a generatióne et progé- 
nie. ¥. Priüsquam montes 
fierent, aut formarétur terra 
et orbis: a seculo, et usque in 
seculum tu es Deus. Allelüja, 


Ps. 89, 1, 2 


Lord, Thou hast been our 
refuge, from generation to gen- 
eration. V. Before the moun- 
tains were made, or the earth 
and the world was formed; 
from eternity and to eternity 


http://ccwatershed.org 


128 


Thou art God. Alleluia, alleluia. 
y. Ps. 113, 1. When Israel went 
out of Egypt, the house of Ja- 
cob from a barbarous people. 
Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


TWENTY-FIRST SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


2lielüja. Y. Ps. 113, 1. In éxitu 
Israél.de ZEgypto, domus Ja- 
cob de pópulo bárbaro. Alle- 
Tája. 


Gospel. Matt. 18, 23-35 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus spoke 

to His disciples this par- 

&ble: The kingdom of heaven 
is likened to a king, who would 
take an account of his servants. 
And when he had begun to take 
the account, one was brought to 
him that owed him ten thou- 
sand talents: and as he had not 
wherewith to pay it, his lord 
commanded that he should be 
sold, and his wife and children, 
and all that he had, and pay- 
ment to be made. But that ser- 
vant falling down, besought 
him, saying, Have patience with 
me, and I will pay thee all. And 
the lord of that servant, being 
moved with pity, let him go; 
and forgave him the debt. But 
when that servant was gone out, 
he found one of his fellow- 
servants that owed him a hun- 
dred pence: and laying hold of 
him, he throttled him, saying, 
Pay what thou owest. And his 
fellow-servant falling down be- 
sought him, saying, Have pa- 
tience with me, and I will pay 
thee all. And he would not; but 
went and cast him into prison 
till he paid the debt. Now his 
fellow-servants, seeing what 
was done, were very much 
grieved; and they came and told 
their lord all that was done. 
Then his lord called him, and 


& Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Matthseum. ` 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Jesus 
discípulis suis parábolam 
hanc: Assimilátum est reg- 
num celérum hómini regi, 
qui vóluit ratiónem pónere 
cum servis suis. Et cum cepís- 
set rationem pónere, oblátus 
est ei unus, qui debébat ei de- 
cem millia talénta. Cum au- 
tem non habéret unde rédde- 
ret, jussit eum dóminus ejus 
venümdari, et uxórem ejus, et 
fílios, et ómnia, que habébat, 
et reddi. Prócidens eutem ser- 
vus ille orábat eum, dicens: 
Patiéntiam habe in me, et 
ómnia reddam tibi. Misértus 
autem dóminus servi illfus, di- 
mísit eum, et débitum dimí- 
sit ei. Egréssus autem servus 
ille, invénit unum de consér- 
vis suis, qui debébat ei centum 
denários: et tenens suffocábat 
eum, dicens: Redde quod 
debes. Et prócidens consérvus 
ejus, rogábat eum, dicens: Pa- 
tiéntiam habe in me, et óm- 
nia reddam tibi Ille autem 
nóluit: sed ábiit, et misit eum 
in cárcerem donec rédderet 
débitum. Vidéntes autem con- 
sérvi ejus que fiébant, contri- 
stati sunt valde: et venérunt, 
et narravérunt dómino suo 
ómnia que facta füerant. 
Tune vocávit illum dóminus 
suus; et ait illi: Serve ne- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ae oe, ee p. 


TWENTY-FIRST SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 729 


quam, omne débitum. dimísi 
iibi quóniam. rogásti me: 
nonne ergo opórtuit et te mis- 
eréri consérvi tui, sicut et ego 
iui misértus sum? Et irátus 
dóminus ejus trádidit eum 
tortóribus, quoadüsque réd- 
deret univérsum débitum. Sic 
et Pater meus ca@léstis faciet 
vobis, si non remiséritis un- 
usquísque fratri suo de córdi- 
bus vestris. 


Creed, page 765. 


saith to him, Thou wicked ser- 


vant, I forgave thee all the 


debt, because thou besoughtest 
me; shouldst not thou then 
have had compassion also on 
thy fellow-servant, even as I 
had compassion on thee? And 
his lord being angry, delivered 
him to the torturers until he 
paid all the debt. So also shall 
my heavenly Father do to you, 
if you forgive not every one his 
brother from your hearts. 


. Offertory. Joi 


Vir erat in terra Hus, nómi- 
ne Job: simplex et rectus, ac 
timens Deum: quem Satan 
pétiit, ut tentáret: et data est 
ei potéstas a. Dómino in fac- 
ultátes, et in carnem ejus: 
perdiditque omnem substánti- 
am ipsíus, et fílios: carnem 
quoque ejus gravi ülcere vul- 
nerávit. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


There was a man in the land 
of Hus, whose name was Job, 
simple, and upright, and fear- 
ing God: whom Satan besought 
that he might tempt: and 
power was given him from the 
Lord over his. possessions and 
his flesh; and he destroyed all 
his substance and his children; 
and wounded his flesh also with 
a grievous ulcer. 


Secret 


tscrre, Dómine, propítius 

hóstias: quibus et te pla- 

cári voluísti, et nobis salütem 

poténti pietáte restítui Per 
Dóminum. 


RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 

the sacrifices with which 

Thou hast willed that Thou 

shouldst be appeased and our 

salvation, by Thy mighty love. 
restored. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Ps. 118, 81, 84, 86. 


In salutári tuo ánima mea, 
et in verbum iuum sperávi: 
quarido fácies de persequénti- 
bus me judícium? iníqui per- 
seciti sunt me, ádjuva me, 
Dómine Deus meus, 


My soul is in Thy salvation, 
and in Thy word have I hoped: 
when wilt Thou execute judg- 
ment on them that persecute 
me? the wicked have persecuted 
me: help me, O Lord my God. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


730 TWENTY-SECOND SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


Postcommunion 


AviNG obtained the nour- 

ishment of immortality, 

we beseech. Thee, O Lord, that 

what has passed our lips we 

may embrace with a pure mind. 
Through our Lord. 


MMORTALITATIS alimóniam ` 


consecüti, quesumus, Dó- 
mine: ut, quod ore percépi- 
mus, pura mente sectémur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Twentp-seconds Sunday after Pentecost (Green) 


The Beginning of Mass, pege 756. 


Introit. P5. 129, 3, 4 


F THOU shalt observe iniqui- 
T ties, O Lord, Lord, who 
Shall endure it? for with Thee 
is propitiation, O God of Israel. 
Ps. 129, 1, 2. From the depths 
I have cried to Thee, O Lord: 
Lord, hear my voice. Y. Glory. 


I INIQUITÁTES observa- 

veris, Dómine, Dómine, 
quis sustinébit? quia apud te 
propitiátio est, Deus Israél. 
Ps 129,1-2. De profündis cla- 
mávi ad te, Dómine: Dómine, 
exáudi vocem meam. Y. 
Gloria Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


GOD, our refuge and our 

Strength, the very author 
of piety, be present to the de- 
voutsupplications of Thy 
Church, and grant that what 
we seek in faith we may effec- 
tively arrive at. Through our 
Lord. 


EUS, refüglum nostrum, 

et virtus: adésto piis 
Ecclésie tue précibus, auctor 
ipse pietátis, et presta; ut, 
quod fidéliter pétimus, efficá- 
citer consequámur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Philip. 1, 6-11 


‘Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Philippians. 

RETHREN, We are confident 

in the Lord Jesus, that 

He Who hath begun a good 
work in you, will perfect it unto 
the day of Christ Jesus. As it is 


Léctio Epistole beati Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Philippénses. 


Jesu, quia qui ccepit in 
vobis opus bonum, perfíciet 
usque in diem Christi Jesu. 
Sicut est mihi justum hoc sen- 


Cos in Domino 


http://ccwatershed.org 


I 


TWENTY-SECOND SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 1781 


tire pro ómnibus vobis: eo 
quod h4beam vos in corde, et 
in vinculis meis, et in defen- 
Sióne, et confirmatióne Evan- 
gélii, sócios gáudii mei omnes 
vos esse. Testis enim mihi est 
Deus, quómodo cüpiam omnes 
vos in viscéribus Jesu Christi. 
Et hoc oro ut cáritas vesira 
magis ac magis abündet in 
sciéntia, et in omni sensu: ut 
probétis potiora, ut sitis sin- 
céri, et sine offénsa in diem 
Christi, repléti fructu justi- 
tim per Jesum Christum, in 
glóriam et laudem Dei. 


meet for me to think this for 
you all, for that I have you in 
my bands, and in the defence 
and confirmation of the gospel 
you are all partakers of my joy. 
For God is my witness, how I 
long after you all in the bowels 
of Jesus Christ, And this I pray, 
that your charity may more and 
more abound in knowledge and 
in all understanding; that you 
may approve the better things; 
that you may be sincere and 
without offence unto the day of 
Christ; filled with the fruit of 
justice, through Jesus Christ, 
unto the glory and praise of 
God. 


Gradual. Ps. 132, 1, 2 


Ecce quam bonum, et quam 
jucündum, habitáre fratres in 
unum! XV. Sicut ungüentum in 
cápite, quod descéndit in bar- 
bam, barbam Aaron. Allelüja, 
allelüja. V. Ps. 113, 11. Qui ti- 
ment Dóminum sperent in eo: 
adjütor et protéctor eórum 
est. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Behold how good and how 
pleasant it is for brethren to 
dwell together in unity. V. It 
is like the precious ointment on 
the head, that ran down upon 
the beard, the beard of Aaron. 
Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 113, iz. 
They that fear the Lord, let 
them hope in Him: He is their 
helper and protector. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 22, 15-21 


HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Matthaeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Abeüntes 

phariszi, consílium inié- 
runt ut cáperent Jesum in 
sermóne. Et mittunt ei discí- 
pulos suos cum Herodianis, 
dicéntes: Magister, scimus 
quia verax es, et viam Dei in 
veritáte doces, et non est tibi 
cura de áliquo: non enim ré- 
spicis persónam hóminum: 
dic ergo nobis quid tibi vidé- 


H* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, the phar- 

jsees went and con- 
sulted among themselves, how 
to ensnare Jesus in His speech. 
And they send to Him their 
disciples, with the Herodians, 
saying, Master, we know that 
Thou art a true speaker, and 
teachest the way of God in 
truth, neither carest Thou for 
any man, for Thou dost not 


http://ccwatershed.org 


782 TWENTY-SECOND SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


regard the person of men. Tell 
us therefore, what, dost Thou 
think? Is it lawful to give trib- 
ute to Cesar, or not? But Jesus 
knowing their wickedness, said, 
Why do you tempt me, ye hypo- 
crites? Show Me the coin of 
the tribute. And they offered 
Him a penny. And Jesus saith 
to them, Whose image and 
superscription is this? They 
say to Him, Caesar's. Then He 
saith to them, Render there- 
fore to Cæsar, the things that 
things that are God's. 


Creed, page 765. 


tur, licet censum dare Cesari, 
an non? Cógnita autem Jesus 
nequitia eórum, ait: Quid me 
tentátis, hypécrite? osténdite 
mihi numísma census. At illi 
obtulérunt ei denárium. Et 
ait illis Jesus: Cujus est ima- 
go hec, et superscriptio? Di- 
cunt ei: Czsaris. Tunc ait 
illis: Réddite ergo que sunt 
Cesaris, Cesari: et que sunt 
Dei, Deo. 


are Cesar's; and to God, the 


Offertory. Esther 14, 12, 13 


Remember me, O Lord, Thou 
Who rulest above all power; 
and give a well-ordered speech 
in my mouth, that my words 
may be pleasing in the ms 
of the prince. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Recordáre mei, Dómine, 
omni potentátui dóminans: et 
da sermónem rectum in os 
meum, ut pláceant verba mea 
in conspéctu príncipis. 


Secret 
RANT, O merciful God, A, MISÉRICORS Deus: ut 
that this saving oblation hzc salutáris oblátio et 
may forever rid us of our own a própriis nos reátibus inde- 
guilt and defend us from all sinénter expédiat, et ab óm- 
adversities. Through our Lord. nibus tueátur advérsis. Per 
Dóminum. 
Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion 


I have cried, for Thou, O Ego clamávi, quóniam, ex- 
God, hast heard me: O incline audísti me, Deus: inclina au- 
Thy ear unto me, and hear my rem tuam, et exáudi verba 
words. mea. 


Postcommunion 


E HAVE taken the gifts of ÜMPSIMUS, Dómine, sacri 
the sacred mystery, O - dona mystérii, humfliter 
Lord, humbly imploring that deprecántes: ut que in tui 


http://ccwatershed.org 


‘3 


TWENTY-THIRD SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 733 


commemoratiónem nos fá- what Thou hast bidden us do 
cere precepisti, in nostre pro- in commemoration of Thee 
ficiant infirmitátis auxílium: may avail unto the help of our 
Qui vivis. . infirmity. Who livest,  - ; 

‘Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. . 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Twenty-third Sundap after Pentecost (Green) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


If there be only twenty-three Sundays after Pentecost the 
following Mass, appointed for the twenty-third Sunday after 
Pentecost, is said on Saturday or some. other day of the pre- 
ceding week, according to special rubrics, and the Mass of the 


twenty-fourth Sunday after Pentecost is said in its stead, 


Introit. Jer. 29,11, 12, 14 


1crr Dóminus: Ego cógi- 

to cogitatiónes pacis, et 
non afflictiénis: invocábitis 
me, et ego exáudiam vos: et 
redücam captivitatem vest- 
ram de cunctis locis. Ps. 84, 2. 
Benedixísti, Dómine, terram 
tuam: advertisi captivita- 
tem Jacob. Y. Glória Patri. 


HE Lord said, I think 

thoughts of peace, and 
not of affliction: you shall call 
upon Me, and I will hear you; 
and I will bring back your cap- 
tivity from all places. Ps. 84, 2. 
Lord, Thou hast blessed Thy 
land: Thou hast turned away 
the captivity of Jacob. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, -page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


BSOLVE, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, tuórum delícta 
populórum: ut a peccatórum 
néxibus, que pro nostra fra- 
gilitáte contráximus, tua be- 
nignitáte liberémur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


. become 


EMIT, We beseech Thee, O 
.Lord, the sins of Thy 
people, that by Thy kindness 
we may be delivered from the 
trammels of our sins, in which, 
through our frailty, we have 
entangled. Through 
our Lord. : 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Philip. 3, 17-21 4, 1-3 


Léctio Epistole beati Pauli 
Apostoli ad Philippénses. 


RATRES: Imitatóres mei 


estéte, et observáte eos 


qui ita ámbulant, sicut habétis 
formam nostram. Multi enim 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle. to the 
Philippians. 


RETHREN, be ye followers 
of me, and observe them 
who walk so as you: have our 
model. For many walk, of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


784 TWENTY-THIRD SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


whom 1 have told you often 
(and now tell you weeping) that 
they are enemies of the cross 
of Christ; whose end is de- 
Struction, whose God is their 
belly and whose glory is in 
their shame; who mind earthly 
things. But our conversation is 
in heaven; from whence also 
we look for the Saviour, our 
Lord Jesus Christ, Who will 
reform the body of our low- 
ness, made like to the body 
of His glory, according to the 
operation whereby also He is 
able to subdue all things unto 
Himself. Therefore, my breth- 
ren, dearly beloved, and most 
desired, my joy and my crown: 
So stand fast in the Lord, my 
dearly beloved: I beg of Evo- 
dia, and I beseech Syntyche 
to be of one mind in the Lord: 
and I entreat thee also, my 
sincere companion, help those 
women who have labored with 
me in the gospel with Clement 
and the rest of my fellow-lab- 
orers, whose names are in the 
book of life. 


ámbulant , quos sepe dicébam 
vobis (nunc autem et flens 
dico) inimicos crucis Christi: 
quorum finis intéritus: quo- 
rum Deus venter est: et glória 
in confusióne ipsórum, qui 
terréne sápiunt. Nostra au- 
tem conversátio in celis est: 
unde etiam Salvatórem ex- 
spectamus Dóminum nostrum 
Jesum Christum, qui. refor- 
mábit.corpus humilitátis no- 
stre; configurátum, córpori 
claritátis sue, secündum op- 
eratiónem, qua étiam possit 
subjicere sibi ómnia. Itaque, 
fratres mei caríssimi, et de- 
sideratíssimi, gáudium meum, 
ei coróna mea: sic state in 
Dómino, carissimi: Evódiam 
rogo, et Syntychen déprecor 
idipsum sapere in Dómino. 
Etiam rogo et te, germáne 
compar, ádjuva illas, que me- 
cum laboravérunt in Evangé- 
lio cum Cleménte, et céteris 
adjutóribus meis, quorum nó- 
mina sunt in libro vitz. 


Gradual. Ps. 43, 8,9 


Thou hast delivered us, O 
Lord, from them that afflict us: 
&nd hast put them to shame 
that hate us. Y. In God we will 
glory all the day; and in Thy 
name we wil give praise for 
ever. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 
129,1,2, From the depths I have 
cried to Thee, O Lord: Lord, 
hear my prayer. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Liberásti nos, Dómine, ex 
affligentibus nos: et eos, qui 
nos odérunt, confudisti. Y. In 
Deo laudábimur tota die, et 
in nómine tuo confitébimur in 
secula. Allelija, allelája. Y. 
Ps. 129, 1, 2. De profündis cla- 
mávi ad te, Dómine: Dó- 
mine,  éxáudl  oratiónem 
meam. Allelija. 


Gospel. Matt. 9, 18-26 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. i 


"f Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Matthæum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a 


N 


TWENTY-THIRD SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 735 


N ILLO témpore: Loquénte 
Jesu ad turbas, ecce prin- 
ceps unus accéssit, et adorá- 
bat eum, dicens: Dómine, fília 
veni, impóne manum tuam 
mea modo defúncta est: sed 
veni, impone manum tuam 
super eam, et vivet. Et surgens 
Jesus sequebátur eum, et dis- 
cípuli ejus. Et ecce múlier, 
que sánguinis, fluxum patie- 
bátur duódecim annis, accés- 
Sit retro, et tétigit fímbriam 
vestiménti ejus. Dicebat enim 
intra se: Si tetigero tantum 
vestiméntum ejus, salva ero. 
At Jesus convérsus, et vídens 
eam, dixit: confíde filia, fides 
tua te salvam fecit. Et salva 
facta est mülier ex illa hora. 
Et cum venísset Jesus in do- 
mum principis, et vidisset ti- 
bícines et turbam tumultuán- 
iem, dicébat: Recédite: non 
est enim mórtua puélla, sed 
dormit. Et deridébant eum. 
Et cum ejécta esset turba, in- 
irávit, et ténuit manum ejus. 
Et surréxit puélla, Et éxiit 
fama, hee in univérsam ter- 
ram illam. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


De profündis clamávi, ad 
te, Dómine: Dómine, exáudi 
oratiónem meam: de profün- 
dis clamávi ad te, Dómine. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


T THAT time, AS Jesus 

was speaking to the 
multitudes, behold a certain 
ruler came up, and adored 
Him, saying, Lord, my daugh- 
ter is even now dead; but come 
lay Thy hand upon her, and 
she shall live. And Jesus, ris- 
ing up, followed him with His 
disciples. And behold a woman, 
who was troubled with an issue 
of blood twelve years, came be- 
hind Him, and touched the 
hem of His garment. For she 
said within herself, If I shall 
touch only His garment, I shall 
be healed. But Jesus turning 
and seeing her, said, Be of 
good heart, daughter, thy faith 
hath made thee whole. And 
the woman was made whole 
from that hour. And when 
Jesus was come into the house 
of the ruler, and saw the min- 
strels and the multitude mak- 
ing & tumult, He said, Give 
place; for the girl is not dead, 
but sleepeth. And they laughed 
Him to scorn. And when the 
multitude was put forth, He 
went in, and took her by the 
hand. And the maid arose. And 
the fame hereof went abroad 
into all that country. 


Ps. 129, 1, 2 


From the depths I have cried 
out to Thee, O Lord; Lord, hear 
my prayer: from the depths I 
have cried out to Thee, O Lord. 


Secret 


RO nostre servitütis aug- 
ménto sacrificium tibi, 
Dómine, laudis offérimus: ut, 


E OFFER Thee, O Lord, 
ihe Sacrifice of praise 
for the increase of our service, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


736 TWENTY-FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


that Thou mayest graciously quod 


imméritis contulisti, 


complete that which, for no propítius exsequaris. Per Dó- 
merit of ours, Thou hast grant- minum. 


ed unto us. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773- 


Communion. 

Amen I say to you, whatso- 

ever, you ask when you pray, 

believe that you shall receive, 
and it shall be done to you. 


Mark 11, 24 


Amen dico vobis, quidquid 
Orántes pétitis, crédite quia 
accipiétis, et fiet vobis. 


Postcommunion 


E PRAY Thee, O almighty 

God, that Thou wilt not 

suffer to be overcome by human 

dangers those to whom Thou 

grantest participation in things 

that are divine. Through our 
Lord. 


USUMUS, omnipotens 
Deus: ut, quos divina 
tríbuis participatióne gaudére, 
humanis non sinas subjacére 
perículis. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Twenty-fourth and Last Sunday after Pentecost 
(Green) 


In case there are more than 24 Sundays after Pentecost see 
Supplementary Masses for extra Sundays after Pentecost on 
page 740. The following Mass, however, is always said on the 
last Sunday after Pentecost, that is, the Sunday preceding the 
first Sunday of Advent. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Jer. 29, 11, 12, 14 


HE Lord saith, I think 

thoughts of peace, and 
not of affliction; you shall cal 
upon Me and I will hear you; 
and I will bring back your 
captivity from all places. Ps. 
84, 2. Lord, Thou hast blessed 
Thy land: Thou hast turned 
away the captivity of Jacob. 
y. Glory. 


Óicif Dóminus: Ego có- 

gito cogitatiónes pacis, 
et non afflictiónis: invocabitis 
me, et ego exáudiam vos: et 
redücam  captivitátem ves- 
tram de cunctis locis. Ps. 84, 2. 
Benedixisti, Dómine, terram 
tuam: avertísti captivitátem 
Jacob. y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TWENTY-FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 737 


Prayer 


"Íxcira, quesumus, Dómi- 
ne, tuórum fidélium vo- 
luntátes: ut divini óperis 
fructum propénsius exsequén- 
tes: pietátis tue remédia ma- 
jóra percipiant. Per Dómi- 
num. 


ROUSE, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, the wills of Thy 
faithful, that, by more ear- 
nestly following after the fruit 
of the divine work, they may 
the: more abundantly partake 
of Thy mercies, Through our 
Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Col. 1, 9-14 


-Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apostoli ad Colossenses. 


RATRES: Non cessámus 
pro vobis orántes, e£ 
postulántes ut impleámini ag- 
nitióne voluntátis Dei, in 
omni sapiéntia et intelléctu 
Spiritáli: ut ambulétis digne 
Deo per ómnia placéntes: in 
omni ópere bono, fructifi- 
cántes, eb crescéntes in scién- 
tia Dei: in omni virtüte con- 
fortati secündum poténtiam 
claritátis ejus in omni pa- 
tiéntia, et longanimitáte cum 
gáudio, grátias agéntes Deo 
Patri, qui dignos nos fecit in 
partem sortis sanctórum in 
Tümine: qui erípuit nos de po- 
testáte tenebrárum, et tráns- 
tulit in regnum Fílii dilectió- 
nis sue, in quo habémus re- 
demptiónem per sánguinem 
ejus, remissiónem  peccató- 
rum. 


Gradual. 


Liberásti nos, Dómine, ex 
affligéntibus nos: et eos, qui 
nos odérunt, confudisti. Y. In 
Deo laudábimur tota die, et 
in nómine tuo confitébimur in 


' Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Colossians. 


RETHREN, We cease not to 

pray for you, and to beg 
thát you may be filled with the 
knowledge of the will of God, 
in all wisdom and spiritual un- 
derstanding; that you may 
walk worthy of God, in all 
things pleasing, being fruitful 
in every good work, and in- 
creasing in the knowledge of 
God; strengthened with all 
might according to the power 
of. His glory, in all patience 
and long-suffering with joy; 
giving thanks to God the 
Father, Who hath made us 
worthy to be partakers of the 
lot of the saints in light; Who 
hath delivered us from the 
power of darkness, and hath 
translated us into the kingdom 
of the Son of His love, in Whom 
we have redemption through 
His blood, the remission of sins. 


Ps. 43, 8, 9 


Thou hast delivered us, O 
Lord, from them that afflict us: 
and hast put them to shame 
that hate us. V. In God we will 
glory all the day: and in Thy 


http://ccwatershed.org 


738 TWENTY-FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 


name we will give praise for 
ever. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 
129,1,2. From the depths I have 
cried to Thee, O Lord: Lord, 
hear my prayer. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


secula. Alleluia, alleluia. y. 
Ps. 129, 1, 2. De profündis 
clamávi ad te, Dómine: Dó- 
mine, exáudi oratiónem me- 
am. Allelüia. 


Gospel. Matt. 24, 15-35 


*B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
ihew. 


T THAT time, Jesus said 

to His disciples, When 
you shall see the abomination 
of desolation, which was spoken 
of by Daniel the prophet, 
standing in the holy place; he 
that readeth, let him under- 
stand: then they that are in 
Judea, let them flee to the 
mountains; and he that is on 
the house-top, let him not come 
down to take anything out of 
his house; and he that is in 
the field, let him not go back 
to take his coat. And woe to 
them that are with child, and 
that give suck, in those days. 
But pray that your flight be 
not in the winter, or on the 
sabbath: for there shall be 
then great tribulation, such as 
has not been found from the 
beginning of the world until 
now, neither shall be: and un- 
less those days had been short- 
ened, no flesh. should be saved; 
but for the sake of the elect, 
those days shall be shortened. 
Then if any man shall say to 
you, Lo, here is Christ, or 
there; do not believe Him: for 
there shall arise false Christs 
and false prophets, and shall 
show great signs and wonders, 
insomuch as to deceive (if pos- 
sible) even the elect. Behold, 


HK Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Matthgeum.: 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Jesus 

discipulis suis: Cum vi- 
déritis abominatiónem deso- 
latiónis, que dicta est a Dan- 
iéle prophéta, stantem in loco 
Sancto: qui legit, intélligat; 
tune qui in Judzz sunt, fú- 
giant ad montes: et qui in 
tecto, non descéndat. tüllere 
áliquid de domo sua: et qui 
in agro, non revertátur tóllere 
tünicam suam. Vz autem 
pregnántibus, et nutriéntibus 
in illis diébus. Oráte autem ut 
non fiat fuga vestra in híeme, 
vel sábbato. Erit enim tunc 
tribulátio magna, qualis non 
fierit salva omnis caro: sed 
modo, neque fiet, Et nisi bre- 
viáti fuíssent dies illij non 
fierit salva omnis caro: sed 
propter eléctos breviabüntur 
dies illi. Tunc si quis vobis 
díxerit: Ecce hic est Christus, 
aut ilic: nolíte crédere. Sur- 
gent enim pseudochristi, et 
pseudoprophéte: et dabunt 
signa magna, et prodígia, ita 
ut in errórem inducantur (si 
fíeri potest) étiam  elécti. 
Ecce predíxi vobis. Si ergo 
dixerint vobis: Ecce in de- 
sérto est, nolíte exíre: ecce in 
penetrélibus nolíte crédere. 
Sicut enim fulgur exit ab 
Oriénte, et paret usque jn Oc- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


< 


TWENTY-FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 739 


cidéntem: ita erit et advén- 
tus Fílii hóminis. Ubicumque 
füerit corpus, illic congrega- 
büntur et áquile. Statim au- 
tem post tribulatiónem dié- 
rum illórum sol obscurábitur, 
et luna non dabit lumen su- 
um, et stelle cadent de czlo, 
et virtütes celórum commo- 
vebüntur: et tunc parébit sig- 
num Filii hóminis in celo: et 
tunc plangent omnes tribus 
terre: et vidébunt Fílium hó- 
minis veniéntem in nübibus 
celi cum virtüte multa, et 
majestáte. Et mittet Angelos 
suos cum tuba, et voce mag- 
na: et congregábunt eléctos 
ejus a quátuor ventis, a sum- 
mis cel6rum usque ad térmi- 
nos eórum. Ab árbore autem 
fici díscite parábolam: cum 
jam ramus ejus tener füerit, 
et fólia nata, scitis quia prope 
est estas: ita et vos cum vi- 
Géritis hec ómnia, scitóte quia 
prope est in jánuis. Amen dico 
vobis, quia non preteríbit gen- 
erátio hzc, donec ómnia hac 
fiant. Czlum et terra transí- 
bunt, verba autem mea non 
preterfbunt. 


I have told it to you before- 
hand: if they therefore shall 
Say to you, Behold, He is in 
the desert, go ye not out; be- 
hold, He is in the closets, be- 
lieve it not. For as lightning 
cometh out of the east, and 
appeareth even into the west, 
so shall also the coming of the 
Son of man be. Wheresoever 
the body shall be, there shall 
the eagles also be gathered to- 
gether. And immediately after 
the tribulation of those days, 
the sun shall be darkened, and 
the moon shall not give her 
light, and the stars shall fall 
from heaven, and the powers 
of heaven shall be moved; and 
then shall appear the sign of 
the Son of man in heaven, and 
then shall all the tribes of the 
earth mourn; and they shall 
see the Son of man coming in 
the clouds of heaven with much 
power and majesty: and He 
shall send His angels with a 
trumpet and a great voice and 
they shall gather together His 
elect from the four winds, from 
the farthest parts of the heav- 
ens to the utmost bounds of 
them. And from the fig-tree 


learn a Parable: when the branch thereof is now tender, 
and the leaves come forth, you know that summer is nigh. So 
you also, when you shall see all these things, know ye that it 
is nigh even at the doors. Amen I say to you, that this genera- 
tion shall not pass till all these things be done. Heaven and 
earth shall pass away, but My words shall not pass away. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 129, 1, 2 


De profündis clamávi ad te, From the depths I have cried 
Dómine: Dómine, exáudi ora- out to Thee, O Lord: Lord, hear 
tiónem meam: de profündis my prayer: from the depths I 


Clamávi ad te, Dómine. have cried out to Thee, O Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


740 


SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No. 1 


Secret 


our supplications, and 
accept the offerings and pray- 
ers of Thy people: turn all our 
hearts unto Thee, that, being 
delivered from earthly desires, 
we may pass on to the enjoy- 
ments of heaven. Through our 
Lord. 


B PROPITIOUS, O Lord, to 


supplicatiónibus nos- 
tris: et pópuli tui oblatióni- 
bus, precibüsque  suscéptis, 
ómnium nostrum ad te corda 
convérte, ut a terrénis cupidi- 
tatibus liberáti, ad coléstia 
desidéria transeámus. Per 
Dóminum. | 


Piia esto Dómine 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
Choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. 

Amen, I say to you, whatso- 
ever you ask when you pray, 
believe that you shall receive, 
and it shall be done unto you. 


Mark 11, 24 

Amen, dico vobis, quidquid 
orántes pétitis, crédite quia 
accipiétis, et fiet vobis. 


Postcommunion 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, that, through 

this sacrament which we have 

received, whatever is evil in 

our hearts may be restored by 

its gift of healing. Through our 
Lord. 

Second Postcommunion, Ma; 


ONCEDE nobis quesumus 

Dómine: ut per hec 
sacraménta que sümpsimus, 
quidquid .in nostra mente 
vitiósum est, ipsórum medi- 
catiónis dono curétur. Per 
the gift, page 828; third at 


y 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Masses for Extra Sundaps after Pentecost 
Supplementary Mass Mo. t. 
Mass of the Sixth Sundap after Epiphany (Green) 


If there are twenty-five Sundays after Pentecost, this is 
said on the twenty-fourth; if twenty-six, on the twenty-fifth; 
if twenty-seven, on the twenty-sixth, and if twenty-eight, on 


the twenty-seventh. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Jer. 29, 11, 12, 14 


HE Lord saith, I think 
thoughts of peace, and 
not of affliction; you shall call non afflictiónis: 


upon Me and I will hear you; 
and I will bring back your cap- 


cit Dóminus, ego cégi- 
to cogitatiónes pacis, et 
Invocábitis 
me, et ego exáudiam vos; et 
redácam  captivitátem ves- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No. 1 741 


iram de cunctis locis. Ps. 84, 2. tivity from all places. Ps. 84, 2. 
Benedixisti Dómine terram Lord, Thou hast blessed Thy 
tuam:- avertisti captivitátem land: Thou hast turned away 
Jacob. Y. Glória Patri. the captivity of Jacob. Y. Glory. 


` Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


RÆSTA quesumus omni- 

potens Deus: ut semper 
rationabília meditántes, que 
tibi sunt plácita, et dictis ex- 
sequámur et factis. Per Dó- 
minum. i 


RANT, We beseech Thee, al- 

mighty God, that, ever 
fixing our thoughts on reason- 
able things, we may both in 
word and in deed do what is 
pleasing to Thee. Through our 
Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. 1 Thess. 1, 2-10- 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Thessalonicénses, 


RATRES: Grátias ágimus 

"Deo semper pro ómni- 
bus vobis, memóriam vestri 
faciéntes in oratiónibus nos- 
tris sine intermissióne, mémo- 
res óperis fídei vestre, et la- 
bóris, et caritátis, et sustinén- 
tie spei Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi, ante Deum et Patrem 
nostrum: sciéntes fratres, di- 
lécti a Deo, electiónem ves- 
tram: quia Evangélium nos- 
trum non fuit ad vos in ser- 
móne tantum, sed et in virtüte 
et in Spiritu sancto, et 
in plenitüdine sancto, et in 
plenitüdine multa, sicut sci- 
tis quales fuérimus in’ vobis 
propter vos. Et vos imitatóres 
nostri facti estis, et Dómini, 
excipiéntes verbum in tribu- 
latióne multa, cum gaudio 
Spíritus sancti: ita’ ut facti 
sitis forma ómnibus credénti- 
bus in Macedónia, et in Achá- 
j&. A vobis enim diffamátus 
est sermo Dómini, non solum 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Thessalonians. —— 


RETHREN, We give thanks 

to God for you all, 
making a remembrance of you 
in our prayers without ceasing; 
being mindful of the work of 
your faith, and labor, and 
charity, and of the enduring 
of the hope of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ before God and our 
Father: knowing, brethren, be- 
loved of God, your election; for 
our gospel hath not been unto 
you in word only, but in power 
also, and in the Holy Ghost, 
and in much fulness, as you 
know what manner of men we 
have been among you for your 
sakes. And you became fol- 
lowers of us and of the Lord; 
receiving the word in much 
tribulation, with joy of the 
Holy Ghost: so that you were 
made a pattern to all that be- 
lieve, in Macedonia and in 
Achaia. For from you was 
spread abroad the word of the 
Lord, not only in Macedonia 


http://ccwatershed.org 


142 SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No. 1 


and Achaia, but also in every 
place, your faith which is 
towards God, is gone forth; so 
that we need not to speak any 
thing. For they themselves re- 
late to us, what manner of en- 
tering in we had unto you; and 
how ye turned to God from 
idols, to serve the living and 
true God, and to wait for His 
Son from heaven (whom He 
raised from the dead), Jesus 
Who hath delivered us from 
the wrath to come. 


in Macedónia, et in Achája, 
sed et in omni loco fides ves- 
tra, que est ad Deum, proféc- 
ta est, ita.ut non sit nobis ne- 
césse quidquam loqui. Ipsi 
enim de nobis annüntiant 
qualem intróitum  habuéri- 
mus ad vos: et quómodo con- 
vérsi estis ad Deum a simulá- 
Cris, servíre Deo vivo, et vero, 
et exspectáre Fílium ejus. de 
celis (quem ,.suscitávit ex 
mórtuis Jesum, qui erípuit nos 
ab ira ventüra. 


Gradual. Ps. 43, 8, 9 


Thou hast delivered us, O 
Lord, from them that afflict us: 
and hast put them to shame 
that hate us. Y. In God we will 
glory all the day: and in Thy 
name we will give praise for 
ever. Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 
129, 1, 2. From the depths I 
have cried to Thee, O Lord: 
Lord, hear my prayer. Aleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Liberásti nos, Dómine, ex 
affligéntibus nos: et eos qui 
nos odérunt, confudísti. Y. In 
Deo laudábimur tota die: et 
in nómine tuo confitébimur in 
secula. Y. Ps. 129, 1, 2. De 
profündis clamávi ad te, Dó- 
mine: Dómine, exáudi ora- 
tiónem meam. Allelüia. 


Gospel. Matt. 13, 31-35 


"H3 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT lime, Jesus spoke 

this parable to the mul- 

itudes: The kingdom of heav- 
en is like to a grain of mus- 
tard-seed, which a man took 
and sowed in his field: which 
is the least indeed of all seeds; 
but when it is grown up, it is 
greater than all herbs, and be- 
cometh a tree; so that the 
birds of the air come, and dwell 
in the branches thereof. An- 
other parable he spoke to them: 
The kingdom of heaven is like 
to leaven, which a woman took 
and hid in three measures of 


% Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Jesus 
turbis parábolam hanc: 
Símile est regnum colórum 
grano sinápis, quod accípiens 
homo seminávit in agro suo: 
quod mínimum quidem est 
ómnibus semínibus: cum au- 
tem créverit, majus est ómni- 
bus oléribus, et fit arbor, ita 
ut vólucres coeli véniant, et 
hábitent in ramis ejus. Aliam 
parábolarm, locútus est eis. Sí- 
mile est regnum celérum fer- 
ménto, quod accéptum mulier 
abscéndit in farine satis tri- 
bus, donec fermentátum est 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a AN 


SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No. 1 


totum. Hsc ómnia locütus est 
Jesus in parábolis ad turbas: 
et sine parábolis non loque- 
bátur eis: ut implerétur quod 
dictum erat per prophétam di- 
céntem: Apériam in parábolis 
os meum, eructábo abscóndita 
@ constitutióne mundi, 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 
De profündis clamavi ad te 
Dómine; Dómine exáudi ora- 
tiónem meam: de profündis 
clamávi ad te Dómine. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


748 


meal, until the whole was leav- 
ened. All these things Jesus 
Spoke in parables to the multi- 
tudes, and without parables 
He did not speak to them; that 
it might be fulfilled which was 
spoken by the prophet, saying, 
I will open my mouth in par- 
ables, I will utter things hidden 
from the foundation of the 
world. 


Ps. 129, 1, 2 


From the depths I have cried 
out to Thee, O Lord; Lord, hear 
my prayer: from the depths I 
have cried out to Thee, O Lord. 


Secret 


~ zc nos oblátio Deus 

mundet, qusesumus, et 

rénovet, gubérnet, et prótegat. 
Per Dóminum. 


Av this oblation, O God, 

cleanse, renew, govern, 
and. protect us, we' beseech 
Thee. Through our Lord. - 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Mark 11, 34 


Amen dico vobis, quidquid 
orantes pétitis, crédite quia 
accipiétis, et fiet vobis. 


Amen I say to you, whatso- 
ever you ask when you pray, 
believe that you shall receive, 
and it shall be done to you. 


Postcommunion 


G@LESTIBUS Dómine pasti 

: delíciis: quesumus; ut 

semper éadem, per que verá- 

citer vívimus, appetámus. Per 
Dóminum. . 


EING fed with celestial 

delights, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that we may 
ever hunger after those things 
by which we truly live. Through 
our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


744 SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No, 2 


Supplementary Mass 320, 2. 
Mass of the Fifth Sunday after Epiphany, (Green) 


If there are twenty-six Sundays ajter Pentecost, this is said 
on the twenty-fourth; if twenty-seven, on the twenty-fifth; if 
twenty-eight, on ‘the twenty-sixth, : : 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Jer. 29, 11, 12, 14 


HE Lord saith, I think 
thoughts of peace, and 
not of affliction: you shall call 
upon Me, and I will hear you; 
and I will bring back your cap- 
tivity from all places. Ps. 84, 2. 
Lord, Thou hast blessed Thy 
land: Thou hast turned away 
the captivity of Jacob. Y. 
Glory. 


cogitatiónes pacis, et 
non afflictiónis: invocábitis 
me, et ego exáudiam vos; et 
redücam  captivitátem ves- 
tram de cunctis locis. Ps. 84, 2. 
Benedixísti Dómine terram 
tuam: avertísti captivitátem 
Jacob. Y. Glória Patri. 


D Dóminus, ego cógito 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EEP Thy family, we be- 
i seech Thee, O Lord, with 


AMILIAM tuam quaesumus 
Dómine contínua pie- 


Thy continual mercy, that, tate custédi: ut quæ in sola 
leaning only upon the hope of spe grátie celéstis innítitur, 
Thy heavenly grace, it may tua semper protectióne mu- 


ever be defended by Thy pro- 
tection. Through our Lord. 


niátur. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Col. 3, 12-17 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Colossians. à 

RETHREN, put ye on, as 

the elect of God, holy 
and beloved, the bowels of 
mercy, benignity, humility, 
modesty, patience; bearing 
with one another, and forgiving 
one another, if any have a 
complaint against another, 
even as the Lord hath forgiven 
you, SO you also. But above all 
these things, have charity, 
which is the bond of perfec- 
tion: and let the peace of 


Léctio Epistole beatí Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Colossénses. 


RATRES: Indüite vos sicut 
elécti Dei, sancti, et di- 

lécti, viscera misericórdie, be- 
nigitótem, humilitátem, mo- 
déstiam, patiéntiam: suppor- 
tántes invicem, et donantes 
vobismetípsis si quis advérsus 
áliquem habet querelam: si- 
cut et Dóminus donavit vobis, 
ita et vos. Super ómnia autem 
hee, caritátem habéte, quod 
est vínculum perfectiónis: et 
pax Christi exsültet in córdi- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No. 2 


bus vestris, in qua et vocáti 
estis in uno córpore: et grati 
estóte, Verbum Christi hábitet 
in vobis abundánter in omni 
Sapiéntia, docéntes, et com- 
monéntes, vosmetipsos, psal- 
mis, hymnis, et cánticis spiri- 
tuálibus, in grátia cantántes 
in córdibus vestris Deo. Om- 
ne, quodcümque fácitis in ver- 
bo aut in ópere; ómnia in nó- 
mine Dómini Jesu Christi, 
grátias agéntes Deo et Patri 
per Jesum Christum Dómi- 
num nostrum. 


Gradual. 


Liberásti nos, Dómine, ex 
affligéntibus nos: et eos qui 
nos odérunt, confudísti. Y. In 
Deo laudábimur tota die: et 
in nómine. tuo confitébimur 
in secula. Alleluia, allelüia. 
V. Ps. 129, 1, 2. De profindis 
clamávi ad te, Dómine: Dó- 
mine, exáudi oratiónem me- 
am. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


"4b 


Christ rejoice in your hearts, 
wherein also you are called in 
one body: and be ye thankful. 
Let the word of Christ dwell in 
you abundantly, in all wisdom; 
teaching and admonishing one 
another, in psalms, hymns, and 
spiritual canticles, singing in 
grace in your hearts to God. Al) 
whatsoever you do in word or 
in work, all things do ye in the 
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
giving thanks to God and the 
Father through Jesus Christ 
Our Lord. 


Ps. 43, 8, 9 


Thou hast delivered us, O 
Lord, from them that afflict us: 
and hast put them to shame 
that hate us. V. In God we will 
glory all the day: and in Thy 
name we will give praise for 
ever. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 
129, 1, 2. From the depths I 
have cried to Thee, O Lord: 
Lord, hear my prayer. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 13, 24-30 


H Sequéntia sancti Evangé- 
lii secundum Matthzeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Jesus 

turbis parábolam hane: 
Símile factum est regnum 
celérum hómini, qui seminá- 
vit bonum semen in agro suo. 
Cum autem dormírent hómi- 
nes, venit inimícus ejus, et 
superseminávit  zizánia in 
médio tritici, et ábiit. Cum 
autem  crevíssit herba, et 
fructum fecísset, tunc appa- 
ruérunt et zizánia. Accedéntes 
autem servi patrisfamilias, 
dixérunt ei: Dómine, nonne 
bonum semen seminásti in 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus spoke 

this parable to the mul- 
titudes: The kingdom of heav- 
en is likened to & man that 
Sowed. good seed in his field. 
But while men were asleep, his 
enemy came, and oversowed 
cockle among the wheat, and 
went his way. And when the 
blade was sprung up, and had 
brought forth fruit, then ap- 
peared also the cockle. And the 
servants of the good man of 
the house coming, said to him, 
Sir, didst thou not sow good 


http://ccwatershed.org 


746 


seed in thy field? whence then 
hath it cockle? And he said to 
them, An enemy hath done 
this. And the servants said to 
him, Wilt thou that we go and 
gather it up? And he said, No: 
lest perhaps gathering up the 
cockle you root up the wheat 
also together with it. Suffer 
both to grow until the harvest; 
and in the time of the harvest, 
I will say to the reapers, 
Gather up first the cockle, and 
bind it into bundles to burn, 
but the wheat gather ye into 
my barn. 


Creed, page 765. 


SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No. 2 


agro tuo? Unde ergo habet zi- 
zania? Et ait illis: Inimícus 
homo hoe fecit. Servi autem 
dixérunt ei: Vis, imus, et col- 
ligimus ea? et ait: Non: ne 
forte colligéntes zizánia, erad- 
icétis simul cum eis et triti- 
cum. Sínite ütraque créscere 
usque ad messem, et in tém- 
pore messis dicam. messóri- 
bus: Collígite primum zizánia, 
et alligáte ea in fascículos ad 
comburéndum, triticum au- 
tem congregate in hórreum 
meum. 


Offertory. Ps. 129, 1, 2 


From the depths I have cried 
out to Thee, O Lord; Lord, 
hear my prayer: from the 
depths I have cried out to 
Thee, O Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


De profündis clamávi ad te 
Dómine: Dómine exáudi or- 
atiónem meam: de profúndis 
clamávi ad te Dómine. 


Secret 


E OFFER Thee, O Lord, 

the sacrifice of recon- 
ciliation, that Thou mayest 
mercifully forgive our sins and 
direct our wavering hearts. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


ostras tibi Dómine pla- 

catiónis offérimus: ut 

et delicta nostra miserátus 

absolvas, et nutántia corda tu 
dirigas. Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Communion. 


Amen, I say to you, what- 
soever you ask when you pray, 
believe that you shall receive, 
and it shall be done unto you. 


Mark 11, 24 

Amen dico vobis, quidquid 
orántes pétitis, crédite quia 
accipiétis, et fiet vobis. 


Postcommunion 


E PRAY Thee, O almighty 
God, that we may re- 


UXSUMUS omnipotens 
Deus: ut illíus salutá- 


ceive the effect of that salva- ris Capiámus efféctum, cujus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Em m—I 


SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No. 8 147 


per hæc mystéria pignus accé- tion of which we have re- 
pimus. Per Dóminum. ceived the pledge. Through our 
Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 
Supplementary Mass Mo. 3. 


Sass of the Fourth Hunday after Epiphany (Green) 


If there are twenty-seven Sundays after Pentecost, this is 
eh. on the twenty-fourth; if twenty-eight, om the twenty- 


'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Jer. 29, 11, 12, 14 
IcrT Dóminus, ego cógito 

D cogitatiónes pacis, et 

non afflictiónis: invocabitis 

me, et ego exáudiam vos; et 

redücam  captivitátem ves- 

iram de cunctis locis. Ps. 84, 2. 

Benedixísti Dómine terram 


tuam: avertísti captivitátem 
Jacob. Y. Glória Patri. 


HE Lord saith, I think 

thoughts of peace, and 
not of affliction; you shall call 
upon Me and I will hear you; 
and I will bring back your 
captivity from all places. Ps. 
84, 2. Lord, Thou hast blessed 
Thy land: Thou hast turned 
away the captivity of Jacob. Y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui nos in tantis 

perículis ^ constitütos 
pro humána scis fragilitáte 
non posse subsístere: da no- 
bis salitem mentis et córpo- 
ris; ut ea, que pro peccátis 
nostris pátimur, te adjuvánte 
vincámus. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, p 
the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


cop, Who knowest that 
we are surrounded by 
perils so great as to be unen- 
durable because of our human 
frailty, grant us health of mind 
and body, so that by. Thine 
assistance we may conquer the 
things with which we are 
afflicted because of our sins, 
Through our Lord. 


age 827; third at the choice of 


Epistle. Rom. 13, 8, 10 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Romanos. 


RATREs; Némini quid- 
quam debeátis: nisi ut 
invicem diligátis, qui enim 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 


RETHREN, owe no man any 
thing, but to love one 
another; for he that loveth his 


http://ccwatershed.org 


748 


neighbor hath fulfilled the law. 
For thou shalt not commit 
adultery, thou shalt not kill, 
thou shalt not steal, thou shalt 
not bear false witness, thou 
shalt not covet, and if there be 
any other commandment, it is 
comprised in this word, thou 
shalt love thy neighbor as thy- 
self. The love of our neighbor 
worketh no evil. Love, there- 
fore, is the fulfilling of the law. 


SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No. 3 


diligit proximum, legem im- 
plévit. Nam: Non adulterábis: 
Non occídes: Non furáberis: 
Non falsum  testimónium 
dices: Non concupísces: et si 
quod est áliud mandátum, in 
hoc verbo instaurátur: Díliges 
próximum tuum sicut teíp- 
Sum. Diléctio próximi malum 
non operátur. Plenitüdo ergo 
legis est diléctio. 


Gradual. Ps. 43, 8,9 


Thou hast delivered us, O 
Lord, from them that afilict us: 
and hast put them to shame 
that hate us. Y. In God we will 
glory all the day: and in Thy 
name we will give praise for 
ever. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 
129, 1, 2. From the depths I 
have cried to Thee, O Lord: 
Lord, hear my prayer. Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Liberásti nos, Dómine, ex 
affigéntibus nos: et eos qui 
nos odérunt, confudísti. Y. In 
Deo laudábimur tota die: et 
in nómine tuo confitébimur in 
secula. Allelüia, allelüia. Y. 
Ps. 129, 1, 2. De profündis 
clamávi ad te, Dómine: Dó- 
mine,  exáudi  oratiónem 
meam. Alleluia, 


Gospel. Matt. 8, 23-27 


& Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
ihew. 


T THAT lime, when Jesus 

entered into the ship, 
His disciples followed Him. 
And behold a great tempest 
arose in the sea, so that the 
ship was covered with waves, 
but he was asleep. And they 
came to Him and awaked Him, 
saying, Lord, save us, we per- 
ish. And Jesus saith to them, 
Why are ye fearful, O ye of 
little faith? Then rising up, He 
commanded the winds and the 
sea, and there came a great 
calm. But the men wondered, 
saying, What manner of man is 
this, for the winds and the sea 
obey Him? 

Creed, page 765. 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Matthzum. 


N ILLO témpore: Ascendén- 

teJesu in navículam;secü- 
ti sunt eum discípuli ejus: et 
ecce motus magnus factus est 
in mari ita ut navícula ope- 
rirétur flüctibus, ipse vero 
dormiébat. Et accessérunt ad 
eum discípuli ejus, et suscita- 
vérunt eum, dicéntes; Dómine, 
Salva nos, perímus. Et dicit 
eis Jesus: Quid tímidi estis, 
médice fídei? Tunc surgens, 
imperávit ventis, et mari, et 
facta est tranquíllitas magna. 
Porro hómines miráti sunt, 
dicéntes: Qualis est hic, quia 
venti et mare obédiunt ei? 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No..4 749 


Offertory. Ps. 129, 1,2 


De profundis clamávi ad te From the depths I have cried 
Dómine; Dómine exáudi ora- outto Thee, O Lord; Lord, hear 
liónem meam: de profundis my prayer: from the depths I 
clamavi ad te Dómine. have cried out to Thee, O Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


' Secret 


ONCÉDE qusesumus omni- Gu we beseech Thee, O 
potens Deus: ut hujus almighty God, that the 
sacrificii munus  oblátum, offering of this sacrifice pre- 
fragilitátem nostram ob omni sented to Thee may ever purge 
malo purget semper, et mü- our frailty of all evil and may 
niat. Per Dóminum. fortify it. Through our Lord. 
Second Secret, Graclously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. Mark 11, 24 


Amen dico vobis, quidquid Amen I say to you, whatso- 
orántes pétitis, crédite quia ever, you ask when you pray, 
accipiétis, et fiet vobis. believe that you shall receive, 

. and it shall be done to you. 


` Postcommunion _ l 
tni tua nos Deus a Av Thy gifts, O God, free 
delectatiónibus  terré- us from the allurements 


nis expédiant: et celéstibus of earthly. things, and ever re- 
semper instáurent aliméntis. store us with heavenly nour- 
Per Dóminum. ishment. Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; mE at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concludinz Prayers, page 793. 


Supplementary Mass Mo. 4. 
Mass of tbe Third Sunday after Epiphany ( Green) 


If there are twenty-ei ight Sundays after Pentecost this is 
said on the twenty-fourt 


'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Jer. 29, 11, 12, 14 es 
ICIT Dóminus, ego cógito HE Lord said, I think 
cOgitatiónes pacis, et thoughts. of peace, and 
non afflictignis: invocábitis not of affliction: you shall call 
me, et ego exáudiam vos; et upon Me, and I will hear you; 
redficam  captivitátem ves- and I-will bring back your cap- 
tram de cunctis locis. Ps. 84, tivity from all places. Ps. 84, 2. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


750 SUPPLEMENTARY MASS NO. 4 

Lord, Thou hast blessed Thy 2. Benedixísti Dómine ter- 
land: Thou hast turned away ram tuam: avertísti captivi- 
the captivity of Jacob. Y. Glory. tátem Jacob. V. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

look with mercy upon 
our infirmities, and stretch 
forth the right hand of Thy 
majesty to protect us. Through 
our Lord. 


MNÍPOTENS Sempitérne 
Deus: infirmitátem no- 
Stram propítius réspice; at- 
que ad protegéndum nos déx- 
teram tux majestátis exténde. 
Per Dóminum. ` 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle. Rom. 12, 16-21 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 


RETHREN, be not wise in 
your own conceits. 'To 
no man rendering evil for evil: 
providing good things not only 
in the sight of Grod, but also in 
the sight of men: If it be pos- 
sible, as much as it is in you, 
having peace with all men. Re- 
venge not yourselves, my dearly 
beloved; but give place unto 
wrath, for it is written, Revenge 
is Mine; I will repay, saith the 
Lord. But if thy enemy be hun- 
gry, give him to eat; if he 
thirst, give him to drink, for 
doing this, thou shalt heap 
coals of fire upon his head. Be 
not overcome by evil, but over- 
come evil by good. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apdstoli ad Romanos. 


RATRES: Nolite esse pru- 

déntes apud vosmetip- 
sos: Nulli malum pro malo 
reddéntes: providéntes bona 
no ntantum coram Deo, sed 
étiam coram ómnibus homí- 
nibus. Si fíeri potest, quod ex 
vobis est, cum ómnibus ho- 
minibus pacem  habéntes: 
non vosmetípsos defendentes 
carissimi, sed date locum 
ire, Scriptum est. enim: Mihi 
vindicta: ego retribuam, di- 
cit Déminus. Sed si esurierit 
inimicus tuus, ciba illum: si 
sitit, potum da illi; hoc enim 
fáciens carbónes ignis cón- 


geres super caput ejus. Noli 


vinci a malo, sed vince in 
bono malum. 


Gradual. Ps. 43, 8, 9 


Thou hast delivered us, O: 
Lord, from them that afflict us: 
and hast put them to shame 
that hate us. Y. In God we will 
glory all the day: and in Thy 
name we will give praise for 
ever. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 


Liberásti nos, Dómine, ex 
affigéntibus nos: et eos qui 
nos odérunt, confudísti. Y. In 
Deo laudábimur tota die: et 
in nómine tuo confitébimur 
in szcula. Allelüja, allelüja. 
y. Ps. 129, 1, 2. De profündis 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No. 4 


tlamávi ad te, Dómine: Dó- 
mine, exáudi oratiónem me- 
am. Allelüua. : 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


751 


129, 1, 2. From the depths I 
have cried to Thee, O Lord: 
Lord, hear my prayer. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 8, 1-13 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheeum, 


scendisset Jesus de 
monte, secüte sunt eum tur- 
be multe: et ecce leprósus 
véniens, adorábat eum, di- 
cens: Dómine, si vis, potes me 
mundáre, Et exténdens Jesus 
manum, tétigit eum, dicens: 
Volo. Mundáre. Et conféstim 
mundáta est lepra ejus. Et 
ait illi Jesus: Vide, némini 
díxeris: sed vade, osténde te 
Sacerdóti, et offer munus, 
quod precépit Móyses, in tes- 
timónium illis Cum autem 
introisset Caphárnaum, ac- 
céssit ad eum centürio, ro- 
gans eum, et dicens: Dómine, 
puer meus jacet in domo par- 
alyticus, et male torquétur. 
Et ait illi Jesus: Ego véniam, 
et curábo eum. Et respóndens 
centürio, ait: Dómine, non 
sum dignus ut intres sub tes- 
tum meum: sed tantum dic 
verbo, et sanábitur puer me- 
us. Nam et ego homo sum sub 
potestáte constitütus, habens 
Sub me mílites, et dico huic: 
Vade, et vadit: et alii: Veni, 
et venit: et servo meo: Fac 
hoc, et facit. Audiens autem 
Jesus miratus est, et sequén- 
tibus se dixit: Amen dico vo- 
bis, non invéni tantam fidem 
in Israël. Dico autem vobis, 
quod multi ab oriénte et occi- 
dénte vénient, et recümbent 
cum Abraham, et Isaac, et 


I^ ILLO témpore: Cum de- 


Æ Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
ihew. 


T THAT time, when Jesus 

was come down from 
the mountain, great multitudes 
followed Him; and behold a 
leper came and adored Him, 
saying, Lord, if Thou wilt Thou 
canst make me clean. And Je- 
sus stretching forth His hand, 
touched him, saying, I will, be 
thou made clean: and forth- 
with his leprosy was cleansed. 
And Jesus saith to him, See 
thou tell no man: but go, show 
thyself to the priest, and offer 
the gift which Moses com- 
manded for a testimony unto 
them. And when He had en- 
tered into Capharnaum, there 
came to Him a centurion be- 
seeching Him, and saying, 
Lord, my servant lieth at home 
sick of the palsy, and is 
grievously tormented. And Je- 
sus saith to him, I will come 
and heal him. And the centur- 
ion making answer, said, Lord, 
I am not worthy that Thou 
shouldst enter under my roof: 
but only say the word, and my 
servant shall be healed. For I 
also am a man subject to au- 
thority, having under me sol- 
diers: and I say to this man, 
Go, and he goeth: and to an- 
other, Come, .and he cometh: 
and to my servant, Do this, and 
he doth it..And Jesus hearing 
this, marvelled; and said to 
them that followed him, Amen 


http://ccwatershed.org 


752 


I say to you, I have not found 
5o great faith in Israel. And I 
say to you, that many shall 
come from the east and the 
west, and shall sit down with 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in 
the kingdom of heaven; but 
the children of the kingdom 
shall be cast into the exterior 


SUPPLEMENTARY MASS No. 4 


Jacob in regno celérum: filii 
autem regni ejiciéntur in 
ténebras exterióres: ibi erit 
fletus, et stridor déntium. Et 
dixit Jesus centurióni: Vade, 
et sicut creddidísti, fiat tibi. 
Et sanátus est puer in illa 
hora. 


darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And 
Jesus said to the centurion, Go, and as thou hast believed, so 
be it done to thee; and the servant was healed at thess same hour. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 
From the depths I have cried 
out to Thee, O Lord; Lord, 
hear my prayer: from the 
depths I have cried out to Thee, 
O Lord. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 129, 1 2 


De profündis clamávi ad 
te Dómine; Dómine exáudi 
oratiónem meam; de profün- 
dis clamávi ad te Dómine. 


Secret 


AY this offering, we be- 
@M seech Thee, O Lord, wipe 
out our sins, and sanctify the 
bodies and minds of. Thy ser- 
vants for the celebration of the 
sacrifice. Through our Lord. 


zc hóstia Dómine quæ- 

sumus emuündet nostra 
delícta: et ad sacrificium 
celebrándum, subditórum tibi 
córpora mentésque sanctifi- 
cet. Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Communion. 

-Amen I say to you, whatso- 

ever you ask when you pray, 

believe that you shall receive, 
and it shall be done to you. 


Mark 11, 24 

: Amen dico vobis, quidquid 
orántes pétitis, crédite quia 
accipiétis, et fiet vobis. 


Postcommunion 


E BESEECH- Thee, O Lord, 

that Thou  wouldst 
vouchsafe to fit us to receive 
the benefits of these august 
mysteries as 'Thou dost of Thy 
bounty grant us to perform 
them. Through our Lord. 


vos tantis Dómine lar- 

giris uti  mystériis; 
quesumus; ut efléctibus nos 
eórum veráciter aptáre dig- 
néris. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at 
the ‘choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Cancluding Prayers, page 793- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE ASPERGES. 758 


Copyright, by Benziger Brothers 


The Asperges 


or 


Solemn Sprinkling witb moly Water 


The Aspérges or sprinkling with holy water may be per- 
formed every Sunday immediately before High Mass. This 
water is blessed before the ceremony. 

The priest who is about to celebrate High Mass enters the 
sanctuary vested in alb and stole (and sometimes in a cope 
also) of the color of the Mass, accompanied on his left by an 
acolyte bearing the vessel of holy water. Arriving at the foot 
of the altar the priest, while 1ntoning the following anthem 
sprinkles the altar three times, then himself, and afterward 
his assistants. Then he sprinkles the congregation. On Pas- 
sion Sunday and on Palm Sunday the Gloria Patri after the 
psalm-verse is omitted. In Paschal-time the Asperges is re- 
Placed by Vidi Aquam. 


Antiphon 


SPÉRGES me Dó- HOU shalt sprinkle me 
aJ-J., mine, hyssópo, et with hyssop, O Lord, 
mundábor; lavabis and I shall be cleansed; 
me et super nivem deal- Thou shalt wash me, and I 


bábor. shall be made whiter than 
snow. i 
Psalm 50 

ISERÉRE mei Deus, AVE mercy on me, O 
MA SeCindum magnam God, according to 

misericórdiam tuam. Thy great mercy. 
J . Glória Patri et Filio, X. Glory be to the 
et Spirítui Sancto, Father, and to the Son, and 

` to the Holy Ghost. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


154 THE VIDI AQUAM 

. As it was in the be- ff. Sicut erat in prin- 
ginning, is now, and ever cípio, et nunc, et semper, 
shall be, world without end. et in secula sSeculórum. 


Amen. 


Amen. 


Antiphon 


with hyssop, O Lord, 
I shall be cleansed: 
Thou shalt wash me, and I 
shall be made whiter than 
snow. . 
y . Show us, O Lord, Thy 
mercy. 


nis shalt sprinkle me 
an 


. And grant us Thy sal- 

vation. 

W.O Lord, hear my 
prayer. 

BY. And let my cry come 
unto Thee. 

V. The Lord be with you. 

H/. And with thy spirit. 


Let us pray 


RACIOUSLY hear us, 

O Holy Lord, Father 
Almighty, Eternal God; 
and vouchsafe to send down 
from heaven Thy hely 
angel, that he may watch 
over, foster, safeguard, 
abide with and defend all 
who dwell in this house. 
Through Christ Our Lord. 

H. Amen. 


SPÉRGES me Dó- 

mine, hyssópo et 
mundábor: lavábis me, ei 
super nivem dealbábor. 


WV. Osténde nobis, Dó- 
mine, misericórdiam 
tuam. 

B . Et salutáre tuum da 
nobis. 

y . Dómine, exáudi ora- 
tiónem meam. 

BY. Et clamor meus ad 
te véniat. 

¥. Dóminus vobiscum. 

B. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


Orémus 


XAUDI nos Dómine 

sancte, Pater omni- 
potens, ætérne Deus: et 
mittere dignéris sanctum 
Angelum tuum de colis, 
qui custódiat, fóveat, pró- 
tegat, vísitet atque defénd- 
dat omnes habitántes in 
hoc habitaculo. Per Chris- 
tum Dóminum nostrum. 

RY. Amen. 


Bit while the celebrant vests for Mass. 


Jn Paschal Time 
Antiphon 


SAW water coming IDI aquam egredién- 


forth from the temple 


tem de templo, a 


on the right side, alleluia: látere dextro, allelúia: et 
&nd allthose to whom this omnes ad quos pervénit 
water came were saved, and aqua ista, salvi facti sunt, 
Shall say, alleluia. et dicent, allelüia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


è 


THE VIDI AQUAM 


Ps. 117. Confitémini Dó- 
mino, quóniam bonus: 
quóniam in sæculum mis- 
ericórdia ejus. 


y. Gloria Patri, et Fílio, 
et Spirítui Sancto. 


.H. Sicut erat in prin- 
cipio, et nunc, et semper, 
et in secula sexculorum. 
Amen. 


ANTIPHON Vidi aquam 
egrediéntem de templo, a 
látere dextro allelüia: et 
omnes ad quos pervénit 
aqua ista, salvi facti sunt, 
et dicent, allelüia. 


y. Osténde nobis, Dó- 
mine, misericórdiam tu- 
am. Alleluia. 

. Et salutare tuum da 
nobis. Allelüia. 

. Dómine, exáudi ora- 
tiónem meam. 

. Et clamor meus ad 
te Véniat. 

. Dóminus. vobiscum. 

B- Et cum spíritu tuo. 


Orémus 


XAUDI nos, Dómine 

sancte, Pater omní- 
potens, ztérne Deus: et 
mittere dignéris sanctum 
Angelum tuum de celis, 
qui custódiat, fóveat, pró- 
tegat, vísitet atque defén- 
dai omnes habitántes in 
hoc habitáculo. Per Chris- 
tum Dóminum nostrum. 

B Amen, 


755 


Ps. 117. Give praise to the 
Lord, for He is good: for 
His mercy endureth for- 
ever. 


; Glory be to the 
Father, and to the Son, 
and to the Holy Ghost. 


W. As it was in the be- 
ginning, is now, and ever 
shall be, world without end. 
Amen. 


ANTIPHON I saw water 
coming forth from the tem- 
ple on the right side, alle- 
luia: and all those to whom 
this water came, were 
saved, and shall say, alle- 
luia. 


y. Show us, O Lord, thy 
mercy, alleluia. 


. And grant us thy sal- 
vation. Alleluia. 

.O Lord, hear my 
prayer. 

. And let my cry come 
unto thee. 

y- The Lord be with you. 
H. And with thy spirit. 
Let us pray 

RACIOUSLY hear us, 

O Holy Lord, Father 
Almighty, Eternal God; 
and vouchsafe to send down 
from heaven Thy holy 
angel, that he may watch 
over, foster, safeguard, 
abide with and defend all 
who dwell in this house. 
Through Christ Our Lord. 

pg. Amen, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


The Ordinary of tbe dass" 


When the priest enters the Sanctuary, stand until he 
begins the prayers at the foot of the altar. Then kneel. 

Bowing before the altar, the priest makes the sign of the 
cross, saying: 


N THE name of the ‘WN nómine Patris, © et 
Father, % and of the Filii, et Spiritus San- 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. cti. Amen. 
Amen. 
P. I will go in to the altar P. Introibo ad altare 
of God. Dei. : 
W. To God, Who giveth W. Ad Deum qui letifi- 


joy to my youth. cat juventütem meam. 
The priest and server say alternately: 
Psalm 42 


In Passion-tide &nd in Masses for the Dead, this Psalm is 
omitted as far as Adjutórium atx 


P. YYUDGE me, O God, P."YUDICA me Deus, et 
and distinguish my discérne causam 

cause from the nation that meam de gente non sanc- 

is not holy; deliver me from ta: ab hómine iníquo et 

the unjust and deceitful dolóso érue me. 

man. f 

:H. For Thou art, God, Æ. Quia tu es Deus 
my strength: why hast fortitüdo mea: quare me 
Thou cast me off? and why repulísti, et quare tristis 
do I go sorrowful whilst the incédo, dum affligit me 
enemy afflicteth me? inimicus? 

P. Send forth Thy. light P. Emítte lucem tuam, 
&nd Thy truth: they have et veritátem tuam: ipsa 
conducted me and brought me deduxérunt, et addux- 
me unto Thy holy hill, and érunt in montem sanc- 
into Thy tabernacles. . tum tuum, et in taber- 

nácula tua. ` 

H. And I will goin tothe 4. ‘Et introibo ad altáre 
altar of God: to God Who Dei; ad Deum qui letifi- 
giveth joy to my youth. cat juventütem meam. 


Lu — ——————————————————UÁ ———— 

1The Ordinary of the Mass here given is that for Low 
Mass. The variations for Solemn High Mass or Requiem 
Mass are given at the foot of their respective pages. 

The directions given throughout this Ordinary of the 
Mass when to kneel, stand or sit are the general custom for 
Low Mass. Consult the "Ceremonies for the Laity," page 68. 
However, frequently it is the rule to kneel all through Low 
Mass and stand at the twc Gospels. 


756 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE BEGINNING OF MASS 


P Confitébor tibi in 
cithara Deus, Deus meus: 
quare tristis es ánima 
mea, et quare contürbas 
me? 

W. Spera in Deo, quó- 
niam adhuc: confitébor 
illi: salutare vultus mei, 
et Deus meus. 

P. Glória Patri, et Filio, 
et Spirítui Sancto. 


.H. Sicut erat in prin- 
cípio et nunc, et semper, 
et in ssecula szculórum, 
Amen. 

P. Introibo ad altare 
Dei. 

W. Ad Deum qui letifi- 
cat juventütem meam. 

* p. Adjutorium nostrum 
"in nómine Dómini. 

H. Qui fecit. celum et 
terram. 


757 


P To Thee, O God, my 
God, I will give praise upon 
the harp: why art thou sad, 
O my soul and why dost 
thou disquiet me? 

. Hope in God, for I 

still give praise to Him, 

the salvation of my counte- 
nance and my God. 

P Glory be to the 
Father, and to the Son, and 
to the Holy Ghost. 

H. As it was in the be- 
ginning, is now, and ever 
shall be, world without end. 
Amen. 

P Iwill go in to the altar 
of God. 

B. To God, Who giveth 
joy to my youth. 

* P. Our help is in the 
name of the Lord. : 

. Who made heaven 
an ‘earth. 


THE PREPARATORY PRAYERS AT THE FOOT OF THE ALTAR, 
THE PRIEST SAYS THE "CONFITEOR." 


http://ccwatershed.org 


158 THE ORDINARY 


Bowing down low, 


CONFESS to almighty 

God, to blessed Mary 
ever virgin, to blessed Mi- 
chael the archangel, to 
blessed John the Baptist, 
to the holy apostles Peter 
and Paul, to all the saints, 
and to you, brethren, that 
I have sinned exceedingly 
in thought, word, and deed; 
(The priest strikes his 
breast three times, say- 
ing:) through my fault, 
through my fault, through 
my most grievous fault. 
Therefore I beseech the 
blessed Mary ever virgin, 
blessed Michael the arch- 
angel, blessed John the 
Baptist, the holy apostles 
Peter and Paul, all the 
saints, and you, brethren, 
to pray to the Lord our 
God for me. 

B. May almighty God 
have mercy on thee and, 
having forgiven thee thy 
sins, bring thee to life ever- 
lasting. _ 

P. Amen. 


' CONFESS to almighty 
God, to blessed Mary 
ever virgin, to blessed Mi- 
chael the archangel, to 
blessed John the Baptist, to 
the holy apostles Peter and 
Paul, to all the saints, and 
to thee, Father, that I have 
sinned exceedingly in 
thought, word, and deed: 
(Now strike your breast 
three times, saying:) 
through my fault, through 
my fault, through my most 
grievous fault. Therefore I 
beseech the blessed Mary 
ever virgin, blessed Michael 


OF THE MASS 
the priest says: 


ONFITEOR Deo om- 
nipoténti, bedte 
Marie semper virgini, 
beáto Michaéli arch- 
ángelo, beáto Joánni Bap- 
tiste, sanctis Apéstolis 
Petro et Paulo, Omnibus 
Sanctis et vobis fratres, 
quia peccávi nimis cogita- 
tióne, verbo, et (pere: 
(Percútit sibi pectus ter, 
dicens:) mea culpa, mea 
culpa, mea máxima culpa. 
Ideo precor beátam Marí- 
am semper virginem, 
beátum Michaélem arch- 
ángelum, beátum  Joán- 
nem Baptístam, sanctos 
Apóstolos Petrum et Paul- 
um, omnes Sanctos, et vos 
fratres, oráre pro me ad 
Dóminum Deum nostrum. 


W. Misereátur tui om- 
nípotens Deus, et dimissis 
peccátis tuis, perdücat te 
ad vitam etérnam. 


P. Amen. 
ONFÍTEOR Deo om- 
nipoténti, beate 


Marie semper vírgini, 
beáto Michaéli arch- 
ángelo, beáto Joánni Bap- 
tiste, sanctis  Apóstolis 
Petro et Paulo; ómnibus 
Sanctis, et tibi, Pater, 
quia peccávi nimis cogita- 
tióne, verbo, et Opere: 
(Percüie tibi pectus ter, 
dicens:) mea culpa, mea 
culpa, mea máxima culpa. 
Ideo precor beátam Marí- 
am semper virginem, 
beátum Michaélem arch- 
ángelum, beátum Joán- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ah * 


THE BEGINNING OF MASS 


nem. Baptístam, sanctos 
Apóstolos Petrum et Paul- 
um, omnes Sanctos, et te, 
Pater, 'oráre pro me ad 
Dóminum Deum nostrum. 


P. Misereátur vestri 
omnípotens Deus, et di- 
missis peccátis vestris, 
perdücat “vos ad vitam 
etérnam. 

. Amen. 


"7589 


the archangel, blessed John 
the Baptist, the holy apos- 
tles Peter and Paul, all the 
Saints, and thee, Father, to 
pray to tbe Lord our God 
for me. 

P. May .almighty God 
have mercy on you and, 
having forgiven you your 
sins, bring you to Hie ever- 
lasting. 

ly. Amen. 


The priest signs himself, saying: 


P, Indulgéntiam, "f ab- 
solutionem “et remission- 
em  peccatórum  nosiró- 
rum, tríbuat nobis omní- 
potens et miséricors Dó- 
minus. 

B'. Amen. 


P. May the almighty and 
merciful Lord grant us par- 
don, # absolution, and re- 
mission of our sins. 


B. Amen. 


Again bowing slightly, the priest goes on: 


P. Deus tu convérsus 
vivificábis nos. 
BY. Et plebs tua letabi- 
tur in te. 
P , Osténde nobis, Démi- 
ne, misericórdiam tuam. 
. Et salutáre tuum 
da nobis. 


P, Domine exáudi ora-- 


tiónem meam. 
WY. Et clamor meus ad 
te véniat. 
P. Dóminus vobíscum. 
RB. Et cum spíritu tuo. 
P, Orémus. 


P,'Thou wilt turn again, 
O God, and quicken us. 
H.And Thy people will 
sa ar in Thee. 
. Show us, O Lord, Thy 
Pea 
H. and grant us. Thy sal-, 
vation. 
P.O Lord, hear my 
prayer. 
'. And let my cry come 
unto Thee. 
P. The Lord be with you. 
BY. And with thy spirit. 
P. Let us pray. 


Going: up to the altar, the priest prays silently: 


UFER a nobis, 

quesumus Dómine, 
iniquitates nostras: ut ad 
Sancta Sanctorum puris 
mereámur méntibus in- 
troíre. Per Christum Dó- 
minum nostrum. Amen. 


AKE away from us our 
iniquities, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord; that, being 
made pure in heart we may 
be worthy to enter into the 
Holy of Holies. Through 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


He bows down over the altar, which he kisses, saying: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


"160 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


E BESEECH Thee, O RAMUS te, Dómine, 

Lord, by the merits ` per mérita sanctó- 
of those of Thy saints whose rum tuórum, quorum re- 
relics are here, and of all líquie hic sunt et ómnium 
the saints, that Thou sanctórum: ut indulgére 
wouldst vouchsafe to par- dignéris ómnia peccáta 
don me all my sins. Amen! mea. Amen? 


Copyright. by Benger Droite 


re The 3ntroít 


Standing ‘at the Epistle side of the altar, he reads the 
Introit, which varies according to the Mass being celebrated, 
and which will be found’in its proper place in each Mass. 


In Masses for the Season, pages 102 to 752, or in Masses of 
the Saints, pages 830 to 1298, or in Masses for the dead, 
pages 1501 to 1534. 


1At Solemn High Mass the priest before reading the 
Introit, blesses incense, saying: 


Mayest thou be blessed Ab illo bene Tdicáris, in 
by Him in Whose honor thou cujus honóre cremáberis. 
art to be burnt. Amen. Amen. 


He then incenses the altar and is himself incensed by 1 his 
deacon. After this the celebrant reads the Introit. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE KYRIE ELEISON 761 


we 


The priest returns to the middle of the altar and says, 
| alternately with the server: 


Kyrie Eleison 


P RK eléison. P. ORD, have mercy on 
us. 
BY. Kyrie eléison. lj. Lord, have mercy on us. 
P. Kyrie eléison. P. Lord, have mercy on us. 
BY. Christe eléison. IY. Christ, have mercy on us. 
. P. Christe eléison. P. Christ, have mercy on us. 
W. Christe eléison. BY. Christ, have mercy on us. 
P. Kyrie eléison. P, Lord, have mercy on us. 
BY. Kyrie eléison. TY. Lord, have mercy on us. 
P. Kyrie eléison. P. Lord, have mercy on us. 


. When the Gloria is to be said or sung the priest standing 
at the middle of the altar, extends and joins his hands, 
making a slight bow. 


THE “GLORIA IN EXCELSIS.” 


http://ccwatershed.org 


"62 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


Gloria in Excelsis* 


LORY be to God on 

high, and on earth 
peace to men of good will. 
We praise Thee; we bless 
Thee; we adore Thee; we 
glorify Thee. We give Thee 
thanks for Thy great glory, 
O Lord God, heavenly king, 
God the Father almighty, 
O Lord Jesus Christ, the 
only-begotten Son. O Lord 
God, Lamb of God, Son of 
the Father, Who takest 
away the sins of the world, 
have mercy on us. Who 
takest away the sins of the 
world, receive our prayer. 
Who sittest at the right 
hand of the Father, have 
mercy on us. For Thou 
alone art holy; Thou alone 
art the Lord; Thou alone, 
© Jesus Christ, together 
with the Holy Ghost, art 
most high in the glory of 
'God the Father. Amen. 


LÓRIA inexcélsis 

Deo, et in terra pax 
homínibus bone voluntá- 
tis. Laudámus te, bene- 
dicimus te, adoramus te, 
glorificamus te. Gratias 
agimus tibi propter mag- 
nam glóriam tuam. D6- 
mine Deus rex ceeléstis, 
Deus Pater omnipotens. 
Dómine Fili Unigénite, 
Jesu Christe. Dómine 
Deus, Agnus Dei, Fílius 
Patris. Qui tollis peccáta 
mundi, miserére nobis. 
Qui tollis peccáta mundi, 
stiscipe deprecatiónem 
nostram. Qui sedes ad 
déxteram Patris, miserére 
nobis. Quóniam tu solus 
sanctus, tu solus Dóminus, 
tu solus altíssimus, Jesu 
Christe, cum Sancto 
Spíritu, in glória Dei Pat- 
ris. Amen. 


Turning to the people, the priest says: 


/..' P, The Lord be with you. 
B. And with thy spirit. 


P, Dóminus vobíscum. 
HB. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


* The Praper 


Here follow the Prayers appointed for the day, which will 
be found in their proper places in each Mass. Masses for the 
Season, pagés 102 to 752, or in Masses of the Saints, pages 
830 to 1298, or in Masses for the Dead, pages 1501 to 1534. 
See page 819 for various prayer endings. 


1At Solemn High Mass the celebrant sings the first words 
of the Gloria in excelsis Deo, Which is then taken up by the 
choir; the celebrant and ministers being seated until it is 
finished. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


t 
^ 


THE EPISTLE 


The Epistle 
‘The priest next reads the Epistle, or Lesson, from the Mass 


he is celebrating, after which the server says: Deo gratias 


(Thanks be. to God). 
or Sequence. 


Then follows the Gradual, or Tract 


The priest, returning to the middle of the altar, hows 
down, his hands joined, and says the Prayer before the 


Gospel. 
UNDA cor meum, ac 
labia mea, omnipo- 
tens Deus, qui labia Isaíæ 
prophéte cálculo mun- 
dásti igníto: ita me tua 
grata miseratióne dignáre 
mundáre, ut sanctum 
Evangélium tuum digne 
váleam nuntiáre, Per 
Christum Dóminum nos- 

irum. Amen. 

Jube Dómine bene- 

dícere. 
Dóminus sit in corde 


LEANSE my heart and 
my lips, O almighty 
God, Who didst cleanse 
with a burning coal the lips 
f the prophet Isaias; and 
vouchsafe in Thy loving 
kindness so to purify me 
that I may be enabled 
worthily to announce Thy 
holy Gospel. Through 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to 
bless me. 
The Lord be in my heart 


1At Solemn High Mass the Epistle is sung by the sub- 
deacon, the choir afterwards singing the Gradual. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


764 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


and on my lips, that Y may meo, et in lábiis meis; ut 

worthily and  becomingly digne et competénter an- 

announce His gospel Amen. nüntiem Evangélium su. 
um, Amen. . 


The priest goes to the Gospel side of the altar and reads 
the Gospel. See the Mass of the day. 


* The Gospel 
P. The Lord be with you. — P. Dóminus vobíscum. 
RY. And with thy spirit. BR. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


*At Solemn High Mass, after the celebrant has read the 
Gcepel in a low tone, the deacon, taking the book of the Holy 
Gospels from the altar, kneels before the celebrant and asks 
his blessing: 


: Pray, sir,.a blessing. Jube, domne, benedícere. 
The Lord be in thy heart Dóminus sit in corde tuo, 
&nd on thy lips, that worthily et in lábiis tuis: ut digne et 
and becomingly thou mayest competénter annunties 
&nnounce His Gospel: In the Evangélium suum: In nó- 
name of the Father, and of mine Patris, et Fílii, et 
the Son, iu and of the Holy Spiritus sancti. 
Ghost. Amen. Amen. 


Then the deacon goes to the place appointed. and sings 
the Gospel to the end. The celebrant kisses the Sacred Tezt 
as above, and is then incensed by the deacon. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


dasan 


THE NICENE GREED 765 


P.H Seqüentia (vel Ini- P, %; The following or 
tium) Sancti Xvangéli the beginning) is taken 


secgndum N.  .« from the: E Gospel ac~ 
cording toSt. 
LS ‘Gloria. tibi Dómine, B Glory: ber ‘to Thee, O 
Ji ' . Lor ' 


At end of Gosper the server Bays: . 
p: Laus tibi, Christe. Bi Praise be to Thee, re) 
c docta 


"The. Brest kisses the book, saying: 


P. Per evangélica dièta P. May our'sins be blotted 
deleántur nostra delicta; out by the” words of.. the 
: *"* Gospel. 


The priest Tetürns to the. middle of the altar and recites 
the Creed, if it is to be said. 


AE 


= 
E 
Er E 


2 Copynght. by Benuger Brothers 
a The Nicene Creed 


REDO in unum BELIEVE in one God, 

Deum, Patrem om- the Father almighty, 

; nipoténtem, factórem celi maker of heaven and earth, 
et terre, visibílium ómni- and of all things visible and 


A http://ccwatershed.org 


766 THE ORDINARY 
invisible. And in one Lord 
Jesus Christ, the only-be- 
gotten Son of God, born of 
the Father before all ages; 

God of God, light of light, 
true God of true God; be- 
gotten, not made; consub- 
stantial with the Father, 
by Whom all things were 
made. Who for us men, and 
for our salvation, came 
down from heaven, and was 
incarnate by the Holy 
Ghost of the Virgin Mary, 
AND WAS MADE MAN. (Here 
genuflect) He was crucified 
also for us, suffered under 
Pontius Pilate, and was 
buried. And the third day 
He arose again, according 
to the Scriptures, and as- 
cended into -heaven. He 
sitteth at the right hand of 
the Father: and He shall 
come again with glory, to 
judge the living and the 
dead:. and His kingdom 
shall have no end. And in 
the Holy Ghost, the Lord 
and Giver of life, Who pro- 
ceedeth from the Father 
and the Son, Who, together 
with the Father and the 
Son, is adored and glori- 
fied: Who spoke by the 
prophets. And one holy, 
catholic, and apostolic 
Church. I confess one bap- 
tism for the remission of 
sins. And I expect the res- 
urrection of the dead, and 
the life of the world to 
come, Amen. 


The priest kisses the altar 
says: 

P. The Lord be with you. 

R. And with thy spirit. 

P, Let us pray. 


OF THE MASS 


um et invisibilium. Et in' 
Unum Dóminum Jes 
Christum, Fílium Dei ui 
génitum. Et ex P tre 
natum ante ómnia sacula. 
Deum de Deo, lumen de 
lumine, Deum verum de 
Deo vero, Génitum, non 
factum, consubstantiálem 
Patri: per quem omnia 
facta sunt. Qui propter 
nos hómines, et propter 
nostram salütem descén- 
dit de colis. Et incarnátus 
est de Spiritu Sancto ex 
María Virgine: ET HOMO 
FACTUS EST (Hic genuflec- 
titur) Crucifixus étiam 
pro nobis: sub Póntio 
Pilato passus, et sepultus 
est; Et resurréxit tértia 
die, secindum Scriptüras. 
Et ascéndit in coelum: 

edet ad déxteram Patris. 
t iterum venturus est 
cum glória, judicáre vivos 
et mórtuos: cujus regni 
non erit finis. Et in 
Spiritum Sanctum, Dó- 
minum et vivificántem: 
qui ex Patre Filióque pro- 
cédit. Qui cum Patre et 
Filio simul adorátur et 
conglorificátur: qui locü- 
tus est per prophétas. Et 
unam, sanctam, Cathdé- 
licam et Apostólicam Ec- 
clésiam.. Confiteor "inum 
baptisma in remissiónem 
peccatérum, Et exspécto 
resurrectibnem mortu- 
órum. Et vitam venturi 
seculi. Amen. 


and turning to the people, 


P, Dóminus vobiscum. 
B. Et cum spíritu tuo. 
P. Orémus. ; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
| 


THE OFFERTORY 


OBLATION OF THE HOST, 


The Offertorp 


He now says the Offertory, which will be found in its 


LSitT* 


proper place in each Mass. 
chalice.! 


Then the priest uncovers the 


Offering of the Bost 


USCIPE sancte Pater 

omnipotens etérne 
Deus, hanc. immaculátam 
hóstiam, quam ego indig- 
nus fámulus tuus óffero 
tibi Deo meo vivo et vero, 
pro innumerabílibus pec- 
cátis et offensiónibus et 
negligéntiis meis, et pro 
ómnibus circumstántibus, 
sed et pro ómnibus fidéli- 
bus Christiánis vivis atque 


à ECEIVE, O Holy 

Father, almigbty and 
eternal God, this spotless 
host, which I, Thine un- 
worthy servant, offer unto 
Thee, my living and true 
God, for my countless sins, 
irespasses, and omissions; 
likewise for all here pres- 
ent, and for all faithful 
Christians, whether living 
or dead, that it may avail 


iHere at Solemn High Mass the subdeacun proceeds to the 
credence table and putting on the Humeral Veil he takes the 


covered chalice to the altar, 


giving it to the deacon who 


hands the paten with the host to the celebrant. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


768 


both me and them to salva- 
tion, unto life everlasting. 
: Amen. 


THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


defünetis: ut- mihi et illis 
proficiat ad salütem in 
vitam etérnam. Amen. 


" The priest goes to the Epistle side and pours wine and 


water into the chalice. 


GOD, Who in creat- 
O ing man didst exalt 
his nature very wonderfully 
and yet more wonderfully 
didst establish it anew: by 
the mystery signified in the 
mingling of this water and 
wine, grant us to have part 
in the Godhead of Him 
Who hath vouchsafed to 
share our manhood, Jesus 
Christ, Thy Son, Our Lord, 
Who liveth and reigneth 
with Thee in the unity of 
the.Holy Ghost, God; world 
without end. Amen. 


EUS, qui humane 

Substántie  dignitá- 
em mirabiliter condidisti, 
et mirabílius reformásti: 
da nobis per hujus aque 
et vini mystérium, ejus 
qui humanitátis nostre 
fieri dignátus est párti- 
ceps, Jesus Christus, 
Fílius tuus, Dóminus 
nóster: Qui tecum vivit et 
regnat in unitáte Spiritus 
Sancti, Deus; per ómnia 
secula seculérum, 

Amen, 


Offering of the Chalice 
At the middle of the altar the priest says: 


E OFFER unto Thee, 

O Lord, the chalice 
of salvation, beseeching 
Thy clemency that it may 
ascend as a sweet odor be- 
fore Thy divine majesty, 
for our own salvation, and 
for that of the whole world. 
Amen.’ 


FFÉRIMUS tibi Dó- 

mine, cálicem salu- 
táris, tuam deprecántes 
cleméntiam: ut in con- 
spéctu divine majestátis 
tue, pro nostra et totius 
mundi salute cum odóre 
suavitátis ascéndat. 
Amen.? - < : 


3Here at Solemn High Mass the aeacon pours the wine into 
the chalice, the subdeacon afterwards adding a few drops 
of the water'which the celebrant has blessed. i 


?Here at Solemn High Mass the subdeacon receives from 
the deacon the paten, which he covers with the extremity of 
the veil worn over his shoulders; he then proceeds to the 
foot of the altar-steps, and takes his stand behind the priest. 
He holds the paten before his eyes until the conclusion of 
the Pater Noster. 


In Masses for the dead the paten is not removed from the 
altar nor is the humeral veil worn by the subdeacon. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


( 


THE OFFERING 


spíritu humilitátis, 

et in ánimo contrito 

suscipiámur a te Dómine: 

et sic fiat sacrifícium no- 

strum in conspéctu tuo 

hódie, ut pláceat tibi Dó- 
mine Deus. 


ENI  sanctificátor 

omnípotens etérne 
Deus, et béne/fdic hoc sac- 
rifícium tuo sancto nóm- 
ini preparátum. 


OP THE CHALICE 769 


UMBLED in mind, 
and contrite of heart, 
may we find favor with 
Thee, O Lord; and may the 
sacrifice we this day offer 
up be well pleasing to Thee,. 
Who art our Lord and our 
God. 
OME, Thou, the Sanc- 
tifier, God, almighty 
and everlasting: bless Fk 
this sacrifice which is pre- 
pared for the glory of Thy 
holy name. 


14t Solemn High Mass incense is then blessed, the cele- 


brant saying: 


Per intercessiónem  beáti 
Michaélis archángeli stantis 
a dextris altaris incénsi, et 
ómnium electórum suórum, 
incénsum istud dignétur 
Dóminus bene'Adicere, et in 
odórem suavitatis accipere. 
Per Christum | Dóminum 
nostrum. Amen. 


By the intercession of bless- 
ed Michael the archangel, who 
standeth at the right hand of 
the altar of incense, and of all 
His elect, may the Lord vouch- 
safe to bless hi this incense, 
and to receive it for an odor 
of sweetness. Through Christ. 
our Lord. Amen. 


Receiving the thurible from the deacon he incenses the 


bread and wine on the altar 


Incénsum istud a te bene- 
dictum, ascéndat ad te, Dó- 
mine: et descéndat super 
nos misericórdia tua. 

He then incenses the altar 


Dirigátur, Dómine, orátio 
mea, sicut incénsum, in con- 
spéctu tuo: elevátio mánu- 
um rmeárum sacrificium ves- 
pertinum. Pone, Domine, 
custódiam ori meo, et ósti- 
um circumsténtie lábiis 
meis: ut non declinet cor 
meum in verba malitie, ad 
excusándas excusatiónes in 
peccátis. 

The celebrant returns the 


Accéndat in nobis Dó- 
minus ignem sui amóris, et 
flammam etérne  caritátis. 
Ainen. 


with the words: 


May this incense, blessed. 
by Thee, ascend before Thee, 
O Lord, and may Thy mercy 
descend upon us. 


itself, reciting from Ps. 140. 


Let my prayer be directed, 
O Lord, as incense in Thy 
sight, the lifting up of my 
hands as an evening sacrifice. 
Set a watch, O Lord, before 
my mouth: and a door round 
about my lips: that my heart. 
may not incline to evil words: 
to make excuses in sins. 


thurible to the deacon saying: 


May the Lord enkindle. tn. 
us the fire of His love and the 
flame of everlasting charity. 
Amen. : 


Afterward, the celebrant himself, the clergy, and the peo- 


ple are incensed. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


Tue WASHING OF THE HANDS. 


The Lababo 


Going to the ia Bide the priest washes his fingers and 


SBYS: 


WILL wash my hands 

among the innocent, 
and will compass Thine 
altar, O Lord. 

That I may hear the 
voice of praise, and tell of 
all Thy wondrous works. 

I have loved, O Lord, the 
beauty of Thy house, and 
the place where Thy ‘glory 
dwelleth. 

Take not away my soul, 
O God, with the wicked: 
nor my life with men of 
blood. 

_ In whose hands are in- 
iquities: théir right hand 
is filled with gifts. 


AVABO inter inno- 

céntes manus meas: 

et circümdabo altare 
tuum Dómine. 

Ut áudiam vocem lau- 
dis: et enárrem univérsa 
mirabília tua. 

Dómine diléxi decórem 
domus tus, et locum hab- 
itatiónis glorie tue. 


Ne perdas cum impiis 
Deus animam meam: et 
cum viris sanguinum vi- 
tam meam. 

In quorum manibus in- 
iquitátes sunt: déxtera 
eórum repléta est muné- 
ribus. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE ORATE FRATRES 


Ego autem in innocén- 
tia mea ingréssus sum: 
rédime me, ét miserére 
mei. ; 

Pes meus stetit in di- 
récto: in ecclésiis benedí- 
cam te Dómine. 

Glória, etc. 


TÁ 


But as for me, I have 
walked in my ianocence; 
redeem me, and have 
mercy on me. 

My foot hath stood in 
the right way; in the 
churches I will bless Thee, 
O Lord. 

Glory, etc. i : 


The Gloria Patri, etc., is omitted in Masses for the dead 


and in Passion-tide. 


The. priest returns to the middle of the altar and bowing: 


slightly says: 


ÜSCIPE sancta Trin- 

! itas hanc  oblatió- 
nem, quam tibi offérimus 
ob memóriam  passiónis 
resurrectiónis et ascensió- 
nis Jesu Christi Dómini 
nostri: et in honórem 
beáte Maríe semper vír- 
ginis, et beati Joánnis 
Baptiste, et sanctórum 
i Apostolórum Petri et 
% Pauli, et istórum, et óm- 
F nium Sanctérum: ut illis 
k proficiat ad honórem, no- 
ibis autem ad salütem: et 
Wl pro nobis intercédere 
Vignéntur in colis, quo- 
1 memoriam agimus 
JA terris. Per eümdem 
Christum Dóminum nos- 
irum. Amen. 


ECEIVE, O holy Trin- 

ity, this oblation of- 
fered up by us to Thee in 
memory of the passion, res- 
urrection, and ascension of 
Our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
in honor of blessed Mary, 
ever a virgin, of blessed 
John the Baptist, of the 
holy apostles Peter and 
Paul, of these, and of all 
the saints, that it may be 
available to their honor 
and to our salvation; and 
may they whose memory 
we celebrate on earth 
vouchsafe to intercede for 
us in heaven. Through the 
same Christ our Lord. 
Amen. 


The priest kisses the altar and turning to the people, says: 


The Crate Fratres 


RATE, fratres, ut 
meum ac vestrum 


RETHREN, pray that 
my sacrifice and 


sacrificium acceptábile yours may be well pleasing 

fiat apud Deum Patrem to God the Father al- 

omnipoténtem. mighty. 

B CYXUSCIPIAT Domi- B. AY. the Lord re- 
nus sacrifícium de ceive this sacrifice 

mánibus tuis ad laudem et at thy hands, to the praise 

glóriam nóminis sui, ad and glory of His name, to 


http://ccwatershed.org 


772 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


THE "OnATE FRATRES." 


our own benefit, and to that utilitátem quoque nos- 
of ali His Holy Church. iram, totilüsque Ecclésie 
sus sancta. 


* The Secret Praper 


Then with hands extended, the priest says the Se 
prayers. Their order and number are the same as t 
Prayers said after the Gloria and will be found in the propei- 


place in each Mass. 
The Preface 


The priest now says in a louder voice, or sings: 
p. World without end. . p Per ómnia secula 
seculorum. 

V, Amen. . H. Amen. 
P. The Lord be with you. pP. Dóminus vobíscum. 
BH. And with thy spirit. ^H. Et cum spíritu tuo. 
P. Lift up your hearts. P. Sursum corda. 
RY. We have them lifted — H. Habémus ad Dó- 


-up unto the Lord. . . minum. 
P. Let us give thanks to P. Grátias agámus Do- 
the Lord our God. mino Deo nostro. 
E. It is meet and just. "d Dignum -et justum 
est. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


we 


v 


t 
i 
1 


n 
t 


THE PREFACE 


TE 


THE “PREFACE.” 


The Preface: for Sundays 


The following Preface is appointed for Trinity Sunday and 
all Sundays to which no special one is assigned. ` 


s ERE dignum et jus- 
tum est, equum ‘et 
salutare, nos tibi semper, 
et ubique grátias ágere: 
Dómine sancte, Pater om- 
mipotens, etérne Deus. 
Qui cum unigénito Filio 
tuo, et Spíritu Sancto, 
unus es Deus, unus es Dó- 
minus: non in uníus sin- 
gularitáte persóne, sed in 
uníus Trinitáte substán- 
\ tie. Quod enim.de tua 
lória, revelánte te, crédi- 
us, hoc de Fílio tuo, hoc 
K Spíritu sancto, sine dif- 
eréntia discretiónis sen- 
tímus. Ut in confessióne 
vére, sempiterneque Dei- 
tatis, et in persónis pro- 


T IS truly meet and just, 
right and profitable, 
for us, at all times, and in 


all places, to give thanks to 


Thee, O Lord, the holy One, 
the Father almighty, -the 
everlasting God: Who, to- 
gether with Thine only-be- 
gotten Son and the Holy 
Ghost, art one God, one 
Lord, not in the singleness 
of one Person, but in the 
Trinity of one substance. 
For that which; according 
to Thy revelation, we be- 
lieve of Thy glory, the same 
we believe of Thy Son, the 
same of the Holy Ghost, 
without difference or dis- 
tinction; so that in the con- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


V 


i 


THE PREFACE ' 


775 


THE “PREFACE.” 


The Preface for Sundays 


: The following Preface is appointed for Trinity Sunday and 
all Sundays to which no special one is assigned. 


. ERE dignum et jus- 

tum est, equum et 
salutare, nos tibi semper, 
et ubíque grátias ágere: 
Dómine sancte, Pater om- 
nípotéDS, wtérne Deus. 
Qui cum unigénito Filio 
tuo, et Spíritu Sancto, 
unus es Deus, unus es Dó- 
minus: non in uníus sin- 


+ gularitáte persónz, sed in 
| unius Trinitate substán- 


M tie. Quod enim.de tua 
lória, revelánte te, crédi- 
us, hoc de Fílio tuo, hoc 
e Spíritu sancto, sine dif- 
eréntia discretiónis sen- 
timus. Ut in confessióne 
vére, sempiterneque Dei- 
tatis, et in persónis pro- 


TIS truly meet and just, 
right and profitable, 
for us, at all times, and in 


all places, to give thanks to 


Thee, O Lord, the holy One, 
the Father almighty, -the 
everlasting God: Who, to- 
gether with Thine only-be- 
gotten Son and the Holy 
Ghost, art one God, one 
Lord, not in the singleness 
of one Person, but in the 
Trinity of one substance. 
For that which, according 
to Thy revelation, we be- 
lieve of Thy glory, the same 
we believe of Thy Son, the 
same of ihe Holy Ghost, 
without difference or dis- 
tinction; so that in the con- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


174 THE ORDINARY 
fession cf one true and 
eternal Godhead we adore 
distinctness in persons, 
oneness in essence, and 
equality in majesty: Which 
the angels praise, and the 
archangels, the cherubim 
also and the seraphim, who 
cease not, day by day cry- 
ing out with one voice, to 
repeat: 


= 


Copyright, by Benziger Brothers 


neel j* 


OLY, holy, holy, Lord 

God of hosts. The 
heavens and the earth are 
full of Thy glory. Hosanna 
in the highest. Blessed is 
He Who cometh in the 
name of the Lord. Hosanna 
in the highest. . 


OF THE MASS 


prietas, et in esséntia úni- 
tas, et in majestate ado- 
rétur equálitas. Quam 
laudant Angeli, atque 
Archangeli, Chérubim 
quoque ac Séraphim: qui 
non cessant clamáre quo- 
tidie, una voce dicéntes: 


The bell now is rung three times. 


The Sanctus 


ANCTUS, Sanctus, : 

Sanctus, Dóminus / 
Deus Sábaoth. Pleni sunt, 
coli et terra glória tua; 
Hosánna in excélsis. Ben- 
edictus qui venit in nóm- 
jne Dómini. Hosánna in 
excélsis, 


*Remain kneeling until after Communion. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


--— 


THE SANCTUS Tib 


The Preface for Weekdays 


The following Preface is said throughout tne year on all 
week-days and feasts that have no proper Preface. 


"ERE dignum et jus- 

. tum est, equum et 
Salütáre, nos tibi semper, 
et ubique grátias ágere: 
Dómine sancte, Pater om- 
nipotens, etérne Deus: 
per. Christum Dóminum 
nostrum. Per quem ma- 
jestátem | tuam laudant 
Angeli, adórant Domina- 
tiónes, tremunt Pote- 
states. Celi, celorimque 
Virtütes, ac beáta Séra- 
phim, sócia exsultatióne 
concélebrant. Cum quibus 
et nostras: voces, ut ad- 
mitti jübeas deprecámur, 
süpplici confessióne di- 


T: IS. truly meet: and 

just, right and profit- 
able for us, at all times, 
and in all places, to give 
thanks to Thee, O holy 
Lord, Father almighty, 
eternal God, through 
Christ our Lord. Through 
Whom the angels: praise, 
the dominations adore, the 
powers, trembling with 
awe, worship Thy majesty: 
which the heavens, and the 
forces of heaven, together 
with the blessed Seraphim, 
joyfully do magnify. And 
do Thou command that it 
be permitted to our lowli- 


céntes: ness to join with them in 
confessing Thee and un- 
ceasingly to repeat: 
The Sanctus 
ANCTUS, Sanctus, OLY, holy, Moir. Lord 
? Sanctus, Dóminus God of hosts. The 


Deus Sábaoth. 
cceli, et terra glória tua. 


Hosanna in excélsis. Ben- in the highest. 


edictus: qui venit in nó- 
mine Dómini. Hosánna in 
excélsis. 


‘Pleni sunt heavens and the earth are 


full of Thy glory. Hosanna 
Blessed is 
He that cometh in the name 
of the Lord. Hosanna in 


the highest. 


*Remain kneeling until after Communion. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


776 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


FOR FROM THE RISING OF THE SUN EVEN TO THE GOING DOWN, 
My NAME IS GREAT AMONG THE GENTILES, AND IN EVERY PLACE 
THERE IS SACRIFICE, AND THERE IS OFFERED TO MY NAME A CLEAN 
OBLATION, (Malachias, 1, 11.) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE CANON OF THE MASS 


777 


The Canon of the Mass . 


The priest now prays silently. The !H indicates that he 
makes the sign of the cross over the offerings. 


E igitur clementis- 

sime Pater, per Jes- 
um Christum Fílium 
tuum Dóminum nostrum, 
süpplices rogámus ac pé- 
timus, uti accépta hábeas, 
et benedicas hec " dona, 
hec : münera, hec & 
sancta sacrifícia illibáta, 
in primis que tibi offéri- 
mus pro Ecclésia tua 
sancta Cathólica; quam 
pacificáre, custodíre, ad- 
unáre, et régere dignéris 
toto orbe terrárum: una 
cum fámulo tuo Papa 
nostro N. et Antístite nos- 
tro N. et ómnibus ortho- 
dóxis, atque Cathólice et 
Apostólice fidei cultóribus. 


HEREFORE, we 

humbly pray and be- 
seech Thee, most merciful 
Father, through Jesus 
Christ Thy Son,.Our Lord, 
to receive and to bless these 
"X gifts, these 4 presents, 
these ' holy unspotted sac- 
rifices, which we offer up 
to Thee, in the first place, 
for Thy holy Catholic 
Church, that it may please 
Thee to grant her peace, to 
guard, unite, and guide her, 
throughout the world; as 
also for Thy servant N., our 
Pope, and N., our Bishop, 
and for all who are ortho- 
dox in belief and who pro- 
fess the Catholic and apo- 
stolic faith. 


Commemoration of tbe Living 


EMÉNTO Dómine 
famulórum, famu- 
Jarümque tuárum N et N. 
et ómnium circumstánti- 
um, quorum tibi fides cóg- 
nita est, et nota devótio, 
pro quibus tibi offérimus: 
vel qui tibi offerunt hoc 
sacrifícium laudis pro se, 


E MINDFUL, O Lord, 

of Thy servants, Wy. 

and N., and of all here pres- 
ent, whose faith and devo- 
tion are known to Thee, for 
whom we offer, or who offer 
up to Thee, this sacrifice of 
praise, for themselves, 
their families, and their 


http://ccwatershed.org 


T18 


friends, for the salvation of 
their souls and the health 
and welfare they hope for, 
and who now pay their 
vows to Thee, God eternal, 
living, and true, 


THE ORDINARY 


OF THE MASS 


suisque Omnibus: pro re- 
demptione animarum su- 
árum, pro spe salütis et 
incolumitatis suze: tibíque 
reddunt vota sua extérno 
Deo vivo et vero, 


The Communicantes 


AVING communion 


with and venerating : 


the memory, first, of the 
glorious Mary, ever a vir- 
gin, mother of Jesus Christ, 
our God and our Lord: like- 
wise of Thy blessed apostles 
and martyrs, Peter and 
Paul, Andrew, James, John, 
Thomas, James, Philip, 
Bartholomew, Matthew, 
Simon and Thaddeus; of 
Linus, Cletus, Clement, Six- 
tus, Cornelius, Cyprian, 
Lawrence, Chrysogonus, 
John and Paul, Cosmas and 
Damian, and of all Thy 
saints: for the sake of 
whose merits and prayers 
do Thou grant that in all 
things we may be defended 
by the help of Thy protec- 
tion. Through the same 
Christ, our Lord, 
Amen, 


OMMUNICANTES, 
et memoriam vene- 
rántes, in primis gloridse 
semper virginis Marie 
genitricis Dei et Domini 
nostri Jesu Christi: sed et 
beatórum.Apostolórum ac 
Martyrum tuórum, Petri 
et Pauli, Andrée, Jacobi, 
Joannis, ‘Thome, Jacébi, 
Philippi, Bartholomai, 
Matthei, Simónis et 
Thaddzi: Lini, Cleti, Cle- 
ménüs, Xysti, Cornélii, 
Cypriani, Lauréntii, 
Chrysógoni, Joánnis et 
Pauli, Cosme et Damiani, 
et ómnium sanctórum 
tuórum: quorum méritis 
precibüsque concédas, ut 
in ómnibus protectiónis 
tue muniámur auxílio. 
Per eümdem Christum 
Dóminum nostrum. 
Amen, 


The priest extends his hands over the oblation. 


The “Wane Igitur” 


HEREFORE, we be- 

seech Thee, O Lord, 
graciously to receive this 
oblation which we Thy ser- 
vants, and with us Thy 
whole family, offer up to 
Thee: dispose our days in 
Thy peace; command that 


ANC ígitur oblatión- 

em servitütis nos- 
tre, sed et cuncte familie 
tue, quesumus, Dómine, 
ut placátus accípias: di- 
esque nostros in tua pace 
dispónas, atque ab etérna 
damnatióne nos éripi, et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SS 


ni 
T = 


HIA 


THE "HANC IGITUR,” 


in electórum tuórum 
jübeas grege numerari. 
Per Christum Dóminum 
nostrum. Amen. 


we be saved from eternal 
damnation and numbered 
among the flock of 'Thine 
elect. Through Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 


Here the bell is rung once. 


Quam Oblationem 


UAM oblatiónem tu, 
Deus, in ómnibus, 
quesumus bene % dictam, 
adscrip & tam, ra & tam, 
rationabilem, accepta- 
bilémque fácere dignéris: 
ut nobis Cormpus, et San- 
" guis fiat dilectissimi 
Fíli tui Dómini nostri 
Jesu Christi. 


ND do Thou, O God, 
vouchsafe in all re- 
Spects to bless t, consecrate 
4, and approve " this our 
oblation, to perfect it and 
to render it well-pleasing to 
Thyself, so that it may be- 
come for us the body ™ and 
blood m of Thy most be- 
loved Son, Jesus Christ our 
Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


780 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


HO, the day before UI pridie quam pa- 

He suffered, took terétur, accépit pa- 
bread into His holy and nem in sanctas ac venerá- 
venerable hands, and hav- biles manus suas: et elevá- 
ing lifted up His eyes to tis óculis in celum ad te 
heaven, to Thee, God, His Deum Patrem suum om- 
almighty Father, giving nipoténtem, tibi gratias 
thanks to Thee, blessed it agens, bene/fdíxit, fregit, 
%, broke it, and gave it to dedítque  discípulis suis, 
His disciples, saying: dicens: 


Take ye and eat ye all of Accipite et manducáte 
: ex hoc omnes: 


The Consecration of the Host. 


The priest bends over the Host and says: 


For this is Hoe est enim 
Nip Boop Corpus Meum 


Then the priest adores and elevates the Sacred Host. 
The bell is rung. 


When the priest elevates the Sacred Host, look at it and 


say devoutly: 
“Sp Lord and Mp God” 


Indulgence of seven years, and seven quarantines, Pope 


Pius X, May 18, 1907. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


781 


THE CONSECRATION OF THE HOST 


” 


“CONSECRATION OF THE HOST. 


THE 


ELEVATION OF THE Host,” 


THE 


182 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


| 


T 


j) 


THE “CONSECRATION OF THE WINE," 
“THIS IS THE CHALICE OF My BLOOD." 


E! 
8 
E] 
= 
E] 
e 


Tug “ELEVATION OF THE CHALICE,” 


THE CONSECRATION OF THE WINE 783 


The priest uncovers the chalice and says: 


ÍMILI modo post- N LIKE manner, after 

quam cenatum est, He had supped, taking 
accipiens et hunc przec- also into His holy and ven- 
lárum Cálicem in sanctas erable hands this goodly 
ac venérábiles manus chalice again giving thanks 
suas: item tibi grátias to Thee, He blessed it m, 
agens, benemdíixit, dedit- and gave it to His disciples, 


que discípulis suis, dicens: 


Accipite et bibite ex eo 
omnes: 


saying: 
Take ye; and drink ye all 
of this: f 


The Consecration of the Wine. 


The priest bends over the chalice and says: 


Hic est enim Calix 
Sanguinis mei, nobi et 
eterni. testamenti: mps- 
terium fidei, quí pro 
bobís ct pro multis ef- 
fundetur in remissionem 
peccatorum. 


Hec quotiescumaque 
fecéritis in mei memóriam 
faciétis. 


The priest adores and elevates the chalice. 


rung. 


For this is the Chalice 
of lp Blood, of the new 
and eberlasting testament, 
the mpsterp of faith, which 
for pou and for manp shall 
be shed unto the remission 
of sins. 


As often as ye shall do 
these things, ye shall do 
them in memory of Me. 


The bell ts 


http://ccwatershed.org 


184 THE ORDINARY 
He then continues: 

HEREFORE, O Lord, 

we, Thy servants, as 
also Thy holy people, calle 
ing to mind the blessed pas- 
sion of the same Christ, 
Thy Son, our Lord, His res- 
urrection from the grave, 
and His glorious ascension 
into heaven, offer up to Thy 
most excellent majesty of 
Thine own gifts bestowed 
upon us, a victim % which 
is pure, a victim & which is 
holy, a victim & which is 
Stainless, the holy bread & 
of life everlasting, and the 
chalice 4H of eternal salva- 
ion. 


OUCHSAFE to look 

upon them with a 
gracious and tranquil coun- 
tenance, and to accept 
them, even as Thou wast 
pleased to accept the offer- 
ings of Thy just servant 
Abel, and the sacrifice of 
Abraham, our patriarch, 
and that which Melchise- 
dech, Thy high priest, 
offered up to Thee, a holy 
sacrifice, a victim without 
blemish, 


E HUMBLY beseech 
Thee, almighty God, 

to command that these our 
offerings be borne by the 
hands of Thy holy angel to 
Thine altar on high in the 
presence of Thy divine 
Majesty; that as many of us 
as shall receive the most 
sacred & Body and & Blood 
of Thy Son by partaking 
thereof from this altar may 
be filled with every heav- 


OF THE MASS 


NDE et mémores Dó- 

mine, nos servi tui, 
sed et plebs tua sancta, 
ejüsdem Christi Fílii tui 
Dómini nostri tam beáte 
passiónis, nec non et ab 
inferis resurrectiónis, sed 
et in colos gloriósze ascen- 
Siónis: ófférimus precláre 
majestáti tus de tuis donis 
ac datis, hóstiam m 
puram, hóstiam 9 sanc- 
tam, hóstiam m immacu- 
látam, Panem i sanctum 
vite etérne, et Cálieem & 
salütis perpétum. 


UPRA que propítio 

ac seréno vultu re- 
Spicere dignéris: et ac- 
cépta habére, sícuti ac- 
cépta habére dignátus es 
münera püeri, tui justi 
Abel, et sacrifícium patri- 
arche nostri Abrahe: et 
quod tibi óbtulit summus 
Sacérdos tuus Melchí- 
sedech, sanctum sacri- 
ficium, imunacuiavam hós- 
tiam. 


ÜPPLICES te ro- 

gámus, omnípotens 
Deus; jube hec perférri 
per manus sancti Ángeli 
tui in sublíme altáre 
tuum, in conspéctu divine 
majestátis tue: ut quot- 
quot ex bac altáris par- 
ticipatióne, sacrosánctum 
Fílii tui Cor “pus et Sán- 
mguinem sumpsérimus 
omni benedictióne celésti 
et gratia repleamur. Per 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMEMORATION OF THE DEAD 


eümdem Christum  Dó- 
minum nostrum. Amen. 


"85 


enly blessing and grace: 
Through the same Christ. 
our Lord. Amen. 


Commemoration of the Dead 


EMENTO étiam, Dó- 
«D mine, famulórum 
amularümque tuárum NW. 
et y. qui nos precessérunt 
cum signo fídei, et dórmi- 

unt in somno pacis. 


PSIS Dómine, et ómni- 

bus in Christo quies- 
céntibus, locum refrigérii, 
lucis et pacis, ut induül- 
geas, deprecámur, per 
eümdem Christum Dó- 
minum nostrum. Amen. 


E MINDFUL also, O 

Lord, of Thy servants 

N. and N., who bave gone 

before us with the sign of 

faith and who sleep the 
sleep of peace. 


to all who rest in 

ist, grant, we beseech 
Thee, a place of refresh- 
ment, light, and peace. 
Through the same Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


Im THESE, O Lord, and 
hr 


Striking his breast the priest says: 


OBIS quoque pecca- 

tóribus famulis. tuis, 
de multitüdine miseratid- 
num tuárum sperántibus, 
partem áliquam et so- 
cietatem donáre dignéris, 
cum tuis sanctis Apóstolis 
et Martyribus: cum Jo- 
ánne, Stéphano, Matthía, 
Bárnaba, Ignátio, Alexán- 
dro, Marcellino, Petro, 
Felicitate, Perpétua, 
Agatha, Lucia, Agnéte, 
Cecilia, Anastasia, et óm- 
nibus sanctis tuis: intra 
quorum nos consórtium, 
non estimátor mériti, sed 
vénie, quesumus, largitor 
admitte. Per Christum 
Dóminum nostrum. 


ER quem hec ómnia, 
Dómine, semper bona 
creas, sanctifMficas, viví- 
Mficas, bene dicis et 
prestas nobis. 


servants, who put our 
t in the multitude of 
Thy. mercies, vouchsafe to. 
grant some part and fellow- 
ship with Thy holy apostles. 
and martyrs; with John, 
Stephen, Matthias, Barna- 
bas, Ignatius, Alexander, 
Marcellinus, Peter, Felici- 
tas, Perpetua, Agatha, 
Lucy, Agnes, Cecilia, Anas- 
tasia, and with all Thy 
saints. Into their company 
do Thou, we beseech Thee, 
admit us, not weighing our 
merits, but freely pardon- 
ing our offenses: through 
Christ our Lord. 


ng US sinners, also, Thy 
rus 


Y WHOM, O Lord, 

Thou dost always cre- 
ate, sanctify 5, quicken "M, 
bless +H, and bestow upon 
us all these good things. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


786 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


HROUGH him %, and ER ipsum, et cum 
with Him »&, and in ipso, et in ipso, 
Him #, is to Thee, God the est tibi Deo Patri "m omni- 
Father % almighty, in the poténti, in unitate Spíritus 
unity of the Holy 9:4 Ghost, "& Sancti, omnis honor et 


all honor and glory. glória. 
Raising his voice the priest says or sings: 
World without end. , Per ómnia secula secu- 
lórum. ` 
Hf. Amen. B'. Amen. 


The Pater Poster 

Let us pray Orémus 
DMONISHED by sal- RAECEPTIS salutari- 
utary precepts, and bus moniti, et divina 
following divine directions, institutióne formati, au- 

we presume to say: démus dicere: 

UR Father, Who art in ATER noster, qui es 
heaven, hallowed be in celis: sanctificé- 


Thy name; Thy kingdom tur nomen tuum: advéniat 
come; Thy will be done on regnum tuum: fiat volün- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE PATER NOSTER 


tas tua sicut in celo et in 
terra. Panem nostrum 
quotidiánum. da nobis 
hódie: et dimítte nobis 
débita nostra, sicut et nos 
dimíttimus  debitóribus 
nostris. Et ne nos indücas 
in tentatiónem. 

FY. Sed libera nos a 
malo. 

P. Amen. 


ÍBERA nos, que- 

sumus Dómine, ab 
ómnibus malis pretéritis, 
preséntibus, et futüris: et 
intercedénte beáta et 
gloriósa semper Virgine 
Dei Genitríce María, cum 
beátis Apóstolis tuis Petro 
et Paulo, atque Andréa, et 
ómnibus sanctis, da pro- 
pítius pacem in diébus 
nostris: ut ope miseri- 
córdie tue adjuti, et a 
peccáto simus semper 
liberi, et ab omni pertur- 
batióne secüri. 


787 


earth as it is in heaven; give 
us this day our daily bread; 
and forgive us our tres- 
passes, as we forgive those 
who trespass against us, 
and lead us not into temp- 
tation. 


H. But deliver us from 
evil. 
P. Amen. 


ELIVER us, we be- 

seech Thee, O- Lord, 
from all evils, past, present, 
and to come: and by the in- 
tercession of the blessed 
and glorious Mary, ever a 
virgin, Mother of God, and 
of Thy holy apostles Peter 
and Paul, of Andrew, and of 
all the saints, graciously 
grant peace in our days, 
that through the help of 
Thy bountiful mercy we 
may always be free from sin 
and secure from all disturb- 
ance. 


The priest breaks the Sacred Host, saying: 


Per eümdem Dóminum 
nostrum Jesum Christum 
Filium tuum, 

Qui tecum vivit et reg- 
nat in unitáte Spíritus 
Sancti Deus. 

Per ómnia secula secu- 
Jlórum. 

H. Amen. 

P. Pax 9 Dómini sit &% 
semper vobis icum. 


FY. Et cum spiritu tuo. 


Through the same Jesus 
Christ, Thy Son, our Lord, 


Who liveth and reigneth 
with Thee in the unity of 
the Holy Ghost, God. 

World without end. 


RY. Amen. i 
P. May the peace * of 
the Lord & be always with 


you. 
B. And with Thy spirit. 


iHere at Solemn High Mass the subdeacon goes up to the 
altar and gives the paten to the deacon. The subdeacon then 
divests himself of the humeral veil. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


788 


The priest drops a particle 
Chalice. 


AY this commingling 

and consecrating of 
the Body and Blood of Our 
Lord Jesus Christ avail us 
who receive it unto life 
everlasting. Amen. 


THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


of the Sacred Host into the 


ÆC commixtio et 

consecratio Córporis 

et Sánguinis Dómini nos- 

tri Jesu Christi nat accipi- 

éntibus nobis in vitam 
etérnam. Amen. 


Bowing down the priest says: 


The Agnus Dei 


In Masses for the dead the following supplications are 
slightly changed; see second form below. 


AMB of God, Who tak- 

est away the sins of 
the world: have mercy on 
us. 

Lamb of God, Who takest 
away the sins of the world: 
have mercy on us. 

Lamb of God, Who takest 
away the sins of the world: 
grant us peace. 


GNUS Dei, qui tollis 
é peccáta mundi, 
miserére nobis. 


Agnus Dei, qui tollis 
peccáta mundi, miserére 
nobis. 

Agnus Dei, qui tollis 
peccáta mundi, dona 
nobis pacem. 


In Masses for the dead only. 


AMB of God, Who tak- 
est away the sins of 
the world: give unto them 


rest. 

Lamb of God, Who takest 
away the sins of the world: 
give unto them rest. 

Lamb of God, Who takest 
away the sins of the world: 
give unto them rest for- 
evermore. 


GNUS Dei, qui tollis 
peccáta mundi: 
dona eis réquiem. 


qui tollis 
dona eis 


Agnus Dei, 
peccáta mundi: 
réquiem. 

Agnus Dei, qui tollis 
peccáta mundi: dona eis 
réquiem seripitérnam. 


Except in Masses for the dead, the priest, bowing and with 


joined hands, says: 


LORD Jesus Christ 
Who didst say to 
Thine apostles: Peace I 


OMINE Jesu Christe, 
qui dixísti Apóstolis 


tuis: pacem relinquo 


leave you, My peace I give vobis, pacem meam do vo- 
you: look not upon my sins, bis: ne respícias peccáta 
but upon the faith of Thy mea, sed fidem Ecclésie 
Church, and vouchsafe to tue; eámque secündum 
grant her peace and unity voluntátem tuam pacifi- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE KISS OF PEACE 789 
cáre et coadunáre dig- according to Thy will: Who 
néris. Qui vivis et regnas livest and reignest God, 
Deus, per ómnia secula world without end. Amen.’ 


Seculórum. Amen, 


In Masses for the dead, the kiss of peace, ordinarily given 
here, is omitted; the priest continues as follows: 


OMINE Jesu Christe, 

Fili Dei vivi,.qui ex 
voluntáte Patris cooper- 
ante Spíritu Sancto, per 
mortem tuam mundum 
vivificásti: líbera me per 
hoc sacrosánetum Corpus 
et Sánguinem tuum ab 
ómnibus iniquitátibus 
meis et univérsis malis: et 
fac me tuis semper in- 
herére mandátis: et a te 
nunquam  separári per- 
mittas: qui.cum eódem 
Deo Patre et Spíritu Sanc- 
to vivis et regnas Deus 
in secula secul6rum. 

Amen. E 


ERCÉPTIO Córporis 
f tuij Dómine Jesu 
Christe, quod ego indígnus 
sümeré présümo, non 
mihi provéniat in judí- 
cium et condemnatiónem: 
sed pro tua pietáte prosit 


LORD Jesus Christ, 

Son of the living God, 
Who, according to the will 
of the Father, through the 
co-operation of the. Holy 
Ghost, hast by Thy death 
given life to the world: de- 
liver me by this Thy most 
Sacred Body and Blood from 
all my iniquities, and from 
every evil; make me always 
cleave to Thy command- 
ments, and never suffer me 
to be separated from Thee, 
Who with the same God, 
the Father and the Holy 
Ghost, livest and reignest 
God, world without end. 
Amen. B 


ET not the partaking 

A. of Thy Body, O Lord 
Jesus Christ, which I, all 
unworthy, presume to: re- 
ceive, turn to my judgment 
and condemnation; but 
through Thy loving kind- 


iHere at Solemn High Mass the Kiss of Peace is given. 
During the previous prayer the deacon has been kneeling 
at the right of the priest: he now rises, and both he and the 
priest. kiss the altar. Formerly the priest kissed the Blessed 
Sacrament itself. The deacon by an inclination salutes the 
priest, who places his hands upon the shoulders of the 
deacon, bends forward over his right shoulder, and says, 
“Paz: tecum”—“peace be to. thee?” The deacon replies, “Et 
cum spiritu tuo” and after having again saluted the priest 
by an inclination, which is acknowledged in like manner, 
he imparts the kiss of peace to the subdeacon in the manner 
in which he himselj received it. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


790 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


ness may it be to me a safe- mihi ad tutaméntum men- 
guard and remedy for soul tis et cOrporis, et ad 
and body; Who, with God medélam  percipiéndam. 
the Father, in the unity of Qui vivis et regnas cum 
the Holy Ghost, livest and Deo Patre in unitate 
reignest, God, world with- Spiritus Sancti Deus, per 
out end. Amen. pony secula seculórum. 
en. 


At the Communion 
The priest genuflects, rises and says: 


I WILL take the bread ANEM celéstem ac- 
of heaven, and will call -— cípiam et nomen Dó- 
upon the name of the Lord. mini invocábo. 


Taking the Sacred Host with his left hand the priest 
strikes his breast three times, saying (here the bell is rung): 


ORD, I am not worthy ÓMINE, non sum 

that Thou shouldst dignus ut intres sub 
enter under my roof; but tectum meum: sed tan- 
only say the word, and my tum dic verbo, et saná- 
Soul shall be healed. bitur ánima mea. 


2 
d 
H 
c 


Tae “PRIEST'S COMMUNION.” 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE COMMUNION 


791 


Holding the Sacred Host in his right hand the priest 
makes the sign of the cross with it and says: 


ORPUS Dómini nos- 

tri Jesu Christi cus- 
tódiat ánimam meam in 
vitam ætérnam. Amen. 


AY the Body of Our 

Lord Jesus Christ 

keep my soul unto life ever- 
lasting. Amen. 


The priest receives Holy Communion and after a brief 


meditation continues: 


UID retribuam Dó- 

mino pro ómnibus 
quae retribuit mihi? Cáli- 
cem  salutáris accípiam, 
et nomen Dómini invocá- 
bo. Laudans invocábo 
Dóminum, et ab inimícis 
meis salvus ero. 


HAT shall I render 

unto the Lord for all 
the things that He hath 
rendered unto me? I will 
take the chalice of salva- 
tion and will call upon the 
name of the Lord. With 
high praises will I call upon 
the Lord, and I shall be 
saved from all mine ene- 
mies. 


The priest takes the chalice in his right hand and makes 


the sign of tbe cross, saying: 


ANGUIS Dómini nos- 

tri Jesu Christi cus- 
tódiat ánimam meam in 
vitam extérnam. Amen. 


AY the Blood of Our 

Lord Jesus Christ 

keep my soul unto life ever- 
lasting. Amen. 


Here Holy Communion is administered to those of the faithful 


who desire to receive It. In the name of the communicants who 
kneel at the sanctuary rails the acolytes recite the Confiteor as 
found on page 758, the priest responding with the Misereator and 
the Indulgentiam. Facing the people with the Ciborium and 
holding up one of the Sacred Particles before the communicants 
the priest says: 


CCE Agnus Dei, ecce 
Qui tollit peccata 
mundi. 


EHOLD the Lamb of God, 
ehold Him who taketh 
away the sins of the world. 
Then he says three times: 


OMINE, non sum ORD, Iam not worthy that 
dignus, ut intres sub Thou shouldst enter under 
tectum meum: sed tantum my roof, but only say the word 


dic verbo, et sanabitur and my soul shall be healed. 
anima mea: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


792 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


He then goes to the communion rails and gives Holy Commun- 
ion to each communicant saying: . 
AY the. Body of Our ORPUS Domini nostri 
Lord Jesus Christ keep Jesu Christi custodiat 
your soul unto life everlasting. animam tuam in vitam ae- 
Amen. ternam, Amen. 


When all have communicated he returns to the altar and 
replaces the ciborium in the tabernacle. The priest receives wine 
in the chalice and says: 

NTOa pure heart, O Lord, UOD ore sumpsimus 

may we receive the heav- Domine, pura mente 
enly food which haspassed our capiamus: et de munere 
lips; bestowed upon us intime, temporali fiat nobis reme- 
may it be the healing of our dium sempiternum. ` 
souls for eternity. 

The priest goes to the Epistle side and while the server pours 
wine and water over his fingers, he says: 

D AY Thy Body, O Lord, ORPUS tuum, Do- 

LA^ which I have received, mine,quod sumpsi, et 
and Thy.Blood which I have Sanguis, quem potavi, 
drunk cleave to mine inmost adhaereat visceribus meis: 
parts: and do Thou grant that et praesta, ut. in me non ` 
no stain of sin remain in me, remaneatscelerum macula, 
whom pure and holy mysteries quem pura etsancta refece- 
haverefreshed: Wholivestand runt sacramenta. Qui vivis 
reignest world without end. et regnas in saecula saecu- 
Amen.' lorum. Amen.' 


The Communion 
The priest at the Epistle side recites the Communion , which 


will be found in its proper place in each Mass, then returning to 
the middle of the altar, he faces the people, saying: 


P The Lord be with you. P Dominus vobiscum. 
R. And with thy spirit. . R.Et cum spiritu tuo. 


P.Let us pray. |... POremus. 


‘At Solemn High Mass the subdeacon takes the chalice from 
the celebrani for cleansing. Then he arranges the coverings and 
removes the chalice to the credence table. 

http://ccwatershed.org 


THE POSTCOMMUNION 4798 


* The Postcommunion 


Going to the Epistle side he says the prayers called Post- 
communions. They correspond to the Prayers and Secrets 
already read, and are to be found in their proper places m 
the Missal.. 


Then the priest going back to the middle kisses the altar, 
&nd turning toward the people says: 


P. Dóminus vobiscum. P. The Lord be with you. 
HB. Et cum spíritu tuo. RY. And with thy spirit. 


Should the Mass be one in which the Gloria in excelsis 
is omitted, then, in place of Ite, missa est, the priest says or 
sings Benedicamus Domino (Let us bless the Lord). But. in 
Masses for the dead is substituted the prayer, Requiescant 
Am pace (May they rest in peace), to which is answered, 

en. 


P. Ite, missa est. P. Go, the Mass is 
ended.” mn 
H'. Deo grátias. RY. Thanks be to God. 
- Bowing down over the altar, the priest prays: i 
LÁCEAT tibi sancta AY the lowly homage 
Trinitas, obséquium of my service be 


Servitütis.mex; et presta, pleasing to Thee, O most 
ut sacrificium, quod óculis holy Trinity: and do Thou 
tue majestátis indígnus grant that the sacrifice 
Óbtuli, tibi sit acceptábile, which I, all unworthy, have 
mihíque et ómnibus, pro offered up in the sight of 
quibus illud óbtuli, sit, te Thy majesty, may be ac- 
miseránte, propitiábile. ceptable to Thee, and, be- 
Per Christum Dóminum cause of Thy loving-kind- 
nostrum. Amen. ness, may avail to atone to 

Thee for myself and for all 
those for whom I have offered it up. Through Christ 
our Lord. Amen. 


The Blessing 


In Masses for the dead the blessing is not given. 


The priest kisses the altar, and at the word “Pater” turns 
toward the people, and blesses them, saying: 


ENEDICAT vos om- AY almighty God, the 
ynipotens Deus, Father, and the Son, 


— 


‘At Solemn High Mass the Ite, missa est or Benedicamus 
Domino is chanted by the deacon. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


794 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


THE “BLESSING.” 


x and the Holy Ghost, bless Pater, et Filius, m et 
you. Spiritus Sanctus. 
BY. Amen. BY. Amen. 


The priest now goes to the Gospel side of the altar; he 
makes the sign of the cross. first upon the altar, and then 
upon his forehead, lips, and heart, and reads a passage from 
the Gospel—as a rule, the first verses of that according to 
St. John, as below. But if because of the occurrence of a 
festival day, the Gospel proper to a Sunday has not been 
read in its proper place, it must be read here. In this case 
he signs the book, not the altar. 


[stand 


P. The Lord be with you. pP. Dóminus vobiscum. 

B. And with thy spirit. ly. Et cum spíritu tuo. 

P. The beginning of the p, Initium sancti Eyan- 
holy Gospel, according to gélii secándum Joánnem. 
St. John. 

y. Glory be to Thee, O y. Gloria tibi Dómine 
Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


C-— ae 


9: 


THE LAST GOSPEL 798 


The Last Gospel 


N PRINCÍPIO erat 
Verbum, et Verbum 
erat apud Deum, €t Deus 
erat Verbum. ke erat in 


principio apud Deum. 
‘Omnia per ipsum facta 


Sunt, et sine ipso factum 


est nihil quod factum est. 


In ipso vita erat, et vita 
erat lux hóminum: et lux 
in ténebris lucet, et téne- 
bre eam non compre- 
hendérunt. Fuit homo 
missus a Deo, cui nomen 
erat Joánnes. Hic venit 
in testimónium, ut testi- 
mónium perhibéret de 
lümine, ut omnes créder- 
ent per illum. Non erat ille 
lux, sed ut testimónium 
perhibéret de lümine. Erat 
lux vera. que illüminat 
omnem hóminem venién- 
tem in hunc mundum. In 
mundo erat, et mundus 
per ipsum factus est, et 
mundus eum non cog- 
nóvit. In própria venit, 
et sui eum non recepérunt. 
Quotquot autem recepé- 
runt eum, dedit eis potes- 
tátem filios Dei fíeri, his 
qui credunt in nómine 
ejus. Qui non ex san- 
guinibus, neque ex volun- 
táte carnis, neque ex vol- 
untáte viri, sed ex Deo 
nati sunt. : 


N THE beginning was 

the Word, and tbe 
Word was with God, and 
the Word was God. The 
Same was in the beginning 
witb God. All things were 
made by Him, and without 
Him was made nothing that 
was made. In Him was life, 
and the life was the light of 
men: and the light shineth 
in darkness, and the dark- 
ness did not comprehend 
it. There was a man sent 
from God, whose name was 
John. This man came for a 
witness to give testimony 
of the light, that all men 
might believe through him. 
He was not the light, but 
was to give testimony of the 
light. That was the true 
light which enlighteneth 
every man that cometh into 
this world. He was in the 
world, and the world was 
made by Him, and the 
world knew Him not. He 
came unto His own, and His 
own received Him not. But 
as many as received Him, 
to them He gave power to 
become the sons of God: to 
them that believe in His 
name: who are born, not 
of blood, nor of the will of 
the fiesh, nor of the will o 
man, but of God. 


Here all genuflect.. 


Et Verbum caro factum 
est, et habitávit in nobis 
et vidimus glóriam ejüs, 
glóriam quasi unigéniti a 
Patre, plenum gratia et 
veritátis. ` 

BH, Deo iin 


And the Word was made 
flesh, and dwelt among us, 
and we saw His glory, the 
glory as of the only-begot- 
ten of the Father, full of 


` Stace and truth. 


H Thanks be to God, . 


hinia rshed.org 


796 THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS 


oie ts 
' Kneel 


with the people the pra 


Prapers.atter Low Mass 


s which follow. 


After Low Mass ne praya heh d at the altar steps, says 


“Hail Mary,” three times, 


Then, 


Salve Ri eina 


AIL, holy Queen, 
Mother of mercy, 

hail, our life, our sweetness, 
and our hope! To thee do 
we cry, poor banished chil- 
dren of Eve, to thee do we 
send up our sighs, mourn- 
ing and weeping in this 
valley of tears. Turn then, 
most gracious advocate, 
thine eyes of mercy towards 
us; and after this our exile 
Show unto us the blessed 
fruit of thy womb, Jesus. 
O clement, O loving, (6) 
sweet virgin Mary. 

V . Pray for us, O holy 
Mother of God. 

R.That we may be 
worthy of tbe promises of 
"Christ. 


Let us pray 


GOD, our refuge and 

our strength, look 
‘down with favor upon Thy 
people who cry to Thee; 
and through the interces- 
sion of the glorious and im- 
maculate Virgin Mary, 
Mother of God, of her 
Spouse, blessed Joseph, of 
‘Thy holy apostles, Peter 
and Paul, and all the saints, 
mercifully and graciously 
‘hear the prayers which we 
‘pour forth to Thee for the 
conversion of sinners and 
for the liberty and exalta- 
tion of holy mother Church, 
"Through the same Christ 
‘our Lord, Amen, . 


ALVE Regina Mater 
i misericórdiæ, vita, 
dulcédo, et spes nostra 
salve. Ad te clamámus 
éxsules, fílii Heve. Ad te 
suspirámus geméntes, et 
flentes in hac lacrymárum 
valle. Eia ergo advocáta 
nostra, illos tuos miseri- 
córdes óculos ad nos con- 
vérte. Et Jesum bene- 
dictum fructum ventris 
tui, nobis post hoc exsí- 
lium osténde. O clemens, 
O pia, O dulcis Virgo 
María. ; 
¥. Ora pro nobis sancta 
Dei Génitrix. 
8. Ut digni efficiamur 
promissiónibus Christi. 


Orémus 


DE refugium ' nos- 
trum et virtus, pop- 
ulum ad te clamántem 
propítius réspice; et in- 
tercedénte gloriósa et im- 
maculáta Vírgine Dei 
Genitrice María, cum 
beáto Josépho ejus Spon- 
So, ac beátis Apóstolis tuis 
Petro et Paulo, et ómni- 
bus Sanctis, quas pro con- 
versióne peccatórum, pro 
libertóte et  exaltatióne 
sancte Matris Ecclésig, 
preces effündimus, misé- 
ricors et benignus .exáudi. 
Per ,eümdem Christum 
Dóminum nostrum. 
Amen. 


http://ccwatershed.org | 


— Mm 


PRAYERS AFTER MASS 


Sancte Michael] Arch- 
‘angele, 
pralio; , contra nequitiam 
et insidias- diáboli ésto 
presidium. Imperet illi 
Deus; supplices depreca- 
mur: tuque, Princeps milí- 
tie celéstis, Sátanam ali- 
ósque Spíritus malígnos, 
qui ad perditiónem ani- 
márum pervagantur in 
mundo, divína virtüte in 
inférnum detrüde. Amen. 


defénde nos in. 


797 


St. Michael, the arch- 
angel, defend us in battle, 
be our protection against 


the malice and snares of 
-the devil. We humbly be- 


seech God to command 
him, and do thou, O prince 
of the heavenly host, by the 
divine power thrust into 
hell Satan.and the other 
evil spirits who roam 
through the world seeking 
the ruin of souls. Amen. 


Indulgence of 10 years.—S. C. Penit., May 30, 1934. 
Ejaculation after lass 


Cor Jesu sacratissimum, 
.miserére nobis. 


Most sacred Heart of 
Jesus, have mercy on us! 


(Three times, alternately with the priest. ) 


Indulgence of seven years 
X, June 17, 1904. 

Stand and remain in the 
the sacristy. 


and seven quarantines —Pius 


pew unti priest has. entered 


http://ccwatershed.org 


The Prefaces ano tbe Proper 
Communicantes for Certain Feasts 
and Times 


‘dn this section the Sanctus is included after each Preface, 
anà the reference then is to the beginning -of the Canon in 
the Ordinary of the Mass. page 777. However, when the Com- 
Municantes is different, this part of the Canon also is included 
and at its conclusion the reference is then to the continuatioh 
2f the Canon as per page indicated. k : : 


1. Preface and Proper (onununicantes of the 
Nativity 


On Christmas and throughout its Octave the following 
Preface with Communicantes is said. After the Octave and 
until Epiphany, as well as on the feasts of the Holy Name, the 
Purification of our Blessed Lady, Corpus Christi and its Octave 
and the Transfiguration of Our Lord, the following Preface 


without the Communicantes is said: 


Y. The Lord be with you. 

R And with thy spirit. 

V. Lift up your hearts. 

B. We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 

Y. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our God. 

W . It is meet and just. 


r rs truly meet and just, 

right and available to sal- 
vation, that we should always 
and in all places give thanks 
to Thee, O holy Lord, Father 
almighty, eternal God, because 
by ihe mystery of the Word 
made flesh, from Thy bright- 
ness a new light hath risen to 
shine on the eyes of our souls, 
in order that, God becoming 
visible to us, we may be borne 
upward to the love of things 
invisible. And therefore with 
the angels and archangels, 
with the dominions and pow- 
ers, With all the hosts of the 
heavenly army, we sing of Thy 
glory without end saying: 


Y. Dóminus vobíscum. 

Ij . Et cum spíritu tuo. 

Y. Sursum corda. 

R. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


y. Grátias agamus Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
IH . Dignum et justum est. 


Ww dignum et justum 
est, equum et salutáre, 
nos tibi semper, et ubíque 
grátias ágere: Dómine sancte, 
Pater omnipotens,  :térne 
Deus: Quia per incarnata 
verbi mystérium, nova men- 
tis nostre óculis lux tue 
claritátis infülsit: ut dum 
visibiliter Deum cognóscimus, 
per hunc in invisibilium 
amórem rapiámur. Et ideo 
cum Angelis et Archángelis, 
cum Thronis et Dominatióni- 
bus, cumque omni milítia 
celéstis exércitus, hymnum 
glórie tue cánimus, sine fine 
dicéntes: 


798 


http://ccwatershed.org 


p Ar 


PREFACE OF 


Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, 
Dóminus Deus Sábaoth. Pleni 
Sunt cceli et terra glória tua, 
Hosánna in excélsis. Bene- 
dictus qui venit in nómine 
Dómini, Hosanna in éxcélsis. 


THE NATIVITY 


795 


Holy, holy, holy Lord God of 
hosts. The heavens and the 
earth are full of Thy glory. 
Hosanna in the highest. 
Blessed is He that cometh in 
the name of the Lord. Hosanna 
in the highest. ` 


The Beginning of the Canon 


Te ígitur, clementíssime 
Paier, per Jesum Christum 
Fílium tuum Dóminum nos- 
irum süpplices rogámus, ac 
pétimus, uti accépta hábeas, 
et benedícas, hec WM dona, 
hec H4 münera, hec  sanc- 
ta sacrificia  illibáta. In 
primis, que tibi offérimus 
pro Ecclésia sancta, tua 
cathélica: quam  pacificáre, 
custodire, adunáre, et ré- 
gere dignéris, toto orbe ter- 
rarum: una cum fámulo tuo 
Papa nostro N., et Antistite 
nostro N., et ómnibus ortho- 
dóxis atque cathélice, et apos- 
tólicz fídel cultóribus. 

Meménto Dómine, famuló- 
rum famularümque tuárum 
N. et N. et ómnium circum- 
stántium quorum tibi fides 
cognita est, et nota devótio, 
pro quibus tibi offérimus: vel 
qui tibi ófferunt hoc sacrifi- 
cium laudis, pro se, suisque 
ómnibus: pro redemptióne 
animarum suárum, pro spe 
salútis, et incolumitátis sux: 
tibique reddunt vota sua ae- 
térno Deo, vivo et vero, 


Wherefore, we humbly pray 
and beseech Thee, most merci- 
ful Father, through Jesus 
Christ, Thy Son, our Lord, to 
receive and to bless these tB 
gifts, these presents, these 
f holy unspotted sacrifices, 
which we offer. up to Thee, in 
the first place, for Thy holy 
Catholic Church, that it may 
please Thee to grant her peace, 
to guard, unite, and guide her 
throughout the world; as also 
for Thy servant N., our Pope, 
and N., our bishop, and for all 
who are orthodox in belief and 
who profess the catholic and 
apostolic faith. 

Be mindful, O Lord, of 
Thy servants N. and N. And 
of all here present, whose faith 
and devotion are known to 
Thee, for whom we offer, or 
who offer up to Thee, this sac- 
rifice of praise, for themselves, 
their families, and their 
friends, for the salvation of 
their souls, and the health and 
welfare they hope for, and who 
now pay their vows to Thee, 
God eternal, living, and true. 


After the Octave of Christmas this special Communicantes ta 


not said. 


Continue the Canon at page 778. 


The Communicantes 


. Communicantes, et diem 
(noctem) sacratissimum 
celebrántes, quo beatae Marie 


Having communion in and 
celebrating the most sacred 
day (at the Christmas mid- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


800 


night Mass only, night) on 
which the stainless virginity of 
blessed Mary brought forth: the 
Saviour of the world; venerat- 
ing the memory in the first 
place of the same glorious 
Mary, ever a virgin, mother of 
the same Jesus Christ, our God 
and Lord, likewise of Thy 
blessed apostles and. martyrs, 
Peter and Paul, Andrew, James, 
John, Thomas, James, Philip, 
Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon, 
and Thaddeus; of Linus, Cle- 
tus, Clement, Xystus, Cornel- 
ius, Cyprian, ‘Lawrence, Chry- 
sogonus, John and Paul, Cos- 
mas and Damian, and of all 
Thy saints: for the sake of 
whose merits and prayers do 
Thou grant that in all things 
we may be defended by the 
help of Thy protection. 
Through the same Christ our 
Lord. Amen. 


"Continuation of the Canon, 


2. Preface and Proper 


SPECIAL PREFACES 


intemeráta virginitas huic 
mundo édidit Salvatérem: 
sed et memoriam venerántes, 
in primis ejüsdem glorióse 
semper Virginis Mariæ, geni- 
trícis ejüsdem Dei et Dómini 
nostri Jesu Christi: sed et 
beatórum  Apostolórum ac 
Mártyrum .tuórum, Petri et 
Pauli, Andrée, Jacóbi, Joán- 
nis, Thome, Jacóbi, Philíppi, 
Bartholomai, Matthei, Simó- 
nis et Thaddzi: Lini, Cleti, 
Cleméntis, Xysti, Cornélii, Cy- 
priáni, Lauréntii, Chrysógoni, 
Joánnis et Pauli, Cosme et 
Damiani et ómnium Sanctó- 
rum tuórum: quorum méritis 
precibüsque concédis ut in 
ómnibus protectionis tuz mu- 
niámur auxilio. Per eümdem 
Christum Dóminum nostrum. 
Amen, 


di the Hanc igitur, page 778. 


Communicantes of the 


Epiphany 
On Epiphany and during its Octave 


The Lord be with you. 
And' with thy spirit. 

* Lift up your hearts. 

. We have lifted them up 
he Lord. 

Let us give thanks to the 
our God. 

. It is meet and just. 


pibe 


T rs truly meet and just, 
T right and salutary, that 
we should always, and in all 
places, give thanks to Thee, O 
holy Lord, Father almighty, 
eternal God: because Thine 
only-begotten Son appearing 


Y. Dóminus vobiscum. 
FY. Et cum spíritu tuo. 
‘y. Sursum corda. 
. B. ‘Habémus 2d Dóminum. 


¥. Grátias agámus Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
Hf. Dignum et justum est. 


ERE dignum et justum 

V est, 2quum et salutáre, 
nos tibi semper, et ubíque grá- 
tias Agere: Dómine sancte, 
Pater  omnípotens, etérne 
Deus: Quia, cum Unigénitus 
tuus in substantia nostre 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PREFACE OP THE EPIPHANY 


mortalitátisappáruit, nova nos 
immortalitátis suæ luce repa- 
rávit. Et ídeo cum Angelis et 
Archángelis, cum Thronis et 
Dominatiónibus, cumque omni 
militia celéstis  exércitus, 
hymnum glórie tue cani- 
mus, sine fine dicéntes: 


Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, 
Dóminus Deus Sábaoth. Pleni 
sunt coli et terra, glória tua. 
Hosanna in excélsis. Benedíc- 
tus qui venit in nómine Dó- 
mini. Hosánna in excélsis. 


801 


jn our mortal nature hath re- 
stored it by the sheddibg upon 
us of that new and immortaj 
light which is His very own. 
And therefore with the angelz 
and archangels, with the 
thrones and dominations and 
with all the array of the heave 
enly host, we sing 2 hymn ta 
Thy glory and unceasingly re- 
peat: 

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God 
of Hosts. The heavens and the 
earth are full of Thy glory. 
Hosanna in the. highest. 
Blessed is He who cometh in 
the name of the Lord. Hosanna 


. in the highest. 


The Beginning of the Canon 


Te igitur, clementissime 
Pater, per Jesum Christum 
Fílium tuum Dómintüm nos- 
trum, süpplices rogamus, ac 
pétimus, uti accépta hábeas, 
et benedicas, hsc & dona, 
hec & münera, hac m sanc- 
ta sacrificia illibáta. In pri- 
mis, que tibi offérimus pro 
Ecclésia sancta tua cathólica: 
quam  pacificáre, custodire, 
&dunáre, et régere dignéris 
toto orbe terrárum; una cum 
fámulo tuo Papa nostro N., et 
Antistite nostro N., et ómni- 
bus orthodóxis atque .cathó- 
lice, et apostélice fidel cultó- 
ribus. 


Meménto, Dómine, famuló- 
rum famularümque tuárum w. 
et w. et ómnium circumstán- 
tium, quorum tibi fides cogní- 
ta est, et nota devótio, pro 
quibus tibi offérimus: vel qui 
tibi ófferunt hoc sacrifícium 
laudis, pro se, suísque ómni- 


Wherefore, we humbly pray 
and beseech Thee, most merci- 
ful Father, through Jesus 
Christ Thy Son, our Lord, to 
receive and to bless these & 
gifts, these 9M presents, these 
Hm holy unspotted sacrifices, 
which we offer up to Thee, in 
the first place, for Thy holy 
Catholic Church, that it may 
please 'Thee to grant her peace, 
to guard, unite, and guide her, 
throughout the world; as also 
for Thy servant N., our Pope, 
and N., our Bishop, and for 
all who are orthodox in belief 
and who profess the catholic 
and apostolic faith. 


Be mindful, O Lord, of Thy 
servants, N. and N., and of all 
here present, whose faith and 
devotion are known to Thee, 
for whom we offer, or who offer 
up to Thee, this sacrifice of 
praise, for themselves, their 
families, and their friends, for 


http://ccwatershed.org 


802 


the salvation of their souls and 
ihe health and welfare they 
hope for, and who now pay 
their vows to Thee, God etern- 
&), living, and true. 


SPECIAL PREFACES 


bus: pro redemptióne animá- 
rum suárum, pro spe salttis, 
et incolumitátis sue: tibique 
reddunt vota sua aetérno Deo, 
vivo et vero. 


The Communicates 


Having communion in and 
celebrating the most sacred 
day on which Thine only-be- 
gotten Son, co-eternal with 
Thee in Thy glory, in very 
truth: visibly appeared in our 
bodily flesh; venerating the 
memory in the first place of the 
glorious Mary, ever a virgin, 
mother of the same Jesus 
Christ our God and Lord, like- 
wise of Thy blessed apostles 
and martyrs, Peter and Paul, 
Andrew, James, John, Thomas, 
James, Philip, Bartholomew, 
Matthew, Simon, and Thad- 
deus; of Linus, Cletus, Clem- 
ent, Xystus, Cornelius, Cyprian, 
Lawrence, Chrysogonus, John 
and Paul, Cosmas and Damian, 
and of all Thy saints: for the 
sake of whose merits and pray- 
ers do Thou grant that in all 
things we may be defended by 
the help of Thy protection. 
Through the same Christ our 
Lord. Amen, 


Continuation of the Canon, 


Communicantes, et diem 
sacratissimum celebrantes, 
quo Unigénitus tuus in tua te- 
cum glória coztérnus, in veri- 
tate carnis nostre visibíliter 
corporalis appáruit: sed et 
memóriam venerántes, in pri- 
mis glorióse semper Virginis 
Marie, Genitricis ejüsdem 
Dei et Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi: sed et beatórum Apo- 
Sstolórum ac Mártyrum tuó- 
rum, Petri et Pauli, Andrée, 
Jacobi, Joánnis, Thome, Ja- 
cóbi, Philippi, Bartholomzi, 
Matthaei, Simónis et Thad- 
dæi: Lini, Cleti, Cleméntis, 
Xyst,  Cornélii, 'Cypriáni, 
Lauréntii, Chrységoni, Joán- 
nis et Pauli, Cosme et Damiá- 
ni: et ómnium Sanctérum 
tuórum; quorum méritis pre- 
cibüsque concédas, ut in óm- 
nibus protectiónis tue muniá- 
mur auxílio. Per eümdem 
Christum Dóminum nostrum, 
Amen. 


at Hanc igitur, page 778. 


3. Preface of Lent 


On Sundays and week-days from Ash Wednesday till the 


Saturday before Passion Sunday. 


Y. The Lord be with you. 

R. And with thy spirit. 

Y. Lift up your hearts. 

BY. We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 

F. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our God. 

W. It is meet and just. 


y. Dóminus vobíscum. 

A. Et cum spíritu tuo. 

y. Sursum corda. 

BY. Habémus ad Dóminum, 


y. Grátias agámus Dómino 
Deo nostro, 
FY. Dignum et justum est. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PREFACE OP THE HOLY CROSS 803 


ERE dignum et justum 
V est, equum et salutáre, 
nos tibi semper et ubique grá- 
tias ágere: Dómine sancte, 
Pater omnipotens, ztérne De- 
us: Qui corporáli jejünio vitia 
cómprimis mentem  élevas, 
virtütem largiris et premia: 
per Christum Dóminum nos- 
trum. Per quem majestátem 
tuam laudant Angeli, adórant 
Dominatiónes, tremunt Pote- 
states, Celi, celoramque Vir- 
tates, ac beáta Séraphim, só- 
cia exsultatióne concélebrant. 
Cum quibus et nostras voces, 
ut admitti jübeas, deprecá- 
mur, süpplici confessióne di- 
céntes: 


Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus 
Dóminus Deus Sábaoth. Pleni 
sunt celi et terra glória tua. 
Hosánna in excélsis. Benedíc- 
tus qui venit in nómine Dó- 
mini, Hosánna in excelsis. 


I Is truly meet and just, 

right and profitable, for us, 
at all times, and in all places, 
to give thanks to Thee, O Lord, 
the holy One, the Father al- 
mighty, the everlasting God: 
Who on those who chastise 
their bodies by fasting dost be- 
stow the restraining of evil 
passions, uplifting of heart, 
and the enjoying. of virtue with 
its rewerd. Through Christ our 
Lord. Through Whom the 
angels praise, the dominations 
adore, the powers, trembling 
with awe, worship Thy maj- 
esty: which the heavens, and 
the forces of heaven, together 
with the blessed seraphim, joy- 
fully do magnify. And do Thou 
command that it be permitted 
to our lowliness to join with 
them in confessing Thee and 
unceasingly to repeat: 

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God 
of Hosts. The heavens and the 
earth are full of Thy glory. 
Hosanna in the highest. 
Blessed is He who cometh in 
the name of the Lord. Hosanna 
in the highest, 


Beginning of the Canon, Te igitur, page 777. 


4. Preface of the Holy Cross 


From Passion Sunday to Maundy Thursday and also on the 
feasts of the Holy Cross, Of the Passion, and of the Precious 


Blood. 


Y. Dóminus vobiscum. 
B. Et cum spíritu tuo. 

Y. Sursum corda. 

BY. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


Y. Grátias agámus Dómino 
Deo. nostro. 
H. Dignum et justum est. 


Y. The Lord be with you. 

RY. And with thy spirit. 

y. Lift up your hearts. 

H. We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 

JV. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our God. 

Hl. It is meet and just. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


806 SPECIAL PREFACES 


T 1S truly meet and just, 
right and profitable for us, 
at ail times, and in all places, 
to give thanks to Thee, O holy 
Lord, Father almighty, eternal 
God: Who didst establish the 
salvation of mankind in the 
wood of the cross, that from 
whence death came into the 
World, thence a new life might 
Spring, and that he who by a 
tree overcame, by a tree might 
be overthrown. Through Christ 
our Lord: Through Whom the 
angels praise, the dominations 
adore, the powers, trembling 
with awe, worship Thy majesty, 
which the heavens, and the 
forces of heaven, together with 
the blessed seraphim joyfully 
do magnify. And do Thou com- 
mand that it be permitted to 
our lowliness to join with them 
an confessing Thee and un- 
ceasingly to repeat: 

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God 
of Hosts. The heavens and the 
earth are full of Thy glory. 
Hosanna in the highest. 
Blessed is He that cometh in 
the Name of the Lord. Hosanna 
1n the highest, 


ERE dignum et justum 

est, 2quum et salutáre, 
nos tibi semper, et ubíque 
grátias ágere: Dómine sancte, 
Pater  omnípotens  stiérne 
Deus: Qui salitem humápi 
géneris in ligno Crucis consti- 
tuísti: ut unde mors oriebá- 
tur, inde vita resürgeret: et 
qui in ligno quoque vincébat, 
in ligno quoque vincerétur: 
per Christum Dóminum nos- 
trum. Per quem majestátem 
tuam laudant Angeli, adórant 
Dominatiónes, tremunt Potes- 
tates. Cal, cælorúmque Vir- 
tütes, ac beáta Seráphim, só- 
cia, exsultatióne concélebrant. 
Cum quibus et nostras voces, 
ut admitti jübeas, deprecá- 
mur, süpplici confessióne di- 
céntes: 


Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, 
Dóminus Deus Sábaoth. Pleni 
sunt celi et terra glória tua. 
Hosanna in excélsis. Benedic- 
tus qui venit in nómine Dó- 
mini. Hosanna in excélsis. 


Beginning of the Canon, Te igitur, page 777. 


B. Preface and Proper Communicantes for Caster 


From Holy Saturday to the Ascension. 


On Easter Sunday 


til following Saturday, inclusive: ; 
ton this day), but on Holy Saturday, for the word die (day) 


substitute Nocte (night). 


y. The Lord be with you. 

W. And with thy spirit. 

FJ. Lift up your hearts. 

RY. We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 

F. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our God. 

Hf, It is meet and just. 


y. Dóminus vobiscum. 

Hf. Et cum spíritu tuo, 

y. Sursum corda, 

RY. Habémus ad Dóminum, 


FX. Grátias agámus Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
BH. Dignum et justum est. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PREFACE 


RE dignum et justum 

est, equum et salutáre: 
Te quidem, Dómine, omni 
Aémpore, sed in hac potíssi- 
mum die (vel;.in hoc. potissi- 
mum) gloriésius predicare, 
cum Pascha nostrum immolá- 
tus est Christus. Ipse enim 
verus-est Agnus, qui ábstulit 
peccáta mundi. Qui mortem 
nostram moriéndo destruxit, 
et vitam resurgéndo reparávit. 
Et ídeo cum Angelis et Ar- 
chángelis, cum Thronis, et 
Dominatiónibus, cumque om- 
ni militia czeléstis exércitus, 
hymnum glórie tue cánimus, 
sine fine. dicéntes: 


`. Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, : 


Dómine Deus Sábaoth. Pleni 
sunt: cceli et terra glória tua. 
Hosánna in excélsis. Benedíc- 
tus qui venit in nómine Dó- 
mini. Hosánna in excélsis. 


OF EASTER 


805 
IS truly meet and just, 

I Tight and profitable, to ex- 
ol Thee indeed at all times, O 
Lord, but: chiefiy with highest 
praise to magnify Thee on this 


‘day (in these days) on. which 


for us was sacrificed Christ, 


our pasch, For He is the true 


Lamb Who hath. taken away 


the sins of the world; Who by 


dying Himself hath destroyed 
our death; and by rising again 
hath bestowed a new life on 
us. And therefore with the 
angels and archangels, with 
the thrones and dominations, 


and with all the array of the 


heavenly host we sing a hymn 
to Thy glory and unceasingly 
repeat: - 

Holy, holy, ‘holy, Lord God 
of hosts. Heaven and earth 
are full of Thy. glory. Hosanna 
in the highest. Blessed is He 


‘that cometh in the name of the 


Lord, Hosanna in the Pena: 


The Beginning of the Canon 


Te ígitur, clementissime 
Pater, per Jesum Christum 
Filium tuum Dóminum nos- 
trum, súpplices rogámus, ac 
pétimus, uti accépta hábeas, 
et benedícas, hec ym dona, 
hec m muünera, hee ym sancta 
sacrificia illibata, in primis 
que tibi offérimus pro Ecclé- 
sia tua sancta cathdlica: 
quam pacificáre, custodire, ad- 
unáre et régere dignéris toto 
orbe terrárum: una cum fá- 
mulo tuo Papa nostro N et 
Antistite nostro N et ómni- 
bus orthodóxis, atque cathóli- 
cæ et apostélice fidei cultó- 
ribus, 

Memento, Dómine, famuló- 
rum, famularimque tuárum, 


Wherefore, we ‘humbly pray 
and heseech Thee, most merci- 
ful Father, through Jesus 
Christ Thy Son, Our Lord, to 
receive and to bless these œ 


gifts, these im presents, these + 


holy unspotted sacrifices, which 
we offer up to Thee, in the first 
place, for Thy holy Catholic 
Church, that it may please 
Thee to grant her peace, to 
guard, unite, and guide her, 
throughout the world; as also 
for Thy servant yy, our Pope, 
and A. our Bishop, and for all 
who are orthodox in belief and 
who: ‘profess the catholic and 
apostolic faith: : 

Be mindful, O Lord, of Thy 
servants, p. and y., and of all 


http://ccwatershed.org 


806 


here present, whose faith and 
devotion are known to Thee, 
for whom we offer, or who offer 
up to Thee, this sacrifice of 
praise, for themselves, their 
families, and their friends, for 
the salvation of their souls and 
the health and welfare they 
hope for, and who now pay 
their vows to Thee, God 
eternal, living, and true. 


SPECIAL PREFACES 


N, et N. et ómnium circum- 
stantium, quorum tibi fides. 
cógnita est, et nota devótio, 
pro quibus tibi offérimus: vel 
qui tibi offerunt, hoc sacrifi- 
cium laudis, pro se, suisque 
ómnibus: pro redemptióne 
animárum suórum, pro spe 
Salütis et incolumitátis sue: 
tibique reddunt vota sua ætér- 
no Deo, vivo et vero. 


After the Octave of Easter, this special Communicantes is 
not said. Continue the Canon at page 778. 


The Communicantes 


Having communion in and 
celebrating the most sacred 
day of the resurrection of Our 
Lord Jesus Christ according to 
the flesh; venerating also the 
memory, first, of the glorious 
Mary, ever a virgin, mother of 
Jesus Christ, our God and our 
Lord: likewise of Thy blessed 
apostles and martyrs, Peter and 
Paul, Andrew, James, John, 
Thomas, James, Philip, Bar- 
tholomew, Matthew, Simon 
and Thaddeus; of Linus, Cle- 
tus, Clement, Sixtus, Cornelius, 
Cyprian, Lawrence, Chrysogo- 
nus, John and Paul, Cosmas 
and Damian, and of all Thy 
saints: for the sake of whose 
merits and prayers do Thou 
grant that in all things we 
may be defended by the help of 
Thy protection, Through the 
same Christ, our Lord. Amen, 


Communicantes et diem 
Sacratíssimum celebrántes 
Resurrectiónis Dómini nos- 
tri Jesu Christi secündum 
carnem: sed et memóriam 
venerántes, in primis glorió- 
se semper Virginis Mariæ, 
Genitricis ejüsdem Dei et Dó- 
mini nostri Jesu Christi: Sed 
et beatórum Apostolórum ac 
Martyrum tuórum, Petri et 
Pauli, Andrée, Jacóbi, Joán- 
nis, Thome, Jacóbi, Philippi, 
Bartholomei, Matthei, Simó- 
nis, et Thaddzi; Lini, Cleti, 
Cleméntis, Xysti, Cornéli 
Cypriani, Lauréntii, Chrysó- 
goni, Joánnis, et Pauli, Cos- 
me et Damiani, et ómnium 
Sanctórum tuórum: quorum 
méritas precibüsque concé- 
das, ut in ómnibus protec- 
tionis tue muniámur auxílio. 
Per eümdem Christum Dómi- 
num nostrum. Amen. ` 


Continuation of the Canon at the Hanc igitur, page 778, 
except during Easter week the Hanc igitur is as follows: 


Wherefore, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, graciously to receive 
this oblation which we Thy 
servants, and with us Thy 
whole family, make to Thee, 


Hanc ígitur oblatiónem ser- 
vitütis nostre, sed et cunctae 
familie tue, quam tibi of- 
férimus pro his quoque, quos 
regeneráre dignátus es ex 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PREFACE OF ASCENSION 


aqua, et Spíritu Sancto, trí- 
buens eis remissiónem ómni- 
um pecéatórum, quesumus, 
Dómine, ut placátus accípias: 
diésque. nostros in tua pace 
dispónas, atque ab etérna 
damnatióne nos éripi, et in 
electórum tuérum  jübeas 
grege. numerári Per Chris- 
tum’. Dóminum nostrum. 
Amen. 


80% 


offering it up in like manner 
for those also whom Thou hast 
been pleased to make to be 
born again of water and the 
Holy Ghost. Grant to them the 
forgiveness of all their sins; 
do Thou establish our days in 
‘Thy peace; nor suffer that we 
be condemned forever, but 
rather command that we be 
numbered in the flock of Thine 
elect. Through Christ our Lord. 
Amen. 


‘Continuation of the Canon at the ‘Quam oblationem, 


page 779. 


6. Preface for the Ascension 


From Ascension Day to ihe Vigil of Pentecost ezclusive. 


FJ. Dóminus vobíscum. 
Hf. Et cum spíritu tuo. 
FJ. Sursum corda. 

W. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


¥. Grátias agámus Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
_#. Dignum et justum est. 


ERE dignum et justum 
. est, equum et salutáre, 
nos tibi semper, et ubíque grá- 
tias Agere: Dómine sancte, 
Pater  omnípotens, etérne 
Deus: per Christum Dómi- 
num nostrum. Qui post resur- 
rectiónem suam ómnibus dis- 
cípulis suis maniféstus appá- 
ruit, et ipsis cernéntibus est 
elevátus in celum, ut nos di- 
vinitátis suze tribüeret esse 
partícipes. Et ideo cum An- 
gelis et Archángelis, cum 
Thronis et Dominatiónibus, 
cumque omni militia coléstis 
exéreitus, hymnum  glórie 
tue. cánimus, sine fine di- 
céntes: 


¥. The Lord be with you. 

HB. And with thy spirit. 

yY. Lift up your hearts. 

B. We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 

Y. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our God. 

BY. It is meet and just. 


T IS iruly meet and just, 
T right and available to sal- 
vation, that we should always 
and in all places give thanks 
to Thee, O holy Lord, Father 
almighty, eternal God: 
Through Christ our Lord; Who 
after His resurrection very 
openly showed Himself to all 
His disciples, and in their sight 
was raised up to heaven, in 
Order to give to us to be par- 
takers of His Godhead. And 
therefore with the angels and 
archangels, with the thrones 
and dominations and with all 
the array of the heavenly host, 
we sing a hymn to Thy glory 
and unceasingly repeat: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


808 SPECIAL PREFACES ` 


Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God 
of hosts. Heaven and earth are 
full of Thy glory. Hosanna in 
the highest. Blessed is He that 
cometh in the name of the 
Lord. Hosanna in the highest. 


Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, 
Dóminus Deus Sáboath. Pleni 
sunt coeli et terra glória tua, 
Hosánna in excélsis. Benedic- 
tus qui venit in nómine Dó- 
mini. Hosanna, in excélsis. 


The Beginning of the Canon 


Wherefore, we humbly pray 
and beseech Thee, most merci- 
ful. Father, through Jesus 
Christ Thy Son, Our Lord, to 
receive and to bless these 

ifts, these " presents, these 
holy unspotted sacrifices, 
which we offer up to Thee, in 
the first place, for Thy holy 
Catholic Church, that it may 
please Thee to grant her peace, 
to guard, unite, and guide her, 
throughout the world; as also 
for Thy servant Ñ., our Pope, 
and Ñ., our Bishop, and for ail 
"who are orthodox in belief and 
who profess the catholic and 
apostolic faith. 

Be mindful, O Lord, of Thy 
servants, Ñ, and N., and of all 
here present, whose faith and 
devotion are known to Thee, 
for whom we offer, or who offer 
up to Thee, this sacrifice of 
praise, for themselves, their 
families, and their friends, for 
the salvation of their souls and 
the health and welfare they 
hope for, and who now pay 
their vows to Thee, God 
eternal, living, and true. 


Te ígitur clementíssime 
Pater, per Jesum Christum 
Fílium, tuum Dóminum nos- 
trum, süpplices rogámus ac 
pétimus, uti accépta habeas, 
et benedícas hzc dona, hac 

münera, hzc sancta  sac- 
rifícia illibáta, in primis que 
tibi offérimus pro Ecclésia tua 
sancta eathólica; quam pa- 
cificare, custodire, adunáre, 
et régere digneris toto orbe 
terrárum: una cum fámulo 
tuo Papa nostro Ñ. et Anti- 
stite nostro Ñ, et ómnibus or- 
thodóxis, atque Cathólice et 
Apostólice fidei cultóribus. 


Meménto Dómine famuló- 
rum, famularümque tuárum 
NÑ. et N. et ómnium circum- 
stantium, quorum tibi fides 
cógnita est, et nota devótio, 
pro quibus tibi offérimus: vel 
qui tibi ófferunt hoc sacrifí- 
cium laudis pro se, suísqueóm- 
nibus: pro redeémptióne ani- 
márum suárum, pro spe sa- 
lütis et incolumitátis sug: ti- 
bique reddunt vota sua ætér- 
no Deo vivo et vero. 


On Ascension Day and during Octave of Ascension only, the 
following special Communicantes is said. Otherwise continue 
the Canon, at the Hanc igitur, page 778. $ 


The Communicantes 


Having communion in and 
celebrating the most sacred 
day on which Our Lord, Thine 
only-begotten Son, established 


Communicántes et diem 
sacratíssimum celebrántes, 
quo Dóminus noster unigé- 
nitus Fílius, tuus unitam 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PREFACE OF PENTECOST 809 


Sibi fragílitatis nostre sub- 
stantiam in glórie tue déx- 
tera collocávit: sed et me- 
móriam venerántes, in primis 
glorióse semper.vírginis Ma- 
ríe, Genitricis Dei et. Dómini 
nostri Jesu Christi: sed et be- 
atórum Apostolórum ac Már- 
tyrum tuórum, Petri et Pauli, 
Andrés,  Jacóbi, Joánnis, 
Thome, Jacóbi, Philippi, Bar- 
tholomzi, Matthei, Simónis 
et Thaddzi; Lini, Cleti, Cle- 
méntis, Xysti, Cornélii, Cypri- 
áni, _Lauréntii, Chrysógoni, 
Joánnis et.Pauli, Cosme et 
Damiani, et ómnium sanctó- 
rum tuórum: quorum méri- 
tis precibüsque concédas, ut 
in ómnibus protectiónis tue 
muniámur auxílio. Per eim- 
dem Christum Dóminum nos- 
trum. Amen. 


at Thy right hand in glory 
that frail nature of ours which 
He had assumed: venerating 
the memory in the first place 
of the glorious Mary, ever a 
virgin, mother of the same 
Jesus Christ, our God and 
Lord, likewise of Thy blessed 
apostles and martyrs, Peter 
and Paul, Andrew, James, 
John, Thomas, James, Philip, 
Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon 
and Thaddeus; of Linus, Cle- 
tus, Clement, Sixtus, Cornelius, 
Cyprian, Lawrence, Chrysogo- 
nus, John and Paul, Cosmas 
and Damian, and of all Thy. 
saints: for the sake of whose 
merits and prayers do Thou 
grant that in all things we 
may be defended by the help of 
Thy protection. Through the 
same Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Continuation of the Canon, at the Hanc igitur, page 778. 


7. Preface and Communicantes for Pentecost 


From the Vigil of Pentecost, 
clusive, and in votive Masses 


till the following Saturday in- 
oj the Holy Ghost (when the 


words hodierna die (this day) are omitted). 


Y. Dóminus vobiscum. 
. Et cum spíritu tuo. 
Y. Sursum corda. 
RY. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


y. Grátias agámus Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
F . Dignum et justum est. 


ERE dignum et justum 
: est, equum et salutare, 
nos tibi semper, et ubique 
grátias ágere: Dómine sancte, 
Pater omnipotens, ætérne, 
Deus: per Christum Dómi- 
num nostrum. Qui ascéndens 
super omnes celos, sedénsque 


Y. The Lord be with you. 

FRY. And with thy spirit. 

Y. Lift up your hearts. 

RY. We have them lifted up, 
unto the Lord. 

y. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our.God. 

Rf. It is meet and just. 


right and aveilable to sal- 
vation, that we should always 
and in all places give thanks to 
Thee, O holy Lord, Father al- 
mighty, eternal God: Through 
Christ our Lord: Who, ascend- 
ing over all the heavens and 


I 1s truly meet and just, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


810 SPECIAL PREFACES 


sitting at Thy right hand, did 
(this day), according to His 
word, send down the Holy 
Ghost upon the children of His 
adoption. Wherefore all peoples 
upon this earth rejoice with 
exceeding great joy; the heav- 
enly virtues likewise and the 
angelic powers sing a hymn to 
Thy glory and unceasingly re- 
peat: 

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God 
of Sabaoth. Heaven and earth 
are full of Thy glory. Hosanna 
in the highest. Blessed is He 
that cometh in the name of 
the Lord. Hosanna in the high- 
est. 


ad déxteram tuam, promís- 
sum Spiritum sanctum (ho- 
diérna die) in filios adoptió- 
nis effüdit. Quapropter pro- 
füsis gáudiis, totus in orbe 
terrárum mundus exstiltat. 
Sed et supérne Virtütes, at- 
que angélice Potestates, hym- 
num glórie tue CÓncinunt, 
Sine fine dicéntes. 


Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, 
Dóminus Deus Sábaoth. Pleni 
Sunt celi, et terra glória tua. 
Hosanna, in excélsis. Benedíc- 
tus qui venit in nómine Dó- 
mini. Hosánna in excélsis. 


The Beginning of the Canon 


Wherefore, we humbly pray 
and beseech Thee, most merci- 
ful Father, through Jesus 
Christ Thy Son, Our Lord, to 
receive and to bless these "HK 
gifts, these HM presents, these 
% holy unspotted sacrifices, 
which we offer up to Thee, in 
the first place, for Thy holy 
Catholic Church, that it may 
please Thee to grant her peace, 
to guard, unite, and guide her, 
throughout the world; as also 
for Thy servant N., our Pope, 
and N., our Bishop, and for all 
who are orthodox in belief and 
who profess the catholic and 
apostolic faith. 

Be mindful, O Lord, of Thy 
servants, N. and N., and of all 
here present, whose faith and 
devotion are known to Tbee, 
for whom we offer, or who offer 
up to Thee, this sacrifice of 
praise, for themselves, their 
families, and their friends, for 
the salvation of their souls and 
the health and welfare they 


Te ígitur clementissime 
Pater, per Jesum Christum 
Fílium tuum Dóminum nos- 
irum, süpplices rogámus ac 
pétimus, uti accépta habeas, 
et benedícas hzc + dona, hec 
H3 münera, hzc sancta sac- 
rifícia illibàta, in primis que 
tibi offérimus pro Ecclésia tua 
sancta Cathólica; quam pa- 
cificáre, custodíre, adunáre, 
et régere dign ris toto orbe 
terrárum: una cum famulo 
tuo Papa nostro Ñ. et Anti- 
stite nostro N. et ómnibus or- 
ihodóxis, atque Cathdlice et 
Apostólice fidei cultóribus. 


Meménto Dómine famuló- 
rum, famularümque tuárum 
N. et N. Et ómnium circum- 
stantium, quorum tibi fides 
cógnita est, et nota devótio, 
pro quibus tibi offérimus: vel 
qui tibi ófferunt hoc sacrifi- 
cium laudis pro se, suísque 
ómnibus: pro redemptióne 
animárum suárum, pro spe 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PREFACE OF PENTECOST 


salitis et incolumitátis sue: 
tibique reddunt vota sua etér-~ 
no Deo vivo et vero. 


811 


hope for, and who now pay 
their vows to Thee, God 
eternal, living, and true. 


After the Octave of Pentecost, the following Communicantes 
is not said. Continue the Canon at page 778. 


The Communicantes 


Communicántes, et diem 
Sacratissimun Pentecóstes 
celebrantes, quo . Spíritus 
sanctus Apóstolis, innümeris 
linguis appáruit: sed et me- 
móriam venerántes, in primis 
glorióse semper Vírginis Ma- 
ríe, Genitrícis Dei et Dómini 
nostri Jesu Christi: sed et be- 
atórum Apostolórum et Már- 
tyrum tuórum, Petri et Pauli, 
Andrée,  Jacóbi,  Joánnis, 
Thome, Jacobi, Philippi, Bar- 
tholomzi, Matthzi, Simónis et 
Thaddei; Lini, Cleti, Cle- 
méntis, Xysti, Cornélii, Cypri- 
ani, Lauréntii, Chrysógoni, 
Joánnis et Pauli, Cosme et 
Damiani, et ómnium sanctó- 
rum tuórum: quorum méritis 
precibüsque concédas, ut in 
ómnibus protectiónis tue mu- 
niámur auxílio. Per eümdem 
Christum Dóminum nostrum. 
Amen. 


Having communion in and 
celebrating the sacred day of 
Pentecost on which the Holy 
Ghost appeared to the apostles, 
betokened by numberless 
tongues; venerating the mem- 
ory in the first place of the 
glorious Mary, ever a virgin, 
mother of the same Jesus 
Christ our God and Lord, like- 
wise of Thy blessed apostles 
and martyrs, Peter and Paul, 
Andrew, James, John, Thomas, 
James, Philip, Bartholomew, 
Matthew, Simon and Thad- 
deus; of Linus, Cletus, Clement, 
Sixtus, Cornelius, Cyprian, 
Lawrence, Chrysogonus, John 
and Paul, Cosmas and Damian, 
and of all Thy saints: for the 
sake of whose merits and 
prayers do Thou grant that in 
all things we may be defended 
by the help of Thy protection. 
Through the same Christ, our 
Lord. Amen. 


Continuation of the Canon at the Hanc igitur, page 778. 
However, during Pentecost week the Hanc igitur is as follows: 


Hanc ígitur oblationem ser- 
vitütis nostre, sed et cuncta 
familie tue, quam tibi offéri- 
mus pro his quoque, quos re- 
generáre dignátus es ex aqua 
et Spiritu sancto, tríbuens eis 
remissiónem ómnium pecca- 
tórum, quesumus Dómine, ut 
placátus  accípias:  diésque 
nostros in tua pace dispónas, 
atque ab xtérna damnatióne 
nos éripi, et in electórum tuó- 


Wherefore, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, graciously to receive 
this oblation which we Thy 
servants and with us Thy 
whole family, make to Thee, 
offering it up in like manner 
for those also whom Thou 
hast been pleased to make to 
be born again of water and the 
Holy Ghost. Grant to them the 
forgiveness of all their sins; do 
Thou establish our days in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


812 


Thy peace; nor suffer that we 
be condemned forever, . but 
rather command that we be 
numbered in the flock of Thine 
elect. Through Christ our Lord. 
Amen. 


SPECIAL PREFACES 


rum jübeas grege numerári. 
Per Christum Dóminum nos- 
trum. Amen. 


Continuation of the Canon at the Quam oblationem, 


page 779. 


8. Preface of the Most Holp Trinity, 
or for Sundaps 


This preface is found in The Ordinary of the Mass, page 773. 
It is said or sung on all Sundays unless another one is 


assigned. 


9. Preface of the Sacred Beart 


¥. The Lord be with you. 
BY, And with thy spirit. 
Y. Lift up your hearts. 

BY, We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 

Y. Let us give thanks unto the 
. Lord our God. 
` Bí.It is meet and just. 


T IS iruly meet and just, 

right and availing unto 
salvation, that we: should at 
all times and in all places give 
thanks unto thee, O holy Lord, 
Father almighty, everlasting 
God; who hast willed that 
thine only-begotten Son hang- 
ing on the cross should be 
transfixed with a  soldier's 
lance, so that the opened 
Heart, treasure-place of di- 
vine bounty, might flood us 
with the torrents of compas- 
sion and grace, and that that 
which never ceased to burn 
with love for us, should be re- 
Pose for the devout and to the 
penitent should open the shel- 


Y. Dóminus vobiscum. 

Rn. Et cum spíritu tuo. 

F.. Sursum corda. 

R. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


¥. Grátias agámus Dómino. 
Deo nostro. 
R. Dignum et justum est. 


be dignum et justum 
est, equum et salutáre, 
nos tibi semper, et ubíque grá- 
tias ágere: Dómine sancte, 
Pater  omnípotens,  wtérne 
Deus: Qui Unigénitum tuum 
jn cruce pendéntem láncea 
mílitis transfigi voluísti, ut 
apértum Cor, divínz largitátis 
sacrárium, torréntes nobis 
fünderet miseratiónis et grá- 
tie, et quod amóre nostri fla- 
gráre nunquam déstitit, piis 
esset réquies et peniténtibus 
patéret salütis refügium, Et 
ideo cum Angelis et Archán- 
gelis, cum Thronis et Domi- 
natiónibus, cumque omni mi- 
lítia coléstis exércitus, hym- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PREFACE OF JESUS CHRIST, KING 


num gióriz tue cánimus, sine 
fine dicéntes: 


813 


ter of salvation. And there- 
fore with the angels and arch- 
angels, with the thrones and 


dominations, and with all.the array of the heavenly host, we 
sing a hymn to Thy glory and unceasingly repeat: 


Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus 
Dóminus Deus Sábaoth. Pleni 
Sunt celi, et terra glória tua. 
Hosánna in excélsis. Bene- 
dictus qui venit in nómine 
Dómini. Hosánna in excélsis: 


' Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of 
hosts. Heaven and earth are 
full of Thy glory. Hosanna in 
the highest. Blessed is He Who 
cometh in the name of the 
Lord. Hosanna in the highest. 


Beginning of the Canon, Te igitur, page 777. 


10. Preface of Jesus Christ, hing 


Y. Dóminus vobíscum. 
B. Et cum spíritu tuo, 
FX. Sursum corda.. 

B, Habémus ad Dóminum. 


Y. Gratias agámus Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
HB . Dignum et justus est. 


ERE dignum et justum 

est, equum et salutare, 

nos tibi semper, et ubíque 
grátias ágere: Dómine sancte, 
Pater omnípotens, etérne De- 
us:: Qui unigénitum Filium 
tuum Dóminum nostrum Je- 
sum Christum, Sacerdótem 
etérnum et. universórum Re- 
gem, óleo exsultatiónis unxi- 
sti: ut seipsum in ara crucis, 
hóstiam immaculátam.et pa- 
cíficam, offerens, redemptiónis 
humane sacraménta perá- 
geret: et suo subjéctis império 
ómnibus creaturis, etérnum et 
universále regnum imménse 
tus traderet Majestáti: reg- 
num veritátis et vite; regnum 
sanctitatis et grátie; regnum 
justitiz, amóris et pacis. Et 
ídeo cum ‘Angelis et Archán- 
gelis, cum 'Thronis et Domi- 
natiónibus, cumque omni mi- 
lítia celéstis exercitus, hym- 


F. The Lord be with you. 

B. And with thy spirit. 

X. Lift up your hearts. 

B. We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 

X. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our God. 

B. It is meet and just. — 
T: is truly meet and just, 

right and profitable, for us; 

at all times, and in all places, 
to give thanks to Thee, O Lord, 
the holy One, the Father al- 
mighty, the everlasting God: 
Who didst anoint with the oil 
of gladness Thine only-begot- 
ten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, 
eternal Priest and King of the 
universe: that, offering Him- 
self as a stainless peace-offer- 
ing on the altar of the cross, 
He might fulfill the pledges of 
man’s redemption; and, having 
all creatures subject to His 
power, might deliver to Thy. 
sublime majesty an eternal and 
universal kingdom, a kingdom 
of truth and life; a kingdom of 
holiness and grace, a kingdom 
of justice, love and peace. And 
therefore with the angels and 
archangels, with the thrones 
and dominations, and with all 


http://ccwatershed.org 


814 


the array of the heavenly host, 
we sing & hymn to Thy glory 
and unceasingly repeat: 

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God 
of hosts. Heaven and earth are 
full of Thy glory. Hosanna in 
the highest. Blessed is He Who 
cometh in the name of the 
Lord. Hosanna in the highest. 


SPECIAL PREFACES 


num glóriz tue cánimus, sine 
fine dicéntes. 


Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus 
Dóminus Deus Sábaoth. Pleni 
sunt cxli et terra glória tua. 
Hosánna in excélsis. Benedíc- 
tus qui venit in nómine Dó- 
mini. Hosánna in excélsis. 


Beginning of the Canon, Te igitur, page 777. 


11. Preface of the Blessed Virgin 


On all feasts of our Blessed Lady except Purification. In this 
Preface the title of the occurring festival of our Blessed Lady 


4s inserted in the place indicated. 


In Masses of the Blessed 


Virgin Mary said on other than her feast-days, the insertion ts 


Et te in veneratione (“Likewise . . 


Y, The Lord be with you. 
W. And with thy spirit. 
Y, Lift up your hearts. 
W. We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 
Y. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our God. 
HE. Tt is meet and just. 


T IS truly meet and just, 

right and availing unto 
salvation, that we should at 
all times and in all places give 
thanks to thee, O holy Lord, 
Father almighty, everlasting 
God: and on the... of the 
blessed Mary, ever a virgin, 
should. praise and bless and 
proclaim Thee. For she con- 
ceived Thine only-begotten Son 
‘by the overshadowing of the 
Holy Ghost; and losing not the 
glory of her virginity, gave to 
the world the everlasting light, 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Through 
whom the angels praise thy 
majesty, the dominions wor- 
ship it, and the powers are in 
awe. The heavens and the 
heavenly hosts, and the blessed 


. in the veneration”). 


Y. Dóminus vobiscum. 

W. Et cum spíritu tuo. 

Y. Sursum corda. 

AY. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


V. Grátias agámus Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
R. Dignum et justum est. 


bb dignum et justum 
est, equum et salutare, 


nos tibi semper et ubique grá- 
tias ágere: Dómine sancte, 
Pater omnípotens, etérne De- 
us: Et te in... beáte Ma- 
riz semper Virginis collau- 
dare, benedicere et predicáre. 
Que et Unigénitum tuum 
Sancti Spiritus obumbratióne 
concépit: et virginitátis glória 
permanénte, lumen ætérnum 
mundo effudit, Jesum Chri- 
stum Dóminum nostrum. Per 
quem majestátem tuam lau- 
dant Angeli, adórant Domina- 
tiónes, tremunt Potestates. 
Cel celorimque Virtütes, ac 
beáta Séraphim, sócia exsul- 
tatióne concélebrant. Cum 
quibus et nostras voces ut ad- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PREFACE OF ST. JOSEPH 


mítti  jübeas  deprecámur, 
supplici confessióne dicéntes: 


Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus 
Dóminus Deus Sábaoth. Pleni 
sunt celi, et terra glória tua. 
Hosánna in excélsis. Benedíc- 
tus qui venit in nómine Dó- 
mini, Hosánna in excélsis, 


815 


seraphim join together in cele- 
brating their joy. With these 
we pray.Thee join our own 
voices also, while we say with 
lowly praise: 

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God 
of hosts. The heavens and the 
earth are full of Thy glory. 
Hosanna in the highest. 
Blessed is He Who cometh in 
the name of the Lord. Hosanna 
in the highest. 


Beginning of the Canon, Te igitur, page 777. 


12. Preface of St. Joseph 


In all the Masses of St. Joseph and in those not of Our Lord 


in which 
prescribed, 


Y. Dóminus vobiscum. 

R. Et cum spíritu tuo. 

Y. Sursum corda. 

BH. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


Y. Grátias agámus Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
Bí, Dignum et justum est. 


M dignum et justum 
i “est, equum et salutáre, 
nos tibi semper, et ubíque 
grátias ágere: Dómine sancte, 
Pater  omnípotens,  ztérne 
Deus. Et te in Festivitáte 
(Veneratióne) beati Joseph 
débitis magnificáre precéniis, 
benedicere et predicáre. Qui 
et vir justus, a Te Deípare 
Vírgini Sponsus est datus: et 
fídelis servus ac prudens, su- 
per Famíliam tuam est consti- 
tütus: ut Unigénitum tuum 
Sancti Spíritus obumbratióne 
concéptum, patérna vice cus- 
todiret, Jesum'Christum, Dó- 
minum nostrum. Per quem 
majestátem tuam laudantAn- 


he is commemorated, unless another Preface is 


¥. The Lord be with you. 
W. And with thy spirit. 
¥. Lift up your hearts. 

H. We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 

¥. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our God. 

Hf. It is meet and just. 


T IS truly meet and just, 

right and profitable for us, 
at all times, and in all places, 
to give thanks to Thee, O holy 
Lord, Father almighty, eternal 
God, and on the festivity (ven- 
eration) of St. Joseph to mag- 
nify Thee with due praise, to 
bless and proclaim Thee. The 
just man who was given by 
‘Thee as @ spouse to the Virgin 
Mother of God, and was 
Placed over Thy Family as a 
faithful and prudent servant; 
so that taking the place of the 
eternal Father, he might guard 
the only-begotten ‘Son con- 
ceived by the shadow of the 
Holy Ghost, Jesus Christ, Our 


http://ccwatershed.org 


816 


Lord, through Whom the 
angels praise Thy majesty, the 
dominions worship it, the pow- 
ers are in awe, the heavens and 
the heavenly hosts and the 
blessed seraphim join together 
in celebrating their joy. With 
these, we pray Thee, join our 
own voices also,. while. we sing 
with lowly praise: 

. Holy, Holy, Holy; Lord God 
of hosts. The heavens and the 
earth are full of Thy glory. 
Hosanna in the highest. 
Blessed is He Who cometh in 
the name of the Lord. Hos- 
&nna in the highest. 


SPECIAL PREFACES 


geli, adórant Dominatiónes, 
tremunt  Potestátes. Coli, 
celorumque Virtütes, ac beáta 
Séraphim, sócia exsultatióne 
concélebrant. Cum quibus et 
nostras voces, ut admitti. jú- 
beas deprecámur, stpplici 
confessióne. dicéntes. 


Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, 
Dóminus Deus Sábaoth. Pleni 
sunt celi et terra glória tua. 
Hosánna in excélsis. Benedíc- 
tus qui venit in nómine Dó- 
mini. Hosanna in excélsis. 


Beginning of the Canon Te igitur, page 777. 


13. Preface of the Apostles 


On the jestivals of the Apostles and Evangelists (except that 
of Bt. John, Apostle and Evangelist, Dec. 27), and during their 


octaves. 


y - The Lord be with you. 

B And with thy spirit. 

Y Lift up your hearts. 

B We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 


y. Let us give thanks to the - 


Lord. our God. 
RY. Tt is meet and just. 


Is truly meet and just, 
do and profitable, hum- 
ly to beseech Thee, O Lord, to 
forsake not. the flock of which 
Thou art the eternal shepherd, 
but through Thy holy apostles 
ever to guard and keep. it, so 
that it be governed by those 
rulers whom Thou didst set 
over it to be its pastors under 
Thee, And therefore with the 
angels and archangels, with 
the thrones and dominations, 
and with all the array of the 


FJ. Dóminus vobíscum. 

Hf. Et cum spíritu tuo. 

Y. Sursum corda. 

By. Habémus ad Dóminum, 


y. Grátias agámus.Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
R. Dignum et justum est, 


VW. dignum et justum 
est, equum et salutare: 
Te, Démine, suppliciter exo~ 
rare, ut gregem tuum pastor 
ætérne non déseras: sed per 
beátos Apóstolos tuos con- 
tínua protectióne. custódias. 
Ut iísdem rectéribus guberné- 
tur, quos Óperis tui vicários 
eídem contulísti praésse pas- 
tóres. Et ideo cum Angelis et 
Archángelis, cum 'Thronis et 
Dominatiónibus, cumque om- 
ni. militia celéstis exércitus, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PREFACE FOR WEEKDAYS 


hymnum glóriæ tue cánimus, 
sine fine dicéntes. 


Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, 
Déminus Deus Sábaoth. Pleni 
sunt cœli et terra glória tua. 
Hosánna in excélsis. Benedíc- 
tus qüi venit in nómine Dó- 
mini. Hosánna in excélsis. 


817 


heavenly host we sing a hymn 
to Thy glory and unceasingly 
repeat: - . 

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God 
of hosts. 'The heavens and the 
earth are full of Thy glory. 
Hosanna in the highest, 
Blessed is He Who cometh in 
the name of the Lord, Hos 
in the highest, — 


Beginning of the Canon, Te igitur, page 777. 


14. Preface for Weekdaps 


Also called Common or Daily Preface. 
This Preface is found in the Ordinary of the Mass, page 775. 


15. Preface for the Dead 


In all Masses for the Dead, 


y. Dóminus vobiscum. 

W. Et cum spíritu tuo. 

y. Sursum corda. 

B. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


y. Grátias agimus Dómino 
Deo nostro. 
W. Dignum et justum est. 


a dignum et justum 
est equum et salutáre, 
Nos tibi semper et ubique, 
grátias ágere; Dómine Sancte, 
Pater omnípotens, etérne De- 
us: per Christum Dóminum 
nostrum. In quo nobis spes 
beáte resurrectiónis effülsit, 
ut quos contrístat certa mori- 
éndi condítio, eósdem. conso- 
létur futüre immortalitatis 
promíssio. Tuis enim fidéli- 
bus, Dómine, vita mutátur, 
non tóllitur, et dissolüta ter- 
réstris hujus incolátus domo, 
etérna in celis habitátio com- 

tur. Et ideo cum Angelis 
et Archángelis, cum Thronis 
et Dominatiónibus cumque 


y. The Lord be with you. 

W. And with thy spirit. 

y. lift up your hearts. 

RY. We have them lifted up 
unto the Lord. 

Y. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our God. 

BY. It is meet and just. 


T 1s truly meet and just, 

right and profitable for us, 
at all times, and in all places, 
to give thanks to Thee, O holy 
Lord, Father almighty, eternal 
God: through Christ, our Lord, 
in Whom the hope of a happy 
resurrection has shone on us, 
so that those whom the cer- 
tain fate of dying renders sad, 
may be consoled by the prom- 
ise of future immortality. For 
with regard to Thy faithful, O 
Lord, life is changed, not taken 
away; and the house of their 
earthly dwelling being de- 
stroyed, an eternal dwelling in 
heaven is obtained. So with the 
angels and archangels, with 


http://ccwatershed.org 


818 


the dominions and powers, with 
all the hosts of the heavenly 
army, we sing of Thy glory 
without end, saying: 

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God 
of hosts. The heavens and the 
earth are ful of Thy glory. 
Hosanna in the highest. 
Blessed is He Who cometh in 
the name of the Lord. Hosanna 
in the highest. 


SPECIAL PREFACES 


omni militia celéstis exérci- 
tus, hymnum glórie tue cá- 
nimus, sine fine dicéntes. 
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, 
Dóminus Deus Sábaoth, Pleni 
sunt coli et terra glória tua. 
Hosánna in excélsis. Benedic- 
tus qui venit in nómine Dé- 
mini. Hosánna in excélsis. 


Beginning of the Canon, Te igitur, page 777. 


ah be 


aN 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PRAYER CONCLUSIONS 819 


Draper Conclusions 


The endings of the Prayers (also named Collects), Secrets 
Gnd Postcommunions vary according to the nature of the 
Prayer. 


Because of their frequent repetition they are not given in 
full, but are referred to under abbreviated desighations as 
follows: 


Through our Lord. This is used in prayers addressed to 
God the Father, and its complete form is: Through Our Lord 
Jesus Christ, Thy Son, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee in 
the unity of the Holy Ghost, God, world without end. R. Amen. 


(Latin: Per Dóminum nostrum Jesum, Christum filium 
tuum, qui tecum vivit et regnat in unitate Spíritus Sancti, 
Deus, per ómnia. secula, seecul6rum. B. Amen). 


Through the same. This is used in prayers making mention 
of our Blessed Lord. The complete form is: Through the same 
Jesus Christ, Thy Son, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee 
in the unity of the Holy Ghost, God, world without end. W. 
Amen. (Latin: Per eümdem Dóminum mostrum Jesum 
Christum filium tuum, qui tecum vivit et regnat in imitáte 
Spiritus Sancti, Deus, per ómnia secula sceculórum. K. Amen). 


Through . . . in the unity of the same. This is used when 
the prayer makes mention of the Holy Ghost. 'The complete 
form is: Through Jesus Christ, Thy Son, Our Lord, Who 
liveth and reigneth with Thee in the unity of the same Holy 
Ghost, God, world without end. RY. Amen. (Latin: Per 
Jesum Christum filium tuum, qui tecum vivit et regnat in 
unitate ejusdem Spiritus Sancti, Deus, per ómnia secula 
scculórum. B. Amen). 


Who with Thee. This is used when the final clause in the 
prayer refers to our Blessed Lord. 'The complete form is: 
Who with Thee liveth and reigneth in the unity of the Holy 
Ghost, God, world without end. B. Amen. (Latin: Qui tecum 
vivit et regnat in unitate Spiritus Sancti, Deus, per ómnia 
secula seculérum. B. Amen). 


Who livest. This is used when the prayer is addressed di- 
rectly to God the Son. The complete form is: Who livest 
and reignest, with God the Father, in the unity of the Holy 
Ghost, God, world without end. W. Amen. (Latin: Qui vivis 
et regnas, cum Deo Patre in unitate Spiritus Sancti, Deus, per 
ómnia secula seculérum. B. Amen). 


http://ccwatershed.org 


820 ADDITIONAL PRAYERS 


Additional Prayers 


Prapers, Secrets and PBostcommunions 


On all days on which no festival marked in the calendar 
es of double rite occurs, the number of Prayers (sometimes 
known as Collects), and of corresponding Secrets and Post- 
communions ‘said at Mass, may not be less than three. If 
more..are used, the whole number must be odd, (five or 
seven). The exceptions to this rule are stated in their proper 
places in this Missal, and are to be found noted each year in 
the diocesan directory or Ordo. 


Of the three Prayers, the first.is the one proper to the 
Mass then being celebrated. For the second and third are . 
counted such commemorations as may have to be made of 
saints’ days, octaves, vigils, or ferias. For days on, which 
such commemorations are lacking, two Prayers, varying ac- 
cording to the seasons of the liturgical year, are appointed, 
‘one or both to be said as may be required. 


When a semi-double or simple feast occurs on a Sunday, 
ihe second prayer is of the feast, the third of our Blessed Lady, 
and the prayer for the Church or Pope is omitted. When two 
semi-double or simple feasts, or one semi-double and one 
simple feast occur on a Sunday, they are commemorated and 
the commemoration of our Blessed Lady and the prayer for 
the Pope are omitted. When a. double feast or a double and a 
simple feast occur on a Sunday they are commemorated, 
end the commemoration of our Blessed Lady and the prayer 
for the Pope are omitted. . 


They are called Common Commemorations and are six in 
number, as follows: 


1. Of Our Blessed Lady. 
'2. For God's Holy Church, or for the Pope. 
3. For the Intercession of the Saints, 
4. For the Living and the Dead. 
- 5. Of the Holy. Ghost. 
6. Prayer at the Choice of the. Celebrant, ` 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ADDITIONAL PRAYERS 821 


The following table indicates how these Common Com- 
memorations are to be employed throughout the ecclesiastical 


year: 


1. From the first Sunday gue to the vigil of the 
Nativity of Our Lord exclusive: 


IN MASSES OF THE SEASON: 1 


Second Prayer, of Our Blessed Lady. 
Third Prayer, for God's Hély Church, or for the Pope. 


ON SEMI-DOUBLE FEASTS: 


Second Prayer, of the Feria. - 
Third Prayer, of Our Blessed Lady, 


2. From the Octave of the Epiphany to the Purification: 


Second Prayer, of Our Blessed Lady. ` 
Third Prayer, for God’s Holy Church, or for the Pope. 


3. From the Purification to Ash Wednesday: 


Second. Prayer, for the Intercession of the Saints. 
Third Prayer, at the choice of the Celebrant. 


4. From Ash Wednesday to Passion Sunday: 


IN MASSES OF THE SEASON: 


Second Prayer, for the Intercession of the Saints. 
Third Prayer, for the Living and the Dead. 


ON SEMI-DOUBLE FEASTS: 


Second Prayer, of the Feria. 
Third Prayer, for the Intercession of the Saints. 


5. From Passion Sunday to Holy Thursday: 
IN MASSES OF THE SEASON: 


Second Prayer, for God’s Holy Church, or for the Pope. 
Third Prayer is not. said. : 


ON SEMI-DOUBLE FEASTS: 


Second Prayer, of the Feria. 
Third Prayer, for God's Holy Church, or for the Pope. 


1The term Prayer mere includes also the corre 
abd poses ELE ui sponding Secret 


http://ccwatershed.org 


822 ADDITIONAL PRAYERS 


6. Within the Octave of Easter: 


Second Prayer, for God's Holy Church, or for the Pope. 
Third Prayer is not said, 


7. From the Octave of Easter to the Feast of the Ascen- 
sion: 


Second Prayer, of Our Blessed Lady. . . 
Third Prayer, for God's Holy Church, or for the Pope. 


8. Within the Octave of Pentecost: 


Second Prayer, for the Church, or for the Pope. 
Third Prayer is not said. 


9. From the Octave of Pentecost to Advent: 


Second Prayer, for the Intercession of the Saints. 
Third Prayer, at the Choice of the Celebrant. 


10. Within the Octaves of the Blessed Virgin and of 
All Saints; likewise on Saturdays when the Office of the 
Blessed Virgin is recited: 


Second Prayer, of the Holy Ghost. 
Third Prayer, for the Church, or for the Pope. 


11. Within the Octaves of Corpus Christi and of All 
Saints: 


IN THE MASSES OF THE OCTAVE: 
Second Prayer, of Our Blessed Lady. 
Third Prayer, for the Church, or for the Pope. 
ON SEMI-DOUBLE FEASTS OCCURRING WITHIN OCTAVES: 


Second Prayer, of the Octave. 
Third, that Prayer which would be said in the second 
place if the Mass of the Octave were celebrated. 


12. On Vigils (except the Vigils of Christmas, Pente- 
cost, and All Saints): 


Second Prayer, of Our Blessed Lady. 
Third Prayer, for the Church, or for the Pope. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ADDITIONAL PRAYERS 


13. On Vigil of All Saints: 


Second Prayer, of the Holy Ghost. 
"Third Prayer, for the Church, or for the Pope. 


14. For the Votive Mass of the Immaculate Conception of 


the Blessed Virgin Mary: 


Second Prayer, of the Holy Ghost. 
Third Prayer, for the Church, or for the Pope. 


Note.—When on & Sunday a commemoration is made of any 
double, or of an octave-day, or of a day within an octave, the 
third prayer in Mass is omitted. ; 


Qf Our Blessed Xabp - 
(From the first Sunday of Advent to Christmas Eve) 


Prayer. Deus qui de beatae 


EUS, qui de beáte Ma- 
D ríe Virginis útero, Ver- 
bum tuum, Angelo nuntiánte, 
carnem  suscípere  voluísti: 
presta supplícibus tuis; ut qui 
vere eam Genitrícem Dei cré- 
dimus, ejus apud te interces- 


cop, Who didst will that 

at the message of an 
angel Thy. word should take 
fiesh in the womb of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary: grant 
that we, Thy suppliants, who 
believe her to be truly the 


siónibus adjuvémur. Per mother of God, may be helped 
eumdem Dóminum. by her intercession with Thee. 
; Through the same. 

Secret 


N MÉNTIBUS nostris quesu- 

mus Dómine vere fídei 
sacraménta confirma: ut qui 
concéptum de Virgine Deum 
verum et hóminem confité- 
mur; per ejus salutifere re- 
surrectiónis poténtiam, ad 
etérnam mereámur perveníre 
letitiam. Per eümdem Dó- 
minum. 


TRENGTHEN in our minds, 

we beseech Thee, O Lord, 

ihe mysteries of the true faith: 

that we, who profess Him Who 

was conceived of the Virgin to 

be true God and man, may, by 

the power of His saving resur- 

rection, deserve to attain unto 

everlasting joy. Through the 
same. 


Postcommunion 


RÁTIAM tuam, quesumus, 
Dómine, méntibus nos- 
iris infünde: ut qui, Angelo 


our forth, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, Thy grace 
into our hearts: that we, to 


http://ccwatershed.org 


824 


whom the incarnation of 
Christ, Thy Son, was made 
known by the message of àn 
angel may by His passion and 
cross be brought to the glory 
of His resurrection. Through 
the same. 


ADDITIONAL PRAYERS 


nuntiánte, Christi Fílii tui in- 
carnatiónem cognóvimus, per 
passiónem ejus et crucem ad 
resurrectiónis glóriam perdu- 
cámur. Per eümdem Dómi- 
num, MP 


(From Christmas Day to the feast of the Purification) 


Prayer. Deus, qui salutis 


cop, Who, through the 

fruitful virginity of 
blessed Mary, hast bestowed 
upon mankind the rewards of 
eternal salvation, grant, we 
beseech Thee, that we may ex- 
perience the intercession in 
our behalf of her through 
whom we have been made 
worthy to receive the author of 
life, Our Lord Jesus Christ, 
Thy Son. Who with Thee. 


EUs, qui salitis etérne, 
beáte Marie virginitáte 
fecünda, humáno géneri præ- 
mia prestitisti: tríbue, que- 
sumus; ut ipsam pro nobis 
intercédere  sentiámus, per 
quam  merüimus  auctórem 
vite suscípere, Dóminum nos- 
trum Jesum Christum Fílium 
tuum. Qui tecum, ` 


Secret 


and by the intercession 
of blessed Mary, ever Virgin, 
may this offering avail us for 
prosperity and peace, now and 
forevermore. Through our Lord. 


T. THY Clemency, O Lord, 


Postcommunion .- 


va, Dómine, propitia- 

tione, et beáte Marie 
semper Vírginis intercessióne: 
ad perpétuam atque presén- 
tem hzc oblátio nobis profi- 
ciat prosperitátem et pacem. 
Per Dóminum. 


AY this communion, O "qc nos commünio, Dô- 


‘Lord, cleanse us from 
sin and, by the intercession of 
the Blessed Virgin Mary, 
mother of God, make us par- 
takers of the heavenly remedy. 
Through our Lord. 


mine, purget a crimine, 
et, intercedénte beáta Vírgine, 
Dei Genitríce, María, celéstis 
remédii fáciat esse consórtes, 
Per Dóminum. 


(From the feast of the Purification to Advent Sunday) 


Prayer. Concede nos 


RANT us, 'Thy servants, we 
beseech 'Thee, O Lord 
God, to enjoy continual health 


^d oncEnE nos fámulos tuos, 
quesumus, Dómine Deus 
perpétua mentis et córporis 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ADDITIONAL PRAYERS 


sanitáte gaudére: et gloriósa 
beáte Marie semper Vírginis 
intercessióne, à presénti li- 
berári tristítia, et etérna pér- 
frui iætítia, Per Dóminum, 


825 


of soul and body; and by the 
glorious. intercession of blessed 
Mary, ever Virgin, to be deliv- 
ered from present sorrow, and 
to attain everlasting joy. 
Through our Lord. 


Secret — 


UA Dómine propitiatióne, . 


| et be&te Marie semper 
Virginis intercessióne, ad per- 
pétuam atque preséntem 
hsc oblatio nobis profíciat 
prosperitátem et pacem. Per 
Dóminum. 


y THY mercy, O Lord, and 

through the intercession 

of blessed. Mary, ever Virgin, 

may this offering avail us unto 

our welfare and peace, both 

now and forever. Through our 
Lord. - . 


Postcommunion 


umpris Dómine salütis 

nostre  subsídiis: da 
quesumus be&áte Marie sem- 
per Vírginis patrocíniis nos 
ubíque prótegi; in cujus ven- 
eratióne hsec tue obtülimus 
. majestáti. Per Dóminum. 


RANT, O Lord, that we who 

have received these helps 
to salvation may be everywhere 
defended by the patronage of 
blessed Mary, ever Virgin, in 
whose honor we have offered 
this sacrifice to Thy majesty. 
Through our Lord, 


For God's Holp Church 
Prayer. Ecclesiae tuae 


CcLÉSIE tus, quesumus, 

Dómine, preces placátus 
admitte: ut, destrüctis adver- 
sitátibus et erróribus univér- 
sis, secura tibi sérviat liber- 
táte. Per Dóminum. 


RACIOUSLY hear, O Lord, 

.the . prayers of Thy 
Church that, having overcome 
all adversity and every error, 
she may serve Thee in security 
and freedom. Through our 
Lord. 


Secret 


ÓTEGE nos, Dómine, tuis 
mystériis serviéntes: ut 


divinis rebus inheréntes, et 
córpore tibi famulémur et 
mente. Per Dóminum. 


ROTECT us, O Lord, who 
T assist at Thy mysteries, 
that, cleaving to things divine, 
we may serve Thee both in 
body and in mind. ‘Through our 
Lord. 


Postcommunion 


umsUMus, Dómine Deus 
noster, ut quos divina 


Lorp our God, we pray 
Thee that Thou suffer 


http://ccwatershed.org 


$26 ADDITIONAL PRAYERS 

not to succumb to human ha- tribuis participatiéne gau- 
zards those whom Thou hast dére, humánis non sinas sub- 
been pleased to make sharers jacére perículis. Per Dómi- 


of divine mysteries, Through 
our Lord. 


num. 


For the Pope 
Prayer. Deus, omnium fidelium 


O GOD, the shepherd and 
ruler of all the faithful, 
look with favor upon Thy ser- 
vant N., whom 'Thou hast been 
pleased to appoint pastor over 
Thy Church: grant him, we be- 
seech Thee, that by word and 
example he may be of profit to 
those over whom he has been 
placed, and, together with the 
flock committed to his care, at- 


EUS ómnium fidélium 
pastor et rector, fámu- 
um tuum N. quem pastórem 
Ecclésie tue preésse voluisti, 
propitius réspice: da ei que- 
sumus verbo et exémplo, qui- 
bus praeest, proficere; ut ad 
vitam, una cum grege sibi 
crédito, pervéniat sempitér- 
nam. Per Dóminum. 


tain unto life everlasting. 
Through our Lord. 
Secret 
E APPEASED, We beseech BLATIS quesumus Dó- 


Thee, O Lord, by the 
gifts we offer; and govern by 
Thy continuous ^ protection 
Thy servant N., whom Thou 
hast been pleased to appoint 
chief shepherd over Thy 
Church. Through our Lord. 


mine placáre munéri- 
bus: et fámulum tuum N. 
quem pastórem Ecclésie tue 
praésse voluisti, assidua pro- 
tectióne gubérna. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Postcommunion 


AY ihe reception of this 
divine sacrament be our 
protection, O Lord; and may it 
ever save and defend Thy ser- 
vant N., whom Thou hast been 
pleased to set up as pastor over 
Thy Church, and also the flock 
Thou hast entrusted to his care. 
Through our Lord. 


XC nos quesumus Dó- 

mine divíni sacraménti 
percéptio prótegat: et fámu- 
lum tuum N. quem pastórem 
Ecclésim tue preésse voluísti; 
una cum commisso sibi grege, 
salvet semper et müniat. Per 
Dóminum. 


In Masses in which a Collect in honor of the Blessed Virgin 
has been said either as the prayer proper to the Mass, or as 
an obligatory commemoration, in place of those just given, the 
Collect or Prayer of the Holy Ghost is said before that for the 


Church or for the Pope. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Nee at 


a 


ADDITIONAL PRAYERS 827 
Of the Holp Ghost 


Prayer. Deus, qui corda 


EUS, qui corda fidélium Gop, Who hast instructed 
Sancti Spíritus illus- ihe hearts of the faith- 
tratióne docuísti: da nobis in ful by the light of the Holy 
eódem Spiritu recta sapere, et Spirit: grant us by the same 
de ejus semper consolatióne spirit to relish what is right 
gaudére, Per Dóminum . . . and ever rejoice in His conso- 
in unitate. lation. Through ... in the 
unity of the same . , . 


Secret 


ÜNERA, quesumus, Dó- ANCTIFY, We beseech Thee, 

‘mine, oblata sanctifi- S O Lord, the gifts we offer, 

ca: et corda nostra sancti and cleanse our hearts by the 

Spíritus illustratióne emünda. light of the Holy Ghost. 

Per Dóminum ... in unitate. Through ... in the unity of 
the same... 


Postcommunion 
ANCTI Spíritus, Dómine, AY our hearts be cleansed, 
1 corda nostra mundet in- O Lord, by the inpour- 


üso: et sui roris intima as- ing of the Holy Spirit; may He 
persíone fecündet. Per Dómi- render them fruitful by water- 


num...inunitate. ing them with His heavenly 
dew. Through . . . in the unity 
of the same. 


By exception, fiom Passion Sunday to Low Sunday, and 
within the octave of Pentecost, only two prayers are obligatory 
at Mass: the one proper to the Mass itself, and another which, 
when no commemoration has to be made, must be one. of those 
given above for the Church or for the Pope. 

At other seasons of the year, that is, from the feast of the 
Purification to Lent, and from Trinity Sunday to Advent, the 
two additional prayers are: the first, for the intercession of 
the saints, and the second, any one of those in the Missal that 
the priest may choose. This third prayer is usually selected 
from those which appear toward the end of this volume, un- 
der the title Occasional Prayers, page 1494. But in Lent it is 
appointed that the celebrant say in this place the Prayer for 
the living and the dead. 4 


For the Dutercession of the Saints 


Prayer. A cunctis 


CUNCTIS nos quesumus EFEND US, We beseech 
Dómine mentis et cór- Thee, O Lord, from ail 
poris defénde perículis: et in- dangers of mind and body: and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


828 ADDITIONAL PRAYERS 


through the intercession of the 
blessed and glorious Mary, ever 
Virgin, mother of God, of St. 
Joseph, of Thy holy apostles 
Peter and Paul, of blessed N. 
(the patron saint) and of all 
the saints, in Thy loving-kind- 
ness grant us safety and peace; 
that, all adversities and errors 
being overcome, Thy Church 
may serve Thee in security and 
freedom, Through our Lord. 


tercedénte beáta et gloriósa 
semper Vírgine Dei Genitríce 
María, cum beáto Joseph, be- 
atis Apóstolis tuis Petro et 
Paulo, atque beáto N. et óm- 
nibus Sanctis, salütem nobis 
iríbue benígnüs et pacem; ut 
destrüctis adversitátibus et 
erróribus univérsis, Ecclésia 
tua secüra tibi sérviat liber- 
táte. Per Dóminum, 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY hear us, O God 

! our Saviour, and, by vir- 
iue of this Sacrament, defend 
us from all enemies of soul and 
body, bestowing upon us Thy 
grace here and Thy glory here- 
after. Through our Lord. 


xAupt nos Deus salutáris 
noster: ut per hujus 
sacraménti virtütem, a cunc- 
tis nos mentis et córporis hós- 
tibus tueáris, grátiam tríbu- 
ens in presénti, et glóriam in 
füturo, Per Dóminum, 


Postcommunion 


Av the gift of this Divine 

Sacrament which we 
have offered, cleanse us‘and de- 
fend us, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord; and through the inter- 
cession of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary, mother of God, of St. 
Joseph, of Thy holy apostles 
Peter and Paul, of blessed N. 
(the patron saint of the 
Church) and of all the saints, 
free us from all iniquity and 
deliver. us from all adversity 
Through the same, 


UNDET et müniat nos 

quaesumus Dómine di- 
víni sacraménti munus oblá- 
tum: et intercedénte beáta 
Vírgine Dei Genitríce María, 
cum  beáto Joseph, beatis 
Apóstolis tuis Petro et Paulo, 
atque beáto N. et ómnibus 
Sanctis; a cunctis nos reddat 
et pervérsitátibus expiátos, et 
advérsitatibus expedítos, Per 
eumdem Dóminum, 


For the Libing and the Dead 


Prayer. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus 


LMIGHTY and eternal God, 
Who hast dominion over 


MNÍPOTENS  sempitérne 
Deus, qui vivórum do- 


- 


the living and the dead, and mináris simul et mortuórum, 
art merciful to all of whom omnitimque miseréris, quos 
Thou foreknowest that they tuos fide et Ópere futüros esse 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ADDITIONAL PRAYERS 


Prendscis: te süpplices exo- 
Tamus: ut pro quibus effün- 
dere preces decrévimus, quos- 
que vel præsens seculum ad- 
huc in carne réünet, vel fu- 
túrum jam exttos córpore 
Suscépit, intercedéntibus óm- 
nibus Sanctis tuis, pietátis 


tórum suórum véniam conse- 
quántur. Per Dóminum. 


prayers, 


$^ tuse cleméntia ómnium delic- 


829 


will be Thine by faith and good 
works, we humbly beseech 
Thee, that they for whom we 
have resolved to pour forth our 
whether this world 
still retaineth them in the flesh, 
or the other world hath already 
received them freed from. the 
body, may by the grace of Thy 
loving-kindness, and through 
the intercession of all Thy 
saints, obtain the forgiveness 
of all their sins. Through our 
Lord, 


Secret 


EUS, cui soli cógnitus est 
nümerus electórum in 
Supérna felicitóte lócandus: 
tríbue qusesumus; ut interce- 
déntibus ómnibus Sanctis tuis, 
universórum, quos in oratióne 
commendátos suscépimus, et 
ómnium fidélium nómina, be- 
áte  predestinatiónis liber 
adscrípta retíneat. Per Domi- 
num. 


Gop, to Whom alone is 

known the number of the 
elect who shall attain the hap- 
piness of heaven, grant, we be- 
seech Thee, that by the inter- 
cession of all Thy saints, the 
names of those who have been 
commended to our prayers and 
of all the faithful, may be writ- 
ten in the book of blessed pre- 
destination. Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


URÍFICENT nos quesumus 

omnipotens et miséri- 
cors Deus sacraménta que 
sümpsimus: et intercedénti- 
bus ómnibus Sanctis tuis, 
presta; ut hoc tuum sacra- 
méntum non sit nobis reá- 
tus ad penam, sed inter- 
céssio salutáris ad véniam: sit 
ablütio scélerum, sit fortitüdo 
fragilium, sit contra ómnia 
mundi perícula firmament- 
um; sit vivórum atque mortu- 
órum fidélium remíssio ómni- 
um delictérum, Per Dóminum. 


LMIGHTY and merciful 
s God, let the sacred mys- 
teries we have received purify 
us, we beseech Thee, and grant, 
by the intercession of all Thy 
saints, that this Thy sacrament 
may be unto us not an occasion 
of guilt and punishment, but a 
means of pardon and salvation: 
may it wash away our offenses; 
may it be our strength in weak- 
ness; may it be our defence in 
all dangers; and to every one 
of the faithful, whether living 
or dead, may it avail to the re- 
mission of all. their sins. 
Through our Lord. D 


For other Prayers, see page 1494, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


The Proper of Saints 


As the ecclesiastical year begins on the first Sunday of Ad. 
vent, that is, on the Sunday next before or after the feast of 
St. Andrew the Apostle (Nov. 30), it is customary to begin this 
part of the Missal with the Mass of the vigil of the same 
Apostle, or with that of tbe feast if any appointed to be cele- 
brated on St. Andrew's-eve (Nov. 29). 


Nov. 29—Wigil of St. Andrew, Apostle (Purple) ^ 


If the joast of St. Andrew falls on a Monday and as no vigil 
may be kept on a Sunday, the Mass of this vigil is celebrated ( 
on the preceding Saturday. | 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Matt. 4, 18, 19 


HE Lord saw two brothers, OMINUS secus mare Gali- 
Peter and Andrew, by the lee vidit duos fratres, 
Seaside of Galilee, and He Petrum et Andréam, et vocá- 
called them; Come ye after vit eos: Venite post me: fá- 
Me, I will make you to be fish- ciam vos fíeri piscatóres hó- i 
ers of men. Ps. 18, 2. The heav- minum. Ps. 18, 2. Coli enár- 
ens show forth the glory of rant glóriam Dei: et ópera 
God, and the firmament de- mánuum ejus annüntiat fir- 
clareth the works of His hands. maméntum. Y. Glória Patri. 
y. Glory. 
Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 
E BESEECH Thee, O al- UXSUMUS, omnipotens 
‘mighty God, that Deus: ut bedtus Andréas 


blessed Andrew, Thine apostle, Apóstolus, cujus prevenimus 
for whose feast we are prepar- festivitátem, tuum pro nobis 
ing, may implore for us Thine implóret auxilium; ut, a nos- 
aid, that, our offenses being tris reátibus absolüti, a cunc- 
pardoned, we may also be tis étiam perículis eruámur. 
saved from all dangers. Per Dóminum. 
Through our Lord. 

IN ADVENT: The Second Prayer is that of the Feria (Prayer 


Ist Sunday of Advent, page 103); the third of St. Saturninus 
as below. 

BEFORE ADVENT: The Second Prayer is that of St, Saturninus as 
below; the third, Concede nos, page 824. 


If this vigil is celebrated on the preceding Saturday: The 
Second Prayer is Deus qui de beate, page 823; the third, Ec- 
Clesie tux, page 825, or Deus omnium fidelium, page 826. 
In that case the Prayer of St. Saturninus is said om Sunday. 


Commemoration of St. Saturninus. 
830 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ER. — COP 


VIGIL OF ST. ANDREW 881 
Prayer 
gus, qui nos beáti Satur- cop, Who dost permit us 


nini Mártyris tui con- 
cedis natalitio pérfrui: ejus 
nos tribue méritis adjuvári. 
Per Dóminum. 


to enjoy the feast-day o£ 
blessed Saturninus, Thy mar- 
tyr, grant us to be assisted by 
his merits. Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 44, 25-27; 45, 2-4; 6-9 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiz. 


ENEDICTIO Dómini super 
caput justi. Ideo dedit 
ili Dóminus hzreditátem, et 
divisit illi partem in tríbubus 
duódecim: et invénit grátiam 
in conspéctu omnis carnis. Et 
magnificávit eum in timóre 
inimicórum, et in verbis suis 
monstra placávit. Glorificávit 
illum in conspéctu regum, et 
jussit illi coram pópulo suo, et 
osténdit illi glóriam suam. In 
fide, et lenitáte ipsíus, sanc- 
tum fecit illum, et elégit eum 
ex omni carne. Et dedit illi 
coram precépta, et legem vi- 
ie, et discipline, et excélsum 
fecít illum. Státuit ei testa- 
méntum etérnum, et circum- 
cinxit eum zona justítie: et 
índuit eum Dóminus corónam 
glóris. 


Lesson from the Book of 


Wisdom. 


HE blessing of the Lord 

was upon the head of the 
just man. Therefore the Lord 
gave him an inheritance, and 
divided him his portion in 
twelve tribes: and he found 
grace in the eyes of all flesh. 
He magnified him in the fear 
of his enemies, and with his 
words He made prodigies to 
cease. He glorified him in the 
sight of kings, and gave him 
commandments in the sight of 
his people, and showed him 
His glory. He sanctified him in 
his faith and meekness, and 
chose him out of all flesh. And 
He gave him commandments 
before His face, and a law of 
life and instruction: and He 
exalted him, He made an ever- 
lasting covenant with him, and 
girded him about with a girdie 


of justice: and the Lord crowned him with a crown of glory. 


Gradual. Ps. 138, 17, 18 


Nimis honoráti sunt amíci 
tui, Deus: nimis confortátus 
est principátus eórum. y. Di- 
numerábo eos: et super aré- 
nam multiplicabüntur. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Thy friends, O God, are made 
exceedingly honorable: their 
principality is exceedingly 
strengthened. Y. I will number 
them, and they shall be mul- 
tiplied above the sand. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


832 VIGIL OF ST. ANDREW 


Gospel. 
®© Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, John stood, 
and two of his disciples: 


&nd beholding Jesus walking, 


he gaith, Behold the Lamb of 
God. And the two disciples 
heard him speak, and they fol- 
lowed Jesus. And Jesus turn- 
ing, and seeing them following 
Him, He saith to them, What 


seek you? Who said to Him, 


Rabbi (which is to say, being 
interpreted, Master), where 
dwellest Thou? He saith to 
them, Come, and see. They 
came, and saw where He abode, 
and they stayed with Him that 


day: now it was about the 


tenth hour. And Andrew, the 
brother of Simon Peter, was 
one of the two who had heard 
of John, and followed him. He 
findeth first his brother Simon, 
and saith to him, We have 
found the Messias (which is, 
being interpreted, the Christ). 
And he brought him to Jesus; 
and Jesus, looking upon him, 
said, Thou art Simon, the son 
of Jona; thou shalt be called 
Cephas, which is interpreted, 
Peter. On the following day, 
He would go forth into Galilee: 
and He findeth Philip. And Je- 
sus saith to him, Follow Me. 
Now Philip was of Bethsaida, 
the city of Andrew and Peter. 
Philip findeth Nathanel, and 
saith to him, We have found 
Him of Whom Moses in the 
law and the prophets did write, 
Jesus, the son of Joseph of 
Nazareth. And Nathanzl saith 
to bim, Can anything of good 
come from Nazareth? Philip 
saith to him, Come, and see. 


John 1, 35-51 


"HR Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Stabat 

Joánnes, et ex discípulis 
ejus duo. Et respíciens Jesum 
ambulántem, dicit: Ecce Ag- 
nus Dei Et audiérunt eum 
duo discfpuli loquéntem, et 
secüti sunt Jesum. Convérsus 
autem Jesus, et videns eos 
sequéntes se. dicit eis: Quid 
queritis? Qui dixérunt ei: 
Rabbi (quod dícitur interpre- 
tatum Magister) ubi hábitas? 
Dicit eis: Veníte, et vidéte. 
Venérunt, et vidérunt ubi 
manéret, et apud eum mansé- 
runt die illo: hora autem erat 
quasi décima. Erat autem 
Andréas frater Simónis Petri 
unus ex duóbus, qui audíerant 
a Joanne, et secüti füerant 
eum, Invénit hic primum fra- 
trem suum Simónem, et dicit 
ei: Invénimus Messíam (quod 
est interpretátum Christus). 
Et addüxit eum ad Jesum. 
Intüitus autem eum Jesus, 
dixit: Tu es Simon fílius 
Jona: tu vocáberis Cephas, 
quod interpretátur Petrus. In 
crástinum vóluit exíre in Ga- 
lileam, et invénit Phílippum. 
Et dicit ei Jesus: Séquere me. 
Erat autem Philíppus a Beth- 
sáida, civitáte Andrée et Petri. 
Invénit Philippus Nathánaél, 
et dicit. ei: Quem scripsit 
Móyses in lege, et prophétz, 
invénimus Jesum fílium Jo- 
seph a Názareth. Et dixit ei 
Nathanaél: A Nazareth po- 
test aliquid boni esse? Dicit 
ei Philíppus: Veni, et vide. 
Vidit Jesus Nathánaél venién- 
tem ad se, et dicit de eo: Ecce 
vere Israélita, in quo dolus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
| 


VIGIL OF ST. ANDREW 


non est. Dicit ei Nathanaél: 
Unde me nosti? Respéndit 
Jesus, et dixit ei: Priüsquam 
te Philippus vocáret, cum es- 
Ses sub ficu, vidi te. Respóndit 
ei Nathanaél, et ait: Rabbi 
tu es Filius Dei, tu es Rex 
Israël. Respéndit Jesus, et 
dixit ei: Quia dixi tibi: Vidi 
te sub ficu, credis: majus his 
vidébis. Et dicit ei: Amen, 
amen dico vobis, et vidébitis 
celum apértum, et Angelos 
Dei ascendéntes, et descen- 
déntes supra Fílium hóminis. 


833 


Jesus saw Nathanel coming to 
Him: and He said to him, Be- 
hold an Israelite indeed, in 
whom there is no guile. Na- 
thanel saith to Him, Whence 
knowest Thou me? Jesus an- 
swered, and said to him, Be- 
fore that Philip called thee, 
when thou wast under the fig- 
tree, I saw thee. Nathanel an= 
swered Him, and said, Rabbi, 
Thou art the Son of God, Thou: 
art the King of Israel. Jesus 
answered, and said to him, Be- 
cause I said unto thee, I saw 
thee under the fig-tree, thou 


believest: greater things than these shalt thou ‘see. And 
He saith to him, Amen, amen I say to you, you shall see 
the heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and 


descending upon the Son of man. 


Offertory. Ps. 8, 6, 7 


Glória et honóre coronásti 
eum, et constituísti eum super 
ópera mánuum tuárum, Dó- 
mine. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Thou hast crowned him with 
glory and honor; and hast set 
him over the works of Thy 
hands, O Lord. 


Secret 


AcRÁNDUM tibl Dómine, 

munus offérimus: quo 
beáti Andrée Apóstoli solém- 
nia recoléntes, purificatiónem 
quoque nostris méntibus im- 
plorámus. Per Dóminum. 


E OFFER Thee, O Lord, 

the gift to be conse- 
crated, whereby, commemorat- 
ing the solemnity of blessed 
Andrew, the apostle, we at the 
same time implore that our 
Souls may be made clean. 
Through our Lord. 


Iw Apvent: The second Secret is that of the Feria (Secret 
1st Sunday of Advent, page 105); the third Secret of St. Satur- 


ninus as below. 


BEFORE ApvENT: The second Secret is that of St. Saturninus 
as below; the third Secret, By Thy mercy, page 825. 


IF THIS vrcIL IS CELEBRATED ON THE PRECEDING SATURDAY: The 
second Secret is Strengthen in our minds, page 825; the third, 


Protect us, page 825, or, Be appeased, page 826. 
the Secret of St. Saturninus is said on Sunday. 


In that case 


http://ccwatershed.org 


834 VIGIL OF ST. ANDREW 


Commemoration of St. Saturninus. 
Secret 


ANCTIFY, O Lord, the sacri- ÜNERA, Dómine, tibi di- 
fices dedicated. to Thee, cata sanctifica: et, in- 
and, being appeased by means tercedénte beato Saturnino 
thereof, by the intercession of Martyre tuo, per hsec éadem 
blessed Saturninus, Thy mar- nos Placatus inténde. Per 
tyr, look favorably upon. us. Dóminum. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. John 1, 41, 42 


Andrew saith to Simon his Dicit Andréas Simóni fratri 
brother: We have found the suo: Invénimus Messíam, qui 
Messias, Who is called Christ; dícitur Christus: et addüxit 


and he brought him to Jesus. 


eum ad Jesum. 


Postcommunion 


AVING received Thy sacra- 
ments, O Lord, we hum- 
bly beseech Thee, that, by the 
intercession of blessed Andrew, 
Thy apostle, that which we per- 
form in honor of his venerable 
passion may profit unto our 
healing. Through our Lord. 


ERCEPTIS, Dómine, sacra- 

mentis suppliciter exo- 
ramus: ut, intercedénte beáto 
Andréa Apóstolo tuo, que pro 
illíus veneránda gérimus pas- 
sióne, nobis profíciant ad me- 
délam. Per Dóminum. 


IN ADVENT: The second Posicommunion is that of the Feria 
(Postcommunion Ist Sunday of Advent, page 106); the third 
Postcommunion of St. Saturninus as below. 


BEFORE ADVENT: 


The second Postcommunion is that of St. 


Saturninus as below; the third Postcommunion, Grant O Lord, 


page 825.. 


IF THIS VIGIL IS CELEBRATED ON THE PRECEDING SATURDAY: The 
second Postcommunion is Pour forth, page 823; the third, O 


Lord our God, page 825, or, May the reception, page 826. 


In 


that case the Postcommunion of St. Saturninus is said on 


Sunday. 


Commemoration of St. Saturninus. 


Postcommunion 


AY the partaking of Thy 

divine sacrament, sanc- 
tify us, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, and by the intercession 
of Thy saints render us ac- 
ceptable. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ANCTÍFICET nos, qu&esu- 

mus, Dómine, tui per- 
céptio sacraménti: et inter- 
cessióne Sanctérum tuórum 
tibi reddat accéptos. Per Dó- 
minum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 30—ST ANDREW, APOSTLE 835 


Nov. 30—St. Andrew, Apostle (Red) 


Double of the Second Class 


Ut this feast occurs on the first Sunday of Advent, it is cele- 
brated on the Monday following. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 138, 17 


THI autem nimis hono- o ME Thy friends, O God, 
ráti sunt amici tui, are made exceedingly 
Deus: nimis confortátus est honorable: their principality is 
principátis eórum. Ps. 138, exceedingly strengthened. Ps. 
1, 2. Dómine, probásti me, et 138, 1, 2. Lord, Thou hast 
cognovísti me: tu cognovísti proved me, and known me: 
sessiónem meam, et resurrec- Thou hast known my sitting 
tiónem meam. Y. Glória Patri. down, and my rising up. X. 
Glory. 


Kytie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


AJESTÁTEM tuam, Dó- E SUPPLICATE Thy maj- 

mine, suppliciter exo- esty, O Lord, that as 
ramus: ut, sicut Ecclésie tue blessed Andrew was in this 
beátus Andréas Apóstolus éx- world a preacher and ruler of 
stitit prædicátor et rector; ita Thy Church, so he may be our 
apud te sit pro nobis perpé- constant intercessor before 
tuus intercéssor. Per: Démi- Thee. Through our Lord. 
num. 


In Advent commemoration of the feria (Prayer, 1st Sunday of 
Advent, page 103). 


Epistle. Rom. 10, 10-18 
Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli Lesson from the Epistle of 


ad Romanos. 


RATRES: Corde enim cré- 

ditur ad justitiam: ore 
autem conféssio fit ad' salü- 
tem. Dicit enim Scriptüra: 
Omnis, qui credit in illum, 
non confundétur. Non enim 
est distínctio Judei, et Greci: 
nam idem Dóminus ómnium, 
dives in omnes, qui invocant 
ilum. Omnis enim, quicüm- 


blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 


RETHREN, With the heart 

we believe unto justice, 
but with the mouth confession 
is made unto salvation. For 
the Scripture saith, Whosoever 
believeth in Him shall not be 
confounded. For there is no 
distinction of the Jew and the 
Greek; for the same is Lord 
over all, rich unto all that call 


http://ccwatershed.org 


836 


upon Him. For whosoever shail. 
call upon the name of the Lord 
shall be saved. How then shall 
they call on Him in Whom they 
have not believed? or how 
shall they believe Him of 
Whom they have not heard? 
and how shall they hear, with- 
out a preacher? and how shall 
they preach, unless they be 
sent? as it is written, How 
beautiful are the feet of them 
that preach the gospel of peace, 
of them that bring glad tid- 
ings of good things! But all do 
not obey the gospel. For Isaias 
saith, Lord, who hath believed 
our report? Faith, then, cometh 
by hearing; and hearing by the 
word of Christ. But I say, Have 
they not heard? Yea, verily, 
their sound hath gone forth 


NOV. 30—ST. ANDREW, APOSTLE 


que invocaverit nomen Dó- 
mini, salvus erit. Quémodo 
ergo invocábunt, in quem non 
credidérunt? Aut quómodo 
credent ei, quem non audié- 
runt? Quómodo autem áudi- 
ent sine predicánte? Quó- 
modo vero predicábunt, nisi 
mittántur? sicut scriptum est: 
Quam speciósi pedes evan- 
gelizántiüm pacem, evangeli- 
zántium bona! Sed non om- 
nes obédiunt Evangélio, Isaías 
enim dicit: Dómine, quis cré- 
didit audítui nostro? Ergo fi- 
des ex audítu, auditus autem 
per verbum Christi. Sed dico: 
Numquid non audiérunt? Et 
quidem in omnem terram exí- 
vit sonus eórum, et in fines 
orbis terre verba eórum. 


into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the whole 


world. 


Gradual. Ps. 44, 17, 18 


Thou shalt make them 
princes over all the earth: they 
shall remember Thy name, O 
Lord. Y. Instead of Thy fath- 
ers, sons are born to Thee: 
therefore shall people praise 
Thee. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. The 
Lord loved Andrew for an odor 
of sweetness. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. 


E] Continuation of the holy 
«Gospel according to St. Mat- 
tbew. 


T THAT lime, Jesus, walk- 
ing by the sea of Gali- 
ee, Saw two brethren, Simon, 


who is called Peter, and An- 
drew his brother, casting a net 


Constítues eos  princípes 
super omnem terram: mé- 
mores erunt nóminis tui, Dó- 
mine. JY. Pro pátribus tuis 
nati sunt tibi fílii: proptérea 
pópuli confitebüntur tibi. 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Diléxit 
Andréam Dóminus in odórem 
suavitatis. Allelija. 


Matt. 4, 18-22 


H6 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Matthdeum. 


N 1LLO témpore: Ambulans 
Jesus juxta mare Galilææ, 
vidit duos fratres, Simónem, 
qui vocátur Petrus, et André- 
am fratrem ejus, mitténtes 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 390—5T. ANDREW, APOSTLE 


rete in mare (erant enim pis- 
catóres), et ait illis: Venite 
post me, et faciam vos fíeri 
piscatéres hóminum. At illi 
contínuo, relíctis rétibus, se- 
citi sunt eum. Et procédens 
inde, vidit álios duos fratres, 
Jacóbum Zebedai, et Joannem 
fratrem ejus in navi cum Ze- 
bedzo patre eórum, reficiéntes 
rétia sua: et vocávit eos. Illi 
autem statim, relíctis rétibus 
et patre, secüti sunt eum. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


Mihi autem nimis honoráti 
sunt amíci tui, Deus: nimis 
confortétus est principátus 
eórum. 

“Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


837 


into.the sea (for they were 
fishers). And He saith to them, 
Come ye after Me, and I will 
make you to be fishers of men: 
and they immediately leaving 
their nets followed Him. And 
going on from thence, He saw 
other two brethren, James the 
son of Zebedee, and John his 
brother, in a ship with Zebedee 
their father mending their 
nets; and He called them: and 
they forthwith left their nets 
and father, and followed Him. 


Ps. 138, 17 


To me Thy friends, O God, 
are made exceedingly honor- 
able; their principality is ex- 
ceedingly strengthened. 


Secret 


acriricrom nostrum tibi, 

Dómine, quesumus, be- 
ati Andrée Apóstoli precátio 
sancta conciliet: ut, in cujus 
hónore solémniter exhibétur, 
ejus méritis efficiátur accép- 
tum. Per Dóminum. 


Av the holy prayer of the 
blessed apostle Andrew 
commend our sacrifice to Thee, 
O Lord, we beseech, that it may 
be made acceptable by His 
merits in whose honor it is sol- 
emnly offered. Through our 
Lord. 


In Advent commemoration of the feria (Secret, 1st Sunday 


of Advent, page 105). 
Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. 


Venite post me; faciam vos 
fieri piscatóres hóminum: at 
illi continuo, relictis rétibus 
secüti sunt Dóminum. 


Matt. 4, 19, 20 


Come ye after Me: I will 
make you to be fishers of men. 
But they immediately leaving 
their nets, followed the Lord. 


Postcommunion 


6xPSrwus, Dómine, dí- 
vina mystéria, beáti An- 
dréæ festivitáte letantes: que, 


EJOICING, O Lord, on the 
feast-day of blessed An- 
drew, we have taken part in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


838 


Thy divine mysteries, and may- 
est Thou make them, we be- 
seech Thee, redound to our for- 
giveness a's they do to the glory 
of Thy saints. Through our 
Lord. 


DEC. 8—ST. FRANCIS XAVIER 


Sicut tuis Sanctis ad glóriam, 
ita nobis, quesumus, adyé- 
niam prodésse perfícias. Per 
Dóminum. 


In Advent the commemoration of the feria (Postcommunion, 
ist Sunday of Advent, page 106). 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Dec. 2—St. Bibiana, Virgin, Martyr (Red) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Me exspectaverunt, page 1363, except: 


Prayer 


GOD, the giver of all good 

gifts, Who in Thy hand- 
maid Bibiana didst join the 
palm of martyrdom to the 
flower of virginity, by her in- 
tercession, unite our hearts in 
charity to Thee, that our per- 
ils may be removed, and we 
may obtain the rewards of 
eternity. Through our Lord. 


EUS, ómnium  largítor 
D bonórum, qui in fámula 
ua, Bibiana cum virginitátis 
flore martyrii palmam con- 
junxísti: mentes nostras ejus 
intercessióne tibi caritáte con- 
junge; ut, amótis perículis, 
premia consequámur etérna. 
Per Dóminum. 


In Advent a commemoration of the feria (the Prayer, Secret 
and Postcommunion) of the preceding Sunday or those of an 
Ember-day is made, and similarly on all other festival-days 


until Christmas. 


Dec.3—$5t. Francis Xabier, Confessor (White) 
Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 118, 46, 47. 


sPOKE of Thy testimonies 

before kings, and I was not 
ashamed: I meditated also on 
Thy commandments, which I 
loved exceedingly. Ps. 116, 1, 2. 
Praise the Lord, all ye nations, 
and praise Him, all ye people: 
because His mercy is confirmed 
upon us, and the truth of the 


oqUÉsaR de testiméniis 

tuis in conspéctu re- 
gum, et non confundébar: et 
meditábar in mandátis tuis, 
quz diléxi nimis, Ps. 116, 1, 2. 
Laudáte Dóminum, omnes 
gentes, laudáte eum, omnes 
pópuli: quóniam confirmata 
est super nos misericórdia 


http://ccwatershed.org 


t 


DEC. 3—ST. FRANCIS XAVIER 


ejus, et véritas Dómini manet 
in ætérnum. V. Glória Patri. 


838 


Lord remaineth forever. F. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EVs, qui Indiárum gentes 
beáti Francisci predi- 
Catióne et miráculis Ecclésie 
tue aggregáre voluisti: con- 
céde propitius; ut, cujus glori- 
ósa mérita venerámur, virtu- 
tum quoque imitémur exém- 
pla. Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who wast pleased to 
O gather into Thy Church 
the nations of the Indies by 
the preaching and miracles of 
blessed Francis, mercifully 
grant that we, who venerate his 
glorious merits, may also imi- 
tate the example of his virtues. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the feria. 
Epistle as on the feast of St. Andrew, page 835. 


Gradual. Ps. 91, 13, 14 


Justus ut palma florébit: 
sicut cedrus Libani multipli- 
cábitur in domo Dómini. JV. 
91, 3. Ad annuntiándum mane 
misericórdiam tuam, et veri- 
iátem tuam per noctem. 

Allelija, allelüja. E. Jac. 
1, 12. Beátus vir, qui suffert 
tentatiónem: quóniam cum 
probátus füerit, accipiet coró- 
nam vite, Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


The just man shall flourish 
like the palm-tree: he shall 
grow up like the cedar of Li- 
banus, V. 91, 3. To show forth 
Thy mercy in the morning, and 
Thy truth in the night. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. James 1, 
12. Blessed is the man that en- 
dureth temptation: for, when 
he hath been proved, he shall 
receive the crown of life, Alle- 
luia. 


Gospel. Mark 16, 15-17 


*B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secüóndum Marcum, 


'N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
T sus discípulis suis: Eün- 
tes in mundum univérsum, 
predicáte Evangélium omni 
creature. Qui credíderit, et 
baptizátus. fuerit, salvus 
erit: qui vero non crediderit, 
condemnábitur. Signa autem 
eos, qui crediderint, hzc se- 
quéntur: In nómine meo dæ- 
mónla ejicient: linguis lo- 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 


T THAT time, Jesus said to 

His disciples, Go ye into 
he whole world, and preach 
ihe gospel to every creature. 
He that believeth and is bap- 
tized, shall be saved; but he 
that: believeth not, shall be 
condemned. And these signs 
shall follow them that believe: 
In My name they shall cast out 
devils; they shall speak with 


http://ccwatershed.org 


840 DEC. 3—ST. FRANCIS XAVIER 


new tongues; they Shall take quéntur novis: serpéntes tol- 
up serpents; and if they shall lent: et si mortiferum quid 
drink any deadly thing, it shall biberint, non eis nocébit: su- 
not hurt them; they shall lay per gros manus impónent, et 
their hands upon the sick,.and bene habébunt. 

they shall recover, 


Offertory. Ps. 88, 25 


My truth and My mercy shall ^ Véritas mea, et misericérdia 
be with him: and in My name mea cum ipso: et in nómine 
shall his horn be exalted, meo exaltábitur cornu ejus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


RANT, we beseech 'Thee, O RESTA nobis, quesumus, 

almighty God, that the omnipotens Deus: ut 
offering of our lowliness may be nostre humilitátis oblatio, et 
both pleasing to Thee for the pro tuórum tibi grata sit ho- 
honor of Thy saints and may nóre Sanctórum, et nos cór- 
likewise purify us in body and pore páriter et mente purí- 
soul. Through our Lord. ficet. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of the feria, 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion, Matt. 24, 46, 47 


Blessed is that servant, whom Beátus servus, quem, cum 
when the Lord shall come, He vénerit dóminus, invénerit 
shall find watching: Amen I vigilantem: amen dico vobis, 
say to you, He shall set him super ómnia bona sua consti- 


over all His goods. tuet eum. 
Postcommunion 
E BESEECH Thee, O al- UZSUMUS, omnípotens 
mighty God, that we, Deus: ut, qui celéstia 


who have partaken of heavenly aliménta percépimus, inter- 
nourishment, may, by the in- cedénte beáto Francísco Con- 
tercession of blessed Francis, fessóre tuo, per hec contra 
Thy confessor, be fortified by ómnia advérsa muniámur, 
the same against all adverse Per Dóminum. 

influences, Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the feria. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


i 
{ 


| 
» 


DEC. 4—ST. PETER CHRYSOLOGUS 


841 


Dec. 4—St, Peter Chrpsologus, Bishop, Confessor, 
Doctor of the Church (White) 
i Double 
St. Barbara, Virgin, Martyr 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ecclus. 15, 5 


MÉDIOEcclésie apéruit os 
ejus: et implévit eum Dó- 
minus spíritu sapiéntie et in- 
telléctus: stolam glóris induit 
eum. (T. P. Allelája, allelája.) 
Ps. 91, 2. Bonum est confitéri 
Dómino: et psállere nómini 
tuo, Altissime. Y. Glória Patri. 


N THE midst of the Church 

the Lord opened his mouth: 
and filled him with the spirit 
of wisdom and understanding: 
He clothed him with a robe of 
glory. (P. T. Alleluia, alleluia.) 
Ps. 91, 2. It is good to give 
praise to the Lord; and to sing 
to Thy name, O Most High. y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui beátum Petrum 
Chrysólogum Doctórem 
egrégium, divínitus premon- 
strátum, ad regéndam et in- 


struéndam  Ecclésiam tuam. 


éligi voluísti: presta, quesu- 
mus; ut, quem Doctórem vite 
habüimus in terris, interces- 
sérem habére mereámur in 
celis. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of the feria. 


cop, Who didst will that 

blessed Peter Chrysolo- 
gus, divinely foreshown to be a 
great doctor, should be elected 
to rule and instruct Thy 
Church, grant, we beseech 
Thee, that we may be worthy to 
have him as our intercessor in 
heaven, whom we have had as 
& teacher of holy living on 
earth. Through our Lord. 
Third Prayer of St. Barbara 


from the Mass, Loquebar, page 1359. 
Epistle, from the Mass In medio, page 1345. 


Gradual. Ecclus. 44, 16 


Ecce sacérdos magnus, qui 
in diébus suis plácuit Deo. V. 
Ecclus, 44, 20. Non est invén- 
tus similis illi, qui conserva- 
ret legem Excélsi. 

Allelija, allelija. V. Ps. 109, 
4. Tu es sacérdos in etérnum, 
secindum órdinem Melchise- 
dech. Allelüja. 


Behold a great priest, who in 
his days pleased God. YF. 
Ecclus. 20. There was not any 
found like to him, who kept the 
law of the Most High. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 109, 
4. Thou art a priest forever ac- 
cording to the order of Mel- 
chisedech. Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


842 - DEC. 6—ST. NICHOLAS, BISHOP 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 

Gospel from the Mass In medio, page 1346. 

Creed, page 765. 

Offertory jrom the Mass In medio, page 1347. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 

Secret from the Mass, In medio, page 1347. Commemoration 


of the feria. Third Secret of St. Barbara from the Mass, Loque- 
bar, page 1362. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Matt. 25, 20 


Lord, Thou didst deliver to Dómine, quinque talénta 
me five talents: behold I have tradidisti mihi: ecce ália 
gained other five over and quinque superlucratus sum. 
above. Well done, good and Euge, serve bone, et fidélis, 
faithful servant; because thou quia in pauca fuísti fidélis, 
hast been faithful over a few supra multa te constituam, 
things, I will place thee over intra in gáudiura Dómini tul. 
many things; enter thou into 
the joy of thy Lord. 


Postcommunion from the Mass, In medio, page 1348. Com- 
memoration of the feria. Third Postcommunion of St. Barbara 
zrom the Mass, Loquebar, page 1363. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Dec. 5—St. Sabbas, Abbot (White) 
- Simple 


Mass of the feria. Commemoration of St. Sabbas, from the 
Mass Os justi, page 1349. : 


Dec. 6-—St. Micholas, Bishop, Confessor (White) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 45, 30 


HE Lord made to him a TATUIT ei Dóminus testa- 
covenant of peace, and méntum pacis, et prin- 
made him 2 prince; that the cipem fecit eum: ut sit illi 
dignity of priesthood should be sacerdótii dígnitas in ætér- 
to him for ever. Ps..131, 1. O num. Ps. 131, 1. Meménto, 
Lord, remember David, and all Dómine, David: et omnis 
his meekness, Y, Glory. mansuetüdinis ejus, Y. Glória 
Patri 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


4 
| 


DEC. 6—ST. NICHOLAS, BISHOP 


843 


_ Prayer 


EUS, qui beátum Nico- 

láum Pontíficem innü- 
meris decorasti miraculis: 
iríbue quesumus; ut ejus mé- 
ritis et précibus, a gehénne 
incéndiis liberémur, Per Dó- 
minum. 


cop, Who didst. adorn 

blessed Nicholas, the 
bishop, with miracles unnum- 
bered, grant, we beseech Thee, 
that by his merits and prayers 
we may be delivered from the 
fires of hell. Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the ‘feria. 


Epistle. Heb. 13, 7-17 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apostoli ad Hebreeos. 


RATRES: Mementóte præ- 

positórum vestrórum, qui 
vobis locuti sunt verbum Dei: 
quorum intuéntes éxitum con- 
versatiónis, imitámini fidem. 
Jesus Christus heri, et hódie: 
ipse et in secula. Doctrinis 
váriis et peregrínis nolíte ab- 
düci. Optimum est enim grá- 
tia stabilire cor, non escis, quz 
non profuérunt ambulántibus 
in eis. Habémus altáre, de quo 
édere non habent potestatem, 
qui tabernaculo desérviunt. 
Quorum enim animálium in- 
fértur sanguis pro peccato in 
Sancta per pontificem, horum 
córpora cremántur extra cas- 
tra. Propter quod et Jesus, ut 
sanctificaret per.suum sán- 
guinem pópulum, extra por- 
tam passus est, Exeámus ígi- 
tur ad eum extra castra, im- 
propérium ejus  portántes. 
Non enim habémus hic ma- 
néntem civitátem, sed futü- 
ram inquírimus. Per ipsum 
ergo offerámus hóstiam laudis 
semper Deo, id est, fructum 
labiórum confiténtium némini 
ejus. Beneficéntie autem, et 
communiónis nolíte oblivísci: 
tálibus enim hóstiis promeré- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Hebrews. 

RETHREN, remember your 

prelates who have spoken 
the word of God to you: whose 
faith follow, considering the 
end of their conversation. Je- 
sus Christ yesterday, and to- 
day, and the same forever. Be 
not led away with various and 
strange doctrines: for it is best 
that the heart be established 
with grace; not with meats, 
which have not profited those 
that walk in them. We have an 
altar, whereof they have no 
power to eat who serve the 
tabernacle. For the bodies of 
those beasts, whose blood is 
brought into the Holies by the 
high priest for sin, are burned 
without the camp. Wherefore 
Jesus also, that He might sanc- 
tify the people by His own 
blood, suffered without the 
gate. Let us go forth therefore 
to Him without the camp, 
bearing His reproach: for we 
have not here a lasting city, 
but we seek one that is to come. 
By Him therefore let us offer 
the sacrifice of praise always 
to God, that is to say, the fruit 
of lips confessing to His name. 
And do not forget to do good 


http://ccwatershed.org 


844 


and to impart: for by such sac- 
rifices God's favor is obtained. 
Obey your prelates, and be sub- 
ject to them; for they watch, 
as being to render an account 
for your souls. 


DEC. 6—ST. NICHOLAS, BISHOP 


tur Deus. Obedite prepósitis 
vestris, et subjacéte eis. Ipsi 
enim pervígilant, quasi ratió- 


nem pro animábus vestris red- 


ditüri. 


Gradual. Ps. 88, 21-23 


I have found David, My ser- 
vant: with My holy oil I have 
anointed him; for My hand 
shall help him, and My arm 
shall strengthen him. VY. The 
enemy shall have no advantage 
over him; nor the son of in- 
iquity have power to hurt him. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 91, 
13. The just man shall flourish 
like the palm-tree: he shall 
grow up like the cedar of Li- 
banus. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 
Gospel from the Mass Statuit, 
Offertory. 


My truth and mercy shall be 
with him: and in My name 
shall his horn be exalted. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Invéni David servum me- 
um, óleo sancto meo unxi 
eum: manus enim mea auxili- 
abitur ei, et bráchium meum 
confortábit eum. Y. Nihil pro- 
fíciet inimícus in eo, et fílius 
iniquitátis non nocébit ei. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 91, 
13. Justus ut palma florébit: 
Sicut cedrus Líbani multipli- 
cábitur. Allelüja. 


page 1304. 
Ps. 88, 25 


Véritas mea, et misericórdia 
mea cum ipso: et in nómine 
meo exaltábitur cornu ejus. 


Secret 


ANCTIFY, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord. God, these gifts, 
which we offer on the solemnity 
of Thy holy bishop, Nicholas, 
that through them our lives, 
whether in adversity or in pros- 
perity, may everywhere be 
guided aright. Through our 
Lord. 
Commemoration of the feria. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Once have I sworn by My 
holiness, his seed shall endure 


ANCTÍFICA, quzsumus, Dó- 

mine Deus, hzc münera, 
quz in solemnitáte sancti An- 
tístitis tui Nicolái offérimus: 
ut per ea, vita nostra inter 
advérsa et próspera ubíque 
dirigátur. Per Dóminum. 


Ps. 88, 36-38 


Semel jurávi in sancto meo: 
semen ejus in etérnum mané- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEC. 7—ST. AMBROSE, BISHOP 845 
bit, et sedes ejus sicut sol in forever: and his throne as the 
conspéctu meo, et sicut luna sun before Me, and as the moon 
perfécta in etérnum, et testis perfect forever; and a faith- 


in ccelo fidélis. 


ful witness in heaven. 


Postcommunton 


ACRIFÍCIA, que  sümpsi- 

mus, Dómine, pro solem- 
nitáte sancti Pontíficis tui 
Nicolai, sempitérna nos pro- 
tectiéne consérvent. Per Dó- 
minum. 


AY the sacrifices of which 

we have partaken, O 

Lord, to honor the feast of Thy 

holy bishop, Nicholas, preserve 

us with their protection for- 
evermore. Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the feria. . 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Dec. 7—St. Ambrose, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor 
of the Church (White) 
Double 
Vigil of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary (Purple) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 15, 5 


N MÉDIO Ecclésie apéruit os 
T ejus: et implévit eum Dó- 
minus spíritu sapiéntie et in- 
telléctus: stolam glórie induit 
eum. Ps. 91, 2. Bonum est 
confitéri Dómino: et psállere 
nómini tuo, Altissime. JY. 
Gloria Patri. 


N THE midst of the church 
I the Lord opened his 
mouth: and filled him with the 
Spirit of wisdom and under- 
Standing: He clothed him with 
a robe of glory. Ps. 91, 2. It is 
good to give praise to the Lord: 
and sing to Thy name, O Most 
High. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui pópulo tuo etér- 
ne salütis beátum Am- 
brosium minístrum tribuísti: 
presta, quesumus; ut, quem 
Doctórem vite habüimus in 
terris, intercessórem habére 


cop, Who  didst give 
O blessed Ambrose to Thy 
people to be a minister of 
eternal salvation, grant, we be- 
seech Thee, that we may be 
worthy to have him as our in- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


846 


tercessor in heaven whom we 

have had as a teacher of life 

on earth. Through our Lord. 
Commemoration of the feria. 


DEC. 7—ST. AMBROSE, BISHOP 


mereámur in calis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Third Prayer from the Mass 


of the vigil of the Immaculate Conception, page 847. 
Epistle from the Mass In medio, page 1345. 


Gradual. Ecclus. 44, 16, 20 


Behold a great priest, who 
in his days pleased God. Y. 
Ecclus, 20. There was not any 
found like to him, who kept the 
law of the Most High. 

Aleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 109, 4. 
The Lord hath sworn, and He 
will not repent. Thou art a 
priest forever according to the 
order of Melchisedech. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ecce sacérdos magnus, qui 
in diébus suis plácuit Deo. Y. 
Ecclus. 20. Non est invéntus 
similis illi, qui conserváret 
legem Excélsi. 

Allelija, allelija. JP. Ps. 
109, 4. Jurávit Dóminus, et 
non penitébit eum: Tu es 
sacérdos in seternum, secün- 
dum órdinem Melchisedech. 
Allelüja. 


Gospel from the Mass In medio, page 1346. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 
My truth and My mercy shall 


be with him: and in My name 
Shall bis horn be exaited. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 88, 25 

Véritas mea, et misericórdia 
mea cum ipso: et in nómine 
meo exaltábitur cornu ejus. 


Secret 


LMIGHTY, everlasting 

God, do Thou cause the 

gifts that are offered to Thy 

majesty, by the intercession of 

blessed Ambrose Thy confessor 

and bishop, to benefit us unto 

everlasting salvation. Through 
our Lord. 


Commemoration of the feria. 


MNíÍPOTENS sempitérne 

Deus, münera tue ma- 
jestati oblata, per interces- 
siónem beáti Ambrósii Con- 
fessóris tui atque Pontíficis, 
ad perpétuam nobis fac pro- 
veníre salütem. Per Dómi- 
num. 
Third Secret from the Mass 


of the vigil of the Immaculate Conception, page 849. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Ps. 88, 35, 38 
Once have I sworn by My Semel juravi in sancto meo: 
holiness, his seed shall endure semen ejus in etérnum mané- 
forever: and his throne as the bit, et sedes ejus sicut sol in 
sun before Me, and as the conspéctu meo, et sicut luna 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEC. 7—VIGIL OF IMMACULATE CONCEPTION 


perfécta in etérnum, et testis 
in celo fidélis. 


847 


moon perfect forever; and a 
faithful witness in heaven. 


Postcommunion 


ACRAMÉNTA salütis nostre 

suscipiéntes, concéde, 
quesumus, omnípotens Deus: 
ut beáti Ambrósii Confessóris 
tui atque Pontíficis, nos ubí- 
que orátio ádjuvet; in cujus 
veneratióne hsc tue obtüli- 
mus majestáti. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of the feria. 


RANT US, we beseech Thee, 
O almighty God, as we 
receive the sacrament of our 
salvation, that the prayer of 
blessed Ambrose, Thy confes- 
sor and bishop, in veneration of 
whom we have offered this sac- 
rifice to Thy majesty, may 
everywhere assist us. Through 
our Lord. 


Third Postcommunion from 


the Mass of the vigil of the Immaculate Conception, page 849. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793; except the last Gospel is that of the 
vigil of the Immaculate Conception. 


The Vigil of the Immaculate Conception of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary (Purple) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 65, 76 


ENITE, audite, et nar- 
V rábo, omnes qui timé- 
tis Deum, quanta fecit Dó- 
minus anime mez. Ps. 65, 1. 
2. Jubiláte Deo, omnis terra: 
psalmum dícite nómini ejus, 
date glóriam laudi ejus. Y. 
Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


OME and hear, all ye that 
fear,God: and I will tell 
you what great things the Lord 
hath done for my soul. Ps. 65, 1, 
2. O sing joyfully unto God, all 
the earth, sing ye a psalm unto 
His name: give glory unto His 
praise. Y. Glory. 


Prayer 
EUS, qui Unigéniti tui cop, Who didst won- 
Matrem ab origináli drously preserve the 


culpa in sua Conceptióne mi- 
rábiliter preservasti: da, quz- 
sumus; et sua nos interces- 
sióne munítos, corde mundos 
fácias sue interésse festivi- 
táti. Per eümdem Dóminum. 


mother of Thine only-begotten 
Son from original sin in her 
own conception, grant, we be- 
seech Thee, that Thou mayest 
make us, strengthened by her 
intercession, to keep her fes- 
tival with clean hearts. 
Through the same. 


Commemoration of the feria. Third Prayer, page 827. 
Lesson, As the vine, page 1106. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


848 


DEC. 7—VIGIL OF IMMACULATE CONCEPTION 


Gradual. Proy. 9, 1 


Wisdom hath built herself a 
house, she hath hewn her out 
of seven pillars. Y. Ps. 86, 1, 2. 
Her foundations are in the 
holy mountains: the Lord lov- 
eth the gates of Sion above 
all the dwellings of Jacob. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Sapiéntia zdificávit sibi do- 
mum, excidit colümnas sep- 
tem. Y. Ps. 86, 1, 2. Funda- 
ménta ejus in móntibus sanc- 
tis: díligit Dóminus portas 
Sion super ómnia tabernácula 
Jacob. 


Gospel. Matt. 1, 1-16 


Beginning of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

HE book of the generation 

of Jesus Christ, the son 
of David, the son of Abraham. 
Abraham  begot Isaac; and 
Isaac begot Jacob; and Jacob 
begot Judas, and his brethren; 
and Judas begot Phares and 
Zara of Thamar; and Phares 
begot Esron; and Esron begot 
Aram; and Aram begot Amina- 
dab; and Aminadab  begot 
Naasson; and Naasson begot 
Salmon; and Salmon begot 
Booz of Rahab; and Booz be- 
got Obed of Ruth; and Obed 
begot Jesse; and Jesse begot 
David the king. And David the 
king begot Solomon, of her 
who had been the wife of Urias; 
and Solomon begot Roboam; 
&nd Roboam begot Abia; and 
Abia begot Asa; and Asa begot 
Josaphat; and Josaphat begot 
Joram; and Joram begot Ozias; 
and Ozias begot Joatham; and 
Joatham begot Achaz; and 
Achaz begot Ezechias; and 
Ezechias begot Manasses; and 
Manasses begot Amon; and 
Amon begot Josias; and Josias 
begot Jechonias and his breth- 
ren in the transmigration of 
Babylon. And after the trans- 


4 Inítium sancti Evangélii 
secündum Mattheum. 


IBER generatiónis Jesu 

Christi fílii David, filii 
Abraham. Abraham génuit 
Isaac. Isaac autem génuit 
Jacob. Jacob autem génuit 
Judam, et fratres ejus. Judas 
&utem génult Phares, et Za- 
ram de Thamar. Phares au- 
tem génuit Esron. Esron au- 
tem génuit Aram. Aram au- 
tem génuit Amínadab. Amí- 
nadab autem génuit Naásson. 
Naásson autem génuit Sal- 
mon. Salmon autem génuit 
Booz de Rahab. Booz autem 
génuit Obed ex Ruth. Obed 
autem génuit Jesse. Jesse au- 
tem génuit David regem. 
David autem rex génuit Salo- 
mónem ex ea, que fuit Urie. 
S4lomon autem génuit Ró- 
boam. Róboam autem génuit 
Abíam. Abías autem génuit 
Asa. Asa autem génuit Jósa- 
phat. Jósaphat autem génuit 
Joram. Joram autem génuit 
Oziam. Ozías autem génuit 
Jóatham. Jéatham autem gé- 
nuit Achaz. Achaz autem gé- 
nuit Ezechíam. Ezechías au- 
tem génuit Manássen. Ma- 
násses autem génuit Amon. 
Amon autem génuit Josíam. 


migration of Babylon, Jechon- Josías autem génuit Jecho- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEC. 7—VIGIL OP IMMACULATE CONCEPTION 849 


níam, et fratres ejus in trans- 
migratióne Babylónis. Et post 
transmigratiónem Babylónis: 
Jechonias génuit Salathiel. 
Salathiel autem génuit Zoró- 
babel, Zoróbabel autem génuit 
Abiud: Abiud autem génuit 
Eliacim, Eliacim autem gé- 
nuit Azor. Azor autem génuit 
Sadoc... Sadoc autem génuit 
Achim. Achim autem génuit 
Eliud. Eliud autem génuit 


Eleázar. Eleázar autem génuit: 


Mathan. Mathan autem gé- 


ias begot Salathiel; and Sala- 
thiel. begot Zorobabel; and 
Zorobabel begot Abiud; . and 
Abiud begot. Eliacim; and Elia- 
cim begot Azor; and: Azor be- 
got Sadoc; and Sadoc begot 
Achim; and Achim begot Eliud; 
and Eliud begot Eleazar; and 
Eleazar begot Mathan; and 
Mathan begot Jacob; and Ja- 
cob begot Joseph, the husband 
of Mary, of whom was born 
Jesus, Who is called Christ. 


nuit Jacob; Jacob autem génuit Joseph virum Marie, de qua 
natus est Jesus, qui vocatur Christus. 


Offertory. Cant. 6,2 


Ego dilécto meo, et diléctus 
meus mihi, qui páscitur inter 
lília. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


NERA nostra, Dómine, 

-apud tuam cleméntiam 
Immaculate Dei Genetricis 
comméndet orátio: quam ab 
omni origináli labe preser- 
vásti; ut dignum Fílii tui 
habitáculum éffici mererétur. 
Qui tecum. 


page 8. 


Ito my beloved and my be- 
loved to me, who feedeth 


, among the lilies. 


Secret - 


í AY our gifts be com- 
(D mended in the sight of 
Thy mercy, O Lord, by the 
prayer of the immaculate 
Mother of God, whom Thou 
didst preserve from original sin 
that she might be worthy to 
become the dwelling of Thy 
Son. Who livest. 


Commemoration of the feria; third Prayer of the Holy Ghost, 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Cant. 6,9 
Quz est ista, que progrédi-: Who is she that cometh forth 
tur quasi auróra consürgens, as the morning rising, fair as 
pulchra ut luna, elécta ut sol, the moon, bright as the sun, 
terrfbilis ut castrórum ácies terrible as an army set in 
ordineta? array. 


Postcommunion 


ONCÉDE, miséricors Deus, RANT, O merciful God, Thy 
fragilitáti nostr: przsí- protection to our frailty, 
dium: ut, qui Immaculáte that we, who prepare for the 
Conceptiónis Genitricis uni- festival of the Immaculate Con- 
géniti Fili tui festivitátem ception of the Mother of Thine 


http://ccwatershed.org 


850 DEC. 8—IMMACULATE CONCEPTION 


Copyright. 1936, by Benziger Brothers 


BLESSED ART THOU, O VIRGIN MARY, BY THE LORD, THE MOST 
HIGH GOD, ABOVE ALL WOMEN, UPON THE EARTH. THROU ART THE 
GLORY OF JERUSALEM, THOU ART THE JOY OF ISRAEL, THOU ART THE 
HONOR OF OUR PEOPLE. THOU ART ALL FAIR, O MARY, AND THERE 
18 IN THEE NO STAIN OP ORIGINAL SIN, (Judith 13.) 


DEC.:8—IMMACULATE CONCEPTION 


prevenímus;  intercessiónis 
ejus auxílio a nostris iniqui- 
tátibus resurgámus. Per eum- 
dem Dóminum. 


851 


only-begotten Son, may, by the 
aid of her intercession, rise 
from our iniquities. Through 
the same. ` 


Commemoration of the feria; third Postcommunion of the 


Holy Ghost, page 827. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Dec. 8—3immaculate Conception of the Blessed 
"Virgin Marp (White) 


Double of the First Class with a Common Octave 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


QU gaudébo in Dó- 
.mino, et exsultábit áni- 
ma mea in Deo meo: quia in- 
duit me vestiméntis salütis: 
et induménto justitie circim- 
dedit me, quasi sponsam or- 
nátam monílibus suis. Ps. 29, 
2. Exaltábo te, Dómine, quó- 
niam suscepisti.me: nec de- 
lectásti inimícos meos super 
me. Y. Glória Patri. | 


Is. 61, 10 
^ WILL greatly rejoice in the 
Lord, and my soul shall be 
joyful in my God: for He hath 
clothed me with the garments 
of salvation, and with the robe 
of justice He hath covered me, 
as & bride adorned with her 
jewels. Ps. 29, 2. I will extol 
Thee, O Lord, for Thou hast 
upheld me: and hast not made 
my enemies to rejoice over me, 
y. Glory. 


` Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui per immaculá- 

tam Vírginis Concepti- 
ónem dignum Filio tuo habi- 
táculum preparasti: quesu- 
mus; ut, qui ex morte ejüsdem 
Fílii tui prevísa, eam ab omni 
labe preservásti, nos quoque 
mundos ejus intercessióne ad 
te perveníre concédas. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


Commemoration of the feria. 
Prov. 8, 22-35 


Lesson. 
Léctio libri Sapiéntiz, 


ÓMINUS possédit me in 
inítio viárum suárum, 


cop, Who, by the Immac- 

ulate Conception of the 
Virgin, didst prepare a worthy 
dwelling for Thy Son, we be- 
seech Thee that Thou, Who, by 
the death, foreseen by Thee, of 
the same Thy Son, didst pre- 
serve her from all stain, wilt 
grant us also, by her interces- 
sion, to come to Thee pure in 
heart. Through the same. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 

HE Lord possessed me in 

the beginning of His 


http://ccwatershed.org 


852 


ways, before He made any- 
thing,from the beginning. Iwas 
Set up from eternity, and of old, 
before the earth was made. The 
depths were not as yet, and I 
was already conceived; neither 
had the fountains of waters 
as yet sprung out; the moun- 
tains with their huge bulk had 
not as yet been established: be- 
fore the hills I was brought 
forth; He had not yet made the 


earth, nor the rivers, nor the 


poles of the world. When He 
prepared the heavens, I was 
there; when with a certain law 
and compass He enclosed the 
depths; when He established 
ihe sky above, and poised the 
fountains of waters; when He 
compassed the sea with its 
bounds, and set a law to the 
waters that they should not 
pass their limits; when He bal- 
anced the foundations of the 
earth, I was with him, forming 
all things, and was delighted 
every day, playing before Him 
at all times, playing in the 
world: and my delight is to be 
with the children of men. Now, 
therefore, ye children, hear me: 
blessed are they that keep my 
ways. Hear instruction, and be 
wise, and refuse it not. Blessed 
is the man that heareth me, 
and that watcheth daily at my 
gates, and waiteth at the posts 


DEC. 8—IMMACULATE CONCEPTION 


ántequam quidquam faceret.a 
princípio. Ab ztérno ordináta 
sum, et ex antíquis, ántequam 
terra fieret. Nondum erant 
abyssi, et ego jam concépta 
eram: necdum fontes aquá- 
rum erüperant: necdum mon- 
tes gravi mole constíterant: 
ante colles ego parturiébar: 
2dhuc terram non fécerat, et 
flümina, et cárdines orbis ter- 
ræ. Quando preparábat celos, 
aderam: quando certa lege et 
gyro vallábat abyssos. quando 
sthera firmábat sursum, et 
librábat fontes  aquárum: 
quando circümdabat mari tér- 
minum suum, et legem poné- 
bat aquis, ne transirent fines 
suos: quando appendébat fun- 
daménta terre. Cum eo eram 
cuncta compónens: et delec- 
tábar per síngulos dies, ludens 
coram eo omni témpore: lu- 
dens in orbe terrárum: et de- 
lície mem esse cum filiis hó- 
minum. Nunc ergo, filii, au- 
dite me: Beáti, qui custédiunt 
vias meas. Audite discipli- 
nam, et estóte sapiéntes, et 
nolite abjícere eam. Beátus 
homo, qui audit me, et qui 
vigilat ad fores meas quotídie, 
et obsérvat ad postes éstii mei. 
Qui me invénerit, invéniet vi- 
tam, et hauriet salütem a Dó- 
mino. 


of my doors. He that shall find me shall find life, and shall 


have salvation from the Lord. 


"In Votive Masses from Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser 


Alleluia in the Gradual is replaced by the Tract. 


in Paschal- 


time the Gradual and Tract are replaced by the Greater Alle- 


luia found after the Tract. 


Gradual. Judith 13,.23 


Blessed art thou, O Virgin 
Mary, by the Lord, the most 
high God, above all women, 


Benedicta es tu, Virgo Ma- 
ría, à Dómino Deo excélso, 
pre ómnibus muliéribus super 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEC. 8—IMMACULATE CONCEPTION 853 


terram. Y. Judith, 15, 10. Tu upon the earth. Y. Thou art the 
glória Jerúsalem, tu letitia glory of Jerusalem, thou art 
Israël, tu honorificéntia pó- the joy of Israel, thou art the 


puli nostri, 


honor of our people. 


The Lesser Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Cant. 
4, 7. Tota pulchra es, María: 
et mácula originális non est 
in te. Allelija. 


Tract. 


Fundaménta ejus in món- 
tibus sanctis: díligit Dóminus 
portas Sion super ómnia ta- 
bernácula Jacob. Y. Ps. 86, 3. 
Gloriósa dicta sunt de te, civi- 
tas Del Y. Ps. 86, 5. Homo 
natus est in ea, et ipse fundá- 
vit eam Altíssimus. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Thou art 
all fair, O Mary, and there is 
in thee no stein of original sin. 
Alleluia. 


Ps. 86, 1 


The foundations thereof are 
in the holy mountains: the 
Lord loveth the gates of Sion 
above all the tabernacles of 
Jacob. Y. Ps. 86, 3. Glorious 
things are said of thee, O city 
of God. Y. 86, 5. A man is born 
in her, and the Highest Himself 
hath founded her. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelüája, allelija. Y. Judith 
15, 10. Tu glória Jerüsalem, 
tu letitia Israél, tu honorifi- 
céntia pópuli nostri. Allelija. 
Y. Cant. 4, 7. Tota pulchra 
es, María: et mácula originális 
non est in te. AUelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Judith 
15, 10. Thou art the glory of 
Jerusalem, thou art the joy of 
Israel, thou art the honor of 
our people. Alleluia. VY. Cant. 
4,7. Thou art all fair, O Mary: 
and the stain of original sin 1s 
not in thee. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 1, 26-28 


*B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Missus est 
Angelus Gabriel a Deo in 
civitátem Galilee, cui nomen 
Nazareth, ad Virginem de- 
sponsátam viro, cui nomen 
erat Joseph, de domo David, 
et nomen Vírginis María. Et 
ingréssus Angelus ad eam, di- 
xit: Ave, grátia plena: Dó- 
minus tecum: benedícta tu in 
muliéribus. 
Creed, page 765. 


"B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


HE angel Gabriel was sent 

from God into a city of 
Galilee, called Nazareth, to a 
virgin espoused to a man 
whose name was Joseph, of 
the house of David: and the 
virgin’s name was Mary. And 
the angel being come in, said 
unto her: Hail, full of grace, 
the Lord is with thee: blessed 
art thou among women. 


The Creed is said during the entire octave. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


854 DEC. 9——OP OCTAVE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION 


Offertory. Luke 1, 28 


Hail, Mary, full of grace: the 
Lord is with thee: blessed art 
thou among women. Alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ave María, grátia plena: 
Dóminus tecum: benedicta tu 
in muliéribus, allelüja. 


Secret 


ECEIVE, O Lord, the saving 
oblation which we offer 
Thee on the solemnity of the 
Immaculate Conception of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary, and grant 
that, as we confess her to have 
been preserved, by Thy pre- 
venient grace, from all taint of 
evil, so, through her interces- 
sion, we may be freed from all 
sin. Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the feria. 
Preface No. 11, page 814. 


ALUTÁREM hóstiam quam 

in solemnitáte immacu- 

late Conceptiónis beátæ Vír- 

ginis Mariæ tibi, Dómine, of- 

férimus, süspice, et presta: 

ut, sicut illam tua grátia præ- 

veniénte ab omni labe immü- 

nem profitémur; ita ejus in- 

tercessióne a culpis omnibus 
liberémur, Per Dóminum, 


Communion 


Glorious things are spoken 
of thee, O Mary; for He that 
is mighty hath done great 
*hings unto thee. 


Gloriésa, dicta sunt de te, 
María: quia fecit tibi magna 
qui potens est. 


Postcommunion 


AY the sacrament which 
@M we have received, O 
Lord, our God, heal in us the 
wounds of that sin from which, 
by a singular privilege, Thou 
didst preserve immaculate the 
conception of blessed Mary. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the feria, 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ACRAMENTA que súmpsi- 

mus, Dómine Deus nos- 
ter: illíus in nobis culpe vül- 
nera réparent; a qua immacu- 
latam beáte Marie Concep- 
tionem singuláriter praeser- 
vásti. Per Dóminum, 


Dec. 9—Of the Octave of the Jmmaculate Conception 
(White) 
Semi-double 

Mass as on the feast-day, page 851, with second Prayer, 


Secret and Postcommunion of the feria, 


Ghost, page 827. 


and third of the Holy 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEC. 11—ST. DAMASUS, POPE 


855 


Dec. 10—0Of the Octave of the Immaculate 
Conception (White) 
St. Melehiades, Pope, Martyr (Red) 
Semi-double 


The Mass is as on the feast of the Immaculate Conception, 
page 851, with second Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion of 
the feria and third of St. Melchiades from the Mass, Si diligis 


me, page 1302. 


Dec. 11—$5t, Pamasus, Pope, Confessor (White) 


Semi-double 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit from the Mass, Si díligis me, page 1302. 
Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


REGEM tuum, Pastor æ- 
térne, placátus intén- 

de: et per beátum Dámasum 
Summum Pontificem, perpé- 
tua protectióne custódi; quem 
totíus  Ecclésie prestitisti 
esse pastórem. Per Dóminum. 


ETERNAL Shepherd, do 

Thou look favorably up- 
on Thy flock, which we beseech 
Thee to guard and keep for 
evermore through the blessed 
Damasus, Supreme Pontiff, 
whom 'Thou didst choose to be 
the chief shepherd of the whole 
Church. Through Our Lord, 


Second Prayer of the octave, page 851, third of the feria. 
Epistle: from the Mass Si díligis me, page 1302. 


Gradual. Ps. 106, 32, 31 


Exáltent eum in Ecclésia 
plebis: et in cáthedra senió- 
rum laudent eum. Y. Con- 
fiteántur Dómino misericór- 
die ejus; et mirabília ejus 
filiis hóminum. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Let them exalt him in the 
Church of the people: and 
praise him in the chair of the 
ancients. VY. Let the mercies of 
the Lord give glory to him, and 
his wonderful works to the 
children of men. 


Gospel from the Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Jerem. 1, 9-10 


Ecce dedi verba mea in ore 


Behold, I have given my 


tuo: ecce constítui te super words in thy mouth; lo, I have 
gentes et super regna, ut set thee this day over the na- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


856 DEC. 12—OF OCTAVE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION 


fions, and over the kingdoms, 
to waste and to destroy, and 
to build and to plant, (P. T. 
Alleluia). 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


evéllas et déstruas, et edifices 
et plantes. (T. P. Allelüja). 


Secret 


I5 THY loving kindness, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, be 
moved by the offering of our 
gifts and enlighten Thy 
Church: that Thy flock may 
prosper everywhere, and the 
shepherds, under Thy guid- 
ance, may be rendered accept- 
able to Thee, Through Our 
Lord. 


Ou: munéribus, qué- 
sumus Domine, Ecclé- 
siam tuam benignus illü- 
mina: ut, et gregis tui pro- 
fíciat ubíque succéssus, et 
grati fiant nómini tuo, te 
gubernánte, pastóres. Per 
Dóminum, 


Second, Secret of the octave, page 854, third of the feria. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. 


Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I will build My 
Church. (P. T. Alleluia). 


Matt. 16,18 


Tu es Petrus, et super hanc 
petram zdificábo Ecclésiam 
meam. (T. P. Allelüja). 


Postcommunion 


INcE Thy church has been 
nourished by the sacred 
repast, govern her in Thy 
clemency, we beseech Thee, O 


Lord, so that under the guid- 


ance of Thy mighty rule she 
may enjoy greater freedom and 
abiding integrity of religion. 
Through our Lord. 


EFECTIÓNE sancta enu- 

tritam gubérna, quze- 
sumus Dómine, tuam placá- 
tus Ecclésiam: ut poténti 
moderatióne dirécta, et in- 
creménta libertátis accípiat 
et in religiónis integritáte 
persístat. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion of the octave, page 854, third of the 


feria. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Dec. 12—Octave of the Immaculate Conception 
(White) 
Semi-double 


Mass as on the feast, page 851, with second Prayer, Secret, 
and Postcommunion of the feria, and third of the Holy Ghost, 


page 827. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


owe o E 


LJ. S 


) 


` 


Dec.13—4$5t. Lucp, 


DEC. 13—ST. LUCY, VIRGIN 


857 


Virgin, Martyr (Red) 


Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


ILEXISTI justitiam, et 

edísti iniquitátem: 
proptérea unxit te Deus, Deus 
tuus, óleo latitia pre consórti- 
bus tuis. Ps. 44, 2. Eructávit 
cor meum verbum bonum: 
dico ego ópera mea Regi. y. 
Glória Patri. ' 


Ps. 44, 8 


Hov hast loved justice and 

hated iniquity: therefore 
God, thy God, hath anointed 
thee with the oil of gladness 
above thy fellows. Ps. 44, 2. 
My heart hath uttered a good 
word: I speak my works to the 
King. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


XxÁuDi nos, Deus salutá- 

ris noster: ut, sicut de 
bedte Lucie Vírginis et Már- 
tyris tue festivitate gaudé- 
mus; ita pie devotiónis erudi- 
ámur afféctu. Per Dóminum. 


ARKEN unto us, O God, 

-our salvation, that as 
because of the festival of 
blessed Lucy we rejoice, so by 
reason of our feeling of loving 
devotion may we become bet- 
ter grounded in doctrine. 
Through our Lord. 


Second, Prayer of the octave, page 851, third of the feria. 
Epistle from the Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370. 


Gradual. 


Dilexisti justitiam, et odisti 
iniquitátem. VY. Propterea un- 
xit te Deus, Deus tuus, óleo 
letite. 

Alleluja, allelüja. V. Ps. 44, 
3. Diffüsa est grátia in lábiis 
tuis: proptérea benedíxit te 
Deus in etérnum, Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ps. 44, 8 


Thou hast loved justice, and 
hated iniquity. V. Therefore 
God, thy God, hath anointed 
thee with the oil of gladness. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 44, 3. 
Grace is poured abroad in thy 
lips, therefore hath God blessed 
thee forever. Alleluia. 


Gospel from the Mass Me exspectaverunt, page 1365. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 15, 16 


Afferéntur regi virgines post After her shall virgins be 
eam: próximze ejus afferéntur brought to the King: her 
tibi in letitia, et exsultatióne: neighbors shall be brought to 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a 


858 DEC. 14—OF OCTAVE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION é : 


thee with gladness and rejoic- adducéntur in templum regi ` 
ing: they shall be brought into Dómino. 
the temple to the Lord the 


King. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 
ay the offering made by CcÉPTA tibi sit, Dómine, 
XD a consecrated people be sacrate plebis oblatio 


accepted by Thee, Lord, for the pro tuórum honóre Sanctó- 
honor of Thy saints, by whose rum: quorum se méritis, de 
merits it knoweth that it hath tribulatiéne percepísse cog- 
received help in tribulation. nóscit auxílium. Per Dómi- 
Through our Lord. num. 


Second, Secret of the octave, page 854, third. of the feria. 
Preface No. 11, page 814. 


Communion. Ps. 118, 161, 162 


Princes have persecuted me Príncipes persecüti sunt me 
without cause and my heart gratis, et a verbis tuis formi- 
hath been in awe of Thy words: dávit cor meum: letabor ego 
I will rejoice at Thy words, as super elóquia tua, quasi qui 
one that hath found great invénit spólia multa. 
spoil. 


Postcommunion 
Hou hast regaled Thy ATiÁsTI, Dómine, famili- 
household, O Lord, with am tuam munéribus sa- 


Sacred gifts: do Thou ever com- cris: ejus, quesumus, semper 

fort us, by her intervention interventióne nos réfove, cu- 

whose solemnity we are cele- jus solémnia celebrámus. Per 

brating. Through our Lord. Dóminum. 

f Pune Postcommunion of the octave, page 854, third of the 
e " 

Concluding Prayers, page 793, 


Dec. 14—Octave of the Immaculate Conception 
(White) 
Semi-double 


Mass as om the feast, page 851, with second, Prayer, Secret 
and Fircommtmnton of the feria, and third of the Holy Ghost, 
page . 


If this be Wednesday of the Ember-week, the Mass of the 
feria will be celebrated with a commemoration of the octave. 
The third Prayer will be of the Holy Ghost and the Preface of 
the octave will be recited. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


f 


we 


DEC. 21—ST. THOMAS, APOSTLE 


859 


Dec, 15—Octave day of the Jmmaculate Conception 
(White) 
Double Major 


Mass as on the feast, page 851, with second Prayer, Secret 
and Postcommunion. of the feria. 


Dec. 16-—St. Eusebius, Bishop, Martyr (Red) 


Semi-double 
Mass, Sacerdotes, page 1306, with second Prayer, Secret and 


Postcommunion of the feria. 


Dec. 20—Wigil of St. Thomas, Apostle (Purple) 


Mass, Ego autem, page 1299, with commemoration of the 


feria. 


If the feast of St. Thomas falls on Monday, the vigil 


will be celebrated on December 19, Saturday of Ember-week. 
In this case the Mass will be of the feria, with a commemora- 


tion of the vigil. 


Dec.21— $5t. Thomas, Apostle (Red) 


Double of the Second Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


IHI autem nimis hono- 

'ráti sunt amíci tui, 
Deus: nimis confortátus est 
principátus eórum. Ps. 138, 
1, 2. Dómine, probásti me, et 
cognovísti me: tu cognovísti 
sessiónem meam, et resurrec- 
tiónem meam. V. Glória Patri. 


Ps. 138, 17 


o ME Thy friends, O God, 

are made exceedingly hon- 
orable: their principality is ex- 
ceedingly strengthened. Ps. 138, 
1, 2. Lord, Thou hast proved 
me: and known me: Thou hast 
known my sitting down, and 
my rising up. V. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


A NOBIS, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, beáti Apóstoli tui 
Thome solemnitátibus glori- 
ári, ut ejus semper et patro- 
cíniis sublevémur; et fidem 
cóngrua devótióne sectémur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of the feria. 


RANT us, we beseech ‘Thee, 
O Lord, to glory in the 
solemn festival of blessed 
‘Thomas, Thine apostle, that we 
may both be helped continually 
by his patronage and imitate 
his faith with befitting devo- 
tion. Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


860 


DEC. 21—ST. THOMAS, APOSTLE 


Epistle. Eph. 2, 19-22 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians. 

RETHREN, You are no more 
strangers and foreign- 
ers, but you are fellow-citizens 
with the saints, and domestics 
of God: built upon the founda- 
tion of the apostles and proph- 
ets, Jesus Christ Himself being 
the chief corner-stone. In 
Whom all the building, being 
framed together, groweth up 
into a holy temple in the Lord: 
In Whom you also are built 
together into an habitation of 
God in the Spirit. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apéstoli ad Ephésios. 


RATRES: Jam non estis 

hóspites, et ádven:z: sed 
estis cives sanctórum, et do- 
méstici Dei: ‘superedificati 
super fundaméntum Aposto- 
lórum et Prophetárum, ipso 
summo angulári lápide 
Christo Jesu: in quo omnis 
tdificátio constrücta crescit 
in templum sanctum in Dó- 
mino, in quo et vos coxdificá- 
mini in hebitáculum Dei in 
Spíritu. 


Gradual. Ps. 138, 17, 18 


Thy friends, O God, are made 
exceedingly honorable: their 
principality is exceedingly 
strengthened. VY. I will num- 
ber them, and they shall be 
multiplied above the sand. 

Alleluia, alleuia. Y. Ps. 32, 1. 
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye just: 
praise becometh the upright. 
Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Nimis honoráti sunt amici 
tui Deus: nimis confortátus 
est principátus eórum. Y. Di- 
numerábo eos, et super aré- 
nam multiplicabüntur. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 
32, 1. Gaudéte, justi, in Dó- 
mino: rectos decet collaudá- 
tio. Allelüja. 


Gospel. John 20, 24-29 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, Thomas, one 
of the twelve, who is 
called Didymus, was not with 
them when Jesus came. ‘The 
other disciples therefore said to 
him, We have seen the Lord. 
But he said to them, Except I 
shall see in His hands the print 
of the nails, and put my hand 
into His side, I will not believe. 
And after eight days, again His 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 

N ILLO témpore: Thomas, 
T unus ex duódecim, qui 
dicitur Dídymus, non erat 
cum eis, quando venit Jesus. 
Dixérunt ergo ei Alli discipuli: 
Vidimus Dóminum. Ill au- 
tem dixit eis: Nisl vídero in 
mánibus ejus fixüram clavó- 
rum, et mittam dígitum meum 
in locum clavórum, et mittam 
manum meam in latus ejus, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


4 


aea 


DEC. 21—ST. THOMAS, APOSTLE 


non credam. Et post dies octo, 
iterum erant discípuli ejus 
intus, et Thomas cum eis. Ve- 
nit Jesus jánuis clausis, et 
Stetit in médio, et dixit: Pax 
vobis. Deínde dicit Thome: 
Infer digitum tuum huc, et 
vide manus meas, et affer ma- 
num tuam, et mitte in latus 
meum: et noli esse incrédulus, 
Sed fidélis. Respóndit Thomas, 
et dixit ei: Dóminus meus; et 
Deus meus. Dixit ei Jesus: 
Quia vidísti me, Thoma, cre- 
didísti: beáti qui non vidé- 
runt, et credidérunt. 


Creed, page 765. 


861 


disciples were within, and 
Thomas wth them. Jesus com- 
eth, the doors being shut and 
stood in the midst, and said, 
Peace be to you. Then He saith 
to Thomas, Put in thy finger 
hither, and see My hands, and 
bring hither thy hand, and put 
it into My side; and be not 
faithless but believing. Thomas 
answered, and said to Him, My 
Lord and my God. Jesus saith 
to him, Because Thou hast 
seen Me, Thomas, thou hast 
believed: blessed are they that 
have not seen, and have be- 
lieved. 


Offertory. Ps. 18, 5 


In omnem terram exívit 
Sonus eórum: et in fines or- 
bis terre verba eórum. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Their sound went forth into 
all the earth; and their words 
to the ends of the world. 


Secret 


ÉBITUM tibi, Dómine, 
nostre réddimus servi- 
tátis, suppliciter exorántes: 
ut, suffrágiis beáti Thome 
Apóstoli, in nobis tua münera 
tueáris, cujus honoránda con- 
fessióne laudis tibi hóstias im- 
molámus. Per Dóminum. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Commemoration of the feria, 


Communion. 


Mitte manum tuam, et cog- 
nésce loca clavórum: et noli 
esse incrédulus, sed fidélis. 


E RENDER to Thee, O Lord, 
the homage due 'Thee, 
earnestly entreating that by the 
prayers of Thy blessed apostle 
Thomas, on whose feast we of- 
fer these sacrifices of praise, 
that Thou guard Thy gifts to 
us, Through our Lord. 


John 20, 27 


Put thy hand and know the 
place of the nails, and be not 
incredulous, but believing. 


Postcommunion 


7g DÉSro nobis, miséricors 
Deus: et intercedénte 
pro nobis beáto Thoma Após- 


MERCIFUL God, do Thou 
abide with us, and, with 
the blessed apostle Thomas in- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


862 JAN. 14—ST. HILARY, BISHOP 


terceding for us, mercifully tolo, tua circa nos propitiátus 
watch over Thy gifts made for dona custódi. Per Dóminum. 
our welfare. Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the feria. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793, but on Ember-days the Jast Gospel of 
the feria is said. 


Note—The order of Masses celebrated between Christmas 
Eve and the octave-day of the Epiphany will be found in the 
Proper of the Season. 


Jan. 11—$t. Hpginus, Pope, Martyr (Red) 


A commemoration of St. Hyginus is made in the Mass of 
the octave of the Epiphany by the Prayer, Secret and, Postcom- 
munion from the Mass Si diligis me, page 1302. 


Jan. 14—$5t. Hilary, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of 
the Church (White) St. Felix, Martyr 


.Double 


The Mass of St. Hilary is that of the Common of Doctors, 
page 1344, beginning In medio, in which the Nicene Creed is 
said, and commemoration made of St. Feliz, as follows: 


Prayer 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O Gin quaesumus, om- 
almighty God, that the nipotens Deus: ut ad 
examples of Thy saints may in- meliórem vitam Sanctérum 
spire us to a better life, whereby tuórum exémpla nos próvo- 
we may imitate his deeds whose cent; quátenus, quorum so- 
solemnity we are keeping. lémnia ágimus, étiam actus 


Through our Lord. imitémur. Per Dóminum. 
Secret 
RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, vzsumus, Dómine, salu- 
the sacrifices dedicated to táribus repléti mysté- 


the merits of Thy blessed mar- riis: ut, beáti Felicis Mártyris 
tyr Felix, and grant them to tui, cujus solémnia celebrá- 
profit us unto everlasting aid. mus, oratiónibus adjuvémur. 
Through our Lord. Per Dóminum. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Postcommunion 
ILLED With the mysteries ósTras tibi, Dómine, hee 
of salvation, we beseech ati Felicis Mártyris tui 


Thee, O Lord, that we may be decátas méritis, benignus as- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JAN. 15—ST. PAUL, HERMIT 


Süme: et ad perpétuum nobis 
tribue proveníre subsídium. 
Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


863 


assisted with the prayers of 
blessed Felix, Thy martyr. 
Through our Lord. 


Jan.15—$5t, Paul, the First Hermit, Confessor - 
(White) 
Double 


St. Maurus, Abbot 


Introit. 


UsTUS ut palma florébit: si- 
cut cedrus Líbani multi- 
plicábitur: plantátus in domo 
Dómini: in átriis domus Dei 
nostri. Ps. 91, 2. Bonum est 
confitéri Dómino: et. psállere 
nómini tuo, Altissime. J. 
Glória Patri. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Ps. 9, 13, 14 


HE just shall flourish like 

the palm-tree; he shall 
grow up like the cedar of Li- 
banus; planted in the house of 
the Lord, in the courts of the 
house of our God. Ps. 91, 2. It 
is good to give praise to the 
Lord; and to sing to Thy name, 
O Most High. Y. Glory. 


i Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui nos beáti Pauli 

Confessóris tui annua 
Solemnitáte letificas: concéde 
propítius; ut, cujus natalítia 
cólimus, étiam actiónes imi- 
témur. Per Dóminum. 


NTERCESSIO nos, quesumus, 

Dómine,  beáti Mauri 
Abbátis comméndet: ut quod 
nostris méritis non valémus, 
ejus patrocinio assequámur. 
Per Dóminum, 


cop, Who dost gladden us 

with the yearly solemnity 
of blessed Paul, Thy confessor, 
mercifully grant that we may 
imitate his actions whose natal 
day we honor. Through our 
Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Maurus. 


Prayer 


ET the intercession of the 
blessed abbot Maurus 
commend us, O Lord, we be- 
seech Thee, that we may receive 
through his patronage what we 
could not obtain by our own 
deserts. Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


864 JAN. 15—ST. PAUL, HERMIT 
Epistle. Philip 3, 7-12 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Philippians. 

RETHREN, the things that 
B were gain to me, the 
same I have counted loss for 
Christ. Furthermore, I count 
all things to be but loss, for 
the excellent knowledge of Je- 
sus Christ, my Lord; for whom 
I have suffered the loss of all 
things, and count them but as 
dung, that I may win Christ; 
and may be found in Him, not 
having my justice, which is of 
the law, but that which is of 
the faith of Christ Jesus, which 
is of God, justice in faith; that 
I may know Him, and the power 
of His resurrection, and the 
fellowship: of His sufferings; 
being made conformable to 
His death, if by any means I 
may attain to the resurrection 
which is from the dead; not as 
though I had already attained, 
or were already perfect; but I 
follow after, if I may by any 
means apprehend wherein I am 
also apprehended by -Christ 
Jesus. 


Léctio Epfstole beáti Pauli 
Apéstoli ad Philippénses, 


RATRES: Que mihi fué- 

runt lucra, hee arbitrá- 
tus sum propter Christum 
detriménta. Verümtamen ex- 
fstimo ómnia detriméntum 
esse, propter eminéntem sci- 
éntiam Jesu Christi Dómini 
mel: propter quem ómnia 
detriméntum feci, et arbitror 
ut stércora, ut Christum lucri- 
fáciam, et invéniar in illo, non 
habens meam justítiam, que 
ex lege est, sed illam que ex 
fide est Christi Jesu: que ex 
Deo est justítia in fide, ad cog- 
noscéndum illum et virtütem 
resurrectiónis ejus, et socie- 
tátem passiónum illíus, con- 
figurátus morti ejus: si quo 
modo occtrram ad resurrec- 
tiónem, que est ex mórtuis: 
non quod jam accéperim, aut 
jam perféctus sim: sequor au- 
tem, si quo modo comprehén- 
dam, in quo et comprehénsus 
sum a Christo Jesu. 


Gradual. Ps. 91, 13, 14 


The just shall flourish like 
the palm-tree: he shall grow 
up like the cedar of Libanus in 
the house of the Lord. Y. To 
show forth Thy mercy in the 
morning, and Thy truth in the 
night. 


Justus ut palma florébit: 
Sicut cedrus Líbani multipli- 
cábitur in domo Dómini. Y. 
Ad annuntiándum mane mi- 
sericórdiam tuam, et veritá- 
tem tuam per noctem. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Osee 14, 
6. The just man shall spring 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Osee 
14, 6. Justus germinabit sicut 


http://ccwatershed.org 


n 
i 


JAN. 15—ST. PAUL, HERMIT 


lilium: et florébit in etérnum 
ante Dóminum, Allelüja. 


865 


as the lily; and flourish forever 
before the Lord. Alleluia. 


After Septuagesima, in place of the. Lesser BHEUM, is said or 


sung, the Tract. 


Tract. 


Beátus vir, qui timet Dómi- 
num: in mandátis ejus cupit 


nimis. V. Potens in terra erit. 


semen ejus: generátio rectó- 
rum benedicétur. Y. Glória 
et divitie in domo ejus: et 
justitia ejus manet in szcu- 
lum seculi. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 762. 


Ps. 111, 1-3 


Blessed is the man that fear- 
eth the Lord: in His command- 
ments he hath great delight. V. 
His seed shall be mighty upon 
earth: the generation of the 
righteous shall be blessed. Y. 
Glory and wealth shall be in 
his house: and his justice re- 
maineth forever and ever. ` 


Gospel. Matt. 11, 25-30 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Respón- 
dens Jesus, dixit: Confí- 
teor tibi, Pater, Dómine czli 
et terre, quia abscondísti hæc 
a sapiéntibus et prudéntibus, 


et revelasti ea parvulis. Ita’ 


Pater: quóniam sic fuit plá- 
citum ante te. Omnia mihi 
tradita sunt a Patre meo. Et 
nemo novit Fílium, nisi Pa- 
ter: neque Patrem quis novit, 
nisi Fílius, et cui volüerit 
Fílius reveláre. Veníte ad me 
omnes, qui laborátis, et on- 
eráti estis, et ego refíciam 
vos. ‘Téllite jugum meum su- 
per vos, et díscite a me, quia 
mitis sum, et húmilis corde: 
et inveniétis réquiem animá- 
bus vestris. Jugum enim me- 
um suave est, et onus meum 
leve. - 


%H Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT lime, Jesus an- 
swered, and said, I 
praise Thee, O Father, Lord of 
heaven and earth, because 
Thou hast hid these things 
from the wise and prudent, and 
hast revealed them to little 
ones. Yea, Father; for so it hath 
seemed good in Thy sight. All 
things are delivered to Me by 
My Father; and no one know- 
eth the Son, but the Father; 
neither doth any one know the 
Father, but the Son, and He 
to Whom it shall please the 
Son to reveal Him. Come to Me, 
all you that labor, and are bur- 
dened; and I will refresh you. 
Take up My yoke upon you, 
and learn of Me, because I am 
meek, and humble of heart; 
and you shall find rest to your 
souls: for My yoke is sweet, 
and My burden light. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


866 JAN. 15—ST. PAUL, HERMIT 
Offertory. Ps. 20, 2, 3 


In Thy strength, O Lord, the 
just shall joy, and in Thy sal- 
vation he shall rejoice exceed- 
ingly: Thou hast given him his 
heart's desire. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


In vírtute tua Dómine, lætá- 
bitur justus, et super salutáre 
iuum exsultábit veheménter: 
desidérium ánimw ejus tri- 
buísti ei. 


Secret 


OFFER Thee sacrifices of 

praise, O Lord, in com- 
memoration of Thy saints, 
irusting that by them we may 
be delivered from both present 
and impending evils. Through 
our Lord. 


AuDIS tibi, Dómine, hó- 
stias immolámus in tu- 

órum commemoratióne Sanc- 
tórum: quibus nos et præ- 
séntibus éxui malis confidi- 
mus et futüris. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Maurus. 
Secret 


E BESEECH Thee, O Lord, 

that, by his prayers the 

holy abbot Maurus may obtain 

ihat the sacrifices laid upon the 

Sacred altars may profit for 

our salvation. Through our 
Lord. 

Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


acris altáribus, Dómine, 
hóstias superpósitas 
sanctus Maurus Abbas, que- 
sumus, in salitem nobis pro- 
veníre depóscat. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Communion. Ps. 63, 11 


The just shall rejoice in the 
Lord, and shall hope in Him; 
and all the upright in heart 
shall be praised. 


Letabitur justus in Dó- 
mino, et sperabit in eo: et 
laudabüntur omnes recti cor- 
de. 


Postcommunion 


EFRESHED with heavenly 

food and drink, we hum- 

bly supplicate Thee, O our God, 

that we may also be fortified by 

the prayers of Him in commem- 

oration of Whom we have par- 
taken. Through our Lord. 


EFÉCTI cibo, pottique 
celésti, Deus noster, te 
süpplices exorámus: ut in cu- 
jus hec commemoratióne per- 
cépimus, ejus muniámur et 
précibus. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Maurus. 


Postcommunion 


ay the blessed abbot Mau- 
rus, by his intercession, 
together with the partaking of 


ROTEGAT nos, Dómine, 
cum tui  perceptióne 
Sacraménti beátus Maurus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


pm - uu 


| 


JAN. 16—ST. MARCELLUS, POPE 867 


Abbas, pro nobis interce- the sacrament, protect us, O 
déndo: ut et conversatiónis Lord, that we may experience 
ejus experiámur insígnia, et the effects of communion with 
intercessiónis percipiámus him and share his intercessory 


suffrágia. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


prayers. Through our Lord. 


Jan. 16—St. Marcellus, Pope, Martyr (Red) 


Semi-double 
Introit from the Mass Si diligis me, page 1302. 


Prayer 


REGEM tuum, Pastor æ- 

térne, placátus intén- 
de: et per beátum Marcellum 
Mártyrem tuum atque Sum- 
mum Pontificem, perpétua 
protectióne  custódi; quem 
totíus Ecclésim prestitisti esse 
pastórem. Per Dóminum. 


ETERNAL Shepherd, do 

Thou look favorably up- 
on Thy flock, which we be- 
seech Thee to guard and keep. 
for evermore through the 
blessed Marcellus, Thy Martyr 
and Supreme Pontiff, whom 
Thou didst choose to be the 
chief shepherd of the whole 
Church. Through our Lord. 


| The Epistle, Gradual, Gospel and Offertory are from the Mass 


Secret 


Si diligis me, page 1302. 


Onn munéribus, qué- 
sumus Dómine, Ecclé- 
siam tuam  benígnus illü- 
mina: ut, et gregis tui pro- 
ficiat ubíque succéssus, et 
grati fiant nómini tuo, te 


N THY loving kindness, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, be 
moved by the offering of our 
gifts and enlighten 'Thy 
Church: that Thy flock may 
prosper everywhere and the 


gubernánte,  pastóres. Per shepherds, under Thy guid- 
Dóminum. ance, may be rendered accept- 
able to Thee, Through our 
Lord. 
Preface. No. 13, page 816 
Communion. Matt. 25, 2 


Tu es Petrus, et super hanc 
petram edificdbo Ecclésiam 
meam. : 


Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I will build My 
Church. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


. 868 


JAN. 18—CHAIR OF ST. PETER AT ROME 


Postcommunion 


ince Thy Church has been 

nourished by the sacred 
repast, govern her in Thy 
clemency, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, so that under the guid- 
ance of Thy mighty rule she 
may enjoy greater freedom 
and abiding integrity of re- 


] EFECTIÓNE sancta enu- 
tritam gubérna, que- 
sumus Dómine, tuam placá- 
tus Ecclésiam: ut poténti 
moderatióne dirécta, et incre- 
ménta libertátis accípiat et in 
religiónis  integritáte per- 
sistat. Per Dóminum. 


ligion. Through our Lord. 


Jan. 11—$bt. Anthony, Abbot (White) 
Double 


Mass, Os justi meditabitur, page 1356, but the Gospel from 
the other Mass which also begins Os justi, page 1351. 


Jan. 18—Feast of the Chair of St. Peter 
at Rome, (White) 
Double Major 


St. Prisca, Virgin, Martyr (Red) 


In the Mass of St. Peter a commemoration is made of his ; 


fellow-apostle St. Paul. A commemoration is likewise made 


of St. Prisca. 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Eccles. 45, 30 


HE Lord made to him a TÁTUIT el Dóminus testa- 
covenant of peace, and méntum pacis, et prin- 
made him-a prince; that the cipem fecit eum: ut sit iili 
dignity of priesthood should be sacerdótii dígnitas in ætér- 
to him for ever. Ps. 131, 1. O num. Ps. 131, 1. Meménto, 
Lord, remember David, and all Dómine, David: et omnis 
his meekness. J. Glory. mansuetüdinis ejus. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who, committing to D qui beáto Petro 

blessed Peter, Thine apos- Apóstolo tuo, collátis 
tle, the keys of the heavenly clávibus regni celéstis, ligán- 
kingdom, didst bestow on him di atque solvéndi pontificium 
the pontifical function of bind- tradidisti: concéde; ut, inter- 
ing and loosing, grant that, Dy cessiónis ejus auxílio, & pec- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NV 


JAN. 18—CHAIR OF ST. PETER AT ROME 869 


catórum nostrórum néxibus 
liberémur: Qui vivis. 


Commemoration of St. Paul. 


the help of his intercession, We 


may be delivered from the bonds 


of our sins. Who livest, 


Prayer 


EUS, Qui multitüdinem 

géntium  beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli predicatióne docui- 
Sti: da nobis, quesumus: ut 
cujus. commemoratiónem có- 
limus, ejus apud te patrocinia 
sentiámus. Per Dóminum. 


O cop, Who by the preach- 
ing of the blessed apostle 
Paul: didst teach the multitude 
of the gentiles, grant us, we 
pray Thee, that, honoring his 
commemoration; we may ex- 
perience the benefit of his pa- 


. tronal influence . with ‘Thee. 


ry 


Commemoration of St. Prisca. 


Through our Lord. 


Prayer 


A, QUESUMUS, omnípo- 

tens Deus: ut, qui 
beáte Prisce Virginis et 
Mártyris tue natalítia cóli- 
mus; et ánnua solemnitate 
letémur, et tantz fidei pro- 
ficiamus exémplo. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Gu we beseech Thea, O 
almighty God, that we, 
who venerat~ the birthday of 
blessed Prisca, Thy virgin and 
martyr, may both rejoice for 
her annual solemnity and profit 
by the example of so great 
faith. Through our Lord. 


Epistle. 1 Pet. 1, 1-7 


Léctio Epístole beati Petri 
Apóstoli. 
TRUS  Apóstolus Jesu 
A~ Christi, eléctis ádvenis 
Gispersiónis Ponti, Galatie, 
Cappadócie, Asie et Bithy- 
nie, secündum presciéntiam 
Dei Patris, in sanctificatión- 
em Spíritus, in obediéntiam, 
et aspersiónem sánguinis Jesu 
Christi: grátia vobis, et pax 
multiplicétur. Benedíctus De- 
us, et Pater Dómini nostri 
Jesu Christi, qui secündum 
misericórdiam suam magnam 
regenerávit nos in spem vi- 
vam, per resurrectiónem Jesu 
Christi ex mórtuis, in heredi- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle. 
ETER, an apostle of Jesus 
Christ, to the strangers 
dispersed through Pontus, Ga- 
latia, Cappadocia, Asia, and 
Bithynia, elect according to the 
foreknowledge of God the 
Father, unto the sanctification 
of the Spirit, unto obedience, 
and sprinkling cf the blood of 
Jesus Christ; grace unto you 
and peace be multiplied. 
Blessed be the God and Father 
of Our Lord Jesus Christ, Wha 
according to His great mercy 
hath. regenerated us unto a 
lively hope, by the resurrection 


http://ccwatershed.org 


870 


of Jesus Christ from the dead, 
unto an inheritance incorrup- 
tible and undefiled, and that 
can not fade, reserved in heaven 
for you, who by the power of 
God are kept by faith unto sal- 
vation, ready to be revealed in 
the last time. Wherein you 
shall greatly rejoice, if now you 
must be for a little time made 
sorrowful in divers tempta- 
tions: that the trial of your 
faith, much more precious than 
gold (which is tried by the fire), 
may be found unto praise, and 
glory, and honor, at the ap- 
pearing of Jesus Christ our 
Lord. 


JAN. 18—CHAIR OF ST. PETER AT ROME 


tátem incorruptibilem, et in- 
contaminatam, et immarces- 
cíbilem, conservátam in calis 
jn vobis, qui in virtüte Dei 
custodímini per fidem in sa- 
dütem, parátam revelári in 
témpore novissimo. In quo ex- 
sultaébitis módicum nunc si 
opórtet contristári in váriis 
tentatiónibus: ut  probátio 
vestre fídei multo pretiósior 
auro (quod per ignem probá- 
tur) inveniátur in laudem, et 
glóriam, et honórem, in rev- 
elatióne Jesu Christi Dómini 
nostri. 


Gradual. Ps. 106, 32, 31 


Let them exalt him in the Exáltent eum in ecclésia 
church of the people; and plebis: et in cáthedra seniór- 
praise him in the chair of the um laudent eum. Y. Confite- 
ancients. Y. Let the mercies of ántur Dómino misericórdie 
the Lord give glory to him; ejus, et mirabília ejus filiis 
and his wonderful works to the hóminum. 
children of men. 

After Septuagesima, in place of the Lesser Alleluia is said or 


sung the Tract. In votive Masses during Paschal Time the 
Gradual is omitted and instead is said or sung the Greater 


Alleluia, 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Matt. 16, 
18. Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I will build my church. 


Allelija, allelüja. V. Matt. 
16, 18. 'Tu es Petrus, et super 
hanc petram zdificábo Ecclé- 
siam meam, Allelüja. 


Tract. Matt. 16, 18, 19 


Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rockI will buildmy church. 
Y. And the gates of hell shall 
not prevail against it; and to 
thee I will give the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven. Y. Whatso- 
ever thou shalt bind upon 
earth, shall be bound also in 


Tu es Petrus, et super hanc 
petram zdificábo Ecclésiam 
meam. Y. Et porte inferi non 
prevalébunt advérsus eam: et 
tibi dabo claves regni celér- 
um. ¥. Quodcümque ligáveris 
super terram erit ligátum et 
in celis, Y. Et quodcümque 


http://ccwatershed.org 


=~ 


JAN. 18—CHAIR OF ST. PETER AT ROME 871 


Sólveris super terram, erit so- 
lütum et in celis. 


heaven. Y. And whatsoever 
shou shalt loose upon earth, 


shall be loosed also in heaven. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluja, allelija. D. Ps. 
106, 15. Confiteántur Dómino 
misericórdie ejus, et mirabilia 
ejus fíliis hóminum. Allelüja. 
Y. Matth. 16, 18. Tu es Petrus, 
et super hanc petram zdifi- 
Cábo Ecclésiam meam. Alle- 
lüja. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 106, 15. 
y. Let the mercies of the Lord 
give glory to Him, and His.won- 
derful works to the children of 
men. Alleluia. Y. Matt. 16, 18. 
Thou art Peter, and upon this 
rock I will build My Church. 
Alleluia. - 


Gospel. Matt. 16, 13-19 


HK Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Matthéum. 


N ILLO témpore: Venit Je- 
I sus in partes Cæsaréæ 
Philippi, et interrogábat dis- 
cípulos suos, dicens: Quem 
dicunt hómines esse Fílium 
hóminis? At ili dixérunt: 
Alii Joánnem Baptistam, álii 
autem Eliam, álii vero Jere- 
míam, aut unum ex prophé- 
tis. Dicit illis Jesus: Vos au- 
tem quem me esse dicitis? Re- 
spóndens Simon Petrus, dixit: 
Tu es Christus Fílius Dei vivi. 
Respóndens autem Jesus, di- 
xit ei: Beátus es, Simon Bar- 
Jona: quia caro et sanguis 
non revelávit tibi, sed Pater 
meus, qui in celis est. Et 
ego dici tibi, quia tu es Petrus, 
et super hanc petram edifi- 
cabo Ecclésiam meam, et por- 
tæ inferi non prevalébunt ad- 
vérsus eam. Et tibi dabo 
claves regni celérum. Et 
quodcimque ligáveris super 
terram, erit ligátum et in ce- 
lis: et quodeümque sólveris 


©% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 


thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus came 

into the quarters of 
Cæsarea Philippi, and He asked 
His disciples, saying, Whom do 
men say that the Son of man 
is? But they said, Some, John 
the Baptist, and other some, 
Elias, and others, Jeremias, or 
one of the prophets, Jesus saith 
to them, But whom do you say 
that I am? Simon Peter an- 
swered, Thou art Christ, the 
Son of the living God. And 
Jesus answering, said to him, 
Blessed art thou, Simon Bar- 
Jona, because flesh and blood 
hath not revealed it to thee, 
but My Father Who is in hea- 
ven: and I say to thee, that 
thou art Peter, and upon this 
rock I will build My church, 
2nd the gates of hell shall not 
prevail against it; and to thee 
I will give the keys of the king- 
dom of heaven; and whatso- 


ever thou shalt bind upon earth, 


it shall be bound also in hea- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


872 


ven; and whatsoever thou shalt 
loose on earth, it shall be loosed 
also in heaven. 


Creed, page 765. 


JAN. 18—CHAIR OF ST. PETER AT ROME 


super terram, erit solütum et 
in colis, 


Offertory. Matt. 16, 18, 19 


Thou art Peter, and upon this 
rock I will build My church, 
and the gates of hell shall not 
prevail against it; and I will 
give to thee the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Tu es Petrus, et super hanc 
petram ædificábo Ecclésiam 
meam: et porte inferi non 
prevalébunt advérsus eam: 
et tibi dabo claves regni cœló- 
rum. 


Secret 


E BESEECH Thee, O Lord, 

that the prayer of the 
blessed apostle Peter may com- 
mend the sacrifices and sup- 
plications of Thy Church, so 
that the celebration we hold 
for his glory may profit for 
our pardon. Through our Lord. 

Commemoration of St. Paul. 


A Timin tue, quesumus, 
: Dómine, preces et hós- 
tias beáti Petri Apóstoli com- 
méndet orátio; ut, quod pro 
illus glória celebrámus, no- 
bis prosit ad véniam. Per 
Dóminum. 


Secret 


ANCTIFY, O Lord, the offer- 
ings of Thy people by the 
prayer of Thine apostle Paul, 
that those things which are 
pleasing to Thee by Thine own 
institution may become the 
more pleasing by the favor of 
his intercession. Through our 
Lord. 
Commemoration of St. Prisca. 


[Ros tui Pauli pré- 
cibus, Dómine, plebis 
æ dona sanctífica: ut, que 
tibi tuo grata sunt institüto, 


gratióra fiant patrocínio 
supplicántis. Per Dóminum. 


Secret 


ay this sacrifice, we be- 

seech Thee, O Lord, 
which we offer to commemorate 
the birthday of Thy saints, both 
loose the bonds of our base na- 
ture and bring upon us the 
gifts of Thy mercy. Through 
our Lord. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Ec hóstia, quesumus, 

Dómine, quam Sanc- 
térum tuórum natalitia re- 
censéntes offérimus, et vin- 
cula nostre pravitátis ab- 
sólvat, et tue nobis miseri- 
córdie dona conciliet. Per 
Dóminum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JAN, 19—STS. MARIUS AND COMPANIONS 878 


Communion. Matt. 16, 18 


Tu es Petrus, et super hanc Thou art Peter, and upon this 
petram edificdbo Ecclésiam rock I will build My church. 
meam. 


Postcommunion 
ÆTÍFICET nos, Dómine, Et the gift we offer bring 
munus oblétum: ut, us joy, O Lord, that, as 


Sicut in Apóstolo tuo Petro te we declare Thee wonderful in 

mirdbilem  przedicámus, sic Thine apostle Peter, so through 

per illum tum sumámusindul- him we may share the gen- 

géntie largitátem. Per Dó- erosity of Thy forgiveness. 

minum. ‘Through our Lord. - 
Commemoration of St. Paul. 


Postcommunion 
ANCTIFICATI, Démine, sa- ANCTIFIED by the mystery 
lutári mystério: quesu- of salvation, O Lord, we 


mus; ut nobis ejus non desit pray that his prayer may fail 

orátio, cujus nos donásti pa- us not, by whose patronage 

irocínio gubernári Per Dó- Thou hast granted us to be 

minum. governed. Tene our Lord. 
Commemoration of. St. Prisca. 


Postcommunion 
vxsumus, Dómine, salu- E Pray Thee, O Lord, 
táribus repléti mysté- that, being filled with 


Iiis: ut, cujus solémnia cele- the mysteries of salvation, we 

brámus, ejus oratiónibus ad- may be helped by her prayers 

juvémur. Per Dóminum. whose feast we celebrate. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Jan. 19—ts. Marius and Companions, Martyrs 
(Red) 
Simple 
St. Canute, King, Martyr 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 67, 4 


ustr epuléntur, et exsül- ND let the just feast, and 
tent in conspéctu Dei, et rejoice before God: and 
electéntur in lmtitia. be delighted with gladness. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


874 JAN. 19—STS. MARIUS AND COMPANIONS 

Ps. 67, 2. Let God arise, and let Ps. 67, 2. Exsürgat Deus, et 
His enemies be scattered, and dissipéntur inimici ejus: et 
Jet them that hate Him flee fügiant qui odérunt eum, a 


from before his face. Y. Gloria 
Patri. 


facie ejus. V. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ARKEN, O Lord, to Thy 

people who make suppli- 
cation in union with the in- 
tercession of Thy saints, that 
Thou mayest grant us to re- 
joice in peace during this life 
on earth and to find the help 
of the life eternal. Through our 
Lord. 


xAupr, Dómine, pópu- 

Jum tuum cum Sanc- 
tórum tuórum patrocínio sup- 
plicántem: ut et temporális 
vite nos tribuas pace gau- 
dére; et ætérnæ reperíre sub- 
Sídium. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Canute. 


Prayer 


cop, Who for the enlight- 
O enment of Thy Church 
didst vouchsafe to distinguish 
blessed King Canute with the 
palm of martyrdom and with 
glorious miracles, mercifully 
grant, that as he was an imi- 
tator ofthe Lord's passion, so 
we, walking in his footsteps, 
may deserve to enter into ever- 
lasting joys. Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui ad illustrándam 
D Ecclésiam tuam, beá- 
m Canütum regem martyrii 
palma et gloriósis miráculis 
decorare dignátus es: concéde 
propítius: ut, sicut ipse Do- 
mince passiónis imitátor fuit, 
ita nos per ejus vestigia gra- 
diéntes, ad gáudia sempitérna 
perveníre mereámur. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


Third Prayer, Deus qui salutis, page 824. 
Epistle from the Mass, Salus autem, page 1325. 
After Septuagesima, in place of the Lesser Alleluias is said or 


sung the Tract. 


Gradual. 


The souls of the just are in 
the hand of God, and the tor- 
ment of malice shall not touch 
them. In the sight of the un- 
wise they seemed to die, but 
they are in peace, 


Wis. 3, 1 


Justórum anime in manu 
Dei sunt: et non tanget illos 
torméntum malítie. Y. Visi 
Sunt óculis insipiéntium mori: 
illi autem sunt in pace. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JAN. 19—STS. MARIUS AND COMPANIONS 


Lesser 


Allelája, allelúja. Y. Ps. 67, 
36. Mirábilis Deus noster in 
Sanctis suis. Allelüja. 


Tract. 


Qui séminant in lácrimis, 
in gáudlo metent. Y. Eüntes 
ibant et flebant, mitténtes 
sémina sua. V. Veniéntes au- 


875 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia, Ps. 67, 36. 
Wonderful is our God in His 
Saints. Alleluia, 


Ps. 125, 5, 6 


They that sow in tears shall 
reap in joy. Going they went 
and wept casting their seeds. 
But coming they shall come 


tem vénient cum exsultatióne, with joyfulness carrying their 


portántes manípulos suos. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


sheaves. 


Gospel. Matt. 24, 3-13 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Matthzeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Sedénte 

Jesu super montem Oli- 
véti, accessérunt ad eum dis- 
cípuli secréto, dicéntes: Dic 
nobis, quando hzc erunt? et 
quod signum advéntus tui, et 
consummatiónis seculi? et 
respóndens Jesus, dixit eis: 
Vidéte, ne quis vos sedücat. 
Muli enim vénient in no- 
mine meo, dicéntes: Ego sum 
Christus: et multos sedücent. 
Auditüri enim estis prelia, et 
opiniónes preliórum. Vidéte, 
ne turbémini. Opórtet enim 
hee fferi, sed nondum est 
finis. Consürget enim gens in 
gentem, et regnum in reg- 
num, et erunt pestiléntie, et 
fames, et terremótus per loca. 
Hee autem ómnia, initia sunt 
dolórum. Tunc tradent vos in 
tribulati6nem, et  occídent 
vos: et éritis ódio ómnibus 
géntibus propter nomen me- 
um. Et tunc scandalizabintur 
multi, et invicem tradent, et 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, as Jesus Was 
A sitting on Mount Olivet, 
he disciples came to Him pri- 
vately, saying: 'Tell us when 
shall these things be? and what 
Shall be the sign of Thy coming 
and of the consummation of 
the world? And Jesus answer- 
ing, said to them: Take heed 
that no man seduce you, for 
many will come in My name, 
saying, I am Christ; and they 
will seduce many. And you shall 
hear of wars and rumors. of 
wars. See that ye be not trou- 
bled, for these things must 
come to pass, but the end is not 
yet: for nation shall rise against 
nation, and kingdom against 
Kingdom, and there shall be 
pestilences and famines, and. 
earthquakes in places: now all 
these are the beginning of sor- 
rows. Then shall they deliver 
you up to be afflicted, and shall 
put you to death, and you shall 
be hated by all nations for My 


http://ccwatershed.org 


876 


name's sake, and then shall 
many be scandalized and shall 
betray one another, and shall 
hate one another, and many 
false prophets shall rise and 
shall seduce many; and because 
iniquity hath abounded the 
charity of many shall grow 


JAN. 19—STS. MARIUS AND COMPANIONS 


édio habébunt invicem. Et 
multi pseudoprophéte sur- 
gent, et sedücent multos. Et 
quóniam abundavit iníquitas, 
refrigéscet cáritas multórum. 
Qui autem  perseveráverlt 
usque in finem, hic salvus erit. 


cold. But he that shall persevere to the end, he shall be saved. 


Offertory. Ps. 123, 7 


Our soul hath been delivered 
as a sparrow out of the snare 
of the fowlers: the snare is 
broken and we are delivered. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Anima nostra sicut passer 
erépta est de laqueo venán- 
tium: láqueus contrítus est, 
et nos liberáti sumus. 


Secret 


AVE regard, O Lord, to the 

prayers and offerings of 

'Thy faithful, that they may be 

both pleasing to Thee for the 

festival of Thy saints and may 

bring us the help of Thy mercy. 
Through our Lord. 


RECES, Dómine, tuórum 
T réspice, oblationésque, 
fidélum: ut et tibi grata sint 
pro tuórum festivitáte Sanc- 
tórum, et nobis cónferant tug 
propitiatiónis auxílium. Per 
Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Canute. 


Secret: 


AY our devout offerings, O 

Lord, be acceptable in 
Thy sight; and by the inter- 
cession of the holy martyr on 
whose festival they are laid be- 
fore Thee, may they profit us 
unto salvation. Through our 
Lord. 


CccÉPTA sit in conspéctu 

tuo, Dómine, nostra 
devótio: et ejus nobis fiat 
supplicatióne salutáris, pro 
cujus solemnitáte defértur. 
Per Dóminum, 


Third Secret, By Thy clemency, page 824. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


But I say to you, my friends, 
be not afraid of those who per- 
secute you. 


Luke 12, 4 


Dico autem vobis amícis 
meis: Ne terreámini ab his 
gui vos perseguüntur. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JAN. Z0—STS. FABIAN AND SEBASTIAN 877 


Postcommunion 


ANCTÓRUM. tuórum, Dó- 

mine, intercessióne pla- 
cátus: presta, quesumus; ut, 
que temporáli celebrámus ac- 
tióne, perpétua  Salvatióne 
capiámus. Per Dóminum. 


B APPEASED by the prayers 
of Thy saints, O Lord, 
and grant, we beseech Thee, 
that the rites we perform here 
on earth may avail for our ever- 
lasting salvation. Though our 
Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Canute. 


Postcommunion 


EFÉCTI participatióne 

müneris sacris, quesu- 
mus, Dómine Deus noster: ut, 
cujus exséquimur cultum, in- 
tercedénte beáto Canüto Már- 
tyre tuo, sentiámus efféctum. 
Per Dóminum. 


Third Postcommunion, May 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


UR strength renewed from 

having shared in Thy sa- 
cred gift, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord our God, that, by the in- 
tercession of blessed Canute 
Thy martyr, we may ever feel 
the mighty power of the Sac- 
rament we worship. Through 
our Lord. i 


this communion, page 824. 


Jan. 20—Sts. Fabian and Sebastian, Martyrs (Red) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 


NTRET in conspéctu tuo, 

Dómine, gémitus compe- 
ditórum: redde vícinis nostris 
séptuplum in sinu eórum: 
víndica sánguinem sanctór- 
um tuórum, qui effüsus est. 
Ps. 78, 1. Deus, venérunt 
gentes in hereditétem tuam: 
polluérunt templum sanctum 
tuum: Posuérunt Jerúsalem 
in pomórum custódiam. FY. 
Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 


78, 11, 12, 10 


ET the sighing of the pris- 

oners come in before 
Thee, O Lord; render to our 
neighbors sevenfold in their 
bosom; revenge the blood of 
Thy saints which hath been 
shed. Ps. 78, 1. O God, the 
heathens are come into Thy in- 
heritance; they have defiled 
Thy holy temple; they have 
made Jerusalem as a place te 
keep fruit. Y. Glory. 


762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


878 


JAN. 20—STS. FABIAN AND SEBASTIAN 


Prayer 


ooK down upon our in- 

firmity, O almighty God, 
and, because the burden of our 
own deeds weigheth us down, 
let the glorious intercession of 
Thy blessed martyrs, Fabian 
and Sebastian, protect us. 
Through our Lord. 


NFIRMITATEM nostram ré- 
T Spice, omnípotens Deus: 
et, quia pondus próprie ac- 
tiónis gravat, beatórum Már- 
tyrum tuórum Fabiani et Se- 
bastiáni intercéssio gloriós& 
nos prótegat. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. Heb. 11, 33-39 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
St. Paul to the Hebrews. 


RETHREN, ihe saints 

through faith subdued 
kingdoms, wrought justice, ob- 
tained promises, stopped the 
mouths of lions, quenched the 
violence of fire, escaped the 
edge of the sword, recovered 
Strength from weakness, be- 
came valiant in battle, put to 
füght the armies of foreigrers: 
women received their dead 
raised to life again: but others 
were racked, not accepting de- 
liverance, that they might find 
& better resurrection; and 
others had trial of mockeries 
and stripes, moreover also of 
bands and prisons: they were 
Stoned, they were cut asunder, 
they were tempted, they were 
put to death by the sword, they 
wandered about in sheep-skins, 
and in goat-skins, being in 
want, distressed, afflicted, of 
whom the world was not wor- 
ihy; wandering in deserts, in 
mountains, and in dens, and in 
caves of the earth. And all 
these were found approved by 
the testimony of faith, in Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Hebrzos, 


RATRES: Sancti per fidem 

vicérunt regna, operáti 
sunt justítiam, adépti sunt 
repromissiónes, obturavérunt 
ora leónum, exstinxérunt im- 
petum ignis, effugérunt áciem 
glddii, convaluérunt de in- 
firmitáte, fortes facti sunt in 
bello, castra vertérunt exter- 
érum: accepérunt mulieres de 
resurrectióne mórtuos suos: 
alii autem disténti sunt, non 
suscipiéntes  redemptiónem, 
ut meliórem invenírent resur- 
rectiónem: álii vero ludíbria, 
et vérbera expérti, insuper et 
vincula, et cárceres: lapidáti 
sunt, secti sunt, tentáti sunt, 
in occisiéne gládii mórtui 
sunt: circuiérunt in melótis, 
in péllibus caprinis, egéntes, 
angustiati, affifcti: quibus 
dignus non erat mundus: in 
solitudinibus ^ errántes, in 
móntibus, et spelincis, et in 
cavérnis terre, Et hi omnes 
testimónio fídei probáti, in- 
vénti sunt in Christo Jesu 
Dómino nostro, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JAN. 20—STS. FABIAN AND SEBASTIAN 879 


Gradual. Ex. 15, 11 


Gloriósus Deus in sanctis God is glorious in His saints, 
suis: mirábilis in majestate, wonderful in majesty, doing 
faciens prodigia. Y. Déxtera wonders. V. Thy right hand, O 
tua, Dómine, glorificáta est in Lord, is glorified in strength: 
virtüte: déxtera manus tua Thy right hand hath broken 
confrégit inimicos. the enemies. 


After Septuagesima, in place of the Lesser Alleluia and 
verse following, is said or sung the Tract. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 144, 
144, 10, 11. Sancti tui, Dó- 10, 11. Thy saints shall bless 
mine, benedícent te: glóriam Thee, O Lord; they shall speak 
regni tui dicent. Allelüja. of the glory of Thy kingdom. 

Alleluia. 


Tract. Ps. 125, 5, 6 


Qui séminant in lácrimis, They that sow in tears, shall 
in gáudio metent. Y. Eüntes reap in joy. Y. Going, they went 
ibant et flebant, mitténtes and wept, casting their seed. 
sémina sua. Y. Veniéntes au- Y. But coming, they shall come 
tem vénient cum exsultatióne, with joyfulness, carrying thei. 
portántes manipulos suos. sheaves. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel from the Mass Sapientiam, page 1323. 


Offertory. Ps. 31, 11 


Letáminiin Dómino, et ex- Be glad in the Lord, and re- 
sultate, justi: et glori&mini, joice, ye just; and glory all ye 
omnes recti corde. right of heart. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
ósTIAS . tibi, Dómine, RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 
beatórumMártyrum tu- the sacrifices dedicated 


órum Fabiáni et Sebastiáni to the merits of Thy blessed 
dicátas méritas, benfgnus as- martyrs Fabian and Sebastian, 
süme: et ad perpétuum nobis and grant that they may profit 
tríbue proveníre subsídium. for our everlasting help. 
Per Dóminum. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


880 JAN. 21—ST. AGNES, VIRGIN, MARTYR 
Communion. Luke 6, 17, 18, 19 
A multitude of sick, and they — Multitüdo languéntium, et 
that were troubled with un- qui vexabántur a Spirítibus 
clean spirits, came to Him; for immündis, veniébant ad eum: 
virtue Went out from Him, and quia virtus de illo exíbat, et 


healed all. 


sanábat omnes. 


Postcommunion 


EFRESHED by participation 

in Thy sacred gift, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, our God, 
that, by the intercession of Thy 
holy martyrs Fabian and Se- 
bastian, we may experience the 
power of the sacrament which 
we worship. Through our Lord. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EFEctT1 participatiéne 
| müneris Sacri, quæsu- 
mus, Dómine Deus noster: ut, 
cujus exséquimur cultum in- 
tercedéntibus sanctis Mar- 
tyribus tuis Fabiáno et Sebas- 
tiáno, sentiámus  efféctum. 
Per Dóminum. 


Jan.21—$t. Agnes, Virgin, Martyr (Red) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 

HE Wicked have waited for 

me to destroy me: I have 

understood Thy testimonies, O 

Lord: I have seen an end of all 

perfection. Thy commandment 

is exceedingly broad. Ps. 95, 1. 

Blessed are the undefiled in the 

way, who walk in the law of 
the Lord. Y. Glory. 


Ps. 118, 95, 96 


E exspectavérunt pecca- 
tóres, ut pérderent me: 
testimónia tua, Dómine, in- 
telléxi: omnis consumma- 
tiónis vidi finem: latum man- 
dátum tuum nimis. Ps. 95, 1. 
Beáti immaculáti in via: qui 
ambulant in lege Dómini. Y. 
Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

Who dost choose the 
weak things of the world to 
confound the strong, mercifully 
grant that we, who venerate 
the festival of blessed Agnes, 
Thy virgin and martyr, may ex- 
perience the benefit of her pa- 
tronal influence with Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 
Deus, qui infirma mun- 
di éligis, ut fórtia queque con- 
fündas: concéde propítius; ut 
qui beátse Agnétis Vírginis et 
Mártyris tue solémnia cóli- 
mus, ejus apud te pátrocinia 
sentiámus. Per Dóminum. 


Lesson from the Mass Loquebar, page 1360. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JAN. 21—ST. AGNES, VIRGIN, MARTYR 


Gradual. 


'"Diffüsa est grátia in lábiis 
tuis: proptérea benedixít te 
Deus in ætérnum. Y. Ps. 44, 
5. Propter veritátem, et man- 
Suetüdinem, et justitiam: et 
dedücet te mirabiliter déx- 
lera tua. 


881 


Ps. 44, 3 


Grace is poured abroad in thy 
lips: therefore hath God blessed 
ihee forever. V. Ps. 44, 5. Be- 
cause of truth, and meekness, 
and justice: and thy right hand 
shall conduct thee wonderfully. 


After Septuagesima, in place of the Lesser Alleluia and verse 
following, is said. or sung the Tract. 


Lesser Alleluia : 


Alleluja, allelija. Y. Matt. 
25, 4, 6. Quinque prudéntes 
virgines accepérunt óleum in 
vasis suis cum Jampádibus: 
média autem nocte clamor 
factus est: Ecce sponsus ve- 
nit: exite óbviam Christo Dó- 
mino. Allelija. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Matt. 25, 
4, 6. The five wise virgins took 
oil in their vessels with the 
lamps; but at midnight there 
was & cry made, Behold the 
bridegroom cometh, go ye forth 
to meet Christ our Lord. Alle- 
luia. 


Tract 


Veni, sponsa Christi, áccipe 
corónam,. quam tibi Dóminus 
preparavit in wtérnum: pro 
cujus amóre sánguinem tuum 
fudisti. Y. Ps. 44, 8. Dilexisti 
justitiam, et odísti iniquitá- 
tem: proptérea unxit te Deus, 
Deus tuus, óleo letitie præ 
consórtibus tuis. Y. Ps. 44 5. 
Spécie tua, et pulchritüdine 
tua inténde, próspere pro- 
céde, et regna. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Come, spouse of Christ, re- 
ceive the crown which the Lord 
hath prepared for thee forever, 
for Whose love thou didst shed 
thy blood. V. Ps. 44, 8. Thou 
hast loved justice and hated in- 
iquity: therefore God, thy God. 
hath anointed thee with the oil 
of gladness above thy fellows. 
y. Ps. 44, 5. With thy comeli- 
ness and thy beauty, set out, 
proceed prosperously, and 
reign. 


Gospel from the Mass Loquebar, page 1361. 


Offertory. 
Afferéntur regi virgines post 


Ps. 44, 8, 5 
After her shall virgins be 


eam: proximz ejus afferéntur brought to the King: her neigh- 
tiblin letitia, et exsultatióne: bors shall be brought to Thee 
&dducéntur in templum regi with gladness and rejoicing; 
Dómino. they shall be brought into the 

temple to the King our Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


29 http://ccwatershed.org 


882 


JAN. 22—8TS. VINCENT AND ANASTASIUS 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 

the sacrifices we offer 

Thee, and, by the intercession 

of blessed Agnes, Thy virgin 

and martyr, loose the bonds of 
our sins, Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


éstas. Dómine, quas tibi 

-Q offerimus, propitius sú- 

Scipe: et intercedénte beáta 

Agnéte Vírgine et Mártyre 

tua, víncula peccatórum no- 

Strórum absólve. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Communion. Matt. 25, 4, 6 


The five wise virgins took oil 
in their vessels with the lamps: 
but at midnight there was a cry 
made, Behold the bridegroom 
cometh, go ye forth to meet 
Christ our Lord. 


Quinque prudéntes virgi- 
nes accepérunt óleum in vasis 
suis cum lampádibus: média 
autem nocte clamor factus 
est: Ecce sponsus venit: ex{te 
óbviam Christo Dómino. 


Postcommunion 


EGALED With heavenly food 

and drink, we humbly 

beseech Thee, O Lord our God, 

that we may be fortified by the 

prayers of her in whose com- 

memoration we have partaken 
of them. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EFÉCTI cibo potüque ce- 

lésti, Deus noster, te 

Süpplices exorámus: ut in cu- 

jus htec commemoratióne per- 

cépimus, ejus muniámur et 
précibus. Per Dóminum. 


Jan. 22—Sts, Vincent and Anastasius, 
Martyrs (Red) 
Semi-double 


Mass, Intret, page 1316, except: 


Prayer: 


ARKEN, O Lord, to our sup- 
plications, that we, who 

know ourselves bound by reason 
of our own iniquity, may be 
delivered by the intercession 
of Thy blessed martyrs Vincent 


and Anastasius, Through our 
Lord. 


pÉsTO, Dómine, suppli- 

catiónibus nostris: ut, 
qui ex iniquitáte nostra reos 
nos esse cognóscimus, beató- 
rum Mártyrum tuórum Vin- 
céntii et Anastasii interces- 
sióne liberémur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JAN. 23—ST. RAYMUND OF PENNAFORT 883 


Secret 


ÜNEnA tibi, Dómine, nos- E OFFER Thee, O Lord, 
tre devotiónis offéri- the gifts of our devo- 
mus: que et pro tuórum tibi tion; may they both be pleasing 
grata sint honóre justórum, et to Thee for the honor of Thy 
nobis salutária, te miseránte, just ones and, by Thy mercy, 


reddántur. Per Dóminum. be rendered salutary to us. 
‘Through our Lord. 
Postcommunion 


Deus: ut, qui celéstia 
aliménta percépimus, inter- 
cedéntibus beátis Martyribus 
tuis Vincéntio et Anastasio, 
per hzc contra ómnia advérsa 
muniámur. Per Dóminum. 


Qo t emnípotens 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


E BESEECH Thee, O al- 

mighty God, that we 
who have partaken of heavenly 
nourishment may by it, with 
the intercession of Thy blessed 
martyrs Vincent and Anasta- 
sius, be fortified against all ad- 
verse influences. Through our 
Lord. 


Jan. 23—St, Rapmund of 3Bennafort, Confessor (Red) 
U Semi-double 
St. Emerentiana, Virgin, Martyr (Red) 


Mass, Os justi, page 1349. ` 


Prayer 


EUS, qui beátum Ray- 
mündum  peniténtie 
Sacraménti insígnem minís- 
trum elegísti, et.per maris un- 
das mirabíliter traduxísti: 
concéde; ut ejus intercessióne 
dignos peniténtie fructus fá- 
cere, et ad etérne salütis por- 
tum perveníre valeámus. Per 
Dóminum. 


cop, Who didst choose 

blessed Raymund to be 
an eminent minister of the sac- 
rament of Penance, and didst 
wondrously bring him through 
ihe waves of the sea, grant that 
by his intercession we may have 
the grace to bring forth fruits 
worthy of penance and to reach 
the port of eternal safety. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Emerentiana, Prayer, Secret and Post- 
communion from the Mass Me exspectaverunt, page 1363. Third 
Prayer of our Blessed Lady Deus, qui salutis, with the accom- 
panying Secret and Postcommunion, page 824, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


884 


JAN. 25—CONVERSION OF ST. PAUL 


Jan.24—$5t. Timothy, Bishop, Martyr (Red) 


Double 
Mass, Statuit, page 1302, except: 


Epistle. 1 Tim. 6, 11-16 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
Timothy. 


EARLY beloved, Follow after 
justice, godliness, faith, 
Charity, patience, mildness. 
Fight the good fight of faith; 
Jay hold on eternal life, wheré- 
unto thou art called, and hast 
confessed a good confession be- 
fore many witnesses. I charge 
thee before God, Who quicken- 
eth all things, and before Christ 
Jesus, Who gave testimony un- 
der Pontius Pilate, a good con- 
fession; that thou keep the 
commandment without spot, 
blameless, unto the coming of 
Our Lord Jesus Christ; which, 
in His times, He shall show, 
Who is the blessed and only 
mighty, the King of kings, and 
Lord of lords; Who alone hath 
immortality, and inhabiteth 
light inaccessible; Whom no 
man hath seen nor can see; to 
Whom be honor and empire 
everlasting. Amen. 


Jan. 25—Uhe Conversion 


Léctio Epistole beáti Paul 
Apéstoli ad Timétheum, 


ARISSIME: Sectáre justi- 

tiam, pietátem, fidem, 
caritátem, patiéntiam, man- 
suetüdinem. Certa bonum cer- 
tamen fidei, apprehénde vi- 
tam metérnam, in qua vocátus 
es, et conféssus bonam con- 
fessiónem coram multis tésti- 
bus. Precípio tibi coram Deo, 
qui vivificat ómnia, et Christo 
Jesu, qui testimónium, réddi- 
dit sub Póntio Piláto, bonam 
confessiónem: ut serves man- 
dátum sine mácula, irrepre- 
hensíbile usque in advéntum 
Dómini nostri Jesu Christi, 
quem suis tempóribus ostén- 
det beátus, et solus potens, 
Rex regum, et Dóminus domi- 
nántium: qui solus habet im- 
mortalitàem, et lucem in- 
hábitat inaccessíbilem: quem 
nullus hóminum vidit, sed 
nec vidére potest: cui honor 
et impérium sempitérnum. 
Amen. 


of St. Paul, (White) 


; Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 2 Tim. 1, 12 


xNow whom I have be- 
lieved and I am certain 


cio cui crédidi et certus 
sum, quia potens est de- 


that he is able to keep that pósitum meum serváre in il- 
which I have committed to lum diem, justus judex. Ps. 
him, against that day; being a 138, 1, 2. Dómine, probásti 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JAN. 25—CONVERSION OF ST. PAUL 885 
me, et cognovisti me: tu cog- just judge. Ps. 138, 1, 2. Lord, 
novisti sessiónem meam. Et Thou hast proved me and 
resurrectiónem meam. Y. known me: Thou hast known 


Glória Patri. 


my sitting down, and my rising 
up. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, Page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui univérsum mun- 

dum beáti Pauli Após- 

toli predicatióne docuísti: da 

nobis, quesumus; ut, qui ejus 

hódie Conversiónem cólimus, 

per ejus ad te exémpla gradiá- 
mur. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Pete 


cop, Who hast taught the 
XJ whole world by the 
preaching of blessed Paul, Thy 
apostle, we beseech Thee, grant 
us, who this day celebrate his 
conversion, that we may ad- 
vance toward Thee by follow- 
ing his example. Through our 
Lord. 


T. 


Prayer 


WEUS, qui beáto Petro 

Apóstolo tuo, collátis 
clávibus regni celéstis, li- 
gándi atque solvéndi pontifí- 
cium tradidisti: concéde; ut, 
intercessiónis ejus auxilio, a 
peccatórum nostrórum néxi- 
bus liberémur: Qui vivis. 


Lesson. 


Léctio Áctuum  Apostoló- 
rum. 
N DIÉBUS illis: Saulus ad- 
huc spirans minárum, et 
cedis in discípulos Dómini, 
accéssit ad principem sacer- 
détum, et pétiit ab eo epistolas 
in Damáscum ad synagógas: 
ut si quos invenísset hujus vie 
viros, ac mulíeres, vinctos per- 
düceret in Jerüsalem. Et cum 
iter faceret, cóntigit, ut ap- 
propinquáret Damásco: et sü- 
bito cireumfülsit eum lux de 
ccelo. Et cadens in terram, au- 
divit vocem dicéntem sibi: 


cop, Who, committing to 
blessed Peter, Thine apos- 
tle, the keys of the heavenly 
kingdom, didst bestow on him 
the pontifical function of bind- 
ing and loosing, grant that, by 


the help of his intercession, we 


may be delivered from the 
bonds of our sins. Who livest. 


Acts 9, 1-22 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 
N THOSE days, Saul, ss yet 
4 breathing out threatenings 
and slaughter against the dis- 
ciples of the Lord, went to the 
high priest, and asked of him 
letters to Damascus, to the syn- 
agogues; that if he found any 
men and women of this way, 
he might bring them bound to 
Jerusalem. And as he went on 
his journey, it came to pass that 
he drew nigh to Damascus: and 
suddenly a light from heaven 
shined round about him. And 


http://ccwatershed.org 


886 


falling on the ground he heard 
& voice saying to him, Saul, 
Saul, why persecutest thou Me? 
Who said, Who art Thou, Lord? 
And He said, I am Jesus of 
Nazareth, Whom thou perse- 
cutest. It is hard for thee to 
kick against the goad. And he 
trembling and astonished, said, 
Lord, what wilt Thou have me 
to do? And the Lord said to 
him, Arise, and go into the city, 
and there it shall be told thee 
what thou must do. Now the 
men who went in company with 
him stood amazed, hearing in- 
deed a voice, but seeing no man. 
And Saul arose from the 
ground, and when his eyes were 
opened, he saw nothing. But 
they leading him by the hand, 
brought him to Damascus. And 
he was there three days without 
sight; and he did neither eat 
nor drink. Now there was 2 cer- 
tain disciple at Damascus, 
named Ananias: and the Lord 
said to him in a vision, Ananias. 
And he said, Behold I am here, 
Lord. And the Lord said to him, 
Arise and go into the street 
that is called Strait, and seek 
in the house of Judas one 
named Saul of Tarsus; for be- 
hold he prayeth. (And he saw 
@ man, named Ananias, com- 
ing in, and putting his hands 
upon him, that he might re- 
cover his sight. But Ananias 
answered, Lord, I have heard 
by many of this man, how much 
evil he hath done to thy saints 
in Jerusalem: and here he hath 
authority from the chief priests 
to bind all that invoke Thy 
name, And the Lord said to 
him, Go thy way; for this man 
is to Me a vessel of election, to 
carry My name before the gen- 


JAN. 25—CONVERSION OF ST. PAUL 


Saule, Saule, quid me persé- 
queris? Qui dixit: Quis es, 
Dómine? Et ille: Ego sum Je- 
sus, quem tu perséqueris: du- 
rum est tibi contra stímulum 
calcitráre. Et tremens, ac stu- 
pens, dixit: Dómine, quid me 
vis fácere? Et Dóminus ad 
eum: Surge, et ingrédere civi- 
tátem, et ibi dicétur tibi quid 
te opórteat facere. Viri au- 
tem ili, qui comitabántur 
cum eo, stabant stupefácti, 
&udiéntes quidem vocem, né- 
miném autem vidéntes. Sur- 
réxit autem Saulus de terra, 
&pertísque óculis nihil vidé- 
bat. Ad manus autem illum 
trahéntes, introduxérunt Da- 
mascum. Et erat ibi tribus dié- 
bus non videns, et non man- 
ducávit, neque bibit. Erat au- 
tem quidem discípulus Damá- 
Sci, nómine Ananias: et dixit 
ad illum in visuDóminus: An- 
&nía. At ille ait: Ecce ego, Dó- 
mine. Et Dóminus ad eum: 
Surge, et vade in vicum, qui 
vocátur Rectus: et quere in 
domo Jude Saulum nómine 
Tarsénsem: ecce enim orat, 
(Et vidit virum, Ananíam nó- 
mine, introéintem, et impo- 
néntem sibi manus, ut visum 
recipiat.  Respóndit autem 
Ananías: Dómine, audívi a 
multis de viro hoc, quanta 
mala fécerit sanctis tuis in 


Jerüsalem: et hic habet po- 


testátem a princípibus sacer- 
détum alligindi omnes, qui 
invócant nomen tuum. Dixit 
autem ad eum Dóminus: 
Vade, quóniam vas electiónis 
est mihi iste, ut portet no- 
men meum coram géntibus, 
et régibus, et fíliis Israel. Ego 
enim osténdam illi, quanta 
opórteat eum pro nómine meo 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JAN. 25—CONVERSION OF ST. PAUL 


pati; Et abiit Ananías, et in- 
iroivit in domum: et impó- 
nens ei manus dixit: Saule 
frater, Dóminus misit me Je- 
Sus, qui appáruit tibi in via, 
qua veniébas, ut videas, et im- 
Plearis Spíritu Sancto. Et con- 
féstim cecidérunt ab óculis 
ejus tamquam squame, et vi- 
sum recépit: et surgens bap- 
tizátus est. Et cum accepísset 
cibum, confortátus est. Fuit 
autem : cum  discípulis, - qui 
erant Damásci, per dies áli- 
quot. Et continuo in synagógis 
predicábat Jesum, quóniam 
hic est Fílius Dei. Stupébant 
autem omnes, qui audiébant, 
et dicébant: Nonne hic est, 
qui expugnábat in Jerüsalem 
eos, qui invocábant nomen 
istud: et huc ad hoc venit, ut 
vinctos illos düceret ad prín- 
cipes sacerdótum? Saulus au- 
tem multo magis convalescé- 
bat, et confundébat Judeos, 
qui habitabant Damásci, af- 
firmans quóniam hic est 
Christus. 


887 


tiles, and kings, and the chil- 
dren of Israel. For I will show 
him how great things he must 
suffer for My name's sake. And 
Ananias went his way, and en- 
tered into the house, and laying 
his hands upon him he said, 
Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus 
hath sent me, He that appeared 
to thee in the way as thou 
camest, that thou mayest re- 
ceive thy sight, and be filled 
with the Holy Ghost. And im- 
mediately there fell from his 
eyes as it were scales, and.he 
received his sight; and rising 
up he was baptized. And. when 
he had taken meat, he was 
strengthened. And he was with 
the disciples that were at Da- 
mascus for some days. And im- 
mediately he preached Jesus in 
the synagogues, that He is the 
Son of God. And all that heard 
him were astonished, and said, 
Is not this he who persecuted 
in Jerusalem those who called 
upon this name: and came 
hither for that intent, that he 
might carry them bound to the 


chief priest? But Saul increased much more in strength, and 
confounded the Jews who dwelt in Damascus, affirming that 


this is the Christ. 


Gradual. Gal. 2, 8,9 


Qui operátus est Petro in 
&postolátum, operátus est et 
mihi inter gentes: et cogno- 
vérunt grátiam Dei, que data 
est mihi. V. Gratia Dei in me 
vacua non fuit: sed gratia ejus 
semper in me manet. 


He who wrought in Peter to 
the apostleship, wrought in me, 
also among the gentiles, and 
they knew the grace of God 
which was given to me. V. The 
grace of God in me hath not 
been void; but His grace al- 
ways remaineth in me. 


Ajter Septuagesima, in place of the Lesser Alleluia is said 


or sung the Tract. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Mag- 
nus sanctus Paulus, vas electi- 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. The great 
saint Paul, the vessel’ of elec- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


888 JAN. 25—CONVERSION OF ST. PAUL 


tion, is truly worthy of all ónis, vere digne est glorificán- 
glory; for he hath deserved to dus, qui et máruit thronum 


possess the twelfth throne. duodécimum possidére, Alle- 


Alleluia, 


lája. 


Tract 


Thou art a, vessel of election, 
O holy apostle Paul: truly wor- 
thy art thou to be gorified. Y. 
Preacher of the truth and 
teacher of the gentiles in faith 
and truth. Y. By thee have all 
nations known the grace of 
God. Y. Intercede for us with 
God, Who chose thee. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Tu es vas electiónis, sancte 
Paule Apóstole: vere digne es 
glorificándus. V.. Predicátor 
veritátis, et doctor géntium 
in fide et veritáte. V. Per te 
omnes gentes cognovérunt 
grátiam Dei. Y. Intercéde pro 
nobis ad. Deum, qui te elégit. 


Gospel. Matt. 19, 27.29 


& Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. f 


T THAT lime, Peter said to 

Jesus, Behold we have 
eft all things and have fol- 
lowed 'Thee: what therefore 
shall we have? And Jesus said 
to them, Amen I say to you, 
that you who have followed Me, 
in the regeneration, when the 
Son of man shall sit on the 
seat of his majesty, you also 
shall sit on twelve seats judg- 
ing the twelve tribes of Israel. 
And every one tliat hath left 
house, or brethren, or sisters, 
or father, or mother, or wife, 
or children, or lands, for My 
name's sake, shall receive a 
hundredfold, and shall possess 
life everlasting. 


Creed, page 765. 


H4 Sequéntia sancti Evan= 
gélii secüándum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Pe- 

trus ad. Jesum: Ecce nos 
relíquimus .ómnia, et secüti 
sumus te: quid ergo erit no- 
bis? Jesus autem dixit illis: 
Amen dico vobis, quod vos, 
qui secüti estis me, in regene- 
ratióne, cum séderit Filius 
hóminis in sede majestátis 
sue, sedébitis et vos super 
Sedes duódecim, judicantes 
duódecim tribus Israel. Et om- 
nis, qui relíquerit domum, vel 
fratres, aut soróres, aut pa- 
trem, aut matrem, aut uxó- 
rem, aut fílios, aut agros, 
propter nomen meum, céntu- 
plum accipiet, et vitam xtére 
nam possidébit, 


Offertory. Ps. 138, 17 


But to me Thy friends, O 
God, are made exceedingly hon- 


Mihi autem nimis honoráti 
sunt amíci tui, Deus: nimis 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JAN. 25—CONVERSION OF ST. PAUL 889 


confortátus est principátus orable: their principality is ex- 


eórum. 
Offertory biras page 767. 


ceedingly Ea Oa USER 


Secret 


OsTOLI tui Pauli pré- 
cibus, Dómine, plebis 
tue dona sanctifica: ut, que 
tibi tuo grata sunt institüto, 
gratióra fiant patrocínio sup- 
plicántis; Per Dóminum. 


HROUGH the prayer of Paul, 
Thy apostle, sanctify, O 
Lord, the offerings of Thy peo- 
ple, that what is pleasing to 
Thee by Thine own ordinance, 


: may become more pleasing by 


the favor of his supplication. 


` Through our Lord. 


Commemotation of St. Peter. 


Secret 


COLÉSIE tue, quesumus, 
Dómine, preces et hós- 
tias beáti Petri Apostoli com- 
méndet orátio: ut, quod pro 
ilius glória celebrámus, no- 
bis prosit ad véniam. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


E BESEECH Thee, O Lord, 

that the prayer of the 
blessed apostle Peter may com- 
mend the sacrifices and suppli- 
cations of Thy Church, so that 


the celebration we hold for his 


glory may profit for our pardon. 
Through our Lord. 


Communion. Matt. 19, 28, 29 


Amen dico vobis: quod vos, 
qui reliquístis ómnia, et se- 
cúti estis me, céntuplum acci- 
piétis, et vitam ætérnam pos- 
sidébitis. 


Amen I say to you, that you 
who have left all things, and 
followed Me, shall receive a 
hundredfold, and shall possess 
life everlasting. 


Postcommunion 


ANCTIFICÁTI, Dómine, Sa- 

lutári mystério: quesu- 
mus; ut nobis ejus non desit 
orátio, cujus nos donásti pa- 
trocínio gubernári, Per Dó- 
minum. 


AwNCTIFIED by this saving 

mystery, We beseech Thee, 
O Lord, that he, under whose 
patronage Thou hast vouch- 
safed to place us, may not fall 
to intercede for us. Through 
our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Peter. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


890 


JAN. 26—ST. POLYCARP, BISHOP 


Postcommunion 


ET the gift we offer bring 

us joy, O Lord, that, as 
Wwe declare Thee wonderful in 
Thine apostle Peter, so through 
him we may share the gen- 
erosity of ‘Thy forgiveness. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793- 


Jan.26—85t, 3Bolpratp, 


ÆTÍFICET nos, Dómine, 

munus oblátum: ut, si- 
cut in Apóstolo tuo Petro te 
mirábilem  prs&dicámus sic 
per illum tue sumámus indul- 
géntie largitátem. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Bishop, Martyr (Red) 


Double 
Mass, Sacerdotes, page 1306, except: 


Epistle. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed John the Apostle. 


ost dearly beloved, who- 
XD ever is not just, is not of 
God, nor he that loveth not his 
brother. For this is the declara- 
tion, which you have heard 
from the beginning, that you 
should love one another. Not 
as Cain, who was of the wicked 
one, and killed his brother. And 
wherefore did he kill him? Be- 
cause his own works were 
wicked, and his brother’s just. 
Wonder not, brethren, if the 
world hate you. We know that 
we have passed from death to 
life, because we love the breth- 
ren. He that loveth not, abid- 
eth in death, Whosoever hateth 
his brother is a murderer. And 
you know that no murderer 
hath eternal life abiding in 
himself. In this we have known 
the charity of God, because He 
hath laid down His life for us; 
and we ought to lay down our 
lives for the brethren. 


1 John 3, 10-16 


Léctio Epistole beati Joán- 
nis Apóstoli. 
ARÍssIMI: Omnis qui non 
est justus, non est ex 
Deo, et qui non diligit fratrem 
suum: quóniam hzc est an- 
nuntiátio, quam audistis ab 
inítio, ut diligátis altérutrum. 
Non sicut Cain, qui ex ma- 
ligno erat, et occídit fratrem 
suum. Et propter quid occídit 
eum? Quóniam ópera ejus 
maligna erant: fratris au- 
tem ejus justa. Nolíte mi- 
rari, fratres, si odit vos 
mundus. Nos scimus quóniam 
transláti sumus de morte ad 
vitam, quóniam  dilígimus 
fratres. Qui non díligit, manet 
in morte: omnis qui odit fra- 
trem suum, homicída est. Et 
Scitis, quóniam omnis homi- 
cida non habet vitam etér- 
nam in semetípso manéntem. 
In hoc cognóvimus caritátem 
Dei, quóniam ille ánimam 
suam pro nobis pósuit: et nos 
debémus pro frátribus ánimas 
pónere. 


Gospel from the Mass Leetabitur, page 1314. 
Postcommunion from the Mass Statuit, page 1305. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


-ë 


VE Educa 


JAN. 28—ST. PETER NOLASCO, CONFESSOR 891 


Jan. 27—St, John Chrpsostem, Bishop, Confessor, 
Doctor of the Church (White) 
Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer 


CCLÉSIAM tuam, quesu- 

mus, Dómine, grátia 
coléstis amplíficet, quam beá- 
ti Joánnis Chrysóstomi Con- 
fessóris tui atque Pontificis 
illustráre voluisti gloriósis 
méritis et doctrinis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


AY heavenly grace, we be- 
[6 seech Thee, O Lord, en- 
rich Thy Church which Thou 
didst vouchsafe to enlighten 
with the glorious virtues and 
teachings of blessed John Chry- 
sostom, Thy confessor anc 
bishop. Through our Lord, 


Gradual. Eccles. 44, 16 


Ecce sacérdos magnus, qui 
in diébus suis plácuit Deo. Y. 
Non est invéntus similis illi, 
qui conserváret legem Excélsi, 


Allenüja, allelüja. Y. Jac. 1, 
12. Beátus vir, qui suffert ten- 
tatiónem: quóniam cum pro- 
bátus füerit, accipiet corónam 
vitæ. Allelüja. is 


Behold a great priest, who 
in his days pleased God. 
There was not any found like 
to him, who kept the law of 
the Most High. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Jas. 1, 
12. Blessed is the man that en- 
dureth temptation: for, when 
he hath been proved, he shall 
receive the crown of life. Alle- 
uia. 


Jan, 28—St, Peter Polasco, Confessor (White) 
Double 
St. Agnes (secundo), Virgin, Martyr 


Mass, Justus ut palma, page 1352, except Secret and Poste 
communion from. Mass Os justi, page 1352. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui in tux caritátis 
exémplum, ad fidélium 
Tedemptiónem sanctum Pe- 
trum Ecclésiam tuam nova 
prole fecundare divínitus do- 


cov, Who, as a token of 
Thy loving-kindness, didst 
inspire holy Peter to enrich Thy 
Church with a new progeny 
devoted to the redemption of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


892 


the faithful, grant that, being cuíisti: ipsíus nobis interces- 
delivered through his interces- sióne concéde: a peccáti ser- 
sion from the servitude of sin, vitüte solütis, in celésti pá- 
we may know the joys of tria perpétua libertáte gau- 


JAN. 28--ST. PETER NOLASCO, CONFESSOR 


eternal freedom in heaven, 
our native land. Who livest. 


dére. Qui vivis. 


St. Agnes is commemorated for the second time on this day, 


a week after her feast. 


Prayer. 


cop, Who dost gladden us 

with the yearly solemnity 
of blessed Agnes, Virgin and 
Martyr, grant us, we beseech 
Thee, to follow the example of 
pious living set by her whom we 
venerate in our devotions. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, 
i third for the Church, page 825, 


EUs, qui nos ánnu& beá- 

te Agnétis Virginis et 

Martyris tue solemnitate leti- 

ficas: da, quesumus; ut,quam 

venerámur offício, étiam pie 

conversatiónis sequámur ex- 
émplo. Per Dóminum. 


Deus qui salutis, page 
or for the Pope, page 


Epistle and Gradual from the Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370. 
ge and Offertory from the Mass, Me expectaverunt, page 


Secret 


“yay Thy plenteous bless- 

ing, O Lord, descend 

upon these offerings, through 

Thy mercy, to work out our 

sanctification and to bring us 

joy in the solemnity of the mar- 
tyrs. Through our Lord. 


UPER has, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, bóstias benedíctio 
copiósa descéndat: que et 
sanctificeatiónem nobis cle- 
ménter operétur, et de Már- 
tyrum nos solemnitáte letifi- 
cet. Per Dóminum, 


Communion from the Mass Vultum tuum, page 1378. 


Postcommunion 


FC) We HAVE partaken of the 
votive sacraments, O 
Lord, of this annual celebra- 
tion: grant, we beseech Thee, 
that they may bring us healing 
remedies both for this mortal 
life and for life everlasting. 
Through our Lord, 


owPsrwvs, Dómine, cele- 
britátis ánnus votíva 
Sacraménta: presta quesu- 
mus: ut et temporális vite no- 
bis remédia przbeant, et ætér- 
ne, Per Dóminum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


"-——" uup— 


JAN. 31—ST. JOHN BOSCO, CONFESSOR 893 


Jan.29—$9t. Francis of Dales, Bishop, Confessor, 
l Doctor of the Church (White) l 
Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer 


D's qui ad animárum 
salütem beátum Fran- 
ciscum  Confessórem tuum 
atque Pontificem ómnibus 
ómnia factum- esse voluísti: 
concéde propítius; ut caritá- 
tis tuæ dulcédine perfúsi, ejus 
dirigéntibus mónitis ac suf- 
fragántibus méritis, ætérna 
gáudia consequámur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


cop, Who, for the saving 

of souls didst will that 
blessed Francis, Thy Confessor 
and Bishop, should become all 
things to all men, be pleased to 
grant that we, being filled with 
the sweetness of Thy love, 
guided by his teachings, and 
helped by his merits and pray- 
ers, may attain the joys of ever- 
lasting life. Through our Lord. 


Jan. 30—St. Martina, Virgin, Martyr (Red) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Loquebar, page 1359. 


Jan. 31—St. John Bosco, Confessor (White) 
mE Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 3 Kings 4, 29. 


EDIT illi Deus sapién- 

tiam, et prudéntiam 
multam nimis, et latitüdinem 
cordis, quasi arénam que est 
in líttore maris. Ps. 112, 1. 
Laudáte, püeri, Dóminum, 
laudáte nomen Dómini. y. 
Glória Patri. 


ND God gave to him wis- 

dom and understanding 
exceeding much, and largeness 
of heart as the sand that is on 
the seashore. Ps. 112, 1. Praise 
the Lord, ye children: praise ye 
the name of the Lord. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


EUS, qui sanctum Joán- 
nem Conífessórem tuum 


Prayer 


cop, who hath raised up 
in thy Confessor Saint 


adolescéntium patrem et ma- John Bosco a father and teach- 
gistrum excitásti ac per eum, er of youth, and didst will that 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a94 JAN. 31—ST. JOHN BOSCO, CONFESSOR 


through him with the help of 
the Virgin Mary new religious 
families should flourish in the 
Church, grant, we beseech 
Thee, that enkindled by the 
same fire of charity we may be 


auxiliatrice Vírgine María, 
novas in Ecclésia tua familias 
floréscere voluísti: concéde, 
quiésumus; ut eódem caritá- 
tis igne succénsi, ánimas qué- 
rere, tibíque soli servíre valeá- 


able to labor in finding souls mus. Per Dóminum. 
and serve only Thee. Through 
our Lord. 


Epistle. Philip 4, 4-9 


Lesson from the Epistle of ^ Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the Apóstoli ad Philippénses. 
Philippians. 

EJOICE in the Lord always; RATRES: Gaudéte in Dó- 
A. again I say, rejoice. Let mino semper: íterum 
your modesty be known to all dico, gaudéte. Modéstia ves- 
men. The Lord is nigh. Be tra nota sit ómnibus homini- 
nothing solicitous; but in bus: Dóminus prope est. Nihil 
everything, by prayer and sup- Solliciti sitis; sed in omni ora- 
plication, with thanksgiving, tióne et obsecratióne, cum 
let your petitions be made gratiárum actióne, petitiónes 
known to God. And the peace vestre innotéscant apud 
of God, which surpasseth all Deum. Et pax Dei que exsü- 
understanding, keep your perat omnem sensum, custó- 
hearts and minds in Christ Je- diat corda vestra et intelli- 
sus. For the rest, brethren, géntias vestras, in Christo 
whatsoever things are true, Jesu. De cétero, fratres, que- 
whatsoever modest, whatsoever cümque sunt vera, quectimque 
just, whatsoever holy, whatso- pudíca, quæcúmque justa, 
ever lovely, whatsoever of good qusecümque sancta, quecim- 
fame, if there be any virtue, que amabilia, quectimque 
if any praise of discipline, think bone fame, si qua virtus, si 
on these things. The things qua laus discipline, hec cogi- 
which you have both learned, táte. Que et didicístis, et ac- 
and received, and heard, and cepístis, et audistis, et vidístis 
seen in me, these do ye, and the in me, hzc ágite: et Deus pae 
God of peace shall be with you. cis erit, vobíscum. 


In Votive Masses in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are 
replaced by the Greater Alleluia, 


Gradual. Ps. 36, 3-5 


Trust in the Lord, and do Spera in Dómino, et fac 
good, and dwell in the land, and bonitátem, et inhábita terram. 
thou shalt be fed with its et pascéris in divitiis ejus. Y 
riches. Y. Delight in the Lord Delectáre in Dómino, et dabit 
and. He will give thee the re- tibi petitiónes cordis tui; ree 


http://ccwatershed.org 


T—m FENCE 


JAN. 31—2T. JOHN BOSCO, CONFESSOR 895 


véla Dómino viam tuam et quests of thy heart: Commit 
Spera ineo, et ipse faciet, thy way to the Lord, and trust 
in Him, and he will do it. 


After Septuagesima the Lesser Alleluia and, verse are replaced 
by ihe Tract. : 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelija, allelüja, Y. Ps, 73, Aleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 73, 
21. Pauper et inops laudá- 21. The poor and needy shall 
bunt nomen tuum. Allelija, praise thy name. 


Tract. Ps.60, 4-6 


Factus es spes mea, Dó- Thou hast been my hope; a 
mine: turris fortitüdinis a fá- tower of strength against the 
cie inimíci. Y. Inhabitábo in face of the enemy. Y. In thy 
tabernáculo tuo in ssecula: tabernacle I shall dwell for- 
protegar in velaménto alá- ever: I shall be protected under 
rum tuárum. V. Quóniam tu, the covert of thy wings. Y. For 
Deus, exaudisti oratiónem thou, my God, hast heard my 
meam: dedísti hereditátem prayer: thou hast given an 
timéntibus nomen tuum. inheritance to them that fear 

ihy name, 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 73. ^ Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 73, 21. 
21. Pauper et inops laudábunt The poor and needy shall praise 
nomen tuum, Allelija. Y. Ps. thy name. Alleluia. Y. Ps. 35, 9. 
35, 9. Inebriabüntur ab uber- They shall be inebriated with 
táte domus tue: et torrénte the plenty of thy house; and 
voluptátis tue potábis eos, thou shalt make them drink of 
Allelája. the torrent of thy pleasure. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 18, 1-5 


T Sequéntia sancti Evan- m Continuation of the holy 
gélii secándum Matthéeum, Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

N ILLO témpore: Accessé- T THAT time, the disciples 
runt discipuli ad Jesum came to Jesus, saying: 
dicéntes: Quis, putas, major Who thinkest Thou is the 
est in regno cxlórum? Et ád- greater in the kingdom of hea- 
vocans Jesus párvulum, stá- ven? And Jesus, calling unto 
tuit eum in médio eórum, et Him a little child, set him in 
dixit: Amen dico vobis, nisi the midst of them, and said: 
convérsi fuéritis, et efficlamini Amen, I say to you, unless you 
sicut párvuli, non intrábitis be converted, and become as 


http://ccwatershed.org 


A 


896 JAN. 31—ST. JOHN BOSCO, CONFESSOR 


little children, you shell not 
enter into the kingdom of hea- 
ven. Whosoever therefore shall 
humble himself as this little 
child, he is the greater in the 
kingdom of heaven. And he 
that shall receive one such lit- 
tle child in My name, receiv- 
eth Me. 


in regnum celérum. Quicüm- 
que ergo humiliáverit se sicut 
párvulus iste, hic est major 
in regno celérum. Et qui sus- 
céperit unum párvulum ta- 
t in nómine meo, me süsci- 
pit. 


Offertory. Ps. 33, 12 


Come, children, hearken to 
me; I will teach you the fear of 
the Lord. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Venite, filii, audite me, ti- 
morem Démini docébo vos. 


S ecret 


AKE, O Lord, this clean of- 

fering of the Victim of 
Salvation, and assure us that 
loving Thee in all and above 
all, we may earn the reward of 
life in the praise of Thy glory. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Who against hope believed in 
hope; that he might be made 
the father of many nations; 
according to that which was 
said to him. 


nem mundam salutaris 
Hóstie, et presta: ut, te in 
ómnibus et super ómnia dili- 
géntes, in glórie tue laudem 
vívere mereámur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Su. Dómine, oblatió- 


Rom. 4-18 ( 


Contra spem in spem cré- 
didit, ut fieret pater multá- 
rum géntium, secindum quod 
dictum est ei. 


Postcommunion 


EJOICING, O Lord, in the 

abundant mystery of Thy 
Body and Blood, grant, we be- 
seech Thee, that through the 
intercession of Saint John 
Bosco Thy Confessor, we may 
continue ever in thanksgiving. 
Who liveth. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ÓnPonIs et Sánguinis tul, 

Dómine, mystério satiá- 
tis, concéde, qusesumus; ut, 
intercedénte Sancto Joánne 
Confessóre tuo, in gratiárum 
Semper actióne maneamus: 
Qui vivis. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


—ha 1 14 


FEB. 1—ST. IGNATIUS, BISHOP, MARTYR 


897 


Feb.1—St. Jynatiug, Bishop, Martyr (Red) 
i Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


iHi autem absit gloriári 
nisi in cruce Dómini 
nosiri Jesu Christi: per quem 
mihi mundus crucifixus est, et 
ego mundo. Ps. 131, 1. Me- 
ménto, Dómine, David: et om- 
nis mansuetüdinis ejus. ¥. 
Glória Patri. 


Gal. 6, 14 


op forbid that Y should 
glory, save in the cross of 

Our Lord Jesus Christ: by 
Whom the world is crucified to 
me, and I to the world. Ps. 131, 
1. O Lord, remember David, 
and all his meekness. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


NFIRMITÁTEM nostram ré- 

Spice, omnípotens Deus: 
et, quia pondus prépriz actió- 
nis gravat, beáti Ignátii Már- 
tyris tui atque Pontfficis. in- 
tercéssio gloriósa nos próte- 
gat. Per Dóminum. 


AVE regard to our weak- 

ness, O almighty God, 
and, since the burden of our 
own deeds is heavy upon us, let 
the glorious intercession of 
blessed Ignatius, Thy Martyr 
and Bishop, be our protection. 


. Through our Lord. 
Epistle. Rom. 8, 35-39 


Léctio Epístole béati, Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Romános. 


RATRES: Quis nos Separá- 
H bit a caritáte Christi? 
tribulátio? an angústia? an 
fames? an núditas? an perí- 
culum? an persecútio? an glá- 
dius? (sicut scriptum est: 
Quia propter te mortificámur 
tota die: estimati sumus sicut 
oves occisionis). Sed in his 
ómnibus superámus propter 
eum, qui diléxit nos. Cer- 
tus sum enim, quia neque 
mors, neque vita, neque án- 
geli, neque principátus, neque 
virtütes, neque  instántia, 
neque futüra, neque fortitüdo, 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 


RETHREN, Who shall sep- 
arate us from the love of 
Christ? shall tribulation? or 
distress? or famine? or naked- 
ness? or danger? or persecu- 
tion or the sword? (As it is 
written, for Thy sake we are 
put to death all the day long: 
we are accounted as sheep. for 
the slaughter.) But in all these 
things we overcome because of 
Him that hath loved us. For I 
am sure that neither death, nor 
life, nor angels, nor principali- 
ties, nor powers, nor things 
present, nor things to come, nor 


http://ccwatershed.org 


898 FEB. 1—ST. IGNATIUS, BISHOP, MARTYR 


might, nor height, nor depth, neque altitüdo, neque profün- 
nor any other creature shali be dum, neque creatüra ália pó- 
able to separate us from the terit nos separáre a caritáte 
love of God, which is in Christ Dei, que est in Christo Jesu 
Jesus our Lord. Dómino nostro. 

After Septuagesima the Lesser Alleluia of the Gradual is re- 


placed by the Tract. In Votive Masses during Paschal-time the 
Gradual is replaced by the Greater Alleluia below. 


Gradual. Ecclus. 44, 16 
Behold, a great priest, who Ecce sacérdos magnus, qui 
in his days pleased God. y. in diébus suis plácuit Deo. y. 
There was not any found like Non est invéntus similis illi, 
to him, who kept the law of qui conserváret legem Excélsi. 
the Most High. - 


Lesser Alleluia 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Gal. 2, Alelúja, allelúja. Y. Gal. 2, 
19, 20. With Christ I am nailed 19, 20. Christo confíxus sum 
to the cross: I live, now not I, cruci: vivo ego, jam non ego, 
put Christ liveth in me. Alleluia. vivit vero in me Christus. Al- 
lelúja. : 


Tract. Ps. 20, 3, 4 
Thou hast given him his Desidérium ánimæ ejus tri- 
heart’s desire, and hast not buisti ei, et voluntáte labió- 
withholden from him the will rum ejus non fraudásti eum. 
^*^ ne Y For thou hast pree V. Quóniam prevenisti eum 
: 114148 fhna duilcédinis, 


SVO. 


Greater Alleluia 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Gal. 2, Allelija, alleluja. V. Gal. 2, 
19, 20. With Christ Iam nailed 19, 20. Christo confíxus sum 
to the cross: I live, now not I, cruci: vivo ego, jam non ego, 
but Christ liveth in me. Alle- vivit vero in ine Christus, 
]uia. Y. Ps. 20, 4. Thou hast set Allelüja. V. Ps. 20, 4. Posuísti 
on his head a crown of precious super caput ejus corónam de 
stones. Alleluia. lápide pretióso. Allehija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 12, 24-26 


% Continuation of the holy œŒ Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
Gospel according to St. John. gélii secündum Joánnem. 


T THAT time, Jesus said to ILLO témpore: DixitJesus 
His disciples: Amen, discípulis suis: Amen, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


D 


FEB. 1—ST. IGNATIUS, BISHOP, MARTYR 


amen dico vobis, nisi granum 
fruménti cadens in terram, 
mórtuum fuérit, ipsum solum 
manet: si &utem mortuum 
fuerit, multum fructum 
affert, Qui amat ánimam 
Suam, perdet eam; et qui 
odit ánimam suam in hoc 
mundo, in vitam etérnam 
custódit eam. Si quis mihi 
minístrat, me sequátur: et ubi 
sum ego, illic et minister meus 
erit. Si quis mihi ministráve- 
rit, honorificahit eum Pater 
meus. 


Offertory. 
Glória et honóre coronásti 
eum: et constituisti eum su- 
per ópera mánuum tuérum, 
Dómine. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


899 


amen I say to you, unless the 
grain of wheat falling into the 
ground, die, itself remaineth 
alone: but if it die, it bringeth 
forth much fruit. He that lov- 
eth his life, shall lose it; and 
he that hateth his life in this 
world, keepeth it unto life eter- 
nal If any man minister to 
Me, let him follow Me; and 
where I am, there also shall My 
minister be. If any man min- 
ister to Me, him will My Father 
honor. 


Ps. 8, 6,7 

Thou hast crowned him with 
glory and honor: and hast set 
him over the works of Thy 
hands, O Lord. s 


Secret 


éstias tibi, Dómine, beá- 

ti Ignátii Mártyris tul 

atque Pontíficis dicátas méri- 

tis, benígnus assüme: et ad 

perpétuum nobis tríbue pro- 

veníre subsídium. Per Dómi- 
num. 


RACIOUSLY accept, O Lord, 

the sacrifices dedicated 
to the merits of blessed Igna- 
tius, Thy Martyr and Bishop, 
and grant that they may be 
profitable for our eternal help. 
'Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. — 
Communion 


Fruméntum Christi sum: 
déntibus bestiárum molar, ut 
panis mundus invéniar. 


Iam Christ's corn; let me be 
ground by the teeth of beasts, 
that I may be made into clean 
bread. 


Postcommunion 


EFÉCTI participatióne 
müneris sacri, quesu- 
mus, Dómine Deus noster: ut, 
cujus exséquimur cultum, in- 
tercedénte beáto Ignátio Már- 
tyre tuo atque Pontifice, sen- 
tiámus efféctum. Per Dómi- 
num, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793, 


EFRESHED by partaking of 

Thy sacred gift, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord our God, 
that by the intercession of 
blessed Ignatius, Thy Martyr 
and Bishop we may feel the 
power of the sacrament which 
we worship, Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


900 FEB. 2—PURIFICATION OP THE B. V. M. 


TAM THE LIGRT 


TRE LIGHT 


Copyright py Benzger Brothers 


OF THE WORLD 
ETR ME WALKETR 
BUT SRALL RAVE 
OF LIFE ‘ 


Feb. 2—The Feast of the Purification of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary, ot Candlemas Dap (White) 


Double of the Second Class 


Should the feast of the Purification fall on Septuagesima, 
Sexagesima, or Quinquagesima Sunday, the festival Mass is 
said on the following day; but the blessing of candles and the 
procession take place on the Sunday itself. `. 


The Blessing of the Candles 


The officiating priest attended by his deacon and subdeacon 
all wearing purple vestments, stands at the Epistle corner of 
the altar and chants the following prayers over the candles to 


he hlessed: 


Let us pray 


O holy Lord, Father al- 
mighty, eterna] God, Who hast 
created all things out of noth- 
ing, and by Thy word hast 
caused this liquid through the 
work of bees to come to the 
perfection of wax, and who on 
this day didst fulfil the peti- 
tion of just Simeon; deign, we 
humbly beseech 'Thee, to bless 
*& and sanctify 4 these candles 
for the uses of men, for the 
health of bodies and of souls, 
whether on the land or on the 
waters, by the invocation of 


Dómine sancte Pater om- 
nípotens, ætérne Deus, qui 
ómnia ex níhilo creásti, ut 
jussu tuo per ópera apum, 
hunc liquórem ad perfectió- 
nem cérei veníre fecísti: et qui 
hodiérna die petitiónem justi 
Simeónis implésti; te humi- 
liter deprecámur; ut has can- 
délas ad usus hóminum, et sa- 
nitátem córporum et animá- 
rum, sive in terra, sive in 
aquis, per invocatiónem tui 
Sanctíssimi nóminis, et per in- 
tercessiónem  beáte Marie 


http://ccwatershed.org 


m Art. 


| 


tee da 


FEB. 2—PURIFICATION OF THE B. V. M. 901 


semper Vírginis, cujus hódie 
festa devóte celebrántur, et 
per preces ómnium Sanctó- 
rum tuórum, bene 4 dícere, 
et.sancti Œ ficáre dignéris: et 
hujus plebis tus, que illas 
honorífice in mánibus desíde- 
rat portáre, teque cantando 
laudáre, exáudias voces de 
celo sancto tuo, et de sede 
majestatis tue: et propitius 
sis ómnibus clamantibus ad 
te, quos redemísti pretióso 
sánguine Fílii tui: Qui te- 
cum vivit. W. Amen. -: 


Thy most holy name, and by 
the intercession of the blessed 
Mary ever virgin, whose festi- 
val we this day celebrate, and 
by the prayers of all Thy saints; 
and graciously, from Thy holy 
heaven and the seat of Thy 
majesty, hear the voices of this 
Thy people which desireth to 
carry these candles in their 
hands, unto Thy honor, and to 
praise Thee with singing; and 
be merciful to all who call upon 
Thee, whom Thou hast re- 
deemed with the most precious 
blood of Thy Son, Who witb 
Thee liveth. H. Amen. 


Let us pray 


Omnípotens sempitérne De- 
us, qui hodiérna die Unigéni- 
tum tuum ulnis sancti Simeó- 
nis in templo sancto tuo sus- 
cipiéndum przsentásti: tuam 
süpplices deprecámur clemén- 
tiam; ut has. candélas, quas 
nos fámuli tui, in tui nóminis 
magnificéntiam suscipiéntes, 
gestare cüpimus luce accén- 
sas, bene 4H dicere et sancti FH 
ficáre, atque lúmine supérnz 
benedictiónis accéndere dig- 
néris: quétenus.eas tibi Dó- 
mino Deo ‘nostro offeréndo 
digni, et sancto igne dulcís- 
rime caritatis tue succénsi, in 
templo sancto glórie tue rep- 
resentari | mereámur. Per 
éumdem Dóminum. RY. Amen. 


Almighty, everlasting God, 
Who on this day didst present 
Thine only-begoiten Son to be 
taken in holy Simeon's arms 
in Thy holy temple, we humbly 
beseech Thy mercy that these 
candles which we, Thy servants, 
would take in our hands for 
ihe magnifying of Thy name, 
to carry them lighted, Thou 
wilt deign to bless H* and sanc- 


tify  and.to kindle with the 


light of ‘Thy supernal.benedic- 
tion, so that by offering them 
to Thee, our Lord God, we may 
deserve to be presented wor- 
thily, lighted with the holy fire 
of Thy most dear charity, in 
the holy temple of Thy glory. 
Through the same. Pf. Amen. 


Let us pray 


Dómine Jesu Christe, lux 
vera, que illüminas omnem 
hóminem veniéntem in hunc 
mundum: effünde bene %& 


dictibnem tuam super nos. 


céreos, et sancti 1 fica eos 
lumine grátie tue, et concéde 
propitius; ut, sicut hzc lumi- 


O Lord Jesus Christ, the true 
Light, Who enlightenest every 
man that cometh into this 
world, pour forth Thy blessing 
"HK upon these waxen candles 
and sanctify FK them with the 
light of Thy grace; and be 
pleased to grant that, as these 


http://ccwatershed.org 


902 


lights, kindled with visible fire, 
dispel the darkness of night, so 
our hearts, being enlightened 
with invisible fire, even the ef- 
fulgence of the Holy Spirit, may 
be delivered from the blindness 
of every vice, that with the eye 
of the mind purified we may 
be able to discern those things 
which are pleasing to Thee and 
useful for our salvation; 
whereby, after the dark trials 
of this world, we may be found 
worthy to enter into the light 
that is never obscured; through 
Thee, Christ Jesus, Saviour of 
the world, Who in perfect Trin- 
ity livest and reignest, God, 
world without end. W. Amen. 


FEB. 2—PURIFICATION OF THE B. V. M. 


nária igne visibili accénsa 
noctürnas depéllunt ténebras; 
ita corda nostra invisibili 
igne, id est, Sancti Spíritus 
splendóre illustráta, ómnium 
vitiórum cæcitáte cáreant: ut, 
purgáto mentis óculo, ea cér- 
nere possémus, que tibi sunt 
plácita, et nostr: salúti utilia; 
quátenus post hujus seculi 
caliginósa discrímina, ad lu- 
cem indeficiéntem pervenire 
mereámur. Per te, Christe 
Jesu, Salvátor mundi, qui in 
Trinitéte perfécta vivis et 
regnas Deus, per ómnia secu- 
la seculorum, Jf. Amen. 


Let us pray 


Almighty, eternal God, Who 
through Thy servant Moses 
didst order the purest of oil 
to be prepared for the con- 
tinual furnishing of the lamps 
before Thy presence, gra- 


WAHL, OV kdiY Babb, GG AdAware 
light of the Spirit may not be 
wanting to our minds, Through 
... in the unity of the same. 
RY. Amen. 


Omnípotens sempitérne De- 
us, qui per Móysen fámulum 
tuum purissimum ólei liquó- 
rem ad luminária ante con- 
spéctum tuum jügiter con- 
cinnánda preparári jussísti: 


hana QU dintiAnic tum emeátiam 


Maas AtRAAA UAR Rae aurar 


nostris non desit méntibus in- 
térius. Per Dóminum . . . in 
unitate ejüsdem. BY. Amen. 


Let us pray 


O Lord Jesus Christ, Who on 
this day appearing among men 


in the substance of flesh wast 


presented by Thy parents in the 
temple, and Whom the vener- 
able old man Simeon, being 
filled with the light of Thy 
Spirit, recognized, took up, and 
blessed, be pleased to grant that 
we, enlightened and taught by 
the grace of the same Holy 


Démine Jesu Christe, qui 
hodiérna die in nostre carnis 
substantia inter hémines ap- 
párens, a paréntibus in tem- 
plo eS presentátus: quem 
Simeon venerábiliz senex, lú- 
mine Spíritus tui irradiátus, 
agnóvit, suscépit, et benedixit: 
presta propitius; ut ejüsdem 
Spíritus Sancti grátia illumi- 
nati, atque edócti, te veráciter 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FEB. 2—PURIFICATION OF THE B. V. M. 903 


agnoscámus, et fidéliter dili- 
gámus:. Qui cum Deo Patre in 
unitate ` ejüsdem Spíritus 
Sancti vivis et regnas Deus, 
per ómnía secula seculórum. 
R. Amen. 


Spirit, may know. Thee rightly 
and love Thee faithfully. Who 
with God the Father livest and 
reignest in the unity of the 
Same Holy Spirit, God, world 
without end. R. Amen. 


After these prayers the celebrant sprinkles the candles which 


he has, blessed, with holy water, and incenses them. First re- 
ceiving one himself from the hand. of one of the priests pres- 
ent, he distributes them among the clergy and people. Each 
one receiving the blessed candle should kneel, and, afterwards 
kiss the candle and the priests hand. During the distribution 
of the candles the choir sings the Nunc dimittis as follows: 


Antiphon. 


Lumen ad revelatiénem 
géntium: et glóriam plebis 
tue Israel. 


Luke 2, 32 


A light to the revelation of 
the gentiles, and the glory of 
Thy people Israel. 


Canticle. Luke 2, 29-31 


Nunc dimittis servum tuum, 
Dómine, secündum. verbum 
tuum in pace. 


Now Thou dost dismiss Thy 


‘servant, O Lord, according to 


Thy word in peace, 


Then is repeated the Antiphon, A light to the revelation, as 
above, and the same after each verse. 


Quia vidérunt óculi mei sa- 
iutáre tuum. 

Quod parásti ante fáciem 
ómnium populórum. 

Glória Patri, et Filio, et 
Spiritui sancto. : 


Sicut erat in principio, et 
nunc, et semper, et in secula 
Sseculórum. Amen. 


Because my eyes have seen 
Thy salvation. 

Which Thou hast prepared 
before. the. face of all peoples. 

Glory be to the Father, and 
to the Son, and to the Holy 
Ghost. 


As it was in the beginning, 
is now, and ever shall be, world 
without end. Amen. 


Antiphon. Ps. 43, 26 


Exsürge, Dómine, adjüva 
nos: et libera nos propter no- 
men tuum. Ps. 43, 2. Deus, áu- 
ribus nostris audívimus: pa- 
tres nostri annuntiáverunt 
nobis. Y. Gloria Patri. 


Arise, O Lord, lielp us, and 
deliver us, for Thy name's sake. 
Ps. 43, 2. We have heard, O 
God, with our ears: our fathers 
have declared to us. V. Glory. 


Antiphon—Arise, O Lord (as above). 


http://ccwatershed.org 


904 


FEB, 2—PURIFICATION OF THE B. V. M. 


Returning to the altar the priest chants the following Prayer. 


Should it be after Septuagesima, that is, within the season of 
penance, there is added Flectamus genua (“Let us kneel”), and 


Levate (“Arise”) 


Let us pray : 


Harken to Thy people, we 
beseech 'Thee, O Lord; and 
what Thou dost give us year 
after year to venerate devoutly, 
outwardly, grant us to follow 
it inwardly with the light of 
‘Thy grace. Through our Lord. 
BY. Amen. 


Exáudi,qussumus, Dómine, 
plebem tuam: et que extrín- 
Secus ánnua tríbuis devotióne 
venerári, intérius ássequi grá- 
tie tue luce concéde. Per 
Christum Dóminum nostrum. 
W. Amen. 


After the deacon says: Procedamus in pace ("Let us set forth 


in peace"), and the 
(“In the name of Christ. 


choir answers, in nomine Christi. 


Amen 


Amen”), comes the procession in 


which all beat lighted candles in their hands. The anthems 
appointed to be sung during the Candlemas procession are 


ese: 


Antiphon 


Deck thy bridal chamber, O 
Sion, and receive Christ, thy 
King; embrace Mary, who is 
the gate of heaven; for she car- 
ries the King of glory of the 


new light; a virgin, she stand- vi 


eth bringing in her hands the 
Son begotten before the day- 
star; and receiving Him in his 
arms, Simeon hath declared to 
the nations that He is the Lord 
-of life.and death, and Saviour 
of the world. 


Adórna thélamum tuum, 
Sion, et siscipe Regem Chris- 
tum: ampléctere Mariam, 
que est celéstis porta: ipsa 
enim portat Regem glérie no- 
lüminis: subsistit Virgo, 


‘addicens mánibus Fílium 


ante  lucíferum génitum: 
quem accípiens Simeon in ul- 
nas suas, predicávit pópulis, 
Dóminum eum esse vite et 
mortis, et: Salvatórem mundi. 


Another Antiphon 


Simeon received an answer 
from the Holy Ghost, that he 
Should not see death until he 
had seen the Christ of the Lord; 
and when they brought the 
Child into the temple he took 
Him in his arms, and blessed 
God, and said: Now, O Lord, 
dost Thou dismiss Thy servant 
in peace. Y. When His parents 
brought the child Jesus into 
the temple, to do in His behalf 
according to the custom of the 
law, he took Him in his arms. 


Respónsum accépit Simeon 
a Spíritu Sancto, non visárum 
se mortem, nisi vidéret Chri- 
stum Dómini: et cum indüce- 
rent püerum in templum, ac- 
cépit eum in ulnas suas, et 
benedíxit Deum, et dixit: 
Nunc dimíttis servum tuum, 
Dómine, in pace, Y. Cum in- 
dücerent püerum Jesum pa- 
réntes ejus, ut fácerent se- 


‘cindum consuetüdinem legis 


pro eo, ipse accépit eum in ul- 
nas Suas. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


‘aw 


FEB. 2—PURIFICATION OF THE B. V. M. 905 


While the procession re-enters the church, the choir sings.a 


responsory. 


Response 


Obtulérunt pro eo Dómi- 
no par türturum, aut duos 
pullos columbárum: Sicut 
Scriptum est in lege Dómini. 
V. Postquam impléti sunt dies 
purgatiónis Marie, secindum 
legem Móysi, tulérunt Jesum 
in Jerüsalem, ut sísterent eum 
Dómino. Sicut scriptum est 
in lege Dómini. .Y. Glória 
Patri, et Fílio, et Spiritui 
sancto. Sicut scriptum est in 
lege Dómini. 


The celebrant now puts on white vestments. 


less it be of S 


They offered in His behalf a 
pair of turtle-doves or two 
young pigeons. As it is written 
in the law of the Lord. Y. After 
Mary’s days of purification were 
fulfilled, according to the law 
of Moses, they carried Jesus to 
Jerusalem, to set Him before 
the Lord. As it is written in the 
law of the Lord. J. Glory be to 
the Father, and to the Son, and 
to the Holy Ghost. As it is writ- 
ten in the law of the Lord. 


At Mass, un. 


tuagesima, Sexagesima, or Quinquagesima Sun- 


day, during the singing of the Gospel, and also from the 
Sanctus to the Communion, the blessed candle should be held 


lighted in the hand. 


Note.—In churches where a sufficient number of minish 
is wanting, the ceremonies given above are carried out, 


feasible, in their entirety b: 


the celebrant alone. In this case. 


according to the Memoriale Rituum the prayers are recited... 
As usage demands, however, the functions are often performed ` 


with chant. 


The 


Miass 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 47, 10, 11, 


"CY usctpmrs, Deus, ‘miseri- 


L2 córdiam tuam im médio 


: empli tui; Secündum nomen 


tuum, Deus, ita et laus tua in 
fines terre: justitia plena est 
déxtera tua. Ps. 47, 2, Magnus 
Dóminus, et laudábilis nimis; 
in civitáte Dei nostri, in 
monte sancto ejus. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


"E HAVE -received . Thy 
mercy, © God, in the 

midst of Thy temple: according 
to Thy name, O God, so also is 
Thy praise unto the ends of the 
earth: Thy right hand is full of 
justice. Ps. 47, 2. Great is the 
Lord, and exceedingly to be 
praised: in the city of our God, 
in ‘His holy mountain. V. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


MNiporens sempitérne 
Deus, majestátem tuam 
süpplices exorámus: ut, sicut 


'LMIGHTY, eternal God, we 
humbly beseech Thy 
majesty that, as Thine oniy- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


906 


begotten Son was this day pre- 
sented in the temple in the sub- 
stance of our flesh, so Thou 
mayest cause us to be presented 
to Thee with minds purified. 
Through the same. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from Malachy the 
Prophet. 


Hus saith the Lord God, 

Behold I send My angel, 
and he shall prepare the way 
before My face; and presently 
the Lord, Whom you seek, and 
the angel of the testament, 
whom you desire, shall come to 
His temple. Behold He cometh, 
saith the Lord of hosts; and 
who shall be able to think of the 
day of His coming? and who 
shall stand to see Him? for He 
is like a refining fire, and like 
the fuller’s herb; and He shall 
sit refining and cleansing the 
silver, and He shall purify the 
sons of Levi, and shall refine 
them as gold, and as silver, and 
they shall offer sacrifices to 
the Lord in justice. And the 
sacrifice of Juda and of Jeru- 
salem shall please the Lord, as 
in the days of old, and in the 
ancient years; saith the Lord 
almighty. - 


FEB. 2—PURIFICATION OF THE B. V. M. 


unigénitus Fílius tuus hodiér- 
na die cum nostræ carnis sub- 
stantia in templo est præsen- 
tátus; ita nos fácias purificá- 
tis tibi méntibus presentári. 
Per eümdem Dóminum. 


Mal. 5, 1-4 


Léctio Malachíe Prophéte. 


zC, dicit Dóminus Deus: 

Ecce ego mitto Ange- 
lum meum, et preparábit 
viam ante fáciem meam. Et 
Statim véniet ad templum 
suum Dóminátor, quem vos 
queritis, et Angelus testa- 
ménti, quem vos vultis. Ecce 
venit, dicit Dóminus exercí- 
tuum: et quis póterit cogitáre 
diem advéntus ejus, et quis 
stabit ad vidéndum eum? Ipse 
enim quasi ignis conflans, et 
quasi herba fullónum: et se- 
débit conflans, et emündans 
argéntum, et purgábit fílios 
Levi et colábit eos quasi au- 
rum et. quasi argéntum: et 
erunt Dómino offeréntes sac- 
rifícia in justítia. Et placébit 
Dómino sacrifícium Juda, et 
Jerúsalem, sicut dies sseculi, 
et sicut anni antíqui: dicit 
Dóminus omnípotens, 


Gradual. Ps. 47, 10, 11 


We have received Thy mercy, 
O God, in the midst of Thy 
temple: according to Thy name, 
O God, so also is Thy praise 
unto the ends of the earth. ¥. 
As we have heard, so have we 
seen, in the city of our God, 
and in His holy mountain. 


Suscépimus, Deus, miseri- 
cérdiam tuam in médio tem- 
pli tul: secándum nomen tu- 
um, Deus, ita et laus tua in 
fines terre. Y. Sicut audivi- 
mus, ita et vídimus, in civitáte 
Dei nostri, in monte sancto 
ejus. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


h 


FEB. 2—PURIFICATION OF THE B. V. M. 807 


After Sentudyeria, in place of the Lesser Alleluia is said 


or sung the Tract. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelüja,'allelüja. Y. Senex 
püerum portábat: Puer au- 
tem senem regébat. Allelüja. 


Tract. 


Nunc dimíttis servum tu- 
um, Dómine, secündum ver- 
bum tuum in pace. Y. Quia 
vidérunt óculi mei salutáre 
tuum. Y. Quod parásti ante 
fáciem ómnium populórum. 
y. Lumen ad revelatiónem 
géntium et glóriam plebis tue 
Israél. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. The old 
man carried the child: but the 
child ruled the old man. Alle- 
luia. 


Luke 2, 29-32 


Now Thou dost dismiss Thy 
servant, O Lord, according te 
Thy word in peace. Y. Because 
my eyes have seen Thy salva- 
tion. V. Which Thou hast pre- 
pared before the face of all peo- 
ples. Y. A light to the revela- 
tion of the gentiles, and the 
glory of Thy people, Israel, 


Gospel. Luke 2, 22.32 


Sequéntia sancti Evangélii 
secündum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Postquam 
impléti sunt dies purga- 
tiónis Maríz, secundum legem 
Móysi, tulérunt Jesum in Je- 
rüsalem, ut sísterent eum D6- 
mino, sicut scriptum est in 
lege Dómini: Quia omne mas- 
culinum adapériens vulvam 
sanctum Dómino vocábitur. 
Et ut darent hóstiam secün- 
dum quod dictum est in lege 
Dómini, par türturum, aut 
duos pullos columbárum. Et 
ecce homo erat in Jerüsalem, 
cui nomen Símeon, et homo 
iste justus et timorátus, ex- 
Spéctans consolatiónem Israël 
et Spiritus Sanctus erat in eo. 
Et respónsum accéperat & 
Spfritu Sancto, non visürum 
Se mortem, nisi prius vidéret 
Christum Dómini. Et venit in 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, after the 

days of Mary's purifica- 

tion, according to the law of 
Moses, were accomplished, they 
carried Jesus to Jerusalem, to 
present Him to the Lord; as it 
is written in íhe law of the 
Lord, Every male opening the 
womb shall be called holy to 
the Lord; and to offer a sacri- 
fice, according as it is written 
in the law of the Lord, a pair 
of turtle-doves, or two young 
pigeons. And behold there was 
@ man in Jerusalem named 
Simeon, and this man was just 
and devout, waiting for the 
consolation of Israel, and the 
Holy Ghost was in him: and 
he had received an answer from 
the Holy Ghost, that he should 
not see death, before he had 


http://ccwatershed.org 


908 


seen the Christ of the Lord. 
And he came by the Spirit into 
the temple. And when His pa- 
rents brought in the child Je- 
sus, to do for Him according to 
the custom of the law, he also 
took Him into his arms, and 
blessed God, and said, Now 
Thou dost dismiss Thy servant, 
O Lord, according to Thy word 
in peace; because my eyes have 
seen Thy salvation, which Thou 
hast prepared before the face 
of all peoples; & light to the 
revelation of the gentiles, and 
the glory of Thy people Israel. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


Grace is poured abroad in thy 
lips: therefore hath God blessed 
thee for ever, and for ages of 
ages. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


FEB. 2—PURIFICATION OF THE B. V. M. 


spíritu in templum. Et cum 
indücerent püerum Jesum pa- 
réntes ejus, ut fácerent se- 
cündum consuetüdinem legis 
pro eo: et ipse accépit eum in 
ulnas suas, et benedíxit Deum, 
et dixit: Nunc dimíttis ser- 
vum tuum, Dómine, secündum 
verbum tuum in pace: Quia 
vidérunt óculi mei salutáre 
tuum: Quod parásti ante fá- 
ciem ómnium populórum: Lu- 
men ad revelatiónem génti- 
um, et glóriam plebis tue 
Israél. 


Ps. 44, 3 


Diffüsa est grátia in lábiis 
tuis: proptérea benedíxit te 
Deus in etérnum, et in secu- 
Tum seculi. 


Secret 


EAR our prayers, O Lord, 

and, in Thy loving-kind- 

ness, help us, so that the gifts 

Wwe offer ‘may be found worthy 

in the eyes of Thy majesty. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 1, page 798. 


Communion. 


Simeon received an answer 
from the Holy Ghost, that he 
Should not see death until he 
had seen the Christ of the Lord. 


xáupnti, Dómine, preces 

nostras: et, ut digna 
sint münera, que óculis tue 
majestátis offérimus subsi- 
dium nobis tuse pietátis im- 
pénde. Per Dóminum. 


Luke 2, 26 


Respónsum accépit Símeon 
a Spfritu sancto, non visürum 
se mortem, nisi vidéret Chris- 
tum Dómini. 


Postcommunion 


Lorp our God, we beseech 
Thee, by the intercession 
of blessed Mary ever virgin, 
make the sacred mysteries, 


UxsuMUS, Dómine Deus 
noster: ut sacrosáncta 
mystéria que pro reparatiónis 
nostre munímine contulísti, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


! 
| 


FEB. 5—ST. AGATHA, VIRGIN, MARTYR 909 


intercedénte bedta Maria 
semper Virgine, et præsens 
nobis remédium esse facias, et 
futürum. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


which 'Thou hast given for the 
preservation of our spiritual 
life, a healing remedy for us, 
both for the present and for the 


future, Through our Lord. 


PFeb.3—$»t. Blaise, Bishop, Martyr (Red) 
Simple 
Mass, Sacerdotes, page 1306. 


Feb. 4—St. Andrew Corsini, Bishop, Confesser 
(White) 


Double 
Mass, Statuit ei, page 1337, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui in Ecclésia tua 
nova semper instáuras 


cop, Who failest not to set 
up in Thy Church ever 


exémpla virtütum: da pópulo new examples of the virtues, 
tuo beáti Andrée Confessóris grant unto Thy people so ta 
tui atque Pontíficis ita sequi walk in the footsteps of blessed 


vestigia; ut assequátur et 
premia. Per Dóminum. 


Andrew, Thy Confessor and 
Bishop, that they may also 
come to his reward. Through 
our Lord. 


Feb. 5—t. Agatha, Virgin, Martyr (Red). 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 


do omnes in Dó- 
mino, diem festum cele- 
brántes sub honóre beátæ Ag- 
athe Virginis et Mártyris: de 
cujus passióne gaudent An- 
geli, et colláudant Fílium Dei. 
Ps. 44, 2. Eructávit cor meum 
verbum bonum: dico ego óp- 
era mea Regi. Y. Glória Patri. 


ET us all rejoice in the 
] Lord, celebrating the 
feast in honor of blessed Aga- 
tha, Virgin and Martyr, for 
whose passion the angels re- 
joice and praise with one ac- 
cord the Son of God. Ps. 44, 2. 
My heart hath uttered a good 
word: I speak my works to the 
King. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, Page 761; Gloria, page 762 


http://ccwatershed.org 


910 FEB. 5—ST. AGATHA, VIRGIN, MARTYR 
Prayer 
cop, Who, among the EUS, qui inter cétera po- 
other miracles of 'Thy téntie tue  mirácula 


power, hast bestowed the vic- 
tory of martyrdom on the 
weaker sex also, graciously 
grant that we, who keep the 
feast of blessed Agatha, Thy 
Virgin and Martyr, may ad- 
vance toward Thee by the path 
of her examples. ‘Through our 
Lord, 


étiam in sexu frágili victó- 
riam martyrii contulísti: con- 
céde propítius; ut, qui beáte 
Agathe Vírginis et Mártyris 
tue natalftia cólimus, per 
ejus ad te exémpla gradiámur. 
Per Dóminum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the feria. 


Epistle. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paulthe Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 


RETHREN, See your voca- 

tion, that there are not 
many wise according to the 
flesh, not many mighty, not 
many noble: but the foolish 
things of the. world hath God 
chosen, that He may confound 
the wise, and the weak things 
of the world hath God chosen, 
that He may confound the 
strong; &nd the base things of 
the world, and the things that 
are contemptible hath God 
chosen, and things that are not, 
that He might bring to nought 
things that are: that no flesh 
should glory in His sight. But 
of Him are you in Christ Jesus, 
Who of God is made unto us 
wisdom, and justice, and sanc- 
tification, and redemption, that 
as it is written, he that glori- 
eth, may glory in the Lord. 

Gradual. 


God will help her with His 
countenance; God is in the 
midst of her; she shall not be 
moved. F. Ps, 45, 5. The stream 


1 Cor. 1, 26-31 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Vidéte vocatió- 

nem vestram, quia non 
multi sapiéntes secindum 
carnem, non multi poténtes, 
non multi nóbiles: sed que 
stulta sunt mundi elégit Deus, 
ut confündat sapiéntes: et in- 
firma mundi elégit Deus, ut 
confündat fórtia: et ignobí- 
lig mundi, et contemptibília 
elégit Deus, et ea que non 
sunt, ut ea que sunt destrüe- 
ret: ut non gloriétur omnis 
caro in conspéctu ejus. Ex ipso 
autem vos estisin Christo Jesu, 
qui factus est nobis sapiéntia 
& Deo, et justítia, et sanctifi- 
cátio, et redémptio: ut que- 


mádmodum scriptum est: 
Qui gloriátur, in Dómino glo- 
riétur. 

Ps. 45, 6 


Adjuvábit eam Deus vultu 
suo: Deus in médio ejus, non 
commovébitur, Y. Ps. 45, 5. 
Flüminis impetus letíficat ci- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FEB. 5—ST. AGATHA, VIRGIN, MARTYR 911 


vitátem Dei: sanctificávit ta- of the river maketh the city of 
bernáculum suum Altíssimus. God joyfu!; the Most High hath 


sanctified His own tabernacle. 


After Septuagesima, in place of the Lesser Alleluia is said or 


sung the Tract. 


Lesser 


Allelija, allelija. Y. Ps. 
118, 46. Loquébar de testimó- 
niis tuis in conspéctu regum, 
et non confundébar. Allelája. 


Tract. 


Qui séminant in lácrimis, 
in gáudio metent. Y. Eüntes 
ibant, et flebant, mitténtes 
sémina sua. Y. Veniéntes au- 
tem vénient cum exsultatióne, 
portántes manípulos suos. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 118, 
46. I spoke of Thy testimonies 
before kings, and I was not 
ashamed. Alleluia, 


Ps. 125, 5, 6 


They that sow in tears shall 
reap in joy. Y. Going they went, 
and wept, casting their seeds. Y. 
But coming, they shali come 
with joyfulness, carrying their 
sheaves. 


Gospel. Matt. 19, 3-12 


HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Matthdeum. 


T: ILLO témpore: Accessé- 
runt ad Jesum Pharisæi 
tentántes eum, et dicéntes: Si 
licet hómini dimíttere uxórem 
suam quacumque ex causa? 
Qui respóndens, ait eis: non 
legístis, quia, qui fecit hó- 
minem ab inítio, másculum et 
féminam fecit eos? et dixit: 
Propter hoc dimíttit homo pa- 
trem, et matrem, et adherébit 
uxóri sug, et erunt duo in 
carne una. Itaque jam non 
sunt duo, sed una caro. Quod 
ergo Deus conjünxit, homo 
non séparet, Dicunt illi: Quid 
ergo Móyses mandávit dare 
libéllum repüdii, et dimíttere? 
Ait illis: Quéniam Móyses ad 
duritiam cordis vestri per- 
misit vobis dimíttere uxóres 


© Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time the pharisees 

came to Jesus tempting 
Him, and saying, is it lawful 
for & man to put away his wife 
for every cause? Who answer- 
ing, said to them, Have ye not 
read, that He who made man 
from the beginning, made them 
male and female? And He said, 
for this cause shall a man leave 
father and mother, and shall 
cleave to his wife, and they 
two shall be in one flesh. 
Therefore now they are not 
two, but one flesh. What 
therefore God hath joined to- 
gether, let no man put asun- 
der. They say to Him, Why 
then did Moses command to 
give & bill of divorce, and to 
put away? He said to ther. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


912 


because Moses, by reason of the 
hardness of your heart, per- 
mitted you to put away your 
wives; but from the beginning 
it was not so. And I say unto 
you, that whosoever shall put 
away his wife, except it be for 
fornication, and shall marry 
another, committeth adultery; 
and he that shall marry her 
that is put away, committeth 
adultery. His disciples say unto 
Him, if the case of à man with 
his wife be so, it is not expe- 
dient to marry. Who said to 
them, All men take not this 
word, but they to whom it is 
given; for there are eunuchs 
who were born so from their 
mother's womb; and there are 
eunuchs who were made so by 
men; and there are eunuchs 


FEB. 5—ST. AGATHA, VIRGIN, MARTYR 


vestras: ab initio autem non 
fuit sic. Dico autem vobis, 
quia quicümque dimíserit ux- 
órem suam, nisi ob fornica- 
tiónem, et áliam düxerit, me- 
chátur: et qui dimíssam 
düxerit, mochátur. Dicunt 
ei discípuli ejus: Si ita est 
causa hóminis cum uxore, 
non éxpedit mnübere. Qui 
dixit ilis: Non omnes cá- 
piunt verbum istud, sed qui- 
bus datum est. Sunt enim 
eunüchi, qui de matris ütero 
Sic nati sunt: et sunt eunüchi, 
qui facti sunt ab hominibus: 
et sunt eunüchi, qui seípsos 
castravérunt propter regnum 
calórum. Qui potest cápere, 
cápiat. 


who have made themselves 


eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven: He that can take it, let 


him take it. 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 15 


After her shall virgins be 
brought to the King; her neigh- 
bors shall be brought to Thee. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Afferéntur regi vírgines post 
eam: próximæ ejus afferéntur 
tibi. . 


Secret 


CCEPT, O Lord, the gifts 

we bring on the feast of 

blessed Agatha, Thy Virgin and 

Martyr, by whose protection we 

trust to be delivered. Through 
our Lord. 


ÜscrPE, Dómine, münera, 

que in beáte Agathe 
Virginis et Mártyris tue so- 
lemnitáte deférimus: cujus 
nos confídimus patrocínio li- 
berári. Per Dóminum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the feria. 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775, but during Lent, Preface No. 3, 


page 802. 


Communion 


He that hath deigned to heal 
me of every wound, and to re- 


Qui me dignátus est ab 
omni plaga curáre, et ma- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


i; FEB. 7—ST. ROMUALD, ABBOT 


milam meam meo, péctori 
restitüere, ipsum ínvoco Deum 
vivum. 


913 


Store to me my breast, upon 
Him I call, the living God. 


Postcommunion 


UXILIÉNTUR nobis, Dó- 

mine, sumpta mysté- 
ria: et, intercedénte beata 
Agatha, Vírgine et Mártyre 
tua, sempitérna protectióne 
confirment. Per Dóminum. . 
num.. 


Av the sacred mysteries 
we have received help 
us, O Lord, and, by the inter- 
cession of blessed Agatha, Thy 
Virgin and Martyr, strengthen 


. us by Thy eternal protection, 


‘Through our Lord. 


In Lent a commemoration of the feria. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 
St. John, the Gospel of the Feria. 


In Lent in place of the Gospel of 


Feb. 6-—$t. Titus, Bishop, Confessor (White) 
Double 
St, Porothy, Virgin, Martyr (Red) 


Mass, Statuit el, 


page 1337, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui beátum Titum 
Confessórem tuum at- 
que Pontificem, apostdlicis 
virtütibus decorásti: ejus mé- 
ritis et intercessióne concéde; 
Vit juste et ple vivéntes in hoc 
seculo ad ccGléstem patriam 
pervéníre.: mereámur. ^ Per 
Dóminum. 


cop, Who didst adorn 

blessed Titus, Thy Con- 
fessor and Bishop, with apos- 
tolic virtues, grant, through his 
merits and intercession, that, 
living righteously and: devoutly 
in this world, we: may: deserve 
to reach our heavenly country. 
‘Through our Lord, 


Gospel from.the feast of St. Mark, page 989. 
In Lent last Gospel of the Feria. 
In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


Commemoration of St. Dorothy, Prayer, Secret and Postcom= 
munion of the Mass Me exspectaverunt, page 1363. 


Feb. 7—St. Romuald, Abbot (White) 
Double 
Mass, Os justi meditabitur, page 1356, 


In 


end. 


Lent a commemoration of the Feria, and its Gospel at the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


914 


FEB. 9—ST. CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA, B. C. 


Feb. 8—St, John of Matha, Confessor (white) 


Double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


Gop, Who by means of St. 

John, didst vouchsafe di- 
vinely to institute the order of 
the Most Holy Trinity to re- 
deem captives from the hands 
of the Saracens, grant, we be- 
seech Thee, that through the 
power of his merits we may be 
delivered by Thy help from cap- 
tivity of body and of soul. 
Through our Lord. 


en 


EUS, qui per sanctum Jo- 
D ánnem órdinem sanc- 
sime Trinitatis ad redi- 
méndum de potestáte Sara- 
cenórum captívos coelitus in- 
stitüere dignátus es: presta, 
quesumus; ut, ejus sufira- 
gantibus méritis, a captivi- 
táte córporis et ánimz, te ad- 
juvánte, liberémur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


m Lent a commemoration of the Feria, and its Gospel at the 


Feb.9—St. Cpril of Alexandria, Bishop, Confessor, 
Doctor of the Church (White) 
Double 
St. Apollonia, Virgin, Martyr 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer 


GOD, 

blessed Cyril, Thy Con- 
fessor and Bishop, the invinci- 
ble champion of the most 
blessed Virgin Mary’s divine 
maternity, grant through his 
intercession that we, who verily 
believe her to be the Mother of 
God, may be saved by her ma- 
ternal protection. Through the 
same. 


Who: didst make 


EUS, qui beátum Cyrfl- 

lum Confessórem tuum 
atque Pontíficem divine ma- 
ternitatis beatissime Virginis 
Marie assertórem invictum 
effecisti: concéde, ipso inter- 
cedénte, ut, qui vere eam Ge- 
nitrícem Dei crédimus, ma- 
térna  ejüsdem  protectióne 
Salvémur. Per eümdem Dó- 
minum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 
Commemoration of St. Apollonia, Prayer, from the Mass 


Loquebar, page 1359. 


Secret 


ook with kindness, O al- 
mighty God, upon our 


ÜNERA Nostra, omnípo- 
tens Deus, benígnus re- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FEB. 10—ST. SCHOLASTICA, VIRGIN 


spice: et, intercedénte beáto 
Cyríllo, presta; ut unigénitum 
tuum Jesum Christum Dó- 
minum nostrum in tua tecum 
glória coxtérnum, in córdibus 
nostris digne suscipere mereá- 
mur: Qui tecum. 


915 


gifts and, through the interces- 
sion of blessed Cyril, grant that 
we may worthily take into our 
hearts Thine  only-begotten 
Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, 
Who with Thee. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 
Commemoration of St. Appolonia, Secret from the Mass, 


Loquebar, page 1362. 


Postcommunion 


tvinrs, Dómine, refécti 

mystériis, te süpplices 
deprecámur: ut exémplis et 
méritis beáti Cyrílli Pontíficis 
adjuti sanctissime Genitrici 
Unigéniti tui digne famulári 
valeámus: Qui tecum. 


EFRESHED with the divine 
mysteries, O Lord, we 
humbly beseech Thee that, 
aided by the examples and the 
merits of blessed Cyril Thy 
Bishop, we may be able to serve 
worthily the most holy Mother 
of Thine only-begotten Son, 
Who with Thee liveth. 


. In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 
Commemoration o1 5i; Apollonia, Postcommunion from the 


Mass Loquebar, page 13 
Last Gospel of the Feria. 


Feb. 10—St. Scholastica, Virgin (White) 
Double 
Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, Qui ánimam beáte 
Virelnis tue Scholásti- 
ce ad ostendéndam innocén- 
tie viam in colimbe spécie 
celum penetráre fecisti: da 
nobis ejus méritis et précibus 
ita innocénter vívere; ut ad 
etérna mereámur gáudia per- 
venire, Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who, to show us the 

way of innocence, didst 
cause the soul of Thy blessed 
Virgin, Scholastica, to soar to 
heaven in the likeness of a 
dove, grant us, through her 
merits and prayers, to live in- 
nocently, so that we may de- 
serve to attain everlasting joys. 
Through our Lord. 


: 2 Lent a commemoration of the Feria, and its Gospel at the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


918 


FEB. 11—APPARITION B. V. M. AT LOURDES 


Feb.li—Q/fe Feast of the Apparition of Gur 
Blessed Ladp at Lourdes (White) 
Double Major 

The Beginning of Mass, page 756, 


Introit. Apoc. 21, 2 


saw the holy city, the new 
T Jerusalem, coming down 
out of heaven from God, pre- 
pared as a bride adorned for 
her husband. Ps. 44, 2. My 
heart hath uttered a good 
word; I speak my works to the 
King. JF. Glory. 


mı civitáótem sanctam, 

Jerüsalem. novam de- 
scendéntem de celo a Deo, 
parátam sicut sponsam orná- 
tam viro suo. Ps. 44, 2. Eruc- 
tavit cor meum verbum bo- 
num, dico ego ópera mea regi. 
F. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who by the immac- 

ulate conception of the 
Virgin didst prepare a worthy 
habitation for Thy Son, we 
humbly beseech Thee that, 
worthily celebrating the appa- 
rition of the same Virgin, we 
may obtain health of soul and 
body. Through the same. 


EUS, qui per immaculá- 

tam Virginis Concep- 
tiónem dignum Filio tuo ha- 
bitáculum przeparásti: süppli- 
ces a te quesumus; ut ejüs- 
dem "Virginis Apparitiónem 
celebrántes, salütem mentis 
et córporis consequámur. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


Lesson. Apoc. 11, 19, 12, 1, 10 


Lesson from the Apocalypse 
of blessed John the Apostle. 


ND the temple of God was 

opened in heaven; and 
he ark of His testament was 
seen in His temple, and there 
were lightnings and voices, and 
an earthquake and great hail, 
And a great sign appeared in 
heaven; A woman clothed with 
the sun, and the moon under 
her feet, and on her head a 
crown of twelve stars. And I 
heard & loud voice in heaven, 
saying: Now is come salvation 


Léctío libri Apocalfpsis 
beati Joánnis Apóstoli. 
PÉRTUM est templum 
Dei in celo: et visa est 
arca testaménti ejus in templo 
ejus, et facta sunt fülgura, et 
voces, et terremétus, et gran- 
do magna. Et signum mag- 
num appáruit in celo: Mülier 
amicta sole, et luna. sub pé- 
dibus ejus et in cápite ejus 
coróna stellárum duddecim. 
Et audívi vocem magnam in 
celo dicéntem: Nunc facta 
est salus, et virtus et regnum 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FEB. 11—APPARITION B. V. M, AT LOURDES 


Dei nostri, et potéstas Christi 
ejus, 


Gradual. 


Flores apparuérunt in terra 
nostra, tempus putatiónis ad- 
vénit, vox türturis audita est 
in terra nostra. Y. Cant. 2, 
10, 14. Surge, amica mea, spe- 
ciósa mea, et veni: colümba 
mea in foramínibus petre, in 
cavérna macérim. 


917 


and strength and the kingdom 
Of our God end the power of 
His Christ. 


Cant. 2, 12. 


` The flowers have appeared 1 in 
our land, the time of pruning 
is come, the voice of the turtle 
is heard in our land. Y. Cant. 
2, 10, 14. Arise, my love, my 
beautiful one; and come; my 
dove in the clefts of the rock, 
in the hollow places of the wall. 


Ajter Septuagesima, in place of the Lesser Alleluia is said or 


sung the Tract. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelüja, allehija. V. Os- 
ténde mihi faciem tuam, so- 
net vox tua in áuribus meis: 
vox enim tua dulcis, et fácies 
tua decóra. Allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleuia. Y. Show me 
thy face, let thy voice sound in 
my ears, for thy voice is sweet 
and thy face comely. Alleluia. 


Tract. Judith 15, 10 


Tu glória Jerüsalem, tu 
letitia Israel, tu honorificén- 
tia pópuli nostri. V. Cant. 4, 7. 
Tota pulchra es, María: et 
mácula originális, non est in 
te. V. Felix es, sacra Virgo 
Maria, et omni laude dignís- 
sima, que serpéntis caput vir- 
gineo pede contrivisti. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Thou art the glory of Jeru- 
salem, thou art the joy of 
Israel, thou art the honor of 
our people. V. Cant. 4, 7. All 
fair art thou, Mary, and the 
Stain of original sin 1s not in 
thee. V. Happy art thou, Virgin 
Mary, and most worthy of all 
praise, who with thy virgin 
foot hast crushed the serpent’s 
head. 


Gospel. Luke 1, 26-38 


"M Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Missus est 
Angelus Gabriel a Deo in 
civitátem Galilee, cui no- 
men Názareth, ad Vírginem 
desponsátam viro, cui nomen 
erat Joseph, de domo David, 
et nomen Vírginis María. Et 


" Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time; the angel 
Gabriel was sent from 


od into a city of Galilee, called 


Nazareth to a virgin espoused to 


2 man whose name was Joseph, 
of the house of David: and the 
virgins name was Mary. And 


http://ccwatershed.org 


918 


the angel being come in, said 
unto her: Hail! full of grace, 
the Lord is with thee; blessed 
art thou among women. Who 
having heard, was troubled at 
his saying, and thought within 
herself what manner of salu- 
tation this should be. And the 
angel said to her, Fear not, 
Mary, for thou hast found grace 
with God. Behold thou shalt 
conceive in thy womb, and shalt 
bring forth a son; and thou 
shalt call His name Jesus. 


Creed, page 765. 


FEB. 11—APPARITION B. V. M. AT LOURDES 


ingréssus Angelus ad eam 
dixit: Ave, grátia plena: Dó- 
minus tecum: benedícta tu in 
muliéribus. Qu: cum audisset, 
turbáta est in sermóne ejus, 
et cogitábat qualis esset ista 
selutátio. Et ait Angelus ei: 
Ne timeas, Maria, invenisti 
enim grátiam apud Deum: 
ecce concipies in útero, et på- 
ries fílium, et vocábis nomen 
ejus Jesum. 


Offertory. Luke 1, 28 


Hall, full of grace, the Lord 
is with thee, blessed art thou 
amongst women. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ave, grátia plena: Dóminus 
tecum: benedicta tu in mulié- 
ribus. 


Secret 


ay the sacrifice of praise 
which we offer Thee, O 
Lord, by the merits of the glori- 
ous and immaculate Virgin, be 
as an odor of fragrance unto 
Thee and bring down upon us 
health of body and soul. 
Through our Lord. 


ósTIA laudis, quam tibi, 
Dómine, per mérita 
glorióse et immaculáte Vír- 
ginis offérimus, sit tibi in odó- 
rem suavitatis, et nobis optá- 
tam cónferat córporis et áni- 
me sanitáótem. Per Dóminum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


Communion. Ps. 64, 10 


Thou hast visited the earth, 
and hast plentifully watered it; 
thou hast many ways enriched 
it. 


Visitásti terram et inebri- 
ásti eam, multiplicásti locu- 
pletáre eam. 


Postcommunion 


ET the right hand of Thine 
immaculate Mother, O 


UOS ctelésti, Dómine, ali- 
ménto satiásti, süblevet 


Lord, support those whom Thou déxtera Genitricis tue im- 
aast filled with heavenly nour- maculdte: ut ad aitérnam pá- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FEP. 12—HOLY SEVEN FOUNDERS 


triam, ipsa adjuvánte, perve- 
níre mereámur: Qui vivis. 


919 


ishment, that with her help we 
may deserve to reach our ever- 
lasting country. Who livest. 


In Lent a commemoration of Feria. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


In Lent last Gospel of the Feria, 


Feb. 12—The Holp Heben Founders of the Soerbítes 
(White) . 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Wis. 10, 20, 21 


ustr decantavérunt, Dó- 

mine, nomen sanctum 
tuum, et victricem manum tu- 
am laudavérunt pariter: quó- 
niam sapiéntia apéruit os mu- 
tum, et linguas infántium fe- 
cit disértas. Ps. 8, 2. Dómine 
Dóminus noster, quam ad- 
Tnirábile est nomen tuum in 
univérsa terra! Y. Gloria 
Patri. 


te just sang to Thy holy 

name, OLord, they praised 
with one accord Thy victorious 
hand. For wisdom opened the 
mouth of the dumb, and made 
the tongues of infants eloquent. 
Ps. 8, 2. O Lord our Lord, how 
admirable is Thy name in the 
whole earth! Y, Glory, 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ÓwrNE Jesu Christe, qui 

ad recoléndam memó- 
riam  dolórum  sanctíssime 
Genitricis tuz, per septem 
beátos Patres nova Servórum 
ejus família Ecclésiam tuam 
fecundásti: concéde propi- 
tius ita nos eórum consociári 
flétibus, ut perfrudmur et 
gáudiis; Qui vivis. 


zord Jesus Christ, Who, 

to honor the memory of 
Thy most holy Mother's sor- 
rows, didst make Thy Church 
bring forth, through the Seven 
Holy Fathers, a new family for 
her service, favorably grant us 
to be so joined with them in 
their tears that we may also 
partake in the fulness of their 
joys. Who livest. 


in Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 44, 1-15 


Léctio libri Sapiéntism. 


AUDÉMUSs viros gloriósos, 

et paréntes nostros in 
generatióne Sua. Multam gló- 
riam fecit Dóminus magnifi- 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 

ET us now praise men of 

renown, and our fathers 

in their generation. The Lord 

hath wrought great glory 


http://ccwatershed.org 


920 


through His magnificence from 
the beginning. Such as have 
borne rule in their dominions, 
men of great power and endued 
with their wisdom, showing 
forth in the prophets the dig- 
nity of prophets. And ruling 
over the present people, and by 
the strength of wisdom in- 
structing the people in most 
holy words. Such as by their 
Skill sought out musical tunes, 
and published canticles of the 
Scriptures, Rich men in virtues, 
lovers of beautifulness: living 
at peace in their houses. All 
these have gained glory in their 
generations, and were praised 
in their days. They that were 
born of them have left a name 
behind them, that their praises 
might be related. And there are 
some of whom there is no me- 
morial; who are perished, as if 
they had never been, and are 
born as if they had never been 
born, and their children with 
them. But these were men of 
mercy, whose godly deeds have 
not failed. Good things con- 
tinue with their seed. Their pos- 
terity are a holy inheritance, 
and their seed hath stood in 
the covenants, And their chil- 
dren for their sakes remain for- 
ever; their seed and their glory 
shall not be forsaken. Their 
bodies are buried in peace, and 
their name liveth unto genera- 
tion and generation. Let the 
people show forth their wis- 
dom, and the church declare 


FEB, 12—HOLY SEVEN FOUNDERS 


céntia sua a seculo. Domi- 
nantes in potestatibus suis, 
hómines magni virtüte, et 
prudéntia sua prediti nun- 
tiántes in prophétis dignitá- 
tem prophetárum, et impe- 
rántes in presénti pópulo, et 
virtüte prudéntie ^ pópulis 
sanctíssima verba. In perítia 
sua requiréntes modos müsi- 
cos, et narrántes cármina 
scripburárum. Hémines divi- 
tes in virtüte, pulchritudinis 
stádium habéntes: pacifi- 
cantes in dómibus suis, Omnes 
isti in generatiónibus gentis 
sum glóriam adépti sunt, et 
in diébus suis habéntur in 
Jáudibus. Qui de illis nati sunt, 
reliquérunt nomen narrándi 
laudes eórum. Et sunt quorum 
non est memória: periérunt 
quasi qui non füerint: et nati 
sunt, quasi non nati, et filii 
ipsórum cum ipsis. Sed ili 
viri misericórdig sunt, quorum. 
pietátes non defuérunt: cum 
sémine eórum pérmanent bo- 
na, heréditas sancta nepótes 
eórum, et in testaméntis stetit 
semen eórum: et fíli eórum 
propter illos usque in ztér- 
num manent: semen eórum et 
glória eórum non derelinqué- 
tur. Corpora ipsorum in pace 
septlta sunt, et nomen eórum 
vivit in generatiónem et gen- 
eratiónem. Sapiéntiam ipsó- 
rum narrent pópuli, et laudem 
eórum nuntiet Ecclésia. 


their praise. 


From Septuagesima to aster the Lesser Alleluia in the Grad- 


ual is: replaced by the Tract. 
a 


and Tract are rep 


In Paschal-time the Gradual 


ced by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Is. 65, 23 


My elect shall not labor in 
vain, nor bring forth in trou- 


Elécti mei non laborábunt 
frustra, neque germinábunt 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 


FEB. 12—HOLY SEVEN FOUNDERS 


in conturbatióne: quia semen 
benedictórum Dómini est, et 
nepótes eórum cum eis. y. 
Ecclus 44, 14. Cérpora ipsó- 
rum in pace sepülta sunt, et 
nomen eórum vivit in genera- 
tiónem et generatiónem. 


Lesser 


Allelája, allelija. Y. Ecclus. 
44, 15. Sapiéntiam ipsórum 
narrent pópuli, et laudem eó- 
rum nüntiet Ecclésia. Alle- 
Tája. : 


Tract. 


Qui séminant in lácrymis, 
in exsultatióne metent. V. 
Euntes ibant et flebant, mit- 
téntes sémina sua. Y. Venién- 
tes autem vénient cum exsul- 
tatióne, portántes manípulos 
suos. 


921 


ble, for they are the seed of the 
blessed of the Lord, and their 
posterity with them. Y. Ecclus. 
44, 14. Their bodies are buried 
in peace, and their name liveth 
unto generation and genera- 
tion 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ecclus. 
44, 15. Let the people show 
forth their wisdom and the 
Church declare their praise. 
Alleluia. 


Ps. 125, 5, 6 


They that sow in tears shall 
reap in joy. VY. Going they went 
and wept, casting their seeds. 
V. But coming they shall come 
with joyfulness, carrying their 
sheaves. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelája, allelija. Y. Eccli. 
44, 15. Sapiéntiam ipsórum 
nárrent populi, et Jaudem eó- 
rum nüntiet Ecclésia. Allelüja. 
¥. Ps. 36, 28. Non derelinquet 
Dóminus sanctos suos: in 
ætérnum conservabüntur. Al- 
lelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ecclus. 
44, 15, Let the. people show 
forth their wisdom, and the 
Church declare their praise, 
alleluia. V. Ps. 36, 28. The Lord 
will not forsake His saints; they 
shall be preserved forever. Al- 
leluia. 


Gospel, from the Mass Os justi meditabitur, page 1358. 


Offertory. Is. 56, 7 


Addücam eos in montem 
sanctum meum, et letificábo 
eos in domo oratiónis mez: 
holocáusta eórum, et victime 
eórum placébunt mihi super 
altáré meum, 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


I wil bring them into My 
holy mount, and wil make 
them joyful in My house of 
prayer; their holocausts and 
their victims shall please Me 
upon My altar. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


922 


FEB. 14—ST. VALENTINE, MARTYR 


Secret 


cCEPT, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the sacrifices we 
offer Thee, that by the inter- 
cession of Thy saints we may 
serve Thee with freedom of 
spirit and be set on fire with 
the love of the sorrowing 
Mother of Thy Son. Through 
the same. 


cce, qusesumus, Dó- 
mine, hóstias quas tibi 
offérimus: et presta; ut, in- 
tercedéntibus Sanctis tuis, li- 
bera tibi mente servidmus, et 
perdoléntis Virginis Genitrí- 
cis F{lii tui amóre inflammé- 
mur. Per eümdem Dóminum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775, but in Lent Preface No. 3, page 


Communion. 


I have chosen you from the 
world, that you should go and 
bring forth fruit, and your 
fruit should remain. 


John 15, 16 


Ego vos elégi de mundo, ut 
eátis, et fructum afferátis: et 
fructus vester máneat. 


Postcommunion 


EFRESHED with the hea- 
venly mysteries, we be- 

seech 'Thee, O Lord, that, fol- 
lowing the example of them 
whose festival we honor, with 
all our heart we may faithfully 
stand by the cross of Jesus with 
Mary His Mother, and may de- 
Serve to reap the fruit of His 
redemption. Through the same. 


tériis te, Domine, de- 
precámur; ut quórum festa 
percólimus imitántes exém- 
pla; juxta crucem Jesu cum 
María Matre ejus fidéliter ad- 
stémus, et ejüsdem redemp- 
tiónis fructum percipere me- 
reámur. Per eümdem Dómi- 
num. 


CI eus te refécti mys- 


In Lent commemoration of the Feria. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


In Lent the Last Gospel of the Feria, 


Feb. 14—St. Valentine, Martyr (Red) 
Simple 
Mass, In virtute, page 1309. 


Prayer 


(Gum we beseech 'Thee, O 
almighty God, that we, 
who keep the birthday of 
blessed Valentine, Thy Martyr, 
may by his intercession be de- 


RESTA quesumus, omní- 
potens Deus: ut, qui 
beáti Valentini, Mártyris tui 
natalítia cólimus, a cunctis 
malis imminéntibus, ejus. in- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FEB. 15—STS. FAUSTINUS AND JOVITA 


tercessióne, liberémur. Per 


Dóminum. 


923 


livered. from all the ills that 
threaten us. Through our Lord. 


Secret 


scree, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, münera dignánter 
Obláta: et beati Valentini 
Martyris tui suífragántibus 
méritis, ad nostrz salütis aux- 
flium proveníre concéde. Per 
Dóminum. 


EIGN, O Lord, we beseech 

Thee, to accept the gifts 

we offer; and through the in- 

tercession of Thy blessed Mar- 

tyr Valentine, grant that they 

may avail as a help to our sal- 
vation. Through our Lord, 


Postcommunion 


IT nobis Dómine, repará- 

tio mentis et córporis 

coléste mystérium: ut, cujus 

exséquimur actiónem, inter- 

cedénte beáto Valentíno Már- 

tyre tuo, sentidmus efféctum. 
Per Dóminum. 


ET Thy heavenly mystery, 
O Lord, avail to the 
restoration of mind and body, 
that, by the intercession of Thy 
blessed Martyr Valentine, we 
may. feel the effect of the act 
which we are performing. 
Through our Lord. 


In Lent the Mass of the Feria is said with a commemoration 


of St. Valentine. 


Feb. 15—Sts. Faustinus and Jovita, Martyrs (Red) 
Simple 


Mass, Salus autem, page 1325. In Lent the Mass of the Feria 
is said with a commemoration of Sts. Faustinus and Jovita. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui nos 4nnua sanc- 

tórum Mártyrum tuó- 

rum Faustini et Jovite solem- 

nitáte lætíficas: concéde pro- 

pitius: ut quorum gaudémus 

méritis, accendámur exémplis. 
Per Dóminum. 


O cop who dost gladden us 
each year by the Feast 
day of thy holy Martyrs, Faus- 
tinus and : Jovita, mercifully 
grant that rejoicing in their 
merits we may be quickened by 
their example. Through our 
Lord. 


Secret 


nÉsro Dómine suppli- 


catiónibus nostris, 


IVE ear, O Lord, to our sup- 
Plication, that we who 


quas in Sanctórum tuórum put no trust in our own justice 
commemoratióne deférimus: may be helped by the merits of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


924 FEB. 18—ST. MARIE BERNADETTE SOUBIROUS 


those who have been pleasing ut qui nostre justitie fiduciam 

to thee. Through our Lord. non habémus, eórum qui tibi 
placuérunt, méritis adjuvé- 
mur. Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 
ATisrrep by these saving uvzsomus Dómine, salu- 
Mysteries, we beseech taribus repléti mysté- 


‘Thee, O Lord, that their pray- riis: ut quorum solemnia cele- 
ers may help us whose festival brámus, eórum  oratiónibus 
we celebrate. Through our Lord. adjuvémur, Per Dóminum. 


Feb. 18—St. Marie Bernadette Soubirous, 
Virgin (White) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 44, 13, 15, 16 


LL the rich among the ULTUM tuum depreca- 
people shall entreat Thy büntur omnes divites 
countenance; after her shall plebis: adducéntur regi vir- 
virgins be brought to the King; gines post eam: préxime ejus 
her neighbors shall be brought adducéntur tibi in Ietitia et 
to Thee with gladness and re- exsultatione. Ps. 44, 2. Eruc- 
joicing. Ps. 44, 2. My heart távit cor meum verbum bo- 
hath uttered a good word; I num: dico ego ópera mea regi. 
speak my works to the King. V. Glória Patri. 
V. Glory. 
Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
cop who dost love and umitrom Deus protéctor 
protect the humble and et amátor, qui fámulam 


who transformed thy handmaid tuam Mariam Bernárdam Im- 
Marie Bernadette by the ap- maculáte Virginis Marie ap- 
parition and spoken words of paritióne et allóquiorecreásti: 
the Blessed Virgin Mary, grant, presta, qusesumus, ut, per 
we beseech 'Thee, that follow- simplices fídei sémitas, ad 
ing the simple pathways of tuam in celis visiónem per- 
Faith, we may be deemed veníre mereámur. Per Démi- 
worthy to come to thy heavenly num, i 

vision. Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Simeon, Bishop and Martyr. 


Prayer 
oox mercifully, almighty NFIRMITATEM nostram rés- 
God, upon our weakness; pice, omnípotens Deus: et 


and, because the weight of our quia pondus préprie actiónis 
own deeds presses upon us, may gravat, beáti Simeónis Már- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FM 


ME 


X 


FEB. 18—5T. MARIE BERNADETTE SOUBIROUS 925 


tyris tui atque Pontfficis in- the glorious intercession of 

tercéssio gloriésa nos préte- Saint Simeon Thy Martyr and 

gat. Per Dóminum. Bishop be our protection. 
aa Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Isaias 55, 1,9 


Léctio Isaíe Prophéte. 


mmes Sitiéntes veníte ad 

aquas, et qui non habétis 
argéntum properate, émite, 
et comédite: venite, émite 
absque argénto et absque ulla 
commutatióne vinum et lac. 
Quare . appénditis argéntum 
non in pánibus, et labórem 
vestrum in saturitáte? Audite 
audiéntes me, et comédite 
bonum, et delectábitur in 
crassitüdine ánima vestra. 
Inclináte aurem vestram, et 
veníte ad me: audíte et vivet 
ánima vestra, et fériam vobis- 
cum pactum sempitérnum; 
misericórdias David fidélis. 
Querite Dóminum dum inve- 
níri potest; invocáte eum dum 
prope est. Derelínquat ím- 
pius viam suam, et vir iniquus 
cogitatiónes suas, et revertá- 
tur ad Dóminum, et miseré- 
bitur ejus, et ad Deum nos- 
trum, quóniam multus est ad 
ignoscéndum. Non enim co- 
gitatiónes mes, cogitatiónes 
vestre: neque vie vestre, vie 
mez, dicit Dóminus. Quia si- 
cut exaltántur celi a terra, sic 
exaltate sunt vie mez a viis 
vestris, et cogitatiónes mer a 
cogitatiónibus vestris. 


Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 


LL you that thirst, come 

to the waters: and you 
that have no money, make 
haste, buy and eat. Come ye: 
buy wine and milk without 
money and without any price. 
Why do you spend money for 
that which is not.bread and 
your labour for that which doth 
not satisfy you? Hearken dili- 
gently to me and eat that 
which is good: and your soul 
shall be delighted in fatness. 
Incline your ear and come to 
me. Hear and your soul shall 
live. And I will make an ever- 
lasting covenant with you, the 
faithful mercies of David. Be- 
hold I have given him for a 
witness to the people, for a 
leader and a master to the 
Gentiles. Behold thou shalt call 
a nation which thou knewest 
not :and the nations that knew 
not thee shall run to thee, be- 
cause of the Lord thy God, and 
for the Holy One of Israel; for 
he hath glorified thee. Seek ye 
the Lord while he may be 
found: call upon him while he 
is near. Let the wicked forsake 
his way and the unjust man his 
thoughts, and let bim return to 
the Lord; and he will have 


mercy on him: and to our God; £or he is bountiful to forgive. 
For my thoughts are not your thoughts: nor your ways my 
ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are exalted above the 
earth, so are my ways exalted above your ways, and my 
thoughts above your thoughts. 

In Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are replaced by the 


l Greater Alleluia, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


U26 FEB. 18—ST. MARIE BERNADETTE SOUBIROUS 


Gradual. 


With thy comeliness and thy 
beauty set out: proceed pros- 
perously, and reign. Y. Because 
of truth and meekness and 
justice: and thy right hand 
shall conduct thee wonder- 
fully. 


Ps. 44, 5 


Spécie tue et pulchritüdine 
tua inténde, próspere procéde, 
et regna. Y. Propter veritá- 
tem, et mansuetüdinem et 
justítiam, et dedücet te mira- 
bíliter déxtera tua. 


Lad Septuagesima the Lesser Alleluia is replaced by the 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. I have 
seen her beautiful as a dove, 
and flowers from the rose- 
trees and lilies from the val- 
leys surrounded her. 


Tract. Ps. 


Hearken, O daughter, and 
see, and incline thine ear; for 
the King shall greatly desire 
thy beauty. Y. Ps. 44, 13, 10. And 
the rich among the people shall 
entreat thy countenance, the 
daughters of kings have de- 
lighted thee in thy glory. V. Ps. 
44, 15, 16. After her shall virgins 
be brought to the King; her 
neighbors shall be brought to 
Thee. Y. They shall be brought 
with gladness and rejoicing; 
they shall be brought into the 
temple of the King. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Vidi 
speciósam sicut colümbam, et 
circümdabant eam flores ro- 
sárum et lilia convállium. 
Allelüja. 


44, 11, 12 


Audi, fília, et vide, et in- 
clína aurem tuam: quia con- 
cupivit Rex spéciem tuam. Y. 
Ps. 44, 13, 10. Vultum tuum 
deprecabtntur omnes dívites 
plebis: fili regum in honóre 
tuo. Y. Ps. 44, 15, 16. Addu- 
céntur regi vírgines post eam: 
próxime ejus afferéntur tibi. 
y. Afferéntur in letitia et ex- 
sultatióne:  adducéntur in 
templum regis. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. J. I have 
seen her beautiful as a dove, 
and flowers from the rose-trees 
and lilies from the valleys sur- 
rounded her. Y. Come, my elect, 
and I will set up my throne 
within thee, for the King hath 
desired thy beauty. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Vidi 
Speciósam sicut colümbam, et 
circtimdabant eam flores ro- 
sárum, et lilia convállium. 
Allelüja. Y. Veni, elécta mea, 
et ponam in te thronum me- 
um, quia concupivit Rex Spé- 
ciem tuam. Allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


l 
€ 


FEB, 18—5T. MARIE BERNADETTE SOUBIROUS 927 


Gospel. Matt. 13, 44-52 


MM Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Matthzum. 


wN ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 

sus discípulis suis pará- 
bolam hanc: Símile est reg- 
num celérum thesáuro ab- 
Scóndito in agro, quem qui 
invénit homo, abscóndit, et 
pre gáudio illius vadit, et 
vendit univérsa quz habet, et 
emit agrum illum. Iterum 
simile est regnum celérum 
hómini negotiatóri, querénti 
bonas margarítas. Invénta 
autem una pretiósa marga- 
ríta, ábiit, et véndidit ómnia 
que hábuit, et emit eam. Ite- 
rum simile est regnum celé- 
rum sagéne misse in mare, et 
ex omni génere píscium con- 
gregánti. Quam, cum impléta 
esset, educéntes, et secus lit- 
tus sedéntes, elegérunt bonos 
in vasa, malos autem foras 
misérunt. Sic erit in consum- 
matióne seculi; exíbunt An- 
geli, et separábunt malos de 
médio justórum, et mittent 
eos in camínum ignis: ibi erit 
fletus et stridor déntium. In- 
tellexístis hec ómnia? Dicunt 
ei: Etiam. Ait illis: Ideo om- 
nis scriba doctus in regno 
cmlórum, similis est hómini 
patrifamílias, qui profert de 
thesáuro suo nova et vétera. 


44 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT lime Jesus spoke 

to his disciples this par- 
&ble: The kingdom of heaven is 
like unto a treasure hidden in 
& field. Which a man having 
found, hid it: and for joy 
thereof goeth and selleth all 
that he hath and buyeth that 
field. Again the kingdom of 
heaven js like to à merchant 
Seeking good pearls. Who, when 


“he had found one pearl of great 


price, went his way and sold 
all that be had and bought it. 
Again the kingdom of heaven 
is like to a net cast into the sea 
and gathering together of all 
kind of fishes. Which, when it. 
was filled, they drew out: and 
sitting by the shore, they chose 
out the good into vessels, but 
the bad they cast forth. So shall 
it be at the end of the world. 
The angels shall go out and 
shall separate the wicked from 
among the just. And shall cast 
them into the furnace of fire. 
There, shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. Have ye un- 
derstood all these things? They 
say to him: Yes. He said unto 
them: Therefore every scribe 
instructed in the kingdom of 
heaven is like to a man that is 
a householder, who bringeth 
forth out of his treasure new 
things and old. 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 15, 16 


Afferéntur regi vírgines post 
eam, próxima ejus afferéntur 
tibi in letitia et exsultatióne; 
adducéntur in templum regis. 
Pro páiribus tuis nati sunt 


After her shall virgins be 
brought to the King; her neigh- 
bors shall be brought to thee 
with gladness and rejoicing; 
they shall be brought into the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


928  FEB. 18—ST. MARIE BERNADETTE SOUBIROUS 


temple of the King. Instead of 
thy fathers, sons are born to 
thee; Thou shalt make them 
princes over all the earth. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


tibi filii: constitues eos prin- 
cipes super omnem terram. 


Secret 


Lorp, may the gifts of thy 
Holiness set before us the 
heavenly fervour by which the 
holy virgin Marie Bernadette 
hath shown herself a sacrifice 
of praise pleasing unto Thee. 
Through our Lord. 
Second Secret of St: Simeon. 


cLÉsrEM nobis, Dómine, 

prebeant tua sancta 
fervórem, quo beáta Virgo 
María Bernárda seípsam hós- 
tiam laudis tibi placéntem 
exhíbuit. Per Dóminum. 


Secret 


ccert with favour, O 
M, Lord, the offerings set 
apart for Thee, by the merits of 
Blessed Simeon martyr and 
bishop; and grant that they be 
unto us & help for eternity. 
Through our Lord. - 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Send forth flowers as the 


ósTIAS tibi, Dómine, be- 

áti Simeónis Mártyris 
tui atque Pontíficis dicátas 
méritis, benígnus assüme: et 
ad perpétuum nobis tribue 
proveníre subsídium. Per Dé- 
minum. 


Eccl. 39 


Floréte flores quasi lílium, 


lily, and yield a smell, and bring et date odórem, et frondéte 
forth leaves in grace. And in gratiam. Collaudate cánti- 
praise with canticles and bless cum, et benedícite Dóminum 


the Lord in His works, 


in opéribus suis. 


Postcommunion 


ADE anew by the holy mys- 

teries we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, that striving to attain 
the admirable constancy of 
blessed Marie Bernadette, we 
may be found worthy to gain 
the eternal reward of patient 
endurance. Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion of St. 


ACRIS, Démine, recreatis 

-mystériis, quesumus; ut 
miram beáte Marie Bernár- 
dz constantiam zmulantes, 
patiéntie premium cónsequi 
mereámur etérnum. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Simeon. 


Postcommunion 


the holy offering, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord our God, 
that we who celebrate its lit- 


me by partaking of 


EFÉCTI participatióne 
müneris sacri, quesu- 

mus, Dómine Deus noster: ut, 
cujus exséquimur cultum, in- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FEB. 22—CHAIR OF ST. PETER, ANTIOCH 929 


tercedénte ` beto  Simeóne urgy, through blessed Simeon 
Mártyre tuo atque Pontifice, thy Martyr and Bishop may ex- 
Sentiámus efféctum. Per Dó- perience its effects. Through 
minum. our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers Page 793. 


Feb. 18—49t. Simeon, Bishop, Martyr (Red) 
Simple 


Mass, Statuit, page 1302. In Lent the Mass of the Feria is 
said with a commemoration of St. Simeon. 


Feb.22—The Feast of the Chair of St. Peter 
at Antioch (White) 
Double Major 


The Mass as on the feast of St. Peter's Chair at Rome, page 
868. Commemoration of St. Prisca being omitted. In Lent a 
commemoration of the Feria, and its Gospel at the end. 


Feb. 23—St. Peter Bamian, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor 
of the Church (White) 
Double 


The Vigil of St. Matthias the Apostle (Purple) 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 
Prayer 

ONCÉDE nos, quesumus, RANT us, we beseech Thee, 
. omnípotens Deus: beáti almighty God, to follow 
Petri, Confesséris tui atque the admonitions and examples 
Pontificis mónita et exémpla of blessed Peter, Thy Confessor 
sectári: ut per terréstrium re- and Bishop, that by contempt 
rum contémplum etérna gáu- of the things of earth we may 
dia consequámur. Per Dó- attain to everlasting joys. 

minum. : Through our Lord. 
Commemoration is made, in the Mass of St. Peter Damian, 
of the vigil, of St. Matthias, Apostle, Feb. 24, from the Mass Ego 
autem, page 1299. In Lent a commemoration of the Feria is 


made before that of the vigil, and the Gospel of the Feria is 
Said at the end. 


Feb. 24— (In leap year Feb. 25) —St. Matthias, 
Apostle (Red) 
Double of the Second Class 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 138, 17 
‘Ht autem nimis hono- o ME Thy friends, O God, 


ráti sunt amici tui, are made exceedingly 
Deus: nimis confortátus est honorable: their principality 


http://ccwatershed.org 


930 FEB. 24—ST. MATTHIAS, APOSTLE 

is exceedingly strengthened. Ps. principátus eórum. Ps. 138, 
138, 1, 2. Lord, Thou hast 1, 2. Dómine, probásti me, et 
proved me, and known my sit- cognovisti me: tu cognovisti 
ting down, and my rising up. sessiónem meam, et resurrec- 


Y. Glory. tiónem meam. FY. Glória Patri. 
Kyrie, Page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 
cop, Who didst join EUS, qui beátum Matthí- 


blessed Matthias to the 
company of ‘Thine apostles, 
grant, we beseech Thee, that by 
his intercession we may ever 
be aware of the depths of Thy 
goodness round about us. 
Through our Lord. 
In Lent a commemoration of 


Lesson. 
Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 


N THOSE days, Peter rising 
up in the midst of the 
brethren, said: (now the num- 


ber of persons together was. 


about a hundred and twenty) 
men and brethren, the Scrip- 
ture must needs be fulfilled 
which the Holy Ghost spoke be- 
fore by the mouth of David 
concerning Judas, wbo was the 
leader of them that appre- 
hended Jesus; who was num- 
bered with us, and had obtained 
part of this ministry. And he 
indeed hath possessed a field 
of the reward of iniquity; and, 
being hanged, burst asunder in 
the midst; and all his bowels 
gushed out. And it became 
known to all the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, so that the same 
field was called in their tongue 
Haceldama, that is to say, the 
field of blood. For it is written 
in the book of Psalms, let their 
habitation become desolate, and 


am Apostolórum tuó- 
rum collégio sociásti: tríbue, 
quaesumus, ut ejus interven- 
tidne, tue circa nos pietátis 
semper viscera sentiamus. 
Per Dóminum. 


the Feria. 


Acts 1, 15-26 


Léctio Áctuum  Apostoló- 
rum. 
g^N niÉBUS ilis exsürgens 
Petrus in médio fratrum, 
dixit (erat autem turba hó- 
minum simul, fere centum 
viginti): Viri fratres, opórtet 
impléri Sceriptüram, quam 
predixit Spíritus Sanctus per 
os David de Juda, qui fuit 
dux eórum, qui comprehen- 
dérunt Jesum: qui connume- 
rátus erat in nobis, et sortitus 
est sortem ministérii hujus. 
Et hic quidem possédit agrum 
de mercéde iniquitátis, et sus- 
pénsus crépuit médius: et dif- 
füsa sunt ómnia víscera ejus. 
Et notum factum est ómnibus 
hahitantibus Jerúsalem, ita 
ut appellaretur ager ille, lin- 
gua eórum, Hacéldama, hoc 
est, ager sánguinis. Scriptum 
est enim in libro Psalmórum: 
Fiat commorátio eórum de- 
sérta, et non sit qui inhábitet 
in ea: et episcopátum ejus ac- 
cipiat alter. Opórtet ergo ex 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FEB. 24—ST. MATTHIAS, APOSTLE 


his viris, qui nobiscum sunt 
congregáti in omni témpore, 
quo intrávit et exívit inter nos 
Dóminus Jesus, incípiens a 
baptismate Joánnis usque in 
diem, qua assttmptus est a 
nobis, testem  resurrectiónis 
ejus nobíscum fieri unum ex 
istis. Et statuérunt duos, Jo- 
seph, qui vocábitur Bársabas, 
qui cognominátus est Justus, 
et Matthiam. Et orántes.dix- 
érunt: Tu, Dómine, qui corda 
nosti ómnium. osténde, quem 
elégeris ex his duóbus unum, 
accípere locum ministérii hu- 
jus, et apostolátus, de quo 
prevaricatus est Judas, ut 
abíret in locum suum. Et de- 
dérunt sortes eis, et cécidit 
sors super Matthiam, et an- 
numerátus est cum ündecim 
Apéstolis. 


932 


let there be none to dwell there- 
in: and his bishopric let an- 
other take. Wherefore of these 
men who have companied with 
us, all the time that the Lord 
Jesus came in and went out 
among us, beginning from the 
baptism of John until the day 
wherein He was taken up from 
us, one of these must be made 
a witness with us of His resur- 
rection. And they appointed 
two, Joseph called Barsabas, 
who was surnamed Justus, and 
Matthias. And praying they 
said, Thou, Lord, Who knowest 
the hearts of all men, show 
whether of these two Thou hast 
chosen, to take the place of 
this ministry, and apostleship, 
from which Judas hath by 
transgression fallen, that he 
might go to his own place. And 
they gave them lots, and the 


lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven 


apostles. 


Gradual. 


Nimis honoráti sunt amici 
tui, Deus: nimis confortatus 
est principátus eórum. Y. Di- 
numerábo eos, et super aré- 
nam multiplicabüntur. 


Ps. 138, 17, 18 


Thy friends, O God, are ex- 
ceedingly honorable: their 
principality -is exceedingly 
strengthened. J. I will number 
them, and they shall be mul- 
tiplied above the Sand. 


Tract. Ps. 20, 3, 4 


Desidérium anime ejus trí- 
buísti ei: et voluntáte labió- 
rum ejus nón fraudásti eum. 
X. Quóniam prevenísti eum 
in benedictiónibus dulcédinis. 
Y. Posuisti in cápite ejus co- 
rónam de lápide pretióso. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Thou hast given him his 
soul’s desire, and hast not with- 
holden from him the will of 
his lips. Y. For Thou hast pre- 
vented him with blessings of 
sweetness. Y. Thou hast set on 
his head a crown of preciour 
stones. 


Gospel as in Mass of St. Paul. Hermit. page 865. 


Creed, page 765. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


932 FEB. 27—ST. GABRIEL OF OUR LADY OF SORROWS 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 17, 18 
Thou shalt make them Constítues eos príncipes su- 
princes over all the earth: they per omnem terram: mémores 
shall remember Thy name, O erunt nóminis tui, Dómine, in 
Lord, in every progeny and omni progénie et generatióne. 


generation. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
ay the prayer of Thy holy Ósr1as tibi, Dómine, quas 
X€ ‘apostle Matthias, O Lord, nómini tuo sacrándas 


accompany the sacrifices which 
we present to be sanctified unto 
Thy name; and by it do Thou 
cause us to be purified and de- 
fended Through our Lord. 


offérimus, sancti Matthie 
Apóstoli tui prosequátur orá- 
tio: per quam nos expiári fá- 
cias, et deféndi. Per Démi- 
num. 


In Lent commemoration of ihe Feria. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. Matt. 19, 28 


` You who have followed Me 
shali sit on seats judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel, 


Vos, qui secüti estis me, se- 
débitis super sedes, judicántes 
duódecim tribus Israel. 


Postcommunion 


RANT, we pray Thee, O al- 
mighty God, that at the 
intercession of blessed. Mat- 
thias, Thine Apostle, we obtain 
pardon and peace through the 
holy things we have received. 
Through our Lord. 


RESTA, quæsumus, omni- 
potens Deus: ui per hzc 
sancta, quz sümpsimus, inter- 
veniénte beáto Matthía Após- 
tolo tuo, véniam consequá- 
mur, et pacem. Per Dóminum. 


In Lent commemoration of the Feria. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. In Lent the Last Gospel of the Feria. 


Feb. 27—St. Gabriel of Our Ladp of Sorrows, 


Confessor, (White) 
Double 


(In Leap Year this Feast occurs on Feb. 28.) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 11, 13 


fue eye of God looked upon 
him for good, and He 


cuLus Dei respéxit illum 
O in bono, et eréxit eum 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FEB. 27--ST. GABRIEL OF OUR LADY OF SORROWS 933 


ab humilitáte ipsíus, et exal- 
távit caput ejus: et miráti 
sunt in illo multi, et honora- 
vérunt Deum. Ps. 72, 1. Quam 
bonus Israél Deus his, qui rec- 
to sunt corde. Y. Gloria Patri. 


raised him from his humility, 
and exalted his head: and 
many wondered at him, and 
gave honor to God. Ps. 72, 1. 
How good is God to Israel, to 
those who are right of heart! 
y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui beátum Gabrié- 


Jem dulcissime Matris 
tue dolóres assídue recólere 
docuisti, ac per illam sancti- 
tatis et miraculérum glória 
sublimasti: da nobis, ejus in- 
lercessióne et exemplo; ita 
Genitricis tue consociari fieti- 
bus, ut matérna ejüsdem pro- 
tectiéne salyémur: Qui vivis. 


; Go», Who didst teach 
blessed Gabriel, diligently 
to ponder the sorrows of Thy 
most sweet Mother, and Who 
hast gloriously exalted him as 
a saint and worker of wonders: 
vouchsafe to be moved by -his 
merits and prayers, and to 
grant unto us so to mourn with 
Mary Thy Mother, that her 
maternal care may ensure our 
salvation. Who livest. 


Lesson. 1 John 2, 14-17 


Léctio Epistole beáti Joán- 
nis Apóstoli. 
aRfssrMI: Scribo. vobis, 
jüvenes, quóniam fortes 
estis, et verbum Dei manet in 
vobis, et vicístis malignum. 
Nolite diligere mundum, ne- 
que ea que in mundo sunt. Si 
quis diligit mundum, non est 
caritas Patris in eo: quéniam 
omne guod est in mundo,.con- 
cupiscéntia carnis est, et con- 
cupiscéntia oculórum, et su- 
pérbia vite: que non est ex 
Patre, sed ex mundo est. Et 
mundus transit, et concupis- 
céntia ejus. Qui autem facit 
voluntátem Dei, manet in 
setérnum. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed John the Apostle. 


EARLY beloved: I write 
unto you, young men, be- 
cause you are strong, and the 
word of God remaineth in you, 
and you have overcome the 
evil. Love nof the world nor the 
things that are in the world. If 
any man love.tbe world, the 
charity of the Father is not in 
him: for all that is in the world 
js the concupiscence of the flesh 
and the concupiscence of the 
eyes and the pride of life: 
which is not of the Father, but 
is of the world. And the world 
passeth, and its concupiscence. 
put he who doeth the will of 
God abideth for ever, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


934 FEB. 27--ST. GABRIEL OF OUR LADY OF SORROWS 


From, Septuagesima io Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re~ 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 30, 20 


How great is the multitude of Quam magna multitude 
Thy sweetness, O Lord, which dulcédinis tue, Dómine, quam 
Thou hast hidden for them abscondisti timéntibus te! y. 
that fear Thee! Y. Thou hast Perfecisti eis qui sperant in 
perfected them that hope in te, in conspéctu filiórum hó- 
Thee in the sight of the sons of. minum. 
men. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 8, 6, — Allelája, allelüja. Y. Ps. 8, 
7. Thou hast made him a little 6, 7. Minuísti eum, Dómine, 
less than the angels; Thou paulo minus ab Angelis, glória 
hast crowned him with glory et honóre coronásti eum: et 
and honor and hast set him constituísti eum super ópera 


over the works of Thy hands. 


mánuum tuárum,. Allelüja. 


Tract. Ps. 83, 6-7, 11, 13 


Blessed is the man whose 
help is from thee: in his heart 
he hath disposed to ascend by 
Steps, in the vale of tears, in 
tne place which he hath set. Y. 
£ have chosen to be an abject 
in the house of my God, rather 
than to dwell in the tabernacles 
of sinners. Y. He will not de- 
prive of good things them that 
walk in innocence: O Lord of 
hosts, blessed is the man that 
trusteth in Thee. 


Beatus vir, cujus est auxí- 
lium abs te: ascensiónes in 
corde suo dispósuit, in valle 
lacrimarum, in loco quem pó- 
suit. Y. Elégi abjéctus esse in 
domo Dei mei: magis quam 
habitáre in tabernáculis pec- 
catórum. JY. Non privábit 
bonis eos, qui ámbulant in in- 
nocéntia: Dómine virtütum, 
beátus bomo, qui sperat in te. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 8, 6,7. 
Thou hast made him, O Lord, 
& little less than the angels, 
Thou hast crowned him with 
glory and honour: and hast set 
him over the works of thy 
hands. Alleluia. Y. Eccl. 11, 24. 
The blessing of God maketh 
haste to reward the just, and 
in a swift hour His blessing 
beareth fruit. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 8, 
6,7. Minuísti eum, Dómine, 
paulo minus ab Angelis, glória 
et honóre coronásti eum: et 
constituisti eum super ópera 
mánuum tuárum. Allelija. 
FW. Eccli. 11, 24. Benedíctio 
Dei in mercédem justi festi- 
nat et in hora velóci procéssus 
illius fructfficat. Allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FEB. 27—ST, GABRIEL OP OUR LADY OF SORROWS 98b 
Gospel. Mark 10, 13-21 


% Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secándum Marcum. 
N ILo témpore: Offeré- 
bant Jesu párvulos ut 
tángeret illos. Discípuli autem 
cOmminabéntur offeréntibus. 
Quos cum vidéret Jesus, íj- 
digne tulit, et ait illis: Sinite 
párvulos veníre ad me, et ne 
prohibuéritis eos: tálium enim 
est regnum Dei. Amen dico 
vobis: Quisquis non receperit 
regnum Dei velut párvulus, 
non intrábit in illud. Et com- 
pléxans eos, et impónens ma- 
nus super illos, benedicébat 
eos, Et cum egréssus esset in 
viam, procirrens quidam, 
genu flexo ante eum, rogábat 
eum: Magíster bone, quid fá- 
ciam ut vitam etérnam percí- 
piam? Jesus autem dixit ei: 
Quid me dicis bonum? Nemo 
bonus, nisi unus Deus. Pre- 
cépta nosti: Ne adülteres, Ne 
occídas, Ne furéris, Ne falsum 
testiménium dixeris, Ne frau- 
dem féceris, Honóra patrem 
tuum et matrem. At ille re- 
Spóndens, ait il: Magister, 
haec ómnia observávi a juven- 
tüte mea. Jesus autem intüi- 
tus eum, diléxit eum, et dixit 
ei: Unum tibi deest: vade, 
quecümque habes vende, et 
da paupéribus, et habétis the- 
saurum in celo: et veni, sé- 
quere me, ` 


*H Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 
T THAT lime: 'Ihey of- 
fered to Jesus little chil- 
Greri, that he should touch 
them. But the disciples rebuked 
them that offered them. Whom, 
when Jesus saw, He was ang- 
ered and said to them: Suffer 
little children to come to Me, 
and forbid them not, for of 
such is the Kingdom of God, 
Amen I say to you, whosoever 
shall not receive the kingdom 
of God as a little child, shall 
not enter into it. And embrac- 
ing them, and laying His hands 
upon them. He blessed them. 
And when He was gone forth 
into the way, a certain man 
running up and kneeling be- 
fore Him, asked Him, Good 
Master, what shall I do that I 
may receive life everlasting? 
And Jesus said to him, Why 
callest thou Me good? None is 
good but one, that is God. Thou 
knowest the commandments? 
Do not commit adultery, do not 
kill, do not steal, bear not 
false witness, do no fraud, 
honour thy father and mother. 
But he answering, said to Him: 
Master, all these things I have 
observed from my youth. And 
Jesus looking on him, loved 
him, and said to him: One 
thing is wanting unto thee: go, 
sell whatsoever thou hast, and 


give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and 


come, follow Me. 


Offertory. Ps. 115, 16, 17 


O Dómine, quia ego servus 
tuus, et filius ancille tuz: 


O Lord, for I am Thy servant 
and the son of Thy handmaid: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


936 


Thou hast broken my bonds, to 
Thee will X sacrifice a host of 
praise. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


. Secret 


ARE us, O Lord, who offer 


Thee the saving host in — 


memory of St. Gabriel, daily to 
recall the sacrifice of Thy 
death; and by the merits of the 
sorrowful Virgin abundantly to 
receive the fruit of the same 
sacrifice. Who livest. 

Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 

Behold, I stand at the door 

and knock: if any man shall 

hear My voice, and sball open 

to Me the door, I will enter in 

io him and will sup with him 
and he with me. 


MARCH 4—ST. CASIMIR 


dirupisti vincula mea, tibi 
sacrificábo hóstiam laudis. 


' ALUTÁREM hóstiam in me- 
Y móriam sancti Gabriélis 
lbi, Dómine, offeréntes, fac 
nos sacrifícium mortis tue rite 
recólere: ac, méritis perdo- 
léntis Virginis, ejusdem sacri- 
ficii fructum copióse percí- 
pere: Qui vivis. 


Apoc. 3, 20 

Ecce sto ad óstium, et pulso: 
Si quis audíerit vocem meam, 
et aperüerit mihi januam, in- 
trabo ad illum, et cenábo cum 
illo, et ipse mecum. 


Postcommunion 


HE thanks which we offer 

to Thee, O Lord, in the 
festivity of St. Gabriel, 'Thy 
confessor, for the gifts we have 
received, do 'Thou graciously 
receive at the hands of the 
Elorious ever-virgin Mary: of 
whom Thou didst take that 
fiesh whose sweetness we have 
deserved to taste in this health- 
ful banquet. Who livest. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


vas tibi, Démine, in festi- 
vitate sancti Gabriélis 
Confessóris tui, pro collátis 
donis grátias agimus, süscipe 
propítius per manus gloriése 
semper Vírginis Marie: ex 
qua carnem illam assumpsisti, 
cujus in hoc salutári convívio 
merüimus gustáre dulcédi- 
nem: Qui vivis. 


March 4—85t. Casimir, Confessor (White) 
Semi-double 
Mass Si diligis me, page 1302. 
St. Lucius, Pope, Martyr (Red) 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except Prayer as below. 


Prayer 


GOD, Who didst fortify 
holy Casimir with the vir- 


EUS, qui inter regáles 
delícias, et mundi illé- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


E ee SA 


MARCH 6-—STS. PERPETUA AND FELICITAS 


cebras, sanctum Casimirum 
virtüte constantie roborasti: 
quesumus; ut ejus interces- 
sióne fidéles tui terréna des- 
piciant, et ad celéstia semper 
aspirent, Per Dóminum. 


937 


tue of constancy in the midst 
of kingly delights and the 
world’s allurements, through 
his intercession we beseech 
Thee that Thy faithful may 


‘scorn earthly things and ever 


aspire to those of heaven. 
Through our Lord. 


. In Lent commemoration of the Feria. ; ! 
Commemoration of St. Lucius, Prayer as below, the Secret 
and Postcommunion from the Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302. 
In Lent the Gospel of the Feria at the end. 


REGEM tuum, Pastor æ- 

térne, placátus intén- 
de: et per beátum Lücium 
Mártyrem tuum atque Sum- 
mum Pontificem, perpétua 
protectióne  custódi; quem 
totíus Ecclésie prestitisti esse 
pastórem. Per Dóminum. 


Prayer 


ErERNAL Shepherd, do 
Thou look favorably up- 
on Thy flock, which we beseech 
Thee to guard and keep for 
evermore through the blessed 
Lucius Thy Martyr and Su- 


preme Pontiff, whom Thou 


didst choose to be the chief 
shepherd of the whole Church. 
Through our Lord. 


March 6—S»f$. Perpetua and felicitas, Martyrs (Red) 
Double 
Mass, Me exspectaverunt, page 1378, except: 


Prayer 


A NOBIS, quesumus, Dó- 

mine Deus noster, san- 
ctarum Vírginum et Márty- 
rum tuárum, Perpetue et 
Felicitatis palmas incessábili 
devotióne venerári: ut quas 
digna mente non póssumus 
celebráre, humílibus saltem 
frequentémus obséquiis. Per 
Dóminum. 


IvE unto us, we beseech 
thee, O Lord our God, tc 
reverence with unceasing. de- 
votion the glory of Thy holy 
Virgin-Martyrs Perpetua and 
Felicitas; and though it be not 
ours worthily to honour their 
triumph, to persevere in offer- 
ing them the humble tribute of 
our duty. Through our Lord. 


Secret 


NTÉNDE quesumus Dómine 
münera altáribus tuis pro 
sanctárum Vírginum et Már- 
tyrum tuárum Perpetue et 
Felicitatis festivitáte propó- 
sita: ut sicut per hee beáta 
mystéria illis glóriam contu- 


AvoRABLY look down we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, 

upon the gifts laid upon Thine 
altars for the feast-day of Thy 
holy Virgin-Martyrs Perpetua 
and Felicitas, and as by these 
Sacred Mysteries, ‘Thou didst 


http://ccwatershed.org 


938 


raise Thy Saints to glory ever- 
lasting, so through them 
vouchsafe to us Thy forgive- 
ness. Through our Lord. 


MARCH 7—ST. THOMAS AQUINAS 


Misti, ita nobis indulgéntiam 
largiáris, Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


zov hast filled us, O Lord, 

with mystic graces and 
joys: grant, we beseech Thee, 
that through the prayers of 
Thy holy Martyrs, Perpetua 
and Felicitas, we may profit 
eternally from having in this 
our time ministered to Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


ystrcrs, Dómine, repléti 
sumus votis et gáudiis: 
presta, quesumus; ut inter- 
cessiónibus sanctárum Márty- 
rum tuárum Perpétuz et Feli- 
citátis, que temporáliter ági- 
mus, spirituáliter consequá- 
mur. Per Dóminum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria is made and its 


Gospel is read at the end, 


March 7—$5t. Thomas Aquinas, Confessor, Doctor 
(White) 


. Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer 


cop, Who dost enlighten 

Thy Church with the 
wondrous learning of blessed 
Thomas, Thy Confessor, and 
dost make it fruitful with his 
holy labors, grant us, we be- 
seech Thee, both to understand 
what he taught and to imitate 
what he practiced. Through our 
Lord. 


EUS, qui Ecclésiam tuam 
beáti Thome Confessó- 
ris tui mira eruditióne clarí- 
ficas, et sancta operatiéne 
fecündas: da nobis, qusgsu- 
mus; et que dócuit, intelléctu 
conspicere, et que egit, imita- 
tióne complére. Per Dómi- 
num: 


Ip Lent a commemoration of the Feria, and its Gospel at the. 


Lesson. Wis. 7, 7-14 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


WISHED, and understand- 

ing was given me; and I 
called, and the spirit of wis- 
dom came upon me; and I pre- 
ferred her before kingdoms and 
thrones, and esteemed riches 
nothing in comparison of her. 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


Oo! et datus est mihi 
sensus: et invocávi, et 
venit in me spíritus sapiéntiz: 
et prepósui illam regnis et 
Sédibus, et divitias nihil esse 
duxi in comparatióne illíus: 
nec comparavi ili lápidem 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MARCH 8—ST. 


pretiósum: quóniam omne au- 
rum jn comparatióne illus, 
aréna est exígua, et tamquam 
lutum estimabitur argéntum 
in conspéctu ilius. Super 
salütem et spéciem diléxi il- 
lam, et propósui pro luce ha- 
bére illam quóniam inexstin- 
guíbile est lumen illfus. Vené- 
runt autem mihi ómnia bona 
páriter cum illa, et innumerá- 
bilis honéstas per manus il- 
líus, et letatus sum in ómni- 
bus: quóniam antecedébat me 
ista sapiéntia, et ignorábam 
quóniam horum ómnium ma- 
ter est. Quam sine fictióne 
didici, et sine invídia com- 
münico, et honestátem illíus 
non abscóndo. Infinítus enim 
thesáurus est homínibus: quo 
qui usi sunt, partícipes facti 
sunt amicitiz Dei, propter 
discipline dona commendáti. 


JOHN OF GOD 939 
Neither did I compare unto her 
any precious stone, for all gold 
in comparison of her is as a 
little sand, and silver in respect 
to her shall be counted as clay. 
I loved her above health and 
beauty, and chose to have her 
instead of light, for her light 
can not be put out. Now all 
good things came to me to- 
gether with her, and innumer- 
able riches through her hands. 
And I rejoiced in them all; for 
this wisdom went before me, 
and I knew not that she was 
the mother of them all: which 
Y have learned without guile, 
and communicate without 
envy, and her riches I hide not; 
for she is an infinite treasure to 
men, which they that use be- 
come the friends of God, being 
commended for the gifts of 
discipline, 


March 8—@t. John of God, Confessor (White) 
Double 
Mass, Os Justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui beátum Joán- 
D nem, tuo amóre suc- 
cénsum, inter flammas innóx- 
ium incédere fecisti, et per 
eum Ecclésiam tuam nova 
prole fecundásti: presta ip- 
sius suffragántibus méritas; 
ut igne caritátis tue vítia no- 
Stra curéntur, et remédia 
nobis ætérna provéniant. Per 
Dóminum. 


cop, Who didst cause 

blessed John, when burn- 
ing with love of Thee, to walk 
unharmed through the midst 
of flames, and by his means 
didst enrich Thy Church with 
a new Religious Order, grant, 
through the aid of his merits, 
that our evil passions may be 
consumed by tbe fire of Thy 
love, and that we may recelve 
healing remedies unto life ever- 
lasting. Through our Lord. 


ad Lent a commemoration of the Feria, and its Gospel at th 


The Gospel of the 17th Sunday after Pentecost, page 697. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


$40 


MARCH 10—-THE HOLY FORTY MARTYRS 


March 9—St. frances of Rome, Widow (White) 
Double _ 
Mass, Cognovi, page 1383, except: 


co», Who, among other 
O gifts of Thy grace didst 
honor blessed Frances, Thine 
hand-maid, with the familiar 
companionship of an angel, 
grant, we beseech Thee, that 
by the help.of her intercession 
we may deserve to attain the 
company of angels. Through 
our Lord. ` 


e 


Prayer 


D qui beátam Fran- 
ciscam fámulam tuam, 
inter cétera grátiæ tuæ dona, 
familiári Angeli consuetüdine 
decorasti: concéde, quesu- 
mus; ut intercessiónis ejus 
auxilio, Angelórum consórti- 
um cónsequi mereámur. Per 
Dóminum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria and its Gospel at the 
nd. 


.March 10—The Holp Forty Martyrs (Red) 
Semi-double 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


HE just cried and the Lord 

heard them: and deliv- 
ered them out of all their 
troubles. Ps. 33, 2. I will bless 
the Lord at all times: His praise 
shall be ever in my mouth. yY. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Ps. 33, 18 


LAMAVÉRUNT justi, et Dó- 

minus exaudívit eos: et 

ex ómnibus tribulatiónibus 

eórum liberávit eos. Ps. 33, 2. 

Benedícam Dóminum in omni 

témpore: semper laus ejus in 
ore meo. V. Glória Patri. 


Prayer 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we, 
who know Thy glorious mar- 
tyrs to have been courageous in 
confessing Thee, may experi- 
ence their kindness in interced- 
ing for us with Thee. Through 
our Lord. 
Commemoration of the Feria. 


RESTA, quesumus, omni- 
potens Deus: ut, qui glo- 
riósos Mártyres fortes in sua 
eonfessióne .cognóvimus, pios 
apud te in nostra intercessi- 
óne sentiámus, Per Dóminum. 


Epistle from the Mass of Sts. Fabian and Sebastian, page 878. 
Gradual. Ps.132,1,2 


Behold how good and how 
pleasant it is for brethren to 


Ecce quam bonum, et quam 
jucindum, habitáre fratres in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MARCH 10-—-THE HOLY FORTY MARTYRS l 941 
unum! y. Sicut unguéntum in dwell together in unity. Y. It 
cApite, quod descéndit in bar- is like the precious ointment on 
bam, barbam Aaron. the head, that ran down upon 
the beard, the beard of Aaron. 


Tract.. Ps. 125, 5, 6 


Qui séminant in lácrymis, They that sow in tears, shall 
in gáudio metent. Y. Wüntes reap in joy. Y. Going they went 
ibant et flebant, mitténtes and wept, casting their seeds. 
sémina sua. Y. Veniéntes au- XY. But coming they shall come 
tem vénient cum exsultatiéne, with joyfulness, carrying their 
portántes manípulos suos. sheayes,. . ; 

" Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 
Gospel from ihe Mass Sapientiam, page 1323. 


Offertory. Ps. 31, 11 - 


Letamini in Dómino, et ex- Be glad in the Lord, and re- 
sultate, Justi: et gloriámini, joice ye just; and glory all ye 
omnes recti corde. right of heart. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


RECES, Dómine, tuórüm 
'réspice, oblationésque fi- 


cox, O Lord, upon the 
prayers and offerings of 


délium: ut et tibi grate sint 
pro tuórum festivitáte Sanc- 
torum, et nobis cónferant tue 


Thy faithful, that on this feast 
of Thy saints, they may be ac- 
ceptable to Thee and may con- 


propitiatiónis auxílium. Per fer upon us the grace of for- 
Dóminum. giveness. Through our Lord. 
In Lent commemoration of the Feria. — 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775, but in Lent Preface No. 3, page 802. 


Communion. Matt. 12, 50 


Quicümque fécerit volum- Whosoever. shall do the will 
tátem Patris mei, qui in celis of My Father Who is in heaven, 
est: ipse meus frater, et soror, the same is My brother, and 
et mater est, dicit Dóminus. sister, and mother, saith the 

Lord. 


_ Postcommunion 


ANCrTÓRUM tuórum, Dó- PPEASED by the interces- 
~ mine, intercessióne pla- sion of Thy saints, O 
cátus: presta, quesumus; ut Lord, grant us, we. -beseech 


qu temporáli celebrámus ac- Thee, that through the tem- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


342 


poral endeavors of this cele- 
bration we may obtain eternal 
salvation, Through our Lord. 

In Lent commemoration of the 


MARCH 12—ST. GREGORY THE GREAT 


tióne, perpétue salvatióne ca- 
piámus. Per Dóminum. 


Feria. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. In Lent the Last Gospel of the Feria. 


March 12—$5t, Gregorp the Great, Pope, Confessor, 
Doctor of the Church (White) 
Double 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. John 21, 15-17 


F THOU lovest me, Simon 
Peter, feed My lambs, feed 

My sheep. Ps. 29, 4. I will ex- 
tol Thee, O Lord, for Thou hast 
upheld me: and hast not made 
my enemies to rejoice over 

me. Y. Glory. 

Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


1 piticis me, Simon Petre, 

pasce agnos meos, pasce 

oves meas. Ps. 29, 1. Exaltábo 

te, Dómine, quóniam susce- 

písti me, nec delectásti ini- 

mícos meos super me. V. Gló- 
ria Patri. 


Prayer 


GOD, Who hast conferred 
the rewards of everlasting 
happiness upon the soul of 
Thy servant Gregory, merci- 
fuly grant that we, who are 
oppressed by the burden of our 
sins, may be relieved by his 
prayers to Thee. Through our 
Lord. 
Commemoration of the Feria. 


EUS, qui anime famuli 

tui Gregórii etérne be- 
atitüdinis premia contulisti, 
concéde propítius; ut, qui pec- 
catórum nostrórum póndera 
prémimur, ejus apud te préci- 
bus sublevémur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Epistle from the Mass Si diligis me, page 1302. 
Gradual. Ps. 106, 32, 31 


Let them exalt him in the 
Church of the people: and 
praise him in the chair of the 
ancients. Y. Let the mercies of 
the Lord give glory to him, and 
his wonderful works to the 
children of men. 


Tract. Ps. 
I have declared Thy justice 


Exáltent eum in Ecclésia 
plebis: et in cáthedra senió- 
rum laudent eum. Y. Con- 
fiteántur Dómino misericór- 
die ejus; et mirabília ejus 
filiis hóminum. 


39, 10-11 
Annuntiávi justítiam tuam 


in a great Church, lo, I will not in ecclésia magna, ecce labia 
restrain my lips: O Lord Thou mea non prohibébo: Dómine, 
knowest it. Y. I have not hid tu scisti. Y. Justitiam tuam 
Thy justice within my heart. E non abscóndi in corde meo: 
have declared Thy truth and veritátem tuam et salutáre 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MARCH 12—ST. GREGORY THE GREAT 


tuum dixi Y; Non abscóndi 
misericórdiam tuam, et ve- 
ritátem tuam a  concílio 
multo. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


943 


Thy salvation. Y. I have not 
concealed Thy mercy and Thy 
iruth from a great council. 


. Gospel from the Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Jerem. 1, 9-10 


Ecce dedi verba mea in ore 
tuo: ecce constitui te super 
gentes et super regna, ut 
evéllas et déstruas, et edifices 
et plantes. 


Offertoty Prayers, page 767. 


Bebold I have given my 
words in thy mouth; lo, I have 
set thee this day over the na- 
tions, and over the kingdoms, 
to waste and to destroy, and to 
build and to plant, 


Secret 


NNUE nobis, quesumus 

Démine: ut interces- 
sióne beáti Gregórii hac nobis 
prosit oblátio quam immo- 
lándo totíus mundi tribuísti 
relaxdri delícta. Per Dómi- 
num, 


Commemoration of the Feria. 
Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. 


Tu es Petrus, et super hanc 
petram edificabo Ecclésiam 
meam. 


UFFER, We beseech Thee, Q 

Lord, that through the 
intercession of blessed Gregory 
this oblation may profit us; 
for by its offering Thou hast 
granted that the sins of all the 
world should be pardoned 
Through our Lord, 


Matth. 16-18 


Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I wil build My 
Church. 


Postcommunion 


xus, qui beátum Gregé- 

rium Pontificem San- 
ctorum tuórum méritis coe- 
quásti: concéde propítius; ut, 
festa percólimus vite quoque 
2 qui commemoratiónis ejus 
imitémur exémpla. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Commemoration of the Feria. 


cop, Who didst make Thy 

bishop Gregory equal 
with the saints in merit, favor- 
ably grant that we, who faith- 
fully keep the feast of his 
commemoration, may also imi- 
tate the examples set by his 
life, Through our Lord, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. The Last Gospel of the Feria. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


844 


MARCH 18—ST. CYRIL OP JERUSALEM 


March 17—t. Patrick, Bishop, Confessor (White): 
: Double 
Mass, Statuit ei, page 1337, except: 


Prayer 


Gop, Who didst deign ta 
send blessed Patrick, Thy 
confessor and bishop to preach 
Thy glory to the nations, grant, 
through his merits and inter- 
cession, that those commands 
which Thou dost set before us 
we may by Thy mercy be able 
to fulfil. Through our Lord. 
Commemoration of the Feria 


EUS, qui ad predicán- 

dum géntibus glóriam 
iuam beátum Patrícium Con- 
fessórem - atque Pontificem, 
míttere dignátus es; ejus mé- 
ritis et intercessióne concéde; 
ut, que nobis agénda preci- 
pis, te miseránte adimplére 
possímus. Per Dóminum. 
and its Gospel at the end. 


March 18—$5t. (Cyril of Jerusalem, Bishop, Confessor, 
Doctor of the Church (White) 


Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 
O almighty God, through 
the intercession of the blessed 
Bishop Cyril, so to know Thee, 
the only true God, and Jesus 
Christ, Whom Thou hast sent, 
that we may deserve to be num- 
bered forever among the sheep 
that hear His voice. Through 
the same, 
` Commemoration of the Feria. 


A nobis qusesumus, .om- 

nipotens Deus, beáto 
Cyrillo Pontifice intercedén- 
te: te solum verum Deum, et 
quem misisti Jesum Christum 
ita cognóscere; ut inter oves, 
qua vocem ejus áudiunt, per- 
pétuo connumerári mered- 
mur. Per eümdem Dóminum. 


Lesson, "The just man will give," page 1348. 
Gospel as on the feast of St. Athanasius, page 1007. 


Secret 


ook down with favor, O 

Lord, upon ihe immacu- 
late victim which we offer to 
Thee, and grant that, by the 
merits of the blessed. bishop 
&nd confessor, Cyril, we may 
earnestly endeavor to receive 
it with a pure heart. Through 
our Lord. 


Gommemoration of the Feria. 


ÉsPICE, Dómine, immac- 

ulatam hóstiam, quam 

tibi offérimus: et presta; ut 

méritis beáti Pontíficis et 

Confessóris tui Cyrilli eam 

undo corde suscípere stude- 
ámus. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MARCH 18—ST. CYRIL OP JERUSALEM 945 


Postcommunion 
ACRAMENTA . COrporis - et AY the sacrament of Thy 
sánguinis tui, que sümp- body &nd blood, O Lord 


simus, Dómine Jesu Christe, Jesus Christ, which we have re- 

beáti Cyrílli Pontificis préci-.ceived, by the prayers of the 

bus, mentes et corde nostra blessed Bishop Cyril, sanctify 

sanctificent: ut divine con- our minds and hearts, that we 

sértes natüre éffici mereá- may deserve to become par- 

mur: Qui vivis. takers of the divine nature, 
. Who livest. 


Commemoration of the Feria and its Gospel at the end. 


‘oy 4 
SOTO JOSEPH) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


946 MARCH 19—-ST. JOSEPH 


BLESSED IS THE MAN THAT FEARETH THE LORD; HE SHALL DELIGRY 
EXCEEDINGLY IN His COMMANDMENTS. HIS SEED SHALL BE MIGHTy 
UPON EARTH; THE GENERATION OF THE RIGHTEOUS SHALL Bg 
BLESSED. GLORY AND WEALTH SHALL BE IN HIS HOUSE; AND Hig 
JUSTICE REMAINETH FOR EVER AND EVER. (Ps. 111.) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MARCH 19—ST. JOSEPH 


947 


March 19—St. Yoseph, Spouse of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary, Confessor (White) 
Double of the First Class 


1j the feast of St. Joseph 
brated on the following j^ 


onday. 


falls on. Passion Sunday, it is cele- 


If it falis in Holy Week, it is 


celebrated on the Wednesday after Low Sunday. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit., 


ustus ut palma florébit: 

Sicut cedrus Libani multi- 
plicábitur: plantátus in domo 
Dómini, in átriis domus Dei 
nostri. (T. P. Allelüja, alle- 
laja.) Ps. 91, 2. Bonum est 
confitéri Dómino: et psállere 
nómini tuo, Altissime. Y. Gló- 
ria Patri. 


Ps. 91, 13, 14- 


He just man shall flourish 

like the palm-tree; he 

shall grow up like the cedar of 

Libanus; planted in the house 

of the Lord, in the courts of the 

house of our God. (P. T. Alle- 

luia, alleluia. Ps. 91, 2. It is 

good to give praise to the Lord; 

and to sing to Thy name, O 
Most High. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ANCTÍSSIME Genitricis tue 
S Sponsi, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, méritis adjuvémur: ut, 
quod possibílitas nostra non 
Óbtinet, ejus nobis interces- 
siéne donétur: Qui vivis. 


AY we be assisted, we beg 
b Thee, O Lord, by the 
merits of the spouse of Thy 
most holy Mother, that what 
our own power obtaineth not 
may be granted us by his inter- 
cession. Who livest. 


In Lent commemoration of the Feria. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 45, 1-6 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiz. 


ILEcTus Deo et homini- 
D bus, cujus memória in 
jenedictióne est. Similem il- 
lum fecit in glória sanctórum, 
et magnificávit eum in timóre 
inimicórum, et in verbis suis 
monstra placávit. Glorificavit 
illum in conspéctu regum, et 
jussit ii coram pópulo suo, 
et osténdit illi glóriam suam. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


E WAS beloved of God and 
men, whose memory is 

in benediction; He made him 
like. the saints in glory, and 
magnified him in the fear of 
his enemies; and with his words 
he made prodigies to cease; He 
glorified him in the sight of 
kings, and gave him command- 
ments in the sight of his people, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


948 MARCH 19—ST. JOSEPH 


&nd showed him his glory; He 
sanctified him in his faith and 
meekness, and chose him out 
of all flesh; for He heard him 
&nd his voice, and brought him 
into a cloud; and He gave him 
commandments before his face, 
and a law of life and instruc- 
tion. 


In fide, et lenitáte ipsíus, 
sanctum fecit illum, et elégit 
eum ex omni carne. Audivit 
enim eum, et vocem ipsíus, et 
indüxit illum in nubem. Et 
dedit illi coram precépta, et 
legem vite et disciplina, 


In Paschal- time, in place of the Gradual and Tract, is said 


or sung the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 20, 4, 5 


O Lord, Thou hast prevented 
him with blessings of sweet- 
ness: Thou hast set on his head 
a crown of precious stones. Y. 
He asked life of Thee and Thou 
hast given him length of days 
for ever and ever. 


Tract. Ps. 


Blessed is the man that fear- 
eth the Lord: he shall delight 
exceedingly in His command- 
ments. Y. His seed shall be 
mighty upon earth: the gener- 
ation of the righteous shall be 
blessed. Y. Glory and wealth 
Shall be in his house: and his 
justice remaineth for ever and 
ever. 


Dómine, prevenisti eum in 
benedictionibus ^ dulcédinis: 
posuísti in cápite ejus coró- 
nam de lápide pretióso. Y. Vi- 
tam pétiit a te, et tribuisti ei 
longitüdinem diérum in secu- 
lum seculi. 


111, 1, 3 


Beátus vir, qui timet Dómi- 
num: in mandátis ejus cupit 
nimis, Y. Potens in terra erit 
semen ejus: generátio rectó- 
rum benedicétur. Y. Glória et 
divitie in domo ejus: et ju- 
stitia ejus manet in seculum 
sseculi. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ecclus. 
45, 9. The Lord loved him, and 
adorned him: He clothed him 
with a robe of glory. Alleluia. 
X. Osee 14, 6. The just shall 
spring as the lily: and shall 
flourish for ever before the 
Lord. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ecclus 
45, 9. Amávit eum Dóminus, 
et ornávit eum: stolam glórie 
induit eum. Allelüja. V. Osee 
14, 6. Justus gérminábit sicut 
Ilium: et florébit in etérnum 
ante Dóminum. Allelája. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


p — 


MARCH 19—ST. JOSEPH 


949 


Gospel. Matt. 1, 18-21 


MH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 


um esset desponsáta ma- 

ter Jesu Maria Joseph, 
Antequam  convenírent, in- 
vénta est in utero habens de 
Spiritu sancto. Joseph autem 
vir ejus, cum esset justus, et 
nolet eam tradücere, vóluit 
occtilte dimíttere eam. Hec 
autem eo cogitánte, ecce An- 
gelus Dómini appáruit in 
somnis ei, dicens: Joseph, fífli 
David, noli timére accípere 
Maríam  cónjugem tuam: 
quod enim in ea natum est, 
de Spíritu sancto est. Páriet 
autem fílium et vocabitis no- 
men ejus Jesum: ipse enim 
Salvum fáciet pópulum suum 
a peccátis eórum. 


Creed, page 765. 


- Offertory. 


Véritas mea, et misericórdia 
mea cum ipso: et in nómine 
meo exaltábitur cornu ejus. 
(T. P, Allelája.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. "n 

HEN Mary, the mother of 
N Jesus, was espoused to 
Joseph, before they: came to- 
gether, she was found with 
child, of the Holy Ghost. 
Whereupon Joseph her hus- 
band, being a just.man, and not 
willing publicly to expose her, 
was minded to put her away 
privately. But while he thought 
on these things, behold the 
angel of the Lord appeared to 
him in his sleep, saying: Jos- 
eph, son of David, fear not to 
take unto thee Mary thy wife, 
for that which is conceived in 
her is of the Holy Ghost. And 
she shall bring forth a son; and 
thou shalt call His name Jesus. 
For He shall save His people 
from their sins. 


Ps. 88, 25 


My truth and My mercy are 
with him: and in My name his 
horn shall be exalted. (P.T. 
Alleluia.) 


Secret 


ÉBITUM tibi, Dómine, no- 
stre réddimus servitü- 
tis, suppliciter exorántes: ut, 
suffragiis beáti Joseph, Sponsi 
Genitricis Fílii tui Jesu 
Christi Démini nostri, in no- 
bis tua münera tueáris, ob 
cujus venerándam festivitá- 
tem laudis tibi hóstias immo- 
Aàmus. Per eümdem Démi- 
num. 


E RENDER unto Thee, O 

Lord, the debt of our 
service, and humbly entreat 
Thee to guard Thy gifts within 
us, through the intercession of 
blessed Joseph, the spouse of 
the motber of Thy Son, Jesus 
Christ, Our Lord, in honor of 
whose feast we offer unto 'Thee 
this sacrifice of praise. Through 
the same. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


950 MARCH 24—8ST. GABRIEL 


In Lent Commemoration of the Feria. 
Preface No. 12, page 815. 


Communion. Matt. 1, 20 
Joseph, son of David, fear Joseph fili David, noli ti- 
not to take unto thee Mary thy mére accípere Mariam cón- 
wife: for that which is born in jugem tuam: quod enim in ea 
her is of the Holy Ghost. (P.T. natum est, de Spiritu sancto 


Alleluia.) 


est. (T. P. Alleliuja.) 


Postcommunion 


E WITH us, we beg, O mer- 

ciful God, and being pro- 

pitiated by the intercession of 

blessed Joseph, Thy confessor, 

watch over the gifts with 

which Thou hast surrounded 
us. Through our Lord. 


DESTO nobis, quesumus, 
miséricors Deus: et, 
tercedénte pro nobis beáto 
Joseph Confessóre, tua circa 
nos propitiátus dona custódi. 
Per Dóminum. 


In Lent Commemoration of the Feria. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


In Lent the Last Gospel of the Feria. 


March 21—t. Benedict, Abbot (White) 


‘Double Major 
Mass, Os justi meditábitur, page 1356. 
Commemoration of the Feria, and its Gospel at the end. 


March 24—85t. Gabriel, Archangel (White) 
Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 
LESS the Lord, all ye His 
B angels: you that are 
mighty in strength, and exe- 
cute His word, harkening to the 
voice of His orders. Ps. 102, 1. 
Bless the Lord, O my soul: and 
let all that is within me bless 
His holy name. Y. Glory. 


Ps. 102, 20 


EeNEDÍCITE Dóminum, 
omnes Angeli ejus: po- 
téntes virtüte, qui fácitis ver- 
bum ejus, ad audiéndam vo- 
cem sermónum ejus. Ps. 102, 1. 
Bénedic ánima mea, Dómino: 
et ómnia, que intra me sunt, 
nómini sancto ejus. Y. Glória. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


O Gop, Who in preference to 
any other of Thine angels 
didst elect Gabriel the arch- 


Eus qui inter cétefos 
Angelos, ad annuntión- 
dum Incarnatiónis tue mysté- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MARCH 24—ST GABRIEL 951 
rium Gabriélem Archángelum angel to announce the mystery 
elegisti: concéde propítius; ut of Thine incarnation, be 
qui festum ejus celebrámus pleased to grant that we who 
in terris, ipsíus patrocinium keep his feast on earth may ex- 
sentiámus in celis, Qui vivis. perience his patronage in 

heaven, Who livest. . 


Commemoration of the Feria. 


Lesson. 
Léctio Daniélis Prophéte. 


yN viéeus. ills: Ecce vir 
Gabriel, quem videram in 
visióne a princípio, cito volans 
tétigit me in témpore sacri- 
fícii vespertíni. Et décuit me, 
et locütus est mihi, dixitque: 
Dániel, nunc egréssus sum ut 
docérem te, et intellígeres. Ab 
exórdio precum tuárum egrés- 
sus est sermo: ego autem veni 
ut indicárem tibi, quia vir de- 
sideri6rum es: tu ergo anim- 
advérte sermónem, et intéllige 
visiónem. Septuaginta heb- 
dómades abbreviáte sunt su- 
per pópulum tuum, et super 
urbem sanctam tuam ut con- 
summétur prevaricatio, et 
finem accípiat peccátum, et 
deleáiur iníquitas, et adducá- 
tur justítia sempitérna, et im- 
pleátur vísio, et prophetía et 
ungátur Sanctus sanctórum. 
Scito ergo, et animadvérte: 
Ab éxitu sermónis, ut fterum 
edificétur Jerusalem usque 
ad Christum ducem, hebdó- 
mades septem et hebdómades 
sexaginta due erunt: et rur- 


sum edificdbitur platéa et 


muri in angüstia témporum. 
Et post hebdómades sexaginta 
duas occidétur Christus: et 
non erit ejus pópulus, qui eum 
Negatirus est. Et civitátem 
et sanctuárium dissipábit pó- 


Dan. 9, 21-26 


Lesson from Daniel the 
Prophet. 
N THOSE days, behold the 
man Gabriel, whom I had 
seen in the vision at the be- 
ginning, flying swiftly, touched 
me at the time of the evening 
sacrifice. And he instructed me, 
and spoke to me and said: O 
Daniel, I am now come forth 
to teach thee, and that thou 
mightest understand. From the 
beginning of thy prayers the 
word came forth: and I am 
come to show it to thee, because 
thou art a man of desires, 
therefore do thou mark the 
word and understand the vision. 
Seventy weeks are shortened 
upon thy people and upon thy 
holy. city, that transgression 
may be finished, and sin may 
have an end, and iniquity may 
be abolished; and everlast- 
ing justice may be brought; 
and vision and prophecy may 
be fulfilled; and the Saint 
of saints may be anointed. 
Know thou therefore and 
take notice that from the go- 
ing forth of the word to 
build up Jerusalem again, unto 
Christ the prince, there shall 
be seven weeks, and sixty-two 
weeks: and the street shall be 
built again, and the walls in 
troublesome times. And after 
sixty-two weeks Christ shall be 


http://ccwatershed.org 


802 


slain: and the people that shall 
deny Him shall not be His. 
And a people with their leader- 
that shall come, shall destroy 


MARCH 24—ST. GABRIEL 


pulus cum duce ventüro: et 
finis ejus vástitas et post 
finem belli statüta desolátio. 


the city and the sanctuary: and the end thereof shall be 
waste, and after the end of the war the appointed desolation. 


In votive Masses in Paschal-time Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 102, 20, 1 


Bless the Lord, all ye His 
angels: you that are mighty in 
strength, and execute His word. 
V. Bless the Lord, O my soul, 
and let al that is within me 
praise His holy name. 


Benedícite Dóminum, om- 
nes Angeli ejus, poténtes vir- 
tüte, qui fácitis verbum ejus. 
y. Bénedic, ánima mea, Dó- 
minum, et ómnia interióra 
mea nomen sanctum ejus. 


In Votive Masses before Septuagesima and after Pentecost 
the Tract is replaced by the Lesser Alleluia. 


Tract. Luke 1, 


Hail, Mary, full of grace, the 
Lord is with thee. Y. Blessed art 
thou among women, and blessed 
is the fruit of thy womb. Y. Be- 
hold, thou shalt conceive and 
bring forth a son, and thou 
shalt call His name Emmanuel. 
X. The Holy Ghost shall come 
upon thee, and the power of 
the Most High shall overshadow 
thee; Y. And therefore also the 
Holy which shall be born of 
thee shall be called the Son of 
God. 


28, 42, 31, 35 


Ave, María, grátia plena: 
Dóminus tecum. Y. Benedicta 
tu in muliéribus: et benedic- 
tus fructus ventris tui. Y. Ecce 
concípies, et páries Fílium, et 
vocábis nomen ejus Emmá- 
nuel. Y. Spíritus Sanctus su- 
pervéniet in te, et virtus Altís- 
simi obumbrábit tibi. V. Ideó- 
que et quod nascétur ex te 
Sanctum, vocábitur Fílius 


Dei. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 102, 
21. Bless the Lord, all ye His 
hosts: you ministers of His that 
do His will. Alleluia. 


' Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 102, 
21. Benedícite Dómino, omnes 
virtütes ejus: ministri ejus, 
qui fácitis voluntátem ejus. 
Allelüja. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 103, 
4. Who maketh His angels 
Spirits, and His ministers a 
fiame of fire. Alleluia. Y. Luke 
1, 28. Hail, Mary, full of grace, 


Spiritus: 


Allelüje, allelüja. Y. Ps. 
103,4. Qui facit Angelos suos 
et minístros suos 
flammam ignis. Allelüja. y. 
Luc. 1, 28. Ave, Maria, grátia 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MARCH 24—ST. GABRIEL 953 


F 
./ plena: Dóminus tecum: bene- the Lord is with thee; blessed 
dicta tu in muliéribus. Alle- art thou among women. Alle- 
lája. luia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 

Gospel, The angel Gabriel, page 1227. 


Creed, page 765. 


i 


Offertory. 
. Stetit Angelus juxta aram 
templi, habens thuríbulum 
áureum in manu sua, et 
data suntei incénsa multa: et 


Apoc. 8, 3 

An angel stood near the altar 
of the temple, having & golden 
censer in his hand: and there 
‘was given to him much in- 


‘ascéndit fumus arómatum in -cense: and the smoke of the 
conspéctu Dei, allelija. perfumes ascended before God, 
alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


$ ecret 


€ I fiat in con- AY the. offering of our 
spéctu tuo, Dómine, | , homage find acceptance 
, nostra servitütis munus et in Thy sight, O Lord, and the 

beáti Archángeli Gabriélis prayer of the blessed arch- 
Orátio: ut qui a nobis venerá- angel Gabriel; that he, to whom 
tur in terris, sit apud te pro we pay homage on earth, may 
nobis' advocátus in colis. Per be our advocate in heaven. 
Dóminum. - 'Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the Feria. 
Preface fót-Weekdays, page 775. 


. Communion 


Benedicite, omnes Angeli All ye angels of the Lord, 
- Dómini, Dómino: hymnum bless the Lord: sing a hymn, 
dícite, et superexaltáte eumin and exalt Him above all for- 
secula. ever. 


Postcommunion 


ÓnPonIs tui et Sánguinis avine received the mys- 
sumptis mystériis, tuam, teries of Thy body and 
Dómine Deus noster, depre- blood; O God our Lord, we pray 
cámur cleméntiam: ut sicut Thy clemency, that, as we 
Gabriéle nuntiante Incarna- have known of Thine incarna- 
tiónem tuam cognóvimus, ita tion by the message of Gabriel, 
ipso adjuvánte, Incarnatiónis so by his help we may obtain 
ejúsdem benefícia consequá- the benefits of the same incar- 
mur. Qui vivis. nation. Who livest. 
É Commemoration of the Feria. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. Gospel of the Feria at end. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


954 MARCH 25—THE ANNUNCIATION x 


Copyright by Benziger Brothers - 


Har, Mary, FULL OF GRACE, THE LORD IS WITH THEE, BLESSED 
ART THOU AMONG WOMEN, AND BLESSED IS THE FRUIT OP THY WOMB. 
BEHOLD, THOU SHALT CONCEIVE AND BRING FORTH A SON, AND THOU 
SHALT CALL HIS NAME EMMANUEL. THE HOLY GHOST SHALL COME 
UPON. THEE, AND THE POWER OF THE Most HIGH SHALL OVERSHADOW 
THEE, AND THEREFORE ALSO THE HOLY WHICH SHALL BE BORN OF 
THEE SHALL BE CALLED THE Son OF Gop. (Luke 1.) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MARCH 27—8T. JOHN DAMASCENE 


meos. Y. Proptérea confitébor 
in natiónibus, Dómine, et nó- 
mini tuo psalmum dicam. 


Allelája, allehija. Y. 1 Reg. 

25, 26, 28. Dóminus salvávit 
| manum tuam tibi: quia przlia 
Dómini tu przliáris. Allelija. 
Yy. Ps. 143, 1. Benedictus Dó- 
minus Deus meus, qui docet 
manus meas ad prelium, et 
dígitos meos ad bellum. Al- 
lelija. 


Gradual. 


Deus, qui precínxit me 

Virtüte: et pósuit immaculá- 

tam viam meam. ¥. Qui do- 

r cet manus meas ad prelium: 
et posuísti, ut arcum areum, 
brachia mea. 

Allehija, allelüja. Y. Dedisti 
mihi  protectiónem ^salütis 
tue: et déxtera tua suscépit 
me, Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


961 


shall fall under my feet. V. 
Therefore wil I give glory to 
Thee, O Lord, among the na- 
tions, and I will sing a psalm 
to Thy name. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. 1 Kings 
25, 26, 28. The Lord hath saved 
ihy hand to thee: because thou 
fightest the battles of the Lord. 
Alleluia. Y. Ps. 143, 1. Blessed 
be the Lord my God, Who 
teacheth my hands to fight, 
and my fingers to war. Alleluia. 


Ps. 17, 33 


God, Who hath girt me with 
strength: and made my way 
blameless. Y. Who teacheth my 
hands to war: and hast made 
my arms like a brazen bow. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 58. 
Thou hast given me the pro- 
tection of Thy salvation: and 
Thy right hand hath held me 
up. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 6, 6-11 


4H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 


I; ILLO témpore: Factum 
est in álio sábbato, ut in- 
d tráret Jesus in synagógam, et 
docéret. Et erat ibi homo, et 
manus ejus déxtera erat árida. 
Observábant autem scribe et 
pharisæi. si in sábbato curá- 
ret: ut invenirent unde accu- 
Sárent eum. Ipse vero sciébat 
cogitatiónes eórum: Et ait 
hómini, qui habébat manum 
aridam: Surge, et sta in mé- 


9$ Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
* THAT time: It came to 
; pass also on another 
sabbath, that Jesus entered 
into the synagogue, and taught. 
And there was-a man, whose 
right hand was withered. And 
the scribes and pharisees 
watched if He would heal on 
the sabbath; that they might 
find an accusation against 
Him. But He knew their 
thoughts; and said to the man 


http://ccwatershed.org 


962 


who had the withered hand: 
Arise, and stand forth in the 
midst. And rising he stood 
forth. Then Jesus said to them: 
I ask you, if it be lawful on the 
sabbath-days to do good or to 
do evil; to save life, or to de- 
Stroy? And looking round about 
on them all He said to the 
nian: Stretch forth thy hand. 
And he stretched it forth; and 
his hand was restored. And 
they were filled with madness; 


MARCH 27—ST. JOHN DAMASCENE 


dium. Et surgens stetlt. Ait 
autem ad illos Jesus: Intér- 
rogo vos si licet sábbatis bene- 
fácere, an male: ánimam 
salvam fácere, an pérdere? 
Et circumspéctis ómnibus di- 
xit hómini: Exténde manum 
tuam. Et exténdit: et resti- 
túta est manus ejüs. Ipsi au- 
tem repléti sunt insipiéntia, 
et colloquebántur' ad invicem, 
quidnam fácerent Jesu. 


and they talked one with another, what they might do to 


Jesus. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Job. 14, 7 


A tree hath hope: if it be cut, 
it groweth green again, and the 
boughs thereof sprout. 


- Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


cisum füerit, rursum viréscit; 


Lignum habet spem, si præ- ” 
et rami ejus püllulant. A 


Secret 


HAT the gifts we offer Thee, 

O Lord, may be worthy in 

Thy sight, let the loving inter- 

cession of blessed John be 

joined with that of Thy saints, 

whose visible forms we, by his 

doing, venerate in our churches. 
Through our Lord. 


T, QUÆ tibi, Dómine, of- 

férimus, dona tuo sint, 
digna conspéctu: beati Jo- 
ánnis et Sanctórum, quos 
ópera expósitos in templis 
cólimus, pia suffragatio con- 
spiret. Per Dóminum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


The arms of the wicked shall 
be broken in pieces, but the 
Lord strengtheneth the just. 


Ps. 36, 17 


Bráchia peccatórum con- 
teréntur, confirmat autem 
justos Déminus. 


Postcommunion 


Dr the gifts we have re- 
ceived, O Lord, we be- 


seech Thee, guard us with their 


UMPTA nos, quesumus 
Dómine, dona celéstibus 
armis tueántur: et beáti Jo- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MARCH 28—ST. 


ánnis patrocinia cireümdent 
Sanetórum unánimi suffrágio 
cumuléta; quorum imagines 
evicit in Ecclésia esse vene- 
rándas. Per Dóminum. 


JOHN CAPISTRAN 963 
heavenly weapons, and the 
patronage.of blessed John com- 
pass us about, reinforced by the 
united prayers of the saints, the 
veneration of whose images by 
Thy Church he vindicated. 
Through our Lord. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. i 


In Lent the Last Gospel of the Feria. 


March 28—$9t. Jobn «Cápistram, Confessor (White) 


Semi-double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. ' 


Introit. 


Go autem in Dómino gau- 

débo et exsultábo in Deo 

Jesu meo: Deus Dóminus for- 

titüdo mea. Ps. 80, 2. Exsul- 

táte Deo adjutóri nostro, jubi- 

late Deo Jacob. Y. Gloria 
Patri. 


Hab. 3, 18, 19 


WILL rejoice in the Lord: 

and I will joy in God my 
Jesus: the Lord God is my 
strength. Ps. 80, 2. Rejoice to 
God our helper: sing aloud to 
the God of Jacob. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762, 


Prayer 


.EUS, qui per beátum Jo- 
annem fidélis tuos in 
virtüte sanctissimi nóminis 
Jesu de crucis inimícis trium- 
pháre fecísti: presta, quesu- 
mus; ut, spiritualium hóstium, 
ejus intercessióne,  superátis 
insídiis, corónam justite a te 
accipere mereámur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


` gov, Who, through blessed 
John, didst make Thy 
faithful, in virtue of the most 
holy name of Jesus, to triumph 
over the enemies of the cross; 
grant, we beseech Thee, that 
overcoming by his intercession 
the snares of our spiritual ene- 
mies, we may deserve to receive 
from Thee & crown of justice. 
Through our Lord. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


Lesson. 
Léctio líbri Sapiéntiz. 


ustum deduxit Dóminus 
per vias rectas, et ostén- 
dit ill regnum Dei, et de- 
dit illi sciéntiam sanctórum: 


Wis. 10, 10-14 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. j 
HE Lord conducted the just 
through the right ways, 
and showed him the kingdom 
of God, and gave him the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


964 MARCH 28—ST. JOHN CAPISTRAN 


knowledge of the holy things; 
made him honorable in his 
labors, and accomplished his 
labors. In the deceit of them 
that overreached him, He stood 
by him, and made him honor- 
able. He kept him safe from his 
enemies, and defended bim 
from seducers, and gave him a 
strong conflict, that he might 
overcome, and know that wis- 
dom is mightier than all, She 
forsook not the just when he 
was sold, but delivered. him 
from sinners: she went down 
with him into the pit, and in 
bands she left him not. 


honestávit ilum in labóri- 
bus, et complévit labóres il- 
lius. In fraude circumven- 
iéntium illum áffuit illi: et 
honéstum fecit illum. Custo- 
divit illum ab inimicis, et a 
Seductóribus tutávit illum, et 
certámen, forte dedit illi, ut 
vínceret, et sciret, quóniam 
ómnium poténtior est sapién- 
tia. Hee vénditum justum non 
Gerelíquit, sed a peccatóribus 
liberávit eum: descenditque 
cum illo in fóveam et in vín- 
culis non derelíquit illum. 


‘In Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are replaced by the 
Greater Alleluia. Out of Paschal-time the Tract is replaced 
by the Lesser Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 21, 24, 25 


Ye that fear the Lord, praise — Qui timétis Dóminum, lau- 
Him: al ye seed of Jacob, dáte eum: univérsum semen 
glorify Him. Y. Let all the seed Jacob glorificáte eum. YF. 
Of Israel fear Him: because He Timeat eum omne semen Is- 
hath not slighted nor despised raél: quóniam non sprevit, 
the supplication of the poor neque despéxit deprecatiónem 
man. . páuperis. 


l Tract. Ex. 15, 2, 3 


The Lord is my strength and Feortitúdo mea, et laus mea 
my praise, and He is become Dóminus, et factus est mihi in 
salvation to me: He is my God, salútem: iste Deus meus, et 
and I will glorify Him. Y. The glorificábo eum. Y. Dóminus 
Lord is a man of war, Almighty quasi vir pugnátor, omnípo- 
is His name. V. Jud. 16, 3. The tens nomen ejus. Y. Jud. 16, 
Lord putteth an end to wars: 3. Dóminüs cónterens bella: 
the Lord is His name. Dóminus nomen est illi. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 58, Alleluja, alleluja. V. Ps. 58, 
17.But I willsing Thy strength: 17. Ego autem cantábo forti- 
and wil extol Thy mercy in tüdinem tuam: et exsultábo 
the morning. Alleluia. mane misericórdiam tuam. 

Allelü ja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MARCH 28—ST. JOHN CAPISTRAN 


965 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelitia, allelüja. V. Ps. 58, 
7, Ego autem .cantabo forti- 
idinem tuam: et exsultábo 
ane misericérdiam tuam. 
Nelija. Quia factus es sus- 
iptor meus, et refügiam 
eum in die tribulatiónis 
em. Allelüja. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia, Y. Ps. 58, 
17. But I wil sing Thy 
strength: and will extol Thy 
mercy in the morning. Alleluia. 
¥. For Thou art become my 
support and my refuge in the 
day of my trouble, Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 9, 1-6 


HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
lii secündum Lucam. 

"N ILLO témpore: Convocá- 
4 tis Jesus duódecim Após- 
lis, dedit ilis virtütem, et 
testátem super ómnia 
mónia, et ut languéres cu- 
rent. Et misit illos predicare 
mum Dei, et sanáre infír- 
js. Et. ait ad illos: Nihil tu- 
itis in. via meque virgam, 
que. perám, neque panem, 
que pecüniam, neque duas, 
licas habeátis. Et in quam- 
mque, domum intravéritis, 
manéte, et inde ne exeátis. 
quicümque non recéperint 
x exeüntes de civitáte illa. 
am pülverem pedem ves- 
rum excutite in testimó- 
ım supra illos. Egréssi au- 
1 circuíbant per castélla, 
ngelizántes, et curántes 
que. 


“44 Continuation. of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, Jesus call- 
ing together the twelve 
apostles, gave them power and 
authority over all devils, and 
to cure diseases. And He sent 
them to preach the kingdom of 
God, and to heal the sick. And 
He said to them, Take nothing 
for your journey, neither staff, 
nor scrip, nor bread, nor 
money: neither have two coats: 
and whatsoever house you shall 
enter into, abide there, and de- 
part not from thence. And who- 
Soever will not receive you, 
when ye go out of that city, 
Shake off even the dust of your 
feet for a testimony against 
them, And góing out, they went 
about through the towns; 
preaching the gospel; and heal- 
ing everywhere. 


Offertory. Ecclus. 46, 6 


nvocávit Altíssimum po- 
tem in oppugnándo inimí- 
ündique, et audivit illum 
znus et Sanctüs Deus, 


Mfertory Prayers, page 767. 


He called upon the most high 
Sovereign when the enemies 
assaulted him on every side, 
and the great and holy God 
heard him. 


Secret 


f aoRtefCIOM, Dómine, quod 
) immolámus, placátus in- 


E APPEASED, O Lord, and 
look upon the sacrifice 


http://ccwatershed.org 


966 


which we offer, that, by the 
intercession of blessed John, 
Thy confessor, it may establish 
us in the Security of Thy pro- 
tection until we tread under 
foot the snares of our enemies. 
Through our Lord... 


SEVEN DOLORS OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN 


ténde: ut, intercedénte beáto 
Joanne Confessóre tuo, ad 
conteréndas inimicérum in- 
sidias nos in tue protectiónis 
securitáte constítuat. Per Dó- 
minum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria, 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


They sung to Thy holy name, 
O Lord, and praised Thy vic- 
torious hand. 


Wis. 10, 20 


Decantavérunt, Domine, 
nomen sanctum tuum, et vic- 
tricem manum tuam lauda- 
vérunt. 


Postcommunion 


ILLED With heavenly food 

and refreshed with the 
spiritual cup, we beseech Thee, 
O almighty God, that by the 
intercession of blessed John, 
Thy confessor, Thou defend us 
against the malice of the enemy 
and keep continual peace in 
Thy Church. Through our Lord. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. i 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. In Lent the Last Gospel of the Feria. 


EPLÉTI alimónią celésti 

et spirituáli póculo re- 
creáti, quæsumus, omnipo- 
tens Deus: ut intercedénte 
beáto Joánne Confessóre tuo, 
nos ab hoste maligno defén- 
das, et Ecclésiam tuam perpé- 
tua pace custódias. Per Dó- / 
minum. 


Friday in Passion Week 
Feast of the Heben 3Dolors of the Blessed Virgin 
flatp (White) 
Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. John 19, 25 


HERE Stood by the cross of 

Jesus, His mother, and 
His mother’s sister Mary of 
Cleophas, and Salome, and 
Mary Magdalen. Y. Woman, 
behold thy son, said Jesus; to 
the disciple, however, Behold 
thy mother. Y. Glory. 


mater ejus, et soror ma- 

is ejus Maria Cléophe, et 

Salóme, et Maria Magdaléne. 

Y. Mülier, ecce fílius tuus: 

dixit Jesus; ad discípulum au- 

tem: Ecce mater tua. Y. Gló- 
ria Patri. 


Su juxta crucem Jesu 
T 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEVEN DOLORS OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN 


967 


Prayer 


EUS, in cujus passióne, 

secandum Simeónis 
prophetíam, dulcíssimam áni- 
mam glorióse Vírginis et Ma- 
tris Marie dolóris gládius per- 
transívit: concéde propítius; 
ut, qui transfixiónem ejus et 
passiónem venerándo recóli- 
mus, gloriósus méritis et pré- 
cibus ómnium  Sanctórum 
cruci fidéliter astántium in- 
tercedéntibus, passiónis tue 
efféctum felicem consequa- 
mur: Qui vivis. 


GOD, in Whose passion the 

sword, according to the 
prophecy of blessed Simeon, 
pierced through the soul of 
Mary, the glorious virgin and 
mother, mercifully grant that 
we, who reverently commemo- 
rate her piercing through and 
her suffering, may, by the in- 
terceding glorious merits of all 
ihe saints faithfully standing 
by the cross, obtain the happy 
fruit of Thy passion. Who 
livest. 


Commemoration of the Feria in Low Masses. 


In Votive Masses of the Seven Dolors the Prayer appointed in 
place of that given here is the one following it. 


Prayer 


ÓRDIBUS nostris, quesu- 
q mus, Dómine, grátiam 
tuam benignus infünde: ut 
peccáta nostra castigatióne 
voluntária cohibéntes, tem- 
poráliter pótius macerémur, 
quam suppliciis deputémur 
etérnis. Per Dóminum. 


F THY goodness pour Thy 

grace into our hearts, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, that, 
bridling our sinful appetites 
with voluntary discipline, we 
may suffer temporal mortifica- 
tions rather than be con- 
demned to eternal punish- 
ments. Through our Lord. 


Prayer 


NTERVÉNIAT pro nobis, 
quesumus, Dómine Jesu 
Christe: nunc, et in hora mor- 
tis nostre, apud tuam clemén- 
tiam beáta Virgo Maria Mater 
tua; cujus sacratissimam áni- 
mam in hora tu# pássionis 
doléris gládius pertransivit. 
Qui vivis. 


LorD Jesus Christ, we be- 

seech Thee that now and 
at the hour of our death the 
blessed Virgin, Thy Mother, 
whose most sacred soul the 
sword pierced in the hour of 
Thy passion, may intercede for 
us at the throne of Thy mercy. 
Who livest. 


Lesson. Judith 13, 22-25 


ENEDÍxIT te Dóminus in 
virtüte sua, quia per te 
&d níhilum redégit inimícos 


HE Lord hath blessed thee 
by His power, Who by 
thee hath brought our enemies 


http://ccwatershed.org 


963 SEVEN DOLORS OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN 


to nought. Blessed art thou, O 
daughter, by the Lord the most 
high God, above all women 
upon the earth. Blessed be the 
Lord Who made heaven and 
earth, because He hath so mag- 
nified thy name this day, that 
thy praise shall not depart out 
of the mouth of men, who shall 
be mindful of the power of the 
Lord forever; for that thou 
hast not spared thy life by rea- 
son of the distress and tribu- 
lation of thy people, but hast 
prevented our ruin in the pres- 
ence of our God. 


nostros. Benedicta es tu fília 
a Dómino Deo excélso, pre 
ómnibus muliéribus super ter- 
ram. Benedíctus Dómine, qui 
creávit calum et terram: 
quia hódie nomen tuum ita 
magnificávit, ub non recédat 
laus tua de ore hóminum, qui 
mémores füerini virtütis Dó- 
mini in etérnum, pro quibus 
non pepercisti dnime tue 
propter angustias et tribula- 
tiónem géneris tui, sed subve- 
nísti ruíne ante conspéctum 
Dei nostri. 


In Paschal-time the Gradual is replaced by the Greater Alle- 


luia, below. 


Gradual 


Sorrowful and tearful art 
ihou, O Virgin Mary, standing 
by the cross of the Lord Jesus, 
thy Son and Redeemer. Y. O 
Virgin Mother of God, He 
Whom tbe whole earth con- 
taineth not, the Author of life, 
made man, beareth this anguish 
of the cross. ` 


Dolorósa et lacrimábilis es, 
Virgo María, stans juxta cru- 
cem Dómini Jesu Fílii tui Re- 
demptóris. Y. Virgo Dei Géni- 
trix, quem totus non capit 
Orbis, hoc crucis fert suppli- 
cium, auctor vite factus 
homo. 


In votive Masses the Tract is replaced by the Lesser Alleluia. 


Tract 


Holy Mary, queen of heaven 
and mistress of the world, filled 
with sorrow, stood by the cross 
of Our Lord Jesus Christ. V. 
Lam. 1, 12. O all you that pass 
by the way, attend and see if 
there be any sorrow like to my 
Sorrow. 


Stabat sancta Maria, celi 
Regina, et mundi Dómina, 
juxta crucem Dómini nostri 
Jesu Christi dolorósa. JJ. 
Thren. 1,12. O vos omnes, qui 
transítis per viam, atténdite, 
et vidéte, si est dolor sicut 
dolor meus. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Holy 
Mary, queen of heaven and mis- 
tress of the world, stood, filled 
with sorrow, by the cross of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. Alleluia. 


Allelája, allelüája. Y. Stabat 
sancta María, cæli Regina, et 
mundi Domina, juxta Crucem 
Dómini nostri Jesu Christi 
dolorésa. Allelija. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


E 


f 


H 


í 


X 


SEVEN DOLORS OP THE BLESSED VIRGIN 


969 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelaja, allelija. Y. Stabat 
sancta María, celi Regina, et 
mundi Dómina, juxta Crucem 
Dómini nostri Jesu Christi 
dolorósa, Allelija. Y. Thren. 
1, 12. O vos omnes, qui transí- 
tis per viam, atténdite, et vi- 
déte, si est dolor sicut dolor 
meus. Allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Holy 
Mary, queen of heaven. and mis- 
iress of the world, stood, filled 
with sorrow, by the cross of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Alleluia. 
¥. Lam. 1, 12. O all you that 
pass by the way, attend and see 
if there be any sorrow like to 
my sorrow, Alleluia, 


The following Sequence is not said in Votive Masses: 


Sequence 


Stabat Mater dolorósa 
Juxta crucem lacrymósa, 
Dum pendébat Fílius. 


Cujus ánimam geméntem, 
Contristátam et doléntem, 
Pertransívit gládius. 


O quam tristis et afflícta, 
Fuit illa benedicta : 
Mater Unigéniti! 

Que merébat, et dolébat, 
Pia Mater, dum vidébat 
Nati penas inclyti. 


Quis est homo, qui non fleret, 


Matrem Christi si vidéret 
In tanto supplício? 


Quis non posset contristári, 


Chrísti Matrem contemplári 
Doléntem cum Filio? 


Next the cross in tears unceas- 
ing, 

‘Worn by sorrow aye increasing, 

Stood the Mother 'neath. her 
Son. 


"Through her soul already riven, 

Simeon's sword divinely driven, 

Edged with anguish, lo! hath 
run. 


Sad, afflicted as no other, 

Was that chosen blessed 
Mother, 

Having none but Christ begot. 


Faithful Mother! upward gaz- 
ing, 

Heart and hands to Son up- 
raising, 

Mourns and grieves His cruel 
lot. 


Hard the man his tears refrain- 
ing, 

Watching Mary uncomplaining, 

Bear & sorrow like to none. 


Hard the man that shares no 
SOITOW, 

With a Mother fain to borrow 

Every pang that writhes her 
Son. - 


http://ccwatershed.org 


970 


Tortured, scourged in expiation 

Of the sins that marred His 
Nation, 

Mary watched His every pang. 


She beheld her dear Begotten, 

Stretched in death by all for- 
gotten, 

As on hoisted rood He hang. ; 


Mother, fount of love, the pur- 
est, 

Floods of sorrow thou endurest, 

Turn them toward this heart of 
mine, 


With these waters purge its 
guileness, 

Burn with love its innate vile- 
ness, 

With the flames of love divine. 


Hallowed Mother, do this fa- 
vor, 

Those five wounds that gored 
my Saviour 

Deeply on my heart engrave. 


Pains thou gladly TM Him 
sharest, 

Anguish that thou bravely 
bearest, 

Fully share with me, I crave. 


Blend thy tears with mine in 
wailing, 

Sorrow for my sins prevailing, 

Till the break of endless dawn. 


Next the cross to take my sta- 
tion, 

By thy side in desolation, 

Thus, I long with thee to 
mourn. 


Maiden of all maidens fairest, 

Sate me with the grief thou 
bearest: 

Spurn me not, but be thou kind, 


SEVEN DOLORS OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN 


Pro peccátis sue gentis 
Vidit Jesum in torméntis, 


Et flagéllis sibditum, 
Vidit suum dulcem natum 


Moriéndo desolátum, 
Dum emísit spíritum. 


Eia Mater, fons amóris, 
Me sentíre, vim dolóris 
Fac ut técum lügeam. 
Fac, ut árdeat cor meum, 
In amando Christum Deum, 
Ut sibi compláceam. 
Sancta Mater, istud agas 
Crucitixi fige plagas 
Cordi meo válide. 

Tui nati vulneráti, 

Tam dignáti pro me pati, 
Penas mecum divide. 
Fac me tecum pie flere, 


Crucifíxo condolére, 
Donec ego víxero. 


Juxta Crucem tecum stare 
Et me tibi sociáre 

In planctu desídero. 

Virgo vírginum preclara, 
Mihi jam non sis amara: 


Fac me tecum plángere. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEVEN DOLORS OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN 


Fac, ut portem Christi mor- 
tem, 

Passiónis fac consórtem, 

Et plagas recólere. 


Fac me plagis vulnerári, 

Fac me Cruce inebriári, 

Et crüore Fílii, 

Flammis ne urar succénsus, 


Per te, Virgo, sim defénsus 
In die judícii. 


Christe, cum sit hinc exire, 


Da per Matrem me veníre 
Ad palmam victóriz. 


Quando corpus moriétur, 
Fac, ut anime donétur 


Paradisi glória. 
Amen. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


971 


Mine it be Christ’s throes in 
sharing, 

Mine it be His anguish bearing, 

These His wounds to keep in 
mind. 


May His scars my body carry. 

May His cross and blood not 
tarry 

Soul of mine to satiate! 


Thus inflamed with love con- 
suming, 

Shall I not thy aid presuming 

Safe the reck’ning day await? 


When in death my eyes are 
closing, 

Ope them, Lord, to see reposing 

Victory’s crown in Mary’s hand. 


When my frame by death is 


broken, 

And my doom by Thee is 
spoken, 

Be it, Lord, the better land. 


Amen. 


Gospel. John 19, 25-27 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secüóndum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Stabant 
juxta crucem Jesu mater 
ejus, et soror matris ejus, Ma- 
ria Cléophe, et María Magda- 
léne. Cum vidísset ergo Jesus 
matrem, et discípulum stan- 
tem, quem diligébat, dicit ma- 
tri sume: Muülier, ecce fílius 
tuus. Deinde dicit discípulo: 
Ecce mater tua. Et ex illa hora 
accépit eam discípulus in sua. 


Creed, page 765. 


H* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, there stood 

by the cross of Jesus, 
His mother, and His mother's 
sister Mary of Cleophas, and 
Mary Magdalen. When Jesus 
therefore had seen His mother 
and the disciple standing, 
whom He loved, He saith to His 
mother, Woman, behold thy 
son. After that He saith to the 
disciple, Behold, thy mother, 
And from that. hour the dis- 
ciple took her to his own. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


972 SEVEN DOLORS OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN 
Offertory 
Remember, O Virgin Mother ^ Recordáre, Virgo Mater Dei, 
of God, when thou standest in dum stéteris in conspéctu Dó- 
the presence of the Lord, that mini, ut loquáris pro nobis 
thou speak good things for us bona et ut avértat indigna- 


and turn His wrath from us. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


tiónem suam a nobis, 


Secret 
Qa OFFER Thee prayers and FFERIMUS tibi preces et 
sacrifices, O Lord Jesus hóstias, Dómine, Jesu 


Christ, humbly entreating that 
we, who commemorate in our 
prayers the piercing of the 
most dear soul of blessed Mary, 
Thy Mother, may, through the 
multiplied intercession of her 
and of her holy companions 
under the cross, by the merits 
of Thy death, receive our por- 
tion with the blessed. Who 
livest. 


Christe, humfliter suppli- 
cántes: ut, qui Transfixiónem 
dulcíssimi spíritus beate 
Marie Matris tue précibus re- 
censémus; suo suorümque sub 
cruce Sanctérum, consórtium 
multiplicáto pifssimo inter- 
véntu, méritis mortis tue, mé- 
ritum cum beátis habeámus: 
Qui vivis. 


Commemoration of the Feria in Low Masses. 


Secret 


Gu us, O merciful God, 
that we may ever have 
the grace of serving Thine al- 
tars worthily, and may be sav- 
ed by constantly partaking of 
the sacrifices offered thereon. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


RÆSTA nobis, miséricors 

Deus: ut digne tuis ser- 
víre semper altáribus mereá- 
mur; et eórum perpétua par- 
ticipatióne salvári, Per Dó- 
minum. 


Communion 


Happy the senses of the 
blessed Virgin Mary, which 
without death earned the palm 
of martyrdom beneath the 
Cross of our Lord. 


Felices sensus beáte Marie 
Virginis, qui sine morte me- 
ruérunt martyrii palmam sub 
cruce Dómini. 


Postcommunion 


Av the sacrifices of which 
we have partaken, O 
Lord Jesus Christ, devoutly 


ACRIFICIA, que sümpsimus 
Dómine Jesu Christe, 
'Iransfixiónem Matris tue et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 2—ST. FRANCIS OF PAULA 


Virginis devóte celebrántes: 
nobis impetrent apud clemén- 
iiam tuam omnis boni salu- 
táris efféctum: Qui vivis. 


973 


celebrating the piercing of Thy 
virgin Mother’s soul, obtain for 
us with Thy clemency the effect 
of every salutary benefit. Who 
livest. 


Commemoration of the Feria in Low Masses. 


Postcommunion 


UMPTI sacrificii, Dómine, 

A perpétua nos tuítio non 

erelinquat: et nóxia semper 

a nobis cuncta depellat. Per 
Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


April 2—St. Francis of 


AY ihe protection of the 
(D Sacrifice which we have 
received. never leave us, and 
may it ever ward off from us 
all things harmful Through 
our Lord. 


In Lent the Last Gospel of the Feria. 


Paula, Confessor (White) 


Double 
Mass, Justus ut palma, page 1352, ezcept: 


Prayer. 


rus humilium celsitüdo, 
qui beátum Francíscum: 
Confessórem Sanctórum tuó- 
rum glória sublimásti: tríbue, 
quaesumus, ut ejus méritis et 
imitatióne, promíssa humfli- 
bus premia feliciter conse- 
quámur, Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who in exalting the 

lowly hast raised the 
blessed confessor Francis to the 
glory of the saints, grant, we 
beseech Thee, that, by his mer- 
its and our imitation of him, 
we may happily attain to the 
rewards promised to the 
humble. Through our Lord. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


Epistle. Philipp. 3, 7-12 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apéstoli ad Philippénses. 


RATRES: Que mihi fué- 

runt lucra, hec arbi- 
trátus sum propter Christum 
detriménta. Verümtamen ex- 
istimo ómnia detriméntum 
esse, propter eminéntem sci- 
éntiam Jesu Christi Dómini 
mei: propter quem ómnia de- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Philippians. . 

RETHREN, The things that 

were gain to me, the 
same I have counted loss for 
Christ. Furthermore, I count 
all things to be but loss, for 
the excellent knowledge of 
Jesus Christ my Lord; for 
Whom I have suffered the loss 


http://ccwatershed.org 


974 


of all things, and count them 
but as dung, that I may win 
Christ: and may be found in 
Him, not having my justice, 
which is of the law, but that 
which is of the faith of Christ 
Jesus, which is of God, justice 
in faith; that I may know Him, 
and the power of His resurrec- 
tion, and the fellowship of His 
Sufferings; being. made con- 
formable to His death, if by 
any means I may attain to the 
resurrection which is from the 
dead; not as though I had al- 
ready attained, or were already 
perfect; but I follow after, if 
I may by any means apprehend 
wherein I am also apprehended 
by Christ Jesus. 


APRIL 4—ST. ISIDORE, BISHOP 


triméntum feci, et árhbitror ut 
stércora, ut Christum lucri- 
fáciam, et invéniar in illo, 
non habens meam justítiam, 
que ex lege est, sed illam que 
ex fide est Christi Jesu; que 
ex Deo est justitia in fide, ad 
cognoscéndum illum, et vir- 
tütem resurrectiónis ejus, et 
Societátem passiónum illius: 
configurátus morti ejus: si 
quo modo occürram ad resur- 
reciiónem, que est ex mór- 
tuis: non quod jam accéperim, 
aut jam perféctus sim: sequor 
autem, is quo modo compre- 
héndam, in quo et compre- 
hénsus sum 2 Christo Jesu. 


Secret 
AY these offerings of a de- ic dona devóte plebis, 
vout people with which Dómine, quibus tua cu- 


we heap Thine altars, O Lord, 
be rendered pleasing to Thee by 
the merits of blessed Francis, 
and, by Thy mercy, salutary to 
us. Through our Lord. 


mulámus altária, beáti Fran- 
císci méritis tibi grata, no- 
bísque salutária, te miseránte, 
reddántur. Per Dóminum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


Postcommunion 


PRAY Thee, O Lord, that 

the divine sacrament 
we have received may by the 
intercession of blessed Francis, 
Thy confessor, bestow on us the 
aids both of temporal and of 
life eternal. Through our Lord. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


the Feria. 


uMPTA, Dómine, sacra- 

ménta celéstia, beáto 
Francísco Confessóre tuo in- 
tercedénte, precámur; ut et 
temporális vite subsídia no- 
bis cónferant, et etérne. Per 
Dóminum. 
The last Gospel of 


April 4—$»t. Isidore, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of the 
Church (White) 
Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, 
ae Lent a commemoration of the Feria, and its Gospel at the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 11—ST. LEO THE GREAT 


975 


April 5—St, Wincent Ferrer, Confessor (White) 


Double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 
Prayer 


EUS, qui Ecclésiam tuam 

beáti Vincéntii Confes- 

sóris tui méritis et predica- 

tióne, illustráre dignátus es: 

concéde nobis fámulis tuis; ut 

et ipsíus instruámur exémplis, 

et ab ómnibus ejus patrocínio 

liberémur advérsis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


O cop, Who didst vouch- 
safe to enlighten Thy 
Church with the virtues and 
preaching of blessed Vincent, 
Thy confessor, grant unto us, 
Thy servants, that we may be 
both instructed by his examples 
and delivered from all evil by 
his patronage. ‘Through cur 
Lord. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria, and its Gospel at 


the end. 


April 11—St. Leo the Great, Pope, Confessor, Doctor 
of the Church (White) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


1 DiLIGIs me, Simon Petre, 
pasce agnos meos, pasce 
oves meas. (T. P. Allelüja, 
allelüja). Ps. 29, 1. Exaltábo 
te, Dómine, quóniam susce- 
písti me, nec delectásti ini- 
mícos meos super me. Y. Gló- 
ria Patri. 


John 21, 15-17 


F THOU lovest me, Simon 

Peter, feed My lambs, feed 
My sheep. (P. T. Alleluia, alle- 
luia). Ps. 29, 1. I will extol 
Thee, O Lord, for Thou hast 
upheld me: and hast not made 
my enemies to rejoice over me. 
y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


REGEM tuum, Pastor æ- 

térne, placátus intén- 
de: et per beátum Leonem 
Summum Ponííficem, perpé- 
tua, protectióne custódi; quem 
totíus Ecclésie prestitisti esse 
pastérem. Per Dóminum. 


ETERNAL Shepherd, do 

Thou look favorably up- 
on Thy flock, which we be- 
seech Thee to guard and, keep 
for evermore through the 
blessed Leo, Supreme Pontiff, 
whom Thou didst choose to be 
the chief shepherd of the whole 
Church. Through our Lord. — 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


976 


APRIL 11—ST. LEO THE GREAT 


Lesson. 1 Peter 5, 1-4; 10-11 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle. 
RETHREN: The ancients 
therefore that are 
among you, I beseech, who am 
myself also an ancient and a 
witness of the sufferings of 
Christ: as also a partaker of 
that glory which is to be re- 
vealed, in time to come: Feed 
the flock of God which is 
&mong you, taking care of it 
not by constraint, but willingly 
according to God: not for filthy 
lucre's sake, but voluntarily: 
Neither as lording it over the 
clergy, but being made a pat- 
tern of the flock, from the 
heart. And when the prince of 
pastors shall appear, you shall 
receive a never-fading crown 
of glory. But the God of all 
grace, Who hath called us unto 
His eternal glory in Christ Je- 
sus, after you have suffered a 
little, will Himself perfect you, 
and confirm you and establish 
you, To Him be glory and em- 
pire for ever and ever. Amen. 


Léctio Epistole beáti Petri 
Apóstoli 

AníssrwI: Senióres, qui 

in vobis sunt, óbsecro 
consénior et testis Christi 
passiónum, qui et ejus, que 
in futüro revelánda est, gló- 
rie communicator: páscite 
qui in vobis est gregem Dei, 
providéntes nón codcte, sed 
spontanee secundum Deum, 
neque turpis lucri gratia, sed 
voluntárie; neque ut domi- 
nántes in cleris sed forma 
facti gregis ex ánimo. Et 
cum apparterit princeps 
pastórum,  percipiétis im- 
marcescíbilem  glórie  coró- 
nam. Deus autem omnis 
grátie, qui vocávit nos in 
etérnam suam glóriam in 
Christo Jesu, módicum passos 
ipse  perfíciet, confirmábit 
Solidabítque. Ipsi glória et 
impérium in ssecula sæculó- 
rum. Amen. 


In Septuagesima the Lesser Alleluia in the Gradual is replaced 
by the Tract. In Paschal time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 106, 32, 31 


Let them exalt him in the 
Church of the people: and 
praise him in the chair of the 
ancients. JY. Let the mercies 
of the Lord give glory to him, 
and his wonderful works to the 
children of men. 


Exáltent eum in Ecclésia 
plebis: et in cáthedra senió- 
rum laudent eum. Y. Con- 
fiteántur Dómino misericér- 
die ejus; et mirabília ejus 
filiis hóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 11—ST. LEO THE GREAT 977 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluja, allelúja. Matth. Alleluia, alleluia. Matth. 16, 
16, 18. Tu es Petrus, et super 18. Thou art Peter and upon 
hanc petram ædificábo Ec- this rock I will build My 


clésiam meam. Allelüja. 


Church, Alleluia. 


Tract 39, 10-11 


` Annuntiávi justítiam tuam 
in ecclésia magna, ecce labia 
mea non prohibébo: Dómine, 
tu scisti. V. Justítiam tuam 
non abscóndi in corde meo: 
verit&tem tuam et. salutáre 
tuum dixi. V. Non abscóndi 
misericórdiam tuam, et veri- 
tátem tuam a concílio multo. 


I have declared Thy justice 
in a great church, lo, I will not 
restrain my lips: O Lord Thou 
knowest it. V. I have not hid 
Thy justice within my heart. I 
have declared Thy truth and 
Thy salvation. V. I have not 
concealed Thy mercy and Thy 
truth from a great council. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluja, allelüja. Matth. 
16, 18. Tu es Petrus, et super 
hanc petram sgdificábo Ecclé- 
Siam meam. Allelüja. Ps. 44, 
17, 18. Constítues eos prín- 
cipes super omnem terram: 
mémores erunt nóminis tui, 
Dómine. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Matth. 16, 
18. Thou art Peter and upon 
this rock I will build My 
Church. Alleluia. Ps. 44, 17, 13. 
Thou shalt make them princes 
over all the earth: they shall 
remember Thy name through- 
out all generations. Alleluia. 


- Gospel. Matt. 16, 13-19 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Matthzeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Venit Je- 

sus in partes Cesarée 
Philippi: et interrogábat dis- 
cípulos suos, dicens: Quem 
dicunt hómines esse Fílium 
hóminis? At ili dixérunt: 
Alii Joánnem Baptistam, alii 
autem Eliam, alii vero Jere- 
miam, aut unum ex prophé- 
tis. Dicit illis Jesus: Vos au- 
tem quem me esse dícitis? 
Respóndens Simon Petrus 


4” Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus came 

into the quarters of 
esarea, Philippi and He asked 
His disciples, saying, Whom do 
men say.that the Son of man 
is? But they said, Some, John 
the Baptist, and other some 
Elias, and others Jeremias, or 
one of the prophets. Jesus saith 
to them. But whom do you say 
that I am? Simon Peter an- 
swered, and said, Thou art 


http://ccwatershed.org 


978 


Christ, the Son of the living 
God. And Jesus answering, said 
to him, Blessed art thou, Simon 
Bar-Jona, because flesh and 
blood hath not revealed it to 
thee, but My Father Who is in 
heaven: and I say to thee, That 
thou art Peter, and upon this 
rock I will build My Church, 
and the gates of hell shall not 
prevail against it; and to thee 
I will give the keys of the king- 
dom of heaven; and whatso- 
ever thou shalt bind -upon 
earth, it shall be bound also in 
heaven; and whatsoever thou 
shalt loose on earth, it shall be 
loosed also in heaven, 
Creed, page 765. 


APRIL 11—ST. LEO THE GREAT 


dixit: Tu es Christus, Filius 
Dei vivi Respóndens autem 
Jesus, dixit ei: Beátus es 
Simon Bar-Jona: quia caro et 
Sanguis non revelávit tibi, sed 
Pater meus, qui in colis est. 
Et ego dico tibi, quia tu es 
Petrus, et super hanc petram 
zdificábo Ecclésiam meam, 
et porte inferi non preva- 
lébunt advérsus eam. Et 
iibi dabo claves regni cæló- 
rum. Et quodcümque ligá- 
veris super terram, erit ligá- 
tum et in colis: et quodcüm- 
que sólveris super terram, erit 
solütum et in celis, 


Offertory. Jerem. 1,9, 10 


Behold I have given my 
words in thy mouth; lo, I have 
set thee this day over the na- 
tions, and over the kingdoms, 
to waste and to destroy, and to 
build and to plant. (P. T. Alle- 
Juia). 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ecce dedi verba mea in ore 
iuo: ecce constítui te super 
gentes et super regna, ut 
evéllas et déstruas, et sdí- 
fices et plantes. (T. P. Alle- 
JXàja). 


Secret 


N THY loving kindness, we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, be 
moved by the offering of our 
gifts and enlighten Thy 
Church: that Thy flock may 
prosper everywhere and the 
shepherds, under Thy guid- 
ance, may be rendered accept- 
able to Thee. Through our 
Lord. 


Oo] munéribus, qué- 
sumus Dómine, Ecclé- 
siam tuam  benígnus ilú- 
mina: ut, et gregis tui pro- 
fíciat ubique succéssus, et 
grati fiant nómini tuo, te 
gübernánte, pastóres. Per 
Dóminum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. 

Thou art Peter, and upon 

this rock I will build My 
Church. (P. T. Alleluia). 


Matt. 16, 18 


Tu es Petrus, et super hanc 
petram :edificábo Ecclésiam 
meam. (T. P. Allelüja). 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 14—ST. JUSTIN 


979 


Postcommunion 


EFECTIÓNE sancta enu- 

tritam gubérna, qué- 
sumus Dómine, tuam placá- 
tus Ecclésiam: ut poténti mo- 
deratióne dirécta, et incre- 
ménta libertátis accípiat et in 
religiónis  integritáte per- 
sístat. Per Dóminum. 


INCE Thy Church has been 
nourished by the sacred 
repast, govern her in. Thy 
clemency, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, so that under the guid- 
ance of Thy mighty rule she 
may enjoy greater freedom and 
abiding integrity of religion. 
Through our Lord. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. In Lent the Last Gospel of the Fería. 
April 13—St, Hermenegild, Martyr (Red) 


: Semi-double 
In Paschal-time Mass, Protexisti, page 1328. Out of Paschal- 


time, the Mass, In virtute, page 1309. 


tions are as follows: 


In either case the excep- 


Prayer 


EUS, qui beátum Herme- 

negíldum Mártyrem tu- 
um colésti regno terrénum 
postpónere docuísti: da, que- 
sumus, nobis; ejus exémplo 
cadüca despícere, atque ztér- 
na sectéri, Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who didst teach 

blessed Hermenegild, Thy 
martyr, to choose a heavenly 
kingdom rather than anearthly 
one, grant us, we beseech Thee, 
to despise fleeting things, after 
his example, and to pursue 
those that are eternal. Through 
our Lord. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 
Gospe! from the Mass, Statuit, page 1304. 


Last Gospel of the Feria. 


April 14—St. Justin, Martyr (Red) 
Double 
Sts. Tiburtius, Walerian and Maximus, 


Martyrs (Red) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 118, 85, 46 


ARRAVÉRUNT mihi iníqui 
. fabulatiónes, sed non 
ut lex tua: ego autem loqué- 


HE Wicked have told me 
fables, but not as Thy 
law; but I spoke of Thy tes- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


980 APRIL 14—ST.. JUSTIN 

timonies before kings, and I bar de testimóniis tuis in con- 
was not ashamed. (P.T. Alle- spéctu regum et non confun- 
luia, alleluia. Ps. 118, 1. débar. (T. P. Allelüja, alle- 
Blessed are the undefiled in the 1úja.) Ps. 118, 1. Beáti im- 


way, who walk in the law of the 
Lord. y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


maculáti in via, qui ámbu- 
lant in lege Dómini. V. Glória 
Patri. 


Prayer 


cop, Who, through the 

foolishness of the cross, 
didst wondrously teach blessed 
Justin, martyr, the surpassing 
knowledge of Jesus Christ, 
grant us, by his intercession, 
that we may avoid the wiles of 
error and attain to firmness of 
faith. Through the same. 


EUS, qui per stultítiam 

crucis eminéntem Jesu 
Christi sciéntiam beátum Jus- 
tinum Mártyrem mirabiliter 
docuísti; ejus nobis interces- 
sióne concéde; ut, errórum 
circumventióne depülsa, fídei 
firmitátem consequamur. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 
Of St. Tiburtius and his fellow-martyrs. 


Prayer 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that, as we 


RESTA, quesumus, omní- 
potens Deus: ut, qui 


Observe the feast of Thy holy sanctórum Mártyrum tuórum 
martyrs, Tiburtius, Valerian 'Tibürtii, Valeriáni et Máximi 
and Maximus, we may likewise solémnia cólimus: eórum éti- 
imitate their virtues. Through am virtütes imitémur. Per Dó- 
our Lord. minum. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 1, 18-30 
Lesson from the Epistle to ^ Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 


blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, the word of the 
B cross, to them indeed that 
perish, is foolishness; but to 
them that are saved, that is, to 
us, it is the power of God. For 
it is written: I will destroy the 
wisdom of the wise; and the 
prudence of the prudent I will 
reject. Where is the wise? 
Where is the scribe? Where is 
the disputer of this world? Hath 
not God made foolish the wis- 
dom of this world? For seeing 


Apéstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Verbum crucis 

pereüntibus quidem 
stultitia est: iis autem, qui 
salvi fiunt, id est nobis, Dei 
virtus est. Scriptum est enim: 
Perdam sapiéntiam sapién- 
tium, et prudéntiam prudén- 
tium reprobábo. Ubi sápiens? 
ubi scriba? ubi conquisitor 
hujus seculi? Nonne stultam 
fecit Deus sapiéntiam hujus 
mundi? Nam quia in Dei sa- 
piéntia non cognóvit mundus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 14—ST. JUSTIN 


per sapiéntiam Deum: placuit . 


Deo per stultitiam predica- 
tiónis salvos fácere credéntes. 
Quóniam et Judei signa pe- 
tunt, et Greci sapiéntiam 
quérunt: nos autem predicá- 
mus Christum crucifíxum: 
Judeis quidem  scándalum 
géntibus autem stultitiam, ip- 
sis autem vocátis Judzis, at- 
que Grzcis, Christum Dei vir- 
tütem, et Dei sapiéntiam: 
quia quod stultum est Dei, sa- 
piéntius est homínibus: et 
quod infirmum est Dei, fór- 
tius est homínibus. Ex ipso 
autem vos estis in Christo Je- 
Su, qui factus est nobis sapi- 
éntia a Deo, et justítia, et 
sanctificatio, et redémptio. 


981 


that in the wisdom of God the 
world by wisdom knew not God; 
it pleased God by the foolish- 
ness of our preaching to save 
them that believe. For both the 
Jews require signs, and the 
Greeks seek after wisdom, but 
we preach Christ crucified, un- 
to the Jews indeed a stumbling- 
block, and unto the Gentiles 
foolishness; but unto them that 
are called,: both Jews and 
Greeks, Christ the power .of 
God and the wisdom of God. 
For the foolishness of God is 
wiser than men, and the weak- 
ness of God is stronger than 
men. But of Him are you in 
Christ Jesus, Who of God is 
made unto us wisdom and jus- 
tice, and sanctification, and 
redemption. 


nee the Greater Alleluia is replaced by the Gradual and 
rac: 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelúja, allelúja. V. 1 Cor. 
3, 19, 20. Sapiéntia hujus 
mundi stultítia est apud De- 
um, scriptum est enim: Dó- 
minus novit cogitatiónes sa- 
piéntium, | quóniam vane 
sunt. Allelúja. V. Phil. 3, 8. 
Verümtamen exístimo ómnia 
detriméntum esse propter em- 
inéntem sciéntiam — Jesu 
Christi Dómini mei. Allelüja. 


Grad ual. 


Sapiéntia hujus mundi 
stultítia est apud Deum, 
scriptum est enim: Dominus 
novit cogitatiónes sapiéntium, 
quóniam vane sunt. ¥..1 Cor. 
1, 19. Perdam sapiéntiam 
sapiéntium, et prudéntiam 
prudentium reprobábo. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. 1 Cor. 
3, 19, 20. The wisdom of this 
world is foolishness with God, 
for it is written: The Lord 
knoweth the thoughts of the 
wise, that they are vain. Alle- 
luia. V. Philipp. 3, 8. Further- 
more I count all things to be 
but loss, for the excellent 
knowledge of Jesus Christ my 
Lord. Alleluia. 


1 Cor. 3, 19, 20 


The wisdom of this world is 
foolishness with God, for it is 
written: The Lord knoweth the 
thoughts of the wise, that they 
are vain. Ñ. 1 Cor. 1, 19. I will 
destroy the wisdom of the wise, 
and the prudence of the pru- 
dent I will reject. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


582 


APRIL 14—ST. JUSTIN 


Tract. 1 Cor. 2, 2, 7,8 


I judged not myself to know 
anything amongst you but 
Jesus Christ, and Him crucified. 
V. We speak the wisdom of God 
in a mystery, which is hidden, 
which God ordained before the 
world unto our glory. V. Which 
none of the princes of this 
world knew; for if they had 
known it, they would never 
have crucified the Lord of 
glory. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Non judicávi me scire gy. 
quid inter vos nisi Jesum 
Christum, et hunc crucifixum. 
Y. Léquimur Dei sapiéntiam 
in mystério que abscóndita 
est, quam predestinávit Deus 
ante secula in glóriam nos- 
iram. Y. Quam nemo prínci- 
pum hujus sæculi cognóvit. 
Si enim cognovíssent, num- 
quam Dóminum glórie cruci- 
fixissent. 


Gospel. Luke 12, 2-9 


W Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, Jesus said to 
3 His disciples, there is 
nothing covered that shall not 
be revealed: nor hidden, that 
shall not be known. For what- 
Soever things you bave spoken 
in darkness, shall be published 
in the light; and that which 
you have spoken in the ear in 
chambers shall be preached on 
the house-tops. And I say to 
you, My friends, be not afraid 
of them who kill the body, and 
after that have no more that 
they can do. But I wil show 
you Whom you shall fear: fear 
ye Him Who, after He hath 
killed, hath power to cast into 
Hell, Yea, I say to you, fear 
Him. Are not five sparrows sold 
for two farthings and not 
one of them is forgotten before 
God? Yea, the very hairs of 
your head are all numbered. 
Fear not, therefore: you are of 
more value than many spar- 
rows. And I say to you, who- 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secüándum Lucam. 


T; iLLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus discipulis suis: Nihil 
opértum est quod non revelé- 
tur: neque abscónditum, quod 
non sciátur. Quóniam quz in 
ténebris dixistis in Tümine di- 
céntur: et quod in aurem lo- 
citi estis in cubiculis, predic- 
ábitur in tectis. Dico autem 
vobis amícis meis: Ne terreá- 
mini ab his qui occídunt cor- 
pus, et post hec non habent 
amplius quid.fácient. Ostén- 
dam autem vobis quem timeá- 
tis: timéte eum qui, post- 
quam occíderit, habet potestá- 
tem mittere in gehénnam; ita 
dico vobis, hunc timéte. Nonne 
quinque pásseres véneunt di- 
pondio, et unus ex illis non 
est in oblivióne coram Deo? 
Sed et capilli cápitis vestri 
omnes numeráti sunt. Nolíte 
ergo timére: multis passéri- 
bus pluris estis vos, Dico au- 
tem vobis: Omnis quicümque 
conféssus füerit me corem 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 14—8T. JUSTIN 95g 


homínibus, et Fílius hómi- soever shall confess Me before 

nis confitébitur illum coram men, him shall the Son of 

Angelis Dei. man also confess before the 
angels of God. 


Offertory. 1 Cor. 2, 2 


Non enim judicávi me scire For I judged not myself to 
aliquid inter vos nisi Jesum know any thing among you, but 
Christum, et hunc crucifíxum, Jesus Christ; and Him cruci- 
(T. P. Allelája.) fied. (P.T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
UNERA nostra, Dómine RACIOUSLY accept our gifts, 
Deus, benígnus sús- O Lord, the wondrous 


cipe: quorum mirábile mysté- mystery of which St. Justin, 
rium sanctus Martyr Justínus martyr, strenuously defended 
advérsus impiórum ealümnias against the calumnies of the 
strénue deféndit. Per Dómi- impious. Through our Lord. 
num. 

In Lent commemoration of the Feria. 

Of the Holy Martyrs. 


Secret 
JC hóstia, quesumus, AY this sacrifice, O Lord, 
Dómine, quam sanctó- which we offer commem- 


rum Mártyrum iuórum na- drating the birthday of Thy 
talítia recenséntes offérimus: martyrs, both loose us from the 
et vincula nostre pravitatis bonds of our base desires and 
absólvat, et tus nobis miseri- gain for us the gifts of Thy 
pa ie dona concíliet. Per Dó- mercy. Through our Lord, 
minum. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 2 Tim. 4,8 


Repósita est mihi coréna There is laid up for me a 
justitie, quam reddet mihi crown of justice, which the 
Dóminus in illa die justus ju- Lord, the just judge, will ren- 
dex. (T. P. Alleiuja.) der to. me in that day. (P.F. 

; Alleluia.) © 


Postcommunion 


«&LÉsTI alimónia. refécti. EFRESHED With heavenly 
süpplices te, Dómine, food, we humbly pray 
deprecámur: ut, beáti Justíni Thee, O Lord, that, following 
Martyris tui ménitis, de ac- the admonitions of Thy 
céptis donis semper in gra- blessed martyr, Justin, we may 


http://ccwatershed.org 


984 


APRIL 17—ST. ANICETUS 


give thanks incessantly for the tiárum  actióne maneámus, 
gifts we have received. Through Per Dóminum. 


our Lord. 


In Lent a commemoration of the Feria. 


Of the Holy Martyrs. 


Postcommunion ' 


H ILLED with Thy sacred 
gifts, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, that what we celebrate in 
fulfilment of our bounden ser- 
vice we may feel in the in- 
crease of Thy salvation. 
Through our Lord 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ACRO münere satiáti, súp 

plices te, Dómine, depre- 
cámur: ut, quod débitze:ser- 
vitütis celebrámus offício, sal- 
vatiónis tue sentidmus aug- 
méntum, Per Dóminum. 


In Lent the Last Gospel of the Feria. 


April I7—$5t. Snicetus, Pope, Martyr (Red) . 


Simple 
Mass, €. diligis me, page 1302, except as follows: 


Prayer 


ETERNAL Shepherd, do 

Thou look favorably up- 
on Thy flock, which we be- 
seech Thee to guard and keep 
for evermore through the 
blessed Anicetus Thy Martyr 
and Supreme Pontiff, whom 
Thou didst choose to be the 


Gi tuum, Pastor æ- 
térne,  placátus in- 
ténde: et per beátum Anicé- 
tum Mártyrem tuum atque 
Summum Pontíficem, perpé- 
tua protectióne custódi; quem 
totius Ecclésie prestitisti esse 
pastórem. Per Dóminum. 


chief  ahepherg of the whole Church. Through our Lord. 
Secret 


N THY loving kindness, we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, be 
moved by the offering of our 
gifts and ^n'iehten Thy 
Church: that Thy flock may 
prosper evervwhere and the 
Shepherds, under 'Thy guid- 
ance, may be rendered accept- 
able to Thee. 


BLÁTIS munéribus, qué- 

sumus Dómine, Eccié- 
siam tuam benignus ililü- 
mina: ut, et gregis tui profí- 
ciat ubique succéssus, et grati 
fiant nómini tuo, te guber- 
nánte, pastóres. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


INCE Thy Church has been 
nourished by the sacred 
repast, govern her in Thy 
clemency, we beseech 'Thee, O 
Lord, so that under the guid- 
ance of Thy mighty rule she 
may enjoy greater freedom and 
abiding integrity of religion. 
Through our Lord. 


EFECTIONE sancta enu- 

tritam gubérna, que- 
sumus Dómine, tuam placá- 
tus Ecclésiam: ut poténti mo- 
deratióne dirécta, et incre- 
ménta libertatis accípiat et in 
religiónis integritéte. per- 
sistat. Per Dóminum no- 
sirum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 22—STS. SOTER AND CAIUS, POPES 


985 


April 21—St, Anselm, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of 
the Church (White) 
Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, 


April 22—$5ts. Soter and Caius, Popes, Martyrs (Red) 
s Semi-double 
Mass, Si díligis me, page 1302 with Prayer, Secret and Postcom- 


munion as below: 


Prayer 


Cum tuum, Pastor æ- 
térne,  placótus íin- 
ténde: et per beátos Sotérem 
et Cajum  Mártyres tuos 
atque Summos Pontifices, 
perpétua protectióne custódi; 
quos totius Ecclésiz prestiti- 
sti esse pastóres. Per Démi- 
nüm.: 


, ETERNAL Shepherd, do 
Thou look favorably up- 
on Thy flock, which we beseech 
Thee to guard and.keep for 
evermore through the blessed 
Soter and Caius Thy Martyrs 
and Supreme Pontifis, whom 
Thou didst choose to be the 
chief shepherds of the whole 
Church. Through our Lord. 


Secret 


BLATIS munéribus, qué- 

sumus Démine, Ecclé- 
siam. tuam benignus illi- 
mina: ut, et gregis tui pro- 
fíciat ubique succéssus, et 
grati fiant nédmini tuo, te 
gubernante,  pastóres. Per 
Dóminum, 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


N THY loving kindness, we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, be 
moved by the offering of our 
gifts and enlighten Thy 
Church: that Thy flock may 
prosper. everywhere and the 
shepherds, under Thy guid- 
ance, may be rendered accept- 
able to Thee. Through our 
Lord. : 


Postcommunion 


EFECTIÓNE sancta enu- 

tritam gubérna, quæ- 
sumus Dómine, tuam placá- 
tus Ecclésiam: ut poténti mo- 
deratióne dirécta, et incre- 
ménta libertátis accípiat et 
in religiónis integritáte per- 
sistat. Per Dóminum. 


Ince Thy Church has been 
nourished by the sacred 
repast, govern her in Thy 
clemency, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, so that under tbe guid- 
ance of Thy mighty rule she 
may enjoy greater freedom and 
abiding integrity of religion. 
‘Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


986 


APRIL 23—ST. GEORGE 


April 23—&5t. George, Martyr (Red) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Protexistt, page 1328, except: 


Pray 


cop, Who dost gladden us 

by the merits and inter- 
cession of blessed George, Thy 
Martyr, mercifully grant that 
we, who ask Thy favors 
through him, may obtain them 
by the gift of Thy grace. 
‘Through our Lord. 


er 

EUs, qui nos beáti Geór- 

gil Mártyris tui méritis 
et . intercessióne letificas: 
concéde propitius: ut, qui tua 
per eum beneficia póscimus 
dono tue grátie consequa- 
mur. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. 2 Tim. 2, 8-10; 3, 10-12 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
"Timothy. 


EARLY beloved, be mindful 
that the Lord Jesus 
Christ is risen again from the 
dead, of the seed of David, ac- 
cording to my gospel. Wherein 
I labor even unto bands, as 
an evil-doer: but the word of 
God is not bound. Therefore I 
endure all things for the sake 
of the elect, that they may also 
obtain the salvation, which is 
in Christ Jesus, with heavenly 
glory. But thou hast fully 
known my doctrine, manner of 
life, purpose; faith, long-suf- 
fering, love, patience, persecu- 
tions, afflictions, such as came 
upon me at Antioch, at Iconi- 
um, and at Lystra; what per- 
secutions I endured and out of 
them all the Lord delivered me. 
And all that will live godly in 
Jesus: Christ shall suffer perse- 
cution. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad T'imótheum. 


ARISSIME; Memor esto 

Dóminum Jesum Chris- 
tum resurrexísse a mórtuis ex 
sémine David,  secündum 
Evangélium meum, in quo la- 
bóro usque ad víncula, quasi 
male óperans; sed verbum Dei 
non est alligátum, Ideo ómnia 
sustíneo propter eléctos, ut et 
ipsi salitem  consequántur, 
que est in Christo Jesu, cum 
glória celésti. Tu autem as- 
secütus es meam doctrinam 
institutiónem, propósitum, 
fidem, longanimitátem, dile- 
ctiénem, patiéntiam, perse- 
cutiónes, passiónes: qualia 
mihi facta sunt Antiochiz, 
Icónii, et Lystris: quales per- 
Secutiónes sustinui et ómni- 
bus erípuit me Dóminus. Et 
omnes, qui pie volunt vívere 
in Christo Jesu, persecutió- 
nem patiéntur. 


Secret 


anctiry the gifts we offer 


Thee, O Lord, and through 
the intercession of blessed 
George, Thy martyr, cleanse us 
by them from the stains of our 
sins. Through our Lord. 


ÚNERA, Dómine, obláta 

sanctífica, et interce- 
dénte beáto Geórgio Mártyre 
tuo, nos per hec a peccató- 
rum nostrórum .máculis 
emünda. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 25—ST. MARK, EVANGELIST 


987 


Postcommunion 


ÜPPLICES te rogámus, om- 
S nipotens Deus: ut, quos 
tuis réficis sacraméntis, inter- 
cedénte beáto Geórgio Már- 
tyre tuo, tibi étiam plácitis 
móribus dignánter tríbuas de- 
servire, Per Dóminum. 


E BESEECH Thee, O al- 

mighty God, that those 
whom Thou dost refresh with 
Thy sacrament, Thou also 
grant them, by the interces- 
sion of blessed George, Thy 
martyr, to serve Thee, as befits 


them, with behavior pleasing unto Thee. Through our Lord. 


April 24—$5t. Fidelis of Sigmaringen, Martyr (Red) 


Double 
Mass, Protexisti, page 1328, except: 


Prayer 


EUs, qui beátum Fidé- 

lem, seráphico spiritus 
ardóre succénsum, in vere 
fídei propagatióne martyrii 
palma et gloriósis miráculis 
decoráre dignátus es: ejus, 
quaesumus, méritis et inter- 
cessione, ita nos per grátiam 
tuam in fide et caritáte con- 
firma; ut in servítio tuo 
fidéles usque ad mortem in- 
veníri mereámur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


O cop, Who didst vouch- 
safe to adorn with the 
grace of working miracles and 
the palm of martyrdom in the 
propagation of the true faith 
the blessed Fidelis, inflamed 
with seraphic ardor of soul, 
we beseech Thee, by his merits 
and intercession, so to 
strengthen us through Thy 
grace in faith and charity that 
we may be worthy to be found 
faithful in Thy service even 
unto death. Through our Lord. 


April 25—$5t. Mark the Ebangelist (Red) 


Double of the Second Class 
During the Paschal season the following Mass is celebrated. 
if this feast is transferred to a day after the Pentecost octave 
the Mass. is Mihi autem, as on the feast of St. Luke, October 
18, page 1241; but the Prayer, Epistie, Secret and Postcommunion 
are from the following Mass: 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


ROTEXÍSTI me, Deus, a 
T9 conventa malignántium 
allelija: a muXitüdine oper- 
antium iniquitatem, allelija, 
allelija. Ps, 6, 2. Exáudi, 
Deus, oratiónem meam cum 
déprecor: a timóre inimíci 
éripe ánimam meam. Y. Gló- 
xia Patri. 


Ps. 63, 3 


Hou hast protected me, O 

. God, from the assembly 
of the malignant, alleluia: 
from the multitude of the work- 
ers of iniquity, alleluia, alle- 
luia, Ps. 6, 2, Hear, O God, my 
prayer when I make supplica- 
tion to Thee: deliver my soul 
from the fear of the enemy. Y. 
Glory. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


988 


APRIL 25—ST. MARK, EVANGELIST 


Kytie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 


cop, Who didst endow 
blessed Mark, Thine evan- 
gelist, with the grace of preach- 
ing, grant us, we beseech Thee, 
ever to profit by his teaching 
and be defended by his prayers. 
Through our Lord. 


D qui beátum Mar- 
cum Evangelistum tu- 
um evangélice predicatiónis 
gratia sublimásti: trfbue, 
quaesumus; ejus nos semper 
et eruditióne profícere, et ora- 
tióne deféndi. Per Dóminum, 


Lesson. Ezech. 1,10-14 


Lesson from Ezechiel the 

Prophet. 
S Fon the likeness of the 
faces of the four living 
creatures; there was the face 
of a man, and the face of a 
lion on the right side of all the 
four; and the face of an ox on 
the left side of all the four; and 
the face of an eagle over all the 
four. And their faces and their 
wings were stretched upward; 
two wings of every one were 
joined, and two covered their 
bodies; and every one of them 
went straight forward; whither 
the impulse of the spirit was to 
£o, thither they went, and they 
turned not when they went. 
And as for the likeness of the 
living creatures, their appear- 
ance was like that of burning 
coals of fire, and like the ap- 
pearance of lamps. This was 
the vision running to and fro 
in the midst of the living crea- 
tures, a bright fire, and light- 
ning going forth from the fire, 
And the living creatures ran 
lightning. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 88, 6. 
‘The heavens shall confess ‘Thy 
wonders, O Lord; and Thy 
truth in the Church of the 
saints. Alleluia. V. Ps. 20, 4. O 
Lord, T'hou hast set on his head 
a crown of precious stones. Al~ 
leluia. 


Léctio Ezechiélis Prophé- 
te. 
IMILYTUDO vultus quátuor 
animálium: facies hó- 
minis, et facies leónis a dex- 
tris ipsórum quátuor: fácies 
autem bovis a sinístris ipsó- 
rum quátuor, et facies aquille 
désuper ipsédrum  quátuor, 
Fácies eórum, et penne eó- 
rum exténte désuper: due 
penne singulórum jungebán- 
tur, et duz tegébant córpora 
eórum: et unumquódque eó- 
rum coram fácie sua ambulá- 
bat: ubi erant impetus spíri- 
tus, illue gradiebántur, nec 
revertebintur cum ambulá- 
rent, Et similitüdo animálium, 
aspéctus eórum quasi carbó- 
num ignis ardéntium, et quasi 
aspéctus lampadárum. Hec 
erat vísio discürrens in médio 
animálium, splendor ignis, et 
de igne fulgur egrédiens. Et 
snimálja ibant, et reverte- 
bántur in similitüdinem fúl- 
guris coruscántis, 
and returned like flashes of 


Allehija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 88, 
6. Confitebüntur celi mira- 
bilia tua, Dómine: étenim 
veritátem tuam in ecclésia 
sanctórum. Allelüja. Y. Ps. 20, 
€. Posuisti, Dómine, super ca- 
put ejus corénam de lápide 
pretióso. Allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 25—ST. MARK, EVANGELIST 


989 


Gospel. Luke 10, 1-9 


H$ Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 

N ILLO témpore: Designávit 

Dóminus et álios septua- 

gínta duos: et misit illos binos 
ante fáciem suam in omnem 
clvitátem et locum, quo erat 
ipse ventürus. Et dicébat illis: 
Messis quidem multa, operárii 
autem pauci. Rogáte ergo Dó- 
minum messis ut mittat op- 
erários in messem suam. Ite: 
ecce ego mitto vos sicut agnos 
inter lupos. Nolíte portáre sác- 
culum, neque peram, neque 
calceaménta, et néminem per 
viam salutavéritis. In quam- 
cümque domum intravéritis, 
primum dícite: Pax huic dó- 
mui; et si ibi füerit fílius pa- 
cis, requiéscet super illum pax 
vestra: sin autem, ad vos re- 
vertétur. In eádem autem 
domo manéte edéntes, et bi- 
béntes que apud illos sunt: 
dignus est enim operdrius 
mercéde sua. Nolíte transire 
de domo in domum. Et in 
quamcumaue civitátem intra- 
véritis, et suscéperint vos, 
manducáte que apponüntur 
vobis: et curáte infírmos, qui 
in illa sunt, et dicite ilis: Ap- 
propinquávit in vos regnum 
Dei. 

Creed, page 763. 


& Continuation of the holy 
Gospel acording to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, The Lord 
: appointed also other 
seventy-two; and He sent them 
two and two before His face 
into every city and place 
whither He Himself was to 
come. And He said to them, The 
harvest indeed is great, but-the 
laborers are few: pray ye there- 
fore the Lord of the harvest, 
that He send laborers into His 
harvest. Go, behold I send you 
as lambs among wolves. Carry 
neither purse, nor scrip, nor 
shoes; and salute no man by 
the way. Into whatsoever house 
you enter, first say, Peace be to 
this house: and if the son of 
peace be there, your peace shall 
rest upon him: but if not, it 
shall return to you. And in the 
same house remain, eating and 
drinking such things as they 
have: for the laborer is worthy 
of his hire. Remove not from 
house to house. And into what 
city soever you enter, and they 
receive you, eat such things as 
are set before you; and heal the 
sick that are therein; and say 
to them, The kingdom of God 
is come nigh unto you. 


Offertory. Ps. 88, 6 


Confitebüntür cœli mira- 
bília tua, Dómine, et veritá- 
tem tuam in ecclésia sanctó- 
rum, allelüja, allelüja. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


The. heavens shall confess 
Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the church of the 
saints, alleluia, alleluia. 


` Secret 


EÁTI Marci Evangeliste 
tui solemnitáte, tibi 


RINGING "Thee gifts, O 
Lord. on the festival of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


990 


blessed Mark, Thine evangelist, 
we pray Thee, that, as the 
preaching of the Gospel made 
him glorious, so his interces- 
‘sion may render us in word and 
deed acceptable to "Thee. 
"Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


APRIL 26—STS. CLETUS AND 4ARCELLINUS 


münera deferéntes, quesu- 
mus, Dómine; ut, sieut illum 
predicátio evangélica fecit 
gloriósum: ita nos ejus inter- 
céssio et verbo, et dpere tibi 
reddat accéptos. Per Dómi- 
num, 


Communion. Ps. 63, 11 


The just shall rejoice in the 
Lord, and shall hope in Him: 
and all the upright in heart 
Shall be praised, alleluia, alle- 
luia. 


Lætábitur justus in Dómino, 
et sperábit in eo: et lauda- 
búntur omnes recti corde, al- 
lelúja, allelija, 


Postcommunion 


AY Thy holy things, we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, 
bring us continual protection, 
so that, through the prayers of 
blessed Mark, Thine evangelist, 
they may ever guard us from 
all evils. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


RÍBUANT nobis, quesumus, 

Démine, continuum tua 
Sancta presídium: quo, beáti 
Marci Evangelíste tui préci- 
bus, nos ab ómnibus semper 
tueántur advérsis. Per Dómi- 
num. 


On this day after the singing in procession of the Litany of 
the Saints, page 1536, the Mass of the Rogation-days is ap- 
pointed to be celebrated, as on the three days preceding the 
festival of the Ascension, page 578. 


April 26—$»ts. Cletus and Marcellinus, Popes, 
Martyrs (Red) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302, except: 
Prayer 


ETERNAL Shepherd, do 

Thou look favorably up- 
on Thy flock, which we beseech 
Thee to guard and keep for 
evermore through the blessed 
Cletus and Marcellinus Thy 
Martyrs and Supreme Pontiffs, 
whom Thou didst choose to be 
the chief shepherds of the 
whole Church. Through our 
Lord. 


REGEM tuum, Pastor æ- 

térne,  placátus in- 
ténde: et per beátos Cletum 
et Marcellinum Mártyres tuos 
atque Summos  Pontífices 
perpétua protectióne custódi; 
quos totíus Ecclésim prestiti- 
sti esse pastóres. Per Dómi- 
num. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 28—ST. PAUL OF THE CROSS 


sot 


April 27—-St. Peter Canisius, Confessor and Doctor 
of the Church (White) 
Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui ad tuéndam ca- 
thólicam fidem beátum 
Petrum  Confessórem tuum 
virtute et doctrina roborásti: 
concéde propítius: ut ejus ex- 
emplis et mónitis errántes ad 
salütem resipiscant, et fidéles 
in veritátis confessióne perse- 
vérent. Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who for the defense 

of the Catholic Faith 
didst strengthen blessed Peter, 
Thy confessor, with virtue and 
learning: vouchsafe in Thy 
loving kindness, that by his ex- 
ample and precepts the erring 
may be restored to salvation, 
and the faithful may persevere 
in the confession of the truth. 
Through our Lord. 


April 28—4$5f. Paul of the (Cross, Confessor (White) 
Double 
St. Vitalis, Martyr (Red) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Gal. 2, 19, 20 


HRISTO confixus sum cru- 
ci: vivo autem, jam non 
ego: vivit vero in me Chris- 
tus: in fide vivo Fílii Dei, qui 
diléxit me, et trádidit seme- 
típsum pro me, allelija, alle- 
lúja. Ps. 40, 2. Beátus qui in- 
télligit super egénum et páu- 
perem: in die mala liberábit 
eum Dóminus. Y. Glória Pa- 
tri. 


ITH Christ I am nailed to. 
the cross: bui I live, 
now not I: but Christ liveth in 
me: I live in the faith of the 
Son of God, Who loved me, and 
delivered Himself for me. Alle- 
luia, alleluia. Ps. 40, 2. Blessed: 
is he that understandeth con- 
cerning the needy and the 
poor: the Lord will deliver him 
in the evil day. J. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ÓMrINE Jesu Christe, qui 
ad mystérium crucis 


LorD Jesus Christ, Who 
' didst endow St. Paul with: 


predicándum, sanctum Pau- exceeding charity to preach: 
lum singulári caritáte donás- the mystery of the Cross, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


992 


didst will that through him a 
new family should spring up in 
Thy Church, grant us, by his 
intercession, that, constantly 
venerating Thy passion on 
earth, we may be worthy to 
partake of its fruits in heaven. 
Who livest, 


APRIL 28—ST. PAUL OF THE CROSS 


ti, et per eum novam in Ec- 
clésia familiam  floréscere 
voluísti: ipsíus nobis interces- 
sióne concéde; ut passiónem 
tuam jügiter recoléntes in 
terris, ejüsdem fructum cón- 
sequi mereámur in celis, Qui 
vivis, 


A commemoration of St. Vitalis, Prayer from the Mass In 


virtute, page 1309. 


` Epistle. 1 Cor. 1, 17-25 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 


RETHREN, Christ sent me 

not to baptize, but to 
preach the gospel: not in wis- 
dom of speech, lest the cross 
of Christ should be made void. 
For the word of the cross, to 
them indeed that perish, is 
foolishness: but to them that 
are saved, that is, to us, it is 
the power of God. For it is 
written: I will destroy the wis- 
dom of the wise, and the pru- 
dence of the prudent I will 
reject. Where is the wise? 
Where is the scribe? Where is 
the disputer of this world? 
Hath not God made foolish the 
wisdom of this world? Por see- 
ing that in the wisdom of God 
the world by wisdom knew not 
God, it pleased God by the fool- 
ishness of our. preaching to 
save them that believe. For 
both the Jews require signs, 
and the Greeks seek after wis- 
dom: But we preach Christ 
crucified, unto the Jews in- 
deed a stumbling-block, and 
unto the Gentiles foolishness; 
But unto them that are called, 
both Jews and Greeks, Christ 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apéstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Non misit me 

Christus baptizáre sed 
evangelizáre: non in sapién- 
tia verbi, ut non evacuétur 
crux Christi. Verbum enim 
crucis peréuntibus quidem 
stultitia est: iis autem, qui 
salvi fiunt, id est nobis, Dei 
virtus est. Scriptum est enim: 
Perdam sapiéntiam sapiénti- 
um et prudéntiam prudéntium 
reprobábo. Ubi sapiens? ubi 
scriba? ubi conquisitor hujus 
seculi? Nonne stultam. fecit 
Deus sapiéntiam hujus mun- 
di? Nam quia in Dei sapiéntia 
non cognóvit mundus per 
saptiéntiam Deum: plácuit 
Deo per stultitiam predica- 
tiónis salvos fácere credéntes. 
Quóniam et Judæi signa pe- 
tunt, et Greci sapiéntiam 
quarunt: nos autem predicá- 
mus Christum crucifíxum: 
Judaeis quidem  scándalum, 
géntibus autem  stultítiam, 
ipsis autem vocatis Judsis 
atque Grecis, Christum Dei 
virtütem et Dei sapiéntiam: 
quia quod stultum est Dei, 
sapientius est hominibus: et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 28—ST. PAUL OF THE CROSS 


quod infírmum est Dei, fórti- 
us. est homínibus. 


993 


the power of God, and the wis- 
dom of God. For the foolishness 
of God is wiser than men; 


and the weakness of God is stronger than men. 
In votive Masses out of Paschal-time the Greater Alleluia is 


replaced 


by the Gradual, 
luia is repla 


ced by the Tract. 


After Septuagesima the Lesser Alle- 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allelája. Y. 2 Cor. 
5, 15. Pro ómnibus mórtuus 
est Christus: ut, et qui vivunt 
jam non sibi vivant sed ei, 
qui pro ipsis mórtuus est, et 
resurréxit. Allelüja. Y. Rom. 
8, 17. Si fílii, et herédes: heré- 
des quidem Dei, coherédes au- 
tem Christi: si tamen compá- 
timur, ut et conglorificémur. 
Allelüja. 


^ Gradual. 


Mihi autem absit gloriári, 
nisi in cruce Dómini nostri 
Jesu Christi: per quem mihi 
mundus crucifíxus est, et ego 
mundo. ¥. 1. Cor. 2, 2. Non 
judicavi me scire áliquid inter 
vos, nisi Jesum Christum, et 
hunc crucifíxum. 


Lesser 


Allehija, allelüja. Y. 1 Petr. 
2, 21. Christus passus est pro 
nobis, vobis relínquens exém- 
plum ut sequámini vestigia 
ejus. Allelüja. 


Tract. 1 


Christo ígitur passo in car- 
ne, et vos eádem cogitatióne 
armámini: quia qui passus est 
in carne, désiit a peccátis. 7. 
2 Cor. 4, 10. Semper mortifi- 
cátionem Jesu in córpore nos- 
tro circumferéntes, ut et vita 


Alleluia, alleluia, 2. Cor. 5, 
15. Y. Christ died for all; that 
they also who live may not now 
live to themselves, but to Him 
who died for them, and rose 
again. Alleluia. Rom. 8, 17. y. 
And if sons, heirs also: heirs 
indeed of God, and joint heirs 
with Christ; yet so if we suffer 
with Him, that we may be 
also glorified with Him. Alle- 
luia. 


Gal. 6, 14 


But God forbid that I should 
glory, save in the cross of Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom 
the world is crucified to me, 
and I to the world. Y. 1 Cor. 
2, 2. I judged not myself to 
know anything among you, but 
Jesus Christ, and Him cruci- 
fied. 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. 1 Peter 
2, 21. Christ suffered for us, 
leaving you an example that 
you should follow His steps. 
Alleluia. 


Peter 4, 1 


Christ therefore having suf- 
fered in the flesh, be you also 
armed with the same thought, 
for He that hath suffered in 
the flesh, hath ceased from 
sins. V. 2 Cor. 4, 10. Always 
bearing about in our body the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


994 


dying of Jesus, that the life 
also of Jesus may be made 
manifest in our bodies. Y. Heb. 
12, 2. Looking on Jesus, the 
author and finisher of our 
faith, Who, having joy set be- 
fore Him, endured the cross, 
despising the shame, and sit- 
teth on the right hand of the 
throne of God. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


APRIL 28—ST. PAUL OP THE CROSS 


Jesu manifestétur in corpéri- 
bus nostris. Y. Hebr. 12, 2. As- 
piciéntes in auctórem fídei et 
consummatérem Jesum, qui 
propósito sibi gáudio, susti- 
nuit Crucem, confusióne con- 
témpta, atque in déxtera sedis 
Dei sedet, 


Gospel. Luke 10, 1-9 


?H Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T. THAT lime, The Lord 
appointed. also other 


Seventy-two; and He sent them 
two and two before His face 
into every city and place 
whither He Himself was to 
come. And He said to them, 
The harvest indeed is great, 
but the laborers are few; pray 
ye therefore the Lord of the 
harvest, that He send laborers 
into his harvest. Go, behold I 


Send you as lambs among 


wolves. Carry neither purse, 
nor scrip, nor shoes; and salute 
no man by the way. Into what- 
soever house you enter, first 
say, Peace be to this house: 
&nd if the son of peace be 
there, your peace shall rest 
upon him: but if not, it shall 
return to you. And in the same 
house remain, eating and 
drinking such things as they 
have: for the laborer is worthy 
of his hire. Remove not from 
house to house. And into what 
city soever you enter, and they 
receive you, eat such things as 
are Set before you: 2nd heal 
the sick that are therein; and 
say to them, The kingdom of 
God is come nigh unto you. 


"M Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Designávit 
Dóminus et álios septua- 
ginta duos: et misit illos bi- 
nos ante fáciem suam in om- 
nem civitátem et locum, quo 
erat ipse ventürus. Et dicébat 
ilis: Messis quidem multa, 
operárii autem pauci. Rogáte 
ergo dóminum messis, ut mit- 
tat operários in messem suam. 
Ite: ecce ego mitto vos sicut 
agnos inter lupos. Nolite por- 
táre sácculum, neque peram, 
neque calceaménta, et némi- 
nem per viam salutavéritis. In 
quamcümque domum intra- 
véritis primum dicite: Pax 
huic dómui: et si ibi fü- 
erit fílius pacis, requiéscet 
super ilum pax vestra: sin 
autem, ad vos revertétur. In 
eádem autem domo manéte, 
edéntes et bibéntes que apud 
illos sunt: dignus est enim op- 
erárius mercéde sua. Nolite 
transíre de domo in domum. 
Et in quamcümque civitátem 
intravéritis, et suscéperint vos, 
manducáte que apponüntur 
vobis: et curáte infírmos qui 
jn illa sunt, et dícite illis: Ap- 
propinquávit in vos regnum 
Dei. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


APRIL 28—ST. PAUL OF THE CROSS 


Offertory. 


Ambuláte in dilectióne, si- 
cut et Christus diléxit nos, et 
trádidit semetipsum. pro no- 
bis oblatiónem, et hóstiam Deo 
in odórem suavitátis, alle- 
lúja. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


995 


Eph. 5, 2 


Walk in love, as Christ also 
hath loved us, and hath de- 
livered HimSelf for us, an ob- 
lation and a sacrifice to God, 
for an odor of sweeiness, Al- 
leluia. 


: Secret. 


ÆLESTEM nobis, Dómine, 

prebeant mystéria hec 
passiónis et mortis tue fervó- 
rem: quo sanctus Paulus, ea 
Offeréndo, corpus suum hós- 
tiam vivéntem, sanctam, tibí- 
que placéntem exhibuit: Qui 
vivis. 


AY these mysteries of Thy 
passion and death, O 
Lord, obtain for us that heav- 
enly fervor by which St. Paul, 
when he offered the same, pre- 
sented his own body as a liv- 
ing sacrifice, holy and pleasing 
unto Thee. Who livest. 


Commemoration of St. Vitalis, Secret from the Mass In vir- 


tute, page.1311. 


Preface for. Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 1. Peter 4, 13 


CommunicántesChristipas- If you partake of the suffer- 
siónibus gaudéte, utin revela- ings of Christ, rejoice, that 
tióne, glorie, ejus gaudeátis when His glory shall be re- 


exsultántes, allelija. 


vealed, you may also be glad 
with exceeding joy. Alleluia. 


Postcommunion 


ÓMPsIMUS, Dómine, diví- 

num sacraméntum, im- 
ménse caritátis tue memo- 
riále perpétuum: tríbue, que- 
sumus; ut sancti Pauli méri- 
tis, et imitatióne, aquam de 
fóntibus tuis hauridmus in 
vitam ætérnam saliéntem, et 
tuam sacratissimam passió- 
nem córdibus nostris imprés- 
sam móribus et vita teneá- 
mus: Qui vivis. 


E HAVE received, O Lord, 

Thy divine sacrament, 
ihe perpetual memorial of 
Thine infinite love; grant, we 
beseech Thee, that, by the 
merits of St. Paul and by imi- 
tating him, we may draw from 
Thy fountains the water that 
gusheth out unto life eternal, 
and may by our life and ac- 
tions bear Thy sacred passion 
deep graven upon our hearts. 
Who livest. 


Commemoration of St. Vitalis, Postcommunion from the 


Mass In virtute, page 1312. 
Concluding Prayers, pege 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


996 


APRIL 30—ST. CATHARINE OF SIENA 


April 29—-St, Peter of Werona, Martyr (Red) 
Double 
Mass, Protexisti, page 1328, except: 


Prayer 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we 
may honor ihe faith of blessed 
Peter, Thy martyr, with fitting 
devotion, as he by the spread 
of the same. faith was found 
worthy to obtain the palm of 
martyrdom. Through our Lord. 


RESTA qusesumus, omni- 
potens Deus: ut beati 
Petri Mártyris tui'fidem cón- 
grua devotióne sectémur; qui, 
pro ejüsdem fidei dilatatióne, 
martyrii palmam méruit ob- 
tinére. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle from the Mass Letabitur, page 1313. 


Secret 


Go give ear, O 
Lord, to the prayers we 
offer Thee, and, through the 
intercession of blessed Peter, 
Thy martyr, keep under Thy 
protection those who defend 
the Faith. Through our Lord. 


Toe quas tibi, Dómine, 
offérimus intercedénte 
beáto Petro Mártyre tuo, cle- 
ménter inténde: et propugna- 
tóres fidei sub tua protectióne 
custódi. Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


ay the sacraments which 

we have received, keep 

Thy faithful, O Lord, and, by 

the intercession of blessed 

Peter, Thy martyr, guard them 

against all assaults of the en- 
emy. Through our Lord. 


WELES tuos, Dómine, 

custódiant sacraménta, 
que sümpsimus: et interce- 
dénte beáto Petro Martyre 
tuo, contra omnes advérsos 
tueántur incürsus. Per Démi- 
num. 


April 30—St. Catharine of Siena, Virgin (White) 
Double 
Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370, except: 


Prayer 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we, 

who venerate the natal feast 
of blessed Catharine, Thy vir- 
gin, may be both gladdened by 


A, QUIESSUMUS, omnipo- 
tens Deus: ut, qui beá- 
te Catharine "Virginis tue 
natalitia cólimus; et anima 
solemnitáte letémur, et tante 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SOLEMNITY OF ST. JOSEPH 


virtütis proficiámus exémplo. 
Per Dominum. 


997 


her annual solemnity and 
helped by the example of so 
great virtue. Through our Lord. 


Secret 


SCÉNDANT ad te, Dómine, 

quas in beáte Catha- 

rine solemnitáte offérimus, 

preces, et hóstia salutáris, vir- 

gíneo fragrans odóre. Per Dó- 
minum. 


ET the prayers we offer on 

the feast-day of blessed 
Catharine rise up unto Thee, 
O Lord, and the sacrifice of 
Salvation fragrant with the 
odor of virgin purity. Through 
our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


ETERNITÁTEM nobis, Dó- 

mine, cónferat, qua 
pasti sumus, mensa celéstis: 
qua beáte Catharine Virginis 
vitam étiam áluit temporá- 
lem. Per Dóminum. 


ay the heavenly table, 

from which we have 
been fed, give us eternal life, 
O Lord, as it sustained even the 
temporal life of Catharine, the 
blessed virgin. Through our 
Lord. 


Wednesday before the Third Sundap after Caster 
- The Solemnttp of St. Joseph 


Spouse of the Blessed "Virgin Mary, Patron of 
the Anibersal Church, (White) 


Double of the First Class with a Common Octave 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 32, 20, 21 


DJÓTOR, et protéctor 

noster est Dóminus: in 
eo Iztábitur cor nostrum, et in 
nómine sancto ejus sperávi- 
mus, allelija, allelija. Ps. 79, 
2. Qui regis Israel, inténde: 
qui dedücis, velut ovem, Jo- 
seph. Y. Gloria Patri. . 


HE Lord is our helper and 

protector: in Him our heart 
Shall rejoice, and in His holy 
name we have trusted. Alleluia, 
alleluia. Ps. 79, 2. Give ear, O 
Thou that rulest Israel: Thou 
that leadest Joseph like a 
sheep. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 


EUS, qui ineffábili provi- 
déntia beátum Joseph 


cop, Who, in Thine un- 
speakable providence, 


sanctissime Genitricis tue didst deign to choose blessed 
sponsum eligere dignátus es: Joseph for the spouse of Thy 
presta, quesumus; ut, quem most holy Mother, grant, we 
protectórem — venerámur in beseech Thee, that, venerating 


http://ccwatershed.org 


998 


him on earth as our protector, 
we may deserve to have him 
for our intercessor in heaven. 
Who livest. 


SOLEMNITY OF ST. JOSEPH 


terris, intercessórum habére 
mereámur in calis: Qui vivis. 


Lesson. Gen. 49, 22-26 


Lesson from the Book of 
Genesis. 
oskePH is a growing son, a 
growing son and comely to 
behold: the daughters run to 
and fro upon the wall. But they 
that held darts provoked him, 
and quarrelled with him and 
envied him. His bow rested 
upon the strong, and the bands 
of his arms and hands were 
loosed, by the hands of the 
mighty one of Jacob: thence 
he came forth a pastor, the 
Stone of Israel. The God of 
thy father shall be thy helper, 
and the Almighty shall bless 
thee with the blessings of 
heaven above, with the bless- 
ings of the deep that lieth be- 
neath, with the blessings of 
the breasts and of the womb. 
The blessings of thy father are 
strengthened with the bless- 
ings of his fathers: until the 
desire of the everlasting hills 
shall come; may they be upon 


Léctio libri Génesis. 


inrus accréscens Joseph, 
filius accréscens, et de- 

córus aspéctu: fílie discurré- 
runt super murum. Sed exa- 
speravérunt, eum, et jurgáti 
sunt, inviderüntque illi ha- 
béntes jácula. Sedit in forti 
arcus ejus, et dissolita sunt 
víncula brachiórum et mánu- 
um illius per manus poténtis 
Jacob: inde pastor egréssus 
est, lapis Israël. Deus Patris 
tui erit adjütor tuus, et Om- 
nípotens benedicet tibi bene- 
dictiónibus celi désuper, ben- 


edictiónibus abyssi jacéntis 


deórsum, benedictiónibus ú- 
berum et vulve. Benedictiónes 
patris tui confortáte sunt 
benedictiónibus patrum ejus, 
donec veníret desidérium cól- 
lium zternórum: fiant in cá- 
pite Joseph, et in vértice Na- 
zarei inter fratres suos. 


the head of Joseph, and upon the crown of the Nazarite 


among his brethren. 


If said out of Paschal-time the following Alleluias are re- 


placed by the Gradual below. 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. In what- 
ever tribulation they shall cry 
to me, I will hear them, and 
be their protector aways. Alle- 
luia. V. Grant, O Joseph, that 
ever secure under thy patron- 
age, we may pass our lives 
without guilt. Alleluia. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. De 
quacümque tribulatiéne cla- 
máverint ad me, exáudiam 
eos, et ero protéctor eórum 
semper. Allelüja. Y. Fac nos 
innócuam, Joseph, decürrere 
vitam: sitque tuo semper tuta 
patrocínio. Allelüja. 


Gradual. Ps. 20, 4, 5 


O Lord, Thou hast prevented 
him with blessings of sweet- 


Dómine, prevenísti eum in 
benedictiónibus ^ dulcédinis: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SOLEMNITY OP ST. JOSEPH 


posuisti in cápite ejus coró- 
nam de lápide pretióso. Y. 
Vitam pétiit a te, et tribuisti 
ei longitüdinem diérum in 
seculum seculi. Allelüja, al- 
lelüja. V. Fac nos innócuam, 
Joseph, decürrere vitam: sit- 
que tuo semper tuta patroci- 
nio. Allehija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


999 


ness: Thou hast set on his head 
a crown of precious stones. Y. 
He asked life of Thee and Thou 
hast given him length of days 
for ever and ever. Alleluia, al- 
leluia. Y. Grant, O Joseph, 
that ever secure under thy pa- 
tronage, we may pass our lives 
without guilt. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 3, 21-23 


HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Factum 
I est autem cum baptizaré- 
tur omnis pópulis, et Jesu 
baptizato, et oránte, apertum 
est celum: et descéndit Spír- 
itus Sanctus corporáli spécie 
Sicut colümba in ipsum: et 
vox de celo facta est: Tu es 
Fílius meus diléctus, in te 
complácui mihi. Et ipse Jesus 
erat incípiens quasi annórum 
trigínta, ut putabátur, fílius 
Joseph. 


Creed, page 765. 


HK Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT lime, it came to 

pass, when all the peo- 
ple were baptized, that Jesus 
also being baptized and pray- 
ing, heaven was opened: and 
the Holy Ghost descended in a 
bodily shape as a dove upon 
Him: and a voice came from 
heaven: Thou art My beloved 
Son, in Thee, I am well pleased. 
And Jesus Himself was begin- 
ning about the age of thirty 
years: being (as it was sup- 
posed) the son of Joseph. 


Offertory. Ps. 147, 12-13 


Lauda, Jerüsalem, Dómi- 
num: quóniam confortavit se- 
ras portárum tuárum: bene- 
díxit filiis tuis in te. (T. P. 
Allelüja, allelüja.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Praise the Lord, O Jerusa- 
lem, because He hath strength- 
ened the bolts of thy gates: He 
hath blessed thy children 
within thee. (P. T. Alleluia, 
alleluia.) 


Secret 


ANCTÍSSYMUE Genitricis 
tue Sponsi patrocínio 
suffulti, rogámus, Dómine, 
cleméntiam tuam: ut corda 
nostra fácias terréna cuncta 
despícere, ac te verum Deum 


UPPORTED by the patronage 

of the spouse of Thy most 

holy Mother, we ask Thy clem- 
ency, O Lord, to make our 
hearts despise all earthly 
things and with perfect charity 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1000 


love Thee, the true God. Who 
livest. . 
Preface No. 12, page 815. 


Communion. 


But Jacob begat Joseph, the 
husband of Mary, of whom was 
born Jesus, Who is called 
Christ. (P. T. Alleluia, alle- 
luia.) 


MAY 1—STS. PHILIP AND JAMES 


perfécta caritáte diligere: Qui 
vivis. ; 


Matt. 1, 16 


Jacob autem génuit Joseph 
virum Marie, de qua natus 
est Jesus, qui vocátur Chris- 
tus. (T. P. allelája, allelija.) 


Postcommunion 


EFRESHED at the fountain 

of divine blessing, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, our God, 
as Thou dost make us to re- 
joice in the protection of 
blessed Joseph, so to make us 
also, by his merits and inter- 
cession, partakers of his heav- 
enly glory. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ivinr müneris fonte re- 
D fécti, quaesumus, Dó- 
mine Deus noster: ut, sicut 
nos facis beáti Joseph protec- 
tióne gaudére; ita ejus méri- 
tis et intercessióne, c#eléstis 
glérie fácias esse partícipes. 
Per Dóminum. 


Wednesdap before the Fourth Sunday after Caster 
@ctabve of the Solemnitp of St. Joseph, (White) 
Double Major 
Mass of the feast, page 997, with the commemoration of the 


occurring feast. 


May 1—Sts. Philip and James, Apostles (Red) 


Double of the Second Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 
N THE time of their tribula- 
tion they cried to Thee, O 
Lord, and Thou heardest them 
from heaven, alleluia, alleluia. 
Ps. 32, 1. Rejoice in the Lord, 
ye just: praise becometh the 
upright. Y. Glory. 


2 Esdr. 9, 27 


LAMAVÉRUNT ad te, Dó- 
mine, in témpore afflic- 
tiónis suz, et tu de celo exau- 
disti eos, allelája, allelüja. Ps. 
32, 1. Exsultate, justi, in Dó- 
mino: rectos decet collaudá- 
tio. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who dost gladden us 
with the annual solem- 


Eus, qui nos annua 
Apostolórum tuórum 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MAY 1—STS. PHILIP AND JAMES 


Philippi et Jacóbi solemnitáte 
letificas: presta, quesumus; 
ut, quorum gaudémus méritis, 
instruámur exémplis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


In Votive Masses out of Paschal-time 


1001 


nity of Thine apostles, Philip 
and James, grant, we beseech 
Thee, that we may learn from 
the examples of those in whose 
merits we rejoice. Through our 
Lord. 


only, the following Les- 


son instead of the prescribed one below is said. 


Lesson. Eph. 4, 7-13 
Léctio Epistole beati, Pauli Lesson from the Epistle of 


Apóstoli ad Ephésios. 


RATRES: Unicuíque nos- 

trum data est gratia se- 
ündum mensüram donatiónis 
Christi. Propter quod dicit: 
Ascéndens in altum captívam 
duxit  captivitátem: dedit 
dona homínibus. Quod autem 
ascéndit, quid est, nisi quia et 
descéndit primum in inferi- 
óres partes terre? Qui de- 
scéndit, ipse est et qui ascén- 
dit super omnes caelos, ut im- 
pléret ómnia. Et ipse dedit 
quosdam quidem, Apóstolos, 
quosdam autem Prophétas, 
álios vero Evangelistas, álios 
autem pastores, et doctóres, 
ad consummatiónem sanc- 
tórum in opus ministérii, in 
wdificatiónem córporis 
Christi: donec occurramus 
omnes in unitátem fidei, et 
agnitiónis Fílii Dei, in virum 
perféctum, in  mensüram 
tetátis plenitüdinis Christi. 


Lesson. 
Léctio líbri Sapiéntiz, 
S justi in magna 


constántia advérsus eos, 
qui se angustiavérunt, et qui 


blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians. 

RETHREN, to every one of 

us is given grace accord- 
ing to the measure of the giv- 
ing of Christ. Wherefore he 
saith, Ascending on high, he 
led captivity captive; he gave 
gifts to men. Now, that he 
ascended, what is it, but be- 
cause he elso descended first 
into the lower parts of the 
earth? He that descended is 
the same also that ascended 
above ali the heavens, that he 
might fill all things. And he 
gave some apostles, and some 
prophets, and other some 
evangelists, and other some 
pastors and doctors, for the 
perfecting of the saints, for the 
work of the ministry, for the 
edifying of the body of Christ; 
until we all meet into the unity 
of faith and of the knowledge 
of the Son of God, unto a per- 
fect man, unto the measure of 
the age of the fulness of Christ. 


Wis. 5, 1-5 


Lesson from the Book of 
‘Wisdom. 
HE just shall stand with 
great constancy against 
those that have afflicted them, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1002 


and taken away their labors. 
These seeing it, shall be 
troubled with terrible fear, and 
shall be amazed at the sudden- 
ness of their unexpected sal- 
vation, saying within them- 
selves, repenting and groaning 
for anguish of spirit, These are 
they whom we had some time 
in derision, and for a parable 
of reproach. We fools esteemed 
their life madness, and their 
end without honor, Behold, 
how they are numbered among 
the children of God, and their 
lot is among the saints, 


MAY 1—STS. PHILIP AND JAMES 


abstulérunt labóres eórum. 
Vidéntes turbabüntur timóre 
horribili, et mirabüntur in 
subitatióne insperate salütis, 
dicéntes intra se, peniténtiam 
agéntes et prz angüstia, spíri- 
tus geméntes: Hi sunt, quos 
habüimus aliquándo in deri- 
sum, et in similitüdinem im- 
propérii Nos insensáti vitam 
illórum zstimabámus insáni- 
am, et finem illórum sine ho- 
nóre: ecce quómodo compu- 
táti sunt inter fílios Dei, et 
inter sanctos sors illórum est. 


Out of Pasckal-time the following Alleluias are replaced by 


the Gradual. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 88, 6. 
The heavens shall confess Thy 
wonders, O Lord; and Thy 
truth in the church of ihe 
Saints. Alleluia. Y. John 14, 9. 
So long a time have I been with 
you, and have you not known 
Me? Philip, he that seeth Me, 
seeth My Father also. Alleluia. 


After Septuagesima, by the Tract. 


Allehija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 88, 
6. Confitebüntur celi mirabi- 
lia tua, Dómine: étenim veri- 
tátem tuam in ecclésia sanc- 
térum Allelija. V. Joann. 14, 
9. Tanto témpore vobíscum 
sum, et non cognovístis me? 
Philfppe, qui videt me, videt 
et Patrem meum. Allelüja. 


Gradual. Ps. 44, 17, 18 


Thou shalt make them Constítues eos principes 
princes over all the earth; they super omnem terram: mé- 
Shall remember Thy name, O mores erunt nóminis tui, Dó- 
Lord. Y. Instead of thy fathers, mine. V. Pro pátribus tuis 
sons are born to thee, therefore nati sunt tibi fílii: proptérea 
shall people praise thee. Alle- pópuli confitebüntur tibi. Al- 
luia, alleluia. Y. John 14, 9. So lelüja, allelija. Y. Joann. 14, 
long a time have I been with 9. Tanto témpore vobíscum 
you, and have you not known sum, et non cognovístis me? 
Me? Philip, he that seeth Me Philippe, qui videt me videt 
Seeth My Father also. Alleluia. et Patrem meum, Allelüja. 


Tract. Ps. 125, 5,6 


They that sow in tears shall Qui séminant in lácrimis in 
reap in joy. VY. Going they gáudio metent. JY. Euntes 
went and wept, casting their ibant et flebant, mitténtes sé- 
Seeds. Y. But coming they shall mina sua. Y. Veniéntes autem 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MAY 1—STS. PHILIP AND JAMES 


vénient cum  exsultatióne, 
portántes manípulos suos. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1008 


come with joyfulness, carrying 
their sheaves. 


Gospel. John 14, 1-13 


& Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus discípulis suis: Non 
turbétur cor vestrum. Créditis 
in Deum, et in me crédite. In 
domo Patris mei mansiónes 
multe sunt. Si quo minus 
dixissem vobis: Quia vado 
paráre vobis locum. Et si 
abíero, et preparavero vobis 
locum: íterum vénio, et acci- 
piam vos ad meipsum, ut ubi 
sum ego, et vos sitis. Et quo 
ego vado scitis, et viam scitis. 
Dicit ei Thomas: Dómine, 
nescimus quo vadis: et quó- 
modo póssumus viam scire? 
Dicit ei Jesus: Ego sum via, 
véritas, et vita; nemo venit ad 
Patrem, nisi per me. Si cog- 
novissétis me, et Patrem me- 
um ttique cognovissétis: et 
amodo cognoscétis eum, et vì- 
distis eum. Dicit ei Philippus: 
Dómine, osténde nobis Pa- 
trem, et süfficit nobis. Dicit 
ei Jesus: Tanto témpore vo- 
bíscum sum, et non cognovís- 
tis me? Philíppe, qui videt me, 
videt et Patrem. Quómodo tu 
dicis: Osténde nobis Patrem? 
Non créditis, quia ego in Pa- 
tre, et Pater in me est? Verba, 
que ego loquor vobis, a meípso 
non loquor. Pater autem in 
me manens, ipse facit ópera. 
Non créditis, quia ego in Pa- 
tre, et Pater in me est? Alió- 
quin propter ópera ipsa cré- 
dite, Amen, amen dico vobis, 
qui credit in me, Ópera quae 


"B Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT lime, Jesus said 

to His disciples: Let not 

your heart be troubled: you 
believe in God, believe also in 
Me. In My Father’s house 
there are many mansions. If 
not, I would have told you, 
that I go to prepare a place for 
you. And if I shall go and 
prepare a place for you, I will 
come again and will take you 
to Myself, that where I am you 
also may be. And whither I go 
you know, and the way you 
know. Thomas saith to Him, 
Lord, we know not whither 
Thou goest; and how can we 
know the way? Jesus saith to 
him, I am the way, and the 
truth, and the life. No man 
cometh to the Father, but by 
Me. If you had known Me, you 
would without doubt have 
known My Father also: and 
from henceforth you shall 
know Him; and you have seen 
Him. Philip saith to Him, Lord, 
show us the Father, and it is 
enough for us. Jesus saith to 
him, So long a time have I 
been with you, and have you 
not known Me? Philip, he that 
seeth Me, seeth the Father also. 
How sayest thou, Show us the 
Father? Do you not believe 
that I am in the Father, and 
the Father in Me? The words 
that I speak to you, I speak 
not of Myself. But the Father 
Who abideth in Me, He doeth 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1004 


the works. Believe you not 
that I am in the Father, and 
the Father in Me? Otherwise, 
believe for the very works’ sake. 
Amen, amen, I say to you, he 
that believeth in Me, the works 


MAY 1—STS. PHILIP AND JAMES 


ego facio, et ipse fáciet, et 
majóra horum faciet: quia 
ego ad Patrem vado. Et quod- 
cúmque petiéritis Patrem in 
nómine meo, hoc fáciam, 


that I do, he also shall do; and greater than these shall he do. 
Because I go to the Father: and whatsoever you shall ask 
the Father in My name, that will I do. 


Creed, page 765. 


Out of Paschal-time only, the second Offertory is said in- 


stead of the following one. 


Offertory. 

The heavens shall confess 

‘Thy wonders, O Lord; and Thy 

truth, in the church of the 
Saints, alleluia, alleluia. 


Ps. 88, 6 

Confitebüntur celi mirabí- 
lia tua, Dómine: et veritátem 
tuam in Ecclésia sanctórum, 
alleláüja, allelüja. 


Offertory. Ps. 18, 15 


Their sound went forth into 
all the. earth; and their words 
to the ends of the world. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


In omnem terram exívit 
Sonus eórum; et in fines orbis 
terre verba eórum 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 

the offerings which we 
bring for the feast of Thine 
Apostles Philip and James, and 
turn aside all the evils which 
we deserve. Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


P ÜNERA, Dómine, que pro 
Apostolórum  tuórum 
Philíppi et Jacóbi solemnitáte 
deférimus, propítius süscipe: 
et mala ómnia, que merémur, 
&vérte. Per Dóminum. 


Communion. John 14, 9, 10 


So long a time have I been 
with you, and have you not 
known Me? Philip be that 
seeth Me, seeth My Father 
also, alleluia: believest thou 
not that I am in the Father, 
and the Father in Me? alleluia, 
alleluia. 


Tanto témpore vobiscum 
sum, et non cognovistis me? 
Philippe, qui videt me, videt 
et Patrem meum, allelüja: 
non credis, quia ego in Patre, 
et Pater in me est? Allelüja, 
allelija. 


Postcommunion 


ILLED with the mysteries 

of salvation, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that we may be 
assisted by the prayers of those 


vzsUMUS, Dómine, salu- 
Q táribus repléti mysté- 
riis: ut, quorum solémnia 
celebrámus, eórum oratióni- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MAY 2—8T. 


bus adjuvémur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Concluding Prayers, Page 793. 


ATHANASIUS 1005 


whose feast we celebrate. 
"Through our Lord. 


May 2—St. Athanasius, Bishop, Confessor, 
l Doctor of the Church (White) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit, Ecclus. 15, 5 


N MEDIO Ecclésie apéruit 
T os ejus: et implévit eum 
Dóminus spíritu sapiéntie et 
intelléctus: stolam glórie ín- 
duit eum, allelija, allelüja. 
Ps. 91, 2. Bonum est confitéri 
Dómino: et psállere nómini 
tuo, Altissime. V. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


N THE midst of the Church 
the Lord opened his 
mouth: and filled him with the 
Spirit of wisdom and under- 
Standing: He clothed him with 
£ robe of glory. Ps. 91, 2. It is 
good to give praise to the Lord; 
and to sing to Thy name, Q 
Most High. Y. Glory. 


Prayer 


xáupr qusesumus, Dó- 

mine, preces nostras, 
quas in beáti Athanásii Con- 
fessóris tui atque Pontíficis 
solemnitáte deférimus: et, qui 
tibi digne méruit famulári, 
ejus intercedéntibus méritis, 
ab ómnibus nos absólve pec- 
cátis. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. 2 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Non nosmetípsos 
predicámus sed Jesum 
Christum Dóminum nostrum: 
nos autem servos vestros per 
Jesum: quóniam Deus, qui 
dixit de ténebris lucem splen- 
déscere, ipse illàxit in córdi- 
bus nostris.ad illuminatiénem 


(3: hear our pray- 
ers, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, which we bring before 
Thee on the solemnity of 
blessed Athanasius, Thy con- 
fessor and pontiff, and, by the 
merits and intercession of him 
who had the grace to serve 
Thee worthily, absolve us of all 
our sins. Through our Lord. 


Cor. 4, 5-14 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. : 

RETHREN, We preach not 

ourselves, but Jesus 
Christ our Lord; and ourselves 
your servants through Jesus. 
For God, Who commanded the 
light to shine out of darkness, 
hath shined in our hearts, to 
give the light of the knowledge 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1006 


of the glory of God, in the face 
of Christ Jesus. But we have 
this treasure in earthen ves- 
sels, that the excellency may 
be of the power of God and not 
of us. In all things we suffer 
tribulation, but are not dis- 
tressed; we are straitened, but 
are not destitute; we suffer per- 
secution, but are not forsaken; 
we are cast down, but we per- 
ish not; always bearing about 
in our body the mortification 
of Jesus, that the life also of 
Jesus may be made manifest 
in our bodies. For we who live 
are always delivered unto death 
for Jesus’ sake; that the life 
also of Jesus, may be made 
manifest in our mortal flesh. 
So then death worketh in us, 
but life in you. But having the 
same spirit of faith, as it is 
written, I believed, for which 
cause I have spoken, we also 
believe, for which cause we 
speak also: knowing that He 
who raised up Jesus will raise 
up us also with Jesus, and place 
us with you. 


MAY 2—ST. ATHANASIUS 


sciéntie claritatis Dei, in facie 
Christi Jesu. Habémus autem 
thesáurum istum in vasis fic- 
tílibus: ut sublímitas sit vir- 
tütis Dei, et non ex nobis, In 
ómnibus: tribulatiónem páti- 
mur, sed non angustiamur: 
aporiámur, sed non destitüi- 
mur: persecutiónem pátimur, 
sed non derelinquimur: deji- 
cimur, sed non perimus: sem- 
per mortificatiónem Jesu in 
córpore nostro circumferén- 
tes, ut et vita Jesu manifesté- 
tur in corpóribus nostris. 
Semper enim nos, qui vívimus, 
in mortem trádimur propter 
Jesum: ut et vita Jesu mani- 
festétur in carne nostra mor- 
tál. Ergo mors in nobis ope- 
rátur, vita autem in vobis, 
Habéntes autem eümdem spí- 
ritum fidei sicut scriptum 
est: Crédidi, propter quod lo- 
cütus sum: et nos crédimus, 
propter quod et lóquimur: sci- 
éntes, quóniam qui suscitávit 
Jesum, et nos cum Jesu susci- 
tábit, et constítuet vobíscum. 


In Votive Masses out of Paschal-time the following Alleluias 


are replaced by the Gradual. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 109, 
4. Thou art a priest for ever, 
according to the order of Mel- 
chisedech. Alleluia. Y. James 
1, 12. Blessed is the man that 
endureth temptation; for when 
he hath been proved, he shall 
receive the crown of life, Alle- 
luia. 


Gradual. 
Behold a great priest, who 


Alleluja, allelija. Y. Ps. 
109, 4. Tu es sacérdos in ztér- 
num secündum órdinem Mel- 
chísedech. Allelija. Y. Jac. 
1, 12. Beátus vir, qui suffert 
tentationem: quóniam cum 
probátus füerit, accipiet coró- 
nam vite. Allelüja. 


Eccl. 44, 16 


Ecce sacérdos magnus, qui 


in his days pleased God. JV. in diébus suis plácuit Deo. V. 
Eccl. 44, 20. There was not any Eccl. 44, 20. Non est invéntus 
found like to him, who kept similis illi, qui conserváret 
the Jaw of the Most High. Al- legem Excélsi. Allelája, alle- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MAY 2—ST. ATHANASIUS 1007 
laja. Y. Jac. 1, 12. Beátus vir leluia, alleluia. Y. James 1, 12. 
qui suffert tentatiónem: quó- Blessed is the man that en- 
niam cum probatus fuerit, dureth temptation; for when 


accipiet corónam vitæ. Ale- he hath been proved, he shall 


ja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


receive the crown of life. Al- 
leluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 10, 23-28 


H4 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Matthzeum. 


I" ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus discipulis suis: Cum 
persequéntur vos in civitáte 
ista, fügite in áliam. Amen 
dico vobis, non consummábi- 
tis civitátes Israél, donec vé- 
niat Fílius hóminis. Non est 
discípulus super magistrum, 
nec servus super Dóminum 
suum. Súffcit discípulo, ut 
Sit sicut magíster ejus: et 
servo, sicut. dóminus ejus. Si 
patremfamílias Beélzebub vo- 
cavérunt: quanto magis do- 
mésticos ejus? Ne ergo tim- 
uéritis eos. Nihil enim est 
opértum, quod non revelábi- 
tur: et occültum, quod non 
Sciétur. Quod dico vobis in 
ténebris, dícite in lümine: et 
quod in aure auditis, predi- 
eate super tecta. Et nolite 
timére eos, qui occidunt cor- 
pus, ánimam autem non pos- 
sunt occidere: sed  pótius 
timéte eum, qui potest áni- 
mam et corpus pérdere in 
gehénnam. 


Creed, page 765. 


"K Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus said 

to His disciples, When 
they shall persecute you in this 
city, flee to another. Amen, I 
say to you, you shall not finish 
all the cities of Israel till the 
Son of man come. The dis- 
ciple is not above the master, 
nor the servant above his lord. 
It is enough for the disciple 
that he be as his master, and 
the servant as his lord. If they 
have called the good man of 
the house Beelzebub, how 
much more them of his house- 
hold? Therefore fear them 
not; for nothing is covered that 
shall not be revealed; nor hid 
that shall not be known. That 
which I tell you in the dark, 
speak ye in the light; and that 
which you hear in the ear, 
preach ye upon the housetops. 
And fear ye not them that kill 
the body, and are not able to 
kill the soul; but rather fear 
Him that can destroy both soul 
and body into hell. 


Offertory. Ps. 88, 24, 22 


Invéni David servum me- I have found David my ser- 
um, Óleo sancto meo unxi vant: with my holy oil I have 
eum: manus enim mea auxilii anointed him; for my arm 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1008 


shall help him, and my hand 
Shall strengthen him, alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


MAY 3—FINDING OF THE HOLY CROSS 


ábitur ei, et bráchium meum 
confortábit eum, allelija, 


Secret 


Av ihe annual solemnity 
XD of St. Athanasius, Thy 
confessor, commend us to Thy 
loving-kindness, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that, by this 
office of pious atonement, a 
blessed reward may follow him, 
and he may obtain for us the 
gifts of Thy grace. Through 
our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


That which I tell you in the 
dark, speak ye in the lght, 
saith the Lord; and that which 
you hear in the ear, preach ye 
upon the housetops, alleluia. 


ANCTI Athanásii Confes- 
sóris tui atque Pontificis, 
quesumus, Dómine, ánnua so- 
lémnitas pietáti tuz nos red- 
dat accéptos: ut, per hac pie 
placatiónis officia, et illum be- 
ata retribütio comitétur, et 
nobis grátie tue dona con- 
ciliet. Per Dóminum. 


Matt. 10, 27 


Quod dico vobis in ténebris, 
dicite in lümine, dicit Dómi- 
nus: et quod in aure auditis, 
predicáte super tecta, alle- 
lúja. 


Postcommunton . 


cop, the rewarder of 
Q faithful souls, grant that, 
by the prayers of blessed Atha- 
nasius, Thy confessor and 
bishop, whose august festival 
we celebrate, we may obtain 
pardon; Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EUS, fidélium remunerá- 

tor animárum: presta; 

ut beáti Athanásii Confessóris 

tul atque Pontíficis, cujus ve- 

nerándam celebrámus festivi- 

tatem, précibus indulgéntiam 
consequámur. Per Dóminum. 


May 3—Q e Finding of the Holp Cross, (Red) 
Double of the Second Class 


Sts. Alexander, Chentius, Theodulus anb Jubenal, Martyrs 


If this feast is transferred beyond the Paschal season, the 
Mass below is celebrated, but the alleluia after the Introit and 
Communion, and the commemoration of Sts. Alexander and 
Companions are omitted, and the Gradual will be that of the 
{gast of the Ezaltation of the Holy Cross, September 14, page 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MAY 3—FINDING OF THE HOLY CROSS 


1009 


Introit. Gal. 6, 14 


os autem gloriári opór- 
tet in cruce Dómini 
nostri Jesu Christi in quo est 
salus, vita, et resurréctio nos- 
tra per quem salváti, et libe- 
ráti sumus, allelija, allelüja. 
Ps. 66, 2. Deus misereátur 
nostri, et benedicat nobis: il- 
lüminet vultum suum super 
nos, et misereátur nostri. Y. 
Gloria Patri. 


ur it behooves us to glory 
J in the cross of our Lord 
Jesus Christ: in Whom is our 
Salvation, life, and resurrec- 
tion: by Whom we are saved 
and delivered, alleluia, alleluia. 
Ps. 66, 2. May God have mercy 
on us and bless us: May He 
cause the light of His counte- 
nance to shine upon us, and 
may He have mercy on us. Jf. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloría, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui in preclára sal- 

utifere Crucis Inven- 

lone, passiónis tue mirácula 

suscitasti: concéde; ut vitális 

ligni prétio, etérne vitæ suf- 

frágia consequámur: Qui vi- 
vis. 


cop, Who, in the glorious 

finding of the cross of 
our salvation, didst renew the 
miracles of Thy passion, grant 
that, by the price of that life- 
giving wood, we may obtain the 
privilege of eternal life. Who 
livest. 


Commemoration of Sts. Alexander and Companions, in low 


Masses only. 


Prayer 


RÆSTA, quesumus, omni- 

potens Deus: ut, qui 
sanctórum tuórum Alexándri, 
Evéntii, Theodüli, atque Ju- 
venális natalítia cólimus; a 
cunctis malis imminéntibus 
eórum intercessiónibus libe- 
rémur. Per Dóminum. 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that, vene- 
rating the natal feast of Thy 
saints, Alexander, Eventius, 
Theodulus, and Juvenal, we 
may, by their intercessions, be 
delivered from all the evils 
that threaten us. Through our 
Lord. 


Epistle. Philipp. 2, 5-11 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Philippénses. 


RATRES: Hoc enim sentíte 


in vobis, quod et in 


Christo Jesu: qui cum in 


33 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Philippians. 

RETHREN, Let this mind be 
in you, which was also 
in Christ Jesus; who, being in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1010 


the form of God, thought it not 
robbery to be equal with God; 
but made Himself as nothing, 
taking the form of a servant, 
being made in the likeness of 
men, and in habit found as a 
man. He humbled Himself, be- 
coming obedient unto death, 
even the death of the cross. 
For which cause God also hath 
exalted Him, and hath given 
Him a name which is above all 
names: (Here all kneel down) 
that in the name of Jesus every 
knee should bow, of those that 
are in heaven, on earth, and 
under the earth; and that ev- 
ery tongue should confess that 
the Lord Jesus Christ is in the 
glory of God the Father. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 95, 
10. Say ye among the gentiles, 
that thé Lord hath reigned 
from the wood. Alleluia. JY. 
Sweet the wood, sweet the 
nails, sweet the load that hangs 
thereon, to bear up the King 
and Lord of heaven, no tree 
was worthy, save thou, O holy 
cross, Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


MAY 3—FINDING OF THE HOLY CROSS 


forma Dei esset, non rapinam 
arbitrátus est esse se eequálem 
Deo: sed semetípsum exina- 
nívit formam servi accipiens, 
in similitüdinem hóminum 
factus, et hábitu invéntus ut 
homo. Humiliávit semetíp- 
sum, factus obédiens usque ad 
mortem, mortem autem cru- 
cis. Propter quod et Deus ex- 
altávit ilum: et donávit illi 
nomen, quod est super omne 
nomen: (hic genuflectitur) 
ut in nómine Jesu omne genu 
flectátur celéstium, terréstri- 
um, et infernórum: et omnis 
lingua confiteátur, quia Dó- 
minus Jesus Christus in 
glória est Dei Patris. 


Allehija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 95, 
10. Dicite in géntibus, quia 
Dóminus regnávit a ligno. Al- 
lelúja. Y. Dulce lignum, dul- 
ces clavos, dülcia ferens pón- 
dera: que sola füísti digna 
sustinére Regem celérum, et 
Dóminum. Allelüja. 


Gospel. John 3, 1-15 


"8 Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime, There was 

‘a man of the Pharisees, 
named Nicodemus, a ruler of 
the Jews. This man came to 
Jesus by night; and said to 
Him, Rabbi, we know that 
Thou art come, a teacher from 
God; for no man can do these 
signs which Thou dost, unless 
God be with him. Jesus an- 
Swered and said to him; Amen, 
amen, I say to thee, unless a 


% Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 


ILLO témpore: Erat homo 

ex Pharismis, Nicodémus 
nómine, princeps Judzórum. 
Hic venit ad Jesum nocte, et 
dixit ei: Rabbi, scimus quia 
a Deo venísti magíster, nemo 
enim potest hec signa facere, 
que tu facis, nisi füerit Deus 
cum eo. Respóndit Jesus, et 
dixit ei: Amen, amen dico 
tibi nisi quis renátus füerit 
dénuo, non potest vidére reg- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


<a A tla a it cl iliac eh 


pita RR 


MAY 3—FINDING OF THE HOLY CROSS 


num Dei. Dicit ad eum Nico- 
démus: Quómodo potest homo 
nasci, cum sit senex? num- 
Quid potest in ventrem matris 
Sue iteráto introíre, et re- 
násci? Respóndit Jesus: 
Amen, amen dico tibi, nisi 
quis renátus füerit ex aqua, et 
Spíritu Sancto, non potest in- 
troire in regnum Dei. Quod 
natum est ex carne, caro est: 
et quod natum est ex spíritu, 
Spiritus est. Non miréris quia 
dixi tibi: opórtet vos nasci 
dénuo. Spíritus ubi vult spi- 
rat, et vocem ejus audis, sed 
nescis unde véniat, aut quo 
vadat: sic est omnis, qui na- 
tus est ex spíritu. Hespóndit 
Nicodémus, et dixit ei: Quó- 
modo possunt hzc fieri? Re- 
spóndit Jesus, et dixit ei: Tu 
es magister in Israél, et hzc 
ignóras? Amen, amen dico 
tibi, quia quod scimus lóqui- 
mur, et quod vídimus testá- 
mur, et testimónium nostrum 
non accípitis. Si terréna dixi 
vobis, et- non créditis: quó- 
modo, si dfxero vobis celéstia, 
credétis? Et nemo ascéndit in 
colum nisi qui descéndit de 
celo, Filius hóminis, qui est in 
celo. Et sicut Móyses exaltá- 
vit serpéntum in desérto; ita 
exaltári opórtet Fílium hómi- 
nis: ut omnis qui credit in ip- 
sum, non péreat, sed habeat 
vitam ætérnam. 


1011 


man. be born again, he can not 
see the kingdom of God. Nico- 
demus said to Him, How can a 
man be born again, when he is 
old? Can he enter a second 
time into his mother's womb, 
and be born again? Jesus an- 
Swered, Amen, amen, I say to 
thee, unless a man be born 
again of water and the Holy 
Ghost, he can not enter into 
the" kingdom of God. That 
which is born of the flesh, is 
flesh; and that which is born 
of the spirit, is spirit. Wonder 
not that I said to thee, You 
must be born again. The Spirit 
breatheth where He will; and 
thou hearest His: voice, but 
thou knowest not whence He 
cometh, nor whither He goeth; 
so is every one that is born of 
the Spirit. Nicodemus an- 
swered and said to Him, How 
can these things be done? 
Jesus answered, and said to 
him, Art thou a master in Is- 
rael and knowest not these 
things? Arnen, amen, I say to 
thee, that we speak what we 
know, and we testify what we 
have seen, and you receive not 
our testimony. If I have spoken 
to you earthly things, and you 
believe not; how will you be- 
lieve if I shall speak to you 
heavenly things? And no man 
hath ascended into heaven, but 
He that descended from heav- 
en, the Son of man Who is in 


heaven. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the desert, so 
must the Son of man be lifted up; tbat whosoever believeth in 
Him may not perish but may have life everlasting. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 117, 16, 17 


Dextera Dómini fecit vir- 
tútem. déxtera Dómini exal- 


The right hand of the Lord 
hath wrought strength, the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


101a 


right hand of the Lord hath 
exalted me: I shall not die, but 
live, and shall declare the works 
of the Lord, alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


MAY 3—FINDING OF THE HOLY CROSS 


távit me: non móriar, sed vi- 
vam, et narrábo ópera Dó- 
mini, allelüja. 


Secret 


Jue with favor, O Lord, 
: upon the sacrifice which 
we immolate to Thee, that it 
may preserve us from the hor- 
rors of war and, through the 
banner of the holy cross of 
Thy Son, may establish us in 
the security of Thy protection, 
to trample under foot the 
snares of the enemy's power. 
Through the same. 


acriricrom, Dómine, quod 

tibi immolamus placá- 
ius inténde: ut ab omni 
nos éruat bellórum nequitia, 
et per vexíllum sancte Crucis 
Filii tui, ad conteréndas po- 
testátis advérse insídias, nos 
in tue protectiónis securitáte 
constituat. Per eümdem Dó- 
minum. 


Commemoration of Sts. Alexander and Companions, in low 


Masses only. 


Secret 


ET plenteous benediction, 

we beseech Thee, O Lord, 
descend upon these sacrifices, 
both to work Thy merciful 
sanctification in us and .to 
bring us joy in the solemnity 
of Thy saints. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


UPER has hóstias, quesu- 
mus, Dómine, benedíctio 
copiésa,  descéndat: que et 
sanctifieatiónem nobis cle- 
ménter operétur, et de Sanc- 
tórum nos solemnitáte læti- 
ficet. Per Dóminum. 


Communion 


By the sign of the cross, de- 
liver us from our enemies, O 
'Thou our God, alleluia. 


Per signum Crucis de ini- 
micis nostris lfbera nos, Deus 
noster, allelija. 


Postcommunion 


iLLED with beavenly food, 
and refreshed with the 
spiritual cup, we beseech Thee, 
O almighty God, that Thou 
defend us from the malice of 


.EPLÉTI alimónia celésti, 

et spiritáli póculo re- 
creáti, quesumus, omnipotens 
Deus: ut ab hoste maligno de- 
féndas, quos per lignum sanc- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MAY 5--ST. PIUS V, POPE 


te Crucis Fílii tui, arma justi- 
tie pro salute mundi, trium- 
Phare jussisti, Per eümdem 
Dóminum. 


1018 


the enemy, as Thou hast bid- 
den us triumph by the wood of 
the holy cross, the armor of 
justice for the salvation of the 
world. Through the same 


Commemoration of Sts. Alexander and Companions, in low 


Masses only- 


Postcommunion 


ErFÉCTI participatióne 
müneris sacri, quesu- 
mus, Dómine Deus noster: ut, 
cujus exséquimur cultum, in- 
tercedéntibus sanctis tuis Al- 
exándro, Evéntio, Theodülo, 
et Juvenále, sentiámus efféc- 
tum. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EFRESHED by partaking of 

Thy sacred gift, we pray, 

'Thee, O Lord, our God, that by 

ihe intercessions of Thy. saints 

Alexander, Eventius, Theodu- 

Ius, and Juvenal, we may expe- 

rience the effect of that to 

which we pay our Worship. 
"Through our Lord. 


May 4—St. Monica, Widow (White) 


Double 
Mass, Cognovi, page 1383, except: 


Prayer 


Eus, mezréntium conso- 

látor et in te speránti- 
um salus, qui beáte Ménice 
pias lácrymas in conversióne 
fílii sui Augustini misericór- 
diter suscepísti: da nobis utri- 
usque intervéntu, peccáta no- 
stra deploráre, et gratie tue 
indulgéntiam  invénire. Per 
Dóminum. 


cop, the consoler of them 

that mourn and the 
health of them that hope in 
Thee, Who didst show Thine 
acceptance of blessed Monica’s 
pious tears in the conversion 
of her son Augustine, grant us, 
by the intercession of them 
both, to deplore our sins and 
find the mercy of Thy grace. 
Through our Lord. 


Epistle, Honor widows, page 1388. 
Gospel, At that time Jesus went into a city, page 691. 


May 5—St. Pius V, Pope, Confessor (White) 
Double 
Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302, except: 
Prayer 


£us, qui ad conteréndos 
Ecclésim tuæ hostes, et 


Gop, Who didst vouchsafe 
to choose blessed Pius 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1014 


Thy chief bishop for the crush- 
ing of the enemies of 'Thy 
Church and the restoration of 
divine worship, make us to be 
defended by his watchful care 
and so to adhere to Thy service 
that, all the contrivances of 
our enemies being overcome, 
we may rejoice in everlasting 
peace. Through our Lord. 


MAY 6—ST. JOHN, EVANGELIST 


ad divínum cultum reparán- 
dum, beátum Pium Pontíficem 
máximum eligere dignátus es: 
fac nos ipsíus deféndi presi- 
diis, et ita tuis inhzrére ob- 
séquiis: ut ómnium hóstium 
Superátis insídiis, perpétua 
pace Letémur. Per Dóminum. 


May 6-—St. John before the Latin Gate, (Red) 


Double Major 
Mass, Protexisti, page 1328, except: 


Prayer 


cop, Who beholdest that 

our own ill deeds disquiet 
us on every side, grant, we be- 
seech Thee, that the glorious 
intercession of blessed John, 
Thine apostle and evangelist, 
may be our protection. Through 
our Lord. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 91, 
13. The just shall flourish like 
the palm-tree; he shall grow 
üp like the cedar of Libanus. 
Alleluia. Y. Osee 14, 6. The 
just shall spring as the lily: 
and flourish for ever before 
the Lord. Alleluia. 


EUS, qui cónspicis quia 

nos ündique mala no- 

Stra pertürbant: presta, que- 

sumus; ut beáti Joánnis Apó- 

stoli tui et Evangeliste inter- 

céssio gloriósa nos prótegat. 
Per Dóminum. 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 91, 
13. Justus ut palma florébit: 
sicut cedrus Líbani multipli- 
cabitur. V. Osee, 14, 6. Justus 
germinábit sicut lilium: et 
florébit in etérnum ante Dô- 
minum. Allelija. 


Gospel. Matt. 20, 20-23 


44 Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, the mother 

of the sons of Zebedee 
came to Jesus with her sons, 
worshipping, and asking some- 
thing of Him. Who said to her: 
Wnhat wilt thou? She saith to 
Him: Say that these my two 
ons may sit, the one on Thy 


YH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii sechndum Matthzeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Accéssit 

ad Jesum mater filiórum 
Zebedzi cum fíliis suis, adór- 
ans, et petens áliquid ab eo. 
Qui dixit ei: Quid vis? Ait 
ili: Dic ut sédeant hi duo 
fiii mei, unus ad déxteram 
tuam, et unus ad sinístram in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


— 


MAY 7—ST. 


regno tuo. Respóndens autem 
Jesus, dixit: Nescítis quid pe- 
tátis. Potéstis bibere cálicem, 
quem ego bibitürus sum? Di- 
cunt ei: Póssumus. Ait illis: 
Cálicem quidem meum bibé- 
tis: sedére autem ad dexteram 
meam, vel sinístram, non est 
meum dare vobis, sed quibus 
parátum est a Patre meo. 


Creed, page 765. 


STANISLAUS 1015 


right hand, and the other on 


Thy left, in Thy kingdom. And 
Jesus answering, said: You 


know not what you ask, can 
you drink the chalice that X 


shall drink? They say to Him: 
We can. He saith to them: My 
chalice indeed you shall drink; 
but to sit on my right or left 
hand is not Mine to give to you, 
but to them for whom it is 


prepared by My Father. 


Secret 


'UNÉRIBUS nostris, que- 

sumus, Dómine, preci- 
büsque suscéptis: et celésti- 
bus nos munda mystériis, et 
cleménter exáudi. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


ECEIVING our gifts and 
prayers, we beseech 


Thee, O Lord, do Thou cleanse 


us with Thy heavenly myste- 
ries and mercifully hear us. 
Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


IR s Dómine, pane 
celésti: ad vitam, que- 
sumus, nutriámur ztérnam. 
Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EFRESHED with the bread 

of heaven, we beseech 

Thee, O Lord, that we may be 

nourished unto everlasting life. 
Through our Lord. 


May 1—St. Stanislaus, Bishop, Martyr (Red) 


Double 
Mass, Protexisti, page 1328, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, pro cujus honóre 
Bloriósus Póntifex Sta- 
nisláus gládiis impiórium oc- 
cubuit: presta, quzsumus: ut 
omnes, qui ejus iniplórant 
auxílium, petitiónis sue salu- 
tárem consequántur efféctum. 
Per Dóminum. 


cop, for Whose honor 

Stanislaus, the glorious 
bishop, fell by the sword of 
the impious, grant, we beseech 
Thee, that all who implore his 
aid may obtain the salutary 
effect of their petition. Through 
our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1016 


MAY 10—ST. ANTONINUS 


Secret, Sanctify, O Lord, from Mass, Sacerdotes, page 1308, 
Postcommunion, May this communion, from Mass, Sacerdotes, 


page 1308. 


May 8—@ppatition of St. 


Michael the Archangel, 


(White) 
Double Major 
Mass, Benedicite, as on Sept. 29, page 1213. 


May 9—St. Gregorp azianszen, Bishop, Confessor, 
Doctor of the Church (White) 


Double 


Mass, In medio, page 1344, except Epistle is that contained at 
the end of that Mass, The just man. 


May 10—$t. Antoninus, Bishop, Confessor (White) 


Double 
Mass, Statuit ei, page 1337, except: 


Prayer 


by the merits of St. An- 
toninus, Thy confessor and 
bishop, that, as we declare ‘Thee 
wonderful in him, so we may 
glory in Thy mercy toward us. 
Through our Lord. 


(D; we be assisted, O Lord, 


Prayer, 
Epimachus. 


Secret and Postcommunion of Sts. 


Confesséris tui atque 

tificis, méritis adjuvémur: 

ut, sicut te in illo mirábilem 

predicamus, ita in nos miseri- 

córdem fuísse gloriémur. Per 
Dóminum. 


S Antoníni, Dómine, 
‘on 


Gordian and 


Prayer | 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we, 
who venerate the festival of 
Thy blessed martyrs Gordian 
and Epimachus, may be helped 
by their intercession with Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


A QUISSUMUS, omnípotens 
Deus: ut, qui beatórum 
Mártyrum tuórum Gordiáni 
et Epimáchi solémnia cóli- 
mus eórum apud te interces- 
siónibus adjuvémur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 
the sacrifices dedicated 
to the merits of Thy blessed 


éstias tibi, Dómine, be- 
atérum Mártyrum tuó. 
rum Gordiáni et Epímachi di~ 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ww 7 


MAY 12—STS. NEREUS AND COMPANIONS 1017 
cátas méritis, benígnus as- martyrs, Gordian and Epima- 
súme: et ad perpétuum nobis chus, and grant that they may 
tríbue proveníre subsídium. profit for our everlasting assis- 


Per Dóminum. 


tance. Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


UxsuMUS, omnipotens 

Deus: ut, qui celéstia 
aliménta percépimus, inter- 
cedéntibus sanctis Martyribus 
tuis Gordiáno et Epímácho, 
per hzc contra ómnia advérsa 
muniamur, Per Dóminum. 


May 12—ts. Pereus, 


Qa BESEECH Thee, O al- 
mighty God, that we, 
who have partaken of heavenly 
nourishment, may, by the in- 
tercession of Thy holy mar- 
tyrs, Gordian.and Epimachus, 
be thereby fortified against all 


adverse influences. Through 
our Lord. 
Achilleus, Domitilla and 


3Bantras, Martyrs (Red) 
Semi-double 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


cce Óculi Dómini super 
timéntes eum, sperán- 
tes in misericórdia ejus, alle- 
lúja: ut erípiat a morte áni- 
mas eórum: quóniam adjutor, 
et protéctor noster est, alle- 
lüja. Ps. 32, 1. Exsultáte, 
justi, in Dómino: rectos decet 
collaudátio. V. Glória Patri. 


Ps. 32, 18-20 


EHOLD the eyes of the Lord 
B are on them that fear 
im, hoping in His mercy, al- 
leluia: to deliver their souls 
from death; for He is our 
helper and protector, alleluia, 
alleluia. Ps. 32, 1. Rejoice in 
ihe Lord, ye just: praise be- 
cometh the upright. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EMPER nos, Dómine, Már- 

tyrum tudrum  Nérei, 
AcInnei, Domitílle atque Pan- 
cratii fóveat, quaesumus, be- 
ata solémnitas: et tuo dignos 
reddat obséquio, Per Dómi- 
num. 


ET the blessed solemnity 

of Thy martyrs, Nereus, 
Achilleus, Domitilla, and Pan- 
Cras, ever comfort us, we be- 
Seech Thee, O Lord, and render 
us worthy of Thy service. 
Through our Lord. 


Lesson from the Mass, Protexisti, page 1330. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Hec 
est vera fratérnitas: que vicit 


Alleluia, alleluia, V. This is 
a, true brotherhood, which hath 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1018 


overcome the sins of the world: 
it hath followed Christ, lay- 
ing hold upon the heavenly 
kingdom. Alleluia. Jf. The 
white-robed army of martyrs 
praiseth Thee, O Lord. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Offertory. 


The heavens shall confess 
Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the church of the 
saints, alleluia, alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


MAY 12—STS. NEREUS AND COMPANIONS 


mundi crimina, Christum se- 
cüta est, inclyta tenens regna 
celestia. Allelüja. V. Te Már- 
tyrum candidátus laudat ex- 
ércitus, Dómine. Allelüja, 


Ps. 88, 6 


Confitebüntur cceli mirabí- 
lia tua, Dómine, et veritátem 
tuam in ecclésia sanctórum, 
allelija, allelüja. 


Secret 


ET the confession of Thy 

holy martyrs, Nereus, 
Achilleus, Domitilla, and Pan- 
cras, be pleasing unto Thee, we 
beseech, O Lord, both to com- 
mend our offerings and ever to 
implore Thy pardon for us. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


ANCTÓRUM Mártyrum tu- 

órum, qusesumus, Dó- 
mine, Nérei, Achíllei, Domi- 
tílle atque Pancrátii sit tibi 
grata conféssio: que et mu- 
nera nostra comméndet, et 
tuam nobis indulgéntiam 
semper implóret. Per Dómin- 
um. 


Communion. Ps. 32, 1 


Rejoice, ye just in the Lord, 
alleluia: praise becometh the 
upright, alleluia. 


Gaudéte, justi, in Dómino, 
allelija: rectos decet collau- 
dátio, allelüja. 


Postcommunion 


E BESEECH Thee, O Lord, 

that by the supplica- 
tions of Thy blessed martyrs, 
Nereus, Achilleus, Domitilla, 
2nd Pancras, the holy sacra- 
ments which we have received 
may profit us for the increase 


of 'Thy favor. Through our 
Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, pago 793. 


UEsUMUS, Dómine: ut 
beatórum Mártyrum tu- 
órum Né-ei, Achíllei, Domitil- 
le atque Pancratii depreca- 
tiónibus, sacraménta sancta 
quas simpsimus, ad tuz nobis- 
profíciant placatiónis aug- 
méntum. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MAY 13—ST. ROBERT BELLARMINE 


1019 


May 13—t. Robert Bellarmine, Bishop, Confessor, 
Doctor of the Church (White) 


Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui ad errérum in- 
Sídias repelléndas et 
Apostélice Sedis jura propug- 
nánda beátum  Robértum, 
Pontíficem tuum atque Doc- 
tórem, mira eruditióne et vir- 
tüte decorásti: ejus méritis et 
intereessióne concéde; ut nos 
in veritátis amóre crescámus, 
et errántium corda ad Ecclé- 
siz tue rédeant unitátem. Per 
Dóminum. 


cop, who didst adorn 

blessed Robert, Thy 
Bishop and Doctor, with mar- 
velous learning and virtue to 
expose the deceptions of ‘error 
and to defend the rights of the 
Apostolic See, grant that, by 
his merits and intercession, 
love for the truth may increase 
in us and the souls of the err- 
ing may return to the unity of 
Thy Church. ‘Through our 
Lord. 


Epistle as on feast of St. Thomas Aquinas, page 938. 


Allelüja, allelija. y. Dan. 
12, 3. Qui docti füerint, ful- 
gébunt quasi splendor firma- 
ménti. Allelüja. Y. Qui ad jus- 
titiam erüdiant multos, quasi 
stelle in perpétuas eternita- 
tes. Allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Dan. 12, 
3. They that are learned shall 
shine as the brightness of the 


firmament. Alleluia. Y. They 


that instruct many to justice, 
as stars for all eternity. Alle- 
luia. 


In Votive Masses outside of Paschal-time is said: 


Gradual. Ecclus. 44, 16 


Ecce sacérdos magnus, qui Behold a great priest, who 
in diébus suis plácuit Deo et in his days pleased God and 
invéntus est justus. Y. Eccl. was found just. Y. Eccl. 44, 20. 
44, 20. Non est invéntus sími- There was not any found like 
lis illi, qui conserváret legem to him, who kept the Jaw of the 
Excélsi. Most High. 

Allelüja, allelija. Y. Dan. Alleluia, alleluia. Dan. 12, 3. 
12, 3. Qui docti füerint, ful- They that are learned shall 
Eébunt quasi splendor firma- shine as the brightness of the 
ménti. Allelüja. firmament, Alleluia. 


Tract. Ps. 91, 2, 3, 5 


Bonum est confitéri Dó- It is good to give praise to 
mino, et psállere nómini tuo the Lord, and to sing to Thy 
Altíssime. Y. Ad annuntián- name, O Most High. V. 'To show 
dum mane misericórdiam tu- forth Thy mercy in the morn- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1020 


ing, and Thy truth in the night. 
V. For Thou hast given me, O 
Lord, a delight in Thy doings, 
and in the works of Thy hands 
I shall rejoice. 


Creed, page 765. 


MAY 13—ROBERT BELLARMINE 


am, et veritátem tuam per 
noctem. Y. Quia delectásti 
me, Dómine, in factüra tua, 
et in opéribus mánuum tüar- 
um exsultábo. 


Offertory. Ps. 72, 28 


Tt is good for me to adhere 
to my God, to put my hope in 
my Lord, that I may declare 


Mihi autem adherére Deo 
bonum est, pónere in Dómino 
Deo spem meam: ut annün- 


all Thy-praises in the gates of tiem omnes predicationes 
the daughter of Sion. Alleluia. tuas in portis filie Sion, Alle- 
Taja. ^ 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


E OFFER this sacrifice 

unto Thee, O Lord, for 

an odor of sweetness; grant 

that, taught by the instruction 

and example of blessed Robert, 

we may with enlarged heart 

run the way of Thy command- 
ments. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


You are the. light of the 
world: so let your light shine 
before all men that they may 
see your good works and glorify 
your Father Who is in heaven. 
Alleluia. 


éstias tibi, Dómine, in 

odórem suavitatis of- 
férimus; et presta ut beáti 
Robérti mónitis et exemplis 
edécti, per sémitam manda- 
tórum tuórum dilatéto corde 
currámus. Per Dóminum. 


Matt. 5, 14 


Vos estis lux mundi: sic lú- 
ceat lux vestra coram homini- 
bus, ut videant ópera vestra 
bona, et glorificent Patrem 
vestrum qui in celis est. Alle- 
lija. 


Postcommunion 


ay the sacraments which 
we have received, O 


ACRAMENTA, quæ sümpsi- 
mus, Dómine, Deus nos- 


Lord, our God, inflame us with ter, in nobis fóveant caritatis 
that fire of love which ardently ardórem: quo beátus Robér- 
consumed blessed Robert and tus veheménter accénsus, pro 
led him to spend himself con- Ecclésia tua se jugiter impen- 
tinually for Thy Church. débat. Per Dóminum. 
‘Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MAY 15. gT. JOHN BAPTIST DE LA SALLE 


1021 


May 14—$5t. Bontface, Martyr (Red) 
Simple 
Mass, Protexisti, page 1328, except: 


Prayer 


A,QUzSUMUS, omnipotens 
Deus: ut, qui beáti Bo- 
nifátii Mártyris tui solémnia 
cólimus, ejus apud te interces- 
siénibus adjuvémur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Gi we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that, keep- 
ing the festival of Thy blessed 
martyr, Boniface, we may be 
helped by his intercession with 
‘Thee, Through our Lord. 


Secret 


UNÉRIBUS nostris quesu- 
” mus Dómine precibüs- 
que suscéptis: et celéstibus 
nos munda mystériis, et cle- 
menter exáudi. Per Dóminum. 


ECEIVE, We beseech Thee, 
O Lord, our offerings 
and prayers: cleanse us .by 


virtue of these heavenly mys- 


teries and graciously hear us. 
Through our Lord. 03 


Postcommunion 


EFÉCTY  participatiéne 
múneris sacri, quesu- 
ómine Deus noster: ut 

cujus exséquimur cultum, in- 
tercedénte bedto  Bonifatio. 
Mártyre tuo atque Pontifice, 
sentiámus efféctum. Per Dó- 
minum. 


UR Strength renewed from 

having shared in Thy 
Sacred Gift, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord our God, that by the 
intercession of Blessed Boni- 
face, Thy Martyr and Bishop, 
we may ever feel the mighty 
power of the Sacrament we 
worship. Through our Lord. 


May 15—St. John Baptist de la Salle, Confessor 
(White) 
Double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui ad christianam 

páuperum eruditiónem, 
et ad juvéntam in via veri- 
tátis firmándam, sanctum 
Joánnem Baptistam Confes- 
sórem excitásti, et novam per 
eum in Ecclésia familiam col- 
begisti: concéde propítius; ut 


cop, Who, for the Chris- 

: tian instruction of the 
poor, and the strengthening of 
the young in the way of truth, 
didst raise up St. John Baptist, 
the confessor, and, through 
him, didst gather a new family 
within Thy Church, mercifully 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1022 MAY 16—ST. UBALDUS 

grant that, by his intercession ejus intercessiéne et exémplo, 
and example, fervent in zeal studio glérie tue in animaérum 
for Thy glory and the salvation salute fervéntes, ejus in colis 
of souls, we may be enabled to corén# participes fíeri valeá- 


become sharers of his crown in 
heaven. Through our Lord. 


mus. Per Dóminum. 


Gospel. Matt. 18, 1.5 


% Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, the disciples 

came to Jesus saying: 
Who, thinkest Thou, is the 
greater in the kingdom of 
heaven? And Jesus calling 
unto Him a little child, set him 
in the midst of them and said: 
Amen I say to you, unless you 
be converted and become as 
little children, you shall not 
enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. Whosoever therefore 
shall humble himself as this 
little child, he is the greater in 
the kingdom of heaven. And he 
that shall receive one such 
little child in My name re- 
ceiveth Me. 


H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Matthszum. 


N ILLO témpore: Accessér- 
unt discípuli ad Jesum, 
dicéntes: Quis, putas, major 
est in regno celórum? Et ád- 
vocans Jesus párvulum, stát- 
uit eum in médio eórum, et 
dixit: Amen dico vobis, nisi 
convérsi fuéritis, et efficiámini 
Sicut párvuli, non intrábitis 
in regnum coelórum. Quicüm- 
que ergo humiliáverit se sicut 
párvulus iste, hic est major in 
regno cel6rum. Et qui sus- 
céperit unum párvulum talem 
in nómine meo, me süscipit. 


May 16e—St. Gbaldus, Bishop, Confessor (White) 


Semi-double 
Mass, Statuit ei, page 1337, except: 


Prayer 


E PLEASED to bestow upon 
us Thine assistance, we 


UXILIUM tuum nobis, 
Dómine, quesumus, 


beseech Thee, O Lord, and, by placatus impénde: et, inter- 
the intercession of blessed cessióne beáti Ubaldi Confes- 
Ubaldus, Thy confessor and sóris tui atque  Pontíficis, 
bishop, Stretch forth over us contra omnes diáboli nequitias 
the right hand of Thy mercy déxteram super nos tue pro- 
against all the craft of the pitiatiónis exténde, Per Dó- 
devil Through our Lord. minum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MAY 18—ST. VENANTIUS 


1023 


May 17—St. Paschal Baplon, Confessor (White) 


Double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui beátum Paschá- 
D lem Confessérem tuum 
mirifica, erga córporis et sán- 
guinis tui sacra mystéria di- 
lectióne decorásti: concéde 
propítius; ut, quam ille ex hoc 
divíno convívio spíritus percé- 
pit pinguédinem, eámdem et 
nos percípere mereámur: Qui 
vivis, 


cop, Who didst adorn 

blessed Paschal, Thy con- 
fessor, with a wonderful love 
for the sacred mysteries of Thy 
body and blood, mercifully 
grant that we, too, may be 
worthy to feel the same unc- 
tion of the spirit which he re- 
ceived from this divine ban- 
quet. Who livest. 


May 18—$t: "Venantius, Martyr (Red) 


Double 


Mass, Protexisti, page 1328; if this feast is celebrated afte) 
the. Paschal season the Mass will be In virtute, page 1309, and 
the Gospel from the Mass, Statuit, page 1304, with the proper 


prayers, as follows: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui hunc diem beáti 

Venántii Mártyris tui 
iriümpho consecrásti: exáudi 
preces pópuli tui, et presta; 
ut, qui ejus mérita venerámur, 
fídel constántiam imitémur. 
Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who hast conse- 
crated this day to the tri- 


umph of blessed Venantius, 


Thy martyr, harken to the 
prayers of Thy people, and 
grant that we, who venerate 
his merits, may imitate the 
constancy of his faith. Through 
our Lord. 


Secret 


ANC oblatiónem, omnípo- 

tens Deus, beáti Venán- 

tii mérita tibi reddant accép- 

tam: ut, ipsíus subsídiis ad- 

juti, glérie ejus consórtes ef- 
ficiámur. Per Dóminum, 


ay the merits of blessed 

Venantius render this 
oblation acceptable to Thee, O 
almighty God, that, being as- 
sisted by his help, we may be 
made sharers of his glory. 
Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


tmupsimus, Dómine, ætér- 
ne vite sacraménta, te 
humíliter deprecántes: ut, 
beáto Venántio Mártyre tuo 


E HAVE partaken, O Lord, 
of the sacrament of 
eternal life, humbly beseeching 
Thee, that by the prayer of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1024 


blessed Venantius in our behalf 


it may gain for us pardon and 
grace, Through our Lord. 


MAY 20—ST. BERNARDINE OF SIENA 


pro nobis deprecánte, véniam 


nobis concílient, et grátiam, 
Per Dóminum. 


May 19—St. Peter Celestine, Pope, Confessor 
(White) 
Double | 
Mass, Si díligis me, page 1302, except Prayer as below: 
St. Pudentiana, Virgin (White) 
Prayer l 


O cop, Who didst raise 
blessed Peter Celestine 
‘o the sublime height of the 
pontificate, and didst teach 
aim to prefer humility to that 
dignity, mercifully grant that 
we may have the grace by his 
example to disdain all the 
things of the world, and the 
happiness to attain the rewards 
promised to the humble. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui beátum Petrum 

Celestinum ad summi 
pontificátus ápicem sublimás- 
ti, quique illum humilitati 
postpónere docuisti: concéde 
propítius; ut ejus exémplo 
cuncta mundi despícere, et ad 
promíssa humílibus præmia 
perveníre felíciter mereámur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Pudentiana. Prayer, Secret and Post- 
communion from the Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370. 


May 20—St. Bernardine ef Siena, Confessor 
(White) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


LORD Jesus, Who didst 

bestow on blessed Ber- 
nardine, Thy confessor, a 
singular love of Thy holy name, 
by his merits and intercession, 
we beseech Thee, graciously 
pour upon us the spirit of the 
love of Thee. Who livest. 


ÓMINE Jesu, qui beáto 

Bernardíno, Confessóri 
tuo, exímium sancti nóminis 
tui amórem tribuisti: ejus, 
quaesumus, méritis et inter- 
cessióne, spíritum nobis tue 
dilectiónis benígnus infünde: 
Qui vivis. 


Second Prayer, Concede nos, and accompanying Secret and 


Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, page 824. 


Church or Pope, page 825. 


Third for the 


Gospel of the Common of Holy Abbots, At that time Peter 


said to Jesus, page 1358. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


v 


MAY 25—ST. GREGORY VII, POPE 1025 


May 25—4$5t. Gregotp WIJ, Pope, Cont. (White). 
"uu Double 
St. Urban J, Pope, Martyr (White) 
Mass, Si díligis me, page 1302, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, in te sperántium 
D fortitüdo, qui beátum 
Gregórium, Confessórem tu- 
um atque Pontíficem, pro 
tuénda  Ecclésie  libertáte, 
virtüte constántie roborásti: 
da nobis, ejus exémplo et in- 
lercessióne, ómnia adversán- 
tia fórtiter  superáre. Per 
Dóminum. 


Gop, the strength of them 
that trust in Thee, Who 
didst fortify blessed Gregory, 
Thy Confessor and Pontiff, 
with the virtue of constancy, 
for the defense of the liberty of 
the Church, grant us by his ex- 
ample and intercession coura- 
geously to overcome all adver- 
sities. Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Urban. 


Prayer 


EUs, qui Ecclésiam tu- 

am in apostólice petre 
soliditate fundátam, ab in- 
fernárum éruis terróre por- 
tárum: presta, quesumus, ut 
intercedénte beáto Urbano 
Mártyre tuo atque Summo 
Pontífice, in tua veritáte per- 
sístens; contínua securitáte 
muniátur. Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who didst establish 

Thy church upon the most 
firm foundation of an apostolic 
rock inorder to deliver her from 
the dreadful powers of hell, 
grant her, we beseech Thee, 
that through the intercession 
of the blessed Urban, Thy Mar- 
tyr and Supreme Pontiff, she 
may adhere always to Thy truth 


so as to enjoy at all times a sure defense. Through our Lord. 
Secret 


ÜNERA, que tibi, Dómine, 
letantes offérimus, 
suscipe benignus, et przsta: 
ut intercedénte beáto Urbano 
Ecclésia tua et fidei integri- 
tate letétur, et témporum 
tranquillitate semper exültet 
Per Dóminum, 


ECEIVE, O Lord, in Thy 
loving kindness the joy- 
ful offering of our gifts, and 
through the intercession of 
blessed Urban grant that Thy 
Church may enjoy integrity of 
faith and rejoice in the tran- 
quillity of peaceful times. 
Through our Lord. 


Posteommonton 


ULTÍPLICA, qusesumus 
Dómine, in Ecclésia 
iua spíritum grátie, quem 
dedísti: ut beáti Urbani Már- 
tyris tui atque Summi Pontí- 


NCREASE, We beseech 'Thes, 

O Lord, in Thy Church the 
spirit of grace Thou hast given 
her: that through the prayers 
of the blessed Urban Thy Mar- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1026 


tyr and Supreme Pontiff, the 
flock may never fail in obedi- 
ence to their shepherd nor the 
shepherd in the faithful care 
of his flock. Through our 
Lord. 


MAY 26—ST. PHILIP NERI 


ficis deprecatióne, nec pa- 
stóri obediéntia gregis nec 
gregi desit cura  pastóris. 
Per Dóminum. 


May 26—$5t. Philip Meri, Confessor (White) 
Double 


St. Eleutherius, Pope, Martyr 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Rom. 5,5 


HE charity. of God is 

poured forth in our 
hearts, by His Spirit dwelling 
within us. Ps. 102, 1. Bless the 
Lord, O my soul; and let all 
that is within me bless His holy 
name. Y. Glory. 


árrras Dei diffüsa est in 

córdibus nostris, per in- 
habitántem Spíritum ejus in 
nobis. Ps. 102, 1. Bénedic, án- 
ima mea, Dómino: et ómnia 
que intra me sunt, nómini 
sancto ejus. J. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst. exalt 

blessed Philip, Thy con- 
fessor, with the glory of Thy 
saints, mercifully grant that 
we, who are gladdened by his 
feast, may profit. by the exam- 
ple of his virtues. Through our 
Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Eleutherius. 


Si diligis me, page 1302. 


EUS, qui beátum Philíp- 

pum.Confessórem tu- 

um, Sanctórum tuórum glória 

sublimásti: concéde propítius; 

ut cujus solemnitáte letamur, 

ejus virtütum proficiémus ex- 
émplo. Per Dóminum. 


Prayer from ihe Mass, 


Lesson. Wis. 7, 7-14 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. . 
WISHED, and understand- 
ing was given me; and I 
called, and the spirit of wisdom 
came upon me; and I pre- 
ferred her before kingdoms and 
thrones, and esteemed riches 
nothing in comparison of her. 
Neither did I compare unto her 
any precious stone, for all gold 
in comparison of her is 8$ a 
little sand, and silver in respect 


Léctio Mbri Sapiéntie. 


prvi, et datus est mihi 

sensus: et invocávi, et 
venit in me spíritus sapién- 
tie: et prepósui illam regnis 
et sédibus, et divítias nihil 
esse: duxi in comparatióne 
idíus: nec comparávi illi lá- 
pidem pretiósum: quóniam 
omne aururn in comparatióne 
illus, aréna est exígua, et 
tamquam lutum estimábitur 


http://ccwatershed.org 


31 
i 
1 
{ 


p 


MAY 26--ST. PHILIP NERI 


argéntum in conspéctu illíus. 
Super salütem et spéciem dil- 
éxi illam et propósui pro luce 
habére ilam: quóniam inex- 
tinguíbile est lumen illius. 
Venérunt autem mihi ómnia 
bona páriter cum illa, et in- 
numerábilis honéstas per ma- 
nus illíus, et Jetatus sum in 
ómnibus: quóniam. antecedé- 


' bat me ista sapiéntia et igno- 


rábam quóniam horum óm- 
nium mater est. Quam sine 
fictióne dídici, et sine invídia 
commünico, et honestátem il- 
Mus non abscóndo. Infinitus 
enim thesáurus est homínibus 
quo qui usi sunt, partícipes 
facti sunt, amicitie Dei, prop- 


ster discipline dona commen- 


dáti. 


1025 


to her shall be counted as clay. 
I loved her above health and 
beauty, and chose to have her 
instead of light, for her light 
cannot be put out. Now all 
good things:came to me to- 
gether with her, and innumer- 
able riches through her hands. 
And 1 rejoiced in them all; for 
this wisdom went before me, 
and I knew not that she was 
the mother of them all: which 
I have learned without guile, 
and communicate without 
envy, and her riches I hide not; 
for she is an infinite treasure 
to men, which they that use 
become the friends of God, be- 
ing commended for the gifts 
of discipline. 


h In Paschal-time the Gradual is replaced by the Greater Alle- 
ia. 


Gradual. Ps. 33, 12, 6 


Venite, filii, audite me: ti- 
mórem Dómini docébo vos. Y. 
Accédite ad eum, et illuminá- 
mini; et. facies vestre non 
confundéntur, Allelija, alle- 
lüja. V. Thren. 1, 13. De ex- 
célso misit ignem in dssibus 
meis, et erudívit me. Allelüja. 


Come, children, harken tc 
me: I will teach you the fear 
of the Lord. Y. Come ye to Him, 
and be enlightened: and your 
faces shall not be confounded. 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Lam. 1, 13 
From above He hath sent a fire 
into my bones, and hath in. 
structed me. Alleluia. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelája, allelàja. Y. Thren. 
1, 13. De excélso misit ignem 
in óssibus meis, et erüdivit me. 
Allelüja. Y. Ps. 38. Concáluit 
cor meum inira me: et in me- 
ditatione mea exardéscet ig- 
nis. Allelija. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Lam. 1, 
13. From above He hath sent & 
fire into my bones, and hath 
instructed me. Alleluia. Y. Ps. 
38. My heart grew hot within 
me, and in my meditation a 
fire shall flame out. Alleluia. 


ne Let your Joins be girt, from the Mass Os justi, page 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1028 


MAY 27—ST. BEDE 


Offertory. Ps, 118,32 


I have run the way of Thy 
commandments, when Thou 
didst enlarge my heart. 


Viam mandatérum tuórum 
cucürri cum dilatasti cor 
meum, 


Secret 


oox with satisfaction, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, 
upon the sacrifices here before 
Thee, and grant that the Holy 
Spirit may kindle within us 
ihat fire with which He mirac- 
ulously penetrated the heart of 
blessed Philip. Through . . . in 
the unity of the same. 


Sone preséntibus, 
quaesumus, Dómine, in- 
ténde placátus: et presta; ut 
illo nos igne Spíritus Sanctus 
inflámmet, quo beáti Philippi 
cor mirabfliter penetrávit. 
Per Dóminum .. . in unitate 
ejüsdem. 


Commemoration of St. Eleutherius, Second Secret from Mass 


Si díligis me, page 1302 
Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. Ps. 83, 3 


My heart and my flesh have 
rejoiced in the living God. (P. 
T. Alleluia). 


Cor meum et caro mea ex- 


sultavérunt in Deum vivum. 


(T. P. Allelüja). 


Postcommunion 


EGALED With heavenly de- 

lights, O Lord, we pray 
Thee, that, by the merits of 
blessed Philip, Thy confessor, 
and after his example, we may 
ever seek those things by which 
we truly live. Through our 
Lord. | 


dGrLÉsTIBUS, Dómine, pas- 

ti deliciis: quesumus; ut 
beáti Philippi Confesséris tui 
méritis et imitatióne, semper 
eádem, per que veráciter vivi- 
mus, appetámus. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Commemoration of St. Eleutherius. Second Postcommunion 
from Mass Si diligis me, page 1302. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


May 27—$5t. Wede, Confessor, Doctor of the Church 
(White) 
Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except Prayer as below: 
St. Jobn J, Pope, Martyr (Red) 
Mass Si diligis me, page 1302. 
Prayer 


GOD, Who dost enlighten 
Thy Church with the 


EUS, qui Ecclésiam tuam 
beáti Bede Contessóris 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MAY 28—ST. AUGUSTINE OP CANTERBURY 1029 
tui atque Doctóris eruditióne learning of blessed Bede, Thy 
clarfficas: concéde propítius confessor and doctor, merci- 
fámulis tuis; ejus semper il- fully grant Thy servants ever 
lustrári sapiéntia et méritis to be illuminated by his wis- 


adjuvári. Per Dóminum, 


dom and assisted by his merits. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. John the Pope, Prayer, Secret and, Post- 
communion from the Mass Si diligis me, page 1302; Preface No. 


13, page 816, 


May 28—St: Augustine of Canterhurp, Bishop, 
Confessor (White) 
Double 


Mass, Sacerdotes tui, page 1341, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui Anglórum gentes 
predicatióne et mirác- 
ulis beáti Augustini: Confes- 
sóris tui atque Pontíficis, vere 
fidei luce illustráre dignátus 
es: concéde; ut, ipso interve- 
niénte, errántium corda ad 
veritatis tue rédeant unitá- 
tem, et nos in tua simus vol- 
untáte concórdes. Per Dómi- 
num. 


cop, Who didst vouchsafe 

to. ilumine the English 
people with the light of the 
true faith by the preaching and 
miracles of blessed Augustine, 
Thy confessor and bishop, 
grant that, by his intercession, 
the hearts of those who err 
may return to the unity of the 
iruth and that we may be of 
one mind in Thy will. Through 
our Lord. 


Epistle. 1 Thess. 2, 2-9 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Thessalonicénses. 


RATRES: Fidüciam habüi- 

mus in Deo nostro lò- 

qui ad vos Evangélium Dei 
in multa sollicitüdine. Ex- 
hortátio enim nostra non de 
erróre, neque de immundítia, 
neque in dolo, sed sicut pro- 
báti sumus a Deo, ut crederé- 
tur nobis Evangélium: ita 
lóquimur, non quasi homi- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Thessalonians, 

RETHREN, we had confi- 

dence in our God to 
Speak unto you the gospel of 
God in much carefulness. For 
our exhortation was not of 
error, nor of uncleanness, nor 
in deceit. But as we were ap- 
proved by God that the gospel 
should be committed to us: 
even so We speak, not as pleas- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1030 MAY 28—ST. AUGUSTINE OF CANTERBURY 


ing men, but God, Who proveth 
our hearts. For neither have 
we used at any time the speech 
of flattery, as you know; nor 
taken an occasion of covetous- 
ness, God is witness: nor sought 
we glory of men, neither of 
you, nor of others. Whereas we 
might have been burdensome 
to you, as ihe apostles of 
Christ: but we became little 
ones in the midst of you, as if 
a nurse should cherish her 
children: so desirous of you, 
we would gladly impart unto 
you not only the gospel of God, 
but also our own souls; because 
you were become most dear 
unto us. For, you remember, 
brethren, our labor and toil: 
working night and day lest we 
should be chargeable to any of 
you, we preached unto you the 
gospel of God. 


nibus placéntes, sed Deo qui 
probat corda nostra. Neque 
enim aliquándo füimus in ser- 
móne adulatiónis, sicut scitis: 
neque in occasióne avarítiz: 
Deus testis-est: nec queréntes 
ab homínibus glóriam, neque 
a vobis, neque ab aliis; cum 
possémus vobis óneri esse ut 
Christi Apóstoli; sed facti 
sumus párvuli in médio ve- 
strum, tamquam si nutrix fó- 
veat filios suos. Ita desider- 
ántes vos, cupide volebámus 
tradere vobis non solum 
Evangélium Dei, sed étiam 
ánimas nostras: quóniam ca- 
ríssimi nobis facti estis. Mé- 
mores enim estis, fratres, la- 
bóris nostri, et fatigatiónis: 
nocte ac die operántes, ne 
quem vestrum gravarémus, 
predicávimus in vobis Evan- 
gélium Dei. . 


Gospel, At that time, the Lord appointed, as on feast of St. 


Mark, page 989. 


Secret 


E OFFER sacrifice unto 

Thee, OLord,on the sol- 
emnity of blessed Augustine, 
Thy bishop and confessor, 
humbly beseeching that the 
sheep which have gone astray 
may return to the one fold and 
be nourished with this food of 
salvation. Through our Lord. 


acriricrom iibi offérimus, 
Démine, in solemnitate 
beáti Augustini Pontificis et 
Confessóris tui, humíliter de- 
precántes: ut oves, que perié- 
runt, ad unum ovíle revérsz 
hoc salutári pábulo nutrián- 
tur. Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


EFRESHED With the victim 

of salvation, we suppli- 
cate Thee, O Lord, that, 
through the intercessory pa- 
tronage of blessed Augustine, 
it may always and everywhere 
be offered to Thy name, 
‘Through our Lord. 


Ósr1A salutári refécti: te, 

Dómine, süpplices ex- 
orámus; ut éadem, beáti Au- 
gustini  interveniénte suf- 
fragio, in omni loco némini 
tuo júgiter immolétur. Per 
Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


p ENERE, , PHI, ag, AMINO à 


JUNE 1- ST. ANGELA MERICI 


1031 


May 29—$5t. Mary Magdalen dei Pazzi, Virgin 
(White) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, virginitátis amátor, 

qui beátam Maríam 
Magdalénam Virginem, tuo 
amére succénsam, celéstibus 
donis decorásti: da; ut, 
quam festiva celebritate ve- 
nerámur, puritáte et caritáte 
imitémur. Per Dóminum. 


GOD, Who lovest chastity, 

and didst adorn blessed 
Mary Magdalen, the virgin, 
with heavenly gifts, grant that 
in purity and charity we may 
imitate her whom we venerate 
with this festive celebration. 
Through our Lord. 


May 30—St. Felix J, Pope, Martyr (Red) 
Simple 


Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302. 


May 31 - Feast of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Queen 
Page 1298g 
Commemoration of St. Petronilla, Virgin, Page 1370 


June 1-t. Angela Meriti, Virgin (White 
Double d i 


Mass, Dilexisti, Page 1370, except: 
Prayer 


EUS, qui novum per beá- 

tam Angelam sacra- 
rum virginum collégium in 
Ecclésia tua floréscere volui- 
sti; da nobis, ejus interces- 
sióne, angélicis móribus ví- 
vere; ut, terrénis ómnibus ab- 
dicátis, gáudiis pérfrui me- 
reámur zxtérnis. Per Dómi- 
num. 


cop, Who hast willed that, 

through blessed Angela, 
a new family of consecrated 
virgins should flourish in Thy 
Church, grant us, through her 
intercession, to lead an angelic 
life, that, putting aside all 
earthly joys, we may deserve 
to attain those that are eter- 
nal 'Through our Lord. 


Secret 


ÓósTlA, Dómine, quam 
tibi beáte Angele me- 
móriam recoléntes offérimus, 
et nostre pravitátis véniam 


AY the victim which we 
Xo offer 'Thee, O Lord, ven- 
erating the memory of blessed 
Angela, both obtain the pardon 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1032 JUNE 2—STS. MARCELLINUS AND COMPANIONS 


of our evil deeds and win for implóret, et grátie tue nobis 
us the gifts of Thy grace. dona concíliet. Per Dóminum. 


"Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


EFRESHED with heavenly 

food, O Lord, we humbly 
beg Thee, that, by the prayers 
and example of blessed Angela, 
being cleansed of every stain, 
we may be pleasing to Thee 
both in body and in soul. 
Through our Lord. 


cLÉsrI alimónia refécti, 

süpplices te, Dómine, 
deprecámur: ut beáte Ange- 
le précibus et exémplo, ab 
omni labe mundáti et córpore 
tibi placeámus et mente. Per 
Dóminum. 


June 2—Sts. Marcellinus, Peter and Erasmus, 
Martyrs. (Red) 
Simple 


For the Mass to be said in Paschal-time, in place of the follow- 
ing see directions at the end of this Mass. 


Introit of the Mass of the Holy Forty Martyrs, page 940. 


Prayer 


cop, Who dost gladden us 

with the annual feast of 

Thy blessed martyrs, Marcel- 

linus, Peter, and Erasmus, 

grant, we beseech 'Thee, that as 

we rejoice in their virtues, we 

may be quickened by their ex- 
ample. Through our Lord. 

Epistle of the Fourth Sunday 


Gradual. 


The just cried, and the Lord 
heard them, and delivered 
them out of all their troubles. 
Y. The Lord is nigh unto them 
that are of a contrite heart: 
and He will save the humble of 
spirit. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. John 
15, 16. I have chosen you out 
of the world, that ye should go, 


EUS, qui nos ánnua bea- 
D tórum Mártyrum tuó- 
rum Marcellini, Petri atque 
Erásmi solemnitáte letificas: 
presta, quesumus; ut, quo- 
rum gaudémus méritis, ac- 
cendámur exémplis. Per Dó- 
minum. 
after Pentecost, page 653. 


Ps. 33, 18, 19 


Clamavérunt justi, et Dé- 
minus exaudívit eos: et ex óm- 
nibus tribulatiónibus eórum 
liberávit eos. Y. Juxta est Dó- 
minus his, qui tribuláto sunt 
corde: et hümiles spíritu sal- 
vabit. 

Allelija, allelája. Joan 15, 
16. Y. Ego vos elégi de mundo, 
ut eátis et fructum afferátis; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE2—STS. MARCELLINUS AND COMPANIONS 1033 


et fructus vester máneat. Al- and bring forth fruit, and that 
lelüja. your fruit should endure. Al- 
leluia. 


Gospel, When you shall hear of wars, from the Mass Intret, 
page 1319. 


Offertory. Ps. 31, 11 


Letémini in Dómino, et Be glad in the Lord, and re- 
exsultáte, justi: et gloriá- joice ye just; and glory all ye 
mini, omnes recti corde. right of heart. 


Secret 


zc hóstia, quesumus, AY this sacrifice, which 
h Dómine, quam sanctó- we offer in commemora- 
rum Mártyrum tuórum nata- tion of Thy holy martyrs, O 
lítia recenséntes offérimus: Lord, both loose the bonds of 
et vincula nostre pravitátis our base instincts and win us 
absólvat, et tue nobis miseri- the gifts of Thy mercy. 
córdie dona concíliet. Per 'Through our Lord. 
Dóminum. 


Communion. Wis. 3, 1.3 


Justórum ánims in manu The souls of the just are in 
Dei sunt, et non tanget illos the hand of God, and the tor- 
torméntum malítie: visi sunt ment of malice shall not touch 
óculis insipiéntium mori: them; in the sight of the un- 
illi autem sunt in pace. wise they seemed to die, but 

they are in peace. 


Postcommunion 


AcRO münere satiati, süp- EGALED with Thy sacred 
plices te Dómine depre- R gift, we beseech 'Thee, 
cámur: ut quod débitæ ser- O Lord, that what we celebrate 
vitútis celebrámus officio, sal- in the fulfilment of our boun- 
vatiónis tuæ sentiámus aug- den service, we may feel as the 
méntum. Per Dóminum. increase of Thy salvation. 
Through our Lord. 

If this feast is celebrated in Paschal-time, the Mass (in 
place of the aforegoing) is Sancti tui, page 1333, with Prayer, 
Epistle, Secret and Postcommunion as in the foregoing Mass, 


but the Gradual is omitted and the following verse is added. 
to the alleluia verse: 


V. Pretiésa in conspéctu Y. Precious in the sight of 
Dómini mors sanctórum ejus. the Lord is the death of His 
Allelüja. saints. Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1034 


JUNE 4—ST. FRANCIS CARACCIOLO 


June 4—St. Francis Caracciolo, Confessor (White) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 21, 1, 5; 68,.10 


Y HEART is become like 

wax melting in the 
midst of my bowels: for the 
zeal of Thy house hath eaten 
me up. (P. T. Alleluia, alleluia.) 
Ps. 72, 1. How good is God to 
Israel: to them are of a right 
heart. Y. Glory. 


actum est cor meum 

tamquam cera liqué- 
scens in médio ventris mei: 
quóniam zelus domus tue co- 
médit me (T. P. Allelija, ál- 
Jeüja.) Ps. 72, 1. Quam bonus 
Israel Deus: his, qui recto 
sunt corde. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst adorn 

blessed Francis, as the 
founder of a new order, with 
the spirit of prayer and the 
love of penance, grant Thy 
servants to make such progress 
in imitating him that, by 
prayer without ceasing, and by 
bringing the body into subjec- 
tion, they may deserve to attain 
heavenly glory. Through our 
Lord. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from the Book of 
‘Wisdom. 
HE just man, if he be pre- 
vented with death, shall 
be in rest. For venerable age is 
not that of long time, nor 
counted by the number of 
years; but the understanding 
of a man is gray hairs. And a 
spotless life is old age. He 
pleased God and was beloved, 
and living among sinners he 
was translated. He was taken 
away lest wickedness should 
alter his understanding, or de- 
ceit beguile his soul. For the 
bewitching of vanity obscureth 


Dz qui beátum Fran- 
císcum, novi órdinis in- 
stitutórem, orándi studio et 
peniténtie amóre decorásti: 
da fámulis tuis in ejus imi- 
tatióne ita profícere; ut, sem- 
per orántes, et corpus in ser- 
vitütem redigéntes, ad celés- 
tem glóriam perveníre mere- 
ántur. Per Dóminum. 


Wis. 4, 7-14 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiz. 


USTUS, si morte preoccu- 

patus füerit, in refrigério 
erit. Senéctus enim venerá- 
bilis est non diutürna, neque 
annórum número computáta: 
cani autem sunt sensus hó- 
minis, et ætas senectütis vita 
immaculata, Placens Deo fac- 
tus est diléctus, et vivens inter 
peccatóres  iranslátus est. 
Raptus est ne malítia mutá- 
ret intelléctum ejus, aut ne 
fíctio decíperet ánimam il- 
lius. Fascinátio enim nuga- 
citátis obscürat bona, et in- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 4—ST. FRANCIS CARACCIOLO 


constántia ^ concupiscéntie 
transvértit sensum sine mali- 
tia. Consummátus in brevi 
explévit témpora multa, plá- 
cita enim erat Deo anima 
illius: propter boc properávit 
edücere illum de médio in- 
iquitátum. 


1035 


good things, and the wander- 
ing of concupiscence over- 
turneth the innocent mind. 
Being made perfect in & short 
space, he fulfilled a long time, 
For his soul pleased God: 
therefore He hastened to bring 
him out of the midst of ini- 
quities, 


"E Paschal-time the Gradual is replaced by the Greater Allee 


Gradual. 


Quemádmodum  desíderat 
cervus ad fontes aquárum: 
ita desíderat ánima mea ad 
te, Deus. Y. Ps. 41, 3. Sitivit 
ánima mea ad Deum fortem 
vivum. 

Allelija, allelüja. V. Ps. 72, 
26. Defécit caro mea, et cor 
meum: Deus cordis mei, et 
pars mea Deus in etérnum. 
Alleluja. 


Ps. 41, 2 


As the hart panteth after the 
fountains of waters, so my soul 
panteth after Thee, O God. y. 
Ps. 41, 3. My soul hath thirsted 
after the strong living God. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 72, 
26. My flesh and my heart hath 
fainted away. Thou art the God 
of my heart, and the God that 
is my portion forever. Alleluia. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 64, 
5. Beátus quem elegisti, et as- 
sumpsísti;  inhabitábit in 
átriis tuis. Allelija. Y. Ps. 
111, 9. Dispérsit, dedit pau- 
péribus: justitia ejus manet 
in seculum seculi. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 64, 5. 
Blessed is he whom 'Thou hast 
chosen and taken to Thee; he 
shall dwell in Thy courts. Al- 
leluia. V. Ps. 111, 9. He hath 
distributed, He hath given to 
the poor, His justice remain- 
eth for ever and ever. Alleluia. 


ae Let your loins be girt, from the Mass Os justi, page 


Offertory. 

Justus ut palma florébit; 

sicut cedrus Líbani multipli- 
cábitur. (T. P. Alleluja.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 91, 13 


The just man shall flourish 
like the palm-tree, he shall 


grow up like the cedar of Liba- 
nus. (P, T, Alleluia.) 


. Secret 


A NoBIS, clementissime 
Jesu: ut preclara beá- 


RANT us, O most merciful 
Jesus, that, while cele- 


ti Francisci mérita recolén- brating the noble virtues of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1036 


blessed Francis, we, being en- 
kindled with the same fire of 
charity that burned within 
him, may be able to stand 
worthily about Thy sacred 
table. Who livest. ` 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


O how great is the multitude 
of Thy sweetness, O Lord, 
which Thou hast hidden from 
ihem that fear Thee! (P. T. 
Alleluia.) 


JUNE 5—ST. BONIFACE, BISHOP 


tes, eódem nos, ac ille, caritá- 
tis igne succénsi, digne in 
circúitu sacre hujus mense 
tue esse valeámus: Qui vivis. 


Ps. 30, 20 


Quam magna  multitüdo 
dulcédinis tue, Dómine, quam 
abscondísti timéntibus te! 
(T. P. Allelüja.) 


Postcommunion 


ET the bappy memory of 

ihe most holy sacrifice, 
which we have this day offered 
to Thy majesty on the solemn 
feast of blessed Francis, ever 
endure in our minds together 
with its fruits. Through our 
Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ACROSÁNCTI sacrificii, que- 
sumus, Dómine, quod 
hódie in solemnitáte beati 
Francísci tue obtülimus ma- 
jestáti, grata semper in mén- 
tibus nostris memória perse- 
véret, et fructus. Per Dómi- 
num. 


June 5—$»t. Boniface, Bishop, Martyr (Red) 


Double 
"The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Is. 


WILL rejoice in Jerusalem, 
I and joy in My people, and 
the voice of weeping shall no 
more be heard in her, nor the 
voice of crying. My elect shall 
not labor in vain, nor bring 
forth in trouble: for they are 
íhe seed of the blessed of the 
Lord, and their posterity with 
ihem. (P.T. Alleluia, alleluia.) 
Ps. 43, 2. We have heard, O 
God, with our ears: our 


65, 19, 23 


xsuLTÁBO in Jerúsalem, 

et gaudébo in pópulo 
meo: et non audiétur in eo ul- 
tra vox fletus et vox clamóris. 
Elécti mei non laborábunt 
frustra, neque generábunt in 
conturbatióne: quia semen 
benedictórum Dómini est, 
et nepótes eórum cum eis. 
(T. P. Allelüja, allelája.) Ps. 
43, 2. Deus, áuribus nostris 
audivimus: patres nostri nar- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 5—ST. BONIFACE, BISHOP 


ravérunt opus, quod operátus 
es in diébus eórum. Y. Gloria 
Patri. 


1037 


fathers have declared io us 
the work Thou hast wrought 
in their days. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui, multitüdinem 
D populórum, beáti Boni- 
fátii Mártyris tui atque Pon- 
tificis zelo, ad agnitiónem tui 
nóminis vocáre dignátus es: 
concéde propítius; ut, cujus 
solémnia cólimus, étiam pa- 
trocinia sentiámus. Per Dó- 
minum. 


O Gop, Who didst vouch- 
safe to call a multitude 
of peoples to the knowledge of 
Thy name by means of the 
zeal of blessed Boniface, Thy 
martyr and bishop, mercifully 
grant that, as we venerate his 
festival, we may experience 
the benefits of his protection. 
Through our Lord. 


Lesson, Let us now praise, from ihe Mass of the Seven Holy 
Founders, February 12, page 919. 
P n Paschal-time the Gradual is replaced by the Greater Alle- 
uia. 


Gradual. 1 Peter 4, 13-14 


Communicántes Christi 
passiónibus gaudéte, ut in 
revelatióne glórie ejus gau- 
deátis exsultántes. Y. Si ex- 
probrámini in nómine Christi, 
beáti éritis: quóniam quod 
est honoris, glorie, et virtütis 
Dei, et qui est ejus Spiritus, 
super vos requiéscet. Allelü- 
ja, allelüja. Y. Is. 66, 12. De- 
clinaébo super eum quasi fiú- 
vium pacis, et quasi torrén- 
tem inundántem glóriam. Al- 
lelüja. 


Partaking of the sufferings 
of Christ, rejoice, that when 
His glory shall be revealed, you 
may also be glad with exceed- 
ing joy. V. If you be reproached 
for the name of Christ, you 
Shall be blessed: for that 
which is of the honor, glory, 
and power of God, and that 
which is His spirit resteth 
upon you. Alleluia, alleluia. 
Is. 66, 12. Y wil bring upon 
him as it were a river of peace, 
and as an overflowing torrent 
the glory. Alleluia. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Is. 66, 
10-14. Letamini cum Jerüsa- 
lem, et exsultáte in ea omnes, 
qui diligitis Dóminum. Alle- 
lúja. Y. Vidébitis, et gaudébit 
cor vestrum: cognoscétur ma- 
nus Dómini servis ejus. Alle- 
lija. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Is. 66, 
10, 14. Rejoice with Jerusalem, 
and be glad with her, all you 
that love the Lord. Alleluia. 
¥. You shall see, and your 
heart shall rejoice, the hand 
of the Lord shall be known to 
His servants. Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1038 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


JUNE 5—ST. BONIFACE, BISHOP 


Gospel, At that time Jesus seeing, from the Mass of All 


Saints, page 1267. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 15, 78 


IX will bless the Lord Who 
hath given me understanding: 
I set the Lord always in my 
Sight; for He is at my right 
hand, that I be not moved. 
(P.T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Benedicam Dóminum, qui 
tríbuit mihi intelléctum: pro- 
vidébam Deum in conspéctu 
meo semper, quóniam a dex- 
tris est mihi ne commóvear. 
CT. P. Allelüja.) 


Secret 


ET Thy plenteous blessing 

descend upon these offer- 
ings, O Lord, both mercifully 
to work our sanctification and 
to make us rejoice in the solem- 
nity of St. Boniface, Thy mar- 
tyr and bishop. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface fcr Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


To Him that shall overcome, 
I will give to sit with Me in 
My throne: as I also have 
overcome, and am set down 
with My Father in His throne. 
(P.T. Alleluia.) 


UPER has hóstias, Dómine, 
S quesumus, benedíctio 
copiósa descéndat: que et 
sanctíücatiónem nostram 
inisericórditer operétur: et de 
sancti Bonifátii Mártyris, tui 
atque Pontificis faciat solem- 
nitáte gaudére. Per Dóminum. 


A poc. 3, 21 


Qui vícerit, dabo ei sedére 
mecum in throno meo: sicut 
et ego vici, et sedi cum Paire 
meo in throno ejus. (T. P. Al- 
lelúja.) 


Postcommunion 


ANCTIFIED, O Lord, by this 
S saving mystery, we be- 
seech Thee that the loving 
prayer of St. Boniface, Thy 
martyr and bishop, by whose 
patronage Thou hast given us 
to be governed, may never be 
wanting. Through our Lord. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ANCTIFICÁTI, Dómine, sa- 
lutári mystério: quæsu- 
mus; ut nobis sancti Bonifá- 
til Mártyris tui atque Ponti- 
ficis pia non desit orátio, cu- 
jus nos donásti patrocínio gu- 
bernári . Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


— Mta 


prd 


JUNE 9—STS. PRIMUS AND FELICIAN 1039 


June 6—$5t. sorbert, Bishop, Confessor (White) 
Double 


Mass, Statuit ei, 


page 1337, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui beátum Nor- 

bértum,  Confessórem 
uum atque Pontíficem, verbi 
tui precónem exímium effe- 
cisti, et per eum Ecclésiam 
tuam nova prole fecundásti: 
presta, quesumus; ut, ejüs- 
dem suffragantibus méritis, 
quod ore simul et ópere dó- 
cuit, te adjuvánte, exercére 
valeámus. Per Dóminum. 


O GOD, Who .didst make 
blessed Norbert, Thy 
confessor and bishop, an ex- 
celling preacher of Thy word, 
and through him didst cause 
‘Thy Church to bring forth a 
new progeny, grant, we be- 
seech Thee, that, by the inter- 
cession of his merits, we may 
have the strength, with Thine 
assistance, to practice what 
he, both by word and work, 
hath taught us, Through our 
Lord. 


June 9—Htg. Primus and Felician, Martyrs (Red) 


Simple 
Introit from the Mass, Sapientiam, page 1321 (for direction 
when this Mass is said in Paschal-time see note at end of this 


Mass). 


Prayer 


AC nos, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, sanctórum Már- 
iyrum iuórum Primi et Fe- 
liciani semper festa sectári: 
quorum suffragiis protectió- 
nis tue dona sentiamus, Per 
Déminum. 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, ever to observe 
worthily the festival of Thy 
holy martyrs, Primus and Fe- 
lician, by whose intercession 
may we experience the gifts of 
Thy protection. Through our 
Lord. 


Lesson from the Mass, Sapientiam, page 1322. 


Gradual. 


Confitebuntur cceli mira- 
bilia tua, Dómine: étenim 
veritátem tuam, in ecclésia 
sanctórum. Y. Misericórdias 
tuas, Dómine, in etérnum 
cantábo: in generatióne et 
progénie. 

Allelija, allelija. Y. Hec 
est vera fratérnitas, que vicit 
mundi crimina: Christum se- 


Ps. 88, 6, 2 


The heavens shall confess 
Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the church of the 
saints. Y. Thy mercy, O Lord, 
I will sing forever, to genera- 
tion and generation, 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. This is 
the true brotherhood which 
overcame the wickedness of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1040 


the world; it followed Christ, 
attaining the noble kingdom 
of heaven. Alleluia. 


JUNE 9—STS. PRIMUS AND FELICIAN 


cüta est, inclyta tenens regna 
calestia. Allelüja. 


Gospel, I praise Thee, O Father, from the Mass of St. 


Paul, Hermit, page 865. 


Offertory. Ps. 67, 36 


God is wonderful in His 
Saints: the God of Israel is He 
Who wil give power and 
Strength to His people: blessed 
be God. Alleluia. 


Mirábili Deus in sanctis 
suis: Deus Israél, ipse dabit 
virtütem, et  fortitüdinem 
plebi sum: benedictus Deus, 
allelüja. 


Secret 


ay the offering be ac- 
@M ceptable to Thee, O Lord, 
which is to be consecrated on 
the festival of the precious 
martyrdom, that it may both 
purify us of our sins and com- 
mend to Thee the prayers of 
Thy servants. Through our 
Lord. 


Communion. 


I have chosen you out of the 
world, that you should go, and 
should bring forth fruit, and 
your fruit should remain. ` 


IAT tibi, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, hóstia sacránda 
placábilis, pretiósi celebri- 
táte martyrii: quæ et pec- 
cáta nostra puríficet, et tuó- 
rum tibi vota concíliet fa- 
mulórum. Per Dóminum. 


John 15, 16 


Ego vos elégi de mundo, ut 
eátis, et fructum afferatis: et 
fructus vester máneat. 


Postcommunion 


E BESEECH Thee, O al- 

mighty God, that the 
solemnity of Thy holy martyrs, 
Primus and Felician, cele- 
brated with heavenly mys- 
teries, may gain for us the 
pardon of Thy mercy. Through 
our Lord. 


uzsuMus, Omnipotens 
Q Deus: ut sanct6érum 
Mártyrum tuórum Primi et 
Feliciani celéstibus mysté- 
riis celebráta solémnitas, in- 
dulgéntiam nobis tue propi- 
liatiónis acquírat. Per Dómi- 
num. 


When this feast is celebrated im Paschal-time, the Mass is 
Sancti tui, page 1333, with Prayer, Secret, Postcommunion, and 


Gospel as in the aforegoing Mass. 


The Gradual is omitted and 


the following is added to the Alleluia verse: 


The white-robed army of 
martyrs praiseth Thee, O Lord. 
Alleluia. 


Te Mártyrum candidátus 
Laudat exércitus, Dómine. 
Allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 11—ST. BARNABAS, APOSTLE 


June 10—Ht. Margaret, 


1041 


Queen of Scotland, Widow 


(White) 
Double Major 
. Mass, Cognovi, page 1383, except: 


Prayer 


EUs, qui beátam Marga- 

ritam reginam exímia 
in páuperes caritáte mirábi- 
lem effecisti: da; ut ejus in- 
tercessióne et exémplo, tua in 
córdibus nostris cáritas jügi- 
ter augeátur. Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who didst make 

blessed Queen Margaret 
wonderful by her great char- 
ity toward the poor, grant that, 
by her intercession and ex- 
ample, Thy charity may. be 
continually increased in our 
hearts. Through our Lord. 


June 11—t. Barnabas, Apostle (Red) 


. Double Major 
Should the feast of St. Barnabas be kept in Paschal-time, 
the Mass will be that of St. Mark's feast, April 25, page 987, 
with the Prayers, Epistle and Gospel as in this Mass. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 138, 17 


Tar autem nimis hono- 

ráti sunt amici tui, 
Deus: nimis confortátus est 
principátus eórum. Ps. 138, 1, 
2. Dómine, probásti me, et 
cognovisti me, tu cognovísti 
sessiónem meam, et resurrec- 
tiónem meam. y. Glória Patri. 


o me Thy friends, O God, 

are made exceedingly 
honorable: their principality 
is exceedingly strengthened. 
Ps. 138, 1, 2. Lord, Thou hast 
proved me and known me: 
Thou hast known my sitting 
down and my rising up. ¥. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui nos beáti Bar- 

nebe Apóstoli tui mé- 
ritis et intercessióne letificas: 
concéde propítius; ut, qui tua 
per eum benefícia póscimus, 
dono tue grátie consequá- 
mur. Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who dost make us 

joyful with the merits 
and intercession of blessed 
Barnabas, Thine apostle, mer- 
cifully grant that we, who ask 
Thy benefits through him, may 
obtain them by the gift of Thy 
grace. Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1042 


JUNE 11—ST. BARNABAS, APOSTLE 


Lesson. Acts 16, 21-26; 13, 2-3 


Lesson from the Acts of 
the Apostles. 


N THOSE days, A great num- 

ber of believers at Anti- 
och were converted to the 
Lord; and the tidings came to 
ihe ears of the Church that 
was at Jerusalem touching 
these things, and they sent 
Barnabas as far as Antioch: 
Who, when he was come, and 
had seen the grace of God, 
rejoiced: and he exhorted 
them all with purpose of heart 
to continue in the Lord: for he 
Was a good man, and full of the 
Holy Ghost and of faith. And 
2 great multitude was added 
to the Lord. And Barnabas 
went to Tarsus, to seek Saul; 
whom, when he had found, he 
brought to Antioch. And they 
conversed there in the Church 
a whole year; and they taught 
2 great multitude; so that at 
Antioch the disciples were 
first named Christians. Now 
there were in the Church 
which was at Antioch, prophets 
and doctors, among whom was 
Barnabas, and Simon, who 
was called Niger, and Lucius 
of Cyrene, and Manahen, who 
was the  foster-brother of 
Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. 
And as they were ministering 
to the Lord, and fasting, the 
Holy Ghost said to them, 
Separate me Saul and Barna- 
bas, for the work whereunto 
I have taken them. Then they 
fasting and praying, and im- 


Léctio Áctuum  Apostoló- 
rum. 
N présus illis: Multus nú- 
merus-credéntium Anti- 
Ochíse convérsus est ad Dómi- 
num. Pervénit autem sermo 
ad aures ecclésie, que erat 
Jerosólymis, Super istis: et 
misérunt Bárnabam usque ad 
Antiochiam. Qui cum perve- 
nísset, et vidísset grátiam Dei, 
gavisus est: et hortabatur 
omnes in propósito cordis per- 
manére in Dómino: quia erat 
vir bonus, et plenus Spíritu 
Sancto, et fide. Et appósita 
est multa turba Dómino. Pro- 
féctus est autem Barnabas 
Tarsum, ut quereret Saulum: 
quem cum invenísset, perdüx- 
it Antiochíam. Et annum to- 
tum conversáti sunt ibi in ec- 
clésia: et docuérunt turbam 
multam, ita ut cognomina- 
réntur primum Antiochíz dis- 
cípuli, Christiáni. Erant au- 
tem in ecclésia, quz erat An- 
tiochíe, prophéte et doctóres, 
in quibus Bárnabas et Simon, 
qui vocabátur Niger, et Lücius 
Cyrenénsis, et Mánaben, qui 
erat Heródis Tetrarche col- 
lactáneus, et Saulus. Minis- 
trántibus autem illis Dómino, 
et jejunántibus, dixit illis 
Spíritus Sanctus: Segregáte 
mihi Saulum, et Bárnabam in 
opus, ad quod assümpsi eos, 
Tunc jejunantes et orántes, 
imponentésque eis manus, di- 
misérunt illos. 


posing their hands upon them, sent them away. 
Gradual. Ps. 18, 5, 2 


Their sound went forth into 
all the earth; and their words 


In omnem terram exivit-so- 
nus eórum: et in fines orbis 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 11—ST. BARNABAS, APOSTLE 


terre verba eórum. V. Celi 
enárrant glóriam Del: et 
ópera manuum ejus annün- 
tiat firmaméntum. 


Allehija, allehija. Y. Joan. 
15, 16. Ego vos elégi de mun- 
do, ut eátis, et fructum af- 
ferátis, et fructus vester má- 
neat. AURI 


' Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1043 


to the ends of the world. y. 
The heavens show forth the 
glory of God; and the firma- 
ment declareth the work of 
His hands. 

Alleluia, -alleluia. y. John 
15, 16. I have chosen you out 
of the world, that you should 
£o, and should bring forth 
fruit; and your fruit should 
remain. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 10, 16-22 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Matthzeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 

sus discipulis suis: Ecce 
ego mitto vos sicut oves in mé- 
dio lupérum. Estóte ergo pru- 
déntes sicut serpéntes et sim- 
plices sicut columbe. Cavéte 
autem ab homínibus. Tradent 
enim vos in conciliis et in 
Ssynagógis suis flagellábunt 
vos: et ad presides, et ad re- 
ges ducémini propter me in 
testimónium illis, et géntibus. 
Cum autem iradent vos, no- 
lite cogitáre quómodo, aut 
quid ^ loquámini: dábitur 
enim vobis in illa hora quid 
loquámini. Non enim vos es- 
tis qui loquímini, sed Spíritus 
Patris vestri, qui lóquitur in 
vobis. Tradet autem frater 
fratrem in mortem, et pater 
filium: et insürgent fílii in 
paréntes et morte eos affi- 
cient: et éritis ódio ómnibus 
propter nomen meum: qui au- 
tem perseveráverit usque in 
finem, hic salvus erit. 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus said 

to His disciples, Behold 
1 send you as sheep in the 
midst of wolves. Be ye there- 
fore wise as serpents, and 
simple as doves. But beware of 
men; for they will deliver you 
up in councils, and they will 
Scourge you in their syna- 
gogues. And you shall be 
brought before governors, and 
before kings, for My- sake, for 
a testimony to them and to 
the gentiles. But when they 
shall deliver you up, take no 
thought how, or what, to 
speak; for it shall be given you 
in that hour what to speak; 
for it is not you that speak, 
but the Spirit of your Father 
ihat speaketh in you. The 
brother also shall deliver up 


‘the brother to death, and the 


father the son; and the chil- 
dren shall rise up against the 
parents, and shall put them 
to death; and you shall be 
hated by all men for My 


name's sake: but he that shall persevere to the end, he shall 


be saved, 
Creed, page 765. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 12—ST. JOHN OF ST. FACUNDUS 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 17-18 
Thou shalt make them Constitues eos príncipes su- 
princes over all the earth: they per omnem terram: mémores 
shall remember Thy name, O erunt nóminis tui, Dómine, in 
Lord, throughout all genera- omni progénie et genera- 


1044 


tions. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


tióne. 


Secret 


ANCTIFY, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the gifts offered 
Thee, and, by the interces- 
sion of blessed Barnabas, 
Thine apostle, cleanse us 
through them from the stains 
of our sins. Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. 


You who have followed Me, 
shall sit on seats, judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel. 


tnera, Dómine, obláta 

sanctífica, et interce- 

dénte beáto Bárnaba Apóstolo 

tuo, nos per haec a peccató- 

rum nostrórum máculis 
emünda. Per Dóminum. 


Matt. 19, 28 

Vos, qui secüti estis me, se- 
débitis super sedes, judicantes 
duódecim tribus Israél. 


Postcommunion 


E HUMBLY beseech Thee, 
O almighty God, that, 
through the intercession of 
blessed Barnabas, Thine apos- 
tle, Thou grant us, whom Thou 
dost refresh with Thy sacra- 
ments, to serve Thee worthily 
with behavior pleasing in Thy 
sight. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ÜPPLICES te rogámus, om- 

nipotens Deus: ut, quos 

tuis réficis sacraméntis, inter- 

cedénte beáto Bárnaba Após- 

tolo tuo, tibi étiam plácitis 

móribus, dignánter tribuas 
deservíre. Per Dóminum. 


June 12—St. Jobn of St. Facundus, Conf. (White) 
Double 
Sts. Basilives, Cyprinus, Pabor and Nazarius, 


Martyrs (Red) 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


Gop, the author of peace, 
and lover of charity, Who 


O 


EUS, auctor pacis et am- 
ator caritátis, qui beá- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 12—ST. JOHN OF ST. FACUNDUS 


tum Joánnem Confessórem 
tuum mirifica dissidéntes 
componéndi grátia decorásti: 
ejus méritis et intercessióne 
concéde; ut, in tua caritáte 
firmáti, nullis a te tentatió- 
nibus separémur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


1045 


didst adorn blessed John, Thy 
confessor, with wonderful 
grace for the reconciliation of 
quarrels, grant, by his merits 
and intercession, that, being 
firmly established in Thy char- 
ity, we may not be separated 
from Thee by any temptations. 
Through our Lord, 


Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs. 


Prayer 


ANCTÓRUM Mártyrum tuó- 

rum  Basílidis, Cyrini, 
Náboris atque Nazárii, quesu- 
mus, Dómine, natalítia nobis 
votiva respléndeant: et, quod 
illis cóntulit excelléntia sem- 
pitérna früctibus nostre devo- 
tiónis accréscat. Per Dómi- 
num. : 


Av the natal festival of 

Thy martyrs Basilides, 
Cyrinus, Nabor, and Nazarius, 
be glorious for us, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, and may that 
which eternal goodness hath 
conferred on them increase in 
the fruits of our devotion. 
Through our Lord. 


Secret 


RO sanctérum tuórum 

Basilidis, Cyrini, Nábo- 
ris atque. Nazárii, sanguine 
venerándo, hóstias tibi, Dó- 
mine, solémniter immolámus, 
iua mirabilia pertractántes: 
per quem talis est perfécta 
victéria. Per Dóminum. 


QU OFFER The solemn 
sacrifices, O Lord, in 
honor of the blood of Thy 
saints, Basilides, Cyrinus, 
Nabor, and Nazarius, com- 
memorating Thy wondrous 
works, that through Thee such 
a victory was accomplished. 
Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


EMPER, Dómine, sanctó- 

rum Mártyrum tuórum 
Basilidis, Cyríni, Náboris at- 
que Nazárii solémnia cele- 
brántes: presta, quaesumus; 
ut eórum patrocinia jügiter 
Sentiámus. Per Dóminum. 


vER celebrating the feast 

of Thy holy martyrs, 
Basilides, Cyrinus, Nabor, and 
Nazarius, grant, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that we may 
continually experience the 
blessing of their patronage. 
Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1046 


JUNE 13—ST. ANTHONY OF PADUA 


June 13—t. Anthony of Padua, Confessor, Doctor 
of the Church (White) 
Double 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 15, 5 


N THE midst of the Church 
the Lord opened his 
mouth; and filled him with the 
spirit of wisdom and under- 
standing: He clothed him with 
a robe of glory. Ps. 91, 2. It is 
good to give praise to the 
Lord, and to sing to Thy name, 
O Most High. Y. Glory. 


N MÉDIO Ecclésie apéruit 
I os ejus: et implévit eum 
Dóminus spíritu sapiéntie et 
intelléctus: stolam glórie ín- 
duit eum. Ps. 91, 2. Bonum est 
confitéri Dómino: et psállere 
nómini tuo, Altissime. YV. 
Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Pray 


AY the votive solemnity 

of Thy blessed confes- 
Sor and doctor, Anthony, glad- 
den Thy Church, O God, that 
it may ever be fortified with 
Spiritual aids and deserve eter- 
nal joys. Through our Lord. 


er 

ccLEsIam tuam, Deus, 

beáti Antónii Confesso- 
ris tui atque Doctóris solém- 
nitas votíva letíficet: ut spi- 
rituálibus semper muniátur 
auxiliis, et gáudiis pérfrui 
mereátur etérnis. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Epistle, Dearly beloved, I charge thee, from the Mass In medio, 


page 1345. 


The mouth of the just shall 
meditate wisdom, and his 
tongue shall speak judgment. 
¥. The law of his God is in his 
heart; and his steps shall not 
be supplanted. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ecclus. 
45, 9. The Lord loved him and 
adorned him: He clothed him 
with a robe of glory. Alleluia, 


Gradual. Ps. 36, 30, 31 


Os justi meditábitur sapi- 
éntiam, et lingua ejus loqué- 
tur judicium. Y. Lex Dei ejus 
in corde ípsius; et non sup- 
plantabtintur gressus ejus. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Eccli. 
45, 9. Amávit eum Dóminus, 
et ornávit eum: stolam glórie 
induit eum. Alleluja. 


In Paschal-time the Gradual is replaced by the Greater Alleluia. 
Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Eccius. 
45, 9. The Lord loved him and 
adorned him: He clothed him 
with a robe of glory. Alleluia. 
Osee 14,6. The just shall spring 
as the lily; and shall flourish 
forever before the Lord. Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Eccli. 
45, 9. Amávit eum Dóminus, 
et ornavit eum: stolam glorie 
induit eum. Allelüja. Y. Osee 
14, 6. Justus germinábit sicut 
Mlium: et florébit in etérnum 
ante Dóminum. Allelüja, 


Gospel, from the Mass In medio, page 1346, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


EERE cid 


JUNE 14—ST. BASIL 


1047 


Offertory. Ps. 91, 13 


Justus ut palma florébit: 
sicut cedrus, que in Líbano 
est, multiplicábitur. (T. P. 
Allelüja.) 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


The just shall flourish like 
the palm-tree: he shall grow 
up like the cedar of Libanus. 
(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Secret 


RÆSENS oblátio fiat, Dó- 
mine, pópulo tuo salu- 
táris: pro quo dignátus es Pa- 
tri tuo te vivéntem hóstiam 
immoláre: Qui cum eódem 
Deo Patre, et Spíritu Sancto 
vivis et regnas Deus, per óm- 
nia secula seculérum. 


Av the present offering, O 

Lord, be made salutary 
unto Thy people, for whom 
Thou didst vouchsafe to offer 
Thyself, a living victim, to the 
Father, Who, with the same 
God the Father and the Holy 
Spirit, livest and reignest, God 
for ever and ever. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Luke 12, 42 
Fidélis servus et prudens, A faithful and wise steward, 
quem constituit dóminus su- whom the Lord set over His 
per famíliam suam: ut det family; to give them their 
illis in témpore tritici mensü- measure of wheat indue season. 


ram. (T. P. Allelüja.) 


(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 


1víNis, Dómine, munéri- 

bus satiáti: quesumus; 

ut beáti Antónii Confessóris 

tui atque Doctóris méritis et 

intercessióne, salutáris sacri- 

fícii sentiámus efféctum. Per 
Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ILLED with 'Thy divine 

gifts, O Lord, we be- 
seech Thee, that, by the merits 
and intercession of blessed 
Anthony, Thy confessor and 
doctor, we may experience the 
effect of the sacrifice of salva- 
tion. Through our Lord. 


June 14—9t. Basil, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of 
the Church (White) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 15, 5 


N MEDIO Ecclésie apéruit 
os ejus: et implévit eum 
Dóminus spíritu sapiéntie et 
intelléctus: stolam, glórie ín- 
duit eum, Ps. 91, 2. Bonum est 
confitéri Dómino: et psállere 


PN THE midst of the Church 
the Lord opened his 
mouth; and filled him with the 
spirit of wisdom and under- 
standing: He clothed him with 
a robe of glory. Ps. 91, 2. It is 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1048 


good to give praise to the 
Lord, and to sing to Thy name, 
O Most High. Y. Glory. 


JUNE 14—8ST. BASIL 


nómini tuo, Altissime. y. 


Glória Patri. 


Prayer from Mass Sacerdotes tui, page 1341. 


Epistle from Mass In medio, page 1345. 


Gradual. Ps. 36, 30, 31 


The mouth of the just shall 
meditate wisdom, and his 
tongue shall speak judgment. 
Y. The law of his God is in his 
heart; and his steps shall not 
he supplanted. 

Alleluia, alleluia, Y. Ps. 88, 
21. I have found David My 
servant: with My holy oil I 
have anointed him. Alleluia. 


Os justi meditábitur sapi- 
éntiam, et lingua ejus loqué- 
tur judicium. Y. Lex Dei ejus 
in corde ipsíus; et non sup- 
plantabüntur gressus ejus. 


Alleluja, alleluja. V. Ps. 88, 
21, Invéni David servum me- 
um: óleo sancto meo unxi 
eum. Allelája. 


Gospel. Luke 14, 26-33 


H3 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, Jesus said 

to the multitudes, If 

any man come to Me, and hate 
not his father, and mother, 
and wife, and children, and 
sisters, yea and his own life 
also, he cannot be My disciple. 
And whosoever doth not carry 
his cross, and come after Me, 
can not be My disciple. For 
which of you having a mind 
to build a tower, doth not first 
sit down and reckon the 
charges that are necessary, 
whether he have wherewithal 
to finish it; lest after he hath 
laid the foundation, and is not 
able to finish it, all that see it 
begin to mock him, saying. 
This man began to build, and 
was not able to finish? Or 
what king about to go and 
make war against another 
king, doth not first sit down 
and think whether he be able 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. l 
T; ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus turbis: Si quis venit 

ad me, et non odit patrem su- 
um et matrem, et uxórem, et 
fílios, et fratres, et soróres, 
adhuc autem et ánimam su- 
am, non potest meus esse dis- 
cipulus. Et qui non bájulat 
crucem suam, et venit post 
me, non potest meus esse dis- 
cipulus. Quis enim ex vobis 
volens turrim sdificare, non 
prius sedens cómputat sump- 
tus qui necessárii sunt, si há- 
beat ad perficiéndum, ne, po- 
Steáquam posüerit fundamén- 


, tum, et non potüerit perficere, 


omnes, qui vident, incípiant 
illidere ei, dicéntes: Quia hic 
homo cepit zdificáre, et non 
pótuit consummáre? Aut quis 
rex itürus commíttere bellum 
advérsus áliur regem, non 
sedens prius cégitat, si possit 
cum decem míllibus occürrere 


http://ccwatershed.org 


‘iii d 


JUNE 15—STS. VITUS, MODESTUS, CRESCENTIA 


el qui cum vigínti míllibus 
venit ad se? Alióquin adhuc 
illo longe agénte, legatiónem 
mittens rogat ea, que pacis 
sunt. Sic ergo omnis ex vobis, 
qui non renüntiat ómnibus, 
que póssidet, non potest meus 
esse discipulus. Bonum est 
sal. Si autem sal evanüerit, in 
quo condiétur? Neque in ter- 
ram, neque in sterquilinium 
ütile est, sed foras mittétur. 
Qui habet aures audiéndi, 
&udiat. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 

Véritas mea et misericórdia 
mea cum ipso, et in nómine 
meo exaltábitur cornu ejus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


1049 


with ten thousand to meet him 
that with twenty thousand 
cometh against him? Or else, 
whilst the other is yet afar off, 
sending an embassy, he desir- 
eth conditions of peace. Sa 
likewise every one of you that 
doth not renounce all that he 
possesseth, cannot be My dis- 
ciple. Salt is good: but if the 
salt shall lose its savor, where- 
with shall it be seasoned? It is 
neither profitable for the land, 
nor for the dunghill, but shall 
be cast out. He that hath ears 
to hear, let him hear. 


Ps. 88, 25 


My truth and My mercy 
shall be with him; and in My 
name shall his horn be exalted. 


Secret from Mass Sacerdotes tui, page 1343. 


Communion. Luke 12, 42 


Fidélis servus et prudens, A faithful and wise servant, 
quem constítuit Dóminus su- whom the Lord hath set over 
per famfliam suam, ut det His family, to give them their 
ilis in témpore trítici men- measure of wheat in due sea- 
süram. son. 

Postcommunion from Mass Sacerdotes tui, page 1344. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


June 15—Sts. "Vitus, Modestus anb Creseentia, 
Martyrs (Red) 
Simple 
In Paschal-time the Mass Sancti tui, page 1333, is said in place 
of this Mass, but with the Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion of 
this Mass. f 
Introit. Ps. 33, 20, 1 


ULTÆ tribulatiónes jus- ANY are the afflictions of 
tórum, et de his ómni- the just, and out of all 
bus liberávit eos Dóminus: these the Lord hath delivered 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1050 JUNE 15—8STS. VITUS, MODESTUS, CRESCENTIA, 


them: the Lord keepeth all Dóminus custódit ómnia ossa 
their bones: not one of them eórum: unum ex his non con- 
Shall be broken. Ps. 33, 2. I terétur. Ps. 33, 2. Benedicam 
will bless the Lord at all times: Dóminum in omni témpore: 
His praise shall be always in semper laus ejus in ore meo. 
my mouth. VY. Gory. Y. Glória. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


RANT unto Thy Church, 

we beseech Thee, O Lord, 
by the intercession of Thy holy 
martyrs, Vitus, Modestus, and 
Crescentia, to forego the spirit 
of pride and progress in the 
humility which is pleasing to 
'ÜThee, that, contemning base 
things, it may, with generous 
charity, practice all those 
things which are right. 
Through our Lord. 


A ECCLESLE tus, quesu- 

mus, Démine, sanctis 
Martyribus tuis Vito, Modés- 
to atque Crescéntia interce- 
déntibus, supérbe non sapere, 
sed tibi placita humilitate 
proficere: ut, prava despi- 
ciens, quecümque recta sunt, 
libera exérceat caritáte. Per 
Dóminum. 


Lesson The souls of the just, from the Mass Intret, page 1317. 


Gradual. Ps. 149, 5,1 


The saints shall rejoice in Exsultábunt sancti in glória: 
glory: they shall be joyful in letabüntur in cubílibus suis. 
their beds. Y. Sing ye to the Y. Cantáte Dómino cánticum 
Lord a new canticle: let His novum: laus ejus in ecclésia 


praise be in the church of the 
Saints. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 144, 
10, 11. Thy saints shall bless 
Thee, O Lord: they shall speak 
of the glory of Thy kingdom. 
Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ssanctórum. 


Allelaja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 144, 
10, 11. Sancti tui, Dómine, 
benedicent te: glóriam regni 
tui dicent. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Luke 10, 16-18 


®© Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, Jesus said 

to His disciples, He 

that heareth you, heareth Me; 
and he that despiseth you, des- 
piseth Me; and he that despis- 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 

N rto témpore: Dixit Je- 
I Sus discípulis suis: Qui 
vos audit, me audit: et qui 
vos spernit, me spernit. Qui 
autem me spernit, spernit 


http://ccwatershed.org 


eum qui misit me. Revérsi 
sunt autem septuaginta duo 
cum gáudio, dicéntes: Dómi- 
ne, étiam demoénia subjiciün- 
tur nobis in nómine tuo. Et ait 
ilis: Vidébam sátanam sicut 
fulgur de celo cadéntem. Ecce 
dedi vobis potestátem calcan- 
di supra serpéntes et scor- 
piónes, et super omnem vir- 
tütem inimici: et nihil vobis 
nocébit. Verümtamen in hoc 
nolite gaudére, quia spiritus 
| vobis subjiciüntur: geudéte 
à autem, quod nómina vestra 
Pscripta sunt in celis. 


Offertory. 
|  Mirábilis Deus in sanctis 
& suis: Deus Israel ipse dabit 
t. virtütem et fortitüdinem ple- 
bis sue; benedictus Deus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


JUNE 15—STS. VITUS, MODESTUS, CRESCENTIA 


1051 


eth Me, despiseth Him that 
sent Me. And the seventy-two 
returned with joy, saying, 
Lord, the devils also are sub- 
ject to us in Thy name: and 
He said to them, I saw Satan 
like lightning falling from 
heaven. Behold, I have given 
you power to tread upon ser- 
pents, and scorpions, and upon 
all the power of the enemy: 
and nothing shall hurt you. 
But yet rejoice not in this, that 
spirits are subject to you; but 
rejoice in this, that your names 
are written in heaven. 


Ps. 67, 36 


God is wonderful in His 
saints, the God of Israel is He 
Who will give power and 
strength to His people: blessed 
be God. 


Secret 


Icut glóriam divine po- 

téntie miinera pro 
Sanctis obláta testantur: sic 
nobis efféctum, Dómine, tue 
salvatiónis impéndant. Per 
Dóminum. 


S THE gifts offered for 

the saints testify the 
glory of the divine power, so 
let them bestow upon us, O 
Lord, the effect of Thy salva- 
tion. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Wis. 3, 1-3 


Justórum anime in manu 
Dei sunt, et non tanget illos 
torméntum malitie: visi sunt 
óculis insipiéntium mori: illi 
autem sunt in pace. 


The souls of the just are in 
the hand of God, and the tor- 
ment of malice shall not touch 
them: in the sight of the un- 
wise they seem to die; but they 
are in peace. 


Postcommunion 


EPLÉTI, Dómine, bene- 
dictióne solémni: que- 
s unus; ut per intercessiónem 


ILLED with 'Thy solemn 
blessing, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that, by the in- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1052 


tercession of Thy holy martyrs, 
Vitus, Modestus, and Cres- 
centia, the healing power of 
the sacrament may profit both 
our bodies and our souls. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


JUNE 18—ST. EPHREM 


sanctórum Mártyrum tuórum 
Viti, Modésti et Crescéniim, 
medicína sacraménti et cor- 
póribus nostris prosit, et mén- 
tibus. Per Dóminum. 


June 18 — $t. Ephrem the S»prían, Deacon, Confessor 
and Doctor of the Church (White) 
Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer 


cop Who on Thy Church 

didst bestow a new glory 
in the marvelous learning and 
in the meritorious life of 
blessed Ephrem, Thy confessor 
and doctor: humbly we beseech 
Thee that, through his pray- 
ers, she may be shielded by 
Thine unfailing might against 
every snare of false teaching 
and wickedness. Through our 
Lord. 


EUS, qui Ecclésiam tuam 
beáti Ephrem Confes- 
sóris tui et Doctóris mira eru- 
ditióne et preclaris vitæ méri- 


tis illustráre voluísti: te súp- f 


plices exorámus; ut, ipso in- 
tercedénte, eam advérsus er- 
róris et pravitátis insidias pe- 
rénni tua virtüte deféndas. 
Per Dóminum. 


Secret 


AY ihe loving prayers of 

St. Ephrem, Thy con- 
fessor and doctor, not be want- 
ing to us, O Lord, to commend 
our gifts and ever to obtain 
pardon for us. Through our 
Lord. 


ANCTI Ephrem Confes- 

sóris tui, atque Doctóris, 
nobis, Dómine, pia non desit 
oratio: que et munera nostra 
conciliet; et tuam nobis in- 
dulgéntiam semper obtíneat. 
Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


HAT Thy sacrifices may 

give us health, O Lord, 
may blessed Ephrem, confes- 
sor and illustrious doctor, we 
beseech Thee, act as our inter- 
cessor. Through our Lord. 


d: NoBIs, Dómine, tua 
sacrificia dent salütem: 
beatus Ephrem Conféssor tu- 
us et Doctor Egrégius, qué- 
sumus, precator accédat. Per 
Dóminum. 


The Same Day—Sts. Mark and Marrellianus 
Martyrs 
Simple 
Introit from Mass Salus autem, page 1325. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 18—87TS. MARK AND MARCELLIANUS 


1053 


Prayer 


RESTA, quesumus, omní- 

potens Deus, ut, qui 
Sanctórum Mártyrum tuórum 
Marci et Marcelliáni natalitia 
Célimus; a cunctis malis im- 
minéntibus eórum interces- 
sidnibus liberémur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that we, 
who observe the natal feast of 
Thy martyrs, Mark and Mar- 
cellianus, may by their inter- 
cession be delivered from all 
the evils that threaten us. 
Through our Lord. 


Epistle from Mass of Whit-Saturday, page 623. 


Gradual. 


Justórum anime in manu 
Dei sunt; et non tanget illos 
torméntum malítis. V. Visi 
sunt óculis insipiéntium 
mori: illi autem sunt in pace. 
Allelüja, allelüja. V. Hee est 
vera fratérnitas, que nun- 
quam pótuit violári certá- 
mine: qui effüso, sánguine 
secüti sunt Dóminum. Alle- 
Jája. 


Wis. 3, 1-3 

The souls of the just are in 
the hand of God; and the tor- 
ment of malice shall not 
touch them. Y. In the sight of 
the unwise they seemed to die: 
but they are in peace. Alleluia, 
alleluia. Y. This is the true 
brotherhood, which could never 
be broken by any discord: 
shedding together their blood, 
these saints followed their 
Lord. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 11, 47-51 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Dicébat 

Jesus Scribis et Phari- 
seis: Ve vobis, qui sdificátis 
monuménta Prophetárum: 
patres autem vestri occidé- 
runt illos. Profécto testificá- 
mini quod consentitis opéri- 
bus patrum vestrórum: quó- 
niam ipsi quidem eos occidé- 
runt, vos autem edificdtis 
eórum sepülera. Proptérea et 
sapiéntia Dei dixit: Mittam 
ad illos Prophétas, et Após- 
tolos, et ex illis occídent, et 
persequéntur: ut inquirátur 
sanguis ómnium; Prophetá- 
rum, qui effüsus est a con- 
stitutióne mundi a genera- 
tióne ista, a sánguine Abel, 


4X Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, Jesus said 

to the Scribes and Pha- 

risees, Woe to you who build 
the monuments of the pro- 
phets: and your fathers killed 
them. Truly you bear witness 
that you consent to the doings 
of your fathers: for they in- 
deed killed them, and you 
build their sepulchres. For this 
cause also the wisdom of God 
said, I will send to them pro- 
phets and apostles, and some 
of them they will kill and per- 
secute. That the blood of all 
the prophets, which was shed 
from the foundation -of the 
world, may. be required of this 
generation; from the blood of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1054 JUNE 19—ST. JULIANA FALCONIERI 


Abel unto the blood of Zach- 
arias, who was slain between 
the altar and the temple. Yea, 
I say to you, it shall be required 
of this generation. 


usque ad sánguinem Zacha- 
rie, qui périit inter altáre et 
eedem. Ita dico vobis, requiré- 
tur ab hac generatióne. 


Offertory from the feast of Holy Innocents, page 156. 


Secret 


ANCTIFY, O Lord, the gifts 
dedicated to Thee, and 
through the same, and by the 
intercession of Thy holy 
martyrs, Mark and Marcel- 
lianus, look upon us with 
favor. Through our Lord. 


ÜNERA tibi, Dómine, di- 

cáta sanctifica: et, in- 

tercedéntibus sanctis Mar- 

tyribus tuis Marco et Marcel- 

liáno, per eádam nos placá- 
tus inténde. Per Dóminum. 


age ion from Mass of Monday, first week in Lent, page 


Postcommunion 


ILLED with the offering 

of salvation, we humbly 
entreat Thee, O Lord, that, by 
the intercession of the holy 
martyrs, Mark and Marcel- 
lianus, we may be renewed by 
the effect of that which glad- 
dens us with its taste. Through 
our. Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ALUTARIS tui, Dómine, 

münere satiáti, süpplices 
exorámus: ut, cujus letámur 
gustu, intercedéntibus sanctis 
Martyribus tuis Marco et 
Marcelliáno, renovémur ef- 
féctu. Per Dóminum. 


June 19—St. Juliana Faleonieri, Virgin (white) 
. Double 


Sts. Gerbase and Protase, Martyrs (Red) 
Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370, except: 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst vouch- 

safe miraculously to re- 
store blessed Juliana, Thy vir- 
gin, with the precious body of 
Thy Son, when she suffered 
with a mortal sickness, grant, 
we beseech Thee, that, by her 
merits interceding for us, we, 
too, being refreshed. and 


EUS, qui bedtam Juliá- 

nam Virginem tuam 
extrémo morbo laborántem, 
pretióso Fílii tui córpore mi- 
rabíliter recreáre dignátus es: 
concéde, quesumus; ut, ejus 
intercedéntibus méritis, nos 
quoque eódem in mortis agóne 
refécti ac roboráti, ad cælé- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
| 
l 


JUNE 21—ST ALOYSIUS 


1055 


stem pátriam perducámur. strengthened by the same in 


Per eümdem Dóminum. 


ihe agony of death, may be 
brought to our heavenly 
country. Through the same. 


Commemoration of Sts, Gervase and Protase with the Prayer, 
Secret and Postcommunion of the Mass Salus autem, page 1325. 


June 20—$t. Silberius, Pope, Martyr (Red) 


Simple 


Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302, except: 


Prayer 


REGEM tuum, Pastor, æ- 

térne,  placátus in- 
ténde: et per beátum Sylvé- 
rium Mártyrem tuum atque 
Summum Pontíficem, perpé- 
tua protectióne custódi: quem 
totíus Ecclésie prestitisti esse 
pastórum. Per Dóminum. 


ETERNAL Shepherd, ao 

Thou look favorably 
upon Thy flock, which we he- 
seech Thee to guard and keep 
for evermore through the 
blessed Silverius Thy Martyr 
and Supreme Pontiff, whom 
Thou didst choose to be the 
chief shepherd of the whole 
Church. 


June 21—St, Alopsius, Confessor (White) 


Double 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


iNUÍSTI eum paulo mi- 

nus ab Angelis: gléria 

et honóre coronásti eum. Ps. 

148, 2. Laudáte Dóminum, 

omnes Angeli ejus: laudáte 

eum, omnes virtütes ejus. VY. 
Glória Patri, 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 


Ps. 8,6 


Hov hast made him a little 

less than the angels: 
Thou hast crowned him with 
glory aud honor. Ps, 148, 2. 
Praise ye the Lord, all His 
angels: praise ye Him, all His 
hosts. Y. Glory. 


762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1056 


JUNE 21—ST. ALOYSIUS 


Prayer 


cop, the dispenser of 

heavenly gifts, Who in 
the angelic youth Aloysius didst 
combine wonderful innocence 
of life with penance, grant to 
his ‘merits and prayers that 
we, who have not followed him 


in his innocence, may imitate. 


his penance. 
Lord. 


Through our 


CLÉSTIUM donórum dis- 
a tribütor, Deus, qui in 
angélico jüvene Aloísio mi- 
ram vite innocéntiam pari 
cum peniténtia sociásti: ejus 
méritis et précibus concéde; 
ut, innocéntem non secúti, 
peniténtem  imitémur. Per 
Dóminum. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 31, 8-11 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


LESSED is the man that is 

found without blemish, 
and that hath not gone after 
gold, nor put his trust in 
money nor in treasures. Who 
is he, and we will praise him? 
for he hath done wonderful 
things in his life. Who hath 
been tried thereby, and made 
perfect, he shall have glory 
everlasting: he that could 
have transgressed, and hath 
not transgressed, and could 
do evil things, and hath not 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


est sine macula, et qui 
post aurum non 4biit, nec 
sperávit in pecünia et the- 
Ssáuris. Quis est hic, et lau- 
dábimus eum? fecit enim mi- 
rabilia in vita sua. Qui pro- 
bátus est in illo, et perféctus 
est, erit ili glória etérna: 
qui pótuit tránsgredi, et non 
est transréssus: fácere mala, 
et non fecit: ideo stabilíta 
sunt bona illíus in Dómino. 


T vir, qui invéntus 


done them: therefore are his goods established in the Lord. 
Gradual.. Ps. 70, 5, 6 


My hope, O Lord, from my 
youth: by Thee have I been 
confirmed from ihe womb; 
from my mother's womb Thou 
art my protector. Y. Ps. 40, 13. 
But Thou hast upheld me by 
reason of my innocence, and 
hast established me in Thy 
sight forever. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 64, 
$. Blessed is he whom Thou 
hast chosen, and taken to 
Thee: he shall dwell in Thy 
courts. Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Dómine, spes mea a juven- 
tute mea: in te confirmátus 
sum ex ütero: de ventre ma- 
iris mez tu es protéctor meus. 
Y. Ps. 40, 13. Me autem prop- 
ter innocéntiam  suscepísti: 
et confirmásti me in conspéc- 
tu tuo in etérnum. 


Allelüja, alleluja. Y. Ps. 
64, 5. Beátus quem elegisti et 
assumpsísti: inhabitábit in 
atriis tuis. Allelija. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 21—ST, ALOYSIUS 


1057 


Gospel. Matt. 22, 29-40 


HH Sequépntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Matthdeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Respón- 

dens Jesus, ait Saddu- 
Cis: X Errátis, nesciéntes 
Scriptiras, neque virtütem 
Dei. In resurrectióne enim 
neque nubent, neque nubén- 
iur: sed erunt sicut Angeli 
Dei in ccelo. De resurrectióne 
autem mortuórum non legís- 
tis quod dictum est a Deo di- 
cénte vobis: Ego sum Deus 
Abraham, et Deus Isaac, et 
Deus Jacob? Non est Deus 
mortuórum, sed vivéntium. 
Et audiéntes turbe, mira- 
bantur in doctrina ejus. Pha- 
ris#i autem audiéntes quod 
siléntium imposuisset Saddu- 
ceis, convenérunt in unum: 
et interrogávit eum unus ex 
eis legis doctor, tentans eum: 
Magíster, quod est mandátum 
magnum in lege? Ait ili Je- 
sus: Diliges Dóminum Deum 
tuum ex toto corde tuo, et in 
tota ánima tua, et in tota 
mente tua. Hoc est máximum, 
et primum mandátum. Se- 
cündum autem simile est 
huic: Díliges próximum tu- 
um, sicut teipsum. In his duó- 
bus mandátis univérsa lex 
pendet, et prophéte. 


"H* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


NE THAT lime, Jesus an- 
swering, said to the 
Sadducees: You err, not know- 
ing the Scriptures, nor the 
power of God. For in the res- 
urrection they shall neither 
marry nor be married: but 
shall be as the angels of God 
in heaven. And concerning 
the resurrection of the dead, 
have you not read that which 
was spoken by God, saying to 
you: I am the God of Abra- 
ham, and the God of Isaac, 
and the God of Jacob? He is 
not the God of the dead, but 
of the living. And the multi- 
tudes hearing it were in ad- 
miration of His doctrine. But 
the phariseés, hearing that. He 
had silenced the Sadducees, 
came together: and one of 
them, a doctor of the law, 
asked Him, tempting Him: 
Master, which is the great 
commandment in the law? 
Jesus said to him: Thou shalt 
love the Lord thy God with thy 
whole heart, and with thy 
whole soul, and with thy whole 
mind. This is the greatest and 
the first commandment. And 
the second is like to this: Thou 
shalt love thy neighbor as thy- 


self. On these two commandments dependeth the whole law 


and the prophets. 


Offertory. 

Quis ascéndet in montem 

Démini, aut quis stabit in 

loco sancto ejus? Innocens 
mánibus, et mundo corde. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 23, 3, 4 

Who shall ascend into the 
mountain of the Lord? or who 
shall stand in His holy place? 
the innocent in hands, and 
clean of heart. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1058 


JUNE 22—ST. PAULINUS 


Secret 


AXE us, O Lord, to sit 

down to Thy heavenly 
banquet clothed in the wed- 
ding-garment which the pious 
preparation and constant tears 
of blessed Aloysius adorned 
with priceless pearls. Through 
our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


crésri convívio fac nos, 

Dómine, nuptiáli veste 
indutos acctimbere: quam 
beáti Aloísii pia preparátio, 
et juges lácrymse inestima- 
bilibus ornábant margaritis. 
Per Dóminum. 


Communion. Ps. 77, 24, 25 


He gave them the bread of 
heaven: man ate the bread of 
angels, 


.Panem celi dedit eis: pa- 
nem Angelórum manducávit 
homo. 


Postcommunion 


RANT, O Lord, that we, 

who have been fed with 
the bread of angels, may also 
livé angelic lives, and after the 
example of him whom we this 
day venerate, pass our days in 
incessant giving of thanks. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


NGELÓRUM esca nutrí- 

£. tos, angélicis étiam. 
Dómine, da móribus vívere: 
et ejus, quem hódie cólimus, 
exémplo, in gratiárum sem- 
per actióne manére. Per Dó- 


June 22—$5t. Paulinus, Bishop, Confessor (White) 
Double 


'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit from Mass Sacerdotes tul, page 1341. 


Prayer 


cop, Who hast promised 
O to those who leave all in 
this world for Thee a hun- 
dred-fold in the world to come 
and life everlasting, mercifully 
grant that, following closely 
in the footsteps of the holy 
bishop, Paulinus, we may have 
the grace to despise earthly 
things and desire only heav- 
enly Who livest. 


EUS, qui ómnia pro te in 
D hoc seculo relinquénti- 
us, céntuplum in futüro et 
vitam etérnam  promisísti: 
concéde propítius; ut sancti 
Pontíficis Paulini vestígiis in- 
heréntes, vale&mus terréna 
despicere, et sola celéstia de- 
sideráre. Qui vivis. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 22—ST. PAULINUS 


Epistle. 2 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Scitis grátiam 

Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi, quóniam propter vos 
egénus factus est, cum esset 
dives, ut ilíus inópia vos dí- 
vites essétis. Et consílium in 
hoc do: hoc enim vobis ütile 
est, qui non solum fácere, sed 
et velle cepistis ab anno 
prióre: nunc vero et facto 
perfícite: ut quemádmodum 
promptus est ánimus volun- 
tátis, ita sit et perficiéndi ex 
eo quod habétis. Si enim vyol- 
üntas prompta est, secindum 
id quod habet, accépta est, 
non secündum id quod non 
(habet. Non enim ut aliis sit 
remissio, vobis autem tribulá- 
#tio, sed ex xqualitate. In præ- 
isénti témpore véstra abun- 
Jdántia ilidrum inópiam súp- 
gpleat: utet illórum abundan- 
tia vestre inópie sit supple- 
méntum, ut fiat cequálitas, si- 
cut scriptum est: Qui mul- 
tum, non abundávit: et qui 
módicum, non minorávit. 


Gradual. 


Ecce sacérdos magnus, qui 
in diébus suis placuit Deo. F. 
Eccl, 44, 20. Non est invéntus 
similis illi, qui conserváret 
Jegem Excélsi. 

Allelája, allelüja. V. Ps. 
109, 4. Tu es sacérdos in ætér- 
num secündum órdinem Mel- 
chísedech. Allelüja. 

Gospel Fear not, little flock, 
page 1354. ] 
Offertory from Mass Statuit 


1059 


Cor. 8, 9.15 
Lesson from the Epistle of 
biessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. j 
RETHREN: Ye know the 
grace of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that being rich He be- 
came poor for your sakes; that 
through His poverty ye might 
be rich. And herein, I give my 
counsel: for this is profitable 
for you, who have begun not 
only to do, but also to be will- 
ing, a year ago; now therefore 
perform it also in deed: that 
as your mind is forward to be 
willing, so it may be also to 
perform, out of that which ye 
have. For if the will be for- 
ward, it is accepted according 
to that which a man hath, not 
according to that which he 
hath not. For I mean not that 
others should be eased, and 
you burthened, but by an 
equality. In this present time 
let your abundance supply 
their want, that their abund- 
ance also may supply your 
want; that there may be an 
equality, as 1t is written: He 
that had much had nothing 
over; and he that had little 
had no want. 


Eccl. 44, 16 


Behold a great priest, who in 
his days pleased God. Y. Eccl. 
44, 20. There was not any 
found like to him, who kept 
the law of the Most High. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 109, 
4. Thou are a priest forever 
according to the order of Mel- 
chisedech. Alleluia. 


jrom the Mass Justus ut palma, 


ei, page 1340. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1060 JUNE 28—VIGIL OF NATIVITY ST. JOHN BAPTIST 


Secret 


RANT US, O Lord, to join 
the sacrifice of perfect 
charity with the oblation of 
the altar, after the example of 
the holy bishop Paulinus, and, 
by zeal for good works, to de- 
Serve everlasting mercy. 
‘Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775- 


fécte caritátis sacrifí- 
cium exémplo sancti Pontifi- 
cis Paulíni cum altáris ob- 
latióne conjüngere: et bene- 
ficéntie stüdio sempitérnam 
misericórdiam promeréri. Per 
Dóminum, 


D' Nonis, Dómine, per- 


Communion from Mass Statuit ei, page 1340. 


Postcommunion 


RANT us, O Lord, by these 
à holy things that senti- 
ment of piety and humility 
|} which Thy holy bishop Paul- 
‘inus drew from the same di- 
vine source, and by his inter- 
cession  benignly pour the 
riches of Thy grace upon all 
who call upon Thee. Through 
our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


/RIBDE Nobis per hee sanc- 

to, Dómine, illum pietá- 

tis et humilitátis afféctum, 

quem ex hoc divíno fonte 

hausit sanctus Póntifex tuus 

Paulinus: et ipsíus interces- 

Sióne, in omnes, qui te depre- 

cántur, gratie tue divitias be- 

nignus effünde. Per Démi- 
num, i 


June 23—The Vigil ot the Nativity of St. Jobn 
the Baptist, (Purple) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Luke 1, 13, 15, 14 


Hi not, Zachary; thy 
prayer is heard, and 
thy wife Elizabeth shall bear 
thee a son, and thou shalt call 
his name John; and he shall 
be great before the Lord, and 
he shall be filled with the Holy 
Ghost even from his mother's 
womb; and many shall rejoice 
at his birth. Ps. 20, 2. In Thy 
strength, O Lord, the king 
shall joy; and in Thy salva- 
tion he shall rejoice exceed- 
ingly. Y. Glory. 


ue Zacharía ex- 
audita est orátio tua: 
et Elisabeth uxor tua páriet 
tibi filium, et vocábis nomen 
ejus Joánnem: et erit mag- 
nus coram Dómino: et. Spíritu 
sancto replébitur adhuc ex 
útero matris sue: et multi in 
nativitáte ejus gaudébunt. Y. 
Ps. 20, 2. Dómine, in virtüte 
tua letabitur rex: et super 
salutáre tuum exsultábit ve- 
heménter. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 23—VIGIL OF NATIVITY ST. JOHN BAPTIST 


1061 


Prayer 


RUESTA, quæsumus, om- 
i~ nípotens Deus, ut fami- 
lig tua per viam salütis in- 
cédat; et beáti Joánnis Pre- 
curséris hortaménta sectán- 
do, ad eum quem praedixit, se- 
C€üra  pervéniat, Dóminum 
nostrum Jesum Christum Fi- 
lium tuum. Qui tecüm. 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that Thy 
household may walk in the 
way of salvation and, by fol- 
lowing the exhortations of 
blessed John the Precursor, 
may safely come unto Him 
Whom he foretold, even Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, Thy Son, 
Who with Thee. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady Concede nos, page 824, 
third Prayer for the Chureh, page 825, or for the Pope, page 826. 


Lesson. 
Léctio Jeremie Prophéte. 


N p»iÉBUS illis: Factum est 
T verbum Dómini ad me, 
dicens: Priüsquam te formá- 
rem in ütero, novi te: et án- 
tequam exires de vulva, sanc- 
tificávi te et prophétam in 
géntibus dedi te. Et dixi: A, 
a, a, Dómine Deus: ecce nés- 
cio loqui, quia puer ego sum. 
Et dixit Dóminus ad me: Noli 
dicere: Puer sum: quóniam 
ad ómnia, que mittam te, 
ibis: et univérsa, quectimque 
mandávero tibi, loquéris. Ne 
timeas à facie eórum: quia 
tecum ego sum, ut éruam te, 
dicit Dóminus. Et misit Dó- 
minus manum suam, et téti- 
git os meum: et dixit Dómi- 
nus ad me: Ecce dedi verba 
mea in ore tuo: ecce consti- 
iui te hódie super gentes, et 
super regna, ut evéllas, et dé- 
struas, et dispérdas, et dis- 
sipes, et tedífices, et plantes: 
dicit Dóminus omnipotens. 


Jer. 1, 4-10 


Lesson from Jeremias the 
Prophet. 


N THOSE days the word of 

the Lord came to me, say- 
ing, Before I formed thee in 
the bowels of thy mother, I 
knew thee; and before thou 
camest forth out of the womb 
I sanctified thee, and made thee 
& prophet unto the nations. 
And I said, Ah, ah, ah, Lord 
God; behold I can not speak; 
for I am a child. And the Lord 
said to me, Say not, I am a 
child: for thou shalt go to all 
that I shall send thee; and 
whatever I shall command 
thee, thou shalt speak. Be not 
afraid at their presence; for 
I am with thee to deliver thee, 
saith the Lord. And the Lord 
put forth His hand, and 
touched my mouth: and the 
Lord said to me, Behold I have 
given My words in thy mouth: 
lo, I have set thee this day 
over the nations, and over 
kingdoms, to root up, and to 
pull down, and to waste, and 


to destroy, and to build, and to plant; saith the Lord al- 


mighty. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1062 


JUNE 23—VIGIL OP NATIVITY ST. JOHN BAPTIST 


Gradual. John 1, 6, 7 


There was a man sent from 
God, whose name was John. 
V. This man came to bear wit- 
ness of the light, to prepare 
unto the Lord a perfect people. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Fuit homo missus a Deo, 
cui nomen erat Joannes. y. 
Hic venit ut testimónium per- 
hibéret de lümine, paráre 
Dómino plebem perféctam. 


Gospel. Luke 1, 5-17 


4 Beginning of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


HERE was, in the days of 

Herod, the king of Judea, 
a certain priest named Zach- 
ary, of the course of Abia: and 
his wife was of the daughters 
of Aaron, and her name Eliz- 
abeth: and they were both just 
before God, walking in all the 
commandments and justifica- 
tions of the Lord without 
blame. And they had no son, 
for that Elizabeth was barren, 
and they both were well ad- 
vanced in years. And it came 
to pass, when he executed the 
priestly function, in the order 
of his course, before God, ac- 
cording to the custom of the 
priestly office, it was his lot to 
offer incense, going into the 
temple of the Lord; and all the 
multitude of the people was 
praying without at the hour 
of incense: and there appeared 
to him an angel of the Lord, 
standing on the right side of 
the altar of incense. And Zach- 
ary seeing him was troubled, 
and fear fell upon him; but 
the angel said to him, Fear 
not, Zachary, for thy prayer 
is heard, and thy wife Eliza- 
beth shall bear thee a son, and 
thou shalt call his name John; 
and thou shalt have joy and 
gladness, and many shall re- 
joice at his nativity. For he 


FR Inítium sancti Evangélii 
secündum Lucam. 


vir in diébus Heródis, 

regis Judææ, sacérdos 
quidam nómine Zacharias, de 
vice Abia, et uxor illíus de fil- 
iábus Aaron, et nomen ejus 
Elisabeth. Erant autem justi 
ambo ante Deum, incedéntes 
in ómnibus mandatis, et jus- 
tificatiónibus Dómini sine 
queréla, et non erat illis fíl- 
ius, eo quod esset Elísabeth 
Stérilis, et ambo processíssent 
in diébus suis. Factum est au- 
tem, cum sacerdótio fungeré- 
tur in órdine vicis sue ante 
Deum, secündum consuetü- 
dinem sacerdótii, sorte éxiit, 
ut incénsum póneret ingrés- 
sus in templum Dómini: et 
omnis multitüdo pópuli erat 
orans foris hora incénsi. Ap- 
páruit autem illi Angelus Dó- 
mini, stans a dextris altáris 
incénsi. Et Zacharías turbá- 
tus est, videns, et timor írruit 
super eum, Ait autem ad il- 
Jum Angelus; Ne timeas, 
Zacbaría quóniam exaudita 
est deprecátio tua: et uxor tuo 
Elísabeth páriet tibi fílium, 
et vocábis nomen ejus Joán- 
nem: et erit gáudium tibi, et 
exsultátio, et multi in nativi- 
táte ejus gaudébunt: erit 
enim magnus coram Dómino: 
et vinum et síceram non bibet 
et Sníritu Sancto repJébitur 


http://ccwatershed.org 


f 


JUNE 23—VIGIL OF NATIVITY ST. JOHN BAPTIST 


adhuc ex útero matris sue: 
et multos fíliórum Israël con- 
vértet ad Dóminum Deum ip- 
Sórum: et ipse precédet ante 
illum in spíritu, et virtüte 
Elie: ut convértat corda pa- 
trum in fílios et incrédulos ad 
prudéntium justórum, paráre 
Dómino plebem perféctam. 


1062 


shall be great before the Lord; 
and shall drink no wine nor 
strong drink, and he shall be 
filed with the Holy Ghost 
even from his mother’s womb. 
And he shall convert many of 
the children of Israel to the 
Lord their God; and he shall 
go before Him in the spirit and 
power of Elias, that he may 


turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the in- 
credulous to the wisdom of the just to prepare unto the Lord 


a perfect people. 
Offertory. 


Glória et honóre coronasti 
eum: et constituisti eum su- 
per ópera mánuum tuárum, 
Dómine. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 8, 6, 7 

Thou hast crowned him 
with glory and honor, and bast 
set him over the works of Thy 
hands, O Lord. 


Secret 


ÜNERA, Dómine, obláta 

sanctifica: et, interce- 

dénte beáto Joánne Baptista, 

nos per hzc a peccatórum no- 

Strórum máculis emünda. Per 
Dóminum. 


ANCTIFY, O Lord, the gifts 

we offer, and, by the in- 
tercession of.blessed John the 
Baptist, cleanse us through 
them from the stains of our 
sins. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret of our Blessed Lady, By Thy mercy, page 825, 


third for the Church, page 825, 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Magna est glória ejus in sa- 
lutári tuo: glóriam et mag- 
nam decórem impónes super 
eum, Dómine. 


or for the Pope, page 826. 


Ps. 20, 6 
His glory is great in Thy sal- 
vation; glory and great beauty 
shalt Thou lay upon him, O 
Lord. 


Postcommunion 


EArt Joánnis Baptiste 
B nos, Dómine, preclara 
comitétur orátio: et quem 
ventürum esse predixit, pos- 
cat nobis fore placátum, Dó- 
minum nostrum Jesum Chri- 
stum Fílium tuum: Qui te- 
cum. 


AY the glorious interces- 
sion of blessed John the 
Baptist go with us, O Lord, and 
may he obtain for us the mercy 
of Him Whose coming he fore- 
told, even Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, Thy Son, Who with 
'Thee. 


` Second Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, Grant, O Lord, 
page 825, for the Church, page 825, or for the Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1064 JUNE 24—NATIVITY OF ST. JOHN BAPTIST 


Capyright. by —— Brothers 


June 24—The Natibitp of St. 3 obn the Baptist, 
(White) 


Double of the First Class 


with a Common Octave 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 
HE Lord hath called me 
by my name from the 
womb of my mother, and He 
hath made my mouth like a 
Sharp sword; in the shadow of 
His hand He hath protected 
me, and hath made me as a 
chosen arrow. Ps. 91, 2. It is 
good to give praise to the Lord, 
and to sing to Thy name, O 
Most High. Y. Glory. 


Is. 49, 1, 2 


. E VENTRE matris mese 
vocávit me Dóminus 


nómine meo: et pósuit os me- 
um ut gládium acütum: sub 
teguménto manus sue pro- 
texit me, et pósuit me quasi 
sagíttam eléctam. Ps. 91, 2. 
Bonum est confitéri Dómino: : 
et psállere nómini tuo, Altís-. 
sime. Y. Gloria Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who hast made this 

day honorable to us on 
account of the birth of blessed 
John, grant Thy people the 
grace of spiritual joys, and di- 
rect the minds of all the faith- 
ful in the way of everlasting 
salvation. Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Is. 
Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 
IVE ear, ye islands, and 
harken, ye people from 
afar. The Lord hath called me 
from the womb, from the 
bowels of my mother He hath 
been mindful of my name. And 
He hath made my mouth like 
a sharp sword; in the shadow 


EUs, qui  preséntem 

diem honorábilem. no- 
bis in beáti Joánnis nativitáte 
fecisti: da pópulis tuis spiri- 
tuálium grátiam gaudiórum; 
et ómnium fidélium mentes 
dírige in viam salütis ætérnæ. 
Per Dóminum. 


49, 1-3, 5-7 
Léctio Isaíe Prophétæ. 
UDírE, insule, et at- 
;téndite,  pópuli de 


longe: Dóminus ab ütero vo- 
cávit me, de ventre matris 
mes recordátus est nóminis 
mei. Et pósuit os meum quasi 
gladium acütum: in umbra 
manus sue protéxit me, et pô- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 24—NATIVITY 


suit me sicut sagíttam eléc- 
tam: in pháretra sua abscón- 
dit me. Et dixit mihi: Servus 
meus es tu, Israël, quia in te 
gloriábor. Et nunc dicit Dó- 
minus, formans me ex utero 
servum Sibi: Ecce dedi te in 
lucem géntium, ut sis salus 
mea usque ad extrémum ter- 
re. Reges vidébunt, et con- 
Sürgent principes, et adorá- 
bunt propter Dóminum, et 
sanctum Israél, qui elégit te. 


OF ST. JOHN BAPTIST 1065 


of His hand He hath protected 
me, and hath made me as a 
chosen arrow; in His quiver 
He hath hidden me. And He 
Said to.me, Thou art My ser- 
vant Israel, for in thee will I 
glory. And now saith the Lord 
that formed me from the womb 
to be His servant, Behold I 
have given thee to be the light 
of the gentiles, that thou may- 
est be My salvation even to the 
farthest part of the earth. 
Kings shall see, and princes 


shall rise up, and adore for the Lord's sake, and for the Holy 
One of Israel, Who hath chosen thee. 


Gradual. 


Priüsquam te formárem in 
utero, novi te: et ántequam 
exires de ventre, sanctificávi 
te. V. Misit Dóminus manum 
suam, et tétigit ‘os meum, et 
dixit mihi. 


Allelüja allelüja. V. Luc. 
1, 76. Tu, puer prophéta Al- 
tíssimi vocáberis: preibis an- 
te Dóminum paráre vias ejus. 
Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Jer. 1, 5, 9 

Before I formed thee in the 
bowels of thy mother, I knew 
thee: and before thou camest 
forth out of the womb, I 
sanctified thee. Y. The Lord 
put forth His hand, and 
touched my mouth: and said 
to me. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Luke 1, 
76. Thou, child, shalt be 
called the Prophet of the 
Highest; thou shalt go before 
the Lord to prepare His ways. 
Alleluia, 


Gospel. Luke 1, 57-68 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii sectindum Lucam. 


LISABETH implétum est 
tempus pariéndi, et pépe- 
rit filium. Et audiérunt vicíni, 
et cognáti ejus, quia magnifi- 
cávit Dóminus misericórdiam 
suam cum illa, et congratu- 
labántur ei. Et factum est in 
die octávo, venérunt circum- 
cídere púerum, et vocábant 
eum nómine patris sui Zach- 
arfam. Et respóndens mater 


"HB Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


LIZABETH'S full time of 

being delivered was 
come, and she brought forth a 
son. And her neighbors and 
kinsfolk heard that the Lord 
had showed His great mercy 
towards her, and they con- 
gratulated with her. And it 
came to pass, that on the 
eighth day they came to cir- 
cumcise the child, and they 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1066 JUNE 24—NATIVITY OP ST. JOHN BAPTIST 


called him by his father's 
name, Zachary. And his 
mother answering, said Not so, 
but he shall be called John. 
And they said to her, There is 
none of thy kindred that is 
called by that name. And they 
made signs to his father, how 
he would have him called. And 
demanding a writing-table, be 
wrote, saying, John is his 
name: and they all wondered. 
And immediately his mouth 
was opened, and his tongue 
loosed; and he spoke, blessing 
God. And fear came upon all 
their neighbors; and all these 
things were noised abroad 
over all the hill country of 
Judea; and all they that had 
heard them, laid them up in 
their heart, saying, What a 
one, think ye, shall this child 
be? For the hand of the Lord 
was with him. And Zachary 
his father was filled with the 
Holy Ghost; and he prophe- 
siea, sayiug, Dlcesed be the 


ejus dixit: Nequáquam, sed 
vocábitur Joánnes. Et dix- 
érunt ad ilam: Quia nemo 
est in cognatióne tua, qui 
vocétur hoc nómine, Innué- 
bant auteni patri ejus, quem 
vellet vocári eum. Et póstu- 
lans  pugillàrem, scripsit, 
dicens: Joánnes est. nomen 
ejus. Et miráti sunt univérsi, 
Apértum est autem illico os 
ejus, et lingua ejus, et loque- 
bátur benedicens Deum. Et 
factus est timor super omnes 
vicínos eórum: et super óm- 
nia montana Judee divulga- 
bántur ómnia verba hec: et 
posuérunt omnes, qui audí- 
erant in corde suo, dicéntes: 
Quis, putas puer iste erit? Et- 
enim manus. Dómini erat cum 
ilio. Et Zacharías pater ejus 
replétus est Spíritu Sancto, 
et prophetávit, dicens: Bene- 
dictus Dóminus Deus Israël, 
quia visitávit et fecit redemp- 
tiónem plebis sus. 


Lord God of Israel; because He hath visited, and wrought 
the redemption of His people. 


The Nicene Creed, by ancient custom, is not said in the Mass 
of St. John the Baptist, unless it is celebrated in a church 
dedicated to St. John the Baptist, or unless the feast falls on a 
Sunday or other day for which the saying of it is appointed. 


Offertory. Ps. 91, 13 


The just man shall flourish Justus ut palma florébit: 
like the palm-tree; he shall sicut cedrus, que in Libano 
grow up like the cedar of Li- est, multiplicábitur. 
banus. - 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


E HEAP Thine altars with 
gifts, O Lord, celebrat- 


va, Démine, munéribus 
altári& cumulámus: 


ing with fitting honor the 
nativity of him who heralded 
the coming of the Saviour, 
and pointed Him out when He 


ilíus nativitátem honóre dé- 
bito celebrántes qui Salvató- 
rem mundi et cécinit adfutü- 
rum, et adésse monstrávit, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


{ 


JUNE 25—ST. WILLIAM 1067 


Our Lord Jesus 
Who with 


Dóminum nostrum Jesum had come, 
Christum Fílium. tuum: Qui Christ, Thy Son. 
tecum. 'Thee. 

Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Luke 1, 76 


Tu, puer, prophéta Altís- 
simi vocáberis: preibus enim 
ante fáciem Dómini paráre 
vias ejus. 


Thou, child, shalt be called 
the Prophet of the Highest; 
for thou shalt go before the 
face of the Lord, to prepare 
His ways. 


Postcommunion 


fumaT Ecclésia tua, Deus, 
beáti Joánnis Baptiste 
generatióne letitiam: per 
quem sue regeneratiónis cog- 
nóvit auctórem, Dóminum 
nostrum Jesum Christum Fíl- 
ium tuum: Qui tecum. 


AY Thy Church, O God, 

be joyful at the birth of 
blessed John the Baptist, 
through whom she knew the 
Author of her regeneration, 
Our Lord Jesus Christ, Thy 
Son. Who with Thee. 


During the octave a commemoration of St. John the Baptist 
in every Mass that is said, except on June 27 and 29. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


June 25—St. William, Abbot (White) 


Double 
Mass, Os justi meditabitur, page 1356, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui infirmitati no- 

stre, ad  teréndam 
salütis viam in Sanctis tuis 
exémplum et presidium col- 
locásti: da nobis, ita beáti 
Guliélmi Abbátis mérita ven- 
erári: ut ejüsdem excipiámus 
suffragia, et vestigia prose- 
quámur. Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who hast set for us 

in Thy saints an example 
and a help to our weakness, to 
assist us to tread the patn of 
salvation, grant us so to ven- 
erate the virtues of the blessed 
abbot William, that we may 
share in his prayers and fol- 
low in his footsteps. Through 
our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. John the Baptist, page 1064. 


June 26—Hts. John and Paul, Martyrs (Red) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


vLTÆ iribulatiónes jus- 
tórum, et de his ómni- 


Ps. 33, 20, 21 


ANY were the afflictions 
(D of the just, and out of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1068 


all these the Lord delivered 
them: the Lord keepeth all 
their bones, not one of them 
shall be broken. Ps. 33, 2. I 
will bless the Lord at all times: 
His praise shall be ever in my 
mouth, Y. Glory. 


JUNE 26—STS. JOHN AND PAUL 


bus liberávit eos Dóminus: 
Dóminus custódit ómnia ossa 
eórum: unum ex hi5 non con- 
terétur. Ps. 33, 2. Benedicam 
Dóminum in omni témpore: 
semper laus ejus in ore meo. 
¥. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


E BESEECH Thee, O al- 

mighty God, that the 
double joy of this day's fes- 
tival, which proceedeth from 
the glory of blessed John and 
Paul, kindred through the one 
faith and the one martyrdom, 
may take possession of us. 
‘Through our Lord. 


UXSUMUS oOmnipotens 

Deus: ut nos geminata 
letitia hodiérne festivitatis 
excipiat, que de beatórum 
Joánnis et Pauli glorifica- 
tióne procédit; quos éadem 
fides et pássio vere fecit esse 
germános. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. John the Baptist, page 1064. 
Lesson, These are men, page 1097. 


Gradual. 


Behold how good and how 
pleasant it is for brethren to 
dwell together in unity. V. It 
is like the precious ointment 
on the head, that ran down 
upon the beard, the beard of 
Aaron. 

Alleluia, aleluia. Y. This is 
the true brotherhood which 
overcame the wickedness of 
the world: it followed Christ, 
attaining the noble kingdom 
of heaven. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 
Gospel, Beware ye, page 1326. 


Ps. 132, 1, 2 


Ecce quam bonum, et quam 
jücundum, habitare fratres; 
in unum. VY. Sicut unguént- 
um in cápite, quod descéndit 
in barbam, barbam Aaron. 


Allelüja, allelüja. V. Hec 
est vera fratérnitas que vicit 
mundi crímina: Christum 
Secüta est, inclyta tenens 
regna celéstia, Allelija. 


Offertory. Ps. 5, 12, 13 
All they that love Thy name Gloriabüntur in te omnes, 


shall glory in Thee, for Thou, qui diligunt nomen tuum, 
O Lord, wilt bless the just: O quóniam tu, Dómine, bene- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 28—ST. IRENAEUS 


dices justo: Dómine, ut scuto 
bone voluntátis tue coron- 
ásti nos. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


1069 


Lord, Thou hast crowned us, 
as with a shield of Thy good 
will. 


Secret 


Ósrras tibi, Dómine, 
sanctórum  Mártyrum 
tuórum Joánnis et Pauli dicá- 
tas méritis, benígnus assüme: 
et ad perpétuum nobis tríbue 
proveníre subsidium. Per 
Dóminum. 


RACIOUSLY receive, O 
Lord, the sacrifices con- 
Secrated to 'Thee for the merits 
of Thy saints, John and Paul, 
and grant that they may profit 
for our everlasting help. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St, John the Baptist, page 1066. 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Et si coram homínibus tor- 
ménta passi sunt, Deus tent- 
ávit eos: tamquam aurum in 
fornáce  probávit eos, et 
quasi holocáusta accépit eos. 


Wis. 3, 4, 6 

Though in the sight of men 
they suffered torments. God 
hath tried them: as gold in the 
furnace He hath proved them, 
and as a holocaust He hath 
received them. 


- Postcommunion 


tmpsiuvus, Dómine, sanc- 

tórum Mártyrum tuór- 
um Joánnis et Pauli solém- 
nia celebrántes, sacraménta 
celéstia: presta, quesumus; 
ut, quod temporáliter géri- 
mus, ztérnis gáudiis conse- 
quámur. Per Dóminum. 


E HAVE partaken of Thy 

heavenly sacrament, O 
Lord, celebrating the feast of 
Thy holy martyrs John and 
Paul; grant, we beseech Thee, 
that what we do in this life 
may have its consequences in 
everlasting joys, Through our 
Lord. 


Commemoration of St. John the Baptist, page 1067. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


June 28—St. Irenaeus, Bishop, Martyr (Red) 
Double 


Wigil of the Feasts of Sts. Peter and Paul, (Purple) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 

EX veritatis fuit. in ore 

; ejus, et iníquitas non 

est invénta in lábiis ejus: in 


Mal. 2, 6 
HE law of truth was in his 
mouth, and iniquity was 
not found in his lips:.he walked 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1070 


with me in peace and in equity, 
and turned many away from 
iniquity. Ps. 77, 1. With them 
that hated peace I was peace- 
ful, when I spake unto them, 
they fought against me with- 
out cause. Y. Glory. 


JUNE 28—ST. IRENAEUS 


pace, et in equitáte ambulá- 
vit mecum, et multos avértit 
ab iniquitáte. Ps, 77, 1. At- 
téndite, pópule meus, legem 
meam: inclináte aurem ves- 
tram in verba oris mei, y. 
Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


top, Who didst vouchsafe 

unto blessed Irenzus, Thy 
martyr and bishop; by his 
strenuous teaching of the truth, 
utterly to confute heresies, and 
happily to establish peace in 
‘Thy Church: unto us Thy peo- 
ple, grant, we beseech Thee, to 
be steadfast in the practice of 
our holy religion, and in all 
our days to enjoy that peace 


mus, qui beáto Irenxo 

Mártyri tuo atque 
Pontifici tribuisti, ut et veri- 
tate doctrine expugnaret 
hereses, et pacem Ecclésiz 
feliciter ^ confirmáret: da, 
quesumus, plebi tuæ in sanc- 
ta religióne constántiam: et 
pacem tuam nostris concéde 
iempóribus. Per Dóminum. 


which is from Thee. Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the Octave of St. John the Baptist, page 
1064, and of the Vigil of the Apostles, as follows: 


Prayer 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that Thou 
permit us not to be shaken by 
any fears, whom Thou hast 
solidly established upon the 
rock of the apostolic confes- 
sion. Through Our Lord. 


Epistle. 2 Tim. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
Timothy. 

EARLY Beloved: Continue 

thou in those things 
which thou hast learned and 
which have been committed to 
thee: knowing of Whom thou 
hast learned them; and be- 
cause from thy infancy thou 


RÆSTA, Quosumus, omni- 

potens Deus: ut nullis 

non permittas perturbatióni- 

bus cóncuti; quos in apos- 

télice confessiónis petra sol- 
idásti. Per Dóminum. 


3, 14-17; 4, 1-5 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Timétheum. 


ARISSIME: Pérmane in 

jis, que didicisti, et 
erédita sunt tibi: sciens a 
quo didiceris; et quia ab in- 
fántia sacras litteras nosti, 
que te possunt insirüere ad 
sahitem, per fidem, que est 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 28—ST. IRENAEUS 


in Christo Jesu, Omnis Scrip- 
türa divínitus inspiráta ütilis 
est ad docéndum, ad arguén- 
dum ad corripiéndum, ad 
erudiéndum in jusítia: ut 
perféctus sit homo Dei, ad 
omne opus bonum instrüctus. 
Testificor coram Deo, et Jesu 
Christo, qui judicatürus est 
vivos et mórtuos per advén- 
tum ipsius, et regnum ejus: 
predica verbum, insta oppor- 
tüne, importüne: árgue, ób- 
secra, íncrepa in omni pa- 
tiéntia, et doctrina. Erit enim 
tempus, cum sanam doctrin- 
am non sustinébunt, sed ad 
Sua desidéria coacervábunt 
Sibi magistros, pruriéntes áu- 
ribus, et a veritáte quidem 
auditum avértent, ad fábulas 
autem converténtur. Tu vero 
vigila, in ómnibus labéra, 
opus fac Evangelíste, minis- 
térium tuum imple. 


vigilant, labor in all things, 
fulfil thy ministry. 


1071 


hast known the Holy Scrip- 
tures, which can instruct thee 
to salvation by the faith which 
is in Jesus Christ, All Scrip- 
ture, inspired by God, is prof- 
itable to teach, to reprove, to 
correct, to instruct in justice, 
that the man of God may be 
perfect, furnished to every 
good work. I charge thee, be- 
fore God and Jesus Christ, 
Who shall judge the living and 
the dead by His coming, and 
His kingdom: Preach the word: 
be instant in season, out of 
season; reprove, entreat, re- 
buke in all patience and doc- 
trine. For there shall be a time 
when they shall not endure 
sound doctrine: but according 
to their own desires, they will 
heap to themselves teachers 
having itching ears, and will 
indeed turn away their hearing 
from the truth, but will be 
turned unto fables. But be thou 
do the work of an evangelist, 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced by 
the Tract; in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are replaced 


by the Greater Alleluia. 
Gradual. 


Propter fratres meos, et 
próximus meos loquébar pa- 
cem de te. V. Ps. 36, 37. Cus- 
tódi innocéntiam, et vide 
tequitátem: quóniam sunt re- 
liquis hómini pacifico. 


Lesser 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Eccli. 
6, 35. In multitüádine pres- 
byterórum prudéntium sta, 
et sapiéntie illórum ex corde 
conjüángere, ut omnem nar- 
ratiónem Dei possis audíre. 
Allelüja. 


Ps. 121, 8 


For my brethren and com- 
panions' sake, I spake peace 
concerning thee. Y. Ps. 36, 37. 
Keep innocence and behold jus- 
tice, for the prosperity of the 
peaceable man continues. 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Eccius. 
Ps. 6, 35. Stand in the multitude 
of the ancients that are wise, 
and join thyself from thy heart 
to their wisdom, that thou may- 
est hear every discourse of God. 
Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1072 


JUNE 28—ST. IRENAEUS 


Tract. Ps. 36, 23, 30, 31 


With the Lord shall the steps 
of a man be directed, and he 
shall like well his way. Y. The 
mouth of the just shall medi- 
tate wisdom: and his tongue 
shall speak judgment. Y. The 
law of his God is in his heart, 
and his steps shall not be sup- 
planted. 


Apud Dóminum gressus 
hóminis dirigéntur: et viam 
ejus volet. Y. Os justi medi- 
tábitur sapiéntiam, et lingua 
ejus loquétur judícium. yY, 
Lex Dei ejus in corde ipsíus: 
et non supplantabüntur gres- 
Sus ejus. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 36, 37. 
Keep innocence and behold jus- 
tice, for the prosperity of the 
peaceable man continues. Al- 
leluia. Y. Ecclus. 6, 35. Stand 
in the multitude of the ancients 
that are wise, and join thyself 
from thy heart to their wis- 
dom that thou mayest hear 
every discourse of God. Alle- 
Tula. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 
36, 37. Custédi innocéntiam 
et vide equitátem: quóniam 
sunt relíquie homíni pacifico. 
Allelüja. Y. Eccli 6, 35. In 
multitüdine ^ presbyterórum 
prudéntium sta, et sapiéntie 
illórum ex corde conjüngere, 
ut omnem narratiónem Dei 
possis audíre. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Matt. 10, 28-33 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time: Jesus said 

to His disciples: Fear ye 

not them that kill the body, 
and are not able to kill the 
soul; but rather fear him that 
can destroy both soul and body 
in hell. Are not two sparrows 
sold for a farthing, and not one 
of them shall fall on the 
ground without your Father. 
But the very hairs of your head 
are all numbered. Fear not 
therefore: better are you than 
many sparrows. Every one 
therefore that shall confess Me 
before men, I will also confess 
him before My Father Who is 


"à Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Mattheum. 


sus discipulis suis: No- 
lite timére eos qui occidunt 
corpus, ánimam autem non 
possunt. occídere; sed pótius 
timéte eum qui potest et 
ánimam et corpus pérdere in 
gehénnam. Nonne duo pás- 
Seres asse véneunt: et unus 
ex ilis non cadet super ter- 
ram sine Patre vestro? Ves- 
iri autem capílli cápitis om- 
nes numeráti sunt. Nolite 
ergo timére: multis passéri- 
bus melióres estis vos. Omnis 
ergo qui confitébitur me cor- 
am hominibus, confitébor et 


T ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 28—8T. IRENAEUS 1078 


ego eum coram Paire meo, in heaven. But -he that shall 
qui in celis est. Qui autem deny Me before men, I will also 
negaéverit me coram homíni- deny him before My Father 
bus, negábo.et ego eum coram Who is in heaven. 

Patre meo, qui in colis est. 


Offertory. Ecclus. 24, 44 


Doctrinam quasi antelu- I make my doctrine to shine 
cánum illimino ómnibus, et forth to all as.the morning 
enarrábo ilam usque ad light, and I will declare it afar 
longínquum. off. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret. 0| 
EUS, qui credéntes in te ‘Gop, Who suffererest not 
y pópulos nullis sinis the ‘nations that believe 


cóneuti terróribus: dignáre in Thee to be shaken by any 

preces et hóstias tibi plebis, fear, deign, we beseech Thee, 

suscipere; ut pax a tua pie- to receive the prayers and sac- 

táte concéssa, Christianórum rifices of the people consecrated 

fines ab nomi hoste fáciat to Thee, that peace, the gift 

esse Secüros. Per Dóminum. of Thy loving-kindness, may 
render Christian countries safe 
from every enemy, Through our 
Lord, 


Commemoration of St. John the i page 1066, and oj 
the Vigil as follows: 


Secret 
UNUS pópuli tui quæ- ANCTIFY ihe gift of Thy 
sumus Dómine, aposto- people, we beseech Thee, 


lica intercessióne sanctifica: O Lord, by the apostolic inter- 
nosque a peccatórum nosiró- cession, and cleanse us from 
rum maáculis emünda. Per the stains of our sins, Througn 
Dóminum. our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Ecclus. 24, 47 


Vidéte quóniam non soli See ye, that I have- not la- 
mihi laborávi, sed ómnibus bored for myself only, but for 
exquiréntibus veritátem. all that seek out the truth. 


Postcommunion 


EUS, auctor pacis et cop, the author and lover 
amétor, quem nosse, of peace, to know Whom 
vivere, cui servire, regnáre is to live, and to serve Whom 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1074 


is to reign, protect us Thy sup- 
pliants from all assaults, that 
we, who trust in Thy defense, 
by the intercession of blessed 
Ireneus, Thy martyr and 
bishop, may not fear the arms 
of any of our foes, Through our 
Lord. a 


JUNE 28—VIGIL OF STS. PETER AND PAUL 


est: protege ab ómnibus im- 
pugnatiónibus supplices tu- 
os: ut, qui in defensióne tua 
confidimus, beáti Irenei 
Mártyris tul atque Pontificis 
intercessióne, nullíus hostili- 
tátis arma timeámus. Per 
Dóminum. ; 


Commemoration of St. John the Baptist, page 1067, and of 


the Vigil as follows: 


Postcommunion 


EEP from all adversity, O 
Lord, by the apostolic 
intercessions, those whom 


uos celésti, Dómine, ali- 
ménto satiasti: apos- 
tólicis intercessiónibus ab 


Thou hast filled with heavenly omni adversitate custódi. 


nourishment. our 


Lord. 


Through 


Per Déminum. 


But in place of the Gospel of St. John is read the Gospel of 
the Vigil as in the following Mass. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793.. | 


Wigil of Sts. Peter and Paul, (Purple) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. John 21, 18, 19 


HE Lord said to Peter: 

When thou wast younger, 
thou didst gird thyself, and 
didst walk where they wouldst: 
but when thou shalt be old, 
thou shalt stretch forth thy 
hands, and another shall gird 
thee, and lead thee whither 
thou wouldst not: and this He 
said, signifying by what death 
he should glorify God. Ps. 18, 1. 
The heavens show forth the 
glory of God: and the firma- 
ment declareth the work of His 
hands. V. Glory. 


Icir Dóminus Petro: 

Cum esses junior, cin- 
gébas te, et ambulábas ubi 
volébas: cum autem senüeris, 
exténdes manus tuas, et álius 
te cinget, et ducet quo tu non 
vis: hoc autem dixit, signífi- 
cans qua morte. clarificatürus 
esset Deum. Ps. 18, I. Celi 
enárrant glóriam Dei: et 
ópera mánuum ejus annün- 
tiat firmaméntum. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer, Grant, we beseech Thee, page 1070, as in preceding 


Mass. 


Second Prayer of St. Irencus, page 1070; the third of 
St. John the Baptist, page 1064. , 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 28—VIGIL OF STS. PETER AND PAUL 1078 


Lesson. Acts 3, 1-10 


Léctio Áctuum  Apostólo- 
rum. 
N DIÉBUS ills: Peirus et 
Joánnes ascendébant in 
templum ad horam oratiónis 
nonam. Et quidam vir; qui 
erat claudus ex útero matris 
sue, bajulabátur: quem po- 
nébant quotidie ad portam 
templi, que dícitur Speciósa, 
ut péteret eleemósynam ab 
introeüntibus in templum. Is, 
cum vidísset Petrum et Joán- 
nem incipiéntes introire in 
templum, rogábat ut eleemó- 
synam accíperet. Intuens au- 
tem in eum Petrus cum 
Joanne, dixit: Réspice in nos. 
At ille intendébat in eos, spe- 
rans se aliquid acceptürum 
ab eis. Petrus autem dixit: 
Argéntum et aurum non est 
mihi: quod autem hábeo, hoc 
tibi do: In nómine Jesu 
Christi Nazaréni surge, et 
ámbula. Et apprehénsa manu 
ejus déxtera, allevávit eum, 
et prótinus consolidate sunt 
bases ejus, et plantz. Et ex- 
siliens stetit, et -ambulabat: 
et intrávit cum illis in tem- 
plum; ámbulans, et exsíliens, 
et laudans Deum. Et vidit 
omnis pópulus eum ambulán- 
tem, et laudántem Deum. 
Cognoscébant autem illum, 
quod ipse erat, qui ad elee- 
mósynam sedébat ad Speci- 
ósam portam templi: et im- 
pléti sunt stupóre et éxtasi 
in eo, quod contigerat illi. 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 
N THOSE days, Peter and 
John wetit up into the tem- 
pie, at the ninth hour of prayer. 
And a certain man, who was 
lame from his mother's womb, 
was carried; whom théy laid 
every day at the gate of the 
temple, which is called Beauti- 
ful, that he might ask alms of 
them that went into the tem- 
ple. He; when he bad seen Peter 
and John about to go into the 
temple, asked to receive an 
alms. But Peter, with John, 
fastening his eyes upon him, 
said: Look upon us. But he 
looked earnestly upon them, 
hoping that he should receive 
something of them. But. Peter 
said: Silver and gold I have 
none, but what I.have I give 
thee: In the name of Jesus 
Christ of Nazareth, arise and 
walk. And taking him by the 
right hand, he lifted him up: 
and forth with his feet and soles 
received strength. And hé leap- 
ing up, stood and walked: and 
went in with them. into the 
lemple, walking, and leaping, 
and praising God. And all the 
people saw. him walking and 
praising God. And they knew 
him, that it was he who sat 
begging alms at the Beautiful 
gate of the temple: and they 
were filled with wonder and 
amazement at that which had 
happened to him. 


Gospel. Ps. 18, 5, 2- 


In omnem térram exívit 
Sonus eórum: et in fines orbis 
terre verba eórum. Y. Coli 


' Their sound went forth into 
all the earth: and their words 
to the ends of the world. P. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1076 JUNE 28—VIGIL OF SIS. PETER AND PAUL 


The heavens show forth the 
glory of God: and the firma- 
ment declareth the works of 
His hands. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


entrant glóriam Dei: et 
Ópera mánuum ejus annün- 
tiat firmaméntum. 


Gospel. John 21, 15-19 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, Jesus said to 
Simon Peter, Simon, son 

of John, lovest thou Me more 
ihan these? He saith to Him, 
Yea, Lord, Thou knowest that 
I love Thee. He saith to him, 
Feed my lambs. He saith to 
him again, Simon, son of John, 
lovest thou Me? He saith to 
Him, Yea, Lord, Thou knowest 
that I love Thee. He saith to 
him, Feed My lambs. He saith 
to him the third time, Simon, 
son of John, lovest thou Me? 
Peter was grieved, because He 
said to him the third time, 
Lovest thou Me? And he said 
to Him, Lord, Thou knowest all 
things: Thou knowest that I 
love Thee. He said to him, Feed 
My sheep. Amen, amen I say 
tu thee, when thou wast young- 
er, thou didst gird thyself, and 
didst walk where thou wouldst: 
but when thou shalt be old, 
thou shalt stretch forth thy 
hands, and another shall gird 


% Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Dixit 
Jesus Siméni Petro: 
Simon Joánnis, diligis me 
plus his? Dicit ei: Etiam. 
Dómine, tu scis quia amo te. 
Dicit ei: Pasce agnos meos. 
Dicit ei iterum: Simon Jo- 
annis, díligis me? Ait illi: 
Etiam, Dómine, tu scis quía 
amo te. Dicit ei: Pasce &gnos 
meos. Dicit ei tértio: Simon 
Joánnis, amas me? Contris- 
tátus est Petrus, quia dixit ei 
tértio, Amas me? et dixit ei: 
Dómine, tu ómnia nosti: tu 
scis quia amo te. Dixit ei: 
Pasce oves meas. Amen, 
amen dico tibi: cum esses 
junior, cingébas te, et am- 
bulábas ,ubi volébas: cum 
autem  senüeris,  exténdes 
manus tuas, et álius te cin- 
get, et ducet quo tu non vis. 
Hoc autem dixit, significans 
qua morte clarificatürus esset 
Deum. 


thee, and lead thee whither thou wouldst not. And this He 
said signifying by:what death he should glorify God. ~ 


Offertory. Ps. 138, 17 


To me Thy friends, O God, 
are made exceedingly honor- 
able; their principality is ex- 
ceedingly strengthened. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Mihi autem nimis honor- 
ati sunt: amici tui, Deus: 
nimis confortátus est prin- 
cipátus eórum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 29—HOLY APOSTLES STS. PETER AND PAUL 1077 


Secret, Sanctify, the gift, as in preceding Mass, page 1073. 
The second of .St Irenæus, page 1073; the third of St. John 


the Baptist, page 1066. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Simon Joánnis, díligis me 
plus his? Dómine, tu. ómnia 
nosti tu scis, Domine, quia 
amo te. 


John 21 


Simon son of John, lovest 
thou Me more than these? Lord, 
Thou knowest all things, Thou 
knowest, Lord, that I love Thee. 


Postcommunion, Keep from all adversity, as in preceding 


Mass, page 1074. 


The second of St. Irenæus, page 1073; the 


third of St. John the Baptist, page 1067. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


IU IE i 
aua MAD 
p EET |, 


Copyright by Benziger Brothers. 


June 29—The Holp Apostles, Sts. Peter and Paul, 
. (Red) 
Double of the First Class with a Common Octave 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 

unc scio vere, quia misit 

Dóminus Angelum su- 
um: et eripuit me de manu 
Heródis, et de omni exspec- 
tatióne plebis Judzórum. Ps. 
138, 1, 2. Dómine, probásti 
me, et cognovísti me: tu cog- 
novísti sessiónem meam, et 
resurrectiónem meam. Jy. 
Glória Patri. 


Acts 12, 11 


ow I know in very deed, 

that the Lord hath sent 
His angel, and hath delivered 
me out of the hand of Herod, 
and from all the expectation 
of the people of the Jews. Ps. 
138, 1, 2. Lord, Thou. hast 
proved me, and known me: 
Thou hast known my sitting 
down, and my rising up. Y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 


EUS, qui hodiérnam diem 
Apostolérum  tuórum 

Petri et Pauli martyrio con- 
secrasti: da  Ecclésie tue, 
eórum in ómnibus sequi pre- 


cop, Who hast consecra- 
ted this day to the mar- 
tyrdom of 'Thine apostles Peter 
and Paul, grant to Thy Church 
in all things to follow their 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1078 JUNE 29—HOLY APOSTLES STS. PETER AND PAUL 


teaching from whom it received 
the right ordering of religion 
in the beginning. Through our 
Lord. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 


N THOSE days, Herod the 

king stretched forth his 
hands to afflict some of the 
Church: and he killed James, 
the brother of John, with the 
sword; and seeing that it 
pleased the Jews, he proceeded 
to take up Peter also. Now it 
was in the days of the Azymes: 
and when he had apprehended 
him, he cast him into prison, 
delivering him to four files of 
soldiers to be kept, intending 
after the pasch to bring him 
forth to the people. Peter 
therefore was kept in prison: 
but prayer was made without 
ceasing by the Church unto 
God for him. And when Herod 
would have brought him forth, 
the same night Peter was sleep- 
ing between two soldiers, bound 
with two chains; and the keep- 
ers before the door kept the 
prison: and behold an angel of 
the Lord stood by him, and a 
light shined in the room and 
he striking Peter on the side, 
raised him up, saying, Arise 
quickly; and the chains fell off 
from his hands: and the angel 
said to him, Gird thyself and 
put on thy sandals; and he did 
so: and he said to him, Cast 
thy garment about thee and 
follow me: and going out he 
followed him: and he knew not 
that it was true which was done 
by the angel; but he thought he 
saw a vision. And passing 


céptum; per quos religiónis 
sumpsit exórdium. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Acts 12, 1-11 


Léctio Áctuum Apostolór- 
um. 


N DIEBUS illis: Misit Her- 
I odes rex manus, ut afii- 
geret quosdam de ecclésia. 
Occídit autem Jacóbum fra- 
irem Joánnis gládio. Videns 
autem quia placéret Judais, 
appósuit ut apprehénderet et 
Petrum erant autem dies 
Azymórum. Quem cum ap- 
prehendísset, misit in cár- 
cerem, tradens quátuor qua- 
terniónibus mílitum custodi- 
éndum, volens post Pascha 
prodücere eum pópulo. Et 
Petrus quidem servabátur in 
cárcere. Orátio autem fiébat 
sine intermissióne ab Ecclésia 
ad Deum pro eo. Cum au- 
tem productürus eum esset 
Heródes, in ipsa nocte erat 
Petrus dórmiens inter duos 
mílites, vinctus caténis du- 
ébus: et custódes ante ósti- 
um custodiébant carcerem. 
Et ecce Angelus Dómini 
ástitit: et lumen refülsit in 
habitáculo: percussóque lá- 
tere Petri, excitávit eum, di- 
cens: Surge velóciter. Et ce- 
cidérunt caténe de mánibus 
ejus. Dixit autem. Angelus ad 
eum: Precingere, et cálcea 
te cáligas tuas. Et fecit sic. 
Et dixit illi: Circümda tibi 
vestiméntum tuum, et sé- 
quere me. Et éxiens sequebá- 
tur eum, et nesciébat quia 
verum est, quod fiébat per 
Angelum: existimábat autem 
se visum vidére. Transeüntes 


http://ccwatershed.org 


autem primam et secündam through the first and the sec- 
custédiam, venérunt ad por- ond ward, they came to the 
tam férream, que ducit ad iron gate that leadeth to the 
civitátem: qu ultro apérta city, which of itself opened to 
est eis. Et exeüntes processé- them; and going out, they 
runt vicum unum: et con- passed on through one street, 
iínuo discéssit Angelus ab and immediately the angel de~ 
eo. Et Petrus ad se revérsus, parted from him. And Peter 
dixit: Nune scio vere, quia coming to himself, said, Now I 
misit Dóminus Angelum su- know in very deed that the 
um, et erípuit me de manu Lord hath sent His angel, and 
Heródis, et de omni exspecta- hath delivered me out of the 
tióne plebis Judzórum. hand of Herod, and from all 
the expectation of the people of 
the Jews. 


Gradual. Ps. 44, 17, 18 


Constítues eos principes Thou shalt make them 
super omnem terram: mém- princes over all the earth: they 
ores erunt nóminis tui, Dó- shall remember Thy name, O 
mine. Y. Pro pátribus tuis Lord. Y.Instead of Thy fathers, 
nati sunt tibi filii: proptérea sons are born to Thee; there- 
pópuli confitebüntur tibi. fore shall people praise Thee. 

Allelüja, allelüja. V. Matt. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Matt. 16, 
16, 18. Tu es Petrus, et super 18. Thou art Peter, and upon 
hanc petram. edifüicábo Ec- this rock I will build My 
clésiam meam. Allelija. Church Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 

Gospel, Jesus came, page 871. 


| JUNE 29—HOLY APOSTLES STS. PETER AND PAUL 1079 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 17, 18 
Constítues eos principes Thou shalt make them 
super omnem terram: mém-~ princes over all the earth: they 
ores erant nóminis tui, Dó- shall remember Thy name, O 
mine, in omni progénie et Lord, throughout all genera- 
generatióne. tions. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


Dy som Dómine, quas ay the prayer of Thine 
nómini tuo sacrandas (D apostles, O Lord, accom- 
offérimus, apostóliea prose- pany the sacrifices Which we 
quátur orátio: per quam nos offer to be consecrated to Thy 
expiári tribuas, et deféndi. name, and through it do Thou 
Per Dóminum, grant us to be pardoned and 
defended. Through our Lord. 
Preface No. 13, page 816, is said or sung daily during the octave. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1080 


JUNE 80—COMMEMORATION OF ST. PAUL 


Communion. Matt. 16, 18, 19 


Thou art Peter: 
this rock I wil build My 
Church. 


and upon 


Tu es Petrus, et super hanc 
petram sdificábo Ecclésiam 
meam. 


Postcommunion 


RESERVE, O Lord, from all 
dangers, by the interces- 
sion of Thine apostles, those 


vos celésti, Dómine, ali- 
ménto satiásti: apos- 
tólicis intercessiónibus ab 


whom Thou hast filled with omni adversitáte custódi. Per 


heavenly nourishment. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Dóminum. 


During the octave (ercept on days of great solemnity) a 
commemoration of the Apostles is made in every Mass that is 


said. 


June 30—Commemoration of St. Paul, Apostle, 
(Red) 
Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 2 Tim. 1, 12 


I KNow Whom I have be- 
lieved, and I am certain 
that He is able to keep that 
which I have committed to Him 
against that day; being a just 
judge. Ps. 138, 1, 2. Lord, Thou 
nast proved me and known me: 
Thou has known my sitting 
down, and my rising up. VY. 
Glory. 


cio cui crédidi, et certus 

sum, quia potens est de- 
pósitum meum serváre in 
ilum diem, justus judex. Ps. 
138, 1, 2. Dómine, probásti 
me, et cognovisti me: tu cog- 
novísti sessiónem meam et 
resurrectiónem meam. y. 
Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst teach the 

multitude of the nations 
by the preaching of the blessed 
apostle, Paul, grant us, we be- 
seech Thee, that, venerating 
his natal day, we may experi- 
ence the benefits of his inter- 
cession with Thee. Through our 
Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Peter. 


EUs, qui multitüdinem 

géntium  beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli predicatióne docuis- 
ti: da nobis, quesumus; ut, 
cujus natalítia cólimus, ejus 
apud te patrocinia sentiámus. 
Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JUNE 30—COMMEMORATION OF ST. PAUL 


1081 


Prayer 


xus, qui beáto Petro 

Apóstolo tuo, collátis 
Clávibus regni celéstis, li- 
gándi atque solvéndi pon- 
tificium tradidisti: concéde; 
ut intercessiónis ejus auxílio, 
a peccatérum — nosirórum 
néxibus liberémur. 


Gop, Who, in conferring 

upon blessed Peter, Thine 
apostle, the keys of the heaven» 
ly kingdom, didst commit t* 
him the priestly power of bind: 
ing and loosing, grant that, by 
the help of his intercession, we 
may be delivered from the 
bonds of our sin. 


Commemoration of St. John the Baptist, page 1064. 


Epistle. 1 Gal. 1, 11-20 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Gálatas. 


RATRES: Notum vobis 
fácio Evangélium quod 
evangelizátum est a me, quia 


' mon est secindum hóminem: 


neque enim ego ab hómine 
accépi illud, neque didici, 
sed per revelatiónem Jesu 
Christi Audistis enim con- 
versatiónem meam aliquándo 
in Judaísmo: quóniam supra 
modum  persequébar Ecclé- 
siam Dei, et expugnábam il- 
lam, et proficiébam in Juda- 
ísmo supra multos coztáneos 
meos in génere meo, abun- 
dántius emulator existens 
paternárum meárum tradi- 
tiónum. Cum autem plácuit 
ei, qui me segregávit ex ütero 
matris mez, et vocávit per 
grátiam suam ut reveláret 
Filium suum in me, ut evan- 
gelizarem illum in géntibus: 
continuo non acquiévi carni 
et sánguini, neque veni Jero- 
sólynam ad  antecessóres 
meos Apóstolos: sed ábii in 
Arábiam: et fterum revérsus 
sum Damáscum: deínde post 
annos ires veni Jerosólymam 
vidére Petrum, et mansi apud 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Galatians. 

RETHREN, I give you to un- 
derstand that the gospel 
which was preached by me, is 
not according to man. For 
neither did I receive it of man, 
nor did I learn it; but by the 


revelation of Jesus Christ. For 


you have heard of my conver- 
sation in time past in the Jews’ 
religion: how that beyond mea- 
sure I persecuted the Church 
of God, and wasted it; and I 
made progress in the Jews’ re- 
ligion above many of my equals 
in my own nation, being more 
abundantly zealous for the tra- 
ditions of my fathers. But when 
it pleased Him, Who separated 
me from my mother’s womb, 


-and called me by His grace, to 


reveal His Son in me, that I 
might preach Him among the 
gentiles, immediately I conde- 
scended not to flesh and blood. 
Neither went I to Jerusalem 
to the apostles who were before 
me: but I went into Arabia, 


and again I returned to Da- 


mascus. Then, after three 
years, I went to Jerusalem to 
see Peter, and I tarried with 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1082 JUNE 30—COMMEMORATION OF ST. PAUL 

him fifteen days; but other of eum diébus quindecim: áli- 
the apostles I saw none; sav- um autem Apostolórum vidi 
ing James the brother of the neminem, nisi Jacobum frat- 
Lord. Now the things which I rem Dómini, Que autem 
write to you, behold before God scribo vobis, ecce coram Deo, 


I lie not. 


quia non méntior. 


Gradual. Gal. 2, 8, 9 


He who wrought in Peter to 
the apostleship, wrought in me 
also among the gentiles, and 
they knew the grace of God, 
which was given to me. Y. The 
grace of God in me hath not 
been void; but His grace al- 
ways remaineth in me. 

Alleluia, alleluia. JF. Holy 
apostle Paul, preacher of truth, 
and doctor of the Genties, in- 
tercede for us. Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 

Gospel, Jesus said, page 1043. 

Creed, page 765. 


Qui operátus est Petro in 
apostolátum, operátus est et 
mihi inter gentes: et cogno- 
vérunt grátiam Dei, que data 
est mihi, Y. Grátia Dei in me 
vácua non fuit: sed grátia 
ejus semper in me manet. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Sancte 
Pauli Apostoli praedicator 
veritatis, et doctor géntium 
intercéde pro nobis. Allelija. 


Offertory. Ps. 138, 17 


To me Thy friends, O God, 
are made exceedingly bonor- 
able: their principality is. ex- 
ceedingly strengthened. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Mihi autem nimis honoráti 
sunt amíci tui, Deus: nimis 
confortátus est principátus 
eórum. 


Secret 


ovED by the prayers of 

Thine apostle, Paul, O 
Lord, do Thou sanctify the gifts 
of Thy people, that what is 
pleasing to Thee, Who hast or- 
dained it, may be the more 
pleasing by the patronage of 
his supplication. Through our 
Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Peter. 


PÓSTOLI tul Pauli pré- 
A cibus, Dómine, plebis 
ue dona sanctifica: ut, que 
tibi tuo grata sunt institüto, 


gratióra fiant patrocínio sup- 
plicántis. Per Dóminum. 


Secret 


ANCTIFY, O Lord, the offer- 
ings of Thy people, by the 


CCLESIZ ius, qusesumus 
Dómine, preces et hós- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY, 1—MOST PRECIOUS BLOOD OF OUR LORD 1083 
tias beáti Petri Apóstoli com- prayer of 'Thine apostle Peter, 
méndet orátio: ut quod pro that those things which are 
ilíus glória celebrámus, no~- pleasing to Thee by Thine own 
bis prosit ad véniam, institution may become the 
more pleasing by the favor of 
s% his intercession. 

Commemoration of St. John the Baptist, page 1066. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Matt. 17, 28 

Amen I say to you, that you 
who have left all things, and 
have followed Me, shall receive 
an hundredfold, and shall pos- 
sess life everlasting. 


Communion. 

Amen dico vobis, quod vos, 

qui reliquístis ómnia, et se- 

cüti estis me, céntuplum ac- 

cipiétis, et vitam etérnam 
possidébitis. 


Postcommunion 
ERCÉPTIS, Dómine, sacra- AVING partaken of Thy 
méntis, beáóto Paulo Sacraments, O Lord, we 
Apóstolo tuo interveniénte, implore^ Thee, that what we 
deprecámur: ut, que pro il- have celebrated in honor of 
lius celebráta sunt glória, no- blessed Paul, Thine apostle, 
bis proficiant ad medélam. may, by his intercession, avail 
Per Déminum. us as a healing remedy. 
Through our Lord. 
Commemoration of St. Peter. 


Postcommunion 


mríricgT nos, Dómine, AY ihe gift we have of- 
munus oblátum: uf si- fered fill our hearts with 


cut in Apóstolo tuo Petro te 
mirábilem  predicámus, sic 
per illum tue sumámus in- 
dulgéntie largitátem. 


joy, O Lord, that, as we de- 
clare Thee wonderful in Thine 
apostle Peter, so through him 
we may receive the abundance 


of Thy pardon. 
Commemoration of St. John the Baptist, page 1067. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


July 1—The Most Precious Blood of Our Lord 
(Red) 
Double of the First Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Apoc. 5, 9, 10 


EDEMÍsTI: nos, Dómine, mou hast redeemed us, O 
in sánguine tuo, ex Lord, in Thy blood, out of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1084 


every tribe and tongue, and 
people, and nation, and hast 
made us to our God & kingdom. 
Ps. 88, 2. 'The mercies of the 
Lord I will sing forever: I 
will show forth Thy truth with 
my mouth to generation and 
generation. Y. Glory. 


JULY 1—MOST PRECIOUS BLOOD OF OUR LORD 


omni tribu, et lingua, et pó- 
pulo, et natióne: et fecisti 
nos Deo nostro regnum. Ps. 
$8, 2. Misericórdias Dómini 
in eternum cantábo: in gen- 
eratiónem et generatiónem 
annuntiabo veritátem tuam 
in ore meo. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 
Who hast appointed 
hine only-begotten Son to be 
the Redeemer of the world, and 
hast willed to be appeased by 
His blood, grant us, we be- 
seech Thee, so incessantly to 
worship the price of our salva- 
tion, and to be so defended by 
its power from the ills of this 
life on earth, that we may en- 
joy its everlasting fruit in 
heaven. Through the same. 


MNÍPOTENS Sempitérne 

Deus, quí unigénitum 
Filium tuum mundi Redemp- 
tórem. constituisti, ac ejus 
Sanguine  placári  voluísti: 
concéde, qusesumus, salütis 
nostre  prétium (solémni 
cultu) ita venerári, atque a 
preséntis vite malis ejus vir- 


‘tite deféndi in terris; ut 


fructu perpétuo letémur in 
colis. Per eimdem Dóminum. 


Commemoration of ihe Ociave-day oj St. John Baptist in 
Low Masses only. Prayer, page 1064. 


Epistle, Christ being come, from the Mass on Passion Sum- 


day, page 360. 


In Votive Masses, from Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser 


Alleluia in the Gradual is replaced by the 


Tract. In Paschal- 


time the Gradual and Tract are replaced by the Greater Alle- 


luia. 


Gradual. 1 John 5, 6-8 


This is He that came by 
water and blood, Jesus Christ: 
not by water only, but by water 
and blood. FJ. There are three 
‘Who give testimony in heaven: 
the Father, the Word, and the 
Holy Ghost; and these three 
are one. And there are three 
that give testimony on earth: 
the Spirit, the water, and the 
blood; and these three are one. 


Hic est qui venit per aquam 
et sanguinem, Jesus Christus: 
non in aqua solum, sed in 
aqua et sanguine. Y. Tres 
sunt, qui testiménium dant 
in celo: Pater, Verbum, et 
Spiritus Sanctus: et hi tres 
unum sunt. Et tres sunt, qui 
testimónium dant in terra: 
Spíritus, aqua, et sanguis: et 
hi tres unum sunt. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


M 


í 


| 


JULY 1—MosT PRECIOUS BLOOD OF OUR LORD 


1085 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelája, allelija. V. 1 John 
5, 9. Si testimónium hóminum 
accipimus, testiménium Dei 
majus est. Allelüja.. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. 1 John, 
5, 9. If we receive the testi- 
mony of men, the testimony of 
God is greater. Alleluia. 


Tract. Ephes. 1, 6-8 . 


Gratifieávit nos Deus in 
dilécto Filio suo, in quo habé- 
mus redemptiónem per sán- 
guinem ejus.-Y. Remissiónem 
peccatóruni, secündum diví- 
tias gratie ejus que super- 
abundávit in. nobis. Y. Rom. 
3, 24, 25. Justificati gratis per 
grátiam ipsius, per redemp- 
tiónem, que est in Christo 
Jesu. V. Quem propósuit Deus 
propitiatiónem per fidem in 
sánguine ipsíus. 


God hath graced us in His 
beloved Son: in Whom we have 
redemption through His blood. 
Y. The remission of sins, ac- 
cording to the riches of His 
grace, which hath  super- 
abounded in us. Y. Rom. 3, 24; 
25. Being justified freely by 
His grace, through the redémp- 
tion, which is in Christ Jesus. 
Y. Whom God hath. set forth 
to be a propitiation through 
faith in His blood. 


Greater Alleluia 


. Allelája, allelija. V. Apoc. 
5, 9. Dignus es, Dómine, acci- 
pere librum, et aperíre signá- 
cula ejus: quóniam occisus 
es, et redemísti nos Deo in 
sanguine tuo. Allelüja. JV. 
Ezod. 12,13. Erit autem san- 
guis vobis in signum; et vi- 
débo sánguinem, et transíbo 
vos: nec erit in vobis plaga 
dispérdens. Allelija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Apoc. 5, 
9. Worthy art Thou, O Lord, 
to take the book, and to open 
the seals thereof: because Thou. 
wast slain, and hast redeemed 
us to God in Thy blood. Alle- 
luia. Y. Exod. 2, 13. And: the 
blood shall be to you for a 
Sign: and I shall see the blood 
and pass over you; and the 
plague shall not be on you to 
destroy you. Alleluia. 


Gospel. John 19, 30-35 


H4 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Cum ac- 


cepísset Jesus acétum, 
dixit: Consummátum est. Et 
inclináto cápite trádidit spí- 
ritum. Judai ergo (quóniam 
Parascéve erat) ut non re- 
manérent in cruce córpora 


H& Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, Jesus, when 

He had taken the vine- 

gar, said: Ib is consummated. 
And bowing His head He gave 
up the ‘ghost. Then the Jews 
(because it was the-parasceve), 
that the bodies might not re- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1086 


main upon the cross on the 
sabbath-day (for that was a 
great sabbath-day), besought 
Pilate that their legs might be 
broken, and that they might 
be taken away. The soldiers, 
therefore, came: and they 
broke the legs of the first and 
of the other that was crucified 
with him. But after they were 
come to Jesus, When they Saw 
that He was already dead, they 
did not break His legs. But one 
Of the soldiers with a spear 
opened His side, and immedi- 
ately there came out blood and 
' water, And he that saw it hath 


JULY i—MOST PRECIOUS BLOOD OF OUR LORD 


sAbbato (erat enim magnus 
dies ille sábbati), rogavérunt 
Pilátum, ut frangeréntur eó- 
rum crura, et tolleréntur. Ve- 
nérunt ergo mílites: et primi 
quidem fregérunt crura, et al- 
térius, qui crucifíxus est cum 
eo. Ad Jesum autem cum ve- 
níssent, ut vidérunt eum jam 
mórtuum, non fregérunt ejus 
crura, sed unus militum lán- 
cea latus ejus apéruit, et con- 
tinuo exívit sanguis et aqua. 
Et qui vidit; testimónium per- 
híbuit: et verum est testimó- 
nium ejus. 


given testimony, and his testimony is true. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 1 Cor. 10, 16 


The chalice of benediction 
which we bless, is it not the 
communion of the blood of 
Christ? And the bread which 
we break, is it not the partak- 
ing of the body of the Lord? 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Calix benedictiónis, cui be- 
nedicimus, nonne communi- 
cáiio sanguinis Christi est? 
et panis, quem frangimus, 
nonne participátio córporis 
Dómini est? 


Secret 


HROUGH these divine mys- 

teries, we beseech Thee 
may we draw near to Jesus, the 
mediator of the New Testa- 
ment, and renew upon Thine 
altars, O Lord of virtues, the 
sprinkling of the blood, which 
speaketh more eloquently than 


that of Abel. Through the same.. 


ER Hc divina mystéria, 

ad novi quæsumus, tes- 
taménti mediatórem Jesum 
accedamus: et super altária 
tua, Dómine virtütum, asper- 
siónem sánguinis mélius l0- 
quéntem, quam Abel, innové- 
mus. Per eümdem Dóminum. 


Commemoration of Octave-day of St. John the Baptist in Low 


Masses only. 
Preface No. 4, page 803. 


Communion. 


Christ was offered once to 
exhaust the sins of many; the 


Secret, page 1066. 


Heb. 9, 28 


Christus semel oblátus est 
ad - multórum  exhauriénda 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 2—VISITATION OF OUR BLESSED LADY 1087 


peccáta: secündo sine pec- second time He shall appear 
cáto apparébit exspectántibus without sin to them that ex- 


se in salütem. 


pect Him, unto salvation. 


Postcommunion 
D SACRAM, Dómine, men- DMiTTED to the sacred 
sam admíssi, háusimus table, O Lord, we have 


aquas in gáudio de fóntibus 
Salvatoris: sanguis ejus fiat 
nobis, quesumus, fons aqua 
in vitam ztérnam saliéntis: 
Qui tecum. 


drawn water in gladness from 
the fountain. of the ‘Saviour; 


may His blood, we beseech 


Thee, become unto us a well 
of water springing up unto 
everlasting life. Who with Thee. 


Commemoration of Octave-day of St. John the Baptist in Low 
Masses only. Postcommunion, page 1067. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


July 2—The Visitation of Our Blessed Lady, / 
(White) x 
Double of the Second Class 


Sts. Processus and Martinian, Martyrs 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 


ALVE, Sancta parens, enixa 
puérpera Regem: qui cæ- 
lum, terramque regit in secula 
Seculórum. Ps. 44, 2. Eructá- 
vit cor meum verbum bonum: 
dico ego ópera mea regi. JF. 
Glória Patri. 


AIL, holy Mother, who in 

childbirth didst bring 
forth the King Who ruleth 
heaven and earth, world with- 
out end. Ps. 44, 2. My heart 
hath uttered a good word: I 
speak my works unto the King. 
y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ÁMULIS tuis, quesumus, 
Dómine, celéstis grátie 
munus impertíre: ut, quibus 
beáte Virginis partus éxstitit 
salutis exórdium: Visitatiónis 
ejus votíya solémnitas, pacis 
tribuat increméntum. Per Dó- 
minum. 


MPART unto Thy servants, 
we beseech Thee, O Lord,. 
the gift of heavenly grace, that 
to us, to whom the childbirth 
of the Blessed Virgin hath been 
the beginning of salvation, the 
votive solemnity of: her visita- 
tion may bring an increase of 
peace. Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


i088 JULY 2—VISITATION OF OUR BLESSED LADY 


In low Masses commemoration of Sts, Processus and Mar- 


tinian as follows: 


Prayer 


co», Who dost encompass 
O us and protect us by the 
glorious testimony of Thy mar- 
tyrs, Processus and Martinian, 
grant us to profit by imitating 
them and to rejoice by their 
intercession. Through our Lord. 


rus, qui nos sanctórum 

Mártyrum tuórum Pro- 
céssi et Martiniáni gloriósis 
confessiónibus circümdas et 
prótegis: da nobis et eórum 
imitatióne proficere, et inter- 
cessióne gaudére, Per Dómi- 
num. , EE. 


Lesson.. Cant. 2, 8-14 


Lesson from the Book of Wis- 
dom. 
EHOLD He cometh, iespiñg 
upon the mountains, 
skipping over the hills. My be- 
loved is like & roe or a young 
hart. Behold He standeth be- 
hind our wall; looking through 


the windows, looking through 


the lattices. Behold, my be- 
loved speaketh to me, Arise, 
make haste, my love, my dove, 
my beautiful one; and come. 
For winter is now past, the 
rain is over and gone. The 
flowers have appeared in our 
land, the time of pruning is 
come, the voice of the turtle is 
heard in our land: the fig-tree 
hath put forth her green figs, 
the vines in flower yield their 
sweet smell. Arise my love, my 
beautiful one; and come. My 
dove in the clefts of the rock, 
in the hollow places of the 
wall, show Me thy face, let thy 
voice sound in My ear;:for thy 
voice is sweet, and thy face 
comely, 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


cce iste venit sáliens in 

móntibus, transíliens 
colles: símilis est diléctus 
meus cáprez, hinnulóque cer- 
vórum. En ipse stat post pa- 
rietem nostrum, respiciens 
per fenéstras, prospíciens per 
cancéllos. En diléctus meus 
lóquitur mihi: Surge, própera, 
amíca mea, colümba mea, for- 
mósa mea, et veni. Jam enim 
hiems tránsiit, imber ábiit, et 


recéssit. Flores apparuérunt 


in terra nostra, tempus puta- 
tiónis. advénit: vox turturis 
audita est in terra nostra: 
ficus prótulit grossos suos: 
vinee  floréntes dedérunt 
odórem suum. Surge, amica 
mea, speciósa mea, et veni: 
colümba mea in foramínibus 
petra, in cavérna macérie, 
osténde mihi faciem tuam, 
sonet vox tua in áuribus meis: 
vox enim tua dulcis, et fácies 
tua decóra. 


Gradual 


Blessed and venerable art ^ Benedícta et venerábilis es, 
thou, O Virgin Mary, who with- Virgo María: que sine tactu 
out spot wast found the Mother pudóris, invénta es Mater 
of the Saviour. Y. O Virgin Salvatóris. V. Virgo Dei Géni- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Pe A On 


JULY 2—VISITATION OF OUR BLESSED LADY 


trix, quem totus non capit 
Orbis, in tua se clausit vís- 
cera factus homo. 


Allelija, allelája. V. Felix 
es, sacra Virgo María, et omni 
laude digníssima: quia ex te 
ortus est sol justíti», Christus 
Deus noster, Allelüja. 


Mundi Cor Meum, page 763. 


1089 


Mother of God, He, Whom the 
"whole world can not contain, 
hath shut Himself within thy 
womb, becoming man. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Happy 
art thou, O sacred Virgin Mary, 
and most worthy of all praise, 
for out of thee hath risen the 
sun of justice, Christ, our God. 
Alleluia. . 


Gospel. Luke 1, 39-47 


W Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 


WN ILLO témpore: Exsürgens 
T María ábiit in montana 
cum festinatióne in civitátem 
Juda: et intrávit in domum 
Zachariz, et salutavit Elísa- 
beth. Et factum est, ut audí- 
vit salutatiónem Marie Elísa- 
beth, exsultávit infans in 
ütero ejus: et repléta est Spí- 
titu Sancto Elísabeth, et ex- 
clamávit voce magna et dixit: 
Benedícta tu inter mulíeres, et 
benedíctus fructus ventris tui. 
Et unde hoc mihi, ut véniat 
mater Dómini mei ad me? 
Ecce enim, ut facta est vox 
salutatiénis tue in áuribus 
meis, exsultávit in gáudio in- 
fans in ütero meo. Et beáta, 
qus credidísti, quóniam per- 
ficiéntur ea, que dicta sunt 
tibi a Démino, Et ait Marfa: 
Magníficat ánima mea Dómi- 


num: et exsultávit spíritus 


meus in.Deo salutári meo. 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, Mary rising 

up, went into the hill 
country ‘with haste, into a city 
of Juda. And ‘she entered into 
the house of Zachary, and sa- 
luted Elizabeth. À? 4t came 
to pass that whel Elizabeth 


"heard the salutation of Mary, 


the infant leaped in her womb. 
And Elizabeth was filled with 
ihe Holy Ghost: and she cried 
out with a loud voice, and said, 
Blessed art thou among wo- 
men, and blessed is the fruit 
of thy womb. And whence is 
this to me, that the mother of 
my Lord should come to me? 
For behold, as soon as the voice 
of thy salutation sounded in 
my ears, the infant in my 
womb leaped for. joy. And 
blessed art thou that hast be- 
lieved, because those things 
shall -be accomplished that 
were spoken to thee by the 
Lord. And Mary said, My soul 


doth magnify the Lord; and my spirit hath rejoiced in God 


my Saviour. 
; Creed, page 765. 


Offertory 


Beata es, Virgo María, que 
ómnium portásti Creatérem: ` 


Blessed art thou, O Virgin 
Mary, who didst bear the Cre- - 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1090 


ator of all things; thou didst 
bring forth Him Who made. 
thee, and remainest a virgin 
forever. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


JULY 2—VISITATION OF OUR BLESSED LADY 


genuísti qui te fecit, et in 
etérnum pérmanes virgo. 


Secret 


E7 the mamy of Thine 
only-begotten Son suc- 
cor us, O Lord, that He, Who, 
born of a virgin, did not di- 
minish, but consecrated, the 
virginity of His mother, may, 
on this solemn festival of her 
visitation, deliver us from -our 
sins and make our offering ac- 
ceptable, even Jesus Christ our 
Lord, Who with Thee liveth. 


GENITI tui, Dómine, no- 

bis succürrat humáni- 
tas: ut; qui natus de Vírgine, 
matris integritátem non mí- 
nuit, sed sacrávit; in Visita- 
tiónis ejus solémniis, nostris 
nos piáculis éxuens, oblatió- 
nem nostram tibi fáciat ac- 
céptam. Jesus Christus Démi- 
nus noster: Qui tecum. 


In .Low. Masses commemoration of Sts. Processus and Mar- 


tinian as follows: 


Secret 


ECEIVE, O Lord, our pray- 

ers and offerings, and, 
that they may be worthy in 
Thy sight, nay we be assisted 
by the prayers of Thy saints. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


ÜScIPE, Dómine, preces et 
münera: que ut tuo sint 
digna conspéctu, Sanctórum 
tuórum précibus adjuvémur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Communion 


: Blessed is the womb of the 


Virgin Mary, which bore the 
Son of the eternal Father. 


"Beáta viscera Marie Vír- 
ginis, que portavérunt ætérni 
Patris Fílium. 


Postcommunion 


^E HAVE received, O Lord, 

the votive sacrament of 

this annual solemnity; grant, 

we beseech Thee, that it may 

afford us a remedy both for 

temporal and for eternal life. 
Through our Lord. 


OMPSIMUS, Dómine, cele- 

britatis annue votiva 
sacraménta: presta, quæsu- 
mus; ut et temporális vite 
nobis remédia prxbeant, et 
etérne. Per Dóminum. 


In Low Masses commemoration of Sts. Processus and Mar- 


' tinian as follows: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


` JULY 3—ST. 


LEO II, POPE 1091 


Postcommunion: 


ÓRPORIS sacri, ef pretiósi 
sánguinis repléti libá- 
mine, quesumus, Dómine 
Deus noster: ut, quod pia de- 
votióne gérimus, certa re- 
demptióne capiámus. Per 
eümdem Dóminum, 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ILLED With the offering d 

Thy sacred body and Thy 

precious blood, we beseech 

Thee, O Lord, that what we do 

in pious devotion may assure 

us of redemption. Through the 
same. 


July 3—85t. Leo II, Pope, Confessor (White) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302, except: 


E . Prayer 


Gum tuum, Pastor æ- 
térne, placátus in- 
ténde: et per beátum Leónem 
Summum Pontíficem, perpé- 
tua protectióne cüstódi; quem 
totíus Ecclésie prestitisti esse 
pastórem. Per Dóminum. 


ETERNAL Shepherd, do 

Thou .look favorably 
upon Thy flock, which we be- 
seech Thee to guard and keep 
for evermore through -the 
blessed Leo Thy Martyr and 
Supreme Pontiff, whom Thou 
didst choose to be the chief 
shepherd of the whole Church. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer of Sts. Peter and Paul, page 1077; third of our 
Blessed Lady, Concede nos, page 824. 


Secret 


BLATIS munéribus, que- 

sumus Dómine, Eéclé- 
siam tuam benignus illü- 
mina: ut, et gregis tui pro- 
fíciat ubique succéssus, et 
grati fiant nómini tuo, te 
gubernante, pastéres. Per 
one f 


N THY loving kindness, we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, be 
ved by ‘the offering of our 
gifts and enlighten Thy 
Church: that Thy flock may 
prosper everywhere and the 
shepherds, under Thy guid- 
ance, may be rendered accepta- 
ble to Thee. Through our Lord. 


Second Secret of Sts. Peter and Paul, page 1079; third of our 
Blessed Lady, By Thy mercy, page 825, 


Postcommunion 


EFECTIONE sancta enu- 

tritam gubérna, que- 
sumus Dómine, tuam placá- 
tus Ecclésiam: ut poténti mo- 
deratióne dirécta, et incre- 
ménta libertátis acefpiat et 
in religiónis integritáte per- 
sistat, Per Dóminum. 


INCE Thy Church has been 

nourished by the sacred 
repast, govern her in Thy 
clemency, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, so that under the guid- 
ance of Thy mighty rule she 
may enjoy greater freedom 
and abiding integrity of re- 
ligion. Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1092 


JULY 4—OF OCTAVE OF STS. PETER AND PAUL 


Second Postcommunion of Sts. Peter and Paul, page 1080; 
third of our Blessed Lady, Grant, O Lord, page 825. 


July 4—@f the Octave of the Apostles, 
Sts. Beter and Paul, (Red) 


Semi-double 
Introit, Votive Mass of Sts. Peter and Paul, page 1421. 


Prayer 


O Gop, Who hast conse- 
crated this day to the 
martyrdom of Thine apostles 
Peter and Paul, grant to Thy 
Church in all things to follow 
their teaching by whom it re- 
ceived the right ordering of 
religion in the beginning. 
Through our Lord. . 


EUS, qui hodiérnam diem 

Apostol6érum tuórum 
Petri et Pauli martyrio con- 
secrásti: da Ecclésie tue, eó- 
rum in ómnibus sequi præ- 
céptum; per quos religiónis 
sumpsit exórdium. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Second Prayer, Concede nos, of our Blessed Lady, page 824; 
thitd for the Church, page’825, or for the Pope, page 826. 


Lesson from the Mass on Whit-Wednesday, page 609. 


Gradual. Ps..44, 17, 18 


. Thou shalt make them 
princes over all the earth: they 
shall remember Thy name, O 
Lord. Y. Instead of thy fathers, 
sons are born to thee: there- 
fore shall people praise thee. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Luke 22, 
32. I have prayed for thee, 
Peter, that thy faith may not 
fail; and thou, being once con- 
verted, confirm thy brethren. 
Alleluia. 


Constitues eos príncipes 
super omnem terram: mé- 
mores erunt nóminis tui, Dó- 
mine. Y. Pro pátribus tuis 
nati sunt tibi filii: proptérea 
pópul confitebüntur tibi. 

Allelüja, allelüája. Y. Luke 
22, 32. Rogávi pro te, Petre, ut 
non defíciat fides tua: et tu 
aliquéndo convérsus, confir- 
ma fratres tuos, Allelüja. 


Gospel, Peter said to Jesus, page 1358. 
Offertory from Votive Mass of Sts. Peter and Paul, page 1423, 


Secret 


AY the prayers of Thine 
apostles, O Lord, ac- 


ÓsTIAS, Dómine, quas nó- 
mine tuo sacrándas of- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 5—ST. ANTONY MARY ZACCARIA 


férimus, apostólica prosequá- 


tur oratio: per quam nos ex- 
piári tribuas et deféndi. Per 
Dóminum. 


1098 


company the sacrifices which 
we offer to be consecrated to 
Thy name, through which 
prayers do Thou grant us to 
be pardoned: and defended. 
- Through our Lord.: 


Second Secret, By Thy mercy, of our Blessed Lady, page 
825; third for the Church, page 825, or for the Pope, page 826. 


Preface No. 13, page 816.. 


Communion. Matt. 19, 28 


Vos qui secüti estis me, 


Sedébitis super sedes, judi- 


cántes duódecim tribus Israél, 


You who have followed me 
Shall sit on seats, judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel. 


Postcommunion 


vos celésti, Dómine ali- 
mento satiásti: apostó- 
licis intercessiónibus ab omni 
advérsitate custódi Per Dó- 


RESERVE, O Lord, from al) 
dangers, by the interces- 
sion of . Thine . apostles, 
those whom Thou hast filled 


` with heavenly nourishment. 


Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, Grant, O Lord, of our Blessed Lady, 
page 825; third for the "Church, page 825, or for the Pope, 


page 826. 


July 5—St. Antonp Mary Zaccaria, Conf. (White) 
Double: E 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


mea non in persuasibili- 
bus humane sapiéntie verbis, 
sed in ostensióne spiritus, et 
virtütis. Ps. 110, 1. Confitébor 
tibi, Dómine, in toto corde 
meo, in consilio justórum et 
ee y. Glória Pa- 


1 Cor. 2, 4 


ERMO meus, et predicátio 


Y SPEECH and my preach- 
ing was not in the per- 
suasive words of human wis- 
dom, but in the showing of 
spirit and power. Ps. 110, 1. I 
will praise Thee, O Lord, with 


"my whole héart, in the coun- 


eil of the just, and in the con- 
gregation: ¥. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1094 


JULY 5—ST. ANTONY MARY ZACCARIA 


Prayer 


Gu us, O Lord God, to 
! learn, fin the spirit of 
Paul the apostle, that transcen- 
dent knowledge of Jesus Christ 
by which blessed Antony Mary, 
wonderfully instructed, gath- 
ered in Thy Church new fam- 
ilies of clerics and virgins. 
Through the same. 


ac Nos, Dómine Deus, 

supereminéntem Jesu 
Christi sciéntiam, spíritu 
Pauli Apóstoli edíscere: qua 
bedtus Antonius Maria mira- 
bíliter eruditus, novas in Ec- 
clésia tua clericórum et vir- 
ginum famílias congregávit. 
Per eümdem Dóminum. 


Commemoration of the octave of the Apostles, page 1092. 


Epistle. 1 Tim. 4, 8-16 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
Timothy. . 

ODLINESS is profitable to all 
things, having promise of 

the life that now is, and of that 
which is to come. A faithful 
saying and worthy of all ac- 
ceptation. For therefore we la- 
bor and are reviled, because we 
hope in the living God, Who is 
the Saviour of all men, espe- 
cially of the faithful. These 
things command and teach. 
Let no man despise thy youth: 
but be thou an example of the 
faithful, in word, in conver- 
sation, in charity, in faith, in 
chastity. Till I come, attend 
unto reading, to exhortation, 
and to doctrine. Neglect not 
the grace that is in thee, which 
was given thee by prophecy, 
with imposition of the hands of 
the priesthood. Meditate upon 
these things, be wholly in these 
things: that thy profiting may 
be manifest to all. Take heed 
io thyself, and to doctrine: be 
earnest in them. For in doing 
this thou shalt both save thy- 
self and them that hear thee. 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apéstoli ad Timétheum. 


ferras ad ómnia utilis est: 

-promissiénem habens 
vite, quz nunc est, et futüre. 
Fidélis sermo, et omni accep- 
tióne dignus. In hoc enim 
laborámus, et maledícimur, 
quia sperámus in Deum vi- 
vum, qui est Salvator ómni- 
um hóminum, máxime fidéli- 
um. Precipe hec, et doce. 
Nemo adolescéntiam tuam 
contémnat: sed. exémplum 
esto fidélium in verbo, in 
conversatióne, in caritáte, in 
fide, in castitáte. Dum vénio, 
atténde lectióni, exhortatióni, 
et doctrine. Noli negligere 
gratiam, que in te est, que 
data est tibi per prophetiam, 
cum  impositióne mánuum 
presbytérii. Hzc meditare, in 
his esto: ut proféctus tuus 
maniféstus sit ómnibus. At- 
ténde tibi, et doctrine, insta 
in illis. Hoc enim fáciens. et 
teipsum salvum fácies, et eos 
qui te áudiunt. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 


LI 


| 


JULY 5—ST. ANTONY MARY ZACCARIA 


1095 


Gradual. Philipp. 1, 8, 9 


Testis mihi est Deus, quo 
modo cüpiam omnes vos in 
viscéribus Jesu Christi. Et hoc 
Oro, ut cáritas vestra magis 
ac magis abündet in sciéntia, 
et in omni sensu. V. Ut pro- 
bétis potióra, ut sitis sincéri, 
et sine offénsa in diem Christi. 


Alletüja, allelüja. Y. Repléti 
fructu justitie per Jesum 
Christum, in glóriam et lau- 
dem Dei. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, DAS 763. 


For God is my witness, how 
I long after you in the bowels 
of Jesus Christ. And this I 
pray, that your charity may 
more and more abound in 
knowledge and in all under- 
standing. Y. That you may ap- 
prove the better things, that 
you may he sincere and with- 
out offense unto the day of 
Jesus Christ. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Filled 
with the fruit of justice through 
Jesus Christ unto the glory and 
praise of God. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Mark 10, 15-21 


TB Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Marcum. 


I: ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus discípulis suis: Quis- 
quis non recéperit regnum 
Dei velut párvulus, non intrá- 
bit in illud. Et compléxans 
párvulos, et impónens manus 
super illos, benedicébat -eos. 
Et cum egréssus esset in viam, 
procürrens quidam, genu flexo 
ante eum, rogábat eum: Ma- 
gister bone, quid faciam ut 
vitam etérnam percipiam? 
Jesus autem dixit ei: Quid me 
dicis bonum? Nemo bonus nisi 
unus Deus. Precépta nosti: 
Ne adülteres, ne occídas, ne 
furéris, ne falsum testimóni- 
um dixeris, ne fraudem féce- 
ris, honóra patrem tuum et 
matrem. At ille respóndens, 
ait illi: Magister, hec ómnia 
observavi a juventüte mea. 
Jesus autem intüitus eum, di- 
léxit eum, et dixit ei: Unum 
libi deest: vade, quectimque 


*B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 
T THAT time, Jesus said 

to His disciples, Who- 
soever shall not receive the 
kingdom of God as a little 
child, shall not enter into it. 
And embracing them, and lay- 
ing His hands upon them, He 
blessed them. And when He 
was gone forth into the way, 3 
certain man running up and 
kneeling before Him, asked 
Him, Good Master, what shall 
I do that I may receive life ever- 
lasting? And Jesus said to 
him, Why callest thou Me 
good? None is good but one, 
that is God. Thou knowest the 
commandments: Do not come 
mit adultery, do not steal, bear 
not false witness, do no fraud, 
honor thy father and mother. 
But he answering, said to Him: 
Master, all these things I have 
observed from my youth, And 
Jesus looking on him, loved 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1096 


him, and said to him: One 
thing is wanting unto thee: 
go, sell whatsoever thou hast, 
and give to the poor, and thou 


JULY 5—ST. ANTONY MARY ZACCARIA 


habes vende, et da paupéribus, 
et habébis thesáurum in celo: 
et veni, Séquere me. 


Shalt have treasure in heaven; and come, follow Me 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 137, 1, 2 


I wil sing praise to Thee in 
the sight of the angels; I will 
adore at Thy holy temple, and 
give glory to Thy name. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


In conspéctu Angelérum 
psallam tibi: adorábo ad tem- 
plum sanctum tuum, et con- 
fitébor nómini tuo. 


Secret 


(D^ we bring to the table 
of the heavenly banquet, 
O Lord,that purity of mind and 
body with which blessed An- 
tony Mary, in offering this 
most sacred Victim, was so 
wonderfully adorned and re- 
splendent. Through our Lord. 


D MENSAM cteléstis con- 

vívii fac nos, Dómine, 

eam mentis et córporis puri- 

tátem afférre qua beátus An- 

tónius. María, hanc sacratis- 

simam hóstiam Ófferens, mirí- 

fice ornátus enítuit. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Commemoration of the Octave- of the Apostles, page 1092. 


Preface No. 13, page-816. 


Communion. Philipp. 3, 17 


Be. followers of Me, brethren, 
and observe them who walk, so 
as you have our models. 


Imitatóres mei estóte, fra- 
tres, et observáte eos, qui ita 
ámbulant, sicut habétis for- 
mam nostram. -- 


Postcommunion . 


Y THE royal food of hea- 
B ven with which we have 
been fed, O Lord Jesus Christ, 
may our hearts be inflamed 
with that fire of charity with 
which blessed Antony Mary 
carried the banner of tbe sav- 
ing Victim to victory: against 
the enemies of Thy Church. 
Who. livest. 


@LésTr dape qua pasti 

sumus, Dómine Jesu 
Christe, eo corda nostra cari- 
tátis igne flamméscant: quo 
beátus Anténius María salu- 
táris hóstie vexíllum, contra 
Ecclésis tux hostes, éxtulit ad 
victóriam: Qui vivis. 


Commemoration of the Octave of the Apostles, page 1093. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


{ 


than. 


JULY 6—OCTAVE OF STS. PETER AND PAUL 1097 


July 6-—The Cctave-Day of the Walp Apostles, 
Ste. Peter and Paul, (Red) 
Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus, 44, 15, 14 


APIÉNTIAM sanctérum 

narrent pópuli, et laudes 
eórum nüntiet ecclésia: nó- 
mina autem eórum vivent in 
seculum seculi. Ps. 32, 1. Ex- 
sultáte, justi, in Dómino: rec- 
tos decet collaudátio. Y. Gló- 
ria Patri. 


ET the people skow forth 

the wisdom of the saints, 
and the Church declare their 
praise; and their names shall 
live unto generation and gen- 
eration. Ps. 32, 1. Rejoice in 
the Lord, ye just: praise becom- 
eth the upright. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. | 


Prayer 


EUs, cujus déxtera beá- 

tum Petrum ambulán- 
tem in flüctibus, ne mergeré- 
tur, eréxit, et coapóstolum 
ejus Paulum, tértio naufra- 
gántem, de profündo pélagi 
liberávit: exáudi nos propí- 
tius, et concéde; ut ambórum 
méritis, æternitátis glóriam 
consequámur. Qui vivis. 


Lesson. 
. Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


I VIRI misericórdism sunt, 

quorum pietates non 
defuérunt: cum sémine eórum 
pérmanent bona, heréditas 
sancta nepótes eórum, et in 
testaméntis stetit semen eó- 
rum, et filii eórum propter 
illos usque in xiérnum ma- 
nent: Semen eórum et glória 
eórum non  derelinquétur. 
Córpory ipsórum in pace se- 
pült& sunt, et nomen eórum 
vivit in generatiónem et ge- 


Ecclus. 


cop, Whose right hand 
raised up blessed Peter, 


"hen he walked upon the 


waves, that he might not sink, 
and delivered his fellow-apostle 
Paul, thrice shipwrecked, from 
ihe depths of the sea, gracious- 
ly hear us, and grant that, by 
ihe merits of them both, we 
may reach the glory of eternity. 
Who livest. 


44, 10-15 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 
HESE are men of mercy 
whose godly.deeds have 
not failed. Good things con- 
tinue with their seed; their 
posterity are a holy inheritance, 
and their seed hath stood in 
the covenants; and their chil- 
dren for their sakes remain for- 
ever: their seed and their glory 
shall not be forsaken. Their 
bodies are buried in peace, and 
their name liveth unto genera- 
tion and generation. Let the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1098 JULY 6—OCTAVE OF STS. PETER AND PAUL 


people show forth their wis- 
dom, and the Church declare 
their praise, 


Gradual. 


The souls of the just are in 
in the hand of God, and the 
torment of malice shall not 
touch them. Y. In the sight of 
the unwise they seemed to die, 
but they are in peace. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Luke 
22, 28-30. You are they who 
have continued with Me in My 
temptations: and I dispose to 
you a kingdom, that you may 
ait upon thrones, judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


neratiónem. Sapiéntiam ip- 
sérum narrent pópuli, et lau- 
dem eórum nüntiet Ecclésia. 


Wis. 3, 1-3 


Justórum anime in manu 
Dei sunt, et non tanget illos 
torméntum malítis. Y. Visi 
sunt óculis insipiéntium mori, 
ili autem sunt in pace. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Luc. 
22, 28-30. Vos estis, qui per- 
mansistis mecum in tenta- 
tiénibus meis: et ego dispóno 
vobis regnum, ut sedeátis su- 
per thronos, judicántes duó- 
decim tribus Israel. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Matt. 14, 22-33 


"4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel aecording to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT lime, Jesus obliged 

His disciples to go up 

into the ship, and to go before 
Him over the water, till He 
dismissed the people. And hav- 
ing dismissed the multitude, 
He went up into a mountain to 
pray; and when it was evening, 
He was there alone. But the 
ship in the midst of the sea was 
tossed with the waves; for the 
wind was contrary; and in the 
fourth watch of the night, He 
came to them walking upon the 
Sea; and they seeing Him walk- 
ing upon the sea, were troubled 
saying, It is an apparition: and 
they cried out for fear. And im- 
mediately Jesus spoke to them, 
saying, Be of good heart; it is 
I, fear ye not. And Peter mak- 
ing answer, said, Lord, if it be 
Thou, bid me to come to Thee 
upon the waters: and He said, 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Cómpulit 

Jesus discípulos ascén- 
dere in navículam, et precé- 
dere eum trans fretum, donec 
dimítteret turbas. Et, dimíssa 
turba, ascéndit in montem 
solus oráre. Véspere autem 
facto solus erat ibi. Navícula 
autem in médio mari jacta- 
bátur flüctibus: erat enim 
contrárius ventus. Quarta 
autem vigília noctis, venit ad 
eos ámbulans super mare. Et 
vidéntes eum super mare am- 
bulántem, turbáti sunt, di- 
céntes: Quia phantásma est. 
Et pre timóre clamavérunt. 
Statimque Jesus locütus est 
eis, dicens: Habéte fidüciam: 
ego sum, nolíte timére. Re- 
spóndens autem Petrus dixit: 
Dómine, si tu es, jube me ad 
te venire super aquas. At 
ipse ait: Veni. Et descén- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 6—OCTAVE OF STS. PETER AND PAUL 1089 


dens Petrus de navicula, 
ambulábat super aquam, ut 
veníret ad Jesum. Videns 
vero ventum válidum, tímuit: 
et cum cepisset mergi, clamá- 
vit dicens: Dómine, salvum 
me fac. Et contínuro Jesus 
exténdens manum, apprehén- 
dit eum, et ait illi: Médice 
fídei, quare dubitásti? Et cum 
ascendísset in naviculam, ces- 
Sávit ventus. Qui autem in 
navícula erant, venérunt, et 
adoravérunt eum, dicéntes: 
Vere Fílius Dei es. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 

Exsultábunt sancti in gló- 
ria, letabintur in cubilibus 
suis: exaltatiónes Dei in fau- 


Come. And Peter going down 
out of the ship, walked upon 
the water to come to Jesus. But. 
seeing the wind strong, he was 
afraid; and when he began to 
sink, he cried out, saying, Lord, 
save me. And immediately 
Jesus, stretching forth His 
hand, took hold of him, and 
said to him: O thou of little 
faith, why dost thou doubt? 
And when they were come into 
the ship, the wind ceased; and 
they that were in the ship, 
came and adored Him, saying, 
Indeed Thou art the Son of 
God. 


Ps. 149, 5, 6 


The saints shall rejoice in 
glory, they shall be joyful in 


‘their beds: the high praises of 


cibus eórum. God shall be in their mouth. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 
FFÉRIMUS tibi, Dómine, E OFFER 'Thee, O Lord, 


preces et münera: qua, 
ut tuo sint digna conspéctu, 
Apostolórum tuórum Petri et 
Pauli précibus adjuvémur. Per 
Dóminum. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. 


Justórum ánime in manu 
Dei sunt, et non tanget illos 
torméntum malitiz: visi sunt 
óculis insipiéntium mori: illi 
autem sunt in pace. 


prayers and gifts, and, 
that they may be worthy in 
Thy sight, may we be assisted 
by the prayers of Thine apos- 
tles Peter and Paul. Through 
our Lord. 


Wis. 3, 1, 2, 3 

'The souls of the just are in 
the hand of God, and the tor- 
ment of malice shall not touch 
ihem: in the sight of the un- 
wise they seemed to die, but 
ihey are in peace. 


Postcommunion 


RÓTEGE, Dómine, pópulum 
tuum: et Apostolórum 
tuórum Petri et Pauli patroci- 


ROTECT Thy people, O Lord, 
and preserve by never- 
ending defence those who trust 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1100 


in the patronage of Thine apos- 
tles, Peter and Paul. Through 
our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


JULY 7—STS. CYRIL AND METHODIUS 


nio confidéntem, perpétua de- 
fensióne consérva. Per Démi- 
num. 


July 7—$»ts. Cyril and Methodius, Bishops, Confessors 
(White) 
Double 
'Tbe Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit, Mass Sacerdotes tui, page 1340. 
Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

Who didst grant the 
peoples of Slavonia to come to 
the knowledge of Thy name 
through Thy blessed confes- 
sors and bishops, Cyril and 
Methodius, grant that, as, we 
glory in their festival, we may 
be joined with them in fellow- 
Ship. Through our Lord. 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 
Deus, qui Slavóniæ gen- 
tes per beátos Confesséres 
tuos atque Pontífices Cyríllum 
et Methódium ad agnitiónem 
tui nóminis venire tribuisti: 
presta: ut, quorum festivitate 
gloriamur, eórum consórtio 
copulémur, Per Dóminum. 


Epistle, Mass Sacerdotes tui, page 1341. 
Gradual, Mass Sacerdotes tui, page 1342. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


oe The Lord appointed, Mass St. Mark, April 25, page 


Offertory. Ps. 67, 36 


God is wonderful in His 
saints: the God of Israel is He 
Who will give power and 


Mirabilis Deus in sanctis 
suis: Deus Israel, ipse dabit 
virtütem, et  fortitüdinem. 


strength to His people: blessed plebi sue: benedictus Deus, 


be God. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


AVE regard to our prayers, 

we beseech Thee, O Lord, 

and to the oblations of Thy 
faithful, that they may be 
pleasing unto Thee on the fes- 
tival of Thy saints, and may 
draw down on us the aid of 
Thy mercy. Through our Lord. 


RECES nostras, quaesumus, 

Dómine, et tuórum rés- 

pice oblatiónes fidélium: ut 

tibi gratz sint in tuórum fes- 

tivitáte Sanctérum, et nobis 

cónferant tue propitlatiónis 
auxílium, Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 10—HOLY SEVEN BROTHERS, MARTYRS 1101 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 
Communion. Matt. 10, 27 


Quod dico vobis in ténebris, 
dicite in lümine, dicit Dómi- 
nus: et quod in aure audítis, 
Predicate super tecta. 


That which I tell you in the 
dark, speak ye in the light, 
saith the Lord; and that which 
you hear in the ear, preach ye 
upon the house tops. 


Postcommunion 


UESUMUS, omnipotens 

Deus: ut, qui nobis mü- 
nera dignáris prebére celés- 
tia, intercedéntibus sanctis 
tuis Cyrillo et Methddio, des- 
pícere terréna concédas. Per 
Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793... 


E BESEECH Thee, O Al- 

» mighty God, that Thou, 
Who dost vouchsafe unto us 
the heavenly gifts, grant us, 
by the intercession of Thy 
saints, Cyril and Methodius, to 
despise all -things earthly. 
Through our Lord. 


July 8—$5f. Elisabeth, Queen of Portugal, Widow 
(White) : 
Semi-double ; 
| Mass, Cognovi, page 1383, except: 


- Prayer 


LEMENTÍSSIME Deus, qui 

beátam Elísabeth regí- 
nam, inter céteras  egrégias 
dotes, béllici furóris sedándi 
prerogatíva decorásti: da no- 
bis, ejus intercessióne; post 
mortális vite, quam supplici- 
ter pétimus, pacem, ad etérna 
£áudia pervenire, Per Dómi- 
num. 


osr merciful God, Who, 
D among other noble gifts, 
didst -adorn Elizabeth, the 
blessed queen, with the gift of 
ellaying the furies Of war, 
grant us, by her intercession, 
after the peace which we seek 
in this mortal life, to attain 
unto everlasting joys. Through 
our Lord. 


July 10—The Holp Seben Brothers, Martyrs, with 
Sts. Rufina and S»écunba, Virgins and Martyrs 


(Red) 
.Semi-double 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
. Introit. Ps. 112; 1, 9 


AUDATE, püeri, Dóminum, 
laudáte nomen Dómini: 


RAISE the Lord, ye chil- 
dren, praise ye the name 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1102 JULY 10—HOLY SEVEN BROTHERS, MARTYRS 


of the Lord; Who maketh the 
barren woman to dwell in à 
house, the joyful mother of 
children, Ps, 112, 2. Blessed be 
the name of the Lord, from 
henceforth, now and forever. 
X. Glory. 


qui habitáre facit stérilem in 
domo, matrem filiórum letán- 
tem. Ps. 112, 2. Sit nomen 
Dómini benedíctum: ex hoc 
nunc, et usque in seculum. 
¥. Glória Patri, 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that, we, 
who have known the courage of 
the glorious martyrs in their 
confessing Thee, may experi- 
ence their kindness in inter- 
ceding for us with Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


RZESTA, Quesumus, omní- 

potensDeus: ut,qui glo- 

riósos Mártyres fortes in sua 

confessióne cognóvimus, pios 

apud te in nostra interces- 

sióne sentiamus, Per Dómi- 
num. 


Epistle, Mass Cognovi, page 1384. 


Gradual. 


Our soul hatn been deliv- 
ered, as a sparrow, out of the 
snare of the fowlers. V. The 
snare is broken, and we are de- 
livered: our help is in the name 
of the Lord, Who made heaven 
and earth. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. This is 
the true brotherhood, which 
overcame the wickedness of 
the world: it followed Christ, 
attaining the glorious kingdom 
of heaven, Alleluia, 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ps. 123, 7, 8 


Anima nostra, sicut passer, 
erépta est de láqueo venán- 
tium. Y. Láqueus contrítus 
est, et nos liberati sumus: ad- 
jutórium nostrum. in nómine 
Dómini, qui fecit celum et 
lerram. 

Allelija, allelija V. Hec 
est véra fratérnitas, que vicit 
mundi crimina: Christum se- 
cüta est, inclyta tenens regna 
celéstia, Allelüja. 


Gospel. Matt. 12, 46-50 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time: As Jesus 

was speaking to the 
multitudes, behold His mother 
and His brethren ‘stood with- 
out, seeking to speak to Him; 
and one said to Him, Behold 
Thy mother and Thy brethren 


H4 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Loquénte 

Jesu ad turbas, ecce ma- 
ter ejus, et fratres stabant 
foris, queréntes loqui ei. Dixit 
autem ei quidam: Ecce ma- 
ter tua, et fratres tui foris 
Stant, queréntes te. At ipse 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 10—HOLY SEVEN BROTHERS, MARTYRS 


respóndens dicénti sibi, ait: 
Qus est mater mea, et qui 
sunt fratres mei? Et extén- 
dens manum in discípulos 
suos dixit: Ecce mater mea, 
et fratres mei. Quicümque 
enim fécerit voluntátem Pa- 
tris mei, qui in celis est: ipse 
meus frater et soror, et mater 
est. ` 


Offertory. 

Anima nostra, sicut passer, 

erépta est de láqueo venán- 

tium: láqueus contrítus est, 
et nos liberáti sumus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


1103 


stand without, seeking Thee. 
But he answering him that told 
Him, said, Who is My mother, 
and who are My brethren? And 
stretching forth His hand to- 
ward His disciples, He said, 
Behold My mother and My 
brethren: for whosoever shall 
do the will of My father that 
is in heaven, he is My brother, 
and sister, and mother. 


Ps. 123, 7 


Our soul hath been delivered, 
as 2, sparrow, out of the snare 
of the fowlers: the snare is 
broken, and we are delivered. 


Secret 


acRiriciis preséntibus, 

Y quesumus, Dómine, in- 

nde plaeátus: et, interce- 

déntibus Sanctis tuis, devo- 

tióni nostre profíciant, et sa- 
lúti. Per Dóminum. 


E APPEASED, We beseech 

Thee, O Lord, and look 
upon the sacrifices here be- 
fore Thee, and may they, by 
the intercession of Thy saints, 
benefit both our devotion and 
our salvation. Through our 
Lord.. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Quicimque fécerit volun- 
tátem Patris mei, qui in colis 
est: ipse meus frater, et soror, 
et mater est, dicit Dóminus. 


Matt. 12, 50 


Whosoever shall do the will 
of My Father Who is in heaven, 
he is My brother, and sister, 
and mother, saith the Lord. 


Postcommunion 


UEXSUMUS, omnipotens 

Deus: ui intercedénti- 
bus Sanctis tuis, illfus salu- 
taris capiámus efféctum: cu- 
jus per hec mystéria pignus 
accépimus, Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that, by 
the intercession of Thy saints, 
we may obtain the effect of 
that salvation of which we 
through these mysteries have 
received 2 pledge. Through our 
Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1104 


July 11—St. Pius J, 


JULY 12—ST. JOHN GUALBERT, ABBOT 


Pope, Martyr (Red) 


Simple 
Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302. 


July 12—Ht. John Gualbert, Abbot (White) 
“ Double 


Sts. Nabor and 


Felix, Martyrs 


Mass, Os justi meditábitur, page 1356, with the Gospel and 
the commemorations of Sts. Nabor and Feliz, as given herewith. 


Gospel. Matt. 5, 43-48 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
ihew.. l 

T. THAT time, Jesus said 

to His disciples, You 
have heard that it hath been 
said, Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor, and hate thy enemy. 
But I say to you, Love your en- 
emies, do good to them that 
hate you, and pray for them 
that persecute and calumniate 
you: that you may be the chil- 
ären of your Father Who is in 
heaven, Who maketh His sun 
to rise upon the good and bad, 
and raineth upon the just and . 
the unjust. For if you love them 
that love you, what reward shall 
you have; do not even the pub- 
licans this? And if you salute 
your brethren only, what do 
you more? do not also the 
heathens this? Be you there- 
fore perfect, as also your hea» ` 
venly Father is perfect. 


MH Sequéntia. sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Matthzeum. . 
T" ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 

sus discípulis suis: Audis- 
tis quia dictum est: Díliges 
próximum tuum, et ódio ha- 
bébis inimícum tuum. Ego 
autem dico vobis: Dilígite ini- 
mícos vestros, benefácite his 
qui odérunt vos: et oráte pro 
persequéntibus, et calumni- 
antibus vos: ut sitis fflii Pa- 
tris vestri, qui in celis est, qui 
solem suum oríri facit super 
bonos et malos: et pluit super 
justos et injüstos. Si enim di- 
lígitis eos, qui vos diligunt, 
quam mercédem habébitis? 
nonne et publicáni hoc faci- 
unt? Et si salutavéritis fra- 
tres vestros tantum, quid 
ámplius fácitis? nonne et éth- 
nici hoc fáciunt? Estóte ergo 
vos perfécti, sicut et Pater 
vester ccléstis perféctus est. 
and. Feliz. 


Prayer 


Commemorations of Sts. Nabor 
RANT, We beseech Thee, O 


G Lord, that as we never 


RESTA, quesumus, Dó- 
mine: ut, sicut nos 


fail to celebrate the natal feast sanctórum Mártyrum tuórum 
of Thy holy martyrs, Nabor Náboris et Felicis natalitia 
and Felix, we may continually celebránda non déserunt; ita 
be helped by their prayers. jügiter suffráglis comiténtur. 
Through our Lord. Per.Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 15—ST. HENRY, EMPEROR . 


1105 


Secret 


ÜNERA plebis tum, que- 

* sumus, Dómine, sanc- 
tórum Mártyrum tuórum Ná- 
boris et Felícis fiant grata 
Suffrágils: et quorum triüm- 
phis tuo nómini offerüntur, 
ipsórum digna perficiántur et 
mnéritis, Per Dóminum. 


AY the gifts of Thy peo- 

ple, we pray Thee, O 

Lord, be made pleasing by the 

favoring prayers of Thy holy 

martyrs, Nabor and Felix, and 

let these offerings which are 

made for their triumph, be also 

rendered worthy by their 
merits. Through our Lord, 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Postcommunion 


ATALÍTIIS Sanctórum tu- 

Óórum, quesumus, Dó- 
mine: ut, sacraménti münere 
vegetátl, bonis, quibus per 
tuam grátiam nunc fovémur, 
perífruámur etérnis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


N THE natal feast of Thy 

saints we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, that, being strength- 
ened by the gift of the sacra- 
ment, we may enjoy forever the 
good things with which, 
through Thy grace, we are now 
comforted. ‘Through our Lord, 


July 13—Ht. Anacletus, Pope, Martyr (Red) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Si díligis me, page 1302. 


July 14—$5t. Bonaventure, Confessor, Bishop, Doctor 
‘of the Church ( White) 


Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, with the Alleluia verse after the 


Gradual. 
Sacerdotes tui, page 1341. 


Offertory, Secret and Postcommunion, from the Mass 


July 15—$5t. dÓrnrp, Emperor of Germany, 
Confessor (White) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer . 


EUs, qui hodiérna die 
"beátum Henricum Con- 


36 


Who on this day 
remove ` blessed 


O as GOD, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1106 


Henry, Thy confessor, from the 
crown of an earthly empire to 
an everlasting kingdom, we 
humbly beseech Thee that, as, 
protected by the abundance of 
Thy grace, Thou didst enable 
him to overcome the tempta- 
tions of the world, so Thou 
make us, in imitation of him, 
to avoid the allurements of this 
world and to come with pure 
minds unto Thee. Through our 
Lord. 


JULY 16—OUR LADY OF MOUNT CARMEL 


fessórem tuum e terréni cül- 
mine impérii ad regnum etér- 
num transtulísti: te süpplices 
exorámus; ut, Sicut illum, 
grátie tue ubertate prevén- 
tum, illécebras seculi supe- 
rare fecísti, ita nos fácias, 
ejus imitatióne, mundi hujus 
blandiménta vitáre, et ad te 
puris méntibus perveníre. Per 
Dóminum. 


July 16—©ur Ladp of Mount Carmel (White) 


Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit 


ET us all rejoice in the 

Lord, celebrating a fes- 
tival in honor of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary, for whose sol- 
emnity the angels rejoice and 
join in praising the Son of God. 
Ps. 44, 2. My heart hath ut- 
tered a good word: I speak my 
works to the King. V. Glory. 


Cou omnes in Dó- 
mino, diem festum cele- 
brántes sub honére bedte 
Mariæ Virginis: de cujus so- 
lemnitáte gaudent Angeli, et 
colláudant Fílium Dei. Ps. 
44, 2. Eructávit cor meum ver- 
bum bonum: dico ego ópera 
mea Regi. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 


Gop, Who hast honored 

the Order of the most 
blessed Mary, ever a virgin, Thy 
: mother, with the special title 
of Carmel, graciously grant 
that we, who this day celebrate 
her commemoration with sol-. 
emn service, may, being pro- 
tected by her care, be worthy to 
attain to everlasting joys. Who 
livest. 


Lesson. 
Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


A: THE vine I have brought 
forth a pleasant odor, 


and my flowers are the fruit of 


EUS, qui beatissimæ sem- 
D per Vírginis et Geni- 
Ícis tue Mariæ singulári tí- 
tulo Carméli órdinem deco- 
rásti: concéde propitius; ut, 
cujus hódie, commemoratió- 
nem solémni celebrámus of- 
fício, ejus muniti presídiis, 
&d gáudia sempitérna perve- 
nire mereámur: Qui vivis. 


Wis. 24, 23-31 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiæ. 


cávi suavitátem odóris: 


e QUASI vitis fructifi- 
et flores mei, fructus honóris 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 16—OUR LADY OF MOUNT CARMEL 


et honestátis. Ego mater pul- 


chre dilectiónis, et timóris, 


et agnitiónis, et sanct# spei. 
In me grátia omnis vie et 
veritatis: in me omnis spes 
vite et virtütis. Transite ad 
me omnes qui concupiscitis 
me, et a generatiónibus meis 
implémini. Spíritus enim 
meus super mel. dulcis, et 
heréditas mea super mel et 
favum. Memória mea in gen- 
eratiónes sæculórum. Qui ed- 
unt me, adhuc esúrient: et 
qui bibunt me, adhuc sítient. 
Qui audit me, non confundé- 
tur: et qui operántur in me, 
non peccábunt. Qui elücidant 
me, vitam etérnam habébunt, 


1107 


honor and riches. I am the 


-mother of fair love, and of fear, 


and of knowledge, and of holy 
hope. In me is all grace of the 
way and of the truth, in me is 
all hope of life and of virtue. 
Come over to me, all ye that 
desire me, and be filled with my 
fruits; for my spirit is sweet 
above honey, and my inheri- 
tance above honey and the 
honeycomb. My memory: is 
unto everlasting generations. 
They that eat me, shall. yet 
hunger; and they that drink 
me, shall yet thirst. He that 
harkeneth to me shall not be 
confounded, and they that 
work by me shall not sin. They 
that explain me shall have life 
everlasting. T 


Gradual 


Benedicta et venerábilis es, 
Virgo María: que sine tactu 
pudóris invénta es Mater sal- 
vatóris. Y. Virgo Dei Génitrix, 
quem totus non capit orbis, 
in tua se clausit viscera factus 
homo. 


Allelüja, allelija. V. Per. te, 
Dei Génitrix, nobis est vita 
pérdita data: que de celo 
suscepísti prolem, et mundo 
genuísti Salvatórem. Allelija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Blessed and venerable art 
thou, O Virgin Mary, who, 
without spot, wast found the 
Mother of the Saviour. Y. Vir- 
gin Mother of God, He Whom 
the whole world containeth not, 
being made man, shut Himself 
in thy womb. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Mother 
of God, the life that had been 
lost was given us through thee, 
who didst receive thine off- 
spring from heaven, and didst 


. bring forth a Saviour unto the 


world. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 11, 27, 28 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
N ILL témpore: Loquénte 
Jesu ad turbas, extóllens 
vocem quadam  mülier de 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time: As Jesus 

was speaking to the 
multitudes, a certain woman 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1108 JULY 16—OUR LADY 


from the crowd, lifting up her 


voice, said to Him, Blessed is- 


the womb that bore Thee, and 
the breasts that gave Thee suck. 
But He said, Yea, rather, 
blessed are they who hear the 
word of God and Keep it. 


Creed, page 765. 


OF MOUNT CARMEL 


turba, dixit illi: Beátus ven- 
ter, qui te portávit, et übera 
que suxísti. At ille dixit: Qui- 
nímo beáti, qui áudiunt ver- 
bum Dei, et custódiunt illud. 


Offertory. Jer. 18, 20. 


Remember, O Virgin Mother, 
that thou speak good things for 
us in the sight of God, that He 
turn away His wrath from us. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Recordáre, Virgo mater, in 
conspéctu Dei, ut loquáris pro 
nobis bona, et ut avértat in- 
dignatiónem suam a nobis. 


Secret 


ANCTIFY, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the sacrifices we 
offer, and, by the most salu- 
tary intercession of blessed 
Mary, Mother of God, grant 
them to be effectual for our 
salvation. Through the same. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


ANCTÍFICA, Dómine, que- 

sumus, obláta libámina: 

et beátæ Dei Genitrícis Marie 

salubérrima intercessióne, no- 

bis salutária fore concéde. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


Communion 


. Most worthy queen of the 
world, Mary, ever a virgin, in- 
tercede for our peace and 
safety, who didst bring forth 
Christ, Our Lord, the Saviour 
of all, 


Regína mundi digníssima, 
Marfa Virgo perpétua, inter- 
céde pro nostra pace et salüte, 
que genuisti Christum Dómi- 
num Salvatórem ómnium. 


Postconimunion 


(D. the august intercession DJUVET DOS, quesumus, 
of Mary, Thy glorious Dómine, gloridse tue 


Mother, ever a virgin, help us, 
© Lord, that those whom it 


hath heaped with benefits ii 


may deliver from all perils and, 
by her tender kindness, make 
to be of one mind. Who livest. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


enitrícis, sempérque Vírginis 
Marie intercéssio veneránda: 
ut, quos. perpétuis cumulávit 
beneficiis, & cunctis periculis 
absolitos, sta fáciat pietáte 
concórdes: Qui vivis. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 18—ST. CAMILLUS OF LELLIS 


1109 


July 17—&. Alexius, Confessor (White) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Epistle. 1 Tim. 6, 6-12 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Timótheum. 


ARISSIME: Est questus 

A magnus pietas cum suf- 
ficiéntia. Nihil enim intüli- 
mus in hunc mundum: haud 
dübium quod nec auférre quid 
póssumus. Habéntes autem 
aliménta, et quibus tegámur, 
his conténti simus. Nam qui 
volunt divites fíeri, incidunt 
in tentatiónem, et in laqueum 
diáboli, et ‘desidéria multa 
inutilia, et nocíva: que mer- 
gunt hómines in intéritum, 


et perditiónem. Radix enim 


ómnium malórum est cupídi- 
tas: quam quidam appeténtes, 
erravérunt a fide, et inserué- 
runt se dolóribus multis. Tu 
autem, o homo Dei, hzc fuge: 
Sectáre vero justítiam, pietá- 
tem, fidem, caritátem, pati- 
éntiam, mansuetüdinem. Cer- 
ta bonum certamen fidei, ap- 
prehénde vitam etérnam. 


page 1 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul, the Apostle to 
Timothy. 


EARLY beloved: Godliness 

with contentment is 
great gain, For we brought 
nothing into this world, and 
certainly we can carry nothing 
out. But having food, and 
wherewith to be covered, with 
these we are content. For they 
that will become rich, fall into 
temptation, and into the snare 
of the devil, and into many un- 
profitable and hurtful desires, 
which drown men in destruc- 
tion and perdition. For covet- 
ousness is the root of all evils; 
which some desiring have erred 
from the Faith and have en- 
tangled themselves in many 
sorrows. But thou, O man of 
God, fly these things; and pur- 
sue justice, godliness, faith, 
charity, patience, meekness. 
Fight the good fight of faith; 
lay hold on eternal life. 


Sopa om. the Mass, Os justi meditabitur, of an. Abbot, 


July 18—$t. M of Lellis, dud (White) 
Double 


St. S»pmpborosa and her Children, Martyrs (Red) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


AJÓREM hac dilectiónem 
nemo habet, ut áni- 
mam suam ponat quis pro 
amicis suis. Ps. 40, 2. Beátus 


John 15, 13 


REATER love than this no 
man hath, that a man 
lay.down his life for his friends. 
Ps. 40, 2. Blessed is he that un- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1110 JULY 18—ST. CAMILLUS OF LELLIS 


derstandeth concerning the qui intélligit super egénum, 
needy and poor: the Lord will et pauperem: in die mala li- 
deliver him in the evil day. Y. berábit eum Dóminus. y. Gló- 
Glory. xia Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


Go», Who didst adorn 
blessed Camillus with a 


EUS, qui sanctum Camil- 
lum, ad animárum in 


Special gift of charity for the 
help of souls struggling in their 
last agony, pour upon us, we 
beseecb Thee, by his merits, the 
Spirit of Thy love, that in the 
hour of our death we may be 
worthy to overcome ihe enemy 
and attain unto the heavenly 
crown. Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs. 


extrémo agéne luctantium 
subsidium, singulári caritátis 
prerogativa decorásti: ejus, 
quaesumus, méritis spíritum 
nobis tue dilectiónis infünde; 
ut in hora éxitus nostri hos- 
tem vincere, et ad celéstem 
mereámur corónam perveníre. 
Per Dóminum. 


Prayer, God Who dost. 


permit, from the Mass Intret, page 1317. 
Epistle. 1 John 3, 13-18 


Lesson from ihe Epistle of 
blessed John the Apostle. 
EARLY beloved, Wonder 
not if the world hate 
you. We know that we have 
passed from death to life, be- 
cause we love the brethren. He 
that loveth not, abideth in 
death. Whosoever hateth his 
brother is a murderer: and you 
know that no murderer hath 
eternal life abiding in himself. 
In this we have known the 
charity of God, because He 
hath laid down His life for us: 
and we ought to lay down our 
lives for the brethren. He that 
hath the substance of this 
world, and shall see his brother 
in need, and shut up his bow- 
els from him, how doth the 
charity of God abide in him? 
My little children, let us not 


love in word nor iri tongue, but: 


in deed and in truth. 


Léctio Epistole beáti Jo- 
£nnis Apóstoli. 


ARISSIMI: Nolíte mirári, 
A si odit vos mundus. Nos 
Scimus, quóniam transláti su- 
mus de morte ad vitam, quó- 
niam dilfgimus fratres. Qui 
non díligit, manet in morte: 
omnis qui odit fratrem suum, 
homicída est. Et scitis, quó- 
niam omnis homicída non ha- 
bet vitam ætérnam in seme- 
típso manéntem. In hoc cog- 
nóvimus caritátem Dei, quó- 
niam ille ánimam suam pro 
nobis pósuit: et nos debémus 
pro frátribus ánimas pónere. 
Qui habüerit substántiam hu- 
jus mundi, et víderit fratrem 
suum necessitátem habére, et 
cláuserit víscera sua ab eo: 
quómodo cáritas Dei manet 
in eo? Filíoli mei, non diligá- 
mus verbo, neque lingua, sed 
Ópera et veritáte. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 18—ST. CAMILLUS OF LELLIS 


1111 


Gradual. Ps. 36, 30, 31 


Os justi meditábiur sapi- 
éntiam, et lingua ejus loqué- 
tur judícium. Y. Lex Dei ejus 
in corde ipsius: et non sup- 
Plantabüntur gressus ejus. 


Alleliija, allelüja. V. Ps. 111, 
1. Beátus vir, qui timet Dómi- 
num: in mandátis ejus cupit 
nimis. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


The mouth of the just shall 
meditate wisdom, and his 
tongue shall speak judgment. 
Y. The law of his God is in his 
heart; and his steps shall not 
be supplanted. 

Alleluia, alleluia. ¥. Ps. 
111, 1. Blessed is the man that 
feareth the Lord, he delights 
exceedingly in His command- 
ments. Alleluia. 


Gospel, This is My commandment, from the Mass of the Vigil 


of an Apostie, page. 1300. 


Offertory. 

In virtüte tua, Dómine, læ- 

tábitur justus, et super salu- 

tare tuum exsultábit vehe- 

ménter: desidérium ánimæ 
ejus tribuísti ei. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 20, 2, 3 


In thy strength, O Lord, the 
just shall exult and in Thy 
salvation he shall rejoice ex- 
ceedingly: Thou hast given 
him his heart’s desire. 


Secret 


é6st1a immaculáta, qua 

illud Dómini nostri 
Jesu Christi imménsæ cari- 
tátis opus renovámus, sit, 
Deus Pater omnípotens, sánc- 
to Camillo interccdénte, con- 
tra omnes córporis et 4nime 
infirmitates salutére remé- 
dium, et in extrémo agóne so- 
latium, et tutéla. Per eüm- 
dem Dóminum. i 


h AY this unspotted victim, 
with which we renew the 
great work of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ's infinite charity, be, 
through the intercession of 
blessed Camillus, our saving 
remedy against all infirmities 
of body and soul, and, in the 
last agony, our solace and pro- 
tection. Through the same. 


Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs, We offer Thee, O Lord, 


from ihe Mass Intret, page 1320. 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Matt. 25, 36, 40 


Infirmus fui, et visitástis I was sick and you visited 
me. Amen, amen dico vobis: Me: Amen, amen I say to you, 
quámdiu fecistis uni ex his as long as you did it to one of 
ifrátribus meis minimis, mihi these My least brethren, you 
fescístis. i - did it to Me, s 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1112 .JULY 20—ST. JEROME EMILIAN 


Postcommunion 


HROUGH this heavenly 
nourishment which we 
have received with pious devo- 
tion, in celebrating the solem- 
nity of blessed Camillus, Thy 
confessor, grant, we beseech 
"Thee, O Lord, that in the hour 
of.our death, refreshed by Thy 
sacraments, and. al our sins 
forgiven, we may deserve to be 
taken up, rejoicing, into the 
bosom of Thy mercy. Who liv- 
est. 
Commemoration of the Holy 


ER Hac celéstia alimén- 

ta, que sancti Camilli 
Confesséris tui solémnia cel- 
ebrántes, pia devotióne sus- 
cépimus: da, quesumus, Dó- 
mine: ut in hora mortis nos- 
tre sacraméntis refécti, et 
culpis ómnibus expiati, in si- 
num misericórdie tue læti 
suscipi mereámur: Qui vivis. 


Martyrs, Grant us we beseech 


Thee, O Lord, from the Mass Intret, page 1320. 


Concluding Prayers, page- 793. 


July 19—4$5t. Vincent de Paul, Confessor (White) 


; Double 
Mass, Justus ut palma, page 1352, except: 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst strengthen 
blessed Vincent with 


EUS, qui ad evangelizán- 
dum paupéribus et ec- 


apostolic virtue to preach the clesiástici drdinis decórem 
Gospel to the poor, and to pro- promovéndum, beátum Vin- 
mote the dignity befitting the .céntium apostólica virtüte ro- 
ecclesiastical order, grant, we borásti:. presta, quaesumus; 
beseech Thee, that we, who ut, cujus pia. mérita venerá- 
venerate his holy. merits, may mur, virtütum quoque instru- 
be instructed by the example.of ámur exémplis, Per zone: 
his virtues. Through our Lord. num. 


Gospel, The Lord appointed, from the Mass of St. Mark, 
April E page 989. 


July 20—4$5t. Jerome Emilian, c Confessor (White) 
Double 
St. Margaret, Martyr (Red) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Lam. 2, 11 


Y LIVER is poured out rrtsum est in terra je- 
upon the earth, for the - cur meum super con- 
destruction of the daughter of tritióne fíliæ pópuli mei, cum 
my people, when the child and deficeret párvulus et lactens 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 20—ST. JEROME EMILIAN 1118 
in platéis óppidi. Ps. 112, 1. the suckling fainted away in 
Laudáte, püeri, Dóminum: the streets of the city. Ps. 112, 
laudáte nomen Dómini. Y. 1. Praise the Lord, ye children: 


Gloria Patri. 


praise ye the name of the 
Lord. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS,  misericordiárum 
pater, per mérita et 
tercessiónem  beáti Hieró- 
nymi, quem órphanis adjutó- 
rem et patrem -esse voluísti: 
concéde; ut spíritum adop- 
tiónis, quo fílii tui nomináàmur 
et sumus, fidéliter custodiá- 
mus. ind Dóminum. 


cop, the Father of mer- 

cies, grant, by the inter- 
cession of blessed Jerome, 
whom Thou didst will to be the 
helper and father of orphans, 
that. we may faithfully guard 
the spirit of adoption whereby 
we are both in name and reality 
Thy children. Through our 
Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Margaret. Prayer from the Mass Me 


exspectaverunt, page 1363. 
Lesson. 
Léctio Isafe Prophéte. 


ac dicit Dóminus: 

Frange esuriénti panem 
tuum, et egénos, vagósque in- 
duc in domum tuam: cum 
videris nudum, óperi eum, et 
carnem tuam ne despéxeris. 
Tunc erümpet quasi mane 
lumen tuum, et sánitas tua 
cítius oriétur, et antefbit fá- 
ciem tuam justitia tua, et 
glória Dómini cólliget te. 
Tune invocábis, et Dóminus 
exáudiet: clamábis, et dicet: 
Ecce adsum; si abstileris de 
médio tui caténam, et desferis 
extendere digitum, et loqui 
quod non prodest. Cum ef- 
füderis esuriénti ánimam tu- 
am, et ánimam afilictam re- 
pléveris, oriétur in ténebris 


lux tua, et ténebre tue erunt. 


Sicut merídies. Et réquiem 
tibi dabit Dóminus semper, et 
implébit splendóribus ánimam 


Is. 58, 7-11 


Lesson from Isaias the 
Prophet. 
Hus said the Lord: Deal 
thy bread to the hungry, 
and bring the needy and the 
harborless into. thy house: 
when thou shalt see one naked, 
cover him, and despise not thy 
own flesh. Then shall thy light 
break forth as the morning, 
and thy health shall speedily 
arise, and thy justice shall go 
before thy face, and the glory 
of the Lord shall gather: thee 
up. Then shalt thou call, and 
the Lord shall hear: thou shalt 
cry, and He shall say, Here I 
am. If thou wilt take away the 
chain out of the midst of thee, 
and cease to stretch out the 
finger, and to speak that which 
profiteth not. When thou shalt 
pour out thy soul to the hun- 
gry, and shalt satisfy the af- 
flicted soul, then shall thy light 
rise up in darkness, and thy. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1114 JULY 20—ST. JEROME EMILIAN 

darkness shall be as the noon- tuam, et ossa tua liberabit, et 
day. And the Lord will give eris quasi hortus irriguus, et 
thee rest continually, and will sicut fons aquárum, cujus non 
fil thy soul with brightness, defíciens aque. 

and deliver thy bones: and 

thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a fountain of 


water whose waters shall not fail. 


Gradual. Prov. 5, 16 


Let thy fountains be con- 
veyed abroad, and in the streets 
divide thy waters. Y. Accep- 
lable is the man that showetn 
mercy and lendetb, he order- 
eth his words with judgment; 
because he shall not be moved 
forever. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 111,5, 
6. He hath distributed, he hath 
given to the poor; his justice 
remaineth forever and ever. 
Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Derivéntur fontes tui foras, 
et in platéisaquas tuas divide. 
y. Jucindus homo, qui mi- 
serétur, et cómmodai: dis- 
pónet sermónes suos in judí- 
cio, quia in ætérnum non 
commovébitur. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 111, 
5, 6. Dispérsit, dedit paupéri- 
bus: jüstítia ejus manet in 
seculum saeculi. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Matt. 19, 13-21 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Little chil- 

dren were presented to 
Him, that He should impose 
hands upon them, and pray. 
And the disciples rebuked them. 
But Jesus said to them, Suffer 
the little children, and forbid 
them not to come to Me; for 
the kingdom of heaven is for 
such, And when He had im- 
posed hands upon them, He de- 
parted from thence. And be- 
hold one came to Him, and said 
to Him, Good master, what 
good shall I do, that I may have 
life everlasting? Who said to 
him, Why askest thou Me con- 
cerning good? One is good, 


"BR Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Matthaeum. 


I. ILLO témpore: Obláti 
sunt Jesu párvuli ut 
manus eis impóneret, et orá- 
ret. Discípuli autem incre- 
pábant eos. Jesus vero ait eis: 
Sinite párvulos, et nolíte eos 
prohibére ad me veníre: tá- 
lium est enim regnum cæló- 
rum, Et cum imposuisset eis 
manus, áblit inde. Et ecce 
unus accédens, ait illi: Ma- 
gíster bone, quid boni fáciam, 
ut hábeam vitam. ætérnam? 
Qui dixit ei: Quid me in- 
térrogas de bono? Unus est 
bonus, Deus. Si autem vis ad 
vitam ingredi, serva mandáta. 
Dicit illi: Que? Jesus autem 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 20—ST. JEROME EMILIAN 


dixit: Non homicídium fácies: 


Non adulterabis: Non facies. 


furtum: Non falsum testimó- 
nium dices: Honóra patrem 
tuum, et matrera tuam, et dí- 
liges próximum tuum Sicut 
teípsum. Dicit illi adoléscens: 
Omnia hac custodívi a juven- 
tite mea: quid adhuc mihi 
deest? Ait ilii Jesus: Si vis 
perféctus esse, vade, vende 
que habes, et da paupéribus, 
et habébis thesáuxum in celo: 
et veni. séquere me. . 


1115 


God. But if thou wilt enter into 
life, keep the commandments, 
He said to Him, Which? And 
Jesus said, Thou shalt do no 
murder, thou shalt shalt not 
commit adultery, thou shalt 
not steal, thou shalt not bear 
false witness, honor thy father 
and thy mother; and thou shalt 
love thy neighbor as thyself. 
The young man saith to Him, 
AH these things have I kept 
from my youth; what is yet 
wanting to me? Jesus saith to 
Liz, Tf thou wilt be perfect, go, 


sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt - 
have treasure in heaven: and come, follow Me. 


Offertory. Tob. 12, 12 


Quando orábas cum lácry- When thou didst pray with 
mis, et sepeliébas mórtuos, et tears, and didst bury the dead, 


derelinquébas prándium tu- 
um, et mórtuos abscondébas 
per diem in domo tua, et 
nocte sepeliébas eos: ego ób- 
tuli oratiónem tuam Dómino. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


and didst leave thy dinner, and 
hide the dead by day in thy 
house, and bury them by night, 
Ioffered thy prayer to the Lord. 


Secret 


LEMENTÍSSIME Deus, qui, 

véteri hómine consümp- 
to, novum secündum te. in 
peáto Hierónymo creáre dig- 
nátus es: da, per mérita ip- 
Síus; ut nos páriter renováti, 
hane placatiónis hóstiam in 
odórem tibi suavíssimum of- 
ferámus. Per Dóminum. 


ost merciful God,. Who, 
having destroyed the old 
man, didst vouchsafe to create 
in blessed Jerome a new man 
according to Thee, grant by 
his merits that we, renewed in 
like manner, may offer this 
sacrifice of propitiation for an 
odor of sweetness unto Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Margaret from the Mass, Me exspec- 


taverunt, page 1366. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Religio munda, et immacu- 


Jas. 1, 27 


Religion clean and unde- 


láta apud Deum et Patrem, filed before God and the Father, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1116 JULY 21—ST. PRAXEDES 

js this: to visit the fatherless hsc est: visitáre pupíllos, et 
and widows in their tribula~ víduas in tribulatióne eórum, 
tion, and to keep one's self un- et immaculátum se custodire 


spotted from this world. 


ab hoc seculo. 


Postcommunion 


EFRESHED With the bread 

. of angels we humbly ask. 
of Thee, O Lord, that we, who 
joyfully celebrate the annual 
commemoration of blessed Je- 
rome, Thy confessor, may also 
imitate his example and be.en- 
abled to obtain a most abun- 
dant reward in Thy kingdom. 
"Through our Lord. 


NGELORUM. pane refécti 

te, Dómine, supplici- 
ter deprecámur: ut, qui án- 
nuam beáti Hierónymi Con- 
fessóris tui memóriam cele- 
bráre gaudémus; ejüsdem éti- 
am et exémplum imitémur, et 
amplíssimum in regno tuu 
premium obtinére valeámus. 
Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Margaret, from the Mass, Me exspec- 
taverunt, page 1366. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


July 21—$5t. Praxedes, Virgin (White) 
Simple 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 118, 46, 47 
SPOKE of Thy testimonies oqUÉBAR de testimóniis 
before kings, and I was not tuis in conspéctu re- 


ashamed: I meditated also on gum, et non confundébar: et 
Thy commandments, which I meditábar in mandátis tuis, 
Joved exceedingly. Ps. 118, que diléxi nimis. Ps. 118, 1. 
1. Blessed are the undefiled in Beáti immaculáti in via: qui 
the way, who walk in the law ámbulant in lege Dómine. Y. 
of the Lord. Y. Glory. Glória Patri, 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer from the Mass, Vultum tuum, page 1374. ` 
£pistle from the Mass, Vultum tuum, page 1374. 


Gradual. Ps. 44, 8 


Thou hast loved justice and ^ Dilexísti justitiam, et odisti 
hated iniquity. Y. Therefore, iniquitátem. — Y.  Proptérea 
God, thy God, hath anointed unxit te Deus, Deus tuus, óleo 
thee with the oil of gladness. letitie. 

Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps, 44,5. — Allelüja, allelüja. V. Ps, 44, 
With they comeliness and thy 5. Spécie tua, et pulchritudine 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 22—ST. MARY MAGDALEN 


tua inténde, próspere procéde 
et regna. Allelija: : 


1117 


beauty, set. out, proceed pros- 
perously, and reign, Alleluia. 


"Gospel from the Mass, Vultum tuum, page 1377. 


Offertory. 


 Diffüsa est grátia in lábiis 
tuis: proptérea benedixit te 

Deus in etérnum, et in secu- 
lum saeculi. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767.. 


P. Se 44, 3 

Grace is poured abroad in 
thy lips; therefore hath God 
blessed thee forever, and for 
ages of ages. 


Secret,.Communion, Posteommunion from thà Mass, Vultum 


tuum, page 1378. 


"duly 22t. Mary Magvater, (White) 


jas Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. ` 


E Introit. Ps. 118, 95, 96 


QE EXSPECTAVÉRUNT pèc- 
catéres; ut pérderent 

me: testinióni& tua, Domine, 
intelléxi: omnis consummati- 
ónis vidi finem: latum man- 
dátum tuum nimis. Ps; 118, 
1. Beáti immaculáti in via: 


qui 4ambulant in lege Dómini.. 


Y. Glória Patri. 


HE wicked have waited for 
me to destroy me; I have 
understood Thy testimonies, O 
Lord: I have seen an end of all 
perfection: Thy commandment. 
is exceedingly broad, Ps: 118, 
1. Blessed are the undefiled in 
the way: who walk in the law 
of the Lord. V. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer. 


BEATE Marte Magdalénz, 
quesumus, Dómine, 
Suffrágiis adjuvémur: cujus 
précibus -exoratus, quatridüá- 
num fratrem Lázarum vivum 


AY we be assisted, O 
Lord, we beseech ‘Thee, 
by the intercession of blessed 
Mary Magdalen for whom, 
moved by her prayers, Thou. 


ab inferis resuscitásti: Qui didst bring back her brother 
vivis. ^ Lazarus, then dead for four 
days, alive from the grave, Who 
livest. 
Lesson. Cant. 3, 2-5; 8,6,7 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


vncAM, et cireufbo civitá- 
tem; per vicos et pla- 
téas queram quem díligit áni- 


Lesson from the book of Wis- 
dom. . 
WILL rise and will go about 
ihe city: in the streets and 
the broad ways I will seek Him: - 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1118 


Whom my soul loveth: I sought 


Him, and I found Him not. 


The watchmen who keep the 
city found me. Have you seen 
Him Whom my soul loveth? 
When I had a little passed by 
them, I found Him Whom my 
soulloveth; I held Him, and I 
will not let Him go till I bring 
Him into my mother's house, 
and into the chamber of her 
that bore me. I adjure you, O 
daughters of Jerusalem, by the 
roes and harts of the fields, 
that you stir not up, nor wake 
my beloved till she please. Put 
me as a seal upon Thy heart, as 


a seal upon Thy arm; for love. 


is strong as death, jealousy is 
hard as hell; the lamps thereof 
are lamps of fire and flames. 
Many waters cannot quench 
charity, neither can the floods 
drown it; if a man shall give 
all the substance of his house 
for love, he shall despise it as 
nothing. 


Gradual. 


Thou hast loved justice, and 
hated iniquity. V. Therefore 
God, thy God, hath anointed 
thee with the oil of gladness. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Grace is 
poured abroad in thy lips: 
therefore hath God blessed 
thee forever. Alleluia, ` 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


JULY. 22—ST. MARY MAGDALEN 


ma mea: quesivi illum, et non 
invéni. Invenérunt me vígiles, 
qui custódiunt civitátem. Num 
quem diligit ánima mea, vi- 
dístis? Páululun cum per 
transissem eos, invéni quem 
diligit ánima mea: ténui eum, 
nec dimittam, donec intro- 
dücam illum in domum matris. 
meg, et in cubiculum genitri- 
cls mez, Adjüro vos, fílie 
Jerüsalem, per cápreas, cer- 
vósque campórum, ne susci- 
tétis, neque evigilare faciátis 
diléctam, donec ipsa velit. 
Pone me ut signáculum super 
cor tuum, ut signáculum su- 
per bráchium tuum: quia for- 
tis est ut mors diléctio dura 
sicut inférnus emulatio: lám- 
pades ejus, lámpades ignis, 
atque flammárum. Aque mul- 
te non potuérunt exstínguere 
caritátem, nec flümina óbru- 
ent illam: si séderit homo om- 
nem substántiam domus sue 
pro dilectióne, quasi nihil 
despiciet eam, 


Ps. 44, 8 


Dilexísti justitiam, et odísti 
iniquitátem. VY.  Proptérea 
unxit te Deus, Deus tuus, 
óleo lætítiæ. . 

Allelüja, allelüja. V. Dif- 
füsa est grátia in lábiis tuis: 
proptérea benedixit te Deus 
in etérnum. Allelüja. 


Gospel, At that time, one of the Pharisees, from the Mass for 
Thursday in Passion Week, page 377. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


The daughters of kings in 
thy glory: the queen stood on 


Ps. 44, 10 


Fílie regum in honóre tuo: 
Adstitit regina a dextris tuis 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 23—ST. APOLLINARIS 1119 


in vestitu deauráto, circüm- thy right hand in gilded cloth- 
data varietáte. ing, surrounded with variety. 
- Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


: Secret 
ÓNERA nostra, quesum-~ AY the glorious merits of 
us, Dómine,  beáte blessed Mary Magdalen, 


Marie Magdaléne. gloriésa we beseech Thee, O Lord, ren- 
mérita tibi reddant accépta: der our gifts acceptable to 
eujus oblatiónis obséquium Thee, as Thine only-begotten 
unigénitus Fílius tuus clem- Son mercifully received the ho- 
énter suscépit impénsum: mage of the offering which she 
Qui tecum. presented. Who with Thee. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Ps. 118, 121 
Feci judicium et justitiam, I have done judgment and 
Dómine, non calumniéntur justice, O Lord, let not the 
mihi ‘supérbi: ad ómnia proud calumniate me; I was 
mandata tua dirigébar, om- directed to all Thy command- 
nem viam iniquitatis ódio ments: I have hated all wicked 
hábui. Ways. 


Postcommunion 
"UMPTO, güssumus, Dó- “gow avine received the sole 
mine, ünico ac salutári n remedy of salvation, Thy 
remédio, córpore et sánguine body and precious blood, O 
tuo pretióso: ab ómnibus ma- Lord, we beseech Thee, that, 
lis, sancte Marie Magdaléne by the intercession of St. Mary 
patrociniis, eruámur: Qui Magdalen, we may be deliv- 
vivis. ered from, all evils. Who livest. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


July 2—$t. Apollinaris, Bishop, Martyr. (Red) 
s Double - 
St. Liborius, Bishop, Confessor (White) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. ‘Dan. 3, 84, 87 

ACERDÓTES Dei, benedicite ve priests of the Lord, 

Déminum: sancti, et bless the Lord: O ye holy 
humiles corde, laudáte Deum. and humble of heart, praise 
Dan. 3, 57. Benedícite, ómnia God. Dan. 3, 57. All ye works 
ópera Dómini, Dómino: lau- of the Lord, bless the Lord, 
date et superexaltáte eum in praise and exalt Him above all 
secula. V. Glória Patri. for ever. Y Glory. 

Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1120 


Prayer 


cop, the rewarder of faith- 

ful souls, Who hast con- 
secrated this day to the mar- 
tyrdom of blessed Apollinaris, 
Thy priest, grant us, Thy ser- 
vants, we beseech Thee, that, 
as we observe his venerable 
feast, we may obtain forgive- 
ness through his prayers. 
Through our Lord: > 


JULY 23—ST. APOLLINARIS 


EUS, fidélium remunerá- 


tor animárum, qui hunc : 


diem beáti Apollináris sacer- 
dótis tui martyrio consecrás- 
ti: tríbue nobis, quaesumus, 
fámulis tuis: ut, cujus vener- 
ándam celébrámus ‘festivita- 
tet, précibus ejus indulgén- 
tiam consequámur..' "Per Dó- 
' minum. 


Commemoration of .St. Liborius, Prayer from the Mass 


Statuit el, page 1337. 


Epistle. 1 Peter 5, 1-11. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle. 
EARLY beloved, The an- 


cients that are among 


you I.beseech, who am myself 
also an ancient and a witness 
of the sufferings of Christ; as 
also a partaker of that glory 
which is to be revealed in time 
to come; feed the flock of God 
which. is among you, taking 
care of it not by constraint, but 


villingly according to God; not 
for filthy lucre's sake, but vol- 


untarily; neither as lording it 
over the elergy but belng made 
a pattern of tbe flock from the 
heart: and when the Prince of 
pastors shall appear, you shall 
receive a never-fading crown 
of glory. In like manner, ye 


young men, be subject to the: 


ancients: and do ye all insin- 
uate humility one to another; 
for God resisteth the proud, 
but to the humble He giveth 
grace. Be you humbled there- 
fore under ‘the mighty hand of 
God, that He may exalt you in 
the time of visitation; casting 
all your care upon Him, for He 
hath care of you. Be sober and 
watch, because your adversary 


rig... communicator: 


Léctio Epistole beáti Petri 
Apóstoli . 
ARISSIMI: Senidres, qui 
(LA in vobis sunt, óbsecro, 
consénior et testis Christi 
passiónum: qui et ejüs, que 
in futüro revelánda est, gló- 
páscite 
qui in vobis est gregem Dei, 
providéntes non coácte, sed 
spontanee secündum Deum: 
neque turpis lucri grátia, sed 


voluntárie: neque ut domin- 


antes in cleris, sed forma 


facti gregis ex ánimo. Et cum’ 


apparüerit princeps pastór- 
um, percipiétis immarcesci- 
bilem glórie corónam. Simil- 
iter adolescéntes, sübditi es- 
tóte senióribus. Omnes au- 
tem invicem humilitatem ìn- 
Sinuáte: quia Deus supérbis 
resístit, humilibus autem, dat 
grátiam. Humiliàmini ígitur 
sub poténti manu Dei, ut vos 
exdltet in témpore visita- 
tiónis: omnem sollicitüdinem 
vestram projiciéntes in eum, 
quóniam ipsi cura est de vo- 
bis. Sébrii estóte, et vigiláte: 
quia adversárius vester diáb- 
olus tamquam leo rigiens 
circuit, quaerens quem dé- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


‘shatter Meret ATER - 


mcd 


: Miana, Peeters, 


JULY 23—ST. APOLLINARIS 


voret: cui resístite fortes in 
fide: sciéntes eámdem pas- 
Siónem ei, que in mundo est, 
vestre fraternitáti fíeri. Deus 
autem omnis gratiz, qui vo- 
cévit nos in ztérnam suam 
glóriam jn Christo Jesu, mó- 
dicum passos ipse perfíciet, 
confirmábit, solidabitque. Ipsi 
glória, et impérium, in secula 
seculérum: Amen.. 


1121 


the devil, as & roaring Hon, 


-goeth about, seeking whom he 


may devour. Whom resist ye, 
strong in faith, knowing that 
the same affliction befalls your 
brethren who are in the world. 
But the God of all grace, Who 
hath called us unto His eternal 
glory in Christ Jesus, after you 
have suffered a little, will Him- 
self perfect you,, and confirm 
you, and establish you. To Him 


be glory and empire for ever and ever. Amen, 


Gradual. Ps. 88, 21-23 


Invéni David servum me- 
um, óleo sancto meo unxi 
eum: manus enim mea aux- 
iliábitur. ei, et  bráchium 
meum confortabit eum. y. 
Nihil profíciet inimícus in eo, 
et fílius iniquitátis non nocé- 
bit ei. 

Allelüja, allelüja. V. Ps. 109, 
4. Jurávit Dóminus, et non 
penitébit eum: Tu es sacér- 
dos in etérnum secündum 
érdinem "Melchísedech. - Alle- 
lája. i 

` Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


I have found David My ser- 
vant, with My holy oil I have 
anointed him: for My hand 
shall help. him, and My arm 
shall strengthen him. JY. The 
enemy shall have no advantage 
over him; nor the son of in- 
iquity have power to hurt him. 

Alleluia, alleuia. Y. Ps. 109, 
4. The Lord hath sworn, and 
He wil not repent: thou art a 
priest forever according to the 
order..of Melchisedech. Ale- 


. luia. 


Gospel. Luke 22, 24-30 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
y ILLO témpore: Facta est 
conténtio inter discípulos, 
quis eórum  viderétur esse 
major. Dixit autem eis Jesus: 
Reges géntium dominántur 
eórum; et qui potestátem ha- 
bent.super eos, benéfici vo- 
cántur. Vos autem non sic: 
Sed qui major est in vobis, fiat 


Sicut minor: et.qui precéssor - 


est, sicut ministrátor. Nam 
quis major est, qui recümbit, 
&n qui minístrat? nonne qui 


"B Continuation of tbe holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, There was a 

strife among the disci- 

ples, which of them should 
seem to be greater. And Jesus 
said to them, The kings of the 
gentiles lord it over them; and 
they that have : power -over 
them, are called beneficent. But 
you not so; but he that is the 
greater among you, let him be- 
come as the younger; and he 
that is the leader, as he that 
serveth. For .which is greater, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1122 


he that sitteth at table; or he 
that serveth? Is not he that sit- 
teth at table? but Iam in the 
midst of you, as he that serv- 
eth. And you are they who have 
continued with Me in My temp- 
tations: and I dispose to you, 
as My Father hath disposed to 
Me, a kingdom: that you may 
eat and drink at My. table in 
My kingdom, and may sit upon 
thrones, judging the twelve 
tribes of Israel. : 


JULY 29—8ST. APOLLINARIS 


recümbit? Ego autem in mé- 


:dio vestrum sum, sicut qui 


ministrat. Vos. autem estis, 
qui permansistis mecum in 
tentatiónibus meis: et ego 
dispóno vobis, sicut dispósuit 
mihi Pater meus regnum, ut 
edátis, et bibátis super men- 
sam meam in regno meo: et 
sedeátis super thronos, judi- 
cántes duódecim tribus Israel. 


Offertory. Ps. 88, 25 


My truth and My mercy shail 
be with him: and in My name 
shall his horn be exalted. 


Offestory Prayers, page 767. 


Veritas mea, et miseri- 
cérdia mea cum ipso: et in 
némine meo PXMAAEIUE 
cornu ejus. 


Secret 


 RACIOUSLY look down upon 


these gifts, O Lord, which. 


ÉsP1cE, Dómine, propít- 
ius super hee. munera: 


we bring in remembrance of que pro beáti Sacerdótis et 
Thy blessed priest and martyr, Mártyris tui Apollináris com- 
Apollinaris, and offer up for memoratióne deférimus, et 
our offenses. ERE our Lord. pro nostris offensiónibus im- 
.molámus..Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Liborius from the Mass Statuit ei, 


page 134 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Matt. 25, 20-21 


Lord, Thou deliveredst to me 
five talents, behold I have 
gained other five over and 
above. Well done, good and 


faithful servant; because thou. 


hast been faithful over a few 
things, I will get thee over 
many things: enter thou into 
the. joy of thy Lord. 


Dómine, - quinque talénta 
tradidisti mihi: ecce ála 
quinque superlucrátus sum. 
Euge serve bone et fidélis, quia 
in pauca fuísti fidélis, supra 
mulia te constituam: intra in’ 
gáudium Démini tui. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 25—ST. JAMES THE GREATER, APOSTLE 1123 


Postcommunion 
UA sancta suméntes, que~ /ECEIVING Thy holy mys- 
sumus, Dómine, ut teries, we beseech Thee, 


beáti Apollináris nos fóveant O Lord, that the continued 
Continuata presidia: quia protection of blessed Apolli- 
non déstinis propítius intuéri, naris may comfort us; for Thou 
Quos tálibus auxiliis concés- dost not cease to regard mer- 
seris adjuvári Per Dóminum, cifully those to whom Thou 
i ' hast granted such .aids for 
their assistance. "Through our 
Lord. 
Commemoration of St. “Liborius from the Mass Statuit el, 
page 1340. ! 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


July 24—Q e "Vigil ot St. James, Apostle (Purple) 
St. Christina, Virgin, Martyr (Red). 


Mass, Ego autem, of P Vigil, page 1299. . 

Commemoration of St. Christina, from the Mass Me exspec- 
taverunt, page 1363, th additional prayers of our Blessed 
Lady, Concede nos, page 824. 


July 25—feast of St. James the eren Apostle, 
— (Red) 
Double of the Second Class 


St. Christopher, Martyr (Red) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit, Ps. 138, 17 


THI autem nimis honor- o ME Thy friends, O God, 

ati sunt amici tui, De- are made exceedingly 
us: nimis confortétus est honorable: their principality is 
principátus eórum. Ps. 138, exceedingly strengthened. Ps. 
1, 2. Dómine, probásti me, et 138, 1-2. Lord, Thou hast 
cognovísti me: tu cognovisti proved me, and known me; 
sessiónem meam, et resur- Thou hast known my sitting 
rectiónem meam. V. Glória down, and my rising up. JY. 
Patri. Glory. 

Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
STO, Dómine, plebi tuse E THOU, O Lord, the sanc- 
sanctificátor et custos: tifier, and the guardian 


ut, Àpóstoli tui Jacóbi munita of Thy people, so that, being 
presidiis, et conversatiéne defended by the protection of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1194 JULY 25—ST. JAMES THE GREATER, APOSTLE 


Thine apostle James, they may 
both please Thee by their con- 
duct and serve Thee with mind 
all untroubled. Through our 
Lord. 


tibi pláceat, et secüra mente 


'desérviat. Per Dóminum. 


In low Masses a commemoration is made of St. as: 
Prayer from the Mass In virtute, page 1309. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 4. 


Lesson from the. Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 


RETHREN, I think that 
God hath set forth us 
apostles the last, as it were 


men appointed to death: we. 


are made a spectacle to the 
world, and to angels, and to 
men. We are fools for Christ’s 
sake, but you are wise in Christ: 
we are weak, but you are 
strong: you are honorable, but 
we without honor. Even unto 


this hour we both hunger, and. 


thirst, and are naked, and are 
buffeted, and have no fixed 
abode, and we labor, working 
with our.own hands. We are 
reviled, and we bless: we are 
persecuted, and we suffer it: 
we are blasphemed, and we en- 
treat: we are made as the 
refuse of this world, the off- 
scouring of all even until now. 
I write not these things to con- 
found you: but I admonish you 
as my dearest children: for if 
you have ten thousand instruc- 
tors in Chrtst, yet not many 
fathers. For in Christ Jesus by 
the gospel I have begotten you. 


4, 9-15 


Iiko Epístolæ beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Puto, quod Deus 

nos Apóstolos novíssi- 
mos osténdit, tamquam morti 
destinátos: quia spectáculum 
facti sumus mundo, et An- 
gelis, et hominibus. Nos stulti 
propter Christum, vos autem 
prudéntes in Christo: nos 
infirmi, vos autem fortes: 
vos nobiles, nos autem ignó- 
biles. Usque in hanc horam 
et esurímus, et sitímus, et 
nudi sumus, et cólaphis czdi- 
mur, et instábiles sumus, et 
Jaborámus operántes mánibus 
nostris: maledícimur, et ben- 
edicimus: persecutiónem 
pátimur, et sustinémus: blas- 
phemámur, et obsecrámus: 
tamquam purgaménta hujus 
mundi.facti sumus, ómnium 
peripséma, usque adhuc. Non 
ut confandam vos, hee scribo, 


‘sed ut filios meos caríssimos 


móneo, Nam si decem millia 
pedagogórum  habeátis in 
Christo: sed non multos pa- 
tres. Nam in Christo Jesu per 
Evangélium ego vos génui. 


Gradual. Ps. 44, 17, 18 


Thou. shalt make them Constítues eos principes 
princes over all the earth: they super omnem terram: mém- 
shall remember Thy name, O ores erunt nóminis tui, Dó- 
“ord. Y. Instead of thy fath- mine. Y. Pro pátribus tuis 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 25—ST. JAMES THE GREATER, APOSTLE 1125 


nati sunt tibi filii: proptérea ers, sons are born to thee: 
Populi confitebüntur tibi. therefore shall people praise 
ihee. 

Allelaja, allelüja. V. Joan. Alleluia, alleluia, Y. John 15, 
15, 16.:Ego vos elégi de mun- 16.-I have chosen you out of 
do, ut eátis, et fructum the world, that you should go, 
afferétis: et fructus vester and should bring forth fruit, 
máneat. Allelüja. &nd your fruit should remain. 

Alleluia, 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763... 

Gospel, 'The Mother of the Sons, from the Mass of St. John: 
Before the Lateran Gate, E 6, page 1014.  . 


Creed, page 765. 


Dind»; Ps. 18, 5 


In omnem: terram exívit Their sound hath gone forth 
sonus eórum: et in fines:or- into all the earth; and their 
bis terre verba eórum. - words unto the ends of the 

world. , 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. ` 


Secret 
Oo pópuli tui, AY the holy sufferings: o; 
quesumus, Dómine, ALZ James, Thy blessed 
beáti Jàcóbi Apóstoli pássio apostle, commend the offeringe 
beaéta concíliet: et que nostris- of Thy people, we beseech Thee, 
non apte sunt méritis, fiant O Lord; and since they are not 
tibi plácite ejus depreca- worthy for any merits of ours 
tióne. Per Dóminum. ` let them be made pleasing to 
i 7 ' Thee by his prayers. Through 
our Lord. 
Commemoration of St. Christopher from the Mass m yirtute, 
page 1311. 
Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. Matt. 19; 28 


Vos, qui secüti estis me, You that have followed me 
sedébitis super sedes, judi- shall sit upon seats, judging the 
cántes duódecim tribus Israël. twelve tribes of Israel. 


Postcommunion 


EÁTI Apéstoli tui Jacobi, ssist us, O Lord, we be~ 
B quæsumus, Dómine, in- 4 Seech Thee, by the in- 
tercessióne nos ádjuva: pro tercession of Thy blessed apos- 
cujus festivitáte percépimus tle James, for whose festivity 
tua sancta letantes. ‘Per Dó- we have joyfully partaken of 
minum, Thy holy sacraments. Through 

eur Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1126 


JULY 26—ST. ANNE 


Commemoration of St. Christopher from the Mass In virtute, 


page 1312. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


July 26—$5t. Anne, Mother of Our Blessed Lady 
(White) 
Double of the Second Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 


ET US all rejoice in the 
Lord, celebrating a fes- 
tival-day in honor of blessed 
Anne; on whose solemnity the 
angels rejoice, and give praise 
to the Son of God. Ps. 44, 2. My 
heart hath uttered a good 
word: I speak my works to the 
King. Y. Glory. 


AUDEÁMUS Omnes in Dó- 
mino, diem festum cel- 
ebrántes sub honóre beate 
Annz: de cujus solemnitáte 
gaudent Angeli, et colláudant 
Fílium Dei. Ps. 44, 2. Eructá- 
vit cor meum verbum bonum: 
dico ego ópera mea Regi. Y. 
Glórie Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst vouchsafe 
to confer grace on blessed 


Anne that she might deserve.to. 


be made the mother of the 
mother of Thine only-begotten 
Son, mercifully grant that, as 
we celebrate her solemnity, we 
may be assisted with Thee by 
her patronage. Through the 
same. 


EUs, qui beáte Anne 

grátiam conférre dig- 
nátus es, ut Genitricis uni- 
géniti Fílii tui.mater éffici 
mererétur: concéde propítius; 
ut,cujus solémnia celebrámus, 
ejus apud te patrocíniis adju- 
vémur. Per eümdem Dómi- 
num. 


Epistle from the Mass Cognovi, page 1384. 


Gradual. 

Thou hast loved justice, and 
hated iniquity. Y. Therefore 
God, thy God, hath anointed 


thee with the oil of gladness. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 44, 3. 
Grace is poured abroad in thy 
lips: therefore hath God blessed 
thee forever. Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ps. 44, 8 

Dilexisti PEET TR et odís- 
ti iniquitátem. Y. Proptérea 
unxit te Deus, Deus tuus, óleo 
letitie. i 

Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 44, 
3. Diftüsa, est grátia in lábiis 
tuis: proptérea benedíxit te 
Deus in etérnum, Allelüja. 


Gospel from the Mass Me exspectaverunt, page 1365. 
Offertory. Ps. 44, 10 


The daughters of kings in 
Thy glory; the queen stood on 


Fílig regum in honóre tuo: 
astitit regina à dextris tuis in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


q 


JULY 28—STS. NAZARIUS AND COMPANIONS 1127 


vestítu deauráto, circtimdata 
varietáte. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Thy right hand in gilded cloth- 
ing, surrounded with variety. 


Secret 


ACRIFÍOUS . preséntibus, 

quaesumus, Dómine, pla- 
cátus inténde: ut per inter- 
cessiónem beáte Anne, que 
Genitrícis Fílii tui Dómini 
nostri Jesu Christi mater éx- 
stitit, et devotióni nostre pro- 
fíciant, et salüti. Per eüm- 
dem Dóminum. 


E APPEASED, O Lord, we be- 
B seech Thee, and look 
upon the sacrifices here before 
‘Thee, that, by the intercession 
of blessed Anne, who was the 
mother of Thy Son’s mother, 
Our Lord Jesus Christ, they 
may profit both for our devo- 
tion and our salvation, Through 
the same, 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Diffüsa est grátia in lábiis 
tuis: proptérea benedíxit te 
Deus in etérnum, et in secu- 
lum seculi. : 


Ps. 44, 3 
Grace is poured abroad in 
thy lips: therefore hath God 
blessed thee forever; and for 
ages of ages. 


Postcommunion 


IELÉSTIBUS sacraméntis 

vegetati, quesumus, Dó- 
mine Deus noster: ut, inter- 
cessióne beátæ Anne, quam 
Genitrícis Fílii tui matrem 
esse voluíst!, ad ætérnam Sa- 
litem perveníre mereámur. 
Per eümdem Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


OURISHED by 'Thy heavenly 

Sacraments, we beseech 
"Thee, O Lord, our God, that, by 
the intercession of blessed 
Anne, whom Thou didst will to 
be the mother of Thy Son’s 
mother, we may be worthy to 
attain unto everlasting salva- 
tion. Through the same, 


July 27—Ht.: Pantaleon, Martyr (Red) - 
Simple 
Mass, Letabitur, page 1312. 
July 28—$5ts. Maszarius, (Celsus, Wictor J, and 
Innocent J, Martyrs (Red) 


Semi-double 
Mass, Intret, page 1316, except: 


Prayer 


ANCTÓRUM tudrum nos, 
Dómine, Nazárii, Celsi, 


AY the confession of Thy 
saints, Nazarius, Celsus, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1128 JULY 28—STS. NAZARIUS AND COMPANIONS 


Victor, and Innocent, fortify Victóris et Innocéntii con- 
us, O Lord, and.may it, for the féssio beáta commüniat: et 
sake of their merits, obtain help fragilitáti nostre subsídium 
for our frailty. Through our dignánter exóret. Per Dó- 


Lord. 


minum. 


Lesson. Wis. 10, 17-20 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


op rendered to the just the 
wages of their labors, and 
conducted them in & wonderful 
Way; and He was to them for a 
covert by day, and for the light 
of stars by night; and He 
brought them through the Red 
Sea, and carried them. over 
through a great water: But 
their enemies He drowned in 
the sea, and from the depth of 
hell He brought them out. 
Therefore the just took the 
spoils of the wicked. And they 
sung to Thy holy name, O 
Lord, and they praised with one 


accord Thy victorious hand, O 


Lord, our God. 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


ÉppipiT Deus justis mer- 

cédem: labórum sud- 
rum, et dedüxit illos in via 
mirábili: et fuit illis in vela- 
ménto diéi, et in luce stellá- 
rum per noctem: transtulit 
illo per Mare Rubrum, et 
transvéxit illos per aquam ní- 
miam. Inimícos autem illó- 
rum demérsit in mare, et ab 
altitüdine inferórum edüxit 
illos. Ideo justi tulérunt spólia 
impiórüm, et decantavérunt, 
Dómine, nomen sanctum tu- 
um, et victrícem manum tu- 
am laudavérunt páriter, Dó- 
mine Deus noster. 


Secret 


Gu us, O almigbty God, 
that we may both please 
Thee with the offering and be 
vivified by the receiving of 
these gifts which we bring in 
honor of Thy saints, Nazarius, 
Celsus, Victor, and Innocent. 
Through our Lord. 


ONCEDE nobis, omnipo- 

tens Deus: ut his muné- 
ribus, que in sanctórum tuó- 
rum Nazárii, Celsi, Victóris et 
Innocéntii honóre deférimus, 
et te placemus exhíbitis, et 
nos vivificémur accéptis. Per 
Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


EING appeased by the in- 
tercession of Sts. Naz- 

arius, Celsus, Victor, and In- 
nocent, grant, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, that what we celebrate 


ANCTÓRUM Nazárii, Celsi, 
Victéris et Innocéntii, 
Dómine, intercessióne placá- 
tus: przsta, quesumus; ut, 
quod temporáli celebrámus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 290 —STS. FELIX II AND COMPANIONS 1129 


actiéne, perpétua salvatióne by a temporal service we may 
capiámus, Per Dóminum. .recelve for our eternal salva- 
tion. Through our Lord. 


July 29—$»t. Martha, Virgin (White) 
Semi-double 


Sts. Felix IF, Simplicius, Faustinus, and Beatrice 
Martyrs (Red) 


Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370, with Gospel, Jesus entered, from 
the Mass on the Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary, page 1160. 


For the commemoration of the Holy Martyrs. 


Prayer 
RÆSTA, quesumus, Démi- RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
mine; ut, sicut pópulus Lord, that as Thy Chris- 


christianus Mártyrum tuó- tian people joyfully unite in 
rum Felicis, Simplicii, Fau- celebrating the temporal solem- 
stini et Beatricis temporáli nity of Thy holy martyrs Felix, 
Solemnitáte  congáudet, ita Simplicius, Faustinus, and Bea- 
perfruátur stérna; et, quod trice, so they may enjoy it in 
votis célebrat, comprehéndat eternity, and may effectually 
efféctu. Per Dóminum. attain to what they celebrate 
in desire. Through our Lord. 


Secret 
ésrias tibi, Dómine, E BRING Thee Sacrifices, 
pro sanctórum Mártyr- O Lord, for the com- 


um tuórum Felicis, Simplícii, memoration of Thy holy mar- 
Faustini et Beatricis com- tyrs, Felix, Simplicius, Fausti- 
memoratióne deférimus: sup- nus, and Beatrice, humbly 
pliciter deprecantes; -ut in- praying that they may obtain 
dulgéntiam nobis páriter cón- for us at once forgiveness and 
ferant, et salütem. Per Dó- salvation. Through our Lord. 
minum. 


Postcommunion 
RÆSTA, quesumus, omní- RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
potens Deus: ut sanc- &lmighty God, that the 


tórum Mártyrum tuórum Fe- solemnity of Thy holy martyrs, 

licis, Simplícii, Faustini et Felix, Simplicius, Faustinus, 

Beatricis celéstibus mystériis and Beatrice, celebrated with 

celebráta solémnitas, indul- the sacred mysteries, may ac- 

géntiam nobis tue propitia- quire for us the grant of Thy 

tiónis acquirat. Per Dóminum. idi aig of our sins. Through 
our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1130 


July 30— Stg. Abdon 


JULY 30—STS. ABDON AND SENNEN 


and Sennen, Martyrs (Red) 
Simple ' 


'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit from the Mass, Intret, page 1316. 
Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer | 


Gop, Who didst bestow 

upon Thy saints, Abdon 
and Sennen, an abundance of 
grace to bring them to this 
glory, grant to Thy servants the 
pardon of their sins, that, by 
the interceding merits of Thy 
saints, they may deserve to be 
delivered from all adversities. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui sanctis tuis Ab- 

don et Sennen ad hanc 
glóriam veniéndi copiósum 
munus grátie contulísti: da 
fámulis tuis suórum véniam 
peccatórum; ut, Sanctérum 
tuórum intercedéntibus méri- 
tis, ab ómnibus mereántur 
adversitátibus liberári, Per 
Dóminum. 


Epistle. 2 Cor. 6, 4-11 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. - 


RETEREN: In all things let 
us exhibit ourselves as 
the ministers of God, in much 
patience, in tribulation, in ne- 
cessities, in distresses, in stripes, 
in prisons, in seditions, in la- 
bors, in watchings, in fastings, 
in chastity, in knowledge, in 
long-suffering, in sweetness, in 
the Holy Ghost, in charity un- 
feigned, in the word of truth, 
in the power of God: by the 
armor of justice on the right 
hand and on the left: by hon- 
or and dishonor: by evil report 
and good report: as deceivers, 
and yet true: as unknown, and 
yet known: as dying, and be- 
hold we live: as chastised, and 
not killed: as sorrowful, yet al- 
ways rejoicing: as needy, yet 
enriching many: as having 
nothing, and possessing all 
things. 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Exhibeámus nos- 

metípsos sicut Dei miní- 
Stros in multa patiéntia, in 
iribulatiónibus, in necessitá- 
tibus, in angüstiis, in plagis, 
in carcéribus, in seditiónibus, 
in labóribus, in vigiliis, in 
jejüniis, in castitáte, in scién- 
tia, in longanimitáte, in sua- 
vit&áte, in Spíritu Sancto, in 
caritáte non ficta, in verbo 
veritatis, in virtüte Dei, per 
arma justitie a dextris, et 
a sinfstris: per glóriam et 
ignobilitátem: per infámiam, 
et bonam famam: ut seduc- 
tores, et veráces: sicut qui 
ignótl, et cógniti: quasi mo- 
riéntes, et ecce vivimus: ut 
castigáti, et non mortificáti: 
quasi tristes, semper autem 
gaudéntes: sicut egéntes, 
multos autem locupletantes: 
tamquam nihil habéntes, et 
omnia possidéntes. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


JULY 30—STS. ABDON AND SENNEN 


Gradual. - 


Gloriósus Deus in sanctis 
suis: mirdbilis in majestate, 
fáciens prodígia. Y. Ex. 15, 6. 
Déxtera tua, Dómine, glori- 
ficáta est in virtüte: déxtera 
manus tua confrégit inimícos. 

Allelüja, allelüja. V. Sap. 
3, 1. Justórum ánimz in manu 
Dei sunt, et non tanget illos 
torméntum malítim, Allelija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


113I 


Ex. 15, 14 


God is glorious in His saints: 
wonderful in majesty, doing 
wonders, V. Ex. 15, 6. Thy right 
hand, O Lord, is glorified in 
strength: Thy right hand hath 
broken the enemies. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Wis. 
3, 1. The souls of just men are 
in the hands of God, nor shall 
the tortures of the wicked 
touch them. Alleluia, 


Gospel, Jesus seeing the multitudes, from the Mass on the 


feast of All Saints, page 1267. 


Offertory, from the Mass Intret, page 1319. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


ze hóstia, quesumus, 
Dómine, quam sanctó- 
rum Mártyrum tuórum nata- 
lítia recenséntes offérimus: et 
víncula nostre pravitátis ab- 
sélvat, et tum nobis miseri- 
cérdiz dona concíliet. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775 


Communion. 


Posuérunt mortália servó- 
rum tuórum, Dómine, escas 
volatílibus cœli, carnes sanc- 
tórum tuórum béstiis terre: 
secindum magnitüdinem þrá- . 
chii tui pósside filios morte 
punitórum. 


Av this offering, which we 
present, O Lord, 1n com- 
memorating the natal feast of 
Thy martyrs, both loose, we be- 
seech Thee, the bonds of our 
base desires and win for us the 
gifts of Thy mercy. Through 
our Lord. ` 


Ps. 78, 2, 11 


They have given the dead 
bodies of Thy servants, O Lord, 
to be meat for the fowls of the 
air, the flesh of Thy saints to 
the beasts of the earth: in the 
might of Thine arm, take Thou 
for Thine own the children of 
them that suffered death for 
Thee. 


Postcommunion 


ER hujus, Dómine, oper- 
ati6nem mystérii, et vitia 
nostra purgéntur: et, interce- 
déntibus sanctis Martyribus 


x THE Operation. of this 
mystery, O Lord, may 
our lives be purified, and, 
through the intercession of Thy 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1132 JULY 31—ST. IGNATIUS 


martyrs, Abdon and Sennen, tuis Abdon et Sennen, justa 
our just desires have fulfill- desidéria compleántur. Per 
ment. Through our Lord. Dóminum, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


July 31—$5t. Jgnatius of Lopola, Confessor (White) 


Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Philipp. 2, 10, 11 


N THE name of Jesus let 
T every knee bow, of things 
in heaven, on earth, and under 
the earth: and let every tongue 
confess that the Lord Jesus 
Christ is in the glory of God 
the Father. Ps. 5, 12, 13. All 
they that love Thy name shall 
glory in Thee: for Thou wilt 
bless the just. Y. Glory. 


N NÓMINE Jesus omne gen- 
I uflectátur, celéstium, ter- 
réstrium, et infernórum: et 
omnis lingua confiteatur, quia 
Dóminus Jesus Christus in 
glória est Dei Patris. Ps. 5, 
12, 13. Gloriabuntur in te om- 
nes, qui díligunt nomen tu- 
um: quóniam tu benedíces 
justo. Y. Gloria Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who, to spread 

abroad the greater glory 
of Thy name, didst, through 
blessed Ignatius, strengthen the 
Church militant with a new 
reinforcement, grant that we, 
who are fighting on earth by 
his help and after his example, 
may deserve to be crowned with 
him in heaven. Through our 
Lord. 


page 1313. 


EUS, qui ad majórem tui 
D nóminis glóriam prop- 
agándam, novo per beátum 
Ignátium subsidio militántem 
Ecclésiam roborásti: concéde; 
ut, ejus auxílio et imitatióne 
certántes in terris, coronári 
cum ipso mereámur in colis. 
Per Dóminum. 


Epistle, Dearly beloved, be mindful, from the Mass Lætábitur, 


Gradual. Ps. 91, 13, 14 


The just shall flourish like 
the palm-tree; he shall grow 
up like the cedar of Libanus in 
the house of the Lord. Y, To 
Show forth Thy mercy in the 
morning and Thy truth in the 
night. 


Justus ut palma florébit: 
sicut cedrus Libáni multipii- 
cábitur in domo Dómini. Y. 
Ad annuntiándum mane mis- 
ericórdiam tuam, et veritá- 
tem tuam per noctem. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUGUST 1—ST. PETER'S CHAINS 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Jac. 1, 
12. Beátus vir qui suffert ten- 
tatiónem: quóniam, cum pro- 
bátus füerit, accipiet coró- 
nam vite. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1133 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. James 1, 
12. Blessed is the man that en- 
dureth temptation; for when 
he hath been proved, he shall 
receive the crown of life. Alle- 
huie. f 


Gospel, The Lord appointed, from the Mass of St. Mark, April 


25, page 989. 
Offertory. 


ÉRITAS mea, et miseri- 
córdia mea cum ipso: 


et in nómine meo exaltábitur 
cornu ejus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. . 


Ps. 88, 25 
Y TRUTH and My mercy 
shall be with him: and 
in My name shall his horn 
be exalted, 


u Secret : 
DSINT, Dómine Deus, 0^ the kind intercessions 
oblatiónibus ^ nostris of St. Ignatius be with 


sancti Igndtii benígna suffrá- 
gia: ut sacrosáncta niystéria, 
in quibus omnis sanctitátis 
fontem constituísti, nos quo- 
que in veritáte sanctificent. 
Per Dóminum. 


our offerings, O Lord God, that 
the most holy mysteries, in 
which Thou hast established 
the fountain of all sanctity, 
may in very truth sanctify us 
likewise. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Ignem veni míttere in ter- 
ram: et quid volo, nisi ut ac- 
cendátur? 


Luke 12, 49 

I am come. to send fire upon 
the earth, and what will I but 
that it be enkindled? 


Postcommunion 


AUDIS hóstia, Dómine, 
quam pro sancto Igná- 

tio gratias agéntes obtülimus: 
ad perpétuam nos majestátis 


tue laudatiónem, ejus inter-. 


cessióne, perdücat. Per Dó- 
minum. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


AY ihe sacrifice of praise, 

O Lord, . which with 
thanksgiving we have. offered 
Thee, in honor of St. Ignatius, 


bring us, by his intercession, to 


the everlasting praise of Thy 
majesty. Through our Lord. 


August 1—$5t. Peter’s Chains, (White) 
Double Major 
The Holp Machabees, Martyrs 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1134 


Introit. 


ow I know in very deed, 

that the Lord hath sent 

His angel and hath delivered 

me out of the hand of Herod, 

and from all the expectation of 

the people of the Jews. Ps. 138, 

1, 2.. Lord, Thou hast proved 

me, and known me: Thou hast 

known my sitting down, and 
my rising up. V. Glory. 


AUGUST 1—ST. PETER'S CHAINS 


Acts 12, 11 


unc scio vere, quia misit 

Dóminus Angelum su- 
um: et eripuit me de manu 
Heródis, e£ de omni exspec- 
tatióne plebis Judeórum. Ps. 
138, 1, 2. Dómine, probásti me, 
et cognovísti me: tu cogno- 
visti sessiónem meam, et res- 
urrectiónem meam. Y. Glória 
Patri, 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst cause 

blessed Peter, the apostle, 
to depart, loosed from his 
chains and unhurt, loose, we 
beseech Thee, the chains of our 
sins, and graciously keep all 
evils far from us. Through our 
Lord, 


EUS, qui beátum Petrum 
Apóstolum, a vinculis 
absolitum, illesum abíre fe- 
cisti: nostrórum qusesumus, 
absólve vincula peccatórum; 
et ómnia mala a nobis propi- 
tiátus exclüde. Per Dóminum. 


‘Commemoration of St. Paul the Apostle. 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst teach the 

multitude of the gentiles 
by the preaching of blessed 
Paul the apostle, grant us, we 
beseech Thee, that we, who ob- 
serve his commemoration, may 
experience the fruits of his pat- 
ronal influence with Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS qui multitüdinem 

géntium  beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli predicatióne docui- 
sti: da nobis, quesumus; ut, 
cujus commemoratiónem cóli- 
mus, ejus apud te patrocínia 
sentiámus. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of the Holy Machabees. 


Prayer 


AY the fruits of the fra- 

ternal crown of Thy 

martyrs, O Lord, make us joy- 

ful both to afford our faith 

- increase of virtues and to con- 

Sole us with their manifold 
prayers, Through our Lord. 


Epistle as on, e feast of the 
June 29, page 1 


RATÉRNA nos, Dómine, 

Mártyrum tuórum co- 
róna letíficet: que et fídei 
nostre preheat increménta 
virtütum; et multiplici nos 
suffrágio consolétur. Per Dó- 
minum. 
Holy Apostles, Peter and Paul, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUGUST 1—ST. PETER'S CHAINS 


1186 


Gradual as on the feast of the Holy Apostles, Peter and Paul, 
June 29, page 1079, but ihe Alleluia verse is as follows: 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Solve, 
jubénte Deo, terrárum, Petre, 
caténas: qui facis ut páteant 
ewléstia regna beátus. Alle- 
ja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Loose, O 
Peter, the chains of the world 
at the bidding of God, thou 
that dost cause the heavenly 
realms to open to the blessed. 
Alleluia, 


Gospel, At that time Jesus came, page 871. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 17, 18 


Constitues eos príncipes 
super omnem terram: mém- 
ores erunt nóminis tui, Dó- 
mine, in omni progénie et 
generatióne. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


BLÁTUM tibi Dómine, 

Sacrificium intercédente 
beáto Petro Apóstolo tuo, vi- 
víficet nos semper, et müniat. 
Per Dóminum. 


Thou shalt make them 
princes over all the earth: they 
shall remember Thy name, O 
Lord, throughout all genera- 
tions. 


Secret 


‘ay the sacrifice offered to 
Thee, O Lord, by the in- 
tercession of blessed Peter ever 
vivify and strengthen us. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Paul the Apostle. 


Secret 


PÓsTOLI tui Pauli pré- 

cibus, . Dómine, plebis 
ius dona sanctífica: ut, que 
tibi tuo grata sunt institüto, 
gratióra fiant patrócínio sup- 
plicántis. 


ANCTIFY the gifts of Thy 

people, O Lord, through 
the prayers of Paul Thine 
apostle, that what is pleasing 
to Thee by Thine own ordi- 
nance may become the more 
pleasing by the patronal in- 


fiuence of his supplication. 


Commemoration of the Holy Machabees. : 


Secret | 


xsrÉRIA tua, Dómine, 
pro sanctórum Mártyr- 
um tuórum honóre, devóta 


mente tractémus: quibus et 


presídium nobis crescat, et 
gáudium. Per Dóminum. 
Preface No. 13, page 816. 


AY we devoutly deal with 
(D Thy mysteries, O Lord, 
for the honor of Thy holy mar- . 
tyrs, and by them may both 
protection and joy be increased 
unto us. Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1136 


AUG. 2—ST. ALPHONSUS LIGUORI 


Communion. Matt. 16, 18 - 


Thou art Peter: and upon 
this rock I wil build My 
Church. 


Tu es Petrus; et super hanc 
petram edifichbo Ecclésiam 
meam. f 


Postcommunion 


ILLED with the sacrificial 

food of Thy sacred body 
and precious blood, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, our God, that 
what we perform in pious de- 
votion we may effectually ob- 
tain in assured redemption. 
Through the same. . 

Commemoration of St. Paul. 


ÓnPonRIS sacri, et pretiósi 

sánguinis repléti libá- 
mine, quaesumus, Dómine 
Deus noster: ut quod pia de- 
votióne gérimus certa re- 
demptióne  capiámus. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


AVING received Thy sac- 
n raments, O Lord, we be- 
seech Thee, by the intercession 
of blessed Paul, Thine apostle, 
that what has been celebrated 
for his glory may profit unto 
our healing. 


Ie Dómine sacra- 
méntis: beáto Paulo 
Apóstolo tuo interveniénte, 
deprecámur; ut, que pro illíus 
celébrata sunt glória, nobis 
profíciant ad medélarm. 


Commemoration of the Holy Machabees. 


Postcommunion 


Gu. we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we 
may more and more closely 
follow the faith of those whose 
memory we venerate in par- 
taking of Thy sacrament. 
Through our Lord. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


RESTA, quesumus, omní- 

potens Deus: ut, quo- 
rum memóriam sacramenti 
participatióne recólimus, fi- 
dem quoque proficiéndo secté- 
mur, Per Dóminum. 


August 2—$5t. Alphonsus Mary de Liguori, Bishop, 
Confessor, Doctor of the Church (White) 
Double 


St. Stephen J, Pope, Martyr 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit.. Luke 4, 18 


HE Spirit of the Lord is 
upon me, wherefore He 


PÍRITUS Dómini super me: 
propter quod unxit me: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


CNRC tmp ouem en —n À 


dnd ee 


AUG. 2—ST. ALPHONSUS LIGUORI 1137 


evangelizáre paupéribus misit 
Me, sanáre contrítos corde. 
Ps. 77, 1. Atténdite, pópule 
meus, legem meam: inclináte 
aurem vestram in verba oris 
mei. Y. Gloria Patri.. 


hath anointed me, to preach 
the gospel to the poor, He hath 
sent me to-heal the contrite of 
heart. Ps. 77, 1. Attend, O My 
people, to My law: incline your 
ear to the words of My mouth. 
y. Glory. ° 


Kyrie, .page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer . 


EUS, qui per beátum Al- 
phónsum Mariam, 
Confessórem tuum atque Pon- 
tificem, animárum zelo suc- 
cénsum, Ecclésiam tuam nova 
prole fecundásti: quaesumus; 
ut ejus salutáribus mónitis 
edócti, et exémplis roboráti, 
ad te pervenire felíciter valeá- 
mus. Per Dóminum. 


‘gov, Who through blessed 

Alphonsus Mary, Thy 
confessor and bishop, fired with 
zeal for souls, didst cause Thy 
Church to bring forth a new 
progeny, we beseech ‘Thee that, 
being taught by his wholesome 
precepts, and strengthened by 
his example, we niay be enabled 
happily to come unto Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


Com in STOT ARION of St. Stephen, from the Mass, Si diligis me, 


page 1302. 


Epistle. 2 Tim. 2, 1-7 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Timótheum. 


ARISSIME: Confortare in 
grátia que est in Chris- 
to Jesu: et que audisti a me 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
Timothy. . 

EARLY beloved, be strong 
in the grace which is in 
Christ Jesus, and the things 


per multos testes, bec com- which thou hast heard -of me 
ménda fidélibus homínibüs, before many witnesses, the 
qui idónei erunt et álios do- same commend to faithful men, 
cére. Labóra sicut bonus miles who shall be fit to teach others 
Christi Jesu. Nemo militans also. Labor as a good soldier of 
Deo implicat se negótiis swcu- Christ Jesus. No man being a 
láribus: ut ei pláceat, cui se soldier to God, entangleth him- 
probávit. Nam et qui certatin self with worldly business: that 
agóne, non coronátur, nisi le- he may please Him to Whom he 
gitime certayerit, Laborantem hath engaged himself, For he 
agricolam opórtet primum de also that striveth for the. mas- 
früctibus bercípere. Intéllige tery, is not crowned, except he 
que dico: dabit enim tibiDó- strive lawfully. The husband- 


37 http://ccwatershed.org 


1138 


AUG. 2—ST. ALPHONSUS LIGUORI 


man that laboreth, must first minus in ómnibus intelléctum. 


partake of the fruits. Under-. 


stand what I say: for the Lord will give e thee understanding in 


all things. 


Gradual. Ps. 118, 52, 53 


I remembered, O Lord, Thy 
judgments of old, and I was 
comforted; a fainting hath 
taken hold of me because of 
the wicked that forsake Thy 
law. Y. Ps. 39, 11. I have not 
hid Thy justice within my 
heart. I have declared 'Thy 
iruth and Thy salvation, 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Eeclus. 
49, 3, 4. He was directed by 
God unto the repentance of 
the nation, and he took away 
the abominations of wicked- 
ness: and he directed his heart 
toward the Lord; and in the 
days of sinners he strengthened 
godliness. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel, The Lord appointed 
Mark, page 989. 


Creed, page 765. 


Memor fui judiciórum tuó- 
rum a seculo, Dómine, et con- 
solatus sum: deféctio ténuit 
me pro peccatóribus derelin- 
quéntibus legem tuam. Y. Ps. 
39, 11. Justitiam tuam non 
abscondi in corde meo: veri- 
tátem tuam et salutáre tuum 
dixi. 

Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Eccli. 
49, 3, 4. Ipse est diréctus di- 
vínitus in peniténtiam gentis, 
et tulit abominatiónes impie- 
tátis: et gubernávit ad Dó- 
minum cor ipsíus: et in dié- 
bus peccatórum corroborávit 
pietátem. Allelüja. 


also, as on the feast of St. 


Offertory. Prov. 3, 9, 27 


Honor the Lord with thy sub- 
stance, and give Him of the 
first of.all thy fruits. Do not 
withhold him from doing good 
who is able: if thou art able, 
do good thyself also. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Honóra Dóminum de tua 
substantia, et de primítiisóm- 
nium frugum tuárum da ei. 
Noli prohibére  benefácere 
eum, qui potest: si vales, et 
ipse bénefac. 


Secret 


O LoRD Jesus Christ, burn 
our hearts thoroughly 


ŒLÉSTI, Dómine Jesu 
Christe, sacrifícii igne 


with the heavenly fire of this corda nostra in odórem suavi- 
Sacrifice for an odor of sweet- tátisexüre: qui beáto Alphón- 
ness, Thou Who didst grant to so María tribuisti et haec my- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 3—FINDING OF BODY OF ST. STEPHEN 1139 


stéria celebráre, et per éadem blessed Alphonsus Mary both 
hóstiam tibi sanctam seíp- to celebrate these mysteries 
sum exhibére: Qui vivis, 2nd, through them, to offer 
himself to Thee a holy. victim. 
Who livest. 
Commemoration of .St. Stephen, from the Mass, Si diligis me, 
page 1302. 
Preface No. 13, page 816. 


"Communion. Ecclus. 50, 1, 9 - 

Sacérdos magnus, qui in A great priest, who in his life 
vita sua, suffülsit domum, et propped up the hoüse, and in 
in diébus suis corroborávit his days fortified the temple as 
templum quasi ignis effül- a bright fire, and frankincense 


gens, et thus ardens in igne. 


burning in the fire. 


Postcommunion 
Du qui beátum Alphón- cop, Who didst cause 
sum Mariam Confesso- blessed Alphonsus Mary, 


rem tuum. atque Pontíficem, 
fidélem divíni mystérii dis- 
pensatórem et pracénem ef- 
fecísti: ejus méritis, precibüs- 
que concéde; ut fidéles tui et 
frequénter ‘percipiant et per- 
cipiéndo sine fine colláudent. 
Per Dóminum. 


Thy confessor and bishop, 
faithfully to dispense and 
preach this divine mystery, 
grant, by his merits and pray- 
ers, that Thy faithful may both 
frequently receive it, and, re- 
ceiving it, praise it forever. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Stephen, from the Mass, Si diligis me, 


page 1302. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Aug. 3—The Finding of the Bodp of St. Stephen, 
the First Martpr (Red) 
Semi-double l 
Mass as on the feast of St. Stephen, December 26, mage 146. 


But the Prayer is as follows: 


Prayer 


A NOBIS, quesumus, Dó- 
D mine, imitári quod có- 
us: ut discámus et inimí- 
cos dilígere; quis ejus Inven- 
tiónem celebrámus, qui novit 
étiam pro persecutóribus ex- 


oráre Dóminum nostrum Je-: 


sum Christum Fílium tuum: 
Qui tecum vivit. 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, to imitate what 

we worship, that we may learn 

to love our enemies also; for 

we celebrate the finding of him 

who knew how to pray even for 

his persecutors to Our Lord 

Jesus Christ, Thy. Son. Who 
with Thee, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1140 


AUG. 4—ST. DOMINIC 


Aug. 4—St. Dominic, Confessor (White) 
Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


HE mouth of the just shall 

meditate wisdom, and his 
tongue shall speak judgment: 
the law of his God is in his 
heart. Ps. 36, 1. Be not, emu- 
lous of evil-doers; nor envy 
them that work iniquity. Y. 
Glory. 


Ps. 36, 30, 31 


S JUsrI meditábitur sa- 

piéntiam, et lingua ejus 
loquétur.judícium: lex Dei 
ejus in corde ipsius. Ps. 36, 1. 
Noli emuléri in malignánti- 
bus; neque zeláyeris faciéntes 
iniquitátem. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer. 
cop, Who hast vouchsafed EUS, qui Ecclésiam tuam 
-to illuminate Thy Church beáti Domínici Confes- 


with the virtues and teaching 
of blessed Dominic, Thy con- 
fessor, grant that, by his in- 
tercession, it may not be des- 
titute of temporal aids and may 
ever progress in spirituel in- 
crease. Through our Lord. . 


sóris tui illumináre dignátus 
es méritis et doctrinis: con- 
céde: ut ejus intercessióne 
temporálibus non destituátur 
auxíliis, et spirituálibus sem- 
per profíciat increméntis. Per 
Dóminum. 


Epistle, I charge Thee, from ihe Mass In medio, page 1345. 
Gradual. Ps. 91, 13, 14 


The just man shall flourish 
like the palm-tree: he shall 
grow up like the cedar of Li- 
banus in the house of the Lord. 
¥. Ps. 91, 3. To show forth Thy 
mercy in the morning, and Thy 
truth in the night. 

Alleluia, alleluia. V. Osee 14, 
6. 'The just shall spring as the 
lily: and flourish forever be- 
fore the Lord. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 
Gospel, Let your loins, from 
Offertory. 


My truth and My mercy 
shall be with him: and in My 


Justus ut palma florébit: 
sicut cedrus Líbani multipli- 
cábitur in domo Dómini. J. 
Ps. 91, 3. Ad annuntiándum 
mane misericórdiam tuam, et 
veritátem tuam per noctem. 


Allelija, allelüja. V. Osee 14, 
6. Justus germinábit sicut li- 
lium: et florébit in etérnum 
ante Dóminum. Allelija. ` 


the Mass Os justi, page 1351. 


Ps. 88, 25 


Veritas mea, et misericér- 
dia mea cum ipso: et in nó- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 6—TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR LORD 1141 


mine meo exaltábitur cornu name shall his horn be ex- 
ejus. ;. alted. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
V NERA tibi, Dómine, di- ANCTIFY, O Lord, the gifts 
cáta sanctifica: ut mé- dedicated to Thee, that, 
ritis beáti Domínici Confes- by the merits of blessed Domi- 
Sóris tui nobis proficiant ad nic, Thy confessor, they may 
medélam. Per Dóminum. profit for our healing. Through 
our Lord. 
: Preface for. Weekdays, Page 775. n 


Communion. Luke 12, 42 _ 

Fidélis servus et prudens, A faithful and wise steward, 
quem constituit dóminus su- whom the Lord has set over 
per famíliam suam: ut det il- His family; to give them their 
lis in témpore trítici mensú- measure of wheat in due sea- 
ram.. ©. 50D, 


` Postcommunion 


ONCÉDE, qusesumus, om- Gu we beseech Thee, O 

nípotens Deus: ut, qui almighty God, that we, 
peccatórum nostrórum pón- who are borne down by the 
dere prémimur, beáti Domíni- weight of our sins, may be sus- 
ci Confessóris tui patrocínio tained by the patronage of 
sublevémur. Per Dóminum. blessed Dominic, Thy confessor. 
Through our Lord. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. s 


Aug. 5—The Dedication of the Church of Our 
Ladp-of-the-Snows (White) 
Double Major 
Mass Salve sancta parens, page 1394. The Creed is said. 
_ Preface No. 11, page 814. 


Aug. 6-—The Transfiguration of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ (white) 
Double of the Second Class 
Sts. Xpstus, Felicissimus, and Agapitus, Martyrs 


‘The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 76,19 _ 
LLUXÉRUNT. coruscatiónes fay lightnings enlightened 
tue orbi terre: commota the World: the earth shook 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1142 AUG. 6—TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR LORD 


and trembled. Ps. 83, 2, 3. How 
lovely are Thy tabernacles, O 
Lord of hosts! my soul longeth 
and fainteth for the courts of 
the Lord. Y. Glory. 


est, et contrémuit terra, Ps, 
38, 2. 3. Quam dilécta taber- 
nácula tua, Dómine virtü- 
tum! concupiscit et déficit 
anima mea in atria Dómini. 
Y. Gloria Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


sop, Who in the glorious 

transfiguration of Thine 
only-begotten Son didst 
strengthen the sacraments of 
faith by the testimony of the 
fathers, and Who didst won- 
derfully foreshow the perfect 
adoption of Thy children by a 
voice coming down in a shining 
cloud, mercifully grant that we 
be made co-heirs of the King 
of glory Himself, and grant us 
to be sharers in that very glory. 
Through the same. 


EUS, qui fídei sacramén- 
ta, in Unigéniti tui glo- 
riósa. Transfiguratióne, pa- 
irum testimónio roborásti, et 
adoptiónem filiórum perféc- 
tam, voce delápsa in nube lú- 
cida, mirabíliter presignasti: 
concéde propítius; ut ipsius 
Regis glóriæ nos coherédes ef- 
ficias, et ejüsdem glérie trí- 
buas esse consórtes. Per eüm- 
dem Dóminum. f 


In low Masses, commemoration of the Holy Martyrs, Prayer, 
God, Who dost permit, from the Mass Intret, page 1317, with 
the corresponding Secret and Postecommunmion. 


Epistle. 2 Peter 1, 16-19 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle, 


EARLY beloved, We have 

not followed cunningly 
devised fables, when we made 
known to you the power and 
presence of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ; but having been made 
eyewitnesses of His majesty. 
For He received from God the 
Father honor and glory: this 
voice coming down io Him 
from the excellent glory, This 
is My beloved Son in Whom I 
am well pleased, hear ye Him. 
And this voice we heard 
brought from heaven, when we 
were with Him in the holy 
mount. And we have the more 


Léctio Epistole beáti Petri 
Apóstoli. 
ARÍssIMI: Non doctas fá- 
bulas secüti notam féci- 
mus vobis Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi virtütem et presén- 
tiam sed speculatóres facti 
illius magnitüdinis. Accípiens 
enim a Deo Patre honórem et 
glóriam, voce delápsa ad eum 
hujuscémodi a magnifica 
glória: Hic est Filius meus di- 
léctus, in quo mihi compla- 
cui, ipsum audite. Et hanc vo- 
cem nos audívimus de czlo al- 
latam, cum essémus cum ipso 
in monte sancto. Et habémus 
firmiórem prophéticum ser- 
mónem: cui bene fácitis at- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 6—TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR LORD 


tendéntes, quasi lucérne lu- 
cénti in caliginóso loco, do- 
nec dies elucéscat et lücifer 
oriátur in córdibus vestris. 


Gradual. 

Speciosus forma pre fíliis 
hóminum: diffüsa est grátia 
in lábiis tuis. Y. Eructávit cor 
meum verbum bonum: dico 
ego ópera mea Regi, ` 

Allelüja, allelija. Y. Sap. 
7, 26. Candor est lucis etérne, 
spéculum sine macula, et 
imágo bonitátis illus. Alle- 
lija. 

Munda Cor Meum, page. 763. 


1143 


firm prophetical word, where- 


-unto you do well to attend, as 


to a light that shineth in a dark 
place, until the day dawn, and 
ihe day-star arise in your 
hearts. 


Ps. 44, 3, 2 

Thou art beautiful above the 
sons of men: grace is poured 
abroad in Thy lips. Y. My heart 
hath uttered a good word. I 
speak my works to the King. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Wis. 7, 
26. He is the brightness of eter- 
nal light, the unspotted mir. 
ror, and the image of His good. 
ness. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 17, 1-9 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Matthzeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Assümpsit 

Jesus Petrum, et Jacó- 
bum, et Joánnem fratrem 
ejus, et duxit illos in montem 
excélsum seórsum: et trans- 
figurátus est ante eos. Et re- 
splénduit fácies ejus sicut sol, 
vestiménta autem ejus facta 
sunt alba sicut nix. Et ecce 
apparuérunt illis Móyses et 
Elfas cum eo loquéntes. Re- 
spóndens autem Petrus, dixit 
&d Jesum: Dómine, bonum 
est nos hic esse: si vis, faciá- 
mus hic tria tabernácula, tibi 
unum, Móysi unum, et Elie 
unum.-Adhuc eo loquénte, 
ecce: nubes lúcida obumbrá- 
vit eos. Et ecce vox de nube, 
dicens: Hic est Fílius meus 
diléctus, in quo mihi bene 
complácui: ipsum audíte. Et 
audiéntes discípuli, cecidé- 
runt in fáciem suam, et ti- 
muérunt valde. Et accéssit 


"* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. j 

T THAT time, Jesus took 

Peter, and James, and 
John his brother, and bringing 
them up into a high mountain 
apart: and He was transfigured 
before them. And His face did 
shine as the sun, and His gar- 
ments became white as snow. 
And behold, there appeared to 
them Moses and Elias talking 
with Him. And Peter answer- 
ing, said to Jesus, Lord, it is 
good for us to be here; if Thou 
wilt, let us make here three 


‘tabernacles, one for Thee, and 


one for Moses, and one for 
Elias. And as he was yet speak- 
ing, behold a bright cloud over- 
shadowed them; and lo, a voice 
out of the cloud, saying This is 
My: beloved Son in Whom I am 
well pleased, hear ye Him. And 
the disciples hearing, fell upon 
their face, and were very much 
afraid: and Jesus came and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1144 AUG. 6—TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR LORD 


touched them, and seid to 
ihem, Arise, and fear not. And 
they lifting up their eyes saw 
no one, but only Jesus, And as 
they came down from the 
mountain, Jesus charged them, 
saying, Tell the vision to no 
man, till the Son of man be 
risen from the dead. 


Creed; page 763. 


Jesus, et tétigit eos, dixitque 


-eis:  Sürgite et nolíte ` ti- 


mére. Levántes autem óculos 
suos, néminem vidérunt nisi 
solum Jesum. Et descendén- 
tibus illis de monte, precépit 
eis Jesus, dicens: Némini dix- 
éritis visiónem, donec Fi- 
lius hóminis a  mórtuis re- 
surgat. 


Offertory. Ps 111, 3 


Glory and wealth are in His 
house: and His justice remain- 
eth forever and ever. Alleluia. 


Glória, et divitie in domo 
ejus: et justítia ejus manet in 
seculum saeculi, allelija. 


Secret 


ANCTIFY, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the gifts offered 
on the glorious transfiguration 
of Thine only-begotten Son, 
and by the splendors of that 
very illumination cleanse us 
from the stains of our sins. 
Through the same. 


BLATA, quesumus, Démi- 

ne, münera, gloriósa 
Unigéniti tui Transfigura- 
tióne sanctifica: nosque a 
peccatórum máculis, splen- 
dóribus ipsíus illustratiónis 
emunda. Per eümdem Dómi- 
num. 


Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs, We offer Thee, O Lord, 


from the Mass, Intret, page 1320. 


Preface No. 1, page 798. 


Communion. 

Tell the vision you have seen 

to no man, till the Son of man 
be risen from the dead. i 


Matt. 17,9 l 

Visiónem quam vidístis, 
némini dixéritis, donec a 
mórtuis resürgat Filius hó- 
minis. 


Postcommunion — 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that with 
the understanding of & purified 


mind we may follow those sa- 
cred mysteries of Thy Son's 
transfiguration which we cele- 
brate with our solemn office. 
Through the same. 


Commemoration ZA Me Holy 


Mass, Intret, page 1320. 
‘Concluding Prayers, page 793. . 


RESTA, - quesumus, omni- 
potens Deus: ut sacro- 
sancta Fílii tui Transfigura- 
tiónis mystéria, que solémni 
celebrámus officio, purificátze 
mentis intelligéntia consequá- 
mur: Per eúmdem Dóminum. 


Martyrs, Grant us, from- the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


2m 


OSS Ov wo 


AUG. 7—ST. CAJETAN 1145 


Aug. 7—St. Cajetan, Confessor (White) 
Double 


St. Donatus, Bishop and Martyr 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 
EUS, qui beáto Cajetano cop, Who didst give to 
Confessdri tuo apostóli- Blessed Cajetan, Thy 


cam vivéndi formam imitári confessor, the grace to imitate 

tribuísti: da nobis, ejus inter- the apostolic way of life, grant 

cessióne et exémplo, in te sem- us by his intercession and ex- 

per confidere, et sola celés- ample ever to trust in Thee and 

tia desideráre. Per Dóminum. to desire only heavenly things. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Donatus. 


‘Prayer 
EUS, tuórum glória sac- cop, the glory of Thy 
erdotum: presta, quz- priests, grant, we beseech 


sumus: ut sancti Martyris tui Thee, that we may experience 

et Episcopi Donati, cujus festa the assistance of Thy holy mar- 

gérimus, sentiámus auxilium. tyr and bishop, Donatus, whose 

Per Dóminum. festival we celebrate. Through 
our Lord. 


Gospel, No man can serve, from the Mass of the Fourteenth. 
Sunday after Pentecost, page 687. 


Secret 
RÆSTA nobis, quaesumus, RANT, We beseech Thee, O 
omnípotens Deus: ut almighty God, that our 


nostre humilitátis oblátio, et humble offerings may be both 
pro tuórum tibi gráta sit ho- pleasing to Thee in honor of 
nóre Sanctórum, et nos cór- Thy saints and may cleanse us 
pore páriter et mente purífi- alike in body and soul. Through 
cet. Per Dóminum. our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Donatus. 


Secret 
RESTA, quesumus, Dó- RANT, We beseech Thee, O 
mine: ut sancti Már- Lord, that through the 


tyris tui et Epíscopi Donati intercession of Thy holy bishop 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1146 AUG. 8—STS. CYRIACUS AND COMPANIONS 


and martyr, Donatus, whom we 


venerate with the offerings ded-- 


lcated to the praise of Thy 
name, the fruit of tender de- 
votion may increase in us. 
Through our Lord. 


jntercessióne, quem ad lau- 
dem nóminis tui dicátis mu- 


néribus honorámus, pie no- . 


bis fructus devotiónis accré- 
Scat. Per Dóminum, 


Postcommunion 


E BESEECH Thee, O al- 

mighty God, that we, 
who have partaken of heavenly 
nourishment, may, by the in- 
tercession of blessed Cajetan, 
Thy confessor, be fortified by it 
against all adverse influences. 
Through our Lord. 


UJXSUMUS, | Omnípotens 

Deus: ut, qui celéstia 
aliménta percépimus, inter- 
cedénte beáto Cajetáno Con- 
fessóre tuo, per hec contra 
ómnia advérsa muniàmur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Donatus. 
Postcommunion 


LMIGHTY and merciful 
God, Who dost make us 
oth the partakers and the 
ministers of Thy sacraments, 
grant, we beseech Thee, that, 
by the intercession of blessed 
Donatus, Thy martyr and 
bishop, we may profit both by 
our fellowship with him in faith 
and by our worthy service. 
Through our Lord. 


MNÍPOTENS et miséricors 

Deus, qui nos sacramen- 
tórum tuórum et partícipes 
éfücis, et minístros: presta, 
quesumus; ut, intercedénte 
beáto Donato, Mártyre tuo at- 
que Pontífice, ejüsdem pro- 
ficiámus et fídei consórtio, et 
digno servítio. Per Dóminum. 


Aug.8— Sts. Cpriacus, Largus aud Somaragbus, 
Martyrs (Red) 


Semi-Double 
"The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


EAR the Lord, all ye His 
B saints; for there is no 
want to them that fear Him: 
the rich have wanted and have 
suffered hunger, but they that 
seek the Lord shall not be de- 
prived of any good. Ps. 33, 2. I 
will bless the Lord at all times: 
His praise shall be always in 
my mouth. Y.. Glory. 


Ps. 33, 10, 11 


IMETE Dóminum, omnes 

Sancti ejus quóniam ni- 
hil deest timéntibus eum: dí- 
vites eguérunt, et esuriérunt: 
inquiréntes autem Dóminum 
non defícient omni bono. Ps. 
33, 2. Benedícam Dóminum in 
omni témpore: semper laus 
ejus in ore meo. VY. Glória 
Patri - 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


B. rrr 


AUG. 8—STS. CYRIACUS AND COMPANIONS 


1147 


Prayer 


Eus, qtii nos ánnua sanc- 

tórum Mártyrum tuó- 
rum OCyriáci Largi et Sma- 
rágdi solemnitáte letificas: 
concéde propítius: ut, quorum 
natalítia cólimus, virtütem 
quoque passiónis imitámur. 
Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who dost gladden us 

with the solemn yearly 
festival of Thy holy martyrs, 
Cyriacus, Largus, and Smarag- 
dus, mercifully grant that we 
may imitate the virtue of their 
martyrdom whose feast-day we 
now celebrate. Through our 
Lord. 


There is added the Prayer, A cunctis, page 827, with a third 


Prayer at the choice of the celebrant. 


Secret and Postcommunion. 


4nd similarly after the 


Epistle. 1 Thess. 2, 13-16 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Thessalonicénses. 


RATRES: Grátias ágimus 

Deo sine intermissióne: 
quóniam cum accepissétis a 
nobis verbum audítus Dei, ac- 
cepístis illud, non ut verbum 
hóminum, sed (sicut est vere) 
verbum Dei, qui operátur in 
vobis, qui credidístis. Vos 
enim imitatóres facti estis, 
fratres, ecclesiárum Dei, que 
sunt in Judæa in Christo Jesu: 
quia éadem passi estis et vos 
a contribülibus vestris, sicut 
et ipsi a Judzis: qui et Dó- 
minum occidérunt Jesum, et 
prophétas: et nos persecüti 
sunt, et Deo non placent, et 
ómnibus homínibus adver- 


sántur, prohibéntes nos gén-. 


tibus loqui, ut salve fiant, ut 
impleant peccáta sua semper; 
pervénit enim ira Dei super 
illos usque in finem. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Thessalonians. 


RETHREN, We give thanks 

to God without ceasing, 
because that when you had re- 
ceived of us the word of the 
hearing of God, you received it 
not as the word of men, but (as, 
it is indeed) the word of God, 
Who worketh i. you that have 
believed. For you, brethren, are 
become followers of the 
churches of God which are in 
Judea, in Christ Jesus; for you 
also have suffered the same 
things from your own country- 
men, even as they have from 
the Jews, who both killed the 
Lord Jesus and the prophets, 
and have persecuted us, and 
please not God, and are ad- 
versaries to all men; prohibit- 
ing us to speak to the gentiles 
that they may be saved, to fill 
up their sins always: for the 


' wrath of God is come upon 


them to the end. 


Gradual. Ps. 33, 10, 11 


Timéte Dóminum, omnes 
sancti ejus: quóniam nihil 


Fear the Lord, all ye His 
saints: for there is no want to 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1148 AUG. 8—STS. CYRIACUS AND COMPANIONS 


them that fear Him. Y. But 
they that seek the Lord shall 
not be deprived of any good. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Wis. 3, 7. 
The just shall shine, and shall 
run to and fro like sparks 
among the reeds forever. Alle- 
luia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


deest timéntibus eum. Y. In- 
quiréntes autem Dóminum, 
non deficient omni bono, 

Allelüja, allelája. Y. Sap. 
3, 7. Fulgébunt justi, et tam- 
quam scintille in arundinéto 
discürrent in xtérnum. Alle- 
lája. ; 


Gospel, Go ye unto the whole world, from the Mass of St. 
Francis Xavier, December 3, page 839. 


Offertory. 


Be glad in the Lord, and re- 
joice, ye just: and glory all ye 
right of heart. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 31, 11 


Letamini in Dómino, et 
exsultáte justi: et gloriámini 
omnes recti corde. 


Secret 


ay our devotion, O Lord, 

find favor in Thy sight, 

and be made profitable for our 

salvation by the supplication of 

those on whose solemnity it is 
offered. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


ccÉPTA sit in conspéctu 

tuo, Dómine, nostra 
devótio: et eórum nobis fiat 
supplicatióne salutéris, pro 
quorum solemnitáte defértur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Communion. Mark 16, 17, 18 


And these signs shall follow 


Signa autem eos, qui in me 


them that believe in Me: they credunt, hec sequéntur: dæ- 
shall cast out devils: they shall ménia ejícient: super ægros 
lay their hands upon the sick, manus impónent, et bene ha- 


and they shall recover. 


bébunt, 


‘Postcommunion 


EFRESHED by partaking of 

Thy sacred gift, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, our God, 
that, by the intercession of Thy 
holy martyrs, Cyriacus, Largus, 
and Smaragdus, we may ex- 
perience the effect of that to 
which we pay our worship. 
Through our Lord. 


EFÉCTI participatióne 
müneris sacri, quesu- 
mus, Dómine Deus noster: ut, 
cujus exséquimur cultum, in- 
tercedéntibus sanctis Mártyr- 
ibus tuis Cyríaco, Largo et 
Smarágdo, sentiámus efféc- 
tum. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


f 


AUG. 9—VIGIL OF ST. LAWRENCE 


1149 


If the feast of St. Lawrence (August 10) falls on Monday the 
commemoration of St. Romanus, jound in the Mass for the 


Vigil of St. Lawrence i$ made on Sunday. 


The Vigil of St. 


Lawrence is then celebrated on Saturday, August 8, and, in the 


foregoing Mass of Sts. 


Cyriacus and companions a commemora- 


tion of the vigil is made and its Gospel is.read at the end. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Aug. 9—St. Sohn Mary Vianney, Confessor (White) 


.- Double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


MNÍPOTENS et miséricors 


Deus, qui beátum Joán- ' 


nem Mariam, pastoráli stüdio 
et jugi oratiónis ac penitén- 
tie ardóre mirábilem effecisti: 
da quesumus, ut ejus exémplo 
et intercessióne, ánimas fra- 
trum lucrari Christo, et cum 
eis etérnam glóriam cónse- 
qui. valeámus. Per eümdem 
Dóminum. 


Commemoration of the Vigil of St. Lawrence and St. 


ALMIGHTY and. merciful 
God, Who by pastoral 
zeal, the yoke of prayer, and 
the ardor of penance hast made 
glorious St. John Mary; grant, 
we beseech 'Thee, that by his 
example and intercession we 
may be enabled to gain for 
Christ the souls of our brethren 
and with them attain to ever- 
lasting glory. Through the 
same, 


Ro- 


Mase” Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion from the following 
ASS. 


The same day-—The Wigil of St. Batwrence, 
St. Romanus, Martyrs (Red) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


: - Introit. 
jIsPÉRsIT, dédit paupéri- 
bus: justitia ejus ma- 
net in seculüm seculi; cornu 
ejus exaltábitur in glória. Ps. 
111, 1. Beátus vir, qui timet 
Dóminum: in mandátis ejus 
cupit nimis. V. Glória Paíri. 


Ps, 11,4. 


E: HATH distributed, he 

hath given to the. poor: 
his justice remaineth forever 
and ever; his horn shall be ex- 
alted in glory. Ps. 111, 1. Blessed 
is the man that feareth the 
Lord; he delighteth exceeding- 
iy in His commandments, f. 
Glory. 


` Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer. 


DÉSTO, Démine, suppli- 
catiónibus nostris: et 


Trend, O Lord, to our 
supplications, and by the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1150 


intercession of Thy blessed 
martyr, Lawrence, whose feast 
we anticipate, graciously be- 
stow upon us Thy everlasting 


AUG. 9—VIGIL OF ST, LAWRENCE 


intercessióne beáti Lauréntii 
Martyris tui, cujus prevéni- 
mus festivitátem; perpétuam 
nobis misericórdiam benignus 


mercy. Through our Lord. impénde. Per Dóminum. 
Commemoration of St. Romanus. 


Prayer 

RANT, we beseech Thee, O RESTA, quesumus, omní- 
almighty God, that by potens Deus: ut, inter- 

the intercession of blessed Ro- cedénte beáto Romano Már- 
manus, Thy martyr, we may be tyre tuo, et a cunctis adver- 
delivered from all adversities sitátibus liberémur in cór- 
in body, and be purified from pore, et a pravis cogitatióni- 
all evil thoughts in mind. bus mundémur in mente. Per 


Through our Lord. 


Déminum. 


Third Prayer, Concede nos, of our Blessed Lady, page 824. 


Epistle. 


Mass, Loquebar, page 1360. 


Gradual. Ps. 111, 9, 2 


He hath distributed, he hath 
given to the poor: his justice 
remaineth forever and ever. y. 
His seed shall be mighty upon 
earth; the generation of the 
righteous shall be blessed. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Dispérsit, dedit paupéribus: 
justitia ejus manet in sæcu- 
lum sæculi. V. Potens in terra 
erit semen ejus: generátio 
rectórum benedicétur. 


Gospel, If any man will come, from the Mass, Sacerdotes, 


page 1307. 


Offertory. Job. 16, 20 


My prayer is pure, and there- 
fore I ask that 2 place may be 
given to my voice in heaven: 
for there is my judge, and He 
that knoweth my conscience is 
on high: let my prayer ascend 
to the Lord. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Orátio mea munda est: et 
ideo peto, ut detur locus voci 
mee in coelo; quia ibi est 
judex meus, et cónscius meus 
in excélsis: ascéndat ad Dó- 
minum deprécátio mea. 


"Secret : 
ERCIFULLY receive, O ósr1as, Dómine, quas tibi 
Lord, the sacrifices offérimus, propítius 


which we offer Thee, and by 
the intercession of blessed Law- 
rence, Thy martyr, loose the 
bonds of our sins. Through our 
Lord. i 


súscipe: et, intercedénte beáto 
Lauréntio, Mártyre tuo, vín- 
cula peccatérum nostrérum 
absélve. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Romanus. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ONT w—H— 


AUG. 10—ST. LAWRENCE 1151 


Secret 


UNÉRIBUS nostris, -que- 'E BESEECH Thee, O Lord, 

sumus, Dómine, preci- to receive our offerings 
büsque suscéptis: et celésti- and prayers; and by Thy hea- 
bus nos munda mystériis, et venly mysteries cleanse us and 
cleméntur exáudi. Per Dómi- mercifully hear us. Through 
num. our Lord. 


Third Secret, By Thy mercy, of our Blessed Lady, page 825. 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 

Qui vult veníre post me, 

&bneget semetípsum: et tol- 

lat crucem suam, et sequátur 
me. 


Matt. 16, 24 


He that will come after Me, 
let him deny himself, and take 
up his cross and follow Me. 


Postcommunion 


A, QUISUMUS, Dómine 

Deus noster: ut, sicut 
beáti Lauréntii Martyris tui 
commemoratióne, temporáli 
gratulámur officio; ita per- 
pétuo latémur aspéctu. Per 
Dóminum. 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 

Lord, our God, that, as 
in commemorating blessed 
Lawrence, Thy martyr, we 
show our joy in a temporal 
duty, so we may be gladdened 
by beholding him in eternity. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Romanus. 


Postcommunion 


UXsuMUS, omnipotens 
Deus: ut, qui celéstia 
aliménta percépimus, interce- 
dénte beáto Románo Mártyre 
tuo, per hzc contra ómnia ad- 
vérsa muniámur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


E BESEECH Thee, almighty 

God, that we who have 

partaken of the food of heaven 

may, by the intercession of 

blessed Romanus, Thy martyr, 

be strengthened by it against 
all harm. Through our Lord. 


Third Postcommunion, Grant us O Lord, of our Blessed 


Lady, page 825. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Aug. 10—St. Lawrence, Martyr (Red) 


Double of the Second Class with a Simple Octave 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


owrFÉsSIO et pulchritido 
in conspéctu ejus: sánc- 


Ps. 95, 6 


RAISE and beauty are be- 
fore Him: holiness and 


r 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1152 AUG. 10—ST. 
majesty in His sanctuary. Ps. 
95, 1. Sing ye to the Lord à new 
canticle; sing to the Lord all 
the earth. Y. Glory. 


LAWRENCE 


titas, et  magnificéntia in 
sanctificatióne ejus. Ps. 95, 1. 
Cantáte Dómino canticum 


. novum: cantáte Dómino, om- 


nis terra: Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O almighty God, to ex- 

tinguish the flames of our evil 

dispositions, as Thou didst 

grant blessed Lawrence to over- 

come the fires of his torments. 
Through our Lord. 


A.NOBIS, quesumus, om- 

nípotens Deus: vitió- 
rum nostrórum flammas ex- 
stinguere; qui beáto Laurén- 
tio tribuísti tormentórum su- 
órum incéndia superáre. Per 
Dóminum. 


Epistle. 2 Cor. 9, 6-10 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, He who soweth 
B sparingly, shall also reap 
sparingly: and he who sow- 
eth in blessings, shall also reap 
of blessings. Everyone as he 
hath determined in his heart; 
not with sadness, or of neces- 
sity; for God loveth & cheer- 
ful giver. And God is able to 
make all grace abound in you; 
that ye, always having all suf- 
ficiency in all things, may 
abound to every good work; as 
jt is written, He hath dis- 
persed abroad, He hath given to 
the poor: His justice remaineth 
forever. And He that minister- 
eth seed to the sower, will both 
give you bread to eat, and will 
multiply your seed, and in- 
crease the growth of the fruits 
of your justice. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Qui parce sémi- 

nat, parce et metet: et 
qui séminat in benedictióni- 
bus, de benedictiónibus et 
metet.  Unusquísque prout 
destinávit in corde suo, non 
ex tristítia aut ex necessitáte: 
hilarem enim datórem diligit 
Deus. Potens est autem Deus 
omnem grátiam abundáre fá- 
cere in vobis, ut in ómnibus 
Semper omnem sufficiéntiam 
habéntes, abundétis in omne 
opus bonum, sicut scriptum 
est: Dispérsit, dedit paupéri- 
bus: justitia ejus manet in 
seculum seculi. Qui autem 
adminfstrat semen seminanti: 
et panem ad manducándum 
prestábit, et multiplicábit se- 
men vestrum, et augébit in- 
creménta frugum justitie ves- 
tre. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 10—9T. LAWRENCE 


Gradual. 


Probásti, Dómine, cor me- 
um, et visitásti nocte, V. Igne 
me examinásti et non est in- 
vénta, in me iniquitas. 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Levíta 
Lauréntius bonum opus ope- 
rátus est: qui per signum cru- 
cis cecos illuminávit. Alle- 
lája. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1153 


Ps. 18, 3 


Thou hast proved my heart, 
O Lord, and visited it by night. 
¥. Thou hast tried me by fire, 
and iniquity hath not been 
found in me. 

Alleluia, alleluia, V. The le- 
vite Lawrence wrought a good 
work, who by the sign of the 
cross gave sight to the blind. 
Alleluia. 


Gospel. John 12, 24-26 


© Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joánnem. 

N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus discipulis suis: Amen, 
amen dico vobis, nisi granum 
fruménti cadens in terram, 
mórtuum füerit, ipsum solum 
manet: si autem mórtuum 
füerit, multum fructum af- 
fert. Qui amat ánimam suam, 
perdet eam: et qui odit áni- 
mam suam in hoc mundo, in 
vitam ztérnam custódit eam. 


Si quis mihi minístrat, me ` 


sequátur: et ubi sum ego et 
miníster meus erit. Si quis 


mihi ministráverit, honorifi- 


cábit eum Pater meus. 


Offertory. 
Conféssio et pulchritüdo in . 


conspéctu ejus: sánctitas, et 
magnificéntia in sanctifica- 
tióne ejus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


.H Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime, Jesus said 
to His disciples: Amen, 
amen, I say to you, unless the 
grain of wheat falling into the 
ground, die, itself remaineth 
alone: but if it.die, it bringeth. 
forth much fruit. He that lov- 
eth his life, shall lose it; and 
he that hateth his life in this 
world, keepeth it unto life eter- 
nal. If any man minister to Me, 
let him follow Me; and where 
I am, there also shall My min- 
ister be. If any man minister 
to Me, him will My Father 
honor. 


Ps. 95, 6 


Praise and beauty are before 
Him: holiness and majesty are 
in His sanctuary. 


Secret 


CCIPg, qusesumus, Dó- 
mine, münera dignán- 
ter obléta: et beáti Lauréntii 


'CCEPT, we beseech Thee, 
. O Lord, the gifts offered 
‘Thee, and, by the interceding 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1154 


merits of blessed Lawrence, 
grant that they may be to 
as a help unto our salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 

If any man minister to Me, 

let him follow Me: and where 

I am, there also shall My min- 
ister he. 


AUG. 11—STS. TIBURTIUS AND SUSANNA 


suffragántibus  méritis, ad 
nostre salütis auxílium pro- 
veníre concéde, Per Dómi- 
num. 


John 12, 26 

Qui mihi minístrat, me se- 
quátur: et ubi ego sum, illic 
et miníster meus erit. 


Postcommunion 


ILLED with 'Thy sacred 

gift, we humbly beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that what we 
celebrate with our homage duly 
given by the intercession of 
Thy blessed martyr Lawrence, 
we may also know as an in- 
crease of Thy saving grace 
within us. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. : 


ACRO münere satiáti, süp- 

plices te Dómine depre- 
cámur: ut quod débite servi- 
tütis celebrámus officio, in- 
tercedénte bedto Lauréntio 
Martyre tuo, selvatiónis tue 
sentiàmus augméntum. Per 
Dóminum, 


Aug. 11—Sts. Wiburtius and Susanna, Virgin 
Martyrs (Red) 
Simple 
Mass, Salus autem, page 1325, except: 


Prayer 


ay the constant protec- 

tion of Thy holy mar- 
tyrs, Tiburtius and Susanna, 
support us, O Lord, for Thou 
dost never cease mercifully to 
regard those to whom Thou 
hast granted such assistance. 
Through our Lord. 


(ANCTÓRUM Mártyrum tu- 

órum Tibürtii et Susan- 

næ nos, Dómine, fóveant con- 

tinuáta presidia; quia non 

désinis propítius intuéri; quos 

tálibus auxiliis  concésseris 
adjuvári. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer, A punctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-15 


Epistle, The saints through faith subdued, Pes the Mass of 
Sts. Fabian and Sebastian, January 20, page 878 


Secret 


ISTEN, O Lord, to the 
prayers of Thy people; 


DÉSTO, Dómine, préci- 
bus pópuli tui, adésto 


http://ccwatershed.org 


( 


b sd 


AUG, 13—STS. HIPPOLYTUS AND CASSIAN 1155 


munéribus: ut, que sacris look with favor on their offer- 

sunt obláta mystériis, tuórum ings, that those things which 

tibi .pláceant  intercessióne are offered.in the sacred mys- 

Sanctórum. Per Dóminum, teries may please Thee by the 
intercession of ‘Thy saints. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828, third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. . 


Postcomminion l 
ÜxPsrwus, Dómine, pig- ['E HAVE received, O. Lord, 
nus redemptiónis ætér- the pledge of everlast- 


næ: quod sit nobis, quæsumus, ing redemption; may it, by the 
interveniéntibus sanctis Mar- intercession of Thy holy Mar- 
tyribus tuis, vitæ præséntis tyrs, be our aid alike in the 
auxilium páriter et future. present and in the life to come. 
Per Dóminum. Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Aug. 12—t. Clare, Virgin (White) 


Double 
Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370: 


Aug. 13—$5ts. Hippolptus and Cassian, Martyrs 
( Red) 
Simple . 
Mass, Salus autem, page 1325, ezcept: 


Prayer 

A, QUÆSUMUS, omnipo- Gu we beseech Thee, O 
D tens Deus: ut beató- almighty God, that the 
rum Mártyrum. tuórum Hip- august solemnity of the blessed 
pólyti et Cassiáni veneránda martyrs, Hippolytus and Cas- 
solémnitas, et devotiónem no- sian, may increase both our de- 
bis áugeat, et salütem. Per votion and our salvation. 
Dóminum. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 
the Priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Secret 
£sPice, Dómine, münera EGARD, O Lord, the offer- 
pépuli tui, Sanctórum ings of Thy people on the 


festivitáte votiva: et tue tes- votive solemnity of these saints, 
tificátio veritatis nobis pro- and let their testimony to Thy 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1156 


truth profit for our salvation. 
Through our Lord: 


AUG. 14—VIGIL OF THE ASSUMPTION 


fíciat ad salütem. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Postcommunion 


ay. the partaking of Thy 
sacrament which we 

have received save us, O Lord, 
and confirm us in the light of 
Thy truth. Through our Lord. 


ACRAMENTÓRUM tuórum, 

Dómine, commünio 
sumpta nos salvet: et in tue 
veritátis luce confírmet. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. | 


Aug. 14—Q( fe "Vigil of the Feast of tbe Assumption 
of Our Blessed Ladp, (Purple) l 
St. Eusebius, Confessor 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 44, 13, 15, 16 


LL the rich among the 
people shall entreat thy 
countenance: after her shall 
virgins be brought to the King: 
her neighbors shall be brought 
to thee in gladness and re- 
joicing. Ps. 44, 2. My heart hath 
uttered a good word: I speak 
my works to the King. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


uLTUM tuum depreca- 
büntur omnes dívites 
plebis: adducéntur regi vír- 
gines post eam: préxime ejus 
adducéntur tibi in letitia et 


-exsultati6ne. Ps. 44, 2. Eruc- 


távit cor meum verbum bo- 
num: dico ego ópera mea 
regi. Y. Glória Patri, ‚+ 
n 
x 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst deign to 

' choose for Thy dwelling 

the virginal womb of the blessed 

Mary, grant, we beseech Thee, 

that defended by her protec- 

tion we may assist with joy at 
her festival. Who livest. 


Feus, qui virginálem au- 

lam beáśtæ Marie, in 

qua habitáres, elígere digná- 

tus es: da, quæsumus; ut, sua 

nos defensióne munitos, ju- 

Ccündos fácias sue interésse 
festivitati: Qui vivis. 


Commemoration of St. Eusebius, Prayer from the Mass, Os 


justi, page 1349. 


Third Prayer of the Holy Ghost, Deus qui Corda, page 827. 


Epistle, As the vine, 
Carmel, July 16, page 1106. 


from the Mass of our Lady of Mount 


Gradual (without the Alleluia and verse) from the same Mass. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 14—VIGIL OF THE ASSUMPTION 1157 


' Gospel, As Jesus was speaking, from the Mass of our Lady 
of Mount Carmel, July 16, page 1107. 


i Offertory 
Beáta es, Virgo María, que Blessed art thou, O Virgin 
éronium portásti Creatórem: Mary, who didst bear the Crea- 
genuísti qui te fecit, et in tor of all things: thou didst 
atérnum pérmanes virgo. bring forth Him Who made 
thee, and remainest forever a 

virgin. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
ÜNERA. nostra, Dómine, Av our offerings be com- 
apud cleméntiam tu- mended to Thy mercy, 


am Dei Genitricis commén- O Lord, by the prayer of the 
det orátio: quam idcirco de mother of God, whom Thou 
presénti seculo transtulisti; hast removed from this world 
at pro peccátis nostris apud that she may with confidence 
te fiduciáliter intercédat. Per intercede for us with ‘Thee. 
eümdem Dóminum. Through the same. 
Commemoration of St. Eusebius, Secret from the Mass Os 


justi, page 1352; third Secret Sanctify, we beseech Thee, of the 
Holy Ghost, page 827, 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion 


Beáta viscera Marie Vir- Blessed is the womb of the 
ginis, que "portavérunt etérni Virgin Mary, which bore the 


Patris Pliu. s Son of the eternal Father, . 
Postcommunion ^ 
dosclik miséricors Deus, RANT Thine — [9] 
fragilitati nostra præ- merciful God, to our 


sidium: ut, qui sancte Dei frailty, that we, who anticipate 
Genitricis festivitátem præ- the festival of CGod'$ holy 
venimus: intercessiónis ejus mother, may, by the aid of her 
auxilio, a nostris iniquitáti- intercession, rise from our in- 
bus resurgámus, Per eümdem iquity. Through the same. 
Dóminum. . _ 

Commemoration of St. Eusebius from the Mass Os justi,’ page 


1352. Third Postcommunion, May our hearts, of the Holy 
Ghost, page 827. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1158 AUG. 15—ASSUMPTION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN 


MARY, WHO DIDST ENTER THE WORLD FREE FROM STAIN, DO THOU 
OBTAIN FOR ME FROM Gop THAT I MAY PASS OUT OF IT FREE FROM 
n5 (Indulgence: 100 days once a day.—Pius IX, March 27, 
1863.) 


AUG. 15 - ASSUMPTION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN 1159 


Aug. 15 - Whe Assumption of the Blessed Virgin 
füarp. (White) , 
Double of the First Class with a Common Octave 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Apoc. 12,1 


IGNUM magnum appa- 
S ruit in caelo: mulier 
amicta sole, et luna sub 
pedibus ejus, et in capite ejus 
corona stellarum duodecim. 
Ps. 97.1. Cantate Domino 
canticum novum: quia 
mirabilia fecit. v. Gloria 
Patri. 


GREAT sign appeared in 

heaven: a woman clothed 
with the sun, and the moon under 
her feet, and on her head a crown 
of twelve stars. Ps. 97. 1: Singye to 
the Lord a new canticle: because 
He hath done wonderful things. V. 
Glory be. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 


MNIPOTENS sempiterne 

Deus,quilmmaculatam 
Virginem Mariam, Filii tui 
Genitricem, corpore et anima 
ad caelestem gloriam as- 
sumpsisti; concede, 
quaesumus, ut ad superna 
semper intenti, ipsius gloriae 
mereamur esse consortes. Per 
eumdem Dominum. 


LMIGHTY, everlasting God, 

who hath taken up the Im- 
maculate Virgin Mary, the Mother 
of Thy Son, with body and soul 
into heavenly glory: grant, we 
beseech Thee, that we may al- 
ways, intent on higher things, 
deserve to be partakers of her 
glory. Through the same. 


Lesson. Judith 13.22-25;15.10 


Lectio libri Judith. 


ENEDIXIT te Dominus in 
B virtue sua, quia per te 
ad nihilum redegit inimicos 
nostros. Benedictaes tu, filia, 
a Domino Deo excelso, prae 
omnibus mulieribus super 
terram. Benedictus Dominus, 
quicreavit caelum et terram, 
qui te direxit in vulnera 
capitis principis inimicorum 
nostrorum; quia hodie nomen 
tuumita magnificavit, utnon 


Lesson from the book of Judith. 


HE Lord hath blessed thee by 
T His power, because by thee 
He hath brought our enemies to 
nought. Blessed art thou, O daugh- 
ter, by the. Lord the most high 
God, above all women upon the 
earth. Blessed be the Lord, who 
made heaven andearth, who hath 
directed thee to the cuttingoffthe 
head of the prince of our enemies; 
because He hath so magnified thy 
name this day, that thy praise 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1160 


shall not depart out of the mouth 
of men who shall be mindful ofthe 
power ofthe Lord, forever: for that 
thou hast not spared thy life, by 
reason of the distress and tribula- 
tion of thy people; but hast pre- 
vented our ruin in the presence of 
our God. Thou art the glory of 
Jerusalem, thou art the joy of 
Israel, thou art the honor of our 
people. i 


AUG. 15 - ASSUMPTION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN 


recedat laus tua de ore homi. 
num, qui memores fuerint 
virtutis Domini in aeternum, 
pro quibus non pepercisti 
animae tuae propter 
angustias et tribulationem 
generis tui, sed subvenisti 
generis tui, sed subvenisti 
ruinae ante conspectum Dei 
nostri. Tu gloria Jerusalem, 
tu laetitia Israel, tu honori- 
ficentia populi nostri. 


Gradual. Ps, 44.11-12,14 


Hearken O daughter, and see, 
incline thy ear: and the King shall 
greatly desire thy beauty. V. The 
daughter ofthe King comes in, all 
beautiful: her robes are of golden 
cloth. -~ 
Alleluia, alleluia. ~ Mary has 
been taken up into heaven, the 
choirs of angles rejoice. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Audi, filia, et.vide, et in- 
clina aurem tuam, et concu- 
piscet rex pulchritudinem 
tuam. V. Tota decora ingredi- 
tur filia regis, texturae aureae 
sunt. amictus ejus. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Vv As- 
sumpta est Maria in caelum: 
gaudetexercitus Angelorum. 
Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke I, 41-50 


T that time: Elizabeth was 
A filled with the Holy Ghost: 
and she cried out with a loud voice 
and said: Blessed art thou among 
women, and blessed is the fruit of 
thy womb. And whence is this to 
me, that the mother of my Lord 
Should come to me? For behold, as 
soon as the voice of thy salutation 
sounded in my ears, the infant in 
my womb leaped for joy. And 
blessed art thou that hast be- 
lieved, because those things 
shall be accomplished that were 
spoken to thee by the Lord. And 
Mary said, My soul doth magnify 


N illo tempore: Repleta 
I est Spiritu Sancto Eli- 
sabeth et exlamavit voce 
magna, et dixit: Benedicta tu 
inter mulieres, et benedictus 
frutus ventris tui. Et unde 
hoc mihi ut veniat mater 
Domini meiad me? Ecce enim 
ut facta et vox salutationis 
tuae in auribus meis, 
exultavit in gaudio infans in 
utero meo, Et beata, quae 
credidisti, quoniam perficien- 
tur ea, quae dicta sunt tibia 
Domino. Et ait Maria: 
Magnificat anima mea 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FL 


hou 


é 
/ 


AUG. 15 - ASSUMPTION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN 1161 


Dominum; etexsultavitspiri- the Lord; and my spirit hath re- 
tus meus in Deo salutari meo; joiced in God my Savior; because 
quia respexit humilitatem He hath regarded the humility of 
ancillae suae, ecce enim ex His handmaid: for behold from 
hoc beatam me dicent omnes henceforth all generations shall 
generationes. Quia fecit mihi call me blessed. Because He that 
magna qui potens est, etsanc- is mighty hath done great things 
tum nomenejus, et misericor- to me, and holy is His name, and 
dia ejus a progenie in proge- Hismercyisfrom generation unto 
nies timentibus eum. generations, to them that fear 
Him. 
Creed, page 765. 
Offertory. Gen III, 15 


Inimicitias ponam inter te Iwillputenmitiesbetweenthee 
etMulieremetsemen tuumet and the Woman, and between thy 
Semen illius. seed and her Seed. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


SCENDAT ad te, Domine, AY the offering of our devo- 

nostrae devotionis obla- tion ascend to Thee, O Lord; 
tio, et, beatissima Virgine Ma- and through the intercession of 
ria in caelum assumptainter- the most blessed Virgin Mary, 
cedente, corda nostra, carita- who was taken up into heaven, 
tisigne succensa, ad tejugiter mayour hearts be inflamed with 
adspirent. Per Dominum nos- the fire of love, and continually 
trum Jesum Christum. long for Thee. Through our Lord. 

Preface No. 11, page 814; this Preface is said or sung during the 

entire octave, except on a Sunday that occurs during it. 


Communion: Luke I, 48-49 


Beatam me dicent omnes All generations shall call 
generationes, quia fecit mihi meblessed, because He thatis 
magna qui potens est. mighty hath done great things 

to me. 


Postcommutnion 


* UMptis, Domine, salu- ow that we have received, O 
taribus sacramentis, da, N Lord, the Sacrament of sal- 
quaesumus, ut, meritis et vation, grant, we beseech Thee, 
intercessione beatae Virginis that through the merits and the 
Mariae incaelum assumptae, intercession of the blessed Virgin 


ad resurrectionis gl ary, who into 
hf lygiam Mary. org Was taken. up i 


1162 


heaven, we may be brought to the 
glory ofthe resurrection. Through 
our Loxd. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Aug. 16-—St. Joachim, 


AUG. 16 - ST. JOACHIM 


perducamur. Per Dominum, 


Father of the B. V. M., 


Confessor (White) 
Double of the Second Class 
'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 111,9 


E HATH distributed, he 

hath given to the poor: 
his justice remaineth forever 
and ever: his horn shall be ex- 
alted in glory. Ps. 112, 1. 
Blessed is the man that fear- 
eth the Lord: he delighteth ex- 
ceedingly in His command- 
ments. Y. Glory. 


ISPÉRSIT, dedit paupéri- 

bus: justitia ejus ma- 
net in seculum seculi: cornu 
ejus exaltábitur in glória. Ps. 
111, 1. Beátus vir, qui timet 
Dóminum: in mandatis ejus 
cupit nimis, J. Gloria Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


GoD,. Who didst will that 

blessed Joachim, in pref- 
erence to any other of Thy 
saints, should be the father 
of the mother of Thy Son, 
grant, we beseech "Thee, that, 
as we venerate his festival, we 
may continually experience his 
patronage. Through the same. 


EUS, qui pre ómnibus 

Sanctis iuis beátum 
Jóachim Genitrícis Fili tui 
patrem esse voluisti: con- 
céde, guzsumus; ut, cujus 
festa venerámur, ejus quoque 
perpétuo patrocinia sentiá- 
mus. Per eümdem Dóminum. 


Epistle, Blessed is the man, from the Mass, Os justi, page 1349. 


Gradual. Ps. 111, 9, 2 


He bath distributed, he hath 
given to the poor: his justice 
remaineth forever and ever. Y. 
His seed shall be mighty upon 
earth: the generation of the 
righteous shall be blessed. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. O holy 
Joachim, spouse of St. Anne, 


Dispérsit, dedit paupéri- 
bus: justitia ejus manet in 
seculum seculi, Y. Potens in 
terra erit semen ejus: gene- 
ratio rectórut benedicétur. 


Allelüja, alletuja. Y. O Jó- 
achim, sancte conjux Anne, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 16—ST. JOACHIM 


pater alme Virginis, hic fá- 
mulis ferto salutis opem. Al- 
lelája. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1163 


father of the kindly virgin, help 
thy servants to save their souls. 
Alleluia. 


Gospel, The book of the generation, from the Mass of the 
Vigi? of the Immaculate Conception, December 7, page 848. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 

Glória et honóre coronásti 

eum: et constituísti eum su- 

per ópera mánuum tuárum, 
Dómine. . 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 8, 6, 7 


Thou hast crowned him with 
glory and honor, and hast set 
him over the works of Thy 
hands, O Lord. 


Secret 


ÜsciPE, clementissime 

Deus, sacrifícium in ho- 
nórem sancti Patriarche Jó- 
achim, patris Marie Vírginis, 
majestáti tuse oblátum: ut, 
cum cónjuge sua, et beatís- 
sima prole intercedénte, per- 
féctam  cónsequi mereámur 
remissiónem peccatórum, et 
glóriam sempitérnam. Per 
Dóminum. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


Communion. 


Fidélis servus et prudens, 
quem constítuit dóminus su- 
per famíliam suam: ut det 
illis in témpore tritici men- 
süram. 


RACIOUSLY receive, O most 

merciful God, the sacri- 
fice offered to Thy majesty in 
honor of the holy patriarch 
Joachim, father of Mary the 
Virgin, that by his own inter- 
cession, with that of his spouse 
and their most blessed off- 
spring, we may deserve to ob- 
tain forgiveness of our sins and 
everlasting glory. Through our 
Lord. 


Luke 12, 42 


A faithful and wise steward, 
whom His lord set over His 
family; to give them their mea- 
sure of wheat in due season. 


Postcommunion 


UEsUMUS, omnípotens 

Deus: ut per hec sac- 
raménta, que simpsimus, in- 
tercedéntibus méritis et pré- 
cibus beáti Jóachim patris 
Genitricis dilécti Fílii tui Dó- 
mini nostri Jesu Christi, tue 
gratie in presénti, et ætér- 


E BESEECH Thee, O al- 
mighty God, that by 

this sacrament which we have 
received, and by the interced- 
ing merits and prayers of 
blessed Joachim, the father of 
the mother. of Thy beloved Son, 
Our Lord Jesus Christ, we may 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1164 


deserve to share Thy grace in 
the present and eternal glory 
in the future. Through the 
same. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


OCTAVE-DAY OF ST. LAWRENCE 


ne glórie in futuro partícipes 
esse mereamur. Per eumdem 
Dóminum. 


Aug. 17—$5t. Hpacinth, confessor (White) 
Double 


Mass, Os justi, page 1349. 


Commemoration of the Octave of the Assumption, Prayer, 
Secret and Postcommunion from the Mass of the Assumption, 


page 1159. 


Also of the Octave-day of St. Lawrence; Prayer, 
Secret and Postcommunion from the Mass, page 1152, 


The 


Nicene Creed and Preface of the Assumption of our Blessed 


Lady (No. 11) are said. 


The same day in churches of which St. Lawrence is the 


titular (or patron), 


The Octabe-dap of St. Lawrence, (Red) 
Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


HOU hast proved my heart, 

O Lord, and visited it by 

night: Thou hast tried me by 

fire, and iniquity hath not been 

found in me. Ps. 16, 1. Hear, O 

Lord, my justice: attend to my 
supplication. Y. Glory. 


Ps. 16, 3 


e ROBÁSTI, Dómine, cor 

meum, et visitásti noc- 
te: igne me examinásti, et 
non est invénta in me iníqui- 
tas. Ps. 16, 1. Exáudi, Dó- 
mine, justitiam meam: in- 
ténde deprecatiónem meam. 
y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ROUSE in Thy Church, O 
Lord, the Spirit which 
governed blessed Lawrence, the 
levite, that we, being filled with 
the same, may endeavor to love 
what he loved and to practise 
what he taught. Through... 
in the unity of the same. 


ess Dómine, in Ec- 
clésia tua  Spíritum, 
cui beátus Lauréntius Levíta 
servivit: ut, eódem nos re- 
piéti, studeámus amáre quod 
amávit, et Opere exercére 
quod \décuit. Per Dóminum 
unitate ejüsdem. 


. Commemoration of St. Hyacinth, Prayer from the Mass, Os 
justi, page 1349; third Prayer of the Octave of the Assumption, 


page 1159. 


Epistle as on the feast of the Assumption, page 1159. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCTAVE-DAY OP ST. LAWRENCE 


Gradual. 


Glória et honóre coronásti 
eum, Dómine. Y. Et consti- 
tuísti eum super Ópera má- 
nuum tuárum. 

Allelija, allelüja. V. Levita 
Lauréntius bonum opus ope- 
rátus est, qui per signum cru- 
cis cecos illuminávit. Alle- 
lája. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1165 


Ps. 8, 6-7 


Thou hast crowned him with 
glory and honor, O Lord. Y. 
And hast set him over the 
works of Thy hands. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. The le- 
vite Lawrence performed a 
good work, for by the sign of 


‘the cross he gave light to the 


blind, Alleluia. 


The Gospel as on the feast- of the Assumption, page 1160.: 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 

In virtüte tua, Dómine, le- 

tábitur justus: et super salu- 

tare tuum exsultabit vehe- 

ménter: desidérium anime 
ejus tribuisti ei. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 20, 2, 3 

In Thy strength, O Lord, the 
just man shall joy, and in Thy 
salvation he shall rejoice ex- 
ceedingly: Thou nast given him 
his soul’s desire. 


Secret 


Nacririctum nostrum tibi, 
Dómine, quesumus, be- 
áti.Lauréntii precátio sancta 
concíliet: ut, cujus honóre 
solémniter exhibétur, ejus 
méritis efficiátur accéptum. 
Per Dóminum, : 


AY the holy prayer of 

blessed Lawrence, O. 
Lord, we beseech Thee, com- 
mend to Thee our sacrifice: 
that it may be rendered accep- 
table by his merits in whose 
honor it is solemnly offered. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Hyacinth, from the Mass, Os justi, 


page 1352; 
1161. 
Preface No. 11, page 814. 


Communion. 


Qui vult veníre post me, 
ábneget semetípsum, et tollat 
crucem suam et sequátur me. 


third Secret of the Octave of the Assumption, page 


Matt. 16, 24 


He that will come after Me, 
Jet him deny himself, and take 
up his cross, and follow Me. 


Postcommunion 


ÜPPLICES te rogámus, om- 
nipotens Deus: ut, quos 


E HUMBLY entreat Thee, 
O almighty God, that, 


donis celéstibus satiásti, in- by the intercession of blessed 
tercedénte beato Lauréntio Lawrence, Thy martyr, Thou 
Máriyre tuo, perpétua pro- keep us under Thy continual 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1166 AUG. 19—ST. JOHN EUDES 


protection. Through our Lord. tectióne custódias. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Commemoration of St. Hyacinth, from the Mass, Os justi. 
page 1352; third Postcommunion of the Octave of the Assump- 
tion, page 1161. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Aug. 18—@®f the @ctabe of tbe Assumption, (white) 
Semi-Double 
St. Agapitus, Martyr (Red) 


Mass as on the feast of the Assumption, page 1159, with com- 


memoration of St. Agapitus, as below: 


Prayer 
ay Thy Church, O Lord, ÆTÉTUR Ecclésia tua, 
MD rejoice, trusting in the Deus, beati Agapiti 


intercession of Thy blessed Martyris tui confisa sufirá- 
martyr, Agapitus, and, through giis: atque ejus précibus glo- 
his glorious prayers, let it con- riósis, et devóta permaneat, 
tinue devout and be established et secüra consistat. Per Dó- 
in security. Through our Lord. minum. 


Secret 
ECEIVE, O Lord, the gifts ÓsciPE, Dómine, münera 
which we bring on the S que in ejus tibi solemni- 
solemnity of him by whose pat- tate deférimus: cujus nos 
ronage we trust to be relieved. confídimus patrocínio libe- 
Through our Lord. rari. Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


Hou hast regaled Thy ATIÁSTI, Dómine, famíli- 
household, O Lord, with S am tuam  munéribus 
the gifts of Thy holy sacra- sacris: ejus, quesumus, sem- 
ment; ever comfort us, we be- per interventióne nos réfove, 
Seech, with his protection, cujus solémnia celebrámus. 
whose feast we celebrate. Per Dóminum. 
Through our Lord. 


Aug. 19—St. John Eudes, Confessor (White) 


` Double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, ezcept the Prayer as below: 


A commemoration of the Octave of the Assumption is made, 
Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion, page 1159, 


Prayer. 


cop, Who, to rightly pro- EUS, qui beátum Joán- 
mote the worship of the nem Confessórem tu- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 21—ST. JANE FRANCES DE CHANTAL 


um, ad cultum sacrórum Cór- 
dium Jesu et Mariæ rite pro- 
movéndum, mirabiliter in- 
flammásti, et per eum novas 
in Ecclésia tua famílias con- 
gregáre voluísti: presta, que- 
sumus: ut cujus pia mérita 
venerámur, virtütum quoque 
instruámur  exémplis. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


1167 


Sacred Hearts of Jesus and 
Mary, hast wonderfuly in- 
fiamed blessed John Thy con- 
fessor, and through him hast 
willed to assemble new fami- 
lies in Thy Church; grant, we 
beseech Thee, that we may both 
venerate his pious merits and 
be edified by the examples of 
his virtues. Through the same. 


Aug. 20—St. Bernard, Abbot, Doctor (White) 


Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344. 


Commemoration is made of the Octave of the Assumption, 
Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion, page 1159. 


Epistle, The just man, found at the end of the Mass, In 


medio, page 1348. 
Preface No. 11, page 814. 


Aug. 21—St. Jane Frances de Chantal, Widow 
(White) 


Double 
Mass, Cognovi, page 1383, except the Prayer, Secret and Post- 


communion below: 


Commemoration is made of the Octave of the Assumption, 
rayer, Secret and Posicommunion, page 1159. 


Nicene Creed, page 765. 


Prayer 


MNíPOTENS et miséricors 
Deus, qui beátam Joán- 

nam Francíscam tuo amóre 
succénsam, admirábili spíri- 
tus fortitüdine per omnes vi- 
te sémitas in via perfectiónis 
donásti, quique per illam il- 
lustrare Ecclésiam tuam nova 
prole voluísti: ejus méritis et 
précibus concéde; ut, qui in- 
firmitátis nostre cénscii de 
tua virtüte confidimus, celés- 


LMIGHTY and merciful 
‘ God, Who didst endow 
blessed Jane Frances, burning 
with love of Thee, with an ad- 
mirable strength of soul 
through all the paths of life in 
the way of perfection, and Who 
wast pleased to glorify Thy 
Church with a new family by 
her means, grant to her merits 
and prayers that we, who, con- 
scious of our own infirmity, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1168 AUG.22—IMMACULATE HEART OF BLESSED VIRGIN . 


trust in Thy power, may, by the tis gratie auxílio, cuncta no- 
assistance of divine grace, con- bis adversántia vincámus. Per 


quer all obstacles which beset 
us. Through our Lord. 


Dóminum. 


Secret 


ay this saving Victim, O 
Lord, inflame us with 
that fire of love with which it 
vehemently kindled tbe heart 
of blessed Jane Frances, burn- 
ing it away with the flames of 
eternal charity. Through our 
Lord. , 
Preface No. 11, page 814. 


LLO nos amóris igne, quae- 

sumus, Dómine, hec hós- 

tia salutaris inflammet: quo 

beáte Jodnne Francíscm cor 

veheménter incéndit, et flam- 

mis adüssit etérne caritatis. 
Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


OUR upon us, O Lord, the 
P spirit of Thy love, that 
we, whom Thou hast filled with 
the virtue of the heavenly 
bread, may, by tbe intercession 
of blessed Jane Frances, be 
made to despise earthly things 
and with pure minds seek only 
Thee, our God. Through our 
Lord. 


pirirum nobis, Dómine, 

tug caritátis infünde; ut, 
quos celéstis panis virtüte 
satiasti, beáta Joanna Fran- 
císca intercedénte, fácias ter- 
réna despicere, et te solum 
Deum pura mente sectari. 
Per Déminum, 


Aug. 22—The Feast of the Immaculate Beart 
of the Blessed Virgin Mary, (White) 


Double of the Second Class 
Sts. Timothy, Hippolptus, and Spmpbhorian, Martyrs 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Heb. 4, 16 


pEÁMUS cum fidücio ad ET Us GO with confidence 
thronum gratiz, ut mi- to the throne of grace, 


sericérdiam  consequamur, et 
grátiam inveniámus in auxí- 
lio opportüno Ps. 44, 2. Eru- 
cíávit cor meum verbum 
bonum: dico ego ópera mea 
regi Y. Glória Patri. 


that we may obtain mercy and 
find grace in seasonable aid. 
Ps. 44, 2. My heart hath ut- 
tered a good word: I speak my 
works to the King, Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG.22—IMMACULATE HEART OF BLESSED VIRGIN 11684 


Prayer 


MNÍPOTENS sempiterne 

Deus, qui in Corde beá- 
te Maríe Virginis dignum 
Spíritus Sancti Habitáculum 
preparásti: concéde propítius 
ut ejüsdem immaculáti Cor- 
dis festivitatem devóta: men- 
te recoléntes, secündum cor 
tuum vivere valéamus. Per 
Dóminum .. . in unitate ejüs- 
dem. i 


In Low Masses only, there 
St. Timothy and Companions. 


LMIGHTY, everlasting 

God, who didst prepare 
in the Heart of the Virgin 
Mary a worthy dwelling-place 
for the Holy Ghost; mercifully 
grant that we, devoutly con- 
templating the festivity of the 
same Immaculate Heart,- may 
be enabled to live according to 
Thy heart. Through our Lord 
.. . in union with the same.. 


is made a commemoration of 


Prayer 


uxitium tuum nobis 
Dómine, quesumus, 
placátus impénde: et, inter- 
cedéntibus beátis Martyribus 
tuis Timótheo, Hippólyto et 
Symphoriáno déxteram super 
nos tue propitiationis ex- 
ténde. Per Dóminum. 


'polytus, 


‘hand 


E APPEASED, O Lord, and 
bestow Thine assistance 


‘upon us, we beseech Thee, and 


by the intercession of Thy 
blessed martyrs, Timothy, Hip- 
and Symphorian, 
stretch forth upon us the right 
of Thy forgiveness. 
Through our Lord, 


Lesson, AS the vine I have brought forth, from the Mass for 
the Feast of the Maternity of the B.M.V., page 1233. 


Gradual. 


Exsultabit cor meum in 

salutari tuo: cantábo Dómino 
qui bona tríbuit mihi: * et 
psallam nómini Dómini altís- 
simi. Y. Ps. 44, 18. Mé- 
mores erunt nóminis tui: 
in omni generatióne et gene- 
ratiónem: Proptérea pópuli 
confitebüntur tibi in etér- 
num. 
Allelüja, allelija. V. Luc. 
1, 46, 47. Magnificat ánima 
mea Dóminum: et.exsultávit 
spíritus meus in Deo salutári 
meo. Allelája. 


Ps. 12, 6 


My heart shall rejoice in thy 
salvation: I wil sing to the 
Lord, who giveth me good 
things: yea I will sing to the 


name of the Lord the most high. 


Y. Ps. 44, 18. They shall re- 
member thy name throughout 
all generations. Therefore shall 
People praise thee for ever: yea, 
for ever and ever. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Luke 
1, 46, 47. My soul doth magnify 
the Lord. And my spirit hath 
rejoiced in God my Saviour. 
Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1168p AUG. 22—IMMACULATE HEART OF BLESSED VIRGIN 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel, At that time there stood, from the Mass for the Seven 
Dolors of the B.M.V., page 971. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Luke 1, 46, 49 


Exsultávit spíritus meus in My spirit hath rejoiced in 
Deo salutári meo; quia fecit God my Saviour; because He 
mihi magna qui potens est, that is mighty hath done great 


et sanctum nomen ejus. 


things to me: and holy is His 
name. 


Secret 


AJESTÁTI iue, Dómine, 

Agnum immaculátum 
Offeréntes, qusesumus: ut 
corda nostra ignis ille divinus 
accéndat, qui Cor beate 
Marie Virginis ineffabíliter 
inflammávit. Per etimdem 
Dóminum. 


FFERING THE Immaculate 

Lamb to Thy Majesty, O 
Lord, we beg that the divine 
fire which ineffably inflamed 
the Heart of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary may be lighted in our 
hearts. 'Through the same 
Lord... 


Commemoration of Sts. Timothy and Companions. 


Secret 


CCcÉPTA tibi sit, Dómine, 

sacrate plebis oblátio 
pro tuórum honóre Sanctó- 
rum: quorum se méritis de 
tribulatióne  percepísse co- 
gnóscit auxílium. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


AY the offering of Thy 
Monserata people be ac- 
ceptable to Thee, O Lord, for 
the honor of Thy saints, by 
whose merits it knoweth that 
it hath received help from trib- 
ulation. Through our Lord. 


- Communion. John 19, 27 


Dixit Jesus matri suæ: Jesus said to His mother: 
Múlier, ecce fílius tuus: dein- Woman, behold thy son: 'Then 
de dixit discípulo: Ecce mater He said to the disciple: Behold 
tua. Et ex illa hora accépit thy mother. And from that 
eam discípulus in sua. hour, the disciple took her to 

: his own. 


Postcommunion 


Ivints refécti munéribus EFRESHED by divine gifts 
te, Démine, suppliciter we humbly beseech Thee, 
exorámus: ut beáte Marie O Lord, that, by the interces- 
Virginis intercessióne, cujus sion of ‘the Blessed Virgin 
immaculati Cordis solémnia Mary, the solemnity of whose 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 24—ST. BARTHOLOMEW, APOSTLE 


venerándo égimus, a præ- 
séntibus  perículis  liberáti, 
ætérnæ vitæ gáudia consequá- 
mur. Per Dóminum, 


1169 


Immaculate Heart we have 
just venerated, we may be 
freed from present dangers and 
may attain to the joys of eter- 
nal life, Through the Lord... 


Commemoration of Sts. Timothy and Companions. 


Postcommunion 


1vinr müneris largitáte 

Satiáti, quesumus, Dó- 
mine Deus noster: ut, inter- 
cedéntibus sanctis Martyri- 
bus tuis Timótheo, Hippólyto 
ct Symphoriáno, in ejus sem- 
per participatióne vivámus. 
Per Dóminum. 


ILLED With the abundance 

of the divine offering, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, our God, 
that, by the intercession of Thy 
holy martyrs, Timothy, Hip- 
polytus, and. Symphorian, we 
may ever live: by the partaking 
of the same. Through our Lord. 


Aug. 23—$5t. Philip Benizi, Confessor (White) 
Double 


The "Vigil of St. Bartholomew, Apostle (Purple) 


Mass, Justus ut palma, page 1352, except ihe Prayer as below: 


Commemoration of the Vigil of St. Bartholomew, Prayer, 
ag and Postcommunion from the Mass, Ego autem, page 


Last Gospel, This is My commandment, from the Mass, Ego 


autem, page 1300. 


Prayer 


EUs, qui per beátum 
D Philippum Confessér- 
em tuum, exímium nobis hu- 
militátis exémplum tribuísti: 
da famulis tuis próspera 
mundi ex ejus imitatióne de- 
Spícere, et celéstia semper in- 
quírere. Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who, through blessed 

Philip, Thy confessor, 
hast afforded us a distinguished 
example of humility, grant 
unto Thy servants to despise, 
after his example, the pros- 
perity of the world and ever to 


‘seek after heavenly things. 


Through our Lord. 


Aug. 24—TUhe Feast of St. Bartholomety, Apostle 
(Red) 
Double of the Second Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 138, 17 


IHI autem nimis hono- o ME Thy friends, O God, 
rati sunt amíci tui, are made exceedingly hcn- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1170 


orable: their principality is ex- 
ceedingly strengthened. Ps. 138, 
1, 2. Lord, Thou hast proved 
me, and known me: Thou hast 
known my sitting down and my 
rising up. V. Glory. 


AUG. 24—ST. BARTHOLOMEW, APOSTLE 
Deus: nimis confortátus est 


principátus eórum. Ps. 138, 
1, 2. Dómine, probásti me, et 
cognovisti me: tu cognovísti 
Sessiónem meam, et resurrec- 
tiónem meam, f. Gloria 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

Who hast bestowed on 
us the august and holy joy of 
this day by the festival of Thy 
blessed apostle Bartholomew, 
grant unto Thy Church, we be- 
seech Thee, both to love what 
he believed and to preach what 
he taught. Through our Lord. 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 
Deus, qui hujus diéi ve- 
nerándam sanctámque letí- 
tiam in beáti Apóstoli tui 
Bartholomai festivitáte tri- 
buísti: da Ecclésie tue, quæ- 
sumus; et amáre quod crédi- 
dit, et predicáre quod dócuit. 
Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 12, 27-31 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. : 


RETHREN, you are the body 
\ of Christ, and members 
of member. And God indeed 
hath set some in the Church, 
first apostles, secondly pro- 
phets, thirdly doctors, after 
that miracles, then the graces 
of healings, helps, governments, 
kinds of tongues, interpreta- 
tions of speeches. Are all apos- 
tles? Are all prophets? Are all 
doctors? Are all workers of mir- 
acles? Have all the grace of 
healing? Do all speak with 
tongues? Do all interpret? But 
be ye zealous for the better 
gifts. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Vos estis corpus 
Christi, et membra de 
membro. Et quosdam quidem 
pósuit Deus in Ecclésia pri- 
mum apóstolis, secündo pro- 
phétas, tértio doctóres, deínde 
virtütes, exínde grátias cura- 
tiónum, opitulatiónes, guber- 
natiónes, génera linguárum, 
interpretatiónes  sermónum. 
Numquid omnes apóstoli? 
numquid omnes prophétæ? 
numquid omnes doctóres? 
numquid  ommes  virtütes? 
numquid omnes grátiam ha- 
bent curatiónum? numquid 
omnes liguis loquüntur? 
numquid omnes interpretán- 
tur? ZEmulámini autem 
charísmata melióra. 


Gradual. Ps. 44, 17, 18 


Thou shalt make 
princes over all the earth: they 


them _ 


Constítues eos príncipes 
super omnem terram: mémo- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 24—ST. BARTHOLOMEW, APOSTLE 


res erunt nóminis tui, Dó- 
mine, V. Pro pátribus tuis 
nati sunt tibi fílii: proptérea 
Populi confitebüntur tibi, 


Alelüja, allelüja. Y. Te 


gloriésus Apostolórum chorus 
laudat, Dómine. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1171 


Shall be mindful of Thy name, 
O Lord. Y. Instead of Thy 
fathers sons are born to Thee: 
therefore shall people praise 
Thee. ` i 

Aleluia, alleluia. V. Thee, 
the glorious choir of the apos- 
tles doth praise, O Lord. Alle- 
luia. 


Gospel. Luke 6, 12-19 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Exiit Je- 
T sus in montem oráre, et 
erat pernóctans. in oratióne 
Dei. Et cum dies factus esset, 
vocávit discípulos suos, et 
elégit duódecim ex ipsis (quos 
et Apóstolos nominávit): Si- 
mónem, quem cognominávit 
Petrum, et Andréam fratrem 
ejus, Jacóbum et Joánnem, 
Philippum et Bartholomeum, 
Mattheum et Thomam, Ja- 
cóbum Alphæi et Simónem, 
qui vocátur Zelótes, et Judam 
Jacóbi, et Judam Iscariótem, 
qui fuit próditor. Et descén- 
dens cum illis, stetit in loco 
campéstri, et turba discipu- 
lórum ejus, et multitüdo co- 
piósa plebis ab omni Judea, 
et Jerüsalem, et marítima, et 
Tyri, et Sidónis, qui vénerant 
ut audírent eum, et sanarén- 
tur a languóribus suis. Et qui 
vexabántur a spirítibus im- 
mündis curabántur. Et omnis 
turba querébat eum tángere: 
quia virtus de ilo exíbat et 
sanábat omnes. 


Creed, Page 765. 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to. St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus went 
out into a mountain to 
pray, and He passed the whole 
night in the prayer of God: 
and when day was come, He 
called unto Him His disciples; 
and He chose twelve of them 
(whom also He named apos- 
ile, Simon whom He sur- 
named Peter, and Andrew his 
brother, James and. John, 
Philip and Bartholomew, Mat- 
thew and Thomas, James the 
son of Alpheus, and Simon who 
is called Zelotes, and Jude the 
brother of James, and Judas 
Iscariot, who was the traitor. 
And coming down with them, 
He stood in a plain place, and 
the company of His disciples, 
and a very great multitude of 
people from all Judea and Je- 
rusalem, and the seacoast, both 
of Tyre and Sidon, who were 
come to hear Him, and to be 
healed of their diseases. And 
they that were troubled with 
unclean spirits were cured. And 
all the multitude sought to 
touch Him, for virtue went out 
from Him, and healed all. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1172 


AUG. 25—ST. LOUIS 


Offertory. Ps. 138, 17 


To me Thy friends, O God, 
are made exceedingly honor- 
able: their principality is ex- 
ceedingly strengthened. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Mihi autem nimis honoráti 
sunt amíci tui, Deus: nimis 
confortátus est principátus 
eórum. 


Secret 


OMMEMORATING the feast 

of Thy blessed apostle 
Bartholomew, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, that we may obtain 
Thy blessings by his aid for 
whom we immolate sacrifices 
of praise to Thee. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. 

You, who have followed Me, 
shall sit on seats, judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel, saith 
the Lord. 


EÁTI Apóstoli tui Bar- 

tholomzi solémnia re- 
censéntes, qusesumus, Dó- 
mine: ut ejus auxílio tua 
benefícia capiámus, pro quo 
tibi laudis hóstias immolá- 
mus, Per Dóminum. 


Matt. 19, 28 

Vos, qui secuti estis me, 
Sedébitis super sedes, judi- 
cántes duódecim tribus Israel, 
dicit Dóminus. 


Postcommunion 


Av the pledge of 
(D everlasting redemption, 
which we have received, O 
Lord, be unto us, we beseech 
Thee, by the intercession of 
blessed Bartholomew Thine 
apostle, an aid alike for the 
present and the future life. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


CN uuPTUM, Dómine, pignus 
redemptiónis etérne: sit 
nobis, quesumus; interveni- 
énte be&áto Bartholomeo Apó- 
stolo tuo, vite preséntis aux- 
ilium páriter et futüre. Per 
Dóminum. 


Aug. 25—St. Louis, King of France, Confessor - 
(White) 


Semi-Double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


Go», Who didst take Thy 
blessed confessor, Louis, 


EUS, Qui beátum Ludo- 
vícum Confess6érem tu- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


dini, = 


AUG. 25—ST. LOUIS 


um de terréno regno ad celés- 
tis regni glóriam transtulísti: 
ejus, quesumus, méritis et in- 
tercessióne; Regis regum Jesu 
Christi Fílii tui fácias nos 
esse consórtes: Qui tecum. 


1178 


from an earthly throne to the 
glory of the heavenly kingdom, 
by his merits and intercession 
we beseech Thee that Thou 
make us to be associates of the 
King of kings, Jesus Christ Thy 
Son. Who with Thee. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle, The Lord conducted the just, from the Mass, In vir- 


tute, page 130: 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Luke 19, 12-26 


H3 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Lucam. 


T ILLO témpore: Dixit Je-. 


sus discípulis suis pará- 
bolam hanc: Homo quidam 
nóbilis ábiit in regiónem lon- 
gínquam accfpere sibi reg- 
num et revérti. Vocátis autem 
decem servis suis, dedit eis 
decem mnas et ait ad illos: 
Negotiámini dum vénio. Cives 
autem ejus óderant eum: et 
misérunt legatiónem post il- 
lum, dicéntes: Nólumus hunc 
regnáre super nos. Et factum 
est, ut redíret, accépto regno; 
et jussit Vocári servos, quibus 
dedit pecüniam, ut sciret 
quantum quisque negotiátus 
esset. Venit autem primus, 
dicens: Dómine mna tua de- 
cem mnas acquisivit. Et ait 
jlli: Euge bone serve, quia in 
médico fuísti fidélis, eris po- 
testátem habens super decem 
civitátes. Et alter venit, di- 
cens; Dómine, mna tua fecit 
quinque mnas, Et huic ait: 
Et tu esto super quinque civi- 
tátes. Et alter venit, dicens: 
Dómine, ecce mna tua, quam 
hábui repósitam in sudário; 
tímui enim te, quia homo 


"f Continuation. of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time Jesus spoke 

this parable to His dis- 

ciples: A certain nobleman 
went into a far country to re- 
ceive for himself & kingdom, 
and to return. And calling his 
ten servants, he gave them ten 
pounds; and said to them, 
Trade till I come. But his citi- 
zens hated him; and they sent 
an embassage after him, say- 
ing, We will not have this man 
to reign over us. And it came 
to pass that he réturned, hav- 
ing received the kingdom; and 
he commanded his servants to 
be calied, to whom he had given 
the money, that he might know 
how much every man had 
gained by trading. And the 
first came, saying, Lord, thy 
pound hath gained ten pounds: 
2nd he said to him, Well done, 
thou. good servant, because 
thou hast been faithful in & 
little, thou shalt have power 
over ten cities. And the second 
came, saying, Lord, thy pound 
hath gained five pounds: and 
he said to him, Be thou also 
over five cities. And another 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1174 AUG. 25—ST. LOUIS 


came, saying, Lord, behold, 
here is thy pound, which I have 
kept laid up in à napkin; for 
I feared thee, because thou art 
an austere man; thou takest 
up what thou didst not lay 
down, and thou reapest that 
which thou didst not sow. He 
saith to him, Out of thy own 
mouth I judge thee, thou 
wicked servant. Thou knowest 
that I was an austere man, 
taking up what I laid not 
down, and reaping that which 
I did not sow: and why then 
didst thou not give my money 
into the bank, that at my com- 
ing I might have exacted it 
with usury? And he said to 
them that stood by, Take the 
pound away from him, and give 


austérus es: tollis quod non 
posuisti, et metis quod non 
seminásti. Dicit ei: De ore 
tuo te jüdico, serve nequam. 
Sciébas quod ego homo aus- 
térus sum, tollens duod non 
pósui, et metens quod non 
Seminávi: et quare non de- 
disti pecüniam meam ad 
mensam, ut ego véniens cum 
usüris ütique exegissem il- 
lam? Et adstántibus dixit: 
Auférte ab illo mnam, et date 
illi, qui decem mnas habet. Et 
dixérunt ei: Dómine, habet 
decem mnas. Dico autem vo- 
bis: Quia omni habénti dá- 
bitur, et abundábit: ab eo 
autem qui non habet, et quod 
habet, auferétur ab eo. 


it to him that hath the ten pounds. And they sald to Him, 
Lord, he hath ten pounds. But I say to you, that to every one 
that hath shall be given, and he shall abound; and from him 
that hath not, even that which he hath shall be taken from 


him. 


Ss ecret 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that as 
blessed Louis, Thy ‘confessor, 
spurning the delights of the 
world, strove only to please 
Christ, his King, so his prayer 
may render us acceptable to 
Thee. Through our Lord. ` 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at thë 


RÆSTA, quæsumus, omní- 

potens Deus: ut, sicut 
beátus Ludovícus Conféssor 
tuus, spretis mundi oblecta- 
méntis, soli Regi Christo pla- 
cére stüduit; ita ejus orátio 
nos tibi reddat accéptos. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Postcommunion 


cop, Who didst make Thy 

blessed confessor, Louis, 
wonderful on earth and glori- 
ous in heaven, constitute him, 
we beseech Thee, the defender 
of Thy Church. Through our 
Lord. 


EUS, qui beátum Confes- 

Sórem tuum Ludovi- 

cum mirificásti in terris, et 

gloriósum in celis fecísti: 

eümdem, quesumus, Ecclésie 

tue constítue defensórem. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. , 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 27—ST. JOSEPH CALASANCTIUE 


1178 


Aug. 26—@t. Zephprinus, Pope, Martyr (Red) 
Simple 
Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302, except: 


Prayer 


REGEM tuum, Pastor æ- 
térne,  placátus . in- 
ténde: et per beátum Zephy- 
rínum Mártyrem tuum atque 
Summum  Pontíficem, per- 
pétua  protectióne  custódi; 
quem totíus Ecclésiz prestiti- 
sti esse pastórem. Per Dómi- 
num. 


ETERNAL Shepherd, do 

Thou look favorably upon 
Thy flock, which we beseech 
Thee to guard and keep for 
evermore through the blessed 
Zephyrinus Thy Martyr and 
Supreme Pontiff, whom Thou 
didst choose to be the chief 
shepherd of the whole Church 
Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827, with its accompanying 
Secret and Postcommunion; third at the choice of the priest, 


pages 1494-1500. 


Aug. 27—St. Joseph Calasanctius, Confessor (White) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


ENÍTE, fili, audite me: 

timórem Dómini docébo 
vos. Ps. 33, 2. Benedícam Dó- 
minum in omni témpore: 
semper laus ejus in ore meo. 
X. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 


Ps. 33, 12 


‘ome, children, harken to 

me: I will teach you the 
fear of the Lord. Ps. 33, 2. I will 
bless the Lord at all times: His 
praise shall be ever in my 
mouth. ¥. Glory. 


762. 


Prayer 


eus, qui per sanctum 

Joséphum Confessórem 
tuum, ad erudiéndam spíritu 
intelligéntie ac pietátis ju- 
ventütem, novum  Ecclésie 
tue subsidium proveníre di- 
gnátus es: presta, quesumus; 
nos, ejus exémplo et interces- 
sióne, ita fácere et docére, ut 
premia consequámur ztérna. 
Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who, through St. 

Joseph, Thy Confessor, 
didst vouchsafe to provide Thy 
Church with & new aid for the 
education of youth in the 
spirit of piety and understand- 
ing, grant us, we beseech Thee, 
so to do and to teach after his 
example that we may attain 
eternal rewards. Through our 
Lord. 


Epistle, The Lord conducted the just, from the Mass In vir- 


tute, page 1309. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1176 


AUG. 27—ST. JOSEPH CALASANCTIUS 


Gradual, Ps. 36, 30, 31 


The mouth of the just shall 
meditate wisdom, and his 
tongue shall speak judgment. 
Y. The law of his God is in his 
heart: and his steps shall not 
be supplanted. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. James 
1, 12. Blessed is the man that 
endureth temptation: for when 
he hath been proved he shall 
receive the crown of life. Alle- 
luia. 


‘Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Os justi meditabitur sapi- 
éntiam, et lingua ejus loqué- 
tur judícium. V. Lex Dei ejus 
in corde ipsíus: et non sup- 
plantabüntur gressus ejus. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Jac. 
1, 12. Beátus vir, qui suffert 
tentatiónem: quóniam cum 
probátus füerit, accípiet coró- 
nam vite. Allelija. 


Gospel. Matt. 18, 1-5 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, the disciples 
came to Jesus, saying, 
Who, thinkest Thou, is the 
greater in the kingdom of hea- 
ven? And Jesus calling unto 
Him a little child, set him in 
the midst of them, and said, 
Amen I say to you, unless you 
be converted, and become as 
little children, you shall not 
enter into the kingdom of hea- 
ven. Whosoever therefore shall 
humble himself as this little 
child, he is the greater in the 
kingdom of heaven; and he 
that shall receive one such lit- 
tle child in My name, receiveth 
Me, 


Offertory. 


The Lord hath heard the de- 
sire of the poor: Thy ear hath 
heard the preparation of their 
heart. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


H6 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secüóndum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Accessé- 

runt discípuli ad Jesum 
dicéntes: Quis putas major 
est in regno celórum? Et ád- 
vocans Jesus párvulum, stá- 
tuit eum in médio eórum, et 
dixit: Amen dico vobis, nisi 
convérsi füéritis, et efficia- 
mini sicut párvuli, non intrá- 
bitis in regnum colórum. Qui- 
cümque ergo humiliáverit se 
sicut párvulus iste, hic est 
major in regno celórum. Et 
qui suscéperit unum párvu- 
lum talem in nómine meo, 
me suscipit, 


Ps. 9, 17 


Desidérium páuperum ex- 
audivit Dóminus: preparati- 
ónem cordis eórum audivit 
auris tua. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 28—ST. AUGUSTINE 


1177 


Secret 


LTÁRE tuum, Dómine, 

munéribus cumulá- 

mus oblátis: ut ejus nobis 

fiant supplicatióne propítia, 

cujus nos donásti patrocínio 
adjuvári. Per Dóminum. 


E HEAP Thine altar, O 

Lord, with gifts offered 
to Thee, that they may be 
made effectual for mercy by 
his supplication by whose pa- 
tronage Thou hast granted us 
to be assisted. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 

Sínite párvulos veníre ad 
me, et ne probibuéritis eos: 
tálium est enim regnum Dei. 


Mark 10, 14 

Suffer little children to come 
to Me, and forbid them not, 
for of such is the kingdom of 
God. 


Postcommunion 


ANCTIFICÁTI, Dómine, sal- 

utari mystério: quesu- 
mus: ut, intercedénte sancto 
Josépho Confessóre tuo, ad 
majus semper proficiamus 
pietátis increméntum. Per 
Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ANCTIFIED by the mystery 

of salvation, O Lord, we 
pray that, by the intercession 
of St. Joseph, Thy confessor, 
we may ever progress to a 
greater increase of  piety. 
Through our Lord. 


Aug. 28— Ht. Augustine, Bishop, Confessor 
Doctor of the Church (White) 
Double 
St. Hermes, Martyr 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer 


DÉSTO supplicatiénibus 
nostris, omnípotens 
Deus: et, quibus fidüciam 
speránde  pietátis indulges, 
intercedénte beáto Augustine, 
Confessóre tuo atque Pontí- 
fice, consuéte misericérdie 
tríbue benígnus efféctum. Per 
Dóminum, 


G™ ear to our prayers, O 
almighty God, and, by 
the intercession of blessed Au- 
gustine, Thy confessor and 
bishop, graciously grant the 
effect of ‘Thine accustomed 
mercy to those in whom Thou 
dost encourage a strong trust. 
in the kindness which is their 
hope. Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Hermes. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1178 


AUG. 28—ST. AUGUSTINE 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst strengthen 

blessed Hermes, Thy 
martyr, with the virtue of con- 
stancy in his suffering, grant 
us, in imitation of him, to 
despise the prosperity of the 
world for love of Thee, and not 
to fear worldly adversity. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui beátum Hermé- 
tem Martyrem tuum 
virtüte constantie in passióne 
roborasti: ex ejus nobis imi- 
tatióne trfbue; pro amóre tuo 
préspera mundi despícere, et 
nulla ejus advérsa formidáre. 
Per Dóminum. 


Gradual. Ps. 36, 30, 51 


The mouth of the just shall 
Meditate wisdom and his 
tongue shall speak judgment. 
¥. The law of his God is in 
his heart: and his steps shall 
not be supplanted. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 88, 
21. I have found David my ser- 
vant: with my holy oil I have 
anointed him. Alleluia. 


Os justi meditábitur sapi- 
éntiam, et lingua ejus loqué- 
tur judicium. Y. Lex Dei ejus 
in corde ipsíus: et non sup- 
plantabüntur gressus ejus. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 88, 
21. Invéni David servum me- 
um, óleo sancto meo unxi 
eum. Allelája. 


For St. Hermes the Secret and Postcommunion are as fol- 


Ows: 


Secret 


E OFFER 'Thee, O Lord, 

the sacrifice of praise 
in commemoration of Thy 
saints; grant, we beseech Tee, 
that what hath conferred glory 
on them may profit us unto 
salvation. Through our Lord. 


laudis offérimus in tuó- 
rum commemoratióne Sanc- 
tórum: da, quesumus; ut, 
quod illis cóntulit glóriam, 
nobis prosit ad salütem. Per 
Dóminum. 


Seas on tibi, Dómine, 


Postcommunion 


ILLED With heavenly bless- 

ings, O Lord, we beseech 

Thy mercy that, by the inter- 

cession of blessed Hermes, Thy 

martyr, we may feel the salu- 

tary effects of that which we 

humbly perform. Through our 
Lord. 


EPLÉTI, Dómine, bene- 

dictióne celésti, que- 
sumus cleméntiam tuam: ut, 
intercedénte beáto Herméte 
Mártyre tuo, que humiliter 
gérimus, salübriter sentiá- 
mus, Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 29 BEHEADING OF ST. JOHN BAPTIST 1179 


Aug. 29— The Beheading of St. Jobn the Baptist 
(Red) 
Double Major ` 


St. Sabina, Martyr (Red) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 118, 46, 47 


| 


OQUÉBaR de testimóniis 

tuis in conspéctu re- 
gum,-et non confundébar: et, 
meditábar.in mandátis tuis, 
que diléxi nimis. Ps. 91, 2. 
Bonum est confitéri Dómino: 
te psállere nómini tuo, Altís- 
sime. Y. Glória Patri. 


SPOKE Of Thy testimonies 

before kings, and I was not 
ashamed: I meditated also on 
Thy commandments, which I 
loved exceedingly. Ps. 91, 2. 
Jt is good to give praise to the 
Lord; and to sing to Thy name, 
O Most High. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ANCTI Joánnis Baptíste 

Precursóris, et Martyris 
tui, quesumus, Dómine, vene- 
ránda festivitas salutáris 
auxilii nobis prestet efféct- 
um: Qui vivis. 


ay the august festival of 

St. John the Baptist, 
Thy precursor and martyr, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, effect 
for us the furtherance of our 
salvation. Who livest. 


Conimemoration of St. Sabina from the Mass Loquebar, page 
359. 


Lesson. 
Léctio Jeremie Prophétæ. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Factum est 
T verbum Dómini ad me, 
dicens: Accínge lumbos tuos, 
et surge, et lóquere ad Juda 
ómnia, que ego precipio tibi, 
Ne formídes a facie eórum: 
nec enim timére te fáciam 
vultum eórum. Ego quippe, 
dedi te hódie in civitátem 
münitam, et in colümnam 
férream, et in murum zreum, 
super omnem terram, régibus 
Juda, princípibus ejus, et 


Jer. 1, 17-19 


Lesson from Jeremias the 
Prophet. 


N THOSE days: The word of 

the Lord.came to me, say- 
ing, Gird up thy loins, and 
arise, and speak to Juda all 
that I command thee. Be not 
afraid at their presence; for I 
will make thee not to fear their 
countenance. For behold I have 
made thee this day a fortified 
city, and a pillar of iron, and 
a wall of brass, over all the 
Jand, to the kings of Juda, to 
the princes thereof. and to the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1180 AUG. 29.-BEHEADING OF ST. JOHN BAPTIST 


priests, and to the people of 
the land. And they shall fight 
against thee, and shall not pre- 
vail: for I am with thee, saith 
the Lord, to deliver thee. 


sacerdótibus, et pópulo terre. 
Et bellábunt advérsum te, et 
non prevalébunt: quia ego 
tecum sum, ait Dóminus, ut 
liberem te. 


Gradual. Ps. 91, 13, 14 


The just shall flourish like 
the palm-tree; he shall grow 
up like the cedar of Libanus in 
the house of the Lord. ¥. To 
show forth Thy mercy in the 
morning and Thy truth in the 
night. . 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Osee 14, 
6. The just shall spring as the 
lily, and flourish forever before 
the Lord. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Justus ut palma florébit: 
sicut cedrus Líbani multipli- 
cábitur in domo Dómini. Y. 
Ad annuntiándum mane mi- 
sericórdiam tuam, et veritá- 
tem tuam per noctem. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Osee 
14, 6. Justus germinabit sicut 
lilium: ét florébit in etérnum 
ante Dóminum. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Mark 6, 17-29 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 
T THAT time: Herod sent 

and apprehended John, 

and bound him in prison for 
the sake of Herodias, the wife 
of Philip his brother, because 
he had married her, For John 
said to Herod, It is not lawful 
for thee to have thy brother’s 
wife. Now Herodias laid snares 
for him, and was desirous to 
put him to death, and could 
not. For Herod feared John, 
knowing him to be a just and 
holy man, and kept him, and 
when he heard him did many 
things; and he heard him will- 
ingly. And when a convenient 
day was come, Herod made 2 
supper for his birthday, for 
the princes, and tribunes, and 
chief men of Galilee. And 
when the daughter of the same 


4H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Marcum. 
I^ ILLO témpore: Misit Hé- 
rodes, ac ténuit Joánnem, 
et vinxit eum in cárcere prop- 
ter Herodíadem uxorem Phi- 
lippi fratris sui, quia düxerat 
eam. Dicébat enim Joánnes 
Heródi: Non licet tibi habére 
uxórem fratris tui  Heró- 
dias autem insidiabátur illi, et 
volébat occídere eum, nec pó- 
terat. Heródes enim metué- 


‘bat Joánnem, sciens eum vi- 


rum justum et sanctum, et 
custodiébat eum, et audito eo 
multa faciébat et libénter 
eum audiébat. Et cum dies 
opportünus accidisset, Heró- 
des natális sui cenam fecit 
principibus, et tribünis, et 
primis Galilee. Cumque in- 
troísset fília ipsíus Herodía- 
dis, et saltásset et placuísset 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AUG. 29— BEHEADING 


Heródi, simúlque recumbén- 
tibus; rex ait puéllæ: Pete a 
me quod vos, et dabo tibi. Et 
jürávit illi Quia quidquid 
petíeris dabo tibi, licet dimí- 
dium regni mei. Que cum 
exísset, dixit matri sue: Quid 
petam? At illa dixit: Caput 
Joánnis Baptiste. Cumque 
introísset statim cum festina- 
tióne ad regem, petívit di- 
cens: Volo ut prótinus des 
mihi in disco caput Joánnis 
Baptiste. Et contristatus est 
rex: propter jusjurándum, et 
propter simul discumbéntes 
néluit eam contristare: sed 
misso spiculatóre, precépit 
afférri caput ejus in disco. 
Et decollàvit eum in cárcere. 
Et áttulit caput ejus in disco: 
et dedit illud puélle, et pu- 
ella dedit matri sue. Quo au- 
dito, discípuli ejus venérunt, 
et tulérunt corpus ejus: et 
posuérunt illud in monu- 
ménto, 


OF ST. JOHN BAPTIST 1181 


Herodias had come in, and had 
danced, and pleased Herod, and 
them that were at table with 
him, the king said to the dam- 
sel, Ask of me what thou wilt, 
and I will give it thee. And he 
swore to her, whatsoever thou 
shalt ask, I will give thee; 
though it be the half of my 
kingdom. Who, when she was 
gone out, said to her mother, 
What shall I ask? But she said, 
the head of John the Baptist. 
And when she was come in im- 
mediately with haste to the 
king, she asked, saying, I wil 
that forthwith thou give me in 
a dish the head of John the 
Baptist. And the king was 
struck sad; yet because of his 
oath, and because of them that 
were with him at table, he 
would not displease her; but 
sending an executioner he com- 
manded that his head should 
be brought in a dish. And he 
beheaded him in the prison, 
and brought his head in a dish, 


and gave it to the damsel, and the damsel gave it to her 
mother. Which his disciples hearing, came, and took his body, 


and laid it in a tomb. 


Offertory. 


In virtüte tua, Dómine, le- 
tábitur justus, et super salu- 
táre tuum exsultábit vehe- 
ménter: desidérium anime 
ejus tribuísti ei. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 20, 2, 3 


In thy strength, O Lord, the 
just man shall exult, and in 
Thy salvation he shall rejoice 
exceedingly: Thou hast given 
him his heart's desire. 


Secret 


Üwxrna, que tibi, Dó- 
mine, pro sancti Már- 
tyris tui Joánnis Baptiste 
passióne deférimus: quesu- 
mus, ut ejus obténtu nobis 


HE offerings which we 
bring, O Lord, in memory 
of the passion of Thy holy mar- 
tyr, John the Baptist, we pray 
that, by his favor, they may 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1182 AUG. 29—BEHEADING OF ST. JOHN BAPTIST 


profit us unto salvation. 
"Through our Lord. 


‘Commemoration of St. Sabina, 


1362. 


proficiant ad salütem. Per 
Dóminum. 


from the Mass Loquebar, page 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. _ 


Communion. 


O Lord, Thou hast set on his 
head a crown of precious stones. 


Ps. 20, 4 


Posuísti, Dómine, in cápite 
ejus corónam de lápide pre- 
tióso. 


Postcommunion 


AY the solemn festival of 
XD St. John the Baptist 
bring us the grace, O Lord, 
both to venerate that which is 
signified in the great sacrament 
we have received, and to be 
joyful because this thing hath 
been more abundantly mani- 
fested in us. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Cl nobis, Dómine, 
sancti Joánnis Baptís- 
te solémnitas: ut et magni- 
fica sacraménta, que sümpsi- 
mus, significóta venerémur, 
et in nobis pótius édita gau- 
deámus. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Sabina, from ihe Mass Loquebar, page 


Aug. 30—t. Rose of Lima, Virgin (White) 
Double 


Sts. Felix and Abauctus, Martyrs (Red) 
Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370, except: 


Prayer 


LMIGHTY God, giver of all 

good gifts, Who didst 
will that blessed Rose, imbued 
with the dew of heavenly grace, 
should bloom among the In- 
dians (or, in the Indies) with 
the beauty of virginity and pa- 
tience, grant unto us, Thy ser- 
vants, that, following the fra- 
grance of her virtues, we may 
deserve to become a sweet odor 
of Christ, Who with Thee 
liveth. 


onérum ómnium largí- 
n tor, omnípotens Deus, 
qui beátam Rosam, celéstis 
grátie rore prevéntam, vir- 
ginitátis et patiéntie decóre 
Indis floréscere voluísti: da 
nobis fámulis tuis; ut in odó- 
rem suavitátis ejus curréntes, 
Christi bonus odor éffici me- 
reámur: qui tecum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


wr 


AUG. 31—ST. RAYMUND NONNATUS 


1188 


Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs. 


Prayer 


AJESTÁTEM tuam, Dó-: 


mine, súpplices exorá- 
mus: ut, sicut nos júgiter 
Sanctórum tuórum commem- 
oratióne Letificas; ita semper 
supplicatióne deféndas. Per 
Dóminum, 


E HUMBLY entreat Thy 
majesty, O Lord, that 
as Thou dost continually glad- 
den us with the commemora- 
tion of Thy saints, so Thou 
ever defend us at their petition. 


Through our Lord. 


Secret 


s ósrras, Dómine, tue ple- 

bis inténde: et, quas in 

honóre Sanctórum tüórum 

devóta mente célebrat, pro- 

ficere sibi séntiat ad salütem. 
Per Dóminum. 


AVE regard, O Lord, to the 
nh sacrifices of Thy people, 
and let them feel that thése 
profit for their welfare since 


they do devoutly celebrate 


them in honor of Thy saints. 
Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


EPLÉTI, Dómine, muné- 

X, ribus sacris, quesumus; 

ut, intercedéntibus Sanctis 

tuis, in gratiárum semper ac- 

tióne maneámus. Per Dómi- 
num. 


ILLED With Thy sacred 

gifts, O Lord, we be- 
seech Thee that, by the inter- 
cession of Thy saints, we may 
pass our lives in giving thanks 
to Thee. Through our Lord. 


Aug. 31—St. Aamiin MPonnatus, Confessor 
(White) 


Double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui in liberándis 

fidélibus tuis ab impi- 
órum  captivitáte, beátum 
Raymündum Confessórem tü- 
um mirábilem effecísti: ejus 
nobis intercessióne concéde: 
ut, a peccatórum vínculis ab- 
solüti, que tibi sunt plácita, 
liberis méntibus exsequámur. 
Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who didst make 

blessed Raymund, Thy 
confessor, wonderful in deliv- 
eting Thy faithful held in cap- 
tivity by the infidels, grant us 
by his intercession that, being 
loosed from the bonds of our 
sins, we may with quiet minds 
perforrn those things which are 
pnt tó Thee. Through our 
Lor 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1184 


SEPT. 2—ST. STEPHEN 


Sept. 1—$5t. Giles, Abbot (White) 
Simple 


The Holp Twelve Brothers, Martyrs (Red) 


Mass, Os justi, page 1349. 


Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs. 


Third Prayer, A 


cunctis, page 827, and its accompanying Secret and Postcom- 


munion. : 


Prayer 


AY the fraternal crown of 
XD Thy mertyrs, O Lord, 
make us joyful; may it procure 
for our faith increase of virtues 
and comfort us with a manifold 


RATÉRNA nos, Dómine, 
Mártyrum tuórum cor- 
ona letificet: que et fidei 
nostre prebeat increménta 
virtütum, et multiplici nos 


intercession. Through our suffrágio consolétur. Per Dó- 
Lord. minum, 
Secret 


N COMMEMORATION of Thy 

holy martyrs, O Lord, we 
devoutly engage in Thy mys- 
teries, by which may our help 
and‘ our joy alike increase. 
Through our Lord. — 


YSTÉRIA tua, Dómine, 

pro sanctórum Márty- 

rum tuórum commemorati- 

óne, devóta mente tractémus: 

quibus nobis et presidium 

crescat, et gáudium. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Postcommunion 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that we 
may improve by following the 
faith of those whose memory 
we venerate by partaking of 
Thy sacrament, Through our 
Lord. 


RESTA, quæsumus, omní- 

potens Deus: ut, quo- 
rum memóriam sacraménti 
participatióne recólimus, fi- 
.dem quoque proficiéndo sec- 
témur. Per Dóminum. 


Sept. 2--$5t. Stephen, King of Hungary, Confessor 
7 (White) — 
Semi-Double 


Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except the Gospel which is the same 
as for the feast of St. Louis, King of France, page 1173. 


Prayer 


RANT Unto Thy Church, we 
beseech Thee, O almighty 


G 


ONCÉDE, Quesumus, Ec- 
clésie tue, omnípotens 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEPT. 5—ST. LAWRENCE JUSTINIAN 


Deus: ut beátum Stéphanum 
Contéssórem tuum, quem reg- 
nántem in terris propagató- 
rem hábuit, propugnatórem 
habére mereátur gloriósum in 
celis, Per Dóminum. 


1185 


God, that it may be worthy to 


‘have for its glorious defender 


in heaven blessed Stephen, Thy 
confessor, whom it had for its 
champion while he reigned on 
earth. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of 


the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Secret 


ÉsPICE, quas offérimus 


hóstias, omnipotens 
Deus: et presta; ut, qui pas- 
siónis Dominice mystéria cel- 
ebrámus, imitémur quod ági- 
mus. Per eümdem Dóminum. 


o THOU regard, O almighty 

God, the sacrifices which 

we offer, and grant that we, 

who celebrate the mysteries of 

the Lord's passion, may imitate 

what we commemorate. 
Through the.same. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828, third at the 


choice of the priest. 


Postcommunion 


RESTA, quzsumus, omní- 
potens Deus: ut beáti 
Stéphani Confessóris tui fi- 
dem cóngrua devotióne sec- 
témur; qui pro ejüsdem fídei 
dilatatiórie, de terréno regno 
ad celéstis regni glóriam mé- 
ruit perveníre. Per Dóminum. 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God. that we 
may follow with due devotion 
the faith of blessed Stephen, 
Thy confessor, who, by spread- 
ing abroad the. same faith, 
merited to go from an earthly 
kingdom into the glory of Thy 
heavenly kingdom. Through 
our Lord. 


Second, Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Sept. 5—St. Laturence Justinian , Bishop, Confessor 
(White) 
Semi-Double 
Mass, Statuit, page 1302. 
The prayer A cunctis, with its accompanying Secret and Post- 


communion, page 827, 


is added, 


with a third Prayer at the 


choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1186 SEPT. 8—NATIVITY OF BLESSED VIRGIN 


Copyright. by Benager Brothers : 


Sept. 8—The Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary 
(White) 
Double of the Second Class with a Simple Octave 


St. Hadrian, Martyr 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit (Sedulius) - 


AIL, holy mother! who in ALVE, Sancta parens, en- 

5 thy child-bearing didst íxa  puérpera regem: 
bring forth the King Who rul- qui ccelum terrámque regit in 
eth heaven and earth, world ssecula secul6rum. Ps. 44, 2. 
without end. Ps. 44, 2. My heart Eructávit cor meum verbum 
hath uttered a good word: I bonum: dico ego ópera mea 
Speak my works to the King. Regi. JV. Gloria Patri. 
¥. Glory.. 

Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


; Prayer ; 
MPART unto Thy servants, ÁwULIS tuis, quesumus, 
we beseech Thee, O Lord, Dómine, celéstis grá- 


the gift of Thy heavenly grace, tie munus impertíre: ut, qui- 
that to us, for whom the child- bus beáte Virginis partus 
bearing of the Blessed Virgin éxstitit salütis éxórdium; Na- 
was the beginning of our sal- tivitátis ejus votíva solémni- 
vation, the votive solemnity of tas, pacis tríbuat incremén- 
her nativity may give increase tum. Per Dóminum. 
of peace. Through our Lord. 

.In low Masses a commemoration of St. Hadrian, from the 
Mass In virtute, page 1309. 


Epistle, The Lord possessed me, from the Mass on the feast 
of the Immaculate Conception, December 8, page 851 


Gradual 
Blessed and venerable art ^ Benedícta et venerábilis es, 
thou, O Virgin Mary, who, pre- Virgo María: que sine tactu 
serving thine immaculate vir- pudóris invénta es Mater Sal- 
ginity, didst become the Mother vatóris. Y. Virgo Dei Géni- 
af the Saviour. V. O Virgin trix, quem totus non capit or- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


DEPT. 8—NATIVITY 


bis, in tua se clausit viscera 
factus homo. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Felix 
es, sacra, Virgo María, et om- 
ni laude digníssima: quia ex 
te ortus est sol justitie 
Christus Deus noster. Alle- 
Tája. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


OF BLESSED: VIRGIN 1187 
Mother of God. He Whom the 
whole world doth not contain, 
shut Himself in thy womb, 
being made man. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Happy 
art thou, O Virgin Mary, and 
most worthy of all praise, for 
out of thee the Son of justice 
hath risen, Christ, our God. 
Alleluia. 


Gospel, The book of the generation, from the Mass of the 
vigil of the Immaculate Conception, December 7, page 848. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory 


Beata es, Virgo Maria, que 
émnium portasti Creatérem: 
genuisti qui te fecit, et in 
ætérnum pérmanes Virgo. 


Offertory, Prayers, page 767. 


Blessed art thou, O Virgin 
Mary, who didst bear the Crea- 
tor of all things; thou didst 
bring forth Him Who made 
thee, and remainest a virgin 
forever. 


Secret 


NIGÉNITI tui, Dómine, 

nobis succürrat human- 
itas: ut, qui natus de Virgine, 
matris integritátem non mín- 
uit, sed sacrávit; Nativitatis 
ejus solémniis, nostris nos 
piáculis éxuens, oblatiónem 
nostram tibi fáciat accéptam 
Jesus Christus Dóminus nos- 
ter: Que tecum. 


Av the humanity of 

Thine only-begotten Son 
succor us, O Lord, that He, 
Who, born of the Virgin, did 
not diminish, but consecrated, 
the virginity of His Mother, 
may, in the solemnity of her 
nativity, cleanse us of our sins 
and make our offering accept- 
able to Thee, even Jesus Christ 
our Lord, Who with thee liv- 
eth. 


Commemoration of St. Hadrian, from the Mass In virtute, 


page 1311, 
Preface No. 11, page 814. 


Communion 


Beata viscera Marie Vír- 
ginis que portavérunt etérni 
Patris Filium. 


Blessed is the womb of the 
Virgin Mary that bore the Son 
of the eternal Father. 


Postcommunion 


Guprsmmus, Dómine, cele- 
britáis ánnuæ votive 
Sacraménta: presía qussu- 


E HAVE received, o Lord, 
the votive sacrament of 
this annual festival; grant, we 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1188 SEPT. 9—ST PETER CLAVER 


beseech Thee, that it may bring mus; ut et temporális vite 
us the means of health in this nobis remédia prebeant, et 


life and in life eternal. Through ætérnæ. Per Dóminum. 


our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Hadrian, from the Mass In virtute, 


page 1312. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Sept. 9—St. Peter Claber, Confessor (White) 
Double 


St. Gorgonius, Martyr 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 106, 9, 10 


"E Lord hath satisfied the 
empty soul: such as sat 
n darkness and in the shadow 
of death, being tast bound in 
misery and iron. Ps. 106, 8. Let 
the mercies of the Lord give 
glory unto Him: and His won- 
drous works unto the children 
of men. Y. Glory. 


ATIÁVIT Dóminus ánimam 
inánem:  sedéntes in 
ténebris et umbra mortis, 
vinctos in  mendicitáte et 
ferro. Ps. 106, 8. Confiteántur 
Dómino misericórdie ejus: et 
mirabilia ejus fíliis hóminum. 
yY. Gloria Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who, when about to 
call the enslaved negroes 
unto the knowledge of Thy 
name, didst strengthen blessed 
Peter with a wondrous charity 
and patience for their help: 
grant, through his intercession, 
that we, seeking the things of 
Christ Jesus, may love our 
neighbors in deed and in truth. 
Through the same. 


EUS, qui abréptos in 

servitütem Nigrítas, ad 
agnitionem tui nóminis. vo- 
catürus, beátum Petrum mira 
in eis juvándis caritáte et pa- 
tiéntia roborásti: ejus nobis 
intercessióne  concéde; ut, 
que Jesu Christi sunt que- 
réntes, próximos épere et 
veritáte diligámus. Per eüm- 
dem Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Gorgonius. 


Prayer 


ay Gorgonius, Thy saint, 

O Lord, gladden us by 
his intercession, and make us 
joyful on his propitious festi- 
val. Through our Lord. 


ANCTUS tuus, Dómine, 

Gorgónius sua nos in- 
tercessióne lmtíficet: et pia 
fáciat solemmitáte gaudére. 
Per Dóminum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


j 
i 
I 


SEPT. 9—ST. PETER CLAVER 


1189 


Lesson. Is. 58, 6-10 


Léctio Isais Prophéte. 


mc dicit Dóminus: Dis- 

sólve colligatiónes im- 
pietátis, solve fascículos de- 
priméntes, dimítte eos, qui 
confrácti sunt, líberos, et 
omne onus dirümpe. Frange 
esuriénti panem tuum, et 
egénos, vagósque induc in 
domum tuam: cum videris 
nudum,. 6peri eum, et car- 
nem tuam ne despéxéris. 
Tunc erümpet quasi mane lu- 
men tuum, et sánitas tua 
cítius oriétur, et anteíbit fá- 
ciem tuam justitia tua, et 
glória Dómini cólliget te. 
Tunc invocábis, et Dóminus 
exáudiet: clamábis, et dicet: 
Ecce adsum. Cum effüderis 
esuriénti ánimam tuam, et 
ánimam afflíctam repléveris, 
oriétur in ténebris lux tua, 
et ténebre tue erunt sicut 
merídies. 


Lesson 
Prophet. 


Hus saith the Lord: Loose 

the bands of wickedness, 
undo the bundles that oppress, 
let them that are broken go 
free, and break asunder every 
burden. Deal thy bread to the 
hungry, and bring the needy 
and the harbourless into thy 
house: when thou shalt see one 
naked, cover him, and despise 
not thy own flesh. Then shall 
thy light break forth as the 
morning, and thy health shall 
speedily arise, and thy justice 
shall go before thy face, and 
the glory of the Lord shall 
gather thee up. Then shalt 
thou call, and the Lord shall 
hear: thou shalt cry, and he 
shall say, Here I am. When 
thou shalt pour out thy soul to 
the hungry, and shalt satisfy 
the afflicted soul, then shall thy 
light rise up in darkness, and 
thy darkness shall be as the 
noonday. 


from Isaias the 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 71, 12-14 


Liberabit páuperem a po- 
ténte, et páuperem cui non 
erat adjütor: parcet páuperi 
et inopi, et ánimas páuperum 
salvas fáciet. V. Exusüris et 
iniquitate rédimet  ánimas 
eórum: et honorábile nomen 
eórum coram illo. 


He shall deliver the poor 
from the mighty, and the needy 
that had no helper; He shall 
spare the poor and needy, and 
save the souls of the poor. Y. 
From usuries and iniquity He 
shall redeem their souls: and 
their names shall be honorable 
before Him. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 
9, 33, 35. Exsürge, Dómine 
Deus, exaltétur manus tua: 
ne obliviscáris páuperum: 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 9, 
33, 35. Arise, O Lord God, let 
Thy hand he exalted, forget not 
the poor: unto Thee is the poor 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1190 


man left: Thou wilt be a helper 
to the orphan. Alleluia. 


Tract. 
The Lord hath sent me to 
heal the contrite of heart and 
to preach a release to the cap- 
tives. Y. 1 Cor. 9, 22. To the 
weak I became weak, that I 
might gain the weak. Y. I be- 
came all things to all men, 
that I might save all. © 


SEPT. 9—ST. PETER CLAVER 


tibi derelíctus est pauper: 
órphano tu eris &djütor. Al- 
lelüja. 


Is. 61, 1 


Misit me Dóminus, ut med- 
érer contritis corde et præ- 
dicárem captivis indulgénti- 
am. V. 1, Cor. 9, 22. Factus 
sum infirmis infírmus, ut in- 
firmo lucrifácerem. V. Omni- 
bus ómnia factus sum, ut om- 
nes fácerem salvos. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 123, 
7. Our soul hath beén delivered 
as a sparrow out of the snare 
of the fowlers; the snare is 
broken: and we are delivered. 
Alleluia. V. Ps. 84, 10. His sal- 
vation is near to them that fear 
the Lord God: that glory may 
dwell in our land. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 
123, 7. Anima nostra, sicut 
passer, erépta est de láqueo 
venántium: láqueus contrítus 
est, et nos liberáti sumus. 
Allehüja. Y. Ps. 84, 10. Prope 
timéntes Dóminum Deum 
salutáre ípsius: ut inhábitet 
glória in terra nostra. Alle- 
lúja. 


Gospel. Luke 10, 29-37 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime a certain 
lawyer willing to justify 
himself, said to Jesus, And who 
is my neighbor? And Jesus an- 
Swering said, A certain man 
went down from Jerusalem to 
Jericho, and fell among rob- 
bers, who also stripped him, 
and having wounded him, went 
away, leaving him half dead: 
and it chanced that a certain 
priest went down the same way, 
and seeing him, passed by. In 
like manner also a levite, when 
he was near the place and saw 
him, passed by. But a certain 
Samaritan being on his jour- 
hey, came near him, and seeing 
him, was moved with compas- 


W Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Legisper- 
itus quidam volens jus- 
tificáre sefpsum, dixit ad Je- 
Sum: Et quis est meus próxi- 
mus? Suscípiens autem Jesus, 
dixit: Homo quidam descen- 
débat ab Jerüsalem in Jér- 
icho, et íncidit in latrones, 
qui étiam despoliavérunt 
eum: et plagis impósitis abié- 
runt semivívo relícto. Accidit 
autem ut sacérdos quidam de- 
Scénderet eádem via: et viso 
ilo preterivit. Simíliter et 
Levita, cum esset secus locum, 
et vidéret eum, pertránsiit. 
Samaritánus autem quidam 
iter fáciens, venit secus eum: 
et videns eum, misericórdia 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 


SEPT. 9—ST. PETER CLAVER 


motus est, Et apprópians alli- 
gávit vülnera ejus, infündens 
éleum, et vinum: et impónens 
ilum in juméntum suum, 
duxit in stábulum, et curam 
ejus egit. Et áltera die prótu- 
lit duos denários, et dedit 
Stabulário, et ait: Curam il- 
líus habe: et quodcümque 
supererogaveris, ego: cum re- 
díero reddam tibi. Quis ho- 
rum trium vidétur tibi próxi- 
mus fuísse illi, qui íncidit in 
latrónes? At ille dixit: Qui 
fecit misericórdiam in ilum. 
Et ait illi Jesus: Vade, et tu 
fac similiter. 


Offertory. Job. 


Eo quod liberássem pauper- 
em vociferantem, et pupil- 
lum, cui non esset adjutor, 
benedictio perituri super me 
veniébat, et cor vidue con- 
solatus sum: óculus fui czco, 
et pes claudo: pater eram 
páuperum. 


1191 


sion; and going up to him, 
bound up. his wounds, pouring 
in oil and wine; and, setting 
him upon his own beast, 
brought him to an inn, and took 
care of him: and the next day 
he took out two pence, and gave 
to to the host, and said, Take 
care of him, and whatsoever 
thou shalt spend over and 
above, I, at my return, will re- 
pay thee. Which of these three, 
in thy opinion, was neighbor 
to him that fell among rob- 
bers? But he said, He that 
Showed mercy to him. And Je- 
sus said to him, Go and do thou 
in like manner. 


29, 12, 13, 15, 16 


Because I delivered the poor 
man that cried out, and the 
fatherless that had no helper: 
the blessing of him that was 
about to perish came upon me. 
And I comforted the heart of 
the widow: I was an eye to the 
blind, and & foot to the lame, 
I was a father to the poor. 


Secret 


ARITÁTIS víctima, quam 
immolántes offérimus, 
sit nobis, Dómine, te miser- 
ánte, propitiábilis: et, beáti 
Petri précibus et méritis, ad 
obtinéndum patiéntie et car- 
itatis augméntum, éfficax et 
Salutáris. Per eümdem Dó- 
minum. 


AY the Victim of love 
(D which we offer up in this 
Sacrifice be & propitiation for 
us, through Thy mercy, O Lord: 
and by the prayers and merits 
of blessed Peter may it be 
most efficacious and salutary in 
obtaining for us greater pa- 
tience and charity. Through 
the same. 


Commemoration of St. Gorgonius. 


Secret 


RATA tibi sit, Dómine, 
# nosre servitütis 
ablatio: pro qua sanctus 


Av the oblation of our 
(D homage, O Lord, be 
pleasing unto Thee, Thy holy 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1192 


martyr Gorgonius being our 
advocate. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


SEPT. 10—ST. NICHOLAS OF TOLENTINO 


Gorgónius Martyr intervén- 
tor exsistat. Per Dóminum. 


Communion. Ezech. 34, 15, 16 


I wil feed my sheep, and I 
wil cause them to lie down, 
saith the Lord God. I will seek 
that which was lost, and that 
which was driven away I will 
bring back, and that which was 
broken I will bind up, and I 
wil make strong that which 
was Weak. 


Ego pascam oves meas: et 
ego eas accubáre fáciam, dicit 
Dóminus Deus. Quod períerat 
requiram, et quod abjéctum 
erat redücam, et quod .con- 
fractum fuerat alligábo et 
quod infirmum füerat con- 
solidábo. , 


Postcommunion 


ay the salutary effect of 
Thy loving kindness in- 
crease in us, O Lord: that, re- 
freshed by this heavenly food, 
we may, by the intercession of 
blessed Peter, happily obtain 
the crown of everlasting life. 
Through our Lord. 


rescar in nobis, Dó- 

mine, tue pietátis ef- 
féctus salutáris: ut, calésti 
pábulo nutríti, etérne vite co- 
rónam, beáto Petro interce- 
dénte, felíciter assequámur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Gorgonius. 
Postcommunion 


AY everlasting sweetness 
be the portion of Thy 
household, O Lord, and 
strengthen ‘it, that through 
Gorgonius, Thy martyr, it may 
constantly be sustained in the 
sweet odor of Christ, Thy Son. 
Who with Thee. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


AMILIAM tuam, Deus, su- 

: avitas ætérna contingat 
et végetat: que in Martyre 
tuo Gorgónio Christi Filii tui 
bono jügiter odóre pascátur: 
Qui tecum. 


Sept. 10—St. Picholas of Tolentino, confessor 
(White) 
Double 
Mass, Justus ut palma, page 1352, 


Sept. 11—Sts. Protus and Hyacinth, Martyrs (Red) 
Simple 


Mass, Salus autem, page 1325, 
Additional Prayers, A cunctis, 


except as below: 
with the accompanying Secret 


and Postcommunion, page 827. The third Prayer, Secret and 
Communion are at the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEPT. 12—MOST HOLY NAME OF MARY 


1193 


Prayer 


EATÓRUM Máriyrum tu- 

órum Proti et Hyacin- 

thi nos, Dómine, fóveat pre- 

t16sa conféssio: et pia jügiter 

intercéssio tueátur. Per Dó- 
minum. i 


AY the confession of Thy 

blessed martyrs, Protus 
and Hyacinth, comfort us, O 
Lord, and their kind interces- 
sion constantly protect us. 
Through our Lord. 


Secret 


RO sanctórum Mártyrum 

tuórum Proti et Hya- 
cinthi commemoratióne, mü- 
nera tibi, Dómine, que debé- 
mus,  exsólvimus: presta, 
quesumus; ut remédium no- 
bis perpétue salütis operén- 
iur, Per Dóminum. 


N COMMEMORATION of Thy 
-A holy martyrs Protus and 
Hyacinth we pay to Thee, O 
Lord, the offerings which we 
owe Thee; grant, we beseech 
'Thee, that they may procure 
for us the remedy of eternal 
salvation. Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


T PERCÉPTA nos, Dómine, 

tua sancta purificent: 
beatórum Mártyrum tuórum 
Proti et Hyacinthi, quesumus, 
implóret oratio. Per  Dó- 
minum, ` 


ET the prayer of Thy 

blessed martyrs, Protus 
and Hyacinth, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, bring it to pass that we 
may be purified by Thy holy 
mysteries which we have re- 
ceived, Through our Lord. 


Sept. 12—The Most Holp Mame of Marp (white) 
Double Major 


-The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


“Introit. Ps. 44, 13, 15, 16 


oLtum tuum depreca- 

buntur omnes divites 
plebis: adducéntur regi vir- 
gines post eam: préxime ejus 
adducéntur tibi in letitia et 
exsultatióne. Ps. 44, 2, Eruc- 
tavit cor meum verbum bo- 
num: dico ego ópera mea 
Regi. V. Glória Patri, 


LL the rich among the 
people shall entreat thy 
countenance: after her shall 
virgins be brought to the King: 
her neighbors shall be brought 
to thee in gladness and re- 
joicing. Ps. 44, 2. My heart hath 
uttered a good word: I speak 
my works to the King. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1194 


SEPT. 12—MOST HOLY NAME OF MARY 


Prayer 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that Thy 
faithful, happy under the in- 
vocation and protection of the 
most holy Virgin Mary, may, by 
her dear intercession, be de- 
livered from all evils on earth 
and be worthy to attain unto 
eternal joys in heaven. Through 
our Lord. 


‘ONCEDE, qusesumus, om- 
nípotens Deus; ut fidé- 
les tui, qui sub sanctissime 
Virginis Marie nómine et 
protectióne letantur, ejus pia 
intercesslóne, a cunctis malis 
liberéntur in terris et ad 
gáudia ztérna pervenire mer- 
eántur in colis. Per Dómin- 
um. 


Epistle, As the vine, as in the Mass of our Lady ‘of Mount 


Carmel, July 16, page 1106. 


Gradual 


O Virgin Mary, blessed and 
venerable art thou: who, re- 
maining immaculate, didst be- 
come the Mother of the Sa- 
viour. Y. Virgin Mother of God, 
He, Whom the whole world 
doth not contain, shut Himself 
in Thy womb, being made man. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. After 
childbirth thou didst remain a 
virgin inviolate: Mother of 
God, intercede for us. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Benedícta et venerábilis es, 
Virgo. Maria: que sine tactu 
pudóris, invénta es Mater 
Salvatóris. Y. Virgo Dei Gén- 
itrix, quem totus non capit 
orbis, in tua se clausit víscera 
factus homo. . 


Allelája, allelija. Y. Post 
partum, Virgo, invioláta per- 
mansísti: Dei Génitrix, in- 
tercéde pro nobis. Allelüja. 


Gospel as on the feast of the Annunciation March 25, page 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Luke 1, 28, 42 


Hail, Mary, full of grace: the 
Lord is with thee: blessed art 
thou among women, and blessed 
is the fruit of thy womb. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ave, Maria, gratia plena: 
Dóminus tecum:  benedícta 
tu in muliéribus, et benedíc- 
tus fructus ventris tui. 


Secret 


v THY mercy, O Lord, and 


ihe intercession of 


UA, Dómine, propitia 
tióne, et beáte Marie 


blessed Mary, ever virgin, may semper Vírginis intercessióne, 
this oblation profii us unto ad perpétuam atque presén- 
eternal and present prosperity tem hee oblátio nobis pro- 
and peace. Through our Lord. fíciat prosperitátem et pa- 
cem. Per Dóminum. 
Preface No. 11, page 814. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEPT. 14—EXALTATION OF THE HOLY CROSS 1195 


Communion 


Beata viscera Marfe Vír- 
ginis que portavérunt ztérni 
Patris Fílium. 


Blessed is the womb of the 
virgin Mary, Which bore the 
Son of the eternal Father, 


Postcommunion 


vMwPTIS, Dómine, salütis 

nostre  subsídiis: da, 
quzsumus, beats Marie sem- 
per Vírginis patrocíniis nos 
ubíque prótegi; in cujus ven- 
eratióne. bec tue obtülimus 
majestati. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


LORD, grant, we beseech 
Thee, that, baving re- 
ceived the aids of our salva- 


tion, we may always and every- 


where be protected by the pa- 
tronage of Blessed Mary ever 
virgin, in veneration of whom 
we have made this offering to 


to Thy majesty. Through our 
Lord. 


Sept. 14—The Exaltation of the Holp Cross, (Red) 
Double Major 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


os autem gloriári opór- 

tet in Cruce Dómini 
nostri Jesu Christi: in quo est 
salus, vita, et resurréctio no- 
Stra: per quem salváti, et lib- 
eráti sumus, allelija, alleluja. 
Ps. 66, 2. Deus misereátur no- 
stri, et benedícat nobis: ilú- 
minet vultum suum super 
nos, et misereátur nostri. Y. 
Glória Patri. ; 


Gal. 6, 14 


ur it behooves us to-glory 

in the cross of Our Lord 
Jesus Christ: in Whom. is our 
salvation, life, and resurrec- 
tion; by Whom we are saved 
and delivered. Ps. 66, 2. May 
God have mercy on us, and 
bless us; may He cause the 
light of His countenance to 
shine upon us, and may He 
have mercy on us. Y. Glory. . 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


` 


EUs, qui nos hodiérna 

die Exaltatiónis sancte 

Crucis ánnua solemnitáte le- 
tificas: presta quaesumus; ut, 
cujus nmiystérium in terra cog- 


Prayer 


coo, Who dost gladden 
us this day by the annual 
solemnity of the exaltation of 
the Holy Cross, grant, we be- 
seech ‘Thee, that, as we have 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1196 SEPT. 14—EXALTATION OF THE HOLY CROSS 


known its mystery on earth, we 
may deserve in heaven the re- 
ward which it had purchased. 
Through the same. 


nóvimus, ejus redemptiónis 
premia in celo mereámur, 
Per eimdem Dóminum, 


Epistle, Let this mind be in you, as in the Mass on Palm Sun- 


day, page 400. 


Gradual. Philipp. 2, 8, 9 


Christ became cbedient for 
us unto death: even the death 
of the cross. V. For which cause 
also God hath exalted Him and 
hath given Him a name which 
is above all names. 

Alleluia, alleluia. V. Sweet 
the wood, sweet the nails, sweet 
the load that hangs thereon: 
to bear up the King and Lord 
of heaven nought was worthy 
Save thou, O holy cross. Alle- 
luia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Christus factus est pro no- 
bis obédiens usque ad mortem, 
mortem autem crucis. JY. 
Propter. quod et Deus exaltá- 
vit illum, et dedit illi nomen, 
quod est super omne nomen. 

Allelaja, allelája. Y. Dulce 
lignum, dulces clavos, dülcia 
ferens póndera: que sola fu- 
isti digna sustinére Regem 
celórum, et Dóminum. Alle- 
lája. 


Gospel. John 12, 3-36 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime: Jesus said 

to the multitude of the 

Jews, Now is the judgment of 
the world: now shall the prince 
of this world be cast out. And 
I, if I be lifted up from the 
earth, will draw all things to 
Myself. (Now this He said, sig- 
nifying what death He should 
die.) The multitude answered 
Him, We have heard out of the 
Jaw, that Christ abideth for- 
ever: and how sayest Thou, 
The Son of man must be lifted 
up? Who is the Son of man? 
Jesus therefore said to them, 
Yet a little while, the light is 
among you. Walk whilst you 
have the light, that the dark- 
ness overtake you not. And he 


HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 

N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
T sus turbis Judeórum: 
Nunc judícium est mundi: 
nunc princeps hujus mundi 
ejiciétur foras. Et ego si ex- 
altátus füero a terra, ómnia 
traham ad mefpsum. (Hoc 
autem dicébat, signíficans qua 
morte esset moritürus). Re- 
spóndit ei turba: Nos audfvi- 
mus ex lege, quia Christus 
manet in etérnum: et quó- 
modo tu dicis: Opórtet exal- 
tári Fílium hóminis? Quis est 
iste Filius hóminis? Dixit 
ergo eis Jesus: Adhuc médi- 
cum lumen in vobis est. Am- 
buláte dum lucem habétis, ut 
non vos ténebre comprehén- 
dant: et qui ámbulat in téne- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEPT. 14—EXALTATION OF THE HOLY CROSS 1197 


bris, nescit quo vadat. Dum that walketh in darkness know- 
lucem habétis, créaite in lu- eth not' whither he goeth. 


cem, ut filii lucis sitis. 


Creed, page 765. ` 


Whilst you have the light, be- 
lieve in the light; that you may 
be the children of light. — 


Offertory 


RÓTEGE, Dómine, plebem 

tuam per signum sanc- 

te Crucis, ab insídiis inimicó- 

rum ómnium: ut tibi gratam 

exhibeámus  servitütem, et 

acceptabile fiet sacrificium 
nostrum, Allelüja. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


HROUG the sign of the holy 
TIT cross, protect Thy people, 
O Lord, from the snares of all 
enemies, that we may pay Thee 
2 pleasing service, and our sac- 
rifice be acceptable, alleluia. 


Secret 


ESU CHRISTI Dómini nostri 

córpore et sanguine sag- 
inándi, per quem Crucis est 
sanctificátum vexillum: que- 
sumus, Dómine Deus noster; 
ut, sicut illud adoráre merüi- 
mus, ita  perénniter ejus 
glórie salutáris potidmur ef- 
féctu. Per eümdem Dóminum. 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


EING about to be fed with 
the body and blood of 
Jesus Christ our Lord, through 
Whom the banner of the cross 
was sanctified, we beseech Thee 
O Lord, our God, that, as we 
have had the grace to adore 
it, so we may forever enjoy the 
effect of its salutary glory. 
Through the same, 


Communion 


Per signum Crucis de inim- 
icis nostris libera nos Deus 
noster. 


'Through the sign of the cross 
deliver us from our enemies, O 
our God. 


Postcommunion 


pEsto nobis, Dómine 

Deus noster: et quos 
sancie Crucis lætári facis 
honóre, ejus quoque perpétuis 
defénde subsídiis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


B THOU with us, O Lord. 
our God, and as Thou 
dost make us rejoice in honor 
of the holy cross, defend us 
also'by its perpetual assistance. 
Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


‘Copyright, by Bentiger Brothers 


‘Sept. 15—The 
i 38.9. t. 


SEPT. 15—SEVEN DOLORS OF B. V. M. 


Feast ot the Seven BPolors of the 


(White) 


Double of the Second Class 


St. Nicomedes, 


Martyr (Red) 


Mass as on the Friday after Passion Sunday, page 966, except: 


Prayer 


Gop, in Whose passion a 

sword of.sorrow pierced 
the most dear soul of the glo- 
rious Virgin-Mother, Mary, as 
foretold by Simeon, mercifully 
grant that we. who. reverently 
commemorate her sorrows, may 
obtain the happy effect of Thy 
passion. Who livest. j 


EUS, in cujus passióne, 
D secúndum. Simeónis 
prophetiam, dulcissimam áni- 
mam gloriósæ  Vírginis et 
Matris Marie dolóris gládius 
pertransivit: concéde propit- 
ius; ut qui dolóres ejus ven- 
erándo recólimus, passiónis 
iue efféctum felicem conse- 
quámur: Qui vivis. 


After the Gradual, in place of the Tract is said of sung: 


Alleluia, alleluia. ¥. Holy 


Allehija, allelàja. V. Stabat 


Mary, queen of heaven and sancta María, celi Regina, et 
mistress of the world, stood by mundi Dómina, juxta crucem 
the cross of Our Lord Jesus Dómini nostri Jesu Christi 
Christ, sorrowing. dolorósa. 

The Sequence, Stabat Mater, page 969, is then chanted, 
Alleluia being added at the end. 

In low Masses a commemoration of St. Nicomedes as follows: 


Prayer 
I PRESENT With Thy peo- JA Dómine, pópulo 


ple, O Lord, that, receiv- tuo: ut, beáti Nicomé- 
ing the reward of the merits of dis Mártyris tui mérita præ- 


blessed Nicomedes, Thy mar- 
tyr, it may ever be assisted by 
his patronage to obtain Thy 


clara suscipiens, ad impe- 
trándam míiscricórdiam tuam 
semper ejus patrociniis ad- 


mercy, Through our Lord. juvétur. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEPT. 16—STS. EUPHEMIA AND COMPANIONS 


1199 


Secret 


ÜscreE, Dómine, münera 
S propítius oblata: 
Majestati tue beáti Nicomé- 
dis Mártyris comméndet orá- 
tio. Per Dóminum. 


que ' 


RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 
the gifts: offered to Thee, 
and may the prayer of Thy 
blessed martyr Nicomedes com- 
mend them. Through our Lord. 


: Postcommunion 


URIFICENT nos, Dómine, 
'sacraménta que sümp- 
simus: et, intercedénte beáto 
Nicoméde Martyre tuo, a 
cunctis effíciant vítiis abso- 


Av the sacraments we 
have received purify us, 

O Lord, and, by the interces- 
sion of blessed Nicomedes, Thy 


-martyr, cause us to be ab- 


Solved from all sin. Through 
our Lord. 


jülos. Per Dóminum. 


Sept. 16—Hts. Cornelius and Cpprian, Bishops, 
Martyrs (Red) - 
Semi-double 


gs. Euphemia, Lucp, and Gentinianus, Martyrs 


Es (Red) 


Mass, Intret, page 1316. Here is added the Prayer, A cunctis, 
with its accompanying Secret and Postcommunion, page 827. 


Commemoration of ihe Holy Martyrs. 
Prayer 
ESTA, Dómine, précibus 


nostris cum exsultatióne 
provéntum: ut sanctérum 


RANT. unto our prayers, O 
Lord, both joy and profit, 
that, as we each. year commem- 
Martyrum -Euphémis, Lucie orate with devotion the day of 
et Geminiani,: quorum diem the suffering of the holy mar- 
passiónis annua  devotióne tyrs Euphemia, Lucy, and Qe- 
recólimus, étiam fídei con- minianus, we may also follow 
stántiam subsequámur. them in the constancy of thelr 
faith. Through our Lord. 


Ky ecret 


rota pópuli tui, quesumus RACIOUSLY look upon the 
Dómine, propítius in- desires of Thy people, O 
Aénde: et; quorum nos tríbuis Lord, and cause us to rejoice in 
solémnia celebráre, fac gau- the’ interceding prayers of 
dére suftrágis, Per Dóminum. those whose festival Thou‘ dost 
. permit us to celebrate. Through 

our Lord. . 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1200 


SEPT. 17—STIGMATA ST. FRANCIS 


Postcommunion 


ARKEN unto our prayers, O 
Lord, and may we be 
comforted by the continual help 
of Thy holy martyrs, Euphe- 
mia, Lucy, and Geminianus, 
whose festival we solemnly cel- 
ebrate. Through our Lord. 


XxÁupr, Dómine, preces 
nostras: et sanctórum 
Martyrum tuórum Euphémig, 
Lücie et Geminiáni, quorum 
festa solémniter celebrámus, 
continuis foveámur auxiliis. 
Per Dóminum. 


. Sept. 17—The Smpression of the Stigmata of 
«St. Francis, (White) 
f Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


ur God forbid that I 
should glory, save in the 
cross of Our Lord Jesus Christ: 
by Whom the world is crucified 
to me, and I to the world. Ps. 
141, 2. I cried to the Lord with 
my voice; with my voice I 
made supplication to the Lord. 
¥. Glory. 


Gal. 6, 14 


IHI autem absit gloriari, 

nisi in cruce Dómini 
nostri Jesu Christi: per quem 
mihi mundus crucifíxus est, 
et ego mundo. Ps. 141, 2. Voce 
mea ad Dóminum clamávi: 
voce mea ad Dóminum de- 
precátus sum. Y. Glória Pa- 
iri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


LORD Jesus Christ, Who, 
when the world 'was 
growing cold, didst renew. the 
Sacred marks of Thy passion in 
ihe flesh of the most.blessed 
Francis, to inflame our hearts 
with the fire of Thy love, gra- 
. Clously grant that by his merits 
&nd prayers we may contin- 
ually bear the cross and bring 
forth fruits worthy of penance. 
Who livest. 


ówINE Jesu Christe, qui 

frigiscénte mundo, ad 
inflammandum corda nostra 
tui amóris igne, in carne 
beatíssimi Francísci passiónis 
tus sacra stigmata renovásti: 
concéde propítius: ut ejus 
méritis et précibus crucem 
jügiter ferámus, et dignos 
fructus peniténtie faciámus: 
Qui vivis, 


Epistle. Gal. 6, 14-18 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Galatians. 

RETHREN, But God forbid 
that I should glory, save 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Gálatas. 


ATRES, Mihi autem ab- 
sit gloriári, nisi in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEPT. 17—STIGMATA ST. FRANCIS 


cruce "Dómini .nostri Jesu 
Christi: per quem mihi mun- 
dus’ crucifíxus est, et ego 
mundo. In Christo enim 
Jesu neque circumcisio: áli- 
quid valet, neque prepütium, 
sed nova creatura, Et qui- 
cümque hanc régulam sectiti 
füerint, pax super illos, et 
misericórdia, et super Israél 

' Del. De cétero nemo mihi mo- 
léstus sit: ego enim stigmata 
Dómini Jesu in córpore meo 
porto. Grátia Dómini nostri 
Jesu Christi cum spíritu ves- 
tro, fratres. Amen. 


1201 


in the cross of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ: by Whom the world is 
crucified to me, and I to the 
world. For in Christ Jesus 
Neither circumcision availeth 
anything, nor uncircumcision, 
but a new creature: and who- 
Soever shali follow this rule, 
peace on them, and mercy, and 
upon the Israel of God. From 
henceforth let no man be trou- 
blesome to me; for I bear the 
marks of the Lord Jesus in my 
body. The grace of Our Lord 
Jesus Christ be with your spirit, 
brethren, Amen. 


Gradual. Ps. 36, 30, 31 


Os justi meditábitur sa- 
piéntiam, et lingua ejus lo- 
quétur judicium. Y. Lex Dei 
ejus in corde ipsíus: et non 
supplantabüntur gressus.ejus. 


Alleluja, allelija. Y. Fran- 
císeus pauper.et hümilis, ce- 
lum dives ingréditur: hymnis 
celéstibus honorátur. Alle- 
Jàja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


The mouth of the just shall 
meditate wisdom, and his 
tongue shall speak judgment. 
¥. The law of his God is in his 
heart: and. his steps shall not 
be supplanted. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. The 
poor and lowly Francis enter- 


eth heaven abounding in riches; 


he is acclaimed with celestial 
hymns. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 16, 24-27 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
T sus discipulis suis: Si 
quis vult post me veníre, áb- 
neget semetípsum, et tollat 
crucem suam, et sequátur me. 
Qui. enim volüerit ánimam 
Suam salvam facere, perdet 
eam: qui autem perdíderit 
ánimam suam propter me, in- 
véniet eam. Quid enim pro- 


dest hómini, si mundum uni- - 


vérsum lucrétur, ánims vero 
sue detriméntum pati&tur? 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mate 
thew. 

T THAT time: Jesus said 

to His disciples, If any 
man will come after Me, let 
him deny himself, and take up 
his cross, and follow Me. For 
he that will save his life, shall 
lose it: and he that shall lose 
his life for My sake, shall find 
it. For what doth it profit a 
man, if he gain the whole 
world, and lose his own soul? 
Or what exchange shall a man 
give for his soul? For the Son 


http://ccwatershed.org 


2202 SEPT. 18—ST. JOSEPH OF CUPERTINO 

of man shall come in the glory Aut quam dabit homo com- 
of His Father with His angels: mutatiónem pro ánima sua? 
and then will He render to Fílius enim hóminis ventüris 
every man according to his est in glória Patris sui cum 


Works. Angelis suis: et tunc reddet 
unicuíque secündum ópera 
ejus. 

Offertory. Ps. 88, 25 
My truth and My mercy shall Veritas mea, et misericór- 


be with him: and. in My name 
shall his horn be exalted. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


dia mea cum ipso: et in nó- 
mine meo exaltabitur cornu 
ejus. 


Secret 


ANCTIFY the gifts dedicated 

to Thee, O Lord, and, by 

the intercession of blessed 
Francis, purify us from every 
stain of sin. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


A faithful and wise steward, 
whom the Lord set over His 
family: to give them their 
measure of wheat in due sea- 
son. 


unera tibi, Dómine, di- 

c&ta sanctifica: et, in- 

tercedénte beáto Francisco, 

ab omni nos culpérum labe 
purífica. Per Dóminum. 


Luke 12, 42 

Fidélis servus et prudens, 
quem constítuit Dóminus su- 
per famíliam suam, ut det il- 
lis in témpore tritici men- 
süram. 


Postcommunion 


con, Who didst in many 

ways demonstrate in 
blessed Francis, Thy confessor, 
the mysteries of the cross, 
erant us, we beseech Thee, ever 
to follow the examples of his 
devotion and to be fortified by 
constant meditation upon the 
same cross. Through our Lord. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EUS, qui mira crucis 

mystéria in beáto 
Francisco  Confessóre tuo 
multifórmiter demonstrásti: 
da nobis, quaesumus; devo- 
tiénis sus semper exémpla 
sectári, et assídua ejüsdem 
crucis meditatiéne muniri. 
Per Déminum. 


Sept, 18—$5t. Joseph of Cupertino, Confessor (White) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 1, 14, 15 


HE love of God is honorable 
wisdom: andthey towhom 


m£cTIo Del honorábilis 
sepiéntia: quibus au- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEPT, 1g—ST. JOSEPH OF CUPERTINO 


tem apparüerit in visu, dilli- 
gunt eam in visióne, et in ag- 
nitióne magnálium suórum. 
Ps. 83, 2. Quam dilécta tab- 
ernácula tua, Dómine virtü- 
tum! concupíscit, et déficit 
anima mea in atria, Dómini. 
y. Glória Patri.. 


1203 


she shall show herself, love her 
by the sight, and by the knowl- 
edge of her great works, Ps. 83, 
2. How lovely are Thy taber- 
nacles, O Lord of hosts my 
soul longeth and fainteth for 
the courts of the Lord. V. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui ad unigénitum 

Filium tuum exaltátum 
& terra ómnia tráhere dispo- 
suísti: pérfice propítius; ut, 
méritis et exémplo seráphici 
Confessórls tui Joséphi, su- 
pra terrénas omnes cupidi- 
tates eleváti, ad eum perve- 
níre mereámur:; Qui tecum. 


Epistle. 1 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Si linguis hó- 

minum loquar et An- 
gelórum, caritatem autem 
non hábeam, factus sum ve- 
lut ss sonans, aut cymbalum 
tínniens. Et si habüero pro- 
phetiam, et nóverim mystéria 
ómnia, et omnem sciéntiam: 
et si habüero omnem. fidem, 
ita ut montes tránsferam, 
caritátem autem non habú- 
ero, nihil sum, Et si distri- 
büero in cibos páuperum 
omnes facultátes meas, et si 
tradidero corpus meum, ita 
ut árdeam, caritétem autem 
non habüero, nihil mihi pro- 
dest. Cáritas pátiens est, be- 
nigna est: Cáritas non emu- 
látur, non agit pérperam, non 
infla4tur, non est ambitiósa, 
non querit que sua sunt, non 


į co», Who didst purpose to 
draw all things unto Thy 
Son when He was lifted. up 
from the earth, mercifully 
grant that we, by the merits 
and example of Thy seraphic 
confessor, Joseph, being lifted 
above all earthly desires, may 
be worthy to come unto Him. 
Who with Thee liveth. 


1 Cor. 13, 1-8 
-Lesson from the Epistle of 

blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. . 

RETHREN: If I speak with 

tongues of men, and of 
angels, and have not charity, I 
am becoming as sounding brass 
or a tinkling cymbal. And if 
I should have prophecy, and 
know .all mysteries and all 
knowledge, and if I should have 
all faith, so that I could re- 
move mountains, and have not 
charity, I am nothing. And if I 
should distribute -all my goods 
to feed the poor, and if I should 
deliver my body to be burned, 
and have not charity, it profit- 
eth me nothing. Charity is pa- 
tient, is kind: charity envieth 
not; dealeth not perversely; is 
not puffed up; is not ambitious; 
seeketh not her own; is not 
provoked to anger; thinketh no 
evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1204 


but rejoiceth in the truth; bear- 
eth all things, believeth all 
things, hopeth all things, en- 
dureth all things. Charity never 
falleth away: whether proph- 
ecles shall be made void, or 
tongues shall cease, or knowl- 
edge shall be destroyed. 


SEPT. 18—ST. JOSEPH OF CUPERTINO 


irritátur, non cégitat. malum, 
non gaudet super iniquitáte, 
congáudet autem  veritáti: 
ómnia suffert, ómnia credit, 
ómnia sperat, ómnia süstinet. 
Cáritas nunquam éxcidit: sive 
prophetie evacuabüntur, sive 
lingue cessábunt sive sciéntia 
destruétur. 


Gradual. Ps. 20, 4, 5 


O Lord, Thou hast pre- 
vented him with blessings of 
sweetness: Thou hast set on 
his head a crown of precious 
stones. Y. He asked life of 
Thee, and Thou hast given him 
length of days forever, and for 
ages of ages. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ecclus. 
11, 13. The eye of God hath 
looked upon him for good, and 
hath lifted him up from his low 
estate, and hath exalted his 
head. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Démine, prevenisti eum in 
benedictiónibus dulcédinis; 
posuísti in cápite ejus coró- 
nam de lápide pretióso. Y. 
Vitam pétiit a te, et tribuisti 
ei longitüdinem diérum in 
seculum seculi. 


Allelija, allelája. Y. Eccli. 
11, 13. Oculus Dei respéxit il- 
lum in bono, et eréxit eum ab 
humilitáte ipsíus, et exaltávit 
caput ejus Allelüja. 


Gospel, Jesus spoke, as on the Nineteenth Sunday after Pen- 


tecost, page 721. 


Offertory. Ps. 34, 13 


But as for me, when they 
were troublesome to me, I was 
clothed with  haircloth. I 
humbled my soul with fasting; 
and my prayer shall be turned 
into my bosom. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ego autem cum mihi mo- 
lésti essent, induébar cilício. 
Humilidbam in jejünio áni- 
mam meam: et orátio mea in 
sinu meo convertétur. 


Secret 
a OFFER Thee sacrifices AUDIS tibi, Dómine, hós- 
of praise, O Lord, in tias immolámus, in tu- 


commemoration of Thy saints, órum commemoratióne Sant- 
by whom we trust to be deliv- tórum: quibus nos et presén- 
ered both from present and tibus éxui malis confídimus, 
pen future evils. Through our et futüris. Per Dóminum. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEPT. 20—VIGIL ST. MATTHEW 


Communion. 


Ego sum pauper, et dolens: 
salus tua, Deus, suscépit me. 
Laudábo nomen Dei cum 
cántico: et magnificábo eum 
in laude. 


1205 


Ps. 68, 30, 31 


I am poor and sorrowful: 
Thy salvation, O God, hath 
set me up. I will praise the 
name of God with a canticle: 
and I wil magnify Him with 
praise. 


Postcommunion 


EFÉCTI cibo potüque ce- 

lésti, Deus noster, te 
süpplices exorámus: ut, in 
cujus hæc commemoratióne 
percéplmus ejus muniámur 
et précibus, Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EFRESHED with celestial 

food and drink, O our 
God, we humbly beseech Thee 
that we may be defended by 
the prayers of the saint whose 
feast we commemorate, and of 
whom we have received these 
blessings. Through our Lord. 


Sept. 19—$5t. Januarius and His Companions, 


Martyrs (Red) 
Double ` 


Mass, Salus autem, page 1325, except the Gospel, which is, AS 
Jesus was sitting, as in Mass of feast of Sts. Marius and Come 


panions, January 19, page 


Sept. 20—St. Eustace and Gis Companiens, 
Martyrs (Red) 
Double 


The Vigil of St. Matthew, Apostle (Purple) 


Mass, Sapientiam, page 1321. 


Commemoration of the vigil of 


St. Matthew, Prayer, Secret. and Postcommunion from the 
Mass, Ego autem, page 1299. At the end the following Gospel 


ts read: 


Gospel. Luke 5, 27-32 


% Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélil secüÜndum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Vidit Je- 
L, sus publicanum nómine 
Levi, sedéntem ad telónium, 
et ait illi: Séquere me. Et re- 
lictis ómnibus, surgens secü- 
tus est eum. Et fecit ei 
convivium magnum Levi in 
domo sua: et erat turba multa 


- && Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke, 
T THAT time, Jesus saw a 
publican, named Levi, 
Sitting at the receipt of custom; 
and He said to him, Follow Me. 
And, leaving all things, he rose 
up, and followed Him. And Levi 
made Him a great feast in his 
own house; and there was a 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1206 


great company of publicans, 
and of others, that were at 
table with them. But the phari- 
Sees and scribes murmured, 
‘saying to His disciples, Why 
do you eat and drink with pub- 
licans and sinners? And Jesus 
answering, said to them, They 
that are whole need not the 
physician: but they that are 
Sick. I came not to call the 
just, but sinners, to penance. 


SEPT. 21—ST. MATTHEW, APOSTLE 


publicanórum, et aliórum, qui 
cum illis erant discumbéntes. 
Et murmurébant Phariszi et 
Scribe eórum, dicéntes ad di- 
Scípulos ejus: Quare cum pu- 
blicánis et peccatéribus man- 
ducátis et bíbitis? Et respón- 
dens Jesus, dixit ad illos: Non. 
egent qui sani sunt médico, 
sed qui male habent, Non 
veni vocáre justos, sed pecca- 
tóres ad peniténtiam, 


- Sept. 21—$5t. Matthew, Apostle, Evangelist 


Double of 


(Red) 
the Second Class 


"The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 36, 30, 31 

HE mouth of the just shall S JusTI meditábitur sa- 

meditate wisdom, and his piéntiam, et lingua ejus. 
tongue shall speak judgment: loquétur judícium: lex Dei 
the law of his God is in his ejus in corde ipsius. Ps. 36, 1. 
heart. Ps. 36, 1. Be not emu- Noli emulári in malignánti- 
lous of evil-doers; nor envy bus: neque zeláveris faciéntes. 
them that work iniquity. Y. iniquitátem, Y. Glória Patri. 
Glory. 

Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 

AY We be assisted, O Lord, rÁTI Apóstoli et Evan- 
by ihe prayers of the geliste Matthei, Dó- 
blessed apostle and evangelist, mine, précibus adjuvémur: 
Matthew, that what our effort ut, quod possibilitas nostra 
obtaineth not, may be granted non óbtinet, ejus nobis inter- 
us by his intercession. Through cessióne donétur. Per Dó- 

our Lord. - minum. 


Epistle, As for the likness, as on the feast of St. Mark, Apriz 
25, page 988. 


Gradual. Ps, 111, 1, 2 


Blessedis the man that fear- ^ Beátus vir qui timet Dó- 
eth the Lord: he delights ex- minum: in mandátis ejus cu- 
ceedingly in His command- pit nimis. Y. Potens in terra 
ments. JY. His seed shall be erit semen ejus generátio rec- 
mighty upon earth; the gen- tórum benedicétur, 
eration of thé righteous shall ` 
be blessed. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


i Ww 70 077 


SEPT. 21—ST. MATTHEW, APOSTLE 


Allelüja, allelija. y. Te 
gloriósus Apostolórum chorus 
laudat, Dómine. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1207 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. 'Thee, 
the glorious choir of apostles 
doth praise, O Lord. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 9, 9-13 


H* Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Mattheeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Vidit Je- 
T sus hóminem sedéntem 
in telónio, Mattheum nó- 
mine. Et ait illi: Séquere me. 
Et surgens, secütus est eum. 
Et factum est, discumbénte, 
eo in domo, ecce multi publi- 
cáni, et peccatóres veniéntes, 
discumbébant cum Jesu, et 
discípulis ejus. Et vidéntes 
phariswi, dicébant discípulis 
ejus: Quare cum publicánis, 
et peccatéribus mandücat 
Magister vester? At Jesus 
áudiens, ait: Non est opus 
valéntibus médicus, sed male 
habéntibus. Eüntes autem di- 
Scite quid est: Misericórdiam 
volo, et, non sacrifícium. Non 
enim veni vocáre justos, sed 
peccatóres, 

Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 

Posufsti, Dómine, in cápite 

ejus corónam de lápide preti- 

óso: vitám pétiit a te et tribu- 
isti ei, allelüja. 


4X Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus saw æ 
mán sitting in the cus- 
tom-house, named Matthew; 
and He said to him, Follow Me. 
And he rose up, and followed 
Him. And it came to pass, as 
He was sitting at meat in the 
house, behold many publicans 
and sinners came and sat down 
with Jesus and His disciples. 
And the pharisees seeing it, 
said to His disciples, Why doth 
your master eat with publicans 
and sinners? But Jesus hear- 
ing it, said, They that are in 
health need not a physician: 
but they that are ill. Go, then, 
and learn what this meaneth, 
I will have mercy, and not sac- 
rifice. For I am not come to 
call the just, but sinners. 


Ps. 20, 4, 5 

O Lord, Thou hast set on his 
head a crown of precious 
stones: he asked life of Thee, 
and Thou didst grant it to him, 
alleluia. 


Secret 


UPPLICATIÓNIBUS beati 

Matthei Apóstoli et 
Evangelíste, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, Ecclésiz tue commen- 
détur oblátio: cujus magni- 
ficis. predicatiónibus erudí- 
tur. Per Dóminum. 


‘ay the oblation of Thy 
@M Church, we pray Thee, 
O Lord, be commended by the 
supplications of Thy blessed 
apostle and evangelist Mat- 
thew, by whose glorious preach- 
ing it is instructed. Through 


' our Lord.. 


Preface INo. 12, page 816. 


http://ccwatershed.org. 


1208 


SEPT. 22—ST. THOMAS OF VILLANOVA 


Communion 


His glory is great in Thy 
salvation; glory and great 
beauty shalt Thou lay upon 
him, O Lord. 


Magna est glória ejus in 
salutaéri tuo: glóriam et mag- 
num decórem impónes super 
eum, Dómine. 


Postcommunion 


AVING received the sacra- 

ments, O Lord, we pray 
Thee, by the intercession of 
blessed Matthew, Thine apos- 
tle and evangelist, that what 
has been celebrated for his 
glory may profit for the heal- 
ing of our souls. Through our 
Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ERCEPTIS Dómine, sacra- 

méntis, beáto Matthzo 
Apóstolo tuo et Evangelísta 
interveniénte, deprecdmur: 
ut, que pro ejus celebráta 
sunt glória, nobis profíciant 
ad medélam. Per Dóminum. 


Sept. 22—&5t. Thomas of Willanova, Bishop, 


Confessor 


(White) 


Double 


St. Maurice and His Companions, Martyrs (Red) 

For St. Thomas, Mass, Statult, page 1302d, except the Prayer 
as below. Prayer for Commemoration of St. Maurice and his 
companions as below. Secret and Postcommunion for St. 
Thomas from Mass Sacerdotes tui, page 1341. Secret and Post- 


communion for St. Maurice, page 1209. 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst adorn 


blessed Thomas, Thy 
bishop, with the virtue of a 
consuming charity for the poor, 
we beseech Thee that, through 
his intercession, Thou gra- 
ciously pour forth the riches 


of Thy mercy upon all who 


pray to Thee. Through our 
Lord. 


EUS, qui beátum Tho- 

mam ` Pontificem in- 
signis in páuperes miseri- 
córdiæ virtúte decorásti: 
quæsumus; ut, ejus interces- 
sióne, in omnes, qui te depre- 
cántur, divítias misericórdiæ 
tue benígnus effúndas. Per 
Dóminum. 


Commemorations of St. Maurice and his companions. 


Prayer 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that the 
solemn festival of Thy holy 
Martyrs, Maurice and his com- 
panions, may bring us joy, 


NNUE, Quesumus, omní- 

AA, potens Deus: ut sanc- 
térum  Mártyrum  tuórum 
Maurítii et Sociórum ejus nos 
letíficet festiva solémnitas; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEPT. 23—ST. LINUS, POPE 


ut, quorum suffrágiis nftimur, 
eórum natalitiis gloriémur. 
Per Dóminum. 


1208 


that we may glory in the natal 
day of those upon whose pa- 
tronage we lean. Through our 
Lord. 


Secret 


ÉsPrcE, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, munera, que in 
sanctérum Mártyrum tuórum 
Mauritii et sociórum ejus 
commemoratióne deférimus: 
et presta; ut, quorum hon- 
ére sunt grata, eórum nobis 
fiant intercessióne perpétua. 
Per Dóminum. 


EGARD, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, our gifts which 

we bring in commemoration of 

‘Thy holy martyrs, Maurice and 

his companions, and grant that 

they be made pleasing by the 

perpetual intercession of those 

in whose honor they are of- 
fered. Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


(ELÉSTIBUS refécti sacra- 

méntis et gáudiis: süp- 
plices te rogámus, Dómine: 
ut, quorum gloriámur triüm- 
phis, protegámur auxiliis. Per 
Dóminum. 


EFRESHED With heavenly 

sacraments and joys, we, 
Thy suppliants, beseech Thee, 
O Lord, that we be protected 
by the assistance of those in 
whose triumphs we glory. 
Through our Lord. 


Sept. 23—St. Linus, Pope, Martyr (Red) 


Semi-double 
Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302. 


St. Thecla, Virgin, Martyr (Red) 


Commemoration of St. Thecla, Prayer as below; Secret and 


Postcommunion from the Mass 


Loquebar, page 1359; third 


Prayer A cunctis, with the accompanying Secret and Postcom- 


munion, page 827. 


Prayer 


A QUSUMUS, omnipo- 

J tens Deus: ut, qui 
beáte Thecle Virginis et 
Martyris tue natalitia cóli- 
mus; et annua solemnitáte 
letémur, et tante fídei pro- 
ficlámus exémplo. Per Dó- 
minum. 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 

almighty God, that we, 
who venerate the natal feast 
of blessed Thecla, Thy virgin 
and martyr, may rejoice in her 
annual solemnity and make 
progress by the example of so 
great a faith. Through our 
Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


3210 


SEPT. 27—STS. COSMAS AND DAMIAN 


Sept. 24— Our Ladp of Ransom, (White) 


Double Major 
Mass, Salve sancta parens, page 1394, except: 


Prayer 


cop, Who for the ransom- 

ing from slavery of the 
Christians held captive by pa- 
gans wast pleased, through the 
most glorious mother of Thy 
Son to enrich Thy Church by 
@ new order: grant, we beseech 
Thee, that she, whom we pi- 
ously venerate as the founder 
Of so great & work, may, 
through her merits and pray- 
ers, deliver us from all our sins 
and from the captivity of the 
devil. Through the same. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


EUS, qui per gloriosissi- 

mam Fílii tui Matrem, 
ad liberándos Christi fidéles 
a potestáte paganórum, nova 
Ecclésiam tuam prole ampli- 
ficare dignátus es: preste. 
quaesumus; ut, quam pie ven- 
erámur tanti óperis institu- 
trícem, ejus páriter méritis 
et intercessióne, a peccatis 
ómnibus, et captivitáte dæ- 
monis liberémur, Per eüm- 
dem Dóminum. 


Sept. 26—4$5ts. (Cpprían and Justina, Martyrs (Red) 


Simple 
Mass, Salus autem, page 1325, except: 


Prayer 


AY the continual protec- 

tion of the blessed mar- 
tyrs, Cyprian and Justina, 
comfort us, O Lord; for Thou 
dost not cease to behold with 
favor those whom Thou hast 
granted the grace of such as- 
sistance. Through our Lord. 


EATÓRUM Mártyrum 
B Cypriani et Justine 
nos, Dómine, fóveant contin- 
uáta presidia: quia non dé- 
sinis propitius intuéri, quos 
talibus auxiliis concésseris 
adjuvári. Per Dóminum. 


Secret, We offer Thee, O Lord, the gifts, from the Mass Intret, 


page 1320. 


Postcommunion, Grant us, we beseech Thee, O Lord, from 


ihe Mass Intret, page 1321. 


Sept. 27—Sts. Cosmas and Damian, Martyrs 
(Red) 
Semi-Double 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 44, 15, 14 


Ti the people show forth APIÉNTIAM sanctérum 
the wisdom of the saints, narrent pópuli, et laudes 


http://ccwatershed.org 


—— 9Ó— 


F 


SEPT. 27—STS. COSMAS AND DAMIAN 1211 


eórum núntiet Ecclésia; nó- 
mina autem eórum vivent in 
sæculum seculi. Ps. 32, 1. Ex- 
suitate justi in Dómino; rec- 
tos decet collaudatio. Y. Gló- 
ria Patri. 


and the Church declare their 
praise; and their names shall 
live unto: generation and gen- 
eration. Ps. 32, 1. Rejoice in 
the Lord, ye just; praise be- 
cometh the upright. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


RESTA, quesumus omni- 

potens Deus: ut, qui 
Sanctórum Mártyrum tuór- 
um. Cosme et Damiani natal- 
ítia cólimus, a cunctis malis 
imminéntibus, eórum inter- 
cessiónibüs  liberémur. Per 
Dóminum. 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we 
who celebrate the feast-day of 
Thy holy martyrs, Cosmas and 
Damian, by their intercession 
may be delivered from all dan- 
gers that threaten us, Through 
our Lord. 


Second, Prayer A cunctis, page 827; third at the choice of the 


priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Epistle, But the just, from the Mass Sapientiam, page 1322. 


Gradual. Ps. 33, 18, 19 


Clamavérunt justi, et Dó- 
minus exaudívit eos: et ex 
ómnibus tribulatiónibus eór- 
um liberávit eos. Y. Juxta est 
Dóminus his qui tribuláto 
sunt corde: et hümiles spíritu 
salvabit. 

Allehija, allelija. V. Hee 
est vera fratérnitas, que vicit 
mundi crimina: Christum se- 
ctita est, inclyta tenens regna 
celéstia, Allelüja. 


1 Gospel, Jesus coming down, 
3. 


Offertory. 

Gloriabintur in te omnes, 

qui diligunt nomen tuum: 

quóniam tu, Dómine, bene- 

díces justo: Dómine, ut scuto 

bone voluntátis tue coronásti 
nos. . : 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


The just cried, and the Lord 
heard them: and delivered 
them out of all their troubles. 
Y. The Lord is nigh unto those 
who are troubled in heart, and 
the humble in spirit shall be 
saved. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. This is 
the true brotherhood that over- 
cometh the wickedness of the 
world; it hath followed Christ, 
holding fast to the glorious 
heavenly kingdom. Alleluia. 


from the Mass Sapientiam, page 


Ps. 5, 12-13 


All they that love Thy name 
shall glory in Thee: for Thou, 
O Lord, wilt bless the just: O 
Lord, Thou hast crowned us 
with the shield of Thy good 
will, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1212 SEPT. 28—ST. WENCESLAUS 


Secret 


AY the loving prayers of ANCTORUM tuórum nobis, 

Thy saints not be want- Dómine, pia non desit 

ing to us, O Lord, to win us orátio: que et münera nostra 

Thy gifts and ever to obtain us concíliet, et tuam nobis in- 

Thy pardon. Through our Lord. dulgéntiam semper obtíneat. 
Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear i us, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Ps. 78, 2, 11 
They have given the dead Posuérunt mortália servó- 


bodies of Thy servants, O Lord, 
to be meat for the fowls of the 
air, the flesh of Thy saints to 


rum tuórum, Dómine, escas 
volatilibus celi, carnes sanc- 
tórum tuórum béstiis terre: 


the beasts of the earth: ac- secándum magnitüdinem 
cording to the greatness of Thy brachii tui  pósside  fílios 
arm take possession of the chil- morte punitórum. 

dren of them that have been 

punished by death. 


Postcommunion 


AY 'Thy people, we be- RÓTEGAT, quesumus Dó- 
seech Thee, O Lord, be mine, pópulum tuum et 
protected by the privilege of participátio celéstis indülta 
participation in the heavenly convívii, et deprecátio colláta 
banquet and by the prayer of sanctórum. Per Dóminum. 
ihe saints made in their behalf. 
Through our Lord. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
choice of the priest, pages ' 1494-1500. 


Sept. 28—$5t. Wenceslaus, Martyr (Red) 


Semi-Double 
Mass, In virtute, page 1309, except: 


Prayer 


O cop, Who, through the EUs, qui beátum Wen» 
palm of martyrdom, didst cesláum per martyrii 
transfer blessed Wenceslaus palmam a terréno principátu. 
from an earthly principality to ad celéstem glóriam transtu- 
heavenly glory, keep us, by his lísti: ejus précibus nos ab 
prayers, from all adversity, and omni adversitáte custódi, et. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ri 


SEPT. 29—-DEDICATION ST. MICHAEL 1213 


Bjüsdem iríbue gaudére con- grant us to rejoice in his fellow- 
šórtio. Per Dóminum. ship. Through our Lord. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, with its accompanying Secret and 
Postcommunion, page 827; third at the choice of the priest. 


Sept. 29—Whe Dedication of St. Michael the 


Archangel, (White) 
Double of the First Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 102, 20 


EeNEDÍCITE Dóminum, 
omnes Angeli ejus: po- 
éntes virtüte, qui fácitis ver- 
um ejus, ad audiéndam vo- 
em sermónem ejus. Ps. 102, 
. Bénedic, ánima mea, Dó- 
Mno: et ómnia, que intra 
1e sunt, nómini sancto ejus. 
' Gloria Patri. 


tess the Lord, all ye His 
angels: you that are 
mighty in strength, and exe- 
cute His word, harkening to 
the voice of His orders. Ps. 102, 
1. Bless the Lord, O my soul: 
&nd let all that is within me 
bless His holy name. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUs, qui miro órdine, 

Angélórum ministéria 
»minümque dispénsas: con- 
ide propítius; ut, a quibus 
bi ministrántibus in ccelo 
mper assistitur, ab his in 
rra vita nostra muniátur. 
'r Dóminum. 


Lesson. 
Léctio libri Apocalypsis 
áti Joánnis Apóstoli. 


“vn DIÉBUS illis: Significávit 
, Deus que oportet fieri 
o, mittens per Angelum 
um servo suo Joánni, qui 
stiménium perhíbuit verbo 
1, 
risti, quecümque vidit. 
átus qui legit, et audit 
rba prophetíe hujus: et 
vat ea, que in ea scripta 


et testimónium . Jesu. 


cop, Who dost in wonder- 

fulorder dispose the min- 
istries of angels and men, mer- 
cifuly grant that our lives be 
fortified by those who continu- 
ally stand in Thy presence and 
minister before Thee in heaven. 
Through our Lord. 


Apoc. 1, 1-15 


Lesson from the Book of the 
Apocalypse of blessed John the 
Apostle. 


*N THOSE days: God signified 
the things which must 
Shortly come to pass, sending 
by His angel to His servant 
John, who hath given testi- 
mony to the word of God, and 
the testimony of Jesus Christ, 
what things soever he hath 
seen. Blessed is he that readeth 
and heareth the words of this 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1214 


prophecy, and keepeth those 
things which are written in it; 
for the time is at hand. John 
to the seven churches which 
are in Asia: Grace be unto you 
and peace from Him that is, 
and that was, and that is to 
come; and from the seven spi- 


rits which are before His. 


throne; and from Jesus Christ, 
Who is the faithful witness, 
ihe first begotten of the dead, 
and the.prince of the kings of 
the earth, Who. hath loved us, 


SEPT. 29—DEDICATION ST. MICHAEL 


sunt: tempus enim prope est. 
Joánnes Septem  ecclésiis, 
que sunt in Asia. Grátia vo- 
bis, et pax ab eo, qui est, et 
qui erat, et qui ventürus est: 
et a septem spirítibus, qui in 
conspéctu throni ejus sunt: 
et a Jesu Christo, qui est tes- 
tis fidélis, primogénitus mor- 
tuérum, et princeps regum 
terre, qui diléxit nos, et lavit 
nos a peccatis nostris in san- 
guine suo. 


and washed us from our sins in His.own blood. 
In Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are replaced: by the 


Greater Alleluia below. 


Gradual. Ps. 102, 20, 1 


Bless the Lord all ye His an- 
gels: you that are mighty in 
strength, that do His will y. 
O my soul, bless thou the Lord: 
and all that is within me praise 
His holy name. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Holy 
archangel Michael, defend us 
in battle: that we perish not in 
the dreadful judgment. Alle- 
luia. 


Benedícite Dóminum, om- 
nes Angeli ejus:. poténtes vir- 
túte, qui fácitis verbum ejus. 
¥. Bénedic, ánima mea, Dó- 
minum, et ómnia interióra 


mea nomen sanctum ejus. 


Allelája, allelüja. Y. Sancte 
Michel Archángele, defénde 
nos in prelio: ut non pereá- 
mus in treméndo judício. Al- 
lelija. 


roe Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Holy 
archangel Michael, defend us 
in battle, that we perish not in 
the dreadful judgment. Alle- 
luia. V. The sea was shaken, 
and the earth trembled, when 
the archangel Michael de- 
scended from heaven. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelija. Y. d 
Michel Archángele, defénde' 
nos in prelio: ut non pereá- 
mus in treméndo judício. Al- 
lelija. V. Conceüssum est 
mare, et contrémuit terra, 
ubi Archangelus Michel des- 
céndit de colo. Allelija. 


' Gospel. Matt. 18, 1-10 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according. to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, the disciples 
came to Jesus, saying, 


W Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélil secundum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Accessé- 
runt discipuli ad Jesum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SEPT. 29.—0EDICATION ST. MICHAEL 


dicéntes: Quis, putas, major 
est in regno celórum? Et ád- 
votans Jesus párvulum, Stá- 
tuit eum in médio eórum, et 
dixit: Amen, dico vobis, nisi 
convérsi fuéritis, et efficiá- 
mini sicut párvuli, non intrá- 
bitis in regnum ceælórum. 
Quicümque ergo humiliáverit 
se sicut párvulus iste, hic est 
major in regno celórum. Et 
qui suscéperit unum párvulum 
talem in nómine meo, me 
suscipit. Qui autem scandal- 
izáverit unum de pusíllis istis, 
qui in me credunt, expedit ei, 
ut suspendátur mola asinárià 
in collo ejus, et demergátur 
in profündum maris. Ve 
mundo a scándalis. Necésse 
est enim ut véniant scándala: 
verümtamen ve hómini illi, 
per quem scándalum venit. Si 
autem manus tua, vel pes 
tuus scandalizat te, abscide 
eum, et prójice abs te: bonum 
tibi est ad vitam ingredi dé- 
bilem, vel claudum, quam’ du- 
as manus, vel duos pedes ha- 
béntem mitti in ignem etér- 
num. Et si óculus tuus scan- 
dalizat te, érue eum, et.pró- 
jice abs te: bonum tibi est 
cum uno óculo in vitam in- 
tráre, quam duos óculos ba- 
béntem mitti in gehénnam 
ignis. Vidéte ne contemnátis 
unum ex bis pusíllis: dico 
enim vobis, quia Angeli eórum 
in celis semper vident fáciem 
Patris mei, qui in colis est. 


1215 


Who, thinkest Thou, is the 
greater in the kingdom of 
héaven?. And Jesus. calling 
unto Him a little child, set him 
in the midst of them, and said, 
Amen I say to you, unless you 
be converted, and become as 
little children, you shall not 
enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. Whosoever therefore 
shall humble himself as this 
little child, he is the greater 
in the kingdom of heaven: and 
he that shall receive one such 
little child in My name, receiv- 
eth Me; but he that shall scan- 
dalize one of these little ones 
that believe in Me, it were bet- 
ter for him that a millstone 
should be hanged about his 
neck, and that he should be 
drowned in the depth of the 
sea. Woe-to the world because 
of scandals: for it must needs 
be that scandals come; but nev- 
ertheless woe to that man by 
whom the scandal cometh. And 
if thy hand, or thy foot, scan- 
dalize thee, cut it off, and cast 
it from thee. It is better for 
thee to go. into life maimed or 
lame, than having two hands 
or two feet, to be cast into 
everlasting fire. And if thy eye 
Scandalize thee, pluck it out, 
and cast it from thee. It is bet- 
ter for thee having one eye to 
enter into life, than having 
two eyes to be cast into hell 
fire, See that you despise not 
one of these little ones; for I 
Say to you, that their angels 


in heaven always see the face of My Father Who is in heaven. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


: Stetit Angelus juxta aram 
templi; habens thuríbulum 


Apoc. 8, 3,4 


An angel stood near the altar 
of the temple, having & golden 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1216 SEPT. 30—ST. JEROME 


censer in his hand: and there áureum in manu sua, et data 
was given to him much in- sunt ei incénsa multa: et as- 
cense: and the smoke of the céndit fumus arómatum in 
perfumes ascended before God, conspéctu Dei, allelüia. 
alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
QU OFFER Thee sacrifices ósrras tibi, Dómine, 

of praise, O Lord, hum- G laudis offérimus, sup- 
bly praying that Thou be pliciter deprecántes: ut eás- 
pleased to. receive them, dem, angélico pro nobis in- 
through the angelic interces- terveniénte suffrágio, et pla- 
sion in our behalf, and grant cátus accípias, et ad salütem 
that they may avail for, our nostram provenire concédas. 
Salvation. Through our Lord. Per Dóminum. 


Preface. for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Dan. 3, 58 


All ye angels of the Lord, Benedicite, omnes Angeli 
bless the Lord: sing a hymn, Dómini, Dóminum: hymnum 
and exalt Him above luus for- dícite, et superexaltate eum 
ever, alleluia. : in secula. 


Postcommunion 
ELYING upon the interces- rAtr Archángeli tui Mi- 
sion of blessed Michael, chelis intercessióne 


Thine archangel, O Lord, we sSuffülti: süpplices te, Dómine; 
Thy suppliants pray that what deprecámur; ut, quod ore 


we perform with our lips wé proséquimur, contingámus et * 


may attain with our hearts. mente. Per Dóminum. 
"Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Sept. 30—St. Jerome, Confessor, Doctor of the 
l Church (White) 
Double 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst vouchsafe 
O to provide for ‘Thy 


EUS, qui Ecclésime tue in 
exponéndissacris Scrip- 


Church blessed Jerome, Thy 
confessor, 2 great Doctor for 
the expounding of the Sacred 


türis beátum  Hierónynum 
Confessórem tuum, Dóctórem 
máximum providére dignátus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 2—HOLY GUARDIAN ANGELS 


es: presta, qusesumus; ut, 
ejus suffragántibus méritis, 
quod ore'simul et ópere dó- 
cuit, te adjuvante exercére 
valeamus. Per Dóminum. 


1217 


Scriptures, grant, we beseech 
Thee, that through his merits 
we may be enabled, by Thine 
assistance, to practise what 
both by word and deed he hath 
taught us, Through our Lord. 


Secret 


ons: celéstibus da no- 

bis, quæsumus, Dómine, 
líbera tibi mente servíre ut 
münera que deférimus, inter- 
veniénte beáto Hierónymo 
Confessóre tuo, et medélam 
nobis operéntur, et glóriam. 
Per Dóminum, 


x THY heavenly gifts, O 

Lord, grant us, we pray, 
o Serve Thee with untram- 
meled minds, that the offerings 
we bring may, by the interces- 
sion of blessed Jerome, Thy 
confessor, effect our healing 
and our glory. Through our 
Lord. 


Postcommunion 


EPLETI alimónia celésti, 
quesumus, Dómine: 


—yiLLED with heavenly nour- 
ishment, we pray Thee, O 


ut, interveniénte beáto Hier- Lord, that, by the intercession 

énymo Confessóre tuo, miser- of blessed Jerome, Thy confes- 

icórdie tue grátiam cónse- sor, we may be found worthy to 

qui mereámur. Per Dóminum. obtain the favor of Thy mercy. 
Through our Lord. 


Oct. 1 ft Remigius, Bishop, Confessor (White) 


Simple 


Mass, Statuit ei, page 1337; Second Prayer, A cunctis, with the 
accompanying Secret and Postcommunion, page 827; third at 
the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Oct. 2— ff east of the Holy Guardian Angels (white) 
Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 102, 20 
ENEDicITre Dóminum, LESS the Lord, all ye His 
omnes Angeli ejus: angels: you that are 


poténtes virtüte, qui fácitis 
verbum ejus, ad audiéndam 
vocem 'sermónum ejus. Ps. 
102, 1. Bénedic, ánima mea, 
Dómino: et ómnia, que intra 
me Sunt, nómini sancto ejus. 
X. Glória Patri, 


mighty in strength, and exe- 
cute His word, harkening to the 
voice of His orders. Ps. 102, 1. 
Bless the Lord, O my soul; and 
let all that is within me praise 
His holy name. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1218 


OCT. 2—HOLY GUARDIAN ANGELS 


Prayer 


Gop, Who in Thine inef- 

fable providence . dost 
vouchsafe to send Thine angels 
to watch over us, grant to Thy 
suppliants to be continually 
defended by their protection 
and to share their companion- 
ship in eternity. Throngh our 
Lord. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Exodus. DE 
HUS saith the Lord God, 
Behold I will send My an- 
gel, who shall go before thee, 
and keep thee in thy journey, 
and bring thee into the place 
that I have prepared. Take no- 
tice of him, and hear his voice, 
. and do not think him one to be 
contemned, for he will not for- 
give when thou hast sinned, 
and My name is in him. But if 
thou wilt hear his voice, and 
do all that I speak, I will be an 


enemy to Thy enemies, and will.. 
afflict them that afflict thee: : 


and My angel shall go before 
thee. i 


| EUS, qui ineffábili provi- 
D déntia sanctos Angelos 
uos ad nostram custódiam 
míttere dignáris: largíre sup- 
plícibus tuis; et eórum sem- 
per protectióne deféndi et 
setérna societáte gaudére. Per 
Dóminum. 


Ex. 23, 20-23 


Léctio libri Exodi. 


EC dicit Dóminus Deus: 
Ecce ego mittam Ange- 
lum meum qui præcédat te, et 
custódiat in via, et introdücat 
in locum, quem parávi. Ob- 
sérva eum, et audi vocem 
ejus, nec  contemnéndum 
putes: quia non dimittet cum 
peccáveris, et est nomen me- 
um in illo. Quod si audíeris 
vocem ejus, et féceris ómnia, 
que loquor, inimicus ero in- 
imícis tuis, et afligam afili- 
géntes te: precedétque te 
Angelus meus. 


In Votive Masses from Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser 
Alleluia in. the Gradual is replaced by the Tract. Im Paschal- 
time the Gradual and Tract are replaced by the Greater Alle- 
tuia and Verses found after the Tract. 


Gradual. Ps. 90, 11, 12 


God haih given His angels 
charge over thee, to keep thee 
in all thy ways. Y. In their 
hands they shall bear thee up, 
lest at any time thou dash thy 
foot against a stone. 


Angelis suis Deus mandá- 
vit de te, ut custódiant te in 
ómnibus viis tuis, Y. In mán- 
ibus portábunt te, ne umquam 
offéndas ad lápidem pedem 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. y. Ps. 102, 
21. Bless the Lord, all ye His 


Allelija, allelija. Y. Ps. 
102, 21. Benedícite Dómino, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


"OCT. 2—HOLY GUARDIAN ANGELS 


omnes virtütes ejus: minístri 
ejus, qui fácitis voluntátem 
ejus. Allelüja. 


1219 


hosts: you ministers of His who 
do His will. Alleluia. 


Tract. Ps. 102, 20. 


Benedicite Dóminum, om- 
nes Angeli ejus: poténtes vir- 
tüte qui fácitis verbum ejus, 
y. Ps. 102, 21, 22. Benedícite 
Dómino, omnes virtütes ejus: 
ministri ejus, qui fácitis vol- 
untátem ejus. Y. Benedícite 
Dómino, ómnia ópera ejus: in 
omni loco dominatiónis ejus, 
bénedic, ánima mea, Dómino. 


Bless the Lord, all Ye His 
angels: you that are mighty in 
strength and execute His word. 
Y. Ps. 102, 21, 22. Bless the 
Lord, all ye His hosts: you min- 
isters of His who do His will. 
Yy. Bless the Lord, all ye His 
works: in every place in His 
dominion, O. my soul, bless. thou 
the Lord. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelája, allelüja. Y. Ps. 
137, 1,2. In conspéctu Ange- 
lórum. psallam tibi: adorábo 
ad templum sanctum tuum, 
et confitébor nómini tuo. Al- 
lelija. Y. Matt. 28, 2. Angelus 
Dómini descéndit de eclo, et 
accédens revólvit lápidem, et 
sedébat super eum. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel, The disciples came 
feast of St. Michael, Sept. 29. 


Creed, page 765. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 137, 1, 2. 
I will sing praise to Thee in the 
sight of the angels: I wil wor- 
ship toward Thy :holy temple, 
and I wil give glory to Thy 
name. Alleluia. Y. Matt. 28, 2. 
An. angel of the Lord descended 
from heaven, and coming, 
rolled back the stone, and sat 
upon it. Alleluia. 


to Jesus, page 1214, as on ihe 


. Offertory. Ps. 102, 20, 21 


Benedícite Dóminum, om- 
nes Angeli ejus: minístri ejus, 
qui fácitis verbum ejus, ad 
audiéndam vocem sermónum 
ejus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Bless the Lord, all ye his 
angels: you ministers of His 
who execute His word, harken- 
ing to the voice of His orders. 


Secret 


ÜscrPE, Dómine, münera, 
que pro sanctórum An- 
£elórum tuórum veneratióne 
deférimus: et concéde propi- 
tius; ut perpétuis eórum pre- 
sídiis a, preséntibus perículis 


EcEIVE the gifts, O Lord, 
which we: bring in ven- 
eration of Thy holy angels, and 
mercifully grant that we be 
delivered by their perpetual 
guard from the perils of this 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1220 OCT. 8—ST. TERESA OF THE INFANT JESUS 


life and at last attain unto life liberémur et ad vitam per- 
everlasting, Through our Lord. veniámus stérnam, Per Dó- 
minum. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Dan. 3, 58 
. AM ye angels of the Lord, ^ Benedícite, omnes Angeli 
bless the Lord: sing & hymn, Dómini, Dóminum: hymnum 
and exalt Him above all for- dícite et super-exaltate eum 
ever, in secula. ` 


Postcommunion 
E HAVE received, O Lord, UxPsrwus, Dómine, div- 
the divine mysteries, re- ina mystéria, sanctórum 
joicing in the festivity of Thy Angelórum tuórum festivitáte 


holy angels; we pray that we 
be continually delivered by 
their protection from . the 
Snares of our enemies and for- 
tified against all adverse pow- 
ers, Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


letántes: qusesumus: ut eór- 
um protectióne ab hóstium 
jügiter liberémur insídiis et 
contra ómnia advérsa muniá- 
mur. Per Dóminum, 


Oct. 3—St. Teresa of the Infant Jesus 
(The “Little Flower"), Virgin (White) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Cant. 4, 8, 9 


‘ome from Libanus, my 
spouse, come from Liba- 
nus, come: Thou hast wounded 
my heart, my sister, my spouse: 
Thou hast wounded my heart. 
Ps. 112, 1. Praise the Lord, ye 
children: Praise ye the name of 
the Lord. Y. Glory. 


ENI de Líbano, sponsa 

mea, veni de Líbano, 
veni: vulnerásti cor meum, 
soror mea sponsa, vulnerásti 
cor meum. Ps. 112, 1. Lau- 
dáte, püeri, Dóminum: lau- 
dáte nomen Domini. y. 
Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


LORD, Who hast said: Un- 
less ye hecome as little 


OMINE, qui dixísti: Nisi 
efficiámini sicut párvuli, 


children, ye shall not enter into non intrábitis in regnum cæ- 
the kingdom of heaven, grant lorum: da nobis, qusesumus; 
unto us, we beseech Thee, so to ita beáte Terésim Virginis in 
follow the footsteps of blessed humilitàte et  simplicitáte 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. S—ST. TERESA OF THE INFANT JESUS 1221 


cordis vestigia sectari, ut præ- Teresa, virgin, in lowliness and 
mia consequámur ætérna. Qui simplicity of heart that we may 


vivis. 


Lesson. 
Léctio Isaie Prophéte, 


ic dicit Dóminus: Ecce 

ego  declinábo super 
eam quasi flüvium pacis, et 
quasi torréntem inundántem 
glóriam géntium, quam sugé- 
tis: ad übera portabímini, et 
super génua blandiéntur vo- 
bis. Quómodo si cui mater 
blandiátur, ita ego. consolábor 
vos, et in Jerüsalem consola- 
bimini. Vidébitis, et gaudébit 
cor vestrum, et ossa vestra 
quasi herba germinábunt, et 
cognoscétur manus Dómini 
Servis ejus. 


gain everlasting rewards. Who 
livest. 


Is. 66, 12-14 


Lesson from Isaias the 


Prophet. 

OR thus saith the Lord: 

Behold I will bring upon 
her as it were a river of peace, 
and as an overflowing torrent 
ihe glory of the gentiles, which 
you shall suck; you shall be 
carried at. the breasts, and 
upon the knees they shall ca- 
ress you. As one whom the 
mother caresseth, so will I 
comfort you, and you shall be 
comforted in Jerusalem. You 
shall see and your heart shall 
rejoice, and your bones shall 
flourish like an herb, and the 
hand of the Lord shall be 
known to His servants. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
placed by thé Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Matt. 11, 25 


Confíteor tibi, Pater, Dó- 
mine cæli et terræ, quia ab- 
Scondísti hec a sapiéntibus, 
et prudéntibus, et revelásti 
ea párvulis Y. Ps. 70, 5. Dó- 
mine, spes mea a juventüte 
mea. 


' Lesser 


Allelüja, allelüja. V. Ecclus. 
39, 17-19. Quasi rosa plantáta 
super rivos aquárum fructifi- 
cate: quasi Líbanus odórem 
suavitátis habéte: floréte 
flores, quasi lilium, et date 
odórem, et frondéte in grá- 
tiam, et.collaudáte cánticum, 
et benedícite Dóminum in 
opéribus suis. Allelüja. 


I confess to Thee, O Father, 
Lord of heaven and earth, be- 
cause Thou hast hid these 
things from the wise and pru- 
dent and hast revealed them to 
little ones. VY. Ps. 70, 5. My 
hope, O Lord, from my youth. 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia, Y. Ecclus. 
39, 17-19. Bud forth as the rose 
planted by the brooks of wa- 
ters, Give ye a sweet odor as 
Libanus, Send forth flowers, as 
the lily, and yield a smell, and 
bring forth leaves in grace, and 
praise with canticles, and bless 
the Lord in His works, Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1222 OCT. 3—ST. TERESA OF THE INFANT JESUS 


Tract. Cant. 2, 11, 12 


For winter is now past, the 
rain is over and gone. V. The 
flowers have appeared in our 
land: The time of pruning is 
come: The voice of the turtle 
js heard in our land. ¥. Jer. 
31, 3. I have loved Thee with 
an everlasting love: Therefore 
have I drawn thee, taking pity 
on thee. 


Jam hiems tránsiit, imber 
ábiit, et recéssit. Y. Flores ap- 
paruérunt in terra nostra, 
tempus putatiónis advénit: 
vox türturis audita est in ter- 
ra nostra, Y. Jer. 31, 3. In 
caritáte perpétua diléxi te: 
ideo attráxi te, míserans tui. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Ecclus. 39, 
17-19. Bud forth as the rose 
planted by the brooks of waters. 
Give ye a sweet odor as Liba- 
nus, Send forth flowers, as the 
lily and yield a smell, and 
bring forth leaves in grace, and 
praise with canticles, and bless 
the Lord in His works. Alleluia. 
Ps. 33, 9; 99, 5. O taste and see 
that the Lord is sweet: His 
mercy endureth forever. Alle- 
luia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


ANelúja, allelüja. V. Ecclus. 
39, 17-19. Quasi rosa plantáta 
super rivos aquárum fructi- 
ficáte: quasi Líbanus odórem 
suavitátis ^ habéte:  floréte 
flores, quasi lílium, et date 
odórem, et frondéte in grá- 
tiam, et collaudáte cánticum, 
et benedicite Dóminum in 
opéribus suis. Allelüja. Y. Ps. 
33, 9; 99, 5. Gustáte, et vi- 
déte quóniam suávis est Dó- 
minus: in etérnum misericór- 
dia ejus. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Matt. 18, 1-5 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

YT THAT time, the disciples 
came to Jesus saying: 
Who, thinkest Thou, is the 
greater in the kingdom of 
heaven? And Jesus calling unto 
Him a little child, set him in 
the midst of them and said: 
Amen I say to you, unless you 
be. converted and become as 
little children, you shall not 
enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. Whosoever therefore 
shall humble himself as this 
little child, he is the greater 
in the kingdom of heaven, 


"5 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Matthzeum. 


PN ILLO témpore: Accessér- 
unt discípuli ad Jesum, 
dicéntes: Quis, putas, major 
est in regno celérum? Et ád- 
vocans Jesus párvulum, stá- 
tuit eum in médio eórum, et 
dixit: Amen dico vobis, nisi 
convérsi fuéritis, et efficiá- 
mini sicut párvuli, non intrá- 
bitis in regnum cælórum. Qui- 
cümque ergo humiliáverit se 
sicut párvulus iste, hic est 
major in regno celórum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 4—ST. FRANCIS ASSISI 1223 


Offertory. Luke 1, 46-48, 49 


Magnífieat ánima mea Dó- . My. soul doth magnify the 
minum: et exsultávit spíritus Lord. And my spirit hath re- 
meus in Deo salutári meo: joiced in God my Saviour. Be- 
quia respéxit humilitátem an- cause He hath regarded the 
Cille sue: fecit mihi magna humility of His handmaid: He 


qui potens est. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


that is mighty hath done great 
ihings to me. 


Secret 


ACRIFicIuM nostrum tibi, 
Dómine, quesumus, 
beate Therésie Vírginis tue 
precatio sancta conciliet: ut 
in cujus honóre solémniter 
exhibétur, ejus méritis effici- 
átur accéptum. Per Dómin- 
um. 


E BESEECH Thee, O Lord, 

that the holy interces- 

sion of blessed Teresa, Thy vir- 

gin, may make our sacrifice 

agreeable to Thee, so that it 

may be made acceptable by the 

merits of her in whose honor 

it is solemnly offered. Through 
our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Deut. 32, 10, 12 


Circumdüxit eam, et dó- 
cuit: et custodivit quasi pu- 
pillam óculi sui. Sicut áquila 
expándit alas suas, et 
assumpsit eam, atque portá- 
vit in hümeris suis Dóminus 
solus dux ejus fuit. 


He led her about and taught 
her: and He kept her as the 
apple of His eye. As the eagle, 
He spread His wings and hath 
taken her, and carried her on 
His shoulders. The Lord alone 
was her leader. 


Postcommunion 


LLO nos, Dómine, amóris 

igne celéste mystérium 
infiámmet quo beáta Therésia 
Virgo tua se tibi pro homini- 
bus caritátis victimam devó- 
vit. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Oct. 4—S5t, Francis of 


Ax the heavenly mystery, 

O- Lord, enkindle in us 
that fire of love, whereby the 
blessed Teresa, Thy virgin, of- 
fered herself to Thee as a 
victim of charity for men. 
Through our Lord. 


Assisi, Confessor (White) 


Double Major 
Mass as On the feast of the Stigmata, Sept. 17, page 1200, 


except: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1224 


OCT. 6—ST. BRUNO 


Prayer 


cop, Who, by the merits 

of blessed Francis, didst 
increase Thy Church by bring- 
ing forth a new progeny, grant 
us to imitate him in despising 
earthly things and ever to re- 
joice in partaking of heavenly 
gifts. Through our Lord. 


EUs, qui Ecclésiam tu- 
am, beati Francisci 
méritis fetu nove prolis am- 
plíficas: tríbue nobis: ex ejus 
imitatióne, terréna despícere, 
et celéstium donórum semper 
participatióne gaudére. Per 
Dóminum. 


Gospel Jesus answered and said, as on the feast of St. Paul, 


Hermit, January 19, page 865. 


ANCTIFY, O Lord, the gifts 
dedicated to Thee, and, 
by the intercession of blessed 
Francis, cleanse us from all 
stain of sin. Through our Lord. 


. Secret 


ÜNERA tibi, Dómine, di- 

cáta sanctífica: et, in- 

tercedénte beato Francisco, 

ab omni nos culpárum labe 
purífica. Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


ay heavenly grace, we be- 
XD Seech Thee, O Lord, en- 
large Thy Church which Thou 
wast pleased to enlighten by 
ihe glorious merits and ex- 
amples of blessed Francis, Thy 
confessor, Through our Lord. 


COLÉSIAM tuam, quesu- 

mus, Dómine, grátia 
coléstis amplificet: quam 
beáii Francisci Confessóris 
tui illumináre voluísti glori- 
Osis méritis, et exémplis. Per 
Dóminum. 


Oct. 5—$5t. Placidus and His Companions, Martyrs 
(Red) 
Simple 
Mass Salus autem, page 1325, except: 


Prayer O God, Who dost permit us, from the Mass Intret, 
page 1317, with the corresponding Secret and Postcommunion. 
Second Prayer A cunctis, page 827, with the accompanying 
Secret and Postcommunion; third at the choice of the priest, 


pages 1494-1500, 


Oct. -—St. Bruno, Confessor (White) 


Double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


E BESEECH Thee, O Lord, 
that we may be assisted 


ANCTI Brunónis Confes- 
SÓris tui, quesumus, 


by the prayers of St. Bruno, Dómine, intercessiónibus ad- 
Thy confessor, that we, who juvémur: ut, qui majestátem 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 7—MOST HOLY ROSARY 1225 
tuam graviter delinquéndo have grievously offended Thy 
offéndimus, ejus méritis et majesty by sin, may obtain the 
préeibus, nostrórum delictó- forgiveness of our offenses 
rum véniam consequamur. through his merits and prayers. 


Per Dóminum. 


"Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion is from the Mass Justus ut palma, page 1355. 


Oct. 7—The Most Holp Rosary of the B.V.M. 
(White) 
Double of the Second Class 


St. Mark, Pope, Confessor (White) 
. Simple 
Sts. Sergius, Bacchus, Marcellus, and Apuleius, 
Martyrs 
Simple 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit 


AUDEÁMUS omnes in Dó- 

mino, diem festum cel- 
ebrántes sub honóre beate 
Maríe Vírginis: de cujus so- 
lemnitáte gaudent Angeli et 
collàudant Fílium Dei. Ps. 
44, 2. Eructávit cor meum 
verbum bonum: dico ego 
ópera mea Regi. V. Glória Pa- 
tri. l 


ET us all rejoice in the 

Lord, keeping a feast- 
day in honor of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary, for whose cele- 
bration the angels rejoice and 
unite in praising the Son of 
God. Ps. 44, 2. My heart hath 
uttered a good word: I speak 
my Works to the King. Y. Glory. 


"Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 


EUS, cujus Unigenitus 

per vitam, mortem et 
resurrectiónem suam nobis 
salutis etérne premia com- 
parávit: concéde, quaesumus; 
ut, hec mystéria sanctíssimo 
beáte Marie Vírginis Rosário 
recoléntes, et imitémur quod 
cóntinent, et quod promit- 
tunt, assequámur. Per eüm- 
dem Dóminum.. 


In low Masses a commemoration 


Martyrs. as follows: 
Of St. Mark. 


cop, Whose only-begotten 

Son, by His life, death, 
and resurrection hath pur- 
chased for us the rewards of 
eternal life: grant, we beseech 
Thee, that, meditating on the 
mysteries of the most holy 
Rosary of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary, we may imitate what 
they contain and obtain what 
they promise. Through the 
same. NN . 
of St. Mark and of the Holy 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1226 


OCT. 7—MOST HOLY ROSARY 


Prayer 


ETERNAL Shepherd, do 

Thou look favorably 
upon Thy flock, which we be- 
seech Thee to guard and keep 
for evermore through the 
blessed Mark, Supreme Pontiff, 
whom Thou didst choose to be 
the chief shepherd of the whole 
Church. Through our Lord. 


Of the Holy Martyrs. 


nEGEM tuum, Pastor æ- 
térne,  Dlacátus in- 
ténde: et per beátum Mar- 
cum Summum Pontificem, 
perpétua, protectióne custódi; 
quem totíus Ecclésie prestití- 


‘sti esse pastórem. Per Dómi- 


num. 


Prayer 


AY the blessed merits of 
Thy holy martyrs, Ser- 
gius, Bacchus, Marcellus, and 
Apuleius, bide with us, O 
Lord, and make us ever fervent 
in Thy love. Through our Lord. 


ANOTÓRUM Mártyrum tu- 

órum nos, Dómine, 
Sérgii, Bacchi, Marcéli et 
Apuléii beáta mérita prose- 
quántur: et tuo semper fáci- 
ant amóre fervéntes. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Lesson. Prov. 8, 22, 24, 32, 35 


Lesson from the book of 
Wisdom. 
HE Lord possessed me in 
the beginning of His ways, 
before He made anything, from 
the beginning. I was set up 
from eternity, and of old, be- 
fore the earth was made. The 
depths were not as yet, and I 
was already conceived. Now, 
therefore, ye children, hear 
me: blessed are they that keep 
my ways. Hear instruction, 
and be wise, and refuse it not. 
Blessed is the man that. hear- 
eth me, and that watcheth 
daily at my gates; and waiteth 
at the posts of my doors. He 
that shall find me, shall find 
life, and shall have salvation 
from the Lord. 


Gradual. Ps. 


Because of truth, and meek- 
ness, and justice: and thy right 
hand shall conduct thee won- 
derfully. Y. Hear, O daughter, 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiz. 


ÓwiNUS possédit me in 

initio viárum suárum, 
ántequam quidquam fáceret a 
princípio. Ab ztérno ordináta 
sum, et ex antíquis ántequam 
terra fieret. Nondum erant 
abyssi, et ego jam concépta 
eram. Nunc ergo, fílii, audíte 
me: Beá&ti, qui custódiunt vias 
meas, Audite dísciplinam, et 
estóte sapiéntes, et nolíte ab- 
jicere eam. Bedtus homo, qui 
audit me, et qui vigilat ad 
fores mess quotídie, et ob- 
sérvat.ad postes óstii mel. 
Qui me invénerit, invéniet vi- 
tam, et háuriet salütem & 
Dómino. ‘ 


44, 5, 11, 12 

Propter verltátem, et man- 
suetüdinem, et justítiam: et 
dedücet te mírabiliter déxtera 
tua. V. Audi, filia et vide, et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 7—MOST HOLY ROSARY 


inclina aurem tuam, quia 
coneupívit Rex spéciem tuam. 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Solém- 
nitas glorióse Virginis Marie 
ex sémine Abrahe, orta de 
tribu Juda, clara ex stirpe 
David. Allelája. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1227 


and see, and incline thine ear; 
for the King hath desired thy 
beauty. 

- Alleluia, .alleluia. Y. The 
solemnity of the glorious Vir- 
gin Mary, of the seed of Abra- 
ham, sprung from the tribe of 
Juda, of the noble line of Da- 
vid. Alleluia, 


Gospel. Luke 1, 26-38 


HM Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 
^N ILLO témpore: Missus est 
Angelus Gabriel a Deo 
in civitátem Galilee, cui no- 
men Nazareth, ad virginem 
desponsátam viro, cui nomen 
erat Joseph, de domo David, 


et nomen vírginis María. Et. 


ingréssus. Angelus. ad eam, 
dixit; Ave, grátia plena: Dó- 
minus tecum: benedicta tu in 
muliéribus. Que cum audís- 
set, turbáta est in sermóne 
ejus, et cogitábat qualis esset 
ista salutátio. Et ait Angelus 
ei: Ne tímeas, Maria, inven- 
isti enim grátiam apud Deum: 
ecce concíples in útero, et pá- 
ries filium, et vocábis nomen 
ejus Jesum. Hic erit magnus, 
et Fílius Altissimi vocábitur, 


et dabit illi Dóminus Deus. 


sedem David patris ejus: et 
regnábit.in domo Jacob in 
etérnum, et regni ejus non 
erit finis. Dixit autem María 
&d Angelum: Quómodo fiet 
istud, quóniam virum non 
cognósco? Et respóndens An- 
gelus, dixit ei: Spíritus sanc- 
tus supervéniet in te, et vir- 
tus Altíssimi abumbrábit tibi. 
Ideóque et quod nascétur ex 
te Sanctum, vocábitur Filius 
Dei. Et ecce Elisabeth cogná- 


"B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time: the angel 

Gabriel was sent from 
God into a city of Galilee, 
called Nazareth, to a virgin 
espoused to a man whose name 
was Joseph, of the house of 
David; and the virgin's name 
Was Mary. And the angel being 
come in, said unto her: Hail, 
full of grace, the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among 
women.. Who having heard, 
Was troubled at his saying, and 
thought with herself what 
manner of salutation this 
Should be. And the angel said 
to her, Fear not, Mary, for thou 
hast found grace with God. 
Behold thou shalt conceive in 
thy womb, and shalt bring 
forth a son; and thou shalt call 
His name Jesus. He shall be 
great, and shall be called the 
Son of the Most High, and the 
Lord God shall give unto Him 
the throne of David His father; 
and He shall reign in the house 
of Jacob forever. And of His 
kingdom there shall be no end. 
And Mary said to the angel, 
How shall this be done, because 
I know not.man? And the angel 
answering’ said to her, The 
Holy Ghost shall come upon 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1228 


thee, and the power of the Most 
High shall overshadow thee. 
And therefore also the Holy 
which shall be born of thee 
shall be called the Son of God. 
And behold thy cousin Eliza- 
beth, she also hath conceived a 
son in her old age; and this is 
the sixth month with her that 


OCT. 7—MOST HOLY ROSARY 


ta tua, et ipsa concépit filium 
in senectüte sua: et hic men- 
sis sextus est illi, que vocátur 
Stérilis: quia non erit impos- 
síbile apud Deum omne ver- 
bum. Dixit autem María: 
Ecce ancíla Dómini, fiat 
mihi secündum verbum tuum. 


is called barren; because no word shall be impossible with 
God. And Mary said: Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be 
it done to me according to thy word. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ecclus. 24, 25, 39, 17 


In me is all grace of the way 
and of the truth; in me is all 
hope of life and of virtue. Like 
a rose planted on the rivers I 
have borne fruit. ` 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


In me grátia omnis vie et 
veritátis, in me omnis spes 
vite et virtütis: ego quasi ro- 
sa plantáta super rivos aquá- 
rum fructificavi. 


Secret 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 
P O Lord, to be fittingly pre- 
pared for the offering of these 
gifts, and, through the mys- 
teries of the most holy Rosary, 
so to meditate upon the life, 
passion, and glory of Thine 
only-begolten Son, that we 
may become worthy of His 
promises. Who with Thee. 


AC nos quesumus, Dómi- 

ne, his munéribus of- 
feréndis conveniénter aptári: 
et per sacratissimi Rosárii 
mystéria sic vitam, passiónem, 
et glóriam Unigéniti tui re- 
cólere; ut ejus digni promis- 
siénibus efficiamur: Qui te- 
cum. i . 


In low Masses commemoration of St. Mark and. of the Holy 


Martyrs, as follows: 
Of St. Mark. 


Secret 


N THY loving kindness we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, be 
moved by the offering of our 
gifts and enlighten Thy 
Church: that Thy flock may 
prosper everywhere and the 
shepherds, under Thy guid- 


BLATIS munéribus, quee- 

sumus Démine, Ecclé- 

siam tuam benígnus illümina: 

ut, et gregis tui profíciat ubí- 

que succéssus, et grati fiant 

nómini tuo, te gubernánte, 
pastóres, Per Dóminum. 


ance, may be rendered acceptable to Thee, Through our Lord. 


Of the Holy Martyrs. 


Secret 


AY this sacrifice that is 
about to be offered cause 


AJESTÁTEM tuam nobis, 
Dómine, | quesumus, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 7—MOST HOLY ROSARY 


hzc hóstia reddat immolanda 
Placátam, tuórum digna pos- 
tulatióne Sanctórum. Per 
Dóminum. 

Preface No. 13, page 816 

Communion. 

Floréte flores quasi lilium, 
et date odórem, et frondéte in 
gratiam, collaudáte canticum 
et benedicite. Dóminum in 
opéribus suis. 


1220 


Thy majesty to be appeased 
toward us, O Lord, by the 
worthy prayer of Thy saints. 
Through our Lord. 


Ecclus, 39, 19 


Send forth flowers, as the 
lily, and yield a smell, and 
bring forth leaves in grace, and 
praise with canticles, and bless 
the Lord in His works. 


Postcommunion 


ANCTÍSSYMEm Genitricis 

tus, cujus Rosérium 
celebrámus, quesumus Dómi- 
ne, précibus adjuvémur: ut et 
mysteriórum, que. cólimus, 
virtus percipiátur; et sacra- 
mentórum, que sümpsimus, 
obtineátur efféctus: Qui vivis. 


Av we be assisted, we be- 
(D seech Thee, O Lord, by 
the prayers of Thy most holy 
Mother, whose Rosary we cele- 
brate, that. the virtue of the 
mysteries we adore may be 
shared and the effect of the 
sacraments we have received 
may be obtained. Who livest. 


In low Masses commemorations of St. Mark and the Holy 


Martyrs are as follows: 
Of St. Mark. 


Postcommunion 


EFECTIÓNE sancta enu- 

tritam gubérna, qué- 
sumus Dómine, tuam placá- 
ius  Ecclésigm: ut poténti 
moderatióne dirécta, et in- 
creménpta. libertátis accípiat 
et in religiónis integritáte 
persístat. Per Dóminum. 


Of the Holy Martyrs. 


ince Thy Church has been 
nourished by the sacred 
repast, govern her in Thy 
clemency, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, so that under the guid- 
ance. of Thy mighty rule she 
may enjoy greater freedom and 
abiding integrity of religion. 
Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


| ACRAMENTIS, Dómine, mu- 
niámur accéptis, et 
sanctórum  Mártyrum  tuó- 
rum Sérgii, Bacchi, Marcélli 
et Apuléii intercessióne, con- 
tra omnes nequítias irruéntes, 
armis czléstibus protegámur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


AY we be fortified, O Lord, 

by the reception of Thy 
sacraments, and protected, 
through the intercession of 
Thy holy martyrs, Sergius, 
Bacchus, Marcellus, and Apu- 
leius, by heavenly armor 
against all the malice that as- 
saileth us. Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1230 


OCT. 9—ST. JOHN LEONARD 


Oct. 8—St, Bridget, widow (White) 
Double 
Mass, Cognovi, page 1383, except: 


Prayer 


LORD, our God, Who 

through Thine only-be- 
gotten Son, didst reveal heav- 
enly secrets to blessed Bridget, 
grant us, Thy servants, by her 
kind intercession, to rejoice and 
be. glad in. the revelation of 
Thine: eternal glory. Through 
the same. 


Epistle, Honor “widows, found 
novi, page 1388. . : 


ÓwINE, Deus noster, qui 
bedte, Brigitte per Fíl- 
ium tuum unigénitum secré- 
ta celéstia revelásti: ipsíus 
pia intercessióne da nobis fá- 
mulis tuis; in revelatióne sem- 
pitérne glórie tue gaudére 
Metántes, Per eümdem Dómi- 
num. i 


at the end of the Mass Cog- 


Oct. 9—Ht. Yohn Leonard, Confessor (White) 


Double 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 


Y THE words of the Lord 
are His works: the sun 
giving light hath looked upon 
all things, and full of the glory 
of the Lord is His work. Ps. 95, 
1. O sing unto the Lord à new 
song: sing unto the Lord, all 
the earth. Y. Glory. 


n  sermónibus | Dómini 

Ópera ejus: sol illümi- 
nans per ómnia respéxit, et 
glória Dómini plenum est 
opus éjus, Ps. 95, 1 Cantáte 
Dómino cánticum novum: 
cantáte Dómino, omnis terra. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


` Prayer 


O Gov, Who for the propa- 
gation of the Faith among 


eus, qui beátum Joán- 
nem Confessórem tu- 


the people wast pleased in a um ad fidem in géntibus 
wondrous manner to stir up propagándam mirabíliter ex- 
blessed John, Thy confessor: citére dignátus es, ac per 
and Who, through him, didst eum in erudiéndis fidélibus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


T ——— 


OCT. 9—ST. JOHN LEONARD 


novam in Ecclésia tua fa- 
míliam congregasti: da no- 
bis fámulis tuis; ita ejus in- 
Stitütis profícere, ut préemia 
consequámur extérna. Per 
Dóminum. 


1230a 


in Thy Church gather together 
a new Society for the instruc- 
tion of the faithful: do Thou 
grant unto us Thy servants, 
that we may so profit by his 
teaching, as to attain unto the 
everlasting rewards. Through 
our Lord, 


Commemoration of Sts. Dionysius, Rusticus, and Eleutherius. 


Prayer 


eus, qui hodiérna die 

beatum Dionysium, 
Martyrem tuum atque Pon- 
tificem, virtüte constantiz in 
passióne  roborásti, quique 
ili, ad predicándum génti- 
bus glóriam tuam, Rüsticum 
et Eleuthérium sociáre di- 


gnátus es: tribue nobis, 
qusesumus; eórum imitatióne 
pro amédre tuo  próspera 


mundi despícere, et nulla 
ejus advérsa formidare. Per 
Dóminum. 


cop, Who on this day 

didst strengthen blessed 
Dionysius, Thy martyr, with 
the virtue of fortitude in his 
suffering, and. didst vouchsafe 
to join with him Rusticus and 
Eleutherius -to  preac Thy 
glory to the nations, grant us, 
we beseech Thee, to imitate 
them in contemning the pros- 
perity of the world for the sake 
of Thy love, and to fear none of 
its adversity. "Through our 
Lord. 


Epistle. 2 Cor. 4, 1-6, 15-18 


ratres:  Habéntes ad- 

ministratiónem juxta 
quod  misericórdiam con- 
sectiti sumus, non defícimus, 
sed abdicámus occülta dedé- 
coris, non ambulantes in 
astütia, neque adulterántes 
verbum Dei, sed in mani- 
festatióne veritatis com- 
mendántes nosmetipsos ad 
omnem consciéntiam hómi- 
num coram Deo. Quod si 
étiam opértum est Evangé- 
lium nostrum: in iis, qui 
péreunt, est opértum: in qui- 
bus Deus hujus seculi exeg- 


RETHREN. Seeing we have 

this ministration, ac- 
cording as we have obtained 
mercy, we faint not, but re- 
nounce the hidden things of 
dishonesty, not walking in 
craftiness, nor adulterating the 
word of God, but by manifes- 
tation of the truth commend- 
ing ourselves to every man's 
conscience, in the sight of God. 
And if our Gospel be also hid; 
it is hid to them that are lost: 
in whom the God of this world 
hath blinded the minds of un- 
believers, that the light of the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1230b 


Gospel of the glory of Christ, 
Who is the image of God, 
Should not shine unto them. 
For we preach not ourselves, 
but Jesus Christ our Lord: and 
ourselves your servants through 
Jesus. For God, Who com- 
manded the light to shine out 
of darkness, hath shined in 
our hearts, to give the light of 
the knowledge of the glory of 
God, in the face of Christ Je- 
sus. For all things are for 
your sakes: that the grace, 
abounding through many, may 
abound in thanksgiving unto 
the glory of God. For which 
rause we faint not; but though 
our outward man be corrupted, 
yet the inward man is renewed 
day by day. For that which is 
at present momentary and 
light of our tribulation, work- 
eth for us above. measure ex- 
ceedingly an eternal weight of 
glory; while we look, not at the 
things which are seen, but at 
the things which are not seen. 
For the things which are seen, 
are temporal: but the things 
which are not seen, are eternal. 


OCT. 9—ST. JOHN LEONARD 


cávit mentes infidélium, ut 
non fülgeat illis illuminátio 
Evangélii glórie Christi, qui 
est imágo Dei. Non enim 
nosmetipsos predicámus, sed 
Jesum Christum Dóminum 
nostrum: nos autem servos 
vestros per Jesum: quóniam 
Deus, qui dixit de ténebris 
lucem splendéscere, ipse il- 
lüxit in córdibus nostris ad 
illuminatiónem sciéntie cla- 
ritátis Dei, in fácie Christi 
Jesu. Omnia enim propter 
vos: ut grátia abündans, per 
multos in gratiárum actióne, 
abündet in glóriam Dei. Prop- 
ter quod non defícimus: sed 
licet is, qui foris est, noster 
homo corrumpátur: tamen 
is, qui intus est, renovátur 
de die in diem. Id enim, quod 
in presénti est momentá- 
neum et. leve tribulatiónis 
nostre, supra modum in su- 
blimitáte  stérnum  glórie 
pondus operátur in nobis, 
non contemplántibus nobis 
que vidéntur, sed que non 
vidéntur. Que enim viden- 
tur, temporália sunt: que 
autem non vidéntur, etérna 
sunt. 


Gradual. Ps. 72, 21; 68 


Y HEART hath been in- 

flamed and my loins 
have been changed: the zeal ot 
Thy house hath eaten me up. 
y. Is. 49, 2. He hath made my 
mouth like unto a sharp sword: 
in the shadow of His hand 
hath He protected me, and 
made me as & chosen shaft. 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 70, 7. 


nflammátum est cor me- 

um et renes mei commu- 
táti sunt: zelus domus tue 
comédit me. Y. Isai. 49, 2. Pó- 
suit os meum quasi gládium 
acütum: in umbra manus sue 
protéxit me, et pósuit me sic- 
ut sagittam eléctam. Alle- 
luja, allelija. Y. Ps. 70, 7. 
Tamquam. prodígium factus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 9—ST. JOHN LEONARD 


1230c 


Sum multis: et tu adjütor I am become to many as a 


fortis. Allelüja. 


wonder: but Thou art a strong 
helper. Alleluia. 


After Septuagesima in place of alleluia and verse add: 


Tract 


ontristátus sum in ex- 

ercitatióne mea: et 
conturbátus sum a voce 
inimici et a tribulatióne pec- 
catóris. Y. Quóniam declina- 
vérunt in me iniquitátes: et 
in, ira molésti erant mihi. 
Y. Ego autem ad Deum cla- 
mávi: et Dóminus salvábit 
me. 


I AM grieved in my exercise: 
and am troubled at the 
voice of the enemy, and at the 
tribulation of the sinner. 
Y. For they have cast iniquities 
upon me: and in wrath they 
were troublesome to me. 
yY. But I have cried to God: 


and the Lord will save me. 


In Paschal-time omit Gradual and sag instead: 


. Allelája, allelüja. Y. Ps. 51, 
10. Sicut olive, fructífera in 
domo Dei, sperávi in miseri- 
córdia Dei in stérnum: et in 
seeculum sseculi  Allelüja. 
Y. Ps. 61, 8. In Deo salutáre 
meum et glória mea: Deus 
auxili mei, et spes mea in 
Deo est. Allelüja. 


"Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia, Y. Ps. 51, 
10. As a fruitful olive tree in 
the house of God, I have hoped 
in the mercy of God forever, 
yea forever and ever. Alleluia. 
Y. Ps. 61, 8. In God is my sal- 
vation and my glory: He is the 
God of my help, and my hope is 


in God. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 10, 1-9 


S Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii sectndum Lucam 
n ilo témpore: Designá- 
vit Dóminus et dlios 
Septuagínta duos: et misit 
illos binos ante fáciem suam 
in omnem civitátem et locum 
quo. erat ipse ventürus.. Et 
dicébat illis: Messis quidem 
multa, operárii autem pauci. 
Rogate ergo dóminum messis 
ut mittat operários in mes- 


" Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke 


T THAT lime, The Lord 

appointed also other 
seventy-two; and He sent them 
two and two before His face 
into every city and place 
whither He Himself was to 
come, And He said to them, 
The harvest indeed is great, 


but the laborers are few: pray 
ye therefore the Lord of the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ia30d 


harvest, tnat He send laborers 
into His harvest. Go, behold I 
send you as -lambs among 
wolves. Carry neither purse, 
nor scrip, nor shoes; and sa- 
lute no man by the way. Into 
whatsoever house you enter, 
first say, Peace be to this 
house: and if the son of peace 
be there, your peace shall rest 
upon him: but if not, it shall 
return to you. And in the same 
house remain, eating and 
drinking such things as they 
have: for the laborer is worthy 
of his hire. Remove not from 
house to house. And into what 
city soever you enter, and they 
receive you. eat such things as 
are set before you; and heal 
the sick that are therein; and 
say to them, The kingdom of 
God is come nigh unto you. 


‘Offertory. 


am made a minister of 
I Christ according to the 
dispensation of God, which is 
given to me, that I may fulfil 


OCT. 9—ST. JOHN LEONARD 


sem suam. Ite: ecce ego 
mitto vos sieut agnos inter 


lupos. Nolite portáre sáccu- 
lum, neque peram, negute 
calceaménta: et néminem 


per viam salutavéritis. In 
quamcümque domum intra- 
véritis, primum dicite: Pax 
huic dómui: et si ibi füerit 
fflius pacis, requiéscat super 
ilum pax vestra: sin autem, 
ad vos revertétur. In eádem 
autem domo manéte, edéntes 
et bibéntes que apud illos 
sunt: dignus est enim ope- 
rárius mercéde sua.  Nolíte 
transíre de domo in domum. 
Et in quamcümque civitátem 
intravéritis et  suscéperint 
vos, manducáte que appo- 
nüntur vobis: et curáte in- 
firmos qui in illa sunt, et 
dícite: illis: Appropinquávit 
in vos regnum Dei. 


Col. 1, 25 


HRISTI factus sum ego 
minister secindum dis- 
pensatiónem Dei, que data 
est mihi, ut impleam verbum 


the word of the Lord. (P. T. Dómini. (T. P. Allelija.) 
Alleluia.) 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


ECEIVE, O Lord, the clean 
oblation of this salutary 
Sacrifice: and, by the interces- 
sion of blessed John, Thy con- 
fessor, grant that everywhere 
among the nations it may fit- 
tingly be offered up. Through 
our Lord. 


üscipe, Dómine, oblatió- 

nem mundam salutáris 
hóstim: et presta; ut, inter- 
cedénte beáto Joánne Con- 
fessóre tuo, ubíque géntium 
jügiter offerátur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 9—ST. JOHN LEONARD 


1230e 


Commemoration of Sts. Dionysius, Rusticus, and Eleuthertus, 


Secret 


Que tibi, Dómine, mú- 
nera pópuli tui, pro tuó- 
rum honóre Sanctórum, süs- 
cipe propitius, qudesumus: et 
eórum nos intercessióne san- 
ctifica. Per Dóminum. 


RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 

the gifts of Thy people in 

honor of Thy saints, and sanc- 

tify us by their intercession. 
‘Through our Lord; 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion 


um mihi fuérunt lucra, 

hec arbitratus sum 

propter Christum detrimén- 
ta. (T. P. Allelüja.) 


HE things that were gain 

to me, the same I count- 

ed loss for Christ. (P. T. Alle- 
luia.) 


Postcommunion 


retiósi córporis, et sán- 

guinis tui sacris refécti 
mystériis, Dómine, adprecá- 
mur: ut beáti Joánnis Con- 
fessóris tui exémplo, studeá- 
mus confitéri quod crédidit, 
et dpere exercére quod dó- 
cuit: Qui vivis. 


EFRESHED by the sacred 

mysteries of Thy precious 
body and blood, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that, following 
the example of blessed John, 
Thy confessor, we may set our- 
selves to profess that which he 
believed, and in our actions to 
put into practice that which he 


taught. Who livest. 


Commemoration of Sts. Dionysius, Rusticus, and Eleutherius, 


Postcommunion 


umptis, Dómine, sacra- 
méntis, queesumus: ut, 
intercedéntibus beátis Mar- 
tyribus tuis Dionysio, Rustico 
et Eleuthério,ad redemptiónis 


E WHO have received Thy 
sacraments, O Lord, 


pray that, by the intercession 
of Thy blessed Martyrs, Diony- 
sius, Rusticus, and Eleuthe- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1230f OCT. 9—STS. DIONYSIUS, RUSTICUS, ELEUTHERIUS 


rius, we may be profited unto ætérnæ proficidémus augmén- 
the increase of our everlasting tum. Per Dóminum. 
redemption. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 
The Same Day 
Sts. Dionysius, Rusticus and Cleutheriugs 
Martyrs (Red) | 
Semi-double 
'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit jrom, the Mass, Sapientiam, page 1321. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who on this day 

didst strengthen blessed 
Dionysius, Thy martyr, with 
the virtue of fortitude in his 
suffering, and didst vouchsafe 
to join with him Rusticus and 
Eleutherius to preach Thy 
glory to the nations, grant us, 
we beseech Thee, to imitate 
them in contemning the pros- 
perity of the world for the sake 
of Thy love, and to fear none of 
its adversity, Through our 
Lord, 


Second Prayer A cunctis, page 
priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from the Acts of the 
Apostles. 

N THOSE days, Paul standing 

in the midst of the Areo- 


EUS, qui hodiérna die 

beátum Dionysium, 
Mártyrem tuum atque Ponti- 
ficem, virtüte constántie in 
passióne roborásti, quique illi, 
ad predicandum  géntibus 
glóriam tuam, Risticum et 
Eleuthérium socidre digná- 
tus es: tribue nobis, quesu- 
mus; eórum imitatióne, pro 
&móre tuo próspera mundi de- 
spicere, et nuila ejus advérsa 
formidáre. Per Dóminum. 


827; third at the choice of the 


Acts 17, 22-34 


Léctio Áctuum  Apostoló- 
rum. ` : 
N piÉBUS illis: Stans Pau- 
lus in médio Areópagi. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 9—STS. DIONYSIUS, RUSTICUS, ELEUTHERIUS 1231 


ait: Viri Atheniénses, per óm- 
nia quasi superstitiosióres vos 
vídeo. Pretériens enim, et vi- 
dens simulácra vestra, invéni 
et aram, in qua scriptum erat: 
Ignóto Deo. Quod ergo igno- 
rántes cólitis, hoc ego annün- 
tio vobis. Deus, qui fecit mun- 
dum, et ómnia, que in eo 
sunt, hic celi et terre cum sit 
Dóminus, non in manufáctis 
templis hábitat, nec mánibus 
humánis cólitur, indigens áli- 
quo, cum ipse det ómnibus vi- 
tam, et inspiratiónem, et óm- 
nia: fecítque ex uno omne ge- 
nus hóminum inhabitáre su- 
per univérsam fáciem terre, 
defíniens statüta témpora, et 
términos habitatiónis eórum, 
querere Deum, si forte at- 
tréctent eum, aut invéniant, 
quamvis non longe sit ab uno- 
quóque nostrum. In ipso enim 
vivimus, et movémur et sum- 
us: sicut et quidam vestrorum 
poétárum  dixérunt: Ipsius 
enim et genus sumus. Genus 
ergo cum simus Dei, non de- 
bémus æstimare auro, aut ar- 
génto, aut lapidi, sculptire 
artis, et cogitatiónis hóminis, 
Divinum esse simile. Et tém- 
pora quidem hujus, ignorántise 
despiciens Deus, nunc annün- 
tiat hominibus ut omnes 
ubíque preniténtiam agant, eo 
quod státuit diem, in quo ju- 
dicatürus est orbem in zqui- 
táte, in viro, in quo státuit 
fidem prebens ómnibus, süs- 
citans eum a mortuis. Cum 
audissent autem resurrectió- 
nem mortuórum, quidam qui- 
dem irridébant, quidam vero 
dixérunt: Audiémus te de hoc 
íterum Sic Paulus exivit de 
médio eórum. Quidam vero 
viri adheréntes ei, credidé- 


pagus, said, Ye men of Athens, 
I perceive that in all things you 
are too superstitious. For pass- 
ing by and seeing your idols, I 
found an altar also on which 
was written, To the unknown 
God. What therefore you wor- 
ship without knowing it, that 
I preach to you. God Who made 
the world and all things there- 
in, He being Lord of heaven 
and earth, dwelleth not in 
temples made with hands, 
neither is He served with men’s 
hands, as though He needed 
any thing, seeing it is He Who 
giveth to all life, and breath, 
and all things; and hath made 
of one all mankind to dwell 
upon the whole face of the 
earth, determining appointed 
times, and the limits of their 
habitation, that they should 
seek. God, if happily they may 
feel after Him, or find Him; al- 
though He be not far from 
every one of us, for in Him we 
Jive and move and be: as some 
also of your own poets said, 
For we are also His offspring. 
Being therefore the offspring 
of God, we must not suppose 
the Divinity to be like unto 
gold, or silver, or stone, the 
graving of art and device of 
man. And God indeed having 
winked at the times of this 
ignorance, now declareth to 
men, that all should every- 
where do penance, because He 
hath appointed a day wherein 
He will judge the world in 
equity, by the man whom He 
hath appointed, giving faith to 
all, by raising Him up from the 
dead. And when they had 
heard of the resurrection of 
the dead, some indeed mocked; 
put others said, We will hear 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1232 


thee again concerning this 
matter. So Paul went out from 
among them, but certain men 
adhered to him, and believed; 


OCT. 10—ST. FRANCIS BORGIA 


runt: in quibus et Dionysius 
Areopagita, et mülier nómi- 
ne Dámaris, et álii cum eis. 


among whom was also Dionysius the Areopagite, and a 
woman named Damaris, and others with them. 


Gradual from the Mass, Sapientiam, page 1322. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel, Beware you of the leaven, from the Mass, Salus 


autem, page 1327. 


Offertory from the Mass, Sapientiam, page 1324. ` 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 

) the gifts of Thy people in 

honor of Thy saints, and sanc- 

tify us by their intercession. 
Through our Lord. 


BLÁTA tibi, Dómine, mú- 

nera pópuli tui, pro tuó- 
rum honóre Sanctórum, süs- 
cipe propítius, quesumus: et 
eórum nos intercessióne sanc- 
tífica. Per Dóminum. 


Second Secret, Graciously hear us, page 828; third at the 


choice of the priest. 


Preface for Weekdays, page. 775. 


. Communion from the Mass, Sapientiam, page 1323. 


Postcommunion 
Ch te wo have received Thy (C(UuwPrris, Dómine, sacra- 
‘sacraments, O Lord, méntis,. quesumus: ut, 


pray that, by the intercession 
of Thy blessed Martyrs, Diony- 
sius, Rusticus, and Eleuthe- 
rius, we may be profited into 
the increase of our everlasting 
redemption. Through our Lord. 


infercedéntibus beátis Mar- 
tyribus. tuis Dionysio, Rustico 
et Eleuthério, ad redemptiónis 
etérne proficidmus augmén- 
tum. Per Dóminum. 


Second Postcommunion, May the gift, page 828; third at the 
Choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Oct. 10—Ht. Francis Borgia, Confessor (White) 


Semi-double 
- Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


O LORD Jesus Christ, the 
pattern of true humility 
and its reward, we beseech 
Thee, that, as Thou didst make 


Prayer 


ÓMiNE Jesu Christe, 
veræ humilitátis et ex- 
émplar et premium: quæsu- 
mus; ut, sícut beátum Fran- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 11—MATERNITY OF BLESSED VIRGIN 1233 


císcum in terréni honóris con- 
témptu, imitatórem tui glo- 
riósum effecísti, ita nos ejüs- 
dem imitatiónis et glóriæ trí- 
buas esse consórtes: Qui vivis. 


blessed Francis Thy glorious 
imitator in contempt of earthly 
honors, so Thou wouldst grant 
us to share his imitation and 
his glory. Who livest. 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, with the accompanying Secret and 
Postcommunion, page 827; third at the choice of the priest, 


pages 1494-1500. 


- Oct. 11— Feast of the Maternity of the Blessed 
Wirgin Mary, (White) 
Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Intrott. 


cce Virgo concípiet, et 
páriet fílium, et vocá- 
bitur nomen ejus Emmanuel. 
Ps. 97, 1. Cantáte Dómino 
cánticum novum; quia mira- 
bília fecit. Y. Glória Patri. 


Is. 7, 14 


EHOLD, 2 Virgin shall con- 

ceive, and bear a Son, 

and His name shall be called 

Emmanuel Ps. 97, 1. Sing ye 

to the Lord a new canticle: be- 

cause He hath done wonderful 
things. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS qui de beátz Marie 

Vírginis utero Verbum 
uum, Angelo nuntiánte, car- 
nem suscípere voluísti: presta 
supplícibus tuis; ut, qui vere 
eam Genitricem Dei, crédi- 
mus, ejus apud te interces- 
siónibus adjuvémur, Per eüm 
dem Dóminum. i 


cop, Who wast pleased 

that at the angel’s mes- 
sage Thy Word should take 
flesh in the womb of the blessed 
Virgin Mary, grant to Thy sup- 
pliants that, believing her to be 
truly the mother of God, we 
may be assisted by her inter- 
cessions with Thee. Through 
the same, ` 


Lesson. Ecclus. 24, 23-31 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiæ. 


co quasti vitis fructificá- 

vi suavitátem odóris: et 
flores mei fructus honóris et 
honestátis. Ego mater pul- 
chre dilectiónis, et timóris, et 
agnitiónis, et sancte spei. In 
me.grátia omnis vie et veri- 


Lesson from the book of 
Wisdom. 

s THE Vine I have brought 

forth a pleasant odor, 

and my flowers are the fruit of 

honor and riches. I am the 

mother of fair love, and of fear, 

and of knowledge, and of holy 

hope. In me is all grace of the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1234 OCT. 11—MATERNITY 


way of the iruth, in me is all 
hope of life and of virtue. 
Come over to me, all ye that 
desire me, and be filled with 
my fruits; for my spirit is 
sweet above honey, and my in- 
heritance above honey and the 
honeycomb. My memory is 
unto everlasting generations. 
They that eat me, shall yet 
hunger; and they that drink 
me, shall yet thirst. He that 
harkeneth to me shall not be 
confounded, and they that 
work by me shall not sin. They 
that explain me shall have life 
everlasting, 


OF BLESSED VIRGIN 


tatis, in me omnis spes vite 
et virtütis. Transite ad me 
omnes qui concupísoitis me, 
et a generatiónibus meis im- 
plémini: Spíritus enim meus 
super mel dulcis, et heréditas 
mea super mel et favum. Me- 
mória mea in generatiónes 
seculórum. Qui edunt me, gd- 
huc. esürient: et qui bibunt 
me, adhuc sítient. Qui audit 
me, non confundétur: et qui 
operántur in me, non peccá- 
bunt. Qui elücidant me, vi- 
tam etérnam habébunt. 


Gradual. Is. 11, 1, 2 


There shall come forth a rod 
out of the root of Jesse, and a 
flower shall rise up out of his 
root. JY. And the spirit of the 
Lord shall rest upon him. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. O Virgin 
Mother of God, He whom the 
whole world. cannot contain, 
being made man, imprisons 
Himself in thy womb. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Egrediétur virga de radíce 
Jesse, et flos de redíce ejus as- 
céndet. Y. Et requiéscet super 
eum Spíritus Dómini. 


Allelüja, allelija. V. Virgo 
Dei Génitrix, quem totus non 
capit orbis, in tua se cláusit 
viscera factus homo. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Luke 2, 43-51 


*R Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, when they 
returned, the child Je- 

sus remained in Jerusalem; 
and His parents knew it not. 
And thinking that He was in 
the company, they came a day's 
journey, ard sought Him 
amongst their kinsfolks and 
acquaintance. And not finding 
Him, they returned into Jeru- 
salem, seeking Him. And it 
came to pass that after three 
days they found, Him in the 


HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 
N 1LLO témpore: Cum re- 
dírent, remánsit puer 
Jesus in Jerúsalem, et non 
cognovérunt paréntes ejus. 
existimántes autem ilium 
esse in comitátu, venérunt 
iter diéi, et requirébant eum 
inter cognátos et notos. Et 
non inveniéntes, regréssi sunt 
in Jerúsalem,  requiréntes 
eum, Et factum est, post tri- 
duum invenérunt illum in 
templo sedéntem in médio 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Ma OP me 6 


OCT. 11—MATERNITY OP BLESSED VIRGIN 1235 


doctórum, audiéntem illos, et 
interrogántem eos. Stupébant 
autem omnes, qui eum audi- 
Ébant, super prudéntia et re- 
Spónsis ejus. Et vidéntes ad- 
miráti sunt. Et dixit. mater 
ejus ad illum: Fili, quid fe- 
císti nobis sic? ecce pater 
tuus, et ego doléntes quere- 
bámus te. Et ait ad illos: Quid 
est quod me querebatis? Ne- 
Sciebátis quia in his, que Pa- 
tris mei sunt, opórtet me 
esse? Et ipsi non intellexé- 
runt verbum, quod loctitus est 
ad eos. Et descéndit cum eis, 
et venit Nazareth: et erat 
subditus illis. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


Cum esset desponsáta ma- 
ter ejus María Joseph, in- 
vénta est in ütero habens de 
Spiritu Sancto. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


temple sitting in the midst of 
the doctors, hearing them, and 
asking them questions. And all 
that heard Him were aston- 
ished at His wisdom and His 
answers. And seeing Him, they 
wondered. And His mother 
said to Him: Son, why hast 
Thou done so to us? Behold 
Thy father and I have sought 
Thee sorrowing, And He said 
to them: How is it that you 
sought Me? Did you not know 
that I must be about My Fa- 
ther’s business? And they un- 
derstood not the word that He 
spoke unto them, And He went 
down with them, and came to 
Nazareth: and was subject to 
them, 


Matt. 1, 18 


When His mother Mary was 
espoused to Joseph, she was 
found with child of the Holy 
Ghost. 


Secret 


UA Dómine propitiatióne, 

et beáte Marie semper 
Virginis Unigéniti tui Matris 
intercessióne, ad perpétuam 
atque preséntem hsc oblátio 
nobis profíciat prosperitátem 
et pacem. Per eümdem. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


HROUGE. Thy mercy, O Lord, 
and the intercession of 
blessed Mary, ever a virgin, the 
Mother of Thine only-begotten 
Son, may our oblation profit us 
for eternal and for present 
prosperity and peace. Through 
the same, 


Communion 


Beáta viscera Marie Vir- 
ginis, que portavérunt etérni 
Patris Filium. ' 


Blessed is the womb of the 
Virgin Mary that bore the Son 
of the eternal Father, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1286 


OCT. 14—ST. CALLISTUS 


Postcommunion 


Lord, purge away our 
guilt and, by the intercession of 
blessed Mary the Mother of 
God, make us companions of 
Him, Who is our heavenly heal- 
ing. Through the same. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


(D this communion, O 


zc nos commünio Dó- 

mine purget a crimine: 

et intercedénte beáta Virgine 

Dei Genitríce Maria, celéstis 

remédii fáciat esse consórtes. 
Per eumdem Dóminum. 


Oct. 13—St. Edward, King, Confessor (White) 


Semi-double 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


O Gop, Who hast crowned 

the blessed King Edward, 
Thy confessor, with the glory 
of eternity, make us, we be- 
seech Thee, so to venerate him 
on earth that we may be able 
to reign with him in heaven. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui beátum regem 

Eduárdum, Confessórem 
tuum, eternitatis glória coro- 
násti: fac nos, quesumus, ita 
eum venerári in terris, ut 
cum eo regnáre possímus in 
celis. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer A cunctis, with the accompanying Secret and 
Postcommunion, page 827; third at the choice of the priest. 


Oct. 14—St. (Callistus, Pope, Martyr (Red) 
Double 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. John 21, 15-17 


F THOU lovest Me, Simon 
I Peter, feed My lambs, feed 
My sheep. Ps. 29, 1, I will extol 
Thee, O Lord, for Thou hast 
upheld me: and hast not made 
my enemies to rejoice over me. 
¥. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


I pintcis me, Simon Pe- 

tre, pasce agnos meos, 
pasce oves meas. Ps. 29, 1. Ex- 
altábo te, Dómine, quóniam 
Suscepísti me, nec delectásti 
inimícos meos super me. Y. 
Giória Patri. 


Prayer 


cop, Who dost behold how 
we fail in our weakness, 
mercifully restore us unto Thy 


eus, qui nos cónspicis ex 
nostra infirmitáte de- 
fícere: ad amórem tuum nos 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ocr, 14—ST. CALLISTUS 


misericérditer per sanctérum 
tuérum exémpla restáura. Per 
Déminum. 


1237 


love through the examples of 
Thy saints. Through our Lord. 


Epistle. 1 Peter 5, 1-4; 10-11 


Léctio Epistole beáti Petri 
Apéstoli, 


AmíssIMI: Senidres, qui 

in vobis sunt, óbsecro 
consénior et testis Ohristi 
passiónum, qui et ejus, que 
in futüro revelánda est, gló- 
rie communicator: páscite 
qui in vobis est gregem. Dei, 
providéntes non coácte, sed 
spontánee secündum Deum, 
neque turpis lucri grátia, sed 
voluntárie; neque ut domi- 
nántes in cleris, sed forma 
facti gregis ex ánimo. Et, cum 
apparúerit: princeps pastó- 
rum, percipiétis immarcescí- 
bilem giérie corónam. Deus 
autem omnis grátie, qui vo- 
cávit nos in. etérnam suam 
glóriam in Christo Jesu, mó- 
dicum passos ipse perfíciet, 
confirmábit solidabitque. Ipsi 
glória et impérium in ssecula 
seculérum. Amen, 


you, and confirm you and establish you. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle. 
RETHREN: The ancients 
therefore that are among 
you, I beseech, who am myself 
also an ancient and a witness 
of the sufferings of Christ: as 
also a partaker of that glory 
which is to be revealed in time 
to come: Feed the flock of God 
which is among you, taking 
care of it not by constraint, but 
willingly according to God: not 
for filthy lucre's sake, but vol- 
untarily: Neither as lording it 
over the clergy, but being made 
2 pattern of the flock from the 
heart. And when the. prince of 
pastors shall appear, you shall 
receive à never-fading crown 
of glory. But the God of ali 
grace, Who hath called us unto 
His eternal glory in Christ 
Jesus, after you have suffered 
a little, will Himself perfect 
To Him be glory 


and empire for ever and ever. Amen, 


Gradual. Ps. 106, 32, 31 


Exáltent eum in Ecclésia 
plebis: et in cáthedra senió- 
rum laudent eum. Y. Con- 
fiteántur. Dómino misericór- 
diz ejus; et mirabilia ejus fí- 
liis héminum, 


Allelüjo, allelüja. Matth. 
16, 18. Tu es Petrus, et super 
hane petram zdificábo Ec- 
clésiam meam. Allelája. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Let them exalt him in the 
Church of the people: and 
praise him in the chair of the 
ancients. Y. Let the mercies of 
the Lord give glory to him, and 
his wonderful works to the 
children of men. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Matth. 16, 
18. Thou art Peter and upon 
ihis rock I wil build My 
Church. Alleluia. 


Gospel from the Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302. 
Offertory. Jerem. 1, 9-10 


Ecce dedi verba mea in ore 
*uo: ecce constitui te super 


Behold I have given My 
words in thy mouth: lo, I have 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1288 


set thee this day over the na- 
tions, and over the kingdoms, 
to waste and to destroy, and to 
build and to plant. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767 


OCT. 15—ST. HEDWIG 


gentes et super regna, ut 
evéllas et déstruas, et edifices. 
et plantes. 


Secret 


Av this mystical offering 

profit us, O Lord, to rid 

us of our sins and to confirm 

us with Thy everlasting salva- 
tion. Through our Lord. 
Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. 


Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I will build My 
Church. 


xsTICA nobis, Dómine, 

prosit oblátio: que nos. 

et a reátibus nostris expédiat, 

et perpétua salvatióne confír- 
met. Per Dóminum. 


Matt. 16, 18 


Tu es Petrus, et super hanc 
petram szedificábo Ecclésiam. 
meam. 


Postcommunion 


E BESEECH Thee, O al- 


mighty God, that these 
sacred gifts may purge our sins 
and by their effect make us lead 
holy lives. Through our Lord. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


UXSUMUS, omnipotens: 
Deus: ut reátus nostros: 
münera sacráta puríficent, et 
recte vivéndi nobis operántur 
efféctum. Per Dóminum. 


‘Oct. 15—St, Teresa, Virgin (White) 
Double 
Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370, except: 


Prayer 


ARKEN unto us, O God, our 
Saviour, that as we re- 
joice in the festival of blessed 
Teresa, Thy virgin, so we may 
find food for the nourishment 
of our souls in her heavenly 
doctrine, and be instructed by 
the affection of pious devotion. 
Through our Lord. 


xAunr nos, Deus salutá- 

ris noster: ut, sicut de 
bedte Terésie Virginis fes- 
tivitáte gaudémus; ita celés- 
tis ejus doctrine pábulo nu- 
triàmur, te pis devotiónis 
erudiámur afféctu. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Oct. 16— $t, Hedwig, Widow (White) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Cognovi, page 1383, except: 
Prayer | 


Go», Who didst teach 
blessed Hedwig to leave 


EUS, qui beátam Hedwi-- 
gem a seculi pompa ad: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 171—8T. MARGARET MARY ALACOQUE 1289 


hümilem tue crucis sequélam 
toto corde transíre docuisti: 
concéde; ut ejus méritis et ex- 
émplo  discámus  peritüras 
mundi calcáre delícias, et in 
ampléxu tue crucis ómnia 
nobis adversántia superáre: 
Qui vivis. i 


the pomp of the world for the 
humble following of Thy cross, 
grant that, through her merits 
and intercession, we may learn 
to trample under foot the per- 
ishable delights of the world 
and in the embrace of Thy 
cross to overcome all things 
that oppose us. Who livest. 


Oct. 17—85t. Margaret Harp Alacoque, Virgin 
(White) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Cant. 2, 3 


UB umbra illíus, quem de- 
sideráveram, sedi; et 
ructus ejus dulcis: gutturi 
meo. Ps. 83, 2, 3. Quam diléc- 
ta tabernáecula tua, Dómine 
virtutum! concupiscit et dé- 
ficit anima mea in átria Dó- 
mini. Y. Glória Patri. 


NDER the shadow of Him 

Whom I had desired, did 
I sit: and His fruit was sweet 
to my taste. Ps. 83, 2, 3. How 
lovely are thy tabernacles, O 
Lord of Hosts! My soul longeth 
and fainteth for the courts of 
the Lord. Y. Glory. i 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ÓMINE Jesu Christe, qui 

investigábiles —divítias 
Cordis tui beate Margarite 
Vírgini mirabiliter revelásti; 
da nobis, ejus méritis et imi- 
tatióne; Ut te in ómnibus et 
Super ómnia diligéntes, ju- 
gem in eódem Corde tuo man- 
siónem  habére mereámur: 
Qui vivis. 


Lorp Jesus Christ, Who 

didst reveal the unsearch- 
able riches of Thy Heart to 
blessed Margaret, the. virgin, 
grant us, by her merits and our 
imitation of her that, loving 
Thee in all things and above 
all things, we may deserve to 
have our continual abode in 
that same Heart of Thine. Who 
livest. 


Epistle, Brethren, to me the least of all the saints, from the 
Mass of the feast of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, page 645. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia in the Grad- 
ual is replaced by the Tract. In Paschal-time the Gradual and 


Tract are replaced 
after the Tract. o 


the Greater Alleluia and Verse found 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1240 OCT. 17—ST. MARGARET MARY ALACOQUE 


Gradual. Cant. 8,7 


^ Many waters have not been 
able to quench charity: neither 
Shall floods drown it. Y. Ps. 
72, 26. My flesh hath fainted, 
and my heart: O God, the God 
of my heart, and my portion 
forever. 


Aque multe non potuérunt 
exstinguere  caritátem, nec 
flümin& óbruent Mam, Y..Ps. 
72, 26. Defécit caro mea, et 
cor meum: Deus cordis mei, et 
pars mea, Deus, in ætérnum, 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Cant. 7, 
10. I unto my Beloved: and His 
turning is toward me. Alleluia. 


Tract. 


My heart and my flesh have 
rejoiced in the living God. Y. 
For the sparrow hath found 
nerself a house: and the turtle- 
dove a nest for herself, where 
she may lay her young. X. 
Thine altars, O Lord of hosts: 
my Xing and my God. 


' Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Cant. 7, 
10. Ego dilécto meo, et ad me 
convérsio ejus. Allelüja. 


Ps. 83, 3-4 


Cor meum, et caro mea ex- 
sultavérunt in Deum vivum. 
Y. Etenim passer invénit sibi 
domum: et turtur. nidum 
sibi, ubi. ponat pullos suos. 
y. Altária tua, Dómine vir- 
tütum: Rex meus, et Deus 
meus. 


Greater Alleluia — 


Alleluia, alleluia, Y. Prov. 9, 
5. Come, eat my bread: and 


drink the wine that I have 


mingled for you. Alleluia. Jy. 
Ps. 30, 20. O how great is the 
multitude of. Thy sweetness, O 
Lord: which Thou hast hidden 
for them that fear Thee. Alle- 
luia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelija. V: Prov. 
9, 5. Veníte, comédite panem 
meum, et bíbite vinum quod 
miscui vobis, Allehija. Y. Ps. 
30, 20. Quam magna multitü- 
do dulcédinis tus, Dómine, 
quam abscondisti timéntibus 
te, Allelüja. 


Gospel, At that time Jesus answered, from the Mass of the 
feast of St. Paul, Hermit, January 15, page 865. 


Offertory. Zach. 9, 17 


What is His good, and what 
is His beautiful thing: but the 
corn of the elect, and the wine 
springing forth virgins? 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Quid bonum ejus est, et 
quid pulchrum ejus, nisi fru- 
méntum electórum, et vinum 
gérminans virgines? 


http://ccwatershed.org 


: 
| 
| 


OCT. 18—S9T. LUKE, EVANGELIST 


1241 


Secret 


CCÉPTA tibi sint, Dó- 
mine, plebis tue mú- 
nera: et concéde; ut ignis ille 
dívinus nos inflámmet, quo de 
Corde Fílii tui emisso, beáta 
Margaríta María veheménter 
estudvit. Per eümdem Dómi- 
num. 


AY the offerings of Thy 

people be accepted by 
Thee, O Lord, and grant that 
we be enkindled with that di- 
vine fire sent forth from the 
Heart of Thy Son, with which 
blessed Margaret was so ar- 
dently inflamed. Through the 
same, 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 

Ego dilécto meo, et diléctus 

meus mihi, qui páseitur inter 
Hla. r à 


Cant. 6, 2 


I unto my Beloved, and my 
Beloved unto me: He that feed- 
eth among the lilies. 


Postcommunion 


ÓnPORIS et sánguinis tui, 

Dómine Jesu, sumptis 
mystériis: concéde nobis, que- 
sumus, beáta Margaríta Ma- 
ría, Vírgine intercedénte; ut, 
supérbis seculi vanitátibus 
exütis, mansuetüdinem et hu- 
militátem Cordis tui induere 
mereamur, Qui vivis. 


Coops Prayers, page 793. 


AVING received the myste- 
ries of Thy body and 
blood, we beseech Thee, O Lord 
Jesus, grant us by the iriter- 
cession of blessed Margaret, the 
virgin, that, putting off the 
proud vanities of the world, we 
may have the grace to put on 
the meekness and humility of 
Thy Heart. Who livest. 


Oct. 18—St. Luke the Evangelist, (Red) 


Double of the Second Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 138, 17 


mr autem nimis honorá- Yy 0 me thy friends, O God, 
ti sunt amici tui, Deus: ni are made exceedingly 
nimis confortatus est prin- honorable: their principality 
cipatus eórum. Ps. 138, 1, 2. is exceedingly strengthened. 
Dómine, probasti me, et cog- Ps. 138, 1, 2. Lord, thou hast 
novisti me: tu cognovisti ses- proved me, and known me: 
siónem meam, et resurrectió- thou hast known my sitting 
nem meam. Y. Glória Patri. down and my Put up. V. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, | page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1242 OCT. 18—ST. LUKE, EVANGELIST 


Prayer 


Av Luke, Thy holy evan- 

gelist, O Lord, we be- 
seech Thee, intercede in our 
behalf, who for the honor of 
Thy name bore continually in 
his body the mortification of 
the cross, Through our Lord. 


NTERVÉNIAT pro nobis, 

quaesumus Dómine, sanc- 

tus tuus Lucas Evangelísta: 

qui crucis mortificatiónem 

jügiter in suo córpore pro tui 

nóminis honóre e Per 
Dóminum. 


Epistle. 2 Cor. 8, 16-24 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, I give thanks to 

God, Who hath given 
the same carefulness for you 
in the heart of Titus, for indeed 
he accepted the exhortation; 
but being more careful, of his 
own wil be went unto you. 
We have sent also with him 
the brother, whose praise is in 
the gospel through all the 
churches; and not that only, 
but he was also ordained by the 
churches companion of our 
travels for this grace, which is 
administered by us to the glory 
of the Lord and our determined 
will: avoiding this, lest any 
man should blame us in this 
abundance which is adminis- 
tered by us; for we forecast 
what may be good not only 
before God, but also before 
men. And we have sent with 
them our brother also, whom 
we have proved diligent in 
many things; but now much 
more diligent, with much con- 
fidence in you, either for Titus, 
who is my companion and 
fellow-laborer toward you, or 
Our brethren the apostles of 
the churches, the glory of 
Christ. Wherefore show ye to 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Gratias ago Deo, 
E dedit e&mdem solli- 
citüdinem pro vobis in corde 
Titi, quóniam exhortatiónem 
quidem suscépit: sed cum sol- 
lieftior' esset sua voluntáte 
proféctus est ad vos. Mísimus 
étiam cum illo fratrem, cujus 
laus est in Evangélio per om- 
nes ecclésias; non solum au- 
tem, sed et ordinátus est ab 
ecclésiis comes peregrinatió- 
nis nostre in hanc grátiam, 
que ministrátur & nobis ad 
Dómini glóriam, et destiná- 
tam voluntátem nostram: de- 
vitántes hoc, ne quis nos vi- 
tüperet in hac plenitüdine, 
que ministrátur a nobis. Pro- 
vidémus enim bona non so- 
lum coram Deo, sed étiam co- 
ram homínibus. Mísimus au- 
tem cum illis et fratrem nos- 
irum, quem probávinius: in 
multis sepe sollicitum ‘esse: 
nunc autem multo sollicitió- 
rem, confidéntia multa in vos, 
sive pro Tito, qui est sócius 
meus, et in vos adjütor, sive 
fratres nostri, Apóstoli eccle- 
siárum, glória Christi. Osten- 
siénem ergo, que est caritá- 
tis vestre, et nostre glóris pro 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 18—ST. LUKE, EVANGELIST 


vobis, in illos osténdite in fá- 
ciem ecclesiárum. 


Gradual. 

In omnem terram exívit so- 
nus eórum: et in fines orbis 
terre verba eórum. Y. Celi 
enárrant glóriam Dei: et óp- 
era mánuum ejus aunüntiat 
firmaméntum. 

Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Joann. 
15, 16. Ego vos elégi de mun- 
do, ut eátis, et fructum afferá- 
tis, et fructus vester máneat. 
Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1243: 


ihem, in the sight of the 
churches, the evidence of your 
charity, and of our boasting on. 
your behalf, 


Ps. 18, 5, 2 

Their sound went forth into. 
all the earth: and their words. 
to the ends of the world. Y. The: 
heavens show forth the glory 
of God; and the firmament de- 
clareth the works of His hands. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. John 15, 
16. I have chosen you out of the 
world, that you should go, and 
should bring forth fruit: and 
: your fruit should remain. Alle- 
luia. 


Gosp el, The Lord appointed, as on the feast of St. Mark,. 


April 55, "page. 989. 
Creed, page 765. 


E Offertory. 
' Mihi autem nimis honoráti 
sunt amíci tui, Deus: nimis 
confortátus est principátus 
eórum. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 138, 17 

To me Thy friends, o God,. 
are exceedingly honorable: 
their principality is exceed- 
ingly strengthened. 


Secret 


ONIS caléstibus da no- , 


bis, quzsumus, Dómine, 
libera tibi mente servire: ut 
muünera que deférimus, inter- 
veniénte -bedto Evangelista 
tuo Luca, et medélam nobis 
: operéntur, et glóriam. Per 
Dóminum. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. 


Vos, qui secüti estis me, se- 
débitis super sedes, judi- 
cántes duddecim tríbus 
Israël. | 


x TEY celestial gifts grant 

us, we beseech Thee, O 

Lord, to serve Thee with willing 

hearts, that the offerings we: 

bring may, through the inter- 

cession of blessed Luke, Thine 

evangelist, procure for us both 

our healing and our glory. 
Through our Lord. 


Matt. 19, 28 

You who have followed Me, 
shall sit upon seats, judging 
the twelve tribes of Israel. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1244 


OCT. 20—ST. JOHN CANTIUS 


Postcommunion 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that what 
we have received from Thy holy 
altar may, by the prayers of 
Thy blessed evangelist, Luke, 
sanctify our souls, whereby we 
may be made secure. Through 
our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


RESTA, quesumus, omni- 

potens Deus: ut, quod 
de sancto altári tuo accépi- 
mus, précibus beáti Evange- 
liste tui Luce sanctíficet áni- 
mas nostras, per quod tuti 
esse possímus. Per Dóminum. 


Oct. 19—St. Peter of Alcantara, Confessor (White) 
. Double. 
e Mass, Justus ut palma, page 1352, except: 


Prayer 


Gon, Who didst vouchsafe 

to make blessed Peter, 
Thy confessor, glorious by the 
gift of a wonderful spirit of 
penance and most lofty con- 
templation, grant us, we be- 
seech Thee, that, through his 
interceding merits, being mor- 
tified in the flesh, we may the 
more easily understand the 
things of heaven. Through our 
Lord. 


EUS, qui beátum Petrum 
Confessórem tuum ad- 
mirabilis peniténtie et altis- 
sime contemplatiénis mü- 
nere illustráre dignátus es: da 
nobis, quesumus; ut, ejus 
suffragantibus méritis, carne 
mortificáti, facilius celéstia 
capiámus. Per Dóminum. ` 


Epistle, Brethren, the things that were gain to me, from the 
x of the feast of St. Paul, the first hermit, January 15, page 


Oct. 20—48&5t. John Cantius, Confessor (White) 
Double 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 18, 12, 13 


HE compassion of man is ISERÁTIO hóminis circa 
ril toward his neighbor; but próximum: misericór- 
the mercy of God is upon all dia autem Dei super omnem 
flesh. He hath mercy, and carnem. Qui misericórdiam 
teacheth and correcteth, as a habet, docet, et érudit quasi 
shepherd doth his flock, Ps. 2, 1. pastor gregem suum. Fs. 2, t. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


3 


| 
: 


OCT. 20—ST. JOHN CANTIUS 1245 


Beátus vir, qui non ábiit in Blessed is the man. who hath 
consílio impiórum, et in via not walked in the counsel of 
peccatórum non stetit, et in the ungodly nor stood in the 
cáthedra pestiléntie non se- way of sinners, nor sat in the 
dit. Y. Glória Patri.: : chair of areata ¥. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
A, QUÆSUMUS, omnípo- RANT us, we beseech Thee, 
tens Deus: ut, sancti O almighty God, that, 


Joánnis Confessóris exémplo after the example of St. John, 

in sciéntia Sanctórum profi- Thy confessor, making prog- 

ciéntes, atque áliis misericór- ress in the science of the saints 

diam exhibéntes; ejus méri- and showing mercy to others, 

tis, indulgéntiam apud te we may through his merits ob- 

consequamur. Per Dóminum. tain forgiveness before Thee. 
Through our. Lord. 


Epistle. Jas. 2, 12-17 
Léctio Epístole beáti Jacóbi ^ Lesson from the Epistle of 


Apéstoli. blessed James the Apostle. 
Ic loquimini, et sic facite, VO SPEAK ye, and so do, as 
Sicut per legem libertá- being to be judged by the 


tis incipiéntes judicári. Judí- law of liberty. For judgment 
cium enim sine misericórdia without mercy to him that 
illi, qui non fecit misericór- hath not done mercy:. and 
diam: superexáltat autem mi- mercy exalteth itself above 
Sericórdia  judícium. Quid judgment. What shall it profit, 
próderit, fratres mei, si fidem my brethren, if a man say he 
quis dicat se habére, ópera au- have faith, but hath not works? 
tem non hábeat? Numquid Shall faith be able to save him? 
póterit fides salváre eum? Si And if a brother or sister be 
autem frater, et soror nudi naked, and want daily food, 
sint, et indígeant victu quo- and one of you say to them, 
tidiáno, dicat autem áliquis Go in peace, be you warmed 
ex vobis illis: Ita in pace, cal- and filled, and yet give them 
efacimini, et saturámini: non not those things that are nec- 
dedéritis autem eis, que ne- essary for the body; what shall 
eesséria sunt córpori quid it profit? So faith also, if it 
próderit? Sic et fides; si non have not works, is dead in itself. 
habeat ópera, mértua est in 

semetipsa. 


Gradual. Ps. 1 06, 8,9 


Confiteántur Dómino mise- Let the mercies of the Lord 
ricórdie ejus: et mirabília give glory to Him: and His 
ejus filiis hóminum. Y. Quis wonderful works to the chil- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1246 


dren of men. Y. For He hath 
satisfied the empty soul, and 
hath filled the nungry soul with 
good things, 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Prov. 31, 
20. He hath opened His hand to 
the needy, and stretched out 
His hands to the poor. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


13. 


Gospel, Let your loins bé girt, 


OCT. 20—ST. JOHN CANTIUS 


satiávit ánimam inánem: et 
ánimam esuriéntem satiávit 
bonis. 


Allelája, allelája. Y. Prov. 
31, 20. Manum suam apéruit 
inopi: et palmas suas extén- 
dit ad páuperem. Allelüja. 


jrom ihe Mass Os justi, page 


Offertory. Job. 29, 14, 16 


I was clad with justice and I 
clothed myself with my judg- 
ment, as with a robe and a 
diadem; I was an eye to the 
blind, and a foot to the lame; 
I was ihe father of the poor. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Justitia indütus sum, et 
vestivi me, sicut vestiménto 
et diadémate, judício meo. 
Oculus fui cæco, et pes clau- 
do: pater eram páuperum. 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY receive these 

Offerings, we  beseech 
Thee, O Lord, by the merits of 
St. John, Thy confessor, and 
grant that, loving Thee above 
all things and all things for 
Thy sake, we may in heart and 
in deed be pleasing to Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Give and it shall be given to 
you: good measure, and pressed 
down, and shaken together, and 
running over, shall they give 
into your bosom. 


AS, quesumus, Dómine, 

hóstias sancti Joánnis 
Confess6ris tui méritis benig- 
nus ássume: et przsta; ut te 
super ómnia, et omnes propter 
te diligéntes, corde tibi et óp- 
ere placeámus. Per Dóminum. 


Luke 6, 38 


Date, et dábitur vobis: 
mensüram bonam, et con- 
fértam, et coagitátam, et su- 
perefiluéntem dabunt in si- 
num vestrum. 


Postcommunion 


EGALED With the delights 

of Thy precious body 

and blood, we humbly pray Thy 
clemency, O Lord, that by the 


RETIÓSI corporis, et sán- 
guinis tui, Dómine, pasti 
deliciis, tuam süpplices depre- 
cámur cleméntiam: ut sancti 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 24—ST. RAPHAEL 


Joánnis Confessóris tui méri- 
tis et exémplis, ejüsdem cari- 
tatis imitatóres effécti, con- 
sértes simus et. glórie. Qui 
Vivis. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


1247 


merits and example of St. John, 
Thy confessor, we may be made 
imitators of his charity and 
sharers of his glory. Who livest. 


Oct. 21—Ht. Hilarion, Abbot (White) 
Simple l 
St. Ursula and Her Companions, Virgin-Martyrs 


Mass, Os justi, meditábitur, page 1356. 


Commemoration of St. Ursula and her companions with the 
Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion, from the Common of two 
or more Virgin-Martyrs, page 1368. 


Oct. 24—-St, Raphael, Archangel (White) 


Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit from the Mass on the feast of St. Michael, September 


29, page 1213. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


xus, qui beátum Ra- 

phaélem Archángelum 
Tobie fámulo tuo cómitem 
dedísti in via: concéde nobis 
fámulis tuis; ut ejüsdem sem- 
per protegámur custódia, et 
muniámur auxílio. Per Dó- 
minum, 


Lesson. 
Léctio líbri Tobie. 


N DIEBUS illis: Dixit Ange- 
lus Ráphaél ad Tobiam: 
Sacraméntum regis abscón- 
dere bonum est: ópera autem 
Dei reveláre et confitéri hon- 
orificum est: Bona est orátio 
cum jejünio, et eleemósyna 


cop, Who to thy servant 
Tobias when on his jour- 
ney didst give blessed Raphael, 
the archangel, as a companion, 
grant us, Thy servants, that we 
may ever be protected by his 
guardianship and strengthened 
by his assistance. Through our 
Lord. 


Tob. 13, 7-15 


Lesson from the Book of 
Tobias. 
N THOSE days, the angel Ra- 
phael said to Tobias: It is 
good to hide the secret of & 
king: but honorable to reveal 
and confess the works of God. 
Prayer is good with fasting and 
alms, more than to lay up 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1248 


treasures of gold: for alms de- 
livereth from death, and the 
same is that which purgeth 
away sins, and maketh to find 
mercy and life everlasting. But 
they that commit sin and ini- 
quity are enemies to their own 
Soul I discover then the truth 
unto you, and I wil not hide 
the secret from you. When thou 
didst pray with tears, and didst 
bury the dead, and didst leave 
thy dinner, and hide the dead 
by day in thy house, and bury 


them by night, I offered thy. 


prayer to the Lord. And he- 
cause thou wast acceptable to 
God, it was necessary that 
temptation should prove thee. 
And now the Lord hath sent 
me to heal thee, and to deliver 
Sara thy son's wife from the 
devil. For I am the angel Ra- 
phael, one of the seven who 
Stand before the Lord. 


OCT. 24—-ST.. RAPHAE:. 


magis quam thesauros auri 
recóndere: quóniam eleemó- 
syna a morte liberat, et ipsa 
est, que purgat peccáta, et 
facit invenire misericérdiam 
et vitam etérnam. Qui autem 
fáciunt peccátum, et iniqui- 
tatem, hostes sunt anime 
sue. Manifésto ergo vobis ve- 
ritátem, et non abscóndam a 
vobis occültum  sermónem. 
Quando orábas cum lácrymis, 
et sepeliébas mórtuos, et dere- 
linquébas prándium tuum, et 
xnórtuos abscondébas per 
diem in domo tua, et nocte 
sepeliébas eos, ego óbtuli ora- 
tiónem tuam Dómino. Et quia 
&ccéptus eras Deo, necésse 
fuit ut tentátio probéret te. 
Et nunc misit me Dóminus ut 
curárem te, et Saram uxórem 
filii tui a demdnio liberárem. 
Ego enim sum Raphaél Ange- 
lus, unus ex septem, qui ad- 
stamus ante Dóminum. 


From, Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia in the Grad- 
ual is replaced by the Tract. In Paschal-time the Gradual and 
Tract are replaced by the Greater Alleluia and Verse found 


after the Tract. 


Gradual. Tob. 8, 3 


Raphael, the angel of the 


Angelus Dómini Raphaél 


Lord, took, and bound the devil. apprehéndit et ligávit dæmó- 

V. Ps. 146,5. Great is Our Lord, nem. V. Ps. 146, 5. Magnus 

and great is His power. Dóminus noster, et magna 
virtus ejus. 


a Septuagesima the: Lesser Alleluia is replaced by the 
Tract. " 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, allelula. Y. Ps. 137, 
1, 2. I will sing praise to Thee 
in the sight of the angels, I 
will worship towards Thy holy 
temple, and I will give glory to 
Thy name, O Lord. Alleluia. 


Allelüja, alleluja. Y. Ps. 
137, 1, 2. In conspéctu Ange- 
lórum psallam tibi: adorábo 
ad templum sanctum tuum, et 
confitébor nómini tuo, Dó- 
mine, Allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 


OCT. 24—ST. RAPHAEL 


1249 


Tract. Ps. 148, 2 


Laudáte Dóminum, omnes ` 


Angeli ejus: laudáte eum, 
omnes virtütes ejus. Y. Ps. 
102, 21. Benedícite Dóminum, 
omnes virtütes ejus: minfstri 
ejus, qui fácitis voluntátem 
ejus. i 


Praise the Lord all ye His 
angels. Praise ye Him, all His 
hosts. Y. Ps. 102, 21. Bless the 
Lord all ye His hosts, you min- 
isters of His that do His will. 


Greater A lleluia 


Allelija, allelüja Y. Ps. 102, 
1. Bénedic, ánima mea, Dó- 
minum: et ómnia interióra 
mea nomen sanctum ejus. V. 
Tob..3, 25; 5, 11. Missus est 
Ángelus Dómini sanctus Rá- 
phaél a Deo ad Tobiam, et sa- 
lutávit eum, et dixit: Gráudi- 
um sit tibi semper, Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 102, 
1. Bless the Lord, O my soul, 
and let all that is within me 
bless His holy name. Alleluia. 
Y. Tob. 3, 25; 5, 11. The holy 
angel of the Lord, Raphael, 
was sent by God to Tobias, and 
he saluted him and said, Joy 
be to thee always. Alleluia. 


Gospel. John 5, 1-4 


H$ Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Erat dies 
festus Judzórum, et as- 
céndit Jesus  Jerosólymam. 
Est autem Jerosólymis Probá- 
tica piscina, que cognominá- 
tur Hebráice Bethsáida, quin- 
que pórticus habens. In his 
jacébat multitüdo magna lan- 
guéntium, cecérum, claudó- 
rum, aridórum expectántium 
aque motum. Angelus autem 
Dómini descendébat secün- 
dum tempus in piscínam, et 
movebatur aqua. Et qui prior 
descendisset in piscínam post 
motiónem aque, sanus fiébat, 
& quacümque detinebátur in- 
firmitate. 


Creed, page 765. 


H Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, there was a 
L, festival day of the Jews, 
and Jesus went up to Jerusa- 
lem. Now there is at Jerusalen 
2, pond, called Probatica, which 
in Hebrew is named Bethseda, 
having five porches. In these 
lay a great multitude of sick, 
of blind, of lame, of withered, 
waiting for the moving of the 
Water. And an angel of the 
Lord descended at certain 
times into the pond: and the 
water was moved. And he that 
went down first into the pond 
after the motion of the water, 
was made whole of whatsoever 
infirmity he lay under, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1250 


OCT. 25—STS. CHRYSANTHUS AND DARIA 


Offertory (without Alleluia) and Secret from the Mass on 
the nu of St. Michael, September 29, pages 1215, 1216. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion from the Mass on the feast of St. Michael, Sep- 


tember 29, page 1216. 


Postcommunion 


OUCHSAFE, O Lord, to 

make the holy archangel 
Raphael our helper, and let 
him whom we believe to be 
continually standing before 
Thy majesty, present our poor 
prayers to be blessed by Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


IRÍGERE dignáre, Dómine 
Deus, in adjutórium 
nostrum sanctum Raphaélem 
Arehángelum: et, quem tuz 
majestáti semper  assístere 
crédimus, tibi nostras exíguas 
preces benedicéndas assígnet. 
Per Dóminum. 


Oct. 25—$5t. Chrpsanthus and Baria, Martyrs (Red) 
Simple 
Mass, Intret, page 1316, except: 


Prayer 


ay the prayers of Thy 
XD blessed martyrs, Chrys- 
antbus and Daria, be with us, 
O Lord, that we may continu- 
ally experience the loving as- 
istance of those to whom we 
pay homage 'of veneration. 
Through our Lord. 


EATÓRUM Mártyrum tuó- 
B rum, Dómine, Chry- 
santhi et Darie, quesumus 
adsit nobis orátio: ut, quos 
venerámur obséquio, eórum 
pium  jügiter experidmur 
auxflium. Per Dóminum. 


Second Prayer A cunctis, and accompanying Secret and Post- 
communion, page 827; third at the choice of the priest, pages 


1494-1500. 


Epistle In all things let us exhibit ourselves, from the Mass 
of St. Abdon and Sennen, July 30, page 1130. 


Gospel, Woe to you who build the monuments, from the 
Mass of Sts. Mark and Marcellianus, June 18, page 1053. 


Secret 


ay the offering of Thy 
D people be pleasing to 
Thee, O Lord, which is sol- 
emnly sacrificed on the natal 
feast of Thy holy martyrs 
Chrysanthus and Daria. 
Through our Lord. 


ÓPULI tui, quesumus, 

Dómine, tibi grata Sit 
hóstia, que in natalítiis sanc- 
tórum  Mártyrum  tuórum 
Chrysanthi et Daria solem- 
niter immolátur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 27—VIGIL STS. SIMON AND JUDE 1251 


Postcommunion 


ysricis, Dómine, repléti HAVE been filled, O 
(D sumus votis et gáudiis: Lord, with mystic de- 
presta, quesumus; ut, inter- sires and joys; grant, we be- 
cessiónibus sanctórum Már- seech Thee, that, by the inter- 
tyrum tuórum Chrysanthi et cession of Thy holy martyrs, 
Dariz, que temporáliter ági- Chrysanthus and Daria, we 
mus, 'spirituáliter consequá- may in spirit attain those 
mur. Per Dóminum. things which in time we cele- 

brate. Through our Lord. 


Oct. 26—$5t. Cbaristus, Pope, Martyr (Red) 
Simple 
Mass, Si díligis me, page 1302. Second Prayer, A cunctis, with 
the accompanying Secret and Postcommunion, page 827; third 
at the choice of the priest, pages 1494-1500. 
Oct. 27—Wigil of Sts. Simon and Jude, Apostles, 
(Purple) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 78, 11, 13, 10 


NTRET in conspéctu tuo, 

Démine, gémitus compe- 
ditórum: redde vicínis nostris 
séptuplum in sinu eórum: vín- 
dica sánguinem sanctérum 
tuórum, qui effüsus est. Ps. 
78, 1. Deus, venérunt gentes 
in hereditátem tuam: pollué- 
runt templum sanctum tuum: 
posuérunt Jerüsalem in po- 
mórum custódiam, Y. Glória 
Patri. 


ET the sighing of the pris- 

oners come in before 
‘Thee, O Lord; render to our 
neighbors sevenfold in their 
bosom; revenge the blood of 
Thy saints which hath been 
shed. Ps. 78, 1. O God, the 
heathen are come into Thy in- 
heritance; they have defiled 
Thy holy temple; they have 
made Jerusalem as a place to 
keep fruit. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 


ONCÉDE, quesumus, omní- 
potens Deus: ut, sicut 
Apostolórum tuórum Simónis 
et Jude gloriósa natalitia 
prevenimus; sic ad tua bene- 
ficia promerénda, majestá- 
tem tuam pro nobis ipsi pre- 
téniant. Per Dóminum. 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that, as 


we approach the glorious natal 


day of Thy holy apostles, Si- 


mon and Jude, so they, implor- 
ing Thy majesty, may win Thy 


benefits for us. Through our 
Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1252 


OCT. 27—VIGIL STS, SIMON AND JUDE 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, Concede nos, page 824; 
third for the Church or for ihe Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Epistle, Brethren, we are made a spectacle, from the Mass, 


Justus ut palma, page 1353. 


Gradual. Ps. 78, 102 


Revenge, O Lord, the blood 
of Thy saints, which hath been 
Shed. Y. They have given the 
dead bodies of 'Thy servants, O 
Lord, to be meat for the fowls 
Of the air: the flesh of Thy 
saints to the beasts of the earth. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Vindica, Dómine, sángui- 
nem sanctórum tuórum, qui 


effüsus est. Y. Posuérunt 
mortália servórum tuórum, 
Dómine, escas  volatílibus 


celi: carnes sanctórum tuó- 
rum béstiis terre. 


Gospel, I am the true vine, from the Mass Protexisti, page 1330. 


Offertory. Ps. 149, 516 


The saints shall rejoice in Exsultábunt sancti in 
glory, they shall be joyful in glória, letabüntur in cubi- 
their beds; the high praises of libus suis: exaltatiónes Dei in 


God shall be in their mouths. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


fáucibus eórum. 


Secret 


ITH our gifts, O Lord, we 
G anticipate the feast of 
Thy apostles, Simon and Jude, 
and humbly beseech Thee that 
since these offerings are not ac- 
ceptable to Thee, because of 
our sins, they may be rendered 
pleasing in Thy sight, through 
the merits of these Thy saints. 
Through our Lord, 


UNÉRIBUS nostris, Dö- 
mine,sanctórum Apos- 
tolorum tuórum Simónis et 
Jude festa precédimus: te 
suppliciter deprecántes; ut, 
que consciéntiz nostre præ- 
pediüntur obstáculis, illórum 
méritis grata, reddántur. Per 
Dóminum. 


Second. Secret of our Blessed Lady, By Thy mercy, page 825; 
third for the Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Preface, page 775. 


Communion. Ps. 78, 2, 11 
‘They have given the dead Posuérunt mortália servó- 


bodies of Thy servants, O Lord, 
to be meat for the fowls of the 
air, the flesh of Thy saints to 
the beasts of the earth: accord- 


rum tuórum, Dómine, escas 
volatílibus celi, carnes sanc- 
tórum tudrum béstiis terrm: 
secindum magnitüdinem 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 28—STS. SIMON AND JUDE 1253 

brachii: tui. pósside  fílios ing to the greatness of Thy arm 

morte punitérum. take possession of the children 
of those who have been pun- 
ished with death. 


Postcommunion 


umPpto, Dómine, . sacra- 

ménto, suppliciter de- 
precamur:; ut, intercedéntibus 
beátis Apóstolis tuis Simóne 
et Juda, quod temporáliter 
gérimus, ad vitam capiámus 
etérnam. Per Dóminum. 


AVING received Thy sacra- 
ment, O Lord, we, Thy 
suppliants,, humbly beseech 
Thee, that, by the intercession 
of Thy blessed apostles, Simon 
and Jude, we may receive in 
eternal life that which we cele- 
brate in this life. Through. our 
Lord. ect 
Second, Postcommunion of our Blessed Lady, Grant, O Lord, 
page 825; third for the Church or for the Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Oct. 283—Ohe Holp Apostles Simon and Jude (Red) 
Double of the Second Class 
The Beginning. of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


IHI autem nimis hono- 

ráti sunt amici tui, 
Deus: nímis confortátus.est 
principátus eórum. Ps. 138, 
1, 2. Dómine, probásti me, et 
cognovisti me: tu cognovísti 
sessi6nem meam, et resurrec- 
tiónem meam, Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Ps. 138, 17 


o ME Thy Friends, O God. 
are made exceedingly 
honorable: their principality is 
exceedingly. strengthened. Ps. 
38, 1, 2. Lord, Thou hast proved 
me, and known me; Thou hast 
known my sitting down, and 
my rising up. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui nos per beátos 
D Apóstolos tuos Simó- 
nem et Judam, ad agnitiónem 
tui nóminis venire tribuísti: 
da nobis eórum glóriam sem- 
pitérnam et proficiéndo cele- 


cop, Who hast granted us 
to come to the knowledge 
of Thy name through Thy 
blessed apostles Simon and 
Jude, grant us to celebrate 
their everlasting glory by ad- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1254 


vancing in knowledge and to 
improve by this celebration. 
Through our Lord. 


OCT. 28—STS. SIMON AND JUDE 


bráre, et celebrándo profícere. 
Per Dóminum. 


Epistle, Brethren, to every one of us, from the Mass on 


Ascension Eve, page 582. 


Gradual. Ps. 44, 17, 18 


Thou shalt make them 
princes over all the earth: 
they shall remember Thy 


name, O Lord. Y. Instead of 
Thy fathers, sons are born to 
Thee: therefore shall people 
praise Thee. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 138, 
17. To me Thy friends, O God, 
are made exceedingly honor- 
able: their principality is ex- 
ceedingly strengthened. Alle- 
luia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Constitues eos príncipes su- 
per omnem terram: mémores 
erunt nóminis tui, Dómine. V. 
Pro pátribus suis nati sunt 
tibi. fíli: proptérea popuii 
confitebúntur tibi. 


Allehija, allełúja. V. Ps. 138, 
17. Nimis honoráti sunt amci 
tui, Deus; nimis confortátus 
est principátus eórum. Alle- 
luja. 


Gospel. John 15, 17-25 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, Jesus said 

to His disciples, These 
things I command you, that 
you love one another. If ihe 
world hate you, know ye that 
it bath hated Me before you. 
If you had been of the world, 
the world would love its own; 
but because you are not of the 
world, but I have chosen you 
out of the world, therefore the 
world hateth you. Remember 
My word that I said to you, 
'The servant is not greater than 
his master. If they have per- 
secuted Me, they will also 
persecute you: If they have 
kept My word, they will keep 
yours also. But all these things 
they will do to you for my 
name's sake, because they know 
not Him that sent Me. If I had 


®© Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
géBi secundum Joánnem. 
T ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus discípulis suis: Hec 
mando vobis, ut diligátis ínvi- 
cem. Si mundus vos odit: sci- 
tóte, quia me priórem vobis 
ódio hábuit. Si de mundo 
fuissétis: mundus quod suum 
erat, diligeret: quia vero de 
mundo non estis, sed ego elégi 
vos de mundo, proptérea odit 
vos mundus. Mementóte ser- 
mónis mei, quem ego dixit vo- 
bis: Non est servus major dó- 
mino ‘suo. Si me persecüti 
sunt, et vos persequéntur: si 
sermónem meum servavérunt, 
et vestrum servabunt, Sed 
hee ómnia fácient vobis 
propter nomen meum: quia 
nésciunt eum, qui misit me. 
Si non venissem, et locütus 
fuíssem eis, peccátum non 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 28—STS. SIMON AND JUDE 


habérent: nunc autem excu- 
satiénem non habent de pec- 
Cáto suo. Qui me odit: et Pa- 
trem meum odit. Si ópera non 
fecissem in eis, que nemo áli- 
us fecit, peccátum non habé- 
rent: nunc autem et vidé- 
runt, et odérunt et me, et 
Patrem meum. Sed ut adim- 
pleátur sermo, qui in lege 
eórum scriptus est: Quia ódio 
habuérunt me gratis. 


Creed, page 765. 


1265 


not come, and spoken to them, 
they would not have sin; but 
now they have no excuse for 
their sin. He that hateth Me, 
hateth My Father also. If I 
had not done among them the 
works that no other man hath 
done, they would not have sin; 
put now they have both seen 
and hated both Me and My 
Father, But that the word may 
be fulfilled which is written in 
their law, They. faroa Me with- 
out cause. 


Offertory. Ps. 18, 5 


In omnem terram exívit so- 
nus eórum: et in fines orbis 
terre verba eórum. | 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Their sound went forth into 
all the earth; and their words 
to the end of the world: 


Secret 


Ca" Dómine, sanctó- 
rum Apostolórum tuó- 
rum Simónis et Jude perpé- 
tuam venerántes: quesumus; 
ut eam, sacris mystériis ex- 
piáti, dignius celebrémus. Per 
Dóminum. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


ENERATING the everlasting 
glory of Thy holy apos- 
tles, Simon and Jude, we be- 


'seech Thee, O Lord, that, be- 


ing purified by these sacred 
mysteries, it may the more 
worthily be celebrated by us. 
Through our Lord. 


Communion. Matt. 19, 28 


Vos, qui secüti estis me, se- 
débitis super sedes, judicántes 
duódecim tribus Israel. 


You who have foliowed Me 
shall sit upon seats judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel. 


Postcommunion 


ERCEPTIS, Dómine, Sacra- 

méntis, supplíciter ex- 
orámus; ut, intercedéritibus 
beátis Apóstolis tuis Simóne 
et Juda, que pro illórum ve- 
neránda gérimus  passióne, 
nobis profíclant ad medélam. 
Per Dóminum, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


raments, we beseech and 
supplicate Thee, O Lord, that, 
by the intercession of Thy 
blessed apostles Simon and 
Jude, the things which we do 
for the veneration of their glory 
may profit us unto our heating. 
Through our Lord. 


Ds received Thy sac- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Copyright, 1936, by Benziger Brothe 


INE IS THE KINGDOM, O Lorn, AND THOU ART ABOVE ALL 
PRINCES, THINE ARE RICHES, AND THINE IS GLORY: THOU HAST 
DOMINION OVER ALL. IN THY HAND IS POWER AND MIGHT, IN THY 
oo, URSIN: AND THE EMPIRE OF ALL THINGS, (Paral. 29, 

» 12. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, KING 


Feast of Gur Lord Jesus Christ, King, (white) 
(Last Sunday in October) 
Double of the First Class 


1257 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Apoc. 5, 12; 1,6 


IGNUS est Agnus, qui oc- 
císus est, accípere vir- 
tem, et divinitátem, et sa- 


piéntiam, et fortitüdinem, et 
honórem. Ipsi glória et impé- 
rium in sécula seculórum. 
Ps. 71, 1. Deus, judícium tu- 
um Regi da: et justítiam tu- 
am Filio Regis. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


HE Lamb that was slain is 

worthy to receive power, 
and divinity, and wisdom, and 
strength, and honor. To Him 
be glory and empire for ever 
and ever. Ps. 71, 1. Give to the 
King Thy judgment, O God: 
and to the King's Son Thy jus- 
tice. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne, 

Deus, qui in dilécto Fílio 
tuo, universórum Rege, óm- 
nia instauráre voluísti: con- 
céde propítius; ut cuncte fa- 
mílie Géntium, peecáti vül- 
nere disgregáts, ejus suavís- 
simo subdántur império: Qui 
tecum vivit. 


LMIGHTY and eternal 

; God, Who hast wished to 
restore all things through Thy 
beloved Son, the King of the 


universe, graciously grant that 


all the familes of the Gentiles 
separated by the wound of 
sin, may be subjected to His 
most loving dominion, Who 
with Thee liveth. 


Commemoration, Prayer of the occurring Sunday. 


Epistle. Col. 1, 12-20 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Colossenses. 


RATRES: Gratias ágimus 
DeoPatri,qui dignos nos 
fecit in partem sortis sanc- 
térum in lümine, qui eripuit 
nos de potestáte tenebrárum, 
et transtulit in regnum Fílii 


41 


Lesson from the Epistle ‘of 
blessed Paul the Apostie to the 
the Colossians. 

RETHREN, we give thanks 


. to God the Father, Who 


hath made us worthy to be par- 
takers of the lot of the saints 
in light: Who hath delivered 
us from the power of darkness, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1258 


and hath translated us into 
the kingdom of the Son of His 
love. In Whom we have re- 
demption through His blood, 
ihe remission of sins; Who is 
the image of the invisible God, 
ihe firstborn of every creature; 
for in Him were all things 
created in heaven and on earth, 
visible and invisible, whether 
thrones, or dominations, or 
principalities, or powers: all 
things were created by Him 
and in Him. And He is be- 
fore all, and by Him all things 
consist. And He is the head 
of the body, the Church, 
Who is the beginning, the 
firstborn from the dead; that 
in all things He may hold 
the primacy: because in Him, 
it hath well pleased the Father, 
that all fuliness should dwell; 
and through Him to reconcile 
all things unto Himself, mak- 
ing peace through the blood of 
His cross, both as to the things 


OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, KING 


dilectiónis sue, in quo habé- 
mus redemptiónem per sán- 
guinem ejus, remissiónem 
peccatórum. Qui est imágo 
Dei invisibilis, primogénitus 
omnis creatire; quóniam in 
ipso cóndita sunt univérsa in 
celis et in terra, visibilia et 
invisibília, sive throni, sive 
dominatiónes principátus, 
sive potestátes: ómnia per ip- 
sum et in ipso creáta sunt: et 
ipse est ante omnes, et ómnia 
in ipso constant. Et ipse est 
caput córporis Ecclésiz, qui 
est princípium, primogénitus 
ex mórtuis: ut sit in ómnibus 
ipse primátum tenens: quia 
in ipse complacuit omnem 
plenitüdinem inhabitáre; et 
per eum reconcilidre ómnia, 
in ipsum, pacificans per sán- 
guinem crucis ejus, sive que 
in terris, sive que in celis 
sunt, in Christo Jesu Dómino 
nostro. 


that are on earth, and the things that are in Bu in 


Christ Jesus Our Lord. 


In votive Masses in Paschal-time the Gradual is replaced by 
the Greater Alleluia found after ihe Tract. 


Gradual. 


He shall rule from sea to 


Ps. 71, 8, 11 


Dominábitur a mari usque 


sea, and from the river unto ad mare, et a flumine usque 
the ends of the earth. V. And ad términos orbis terrárum. 
all kings of the earth shall Y. Et adorábunt eum omnes 
adore Him: all nations shall reges terre: omnes Gentes 
serve Him. sérvient ei. 


In Votive Masses after Septuagesima, the Lesser Alleluia is 
replaced by the Tract. 


Lesser Alleluia 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Dan. 7, Allelija, allelija. Y. Dan. 7, 


14. His power is an everlasting 14. Potéstas ejus, potéstas 
power that shall not be taken #térna, que non auferétur: et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, KING 1259 


regnum ejus, quod non cor- away: and His kingdom that 
rumpétur. Allelüja. Shall not be destroyed. Alleluia, 


_ Tract. Ps. 88, 27, 28, 30 


Ipse invocábit me: Pater He shali cry out to Me: Thou 
meus es tu: Deus meus, et art My Father; My God, and 
suscéptor salitis mex, Y. Et the support of: My salvation. 


ego primogénitum ponam il- 
lum: excélsum pre régibus 
terre. Y. Et ponam in secu- 
lum seculi semen ejus: et 
thronum ejus sicut dies coli. 


y. And I wil make Him My 
firstborn, high above the-kings 
of the earth. Y. And I will make 
His seed to endure for ever- 
more: and His throne as the 
days of heaven. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allelija. Dan. 7, 
14. Y. Potéstas ejus, potés- 
tas etérna, que non auferé- 
tur: et regnum ejus, quod non 
corrumpétur. Allelija. y. 
Apoc. 19, 16. Habet in vesti- 
ménto et in fémore suo scrip- 
tum: Rex regum et Dóminus 
dominántium. Allehija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Dan. 7, 
14. His power is an everlasting 
power that shall not be taken 
away: and His kingdom that 
shall not be destroyed, Alleluia. 
y. Apoc. 19, 16. He hath on His 
garment, and on His thigh 
written: King of kings, and 
Lord of lords, Alleluia, 


Gospel. John 18, 33-37 


"^ Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Dixit Pi- 
latus ad Jesum: Tu es Rex 
Judeórum? Respóndit Jesus: 
A temetípso hoc dicis, an álii 
dixérunt tibi de me? Respón- 
dit Pilátus: Numquid ego Ju- 
deus sum? Gens tua, et pon- 
tifices tradidérunt te mihi: 
quid fecisti? Respéndit Jesus: 
Regnum meum non est: de 
hoc mundo. Si ex hoc mundo 
esset regnum meum, minístri 
mei ütique decertárent ut non 
tráderer Judaeis: nunc autem 
regnum meum non est hinc. 
Dicit ítaque ei Pilatus: Ergo 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime: Pilate said 
to Jesus: Art thou the 
King of the Jews? Jesus an- 
swered: Sayest thou this thing 
of thyself, or have others told 
it thee of Me? Pilate answered: 
Am I a Jew? Thy own nation, 
and the chief priests, have de- 
livered thee up to me: what 
hast thou done? Jesus an- 
swered: My kingdom is not of 
this world. If My kingdom were 
of this world, My servants 
would certainly strive that I 
should not be delivered to the 
Jews: but now My kingdom is 


http://ccwatershed.org 


2260 


not from hence. Pilate there- 
fore said to him: Art thou a 
king then? Jesus answered: 
Thou sayest that I am a King. 
For this was I born, and for 
this came I into the world; 
that I should give testimony 
to the truth, Everyone that is 
of the truth, heareth My voice. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


Ask of Me, and I will give 
The the Gentiles for Thy in- 
heritance, and the utmost parts 
of the earth for Thy possession. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, KING 


Rex es tu? Respóndit Jesus: 
Tu dicis, quia Rex sum ego. 
Ego in hoc natus sum, et ad 
hoc veni in mundum, ut tes- 
timónium  perhíbeam  veri- 
táti: omnis qui est ex veritáte, 
audit vocem meam. 


Ps. 2, 8 


Póstula a me, et dabo iibi 
Gentes hereditátem tuam, et 
possessiónem tuam términos 
terre. 


Secret 


LORD, We offer Thee this 

host for the reconciliation 
of humanity; grant, we be- 
seech Thee, that Jesus Christ 
Thy Son our Lord, Whom we 
immolate in this sacrifice, will 
bestow on all Gentiles the gifts 
of unity and peace, Who with 
Thee liveth. 


ést1am tibi, Dómine, hu- 

mane reconciliatiónis 
offérimus: presta, quesumus; 
ut quem sacrificiis presénti- 
bus immolámus, Ipse eunctis 
Géntibus unitatis et pacis 
dona concédat, Jesus Chris- 
tus, Filius tuus Dóminus nos- 
ier: Qui tecum. 


Commemoration, Secret of the occurring Sunday. 


Preface No. 10, page 813. 


Communion. 


ever. The Lord will bless His 
people with peace. 


Ps. 28, 10, 11 
The Lord shall sit King for- . 


Sedébit Dóminus Rex in 
etérnum: Dóminus benedícet 
pópulo suo in pace. 


Postcommunion 


ep with. this ‘immortal 

nourishment, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that we who 
glory to fight under the stan- 
dard of Christ the King, may 
forever reign with Him on the 
heavenly throne. Who with 
Thee liveth. 


— aliméniam 
AL, consecüti, quesumus, Dó- 
mine: ut, qui sub Christi Re- 
gis vexílis militáre gloriá- 
mur, cum Ipso, in celésti sede, 
jügiter regnáre  possímus: 
Qui tecum. 


Commemoration, Postcommunion of the occurring Sunday. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 31—VIGIL OF ALL SAINTS 


1261 


Oct. 31—The Vigil of AU Saints, (Purple) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


ÜDICANT sancti gentes, et 

dominántur pépulis: et 
regnabit Dóminus Deus illó- 
rum in perpétuum. Ps. 32, 1. 
Exsultáte, justi, in Dómino: 
rectos decet collaudátio. y. 
Gloria Patri. 


Wis. 3,8 


HE Saints judge nations, 

and rule over people: and 
the Lord their God shall reign 
forever, Ps. 32, 1. Rejoice in 
the Lord, ye just: praise be- 
cometh the upright. V. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761. Gloria is omitted. 


Prayer 
ÓMINE Deus noster, mul- Lorn, our God, multiply 
típlica super nos gráti- "Ihy graces upon us, and 


am tuam: et, quorum preve- 
nimus gloriósa solémnia, tri- 
bue sübsequi in sancta pro- 
fessióne letitiam. Per Dómi- 
num. : 


Second Prayer of the Holy 


grani that joy inay follow in 
the holy praise of those whose 
glorious festival we anticipate. 
Through our Lord. 


Ghost, page 827; third for the 


Church or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Lesson. 


Léctio libri Apocalypsis 
beáti Joánnis Apóstoli. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Ecce ego 

Joánnes vidi in médio 
throni, et quátuor animá- 
lium, et in médio senió- 
rum, Agnum stantem tam- 
quam occisum, habéntem 
córnua Septem et óculós sep- 
tem: qui sunt septem spíritus 
Dei, missi in omnem terram. 
Et venit: et accépit de déx- 
tera sedéntis in throno li- 
brum. Et cum aperuísset li- 
brum, quátuor animália et 
vigintiquátuor senióres ceci- 
dérunt coram Agno, habéntes 
singuli cítharas, et phíalas 


Apoc. 5, 6-12 


Lesson from the Book of the 
Apocalypse of blessed John the 
Apostle. 

N THOSE days, Behold, I, 

John, saw in the midst of 
the throne and of the four 
diving creatures, and in the 
midst of the ancients, a Lamb, 
standing as it were slain, hav- 
ing seven horns and seven eyes, 
which are the seven spirits of 
God, sent forth into all the 
earth. And He came, and took 
the book out of the right hand 
of Him that sat on the throne: 
and when He had opened the 
book, the four living creatures, 
&nd the four and twenty an- 
cients fell down before the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1262 


Lamb, having every one of 
them harps, and golden vials 
ful of odors, which are the 
prayers of saints; and they 
sung a new Canticle, saying, 
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to 
take the book, and to open the 
seals thereof; because Thou 
wast slain, and hast redeemed 
us to God, in Thy blood, out of 
every tribe, and tongue, and 
people, and nation, and hast 
made us to God a kingdom and 
priests; and we shall reign on 
the earth. And I beheld, and I 
heard the voice of many angels 
round about the throne, and 
the living creatures and the 
ancients, and the number of 
them was thousands of thou- 
sands, saying with a loud voice, 
The Lamb that was slain is 
worthy to receive power, and 
divinity, and wisdom, and 
strength, and honor, and glory, 
and benediction for ever and 
ever. Amen. 


OCT. 31—VIGIL OF ALL SAINTS 


áureas plenas odoramentó- 
rum, que sunt oratiónes sanc- 
tórum: et cantábant cánti- 
cum novum, dicéntes: Dignus 
es, Dómine, accípere librum, 
et aperire signácula ejus: 
quóniam occísus es, et rede- 
místi nos Deo in sánguine tuo 
ex omni tribu, et lingua, et 
pópulo, et natióne: et fecísti 
nos Deo nostro regnum, et 
Sacerdótes: et regnábimus 
super terram. Et vidi, et au- 
dívi vocem Angelórum mul- 
tórum in circüitu throni, et 
animálium, et seniórum: et 
erat nümerus eórum millia 
míllium dicéntium voce mag- 
na: Dignus est Agnus, qui oc- 
císus est, accípere virtütem, 
et divinitátem, et sapiéntiam, 
et fortitüdinem, et honórem, 
et glóriam, et benedictiónem, 
in secula seculórum. Amen. 


Gradual. Ps. 149, 5, 1 


The saints shall rejoice in 
glory; they shall be joyful in 
their beds. Y. Sing ye to the 
Lord a new canticle; let His 
praise be in the assembly of the 
saints. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Exsultábunt sancti in gló- 
ria, letabüntur in cubílibus 
suis. Y. Cantáte Dómino cán- 
ticum novum, laus ejus in 
Ecclésia sanctórum. 


E ani Jesus coming down, from the Mass Sapientiam, page 


Offertory. Ps. 149, 5, 6 


The saints shall rejoice in 
glory, they shall be joyful in 
their beds: the high praises of 
God are in their mouth. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Exsultábunt sancti in gló- 
ria, letabüntur in cubilibus 
Suis: exaltatiónes Dei in fáu- 
cibus eórum. 


Secret 


C) ie HEAP Thine altar with 
oblations, O Lord; 


LTÁRE tuum, Dómine, 
munéribus cumulámus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCT. 31—VIGIL OF ALL SAINTS 1263 


oblátis: da, quesumus; ut ad grant, we beseech Thee, that 
salitem nostram, Omnium they may profit for our salva- 
Sanctórum tuórum.precatióne tion by the prayer of all Thy 
profíciant, quorum solémnia saints, to whose coming festival 
ventura  precürrimus. Per we hasten. Through our Lord. 
Dóminum. 


Second Secret of the Holy Ghost, page 827; third for the 
Church, or for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Wis. 3, 1 


Justórum ánimæ in manu The souls of the just are in 
Dei sunt, et non tanget illos the hand of God, and the tor- 
torméntum malitie: visi sunt ment of malice shall not touch 
óculis insipiéntium mori: illi them: in the sight of the un- 
autem sunt in pace. wise they seemed to die, but 

they are in peace. 


Postcommunion 
ACRAMÉNTIS, Dómine, et AVING completed the sac- 
gáudiis optáte celebri- raments and the joys of 


tátis explétis: quasumus; ut the earnestly desired festival, 

eórum précibus adjuvémur, O Lord, we beseech Thee that 

quorüm recordatiónibus ex- we may be assisted by the 

hibéntur. Per Dóminum. prayers of those in whose lov- 

i ing remembrance they are 

oferedd. Through our Lord. 

Second Postcommunion of ihe Holy Ghost, page 827; thire 

for the Church or for the Pope, page 826. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1264 NOV. 1—ALL SAINTS 


FATHER, I WILL THAT WHERE I AM, THEY ALSO WHOM THOU HAST 
GIVEN ME MAY BE WITH ME: THAT THEY MAY SEE MY GLORY WHICH 
THOU HAST GIVEN ME, BECAUSE THOU HAST LOVED ME BEFORE THE 
CREATION OF THE WORLD. JUST FATHER, THE WORLD HATH NOT 


KNOWN THEE: BUT I HAVE KNOWN THEE. AND THESE HAVE KNOWN 
THAT THOU HAST SENT ME. (John 17, 24, 25.) 


NOV. 1—ALL SAINTS 


1265 


Nov. 1—Ohe Feast of AU Haints (White) 


Double of the First Class with a Common Octave 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Intrott 


AUDEÁMUS omnes in Dó- 

mino, diem festum cele- 
brántes sub honóre Sanctó- 
rum ómnium: de quorum so- 
lemnitáte gaudent Angeli, et 
colláudant Fílium Dei. Ps. 
32, 1. Exsultáte, justi, in Dó- 


ET us all rejoice in the 

Lord, celebrating a feast 
in honor of all the saints, in 
whose solemnity the angels re- 
joice and join in praising the 
Son of God. Ps. 32, 1. Rejoice 
in the Lord, ye just: praise 


mino: rectos decet collaudá- becometh the upright. y. 
tio. Y. Glória Patri. Glory. 
Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 
MNÍPOTENS sempitérne ALMIGHTY, eternal God, 


Deus, qui nos ómnium 
Sanctórum tuóram mérita sub 
una tribuísti celebritáte ve- 
nerári: quesumus: ut desi- 
derátam nobis tus propitia- 
tiónis abundántiam, multipli- 
cátis intercessóribus, largiáris. 
Per Dóminum. 


Lesson. 


Léctio libri Apocalypsis 
béati Joánnis Apostoli. 


N DIÉsus illis: Ecce ego 

Joánnes vidi álterum An- 
gelum ascendéntem ab ortu 
Solis, habéntem signum Dei 
vivi: et clamávit voce magna 
quátuor Angelis, quibus da- 
tum est nocére terre et mari, 
dicens: Nolíte nocére terre, et 
mari, neque arbóribus, quoad- 
üsque signémus servos Dei 
nostri in fróntibus eórum. Et 
audivi númerum signatórum, 
centum quadraginta quátuor 
millia signáti, ex omni tribu 


Who hast granted us to 
venerate the merits of all Thy 
saints in one solemnity, vouch- 
safe to us, we beseech Thee, 
through the multitude of our 
intercessors, that abundance of 
Thy mercy for which we ever 
have hoped. Through our Lord. 


Apoc. 7, 2-12 


Lesson from the Book of the 
Apocalypse of blessed John the 
Apostle. 


N THOSE days, behold, I, 

John, saw another angel 
ascending from the rising of 
the sun, having the sign of the 
living God. And he cried with 
a loud voice to the four angels, 
to whom it was given to hurt 
the earth and the Sea, saying, 
Hurt not the earth, nor the sea, 
nor the trees, till we sign the 
servants of our God in their 
foreheads. And I heard the 
number of them that were 
signed: an hundred and forty- 


filiórum Israël. Ex tribu Juda four thousand were signed, of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1266 


every tribe of the children of 
Israel, Of the tribe of Juda 
were twelve thousand signed: 
of the tribe of Ruben twelve 
thousand signed: of the tribe 
of Gad twelve thousand signed: 
of. the tribe of Aser twelve 
thousand signed: of the tribe 
of Nephthali twelve thousand 
signed: of the tribe of Manasses 
twelve thousand signed: of the 
tribe of Simeon twelve thou- 
sand signed: of the tribe of 
Levi twelve thousand signed: 
of the tribe of Issachar twelve 
thousand signed: of the tribe 
of Zabulon twelve thousand 
signed: of the tribe of Joseph 
twelve thousand signed: of the 
tribe of Benjamin twelve thou- 
sand signed. After this, I saw a 
great multitude which no man 
could number, of all nations, 
and tribes, and peoples, and 
tongues, standing before the 
throne and in sight of the 
Lamb, clothed with white 
robes, and palms in their 
hands; and they cried with a 
loud voice, saying, Salvation to 
our God Who sitteth upon the 
throne, and to the Lamb. And 
all the angels stood round about 
the throne, and the ancients, 
and the four living creatures; 
and they fell down before the 
throne upon their faces, and 
adored God, saying, Amen. 
Benediction, and glory, and 
wisdom, and thanksgiving, 


NOV. 1—ALL SAINTS 


duódecim millia signati. Ex 
tribu Ruben duódecim milla 
signáti. Ex tribu Gad duóde- 
cim millia signáti. Ex tribu 
Aser duódecim millia signáti. 
Ex tribu Néphtali duódecim 
míllia signáti. Ex tribu Ma- 
násse duódecim millia signa- 
ti. Ex tribu Simeon duódecim 
millia signáti. Ex tribu Levi 
duódecim millia signáti. Ex 
tribu Issachar duodecim míl- 
lia signáti. Ex tribu Zábu- 
lon duódecim míllia signati. 
Ex tribu Joseph duódecim 
míllia signati, Ex tribu Ben- 
jamin duódecim míllia signá- 
ti. Post hzc vidi turbam mag- 
nam, quam dinumeráre nemo 
póterat, ex omnibus géntibus, 
et tríbubus, et pópulis, et lin- 
quis: stantes ante thronum, 
et in conspéctu Agni, amícti 
stolis albis, et palme in má- 
nibus eórum: et clamábant 
voce magna, dicéntes: Salus 
Deo nostro, qui sedet super 
thronum, et Agno. Et omnes 
Angeli stabant in circüitu 
throni, et seniórum, et quá- 
tuor animálium: et cecidé- 
runt in conspéctu throni in 
fácies suas, et adoravérunt 
Deum, dicéntes: Amen. Bene- 
dictio, et cláritas, et sapiéntia, 
et gratiárum áctio, honor, et 
virtus, et fortitüdo Deo nos- 
iro, in secula seculérum. 
Amen. 


honor, and power and strength to our God for ever and ever. 


Amen. 


Gradual. Ps. 33, 10, 11 


Fear the Lord, all ye His 
saints: for there is no want 
to them that fear Him. Y. But 
they that seek the Lord shall 
not be deprived of any good. 


Timéte Dóminum, omnes 
Sancti ejus: quóniam nihil 
deest timéntibus eum. y. In- 
quiréntes autem Dóminum, 
non deficient omni bono. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV..1—ALL SAINTS 


Allelija, allelüja. V. Matt. 
11, 28. Venite ad me omnes 
qui laborátis et oneráti estis: 
et ego refíciam Vos. Allehija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1267 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Matt. 11, 
28. Come to Me, all you that 
labor and are heavy laden, and 
I will refresh you. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 5, 1-12 


E Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secándum Matthéum. | 


N ILLO témpore: Videns 

Jesus turbas, ascéndit in 
montem, et cum sedísset, ac- 
cessérunt ad eum discípuli 
ejus, et apériens os suum do- 
cébat eos, dicens; Beáti páu- 
peres spíritu: quóniam ipsó- 
rum est regnum celérum. 
Beáti mites: quóniam ipsi 
possidébunt terram. Beáti qui 
lugent: quóniam ipsi consola- 
büntur. Beáti qui esüriunt et 
sitiunt justitiam: quóniam 
ipsi saturabüntur. Beáti mise- 
ricórdes: quóniam ipsi miseri- 
córdiam consequéntur. Beáti 
mundo corde: quóniam ipsi 
Deum vidébunt. Beáti pacífi- 
ci: quóniam fílii Del vocabün- 
tur. Beáti qui persecutiónem 
patiüntur propter justítiam: 
quóniam ipsórum est regnum 
ceelórum. Beáti estis cum ma- 
ledíxerint vobis, et persecüti 
vos füerint, et díxerint omne 
malum advérsum vos, men- 
tiéntes, propter me: gaudéte, 
et exultáte, quóniam merces 
vestra copiósa est in colis. 


Creed, page 765. 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT lime, Jesus seeing 
the multitudes, went up 
into a mountain; and when He 
was sat down, His disciples 
came unto Him. And opening 
His mouth, He taught them, 
saying, Blessed are the poor in 
Spirit; for theirs is the king- 
dom of heaven. Blessed are the 
meek; for they shall possess the 
land. Blessed are they that 
mourn; for they shall be com- 
forted.. Blessed are they that 
hunger and thirst after justice; 
for they shall have their fill. 
Blessed are the merciful: for 
they shall obtain mercy. 
Blessed are the clean of heart; 
for they shall see God. Blessed 
are the peacemakers; for they 
shall be called the children of 
God. Blessed are they that 
suffer persecution for justice’ 
sake; for theirs is the kingdom 
of heaven. Blessed are ye when 
they shall revile you, and per- 
secute you, and speak all that 
is evil against you, untruly, for 
My sake: be glad and rejoice, 
for your reward is very great in 
heaven. 


It is said or sung every day during the octave, except on 


November 2. 


Offertory. 
Justérum anime in manu 
Dei sunt, et non tanget illos 


Wis. 3, 1-3 
The souls of the just are in 
the hand of God, and the tor- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1268 NOV. 1—ALL SAINTS 


ment of malice shall not touch torméntum malítie: visi sunt 
them: in the sight of the un- óculis insipiéntium mori: ijlà 
wise they seemed to die, but autem sunt in pace, allelüja, 
they are in peace. Alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


E OFFER Thee, O' Lord, 

the gifts of our devo- 
tion; may they be made pleas- 
ing to Thee for the honor of 
all the just and, by Thy mercy, 
be profitable to our selves. 
"Through our Lord. 


(D us tibi, Dómine, 
nostre devotiónis offé- 
rimus: que et pro cunctórum 
tibi grata sint honóre justó- 
rum, et nobis salutária, te 
miserante, reddántur. Per 
Dóminum, 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Matt. 5, 8-10 


Blessed are the clean of Beáti mundo corde, quó- 
heart, for they shall see God: niam ipsi Deum vidébunt: 
blessed are the peacemakers, beáti pacffici, quóniam  fílii 
for they shall be called the Dei vocabüntur: beáti qui per- 
children of God: blessed are secutiónem patiüntur propter 
they that suffer persecution for justítiam, quóniam ipsórum 
justice’s sake, for theirs is the est regnum celérum. 
kingdom of heaven. 


Postcommunion 

; rant to Thy faithful peo- A QUIESUMUS, Dómine, 
ple, we beseech Thee, O fidélibus pópulis ómni- 
Lord, ever to rejoice in the um Sanctórum semper vene- 


veneration of all Thy saints, 
and to be defended by their un- 
ceasing prayers. Through our 


ratióne letari: et eórum per- 
pétua supplicatióne muniri, 
Per Dóminum. 


Lord. : 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 2—ALL SOULS’ DAY 1269 


Copyright. by Bennger Brothers.” ^ 


Nov. ~The Commemoration of AU the Faithful 
Departed, (Black) 


The Three Masses for All Souls’ Bap, (Black) 


Pope Benedict XV granted priests permission to offer three 
‘Masses on Ali Souls’ Day. One of these Masses the Celebrant 
may say according to his own intention; one must be offered 
for the faithful departed and the third for the intention of the 
Holy Father. The common or daily Mass, and other Masses for 
the dead will be found on page 1501, i 


. The First Mass for AU Souls’ Day 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 4, Esdr. 2, 34, 35 


) EQUIEM etérnam dona TERNAL rest give to them, 
i eis, Dómine; et lux per- O Lord; and let perpetual 
pétua lúceat eis. Ps. 64, 2, 3. light shine upon them. Ps. 64, 
Te decet hymnus Deus in 2,3. A hymn, O God, becometh 
Sion; et.tibi reddétur votum Thee in Sion; and a vow shall 
in Jerusalem: exáudi oratión- be paid to Thee in Jerusalem: 
‘em meam; ad te omnis caro O Lord, hear my prayer; al! 
véniet. Réquiem. flesh shall come to 'Thee. Eter- 
nal rest. 


Kyrie, page 756. ` 


Prayer 
IpÉLIUM Deus ómnium. cop, the creator and re- 
Cónditor et Redémptor, deemer of all the faith- 


&nimábus famulórum famu- ful, grant to the souls of Thy 
larümque tuárum remissió- servants and handmaids the 
nem cunctórum tríbue pecca- remission of all their sins, that 
tórum: ut  indulgéntiam, they may obtain by loving 
quam semper optavérunt, piis prayers the forgiveness which 
:supplicatiónibus consequán- they have always desired. Who 
tur. Qui vivis, livest. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1279 NOV. 2—-ALL SOULS’ DAY 


HE sENT TWELVE THOUSAND DRACHMAS OF SILVER TO JERUSALEM 
FOR SACRIFICE TO BE OFFERED FOR THE SINS OF THE DEAD, THINKING 
WELL CONCERNING THE RESURRECTION.. IT IS THEREFORE A HOLY AND 
WHOLESOME THOUGHT TO PRAY FOR THE DEAD, THAT THEY MAY BF 
LOOSED FROM SINS. (2 Mach. 12, 43, 46.) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 2—ALL SOULS' DAY i271 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 15, 51-57 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstol ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Ecce mystérium 
vobis dico: Omnes qui- 


y dem resurgémus, sed non 


omnes immutábimur..In mo- 
ménto, in ictu óculi, in novís- 
sima tuba: canet enim tuba, 
et mórtui resürgent incor- 
rüpti: et nos immutábimur. 
Opórtet enim corruptíbile hoc 
indüere incorruptiónem: et 
mortále hoc indüere immor- 
talitátem. Cum autem mor- 
tále hoc indüerit immortali- 
tátem, tunc fiet sermo, qui 
Scriptus est: Absérpta est 
mors in victória. Ubi est, mors, 
vietória tua? Ubi est, mors, 
stimulus tuus? Stimulus au- 
tem mortis peccátum est: vir- 
tus vero peccáti lex. Deo au- 
tem grátias, qui dedit nobis 
victóriam per Dóminum nos- 
irum Jesum Christum. 


Lesson from the Epistie of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, Behold, I tell 

you a mystery: we shall 
all indeed rise again, but we 
shall not all be changed. In a 
moment, in the twinkling of 
an eye, at the last trumpet; for 
the trumpet shall sound, and 
ihe dead shall rise again in- 
corruptible, and, we shall be 
changed. For this corruptible 
must put on incorruption, and 
this mortal must put on im- 
mortality. And when this mor- 
tal hath put on immortality, 
then shall come to pass the 
saying that is written, Death is 
swallowed up in victory. O 
death, where is thy victory? O 
death, where is thy sting? Now 
the sting of death is sin: and 
the strength of sin is the law. 
But thanks be to God, Who 
hath given us the victory 
through Our Lord Jesus Christ, 


Gradual. 4 Esdr. 34, 35 


Réquiem ætérnam dona eis, 
Dómine; et lux perpétua lú- 
ceat eis. Y. Ps. 111, 7. In me- 
moria ætérna erit justus; ab 
auditióne mala non timébit. 


Eternal rest give to them, O 
Lord; and let perpetual light 
shine upon them. y. Ps. 111, 7. 
The just shall be in everlasting 
remembrance; he shall not fear 
the evil hearing. 


Tract 


Absólve, Dómine, ánimas 
ómnium fidélium defunctó- 
rum ab omni vínculo delictó- 
rum: JY. Et grátia tua illis 
succurrénte, mereántur evá- 
dere judícium ultiónis: Y. Et 
lucis ætérnæ beatitüdine pér- 
frui. 


O Lord, absolve the souls of 
all the faithful departed from 
every bond of sin. Y. And by 
the help of Thy grace may they 
be worthy to escape the sen- 
tence of vengeance. Y. And to 
enjoy all the beatitude of the 
light eternal. 


Sequence, Dies ire, as in the Common or Daily Mass for the 


Dead, page 1503. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1272 


In high Mass incense is not burned at the Gospel. 


NOV. 2—ALL SOULS' DAY 


The 


deacon does not ask the priest's blessing before beginning his 
chant, or send the Sacred Text at its termination for him to 


kiss. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 5, 25-29 


mH Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, Jesus said 
to the multitudes of the 
Jews, Amen, amen, I say unto 
you, that the hour cometh, and 
now is, when the dead shall 
hear the voice of the Son of 
God; and they that hear shall 
live. For as the Father hath 
life in Himself, so He hath 
given to the Son also to have 
life in Himself; and He hath 
given Him power to.do judg- 
ment, because He is the Són of 
man. Wonder not at this, for 
the hour cometh wherein all 
that are in the graves shall hear 
the voice of the Son of God; 
and they that have done good 
things shall come forth unto 
the resurrection of life, but 


" Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 


T ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus turbis Judedrum: 
Amen, amen dico vobis, quia. 
venit hora, et nunc. est, 
quando mórtui áudient vocem 
Fílii Dei: et qui audíerint, vi- 
vent. Sicut enim Pater habet 
vitam in semetípso: sic dedit. 
et Filio vitam habére in seme- 
tipso: et potestátem dedit ei 
judícium fácere, quia Filius. 
hóminis est. Nolite mirári hoc, 
quia venit hora, in qua omnes, 
qui in monuméntis sunt, áu- 
dient vocem Fílii Del: et pro- 
cédent qui bona fecérunt, in. 
resurrectiónem vite: qui vero 
mala egérunt, in resurrectió- 
nem judícii. 


they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment. 


Offertory 


O Lord Jesus Christ, King of 
glory, deliver the souls of all 
the faithful departed from the 
pains of hell and from the deep 
pit; deliver them from the 
lion's mouth, that hell engulf 
them not, nor they fall into 
darkness, but let Michael, the 
holy standard-bearer, bring 
them into the holy light which 
Thou once didst promise to 
Abraham and his seed. JY. We 
offer Thee, O Lord, sacrifices 
and prayers:of praise; do Thou 
accept them for those souls 
whom we this day commemo- 


Démine Jesu Christe, Rex 
glorie, líbera ánimas ómnium 
fidélium defunciérum de pæ- 
nis inférni, et de profündo 
lacu: líbera eas de ore leónis, 
ne absórbeat eas tártarus, ne 
cadant in obscürum; sed síg- 
nifer sanctus Michael repre- 
séntet eas in lucem sanctam: 
Quam olim Abrahe promisísti, 
et sémini ejus. Y. Hóstias et 
preces tibi, Dómine, laudis of- 
férimus: tu süscipe pro ani- 
mábus illis, quarum hódie me- 
móriam, fácimus: fac eas, 
Dómine, de morte transíre ad 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOY. 2—ALL SOULS’ DAY 


vitam: Quam olim Abrahe 
promisísti, et sémini ejus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


i273 


rate; grant them, O Lord, to 
pass from death to the life 
which Thou once didst prom- 
ise to Abraham and his seed. 


Secret 


.ÓsTIAS, qusesumus, Dó- 
mine, quas tibi pro ani- 
mábus famulórum famulà- 
rümque tuárum  ofrérimus, 
propitiátus inténde: ut qui- 
bus fídei christiane méritum 
contulísti, dones et premium. 
Per Dóminum. 


Preface No. 15, page 817. 


Communion. 

Lux etérna lüceat eis, Dó- 
mine: Cum sanctis tuis in 
tetérnum, quia pius es. Y. Ré- 
quiem ztérnam dona eis, Dó- 
mine; et lux perpétua liceat 


ERCIFULLY look down, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, 

upon the sacrifice which. we 
offer Thee for the souls of Thy 
servants and handmaids, that, 
ío those on whom 'Thou didst 
confer the merit of Christian 
faith, Thou mayst also grant 
its reward. Through our Lord. 


4, Esdr. 35, 34 

May light eternal shine upon 
them, O Lord, with Thy saints 
forever, for Thou art kind. Y. 
Grant them everlasting rest, O 
Lord, and let perpetual light 


eis: Cum: sanctis. shine’ upon them, with 'Ihy 
: d saints. + 
Postcommunion 
NIMÁBUS quesumus Dó- , At the prayer of Thy sup- 


mine famulórum fa- 


pliants profit the souls 


mularümque tuárum orátio of Thy servants and hand- 
profíciat supplicántium: ut maids, we beseech Thee, O 
eas ct a peccátis ómnibus Lord, that Thou mayst free 
éxuas, et (us redemptiónis them from all sins and make 
facias esse participes. Qui them ‘shavers in Thy redemp- 
vivis. tion, Who livest, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


The Second Mass for All Souls’ Dap 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 4, Esdr. 34, 35 
EQUIEM stérnam dona TERNAL rest give to them, 
eis, Dómine; et lux per- O Lord: and let perpetual 
pétua lüceat eis. Ps. 64, 2, 3. light shine upon them. Ps. 64, 
Te decet hymnus Deus "in 2, 3. A hymn, O God, becometh 
Sion; et tibi reddétur votum Thee in Sion; and a vow shall 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1274 


be paid to Thee in Jerusalem: 
O Lord, hear my prayer; all 
flesh shall come to Thee. Eter- 
nal rest. i 


Kyrie, page 761. 


NOV. 2—ALL SOULS' DAY 


in Jerüsalem: exaudi oratió- 
nem meam; ad te omnis caro 
véniet. Réquiem. 


Prayer 


con, the Lord of mercies, 

grant to the souls of Thy 
servants and handmaids, the 
anniversary of whose "burial 
we commemorate, an abode of 
refreshment, the beatitude of 
rest, and the: brightness of 
light. Through our Lord. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Machabees. 


N THOSE days, the most val- 
iant man Judas, making a 
gathering,sent twelve thousand 
drachmas of silver to Jeru- 
salem for sacrifice to be. of- 
fered for the sins of the dead, 
thinking well and religiously 
concerning the resurrection 
(for if he had. not hoped that 
they that were slain shoùld 
rise again, it would have 
seemed superfiuous and vain to 
pray for the dead); and be- 
cause he considered that they 
who had fallen asleep with god- 
liness, had great grace laid up 
for them. It is therefore a holy 
and wholesome thought to pray 
for the dead, that they may be 
loosed from sins. 


Gradual. 


Eternal rest give to them, O 
Lord; and let perpetual light 
shine upon them Y. Ps. 111, 7. 
The just shall be in everlasting 


remembrance; he shall not fear 


the evil hearing. 


4 Esdr. 


EUS indulgentiárum Dó- 
mine, da animabus fa- 
mulórum famularümque tuá- 
rum refrigérii sedem, quiétis 
beatitüdinem et lüminis cla- 
ritátem, Per Dóminum. 


2 Mach. 12, 43-46 


Léctio libri Machabeórum. 


simus Judas, facta colla- 
tióne, duódecim míllia drach- 
mas argénti misit Jerosóly- 
mam offérri pro peccátis mor- 
tuórum sacrifícium, bene et 
religióse de resurrectióne có- 
gitans: (nisi enim eos, qui 
cecíderant, resurrectüros spe- 
ráret, supérfiuum viderétur et 
vanum oráre pro mórtuis) et 
quia considerábat quod hi, qui 
cum pietáte dormitiónem ac- 
céperant, óptimam  habé- 
rent repósitam grátiam. Sanc- 
ta ergo, et salübris est cogi- 
tátio pro defünctis exoráre, 
ut a peccátis solvántur. 


T. DiÉBUS illis: Vir fortis- 


2, 34, 35 

Réquiem ztérnam dona eis, 
Dómine; et lux perpétua lú- 
ceat eis. V. Ps. 111, 7. In me- 
mória etérna erit justus; ab 
auditiéne mala non timébit, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


oe 


—— a 


NOV. 2—ALL SOULS' DAY 


Tract 


.Ahsólve, Dómine, ánimas 
ómnium fidélium defunctó- 
rum ab omni vinculo delictó- 
rum: V. Et grátia tua illis suc- 
currénte, mereántur evádere 
judícium ultiónis: Y. Et lucis 
etérne beatitüdine pérfrui. 


1275 


O Lord, absolve the souls of 
all the faithful departed from 
every bond of sin. Y. And by 
the help of Thy grace may they 
be worthy. to escape the sen- 
tence of vengeance. Y. And to 
enjoy all the beatitude of the 
light eternal. 


Sequence, pies iræ, as in the Common or Daily Mass for the 


Dead, page 


Gospel. John 6, 37-40 


HB Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Joánnem. 
r ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 

sus turbis. Judæórum: 
Omne, quod dat mihi Pater, 
ad me véniet: et eum, qui ve- 
nit ad me, non ejíciam foras: 
quia descéndi de colo, non ut 
fáciam voluntátem meam, sed 
voluntátem ejus, qui misit me. 
Hec est autem volüntas ejus, 
qui misit me, Patris: ut omne, 
quod dedit mihi non perdam 
ex eo, sed resüscitem illud in 
novíssimo die. Hzc est autem 
volüntás Patris mei, qui misit 
me: ut omnis, qui videt Fíli- 
um, et credit in eum, hábeat 
vitam etérnam, et ego re- 
suscitábo eum in novíssimo 
die. 


Continuation of the Holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, Jesus said 
to the multitudes of the 
Jews, All that the Father giv- 
eth Me shall come to Me; and 
him that cometh to Me I will 
not cast out: because I came 
down from heaven, not to do 
My own will, but the will of 
Him Who sent Me. Now this 
is the will of the Father Who 
sent Me, that of all that He 
hath given Me, I should lose 
nothing, but should raise it up 
again in the last day; and this 
is the will of My Father that 
sent Me, that every one who 
seeth the Son, and helieveth in 
Him, may have life everlasting; 
and I will raise him up in the 
last day. 


Offertory 


-Démine Jesu Christe, Rex 
glorie, líbera ánimas óm- 
nium fidélium  defunctó- 
rum. de penis inférni et de 
profündo lacu: líbera eas de 
ore leónis, ne absórbeat eas 
tártarus, ne cadant in obscü- 
rum: sed sígnifer sanctus Mi- 
chaél represéntet eas in lu~ 


O Lord Jesus Christ, King of 
glory, deliver the Souls of all 
the faithful departed from the 
pains of hell and from the deep 
pit; deliver them from the 
lion's mouth, that hell engulf 
them not, nor they fall into 
darkness, but let Michael, the 
holy. standard-bearer, bring 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1276 


them into the holy light which 
Thou once didst promise to 
Abraham and his seed. Y. We 
offer Thee, O Lord, sacrifices 
and prayers of praise; do Thou 
accept them for those souls 
whom we this day commemo- 
rate; grant them, O Lord, to 
pass from death to the life 
which Thou once didst promise 
to. Abraham and his seed. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


NOV. 2—ALL SOULS' DAY 


cem sanctam: Quam olim 
Abrahe promisisti, et sémini 
ejus. Y. Héstias et preces tibi, 
Dómine laudis offérimus: tu 
Süscipe pro &ànimábus illis, 
quarum hdédie memériam fá- 
cimus: fac eas, Dómíne, de 
morte transire ad vitam. 
Quam olim Abrahe promisisti 
et sémini ejus. 


Secret 


E PROPITIATED, O Lord, by 

our supplications for the 
Souls of 'Thy servants .and 
handmaids, whose anniversary 
is kept to-day, for whom we 
offer Thee the sacrifice of 
praise, that Thou vouchsafe to 
join them to the company of 
Thy saints. Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 15, page 817. 


ROPITIARE Dómine suppli- 
catiónibus nostris, pro 
&nimábus famulórum famu- 
larümque tuárum, quorum hó- 
die ánnua dies ágitur, pro qui- 
bus tibi offérimus sacrificium 
laudis: ut eas Sanctórum tuó- 
rum consórtio sociáre digné- 
xis. Per Dóminum. © 


Communion, 4 Esdr. 2, 35, 34 


May eternallight shine upon 
them, O Lord, with Thy saints 
forever, because Thou art kind. 
Y. Grant them everlasting rest, 
O Lord, and let perpetual light 
shine upon them, with Thy 
saints, etc. - 


Lux ztérna lüceat eis, Dó- 
mine: Cum.sanctis tuis in 
telérnum, quia pius es. Y. Ré- 
quiem ætérnam dona eis, Dó- 
mine; et lux perpétua lüceat 
eis: Cum sanctis. 


Postcommunion 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, that the souls of 

Thy servants and handmaids, 
the anniversary of whose burial 
we commemorate, may be 
purged by this sacrifice and ob- 
tain alike forgiveness and ever- 
hi rest. Through our 

rd, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


pe quesumus, Démi- 
ne, ut anime famuló- 
rum famulartimque tuárum, 
bis purgáte sacrificiis, in- 
dulgéntiam páriter et réquiem 
eápiant sempitérnam. Per 
Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 2—ALL SOULS’ DAY 


1277 


The Third Mass for All Souls’ Dap 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 

EQUiEM atérnam dona 

eis, Domine; et lux per- 

pétua lüceat eis. Ps. 64, 2, 3. 

Te decet hymnus Deus in 

Sion; et tibi reddétur votum 

in Jerúsalem: exáudi oratió- 

nem meam, ad te omnis caro 
véniet. Réquiem. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


4 Esdr. 34, 35 


TERNAL rest give to them, 

O Lord; and let perpet- 
ual light shine upon them. Ps. 
64, 2, 3. A hymn, O God, be- 
cometh Thee in Sion; and & 
vow shall be, paid to Thee in 
Jerusalem: O Lord, hear my 
prayer; all flesh shall come to 
Thee. Eternal rest. 


Prayer 


EUS, vénie largítor et 
humáne salütis amá- 

tor; quesumus cleméntiam 
tuam; ut ánimas famulórum 
famularümque tuárum, que 
ex hoc seculo transiérunt, be~ 
áta María. semper Vírgine in- 
tercedénte cum ómnibus 
Sanctis tuis, ad perpétue be- 
atitüdinis consértium perve- 
níre concédas. Per Dóminum. 


cop, the bestower of par- 

don and lover of man's 
Salvation, we beseech Thy 
clemency, through the inter- 
cession. of blessed Mary ever 
a virgin, and all Thy saints, 
that the brethren, who have 
passed out of this world may 
together enjoy everlasting hap- 
piness. Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Apoc. 14, 13 


Léctio libri 
beati Joánnis Apóstoli. 


y's niÉBUs ilis: Audivi vo- 
I cem de celo, dicéntem 
mihi: Scribe: Beáti mórtui, 
qui in Dómino mioriüntur. 
Amodo jam dicit Spíritus, ut 
requiéscant a labóribus suis: 
ópera enim illórum sequün- 
tur illos. 


Apocalypsis Lesson from the book of the 


Apocalypse of Blessed John the 
Apostle. 


N THOSE days I heard a voice 

, from heaven, saying to me, 
Write, ‘blessed are the dead, 
who die in the Lord. . From 
henceforth now, saith the Spi- 
rit, that they may rest from 
their ‘labors, for their works 
follow them. 


Gradual. 4 Esdr. 2, 34, 35 


Réquiem etérnam dona eis, 


Eternal rest give to them, O 


Dómine; et lux perpétua lú- Lord; and let perpetual light 

ceat eis. V. Ps. 111, 7. In me- shine upon them. Y. Ps. 111,7. 

mória 2térna erit justus; ab The just shall be in everlasting 

auditióne mala non timébit. remembrance; he shall not fear 
the evil hearing. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1278 


NOV. 2—ALL SOULS' DAY 


Tract 


Absolve, O Lord, the souls of 
all the faithful departed from 
every bond of sin. Y. And by 
the help of Thy grace Jet them 
be found worthy to escape the 
Sentence of vengeance. Y. And 
to enjoy the full beatitude of 
the light eternal. 


Absólve, Dómine, ánimas 
ómnium fidélium defunctó- 
rum ab omni vinculo delictó- 
rum: Y. Et grátia tua illis 
succurrénte, mereántur evá- 
dere judicium ultiónis: V. Et 
lucis ætérnæ beatitüdine pér- 
frui. 


Sequence, Dies ire, as in the Common or Daily Mass for the 


Dead, page 1503. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


| Gospel. 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT lime, Jesus said to 
the multitudes of the 
Jews: I am the living bread, 
which came down from heaven. 
If any man eat of this bread 
he shall live forever: and the 
bread that I will give is My 
flesh for the life of the world. 
The Jews therefore strove 
among themselves, saying, How 
can this man give us His flesh 
to eat? Then Jesus said to 
them, Amen, amen, I say unto 
you, Except you eat the flesh of 
the Son of man, and drink His 
blood, you sball not have life 
in you. He that.eateth My flesh, 
and drinketh My blood, hath 
everlasting life: and I will raise 
him up in the last day. 


John 6, 51-55 


®© Seqüentia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 


I" ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus turbis Judeórum: 
Ego sum panis vivus, qui de 
ccelo descéndi. Si quis mandu- 
cáverit ex hoc pane, vivet in 
etérnum: et panis, quem ego 
dabo, caro mea est pro mundi 
vita. Litigábant ergo Judai ad 
fnvincem, dicéntes: Quómodo 
potest hic nobis carnem suam 
dare ad manducándum? Dixit 
ergo eis Jesus: Amen, amen 
dico vobis: Nisi manducavéri- 
tis carnem Fílii hóminis, et 
bibéritis ejus sánguinem, non 
habébitis vitam in. vobis. Qui 
mandücat meam carnem, et 
bibit meum sánguinem, habet 
vitam etérnam: et ego resus- 
citábo eum in.novíssimo die. 


Offertory 


O Lord Jesus Christ, the 
King of glory, deliver the souls 
of all the faithful departed 
from the pains of hell and 
from the deep pit; deliver them 
from the lion’s mouth, that 
hell engulf them not, that they 
fall not into the darkness; but 
Je’, Michael, the holy standard- 


Dómine Jesu Christe, Rex 
glórie, libera ánimas ómnium 
fidélium ` defunctórum de 
penis inférni, et de profündo 
lacu: líbera eas de ore leónis, 
ne absórbeat eas tártarus, ne 
cadant in obscürum; sed síg- 
nifer sanctus Michael repre- 
séntet eas in lucem sanctam: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 2-—ALL SOULS' DAY 


Quam olim Abrahe promisís- 
ti, et sémini ejus. Y. Hóstias 
et preces tibi, Dómine, laudis 
Offérimus: tu süscipe pro ani- 
mábus illis; quarum memó- 
riam fácimus: fac eas, Dó- 
mine, de morte transíre ad vi- 
tam: Quam olim Abrahe pro- 
misisti, et sémini ejus. 


1279 


bearer, bring them into the holy 
light which Thou didst promise 
of old to Abraham and his seed. 
Y. We offer Thee sacrifices and 
prayers of praise, O Lord; do 
Thou accept them for those 
souls of which we this day make 
commemoration; cause them, 
O Lord, to pass from death to 
the life which of old Thou didst 
promise to Abraham and his 
seed. 


Secret 


EUs, cujus misericórdie 

non est nümerus, süs- 
cipe propitius preces humili- 
tátis nostre: et animábus 
fratrum, propinquérum, et 
benefactórum nostrórum, qui- 
bus tui nóminis dedísti con- 
fessiónem, per hec sacramén- 
ta salütis nostre, cunctórum 
remissiónem tríbue peccató- 
rum. 


Preface No. 15, page 817. 


Communion. 


Lux etérna lüceat eis, Dó- 
mine: Cum sanctis tuis in 
ætérnum, quia pius es. P. Ré- 
quiem ztérnam dona eis, Dó- 
mine; et lux perpétua lüceat 
eis: Cum sanctis. 


cov, Whose mercy is 

boundless, mercifully re- 
ceive the prayers of our lowli- 
ness,.and grant, through these 
sacraments of our salvation, to 
the souls of our brethren, kin- 
dred, and benefactors, to whom 
Thou didst grant the confession 
of Thy name, the remission of 
all sins. 


4 Esdr. 2, 35, 34 


May eternal light shine upon 
them, O Lord, with Thy saints 
forever, because Thou art kind. 
X. Grant them everlasting rest, 
O Lord, and let perpetual light 
shine upon them, with Thy 
Saints, etc. 


Postcommunion 
RESTA quesumus omnípo- RANT, we beseech Thee, O 


tens et miséricors Deus: 
ut anime fratrum, propinquó- 
rum, et benefactórum nostró- 
rum, pro quibus hoc sacrifí- 
cium laudis tue obtülimus 
majestáti; per hujus virtü- 
tem sacraménti a peccátis 
ómnibus expiátæ, lucis per- 


almighty and merciful 
God, that the souls of our 
brethren, kindred, and bene- 
factors, for whom we have of- 
fered this sacrifice of praise 
to Thy majesty, being purified 
of all sins by the virtue of this 
sacrament, may, by Thy mercy. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1280 NOV. 4—ST. CHARLES BORROMEO 

receive the bestitude of per- pétue, te miseránte, recípi- 

petual light. Through our Lord. ant beatitüdinem. Per Dómi- 
^ num. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Nov. 3—@f the Octave of AU Saints (White) 


Semi-double 


Mass as on the feast, page 1265; second Prayer of the Holy 
Ghost, page 1265; third for the Church or for the Pope, pages 


825, 826. 


Nov. 4—St. Charles Borromeo, Bishop, Confessor 
(White) 
Double 


Sts. Vitalis and Agricola, Martyrs (Red) 
Mass, Statult ei, page 1337, except: 


Prayer 


EEP safe Thy Church, O 

Lord, with the continual 
protection of St. Charles, Thy 
confessor and bishop, that, as 
pastoral solicitude rendered 
him glorious, so his intercession 
may ever make us fervent in 
Thy love. Through our Lord. 


sancti Caroli Confessó- 
ris tui atque Pontificis con- 
tinua protectióne custódi: ut, 
sicut illum pastorális sollici- 
tüdo gloriósum réddidit; ita 
nos ejus intercéssio in tuo 
semper fáciat amóre fervén- 
tes. Per Dóminum. 


g ccLÉsam tuam, Dómine, 


Commemoration of the octave of All Saints, Prayer, Secret 
and Postcommunion as in the Mass of the feast, nage 1265. Com- 
memoration of St. Vitalis and Agricola. 


Prayer 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we, 
who venerate the solemnity of 
Thy holy martyrs, Vitalis and 
Agricola, may be assisted by 
their intercession with Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


RÆSTA, Quesumus, omní- 
potens Deus: ut, qui 
sanctérum Mártyrum tuórum 
Vitális et Agricole solémnia 
célimus, eórum apud te in- 
tercessiónibus adjuvémur. Per 
Dóminum. 


Secret 


T APPEASED, O Lord, with 
the gifts we offer, and, by 
the intercession of Thy holy 


BLATIS, quesumus, Démi- 
ne, placáre munéribus: 


et, intercedéntibus sanctis 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 8—OCTAVE-DAY OP ALL SAINTS 


Mártyribus tuis Vitale et Ag- 
rícola, a cunctis nos defénde 
perículis. Per Dóminum. 


1281 


martyrs, Vitalis and Agricola, 
defend us from all dangers. 
Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


XC nos commünio, Dó- 

mine, purget a crímine: 
et, intercedéntibus sanctis 
Mártyribus tuis Vitále et Ag- 
rícola, celéstis remédii fá- 
ciat esse consórtes. Per Dó- 
minum. 


AY this communion, O 

Lord, purge us of guilt 

and, by the intercession of Thy 

holy martyrs, Vitalis and Agri- 

cola, make us partakers of the 

heavenly salvation. Through 
our Lord. "s 


Nov. 5,6 and 71—4€Pf the Octave of All Saints 
(White) 
Semi-double 


Mass as on the feast, page 1265, with the additional Prayer 
of the Holy Ghost, page 827, and either that for the Church or 


for the Pope, pages 825, 826. 


Nov. 8—The Octabe-Bap of All Saints (White) 
Double Major 
The Holp Four Crowned Martyrs (Red) 


Mass as on the feast of All Saints, page 1265. 
. Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs. 


Prayer 


RÆSTA, quesumus, omni- 

potens Deus: ut, qui 
gloriósos. Mártyres fortes in 
sua confessióne cognóvimus, 
pios apud te in nostra inter- 
cessióne sentiámus. Per Dó- 
minum. i 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we, 
who have known the fortitude 
of the glorious martyrs in 
bearing witness to Thee, may 
experience the fruit of their 
intercession with Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


Secret 


ENEDÍCTIO tua, Dómine, 
larga descéndat: que et 
muünera nostra, deprecántibus 
sanctis Mártyribus tuis, tibi 
reddat accépta, et nobis sac- 


ay Thy plenteous bless- 
ing descend upon us, O 
Lord, both to render our gifts 
acceptable to Thee, by the in- 
tercession of Thy holy martyrs, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1282 NOV: 9—DED. OF BASILICA OF OUR SAVIOUR 


and to effect the sacrament of raméntum redemptiónis effi- 


our redemption. Through our 
Lord. 


ciat. Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


EFRESHED with heavenly 

sacraments and joys, we, 
Thy suppliants, beseech Thee, 
O Lord, that we may be pro- 
tected by the assistance of 
those in whose triumphs we 
glory. Through our Lord. 


GLÉSTIBUS refécti sacra- 

méntis et gáudiis: süp- 
plices te, Dómine, deprecá- 
mur; ut quorum gloriámur 
triümphis, protegámur auxíl- 
iis, Per Dóminum. 


Nov. 9—~Dedication of the Basilica of. Our Sabiour 
(White) 
Double of the Second Class 
St. Theodore, Martyr (Red) 


Mass, Terribilis, of the Dedication of a Church, page 1388. 
In low Masses only, a commemoration of St. Theodore. 


Prayer 


cop, Who dost encompass 

and protect us with the 
glorious testimony of blessed 
Theodore, Thy martyr, grant 
us to profit by imitating him 
and to be supported by his 
prayers. Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui nos beáti Theo- 

dóri Mártyris tui con- 
fessióne gloriósa circümdas 
et prótegis: presta nobis ex 
ejus imitatióne profícere et 
oratióne fulciri. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Secret 


ECEIVE, O Lord, the pray- 

ers of the faithful with 
offerings of sacrifices, and, by 
the intercession of blessed 
Theodore, Thy martyr, may we 
pass through these offices of 
pious devotion to heavenly 
glory. Through our Lord. 


ÜsciPE, Dómine, fidélium 
S preces cum oblatiónibus 
hostiárum: et, intercedénte 
beáto Theodóro Mártyre tuo, 
per hec pie devotiónis officia 
ad celéstem glóriam transeá- 
mus, Per Dóminum nostrum. 


Postcommunion 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, by the interces- 


RÆSTA nobis, quesumus, 
Dómine:  intercedénte 


sion of blessed Theodore, Thy beáto Theodóro Mártyre tuo; 
martryr, that what we touch ut, quod ore contingimus, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 10--ST. ANDREW AVELLINO 


pura mente capiámus. Per 
Dóminum. 


1283 


with our lips we may receive 
with pure hearts. Through our 
Lord. . 


Nov. 10—St. Andrew. Avellino, Confessor (White) 
Double 

Sts. Trpphon, Respicius and Mypmpha, Martyrs 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349: 


Prayer 


EUs, qui in corde beáti 

Andrée Confessóris tui, 
per arduum quotidie in virtu- 
tibus proficiéndi votum, ad- 
mirábiles ad te ascensiónes 
disposuisti: concéde nobis, 
ipsius méritis et interces- 
sióne, ita ejüsdem grátie par- 
ticipes fieri; ut, perfectióra 
semper exsequéntes, ad glóriæ 
tue fastígium feliciter perdu- 
cámur. Per Dóminum. . 


Gop, Who didst create in 

‘the heart of blessed An- 
drew, Thy confessor, through 
his difficult vow, wonderful as- 
pirations to advance daily in 
virtue toward. Thee, grant us, 
by his merits and intercession, 
so. to become participators in 
the same grace that, ever pur- 
suing the more perfect things, 
we may be happily brought 
unto the summit of Thy glory. 
Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of the Holy Martyrs. 


Prayer 


AC nos, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, sanctórum Már- 
tyrum  tuórum  Tryphónis, 
Respicii et Nymphe semper 
festa sectari: quorum suffrá- 
giis, protectiónis tue dona 
sentidmus, Per Dóminum. 


AKE us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, ever assiduously 
to observe the festival of Thy 
holy martyrs, Tryphon, Res- 
picius, and Nympha, that we 
may, by their patronage, ex- 
perience the gifts of Thy pro- 
tection, Through our Lord. 


Secret 


ÜNERA tiki, Dómine, 

nostræ devotiónis of- 
férimus: que et pro tuórum 
tibi grata sint honóre justó- 
rum, et nobis salutária, te 
miseránte, reddántur. Per 
Dóminum. 


E OFFER Thee, O Lord, 

the gifts of our devo- 
tion; may they be made pleas- 
ing to Thee for the honor of 
all the just and, by Thy mercy, 
salutary to us. Through our 
Lord, . 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1284 


NOV. 11—ST. MARTIN, BISHOP 


Postcommunion: 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, by the interces- 
sion of Thy martyrs, Tryphon, 
Respicius, and Nympha, that 
what we touch with our lips 
we may receive with pure 
hearts. Through our Lord. 


RÆSTA nobis, quesumus, 

Dómine: intercedénti- 
bus sanctis Mártyribus tuis 
Tryphóne, Respício et Nym- 
pha; ui, quod ore contíngi- 
mus, pura mente capiámus. 
Per Dóminum. 


Nov. 11—85t. Martin, Bishop, Confessor 
(White) 
Double 


St. Mennas, Martyr 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 45, 30 


HE Lord made to him a TÁTUIT ei Dóminus testa- 
covenant of peace, and méntum pacis, et prín- 
made him & prince that the cipem fecit eum: ut sit illi 
dignity of priesthood should be sacerdótii dígnitas in ætér- 
io him forever. Ps, 131, 1. O num. Ps.131, 1. Meménto, Dó- 
Lord, remember David, and all mine, David: et omnis man- 
his meekness.Y. Glory. suetüdinis ejus. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who seest that we 

; exist by no power of our 
own, mercifully grant that, by 
the intercession of blessed Mar- 
tin, Thy confessor and bishop, 
we be strengthened against all 
adversities. Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui cónspicis, quia 

ex nulla nosira virtüte 
Subsístimus: concéde propí- 
tius; ut, intercessióne beáti 
Martíni Confessóris tui atque 
Pontificis, contra ómnia ad- 
vérs& muniámur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Commemoration of St. Mennas, Prayer from the Mass In 


virtute, page 1309. 


Epistle, Behold a great priest, from the Mass Statuit ei, page 


Gradual. Ecclus. 44, 16 
Behold a great priest, who in Ecce sacérdos magnus, qui 
his days pleased God. Y. There in diébus suis plácuit Deo. ¥. 
was not any found like to him Non est invéntus similis illi, 


who 


High 


kept the law of the Most qui conserváret legem Excélsi. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 11—ST. MARTIN, BISHOP 


Alletája, allelája. V. Beátus 
vir, sanctus Martinus, urbis 
Turénis Epíscopus, requiévit: 


quem suscepérunt Angeli, 
atque  Archángeli, Throni, 
Dominetiónes, et  Virtütes. 
Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1285 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. The 
blessed man, St. Martin, bishop 
of Tours, hath gone to rest, 
and angels and archangels, 
thrones, dominations, and pow- 
ers have received him, Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 11, 33-36 


% Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 

N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus discípulis suis: Nemo 
lucérnam accéndit et in ab- 
scéndito ponit, neque sub mó- 
dio: sed supra candelábrum, 
ut qui ingrediüntur, Jumen ví- 
deant. Lucérna córporis tui 
est óculus tuus. Si óculus tuus 
füerit simplex, totum corpus 
tuum lücidum erit: si autem 
nequam füerit, étiam corpus 
tuum tenebrósum erit. Vide 
ergo, ne lumen, quod in te est, 
ténebre sint. Si ergo corpus 
tuum totum lücidum füerit, 
non habens áliquam partem 
tenebrárum, erit licidum to- 
tum et sicut Iucérna fulgóris 
illuminábit te. 

Offertory. 
Véritas mea, et misericór- 


dia mea cum ipso: et in nómi- 
ne meo exaltábitur cornu ejus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


"& Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, Jesus said 

to His disciples, No man 
lighteth a candle, and putteth 
it in a hidden place, nor under 
a bushel: but upon a candle- 
stick, that they that come in 
may see the light. The light 
of thy body is thy eye. If thy 
eye be single, thy whole body 
will be lightsome; but if it 
be evil, thy body also will be 
darksome. Take heed there- 
fore that the light which is in 
thee be not darkness, If then 
thy whole body be lightsome, 
having no part of darkness, the 
whole shall be lightsome, and 
as a bright lamp shall en- 
lighten thee. 


Ps. 88, 25 

My truth and My mercy shall 
be with him; and in My name 
shall his horn be exalted. 


Secret 


ANCTÍFICA, quæsumus, Dó- 

mine Deus, hæc münera, 

que in solemnitáte sancti An- 

tistitis tui Martini offérimus: 

ut per ea, vita, nostra inter ad- 

vérsa et próspera ubique diri- 
gátur. Per Dóminum. 


ANCTIFY, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord God, ihese gifts 
which we offer to Thee in the 
solemnity of Thy holy bishop 
Martin, that by them our life, 
everywhere, may go in the 
straight path, in adversity and 
in happiness. Through our 
Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1286 


NOV. 12—ST. MARTIN, POPE 


Commemoration of St. Mennas from the Mass In virtute, page 


1311. 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Matt. 24, 46, 47 


Blessed is that servant whom, 
when his lord shall come, he 
Shall find watching; Amen, I 
say to you, he shall set him 
over all his goods. 


Beátus servus, quem cum 
vénerit dóminum, invénerit 
vigilantem: amen dico. vobis, 
super ómnia bona sua con- 
stituet eum. 


Postcommunion 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 

Lord, our God, that by 
the intercession of those on 
whose feast the mysteries are 
offered, they may be made effi- 
cacious for our salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


TIU quzesumus, Dómi- 
ne Deus noster: ut, 
quorum festivitáte votíva sunt 
sacraménta, eórum interces- 
sidne salutária nobis reddan- 
tur. Per Dóminum. 


E bi cadi dd of St. Mennas from the Mass In virtute, page 
2. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Nov. 12— St. Martin, Pope, Martyr (Red) 


Semi-double . 
Mass, Si diligis me, page 1302, with Prayer, Secret and Postcom- 


munion as below: 


Second Prayer, A cunctis, with the accompanying Secret and 
Postcommunion, page 827; third at the choice of the priest, 


pages 1494-1500. 


Prayer 


ETERNAL Shepherd, do 

Thou look favorably up- 
on Thy flock, which we be- 
seech Thee to guard and keep 
for evermore through the 
blessed Martin, Thy Martyr 
and Supreme Pontiff, whom 
Thou didst choose to be the 


REGEM tuum, Pastor 

etérne, placatus in- 
ténde: et per beátum Martí- 
nem Martyrem tuum atque 
Summum Pontificem, perpé- 
tua protectióne custódi; quem 
totíus  Ecclésim prestitisti 
esse,pastórem. Per Démi- 


chief shepherd of the whole num. 
Church. Through our Lord. 
Secret 


N TRY loving kindness, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, be 
moved by the offering of our 
gifts and enlighten Thy 
Church: that Thy flock may 


Onn munéribus, qué- 
sumus Domine, Ecclé- 
siam tuam benignus illümi- 
na: ut, et gregis tui proficiat 
ubique succéssus, et grati 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 14—ST. JOSAPHAT 


fiant nómini tuo, te guber- 


1287 


prosper everywhere and the 


nánte, pastéres, Per Dómi- shepherds, under Thy guid- 
num. ance, may be rendered accept- 
able to Thee. Through our 
Lord. 
Postcommunion 


EFECTIÓNE Sancta enu- 

tritam gubérna, qué- 
sumus Dómine, tuam placá- 
tus Ecclésiam: ut poténti 
moderatióne dirécta, et in- 
creménta libertátis accípiat 
et in religiónis integritáte 
persístat. Per Dóminum. 


INCE Thy Church has been 
nourished by the sacred 
repast, govern her in Thy 
clemency, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, so that under the guid- 
ance of Thy mighty rule she 
may enjoy greater freedom and 
abiding integrity of religion. 
Through our Lord. 


Nov. 13—St. JBibatus, Confessor (White) 
Semi-double 
Mass, Justus ut palma, page 1352. 


Prayer 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 

Deus, qui dispositióne 
mirábili infírma mundi éligis, 
ut fórtia quaque confündas, 
concéde propitius humilitati 
nostre; ut, piis beáti Didaci 
Confessóris tui précibus, ad 
perénnem in celis glóriam 
sublimári mereámur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

Who, in Thy wonderful 
providence, dost choose the 
weak things of the world to 
confound the strong, mercifully 
grant unto our lowliness that, 
by the prayers of blessed Di- 
dacus, Thy confessor, we may 
be made worthy to be raised to 
the everlasting glory of heaven. 
Through ou: Lord. 


Second Prayer A cunctis, with the accompanying Secret and 
Postcommunion, page 827; third at the choice of the priest, 


pages 1494-1500. 


Nov. 14—t. Josaphat, Bishop, Martyr (Red) 
Double 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 


AUDEAMUS omnes in Dó- 
mino. diem festum cele- 


ET us all rejoice in the 
Lord, celebrating @ fes- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1288 


tival-day in honor of. the 
blessed martyr Josaphat: at 
whose martyrdom the angels 
rejoice, and give praise to the 
Son of God. Ps. 32, 1. Rejoice 
in the Lord, ye just, praise be- 
cometh the upright. Y. Glory. 


NOV. 14—ST. 


JOSAPHAT 


brántes sub honóre beáti Jó- 
saphat Mártyris: de cujus 
passióne gaudent Angeli, et 
colláudant Fílium Dei. Ps. 32, 
1. Exsultáte, justi, in Dómino: 
rectos decet collaudátio. Y. 


:Glória Patri. 


Kyrie; page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


Tr up in Thy Church, O 
Lord, the spirit with 
which blessed Josaphat, Thy 
martyr and bishop, was filled 
when he laid down his life for 
his sheep, so that, by his Inter- 
cession, we, also, may be moved 
and strengthened by the same 
Spirit, and may not fear to lay 
down our lives for our brethren. 
Through...in the unity of the 
same. 


Xcrra, quesumus, Dómi- 

ne, in Ecclésia. tua Spí- 
ritum, quo replétus beátus 
Jósaphat Martyr et Póntifex 
tuus ánimam suam pro.óvibus 
pósuit: ut, eo intercedénte, 
nos quoque .eódem Spiritu 
moti ac roboráti, ánimam nos- 
tram pro frátribus pónere 
non vereámur. Per Dóminum 
. . . in unitáte ejüsdem. 


Epistle Every high priest — as on the feast of St. Thomas 


of Canterbury, Dec. 29, page 1 


Gradual. Ps. 88, 21-23 


I have found David My ser- 
vant: with My holy oil I have 
anointed him; for My hand 
shall help him, and My arm 
shall strengthen him. Y. The 
enemy shall have no advantage 
over him, and the son of ini- 
quity shall not hurt him. 

Alleluia, alleluia. V. This is 
the priest whom the Lord hath 
crowned. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Invéni David servum meum, 
óleo sancto meo unxi eum: 
manus enim mea auxiliábitur 
ei, et bráchium meum confor- 
tábit eum. V. Nihil profíciet 
inimícus in eo, et filius iniqui- 
tátis non nocébit ei. 


Allelüja, allelija. V. Hic est 
Sacérdos, quem coronávit Dó- 
minus. Allelüja. 


Gospel, I am the good shepherd, f on the feast of St. 
Thomas of Canterbury, Dec. 29, page 159. f f 


Offertory. John 15, 13 


Greater Jove than this no 
man hath, that a man lay down 
his life for his friends. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Majórem caritátem nemo 
habet, ut ánimam suam ponat 
quis pro amícis suis. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 15—ST. ALBERT THE GREAT 


1289 


Secret 


LEMENTÍssIME Deus, mú- 
nera hsc tua benedic- 
tióne perfünde, et nos in fide 
confírma: quam sanctus Jó- 
saphat Martyr et Póntifex tu- 
us, effüso sánguine, asséruit. 
Per Dóminum. L 


MosT merciful God, pour 

Thy. blessing over these : 
our offerings and.confirm us 
in the Faith, which St. Josa- 
phat, Thy martyr and bishop, 
upheld by the shedding of his 
blood.: Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


‘Ego sum pastor bonus, et 
cognósco oves meas, . et 
cognóscunt me mez. 


John 10, 14 


Iam the good Shepherd, and 
I.know My sheep, and Mine 


"^ know Me.. 


Posicommuünion 


— Dómine, fortitü- 

dinis hec nobis tribuat 
mensa celéstis: que sancti 
Jósaphat Mártyris tui atque 
Pontíficis vitam pro Ecclé- 
sie honóre jugiter áluit ad 
victóriam. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Av this heavenly table, O 

Lord, impart to us the 
spirit of fortitude which con- 
stantly nourished the life of 
St. Josaphat, Thy martyr and 
bishop, unto victory for the 
honor of the Church, Through 
our Lord, 


Nov. 15— St. Albert the Great, Bishop; Confessor 
‘and. Doctor of the Church ( White) 
Double ' 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer | 


EUS, qui beátum Albér- 

tum Pontificem tuum 
atque Doctórem, in humana 
sapiéntia divine fídei subji- 
ciénda magnum effecisti: da 
nobis, quesumus, ita ejus ma- 
gistérii inherére vestigiis, ut 
luce perfécta fruámur in cælis. 
Per Dóminum. 


cop, who to subject hu- 

man wisdom to divine 
faith hast made great Thy 
Bishop and Doctor blessed Al- 
bert, grant us, we beseech Thee, 
so to follow in the path of his 
teaching as to enjoy perfect 
light in heaven. Through our 
Lord. . 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1290 


.. NOV. 16—$T. GERTRUDE 


Secret 


ERCIFULLY regard this our 
Sacrifice, O Lord, that 
what we.offer up in the mys- 
tery of the Passion.of Thy Son 
cur-Lord, -we may, through the 
intercession and example of 
blessed Albert, receive with pi- 
cus affection. Through the 
same. 


TY AcRIFÍCIIS... »preséntibus, 

J Dómine, quæsumus; in- 
ténde.placátus: ut quod Pas- 
siónis Fílii tui.Dómini nostri 
mystério gérimus, béati Al- 
bérti intercessióne et exém- 
plo, pio consequamur afféctu. 


Per eümdem Dóminum. 


‘Pestcommunion 


HROUGH this holy nourish- 
ment which we have con- 
sumed, defend us, O Lord, from 
the onslaughts of our enemies, 
and grant that through the 


prayers of blessed Albert, Thy 


Confessor and Bishop, we.may 
be gladdened by perpetual 
peace,. Through our Lord. 


ER hec sancta que sümp- 
T9 simus, ab. hóstium nos, 
Dómine, .impugnatidne de- 
fénde: et intercedénte beáto 
Albérto, Confessóre tuo atque 
Pontífice, perpétua pace re- 
spirare concéde. Per Dómi- 


Nov. 16—t. Gertrude, Virgin, Abbess (White) 


Ue ` Double mu 
Mass, Dilexisti, page 1370, except: 


Prayer 


Gop, Who didst prepare 
7 for Thyself:.2 pleasant 
dwelling-place in the heart of 
blessed Gertrude, do Thou, 
through her merits and inter- 
cession, mercifully wipe away 
from our hearts. every stain of 
sin, and grant us to enjoy her 
companionship. Through our 
Lord. 


EUs, qui in corde beatz 
: Gertrúdis Vírginis ju- 
cündam tibi mansiónem præ- 
parásti: ipsíus méritis et in- 
tercessióne, cordis nostri má- 
culas cleménter abstérge, et 
ejüsdem. tríbue gaudére con- 
sórtio. Per Dóminum. 


Nov. 17—$5t. Gregory Thaumaturgus, Bishop, 
Confessor (White) 
Semi-double 


. Mass Statuit ei, page 1337, except the Gospel as below: kt 


: Second, Prayer, A cunctis, with the accompanying Secret and 
Postcommunion, page 827; third at the choice of the priest, 


pages 1494-1500. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 19—ST. ELIZABETH 


1291 


Gospel. Mark 11, 22-24 


Ù Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Marcum. 


N ILLO témpore: Respón- 
dens Jesus discípulis suis, 
ait ilis: Habéte fidem Dei. 
Amen dico vobis, quia qui- 
cümque díxerit huic monti: 
Téllere, et mittere in mare, et 
non hesitdverit in corde suo, 
sed crediderit, quia quedcüm- 
que dixerit fiat, fiet ei. Prop- 
térea dico vobis: Omnia quæ- 
cümque orántes pétitis, cré- 
dite quia accipiétis, et evéni- 
ent vobis. 


‘A Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 
T THAT time, Jesus an- 
swering, said to His dis- 

ciples, Have the faith of God. 
Amen I gay to you, that who- 
soever shall say to this moun- 
tain, Be thou rernoved and be 
cast into the sea; and shall 
not stagger in his heart, but 
believe that whatsoever he 
saith shall be done, it shall be 
done unto him. ‘Therefore I 
say unto you, all things, what- 
Soever you ask when ye pray, 
believe that you shall receive, 
and they shall come unto you. 


Nov. 18—Whe Dedication of the 3Basilíras of 
‘St. Peter and St. Paul, (White) 


Double Major 
Mass, Terribilis, of the Dedication of a Church, page 1388. 


Nov. 19—$5t. Elisabeth, Queen of Hungary, 
Widow (White) i 
Double 


St. Pontianus, Pope, Martyr (Red) 
Mass, Cognovi, page 1383, except Prayer: 


Prayer 


vónuM corda fidélium, 
TIT Deus miserátor, illüstra: 
et, beáte Elisabeth précibus 
gloriósis; fac nos próspera 
mundi despícere, et celésti 
semper consolatióne gaudére. 
Per Dóminum. 


cop of mercy, enlighten 

the hearts of Thy faith- 
ful, and through the prayers 
of blessed Elizabeth, make us 
to despise the prosperity of the 
world and ever to enjoy the 
consolation of heaven. Through 
our Lord. 


Commemoration is made of St. Pontianus, Prayer, Secret and. 


Postcommunion from the Mass Si diligis me, page 1302, 


Preface is No, 13, page 816. 


The 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1292 


NOV. 21—PRESENTATION OF BLESSED VIRGIN 


Nov. 20—St. Felix of Valois, confessor (White) 


. - Double . 
Mass Justus ut palma, page 1352, except: 


Prayer 


GoD, Who didst vouchsafe 

io call out of the desert 
blessed Felix, Thy confessor, 
unto the work of redeeming 
captives, grant, we beseech 
Thee, that, being through his 
intercession delivered by Thy 
grace from the captivity of our 
sins, we may be brought to our 
heavenly country. Through. our 
Lord. . 


EUS, qui beátum Felícem 

Confessórem tuum ex 
erémo ad munus rediméndi 
captívos celitus vocáre dig- 
nátus es: presta, quesumus: 
ut per grátiam tuam ex pecca- 
tórum nostrórum captivitáte, 
ejus intercessióne, liberáti, ad 
celéstem páiriam. perducá- 
mur. Per Dóminum. 


"Nov. 21—The Presentation of tbe 28. V7. Mary 


(White) 


Double Major 
Mass. Salve sancta parens, page. 1394, except: 


Prayer 


cop, Who .wast pleased 
that on this day the 


O 


Blessed Virgin, the dwelling- 


place of the Holy Spirit, should 
be presented in the Temple, 
grant, we beseech Thee, that, 
by her intercession, we may 
deserve to be presented in the 


temple of Thy glory. Through 


...in the unity of the same. 


The Creed is said, or sung. 
Blessed Virgin Mary, page 814, 


EUS, qui beátam Mariam 
semper Virginem, Spi- 
ritus Sancti habitáculum, ho- 
diérna die in templo præsen- 
tari voluisti: presta, quesu- 
mus; ut, ejus intercessióne, in 
templo glórie tue presentari 
mereámur. Per Déminum... 
in unitate ejusdem. 


The Preface is No. 11 of the 


Nov. 22—t. Cecilia, Virgin, Martyr (Red) 
Double . i 
Mäss, Loquebar, page 1359, except: 


Prayer 


:Gop, Who dost. gladden us 
with the annual feast of 
blessed Cecilia, Thy virgin.and 


EUS, qui nos ánnuæ beá- 
te Cæciliæ Virginis et 
Martyris tue  solemnitate 


martyr, grant that, as we vene- letfficas: da, ut quam vene- 
rate her in our liturgy, we may rámur officio, étiam pie con~ 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 28—ST. CLEMENT 


versatiónis sequámur exém- 
plo. Per Dóminum. 


1293 


also follow her example in 
godly living. Through our Lord. 


Epistle, O Lord my God, from the Mass Me exspectaverunt, 


page 1364. 


Gradual. Ps. 44, 11, 12 


Audi, filia et vide, et inclina 
aurem tuam: quia concupi- 
vit rex spéciem tuam. Y. Ps. 
44, 5. Spécie tua, et pulchri- 
tüdine tua inténde, próspere 
procéde, et regna.. 


Allelija, alielüja. V. Matth. 
25, 4, 6. Quinque prudéntes 
vírgines accepérunt óleum in 
vasis suis cum lampádibus: 
média autem nocte clamor 
factus est: Ecce sponsus venit, 
exite óbviam Christo Dómino. 
Allelüja. 


Harken, O daughter, and see, 
and incline thine ear; for the 
King bath greatly desired thy 
beauty. Y. Ps. 44, 5. With thy 
comeliness and thy beauty, set 
out, proceed prosperously, and 
reign. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Matt. 
25, 4, 6. The five wise virgins 
took oilin their vessels with the 
lamps: and at midnight there 
was & cry made: Behold the 
bridegroom cometh, go ye forth 
to meet Christ our Lord. AM 
luia. 


Secret 


Ec hóstia, Dómine, pla- 
catiónis et laudis, quæ- 
sumus: ut, intercedénte beáta, 
Cecilia Virgine et Martyre 
tua, nos propitiatióne tua dig- 
nos semper effíciat. Per Dó- 
minum. 


AY this sacrifice of atone- 

ment and praise, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, by the 
intercession of blessed Cecilia, 
Thy virgin and martyr, ever 
make us worthy of Thy for- 
giveness. Through our Lord. 


Postcommiunion 


am tuam munéribus sa- 
cris: ejus, quesumus, semper 
interventióne nos réfove, cu- 
jus solémnia, celebrámus. Per 
Déminum. 


gi Dómine, famíli- 


LORD, Thou hast regaled 

"Thy household with sa- 
vred gifts; ever comfort us, we 
pray, with her intercession 
whose festival we celebrate. 
Through our Lord. 


Nov. 23—$5t. Clement, Pope, Martyr (Red) 
^. Double 


St. Felicitas, Martyr (Red) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


fcrr Dóminus: Sermónes 
D mei, quos dedi in os 


Is. 59, 21; 56,7 


HE Lord saith, My words 
which I have put in thy 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1294 


mouth, shall not depart out of 
thy mouth: and thy gifts shall 
be accepted upon My altar. Ps. 
111,1. Blessed is the man that 
feareth the Lord; he delighteth 
exceedingly in His command- 
ments. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


NOV. 28—ST. CLEMENT 


iuum, non defícient de ore 
tuo: et münera tua accépta 
erunt super altáre meum. Ps. 
111, 1, Beátus vir, qui timet 
Dóminum; in mandátis ejus 
cupit nimis, Y. Glória Patri. 


Prayer 


ETERNAL Shepherd; do 

Thou look favorably up- 
on Thy flock, which we be- 
seech Thee to guard and keep 
for evermore through the 
blessed Clement, Thy Martyr 
and Supreme Pontiff, whom 
Thou didst choose to be the 
chief shepherd of the whole 
Church. 


Gum tuum, Pastor 
etérne, placátus in- 
ténde: et per beátum Cle- 
mentem Martyrem tuum at- 
que Summum Pontificem, 
perpétua protectióne custódi; 
quem totíus Ecclésie presti- 
tísti esse pastórem. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Commemoration of St. Felicitas. 


Prayer 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that, ob- 


RÆSTA, quaesumus, omni- 
potens Deus: ut beátæ 


serving the festival of blessed Felicitátis Mártyris tuæ so- 
Felicitas, Thy Martyr, we may lémnia recenséntes méritis 
be protected by her merits and ipsíus protegámur, et préci- 
prayers. Through our Lord. bus. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle, Brethren, be ye followers, as in the Mass of the 23rd 
Sunday after Pentecost, page 733. 


Gradual. Ps. 106, 32, 31 


Let them exalt him in the 
Church of the people: and 
praise him in the chair of the 
ancients. V. Let the mercies of 
the Lord give glory to him and 
his wonderful works to the 
children of men. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Matth. 16, 
18. Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I will build My 
Church. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Exáltent eum in Ecclésia 
plebis: et in cáthedra senió- 
rum laudent eum. JY. Confi- 
teántur Dómino misericórdie 
ejus; et mirabília ejus fíliis 
hóminum. 


Allelija, alleluja. Matth. 
16,18. Tu es Petrus, et super 
hanc petram zdificábo Ecclé- 
siam meam. Allelüja. 


Gospel from the Mass, Si díligis me, page 1302. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 23—ST. CLEMENT 


1295 


Offertory. Jerem. 1, 9-10 


Ecce dedi verba mea in ore © 


tuo: ecce constitui te super 
gentes et super regna, ut 
evéllas et déstruas, et edifices 
et plantes. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Behold, I have given My 
words in thy mouth: lo, I have 
set thee this day over the na- 
tions and over the kingdoms, 
to waste and to destroy, and to 
build and to plant. 


Secret 


Qs munéribus, qué- 
sumus Dómine, Ecclé- 
siam tuam benígnus illümi- 
na: ut, et gregis tul profíciat 
ubíque succéssus, et grati 
fiant nómine tuo, te guber- 
nánte, pastóres. Per Dómi- 
num. 


N THY loving kindness, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, be 
moved by the offering of our 
gifts and enlighten Thy 
Church: that Thy flock may 
prosper everywhere and the 
shepherds, under Thy guid- 
ance, may be rendered accepta- 
ble to Thee. Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of St. Felicitas, 


Secret 


OTA pópuli tui, Dómine, 

propitiátus inténde: et, 
cujus nos tríbuis solémnia 
celebráre, fac gaudére suffrá- 
giis. Per Dóminum. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


E MERCIFUL, O Lord, and 

look with favor upon the 
prayers of 'Thy people, and 
make us to rejoice in the pa- 
tronage of her whose solemnity 
we celebrate. Through our 
Lord, 


Communion. Matt. 16,18 


Tu es Petrus, et super hanc 
petram edificabo Ecclésiam 
meam. 


Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I will build My 
Church. 


Postcommunion 


EFECTIÓNE Sancta enu- 

tritam gubérna, qué- 
sumus Dómine, tuam placátus 
Ecclésiam: ut poténti mode- 
ratióne dirécta, et incremén- 
ta libertátis accipiat et in re- 
ligiónis integritáte persfstat. 
Per Dóminum. 


INCE Thy Church has been 
nourished by the sacred 
repast, govern her in Thy 
clemency, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, so that under the guid- 
ance of Thy mighty rule she 
may enjoy greater freedom and 
abiding integrity of religion. 


` Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1296 


NOV. 24—ST. JOHN OF THE CROSS 


Commemoration of St. Felicitas. 


Postcommunion 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that, by 
the intercession of Thy saints, 
Thou both multiply Thy gifts 
in us and dispose our lives 
according to Thy wisdom. 
Through our Lord. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ÜPPLICES te rogámus, om- 
nípotens Deus: ut, in- 
tercedéntibus Sanctis tuis, et 
tua in nobis dona multíplices, 
et témpora nostra dispónass. 
Per Dóminum, 


Nov. 24—$5t. John of the Cross, Confessor, Doctor 
|. (White) 
Double 
St. Chrpsogonus, Martyr (Red) 
Mass, In medio, page 1344, except: 


Prayer 


Gop, Who didst make Thy 

holy confessor and doc- 
tor, John, a man of: perfect 
self-denial and an eminent 
lover of the cross, grant that, 
continually applying ourselves 
to imitating him, we may attain 
unto everlasting glory. Through 
our Lord. 


EUS, qui sanctum Joán- 

nem Confessórem tu- 
um, atque Doctórem perfécte 
sui abnegatiónis, et Crucis 
amatórem exímium effecisti: 
concéde; ut, ejus imitatióni 
jügiter, inhzréntes, glóriam 
assequámur etérnam., Per Dó- 
minum. 


Commemoration of St. Chrysogonus. 


Prayer 


IVE ear, O Lord, to our 
supplications, that we, 

who know ourselves to be guilty 
by reason of our own iniquity, 
may be delivered by the inter- 
cession of blessed Chrysogonus, 
Thy martyr. Through our Lord. 


pnÉsro Dómine, suppli- 

A catiónibus nostris; ut, 

qui ex iniquitáte nostra reos 

nos esse cognóscimus beáti 

Chrysógoni Mártyris tui in- 

tercessióne liberémur, Per Dó- 
minum, 


Secret 


E APPEASED, O Lord, with 

the gifts offered Thee, 
and, by the intercession of 
blessed Chrysogonus, Thy mar- 
tyr, defend us from all dan- 
gers. Through our Lord. 


BLÁTIS quesumus, Dómi- 

ne placáre munéribus: 
et, intercedénte beáto. Chry- 
Sógno Mártyre tuo, & cunctis 
nos defénde perículis. Per 
Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NOV. 26—ST. SYLVESTER 1297 


Postcommunion 


vi, Dómine, perceptióne 

sacraménti, et a nostris 
mundémur occültis, et ad 
hóstium liberémur insídiis. 
Per Dóminum. 


Y THE participation of 
'Thy sacrament, O Lord, 
may we be cleansed from our 
hidden sins and delivered from 
the snares of our enemies. 


Through our Lord. 


Nov. 25—t. Catharine, Virgin, Martyr (Red) 
Double l 
Mass, Loquebar, page 1359, except: 


Prayer 


EUs qui dedísti legem 
Móysi in summitáte 
montis Sínai, et in eódem loco 
per sanctos Angelos tuos cor- 
pus beátæ Catharine Vírginis 
et Mártyris tuse mirabiliter 
collocásti: presta, quesumus; 
ut, ejus méritis et interces- 
sióne ad montem qui Christus 
est, perveníre valeámus: Qui 
tecum. 


Gop, Who didst give the 

law to Moses on the sum- 
mit of Mt. Sinai and by means 
of Thy holy angels didst mirac- 
ulously place there the body of 
blessed Catherine, Thy virgin 
and martyr, grant we beseech 
Thee, that, by her merits and 
intercession, we ‘may be able to 
come unto the mountain which 
is Christ. Who with Thee. 


Nov. 26—$»t. Splhester, Abbot (White) 
Double 


St. Peter of Alexandria, Bishop, Martyr 
Mass, Os justi meditábitur, page 1356, except: 


Prayer 


sanctum Silvéstrum.Ab- 
bátem, sæculi hujus vanitátem 
in apérto támulo pie meditán- 
tem, ad erénum vocáre, et 
precláris vite méritis dec- 
oráre dignátus es: te süpplices 
exoramus ut, ejus exémplo 
terréna despiciéntes, tui con- 
sértio perfruámur etérno. 
Per Dóminum. 


Cl sanctum Sis Deus, qui 


most merciful God, Who, 

when the holy abbot Syl- 
vester was piously pondering 
over the vanity of earthly 
things whilst he stood by an 
open grave, didst vouchsafe to 
call him to the deseft, we sup- 
plicate Thee that, despising 
earthly things, after his ex- 
ample, we may forever enjoy 
Thy presence. Through our 
Lord. i 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1298 


NOV. 26—ST. SYLVESTER 


Commemoration of M. Peter of Alexandria, Prayer from the 


Mass Statuit, page 1302. 


‘Secret 


E beseech Thee, O Lord, 

that, while we rever- 

ently offer these gifts to Thy 

divine majesty we may by pious 

preparation of soul and purity 

of heart, following the example 

of blessed: abbot Sylvester, be- 

come worthy to partake holily 

of the body and blood of Thy 
Son. Who with Thee. 


Commemoration of St. Peter, 
page 1305. i 


u:xsuMus, Dómine: ut, 

dum hec münera di- 
vine majestáti tuse rever- 
énter offérimus: pia mentis 
preparatióne et cordis puri- 
táte, béati Silvéstri Abbátis 
imitatóres effécti, corpus et 
sanguinem Fílii tui sancte 
percipere mereamur: Qui 
tecum. 
Secret from the Mass Statuit, 


‘Postcommunion 


E PRAY Thee, O Lord, that 
Thou grant unto us, re- 
freshed with the divine ban- 
quet, to follow closely the foot- 
steps of the holy abbot Sylves- 
ter, that we may have an abun- 
dant reward with the saints in 
the kingdom of Thy glory. 
Through our Lord. 


IVINA dape reféctis tríbue 
quesumus, Dómine: 
Sancti Silvéstri Abbátis ves- 
tigiis ita inherére; ut co- 
pidsam .mercédem in regno 
glórie tue cum sanctis ha- 
beámus. Per Dóminum. 


Commemoration of St. Peter, Postcommunion from the Mass 


Statuit, page 1305. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


E a 


The Common of Saints 


The Vigil or Eve of the Feast of an Apostle 
(Purple) 


(Ego autem) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 51,10,11 


GO autem sicut olíva fruc- 
tifera in domo Dómini, 
sperávi in misericórdia Dei 
mei: et exspectábo nomen tu- 
um, quóniam bonum est ante 
conspéctum sanctórum 'tuó- 
rum. Ps. 51, 3. Quid gloriáris 
in malítia: qui potens es in in- 
iquitáte? Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


UT I, as a faithful olive- 

tree in the house of the 
Lord, have hoped in the mercy 
of my God: and I will wait on 
Thy name, for it is good in the 
sight of Thy saints. Ps. 51, 3. 
Why dost thou glory in mis- 
chief, thou who art mighty in 
iniquity? Y. Glory. 


Gloria is omitted. 


Should the following Prayer already have been said, it is 
omitted here, and the Prayer next following is substituted. 


Prayer | 


A, QUIESUMUS, omnipo- 
tens Deus, ut beáti N. 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that the 


Apóstoli tui, quam preveni- august solemnity of blessed N., 
mus, veneránda solémnitas, et Thine apostle to which we look 
devotiónem nobis áugeat, et forward, may increase both our 


salütem. Per Dóminum. 


devotion and our salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


Prayer 
UJXSUMUS, omnipotens QU beseech Thee, O 
Deus: ut beátus N. almighty God, that 


Apostolus, cujus prevenimus 
festivitatem, tuum pro nobis 
implóret auxílium; ut a nos- 
tris  reátibus  absolüti, a 
cunctis étiam perículis eruá- 
mur. Per Dóminum. 


blessed N., Thine apostle, for 
whose feast we are preparing, 
may implore for us Thine aid, 
that, our offences being par- 
doned, we may also be saved 
from all dangers. Through our 
Lord. 


Second Prayer of our Blessed Lady, Concede nos, page 824; 
third for the Church, page 825, or for the Pope, page 826, 


1299 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1300 


Lesson. Ecclus. 44, 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


HE blessing of the Lord was 
upon the head of the just 

man. Therefore the Lord gave 
him an inheritance, and di- 
vided him his portion in twelve 
tribes: and he found grace in 
the eyes of all flesh. He magni- 
fied him in the fear of his 
enemies, and with his words he 
made prodigies to cease. He 
glorified him in the sight of 
kings, and gave him command- 
ments in the sight of his peo- 
ple, and showed him His glory. 
He sanctified him in his faith 
and meekness, and chose him 
out of all flesh. And He gave 
him commandments before His 
face, and a law of life and in- 
struction; and He exalted him. 
He made an everlasting cove- 
nant with him, and girded him 
about with a girdle of justice: 


VIGIL OF AN APOSTLE 


25-27; 45, 2-4, 6-9 
Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


Tu Dómini super 


caput justi. Ideo dedit 
ili Dóminus hereditatem, et 
divisit illi partem in tríbubus 
duódecim: et invénit grátiam 
in conspéctu omnis carnis. Et 
magnificavit eum in timóre 
inimicórum, et in verbis suis 
monstra placávit. Glorificávit 
ilium in conspéctu regum, et 
jussit ili coram pópulo suo, 
et osténdit illi glóriam suam. 
In fide, et lenitáte ipsíus, 
sanctum fecit illum, et elégit 
eum ex omni carne. Et dedit 
illi coram precépta, et legem 
vite, et discipline, et excél- 
sum fecit illum. Státuit ei 
testaméntum etérnum, et 
circumcinxit eum zona jus- 
titie: et induit eum Dóminus 
corónam glórim. 


and the Lord crowned him with a crown of glory. 


Gradual. Ps. 91, 13-14 


The just shall flourish like 
the palm-tree; he shall grow 
up like the cedar of Libanus 
in the house of the Lord. Y. Ps. 
91, 3. To show forth Thy mercy 
in the morning, and Thy truth 
in the night. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Justus ut palma florébit: si- 
cut cedrus Libani multiplica- 
bitur in domo Dómini. Y. Ps. 
91,3. Ad annuntiándum mane 
misericórdiam tuam, et veri- 
tátem tuam per noctem. 


Gospel. John 15, 12-16 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime, Jesus said 

to His disciples, This is 

My commandment, that you 
love one another, as I have 
loved you. Greater love than 
this no man hath, that a man 


4H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 

N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus discípulis suis: Hoc 
est precéptum meum, ut dili- 
gátis invicem, sicut diléxi vos. 
Majórem hac dilectiónem ne- 
mo habet, ut ánimam suam 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VIGIL OF AN APOSTLE 


ponat quis pro amícis suis. 
Vos amici mei estis, si fecéri- 
tis que ego precípio vobis. 
Jam non dicam vos servos: 
‘quia, servus nescit quid fáciat 
dóminus ejus. Vos autem dixi 
amicos: quia ómnia quecüm- 
‘que audivi a Patre meo, nota 
feci vobis. Non vos me elegis- 
tis: sed ego elégi vos, et pósui 
vos, ut eátis, et fructum af- 
ferátis: et fructus vester má- 
neat: ut quodcümque petiéri- 
tis Patrem in nómine meo, det 
vobis. 


1301 


lay down his life for his friends. 
You are My friends, if you do 
the things that I command you. 
I wil not now call you ser- 
vants; for the servant knoweth 
not what his lord doth. But I 
have called you friends; be- 
cause all things whatsoever I 
have heard of My Father, I 
have made known to you. You 
have not chosen Me, but I have 
chosen you; and have ap- 
pointed you that you should 
go, and should bring forth 
fruit; and your fruit should 
remain: that whatsoever you 


shall ask of the Father in My name, He may give it you. 
Offertory. Ps.8,6,7 


Glória et honóre coronásti 
eum: et constituísti eum su- 
per ópera mánuum tuárum, 
Dómine. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Thou hast crowned him with 
glory and honor, and hast set 
him over the works of Thy 
hands, O Lord. 


Secret 


POSTÓLICI reveréntia 

cülminis offeréntes tibi 
Sacra mystéria, Dómine, que- 
sumus: ut beáti N. Apóstoli 
tui suffrágiis, cujus natalítia 
prevenímus, plebs tua sem- 
per et sua vota deprómat, et 
desideráta percipiat. Per Dó- 
minum. 


FFERING to Thee, O Lord, 
these sacred mysteries in 
reverence for the supreme apos- 
tolic dignity, we beseech Thee, 
that Thy people may, by the 
protection of blessed N., Thine 
apostle to whose heavenly 
birthday we look forward, at 
all times utter their prayers to 
Thee and obtain that for which 
they ask. Through our Lord. 


Or the following Secret: 


AcRÁwDUM tibi, Dómine, 

munus offérimus: quo 
beáti N. Apóstoli solémnia re- 
coléntes, purificatiónem quo- 
que.nostris méntibus implo- 
ramus. Per Dóminum. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


E OFFER Thee, O Lord, 

ihe gift to be conse- 
crated, whereby, commemorat- 
ing the solemnity of blessed 
N., the apostle, we at the same 
time implore that our souls 
may be made clean. Through 
our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1302 


COMMON OF A SUPREME PONTIFF 


Communion. Ps. 20, 6 


His glory is great in Thy sal- 
vation; glory and great beauty 
shalt Thou lay upon him, O 
Lord. 


EING appeased by the sup- 

plication of Thy holy 
apostle, N., O Lord, grant us, 
we-beseech Thee, both pardon 
and everlasting salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


Magna est glória ejus in s2- 
lutári tuo: glóriam et mag- 
num decórem impónes super 
eum, Dómine. 


Poscommunion 


ANCTI Apóstoli tui N. 

quesumus, Dómine, sup- 
plicatióne plàcátus: et véni- 
am nobis tribue, et remédia 
sempitérna concéde, Per Dó- 
minum. 


Or the following Postcommunion: 


AVING received Thy sacra- 

ments, O Lord, we hum- 
bly beseech Thee, that, by the 
intercession of blessed N., Thy 
apostle, that which we perform 
in honor of his venerable pas- 
sion may profit unto our heal- 
ing. Through our Lord. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ERCEPTIS, Démine, sacra- 
méntis suppliciter exo- 
rámus: ut, intercedénte beáto 
N. Apóstolo tuo, que pro íllius 
veneránda gérimus passióne, 
nobis profíciant ad medélam. 
Per Dóminum. 


Common of One or More Supreme Pontifts 
(Si diligis me) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. John, 21, 15-17 


F THOU lovest me, Simon 
Peter, feed My lambs; feed 
My sheep. (P. T. Alleluia, alle- 
luia). Ps. 29, 1. I will extol 
'Thee, O Lord, for Thou hast 
upheld me: and hast not made 
my enemies to rejoice over me. 
Y. Glory. 
Kyrie, page 761. 


1 díligis me, Simon Petre, 
pasce agnos meos, 
pasce oves meas. T. P. Alle- 
laja, allelija). Ps. 29, 1. Exal- 
tábo te, Dómine, quóniam 
suscepisti me, nec delectásti 
inimícos meos super me. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


Prayer 


ETERNAL SHEPHERD, do 

Thou look favorably upon 
Thy flock, which we beseech 
Thee to guard and keep for 
evermore through the Blessed 
N. (Thy Martyr and) Supreme 
Pontiff, whom Thou didst 
choose to be the chief shepherd 
of the whole Church. Through 
Our Lord 


REGEM tuum, Pastor #- 

térne, placátus intén- 
de: et per beátum N. (Már- 
tyrem tuum atque) Summum 
Pontíficem, perpétua prote- 
ctióne custódi; quem. totíus 
Ecclésie prsstitísti esse pa- 
stérem, Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A SUPREME PONTIFF 


If a Commemoration is to be 


1302a 


made of another Supreme Pon- 


tiff, the following prayer is said: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui Ecclésiam tuam 

in apostélice petre so- 
liditáte fundátam, ab infer- 
nórum éruis terróre portá- 
rum: presta, quesumus, ut 
intercedénte beáto N. (Mar- 
tyre tuo atque) Summo Pon- 
tifice, in tua veritáte persi- 
stens; continua  securitáte 
muniátur. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. 1 Pet 
Léctio Epístole beáti Petr. 
Apóstoli i 
ARISSIMI: Senióres, qui 
in vobis sunt, Óbsecro 
consénior et testis Christi 
passiónum, qui et ejus, que 
in futüro revelánda est, gló- 
rie communicator: pascite 
qui in vobis est gregem Dei, 
providéntes non coácte, sed 
spontánee secündum Deum, 
neque turpis lucri grátia, sed 
voluntárie; neque ut domi- 
nántes in cleris, sed forma 
facti gregis ex ánimo. Et 
cum apparüerit princeps pa- 
stórum, percipiétis immarce- 
scibilem — glórie | corónam. 
Deus autem omnis gratie, qui 
vocávit nos in etérnam suam 
glóriam in Christo Jesu, mó- 
dicum passos ipse perfíciet, 
confirmabit solidabitque. Ipsi 
glória et impérium in ssecula 
seculédrum. Amen. 


cop, Who didst establish 

Thy church upon the 
most firm foundation of an 
apostolic rock in order to de- 
liver her from the dreadful 
powers of hell, grant her, we 
beseech Thee, that through the 
intercession of the blessed N. 
(Thy Martyr and) Supreme 
Pontiff, she may adhere always 
to Thy truth so as to enjoy at 
al times a sure defence. 
Through Our Lord. 


er 5, 1-4; 10-11 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Peter the Apostle. 


RETHREN: "The  ancients 

therefore that are among 
you, I beseech, who am myself 
also an ancient and a witness 
of the sufferings of Christ: as 
also & partaker of that glory 
which is to be revealed in time 
to come: Feed the flock of God 
which is among you, taking 
care of it not.by constraint, but 
willingly according to God: not 
for filthy lucre’s sake, but vol- 
untarily: Neither as lording it 
over the clergy, but being made 
a pattern of the flock from the 
heart. And when the prince of 
pastors shall appear, you shall 
receive a never-fading crown 
of glory. But the God of all 
grace, Who hath called us unto 
His eternal glory in Christ Je- 
sus, after you have suffered & 
little, will Himself perfect you, 
and confirm you, and establish 
you. To Him be glory and em- 
pire for ever and ever.. Amen. 


After Septuagesima the Lesser Alleluia in the Gradual is re- 
placed by the Tract. In Paschal time the Gradual and Tract are 
replaced by the Greater Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1802b 


COMMON OF A SUPREME PONTIFF 


Gradual. Ps. 106, 32, 31 


Let them exalt him in the 
Church of the people: and 
praise him in the chair of the 
ancients. Y. Let the mercies of 
the Lord give glory to him, and 
the wonderful works to the 
children of men, 


Exáltent eum in Ecclésia 
plebis: et in cáthedra senid- 
rum laudent eum. Y. Con- 
fiteántur Dómino misericór- 
die ejus; et mirabilia ejus 
filiis hóminum, 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Matth. 16, 
18. Thou art Peter and upon 
this rock I wil build My 
Church. Alleluia. 


Allelija, allelija. Matth. 
16, 18. 'T'u es Petrus, et super 
hane petram ædificábo Ec- 
clésiam meam.  Allelája. 


Tract. Ps. 39, 10-11 


I have declared Thy justice 
in a great church, lo, I will not 
restrain my lips: O Lord, Thou 
knowest it. Y. I have not hid 
Thy justice within my heart: I 
have declared Thy truth and 
Thy salvation. Y. I have not 
concealed Thy mercy and Thy 
truth from a great council. 


Annuntiávi justítiam tuam 
in ecclésia magna, ecce lábia 
mea non prohibébo: Dómine, 
tu scisti. Y. Justítiam tuam 
non abscóndi in corde meo: 
veritátem tuam et salutáre 
tuum dixi. Y. Non abscóndi 
misericórdiam tuam, et veri- 
tátem tuam a concílio multo. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Matth. 18, 
18. 'Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I wil build My 
Church. Alleluia. Ps. 44, 17, 18. 
Thou shalt make them princes 
over all the earth: they shall 
remember Thy name through- 
out all generations. Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija,. allelija. Matth. 
16,18: Tu es Petrus, et super 
hanc petram edificabo Ecclé- 
siam meam.  Allelüja. Ps. 
44, 17, 18. Constítues eos prín- 
cipes super omnem terram: 
mémores erunt nóminis tui, 
Dómine. Allelája. : 


Gospel. Matt. 16, 13-19 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus came. 

à into the quarters of 
Cesarea Philippi, and He asked 
His disciples, saying, Whom do 
men say that the Son of man 
is? But they said, Some, John 
the Baptist, and other some, 
Elias, and others, Jeremias, or 
one of tbe prophets. Jesus saith 
to them, But whom do you say 


Hs Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secüándum Matthzeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Venit 

Jesus in partes Cesarée 
Philippi, et interrogábat di- 
Scípulos suos, dicens: Quem 
dicunt hómines esse Fílium 
hóminis? At ill dixérunt: 
Alii Joánnem Baptistam, alii 
autem Elíam, álii vero Jere- 


‘miam aut unum ex pro- 


phétis, Dicit illis Jesus: Vos 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A SUPREME PONTIFF 


autem quem me esse dicitis? 
Respóndens Simon. Petrus, 
dixit: Tu es Christus, Filius 
Dei vivi. Respóndens autem 
Jesus, dixit ei: Bedtus es, 
Simon Bar Jona: quia caro 
et sanguis non revelávit tibi, 
sed Pater meus, qui in celis 
est. Et ego dico tibi, quia tu 
es Peirus, et super hanc pe- 
iram edificabo Ecclésiam 
meam, ef porte inferi non 
prevalébunt advérsus eam. 
Et tibi dabo claves regni cz- 
lórum. Et quodcümque ligá- 
veris super terram, erit ligá- 
tum et in celis: et quodcüm- 
que sólveris super terram, 
erit solütum et in czlis. 


1302c 


that I am? Simon Peter an- 
swered, Thou art Christ, the 
Son of the living God. And 
Jesus answering, said to him, 
Blessed art thou, Simon Bar- 
Jona, because flesh and blood 
hath not revealed it to thee, 
but My Father Who is in hea- 
ven: and I say to thee, that 
ihou art Peter, and upon this 
rock I will build My Church, 
and the gates of hell shall not 
prevail against it; and to thee 
I will give the keys of the king- 
dom of heaven; and whatso- 


ever thou shalt bind uponearth, 


it shall be bound also in hea- 
ven; and whatsoever thou shalt 
loose on earth, it shall be loosed 
also in heaven. 


Offertory. Jerem. 1, 9-10 
Ecce dedi verba mea in ore Behold I have given My 
tuo: ecce constitui te super words in thy mouth: lo, I have 
gentes et super regna, ut set thee this day over the na- 
evéllas et déstruas, et edifices tions, and over the kingdoms, 


et plantes. (T. P. Allelüja). 


to waste and to destroy, and to 


build and to plant. (P. T. Alleluia). . 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


BLATIS munéribus, qué- 

sumus Dómine, Ecclé- 
siam tuam benígnus illümi- 
na: ut, et gregis tui profíciat 
ubique succéssus, et grati 
fiant nómini tuo, te guber- 
nánte, pastóres. Per Dómi- 
num. 
able to Thee. 


N THY loving kindness, we 

beseech Thee, Lord, be 
moved by the offering of our 
gifts and enlighten Thy 
Church: that Thy flock may 
prosper everywhere and the 
shepherds, under Thy guid- 
ance, may be rendered accept- 


Through our Lord. 


Another Secret as above 


ÜNERA, que tibi, Dómine, 

letántes offérimus, 
Süscipe benígnus, et presta: 
ut intercedénte beato N. 
Ecclésia tua et fídei integri- 
táte letétur, et témporum 
tranquillitáte semper exültet. 
Per Dóminum. 


ECcEIVE, O Lord, in Thy 

loving kindness the joy- 
ful offering of our gifts, and 
through the intercession of 
blessed N. grant that Thy 
Church may enjoy integrity of 
faith and rejoice in the tran- 
quillity of peaceful times. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1302d 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 
Communion. 
Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I will build My 
Church. (P. T. Alleluia). 


COMMON OF A MARTYR-BISHOP 


Matt. 16, 18 

Tu es Petrus, et super hanc 
petram zdificábo Ecclésiam 
meam. (T. P. Allelija). 


Postcommunion 


nourished by the sacred 


gue Thy Church has been 
in Thy 


repast, govern her 
clemency, we beseech Thee, 
Lord, so that under the guid- 
ance of Thy mighty rule she 
may enjoy greater freedom and 
abiding integrity of religion. 
Through our Lord. : 


O tus Ecclésiam: 


EFECTIÓNE sancta enu- 

trílam gubérna, qué- 
sumus, Dómine, tuam placá- 
ut poténti 
moderatióne dirécta, et in- 
creménta libertatis accípiat 
et in religiónis integritáte 
persístat. Per Dóminum. 


Another Postcommunion as above 


NCREASE, We beseech 'Thee, 

O Lord, in Thy Church the 
spirit of grace Thou hast given 
her: that through the prayers 
of the blessed N. (Thy Martyr 
and) Supreme Pontiff, the 
flock may never fail in obedi- 
ence to their shepherd nor the 
shepherd .in the faithful care 
of his flock. Through our Lord. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ULTÍPLICA, qudesumus 

Dómine, in Ecclésia 
tua spíritum grátie, quem 
dedísti: ut beáti N. (Már- 
tyris tui atque) Summi Pon- 
tíficis deprecatióne, nec pa- 
stóri obediéntia gregis nec 
gregi desit cura pastoris. 
Per Dóminum. 


Common of a Martyr-Bishop Out of Paschal Time 
(Red) 
(Statuit) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Ecclus. 45, 30 


Introit. 

HE Lord made to him a coy- 

enant of peace, and made 

im a prince; that the dignity 

of priesthood should be to him 

forever. Ps. 131, 1. O Lord, re- 

member David; and all his 
meekness, Y. Glory. 


TATUIT ei Dóminus testa- 

méntum pacis, et prín- 
cipem fecit eum: ut sit illi 
Sacerdótii dígnitas in etér- 
num. Ps. 131, 1, Meménto, Dó- 
mine, David: et omnis man- 
Suetüdinis ejus. JY. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


almighty God, and, be- 


Ti upon our infirmity, O 


Cause the weight of our own 


NFIRMITÁTEM nostram, ré- 
spice, omnipotens Deus: 
et, quia pondus prépriz actió- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A MARTYR-BISHOP 1303 

nis gravat, beáti N. Mártyris evil deeds beareth us down, may 

tui atque Pontíficis interces- the glorious intercession of 

sio gloriósa nos prótegat. Per blessed N., Thy martyr and 

Dóminum. bishop, protect us. Through our 
Lord. 


Epistle. James 1, 12-18 


Léctio Epistole beáti Jacóbi ^ Lesson from the Epistle of 
Apóstoli. blessed James the Apostle. 


ARISSIMI: Beátus vir, qui EARLY beloved, blessed is 
suffert tentatiónem: the man that endureth 
quóniam cum probátus füerit, temptation: for when he hath 
accipiet corónam vite quam been proved, he shall receive 
repromísit Deus diligéntibus the crown of life, which God 
se. Nemo cum tentátur, dicat hath promised to them that 
quóniam a Deo tentátur Deus love Him. Let no man, when 
enim intentátor malórum est: he is tempted, say that he is 
ipse autem néminem tentat. tempted by God. For God is 
Unusquísque vero tentátur a not a tempter of evils, and He 
concupiscéntia sua abstrác- tempteth no man. But every 
tus, et illéctus. Deinde concu- man is tempted by his own 
piscéntia cum concéperit, pa- concupiscence, being drawn 
rit peceátum: peccátum vero away and allured. Then when 
cum consummatum  füerit, concupiscence hath conceived 
génerat mortem. Nolite itaque it bringeth forth sin. But sin, 
erráre, fratres mei dilectissi- when it is completed, begetteth 
mi. Omne datum óptimum, et death. Do not err therefore, 
omne donum perféctum de- my dearest brethren. Every 
strsum est, descéndens a Pa- best gift, and every perfect gift, 
tre làminum, apud quem non is from above; coming down 
est transmutatio, nec vicissi- from the Father of lights, with 
tüdinis obumbrátio. Voluntá- Whom there is no change, nor 
rie enim génuit nos verbo ve- shadow of alteration. For of 
ritátis, ut simus initium áli- His own wil hath He begotten 
quod creatürs ejus. us by the word of truth, that 
we might be some beginning of 
His creature. 


Gradual. Ps. 88, 21-23 


Invéni David servum meum, 
óleo sancto meo unxi eum: 
manus enim mea auxiliábitur 
ei, et bráchium meum con- 
fortábit eum. Y. Nihil pro- 
fíciet inimícus in eo, et fílius 
iniquitátis non nocébit ej. 


I have found David, My ser- 
vant; with My holy oil I have 
anointed him: for My hand 
shall help him, and My arm 
shall strengthen him. y. The 
enemy shali have no advantage 
over him, nor the Son of in- 
iquity have power to hurt him. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1304 COMMON OF A MARTYR-BISHOP 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 109, ^ Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 
4. Thou art a priest.forever,ac- 109, 4. Tu es sacérdos in etér- 
cording to the order of Melehi- num, secündum órdinem Mel- 
sedech. Alleluia. chísedech. Allehija. 


From Septuagesima, Sunday to Easter, the Lesser Alleluia is 


replaced. by the Tragis 


Tract. Ps. 20, 3, 4 


Thou hast given him` his 
hearts desire; and hast not 
withholden from him the will 
of his lips. Y. For Thou hast 
prevented him with blessings 
of sweetness. Y. Thou hast set 
on his head a crown of precious 
Stones. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Desidérium ánim: ejus tri- 
buisti ei: et voluntáte labió- 
rum ejus non fraudásti eum. 
FJ. Quóniam prevenisti eum 
in benedictiónibus dulcédinis. 
¥. Posuísti in cápite ejus coró- 
nam de lápide pretióso. 


Gospel. Luke 14, 26-33 


*B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, Jesus said to 

the multitudes, If any 

man come to Me, and hate not 
his father, and mother, and 
wife, and children, and sisters, 
yea and his own life also, he 
cannot be My. disciple. And 
whosoever. doth not carry his 
cross, and come after Me, can 
not be My disciple. For which 
of you having a mind to build 
a tower, doth not first sit down 
and reckon the charges that 
are necessary, whether he have 
wherewithal to finish it; lest 
after he hath laid the founda- 
tion, and is not able to finish 
it, all that see it begin to mock 
him, saying. This man began 
to build, and was not able to 
finish? Or what king about to 
go and make war against an- 
other king, doth not first sit 
Gown and think whether he be 


A Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 

N iLLO témpore Dixit Je- 
T sus turbís: Si quis venit 
ad me, et non odit patrem su- 
um, et matrem, et uxórem, et 
fílios, et fratres, et soróres, 
adhuc autem et ánimam su- 
am, non potest meus esse dis- 
cípulus. Et qui non bájulat 
crucem suam, et venit post 
me, non potest meus esse dis- 
cípulus. Quis enim ex vobis 
volens turrim edificdre, non 
prius sedens cómputat sump- 
tus, qui necessárii sunt, si há- 
beat ad perficiéndum; ne po- 
Steáquam posuerit funda- 
méntum, et non potüerit per- 
ficere, omnes, qui vident, in- 
efpiant illádere ei, dicéntes: 
Quia hic homo cepit ædificáre 
et non pótuit consummére? 
Aut quis rex itérus commit- 
tere bellum advérsus álium re- 
gem, non sedens prius cógitat, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1 


COMMON OF A MARTYR-BISHOP 1805 
able with ten thousand to meet 
him that with twenty thousand 
cometh against him? Or else, 
Whilst the other is yet afar off, 
sending an embassy, he desir- 
eth conditions of peace. So like- 
wise every one of you that doth 
not renounce all that he pos- 
sesseth, cannot be My disciple. 


Si possit eum decem míllibus 
Occürrere ei, qui cum viginti 
míllibus venit ad se? Alióquin, 
adhuc illo longe agénte, lega- 
tiónem mittens, rogat ea, 
Que pacis sunt. Sic ergo om- 
nis ex vobis, qui non renüntiat 
Ómnibus, que póssidet, non 
potest meus esse discípulus. 


Offertory. Ps. 88, 25 


Véritas mea, et misericórdia My truth and My mercy shall 
mea cum ipso: et in nómine be with him; and in My name 
meo exaltábitur cornu ejus. shall his horn be exalted, 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


Óósrrias tibi, Dómine, RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 


È beáti N. Mártyris- tui 
atque Pontíficis dicátas méri- 
tis, berifgnus assüme: et ad 


) the sacrifices dedicated 
to the merits of Thy blessed 
martyr and. bishop, N. and 


grant they may be for us an 
everlasting help. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


perpétuum nobis tríbue pro- 
veníre subsídium. 


Communion. Ps. 88, 36-38 


Semel jurávi in sancto meo: Once have I sworn by My 
semen ejus in ætérnum mané- holiness: his seed shall endure 
bit: et sedes ejus sicut sol in forever; and his throne as the 
conspéctu meo, et. sicut luna sun before Me, and as the moon 
perfécta in etérnum, et testis perfect forever: and a faithful 


in celo fidélis. witness in heaven. 
Postcommunion 
EFECTI participatióne EFRESHED by participation 


miuneris sacri, quesu- 
mus, Démine Deus noster: ut, 
cujus exséquimur cultum, in- 
tercedénte beáto N. Martyre 
tuo atque Pontífice, sentiá- 
mus efféctum. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


in the sacred gift, we 
beseecn Thee, O Lord, our God, 
that, through the intercession 
of blessed N., Thy martyr and 
bishop, we may ever experience 
the effect of the worship we 
offer. Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1306 


COMMON OF A MARTYR-BISHOP 


Another Mass ot a Martpr-Bishop Out of 
Pasehal-Time (Red) 


(Sacerdotes ) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Dan. 3, 84, 87 


& YE priests of the Lord, 

bless the Lord; O ye holy 

and humble of heart, praise 

God. Dan. 3, 57. All ye works 

of the Lord, bless the Lord; 

praise and exalt Him above all 
forever. Y. Glory. 


ACERDOTES Dei, benedícite 


. Dóminum: sancti et hü- 


miles corde, laudáte Deum. 
Dan. 3, 57. Benedícite, ómnia 
ópera Dómini, Dómino: lau- 
dáte et superexaltáte eum in 
secula. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who dost gladden us 
O with the yearly festival 
of blessed N., Thy martyr and 
bishop, mercifully grant that, 
as we venerate his festival, we 
may also rejoice in his protec- 
tion. Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui nos beáti N. 
D Martyris tui atque Pon- 
tificis annua  solemnitáte 
letificas, concéde propitius; 
ut, cujus natalftia célimus, de 
ejüsdem étiam  protectióne 
gaudeámus. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. 2 Cor. 1, 3-7 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, blessed be the 

God the Father of Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father 
of mercies, and the God of all 
comfort, Who comforteth us in 
all our tribulation; that we 
also may be able to comfort 
them who are in all distress, by 
the exhortation wherewith we 
also are exhorted by God. For 
as the sufferings of Christ 
abound in us, so also by Christ 
doth our comfort abound. Now 
whether we be in tribulation; it 
is for your exhortation and sal- 
vation: or whether we be com- 
forted, it is for your consola- 


Léctio Epistole beati Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Benedíctus Deus 

et Pater Dómini nostri 
Jesu Christi, Pater misericor- 
diárum, et Deus totíus con- 
Solatiónis, qui consolátur nos 
in omni tribulatióne nostra: 
ut possímus et ipsi consolári 
eos, qui in omni pressüra sunt, 
per exhortatiónem, qua ex- 
hortámur, et ipsi a Deo. Quó- 
niam sicut abündant passió- 
nes Christi in nobis: ita et 
per Christum abündat conso- 
látio nostra. Sive autem tri- 
bulámur pro vestra exhorta- 
tióne et salüte, sive consolá- 
mur pro vestra consolatióne. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


yY 


iea 


\ 


COMMON OF A MARTYR-BISHOP 


sive exhortámur pro vestra 
exhortatióne et .salúte, quæ 
operátur tolerántiam earúm- 
dem passiónum, quas et nos 
pátimur: ut spes nostra firma 
Sit pro vobis: sciéntes quod si- 
cut sócii passiónum estis, sic 
éritis et consolatiónis in 
Christo Jesu Dómino nostro. 


Gradual. 


Giória et honóre coronásti 
eum. Y. Et constituisti eum 


1307 


tion: or whether we be ex- 
horted, it is for your exhorta- 
tion and salvation, which work- 
eth the enduring of the same 
sufferings which we also suf- 
fer. That our hope for you may 
be steadfast: knowing that as 


you are partakers of the suf- 


ferings, so shall you be also of 
the consolation, in Christ Jesus 


our Lord. 


Ps.8,6,7 


Thou hast crowned him with 
glory and honor. Y. And hast 


super ópera mánuum tuárum, 


set him over the works of Thy 
Dómine. 


hands, O Lord. 


From Septuagesima Sunday to Easter, the Lesser Alleluia is 
replaced, by the Tract. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelija, alleluja. Y. Hic est Alleluia, alleluia. y. This is 
sacérdos, quem coronávit Dó- the priest whom the Lord hath 
minus. Allelüja. crowned. Alleluia. 


Tract. . Ps. 111, 1.3 


Beátus vir, qui timet Dó- Blessed is the man that fear- 
minum: in mandátis ejus cu- eth the Lord; he delightetn ex- 
pit nimis. Y. Potens in terra ceedingly in His command- 
erit semen ejus: generátio ments. JY. His seed shall be 
rectórum benedicétur. Y. Gló- mighty upon earth: the gene- 
ria et divítie in domo ejus: ration of the righteous shall be 
et justitia ejus manet in sæ- blessed. Y. Glory and wealth 
culum seculi. Shall be in his house, and his 

justice remaineth forever and 
ever. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 16, 24-27 


HH Sequéntia sancti Evan-  ?& Continuation of the holy 

gélii secündum Mattheum. Gospel according to St. Mat- 
i thew. ] 

"N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- T THAT time, Jesus said to 

T sus discfpulis suis: Si His disciples, If any man 

quis vult post me venire, áb- will come after me, let him deny 

\ neget semetfpsum, et tollat himself, and take up his.cross 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1308 


and follow Me. For he that will 
save his life, shall lose it; and 
he that shall lose his life for 
My sake, shall find it, For 
what doth it profit a man, if he 
gain the whole world, and lose 
his own soul? Or what ex- 
change shall a man give for his 
soul? For the Son of man shall 
come in the glory of His Father 
with His angels: and then will 
He render to every man accord- 
ing to his works. 


COMMON OF A MARTYR-BISHOP 


crucem suam et sequátur me. 
Qui enim volüerit ánimam 
suam salvam fácere, perdet 
eam: qui autem perdíderit 
ánimam suam propter me, in- 
véniet eam, Quid enim pro- 
dest hómini, si mundum uni- 
vérsum lucrétur, ánims vero 
sue detriméntum patiátur? 
Aut quam dabit homo com- 
mutatiónem pro ánima sua? 
Filius enim hóminis ventürus 
est in glória Patris sui cum 
Angelis suis: et tunc reddet 
unicuique secindum ópera 
ejus. 


Offertory. Ps. 88, 21, 22 


I have found David My ser- 
vant; with My holy oil I have 
anointed him; for My hand 
shall help him and My arm 
shall strengthen him. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Invéni David servum me- 
um, óleo sancto meo unxi 
eum: manus enim mea auxil- 
iábitur ei, et bráchium meum 
confortábit eum. 


Secret 


l'aNcrIFY, O Lord, the gifts 
dedicated to Thee, and by 


ÓNERA tibi, Dómine, di- 
cata sanctffica: et, in- 


he intercession of blessed N., tercedénte beáto N. Mártyre 
Thy martyr and bishop, look tuo atque Pontífice, per éa- 
upon them with approval. dem nos placátus inténde. 
Through our Lord. Per Dóminum. 

Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Ps. 20, 4 


Thou hast set on his head, 
O Lord, a crown of precious 
stones. 


Posuísti, Dómine, in cápite 
ejus corónam de lápide pre- 
tióso. 


Postcommunion 


AY this communion, O 
Lord, purge us of guilt, 


EC nos commuünio, Dó- 
mine, purget a crímine: 


and, by the intercession of et intercedénte beáto N. Már- 
blessed N., Thy martyr and tyre tuo atque Pontífice, cœ- 
bishop, may it make us sharers léstis remédii faciat esse con- 
of the heavenly healing. sértes, Per Dóminum, 
Through our Lord. l 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A MARTYR NOT A BISHOP 


1309 


Common of a Martyr not a Bishop, (Red) 
(In virtute) 


N VIRTÜTE iua, Dómine, 

letabitur justus: et super 
salutáre tuum exsultábit ve- 
heménter: desidérium anime 
ejus tribuisti ei. Ps. 20, 4. 
Quóniam prevenisti eum in 
benedictiónibus ^ dulcédinis: 
posuísti in cápite ejus coró- 
nam de lápide pretióso. JV. 
Glória Patri. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit, Ps. 20, 2, 3 


N THY strength, O Lord, the 

just man shall joy: and in 
Thy salvation he shall rejoice 
exceedingly: Thou hast given 
him his heart’s desire. Ps. 20, 4. 
For Thou hast prevented him 
with blessings of sweetness; 
Thou hast set on his head a 
crown of precious stones. JV. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


RESTA, quzsumus, omni- 

potens Deus: ut, qui 

beáti N. Mártyris tui, natalí- 

| tia cólimus, intercessióne 

ejus, in tui nóminis amóre ro- 
borémur. Per Dóminum. 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiæ. 


per vias rectas, et osténdit 
illi regnum Dei, et dedit illi 
sciéntiam sanctórum: hones- 
tavit ilum in labóribus, et 
complévit labóres illíus. In 
fraude circumveniéntium il- 
lum áffuit illi, et honéstum 
fecit illum. Custodivit ilum 
ab inimícis, et a seductóribus 
tutávit illum, et certámen 
forte dedit illi, ut vínceret, et 
sciret, quóniam ómnium po- 
téntior est sapiéntia. Hec 
vénditum justum non derelí- 


de dedüxit Dóminus 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that we, 
who venerate the birthday of 
blessed N., Thy martyr, may, 
through his intercession, be 
strengthened in the love of Thy 
name, Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Wis. 10, 10-14 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. i 


HE Lord conducted the just 

through the right ways, 
and showed him the kingdom 
of God, and gave him the 
knowledge of the holy things; 
made him honorable in his 
labors, and accomplished his 
labors. In the deceit of them 
that overreached him, He 
stood by him, and made him 
honorable. He kept him safe 
from his enemies, and defended 
him from seducers, and gave 
him 2 strong conflict, that he 
might Overcome, and know 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1310 


that wisdom is mightier than 
all. She forsook not the just 
when he was sold, but delivered 
him from sinners: she went 
down with him into the pit, 
and in bands she left him not, 
till she brought him the sceptre 
of the kingdom, and power 
against those that oppressed 
him; and showed them to be 
liars that had accused him: 
and the Lord our God gave 
him everlasting glory. 


COMMON OF A MARTYR NOT A BISHOP 


quit, sed a peccatóribus libe- 
rávit eum: descenditque cum 
illo in fóveam, et in vinculis 
non dereliquit illum, donec 
afférret illi sceptrum regni, et 


.poténtiam advérsus eos, qui 


eum deprimébant: et men- 
daces osténdit, qui maculavé- 
runt illum: et dedit illi clari- 
tatem &ætérnam, Dóminus 
Deus noster. 


Gradual. Ps. 111, 1, 2 


‘Blessed is the man that fear- 
eth the Lord; he delighteth ex- 
ceedingly in His command- 
ments. Y. His seed shall be 
mighty upon earth: the gene- 
ration of the righteous shall be 
blessed. 


Beátus vir, qui timet Dó- 
minum: in mandátis ejus cu- 
pit nimis. V. Potens in terra 
erit semen ejus: generátio 
rectórum benedicétur. 


From Septuagesima Sunday -to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is 


replaced by the Tract. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 20, 4. 
O Lord, Thou hast set on his 
head a crown of precious 
Stones. Alleluia. 


Tract. 
Thou hast given him his 
heart’s desire; and hast not 
withholden from him the will 
of his lips. Y. For thou hast 
prevented him with’ blessings 
of sweetness. Y. Thou hast set 
on his head à crown of precious 
stones. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelája. Y. Ps. 20, 
4. Posuísti, Dómine, super ca- 
put ejus corónam de lápide 
pretióso. Allelája. 


Ps. 20, 3,4 


Desidérium Anime ejus tri- 
buisti ei; et voluntáte labió- 
rum ejus non fraudásti eum. 
V. Quóniam prevenisti eum in 
benedictiónibus dulcédinis. Y. 
Posuísti in cápite ejus coró- 
nam de lápide pretióso. 


Gospel. Matt. 10, 34.42 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


7 THAT time, Jesus said to 
His disciples, Do not 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secándum Matthaeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus discípulis suis: Nolíte 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MMC oce o0 c opereccageem 


€. wt pem 


COMMON OF A MARTYR NOT A BISHOP 1311 


arbitrári quia pacem vénerim think that I came to send peace 
míttere in terram: non veni upon earth: I came not to send 
pacem mittere, sed gladium. peace, but the sword. For I 
Veni enim separáre hóminem came to set a man at variance 
advérsus patrem suum, et fí- against his father, and the 
liam advérsus matrem suam, daughter against her mother, 
et nurum advérsus socrum and the daughter-in-law 
Suam: et inimíci hóminis, do- against her  mother-in-law: 
méstici ejus. Qui amat patrem and a man’s enemies shall be 
aut matrem plus quam me, they of his own household. He 
non est me dignus: et qui that loveth father or mother 
amat fílium aut fíliam super more than Me, is not worthy of 
me, non est me dignus. Et Me; and he that loveth son or 
qui non áccipit crucem suam, daughter more than Me, is not 
et séquitur me, non est. me worthy of Me; and he that tak- 
dignus. Qui invénit ánimam eth not up his cross, and fol- 
suam, perdet illam: et qui loweth Me, is not worthy of Me. 
perdiderit ánimam suam He that findeth his life, shall 
propter me, invéniet eam. lose it: and he that shall lose 
Qui récipit vos, me récipit: et his life for Me, shall find it. 
qui me récipit, récipit eum, He that receiveth you, receiv- 
qui me misit. Qui récipit pro- eth Me; and he that receiveth 
phétam in nómine prophéte, Me, receiveth Him that sent 
mercédem prophéte, accípiet: Me. He that receiveth a prophet 
et qui récipit justum in nómi- in the name of a prophet, shall 
ne justi, mercédem justi acci- receive the reward of a 
piet. Et quicümque potum dé- prophet; and he that receiveth 
derit uni ex minimis istis cál- a just man in the name of a 
icem aque frígide tantum in just man, shall receive the re- 
nómine discípuli: amen, dico ward of a just man. And who- 
vobis, non perdet mercédem soever shall give to drink to 
suam. one of these little ones a cup 
. of cold water in the name of a 
disciple, amen I say to you, he shall not lose his reward. 


Offertory. Ps.8,6,7 


Glória et honóre coronásti ^ Thou hast crowned him with 
eum: et constituísti eum su- glory, and honor; and hast set 
per ópera mánuum tuárum. him over the works of Thy 
Dómine. hands, O Lord, _ 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


. Secret 
UNÉRIBUS nostris, que- ccEPT, we beseech Thee, 
sumus, Dómine, preci- O Lord, our offerings 


büsque suscévtis: et celésti- and prayers; both cleanse us 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1312 


by these heavenly mysteries 
and graciously hear us. 
'Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


If any man will come after 
Me, let him deny himself, and 
take up his cross, and follow 
Me. 


COMMON OF A MARTYR NOT A BISHOP 


bus nos munda mystériis, et 
cleménter ex4udi, Per Dómi- 
num. 


Matt. 16, 24 


Qui vult veníre post me, áb- 
neget semetípsum, et tollat 
crucem suam, et sequátur me. 


Postcommunion 


RANT, We.bseech Thee, O 

. Lord, our God, that we, 
who in this life joyfully assist 
in the commemoration of Thy 
saints, may hereafter rejoice 
in beholding them forever in 
heaven. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


A, QUzSUMUS, Dómine 
D Deus noster: ut, sicut 
uórum commemoratióne 
Sanctórum, temporáli gratu- 
lamur officio; ita perpétuo 
letémur aspéctu. Per Démi- 
num. 


Another Mass of a Martyr not a Bishop, (Red) 
(Letabitur ) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 63,11 


HE just shall rejoice in the 
Lord, and shall hope in 
Him: and all the upright in 
heart shall be praised. Ps. 63, 2. 
Hear, O God, my prayer when I 
make supplication to Thee: de- 
liver my soul from the fear of 
the enemy. J. Glory. 


IETABITUR justus in Dó- 

mino, et sperábit in eo: 
et laudabüntur omnes recti 
corde. Ps. 63, 2. Exáudi, Deus, 
oratiónem meam cum dépre- 
cor: a timóre inimíci éripe 
ánimam meam. JJ. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that, by 


RESTA, quesumus, omní- 
potens Deus: ut, inter- 


the intercession of blessed N., cedénte beáto N. Mártyre tuo 
Thy martyr, we may be both et a cunctis adversitátibus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


^78 


c V EE 


COMMON OF A MARTYR NOT A BISHOP 


liberémur in córpore, et a pra- 
vis cogitatiónibus mundémur 
in mente. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. 2 Tim. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Timdétheum. 


ARISSIME: Memor esto 

Dóminum Jesum Chris- 
tum resurrexísse a mórtuis ex 
sémine David, sectindum 
Evangélium meum, in quo la- 
bóro usque ad vincula, quasi 
male óperans: sed verbum Dei 
non est alligátum. Ideo ómnia 
sustíneo propter eléctos, ut et 
ipsi salütem  consequántur, 
que est in Christo Jesu, cum 
glória celésti. Tu autem as- 
Secütus es meam doctrinam, 
institutiónem, propósitum, 
fidem, longanimitátem, dilec- 
tiónem, patiéntiam, persecu- 
tiónes, passiónes: quália mihi 
facta sunt Antiochim, Icónii, 
et Lystris: quales persecu- 
tiónes sustínui et ex ómnibus 
eripuit me Dóminus. Et om- 
nes, qul pie volunt vívere in 
Christo Jesu, persecutiónem 
patiéntur. 


Gradual. 


Justus cum ceciderit, non 
collidétur: quia Dóminus sup- 
pónit manum suam. Y. Ps. 
36, 26. Tota die miserétur, et 
cómmodat: et semen ejus in 
benedictióne erit. 


From Septuagesima Sunday 
replaced by. the Tract. 


Lesser 


Allelüja, alleluja. Y. Qui sé- 
quitur me, non ámbuleat.in 


1313 


delivered from. all adversities 
of the body and cleansed from 
all evil thoughts of the mind. 
‘Through our Lord, 


2, 8-10; 3, 10-12 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
Timothy. 

EARLY beloved, be mindful 
that the Lord Jesus 
Christ is risen again from the 
dead, of the seed of David, ac- 
cording to my gospel. Wherein 
I labor even unto bands, as 
an evil-doer: but the word of 
God is not bound. Therefore I 
endure all things for the sake 
of the elect, that they may also 
obtain the salvation, which is 
in Christ Jesus, with heavenly 
glory. But thou hast fully 
known my doctrine, manner of 
life, purpose, faith, long-suf- 
fering, love, patience, persecu- 
tions, afflictions, such as came 
upon me at Antioch, at Iconi- 
um, and at Lystra; what per- 
secutions I endured and out of 
them all the Lord delivered me. 
And all that will live godly in 
Jesus Christ shall suffer perse- 
cution. 


Ps. 36, 24 


When the just man shall fall, 
he shall not be bruised: for the 
Lord putteth His hand under 
him. Y. Ps. 36, 26. He showeth 
mercy and lendeth all the day 
Jong: and his seed shall be in 
blessing. 


to Easter, the Lesser Alleltita is 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. John 8, 
12, He that followeth Me. walk- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1314 


eth not in darkness, but shall 
have the light of life eternal. 
Alleluia. 


COMMON OF A MARTYR NOT A BISHOP 


ténebris: sed habébit lumen 
vite etérne. Allelüja. 


Tract. Ps. 111, 1-3 


Blessed is the man that fear- 
eth the Lord; he delighteth ex- 
ceedingly in His command- 
ments. Y. His seed shall be 
mighty upon earth: the gene- 
ration of the righteous shall be 
blessed. Y. Glory and wealth 
Shall be in his house, and his 
justice remaineth forever and 
ever. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Beátus, vir, qui timet, Dó- 
minum: in mandátis ejus cu- 
pit nimis. Y. Potens in terra 
erit semen ejus: generátio 
rectórum benedicétur. V. Gló- 
ria et divitie in domo ejus: et 
justitia ejus manet in secu- 
lum seculi. 


Gospel. : Matt. 10, 26-32 


H8 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT lime, Jesus said 

toHis disciples, Nothing, 
Is covered that shall not be 
revealed; nor hid that shall 
not be known. That which I 
tell you in the dark, speak ye 
in the light; and that which 
you hear in the ear, preach ye 
upon the house-tops. And fear 
ye not them that kill the body, 
and are not able to kill the 
soul; but rather fear Him that 
can destroy both soul and body 
in hell. Are not two sparrows 
sold for a farthing, and not one 
of them shall fall to the ground 
without your Father. But the 
very hairs of your head are all 
numbered. Fear not therefore: 
better are you than many spar- 
rows. Every one therefore that 
shall confess Me before men, I 
will also confess Him before 
My Father Who is in heaven. 


© Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Mattheeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus discípulis suis: Nihil 
est opértum, quod non revelá- 
bitur: et occültum, quod non 
sciétur. Quod dico vobis in té- 
nebris, dicite in lümine: et 
quod in aure audítis, predi- 
cate super tecta. Et nolíte ti- 
mére eos, qui occídunt corpus, 
ánimam autem non possunt 
occidere; sed pótius timéte 
eum, qui potest et ánimam et 
corpus pérdere.in gehénnam. 
Nonne duo pásseres asse vé- 
neunt: et unus ex illis non ca- 
det super terram sine Patre 
vestro? Vestri autem capílli 
cápitis omnes numeráti sunt. 
Nolite ergo timére: multis 
passéribus melióres estis vos. 
Omnis ergo, qui confitébitur 
me coram homínibus, confité- 
bor et ego eum coram Paire 
meo, qui in celis est. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


LE 


"& in place of those given above, are as follows: 


COMMON OF A MARTYR NOT A BISHOP 


1815 


Offertory. Ps. 20,4,5 


Toss Dómine, in cá- 
pite ejus corónam de 
lápide pretióso: vitam pétiit 
a te, et tribuisti ei, allelüja. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


LoR», Thou hast set on 

his. head a crown of pre- 
cious stones: he asked life of 
Thee, and Thou hast given it 
to him. Alleluia. 


Secret 


CCÉPTA Sit in conspéctu 

tuo: Dómine, nostra 

devotio: et ejus nobis fiat sup- 

plicatióne salutáris, pro cujus 

solemnitáte defértur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


table in Thy sight, O 
Lord, and may it be rendered 
Salutary for us by ihe prayer 
of him for whose festival it is 
offered. Through our Lord. 


o our devotion be accep- 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. John 12, 26 


Qui mihi minístrat, me se- 
quátur: et ubi sum ego, illic 
et miníster meus erit. 


If any man minister to Me, 
let him follow Me; and where 
I am, there also shall My min- 
ister be. ' 


Postcommunion 


EFÉCTI participatióne 

müneris sacri, quesu- 
mus, Dómine Deus noster: ut, 
cujus exséquimur cultum, in- 
tercedénte beáto N. Martyre 
tuo, sentiámus efféctum. Per 
Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EFRESHED by participation 
AX. in the sacred gift, we be- 
Seech 'Thee, O Lord, our God, 
that, through the intercession 
of blessed N., Thy martyr, we 
may ever experience the effect 
of the worship we perform. 
'Through our Lord. 


Other Epistles and Gospels read on certain feasts of martyrs, 


Léctio Epistole beati Jacobi 
Apóstoli. 
ARÍssIMI: Omne gáudium 
existimáte, cum in ten- 
tatiónes várias  incidéritis: 
Sciéntes, quod probátio fídei 


Epistle. James 1, 2-12 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed James the Apostle. 

EARLY beloved, count it 

all joy, when you shall 

fall into divers temptations; 

knowing that the trying of your 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1316 


faith worketh patience. And 
patience hath a perfect work; 
that you may be perfect and 
entire, failing in nothing. But 
if any of you want wisdom, let 
him ask of God, who giveth to 
all men abundantly, and up- 
braideth not; and it shall be 
given him. But let him ask in 
faith, nothing wavering. For he 
that wavereth is like a wave of 
the sea, which is moved and car- 
ried about by the wind. There- 
fore let not that man think 
that he shall receive anything 
of the Lord. A double minded 
man is inconstant in all his 
ways. But let the brother of 
low condition glory in his ex- 
altation: And the rich, in his 
being low; because as the flower 
of the grass shall he pass away. 
For the sun rose with a burn- 
ing heat, and parched the grass, 
and the flower thereof fell off, 
and the beauty of the shape 
thereof perished: so also shall 
the rich man fade away in his 
ways. Blessed is the man that 
endureth temptation; for when 
he hath been proved, he shall 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 


vestre patiéntiam operátur. 
Patiéntia autem opus perféc- 
ium habet: ut sitis perfécti, 
et integri, in nullo deficiéntes. 
Si quis autem vestrum indiget 
sapiéntia, póstulet a Deo, qui 
dat ómnibus affluénter, et non 
impróperat: et dábitur el. 
Póstulet autem in fide nihil 
hesitans: qui enim hesitat, 
similis est flüctui maris, qui a 
vento movétur, et circumfér- 
tur. Non ergo sstimet homo 
ille, quod accípiat áliquid a 
Dómino. Vir duplex ánimo in- 
cónstans est in ómnibus viis 
suis, Gloriétur autem frater 
hümilis in exaltatióne sua: 
dives autem in humilitáte sua, 
quóniam sicut flos feni tran- 
Sibit: exórtus est enim sol 
cum ardóre, et arefécit fœ- 
num, et flos ejus décidit, et 
decor vultus ejus depériit: ita 
et dives in itinéribus suis mar- 
céscet. Beátus vir, qui suffert 
tentatiónem: quóniam cum 
probátus füerit, accípiet coró- 
nam vitæ, quam repromisit 
Deus diligéntibus se. 


receive the crown of life, which God hath promised to them 


what love Him. 


Epistle, feast of St. Martin, November 12, page 1286. 
wee feast of St. Lawrence the Martyr, August 10, page 


Common of Wiwo or More Martyrs, (Red) 


Outside Paschal-time 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


(Intret) 
Introit. Ps. 78, 11-13, 10 


ET the sighing of the pris- 
oners come in before 
Thee, O Lord; render to our 


NTRET jn conspéctu tuo 
Domine, gémitus compe- 
ditorum: redde vicínis nos- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 1317 
tris séptuplum in sinu eórum: 
vindica sánguinem  sanctó- 
rum tuórum, qui effüsus est. 
Ps. 78, 1. Deus, venérunt gen- 
tes in hereditátem tuam: pol- 
luérunt templum sanctum tu- 
um: posuérunt Jerüsalem in 
pomórum custódiam. Y. Glé- 
ria Patri. 


neighbors sevenfold in their 
bosoms; revenge the blood of 
Thy saints which hath been 
shed. Ps. 78, 1. O God, the 
heathens are come into Thy 
inheritance; they have defiled 
Thy holy temple; they have 
made Jerusalem as a place to 
keep fruit. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
If the feast be of martyrs who were bishops. l 


EATÓRUM Mártyrum pa- AY the feast of the blessed 

ritérque Pontificem N. martyrs and bishops, N. 

et N. nos, quesumus, Dómine, and N., protect.us, we beesech 

festa tueántur: et eórum com- "Thee, O Lord, and their august 

méndet orátio veneránda. Per prayers commend us to Thee. 
Dóminum. Through our Lord. 


If of martyrs not bishops. 


EUS, qui nos concédis cop, Who dost permit us 

sanctérum  Mártyrum to celebrate the birthday 
tuórum. N. et N. natalitia có- of Thy holy martyrs, N. and N., 
lere: da nobis in etérna beati- grant us to enjoy their com- 
tüdine de eórum societáte panionship in everlasting beati- 
gaudére. Per Dóminum. tude. Through our Lord. 


Or the following. 


EUS, qui nos ánnua sanc- Gop, Who dost gladden us 
térum Martyrum tuó- by the annual solemnity 


rum N. et N. solemnitáte læ- 
tificas: concéde propítius; ut, 
quorum gaudémus méritis, ac- 
cendámur exémplis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


of Thy martyrs, N. and N., 
mercifull grant that we be 
kindled by the example of those 
in whose merits we rejoice. 
Through our Lord. 


Epistle. Wis. 3, 1-8 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


Dei sunt, et non tanget 
los torméntum mortis. Visi 
sunt óculis insipiéntium mori: 
et estimáta est afflíctio exitus 
illórum: et quod a nobis est 
iter extermínium: illi au- 


ge anime in manu 
i 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 
HE souls of the just are in 
the hand of God, and the 
iorment of death shall not 
touch them. In the sight of the 
unwise they seemed to die, and 
their departure was taken for 
misery; and their going away 


http://ccwatershed.org 


43 


1318 


from us for utter destruction: 
but they are in peace. And 
though in the sight of men they 
suffered torments, their hope 
is full of immortality. Afflicted 
in few things, in many they 
shall be well rewarded: because 
God hath tried them, and 
found them worthy of Himself. 
As gold in the furnace He hath 
proved them, and as a victim 
of a holocaust He hath received 
them, and in time there shall 
be respect had to them. The 
just shall shine, and shall run 
to and fro like sparks among 
the reeds. They shall judge na- 
tions, and rule over people, and 
their Lord shall reign forever. 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 


tem sunt in pace. Et si coram 
homínibus torménta passi 
sunt, spes illórum immortali- 
táte plena est. In paucis vex- 
áti, in multis bene. disponén- 
tur: quóniam Deus tentávit 
eos, et invénit illos dignos se. 
"Tamquam aurum in fornáce 
probávit illos, et quasi holo- 
cáusti hóstiam accépit illos, 
et in témpore erit respéctus il- 
lórum. Fulgébunt justi, et 
tamquam scintille in arundi- 
néto discürrent. Judicábunt 
natiónes, et dominabüntur 
pópulis, et regnábit Dóminus 
illórum in perpétuum. 


Gradual. Ex. 15, 11 


God is glorious in His saints: 
wonderful in majesty, doing 
wonders. Y. Ex. 15, 6. Thy right 
hand, O Lord, is glorified in 
strength: Thy right hand hath 
broken the enemies. 


Gloriédsus Deus in sanctis 
suis, mirabilis in majestáte, 
fáciens prodígia. Y. Ex. 15, 6. 
Dextera tua, Dómine, glorifi- 
cata est in virtüte: dáxtera 
manus tua confrégit inimícos. 


From Septuagesima Sunday to Easter, ihe Lesser Alleluia is 


replaced, by the Tract 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ecclus. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Eccl. 


44, 14. The bodies of the saints 44, 14. Córpora sanctérum in 
are buried in peace: and their pace sepülta sunt, et nómina 
names live unto generation and eórum vivent in generatiónem 
generation. Alleluia. et generatiónem. Allelüja. 


Tract, Ps.125,5,6 


They that sow in tears shall Qui séminant in Jlácrimis, 
reap in joy. Y. Going they went in gáudio metent. Y. Eüntes 
and wept, casting their seeds. ibant et flebant, mitténtes sé- 
¥. But coming they shall come mina sua. Y. Veniéntes autem 
with joyfulness, carrying their vénient cum  exsultatióne, 
sheaves. portántes manípulos suos. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 


1319 


Gospel. Luke 21,9-19 


FM Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secüándum Lucam. 

N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je~ 
I sus discípulis suis: Cum 
audiéritis praelia, et seditiónes, 
nolíte terréri: opórtet primum 
hzc fieri, sed nondum statim 
finis. Tunc dicébat illis: Sur- 
get gens contra gentem, et 
regnum advérsus regnum. Et 
terremótus: magni erunt per 
loca, et pestiléntie, et fames, 
terrorésque de colo, et signa 
magna erunt. Sed ante hzc 
à ómnia injícient vobis manus 

^ suas, et persequéntur tra- 
4déntes in synagógas et cus- 
$todias, trahéntes ad reges et 


deátis, Ego enim dabo vobis 
? os, et sapiéntiam, cui non pó- 
terunt resístere, et contradi- 
cere omnes adversárii vestri. 
Tradémini autem a parénti- 
bus, et frátribus, et cognátis, 
et amícis, et morte afficient 
ex vobis: et éritis odio 6mni- 
bus propter nomen meum: et 
capíllus de cápite vestro non 
períbit. In patiéntia vestra 
possidébitis ánimas vestras. 


"K Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus said to 

His disciples, When you 

shall hear of wars and sedi- 
tions, be not terrified: these 
things must first come to pass, 
but the end is not yet presently. 
Then He said to them, Nation 
shall rise against nation, and 
kingdom against kingdom. And 
there shall be great earth- 
quakes in divers places, and 
pestilences, and famines, and 
terrors from heaven, and there 
shall be great signs. But before 
all these things they will lay 
their hands on you, and perse- 
cute you, delivering you up to 
the synagogues and into pris- 
ons, dragging you before kings 
and governors for My name's 
sake. And it shall happen unto 
you for a testimony. Lay it up 
therefore in your hearts, not 
to meditate before how. you 
Shall answer. For I will give 
you & mouth and wisdom, 
which all your adversaries shall 
not be able to resist and gain- 
Say. And you shall be betrayed 
by your parents, and brethren, 
and kinsmen, and friends, and 
some of you they will put to 
death. And you shall be hated 
by all men for My name's sake; 


but a hair of your head shall not perish. In your patience 


you shall possess your souls. 


Offertory. Ps. 67, 36 


Mirábilis Deus in sanctis 
suis: Deus Israël, ipse dabit 
virtütem et fortitüdinem plebi 
sum: benedíctus Deus, alle- 
lúja. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


God is wonderful in His 
saints: the God of Israel is He 
Who wil give power and 
strength to His people: blessed 
be God. Alleluia, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1320 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 


Secret 
For martyr-bishops. 


IVE ear, O Lord, to our 

supplications which we 
offer in commemoration of Thy 
saints, that, we, having no con- 
fidence in our own justice, may 
be assisted by the merits of 
those who have been pleasing 
to Thee. Through our Lord. 


DESTO, Dómine, suppli- 

catiónibus nostris, 
quas in sanctórum tuórum 
commemoratióne deférimus: 
ut, qui nostre justitie fidüci- 
am non habémus, eórum qui 
tibi placuérunt, méritis ad- 
juvémur. Per Dóminum. ` 


For martyrs not bishops. 


E OFFER Thee, O Lord, 

the gifts of our devo- 
tion; may they be rendered 
both pleasing unto Thee, for 
the honor of Thy just ones, and 
to us, through Thy mercy, help- 
ful to salvation. Through our 
Lord. 


Or the following. 


E APPEASED, O Lord, with 
B the gifts we offer, and, 
hy the intercession of Thy holy 
martyrs, N. and N., defend us 
from all dangers, Through our 
Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 
And though in the sight of 


ÜNERA tibi, Dómine, nos- 

ire devotiónis offéri- 
mus: que et pro tuórum tibi 
grata sint honóre justérum, 
et nobis salutária, te mise- 
ránte reddántür. Per Dómi- 
num. 


BLÁTIS, quesumus, Dó 
mine, placáre munéri 
bus: et intercedéntibus sanc- 
tis Martyribus tuis N. et N. 
a cunctis nos defénde perícu- } 
lis. Per Dóminum. 


$ 


Wis. 3, 4-6 
Et si coram homínibus tor- 


men. they suffered torments, ménta passi sunt, Deus ten- 
God hath tried them: as gold távit eos: tamquam aurum in 
in the furnace He hath proved fornáce probávit eos, et quasi 


them, and as bolocausts He 
hath received them, 


holocáusta accépit eos, 


Postcommunion 
For martyr-bishops. 


ILLED With the mysteries 

of salvation, we beseech 

'Thee, O Lord, that we may be 

helped by the prayers of those 

whose festival we celebrate. 
Through our Lord. 


UxsuMwus, Dómine, salu- 

táribus repléti mysté- 
riis, ut, quorum solémnis cel- 
ebrámus, eórum oratiónibus 
adjuvémur. Per Dóminum. 


For martyrs not bishops, 


RANT ' us, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, by the interces- 


RESTA nobis, quesumus, 
Domine, intercedéntibus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Milos — 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 


sanctis Martyribus tuis N. et 
N.: ut, quod ore contingimus, 
pura mente capiámus. Per 
Dóminum, 


1321 


Sion of Thy holy martyrs, N. 
and N. that what we touch 
with our lips we may receive 
with a pure heart. Through our 
Lord. 


Or the following. 


xc nos commünio, Dó- 

mine, purget a crímine: 

et, intercedéntibus sanctis 

Martyribus tuis N. et N., cœ- 

léstis remédii fáciat esse con- 
Sórtes. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


AY this communion, O 

Lord, purge us of guilt 
and, by the intercession of Thy 
holy martyrs, N. and N., make 
us partakers of. the remedies 
which bring us to heaven. 
Through our Lord. 


| Another Mass of Two or More Martyrs, (Red) 
(Sapientiam ) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 44, 15, 14 


APIENTIAM sanctérum 

narrent pópuli, et laudes 
eórum nüntiet Ecclésia: nó- 
mina autem eórum vivent in 
seculum, seculi. Ecclus. 44, 
32, 1. Exsultáte, justi, in Dó- 
mino: rectos decet collaudá- 
tio. Y. Glória Patri. 


ET the people show forth 

. the wisdom of the saints, 
and the church declare their 
praise; and their names shall 
live unto generation and gen- 
eration. Ecclus. 44, 32, 1. Re- 
joice in the Lord, ye just: 
praise becometh the upright. 
¥. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EaTORUM Mártyrum, pa- 
B ritérque Pontificum N. 
et N. nos quesumus Dómine 
festa tueántur: et eórum 
comméndet orátio veneránda. 
Per Dóminum. 


AY THE feast of the bless- 

ed martyrs and bishops, 
N. and N., protect us, we be- 
Seech Thee, O Lord, and their 
&ugust prayers commend us to 
Thee. Through our Lord. 


If of martyrs not bishops. 


Eus, qui nos concédis 
sanctérum  Mártyrum 
tuórum N. et N. natalitia có- 
lere: da nobis in etérna beati- 
tüdine de eórum  societáte 
gaudére. Per Dóminum. 


Gop, Who dost permit us 
to celebrate the birthday 
of Thy holy martyrs, N. and N., 
grant us to enjoy their com- 


'panionship in everlasting be- 


atitude, Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1322 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 


Or the following. 


Go», Who dost gladden us 

by the annual solemnity 
of Thy martyrs, N. and N., 
mercifully grant we be kindled 
by the example of those in 
whose merits we rejoice. 
Through our Lord. 


EUs, qui nos ánnua sant- 

tórum Mártyrum tuór- 

um N. et N. solemnitáte 

letíficas: concéde propitius; 

ut quorum gaudémus méritis, 

accendámur exémplis, Per 
Dóminum. 


Lesson. Wis. 5, 16-20 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 
vr the just shall live for 
evermore, and their re- 
ward is with the Lord, and the 
care of them with the Most 
High. Therefore shall they re- 
ceive a kingdom of glory, and 
a crown of beauty at the hand 
of the Lord: for with His right 
hand He will cover them, and 
with His holy arm He will de- 
fend them; and His zeal will 
take armor, and He will arm 
the creature for the revenge of 
His enemies. He will put on 
justice as a breastplate, and 
will take true judgment instead 
of a helmet; He will take equity 
for an invincible shield. 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


USTI autem in perpétuum 
vivent, et apud Déminum 
est merces e6rum, et cogitatio 
illórum apud Altissimum. Ideo 
accipient regium decóris, et 
diadéma speciéi de manu 
Dómini: quóniam déxtera 
mea ieget eos, et bráchio 
sancto suo deféndet illos. Ac- 
cipiet armatüram zelus illius, 
et armábit creatüram ad ul- 
tiónem inimicórum. Induet 
pro thoráce justítiam, et ac- 
cípiet pro gålea judicium cer- 
tum. Sumet scutum inexpug- 
nábile, zquitátem. : 


Gradual. Ps.123,7,8 


Our soul hath been delivered, 
as 8 sparrow, out of the snare 
of the fowlers. Y. The snare 
is broken, and we are delivered: 
our help is in the name of the 
Lord, Who made heaven and 
earth, 


From Septuagesima to Easter, 


by the Tract. 


Anima nostra sicut passer 
erépta est de láqueo vanánti- 
um. V. Láqueus contribus est, 
et nos liberáti sumus: adju- 
tórium nostrum in nómine 
Dómini, qui fecit celum et 
terram. 


the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia, Y. Ps. 67, 4. 
Let the just feast, and rejoice 
before God; and he delighted 
with gladness. Alleluia. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 67, 
4. Justi epuléntur, et exsültent 
in conspéctu Dei: et delec- 
téntur in Iztítia. Allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 


1823 


Tract. Ps.125,5,6 


Qui séminant in lácrimis, 
in gáudio metent. V. Eüntes 
ibant et flebant, mitténtes sé- 
mina sua, Y. Veniéntes au- 
tem vénient cum exsultatióne, 
portántes manípulos suos. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


‘They that sow in tears shall 
reap in joy. Y. Going they went 
and wept, casting their seeds. 
Y. But coming they shall come 
with joyfulness, carrying their 
sheaves. . : 


. Gospel. Luke 6,17-23 


HB Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Descén- 


dens Jesus de monte, ste- ` 


tit in loco campéstri, et turba 
discipulórum ejus, et multi- 
tudo copiósa plebis ab omni 
Judæa; et Jerúsalem, et marí- 
tima, et Tyri, et Sidónis, qui 
vénerant, ut audirent eum, et 
sanaréntur a languóribus suis. 
Et qui vexabántur a spirítibus 
immündis, curabántur. Et 
omnis turba querébat eum 
tangere:. quia virtus de illo 
exíbat, et sanábat omnes. Et 
ipse elevátis óculis in discípu- 
los suos, dicébat: Beáti páu- 
peres: quia vestrum est reg- 
num Dei. Beáti, qui nunc esü- 
ritis, quia X saturabímini. 
Beáti, qui nunc fletis: quia 
ridébitis. Beáti éritis, cum vos 
éderint hómines, et cum sep- 
aráverint vos, et exprobráve- 
rint, et ejécerint nomen ves- 
trum tamquam malum, prop- 
ter Fílium hóminis. Gaudéte 
in illa die, et exsultáte: ecce 
enim merces vestra multa est 
in celo. 


Offertory. 


mExsultábunt sancti in gló- 
ria, letabüntur in cubílibus 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus com- 
ing down from the 
mountain. stood in a plain 
place, and the company of His 
disciples, and a very great mul- 
titude of people from all Judea 
and Jerusalem, and the sea- 
coast both of Tyre and Sidon, 
who were come to hear Him, 
and to be healed of their dis- 
eases. And they that were 
troubled with unclean spirits 
were cured. And all the multi- 
tude sought to touch Him, for 
virtue went out from Him, and 
healed all. And He, lifting up 
his eyes on His disciples, said, 
Blessed are ye poor, for yours 
is the kingdom of God. Blessed 
are ye that hunger now, for you 
Shall be filled. Blessed are ye 
that weep now, for you shall 
laugh. Blessed shall you be 
when men shall hate you, and 
when they shall separate you, 
and shall reproach you, and 
cast out your name as evil, for 
the Son of man’s sake: be glad 
in that day and rejoice, for be- 
hold, your reward is great in 
heaven. 


Ps. 149, 5, 6 


The saints shall rejoice in 
glory, they shall be joyful in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1324 


their beds: the high praises of 
God shall be in their mouths, 
alleluia. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 


suis: exaltatiónes Dei in fáu- 
cibus eórum, allelüja. 


Secret 


IvE ear, O Lord, to our 

supplications which we 
offer in commemoration of Thy 
saints, that, we, having no con- 
fidence in our own justice, may 
be assisted by the merits of 
those who have been pleasing 
to Thee. Through our Lord. 


DÉSTO Dómine suppli- 

catiénibus nostris, quas 
in Sanctórum tuórum com- 
memoratióne deférimus: ut 
qui nostre justítie fidüciam 
non habémus, eórum qui tibi 
placuérunt, méritis adjuvé- 
mur. Per Dóminum. 


Fort martyrs not bishops. 


E OFFER Thee, O Lord, 

ihe gifts of our devo- 
tion; may they, through Thy 
mercy, be rendered both pleas- 
ing unto Thee, for the honor 
of Thy just ones, and profitable 
for our salvation. Through our 
Lord. 


ÓNERA tibi Dómine nos- 

tre deyotiónis offéri- 

mus: quas et pro tuórum tibi 

grata sint honóre justórum, 

et nobis salutária, te mise- 

ránte, reddántur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Or the following. 


E APPEASED, O Lord, with 
the gifts we offer, and, by 
the intercession of Thy holy 


BLATIS quesumus Dómi- 
ne, placáre munéribus: 
et  intercedéntibus sanctis 


martyrs, N. and N., defend us Martyribus tuis N. et N. a 
from all dangers, Through our cunctis nos defénde perículis. 
Lord. Per Dóminum. 

Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Luke 12, 4 
But I say to you, My friends, Dico autem vobis a&mícis 
be not afraid of those who per- meis: Ne tereámini ab his, 
secute you. qui vos persequüntur. 


Postcommunion 
For martyr-bishops. 

LED with the mysteries vzxsuMus Dómine, salu- 
H of salvation, we beseech táribus repléti mysté- 
Thee, O Lord, that we may be riis: ut quorum solémnia cel- 
helped by the prayers of those ebrámus, eórum oratiónibus 
whose festival we celebrate. adjuvémur. Per Dóminum. 
"Through our Lord. 

For martyrs not bishops. 
RANT US, we beseech Thee, rasta nobis quesumus 
O Lord, by tne interces- P Dómine, intercedéntibus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 1325 


sanctis Martyribus tuis N. et sion of Thy holy martyrs, N. 
N. ut quod ore contingimus, and N. that what we. touch 
pura mente capiámus. Per Dó- with our lips we may receive 
minum. with a, pure heart. Through our 

* Lord. 

Or the following. 

EC nos commünio Dó- Av this communion, O 

mine purget a crímine: Lord, purge us of guilt 
et  intercedéntibus sanctis and, by the intercession of Thy 
Martyribus tuis N. et N. celés- holy martyrs, N. and N., make 
tis remédii fáciat esse con- us partakers of the heavenly 
Sórtes, Per Dóminum. salvation. Through our Lord. 

Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


A Thirds Mass of Two ov More Martyrs, (Red) 


(Salus autem) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 36, 39 


ALUS autem justórum a HE Salvation of the just is 
Démino: et protéctor from the Lord: and He is 
eórum est in témpore tribula- their protector in the time of 
tiónis. Ps. 36, 1. Noli emuléri trouble. Ps. 36, 1. Be not emu- 
inmalignántibus: neque zelá- lous of evil-doers: nor envy 
veris faciéntes iniquitátem. V. them that work iniquity. Y. 
Gloria Patri, Glory. 
Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 
EUS, qui nos ánnua Gop, Who dost gladden us 
sanctérum Martyrum by the annual solemnity 
tuórum N. et N. solemnitáte of Thy martyrs, N. and N. 
letificas: concéde propitius; mercifully grant that we he 
ut, quorum gaudémus méritis, kindled by the example of 
accendémur exémplis. Per those in whose merits we re- 
Déminum nostrum. joice. Through our Lord. 


Epistle. .Heb. 10, 32-38 
Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli Lesson from the Epistle of 
Apóstoli ad Hebreos. blessed Paul the Apostle to the 

à Hebrews. 

RATRES: Rememorámini kETHREN, call to mind the 
prístinos dies, in quibus former days, wherein, 
illumináti magnum certámen being illuminated, you en- 
sustinuístis passiónum: et in dured a great fight of afflic- 
altero quidem oppróbriis, et tions. And on the one hand in- 
tribulatiónibus spectaculum deed, by reproaches and tribu- 
facti: in áltero autem sócii lations were made a gazing- 
táliter conversantium ef- stock; and on the other, be- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1326 


come companions of them that 
were used in such sort. For you 
both had compassion on them 
that were in bands, and took 
with joy ihe being stripped of 
your own goods, knowing that 
you have a better and lasting 
substance. Do not therefore 
lose your confidence, which 
hath a great reward. For pa- 
tience is necessary for you: 
that doing the will of God you 
may receive the promise. For 
yet a little and a very little 
while, and He that is to come, 
will come and will not delay. 
But my just man liveth by 


faith. 
Gradual. 


The just cried, and the Lord 
heard them, and delivered 
them out of all their troubles. 
¥. The Lord is nigh unto them 
that are of a contrite heart; 
and He will save the humble of 
spirit. 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 


fécti. Nam et vinctis com- 
pássi estis, et rapínam honó- 
rum vestrórum cum gáudio 
suscepístis, cognoscéntes vos 
habére meliórem, et manén- 
tem substántiam, Nolite 
ftaque amittere confidéntiam 
vestram, que magnam habet 
remuneratiónem. Patiéntia 
enim vobis necessária est: ut 
voluntátem Dei faciéntes, re- 
portétis promissiónem. Adhuc 
enim módicum aliquántulum, 
qui ventürus est, véniet, et 
non tardabit. Justus autem 
meus ex fide vivit. 


Ps. 33, 18, 19 


Clamavérunt justi, et Dé- 
minus exaudivit eos; et ex 
ómnibus tribulatiónibus eór- 
um liberávit eos. Y. Juxta est 
Dóminus his, qui tribulato 
sunt corde, et hümiles spíritu 
salvábit. 


From Septuagesima Sunday io Easter, the Lesser Alleluia is 


replaced. by the Tract. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. JY. The 
white-robed army of martyrs 
praiseth Thee, O Lord. Alle- 
luia. 


Alelúja, allelija. V. Te 
Mártyrum candidátus laudat 
exércitus, Dómine. Allelüja. 


Tract. Ps.125,5,6 


They that sow in tears shall 
reap in joy. Y. Going they went 
and wept, casting their seeds. 
FX. But coming they shall 
come with joyfulness, carrying 
their sheaves. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Qui séminant in lácrimis, in 
gáudio metent. Y. Euntes 
ibant, et flebant, mitténtes 
sémina sua. V. Veniéntes 
autem vénient cum exsulta- 
tióne, portántes manípulos 
suos. i 


Gospel. Luke 12, 1-8 


"Hi Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT lime, Jesus said 
to His disciples, Beware 


TK Séquéntis sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 

N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 

sus discípulis suis: At- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE MARTYRS 


téndite a ferménto phariseó- 
rum, quod est hypócrisis. Nihil 
autem opértum est, quod non 
revelétur: neque abscóndi- 
tum, quod non sciátur. Quó- 
niam, quz in ténebris dixistis, 
in lümine dicéntur: et quod 
in aurem locüti estis in cubí- 
culis, predicábitur in tectis. 
Dico autem vobis amícis meis: 
Ne terrámini ab his, qui occí- 
dunt corpus, et post hzc non 
habent amplius quid fáciant. 
Osténdam autem vobis quem 
timeátis: timéte eum qui, 
postquam occíderet, habet po- 
testátem mittere in gehén- 
nam. Ita dico vobis: hunc 
timéte. Nonne quinque pásse- 
res véneunt dipóndio, et unus 
ex illis non est in oblivióne 
coram Deo? Sed et capílli cá- 
pitis vestri omnes numeráti 
sunt. Nolíte ergo timére: mul- 
tis passéribus pluris estis vos. 
Dico autem vobis: Omnis qui- 
cümque conféssus füerit me 
coram homínibus, et Filius 
hóminis confitébitur illum co- 
ram Angelis Dei. 


Offertory. 

Justórum ánime in manu 

Dei sunt, et non tanget illos 

torméntum malitie: visi sunt 

óculis insipiéntium mori, illi 
autem sunt in pace, allelüja. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


1827 


ye of the leaven of the Phar- 
isees, which is hypocrisy. For 
there is nothing covered that 
Shall not be revealed; nor 
hidden, that shall not be 
known. For whatsoever things 
you have spoken in darkness, 
shall be published in the light; 
and that which you have 
spoken in the ear, in the 
chambers, shall be preached 
on the house-tops. And I say 
to you, my friends, be not 
afraid of them who kil the 
body, and after that have no 
more that they can do. But 
I will show you whom ye shall 
fear: fear ye him who after he 
hath killed, hath power to cast 
into hell. Yea, I say to you, fear 
him. Are not five sparrows sold 
for two farthings, and not one 
of them is forgotten before 
God? Yea, the very hairs of 
your head are all numbered. 
Fear not therefore; you are of 
more. value than many spar- 
rows. And I say to you, who- 
soever shall confess Me before 
men, him shall the Son of Man 
also confess before the angels 
of God. 

Wis. 3, 1-3 

'The souls of the just are in 
the hand of God, and the tor- 
ment of malice shall not touch 
them: in the sight of the un- 
wise they seemed to die, bui 
they are in peace, alleluia. 


Secret 


wWBLÁTIS quesumus Dó- 

mine, placáre munéri- 

bus: et intercédentibus sanc- 

tis Martyribus tuis N. et N. a 

cunctis nos defénde perículis. 
Per Déminum. 


E APPEASED, O Lord, with 
B the gifts we offer, and, 
by the intercession of Thy holy 
martyrs, N. and N., defend us 
from all dangers. Through our 
Lord, aa 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1828 COMMON OF ONE MARTYR IN PASCHAL-TIME 


Communion. Matt. 10, 2,7 


That which I tell you in the Quod dico vobis in tenébris, 
dark, speak ye in the light; dicite in lümine, dicit Démi- 
and that which you hear in the nus: et quod in aure auditis, 
ear preach ye upon the house- predicate super tecta. 
tops. 


Postcommunion 
AY this communion, O EC nos communio Dó- 
Lord, purge us of guilt mine purget a crímine: 


and, by the intercession of Thy et  intercedéntibus sanctis 
holy martyrs, N. and N., make Martyribus tuis N. et N. celés- 
us. partakers of the heavenly tis remédii faciat esse con- 
salvation. Through our Lord.  sórtes. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Other Epistles and Gospels, said at times on feasts- of martyrs 
in place of those given above are as follows: 


Epistle: God rendered to the just, page 1128. 
Epistle: Being justified by faith, page 623. 
Epistle: I reckon that the sufferings, page 653. 
Epistle: In all things, page 1130. 

Epistle; The saints through faith, page 878. 
Gospel: As Jesus was sitting, page 875. 

«Gospel: Jesus seeing the multitude, page 1267. 
Gospel: Y praise Thee, page 865. 

Gospel: Woe to you who build, page 1053. 
Gospel: He that heareth you, page 1050. 


Common of One Martyr in Paschal-time, (Red) 


(Protexisti) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 63,3 
HOU hast protected me, O ROTEXISTI me, Deus, à 
God, from the assembly convéntu malignántium, 
of the malignant, alleluia: from allelüja: a multitüdine oper- 


the multitude of the workers ántium iniquitátem, allelija, 
of iniquity, alleluia. alleluia. allelija. Ps. 63, 2, Exáudi, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF ONE MARTYR IN PASCHAL-TIME 


Deus, oratiónem meam cum 
déprecor: a timóre inimici 
éripe ánimam meam. Y. Gló- 
ria Patri. 


1329 


Ps. 63, 2. Hear, O God, my 
prayers, when I make supplica- 
tion to Thee: deliver my soul 
from the fear of the enemy. Y. 
Glory. 


Prayer 
For a Martyr-Bishop. 


NFIRMITÁTEM nostram ré- 

Spice, omnípotens Deus: 
et quia pondus próprie actió- 
nis gravat; beati N. Martyris 
iui atque Pontificis intercés- 
sio gloriósa nos prótegat. Per 
Dóminum. 


AVE regard to our weak- 

ness, O almighty God; 
and grant that we who are 
borne down by the weight of 
our own evil deeds may he 
safeguarded by the glorious in- 
tercession of Blessed N. thy 
Martyr- and Bishop. Through 
our Lord. 


Another Prayer for a Martyr-Bishop. 


EUS, qui nos beáti N. 

Mártyris tui atque Pon- 
tificis annua  solemnitáte 
letificas: concéde propitius; 
ut cujus natalitia cólimus, de 
ejüsdem étiam  protectióne 
gaudeámus. Per Dóminum. 


cop who dost gladden us 

by the yearly festival of 
blessed N., thy martyr and 
bishop, mercifully grant that 
we who celebrate his birthday 
to heaven may ever live with 
joy in his holy keeping. 
Through our Lord, 


For a Martyr Only. — 


RESTA quesumus omní- 

potens Deus: ut qui beá- 
ti N. Mártyris tui natalítia 
cólimus, intercessióne ejus in 
tui nóminis amóre roborémur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Guz: we beseech Thee, 
almighty God, that we 
who keep the birth day to 
heaven of blessed N., thy mar- 
tyr, may by his prayers be 
strengthened in the love of thy 
holy name. Through our Lord. 


Another Prayer for a Martyr Only. 


RESTA quesumus omni- 

potens Deus: ut interce- 
dénte beáto N. Mártyre tuo, 
et a cunctis adversitátibus 
liberémur in córpore, et a 
pravis cogitatiénibus mundé- 
mur in mente, Per Dóminum. 


Guz: we beseech Thee, 
almighty God that, by 
the prayers of blessed N., thy 
martyr, our bodies may be pre- 
served from all dangers and 
our minds may be cleansed 
from all evil thoughts, Through 
our Lord. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1330 COMMON OF ONE MARTYR IN PASCHAL-TIME 


Lesson. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 
HE just shall stand with 
great constancy against 
those that have afflicted them, 
and taken away their labors. 
These seeing it, shall be 
troubled with terrible fear, and 
Shall be amazed at the sud- 
denness of their unexpected 
salvation saying, within them- 
selves, repenting and groaning 
for anguish of spirit, These are 
they whom we had some time 
in derision, and for & parable 
of reproach. We fools esteemed 
iheir life madness, and their 
end without honor. Behold, 
how they are numbered among 
the children of God, and their 
lot is among the saints. 


Wis. 5, 1-5 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiz. 


TABUNT justi in magna 
S constántia advérsus eos, 
qui se angustiavérunt, et qui 
abstulérunt labóres eórum. 
Vidéntes turbabüntur timóre 
horríbili, et mirabüntur in su- 
bitatióne, insperáte salutis, 
dicéntes intra se, peniténtiam 
agéntes, et pre angustia spiri- 
tus geméntes: Hi sunt, quos 
habüimus aliquándo in derí- 
sum, et in similitidinem im- 
propérii. Nos insensáti vitam 
illórum estimabamus insá- 
niam, et finem illórum sine 
honóre: ecce quómodo compu- 
táti sunt inter fílios Dei, et 
inter sanctos sors illórum est. 


Or there is read T d Epistle, Dearly beloved, from the Mass, 


Letabitur, page 131 


Alleluia, alleluia. * . Ps. 88, 6. 
‘The heavens shall confess Thy 
wonders, O Lord; and Thy 
truth in the church of the 
saints. Alleluia. V. Ps. 20, 4. O 
Lord, Thou has set on his head 
& crown of precious stones, 
Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, alleluja. V. Ps. 88, 
6. Confitebüntur coeli mira- 
bília tua. Dómine: étenim ve- 
ritátem tuam in ecclésia sanc- 
tórum. Allelüja. Y. Ps. 20, 4. 
Posuisti, Dómine, super caput 
ejus corónam de lápide pre- 
tióso. Allelüja. 


Gospel. John 15, 1-7 


Hm Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, Jesus said 

to. His disciples, T am 

the true vine and My Father 
is the husbandman. Every 
branch in Me, that beareth not 
fruit, He wil take away; and 
every one that beareth fruit, 
He wil purge it, that it may 
bring forth more fruit. Now 
you are clean by reason of the 


*H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 
T ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 

sus discipulis suis: Ego 
sum vitis vera: et Pater meus 
agrícola est. Omnem pálmi- 
tem in me non feréntem fruc- 
tum, tollet eum: et omnem, 
qui fert fructum, purgábit 
eum, ut fructum plus áfferat. 
Jam vos mundi estis propter 
sermónem, quem locútus sum 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF ONE MARTYRE IN PASCHAL-TIME 


vobis. Manéte in me: et ego 
in vobis. Sicut palmes non po- 
test ferre fructum a semetip- 
so, nisi mánserit in vite: sic 
nec vos, nisi in me manséritis. 
Ego sum vitis, vos pálmites: 
qui manet in me, et ego in eo, 
hic fert fructum multum: 
quia sine me nihil potéstis fá- 
cere. Si quis in me non mán- 
serit, mittétur foras sicut 
palmes, et aréscet, et cólligent 
eum, et in ignem mittent, et 
ardet. Si manséritis in me, et 
verba mea in vobis mánse- 
rint: quodcümque voluéritis, 
petétis, et fiet vobis. 


1331 


word which I have spoken to 
you. Abide in Me, and I in you. 
As the branch can not bear 
fruit of itself, unless it abide 
in the vine, so neither can you, 
unless you abide in Me. I am 
ihe vine, you the branches: He 
that abideth in Me, and I in 
him, the same beareth much 
fruit: for without Mé you can 
do nothing. If any one abide 
not in Me, he shall be cast 
forth as a branch, and shall 
wither, and they shall gather 
him up, and cast him into the 
fire, and he burneth. If you 
abide.in Me, and My word abide 
in you, you shall.ask whatever 
you will, and it shall be done 
to you. 


Offertory. Ps. 88, 6 


Confitebüntur coli mira- 
bília tua, Dómine, et veritá- 
tem tuam in ecclésia sanctó- 
rum, allehija, allelüja. 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


The heavens shall confess 
Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
iruth in the church of the 
saints, alleluia, alleluia. 


Secret 
For a Martyr-Bishop. 


Ósr1AS libi Dómine, beáti 

N. Mártyris tui atque 

Pontificis dicátas méritis, þe- 

nígnus assüme: et ad perpé- 

tuum nobis tribue proveníre 
subsidium. Per Dóminum. 


rN RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 

the Sacred Victim we, 

by the merits of blessed N., thy 

martyr and bishop, dedicate to 

Thee; and grant that it may be 

to us an everlasting help. 
Through our Lord. 


Another Secret for a Martyr-Bishop. 


ÚNERA tibi Dómine dicá- 

ta sanctifica: et inter- 

cedénte beáto N. Mártyre tuo 

atque Pontifice, per éadem 

nos placátus inténde. Per Dó- 
minum. 


ANCTIFY O Lord the gifts 

we offer to Thee, and, 
blessed N., Thy martyr and 
bishop, interceding for us, ap- 
peased thereby, graciously look 
down upon us, Through our 
Lord. 


For a Martyr Only. 


UNÉRIBUS nostris quesu- 
mus Dómine preci- 
busque suscéptis: et colésti- 


ECEIVE, We beseech 'Thee, 
O Lord, our offerings 
and prayers: cleanse us by vir- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1332 COMMON OF ONE MARTYR IN PASCHAL-TIME 


tue of these heavenly mysteries bus nos munda mystériis, et 
and graciously hear us. cleménter exáudi. Per Dómi- 
Through our Lord. num. 


Another Secret for a Martyr Only. 


AY our devout offerings, 
O Lord, be acceptable in 


Thy sight, and, by the interces- 
Sion of the holy Martyr on 
whose festival they are laid be- 
fore Thee, may they profit us 
unto salvation. Through our 
Lord. 

Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 

The just shall rejoice in the 

Lord and shall hope in Him: 

and al the upright in heart 

shall be praised, alleluia, alle- 
Juia. 


ccÉPTA sit in conspéctu 

tuo Dómine nostra de- 

vótio: et ejus nobis fiat sup- 

plicatióne salutáris, pro cujus 

solemnitate defértur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Ps. 63, 11 


Letábitur justus in Démi- 
no, et sperábit in eo: et lau- 
dabüntur omnes recti corde, 
allelija, allehija. 


Postcommunion 
For a Martyr-Bishop. 


ur strength renewed from 

having shared in Thy 
sacred gift, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord our God, that by the in- 
tercession of blessed, N., Thy 
martyr and bishop, we may 
ever feel the mighty power of 
the sacrament we worship. 
Through our Lord. 


EFECTI participatióne 
müneris sacri, quzsu- 

mus Dómine Deus noster: ut 
cujus exséquimur cultum, in- 
tercedénte beáto N. Mártyre 
tuo atque Pontffice, sentiá- 
mus efféctum. Per Dóminum. 


Another Postcommunion for a Martyr-Bishop. 


AY this communion, O 
Lord, cleanse us from 


iC nos commünio Dó- 
mine purget a crímine: 


guilt, and by the intercession et intercedénte beáto N. Már- 
of blessed N., Thy martyr and tyre tuo atque Pontifice, CŒ- 
bishop, unite us in Him who is léstis remédii fáciat esse con- 
the heavenly medicine of our sórtes. Per Dóminum. 

souls. Through our Lord. 


For a Martyr Only. 


UR Strength renewed from EFÉCTI . participatiéne 
having shared in Thy müneris Sacri, quesu- 


Sacred gift, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord our God, that by the 
intercession of blessed N., Thy 


mus Dómine Deus noster: ut 
cujus exséquimur cultum, in- 
tercedénte beáto N. Martyre 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OP MARTYRS IN PASCHAL-TIME 1333 


tuo, sentiámus efféctum. Per martyr, we may ever feel the 
Dóminum. mighty power of the sacrament 
we worship. Through our Lord. 
Another Postcommunion for a Martyr Only. 

A, QUIESUMUS Dómine RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
Deus noster: ut sicut Lord, that we who on 
tuórum commemoratióne earth discharge with joy the 
Sanetórum temporáli gratu- duty of honouring Thy saints 
lamur offício; ita perpétuo may be gladdened by their 
letémur aspéctu. Per Dó- company forever in heaven. 

minum. Through our Lord. 
The Epistle and Gospel for Mass of one Martyr in Paschal- 


time may be said in Mass of two or more Martyrs and vice 
versa; provided no particular one has been assigned. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Common of Two or More Martyrs in Paschal-time 
(Red) 


(Sancti tui) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 144, 10, 1 1 


ANCTI tui, Dómine, bene- HY saints, O Lord, shall 
dicent te: glériam regni bless Thee; They shall 
tui dicent, allelija, allelija. speak of the glory of Thy king- 
Ps. 144, 1. Exaltábo te, Deus dom, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 144, 
meus Rex: et benedícam nó- 1.I will extol Thee, O God, my 
mini tuo in seculum, et in king; and I will bless Thy 
seculum seculi. y. Glória name for ever, yea for ever and 
Patri. ever. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
For Martyr-Bishops. 
EATÓRUM Mártyrum, pa- AY the feast of the blessed 
ritérque Pontificum N. martyrs and bishops, N. 
et N. nos quesumus Dómine and N., protect us, we beseech 
festa tueántur: et eórum Thee, O Lord, and their august 
comméndet orátio veneránda. prayers commend us to Thee. 


Per Dóminum. Through our Lord. 
5 For Martyrs Only. 
EUS, qui nos concédis , cop, Who dost permit us 
Sanctorum Mártyrum to celebrate the birthday 


tuórum N. et N. natalitia có- of Thy holy martyrs, N. and 
lere: da nobis in etérna beati- N.. grant us to enjoy their 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1334 COMMON OF MARTYRS IN PASCHAL-TIME 


tompanionship in everlasting 


tüdine de eórum  societáte 
gaudére. Per Dóminum. 


Another Prayer for Martyrs Only. 


beatitude. Through our Lord. 
cop, Who dost gladden 
O us by the annual solem- 
nity of Thy martyrs, N. and 
N., Mercifully grant that we be 
kindled by the example of those 


in whose merits we rejoice. 
Through our Lord. 


EVS, qui nos ánnua sanc- 

tórum Mártyrum tuó- 
rum N. et N. solemnitate leti- 
ficas: concéde propítius; ut 
quorum gaudémus  méritis, 
accendámur  exémplis. Per 
Dóminum. 


Epistle. 1 Peter 1, 3-7 


Lesson from the Epistle of 

blessed Peter the Apostle. 

LESSED be the God and 

Father of Our Lord 
Jesus Christ, Who according 
to His great mercy hath re- 
generated us unto a lively hope, 
by the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ from the dead, unto an 
inheritance of incorruptible 
and undefiled, and that can 
not fade, reserved in heaven 
for you, who by the power of 
God are-kept by faith unto sal- 
vation ready to be revealed in 
the last time. Wherein you shall 
greatly rejoice, if now you 
must be for a little time made 
sorrowful in divers tempta- 
tions: that the trial of your 
faith, much more precious 
than gold (which is tried by 
the fire), may be found unto 
praise, and glory, and honor, 
at the appearing of Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Thy 
saints, O Lord, shall flourish 
like the lily, and shall be as 
the odor of balsam before 
Thee. Alleluia. Y. Ps. 115, 15. 
Precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of His 
saints. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Petri 
Apóstoli. 
ENEDICTUS Deus et Pater 
Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi, qui secindum miseri- 
córdiam suam magnam rege- 
nerávit nos in spem vivam, 
per  resurrectiónem Jesu 
Christi ex mórtuis, in hzredi- 
tatem incorruptibilem, et in- 
contaminátam, et immarces- 
cibilem, conservátam in ccelis 
in vobis, qui in virtüte Dei 
cusiodimini per fidem in sa- 
lütem, parátam revelári in 
témpore novíssimo. In quo 
exsultábitis módicum nunc si 
opórtet contristári in váriis 
tentatiónibus: ut  probátio 
vestre fidei multo pretiósior 
auro (quod per ignem probá- 
tur) inveniátur in laudem, et 
glóriam, et honórem, in reve- 
latióne Jesu Christi Dómini 
nostri. 


Allelija, allelija. Y. Sancti 
tui, Dómine, florébunt sicut 
lilllum et sícut odor bálsami 
erunt ante te. Allelüja. V. Ps. 
115, 15. Pretiósa in conspéctu 
Dómini, mors sanctórum ejus. 
Allelija. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF MARTYRS IN PASCHAL-TIME 


1835 


Gospel. John 15, 5-11 


*H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joánnem. 
T: ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 

sus discípulis suis: Ego 
sum vitis, vos pálmites: qui 
manet in me, et ego in eo, hic 
fert fructum multum: quia 
Sine me nihil potéstis fácere. 
Si quis in me non mánserit, 
mittétur foras sicut palmes, 
et aréscet, et cólligent eum et 
in ignem mittent, et ardet. Si 
manséritis in me, et verba 
mea in vobis mánserint: 
quodeümque voluéritis, peté- 
tis, et flet vobis. In hoc clari- 
ficátus est Pater meus, ut 
fructum plürimum afferátis, 
et efficiámini mei discípuli. 
Sicut diléxit me Pater, et ego 
diléxi vos. Manéte in dilec- 
tióne mea. Si precépta mea 
Servavéritis, manébitis in di- 
léctione mea, sicut et ego Pa- 
tris mei precépta servávi, et 
máneo in ejus dilectióne. 
Hee locütus sum vobis, ut 
gaudium meum in vobis sit, et 
gáudium Vestrum impleátur. 


Offertory. 
Letamini in Dómino, et ex- 
Sultáte, justi: et gloriámini, 
omnes recti corde, allelija, 
allelúja. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


H6 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, Jesus said to 
His disciples, I am the 
vine, you the branches: he that 
abideth in Me, and I in him, 
the same beareth much fruit: 
for without Me you can do 
nothing. If any one abide not 
in Me, he shall be cast forth as 
a branch, and shall wither, and 
they shall gather him up, and 
cast him into the fire, and he 
burneth. If you abide in Me, 
and My word abide in you, you 
shall ask whatever you will, 
and it shall be done unto you. 
In this is My Father glorified, 
that you bring forth very 
much fruit, and become My dis- 
ciples. As the Father hath 
loved Me, I also have loved 
you. Abide in My love. If you 
keep My commandments, you 
shall abide in My love; as I 
also kept My Father’s com- 
mandments, and do abide in 
His love. These things have I 
spoken to you, that My joy may 
be in you, and your joy may be 
filled. 


Ps. 31, 11 


Be glad in the Lord, and re- 
joice ye just; and glory all ye 
right of heart, alleluia, alleluia. 


Secret 
For Martyr-Bishops. 


pÉsTO Dómine suppli- 
catiónibus nostris, 


IvE ear, O Lord, to our 
supplications which we 


quas in Sanctórum tuórum offer in commemoration of Thy 
commemoratiéne deférimus: saints, that, we, having no con- 
ut qui nostre justitie fidü- fidence in our own justice, may 
ciam non habémus, eórum qui be assisted by the merits of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1336 


those who have been pleasing 
to Thee. Through our Lord. 


COMMON OF MARTYRS IN PASCHAL-TIME 


tibi placuérunt, méritis adju- 
vémur. Per Dóminum. 


For Martyrs Only. 


E OFFER Thee, O Lord, 

the gifts of our devo- 
iion; may they, through Thy 
mercy, be rendered both pleas- 
ing unto Thee, for the honor of 
Thy just ones, and profitable 
for our salvation. Through our 
Lord. ` 


ÓNERA tibi Dómine nos- 

tre devotiónis offéri- 
mus: que et pro tuórum tibi 
grata sint honóre justórum, 
et nobis salutária, te mise- 
ránte, reddántur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Another Secret for Martyrs Only. 


E APPEASED, O Lord, with 

the gifts we offer, and, 
by the intercession of Thy holy 
martyrs, N. and N., defend us 
from all dangers. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


BLÁTIS quesumus Dómi- 

ne, placáre munéribus: 
et  intercedéntibus sanctis 
Martyribus tuis N. et N. a 
cunctis nos defénde perículis. 
Per Dóminum, 


Communion. Ps. 32,1 


Rejoice in the Lord, ye just, 
alleluia; praise becometh the 
upright, alleluia. 


Gaudéte, justi, in Dómino, 
allehija: rectos decet collau- 
dátio, allelüja. 


Postcommunion 
For Martyr-Bishops. 


ILLED with the mysteries 
of salvation, we beseech 


vzsuMus, Dómine, salu- 
táribus repléti mysté- 


Thee, O Lord, that we may be riis: ut, quorum solémnia ce- 
helped by the prayers of those lebrámus, eórum oratiónibus 
whose festival we celebrate. adjuvémur. Per Dóminum 


Through our. Lord. 


nostrum. 


For Martyrs Only. 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, by the interces- 
Sion of Thy holy martyrs, N. 
and N., that what we touch 
with our lips we may receive 
with & pure heart. Through 
our Lord. 


RÆSTA nobis, quesumus, 

Dómine: intercedénti- 
bus sanctis Martjribus tuis 
N. et N.; ut, quod ore con- 
tingimus, pura mente capiá- 
mus, Per Dóminum. 


Another Postcommunion for Martyrs Only. 


ay this communion, O 
Lord, purge us of guilt 
and, by the intercession of Thy 


Ec nos commünio, Dó- 
mine, Purget a crímine: 


€t, intercedéntibus sanctis 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A CONFESSOR-BISHOP 


Martyribus tuis N. et N. cæ- 
léstis remédii fáciat esse con- 
sértes. Per Dóminum. 


1337 


holy martyrs, N. and N., make 
us partakers of the heavenly 
salvation. Through our Lord. 


In common Masses: of martyrs in Paschal-time the following 


Epistle and Gospel may be said 


Epistle: After these things, 
Caius, April 22, page 985. 


as on Feast of Sts. Soter and 


Gospel: Amen, amen I say to you, as on Feast of St. Anicetus, 


April 17, page 984. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Common of a Confessor-Bishop 


(Statuit ei) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 45, 30 


TATUIT ei Dóminus testa- 

méntum pacis, et prín- 
cipem fecit eum: ut sit illi 
sacerdétii dígnitas in etér- 
num (T. P. Allelúja, allelüja.) 
Ps. 131, 1. Meménto, Dómine, 
David: et omnis mansuetüdi- 
nis ejus. Y. Glória Patri. 


HE Lord made to him a 

covenant of peace, and 
made him a prince; that the 
dignity of priesthood should be 
to him forever. (P.T. Alleluia, 
alleluia.) Ps. 131, 1. O Lord, 
remember David, and all his 
meekness. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


A, QU&SUMUS, omnípo- 
tens Deus: ut beáti N. 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that the 


Confessóris tui atque Pontí- august solemnity of Thy 
ficis veneranda solémnitas, et blessed confessor and pontiff, 
devotiónem nobis áugeat, et N., may increase our devotion 


salütem. Per Dóminum. 


and promote our salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 44, 16-27; 45, 3-20 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


CCE sacérdos magnus, qui 

in diébus suis placuit 

Deo, et invéntus est justus: 
et in témpore iractindie fac- 
tus est reconciliátio. Non est 
invéntus similis illi, qui con- 
servávit legem Excélsi. Ideo 
jurejurándo fecit illum Dómi- 
nus créscere in plebem suam. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 
EHOLD a great priest, who 
in his days pleased God, 
and was found just;. and in the 
time of wrath was made a 
reconciliation. There was not 
any found like to him, who 
kept the law of the Most High. 
Therefore by an oath the Lord 
made him increase among his 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1838 


people, He gave him the bless- 
ing of all nations, and con- 
firmed His covenant upon his 
head. He acknowledged him in 
His blessings: He preserved for 
him His mercy: and he found 
grace before the eyes of the 
Lord. He glorified him in the 
sight of kings, and gave him a 
crown of glory. He made an 
everlasting covenant with him; 
and gave him a great priest- 
hood; and made him blessed in 
glory. To execute the office of 
the priesthood and to have 
praise in his name, and to 
offer to him worthy incense for 
an odor of sweetness. 

From Septuagesima to Easter, 


by the Tract, 
placed dy the Greater Alleluia. 


COMMON OF A CONFESSOR-BISHOP 


Benedictiónem ómnium gén- 
tium dedit illi, et testamén- 
tum suum confirmávit super 
caput ejus. Agnóvit eum in 
benedictiónibus suis: conser- 
vávit illi misericórdiam suam: 
et invénit grátiam coram ócu- 
lis Dómini. Magnificávit eum 
in conspéctu regum: et dedit 
ili corónam glóriæ. Státuit 
illi testaméntum ætérnum, et 
dedit illi sacerdótium mag- 
num: et beatificavit illum in 
glória. Fungi sacerdótio, et 
habére laudem in nómine ip- 
sius, et offérre illi incénsum 
dignum in odórem suavitátis. 


the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


Gradual. Ecclus. 44, 16 


Behold a great priest, who in Ecce sacérdos magnus, qui 
his days pleased God. Y. Eccl. in diébus suis plácuit Deo. y. 
44, 20. There was not any Eccl. 44, 20. Non est invéntus 
found like to him, who kept símilis illi, qui conserváret 


the law of the Most High. 


legem Excélsi. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 109, 
4 Thou art a priest forever, ac- 
cording to the order of Mel- 
chisedech. Alleluia. 


Allelija, allelüja. V. Ps. 109, 
4. Tu es sacérdos in etérnum, 
secündum órdinem Melchíse- 
dech. Allelája. 


Tract. Ps. 111,1-3 


Blessed is the man that fear- 
eth the Lord: in His command- 
ments he hath great delight. 
Y. His seed shall be mighty 
upon earth: the generation of 
the righteous shall be blessed. 
Y. Glory and wealth shall be 
in his house: and his justice 
remaineth for ever and ever. 


Beátus vir, qui timet Dó- 
minum: in mandátis ejus cu- 
pit nimis. Y. Potens in terra 
erit semen ejus: generátio 
rectórum benedicétur. Y. Gló- 
ria et divitie in domo ejus: et 
justítia ejus manet in secu- 
lum seculi. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 109, 
4. Thou art a priest forever ac- 


Allelija, allelüja. JY. Ps. 
109, 4. Tu es sacérdos in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


um 
| 


NL di 


COMMON OF A CONFESSOR-BISHOP 


eternum, secündum órdinem 
Melchísedech.  Allelüja. V. 
Hic est sacérdos, quem cor- 
onávit Dóminus. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1389 


cording to the order of Mel- 
chisedech. Alleluia. V. ‘This is 
the priest whom the Lord hath 
crowned. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 25, 14-23 


KR Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Matthzeum. 


'N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I Sus discípulis suis parábo- 
lam hanc: Homo péregre pro- 
ficíscens, vocávit servos suos, 
et trádidit illis bona sua. Et 
uni dedit quinque talénta, 
álii autem duo, alii vero unum, 
unicuíque secindum própri- 
am virtütem, et proféctus est 
Statim. Abiit autem qui quin- 
que talénta accéperat, et op- 
erátus est in eis, et lucratus 
est ália quinque. Simíliter et 
qui duo accéperat, lucrátus 
est ália duo. Qui autem unum 
accéperat, ábiens fodit in ter- 
ram, et abscóndit pecüniam 
dómini sui. Post multum vero 
témporis venit dóminus ser- 
vórum illórum, et pósuit ra- 
tiónem cum eis. Et accédens 
qui quinque talénta accéperat, 
óbtulit alia quinque talénta, 
dicens: Dómine, quinque ta- 
lénta tradidísti mihi ecce 
alia quinque superlucratus 
sum. Ait illi dóminus ejus: 
Euge, serve bone et fidélis, 
quia super pauca fuísti fidélis, 
super multa te constituam: 
intra in gáudium dómini tui. 
Accéssit autem et qui duo ta- 
lénta accéperat, et ait: Dó- 
mine, duo talénta tradidisti 
mihi, ecce ália duo lucrátus 
sum, ait illi dominus ejus: 
Euge, serve bone et fidélis, 
quia super pauca fuísti fidé- 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT lime, Jesus spoke 

j this parable to His dis- 
ciples: A man going into a far 
country, called his servants, 
and delivered to them his 
goods. And to one he gave five 
talents, and to another two, 
and to another one, to every 
one according to his proper 
ability; and immediately he 
took his journey. And he that 
had received the five talents 
went his way, and traded with 
the same, and gained other 
five; and in like manner he 
that had received the two, 
gained other two; but he that 
had received the one, going his 
way, digged into the earth and 
hid his lord's money. But after 
2 long time, the lord of those 
servants came and reckoned 
with them. And he that had 
received the five talents, com- 
ing, brought other five talents 
saying, Lord, thou didst deliver 
to me fve talents; behold I 
have gained other five over and 
above. His lord said to him, 
Well done, good and faithful 
servant, because thou hast been 
faithful over a few things, I 
wil place thee Over many 
things; enter thou into the joy 
of thy lord. And he also that 
had received the two talents 
came and said, Lord, thou de- 
liveredst two talents to me; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1340 COMMON OF A CONFESSOR-BISHOP 


behold I have gained other two. lis, super multa te constítu- 
His lord said to him, Well done, am: intra in gáudium dó- 
good and faithful servant, be- mini tui. 

cause thou hast been faithful 

over a few things, I will place thee over many things; enter 
thou into the joy of thy lord. 


Offertory. Ps.88, 21-22 


I have found David My  Invéni David servum me- 
servant, with My holy oil I um, óleo sancto meo unxi 
have anointed him: for My eum: manus enim mea auxil- 
hand shall help him, and My iábitur ei, et bráchium meum 
arm shall strengthen him. confortábit eum. (T. P. Alle- 
(P. T. Alleluia, alleluia.) Taja.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


ay Thy saints, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, 


everywhere make us joyful, 
that, while we venerate their 
merits, we may experience 
their patronage. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


A faithful and wise servant, 
whom the Lord hath set over 
His family, to give them their 
measure of wheat in due sea- 
son. (P.T. Alleluia, alleluia.) 


ANCTI tui, qusesumus, 
Dómine, nos ubíque le- 
tificent: ut, dum eórum mér- 
ita recólimus, patrocínia sen- 
tiàmus. Per Dóminum. 


Luke 12, 42 


Fidélis servus et prudens, 
quem constituit Dóminus su- 
per familiam suam: ut det 
ilis in témpore tritici men- 
süram. (T.P. Allehija.) 


Postcommunion 


RANT, We beseech Thee, 
O almighty God, that, 
giving thanks for the favors we 
have received, we may, by the 
intercession of blessed N., Thy 
confessor and bishop, obtain 
blessings still greater. Through 
our Lord, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


RESTA, quesumus, omni- 

potens Deus: ut, de per- 
céptis munéribus grátias ex- 
hibéntes, intercedénte beáto 
N. Contessóre tuo atque Pon- 
tifice, benefícla potióra su- 
mámus, Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


^ 


COMMON OF A CONFESSOR-BISHOP 


1341 


Another Mass of a Confessor-Bishop 


(Sacerdotes tui) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 131, 9,19 


ACERDÓTES tui Dómine, 

induant justitiam, et 
sancti tui exsültent: propter 
David servum tuum, non 
avértas fáciem Christi tui. 
CT. P. Allelüja, allelúja.) V. 
Ps. 131, 1. Meménto Dómine 
David et omnis mansuetüd- 
inis ejus. Y. Glória Patri. 


clothed with justice, and 
let Thy saints rejoice: for Thy 
Servant David's sake, turn not 
away the face of Thine 
anointed. (P.T. Alleluia, alle- 
luia). V. Ps. 131, 1. O Lord, re- 
member David and all his 
meekness, Y. Glory. 


Ii. Thy priests, O Lord, be 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


XÁuDI quaesumus Dómine 

preces nostras, quas in 
beáti N. Confessóris tui atque 
Pontíficis solemnitáte deféri- 
mus: et qui tibi digne méruit 
famulári, ejus intercedénti- 
bus méritis ab ómnibus nos 
absólve peccátis, Per Dómi- 
num. 


IVE ear, We beseech 'Thee, 

O Lord, unto our prayers, 
which we offer on the solem- 
nity of blessed N., Thy con- 
fessor and bishop, and by the 
interceding merits of him who 
had the grace to serve Thee 
worthily, free us from all our 
sins, Through our Lord. 


Epistle. Heb. 7, 7-27 


Lectio Epistole beáti, Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Hebrzos. 


RATRES: Plures facti sunt 

sacerdótes, idcirco quod 
morte prohiberéntur perma- 
nére: Jesus autem eo quod 
máneat in extérnum, sempi- 
térnum habet sacerdótium. 
Unde et salváre in perpétuum 
potest accedéntes per seme- 
típsum ad Deum: semper vi- 
vens ad interpellàndum pro 
nobis. Talis enim decébat ut 
nobis esset póntifex, sanctus, 
innocens, impollitus, segregá- 
tus a peccatóribus, et excél- 
sior celis factus: qui non ha- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Hebrews. 


RETHREN, there were made 
many priests, because by 
reason of death they were not 
suffered to continue: but Jesus, 
for that He continueth for- 
ever, hath an everlasting 
priesthood. Whereby He is able 
also to save forever them that 
come to God by Him; always 
living to make intercession for 
us, For it was fitting that we 
should have such a high priest, 
holy, innocent, and undefiled, 
separated from sinners, and 
made higher than the heavens; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1342 


Who needeth not daily (as the 
other priests) to offer sacrifice 
first for His own sins, and then 
for the people's; for this Jesus 
Christ our Lord did once, in 
Offering Himself. 


From Septuagesima to Easter 


COMMON. OF A CONFESSOR-BISHOP 


bet  necessitátem ^ quotidie, 
quemádmodum sSacerdótes, 
prius pro suis delíctis hóstias 
Offérre, deínde pro pópuli: 
hoc enim fecit semel, seipsum 
offeréndo, Jesus Christus Dó- 
minus noster. 


the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual, Ps. 131, 16, 17 


I will clothe her priests with 
salvation: and her saints shall 
rejoice with exceeding great 
joy. Y. There will I bring forth 
2 horn to David; I have pre- 
pared a lamp for my anointed. 


Sacerdótes ejus induam sa- 
lutári: et sancti ejus exsulta- 
tióne exsultábunt. Y. Illuc 
prodücam cornu David; pa- 
rávi lucérnam Christo meo. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 109, 


Allelija, allelája. Ps. 109, 4. 


4. The Lord hath sworn, and Y. Jurávit Dóminus, et non 
He will not repent: Thou art penitébit eum: Tu es sacér- 
& priest for ever according to dos in etérnum, secündum 
the order of Melchisedech. órdinem Melchisedech. Alle- 


Alleluia. 


lája. 


Tract. Ps. 111, 1-3 


Blessed is the man that fear- 
eth the Lord: in His command- 
ments he hath great delight. 
y. His seed shall be mighty 
upon earth: the generation of 
the righteous shall be blessed. 
Y. Glory and wealth shall be 
in his house: and his justice 
remaineth for ever and ever. 


Beátus vir, qui timet Dómi- 
num: in mandátis ejus cupit 
nimis. V. Potens in terra erit 
semen ejus: generátio rectó- 
rum benedicétur. Y. Glória et 
divitie in domo ejus: et jus- 
títia ejus manet in seculum 
seculi. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 109, 


Allelija, alleluja. ¥’. Ps. 109, 


4, The Lord hath sworn, and 4. Jurávit Dóminus, et non 
He will not repent: Thou art penitébit eum: Tu es sacérdos 
a priest forever, according to in xtérnum, secundum órdi- 
the order of Melchisedech. nem Melchisedech. Allelüja. 
Alleluia. Y. Ecclus. 45, 9. The Y. Eccl. 45, 9. Amávit eum 
Lord loved him and adorned Dóminus, et ornávit eum: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A CONFESSOR-BISHOP 


stolam glóriz induit. eum. Al- 
lelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1843 


him; He clothed him with a 
robe of glory. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 24, 42-47 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Mattheum. 


T. ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus discípulis suis: Vigi- 
láte, quia nescítis qua hora 
Dóminus vester ventürus sit. 
Illud autem scitóte, quóniam 
Si sciret paterfamilias, qua 
hora fur ventürus esset, vigi- 
láret ütique, et non síneret 
pérfodi domum suam. Ideo et 
vos estóte paráti: quia qua 
nescítis hora, Fílius hómi- 
nis ventürus est. Quis putas 
est fidelis servus, et pru- 
dens, quem constituit dómi- 
nus suus super famíliam su- 
am, ut det illis cibum in tém- 
pore?  Beátus ille 
quem, cum vénerit dóminus 
ejus, invénerit sic faciéntem. 
Amen dico vobis, quóniam su- 
per ómnía bona sua constítuet 
eum. 


Offertory. 


Véritas mea, et misericór- 
dia mea cum ipso: et in nó- 
mine meo exaltábitur cornu 
ejus. (T. P. Allelüja.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Servus, . 


%4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus said 
to His disciples, Watch 


ye, because ye know not at 


what hour your Lord will come. 
But this know ye, that if the 
good man of the house knew at 
what hour the thief would 
come, he would certainly watch, 
and would not suffer his house 
to be broken open: wherefore 
be you always ready, because 
at what Lour you know not, the 
Son of man will come. Who, 
thinkest thou, is a faithful and 
wise servant, whom his lord 
appointed over his family to 
give them meat in season? 
Blessed is that servant, whom 
when his lord shall come, he 
shall find so doing. Amen I say 
to you, he shall place him over 
all his goods. 


Ps. 88, 25 


My truth and My mercy shall 
be with him: and in My name 
Shall his horn be exalted. 
(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Secret 


atque Pontíficis, quesu- 
mus, Dómine, annua solémni- 
tas pietati tue nos reddat ac- 
céptos; ut, per hzc pie pla- 
catiónis offícia, et illum beáta 
retribütio comitétur. et nobis 


gi N. Confessóris tui 


ay the annual festival of 

blessed N., Thy confes- 
sor and pontiff, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, render us ac- 
ceptable to Thy loving-kind- 
ness, that through these offices 
of pious atonement a blessed 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1344 COMMON OF A DOCTOR OF THE CHURCH 
reward may attend him and he grátiz tue dona concíliet. Per 
may win for us the gifts of Thy Dóminum. 

grace, Through our Lord 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Matt. 24, 46, 47 


Blessed is that servant  Beátus servus, quem, cum 
whom, when his lord shall vénerit dóminus, invénerit 
come, he shall find watching: vigilantem: amen dico vobis, 
Amen I say to you, he shall set super ómnia bona sua consti- 
him over all his goods. (P.T. tuet eum. (T. P. Allelija.) 
Alleluia.) : 


Postcommunion 
Gop, the rewarder of EUS fidélium remunerá- 


faithful souls, grant that, 
through the prayers of blessed 
N., Thy confessor and bishop, 
whose august solemnity we 
celebrate, we may obtain par- 
don of our sins, Through our 


tor animárum: presta; ` 


ut beáti N. Confessóris tui 
atque Pontificis, cujus vene- 
rándam celebrámus festivi- 
tatem, précibus indulgéntiam 
consequámur. Per Dóminum. 


Lord. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 
Other Epistles and Gospels for Mass of a Confessor-Bishop: 
Epistle: Every high priest, page 1237. 
Epistle: Remember your prelates, page 843. 
Gospel; No man lighteth a candle, page 1285. 
Gospel: Take ye heed, watch, as in Anniversary, page 1445. 


Common of a Doctor of the Church 


(In medio) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 15, 5 


N THE midst of the church N MEDIO ecclesie aperuit 

the Lord opened his mouth: os ejus: et implevit eum 
and filled him with the spirit Dominus spiritus sapientie et 
of wisdom and understanding: intellectus: stolam glérie in- 
He clothed him with a robe of duit eum (T.P. Allelüja, al- 
glory. (P.T. Alleluia, alleluia.) lelája.) Ps. 91, 2. Bonum est 
Ps. 91, 2. It is good to give confíteri Dómino: et psallere 
praise to the Lord: and to sing nomini tuo, Altissime. y. 
to Thy name, O Most High. Y. Glória Patri. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a a= 


COMMON OF A DOCTOR OF THE CHURCH 


1345 


Prayer 


ne salütis beátum N. 
minístrum tribuisti: presta, 
quesumus; ut, quem Doctór- 
em vite habüimus in terris, 
intercessórem habére mereá- 
mur in celis, Per Dóminum. 


D qui pópulo tuo ztér- 


“Gop, Who didst give 

blessed N. to be à min- 
ister of everlasting salvation 
unto Thy people, grant, we be- 
seech Thee, that, as we have 
had him for our teacher on 
earth, we may deserve to have 
him .as our intercessor in 
heaven. Through our Lord. 


In place of the following Epistle, the Lesson found at end 
of this Mass is sometimes read on the feasts of Holy Doctors. 


Epistle. 2 Tim. 4, 1-8 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad 'Timótheum. 


ARISSIME: Testificor co- 

ram Deo et Jesu Chris- 
to, qui judicatürus est vivos et 
mórtuos, per advéntum ipsíus, 
et regnum ejus: predica ver- 
bum, insta opportüne, im- 
portüne: árgue, óbsecra, ín- 
crepa in omni patiéntia, et 
doctrína. Erit enim tempus, 
cum sanam doctrinam non 
sustinébunt, sed ad sua de- 
sidéria coacervábunt sibi ma- 
gístros pruriéntes áuribus, et 
a veritáte quidem audítum 
avértent, ad. fábulas autem 
converténtur. Tu vero vígila, 
in ómnibus labóra, opus fac 
evangelíste, ministérium tu- 
um imple. Sóbrius esto. Ego 
enim jam delíbor, et tempus 
resolutiónis mez instat. Bo- 
num certámen certávi cur- 
sum consumávi fidem servá- 
vi. In réliquo reposita est mihi 
corona justitie quam reddet 
mihi Dóminus in illa die, jus- 
tus judex: non solum autem 
mihi, sed et iis, qui diligunt 
&dventum ejus. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
Timothy. 

EARLY beloved, I charge 

thee before God and 
Jesus Christ, Who shall judge 
the living and the dead, by 
His coming, and His kingdom. 
Preach the word: be instant in 
Season, out of season: reprove, 
entreat, rebuke in all patience, 
and doctrine. For there shall 
be a time, when they will not 
endure sound doctrine; but 
according to their own desires 
they. will heap to themselves 
teachers, having itching ears, 
and will indeed turn away their 
hearing from the truth, but 
will be turned unto fables. But 
be thou vigilant, labor in all 
things, do the work of an 
evangelist, fulfil thy ministry. 
Be sober. For I am even now 
ready to be sacrificed; and the 
time of my dissolution is at 
hand. I have fought a good 
fight, X have finished my 
course, I have kept the Faith. 
As to the rest, there is laid up 
for me a crown of justice, 
which the Lord the just judge 
will render to me in that day; 


and not only to me, but to them also that love his coming. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1346 


COMMON OP A DOCTOR OF THE CHURCH 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 36, 30, 31 


The mouth of the just shall 
meditate wisdom, 
tongue shall speak judgment. 
¥. The law of his God is in his 
heart: and his steps shall not 
be supplanted. 


Os justi meditabitur sapi- 


and his entiam, et lingua ejus loque- 


tur judicium. Y. Lex Dei ejus 
in corde ipsius: et non sup- 
plantabuntur gressus ejus. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ecclus. 
45, 9. The Lord loved him, and 
adorned him: He clothed him 
with a robe of glory. Alleluia. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Eccli. 
55,9. Amávit eum Dóminus, et 
ornávit eum: stolam glóriæ 
induit eum. Allelüja. 


Tract. Ps. 111, 1, 3 


Blessed is the man that 
feareth the Lord: he shall de- 
light exceedingly in His com- 
mandments. Y. His seed shall 
be mighty upon earth: the 
generation of the righteous 
Shall be blessed. Y. Glory and 
wealth shall be in his house; 
and his justice remaineth for 
ever and ever. 


Beatus vir, qui timet Dé- 
minum: in mandatis ejus cu- 
pit nimis, Y. Potens in terra 
erit semen ejus: generatio 
rectorum benedicetur. Y. Gló- 


ria et divitie in domo ejus: et 


justitia ejus manet in secul- 
um seculi, 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ecclus. 
45, 9. The Lord loved him, and 
adorned him: He clothed him 
with a robe of glory. Alleluia. 
VF. Osee 14, 6. The just shall 
spring as the lily; and shall 
fiourish forever before the Lord. 
Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Eccli. 
45, 9. Amávit eum Dóminus, 
et ornávit eum: stolam glorie 
induit eum. Allelüja. Y. Osee. 
14, 6. Justus germinábit si- 
cut lilium: et florébit in ztér- 
num ante Dóminum. Allelija. 


Gospel. Matt. 5, 13-19 


®© Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according. to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus said 
to His disciples, You are 


"HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
Sus discípulis suis; Vos 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A DOCTOR OF THE CHURCH 


estis sal terre, Quod si sal 
evantierit, in quo saliétur? Ad 
nihilum valet-ultra, nisi ut 
mittátur foras, et conculeétur 
ab homínibus. Vos estis lux 
mundi. Non potest cívitas ab- 
Scóndi supra montem pósita. 
Neque accéndunt lucérnam, 
et ponunt eam.sub módio, sed 
Super candelábrum, ut lüceat 
ómnibus qui in domo sunt. 
Sic lüceat lux vestra coram 
hominibus ut vídeant ópera 
vestra bona, et gloríficent Pa- 
trem vestrum, qui in colis est. 
Nolíte putáre, quóniam veni 
sólvere legem, aut prophétas: 
non veni sólvere sed adim- 
plére. Amen quippe dico vo- 
bis, donec tránseat celum et 
terra, ióta unum, aut unus 
apex non preteribit a lege, 
donec ómnia fiant. Qui ergo 
sólveri& unum do mandátis 
istis minimis et docüerit sic 
homines minimus vocábitur 
in regno celórum: qui autem 
fécerit et docüerit, hic -mag- 
nus vocábitur in regno ce- 
lórum. i 


1347 


the salt of the earth; but if the 
salt lose.its savor, wherewith 
shall it be salted? It is good for 
nothing any more, but to be 
cast out, and to be trodden on 
by men. You are the light of 
the world. A city seated on a 
mountain can not be hid. 
Neither do men light a candle 
and put.it under a bushel, but 
upon a candlestick, that it may 
shine to all that are in the 
house; so let your light shine 
before men, that they may see 
your good works, and glorify 
your Father Who is in heaven. 
Do. not think that I am come 
to destroy the law or the 
prophets: I am not come to de- 
stroy, but to fulfil. For, amen 
I say unto you, till heaven and 
earth pass, one jot or one tittle 
shall not pass of the law till 
all be fulfilled. He therefore 
that shall break one of these 
least commandments, and shall 
so teach men, shall be called 
the least in the kingdom of 
heaven: but he that shall do 
and teach, he shall be called 
great in the kingdom of 
heaven, 


On the feasts of Holy Doctors of the Church the Nicene Creec 


is always said at Mass. 


EO ux Offertory. Ps. 91, 13 


, Justus ut palma florébit: 
; Sicut, cedrus, que in Líbano 
{ est, multiplicábitur. (T. P. 
Allelija.) ` 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


The just shall flourish like 
the palm-tree: he shall grow 
up like the cedar of Libanus. 
(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Secret 


anctr N. Pohtfficis (vel 
Confessóris) tui atque 
Doctóris nobis, Dómine, pia 


ay the loving prayers of 
N.,'Thy bishop (or con- 
fessor), not be wanting to us, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1848 COMMON OF A DOCTOR OF THE CHURCH 

O Lord, to commend our gifts non desit orátio: quz, et mü- 

and ever to obtain pardon for nera nostra concíliet; et tuam 

us. Through our Lord. nobis indulgéntiam semper 
obtineat. Per Dóminum. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Luke 12, 42 


A faithful and wise steward, Fidélis servus et prudens, 
whom the Lord set over His quem constítuit dóminus su- 
family; to give them their per famíliam suam: ut det 
measure of wheat in due season. illis in témpore trítici mensü- 


(P. T. Alleluia). 


ram, (T. P. Allelija.) 


Postcommunion 


HAT Thy sacrifices may 

give us health, O Lord, 
may blessed N., Thy bishop (or 
confessor) and illustrious doc- 
tor, we beseech Thee, act as 
our intercessor. Through our 
Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


a NoBIS, Dómine, tua 
sacrificia dent salütem: 
beátus N. Póntifex (vel Con- 
féssor) tuus et Doctor egré- 
gius, quesumus, precátor ac- 
cédat. Per Dóminum. 


Another Epistle for a Doctor. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 39, 6-14 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


HE just man will give his 

heart to resort early to 
ihe Lord that made him, and 
ne will pray in the sight of the 
Most High. He will open his 
mouth in prayer, and will make 
supplication for his sins. For 
if it shall please the great Lord, 
He wil fill him with the spirit 
of understanding: and he will 
pour forth the words of His 
wisdom as showers, and in his 
prayer he will confess to the 
Lord. And He shall direct his 
counsel and his knowledge, 
and in His secrets shall he 
Meditate. He shall show forth 
the discipline he hath learned, 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiz. 


USTUS cor suum tradet ad 
vigilandum , dilüculo ad 
óminum;, qui fecit illum, et 
in conspéctu Altíssimi depre- 
cábitur. Apériet os suum in 
oratióne, et pro delíctis suis 
deprecábitur. Si enim Dómi- 
nus magnus volüerit, spíritu 
intelligéntiz replébit illum: 


et ipse tamquam imbres mit- | 


tet elóquia sapiéntie sue, et 
in oratióne confitébitur Dó- 
mino: et ipse diriget consil- 
ium ejus et disciplinam, et in 
abscónditis suis consiliábitur. 
Ipse palam faciet disciplínam 
doctrine sue, et in lege testa- 
ménti Dómini gloriábitur, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


P 


mt 


COMMON OF A CONFESSOR NOT A BISHOP 


Collaudábunt multi sapiénti- 
&m ejus, et usque in seculum 
non delébitur. Non recédet 
memória ejus, et nomen ejus 
requirétur a generatióne in 
generatiónem. Sapiéntiam 
ejus enarrábunt gentes, et 
louden ejus enuntiábit ecclé- 
sia. 


1348 


and shall glory in the law of 
the covenant of the Lord. Many 
shall praise his wisdom, and it 
shall never be forgotten. The 
memory of him shall not pass 
away, and his name shall be 
in request from generation to 
generation. Nations shall de- 
clare his wisdom, and the 
Church shall show forth his 
praise, 


Common of a Confessor not a Bishop 
(Os justi) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 36, 30, 31 


S JUSTI meditábitur sa- 

piéntiam, et lingua ejus 
loquétur judícium; lex Dei 
ejus in corde ipsíus. (T. P. 
Allelüja, allelüja.) Ps: 36, 1. 
Noli æmulári in malignánti- 
bus: neque zeláveris faciéntes 
iniquitátem. V. Glória Patri. 


HE mouth of the just shall 

meditate wisdom and his 
tongue shall speak judgment: 
the law of his God is in his 
heart. (P.T. Alleluia, alleluia.) 
Ps. 36, 1. Be not emulous of 
evil-doers; nor envy them that 
work iniquity. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui nos beáti N. 

Confessóris tui ánnua 
Solemnitáte letificas: concéde 
propitius; ut, cujus natalitia 
cólimus, étiam actiónes imi- 
témur. Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who dost gladden us 

by the annual feast of 
blessed N., Thy confessor, 
mercifully grant that, as we 
celebrate his natal day, we may 
also imitate his actions. 
Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 31, 8-11 


Léctio libri Sapientis. 


EATUs vir, qui invéntus 
est sine mácula, et qui 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. . 

LESSED is the man that is 

found without blemish, 


post aurum non ábiit, nec spe- and that hath not gone after 
rávit in pecünia et thesáuris. gold, nor put his trust in money 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1350 COMMON OF A CONFESSOR NOT A BISHOP 


nor in treasures, Who is he, 
and we will praise him? for he 
hath done wonderful things in 
his life. Who hath been tried 
thereby, and made perfect, he 
shall have glory everlasting: 
he that could have trans- 
gressed, and hath not trans- 
gressed, and could do evil 
things, and hath not done 
them: therefore are his goods 


Quis est hic, et laudábimus 
eum? fecit enim mirabília in 
vita sua. Qui probátus est in 
illo et perféctus est, erit illi 
gloria. etérna: qui pótuit 
iránsgredi, et non est trans- 
gréssus: fácere mala, et non 
fecit: ideo stabilíta sunt bona 
illius in Dómino, et eleemósy- 
nas illius enarrábit omnis ec- 
clésia sanctórum. 


established in the Lord, and 
all the church. of the saints 
shall declare his alms. 
From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 91, 13-14 


The just shall flourish like Justus ut palma florébit: 
the palm-tree; he shall grow sicut cedrus Libani multipli- 
up like the cedar of Libanus in cábitur in domo Dómini. V. 
the house of the Lord. V. Ps. Ps. 91, 3. Ad annuntiándum 
91, 3. To show forth Thy mane misericórdiam tuam, et 
mercy in the morning, and Thy veritátem tuam per noctem. 
truth in the night. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. James 1, Alelúja, allelija. Y. Jac. 
12. Blessed is the man that en- 1, 12. Beátus vir, qui suffert 
dureth- temptation; for when tentatiónem: quóniam cum 
he hath been proved, he shall probátus füerit, accipiet coró- 
receive the crown of life: Alle- nam vite. Allelüja. ' 
luia. 


Tract. Ps. 111, 1-3 


Blessed is the man that fear- ^ Beátus vir, qui timet Dómi- 
eth the Lord: he shall delight num: in mandátis ejus cupit 
exceedingly in His command- nimis. Y. Potens in terra erit 
ments. V. His seed shall be semen ejus: generátio rectó- 
mighty upon earth: the gen- rum benedicétur, Y. Glória et 
eration of the righteous shall divítie in domo ejus: et ju- 
be blessed. Y. Glory and wealth stitia ejus manet in seculum 
Shall be in his house: and his seculi, 
justice remaineth for ever and 
ever. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A CONFESSOR NOT A BISHOP 1351 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelüja. Beatus 
vir, qui suffert tentatiónem: 
quóniam cum probátus füerit, 
accipiet corónam vite. Alle- 
lüja. Y. Eccli. 45, 9. Amávit 


eum Dóminus, et ornávit 
eum: stolam glórie fnduit 
eum, Alleluja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. James 6, 
12. Blessed is the man that en- 
dureth temptation; for when 
he hath been proved, he shall 
receive the crown of life. Alle- 
luia. Y. Ecclus. 45, 9. The Lord 
loved him, and adorned him: 
He clothed him with a robe of 
glory. Alleluia, 


Gospel. Luke 12, 35-40. 


"m Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 


ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
T3 discípulis suis: Sint 
lumbi vestri precincti, et lu- 
cérnz ardéntes in mánibus 
vestris, et vos similes homini- 
bus exspectántibus dóminum 
suum, quando revertátur a 
nüptiis: ut, cum vénerit, et 
pulsáverit, conféstim apéri- 
ant ei. Beáti servi illi, quos, 
cum vénerit dóminus, invéne- 
rit vigilantes: amen dico 
vobis, quod precinget se, et 
fáciet illos discümbere, et 
tránsiens ministrábit illis. Et 
si vénerit in secünda vigilia, 
et si in tértia vigília vénerit, 
et ita invénerit, beáti sunt 
servi illi. Hoc autem scitóte, 
quóniam si sciret paterfamí- 
lias, qua hora fur veníret, 
viglláret ütique, et non sí- 
neret pérfodi domum suam. 
Et vos estóte paráti, quia qua 
hora non putátis. Fílius hó- 
minis véniet, 


Offertory. 
— Véritas mea, et misericór- 
dia mea cum ipso: et in nómi- 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, Jesus said to 

His disciples, Let your 
loins be girt, and lamps burn- 
ing in. your hands, and you 
yourselves like to men who wait 
for their lord, when he shall 
return from the wedding; that 
when he cometh and knocketh, 
they may open to him imme- 
diately. Blessed are those ser- 
vants, whom the Lord when 
He cometh, shall find watch- 
ing. Amen I say to you, that 
He will gird Himself, and make 
them sit down to meat, and 
passing will minister unto 
them. And if He shall come in 
the second watch, or come in 
the third watch, and find them 
so, blessed are those servants. 
But this know ye, that if the 
householder did know at what 
hour the thief would come, he 
would surely watch, and would 
not suffer his house to be 
broken open. Be ye then also 
ready; for at what hour you 
think not, the Son of man will 
come. 


Ps. 88, 25 


My truth and My mercy 
shall be with him: and in My 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1352 COMMON OF A CONFESSOR NOT A BISHOP 


name shall his horn be exalted. ne meo exaltábitur cornu ejus. 
(P, T. Alleluia.) (T. P. Allelija.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
“wre OFFER Thee, O Lord, ~ aunis tibi, Dómine, hós- 
dI sacrifices of praise in tias immolámus in tu- 
commemoration of Thy saints, órum commemoratióne sanc- 
by whom we trust to be deliv- tórum: quibus nos et præsén- 
ered from evils both present tibus éxui malis confidimus, 


and future. Through our Lord. et futüris. Per Dóminum. 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Matt. 24, 46, 47 


Blessed is the servant, whom 
when the Lord shall come, He 
shall find watching: Amen I 
say to you, He shall set him 
over all His goods. (P.T. Alle- 
luia.) 


Beátus servus, quem, cum 
vénerit dóminus, invénerit vi- 
gilántem: amen dico vobis, 
super ómnia bona sua consti- 
tuet eum. (T.P. Allelüja.) 


.Postcommunion 


aL. THY suppliants, who 
are refreshed with 
heavenly food and drink, be- 
seech Thee, O our God, that 
we may be fortified by the 
prayers of him in whose com- 
memoration -we have partaken 
of these gifts. Through our 
Lord. f 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EFÉCTI cibo, potúque cæ- 

lésti, Deus noster, te 
súpplices exorámus: ut, in 
cujus hæc commemoratióne 
percépimus, ejus muniámur 
et précibus. Per Dóminum. 


Another flass of a Confessor not a Bishop 


(Justus ut palma) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. : 


Introit.. Ps. 91, 13, 14 


HE just shall flourish like 
the palm-tree; he shall 
grow up like the cedar of Li- 
banus: planted in the house of 
the Lord, in the courts of the 
house of our God. (P.T. Alle- 


cut cedrus Libani multi- 
icábitur: plantátus in domo 
Dómini: in átriis domus Dei 
nostri, (T.P. Allelája.) Ps. 91, 
2. Bonum est confitéri Dó- 


ag ut palma florébit: si- 
p. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


; MN oso e 


COMMON OF A CONFESSOR NOT A BISHOP 1353 


mino: et psállere nómini tuo, 
Altíssime. Y. Glória Patri. 


luia, alleluia.) Ps. 91, 2. It is 
good to give praise to the Lord; 
and to sing to Thy name, O 
Most High. V. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, páge 762. 


Prayer 


pesto, Dómine, suppli- 

eatiónibus nostris, 
quas in beáti N. Confessóris 
tui solemnitáte deférimus: ut, 
qui nostre justitie fidáüciam 
non habémus, ejus, qui tibi 
plácuit, précibus adjuvémur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. 1 


Léctio, Epístole.beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


ATRES: Spectáculum 
facti sumus mundo, et 
3 Angelis, et homínibus. Nos 
X stulti propter Christum, vos 
Xautem prudéntes in Christo: 
Znos infirmi, vos autem fortes: 
7 vos nóbiles, nos autem ignó- 
biles. Usque in hanc horam et 
fsurimus, et sitímus, et nudi 
umus, et cólaphis cedimur, 
et instábiles sumus, et laborá- 
mus operántes mánibus no- 
‘tris: maledicimur, et benedi- 
mus: persecutiónem pati- 
ar, et sustinémus: blasphe- 
“mur, et obsecrámus: tam- 
am  purgaménta hujus 
7 mundi facti sumus, ómnium 
peripséma usque adhuc. Non 
ut confündam vos, hec scribo, 
sed ut fílios meos caríssimos 
móneo: in Christo Jesu Dómi- 
no nostro, 


G™ ear, O Lord, to our 
: supplications, which we 
offer in commemoration of 
blessed N., Thy confessor, that, 
as we have no confidence in 
our own justice, we may he 
assisted by the prayers of him 
who was pleasing to Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


Cor. 4, 4-19 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. - A 


tec we are made a 
Spectacle to the world 
and to angels and men. We are 
fools.for Christ's sake, but you 
are wise in Christ: we are 
weak, but you are strong: you 
are honorable, but we without 
honor. Even unto this hour we 
both hunger and thirst, and are 
naked, and are buffeted, and 
have no fixed abode, and we 
labor working with our own 
hands. We are reviled, and we 
bless: we are persecuted, and 
we suffer it: we are blas- 
phemed, and we entreat: we 
are made as the refuse of this 
world, the offscouring of all, 
even until now. I write not 
these things to confound you, 
but I admonish you as my 
dearest children in Christ Jesus 
our Lord. BOT 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1354 COMMON OF A CONFESSOR NOT A BISHOP 


Gradual. Ps. 36, 30, 31 


The mouth of the just shall Os justi meditábitur sapién- 
meditate wisdom, and his tiam, et lingua ejus loquétur 
tongue shall speak judgment. judícium. Y. Lex Dei ejus in 
Y. The law of his God is in his corde ipsíus: et non supplan- 
heart: and his steps shall not tabüntur gressus ejus. 
be supplanted, 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 111, ^ Allelüja, allelája. y. Ps. 
1. Blessed is the man that fear- 111, 1. Beátus vir, qui timet 
eth the Lord: in His com- Dóminum: in mandátis ejus 
mandments he hath great de- cupit nimis. Allelüja. 
light. Alleluia, 


Tract. Ps. 111, 1-3 


Blessed is the man that fear- ^ Beátus vir, qui timet Démi- 
eth the Lord: he shall delight num: in mandátis ejus cupit 
exceedingly in His command- nimis. Y. Potens in terra erit 
ments. Y. His seed shall be semen ejus: generátio rectó- 
mighty upon earth: the gen- rum benedicétur. Y. Glória et 
eration of the righteous shall divitie in domo ejus: et justi- 
be blessed. Y. Glory and wealth tia. ejus manet in seculum 
shall be in his house: and his sseculi, 
justice remaineth for ever and 
ever, 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 111, ^ Allelüja, allelüja. Beátuf 
1. Blessed is the man that fear- vir, qui timet Dóminum: 
eth the Lord: in His com- mandatis ejus cupit nimis. Al 
mandments he hath great de- lelija. V. Osee. 14, 6. Justug 
light, Alleluia. V. Osee 14, 6. germinábit sicut Ilium: ef 
The just shall spring as the florébit in ætérnum ante 
lily: and flourish for ever þe- minum. Allelüja. 
fore the Lord. Alleluia, E 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Luke 12, 32-34 


H$ Continuation of the holy Œ= Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
Gospel according to St. Luke. ^ gélii secimdum Lucam. 

T THAT time, Jesus said "QN rio témpore: Dixit Je- 

to His disciples, Fear sus discípulis suis: Nolite 

not, little flock, for it hath timére, pusillus grex, quia 

pleased your Father to give you complácuit Patri vestro dare 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A CONFESSOR NOT A BISHOP 


vobis regnum. Véndite que 
possidétis, et date eleemósy- 
nam, Fácite vobis sácculos. 
qui non veteráseunt, thesáu- 
rum non deficiéntem in colis: 
quo fur non apprópiat, neque 
tinea corrümpit. Ubi enim 
thesáurus vester est, ibi et cor 
vestrum erit. 


Offertory. 

In virtüte tua, Dómine, le- 

tábitur justus, et super salu- 

táre tuum exsultábit. vehe- 

ménier: desidérium ánimse 

ejus tribuísti ei (T. P. Alle- 
lúja.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


RÆSTA . nobis, quaesumus, 
P omnípotens Deus: ut: 
nostre humilitátis oblátio, et 
pro tuórum tibi grata sit ho- 
nóre sanctórum, et nos cór- 
pore páriter et mente purífi- 
cet. Per Dóminum. 


Communion. 


Amen dico vobis: quod vos, 
qui reliquístis ómnia, et secti- 
ti estis me, céntuplum acci- 
piétis, et vitam xtérnam pos- 
sidébitis. (T. P. Allehija.) 


1355 


a kingdom. Sell what you pos- 
sess, and give aims. Make to 
yourselves bags which grow not 
old, à treasure in heaven which 
taileth not; where no thief 
approacheth, nor moth cor- 
rupteth: for wbere your treas- 
ure is, there will your heart be 
also. 


Ps. 20, 2, 3 


In thy strength, O Lord, the 
just shall joy, and in Thy sal- 
vation he shall rejoice exceed- 
ingly: Thou hast given him 
his heart’s desire. (P. T. Alle- 
luia.) 


Secret 


RANT US, we beseech Thee, 

O almighty God, that the 

offering of our lowliness may 

be pleasing to Thee in honor 

of Thy saints, and purify us in 

both body and mind. Through 
our Lord. 


~ Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Matt. 19, 28.29 


Amen I say to you, that you 
who have left all things and 
followed Me, shall receive a 
hundred-fold, and possess life 
everlasting. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


j Postcommunion 


UESUMUS, omnipotens 
deus: ut, qui celéstia al- 
iménta percépimus, interce- 
dénte beáto N. Confessóre tuo, 
per hec contra ómnia advérsa 
muniámur. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


—— gpi 


E PRAY Thee, O almighty 

God, that, having re- 
ceived heavenly nourishment, 
we may thereby, through the 
intercession of blessed N., Thy 
confessor, be fortified against 
all harm and danger. Through 
our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1356 


COMMON OF AN ABBOT 


Another Epistle and Gospel for Mass of a Confessor not a 


gre 


‘pistle: The things rt were, Gs on Feast of St, Francis 


of P Paula, April 2, page 9 


Gospel: A seran nobleman, as om, Feast of St. Louis, King, 


Aug. 25, page 11 


Common of an Abbot 


(Os justi meditabitur ) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 36, 30, 31 


He mouth of the just shall 
meditate wisdom, and 
is tongue shall speak judg- 
ment: the law of his God is in 
his heart. (P. T. Alleluia, alle- 
luia.) Ps. 36, 1. Be not emulous 
of evil-doers; hor envy them 
that work iniquity. Y. Glory. 


S JUSTI meditábitur sapi: 

éntiam, et lingua ejus 
loquétur judícium: lex Dei 
ejus in corde ipsíus. (T. P. Al- 
lelüja, allelüja.) Ps. 36, 1. 
Noli zmulári in malignánti- 
bus: neque zeláveris faciéntes 
iniquitátem. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


Av the intercession of the 

blessed abbot N., com- 

mend us, we beseech Thee, O 

Lord, that what we can not at- 

tain by our own deserts we may 

attain through his patronage. 
‘Through our Lord. 


NTERCÉSSIO nos, quesumus, 
Dómine, beáti N. Abbátis 
comméndet: ut, quod nostris 
méritis non valémus, ejus pa- 
trocinio assequámur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 45, 1-6 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. . 
E was beloved of God and 
men, whose memory is in 
benediction; He made him like 
the saints in glory, and mag- 
nified him in the fear of his 
enemies; and with his words 
he made prodigies to cease; He 
glorified him in the sight of 
kings, and gave him command- 
ments in the sight of his peo- 
ple, and showed him his glory; 
He sanctified him in his faith 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiz, 


ÓinEcrUS Deo et homini- 

bus, cujus memória in 
benedictióne est, Símilem il- 
Tum fecit in glória sanctórum, 
et magnificavit eum in timóre 
inimicórum, et in verbis suis 
monstra placávit. Glorificávit 
ilum in conspéctu regum, et 
jussit illi coram pópulo Suo, 
et osténdit illi glóriam suam. 
In fide, et lenitáte ipsíus, 
sanctum fecit illum et elégit 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MEL. — e 


COMMON OF AN ABBOT 


eum ex omni carne. Audivit 
enim eum, et vocem ipsius 
et indüxit ium in nubem. 
Et dedit illi coram precépta, 
et legem vite et discipline. 


1357 


and meekness, and chose him 
out of all flesh; for He heard 
him and his voice, and 
brought him into a cloud; and 
He gave him commandments 
before his face, and a law of 
life and instruction. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced. 


by the 


Gradual. 
Dómine, prævenísti eum in 
benedictiónibus ^ dulcédinis: 


posuísti in cápite ejus coró- 
nam de lápide pretióso. J. 
Vitam pétiit a te, et tribuisti 
ei longitüdinem diérum in 
seculum seculi, 


Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are Te- 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Ps. 20, 4, 5 


O Lord, 'Thou hast prevented 
him with blessings of sweet- 
ness; Thou hast set on his head 
a crown of precious stones. Y. 
He asked life of Thee, and Thou 
hast given him length of days 
for ever and ever. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 91, 
13. Justus ut palma flórébit: 
sicut cedrus Líbani multipli- 
cábitur. Allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 91, 
13. The just shall flourish like 
the palm-tree; he shall grow 
up like the cedar of Libanus. 


Tract. Ps. 111, 1-3 


Beátus vir, qui timet Dó- 
minum: in mandátis ejus cu- 
pit nimis. Y. Potens in terra 
erit semen ejus: generátio 
rectórum benedicétur. Y. Gló- 
ria et divitiz in domo ejus: et 
justitia ejus manet in secu- 
lum seculi. 


Blessed is the man that fear- 
eth the Lord: he shall delight 
exceedingly in His command 
ments. Y. His, seed shall b 
mighty upon earth: the gens 
eration of the righteous shalf: 
be blessed. V. Glory and wealth ` 
shall be in his house: and his 
justice remaineth for ever and 
ever. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelája, allelüja. Y. Justus 
ut palma fiorébit: sicut ce- 
drus Líbani multiplicábitur. 
Allelüja. V. Osee, 14, 6. Justus 
germinábit sicut lilium: et 
florébit in ætérnum ante Dó- 
minum. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, aleluia, Y. Ps. 91, 
13. The just shall flourish like 
the palm-tree; he shall grow 
up like the cedar of Libanus. 
Alleluia. Y. Osee 14, 6. The just 
shall spring as the lily: and 
fiourish forever before the Lord. 
Alleluia, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1358 


COMMON OF AN ABBOT 


Gospel. Matt. 19, 27-29 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Peter said 
A to Jesus, Behold: we 
ave left all things, and have 

followed. Thee: what. therefore 
shall we have? And Jesus said 
to them, Amen I say to you, 
thaf you who have followed Me, 
in the regeneration, when the 
Son of man shall sit on the 
seat of His majesty, you also 
Shall sit on twelve seats judg- 
ing the twelve tribes of Israel. 
And every one that hath left 
house, or brethren, or sisters, 
or father, or mother, or wife, 
or children, or lands, for My 
name's sake, shall receive an 
hundred-fold, and shall pos- 
Sess life everlasting 


H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secandum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Pe- 

irus ad Jesum: Ecce nos 
relíquimus ómnia, et secüti 
sumus te: quid ergo erit no- 
bis? Jesus autem dixit illis: 
Amen dico vobis, quod vos, 
qui secüti estis me, in regene- 
ratióne, cum séderit Filius 
hóminis in sede majestátis 
sue, sedébitis et vos super 
sedes duódecim, judicántes 
duódecim tribus Israel. Et 
omnis, qui relíquerit domum, 
vel fratres, aut soréres, aut 
patrem, aut matrem, aut uxó- 
rem, aut fílios, aut agros, 
propter nomen meum, céntu- 
plum accipiet, et vitam stér- 
nam possidébit. 


Oa: Ps. 20, 3, 4 


Thou hast given him his 
heart's desire, O Lord, and hast 
not withholden from him the 
will of his lips; Thou hast set 
on his head a crown of precious 
Stones. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Desidérium ánimæ ejus tri- 
buisti ei, Dómine, et voluntáte 
labiórum ejus non fraudásti 
eum: posuísti in cápite ejus 
corónam de lápide pretióso. 
(T. P. Allelája.) 


Secret 


AY the holy abbot N., we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, 
pray that the sacrifices laid 
upon the sacred altars may 
avail for our salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


ACRIS altáribus, Dómine, 
hóstias superpósitas 
Sanctus N. Abbas, quesum 
in salütem nobis provenire de- 
póscat. Per Dóminum. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Luke 12, 42 


A faithful and wise steward, Fidélis servus et prudens, 
whom the Lord hath set over quem constituit dóminus su- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN-MARTYR 1359 


Per famíliam suam: ut det il- His family; to give them their 
lis in témpore tritici mensü- measure of wheat in due sea- 
ram. (T. P, Allelüja) Son. (P.T. Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 


ROTEGAT nos, Dómine, OGETHER with the recep- 

cum tui perceptióne sa- tion of Thy sacrament, O 
Crámentibeátus N. Abbas, pro Lord, may the blessed abbot 
nobis intercedéndo: ut, et N., protect us by interceding for 
conversatiénis ejus experiá- us, that we may put into prac- 
mur insignia, et intercessió- tice the virtues of his life and 
nis percipiámus suffrágia. Per partake of the power of his in- 
Déminum, tercession. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Common of a Wirgin-Martpr 
(Loquebar ) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 118, 46,47 


OQUEBAR de testimóniis SPOKE Of Thy testimonies 

tuis in conspéctu re- before kings, and I was not 
gum, et non confundébar: et ashamed: I meditated also on 
meditábar in mandátis tuis, Thy commandments, which I 
que diléxi nimis. (T. P. Alle- loved exceedingly. (P. T. Alle- 
lája,allelája.) Ps.118,1.Beáti luia, alleluia.) Ps. 118, 1. 
immaculátiin via: qui ámbu- Blessed are the undefiled in the 
lant in lege Dómini. Y. Glória way: who walk in the law of 
Patri. : the Lord. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
EUS, qui inter cétera po- cop, Who, among other 
téntie tue miracula, miracles of Thy power, 


étiam in sexu frágili victó- hast conferred the victory of 
riam martyrii contulisti: con- martyrdom even on the weaker 
céde propítius; ut, qui bea&te sex, mercifully grant that we, 
N. Vírginis et Mártyris tuena- who celebrate the natal feast 
talítia cóltmus, per ejus ad te, of blessed N., Thy virgin and 
exémpla gradiámur. Per Dó- martyr, may advance toward 
minum. . Thee through her example. 
Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1360 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN-MARTYR 


Lesson. Ecclus. 51, 1-12 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


WILL give glory to Thee, O 

Lord my king, and I will 
praise Thee, O God my Saviour. 
I will give glory to Thy name: 
for Thou hast been a helper 
and protector to me, and hast 
preserved my body from de- 
struction, from the snare of an 
unjust tongue, and from the 
lips of them that. forge lies; 
and in the sight of them that 
stood by, Thou hast been my 
helper; and Thou hast deliv- 
ered me, according to the mul- 
titude of the mercy of Thy 
name, from them that did roar, 
prepared to devour. Out of the 
hands of them that sought my 
life, and from the gates of 
afflictions which compassed me 
about from the oppression: of 
the flame which surrounded 
me, and in the midst of the 
fire I was not burnt; from the 
depth of the belly of hell, and 
from an unclean tongue, and 
from lying words, from an un- 
just king, and from a slander- 
ous tongue; My soul shall 
praise the Lord even to death: 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


ONFITEBOR tibi, Dómine 

rex, et collaudábo te 
Deum salvatórem meum. Con- 
fitébor nómini tuo: quóniam 
adjütor et protéctor, factus 
es mihi, et liberásti corpus 
meum a perditióne, a láqueo 
lingue inique, et a lábiis op- 
erántium mendácium, et in 
conspéctu adstántium factus 
es mihi adjütor. Et liberásti 
me secundum multitGdinem 
misericérdiz néminis tui, a 
rugiéntibus preparátis ad es- 
cam, de mánibus queréntium 
ánimam meam, et de portis 
tribulatiónum, que cireumde- 
dérunt me: a pressüra flam- 
mæ, que circümdedit me, et 
in médio ignis non sum estu- 
ata: de altitüdine ventris in- 
feri, et a lingua coinquináta, 
et a verbo mendácii, a rege in- 
iquo, et a lingua injüsta: lau- 
dábit usque ad mortem anima 
mea Dóminum: quóniam éruis 
sustinéntes te, et líberas eos 
de mánibus géntium, Dómine 
Deus noster. 


because Thou, O Lord, our God, deliverest them that wait 
for Thee, and savest them out of the hands of the nations. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
placed by the Greater Alleluia, 


Gradual. Ps. 44,8 
Thou hast loved justice, and ^ Dilexísti justitiam, et odísti 
hated iniquity. Y. Therefore, iniquitátem. Y. Proptérea un- 
God, thy God, hath anointed xit te Deus, Deus tuus, óleo 
thee with the oil of gladness. letitix. Allelüja. 
Alleluia. 


Lesser Alleluia 
Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 44,  Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 44, 
15, 16. After her shall virgins 15, 16. Adducéntur regi vír- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN-MARTYR 1361 


fines post eam: próximse be brought to the King, her 
ejus afferéntur tibi in letitia. neighbors shall be brought to 
Allelüja. thee with gladness. Alleluia. 


Tract 


Veni, sponsa Christi, áccipe Come, O spouse of Christ, re- 
corónam, quam tibi Dóminus ceive the crown which the Lord 
preparávit in stérnum: pro hath prepared for thee forever: 
cujus amóre sánguinem tuum for the love of Whom thou didst 
fudisti. Y. Ps. 44, 7. Dilexisti shed thy blood. Y Ps. 44, 7. 
justitiam, et odísti iniquitá- Thou hast loved justice, and 
tem: proptérea unxit te Deus, hated iniquity: therefore God, 
Deus tuus, óleo letitie pre thy God, hath anointed thee 
consórtibus tuis. Y. Spécie with the oil of gladness above 
tua, et pulchritüdine tua in- thy fellows. V. With thy come- 
ténde, próspere procéde, et liness and thy beauty set out, 
regna. proceed prosperously, and 

reign. . 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allelija. Y. Ps. 44, Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 44, 
15, 16. Adducéntur regi vír- 15,16. After her shall virgins be 
gines post eam: próxime ejus brought to the King, her neigh- 
afferéntur tibi in letitia. Alle- bors shall be brougnt to thee 
luia. V. Spécie tua, et pulchri- with gladness. Allel\ia. Y. With 
tüdine tua inténde, próspere thy comeliness and thy beauty 
procéde, et regna. Allelija. ^ set out, proceed prosperously, 

and reign. Alleluia. ^ 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. Matt. 25, 1-13 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- œŒ Continuation of the holy 

gélii secundum Mattheum. Gospel according to St. Mat- 
f thew. 

N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- T THAT lime, Jesus spoke 
T sus discipulis suis pará- to His disciples this 
bolam hanc: Símile erit reg- parable: The kingdom of hea- 
num celérum decem virgini- ven shall be like to ten virgins, 
bus: que accipiéntes lám- who taking their lamps went 
pades suas, exiérunt óbviam out to meet the bridegroom and 
sponso et sponse. Quinque au- the bride. And five of them 
tem ex eis erant fatuez, et were foolish, and five wise: but 
quinque prudentes: sed quin- the five foolish, having taken 
que fatus, accéptis lampádi- their lamps, did not take oil 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1362 


with them, but the wise took 
oil in their vessels with the 
Jamps. And the bridegroom tar- 
rying, they ail slumbered and 
slept: and at midnight there 
was a cry made, Behold the 
bridegroom cometh, go ye forth 
to meet him. Then all those 
virgins arose and trimmed their 
lamps: and the foolish said to 
the wise, Give us of your oil, 
for our lamps are gone out. 
The wise .answered, saying, 
Lest perhaps there be not 
enough for us and for you, go 
you rather to them that sell, 
and buy for yourselves. Now 
whilst they went to buy, the 
bridegroom came; and they 
that were ready, went in with 
him to the marriage, and the 
door was shut; but at last came 
also the other virgins saying, 
Lord, Lord, open to us: but he 
answered, saying, Amen, I say 
to you, I know you not. Watch 
ye, therefore, because you know 
not the day nor the hour. 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN-MaRIYR 


bus, non sumpsérunt óleum 
secum: prudéntes vero ac- 
cepérunt óleum in vasis suis 
cum lampádibus. Moram au- 
tem faciénte sponso, dormita- 
vérunt omnes, et dormiérunt. 
Média autem nocte clamor 
factus est: Ecce sponsus ve- 
nit, exíte óbviam ei. Tunc 
surrexérunt omnes vírgines 
ille, et ornavérunt lámpades 
suas, Fatue autem sapiénti- 
bus dixérunt: Date nobis de 
6leo vestro: quia lámpades 
nostre  exstinguüntur. Re- 
spondérunt prudéntes, dicén- 
tes: Ne forte non suffíciat no- 
bis, et vobis, ite pótius ad 
vendéntes et émite vobis. 
Dum autem irent émere, venit 
sponsus: et que paráte erant, 
intravérunt cum eo ad nüp- 
tias, et clausa est jánua. No- 
vissime vero véniunt et ré- 
lique, vírgines, dicéntes: Dó- 
mine, Dómine, áperi nobis. At 
ille respóndens, ait: Amen 
dico vobis, néscio vos. Vigi- 
láte itaque, quia  nescítis 
diem, neque horam. 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 15, 16 


After her shall virgins be 
brought to the King: her 
neighbors shall be brought to 
thee with gladness and rejoic- 
ing; they shall be brought into 
the temple to the King our 
Lord. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Afferéntur regi  vírgines 
post eam: próxime ejus affe- 
réntur tibi in letftia, et ex- 
sultatióne:  adducéntur in 
templum regi Dómino. (T. P. 
Allelüja.) 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 

the gifts which we offer 

on the solemnity of Thy virgin 
and martyr, N, by whose patro- 


Uscirz, Dómine, münera, 
que in beátze N. Vírginis 
et Mártyris tue solemnitáte 
deférimus: cujus nos confí- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OP A VIRGIN-MARTYR 1363 

dimus patrocínio liberári. Per nage we trust to be delivered 

Dóminum. . : from all. evil. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Ps. 118, 78-80 


Confundantur supérbi, quia Let the proud be ashamed, 
injüste iniquitátem fecérunt because they have done un- 
in me: ego. autem in mandá- justly toward me: but I will be 
tis tuis exercébor, in tuis jus- employed in Thy command- 
tificatiénibus, ut non con- ments, in Thy justifications, 
fündar. (T. P. Alleluja.) that I may not be confounded. 

EO (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 
UXILIÉNTUR nobis, Dó- AY the mysteries we have 
mine, sumpta mysté- XV received, help us, O Lord, 
ria: et, intercedénte beáta N. and, by the intercession of 
Virgine et Mártyre tua, sempi- blessed N., Thy virgin and mar- 
térna fáciant protectióne gau- tyr, may they cause us to re- 


dére. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


joice in everlasting protection. 
Through our Lord. 


Another Mass of a Wirgin-Martpr 
(Me exspectaverunt ) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


E EXSPECTAVERUNT pec- 

catores, ut -pérderent 
me: testiménia tua, Dómine, 
intelléxi: omnis consumma- 
tiónis vidi finem: latum 
mandátum tuum nimis. (T. P. 
Allelüja, alleluja.) Ps. 118, 1. 
Beáti immaculáti in via: qui 
ámbulant in lege Dómini. Y. 
Glória Patri. 


Ps. 118, 95, 96 


HE wicked have waited for 

me to destroy me: I have 
understood Thy testimonies, O 
Lord: I have seen an end of all 
perfection: Thy commandment 
is exceeding broad. (P. T. Alle- 
luia, alleluia.) Ps. 118, 1. 
Blessed are the undefiled in the 
way: who walk in the law of 
the Lord. y. Glory. 


Kyrie; page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


NDULGÉNTIAM nobis queesu- 
mus, Dómine, beáta. N. 


Virgo et Martyr implóret: 


AY blessed N., virgin and 
martyr, who was ever 
pleasing to Thee by her merit 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1364 


of chastity and by her extoll- 
ing of Thy power, implore Thy 
forgiveness for us, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord. Through our 
Lord. 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN-MARTYR 


que tibi grata semper éxstitit, 
et mérito castitátis, et tue 
professióne virtütis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 51, 13-17 


LORD, my God, Thou hast 
O exalted my dwelling-place 
upon the earth, and I have 
prayed for death to pass away. 
I called upon the Lord, the 
Father of my Lord, that He 
would not leave me in the day 
of my trouble, and in the time 
of the proud, without help. I 
will praise Thy name contin- 
ually, and will praise it with 
thanksgiving, and my prayer 
was heard, and Thou hast 
saved me from destruction, and 
hast delivered me from the evil 
time. Therefore I will give 
thanks, and praise Thee, O 
Lord our God. 


OMINE Deus meus, exal- 

tásti super terram ha- 
bitatiónem meam, et pro 
morte defluénte  deprecáta 
sum. Invocávi Dóminum Pa- 
trem Dómini mei, ut non de- 
relínquat me in die tribula- 
tiónis mez, et in témpore su- 
perbórum sine  adjutório. 
Laudábo nomen tuum assídue, 
et collaudábo illud in confes- 
sióne, et exaudíta est orátio 
mea. Et liberásti me de per- 
ditióne, et eripuisti me de 
tempore  iníquo. Proptérea 
confitébor, et laudem dicam 
tibi, Dómine Deus noster. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


by the Tract. 
Greater Alleluia. 


In Paschal-time the Gradual is replaced by the 


Gradual. Ps. 45, 6, 5 


God will help her with His 
countenance: God is in the 
midst of her, she shall not be 
moved. V. The stream of the 
river maketh the city of God 
joyful; the Most High hath 
sanctified His own tabernacle. 


Adjuvabit eam Deus vultu 
suo: Deus in médio ejus, non 
commovébitur. Y. Flüminis 
impetus letificat civitátem 
Dei: sanctificavit tabernácu- 
Jum suum Altíssimus. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. This is 
@ Wise virgin, and one of the 
number of the prudent. Alle- 
luia. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Hec 
est virgo sápiens, et una de 
nümero prudéntum. Allelüja. 


Tract 


Come, spouse of Christ, re- 
ceive the crown, which the 


Veni, sponsa Christi, áccipe 
corónam, quam tibi Dóminus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN-MARTYR 


preparávit in ztérnum: pro 
cujus amóre sánguinem tu- 
um fudísti. Y. Ps. 44, 8, 5. Di- 
lexisti justítiam, et odísti in- 
iquitatem: proptérea unxit te 
Deus, Deus tuus, óleo lætítiæ 
pre, consórtibus tuis. Y. Spé- 
cie tua, et pulchritüdine tua 
inténde, próspere procéde, et 
regna. 


1865 


Lord hath prepared for thee 
forever: for the love of Whom 
thou didst shed thy blood. Y. 
Ps. 44, 8, 5. Thou hast loved 
justice and hated iniquity: 
therefore God, thy God, hath 
anointed thee with the oil of 
gladness above thy fellows. Y. 
With thy comeliness and thy 
beauty set out, proceed pros- 
perously, and reign. 


The G reater Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Hc 
est virgo sápiens, et una de 
numero prudéntum. Allelija. 
yY. Sap. 4, 1. O quam pulchra 
est casta generátio cum clari- 
táte! Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. This is a 
wise virgin, and one of the 
number of the prudent. Alle- 
luia. Y. Wis. 4, 1. Oh, how beau- 
tiful is the chaste generation 
with glory! Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 13, 44-52 


Hà Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Matthzum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus discipulis suis pará- 
bolam hanc: Símile est reg- 
num cælórum thesáuro ab- 
scóndito in agro: quem qui 
invénit homo, abscóndit, et 
præ gáudio illíus vadit, et ven- 
dit univérsa, quæ habet, et 
emit agrum ilum. Iterum 
simile est regnum colórum 
hómini negotiatóri, quærénti 
bonas margarítas. Invénta au- 
tem una pretiósa margarita, 
ábiit, et véndidit ómnia que 
hábuit, et emit eam. Iterum 
simile est regnum ctelórum 
sagénse misse in mare, et ex 
omni génere píscium congre- 
gánti. Quam, cum impléta es- 
set, educéntes, et secus littus 
sedéntes, elegérunt bonos in 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus spoke 

A this parable to His dis- 
ciples: The kingdom of heaven 
is like unto a treasure hidden in 
a field; which a man having 
found, hid it, and for joy there- 
of goeth, and selleth all that 
he hath, and buyeth that field. 
Again, the kingdom of heaven 
is like to a merchant seeking 
good pearls. Who, when he had 
found one pearl of great price, 
went his way and sold all that 
he had, and bought it. Again, 
the kingdom of heaven is like 
to a net cast into the sea, and 
gathering together of all kinds 
of fishes; which, when it was 
filled, they drew out, and sit- 
ting by the shore, they chose 
out the good into vessels, but 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1366 


the bad they cast forth. So 
shall it be at the end of the 
world. The angels shall go out, 
and shall separate the wicked 
from among the just, and shall 
cast them into the furnace of 
fire; there shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. Have ye un- 
derstood all these things? They 
say to Him, Yes. He said unto 
them, Therefore, every scribe 
instructed in the kingdom of 
heaven, is like to à man who is 
a householder, who bringeth 
forth out of his treasure new 
things and old. 


Offertory. 


Grace is poured abroad in 
thy lips: therefore hath God 
blessed thee forever, and for 
ages of ages. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN-MARTYR 


vasa, malos auiem foras mis- 
érunt. Sic erit in consumma- 
iióne sæculi: exíbunt Angeli, 
et separábunt malos de médio 
justórum, et mittent eos in 
caminum ignis: ibi erit fletus, 
et stridor déntium, Intellex- 
ístis hxc ómnia? Dicunt ei: 
Etiam. Ait ills: Ideo omnis 
Scriba doctus in regno cel6- 
rum similis est hómini pa- 
trifamilias, qui profert de the- 
sáuro suo nova et vétera. 


Ps. 44, 3 


Diffüsa est gratia in lábiis 
tuis: proptérea benedixit te 
Deus in ztérnum, et in secu- 
lum seculi. (T. P. Allelüja.) 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY accept, O Lord, 

the sacrifices dedicated 

to the merits of blessed N., Thy 

virgin. and martyr, and grant 

them as a perpetual aid in our 
behalf. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


ÓsT1AS tibi, Dómine, beá- 

te N. Virginis et Már- 

iyris tue dicátas méritis, be- 

nígnus assüme: et ad perpé- 

tuum nobis tríbue proveníre 
subsidium, Per Dóminum. 


Communion. Ps. 118, 121, 122, 128 


I have done judgment and 
3ustice, O Lord; let not the 
proud calumniate me: I was 
directed to all Thy command- 
ments; I have hated all wicked 
ways. (P. T, Alleluia.) 


Feci judícium et justítiam, 
Dómine, non calumniéntur 
mihi supérbi: ad ómnia man- 
dáta tua dirigébar, omnem 
viam iniquitátis ódio hábui. 
(T. P. Allelüja.) 


Postcommunion 


ILLED With the bounty of 
Thy divine gift, we be- 


IVINYI müneris largitáte 
satiáti, quesumus, Dó- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF. A VIRGIN-MARTYR 


mine Deus noster: ut, inter- 
cedénte beáta N. Vírgine et 
Mártyre tua, in ejus semper 
participatióne vivamus, Per 
Dóminum. . 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


186Y 


Seech Thee, O Lord, that, by 
the intercession of the blessed 
N., Thy virgin and martyr, we 
may ever live in the partaking 
thereof. Through our Lord. 


Sometimes the following Gospel is read in pus of the 


Gospel in the Mass. 


Gospel. Mait. 19, 3-12 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan-. 


gélii secündum Matthzum. 


N ILLO témpore: Accessé- 
runt ad Jesum phariszi 
tentántes eum, ef dicéntes: Si 
licet hómini dimíttere uxó- 
rem suam, quacümque ex 
causa? Qui respóndens, ait 
eis: Non legístis, quia, qui fe- 
cit hóminem ab inítio, más- 
culum et féminam fecit eos? 
et dixit: Propter hoc dimit- 
tet homo patrem, et matrem, 
et adherébit uxóri sus, et 
erunt duo in carne una. Ita- 
que jam non sunt duo, sed una 
caro. Quod ergo Deus conjün- 
xit, homo non séparet. Dicunt 
illi: Quid ergo Móyses mandá- 
vit dare libéllum repüdii, et 
dimíttere? Ait illis: Quóniam 
Móyses ad durítiam cordis ve- 
stri permísit vobis dimíttere 
uxóres vestras: ab initio au- 
tem non fuit sic. Dico autem 
vobis, quia quicümque dimí- 
serit uxórem suam, nisi ob 
fornicatiónem, et áliam dúx- 
erit, mechátur: et qui di- 
missam düxerit, mochátur. 
Dicunt ei discípuli ejus: Si ita 
est causa hóminis cum uxóre, 
non éxpedit nübere. Qui dixit 
illis: Non omnes cápiunt ver- 
bum istud, sed quibus datum 
est. Sunt enim eunüchi, qui de 


"4 Continuation of the holy 


` Gospel according to St. Mat- 


thew. 


T THAT lime there came 

to Jesus the pharisees 
empting Him and saying: Is it 
lawful for & man to put away 
his wife for every cause? Who 
answering, said to them: Have 
ye not read that He Who made 
man from the beginning made 
them male and female? And He 
said: For this cause shall a 
man leave father and mother 
and shall cleave to his wife; 
and they two shall be in one 
fiesh. Therefore now they are 
not two, but one flesh. What 
therefore God hath joined to- 
gether, let no man put asun- 
der. They say to Him: Why 
then did Moses command to 
give a bill of divorce and to 
put away? He saith to them: 
Because Moses by reason of the 
hardness of your heart per- 
mitted you to put away your 
wives. But from the beginning 
it was not so. And I say to you 
that whosoever shall put away 
his wife, except.it be for forni- 
cation, and shall marry an- 
other, committeth adultery: 
and he that shall marry her 
that is put away committeth 
adultery. His disciples say unto 
Him: If the case of a man with 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1868 COMMON OF TWO OR MORE VIRGIN-MARTYRS 


his wife be so, it is not expe- 
dient to marry. Who said to 
them: All men take not this 
word, but they to whom it is 
given. For there are eunuchs 
who were born so from their 
mother’s womb: and there are 
eunuchs who were made so by 


matris útero sic nati sunt: et 
sunt eunüchi, qui facti sunt 
ab hominibus: et sunt eu- 
nüchi, qui seípsos castravé- 
runt propter regnum caolórum. 
Qui potest cápere, cápiat, 


men: and there are eunuchs 


who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of 


heaven. 


He that can take let him take it. 


Common of Tiwo or More Wirgin-Martyrs 


On a feast kept in honor of two or more virgin-martyrs, one 
or other of the above Masses is said, but the Prayer, Epistle, 


Secret and Postcommunions are 


as follows: 


Prayer 


G's" us, we beseech Thee, 
; O Lord, our God, to ven- 
erate with unceasing devotion 
the victories of Thy holy vir- 
gins and martyrs, N. and N., 
that, though we can not worth- 
ily celebrate their merits, we 
may at least offer them our 
humble service. Through our 
Lord. 


A NOBIS, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, Deus noster,sanc- 
tárum Vírginum et Mártyrum 
tuárum N. et N. palmas in- 
cessábili devotióne venerári: 
ut, quas digna mente non 
póssumus celebráre, humili- 
bus saltem frequentémus ob- 
séquiis. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 7, 25-34 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, concerning vir- 
B gins I have no command- 
ment of the Lord; but I give 
counsel as having obtained 
mercy of the Lord to be faith- 
ful I think therefore that this 
is good for the present neces- 
sity, for & man so to be. Art 
thou bound to a wife? seek not 
to be loosed. Art thou loosed 
from a wife? seek not a wife. 
But if thou take a wife, thou 
hast not sinned: and if a vir- 
gin marry she hath not sinned; 


Léctio Epistole beati Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: De virgínibus 

precéptum Dómini non 
hábeo: consílium autem do, 
tamquam misericórdiam con- 
Secütus a .Dómino, ut sim 
fidélis. Exístimo ergo hoc bo- 
num esse propter instántem 
necessitátem, quóniam bonum 
est hómini sic esse. Alligátus 
es uxóri? noli querere solu- 
tiónem. Solitus es ab uxóre? 
noli querere uxórem. Si au- 
tem accéperis uxórem: non 
peecásti. Et si nüpserit virgo, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF TWO OR MORE VIRGIN-MARTYRS 1363 


non peccávit. Tribulatiónem 
tamen carnis habébunt hu- 
jüsmodi. Ego autem vobis 
parco. Hoc ítaque dico, fra- 
tres: Tempus breve est: réli- 
quum est, ut et qui habent 
uxóres, tamquam non habén- 
tes sint: et qui flent, tamquam 
non flentes: et qui gaudent, 
tamquam non gaudéntes: et 
qui emunt, tamquam non pos- 
Sidéntes: et qui utüntur hoc 
mundo, tamquam non után- 
tur: preeterit enim figüra hu- 
jus mundi. Volo autem vos 
sine sollicitüdine ` esse. Qui 
sine uxóre est, sollícitus est 
quie Dómini sunt, quómodo 
pláceat Deo. Qui autem cum 
uxóri est, sollicitus est que 
sunt mundi, quómodo pláceat 
uxóri, et divísus est. Et mü- 
lier innüpta, et virgo cógitat 
que Dómini sunt, ut sit sanc- 
ta córpore et Spiritu: 
Christo Jesu Dómino nostro. 


in 


nevertheless, such shall have 
tribulation of the flesh. But I 
spare you. This therefore I say, 
brethren, The time is short; it 
remaineth, that they also who 
have Wives, be as if they had 
none; and they that weep, as 
though they wept not; and they 
that rejoice, as if they rejoiced 
not; and they that buy, as 
though they possessed not; and 
they that use this world, as if 
they used it not: for the fashion 
of this world passeth away. But 
I would have you to be without 
solicitude. He:that is without 
a wife, is solicitous for the 
things that belong to the Lord, 
how he may please God; but 
he that is with & wife, is solici- 
tous for the things of the world, 
how he may.please his wife: 
and he is divided: and the un- 
married woman and the virgin 
thinketh on the things of the 
Lord, that she may be holy 
both in body and spirit; in 
Christ Jesus our Lord. 


Secret 


NTÉNDE, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, münera altáribus 
tuis pro sanctárum Vírginum 
et Mártyrum tuárum N. et 
N. festivitáte propósita: ut, 
Sicut per hzc beáta mystéria 
ilis glóriam contulísti; ita 
nobis indulgéntiam largiáris, 
Per Dóminum, 


AVORABLY look down, we 

beseech Thee, upon the 
gifts laid upon Thine altars, O 
Lord, for the festival of Thy 
holy virgins and martyrs, N. 
and N., that, as Thou hast con- 
ferred glory upon them through 
these blessed mysteries, so 
Thou mayest bestow upon us 
forgiveness. Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


RÆSTA nobis, qusesumus, 
Dómine, intercedéntibus 
sanctis Virgínibus et Martyri- 
bus tuis N. et N.: ut, quod ore 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, by the interces- 
Sion of Thy holy virgins and 
martyrs, N. and N., that what 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1370 


we touch with our lips we may 
receive with pure 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN NOT A MARTYR 


mente 


contingimus, pura 


hearts. capiámus. Per Dóminum. 


Common of a Virgin not a Martyr 
(Dilexisti) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 44,8 


Hov hast loved justice, and 

hated iniquity: therefore 
God, thy God, hath anointed 
thee with the oil of gladness 
above thy fellows. (P. T. Alle- 
luia, alleluia. Ps. 44, 2. My 
heart hath uttered a good 
word: I speak my works to the 
King. Y. Glory. . 


ILEXISTI justitiam, . et 
odísti iniquitátem: 
proptérea unxit te Deus, De- 
us tuus, óleo letitiz pre con- 
Sórtibus tuis. (T.P. Allelija, 
allelüja.) Ps. 44, 2. Eructávit 
cor meum verbum bonum: 
dico ego ópera mea Regi. J. 
Glória Patri. 


. Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


(3 hear us, O God, 
cur Saviour, that, as we 
rejoice in the festival of blessed 
N., Thy virgin, so we may be 
taught by the spirit of pious 
devotion. Through our Lord. 


xÁun: nos, Deus salutáris 
noster: ut, sicut de 
beate N. Vírginis tue festivi- 
táte gaudémus; ita pie devo- 
tiénis erudiámur afféctu. Per 
Dóminum. 


Epistle. 2 Cor. 10, 17; 11, 1,2 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostie to the 
Corinthians. 

RETHREN, he that glorieth, 

Jet him glory in the Lord. 

For not he that commendeth 
himself is approved, but he 
whom God commendeth. Would 
to God you could bear with some 
little of my folly, but do bear 
with me. For I am jealous of you 
With the jealousy of God. For 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Qui gloriátur, in 

Dómino gloriétur. Non 
enim qui seipsum commén- 
dat, ille probátus est; sed 
quem Deus comméndat. Utin- 
am sustinerétis módicum quid 
insipiéntie mes, sed et sup- 
portáte me: emulor enim vos 
Dei emulatiéne. Despóndi 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN NOT A MARTYR 


enim vos uni viro vírginem 
castam -exhibére Christo. 


1371 


I have espoused you to one hus- 
band, that. I.may present you 
as a chaste virgin to Christ. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. 


Spécie tua, et pulchritüdine 
tua inténde, próspere.procéde, 
et regna. V. Propter veritá- 
tem, et mansuetüdinem, et 
justítiam: et dedücet te mira- 
biliter déxtera tua. 


Ps. 44, 5 


With thy comeliness and thy 
beauty set out, proceed pros- 
perously, and reign. Y. Because 
of truth, and meekness and jus- 
tice: and thy right hand shall! 
conduct thee wonderfully. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ad- 
ducéntur regi vírgines post 
eam: próximæ ejus afferéntur 
tibi in letitia. Allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. After her 
Shall virgins be brought to the 
King: her neighbors shall be 
brought to thee with gladness. 
Alleluia. : 


Tract. Ps. 44, 11,12 


. Audi, fília, et vide, et in- 
clina aurem tuam: quia con- 
cupivit rex spéciem tuam. Y. 
Ps. 44, 13, 10. Vultum tuum 
deprecabuntur omnes dívites 
plebis: fíliæ. regum in’ hon- 
óre tuo. V. Ps. 44, 15, 16. Ad- 
ducéntur regi vírgines post 
eam: próxima ejus afferéntur 
tibi. Y. Afferéntur in letitia, 
et exsultatióne: adducéntur 
in templum regis. 


Harken, O daughter, and see, 
and incline thine ear: for the 
King hath greatly desired thy 
beauty. Y. Ps. 44/13, 10. All the 
rich among the people shall en- 
treat thy countenance: the 
daughters of kings in thy honor. 
V. Ps. 44, 15, 16. After her shall 
virgins be brought to the King: 
her neighbors shall be brought 
to thee. Y. They shall be 
brought with gladness and re- 
joicing: they shall be brought 
into the temple of the King. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allehija. Y. Ps. 44, 
15, 16. Adducéntur regi vir- 
gines post eam: próxims ejus 
afferéntur tibi in letitia. Alle- 
luia. Y. Spécie tua, et pulchri- 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 44, 
15, 16. After her shall virgins 
be brought to the King: her 
neighbors shall be brought to 
thee in gladness. Alleluia. Y. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1372 


Ps. 44, 5. With thy comeliness 
and thy beauty set out, proceed 
prosperously, and reign. Alle- 
luia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN NOT A MARTYR 


túdine tua inténde, próspere 
procéde, et regna. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Matt. 25, 1-13 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus spoke 

this parable to His dis- 
ciples: The kingdom of heaven 
shall be like to ten virgins, who 
taking their lamps went out to 
meet the bridegroom and the 
bride. And five of them were 
foolish, and five wise. But the 
five foolish, having taken their 
lamps, did not take oil with 
them; but the wise took oil in 
their vessels with the lamps. 
And the bridegroom tarrying, 
they all slumbered and slept. 
And at midnight there was a 
cry made, Behold the bride- 
groom cometh, go ye forth to 
meet him. Then all those vir- 
gins arose and trimmed their 
lamps; and the foolish said to 
the wise, Give us of your oil, 
for our lamps are gone out. 
The wise answered, saying, Lest 
perhaps there be not enough for 
us and for you, go you rather 
to them that sell, and buy for 
yourselves. Now. whilst they 
went to buy, the bridegroom 
came, and they that were ready 
went in with him to the mar- 
riage, and the door was shut. 
But at last came also the other 
virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, 
open to us; but he answering 
said, Amen I say to you, I know 
ye not, Watch ye, therefore, be- 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Matthzum. 


Sus discípulis suis parabo- 
lam hanc: Símile erit regnum 
celórum decem virginibus; 
que accipiéntes lampades suas 
exiérunt óbviam sponso et 
sponse. Quinque autem ex eis 
erant fátus, et quinque prü- 
déntes: sed quinque fátusm, 
accéptis Jlampádibus, non 
sumpsérunt óleum secum: 
prudéntes vero accepérunt 
óleum in vasis suis cum lam- 
pádibus. Moram autem fa- 
ciénte sponso, dormitavérunt 
omnes, et dormiérunt. Média 
autem nocte clamor factus 
est: Ecce sponsus venit, exite 
óbviam ei, Tunc surrexérunt 
omnes vírgines ille, et orna- 
vérunt lámpades suas. Fatue 
autem sapiéntibus dixérunt: 
Date nobis de óleo vestro: 
quia lámpades nostre exstin- 
guüntur. Respondérunt pru- 
déntes, dicéntes: Ne forte 
non suffíciat nobis, et vobis, 
ite pótius ad vendéntes, et 
émite vobis, Dum autem irent 
émere, Venit sponsus: et que 
parate erant, intravérunt 
cum €o ad nüptias, et clausa 
est jánua. Novissime vero 
véniunt et rélique virgines, 
dicéntes: Dómine, Dómine, 
áperi nobis. At ille respón- 


T. ILLO iémpore: dixit Je- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN NOT A MARTYR 


1973 


dens, ait: Amen dico vobis, cause you know not the day nor 


néscio vos. 


horam. 


Vigiláte ítaque, the hour. 
quia nescítis diem, neque 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 10 


Fílie regum in honóre tuo, 
adstitit regina a dextris tuis 
in vestítu deauráto, circüm- 
data varietáte. (T. P. Alle- 
lúja.) 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


The daughters of kings in 
Thy honor: the queen stood on 
Thy right hand, in gilded cloth- 
ing, surrounded with variety. 
(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Secret 


CCÉPTA tibi sit, Dómine, 

sacrate plebis oblátio 
pro tuórum honóre sanctór- 
um: quorum se méritis, de 
iribulatióne percepísse cog- 
nóscit auxílium, Per Dómin- 
um. 


Av ihe offering of Thy 
D consecrated people be 
accepted by Thee, O Lord, in 
honor of Thy saints, by whose 
merits it knoweth that it hath 
received aid in time of trouble. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 
Communion. Matt. 25, 4,6 


Quinque prudéntes virgines 
accepérunt óleum in vasis 
suis cum lampádibus: mé- 
dia autem nocte clamor fac- 
tus est: Ecce sponsus venit: 
exíte óbviam Christo Dómino: 
(T. P. Allelüja.) 


The five wise virgins took oil 
in their vessels with the lamps: 
and at midnight there was a 
cry made, Behold the bride- 
groom cometh: go ye forth to 
meet Christ our Lord. (P. T. 
Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 


ATIÁSTI, Dómine, famil- 
iam tuam  munéribus 


HOU hast filled Thy house- 
hold, O Lord, with sacred 


Sacris: ejus, quesumus, sem- gifts; ever comfort us, we be- 
per interventióne nos réfove, seech Thee, through her inter- 
eujus solémnia celebrámus. cession whose festival we cele- 
Per Dóminum. brate. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Another Mass of a Wirgin not a Martyr 
(Vultum tuum) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 44, 13, 15, 16 


ULTUM tuum depreca- LL the rich among the 
büntur omnes divites people shall entreat Thy 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1374 


countenance: after her shall 
virgins be brought to the King; 
her neighbors shall be brought 
to Thee in gladness and rejoic- 
ing. (P. T. Alleluia, alleluia.) 
Ps. 44, 2. My heart hath uttered 
& good word: I speak my works 
to the King. V. Glory. 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN NOT A MARTYR 


plebis: adducéntur Regi vír- 
gínes post eam: próximz ejus 
adducéntur tibi in letitia et 
exsultatióne. (T.P. Allelüja, 
allelája.) Ps. 44, 2. Eructávit 
cor meum verbum bonum: 
dico ego ópera mea regi. Y. 
Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


Gi hear us, O God, 
our Saviour, that, as we 
rejoice in the festival of blessed 
N., Thy virgin, so we may be 
taught by the spirit of pious 
devotion. Through our Lord. 


XÁUDI nos, Deus salutáris 
noster: ut, sicut de 
beate N. Vírginis tue festivi- 
tate gaudémus: ita pie devo- 
tiónis erudiámur afféctu. Per 
Dóminum. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. 7, 25-34 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 

P RETHREN, concerning vir- 
gins I have no command- 

ment of the Lord; but I give 
counsel, as having obtained 
mercy of the Lord to be faith- 
ful I think therefore that this 
is good for the present neces- 
sity, for a man so to be. Art 
thou bound to a wife? seek not 
to be loosed. Art thou loosed 
from a wife? seek not a wife. 
But if thou take a wife, thou 
hast not sinned: and if a virgin 
marry she hath not sinned; 
nevertheless, such shall have 
tribulation of the flesh. But I 
Spare you. This therefore I say, 
brethren, The time is short; it 
remaineth, that they also who 
have wives, be as if they bad 
none; and they that weep, as 
though they wept not; and they 
that rejoice, as if they rejoiced 
not; and they that buy, as 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: De  virgínibus 

precéptum Dómini non 
hábeo: consílium autem do, 
tamquam misericórdiam con- 
secütus a Dómino, ut sim 
fidelis. Exístimo ergo hoc bo- 
num esse propter instántem 
necessitátem, quóniam bon- 
um est hómini sic esse. Alli- 
gátus es uxóri? noli querere 
solutiónem. Solitus es ab 
uxóre? noli querere uxórem. 
Si autem accéperis uxórem, 
non peccásti. Et si nüpserit 
virgo, non peccávit: tribula- 
tiónem tamen carnis habé- 
bunt hujüsmodi Ego autem 
vobis parco. Hoc itaque dico, 
fratres: Tempus breve est: 
réliquum est, ut et qui ha- 
bent uxóres, tamquam non 
habéntes sint: et qui flent, 
tamquam non flentes: et qui 
gaudent, tamquam non gau- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN NOT A MARTYR 


déntes: et qui emunt, tam- 
quam non possidéntes: et qui 
utüntur hoc mundo, tam- 
quam non ütántur: preterit 
enim figúra hujus mundi. 
Volo autem vos sine sollici- 
tüdine esse. Qui sine uxóre 
est, sollicitus est, que Dómini 
sunt quómodo pláceat Deo, 
Qui autem cum uxóre est, sol- 
licitus est, que sunt mundi, 
quómodo placeat uxóri, et di- 
vísus est. Et mülier innüpta, 
et virgo, cógitat que Dómini 
sunt, ut sit sancta córpore et 
Spiritu: in Christo Jesu Dó- 
mino nostro. 


1375 


though they possessed not; and 
they that use this world, as if 
they used it not: for the fash- 
ion of this world passeth away. 
But I would have you to be 
without solicitude. He that is 
without a wife, is solicitous for 
the things that belong to the 
Lord, how he may please God; 
but he that is with a wife, is 
solicitous for the things of the 
world, how he may please his 
wife: and he is divided: and 
the unmarried woman and the 
virgin thinketh on the things 
of the Lord, that she may be 
holy both in body and spirit; in 
Christ Jesus our Lord. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
pia 


ced by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. 


Concupívit rex decórem tu- 
um, quóniam ipse est Dó- 
minus Deus tuus. Y. Ps. 44, 
11. Audi, fília, et vide, et in- 
clina aurem tuam. 


Ps. 44, 12 


The King hath greatly de- 
sired thy beauty, for He is the 
Lord thy God. (P. T. Alleluia., 
alleluia.) V. Ps. 44, 11. Harken, 
O daughter, and see, and in- 
cline thine ear. 


Lesser Alleluia 
.Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Hzc Alleluia, alleluia. Y. This is 


est virgo sápiens, et una de 


a wise virgin, and one of the 


número prudéntum. Allelija. number of the prudent. Alleluia. 


Tract. Ps. 44, 12, 15, 10 


Quia concupivit rex spéci- For the King hath greatly 
em tuam. f. Vultum tuum de- desired thy beauty. Y. All the 
precabüntur omnes divites rich among the people shall en- 
plebis: fíliæ regum in honóre treat thy countenance; the 
tuo. V. Ps. 44, 15, 16. Addu- daughters of kings in thy honor. 
céntur regi vírgines post eam: JV. Ps. 44, 15, 16. After her shall 
préxime ejus afferéntur tibi. virgins be brought to the King: 
y. Afferéntur in letitia, et her neighbors shall be brought 
exsultatiéne: adducéntur in to thee. FJ. They shall be 
templum regis. brought with gladness and re- 

] joicing: they shall be brought 
into the temple of the King. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1376 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN NOT A MARTYR 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. This is 
is a Wise virgin, and one of the 
number of the prudent. Alle- 
luia. Y. Wis. 4, 1. O how beau- 
tiful is the chaste generation 
with glory! Alleluia. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Hac 
est virgo sapiens, et una de 
número prudéntum. Allelája. 
¥. Sap. 4, 1. O quam pulchra 
est casta generátio cum clari- 
tate! Allelüja. 


Either of the following two Gospels may be read. 
Gospel. Matth. 25, 1-13 


A Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
ihew. 

T THAT time, Jesus spoke 

to His disciples this par- 
able: The kingdom of heaven 
shall be like to ten virgins, who 
taking their lamps went out to 
meet the bridegroom and the 
bride. And five of them were 
foolish, and five wise: but the 
five foolish, having taken their 
lamps, did not take oil with 
them, but the wise took oil in 
their vessels with the lamps. 
And the bridegroom tarrying, 
they all slumbered and slept: 
and at midnight there was a 
cry made, Behold the bride- 
groom cometh, go ye forth to 
meet him. Then all those vir- 
gins arose and trimmed their 
lamps: and the foolish said to 
the wise, Give us of your oil, 
for our lamps are gone out. 
The wise answered, saying, Lest 
perhaps there be not enough 
for us and for you, go you 
rather to them that sell, and 
buy for yourselves. Now whilst 
they went to buy, the bride- 
groom came; and they that 
were ready, went in with him to 
the marriage, and the door was 
shut; but at last came also the 
other virgins saying, Lord, 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii seclndum Matthdéum. 


N ILLO témpore: dixit Je- 
I Sus discípulis suis pará- 
bolam hanc: Símile erit reg- 
num celérum decem virgini- 
bus: que accipiéntes lám- 
pades suas exiérunt óbviam 
Sponso et sponse. Quinque 
autem ex eis erant fatue, et 
quinque prudéntes: sed quin- 
que fátue, accéptis lampádi- 
bus, non sumpsérunt óleum 
secum: prudéntes vero accep- 
érunt óleum in vasis suis cum 
lampádibus. Moram autem 
faciénte sponso, dormitavér- 
unt omnes et dormiérunt. 
Média autem nocte clamor 
factus est: Ecce sponsus ven- 
it, exite 6bviam ei. Tunc sur- 
rexérunt omnes virgines il- 
læ, et ornavérunt lámpades 
suas. Fátuæ autem sapiénti- 
bus dixérunt: Date nobis de 
óleo vestro: quia lámpades 
nostre exstinguintur. Re- 
spondérunt  prudéntes, di- 
céntes: Ne forte non sufficiat 
nobis et vobis, ite pótius ad 
vendéntes, et émite vobis, 
Dum autem irent émere, ve- 
nit sponsus: et que parátæ 
erant, intravérunt cum eo ad 
nüptias, et clausa est jánua. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Co a 


COMMON OF A VIRGIN NOT A MARTYR 


Novíssime vero véniunt et ré- 
lique vírgines, dicéntes: Dó- 
mine. Dómine, áperi nobis. 
At ille respóndens, ait: Amen 
dico vobis, néscio vos. Vigiláte 
itaque quia nescítis diem ne- 
que horam. 


1377 


Lord, open to us: but he an- 
swered, saying, Amen, I say to 
you, I know you not. Watch ye, 
therefore, because you know 
not the day nor the hour. 


Gospel. Matt. 13, 44-52 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Matthæum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
T sus discipulis suis pará- 
bolam hanc: Símile est reg- 
num colórum thesáuro ab- 
Sseóndito in agro: quem qui 
invénit homo, abscóndit, et 
pre gáudio illfus vadit, et ven- 
dit univérsa que habet, et 
emit agrum illum. Iterum si- 
mile est regnum celérum hó- 
mini negotiatéri, querénti 
bonas margaritas.. Invénta 
autem una pretiósa margar- 
ita, ábiit, et véndidit ómnia 
que habuit, et emit eam. 
Iterum simile est regnum ce- 
lórum sagéng misse in mare, 
et ex omni génere piscium 
congregánti. Quam, cum im- 
pléta esset, educéntes, et se- 
cus littus sedéntes, elegérunt 
bonos in vasa, malos autem 
foras misérunt. Sic erit in 
consummatióne seculi: exí- 
bunt Angeli, et separábunt 
malos de médio justórum, et 
mittent eos in camínum ig- 
nis: ibi erit fletus, et stridor 
déntium.  Intellexístis hzc 
ómnia? Dicunt ei: Etiam. Ait 
illis: Ideo omnis scriba doc- 
tus in regno colórum, símilis 
est hémini patrifamílias, qui 
profert de thesáuro suo nova 
et vétera. - 


®© Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time, Jesus spoke 
this parable to His dis- 
ciples: The kingdom of heaven 
is like unto a treasure hidden 
in a field; which a man having 
found, hid it, and for joy there- 
of goeth, and selleth all that he 
hath, and buyeth that field. 
Again, the kingdom of heaven 
is like to a merchant seeking 
good pearls. Who, when he had 
found one pearl of great price, 
went his way and sold all that 
he had, and bought it. Again, 
ihe kingdom of heaven is like 
to a net cast into the sea, and 
gathering together of all kinds 
of fishes; which, when it was 
filled, they drew out, and sitting 
by the shore, they chose out the 
good into vessels, but the bad 
they cast forth. So shall it be 
at the end of the world. The 
angels shall go out, and shall 
separate the wicked from the 
just, and shall cast them into 
the furnace of fire; there shall 
be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth. Have ye understood all 
these things? They say to Him, 
Yes. He said unto them, There- 
fore every scribe instructed in 
the kingdom of heaven, is like 
to a man who is a householder, 
who bringeth forth out of his 
treasure new things and old. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1378 COMMON OF HOLY WOMEN 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 15, 16 


After her shall virgins be Afferéntur Regi virgines 
brought to the King: her post eam: próximæ ejus af- 
neighbors shall be brought to feréntur tibi in letitia, et 
Thee with gladness and rejoic- exsultatióne: adducéntur in 
ing: they shall be brought into templum Regi Dómino. (T. P. 
the temple, to the King our Alleluja.) 

Lord. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
AY the offering of Thy CCÉPTA tibi sit, Dómine, 
(D consecrated people be Sacráte plebis oblátio, 


accepted by Thee, O Lord, in pro tuórum honóre sanctór- 
honor of Thy saints, by whose um: quorum se méritis, de 
merits it knoweth that it hath tribulatióne percepisse cog- 
received aid in time of trouble. nóscit auxílium. Per Dómin- 
‘Through our Lord. um. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Matt. 13, 45, 46 


The kingdom of heaven is Simile est regnum celórum 
like to a merchant seeking good hómini negotiatóri, querénti 
pearls; who, when he had bonas margaritas: invénta 
found one pearl of great price, autem una pretiósa margar- 
gave all that he had, and íta, dedit ómnia sua, et com- 
bought it. (P, T. Alleluia.) parávit eam. (T.P. Allelüja.) 


Postcommunion 


HOU hast filled Thy house- ATIÁSTI, Dómine, famil- 
hold, O Lord, with sacred iam tuam  munéribus 
gifts; ever comfort us, we be- sacris: ejus, quesumus, sem- 
seech Thee, through her inter- per interventióne nos réfove, 
cession whose festival we cele- cujus solémnia celebrámus. 
brate. Through our Lord. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Common of a Holp Woman Martpr not a Virgin 
(Me exspectaverunt peccatores) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 118, 95, 96 


HE wicked have waited for E EXSPECTAVERUNT pec- 
: me to destroy me: I have catóres, ut pérderent 


http://ccwatershed.org 


i 


COMMON .OF 


me: testimónia tua, Dómine, 
intelléxi: omnis consumma- 
tiónis vidi finem: latum man- 
dátum tuum nimis. (T.P. 
Allelija, allelüja.) Ps..118, 1. 
Beáti immaculáti in via, qui 
ámbulant in lege Dómini, Y. 
Glória Patri. ] 


HOLY WOMEN 1379 
understood Thy testimonies, O 
Lord: I have seen an end of all 
perfection: Thy commandment 
is exceedingly broad. (P. T. Al- 
leluia, alleluia.) Ps. 118, 1. 
Blessed are the undefiled in the 
way: who walk in the Jaw of the 
Lord. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui inter cétera po- 
téntie tue  mirácula 
étiam in sexu frágili victóri- 
am martyrii contulísti: con- 
céde propitius; ut, qui beate 
N. Martyris tue natalitia có- 
limus, per ejus ad te exémpla 
gradiámur, Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who, among other 

miracles of Thy power, 
hast conferred the victory of 
martyrdom even on the weaker 
sex, mercifully grant that we 
who celebrate the natal feast 
of blessed N., Thy martyr, may 
advance toward Thee through 
her example, Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 51, 1-12 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


ONFITÉBOR tibi Dómine 

rex, et collaudábo te 
Deum salvatórem meum. 
Confitébor nómini tuo: quó- 
niam adjütor et protéctor 
factus es mihi, et liberásti 
corpus meum a perditióne, a 
láqueo lingue inique et a 
labiis operántium mendaci- 
um, et in conspéctu astánti- 
um factus es mihi adjütor. 
Et liberásti me secündum 
multitüdinem | misericórdie 
nóminis tui a rugiéntibus, 
preparátis ad escam, de mán- 
ibus queréntium ánimam 
meam, et de portis tribula- 
tiónem que circumdedérunt 
me: a pressüra fiamme, que 
circümdedit me, et in médio 
ignis non sum estuata: de 
altitüdine ventris ínferi, et 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 
WILL give glory to Thee, O 
Lord my king, and I will 
praise Thee, O God my Saviour. 
I will give glory to Thy name: 
for Thou hast been a helper 
and protector to me, and hast 
preserved my body from de- 
struction, from the snare of an 
unjust tongue, and from the 
lips of them that forge lies; and 
in the sight of them that stood 
by, Thou hast been my helper; 
and Thou hast delivered me, 
according to the multitude of 
the mercy of Thy name, from 
them that did roar, prepared 
to devour. Out of the hands of 
them that sought my life, and 
from’ the gates of afflictions 
which compassed me about; 
from the oppression of the 
flame which surrounded me, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1380 


and in the midst of the fire I 
was not burnt; from the depth 
of the belly of hell, and from 
&n unclean tongue, and from 
lying words, from an unjust 
king, and from a slanderous 
tongue. My soul shall praise 
the Lord even to death: be- 
cause Thou, O Lord our God, 


COMMON OF HOLY WOMEN 


a lingua coinquinóáta, et a 
verbo mendácii, a rege in- 
iquo, et a lingua injusta: lau- 
dábit usque ad mortem anima, 
mea Dóminum, quóniam éruis 
sustinéntes te, et líberas eos 
de mánibus géntium, Dómine 
Deus noster. 


deliverest them that wait for Thee, and savest them out of the 


hands of the nations. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 44,8 


Thou hast loved justice and 
hated iniquity. Y. Therefore 
God, thy God, hath anointed 
thee with the oil of gladness. 


Dilexisti justitiam, et odisti 
iniquitatem. Y. Proptérea 
unxit te Deus, Deus tuus, óleo 
letitia. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 44, 5. 
With thy comeliness and thy 
beauty set out, proceed pros- 
perously, and reign. Alleluia. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 44, 
5. Spécie tua, et pulchritü- 
dine tua inténde, próspere 
procéde, et regna. Allelüja. 


Tract 


Come, spouse of Christ, re- 
ceive the crown, which the 
Lord hath prepared for thee 
forever: for whose love thou 
didst shed thy blood. Y. Ps. 44, 
8, Thou hast loved justice and 
hated iniquity: therefore God, 
thy God, hath anointed tbee 
with the oil of gladness above 
thy fellows. Ps. 44. 5. With thy 
comeliness and thy beauty set 
out, proceed prosperously, and 


reign. 


Veni, sponsa Christi, áccipe 
corónam, quam tibi Dóminus 
preparávit in etérnum: pro 
cujus amóre sánguinem tu- 
um fudísti. Y. Ps. 44, 8. Di- 
lexísti justítiam, et odísti in- 
iquitátem: proptérea unxit te 
Deus, Deus tuus, óleo lætítiæ 
pre consórtibus tuis. Y. Ps. 
44, 5. Spécie tua, et pulchri- 
tüdine tua inténde, próspere 
procéde, et regna. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 44, 
5. With thy comeliness and thy 
beauty set out, proceed prosper- 
ously, and reign. Alleluia. Y. 


Allelija, allelúja. Y. Ps. 44, 
5. Spécie tua, et pulchritü- 
dine tua inténde, próspere 
procéde, et regna. Allelüja. V. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Fi 


COMMON OF HOLY WOMEN 


Propter veritátem, et man- 
Suetüdinem, et justítiam: et 
dedücet te mirabiliter déx- 
tera tua. Allelüja. 


Munda -Cor Meum, page 763. 


1381 


Because of truth, and meek- 
ness, and justice: and thy right 
hand shall conduct thee won- 
derfully. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 13, 44-52 


H4 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Matthzum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
T sus discipulis suis parábo- 
lam hanc: Símile est regnum 
celórum thesáuro abscóndito 
in agro: quem qui invénit ho- 
mo, abscóndit, et pre gáudio 
illíus vadit, et vendit univér- 
sa, que habet, et emit agrum 
illum. Iterum símile est reg- 
num colórum hómini nego- 
tiatéri, querénti bonas mar- 
garítas. Invénta autem una 
pretiósa margarita, abiit, et 
véndidit ómnia que habuit, 
et emit eam. Iterum símile 
est regnum celórum sagéne 
misse in mare, et ex omni 
génere piscium congregànti. 
Quam, cum impléta esset, 
educéntes, et secus littus se- 
déntes, elegérunt bonos in 
vasa, malos autem foras mis- 
érunt. Sic erit in consumma- 
tióne seculi: exibunt Angeli, 
et separábunt malos de mé- 
dio justórum, et mittent eos 
in camínum ignis: ibi erit 
fletus, et stridor déntium. In- 
tellexístis hac ómnia? Dicunt 
ei: Etiam, Ait illis: Ideo om- 
nis scribe doctus in regno cœ- 
lórum similis est, hómini pat- 
rifamilias, qui profert de 
thesáuro suo nova et vétera. 


" Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT lime Jesus spoke 

to His disciples this par- 
able: The kingdom of heaven 
is like unto a treasure hidden 
in a field. Which 2 man having 
found, hid it, and for joy there- 
of goeth and selleth all that he 
hath, and buyeth that field. 
Again the kingdom of heaven 
is like to a merchant seeking 
good pearls. Who, when he had 
found one pearl of great price, 
went his way, and sold all that 
he had, and bought it. Again 
the kingdom of heaven is like 
to a net cast into the sea, and 
gathering together of all kind 
of fishes. Which, when it was 
filed, they drew out, and sit- 
ting by the shore, they chose 
cut the good into vessels, but 
the bad they cast forth. So 
shall it be at the end of the 
world: the angels shall go out, 
and shall separate the wicked 
from among the just, and shall 
cast them into the furnace of 
fire: there shall be Weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. Have ye un- 
derstood all these things? They 
Say to him: Yes. He said unto 
them: Therefore, every scribe 
instructed in the kingdom of 
heaven is like to à man that 
is & householder, who bringeth 
forth out of his treasure new 
things and old. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1382 


Offertory. 


Grace is poured abroad in 
thy lips: therefore hath God 
blessed thee forever, and for 
ages of ages. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


COMMON OF HOLY WOMEN 


Ps. 44, 3 

Diffusa est grátia in lábiis 
tuis: proptérea benedixit te 
Deus in etérnum, et in secu- 
lum seculi. (T. P. Alleluja.) 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 

the gifts we bring on the 

solemnity of blessed N., Thy 

martyr, by whose patronage we 

trust to be delivered from all 
evil. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


uscire, Dómine, münera, 
S que in beáte N. Már- 
tyris tue solemnitate deféri- 
mus: cujus nos confídimus 
patrocinio liberári. Per D6- 
minum. 


Communion. Ps.118, 161, 162 


Princes have persecuted me 
without cause and my heart 
hath been in awe of Thy words: 
I will rejoice at Thy words, as 
one that hath found great spoil. 
(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Príncipes persecüti sunt 
me gratis, et a verbis tuis for- 
midávit cor meum: letábor 
ego super elóquia tua, quasi 
qui invénit spólia multa. 
(T. P, Allelüja) 


Postcommunion 


received aid us, O Lord, 
and, by the intercession of 
blessed N., Thy martyr, make 
us rejoice in Thy everlasting 
protection. Through our Lord. 


(D the mysteries we have 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


UXILIÉNTUR nobis, Dó- 

mine, sumpta mysté- 
ria: et, intercedénte beáta N. 
Mártyre tua, sempitérna fá- 
ciant  protectióne  gaudére. 
Per Dóminum. 


Common of Manp Holp Women Martyrs 
not Virgins 


The Mass is same as preceding, except: 


Prayer 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord our God, ever to 


A NoBIS, quesumus, Dó- 
mine Deus noster, sanc- 


venerate devoutly the victories tárum Martyrum tuárum N. 
of Thy holy martyrs, N. and et N. palmas incessábili de- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


( 


COMMON OF.HOLY WOMEN 


votióne venerári: ut, Quas 
digna mente non póssumus 
celebrare, humílibus saltem 
frequentémus obséquiis. Per 
Dóminum. 


1883 


N.; that we may at least honor 
with our humble homage those 
whom we cannot fittingly cele- 
brate. Through our Lord. 


Secret 


NTÉNDE, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, münera altáribus 
tuis pro sanctárum Mártyrum 
tuárum XN. et N. festivitáte 
propósita: ut, sicut per hec 
beáta mystéria ilis glóriam 
contulisti; ita nobis indul- 
géntiam largiáris. Per Dó- 
minum. 


oox down, we beseech 

Thee, O Lord, upon the 
gifts offered upon Thine altars 
on the feast of Thy holy mar- 
iyrs N. and N.; that as Thou 
hast granted them glory 
through these sacred myster- 
ies, Thou mayest also grant us 
pardon, "Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


RESTA nobis, quesumus 

Dómine, intercedénti- 
bus sanctis Martyribus tuis 
N. et N., ut, quod ore contín- 
gimus, pura mente capiámus. 
Per Dóminum. 


RANT, We beseech Thee, O 

.Lord, through the inter- 
cession of Thy holy martyrs 
N. and N. that what we have 
touched with our lips we may 
receive with pure minds. 
Through our Lord. 


Common of a Holp Woman neither Virgin 
nor füartpt 
(Cognovi) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 118, 75, 120 


OGNOVI, Dómine, quia 

sequitas judicia tua, et 
in veritáte tua humilidsti 
me: confíge timóre tuo car- 
nes meas, a mandátis tuis ti- 
mui. (T. P, Allelüja, allelüja.) 
Ps. 118, 1. Bedti immaculáti 
in via: qui ámbulant in lege 
Dómini. Y. Glória Patri. 


KNOW, O Lord, that Thy 

judgments are equity, and 
in Thy truth Thou hast hum- 
bled me: pierce Thou my flesh 
with Thy fear; I am afraid of 
Thy commandments. (P. T. Al- 
leluia, alleluia) Ps. 118, 1. 
Blessed are the undefiled in 
the way; who walk in the law 
of the Lord. F. Glory, 


Kyrie. page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


2384 


COMMON OF HOLY WOMEN 


Prayer 


RACIOUSLY hear us, O God, 
our Saviour, that, as we 


XÁUDI nos, Deus, saluta- 
ris noster: ut, sicut de 


rejoice on the festivity of beáte N. festivitate gaudé- 
blessed N., so we may be taught mus: ita pie devotiónis erudi- 
by its spirit of pious devotion. ámur afféctu. Per Dóminum. 


Through our Lord. 


On the feast of a holy widow in place of the following Lesson 
is often read the Epistle 1 Tim. 5, 3-10, found at the end of 


this Mass. . 


Lesson. Prov. 31, 10-31 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


HO shall find a valiant 
woman? the price of 

her is as of things brought from 
afar off, and from the utter- 
most coasts. The heart of her 
husband trusteth in her, and 
he shall have no need of spoils. 
She will render him good and 
not evil all the days of her life. 
She hath sought wool and flax, 
and hath wrought by the coun- 
sel of her hands: she is like 
the merchant's snip, she bring- 
eth her bread from afar: and 
she hath risen in the night, and 
given a prey to her household, 
and victuals to her maidens: 
she hath considered a field and 
bought it; with the fruit of 
her hands she hath planted a 
vineyard. She hath girded her 
loins with strength, and hath 
strengthened her arm. She hath 
tasted and seen that her traffic 
is good; her lamp shall not be 
put out in the night. She hath 
put out her hands to strong 
things, and her fingers have 
taken hold of the spindle. She 
hath opened her hand to the 
needy, and stretched out her 
hands to the poor. She shall 
not fear for her house in the 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


ULÍEREM fortem quis in- 

véniet? Procul, et de 
Ultimis finibus prétium ejus. 
Confidit in ea cor viri sui, 
et spoliis non indigébit. Red- 
Get et bonum, et non malum 
ómnibus diébus vite sue. 
Quesivit lanam et linum, et 
operáta est consílio mánuum 
suárum. Facta est quasi na- 
vis institóris, de longe por- 
tans panem suum. Et de noc- 
te surréxit, deditque predam 
domésticis suis, et ^ cibaria 
ancílis suis.  Considerávit 
agrum, et emit eum: de 
fructu mánuum suárum plan- 
távit vineam. Accínxit forti- 
tüdine lumbos suos, et robor- 
ávit brachium suum. Gus- 
távit et vidit quia bona est 
negotiátio ejus: non exstin- 
guétur in nocte lucérna ejus. 
Manum suam misit ad fórtia, 
et digiti ejus apprehendérunt 
fusum. Manum suam apéruit 
inopi, et palmas suas extén- 
dit ad páuperem Non timébit 
dómui sue a frigóribus nivis: 
omnes enim doméstici ejus 
vestíti sunt duplícibus. Strag- 
ulátam vestem fecit sibi: bys- 
sus, et purpura induméntum 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NE ÉL 


COMMON OF HOLY WOMEN 


us. Nóhilis in portis vir ejus, 
1ando séderit cum senatóri- 
is terre, Síndonem fecit, et 
indidit, et cíngulum trádidit 
hananzo. Fortitüdo et decor 
iduméntum ejus, et ridébit 
1 die novíssima. Os suum 
péruit sapiéntie, et lex cle- 
iéntie in lingua ejus. Con- 
iderávit sémitas domus sus, 
t panem otiósa non comédit. 
jurrexérunt fílii ejus, et bea- 
íssimam predicavérunt: vir 
jus, et laudávit eam. Multe 
ilie congregavérunt divítias: 
il supergréssa es univérsas. 
?allax grátia, et vana est pul- 
'ritüdo: mülier timens Dó- 
ninum ipsa laudábitur. Date 
2i de fructu mánuum suárum: 
bt laudent eam in portis 
pera ejus. 


" 


s praise her in the gates. 


1385 


cold of snow; for all her do- 
mestics are clothed with dou- 
ble garments. She hath made 
for herself clothing of tapes- 
try; fine linen and purple is 
her covering. Her husband is 
honorable in the gates, when 
he sitteth among the senators 
of the land. She made fine linen 
and sold.it, and delivered a 
girdle to the Chanaanite. 
Strength and beauty are her 
clothing: and she shall laugh 
in the latter day. She hath 
opened her mouth to wisdom, 
and the law of clemency is on 
her tongue: she hath looked 
well to the paths of her house, 
and hath not eaten her bread 
idle. Her children rose up, and 
called her blessed; her husband, 
and he praised her. Many 
daughters have gathered to- 


ther riches; thou hast surpassed them all. Favor is deceitful, 
€ beauty is vain: the woman that feareth the Lord, she shall 
@raised. Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her 


L om Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
JJ the-Trüct, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
‘placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. 


Ps. 44, 3 


Diffüsa est grátia in lábiis Grace is poured abroad in 


tuis: proptérea benedixit te thy lips: therefore hath God 
Deus in etérnum. Y. Propter blessed thee forever. Y. Because 
veritátem, et mansuetüdinem, of truth and meekness, and jus- 
et justítiam: et dedücet te tice; and thy right hand shall 
mirabíliter déxtera tua. conduct thee wonderfully. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelája, allelija. Y. Ps. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 44, 
44, 5. Spécie tua, et pulehri- 5. With thy comeliness and thy 
tüdine tua inténde, próspere beauty, set out, proceed pros- 
procéde, et regna, Allelija. perously, and reign. Alleluia. 


Tract 


Veni, sponsa Christi áccipe Come, O spouse of Christ, 
corónam, quam tibi Dóminus receive the crown which the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1386 


Lord hath prepared for thee 
forever: for the love of Whom 
thou didst shed they blood. J. 
Ps. 44, 8, 5. Thou hast loved 
justice, and hated iniquity: 
therefore God, thy God, hath 
anointed thee with the oil of 
gladness above thy fellows. Y. 
With thy comeliness and thy 
beauty set out, proceed pros- 
perously, and reign. 


COMMON OF HOLY WOMEN 


preparávit in etérnum: p 
cujus amóre sánguinem t 
um fudísti. Y. Ps. 44,8, 5. D 
lexísti justítiam, et odísti ir 
iquitátem; proptérea unxit ' 
Deus, Deus tuus, óleo lætíti 
pre consórtibus tuis. Y. Spé 
cle tua, et pulehritüdine tu 
inténde, próspere procéde, « 
regna. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 44, 5. 
With thy comeliness, and thy 
beauty, set out, proceed pros- 
perously, and reign. Alleluia. 
V. Because of truth, and meek- 
ness, and justice: and thy right 
hand shall conduct thee won- 
derfully. Alleluia. 


. Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 44 
5. Spécie tua, et pulchritü 
dine tua inténde, prósper 
procéde, et regna. Allelüja. V 
Propter veritátem et mansue- 
tüdinem, et justitiam: et de- 
dücet te mirabiliter déxt 
tua. Allehija. 


Gospel. Matt. 13, 44-52 


© Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 
T THAT time, Jesus spoke 
this parable to His dis- 
ciples: The kingdom of heaven 
is like unto a treasure hidden 
in a field; which a man having 
found, hid it, and for joy there- 
of goeth, and selleth all that 
he hath, and buyeth that field. 
Again, the kingdom of heaven 
is like to a merchant seeking 
good pearls. Who, when he had 
found one pearl of great price, 
went his way and sold all that 
he had, and bought it. Again, 
the kingdom of heaven is like 
to a net cast into the sea, and 
gathering together of all kinds 
of fishes; which, when it was 
filled, they drew out, and sit- 
ting by the shore, they chose 
oui the good into vessels. but 


4H Sequéntia sancti 
gélii secindum Mattheury 


T. ILLO témpore: Dixit J&, 
sus discípulis suis pará- 
bolam hanc: Símile est reg- 
num celérum thesáuro ab- 
scóndito in agro: quem qui 
invénit homo, abscóndit, et 
pre gáudio illius vadit, et ven- 
dit univérsa que habet, et 
emit agrum illum. fterum sí- 
mile est regnum celérum 
hómini negotiatóri, querénti 
bonas margarítas. Invénta 
autem una pretiósa margar- 
ita, ábiit, et véndidit ómnia 
que hábuit, et emit eam. fter- 
um simile est regnum celér- 
um sagéne misse in mare, et 
ex omni génere píscium con- 
gregánti. Quam, cum im- 
pléta esset, educéntes, et se- 
cus littus sedéntes, elegérunt 


http://ccwatershed.org 


L 


COMMON OF HOLY WOMEN 1387 


bonos in vasa, malos autem the bad they cast forth. So 
foras misérunt. Sic erit in shall it be at the end of the 
consummatióne sæculi: exí- world. The angels shall go out, 
bunt Ángeli, et separábunt and shall separate the wicked 
malos de médio justórum, et from among the just, and shall 
mittent eos in camínum ig- cast them into the furnace of 
nis: ibi erit fletus, et stridor fire; there shall be weeping and 
déntium. Intellexistis hec gnashing of teeth, Have ye un- 
ómnia? Dicunt ei: Etiam. Ait derstood all these things? They 
illis: fdeo omnis scriba doc- say to Him, Yes. He said unto 
tus in regno colórum, similis them, Therefore every. scribe 
est hómini patrifamílias, qui instructed in the kingdom of 
profert de thesáuro suo nova, heaven, is like to à man who is 
et vétera, a householder, who bringeth 
forth out of his treasure new 
things and old. 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 3 
Diffüsa est grátia in lábiis Grace is poured abroad in 
tuis: proptérea benedixit te thy lips: therefore hath God 
Deus in ztérnum, et in secu- blessed thee forever, and for 
lum seculi. ages of ages. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


CCÉPTA tibi sit, Dómine, AY the. offerings of thy 
Sacráte plebis oblátio [0] holy people be accepted 
pro tuórum se méritis, de tri- by Thee, O Lord, in honor of 
bulatióne percepísse cognós- 'Thy saints, through whose 
cit auxilium, Per Dóminum. merits they know that they 
have received aid.in time of 

trouble, Through our Lord. 

Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion 
Dilexísti justitiam, et odísti Thou hast loved justice, and 
iniquitátem: proptérea unxit hated iniquity; therefore God, 
te Deus, Deus tuus, óleo le- thy God, hath anointed thee 
títim pre consórtibus tuis. with the oil of gladness above 


(T. P. Allelüja.) 


thy fellows. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 


ATIÁSTI, Dómine, famíl- 

iam tuam  munéribus 
Sacris: ejus, quesumus, sem- 
per interventióne nos réfove, 
cujus solémnia celebrámus. 
Per Dóminum, ' 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


HOU hast filled Thy house- 
hold, O Lord, with sacred 
gifts; ever comfort us, we be- 
seech Thee, by the intercession 
of the saint whose festival we 
celebrate. Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1388 


COMMON OF DEDICATION OF A CHURCH 


On the Feast of a Holy Widow, the following Epistle is 
Epistle. 1 Tim. 5, 3-10 


often read. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
Timothy. 

EARLY beloved: Honor 
D widows, that are widows 
indeed. But if any widow have 
children, or grandchildren, let 
her learn first to govern her 
own house, and to make a re- 
turn of duty to her parents: 
for this is acceptable before 
God. But she that is a widow 
indeed and desolate, let her 
trust in God, and continue in 
prayers and supplications night 
and day. For she that liveth 
in pleasures, is dead while she 
is living. And this give in 
charge, that they may be 
blameless. But if any man have 
not care of his own, and es- 
pecially of those of his house, 
he hath denied the faith, and 
is worse than an infidel. Let 
a widow be chosen of no less 
than threescore years of age, 
who hath been the wife of one 
husband, having testimony for 
her good works, if she have 
brought up children, if she have 
received to harbor, if she have 
washed the saints’ feet, if she 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Timótheum. 


que vere vidue sunt. Si 
qua autem vidua filios, aut 
nepótes habet, discat primum 
domum suam régere, et mü- 
tuam vicem réddere parénti- 
bus: hoc enim accéptum est 
coram Deo. Que autem vere 
vídua est, et desoláta, speret 
in Deum, et instet obsecra- 
tiónibus, et oratiónibus nocte, 
ac die. Nam que in delíciis 
est, vivens mórtua est. Et hoc 
precipe, ut irreprehensibiles 
sint. Si quis autem suórum, et 
máxime domesticórum cur- 
am non habet, fidem negávit, 
et est infidéli detérior. Vídua 
eligátur non minus sexagínta 
annórum, que füerit unius 
viri uxor, in opéribus bonis 
testimónium habens, si fílios 
educávit, si hospítio recépit, 
Si sanctórum pedes lavit, si 
iribulatiónem patientibus 
subministravit, si omne opus 
bonum subsecuta est. 


Oh Viduas honóra 


have ministered to them that 


suffer tribulation, if she have diligently followed every good 


work. 


On the Anniversary of the Pedication of a Church 


When an altar only has been consecrated, the Mass is the fol- 
lowing, with the Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion as found 


(Terribilis) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Gen. 28, 17 


at the end of the Mass. 


m 


ERRIBLE İs this place: it is 
the house of God, and the 


ERRIBILIS est locus iste: 
hic domus Dei est, et 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF DEDICATION OF A CHURCH 


porta celi: et vocábitur aula 
Dei. (T. P. Allelija, allelája.) 
Ps, 83, 2, 3. Quam dilécta 
tabernácula tua, Dómine vir- 
tütum! concupíscit et déficit 
Anima mea in atria Dómini. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


1389 


gate of heaven; and shall be 
called the court of God. (P. T. 
Alleluia, alleluia.) Ps. 83, 2, 3. 
How lovely are Thy tabernacles, 
O Lord of hosts! my soul long- 
eth and fainteth for the courts 
of the Lord. Y, Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui nobis per singu- 

los annos hujus sancti 
templi tui —consecratiónis 
réparas diem, et sacris sem- 
per mystériis represéntas in- 
cólumes: exáudi preces póp- 
uli tui, et presta; ut, quis- 
quis hoc templum benefícia 
petitürus ingréditur, cuncta 
se impetrásse letétur. Per 
Dóminum. 


On the actual day o, 


Gop, Who year by year 

dost renew the day of the 
consecration of this Thy holy 
temple, and dost ever bring us 
again in safety to the holy 
mysteries, hear the prayers of 
Thy people, and grant that 
whosoever entereth this tem- 
ple to seek blessings may re- 
joice to obtain all that he seek- 
eth. Through our Lord. 


Dedication and during its Octave, the 


following Prayer is said, otherwise it is omitted. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui invisibíliter óm- 

nia cóntines, et tamen 
pro salite géneris humáni 
signa tue poténtie visibíliter 
osténdis: templum hoc po- 
téntia tue inhabitatiónis il- 
lüstrat, et concéde; ut omnes, 
qui hue deprecatüri convén- 
iunt, ex quacümque tribula- 
tióne ad te clamáverint, con- 
solatiónis tue benefícia con- 
sequántur. Per Dóminum. 


cov, Who dost invisibly 

contain all things, and 
yet dost visibly show the signs 
of Thy power for the salvation 
of mankind, illumine this tem- 
ple by the virtue of Thine in- 
dwelling, and grant that all 
who assemble here to pray, 
from whatsoever tribulation 
they shall call upon Thee, may 
obtain the blessings cf Thy 
consolation. Through our Lord, 


Lesson. John 21, 2-5 


Léctio libri Apocalypsis 


beáti Joánnis Apéstoli. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Vidi sanc- 


Lesson from the Book of the 
Apocalypse of blessed John the 
Apostle. 


N THOSE days, I saw the 


tam civitátem Jerüsalem holy city, the new Jerusa- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1390 


lem, coming down out of hea- 
ven, from God, prepared as 2 
bride adorned for her husband. 
And I heard a great voice from 
the throne, saying, Behold the 
tabernacle of God with men; 
and He will dwell with them: 
and they shall be His peo- 
ple and God Himself with 
them shall be their God: and 
God shall wipe away all tears 
from their eyes; and death 
shall be no more, nor mourn- 


ing, nor crying, nor sorrow shall 


be any more, for the former 
things are passed away. And 
He that sat on the throne said, 
Behold, I make all things new. 


From Septuagesima to Easter 
by the Tract, 
placed by thé Greater Alleluia. 


COMMON OF DEDICATION OF A CHURCH 


novam descendéntem de ccelo 
a Deo, parátam sicut spons- 
am ornátam viro suo. Et au- 
divi vocem magnam de 
throno dicéntem: Ecce tab- 
ernáculum Dei cum homíni- 
bus, et habitábit cum eis. Et 
ipsi pópulus ejus erunt, et 
ipse Deus cum eis erit eórum 
Deus: et abstérget Deus om- 
nem lácrimam ab óculis eór- 
um: et mors ultra non erit, 
neque luctus, neque clamor, 
neque dolor erit ultra, quia 
prima abiérunt. Et dixit qui 
sedébat in throno: Ecce nova 
fácio ómnia. 


the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


m Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


Gradual 


This place was made by God 
a priceless mystery, it is with- 
out reproof. V. O God, before 
Whom stands the choir of an- 
gels, hear the prayers of Thy 
servants. 


Locus iste a Deo factus est, 
inæstimábile sacraméntum, 
irreprehensíbilis est. Y. Deus, 
cui adstat Angelórum chorus, 
exáudi preces servórum tuó- 
rum. 


Lesser Alleluia ` 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 137, 
2. I wil worship toward Thy 
holy temple; and I will give 
glory to Thy name. Alleluia. 


Allelája, allelúja. Y. Ps. 137, 
2. Adorábo ad templum sanc- 
tum tuum: et confitébor nó- 
mini tuo. Allelüja. 


Tract. Ps.124,1,2 


They that trust in the Lord 
shall be as Mount. Sion: He 
shall not be moved forever that 
dwelleth in Jerusalem. y. 
Mountains are round about it: 
so the Lord is round about His 
people, from henceforth now 
and forever. 


Qui confidunt in Dómino, 
sicut mons Sion: non com- 
movébitur in stérnum, qui 
hábitat in Jerúsalem. Y. Mon- 
tes in circüitu ejus, et Dó- 
minus in cireüitu pópuli sui, 
ex hoc nune, et usque in 
seculum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF DEDICATION OF A CHURCH 


1391 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelája, allelüja. Y. Ps. 
137, 2. Adorábo ad templum 
Sanctum tuum: et confitébor 
nómini tuo. Allelija. Y. Bene 
fundáta est domus Dómini 
Supra firmam petram. Alle- 
lüja. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 137. 
2. I wil worship toward Thy 
holy temple; and I will give 
glory to Thy name. Alleluia. 
¥. The house of the Lord is 
well founded upon a firm rock. 
Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 19, 1-10 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Ingréssus 
Jesus perambulábat Jér- 
icho: et ecce vir nómine 
Zachwus: et hic princeps erat 
ptiblicanórum, et ipse dives: 
et’ querébat vidére Jesum, 
quis esset: et non póterat 
pre turba, quia statüra pusíl- 
lus erat. Et przcürrens ascén- 
dit in árborem sycómorum, 
ut vidéret eum; quia inde erat 
transitürus. Et cum venísset 
2d locum, suspíciens Jesus 
vidit illum, et dixit ad eum: 
Zachee, festinans descénde; 
quia hódie in domo tua opór- 
tet me manére. Et festínans 
descéndit, et excépit illum 
gaudens. Et cum vidérunt 
omnes, murmurábant, di- 
céntes, quod ad hdéminem 
peccatórem divertísset. Stans 
autem Zacheus, dixit ad Dó- 
minum: Ecce dimídium bo- 
nórum meórum, Dómine, do 
paupéribus: et si quid áli- 
quem defraudávi, reddo quád- 
ruplum. Ait Jesus ad eum: 
Quia hódie salus domui huic 
facta est: Eo quod et ipse fíl- 
ius sit Abrahz. Venit enim fíl- 
ius hóminis querere, et sal- 
vum fácere, quod períerat. 


Creed, page 765. 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus enter- 
ing in, walked through 
Jericho. And behold there was 
a man named Zacheus, who 
was the chief of the publicans, 
and he was rich; and he sought : 
to see Jesus Who He was, and 
he could not for the crowd, be- 
cause he was of low stature. 
And running before, he climbed 
up into a sycamore-tree that 
he might see Him, for He was 
to pass that way. And when 
Jesus was come to the place, 
looking up, He saw him, and 
said to him, Zacheus, make 
haste and come down, for this 
day I must abide in thy house. 
And he made haste and came 
down, and received Him with 
joy. And when all saw it, they 
murmured, saying that He was 
gone to be a guest with a man 
that was a sinner. But Zacheus 
standing, said to the Lord, Be- 
hold, Lord, the half of my goods 
I give to the poor, and if I 
have wronged any man of any- 
thing, I restore him fourfold. 
Jesus said to him, This day is 
salvation come to this house; 
because he also is a son of 
Abraham. For the Son of man 
is come to seek and to save 
that which was lost. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1392 


COMMON OF DEDICATION OF A CHURCH 


Offertory. 1 Paral. 29, 17, 18 


O Lord God, in the simplicity 
of my heart, I have joyfully 
offered all these things; and I 
have seen with great joy Thy 
people, which are present: O 
God of Israel keep this will. 
Alleluia. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Dómine Deus, in simplici- 
tate cordis: mei letus óbtuli 
univérsa; et pópulum tuum, 
qui repértus est, vidi cum in- 
génti gáudio: Deus Israél, 
custódi hanc voluntátem, al- 
lelija. 


The words within parentheses in the following Secret are 
said only when the Mass is offered within the very walls of the 
chureh, the feast of whose dedication is being celebrated. 


Secret 


B down to our prayers, 
O Lord, we beseech Thee 
(that all of us who are within 
the precincts of this temple, the 
anniversary of whose dedica- 
tion we celebrate, may please 
thee with full and perfect de- 
votion of body and soul) that, 
while we pay our vows here be- 
low, we may, by Thine assist- 
ance, be worthy to attain unto 
everlasting rewards. Through 
our Lord. 


NNUE, quesumus, 

mine, précibus no- 
Stris; (ut quicümque intra 
templi hujus, cujus anniver- 
sárium dedicatiónis diem cel- 
ebrámus, ámbitum continé- 
mur, plena tibi, atque per- 
fécta córporis et ánimæ de- 
votióne placeámus) ut, dum 
hec vota preséntia réddimus, 
ad siérna premia, te adju- 
vánte, perveníre mereámur. 
Per Dóminum. 


On the actual day of Dedication and during its Octave the 
following Secret is said, otherwise it is omitted. 


Secret 


cop, Who art the author 
Q of the gifts that are to be 
consecrated to Thee, pour forth 
Thy blessing upon this house 
of prayer, that the help of 'Thy 
defence may be felt by all who 
here invoke Thy name. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


My house shall be called the 
house of prayer, saith the 


EUs, qui sacrandórum 

tibi auctor es müner- 
um, effünde super hanc ora- 
tiónis domum benedictiónem 
tuam: ut ab ómnibus in ea 
invocántibus nomen tuum, 
defensiónis tue auxilium sen- 
tiátur. Per Dóminum. 


Matt. 21, 13 


Domus mea, domus ora- 
tiónis vocábitur, dicit Dó- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Dó-. 


z 


f 


L 


4 


COMMON OF DEDICATION OF A CHURCH 


minus: in ea omnis, qui petit, 
Accipit: et qui querit, invenit, 
et pulsanti aperiétur. (T. P. 
Allelüja.) 


1393 


Lord: every one that asks 
therein, receives; and he who 
seeks, finds; and to him who 
knocks, it shall be opened. (P. 
T. Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 


EUS, qui de vivis et eléc- 
D tis lapídibus etérnum 
majestáti tue preparas hab- 
itáculum: auxiliare pópulo 
tuo supplicanti; ut, quod Ec- 
clésie tue corporálibus pró- 
ficit  spátiis,  spirituálibus 
amplificétur augméntis. Per 


cop, Who from living and 

chosen stones dost pre- 
pare for Thy majesty an eter- 
nal dwelling, help Thy people 
who call upon Thee, so that 
what is profitable to Thy 
Church in material growth may 
be accompanied with an in- 


Dóminum, crease of that which is of the 


Spirit. Through our Lord. 


On the actual day of Dedication and during its Octave the 
following Postcommunion is said, otherwise it is omitted. 


Postcommunion 


E PRAY Thee, O almighty 

God, that in this place, 

which we, unworthy, have ded- 

icated to Thy name, the ears 

of Thy loving-kindness may be 

inclined unto all who make 

iheir petitions. Through our 
Lord. 


vxsuMus omnipotens 

Deus: ut in hoc loco, 
quem  nómini tuo indígni 
dedicávimus; cunctis petén- 
tibus aures tue pietatis ac~ 
cómodes. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


For the Consecration of an Altar 


The Mass above is said with the following prayer. If it is a 
fized altar there is added under the one conclusion the prayers 
from the mystery or Saint to whom the altar is consecrated. 


Prayer 


cop, Who dost build for 

Thyself an everlasting 
dwelling out of the fitting to- 
gether of the saints, give hea- 
venly increase to Thine edifice, 
that we may ever be assisted by 
the merits of those whose relics 


EUS, qui ex omni co-ap- 

tatióne sanctórum, 
etérnum tibi condis habitá- 
culum: da zdifieatióni tuz 
increménta celéstia; ut, quo- 
rum hic relíquias pio amóre 
compléctimur, eórum semver 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1394 


we here embrace with tender 
love. Through our Lord. 


COMMON OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


méritis adjuvémur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Secret 


Av Thy holy Spirit, we be- 
seech 'Thee, O Lord our 

God, descend upon this altar, 
that He may both sanctify the 


ESCÉNDAT, quesumus Dó- 
mine Deus noster, Spír- 
itus tuus Sanetus super hoc 
altáre: qui et pópuli tui dona 


gifts of Thy people and duly sanctíficet, et  suméntium 
cleanse the hearts of those who corda  dignánter  emündet. 
partake. Through .. . in the Per Dóminum.,, in unitáte 
unity of the same. ejüsdem. 

Postcommunion 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 
A. sanctify by the power 
of Thy heavenly blessing this 
altar, dedicated to Thy name, 
and show the blessing of Thine 
assistance unto all who hope in 
Thee, that both the power of 
the sacraments and the effect 
of prayer may here be obtained, 
Through our Lord. 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 

Deus, altáre hoc nómini 
tuo dedicátum, celéstis vir- 
tütis benedictióne sanctífica, 
et ómnibus in te sperántibus 
auxíli tui munus osténde: 
ut et hic sacramentórum vir- 
tus, et votórum obtinedtur 
efféctus. Per Dóminum. 


Common of the Blessed Virgin Mary 


On all Feasts of our Blessed Lady for which no special Mass 
is appointed, the following is said: 


(Salve, sancta parens No. 1) 


'The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit (Sedulius) 


AIL holy Mother, who in 

childbirth didst bring 
forth the King Who ruleth hea- 
ven and earth world without 
end. (P. T. Alleluia, alleluia.) 
Ps. 44, 2. My heart hath ut- 
tered a good word; I speak my 
works to the King. Y. Glory. 


ALVE, Sancta parens, en- 

ixa puérpera Regem: qui 
celum, terrámque regit in 
secula seculórum (T. P. Alle- 
lája, allelija.) Ps, 44, 2. 
Eructávit cor meum verbum 
bonum: dico ego ópera mea 
Regi. V. Gloria Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


1395 


Prayer 


ONCÉDE nos fámulos tu- 

os, quesumus, Dómine 
Deus, perpétua mentis et 
cérporis sanitate gaudére: et, 
gloriósa beáte Marie semper 
Virginis intercessióne, a præ- 
sénti liberéri  tristítia, et 
etérna pérfrui lwtítia. Per 
Dóminum. 


RANT us, Thy servants, O 

Lord God, we beseech 
Thee, to enjoy continual health 
of mind and body, and, by the 
glorious intercession of blessed 
Mary, ever a virgin, to be de- 
livered from present sorrow and 
partake of the fulness of eter- 
nal joy. Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 24, 14-16 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiz. 


B INÍTIO, et ante secula 

creáta sum, et usque 
ad  futürum seculum non 
désinam, et in habitatiéne 
sancta coram ipso ministrávi. 
Et sic in Sion firmáta sum, et 
in civitáte sanctificáta simil- 
iter requiévi, et in Jerüsalem 
potéstas mea. Et radicávi in 
pópulo honorificáto, et in 
parte Dei mei heréditas illius, 
et in plenitüdine sanctórum 
deténtio mea. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


rom the beginning, and 
: before the world, was I 
created, and unto the world to 
come I shall not cease to be; 
and in the holy dwelling-place 
I have ministered before Him. 
And so was I established in 
Sion, and in the holy city like- 
wise I rested, and my power 
was in Jerusalem. And I took 
root in an honorable people, 
and in the portion of my God 
His inheritance, and my abode 
is in the full assembly of the 
saints. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual 


Benedicta et venerábilis es, 
Virgo María: que sine tactu 
pudéris invénta es mater Sal- 
vatóris. Y. Virgo Dei Géni- 
trix, quem totus non capit 
orbis, in tua se clausit viscera 
factus homo. 


Blessed and venerable art 
thou, O Virgin Mary, who with 
unsullied virginity, wast found 
to be the Mother of the Saviour. 
Y. O virgin Mother of God, He 
Whom the whole world con- 
taineth not, becoming man, 
shut Himself in thy womb. 


In Advent, these Alleluias and verse are replaced by those 


following them. 


(Lesser Alleluia No. 2.) 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Post 
partum Virgo inviolata per- 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. After 
childbirth thou didst still re- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1396 


main an inviolate virgin; 
Mother of God, intercede for 
us. Alleluia. 


COMMON OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


mansísti: Dei Génitrix, inter- 
céde pro nobis. Allelüja. 


Lesser Alleluia No. 2 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Luke 1, 
28. Hail Mary, full of grace: the 
Lord is with thee; blessed art 
thou among women. Alleluia. 


Alleluja, allelája. Y. Luc. 1, 
28. Ave, María, grátia plena: 
Dóminus tecum: benedicta tu 
in muliéribus. Allelüja. 


Tract 


Rejoice, O Virgin Mary, for 
alone thou hast put an end to 
all heresies. V. Thou that didst 
believe the words of the arch- 
angel Gabriel. Y. Still a virgin, 
thou didst bring forth God and 
man, and after childbirth thou 
didst remain an inviolate vir- 
gin. Y. Mother of God, inter- 
cede for us. 


Gaude, María Virgo, cunc- 
tas heréses sola intermísti. Y. 
Que Gabriélis Archángeli dic- 
tis credidísti. Y. Dum Virgo 
Deum et hóminen genuísti: et 
post partum Virgo invioláta 
permansísti. Y. Dei Génitrix, 
intercéde pro nobis. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Num. 17, 
8. The rod of Jesse hath blos- 
somed; a virgin hath conceived 
Him Who is both God and Man. 
God hath given back peace to 
the earth; in Himself He hath 
reconciled the lowliness of 
earth to the majesty of heaven. 
Alleluia. Y. Luke 1, 28. Hail 
Mary, full of grace; the Lord 
is with thee: blessed art thou 
amongst women. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelija. Y. Num. 
17, 8. Virga Jesse flóruit: 
Virgo Deum et hóminem gé- 
nuit: pacem Deus réddidit, in 
se reconcílians ima summis. 
Allelüja. Y. Luc. 1, 28. Ave, 
María, grátia plena: Dóminus 
tecum: benedícta tu in mulié- 
ribus. Allelüja. Í 


Gospel. Luke 11, 27-28 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT lime, as Jesus was 
Speaking to the multi- 


tudes, a certain woman from 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Loquénte 
Jesu ad turbas, extóllens 
vocem quzdum mülier de tur- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


COMMON OP THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 1397 


ba dixit illi: Beátus venter qui the crowd, lifting up her voice, 
te portávit, ut übera que su- said to Him; Blessed is the 
xisti, Atilledixit: Quinimmo womb that bore Thee, and the 
beáti qui áudiunt verbum Dei, breasts that gave Thee suck. 
et custódiunt illud. But He said, Yea.rather, blessed 
s are they who hear the word of 

God, and keep it. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Luke 1, 28, 42 


Ave, Maria, grátia plena: Hail Mary, full of grace; the 
Dóminus tecum: benedicta tu Lord is with thee: blessed art 
in muliéribus, et benedictus thou among women, and 
fructus ventris tui. (T. P. Al- blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 
lelüja.) (P. T, Alleluia.) f 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


UA, Dómine, propitia- y Tuv clemency, O Lord, 

tióne, et beátæ Maria B and the intercession of 
semper Virginis intercessióne, blessed Mary, ever a virgin, may 
ad perpétuam atque presént- this oblation profit us unto 
em hec oblátio nobis profí- eternal and also present well 
ciat prosperitótem et pacem. being and peace. Through our 
Per Dóminum. ^ Lord 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


Communion 


Beata: viscera Marie Vir- Blessed is the womb of the 
ginis, que portavérunt etérni Virgin Mary, which bore the 
Patris Filium. (T. P. Alle- Son of the eternal Father. (P. 


lúja.) T. Alleluia.) 
Postcommunion 
vwPTIs, Dómine, salütis AVING received the aids of 
nostre. subsidiis: da, cour everlasting salvation, 


quesumus, bedt# Maríe sem- O Lord, we beseech Thee, grant 

per Virginis patrociniis nos us to be everywhere protected 

ubique prótegi; in cujus ven- by the patronage of blessed 

eratióne hec tuse obtülimus Mary, ever a virgin, in venera- 

majestáti, Per Dóminum. tion of whom we have made 
these offerings to Thy majesty. 
Through our Lord 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1398 COMMON OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


Tu 
L— 
eecccacemeem 


REAVEN) 


[SN 


= 


iS 


He 


2S oP 


E 
TÉ 


SZ 
S 


XT TT 


L LEE 


Sa 


a rr eo 


Copyright by Benziger Brothers 


IN ME IS ALL GRACE OF THE WAY AND OF THE TRUTH: IN ME IS 
ALL HOPE OF LIFE AND OF VIRTUE. COME OVER TO ME ALL YOU THAT 
DESIRE ME, AND BE FILLED WITH MY FRUITS. ALLELUIA, ALLELUIA, 
Bat, THOU MOTHER OF MERCY, THOU MOTHER OF HOPE AND OF 
GRACE, O Mary. ALLELUIA. (Gradual from Mass of Mediatriz 
of all Graces.) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


tbe Blessed Virgin Mary 
On Saturday 


These Masses may also be said as Votive Masses on Saturday 
of our Blessed Lady which vary cooording to the seasons of the 
ecclesiastical year. They differ from. others in that the addi- 
tional prayer when required after the commemoration of the 
Office of the day is that of the Holy Ghost, page 827. But on 
Saturdays, if the Office of our Blessed Lady is prescribed, the 
hymn Gloria in excelsis is said and the second Prayer is of the 
Holy Ghost, and the third for the Church, or for the Pope (see 
Additional Prayers, pages 820-829), when a Mass is celebrated 
in honor of our Blessed Lady. i 


Rorate Cocli---In Adbent 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756, 


Masses ot 


Introit. 


ORATE, celi, désuper et 

nubes pluant justum: 
aperiatur terra, et gérminet 
Salvatérem. Ps. 84, 2. Bene- 
dixísti, Dómine, terram tuam: 
avertisti captivitátem Jacob. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


Is. 45, 8 
Ror down dew, ye heavens, 
from above and let the 
clouds rain the just: let the 
earth be opened, and bud forth 
a Saviour. Ps. 84, 2. Lord, Thou 
hast blessed Thy land: Thou 
hast turned away the captivity 
of Jacob. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui de beátæ Mariæ 
Vírginis ütero Verbum 
uum, Angelo nuntiánte, car- 
nem suscípere voluísti: pres- 
ta supplícibus tuis; ut, qui 
vere eam Genitricem Dei cré- 
dimus, ejus apud te interces- 
siónibus adjuvémur. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


Lesson. 
Léctio Isaiæ Prophéte. 


N DIÉBUS illis: Lócutus esf 
Dóminus ad Achaz, di- 
cens: Pete tibi signum a Dó- 
mino Deo tuo in profündum 


cop, Who didst will that 

at the message of an 
angel Thy word should take 
flesh. in the womb of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary: grant. 
that we, Thy suppliants, who 
believe her to be truly the 
mother of God, may be helped 
by her intercession with Thee. 
Through the same. 


Is, 7, 10-15 


Lesson from Isaias the 


Prophet. 
N THOSE days: the Lord 
Spoke to Achaz, saying: 
Ask thee à sign of the Lord 
thy God, either unto the depth 


1899 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1400 


of hell, or unto the height 
above. And Achaz said, I will 
not ask, and I will not tempt 
the Lord. And he said, Hear ye 
therefore, O house of David: 
Is it a small thing for you to be 
grievous to men, that you are 
grievous to my God also? 
Therefore the Lord Himself 
shall give you a sign. Behold a 
virgin shall conceive, and bear 
a son, and His name shall be 
called Emmanuel. He shall eat 
butter and honey, that He may 
know to refuse the evil, and 
to choose the good. 


Gradual. 


Lift up your gates, O ye 
princes; and be ye lifted up, 
O eternal gates: and the King 
of glory shall enter in. Y. Ps. 
23, 3, 4. Who shall ascend into 
the mountain of the Lord, or 
who shall stand in His holy 
piace? The innocent in hands 
and clean of heart. 

Alleluia, alleluia. V. Luke. 1, 
28. Hail Mary, full of grace: the 
Lord is with thee; blessed art 
thou among women. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


MASSES OP THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


inférni, sive in excélsum su- 
pra. Et dixit Achaz: Non pe- 
tam, et non tentábo Dómi- 
num. Et dixit: Audite ergo 
domus David: Numquid pa- 
rum vobis est, moléstos esse 
homínibus, quia molestl es- 
tis et Deo meo? Propter hoc 
dabit Dóminus ipse vobis sig- 
num. Ecce virgo concípiet, et 
páriet fílium, et vocábitur no- 
men ejus Emmanuel. Buty- 
rum et mel cómedet, ut sciat 
reprobáre malum, et elígere 
bonum. 


Ps. 23, 7 


Tólite portas, principes, 
vestras: et elevámini porte 
eterndles: et introibit Rex 
glérie. Y. Ps. 23, 3, 4. Quis 
ascéndet in montem Dómini, 
aut quis stabit in loco sancto 
ejus? Innocens mánibus, et 
mundo corde. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Luc. 
1, 28. Ave María, grátia plena: 
Dóminus tecum: benedicta tu 
in muliéribus, Allelüja. 


Gospel. Luke 1, 26-38 


%& Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time; the angel 

Gabriel was sent from 
God into a city of Galilee, called 
Nazareth, to a Virgin espoused 
to à man whose name was Jos- 
eph, of the house of David; and 
the virgin’s name was Mary. 
And the angel being come 
in, said unto her: Hail, full 
of grace, the Lord is with thee; 


"HB Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Missus est 
Angelus Gabriel a Deo in 
civitatem Galilee, cui no- 
men Názareth, ad Virginem 
desponsátam viro, cui nomen 
erat Joseph, de domo David, 
et nomen Virginis María. Et 
ingréssus Angelus ad eam, 
dixit: Ave grátia plena: Dó- 
minus tecum: benedicta tu in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES. OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


muliéribus. Que cum audís- 
Set, turbita est in sermóne 
ejus: et cogitábat, qualis esset 
ista salutátio. Et ait Angelus 
ei: Ne timeas, María, invenísti 
enim grátiam apud Deum: 
ecce concípies in ütero, et pá- 
ries filium, et vocabis nomen 
ejus Jesum. Hic erit magnus, 
et Fílius Altíssimi vocábitur, 
et dabit illi Dóminus Deus se- 
dem David patris ejus: et reg- 
nábit in domo Jacob in ætér- 
num, et regni ejus non erit 
finis. Dixit autem María ad 
Angelum: Quómodo fiet istud, 
quóniam virum non cognós- 
co? Et respóndens Angelus, 
dixit ei: Spíritus sanctus su- 
pervéniet in te, et virtus Altís- 
simi obumbrábit tibi. Ideóque 
et quod nascétur ex te sanc- 
tum vocábitur Filius Dei, Et 
ecce Elisabeth cognata tua, 
et ipsa concépit filium in se- 
nectüte sua: et hic mensis 
sextus est ili, que vocátur 
stérilis: quia non erit impossi- 
bile apud Deum omne ver- 
bum. Dixit autem María: 
Eece ancílla Dómini, fiat mihi 
Secündum verbum tuum. : 


1401 


blessed art thou among women. 
Who having heard, was trou- 
bled at his saying, and thought 
with herself what manner of 
salutation this. should be. And 
the angel said to her, Fear not, 
Mary, for thou hast found grace 
with God, Behold thou shalt 
conceive in thy womb, and shalt 
bring forth a son; and thou 
shalt call His name Jesus. He 
shall be great, and shall be 
called the Son of the Most 
High, and the Lord God shall 
give unto Him the throne of 
David His father; and He shall 
reign in the house of Jacob 
forever. And of His kingdom 
there shall be no end. And 
Mary said to the angel, How 
shall this be done, because I 
know not man? And the angel 
answering, said to her, The 
Holy Ghost shall come upon 
thee, and the power of the Most 
High shall overshadow thee. 
And therefore also the Holy 
which shall be born of thee 
shall be called the Son of God. 
And behold thy cousin Eliza- 
beth, she also hath conceived 
2 son in her old age; and this is 
the sixth month with her that 


is called barren: because no word shall be impossible with God. 
And Mary said: Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it done 
to me according to thy word, 


Offertory. Luke 1, 28, 42 


Ave, Maria, grátia plena: . Hail Mary, full of grace; the 
Dóminus tecum: benedicta tu Lord is with thee: blessed art 
in muliéribus, et benedictus thou among women, and 
fructus ventris tui. blessed is tbe fruit of thy womb. 


Offertory Prayers, pago 767. 


Secret 


N MÉNTIBUS nostris, quzsu- TRENGTHEN in our hearts, 
mus, Dómine, vere fídei O Lord, we beseech Thee, 
sacraménta confirma: ut, qui the mysteries of the true faith, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1400 MASSES OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


that, confessing Him Who was 
conceived of the Virgin to be 
true God and true man, we may 
deserve, through the power of 
His saving resurrection, to at- 
tain everlasting joy. Through 
the same. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


concéptum de Virgine Deum 
verum et hóminem confité- 
mur; per ejus salutifere re- 
surrectiónis poténtiam, ad 
ætérnam mereámur perve- 
nire letitiam. Per eümdem 
Dóminum. 


Communion. Is. 7, 14 


Behold, a virgin shall con- 
ceive, and bring forth a son; 
and His name shall be called 
Emmanuel. 


Ecce virgo concípiet, et pa- 
riet fíflium: et vocábitur no- 
men ejus Emmanuel. 


Postcommunion 


our forth, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, Thy grace 
to our hearts, that we, to 
whom the incarnation of Christ 
Thy Son was made known by 
the message of an angel, may, 
by His passion and cross, be 
brought to the glory of His res- 
urrection. Through the same, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


RÁTIAM tuam, quesumus, 
Dómine, méntibus nos- 
tris infünde: ut qui, Angelo 
nuntiánte, Christi Fílii tui in- 
carnatiónem cognóvimus: per 
passiónem ejus et crucem, ad 
resurrectiónis glóriam perdu- 
cámur. Per eümdem Dómi- 
num. 


Fram Christmas Bap to the Purification, Feb. 2 
(Vultum tuum) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


. Introit. Ps. 44, 13, 15, 16 


` LL the rich among the 

people shall entreat thy 
countenance: after her shall 
virgins be brought to the King; 
her neighbors shall be brought 
to thee in gladness and rejoic- 
ing. Ps. 44, 2. My heart hath 
uttered a good word: I speak 
my works to the King. Y. Glory. 


vLTUM iuum depreca- 

büntur omnes divites 
plebis; adducéntur Regi vír- 
gines post eam: préxime ejus 
adducéntur tibi in letitia et 
exsuitatióne. Ps. 44, 2. Eruc- 
tavit cor meum verbum bo- 
num: dico ego ópera mea 
Regi. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


J "V itid R eua AM can ` 
a E 


MASSES OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


1403 


Prayer 


EUS, qui salüfis etérne, 
beate Marie virginitáte 
ecünda, humáno géneri pre- 
mia prestitisti: tríbue, quesu- 
mus; ut ipsam pro nobis in- 
tercédere sentiamus, per 
quam  merüimus auctérem 
vite suscipere, Dóminum nos- 
trum Jesum Christum, Filium 
tuum: Qui fecum. 


O . Gon, Who, by the fruitful 
virginity of blessed Mary, 
hast bestowed upon mankind 
ihe rewards of eternal salva- 
tion, grant, we beseech Thee, 
that we may evermore experi- 
ence the intercession in our be- 
half of her through whom we 
have been found worthy to re- 
ceive the author of life, Our 
Lord Jesus Christ; Thy: Son. 
Who with Thee. 


Epistle. Titus 3, 4-7 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Titum. 


ARRISSIME: Appáruit be- 
Ga nígnitas et humánitas 
Salvatóris nostri Dei: non ex 
opéribus justitie, que fécimus 
nos, sed secundum suam mise- 
ricórdiam salvos mos fecit, 
per lavácrum regeneratiónis 
et renovatiónis Spíritus Sanc- 
ti, quem effüdit in nos abünde 
per Jesum Christum Salvató- 
rem nostrum: ut justificati 
grátia ipsius, herédes simus 
secündum spem vite etérne: 
in Christo Jesu Dómino nos- 
tro. ` 


Gradual. 


Spéciósus forma præ fíliis 
hóminum: .diffüsa est grátia 
in lábiis tuis. Y. Ps. 44, 2. 
Eructavit cor meum verbum 
bonum: dico ego ópera mea 
Regi: lingua mea cálamus 
scribe velóciter scribéntis. 


‘Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to 
EARLY beloved, the good- 
ness and kindness of 
God our Saviour hath ap- 
peared: not by the works of 
justice, which we have done, 
but according to His mercy He 
saved us, by the laver of regen- 
eration, and renovation of the 
Holy Ghost, Whom He hath 
poured forth upon us abund- 
antly through Jesus Christ our 
Saviour: that, being justified 
by His grace, we may be heirs 
according to hope of life ever- 
lasting: in Christ Jesus our 
Lord. . 


Ps. 44,3 


'Thou art beautiful above the 
sons of men: grace is poured 
abroad in thy lips. Y. Ps. 44, 2. 
My heart hath uttered a good 
word; I speak my works to the 
King: my tongue is the pen of 
a scrivener that writeth swiftly. 


After Septuagesima the Lesser Alleluia is replaced by the 


Tract. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1404 


MASSES OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. After 
childbirth thou didst still re- 
main an inviolate virgin: O 
Mother of God, intercede for 
us. Alleluia. 


Allelija, allelija. V. Post 
partum, Virgo inviolata per- 
mansisti: Dei Génitrix, inter- 
céde pro nobis. Allehija. 


Tract 


Rejoice, O Virgin Mary, 
alone thou hast put an end to 
all heresies. JY. Thou who 
didst believe the words of the 
archangel Gabriel. Y. Still a 
virgin, thou didst bring forth 
God and man; and after child- 
birth thou didst still remain an 
inviolate virgin. Y. O Mother 
of God, intercede for us. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gaude, María Virgo, cunc- 
tas heréses sola interemísti. 
¥. Que Gabrielis Archángeli 
dictus credidisti. Y. Dum Vir- 
go Deum et hóminem genuis- 
ti: et post partum Virgo in- 
violáta permansísti. Y. Dei 
Génitrix, intercéde pro nobis. 


Gospel. Luke 2,15-20 


* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according. to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, the shep- 
herds said one to an- 

other, Let us go over to Beth- 
lehem, and let us see this word 
that is come to pass, which the 
Lord hath showed to us. And 
they came with haste; and they 
found Mary and Joseph, and 
the infant lying in à manger. 
And seeing, they understood of 
the word that had been spoken 
to them concerning this child. 
And all that heard wondered; 
and at those things that were 
told them by the shepherds. But 
Mary kept all these words, pon- 
dering them in her heart. And 
the shepherds returned, glori- 
fying and praising God, for all 
the things they had heard and 
seen, as it was told unto them. 


WH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Pastóres 
loguebántur ad invicem: 
Transeamus usque Béthle- 
hem, et videámus hoc ver- 
bum, quod factum est, quod 
Dóminus osténdit nobis. Et 
venérunt festinantes et inve- 
nérunt Maríam, et Joseph, et 
infántem pósitum in presépio. 
Vidéntes autem cognovérunt 
de verbo, quod dictum erat 
ilis de püero hoc. Et omnes, 
qui audiérunt, miráti sunt: 
et de his, que dicta erant a 
pastóribus ad ipsos. María 
autem  conservábat ómnia 
verba hzc, cónferens in corde 
suo. Et revérsi sunt pastéres 
glorificántes, et laudántes De- 
um in ómnibus, que audíe- 
rant, et viderant, sicut dic- 
ium est ad illos. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


3 
4 


MASSES OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 1405 


Offertory 


Felix namque es, sacra For thou art happy, O sacred 
Virgo María, et omni laude Virgin Mary, and most worthy 
digníssima: quia ex te ortus of all praise, since out of thee 
est sol justitis, Christus Deus hath arisen the sun of justice, 
noster. Christ our God. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


va, Dómine, propitia- Y THY clemency, O I ord, 
n tióne, et beate Marie and the intercession of 
sember Virginis intercessióne, blessed Mary, ever a virgin, may 
ad perpétuam atque presént- this oblation profit us unto 
em hzc oblátio nobis profíciat eternal. and also present well 
prosperitatem et pacem. Per being and peace. Through our 
Dóminum. Lord. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


Communion 


Beata viscera Marie Vírgi- | Blessed is the womb of the 
nis, que portavérunt #xtérni Virgin Mary, that bore the Son 
Patris Filium. of the eternal Father. 


Postcommunion 


æc nos commiünio, Dó- Av this communion, O 

mine, purget a crimine: Lord, cleanse us from 
et, intercedénte beáta Vír- sin and, by the intercession of 
gine Dei Genitrice Maria, ce- the Blessed Virgin Mary, 
léstis remédii fáciat esse con- mother of God, make us par- 
sórtes. Per eümdem Dédmi- takers of a heavenly remedy. 
num. Through the same. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


From the Feast of the Purification to Zübent 


(Salve, sancta parens No. 2) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit (Sedulius) 


ALVE, sancta parens, ení- AIL holy Mother, who in 
xa puérpera regem: qui childbirth didst bring 
celum, terramque regit in forth the King Who ruleth 
secula seculórum. Ps. 44, 2. heaven and earth world with- 
Eructavit cor meum verbum out end. Ps. 44, 2. My heart 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1406 


hath uttered a good word; I 
speak my works to the King. 
X. Glory, 


MASSES OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


bonum: dico ego opera mea 
Regi. JF. Cuore Patri, 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


RANT US, 'Thy servants, O 
Lord God, we beseech 


Thee, to enjoy continual health - 


of mind and body, and, by the 
glorious intercession of blessed 
Mary, ever a virgin, to be de- 
livered from present sorrow and 
partake of the fulness of eter- 
nal joy, Through our Lord. 


oNcÉpg nos fámulos tuos, 
quesumus, Dómine De- 
us, perpétua mentis et cór- 
poris sanitáte gaudére: et, 
gloriósa beáte Marie semper 
Vrginis intercessióne, a præ- 
sénti liberári tristitia, et etér- 
na pérfrui letitia. Per Démi- 
num. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 24, 14-16 


Lesson froom the Book of  Léctio libri Sapténtie. 


Wisdom. 
rom the beginning, and 
before the world, was.I 
created, and unto the world to 
come I shall not cease to be; 
and in the holy dwelling-place 
I have ministered before Him. 
And so was I established in 
Sion, and in the holy city like- 
wise I rested, and my power 
was in Jerusalem, And I took 
root in an honorable people, 
and in the portion of my God 
His inheritance, and my abode 
is in the full assembly of the 
saints. 


In Paschal-time the Gradual is replaced by the Greater Alle- 
tuia, found after the Tract. . 


Gradual : 


Blessed and venerable art Benedicta et venerábilis es, 
thou, O Virgin Mary, who with Virgo María: que sine tactu 
unsullied virginity, wast found pudóris invénta es mater Sal- 
to be the Mother of the Saviour. vatóris. Y. Virgo Dei Géni- 
JF. O virgin Mother of God, He trix, quem totus non capit 
Whom the whole world con- orbis, in tua se clausit viscera, 
taineth not, becoming man, factus homo. 
shut Himself in thy womb. 


B INÍTIO, et ante secula 
creáta sum, et usque 
ad futürum seculum non dé- 
sinam, et in hahbitatióne sanc- 
ta coram ipso ministravi. Ei 
sie in Sion firmata sum, et in 
civitáte sanctificáta simíliter 
requiévi, et in Jerúsalem po- 
téstas mes. Et radicavi in 
pópulo  honorificáto, et in 
parte Dei mei heréditas illíus, 
et in plenitüdine sanctórum 
deténtio mea, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


1407 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluias and Verse 


Gre replaced by the Tract 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelája, allelüja. Y. Post 
partum, Virgo invioláta per- 
mansisti: Dei Génitrix, inter- 
céde pro nobis. Allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. After 
childbirth thou didst still re- 
main an inviolate virgin; 
Mother of God, intercede for 
us. Alleluia. 


But from the feast of the Purification until Septuagesima for 
the verse Post partum (“After childbirth") there is substituted: 


¥. Num. 17, 8. Virga Jesse 
flóruii: Virgo Deum et 
hóminem génuit: pacem De- 
us réddidif, in se recon- 
cilians ima summis. Allelüja. 


y. Num. 17, 8. The rod of 
Jesse hath blossomed; a virgin 
hath conceived Him, Who is 
both God and man. God hath 
given back peace to the earth; 
in Himself He hath reconciled 


the lowliness of earth to the majesty of heaven. Alleluia. 


Tract 


Gaude, Maria Virgo, cunc- 
tas hereses sola interemísti, 
y. Que Gabriélis Archangeli 
dictis credidisti. Y. Dum Vir- 
go Deum et hóminem genuí- 
sti: et post partum Virgo in- 
violáta permansísti. Y. Dei 
Génitrix, intercéde pro nobis. 


Rejoice, O Virgin Mary, for 
alone thou hast put an end to 
all heresies. ¥. Thou that didst 
believe the words of the arch- 
angel Gabriel. Y. Still a vir- 
gin, thou didst bring forth God 
and man, and after childbirth 
thou didst remain an inviolate 
virgin. Y. Mother of God, in- 
tercede for us, 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Num. 
17, 8. Virga Jesse flóruit: Vir- 
go Deum et hóminem génuit: 
pacem Deus réddidit, in se 
reconcilians ima summis. Al- 
lelája. Y. Luc. 1, 28. Ave, 
María, grátia plena: Dómi- 
nus tecum; benedícta tu in 
muliéribus, Allelüja. 


Alleluig, alleluia. Y. Num. 
17, 8. The rod of Jesse hath 
blossomed: & virgin hath con- 
ceived Him Who is both God 
and man: God hath given back 
peace to the earth: He hath in 
Himself reconciled the lowli- 
ness of earth to the majesty of 
heaven. Alleluia. VY. Luke 1, 
28. Hail Mary, full of grace: the 


Lord is With thee; blessed art thou among women. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1408 


MASSES OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


Gospel. Luke 11, 27-28 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time, as Jesus was 

speaking to the multi- 
udes, a certain woman from 
the crowd, lifting up her voice, 
said to Him; Blessed is the 
womb that bore Thee, and the 
breasts that gave Thee suck. 
But He said, Yea rather, 
blessed are they who hear the 
word of God, and keep it. 


FK Sequéntia sancti Eyan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Loquénte 
Jesu ad turbas, extóllens 
vocem quadam mülier de tur- 
ba, dixit iMi: Beátus venter, 
qui te portávit, et übera, que 
suxísti. At ille dixit: Quinímo 
beáti, qui áudiunt verbum Dei, 
et custódiunt illud. 


In Paschal time the following Gospel is read: 
Gospel. John 19, 25-27 


*B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, there stood 

by the cross of Jesus, 
His mother, and His mother's 
sister Mary of Cleophas, and 
Mary Magdalen. When Jesus 
therefore had seen His mother 
and the disciple standing, 
whom He had loved, He said 
to His mother, Woman, behold 
thy son. After that He saith 
to the disciple, Behold thy 
mother. And from that hour 
the disciple took her to his own. 


% Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Stabant 

juxta crucem Jesu mater 
ejus, et sorror matris ejus 
Maria Cléophe, et Maria 
Magdaléne. Cum vidisset ergo 
Jesus matrem, et discipulum 
stantem, quem diligébat, dicit 
matri sue: Mulier, ecce fílius 
tuus. Deinde dicit discípulo: 
Ecce mater tua. Et ex illa 
hora accépit eam discípulus 
in sua. 


Offertory 


From the Purification to Easter. 

For thou art happy; O sacred Felix namque es, sacra Vir- 
Virgin Mary, and most worthy go María, et omni laude dig- 
of all praise; since out of thee níssima, quia ex te ortus est 
hath risen the sun of justice, sol justítie, Christus Deus 


Christ our God. 


noster. 


In Paschal-time. 


Blessed art thou, O Virgin 
Mary, who didst bear the Crea- 
ior of all things: thou didst 
bring forth Him Who made 
Thee, and thou remainest ever 
& Virgin, Alleluia. 


Beata es, Virgo María, que 
ómnium portásti Creatórem: 
genuisti qui te fecit, et in 
etérnum  pérmanes Virgo. 
Allelüja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 1409 


From Pentecost to Advent. 

Ave, Maria, gratia plena: ^ Hail Mary, full of grace; the 
Dóminus tecum; benedícta tu Lord is with thee: blessed art 
in muliéribus, et benedictus thou among Women, and 
fructus ventris tul. blessed is the fruit of thy 

Womb. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret. 
ua, Dómine, propitia- Y THY clemency, O Lord, 
tióne, et beáte Marie and the intercession of 
semper Virginis intercessióne, blessed Mary, ever a virgin, 
ad perpétuam atque presén- may this oblation profit us un- 
tem hee oblátio nobis profí- to eternal and also present well 
ciat prosperitátem et pacem. being and peace. Through our 

Per Dóminum. Lord. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


Communion 


Beata viscera Marie Virgi- Blessed is the womb of the 
nis, que portavérunt xtérni Virgin Mary, which bore the 
Patris Filium. ` Son of the eternal Father. 


Postcommunion 

omptis, Dómine, salütis AVING received the aids of 
nostra subsidiis: da, Da everlasting salvation, 
quesumus, beáte Marie sem- O Lord, we beseech Thee, grant 
per Virginis patrociniis nos us to be everywhere protected 
ubíque prótegi in cujus vene- by the patronage of Blessed 
ratióne hec tue obtülimus Mary, ever a virgin, in venera- 
majestáti. Per Dóminum. tion of whom we have made 
these offerings to Thy majesty. 

Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


If, however, the Mass of Our Lady is said on the Saturday 
within a simple octave of one of her feasts, the Mass is that 
of the feast, with the second and third Prayer as given pre- 
viously, according to the season. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Votive Masses 


Usually the Mass celebrated by a priest is that proper to the 
day, as Indicated. in the calendar, or ordo. A Mass other than 
hat of the day is called a Votive Mass, or Mass of Devotion. 
These are of two kinds: : 

1) Votive Mass, by order of the Pope, or the bishop, in times 
of public need, to implore God's help. 

In such Masses a) The Nicene Creed is sung. b) The Gloria 
is sung if the oceasion be not of a penitential character. c) 
All commemorations or additional prayers are omitted. 

2) Votive Masses celebrated by individual priests to satisfy 
their own devotion or that of others. 

These are permitted in moderation on all Gays of the year, 
except on: a) Feasts of double rite. b) On Sundays. c) 
During Octaves of Christmas, Epiphany, Easter, Ascension, 
Pentecost and Corpus Christi. d) During Lent. e) On Roga- 
tion Monday. f) On aU Vigils. g} On days on which a Sunday 
Mass is anticipated or postponed. 

3) When it is permitted to say a Votive Mass, the following 
rubrics obtain: 

a) Credo is omitted. b)Gloria in Excelsis is omitted except 
in Votive Mass of the Angels, and the Saturday Votive Masses 
of our Blessed Lady, c) Commemoration is made of the Mass 
of the day. d) Other prayers are added, from those appointed 
for occasional use; they are found on pages 1494-1500. e) The 
total number of Prayers, Secrets and Postcommunions may_be 
never less than three. f) Whenever a Votive Mass is allowed, a 
Mass for the Dead, in black vestments may be said. 

4) Votive Masses assigned to each day are as follows: 

Monday, The Blessed Trinity, page 1414. 

Tuesday, The Holy Angels, page 1417. 

Wednesday, St. Joseph, or the Apostles; see index. 

i Thursday, The Holy Ghost or the Blessed Sacrament; see 
ndez. . . 

Friday, The Holy Cross or the Passion; see indez. 

Saturday, Our Blessed Lady; see indez. 


Motive Mass of ur Lord Jesus Christ, The 
` Most High and Eternal Priest, (White) 


This Mass may be celebrated on the first Thursday of any 
month in churches and oratories in which, by the consent of 
the respective Ordinary special exercises of devotion for the 
sanctification of the clergy are held in the morning. It may 
not be celebrated on a feast which is a double of the first or 
second class, any feast, vigil or octave of Our Lord, or the 
commemoration of the Faithful Departed; nor on the 2, 3 or 
4 of January when the Mass “Puer natus" from the octave of 
Christmas is said; preserving always the rights of the conven- 
tual or parochial Mass. Instead of the first Thursday it may be 
said the first Saturday, under the same conditions. (8. C. Rit., 
March 11, 1935.) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 109, 4 


HE Lord hath sworn, and P7urdvrr Dóminus, et non 
He will not repent; Thou penitébit eum; Tu es sa- 


1410 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS OP ETERNAL PRIESTHOOD 


cérdos in atérnum secündum 
6rdinem Melchisedech (T. P. 
alleiúja, allelija.) Ps. 109, 1. 
Dixit Dóminus Dómino meo: 
Sede a dextris meis. Y. Glória, 
Patri. 


1411 


art a priest forever according 
to the order of Melchisedech. 
(P. T. Alleluia, alleluia.) Ps. 
109, 1. The Lord said to my 
Lord: Sit thou at my right 
hand. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUs, qui ad majestátis 
D tue glóriam et generis 
humáni sahitem, Unigénitum 
tuum summum atque  ætér- 
num constituisti Sacerdótem: 
presta; ut quos ministros et 
mysteriórum suórum dispen- 
satéres elégit, in accépto min- 
istério adimpléndo fidéles in- 
veniántur. Per éumdem Dó- 
minum. 


O cop, who unto the glory 
of Thy majesty and the 
Salvation of the human race 
hast ordained Thy only be- 
gotten Son a Priest Most High 
and Eternal: grant that those 
ministers and dispensers of His 
mysteries whom He hath 
chosen may be found faithful 
in fulfilling the ministry which 
they have accepted. Through 
the same. 


Epistle. Heb. 5, 1-11 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Hebreos. 


RATRES; Omnis Póntifex 

ex homínibus assümp- 

tus, pro homínibus constitüi- 
tur in iis, que sunt ad Deum, 
ut ófferat dona, et sacrificia 
pro peccatis: qui condolére 
possit iis, qui ignórant, et er- 
rani: quóniam et ipse circüm- 
datus est infirmitáte: et prop- 
térea debet, quemádmodum 
pro pópulo, ita étiam et 
pro semetípso offérre pro pec- 
cátis. Nec quisquam sumit 
sibi honórem, sed qui vocátur 
2, Deo, tamquam Aaron. Sic et 
Christus non semetípsum cla- 
rificávit ut péntifex fieret, sed 
qui locütus est ad eum: Fílius 
meus es tu; ego hódie génui te. 
Quemádmodum et in álio loco 
dicit: Tu es Sacérdos in etér- 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Hebrews. 

on every high priest taken 

from among men, is or- 
dained for men in the things 
that appertain to God, that he 
may offer up gifts and sacrifices 
for sins: who can have com- 
passion on them that are ig- 
norant and that err: because 
he himself also is compassed 
with infirmity: and therefore 
he ought, as for the people, so 
also for himself, to offer for 
sins. Neither doth any man 
take the honor to himself, but 
he that is called by God, as 
Aaron was, So Christ also did 
not glorify Himself, that He 
might be made a High Priest: 
but. He that said unto Him: 
Thou art My Son, this day 
have I begotten Thee. As He 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1412 


saith also in another place: 
Thou art a priest forever, ac- 
cording to the order of Mel- 
chisedech. Who in the days of 
his flesh, with a strong cry and 
tears, offering up prayers and 
supplications to Him that was 
able to save him from death, 
was heard for his reverence. 
And whereas indeed He was 
the Son of God, He learned 
obedience by the things which 
He suffered: and being con- 
summated, He became, to all 
that cbey Him, the cause of 
eternal salvation, called by 
God a high priest according to 
the order of Melchisedech. Of 
whom we have much to Say, 


VOTIVE MASS OF ETERNAL PRIESTHOOD 


num secündum órdinem Mel- 
chísedech. Qui in diébus car- 
nis sue preces supplicatio- 
nésque ad eum, qui possit 
illum salvum fácere a morte, 
cum clamóre válido et lácri- 
mis 6fferens, exauditus est 
pro sua reveréntia. Et qui- 
dem, cum esset Filius Dei, di- 
dicit ex iis, que passus est 
obediéntiam: et consummá- 
tus, factus est ómnibus ob- 
temperántibus sibi, causa sa- 
lütis etérne, appellatus a Deo 
pontifex juxta órdinem Mel- 
chísedech. De quo nobis gran- 
dis sermo, et ininterpretábilis 
ad dicéndum. . 


and hard to be intelligibly uttered: 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Luke 4, 18 


The spirit of the Lord is 


Spiritus Démini super me; 


upon me, wherefore He hath propter quod unxit me. Y. 
anointed me. Y. To preach the Evangelizáre paupéribus mi- 
gospel to the poor: He hath sit me, sanáre contrítos corde. 


sent me to heal the contrite of 
heart. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Heb. 7, 
24. But for that Jesus con- 
tinueth forever, hath an ever- 
lasting priesthood. Alleluia. 


Allehija, allelüja. Y. Hebr. 
7, 24. Jesus eo quod máneat in 
etérnum, sempitérnum habet. 
Sacerdótium. Allelija. 


Tract. Ps. 9, 34-36 


Arise, O Lord God, let Thy 
hand be exalted: forget not the 
poor. Y.'Thou seest it, for Thou 
considerest labor and sorrow. 
V. To Thee is the poor man 
left: Thou wilt be a helper to 
the orphan. 


Exsürge, Dómine Deus, eX- 
altétur manus tua: ne oblivi- 
Scáris páuperum. Y. Vide quó- 
niam tu labórem et dolórem 
consíderas. Y. Tibi derelíctus 
est pauper: órphano tu eris 
adjütor. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS OP ETERNAL PRIESTHOOD 


1413 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelija. V. Hebr. 
?, 24. Jesus eo quod máneat in 
ætérnum, sempitérnum habet 
Sacerdótium. Allelija. Y. Luc. 
4, 18. Spíritus Dómini super 
me; propter quod unxit me, 
evangelizáre paupéribus misit 
me, sanáre contrítos corde. 
Allelüja. 


| Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Heb. 7, 
24, But this, for that Jesus 
continueth forever, hath an 
everlasting priesthood. Ale- 
luia. Y. Luke 4, 18. The Spirit 
of the Lord is upon me, where- 
fore He hath anointed me to 
preach the gospel to the poor, 
He hath sent me to heal the 
contrite of heart. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 22, 14-20 


MA Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Lucam. 
K N ILLO témpore: Discúbuit 
Jesus, et duódecim Após- 
toli cum eo. Et ait illis: Desi- 
dério desiderávi hoc Pascha 
manducáre vobíscum, ánte- 
quam pátiar. Dico enim vobis, 
quia ex hoc non manducábo 
illud, donec impleátur in reg- 
no Dei. Et accépto cálice, grá- 
tias egit, et dixit: Accipite, et 
divídite inter vos. Dico enim 
vobis quod non bibam de ge- 
neratióne vitis, donec regnum 
Dei véniat. Et accépto pane, 
grátias egit, et fregit, et dedit 
eis, dicens: Hoc esi Corpus 
meum, quod pro vobis datur: 
hoc fácite in meam commem- 
oratiónem. Simíliter et cáli- 
cem, postquam cenavit, di- 
cens: Hic est calix novum 
testaméntum in  sánguine 
meo, qui pro vobis fundétur. 


"B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, Jesus sat 
down: and the twelve 
apostles with Him. And He 
Said to them: With desire X 
have desired to eat this pasch 
with you, before I suffer. For 
I say to you that from this 
time I will not eat it, till it be 
fulfilled in the kingdom of God. 
And having taken the chalice, 
He gave thanks and said: Take 
and divide it among you. For 
I say to you that I will not 
drink of the fruit of the vine, 
til the kingdom of God come. 
And taking bread, He gave 
thanks and brake and gave to 
them, saying: This is My Body, 
which is given for you. Do this 
for a commemoration of Me. 
In like manner, the chalice 
also, after He had supped, say- 
ing: This is the chalice, the 
new testament in My Blood, 
which shall be shed for you. 


Offertory. Heb. 10, 12, 14 


Christus unam pro peccá- 
tis 6fferens hóstiam, in semp- 
itérnum sedet in déxtera Dei: 
una enim oblatióne consum- 


Christ offering one sacrifice 
for sins, forever sitteth on the 
right hand of God, for by ons 
oblation He hath perfected for- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1414 


ever them that are sanctified. 
(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


VOTIVE MASS OP MOST HOLY TRINITY 


mávit in etérnum sanctificá- 
tos (T. P. Allelüja.) 


Secret 


LORD, may our mediator 

Jesus Christ render these 
gifts acceptable to Thee, that 
we, in union with Him may set 
before Thee offerings that are 
thankworthy. Who liveth. 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


zc münera, Dómine, me- 

diátor noster Jesus 
Ghristus tibi reddat accépta; 
et nos, una secum, nhóstias 
tibi gratas exhibeat: Qui te- 
cum. 


Communion. 1 Cor. 2, 24, 25 


This Body, which shall be 
delivered for you. This chalice 
is the new testament in My 
Blood. This do ye, as often as 
you shall drink, for the com- 
memoration of Me, (P. T. Alle- 
luia.) 


Hoc Corpus, quod pro vobis 
tradétur: hic calix novi testa- 
ménti est in meo sánguine, 
dicit Dóminus: hoc fácite, 
quotiescümque — sümitis, 
meam commemoratiónem (T. 
P. Allelüja. ) 2 


Postcommunion 


E BESEECH Thee O Lord 

, that the divine victim 
which has been our oblation 
and our food may give us life; 
so that united with Thee in 
perpetual charity we may bring 
fruit that remaineth forever. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


IVÍFICET nos, queesumus, 

Démine, divina quam 
obtülimus et  sümpsimus, 
bóstia; ut perpétua tibi carl- 
táte conjücti, fructum, qui 
semper maneat, afferámus. 
Pér Dóminum. 


Mass of the Most Holp Trinity, (White) 


When the votive Mass of the Most Holy Trinity, or any other, 
we celebrated in thanksgiving to almighty God for deliverance 
yrom a danger, or for a favor received, an additional Prayer, 
Secret and Postcommunion are satd after those proper to the 


Mass, under the one conclusion. 


of Thanksgiving, page 1493. 


These are found in the Mass 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 
Bu be the holy Trinity, 
and undivided Unity: we 

will give glory to it because He 
hath showed His mercy to us. 


Tob. 12, 6 


ENEDÍCTA sit sancta Tri- 
nitas, atque indivisa 
Unitas: confitebimur ei, quia 
fecit nobíscum  misericórdi- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS OF MOST HOLY TRINITY 


am suam. Ps. 8, 2. Dómine 
Dóminus noster, quam ad- 
miráble est nomen tuum in 
univérsa terra Y. Glória Patri. 


1415 


Ps. 8, 2. O Lord our Lord, how 
wonderful is Thy name in all 
the earth! Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 
Deus, qui dedísti fámu- 
lis tuis in confessióne vere fí- 
dei, etérnz Trinitátis glóriam 
agnóscere, et in poténtia ma- 
jestatis adoráre  unitátem: 
qusesumus; ut ejüsdem fídei 
firmitáte, ab ómnibus semper 
muniámur advérsis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


LMIGHTY, eternal God, 

Who hast given to Thy 
servants in the confession of 
the true faith to acknowledge 
the glory of the eternal Trinity 
and to adore the Unity in the 
power of majesty, we beseech 
that in the firmness of the 
same faith we may ever be for- 
tified against all our adversa- 
ries, Through our Lord. 


Epistle. 2 Cor. 13, 11-13 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corinthios. 


RATRES: Gaudéte, per- 

fécti, estóte, exhortá- 
mini, idem sápite, pacem ha- 
béte, et Deus pacis et dilec- 
tiónis erit vobíscum. Grátia 
Dómini nostri Jesu Christi, et 
cáritas Dei, et communicátio 
Sancti spíritus sit cum óm- 
nibus vobis. Amen. 


Lesson from thg Epistle of 
blessed Paul the tle to the 
Corinthians. i 

RETHREN, rejyGs_. ^e per- 

fect, take exhortation, 
be of one mind, have peace; 
and the God of peace and of 
love shall be with you. The 
grace of Our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and the charity of God, and the 
communication of the Holy 
Ghost be with you all. Amen. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
pla 


ced by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Dan. 3, 55, 56 


Benedictus es, Démine, qui 
intuéris abyssos, et sedes su- 
per Chérubim. Y. Benedíctus 
es, Dómine, in firnaménto 
celi, et laudábilis in secula. 


Blessed art Thou, O Lord, 
Who beholdest the depths and 
sittest upon the cherubim. VY. 
Blessed art. Thou, O Lord, in 
the firmament of heaven, and 
worthy of praise forever. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleláj&, allehija. V. Dan. 
3. 52. Benedíctus es, Dómine, 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Dan 3, 
52. Blessed art thou. O Lord 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1416 


God of our fathers, and worthy 
of praise forever. Alleluia. 


VOTIVE MASS OP MOST HOLY TRINITY 


Deus patrum nostrórum, et 
laudábilis in secula. Allelája. 


Tract 


With allour hearts we con- 
fess Thee, we praise Thee, we 
bless Thee, God the Father un- 
begotten, Thee, the only-begot- 
ten Son, Thee, the Holy Ghost, 
the Paraclete, holy and undi- 
vided Trinity. Y. For Thou art 
great and  doest wonderful 
Works; Thou alone art God. y. 
To ‘Thee be praise, to Thee 
glory, to Thee thanksgiving for 
eternal ages, O blessed Trinity. 


Te Deum Patrem ingéni- 
tum, te Filium unigénitum, te 
Spiritum Sanctum Parácli- 
tum, sanctam et individuam 
Trinitátem, toto corde confi- 
témur, laudámus, atque bene- 
dicimus. Y. Quóniam magnus 
es tu, et fáciens mirabília, tu 
es Deus solus. V. Tibi laus, 
tibi gloria, tibi grátiárum 
áctio, in secula sempitérna, 
o beáta Trinitas. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Dam 3, 
52. Blessed art Thou, O Lord, 
the God of our fathers, and 
worthy of praise for evermore. 
Alleluia, JY. Let us bless the 
Father and the Son with the 
Holy Ghost. Alleluia. 


Allelüja, allelija. V. Dan. 
3, 52. Benedictus es, Dómine 
Deus patrum nostrorum, et 
laudabilis in secula. Allelüia. 
y. Benedicamus Patrem et 
Filium cum Sancto Spíritu. 
Allelüia. : 


Gospel, When the Paraclete cometh, as in the Mass on the 
Sunday within ihe octave of Ascension, page 589. 


Offertory. Tob. 12, 6 


Blessed be God the Father, 
and the. only-begotten Son of 
God, and also the Holy Ghost; 
because He hath shown His 
mercy to us. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Benedictus sit Deus Pater, 
unigenitüsque Dei Fílius, 
Sanctus quoque Spíritus: quia 
fecit nobíscum misericórdiam 
suam. 


Secret 


ANCTIFY, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, our God, through 

ihe invocation of Thy holy 

name, the victim of this of- 

fering, and through it perfect 

us an everlasting offering unto 
Thee. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Sundays, page 773. 


Y ANCTÍFICA, quesumus, Dô- 

mine Deus noster, per 

tui sancti nóminis invocatió- 

nem, hujus oblatiónis hósti- 

am: et per eam nosmetípsos 

tibi pérfice munus etérnum. 
Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
( 


VOTIVE MASS OF HOLY ANGELS 


1417 


Communion. Tob. 12,6 


Benedicimus Deum ceili, et 
foram ómnibus  vivéntibus 
confitébimur ei: quia fecit no- 
biscum misericórdiam suam. 


We bless the God of heaven, 
and in the sight of all who live 
we will praise Him; because He 
hath shown His mercy to us. 


Postcommunion 


b RoFÍCIAT nobisadsalütem 
P córporis ët ánimæ, Dó- 
mine Deus noster, hujus sac- 
raménti suscéptio: et sempi- 
térnæ sanete Trinitátis, ejus- 
démque individue  unitátis 
conféssio. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ay the partaking of this 
D sacrament, O Lord, our 
God, profit us for bealth of 
body and mind, as also the 
confession of our faitb in the 
eternal holy Trinity and the 


"undivided unity of the same. 


"Through our Lord. 


. Wotibe Mass of the Holy Angels 


_ The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 102, 20 


ENEDÍCITE Dóminum, 
omnes Angeli ejus: 
poténtes virtite, qui fácitis 
verbum ejus, ad audiéndam 
vocem sermónum ejus. Ps. 
102, 1. Bénedic, ánima mea, 
Dómino et ómnia que intra 
me sunt, nómini sancto ejus. 
V. Glória Patri. 


LESS the Lord, all ye His 

angels: you that are 
mighty in strength, and exe- 
cute His word, harkening to 
the voice of His orders. Ps. 
102, 1, Bless the Lord, O my 
soul: and Jet all that is within 
me bless His holy name. y. 
Glory. i 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 


EUS, qui miro órdine An- 
gelórum ministéria ho- 
mintimque dispénsas: concéde 
propítius; ut & quibus tibi 
ministrantibus. in ccelo sem- 
per assístitur, ab his in terra 
vita nostra. muniátur. Per 
Dóminum. 


cop, Who, in wondrous 

* order, dost apportion the 
ministrations of angels and of 
men, mercifully grant that 
those who ever stand minister- 
ing before Thee in heaven may 
be the protection of our. life 
upon earth. Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Apoc. 5, 11-14 


Léctio libri Apocalypsis 
beáti Joánnis Apóstoli. 


I Drésus illis: Audivi vo- 


cem Angelórum multó- 


Lesson from the Book of the 
Apocalypse of blessed John the 
Apostle. 

N THOSE days, I heard the 
, voice of many angels round 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1418 


&bout the throne, and the liv- 
ing creatures, and the ancients; 
and the number of them was 
thousands of thousands, saying 
with a loud voice: The Lamb 
that was slain, is worthy to re- 
ceive power, and divinity, and 
wisdom, and strength, and 
honor, and glory, and benedic- 
tion. And every creature, 
which is in heaven, and on the 
earth, and under the earth, 
and such as are in the sea, and 
al that are in them: I heard 
all saying: To Him that sitteth 
on the throne, and to the Lamb, 
benediction, and honor, and 
glory, and power, for ever and 
ever. And the four living crea- 
tures said: Amen. And the four 
and twenty ancients fell down 
on tbeir faces, and adored Him 
that liveth forever and ever. 


VOTIVE MASS OP HOLY ANGELS 


rum in circüitu tbroni, et an- 
imálium, et seniórum: et erat 
nümerus eórum millia mil- 
lium, dicéntium voce magna: 
Dignus est Agnus qui occisus 
est, accípere virtütem, et di- 
vinitátem, et sapiéntiam, et 
fortitüdinem, et benedictió- 
nem. Et omnem creatüram, 
quz in celo est, et super ter- 
ram, et sub terra, et que sunt 
in mari, et qua in eo omnes 
audivi dicéntes: Sedénti in 
throno, et Agno benedictio, et 
honor, et glória, et potéstas in 
secula seculórum. Et quatuor 
animália dicébant: Amen. Et 


-viginti quátuor suas: et ado- 


ravérunt fáciles suas: et ado- 
ravérunt vivéntem in sæcula 
ssculórum. 


From: Septuagesima. to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced. 
by the Tract, in sg a the ids and Tract are re- 


piaced by the Greater Alleluia 


Gradual. 
Praise ye the Lord from the 


Ps. 148, 1, 2 


Laudáte Dóminum de ce- 


heavens: praise ye Him in the lis: laudáte eum in excélsis. 
high places. V. Praise ye Him V. Laudáte eum, omnes An- 
all His angels: praise ye Him geli ejus: laudáte eum, omnes 
all His hosts. virtütes ejus. 


Lesser. Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 137, — Allelüja, allelüja. V. Ps. 137, 
1, 2. I will sing praise to Thee 1, 2. In conspéctu Angelórum, 
in the sight of the angels: I psallam tibi: adorábo ad tem- 
wil worship toward Thy holy plum sanctum tuum, et con- 
temple, and I will give glory fitébor nómini tuo. Allelüia. 
to Thy name. Alleluia. - 


Tract. Ps. 102, 20 


Bless the Lord all ye His an- Benedicite Dóminum, om- 
gels: you that are mighty in nes Angeli ejus: poténtes vir- 
strength, and execute His word. tüte qui fácitis verbum ejus. 
Bless the Lord all ye His hosts: Y. Benedícite Dómino, omnes 
you ministers of His, who do virtütes ejus: ministri ejus, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS OF HOLY ANGELS 1419 
qui fácitis voluntátem ejus. His will Y. Bless tiie Lord all 
Y. Benedicite Dómino, ómnia His works: in every place of 
Opera ejus: in omni loco do- His dominion, O my soul, bless 


minatiónis ejus, benedic, áni- 
ma mea, Dómino. 


thou the Lord. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelàja. Y. Ps. 
137, 1, 2. In conspéctu ange- 
lórum psallam tibi: adorábo 
ad templum sanctum tuum, 
et confitébor nómini tuo. Al- 
lelúja. Y. Angelus Dómini 
descéndit de celo, et accédens 
revólvit lápidem, et ‘sedébat 
Super eum. Allelája. ` 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia, V. Ps. 137, 
1,2. I will sing praise to Thee 
in the sight of the angels: I 
will worship ‘toward Thy holy 
temple, and I will give glory 
to Thy name. Alleluia. Y. An 
angel of the Lord descended 
from heaven, and coming, 
rolled back the stone and sat 
upon it, Alleluia. 


Gospel. John 1, 47-51 


"HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secündum Joannem. 

N ILLO témpore: Vidit Je- 
I sus Nathána8l veniéntem 
ad se, et dicit de eo: Ecce vera 
Isra&líta in quo dolus non est. 
Dixit ei Nathanaél: Unde me 
nosti? Respóndit Jesus, et 
dixit ei: Priüsquam te Philfp- 
pus vocáret, cum esses sub 
ficu, vidi te. Respóndit ei Na- 
thanaél, et ait: Rabbi, tu es 
Filius Dei, tu es Rex Israél, 
Respóndit Jesus, ef dixit ei. 
' Quia dixi tibi: Vidi te sub ficu, 
credis: majus his vidébis. Et 
dicit ei: Amen, amen dico 
vobis, vidébitis celum apér- 
tum, et Angelos Dei ascen- 
déntes, et descendéntes supra 
Filium hóminis. 


*K Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time, Jesus saw 
Nathanael coming to 
Him: and He saith of him: 
Behold an Israelite indeed, in 
whom there is no guile. Na- 
thanael saith to Him: Whence 
knowest Thou me? Jesus an- 
swered, and said to him: Before 
that Philip called thee, when 
thou wast under the fig-tree, I 
saw thee. Nathanael answered 
Him, and said: Rabbi, Thou 
art the Son of God, Thou art 
the king of Israel. Jesus an- 
swered, and said to him: Be- 
cause I said unto thee, I saw 
íhee under the fig-tree, thou 
believest: greater things than 
these shalt thou see. And He 
Said to him: Amen, amen I say 


to you, you shall see the heaven opened, and the angels of God 
ascending and descending upon the Son of man. 


Offertory. Apoc. 8, 3, 4 


Stetit Angelus juxta aram 
*empli. habens thuríbulum 


An angel stood near the altar 
of the temple, having a golden 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1420 


censer in his hand; and there 
was given to him much in- 
cense: and the smoke of the 
perfumes ascended before God. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


VOTIVE MASS OF ST, JOSEPH 


áureum in manu sua: et data 
sunt ei incénsa multa: et as- 
céndit fumus arómatum in 
conspéctu Dei. 


Secret 


quU OFFER Thee sacrifices 
of praise, O Lord, hum- 
bly beseeching that, with an- 
gelie patronage intervening in 
our behalf, Thou be pleased to 
accept the same and grant 
them to be profitable for our 
salvation, Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


YA Ostias tibi, Dómine, lau- $ 

dis offérimus, supplíci- 
ter deprecántes: ut eásdem, f 
angélico pro nobis interveni- § 
énte suffragio, et placátus ac- 
cipias, et ad salütem nostram 
provenire concédas, Per Dó- 
minum. 


Communion 


Angels and archangels, 
thrones and dominations, prin- 
cipalities and powers, virtues 
of the heavens, cherubim and 
seraphim, bless the Lord for- 
ever, 


Angeli, Archangeli, Throni 
et Dominatiónes. Principátus 
et Potestátes, Virtütes coló- 
rum, Chérubim atque Séra- 
phim, Dóminum benedicite in 
etérnum: 


Postcommunion 


ILLED With heavenly bless- 
H ing, we humbly beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that what we 
celebrate with our feeble ser- 
vice may become of profit to us 
by the assistance of the holy 
angels and archangels, 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EPLÉTI, Dómine, bene- 

dictióne celésti, sup- 
pliciter implorámus: ut, quod 
frágil celebrémus officio, 
Sanctórum Angelórum atque 
Archangelórum nobis pro- 
désse sentiámus auxílio, Per 
Dóminum. 


Votive Mass of St. Joseph, (white) 


Mass, as on the feast of the Solemnity of St. Joseph, page 
997, except the Gradual as below. Also the Alleluias in the 
Introit, Offertory and Communion are. omitted in Paschal- 


time, 


Gradual. Ps. 20, 4, 5 


o Lord, Thou hast prevented 
bim with blessing of sweetness; 


Dómine, prevenísti eum in 
benedictiónibus ^ dulcédinis: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS OF APOSTLES PETER AND PAUL 


posuísti in cápite ejus coró- 
nam de lápide pretióso. V. 
Vitam pétiit a te, et tribuisti 
ei longitüdinem diérum in 
seculum seculi. 

Allelája, allelüja. Y. Fac 
nos innócuam, Joseph, decür- 
xere vitam: sitque tuo semper 
- tuta patrocínio. Allelája. 


1421 


Thou hast set on his head a 
crown of precious stones. Y. He 
asked life of Thee, and Thou 
hast given him length of days 
forever and ever. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Make us, 
O Joseph, to lead a blameless 
life, and may it ever be safe 
under thy patronage. Alleluia. 


Ajter September in place of the Alleluias the Tract as jol- 


lows is said: 


Tract. Ps. 111, 1-3 


Beátus vir, qui timet Démi- 
num: in mandátis ejus cupit 
nimis. Y. Potens in terra erit 
semen ejus: generátio rectó- 
rum benedicétur. Y. Glória et 
divitiz in domo ejus: et jus- 
títia ejus manet in seculum 
seculi. “oe 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Blessed is the man that fear- 
eth the Lord; he shall delight 
exceedingly in His command- 
ments. Y. His seed shall be 
mighty upon earth; the gene- 
ration of the righteous shall 
be blessed. Y. Glory and wealth 
shall be in his house; and his 
justice remaineth forever aud 
ever. 


Wotibe Mass of the Holp Apostles, Peter and Paul 
(Red) 
Out of Paschal-time 


In Paschal-time, see Mass next following. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 138, 17 


imr autem nimis hono- 

ráti sunt amici tui, 
Deus: nimis. confortatus est 
principatus eórum. Ps. 138, 1, 
2, Dómine, probásti me, et 
cognovisti me: tu cognovisti 
sessiónem meam, et resur- 
rectiónem meam. JV. Glória 
Patri. 


o ME Thy friends, O God, 

are made exceedingly 
honorable: their principality is 
exceedingly strengthened. Ps. 
138, 1, 2. Lord, Thou hast 
proved me, and known me: 
Thou hast known my sitting 
down, and my rising up. Y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1422 


VOTIVE MASS OF APOSTLES PETER AND PAUL 


Prayer 


O lifted up blessed Peter, 
when he walked on the waters, 
that he might not be engulfed 
and three times delivered from 
the depths of the sea his ship- 
wrecked fellow-apostle Paul, 
graciously harken to us, and 
grant that by the merits of 
both we may obtain the glory 
of eternity. Who livest. 


cop, Whose right hand. 


EUs, cujus déxtera bed- 
D tum Petrum ambulán- 
m in flüctibus, ne mergeré-. 
tur, eréxit, et co-apóstolum 
ejus Paulum tértio naufra- 
gántem, de profündo pélagi 
liberavit:. exáudi nos propi- 
tius, et concéde; ut, ambó- 
rum méritis, eternitatis gló- 
riam consequámur: Qui vivis. 


Epistle, In those days, from the Mass on Whit-Wednesday, 


page 609.. 


From Septuagesima to Easter, the Lesser Alleluia and its Verse 
in the Gradual is replaced by the Tract, 


Gradual. Ps. 44, 17, 18 


Thou shalt make them 
princes over all the earth: they 
shall remember Thy name, O 
Lord.. P. Instead of Thy 
fathers, sons are born to Thee: 
iherefore shall people praise 
Thee. 


Constitues eos principes su- 
per omnem terram; mémores 
erunt nóminis tui, Dómine. J. 
Pro pátribus tuis nati sunt 
libi filii: proptérea pópuli 
confitebüntur tibi. 


‘Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 238, 17. 
Thy friends, O God, are made 


Allelája, allelija. V. Ps. 138, 
17. Nimis honoráti sunt amici 


exceedingly honorable; their tui, Deus: nimis confortátus 
principality is exceedingly est principátus eórum. Alle- 
strengthened. Alleluia. hija. 

Tract. Ps. 125, 5,6 


They that sow in tears shall 
reap in joy. Y. Going they went 
and wept, casting their seeds. 
Y. But coming they shall come 
with joyfulness, carrying their 
sheaves. ` ` 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Qui séminant in lacrymis, 
in gáudio metent. Y. Eüntes 
ibant et flebant, mitténtes sé- 
mina sua, Y. Veniéntes autem 


vénient cum exsultatióne, por- 


tántes manípulos suos. 


Gospel, Peter said to Jesus, Behold we have left, as in the 
Mass on the Feast of the Conversion of St. Paul Jan. 25, 


Page 888. 
Creed, page 765. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS OF APOSTLES PETER AND PAUL 1423 


Offertory. Ps.18, 5 
In omnem terram exivitso- Their sound went forth into 
nus eórum, et in fines orbis all the earth: and their words 
terre verba. eórum. to the ends of the world. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 

X FFERIMUS tibi, Dómine, U orrer Thee, O Lord, 

preces et múnera: quæ, our prayers and gifts, 

ut tuo sint digna conspéctu, and that they be worthy in Thy 

Apostolórum tuórum Petri et sigħt, may we be assisted by 

Pauli précibus adjuvémur. the prayers of Thine Apostles, 

Per Dóminum. Peter and Paul. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Communion. Matt. 19, 28 : 
Vos, qui secúti estis me, se- You who have followed Me 
débitis super sedes, judicán- shall sit on seats, judging the 
tes duódecim tribus Israel. twelve tribes of Israel. 


Postcommunion 
RÓTEGE, Dómine, pópu- ROTECT Thy people O 
Jum tuum: et Apostoló- Lord, and preserve by 
rum tudrum Petri et Pauli never-ending defense those who 


patrocinio confidéntem, per- 
pétua  defensióne consérva. 
Per Dóminum. 


trust in the patronage of 
Thine Apostles, Peter and 
Paul. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Motive Mass of the Holp Apostles, Peter and Paul 


In Paschal-time 
The Beginning of .Mass, page 756. 


Ps. 63, 3 


Bou hast protected me, O 
God, from the assembly 
of the malignant, alleluia: from 
the multitude of the workers of 
iniquity, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 
63, 2. Hear, O God, my prayer 
when I make supplication to 
éripe ánimam meam. Y. Gló- Thee: deliver my soul from the 
ria Patri. fear of the enemy. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Introit. 

ROTEXÍsTI me, Deus, a 

B resa malignanti- 
um, allelüja: a multitüdine 
operántium iniquitátem, ale- 
hija, allelája. Ps. 63, 2. Exáudi 
Deus oratiónem meam cum 
déprecor: a timóre inimíci 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1424 


VOTIVE MASS OF APOSTLES PETER AND PAUL 


Prayer 


Gop, Whose right hand 

lifted up blessed Peter, 
When he walked on the waters, 
that he might not be over- 
whelmed, and delivered his 
fellow-apostle, Paul, when ship- 
wrecked for the third time, 
from the depths of the sea, 
graciously harken to us, and 
grant that by the merits of both 
we may obtain the glory of 
eternity. Who livest. 


EUS, eujus déxtera beá- 

tum Petrum ambulán- 
em in flüctibus, ne mergeré- 
tur, eréxit, et co-apóstolum 
ejus Paulum tértio naufra- 
gántem, de profündo pélági 
liberavit: exáudi nos propí- 
tius, et concéde; ut ambórum 
méritis, sternitátis glóriam 
consequámur. Qui vivis, 


Epistle, Yn those days, from the Mass on Whit-Wednesday, 


page 608. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 88, 6. 
The heavens shall confess Thy 
wonders, O Lord; and Thy 
truth in the church of the 
saints. Alleluia. Y. John 15, 16. 
I have chosen you out of the 
world that you may go and 
bring forth fruit, and that your 
fruit may remain. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allehija, allelüja. V. Ps. 88, 
6. Conftebüntur coli mira- 
hília tua Dómine; étenim ve- 
ritátem tuam in Ecclésia 
Sanctórum. Allelüja. V. John 
15, 16. Ego vos elégi de mundo 
ut eatis, et fructum afferatis, 
et fructus vester maneat, alle- 
lija. 


Gospel, Peter said to Jesus, Behold we have left, as in the 
Mass E ihe feast of the Conversion of St. Paul, January 25, 
page s 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 17, 18 


Thou shalt make them Constitues eos príncipes su- 
princes over all the earth: they per omnem terram: mémores 
shall remember 'Thy name, O erunt nóminis tui Dómine, in 
Lord, throughout all genera- omni progénie et generatióne, 
tions. Alleluia, alleluia. allelija, allelüja. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


QU OFFER Thee, O Lord, 
our prayers and gifts, 
and that they be worthy in Thy 
Sight, may we be assisted by 
ihe prayers of Thine Apostles, 


(Qe libi Dómine 
preces et münera: que, 
ut tuo sint digna conspéctu, 
Apostolórum tuorum Petri et 
Paul précibus adjuvémur. 


Peter and Paul Through our Per Dóminum. 


Lord. 
Preface No. 13, page 816. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS OF ALL HOLY APOSTLES 1425 


Communion. Ps. 18, 5 


In omnem terram exívit so- Their sound went forth into 
nus eórum, et in fínes orbis all the earth; and their words 
terre verba eórum, allelija, to the ends of the world, alle- 
allelija. luia, alleluia. - 


Postcommunion 


ROTEGE Dómine pópulum ROTECT Thy people G 

tuum: et Apostolórum Lord, and preserve by 
tuórum Petri et Pauli patro- never-ending defense those 
cínio confidéntem, perpétua who trust in the patronage of 
defensióne consérva. Per Dó- 'Thine Apostles, Peter and Paul. 
minum. Through our Lord. 


“Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Wotive Mass of AU tbe Holp Apostles, (Red) 


Out of Paschal-time 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Ps. 138, 17 


o ME Thy friends, O God, 
tu [1] are made exceedingly 
honorable: their principality is 
exceedingly strengthened. Ps. 
138, 1, 2. Lord, Thou hast 
proved me, and known mes: 
Thou hast known my sitting 
down, and my rising up. X. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Introit. 


IHI autem nimis hono- 

rati sunt amici 
Deus; nimis confortatus = 
principátus eórum. Ps. 138, 1, 
2. Dómine, probásti me, et 
cognovísti me: tu cognovísti 
sessiónem meam, et resurrec- 
tiónem meam. V. Glória Patri. 


Prayer 
EUs qui nos per beátos cop, Who hast been 
Apóstolos tuos ad agni- pleased through Thy holy 


tiónem tui nóminis veníre Apostles to bring us the knowl- 


tribuisti: da nobis eórum gló- 
riam sempitérnam et profi- 
cléndo celebráre et celebrándo 
profícere, Per Dóminum. 


edge of Thy name: make us 
while celebrating their ever- 
lasting glory, to advance in vir- 
tue, and the more we advance 
in virtue, the more zealously to 
honor them. 


Epistle, Brethren, To every one, from ihe Mass on Ascension 


“xe, page 582. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1426 


VOTIVE MASS OF ALL HOLY APOSTLES 


Gradual. Ps. 44, 17, 18 


Thou -shalt make them 
princes over all the earth: they 
shall remember Thy name, O 
Lord. Y. Instead of Thy fathers, 
Sons are born to Thee: there- 
fore shall people praise Thee. 


From Septuagesima to Easter 
by the Tract. 


Constitues eos princípes su-- 
per omnem terram: mémores. 


erunt nóminis tui, Dómine. V. 
Pro pátribus tuis nati sunt 


tibi fílii: proptérea pópuli. 


confitebüntur tibi, 


the Lesser Alleluia is replaced: 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 138, 17. 
Thy friends, O God, are made 
exceedingly honorable; their 
principality is exceedingly 
strengthened. Alleluia. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 
138, 17. Nimis honoráti sunt 


amici tui, Deus: nimis con-. 


fortátus est principátus eó- 
rum. Allelüja. 


. Tract. Ps.125,5,6 


They that sow in tears shall Qui séminant in lácrymis. 


reap in joy. Y. Going they went in gáudio metent. Y. Eüntes 
and wept, casting their seeds. ibant et flebant, mitténtes 
¥. But coming they shall come sémina sua. V. Veniéntes au- 
with joyfulness, carrying their tem vénient cum exsultatióne, 
sheaves. portántes manípulos suos. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel, At that time, Peter sald to Jesus, Behold, we have- 
left, from the Mass on the feast of the Conversion of St. Paul,. 


January 25, page 888. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 18,5 . 


Their sound went forth into In omnem terram exivit so- 
all the earth: and their words nus eórum; et in fines orbis 
to the ends of the world. terre verba eórum. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
EVERENTLY, O Lord, we 


honor tbe everlasting 
glory of Thine apostles, be- 
seeching Thee, that, reconciled 
to Thee by these sacred mys- 
teries, we may be the more 
worthy to do them homage. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


CG... Dómine, sanctó- 
rum Apostolórum tuó- 
rum venerántes quesumus ut 


eam, saeris mystériis expláti,. 
dignius celebrémus. Per Dó-. 


minum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


N 


VOTIVE MASS OF ALL HOLY APOSTLES 1427 
Communion. Matt. 19, 18. 


Vos qui secüti estis me, se- You who have followed me 
débitis super sedes, judicántes shall sit on seats, judging the 
duódecim tribus Israël. twelve tribes of Israel. 


Postcommunion 

ERCEPTIS Dómine sacra- a HAVE received Thy sac- 
méntis, supplíciter exo- raments, O Lord, and 
rámus: ut intercedéntibus humbly implore of Thee that, 
beátis Apóstolis tuis, que pro through the intercession of Thy 
ill6rum veneránda gérimus holy apostles, the homage we 
passione, nobis profíciant ad offer Thee in memory of their 
medélam. Per Dóminum. venerable passion, may profit 
us to the healing of our souls. 

Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Wotibe Mass of All the Holp Apostles 
In Paschal-time 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


ROTEXISTI me, Deus, a 

convéntu malignantium, 
allelüja: a multitüdine oper- 
ántium iniquitátem, allelája, 
allelüja. Ps. 63, 2. Exáudi, De- 
us, oratiónem meam cum dé- 
precor: a timóre inimíci éripe 
ánimam meam. Y. Glória Pa- 
iri. 


Ps. 63, 3 


Hov hast protected me, O 
God, from the assembly of 
the malignant, alleluia: from 
the multitude of the workers of 
iniquity, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 
63, 2. Hear, O God, my prayer 
when I make supplication to 
Thee: deliver my soul from the 
fear of the enemy. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. . 
Epistle, Brethren to every one, from Mass of Ascension den 


page 582. 


Allelüja, allelája. y. Ps. 88, 
6. Confitebüntur celi mira- 
bília tua, Dómine: étenim ve- 
ritátem tuam in ecclésia sanc- 
tórum. Allelája. V. Joann. 15, 
16. Ego vos elegi de mundo, ut 
eatis, et fructum afferatis, et 
fructus vester maneat. Alle- 
Tája. 


Munda Cor m. page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 88, 
6. The heavens shall confess 
Thy wonders, O Lord; and Thy 
truth in the. church of the 
saints. Alleluia. Y. John 15, 16. 
I have chosen you out of the 
world that you may go and 
bring forth fruit, and that your 
fruit may remain. Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1428 VOTIVE MASS OF ALL HOLY APOSTLES 


Gospel, At that time Peter said to Jesus, Behold we have 
left, as in the Mass on the feast of the Conversion of St. Paul, 
January 25, page 888. 


Creed, page 765. 
Offertory. Ps. 44, 17, 18 


Thou shalt make them Constítues eos príncipes su- 
princes over all the earth: they per omnem terram: mémores 
shall remember Thy name, O erunt nóminis tui, Dómine, in 
Lord, throughout all genera- omni progénie et generatióne. 


tions. Alleluia, alleluia. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Allelija, allelija. 


Secret, Reverently O Lord, from Votive Mass of All the 
Apostles (out of Paschal-time), page 1426. 


Communion. Ps. 18, 5 


Their sound went forth into 
all the earth; and their words 
to the ends of the world. Alle- 
leuia, alleluia. 


Preface No. 13, page 816. 


Postcommunion, We have received, 


In omnem terram exivit so- 
nus eórum: et in fines orbis 
terre verba eórum. Allelüja, 
allelüja. 


rom the Votive Mass of 


All the Holy Apostles (out of Paschal-time), page 1427. 


Wotive Mass of An Apostle Mot Having a 
Special Mass 


Mass, either of the foregoing Votive Masses of All the Holy 


Apostles, except the following: 


Prayer 


E SUPPLICATE Thy maj- 
a esty, O Lord, that as 
blessed N. was in this world a 
preacher and ruler of Thy 


constant intercessor before 
Thee. Through our Lord. 


AJÉSTATEM luam, Dómi- 

ne, suppliciter exora- 

mus: ut, sicut ecclésie tue 

beátus. N. Apóstolus exstitit 

predicator et rector; ita apud 

te sit pro nobis perpétuus in- 
tercessor. Per Dóminum. 


Secret 


AY the holy prayer of the 

blessed apostle N. com- 
mend our sacrifice to Thee, O 
Lord, we beseech, that it may 
be made acceptable by His 
merits in whose honor it is 
solemnly offered. Through our 
Lord. 


ACRIFÍCIUM nostrum tibi, 

Dómine, quesumus, beá- 
ti. N. Apóstoli precatio sancta 
conciliet: ut, in cujus honore 
solemniter exhibetur, ejus 
méritis efficiatur accéptum. 
Per Dóminum. : 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS OF THE HOLY GHOST 1429 


Postcommunion 


uUmpsimus, Dómine, di- EJO:CING, O Lord, on the 
vina mysteria, beáti N., feast-day of blessed N., 
memoria letantes: que, sicut we have taken part in Thy di- 
tuis sanctis ad gloriam, ita vine mysteries, and mayest 
nobis, quxsumus, ad veniam Thou make them, we beseech 
prodesse perficias. Per Do- Thee, profit for our forgiveness 
minum. as for the glory of Thy saints. 
Through our Lord, 


Wotibe Mass of the Holp Ghost, (Red) 

In Masses celebrated to implore the light of God’s Holy 
Spirit, the Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion are replaced by 
those found at the end of this Mass. 

The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 

Introit, from the Mass on Whit-Sunday, page 598. 

Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 

Prayer, from the Mass on Whit-Sunday, page ‘598. 

Lesson, from the Mass on Whit-Tuesday, page 605. 

From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 32,12,6 


Beáta gens cujus est Dó- Blessed is the nation whose 
minus Deus eórum; pópulus, God is the Lord: the people 
quem elégit Dóminus in hære- whom He hath chosen for His 
ditátem sibi. Y. Verbo Dómini inheritance. V. By the word of 
celi firmáti sunt: et Spiritu the Lord the heavens were es- 
oris ejus omnis virtus eórum. tablished: and all the power 

of them by the spirit of His 
mouth. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelija, allelüja. (Hic gen- Alleluia, alleluia. (Here ail 
uflectitur.) Y. Veni, Sancte kneel.) V. Come, O holy Spirit, 
Spíritus, reple tuórum corda fill the hearts of Thy faithful; 
fidélium: et tui amóris in eis and kindle in them the fire of 
ignem accínde. Allelüja. Thy love. Alleluia. 


Tract. Ps. 103, 30 


Emitte Spíritum tuum, et Send forth Thy spirit, and 
creabuntur: et renovábit fá- they shall be created: and Thou 
ciem terre. P. O quam bonus shalt renew the face of the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1430 


earth. Y. O how good and sweet, 
O Lord, is Thy spirit within us. 
(Here all kneel.) Y. Come, O 
holy Spirit, fill the hearts of 
Thy faithful; and kindle in 
them the fire of Thy love. 


VOTIVE MASS OF THE HOLY GHOST 


et suávis est, Dómine, Spfri- 
tus tuus in nobis. Y. (Hic gen- 
uflectitur.) Veni, Sancte Spi- 
ritus, reple tuórum corda 
fidélium: et tui amóris in eis 
ignem accénde. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 103, 
30. Send forth Thy Spirit, and 
they shall be created; and Thou 
shalt renew the face of the 
earth. Alleluia. (Here all 
kneel.) Come, O holy Spirit, 
fill the hearts of Thy faithful, 
and kindle in them the fire of 
Thy love, Alleluia. 


Allelija, allelija. Ps. 103, 
30. Y. Emítte Spiritum tuum, 
et creabüntur, et renovábis 
faciem terre. Allelája. Y. (Hic 
genufiectitur.) Veni, sancte 
Spíritus, reple tuórum corda 
fidélium: et tui amóris in eis 
ignem accénde. Allelija. 


Gospel, If any one love me, from the Mass of Whit-Sunday, 
page 6 


Offertory. Ps. 67, 29, 30 


Confirm this, O God, which Confirma hoc, Deus, quod 
‘Thou hast wrought in us: from operátus es in nobis; a templo 
Thy temple which is in Jeru- tuo, quod est in Jerúsalem, 
salem, kings shall offer presents tibi ófferent reges münera, 


to Thee. Alleluia. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


allelüja. 


Secret 


ANCTIFY, we beseech 'Thee, 

O Lord, the gifts offered 
Thee, and cleanse our hearts 
by the enlightenment of the 
Holy Spirit. Through...in the 
unity of the same. 


Preface No. 7, page 809. 


Communion. 


There came suddenly & sound 
from heaven as of a mighty 
wind coming, where they were 
sitting, alleluia; and they were 
all filled with the Holy Ghost, 
Speaking the wonderful works 
of God. Alleluia, alleluia. 


ÜNERA, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, obláta sanctífi- 
ca: et corda nostra Sancti 
Spíritus illustratióne emünda. 
Per Dóminum ... in unitate. 


Acts. 2, 2, 4 


Factus est repénte de celo 
sonus, tamquam adveniéntis 
spíritus veheméntis, ubi erant 
sedéntes, allelija: et repléti 
sunt omnes Spiritu Sancto, 
loquéntes magnália Dei, alle- 
luja, allelija. ` 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MaSS OF THE HOLY GHOST 


143: 


Postcommunion 


ANCTI Spíritus, Dómine, 

-corda nostra mundet in- 
füsio: et sui roris íntima as- 
persióne fecündet. Per... 
in unitáte ejüsdem. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Ax our hearts be cleansed, 

O Lord, by the inpouring 

of the Holy Spirit; may He 

render them fruitful by water- 

ing them with His heavenly 

dew. Through...in the unity 
of the same, 


In Masses celebrated to implore the light of God's holy Spirit, 
the following Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion are said in 


place of those appointed. 


Prayer 


EUS, cui omne cor patet, 

et omnis volüntas 16- 
quitur, et quem nullum latet 
secrétum: purífica per infu- 
siónem sancti Spíritus cogita- 
tiónes cordis nostri; ut te per- 
fécte diligere, et digne lau- 
dáre mereámur. Per Dómi- 
num...in unitáte ejüsdem 


GOD, to Whom every heart 

is open, and every will 
doth speak, and from Whom no 
secret is hidden, purify by the 
infusion of the Holy Spirit the 
thoughts of our hearts, that we 
may be worthy to love Thee 
perfectly and praise Thee 
worthily. Through...in the 
unity of the same. 


Secret 


*IEC oblátio quesumus, 
Dómine, cordis riostri 
máculas emündet: ut Sancti 
Spíritus digna efficiátur ha- 
bitátio. Per Dóminum . .. in 
unitáte ejüsdem. 


ay this oblation, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, 
cleanse the stains of our hearts, 
ihat they may be made worthy 
habitations of the Holy Spirit. 
Through...in the unity of the 
same. 


Postcommunion 


ONCÉDE, quzsumus, omní- 
potens Deus, Sanctum 

nos Spíritum votis promeréri 
sédulis: quátenus ejus grátia, 
et ab ómnibus liberémur ten- 
tatiónibus et peccatérum-nos- 
trórum, indulgéntiam percí- 
pere mereámur, Per Dómi- 
num... in unitáte ejüsdem. 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O almighty God, to de- 
serve the Holy Spirit by con- 
stant prayer, whereby His 
grace may deliver us from all 
temptations, and we may he 
worthy to obtain the forgive- 
ness of our sins. Through... 
in the unity of the same. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1432 VOTIVE MASS OF MOST HOLY EUCHARIST 


Wotibe Mass of the Most Blessed Sacrament, 


(White) 
Mass, as on the feast of Corpus Christi, page 635, except: 
The Alleluia at the end of the Introit, Offertory and Com- 


munion is omitted: 


The sequence is not said. After Septua- 


gesima instead of the Alleluia and its verse, the Tract as fol- 


lows is said instead. 


Tract. Malach. 1, 11 


From the rising of the sun 
even to the going down, My 
name is great among the gen- 
tiles. Y. And in every place 
there is sacrifice, and there is 
offered to My name a clean 
oifering: for My name is great 
among the gentiles. Y. Prov. 
9, 5. Come, eat My bread: and 
drink the wine, which I have 
mingled for you. 


Ab ortu solis usque ad oc- 
cásum, magnum est nomen 
meum in.géntibus. V. Et in 
omni loco sacrificátur, et of- 
fértur nómini meo oblatio 


munda: quia magnum est no- 


men meum in géntibus. Y. 
Prov. 9, 5. Venite, comédite 
panem meum: et bíbite vi- 
num, quod míscul vobis. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Luke 24, 
35. The disciples knew the Lord 
in the breaking of bread. Alle- 
luia. V. John 6, 56, 57. My flesh 
is meat indeed, and My blood 
is drink indeed: he that eateth 
My flesh, and drinketh My 
blood, abideth in Me, and I 
in him. Alleluia. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Luc. 24, 
35. Cognovérunt discípuli Dó- 
minum Jesum in fractióne 
panis. Allelüja. Y. Joan. 6, 
56,57. Caro mea vere est cibus, 
et sanguis meus vere est po- 
tus: qui mandücat meam car- 
nem, et bibit meum sángui- 
nem, in me manet, et ego in 
eo. Allelüja. 


"Votive Mass of the Holp Cross, (Red) 


Mass, as on the feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, 


September 14, page 1195, except: 


Prayer 


Gop, Who wast pleased to 

sanctify the standard: of 
the life-giving cross with the 
blood of Thine only-begotten 
Son, grant, we beseech Thee, 
that those who rejoice in hon- 
oring the same holy cross may 
also everywhere rejoice in Thy 
protection. Through the same. 


EUS, qui unigéniti Filii 

tui pretlóso sanguine, 
vivifice Crucis vexillum sanc- 
tificdre volufsti: concéde, 
quzsumus; eos, qui ejusdem 
sanctz Crucis gaudent hon- 
óre, tua quoque ubíque pro- 
tectióne gaudére. Per eimdem 
Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS OF THE HOLY CROSS 


1433 


In Paschal-time, the following Prayer is said in Masses of the 
Holy Cross, in place of the foregoing. . 


Prayer 


EUs, qui pro nobis Fílium 

tuum crucis patibulum 
subire voluisti, ut inimici a 
nobis expelleres potestatem: 
concéde nobis famulis tuis; 
ut resurrectionis grátiam con- 
sequamur. Per eümdem Dó- 
minum. 


cop, Who didst will that 

for our sakes Thy Son 
Should undergo the torment of 
the ‘cross, to free us from the 
power of the enemy, grant us, 
Thy servants, that we may at- 
tain unto the glory of the resur- 
rection. Through the same. 


Epistle. Philip. 2, 8-11 


Léetio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Philippénses. 


RATRES: Christus factus 
est pro nobis obédiens 
usque ad mortem, mortem au- 
tem crucis. Propter quod et 
Deus exaltávit illum, et doná- 
vit illi nomen, quod est super 
omne nomen: (Ric genuflec- 
titur) ut in nómine Jesu om- 
ne genuflectátur, celéstium, 
terréstrium, et infernórum et 
omnis lingua confiteátur, quia 
Dóminus Jesus Christus in 
glória est Dei Patris. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Philippians. 


RETHREN: Christ became 

for us obedient unto the 
death of the cross. Wherefore 
God also hath exalted Him, 
and hath given Him a name 
which is above every name: 
(Here all kneel) that in the 
name of Jesus every knee 
should bow, of those that are 
in heaven, on earth, and under 
the earth; and that every 
tongue should confess that the 
Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory 
of God the. Father. 


From Septuagesima to Easter, the Greater Alleluia is femunen 


by the Tract. 


Tract 


Adorámus te, Christe, et 
benedícimus tibi: quia per 
Crucem tuam redemisti mun- 
dum. V. Tuam Crucem ado- 
rámus, Dómine, tuam glorió- 
sam  recólimus passiénem: 
miserére nostri, qui passus es 
pro nobis. Y, O Crux benedíc- 
ta, que sola fuísti digna por- 
tare. Regem celérum, et Dó- 
sninum. 


We adore Thee, O Christ, 
and bless Thee, because by 'Thy 
cross Thou didst redeem the 
world. Y. We adore Thy cross, 
O Lord, we commemorate Thy 
glorious passion; have mercy 
on us, Thou Who didst suffer 
for us. Y. O blessed cross, that 
alone wast: worthy to bear the 
Lord and king of the heavens. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1434 


VOTIVE MASS OF PASSION OF OUR LOAD 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 95, 
10. Say ye among the gentiles, 
that the Lord hath reigned 
from the wood. Alleluia. Y. 
Sweet the wood, sweet the nails, 
sweet the burden they bore, 
for thou alone, O Tree, wast 
deemed worthy to bear Him 
Who is’ Lord and king of 
heaven, Alleluia, 


Allelája, allelüja. Y. Ps. 95, 
10. Dícite in gentibus quia 
Dóminus regnavit a ligno. Al- 
Jelüja. Y. Dulce lignum, dul- 
ces clavos, dulcia ferens pon- 
dera: quz sola fuisti digna 
sustinere Regem colorum, et 
Dóminum. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Matt. 20, 17-19 


* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. p 

T THAT lime: Jesus took 

the twelve disciples 
apart, and said to them: Be- 
hold we go up to Jerusalem, 
and the Son of man shall be 
betrayed to the chief priests 
and the scribes, and they shall 
condemn Him to death. And 
shall deliver Him to the 
gentiles to be mocked, and 
Scourged, and crucified, and 
the third day He shall rise 
again. 


MH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secüándum Matthzum. 


N ILLO témpore: Assümpsit 
Jesus duódecim discípu- 
los secréto, et ait illis: Ecce 
ascéndimus Jerosólymam et 
Fílius hóminis tradétur prin- 
cípibus sacerdótum, et scribis, 
et condemnábant eum morte; 
et tradent eum géntibus ad 
illudéndum, et flagellándum, 
et crucifigéndum et tértia die 
resürget. 


Secret 


(D ihis oblation, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, 
purge us of all our offenses, as, 
upon the altar of the cross, it 
took away the sins of the whole 
world, Through the same. 


ze oblatio, Dómine, 

quaesumus, ab ómnibus 
nos purget offénsis: que in 
ara Crucis étiam totíus mundi 
tulit offénsum. Per eümdem 
Dóminum. 


Mass of the Passion of Our Blessed Lord, (Purple) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Phil. 2, 8,9 
HE Lord Jesus Christ hum- UMILJÁvzT semetipsum 
bied Himself unto death, Dóminus Jesus Chris- 
even the death of the cross; tus usque ad mortem, mortem 
wherefere God also hath ex- autem crucis: propter quod 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS OF PASSION OF OUR LORD 1435 


et Deus exaltávit illum, et do- alted Him, and hath given Him 
návit illi nomen, quod est Su- a name which is above every 
per omne nomen. Ps. 88, 2. name. Ps. 88, 2. The mercies 
Misericórdias Dómini in etér- of the Lord I will sing forever: 
num cantabo: in generatión- to generation and generation. 
em et generatiónem. V. Gló- Y. Glory. 


ria Patri. 
Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer , 
Ldxcie Jesu Christe, qui LORD Jesus Christ, Who 
de celis ad terram de didst come down to earth 


sinu Patris  descendísti, et from heaven, from the bosom 
sánguinem tuum pretiósum of the Father; and didst pour 
in remissiónem peccatérum out Thy Precious Blood for the 
nostrórum fudísti: te humí- remission of sins, we humbly 
liter deprecámur; ut in die beseech Thee, that, on the day 
judícii, ad déxteram tuam au- of judgment, standing on Thy 
díre mereámur: Veníte, bene- right hand, we may be con- 
dicti. Qui vivis. on sidered worthy to hear: Come, 
ye blessed. Who livest. 


Lesson. Zach. 12, 10; 13, 6, 7 
Léctio Epístole Zácharíe ‘Lesson from Zacharias the 


Prophétz. l Prophet. 
æc dicit Dóminus: Ef- Hus saith the Lord: I will 
fúndum super domum pour out upon the house 


David, et super habitatóres of David, and upon the inhabi- 
Jerúsalem spiritum grátie et tants of Jerusalem, the spirit 
precum: et aspícient ad me, of grace, and of prayers: and 
quem confixérunt: et plan- they shalllook upon Me, Whom 
gent eum planctu quasi super they have. pierced: and they 
unigénitum, et dolébunt super shall mourn for Him as one 
eum, ut doléri solet in morte mourneth for an only son, and 
primogéniti. In die illa mag- they shall grieve over Him as 
nus erit planctus in Jerüsa- the manner is to grieve for the 
lem, ‘et dicétur: Quid sunt death of the first-born. In that 
plage iste in médio mánuum day there shall be a great 
tuárum? Et dicet: His plaga- lamentation in Jerusalem, and 
tus sum in domo eórum, qui it shall be said: What are these 
diligébant me. Framea susci- wounds in the midst of Thy 
táre super pastórem meum, hands? And He shallsay. With 
et super virum cohzeréntem these I was wounded in the 
mihi, dicit Dóminus exercí- house of them that loved Me. 
tuum: péreute pastórem, et Awake, O sword, against My 
dispergéntur oves, ait Dómi- shepherd, and against the man 
nus omnipotens, that cleaveth to Me, saith the 

Lord of hosts: strike the shep- 
herd and the sheep shall be scattered, saith the Lord Almighty. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


J486 VOTIVE MASS OF PASSION OF OUR LORD 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 68, 21, 22 


My heart hath expected re- Impropérium  exspectávit 
proach and misery; and I cor meum, et misériam: et 


Jooked for one that would grieve 
together with Me, and there 
was none: I sought one that 


sustinui, qui simul mecum 
contristarétur, et non fuit: 
consolantem me quesivi, et 


would comfort Me, and I non invéni. V. Dedérunt in 
found none. Y. They gave Me escam meam fel, et in siti 
gall for My food, and in My mea potavérunt me acéto. 
thirst they gave Me vinegar 

to drink. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Hail  Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ave 
Thou, Our King: Thou alone Rex noster, tu solus nostros 
didst pity our errors: obedient es miserátus erróres: Patri 
to the Father, Thou wast led obédiens, ductus es ad cru- 
to be crucified, as a meek Jamb cifigéndum, ut agnus mansué- 


to the slaughter, Alleluia. 


tus ad occisiónem. Allelája. 


Tract. Is. 53, 4, 5 


Surely He hath borne our in- 
firmities, and carried our sor- 
rows. And we have thought 
Him as it were a leper, and as 
one struck by God and afflicted. 
y. But He was wounded for our 
iniquities, He was bruised. for 
our sins. JY. The chastisement 
of our peace was upon Him: 
and by His bruises we are 
healed. 


Vere languóres nostros ipse 
tulit, et dolóres nostros ipse 
portávit. Y. Et nos putávimus 
eum quasi leprósum, et per- 
cüssum 2 Deo, et humiliátum. 
y. Ipse autem vulnerátus est 
propter iniquitátes nostras, 
attrítus est propter scélera 
nostra. Y. Disciplina pacis 
nostre super eum: et livóre 
ejus sanáti sumus. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. JY. Hail 
Thou, our King: Thou alone 
didst pity our errors: obedient 
to the Father, Thou wast led 
to be crucified, as a meek lamb 
to the slaughter. Alleluia. Y. 
Glory to Thee, to Thee ho- 
sanna; to Thee triumph and 


Allelüja, allelija. V. Ave 
Rex noster, tu solus nostros 
es miserátus erróres: Patri 
obédiens, ductus es ad cruci- 
figéndum, ut agnus mansué- 
tus ad occisiónem. Allelija. V. 
Tibi glória, hosánna: tibi tri- 
umphus et victória: tibi sum- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS OF PASSION OF OUR LORD 


mz laudis et honóris coróna. 
Allelija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


143. 


victory; to Thee the crown of 
highest. praise and honor. Al- 
leluia. 


Gospel. John 19, 28-35 


"FW Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Sciens 
Jesu quia ómnia consum- 
máta sunt, ut consummarétur 
Scriptura, dixit: Sitio. Vas 
ergo erat pósitum acéto ple- 
num. Illi autem spóngiam ple- 
nam acéto, hyssópo circumpo- 
néntes, obtulérunt, ori ejus. 
Cum ergo accepísset Jesus 
acétum, dixit: Consummátum 
est. Et inclináto cápite trádi- 
dit spiritum. Judzi ergo (quó- 
niam Parascéve erat), ut non 
remanérent in cruce córpora 
sabbato (erat enim magnus 
dies ille Sábbati), rogavérunt 
Pilátum ut frangeréntur eó- 
rum crura, et tolleréntur. Ve- 
nérunt ergo mílites: et primi 
quidem fregérunt crura, et 
altérius, qui crucifixus est 
cum eo. Ad Jesum autem cum 
venissent, ut vidérunt eum 
jam mórtuum, non fregérunt 
ejus crura, sed unus mílitum 
láncea latus ejus apéruit, et 
continuo exivit sanguis et 
aqua. Et qui vidit, testimó- 
nium perhíbuit: et verum est 
testimónium ejus. 


. Œ Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 

T THAT lime, Jesus know- 

ing that all things were 
now accomplished, that the 
Scripture might be fulfilled, 
Said: I thirst. Now there was 
8, vessel set there full of vine- 
gar. And they putting a sponge 
full of vinegar about hyssop, 
put it to His mouth. Jesus 
therefore when He had taken 
the vinegar, said: It is con- 
summated. Then the Jews (be- 
cause it was the Parasceve), 
that the bodies might not re- 
main upon the cross on the 
Sabbath-day (for that was a 
great Sabbath-day) besought 
Pilate that their legs might be 
broken, and that they might 
be taken away. The soldiers, 
therefore, came: and they broke 
the legs of the first, and of the 
other that was crucified with 
him. But after they were come 
to Jesus, when they saw that 
He was already dead, they did 
not break His legs. But one of 
the soldiers with a spear opened 
His side, and immediately there 
came out blood and water. And 
he that saw it hath given testi- 
mony, and his testimony is 
true. 


Offertory 


Insurrexérunt in me viri 


Wicked men rose up against 


iniqui: absque misericórdia Me; they sought to slay Me 
quesiérunt me interficere: et without mercy; and they did 
non Depercérunt in fáciem not spare to spit in My face; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1438 


with lances they wounded Me, 
and all My bones are broken. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


VOTIVE MASS OF BLESSED VIRGIN 


meam Spüere: lánceis suis 
vulneravérunt me, et concüs- 
sa sunt ómnia ossa mea. 


Secret 


AY the sacrifice offered 

Thee, O Lord, by the 
passion of Thine only-begotten 
Son, interceding for us, ever 
vivify and strengthen us. Who 
with Thee. 


Preface No. 4, page 803. 


BLÁTUM tibi, Domine, sa- 

crificium, intercedénte 
unigéniti Fíli tui passióne, 
vivificet nos semper, et mú- 
niat. Qui tecum. 


Communion. Ps.21,17,18 


They have dug My hands and 
feet; they have numbered all 
My bones. U 


Fodérunt manus meas, et 
pedes meos: dinumeravérunt 
ómnia ossa mea. 


Postcommunion 


LoRD Jesus Christ, Son of 

the living God, Who at 
ihe sixth hour didst ascend the 
scaffold of the cross for the 
redemption of the world, and 
didst shed Thy. Precious Blood 
for the remission of our sins, 
we humbly beseech 'Thee that 
after our death Thou grant us 
to enter the gates of paradise 
rejoicing. Who livest. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ÓMINE Jesu Christe, Fili 

Dei vivi, qui hora sexta 

pro redemptióne mundi Cru- 
cis patíbulum ascendísti, et 
sánguinem tuum pretiósum in 
remissiónem peccatorum nos- 
trorum fudisti: te humiliter 
deprecamur; ut post obitum 
nostrum, paradisi januas nos 
gaudenter, introire concedas: 


. Qui vivis. 


. "Potioe Mass of the Blessed Virgin, (White) 


Mass as given after the Common of her feasts, page 1399. 


Wotibe Masses for Various Occasions 


Among other Votive Masses, which it is permitted (in places 
where by privilege the corresponding feast is kept) to celebrate 
in honor 0] the Mysteries of the Life and Passion of our Blessed 
Lord, are: Of the Most Holy Name of Jesus, page 169; Of the 
Most Precious Blood, page 1083; Of the Holy Family, Jesus, 
Mary and Joseph, page 178; also those of our Blessed Lady: 
Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin, page 851; and 
the Seven Dolors of the Blessed Virgin, page 966, : 


In honor of other saints, votive Masses are said as on their 
feast days. the Paschal rite being followed in its season. For 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS FOR ELECTION OF A POPE 1435 


the Introit Gaudeamus, some other from the Common of Saints 
is substituted. 


The following pages contain all such votive Masses which in 
times of public need are, by order of the Pope or the Bishop, 
sung, often with much solemnity, to implore in the most 
efficacious way God's help. In such cases the Votive Mass 
chosen admits the chant of the Nicene Creed, as also (pro- 
vided it be not one of a penitential character) of the Gloria, 
and all Commemorations or additional Prayers are omitted, 


lass for the Election of a Pope, (Red) 


Celebrated in Times of Vacancy of the Holy See 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 1 Kings 2, 35 


uscrriso mihi sacerdó- 
tem fidélem, qui juxta 
cor meum et ánimam meam 
fáciet: et zdificábo ei domum 
fidélem, et ambulábit coram 
Christo meo cunctis diébus. 
Ps, 131, 1. Meménto, Dómine, 
David: et omnis mansuetüdi- 
nis ejus. Y. Glória Patri. | 


WILL raise Me up à faith- 

ful priest, who shall do ac« 
cording to My heart and My 
soul: and I will build him & 
faithful house: and he shak 
walk all day before My 
anointed. Ps. 131, 1. O Lord, 
remember David, and all his 
meekness. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ÜOPPLICI, Dómine, humili- 

táte depóscimus: ut sa- 
crosancte Romane Ecclésim 
concédat Pontificem illum 
tua imménsa píetas; qui et 
pio in nos stüdio semper tibi 
plácitus, et tuo pópulo pro 
salübri regímine sit assidue 
ad glóriam tui nóminis reve- 
réndus. Per Dóminum. 


E most humbly entreat 

Thee, O Lord, that Thy 
boundless goodness may grant 
as bishop to the most holy 
Roman Church one who shall 
ever be both pleasing to Thee, 
by his loving zeal in our regard, 
and, by his beneficent rule, 
deeply revered by Thy people 
to the glory of Thy name. 
Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Heb. 4, 16; 5, 1-7 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Hebreos. 


ATRES: Adeámus cum 
fidicia ad thronum 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Hebrews. 

RETHREN, let us go there- 
fore with confidence to 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1440 


the throne of grace: that we 
may obtain mercy, and find 
grace in seasonable aid. For 
every high priest taken from 
among men, is ordained for 
men in the things that apper- 
tain to God, that he may offer 
up gifts and sacrifice for sins: 
Who can have compassion on 
them that are ignorant and 
that err: because he himself 
also is compassed with infirm- 
ity. And therefore he ought, 
as for the people, so also for 
himself, to offer for sins. Nei- 
ther doth any man take the 
honor to himself, but he that is 
called by God, as Aaron was. 
So Christ also did not glorify 
Himself, that He might be 
made & high priest: but He 
that said unto Him: Thou art 
My Son, this day have I be- 
gotten Thee. As He saith also 
in another place: Thou art a 
priest forever, according to the 
order of Melchisedech. Who in 
the days of His flesh, with a 
strong cry and tears, offering 
up prayers and supplications 
to Him that was able to save 
Him from death, was heard for 
His reverence, 


VOTIVE MASS FOR ELECTION OF A POPE 


grátie: ut misericórdiam con- 
sequamur, et grátiam inve- 
niámus in auxílio opportüno. 
Omnis namque póntifex ex 
homínibus assimptus, pro 
homínibus constitüitur in iis, 
que sunt ad Deum, ut offerat 
dona, et sacrificia pro peccá- 
tis: qui condolére possit iis, 
qui ignórant, et errant, quó- 
niam et ipse circümdatus est 
infrmitáte, et proptérea de- 
bet, quemádmodum pro pó- 
pulo ita étiam et pro seme- 
típso offérre pro peccátis. Nec 
quisquam sumit sibi honórem, 
Sed qui vocátur a Deo, tam- 
quam Aaron. Sic et Christus 
non semetipsum clarificávit 
ut póntifex fieret: sed qui lo- 
cütus est ad eum: Fílius meus 
es tu, ego hódie génui te. 
Quemádmodum et in álio loco 
dicit: Tu es sacérdos in etér- 
num, secündum órdinem Mel- 
chisedech. Qui in diébus car- 
nis sue preces supplicatio- 
nésque ad eum, qui possit il- 
lum salvum fácere a morte, 
cum clamóre válido, et lácry- 
mis ófferens, exauditis est pro 
sua reveréntia, 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
oy the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re~ 


placed by the Greater Alleluia, 


Gradual. Lev.21, 10 


The high priest, the priest 
great among his brethren, 
upon whose head the oil of 
unction hath been poured, and 
whose hands have been conse- 
crated for the priesthood, and 
who hath been vested with the 
holy vestments: it hehooved 
him in all things to be made 


Péntifex sacérdos magnus 
inter fratres suos, super cujus 
caput fusum est unctiónis 
óleum, et cujus manus in sa- 
cerdótio consecrate sunt, ves- 
litüsque est sanctis véstibus: 
débuit per ómnia frátribus 
similári. Y. Heb. 2, 17. Ut mis- 
éricors fíeret, et fidélis pónti- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


av 


VOTIVE MASS FOR ELECTION OP A POPE 


fex ad Deum: ut repropitiá- 
ret delícta pópull. 


1441 


like to his brethren. Y. Heb.2, 
17. That he might become a 
merciful and faithful high 


priest with God: to make a reconciliation for the sins of the 


people. 


Lesser Alleluia 


-Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Lev. 
21, 8. Sacérdos sit sanctus, si- 
tui exsültent. Y. Propter Da- 
minus, qui sanctífico vos. Al- 
lelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Lev. 21, 
8. Let the priest be holy, as I 
also am holy, the Lord Who 
sanctify you. Alleluia. 


Tract. Ps. 131, 8, 10 


Surge, Domine, in réquiem 
tuam: tu et arca sanctifica- 
tiónis tue. V. Sacerdótes tui 
induántur justitiam, et sancti 
tui exsültent. Y. Propter D- 
vid servum tuum, non avértas 
fáciem Christi tui. 


Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest- 
ing-place, Thou and the ark 
of Thy sanctification. JV. Let 
Thy priests be clothed with 
justice, and Thy saints rejoice. 
J. For Thy servant David's 
sake, turn not away the face 
of Thy anointed. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelája, allelija. Y. Lev. 
21, 8. Sacérdos sit sanctus, si- 
eut et ego sanctus sum, Dó- 
minus, qui sanctífico vos. Al- 
Jelája. Y. Joan. 10, 14. Ego 
sum pastor bonus: et cognós- 
co oves meas, et cognóscunt 
me meg, Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Lev. 21, 
8. Let the priest be holy, as I 
also am holy, the Lord Who 
sanctify you. Alleluia. Y. John 
10, 14. 1 am the good shepherd: 
and I know My sheep, and 
Mine know Me, Alleluia. 


Gospel, If you love me, from the Mass om Whitsun-Eve 


(Vigil of Pentecost), page 595. 


Offertory, 3, Esd. 5, 40 


Non participéntur sancta, 
donec exsürgat póntifex in 
ostensiónem et veritátem. (T. 
P. Allelüja.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


They shall not partake of 
holy things, until a high priest 
shall arise for evidence and 
truth. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1442 VOTIVE MASS FOR CONSECKATION OF BISHOP 


Secret 


AY the abundance of Thy 
(D loving-kindness grant 
unto us, O Lord, that, by the 
sacred gifts which we rever- 
ently offer Thee, we may have 
cause to rejoice that a pontiff 
pleasing to Thy majesty pre- 
sides over the conduct of our 
Holy Mother Church. Through 
our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


væ nobis, Dómine, abun- 

dantia pietátis indülge- 
at: ut per sacra münera, que 
tibi reverénter offérimus, grg- 
tum majestáti tue Pontificem 
Sancta Matris Ecclésie regí- 
mini preésse gaudeámus, Per 
Dóminum. 


Communion. Ex. 29, 29, 30 


The high priest who shall be 
appointed shall wear the holy 
vesture, and shall enter into 
the tabernacle of the testimony, 
to minister in the sanctuary. 
(P. T. Alleluia.) i 


Veste sancta utétur pónti- 
fex, qui fúerit constitútus, et 
ingrediétur tabernáculum tes- 
timónii, ut minístret in sanc- 
tuário. (T. P. Allelája.) 


Postcommunion 


INCE We have been re- 

freshed with the sacra- 
ment of Thy precious body and 
blood, O Lord, let the marvel- 
ous grace of Thy majesty make 
us joyful by granting us a su- 
preme pontiff who may both 
instruct Thy people in virtue 
and fill the hearts of the faith- 
ful with the fragrance of spi- 
ritual odors. Who livest. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


RETIÓSI corporis et sán- 
guinis tui nos, Dómine, 
sacraménto reféctos, mirífico 
tue majestatis grátia de illius 
summi Pontíficis concessióne 
letíficet: qui et plebem tuam 
virtutibus instruat, et fidelium 
mentes spiritualium aroma- 
tum odore perfundat: Qui 
vivis. 


Hass on the Dap of Election and Coronation 
of the Pope and on the Anniversaries, (Red) 


On the days of the election and coronation of the Pope, and 
on the anniversary of those days, the Mass on the feast of the 
Chair of St. Peter at Rome (page 868) is said, but the oration 


O God, the Shepherd and Ruler of all the faithful" (page 


1444) is recited in place of the orations in this Mass, and the 


Credo is said. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VOTIVE MASS FOR CONSECRATION OF BISHOP 1443 


Mass for the Consecration of a Bishop 
The Mass of the day is said, but the. following prayers are 


added to those of the Mass, 
Hanc igitur, as given below. 


under one conclusion and th 


Prayer 


DÉSTO supplicatiónibus 

nostris, omnópotens 

eus: ut, quod humilitátis 

nostre geréndum est ministé- 

rio, tue virtütis impleátur ef- 
féctu. Per Dóminum. 


IVE ear, O God almighty, 

unto our prayers, and by 

Thy power, do Thou fulfil that 

which is to be done by our lowly 
ministry. ‘Through our Lord. 


The Consecrating Bishop and the Bishop who is being con- 
*. Secrated say the following, substituting me, Thy servant (me 
' famulo tuo) in the place of this Thy servant (hoc famulo tuo). 


Secret 


OsciPE, Dómine, münera, 
MJ que tibi offérimus pro 
hoc fámulo tuo: ut propitius 
An eo.tua dona custódias, Per 
'Dóminum. 


ECEIVE, O Lord, the gifts 
which we offer to Thee in 
behalf of this Thy servant, that 
Thou mayest mercifully keep 
in him Thy gifts. Through our 
Lord. - 


Within the Action (The Hanc Igitur) 
The Consecrating Bishop and the Bishop who is, being con- 
secrated say the following, making the necessary changes from 


the third to the first person, as indicated. 


ANC ígitur oblatiónem 

servitütis nostre, sed et 
cunctae familie tue, quam tibi 
offérimus étiam pro hoc fá- 
mulo tuo, quem ad Episcopá- 
tus órdinem promovére dig- 
nátus es, quesumus, Dómine, 
ut placátus accípias, et pro- 
pítius in eo tua dona custó- 
dias: ut, duod divíno münere 
consecütus est, divínis ef- 
féctibus exsequatur: diésque 
nostros in tua pace dispónas, 
atque ab etérna damnatióne 
nos.éripi, et in electórum tuó- 
rum jübeas grege numerári. 
Per Christum Dóminum nos- 
irum. Amen. P 


E THEREFORE  beseech 

"Thee, O Lord, to be ap- 
peased, and to receive this of- 
fering which we Thy servants, 
and likewise Thy whole house- 
hold, do make unto Thee. We 
make it also on behalf of this 
(me) Thy servant whom Thou 
hast vouchsafed to advance to 
the order of bishops. In Thy 
mercy keep in him (me) Thy 
gifts, so that by divine grace 
he (I) may accomplish what 
by divine grace he has (I have) 
received. Order our days in 
Thy peace, and command that 
we be rescued from eternal, 
damnation and received into 
the fold of Thine elect. 
Through our Lord. Amen. ` 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1444 ANNIVERSARY OF CONSECRATION OF BISHOP 


Postcommunion 


E PRAY 'Thee, O Lord, ful- LENUM, Quesumus, Dó- 
fil ‘in us Thy mercy, ; mine, innobis remédi- 
and graciously make us such um tue miseratiónis operáre: 
to be and so to persevere, that ac tales nos esse pérfice pro- 
we may be able to please Thee pítius, et sic fovéri; ut tibi 
in all things. Through our in ómnibus placére valeámus. 


Lord. 


Per Déminum. 


Mass on the Anniversary of the Election and 
Consecration of a Bishop, (white) 


Mass Sacerdotes tul, page 1341, except: 


Prayer 


O cop, the shepherd and 
ruler of all the faithful, 
look propitiously upon Thy ser- 
vant N., whom Thou hast been 
pleased to appoint pastor over 
Thy Church of N., grant, we 
beseech Thee, that both by 
word and by example he may 
edify those over whom he is 
placed, and, together with the 
flock committed to his care, 
may attain unto life everlasting. 


EUs, ómnium fidélium 

pastor et rector, fám- 
ulum tuum N., quem pastór- 
em Ecclésiæ N. præésse vol- 
uísti, propítius réspice: da ei, 
quaesumus, verbo et exémplo, 
quibus preest, profícere; ut 
ad vitam, ung cum grege sibi 
crédito, pervéniat sempitér- 
nam. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. Heb. 5, 1-4 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Hebrews. 

RETHREN: Every high 

priest taken from among 
men, is ordained for men in 
the things that appertain to 
God, that he may offer up gifts 
and sacrifices for sins: Who 
can have compassion on them 
that are ignorant and that err: 
because he himself also is com- 
passed with infirmity. And 
therefore he ought, as for the 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Hebreos. ` 


RATRES: Omnis Pontifex 

ex homínibus assümp- 
tus, pro homínibus constitü- 
itur in iis, que sunt ad Deum, 
ut ófferat dona, et sacrificia 
pro peccátis: qui condolére 
possit iis, qui ignórant, et er- 
rant: quóniam et ipse circüm- 
datus est infirmitáte: et prop- 
térea debet, quemádmodum 
pro pópulo, ita étiam et pro 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NIVERSARY OF CONSECRATION OF BISHOP 1445 


) offérre pro peccá- people, so also for himself, to 
quisquam sumit sibi offer for sins. Neither doth any 
, sed qui vocátur a man take the honor to him- 


iquam Aaron. 


self, but he that is called by 
God, as Aaron was. 


Gospel. Mark. 13, 33-37 


uéntia sancti Evan- 
indum Marcum. 


> témpore: Dixit Je- 
discípulis suis: Vi- 
ilate, et oráte: nes- 
1 quando tempus sit. 
no, qui péregre pro- 
liquit domum suam, 
servis suis potestá- 
sque Óperis, et jan- 
ecépit ut  vígilet. 
ergo, (nescitis enim 
lóminus domus vén- 
an média nocte, an 
itu, an mane) ne 
rit repénte, invéniat 
iéntes. Quod: autem 


% Continuation of the- holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 
THAT lime, Jesus said 

to His disciples, Take 

ye heed, watch and pray. For 
ye know not when the time is, 
Even as a man who going inte 
a far country, left his house; 
and gave authority to his ser- 
vants over every work, and 
commanded the porter to 
watch. Watch ye therefore 
(for you know not when the 
lord of the house, cometh: at 
even, or at midnight, or at the 
cock-crowing, or in the morn- 
ing), lest coming on a sudden, 


co, ómnibus dico: he find you sleeping. And what 
:  Xsaytoyou,Isay to all: Watch. 

Secret 
quesumus, Dó- ooxiNG with favor upon 


? placáre munéri- 
fámulum tuum N., 
Stórem ecclésie N. 
oluísti, assídua pro- 
"übérna. Per Dómin- 


the gifts we offer, do 
Thou, O Lord, we beseech Thee, 
at all times guide and protect 
N., Thy servant, whom Thou 
hast appointed chief shepherd 
of the Church of N. Through 
our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


nos, quesumus, Dó- 
divíni  sacra-. 


3e, 
rcéptio prótegat: et 
tuum N., quem pas- 
»clésie MN. preésse 
una cum commisso 
3, Salvet semper, et 
er Dóminum. 


AY our having received 

this divine sacrament be 

to us, we beseech Thee, O Lord, 
a sure defense: and may it ever 
impart health and strength to 
Thy servant N., whom it has 
pleased Thee to set up as chief 
shepherd over the Church of 
N., and may it in like manner 


fit to the flock which Thou hast entrusted to his 


‘rough our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1446 MASS FOR BRIDE AND BRIDEGROOM 


For Conferring of Holp Orders 


Ordinations are usually held on the Ember Saturd 
these prayers are added to those of the Mass. ` 


Prayer 

EAR, O Lord, wo beseech eu quaesum! 

Thee, the prayers of mine, süpplicur 
those who humbly pray to- et devóto tibi péctor 
gether, guard and continually lántes perpétua de 
defend those who with devout custódi: ut, nullus p 
hearts worship Thee, that we tiónibus impediti libe 
may not. be hindered by any vitütem tuis semper 
trouble, but may always freely ámus offficiis, Per Dói 
serve Thee. Through our Lord. ' 


Secret 
E PRAY Thee, O Lord, do UIS, quesumus, 
become active in these operáre mysté 


mysteries, that we may offer hæc tibi münera dign 
these gifts to Thee with fitting bus offerámus. Per D 
devotion. Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 
N THY goodness, lift up, O vos tuis, Dómir 
Lord, by .Thine abiding Sacraméntis, | 


help those whom Thou dost attólle benignus au; 
refresh by Thy sacraments: so tue redemptiónis of 
that we may receive the fruit mystériis capiám 

of Thy redemption both in bus. Qui vivis. 
these mysteries and in the con- ` 
duct of our lives, Who livest. 


Marriage Service and Aass 


The Ritual for the Celebration of Matrimony 


The priest, vested in surplice and white stole (c 
Nuptial Mass is to follow, vested as for Mass, yet wii 
maniple), in the hearing of the chosen witnesses, asks 
and the woman separately as follows, concerning theii 
First he asks the bridegroom, who should stand at 
hand of the bride: ; : 

N., wilt thou take N., here present, for thy lawful 
cording to the rite of our holy Mother the Church? 


FH. I will. 

Then the priest asks the bride: 

N., wilt thou take N., here present, for thy lawful 
according ‘to the rite of our holy Mother the Church 


Bf. x will, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MARRIAGE SERVICE 14468 


i ir mui t, iest bids the 
nat po n d t dam ee rie neha whee they pledge 
themselves each to the other as follows, repeating the words 
after the priest. 

The man first says: 
N.N., take thee, N.N., for my lawful wife, to have and to 
» hold, from this day foward, for better, for worse, for 
richer, for poorer, in sickness and in health, until death do 
us part. 
Then the woman says: 
N.N., iake thee, N.N., for my lawful husband, to have 
9 and to hold, from this day forward, for better, for worse, 
for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in health, until death 
do us part. i 
The priest then says: 
Go conjungo vos in mat- JOIN you together in mar- 
rimonium, in nomine riage, in the name of the 
Patris, Het Filii, et Spiritus Father, 4 and of the Son, and 
Sancti. of the Holy Ghost. 
Amen. Amen. 


He then sprinkles them with holy water. This done, he 
blesses the ring, saying: 


DJUTORIUM nostrum in UR help is in the name of 
nomine Domini. the Lord. 
W. Qui fecit celum et ter- W. Who hath made heaven 
ram. and earth, 


V. Domine, exaudi oratio- ^Y. O Lord, hear my prayer. 
nem meam. 
BY. Et clamor meus ad Te W. And let my cry come unto 


veniat. Thee. 
¥. Dominus vobiscum. Y. The Lord be with you. 
BY. Et cum spiritu tuo. W. And with thy spirit. 
Oremus Let us pray 
Br HX Domine, an- LESS, 4H O Lord, this ring, 
nulum hunc, quem nos which we bless 8 in Thy 


in Tuo nomine benedicimus, name, that she who shall wear 
"tH ut que eum gestaverit, it, keeping true faith unto her 
fidelitatem integram suo spouse, may abide in Thy peace 
Sponso tenens, in pace et vo- and in obedience to Thy will, 
luntate Tua permaneat, atque and ever live in mutual love. 
in mutua charitate semper Through Christ our Lord. 
vivat. Per Christum Domi- HW. Amen. 
num nostrum. 

BY. Amen. 


Then the priest sprinkles the ring with holy water in the 
form of a cross; and the bridegroom having received the ring 
from the hand of the priest places it on the third finger of the 
left hand of the bride, saying: : ; 

With this ring I thee wed and I plight unto thee my troth. 

Then the priest says: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1446b 


N the name of the Father 
8&3 and of the Son and of 
the Holy Ghost. Amen. 
This done, the priest adds: 
y. Confirm, O God, that 
which Thou hast wrought in 


us. 

Bí. From Thy holy temple, 
which is in Jerusalem. 

Y. Lord, have mercy. 

BY. Christ, have mercy. 

¥. Lord, have mercy. 

Our Father, etc. 

y. And lead us not into 
temptation. 

RY. But deliver us from evil. 

y. Save Thy servants. 

B. Who hope in Thee, O my 
God. 

Y. Send them help, O Lord, 
from Thy holy place. 

RY. And defend them out of 
Sion. 

Y. Be unto them, Lord, a 
tower of strength. 

RY. From the face of the 
enemy. 

X. O Lord, hear my prayer. 


BY. And let my cry come unto 
Thee. 
V. The Lord be with you. 
Ij. And with thy spirit. 
Let us pray 
cox down with favor, O 
Lord, we beseech Thee, 
upon these Thy servants, and 
graciously protect this Thine 
ordinance, whereby Thou hast 
provided for the propagation of 
mankind; that they who are 
joined together by Thy author- 
ity may be peserved by Thy 
help; through Christ our Lord. 
Amen, 


MARRIAGE SERVICE 


N nomine Patris, 9 et 
Fili, et Spiritus Sancti, 
Amen, 


Y. Confirma hoc, Deus, 
quod operatus es in nobis, ` 


ly. A templo sancto Tuo 
quod est in Jerusalem. 

Y. Kyrie eleison. 

W. Christe. eleison. 

Y. Kyrie eleison. 

Pater noster (secreto). 

X. Et ne nos inducas in 
tentationem. 

RY. Sed libera nos a malo. 

FX. Salvos fac servos Tuos. 

RY. Deus meus, sperantes in 
Te. 

¥. Mitte eis, Domine, aux- 
ilium de sancto. 

K. Et de Sion tuere eos, 


y. Esto eis, Domine, turris 
fortitudinis. 
BY. A facie inimici. 
Y. Domine, exaudi 
tionem meam. 
Ij. Et clamor meus ad Te 
veniat. 
Y. Dominus vobiscum. 
WY. Et cum spiritu tuo. 
Oremus 
.ESPICE, qusesumus, Do- 
mine, super bos fa- 
mulos Tuos, et institutis Tuis, 
quibus propagationem hu- 
mani generis ordinasti, be- 
nignus assiste, ub qui Te auc- 
tore jungunter, Te auxiliante 
serventur, Per Christum Do- 
minum nostrum. 
Amen, 


ora- 


Then, if the Nuptial Blessing is to be given, follows the 


fibass for tbe Bridegroom ano Bride 


(From “The Roman Missal.") 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NUPTIAL MASS 1447 


Deus Israel 


` The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Tob. 7, 15; 8, 17 


EUs, Israël, conjügat AY the God of Israel join 

vos: et ipse sit vobís- you together; and may 
cum, qui misértus est duóbus He be with you, Who was mer- 
ünicis: et nunc, Dómine, fac ciful to two only children: and 
eos plénius benedícere te. Ps. now, O Lord, make them bless 
127,1. Beati omnes qui timent ‘Thee more fully, Ps. 127, 1. 
Dóminum: qui ámbulant in Blessed are all they that fear 


Se OS 


viis ejus, y. Glória Patri. 


the Lord; that walk in His 
ways. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


XÁUDI nos, omnípotens 

et miséricors Deus: ut, 
quod nostro ministrátur offi- 
cio, tua benedictióne pótius 
impleátur, Per Dóminum. 


RACIOUSLY hear us, al- 
mighty and merciful 
God, that what is accomplished 
by our ministry may be per- 


fected by Thy blessing. Through 


our Lord. . 


Epistle. Eph.5, 22-23 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
1 Apóstoli ad Ephésios. 


RATRES: Mulferes. viris 
H suis súbditæ sint, sicut 
Dómino: quóniam vir caput 
est mulíeris: sicut Christus 
caput est Ecclésim: Ipse, sal- 
vátor córporis ejus: Sed sicut 
Ecclésia subjécta est Christo, 
ita et mulíeres viris suis in 
ómnibus. Viri, diligite uxóres 
vestras, sicut et Christus dil- 
éxit Ecclésiam, et seípsum 
trádidit pro ea, ut illam sanc- 
tificaret, mundans Javácro 
aque in verbo vite, ut exhib- 
éret ipse sibi gloriósam Ec- 
clésiam, non habéntem mác- 
ulam, aut rugam, aut áliquid 
hujüsmodi, sed ut sit sancta 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians. 


5 'RETHREN,,leb women be 
subject to their husbands 

as to the Lord; because the hus- 
band is the head of the wife, 
as Christ is the head of the 
Church: He is the Saviour of 
His Body. Therefore, as the 
Church is subject.to Christ, so 
also let the wives be to their 
hushands in all things. Hus- 
bands, love your wives, as 
Christ also loved the Church, 
and delivered Himself up for 
it; that He might sanctify it, 
cleasing it by the laver of water 
in the word of life; that He 
might present it to Himself a 
glorious Church, not having 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1448 


Spot, or wrinkle, nor any such 
ihing, but that it should be 
holy and without blemish. So 
also ought men to love their 
wives as their own bodies. He 
that loveth his wife, loveth 
himself: for no man ever hated 
his own flesh, but nourisheth 
and cherisheth it; as also Christ 
doth the Church: for we are 
members of His body, of His 
flesh, and of His bones. For 
this cause shall 3 man leave 
his father and mother, and 
Shall cleave to his wife; and 
they shall be two in one flesh. 
This is a great sacrament; but 
I speak in Christ and in the 
Church. Nevertheless, let every 
one of you in particular love 
his wife as himself, and let 
the wife fear her husband. 


From Septuagesima to Easter 


NUPTIAL MASS 


et immaculáta. Ita et viri de- 
bent dilígere uxóres suas, ut 
córpora sua. Qui suam uxór- 
em diligit, seífpsum diligit. 
Nemo enim unquam carnem 
suam ódio hábuit: sed nutrit, 
et fovet eam, sicut et Chris- 
tus Ecclésiam: quia membra 
sumus córporis ejus, de carne 
ejus, et de óssibus ejus. Prop- 
ter hoc relinquet homo pa- 
trem et matrem suam, et ad- 
herébit uxóri sue: et erunt 
duo in carne una. Sacramén- 
tum hoc magnum est, ego au- 
tem dico in Christo, et in 
Ecclésia. Verümtamen et vos 
singuli, unusquísque uxórem 
suam, sicut seípsum diligat: 
uxor autem tímeat virum su- 
um. 


the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 127, 3 


Thy wife shall be as a fruit- 


Uxor tua sicut vitis abün- 


ful vine on the sides of thy dans in latéribus domus tue. 
house. Y. Thy children as olive- Y. Filii tui sicut novélle oli- 
plants round about thy table. várum in circüitu mens: tue. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 19, ^ Allelüja, allelüja. V. Ps. 19, 
3. May the Lord send you help 3. Mittat vobis Dóminus aux- 
from the sanctuary, and de- ílium de sancto: et de Sion 
fend you out of Sion. Alleluia. tueátur vos. Allelüja. 


Ps. 127, 4-6 


Behold, thus shall the man Ecce sic benedicétur omnis 
be blessed that feareth the homo, qui timet Dóminum. y. 
Lord. Y. May the Lord bless benedicat tibi Dóminus ex 
thee out of Sion; and mayest Sion: et vídeas bona Jerüsa- 
thou see the good things of lem ómnibus diébus vite tue. 


Tract. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NUPTIAL MASS 1449 


Y. Et videas filios fnliórum Jerusalem all the days of thy 

tuórum: pax super Israél. life. Y. And mayest thou see 

i : ihy children's children: peace 
upon Israel, 


Greater A lleluia 


Allelija, allelaja. Y. Ps. Aleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 19, 3. 
19, 3. Mittat vobis Dóminus May the Lord send you help 
auxilium de Sancto: et de from the sanctuary and defend 
Sion tueátur vos. Allelija. V. you out of Sion; alleluia. Y. Ps. 
Ps. 133, 3. Benedicat. vobis 133, 3. May the Lord out of 
Dóminus ex Sion: qui fecit Sion bless you; He that made 
celum et terram. Alleldja. heaven and earth. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


. Gospel. Matt. 19, 3-6 


& Sequéntia sancti Evan- $4 Continuation of the holy 
gélii secündum Mattheum. Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


N ILLO témpore: Acces- T THAT time, thepharisees 
sérunt ad Jesum phari- came to Jesus, tempting 

sæi tentántes eum, et di- Him and saying: Is it lawful 
céntes: Si licet hómini dimít- fora man to put away his wife 
tere uxórem suam quacüm- for every cause? Who answer- 
que ex causa? Quirespóndens, ing, said to them, Have ye not 
ait eis: Non legístis, quia qui read, that. He Who made man 
fecit hóminem ab inítio, más- from the beginning, made them 
culum et féminam fecit eos? male and female? and He said, 
et dixit: Propter hoc dimít- For this cause shall a man 
tet homo patrem, et matrem, leave father and mother, and 
et adherébit uxóri suse, et shall cleave to his wife, and 
erunt duo in carne una. Ita- they two shall be in one flesh. 
que jam non sunt duo, sed Therefore now they are not two, 
una caro. Quod ergo Deus but one flesh. What therefore 
conjünxit,. homo non séparet. God bath joined together, let 

i no man put asunder. 


Offertory. Ps. 30, 15, 16 


In te sperávi Dómine: In Thee, O Lord, have I put 
dixi: tu es Deus meus:^in my trust; I said, Thou art my 
mánibus tuis témpora mea. God; my times are in Thy 

hands. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1450 


NUPTIAL MASS 


Secret 


ECEIVE, we beseech ‘Thee, 
O Lord, the offering 
whic. 


we make to Thee on be- 
half of the sacred bond of wed- 
lock, and be Thou the disposer 
of the work of which Thou art 
the author. Through our Lord. 


ÜSCIPE, quaesumus, Dó- 

mine, pro sacra con- 
nubii lege munus oblátum: et, 
cujus largítor es Óperis, esto. 
dispésitor, Per Dóminum. 


After the Pater Noster the priest, before continuing the Mass,. 
proceeds one step to the Epistle side of the altar, and turning 
toward the bridegroom and bride, who are kneeling at the altar 
steps, says over them the following prayers. 


Prayer 


ERCIFULLY hear our pray- 
(D ers, O Lord, and gra- 
ciously protect Thine ordi- 
nance, whereby Thou hast pro- 
vided for the propagation of 
mankind, that this union made 
by Thy authority may be pre- 
served by Thy help. Through 
our Lord. 


ROPITIARE, Démine, sup- 

plicatiónibus nostris, et 
institütis tuis, quibus propa- 
gatiónem humáni géneris or- 
dinásti, benígnus assíste: ut, 
quod te auctóre jüngitur, te 
auxilidnte servétur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Prayer 


cop, Who by Thy mighty 

power hast made all 
things out of nothing; Who, 
in the beginning having set up 
the world, didst bestow on man, 
whom Thou hadst created in 
Thine own likeness, the in- 
separable help of woman, fash- 
ioning her body from his very 
flesh, and thereby teaching us 
that it is never lawful to put 
asunder what it has pleased 
Thee to make of one substance; 
O God, Who hast consecrated 
wedlock by a surpassing mys- 
tery, since in the marriage- 
bond Thou didst foreshow the 
union of Christ with the 
Church; O God, by Whom 
woman is joined to man, and 
that alliance which Thou didst 
ordain from the beginning is 


EUS, qui potestáte vir- 

tütis tue ‘de nihilo 
cuncta fecisti: qui dispósitis 
universitátis exórdils, hómini 
ad imáginem Dei fecto, ideo. 
inseparábile mulíeris adju- 
tórium condidísti, ut femíneo 
córpori de virili dares carne 
principium, docens quod ex 
uno placuísset, institui, nun- 
quam licére disjüngi: Deus, 
qui tam excellénti mystério- 
conjugálem cópulam conse- 
crásti, ut Christi et Eoclésie 
sacraméntum presignéres in 
federe nuptiárum: Deus, per 
quem mülier jüngitur viro, et 
socíetas principáliter ordin- 
áta, ea benedictióne donátur, 
que sola nec per originális 
peccáti penam, nec per di- 
lüvii est abláta senténtiam: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


NUPTIAL MASS 


réspice propítius super hanc 
fámulam tuam, que.maritali 
jungénda consértio, tua so 
expetit protectióne muniri: 
Sit in ea jugum dilectiónis, et 
pacis: fidélis et casta nubat 
in Christo, imitatrixque 
sanctárum permáneat femi- 
nárum: sit amábilis viro suo, 
ut Rachel: sápiens, ut Re- 
bécca: longeva et fidélis, ut 
Sara: nihil in ea ex áctibus 
suis ille auctor prevarica- 
tiónis usürpet: nexa fidei, 
mandatísque permáneat: uni 
thoro juncta, contáctus illí- 
citos fügiat: müniat infirmi- 
tátem suam rébore disci- 
plíne: sit verectindia gravis, 
pudore venerábilis, doctrínis 
celéstibus erudita: sit fe- 
cünda in sóbole, sit probáta et 
innocens: et ad beatórum ré- 
quiem, atque ad cæléstia reg- 
na pervéniat: et videant am- 
bo fílios fili6rum suórum, 
usque in tértiam et quartam 
generatiónem, et ad optátam 
pervéniant senectütem. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. Amen. 


1451 


endowed with a blessing, which 
alone was not taken away, 
either in punishment of origi- 
nal sin or by the sentence of 
the flood, look down in mercy 
upon this Thy handmaid who, 
being about to enter upon wed- 
ded life, seeks to be strength- 
ened by Thy protection; may 
the yoke she has to bear be one 
of love and peace; true and 
chaste may she marry in Christ, 
and be a follower of holy 
women; may she be pleasing 
to her. husband like Rachel; 
prudent like Rebecca; long- 
lived and faithful like Sara; 
may the author of sin have no 
share in any of her actions; 
may she remain firmly at- 
tached to the faith and the 
commandments, and being 
joined to one man in wedlock, 
may she fly all unlawful ad- 
dresses; may she fortify her 
weakness by strong discipline; 
may she be respected for her 
seriousness and venerated for 
her modesty; may she be well 
versed in heavenly lore; may 
she be fruitful in offspring. May 


her life be pure and blameless; and may she attain to the rest 
of the blessed in the kingdom of heaven. May they both see 
their children’s children even to the third and fourth genera- 
tion and arrive at a happy old age; through Our Lord Jesus 
Christ Thy Son, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee in the 
unity of the Holy Ghost, one God world without end. Amen. 

The priest then continues the Mass, saying the prayer Libera, 


as in the Canon, page 787, and the bridegroom and bride ought 
to receive Holy Communion at the time appointed therefore. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Ps. 127, 4,6 


Ecce sic benedicétur omnis Behold, thus shall every man 
homo, qui timet Dóminum: be blessed ‘that feareth the 
et videas filios filiórum tuó- Lord: and mayest thou see thy 
rum: pax super Israél. children's children: peace be 

upon Israel. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1452 


MASS FOR PROPAGATION OF FAITH 


Postcommunion 


E BESEECH Thee, almighty 
God,in Thy great good- 
ness, to show favor to that or- 
der of things which Thou Thy- 
self hast established, and to 
keep in abiding peace those 
whom Thou hast joined to- 
gether in lawful union. 
Through our Lord. 


UESUMUS omnipotens 

Deus, institita provi- 
déntiz tue pio favóre comi- 
tare: ut, quos legitima socie- 
tate connéctis, longeva pace 
custódias. Per Dóminum. 


Before blessing the people, the priest again turns to the 
bridegroom and bride, and blesses them in particular saying: 


ay the God of Abraham, 
the God of Isaac, and 
the God of Jacob, be with you, 
and may He fulfil His blessing 
in you: that you may see your 
children's children even to the 
third and fourth generation, 
and may afterwards have life 
everlasting, by the grace of Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, Who, with 
the Father and the Holy Ghost, 
liveth and reigneth God, world 
without end. Amen. 


EUs Abraham, Deus 

Isaac, et Deus Jacob sit 
vobiscum: et ipse ‘adimpleat 
benedictiónem suam in vo- 
bis: ut videátis fílios filiórum 
vestrórum usque ad tértiam 
et quartam generatiónem, et 
póstea vitam etérnam ha- 
beátis sine fine: adjuvánte 
Dómino nostro Jesu Christo, 
qui cum Patre et Spiritu 
sancto vivit et regnat Deus, 
per ómnia secula seculorum. 
R. Amen. 


Lastly he sprinkles them with holy water, and admonishes 
both on the responsibilities of the married state, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Mass for the Propagation of the Faith (Purple) 


Authorized in all diocesses in which the Society for the 
Propagation of the Faith has been established. The Prayer 
Secret and Postcommunion may be additionally recited in all 
Masses on the chief festival days of this society. 


The Beginning ‘of Mass, Page 756. 


 Introit. Ps. 66, 2, 3 


(à be merciful unto us, and EUS misereátur nostri, 
bless us: may He cause et benedícat nobis: il- 
the light of His countenance to lüminet vultum suum super 


shine upon us,.and be merciful 
to us. That we may know Thy 
Way upon earth: Thy salvation 
in all nations. Ps. 66, 4. Let the 


nos, et misereátur nostri, ut 
cognoscámus in terra viam 
tuam, in ómnibus géntibus 
salutáre tuum. Ps. 66, 4, Con- 


http://ccwatershed:org 


MASS FOR PROPAGATION OF FAITH 


fite&ntur tibi pópull Deus: 
confiteántur tibi pópuli om- 
nes. Y. Glória Patri. 


1453 


people praise Thee, O God: let 
all the people give praise to 
Thee, Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


‘Prayer 


EUS, Qui omnes hómines 
vis salvos fíeri, et ad 
agniti6nem veritatis venire; 
mitte, quesumus, operários in 
messem tuam, et da eis cum 
omni fidücia loqui verbum 
tuum; ut sermo tuus currat, 
et clarificétur, et omnes 
gentes cognóscant te solum 
Deum verum, et quem misísti 
Jesum Christum Fílium tu- 
um Dóminum nostrum: Qui 
tecum vivit. 


cop, Who willest that all 

men should be saved and 
come to the knowledge of the 
truth, send, we beseech Thee, 
laborers to Thy harvest, and 
give them to speak Thy word 
with all. confidence, that Thy 
message may run and may be 
made plain, and that all peo- 
ples may know Thee, the only 
true God, and Him Whom 
Thou hast sent, Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Who with Thee. 


For the Epistle, either of the two following may be said: 
Lesson. Ecclus. 36, 1-19 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


ISERERE nostri, Deus 

ómnium, et réspice nos, 
et osténde nobis lucem miser- 
atiónum tuárum: et immitte 
timórem tuum super gentes, 
que non exquisiérunt te, ut 
cognóscant, quia non est 
Deus nisi tu, et enárrent 
magnália tua. Alleva manum 
tuam super gentes aliénas, ut 
vídeant poténtiam tuam. Si- 
cut enim in conspéctu eórum 
Sanctificátus es in nobis, sic 
in conspéctu nostro mag- 
nificéberls in eis, ut cognós- 
cant te, sicut et nos cognóvi- 
mus, quóniam non est Deus 


. preter te, Dómine. Innova 
' signa, et immüta- mirabflia: 


glorifica manum, et bráchi- 
um déxterum; éxcita furórem, 
et effünde iram: tolle adver- 
sarium, et afflige inimícum. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 
AVE mercy upon us, God of 
all, and behold us, and 
show us the light of Thy mer- 
cles: and send Thy fear upon 
the nations that have not 
sought after Thee: that they 
may know that there is no God 
beside Thee, and that they may 
show forth Thy wonders. Lift 
up Thy hand over the strange 
nations, that they may see Thy 
power. For as Thou hast been 
sanctified in us in their sight, 
so Thou shalt be magnified 
among them in our presence, 
that they may know Thee, as 
we also have known Thee, that 
there is no god beside Thee, O 
Lord. Renew Thy signs, and 
work new miracles. Glorify 
Thy hand, and Thy right arm, 
Raise up indignation, and pour 
out wrath, Take away the ad- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1454 


versary, and crush the enemy. 
Hasten the time, and remember 
the end, that they may declare 
Thy wonderful works. Give 
testimony to them that are Thy 
creatures from the beginning, 
and raise up the prophecies 
which the former prophets 
Spoke in Thy name. Reward 
them that patiently wait for 
Thee, that Thy prophets may 
be found faithful: and hear the 
prayers of 'Thy servants, ac- 
cording to the blessing of Aaron 
over Thy people, and direct us 
into the way of justice, and let 
all know that dwell upon the 
earth, that Thou art God, the 
beholder of all ages. 


Or there may be read: 


MASS FOR PROPAGATION OF FAITH 


Festina tempus, et meménto 
finis, ut enárrent mirabilia 
tua. Da testimónium his, qui 
ab initio creature tue sunt, 
et süscita predicatiénes, quas 
locúti sunt in nómine tuo 
prophéte prióres. Da mercé- 
dem  sustinéntibus te, ut 
prophéte tui fidéles invenién- 
tur: et exáudi oratiónes ser- 
vórum  tuórum, secindum 
benedictiónem Aaron de póp- 
ulo tuo, et dírige nos in viam 
justítim, et sciant omnes, qui 
hábitant terram, quia tu es 
Deus, conspéctor seculérum, 


Epistle. 1 Tim. 2, 1-7 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
Paul the Apostle to Timothy. 
DESIRE first of all that sup- 
plications, prayers, inter- 
cessions, and thanksgivings be 
made for all men: for kings, 
and for all that are in high 
stations: that we may lead a 
quiet and a peaceable life in 
all piety and chastity. For this 
is good and acceptable in the 
sight of God our Saviour, Who 
will have all men to be saved, 
and to come to the knowledge 
of the truth. For there is one 
God, and one mediator of God 
and men, the man Christ Je- 
sus: Who gave Himself a re- 
demption for all, a testimony 
in due times, whereunto I am 
appointed a preacher and an 
apostle (I say the truth, I lie 
not), a teacher of the gentiles 
in faith and truth. 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Timotheum. 


BSECRO primum ómnium 

fieri obsecratiónes, ora- 
tiónes, postulatiónes, grati- 
árum actiónes, pro ómnibus 
homínibus: pro régibus et 
ómnibus qui in sublimitáte 
sunt, ut quiétam et tranquíl- 
lam vitam agámus, in omni 
pietáte, et castitáte; hoc enim 
bonum est, et accéptum cor- 
am Salvatóre nostro Deo, qui 
omnes hómines vult salvos 
fiéri, et ad agnitiónem veri- 
tátis venire, Unus enim Deus, 
unus et mediator Dei et hó- 
minum, homo Christus Jesus: 
qui dedit redemptiónem se- 
metipsum pro ómnibus, tes- 
timónium tempdribus suis: 
in quo pósitus sum ego præ- 
dicátor et apóstolus (verita- 
tem dico, non méntior) doc- 
tor géntium in fide et veri- 
táte. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


B. o in d 


MASS FOR PROPAGATION OF FAITH 


1455 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
Pla 


ced by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. 


Confiteántur tibi pópuli, 
Deus: confiteántur tibi pópu- 
li omnes: terra dedit fructum 
Suum. V. Benedícat nos Deus, 
Deus noster, benedícat nos 
Deus: et métuant eum omnes 
fines terre. 


Ps. 66, 6-8 


Let the people praise Thee, 
O God, let a1] people give praise 
to Thee: the earth hath yielded 
her fruit. Y. May God, our God, 
bléss us, may God bless us: and 
all the ends of the earth fear 


Him. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 99, 
1. Jubilate Deo, omnis ter- 
ra: servite Dómino in laetitia: 
introíte in conspéctu ejus in 
exsultatióne. Allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y Ps. 99, 1. 
O sing joyfully unto God, all 
the earth, serve ye the Lord 


with gladness: come into His 


presence with exceeding joy. 


Alleluia. 


Tract. Ps.95,3, 5 


Annuntiáte inter gentes Tell forth the glory of the 
glóriam Dómini, in ómnibus Lord among the gentiles: His 
pópulis mirabilia ejus. Y. wonders among all peoples. y. 
Quóniam magnus Dóminus, For great is the Lord, and ex- 
et laudábilis nimis: terribilis ceedingly to be praised: He is 
est super omnes deos. Y. Quó- to be feared above all gods. Y. 
niam omnes dii Géntium For all the gods of the heathen 


demónia: Dóminus autem 
celos fecit. 


are devils: but the Lord made 
the heavens. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelüja. allelija. Ps. 99, 
1, 2. Jubiláte Deo, omnis ter- 
ra: servite Dómino in letitia: 
introite in conspéctu ejus in 
exsultatiéne, Allelüja. V. Sci- 
tóte quóniam Dóminus ipse 
est Deus: ipse fecit nos, et 
non ipsi nos. Allelija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 99, 
1, 2. O sing joyfully unto God, 


all the earth, serve ye the Lord 
with gladness: come into His 


presence with exceeding joy. 
Alleluia. Y. Know ye, that the 
Lord He is God: He made us, 
and not we ourselves. Alleluia, 


Gospel. Matt. 9, 35-38 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélil sectindum Matthzeum. 


N ILLO témpore: Circufbat 
Jesus omnes civitátes, et 


Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT lime: Jesus went 
about all the cities, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1456 


towns, teaching in their syna- 
gogues and preaching the gos- 
pelof the kingdom, and healing 
every disease and every infirm- 
ity. And seeing the multitudes, 
He had compassion on them: 
because they were distressed, 
and lying like sheep that have 
no shepherd. Then saith He to 
His disciples: The harvest in- 
deed is great, but the laborers 
are few. Pray ye therefore the 
Lord of the harvest, that He 
Send forth laborers into His 
harvest. 


MASS FOR PROPAGATION OP FAITH 


castélla, docens in synagógis 
eórum, et praedicans evangé- 
lium regni, et curans omnem 
languórem, et omnem infirm- 
itátem. Videns autem turbas, 
misértus est eis: quia erant 
vexáti, et jacéntes sicut oves 
non habéntes pastórem, Tunc 
dicit discípulis suis: Messis 
quidem multa, operárii au- 
tem pauci Rogáte ergo Dó- 
minum messis, ut míttat op- 
erários in messem suam. 


Offertory. Ps.95,7,9 


Bring unto the Lord, O ye 
kindred of the gentiles, bring 
unto the Lord glory and honor, 
bring unto the Lord glory unto 
His name: bring sacrifices and 
come into His court, adore ye 
the Lord in His holy court. 
(P. T. Alleluia. ) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Afférte Dómino,  pátrie 
géntium, afférte Dómino gló- 
riam, et hondrem, afférte 
Dómino glóriam nómini ejus: 
tólite hóstias, et introíte in 
atria ejus, adoráte Dóminum 
in átrio sancto ejus. (T. P. 
Allelüja.) 


Secret 


EHOLD, O God, our pro- 

tector, and look upon the 
face of Thy Christ, who gave 
Himself a redemption for all, 
and cause that, from the ris- 
ing of the sun unto the going 
down thereof, Thy name be 
magnified among the gentiles, 
and that in every place a clean 
offering be sacrificed to Thy 
name, Through the same. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Praise the Lord all ye na- 
tions: praise Him all ye people: 
for His mercy is confirmed 


ROTÉCTOR noster áspice, 

Deus, et réspice in fáci- 
em Christi tui: qui dedit re- 
demptiónem semetípsum pro 
ómnibus, et fac, ut ab ortu 
Solis usque ad occásum mag- 
nificétur nomen tuum in gén- 
tibus, ac in omni loco sacri- 
ficétur, et offerátur nómini 
tui oblátio munda. Per eüm- 
dem Dóminum. 


Ps. 116, 1, 2 


Laudáte Dóminum, omnes 
gentes: laudáte eum, omnes 
pópuli: quóniam confirmata 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ES pee, 


MASS AGAINST THE HEATHEN 


est super nos misericórdia 
ejus, et véritas Dómini manet 
in etérnum. (T. P. Allelüja.) 


1457 


upon us; and the truth of the 
Lord remaineth forever (P. T. 
Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 


EDEMPTIÓNIS nostre mü- 

nere vegetáti, quesu- 

mus, Dómine: ut hoc perpé- 

tuz salütis auxílio fides sem- 

per vera profíciat. Per Dómi- 
num. (T. P. Allelija.) 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


TRENGTHENED by the gift of 
S our redemption, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, that by 
this aid of everlasting salva- 
tion our faith may ever in- 
crease. Through our Lord. (P. 
T. Alleluia.) 


Sass Against the Heathen, (Purple) 
Introit. Ps. 43, 23-26 


XSÜRGE, quare obdérmis 

Démine? exstirge, et ne 
repéllas in finem: quare fáci- 
em tuam avértis, oblivísceris 
tribulatiónem nostram? ad- 
hesit in terra venter noster: 
exsürge Dómine, adjüva nos, 
et libera nos. (T. P. Allelüja.) 
Ps. 113, 2. Deus áuribus no- 
siris audivimus: patres nostri 
annuntiavérunt nobis. Jy. 
Glória Patri. 


^RISE, Why sleepest Thou, 
: O Lord? arise, and cast 
us not off to the end: why 
turnest Thou Thy face away, 
and forgettest our trouble. Our 
belly hath cleaved to the earth: 
arise, O Lord, help us and de- 
liver us. (P. T. Alleluia.) Ps. 
113, 2. O God, we have heard 
with our ears; our fatbers have 
declared to us. Y. Glory. 


Prayer 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 

“Deus, in cujus manu 
sunt ómnium ‘potestates, et 
ómnium jura regnórum: rés- 
pice in auxilium Christian- 
órum; ut gentes paganórum, 
que in. sua ferltáte confí- 
dunt; déxtere tue poténtia 
conterántur. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle, In those days, from 
week in Lent, page 276. 


LMIGHTY, everlasting 
AL God, in Whose hand are 
he power and the government 
of évery realm; look upon and 
help the Christian people, that 
the heathen nations who trust 
in the fierceness of. their own 
might, may be crushed by the 
power of Thine Arm. Through 
our Lord. 


the Mass on, Wednesday, second 


In Paschal-time the Gradual ond Tract are replaced by” the 


Greater Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1458 MASS AGAINST THE HEATHEN 


Gradual. Ps. 82,19, 14 


Let the gentiles know that Sciant gentes, quóniam 
God is Thy name: Thou alone nomen tibi Deus: tu solus Al- 
art the Most High over all the tíssimus super omnem ter- 
earth. Y. O my God, make them ram. Y. Deus meus, pone illos 
like a wheel, and as stubble be- ut rotam, et sicut stípulam 
fore the face of the wind. ante fáciem venti. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 79, 3. — Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 
Stir up Thy might, O Lord, and 79, 3.- Excita Dómine potén- 
come to save us. Alleluia. tiam tuam, et veni: ut sal- 

vos fácias nos. Allelüja. 


Tract. Ps. 78, 9-11 


Help us, O God our Saviour, Adjuva nos, Deus salutáris 
and for the glory of Thy name, noster: et propter honórem 
O Lord, deliver us: and for- nóminis tui, Dómine, libera 
give us our sins for Thy name's nos: et propítius esto peccá- 
sake. Y. Lest they should say tis nostris, propter nomen 
among the gentiles, Where is tuum. JY. Nequándo dicant 
their God? and let Him be gentes: Ubi est Deus eórum? 
made known among the na- et innotéscat in natiónibus 
tions before our eyes. Y. Avenge coram óculis nostris. Y. Vín- 
the blood of Thy servants dica sánguinem servórum tu- 
which hath been shed; let the órum, qui effüsus est: intret 
sighing of the prisoners come in conspéctu tuo gémitus 


in before Thee. 


compeditórum. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 79, 3. 
Stir up Thy might, O God, and 
come to save us. Alleluia. V. Ps. 
79, 15, 16. Turn again, O God 
of Hosts, look down, and see, 
and visit Thy vineyard, and 
perfect that which Thy right 
hand hath planted. Alleluia. 


Allelüja, allehija. Y. Ps. 79, 
3. Excita, Dómine, poténtiam 
tuam, et veni; ut salvos fácias 
nos. Allelüja. Y. Ps. 79, 15, 
16. Deus virtütum, convértere, 
réspice de ccelo, et vide, et 
vísità víneam istam: et pér- 
fice eam, quam plantávit déx- 
tera tua. Allelája. 


Gospel, Which of you shall have a friend, from Mass on the 


Rogation Days, page 580. 


Offertory. Ps. 17, 28, 32 


Thou wilt save the humble 
people, O Lord, and wilt bring 
down the eyes of the proud; 


Pópulum hümilem salvum 
fácies: et óculos superbórum 
humiliábis: quóniam quis 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS FOR THE HEALING OF SCHISM 


Deus preter te Dómine? (T. P. 
Allelüja.) 


1459 


for Who is God but Thee, O 
Lord? (P..T. Alleluia.) 


Secret 
acririctuom, Dómine, ook, O Lord, upon the 
quod immolámus, in- sacrifice which we offer 


ténde: ut propugnatóres tu- 
os.ab omni éruas paganórum 
nequitia, et in tuse protec- 
tiónis securitáte constituas. 
Per Dóminum. 


up; that Thou mayest deliver 


Thy champions from the wick- 
edness of the heathen, and 
place them safe under Thy 
protection, Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Ps. 18, 81, 84, 86 


In salutári tuo ánima mea, 
et in verbum tuum. sperávi: 
quando fácies de persequén- 
tibus me judicium? iniqui 
persecüti sunt me, ádjuva me 
Dómine Deus meus. (T.P. 
Allelüja.) 


My soul is in Thy salvation, 
and in Thy word have I hoped: 
when wilt Thou execute judg- 
ment on them that persecute 
me? the wicked have persecuted 
me: help me, O Lord my God. 
(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 


ROTÉCTOR noster Aspice, 

Deus: et propugnatéres 
tuos a paganórum defénde 
perículis; ut, omni perturb- 
atiéne submóta, liberis tibi 
méntibus desérviant. Per Dó- 
minum. ` 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


oox upon us, O Lord, our 

protector, and defend 
Thy champions from peril of 
the heathen; that all disturb- 
ance may be ended and they 
may freely serve Thee. Through 
our Lord. 


Hass tor the Healing of Schism (Purple) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 105, 47 


ALVOS hos fac, Dómine 
Deus noster: et cón- 
grega nos de natiónibus: ut 
confite&mur nómini sancto 
tuo: et gloriémur in laude 
tua. (T. P. Allelája, allelüja.) 


AVE us, O Lord our God, 
and gather us from 
among the nations, that we 
may give thanks to Thy holy 
name, and may glory in Thy 
preise. (P. T. Alleluia, alle- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1460 


luia. Ps 105, 1. Praise the 
Lord, for He is good: for His 
mercy is to everlasting. Y. 
Glory. 


MASS FOR THE HEALING OF SCHISM 


Ps. 105, 1. Confitémini. Dó- 
mino, quóniam bonus: quó- 
niam in seculum  miseri- 
córdia ejus. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


O cop, Who settest straight 
what has gone astray, and 
gatherest together what is scat- 
tered, and keepest what Thou 
hast gathered together, we be- 
seech Thee in Thy mercy to 
pour down on Christian people 
the grace of union with Thee, 
that putting aside disunion 
and attaching themselves to 
the true shepherd. of Thy 


EUS, qui errata córrigis, 

et ‘dispérsa cóngregas, 
et congregáta ^ consérvas: 
quaesumus, super pdpulum 
christiànum tue uniónis grá- 
tiam cleménter infünde; ut, 
divisióne rejécta, vero pas- 
téri Ecclésie tue se üniens, 
tibi digne váleat. famulári. 
Per Dóminum. 


Church, they may be able to render Thee due service, ane 


our Lord. 


Epistle. Ephes. 4, 1-7; 13-21 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paulthe Apostie to the 
Ephesians. 

.RETHREN: I beseech you 

that you walk worthy of 

the vocation in which you are 
called: with all humility and 
mildness, with patience, sup- 
porting one another in charity. 
Careful to keep the unity of 
the spirit in the bond of peace. 
One body and one spirit, as you 
are called in one hope of your 
calling. One Lord, one faith, 
one baptism. One God and 
Father of all, who is above all, 
and through all, and in us all. 
But to every one of us is 
given grace according to the 
measure of the giving of Christ; 
until we all meet into the unity 
of faith, and of the knowledge 
of the Son of God, unto a per- 
fect man, unto the measure of 
the age of the fulness of Christ; 


Léctio beáti Pauli Apóstoli 
ad Ephésios. 


RATRES: Obsecro vos, ut 

, digne ambulétis voca- 
tiéme qua vocáti estis, cum 
omni humilitáte, et mansue- 
tüdine, cum patiéntia, sup- 
portántes invicem in caritáte, 
solliciti servare unitatem 
Spíritus in vínculo pacis. 
Unum corpus, et unus spír- 
itus, sicut vocáti estis in una 
Spe vocatiónis vestre. Unus 
Dóminus, una fides, unum 
baptísma. Unus Deus et Pa- 
ter ómnium, qui est super 
omnes et per ómnia, et in 
ómnibus nobis. Unicuique.au- 
tem nostrum data est grátia 
Secündum mensüram dona- 
tiónis Christi: donec occur- 
ramus omnes in unitátem 
fidei, et agnitiónls Fílii Dei, 
in virum perféctum, in men- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS FOR THE HEALING OF SCHISM 


Süram  :tátis  plenitüdinis 
Christi: ut jam non simus 
pérvuli fluctuántes, et cir- 
cumferámur omni vento doc- 
trine in nequitia hóminum, 
in astütia ad circumventión- 
em erróris. Veritátem autem 
faciéntes in caritáte, crescá- 
mus in illo per ómnia, qui est 
caput Christus: ex quo totum 
corpus compáctum, et con- 
néxum per omnem junc- 
türam subministratiónis, se- 
cündum operatiónem in men- 
süram uniuscujüsque mem- 
bri, augméntum córporis fa- 
cit in edificatiénem sui in 
caritáte. Hoc ígitur dico, et 
testificor in Dómino, ut jam 
non ambulétis, sicut et gen- 
tes ámbulant in vanitáte sen- 
sus sui, ténebris obscurátum 
habéntes intelléctum, alien- 
áti a vita Dei per ignoránti- 
&m que est in illis, propter 
cecitéatem cordis ipsórum qui 
desperántes, semetípsos tra- 
didérunt impudicítie, in op- 
eratiónem immunditie om- 
nis, in avarítiam. Vos autem 
non ita didicístis Christum, 
si tamen illum audístis, et in 
ipso edécti estis, sicut est 
véritas in Christo Jesu Dó- 
mino nostro. 


1461 


that henceforth we be no more 
children tossed to and fro and 
carried about with every wind 
of doctrine by the wickedness 
of men by cunning craftiness 
by which they lie in wait to de- 
ceive. But doing the truth in 
charity, we may in all things 
grow up in Him Who is the 
head, even Christ; from Whom 
the whole body. being com- 
pacted and fitly joined together, 
by what every joint supplieth, 
according to the operation in 
the measure of every part, mak- 
eth increase of the body unto 
the edifying of itself in charity. 
This then I say and testify in 
the Lord: that henceforward 
you walk not as also the gen- 
tiles walk in the vanity of their 
mind. Having their under- 
standing darkened, being alien- 
ated from the life of God 
through the ignorance that is 
in them, because of the blind- 
ness of their hearts. Who des- 
pairing, have given themselves 
up to lasciviousness, unto the 
working of all uncleanness, 
unto covetousness. But you 
have not so learned Christ: if 
so be that you have heard Him, 
and have been taught in Him, 
as the truth is in Jesus our 
Lord. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
p 


ced by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 121, 6,7 


Rogáte que ad pacem sunt 
Jerúsalem: et abundántia 
diligéntibus te. Y. Fiat pax in 
virtüte tua: et abundántia in 
türribus tuis. 


Pray ye for the things that 
are for the peace of Jerusalem: 
and abundance for them that 
love thee. Let peace be in thy 
strength: and abundance in 
thy towers. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS FOR THE HEALING OF SCHISM 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 147, ^ Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 
12. Praise the Lord, O Jerusa- 147, 12. Lauda, Jerüsalem, 
lem: praise thy God, O Sion. Dóminum: lauda Deum tu- 
Alleluia. um, Sion. Allelüja. 


Tract. Ps. 75, 2-4 


In Judea God is known: His Notus in Judæa Deus, in 
name is great in Israel. Y. And Israël magnum nomen ejus. 
His place is in peace: and His V. Et factus est in pace locus 
abode in Sion. Y. There hath ejus, et habitátio ejus in Sion. 
He broken the powers of bows, Y. Ibi confrégit poténtias 
the shield, the sword and the árcuum, scutum, gládium et 


1462 


battle. — 


bellum. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, Alleluia. V. 147, 12. 
Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: 
praise thy God, O Sion. Alle- 
luia., V. Ps. 147, 14. Who hath 
placed peace in thy borders: 
and filleth thee, with the fat 
of corn. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelija. Y. Ps. 
147, 12. Lauda, Jerüsalem, 
Dóminum: lauda Deum tu- 
um, Sion. Allelája. V. Ps. 147, 
14. Qui pósuit fines tuos pa- 
cem: et ádipe fruménti sátiat 
te. Allelüja. 


: Gospel. John 17, 1-23 


4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime: Jesus lifting 

up His eyes to heaven, 

Said: Holy Father, keep them 
in Thy name whom 'Thou hast 
given Me; that They may be 
one, as We also are. While I 
was with them, I kept them in 
Thy name. Those whom Thou 
gavest Me have I kept; and 


none of them is lost, but the. 


son of perdition, that the Scrip- 
ture may be fulfilled. And now 
I come to Thee; and these 
things I speak in the world, 
that they may have My joy 
filed in themselves. I have 
given them Thy word, and the 


4 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joannem. 
N ILLO témpore: Sublevá- 
tis Jesus óculis in celum 
dixit: Pater sancte, serva eos 
in nómine tuo, quos dedisti 
mihi: ut sint unum, sicut et 
nos. Cum essem cum eis, ego 
Servábam eos in nómine tuo. 
Quos dedisti mihi custodivi; 
et nemo ex eis périit nisi fil- 
ius perditiónis, ut Scriptura 
impleátur. Nunc autem ad te 
vénio: et hzc loquor in mun- 
do, ut hábeant gáudium me- 
um implétum in semetípsis. 
Ego dedi eis sermónem tuum, 
et mundus eos ódio hábuit, 
quia non sunt de mundo, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS FOR THE HEALING OF SCHISM 


sieut et ego non sum de 
mundo. Non rogo ut tollas 
eos de mundo, sed ut serves 
eos a malo. De mundo non 
sunt, sicut et ego non sum 
de mundo. Sanctifica eos in 
veritáte. Sermo tuus véritas 
est, Sicut tu me misisti in 
mundum, et ego misi eos in 
mundum..Et pro eis ego sanc- 
tífico meipsum, ut sint et ipsi 
Sanctificáti in veritáte. Non 
pro eis autem rogo tàntum, 
sed et pro eis, qui creditüri 
sunt per.verbum eórum in 
me: ut omnes unum sint, 
Sicut tu, Pater, in me, et ego 
in te, ut et ipsi in nobis unum 
sint: ut credat mundus, quia 
tu me misísti, Et ego claritá- 
tem, quam dedísti mihi, dedi 
eis: ut sint unum, sicut et 
nos unum sumus. Ego in eis, 
et tuin me: ut sint consum- 
máti in unum. 


and Thou in Me; that they 


1463 


world hath hated them, because 
they are not of the world; as 
I also am not of the world. I 
pray not that Thou shouldst 
take them out of the world, but 
that Thou shouldst keep them 
from evil. They are not of the 
world, as I also am not of the 
world. Sanctify them in truth. 
As Thou hast sent Me into the 
world, I also sent them into the 
world. And for them do I sanc- 
tify Myself, that they also. may 
be sanctified in truth, And not 
for them only do I pray, but 
for them also who through 
their word shall believe in Me; 
that they all may be one, as 
Thou, Father, in Me, and I in 
Thee; that they also may be 
one in Us; that the world may 
believe that Thou hast sent 
Me, And the glory which Thou 
hast given Me, I have given to 
them; that they may be one, 
as We also are one: I in them, 
may be made perfect in one. 


Offertory. Rom. 15, 5, 6 


Det vobis Deus idípsum 
sapere in  alterütrum: ut 
unánimes uno ore honorificé- 
tis Deum nostrum. (T. P. Al- 
leluja.) i 


Offertory Prayers, páge 767. 


May God give you to be of 
one mind one toward another: 
that with one mind and one 
mouth you may glorify our 
God. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Secret 


ÓNERA hee pro unióne 

pópuli christiáni tibi, 
Dómine, oblata sanctifica: 
per que unitatis et pacis in 
Ecclésia tua, nobis dona con- 
cédas, Per Dóminum. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


ALLOW these gifts which 

we offer up to Thee, O 
Lord, for union among the 
Christian people; and by means 
of these grant us the grace of 
union and peace within Thy 
Church, Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1464 MASS IN TIME OF WAR 


Communion. 1 Cor.10,17 


We, being many, are one Unus panis, et unum cor- 
bréad and one body; all who pus multi sumus, omnes qui 
partake of one bread and of de uno pane et de uno cálice 
one cup. (P. T. Alleluia.) participámus. (T. P. Alle- 


lája.) 


Postcommunion - 


VEN as this, Thy holy 
communion, which we 
have taken, foreshows the 
union of the faithful in Thee, 
O Lord, so, we beseech 'Thee, 
may it bring about reunion in 
Thy Church. Through our 
Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Ec tua, Dómine, sump- 

ta sacra commünio, si- 
cut fidélium in te uniónem 
presignat; sic in tua Ecclé- 
sia unitátis, quesumus, oper- 
étur efféctum. Per Dóminum. 


Mass in Time of War (Purple) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 24, 6, 3, 22 


: EMEMBER, O Lord, Thy 
bowels of compassion, 
and Thy mercies that are from 
the beginning of the world, lest 
at any time our enemies rule 
over us: deliver us, O God of 
Israel, from all our tribulations. 
(P. T. Alleluia, alleluia.) Ps. 
24, 1, 2. 'To Thee, O Lord, have 
Ilifted up my soul: in Thee, O 
my God, I put my trust; let me 
not be ashamed. Y. Glory. 


EMINÍSCERE miseratión- 

um tuárum Dómine, et 
misericórdie tue, que a sæ- 
culo sunt: ne umquam domi- 
néntur nobis inimíci no- 
Siri: lfbera nos Deus Israël 
ex ómnibus angüstiis nostris. 
(T. P. Allelüja, allelüja.) Ps. 
24, 1, 2. Ad te Dómine levávi 
ánimam meam: Deus meus, 
in te confído, non erubéscam. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who dost stamp out 
wars and vanquish the 


EUs, qui cénteris bella, 
et impugnatóres in te 


assailants of them that hope sperántium poténtia tue de- 
in Thee, help us when we cry fensiónis expügnas: auxiliáre 
to Thee, that the ferocity of fámulis tuis, implorántibus 
our enemies may be brought misericórdiam tuam; ut in- 
low, and we may praise Thee imicórum  suórum  feritáte 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS IN TIME OF WAR 


Gepréssa, incessábil te gra- 
tiárum — actióne  laudémus. 
Per Dóminum. 


1465 


with unceasing thanksgiving. 
Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Jer. 42, 1, 2, 7-12 


Léctio Jeremie Prophéte. 


N DIEBUS illis; Accessérunt 
T omnes principes bellà- 
tórum: dixerüntque ad Jere- 
miam prophétam: Ora. pro 
nobis ad Dóminum Deum tu- 
um. Et factum est. verbum 
Dómini ad Jeremiam. Voca- 
vítque omnes príncipes bel- 
latórum, et univérsum pópu- 
lum a mínimo usque ad mag- 
num. Et dixit ad eos: Hec 
dicit Dóminus Deus Israël, 
ad quem misístis me, ut pros- 
térnerem preces vestras in 
conspéctu ejus:. Si quiescéntes 
manséritis in terra hac, 
ædificábo vos, et non déstru- 
am: plantábo, et non evél- 
lam: jam enim placátus sum 
super malo, quod feci vobis. 
Nolíte timére a facie regis 
Babylónis, quem vos -pavidi 
formidátis: nolite metüere 
eum, dicit Dóminus: quia vo- 
bíseum sum ego, ut salvos vos 
faciam, et éruam de manu 
ejus. Et dabo vobis miseri- 
córdias, eb miserébor vestri, 
et habitáre vos fáciam in 
terra vestra: dieit Dóminus 
omnipotens. 


Lesson fror Jeremias the 
Prophet. 


À THOSE days all the cap- 
tains of the warriors came 
near: and they said to Jeremias 
the prophet: pray thou for us 


‘to the Lord thy God. And the 


word of the Lord came to Jere- 
mias. And he called all the 
captains of the fighting men 
thab were with him, and all the 
people from the least. to the 
greatest. And he said to them: 
Thus saith the Lord, the. God 
of Israel, to whom you sent me, 
to present your supplications 
before Him; If you will be quiet 
and remain in this Jand. I will 
build you up, and not pull you 
down: I will plant you, and 
not pluck you up: for now I am 
appeased for the evil that I 
have done to you. Fear not 
because of the king ot Babylon, 
of whom you are greatly afrald: 
fear him not, saith tbe Lord: 
for I am with you, to save you, 
and to deliver you from his 
hand. And I will show mercies 
to you, and will take pity on 
you, and will cause you to dwell 
in your own land, saith the 
Lord almighty. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia i is replaced 


by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are Tee 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 76, 15, 16 


Tu es Deus, qui facis mira- — Thou art the God that alia 
bilia, solus: notam fecisti in dost wonders: Thou hast made 
géntibus virtütem tuam. Y. Thy power known among the 
Liberásti in bráchio tuo póp- nations. V. With Thy. arm 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1466 MASS IN TIME OF WAR 


Thou hast redeemed Thy peo- ulum tuum, filios Israël et 
ple, the children of Israel and Joseph. 
Joseph. 


Lesser Alleluia 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y.Ps.58,2. Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 58, 
Deliver me from my enemies, O 2. Eripe me de inimícis meis, 
my God, and defend me from Deus meus: et ab insurgénti- 
them that rise up against me. bus in me líbera me. Alle- 


Alleluia. 


Tája. 


Tract. Ps. 102, 10 


O Lord, repay us not accord- 
ing to the sins we have com- 
mitted, nor according to our 
iniquities. Y. Ps. 78, 8, 9. O 
Lord, remember not our for- 
mer iniquities: let Thy mercies 
speedily prevent us, for we are 
become exceeding poor. V. Help 
us, O God our Saviour: and for 
the glory of Thy name, O Lord, 
deliver us: and forgive us our 
sins for Thy name's sake. 


Dóminé, non  secündum 
peccáta nostra, que fécimus 
nos: neque secündum iniqui- 
tátes nostras retríbuas nobis. 
NV. Ps. 78, 8, 9. Dómine, ne 
memíneris iniquitátum no- 
strárum  antiquárum: cito 
anticipent nos misericérdie 
tue, quia páuperes facti su- 
mus nimis. Y. Adjuva nos De- 
us salutáris noster: et prop- 
ter glóriam nóminis tui Dó- 
mine líbera nos: et propítius 
esto peccátis nostris propter 
nomen tuum. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 58, 
2. Deliver me from my ene- 
mies, O my God: and defend 
me from them that rise up 
against me. Alleluia. Y. Ps. 58, 
17. But I will sing Thy strength: 
and will extol Thy mercy in the 
morning. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 58, 
2. Eripe me de inimícis meis, 
Deus meus: et ab insurgénti- 
bus in me libera me. Alleluja. 
Yy. Ps. 58, 17. Ego autem can- 
iábo fortitüdinem tuam: et 
exsultábo mane misericórdi- 
am tuam. Allelija. 


Gospel. Matt. 24, 3-8 


| Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 

thew. 
T THAT lime: The dis- 
ciples came to Jesus pri- 


vately, saying, Tell us, when 


HH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Matthzum. 


N ILLO témpore: Acces- 
Sérunt ad Jesum discíp- 
uli secréto, dicéntes: Dic no- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS IN TIME OF WAR 


bis, quando hec erunt? et 
quod signum advéntus tui, et 
consummatiónis seculi? Et 
respóndens Jesus, dixit eis: 
Vidéte ne quis vos sedücat. 
Multi enim vénient in nó- 
mine meo, dicéntes: Ego sum 
Christus: et multos sedücent. 
Auditüri enim estis prelia, et 
opiniónes prelidrum. Vidéte 


ne turbémini. Opórtet enim 


hzc fíeri, sed nondum est 
finis. Consürget enim gens in 
gentem et regnum in reg- 
num, et erunt pestiléntim, et 
fames, et terremótus per loca. 
Hzc autem ómnia initia sunt 
dolórum. 


1467 


shall these things be? and what 
Shall be the sign of Thy com- 
ing, and of the consummation 
of the world? And Jesus an- 
swering, said to them: Take 
heed that no man seduce you: 
For many wil come in: My 
name saying, I am Christ: and 
ihey wil seduce many. And 
you shall hear of wars, and ru- 
mors of wars. See that ye be 
not troubled. For these things 
must come to pass, but the end 
is not yet. For nation shall 
rise against nation, and king- 
dom against kingdom; . and 
there shall be pestilences, and 
famines, and earthquakes in 
places: Now all these are the 
beginning of sorrows. 


Offertory. Ps. 17, 28, 32 


Pópulum. hümilem. salvum 
fácies, Dómine, et óculos su- 
perbórum humiliabis: quó- 
niam quis Deus preter te, 
Dómine? (T. P. Allelája.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Thou wilt save the humble 
people, O Lord, and wilt bring 
down the eyes of the proud; for 
Who is God but Thee, O Lord? 
(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Secret 


ACRIFÍCIUM; Dómine, quod E APPEASED, O Lord, by the 
S immolamus, inténde pla- B sacrifice which we offer, 
catus: ut ab omni nos éruat that it may deliver us from all 
bell6rum nequitia, et in tue the evil of war and set us in the 
protectiónis securitate constí- security of Thy protection. 
tuat. Per Dóminum. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Ps. 30, 3 


Inclina aurem tuam, ac- Bow down Thy ear, make 
celera, ut erípias nos. (T. P. haste to deliver us. (P. T. Al- 
Allelüja.) leluia.) 


Postcommunion 


T WEUS regnórum ómnium, cop, Who hast dominion 
D regümque  dominátor, O over all kingdoms and all 
qui nos et percutiéndo sanas, kings, Who dost heal us by 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1468 


smiting and preserve us by par- 
doning,- stretch forth Thy 
mercy toward us, that we may 
employ for the uses of correc- 
tion the ‘tranquility and peace 
secured by Thy power. Through 
our Lord. i 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


MASS TO BEG FOR PEACE 


et ignoscéndo consérvas: præ- 
ténde nobis - misericérdiam 
tuam: ut tranquillitáte pa- 
cis, tua potestáte serváta, ad 
remédia correctiónis utámuf. 
Per Dóminum. 


Mass to Beg for Peace (Purple) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 36, 118 


IVE peace, O Lord, to them 

that patiently wait for 
Thee, that Thy prophets may 
be found faithful: hear the 
prayers of Thy servant, and of 
Thy people Israel. (P. T. Alle- 
luia, alleluia.) Ps. 121, 1. I 
rejoiced at the things that were 
said to me: We shall go into 
the house of the Lord. y. 
Glory. 


A PACEM, Dómine, sus- 
tinéntibus te, ut Pro- 
phéte tui fidéles invenián- 
tur: exáudi preces servi tui, 
et plebis tue Israél (T. P. Al- 
lelüja, allelija.) Ps. 121, 1. 
Letatus sum in his que dicta 
sunt mihi: in domum Dó- 
' mini íbimus. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, from Whom are holy 
à desires,.. right counsels, 
and just works, give to Thy 
servants that peace which the 
world cannot give; that our 
hearts being .dévoted to the 
keeping of Thy command- 
ments, and the fear of enemies 
removed, our times, by Thy 
protection, may be peaceful. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, a quo Sancta desid- 

éria, recta consilia, et 
justa sunt ópera: da servis 
tuis illam, quam mundus dare 
non potest, pacem; ut et 
corda nostra mandátis tuis 
dédita, et hóstium sublata 
formídine, témpora sint tua 
protectióne tranquílla. Per 
Dóminum. 


Lesson. 2 Mach. 1, 1-5 


Lesson from the Book of 
Machabees. d 

lo THE brethren, the Jews 

that are throughout Egypt, 

the brethren, the Jews that are 


Léctio libri Machabesrum. 


RATRIBUS qui sunt per 
ZEgyptum, Judzis, salú- 
tem dicunt fratres qui sunt in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


e 


MASS TO BEG FOR PEACE 


Jerosólymis, Judei, et qui in 
regióne Judææ, et pacem bo- 
nam, Benefáciat vobis Deus, 
et meminerit testaménti sui 
quod locütus est ad Abraham, 
et Isaac, et Jacob servórum 
suórum fidélium: et det vobis 
cor ómnibus, ut colátis eum, 
et faciótis ejus voluntátem 
corde magno, et ánimo vo- 
lénti. Adapériat. cor vestrum 
in lege Sua, et in precéptis 
suis, et fáciat pacem. Exáu- 
diat oratiónes vestras, et re- 
conciliétur vobis, nec vos 
déserat in témpore malo, Dó- 
minus Deus noster. 


1469 


in Jerusalem, and in the land 
of Judea, send health, and good 
peace. May God be gracious to 
you, and remember His cove- 
nant that He made with Abra- 
ham, and Isaac, and Jacob, His 
faithful servants: And give you 
all a heart to worship Him and 
to do His will with a great 
heart, and a willing mind. May 
He open your heart in His law, 
and in His commandments, and 
send you peace. May He hear 
your prayers, and be reconciled 
unto you, and never forsake 
you in the evil time. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia. is replaced 
by the Tract, in. Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed. by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps.121, "m 7 


Rogate que ad pacem sunt 
Jerúsalem: et abundantia 
diligéntibus te. Y. Fiat pax 
in virtüte tua: et abundantia 
in türribus tuis. 


-Pray ye for the things that 
are for the peace of Jerusalem: 
and abundance for them that 
love thee. Y. Let peace be in 
Thy strength: and abundance 
in thy towers. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelája, allelija. Y. Ps. 
147, 12. Lauda, Jerúsalem, 
Dóminum: lauda Deum tu- 
um, Sion. Alleluja. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 147, 
12. Praise the Lord, O Jerusa- 
lem: praise thy God, O Sion. 
Alleluia, 


Tract. Ps. 75, 2-4 


Notus in Judea Deus, in 
Israël magnum nomen ejus. 
V. Et factus est in pace locus 
ejus, et habitátio ejus in Sion. 
V. Ibi confrégit poténtias ar- 
cuum, scutum, gládium et 
bellum. 


In Judea God is known, His 
name is great in Israel. Y. And 
His place is in peace, and His 
abode in Sion. V. There hath 
He broken the power of bows, 
the shield, the sword, and the 
battle, 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelija. V. Ps. 
147, 12. Lauda, Jerüsalem, 


- Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 147, 
12. Preise the Lord, O Jerusa- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1470 


lem: praise thy God, O Sion. 
Alleluia. Y. Who hath placed 
peace in thy borders: and fill- 
eth thee with the fat of corn. 
Alleluia. : 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


MASS TO BEG FOR PEACE 


Dóminum: lauda Deum tu- 
um, Sion. Allelüja. V. Qui 
pósuit fines tuos pacem: et 
ádipe fruménti sátiat te. Al- 
lelüja. 


Gospel. John 20, 19-23 


H4 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT time: when it was 
JL, late, that same day, the 
first of the week, and the doors 
were shut, where the disciples 
were gathered together for fear 
of the Jews, Jesus came and 
stood in the midst, and said to 
them: Peace be to you. And 
when he had said this, He 
showed them His hands and 
His side. The disciples there- 
fore were glad, when they saw 
ihe Lord. He said therefore to 
ihem again: Peace be to you. 
As the Father bath sent Me, I 
also send you. When He had 
said this, He breathed on them; 
and said to them: Receive ye 
ihe Holy Ghost. Whose sins you 
shall forgive, they are forgiven 
them; and whose sins you shall 
retain, they are retained. 


Hm Sequéntia sancti Eyan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 


T" ILLO témpore: Cum sero 
esset die illo, una sab- 
batórum, et fores essent 
clause, ubi erant discipuli 
congregáti propter metum 
Judeérum, venit Jesus, et 
stetit in médio, et dixit eis: 
Pax vobis. Et cum hoc dixís- 
set, osténdit eis manus et 
latus. Gavisi sunt ergo dis- 
cípuli, viso Dómino. Dixit 
ergo eis iterum: Pax vobis. 
Sicut misit me Pater, et ego 
mitto vos. Hec cum dixisset, 
insuffiàvit, et dixit eis: Ac- 
cípite Spiritum sanctum: 
quorum remiséritis peccáta, 
remittüntur eis: et quorum 
retinuéritis, reténta sunt. 


Offertory. Ps.134,3,6 


Praise ye the Lord, for He is 
good, sing ye to His name, for 
it is sweet: whatsoever He 
pleased, He hath done in 
heaven and upon earth (P. T. 
Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Laudáte Dóminum, quia 
benígnus est: psállite nómini 
ejus, quóniam suávis est: óm- 
nia quecümque vóluit, fecit 
in celo et in terra. (T. P. Alle- 
ja.) 


Secret 


cop, Who sufferest not the 
nations that believe in 
Thee to be shaken by any fear, 


EUs, qui credéntes in te 
pópulos nullis sinis 


cóncuti terróribus: dignáre 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PEUT of 


m7 


MASS IN TIME 


preces et hóstias dicátæ tibi 
plebis suscípere; ut pax a 
tua pletáte concéssa, chris- 
tianórum fines ab omni hoste 
fáciat esse secüros. Per Dó- 


OF PESTILENCE 1471 


deign, we beseech Thee, to re- 
ceive the prayers and sacri- 


fices of the people consecrated 


to Thee, that peace, the gift of 
Thy loving-kindness, may ren- 
der Christian countries safe 
from every enemy. Through 
our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. John 14, 27 


Pacem relinquo vobis: pa- 
cem meam do vobis, dicit Dó- 
minus. (T. P. Allelüja.) 


My peace I leave you: My 
peace I give to you, saith the 
Lord. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 


EUS auctor pacis et 

amátor, quem nosse, 
Vivere, cui servíre, regnáre 
est: prótege ab ómnibus im- 
pugnatiónibus süpplices tu- 
os: ut qui in defensióne tua 
confidimus, nullíus hostilitá- 
tis arma timeámus. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


cop, the author and lover 

of peace, Whom to know 
is to live, and to serve is to 
reign, protect Thy suppliants 
from all assaults, that we who 
trust in Thy defence, may fear 
no armed hostility. Through 
our Lord. 


Mass in Time of Pestilence (Purple) 


‘The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 2 Kings 24, 16 


ECORDÁRE, Dómine, tes- 

taménti tui, et dic An- 
gelo percutiénti: Cesset jam 
manus tua, et non desolétur 
terra, et ne perdas omnes áni- 
mam vivéntem (T. P. Alle- 
lija, allelája.) JV. Ps. 79, 2. 
Qui regis Israél inténde: qui 
dedücis, velut ovem, Joseph. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


JB MINDFUL, O Lord, of Thy 

covenant, and say to the 
destroying angel. Now hold thy 
hand, and let not the land be 
made desolate, and destroy not 
every living soul. (P. T. Alle- 
luia, alleluia.)Ps. 79, 2. Give 
ear, O 'Thou that rulest Israel: 
Thou that leadest Joseph like 
a sheep. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761: Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1472 MASS IN TIME OF PESTILENCE 


Prayer 


cop, Who desirest not the 

death of sinners, but 
their repentance, look merci- 
fully upon Thy people when 
they turn unto. Thee, that, 
while they show devotion to 
Thee, Thou mayst turn away 
from them the scourges of 
Thine anger. Through our 
Lord. : 


EUS, qui non mortem, 
D sed peniténtiam desid- 
eras peccatórum: pópulum 
tuum ad te reverténtem pro- 
pítius réspice: ut, dum tibi 
devótus  exsístit, iracindie 
tue flagélla ab eo cleménter 
amóveas. Per Dóminum. 


Lesson. 2 Kings 24, 15-16, 25 


Lesson from the Book of 
Kings. 

N THOSE days: The. Lord 
T sent a pestilence upon 
Israel, from the morning unto 
the time appointed, and there 
died of the people from Dan to 
Bersabee seventy thousand 
men. And when the angel of 
the Lord had stretched out his 
hand over Jerusalem to destroy 
jt, the Lord had pity on the 
affliction, and said to the angel 
that slew the people: It is 
enough: now hold thy hand. 
And the angel of the Lord was 
by the ‘thrashing-floor of 
Areuna the Jebusite. And 
David said to the Lord, when 
he saw the angel striking the 
people: It is I, I am he that 
have sinned, I have done 
wickedly: these that are the 
sheep, what have they done? 
let Thy hand, I beseech Thee, 
be turned against me, and 
against my father’s house. And 
Gad came to David that day, 
and said: Go up, and build 
an altar to the Lord in the 
thrashing-floor of Areuna the 
Jebusite. And David went up 
according to the word of Gad 
which the Lord had com- 


Léctio libri Regum. 


N DrIÉBUS ills; Immisit 
T Dóminus pestiléntiam in 
Israël, de mane usque ad 
tempus constitütum, et mór- 
tui sunt ex pópulo, a Dan 
usque ad Bersabée, septua- 
ginta millia virórum. Cum- 
que extendísset manum su- 
am Angelus Dómini super 
Jerüsalem, ut  dispérderet 
eam, misértus est Dóminus 
super afflictióne, et ait An- 
gelo percutiénti pópulum: 
Süfficit: nunc cóntine ma- 
num tuam. Erat autem An- 
gelus Dómini juxia áream 
Areüna  Jebussi. Dixitque 
David ad Dóminum, cum 
vidísset Angelum cedéntem 
pópulum: Ego sum qui pec- 
cávi, ego iníque egi: isti, qui 
oves sunt, quid fecérunt? 
vertátur, óbsecro, manus tua 
contra me, et contra domum 
patris mei. Venit autem Gad 
Prophéta ad David in die illa, 
et dixit ei: Ascénde, eb con- 
stitue altáre Dómino in área 
Areüna Jebusmi. Et ascéndit 
David juxta sermónem Gad, 
quem precéperat ei Dómin- 
us: et zdificávit altáre Dó- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS IN TIME OP PESTILENCE 1473 
mino, et Óbtulit-holocáusta et manded him: And he built 
pacífica: et propitiátus est there an altar to the Lord, and 
Dóminus terre, et cohibita est offered holocausts and peace- 
plaga ab Israël. offerings: and: the Lord be- 
" ERU came merciful.to the land, and 
t the plague was stayed from 
Israel. 
From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and ct are ren 
placed, by thé Greater Alleluia. Zn 


Gradual. Ps. 106, 20, 21 


"Misit Dóminus, verbum su- 
um, et sahávit eos: et eripuit 
eos de morte eórum. Y. Con- 
fiteantur Dómino. miseri- 
córdie ejus, et, mirabilia ejus 
filiis hóminum. 


The Lord sent His word, and 
healed ` theni: and delivered 
them from their death. Y. Let 
the mercies of the Lord give 
glory to; Him; and His wọn- 
derful works to the. children of 
men, ` 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allehija, alleluja. Y. Ps. 68; 
2, Salvum. me. fac, . Deus, 
quóniam intravérunt aque 
usque ad.ánimam meam. Al- 
lelüja. , 


Tract. 


Dómine non secündum 
peccáta nostra, que fécimus 
nos: neque secündum in- 
iquitátes nostras 'retríbuas 
nobis. V. Ps. 78, 8, 9. Dómine 
ne ,memíneris iniquitátum 
nostrárum antiquárum, cito 
antícipent nos. misericórdie 
tue; quia páuperes facti su- 
mus nimis. Y. Adjuva nos De- 
us salutáris noster: et prop- 
ter glóriam nóminis tui Dó- 
mine líbera nos: et propítius 
esto peccátis nostris, propter 
nomen tuum. 


. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 68, 2. 
Save me, O God, for the waters 
are come in even unto my soul. 
Alleluia. 


Ps. 102 


O Lord, repay us not accord- 
ing to the sins we have commit- 
ted, nor according to our ini- 
quities. V. Ps. 78, 8, 9. O Lord, 
remember not our former ini- 
quities: let Thy mercies speed- 
ily prevent us, for we are. be- 
come exceeding poor, Help 
us,-O God our Saviour: and for 
the glory of Thy name, O Lord, 
deliver us: and forgive us our 
sins for Thy name’s sake. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 68, 
2. Salvum me fac, Deus, quó- 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 68, 2. 
Save me, O God, for the waters 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1474 


are come in even unto my soul. 
Alleluia, Y. Zach. 8,7, 8. I will 
save my people Israel in the evil 
day: and I will be their God 
in truth and in justice. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel, Jesus rising up, from 


third week in Lent, page 312. 


MASS IN TIME OF PESTILENCE 


niam intravérunt aque usque 
ad ánimam meam. Allelija. 
Y. Zach. 8, 7, 8. Salvábo póp- 
ulum meum Israél in die ma- 
lo, et ero eis in Deum, in veri- 
tate et justitia. Allelája, 


the Mass on Thursday of the 


Offertory. Num. 16, 48 


The high priest stood be- 
tween the dead and the living, 
having & golden censer in his 
hand: and offering the sacrifice 
of incense, he appeased the 
wrath of God, and the afflic- 
tion from the Lord ceased, (P. 
T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. . 


Stetit póntifex inter mór- 
tuos et vivos, habens thuríbu- 
lum áureum in manu Sua: et 
éfferens incénsi sacrifícium, 
placávit iram Dei, et cessávit 
quassátio a Dómino. (T. P. 
Allelája.) 


Secret 


AY the offering of the 

present sacrifice, O Lord, 
we beseech Thee, assist us, that 
it may both absolve us from all 
our sins, and save us from the 
onslaught of complete destruc- 
tion. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


UBVÉNIAT nobis, quesu- 

mus, Dómine, sacrifícii 
preséntis oblátio: que nos et 
ab erróribus univérsis potén- 
ter absólvat, et a totíus erípiat 
perditiónis incürsu. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Communion. Luke 6, 17-19 


A multitude of sick, and they 
that were troubled with un- 
clean spirits, came to Him: for 
virtue went out from Him, and 
healed all. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Multitüdo languéntium, et 
qui vexabántur & spirítibus 
immündis, veniébant ad eum: 
quia virtus de illo exíbai, et 
sanábat omnes. (T. P. Alle- 
lúja.) 


Postcommunion 


ARKEN unto us, O God, our 

Saviour, and make Thy 
people free from the terrors of 
Thy wrath and secure in the 
gift of Thy mercy. Through 
our Lord. : 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


xAUDI nos, Deus, salu- 

táris noster: et pópu- 
lum tuum ab iracúndiæ tuæ 
terróribus liberum, et miseri- 
córdie tuæ fac largitáte se- 
cúrum. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


i the 


MASS TO OBTAIN GRACE OF THE HOLY GHOST 1475 


Mass to Obtain the Grace of the Holp Ghost (Red) 


" Mass of the Holy Ghost, page 1429, with special prayers as 
elow: 


Prayer 


EUS, cui omne cor patet, 

et omnis volüntas ló- 
quitur, et quem nullum latet 
secrétum: purifica per in- 
fusiónem Sancti Spíritus cog- 
itatiónes cordis nostri; ut.te 
perfécte dilígere, et digne 
laudáre mereámur. Per Dó- 
minum ... in unitate ejüs- 
dem. 


cop, to Whom every heart 

is open, and every will 
speaketh, and from Whom no 
secret is hidden, purify by the 
infusion of the Holy Spirit the 
thoughts of our hearts, that 
we may be worthy to love Thee 
perfectly and praise Thee 
worthily. Through...in the 
unity of the same. 


Secret 


ce oblatio, quesumus, 
Dómine, cordis nostri 


ay this oblation, we be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, 


máculas emündet: ut Sancti cleanse the stains of our hearts, 
Spíritus digna efficiátur ha- that they may be made worthy 
bitátio. Per Dóminum ...in habitations of the Holy Spirit. 


| 
i 


unitáte ejüsdem. 


Through...in the unity of the 
same. 


Postcommunion 


ONCÉDE, quesumus, om- 

nípotens Deus, Sanc- 
tum nos Spíritum votis pro- 
meréri sédulis: quátenus ejus 
grátia, et ab ómnibus liberé- 
mur tentatidnibus, et pecca- 
tórum nostrórum indulgén- 
tiam percípere mereámur. Per 
Dóminum...in unitáte ejüs- 
dem. 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 
O almighty God, to de- 
serve the Holy Spirit by con- 
stant prayer, whereby His grace 
may deliver us from all tempta- 
tions, and we may be worthy 
to obtain the forgiveness of our 
sins, Through...in the unity 
of the same. 


Mass for the Remission of Sins (Purple) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Wis. 11, 24, 25, 27 


risERÉRIS ómnium Dó- Hou hast mercy upon all, 
XD mine, et nihil odisti O Lord, and hatest none of 
eórum que fecfsti, dissimu- the things which Thou hast 
lans peccáta hóminum prop- made; winking at the sins of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1476 


men for the sake of repentance; 
and sparing them: for Thou art 
ihe Lord our God. Ps. 56, 2. 
Have mercy on me, O God, 
have mercy on me; for my soul 
trusteth in Thee. Y. Glory. 


MASS FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS 


ter peniténtiam, et parcens 
illis; quia tu es Dóminus De- 
us noster. Ps. 56, 2. Miserére 
mei, Deus, miserére mei, quó- 
niam in te confídit ánima 
mea. VY. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EAR, O Lord, we beseech . XÁUDI, quesumus, Dó- 
Thee, the prayers of Thy mine, súpplicum preces, 
suppliants and punish not the et confiténtium tibi parce 


sins of those who confess unto peccátis: ut páriter nobis in- 
Thee; but in Thy bounty grant dulgéntiam tríbuas benígnus, 


us both forgiveness and peace. 
Through our Lord. 


et pacem. Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. Romans 7, 22-25 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. LE g 

RETHREN: I am delighted 
with the law of God, ac- 
cording to the inward man: but 
I see another law in my mem- 
bers, fighting against the law 
of my mind, and captivating 
me in the law of sin, that is in 
my members. Unhappy man 
that I am, who shall deliver me 
from the body of this death? 
The grace of God, by Jesus 
Christ our Lord. | 


Léctio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Romános. 


RATRES: Condeléctor legi 
Dei secundum interiór- 
em hóminem: vídeo autem 


-éliam legem in membris meis, 


repugnántem legi mentis 
mee, et captivántem me in 
lege peccáti, que est in mem- 
bris meas. Infélix ego homo, 
quis me liberábit de córpore 
mortis hujus? Grátia Dei per 
Jesum Christum, Dóminum 
nostrum. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 78,9, 10 


Forgive us our sins, O Lord, 
lest they should say. among the 
gentiles, Where is their God? 
V. Ps. 78, 9. Help us, O God our 
Saviour; and for the glory of 
Thy name, O Lord, deliver us. 


Propitius esto, Dómine, 
peecátis nostris, nequándo 
dicant gentes: Ubi est Deus 
eórum? Y. Ps. 78, 9. Adjuva 
nos, Deus salutáris noster: et 
propter honórem nóminis tui, 
Dómine, líbera nos. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS 


1477 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelija, alleluja. V. Ps. 7, 
12. Deus judex justus, fortis 
et pátiens: numquid irascétur 
per singulos dies? Allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 7, 12. 
God is a just judge, strong and 
patient: is He angry every day? 
Alleluia. i 


Tract. Ps. 129, 1-4 


De profúndis clamávi ad te 
Dómine: Dómine exáudi vo- 
cem meam. JV. Fiant aures 
tus intendéntes, in oratió- 
nem servi tui. V. Si iniqui- 
tates: observáveris Dómine: 
Dómine quis sustinébit. V. 
Quia apud te propitiátio est: 
et propter legem tuam sustí- 
nui te Dómine. 


From the depths I have cried 
to Thee, O Lord; Lord, hear my 
voice. Y. Let Thine ears be at- 
tentive to the prayer of Thy 
servant. ¥. If Thou shalt ob- 
serve iniquities, O Lord, Lord, 
Who shall endure it? Y. For 
with Thee is propitiation, and 
by.reason of Thy law I have 
waited for Thee, O Lord. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allelúja. Y. Ps. 7, 
12. Deus judex justus, fortis 
et pátiens: numquid irascétur 
per singulos dies? Allelüja. 
¥. Ps. 50, 10. Auditui meo da- 
bis gáudium et letítiam: et 
exsultábunt ossa humiliáta. 
Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps.7, 12. 
God is a just judge, strong and 
patient: is He angry every 
day? Alleluia. Y. Ps. 50, 10. 
To my hearing Thou shalt give 
joy and gladness: and the 
bones that have been humbled 
shall rejoice. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 11, 22-25 | 


7E Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secándum Lucam. 


ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
ra discipulis suis: Pétite, 
et dabitur vobis: querite, et 
inveniétis: pulsáte, et aperié- 
tur vobis. Omnis enim, qui 
petit, accipit: et qui querit, 
ínvenit: et pulsanti aperiétur. 
Quis &utem ex vobis patrem 
petit panem? numquid lápi- 
dem dabit illi? Aut piscem: 
numquid pro pisce serpéntem 
dabit iH? Aut si petíerit 
ovum: numquid pórriget illi 


®© Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT lime: Jesus said 

to His disciples: Ask 
and it shall be given to you; 
seek, and you shall find; 
knock, and it shall be opened 
to you. For every one that ask- 
eth receiveth; and he that 
seeketh findeth; and to him 
that knocketh it shall be 
opened. And which of you if he 
ask his father bread, wil he 
give him a stone? or a fish, will 
he for a fish, give him & ser- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1478 


pent? Or if he shall ask an egg, 
will he reach him a scorpion? 
If you then, being evil know 
how to give good gifts to your 
children, how much more will 
your Father from heaven give 
the good Spirit to them that 
ask Him? 


Offertory. 
O Lord, hear my prayer: and 
let my cry come to Thee. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


MASS FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS 


scorpiónem? Si ergo vos cum 
sitis mali, nostis bona data 
dare fillis vestris: quanto 
magis Pater vester de celo 
dabit spíritum bonum petén- 
tibus se? ` 


Ps. 101, 2 


Domine, exáudi oratiónem 
meam: et clamor meus ad te 
pervéniat. 


Secret 


E OFFER up to Thee, O 

Lord, a sacrifice of 
atonement and praise; that 
Thou mayest both mercifully 
pardon our sins and guide our 
wavering hearts, Through our 
Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


s ÓsTIas tibi, Dómine, pla- 

catiónis et laudis of- 
férimus; ut et delícta nostra 
miserátus absólvas, et nután- 
tia corda tu dírigas. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Communion. Luke 11, 9, 10 


Ask, and you shall receive; 
seek, and you shall find; 
knock, and it shall be opened 
to you. For every one that 
asketh receiveth; and he that 
seeketh findeth; and to him 
that knocketh it shall be 
opened, ' 


Pétite, et accipiétis: quar- 
ite, et inveniétis: pulsáte, et 
aperiétur vobis. Omnis enim, 
qui petit, áccipit: et qui que- 
rit, invenit, et pulsánti ape- 
riétur. 


Postcommunion 


Gu eternal Saviour, that 
we who by means of this 
gift receive forgiveness of sins, 
may henceforth avoid sin. 
'Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers. page 793. 


RESTA nobis, etérne Sal- 

— vator: ut, percipiéntes 

hoc münere véniam peccató- 

rum, deínceps peccáta vité- 
mus. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


fan, 


MASS FOR PILGRIMS AND TRAVELERS 1479 


Mass for Pilgrims and for Travelers (Purple) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. . 


Introit. Ps. 25, 11-12 


EDIME me Dómine, et 
miserére mei pes ením 
meus stetit in via recta; in 
ecclésiis: benedícam  Dómi- 
num. (T. P. Alleluja, allelija.) 
Ps. Íi, 1. Júdica me Dómine, 
quóniam ego. in innocéntia 
mea ingréssus sum; et in Dó- 
nino sperans, non infirmábor. 
y. Glória Patri. 


EDEEM me, O. Lord, and 
have mercy on me: for 


my foot hath stood in the di- 


rect way: in the churches I 
will bless the Lord. (P. 7. Alle- 
luia, alleluia.) Ps. 11, 1. Judge 
me, O Lord, for I have walked 
in my innocence: and I have 
put my trust in the Lord, and 
shall not be weakened. Y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Ésro, Dómine, suppli- 

eatiónibus nostris: et 
viam famulórum tuórum in 
salütis tue prosperitáte dis- 
pone; ut inter omnes vie et 
vite hujus varietátes, tuo 
semper protegántur auxílio. 
Per Dóminum, ` 


Prayer 


END Thine ear to our sup- 
à plications, O Lord, and 
dispose the way of Thy servants 
in the prosperous way of Thy 
salvation, that, among. all the 
vicisitudes of this life’s pilgrim- 
age, they may ever be protected 
by. Thine assistance. Through 
our Lord. A 


Lesson. Gen. 28, 10-22 


Léctio libri Génesis. 


N pIEBUS ills: Egréssus 

Jacob de Bersabée, per- 
gébat Haran. Cumque venís- 
set ad quemdam locum, et 
vellet in eo requiéscere post 
solis occübitum, tulit de lapi- 
dibus qui jacébant, et suppó- 
nens cápiti suo, dormívit in 
eódem loco. Vidítque in som- 
nis Dóminum dicéntem sibi: 
Ego sum Dóminus Deus Abra- 
ham patris tui, et Deus Isaac: 
terram, in qua dormis, tibi 


Lesson from the Book of 
Genesis. 
N THOSE days: Jacob being 
departed from Bersabee, 
went on to Haran. And when 
he was come to a certain place, 
and would rest in it after sun- 
set, he took of the stones that 
lay there, and putting under 
his head, slept in the same 
place. And he saw in his sleep 
the Lord, saying to him: I am 
the Lord God of Abraham thy 
father, and the God of Isaac: 
The land, wherein thou sleep- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1480 MASS FOR PILGRIMS AND TRAVELERS 


est, I will give to thee and to 
thy seed. And thy seed shall 
be as the dust of the earth: 
thou shalt spread abroad to 
the west, and to the east, and 
to the north, and to the south: 
and in thee and thy seed all 
the tribes of the earth shall be 
blessed. And I will be thy 
keeper whithersoever thou go- 
est, and will bring thee back 
into this land: neither will I 
leave thee, till I shall have ac- 
complished all that I have said. 
And Jacob, arising in the 
morning, took the stone, which 
he had laid under his head, 
and set it up for a title, pouring 
oil upon the top of if. And he 
made & vow, saying: If God 
shall be with me, and shall 
keep me in the way, by which 
I walk, and shall give me bread 
to eat, and raiment to put on; 
and I shall return prosperously 


lo my father's house: the Lord 


Shall be my God: and this 
stone, which I have set up for 
a title, shall be called the house 
of God: and of all things that 
Thou shalt give to me, I will 
offer tithes to Thee. 


dabo et sémini tuo. Eritque 
semen tuum quasi pulvis ter- 
ræ: dilatáberis ad Occidén- 
tem, et Oriéntem, et Septen- 
triónem, et Meridiem; et ben- 
edicéntur in te, et in sémine 
tuo cuncte tribus terre. Et 
ero custos tuus quocümque 
perréxeris, et redücam te in 
terram hanc: nec dimittam, 
nisi complévero univérsa que 
dixi. Surgens ergo Jacob 
mane, tulit lápidem, quem 
supposüerat capiti suo, et 
eréxit in títulum, fundens 
éleum désuper. Vovit étiam 
votum, dicens: Si füerit Deus 
mecum, et custodíerit me in 
via, per quam ego ámbulo, et 
déderit mihi panem ad ve- 
scéndum, et vestiméntum ad 
induéndum, reversüsque füe- 
ro próspere ad domum patris 
mel: erit mihi Dóminus in 
Deum, et lapis iste, quem eréxi 
in títulum, vocábitur domus 
Dei: cunctorümque, que dé- 
Rd mihi, décimas ófferam 
ti 2 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
pla 


ced by the Greater Alleluia, 


Gradual. 


Ps. 22, 4 


If I should walk in the midst Si ámbulem in médio um- 
of the shadow of death, I will bræ mortis, non timébo mala: 
fear no evils, for Thou art with quóniam tu mecum es, Dó- 
me, O Lord. Y. Thy rod, and mine. Y. Virga tua et báculus 
Thy staff, they have comforted tuus: ipsa me consoláta sunt. 
me. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 118, — Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 118, 
133. Direct my steps according 133. Gressus meos dírige se- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS FOR. PILGRIMS AND TRAVELERS 


cindum elóquium tuum: ut 
non dominétur mei omnis in- 
justita. Allelüja. 


1481 


to Thy word, and let no iniquity 
have dominion over me. Alle- 
luia. 


Tract. Ps, 90, 11, 13 


Angélis suis Deus mandávit 
de te: ut custódiant te in óm- 
nibus viis tuis, Y. In mánibus 
portábunt te: ne umquam of- 
féndas ad lapidem, pedem tu- 
um.: Y. Super áspidem et 
basiliscum ambulábis: et con- 
culcábis leónem et dracónem. 


God hath given His angels 
charge over thee, to Keep thee 
jn all thy ways. Y. In their 
hands they shall bear thee up: 
Jest thou dash thy foot against 
a stone. Y. Thou shalt walk 
upon the asp and the basilisk, 


‘and thou shalt trample under 


foot the lion and the dragon. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alnlelüja, allehija. V. Ps. 118, 
133. Gressus meos dírige se- 
cündum elóguium tuum: ut 
non dominétur mei omnis in- 
justitia. Allelüja. Y. Ps. 121, 1. 
Letatus sum in his que dicta 
sunt mihi: In domum Dómini 
ibimus. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 118, 
133. Direct my steps according 
to Thy word, and Jet no iniquity 
have dominion over me. Alle- 
luia. V. Ps. 121, 1. I rejoiced 
at the things that were said to 
me: We shall go into the house 
of the Lord. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 10, 7-14 


Hm Sequéntia sancti Evan- ` 


gélii secindum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 

sus discipulis suis: Eüntes 
predicáte, dicéntes: Quia ap- 
propinquávit regnum  cteló- 
rum. Infirmos curáte, mór- 
tuos suscitáte, leprósos mun- 
dáte, demones ejícite: gratis 
accepístis, gratis date. Nolíte 
possidére aurum, neque ar- 
géntum, neque pecüniam in 
zonis vestris: non peram in 
via, neque duas tünicas, neque 
calceaménta, neque virgam: 
dignus enim est operárius 
cibo suo. In quamcümque au- 
tem civitátem aut castéllum 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat. 
thew. 
T THAT time: Jesus said 
to His disciples: Going, 
preach, saying, the kingdom of 
heaven is at hand. Heal the 
sick, raise the dead, cleanse the 
lepers, cast out devils: freely 
have you received, freely give. 
Do not possess gold, nor silver, 
nor money in your purses: nor 
scrip for your journey, nor two 
coats, nor shoes, nor a staff; 
for the workman is worthy of 
his meat. And into whatsoever 
city or town you shall enter, in- 
quire who in it is worthy, and 
there abide till you go thence, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1482 


And when you come into the 
house, salute it, saying: Peace 
be to this house. And if that 
house be worthy, your peace 
shall come upon it; but if it be 
not worthy, your peace shall 
return to you. And whosoever 
shall not receive you, nor hear 
your words: going forth out of 
that house or city shake off the 
dust from your feet. 


MASS FOR PILGRIMS AND TRAVELERS 


intravéritis, interrogate, quis 
in ea dignus Sit: et ibi manéte 
donec exeátis. Intrántes au- 
tem in domum, salutáte eam, 
dicéntes: Pax huic dómui. Et 
si quidem füerit domus illa 
digna, véniet pax vestre su- 
per eam: si autem non füerit 
digna, pax vestra revertétur 
ad vos. Et quicümque non re- 
céperit vos, neque audierit 
sermónes vestros; exeüntes 


foras de domo, vel civitáte, excütite pülverem de pédibus vestris. 


Offertory. Ps.16, 5-7 


Perfect Thou my goings in 
Thy paths, that my footsteps 
be not moved: O incline Thy 
ear unto me, and hear my 
words: show forth Thy won- 
derful mercies, Thou Who 
savest them that trust in Thee, 
O Lord. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Pérfice gressus meos in sé- 
mitis tuis, ut non moveántur 
vestigia mea: inclina aurem 
tuam mihi, et exáudi verba 
mea: mirífica misericórdias 
tuas, qui salvos facis sperán- 
tes in te, Dómine. (T. P. Al- 
lelüja.) 


Secret 


ERCIFULLY listen to our 

prayers, O Lord, and 
graciously accept these obla- 
tions which we offer Thee for 
Thy servants, that 'Thou mayst 
direct their path with Thy 
grace going before and vouch- 
safe to accompany it with Thy 
grace following, and that we 
may rejoice for their behavior 
and their salvation according 
to the safeguards of Thy mercy. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Thou hast commanded Thy 
commandments to be kept 


ROPITIARE, Dómine, sup- 

plicatiónibus nostris; et 
has oblatiónes, quas tibi of- 
férimus pro fámulis tuis, be- 
nígnus assüme: ut viam illó- 
rum et precedénte grátia tua 
dirigas, et subsequénte com- 
itari dignéris; ut de actu at- 
que incolumitáte eórum, se- 
cündum  misericórdie tuse 
presidia gaude&mus. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Ps. 118 


Tu mandásti, mandáta tua 
custodíri nimis: utinam diri- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS FOR THE SICK 


gántur vie mex, ad custodi- 
éndas justificatiónes tuas. 


1483 


most diligently: O that my 
ways may be directed to keep 
Thy justifications. 


Postcommunion 


va, Dómine, sacraménta, 
qua sümpsimus, fámulos 
tuos in te sperántes custódi- 
ant: et contra omnes advér- 
Sos tueántur incürsus. Per 
Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


AY 'Thy sacraments, O 
Lord, which we have re- 
ceived, keep Thy servants, who 


hope in Thee, and guard 


them against all adversaries. 
Through our Lord. 


Mass tor the Sick 


For a sick person near death, special Prayer, Secret and Post- 
communion, as found at the end of this Mass are said. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 54, 2, 3 


xáu»ni Deus oratiénem 

meam, et ne despéxeris 
deprecatiónem meam: in- 
ténde in me, et exáudi me. 
(T. P. Allelúja, allelüja.) Ps. 
54, 3, 4. Contristátus sum in 
exercitatióne mea: et con- 
turbátus sum a voce inimíci, 
et a tribulatióne peccatóris. 
Y. Glória Patri. 


EAR, O God, my prayer, 
hn and despise not my sup- 
plication: be attentive to me, 
and hear me. (P. T. Alleluia, 
alleluia.) Ps. 54, 3, 4. I am 
grieved in my exercise; and am 
troubled at the voice of the 
enemy, and at the tribulation 
of the sinner. P. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


MNÍPOTENS sempitérne 

Deus, salus etérna cre- 
déntium: exáudi nos pro fá- 
mulis tuis infírmis, pro qui- 
bus misericórdie tue implo- 
rámus auxílium; ut, réddita 
sibi sanitáte, gratiárum tibi 
in Ecclésia tua réferant ac- 
tiónes. Per Dóminum. 


ALMIGHTY and everlasting 

‘God, the eternal salvation 
of them that believe, hear our 
prayers for Thy sick servants 
for whom we implore Thy mer- 
cy, that with restored health 
they may render thanks to 
Thee in Thy Church. Through 
our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1484 


MASS FOR THE SICK 


Epistle. James 5, 13-16 


Lesson from. the Epistle of 
blessed James the Apostle. 
EARLY beloved: Is any of 
you sad? Let him pray. Is 
he cheerful in mind? Let him 
sing. Is any man sick among 
you? Let him bring in the 
priests of the Church, and let 
them pray over him, anointing 
him with oil in the name of the 
Lord. And the prayer of faith 
Shall save the sick man: and 
ihe Lord shall raise him up: 
and if he be in sins, they shall 
be forgiven him. Confess there- 
fore your sins one to another: 
and pray one for another, that 
you may be saved. - 


Léctio Epistole beáti Jacóbi 
Apóstoli. 
ARÍssTMI: Tristatur álj- 
quis vestrum? Oret. 
ZEquo ánimo est? Psallat. In- 
firmátur quis in vobis? Indü- 
cat presbyteros Ecclésie, et 
orent super eum, ,ungéntes 
eum óleo in nómine Dómini: 
et orátio fídei salvábit infír- 
mum, et alleviábit eum Dómi- 
nus: et si in peccatis sit, re- 
mitténtur ei. Confitémini ergo 
altérutrum peccáta vestra, et 
orate pro ínvicem, ut salvé- 
mini. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 6, 3, 4 


Have mercy on me, O Lord, 
for I am weak, heal me, O Lord. 
yV. AM my bones are troubled, 
and my soul is troubled exceed- 
ingly. 


Miserére mihi, Domine, 
quéniam infirmus sum: sana 
me, Dómine. V. Conturbata 
sunt ómnia ossa mea, et án- 
ima mea turbáta est valde. 


Lesser A lleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 101, 2. 
O Lord, hear my prayer: and 


Allehija, allelija. V. Ps. 
101, 2. Dómine, exaudi ora- 


let my cry come to Thee. Alle- tiónem meam: et clamor meus 


luia. 


ad te pervéniat. Allelüja. 


Tract. Ps. 30, 10, 11 


Have mercy on me, O Lord, 
for I am afflicted: my. eye is 
troubled with. wrath, my soul 
and my belly. Y. For my life is 
wasted with grief, and my years 
in sighs. Y. My strength is 
weakened through poverty: and 
my bones are disturbed. 


Miserére mei, Dómine, quó- 
niam tríbulor: conturbátus 
est in ira óculus meus, ani- 
ma mea, et venter meus. JY. 
Quóniam defécit in .dolore 
vita mea, et anni mei in ge- 
mítibus. Y. Infirmáta est in 
paupertáte virtus .mea: et 
ossa mea conturbáta sunt. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


í 


Á 


MASS FOR THE sick 


1488 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelaja,. allelúja, Y. Ps. 
101, 2. Dómine, exáudi ora- 
tiónem meam, et clamor meus 
ad te pervéniat. Alleluja. Y. 
Ps, 27, 7. In Deo sperávit cor 
meum, et adjütus sum: et re- 
flóruit caro mea, et ex volun- 
táte mea confitébor el. Alle- 
Jája. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 101, 
2. O Lord, hear my prayer: and 
let my cry come to Thee, Alle- 
luia. Y. Ps, 27, 7. In God hath 
my heart confided, and I have 
been helped: and my flesh hath 
fiourished again, and with my 
will I wil give praise to Him. 
Alleluia. 


Gospel, When Jesus had entered, from ihe Mass on Thurs- 
day after Ash Wednesday, page 224. 


Offertory. 

Exáudi, Deus, oratiónem 

meam, et ne despéxeris de- 

precatiónem meam: inténde 

in me, et exáudi me, (T. P. 
Allelüja.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 54, 2, 3 


Hear, O God, my prayer, and 
despise not my supplication: be 
attentive to me, and hear me. 
XP. T. Alleluia.) 


`- Secret 


Eus, cujus nütibus vite 

nostre moménta de- 
current: süscipe preces et 
hóstias famulórum tuórum, 
pro quibus zgrotántibus mise- 
ricórdiam tuam implorámus; 
ut, de quorum perículo metüi- 
mus, de eórum salüte letémur. 
Per Déminum. 


HOU at Whose will the mo- 
ani ments of our life run on, 
receive, O God, the prayers and 
sacrifices of Thy servants; for 
whom we beseech Thy mercy 
in their sickness, that, as we 
have feared for their peril, we 
may rejoice for their safety. 
‘Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 
Communion. Ps.30, 17,18 


Illümina fáciem tuam su- 
per servum tuum, et salvum 
me fac in tua misericórdia: 
Dómine non confindar, quó- 
niam invocávi te, (T. P. Alle- 
luja.) 


Make Thy face to shine upon 
Thy servant, and save me in 
Thy mercy: Let me not be con- 
founded, O Lord, for I have 
called upon Thee. (P. T. Alle- 
luia.) 


Postcommunion 


rus, infirmitátis humá- 
ne singuláre presidi- 
um: auxilii tui super infir- 


cop, the sole defense of 
human. infirmity, show 
forth Thy power upon Thy sick 


http://ccwatershed.org 


4486 


servants that, being assisted by 
the help of Thy mercy, they 
may be found worthy to be 
brought back in health to Thy 
holy Church. 'Through our 
Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


MASS FOR THE SICK 


mos fámulos tuos osténde vir- 
tütem; ut ope misericérdie 
tue adjuti, Ecclésie tue 
sancte incólumes repræsen- 
ttari mereántur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


For a sick person near death, the same Mass with the following 


prayers: 


Prayer 


LMIcHTy and merciful 
God, Who hast given to 
mankind both the remedies of 
salvation and the rewards of 
everlasting life, mercifully 
look upon Thy servant who is 
suffering from bodily infirmity 
and cherish the soul Thou hast 
created, that in the hour of its 
going forth it may deserve to 
be presented without stain of 
sin to Thee, its Creator, by the 
hands of the holy angels. 
Through our Lord. 


MNÍPOTENS et miséricors 
Deus, qui humáno gé- 
neri et salütis remédia, et vi- 
te etérne münera contulísti: 
réspice propítius fámulum tu- 
um infirmitáte córporis labo- 
rántem, et ánimam réfove, 
quam creásti; ut in hora éx- 
itus illíus, absque peccáti má- 
cula tibi Creatóri suo per ma- 
nus sanctérum  Angélorüm 
representári mereátur. Per 
Dóminum. 


Secret 


ECEIVE, We beseech 'Thee, 


4 O Lord, the sacrifice 


which we offer Thee for Thy 
servant, who is now at the end 
of his life, and grant that 
through it all his sins may be 
purged away, so that he, who 
in this life is bruised by the 
stripes of Thy ordering, may 
in the life to come obtain ever- 
lasting repose. Through our 
Lord. 


SY quaesumus Dómi- 
ne, hóstiam, quam tibi 
offérimus pro fámulo tuo in 
extrémo vite constituto: . et 
concéde, ut per eam univérsa 
illius purgéntur delícta; ut, 
qui tue dispositiónis flagéllis 
in hac vita attéritur, in fu- 
tira réquiem consequatur 
ztérnam. Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


E BESEECH Thy clemency, 
O almighty God, that 


UXSUMUS cleméntiam 
Q tuam, omnípotens Deus, 


by the virtue of this sacrament ut per hujus virtütem sacra- 
‘Thou vouchsafe to confirm Thy ménti fámulum tuum grátia 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS TO BEG A HAPPY DEATH 


tua confirmáre dignéris: ut in 
hora mortis ejus non pre- 
váleat contra eum adversá- 
rius; sed cum Angelis tuis 
tránsitum habére mereátur 
ad vitam. Per Dóminum. 


1487 


servant with Thy grace, that 
in the hour of his death the 
adversary may .not prevail 


against him, but that he may 


be found worthy to have angels 


. with him in his passage to life. 


Through our Lord. 


Mass to Beg a 3bappp Beath (Purple) 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


LLÜMINA óculos meos, ne 

umquam obdórmiam in 
morte; nequándo dicat ini- 
micus méus: Preválui advér- 
sus eum. Ps. 12, 1. Usquequo 
Dómine, obliviscéris me in 
finem? üsquequo avértis fá- 
clem tuam a me? Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761. 


Ps. 12, 4 


NLIGHTEN my eyes, that I 
never sleep in death; lest 

at any time my enemy Say, I 
have prevailed against him. Ps. 
12, 1. How long, O Lord, wilt 
Thou forget me unto the end? 
How long dost Thou turn away 
Thy face from me? Y. Glory. 


- Prayer 


MNíPOTENS et miséricors 

Deus, qui humáno géne- 
ri et salütis remédia et vite 
wtérne munera contulisti: 
réspice propitius nos fámulos 
tuos, et ánimas réfove, quas 
creásti; ut in hora éxitus eá- 
rum, absque peccáti mácula 
tibi Creatéri suo per manus 
sanctorum Angelórum repre- 
sentári mereántur. Per Dómi- 
num. 


LMIGHTY and merciful 

God, Who hast given to 
mankind both the remedies of 
salvation and the rewards’ of 
eternal life, look mercifully 
upon us Thy servants, and 
cherish the souls Thou hast 
created, that in the hour of 
their going forth they may be 
found worthy to be presented 
without stain of sin to Thee, 
their Creator, by the hands of 
the holy angels. Through our 
Lord. 


Epistle. Rom. 14, 7-12 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Romános. 


RATRES: Nemo nostrum 
sibi vivit, et nemo sibi 


móritur. Sive enim vívimus, 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Romans. 

RETHREN, none of us liv- 
eih to himself; and no 
man dieth to himself. For 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1488 


whether we live, we live unto 
the Lord; or whether we die, 
we die unto the Lord. Therefore 
whether we live or whether we 
die, we are the. Lord's. For to 
ihis end Christ died and rose 
again; that He might be Lord 
both of the dead and of the 
living. But thou, why judgest 
thou thy brother? or thou, why 
dost thou despise thy brother? 
For we shall all stand before 
the judgment-seat of Christ. 
For it is written: As I live, saith 
the Lord, every knee shall bow 
to Me: and every tongue shall 
confess. to God. Therefore 
every one of us shall render 
account to God for himself. 


From Septuagesima to Easter 


MASS TO BEG A HAPPY DEATH 


Dómino vívimus: sive móri- 
mur, Dómino mórimur. Sive 
ergo vivimus, sive mórimur, 
Dómini sumus. In hoc enim. 
Christus mórtuus est, et re- 
surrexit: ut et mortuórum et 
vivórum dominétur. Tu au- 
tem quid jüdicas fratrem tu- 
um? aut tu quare spernis fra-. 
trem tuum? Omnes enim stá- 
bimus ante tribunal Christi. 
Scriptum est enim: Vivo ego, 
dicit Dóminus, quóniam mihi 
flectétur omne genu; et om- 
nis lingua confitébitur Deo. 
Itaque unusquisque nostrum. 
pro se ratiónem reddet Deo. 


the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


b 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. 


Though I should walk in the 
midst of the shadow of death, 
_ I will fear no evils: for Thou 
art with me, O Lord. Y. Thy 
rod and 'Thy staff they have 
comforted me. 


Ps. 22, 4 


Si ámbulem in médio um- 
bre mortis, non timébo mala: 
quóniam tu mecum es, Dó- 
mine. Y. Virga tua, et bácu- 
lus tuus, ipsa me consoláta 
sunt. 


Lesser Alleluia 


. Alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 30, 2, 3. 


Allelija, allelija. Y. Ps, 30, 


In Thee, O Lord, I have hoped, 2, 3. In te, Dómine, sperávi, 
let me never.be confounded: non confündar in etérnum: in. 
deliver me in Thy justice and justitia tua libera me et éripe 
save me: bow down Thy ear to me: inclíng ad me aurem tu- 
me: make haste to deliver me. am: accélera ut erípias me. 
Alleluia. Allelüja. 


Tract. Ps. 24, 17-18; 1-4 


Deliver me from my necessi- De  mnecessitátibus meis 
ties, O Lord: see my abjection éripe me, Dómine. Vida hu- 
and my labor, and forgive me militátem meam, et labórem. 
all my sins. Y. To Thee, O Lord, meum: et dimítte ómnia pec- 
have I lifted up my soul: in cáta mea. Y. Ad te, Dómine, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS TO BEG A HAPPY DEATH 


levávi ánimam meam: Deus. 
meus, in te confído, non eru- 
béscam: neque irrídeant me 
inimici mei. V. Etenim uni- 
vérsi, qui te exspéctant, non 
confundéntur: confundántur 
omnes faciéntes vana. 


1489 


Thee, O my God, I put my 
trust, le& me not be ashamed: 
neither let my enemies laugh 
&t me, Y. For none of them 
that wait on Thee shall be con- 
founded: let all them. be con- 
founded that do vain things. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allehija, allehija. Y. Ps. 113, 
1. In éxitu Israél de ZEgypto, 
domus Jacob de pópulo bár- 
baro. Allelija. V. Ps. 107, 2. 
Parátum cor meum, Deus, 
parátum cor'meum: cantábo 
et psallam tibi; glória mea. 
Allelája. : 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y.. Ps. 113, 
1. When Israel went out of 
Egypt, the house of Jacob from 
@ barbarous people. Y. Ps. 107, 
2. My heart is ready, O God, my 
heart is ready: X will sing, I 
will give praise with my CES 
Alleluia, : 


Gospel. Luke 21, 34-36 


"B Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Lucam. 
T; ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus discípulis suis: Attén- 
dite vobis, ne forte gravéntur 
corda vestra in crápula, et 
ebrietáte, et curis hujus vite, 
et supervéniat in vos repen- 
tina dies illa: tamquam já- 
queus enim supervéniet in 
omnes, qui sedent super fá- 
ciem oninis terre. Vigilate 
itaque, omni témpore orántes, 
ut digni habeámini fügere ista, 
ómnia, que futüra sunt et 
stare ante Fílium hóminis, 


,H& Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT time, Jesus said to 
His disciples, Take heed 
to yourselves, lest perhaps your 
hearts. be overcharged with 
surfeiting and drunkeriness and 
the cares of this life; and that 
day come upon you suddenly. 
For as a snare shall it come 
upon all that sit upon the face 
of the whole earth. Watch ye, 
therefore, praying at all times, 
that you may be accounted 
worthy to escape all these 
things that are to come, and 
to stand before the Son of God, 


Offertory. Ps. 30, 15, 16 


In te sperávi Dómine; dixi, In Thee, O Lord, have I 
tu es Deus meus, in mánibus hoped: I said, Thou art my 
tuis témpora mea. (T. P; Al- God, my times are in Thy 
lelúja. . . hands. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1490 


MASS FOR ANY NEED 


Secret 


ECEIVE, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, the sacred vic- 
tim we offer Thee, in prepara- 
tion for our last moments, and 
grant that through it all our 
sins may be purged away, that 
we, who in this life are bruised 
by the stripes appointed by 
Thee, may in the life to 
come obtain everlasting rest. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


USCIPE quesumus, Dómi- 

ne, hóstiam, quam tibi 
offérimus pro extrémo vite 
nostre, et concéde: ut per 
eam univérsa nostra purgen- 
tur delícta; ut, qui tue dispo- 
siiónis flagéllis in hac vita 
attérimur, in futüra réquiem 
consequámur ætérnum, Per 
Déminum. 


Communion. Ps. 70, 16, 17, 18 


O Lord, I will be mindful of 


Dómine memorábor justitie 


Thy justice alone: Thou hast tue solíus: Deus docuísti me 
taught me, O God, from my a juventüte mea; et usque in 
youth, and unto old age and senéctam et sénium, Deus ne 
gray hairs, O God, forsake me derelínquas me. (T. P. Alle- 


not. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


lúja.) 


Postcommunion 


a BESEECH Thy mercy, O 
almighty God, that by 
the power of this sacrament 
Thou vouchsafe to strengthen 
us, Thy servants, in Thy grace, 
that in the hour of our death 
the adversary may not prevail 
against us, but that, in our 
passing to life everlasting, we 
may be worthy to have angels 
with us. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


uzsumus cleméntiam tu- 

am, omnipotens Deus, 

ut per hujus virtütem sacra- 

ménti nos fámulos tuos grá- 

tia tua confirmáre dignéris: 

ut in hora mortis nostre non 

prevéleat contra nos adversa- 

rius, sed cum Angelis tuis 

tránsitum habére mereámur 
ad vitam. Per Dóminum. 


Mass for Anp Peed (Purple) 


Introit, I am the Salvation, as on the 19th Sunday after 


Pentecost, page 720. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Prayer 


ERCIFULLY show unto us 
Thy pity, O Lord, that 
Thou mayst at once rid us of 


NEFFÁBILEM misericórdiam 
tuam, Dómine, nobis cle- 
ménter osténde: ut simul nos 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS POR ANY NEED 1491 
et a peccátis ómnibus éxuas, all our sins and deliver us from 
et a penis, quas pro his meré- the pains which we deserve for 
mur, eríplas. Per Dóminum. them. Through our Lord. 


Kyrie, page 761. 
Lesson. Jer. 14, 7-9 


Léctio Jeremie Prophéte. Lesson from Jeremias the 
Prophet. 


F OUR iniquities have testi- 
fied against us, O Lord, do 
Thou it for Thy name's sake, 
for our rebellions are many: we 
have sinned against Thee. O 
expectation of Israel, the Sa- 
viour thereof in time of trou- 
ble. But Thou, O Lord, art 
among us, and Thy name is 
tum est super nos, ne derelin- called upon us, forsake us not, 
quas nos, Démine Deus noster. O Lord our God, 
From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 43, 8,9 


Liberásti nos, Dómine, ex Thou hast saved us, O Lord, 
affligéntibus nos: et eos, qui from them. that afflict us and 
nos odérunt, confudísti. Y. In hast put them to shame that 
Deo laudábimur tota die, et hate us. Y. In God shall we 
in nómine tuo confitébimur glory all the day long, and in 
in secula. Thy name we will give praise 

for ever. f 


Lesser Alleluia 


X INIQUITÁTES nostræ re- 

spénderint nobis: Dómi- 
ne, fac propter nomen tuum, 
quóniam multæ sunt aversió- 
nes nostre: tibi peccávimus. 
Exspectátio Israél, salvátor 
ejus in témpore tribulatiónis. 
Tu autem in nobis es, Démi- 
ne, et nomen tuum invocá- 


Allelája, allelija. V. Ps. 78, 
9, 10. Propitius esto, Dómine, 
peccátis nostris: nequándo 
dicant gentes: Ubi est Deus 
eórum? Allelija. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 78, 
9, 10, Be merciful, O Lord, to 


our sins: lest ihe gentiles 
Should say, Where is their 
God? Alleluia, 


Greater Alleluia 


AllelGja, alleliija. Y. Ps. 78, 
9, 10. Propítius esto, Dómine, 
peccátis nostris: ne quando 
dicant gentes: Ubi est Deus 
eórum? Allelüja. V. Ps. 30, 8. 
Exsultábo et letabor in mis- 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 78, 9, 
10. Be merciful, O Lord, to our 


Sins: lest the gentiles should 


say, Where is their God? Alle- 
luia. V. Ps. 30, 8. I will be glad 
and rejoice in Thy mercy; for 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1492 MASS FOR ANY NEED 


Thou hast regarded my humil- 
ity: Thou hast saved my soul 
out of distress. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Tract. Ps. 


Deliver me from my neces- 
sities, O Lord: see my abjec- 
tion and my labor, and forgive 
me all my sins. Y. To Thee, O 
Lord, have I lifted up my soul: 
in Thee, O my God, I put my 
trust, le& me not be ashamed: 
neither let my enemies laugh 
at me. JV. For none of them 
that wait on Thee shall be 
confounded: let all them be 
confounded that do vain things. 


ericórdia tua: quóniam resp- 
exísti humilitatem | meam: 
salvásti de necessitátibus áni- 
mam meam. Allelüja. 


24, 17, 18 


De  necessitátibus meis 
éripe me Dómine: vide humil- 
itátem meam, et làbórem me- 
um, et dimítte ómnia peccáta 
mea. Y. Ad te Dómine levávi 
ánimam meam: Deus meus 
in te confido, non erubéscam: 
neque irrídeant me inimíci 
mei. Y. Etenim univérsi qui 
te exspéctant, non confün- 
déntur: confundántur omnes 
faciéntes vana. 


Gospel. Mark 11, 22-26 


& Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mark. 
T THAT lime, Jesus said to 
His disciples: Have the 
aith of God. Amen I say to 
you, that whosoever shall say to 
this mountain, Be thou re- 
moved and be cast into the sea, 
and shall not stagger in his 
heart, but believe, that what- 
soever he saith shall be done; 
it shall be done unto him. 
Therefore I say unto you, all 
things, whatsoever you ask 
When ye pray, believe that you 
Shall receive and they shall 
come unto you. And when you 
shall stand to pray, forgive, if 
you have aught against any 
man; that your Father also, 
Who is in heaven, may forgive 
you your sins. But if you will 
not forgive, neither will your 
Father that is in heaven, for- 
give you your sins. 


© Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Marcum. 


I. ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus discípulis suis: Ha- 
béte fidem Dei. Amen dico 
vobis, quia quicümque díxerit 
huic monti: Tóllere, et mít- 
tere in mare, et non hesita- 
verit in corde suo, sed credi- 
derit quia quodcümque dixerit, 
fiat, fiet ei. Proptérea dico vo- 
bis: Omnia quecumque orán- 
tes pétitis, crédite quia acci- 
piétis, et evénient vobis, Et 
cum stábitis ad orándum, di- 
mittite, si quid habétis advér- 
sus áliquem: ut et Pater ves- 
ter, gui in colis est, dimíttat 
vobis peccáta vestra. Quod 
si vos non dimiséritis: nec 
Pater vester, qui in colis est, 
dimíttet vobis peccáta vestra. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASS OF THANKSGIVING 1498 


Offertory. Ps. 137, 7 

Si ambulávero in médio If I shall walk in the midst 
tribulatiónis, vivificábis me of tribulation, Thou  wilt 
Dómine: et super iram inimi- quicken me, © Lord: and Thou 
córum meórum exténdes ma- wilt stretch forth Thy hand 
num tuam; et salvum me fá- against the wrath of my ene- 
ciet déxtera tu. (T. P. Alle- mies; and Thy right hand shall 
lúia.) ` save me. (P. T, Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
uriricer nos, Dómine ay the offering of the gift 
quesumus, müneris here before Thee, we be- 


preséntis oblátio: et dignos seech Thee, Q Lord, purify us 

sacra participatióne perficiat. and make us fully worthy of 

Per Dóminum.’ its sacred participation. 
i Through our Lord.  - 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


. Communion. Ps. 118, 49, 50 
Meménto verbi tui servo Be Thou mindful of Thy 
tuo Domine, in quo mihi spem word to Thy servant, O Lord, 
dedisti: hzc me consoláta est in which Thou hast given me 
in humilitáte mea. (7. P. hope: this hath comforted me 
Allelüja.) . in my humiliation, (P. T. Alle- 
luia.) . 


Postcommunion 


RESTA, quesumus Dómi- gN RANT, we beseech Thee, O 

ne: ut, terrénis affécti- Lord, that, being purified 

bus expiáti ad supérni pleni- of earthly affections, we may 

tüdinem sacramenti, cujus proceed to the fulness of the 

libavimus sancta, tendamus. supernal sacrament of whose 

Per Dóminum, holiness we bave partaken. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Mass of Thanksgiving 


The Mass of the Most Holy Trinity, page 1414, or of the 
Holy Ghost, page 1429, or of Our Lady, page 1399, or of any 
canonized Saint, is said, adding the following prayers to those 
of the Mass, under the same conclusion: 


Prayer 
EUS, cujus misericérdiz cop, of Whose mercies 
non est nümerus, et bo- there is no number, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1494 


of Whose goodness the treasure 
is infinite; we render thanks to 
'Thy most gracious Majesty for 
the gifts Thou hast bestowed 
upon us, evermore beseeching 
Thy clemency, that as Thou 
grantest tife petitions of them 
that ask Thee, thou wilt never 
forsake them, but wilt prepare 
for the reward to come. 
Through our Lord. 


OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 


nitátis infinitus est thesáu- 
rus: piissime majestáti tue 
pro collátis donis grátias ági- 
mus, tuam semper cleménti- 
am exorántes: ut, qui pe- 
téntibus postuláta concédis, 
eósdem non déserens, ad præ- 
mia futüra dispónas, Per Dó- 
minum. 


_ Secret 


ECEIVE, O Lord, the savor 

of this sacrifice together 
with our thanksgivings, and 
vouchsafe henceforth to guard 
from all adversity those whose 
prayers 'Thou hast been pleased 
to hear; and grant that they 
may be strengthened in Thy 
Service and love. Through our 
Lord. 


DÓREM, Dómine, sacrificii 

hujus cum gratiárum 
actiénibus süscipe, et presta: 
ut quos exaudíre, et incólumes 
servare dignátus es, ab omni 
in pósterum adversitáte cus- 
tódias; et in tuo servítio, et 
amóre concréscant. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Postcommunion 


GOD, Who sufferest no one 

that hopeth in Thee to be 
overmuch stricken, but lendest 
a kindly ear to their prayers; 
we thank Thee for having 
heard our prayers and granted 
our desires, and devoutly en- 
treat Thee that what we have 
received may make us worthy 
to be delivered from all evil. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS qui néminem in te 

sperántem, nimium af- 
fligi permittis, sed pium pré- 
cibus prestas auditum: pro 
postulatiónibus nostris, vo- 
tisque suscéptis grátias ági- 
mus, te piissime deprecántes; 
ut per hee que sümpsimus, 
a cunctis éripe mereámur ad- 
vérsis, Per Dóminum. 


Occasional Prayers 


The following prayers are those from which a celebrating 
priest occasionally selects the third prayer left to his choice 
on days that are not of double rite. Frequently, a bishop may 
order that for some public need one or more of them be added 
in all Masses celebrated in his diocese. Unless he prescribes 
otherwise, such prayer, appointed by the ordinary, is omitted 
on those feasts only which are doubles of the first or second 
class, and on other exceptionally privileged days. In fine, in 
Serial Masses, a priest is allowed to add other Collects, but so 
that the whole number of prayers recited in any Mass never 
exceeds seven. $ 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 1495 


For the Prayers most commonly used, among which are those 
for God’s Holy Church, for the Pope, for the Intercession of 
the Saints and for the Living and the Dead see pages 820-829. 


To Jmplore the Intercession of the Saints 


Prayer 


ONCÉDE, quesumus, om- 

nipotens Deus: ut inter- 
céssio sancte Dei Genitrícis 
Marie, sanctorümque ómmi- 
um Apostolórum, Mártyrum, 
Confessórum, atque Virgi- 
num, et ómnium electérum 
tuérum, nos ubique Letíficet; 
ut dum eórum mérita recóli- 
mus, patrocinia sentiámus. 
Per Dóminum. ` 


Gum we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that the 
intercession of holy Mary, 
Mother of God, and of all the 
holy apostles, martyrs, confes- 
sors, and virgins, and of all 
Thine elect, may everywhere 
gladden us, that, while we com- 
memorate their merits, we may 
experience their protection. 
Through our Lord. 


Secret 


BLÁTIS, Dómine, placáre 

munéribus: et, interce- 
dénte beáta María semper 
Virgine, cum ómnibus Sanctis 
tuis, a cunctis nos defénde pe« 
riculis, Per Dóminum. 


E APPEASED, O Lord, with 

the gifts we offer, and, by 
the intercession of ^ blessed 
Mary, ever a virgin, with all 
Thy saints, defend us from all 
dangers, Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion _ 


UMPSIMUS, Dómine, bedtz 
| Marie semper Virginis, 
et ómnium Sanctórum tuó- 
rum memóriam  recoléntes, 
sacraménta celéstia: presta, 
quaesumus; ut, quod tempo- 
ráliter gérimus, xtérnis gáu- 
diis consequámur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


ENERATING the memory of 

blessed Mary, ever a vir- 
gin, and of all Thy saints, O 
Lord, we have received the hea- 
venly sacraments; grant, we 
beseech Thee, that what we 
celebrate in this life we may ob- 
tain in the joys of heaven. 
Through our Lord. 


For Anp Heed 
Prayer 


EUS, refugium nostrum, 
et virtus: adésto piis 
Ecclési# tum précibus, auctor 
ipse pietatis, et presta; ut, 


Gop, our refuge and our 
strength, the very author 
of piety, harken to the pious 
prayers of Thy Church, that 


http://ccwatershed.org 


14sco OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 


what we seek in faith we may quod fidéliter pétimus, efficá- 
efficaciously obtain. Through citer consequámur. Per Dó- 


our Lord. minum. 
Secret 
Gre we beseech Thee, O A, MISERICORS Deus: ut 
merciful God, that this hzc salutáris oblátio et 


offering of salvation may both a'própriis nos reátibus inde- 
rid us of our own guilt forever sinénter expédiat, et ab óm- 
&nd protect us from allour ad- nibus tueátur advérsis. Per 
versaries, Through our Lord. Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 
E HAVE received, O Lord, ÓxPSIMUS, Dómine, sacri 
the gifts of the sacred dona mystérii, humiliter 


mystery, beseeching that what deprecántes: ut que in tui 
Thou hast taught us to do in commemoratiónem nos fá- 
commemoration of Thee may cere precepisti, in nostre 
profit for the aid of our in- proficiant infirmitátis auxíli- 
firmity. Who livest. um. Qui vivis. 


` In Time of Anp Trouble or Sore Distress 


Prayer 
ESPISE not Thy people, O E DESPÍCIAS, omnipotens 
D almighty God, when they Deus, pópulum tuum in 


cry out in their affliction, but afflictiéne clamantem: sed 
graciously succor them in their propter glóriam néminis tui, 
tribulation, for the glory of tribulatis succürre placátus. 
Thy name. Through our Lord, Per Dóminum. 


Secret 
RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, ÜscrPE, Dómine, propitius 
the sacrifices with which hóstias: quibus et te 


Thou hast willed that Thou placári voluísti, et nóbis sa- 
shouldst be appeased, and that litem poténti pietáte restitui. 
health should be restored to us Per Déminum. 

by the might of Thy loving- 

kindness. Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 
ERCIFULLY look down IBULATIÓNEM nostram, 
upon our tribulation, we qusesumus, Dómine, pro- 


beseech Thee, O Lord, and turn pítius réspice: et iram tue in- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 


dignatiónis, quam juste me- 
rémur, avérte. Per Dóminum, 


1497 


aside the wrath of Thine in- 
dignation; which we justly de- 
serve.. Through our Lord. 


To Beg for Rain s 
Prayer 


rvs, in quo vívimus, 
D movémur, et sumus: 
pliviam nobis tríbue congru- 
éntem;. ut, preséntibus sub- 
sidiis sufficiénter adjuti, sem- 
pitérna fiducidlius appetá- 
mus. Per Dóminum. 


cop, in Whom we live, 

and move, and have our 
being, grant us rain, in due 
abundance, that, being suffi- 
ciently helped with temporal, 
we may the more confidently 
seek after eternal gifts. 
Through our Lord. 


Secret 


BLÁTIS, quesumus, Dó- 

mine, placáre munéri- 

bus: et opportünum nobis trí- 

bue plüvim sufficiéntis auxili- 
um. Per Dóminum. 


E APPEASED, O Lord, we 

beseech 'Thee, by the 
gifts we offer, and give the 
timely aid of sufficient rain. 
"Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


A. NOBIS, quzsumus, Dó- 

mine, pliviam salutá- 
rem: et áridam terre faciem 
fluéntis. celéstibus dignánter 
infünde. Per Dóminum. 


IVE. us, we pray Thee, O 
Lord, wholesome rain, 

and graciously bathe the 
parched face of earth with hea- 
venly floods. Through our Lord. 


To Beg for Fine Weather 


Prayer 


D TE nos, Dómine, cla- 

mántes exáudi: et áé- 
ris serenitátem nobis tríbue 
supplicántibus; ut, qui juste 
pro peccátis nostris affligimur, 
misericórdia tua, preveniénte, 
cleméntiam sentiamus. Per 
Dóminum. 


RACIOUSLY hear us, O 
Lord, when we call upon 
Thee, and grant unto our sup- 
plications a calm atmosphere, 
that we, who are justly afflicted 
for our sins, may, by Thy pro- 
tecting mercy,. experience par- 
don. Through our Lord. 


Secret 


REVENIAT Nos, quesumus, 
Dómine, grátia tua 
semper, et subsequátur: et has 


AY Thy grace, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, ever go 
before us and follow us, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1498 


graciously receive these obla- 
tions, which we bring to be 
consecrated to Thy name for 
our sins, that they may, by the 
intercession of Thy saints, 
profit us all unto salvation. 
Through our Lord. 


OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 


oblatiénes, quas pro peccátis 
nostris nómini tuo consecrán- 
das deférimus benígnus as- 
stime; et, per intercessiónem 
Sanctérum tuórum, cunctis 
nobis profíciant ad salütem. 
Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


a pray Thy clemency, O 
almighty God, that 
Thou check the inundation of 
rain and vouchsafe to bestow 
upon us the gladness of Thy 
countenance. Through our 
Lord. 


"UZSUMUS, omnipotens 

Deus, cleméntiam tu- 

am: ut inundántiam coér- 

ceas imbrium, et hilaritátem 

vultus tui nobis impertiri dig- 
néris, Per Dóminum. 


For the Forgiveness of Sing 


Prayer 


cop, Who rejectest no 

7 one, but in Thy loving 
mercy art appeased by penance, 
howsoever a man may have 
sinned, look mercifully upon 
the prayers of our lowliness and 
enlighten our hearts, that we 
may be enabled to fulfil Thy 
precepts. Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui nullum réspuis, 

sed quantümvis pec- 
cantibus, per peniténtiam pia 
miseratióne placáris: réspice 
propítius ad preces humili- 
tátis nostre, et illümina cor- 
da nostra; ut tua valeámus 
implére precépta. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Secret 


ay the present sacrifice, 

which we offer Thee, O 
Lord, for our transgressions, 
be an acceptable gift unto 
Thee, and let it profit both the 
living and the dead for salva- 
tion, Through our Lord. 


RIESENS sacrificium, Dó- 
2 mine, quod tibi pro de- 
ctis nostris offérimus, sit tibi 
munus accéptum: et tam vi- 
véntibus, quam defünctis pro- 
ficiat ad salütem. Per Dómi- 
num, . 


Postcommunion 


ARKEN to the prayers of 
Thy household, O al- 
mighty God, and grant that 


xÁvuDI preces famflie tue, 
omnípotens Deus: et 
presta; ut sancta hec, que a 


http://ccwatershed.org 


OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 


te sümpsimus, incorrüpta in 
Dobis, te donánte, servéntur. 
Per Dóminum. 


1499 


these holy things, which we 
have received from Thee, may, 
by Thy bounty, be preserved 
incorrupt in us. Through our 
Lord. 


For Our Friends and for Those Bear to Us 
Prayer . 


EUS, qui caritatis dona, 

per grátiam Sancti Spi- 
ritus tuórum fidélium córdi- 
bus infudisti: da famulis et 
famulábus tuis, pro quibus 
tuam deprecámur cleménti- 
am, salitem méntis et cór- 
poris; ut te tota virtüte díli- 
gant, et que tibi plácita sunt, 
tota dilectióne perfíciant. Per 
Dóminum . . .in unitáte 
ejüsdem. 


GOD, Who by the grace of 

the Holy Spirit hast 
poured the gifts of charity into 
the hearts of Thy faithful, 
grant unto Thy servants and 
handmaids, for whom we im- 
plore Thy clemency, health of 
soul and body, that they may 
love Thee with all their might 
and with their whole love may 
execute what things are pleas- 
ing to Thee. Through... in 
the unity of the same. 


Secret 


ISERÉRE, quesumus, Dó- 
mine, fámulis et famu- 
Jábus tuis, pro quibus hoc sac- 
rifícium laudis tue offérimus 
majestáti: ut per hxc sancta, 
supérne benedictiónis gráti- 
am obtineant, et glóriam 
ieternz beatitüdinis acquírant. 
Per Dóminum. 


AVE mercy, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, upon Thy 
servants and handmaids, for 
whom we offer to Thy majesty 
this sacrifice of praise, that 
through these holy things they 
may obtain the grace of su- 
pernal benediction and acquire 
the glory of everlasting beati- 
tude, Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


1vÍNA libántes mystéria, 

quesumus, Dómine: ut 
hzc salutária sacraménta illis 
profíciant ad prosperitátem 
et pacem; pro quorum qua- 
rümque dilectióne hxc tuæ ob- 
tülimus majestáti, Per Dómi- 
num 


ARTAKING of the divine 

mysteries, O Lord, we 
beseech. Thee that this saving 
sacrament may benefit unto 
prosperity and peace, those for 
whose love we have offered it 
to Thy majesty. Through our 
Lord. - 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1500 


OCCASIONAL PRAYERS 


For Our Enemies 


- Prayer 


Gop of peace, lover and 

guardian of charity, give 
to all our enemies true charity 
and peace, grant them the re- 
mission of all their sins, and 
mightily deliver us from their 
machinations. "Through our 
Lord. 


Secret 


E APPEASED, We ‘beseech 
B Thee, O Lord, with the 
gifts we offer, mercifully de- 
liver us from our enemies, and 
grant them pardon of their 
sins. Through our Lord. 


EUS, pacis, caritatisque 
amátor et custos; da 
ómnibus inimícis nostris pa- 
cem, caritatémque veram; et 
cunctérum eis remissiónem 
tríbue peccatórum, nosque ab 
eórum insidiis poténter éripe. 
Per Dóminum. 


BLÁTIS, quesumus, Dómi- 

ne, placáre münéribus: 
et nos ab inimícis nostris cle- 
ménter éripe, esque indulgén- 
tiam tríbue delictórum. Per 
Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


ay this communion, o 

Lord, deliver us from 
our sins and defend us from 
the snares of our enemies. 
Through our Lord. 


æc nos commúnio, Dó- 

mine, éruat a delíctis: 
et ab inimicórum deféndat 
insidiis. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


w 


(Masses and Burial Services for tbe Dead 
The Common or 3Bailp Mass for the Dead 


Any mass, whether festal, ferial, or votive, may be offered up 
for the soul or souls of the faithful departed. But they may 
not be celebrated in black vestments, with the rite proper to 
Masses jor the Dead: 1. On Sunday. 2. On feasts of a double 
rite (except by special indult). 3. During the octaves of Christ- 
mas, Epiphany, Easter, Ascension, Pentecost and Corpus Christi. 
4. During Lent, except, on the first day of each week which is 
not of à double rite. 5. On Rogation Monday. 6. On ember- 
days. 7. On all vigils. 8. When the Most Blessed Sacrament is 
publicly exposed. 9. Om a feria on which the Mass of the Sun- 
day is anticipated or postponed. In this Common or Daily 
Mass for the Dead (Missa Quotidiana), the number of prayers, 
with their corresponding Secrets and Postcommunions, may 
not be less than three; the first, that answering to thé particu- 
lar intention for which the Mass is offered up (for instance, 
for one or for several persons deceased, for a priest, for ali 
buried in a graveyard, etc.), the second, either for all deceased 
brethren, relatives and benefactors, or another at choice, and 
the last, that jor all the faithful departed. These will .be 
found in pages following. The Sequence Dies iræ, dies illa, 
in such Masses may be recited or omitted at the choice of the 
celebrant. It is of counsel, that, should the day on which it 
is desired to have a Mass said for the repose of the soul of a 
deceased person, happen to be one om which Masses for the 
dead are not permitted, the Mass of the occurring feast or feria 
be offered up for the intention, rather than that the benefit 
accruing to the suffering soul be delayed by waiting until a day 
supervene on which a Mass in black vestments may be said, 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 4 Esdr. 2, 34, 35 


EQUIEM «xtérnam dona TERNAL rest give to them, 

Ņ, eis, Dómine; et lux O Lord; and let perpetual. 
perpétua lüceat eis. Ps. 64, 2, light shine upon them. Ps. 64, 2, 
3. Te decet hymnus Deus in 3. A hymn, O God, becometh 
Sion; et tibi reddétur votum 'Thee in Sion; and a vow shall 
in Jerúsalem: exáudi ora- be paid to Thee in Jerusalem: 
tiónem meam; ad te omnis O Lord, hear my prayer; all. 
caro véniet. Réquiem. flesh shall come to Thee. Eter- 

nal rest, etc. 
Kyrie, Page 761. 


For bishops or priests deceased 


: Prayer 
EUS, qui inter apostól- cop, Who, in the apos- 
icos Sacerdótes, fámu- tolic priesthood,  didst 


For other Prayers, Secrets and Postcommunions suited to 
special occasions, see pages 1510 to 1517. i 


1501 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1502 MASSES FOR 
eause Thy servants to be hon- 
ored with pontifical (or sacer- 
dotal) dignity, grant, we be- 
seech Thee, that they may be 
joined in fellowship with Thine 
apostles for evermore, Through 
our Lord. 


THE DEAD 


los tuos pontificali (seu sac- 
erdotáli)  fecísti  dignitáte 
vigére: presta quesumus; ut 
eórum quoque perpétuo ag- 
gregéntur  consórtio. Per 
Dóminum. 


For deceased brethren, friénds, and benefactors 


Prayer 


cop, the bestower of par- 

don and lover of man's 
salvation, we beseech Thy 
clemency. through the inter- 
cession of blessed Mary, ever a 
virgin, and all Thy saints, that 
ihe brethren, kindred, and ben- 
efactors of our congregation 
who have passed out of this 
world may together enjoy ever- 
lasting happiness. 


sus vénie largítor, et 
D humánæ salútis amá- 
tor, qusesumus clementiam 
iuam; ut nostre congrega- 
tiónis fratres, propínquos, et 
benefactéres, qui ex hoc sæ- 
culo transiérunt beáta María 
semper Virgine intercedénte 
cum ómnibus Sanctis tuis, 
ad perpétua beatitüdinis con- 
sórtium perveníre concédas. 


For the souls of all. the faithful departed 


Prayer 


Gop, the creator and re- 

deemer of all the faitbful, 
grant to the souls of Thy ser- 
vants and handmaids the re- 
mission of all their sins, that by 
devout prayers they. may obtain 
ihe pardon which they ever de- 
sired. Who livest, etc. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from the Book of the 
Apocalypse of Blessed John the 
Apostle. 


N TROSE days I heard a voice 

from heaven, saying to me, 
Write, blessed are the dead, 
who die in the Lord. From 
henceforth now, saith the 
Spirit, that they may rest 
from their labors, for their 
works follow them. 


inÉLIUM Deus, ómnium 

cónditor et redémp- 
tor: animábus famulérum 
famularümque tuárum re- 
missiónem cunctórum. tribue 
peccatérum; ut indulgéntiam, 
quam semper optavérunt, piis 
supplicatiónibus consequán- 
tur. Qui vivis. 


Apoc. 14, 13 


Léctio libri  Apocaljpsis 
beáti Joannis Apéstoli. 


N DIEBUS illis: Audívi vo- 

cem de celo, dicéntem 
mihi: Scribe: Beáti mórtui, 
qui in Dómino moriüntur. 
Amodo jam dicit Spíritus, ut 
reduiéscant a labóribus suis: 
Ópera enim illórum Sequün- 
tur illos, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


1503 


Gradual. 4 Esdr. 2, 34, 35 


Réquiem etérnam dona eis, 
Dómine; et lux perpétua lú- 


Ceat eis, Y. PS. 111,7. In mem- 


Órig ætérna erit justus; ab 
&uditióne mala non timébit. 


Eternal rest give to them, O 
Lord; and let perpetual light 
Shine upon them. Y. Ps. 111, 7. 
The just shall be in everlasting 
remembrance; he shall not fear 
the evil hearing. 


Tract 


Absólve Dómine ánimas 
ómnium fidélium defunctór- 
um ab omni vínculo delictór- 
um: X. Et grátia tua illis suc- 
currénte, mereántur evádere 
judícium ultiónis: V. Et lucis 
ætérnæ beatitüdine pérfrui. 


Absolve, O Lord, the souls of 
all the faithful departed from 
every bond of sin. Y. And by 
the help of Thy grace let them 
be found worthy to escape the 
sentence of vengeance. Y. And 
to enjoy the full beatitude of 
the light eternal. 


Sequence 


Es ire, dies illa, 
Solvet seclum in fav- 
ila, 

Teste David cum Sibylla. 
Quantus tremor est futúrus, 
Quando judex est ventúrus, 
Cuncta stricte discussúrus! 
Tuba mirum spargens sonum 
Per sepúlchra regiónum, 
Coget omnes ante thronum. 
Mors stupébit et natüra, 
Cum resürget. creatüra, 
Judicánti responsüra. 
Liber scriptus proferétur, 


In quo totum continétur, 


Unde mundus judicétur, 


READED day, that day of 


e, 
When the world shall melt in 
fire, 
Told by Sibyl and David's lyre. 


Fright mens hearts shall rudely 
shift, 

As the Judge through gleaming 
rift 


` Comes each soul to closely sift. 


Then, the trumpet's shrill re- 
frain, 

Piercing tombs by hill and 
plain, 

Souls to judgment shall ar- 
raign. 


Death and nature stand aghast, 
As the bodies rising fast, 
Hie to hear the sentence passed. 


Then, before Him shall be 
placed, 

That whereon the verdict’s 
based, 

Book wherein each deed is 
traced. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1504 


When the Judge His seat shall 
gain, 

All that’s hidden shall be plain, 

Nothing shall unjudged re- 
main, 


Wretched man, what can I 
plead? 

Whom to ask to intercede, 

When the just much mercy 
need? 


Thou, O awe-inspiring Lord, 
Saving e’en when unimplored, 
Save me, mercy’s fount adored. 


Ah! Sweet Jesus, mindful be, 

That Thou cam’st on earth for 
me: : 

Cast me not this day from 
Thee. 


Seeking me Thy strength was 
spent 

Ransoming Thy limbs were 
rent: : 

Is this toil to no intent? 


Thou, awarding pains condign, 
Mercy's ear to me incline, 
Ere the reckoning Thou assign. 


I, felon-like, my lot bewail, 

Suffused cheeks my shame un- 
veil: 

God! O let my prayer prevail. 

Mary's soul Thou madest 
white, 

Didst to heaven the thief in- 
vite; 

Hope in me these now excite. 


Prayers of mine in vain ascend: 

Thou art good and wilt fore- 
fend, 

In quenchless fire my life to 
end. 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


JudeX ergo cum sedébit, 
Quidquid latet, apparébit: 
Nil inültum remanébit. 


Quid sum miser tunc dictü- 
rus? 

Quem patronum rogatürus? 

Cum vix justus sit secürus. 


Rex treméndz majestátis, 
Qui saivándos salvas gratis, 
Salva me fons pietátis. 


Recordáre, Jesu pie, 
Quod sum causa tue viz, 


Ne me perdas illa die. 


Querens me, sedísti lassus; 


Redemisti crucem passus: 


Tantus labor non sit cassus. 


Juste judex ultiónis, 
Donum fac remissiónis, 
Ante diem ratiónis. 


Ingemísco tamquam reus: 
Culpa rubet vultus meus: 


Supplieánti parce Deus. 
Qui Maríam absolvísti, 

Et latrónem exaudísti, 
Mihi quoque spem dedísti. 


Preces mez non sunt digne; 
Sed tu bonus fac benígne, 


Ne perénni cremer igne. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
) 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


Inter oves locum. presta, 


Et ab hædis me sequéstra, 
Státuens in parte dextra. 


Confutátis maledíctis, 
Flammis ácribus addíctis, 


Voca me cum benedíctis. 
Oro supplex et acclínis, 


Cor contritum quasi cinis: 
Gere curam mei finis. 


Lacrymósa dies illa, 
Qua resürget ex favilla 


Judicándus homo reus. 


Huic ergo parce Deus: 
Pie Jesu Dómine, 
Dona eis réquiem. Amen. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1505 


When the cursed by shame op- 
prest, ; 

Enter flames at Thy behest, _ 

Call me then to join the blest, 


Place amid Thy sheep accord, 

Keep me from the tainted 
horde, 

Set me in Thy sight, O Lord. 


Prostrate, suppliant, now no 
more, 

Unrepenting, as of yore, 

Save me dying, I implore. 


Mournful day that day of sighs, 

When from dust shall man 
arise, 

Stained with guilt his doom to 
know, : 


Mercy, Lord, on him bestow. 

Jesus, kind! Thy souls release, 

Lead them thence to realms of 
peace, Amen. ` 


Gospel. John 6, 51-55 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 


gélii secándum Joánnem. 


T; ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
sus turbis Judæóôrum: 
Ego sum panis vivus, qui de 
ccelo descéndi. Si quis man- 
ducáverit ex hoc pane, vivet 
in etérnum: et panis, quem 
ego dabo, caro mea est pro 
mundi vita. Litigábant ergo 
Judei ad ínvicem, dicéntes: 
Quómodo potest hic nobis 
carnem suam dare ad man- 
ducándum? Dixit ergo eis 
Jesus: Amen, amen dico vo- 
bis: Nisi  manducavéritis 
carnem. Fílii hóminis, et bi- 
béritis ejus sánguinem, non 
habébitis vitam in vobis. Qui 
mondücat meam carnem, et 


H$ Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 
T THAT lime Jesus said to 

the multitudes of the 

Jews: I am the living bread, 
which came down from heaven. 
If any man eat of this bread he 
shall live for ever: and the 
bread that I will give. is My 
flesh for the life of the world. 
The Jews therefore strove 
among themselves, saying, How 
can this man give us His flesh 
to eat? Then Jesus said to 
them, Amen, amen, I say unto 
you, Except you eat the flesh 
of the Son of man, and drink 
His blood, you shall not have 
life in you. He that eateth My 
flesh, and drinketh My biood, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1506 MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


hath everlasting life: and I 
will raise him up in the last 


day. 


bibit meum sánguinem, habet 
vitam etérnam: et ego resus- 
citábo eum in novíssimo die. 


Offertory 


O Lord Jesus Christ, the King 
of glory, deliver the souls of 
all the faithful departed from 
the pains of hell and from the 
deep pit; deliver them from the 
lion’s mouth, that hell engulf 
them not, that they fall not 
Into the darkness; but let Mi- 
chael, the holy standard-bearer, 
bring them into the holy light 
which Thou didst promise of 
old to Abraham and his seed. Y. 
We offer Thee sacrifices and 
prayers of praise, O Lord; do 
Thou accept them for those 
souls of which we this day 
make commemoration; cause 
them, O Lord, to pass from 
death to the life which of old 
Thou didst promise to Abra- 
ham and his seed. 


Dómine Jesu Christe, Rex 
gloria, libera ánimas ómni- 
um fidélium defunctérum de 
penis inférni, et de profindo 
lacu: libera eas de ore leónis, 
ne absórbeat eas tártarus, ne 
cadant in obscürum: sed síg- 
nifer sanctus Michel repre- 
séntet eas in lucem sanctam: 
Quam olim Abrahz promis- 
ísti, et sémini ejus. Y. Hó- 
stias et preces tibi, Dómine, 
laudis offérimus: tu süscipe 
pro animábus illis, quarum 
hódie memórium  fácimus: 
fac eas, Dómine, de morte 
transire ad vitam: Quam 
olim Abrahs promisisti, et 
sémini ejus. 


For deceased bishops or priests 


Secret 


ECEIVE, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the sacrifices 
which we offer for the souls of 
Thy servants, bishops (or 
priests); that Thou mayst 
command those whom on earth 
Thou didst invest with the epis- 
copal (or sacerdotal) dignity 
to be joined to the fellowship 
of Thy saints in the heavenly 
kingdom. Through our Lord. 


Usciwe Dómine quesu- 
-2 mus pro animábus fam- 
ulórum tuórum Pontificum 
(seu Sacerdótum), quas of- 
férimus hóstias: ut quibus in 
hoc seculo pontificále, seu 
Sacerdotále donásti, méritum, 
in celésti regno Sanctórum 
tuórum jibeas jungi con- 
sortio. Per Dóminum. 


For deceased. brethren, friends, and benefactors 


Secret 


cop, Whose -mercy is 
boundless, mercifully re- 
ceive the prayers of our lowli- 
ness, and grant, through these 


EUs, cujus misericérdie 
D non est nümerus, süs- 
cipe propitius preces humili- 
tatis nostre; et animábus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
| 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


fratrum, propinquórum, et 
benefactórum nostrórum, 
quibus tul nóminis dedisti 
confessiónem, per hzc sacra- 
ménta selütis nostre, cunc- 
tórum  remissiónem  tríbue 
peccatórum. 

For the souls of all 


1507 


sacraments of our salvation, to 
the souls of our brethren, kin- 
dred, and benefactors, to whom 
Thou didst grant the confes- 
sion of Thy name, ihe remis- 
sion of all sins. 


the faithful departed 


Secret 


ÓSTIAs, qusesumus, Dó- 
mine, quas tibi pro ani- 
mábus famulórum famular- 
ümque . tuárum  offérimus, 
propitiátus inténde: ut qui- 
bus fídei christiáne méritum 
contulisti, dones et premium. 
Per Dóminum. 


Preface No. 15, page 817. 


ERCIFULLY look down, we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, 
upon the sacrifice which we 
offer Thee for the souls of Thy 
servants and handmaids, that, 
to those on whom Thou didst 
confer the gift of Christian 
faith, Thou mayst also grant 
its reward. Through our Lord. 


Communion. 4 Esdr. 2, 35, 34 


Lux  stérna  lüceat eis, 
Dómine: Cum sanctis tuis in 
etérnum, quia pius es. Y. 
Réquiem etérnam dona eis, 
Dómine; et lux perpétua 
lüceat eis: Cum sanctis. 


May eternal light shine upor 
them, O Lord, with Thy saints 
forever, because Thou art 
kind. Y. Grant them everlast- 
ing rest, O Lord, and let per- 
petual light,shine upon them, 
with Thy sdints, etc. 


For deceased bishops or priests 


Postcommunion 


ne, animábus famuló- 
rum tuórum Pontíficum (seu 
Sacerdótum, misericérdie tue 
imploráta cleméntia: ut ejus, 
in quo speravérunt et credid- 
érunt, etérnum cápiant, te 
miseránte, consórilium. Per 
Dóminum. 

For deceased brethren, 


IUS. quaesumus, Dómi- 


AY Thy clemency, which 

we implore, O Lord, ben- 

efit the souls of Thy servants, 

bishops (or priests), that by 

Thy mercy they may attain to 

everlasting fellowship with 

Him in Whom they hoped and 
believed. Through our Lord. 


friends, and benefactors 


Postcommunion 


RIESTA, quesumus, omni- 
potens et miséricors 
Deus: ut ánimz fratrum, pro- 


Gus we beseech Thee, O 
almighty and merciful 
God, that the souls of our 


49 http://ccwatershed.org 


1508 


brethren, kindred, and bene- 
factors, for whom we have of- 
fered this sacrifice of praise to 
Thy majesty, being purified of 
all sins by the virtue of this 
sacrament, may, by Thy mercy, 
receive the beatitude of per- 
petual light. Through our 
Lord. 


THE ABSOLUTION 


pinqguórum, et benefactórum 
nostrórum, pro quibus hoc 
Sacrifícium laudis tue obtüli- 
mus- majestati; per hujus 
virtütem sacraménti a pec- 
cátis ómnibus expiáte, lucis 
perpétum, te miseránte, re- 
cipiant beatitudinem, Per 
Dóminum. 


For the souls of all the faithful departed 


Postcommunion 


AY the prayer of Thy sup- 

pliants profit the souls 
of Thy servants and hand- 
maids, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, that Thou mayst free 
them from all sins and make 
them sharers in Thy redemp- 
tion. Who livest. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


NIMÁBUS, quesumus, 
JL, Dómine, famulórum 
amularümque tuárum orá- 
tio profíciat supplicántium: 
ut eas et a peccátis ómnibus 
éxuas, et tuse redemptiónis 
fácias esse participes. Qui 
vivis. 


Absolution over the Catafalque 
` After Mass the celebrant lays aside his chasuble and maniple 


and puts on the black cope. 


Attended by the deacon he goes 


to the entrance of the sanctuary, where he stands somewhat 


toward the Epistle side, facing the catafalque. 


The subdeacon, 


attended by the acolytes, stands on the opposite side of the 
catafalque, bearing thé processional cross. 

The clergy standing around the catafalque, the choir now 
chants the following responsory: 


B. ELIVER me, O Lord, 

from eternal death 
on that dreadful day when the 
heavens and the earth shall be 
moved, and Thou shalt come to 
judge the world by fire. V. I am 
seized with fear and trembling 
when I reflect upon the judg- 
ment and wrath to come. Bf. 
When the heavens and the 
earth shall be moved. Y. That 
day, a day of wrath, of wast- 
-ing and of misery, a dreadful 
and exceeding bitter day. Bf. 
Wnen Thou shalt come to judge 
ihe world by fire. y. Eternal 
rest grant unto them, O Lord; 
and let perpetual light shine 


BR. {BERA me, Domine, de 

morte etérna, in die 
illa treménda: Quando coli 
movéndi sunt et terra: Dum 
véneris judicáre seculum per 
ignem. Y. Tremens factus sum 
ego, et timeo, dum disctissio 
vénerit, atque ventura ira. B. 
Quando celi movéndi sunt et 
terra. Y. Dies illa, dies ira, 
calamitátis et misérie; dies 
magna et amára valde. W. 
Dum véneris judicáre secul- 
um per ignem. Y. Réquiem 
ætérnam dona eis Dómine, et 
lux perpétua lüceat eis. W. 
Libera me Dómine de morte 
fetérna in die illa treménda: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE ABSOLUTION 


Quando celi movéndi sunt et 
terra: Dum véneris judicáre 
seculum per ignem. 


Kyrie eléison. Christe eléi- 
Son, Kyrie eléison. 


1509 


upon them. J. Deliver me, O 
Lord, from everlasting death 
on that dreadful day when the 
heavens and the earth shall be 
moved, and Thou shalt come to 
judge the world by fire. 

Lord, have mercy. Christ 
have mercy. Lord have mercy. 


The priest, having put incense into the thurible, intones the 


first words of 


the Lord’s Prayer, Pater noster, saying the rest 


quietly. All others likewise pray in silence whilst the priest, 


accompanied by his deacon, twice passes round the 


bier, 


sprinkling it with holy water and incensing it. He resumes: 


Y. Et ne nos indtcas in 
tentatiónem. 

W. Sed libera nos a malo. 

y. A porta inferi. 

W. Erue, Dómine, ánimam 
ejus «animas eorum). 

y. Requiéscat (Requies- 
cant) in pace. 

H'. Amen. 
. y. Dómine exáudi . ora- 
tiónem meam. ' : 

BR. Et clamor meus ad te 
véniat, 
Y. Dóminus vobiscum. 
K. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


BSÓLVE, quesumus Dó- 

mine, ánimam fámuli 
iui N., ab omni vínculo de- 
lictérum: ut in resurrectiónis 
glória inter Sanctos et Eléc- 
tos tuos resuscitatus respíret. 
Per Christum Dóminum no- 
strum. R. Amen. 


y. And lead us not into 
temptation. : 

W. But deliver us from evil. 

y. From the gate of hell. 

W. Rescue his soul (their 
souls), O Lord. 

F. May he (they) rest in 
peace. 

RY. Amen. 

X. Lord, hear my prayer. 


W. And let my cry come unto 
Thee. 

X. The Lord be with you. 

W. And with thy spirit. 


Let us Pray 


BSOLVE, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the soul of Thy 
servant, N., from every bond of 
sin, that, in the glory of the 
resurrection, he may rise to a 
new and better life with Thy 
saints and elect. Through 
Christ our Lord. W. Amen. 


In place of the above he may repeat the prayer which he 
has said. as the Collect in the Mass. 


"Y. Réquiem ætérnam dona 
ei, Dómine. 

W. Et lux perpétua lüceat 
ei. 


Y. Eternal rest grant unto 
hím, O Lord. 

W. And let perpetual light 
Shine upon him. 


Then again: 


y. Requiéscat in pace. 
R. Amen. 


Y. May he rest in peace. 
R. Amen. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1510 


VARIOUS PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD 


' "V'aríous Prapers for the Bead 
For a deceased Pope 


Prayer 


fable providence, didst 
will that Thy servant N. should 
be numbered among the high 
priests, grant, we beseech Thee, 
that he, who on earth held the 
place of Thine only-begotten 
Son, may be joined forevermore 
to the fellowship of Thy holy 
pontiffs, Through the same. 


(Gà Who, in Thine inef- 


ECEIVE, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, the sacrifice 
which we offer for the soul of 
Thy servant, N., supreme pon- 
tiff, that Thou mayst command 
him, whom on earth Thou didst 
invest with the pontifical dig- 
nity, to be joined to the fellow- 
ship of Thy saints in the king- 
dom of heaven. Through our 
Lord. 


Eus, qui inter summos 
" Sacerdótes  fámulum 
tuum N. ineffábili tua dispo- 


.sitióne connumerári voluisti: 


presta quesumus; ut qui uni- 
géniti Fílii tui vices in terris 
gerébat, sanctórum tuórum 
Pontificum  consórtio per- 
pétuo aggregétur. Per eüm- 
dem Dóminum. 


Secret 


ÜbsciPE, Dómine, quesu- 

mus, pro anima fámuli 
tui N. summi Pontíficis, quas 
offérimus hóstias: ut cui in 
hoc seculo pontificále donásti 
méritum, in celésti regno 
Sanctórum  tuórum  jübeas 
jungi consórtio. Per Dómin- 
um. 


Postcommunion 


AY Thy clemency, which 
we implore, O Lord, 
benefit the soul of Thy servant, 
N., supreme pontiff, that he 
may by Thy mercy attain to 
everlasting fellowship with Him 
in Whom he hoped and be- 
lieved. Through our Lord. 
For a deceased cardinal the 


qeu quesumus, Domi- 
ne, ánimz fámuli tui N. 
summi Pontificis misericórdiz 
tuz .imploráta cleméntia: ut 
ejus, in quo sperávit et cré- 
didit, wtérnum  cápiat, te 
miserante, consórtium. Per 
Dóminum. ` 

Prayer, Secret, and Postcom- 


munion are those appointed, as follows, for a bishop, priest, or 
deacon, with mention inserted in these of his rank as a Prince 


of the Church. 


For a deceased bishop 
Prayer 


O cop, Who in the apostolic 
priesthood didst cause 
Thy servant, N., to be honored 


EUS, qui inter apostóli- 
cos Sacerdótes fámu- 
lum tuum N. pontificáli fe- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


YARIOUS PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD 


cisti dignitáte vigére: presta 
quaesumus; ut eórum quoque 
perpétuo  aggregétur con~ 
Sórtio. Per Dóminum. 


1511 


with the pontifical dignity, 
grant, we beseech Thee, that he 
may be joined forevermore to 
the. fellowship of Thine apos- 
ties. Through our Lord. 


Secret 


Éscrz, Dómine, quesu- 

mus, pro ánima fámuli 
tui N. Pontificis, quas offéri- 
mus héstias: ut cui in hoc 
seculo  pontificàle  donásti 
méritum, in celésti regno 
Sanctórum  tuórum  jübeas 
jungi consértio. Per Dómin- 
um. ` 


ECEIVE, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the sacrifice 
which we offer for the soul of 
Thy servant, N., that Thou 
mayst command him whom on 
earth Thou didst invest with 
ihe episcopal dignity to be 
joined to the fellowship of Thy 
saints in the kingdom of 
heaven. Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


ne, ánimz famuli tui N, 
Pontíficis misericórdie tum 
imploráta cleméntia: ut ejus, 
in quo sperávit et érédidit, 
zxtérnum cápiat, te miseránte, 
consortium. Per Dóminum. 


Ti quesumus, Domi- 


ay Thy clemency, which 
we implore, O Lord, 
benefit the soul of Thy servant, 
the pontiff, N., that, by Thy 
mercy, he may attain to ever- 
lasting fellowship with Him in 
Whom he hoped and believed. 
‘Through our Lord. 


Or the Following 


Prayer 


A NoBIS, Dómine, ut áni- 

mam famuli tui N. 
Episcopi, quam de hujus sæ- 
cul eduxísti laborióso certá- 
mine, Sanctérum  tuórum 
tribuas esse consórtem. Per 
Dóminum. 


Gu us, O Lord, that Thou 
give to be a companion 
of Thy saints the soul of Thy 
servant N., bishop, whom Thou 
hast taken out of the toilsome 
struggle of this world. Through 
our Lord. k 


Secret 


NNUE nobis, quesumus, 

Dómine, ut anime 
fámuli tui N. Epíscopi h»c 
prosit oblatio: quam immo- 
lándo, totíus mundi tribuisti 
relaxári delícta. Per Dó- 
minum. 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, that this obla- 
tion may benefit the soul of 
Thy servant N. bishop, as by 
its offering Thou hast granted 
the sins of the whole world to 
be forgiven. Through our 
Lo 


a 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1512 VARIOUS PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD 


Postcommunion 
URGED by this sacrifice, we 1s sacrificiis quesumus 
beseech Thee, O almighty omnípotens Deus, pur- 


God, may the soul of Thy ser- gáta anima fámuli tui N. 
vant N., bishop, be worthy to Epfscopi ad indulgéntiam et 
be pardoned and enter into refrigérium sempitérnum per- 
everlasting rest. Through our venire mere&tur. Per Dó- 
Lord. : minum. 


For a priest deceased 


Prayer 

cop, Who didst wil that EUS, qui inter apostóli- 

Thy servant N., should cos sacerdétes fámu- 
flourish with the sacerdotal lum tuum N. sacerdotáli fe- 
dignity in the apostolic priest- císti dignitate vigére: presta 
hood, grant, we beseech Thee, quesumus: ut edrum quoque 
that he may be joined forever- perpétuo  aggregétur con- 
more to the fellowship of Thine sórtio. Per Dóminum. 
apostles. Through our Lord. 


Secret . 
ECEIVE, We beseech Thee, úsciPE, Dómine, quesu- 
O Lord, the sacrifices mus, pro ánima famuli 


which we offer for the soul of tui N. Sacerdótis, quas offéri- 
Thy servant, N., Thy priest, mus hóstias: ut cui in hoc 
ihat Thou mayst command seculo sacerdotále  donásti 
him, whom on earth Thou didst méritum, in celésti regno 


invest wit ' ^  twórum  jübeas 
nity, to i i 
ship of Th 
dom of he. VUA sDIOugu- Qus 
Lord. 

Postcommunion 


AY Thy clemency, which ROSIT, quesumus, Dô- 
we implore, O Lord, mine, ánimæ fámuli tui 
benefit the soul of Thy servant, N. Sacerdétis, misericórdie 
N., Thy priest, that he may at- tue imploráta cleméntiar ut 
tain to everlasting fellowship ejus, in quo speravit et crédi- 
with Him in Whom he hoped dit, etérnum cápiat, te mise- 
and believed. Through our ránte consórtium. Per Dó- 
Lord, minum. 


Or the Following 
Prayer 


Giu we beseech Thee, O RESTA, qusesumus, Dó- 
Lord. that the soul of Thy mine, ut ánima famult 


http://ccwatershed.org 


emm 


VARIOUS PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD 


tui N., Sacerdétis, quem in 
hoc sxculo commorántem, 
sacris munéribus decorásti, 
in celésti sede gloriésa sem- 
per exsültet, Per Dóminum. 


gi. Dómine, quzsu- 
mus, pro ánima fámuli 
tui N, Sacerdótis, quas offéri- 
mus hóstias: ut cui sacerdo- 
tále donásti méritum, dones 
et premium, Per Dóminum. 


1518 


servant, N., Thy priest, whom, 
while he dwelt- on earth, Thou 
didst adorn with sacred gifts, 
may ever rejoice in the glory of 
beaven. Through our Lord. 


Secret 


ECEIVE, We beseech Thee, 

O Lord, the sacrifice we 
offer for the soul of Thy ser- 
vant, N., Thy priest, that as 
Thou didst grant him the dig- 
nity of the priesthood 'Thou 
wilt also grant him its reward. 
Through our Lord.. 


Postcommunion 


RÆSTA, qusesumus, omní- 

potens Deus, ut ánimam 
fámuli tui N. Sacerdótis in 
congregatióne justórum, 
tiérne  beatitüdinis jubeas 
esse consórtem, Per Domin- 
um. 


Gn we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that, by 
Thy command, the soul of Thy 
servant, N., Thy priest, may be 
& sharer of everlasting beati- 
tude in the company of the 
just. Through our Lord. 


„For a man, other than a priest, deceased 


Prayer 


NCLÍNA, Dómine, aurem 

tuam ad preces. nostras, 
quibus misericórdiam tuam 
süpplices deprecamur: ut 
ánimam fámuli tui N., quam 
de hoc seculo migráre jus- 
sísti, in pacis ac lucis regióne 
constituas, et Sanctorum tu- 
órum jübeas esse consórtem. 
Per Dóminum. 


NCLINE Thine ear, O Lord, 

to our prayers, with which 
we supplicate Thy mercy that 
‘Thou set the soul of Thy ser- 
vant, N., which Thou hast 
commanded to pass from this 
world, in a region of peace and 
light, and order that it be of 
the fellowship of the saints, 
Through our Lord. 


Secret | 


NNUE nobis, quesumus, 

Dómine, ut anime 
famuli tui N., hsec prosit 
oblatio: quam immolándo, 
totíus mundi tribuísti relax- 
ári delict# Per Dóminum. 


CIS we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, that the soul of 
Thy servant, N., may be bene- 
fited by this oblation, by the 
offering of: which Thou hast 
granted the sins of the whole 
world to be forgiven. Through 
our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1514 


VARIOUS PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD 


Postcommunion 


BSOLVE, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, the soul of Thy 
servant, N., from every bond 
of sin, that, in the glory of the 
resurrection, he may rise to a 
new and better life with Thy 
saints and elect. Through our 
Lord. 


BSÓLVE quaesumus Dó- 
A mine ánimam fámuli 
ui N., ab omni vínculo delic- 
tórum: ut in resurrectiónis 
glória inter sanctos et eléctos 
tuos resuscitátus respíret. Per 
Dóminum. 


For a woman deceased 


Prayer 


E BESEECH, Thee, O Lord, 

that of Thy loving-kind- 
ness Thou have mercy on the 
soul of Thy handmaid, N., free 
her from the defilements of 
this mortal life and number her 
forevermore among the saved. 
Through our Lord. 


UzSUMUS Dómine, pro 

tua pietate  miserére 
anime famule tue N.: et a 
contágiis mortalitatis exü- 
tam, in etérne salvatiónis 
partem restitue. Per Dómin- 
um. 


Secret 


Y THESE sacrifices, without 
which no one hath ever 
been free of offense, may the 
soul of Thy handmaid, N., be 
rid of all sins, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord; that by these offices 
of pious propitiation it may ob- 
tain everlasting mercy. 
Through our Lord. 


IS sacrificiis quesumus 

Domine ánima fámuie 
tue N., a peccatis ómnibus 
exuátur, sine quibus a culpa 
nemo liber éxstitit: ut per 
hec pi» placatiónis officia, 
perpétuam  misericórdiam 
consequátur. Per Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


Av the soul of Thy hand- 

maid, N., we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, partake of eter- 
nal light, as it hath obtained 
the sacrament of Thine ever- 
lasting mercy. Through our 
Lord. 


NVENIAT quesumus Dó- 

mine anima famule tue 
N., lucis etérne consórtium: 
cujus perpétue misericérdiz 
consectita est sacraméntum. 
Per Déminum. 


For the father and mother of the celebrating priest 


Prayer 


O cop, Who hast com- 
manded us to honor our 
father and mother, in Thy 


EUS, qui nos patrem et 
matrem honoráre præ- 
Cepísti: miserére cleménter 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VARIOUS PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD 


animábus patris et matris 
mee, eorümque peccáta dim- 
ftte: meque eos in ætérnæ 
elaritátis gáudio fac vidére. 
Per Dóminum. 


1515 


clemency have mercy upon the 
Souls of my father and mother, 
and pardon their sins; and 
make me to see them in the joy 
of the eternal brightness. 
Through our Lord. 


Secret 


Ss. sacrificium Dó- 
mine, quod tibi pro ani- 
mábus patris et matris meæ 
óffero: eísque gáudium sem- 
pitérnum in regióne vivórum 
concéde; meque cum illis fe- 
licitáti Sanctórum conjünge. 
Per Dóminum. 


p ECEIVE, O Lord, the sacri- 
fice which I offer Thee 

for the souls of my father and 
mother, and grant them ever- 
lasting joy in the land of the 
living; and make me to share 
with them in the happiness of 
the saints. Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


GriÉSTIS  participátio 

Sacraménti quesumus 
Dómine animábus patris et 
matris mez réquiem et lucem 
obtineat perpétuam: meque 
cum illis grátia tua corónet 
etérna. Per Dóminum. 


Av the partaking of the 
heavenly sacrament, we 


beseech Thee, O Lord, obtain 


rest and light everlasting for 


the souls of my father and 


mother; and may Thy eternal 


grace crown me with them. 
Through our Lord. 


Should the Mass be offered up by a priest for his father only, 
or for his mother only, the above prayers are worded in the 


singular number. 


When the Holy Sacrifice is offered up for 


the fathers and mothers of others besides the celebrant, in 
place of "my father and mother" is said "our parents." 


For deceased brethren, friends, and benefactors 


The Prayer, O God, the bestower of pardon, page 1502, Secret, 
and Postcommunion are said with the opportune variations. 


For alt who are buried in a cemetery or graveyard 


Prayer 


EUs, CUjus miseratióne 

anime fidélium requi- 
éscunt: fámulis et famulábus 
tuis, et ómnibus hic et 
ubíque in Christo quiescénti- 
bus, da propitius véniam pec- 
catórum; ut & cunctis reáti- 
bus absolüti, tecum sine fine 
leténtur. Per eümdem Dó- 
minum. 


Gop, by Whose mercy the 
Q souls of the faithful find 
rest, mercifully grant pardon 
of sins to Thy servants and 
handmaids, and to all who, 
here and elsewhere, repose in 
Christ, that, being loosed from 
all guilt, they may rejoice with 
thee for evermore. Through the 
same. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1516 


VARIOUS PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD 


Secret 


RACIOUSLY receive, O Lord, 
the sacrifice offered for 
the souls of Thy servants and 
handmaids, and of all Catho- 
lics who sleep in Christ whether 
in this place or elsewhere, that, 
being delivered from the bonds 
of grim death by this most ex- 
cellent sacrifice, they may be 
found worthy of life everlast- 
ing. Through the same. 


RO animábus famulórum 

- famulerümque tuárum, 
et ómnium Catholicórum hic 
et ubique in Christo dormién- 
tium, hóstiam Domine süs- 
cipe benígnus oblátam: ut 
hoc sacrifício singulári, vin- 
culis horrénde mortis exüti, 
vitam  mereántur extérnam. 
Per eümdem Dóminum. 


Postcommunion 


cop, the light of faithful 

Souls, give ear to our sup- 
plieations, and grant to Thy 
servants and handmaids, whose 
bodies, here and elsewhere, re- 
pose in Christ, an abode of re- 
freshment, the blessedness of 
rest, and the brightness of light. 
Through the same. 


EUS, fidélium lumen an- 

imárum, adésto sup- 
plicatiónibus nostris: et da 
famulis et famulábus tuis, 
quorum córpora hic et ubíque 
in Christo requiéscunt, re- 
frigérii sedem, quiétis beati- 
tüdinem, et lüminis clarita- 
tem. Per eümdem Dóminum. 


For more than one person deceased 


Prayer 


cop, Whose property is 

ever to pity and to spare, 
have mercy on the souls of Thy 
servants and handmaids, and 
forgive them all their sins, that, 
being loosed from the bonds of 
mortality, they may be found 
worthy to enter into life. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, cui próprium est 
D miseréri semper et 
párcere: propitiáre animá- 
bus famulórum famularüm- 
que tuárum, et ómnia eórum 
peccáta dimitte; ut mortali- 
tátis vínculis absolute, tran- 
sire mereántur ad vitam. Per 
Dóminum. 


Secret 


CT we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, that this oblation 
benefit the souls of Thy ser- 
vants and handmaids, as Thou 
hast granted that by the offer- 
ing of it the sins of all the 
world should be forgiven. 
Through our Lord. 


NNUE nobis quesumus 

Dómine, ut animábus 
famulórum famularümque 
tuárum hec prosit oblátio: 
quam immolándo, totíus 
mundi tribuísti relaxári de- 
lícta. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


VARIOUS PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD 


1517 


Postcommunion 


zus, cul soli cómpetit 

medicínam przstáre 
Post mortem: presta quesu- 
mus, ut Anime famulórum 
famularümque tuárum ter- 
Ténis exute contágiis, in tue 
redemptiónis parte numer- 
éntur. Qui vivis. 


cop, Who alone art com- 

petent to administer heal- 
ing remedies after death, grant, 
we beseech Thee, that the souls 
of Thy servants and hand- 
maids, rid of earthly contagion, 
may be numbered among those 
whom Thou hast redeemed. 
Who livest. 


Or the Following 


Prayer 


NIMÁBUS quaesumus 

Dómine  famulórum 
famularümque tuárum, mis- 
ericórdiam concéde perpétu- 
am: ut eis profíciat in etérn- 
um, quod in te speravérunt 
et credidérunt. Per Dómin- 
um. 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 

Lord, everlasting mercy 

to the souls of Thy servants 

and handmaids, that the faith 

and hope which they placed in 

Thee may avail them for eter- 
nity. Through our Lord. 


Secret 


rs Dómine qusesumus 

placátus inténde mun- 
éribus: et quod ad laudem tui 
nóminis supplicántes offéri- 
mus, ad indulgéntiam profíc- 
iat defunctórum. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Ti with favor upon these 
gifts, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, and may that which we 
offer with. supplication to the 
praise of Thy name profit for 
the pardon of the departed. 
Through our Lord. 


Postcommunion 


ÜÓrPPLICES Dómine pro 
animabus famulérum 
famularümque tuárum preces 
effündimus, obsecrántes: ut 
quidquid conversatióne con- 
traxérunt humána, et clem- 
énter indülgeas, et eas in tu- 
órum letantium redemptór- 
um sede constítuas. Per Dó- 
minum nostrum. 


QU POUR forth, O Lord, ouz 
prayers and supplica- 
tions for the souls of Thy ser- 
vants and handmaids, beseech- 
ing that Thou mercifully for- 
give whatever faults they have 
committed in their earthly ca- 
reers, and set them in the bliss- 
ful abode of Thy redeemed. 
Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1518 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


Mass and Absolution on the Bay of the Beath or on 
the Bap of the Burial of One of the Faithful 


If the deceased is a baptized child not yet come to the age 
of reason, the Votive Mass of the Angels, page 1417, may be 
said on days permitted by the rubrics. 

The Priest vested in black cope (and his ministers if it be a 
Solemn Mass) meets the body at the entrance of the Church, 


inside, and says: 
OME to his (her) assis- 
tance, ye saints of God! 
Meet him (her) ye angels of 
the Lord. Receive his (her) 
soul and present it to the Most 
High. 

y. May Christ who called 
thee, receive thee; and may the 
angels lead thee into the bosom 
of Abraham. 

B. Receive his (her) soul, of- 
fering it in the sight of the 
Most High. | 

Y. Eternal rest grant to him 
(her), O Lord, and let per- 
petual light shine upon him 
(her). 

K. Offering it in the sight of 
the Most High. 


UBVENite Sancti Dei oc- 
S cürite, ángeli Dómini, 
suscipiéntés ánimam ejus, of- 
feréntes eam in conspéctu 
altíssimi. 


X. Suscipiat te Christus, 
qui vocávit te: et in sinum 
Abrahae angeli dedücant te. 


W. Suscipiéntes ánimam 
ejus offeréntes eam in con- 
spéctu altissimi. 

FJ. Réquiem etérnam dona 
ei, Dómine: et lux perpétua 
lüceat ei. 


RY. Offeréntes eam in con- 
spéctu altissimi. 


During a funeral Mass the body of the dead person, sur- 


rounded by lights, lies in front of the altar. 


It is placed so 


that if it be a priest the head will be toward the altar and the 
corpse, robed (if practicable) in sacerdotul vestments as at 


Mass, will face the people. 
face the altar. 


The body of one not a priest should 
The Office of. the Dead (wherever usual) is 


then chanted, otherwise as soon as the priest has changed from 
the cope to the chasuble, the Mass begins immediately. 


The Mass 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 4 Esdr. 2, 34, 35 


TERNAL rest give to them, 
g O Lord; and let per- 
petual light shine upon them. 
Ps. 64, 2, 3. A hymn, O God, be- 
cometh Thee in Sion; and a 
vow shall be paid to Thee in 
Jerusalem: O Lord, hear my 
prayer; all flesh shall come to 
Thee. Eternal rest. 

Kyrie, page 761. 


EQUIEM :ziérnam dona 

eis, Dómine: et lux 
perpétua hiceat eis. Ps. 64, 2, 
3. Te decet hymnus Deus in 
Sion; et tibi reddétur votum 
in Jerúsalem: exáudi oratió- 
nem meam; ad te omnis Caro 
véniet. Réquiem. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


i 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


1619 


Prayer 


Eus, cui próprium est 

miseréri semper et 
Parcere, te sUpplices exorá- 
mus pro anima fámuli tui N. 
quam hédie de hoc seculo 
migráre jussísti: ut non tra- 
das eam in manus inimíci, 
neque obliviscáris in finem, 
Sed jübeas eam a sanctis An- 
gelis süscipl, et ad pátriam 
paradisi perdüci; ut, quia in 
te sperávit et crédidit, non 
penas inférni sustíneat, sed 
gáudia xtérna possídeat. Per 
Dóminum nostrum. 


co», Whose property is 

ever to have mercy and 
to spare, we humbly supplicate 
Thee for the soul of Thy ser- 
vant, N., which Thou hast this 
day called out of this world, 
‘Thou deliver it not to the hands 
of the enemy, nor forget it for- 
ever, but command it to be 
received by the holy angels 
and taken to Paradise, its 
home, so that, since it hath 
hoped and believed in Thee, it 
may not bear the pains of hell, 
but possess everlasting joys. 
Through our Lord, 


Epistle. 1 Thess. 4, 13-18 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Thessalonicenses, 


RATRES: Nólumus vos ig- 

noráre de dormiéntibus, 
ut non contristémini sicut et 
céteri, qui spem non habent. 
Si enim crédimus quod Jesus 
mortuus est, et resurréxit: ita 
et Deus eos, qui dormiérunt 
per Jesum, addücet cum eo. 
Hoc enim vobis dícimus in 
verbo Dómini, quia nos, qui 
vivimus, qui resfdui sumus in 
advéntum Dómini, non præ- 
veniémus eos, qui dormiérunt. 
Quóniam ipse Dóminus in 
jussu, et in voce Archángeli, 
et in tuba Dei descéndet de 
celo: et mórtui, qui in 
Christo sunt, resürgent primi. 
Deínde nos, qui vívimus, qui 
relénquimur, simul rapiémur 
cum illis in nübibus óbviam 
Christo in á&ra, et sic semper 
cum Dómino érimus. Itaque 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
‘Thessalonians. 


RETHREN, We will not have 
B you ignorant concerning 
them that are asleep, that you 
be not sorrowful, even as others 
who have no hope. For if we 
believe that Jesus died and rose 
again, even so them who have 
slept through Jesus will God 
bring with Him. For this we say 
unto you in the word of the 
Lord, that we who are alive, 
who remain unto the coming 
of the Lord, shall not prevent 
them who have slept. For the 
Lord Himself shall come down 
from heaven, with command- 
ments, and with the voice of an 
archangel, and with the 
trumpet of God; and the dead 
who are in Christ shall rise 
first. Then we who are alive, 
who are left, shall be taken up 
together with them in the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1520 


clouds to meet Christ, into the 
air, and so shall we be always 
with the Lord. Wherefore 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


consolámini fnvicem in verbis 
istis. 


comfort ye one another with these words. 


Gradual. 


Eternal rest give to them, O 
Lord; and let perpetual light 
shine upon them. Y. Ps. 111, 7. 
‘The just shall be in everlasting 
remembrance; he shall not fear 
the evil hearing. 


4 Esdr. 2, 34, 35 


Réquiem ztérnam dona eis,. 
Dómine; et lux perpétua lü- 
ceat eis. Y. Ps. 111, 7. In 
memória ætérna erit justus; 
ab auditióne mala non timé- 
bit. 


Tract 


O Lord, absolve the souls of 
all. the faithful departed from 
every bond of sin. Y. And by the 
help of Thy grace may they 
be worthy to escape the sen- 
tence of vengeance. Y. And to 
enjoy all the beatitude of the 
light eternal. 


Absólve Dómine ánimas 
ómnium fidélium defunctór- 
um ab omni vínculo delictór- 
um: Y. Et grátia tua illis 
succurrénte, mereántur evá- 
dere judícium ultiónis: Y. Et 
lucis etérne  beatitüdine- 
pérfrui. 


Sequence (Dies Tr®), as in the Common or Daily Mass for- 


the Dead, page 1 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. . 


Gospel. John 11, 21-27 


H* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 

T THAT lime, Martha said 

to Jesus, Lord, if Thou 

hadst been here, my brother 


had not died: but now also I 


know that whatsoever 'Thou 
wilt ask of God, God will give 
it Thee. Jesus saith to her, thy 
brother shall rise again. Martha 
saith to Him, I know that he 
Shall rise again in the resurrec- 
tion at the last day. Jesus said 
to her, I am the resurrection 
and the life: he that believeth 
in Me although he be dead, 
shall live; and every one that 
liveth, and believeth in Me, 
shall not die forever. Believest 
thou this? She saith to Him, 


HA Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Dixit. 
Martha ad Jesum: Dó- 
mine, si fuísses hic, frater 
meus non fuisset mórtuus: 
set et nunc scio quia quecüm- 
que popósceris & Deo, dabit. 
tibi Deus. Dicit illi Jesus: 
Resürget frater tuus. Dicit ei. 
Martha: Scio quia resürget 
1n resurrectióne in novíssimo. 
die. Dixit ei Jesus: Ego sum. 
resurréctio, et vita: qui credit. 
in me, étiam si mórtuus fü- 
erit, vivet: et omnis, qui vivit, 
et credit in me, non moriétur 
in ætérnum, Credis hoc? Ait. 
ili: Utique Dómine, ego cré- 
didi, quia tu es Christus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 1521 


Filius Dej vivi, qui in hunc 
mundum venisti. 


Yea, Lord, I have belleved that 
Thou art Christ the Son of the 
living God, Who art come into 
this world. 


Offertory | 


Dómine Jesu Christe, Rex 
gloriz, libera ánimas ómnium 
fidélium defunctérum de 
penis inférni, et de profündo 
lacu: libera eas de ore leónis, 
ne.absórbeat eas tártarus, ne 
cadant in obscürum; sed síg- 
nifer sanctus Miche! repre- 
séntet eas in lucem sanctam: 
Quam olim Abrahe promis- 
isti, et sémini ejus. Y. Hó- 
stias et preces tibi, Dómine, 


laudis offérimus: tu süscipe- 


pro animábus ills, quarum 
hódie memóriam  fácimus: 
fac eas, Dómine, de morte 
iransíre ad vitam: Quam 
Olim Abrahe promisisti, et 
sémini ejus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


O Lord Jesus Christ, King of 
glory, deliver the souls of all 
the faithful departed from the 
pains of hell and the deep 
pit; deliver them from the 
lion's mouth, that hell engulf 
them not, nor they fall into 
darkness, but that Michael, the 
holy standard-bearer, bring 
them into the holy light which 
Thou once didst promise to 
Abraham and his seed. Y. We 
offer Thee, O Lord, sacrifices 
and prayers of praise; do Thou 


‘accept them for those souls 


whom we this day commemo- 
rate; grant them, O Lord, to 
pass from death to the life 


. Which Thou once didst promise 


to Abraham and his seed. 


Secret . 


ROPITIÁRE quesumus Dó- 

mine ánime fámuli tui 
N. pro qua hóstiam laudis tibi 
immolámus, majestátem tu- 
am. suppliciter deprecántes: 
ut per hec pie placatiónis 
offícia, pervenire mereátur 
ad réquiem sempitérnam, Per 
Dóminum. 


Preface No. 15, page 817. 


Communion. 


Lux etérna Jüceat eis, Dó- 
mine: Cum sanctis tuis in 
ztérnum, quia pius es. Y. Ré- 
quiem s&térnam dona eis, Dó- 


E MERCIFUL, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, to the soul 
of Thy servant, N., for which 
we. offer to Thee the sacrifice 
of praise, .supplicating Thy 
majesty that, through these 
offices of pious propitiation it 
may be worthy to enter unto 
everlasting rest. Through our 
Lord. 


4 Esdr. 2, 35, 34 


May light eternal shine upon 
them, O Lord: With Thy saints 
forever, for Thou art kind. F. 
Grant them everlasting rest, O 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1522 


Lord, and let perpetual light 
shine upon them: With Thy 
saints. 


ABSOLUTION OF THE CORPSE 


mine; et lux perpétua lüceat 
eis: Cum sanctis. 


Postcommunion 


Gu we beseech Thee, O 
almighty God, that the 
soul of Thy servant, N., which 
hath to-day departed this life, 
seing purged by this sacrifice 
and rid of sins, may obtain 
alike pardon and everlasting 
rest. Through our Lord. 


RESTA quesumus omní- 

potens Deus: ut ánima 
fámul tui N. que hódie de 
hoc szculo migrávit, his sac- 
rifíciis purgáta, et a peccátis 
expedíta, indulgéntiam pár- 
iter et réquiem cápiat sem- 
pitérnam, Per Dóminum. 


Absolution of the Corpse - 
After the Last Gospel, the celebrant lays aside his chasuble 


and maniple, and vested in a black 


his deacon, to the feet of the 


cope comes, attended by 
e, at the head of which the 


subdeacon holds uplifted the processional cross, having on both 


sides an acolyte bearing a lighted candle. 
Then the celebrant reads in a 


themselves around the bier. 


The clergy group 


loud voice the following supplication. 


NTER not into judgment 
with Thy servant, O 
Lord, for in Thy sight shall no 
man be justified, unless remis- 
sion of all sins be accorded him 
(her) by Thee. We beseech 
Thee, therefore, that Thy judi- 
cial sentence weigh not heav- 
ily upon him (her) who is 
commended to Thee by the true 
supplication of the Christian 
faith, but, with the help of Thy 
grace, may he (she) be worthy 
to escape the sentence of ven- 
geance, Seeing that, while he 
(she) lived, he (she) was sealed 
with the seal of the Holy 


on intres in judícium 
cum servo tuo Démine, 
quia nullus apud te justificá- 
bitur homo, nisi per te ómni- 
um peccatórum ei tribuátur 
remíssio. Non ergo eum, que- 
sumus, tua judicialis sen- 
téntia premat, quem tibi vera 
supplicátio fídel christidne 
comméndat: sed grátia tua 
ili  succurrénte,  mereátur 
evádere judícium ultiónis, qui 
dum viveret, insignitus est 
signaculo sancte Trinitátis: 
Qui vivis et regnas in ssecula 
seculérum. FY. Amen. 


Trinity. Who livest and reignest world without end. W. Amen. 


ae choir now chants the following responsory (The Libera 
me). 

BY. Deliver me, O Lord, from W. Libera me Dómine de 
eternal death on that dreadful morte ætérna, in die illa tre- 
day, when the heavens and the ménda quando celi movéndi 
earth shall be moved, and Thou sunt et terra: Dum véneris 
shalt come to judge the world judicáre seculum per ignem. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ABSOLUTION OP THE CORPSE 


Y. Tremens factus sum ego, 
et tímeo, dum discüssio vén- 
erit, atque ventüra ira. H. 
Quando coli movéndi sunt et 
terra. V. Dies illa, dies ire, 
calamitatis et misérie; dies 
magna et amára valde. B. 
Dum véneris judicáre secu- 
lum per ignem. V. Réquiem 
etérnam dona eis Dómine, et 
lux perpétua lüceat eis, W. 
Líbera me Dómine de morte 
tetérna in die illa treménda: 
Quando coeli movéndi sunt et 
terra: Dum véneris judicáre 
seculum per ignem. 


1523 


by fire. V. I am seized with 
fear and trembling, when I re-. 
fiect upon the judgment and 
the wrath to come. W. When 
the heavens, and the earth 
shall be moved. V. That day, a 
day of wrath, of wasting and 
of misery, a dreadful and ex- 
ceeding bitter day. W. When 
Thou shalt come, to judge the 
world by fire. Y. Eternal rest 
grant unto him (her), O Lord, 
and let perpetual light shine 
upon nim (her). W. Deliver me 
O Lord, from eternal death on 
the dreadful day, when the 
heavens and the earth shall 


be moved, and Thou shalt come to judge the world by fire. 


Kyrie eléison. Christe eléi- 
son. Kyrie eléison. Pater Nos- 
ter (secreto.) 


Lord, have mercy. Christ, 
have mercy, Lord, have mercy. 
Our Father (inaudibly.) 


Meanwhile the priest sprinkles and incenses the corpse 
thrice on each side, and then says: 


y. Et ne nos indücas in 
tentatiónem. 

W. Sed libera nos a malo. 

Y. A porta fnferi. 

HB. Erue, Dómine, ánimam 
ejus. : 
V. Requiéscat in pace. 


RY. Amen. 

y. Dómine 
iiónem meam. 

RY. Et clamor meus ad te 
véniat. i 

yY. Dóminus vobíscum. 

W. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


exáudi ora- 


Y. And lead us not into 
temptation. 

W. But deliver us from evil, 

y. From the gate of hell. 

W. Deliver his (her) soul, O 
Lord. 

y. May he (she) rest in 


¥. O Lord, hear my prayer. 


W. And let my cry come unto 
‘Thee. 

FK. The Lord be with you. 

HB. And with thy spirit. 


Ij the body is not present, then the Second Prayer in place 


of the following one is said. 


Let us Pray 


EUS, cui próprium est 
miseréri semper et 
párcere, te süpplices exorá- 
mus pro ánima fámuli tui N. 
(fámule tue N.), quam hódie 
de hoc seculo migráre jus- 


cop, Whose property is al- 
ways to have mercy and 
to spare, we humbly beseech 
Thee for the soul of Thy ser- 
vant, N., which Thou hast this 
day commanded to depart out 


http://ccwatershed.org 


-1524 


of this world: that Thou de- 
liver it not into the hands of 
the enemy, nor forget it unto 
the end; but command it to be 
received by Thy holy angels, 
and conducted into Paradise, 
its true country; that, as in 
Thee it hath hoped and be- 
lieved, it may not suffer the 
pains of hell but may take pos- 
session of eternal joys. Through 
Christ our Lord. W. Amen. 


ELIVER, O Lord, we beseech 


"Thee, the soul of Thy 
Servant (handmaid), N., from 
every bond of his (her) sins that 
in the glory of the resurrection 
he (she) may live anew, being 
raised up in the fellowship of 
Thy Saints and elect. Through 
Christ our Lord. W. Amen. 

Yy. Eternal rest grant to 
him (her), O Lord. 

W. And let perpetual light 
shine upon him (her). 

JF. May he (she) rest in 
peace. 

IH. Amen. 

FJ. May his (her) soul and 
the souls of all the faithful de- 
parted, through the mercy of 
God, rest in peace. 

RY. Amen. 


ABSOLUTION OF THE CORPSE 


sisti, I ut non tradas eam in 
manus inimíci, neque oblivis- 
cáris in finem, sed jübeas eam 
& sanctis Angelis süscipi, ef 
ad pátriam paradísi perdüci; 
ut, quia in te sperávit et 
crédidit, non penas inférni 
sustineat, sed gáudia etérna 
possídeat. Per Christum Dó- 
minum nostrum. B. Amen. 


BSOLVE quesumus, Dó- 
mine, ániman fámuli 
tui N. (fámule tue N.) eb 
omni vinculo delictórum: ut 
in resurrectiónis glória, inter 
Sanctos et eléctos tuos resus- 
citátus (resuscitáta) respiret. 
Per Christum Dóminum no- 
strum, W. Amen. 

V. Réquiem etérnam dona 
ei, Dómine. 

FY. Et lux perpétua lüceat 
ei, 
NF. Requiéscat in pace. 


RY. Amen. 

FJ. Anima ejus, et ánime 
ómnium fidélium defunctór- 
um per misericórdiam Dei 
requiéscant in pace. 

RY. Amen. 


After this the body is borne to the grave, and either at the 
prave or in the church the following is said or sung: 


ay the angels lead thee 

into Paradise; at thy 
coming may the martyrs re- 
ceive thee, and bring thee into 
the holy city, Jerusalem. May 
the choir of angels receive thee, 
and with Lazarus, once a beg- 
gar, mayest thou have eternal 
rest. ; 


N PARADÍSUM dedücant te 

Angeli; in tuo advéntu 
suscipiant te Mártyres, et 
perdücant te in civitátem 
sanctam Jerúsalem. Chorus 
Angelorum te suscípiat, et 
cum Lázaro quondam páu- 
pere etérnam habeas ré- 
quiem. 


On reaching the grave, if it be not blessed, the priest blesses 


it, as follows: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ABSOLUTION OP THE CORPSE 


1525 


Let us Pray 


EUS, cujus miseratióne 
D anime fidélium requi- 
unt, hunc tümulum. bene- 
dícere dignáre, eíque Angel- 
um tuum sanctum députa 
Custódem, et quorum quar- 
Ümque córpora hic sepeliün- 
tur, ánimas eórum ab ómni- 
bus absólve vínculis delictór- 
um, ut in te semper cum 
Sanctis tuis sine fine Letén- 
tur. Per Christum Dóminum 
nostrum. RY. Amen. 


cop, through Whose ten- 

der mercy the souls of 
the faithful departed are at 
rest, vouchsafe to bless this 
grave, and assign thereto Thy 
holy angel as its keeper; and 
absolve from all the bonds of 
sin the souls of those whose 
bodies are here buried, that 
with Thy saints they may ever 
rejoice in Thee to all eternity. 
Through Christ our Lord. . 

H. Amen. 


The priest then sprinkles with holy water and incenses the 


corpse and grave, 
Whether the priest goes to 
continues as follows; 


Ant. Ego sum resurréctio 
et vita: qui credit in me, éti- 
&m si mórtuus füerit, vivet; 
et omnis qui vivit et credit in 
me, non moriétur in etérnum. 


the cemetery or not the Office 


Ant. I am the resurrection 
and the life: he that believeth 
in Me, although he be dead, 
shall live and he that liveth 
and believeth in Me shall not 
die forever. 


The Benedictus, or Song of Zachary. Luke 1, 68-79 


y ExEDfcrUs Dóminus, De- 

us Israél, quia visitávit, 

et fecit redemptiónem plebis 
sue: 

Et eréxit cornu salitis no- 

bis: in domo David, püeri sui. 


Sicut locütüs est per os | 


sanctórum, qui a seculo sunt, 
prophetárum ejus: 

Salutem ex inimícis nostris, 
et de manu ómnium quiodér- 
unt nos: 

Ad faciéndam misericórdi- 
am cum patribus nostris: 
memorári testaménti sui 
sancti. 

Juspurándum, quod jurávit 
ad Abraham, patrem no- 
strum, datürum se nobis: 

Ut sine timére, de manu 
inimicérum nostrórum liber- 
&ti, serviámus illi: 


LESSED be the Lord God 

of Israel: for He hath 

visited and wrought the re- 
demption of His people. 

And hath raised up an horn 
of salvation to us, in the house 
of David His servant: 

As He spoke by the mouth of 
His holy prophets, who are 
from the beginning: ; 

Salvation from our enemies, 
and from the hand of all that 
hate us: 

To perform mercy to our 
fathers: and to remember His 
holy testament. 


The oath which He swore to 
Abraham our father: that He 
would grant to us: 

That being delivered from the 
hand of our enemies, we may 
serve Him without fear, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1526 


In holiness and justice be- 
fore Him, all our days. 


And thou, child, shalt be 
called the prophet of the Most 
High: for thou shalt go before 
the Face of the Lord, to pre- 
pare His ways: 

To give knowledge of salva- 
tion to His People: unto the 
remission of their sins: 

Through the bowels of the 
mercy of our God: in which the 
Orient from on high hath 
visited us: 

To enlighten them that sit 
in darkness, and in the shadow 
of death: to direct our feet into 
the way of peace. 

Eternal rest grant unto him 
(her), O Lord. 

And let perpetual light shine 
upon him (her). 

Ant. I am the resurrectión 


and the life: he that believeth 


in Me, although he be dead, 
‘shall live: and every one who 
liveth, and believeth in Me, 
shall never die. 

Lord, have mercy. Christ, 
have mercy. Lord, have mercy. 
Our Father (inaudibly). . 


ABSOLUTION OF THE CORPSE 


In sanctitate, et justitia 
coram ipso, ómnibus diébus 
nostris. 

Et tu, puer Prophétą Al- 
tíssimi vocáberis: præíbis 
enim ante fáciem Dómini 
paráre vias ejus: 


Ad dandum sciéntiam sa- 
lútis plebi ejus: in remissión- 


em peccatórum eórum: 


Per viscera misericérdie 
Dei nostri: in quibus visita- 
vit nos, óriens ex alto: 


Illumináre his, qui in téne- 
bris, et in umbra mortis se- 
dent: ad dirigéndos pedes 
nostros in viam pacis. 

Réquiem ztérnam dona ei, 
Dómine. 

ES lux perpétua lüceat ei. 


Ant. Ego sum resurréctio et 
vita: qui credit in me, étiam 
si mórtuus fúerit, vivit; et 
omnis qui vivit et credit in 
me non moriétur in etérnum. 


Kyrie eléison. Christe eléi- 
Son. Kyrie eléison. Pater nos- 
ter (secreto). 


In ihe meantime, the priest sprinkles the corpse. 


V. And lead us not into 
temptation. 

RY. But deliver us from evil. 

V. From the gate of hell. 

BR. Deliver his (her) soul, O 
Lord. 

FX. May he (she) rest in 
peace. 

BR. Amen. 

y. O Lord, hear my prayer. 


Bí. And let my cry come unto 
Thee. 

¥. The Lord be with you. 

FY. And with thy spirit. 


¥. Et ne nos indücas in 
tentatiónem. 

BY. Sed libera nos a malo. 

¥. A porta inferi. 

AY. Erue, Dómine, ánimas 
eórum. 

¥. Requiéscant in pace. 


BY. Amen. 

FJ. Dómine, 
tiónem meam, 

BY. Et clamor meus ad te 
véniat. 

Y. Dóminus vobíscum. 

RY. Et cum spíritu tuo. 


exáudi ora- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ABSOLUTION OF THE CORPSE 


1527 


Let us Pray 


AC, quaesumus, Dómine, 

hanc cum servo tuo de- 
füncto (fámula tua defüncta) 
misericórdiam ut factórum 
Suórum in penis non recipiat 
vicem, qui (que) tuam in vo- 
tis ténuit voluntátem: ut, 
Sicut hic eum (eam) vera 
fides junxit fidélium turmis; 
ita illic eum (eam) tua mis- 
erátio sóciet angélicis choris. 
Per Christum. 


RY. Amen. ] 

yY. Réquiem etérnam dona 
el, Dómine. 

W. Et lux perpétua lüceat 
el. i 

¥. Requiéscat in pace. 


H. Amen. 

¥. Anima ejus, et anime 
ómnium fidélium defunctór- 
um, per misericórdiam Dei 
requiéscant in pace. 

BY. Amen. 


RANT, O Lord, we beseech 
Thee, this mercy unto Thy 

Servant deceased, that, having 
in desire kept Thy will he 
(she) may not suffer in requital 
of his (her) deeds; and as a 
true Faith joinéd him (her) 
unto the company of Thy faith- 
ful here below, so may Thy 
tender mercy give him (her), 
place above, among the angel 
choirs. Through ‘Christ our 
Lord. 

BY. Amen. 

V. Eternal rest grant unto 
him (her), O Lord. 

W. And let perpetual light 
shine upon him, (her). 

JF. May he (she) rest in 
peace. 

H. Amen. . : 

V. May his (her) soul, and 
and the souls of the faithful 
departed, thrdugh the mercy of 
God, rest in peace. 

BY. Amen. 


Returning to the Church or Sacristy, the priest recites with his 
attendants the following psalm for the souls in Purgatory. 


Ant. Si iniquitates. 


Ant. If thou wilt mark in- 
iquities. 


"Psalm 129 


E PROFÜNDIS clamávi ad 
te, Dómine: Dómine, 
exáudi vocem meam. 

Fíant aures tum inten- 
déntes, in Vocem deprecatión- 
is mee. ` 

Si iniquitátes observáveris, 
Dómine: Dómine, quis susti- 
nébit? 

‘Quia apud te propitiátio 
est: et propter legem tuam 
sustinui te, Dómine. 


Sustínuit ánima mea in 


ut of the depths I have 
cried to Thee, O Lord: 
Lord, hear my voice. 
Let Thy ears be attentive to 
the voice of my supplication. 


If Thou, O Lord, wilt mark 
iniquities: Lord, who shall 
stand it? 

For with Thee there is merci- 
ful forgiveness; and by reason 
of Thy law I have waited for 
Thee, [e Lord. 

My soul hath relied on His 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1528 


word; my soul hath hoped in 
the Lord. 

From the  morning-watch 
even until night, let Israel hope 
in the Lord. 

"Because with the Lord there 
is mercy; and with Him plenti- 
ful redemption. 

And he shall redeem Israel 
from all his iniquities. 

¥. Eternal rest grant unto 
ihem, O Lord. 

IH. And let perpetual light 
shine upon them. 

Ant. If Thou wilt mark ini- 
quities, O Lord: Lord, who shall 
stand it? 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


verbo ejus: sperávit ánima 
mea in Dómino. 

A custódia matutína usque 
ad noctem, speret Israél in 
Dómino. 

Quia apud Dóminum mise- 
ricórdia: et copiósa apud eum 
redémptio. 

Et ipse rédimet Israél, ex 
ómnibus iniquitátibus ejus. 

Y. Réquiem ztérnam dona 
eis, Dómine: 

RY. Et lux perpétua lüceat 
eis. 

Ant. Si iniquitátes ob- 
Serváveris, Dómine: Dómine, 
quis sustinébit? . 


Mass for Thich, Seventh and Thirtieth 
l Bap after Death 


On the third, seventh or: thirtieth day after the death, one 
solemn Mass may be sung, even if a double feast occur, pro- 


vided it be not of the first or second c 


lass, a Sunday or holy- 


day of obligation, or an otherwise exceptionally privileged day. 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


~- Introit. 4 Esdr. 2, 34, 35 


TERNAL rest give to them, 

O Lord; and let per- 
petual light shine upon them. 
Ps. 64, 2, 3. A hymn, O God, be- 
cometh Thee in Sion; and a 
vow shall be paid to Thee in 
Jerusalem: O Lord, hear my 
prayer; all flesh shall come to 
Thee. Eternal. rest.- 

Kyrie, page 761. - 


E BESEECH Thee, O Lord, 

that Thou vouchsafe to 

grant to the soul of Thy ser- 

vant, N., the third (or seventh, 

or thirtieth) day of whose 

burial we commemorate, com- 

panionship with Thy saints 

and elect, and pour upon it. the 

perennial dew of Thy mercy. 
Through our Lord. 


ÉQUIEM etérnam dona 

eis, Démine: et lux 
perpétua lüceat eis. Ps. 64, 2, 
3. Te decet hymnus, Deus, in 
Sion, et tibi reddétur votum 
in Jerúsalem: exaudi ora- 
tiónem meam, ad te omnis 
caro véniet. Réquiem, 


Prayer 


UxsuMus, Dómine, ut 
Q anime fámuli tui (fám- 
ule tuz) N. cujus deposi- 
tiónis diem tértium (vel sép- 
timum, vel trigésimum) com- 
memorámus, Sanctórum at- 
que electórum tuórum largíri 
dignéris consórtium: et ror- 
em misericórdie tus perén- 
nem infündas. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


1529 


Epistle. 1 Thess. 4, 12-17 


Léetio Epístole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Thessalonicénses. 


TRES: Nólumus vos ig- 
.noráre de dormiénti- 
bus, ut non contristémini, 
sicut et céteri, qui spem non 
habent. Si enim crédimus 
quod Jesus mórtuus est, et 
resurréxit: ita et Deus eos, qui 
dormiérunt per Jesum, addü- 
cet cum eo. Hoc enim vobis 
dícimus in verbo Dómini, quia 
nos, qui vívimus, qui resídui 
sumus in advéntum Dómini 
non preveniémus eos, qui 
dormiérunt. Quóniam ipse 
Dóminus in jussu, et in voce 
Archángeli, et in tuba Dei de- 
scéndet de ccelo: et mórtui, 
qui in Christo sunt, resürgent 
primi. Deínde nos, qui vívi- 
mus, qui relínquimur, simul 
rapiémur cum illis in nübibus 
óbviam- Christo in áéra, et sic 
semper cum Dómino érimus. 
Itaque consolámini ínvicem 
in verbis istis. 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
Blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Thessalonians, 

RETHREN, we will not have 

you ignorant concern- 
ing them that are asleep, that 
you be not sorrowful, even as 
others who have no hope. For 
if we believe that Jesus died 
and rose again, even so them 
who have slept through Jesus 
will God bring with Him. For 
this we say unto you in the 
word of the.Lord, that. we who 
are alive, who remain unto the 
coming. of the Lord, shall not 
prevent them who have slept. 
For the Lord Himself ‘shall 
come down from heaven, with 
commandment, and with the 
voice of an archangel, and with 
the trumpet of God; and the 
dead who are in Christ shall 
rise first. Then we who are 
alive, who are left, shall be 
taken up together with them in 
the clouds to meet Christ, into 
the air, and so shall we be al- 
ways with the Lord. Wherefore, 


comfort ye one another with these words. 


Gradual. 4 Esdr. 2, 34, 35 


Réquiem ztérnam dona 
eis, Dómine; et lux perpétua 
lüceat eis. Ps. 111, 7. Y. In 
memoria &térna erit justus: 
ab auditióne mala non timé- 


Eternal rest give to them, O 
Lord; and let perpetual light 
shine upon them. Y. Ps. 111,7. 
The just shall be in everlasting 
remembrance; he shall not fear 


bit. the evil hearing. 
Tract 
Absólve, Dómine, ánimas O Lord, absolve the souls of 


ómnium fidélium defunctór- 
um ab omni vínculo delictó- 
rum. Y. Et grátia tua illis 
succurrénte, mereántur evá- 
dere judícium ultiónis. Y. Et 
lucis ætérnæ beatitüdine pér- 
frui. 


all the faithful departed from 
every bond of sin. Y. And by 
the help of Thy grace may they 
be worthy to escape the sen- 
tence of vengeance. Y. And to 
enjoy all the beatitude of the 
light eternal. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1580 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


Sequence (Dies ire), as in the Common or Daily Mass for 


the Dead, page 1503. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 11, 21-27 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St, John. 
T THAT lime, Martha said 
to Jesus, Lord, if Thou 
hadst been here, my brother 
had not died: but now also I 
know that whatsoever Thou 
wilt ask of God, God will give 
it Thee. Jesus saith to her, thy 
brother shall rise again, Martha 
saith to Him, I know that he 
shall. rise again in the resur- 
rection at the last day. Jesus 
said to her, I am the resurrec- 
tion and tbe life: he that be- 
lieveth in Me although he be 
dead, shall live; and every one 
that liveth, and believeth in 
Me, shall not die forever. Be- 
lievest thou this? She saith to 
Him, Yea, Lord, I have believed 
that Thou art Christ the Son 
of the living God, Who art come 
into this world. 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secundum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Dixit 
Martha ad Jesum: Dó- 
mine, si fuísses hic, frater 
meus non fuisset mórtuus: 
sed et nunc scio, quia que- 
cümque popósceris a Deo, 
dabit tibi Deus. Dicit illi Je- 
sus: Restrget frater tuus. 
Dicit ei Martha: Scio quia 
resürget in resurrectióne in 
novíssimo die. Dixit ei Jesus: 
Ego sum resurréctio, et vita: 
qui credit in me, étiam si 
mórtuus füerit, vivet: et om- 
nis qui vivit, et credit in me, 
non moriétur in etérnum. 
Credis hoc? Ait illi: Utique, 
Dómine, ego crédidi, quia tu 
es Christus Filius Dei vivi, 
qui in hunc mundum venísti. 


Offertory 


O Lord Jesus Christ, King of 
glory, deliver the souls of all 
the faithful departed from the 
pains of hell and from the deep 
pit; deliver them from the 
lion’s mouth, that hell engulf 
them not, nor they fall into 
darkness, but that Michael, the 
holy standard-bearer, bring 
them into the holy light which 
Thou once didst promise to 
Abraham and his seed. V. We 
offer Thee, O Lord, sacrifices 
and prayers of praise; do Thou 
accept them for those souls 
whom we this day commemo- 
rate; grant them, O Lord, to 


Démine Jesu Christe, Rex 
glórie, libera ánimas ómni- 
um fidélium defunctórum de 
penis inférni, et de profündo 
lacu: libera eas de ore leónis, 
ne absérbeat eas tártarus, ne 
cadant in obscürum: sed síg- 
nifer sanctus Michel repre- 
séntet eas in lucem sanctam: 
Quam olim Abrahe promis- 
isti, et sémini ejus. Y. Hó- 
stias et preces tibi, Dómine, 
laudis offérimus: tu süscipe 
pro animábus illis; quarum 
hódie memóriam  fácimus: 
fac eas, Dómine, de morte 
transíre ad vitam. Quam olim 


http://ccwatershed.org 


m 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


Abrahe promisísti, et sémini 
ejus, 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


1531 


pass from death to the life 
which Thou once didst promise 
to. Abraham and his seed. 


Secret 


ÜNERa, quesumus Dó- 

mine, qua tibi pro án- 

ima fámuli tui (famule tum) 

N. offérimus, placátus intén- 

de: ut remédiis purgáta cæ- 

Jéstibus, in tua pietáte requi- 
éscat. Per Dóminum. 

Preface No. 15, page. 817. 


oor with favor, we be- 

seech 'Thee, O Lord, upon 
the offerings we make for the 
Soul of Thy servant, N., that, 
being purged by the heavenly 
remedies, it may repose in Thy 
love. Through our Lord. 


Communion. 4 Esdr. 2, 35, 34 


Lux etérna lüceat eis, Dó- 


May light eternal shine upon 


mine: Cum Sanctis tuis in them, O Lord. With Thy saints 

etérnum: quia pius es. J. forever, for Thou art kind. Y. 

Réquiem etérnam dona eis, Grant them everlasting rest, 

Dómine: et lux perpétua lú- O Lord, and let perpetual light 

ceat eis. Cum Sanctis tuis. shine upon them. With Thy 
saints. 


Postcommunion 


ÜscriPE, Dómine, preces 
nostras pro ánima fám- 
uli tui (fámüle tue) N. ut, 
si que ei mácule de terrénis 
contágiis adhesérunt, remis- 


ECEIVE, O Lord, our pray- 

ers for the soul of Thy 
servant, N., that whatever 
blemishes may have adhered to 
it from its contact with earth 


siónis tue misericórdia de- may be wiped away, by the 
leántur, Per Dóminum. mercy of Thy pardon. ‘Through 
our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Gn the Anniversarp Dap of the Death of One 
or More of the Faithful 


On the anniversary day of the death or burial one solemn 
Mass may be sung, even if a double feast occur, provided it be 
not of the first or second class, a Sunday or holy-day of obliga- 
tion, or an otherwise exceptionally privileged day. Should the 
anniversary be of one person only, the words of the prayers are 
put into the singular number. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. 4 Esdr. 2, 34, 35 


ÉquiEM etérnam dona TERNAL rest give to them, 
eis, Dómine; et lux O Lord and let per- 
perpétua lüceat eis. Ps. 46, 2, petual light shine upon them. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1532 MASSES FOR THE DEAD 

Ps. 64, 2, 3. A hymn, O God, be- 3. Te decet hymnus Deus in 
cometh Thee in Sion; and a Sion; et tibi reddétur votum 
vow shall be paid to Thee in in Jerüsalem; exáudi oratió- 
Jerusalem: O Lord, hear my nem meam; ad te omnis caro 


prayer; all flesh shall come to 
Thee. Eternal rest, etc. 


Kyrie, page 761.° 


Prayer 


cop, the Lord of mercies, 

grant to the souls of Thy 
Servants and handmaids, the 
anniversary of whose burial 
we commemorate, an abode of 
refreshment, the beatitude of 
rest, and the brightness of 
light. Through our Lord. 


Lesson. 

Lesson from the Book of the 
Machabees. | 

N THOSE days, the most vali- 

ant man Judas, making a 

gathering, sent twelve. thou- 


sand drachmas of silver: to Je- 


rusalem for sacrifice to be of- 
fered for the sins of the dead, 
thinking well and religiously 
concerning the resurrection 


(for if he had not hoped that. 


they that were slain should rise 
again, it would have seemed 
superfluous and vain to pray 
for the dead); and because he 
considered that they who had 
fallen asleep with godliness, 
had great grace laid up for 


them. It is therefore a holy, 


and wholesome thought to pray 
for the dead, that they may be 
loosed from sins, 


véniet. Réquiem. 


EUS, indulgentiárum 
D Dómine: da animábus 
amulórum famularümque 
tuárum, quorum anniversári- 
um Gepositiónis diem com- 
memoramus, refrigérii sedem, 
quiétis beatitüdinem, et lüm- 
inis claritátem. Per Dó- 
minum. 


2 Mach. 12, 43-46 


Léctio libri Machabedérum. 


xN DIÉBUS illis: Vir fortissi- 

mus Judas, facta colla- 
tióne, duódecim míllia drach- 
mas argénti misit Jerosály- 
mam; offérri pro- peecátis 
mortuórum sacrifícium, bene 
et religióse de resurrectióne 
cógitans (nisi enim eos, qui 
cecíderant, resurrectüros spe- 
ráret, supérfluum viderétur, 
et vanum oráre pro mórtuis) : 
et quia considerábat quod hi, 
qui cum pietate dormitiónem 
accéperant, óptimam habér- 
ent repósitam gratiam. Sanc- 
ta ergo, et salübris est cogi- 
tátio pro defünctis exoráre, 
ut a peccatis solvántur. 


Gradual. 4 Esdr. 2, 34, 35 
Eternal rest give to them, O Réquiem ætérnam dona eis, 
Lord; and let perpetual light Dómine; et lux perpétua lú- 
shine upon them. YV.Ps.111,7. ceat eis. Ps. 111, 7. Y. In 
The just shall be in everlasting memória stérna erit justus: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


&b auditióne mala non timé- 
bit, 


Absólve, Dómine, ánimas 
ómnium fidélium defunctór- 
um ab omni vínculo delictór- 
um. V. Et gratia tua illis suc- 
currénte, mereántur evádere 
judícium ultiónis. V. Et lucis 
ætérnæ beatitüdine pérfrui. 


1533 


remembrance; he shall not fear 
the evil l hearing. 


Tract 


Absolve, O Lord, the souls of 
all the faithful departed from 
every bond of sin. V. And by 
the help of Thy grace let them 
be found worthy to escape the 
sentence of vengeance. Y. And 
to enjoy the full beatitude of 
the light eternal. 


Sequence, Dies ire, as in the Common or Daily Mass of the 


Dead, page 1503. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel. John 6, 37-40 


m Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 
T” 1LLO témpore: Dixit Je- 

sus turbis Judæórum: 
Omne, quod dat mihi Pater, 
ad me véniet: et eum,:qui ve- 
nit ad me, non ejíciam foras: 
quia descéndi de cælo, non ut 
fáciam  voluntátem meam, 
sed voluntátem ejus, qui misit 
me. Hc est autem volüntas 
ejus, qui misit me, Patris: ut 
omne, quod dedit mihi, non 
perdam ex eo, sed resüscitem 
illud ii novíssimo die. Hec 
est autem  volüntas Patris 
mei, qui misit me: ut omnis, 
qui videt Filium, et credit in 
eum, hábeat vitam etérnam, 
et ego resuscitábo eum in no- 
vissimo die. 


% Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, Jesus said to 
the multitudes of the 
Jews, All that the Father giveth 
Me shall come to Me: and him 
that cometh to Me I will not 
cast-out: because I came-down 
from heaven, not.to.do My own 
will, but the will of Him Who 
sent Me, Now this is the will of 
the Father Who sent Me, that 
of all that He hath given Me, 
I should lose nothing, but 
should raise it up again in the 
last day; and this is the will 
of My Father that sent Me, 
that every one who seeth the 
Son, and believeth in Him, may 
have life everlasting; and I will 
raise him up in the last day. 


Offertory 


Dómine Jesu Christe, Rex 
glóriz, libera ánimas ómnium 
fidélium — defunctórum de 
ponis, inférni, et de profündo 
lacu: libera eas de ore leónis, 
ne absérbeat eas tartarus, ne 
cadant in obscürum; sed síg- 
nifer sanctus Michaël reprz- 


O Lord Jesus Christ, the 
King of glory, deliver the souls 
of all the faithful departed 
from the pains of hell and from 
the deep pit; deliver them from 
the lion’s mouth, that hell en- 
gulf them not, that they fall 
not into the darkness; but let 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1534 


Michael, the holy standard- 
bearer, bring them into the holy 
light which Thou didst promise 
of old to Abraham and his seed. 
FN. We offer Thee sacrifices and 
prayers of praise, O Lord; do 
Thou accept them for those 
souls of which we this day 
make commemoration; cause 
them, O Lord, to pass from 
death to the life which of old 
Thou didst promise to Abraham 
and his seed. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD 


séntet eas in lucem sanctam: 
Quam olim Abrahe promis- 
ísti, et sémini ejus. Y. Hó- 
stias et preces tibi, Dómine, 
laudis offérimus: tu süscipe 
pro animábus illis, quarum 
hódie memoriam, .fácimus: 
fac eas, Dómine, de morte 
iransíre ad vitam. Quam 
olim Abrahæ promisísti, et 
sémini ejus. 


Secret 


E PROPITIATED, O Lord, by 
B our supplications for the 
souls of Thy servants and 
handmaids, whose anniversary 
is kept to-day, for whom we 
offer Thee the sacrifice of 
praise, that Thou vouchsafe to 
join them to the company of 
Thy saints. Through our Lord. 


Preface No. 15, page 817. - 


ROPITIARE Dómine sup- 
plicatiónibus nostris, 
pro animábus famulórum fa- 
mularümque tuárum, quorum 
hódie ánnua dies ágitur, pro 
quibus tibi offérimus sacrific- 
ium laudis: ut eas Sanctórum 
tuórum consórtio sociáre dig- 
néris, Per Dóminum. 


Communion. 4 Esdr. 2, 35, 34 


May eternal light shine upon 
them, O Lord. With Thy saints 
forever, because Thou art kind. 
FJ. Grant them everlasting 
rest, O Lord, and Jet perpetual 
light shine upon them. With 
Thy saints, etc. 


Lux atérna lüceat eis, Dô- 
mine: Cum Sanctis tuis in 
etérnum: quia pius es. y. 
Réquiem stérnam dona eis, 
Dómine: et lux perpétua lü- 
ceat eis. Cum Sanctis tuis, 


Postcommunion 


Lord, that the souls of 
Thy servants and handmaids, 
the anniversary of whose burial 
we commemorate may be 
purged by this sacrifice and ob- 
tain alike forgiveness and ever- 
Jasting rest. Through our Lord. 


Gu wé beseech Thee, O 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


RÆSTA, quesumus, Dó- 

mine: ut anime famu- 
lórum famularümque tuar- 
um, quorum anniversérium 
depositiónis diem commem- 
Orámus; his purgáte sacri- 
fíclis, indulgéntiam páriter et 
réquiem cápiant sempitérn- 
am. Per Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


The Forty Hours’ Adoration 


This prayer of the Forty Hours was established forever by 
Pope Clement VIL, for the whole course of the year, in regular 
continuous succession, from one church to another, commenc- 
ing on the first Sunday in Advent with the chapel in the apos- 
tolical palace, as appears from the constitution Graves et 
diuturna, Nov. 25, 1592. This Pope was moved to establish this 
devotion by the public troubles of holy Church, in order that, 
day and night, the faithful might appease their Lord by prayer 
before the Blessed Sacrament in solemn exposition, imploring 
there His divine mercy. 


As regards the introduction of the Forty Hours, into the 
United States we read in the “Manual of the Forty Hours’ 
Adoration" the following note: 


“This devotion was first introduced into the Diocese of 
Philadelphia in 1853 by the saintly Bishop Neumann; next, in 
1858, into the archdiocese of Baltimore; and finaly at the 
Plenary Council of Baltimore in 1866 formally approved (con- 
firmed by Papal indults) for all the dioceses of the United 
States. The Most Rev. P. F. Kenrick, Archbishop of Baltimore, 
feeling that not all the rules of the Clementine Instruction 
could be strictly observed, had petitioned Pius IX to grant 
some. modifications. A rescript, dated December 10, 1857, and 
extended to all the dioceses of the United States, January 24, 
1868, allowed the following concessions: . 

fa) That,the Exposition need not be continued during the 
night. (b) That the procession may be omitted at the prudent 
discretion of the pastor. (c) That the faithful should be able 
to gain all the indulgences granted by the Constitution Graves 
et diuturna of Clement VIII. ] z ] 


Indul gences 


Once on‘éach of the three days a Plenary Indulgence may be 
gama by visiting the church during Exposition, and reciting 

ve Our Fathers and Hail Marys, Glory be to the Father, add- 
ing one Our Father and Hail Mary and Glory be to the Father 
for the Holy Father's intention; a fúrther requisite is the re- 
ception of the Sacraments of Penance and Holy Communion, 

For every visit during the Exposition a Partial Indulgence 
of fifteen years may be gained, by all who are truly sorry for 
their sins. These latter Indulgences may be applied to the 
souls in Purgatory, A. A. S., page 381, 1933. (Confession and 
Communion within eight days before the Forty Hours fulfills 
this condition. It is not necessary that Confession and Com- 
munion take place in tbe church where the Forty Hours is 
being celebrated.) 


The Masses and Ceremonies 
First Day 


Mass of Exposition is the Votive Mass of the Blessed Sacra- 
ment as said on Corpus Christi, page 635. : 

If the Forty Hours begins on one of the days mentioned be- 
low, the Mass of the day is said and only the Prayer, Secret 
and Postcommunion are from the Votive Mass of the Blessed 


1535 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a a 


^m 
^ 1536 FORTY HOURS' DEVOTION 
Sacrament is said on Corpus Christi. 

1. Sunday of the First Class, 

2. Double Feasts of the First Class. 

3. Feasts commemorating any mystery of our Lord connected 
with the Blessed Sacrament. 

4. Ash Wednesday; Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday in 
Holy Week. 

5. Vigils of Christmas, Pentecost and All Souls’ Day. 

Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament takes place after Holy 
Communion when the celebrant places the sacred Host in the 
monstrance. At the end of Mass he takes off the chasuble, 
puts on the cope and then incenses the Blessed Sacrament. 
During the procession the hymn “Pange Lingua" is sung as 
on Holy Thursday, page 454. 

On returning to the altar the Blessed Sacrament is placed 
on the throne and the choir sings the Tantum Ergo, 


Tantum Ergo Sacramentum 


T)" in adoration falling, 


Lo! the sacred host we 
hail! 
Lo o'er ancient forms depart- 
ing, 
Newer rites of grace prevail; 
Faith for all defects supplying, 
Where the feeble senses fail. 
'To the everlasting Father, 
And the Son Who reigns 
high, - 
With the Holy Ghost proceed- 
ing 
Forth from each eternally, 
Be salvation, honor, blessing, 
Might, and endless majesty. 
Amen. 


on 


ANTUM ergo sacramen- 
tum, 
Veneremur cernui; 


Et antiquum documentum 


Novo cedat ritui; 
Prestet fides supplementum 
Sensuum defectui. 
Genitori, Genitoque, 
Laus et jubilatio; 


Salus, honor, virtus quoque 


Sit et benedictio: 
Procedenti ab utroque 
Compar sit laudatio. 
Amen. 


Then follows the chanting or recital of the Litany of the 


Saints. 


Litany of the Saints 


ORD, have mercy on us. 


Christ, have mercy on 


us. 
Lord, have mercy on us. 
Christ, hear us. 

Christ, gracious^y hear us. 


vnrE eléison. 
Christe eléison. 
Kyrie eléison. 


Christe audi nos. 
Christe exáudi nos. 


God, the father of heaven, Rave Pater de celis Deus, miserére 


mercy on us. 
God, the Son, Redeemer of the 
world, have mercy on us. 


nobis. 
Fili Redémptor mundi Deus, 
miserére nobis. 


God, the Holy Ghost, have Spíritus sancte Deus, mise- 


mercy on us. 


rére nobis. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Se 


= Ne a 


FORTY HOURS’ DEVOTION 


Sancta Trinitas, unus Deus, 
miserére nobis. 

Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis, 

Sancta Dei Génitrix.. 

Sancta Virgo virginum, 

Sancte Michael, 

Sancte Gabriel, 

Sancte Réphal, 

Omnes sancti Angeli et Arch- 
ángeli, ordte, 

Omnes sancti beatórum Spir- 
ituum órdines, . f 

Sancte Joánnes Baptista, , 

Sancte Joseph, : i 

Omnes sancti. Patriárchæ et 
Prophétæ, oráte, ~ 

Sancte. Petre, . 

Sancte Paule, 

Sancte Andréa, 

Sancte Jacóbe, 

Sancte Joánnes, 

Sancte Thoma, 

Sancte Jacóbe, 

Sancte Philippe, 

Sancte Bartholomee, 

Sancte Matthee, 

Sancte Simon, 

Sancte Thaddee, - 

Sancte Matthfa, 

Sancte. Bárnaba, 

Sancte Luca, 

Sancte Marce, 

Omnes sancti Apóstoli et 
Evangelíste, oráte. 
Omnes sancti Discípuli Dó- 
mini, oráte. 
Omnes. . sancti 
oráte. 

Sancte Stéphane, 

Sancte Laurénti, 

Sancte Vincénti, 

Sancti Fabiane et Sebastiáne, 
oráte. 


. Innocéntes, 


Sancti Joánnes et Paule, 
oráte. 

Sancti Cosma et Damiana, 
orate, 


Sancti Gervdsi et Protási, 
oráte, 


1587 


Holy Trinity, one God, have 
mercy on us. 

Holy Mary, pray for us. 

Holy Mother of God, 

Holy Virgin of virgins, 

St. Michael, 


_ St. Gabriel, 


St. Raphzl, 

All ye holy Angels and Arch- 
angels, . 

All ye holy orders of blessed 
Spirits, ; 

St. John Baptist, 

St. Joseph, 

All ye holy Patriarchs - and 
Prophets, 

St. Peter, 

St. Paul, 

St. Andrew, 

St. James, 

St. John, 

St. Thomas, 

St. James, 

St. Philip, 

St. Bartholomew, 

St. Matthew, 

St. Simon, 


; St. Thaddeus, .- 


St. Matthias, 

St. Barnabas, 

St. Luke, 

St. Mark, 

All ye holy Apostles and Evan- 
gelists, 

All ye holy Disciples of our 
Lord, 

All ye holy Innocents,. 


St. Stephen, 

St. Lawrence, 

St.Vincent, . 

Sts. Fabian and Sebastian, 
Sts. John and Paul, .. 

Sts. Cosmas and Damian, 


Sts. Gervase and Protase, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1538 


All ye holy Martyrs, 

St. Sylvester, 

St. Gregory, 

St. Ambrose, 

St. Augustine, 

St. Jerome, 

St. Martin, 

St. Nicholas, 

All ye holy Bishops and Con- 
fessors, 

All ye holy Doctors, 

St. Anthony, 

St. Benedict, 

St. Bernard, 

St. Dominic, 

St. Francis, 

All ye holy Priests and Levites, 


All ye holy Monks and Hermits, 


St. Mary Magdalen, 

St. Agatha, 

St. Lucy, 

St. Agnes, 

St. Cecilia, 

St. Catherine, 

St. Anastasia, 

All ye holy Virgins and Widows, 


All ye holy men and women, 
Saints of God, make interces- 
sion for us. 

Be merciful, spare us, O Lord. 


Be merciful, graciously hear us, 
O Lord. 

From all evil deliver us, O 
Lord. 

From all sin, 

From Thy wrath, 

From threatening dangers, 

From the scourge of earth- 
quake, 

From plague, famine and war, 

From sudden and unprovided 
death, 

From the snares of the devil, 

From anger, hatred and all iN 
will, 


FORTY HOURS’ DEVOTION 


Omnes sancti Mártyres, oráte, 

Sancte Sylvéster, 

Sancte Gregóri, 

Sancte Ambrósi, 

Sancte Augustíne, 

Sancte Hierónyme, 

Sancte Martíne, 

Sancte Nicoláe, 

Omnes sancti Pontífices et 
Confessóres, oráte. 

Omnes sancti ‘Doctéres, orate, 

Sancte Antóni, 

Sancte Benedicte, 

Sancte Bernárde, 

Sancte Domínice, 

Sancte Francísce, 

Omnes sancti Sacerdótes et 
Levite, oráte. 

Omnes sancti Mónachi et Ere- 
mite, oráte. 

Sancta María Magdaléna, 

Sancta Agatha, 

Sancta Lücia, 

Sancta Agnes, 

Sancta Cecilia, 

Sancta Catharina, 

Sancta Anastasia, 

Omnes sanct# Virgines et Vi- 
due, oráte, 

Omnes Sancti et Sancte Dei, 
intercédite pro nobis. 


Propitius esto, Parce nobis 
Dómine. 

Propítius esto, 
Dómine. 

Ab omni malo, libera nos 
Dómine. 

Ab omni peccáto, 

Ab ira tua, 

Ab imminéntibus perículis, 

A flagéllo terremótus, 


Ezráudi nos 


A peste, fame et bello, 

A subitáneg et improvisa 
morte, 

Ab insidiis diáboli, 

Ab ira, et odio, et omni, mala, 
voluntáte, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FORTY HOURS' DEVOTION 


A spiritu fornicatiónis, 

A fülgure et tempestáte, . 

A morte perpétua, 

Per mystérium sancte Incar- 
natiónis tum, 

Per Advéntum tuum, 

Per Nativitátem tuam, 

Per Baptísmum et. sanctum 
jejünium tuum, 

Per Crucem et Passiónem 
tuam, 

Per mortem et sepultürem 
tuam, 

Per sanctam Resurrectiónem 
tuam, 

Per ndmirabHen Ascensiónem 
tuam, ; 

Per advéntum Spiritus Sancti 
Parácliti, 

In die judícii, 

Peccátores, fe rogámus audi 
nos. 

Ut nobis parcas, 

Ut nobis indúlgeas, 

Ut ad veram peniténtiam nos 
perdücere dignéris, 

Ut Ecelésiam tuam sanctam 
régere et conserváre digné- 
ris,. - 

Ut Domnum Apostólicum et 
omnes ecclesiásticos órdines 
in sancta religióne conser- 
váre dignéris, 

Ut inimicos sancte Ecclésie 
humiliáre dignéris, 


Ut régibus et princfpibus 
Christiánis pacem ‘et ve- 
ram concórdiam donáre 
dignéris. 

Ut cuncto pópulo Christiáno 
pacem et unitátem largíri 
dignéris, 

Ut omnes errántes ad unitá- 
tem Ecclésie revocáre et in- 
fidéles univérsos ad evan- 
gélii lumen perdücere- dig- 
néris, 


1538 


From the spirit of fornication, 

From lightning and tempest, 

From everlasting death, 

Through the mystery of Thy 
holy Incarnation, 

Through Thy Coming, 

Through Thy Nativity, 

Through Thy Baptism and holy 
fasting, 

Through Thy Cross and Pas- 
sion, 

Through Thy death and burial, 


Through Thy Holy Resurrec- 
tion, 

Through Thine admirable As- 
cension, 

Through the coming of the 
Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, 

In the day of judgment, 

We, sinners, we beseech Thee 
hear us, 

That Thou wouldst spare us, 

That Thou wouldst pardon us, 

That Thou wouldst bring us 
to true penance, : 

That Thou. wouldst.vouchsafe 
to govern and preserve Thy 
holy Church, 

That Thou wouldst vouchsafe 
to preserve our apostolic pre- 
late, and all orders of the 
Church in holy religion, 

That Thou wouldst vouchsafe 
to humble the enemies of the 
Holy Church, 

That Thou wouldst vouchsafe 
to give peace and true con- 
cord to Christian kings and 
princes, 

That Thou wouldst vouchsafe 
to grant peace and unity to 
all Christian people, 

That Thou wouldst vouchsafe 
to bring back to the unity of 
the Church all those who 
have strayed away, and lead 
to the light of the Gospel all 
unbelievers, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1540 


That Thou wouldst vouchsafe 
to confirm and preserve us in 
Thy holy service, 

That Thou wouldst lift up our 
minds to heavenly desires, 
That Thou wouldst render eter- 
nal blessings to all our ben- 

efactors, ` 

That Thou wouldst deliver our 
'souls, and the souls of our 
brethren, relations, and ben- 
efactors, from eternal dam- 
nation, 

That Thou wouldst vouchsafe 
to give and preserve the 
fruits of the earth, 

That Thou wouldst vouchsafe 
to grant.eternal rest to all 
the faithful departed, 

That Thou wouldst vouchsafe 
graciously to hear us, 

Son of God, 

Lamb of God, Who takest away 
the sins of the. world, 
spare us, O Lord. 

Lamb of God, Who takest away 
ihe sins. of the ‘world, 
hear us, O Lord. 

Lamb of God, Who takest away 
the sins of the world, 

-have mercy on us. 

Christ, hear us. 

Christ, graciously hear us. 

Lord, have merey on us. 

Christ, have mercy on us. 

Lord, have mercy onus. . 

Our Father (said silently). 
¥. And lead us not into temp- 

tation. 

FY, But deliver us from evil. 


Ps. 


O God, come to mine assist- 
ance: O Lord, make haste to 
help me. i 

Let them be.confounded and 
ashamed: that seek after my 
Boul, 


FORTY HOURS’ DEVOTION 


Ut nosmetipsos in tuo sancto 
servétio confortáre et con- 
Serváre dignéris, 

Ut mentes nostras ad celéstia 
desidéria érigas, 

Ut ómnibus benefactóribus 
nostris sempitérna bona 
retríbuas, 

Ut ánimas nostras, fratrum, 
propinquórum, et benefac- 
tórum nostrórum ab ztérna 
damnatiéne eripias, 


Ut fructus terre dare et con- 
servare dignéris, 


Ut ómnibus fidélibus defünc- 
tis réquiem ztérnam donáre 
dignéris, 

Ut nos exaudíre dignéris, 


Fili Dei, 
Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata 
mundi, parce nobis Dómine. 


Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccáta 
mundi, exdudi nos, Dómine. 


Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccáta 
mundi, miserére noois. 


Christe audi nos. 
Christe exáudi nos. 
Xyrie eléison, 
Christe eléison. 
Kyrie eléison. 
Pater noster (secreto). 
F. Et ne nos indücas in ten- 
tatiónem. 
R. Sed libera nos a malo. 


69 


Deus in adjutórium meum 
inténde: Dómine, ad adju- 
vándum me festína. 

Confundántur et revereán- 
tur: qui querunt ánimam 
meam: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FORTY HOURS' DEVOTION 


Avertántur retrórsum, et 


1541 


Let them be turned back- 


erubéscant: qui volunt mihi ward, and blush for shame, 


mala. 

Avertantur statim erubes- 
céntes, qui dicunt mihi: Euge, 
euge. 


Exsültent et leténtur in te 
omnes qui quaerunt te: et 
dicant semper: "Magnificétur 
Dóminus;:qui díligunt salu- 
tare tuum. ^ 

Ego vero egénus et pauper 
sum: Deus ádjuvà me. ' 

Adjütor meus, et liberátor 
meus es tu: Dómine ne mo- 
réris. 

Glória Patti. 

JV. Salvos fac servos tuos. 
RY. Deus meus, sperántes in te. 

Y. Esto nobis Dómine turris 

fortitüdinis. g. A facie in- 
imfici,  - ; 
Y. Nihil proficiat inimicus 
in nobis. W. Et fílius iniqui- 
tátis non appónat nocére 
nobis. 

‘Y. Dómine non secündum 
peccáta nostra fácias nobis. 
H. Neque secúndum iniqui- 
tátes nostras retríbuas nobis. 

¥. Orémus pro Pontífice 
nostro N. B/. Dóminus consér- 
vet eum, eb vivificet eum, et 
beátum fáciat eum in terra, 
et non tradat eum in ánimam 
inimicórum ejus. 
` ¥. Orémus pro benefactóri- 
. bus nostris. BY. Retribüere dig- 
' náre Dómine ómnibus nobis 
"bona faciéntibus propter no- 
men tuum vitam etérnam. 

Amen, 

Y. Orémus pro fidélibus de- 
fünctis. BY. Réquiem ætérnam 
don aeis Démine, et lux per- 
pétua lüceat eis. 


that desire evils unto me. 

Let them be straightway 
turned backward blushing for 
shame, that say unto me: "Tis 
well, ’tis well. 

Let all that seek Thee re- 
joice and be glad in Thee: and 
let such as love Thy. salvation 
say always, The Lord be mag- 
nified. 

But I am needy and poor: O 
God, belp me. 

Thou art my helper and my 
deliverer: O Lord, make no de- 
lay. 

Glory be to the Father. 

Y. Save Thy servants, W. 
Who hope in Thee, O my God. 

V. Be unto us, O Lord, a 
tower of strength. R. From the 
face of the enemy. 

¥. Let not the enemy prevail 
against us. W; Nor the son of 
iniquity have power to hurt us. 


y. O Lord, deal not with us 
according to our sins. W. 
Neither requite us according to 
our iniquities. 

y. Let us pray for our Sov- 
ereign Pontiff, N. RY. The Lord 
preserve him and give him life, 
and make him blessed upon 
the earth; and deliver him not 
up to the will of his enemies. 

¥. Let us pray for our bene- 
factors. W. Vouchsafe, O Lord, 
for Thy name's sake, to reward 
with eternal life all those who 
do us good. 

Amen. 

y. Let us pray for the faith- 
ful departed. W. Eternal rest 
give unto them, O Lord, and 
let perpetual light shine upon 
them. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1542 


Yy. May they rest in peace. 
B. Amen. 

Y. For our absent brethren. 
W. Save Thy servants, who 
hope in Thee, O my God. . 


y. Send them help, O Lord, 
from the holy place. W. And 
from Sion protect them. 

Yy. O Lord, hear my prayer. 
BY. And let my cry come unto 
Thee. 

XY. The Lord be with you. FH. 
And with Thy spirit. . 


Let us 


O God, Who in this wonder- 
ful sacrament hast left us a 
memorial of Thy passion; 
grant us, we beseech Thee, so 
to. venerate the sacred mys- 
teries of Thy body and blood, 
that we may ever feel within 
us the fruit of Thy redemption, 


i 


FORTY HOURS’ DEVOTION 


Y. Requiéscant in pace. W. 
Amen. 

Y. Pro frátribus nostris ab- 
séntibus. Bf. Salvos fac servos 
tuos, Deus meus, sperántes in 
te. 

Y. Mitte eis Dómine auxil- 
ium de sancto. 5. Et de Sion 
tuére eos. n 

Y. Dómine exáudi oratió- 
nem meam. W. Et clamor 
meus ad te véniat. 

<- y. Dóminus vobiscum. 5. 
Et cum spíritu tuo. 


e : 


Deus, qui nobis sub. Sacra- 
ménto mirábili, passiónis tuæ 
memoriam reliquisti: tríbue, 
qusesumus, ita nos córporis et 
sánguinis tui sacra. mystéria 
venerári, ut redemptiónis tue 
fructum in nobis jügiter, sen- 
tiámus. 


From Advent to Christmas 


O God, Who didst will that 
Thy Word, at the message of 
an angel, should take flesh in 
ihe womb of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary: grant that we Thy sup- 
pliants, who verily believe her 
to be the Mother of God, may 
be assisted by her intercessions 
with Thee. 


Deus, qui de Beáte Marie 
Virginis útero Verbum tuum, 
Angelo nuntiante, carnem 
suscipere voluísti: presta sup- 
plícibus tuis; ut qui vere eam 
Genitricem. Dei  crédimus, 
ejus apud te intercessiónibus 
adjuvémur, 


From Christmas to the Purification 


O God, Who by the fruitful 
virginity of blessed Mary, hast 
assured to mankind the bless- 
ings of eternal life: grant, we 
beseech Thee, that we may ex- 
perience the intercession of her, 
through whom we have been 
found worthy to receive the aù- 
thor of life, Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, Thy Son. 


Deus, qui salütis ætérnæ, 
Beát» Marie 
fecünda, humáno géneri præ- 
mia prestitísti: tríbue quesu- 
mus; ut ipsam pro nobis in- 
tercédere sentiámus, per quam 
merüimus auctórem vite sus- 
cípere, Dóminum nostrum Je- 
sum Christum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Vírginitáte ' 


FORTY HOURS’ DEVOTION 


1543 


. From the Purification to Advent 


Concéde nos fámulos tuos, 
quesumus, Dómine Deus, per- 
pétua, mentis et córporis sani- 
táte -gaudére; et  gloriósa 
béate Marfa semper Vírginis 
intercessióne à presénti liber- 
ári tristitia, et etérna pérfrui 
letítia. ` 


Omnipotens sempitérne De- 
us, miserére fámulo tuo Pon- 
tifici nostro, N., et dírige eum 
secündum tuam cleméntiam 
in viam salütis etérne; ut te 
donánte tibi, placita ctipiat, et 
tota virtüte perficiat. 


Deus, refugium nostrum et 
virtus, adésto piisEcclésim tue 
précibus, auctor ipse pietatis: 
et presta, ut quod fidéliter pê- 
timus, efficdciter consequá- 
mur. Ue 7 


Omnípotens, sempitérne De- 


us, qui sálvas omnes, et némi- 
nem vis períre: réspice ad án- 
imas, diabólica fraude decép- 
tas: ut omni herética pravi- 
tate depósita, errántium cór- 
da resipíscant, et ad veritátis 
tue rédeant unitatem.. 


Omnipotens sempitérneDe- 
us, qui vivórum domináris 
simul et mortuórum, omniüm- 
que miseréris, quos tuos fide et 
épere futüros esse prendscis: 
te süpplices exorámus; ut, 
pro quibus effündere preces 
decrévimus quosque vel pre- 
sens seculum adhuc in carne 
rétinet, vel futürum jam exü- 
tos corpore suscépit, interce- 


Grant, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord God, that we, Thy ser- 
vants,' may enjoy perpetual 
héalth of mind and body; and, 
by the glorious intercession of 
the blessed Mary, ever virgin, 
may be delivered from present 
sorrow, and possess eternal joy. 


O almighty God, have mercy 
on Thy servant N., our Sover- 
eign Pontiff, and direct him ac- 
cording to Thy clemency, in 
the way of everlasting salvation, 
that by Thy grace he may both 
desire things that are pleasing 
to Thee, and perform them 
with all his strength, 


-O God, our refuge and our 
strength, and the author of all 
goodness, attend to the pious 
prayers of Thy Church, and 
grant that what we ask in faith 
we may effectually obtain. - 


Almighty, everlasting God, 
Who savest all and wishest 
none to perish: look on the 
souls deceived by the wiles of 
the evil one, that, all the malice 
of heresy being laid aside, the 
hearts of those in error may 
repent and return to the unity 
of Thy truth; 


Almighty, everlasting God, 
Who hast dominion over the 
living and the dead, and art 
merciful to all, of whom Thou 
foreknowest that they will be 
Thine, by faith and good works; 
we humbly beseech Thee that 
they for whom we intend to 
pour forth our prayers, whether 
this present world still detain 
them in the flesh or the world 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1544 


to come hath already received 
them stripped of their bodies, 
may, through the intercession 
of all Thy saints, by the grace 
of Thy goodness, obtain the 
remission of all their sins. 
Through Our Lord Jesus Christ, 
Thy Son, Who with Thee liv- 
eth and reigneth in the unity 
of the Holy Ghost, God, world 
without end. 

R. Amen. 

Y. O Lord, hear my prayer. 
BY. And Jet my cry come unto 
Thee. ; 

Y. May the almighty and 
merciful Lord graciously hear 
us. RY. And always watch over 
us. Amen. 

V. May the souls of the faith- 
ful departed, through the mercy 
of God, rest in peace. RY. Amen. 


FORTY HOURS' DEVOTION 


déntibus ómnibus Sanctis 
tuis, pietátis tue cleméntia 
ómnium delictórum suórum 
véniam  consequántur. . Per 
Dóminum nostrum Jesum 
Christum Fílium tuum, qui 
tecum, vivit et regnat in uni- 
tate Spíritus Sancti Deus, per 
ómnia ssecula seculórum. 


RY. Amen. 

X. Dómine exáudi oratió- 
nem meas. W. Et clamor meus 
ad te véniat. 

y. Exáudit nos omnípotens 
et miséricors Dóminus, W. Et 
custódiat nos semper, Amen. 


Y. Fidélium ánimæ per mis- 
ericórdiam Dei, requiéscant 
in pace. RY. Amen. 


Second Bap 
The Mass of the second day of the Forty Hours’ pevotion is 


usually the solemn Mass for Peace, page 1468, with 


a com- 


memoration of the Blessed Sacrament, that is, the second 


Prayer, Secret and Postcommunion as below. 


The Mass is sung 


without the Gloria but with the Credo. 


Prayer 


Gon, Who in this wonder- 

ful.sacrament hast left 
us & memorial of 'Thy passion, 
grant us, we beseech Thee, so 
to venerate the sacred mysteries 
of Thy body and blood that we 
may constantly experience in 
ourselves the fruit of Thy re- 
demption. Who livest. 


EUS, qui nobis sub Sacra- 
D mento mirábili passió- 
nis tue memóriam reliquísti: 
tribue quesumus; ita nos 
Córporis et Sánguinis tui sa- 
cra mystéria venerári, ut re- 
demptiónis tue fructum in 
nobis jügiter sentiámus. Qui 
vivis. 


Secret 


F THY goodness, we be- 

seech Thee, O Lord, grant 
to Thy Church the gifts of 
unity and peace, which are 
mystically represented under 
the gifts we offer. 


CCLESIZ tue quesumus 

Dómine unitátis et pa- 
cis propítius dona concéde: 
que sub oblátis munéribus 
mystice designántur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


FORTY HOURS' DEVOTION 1545 


mo Postcommunion 
AC nos quesumus Dómi- RANT Us, we beseech Thee, 
ne divinitátis tue sem- ! O Lord, to be filled with 


pitérna. .fruitióne | repléri: the everlasting enjoyment of 

quam: pretiósi. Cérporis et Thy. divinity, which the tem- 

Sánguinis tui temporális per- poral partaking of Thy pre- 

céptio prefigürat. Qui vivis. cious body and blood doth fore- 
a ` shadow, Who livest, 


Third Bap 


On the third day the Mass to be celebrated is again as on 
the first day. See note on first day. On certain occasions 
there is an exception to this rule. During the octave of Corpus 
Christi the Mass is that of the Octave, page 635, with the se- 
ee Sion Salvatorem-—O Sion, thy Redeemer, ete., 
(page 636), - se : 


€onrlusion of the Forty Bours 


For the close of the Forty Hours the celebrant puts on the 
cope and kneels at the foot of the altar. The Litany (page 
1536) is chanted, then the Blessed Sacrament is incensed and 
the procession takes place, during which the hymn Pange 
Lingua (page 454) is sung. At the end of the Procession the 
Blessed Sacrament is placed on the altar, and the choir sings 
the Tantum Ergo Sacramentum (page 1536). This hymn being 
finished, ihe celebrant sings the versicie, "Panem de colo," 
etc., and the. choir responds, "Omne delectamentum,” etc. Then 
the celebrant rises and chants the prayers, after which is 
given Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament as on page 1536. 
Then the service closes with the Te Deum, “Holy God, we praise 
Thy name,” sung by the congregation. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Various Masses for Religious Orders 
and Special Devotion 


This Supplement consists of Masses that are said by special 
permission in the Churches or Chapels of various Religious 
Orders or Congregations, also in certain localities, in honor of 
Our Blessed Lady, under different titles, or as a mark of par- 
ticular devotion to some saints. Excepting a few, these Masses 
do not occur earlier in the book, and all are listed for easy 
hid in the General Index according to the name of the 

east, 


During the Week before the Last Sunday after the Epiphany. 


During the Week Before the Last Sunday After the Epiphany 


The Immaculate Heart of Our Lady, 
Refuge of Sinners (White) 
Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit. Ps. 85, 15, 16 


HOU, O God, art a God of 

compassion, and merciful, 
patient, and of much mercy, 
and true: look upon us and 
have mercy on us, and save the 
sons of Thine handmaiden, 
Mother of Thy Son and queen 
of the whole world. Ps. 85, 1. 
Incline Thine ear, O Lord, and 
hear me: for I am needy and 
poor. ¥. Glory. 


v, DÓMINE Deus, miser- 

. Átor et miséricors, pá- 
tiens et multe misericórdim, 
et verax; réspice in nos et 
miserére nostri, et salvos fac 
filios ancílle tum, Genitricis 
Fíli tui et regine totíus 
mundi. Ps. 85, 1. Inclina Dó- 
mine aurem tuam, et exáudi 
me, quóniam inops et pauper 
sum ego. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


most merciful God, Who 

hast willed that the 
blessed Virgin Mary should be 
the Mother of Thine only-be- 
gotten Son and the adminis- 
tratrix of His graces for the 
salvation of sinners and a ref- 
uge of the wretched, grant, we 
beseech Thee, that, while we 
celebrate the festival of the 
heart of the same most loving 


LEMENTÍSSIME Deus, qui 
Cd ad peccatérum salütem 
et miserórum perfügium beá- 
tam Virginem Maríam, Uni- 
géniti tui Genitrícem ejüsque 
gratiárum administram esse 
voluisti: presta, quesumus; 
ut dum Cordis ejisdem 
amantíssime Matris festivi- 
tátem celebrámus, et pecca- 
téribus conversiónem, et 


1546 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 154] 
cunctis fidélibus coléstium Mother, we may be worthy to 
ubertatem donórum obtinére obtain both the conversion of 
Mereamur, Per eümdem Dó- sinners and an abundance of 


minum, 


heavenly gifts for all the faith- 
ful Through the same. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 36, 13-19 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiz. 


ISERERE nostri, Deus 

ómnium, et réspice 
nos, et osténde nobis lucem 
miseratiónum tuárum. Cón- 
grega omnes tribus Jacob, ut 
cognóscant quia non est De- 
us nisi tu, et, enárrent mag- 
nália tua: hereditábis eos si- 
cut ab inítio. Miserére plebi 
tue super quam invocátum 
est nomen tuum, et Israél 
quem cosquásti primogénito 
tuo. Miserére civitáti sancti- 
ficatiónis tu. Reple Sion in- 
enarrabílibus verbis tuis, et 
glória tua pópulum tuum. Da 
testimónium his qui ab inítio 
creatúræ tue sunt, et süscita 
predieatiónes quas  locüti 
sunt in nómine tuo prophéte 
prióres. Da mercédem sustin- 
éntibus te, ut prophéte tui 
fidéles inveniántur, et exáudi 
oratiónes servérum tuórum 
secündum  benedictiónem 
Aaron de pópulo tuo, et dírige 
nos in viam justitia. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


AVE mercy upon us, O God 

of all, and behold us, and 
show us the light of Thy mercy. 
Gather together all the tribes 
of Jacob that they may know 
that there is no God besides 
Thee, and may declare Thy 
great works: and Thou shalt 
inherit them as from the be- 
ginning. Have mercy on Thy 
people, upon whom Thy name 
is invoked: and upon Israel, 
whom Thou hast raised up to 
be Thy firstborn. Have mercy 
on the city which Thou hast 
sanctified. Fill Sion with Thy 
unspeakable works, and Thy 
people with Thy glory. Give 
testimony to them that are Thy 
creatures from the beginning, 
and raise up the prophecies 
which the former prophets 
spoke in Thy name. Reward 
them that patiently wait for 
Thee, that Thy prophets may 
be found faithful: and hear the 
prayers of thy servants ac- 
cording to the blessing of Aaron 
over Thy people, and direct us 
into the way of justice. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is repiaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual 


Recordáre, Virgo Mater, in 
conspéctu Dei, ut loquáris pro 
nobis bona, et ut avértat in- 
dignatiónem suam a nobis. 


Remember, O Virgin Mother, 
in the presence of God, that 
thou speak good things for us, 
and that He may turn away His 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1548 MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 

wrath from us. Y. Remember Y. Memoráre diérum humili- 
the days of thy lowliness, and tatis tux, et tu invoca Dómi- 
do thou call upon the Lord, and num, et lóquere Regi pro no- 
speak to the King for us, and bis, et libera nos de morte, 
deliver us from death. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Esth, 7. ^ Allelüja, allehija. Y. Esth. 
If I have found favor in Thy 7. Si invéni grátiam in Óculis 
sight give to me my people for tuis, dona mihi pópulum me- 
whom I pray: forthey are de- um pro quo Óbsecro: tráditi 
livered up to be destroyed and sunt enim ut conterántur et 


to perish, Alleluia, 


"d - Tract. 


Give glory to the Lord for all 
the good things that are thine, 
O blessed Mother of the Sav- 


péreant, Allelüja. 


“Tob. 13 


Confitére Dómino in bonis 
tuis, beáta Salvatóris Mater, 
ut révocet ad te omnes cap- 


iour: so that He may call back tivos, et gáudeas in secula 


to thee all the captives of sin, 
and that thou mayest rejoice 
forever and ever. Y. Thou shalt 
shine with a glorious light; 

from afar off nations shall come 
to thee: they shall bring their 
gifts, and shall call upon the 
great name in thee. JY. Thou 
shalt rejoice in thy children: 

because they shall be blessed, 
and shall be gathered together 
to the Lord: blessed are all they 
that love thee, and that rejoice 
in thy peace. Y. Blessed is the 
Lord Who hath exalted her: 

and Who for her sake will show 
mercy to us. 


seculórum. Y. Luce spléndida 
fulgébis, et natiónes ex lon- 
gínquo ad te vénient; et mú- 
nera deferéntes, nomen mag- 
num invocábunt in te. Y. 
Letaberis in filiis tuis, quó- 
niam omnes benedicéntur et 
congregabüntur ad Dómin- 
um: beáti omnes qui diligunt 
te, et qui gàudent super pace 
tua. V. Benedíctus Dóminus 
qui exaltávit eam, et faciet 
Tnisericórdiam suam  nobís- 
cum propter illam, 


Greater. Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia, FX. We 
praise thee in the presence of 
the living, O glorious Mother 
of God; for thou dost make us 
to find mercy and everlasting. 
life. Alleluia. V. Rule over us, 
thou and thy Son, because thou 


Allelija, allelija. V. Co- 
ram ómnibus vivéntibus con- 
fitémur tibi, gloriósa Dei 
Génitrix, quóniam a morte 
liberas, et facis invenire mis- 
ericórdiam et vitam ttérnam. 
AHelüja. Y. Domináre. nostri, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


N 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


tu et fílius tuus, quia liberá- 
Sti nos de manu inimicórum. 
Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


1549 


hast delivered us from the hand 
of our enemies. Alleluia. 


Gospel of the second Sunday after the Epiphany, At that 
time there was a marriage, page 187. 


Creed, Page 765. 


Offertory 


Ne áuferas, Dómine, miser- 
icórdiam tuam a nobis prop- 
ter Matrem tuam; sed fiat 
sacrificium nostrum in con- 
Spéctu tuo hódie, ut pláceat 
tibi, quóniam non est con- 
füsio confidéntibus in te. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


For the sake of Thy Mother, 
O Lord, turn not away Thy 
mercy from us, but may our 
Sacrifice be performed in Thy 
presence this day, that it may 
please Thee, since those who 
trust in Thee shall not be put 
to confusion. 


Secret 


EDÉMPTOR, Dómine, cu- 

jus mortem in hoc sac- 
rifício commemorámus: per 
hujus méritum et piissime 
Matris tue Marie suffragium, 
omnes qui in te peccavérunt 
benígnus intuére; ut convérsi 
ab erróre vie suz, tibi peni- 
téntes desérviant, et ab ætér- 
na damnatióne liberéntur. 
Qui vivis. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


LORD, our Redeemer, 
i Whose death we com- 
memorate in this sacrifice, 
through its merit and the pa- 
tronage of Thy most loving 
Mother Mary, look with com- 
passion upon al who have 
sinned against Thee, that, be- 
ing convertėd from the error 
of their way, they may serve 
Thee in penance and be deliv- 
ered from everlasting damna- 
tion. Who livest. 


Communion 


Regina mundi, piíssima Ma- 
ria Virgo perpetua intercéde 
pro nostra pace et salüte, que 
genuísti Christum Dóminum, 
Salvatórem ómnium. 


O Queen of the world, Mary 
most loving, perpetual Virgin, 
intercede for our peace and 
salvation, thou who didst bring 
forth Christ our Lord, the Sav- 
jor of all. 


Postcommunion 


EUS, qui nobis in hac 
mensa singuláre no- 


cop, Who in this table 
hast left us the preemi- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1550 


nent safeguard of our mortal- 
ity, remember Thy mercies, we 
beseech Thee; of Thy clemency 
accept the entreaty which Thy 
blessed Mother, Mary, doth 
continually pour forth before 
Thee in behalf of sinners, and 
vouchsafe to lead them back 
into the path of righteousness 
and peace. Who livest. 


Concluding’ Prayers, page 793. 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


stre  mortalitátis reliquisti 
presidium: recordáre, qum- 
sumus, miseratiónum tuár- 
um; et deprecatiónem quam 
toto corde beáta María Mater 
tua coram te jügiter pro pec- 
catóribus effündit clemens 
admitte, et eos in viam justí- 
ti? et pacis redücere dignéris. 
Qui vivis. 


Jan. 20— St. Francis of Sales, Bishop, Confessor 
| . and Doctor of the Church (White) 
Founder of the Visitation Nuns 
This Mass is celebrated only in the chapels or churches of 


this Order. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 45, 8,9 


HE Lord made an everlast- 

ing covenant with him and 
gave to him the priesthood of 
the nation and made him 
blessed in glory: He girded him 
about with a glorious girdle 
and clothed him with a robe 
of glory and crowned him with 
majestic attire. Ps. 118. How 
sweet are Thy words to my pal- 
ate, more than honey to my 
mouth. Y. Glory. 


TzÁTUIT ei Dóminus testa- 
S méntum etérnum, et 
dedit ei sacerdótium gentis: 
et beatificávit illum in glória, 
et circumcínxit eum zona 
glóriæ, et induit eum stolam 
glórie, et coronávit eum in 
vasis virtütis. Ps. 118. Quam 
dülcia faucibus meis eléquia 
tua, super mel ori meo, y. 
Glória Patri, 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


con, Who, for the saving 

of souls didst will that 
blessed Francis, Thy Confessor 
and Bishop, should become all 
things to all men, be pleased to 
grant that we, being filled with 
the sweetness of Thy love, 
guided by his teachings, and 
helped by his merits and pray- 
ers, may attain the joys of ever- 
lasting life, Through our Lord. 


EUS qui ad animárum 

Salütem beátum Fran- 
ciscum Confessérem tuum 
atque Pontificem, ómnibus 
ómnia factum esse voluísti: 
concéde propítius ut caritátis 
tue dulcédine perfüsi, ejus 
dirigéntibus mónitis, ac suf- 
fragántibus méritis, ætérna 
gáudia  consequ&ámur. Per 
Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES. FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


155] 


Epistle. Ephes. 3, 7-21 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Ephésios. 


ACTUS sum minister se- 

cündum donum grátie 
Dei que data est mihi secün- 
dum  operatiónem  virtütis 
ejus. Mihi ómnium Sanctór- 
um mínimo data est grátia 
hzc, in géntibus evangélizáre 
investigábiles divítias Christi; 
et ilumináre omnes, que sit 
dispensátio Sacraménti ab- 
scónditi a seculis in Deo, qui 
Ómnia creávit. Ut innotéscat 
principátibus et potestatibus, 
in celéstibus per Ecclésiam, 
multifórmis sapiéntia Dei, se- 
eündum prefinitiónem secu- 
lórum, quam fecit in Christo 
Jesu Dómino nostro, in quo 
habémus fidüciam, et accés- 
sum in confidéntia per fidem 
ejus. Propter quod peto ne de- 
ficiátis in tribulatiónibus me- 
is pro vobis que est glória ve- 
stra. Hujus rei grátia flecto 
génua mea ad Patrem Dó- 
mini nostri Jesu Christi, ex 
quo omnis patérnitas in celo 
et in terra nominátur; ut det 
vobis secündum divítias gló- 
rie virtüte corroborári 'per 
Spiritum ejus in interiórem 
hóminem, Christum inhabi- 
táre per fidem in córdibus 
vestris: in caritáte radicati 
et fundáti: ut possítis com- 
prehéndere cum ómnibus 
Sanctis que sit latitüdo et 
longitüdo et sublimitas et 
profündum: scire étiam su- 
pereminéntem sciéntie cari- 
tátem Christi, ut impleámini 
in omnem plenitüdinem Dei. 
Ei auiem qui potens est óm- 
nia fácere superabundánter 


Lesson from ihe Epistle of 


. blessed Paul the Apostle to the 


Ephesians. 

AM made a minister (of the 

Gospel) according to the 
gift of the grace of God, which 
is given unto me according to 
the operation of His power. 
Unto me, the least of all the 
saints, is given this. grace, to 
preach among the gentiles the 
unsearchable riches of Christ; 
and to enlighten all men what 
is the dispensation of the mys- 
tery which hath been hidden 
from eternity in God, Who cre- 
ated all things. That the mani- 
fold wisdom of God may be 
made known to the principali- 
ties and powers in the heavenly 
places through the Church, ac- 
cording to the eternal purpose, 
which He made in Christ Jesus 
our Lord. In Whom we have 
boldness and access with con- 
fidence by the faith of Him. 
Wherefore I pray you not to 
faint at my tribulations for 
you, which is your glory. For 
this cause, I bow my knees to 
the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, of Whom all paternity 
in heaven and on earth is 
named, that He would grant 
you according to the riches of 
His glory, to be strengthened 
by His Spirit with might, unto 
the inward man, that Christ 
may dwell by faith in your 
hearts; that being rooted and 
founded in charity you may be 
able to comprehend with all the 
saints, what is the breadth and 
length and height and depth: 
to know also the charity of 
Christ, which surpasseth all 
knowledge, that you may be 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1552 


filled unto all the fulness of 
God. Now to him who is able 
to do all things more abun- 
dantly than we desire or under- 
stand according to the: power 
that worketh in us: To him be 
glory in the Church and in 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


quam pétimus aut intelligi- 
mus, secúndum virtütem que 
operátur in nobis; ipsi glória 
in Ecclésia et in Christo Jesu 
in omnes generatiónes seculi 
seculérum. Amen, 


Christ Jesus, unto all generations,. world without end. Amen. 


Gradual. 


See that I have not labored 
for myself only, but for all that 
seek discipline. Y. Hear me, ye 
great men, and all ye people: 
and harken with your ears, ye 
rulers of the Church. 


From. Septuagesima to Easter, 


by the Tract. 


FEcclus; 33, 18, 19 


Respíce quóniam non mihi 
soli laborávi, sed ómnibus ex- 
quiréntibus disciplinam. Y. 
Audite me, Magnátes, et om- 
nes pópuli, et Rectóres Ec- 
clésie auribus percípite. 
the Lesser Alfeluia is replaced 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 32. 


Allehija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 32. 


Behold the eyes of the Lord are Ecce óculi Dómini super me 
on them that fear Him: and on tuéntes eum: et in eis qui 
them that hope in His mercy. sperant super misericórdia 


Alleluia. 


Tract. 


O taste, and see that the Lord 
is sweet: blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him. Y. Prov. 
16. The heart of the wise man 
Shall téach his mouth: and add 
grace to his lips. Y. Prov. 17. 
He that setteth bounds to his 
words, is shrewd and wise: and 
the man of understanding is 
of a precious spirit. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


ejus. Allelüja. 


Ps. 33, 9 


Gustate et vidéte quam 
Suávis est Dóminus: beátus 
vir qui sperat in eo. Y. Prov. 
16. Cor sapiéntis erüdiet os 
ejus, et lábiis ejus addet grá- 
tiam. Y. Prov. 17. Qui moder- 
átur sermónes suos doctus et 
prudens est: et pretiósi spíri- 
tus vir erudítus. 


Gospel, You are the salt of the earth, from the Mass of the 
Common of a Doctor of the Church, page 1346. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 


I know thy works, and thy 
faith and charity, and thy min- 


Apoc. 2 


Novi ópera tüa et fidem et 
earitátem tuam, et patiéuti- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


am tuam et ópera tua novis- 
"me plura priéribus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


1553 


istry and patience: and thy last 
works which are more than the 
former. 


. Secret 


ER hanc Salutárem Hó- 
P stiam quam offérimus 
tibi, Dómine, divino illo 
Sancti Spíritus igne cor no- 
strum accénde: quo mitíssim- 
um beáti Francisci ánimum 
mirabíliter inflammasti: Per 
Dóminum... m unitate ejus- 
dem. : 


P. Per omnia — secu- 
Jorum. 

If. Amen. 

P. Dóminus vobiscum. 

Bí. Et cum spiritu tuo. 

P. Sursum corda, i 
. B. Habémus ad Dóminum. 


. P. Gráfias agámus Dó- 
mino Deo nostro. 
5. pium et justum est. 


o TROU, O Lord, by means 

of this salutary sacrifice 
which we offer unto Thee, 
kindle in us that divine fire 
of tbe Holy Ghost wherewith 
Thou didst so wondrously in- 
flame the gentle soul of blessed 
Francis, . Through...in the 
unity of the same. 


P. World Without end. 


H. Amen. 

P. The Lord be with you. 

W. And with thy spirit. 

P. Lift up your hearts. 

' BY. We have them lifted up 
to the Lord.: 

P. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord our God. LS 

R. It is meet and just. 


Preface 


Vere dignum et justum est, 
æquum et salutare, nos tibi 
semper et ubique  grátias 
ágere, Dómine. Sancte, Pater 
omnipotens, ætérne Deus: 
Per Christum Dóminum no- 
strum. Qui Ecclésiæ suæ beá- 
tum Franciscum  Pastórem 
juxta cor suum suscitávit, ut 
scriptis, sermónibus et exém- 
plis pietátem corroboráret, et 
áspera convérteret in vias 
planas. Quique illum suz lèn- 
itátis spíritu tam mirabiliter 
adimplévit ut non solum in- 
durdta peccatórum corda ad 
peniténtiam flécteret, sed et 
rebélles tot hereticórum 
mentes ad Fidei Cathólice 
unitátem revocéret. Et ideo 
cum Angelis et Archángelis, 


Itis truly meet and just, right 
and profitable, for us, at all 
times and in all places, to give 
thanks to Thee, O Lord, the 
holy One, the Father almighty, 
ihe everlasting God: through 
Christ our Lord. For He hath 
raised up in His Church blessed 
Francis, a shepherd according 
to His own Heart to strengthen 
plety by his writings, by his 
Words and by his example, and 
io make the rough Ways smooth. 
Who likewise so wonderfully 
filled him with His own spirit 
of meekness that not only did 
he bend the hardened hearts 
of sinners to penitence, but also 
restored, to the unity of Catho- 
Xie belief, the rebellious minds 
of numberless heretics. And 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1554 


therefore with the angels and 
archangels, with the thrones 
and dominations, and with all 
the array of the heavenly host, 
we sing a hymn to Thy glory 
and unceasingly repeat: 


Sanctus, page 775. 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


cum Thronis et Dominatión- 
ibus, cumque omni militia 
celéstis exércitus, hymnum 
glórie tus cánimus, sine fine 
dicéntes: 


'The Canon of the Mass, page 777. 


Communion. 


'To the weak I became weak, 
that I might gain the weak. I 
became all things to all men, 
that I might save all. 


1 Cor. 9, 9 


Factus sum infirmis in- 
firmus, ut infírmos lucrifá- 
cerem. Omnibus ómnia fac- 
tus sum ut omnes fácerem 
salvos. 


Postcommunion 


cop, Who in blessed Fran- 

cis, Thy Confessor and 
Pontiff, didst bestow upon Thy 
Church a distinguished minis- 
ter of Christian perfection, and 
through him didst deign to en- 
rich her with a new offspring of 
holy virgins: do Thou, by 
means of the sacrament which 
we have. received, graciously 
grant, that we may here on 
earth imitate his charity and 
gentleness, and attain unto his 
glory in heaven. Through our 
Lord.- 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EUS, qui in beáto Fran- 

cisco Confessóre atque 
Pontífice, eximie Christiáne 
perfectiónis ministrum nobis 
tribuisti, et per eum nova 
Ecclésiam tuam  Sacrárum 
Virginum prole augére dig- 
nátus es: concéde, quesumus; 
ut per Sacraménta que simp- 
Simus, ejus caritatem et 
mansuetüdinem imitántes in 
terris, glóriam quoque conse- 
quamur in colis. Per Dó- 
minum. 


March 15—St. Louise de Marillac, Widow 
(White) 


Foundress of the Institute of the Sisters of Charity 


Mass as on page. 1565. 


April 8— Blessed Julie Billiart, Virgin (White) 


Double in the Oratories of Her Communities 


«ass, Dilexisti, Common of a Virgin, page 1370, except the 


following prayers: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


1555 


Prayer 


EUS qui per invictum 

tue Crucis amórem 
eátam Jüliam nova Ecclési- 
am tuam famíliam in páuper- 
um puellárum  eruditiónem 
fecundáre voluísti: da, ipsa 
intercedénte, ut per con- 
Stántem  tolerántiam pas- 
siónum  szternitátis gáudia 
consequámur. Qui vivis. 


cop, Who hast willed that 

the unconquered love of 
Thy holy cross should inspire 
blessed Julie to enrich Thy 
Church with a new family for 
ihe education of the daughters 
of the poor, grant, through her 
intercession, that steadfast en- 
durance of suffering may ob- 
tain for us everlasting joy. Who 
livest. : 


Secret 


LLA NOS, qusesumus, Dó- 

mine, divína tractántes, 
Spíritus Sanctus fidei luce 
perfündat; que beátam Juli- 
am, ad glórie tue propága- 
tiónem, jügiter illustrávit. Per 
Dóminum...in unitate ejus- 
dem. i i 


E BESEECH Thee, O Lord, 

that Thy Holy Spirit 

may, during the celebration of 

the sacred mysteries, inundate 

us with that light of faith 

wherewith He ever illumined 

blessed Julie for the further- 

ance of Thy glory. Through... 
in the unity of the same. 


Postcommunion 


«LEstr convívio reféc- 

tos fac nos, Dómine, 
beáta Júlia deprecánte; ut 
inter mundánas vicissitüdines 
in te semper firmiter confidá- 
mus. Per Dóminum. 


RANT, O Lord; through ihe 

prayers of blessed Julie, 
that, the Divine Banquet may 
so strengthen us, that, amid all 
the trials of this life, we may 
ever firmly trust in Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


SFridtap After Bassion Sundap 
The Compassion of Our Lady, (White) 


The feast of the Seven Dolors kept in Lent is known in some 
Religious Orders by the foregoing title. 


Mass as for Friday in Passion Week, page 966. 


Monday After Low Sunday 
The Fops of Our Ladp, (White) 


Mass, Salve sancta parens, page 1394, as appointed. for Easter 


time. The Nicene Creed is said, or sung. 


11, page 814. 


The Preface is No. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1555a MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


May 11—@t. Lucia Filippini, Virgin (White) 
The beginning of the Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 72, 28 


i vr it is good for me to 
B adhere to my God, to put 
my hope in the Lord God: that 
I may declare all Thy praises, 
in the gates of the daughter of 
Sion. (P. T. Alleluia, alleluia.) 
Ps. ?2, 1. How good is God to 
Israel: to them that are of 
right heart P. Glory, 


IHI autem adherére Deo 

"bonum est: pónere in 
Démino Deo spem meam, ut 
annüntiem omnes predicati- 
ones tuas in portis filie Sion. 
(T. P. Allelája, allelija.) Ps. 
72, 1. Quam bonus Israél 
Deus, his qui recto sunt corde. 
PF. Glória Patri, 


Prayer 


Gop, who so wonderfully 

didst raise up blessed 
Lucia, Thy virgin, for the pro- 
motion of Christian piety 
among the people, and through 
her, for the education of youth, 
didst gather a new family 
within Thy Church, grant that 
by following her precepts and 
examples we may attain. unto 
the rewards of everlasting life. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui ad christianam 

in pópulo pietátem fo- 
véndam, beátam Lüciam Vir- 
ginem tuam, mirabiliter su- 
Scitásti, et per eam ad juven- 
tütis disciplinam, novam in 
Ecclésia tua familiam colle- 
gisti; concéde, ut, ejus mónita 
et exémpla sectántes, ætérnæ 
vite: prémia consequamur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. Eph. 3, 8-19 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Ephesians. : 


mum Yes, to me, the 


very least of all saints, 
there was given this grace, to 
announce among the Gentiles 
the good tidings of the un- 
fathomable riches of Christ, 
and to enlighten all men as to 


what is the dispensation of the’ 


mystery which has been hid- 
den from eternity in God, who 
created all things; in order 


that through the Church there’ 


be made known to the Princi- 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Ephésios. 
RATRES: mihi ómnium 
sanetórum mínimo data 
est grátia .hmc, in Géntibus 
evangelizáre investigábiles di- 
vitias Christi, et illumináre 
omnes quz sit dispensatio sa- 
craménti abscónditi a sceculis 
in Deo, qui ómnia creávit; ut 
innotéscat principátibus et 
potestatibus in celéstibus per 
Ecclésiam, multifórmis sapi- 
éntia Dei, secündum prefini- 
tiónern seculérum, quam fecit 
in Christo Jesu Dómino no- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


Siro: in quo habémus fidü- 
ciam et accéssum in confidén- 
tia. per fidem ejus. Propter 
quod peto ne deficiátis in tri- 
bulatiónibus meis pro vobis: 
que est glória vestra. Hujus 
rei grátia flecto génua mea ad 
Patrem Dómini nostri Jesu 
Christi, ex quo omnis patérni- 
tas in celis et in terra nomi- 
nátur, ut det vobis secindum 
divitias .glórie: sue, virtüte 
corroborári per Spíritum ejus 
in interiórem hóminem, Chri- 
stum habitáre per fidem in 
córdibus vestris: in caritáte 
radicáti et fundáti ut possítis 
comprehéndere cum ómnibus 
Sanctis, que sit latitüdo, et 
longitüdo, et sublímitas, et 
profündum: scire étiam su- 
pereminéntem sciéntie cari- 
tátem Christi ut impleámini 
in omnem plenitüdinem Dei. 


1555b 


palities and the Powers in the 
heavens the manifold wisdom 
of God according to the eternal 
purpose which He accomplished 
in Christ Jesus our Lord. In 
Him we have assurance and 
confident access through faith 
in Him. Therefore I pray not 
to.be disheartened at my tribu- 
lations for you, for they are my 
glory. I bend my- knees to the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
from whom all fatherhood in 
heaven and on earth receives 
its name, that He may grant 
you from His glorious riches to 
be strengthened with power 
through His Spirit unto the 
progress of the inner man; and 
to have Christ dwelling through 
faith in your hearts: so that, 
being rooted and grounded ir 
love, you may be able to com- 
prehend with all the saints 
what is the breadth and Jength 
and height and depth, and to 
know Christ’s love which sur- 
passes knowledge, in order that 
you may be filled unto all the 
fullness of God. 


In votive Masses out of Paschal-time the Greater Alleluia is 
replaced by the Gradual. After Septuagesima the Lesser Alleluia 


is replaced by the Tract. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelája, allelija. Ps. 26, 10. 
Pater meus et Mater mea de- 
reliquérunt me: Dóminus au- 
tem assümpsit me. Allelüja. 
V. Ps. 44, 5. Spécie tua, et 
pulebritüdine tua: inténde, 
próspere procéde et regna. 
Allelüja. 


Gradual. 


Spécie tua, et pulchritudine 
tua inténde, próspere procéde 


Alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 26, 10, 
For my father and my mother 
have left me; but the Lord hath 
taken me up. Alleluia. Y. Ps. 
44, 5. With thy comeliness and 
thy beauty set out: proceed 
prosperously, and reign. Alle- 
luia. 


Ps. 44, 5 


With. thy comeliness and thy 
beauty set out, proceed pros- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1555c MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


perously and reign. Y. Because 
of truth and meekness and 
justice: and thy right hand 
shall conduct thee wonderfully. 


et regna. Y. Propter veritá- 
tem et mansuetüdinem, et ju- 
stitiam: dedücet te mirabili- 
ter déxtera tua. 


Lesser A lleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. After 
her shall virgins be brought to 
the King: her neighbors shall 
be brought to thee with glad- 
ness, Alleluia. 


Tract. Ps. 


Hearken, O daughter, and 
see, and incline thine ear; for 
ihe King hath greatly desired 
thy beauty. Y. Ps. 44, 13, 10. 
All the rich among the people 
shall entreat thy countenance: 
the daughters of kings in thy 
honor. Y. Ps. 44, 15, 16. After 
her shall virgins be brought to 
the King: her neighbors shall 
be brought to thee. Y. They 
shall be brought with gladness 
and rejoicing: they shall be 
brought into the temple of the 
Lord. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allehija; allelúja. Y. Ad- 
ducéntur regi virgines post 
eam: próximz ejus afferéntur 
tibi in letitia. Allehija, 


44, 11, 12 


Audi, filia, et vide, et in- 
clina aürem tuam: quia con- 
cupívit rex spéciem tuam. 
y. Ps. 44, 13, 10. Vultum tu- 
um deprecabüntur omnes dí- 
vites plebis: fílie regum in 
honóre tuo. V. Ps. 44, 15, 16. 
Adducéntur regi virgines post 
eam: préxime ejus afferéntur 
tbi V. Afferéntur in letítia, 
et exsultatióne: adducéntur in 
templum regis. 


Gospel. Matt. 18, 1-5 


*B8 Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew.- 

T THAT time the disciples 

came to Jesus, saying, 
“Who is greatest in the king- 
dom of heaven?" And Jesus 
called a little child to Him, set 
it in the midst of them, and 
said, “Amen I say to you, unless 
you turn and become like little 
children, you will not enter into 
the kingdom of heaven. Who- 


TH Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Matthdeum. 


I: ILLO témpore: Accessé- 
runt discípuli ad Jesum, 
dicéntes: Quis, putas, major 
est in regno celorum? Et ád- 
vocans Jesus párvulum, stá- 
tuit eum in médio eórum, et 
dixit: Amen, dico vobis, nisi 
convérsi fuéritis, et efficiá- 
mini sieut párvuli, non intrá- 
bitis in regnum celérum. 
Quicümque ergo humili&verit 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


se sicut párvulus iste, hic est. 


major in regno celérum. Et 
qui suscéperit unum párvu- 
lum talem in nómine meo, me 
Süscipit. 


Creed, page 765. 


1555d 


ever, therefore, humbles him- 
self as this little child, he is 
the greatest in the kingdom of 


.heaven. And whoever receives 


one such little child for My 
Sake, receives Me." 


Offertory. Ps. 51, 10, 11 


Ego autem, sicut olíva fru- 
ctifera in domo Dómini, spe- 
rávi in misericórdia Dei mei 
in ætérnum: et exspectábo 
nomen tuum, quóniam bonum 
est ante conspéctum sanctó- 
rum tuórum. (T. P. Allelája.) 

Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Butl,as& fruitful olive tree 
in the house of God, have hoped 
in the mercy of God. forever: 
and I will wait on Thy name, 
for it is good in the sight of 
Thy saints. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Secret 


ONCILIET ‘nobis miseri- 
cérdiam. tuam, Dómine, 
munus oblátum: et interce- 
dénte beáta Lúcia Virgine tua, 
nostre simul protectióni pro- 
ficiat et salüti. Per Dóminum. 


Preface, page 773. 


Communion. 


Innocens mánibus et mun- 
do corde accípiet benedictió- 
nem a Dómino. (T. P. Alle- 
lüja. 


AY the offering of this gift 

win for us Thy mercy 
O Lord, and through the inter- 
cession of blessed Lucia, Thy 
virgin, may it be profitable unto 
us both for our protection and 
salvation. Through our Lord. 


Ps. 23, 45 


The innocent in hands and 
clean of heart shall receive a 
blessing from the Lord. es T. 
Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 


ÜwPsrwus, Dómine, diví- 

na mystéria, beate Lú- 
cim tum festivitate letantes: 
cujus suffrágiis queesumus, 
largiáris, ut, quod  temporá- 
liter gérimus, s&térnis gáudiis 
consequamur. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


E HAVE received, O Lord, 

b the divine mysteries on 

this joyful feast of Thy blessed 
Lucia: by whose prayers we 
beseech Thee, that this short 
period of our temporal rejoicing 
may be followed by one of joys 
without end, Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1556 MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


May 24—®ur Lady of the Wap, (white) 
. (B. M. V. “Della Strada") 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ecclus. 24, 25 


N ME is all grace of the way N ME grátia omnis vie et 

and of truth: in me is all veritatis: in me omnis 
hope of life and salvation. Ps. spes vite et salütis. Ps. 118, 1. 
118, 1. Blessed are the undefiled Beáti immaculati in via, qui 
in the way: that walk in the ámbulant in lege Dómini. V. 
law of the Lord. JY. Glory. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


-LORD Jesus Christ, Thou 
| who art the way, the 
truth and the life: grant, gra- 
ciously, that by the intercession 
of blessed Mary Thy Virgin- 


Mother, we, running in the: 


way of Thy commandments, 
may attain to life everlasting. 
Who livest. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from the Book or 
Wisdom. 
WILL Show thee the way of 
wisdom, I will lead thee by 
the paths of equity: which, 
when thou shalt have entered, 
thy steps shall not be strait- 
ened, and when thou runnest, 
thou shalt not meet a stum- 
bling-block. Take fast hold of 
instruction, let her not go: keep 
her, for she is thy life. Be not 
delighted in the paths of the 
wicked, nor let the way of evil 
men please thee. Flee from it, 
pass not by it: turn aside, and 
leave it. For they sleep not, 
except they have done evil: and 
their sleep is taken away, un- 
less they have caused some to 
fall They eat the bread of 
wickedness, and drink the wine 


ÓMINE Jesu Christe, qui 

es via, véritas et vita, 
concéde propítius; ut per in- 
tercessiónem beate Marie 
Virginis Matris tue, viam 
mandatórum  tuórum cur- 
réntes, ad vitam perveniá- 
mus ætérnam. Qui vivis. 


Prov. 11, 11-18 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiez. 


IAM Sapiéntia monsirá- 

bo tibi, ducam te per 
sémitas equitatis: quas cum 
ingréssus füeris, non arc- 
tabüntur gressus tui, et cur- 
rens non habébis offendícu- 
Jum. Tene disciplínam, ne di- 
míttas eam: custódi illam, 
quia ipse est vita tua. Ne 
delectéris in sémitis impió- 
rum, nec tibi pláceat maló- 
rum, via. Fuge ab ea, nec 
tránseas per illam: declína, et 
désere eam. Non enim dór- 
miunt nisi malefécerint: et 
rápitur somnus ab eis nisi 
supplantáverint. Cémedunt 
panem impietátis, et vinum 
iniquitátis bibunt. Justórum 
autem sémita, quasi lux splen- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
( 


a 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


dens, procédit et crescit usque 
ad perféctam diem. 


1557 


of iniquity. But the path of 
the just goeth forward as a 
shining light, and wìll increase 
even. unto perfect day. 


Gradual. Eccl. 24, 26, 27 


Transite ad me omnes qui 
conetpíscitis me, et a genera- 
tiónibus meis implémini Y. 
Spíritus enim meus super mel 
dulcis, et heréditas mea super 
mel et favum. Allelája, allelü- 
ja. Y. Luc. 1. Benedícta tu in- 
ter mulíeres et benedíctus 
fructus ventris tui. Allehija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Come over to me all ye that 
desire me: and be filled with 
my fruits. Y. For my spirit is 
sweet above honey: and my 
inheritance above honey and 
the honeycomb, Alleluia, alle- 
luia. Y. Luke 1. Blessed art 
thou among women and blessed 
is the fruit of thy womb. Alle- 
luia. . 


Gospel. . Matt. 2, 19-21 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secúndum Matthzum. 


N iLLO témpore: Angelus 
Dómini appáruit in som- 
nis Joseph in Z&gypto dicens: 
Surge, et áccipe püerum et 
matrem ejus, et vade in ter- 
ram Israël: defüncti sunt 
enim qui querébant ánimam 
püeri. Qui consürgens accépit 
püerum et matrem ejus, et 
venit in terram Israël. 


Creed, page 765. . 
Offertory. 
. Misericérdiam et judicium 
cantabo tibi Démine: psallam 


et intélligam in via immacu- 
lata, quando vénies ad me. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


RK Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. : 


T THAT lime: an angel of 
‘the Lord appeared to 
oseph in Egypt, saying: Arise 
and take the Child and His 
Mother, and go into the land 
of Israel. For they are dead 
that sought the life of the 
Child. Who arose and took the 
Child and His Mother and came 
into the land of Israel. 


Ps. 100, 1 . 

Mercy and judgment I wil] 
sing to Thee, O Lord: I will 
sing, and I will understand, in 
the unspotted way, when Thou 
shalt come to me. 


Secret 


anc oblatiónem, Dómi- 
ne, propítius réspice, et 
intercedénte bedta, Virgine 


- María, fac revertántur pec- 


N vay loving kindness, O 
Lord, look down with favor 
on our offering: and, listening 
to the prayers of the blessed 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1558 MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS: 


Virgin Mary, make the wicked catóres a via mala, justi au- 
to turn aside from the way of tem in via tua, et veritate 
sin and the just to persevere firméntur. Per Dóminum. 
in Thy way and Thy truth. 
Through our Lord. 

Preface No. 11, page 814. 


Communion. Ps. 17, 33 


“God hath girt me with Deus precínxit me virtüte, 
strength: and made my way et pdsuit immaculátam viam 
to be blameless. meam. 


Postcommunion 


Gu we beseech Thee, O ONCÉDE, quesumus, om- 
almighty and merciful nipotens et miséricors 
God, that, comforted by Thy Deus, ut donis tuis refécti, 
gifts, we may, through the in- per intercessiónem beátæ Vír- 
tercession of the blessed Virgin ginis Marie in sémita justitie 
Mary, in all our days walk in’ ambulantes, ad celéstem gló- 
the way of uprightness and riam feliciter perveniámus. 
thus attain to the glorious hap- Per Déminum. 
piness of heaven. Through our 

Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


May 25—-St. Madeleine Sophie Barat, 
Virgin (White) 
Double in the Oratories of Her Communities 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. | 


Introit. Cant. 8, 6 


Pr me as a seal upon thy one me ut signáculum 
heart, as a seal upon thy super cor tuum, ut sig- 
arm: for love is strong as death. náculum super bráchium 
Ps. 107. My heart is ready, O tuum: quia fortis est ut mors 
God, my heart is ready. I will diléctio. Ps. 107. Paratum cor 
sing, and will give praise, with meum, Deus, parátum cor 
my glory. Y. Glory. meum: cantágo et psallam in 
glória mea. ¥. Gloria Patri. 
Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 
LoRD Jesus Christ, Who ÓwiwE Jesu Christe, qui 
didst wonderfully grace Sanctam Magdalénam 


Saint Madeleine Sophie with Sophíam ad exémplum Cordis 
humility and love, after the tui humilitáte et caritáte mi- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


E 


[4 


| 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


rabiliter decorásti, e& novam 
Virginum famíliam per eam 
floréscere voluisti: fac nos 
Sanctíssimo Cordi tuo jügiter 
adherére; et ejüsdem imita- 
tióne, tui gaudére consórtio: 
Qui vivis, 


1559 


model of Thy sacred Heart, and 
didst will that through her a 
new company of virgins should 
flower forth: make us cling ever 
to Thy most sacred Heart, and 
by our imitation of the same, 
find our joy in becoming Thy 
companions. Who livest. 


Lesson, Brethren, put ye on, as in the Mass on the 5th Sun- 


day after Epiphany, page 196. 


Outside of Paschal time and in Votive Masses. 


Allelüja, allelája. Y. Ps. 72, 
28. Mihi autem adherére Deo 
bonum est: pónere in Dómino 
Deo spem meam. Allelija. V. 
I Reg. 2, 1. Exsultávit cor me- 
um in Dómino, et exaltátum 
est cornu meum in Deo meo. 
Allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 72, 28. 
But it is good for me to adhere 
to my God, to put my hope in 
the Lord God: Alleluia. Y. 7. 
Kings 2, 1. My heart hath re- 
joiced in the Lord, and my 
horn is exalted in my God. Al- 
leluia. 


Gradual. Ecclus. 51, 18, 70 


Quesivi sapiéntiam palam 
in oratióne mea, ambulávit 
pes meus iter rectum, a juven- 
tite mea investigábam eam. 
FK. 23. Danti mihi sapiéntiam, 
dabo glóriam. 


I sought for wisdom openly 
in my prayer, my foot walked 
in the right way, from my 
youth up I sought after her. 
¥. 23. To him that giveth me 
wisdom will I give glory. 


In Votive Masses after Septuagesima, omit the Lesser Alle- 


luia, and say the Tract. 


Lesser 
Allelüja, alleluja. Y. Hab., 


Alleluia 
Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Hab. 3, 


3, 18. Ego autem in Dómino 18. But I will rejoice in the 
gaudébo: et exsultábo in Deo Lord: and I will joy in God my 
Jesu meo. Allehija. Jesus. Alleluia. 


Tract. Ps. 72, 24, 25, 26 


Tenuísti manum déxteram 
meam: etin voluntáte tua de- 
duxísti me, et cum glória sus- 
cepisti me. Y. Quid enim mihi 
est in cælo? et a te quid vólui 
super terram? Y. Defécit caro 
mea, et cor meum: Deus cor- 
dis mei, et pars mea Deus in 
etérnum, ` 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Thou hast held me by my 
right hand; and by Thy will 
Thou hast conducted me: and 
with Thy glory Thou hast re- 
ceived me. For what have I in 
heaven? And besides Thee what 
do I desire upon earth? For 
Thee my flesh and my heart 
hath fainted away. Thou art 
the God of my heart, and the 
God that is my portion forever. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1560 


Gospel. 


"B Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


AM the true vine; and My 

Father is the husbandman. 
Every branch in Me, that bear- 
eth not fruit, He will take away: 
and every one that beareth 
fruit, He will purge it, that it 
may bring forth more fruit. 
Now you are elean by reason of 
the word, which'I have spoken 
to you. Abide in Me, and I in 
you. As the branch cannot bear 
fruit öf itself, unless it abide 
in the vine, so neither can you, 
unless you abide in Me. I am 
the vine; you the branches: he 
that abideth in Me, and I in 
him, the same beareth much 
fruit: for without Me you can 
do nothing. If any one abide 
not in Me, he shall be cast 
forth as a branch, and shall 
wither and they shall gather 
him up, and cast him into the 
fire, and he burneth. If you 
abide in Me, and My words 
abide in you, you shall ask 
whatever you will, and it 
shall be done unto you. In this 
is My Father glorified; that you 
bring forth very much fruit, 
and become My disciples. As 
the Father hath. loved Me, I 
also have loved you. Abide in 
My love. If you keep My com- 
mandments, you shall abide in 
My love; as I also have kept My 
Father's commandments, and 
do abide in His love. These 
things I have spoken to you, 
that My joy may be in you, 
and your joy may be filled. This 
is My commandment, that you 
love one another, as I have 
loved you. 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 
John. 15, 1-12 


& Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secándum Joánnem. 


N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus: Ego sum vitis vera: 
et Pater meus agrícola est. 
Omnem pálmitem in me non 
feréntem fructum, tollet eum: 
et omnem; qui fert fructum 
purgábit eum, ut fructum 
plus áfterat. Jam vos mundi 
estis propter sermónem, quem 
locütus sum vobis. Manéte in 
me: et ego in vobis. Sicut 
palmes non potest ferre frue- 
tum a semetípso, nisi mánse- 
rit in vite; sie nec vos, nisi 
in me manséritis. Ego sum 
vitis, vos palmites: qui manet 
in me, et ego in eo, hic fert 
fructum multum: quia: sine 
me nihil potéstis fácere. Si 
quis in me non manserit: mit- 
tétur foras sicut palmes, et 
aréscet, et cólligent eum, et 
in ignem mittent, et ardet. Si 
manséritis in me, et verba 
mea in vobis | mánserint: 
quodcümque voluéritis, peté- 
tis, et fiet vobis. In hoc clari- 
ficátus est Pater meus, ut 
fructum plürimum afferátis, 
et effüciámini mel discípuli. 
Sicut dilexit me Pater, et ego 
diléxi vos, Manéte in dilec- 
tióne mea. Si precépta mea 
servavéritis, manébitis in di- 
lectióne mea, sicut et ego Pa- 
tris mei precépta. Servávi, et 
máneo in ejus dilectóne. Hiec 
locütus sum vobis: ut gáudi- 
um meum “in vobis sit, et, 
gáudium vestrum impleátur. 
Hoc est precéptum meum ut 
diligátis invicem, sicut diléxi 
vos. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS. ORDERS 1561 


| Offertory. Ps. 44, 15, 16 

; . Afferéntur Regi virgines After her shall virgins be 

: post eam: próxims ejus af- brought to the king: her neigh- 

feréntur tibi in letitia et ex- bors shall be brought to thee. 

Sultatióne: adducéntur in They shall be Drought with 

templum Regi Domino. gladness and rejoicing: they 
shall be brought into the tem- 
ple of the king, 


Offertor; Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
: DÉsro, Dómine, suppli- ook graciously, O Lord, 
EL, catiónibüs nostris, upon our prayers; look 


adésto munéribus, ut, inter- graciously upon our offerings, 
veniénte Sancta Magdaléna that, by the intercession of 
Sophia, per humilitatem et Saint Madeleine Sophie, 
caritàtem Cordis tui: nobis through the humility and love 
salutáriareddántur. Qui vivis. of Thy Heart, they may be 
S made for us unto salvation. 

Who livest. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Matth. 18, 5 
Qui suscéperit unum pár- And he that shall receive one 


vulum talem in nómine meo, such little child in My name 
me süscipit. receiveth Me. 


Postcommunion 

«LÉsTI dape reféctos, fac RANT, Lord Jesus, that, re- 

nos, Dómine Jesu freshed with the heavenly 
Christe, in humilitate et cari- banquet, we may grow in the 
táte Cordis tui créscere; qui- humility and love of 'Thy Heart, 
bus Sanctam Magdalénam whereby Thou didst advance 
Sophíam ad perénnem in celis Saint Madeleine Sophie to eter- 
glóriam provexisti: Qui vivis. nal glory in heaven. Who livest. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


May 31—St. Angela Merisi, Virgin (White) 


This Mass in honor of the foundress of the Ursuline Nuns is 
celebrated only in the houses of that Order. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 
AUDEÁMUS omnes in Dô- * ET us all rejoice in the 
mino, diem festum cele- Lord, while celebrating 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1562 


the feast day in honor of blessed 
Angela, because of whose sol- 
emnity the angels rejoice and 
honor the Son of God (P. T. 
Alleluia, alleluia). Ps. 44. My 
heart hath uttered a good word: 
Ispeak my works to the king. 
y. Glory. 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


brantes sub honóre beáte An- 
gele, de cujus solemnitáte 
gaudent Angeli et colláudant 
Filium Dei. (P. T. Allelüja, 
allelüja.) Ps. 44. Eructávit cor 
meum verbum bonus: lico ego 
ópera mea regi. V. Glória 
Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who hast willed that, 

through blessed Angela, 
a new family of consecrated 
virgins. should blossom in Thy 
Church, grant us, through her 
intercession, to lead an angelic 
life, that, putting aside all 
earthly joys, we may deserve to 
attain those that are eternal. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui novum per beá- 

tam Angelam sacrá- 
rum virginum collégium in 
Ecclésia tua floréscere voluís- 
ti: da nobis ejus intercessióne 
angélicis móribus vívere; ut 
terrénis ómnibus abdicátis, 
gáudis pérfrui  mereámur 
etérnis, Per Dóminum. 


Epistle, Brethren, see your vocation, as in the Mass of St. 
Agatha, February 5, page 910. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
placed by the Greater Alleluia.” 


Gradual. Ps. 72, 25, 26 


For what have I in heaven. Quid mihi est in celo: et a 
And besides Thee what do I te quid vólui super terram? 
desire upon earth? Y.For' Thee Y. Defécit: caro meg et cor 
my flesh and my heart hath meum, Deus cordis mei et pars 
fainted away. Thou art the God mea, din in etérnum. 
of my heart, and the God of 
my portion forever, 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Apoc. Allelija, allelüja. Y. Apoc. 
14, 4, 5. For ihey are vir- 14, 4, 5. Vírgines sunt: sequ- 
gins: These follow the Lamb untur Agnum  quocümque 
whithersoever He goeth: For ierit: sine mácula enim sunt 
they are without spot before ante thronum Dei. 
the throne of God. 


Tract. Cant. 1, 2 


Thy name is as oil poured Oleum effüsum nomen tu~- 
out: therefore young maidens um: ideo adolescéntule dilex- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MABSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 1563 
érunt te. Y. Trahe nos: post have loved thee. V. Draw me: 
te currémus in odórem un- we will run after thee to the 
guentórum tuórum. V. Exsul- odor of thy ointment. y. We 
tábimus et letabimur in te. will be glad and rejoice in thee. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allehija, alleluja. Y. Apoc. 
14, 4, 5. Virgines sunt, sequün- 
tur Agnum quocümque ierit. 
Sine macula enim sunt ante 
thronum Dei. Allelüja. V. 
Cant. 6, 2. Ego dilécto meo et 
diléctus meus mihi, qui pésci- 
tur inter lília. Allelija. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Apoc. 
14, 4, 5. For they are virgins: 
These follow the Lamb whither- 
soever He goeth: For they are 
without spot before the throne 
of God. Alleluia. V. Cant. 6, 2. 
I to my beloved, and my be- 
loved to me, who feedeth among 
ihe lilies. Alleluia. 


Gospel, The kingdom of heaven, as in tna Mass, Dilexisti, 


page 1372. 
Offertory. 


Parátum cor meum, Deus, 
paratum cor meum: cantábo 
et psallam in glória mea. (T. 
P. Allelija.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 107, 2 


My heart is ready, O God, my 
heart is ready: I will sing, and 
I will give praise, with my glory. 
(P. T. Alleluia.) . 


Secret 


Ostia Dómine quam tibi 
beáts Angele memóri- 
am recoléntes offérimus, et 
nostre pravitátis véniam im- 
plóret, et gratie tuse nobis 
dona concíliet. Per Dóminum. 


Av ihe victim which we 
@M offer Thee, O Lord, ven- 
erating the memory of blessed 
Angela, both obtain the pardon 
of our evil deeds and win for us 
the gifts of Thy grace. Through 
our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


Inhabitábo in tabernáculo 


Ps. 60, 5, 6 . 
In Thy tabernacle I shall 


tuo in ssecula: prótegar in ve- dwell forever: I shall be pro- 
laménto  alárum  tuárum: tected under the covert of Thy 
quóniam tu, Deus meus, exau- wings. For Thou, my God, hast 
dísti oratiónem meam. (T. P. heard my prayer. (P. T. Alle- 
Allelája.) Juia.) 


Postcommunion 


CLÉsTI alimónia refécti, EFRESHED With heavenly 
supplices te Dómine de- food, O Lord, we humbly 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1564 


beg. Thee that, by the prayers 
and example of blessed Angela, 
being cleansed of every stain, 
we may be pleasing to Thee 
both in body and in soul. 
Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


precámur: ut beáte Angele 
précibus et exémplo, ab omni 
labe mundáti, et córpore tibi 
placeámus, et mente, Per Dó- 
minum. 


OE a 


June 27—Blessed Mary Magalen--Dister of 
Cfjarítp---anu ber Companions, Martyrs (Red) 
i . Mass, Me exspectaverunt, page 1363, except: 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst crown 

with the glory of martyr- 
dom the exceeding. great char- 
ity to the poor of Thy holy Vir- 
gins Mary Magdalen and her 
companions: through her in- 
tercession, grant us, we beseech 
Thee, to be so strengthened in 
charity that no calamity may 
avail to separate us from the 
love of Thee. Through our 
Lord. 


EUs, qui beatárum Vir- 
gnum tuárum Maríe 
Magdaléne ejusque sociárum 
exímiam in sublevándis pau- 
péribus caritátem, martyrii 
glória coronáre dignátus es: 
presta quesumus, ut ipsis in- 
tercedéntibus, tua nos quoque 
caritáte firmatos, a te advér- 
sitas nulla sejüngat. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Secret 


AVORABLY look down, we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, 
upon the gifts laid upon Thine 
altars for the feast day of 
Thy holy Virgin Martyrs, Mary 
Magdalen and her compan- 
ions: and as by these sacred 
mysteries, Thou didst raise Thy 
saints to glory everlasting, so, 
through them, vouchsafe to us 
Thy forgiveness. Through our 
Lord. 


NTÉNDE, quesumus, Dó- 
I mine, münera altáribus 
tuis pro beatárum Vírginum 
et Mártyrum tuárum Marie 
Magdaléne ejusque sociárum, 
honóre propósita: ut sicut per 
hec sacra mystéria illis gló- 
ríam contulísti, ita nobis in- 
dulgéntiam largidris. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Postcommunion 


AY this heavenly sacra- 
ment, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, imbue us with its own 
strength, so that aided by the 
urayers of Thy holy Virgin Mar- 


@LESTIA Sacraménta, 
quassumus, Dómine, suf- 
fragantibus beátis Virgínibus 
et Martyribus tuis, María 
Magdaléna  ejüsque  sóciis. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 1565 


prépriam in nobis inserant ef-: tyrs, Mary Magdalen and her 

ficáciam: ut quorum Pie ve- companions, whose victory in 

nerámur in Fidei professióne defense of the Faith we. de- 

victóriam, eárum imitémur in voutly honor, we may take ex- 

morum puritate constantiam, ample from them in. the prac- 

Per Dóminum. . tice of virtue. Through our 
: Lord. : . 


March 15—$5t. Louise be Marillac, widow 
(White) 


Foundress of the Institute _of the Sisters of, Charity 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. .- 


Introit. Job. 30 l 


LEBAM super eum qui af- wert for him that was 

flíctus erat, et compa- afflicted and I had compas- 
tiebátur ánima mea páuperi: sion on the poor: for from my 
quia ab infántia mea crevit infancy, mercy grew up with 
mecum miseratio, et de Utero me; and it came out with me 
matris mem egréssa est me- from my mother’s womb. Ps. 
cum. Ps. 40. Beátus qui intél- 40. Blessed is he that under- 
ligit super egénum et páuper- standeth concerning the needy 
em: in die mala liberábit eum and the poor: the Lord will de- 
Dóminüs. Y. Glória Patri. ' . liver him in the evil day. y. 

` Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


: Prayer l f 
Ņ Eus, caritatis auctor et , cop, the lover and the re- 
premium, qui novam ward of charity Who 


in Ecclésia tua familiam sus- didst ralse up a new Sisterhood 
citásti, ejüsque matrem beá- in Thy Church and didst will 
tam.Ludovícam esse voluísti: that blessed Louise should be 
da qusesumus, ut caritátis.óp- its mother: grant, we beseech 
era exercéntes, promíssam in Thee, that by doing works of 
ccelis, mercédem assequámur. charity we may be found 
Per Dóminum. . .- worthy to receive the reward 
Thou hast promised. Through 
our Lord. 


Epistle, Dea] thy bread to the hungry, from the Mass of. St. 
Jerome Aemiliani, July 20, page 1113. 


‘From Séptuagesima. to Easter the Lesser Alleluia ts replaced 


by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
p aced by the Greater Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1566 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


Gradual. Eccles. 29 


Shut up alms in the heart 
of the poor: and it shall obtain 
help for thee from all evil. Y. 
Tob. 4. Eat thy bread with the 
hungry and the needy: and 
with thy garments cover the 
naked. 


Conclüde eleemósynam in 
corde pauperis: et hee pro te 
exorábit ab omni malo, JV. 
Tob. 4. Panem tuum cum esu- 
riéntibus et egénis cómede, et 
de vestiméntis tuis nudos 
tege. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Act. 10. 
Thy prayer is heard and thy 
alms are had in remembrance 
in the sight of God. Alleluia. 


Tract. 
The ear that heard me 


Job. 


Alleliija, allelüja. Y. Act. 10. 
Exaudita est orátio tua: et 
eleemosyne tua commemorá- 
te sunt in conspéctu Dei. Al- 
lelája. 


29, 11, 12 
Auris. áudiens. beatificábat 


blessed me and the eye that me, et óculus videns testimó- 
saw me gave witness for me. nium reddébat mihi. V. Eo 
¥. Because I had delivered the quod liberássem páuperem vo- 
poor man that cried out and ciferántem, et pupíllum cui 
the fatherless that had no non esset adjótor. Y. Bene- 
helper. V. The blessing of him dictio peritüri super me venié- 


that was ready to perish came 
upon me: and I comforted the 
heart of the widow. 


bat, et cor vidue consolata 
sum, 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Acts 10, 
31. Thy prayer is heard and thy 
alms are had in remembrance 
in the sight of God. Alleluia. 
¥. This woman was full of good 
works and almsdeeds which 
she did. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelija. V. Acts 
10, 3. Exaudita est orátio tua 
et eleemésyne tuz commemo- 
rate sunt in conspéctu Dei. 
Allelüja. V. Hec erat plena 
opéribus bonis et eleemdsynis 
quas faciébat. Allelüje. 


Gospel, When the Son of man, from the Mass in the Monday 
in the first week of Lent, page 239. 


Offertory. Acts. 10, 4 


Thy prayers and thy alms 
are ascended for a memorial in 
the sight of God. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Oratiónes tue et eleemó- 
Syne tue ascendérunt in me- 
móriam in conspéctu Dómini. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ae cart 


( 


y 


i 


1 
Ly 


d 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


1567 


Secret 


ÉSPICE, Dómine, obla- 

tiónes nostras in honó- 
rem beáte Ludovice tibi re- 
verénter exhíbitas: et per ejus 
intercessiónem nos in ómni- 
bus vite sémitis fácias et a 
periculis tutos et ad virtütes 
jügiter expedítos. Per Dómi- 
num. : - 


oox down with favor, O 

| Lord, upon the offerings 
which in honor of blessed Lou- 
ise we reverently place before 
Thee; and ensure to us in all 
the paths of life safety from 
dangers and constant readiness 
in the practice of virtue. 
Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Isaias. 54, 2 


Diláta locum tentórii tui, 
longos fac funículos tuos: ad 
déxteram enim et ad levam 
penetrábis, et semen tuum 
gentes hzreditábit. 


Enlarge the place of thy tent 
and stretch the skins of thy 
tabernacles: for thou shalt pass 
on to the right hand and to the 
left and thy seed shall inherit 
the gentiles. 


Postcommunion 


EVOTIO nostra, Dómine, 

intercedénte beáta Lu- 
dovica, continuum e refec- 
tióne colésti sumat auxílium: 
ut divínam Fidem quam intus 
fovémus in corde étiam foris 
exhibeámus in ópere. Per Dó- 
minum. ‘ 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


AY our devotion, O Lord, 

ever find help from par- 
taking of this heavenly ban- 
quet: so that the divine faith 
which in our hearts we cherish 
may be shown forth in our 
works. Through our Lord. 


July 19—$5t. Wincent Be Paul, Confessor (White) 


The following Mass is proper in churches of the Vincentian 
Fathers and by special privilege in chapels of the Sisters of 


Charity. 


The Beginning of the Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 131, 15, 16 


Aurrres Sion saturábo 
Panibus; sacerdótes ejus 
induam  salutári, et sancti 
ejus eXsultatióne exsultábunt. 


HE poor of Sion I will 
satisfy with bread: her 
priests I will clothe with salva- 
tion, and her saints shall exult 


http://ccwatershed.org 


15678 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


with joy. (P. T. Alleluia, alle- (T. P. Allelúja, allelija.) PS. Y 


luia.) Ps. Ibid., 1. O Lord, re- 
member David: and all his 
meekness, Y, Glory. 


Ibid. 1. Meménto, Dómine. 
David: et omnis mansuetüd!- 
nis ejus. Y. Glória Patri. 


Prayer 


cop, Who for the benefit 

of the poor and the better 
discipline of the clergy didst 
by means of blessed Vincent 
gather together à new family 
in Thy Church: grant, we be- 
seech Thee, that we, likewise 
burning with the same spirit, 
may both love that which he 
cherished and also- put into 
practice that which he taught. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui &d salütem páu- 

perum et cleri discipli- 
nam, novam in Ecclésia tua 
per beátum Vincéntium fa- 
míliam congregásti: da que- 
sumus; ut, eódem nos quoque 
spíritu fervéntes, et amémus 
quod amávit, et quod dócuit 
operémur, Per Dóminum no- 
strum. 


Epistle. 1 Cor. i i, 26-31 and ii, 1 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. 


OR consider your own call, 

brethren; that there were 
not many wise according to the 
flesh, not many mighty, not 
many noble. But the foolish 
things of the world has God 
chosen to put to shame the wise, 
and the weak things of the 
world has God chosen to put to 
shame the strong, and the base 
things of the world and the 
despised has God chosen, and 
the things that are not, to bring 
to naught the things that are; 
lest any flesh should pride itself 
before Him. From Him you are 
in Christ Jesus, Who has be- 
come for us God-given wisdom, 
and justice, and sanctification, 
and redemption; so that, just 
as jt is written, Let him who 
takes pride, take pride in the 
Lord. And I, brethren, when I 


Léctio abies beati Pauli 
Apóstoli ad Corínthios. 


IDÉTE  vocatiónem  ve- 

stram, fratres, quia non 
multi  sapiéntes secündum 
carnem, non multi poténtes, 
non multi nóbiles: sed que 
st lta sunt mundi elégit Deus, 
ut confundat sapiéntes; et in- 
firma mundi elégit Deus, ut 
confündat fortia: et ignobília 
mundi et contemptibília elé- 
git Deus, et ea quis non sunt, 
ut ea que sunt destrüeret: 
ut non gloriétur omnis caro 
in conspéctu ejus. Ex ipso au- 
tem vos estis in Christo Jesu, 
qui factus est nobis sapiéntia 
a Deo, et justitia, et sanctifi- 
catio, eb. redémptio; ut quem- 
ádmodum scriptum est: Qui 
gloriátur, in Dómino glorié- 
tur. Et ego, cum veníssem ad 
vos, fratres, venl non in subli- 
mitáte sermónis, aut sapién- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


TE NEU T C 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 1567b 


tie, annüntians vobis testi- came to you, did not come with 
mónium Christi, Non enim pretentious speech or wisdom, 
judicávi me scire $liquid inter announcing unto you the wit- 
vos, nisi Jesum Christum, et ness to Christ. For I deter- 
hunc crucifíxum. mined not to know anything 
among you, except Jesus Christ 

and Him crucified. 
From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced by 


the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and the Tract are replaced 
by the Greater Alleluia. g 


. Gradual. Luke 4, 18 


VANGELIZARE paupéribus E HATH sent me to preach 
misit me, sanáre con- the Gospel to the poor: 
tritos corde. Y. Ps. 67, 11-12. to heal the bruised of heart. 
Parasti in dulcédine tua páu- Y. Ps. 67, 11-12. In Thy sweet- 
peri, Deus: Dóminus dabit ness, O God, Thou hast pro- 
verbum evangelizántibus vir- vided for the poor: the Lora 
tüte multa. shall give the word unto them 
. that preach good tidings, with 
great power. 


Lesser Alleluia : 

Allelüja, allelúja. Y. Isaia. ^ Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Isai. 
52, 7. Quam pulchri super 52, 7, How beautiful upon the 
montes pedes annuntiántis et mountains are the feet of him 
predicantis pacem, annunti- that bringeth good tidings, and 
ántis bonum, predicantis sa- preacheth peace: of him that 
lütem. Allelája. showeth forth good, that 
preacheth salvation. Alleluia. 


Tract. Prov. 31, 20 

Manum suam apéruit inopi, He hath opened His hand to 
et palmas suas exténdit ad the needy, and stretched out 
páuperem. V. Ps.40,2. Beá- His hands to the poor. Y. Ps. 
tus qui intélligit super egénum 40, 2. Blessed is he that under- 
et páuperem, in die mala li- standeth concerning the needy 
berábit eum Dóminus. V. Ps. and the poor: the Lord will de- 
111, 5-6. Jucündus homo qui liver him in the evil day. Y. Ps. 
miserétur, et cómmodat: dis- 111, 5-6. Acceptable is the man 
pónet sermónes suos in ju- that sheweth mercy and lend- 
dício, quia in ætérnum non eth: he shall order his words 
commovébitur, with judgment: because he 

shall not be moved for ever. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelüja, alleluja. Y. Isai. Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Isai. 
52, 7. Quam pulchri super 52, 7. How beautiful upon the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1567c 


mountains are the feet of him 
that bringeth good tidings, and 
preacheth peace: of him that 
showeth forth good, that preach- 
eth salvation. Alleluia. Y. Ibid., 
11. Go ye out from the midst of 
Babylon: be clean, ye that carry 
the vessels of the Lord. Alle- 
luia. 
Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


montes pedes annuntiántis et 
prædicántis pacem, annunti- 
ántis bonum, prædicántis sa- 
lütem, Allelija. Y. Ibid. 11. 
Exíte de médio -Babylénis: 
mundámini, qui fertis vasa 
Dómini. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Matt. 9, 35-38 


€ Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 


T THAT time Jesus was 

going about all the towns 
&nd villages, teaching in their 
synagogues, and preaching the 
gospel of the kingdom, and 
curing every kind of disease 
and infirmity. But seeing the 
crowds, He ws moved with 
compassi n for them, because 
they were bewildered and de- 
jected, like sheep without a 
shepherd. Then He said to His 
disciples, Thy harvest indeed 
is abundant, but the laborers 
are few. Pray therefore the 
Lord of the harvest to send 
forth laborers into his harvest. 


H Sequéntia sancti Eyan- 
gélii secundum Mattheum. 


N ILLO témpore: Circuíbat 

Jesus omnes civitátes et 
castélla, docens in synagógis 
eórum, et preedicans Evangé- 
lium regni, et curans omnem 
languórem et omnem infirmi- 
tátem. Videns autem turbas, 
misértus est eis: quia erant 
vexáti, et jacéntes sicut oves 
non habéntes pastórem. Tunc 
dicit discipulis. suis: Messis 
quidem multa, operáriüi au- 
tem pauci Rogáte ergo dó- 
minum messis, ut mittat ope- 
rários in messem suam. 


Offertory. 3 Kings 8, 58 


May the Lord our God incline 
our hearts unto Himself that 
we may walk in all His ways: 
and tbat we may keep His 
commandments, and His cere- 
monies and all His judgments 
which He commanded our fa- 
thers. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Inclínet Dóminus Deus no- 
ster corda nostra ad se, ut 
ambulémus in univérsis viis 
ejus, et custodiáàmus mandáta 
ejus, et cxremónias ejus, et 
judicia quecümque mandavit 
pátribus nostris. (T. P. Alle- 
1ája.) 


Secret 


Go», Who upon blessed 
Vincent didst bestow the 
grace of putting into practice 


EUs, qui beáto Vincéntio, 
divina quotídie cele- 
bránii mystéria, tribuísti quod 


http://ccwatershed.org 


(Y mee Ce 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


tractabat imitári: ejus nobis 
Précibus indülge; ut, imma- 
Culátam héstiam offeréntes, 
ipsi quoque in holocáustum ti- 
bi accéptum transeámus, Per 
Dóminum.: 


Preface, page 775. 


Communion. 


Contfiteántur Dómino mise- 
ricórdie ejus; et mirabília ejus 
fíliis hóminum: quia satiávit 
ánimam inánem, et ánimam 
esuriéntem satiávit bonis. (T. 
P. Allelüja.) 


156"d 


the lessons of those mysteries 
which he daily celebrated in 
the sacrifice of the Mass: grant 
us by his prayers, that: when of- 
fering the Victim without spot, 
we may ourselves be trans- 
formed into a sacrifice pleasing 
unto Thee. Through our Lord. 


Ps. cvi, 8-9 


Let the mercies of the Lord 
give glory to Him, and His 
wondrous works to the children 
of men: for He hath satisfied 
the empty soul, and the hungry 
soul He hath filled with good 
things. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 


XLÉSsTIBUS, Dómine, re- 

fécti sacraméntis, qué- 
sumus; ut ad evangélizántem 
paupéribus Filium tuum imi- 
tándum, beáti Vincéntii, sicut 
exémplis provocámur, ita et 
patrocíniis adjuvémur. Per 
Dóminum nostrum. 


EFRESHED by these heaven- 

ly sacraments, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that, stirred up 
aS we are by the example of 
blessed Vincent to imitate Thy 
Son in His preaching of the 
Gospel to the poor, so also we 
may be helped by his patron- 
age. Through our Lord. 


Aug. 19—$5t. John Eudes, Confessor (White) 


(For the Sisters.of the Good Shepherd) 
The Beginning of the Mass, page 756. g 


I ntroit. 


oOminus implébit splen- 

dóribus ánimam tuam, 
et ossa tua liberábit, et eris 
quasi hortus irríguus, et sicut 
fons aquárum, cujus non de- 
ficient aque. Ps. 72, 1. Quam 
bonus Israël Deus: his qui 
recto sunt corde. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Is. 58, 11 


HE Lord will fill thy soul 

with brightness, and de- 
liver thy bones, and thou shalt 
be like à watered garden, and 
like à fountain of water whose 
waters shall not fail. Ps. 72, 1. 
How good is God to Israel, to 
them that are of a right heart. 
y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1568 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


Prayer 


GOD, Who didst wonder- 

fully inflame blessed John 
Thy Confessor solemnly to pro- 
mote the worship of the sacred 
Hearts of Jesus and Mary and 
through him didst will to found 
new religious families in Thy 
Church: grant, we beseech 
Thee, that we who venerate his 
devout merits may also be in- 
structed by the example of his 
virtues, Through the same. 


gus qui beátum Joán- 

nem, Confessérem tu- 
um, ad cultum Sacrórum Cór- 
dium Jesu et Marie rite pro- 
movéndum, mirabiliter in- 
flammásti, et per eum novas 
in Ecclésia tua familias con- 
gregáre — voluísti: ^ presta 
quzsumus, ut cujus pia méri- 
ta venerámur, virtütum quo- 
que instruámur exémplis. Per 
eümdem Dóminum. 


Lesson. 1 John 4,7-11 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed John the Apostle. 


EARLY beloved: Let us love 
D one another, for charity 
is of God. And everyone that 
loveth is born of God, and 
knoweth God. He that loveth 
not knoweth not God; for God 
is charity. By this faith the 
charity of God appeared toward 
us, because God hath sent His 
only-begotten Son into the 
world that we may live by Him. 
In this is charity; not as though 
we had loved God, but because 
He hath first loved us, and sent 
His Son to be a propitiation for 
our sins. My dearest, if God 
has so loved us, we also ought 
to love one another. 


Léctio Epístole beati Joán- 
nis Apóstoli. 
AníssiMI: Diligámus nos 
invicem, quia cáritas ex 
Deo est. Et omnis qui díligit 
ex Deo natus est et cognóscit 
Deum. Qui non díligit non no- 
vit Deum; quóniam Deus c&- 
ritas est. In hoc appáruit cá- 
ritas Dei in nobis, quóniam 
Fílium suum Unigénitum mi- 
sit Deus in mundum, ut vivá- 
mus per eum. In hoc est 
cáritas: non quasi nos dilexé- 
rimus Deum, sed quóniam 
ipse prior diléxit nos, et misit 
Fílium suum propitiatiónem 
pro peccátis nostris. Caríssi- 
mi, si sic Deus diléxit nos, et 
nos debémus altérutrum dilí- 
gere. 


Gradual. Luke 10, 2- 


Pray ye the Lord of the har- 
vest, that He send forth labor- 
ers into His harvest. V. Ps. 131, 
16. Her priests will I clothe with 
salvation, and her saints shall 
exult with exultation. Alleluia, 
alleluia. F. Gal. 2. I live now 


Rogáte Dóminum messis ut 
mittat operários in messem 
suam. Y. Ps. 131, 16. Sacer- 
dótes ejus induam salutári, et 
Sancti ejus exultatióne exul- 
tábunt. Allelija, allelija. Y. 
Gal. 2. Vivo jam non ego: vi- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


M 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 1560 


vit vero in me Christus, Al- not I, but Christ liveth in me. 
lelája. Alleluia. 
` Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 
Gospel, The Lord Me from. the Mass on the feast of 
St. Mark, April 25, page 989. 
Offertory. Ps. 142. 


: Eripe me de inimicis meis, Deliver me from mine ene- 
Dómine, ad te confügi: doce mies, O Lord, to-Thee have I 
me fácere voluntátem tuam, fled: Teach me to do Thy will, 
quia Deus meus es tu. - for Thou art my God. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


éstiss, tibi, Dómine, in 

honórem beati Joánnis, 
Sacerdótis tui, deférimus im- 
molándas: que temporálem 
consolatiónem signíficant, ut 
premia non desperémus ætér- 
na. Per Dóminum. 


E OFFER. to Thee, O Lord, 

in honor of blessed John 
Thy Priest, these victims about 
to be immolated which be- 
token temporal consolation, so 
that we may not despair of 
eternal rewards. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. John 15, 4 


Manéte in me et ego in vo- Reniain in Me, and Iin you. 
bis. Qui manet in me et ego He that remaineth in Me and 
in eo, hic fert fructum mul- I in him, that man. beareth 


tum, dicit Dóminus. 


much fruit, saith the Lord, 


Postcommunion 


acro  münere.. satiátis, 
S presta nobis, quesumus, 
Dómine, ut intercedénte beá- 
to Joánne, quem Sacrórum 
Córdium Jesu et -Mariæ fer- 
véntem cultórem esse voluísti, 
utríque Cordifidéliter adhe- 
réntes in terris, ipsórum gáu- 
dio frui mereámur in ccelis. 
Per eümdem Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


EPLENISHED With this sa- 

cred gift, grant us, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, through 
the intercession of blessed John, 
whom Thou didst will to be the 
fervent worshiper of the sacred 
Hearts of Jesus and Mary, that, 
adhering faithfully to both 
these Hearts on earth, we may 
deserve to delight in their joy 
in heaven. Through the same. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1570 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


August 21—_t. Jane Frances de Chantal, Widow 


(White) 
The following Mass is said only in the Houses of the Order 


of the Visitation. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


G O FORTH out of thy country 
and from thy kindred 
and out of thy father’s house; 
and come into the land which 
I shall show thee. And I will 
make of thee a great nation, 
and I will bless thee, and I will 
magnify thy name; and thou 
shalt be blessed. Ps. 83, 2. How 
lovely are Thy tabernacles, O 
Lord of Hosts: my soul longeth 
and fainteth for the courts of 
the Lord. Y. Glory. 


Gen. 12, 1, 2, 3 


GREDERE de terra tua et 

de cognatióne tua, et de 
domo patris tui, et veni in 
terram quam monstrábo tibi: 
faciámque te in gentem mag- 
nam, et benedícam tibi et 
magnificábo nomen tuum. Ps. 
83, 2. Quam dilécta taber- 
nácula tua, Dómine virtüt- 
um: concupiscit et déficit 
anima mea in atria Dómini. 
X. Glória Patri, 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


. Prayer, Almighty and merciful God, as in the regular Mass 
of St. Jane Frances de Chantal, August 21, page 1167. 


Lesson. Ecclus. 26, 18-24 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


UCH is a wise and silent 

woman; and there is 
nothing so: much worth as & 
well-instructed soul. A holy 
and shamefaced woman is 
grace upon grace: and no price 
is worthy of a continent soul. 
As the sun when it riseth to 
the world in the high places 
of God, so is the beauty of a 
good wife for the ornament of 
her house. As the lamp shin- 
ing upon the holy candlestick, 
so is the beauty of the face in 
a ripe age. As golden pillars on 
bases of silver, so are the firm 
feet upon the soles of a steady 
woman. As everlasting founda- 
tions upon a rock, so are the 
commandments of God in the 
heart of a holy woman, 


Léctio libri Sapiéntiz. 


TLIER Sensáta et tácita, 
non est immutátio eru- 
dite anime. Gratia super grá- 
tiam mülier sancta et pudo- 
ráta. Omnis autem ponderátio 
non est digna continéntis áni- 
me, Sicut sol óriens mundo in 
altíssimis Dei, sic muleris bo- 
næ spécies in ornaméntum 
domus. ejus. Lucérnà splen- 
dens super candelábrum sanc- 
tum, et spécies faciéi super 
etatem stabilem. Cohimne 
áureæ super bases argénteas, 
et pedes firmi super plantas 
stábilis mulferis. Fundaménta 
ætérna supra petram sólidam 
et maridáta Dei in corde mu- 
lferis sanctam. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


1571 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced. 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Esther 14,3 


Et deprecabátur Dóminum 
Deum Israél, dicens: Dómine 
mi, qui Rex noster es solus, 
ádjuva me solitáriam, et cujus 
preter te, nullus est aux- 
ilátor. Y. Sap. 8, 16. In- 
trans in domum meam, con- 
quiéscam cum illa: non enim 
habet amaritüdinem conver- 
sátio illius, nec tedium. con- 
victus illius, sed letitiam et 
gáudium. 


Lesser 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 26, 
4. Unam pétii a Dómino, hanc 
requiram: ut inhábitem in 
domo Dómini ómnibus diébus 
vite mew. Allelüja. 


And she prayed to the Lord 
God of Israel, saying: O Lord, 
my God, Who alone art our 
King, help me, a desolate 
woman and who have no other 
help but Thee. Y. Wis. 8, 16. 
Going into my house, I will rest 
with her: for her conversation 
hath no bitterness, nor her 
company any tediousness, but 
joy and gladness, 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia, Y. Ps. 26, 4. 
One thing X have asked of the 
Lord; this wil I seek after: 
ihat I may dwell in the house 
of the Lord all the days of my 
life. Alleluia. 


Tract 


Veni sponsa Christi, áccipe 
corónam, quam tibi Dóminus 
preparávit in etérnum; pro 
cujus amóre sánguinem tu- 
um fudisti. Y. Ps. 44. Dilexísti 
justitiam, et odísti iniquitá- 
tem: proptérea unxit te Deus, 
Deus tuus, óleo letitie pre 
consértibus tuis. Y. Spécie 
tua, et pulchritüdine tua, in- 
. ténde, prÓspere procéde, et 
regna. 


Come, O spouse of Christ, re- 
ceive the crown which the Lord 
hath prepared for thee forever: 
for the love of Whom thou didst 
shed thy blood. V. Ps. 44. Thou 
hast loved justice, and hated 
iniquity: therefore God, thy 
God, hath anointed thee with 
the oil of gladness above thy 
fellows. Y. With thy comeliness 
and thy beauty set out, proceed 
prosperously, and reign. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. Ps. 44, 
5. Spécie tua, et pulchri- 
tudine tua, inténde, próspere 
procéde, et regna. Allelüja. P. 
Propter veritátem, et man- 


suetüdinem, et mansuetüd- 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y.Ps.44,5. 
With thy comeliness, and thy 
beauty, set out, proceed pros- 
perously, and reign. Alleluia. 
y. Because of truth, and meek- 
ness, and justice: and thy right 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1572 


hand shall conduct thee won- 
derfuly. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


inem, et justitiam: et dedücet 


te mirabiliter déxtera tua. 


Alleluja. 


Gosnel, The kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure, from 
the Mass Me exspectaverunt, page 1365. 


`- Offertory. . Judith 15, 11 


Thou hast done manfully 
and thy heart has been 
strengthened; because “thou 
hast loved chastity and after 
thy husband hast not known 
any other: therefore also the 
hand of the Lord hath 
strengthened thee, and’ there- 
fore thou shalt be blessed for- 
ever. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Quia fecísti viriliter et con- 
fortátum est cor tuum, eo 
quod castitátem amáveris, et 
post virum tuum álterum ne- 
scietis: ideo et manus Dómini 
confortávit te, et ideo eris 
benedicta in ætérnum, ` 


Secret, May this saving victim, as in the regular Mass of St. 
Jane Frances de Chantal, August 21, page 1168. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion, Judith 16, 26 


Chastity also was joined to 


Erat étiam virtüti cástitas 


her virtue, so that she knew adjüncta, ita ut non cognó- 

no man all the days of her life sceret virum ómnibus diébus 

after the death of her husbarid. vite sux, ex quo defünctus est 
vir ejus. 


Postcommunion, Pour upon us, O Lord, from the Mass on 
the feast of St. Jane Frances de Chantal, August 21, page 1168, 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Oct.21—$5t, Ursula and Wer Companions, 


“Virgins and Martyrs (Red) 
This Mass may be said only in houses of the Ursuline Nuns. _ 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 
ET us all rejoice in the 


Lord, celebrating .a fes- 
tival day in honor of the holy 
virgins at whose passion, the 
angels rejoice and join together 
in praising the Son of God. 


Cou omnes in Dé- 
mino diem festum cele- 
brántes sub honóre Sanctá- 
rum Vírginum: de. quarum 
passióne gaudent Angeli et 
colláulant Fílium Dei. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 1578 


Ps. 32. Exsultáte justi in Dó- Ps. 32. Rejoice in the Lord, O 
mino! Rectos decet collaudá- ye righteous! Praise becometh 


tio. V. Glória Patri. 


the upright. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. " 


Prayer 


EUS qui digni tibi sacrá- 
[) tis virginibus, Ursula 
duce, mirándi agónis robur 
Sindidisti, quo per martyrii 
.épalmam, ad supérne contem- 
platiónis pertíngerent glóri- 
am: da qusesumus, eórum in- 
tercessiónibus nos adjuvári, 
quas hodiérna die, transcénso 
mortis stádio, in celéstibus 
fecísti triumpháre. Per Dó- 
minum. 


cop, Who hast given to 

the virgins worthily con- 
Secrated to Thee, the courage 
to face, with Ursula as their 
leader, & wonderful conflict 
whereby through the palm of 
martyrdom they arrived at the 
glory of heavenly contempla- 
tion, grant, we beseech Thee, 
that we may be helped by the 
intercession of those who on 
this day having passed through 
the gates of death, Thou hast 
made to triumph in heaven. 
Through our Lord. 


Epistte, Brethren, concerning virgins, from the Mass Vultum 


tuum, page 1374. 


Gradual. 


Timéte -Déminum, omnes 
Sancti ejus: quóniam nihil 
deest timéntibus eum. y. In- 
quiréntes autem ` Dóminum 
non defícient omni bono. Al- 
lelija, allelüja. V. Ps. 44, 15. 
Adducéntur Regi vírgines post 
eam, proxime ejus afferéntur 
tibi in letitia, Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Ps. 33, 10 


Fear the Lord, al ye His 
saints: for there is no want to 
them that fear Him. Y. They 
that seek the Lord, shall not 
be deprived of any good. Alle- 
luia, alleluia. V. Ps. 44, 15. After 
her shall virgins be brought to 
the king: her neighbors shall 
be brought to thee with glad- 
ness. Alleluia. 


Gospel, The kingdom of heaven, from the Mass Dilexisti, 


, page 1372. 
Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Ps. 44, 15, 16 


Afferéntur Regi vírgines 
post eam: préxime ejus af- 
feréntur tibi in letitia et ex- 
sultatióne;  adducéntur in 
templum Regi Dómino. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


After her shall virgins be 
brought to the King: her neigh- 
bors shall be brought to Thee 
with gladness and rejoicing: 
they shall be brought into the 
temple, to the Xing our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1574 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


Secret 


AY the votive offerings, O 
Lord, of the mystical 
oblation, offered to Thy majesty 
in veneration of the holy Ur- 
sula and her companions, wipe 
out our evil deeds, and, having 
purified us, render us accept- 
able for the carrying out of so 
great mysteries. Through our 
Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 


The five wise virgins took oil 
in their vessels with the lamps: 
and at midnight there was a 
cry made, Behold the bride- 
groom cometh: go ye forth to 
meet Christ our Lord. 


oríva, Dómine, mystici 

libaminis dona, pro 
Sanctárum Ursule et sociá- 
rum ejus, vírginum tuárum, 
véneratióne, majestáti tuz 
obláta, nostra expürgent fací- 
nora: et. purificátos tantis f 
mystéris  exsequéndis nos 
reddant accéptos. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Matt. 25, 4, 6 


Quinque prudentes vírgines 
accepérunt óleum in vasis suis 
cum lampádibus: média au- 
tem nocte clamor factus est, 
Ecce sponsus venit: exíte ób- 
viam Christo Dómino. 


Postcommunion 


the sacrament of heav- 
enly sustenance, we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, that by the inter- 
cession of Thy holy virgins, 
Ursula and her companions, 
what we do to celebrate their 
glory, may further our salva- 
tion. Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


Inu been nourished by 


crÉsrIS alimónie reféc- 

ti Sacraménto, queesu- 
mus, Dómine, ut intercedén- 
tibus Sanctis Virgínibus Ur- 
sula ei sóciis ejus, que pro 
illárum celebrámus glória, ad 
nostre salütis profíciant in- 
creménta. Per Dóminum. 


Oct. 23—Blessed Marp Clotilde Angela—Ursuline 
Mun—and Her Ten Companions, virgins, martyrs 


(Red) 
Mass, Me expectaverunt, page 1363, except: 


Prayer 


cop, Who hast deigned to 
O crown with the glory of 
martyrdom the exceedingly 


D qui beatárum vír- 
ginum tuárum, Clotíl- 
dis Angel? ejüsque Sociárum, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


MASSES FOR RELIGIOUS ORDERS 


exímiam in erudiéndis puéllis 
caritátem martyrii gloria 
coronáre dignátus es: presta, 
qusesumus: ut, ipsis interce- 
déntibus, tua nos quoque cari- 
tate firmátos, a te advérsitas 
nulla sejüngat. Per Dóminum. 


1575 


great charity displayed in in- 
structing young girls of Thy 
blessed virgins, Clotilde Angela, 
and her companions, grant, we 
beseech Thee, that by their 
intercession, we also, being 
strengthened by Thy love, may 
not be separated from Thee by 
any adversity. Through our 
Lord. 


Secret . 


NTÉNDE, quéesumus, Dómi- 
ne, münera altáribus tuis 


NCLINE, We beseech Thee, O 
Lord, unto the gifts placed 


pro beatárum vírginum et upon Thy altars in honor of 
mártyrum tuárum, Clotíldis Thy blessed virgins and mar- 
Angele  ejüsque  Sociárum, tyrs, Clotilde Angela and her 
honóre propósita: ut, sicut companions, that, as Thou hast 
per hee sacra mystéria illis bestowed glory on them through 
glóriam contulísti, ita nobis these sacred mysteries, so Thou 


indulgéntiam  largiáris. Per 
Dóminum. 


mayest accord us pardon. 


Through our Lord, 


Postcommunion 


cifsTI alimónia refécti, 

süpplices te, Dómine, 
deprecámur,  suffragántibus 
beátis virgínibus et martyri- 
bus tuis, Clotílde Angela 
ejüsque Sóciis, ut quarum pie 
venerámur in fídei profes- 
sióne victóriam, eárum imi- 
témur in morum puritáte con- 
stántiam. Per Dóminum. 


Av the heavenly myste- 
@M ries, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord, through the suffrages of 
Thy blessed virgins and mar- 
tyrs, Clotilde Angela and her 
companions, produce in us 
their proper fruit so that we 
may imitate the constancy in 
purity of morals of those whose 
victory in professing the faith 
we piously venerate. Through 
our Lord, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Proper Masses for the United States 


These feasts and solemnities are celebrated in some dioceses 


of the United States. 


Hence if in any locality a feast is cele- 


brated, the Mass Of which is not found in the Proper of Saints, 
the reader ought to refer to this Supplement. 


Dec. 12— Feast of Our Ladp of Guadalupe, 


(White) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 
Introit, from Mass Salve sancta Parens, page 1394. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


Gop, Who hast willed that, 

under the special patro- 
nage of the blessed Virgin Mary, 
we be laden with perpetual 
favors, grant to Thy suppliants 
that, as we this day rejoice in 
her commemoration on earth, 
we may enjoy the vision of her 
tn heaven. Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui sub beatissime 

Virginis Marie singu- 
lari patrocinio constitutos, 
perpétuis beneficiis nos cu- 
mulári voluísti: presta sup- 
plícibus tuis; ut cujus hódie 
commemoratióne letámur in 
terris, ejus conspéctu per- 
fruámur in colis. Per Dómi- 
num. 


Epistle, As the vine, from the Mass on the feast of Our Lady 
of Mount Carmel, July 16, page 1106. 


Gradual. Cant. 6, 9 


Who is she that cometh forth 
as the morning rising, fair as 
the moon, bright as the sun? 
¥. Ecclus. 50, 8. As the rainbow 
giving light in the bright 
clouds, and as the flower of 
roses in the days of spring. 

Alleluia, alleluia. J. Cant. 2, 
12. The flowers have appeared 
in our land, the time of pruning 
is come. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Que est ista, que progrédi- 
tur quasi aurór& consürgens, 
pulchra ut luna, elécta ut sol? 
¥. Ecclus. 50, 8. Quasi arcus 
refülgens inter nébulas gló- 
rim, et quasi flos rosárum in 
diébus vernis. 

Allelüja, allelája. Y. Cant. 
2, 12. Flores apparuérunt in 
terra nostra, tempus puta- 
tiónis advénit. Allelija. 


Gospel, Mary rising up, from the Mass on the feast of the 
Visitation of our Blessed Lady, July 2, page 1089. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. 2 Par. 7, 16 


I have chosen, and have 
sanctified this place, that My 


Elégi, et sanctificávi locum 
istum, ut sit ibi nomen meum, 


1576 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 1577 


et permaneant. óculi mei, et name. may be there, and My 
cor meum ñ ibi cunctis diébus. eyes and My heart may re- 
main there forevermore. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 
vA, Dómine, propitiati- BROUGH thine indulgent 
óne, et beátz Mariæ sem-, mercy, O Lord, and 


per Virginis intercessióne, ad through the prayers of blessed 

perpétuam atque preséntem Mary ever a virgin, may this 

hec oblátio nobis profíciat oblation avail to, the ensuring. 

prosperitátem. et pacem. Per to us of prosperity and peace, 

Dóminum. a now and forevermore. Through 
: 3 , our Lord, : 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Ps. 147, 20 


Non fecit táliter omni He hath not done in like 
natióni: et judicia sua non manner to every nation: and 
manifestávit eis. ^ -` ` His judgments He hath not 

7 ! : ^ made manifest to them. 


Posteommunion jrom the Mass Salve Sancte Parens, page 1397. 


Concluding "Prayers, page 793. 


Jan. 19—The Holp Familp, (White) 
Ps ihe Diocese of roort and in Canada. Mass ds on page . 
Feb. 1— St. Brigid, Virgin (White) 
Mass Dilexisti, page 1370, except: 


Prayer 
EUS, qui nos hodiérna Gop, Who on this day dost 
die beáte Brigide vir- gladden us with the an- 


ginis tue annua solemnitate nual festival of blessed Brigid, 

letificas: coneéde propitius Thy virgin, mercifully grant 

ut ejus adjuvémur méritis cu- that we be assisted by the 

jus castitatis irradiámur ex- merits of her through whose 

émplis. Per Dóminum. . chaste example we are enlight-. 
ened. Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1578 PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Feb, 5—t. Philip of Jesus, Martyr (Red) 


In the Archdiocese of Baltimore and the Diocese of Los 
Angeles. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Phillip. 2, 10, 11 


N THE name of Jesus let 
I every knee bow, of those 
in heaven, on earth, and under 
the earth: and let every tongue 
confess that the Lord Jesus 
Christ is in the glory of God 
the Father. Ps. 102, 1. Bless the 
Lord, O my soul: and all that 
is within me, bless His holy 
name. Y. Glory. 


N NÓMINE Jesu omne genu 
flectátur, celéstium, ter- 
réstrium et infernórum: et 
omnis lingua confiteátur, quia 
Dominus Jesus Christus in 
gloria est Dei Patris. Ps. 102, 
1. Bénedic, anima mea, Dó- 
mino: et ómnia, que intra me 
sunt, nómini sancto ejus. y. 
Glória Patri. 


Prayer 


cop, Who, when the first 

martyrs of Japan were 
put to death, wast pleased that, 
among them all, blessed Philip, 
bound to a cross and thrice 
pierced by a lance, should be 
the fisi iu receive irom ‘nee 
the crown of martyrdom: do 
Thou graciously grant that, 
supported by his patronage, we 
may attain to be likewise 
crowned with him in heaven. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui inter primos 

Japónie Martyres beá- 
tum Philíppum cruci alligá- 
tum, triplicique láncea con- 
fóssum, primum ómnium 
martyrio coronóásti: concéde 
propitius; ut ejusdem nos 
suffulti patrocínio cum illo 
páriter coronémur in celis. 
Per Dóminum. 


In Lent, a commemoration of the Feria, and in like manner 
at the Secret and Postcommunion. 


Epistle, Brethren, but God forbid, from the Mass on the feast 
of the Stigmata of St. Francis, September 17, page 1200. 


Gradual. Ps. 102, 2, 3 


Bless the Lord, O my soul, 
and forget not all He hath done 
for thee. Y. He that forgiveth 
all thine iniquities: that heal- 
eth all thine infirmities. 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Jas. 1, 
12. Blessed is the man that en- 
Gureth temptation: because 
when he hath been proved, he 
shall receive the crown of life. 
Alleluia, 


Bénedic, ánima mea, Dó- 
mino: et noli oblivísci omnes 
retributiónes ejus. Y. Qui pro- 
pitiátur ómnibus iniquitati- 
bus tuis, qui sanat omnes in- 
firmitátes tuas. 

Allelüja, allelija. Y. Jac. 
1, 12. Beátus vir, qui suffert 
tentatiónem: quóniam cum 
probátus füerit, accipiet co- 
rónam vite. Alleluja. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


1579 


After Septuagesima omit the alleluia and verse and say the 


ract. 


Tract. Ps. 117, 16-18 


Déxtera Dómini fecit vir- 
tütem: déxtera Dómini ex- 
altávit me, déxtera Dómini 
fecit virtütem. Y. Non móriar, 
sed vivam: et narrábo ópera 
Dómini. Y. Castigans casti- 
gávit me Dóminus: et morti 
non trádidit me. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


The rigbt hand of the Lord 
hath wrought might: the right 
hand of the Lord hath exalted 
me, the right hand of the Lord 
hath wrought might. Y. I shall 
not die, but live: and declare 
the works of the Lord. Y. Chas- 
tising, the Lord hath chastised 
me: but hath not given me 
over to death. 


. Gospel, If any man, from the Mass Sacerdotes, page 1307. 


Offertory. 


- Véritas mea et misericórdia 
mea cum ipso: et in nómine 
meo exaltábitur cornu ejus. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Ps. 88, 25 


My truth and My mercy 
shall be with him: and in My 
name sball his horn be exalted. 


Secret 


ANCTÍFICA, quesumus D6- 

mine, münera tibi di- 
cata: et intercessióne beáti 
Philippi Martyris tui, ad per- 
pétuum nobis trfbue prove- 
nire subsídium. Per Dómi- 
num, : 


O THOU, O Lord, we be- 
D seech Thee, sanctify the 
gifts which we dedicate unto 
Thee; and by the intercession 
of blessed Philip Thy martyr, 
grant that they may turn to 
our perpetual as Through 
our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Matth. 16, 24 


Qui vult venire post me, He who will come after Me, 
ábneget seme tipsum, et tollat let him deny himself, and take 
crucem suam, et sequátur me. up his cross, and follow Me. 


Postcommunion 


ACRO cérpore, et pretióso - E, WHO have been satis- 
sánguine Jesu Christi fied by the sacred body 
Filii tui Dómine, satiáti: te and the precious blood of Jesus 
süpplices deprecámur; ut in- Christ, Thy Son, suppliantly 
tercedénte þeáto . Philippo beseech Thee, O Lord, that by 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1580 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


the intercession of blessed Mártyre tuo ab omni adver- 
Philip, Thy martyr, we may be sitáte liberémur. Per Dómi- 
delivered from every adversity. num. 


Through our Lord. 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


‘In Lent the Gospel of the Feria is read at the end of Mass. 


March 22—$9t. Catharine Slisea Adorna, Widow 
(White) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 41, 3 


Y sour hath thirsted after 
the strong living God: 
When shall I come and appear 
before the face of God? Ps. 
41, 2. As the hart panteth after 
the fountains of water, so my 
soul panteth after Thee, my 
God. Y. Glory. 


um fortem vivum: 
quando véniam et apparébo 
ante fáciem Dei? Ps. 41, 2. 
Quemádmodum desíderat cer- 
vus ad fontes aquárum: ita 
desíderat ánima- mea ad te, 
Deus. Y. Glória Patri. 


S anima mea ad De- 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


a GOD Why, in biessed Cath- 
O arine, contemplating the 
Passion of Thy Son, didst make 
fiercely to burn up the fire of 
Thy love: moved by her pray- 
ers, enkindle within us, we þe- 
seech Thee, the flame of char- 
ity, and grant us a share in the 
fruit of that same sacred Pas- 
sion. Through the same. 


^w kus, qui beátam Cathar- 

inam, in contemplánda 
Filii tui passióne, divíni amó- 
ris igne flagráre fecisti: que- 
sumus; ut, ipsa intercedénte, 
tum in nobis flammam caritá- 
tis accéndas, et ejüsdem pas- 
siónis participes dignánter 
effícias. Per eümdem Dómi- 
num. 


Epistle, Who shall find a valiant woman, page 1384. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
a 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 44, 3 


Grace is poured abroad in thy 
lips: therefore hath God blessed 
thee forever. Y. Because of 
truth and meekness and jus- 
tice; and thy right hand shall 
conduct thee wonderfully. 


Diffüsa est grátia in lábiis 
tuis: proptérea benedixit te 
Deus in etérnum. Y. Propter 
veritátem et mansuetüdinem 
et justítiam, et dedücet te mi- 
rabiliter déxtera tua. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


1581 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelája, allelüja. V. Ps. 72, 
25, 26. Quid mihi est in ccelo? 
Et & te quid vólui super ter- 
ram? Defécit caro mea et cor 
meum: Deus cordis mei, et 
pars mea, Deus, in etérnum. 
Allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia: V. Ps. 72, 25, 
26. What have I in Heaven, 
and: beside Thee, what do I 
desire on earth? For Thee my 
flesh and my heart have fainted 
away. Thou art the God of my 
heart and the God that is my 
portion forever, Alleluia. 


| Tract. Ps. 44,8, 5 


Veni, sponsa Christi, ác- 
cipe corónam, quàm tibi Dó- 
minus preparavit in etérnum. 
FW. Ps. 44, 8. Dilexísti justi- 
tiam, et odísti iniquitátem: 
proptérea unxit te Deus, Deus 
tuus, óleo letitie pre consór- 
tibus tuis. Y. Ps. 44, 5. Spécie 
tua, et pulchritüdine tua in- 
ténde, prdéspere procéde, et 
regna. 


Come, spouse of Christ, re- 
celve the crown which the Lord 
hath prepared for thee forever. 
y. Ps. 44, 8. Thou hast loved 
justice and hated iniquity: 
therefore God, thy God, hath 
anointed thee with the oil of 
gladness. above thy fellows. y. 
Ps. 44, 5. With thy comeliness 
and thy beauty set out, proceed 
prosperously, and reign. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allelüja. Ps. 72, 
25, 26. Quid mihi est in celo? 
Et a te.quid vólui super ter- 
ram? Defécit-caro mea, et cor 
meum: Deus cordis mei et 
pars mea Deus in etérnum. 
Allelija. V. Ps. 38, 4. Con- 
cáluit cor meum intra me: et 
in meditatióne mea exardéscet 
ignis. Allelüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 72, 25, 
26. What have I in Heaven, and 
beside Thee, what do I desire 
on earth? For Thee my flesh 
and my heart have fainted 
away. Thou art the God of my 
heart and the God that is my 
portion forever. Alleluia. Y. Ps. 
38, 4. My heart grew hot within 
me, and in my meditation a fire 
shall flame out. Alleluia. 


Gospel, At that time, Jesus spoke this parable, page 1386. 


Offertory. Ps. 107, 2 


Parátum cor meum, Deus, 
parátum cor meum: cantábo, 
et psallam in glória mea. . 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


My heart is ready, O God, 
my heart is ready: I will sing 
and give praise with my glory. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1582 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Secret 


ook down in Thy loving 

kindness, O Lord, we be- 
seech Thee, on this our sacri- 
fice: and through the interces- 
sion of blessed Catharine, en- 
kindle in us the spirit of Thy 
love. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Is sacrificiis, quesumus, 

omnipotens Deus, pro- 
pitiátus inténde: et pbeata 
Catharina intercedénte, spiri- 
tum in nobis tue dilectiónis 
accénde. Per Dóminum. 


Communion. Ps. 88, 3 


. My heart and my flesh have 
rejoiced in the living God. 


Cor meum, et caro mea ex- 
sultavérunt in Deum vivum. 


Postcommunion 


UMBLY we beseech Thee, 
O almighty God, Who 


Ü2PLICES te rogamus, om- 
nípotens Deus: ut, quos 


hast vouchsafed to comfort us tuisrefícere dignátus es sacra- 
with sacraments, that, moved méntis, intercedénte  beáta 
by the prayers of blessed Cath- Catharina, tribuas pro tui 
arine, thou wouldst make us amóre terréna despícere; et 
to despise the things of earth celéstium semper participa- 
and ever to rejoice in sharing tióne gaudére. Per Dóminum. 


in those of heaven. Through 
our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


April 5—Blessed Juliana of Cornillon, Virgin 
(White) B 
In the Diocese of Portland. 
Mass Dilexisti, page 1370, except: 


Prayer 


cop, Who liftest up the 

lowly, and didst in won- 
drous wise inspire the holy vir- 
gin Juliana to add splendor to 
the worship of the Most Holy 
Sacrament: grant unto us, we 
beseech Thee, so to follow her 
in her lowly path upon earth 
as to merit to be exalted with 
her in heaven. Through our 
Lord. 


EUs humílium celsitüdo, 

qui beátam Virginem 
Juliànam ad promovéndum 
sanctissimi Sacraménti cul- 
tum mirabíliter inflammasti: 
tríbue qusesumus; ita nos hu- 
militátis ejus vestígia sectári 
in terris, ut cum ipsa subli- 
mári mereámur in colis. Per 
Dóminum. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


X 


T 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


1583 


April 26—®ur Ladp of Good Counsel, (White) 


Double Major 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit 


Gu omnes in Dó- 
mino, diem festum cele- 
brántes sub honóre beate 
Marie Vírginis, Boni Consilii 
Matris: de cujus. solemnitáte 
gaudent Angeli, et colláudant 
Fílium Dei, allelija, allelija. 
Ps. 44, 2. Eructávit cor meum 
verbum bonum: dico ego 
ópera mea regi Y. Glória 
Patri. 


ET us all rejoice in the 

Lord, celebrating a fes- 
tival in honor of the blessed 
Virgin Mary, Mother of Good 
Counsel; on whose festivity the 
angels rejoice and join in prais- 
ing the Son. of God. Alleluia, 
alleluia. Ps. 44, 2. My heart 
hath uttered a good word: I 
speak my works to the King. Y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


EUS, qui Genitrícem di- 

lécti Fíli tui matrem 
nobis dedisti, ejüsque speció- 
sam imáginem mira appari- 
tióne clarificáre dignátus es: 
concéde quesumus; ut ejüs- 
dem mónitis jügiter inhzr- 
éntes, secündum cor tuum ví- 
vere et ad celéstem pátriam 
felíciter perveníre valeámus. 
Per eümdem Dóminum. 


Prayer | 


cop, Who hast given Jr 

her who bore Thy belo 
Son to be our mother and; ^ 
vouchsafed to glorify hey : 
image by a wondrous al - 
tion, grant, we beseech E 
that by always adhering er 
counsels, we may be able to 
live after Thine own heart and 
to arrive happily in our hea- 
venly couniry. Through the 
same. 


Epistle, As the vine, page 1106. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Prov. 8, 12, 34 


Ego sapiéntia hábito in con- I, Wisdom, dwell in counsel 
sílio, et eruditis intérsum co- and am present in learned 
gitatiónibus. Y. Beátus homo thoughts. Y. Blessed is the man 
qui audit me, et vígilat ad that heareth me. and that 
fores meas quótidie, et ob- watcheth daily at my gates and 
sérvat ad postes dstii mei. waiteth at the posts of my 

: doors. 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Prov. 8, 
35. He that shall find me shall 


Lesser 


Allelüja, allelája. Y. Prov. 
8, 35. Qui me invénerit, invé- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1584 


find life, and shall have sal- 
vation from the Lord. Alleluia. 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


niet vitam, et hauriet salütem 
a Dómino. Allelija, 


Tract. Prov. 8, 14, 17, 20, 21 


Counsel and equity is mine, 
prudence is mine, strength is 
mine. Y. I love them that love 
me: and they that early in the 
morning watch for me ‘shall 
find me. Y. I walk in the way 
of justice, in the midst of the 
paths of judgment. Y. That I 
may enrich them that love me, 
and may fill their treasures. 


Meum est consílum et 
tequitas, mea est prudéntia, 
mea est fortitüdo. Y. Ego dili- 
géntes me díligo: et qui mane 
vigilant ad me invénient me. 
Yy. In viis justitie &ámbulo, in 
médio semitárum judicii. y. 
Ut ditem diligéntes me, et 
thesáuros eórum répleam. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Luke 1, 
28. Hail Mary, full of grace, the 
Lord is with thee, blessed art 
ihou among women. Alleluia. 
X. Through thee, O Mother of 
God, has the life we had lost 
been given back to us: for from 
heaven receiving Him who be- 
came thy Son, thou on the 
world hast bestowed its Savior. 
Alleluia. i 


: Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelija, allelüja. V. Luke 
1, 28. Ave María, grátia plena: 
Dóminus tecum: benedicta tu 
in muliéribus. Allelüja. Y. Per 
te Dei Génitrix nobis est vita 
pérdita data, que de celo sus- 
cepísti prolem, et mundo ge- 
nuísti Salvatórem. Allelüja. 


Gospel. Luke 1, 26.33 


% Continuation of the holy. 


Gospel according to St. Luke. 


T THAT time; the angel 
JH. Gabriel was sent from 
d into a city of Galilee, called 
Nazareth, to a virgin espoused 
to a man whose name was Jo- 
seph, of the house of David; 
and the virgin’s name was 
Mary. And the angel being 
come in, said unto her: Hail, 
full of grace, the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among 
women. Who having heard, 
was troubled at his saying, and 
thought with herself what 


 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Lucam. 


N ILLO témpore: Missus 
I est Angelus Gábriél a Deo 
in civitátem Galilee, cui no- 
men Názareth, ad Vírginem 
desponsátam viro, cui nomen 
erat Joseph, de domo David, 
et nomen Virginis Maria. Et 
ingréssus Angelus ad eam, 
dixit: Ave, grátia plena: Dó- 
minus tecum: benedicta tu in 
muliéribus. Que cum audís- 
set, turbáta est in sermóne 
ejus: et cogitábat qualis esset 
ista salutátio. Et ait Angelus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


ei: Ne tímeas Maria, invé- 
nisti enim grátiam apud De- 
um: ecce concípies in utero, 
et páries filium, et vocábis no- 
men ejus Jesum. Hic erit mag- 
nus, et Filius Altissimi vocá- 
bitur, et dabit illi Dóminus 
Deus sedem David patris ejus: 
et regnábit in domo Jacob in 
etérnum, et regni ejus non 
erit finis. 


1585 


manner of salutation this 
should be. And the angel said 
to her, Fear not, Mary, for thou 
hast found. grace with God, 
Behold thou shalt conceive in 
thy womb, ‘and. shalt bring 
forth a son; and thou shalt call 
His name Jesus.. He shall be 
great, and shall be called the 
Son of the Most High, and the 
Lord God shall give unto Him 
the throne of David His 


father; and He shall reign in the house of Jacob forever. And 
of His kingdom there shall be no end. 


Creed, page 765. 


Offertory. Jerem. 18, 20 


Recordáre, Virgo Mater, in 
conspéctu Dei, ut loquáris pro 
nobis bona, et ut avértat in- 
dignatiónem suam a nobis, 
&llelüja, allelüja. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Remember, O Virgin Mother, 
that thou speak good things for 
us in the sight of God, that He 
may also turn aside His wrath 
from us, Alleluia, alleluia. 


Secret 


ANCTÍFICA Dómine quesu- 
mus obláta libamina, et 
beáte Dei Genitrícis Mariz, 
Boni Consílii Matris, salubér- 
rima intercessióne, nobis salu- 
tária fore concéde. Per eüm- 
dem Dóminum. 


Preface No. 11, page 814. 


O Lord, the libations of- 

d Thee, and by the most 

salutary intercession of the 

blessed Mother of God, Mary, 

Mother of Good Counsel, grant 

them to be for our salvation. 
Through the same. 


Bo we beseech 'Thee, 
ere 


Communion 


Regína mundi digníssima, 
María Virgo perpétua, inter- 
céde pro nostra pace et sa- 
lute, que genuísti Christum 
Dóminum Salvatórem. ómni- 
um, allelája, allelüja. 


Postcommunion 


DJUVET Nos ‘quesumus 
Dómine, gloridse tue 
Genitricis sempérque Virginis 


O queen of the world, most 
worthy Mary, ever a Virgin, in- 
tercede for our peace and safe- 
ty, thou who didst bring forth 
Christ our Lord, the Savior of 
all. Alleluia, alleluia. 


AY tlie august intercession 


of Mary, Thy glorious 
and ever virgin Mother, be our 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1586 


help, we beseech Thee, O Lord, 
that it may make those whom 
it hath overwhelmed with in- 
cessant benefits ever to see 
what should be done and 
strengthen them to fulfil what 
they see. Who livest. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Mariz intercéssio veneránda: 
ut quos perpétuis cumulávit 
benefíciis ea que agénda sunt 
jügiter vidére fáciat, et ad 
adimplénda que víderint con- 
valéscere. Qui vivis, 


April 27—St. Thuribius of Mogrovejo, Bishop, 
, Confessor (White) 


In the Archdioceses of Baltimore, San Francisco and Los 


Angeles. 


Mass, Statuit, page 1302, except: 


Prayer 


ET the watchful care of 
Ti blessed Thuribius, Thy 
confessor and pontiff, be a con- 
tinual protection unto "Thy 
Church: that even as his pas- 
toral solicitude brought him 
glory, so his intercession may 
ever keep us fervent in Thy 
love. Through our Lord. 


Lesson. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 
EHOLD. à great confessor, 
who in his life propped 
up the house, and in his days 
fortified the temple. By him 
also the height of the temple 
was founded, the double build- 
ing, and the high walls of the 
temple. In his days the wells of 
Water flowed out, and they were 
filled as the sea above meas- 
ure. He took care of his 
nation, and delivered it from 
destruction. He prevailed to en- 
large the city, and obtained 
glory in his conversation with 
the people: and enlarged the 


CCLÉSIAM tuam, Dómine, 

beáti Thuríbii, Confes- 
sóris tui atque Pontíficis, con- 
tínua protectióne custódi: ut 
Sicut illum pastorális sollici- 
tüdo gloriósum réddidit, ita 
nos ejus intercéssio in tuo 
semper fáciat amóre fervén- 
tes. Per Dóminum. 


Ecclus. 50, 1-14 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


qui in vita sua suffulsit 
domum, et in diébus suis cor- 
roborávit templum. Templi 
étiam altitüdo ab ipso fundáta 
est, duplex edificatio, et ex- 
célsi parfetes templi. In diébus 
ipsíus emanavérunt  pütei 
aquárum, et quasi mare ad- 
impléti sunt supra modum. 
Qui curávit gentem suam, et 
liberávit eam a perditióne. 
Qui preváluit amplificáre ci- 
vitátem, qui adéptus est Eló- 
riam in conversatióne gentis: 
et ingréssum domus, et átrii 


e Conféssor magnus, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Sr * 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 1587 


amplificavit. Quasi stella ma- 
tutina in médio nébule, et 
quasi luna plena in diébus 
suis lucet. Et quasi sol re- 
fülgens, sic ille effülsit in 
templo Dei. Quasi arcus re- 
fülgens inter nébulas glóriz, 
et quasi flos rosárum in diébus 
vernis, et quasi lilia, que sunt 
in tránsitu aque, et quasi thus 
rédolens in diébus æstátis. 
Quasi ignis effülgens, et thus 
ardens in igne. Quasi vas 
auri sólidum ornátum omni 
lápide pretióso. Quasi olíva 
püllulans, et quasi cypréssus 
in altitüdinem se extóllens. 
Circa illum coróna fratrum: 
et quasi plantátio cedri in 
monte Líbano, sic circa illum 
stetérunt, quasi rami palms, 
et omnes filii Aaron in glória 
sua. 


entrance of the house and the 
court, As the morning star in 
the midst of a cloud, he shone 
in his days: and as the moon 
at her full and as the sun 
when it shineth, so shone he in 
the temple of God. And as the’ 
rainbow giving light in the 
bright clouds, and as the flower 
of roses in the days of the 
spring, and as the lilies that are 
on the brink of the water, and 
as the sweet smelling frankin- 
cense in the time of summer. 
As a bright fire, and as frank- 
incense burning in the fire. As 
a massy vessel of gold, adorned 
with every precious stone. As 
an olive-tree budding forth, 
and a cypress-tree rearing itself 
on high. And about him was 
the ring of his brethren: as the 
cedar planted in mount Liba- 
nus, and as branches of palm- 


trees, so stood they round about him, and all the sons of Aaron 


in their glory. 


May 16—t. John Mepomucene, Martyr (fed) 
Mass, Protexisti, page 1328, Secret and Postcommunion, from 


the Mass In Virtute, page 1309, 


Prayer 


EUS, qui ob invíctum be- 

áti Joánnis sacramen- 
tále siléntium, nova Ecclési- 
am tuam martyrii coróna 
decorásti: da nobis, ejus in- 
tercessióne et exemplo, lín- 
guam caute custodíre: ac 
ómnia pótius mala, quam áni- 
me detriméntum, in hoc se- 
culo toleráre. Per Dóminum. 


with following Prayer: 


cop, Whose Church the 
unconquerable sacramen- 
tal silence of blessed John has 
enriched with yet another mar- 
tyr’s crown: grant that, 
strengthened by his prayers 
and example, we may set a 
guard upon our tongue, and be 
ready to endure any suffering 
the world can inflict, rather 
than risk the loss of our soul, 
Through our Lord. 


May 16-—St. Brendan, Abbot (White) 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1588 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


May 22— $t. Rita of Cascia, Widow (White) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. i 


Introit. Ps. 11 7,19-22 


o= ye to me the gates of 
justice: I will go in to 
them, and give praise to the 
Lord: the stone which the 


builders rejected, the same is. 


become the head of the corner. 


Ps. 117, 1. Give praise to the 


Lord, for He is good: for His 
mercy. endureth forever. 2d ; 
Glory. 


PERÍTE mihi portas jus-. 

titiz, ingréssus in eas 
confitébor Démino: lapidem, 
quem repropavérunt edificán- 
tes; hic factus est in caput 
ánguli. (Allelüja, allelüja.) 
Ps. 117, 1. Confitémini Dó- 
mino quóniam bonus, quóni- 
am in seculum. misericórdia 
ejus. Y. Glória Patri. 


, Kytie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
"Prayer 


‘Gop, Who didst vouchsafe 

io confer on St. Rita so 
great grace that she loved her 
enemies and bore in her heart 
and on her brow the stigmata 
of Thy love and passion, grant 
us, we beseech Thee, by her 
intercession’ and merits, so to 
spare our enemies and to medi- 
tate on the pains of Thy pas- 
sion that we may obtain the re- 
wards promised to the meek 
and to them that mourn. Who 
Iivest. 


REUS, qui sancte Rite 
tantam grátiam con- 
férre dignátus es, ut inimícos 
dilígeret, et in corde ac fronte 
caritátis et passiónis tue signa 
portáret: dà nobis, quesumus, 
ejus intercessióne et méritis; 
inimícis nostris, sic párcere, 
et passiónis tuz dolóres con- 
templári, ut promissa mítibus 
ac lugéntibus premia conse- 
quámur: Qui vivis. . 


Loin: Cant. 2, 1-13 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom, 
am the flower of the field; 
and the lily of the valleys. 
As the lily among thorns, so 
is my love among the daugh- 
ters. As the apple-tree among 
the trees of the woods, so is my 
beloved among the sons. I sat 
down under His shadow, Whom 
I desired: and His fruit was 
Sweet to my palate. He brought 
me into the cellar of wine, He 
set in order charity in me. Stay 
me up with flowers, compass 
me about with apples: because 
I languish with love. His left 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


co flos campi, et lilium 
convállium. Sicut líli- 
um inter Spinas, sic amíca 


mea inter fílias. Sicut malus. 


inter ligna silvárum, sic diléc- 
ius meus inter fílios. Sub um- 
bra illius, quem desideráve- 
ram, sedi: et fructus ejus dul- 
cis gütturi meo. Introduxit me 
in cellam vináriam, ordinávit 
in me caritátem. Fulcite me 
flóribus, stipáte me malis: 
quia a&móre lángueo. Leva 
ejus sub cápite meo, et déx- 
tera illíus amplexábitur me. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


——— 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Adjüro vos, filig Jerúsalem, 
per cápreas cervÓsque cam- 
Dórum, ne: suscitétis, neque 
evigllàre facidtis diléctam, 
quoadüsque ipsa velit. Vox di- 
lécti mei, ecce iste venit sáli- 
ens in móntibus, transiliens 
colles: símilis est diléctus 
meus capree, hinnulóque cer- 
vórum. En ipse stat post parí- 
etem nostrum, respíciens per 
fenéstras,  prospíciens per 
cancélos. En diléctus meus 
lóquitur mihi: Surge, prós- 
pera, amíca mea, colümba 
mea, formósa mea, et veni. 
Jam enim hiems transiit, 
imber ábiit, et recéssit. Flores 
apparuérunt in terra nostra, 
tempus putatiónis advénit: 
vox türturis audíta est in terra 
nostra: ficus prótulit grossos 
suos: vinee floréntes dedé- 
runt odórem suum. Surge, 
amica mea, speciósa mea, et 
veni. 


1589 


hand is under my head, and 
His right hand shall embrace 
me. I adjure you, O ye daugh- 
ters of Jerusalem, by the roses 
and the harts of the field, that 
you stir not up, nor make the 
beloved to awake, till she please. 
The voice of my beloved: Be- 
hold He cometh, leaping upon 
the mountains, skipping over 
the hills. My beloved is like 
a roe. or a young hart. Be- 
hold He standeth behind our 
wall; looking through the win- 
dows, looking through the lat- 
tices. Behold my beloved speak- 
eth to me, Arise, make haste, 
my love, my dove, my beautiful 
one; and come. For winter is 
now past, the rain is over and 
gone. The flowers have ap- 
peared in our land, the time of 
pruning is come, the voice of 
the turtle is heard in our land: 
the fig-tree hath put forth her 
green figs, the vines in flower 
yield their sweet smell. Arise, 
my love, my beautiful one; and 
come, 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. 

Déminus mihi adjutor: non 

timébo quid faciat mihi homo. 

V. Ps. 115, 16, 17. Dirupisti 

víncula mea: tibi sacrificábo 

hóstiam laudis, et nomen Dó- 
mini invocábo. 


Lesser 

Allelája, allelüja. JV. Ps. 

115, 18, 19. Vota, mea Dómino 

reddam, in conspéctu omnis 

pópuli ejus: in átriis domus 

Dómini, in médio tui Jerüsa- 
lem. Allelüja. 


Ps. 117, 6 


The Lord is my helper, and 
I wil not fear what man can 
do unto me. Y. Ps. 115, 16, 17. 
Thou hast broken my bonds; 
I will sacrifice to 'Thee a sacri- 
fice of praise, and I will call 
upon the name of the Lord. 


Alleluia 

Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 115, 
18, 19. I will pay my vows to 
the Lord in the sight of all His 
people: in the courts of the 
house of the Lord in the midst 
of thee, O Jerusalem. Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1590 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ecclus. 
24, 18. I was exalted like a 
palm-tree in Cades, and as & 
rose-plant in Jericho. Alleluia. 
V. Ecclus. 24, 20. I gave a sweet 
smell like cinnamon and aro- 
matical balm. I yielded sweet 
odor like the best myrrh. Alle- 
luia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Eccli. 
24, 18. Quasi palma exaltata 
sum in Cades, et quasi plan- 
tátio rose in Jéricho. Alle- 
lúja. V. Eccli. 24, 20. Sicut cin- 
namómum, et bálsamum aro- 
matizans odórem dedi: quasi 
myrrha elécta dedi: suavitá- 
tem odóris. Allelüja. 


The Gospel is, The kingdom of heaven, page 1365. 


Offertory. Gen. 40, 9, 10 


I saw before me a vine, on 
which were three branches 
which by little and little sent 
out buds, and after the blos- 
soms brought forth ripe grapes. 
(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Vidébam coram me vitem, 
in qua erant tres propágines, 
créscere paulátim in gemmas, 
et post floresuvas maturés- 
cere. (T. P. Allelija.) 


Secret 


IERCE Our bearts, we be- 

seech Thee, O Lord, by 
the merits of St. Rita, with the 
thorn of that sorrow which is 
from heaven that, being deliv- 
ered by Thy grace from all sins, 
we may be able to offer to Thee 
the sacrifice of praise with pure 
hearts. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


ORDA nostra, quesumus, 

Dómine, sancte Rite 
méritis, supérni dolóris spina 
confíge: ut, a peccátis ómni- 
bus tua grátia liberáti, sacri- 
ficáre tibi hóstiam laudis pura 
mente valeámus, Per Dómi- 
num. 


Communion. Ps. 20, 4 


Thou hast prevented her, O 
Lord, with blessings of sweet- 
ness: Thou hast set on her head 
& crown of precious stones. (P. 
T. Alleluia.) i 


Praeventsti eam, Dómine, in 
benedictiónibus ^ dulcédinis: 
posuísti in cápite ejus coró- 
nam de lápide pretióso. (T. P. 
Allelüja.) 


Postcommunion 


EGALED with heavenly de- 
lights, O Lord, we hum- 


cLÉsrIBUS, Dómine, pasti 
delíciis, süpplices te ro- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


gámus: ut, intercedénte 
Sancta Rita caritátis et pas- 
siónis tue in méntibus nostris 
signa ferámus, et. perpétue 
pacis fructu jügiter perfruá- 
mur. Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 795. 


1591 


bly entreat Thee that, by the 
intercession of St. Rita, we 
may bear in our souls the 
marks of Thy love and Thy pas- 
sion and constantly enjoy the 
fruit of perpetual peace. 
Through our Lord. 


May 23—t. John Baptist de Rossi, 
Confessor (White) 
In the Archdiocese of Los Angeles 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


rz&cirio tibi ut aperias 

manum fratri tuo egéno 
et páuperi, qui tecum versá- 
tur in terra. Ps. 40, 2. Beátus, 
qui intélligit super egénum et 
páuperem: in die malla liber- 
ábit eum Dóminus. Y. Glória 
Patri. 


Deut. 15, 11 


COMMAND thee to open thy 

hand to thy needy and poor 
brother, that liveth with thee 
in the land (Alleluia, alleluia.) 
Ps. 40. 2. Blessed is he tbat 
understandeth concerning the 
needy and poor: the Lord will 
deliver him in the evil day. Y. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


EUS, qui sanctum Joán- 
D nem Baptístam Con- 
fessórem tuum in evangeli- 
Zándis paupéribus caritáte et 
patiéntia decorásti: concéde, 
quesumus; ut, cujus pia mé- 
rita, venerámur, virtátum quo- 
Que imitémur exempla. Per 
Dóminum. 


cop, Who didst adorn 

blessed John Baptist, Thy 
confessor, with charity and pa- 
tience in the preaching of the 
Gospel to the poor: grant we 
beseech Thee, that we, who 
venerate his pious merits, may 
also imitate the examples of his 
virtues. Through our Lord. 


Lesson. Job 29, 1, 8-18 


Léctio libri Job. - 


N DIÉBUS illis: Addidit Job, 
assümens parábolam su- 
&m, et dixit: Vidébant me jü- 


Lesson from the Book of Job. 

N THOSE days Job also added 
taking up his parable and 
said: The young men saw me 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1592 . 


and hid themselves: and the 
old men rose up and stood. The 
princes ceased to speak and 
laid the finger on their mouth. 
The rulers held their peace, 
and their tongue cleaved to 
their throat. The ear that heard 
me blessed me, and the eye that 
Saw me gave witness to me: be- 
cause I had delivered the poor 
man that cried out, and the 
fatherless that had no helper. 
The blessing of him that was 
ready to perish came upon me, 
and I comforted the heart of 
the widow. I was clad with jus- 
tice: and I clothed myself with 
judgment, as with a robe and 
a diadem. I was an eye to the 
blind and a foot to the lame. 
I was the father of the poor; 
and the cause which I knew not 
I searched out most diligently. 
I broke the jaws of the wicked 
and out of his teeth I took away 
the prey. And I said: I shall die 
in my nest, and as a palm tree 
I shall multiply my days. 


From Septuagesima to Easter 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


venes, et abscondebántur: et 
senes assurgéntes:. stabant. 
Príncipes cessábant loqui, et 
dígitum  superponébant ori 
Suo. "Vocem suam cohíibé- 
bant duces, et lingua eórum 
gütturi suo adherébat. Auris 
áudiens beatificábat me, et 
éculus vídens testimónium 
reddébat mihi: eo quod lib- 
erássem páuperem vocifer- 
ántem, et pupillum, cui non 
esset adjütor. Benedictio per- 
itüri super me veniébat, et 
cor vidue consolátus sum. 
Justítia indütus sum: et ves- 
tivi me, sicut vestiménto et 
diadémate, judício meo. Ocu- 
lus fui c&co, et pes claudo. 
Pater eram páuperum: et 
causam quam nesciébam, dil- 
igentísime investigábam. 
Conterébam molas iníqui, et 
de diébus illius auferébam 
predam. Dicebámque in ní- 
dulo meo móriar, et sicut 
palma multiplicábo dies. 


ihe Lesser Alleluia is replaced 


the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


b; 
placed. by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ecclus. 4, 1 


Son, defraud not the poor of 
aims, and turn not away thine 
eyes from the poor. Y. Eccl. 7, 
39. Be not slow to visit the.sick; 
for by these things thou shalt 
be confirmed in love. 


Fili, eleenósynam páuperis 
ne defráudes, et óculos tuos 
ne transvértas a páupere. V. 
Eccl. 7, 39. Non te pígeat vis- 
itáre infírmum: ex his enim 
in dilectióne fírmáberis, 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Is. 58, 7. 
Deal thy bread to the hungry 
and bring tbe needy and the 
harborless into thy house: 
when thou shalt see one naked, 
cover him; and despise not 
thine own flesh. Alleluia, 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Is. 58, 
7. Frange esuriénti panem 
tuum, et egénos vagósque in- 
duc in domum tuam: cum 
víderis nudum, óperi eum, et 
carnem tuam ne despéxétis. 
Allelüja. : 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


1593 


Tract.. Ps. 111, 1.3 


Beátus vir, qui timet Dó- 
minum: in mandátis ejus cu- 
pit nimis. y. Potens in terra 
erit semen ejus: generátio 
rectórum  benedicétur.. Ý. 
Glória et divitie in domo 
ejus: et justitia ejus manet in 
seculum tcd 


tid 


Blessed is the man that fear- 
eth the Lord, in his command- 
ments he hath great delight. Y. 
His seed shall be mighty upon 
earth: the generation of the 
righteous shall be. blessed. y. 
Glory and wealth shall be in 
his house: and his justice re- 


. maineth forever and ever.. 


(Greater A lleluia. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps;73. 
Ne avertatur hümilis factus 
confüsus: pauper et inops 
laudábunt nomen tuum. Al- 
lája. V. Prov. 31, 20. Manum 
suam apéruit ínopi, et palm- 
as suas exténdit ad páuperem. 
Allelüja. 


Munda Cor ES page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 73, 
21.. Let not the humble be 
turned away- with confusion: 
the poor and needy shall praise 
thy name. Alleluia. Y. Prov. 31, 
20. Hé hath opened his hand to 
the needy and stretched out 
his hands to the poor. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Matt. 25, 31-46 


Œ Sequéntia sancti Evans 
gélii secándum Mattheum. 


'N ILLO témpore: Dixit Je- 
I sus discípulis suis: Cum 
vénerit Fílius hóminis in 
majestáte sua, et omnes An- 
geli cum eo, tunc sedébit su- 
per sedem majestátis sug: et 
congregabuntur ante eam 
omnes gentes, et separabit 
eos ab invicem, sicut pastor 
ségregat oves ab hedis: et 
státuét oves quidem a dextris 
suis, hedos autem a sinítris. 
Tunc dicet rex his, qui' à dex- 
tris ejus erunt: Veníte bene- 
dicti Patris mei, possidéte 
parátum vobis regnum a con- 
stitutióne mundi.  Esurívi 
enim, et dedístis mibi man- 
ducáre:: sitivi, et dedistis 
mihi bíbere: hospes eram, et 


"* Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew. 

T THAT time, Jesus said to 

His disciples, When the 
Son of man ‘shall come in His 
majesty, and all the angels 
with Him, then shall He sit 
upon the seat of His majesty; 
and all nations shall be gath- 
ered together before Him, and 
He shall separate them one 
from another, as the shepherd 
Separateth the sheep from the 
goats; and He shalt set the 
sheep on His right hand, but 
the goats on His left. Then 
shall the King say to them that 
shall be on His- right hand, 
Come, ye blessed of My Father, 
possess you: the kingdom pre- 
pared for you from tHe foun- 
dation of the world, FOr I was 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1594 


hungry, and you gave Me to 
eat; I was thirsty, and you gave 
Me to drink; I was a stranger, 
and you took Me in; naked, and 
you covered Me; sick, and you 
visited Me; I was in prison, and 
you came to Me. Then shall 
the just answer Him, saying, 
Lord, when did we see Thee 
hungry, and fed Thee; thirsty, 
and gave Thee drink; and when 
did we see Thee a stranger, and 
took Thee in; and naked, and 
covered Thee: or when did we 
See Thee sick or in prison, and 
came to Thee? And the King 
answering, shall say to them, 
Amen I say to you, as long as 
you did it to one of these My 
least brethren, you did it to Me. 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


collegístis me: nudus, et co- 
operuístis me: infírmus, et 
visitástis me: in cárcere eram, 
et venistis ad me. Tunc re- 
spondébunt ei justi, dicéntes: 
Dómine, quando te vídimus 
esuriéntem, et pávimus te: 
sitiéntem, et dédimus tibi po- 
tum? quando autem te vídi- 
mus hóspitem, et collégimus 
te: aut nudum, et cooperüi- 
mus te? aut quando te vídi- 
mus infírmum, aut in cár- 
cere, et vénimus ad te? Et 
respóndens rex, dicet illis: 
Amen dico vobis, quámdiu 
fecístis uni ex his frátribus 
meis mínimis, mihi fecístis. 


Offertory. James 1, 27 


Religion, clean and undefiled 
before God and the Father, is 
this: To visit the fatherless and 
widows in their tribulation; and 
to keep oneself unspotted from 
this world. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Relígio munda et immacu- 
láta apud Deum et Patrem, 
hec est: Visitáre pupillos, et 
viduas in tribulatióne eórum, 
et immaculátum se custodíre 
ab hoc seculo. (T. P. Alle- 
lija.) 


Secret 


AY our offered gift, we 

beseech Thee, O Lord, 
ascend as an odor of sweetness: 
and blessed John Baptist, Thy 
confessor, interceding, purify 
us in mind and body. Through 
our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. 2 


"Ihe servant of the Lord must 
not wrangle, but be mild to- 
W&rd all men, apt to teach, pa- 


BLÁTUM tibi munus, 

quesumus, Dómine, in 
odórem suavitátis ascéndat: 
et, sancto Joánne Baptísta 
Confessóre tuo intercedénte, 
nos córpore et mente purifi- 
cet. Per Dóminum. 


Tim. 2, 24, 25 


Servum autem Dómini non 
opórtet litigáre: sed man- 
suétum esse ad omnes, docí- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


bilem, patiéntem, cum mo- 
déstia corripiéntem eos, qui 
resístunt véritati. (T. P. Al- 
lelája.) 


1595 


tient: with modesty admonish- 
ing them that resist the truth. 
(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Postcommunion 


@Lféstis, Dómine, par- 

ticipátio sacraménti, 
Sancti Joánnis Baptiste Con- 
fessóris tui  suffragántibus 
méritis, fidéles tuos mundet 
et müniat: ac bonis opéribus 
jügiter przestet esse inténtos. 
Per Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


AY this partaking of the 

heavenly sacrament, O 
Lord, through the helping 
merits of blessed John Baptist, 
‘Thy confessor, cleanse and pro- 
tect Thy faithful people, and 
make them to be ever intent 
upon good works. Through our 
Lord. 


May 30—St. ferdinand, King, Confessor (White) . 
In the Diocese of San Antonio. 
Mass, Justus ut palma, page 1352, except: 


Prayer 


EUS, qui beáto Confes- 

Sóri .tuo Ferdinando 
preliári prelia tua, et fidei 
inimícos  superáre  dedísti: 
concéde; ut ejus nos inter- 
cessióne muníti, ab hóstibus 
mentis et córporis liberémur. 
Per Dóminum. 


cop, Who wast pleased 

that blessed Ferdinand 
should fight Thy battles and 
overcome the enemies of the 
Faith: grant that, protected 
by his intercession, we may be 
delivered from the enemies of 
mind and body. Through our 
Lord, i 


June 9—$»f. Columba, Abbot (White) 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349. 


June 16—s5t. Fou Francis Regis, Confessor 


(White) i 
In the Diocese of Kansas City. 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Luke 4, 18, 19 


pirirus Dómini super 
me: propter quod unxit 
me: evangelizáre paupéribus 


HE Spirit of the Lord is 
upon me, wherefore He 
hath anointed me: He hath 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1596 


sent me to preach the Gospel 
to the poor, to heal the bruised 
of heart, to proclaim: the ac- 
cepted year of the Lord, and 
the day of retribution. (P. T. 
Alleluia, alleluia.) Ps. 9, 33. 
Arise O Lord God, let Thy 
hand be exalted: forget not the 
poor. Y. Glory. f 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


misit me, sanáre contrítos 
corde, predicare annum Dó- 
mini accéptum, et diem re- 
iributiónis. (T. P. Allelüja, 
allelija.) Ps. 9, 33, Exsürge, 
Dómine Deus, exaltétur ma- 
nus tua: ne obliviscáris páu- 
perum. V. Glória Patri, 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


cop, Who, that blessed 
: John Francis Thy con- 
fessor might endure much la- 
bor for the salvation of souls, 
didst adorn bim with a won- 
drous charity and an invincible 
patience: grant graciously, that 
we, gaining instruction from 
his example, and helped by his 
prayers, may obtain the re- 
wards of  everlasting life. 
Through our Lord. 


EUS, qui ad-plurimos pro 

salute animárum per- 
feréndos labóres, beátum Jo- 
ánnem Francíscum, Confes- 
sórem tuum, mirábili cari- 
tate, et invicta  patiéntia 
decorásti: concéde propitius; 
ut, ejus exémplis instrücti, et 
intercessiónibus adjüti, etér- 
ne vite praemia consequámur. 
Per Dóminum. 


Epistle, Brethren, we had confidence, page 1029. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


b 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 91, 13-14 


The just man shall flourish 
like a palmi-tree: as a cedar 
of Libanus shall he be multi- 
plied in the house of the Lord. 
Ps. 91, 3. To show forth Thy 
mercy in the morning;. and 
Thy truth through the night. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Ps. 67, 12. 
The Lord shall give the word 
unto them that preach good 


Justus ut palma florébit: 
Sicut cedrus Líbani multipli- 
cábitur in domo Dómini. Y. 
Ps. 91, 3. Ad annuntiandum 
mane misericórdiam tuam, et 
veritátem tuam per noctem. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Ps. 
67, 12. Dóminus dabit ver- 
bum  evangelizántibus, vir- 
tute multa. Allelüja. 


Tract, Ps. 111, 1-3 


tidings: with great power. 
Alleluia, 
Blessed is the man that fear- 


eth the Lord; in His command- 


Beátus vir, qui timet Dó- 
minum: in mandátis ejus 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


cupit nimis. Y. Potens in ter- 
ra erit semen ejus: generátio 
rectórum  benedicétur. V. 
Glória et divítie in domo 
ejus: et justitia ejus manet 
in seculum seculi. 


1597 


ments he hath great delight. 
Y. Mighty on earth shall be his 
seed; the generation of the up- 
right shall be blessed. Y. Glory 
and wealth in his house, and 
his justice endureth forever 


and ever. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelija, allelija. Y. Ps. ` Alleluia, alleluia. y. Ps. 67, 12, 
67, 12. Dóminus dabit ver- The Lord shall give the word 
bum evangelizántibus, vir- to them that preach good tid- 
tite multa. Allelüja. Y. Osee, ings with great power. Alle- 
14, 6. Justus germinábit sicut luia. V. Osee 14, 6. The just man 
lilium: et florébit in etérnum shall bud forth as the lily; and 
ante Dóminum. Allelüja. flourish forever before the 

Lord. Alleluia. : 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel, At that time Jesus went about, page 1455. 


Offertory. Job 29, 13, 15, 16 


Benedíctio peritúri super The blessing of Him that was 
‘me veniébat, et cor víduæ ready to perish came upon me; 
consolátus sum: óculis fui and I comforted the heart of 
ceco, et pes claudo: pater the widow. I was an eye to the 
eram páuperum. (T. P. Alle- blind, and a foot to the lame. I 
Túja.) was the father of the poor. 

(P. T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
Secret 


ARITÁTIS victima, quam ay the Victim of love 

immolántes offérimus, (D which we offer up in 
sit nobis, Dómine, te miser- this sacrifice, be a i on 
ante propitiábilis: et, beáti for us, through Thy mercy, O 
Joánnis Francisci précibus et Lord: and by the prayers and 
méritis, ad obtinéndum pa- merits of blessed John Francis 
tiéntie et caritátis augmén- may it be most efficacious and 
tum, éfficax et salutáris. Per salutary in obtaining for us 
eümdem Dóminum. greater patience and charity. 

` Through the same. 
Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Communion. Is. 52, 7 - 


Quam pulchri Super mon- How > beautiful upon the 
tes pedes annuntiántis et mountains are the feet of him 
predicántis pacem; annunti- that bringeth good tidings, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1598 


preacheth peace: of him that 
showeth forth good, .- that 
preacheth salvation. (P. T. Al- 
leuia) 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


ántis bonum, predicántis sa- 
litem. (T. P. Alleliija.) 


Postcommunion 


ET Thy loving-kindness, O 
Lord, ever increase our 
health; so that we who are re- 
freshed with heavenly food and 
inspired by the example of the 
saints, by Thy merciful protec- 
tion and ‘the. intercession of 
blessed John Francis, may hap- 
pily win the haven of eternal 


RESCAT in nobis, Dómine, 

pietátis tue  efféctus 
salutaris: ut celésti páb- 
ulo refécti et Sanctórum ex- 
émplis accénsi, ad etérne sa- 
lútis portum, te misericórditer 
protegénte, et beáto Joánne 
Francisco intercedénte, felic- 
iter perveníre valeámus. Per 


salvation. Through our Lord. Dóminum. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


June 271— Our Ladp of Perpetual Huccor, (White) 
In the Diocese of Concordia, 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


I ntroit 


ET us all rejoice.in the 
Lord, celebrating a festi- 
val in honor of the Blessed Vir- 
gin Mary, for whose solemnity 
the angels rejoice and join in 
praising the Son of God. Ps. 
44, 2. My heart hath uttered a 
good word: I speak my works bum bonum: dico ego ópera 
to the King. Y. Glory. mea Regi. Y. Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


AUDEÁMUS omnes in Dó- 
mino, diem festum cel- 
ebrantes sub honóre beate 
Marie Virginis, de cujus sol- 
emnitáte gaudent Angeli, et 
colláudant Fílium Dei. Ps. 44, 
2. Eructávit cor meum ver- 


Prayer 
LMIGHTY and merciful 
God, ‘Who hast given us 
a picture of Thy most blessed 
Mother to venerate under the 
special title of Perpetual Suc- 
cor, mercifully grant us to be 
so fortified, among all the vi- 
cissitudes of this wayfaring life, 
by the protection of.the same 
immaculate, ever virgin Mary, 
that we may deserve to attain 
the rewards of Thine everlast- 
ing redemption. Who livest. 


ÓwrNE Jesu Christe, qui 

Genitricem tuam Ma- 
riam, cujus insignem ven- 
erámur imáginem, Matrem 
nobis dedísti perpétuo suc- 
cürrere parátam:  concéde, 
quesumus; ut nos, matérnam 
ejus opem assídue implorán- 
tes, redemptiónis tus fruc- 
tum perpétuo experiri mere- 
ámur: Qui vivis. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


1599 


Lesson. Ecclus. 24, 23-31 


Léctio libri Sapiéntie. 


e quasi vitis fructificávi 
suavitátem  odóris: et 
flores mei fructus honóris et 
honestátis. Ego mater pul- 
chre dilectiónis, et timóris, 
et agnitiónis, et sanctz spei. 
In me grátia omnis vie et 
veritatis, in me omnis spes 
vitæ et virtütis. 'Transíte ad 
me omnes qui concupíscitis 
me, et a. generatiónibus meis 
implémini: Spíritus enim me- 
us super mel dulcis, et heré- 
ditas mea super mel et fav- 
um: memória mea in genera- 
tiones seculórum. Qui edunt 
me, adhuc esürient: et qui bi- 
bunt me, adhuc sitient. Qui 
&udit me, non confundétur: 
et qui operántur in me, non 
peccabunt. Qui elücidant me, 
vitam «térnam habebunt. 


Lesson from the Book of 
Wisdom. 


S THE vine I have brought 
forth a pleasant odor, 
and my flowers are the fruit of 
honor and riches. I am the 
mother of fair love, and of 
fear, and of knowledge, and of 
holy hope. In me is all grace of 
the way and of the truth, in me 
is all hope of life and of virtue. 
Come over to me, all ye that 
desire me, and be filled with 
my fruits; for my spirit is sweet 
above honey, and my inheri- 
tance above honey and the 
honeycomb. My memory is 
unto everlasting generations. 
They that eat me, sball yet 
huhger; ànd they that drink 
me, shall yet thirst. He that 
hearkeneth to me shall not be 
confounded, and they that 
work by me shall not sin. They 
that explain me shall have life 
everlasting. 


From Septuagesima to. Easter the Lesser ‘Alleluia is replaced 
by the ‘Tract, in. Paschal-time ‘the Gradual ‘and Tract are re~ 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Cant. 6, 3, 9 


Tota formósa et suávis es, 
fília Sion, pulchra ut luna, 
elécta ut sol, terribilis ut cas- 
trórum  ácies ordináta. J. 
Judith, 13, 22. Benedixit te 
Dóminus in virtüte sua, quia 
per te ad níhilum redégit in- 
imícos nostros, 


Thou art all lovely and sweet, 
O. daughter of Sion, beautiful 
as the moon, bright as the.sun, 
terrible as an army in battle 
array. Y. Judith 13, 22. The 
Lord hath blessed thee by His 
power, because by thee He hath 
brought to naught our enemies. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelája, allelija. V. Luc. 1, 
28. Ave María, grátia plena: 
Dóminus tecum: benedicta 
tu in muliéribus. Allelüja. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Luke 1, 
28. Hail, Mary, full of grace, the 
Lord is with thee, blessed art 
thou among women. Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1600 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Tract. Prov. 8, 17-19 


Ilove them that love me: and 
they that in the morning early 
watch for me shall find me. J. 
With me are riches and glory, 
glorious riches and justice. V. 
For my fruit is better than gold 
and the precious stone, and my 
blossoms than choice silver. 


Ego diligéntes me diligo: et 
qui mane vigilant ad me, in- 
vénient me. Y. Mecum sunt 
divitie, et glória, opes supér- 
be, et justítia. Y. Mélior est 
enim fructus meus auro, et 
lápide pretióso, et genímina 
mea argénto elécto. ` 


Greater Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleiuia. Y. Luke 1, 
28. Hail, Mary, full of grace, the 
Lord is with thee, blessed art 
thou among women. Alleluia. 
¥. Prov. 8, 34. Blessed is the 
man that heareth me, and that 
watcheth daily at my gates, 
and waiteth at the posts of my 
doors. Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Luc. 1, 
28. Ave, Marie, grátia plena: 
Dóminus tecum: benedícta tu 
in muliéribus.  Allelüja. JV. 
Prov. 8, 34. Beàtus homo, qui 
audit me, et qui vigílat ad 
foras meas quotídie, et, obsér- 
vat ad postes ostii mei. Alle- 
Naja. 


Gospel. John 19, 25-27 


. MA Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. John. 


T THAT time, there stood 
by the cross of Jesus, 
is mother, and His mother's 
sister Mary of Cleophas, and 
Mary Magdalen. When Jesus 
therefore had seen His mother 
and the disciple. standing, 
whom He loved, He saith to His 
mother, Woman, behold thy 
son. After that He saith to the 
disciple. Behold thy mother. 
And from that hour the disciple 
took her to his own. 


Creed, page 765. 


"4 Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secindum Joánnem. 
N ILLO témpore: Stabant 
juxta crucem Jesu mater 
ejus, et soror matris ejus, Ma- 
ría Cléophe, et María Mag- 
daléne. Cum vidísset ergo Je- 
sus matrem, et discípulum 
stantem, quem diligébat, di- 
cit matri sue: Müler, ecce 
fílius tuus. Deínde dicit dis- 
cípulo: Ecce mater tua. Et ex 
ila hora accépit eam discí- 
pulus in sua. 


Offertory as on the feast of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel, page 


1108. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Secret 


x THY clemency, O Lord, 
and the intercession of 


ua, Dómine, propitia- 
tióne, et beátæ - Maríæ 


blessed Mary, ever a virgin, semper Virginis intercessióne, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 1601 


ad perpétuam atque presén- may this oblation profit us unto 
tem hee oblátio nobis profi- eternal and also present well 
ciat prosperitátem et pacem; being and Peace. Through our 
Per Dóminum.  . Lord. 


Communion and Postcommunion as on the fehat of Our Lady 
of Mt. Carmel, page 1108. 


-July 3—Commemoration of au Joly Popes 
(White) 
In the Dioceses of Brooklyn and Los Angeles. 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 49, 5-7 


— dni sanctos Gum ye together His 

ejus, qui ordinavérunt saints to Him, ‘who have 
testaméntum ejus super sac- set His Covenant before sacri- 
rifícia. Et annuntiábunt celi fices. And the heavens shall 
justitiam ejus: quia Deus tu- declare His justice: because I 
us ego sum. Ps. 49, 1. Deus am thy God. Ps. 49, 1. The 
Deórum Dóminus loecütus est: God-of gods, the Lord, hath 
ét vocávit terram. Y. Glória spoken: and hath called the 
Patri. earth. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


` Prayer 
EUS, qui pópulis tuis in- cop, Who bountifully pro- 
dulgéntia cónsulis, et videst for Thy people, and 


amore domináris: da spírit- lovingly rulest over them: do 
um ‘sapiéntiz, suffragántibus Thou, through the interceding 
méritis Antístitum Ecclésie merits of the Chief Bishops of 
tiiz, quibus dedisti régimen Thy Church, give the Spirit of 
discipline; ut de proféctu Wisdom. to those unto whom 
sanctérum óvium fiant gáu- Thou hast given the control of 
dia ætérna pastérum. Per its discipline: that the good ad- 
Dóminum. | w vance of their holy flocks may 
NE : be to the Shepherds a source 
of everlasting .joy. Through 
, our Lord. 


' Eplstte, Brethren, remember your relates, pom the Mass on 
the feast of St. Nicholas, December 6, page 843. 


, Gradual, Tract and Alleluia from Mass, tec sida page 1307. 
* Mu&da Cor Meum, page 763. 


- Gospel, Jesus came into the quarters, as on thé feast of the 
Chair of St. Peter, January 18, page 871. 
Ofertory, I have found David, from: thé Mass Statuit el, page 
1340. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1602 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Secret 


AY the spotless sacrifice 
of Thine only-begotten 
Son which we offer unto Thee, 
O God, the Father Almighty, in 
honor of the holy Pontiffs, 


help us to obtain the spiritual 


remedy. Through the same. 
Preface No. 13, page 816. 


NIGÉNITI Fílii tul, quam 
tibi, Deus Pater omni- 
potens, in honórem sanctér- 
um Pontíficum offérimus, im- 
maculáta hóstia, prosit nobis 
ad medélam percipiéndam. 
-Per eimdem Dóminum, 


Communion Ps. 88, 25 


My truth and My mercy 
shall. be with him: and in My 
name shall his horn be exalted. 


Véritas mea, et misericór- 
dia mea cum ipso: et in no- 
mine meo exaltábitur cornu 
ejus. 


Postcommunion 


RANT, we beseech Thee, O 
-Lord, that Thy faithful 
people may ever find joy in the 
veneration of Thy holy Pon- 


A, QUzSUMUS, Dómine, 
fidélibus pópulis: sanc- 
tórum Ponifficum  tuórum 
semper veneratióne letari; et 


tiffs: and be protected by their eórum pérpétua supplicatióne 


unceasing prayer. Through our 
Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


muníri. Per Dóminum. 


July 24—St. Francis Solano, Confessor (White) 
In Archdioceses of Baltimore, San Francisco and Los Angeles, 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


cop, Who by means of EUs, qui plurimas Amér- 
O blessed Francis didst ice gentes per beátum 
bring a number of the tribes Franciscum ad sinum Ecclé- 
of America into the bosom of sie perduxisti: ejus méritis 
the Church: do Thou, through et précibus indignatiónem tu- 
his merits and prayers, turn am a peccátis nostris avérte; 
away Thine indignation from et in gentes, que te non cog- 
our sins, and graciously send novérunt, timórem nóminis 
down the fear of Thy name to tui benignus immitte. Per 
the. nations that have not Dóminum. 
known Thee. Through our Lord, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


1603 


Epistle, Brethren, with the heart, from the Mass on the feast 
of St. Andrew, November 30, page 835. 


Gospel, Go ye unto the whole world, from the Mass on the 
feast of St. Francis Xavier, December 3, page 839. 


Secret 


UNUS, quod tibi offéri- 

mus, det nobis, que- 
sumus, omnípotens Deus, 
fidei, spei et caritátis aug- 
méntum: et, ut mereámur 
Assequi quod promíttis, inter- 
veniénte bedto -Francisco 
Confessóre tuo, fac nos amare 
quod precipis. Per Dómin- 


AY the gift which we offer 

unto Thee give unto us, 
we béseech Thee, almighty 
God, an increase of faith, hope, 
and charity; and that we may 
attain unto that which Thou 
dost promise, do Thou, through 
the intercession of blessed 
Francis Thy confessor, make 
us to love that which Thou 
commandest. Through. our 
Lord. 


Postcommunion 


T suMPTIS, Dómine, red- 
dámur digni munéribus: 


O THOU, O Lord, through 
.the intercession of 


intercedénte beáto Francisco blessed Francis Thy confessor, 
Confessére tuo, fac nos tuis make us ever to obey Thy com- 
semper obedíre mandátis. Per mandments: that so we may 


Dóminum. 


become worthy of the gifts of 
which we have  partaken. 
Through our Lord. 


Aug. 11—$5t. Emigdius, Bishop and Martyr (Red) 


In the Archdioceses of San Francisco and Los Angeles. : 


The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. 


OMMÓTA est, et contrém- 

uit terra: fundaménta 
móntium  conturbáta sunt, 
quóniam irátus est eis. Ps. 49, 
15. Invoca me in die tribula- 
tiónis: éruam te, et honor- 
ificabis me. Y. Glória Patri. 


Ps. 17, 8 


HE earth was shaken and 
a trembled, the foundations 
of the mountains were troubled 
because He was wroth with 
them. Ps, 49, 15. Call upon Me 
in the day of wouble: I will 
deliver thee, and thou shalt 
glorify me. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1604 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst adorn 

blessed Emigdius, Thy 
martyr and pontiff, with vic- 
tory over idols and the glory of 
miracles: mercifully grant, 
through his intercession, that 
we may deserve to defeat. the 
guiles of evil spirits, and to 
Shine forth with. virtues. 


Through our Lord. : = 


EUS, qui beátum Emig- 

dium Mártyrem tuum 
atque Pontificem, idolórum 
victéria et miraculórum gló- 
ria decorasti: concéde propit- 
ius; ut, eo interveniénte, ma- 
lórum spirítuum fraudes vin- 
cere, et coruscáre. virtütibus 
mereámur. Per Dóminum. . 


. Lesson. A poc. 40, 13-15 


Lesson from the Book of the 


Apocalypse of blessed John the: 


Apostle, 


T THAT hour there was 

made a great earth- 
quake, and the tenth part of 
the city fell and there were 
Slain in the earthquake the 
names of men seven thousand; 
and the rest were cast into fear, 
and gave glory unto the God 
of heaven. The second woe is 
past; and behold the third woe 
will.come quickly. And the 
Seventh angel sounded the 
trumpet, and there were great 
voices in heaven saying, The 
kingdom of this world is be- 
come our Lord's and His 
Christ's and He shall reign 
forever and ever. Amen, And 
the four-and-twenty elders who 
sit on their seats in the sight 
of God, fell upon their faces, 
and adored God, saying, We 
give Thee thanks, Lord God 
Almighty,.Who art, and Who 
wast, and Who art to come, for 
that Thou hast taken unto Thee 
Thy great power and hast 
reigned, 


.Léctio  líbri Apocalypsis 
beáti Joánnis Apóstoli. 


N ILLA hora factus est ter- 
I remótus magnus, et dé- 
cima pars civitátis cécidit:et 
occisa sunt in terremdtu 
nómina hóminum . septem 
millia: et réliqui in timórem 
sunt missi, et dedérunt glóri- 
am Deo celi, Ve secündum 
ablit: et ecce ve tértium: vé- 
niet cito. Et séptimus án- 
gelus tuba cécinit: et facte 
sunt voces magna in ccelo di- 
céntes: Factum est regnum 
hujus mundi, Dómini nostri 
et Christi ejus, et regnábit in 
secula seculórum: Amen. Et 
vigintiquátuor senióres, qui in 
conspéctu Dei sedent in sédi- 
bus suis, cecidérunt in fácies 
Suas, et adoravérunt Deum, 
dicéntes: Grátias ágimus tibi, 
Dómine Deus omnípotens, qui 
es, et qui eras et qui ventürus 
es: quia accepísti virtütem 
tuam magnam, et regnásti. 


From Septuagesima. to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


Placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


"— 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Gradual. 


Dedísti metuéntibus te sig- 
nificatiónem ut fügiant. a 
fácie arcus. Y. Ut liberéntur 
dilécti tui: salvum fac déx- 
tera tua, et exáudi me. 


Lesser 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 
88, 22. Manus mea auxiliá- 
bitur ei, et bráchium meum 
confortábit eum, Allelüja. 


1605 


Ps. 59, 6-7 


Thou hast given warning 
unto them that fear Thee, that 
they may flee from before the 
bow. Y. That Thy beloved may 
be delivered: save me with Thy 
right hand, and hear me. 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 88, 
22. My hand shall help him: 
and Mine arm shall strengthen 
him. Alleluia. 


Tract. Jerem. 3, 12 


Non avértam fáciem meam 
a vobis: et non iráscar in 
perpétuum. Y. Is. 42, 6. Dedi 
te in fedus pópuli, et in lucem 
géntium. Y. Is. 25, 4. Factus 
est fortitüdo páuperi, -forti- 
tüdo egéno in tribulatióne 
Sua. 


I will not turn My face away 
from you and I will not be an- 
gry forever. V. Is. 42, 6. I have 
given thee for a covenant of 
ihe people, for & light of the 
gentiles. Y. Is. 25, 4. Because 
thou hast been a strength to 
the poor, a strength to the 
needy in his distress. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelüja, alleluja. Y. Jerem. 
1, 18. Dedi te in civitátem 
munitam, et in colümnam 
férream, et in murum ereum. 
Allelája. Y. Eccli. 39, 20. 
Date nómini ejus magnificén- 
tiam, et confitémini illi. Alle- 
lüja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Jerem. 
1, 18. I have made thee this 
day a fortified city, and a pil- 
lar of iron and a wall of brass. 
X. Ecclus. 39, 20. Magnify His 
name and give glory to Him 
with the voice of your lips. 
Alleluia. 


Gospel, When you shall hesr, page 1319. 


Offertory. Ps. 49, 4 


Commovisti terram, et con- 


Thou hast moved the earth 


turbásti eam: sana contri- and troubled it, heal Thou the 
tiónes ejus, quia.commóto est. breaches thereof, for it has 


Offertory. Prayers, page 767. 


been moved. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1606 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Secret 


O THOU, O Lord, sanctify 

the gifts which we offer 
unto Thee: that by means of 
them we may, through the in- 
tercession of blessed Emigdius, 
Thy Martyr and Pontiff, be de- 
fended from all dangers of soul 
and body. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


unerA tibi Dómine 
XD obláta sanctífica: ut 
per ea, intercedénte beáto 
Emígdio Mártyre tuo atque 
Pontifice, ab ómnibus anime 
et córporis perículis liberé- 
mur. Per Dóminum. 


Communion. Ps. 32, 8 


Let all the earth fear the 
Lord, and all that dwell in the 
world stand in awe of Him, 


Tlímeat Dóminum omnis 
terra: ab eo autem commové- 
ántur omnes inhabitantes or- 
bem. 


Postcommunion 


ay the sacrament which 
@M we have received be unto 
us, O Lord, through the inter- 
cession of blessed Emigdius, 
Thy Martyr and Pontiff, a safe- 
guard to mind and body, and 
2, means of efficaciously obtain- 
ing Thy mercy. Through our 
Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ACRAMÉNTA quae sümpsi- 
mus Dómine, per inter- 
cessiónem beáti Emígdii Már- 
tyris tui atque Pontificis, sint 
nobis ad tutaméntum mentis 
et córporis, et ad misericórdi- 
am iuam efficáciter conse- 
quéndam. Per Dóminum. 


Aug. 11—t. Philomena, Virgin, Martyr (Red) 


Mass, Loquebar, page 1359. 


Aug. 18——$»f. Helena, Empress, Widow (White) 
In Diocese of Helena. i 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Gal. 6, 14 


G forbid that I should m autem absit gloriári, 
glory, save in the Cross nisi in Cruce Dómini 
of our Lord Jesus Christ: by nostri Jesu Christi; per quem 
Whom the world is crucified mihi mundus crucifixus est, 
unto me, and I unto the world. et ego mundo. (T. P. Allelüja, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 1607 


allelija.) Ps. 22, 4. Virga tua (P. T. Alleluia, alleluia.) Ps. 22, 
et báculus tuus: ipsa me con- 4. Thy rod and Thy staff: they 
solata sunt. Y. Glória Patri. have comforted me. Y. Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


ÓMINE Jesu Christe, qui 

locum, ubi Crux tua 
latébat, beáte Hélene revel- 
asti, ut, per eam, Ecclésiam 
tuam hoc pretióso thesáuro 
ditáres: ejus nobis interces- 
sióne concéde; ut vitális ligni 
prétio, etérne vite premia 
consequámur: Qui vivis. 


LonD Jesus Christ, Who 

unto blessed Helena didst 
reveal the place where Thy 
Cross Jay hid: thus choosing 
her as the means to enrich 
Thy Church with that precious 
ireasure: do Thou at her inter- 
cession, grant that by the price 
of the Tree of Life, we may at- 
tain the rewards of everlasting 
life. Who livest. 


Epistle, Who shall find a valiant woman, page 1384. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


b 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 44,10, 15,16 


Vultum tuum deprecabün- 
tur omnes dívites plebis: filiz 
regum in honóre tuo. Y. Ad- 
ducéntur Regi vírgines post 
eam: próxime ejus afferén- 
tur tibi. Afferéntur in letítia, 
et exsultatióne: adducéntur 
in templum Regis. 


Lesser 


Allelüja, allelija. JV. Ps. 
111, 9. Dispérsit, dedit pau- 
péribus: justítia ejus manet 
in seculum seculi. Allelája. 


Thy countenance shall all 
the rich among the people en- 
treat: the daughters of kings 
are in thine honor. y. After her 
shall virgins be brought to the 
King, her neighbors shall be 
brought to thee: they shall be 
brought with joy and gladness, 
they shall be brought into the 
temple of the King, 


Alleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 111, 9. 
She hath dispersed, she hath 
given to the poor: her justice 
abideth forever and ever. Alle- 
Juia. 


Tract 


Veni sponsa Christi, áccipe 
corónam, quam tibi Dóminus 
preparávit in etérnum; pro 
cujus amére sánguinem tu- 


Come, O spouse of Christ, re- 
ceive the crown which the Lord 
hath prepared for thee forever. 
¥. Ps. 44, 8. Thou hast loved 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1608 


Justice and hated iniquity: 
therefore God, thy God, hath 
anointed thee with the oil of 
gladness above thy fellows. Y. 
With thy beauty and thy come- 
liness: set out proceed pros- 
perously, and reign. 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


um fudísti. V. Ps. 44, 8, Dil- 
exísti justitiam, et  odísti 
iniquitátem: praptérea unxit 
te Deus, Deus tuus, óleo 
letitie pre consórtibus tuis. 
V. Spécie tua, et pulchri- 
tüdine, tua, inténde, próspere 
procéde, et regna, 


Greater A lleluia 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 111, 
9. She hath distributed, she 
hath given to the poor: her 
justice shall remain forever. 
Alleluia. V. Ps. 44, 5. With thy 
beauty and comeliness: set out, 
proceed prosperously, and reign. 
Alleluia. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Allelüja, allelija. Y. Ps. 
111, 9. Dispérsit, dedit pau- 
péribus: justitia ejus manet 
in seculum szculi, Allelüja. 
¥. Ps. 44, 5. Spécie tua, et 
pulehritüdine tua  inténde, 
próspere procéde, et regna. 
Allelüja. ; 


Gospel, At that time Jesus spoke this parable, page 1386. 


Offertory. 1 Cor. 2,2 


For I judged not myself to 
know anything: save Jesus 
Christ, and Him crucified. (P. 
T. Alleluia.) 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


Non enim  judicávi me 
Scire áliud, nisi Jesum Chris- 
tum, et hunc crucifíxum. 
(T. P. Allelája.) 


Secret 


O THOU, O Lord, by these 

sacred mysteries, grant 

us the grace which Thou didst 

mercifully vouchsafe unto 

blessed Helena: namely, always 

to bear Thy crucified Son in 
our hearts: Who with Thee, 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


Pr hæc sacra mystéria 
concéde nobis, Dómine: 
ut, sicut beáte Hélenæ mise- 
ricórditer tribuísti ut Fílium 
tuum crucifixum in corde 
semper gestáret; ita et nos 
eum in córdibus nostris per- 
pétuo deferámus: Qui tecum. 


Communion. Cant. 7, 8 


I wil go up into the palm- 
tree: and lay hold of the fruits 
thereof. (P. T. Alleluia.) 


Ascéndam in palmam, et 
apprehéndam fructus ejus. 
(T. P. Allelája. ) 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES POR UNITED STATES 


1009 


Postcommunion 


ONCEDE nobis, miséricors. 


Deus: ut, qui salutifere 
Crucis tue fructu in.terra su- 
mus recréati; per interces- 
Siónem bedte Hélenz, eódem 
jugíter pérfrui mereámur in 
celis: Qui vivis. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


RANT, O merciful God, that 

we who on earth have 
been refreshed by the fruit of 
Thy salvation-bringing Cross, 
may, by the intercession of 
blessed Helena, deserve to en- 
joy that fruit forever in heaven. 
Who livest. 


Sept:1—t. Bibiana, Virgin, Martyr (Red) 
In the Archdiocese of Los Angeles. l 


Mass, Loquebar, “page 1989. 


Sept. "e ‘Cloud, Confessor (White) 
In the Diocese. of St. Cloud. 
MRIN, Os justi, page. 1349, except: ” 


Prayer 


EUS, “qui beátum Clodo- 

álIdum, propter te bu- 
miliátum in seculo, et sacer- 
dótli münere et  virtütum 
spléndóre sublimásti: tribue 
nos, ejus exémplo, tibi digne 
ministráre, et per ejus inter- 
cessiónem' grátia. semper et 


` GoD, Who, is the gift of 
the priesthood -and the 
splendor of .his virtues, didst 
glofify blessed Cloud humbling 
himself for „Thy sake upon 


earth? grant us by his example 


to minister worthily unto Thee, 
and by-his ‘intercession ever to 


mérito proficere. Per D6- advance in merit and grace. 
minum, . Through our Lord, 
Secret 


E, DÓMINE, ‘fidei nostra 
T1 salutísque. auctórem 
cum sancto Sacerdóte Clodo- 
&ldo confiténtes; quesumus; 
ut hane de mánibus nostris 
hóstiam laudis . cleménter 
suscipias, et, qua religióne 
ipse vota sua réddidit, eádem 
nobis tríbuas nostras persól- 
vere. Per Dóminum. 


E BESEECH Thee, O Lord, 

Whom with the holy 
priest Cloud we confess to be 
the author of our faith and our 
Salvation, to receive in Thy 
mercy this sacrifice from our 
hands, and to grant that we 
may render our vows with the 
same devotion wherewith he 
rendered his unto Thee. 
Through our Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1610 PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Copyright, by Denziger Brothers 


THESE ARE THEY WHO ARE COME OUT OF GREAT TRIBULATION, AND 
HAVE WASHED THEIR ROBES, AND HAVE MADE THEM WHITE IN THE 
BLOOD OF THE LAMB, (Ps. 116, 1.) O PRAISE THE LORD, ALL YE 
NATIONS: PRAISE HIM, ALL YE PEOPLE. (Apoc. 7, 14.) 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


1611 


Postcommunion 


['uxENTES, Dómine, in fes- 

‘tivitate sancti Clodo- 
áldi Sacerdótis divina’ mys- 
téria: te supplices deprecá- 
mur, ut, eréctis ad celéstia 
méntibus, ómnia detrimén- 
tum fácere valeámus propter 
eum, qui semetípsum nobis 
dedit, Jesum Christum, Fíli- 
um tuum, Dóminum nostrum 
qui tecum vivit. 


E WHO receive the divine 

mysteries on the festival 
of holy Cloud the Priest, be- 
seech Thee, O Lord, that, our 
hearts being lifted up to heav- 
enly things, we may appraise 
all things as loss, for the sake 
of Him Who gave Himself for 


us, Jesus Christ Thy Son our 


Lord. Who with Thee liveth. 


September 26—Hts. Isaac Pogues, Jobn de 
Brebeni and Companions, Martyrs (Red) 
f Double of the Second Class 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


. Introit. Apoc. 7, 14 


I SUNT qui venérunt de 

tribulatióne magna, et 
lavérunt stolas suas, et deal- 
bavérunt eas in sanguine 
Agni. Ps. 11, 1. Laudáte Dó- 
minum, omnes gentes; lau- 
dáte eum omnes pópul. Y. 
Glória Patri. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


gus, qui primítias fídei 

jn amplíssimis Boreális 
Américe regiónibus sanctér- 
um Mártyrum tuórum Joán- 
nis, Isaáci eorümque Sociór- 
um predicatiéne et sanguine 
consecrasti: concéde propiti- 
us: ut, eórum intercessióne, 
florida christianórum seges 
ubíque in dies augeátur. Per 
Dóminum. 


HESE are they who are 
come out of great tribula- 
iion, and have washed their 
robes, and have made them 
white in the blood of the Lamb. 
Ps. 11, 1. O praise the Lord, all 
ye nations; praise Him, all ye 
people. Y. Glory. 


Prayer 


cop, Who didst consecrate 

the first-fruits of the 
faith in the northern regions 
of America by the preaching 
and blood of Thy blessed Mar- 
tyrs Isaac, John, and their 
Companions: vouchsafe unto 
us, we beseech Thee, that 
through their intercession the 
fruitful harvest of Christians 
may everywhere daily receive 
an increase. Through our Lord. 


Commemoration of Sts. Cyprian and Justina. 


EArTÓRUM Mártyrum 
Cypriáni et Justine nos, 
Dómine, fóveant continuáta 


AY ihe continual protec- 
tion of the blessed mar- 
tyrs, Cyprian and Justina, com- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1612 


fort us, O Lord; for Thou dost 
not cease to behold with favor 
those whom 'Thou hast granted 
the grace of such assistance. 
Through our Lord. 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


presidia: quia non désinis 
propitius intuéri, quos tálibus 
auxílis concésseris adjuvári. 
Per Dóminum. 


Epistle. 2 Cor. 12, 11-15 


Lesson from the Epistle of 
blessed Paul the Apostle to the 
Corinthians. - 


RETHREN; I ought to have 
been commended by you: 
for I have.no way come short 
of them that are above measure 
apostles, although I be nothing. 
Yet the signs of my apostleship 
have been wrought on you, in 
all patience, in signs, in won- 
ders, and mighty deeds. For 
what is there that you have had 
less than the other churches, 
but that I myself was not bur- 
densome to you? Pardon me 
this injury. Behold now the 
third time I am ready to come 
to you; ‘and I will not be bur- 
densome unto you. For I seek 
not the things that are yours, 
but you. For neither ought the 
children to lay up for the par- 
ents, but the parents for the 
children. But I most gladly 
will spend and be spent myself 
for your souls; although lov- 
ing you more, I be loved less. 


Léctio Epistole beáti Pauli 
Apéstoli ad Corínthios. 


RATRES: Ego a vobis dé- 

bui commendári: nihil 
enim minus fui ab iis qui sunt 
supra modum Apóstoli, tam- 
étsi nihil sum. Signa tamen 
apostolátus mei facta sunt 
super vos, in omni patiéntia, 
in signis et prodigiis et vir- 
tütibus. Quid est enim quod 
minus habuistis pre céteris 
ecclésiis, nisi quod ipse non 
gravavi vos? Donáte mihi 
hane injüriam. Ecce tértio 
hoc parátus sum veníre ad 
vos; et non ero gravis vobis. 
Non enim quero quae vestra 
sunt, sed vos; nec enim de- 
bent fílii paréntibus thesaur- 
izáre, sed paréntes fíliis. Ego 
autem libénter impéndam et 
superimpéndar ipse pro ani- 
mábus vestris: licet plus vos 
diligens, minus díligar. : 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
the Tract, im Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


b 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 123, 7, 8. 


Our soul hath been delivered, 
as a sparrow, out of the snare 
of the fowlers.: Y. The snare 
is broken, and we are delivered: 
our help is in the name of the 
Lord, Who made heaven and 
earth. 


Anima nostra sicut passer 
erépta est de láqueo venánti- 
um. Y. Láqueus contrítus est 
et nos liberáti sumus: adju- 
tórium nostrum in nómine 
Dómine, qui fecit celum et 
terram. ; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


Lesser 


Allelija, allelüja. Y. 2 Cor. 
1,5. Sicut abündant passiónes 
Christi in nobis, ita et per 
Christum abündat consolátio 
nostra, allelüja. K 


1613 


Alteluia 


Alleluia, alleluia, Y. 2 Cor. 
1,5. As the sufferings of Christ 
&bound in us, so also by Christ 
doth our comfort abound. Al- 
leluia. 


Tract. Ps. 125, 5,6 


Qui séminant in lácrimis, 
in gáudio metent. Y. Eüntes 
ibant et flebant, mitténtes 
sémina sua. V. Veniéntes au- 
tem vénient cum  exsulta- 
tióne, portántes manípulos 
suos, 


They that sow in tears shall 
reap in joy. V. Going they went 
and wept, casting their seeds. 
Y. But coming they shall come 
with joyfulness, carrying their 
sheaves. 


Greater Alleluia 


Alletája, allelüja. V. 2 Cor. 
1, 5. Sicut abündant passiónes 
Christi in nobis, ita et per 
Christum abündat consolátio 
nostra, allelüja. V. Ex. 15, 11. 
Gloriósus Deus in Sanctis su~- 
is: mirábilis in majestáte, 
fáciens prodígia, alleluja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. 2 Cor. 
1,5. As the sufferings of Christ 
&bound in us, so also by Christ 
doth our comfort abound, al- 
leluia. Y. Ez. 15, 11. Glorious 
is God in His saints: marvelous 
in majesty, doing wonderful 
things. Alleluia. 


Gospel. Luke 6, 17-23 


9H Sequéntia sancti Evan- 
gélii secándum Lucam. 
N ILLO témpore: Descén- 
dens Jesus de monte, 
Stetit in loco campéstri, et 
turba discipulórum ejus, et 
multitado copiósa plebis ab 
omni Judæa, et Jerúsalem, et 
maritima, et Tyri, et Sidónis, 
qui vénerant, ut audirent 
eum, et sanaréntur a lan- 
guóribus suis. Et qui vexa- 
bántur a spirítibus immündis 
curabántur. Et omnis turba 
querébat eum tángere: quia 
virtus de illo exíbat, et saná- 
bat omnes. Et ipse, elevátis 
6culis in discípulos suos, dice- 


*& Continuation of the holy 
Gospel according to St. Luke. 
T THAT lime, Jesus com- 
ing down from the 
mountain stood in a plain place, 
and the company of His dis- 
ciples, and a very great multi- 
tude of people from all Judea 
and Jerusalem, and the sea- 
coast both of Tyre and Sidon, 
who were come to hear Him, 
and to be healed of their di- 
Seases. And they that were 
troubled with unclean spirits 
were cured. And all the multi- 
tude sought to touch Him, for 
virtue went out from Him, and 
healed all And He, lifting up 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1614 


his eyes on His disciples, said, 
Blessed are ye poor, for yours 
is the kingdom of God. Blessed 
are ye that hunger now, for 
you shall be filled. Blessed are 
ye that weep now, for you shall 
laugh. Blessed shall you be 
when men shall hate you, and 
when they shall separate you, 
and shall reproach you, and 
cast out your name as evil, for 
the Son of man’s sake: be glad 
in that day and rejoice, for be- 
hold, your reward is great in 
heaven, 


Offertory. 

As gold in the furnace He 

hath proved them; and as a 

victim of a holocaust He hath 
received them. 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


bat: Bedti páuperes: quia 
vestrum est regnum Dei. 
Beati, qui nune esurítis: quia 
saturabimini, Beati, qui nunc 
fletis: quia ridébitis. Beáti 
éritis, cum vos óderint hó- 
mines, et cum separdverint 
vos, et exprobráverint, et ejé- 
cerint nomen vestrum tam- 
quam malum, propter Fílium 
hóminis, Gaudéte in illa die, 
et exsultate: ecce enim mer- 
ces vestra multa est in celo. 


Wis. 3,6 


Tamquam aurum in for- 
náce probávit illos Dóminus, 
et quasi holocáusti hóstiam 
&ccépit illos, i 


Secret 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 
O LORD, grant that we may 
offer to Thee with pure 
minds the immaculate Host 
which a spotless purity of life 
and continual desire for morti- 
fication rendered to Thy blessed 
Martyrs a most delightful ban- 
quet. Through our Lord. - 


MMACULÁTAM Héstiam fac 
nos, Dómine, méntibus 
tibi puris offérre, quam sanc- 
tis Martyribus tuis illibátus 
vite candor et juge mortifica- 
tiónis stüdium dapem suavís- 
simam efficiébant, Per us 
minum. 


Commemoration of Sts. Cyprian and Justina. 


E OFFER Thee, O Lord, 

the gifts of our devotion; 
may they, through Thy mercy, 
be rendered both pleasing unto 
Thee, for the honor of Thy just 
ones, and profitable for our 
salvation. Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


ÜNERA tibi, Dómine, no- 

Sire devotiónis offéri- 
mus: que et pro tuórum tibi 
grata sint honóre justórum, 
et nobis salutária, te miser- 
ante, reddántur, Per Démi- 
num. 


Communion. Philip. 1, 20, 21 


Christ shall be magnified in 
my body, whether it be by life 


Magnifieábitur Christus in 
córpore meo, sive per vitam 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 1615 


Sive per mortem: mihi enim or by death: for to me, to live 
vivere Christus est et mori is Christ, and to die is gain. 
lucrum. $ 


Postcommunion 
ÓRTIUM pane reféctis EFRESHED by the Bread of 
tribue nobis, omnípo- the strong, grant unto 


tens Deus: ut, sicut sancti us, O almighty God, that as 
Martyres tui Joánnes,Isaácus Thy blessed martyrs Isaac, 
eorümque Sécii, eódem robor- John, and their Companions, 
ati, ánimam suam pro frátri- strengthened by it, did not hesi- 
bus pónere.non dubitárunt; tate to give their lives for their 
ita nos, alter altérius ónera brethren; so may we also, bear- 
portántes, próximos nostros ing one another's burdens, love 
é6pere: et veritáte diligámus. our neighbors in deed and in 
Per Dóminum. : iruth. Through our Lord. 
Commemoration of Sts. Cyprian and Justina. 
RXSTA nobis, qusesumus, RANT us, we beseech Thee, 
Dómine: intercedénti- O Lord, by the interces- 
bus sanctis Martyribus tuis sion of Thy holy martyrs, Cy- 
Cypriáno et Justína; ut, quod prian and Justina that what 
ore contíngimus, pura mente we touch with our lips we may 
capiámus. Per Dóminum. receive with a pure heart. 
: . "Through our Lord. : 
Concluding Prayers, page 793. . 


Oct. 21—$5t. Ursula and Companions, 
Virgins and Martyrs (Red) 
In the Diocese of Portland. 


Prayer 
A NOBIS, quesumus, Dó- RANT us, we beseech Thee, 
: mine, Deus noster, O Lord our God, to rev- 


sanctárum Vírginum et Már- erence with unceasing devotion 
tyrum tuárum Ursule et So- the victories of Thy holy Vir- 
ciarum ejus palmas incessá- gins and Martyrs Ursula and 
bili devotióne venerári: ut, Companions; that those whom 
quas digna mente non póssu- we cannot fittingly celebrate, 
mus celebráre, humílibus sal- we may at least approach with 
tem frequentémus obséquiis. lowly homage. ‘Through our 


Per Dóminum, Lord. 
Secret 
NTÉNDE, quesumus, Dó- EGARD, We beseech Thee, 
mine, münera altáribus `O Lord, the gifts offered 


iuis pro sanctárum Vírginum upon Thine altars on this festi- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1616 


val of Thy holy Virgins and 
Martyrs Ursula and Compan- 
lons; that, as by these blessed 
Mysteries Thou hast conferred 
glory upon them, so 'Thou 
wouldst vouchsafe us Thy par- 
don. Through our Lord. 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


et Mártyrum tuárum Ursule 
et Sociarum ejus festivitáte 
propósita: ut, sicut per hee 
beáta mystéria’ ilis glóriam 
contulisti; ita nobis indul- 
géntiam largjáris, Per Dó- 
minum. i 


Postcommunion 


RANT us, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, ‘by the interces- 

sion of ‘Thy holy Virgins and 
Martyrs Ursula. and Compan- 
ions, that what we take with. 
the mouth we may receive with 
a pure mind. Through our Lord. 


Resta nobis, quesumus, 

Dómine, intercediénti- 
bus sanctis Virginibus et 
Martyribus tuis Ursula et So- 
ciabus ejus: ut, quod ore con- 
tingimus, pura mente capia- 
mus. Per Déminum. 


Nov. 5— Feast of the Holp Relits, (Red) 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Ps. 33, 20, 21. 


ANY are the afflictions of 
the just, and out of alt 


vir tribulatiénes. jus- 
tórum, et de his Ómni- 


these the Lord hath delivered bus liberávit eos Dóminus: 
them: the Lord keepeth all Dóminus custódit ómnia ossa 
their bones; not one of them eórum: unum ex his non con- 
shall be broken. Ps. 33,2. I wil terétur. Ps. 33, 2. Benedicam 
bless the Lord at alltimes: His Dóminum in omni témpore: 
praise shall be always in my semper laus ejus in ore meo. 
mouth. Y. Glory. X. Glória Patri. 
Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 


Prayer 


O THOU, O Lord, increase 
our faith in the Resur- 


UGE. in nobis, Dómine, 
resurrectiónis fidem, 


rection, Thou that workest won- 
ders in the relics of Thy saints: 
and make us partakers of that 
immortal glory, a pledge of 
which we venerate in their 
ashes. Through our Lord, 


qui in Sanctórum tuórum. re- 
líquiis mirabília operáris: et 
fac nos immortális glérie par- 
tícipes, cujus in eórum cinéri- 
bus pignora venerémur. Per 
Dóminum. 


Lesson, These men are men of mercy, page 1097. 


From Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced, 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 
placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 149, 5,1. 
The saints shall rejoice in Exsultábant Sancti in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


glória: letabuntur in cubíli- 
bus suis. Y. Cantáte Dómino 
Cánticum novum: laus ejus in 
Ecclésia Sanctórum. 


1617 


glory: they shall be joyful in 
their beds. J. Sing unto the 
Lord a new song: let His praise 
be-in the Church of the Saints. 


Lesser Alleluia 


Allelija, allelája. Y. Ps. 
67, 4. Justi epuléntur, et ex- 
ültent in conspéctu Dei: et 
delecténtur in letitia. Alle- 
lája. 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Ps. 67, 4. 
And let the just feast, and re- 
joice before God: and be de- 
lighted with gladness. Alleluia. 


Tract. Ps. 125, 5, 6 


Qui séminant in lácrymis, 
in gáudio metent. Y. Eüntes 
ibant et flebant, mitténtes 
sémina sua..Y. Veniéntes au- 
tem .vénient cum  exsulta- 
tióne, portántes manipulos 
Suos. 


They that sow in tears shall 
reapin joy. V. Going they went 
and wept, casting their seeds. 
Y. But coming they shall come 
with joyfulness, carrying their 
Sheaves. 


Greater Alleluia 


Allelüja, allelüja. Y. Sanc- 
ti tui, Dómine, florébunt sicut 
lilium, et sicut odor bálsami 
erunt ante te. Allelija. Y. 
Ps. 115, 15. Pretiósa in con- 
Spéctu Dómini mors sanctór- 
um ejus. Alleluja. 


Munda Cor Meum, page 763, 


Alleluia, alleluia. V. Thy 
saints shall flourish like the 
lily, O Lord, and be as the 
odor of baisam -before Thee. 
Alleluia. Y. Ps. 115, 15. Pre- 
cious in the sight of the Lord 
is the death of His saints. Al- 
leluia. i 


Gospel, At that time Jesus coming down, page 1323. 
Offertory. Ps. 67, 36 


Mirábilis Deus in sanctis 


God is- wonderful in His 


suis: Deus Israél, ipse dabit saints: the God of Israel is He 
virtütem et fortitüdinem plebi Who will give power and 
sue: benedíctus Deus. Alle- strength to His people: blessed 


lája. 
Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


be God. Alleluia. 


Secret 


MPLORÁMUS, Dómine, cle- 
méntiam tuam: ut Sanc- 
tórum tuórum, quorum re- 
líquias venerámur, suffragán- 
tibus méritis, hóstia quam 


E IMPLORE Thy clemency, 

O Lord: that by the in- 
terceding merits of Thy saints 
whose relics we venérate, this 
sacrifice which we offer may 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1618 


be an expiation of our sins, 
'Through our Lord. 


Preface for Weekdays, page 775. 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


offérimus, nostrórum sit ex- 
piáto delictórum. Per Dó- 
minum. . 


Communion. Ps. 32, 1 


Rejoice in the Lord, ye just: 
praise becometh the. upright. 


Gaudéte, justi, in Dómino: 
rectos decet collaudátio. 


Postcommunion 


ULTIPLY upon us Thy 
mercy, we beseech Thee, 
O Lord, through the sacra- 
ments which we have received: 
that even as with a pious de- 
votion we rejoice in the solem- 
nity of Thy saints whose relics 
we venerate, so also by Thy 
bountiful goodness we may en- 
joy their everlasting fellowship. 
'Through our Lord. 


Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


ULTIPLICA Super nos, 

quesumus Dómine, per 
hec sancta que sümpsimus, 
misericórdiam tuam: ut sicut 
in tuórum sollemnitáte Sanc- 
tórum, quorum reliquias có- 
limus, pia devotióne letamur, 
ita eórum perpétua societáte, 
te largiénte, fruamur. Per Dó- 
minum. 


Nov. 7—St. Leonard, Abbot (White) 
Mass, Os justi, page 1349, except: 


Prayer 


AY the kindly prayers of 


Thy most holy Confes- 
sor, Leonard, avail us, O al- 
almighty God, before Thy Di- 
vine Majesty. Dutifully we 
venerate him: may we be 
helped by his intercession. 
Through our Lord. 


AJESTÁTI ius, quesum- 

us, omnípotens Deus, 
nos sanctissimi Confessóris 
tui Leonárdi pia commendet 
orátio; ut, quem venerámur 
officio, ipsíus suffragiis sub- 
Jlevémur. Per Dóminum. 


Nov. 27—©ur Ladp of the Miraculous Medal 


(White) 
In the Diocese of Brooklyn, 
The Beginning of Mass, page 756. 


Introit. Exod. 13, 9 


T SHALL be as a sign in thy 
MK, hand, and as a memorial 


RIT quasi signum in 
manu tua, et quasi 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


monuméntum ante óculos tu- 
OS, et ut lex Dómini semper 
Sit in ore tuo. Ps. 104, 1. Con- 
fitémini Dómino, et invocáte 
nomen ejus; annuntiáte in- 
ter gentes Ópera ejus. Jy. 
Gloria Patri. 


1619 


before thine eyes, and that the 
law of the Lord be always in 
thy mouth. Ps. 104, 1. O give 
thanks unto the Lord, and call 
upon His name: tell forth His 
deeds among the nations. V. 
Glory. 


Kyrie, page 761; Gloria, page 762. 
Prayer 


OMINE Jesu Christe, qui 
D beatissimam Virginem 
Mariam Matrem.tuam ab 
origine immaculátam innüm- 
eris miráculis claréscere vo- 
luisti:. concéde; ut ejüsdem 
patrocinium semper implor- 
antes, gáudia consequámur 
ætérna. Qui vivis. 


LORD Jesus Christ, Who 

hast willed that the most 
blessed Virgin. Mary, Thy 
mother, sinless from the first 
moment of her conception, 
should be glorified by countless 
miracles: grant that we, who 
never cease from imploring her 
patronage, may attain in the 
end to eternal happiness. Who 


: livest, 


Terron: Apoc. 12, 1, 5, 14-16 


Léctio bri  Apocaljpsis 
beáti Joánnis Apóstoli. 


in celo. Mulier amicta 
sole et luna sub pédibus ejus, 
et in cápite ejus coróna stel- 
lárum duódecim. Et péperit 
fílium másculum, qui rectür- 
us erat omnes gentes in virga 
férrea: et raptus est fílius 
ejus ad Deum et ad thronum 
ejus. Et date sunt. mulieri 
ale due áquile magne ut vo- 
láret in desértum in locum 
suum. Et misit serpens de ore 
Suo post mulíerem aquam 
tamquam flumen, ut eam fá- 
ceret trahi a filümine. Et ad- 
jüvit terra mulferem, et apér- 
uit terra os suum, et absórbuit 
flumen, quod misit draco de 
ore Suo. 


Su magnum appáruit 


Lesson from the Book of the 
Apocalypse of blessed John the 
Apostle. 

GREAT sign appeared in 

heaven: a woman 
clothed with the sun, and the 
moon under her feet, and on 
her head a crown of twelve 
stars. And she. brought forth 
a Man-Child, Who was to rule 
all nations with an iron rod: 
and her Son was taken up to 
God, and to His throne. And 
there were given to the woman 
two wings of a great eagle, that 
She might fly into the desert 
unto her place. And the serpent 
cast out of his mouth after the 
woman, water as it were a 
river: that he might cause her 
to be carried away by the river. 
And the earth helped the 
woman, and the earth opened 
her mouth, and swallowed up 
the river, which the dragon cast 
out of his mouth. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1620 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


From, Septuagesima to Easter the Lesser Alleluia is replaced 
by the Tract, in Paschal-time the Gradual and Tract are re- 


placed by the Greater Alleluia. 


Gradual. Ps. 104, 5, 27 


Remember ‘the marvelous 
works which He hath done: His 


wonders, and the judgments. 


of His mouth. Y. He placed in 
them the words of His signs: 
and of His wonders in the land. 


Mementóte mirabilium 
ejus, que fecit; prodigia ejus, 
et jüdícia oris ejus. Y. Pósuit 
in ea verba signórum suórum, 
et prodigiórum suórum in 
terra. 


Lesser Alleluia : 


Alleluia, alleluia. Y. Ps. 18, 7. 
His going forth is from the top- 
most heaven: nor is there any 
that-can hide from His heat. 
Alleluia. 


The foundations thereof are 
in the holy mountains. The 
Lord loveth the gates of Sion, 
above all the tabernacles of 
Jacob. Y. Ps. 86, 3. Glorious 
things are said of- thee, O city 
of God. Y. This man and that 
man is born in her and the 
Highest Himself hath founded 
her. 


Allehija, allelája. y. Ps. 18, 
7. A summo colo -egréssio 
ejus, nec est qui se abscóndat 
a calóre ejus. Allélüja. 


Tract. Ps. 86, 1, 2 


Fundaménta ejus in mén- 
tibus sanctis: díligit Dómin- 
us portas Sion super omnia 
tabernácula Jacob. Y. Ps. 86, 
3. Gloriósa dicta sunt de te, 
cívitas Dei. Y. Homo natus, 
est in ea, et ipse fundávit eam 
altíssimus. 


. Greater Alleluia 

Alleluia, alleluia. Yy. Judith Allelija, allelúja. Y. Jud- 
15, 10. Thou art the glory of ith 15, 10. Tu gloria Jerúsal- 
Jerusalem, thou art the joy of em, tu letitia Israël tu honor- 
Israel, thou art the honor of ificéntia pópuli nostri. Alle- 
our people. Y. Cant. 4, 7. Thou luja. V. Cant. 4, 7. Tota pul- 
art all fair, O my love, and chra es, Maria: et macula 
there is not & spot in thee. originális non est in te. Al- 
Alleluia. lelija. 

Munda Cor Meum, page 763. 


Gospel, At that time there was a marriage, page 187. 
Creed, page 765. - 


Offertory. John 19, 27 


Jesus said to the disciple, Dixit Jesus discípulo: Ecce 
Behold thy Mother. And from mater tua. Et ex illa hora ac- 
that hour the disciple took her cépit eam discípulus in sua. 
for his own. 


Offertory Prayers, page 767. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


PROPER MASSES FOR UNITED STATES 


1621 


Secret 


EÁTA Vírgine María in- . 


tercedénte, cujus préci- 
bus exorátus Jesus Christus 
Filius tuus fecit inítium sig- 
nórum; da nobis, Dómine 
Deus, sacraméntum Córporis 
et Sánguinis ejüsdem Fílii tui 
pura mente  confícere, ut 
fetérni convivii mereámur esse 
partícipes. Per eümdem Dó- 
minum. 


Preface No. 11, page 814, 


oven by the pleading of 

the blessed Virgin Mary, 
in answer to whose prayers 
Jesus Christ Thy Son wrought 
the first of His miracles: vouch- 
safe unto us, O Lord God, to 
minister in cleanness of heart 
unto the sacrament of the body 
and blood of the same Thy Son, 
So as to deserve to sit down to 
the everlasting banquet of eter- 
nity. Through the same. 


Communion. Ecclus. 36, 6, 7 10 


Innova, signa et immüia Renew the signs, and work 
mirabília. Glorífica manum fresh marvels; glorify Thy 
tuam et brachium déxterum. hand and Thy right arm; 
Festina tempus et meménto hasten the time, and remember 
finis et enárrent mirabilia the end, and let them declare 


tua. 


Thy wondrous works, 


Postcommunion 


ÓMINE Deus omnipotens, 
qui per Immaculátam 
Genitricem Fílii tui ómnia nos 
habére voluísti: do nobis tan- 
te Matris auxílio, preséntis 
témporis perícula devitáre; ut 
vitam consequámur etérnam. 
Per eümdem Dóminum. 


f Concluding Prayers, page 793. 


LORD God almighty, Who 

hast willed that all things 
should be given to us through 
the Immaculate Mother of Thy 
Son: grant that under the pro- 
tection of this mighty Mother, 
we may escape all the dangers 
of these our times, and in the 
end may come to life everlast- 
ing. Through the same. 


Nov. 27—$»t. Wirgilius, Bishop, Confessor 


(White) 
Mass Statuit el, page 1337. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


The Ecclesiastical Wear and 
the Sacred Liturgy 


The Divisions of the Ecclesiastical Dear 


HE ecclesiastical year begins on the first Sunday of Ad- 
vent, that is, on the Sunday next, whether before or after, 
the feast of St. Andrew the Apostle, November 30. 

Following this are the four weeks of Advent and the Christ- 
mas festivals, ending with the Epiphany, January 6. 

The Sundays that follow are called the first, the second, 
and so forth, after the Epiphany. They are never more than 
six in number, and their series is, as a rule, interrupted by the 
coming of Septuagesima Sunday, which is the ninth before 
Easter and the first of those on which the liturgy is of a peni- 
tential character. 

Septuagesima is followed by Sexagesima and Quinqua- 
gesima; this last is the Sunday next before Ash Wednesday, 
on which Lent begins. Lent has six Sundays: the two last 
of these are, respectively, Passion Sunday and Palm Sunday. 
The week beginning with Palm Sunday, that in which Our 
Lord was betrayed and crucified, is known as Holy Week. 
Easter Sunday, the feast of the Resurrection of Our Lord, 
upon the date of which the foregoing celebrations depend, 
is the Sunday next following the full moon first occurring 
after the twentieth day of the month of March. The earliest 
possible date for Easter is March 22, and the latest April 25. 

The weeks'between Easter and Trinity Sunday are known 
as Paschal Time. Forty days after Easter is the feast of the 
Ascension of Our Lord, which always falls on a Thursday; 
and ten days later, that is on the seventh Sunday and fiftieth 
day after Easter, is the feast of the Descent of the Holy Ghost, 
called Pentecost or Whit-Sunday. Trinity Sunday is the Sun- 
day next following; on the Thursday after this Holy Church 
celebrates Corpus Christi, the festival of the Most Holy Sacra- 
ment, and after its octave day the feast of the Most Sacred 
Heart of Jesus, with which her cycle of movable feasts ends. 

The remaining Sundays of the year, which cannot number 
more than twenty-eight nor less than twenty-three, are de- 
scribed as the third, fourth, etc., after Pentecost. 


The Movable Feasts Around Which the Ecclesiastical 


Year Is Arranged. 


The Sundays after Epiphany and Pentecost—Easter may 
occur as early aS March 22, and as late as April 25. This 
movable feast determines the date of other movable feasts, 
such as the Ascension, Pentecost, Trinity, and so forth. When 
Easter is exceedingly early there is not sufficient time between 
Epiphany and Septuagesima Sunday for the six Sundays, as 


1622 


http://ccwatershed.org 


) ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1623 


found in the liturgy, after Epiphany, whereas after Pentecost 
more than the twenty-four prescribed Sundays will be needed 
to complete the ecclesiastical year. It may happen, too, when 
eed B late that there are not twenty-four Sundays after 
Pentecost. 


The Sundays omitted after Epiphany are employed, as far 
as necessary, to make up the number required after Pentecost, 
that is, the liturgical parts with some slight changes are 
transferred. When one Sunday only is required, the sixth 
Sunday after Epiphany is taken; if two are necessary to fill 
out the ecclesiastical year, the fifth and sixth Sundays after 
Epiphany are transferred, or, if necessary, the third, fourth, 
fifth, and sixth. 


Because of the special liturgical features of the twenty- 
fourth Sunday after Pentecost, this Sunday comes last, though 
it be the twenty-fifth, twenty-sixth, and so forth. The Sundays 
transferred as above are placed after the twenty-third Sunday 
after Pentecost. Septuagesima Sunday can not be earlier than 
January 18 or later than February 22. There may be as few as 
twenty-three Sundays after Pentecost, and as many as twenty- 
eight. When there are only twenty-three Sundays after Pente- 
cost, the twenty-fourth will retain Sunday, while the twenty- 
third will be observed, rubrics permitting, on the day before 
(Saturday). The office of one of the Sundays after Epiphany, 
namely, the third, fourth, fifth, or sixth (there are special 
rubrics for the second), when it would otherwise be omitted, 
is.said on the Saturday which immediately precedes Septua- 
gesima Sunday. iu 


Besides the above celebrations, there is the calendar of 
festivals fixed to particular days of the month. This varies 
according to the country and the diocese. The calendar 
(see list of contents) shows all festivals that are of obligatory 
observance throughout the Christian world. , 


Those festivals that are special to the United States, and 
certain others kept in various Religious Orders, have been 
placed in several special Supplements and will be found imme- 
diately after the Masses for the Dead (page 1546). To find a 
certain feast, consult the Alphabetical Index at the back of 
the book as every Mass and Feast in this missal is given therein. 
The calendar suffices for general needs to show what Mass 
is to be said on any particular day, but to ensure accuracy 

; in every detail the directory or Ordo annually published in 

i the locality should be consulted. This is the more necessary 
because of the overlapping of movable and fixed feasts, which 
often involves the transfer, or putting off, to another day of 
the one or the other. As a rule a feast of lesser always yields 
to one of higher liturgical rank. 


! Note: The reader is again advised to study the section in 
the front part of the book entitled, Read Mass with the Priest, 
which will enable him to use this book readily and appreciate 
its relation to ihe character of the Ecclesiastical Year as 
explained in this portion. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1624 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


The Sacred Liturgy 
The Yearly Liturgical Cycle 


Liturgy in its full meaning is a vast and intelligent put- 
ting together of the affections toward the Supreme and 
Infinite Good by means of which the Church carries on forever 
that perfect worship in spirit and in truth which Christ came 
to render unceasingly to His divine Father. It includes all the 
sacrifices, rites, and chants, as well as the artistic inspirations 
in the mind of the painters, the sculptors, and the architects, 
who unite their talents and their prayers so that there may 
evolve therefrom the sacred edifice of the Catholic Church. 


The Liturgy is not only the rule of prayer; it is the rule of 
faith. “The law of praying, is the law of believing.” It not 
only comprises the relations or aspirations of the Church to 
Christ and to God, but also contains and transmits to us who 
have. faith the divine word of the most Holy Trinity. It puts 
to the proof the efficacy of its prayers on the divine heart, and 
exerts a powerful influence on the “naturally Christian soul” 
of man, and in a special manner on the religious education 
of the masses. It has an immense influence on the catechetical 
training of the faithful; in former days the collective parti- 
cipation in the Liturgy. with the fervor and spirit desired by 
our Mother the Church would be & great source of knowledge 
as well as of devotion. The Liturgy, as the true mouthpiece 
of God, aims at being eminently for the people, because it 
treats man according to his nature, that is, as a being formed 
of both spirit and matter, who, consequently, infers and 
abstracts that which is conceivable from that which is per- 
ceptible, and which, by reason of its external qualities, is 
manifest to the senses. So in order to be sure of reaching the 
intellect, it first conquers and subjugates the senses and the 
heart, and by means of all the attractions of art, painting, 
sculpture, and architecture, of music, poetry, and literature, 
binds the imagination and compels it to aet as the handmaid 
of faith, at the very moment in which it transmits to the 
intellect the message of God. 


Despite the many associations and celebrations in our day 
the knowledge of God makes but little headway even amongst 
Christians. Even those who are Catholics in name and in 
intention often know very little of the Catechism, and even 
if, for the most part, they are not ignorant of the actual words 
of the Acts of faith, hope, and charity, yet one cannot there- 
fore say that the Gospel is in truth the standard and rule of 
life of all those who inscribe their names in the various 
Catholic societies. 


A fatal error of the Reformation was that of individualizing 
religion through the principle of private judgment, and of 
presenting before God the Father, not one great family united 
by faith, but isolated individuals. The spirit of the Catholic 

turgy, on the other hand, is essentially social, in its char- 
&cter public, tangible, and dramatic. In this lies the secret 
of its early popularity. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ae 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1625 


The Church, says St. Ambrose, presents the most perfect 
form of admirable community and social life. As it has been 
redeemed collectively, and as it is collective in its constitution, 
SO it believes, hopes, and loves collectively, combats collec- 
tively, is persecuted collectively, prays and triumphs col- 
lectively. The Church lives through Christ; not through.Christ 
the Head separated from His mystical body, but through 
Christ, Head and Body, which is the Church. 

The sacred Liturgy contains a spiritual teaching which is 
the most complete in itself, because it does not dwell almost 
conclusively, as so many personal devotions do, on one par- 
ticular mystery, but in the course of the entire. year it unfolds 
before the faithful and explains to them in a marvellous order 
the whole series of the dogmas concerning our holy redemption. 

The Liturgy is best put into practice, in the hearing of Mass 
&nd receiving of Holy Communion, by keeping in touch with 
the various cycles of the sacred Liturgy, all of which lead to 
Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, and demonstrate in the sacrifice 
of the cross and the altar the realization and continuation of 
alt that they offer to our faith, our hope, and our love. 


From the late middle ages we distinguish in the Missa! and 
the Breviary two parts—the Proper of the time (Proprium de 
Tempore) and the Proper of the Saints (Proprium Sanctorum). 
The Proper of the Saints is intended not to weaken nor replace 
the temporal cycle, but to adorn it and give it greater variety 
and grace, in the manner in which an artist would surround 
the figure of Christ in the apse. of a Christian basilica with a 
circle of martyrs. The Proper of the Time occupies the entire 
year, so that the faithful may not simply glance at the mys- 
teries, but by continuous acts of piety and practices of devotion 
assimilate them and be transformed in them. The true litur- 
gical cycle of the Church is represented by the Proptixm de 
Tempore, which, beginning with Advent, passes through the 
four weeks of expectation before Christmas, through tie 
Epiphany, the forty days of Christ's fasting in the desert, the 
two weeks of His Passion, the fifty days of the Paschal feasts, 
and on to the Ascension and Pentecost, completing in this 
Way our catechetical instruction on the mystery of Christ. 


To this long cycle of fifty-two weeks, which contains the 
vivid and dramatic unfolding of the whole Christian cate- 
chism, it is as well to add that other sbort cycle, which, during 
the course of each week, celebrates the divine masterpiece of 
the six days of the Creation and draws a parallel between them 
&nd the acts of grace in the regeneration of the world through 
the blood of the Saviour. ] 

'There remains lastly a daily cycle, which, divided into seven 
periods, or, as the Breviary calls them, canonical hours, 
especially commemorates each day the mysteries of the Passion 
and death of our Saviour. This last daily cycle, which is the 
basis of the other two cycles, forms in its turn the setting, as 
it were, of the Eucharistic sacrifice which is daily offered up 
to God aS. the act of perfect worship in spirit and in truth 
which redeemed humanity offers to the ever-blessed Trinity. 


One only God, one only Church, one only forza of Catholic 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1626 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


piety, one complete whole, but with many sides; like a complex 
but closely connected organism, or rather, like a harmony 
produced by an infinity of sounds; we know only one devotion 
which fulfils all these conditions and blends in óne harmony 
theology, art, architecture, music, all that is most true, most 
beautiful, and most worthy in this poor world: in a word, that 
which we have from the first called jn the fullest significance 
of the word—“Catholic Liturgy.” 


The Sacred Liturgy from Advent to Septuagesima 


First Part of the Ecclesiastical Year: 1. First Sunday of 
Advent to Christmas Eve. 2. Christmas to the Octave of 
the Epiphany. 3. Epiphany Octave to Septuagesima Sunday. 


The essential object of the Liturgy’s yearly cycle is to adore 
in spirit and in truth, to praise, to propitiate and to offer 
thanksgiving to the triune God for His great glory and good- 
ness. This glory and this goodness are especially manifest in 
the twofold work of cosmic creation and human redemption; 
hence in early times these two theophanies (divine manifesta- 
tions) of the divine magnificence, while they afforded the cen- 
tral theme of the Eucharistic prayer and sacrifice, likewise gave 
regent to the liturgical cycle, as well for the week as for 

e year. : 


In the ancient Roman Liturgy, as well as that of other 
churches, there were two distinct cycles, the weekly and the 
yearly. The days of the week commemorate the six days of 
creation, while the annual cycle celebrated the work of our 
redemption. The Vesper hymns of St. Ambrose celebrate in 
beautiful words the work of each day of creation. The mys- 
teries fulfilled by Our Saviour in traversing the way of redemp- 
tion are honored, on the other hand, by a succession of feasts, 
which, beginning with Advent, and going on tc Christmas, 
Lent, Easter and the twenty-four Sundays after Pentecost, 
embraces the whole year, and always maintains a wonderful 
harmony. between the logical order of ideas and the chrono- 
logical sequence of events. The weekly cycle recalls the work 
of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; 
that of the year deals rather with our salvation and our last 
end, but both the one and the other have as their permanent 
objective the glorifying of God in His manifestations of power 
and of love, 


1. Advent 


From the stem of Jesse, according to the prophecy of Isaias, 
there came forth a most fair flower, and that flower was Christ. 
It is therefore only natural that there should be a continuity 
between the liturgy of the synagogue and that of the Christian 
faith. The authority of Imperial Rome even confused the 
Christians with the Jews; during the transitional period the 
Christian family, presenting the outward and legal appearance 
of & Jewish community, borrowed therefrom likewise various 
liturgical usages which still form part of her Sacred patrimony, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1627 


and, like her faith, are, so to speak, of the seed of Abraham and 
of Israel by origin and descent. . 


The Roman Advent bore a joyful character; nów we regard 
this season as a penitential time, or at least, a time in which 
the absence of Christ is stressed in the Liturgy. Until recent 
years it was customary in the United States to fast on the 
Fridays of Advent, but this is no longer done. It is a season 
of preparation, because during all the years before the birth 
of Our Saviour, the events of human history led up to this 
central fact. 


The chants of the Mass, the responsories, the antiphons of 
the divine Office, all contain Alleluias. The Gloria in excelsis 
is omitted from. the ferial Masses until Christmas. It would 
seem that the whole of nature, looking forward, as the Apostle 
describes it, to the last judgment, awaiting the revelation of 
the Son of God, feels herself uplifted by the Incarnation of the 
Word of God, Who after so many ages of waiting, comes at 
length into this world to bring His greatest handiwork to its 
final perfection. The Sacred Liturgy, during this time, gathers 
from the Scriptures all those passages which are most forcible 
and best adapted to express the intense and joyful longing with 
which the holy patriarchs, the prophets and the just men of 
the Old Testament hastened by their prayers the coming of 
the Son of God. We cannot do better than associate ourselves 
with their pious feelings, and pray the Word made Flesh that 
He will deign to be born in the hearts of all men and spread 
His kingdom likewise throughout those many lands where 
His holy Name has not hitherto been made known, and whose 
inhabitants still sleep in darkness and the shadow of death. 


2. Christmas Season 


The period from Christmas to the Octave of the Epiphany is 
filled with first of all the festal days commemorating the birth 
of Our Saviour and His manifestation of Himself to the world, 
and secondly, with the feasts of saints associated with Our 
Saviour’s birth, or by tradition occupying these places in the 
Cycle of the Saints. From all eternity the Son of God lived 
with the Father and the Holy Ghost; on Christmas we cele- 
brate the Word made Flesh, Christ born for us. 


The exact day of Our Lord’s birth on earth has never been 
revealed to us; but thé Roman Church has, from early ages, 
set apart for its solemn celebration the twenty-fifth day of 
December. In the East, however, the birthday of Our Lord 
is kept on the sixth of January, and for that reason the one 
and the other festival has been continued, that of December 
25 as the Nativity of Our Lord, that of January 6 as His 
Epiphany, or manifestation to the Gentiles. 


Only on two days of the year may the priest celebrate three 
Masses, on the day of the commemoration of All Souls, and 
on Christmas. In the last instance, when sung, the first Mass 
is appointed for midnight, the second for daybreak, the third 
for the customary hour of high Mass. In the second Mass 
@ commemoration is made of St. Anastasia, a holy Roman 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1628 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


matron, who suffered martyrdom under Diocletian (a. D. 304), 
and whose feast is kept on December 25. 


3. Epiphany Octave to Septuagesima Sunday 


The Sundays of the year are now counted after the Epiphany 
and after Pentecost. The number after the Epiphany before 
Septuagesima changes according to the earlier or later date 
of Easter. 


Generally speaking the Sundays throughout the year had 
no fixed Station, or Church at which the Pope said Mass. This 
is true outside of Advent, Lent and Eastertime, except in & 
feW cases such as the Second Sunday after the Epiphany. 
'The Chants (Introit and other Propers) of the Third Sunday 
after Epiphany are repeated on the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth 
when such Sundays occur. The Epistles are taken from St. 
Paul, a rule which continues until the Easter Cycle. 


The Church goes back to the regular or usual order in the 
Office and Mass. The green vestments are used for the Sunday 
and ferial Masses. On such days a commemoration is made 
of Our Blessed Lady and the prayer said is for the Church 
or Pope. 


The Sacred Liturgy from Septuagesima to Easter 


Second Part of the Ecclesiastical Year: 1. Septuagesima 
to Passion Sunday. 2. Passion Time and Holy Week. 


In the Church of the Apostolic time the custom existed of 
keeping a vigil each Saturday in expectation of the coming 
of the Lord. Wednesday and Friday were fast days, the basis 
of the liturgical week. This primitive fast and vigil was 
known by the military term statio; as kept by the Christians 
it was of a wholly voluntary character. 


The very spirit and supernatural character of Christianity 
must, even before the canons of the Councils existed, have 
given rise to special observances in preparation for Easter. 
Otherwise it would be difficult to explain the different rules 
of the various churches in this matter. Thus, whilst originally 
the fast lasted à week at Alexandria, at Rome, and in Gaul, 
other churches kept as a fast only the last two days of Holy 
Week, from the Lord's Supper on Maundy Thursday until 
Easter morning, precisely as was done, wé are told by the 
Apostle St. James the Just. 


The Council of Nicza, fixed the duration of the fast at forty 
days. St. Gregory introduced & three weeks' preparation for 
Lent. At Jerusalem the Holy Sacrifice was not offered up on 
week-days during Lent, but at Rome Mass was omitted only 
on the last two days. A trace of this custom remains in the 
omission of Mass on Good Friday. 


At the stational Masses the Kyrie and Litany were not said; 
the Litany was recited on the way from the place of the 
gathering (Collecta) to the stational church, 'The Introit was, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


! 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1629 


however, repeated and the other ceremonies carried out. Lent 
was also the preparatory period for the catechumens who were 
baptized on Holy Saturday. 


Nowadays the changed conditions-of social life have caused 
the Church herself to introduce some minor alterations into 
her rites. The preparatory ritual for catechumens has long 
fallen into disuse, but this does not mean that the Lenten 
liturgy has lost its living force, for even in these latter times 
many souls outside the fold of the Catholic Church await the 
touch of heavenly grace, and it is the duty of the Church to 
hasten by her prayers the hour of their conversion—Oremus 
et pro catechumenis nostris—as we are taught to say in the 
Office for Good Friday. ! 


Lent, moreover, is the season of penitence, of amendment 
of life, of preparation for Easter, and these conditions of the 
spiritual pilgrimage transcend the ages and still continue the 
common duty of all the faithful. 


‘The holy joys of Easter will shine more radiantly and will 
touch the heart of the Christian more intimately if, purified 
by penance, he shall have rendered himself worthy to live 
& supernatural life given entirely to God, after the likeness 
of the risen Christ, of Whom St. Paul writes: “He dies once; 
but in that He liveth, He liveth unto God." : 


The Sacred Liturgy During the Easter Cycle 


Third Part of the Ecclesiastical Year: 1. Easter to Pente- 
cost. 2. Time after Pentecost. ; 


Following the death of Christ on the Cross, which paid the 
penalty for our sins, the Church knowing that this death was 
for our redemption, remembers even the crown of thorns as a 
crown of glory. After contemplating Christ upon the cross we 
now eagerly await His rising from the dead. When two days 
have passed the time comes at last for this poor weakened 
humanity, torn and bruised in the divine person of the Cruci- 
fied, having now made fitting satisfaction to God for its sins, 
to be restored to its former honorable state. Jesus on the cross 
yields himself up into the hands of the Father. The Father 
accepts the offering—a, lifeless body covered with wounds and 
bruises—and pressing it to His heart, warms it with the fire 
of His very being, and communicates to it His own divine life. 
Jesus rises again from death at the dawn of the third day, 
and as He had associated the entire human race with Himself 
in His atonement, so now He shares His triumph with His 
whole mystical body ón Whom He, as head, sheds the glory 
of His resurrection. 


The Eastertime proper extends from Easter Saturday to 
Pentecost. Sunday. In the United States the period allowed 
for fulfilling the precept of Easter Communion extends from 
the first Sunday of Lent to Trinity Sunday. The prayers and 
masses of this season are all joyful; the Alleluia is restored to 
the Liturgy and repeated many times. Instead of the Asperges, 
the Vidi aguam recalling the baptism of the neophytes is 
sung before the principal mass on Sundays. The paschal candle 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1630 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


is given an honored place for it symbolizes the presence of 
Christ on earth; it is extinguished on Ascension Day. The 
feasts of Eastertime are chiefly those of martyrs who straight- 
way after death are admitted into Heaven. 


The Sacred Liturgy During the Time After 
Pentecost 


After Pentecost, the work of the regeneration of the human 
race has reached its highest point. Christ and the Paraclete 
live and dwell within the hearts of the faithful, who are thus 
able to render to the august Triad that perfect adoration in 
spirit and in truth which alone the Father desires. This is the 
profound significance of the feast of the most holy Trinity 
which closes the Octave of Pentecost, and begins the cycle of 
the twenty-four weeks or so which elapse between Trinity 
Sunday and Advent. This long cycle, which comprises nearly 
half the liturgical year, represents the. daily history of the 
Church throughout the ages, a history which begins with the 
first Christian Pentecost, celebrated by the Apostles in the 
Upper Room, and which comes to a close with the coming of 
Christ as Judge, in His second Advent at the end of the world. 
This is the inner meaning of the two Gospel passages concern- 
ing the end of the world and the appearance of the divine 
Judge which the Liturgy causes to be read on the last Sunday 
after Pentecost and on the first Sunday in Advent. 


During the cycle of the Sundays after Pentecost the marks 
of the Church, one, holy, catholic and apostolic in her being 
and in her life, are magnificently expressed in her Liturgy. 
Through the. reading of the Epistles of the Princes of the 
Apostles, Peter and Paul, we experience over again their 
preaching and realize that the edifice of our faith rests on 
that one prophetic and apostolic foundation upon which 
Christ has built His Church. The history of the early Church 
contains also the forecast of that which the life of Christ’s 
flock was to be in the ages to come. 


€xplanation of the Liturgy of the Proper of Time 
l FIRST SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


Station at St. Mary Major? 


The Roman Missal to-day begins the liturgical cycle. The 
Incarnation is the true central point which divides the course 
of the ages, By the perlod of preparation called Advent, the 
ages before Christ and leading us to His birth are recalled; 


‘Indulgences can be gained on those days on which in the 
Roman Missal the Mass is noted for a station. These indul- 
£ences can be gained outside of Rome by the members of cer- 
tain confraternities; thus all members of the Confraternity of 
Christian Doctrine who on these days teach, or superintend 
the teaching of Christian Doctrine can gain these indulgences; 
they can also be gained by any of the faithful who assist at 
ihe explanation of the Catechism. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


no 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1631 


following the feast of Christmas the great events in the life 
of Christ and the ages that lead toward the final judgment 
are kept in mind. The Missal, therefore, is logical and 
corresponds closely to this lofty concept of history, by which 
the Incarnation is made the true central event in the world’s 
drama. The early Christians began their liturgical cycle with 
the festival of Christmas; the present arrangement came into 
use towards the middle of the fifth century. 


The spirit of the sacred Liturgy during Advent, full of the 
joyful announcement of approaching freedom, is one of holy 
enthusiasm, tender gratitude, and an intense longing for the 
coming of the Word of God in the hearts of all the children 
of Adam. 


The Introit gives eloquent expression to the feelings of 
humanity, cast down, yet full of hope, and begs the Saviour 
to bring it back into the path which leads to Bethlehem, along 
the way of truth and justice. The Epistle calls upon us after 
our period of slackness and spiritual lethargy to rouse from 
sleep. The Church in the Gospel connects the second coming 
of Our Lord at the end of the world with his first appearance 
at Bethlehem as Our Redeemer. At one time the Dies iræ, dies 
illa, now used in masses for the dead, was sung on this day 
before the Gospel. 


Man is made up of spirit and flesh, and whilst the former 

desirous of being drawn towards truth and love, the latter 

inderstands only such good or evil as can be perceived by the 

senses, and must therefore be held in check by penance and by 
a salutary fear of the judgments of almighty God. 


The indulgences of the Roman Stations are: 
Plenary Indulgence (under the usual conditions). 


1. To those who on the day of a Station devoutly visit the 
Church and assist at functions morning or evening, accord 
ing to the local custom or the instruction of the Pope. . 


2. If there be no public services in the Church, by saying 
before the Blessed Sacrament the Our Father, Hail Mary 
and Glory be to the Father, five times; adding the Our 
Father, Hail Mary and Glory be to the Father, three times 

. before any relics set out for veneration, and the Our Father, 
Hail Mary and Glory be to the Father, at least once for the 
intention of the Pope. 


Partial Indulgence of ten years to all members who make a 
visit to the Church and recite the prayers above. (Pius XI, 
April 12, 1932; cfr. Sacr. Peenit., Feb. 25, 1933.) 


THE SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT 
Station at Holy Cross in Jerusalem 


After Bethlehem and the manger comes Golgotha with the 
cross already shining far off over the peaceful country of 
Ephrata, where the Incarnate Word first appeared upon earth. 
‘The station is therefore at the Sessorian Basilica—the Roman 
counterpart of the Martyrdom at Jerusalem. Here was kept 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1632 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


the holy cross which the Empress Helena had presented to 
the. Church in Rome. Many allusions are made to-day to 
Jerusalem in the Liturgy. 

The Prayer is inspired by the famous cry of the. Baptist, 
“Prepare ye the way of the Lord;" so we pray to God to pour 
His grace into our hearts. This preparation consists in the 
spirit of contrition purifying the soul and in the sincere pur- 
pose of obedience to the divine precepts. 

In the Epistle-St. Paul in a few touches sketches the mission 
of the Redeemer to establish all mankind in one single family, 
the Church. The Gospel testifies to the divinity of Christ by 
deeds rather than by words. un 

The Eucharistic grace for which we beg in the Post-Com- 
munion is that the holy bread, the memorial of the death of 
Our Lord, may destroy in us the germs of evil and may nourish 
us unto everlasting life. i 


THE THIRD SUNDAY OF ADVENT 


Station a£ St, Peter's 


In Rome on the fourth Sunday of Advent there was no 
station—because of the great ordinations of priests and dea- 


cons, mense Decembri, which took place on the preceding f 


night—-hence this third station preparatory to Christmas 
was celebrated at St. Peter’s with great splendor. 

The stational Mass for this day, as it immediately precedi 
the Christmas season, had originally a strikingly festive char, 
acter. We know the novenas and triduums in preparation fo 


the greater feasts are of later origin, and in the golden age of | 


the Liturgy these weeks before Easter and Christmas, with 
their vigiliary Masses and stational synaxes at the most famous 
basilicas of the Eternal City, were intended to prepare the 
souls of the faithful and to obtain for them from heaven the 
grace to profit by the various solemnities of the liturgical cycle. 

The note of joy has diminished somewhat in modern times; 
however, at the Mass the sacred ministers are clothed in rose- 
colored vestments in place of the customary ones of violet, 
and the organ once again fills the aisles with its strains. 

To dispose our souls for the worthy reception of divine grace 
demands suitable preparation before approaching the sacra- 
ments, by giving due care to prayer and meditation. Wholly 
immersed in vain and worldly desires Jerusalem was indeed 
ill-prepared to see the King of Glory in the Man of Sorrows. 
Ritual and external practices of worship are praiseworthy and 
necessary, but preparation for the right use of grace is some- 
thing far more searching and needful. 


WEDNESDAY IN EMBER WEEK 


Collecta a£ the Title of Eudoxia. Station at St. Mary Major 


The solemn fast of the three days in Ember Week originally 
peculiar to the Roman Church, was afterwards borrowed 
by the other Latin dioceses. St. Leo I explains the Ember 
Days saying that especially at the end of the year it js fittinz 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a — ds mall lla 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1633 


that we dedicate the first fruits to the Divine Providence. 
An ancient tradition reserved the ordinations of priests and 
deacons to the month of December, and the faithful—follow- 
ing a custom introduced by the Apostles therhselves—felt 
constrained to unite with the bishop in prayer and fasting, 
in order to call down from God an abundance of priestly gifts 
upon the heads of those newly chosen to minister at the altar. 


Formerly, after assembling, the procession of clergy and 
people, chanting the Litany, went from St. Peter in Vinculis 
to St. Mary Major by way of the Suburra, the Viminal and 
the Esquiline. To-day’s station—following the custom for 
Ember Wednesdays—is at St. Mary Major, in order that the 
new Levites may be placed under the heavenly patronage of 
her whom the Fathers of the Church, sometimes call the 
“virgin-priest,” in whose temple the Incarnate Word Himself 
was anointed priest by the divine Paraclete. 


Originally, on the days of the stational processions, when 
the great. Litany was sung on the way, the Introit was omitted, 
and the Pope, on reaching the church, recited the Prayer after 
the last Kyrie. The deacon first invited the faithful to pros- 
trate themselves so that they might pray for a while in secret— 
Flectamus genua; then, after a few moments spent in prayer, 
he gave the signal to get up again, and the Pontiff summed up 
the petitions of the assembly in a brief formula—collecta—and 
presented them to God. fo Fe 


In the Post-Communion we pray Our Lord that he will, ..” 
us not to rest satisfied with that pleasure in outward devotion’ 
which is sometimes kindled by partaking of the heavenly food, 
but to aim at laying a firm foundation of virtue. 


"^ 


FRIDAY IN EMBER WEEK 
Collecta at St. Mark’s. Station ai the Twelve Holy Apostles 


"The collecta, or place of assembly, whence the stational pro- 
cession used on this day to start on its way to the Apostoleion, 
must have been in the ancient titular Church of St. Mark 
in Pallacinis, which is quite near by. 


The station preceding the solemn ordinations in Rome is 
always at the Church of the Twelve Holy Apostles, partly in 
homage to the holy Apostles whose mission to evangelize the 
world is to be carried on by the Levites of to-morrow, and 
partly on account of the great celebrity to which this venerable 
basilica attained under Julius I and John III. 


The Mass is once again an impassioned longing of the soul 
for the coming Emmanuel. Isaias speaks in the Epistle, and 
describes for us in glowing colors the future emancipator of 
Israel. The Gospel narrates the visitation when Mary begins 
her works as the dispenser of grace. She visits the house of 
Elizabeth ‘and Jesus sanctifies John in his mother’s womb. 
Thus is John the first among the saints to owe all his gifts 
of grace to Mary, and there, under the humble roof of Zacha- 
rias, is sung for the first time that sublime canticle, the Mag- 
nificat, Which shall form the dedication hymn of the first 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1684 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


church of Our Lady, and shall be the daily prayer of the 
Church through all the ages. 

The coming of the Incarnate Word inaugurates a new era. 
We are brought into this new kingdom by the Sacrament of 
Redemption. We pray Our Lord that the sacred outpouring of 
the chalice of salvation, while it cleanses us from old stains, 
may renew our interior life and make us partakers of the 
mystery of salvation, X 


SATURDAY IN EMBER WEEK 
Station at St. Peter's 


In the first ages ordinations took place in Rome only in the 
month of December, usually at the tomb of St. Peter. The 
Pope alone inherits the plenitude of St. Peter’s primacy, and 
in the Twelfth Century it came to be the rule that the papal 
consecration alone was carried out at the altar over the tomb 
of the Apostle. 

The long Mass contains the traces of the fast which began 
after supper on Friday and lasted until the dawn of Sunday; 
in that period there was no Mass on Saturday. St. Gregory 
shortened the primitive vigil and the Mass assumed the form 
in which we have it to-day. The Mass includes the great 
canticle of the Blessings which, in the earlier rite, formed the 
morning doxology. According to the Pontifical now in use, 
Tonsure is conferred after the Kyrie Eleison; the ordination 
of Porters follows the first lesson; of Readers, the second; of 
Exorcists, the third; of Acolytes, the fourth; of sub-deacons, 
the fifth. Deaconship is conferred at the end of the Epistle; 
the priesthood is conferred after the first versicle of the Tract. 

Christianity came into a world in which events were care~ 
fully noted; the oriental religions arose in a primitive world 
lost in the haze of primitive barbarism. It is for this reason 
that St. Luke begins the narrative of the Gospel of Jesus with 
chronological notes concerning the rulers who were then con- 
trolling the destinies of Palestine. ` 

The Messias assumes the consoling name of Emmanuel, God 
with us. The Word Himself will soon come to make His dwell- 
ing-place amongst us and to redeem us, and, in order to show 
by His very name all this merciful plan of salvation, He. will 
be called Emmanuel and Jesus—that is, Saviour. 


FOURTH SUNDAY OF ADVENT 
Station at the Twelve Holy Apostles 


When the vigils were kept there was no station because the 
Mass of this Sunday concluded the night vigil at St. Peter's. 
When this vigil was shortened the second Mass was introduced 
at the basilica of the Holy Apostles. This accounts for the 
use of the same Gospel as in the Mass of Saturday. 

A Roman tradition attributed the compilation of the Grego- 
rian Antiphonary to the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Conse~ 
quently this work was deemed to be intangible, so no altera- 
tions nor additions could be permitted. Hence the chants of 
to-day’s Mass were borrowed from other preceding Masses, 50 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1635 


that the fourth Sunday of Advent possesses nothing peculiar 
to itself save the Offertory, the Epistle and the three Prayers. 

The Offertory is from St. Luke and repeats the gracious 
salutation of the Angel to Mary, interwoven with the blessings 
addressed to her by Elizabeth. The history of the prayer Ave 
Maria, so dear to the piety of the faithful, and grown so 
familiar to us especially through the rosary, begins with this 
splendid Gregorian Offertory which gives us the text of the 
Ave in its original form as it was used throughout the Middle 
Ages. The Holy Mary has been added at a later time out of 
that Christian piety of the time of the first. Franciscans dis- 
tinguished by its tender love for the Blessed Virgin. 


During Advent the Church surrounds the Immaculate 
Mother of God with special devotion, because she, during the 
nine months in which she bore Our Lord in.her womb, made 
it her first thought to sanctify by her love, her humility, her 
entire consecration to Jesus, this period of glad expectancy 
and of preparation for the birth of the Son of God. 


DECEMBER 24—CHRISTMAS EVE 
Station at St. Mary Major 


It was only when Our Lord's nativity was celebrated with 
increasing solemnity that a special Mass was said on this vigil. 
The actual solemnity of December 25, instead of consisting of 
two Masses, one of the vigil and the other of the feast, with 
a third inserted in commemoration of St. Anastasia, ended by 
allowing four Masses, all of them in honor of the Christian 
mystery—viz., one in the evening of December 24 at the begin~ 
ning of the night Office, one at midnight at the first cock- 
crowing, one in the early morning, and one, finally, at the 
hour of Terce. 


Unlike the other vigils, in which the penitential character 
and a sense of sadness predominate, that of Christmas, is full 
of vivacity and holy joy. This is fully in accordance with the 
nature of the heart of man. After so long a period of anxious 
and painful expectation the sudden news of our approaching 
deliverance lightens the heart, while a common joy unites us 
and makes us forget for a moment the hard conditions of 
our life here below. 


DECEMBER 25—CHRISTMAS DAY 
The First Mass—at Midnight. b Station at St. Mary at the 
ri 


The feast of Christmas was from the first a feast of the 
Apostolic See. The fixation of the date resulted from the 
separation by the Roman Church of the celebration of Our 
Savior's birth from that of His other great manifestation now 
placed on the Epiphany. f 

The characteristic feature of the feast of Christmas in the 
Roman rite is the custom of the three Masses, one at the 
first cock-crowing—ad, galli cantum—the next at dawn, the 
third in broad daylight. St. Gregory bears witness to the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1686 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


custom, but it is certainly older than his time, for the biog- 
rapher of Pope Telesphorus, in the Liber Pontificalis, claims 
that it was this latter Pontiff who first introduced the singing 
of the Gloria in excelsis into the midnight Mass at Christmas. 
The Mass at midnight recalls’ the circumstance that Christ 
was born in Bethlehem at midnight. n ~ 

The midnight Mass commemorates the eternal birth of the 
Word of God amid the magnificence of His Father’s glory; the 
Mass at dawn celebrates His appearance in time in the hu- 
mility of the flesh, and lastly, the third Mass, at St. Peter’s, 
symbolizes His final coming on the day of judgment, to judge 
both the living and the dead. : 

In order to reproduce in liturgical form at Rome, as at 
Jerusalem, the scene of the Savior's birth, Pope Sixtus III 
(432-40) had erected in St. Mary Major a sumptuous oratory 
&t the crib, and one which was considered by the Romans to 
be a copy of the original at Bethlehem. —— . : 

At the foot of the crib we say to the Christ Child in the 
ian of St. Alphonsus “Ah, how much it has cost Thee to 
love us!” : : ` 


The Second Mass—at Dawn.. Station at St. Anastasia 


Originally, the stational Mass at St. Anastasia was wholly 
in honor of the martyr of that name, but later on, as the feast 
of Christmas gradually gained in importance, tbat of St. 
Anastasia dwindled down to à commemorative Collect. Under 
the Diocletian persecution this holy martyr was burnt alive 
on this day. The mystical meaning attached by medieval 
liturgists to the hour of dawn had no foundation in the 
Roman custom. . i 

This Mass draws lis chief inspiration from the thought of 
the sun, whose rising already begins to dispel the shades of 
night and leads us to the contemplation of Him who was be- 
gotten, Light of Light, from the bosom of the divine Father 
before the rising of the day-star. : 

Generosity, magnificence and light, these are always the 
marks of God's handiwork. Sin is generally committed in 
darkness and in secret, for the wicked hate the light, but the 
Redemption is wrought upon Calvary in sight of the whole 
world, so that all people, through the light of faith, may 
recognize and adore the crucified Savior. 


The Third Mass—in Daylight. Station at St. Mary Major 
. (at one time at St. Peter's) 


‘The shortness of the winter days and the difficulty of going 
in procession to the Vatican lead to the substitution of St. 
Mary Major as the stational Church instead of St. Peter’s. In 
the Middle Ages the Pope celebrated Mass in the great hall of 
Sicininus with unusual ceremony and great solemnity. 

The Introit is from Isaias: “Behold a child is born to us, 
and a son is given to us," Who, notwithstanding the infinite 
nothingness to which He stoops, is God eternal, the creator 
of the universe, Who rules and governs all things in the power. 
of His Word, and upon Whose shoulder rests the divine and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1637 


universal monarchy. . He, as the brightness and express image 
of the Father, will reveal Him to men, and will be to them the 
envoy of the Most Holy Trinity, the angel or messenger of 
the glad tidings of redemption. : 

The Gospel, from St. John contains, perhaps, the most 
sublime page to be found in the whole of the Scriptures, It 
speaks of the twofold begetting of the Word in His divine and 
in His human nature. As the image of the supreme artificer, 
the Word is at once the prototype and the pattern of all 
that is created; but in Him this image is identical with His 
own substance, so that all things live in Him. : : 

Jesus is born of woman in order that we may one day cease 
to be the children of woman and may be raised to the dignity 
of sonship to almighty God. The Word joins our human nature 
to His person, to make us sharers in the divine grace. 


. DECEMBER 26—ST. STEPHEN, PROTO-MARTYR .. 


Station at St. Stephen’s on the Coelian Hill 


The feast of St. Stephen is one of the oldest in the Liturgy. 
The greatest saints, that would appear, wish to gather around 
the cradles of the Christ-Child as if to give additional grand- 
eur, The Church of St. Stephen on the Celian Hill was finished 
only under John I (523-26). 

In the Prayer we pray to God that we may imitate the 
example of Stephen, not only by forgiving our enemies, but 
by even loving them and asking for them the grace of 
conversion. 

The Lesson or Reading in the Mass contains the trial of 
Stephen as preserved in the Acts of the Apostles, along with 
the account of his martyrdom. 

Stephen is not only a martyr; he is one of the most 
striking personages of the apostolic age; so much so that 
the Greeks give him the title of Apostle, so the Roman Liturgy 
places him in the category of the prophets, doctors and mas- 
ters, whose cruel fate is described to us in the Gospel for 
to-day. 

On this day, then, let us beg, through the intercession of 
St. Stephen, the grace of fortitude, which is one of the seven 
gifts of the Holy Ghost. 


DECEMBER 27—ST. JOHN, APOSTLE AND EVANGELIST 
Station at St. Mary Major 


The feast of St. John is the only feast of an apostle now 
remaining in the Christmas cycle. The station is at St. Mary 
Major, dedicated to the Savior; this basilica seemed the most 
suitable place for the celebration of the Christmas station 
in honor of St. John to whom the Blessed Virgin had been 
entrusted, both on account of the Savior’s crib there pre- 
served, and of the mosaics of Sixtus I commemorating the 
Council of Ephesus, held near the tomb of the Evangelist, 

The Gradual is drawn from that passage of St. John’s 
Gospel in which reference is made to the popular belief 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1688 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


current in the first generation of Christians in Asia that 
the beloved disciple should not die before the parousia or 
last coming of Christ. The advanced age of the Apostle, 
on the other hand, seemed to lend credit to this opinion. So 
St. John, in the very last chapter of his Gospel, desired—as 
a sort of final postscript—to rectify this erroneous inter- 
pretation of the Savior's words. “So I will have him to remain 
till I come, what is it to thee?” The words were uttered by 
Our Lord merely as an hypothesis. “So (if) I will"; but in the 
several oral versions of the episode the conditional and hypo- 
thetical particle "if" was easily passed over; hence St. John 
felt the necessity of explaining the misunderstanding and 
setting the matter right. 


DECEMBER 28—THE HOLY INNOCENTS 
Station at St. Paul's 


The relics of the Holy Innocents are said to have been 
preserved in the splendid church of St. Paul's; the station 
of to-day, however, was determined by the delicate feeling 
of the ancient liturgy that the great solemnities of the year 
should always be celebrated by a station at the tombs of SS. 
Peter and Paul. 

At a very early date the feast of the Holy Innocents mas- 
Sacred by Herod out of fear of Him who was born King of 
the Jews, was placed near the feast of Christmas; hence in 
Rome this day was observed as a day of mourning and pen- 
ance. Purple vestments were used and the faithful abstained 
from fiesh meat and foods cooked in fats. The fast, however, 
is no longer observed. 

The .Gospel describes the flight of the Holy Family into 
Egypt and the massacre of the Innocents. How short-sighted 
is human scheming! At the very time that it tries to thwart 
the designs of almighty God, it is just then that it merely 
serves them the better. Herod is desirous of slaying the new- 
born Messias; this he fails to do, but sends instead a number 
of innocent babes into Limbo, there to proclaim His coming, 
cx tae Savior goes forth to enlighten and to bless the land 
of Egypt. 


DECEMBER 31—ST. SYLVESTER, POPE AND 
CONFESSOR 


Station at the Cemetery of Priscilla 


To-day’s station was celebrated in the Via Salaria, at ihe 
Basilica of St. Sylvester in the cemetery of Priscilla, where 
the great Pontiff of the Church's triumphant peace lay resting 
beside the martyrs Felix and Philip, two of the sons of St. 
Felicitas, and at a short distance from Pope Marcellus and 
the martyr Crescentian. St. Gregory the Great delivered one 
of his forty homilies there; indeed, for many centuries that 
spot was the goal of pious pilgrims when visiting the holy 
Places of the Eternal City. 

St, Sylvester was one of the very earliest saints to receive 
public veneration, even though he was not a martyr, but only 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1639 


a confessor crowned by the Lord, by reason of his exile in the 
caves of Soracte. This title prope martyribus, joined to his 
extraordinary personal virtues and to the circumstance of his 
having inaugurated a new era of splendor and prosperity 
for the Church, availed to surround the brow of Sylvester with 
the aureole of the blessed and make his name famous even in 
the far-off East. Legendary fancy did not fail to take advan- 
tage of the popularity of the great Pontiff: thus he became 
the destroyer of the famous dragon which used to poison the 
air with its breath, a curious but very impressive figure of the 
Church's victory over idolatry. 


JANUARY 1—OCTAVE OF CHRISTMAS: FEAST OF 
THE CIRCUMCISION 
Station at St. Mary in Trastevere 


The Roman Calendars originally made no mention of the 
Circumcision .which came in through the influence of the 
Gallican Liturgies. Rome preferred to solemnize the eighth 
day after the Nativity of Our Lord. 


The Mass and Office for to-day’s feast show a mixed char- 
acter, At first it was merely a question of the Octave of Our 
Lord; then, in connection with the Basilica of Our Lady, 
where the station was held, a special commemoration of the 
virginal motherhood of Mary Most Holy was inserted, the 
Circumcision and Presentation in the Temple being after- 
wards added, although this last, doubtless through Byzantine 
influence, was afterwards expunged from the office of January 
1, so that it should be celebrated on February 2. 


The grand Post-Communion, terse and forcible, yet per- 
fectly balanced and rhythmical, implores through the prayers 
of Mary our purification from sin and our attainment of 
celestial bliss. : 


Jesus in heaven, in the essential brightness of His glory, is 
seated at the right hand of the Father, but here below his 
more fitting throne of mercy and grace is in the bosom of the 
Virgin who holds Him a little babe in her arms. 


JANUARY 5—VIGIL OF THE EPIPHANY 
Station at St. Peter's 


The festive character which originally pervaded the whole 
fortnight after Christmas Day necessarily forbade the keeping 
of this vigil, which, however elaborate, must always bear a 
penitential character. When, about the Eighth Century, the 
stational afternoon Mass was introduced, it was assigned to 
the Vatical Basilica, whither the Pope was accustomed to 
repair from the Lateran on that afternoon with his Court 
for the celebration of Vespers and of the Night Office, This 
explains why the station is noted in the Missal as being at 
the Basilica of St. Peter on two days in succession, 


In the Holy Family of Nazareth authority and personal 
dignity are seen in inverse order. Jesus is the last in the 
house and is obedient to all. Mary, indeed, commands her 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1640 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


üivine Son, but yields obedience to Joseph; and be, out of 
Obedience to the eternal Father who so ordains it, serves both 
Jesus and Mary, giving them commands, thus setting an 
example of the manner in which all prelates and superiors 
should act in the Church of God. 


JANUARY 6—THE EPIPHANY OF OUR LORD 
Station at St. Peter's 


Epiphany means “appearance” or “manifestation,” and 
among the Eastern Christian had originally the same sig- 
nificance as Christmas in Rome, It was the festival of the 
eternal Word, clothed in the flesh, revealing Himself to man- 
kind. Three different phases of this historical manifestion 
were especially venerated—viz., the adoration of the Magi 
at Bethlehem, 'the changing of the water into wine at Cana, 
and the baptism of Jesus in the Jordan. 

The station at St. Peter's is inspired by the same thought 
as that of Christmas Day. In Rome the greater festivals are 
celebrated at the Pastor Ecclesice whose basilica is the sheep- 
fold of the Roman flock. 

The interior life of a Christian is the reproduction of the 
life of Jesus; thus the object of the Church in placing before 
us the annual cycle of feasts is not merely to commemorate 
the great historical epochs in the history of our redemption, 
but also to reproduce in our souls their spiritual teaching. 
Hence in the Night Office of this feast of the Epiphany we 
do not so much adore the Christ who showed Himself twenty 
centuries ago to the Magi, but rather the Christ who has re- 
vealed Himself to us, too, who are now living. 


SUNDAY WITHIN THE OCTAVE OF THE EPIPHANY 
Station at the Title of Pammachius 


On the day following the Epiphany the station was on the 
Celian Hill where once the martyrs John and Paul were 
beheaded and buried; about the Eighth Century it was trans- 
ferred to the Sunday. The Octave of the Epiphany, repeating 
the same mass each day, is of comparatively late origin. 

The Prayer is one of the most beautiful in the Missal. In 
this true theological gem we pray God of His heavenly mercy 
to grant the prayers of His suppliant people that they may 
not only see by the divine light that which they ought to do, 
but may also have strength to carry it out. 


SECOND SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANY 
Station at St. Eusebius 


The ordinary Sundays of the year are never characterized 
by any stational solemnity. This Sunday, counted either 
from Christmas or from the Epiphany in ancient Lection- 
aries, is an exception. Why this day was chosen for a station 
we do not know. Possibly on one of the days following the 
Epiphany there was a procession at St. Eusebius and when 
this procession was abandoned the station was transferred to 

e Sunday. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1641 


.The Communion tells of the miraculous changing of the 
Water into wine and. of the surprise of the ruler of the 
feast, and. brings out fully the meaning of the miracle by 
connecting it with the Holy Eucharist. Our Lord has kept the 
good wine until now because only in this last age of the world, 
ihe Messianic age, as St. John calls it, has He given to men 
the good wine of His Blood in the Blessed Sacrament. Fur- 
thermore, the sweetness of the holy love of God is an inebri- 
ating draught which He keeps until the last. for those who 


serve Him faithfully. ^ 


 SEPTUAGESIMA SUNDAY . 
Station at St. Lawrence-without-the-Walls 


. The Eastern usage regarded Saturday and Sunday as fes- 
tival days, and therefore as exempt from the Lenten fast; 
S0, in order to complete the forty days of Lent, the Greeks 
anticipated the penitential season by some weeks, and from 
this Sunday onward abstained from the use of meat. Among 
the Latins four days had to be supplied making Lent begin on 
Ash Wednesday; the piety of the more devout wished for 
something more. St. Gregory therefore instituted, or at least 
gave definite form to, a cycle of three weeks’ preparation for 
Lent, with three solemn stations at the patriarchal Basilicas 
of St. Lawrence, St. Paul, and St. Peter, as though to: begin 
the Easter fast.under the auspices of the three great patrons 
of the Eternal City. : 

From this. Sunday until Maundy Thursday the Gloria in 
excelsis is omitted in masses of the season. The Collect, 
which immediately follows the litany (at present the Kyrie) 
on days of fasting and penance, truly represents, therefore, 
the ordinary and normal form of the litany as used in the 
ancient liturgy of the Mass and of the Divine Office. 

The fruit of to-day’s meditation on the Epistle of St. Paul 
and on the parable of the vineyard is the uncertainty of 
eternal’salvation: It is not enough for us to have been bap- 
tized or called to a holy state; it is necessary to labor diligently 
and imitate the chosen few, that is, the saints and martyrs. 


SEXAGESIMA SUNDAY 
Station at St, Paul 


To-day’s Mass at the Basilica of St. Paul combines a 
melancholy strain of penitence with notes of rejoicing in 
honor of the Apostle of the Gentlies, i 

The Epistle describes vividly the incredible trial endured 
by St. Paul in his apostolate among the Gentiles. The par- 
able of the sower related in the Gospel, is aptly chosen by the 
Church for this feast of the Apostle Paul, who scattered the 
seed of the good tidings from Damascus and Arabia in the 
east even unto the Pillars of Hercules in the west. 


Many are the evils that threaten our eternal salvation in 
the midst of the world; the. good seed falls on the highway, 
but its growth is prevented in many ways. Each one of us 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1642 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


should resolve at the foot of the altar to make use, as St, 
Paul would have us do, of every means to ensure our final 
salvation, What shall it profit us to gain the whole world, 
if by so doing, we imperil our own soul? 


QUINQUAGESIMA SUNDAY 
Station at St. Peter 


Having assured ourselves by the stations at St. Lawrence 
and St. Paul on the two preceding Sundays of the patronage 
of these saints we go to-day to the Basilica of St. Peter and 
on next Sunday to that of the Holy Savior in order to com- 
mence with full confidence the holy cycle of penance. On 
‘Wednesday of this week the Church begins the Lenten fast. 


In the Epistle, St. Paul attempts to raise a corner of the 
veil which hides the Eternal Love from the eyes of mortals. 
God is the primary and immediate object of the precept. of 
charity, as He is the final end to which the creature tends. 
Nevertheless, the Apostle dwells rather upon His illuminative 
intercourse with men, in so far as they are created in His like- 
ness and are the mystical members of Christ. 


The Gospel gives us the definite announcement of the ap- 
proaching Passion of Our Lord. The miracle of the blind man 
confirms the wavering faith of the disciples. Even the 
Apostles did not yet understand the mystery of the cross; 
how necessary, then, is it for us to meditate upon Christ 
crucified, lest we should fail in a matter of the highest moment, 
towards which the whole of our spiritual life should be di- 
rected—that is, the mystery of expiation through suffering, 


THE LENTEN LITURGY AT ROME* 


From the time of the Apostles two weekly fasts, Wednesday 
and Friday, were regarded as the principal foundation of the 
liturgical week. In the third century in Rome the fast was 
Poona a for three weeks, It was the example of Our Lord's 

orty days' fast in the desert which lmpelled the. Fathers at 
the Council of Nicæa to fix the duration of the fast ordained 
by them at exactly forty days. Through many centuries 
almost down to our time, Lent was regarded as the support 
of Christian training, the “truce of God,” during which period 
even the law-courts and the places of amusement were 
closed, the whole body of the faithful put aside all other 
concerns, and endeavored by practices of penaner and by 
liturgical instruction to renew their spiritual energy in order 
to Tine to a holier life with Christ risen and triumphant over 

eath, 


At Jerusalem, Lent began eight weeks before Easter, a 
custom which was imitated to a certain degree by the Latins, 
when they, too, began the fast on the Wednesday of Quin- 
quagesima—afterwards known as Ash Wednesday—in order 
to make up the four days lacking to thelr Lenten fast of 


From The Sacramentary by Ildefonso Schuster, Cardinal 
Archbishop of Milan. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1643 


thirty-six days. The very first idea of a penitential period. 
in preparation for Easter seems to have arisen with regard 
to the catechumens, who prepared themselves by. prayer and. 
fasting to receive holy baptism on the night before Easter. 


Ash Wednesday has now for many centuries marked the 
beginning of the venerable solemnities of the fast, but in the 
Roman Liturgy it is still possible to discern through subse- 
quent changes different formulas for the beginning of Lent, 
which at various times superseded one another. Three weeks 
before Easter the Pope wearing his crown (regnum), as on all 
great festivals, passed from the Lateran to the stational 
basilica of Santa Croce in Gerusalemme, carrying in his hand 
& golden rose sprinkled with balsam, which he afterwards 
presented to the prefect of the city. 


In the time of St. Gregory the Great the paschal fast began 
on the first Monday of Lent, so in reality only thirty-six days 
were devoted to rigorous penance. This Pope also reorgan- 
ized the stational functions in Rome. The people were accus- 
tomed to assemble at a certain church and await the arrival. 
of the Pope; a prayer (collecta) was said, and then the pro- 
cession moved to the stational church where Mass was said. 
This was usually late in the day, for it was the custom not to: 
take either food of drink until sunset. The season of Lent 
was also the time in which the catechumens were prepared. 
for baptism; at the beginning of Lent their names were given 
to the bishop and later the great scrutiny was held. 


ASH WEDNESDAY 
Privileged Major Feria 
Collecta at St. Anastasia. Station at St. Sabina 


Since the time of St. Gregory this day has inaugurated at 
Rome the forty holy days of Lent, and was called in capite 
jejunii, The canonical penance imposed on public penitents. 
began on this day. In the rite of the blessing of the ashes, 
& last trace remains of the ceremony of the imposition of 
canonical penance on. public penitents. Towards the Eleventh 
Century the disciplinary rule of public penance being done 
away with, instead of the penitents of former days, the Pope, 
the clergy, and the Roman people took part indiscriminately 
in this function, and began to walk barefoot, with . ashes 
sprinkled on their heads, to the Basilica of St. Sabina. 


The collecta or assembly of the people was at the church 
of St. Anastasia, where the ashes were imposed on the. heads. 
of the clergy and people. They then proceded up the Aven- 
tine Hill to the little church founded or rebuilt under Celestine 
I (423-32) by an Illyrian priest by the name of Peter and 
called by the name Sabina even before the relies of the 
martyred St. Sabina were brought thither from the area 
Vindiciani, i 


The rubric prescribes that the ashes blessed on this day 
be obtained by the burning of the palms, or green branches, 
blessed on the Palm Sunday of the preceding year. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1644 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


THURSDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 


Collecta at St. Nicholas in Carcere. Station at St. George 
: in Velabro 


The Basilica of St. Nicholas stands in the ancient forum 
olitorium near the theatre of Marcellus; during the Middle 
Ages it was raised to the status of a deaconry. - 

The station at St. George's was instituted by St. Gregory 
II (715-31), when the cultus of the great Cappadocian martyr 
had become exceedingly popular in Rome. A titular church 
&lready existed here in 482, as an inscription of that date 
‘mentions an Augustus lector de Belabru, but the dedication 
to St. George was certainly of later date. . 

To-day’s Gospel, telling of the centurion of "Capharnaum, 
alludes to the military character ascribed by tradition to St. 
George, which caused him to be specially invoked during the 
Middle Ages as the armed champion of the Christian family. 

The Mass is a call to penance. The Lesson from Isaias 
recalls the warning given to Ezechias of his approaching 
death; the thought of death is a powerful inducement to us 
to change our mode of life. If we would only realize that the 
moment of our passing from this world to eternity may come 
unawares, we would implore earnestly a space of time in 
which to do penance, and resolve to lead a good life. 


FRIDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 


Collecta a£ Santa Lucia in Septizonio. Station at Sts. John 
and Paul 


Santa Lucia in Septizonio is an ancient deaconry which 
stood at the southern corner of the Palatine, near the Sep- 
tizonium of Septimius Severus. 

The stational Ms S was on the Celian Hill, in the Basilica 
of Bizante, erected by that senator and his son Pammachíus 
within the house of SS, John and Paul. The two martyrs had 
suffered death on this spot for the faith, and had been secretly 
buried in a crypt. They were thus the only Roman martyrs 
buried in the very heart of the Eternal City. . 

The Mass sets forth the emptiness of external ceremonies 
where these are not accompanied by an internal spirit of true 
repentance. . The Gospel sets forth the Christian law of love 
and good-will toward our neighbor. To return the courtesy of 
others with equal grace is a rule of good manners that even 
pagans may practice, but in order to be able to pardon injuries, 

to do good without hope of return, we need the example, the 
command, and the grace of Jesus Christ, 


SATURDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY 
Collecta at St. Lawrence in Lucina. Station at St. Trypho 


St. Lawrence i$ Lucina stands on the Via Lata in the 
Campus Martius. The tile of Lucina still stands first in 
hierarchical rank among the -presbyteral titles, and besides 
many other relics of early martyrs, a large portion of the 
gridiron on which St. Lawrence was burnt is preserved in the 
Spacious basilica, consecrated by Pope Celestine III jn 1196. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1045 


The title of St. Trypho is of medieval origin, and appears. 
to have been. built by the famous Crescenzi family. Under 
Clement VIII the building being in & ruinous condition, both 
the station and the relics of Sts. Trypho, Réspicius, and 
Nympha were transferred to the neighboring Church of St. 
Augustine. 

The Lesson of the Mass teaches that in order to receive the 
divine graces, we must break the bond of sin, perform out- 
ward works of mercy, and render God inward and spiritual. 
worship. The choice of the Gospel has reference to the 
numerous miracles obtained by the faithful at the tomb of 
St. Lawrence. The Sabbath is symbolical of the peace of 
God, and of the repose of the soul after the tempests of this 
life. Many desire it but few attain it. He who would rest 
with Christ must first climb the mount of Calvary and die 
upon the cross before he can find peace in the tomb of Joseph 
of Arimathea. - 


FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT 
Station at St. John Lateran 


As to-day is not a day of fasting, there is no collecta pre- 
vious to the stational procession, this procession being a rite 
of a distinctly penitential character, and therefore not in 
keeping with the Sunday festival 

St. Peter's is the ancient liturgical cathedral of the Roman 
Pontiffs, who repair there to officiate on all the great festivals, 
but the habitual seat, the normal residence of the Popes, is. 
the Lateran, and for this reason the Basilica Salvatoris (St. 
John Lateran) can claim the title of Mother and Head of 
all the churches of the city and of the world. ' ` 

In the Mass for this. Sunday great prominence is given to 
Psalm 90 that psalm which was quoted by Satan when 
tempting Our Lord. "The faithful should contemplate with 
special devotion the mystery of Christ tempted in the desert, 
for there is no other which shows more clearly how the divine 
Providence makes even the wiles of the devil serve to our 
sanctification. 


Although the faithful have already been fasting for four 
days, it is only to-day that the Liturgy celebrates the beginning 
of Lent, for until this Sunday nothing has been changed 
either in the divine Office or in the Mass. The proper Preface 
and other -prayers are now used and the Lenten forms are 
followed in the divine Office. 


MONDAY AFTER THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT 


Collecta at Sts. Cosmas and Damian. Station at St. Peters 
Chains 


Pope Felix IV (526-30) constructed the basilica. where the 
collecta in honor of the two celebrated Eastern doctors takes. 
place. During the Byzantine period it was held in very great 
veneration, and crowds fiocked to the sanctuary of the two 
martyred physicians as to a sure source of health. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1646 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


The chains of St. Peter are preserved at the Basilica in 
exsquiliis, dedicated by Sixtus III to the Apostles Peter and 
Paul; the relics of the seven martyred Machabees are pre- 
served under the altar. The Chains of St. Peter are kept there; 
those of St. Paul are at the Ostian basilica. 


The Prayer begs almighty God to illuminate our minds with 
His heavenly light, so that the Lenten fast may not only 
‘discipline our bodies, but may render our souls both contrite 
and earnest. The Lesson from Ezechiel describes a scene 
frequently reproduced in the cubicula of the ancient ceme- 
teries. It teaches the docility with which the soul entrusts 
itself to the care of the divine Shepherd, keeps it from all 
gange, and renders it the object of his heart’s tenderest 
solicitude. ] x 


TUESDAY AFTER THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT 
Collecta at St. Nicholas in Carcere. Station at St. Anastasia 


In the Middle Ages the church of St. Nicholas was one 
of the most central and important of the Roman churches. 
"Ihe funeral ceremony of. Urban II was held here; the name 
in carcere (in prison) also goes back to the Middle Ages. 


St. Anastasia is commemorated in the second Mass of 
Christmas; her feast at Rome is perhaps older than the feast 
of Christmas itself. The church is said to mark the spot of 
the martyr's dwelling; she was a holy widow martyred under 
Diocletian. 


The Lucernare (Psalm 140) of the Gradual is noteworthy. 
In oriental liturgies.it belongs to the Night Office. We must 
bear in mind that for many centuries Rome did not use the 
canonical Office of Vespers, its place being taken by the 
Stational Mass celebrated either during Lent or on the eve 
of some solemn feast, at the very hour of sunset, when the 
Eastern Church was reciting the Office of the Lucernare. We 
learn from the Mass the importance of prayer and medita- 
tion, and how careful should be our preparation to approach 
ihe sacraments. 


EMBER WEDNESDAY AFTER THE FIRST SUNDAY IN 
LENT 


Collecta at St. Peter ad Vincula, Station at St. Mary Major 


The ancient Roman sources speak of three ember fasts, 
not four. Perhaps the actual fixing of the spring ember days 
in the sixth week before Easter dates from a time when the 
paschal fast began only three weeks before the great festival. 


It was customary at Rome on the Wednesday preceding 
the ordinations of the month of March to hold the scrutinies 
of the candidates for the priesthood in the Liberian Basilica 
(St. Mary Major) under patronage of her whom Proculus of 
Constantinople invoked in the Words: “O temple, in which 
God was made a priest." 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1647 


-The first Prayer and Lesson, in this time of fast and on 
this ancient catechetical day, evoked the remembrance of 
Mount Horeb where Moses dwelt for forty days, fasting and 
conversing with God in order to receive from him the Tables 
of the Law. The second Lesson tells of the wonder-working 
bread which fortified the prophet Elias: a typé of the Euchar- 
ist, the true unleavened bread of mortification which, as the 
Soripture says, purifies the soul and leads it to the height of 

alvary. 


THURSDAY AFTER THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT 


Collecta at St. Agatha in Monasterio. Station at 
St. Lawrence in, Panisperna 


The titular church of the famous deaconry of the Suburra 
was dedicated to the Sicilian martyr Agatha; in the eighth 
century a monastery was attached to it. 

St. Lawrence in Panisperna on the Viminal marks the spot 
of his martyrdom. Gregory II who instituted this station 
with a graceful allusion to the splendor of the sepulchral 
Basilica, called the Speciosa, (St. Lawrence-outside-the- 
Walls) in the Introit celebrates the sanctity of the great 
archdeacon, to whose prayers the early Fathers especially 
attributed the final triumph at Rome of the cross over 
paganism. . 


The Mass dwells on fasting and prayer; the Gospel recalls 
the woman of Chanaan who, by humility and perseverance 
in prayer, obtained the cure of her daughter. Our Lord at 
first. appeared to refuse to perform a miracle in favor of a 
Gentile woman; the cure of her daughter showed the mercy 
of God calling to penance the Chanaanite and the publican. 


EMBER FRIDAY AFTER THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT 
Collecta at St. Mark. Station at ihe Twelve Holy Aposiles 


'The church built by Pope Mark (337-40) is reckoned among 
the first erected in Rome. It is possible that the dedication 
to the Evangelist of Alexandria is of later date. Under the 
altar of the Basilica of the Holy Apostles dedicated by John 
III (560-73) are preserved the relies of St. Philip and St. 
James. In the Middle Ages, many bodies of saints were 
brought hither from the Apronian Cemetery on the Via 
Latina, amongst them that of the martyr Eugenia, in whose 
honor the station of the Fourth Sunday in Advent was cele- 
brated in this church. 


The Liturgy insists on the necessity of a reformation of 
life; when baptism was administered to adults, it was ex- 
pected that the sacrament should effect in the catechumen & 
complete change of heart. The Pool of Bethsaida, of which 
the Gospe! (John 5, 1-15) speaks, symbolizes the baptismal 
font of the catechumens, and is, to all the faithful, a figure 
of the adorable Heart of Jesus, through Whose wounded side 
íhey pass into an ocean of love and compassion. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1648 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


EMBER SATURDAY OF THE TWELVE LESSONS AFTER 
THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT 


Collecta a£ St. Mary in Transpontina. Station at St. Peter 


St. Mary in Transpontina stood between the Atlan Bridge 
and the colonnade which led to St. Peter's. The present 
church is not an ancient building nor does it stand on the 
original site, but abọut three hundred yards nearer the 

atican. 


The station is at St. Peter because of the ordinations; 
according to the Roman idea every transmission of eccle- 
Siastical power through sacred orders, was derived from the 
Supreme power of Peter. Therefore ordinations in Rome 
must take place at the Vatican, with this distinction, that 
whereas it was the prerogative of the Pope to receive conse- 
cration at the altar which was over the tomb of the Prince 
of the Apostles, in other cases the ceremony took place in 
one of the adjoining oratories. 


In former days there was no Mass on this morning; the day 
was spent in strict fasting, the whole of the night in prayer, 
Singing psalms, and listening to the reading, both in Greek 
and in Latin, of twelve lessons from Holy Scripture. 'The 
five lessons which now precede the Epistle are the last relics 
of this ancient solemnity; the conferring of holy orders, minor 
and major were joined with them. 


The Gospel of to-day shows us how deeply imbedded was 
the thought of the cross in the heart of Jesus. Even amid 
the glory of Mount Thabor He spoke with Moses and Elias of 
His approaching death, in order to make known the force of 
the love which impelled Him to sacrifice Himself for us. 


SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT 
Station at St. Mary in Dominica 


In early days there was no stational Mass, nor proper Mass 
for this Sunday; there was only the Mass following the long 
fast of Saturday. 'The name given to the Basilica of St. Mary 
on the Celian Hill, in Dominica, is of very ancient origin— 
of the Fourth Century, at least-—when the Lord's house was 
generally called the Dominicum. 


The Mass is made up chiefly of parts of the Mass of 
Saturday. In the Prayer we ask God to behold our poverty, 
our. weakness and our need, and implore His help that our 
bodies may not succumb to outward evils, and our souls to 
Sin. The use of the Gospel of the Transfiguration for the 
second time emphasizes this festival, The early Roman 
Liturgy did not, it is true, devote many festivals to celebrat- 
ing even the most important mysteries of the life and Passion 
of Our Savior, but in its annual cycle it offered to the faithful 
full opportunity of meditating, at the proper season, on all 
the solemn mysteries of the Redemption. The spirit of the 
liturgy is strongly opposed to the novelty so dear to the 
secular mind. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1649 


MONDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT 


Collecta at Sts. Cosmas and Damian. Station at St. Clement 

The basilica of the two holy physicians stands in, the Forum, 
having been adapted from the ancient templum Romuli and 
the templum sacra urbis. í : 

The Basilica of St. Clement (whose name is mentioned in 
the Canon of the Mass) rises on the site of an ancient Roman 
domus, Which tradition connects with his name. During the 
fina] persecution, there was a deliberate attempt to profane 
that sanctified spot, by erecting here an altar to Mithras, 
which, however, under Constantine, gave place once more to 
the cross of Christ. In the Introit (Ps. 25) the martyr him- 
self speaks in the person of the Psalmist: "In the churches 
will I bless the Lord"—that is, in those assemblies which were 
brought together by Clement in his own house, and which 
were the forerunners of the stational gatherings. 


TUESDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT 
^. Stetion at St. Balbina l 


There was no collecta on this day, perhaps because the 
Basilica of St. Balbina stood alone, far away on the Aventine, 
there being no other church in its vicinity from which the 
stational procession could set out. ] 

The foundress:of the titulus Balbine—dedicated at first to 
the divine Redeemer, before it took the name of the martyr 
Balbina, who was buried in the cemetery of Pretextatus— 
was perhaps the matron—Balbina, after whom a portion of 
the Catacomb of St. Calixtus was called. 

The Mass recalls our needs and places them before God. In 
the final Benediction of the people, we pray that the divine 
mercy may favorably accept our supplications, and k ~1 the 
diseases of our souls, so that having obtained the forglvecess 
of our sins, we may truly rejoice in the blessing of Good. 


WEDNESDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT 


Collecta at St. George. Station at St. Cecilia 

The Basilica of St. George still stands on the further side 
of the pons Senatorum, in the regio of the Velabrum. s 

The titulus Cecilie is in Trastevere, in the actual house 
of thé martyr. In 1595, the sarcophagus under the altar con- 
taining her relics was opened, and the body of the holy virgin 
was found in the same. position as it had assumed after the 
fatalblow of the executioner, lying on one side, with the knees 
slightly bent and her arms stretched along the side. 

The privelege which Jesus concedes to His chosen friends 
is that of drinking His chalice. 'The draught is bitter, but 
it gives strength to the soul. Love is nourished on sacrifice 
m. pan, The more we love Jesus, the more we shall suffer 

or Him. 


THURSDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT 
Collecta at St. Chrysogonus. Station at St. Mary in . 
Š : Trastevere : tg 


The Basilica of St, Chrysogonus, in Trastevere, built under 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1650 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


Constantine stands on the same spot as the former house of 
the martyr. 

An ancient tradition says that on the site of the Basilica 
of St. Mary in Trastevere Pope Callixtus (219-24) died for 
the faith, being thrown into a well. The Christians obtained 
from the Emperor Alexander Severus the right to have a 
meeting-place in Trastevere; the present church is near this 
ancient site; a tavern was near-by, the remembrance of which 
may have suggested the choice of the parable of the rich 
reveller in the Gospel. 

The rich man dies and is buried in hell. This is a fearful 
warning for those who allow themselves to be carried away 
by the lure of earthly pleasures. 


FRIDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT 
Collecta at St. Agatha in Monasterio. Station at St. Vitalis 


The meeting-place to-day is in the deaconry of St. Agatha, 
“of the Goths” in the Suburra, which was restored to Cath- 
olic worship by Gregory the Great. 


From there the procession went to the neighboring Church 
of Vestian, dedicated under Innocent 1 (402-17) to the martyr 
Vitalis. The martyrology of Ado confused this Vitalis with 
the saint of the same name at Ravenna. In the Mass, the 
choice of the lesson of Joseph let down by his brothers into 
an empty well, and the Gospel of the wicked husbandmen 
who stoned their master’s son, was suggested by the Acta of 
St. Vitalis, which tell us how the martyr was first buried up 
to the waist in a pit and then stoned to death. 

‘The Church, as though she feared that the very splendor of 
her liturgy might lead simple folk into thinking that Chris- 
tianity consisted merely in holding functions and receiving the 
sacraments, insists continually in her Lenten formulas that we 
should by our good works, give reality to what is so sublimely 
expressed in the liturgy. 


SATURDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT 


Collecta at St. Clement. Station at Sts, Peter and 
Marcellinus 


The church of SS. Peter and Marcellinus is about three 
hundred yards distant from St. Clement's. Pope Damasus as 
a boy learnt the circumstances of the martyrdom of these two 
saints from the lips of the executioner himself. 


As the liturgy of this day lays great stress on the contrast 
between the two brothers, Esau and Jacob, and between the 
faithful son and the prodigal, it is possible that underneath 
there lies an allusion to that executioner, who expiated his 
crime by baptism and penitence. 

We ourselves were once a long way off, like the prodigal son, 
and if we now belong to the household of the faith it is 
because the Good Shepherd has brought us back to the fold. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1651 


We must try to smooth away difficulties, to help on conver- 
sions, and to imitate the angels of God, who rejoice with 
Jesus in heaven over one repentant sinner. 


THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT 
Station at St. Lawrence-without-the-Walls 


Pope Pelagius IT (578-90) added a large upper aula to the 
original Laurentian Basilica and dedicated it to the Blessed 
Virgin. For this reason Leo IV (847-55) decreed that the 
Station of the Octave of the Assumption should be held there, 
and the Gospel of to-day alludes to this dedication by praising 
the great Mother of God. 

In the Epistle to the Ephesians read as the Lesson for 
to-day, St. Paul speaks very appropriately of the divine light 
and its fruits, which are first described in their negative 
aspect, when he warns his hearers against, sensual pleasures, 
evil-speaking, and covetousness, and then in their positive 
aspect, goodness and justice and truth, 

The Church celebrates her solemn stations in the sanctu- 
aries of the martyrs in order to remind us that we are the heirs 
of their spiritual patrimony. Their blood cemented the first 
Christian edifice, and we, as children of the martyrs, possess 
their sepulchres and the places sanctified by their confession, 
inasmuch as we succeed them in the profession of the 
same faith. . 


MONDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT 
Collecta at St. Adrian. Station at St. Mark 


The church of St. Adrian was dedicated by Pope Honorius 
I (625-38) to the memory of this famous martyr of Nicomedia, 
who, during the Byzantine era, was the object of much devo- 
tion in Rome. : 

The stational Basilica de Pallacine, dedicated later on to 
St. Mark the Evangelist, was erected by the Pope of that 
name (337-40), and is the only church in Rome sacred to the 
memory of this devoted disciple of St. Paul, and faithful 
interpreter of St. Peter, who wrote his Gospel after St. Peter's 
death, at the request of the faithful in Rome. 

The scriptural passages read to-day have in mind the 
Eastern origin of the titular patrons of the Basilica, and tell 
us, therefore, of the Syrian Naaman, who, rejecting the 
grander rivers of Damascus, was cleansed from his leprosy 
in the lesser waters of the Jordan. 

Catechumens desiring to be healed from the leprosy of 
infidelity and original sin, must humble themselves, and, 
abandoning the rivers of Damascus—that is, the attractions 
of their former worldly life—must wash themselves clean in 
the pure waters of holy baptism. 


TUESDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT 


Collecta at Sts. Sergius and Bacchus. Station at 
Pudentiana 


The Byzantines built at least five churches in Rome to the 
http://ccwatershed.org 


1652 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


honor of the martyrs Sergius and Bacchus. The one where 
the people collected for the procession. to the Basilica of 
Pudens, was called the Canelicum, and stood in the regio of 
the Montes. The titulus sancti Pudentis was one of the oldest 
of the urban titular churches; ancient ecclesiastical tradi- 
tion asserts that it was sanctified by the sojourn of Peter in 
the house of the senator Pudens, mentioned by St. Paul in 
his epistles. 'The memories of Pope St. Pius I (158-67), of 
his brother Hermas, the mystic author of the Pastor, those of 
Priscilla, Pudentiana, Praxedes, Justin the Philosopher, Hip- 
polytus the Doctor are all connected with the history of this 
house; it was really the papal residence in the secorid century. 

The Lessons and prayers may have reference to St. Peter, 
whose. presence in the house of Pudens was the cause of all 
manner of prosperity and abundance.: Charity and hos- 
pitality. never impoverished anyone, and when the needy are 
given shelter for the love of God it draws down upon that roof 
the blessings of divine Providence. - - . 


WEDNESDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT 
Collecta at St. Balbina. Station.at St. Siztus 


- The distance from the Church of St. Balbina on the Aven- 
tins to that of St. Sixtus on the Via Appia is not great. St. 
Sixtus (Xystus) was the first Pope martyred in the Cata- 
combs; his name is in the Canon of the Mass. 

In ancient times the scrutiny of the catechumens who 
wished to be admitted to holy baptism on Easter Eve began 
to-day; the Mass, therefore, has a distinctly catechetical 
character, especially in the Lessons. 

The Communion speaks of the ways of life; the way of the 
cross, of the sepulchre, and of the descent into Limbo, by 
which Christ passed to the glory of the resurrection. 


THURSDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT 
Collecta at St. Mark. Station at Sts. Cosmas and Damian 

Under the high altar of St. Mark’s rest the bodies of the 
martyrs Abdon, Sennen, and Hermes, transferred thither by 
Gregory IV (827-44). 

The stational Basilica we have already noticed as the place 
of the collecta on the second Monday in Lent. The Mass 
refers chiefly to the anniversary of the martyrdom, and the 
frequent mention of health, sickness, and healing recalls the 
great popularity of the veneration paid to the holy Anargyri 
(moneyless) in those early days. 


FRIDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT . 


Collecta a£ St. Mary ad Martyres. Station at St. Lawrence 
in Lucina : : 


St. Mary ad Martyres is the name given to the beautiful 
Pantheon of Agrippa when it was turned into a Christian 
Church by Boniface IV (608-15). The Romans of the Middle 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Lud 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1653 


Ages. loved this majestic sanctuary, where among other relics 
was preserved in a casket locked with thirteen keys the image 
of the Holy Face. 

Lucina was a matron living in the time of Pope Marcellus 
(304-9) who placed her houses in the Via Lata at the disposal 
of the ecclesiastical authorities; these erected there the 
titulus Marcelli, and, when the church was confiscated, built 
another not far off, in Lucina. Pope Celestine III placed 
under the altar a large piece of the gridiron on which St. 
Lawrence Was martyred. 


The Liturgy now becomes permeated with the thought of 
Baptism. After hearing of the water gushing from the rock 
in the desert, we now read in the Gospel (John 4, 5-42) of 
the living. water which Our Lord promised to the Samaritan 
woman. ‘This second scriptural scene was also familiar to 
the faithful as & type of the sacrament of Baptism, and we 
see it represented as early as the second century in the 
cemetery of Pretextatus. 


SATURDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT 
Collecta at St. Vitalis “ad duas domos." Station at St. Susanna 


St. Vitalis was dedicated by Innocent I (412-17) to the 
martyrs Vitalis, Gervase, and Protase. 'The Basilica of St. 
Susanna is the ancient titulus Gaii, called also after. the 
Saints Gabinius and Susanna, the brother and the niece of 
the Pontiff who performed the dedication; it rises on the 
ruins of an ancient Roman building (the two houses, ad duas 
domos) and was & parish church in the time of Pope Sym- 
machus (498-514). 

'The story of Susanna, so familiar to the early Church, and 
so often reproduced in the paintings of the Catacombs, should 
fill our souls with loving confidence. Susanna prefers to fall 
a victim to the vengeance of her accusers rather than sin 
against God. She places all her trust in the Lord, and her 
prayer becomes her salvation. 

The holy Gospel describing the scene where the woman 
taken in adultery is brought before Christ, is a great con- 
solation to sinners who can never hope to regain the esteem 
of their fellow men but who hear the voice of God within them 
saying: “Neither will I condemn thee.” 


FOURTH SUNDAY IN LENT 
Station at Holy Cross in Jerusalem 


Ever since the time of St. Helen, a large portion of the true 
cross has heen preserved in the basilica in cdibus sessoriis, 
and for this reason the station is held there to-day. Its earliest 
designation was Basilica Heleniana, or more commonly Sancta 
Hierusalem, whence we have those frequent allusions to Jeru- 
salem in to-day’s Mass. 


Sending the golden rose blessed by the Pope as a gift to 
one of the Catholic princes is a ceremony which at Rome gives 
@ special distinction to the Fourth Sunday in Lent. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1654 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


The Introit sounds the note of joy (Latare) in the triumph 
of the holy cross; to-day is the feast of holy Jerusalem. The 
church invites us, as it were, to take a little rest in order to 
recruit our strength before proceeding with renewed fervo 
on the road of penance. . 

The Liturgy, therefore, reminds us of how Our Lord mul- 
tiplied the loaves and the fishes in the desert, and fed there- 
with five thousand persons (John 6, 1-15). That food repre- 
sents the Word of God, which is the food of the soul; it also 
represents the material blessings with which divine Providence 
unfailingly sustains our human nature. 


MONDAY AFTER THE FOURTH SUNDAY IN LENT 


Collecta at St. Stephen on the Coelian Hill Station at the 
.Four Holy Crowned Martyrs 


The circular church of the Proto-martyr Stephen is situated 
less than three hundred yards from the Basilica of the Four 
Holy Crowned Martyrs, which rises fortress-like on the 
hill-side. 

‘The relics of the titular saints (there are three groups of 
four martyrs in Roman History: Clement, Simpronianus, 
Claudius, and. Nicostratus, buried ad duas lauros on the Via 
Labicana; a group of stone-cutters from Pannonia drowned 
in the river Save, and a group of four other martyrs from 
Albano); are preserved in the crypt under the high altar. 

The story of the judgment of Solomon, of which we find a 
representation even in the paintings at Pompeii, teaches that 
the Church herself, rather than the Synagogue, is the Mother 
of souls: the true Mother loves her children. 


TUESDAY AFTER THE FOURTH SUNDAY IN LENT 


Collecta at the Monastery of “Santa Maria Domne Rose.” 
Station at St. Lawrence in Damaso 


The church of the collecta corresponds to the present Sta. 
Caterina dei Funari; at one time Sancta Maria domna rose 
was the residence of the Dean of the Lateran Schola, and in 
1536 Paul III granted it to St. Ignatius Loyola, who founded 
there an institution for poor girls. 

St. Lawrence in Damaso is built on a spot full of memories 
connected: with the family of Pope Damasus (366-84). His 
relics rest under the high-altar. 

The Lesson (Exod. 32, 7-14) contains the beautiful prayer 
of Moses for his people, who had fallen into the sin of idolatry. 
This is perfect love—to be willing that one's name be struck 
off from the book of life rather than let one's own brethren 
perish beneath the justice of God. 

In going up to the feast of Tabernacles only when the 
festival was well begun, Jesus wishes to teach us to love 
and reverence the sacred Liturgy and the rites of religion, 
and shows us that He Himself is the center of creation and 
of all history. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LrIUR«3Y 1655 


WEDNESDAY IN MEDIANA AFTER THEFOURTH 
SUNDAY IN LENT 


Collecta at St. Mennas. Station at St. Paul “iy aiperitione 
aurium" 


The Church of St. Mennas stood on the left bank of the 
Tiber at the first milestone on the Via Ostiensis. ‘The Alex- 
andrians in Rome had such devotion to this Egyptian saint 
that his natalis on November 11 was still honored in the 
Seventh Century by the celebration of the station at his 
sanctuary. 

St. Paul is the prototype and model of catechumens, on 
account of his conversion on the way to Damascus. The 
miracle which Christ worked upon the blind man was renewed 
in a spiritual sense upon the candidates for baptism, to whom 
the Pontiff explained for the first time with solemn rites the 
Creed, the Lord's Prayer and the beginning of the four 
Gospels. - 

The entire Mass is inspired by the thought of the sacrament 
of Baptism. Holiness is the common vocation of all; one 
often speaks nowadays of a vocation to the priesthood or to 
the religious life, but too little is said of the call to the 
Christian: life, which is bestowed on us through the grace 
of holy Baptism. Yet the religious vocation itself does but 
develop in us the call to a Christian life, by means of the 
counsels of perfection. These are not two separate forms of 
Christianity; the Christianity of the Gospel and that of the 
monastic rule are but one and the same Christian profession. 


THURSDAY AFTER THE FOURTH SUNDAY IN LENT 
Collecta a£ St. Quiricus. Station at St. Martin “ad montes? 


The Church of St. Quiricus (at one time St. Quiricus and 
Julitta, Oriental martyrs) is at the foot of the Quirinal hill, 

Through the zeal of Pope Symmachus, two oratories were 
erected beside the anclent titulus equitii, dedicated to the 
first two confessors to whom after the martyrs liturgical 
cultus was paid, Sts. Martin and Sylvester. It is located on 
the Esquiline hill. 

The Mass dates only from the time of Gregory II: the 
sung parts are from other feasts. Both the Epistle and the 
Gospel recount a miracle of raising the dead to life; St. Martin 
of Tours was celebrated as the resuscitator of three dead 
persons, The story of Eliseus is an example of the discretion 
needed by superiors in dealing with those under their care. 


FRIDAY AFTER THE FOURTH SUNDAY IN LENT 
Collecta at St. Vitus in “Macello Liviæ.” Station at St. Eusebius 


The assembly of the faithful was appointed for to-day at 
& church once called ad Lunam. During the Seventh Cen- 
tury, when St. Vitus was a popular Italian saint, this church 
received his name. 4 e 


http://ccwatershed.org 


165g  XCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


Engeus, whose house occupied the site of tbe stational 
churcby Was martyred under the Arian Emperor Constantius 
JI (352300. The nearness of an ancient burying-ground 
may he influenced the choice of the Epistle and Gospel of 
the Mas. 

The -esurrection of Lazarus may be regarded as a type of 
the sac:ament of Penance. Jesus alone has power to convert 
the heart, but He delegates to his apostles and ministers the 
office o? freeing Lazarus from the bands and the winding- 
sheet which envelope him. 


SATURDAY AFTER THE FOURTH SUNDAY IN LENT 


Collecta at St. Angelius “in piscibus." Station at St. Nicholas 
in Carcere 


The gathering of the faithful to-day was near the fish- 
market; the church was in existence before the Eighth Cen- 
tury. The seven martyred sons of St. Symphorosa repose 
here. 

Over sixty churches were dedicated to St. Nicholas: this 
one stands near the ancient site of a public prison, and is built 
on the ruins of a pagan temple of Piety. 

This Saturday is called sitientes from the opening words 
of the Introit. Since the time of Pope Gelasius it has been 
a day for conferring Holy Orders, and was therefore once a 
day of great fast, extending through the night. . 

The Gospel teaches us that if the house of God on earth is 
not to be turned into a house of traffickers—still less can we 
purchase our entrance into heaven. We are to drink with 
joy Zr tne fountains of grace which flow from the blessed 
Eucharist. 


PASSION SUNDAY, OR SUNDAY IN MEDIANA 
Station a£ St. Peter 


The liturgical cycle of the Passion begins with the Mass at 
the Vatican, where Nero crucified the first Vicar of Christ 
and where Symmachus had built an oratory named Sancta 
Hierusalem, as the Sessorian Basilica was originally called, in 
honor of the triumphant Standard of Redemption. 

The Mass of this Sunday is entirely dominated by the 
memory of the Sacrifice on Golgotha, and is one of the most 
beautiful and pathetic in the whole Roman Antiphonary. 
During the fortnight, the early Ordines Romani forbid the 
final doxology. In to-day’s Mass the Judica me is sung at 
the Introit, and is therefore omitted previous to the Con- 
fession before the priest goes up to the altar. 


The communion verse (1 Cor, 11 24-25) expresses the union 
of the daily sacrifice with the Passion of our Lord. The 
liturgical celebration of the Passion begins today; the words 
of St. Paul (as adapted by the Church) emphasize the com- 
memoration of the sufferings and death of Christ in every 
reception of Holy Communion. The whole Christian life (as 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Y 
k 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1657 


St. Ambrose remarked) is linked through its sufferings, austeri- 
ties, self-denials and sacrifices, with the one only sacrifice of 
Jesus Christ. The whole work of salvation is the continuation 
and completion of the mystery of our Saviour’s death and 
resurrection. His sacrifice sanctifies and consecrates all our 
sacrifices and makes of them one offering before God. 


` MONDAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY 
: Collecta at St. Mark. Station at St. Marcellus 


The Church of St. George de Balabru is at the foot of the 
Palatine, where the four-sided arch of Janus stands, and 
where, from remote antiquity, the pagan populace used to 
seek divinations. 

The Basilica of St. Chrysogonus in Trastevere, near the 
classical guard-house of the Vigiles, still preserves under the 
Sanctuary the remains of the dwelling-place of the martyr of 
that name, which dates back to the time of Constantine. 

In the Prayer we ask two things of God: firstly, that He 
would so sanctify our lenten fast that our interior disposi- 
tions may harmonize with our bodily abstinence; and, sec- 
ondly, that our penitence and contrition of heart may obtain 
for us the pardon of our past shortcomings. 

In the Gospel grace is compared to water, because, like 
water, ib extinguishes the fire of the passions, refreshes the 
Spirit, quenches the thirst of immoderate desires, and gives 
life and growth to the beauteous flowers of virtue. 


TUESDAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY 
Station at St. Cyriacus at the Baths of Dioceletian 


A very ancient regulation prohibited the procession and 
the stational Mass on Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays 
throughout the year, except on the feasts of the martyrs. 
Hence the Ordines Romani observe that no station was held 
on this day. 

St. Cyriacus was long venerated at the Basilica of St. Mary 
in Via Lata; his body was brought there during the middle 
ages. . 

The story of Daniel in the lion’s den read in this Mass was 
widely known in the early days of Christianity, for it is 
reproduced in many of the catacombs. St. Cyriacus is said to 
have first exercised, like Daniel, his apostolate at the Persian 
Court, that. of King Sapor. 

In the Post-Communion we beseech God that our frequency 
in drawing near to the holy table may be for us both a 
token and a pledge of our approaching each day nearer to 
the celestial altar and the eternal prize. 


WEDNESDAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY 
Collecta at St. Mark. Station at St. Marcellus 


The Collecta is at the church built by Pope Marcus, where 
the station is held on Monday after the.third Sunday in Lent. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1658 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


The title of Marcellus stands on the Via Lata, on the site 
once occupied by the house of a matron named Lucina. 
Recent excavations have corroborated the data furnished by 
ihe Acta of St. Marcellus, so that we may hold for a certainty 
that the church was erected during the pontificate of the 
martyr who was afterwards buried there. 


The Lenten fast is now drawing to its close, wherefore we 
pray in the Collect that the abstinence which we have prac- 
ticed, being sanctified by the mortification of all our evil 
passions, may serve to enlighten the hearts of the faithful. 
God himself has placed this desire in our hearts, so we trust 
that he will graciously accept it and will grant it abundant 

ruit. 


THURSDAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY 


Collecta at Sta. Maria “in Via Lata.” Station at 
Si. Apollinaris in Archipresbyteratu 


Under the high altar of Sta. Maria is preserved with all 
veneration the body of Agapitus, the famous martyr of Præn- 
este (Palestrina), together with some relics of St. Cyriacus, 
the martyr of the Via Ostiensis. 

On the feast of St. Apollinaris (July 23) the Lesson from 
the Epistle is read dealing with the Prince of Pastors, and 
with humility and faith, because the archbishops of Ra- 
venna began to arrogate to themselves papal honors. St. 
Apollinaris, who came to Rome with St. Peter, was martyred 
in Ravenna in a.D. 79; many churches and chapels were built 
in Rome in his honor during the period of the greatness of 
Ravenna. 

Rome replied to the usurpations of the Patriarchs of Ra- 
venna in the Middle Ages with lessons on humility drawn from 
the Gospels. This is the law ordained by God: the papal 
blessing consolidates and gives increase to the position of her 
sons, but if one of these rises up against the See of Peter, 
he will infallibly be crushed by the majesty of Rome. From 
the Gospel we learn that Jesus desires all humanity to behold 
the Magdalen and repent for their sins. We are not all able 
to fast, nor can we all be apostles, but everyone of us has a 
heart to consecrate to the love of God alone. 


FRIDAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY 


(For the Feast of the Seven Dolors of the B.V. Mary, kept on 
this day, see p. 966 
Collecta at Sts. John and Paul, Station at St. Stephen on 
the Ceelian : 
The Basilica of SS. John and Paul was built by Bizante and 


Pammachius over the very house where the two martyrs suf- 
fered death for the Faith. 


The circular church of St. Stephen was called in Celio 
monte in order to distinguish it from the many churches dedi- 
cated to him in the city itself. Primus and Felician, the first 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1659 


martyrs whose bodies Were brought from extra-mural ceme- 
teries into the city were placed by Pope Theodore I in a small 
chapel of this church. . 

Caiphas the high priest spoke, saying that. Jesus should 
die for the nation, Christ is to die in order to bring together 
all the children of God dispersed throughout the world in one 
great family, which shall be neither Jew nor Greek nor Gentile, 
but only one holy Catholic Church. Stephen receives this 
last wish of his divine Master, and boldly announces it to the 
Hellenist Synagogues of Jerusalem. 

God holds the souls of all men in his hands, and we should 
welcome with open arms those whom he has brought back 
from a long way off, remembering how we, too, had once 
pina dao away, but are now converted to the Shepherd of 
our souls, : 


SATURDAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY 


Collecta at St. Peter “when the Pope gives the paschal alms to 
the poor.” Station at St. John before the Latin Gate 


To signify their close connection with the Apostolic See, a 
host consecrated by the Pope was sent to the titular priests. 
When they said their own Mass they placed in the chalice a 
particle of the host sent to them on this Saturday; abundant 
alms were distributed to the poor. 

In course of time both these ceremonies became obsolete and 
in their place a new station was instituted at the Church of 
St. John before the Latin Gate. The tradition which relates 
that St. John was miraculously preserved from death when 
plunged into a caldron of boiling oil is very ancient, as it is 
vouched for by Tertullian; the first to connect this scene with 
the place before the Latin Gate where the Church of St. John 
now stands is Ado in his Martyrology. 

In the Prayer we beseech God that the people who are dedi- 
cated to Him may increase in the affections of pious devotion 
and may develop by good works that seed of holiness which was 
sown in their haerts at holy Baptism. The school in which 
they must learn this lesson of perfection is the Church herself 
with her Sacraments and her Liturgy; so that.the Christian 
life may become one long chain of graces connected one with 
another, each grace serving to prepare and dispose us to re- 
ceive another. During our present lives every chastisement 
sent by God is for our correction; in the final prayer the 
Church asks for the special help of God that will enable the 
soul to make the acts of contrition and love which must pre- 
cede its reconciliation and forgiveness; then comes the puri- 
fication from sin by the infusion of sanctifying grace. In a 
few days Christ will be lifted up on the cross, whence He will 
draw all men unto Himself. 


PALM SUNDAY 


Collecta at St. Sylvester in the Lateran. Station at St. John 
Lateran 


'The great ceremonies of Holy Week took place in the ancient 
pontifical residence in the Lateran Palace. After the palms 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1660 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURG'5 


were blessed, they were carried to the chapel of St. Sylvester 
and distributed. The Mass was sung in the Basilica of the 
Savior. 


In the blessing of the palms we have an ancient type.of the 
liturgical synaxes or gatherings for the recitation of the 
Divine Office, the instruction of the faithful and prayer, which 
were not followed by the celebration of Mass. This type of 
synaxis, taken from the Jewish rite used in the synagogues of 
the Dispersion, formed part of the Christian ritual from the 
time of the Apostles. 


In our present rite, not all Darts are equally ancient; the 
Colleets or prayers which follow the Preface in the blessing 
of the palms are of ancient origin and sublime conception; in 
them the Church seems to wish to pour out all her love for her 


Redeemer about tc sacrifice Himself for her. 


The Mass begins upon the return of the procession; it dwells 
chiefly upon the sufferings of the Redeemer, His humilia- 
tions and sorrows, though not unmindful of His glorious resur- 
rection. This week was called “paschal” week because the 
sacred Liturgy in these last days of Lent does not separate 
the remembrance of the Saviour’s Passion from that of His 
triuniphant resurrection, The Collect expresses this in beau- 
tiful words. | 


The remembrance of the sufferings endured for our sakes 
by Jesus Christ should be constantly revived in our hearts, 
that it may awaken in them those feelings of love and grati- 
tude of which St. Paul speaks: “Christ has loved me, and has 
given Himself for me. I live, but it is no more I who live, it 
is Christ who liveth in me. I live in His faith." The reading 
of the whole narrative of the Passion of Our Lord is a very 
ancient Roman tradition; the Ordines of the ninth century 
attest it. i 


MONDAY IN HOLY WEEK 
Collecta at St. Balbina. Station at St. Praxedes 


A little way off from the titular Church of Balbina stands 
the Basilica de fasciola (of the bandage), the ancient station 
for this day. Tradition says that St. Peter, when he sought 
to leave Rome to escape persecution, stopped to replace the 
bandage which covered the wound in his leg caused by the 
chains he. had worn ‘in prison. At that moment Christ 
appeared to him. St. Peter inquired: “Domine, quo vadis?” 
(Lord, whither goest Thou?), and Our Lord made answer: “I 
go to Rome to be crucified again.” ‘The vision passed and 
Peter understood from these words that it was in the person of 
his first Vicar that Christ was to be put to death in Rome, and 
m obedience to the implied command, he returned in all haste 
o the city. 


The title of Praxedes has been the station since the end of 
the Middle Ages; an ancient mosaic representing the Blessed 
Virgin and SS. Praxedes and Pudentiana is venerated here. A 
column of reddish jasper brought to Rome from Jerusalem in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 166i 


1223 is affirmed by tradition to be the one to which Our Re- 
deemer Was bound for the scourging at the pillar. : 

In the Mass, Christ calls upon His Father, protesting His 
own innocence and imploring him to curb the attacks of Satan 
upon the human race. : 

The Gospel, recounting the anointing of the feet of Jesus 
with the spikenard of great price, and the remarks of Judas 
Iscariot, are reminders of the coming betrayal, Passion and 
death. The sweet perfume is the symbol of the perfection of 
the contemplative life, which the worldlings look upon as 
wasted, but which fills the Church of Christ with sweetness. 


TUESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 
Collecta at Sta. Maria in Portico. Station at St. Prisca 


In the porch of the palace of Galla, the daughter of the 
consul Symmachus, a medieval church existed. Galla, on 
entering a convent, turned her own house into a hospital and 
refuge for the poor, in the time of Pope John I (523-26). A 
new church now exists, a little distant from the ancient site. 


The Basilica of St. Prisca on the Aventine is rightly asso- 
ciated with the Roman domestic church of Aquila and Pris- 
cilla. saluted by St. Paul (Romans 16, 3, 5). It is one of the 
most ancient sanctuaries in Rome, hallowed by the presence 
and ministry. of St, Peter and St. Paul. Under the high 
altar lies the body of Prisca, a virgin and martyr (not the wife 
of Aquila and disciple of St. Paul). 

The Mass is a celebration of the mysteries of the Passion 
of the Redeemer, that we may derive therefrom the fruit which 
ihe Church offers us in the holy Liturgy. We are not simply 
commemorating an historic event. 'The works of Christ bear 
fruit when they are recalled, and have the same divine power 
when the Church expounds them to the Christian world to-day 
as they had when they were first done or spoken before the 
Jews. 


Only in the Middle Ages was St. Mark's account of the Pas- 
sion introduced as the Gospel for this Mass. 'The Psalm of the 
Introit (Ps. 66) is the most beautiful prayer that we can, in 
union with the Church, lift up to Christ crucified; may the 
light of His countenance shine upon us; may God have mercy 
on us and bless us. His dying eyes are fixed on us in love, and 
that glance is a living and shining ray which enlightens the 
whole world. 


WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK 


Morning synaxis a£ the Latern. Collecta at St. Peter in 
Chains. Station at St. Mary Major 


In the early Roman church, there was no Liturgy for this 
day; it was kept as we now keep Good Friday; the Mass was 
omitted and only the Litany solemnly recited. The Mass was 
reserved for the evening, in St. Mary Major. By the time 
of St. Leo the Great, this day already had its Mass. It was 
the rule that it be celebrated in St. Mary Major, to entrust 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1662 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


as it were the aspirants for Baptism to her loving care who 
on Good Friday will be named the Mother of Mercy and the 
Advocate of the human race. 

The Introit announces the triumph of the Cross; the 
Church desires to confirm our faith in Him whose Passion is 
read in the Gospel according to St. Luke, Whom to-morrow 
we shall see crucified between two thieves. The crucifixion 
is the summary of Catholic belief. The Cross is the crown 
of all the works of God, and the masterpiece of His love. God 
is well pleased with it; He cannot hear it commemorated nor 
behold its image without being moved with pity towards us. 


MAUNDY THURSDAY 
Station at the Lateran 


The Basilica of the Savior, or the Church of St. John 
Lateran, is the scene of the solemn rites with which the 
Church commences on this day the celebration of the paschal 
feast. Originally there were three Masses, one in the morn- 
ing for the reconciliation of public penitents, another for the 
consecration of the holy oils destined for Extreme Unction 
and Baptism, and a third at the close of the day in commem- 
oration of the Last Supper and for the Easter Communion. 
These rites have now been simplified, and the holy oils are 
blessed in the Mass of the Easter Communion. After the Mass 
of to-day, Holy Communion is not distributed until the Res- 
urrection has been celebrated in the liturgy. For detailed de- 
scription of the ceremonies of Maundy Thursday, see note in 
proper part of the Missal for this day. 


GOOD FRIDAY 


Collecta at the Lateran. Station at the Holy Cross in 
Jerusalem 


The Roman Basilica, Holy Cross in Jerusalem, is to-day’s 
station, for Christ had said, “It cannot be that a prophet 
perish out of Jerusalem.” Formerly, the Pope walked bare- 
foot from St. John Lateran, swinging a censer filled with pre- 
cious perfumes before the wood of the true Cross, carried by a 
deacon. 

Originally, there was not even the Mass of the Presanctified 
on this day, as a sign of deep mourning. Our present rite 
does not go back beyond the Middle Ages, and represents the 
order used in the titular churches of Rome, in which the Pope 
was never present. For detailed description of the ceremonies 
or Good Friday see note in proper part of the Missal for 

s day. 


HOLY SATURDAY 
Collecta at St. John Lateran, for the catechumens 
In olden days the paschal fast was very strict, extending 
from the evening of Good Friday until the dawn of Easter 
Sunday. In Rome, not even children were dispensed from this 
fast; this was also the rule in the Celtic Church. Mass was 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1663 


not celebrated on this day, as the whole Church was watching 
in devout expectation until the night should come in which 
the mystery of Christ's Resurrection should be celebrated, The 
night between Holy Saturday and Easter Sunday was spent in 
prayer; Tertullian speaks of this custom as a law. It was only 
in the later Middle Ages that the ceremony was definitely 
anticipated in the afternoon, and eventually, as now, in the 
morning of Holy Saturday. 


The first ceremony is that of the Lights, or Easter fire 
(Eucharistia lucernaris). It seems to have a twofold origin: 
the Easter fire of the Celtic Churches and the sacred rite of 
lighting the evening candle, to burn throughout the Jong vigil; 
it was not among the primitive rites in Rome, but was adopted 
during the Carlovingian period. 


Next follows the vigil, with its primitive form of the Divine 
Office, with the ancient prophecies whose reading filled the 
night. Then came the blessing of the font and the Baptism 
of the catechumens, followed by the Mass. For detailed de- 
scription of the ceremonies for Holy Saturday see note in 
proper part of the Missal for this day. 


EASTER SUNDAY 
Station at St. Mary Major 


Throughout this paschal week the Roman Liturgy is en- 
tirely absorbed by two great thoughts, that of the Resurrection 
of Our Lord and that of the Baptism of the neophytes. These 
are, as it were, two mysteries which mutually complete and 
explain each other. Each is a symbol of the other; the one 
is the prototype, the other the antitype; but neither can be 
understood if considered by itself, for the regeneration of souls 
to the life of grace through the sacrament of Baptism, after a 
spiritual manner which yet is full of reality, is a new Resur- 
rection of Christ in His Mystical Body. 


'There is no longer any mention of fasts and corporal pen- 
ances, but instead, visits are paid to the great Roman Basilicas, 
the white-clad band of neophytes being conducted thither as 
in a triumphal procession. 


After the paschal vigil of Holy Saturday at the Lateran the 
first basilica to be visited is that of the Mother of God on the 
Esquiline, for it is fitting that to her, before any other, the joys 
of the Resurrection should be announced, to her who more 
intimately than any other shared in the Passion of Jesus. 


The Introit is derived from Psalm 138, which extols the 
knowledge and the presence of God that pervade the inner- 
most part of our being. 'The antiphon has, however, been 
&dapted to the paschal solemnity. 'Truly Christ fell asleep 
upon the cross, having yielded up His spirit to His Father, 
and now He awakens in the loving arms of the Almighty, who 
has accepted the spotless victim spontaneously offered to Him, 
and, pressing Him to His bosom, has revived within Him the 
Spark of His own divine life. Christ has indeed arisen from 
the dead. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1664 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


In the Postcommunion we are reminded that the Holy 
Eucharist is a pledge of the Communion of Saints, uniting the 
hearts of all the faithful in the spirit of love. This is why, in 
olden days, the faithful, at the moment of réceiving Holy 
Communion from the hands of their bishop, gave him the 
kiss of peace, of which we find a last trace in our present 
custom of kissing the ring of a bishop, 


The Holy Eucharist is not only for the commemoration of 
the death of Our Lord, it is also a representation of Him in 
His glory. Therefore, whilst it sows in us the seeds of death, 
that we may learn to die with Christ, it gives us at the same 
time a part and share in His Resurrection. 


EASTER MONDAY 
Station at St. Peter 


Among the early Christians the Easter festivities were pro- 
longed for the entire week; to no other feast was so much 
solemnity given. During this week Rome kept continuous fes- 
tival; business transactions were suspended; every morning the 
stational Mass. was celebrated at one of the chief basilicas. 
The station at St. Peter's brings to his tomb the newly bap- 
tized and bears witness in the Mass to the lively faith of the 
Apostle in whose house to-day the Roman Church is desirous 
of renewing, as it were, the paschal feast. 


In the Epistle St. Peter lifts up his voice and proclaims the 
glory of Christ's Resurrection. In the Gospel mention is 
made of the apparition of Our Lord to Peter on the evening 
of Easter Sunday. The disciples on the way to Emmaus knew 
the Lord in the breaking of the bread. It is probable that 
this was the eucharistic bread; as the Savior at the Last 
Supper received the Eucharist first Himself, in all likelihood 
He did so again after His Resurrection. 

The Prayer speaks of the paschal Sacrament as being closely 
bound up with the redemption of the world. The spiritual 
Israel has come forth from the slavery of Egypt. May the 
Lord then protect this newly won liberty. 


EASTER TUESDAY 
Station a£ St. Paul 


After visiting St. Peter's, it was fitting that the neophytes 
Should at once be brought to the Doctor of the Gentiles, beside 
whose tomb they had learnt the first rudiments of the new 
law of the Gospel. Therefore in the Lesson from the Acts of 
the Apostles chosen for to-day, it is Paul who announces to the 
faithful the Resurrection of the Savior as Peter did on Easter 
Monday. 

The Gospel from St. Luke describes the first appearance of 
Jesus to the Apostles. As the Resurrection of Our Lord is 
the central tenet of the Christian faith, so the Divine Wisdom, 
in order to take away all excuse for the unbelief of the syna- 
gogue, willed that the miracle should be proved beyond all 
Possibility of doubt. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1665 


In the Prayer with solemn simple words a rule of life is set 
rth to-day surpassing the heights to which any mere human 
tind could rise. The Church prays that God may grant to 
1@ baptized realization of all which Baptism means inas- 
wch as it communicates the very life of Jesus Christ Him- 
1f.. In the Postcommunion the Church teaches that there 
re two kinds of Communion, the sacramental and the spir- 
ual. By the first we partake actually of the body dnd blood 
f Christ; by the second we live by the spirit of the Eucharist, 
S the sacramental Communion can be received only at cer- 
iin times and in certain places, Our Lord unites the soul so 
itimately to Himself in the Holy Eucharist that it lives by 
tis spirit and breathes in unison with His heart. Such, in 
s highest sense, is spiritual Communion. 


WEDNESDAY IN EASTER WEEK 
Station at St, Lawrence-without-the-Walls 


To-day we honor St. Lawrence, the Cross-bearer of the 
‘oman Church, to express our gratitude for the favor shown 
y him to the catechumens in bringing them to holy Baptism. 

The Gospel gives the account o£ the third appearance of the 
isen Savior to the Apostles. On the shores of Lake Tiberias 
t. John, the virgin soul among the Apostles, sees him first, 
ut Peter, the most ardent and the most impetuous, in thé 
igor of his faith throws himself into the water and is the 
rst to reach the divine Master, whilst the others slowly fol- 
win the boat. The fishes brought by St. Peter at the com- 
land of Jesus are interpreted to represent the neophytes 
aptized on Holy Saturday. 

Throughout the paschal season the Church displays a great 
eration for the martyrs, of which the first evidence is seen 
ay at the tomb of St. Lawrence. The reason of this devo- 
s that the martyrs have a special claim to the glory of the 
ection, since they have participated more closely than 
in the ignominy of the Cross, , 


THURSDAY IN EASTER WEEK. 
Station a£ the Twelve Holy Apostles 


er the high altar of the Church of the Twelve Apostles 

“*presérved the relics of the Apostles Philip and James only; 
he stational feast is celebrated in honor of all the Apostles 
3gether. The Lesson from the Acts of the Apostles deals 
ith the conversion of the treasurer of Candace, Queen of the 
ithiopians by Philip the deacon, not the Apostle. 

The Gospel gives the account of the appearance of the risen 
&vior to Mary Magdalen; this occurred before He sbowed 
limself to the Apostles, but in the Liturgy it is put back until 
3-day on account of the respect-for them. us 
The words of Jesus to the Magdalen are very consoling; by 
he Resurrection Our Lord has linked humanity to Himself 
y an intimate bond. Jesus is truly our Brother, God is in 
ery deed our Father. By the death of Christ we have gained 
ar more than we had lost by sin, and it is in this sense that 
he deacon sings in the Edster prcconium: “O happy fault, 
hat was worthy of so great a Redeemer.” 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1666 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


FRIDAY IN EASTER WEEK 
Station at St. Mary ad Martyres 


In the Seventh Century the Roman Pantheon was dedi 
cated to St. Mary and the heroic sons of the Roman Church 
who had suffered martyrdom. The martyrs indeed seem t 
have & particular right to the glory of the Resurrection oi 
account of their perfect resemblance to Christ crucified; an 
many ancient liturgies kept & special feast in their honor ij 
the very midst of the Easter festival. To-day’s station ai 
Martyres remains as a last record of this early liturgical tra 
dition, for, later on, the collective feast of the martyrs wa 
transferred, even in Rome, to the middle of the month of May 
and still later to the first day of November. 


The Introit contains an allusion to the paschal feast of th 
neophytes, who, like the Israelites of old, have escaped fron 
the slavery of Egypt across the Red Sea, which is a symbol o 
holy Baptism. The enemy who was overwhelmed by th 
waves is Satan, or sin. 

The doctrine taught in the lesson taken from 1 Peter 1 
that contained in the article of the creed: “He descended int 
hell.” Among the souls in Limbo were patriarchs anc 
prophets and some who had paid no heed to the warnings o 
se ia he predicted the destruction of the world in th 

ood. 

The words must not be taken to mean that Christ preacher 
in hell in order to convert the souls who had already beei 
condemned for their sin of unbelief; for the state of the sou 
cannot change after death. Christ descended into the abode o 
the dead to announce both to the good and to the wicked th: 
redemption now accomplished; to the good for their supre 
consolation, to the wicked as a further reason for their cf 
demnation. 

In the Communion the mission of the Church to te 
nations and baptize is proclaimed. 


SATURDAY IN EASTER WEEK 
Station at St. John Lateran 


The conclusion to-day of the baptismal celebrations 
the neophytes together again in the Lateran Basilica best 
the font in which on Easter Eve they were born to newnes 
of life. To-day’s stational liturgy seems to be influenced mor 
than ever by the thought of purity and innocence, like a lovin; 
mother carried away by the beauty of her newborn child. 

On this day in the early Roman Liturgy the Pope used t 
distribute to the people the Agnus Dei of the blessed wa) 
mixed with sacred chrism, on which was impressed the imagi 
of the Lamb of God. This custom, one of great antiquity, tool 
place during the Mass, whilst the schola of the cantors chante 
the invocation Agnus Dei before the Kiss of Peace precedini 
the Communion. 

The Epistle explains the teaching of St. Peter to the firs 
Christian converts about the sublime dignity to which the: 
have been raised by Baptism. The Gospel befits the retur 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1667 


of the newly baptized to the Lateran Basilica; Peter is the 
pastor whose words have taught the neophytes; John is the 
co-titular patron of the Lateran baptistry, so that it is in his 
house, as it were, that the station is celebrated to-day. 


After eight days Jesus showed Himself to His Apostles say- 
ing: *Peace be to you." When time is drawing to an end and 
the last day is at hand, He will appear once more to His 
Church, and by the gift of His peace will strengthen her 
against the final persecutions of Antichrist, 


LOW SUNDAY (OR DOMINICA IN ALBIS) 


In the morning, Station at St. Pancras; in the afternoon, at 
Sts. Cosmas and Damian 


Low Sunday, so-called in English, by contrast with Easter 
or High Sunday, is known in the Liturgy as Dominica in Albis, 
the Sunday of the laying aside of the white robes; for in early 
eges it was on the evening before this Sunday that the neo- 
phytes, or converts, baptized together on Holy Saturday and 
then solemnly robed in white, the color symbolical of the 
Innocence recovered by them through the grace of the sacra- 
ment, returned to the use of the ordinary habiliments of civil 

e. 

From the time of St. Gregory the Great, the Basilica of the 
martyrs outside the walls were never chosen as the object of 
the stational processions on account of their distance. On the 
Octave of Easter, when everything is eloquent of spiritual 
youth, an exception is made in honor of the tomb of a young 
martyr, the fourteen-year-old Pancras or Pancratius. 

According to the ancient Roman tradition Easter Week 
ended with the Vespers of the Saturday after Easter; hence 
to-day the neophytes lay aside their white garments as a sign 
that the festival is over, and resume their ordinary dress, and 
the Church in the Collect at the Mass speaks of Easter as of a 
festival which has already taken place. 


The Gospel recalls the institution of the Sacrament of 
Penance. It was fitting that the Lord should on the very 
day of the Resurrection institute that sacrament which takes 
away sorrow and mourning in this world and calls sinners to a 
new life of sanctity. In memory of that fact Catholic tradi- 
tion still imposes on the faithful the duty of receiving abso- 
lution from & priest before receiving their Easter Communion. 

When the veneration of the martyrs Sts. Cosmas and 
Damian became general in Rome, the Easter stations had been 
for a long time already settled; however, under Felix IV a sta- 
tion was assigned to the Basilica of Sts. Cosmas and Damian, 
on the second Sunday after Easter. As this conflicted with 
the station at St. Peter, it was put back until the afternoon of 
Low Sunday, 


SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 
Station at St. Peter 


On this Sunday St. Gregory the Great delivered his mag- 
nificent homily on the Gospel of the Good Shepherd, near the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1668 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


iomb of the first universal pastor. Christ founded the papal 
primacy on the unshakable faith and intense love of Peter; 
&nd he, following in his Savior's steps, did not hesitate to 
give his life for the flock entrusted to him. I 

The devotion to Jesus the Redeemer under the figure of the 
Good Shepherd was dear to the faithful from very early 
times; in the catacombs Christ is frequently represented as 
a shepherd. The liturgical and traditional use of the Gospel 
of the Good Shepherd on the second Sunday after Easter is 
very old. Jesus, therefore, presents Himself to us to-day as 
the “Good Shepherd” and tells us what will henceforth be His 
relationship with His flock. Of those outside the fold Our 
Lord speaks gently; not a word of reproach but merely a state- 
ment of facts. 

In the Postcommunion we beseech almighty God that, hav- 
ing participated in the sacrament which causes us to live 
through his own life, he will grant us the enjoyment in 
eternity of the grace we have to-day received. How wonderful 
is the thought that the best preparation for a Holy Communion 
is that Communion which precedes it! 

For the remaining Sundays of Eastertide no stational Church 
is assigned. 


APRIL 25—ST. MARK 
The Greater Litanies 
Collecta at the Title of Lucina. Station at St. Peter 


The Litanies and the Mass of Rogation for this day are of 
ancient origin, except the Introit, which in early days was 
replaced by the Litany in processions. The feast of St. Mark 
is of much later origin. 

The pagan festival, Robigalia, occurred on April 25th; 
young people used to go across the Milvian bridge to sacrifice 
to Robigus who preserved grain from blight. The Christian 
procession formed at St. Lawrence in Lucina and went by the 
Flaminian Way over the same bridge, where the sign In hoc 
singo vinces appeared to Constantine. Then going along the 
Tiber, passing in back of Castel Sant Angelo entered St. 
Peter’s. The people were thus taught that it was not the 
favor of the heathen god, but a devout life, humble prayer, and 
the intercession of the saints, especially that of St. Peter, the 
Pastor ovium, which would disarm the justice of God offended 
by our sins. This rite is called the Greater Litanies, because 
it was of a much more solemn nature than the ordinary sta- 
tional litanies. 

The procession is a survival of classical tradition incor- 
porated into religious customs; the Church preferred to give 
& spiritual significance to observances implanted in the hearts 
of the people, rather than suppress them partially. 

The Litany still preserves the very ancient type of prayer 
which ended the night vigil and served as a transition between 
the vigil Office and the offering of the Holy Sacrifice. The 
oldest part of the Litany is that which begins with the words 
“Through the mystery of thy holy incarnation” which belongs 
to primitive Christianity. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1669 


'ÜThe whole Mass shows us how highly we should value 
prayer. Even in the middle of the night, and even to the 
extent of seeming importunate, our prayers should rise to 
God, because our miseries and our weaknesses are so numer- 
ous, and because God has decreed that His grace shall be 
granted to us only on the wings of prayer. 

St. Mark, who was by birth a Jew, was converted to the 
Faith by St. Peter, whom he afterward accompanied to Rome, 
as secretary or interpreter. St. Peter sent him to Alexandria in 
Egypt, and he was first bishop of that city. He governed his 
See for about twenty years and in the end was martyred, A.D. 
70, by the heathen. His symbol is a lion, for his Gospel begins 
with the mission of John the Baptist in the desert and the 
voice of the lion resounds in desert places. 


MONDAY AFTER THE FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 
Station at St. Mary Major. The Rogations 

In Rome, the Litanies on St. Mark’s day had a festal char- 
acter. The triduum of penitential litanies before the feast of 
the Ascension was first instituted at Vienne by St. Mamertus 
about the year 470, and was accompanied by fasting anc 
abstention from servile work. When ttome adopted this cus- 
tom the fast was abolished, and the three days' prayer re- 
tained. The procession and Mass followed the same order as 
on April 25. 


TUESDAY AFTER THE FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER 
Station at St. John Lateran. The Rogations : 
This station is a proof of the late introduction of the Roga- 
tions into the Roman Liturgy. The Lateran Basilica is no 
longer called the Basilica of the Savior, but of St. John the 
Baptist, to whom is thus given the place immediately after the 
Blessed Virgin and before the Apostle Peter. St. John the 
Baptist is the type of that penitence which disposes us to 
ask for and to obtain grace. The procession and Mass fol- 
lowed the same order as on April 25. 


WEDNESDAY BEFORE THE ASCENSION 
Station at St. Peter. The Rogations 


This station at the Vatican Basilica on the last day of the 
Rogations Was instituted out of veneration for the tomb of the 
Apostle, and in order to assimilate as far as possible the lesser 
litanies to the greater ones of April 25 which ended at the 
Basilica of St. Peter. The Litany of the Saints is & jewel of 
ancient prayer; in its present form it dates from the Tenth 
Century. The names of the saints are the glory of the 
Church; the thought of them fills us with hope. 'The proces- 
sion and Mass followed the same order as an April 25, 


ASCENSION DAY 
Station at St. Peter 


The liturgical festival of the Ascension, whilst less ancient 
than that of Pentecost, is one of the oldest of the cycle, was 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1670 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


already so universally observed that St. Augustine was able to 
Attribute its institution to the Apostles themselves. At Rome, 
the Pope, after the night Office was concluded, and after Mass 
had been celebrated at the altar of St. Peter, was crowned 
by the cardinals, and towards the sixth hour was accom- 
panied by bishops and clergy to the Lateran. 

On this day Jesus was taken up into heaven; His faithful 
disciples continued to gaze heavenward. The contemplative 
vision of Paradise is reserved, however, for those who have 
already passed into the Church Triumphant. : 

The supreme glorification of the Head who is this day en- 
throned at the right hand of the Father in heaven affects the 
members also, like the precious balsam which, as the psalmist 
tells us, descended from the head of Aaron on to his flowing 
beard and on to his gorgeous pontifical vestments. This 
spiritual unction is the gift of the Holy Ghost, which Christ 
obtains to-day from heaven for his Church. Hence the con- 
nection between the Ascension and Pentecost is very close, nor 
can we understand the one without the other. 


SUNDAY AFTER THE ASCENSION 
Station at St. Mary “ad Martyres" 


On this day when the Pope celebrated Mass at Sancta Maria 
rotunda, formerly in the Pantheon, he preached about the 
coming of the Holy Ghost; to illustrate his words a shower of 
roses in figura ejusdem Spiritus Sancti (as a figure of the 
same Holy Spirit) was scattered from the central opening in 
the roof upon the people as he preached, 


THE NIGHT VIGIL OF PENTECOST 
Station at St. John Lateran 

In ancient times Baptism was administered on this night 
in the Lateran exactly as on Easter Eve; but in the Twelfth 
Century, when the ceremony had already been anticipated on 
the afternoon of Holy Saturday, the Pope went at sunset to 
celebrate solemnly Vespers and Matins at St. Peter's, In 
private Masses the Lessons, the Litany, etc., are omitted, and 
the Introit is recited as on the Wednesday after the Fourth 
ord in Lent on the occasion of the great baptismal scru- 

nies. 

Throughout the Mass there are references to Baptism and 
Confirmation. Although Baptism is distinct from Confirma- 
tion, yet the latter takes its name of Confirmatio from the 
fact that the coming down of the Holy Ghost into the soul 
of the neophyte completes the work of his supernatural regen- 
eration. Through its sacramental character it confers on 
him a more perfect likeness to Jesus Christ, impressing on his 
en the final seal or ratification of his union with the divine 

edeemer. 


PENTECOST SUNDAY 
Station at St. Peter 


Peter is the leader around whom gathers the little flock of 
Sion on this first Christian Pentecost, and he inaugurates 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1671 


to-day his pontifical primacy when he announces for the first 
time the Gospel message to the representatives of the various 
nations, without distinction of race or nationality, of country 
or State. 

On this day Christ, risen from the grave and seated at the 
right hand of the Father, communicates His own divine life 
to the members of His Mystical Body through the outpouring 
of the Holy Ghost. So the Church having attained its full 
development, now first appears before the world. 


To appreciate the Introit it should be heard with the-ma- 
jestic and joyful melody which the ancient Gregorian music 
has allotted to it. 


The Sequence, Veni, Sancte Spiritus, attributed to Innocent 
TII, replaced under Pius V an older one of great beauty. This 
Sequence is repeated daily throughout the Octave. 


The Holy Ghost descends in power to vindicate the inno- 
cence of Jesus by filling the Church with such surpassing 
sanctity that it becomes, as it were, a fire prefiguring the final 
judgment on the enemies of God. The faithful kneel at the 
invocation of the Holy Spirit, Who at the last day requires 
the restoration of the Christian soul to the body which has 
been His mystical temple. 


MONDAY IN PENTECOST WEEK 
Station at the Apostles, at the Eudoxian Title ad Vincula 


Originally the feast of Pentecost brought to an end in Rome 
the fifty days of the Easter celebrations and introduced the fast 
of the Ember Days of the summer quarter. Afterwards it 
became customary to continue the festivity for two more 
days, the Monday and the Tuesday, and, finally, after the 
time of St. Leo the Great it was extended like the Octave of 
Easter through the entire week. 


The station was at St. Peter in Chains to avoid having two 
successive stations at the Vatican. 


To-day’s Gospel shows the immense contrast between God 
and man. God so loves the world that, in order to save it, He 
sacrifices His only-begotten Son, whilst mankind repays this 
supreme love with utter ingratitude and obstinately chooses 
darkness rather than light. 


TUESDAY IN PENTECOST WEEK 
Station at St. Anastasia 


The titular church of St. Anastasia, once the Court church 
during the Byzantine period, is chosen for to-day’s station 
instead of the Basilica of St. Paul, as the latter is too far 
out for a procession at this season of the year when the 
weather is too warm. 

During the Octave of Pentecost the Church celebrates more 
especially the glories of the grace of the Holy Ghost and His 
secret, work of sanctification in the Mystical Body of Christ. 
Thus to-day she repeats in the verse for the Communion the 
words of Our Lord: “The Spirit who proceedeth from the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1672 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


Father, he shall glorify me," and this glorification consists 
chiefly in our sanctification and in the growth of the King- 
dom of God in our souls. : 


EMBER WEDNESDAY IN PENTECOST WEEK 
Station at St. Mary Major 


The station is at St. Mary Major, as is the rule in Rome 
whenever the scrutinies of the candidates for Holy Orders are 
to take place. The Mass bears a festival character; at one time 
the Ember fast was postponed for a few weeks. Gregory VII 
re-established the Ember Days in their proper place, but the 
festal tone of the Office was retained. 


'The contrast between to-day's fast and the Gospel lesson in 
which Jesus offers Himself as the bread of eternal life is very 
opportune. Man does not live by bread alone, but has an 
&bsolute need of the Word of God, without Whom this earthly 
existence is as a day without light, an empty pretence of life, 
& gloomy image of death. 


THURSDAY IN PENTECOST WEEK 
Station at St. Lawrence-without-the-Walls 


The station is now at St. Lawrence, although the Mass 
would indicate that at one time it was at the Church of the 
Twelve Apostles, 


The Lesson from the Acts describes the joy which filled the 
people of Samaria when the deacon Philip preached the 
Gospel and worked miracles among them. This joy is a gift 
of the Holy Ghost. If the world nowadays is more than ever 
before restless and eager for amusements, it shows that it 
has none of the joy and consolation of the divine Paraclete, 
of which it has become unworthy by its resistance to His grace. 


EMBER FRIDAY IN PENTECOST WEEK 
Station at the Twelve Holy Apostles 


The stational Mass was at one time placed at Sts. John and 
Paul, but in the earlier days was held where the Roman Missal 
now assigns it. 

The spirit in which the Church solemnizes her feasts is one 
of intense spiritual joy. The Introit to-day contains, as it 
were, the summary of a great ascetic treatise on Christian joy: 
“My lips shall rejoice when I shall sing to thee, alleluia, alle- 
luia"; this is the inward consequence of this prayer of love. 


In the Postcommunion we pray that the sacred mysteries of 
the altar, which we have just celebrated in obedience to Our 
Lord's command, may become a remedy which shall strengthen 
our weakness in the hard trials that beset us. 


EMBER SATURDAY IN PENTECOST WEEK. 
Station at St. Peter 


In the Seventh Century due to the postponement of the 
Ember fast the station was at St. Stephen on the Celian 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 1673 


Hill; in the Eleventh Century a return was made to the primi- 
tive place, St. Peter. 

Of the five scriptural Lessons which precede the Gloria in 
excelsis of the Mass, some refer to the feast of Pentecost and 
Some to the “fast of the fourth month," as St. Leo the Great 
calls it; they represent a kind of compromise or fusion of the 
two rites. Formerly the vigil lasted throughout the night, and 
twelve lessons were read, both in Greek and in Latin; but in 
the time of St. Gregory the Great the vigil was shortened 
and brought within more reasonable limits, as we now find.it 
in our present Missal. 


Ordinations are held on this day, the various Orders being 
given as on the Ember Saturday in September. 


The Paschal Season closes with the Mass, The Sacrifice 
of the Mass fittingly brings the holy season of Easter to an 
end. Our redemption is now accomplished, and the Holy 
Ghost has come as though to insure.its Jasting efficacy by 
means of the sacramental character which He impresses on 
our souls. This is the special prerogative of the divine Para- 
clete; His work is always definite, complete, and final, like 
a conclusion which follows inevitably and irrevocably on its 
premises. This is the reason why sins against the Holy Ghost 
can never find pardon; for they are the outcome of the firal 
hardening of the soul in utter hatred of Supyezic Love. ~ 


EMBER WEDNESDAY IN SEPTEMBER 
Station at St. Mary Major 


The Liturgy of the Ember Day fasts possessed originally a 
distinctly festive quality, and was partly a festival of thanks- 
giving for the ingathering of the fruits of the season. These 
rustic feasts originated at Rome. ‘The observance of the 
Ember Day fasts was only introduced into Milan in the days 
of St. Charles Borromeo. . 

The liturgy of this week has kept to a great extent un- 
changed its early festive character, which recalls so vividly 
the rural feasts of ancient Rome at the close of the vintage. 


The idea of a special preparation for the solemn Ordina- 
tions represents a later addition, which, however, dates from 
ihe time of Gelasius I. 


The station on Ember Wednesday is, as a rule, at St. Mary 
Major, and the three Lessons in the Mass are & survival of 
the ancient Roman liturgical use, which recalls those very 
early times when to the two Lessons from the Law and the 
Prophets, customary in the synagogues of the Dispersion, the 
Apostles added a third lesson taken from the Gospels. 

The passage from the Gospel of St. Mark (9, 16-28) teaches 
that humble prayer, on the other hand, and fasting, spiritual- 
ize our nature, which is thus raised to a supernatural state, and 
render it invulnerable to the fatal blows of Satan. 

'The Church to-day insistently invites us to rejoice, and tells 
us that this holy joy in the Lord is that which nourishes our 
Spiritual strength. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1674 ECCLESIASTICAL YEAR AND SACRED LITURGY 


EMBER FRIDAY IN SEPTEMBER 
Station at the Twelve Holy Apostles 


The Station on Ember Friday is regularly at the Church of 
the Twelve Holy Apostles in Rome. This arose from the 
founding of this Church at the same time when the Friday 
Liturgy became common. An ancient Roman custom of 
fasting strictly three days in the week was relaxed somewhat 
under Pope Callixtus and limited to the three periods of the 
harvest, the vintage, and the drawing off of the new wine. 


The Introit bids us seek the Lord; the search after God is 
in the ancient rule of St. Benedict the one condition by which 
the vocation of aspirants to the religious life is to be judged. 
In the prayer we ask that to bodily abstinence we may add 
mental observances. The Postcommunion of to-day is used 
in many feasts of saints; we ask for greater benefits which can 
be none other than the grace of union with Jesus in heaven. 


EMBER SATURDAY IN SEPTEMBER 
Station and Vigil at St. Peter’s 


This Mass, which was celebrated during the night at St. 
Peter's, is a last relic of the ancient night vigils held every 
Sunday during the first three centuries. The verse for the 
Offertory, “I have cried in the day and in the night before 
thee,” recalls the original nocturnal character of this Mass. 


‘The Lessons recall various Jewish fasts and feasts; thus the 
second Lesson describes the Fast of Tabernacles. This is also 
a day for Ordinations; after the first Lesson the Ostiarii or 
door-keepers are ordained; after the second, the Lectors; after 
the third, the Exorcists; after the fourth, the Acolytes; after 
the fifth the Sub-deacons. This Lesson from Daniel and 
containing the canticle Benedicite concluded the office and 
served as a transition to the Mass. After the Benedicite came 
the great Litany with the Ordination of new deacons and 
priests of the Roman titles, The Roman Pontifical now places 
ine Ordination of sub-deacons after the Lesson from Daniel. 
The Ordination of deacons after the Epistle of St. Paul to 
the Hebrews and the Ordination of priests before the last verse 
of the Tract. 

In the Postcommunion we ask God that His grace, of 
which the Eucharist is the vital source, may be fully effica- 
cious in us, so that the mystical union of the soul with Him 
which is typified by this Sacrament may attain to its full 
perfection in heaven. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Sbort Accounts of Certain Feasts and 
Lives of Saints Found in the 
Proper of Saints of This Missal 


Feasts of Januarp 


Jan. 11, St, Hyginus, Pope and Martyr: St. Irenæus after 
listing Telesphorus as a martyr, adds the name of Hyginus, 
His name was placed in the Roman Missal in the late Middle 
Ages; during the first two centuries hardly any of the martyrs 
had left any trace in the Liturgy. Their burial places were 
generally unknown and their worship was local; there was 
danger that Catholic devotion to the saints might be regarded 
as a new form of paganism. Hyginus was a Pope and a martyr 
(died 142). Because of the Octave of the Epiphany, his feast 
a pelebrasea by a simple commemoration in the Mass 

atuit. 


Jan. 14. St. Hilary, Bishop, Confessor and Doctor of the 
Church: This feast kept in Tours on January 13 from the end 
of the Fifth Century was inserted in the Roman Calendar by 
Pius IX. St. Hilary was a native of Poitiers, and his family 
was one of the most illustrious in Gaul. In the year 353 he 
was chosen bishop of Poitiers. About the year 356 he was 
banished by order of Emperor Constantius. He died in his 
native clty, January 13, 363. 


St. Felix, Martyr: This holy priest born at Nola, 
near Naples, died 312, is also commemorated on this day. He 
is famous for many miracles. Cruel persecution failed to bring 
about his death; to him the famous St. Paulinus owed his 
conversion. - 


Jan. 15. St. Paul, the First Hermit, Confessor: Innocent XIII 
raised the traditional feast of St. Paul to the rank of a double 
for the Universal Church. In the middle of the Third Cen- 
tury, St. Paul, a native of Egypt, fled into the desert, at the 
age of twenty-two, to escape the persecution that Emperor 
Decius waged against Christians. There he devoted his life 
to penance and prayer. He passed nearly a hundred years in 
solitude, and from the time he was forty-three years old his 
food was brought to him by ravens. The emblem of the Her- 
mits of St. Paul was a palm-tree; in the Mass of to-day fre- 
quent graceful allusions are made to this providential tree 
which furnished both food and clothing to our saint, and 
which by its spreading branches so truly symbolized in holy 
Scripture the supernatural energy of the just. He died about 
341, wrapped in the cloak of St. Anthanasius lent to him by 
St. Anthony of the Desert. 

St. Maurus, Abbot: St. Maurus, son of the Roman 
patrician Eutychius and first disciple of St, Benedict, accord- 


1675 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1676 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


ing to the Dialogues of St. Gregory the Great, hastening in 
obedience to help St. Placid who was drowning, walked dry- 
footed on Nero’s lake at Subiaco. Died in 584, in France, 


Jan. 16. St. Marcellus, Pope, Martyr: Marcellus did not die 
2 violent death and was formerly venerated at Rome as a 
Confessor in the original meaning of the word. Because of his 
mildness in reconciling sinners by the Sacrament of Penance 
the austere heretical party raised a tumult. The tyrant Max- 
entius then condemned Marcellus to exile from the trials of 
which he subsequently died. He may thus be rightly called a 
martyr because of his sufferings. 


Jan. 17. St. Anthony, Abbot: St. Anthony, the father and 
patriarch of monks, in all likelihood founded in Egypt the 
first monasteries authorized in the Church. He died in the 
year 356, at the age of a hundred and four years. In conse- 
quence of the disease called St. Anthony's fire, a great number 
of hospitals and chapels called after him arose throughout 
France and Italy. 


JAN, 18. Feast of the Chair of St. Peter at Rome: Eleven 
years after the ascension of Our Blessed Lord, St. Peter who 
had been appointed the head of the Church on earth by Christ 
Himself, transferred the seat of the Papacy from Antioch to 
Rome, where he preached the Faith and established his 
episcopal chair, and there the Bishops of Rome have been ever 
since accounted his successors. The feast of the Chair of St. 
Peter.is that of the foundation of the See of Rome. From the 
Third Century it was symbolized by a chair carved in wood or 
tufa, a relic now kept high in the apse of the Vatican Basilica. 


St. Prisca, Virgin, Martyr: A ‘tommemoration is 
likewise made of St. Prisca, a noble Roman virgin who suf- 
fered martyrdom about the year 275. Her relics are preserved 
in the ancient church in Rome which bears her name. 


Jan. 19. Sts, Marius, Martha, Audifax, and Abachum, 
Martyrs: Station at the Cemetery ad Nymphas; This group of 
Persian. martyrs, consisting of husband, wife, and two sons, 
were originally buried ad nymphas Catabassi. They came to 
Rome under the Emperor Claudius II and visited Christians 
cast into prison. The Mass for their feast is very ancient and 
in excellent liturgical form, 


St. Canute, King, Martyr: St. Canute (died 1086), 
King of Denmark, by his zeal for the Faith made enemies who 
put him to death in the Church of St. Alban. Pope Benedict 
XV adorned his altar in the Church of St. Mary in Trastevere 
(Rome) with artistic candelabra. 


Jan, 20. Sts. Fabian, Pope, and Sebastian, Martyrs: Station 
at the Cemetery of Calliztus and at that ad Catacumbas: 
Pope St. Fabian ruled the Church from A.D. 236 to ap. 250. 
He died a glorious martyr in the persecution under Decius in 
250. St. Sebastian was a high officer in the army of Emperor 
Diocletian. When it was learned that he was a Christian he 
was condemned to death. He was first shot with arrows, but 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1677 


as he survived this he was finally beaten to death in 288, by 
order of the Emperor. 


Jan, 21. St. Agnes, Virgin, Martyr; Station at the “Lesser 
Cemetery" of St. Agnes: St. Agnes, a Roman maiden, in her 
thirteenth year was beheaded, in the year 304, for the sole 
reason that she was a Christian. The original Mass for her 
feast in the Gregorian Sacramentary had a magnificent Pre- 
face. not inserted in modern Missals. She is praised by all 
the Fathers of the Latin Church; the family of Constantine 
built à magnificent basilica at her tomb. 


JaN. 22. Sts. Vincent and Anastasius, Martyrs; Station at 
the Vatican at the Oratory in Jerusalem and at the Mon- 
astery Ad Aquas Salvias on the Ostian Way: These two mar- 
tyrs also had each the honor of a separate stational Mass at 
Rome. St. Vincent, a Spanish deacon, suffered death for the 
Faith, under Diocletian, in the year 300. St. Anastasius, a 
native of Persia, was also put to death for being a Christian. 
The feasts of these two are both celebrated on the same day. 
The example of the heroic fortitude of the martyrs who in the 
hope of the resurrection, rather than betray the Faith, seek no 
escape from death, is, indeed, necessary in our days when a 
sentimental pietistic feeling threatens to replace in the con- 
science of many the practical profession of the Christian life. 


Jan. 23. St. Raymund of Pennafort, Confessor: St. Raymund 
was born in 1175 of a noble Spanish family. In middle life 
he entered the Order of St. Dominic. In 1250 he was called to 
Rome by Pope Gregory IX, who made him his confessor and 
grand penitentiary. He refused the position of archbishop 
and also that of general of his Order, and devoted himself to 
labors among infidels. He died in 1275. 


St. Emerentiana, Virgin, Martyr: St. Emerentiana 
is said to have been stoned by the pagans, when, while still a 
catechumen, she was discovered praying at the tomb of St. 
Agnes, her foster-sister. 


Jan. 24. St. Timothy, Bishop, Martyr: St. Timothy was a 
convert of St. Paul who believed that he was intended for an 
evangelist. Timothy was ordained and at once became the 
beloved fellow-worker of St. Paul. Finally, he became the first 
bishop of Ephesus, and while there received the two Epistles 
which bear his name. In the year 97 he was beaten and stoned 
to death because of his opposition to idolatrous ceremonies. 
Pius IX in 1854 raised his feast to the rank of double. 


Jan. 25. Conversion of St. Paul the Apostle; Station at St. 
Paul: Since the eighth century the feast of the conversion of 
St. Paul has been set apart by the Church to return thanks to 
almighty God for His act of grace in bringing the future 
apostle to the Faith. At one time the feast was even a holy-day 
of obligation. After the miracle of Christ’s Resurrection no 
other wonder in the history of the early Church is a stronger 
proof of the divine origin of Christianity than the marvelous 
conversion of St. Paul. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1678 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


JAN. 26. St. Polycarp, Bishop, Martyr: Polycarp, whose name 
signifies much fruit, was ordained by St. John and made bishop 
of Smyrna. He was martyred in Smyrna in 166. , 


Jan, 27. St. John Chrysostom, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of 
the Church: St. John was born at Antioch in 344. He was 
called Chrysostom, which means “golden mouthed,” on account 
of his eloquence. He was made bishop of Constantinople in 
398, and died in 407 after suffering bitter persecution. 


JAN. 28. St. Peter Nolasco, Confessor: St. Peter was born of 
a noble family in Languedoc, about 1189, He founded the 
Order for the Redemption of Captives, and for twenty-five 
years toiled to release Christian captives from Turkish slavery. 
Worn out by his labors he died on Christmas Day, 1256. 


The Second Feast of St. Agnes, Virgin, Martyr: 
According to some, St. Agnes appeared to her parents eight 
days after her martyrdom. The ancient sacramentaries show 
clearly that this day celebrates the actual earthly birthday of 
St. Agnes; the nativity of John the Baptist and of the Blessed 
Virgin are thus celebrated because they were free from original 
sin; the earthly birth of St. Agnes is celebrated because her 
whole life abounded in divine grace. 


Jan. 29. St. Francis de Sales, Bishop, Confessor, and Doctor 
of the Church: St. Francis de Sales was born near Annecy, 
1567. He became bishop of Geneva in 1602. In union with 
St. Jane Frances of Chantal he founded the Order of the 
Visitation. His life was filled with good works. He died Decem- 
ber 28, 1622. Pope Pius IX made him a Doctor of the Church. 


Jan. 30. St. Martina, Virgin, Martyr: St. Martina was a noble 
Roman lady who was martyred in the Third Century. Urban 
VIII composed hymns for her feast. 


Jan. 31. St. John Bosco, Confessor: St. John was born Aug. 
16, 1815, at Becchi, Italy. His life work was that of taking care 
of young boys and girls. For this purpose he founded the Con- 
gregation of the Salesian Fathers in 1852 and the Daughters 
of Our Lady Help of Christians in 1872. Such was his zeal 
for the welfare of young people that today there are over 1,400 
of his institutions spread over the earth. He died in 1888 and 
was canonized by Pope Pius XI, Easter Sunday, 1934. 


Feasts of February 


Fes, 1. St. Ignatius, Bishop, Martyr: St. Ignatius was the 
third successor of St. Peter at Antioch; a tradition says that he 
was held on the knee of Our Lord when the Savior spoke the 
words “Suffer the little children to come unto me.” During the 
persecution of Trajan he was condemned to death and sent in 
chains to Rome. While on the way he wrote letters to various 
churches; he rejoiced when he heard the roaring of the lions 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1679 


Set loose to devour him. He was martyred at Rome on October 
17, about the year 110. He is commemorated every day in the 
prayer Which precedes the Pater Noster, known as the “Great 
Intercession." 


Fes, 2. The Feast of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary, or Candlemas Day: The celebration of this feast began 
very early at Jerusalem. It commemorates not only the Purif- 
cation of the Blessed Virgin but also the meeting of Simeon 
and the Infant Jesus in the Temple. In the East it was re- 
garded as a feast of Our Lord; Pope Sergius I ordered that it 
Should be preceded by a penitential procession to St. Mary 
Major, and thus it became predominantly a feast of the Blessed 
Virgin. The blessing of the candles as a peculiar rite dates 
only from the Tenth Century. Candles were distributed at 
Rome at all nocturnal processions; it is probable that this 
custom has been retained on this day because of the words of 
the canticle of Simeon, “Lumen ad reuelationem gentium." 


FEB. 3. St. Blaise, Bishop, Martyr: St. Blaise, bishop of 
Sebaste in Armenia, suffered among other torments that of 
flaying with a wool-combers' brush under Licinius, and was 
finally beheaded (317). In the Eleventh Century there were 
thirty-five churches dedicated to him in Rome. He saved the 
life of a child who was dying choked by a bone. In consequence 
he is invoked especially for healing all diseases of the throat. 
His throat is preserved as a relic in the Vatican. The church 
blesses two candles and prays for all those whose necks the 
candles shall touch that they be delivered from diseases of the 
throat and every other evil He is one of the fourteen 
“auxiliary” saints. 

Fes. 4. St. Andrew Corsini, Bishop, Confessor: St. Andrew, 
born at Florence of the noble Corsini family, was consecrated 
at birth to the Blessed Virgin. His mother dreamed she had 
given birth to a wolf, which, on entering into the Carmelite 
Church, was suddenly changed into a lamb. As a young man 
fe fell into many sins, but led by divine grace he entered the 
Carmelite Order, became its head in 'Tuscany and later bishop 
of Fiesole. He was a model bishop, recognizing that the pas- 
toral office demands not mere goodness but an eminent state 
of sanctity. Died 1373. 


Fes, 9. St. Agatha, Virgin, Martyr: St. Agatha, born in 
Sicily, resisted the solicitations of Governor Quintianus, who 
ordered her breast to be torn, but it was healed on the following 
night by the Apostle, St. Peter, as is mentioned in the Com- 
munion. She died uttering a prayer in 251, Her name is in 
the Canon of the Mass. 

Fes. 6. St. Titus, Bishop, Confessor: St. Titus, the first 
bishop of the island of Crete, died about the end of the First 
Century of our era, He received from St. Paul an Epistle, which 
with the two Epistles to St. Timothy, forms the group known 
in the New Testament as the Pastoral Epistles. 

; St. Dorothy, Virgin, Martyr: St. Dorothy, a virgin- 
martyr, was beheaded under Diocletian at the beginning of the- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1680 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


Fourth Century. Legend says that at the moment of her mar- 
tyrdom the lawyer Theophilus begged of her flowers of Para- 
dise, which she sent to him, 


FEB. 7. St. Romuald, Abbot: St. Romuald at the age of 20,. 
undertook a life of prayer, meditation, and penance. He 
founded under the rule of St. Benedict an Order which takes 
its name from a field owned by Maldule. In a vision Romuald 
while in this field saw a ladder on which monks clothed in 
white ascended and descended. He acquired this 3eld and built 
the monastery which he called Camaldule. 


Fes. 8. St. John of Matha, Confessor: St. John of Matha, a. 
Frenchman, with his compatriot, St. Felix of Valois, founded 
the Trinitarian Order for the redemption of Christian slaves. 
from the Mohammedans. The little cell in which he lived in 
Rome is still to be seen. On the door of the church nearby 
there still exists, dating from tiie time of Innocent III, a 
striking mosaic of the Savior between two slaves, one white 
and the other black. 


Fes. 9. St. Cyril of Alexandria, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor 
of the Church: This feast was instituted in 1882 by Leo XIII, 
who chose this day because January 28, on which date the 
saint’s name appears in the Martyrology, is already assigned. 
to another Office. The name of St. Cyril immediately evokes 
the memory of those celebrated early sessions of the Council of 
Ephesus, when, through the agency of Cyril, the most splendid 
pages of the doctrine concerning the Blessed Virgin Mary were 
recorded. Nestorius having thrown doubt upon the dogma that. 
in Jesus Christ there is only one person, it consequently re- 
sulted from this heresy that there could no longer be bestowed 
upon the Blessed Virgin the title of Mother of God, by which 
the faithful until then had been accustomed to invoke her. 
He died a.D. 444. 


St. Apollonia, Virgin, Martyr: St. Apollonia, a 
Christian virgin of Alexandria, was martyred under the Em- 
pcror Decius (249). Because during her martyrdom her teeth 
were broken and torn out, devotion spread to her as a pro- 
tectress against tooth-ache. Under divine impulsion she joy- 
fully cast herself into the flames prepared for her. 


Fes. 10. St. Scholastica, Virgin: St. Scholastica, the twin 
sister of St. Benedict, followed in the footsteps of piety of her 
saintly brother. In the Dialogues of St. Gregory, the Great it 
is related that on the occasion of the last conversation of St. 
Scholastica with her brother, he had determined to return to: 
his monastery at evening, but Scholastica leaning with her: 
elbows on the table and holding her forehead in her hands, 
began to shed tears. A violent storm immediately burst forth, 
&nd the rain fell in torrents, so that Benedict was compelled 
to remain and continue the spiritual conversation. St. Gregory 
Says that on that occasion she had more power than he over 
the heart of God, because whilst St. Benedict upheld the law 
of discipline and justice she, on the other hand, appealed to- 
& higher law, that of love: plus potuit, quia plus amavit. She 
died in the early half of the Sixth Century. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1681 


Fes. 11. The Feast of the Apparition of Our Blessed Lady 
at Lourdes: Our Blessed Lady appeared to Bernadette Soubi- 
rous on February 11, 1858, and said “I am the Immaculate 
Conception.” Pope Pius X in 1908 ordered that this feast be 
kept in the Universal Church on this day. The miracles at 
Lourdes have continued to the astonishment of the world 
Gown to the present time. In 1933 Bernadette was canonized 
and her feast fixed on this day. 


Fes, 12. The Seven Holy Founders of the Order of the 
Servants of the Blessed Virgin Mary: These holy men, canon- 
ized by Pope Leo XIII, were Florentine merchants, who lived 
in the Thirteenth Century. They.established the Order of the 
Religious Servants of the Holy Virgin, commonly called the 
Servites, which aimed to increase the devotion of Our Lady's 
Seven Sorrows. 'Their work was rewarded by tbe conversion 
of many sinners, They were called Servites by little children 
whose innocent lips were miraculously opened on one of the 
pubie squares of Florence to utter the praises of these seven 

oly men. 


Fes. 14. St. Valentine, Priest, Martyr: St. Valentine was a 
holy priest in Rome who assisted the martyrs in the persecu- 
tions under Claudius II. In the end he was beheaded for being 
a Christian, February 14, 270. He was a doctor of medicine as 
well as a priest; one of the catacombs is dedicated to him. 


Fes. 15. Sts. Faustinus and Jovita, Martyrs: Sts. Faustinus 
and Jovita, two brothers, suffered death for the Faith at 
Brescia in Northern Italy, about a.D. 121. 


FER. 18. St. Simeon, Bishop, Martyr: This holy Bishop was, 
according to an ancient tradition, the last offshoot of the 
noble stem of Jesse, and a distant relative of Our Savior. He 
became Bishop of Jerusalem and was crucified under Emperor 
Trajan, A.D. 107, 


. Fes, 22. The Feast of the Chair of St. Peter at Antioch: 
In the ancient Roman traditions the Feast of St. Peter's Chair 
at Rome Was kept on this date; this custom remained unaltered 
down to the Sixteenth Century. The Chair of St. Peter became 
a symbol of the universal primacy which Peter and his succes- 
sors exercised over the whole Church. The Mass is the same 
as that on January 18, except that there is no commemoration 
of St. Prisca, 


Pes. 23. St. Peter Damian, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of the 
Church: This saintly Bishop. of Ostia, selected as advisor by 
seven popes in succession was a fearless and distinguished son 
of the Order of St. Benedict, who, in the Eleventh Century— 
a very turbulent period marked by antipopes, heresies, and a 
lamentable relaxation of the religious spirit—was like a column 
of fire guiding the faithful along the narrow path of the Cross 
of Christ that-leads in safety to heaven. He passed from this 
life to God on February 22, 1072, but because of the feast of 
the Chair of St. Peter, his yearly commemoration takes place 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1682 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


to-day. Leo XII ordered that his Office—which was at first ob- 
served only by the Benedictines—should be extended to the 
Universal Church. 


The Vigil of St. Matthias the Apostle: Com- 
memoration is made, in the Mass of St. Peter Damian, of the 
vigil, or eve of St. Matthias, Apostle, whose feast is kept on 
February 24, except in leap year; at that time it is kept on 
February 25. 


The Mass for the vigil of an apostle will be found in the 
Common of Saints, page 1299. This vigil does not appear in 
ancient liturgical documents; it was instituted by St. Pius V 
in order to raise the feast of St. Mathias to the same dignity 
as that of the feast of the other apostles. 


Fes, 24 (In leap year Feb. 25). St. Matthias, Apostle: St. 
Matthias was elected to take the place of Judas among the 
apostles. He is honored as a martyr by the Church. In the 
Roman Canon of the Mass the name of Matthias is not among 
those of the twelve apostles, whose number is completed by the 
addition of the name of Paul. In the series of apostolic men 
in the prayer preceding the Pater noster, Matthias is named 
between the Proto-martyr and the Apostle Barnabas, His relics 
are said to be kept in the Basilica of St. Mary Major. St. Clem- 
ent of Alexandria says that he gave to us the beautiful maxim: 
“We must wholly subdue the body through mortification, sub- 
jecting it to the spirit of the crucified Jesus,” 


Feasts of March 


Mar. 4, St. Casimir, Confessor: The festival of this saint, 
who preserved a virginal purity in the midst of the frivolities 
of a royal court (died 1483), was instituted by Paul V. He 
practiced bodily mortification in a high degree, gave abundant 
alms and meditated continually on the sufferings of Christ. 


St. Lucius, Pope, Martyr: St. Lucius is praised 
greatly by St. Cyprian for his manner of dealing with lapsed 
Christians; he was exiled from Rome almost immediately after 
he became bishop; he lived only a few weeks after his return. 


Mar. 6. Sts. Perpetua and Felicitas, Martyrs: St. Perpetua 
had just become a mother and St. Felicitas was on the point 
of becoming one, when they were thrown into prison at 
Carthage during the persecution of Severus. They prayed 
that they might become martyrs and were filled with joy at 
their condemnation. They were put to death in the amphi- 
theatre in 202. They were the first saints to be included from 
outside Rome in the Roman Calendar of the Fourth Century. 
They are named in the Canon of the Mass. 


Man. 7. St. Thomas Aquinas, Confessor, Doctor: At the age 
of 5, St. Thomas was committed to the care of the Benedictine 
monks at Monte Cassino; he died at the Abbey of Fossanova 
in 1274. He is called the “Angel of the Schools,” ‘The special 
glory of St. Thomas, his most salient virtue, is the profound 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
| 
| 


\ 


a 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1683 


love which he shows for the sacred tradition of the Church. 
He appears almost to be one with it, and has therefore become 
its most authoritative interpreter. It would, indeed, not be 
easy to find in the annals of Christianity a more inspired mind, 
reflecting better the perfections of the angelic spirits than 
that of the great Dominican, who, building upon the founda- 
tions laid by the ancient Fathers of the Church, gave with 
marvelous accuracy a definite form to our knowledge of God. 
Leo XIII declared him the patron of all catholic schools. 


Mar. 8. St. John of God, Confessor: St. John, because of his 
divine love called “of God" founded the order of Brothers 
Hospitallers, which devotes itself to the healing of bodies and 
of souls. He is patron of Catholic hospitals and of all those 
whose last days of expiation upon earth, before appearing at 
the judgment seat of God, are passed amid the throes and 
agonies of disease. Leo XIII caused his name to be placed 
in the Litany of the Dying. The pharmacy of the apostolic 
palaces is always under the direction of a Religious of the 
Order of St. John of God, who thus holds the post of infir- 
marian to the Pope. He died March 8, 1550. 


Mar. 9. St. Frances of Rome, Widow: St. Frances, a noble 
Roman lady, married at the age of 11, was for forty years a 
perfect Christian spouse. Pope Innocent X placed her name 
in the Calendar of the Church as a striking example and 
heavenly patron of the state of widowhood. She was professed 
as an Oblate of the Basilica of Sta. Maria Nova under the 
rule of St. Benedict, She renounced all her possessions and 
labored for the poor even joining crowds of beggars asking for 
alms, She died 1440. 


Mar. 10. The Forty Holy Martyrs of Sebaste: The Forty 
Martyrs of Sebaste suffered in Armenia under Emperor Lici- 
nius, A.D. 320. Refusing to sacrifice to idols they were stripped 
of their clothes and exposed on a frozen pond. They asked 
God that “the forty who had entered the lists might be forty 
to win the crown, forty being the number consecrated by the 
fasts of Jesus, Moses and Elias.” God can raise up sons to 
Abraham from the stone; if we do not correspond to his grace 
the loss will be ours alone, since God will perform by means 
of another that which He would otherwise have deigned to 
accomplish through our instrumentality. This is what hap- 
pened in the case of the Forty Martyrs of Sebaste. The angels 
had prepared forty crowns in heaven; one of the confessors 
of the Faith broke down under the torments, and apostatized, 
but his place was immediately taken by one of the execution- 
ers, who thereby merited the fortieth crown. They were much 
praised by St. Basil and St, Gregory of Nyssa, and were greatly 
venerated even in the West. 


MAR. 12. St. Gregory the Great, Pope, Confessor, and Doc- 
tor of the Church. Night Vigil and Stational Mass at St. Peter: 
St. Gregory I, called the Great, was one of the most illustrious 
of the Popes. For fourteen years his pontificate was a model 
of ecclesiastical rule. He healed schisms; revived discipline; 
aided in the conversion of the Spanish and French Goths, and 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1684 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


kindled anew in Britain the light of the Faith. He set in order 
the prayers and chant of the Church; and the Church reckons 
him one of her four great Doctors. He died March 12, 604. 
'To this day the Pope when solemnizing High Mass at St. Peter's 
is vested at the altar which covers the tomb of St. Gregory. 


"Man. 17. St. Patrick, Bishop, Confessor: St. Patrick, Apostle 
of Ireland, was sent to that country by Pope St. Celestine as 
a missionary. He found Ireland heathen and left it Christian. 
Bt. Patrick died, A.D. 464, and was buried at Down, in Ulster. 
He scattered the seed of the Gospel with such success that, 
from the innumerable. band of holy men and women which 
1t produced, the verdant land of Erin was known in the Middle 
Ages by the glorious title of the "Island of Saints"—a glory 
which three centuries of bitter persecution of the Catholic 
F'aith at the hands of the Anglican Church utterly failed to 
eclipse. Pius IX in 1859 as a tribute to the vigorous faith of 
this nation raised the feast of St. Patrick which has appeared 
in the Roman Breviary since the Fifteenth Century, to the 
rank of a double. Patrick is the great patriarch of the Irish 
episcopate, and of Irish monachism. This monachism left 
its mark throughout medieval Europe wherever the Scotti 
planted their tents and introduced their traditions. His feast 
is a holy day of obligation in Ireland; there is a church dedi- 
cated to him in Rome, not far from the Via Salaria. Ü 


Mar. 18. St. Cyril of Jerusalem, Bishop, Confessor. Doctor 
of the Church: St. Cyril, Patriarch or Archbishop of Jeru- 
salem, was proclaimed a Doctor of the Church by Pope Leo 

. His instructions in Christian doctrine, solid, simple, 
and profound, show the teachings of the Church in his day 
to be the same as they are to-day. He died in 386, after a 
troubled episcopate of thirty-five years. 

Mar. 19. St. Joseph, Spouse of the Blessed Virgin Mary, 
Confessor: Joseph, says the Holy Scripfure, was a just man; 
he was innocent and pure; he was gentle and tender; he was 
prudent and a lover of silence; above all he was faithful and 
Obedient to divine calls. Devotion to St. Joseph has developed 
amongst Christian people in so marvelous a manner, follow- 
ing such wonderful laws, that it is impossible not to recognize 
therein the working of Divine Providence, In the early Church 
the festivals were such as referred to the mystery of the salva- 
tion of the world. ‘The golden period of devotion to Mary began 
with the Council of Ephesus. Second only to Mary comes 
Joseph who although not the Father of Jesus, had a father's 
authority over Him. He was invested with this authority by 
the Eternal Father. The commands of God to the Holy renty 
were delivered by an angel to Joseph. During the Fourteen 
and Fifteenth Centuries devotion to him grew rapidly fostered 
by St. Bridget of Sweden and St. Bernardine of Sienna. Plus 
IX declared Joseph “Patron of the Universal Church." 


Mar. 21. St. Benedict, Abbot: The son of a member of the 
Roman nobility, he was born at Nursia, near Spoleto, about 
the year 480. While still quite young, he left Rome, giving up 
his studies and career in the world and retired to a place called 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1085 


Subiaco, where he lived as a hermit, receiving the monastic 
habit from Romanus, monk of a neighboring monastery. After 
three years of eremitical life, was made abbot -of Vicovaro, 
but the monks, finding his way of life too strict, strove to 
Poison him. He left them and founded, first, twelve monas- 
teries at Subiaco, and later the great Abbey of Monte Cassino 
where. he wrote the Holy Rule. He died in 543. In medieval 
Rome there were more than eighty Benedictine monasteries 
charged with the singing of the Divine Office in the chief 
basilicas. St. Gregory the Great was the first to encourage the 
universal devotion to St. Benedict, when less than fifty years 
after the death of the Saint, he wrote his life and made known 
his rule.. It was owing to him that this immortal code of 
perfection, kept for greater security in the papal archives at 
the Lateran, very soon superseded in Europe all other earlier 
forms of monastic life and became the Regula Monachorum, 
the eminently Roman and papal rule of the monastic devout 
life. To the Benedictines is conceded a proper Mass with a 
sequence and Preface proper. 


Mar. 24. St. Gabriel, Archangel: The festival of St. Gabriel 
was appointed for this day in the Roman Missal by Pope Bene- 
dict XV. It is placed close to the festival of the Annunciation 
of the Blessed Virgin to whom he announced that she had been 
chosen to become the Mother of God. In the Old Testament 
he is mentioned in the Book of Daniel, and he was the Arch- 
angel who appeared to the High Priest, Zachary, the father 
of John the Baptist. 


Mar. 25. The Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary: 
Collecta at St. Adrian. Station at St. Mary Major: This ancient 
feast, like that of Christmas, was considered originally as a 
feast of Our Lord, rather than of the Blessed Virgin. It has 
been fixed on the date of March 25, since before the Seventh 
Century. 


At the High Mass on this day the celebrant and his minis- 
ters kneel on the altar-steps during the singing of the Et 
incarnatus est, in the Nicene Creed. Should the feast fall on 
Passion Sunday, it is celebrated on the following Monday. 
If it falls in Holy or Easter week it is celebrated on the Monday 
after Low Sunday. 


The Mass, although we are in the middle of Lent, carries us 

straight back to Advent. Yet this white winter blossom which 

\ recalls the snows of Christmas has its own deep significance, 

for it reminds us of Gideon's fleece—that gracious symbol of 

]the spotless virginity of the Mother of God—which was found 

by the Prophet newly wet with the dew of spring in the midst 
of a sun-baked plain in Palestine. 


Mar. 27, St. John Damascene, Confessor, Doctor of the 
Church: St. John of Damascus suffered much from the Greek 
Emperors of Constantinople for upholding the teachings of 
the Church in regard to the religious honor shown to pictures 
and statues of the saints. After many persecutions, he went 
to his reward in heaven in 754. Pope Leo XIII ordered his 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1686 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OP SAINTS 


feast to be celebrated by the Church. His many writings, his 
knowledge, piety, and eloquence caused him to be compared 
by the Second Council of Nicza to a "river of gold," He was 
the last Byzantine to contribute anything to the formation 
of the Catholic theological structure. While not a bishop, 
nor a leader of men, by loving truth and preaching it fearlessly 
he became a light to shine in the darkness of those separated 
from the apostolic communion. 


Man. 28. St. John Capistran, Confessor: St. John Capistran, 
who was born in 1385 (died 1456) distinguished himself in early 
life as & public man. At the age of thirty he entered the 
Franciscan Order and was ordained a priest. From that time 
his zeal for the salvation of souls was unceasing. In a crusade 
against the Turks during the Fifteenth Century he was the 
leading spirit. He was canonized in 1724, and Pope Leo XIII 
ordered that his feast should be observed by the whole Church. 
To his preaching and prayer is attributed the victory over the 
Turks under the walls of Belgrade. The prayers in the Mass 
make allusion to this triumph and to the fervent devotion 
practiced by the great Franciscan toward the holy name of 

esus. 


Feasts of April 


APR. 2. St. Francis of Paola, Confessor: St, Francis was born 
at Paola in Calabria (1416). At an early age he led such a holy 
life that many disciples came to follow his way of living in the 
desert place to which he had retired. He gave them a rule and 
formed them into the Order of the Minims placing them in 
humility a degree below the Friars Minor. His prophecy that 
the Motherhouse of his order would one day stand on the 
Pincian Hill in Rome was fulfilled in 1493 when Charles VIII 
built a church there. After a long life, famous for prophecies 
and miracles which he seemed to work at will, he died at the 
age of 91 in 1508. 


Apr. 4. St. Isidore, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of the Church: 
Devotion to this great Doctor of Catholic Spain, rose in 
Rome shortly after his death in 636. The Synod of Toledo 
composed of fifty-two bishops in 652 proclaimed him “Doctor 
most famous of our day, most recent glory of the Catholic 
Church, following in time those who had gone before us, but 
not lower in his knowledge of doctrine.” He was the great 
source of ecclesiastical learning for many centuries. His in- 
struction on the office of a bishop states that the bishop should 
read the Scriptures and the Canons, imitate the examples of 
saints, engage in vigils, fasts and prayer, join humility with 
authority, and place his chastity under the guard of charity, 
without which all other virtues are nothing. 


APR. 5. St. Vincent Ferrer, Confessor: This great Dominican 
of the Fourteenth Century (died 1419), calling himself "the 
Angel of the Judgment" when two or more aspirants claimed 
the papal throne, brought back to repentance by his powerful 
preaching and miracles, a great multitude of the faithful. At 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1687 


first he favored the anti-pope, Benedict XIII, to whom he was 
confessor, but later realizing the claim of the ambitious Span- 
iard to be indefensible, he left him and foretold that the skull 
of the anti-pope would be tossed about the street Dy children 
as a plaything, This came to pass in 1811, when the French 
occupied the castlé of Illucca and cast the corpse of tbe anti- 
Pope buried there out of the window. He celebrated a sung 
Mass every morning early, imitating the manner of its insti- 
tution by Our Divine Savior in the room of the Last Supper. 

‘Apr. 11. St. Leo the Great, Pope, Confessor, Doctor of the 
Church: ‘The feast of this great Pope was transferred from 
the day of his death, November 10, 461, to April 11, the day on 
which his body was first laid in the tomb under the outer porch 
of the old St. Peter's. He is called "Great," not only for his 
learning, but also for his successful government of the. Church 
by overcoming heretics and saving Rome from the invasion 
of Attila. The magnificent Offices of Advent are attributed to 
him and certainly several of his compositions are contained 
in the Leonine Sacramentary. By his humility, mildness, and 
charity this great Pope won the love and reverence of em. 
perors, princes, and people of every rank. 

APR. 13. St. Hermenegild, Martyr: St. Hermenegild, a Span- 
ish prince, was a convert from Arianism, thanks to the influ- 
ence of his Catholic wife and the instructions and prayers of 
St. Leander. His conversion so angered his father, the king, 
that the monarch had him cast into prison. On Easter night 
a heretical Arian bishop was sent to him with Holy Commu- 
nion, but he refused to receive even the Easter Communion 
from the hands of a heretic, and his father then put him to 
death. St. Gregory the Great learned of his martyrdom while 
at Constantinople and inserted the account in the third book 
of his Dialogues. 


Apr, 14. St. Justin, Martyr: St. Justin, a converted philoso- 
pher, and probably priest, is the greatest of the early Apolo- 
getes. Before arriving at the sublime knowledge of the Cross 
he passed through all the various schools of philosophy. He 
fearlessly proclaimed Christianity, both in argument with the 
Jew Trypho and in his Apologies to the Emperors and the 
Senate. As in the writings of St. Justin, so in his Mass said 
to-day, the antithesis between human learning and divine 
knowledge is ever recurring. Thus in the Gradual we read 
“The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God” (I Cor. iii, 
19). Under the Emperor Marcus Aurelius he was scourged 
&nd put to death April 13, 162. His tomb is believed to be in 
the Cemetery of Priscilla, and in 1882, Pope Leo XIII made him 
after Thomas Aquinas, Patron of Catholic Philosophy, and 
prescrived the celebration of his feast throughout the whole 

urch. 


Sts. Tiburtius, Valerian and Maximus, Martyrs: 
St. Valerian was espoused to St. Cecilia, and was converted 
to the Faith by her, and with her became the means of con- 
verting his brother, Tiburtius. Maximus, the officer appointed 
to attend their execution, was brought to the Faith by their 
Pxample. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1688 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


Apr. 17. St. Anicetus, Pope, Martyr: St. Anicetus was Pope 
when St. Polycarp, the disciple of St. John came to Rome to 
consult about the date on which Easter should be kept. The 
reasons offered by St. Polycarp did not convince St. Anicetus, 
nor did the argument of Anicetus move St. Polycarp. St. 
Anicetus had such respect for St. Polycarp, who had known 
St. John the Evangelist, that although disagreeing on this 
matter of discipline, he allowed St. Polycarp to celebrate Mass 
in tne presence of all the faithful in Rome. He was given the 
title of martyr, because of his sufferings for the Faith, although 
he was not put to death by his persecutors. He died about 161, 
and was buried in the Vatican near the tomb of the Apostles, 
where all the Popes of the first two centuries were buried. 


‘Apr. 21. St. Anselm, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of the 
Church: St. Anselm was born at Aoust, in Piedmont, of noble 
parents. He embraced the religious life, became an abbot, and 
succeeded Blessed Lanfranc as Archbishop of Canterbury. 
Banished by William Rufus, he found at Rome under Urban II 
@ Warm welcome; he assisted the Pope in combating the errors 
of the Greeks at the Council of Bari. Full of faith he said, 
“God loves nothing better in this world than the liberty of 
His Church." Pope Leo XIII on his death bed composed some 
verses in honor of St. Anselm and caused them to be sent at 
once to the great basilica adjoining the university college: of 
the Benedictine Order, which had been built under this Pontiff, 
(Died April 21, 1109.) 


Apr. 22. Sts. Soter and Caius, Popes, Martyrs: St. Soter was 
raised to the Papacy after the death of St. Anicetus, about 161, 
and was martyred under Emperor Marcus Aurelius. St. Caius 
succeeded St. Eutychian as Pope in 283. He died April 21, 296. 
For his sufferings under Diocletian he was made.a martyr 
although he died a natural death. Ancient inscriptions bear 
testimony to the devotion of the faithful to these Pontifis, 


Apr. 23. St. George, Martyr: The feast of St. George is found 
in the Ethiopian, Coptic, Syriac, and Latin liturgies. The 
ancient “Georgia” is named after him. He is renowned as 
the armed defender of the Church, one who carried the 
trophies of victory over the enemy. The Emperor Diocletian 
had at first favored this illustrious son of a noble family of 
Cappadocia, but when St. George reproached the Emperor 
with his cruelty to Christians, he was cast into prison and 
put to death with such great cruelty that in the Eastern 
Liturgy he is styled the “Great Martyr.” England chose him 
for her patron in 800. 


Apr. 24. St. Fidelis of Sigmaringen, Martyr: St. Fidelis of 
Sigmaringen (Suabia) was born in 1577 and was ordained a 
priest in 1612. He brought so many into the Church that he 
incurred the hatred of the Swiss Calvinists, who killed him 
in 1622. He is the proto-martyr of the later reformed Capuchin 
Friars Minor. : 


Arr, 25. St. Mark the Evangelist; Major Litanies. Station 
at St. Peter's: The procession on this day is in no way related 


http://ccwatershed.org 


AOCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OP SAINTS 1689 


to the feast of St. Mark; if the feast be transferred the Great 
Litanies are not transferred, unless Easter Sunday should fall 
on April 25, when the procession would take place on the 
following Tuesday. The feast of St, Mark was not regularly 
inserted into the Roman Calendar until about the Twelfth 
Century. This is explained by the original association of the 
commemorations of the saints with their tombs, Although St. 
Mark was among the first who with St. Peter brought the 
Faith to Rome and at the request of the Romans themselves, 
wrote his Gospel, he did not die in the Holy City, 


Mark is said to have been the young. man who, on the night 
that Jesus was made prisoner, left the sheet in which he was 
clothed, in the hands of the soldiers and fled naked. He ac- 
companied his cousin, Barnabas and Paul, on their first apos- 
tolic mission. Paul, however, would not take him along on the 
second journey; when Paul was in prison at Rome, Mark was 
again closely associated with him. To St. Mark is attributed 


.the foundation of the Church in Alexandria, which See he 


governed for about twenty years and in the end was martyred, 
about the year 70. His body was taken to Venice whose patron 
he has been since the Ninth Century and where there is a 
great Basilica dedicated to his name. 


Apr. 26. Sts. Cletus and Marcellinus, Popes and Martyrs: 
According to the testimony. of St. Irenæus, Cletus is to be 
identified with Anacletus, who governed the Church after 
Linus and before Clement. Of his actions we know nothing 
beyond the notice in the Liber Pontificalis to the effect that 
he embellished the. tombs of the Princes of the Apostles, and 
that he himself was buried in the Vatican. The fact that 
Cletus was raised to the supreme pontificate, whilst the im- 
mediate disciples of Peter and Paul were still living, testifies 
to his great merits. 


Even more obsctire is the history of Pope Marcellinus, con- 
cerning whom the strangest legends were circulated from very 


' early days. According to certain apocryphal writings, dating 


from the time of the disputes of Symmachus, he had formerly 
offered incense to idols, but had afterwards expiated his 
apostasy like Peter, and had voluntarily exposed himself to 
martyrdom. St. Cletus lived in the First Century; St. Marcel- 
linus at the end of the third. 7 - 


Arn. 27. St. Peter Canisius, Confessor and Doctor of the 
Church: St. Peter Canisius, called “The Second Apostle of 
Germany,” as St, Boniface was the first, was the first German 
Jesuit. He was born at Nymwegen, May 8, 1521, and was 
received into the Society of Jesus by Blessed Peter Faber, at 
Mayence, May 8, 1543. After an extraordinarily apostolic 
life as teacher, orator, writer, adviser, he died a holy death 
on December 21, 1597, at Freiburg, Switzerland. He was 
beatified November 20, 1868. and canonized May 21, 1925. 
He had a great love for children; to him we owe the first 
catechism of Christian Doctrine; he is often pictured as sur- 
rounded by a group of devout children, teaching them the 
catechism. 'The greatest stress he placed upon the education 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1690 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


of priests. “To train good priests," he said, "is the simplest 
way towards the sanctification of an entire people." 


Arr. 28. St. Paul of the Cross, Confessor: St. Paul of the 
Cross, born at Ovada, founded the Congregation of the Pas- 
sionists, amid the solitary rocks of Monte Argentaro. He felt 
that in order to form apostles and missionaries it is necessary 
to have retirement from the world, seclusion, spiritual] recol- 
lection, strict poverty, and austere penance. He preached 
everywhere the mystery of the Cross; the Passionists make a 
vow to propagate the memory of Our Savior’s passion, He died 
in Rome October 18, 1775. 


St. Vitalis, Martyr: St. Vitalis was a martyr of 
Ravenne; the Emperor Justinian erected a splendid basilica 
in his honor. He was martyred by being buried alive up to 
his waist and then stoned. 


Arn. 29. St. Peter of Verona, Martyr: St. Peter was a 
Dominican priest of unspotted life, who labored earnestly 
for the conversion of heretics. In the end he was cruelly killed 
near Como, in Italy, April 6, 1252. He was the object of wide- 
spread veneration in Italy during the Fifteenth Century. In 
his day heresy was a crime against the state and punished by 
civil authority. St. Peter, as inquisitor, was thus able to pro- 
tect the Faith and to save the state from revolution. 


Apr. 30. St. Catharine of Siena, Virgin: St. Catharine of 
Siena was the twenty-third in & family of twenty-four chil- 
dren. She is best known for the work she did in persuading 
Gregory XI in bringing the Papacy from Avignon back to 
Rome. She worked miracles for the sake of the poor and the 
afflicted. At the age of eighteen she received the habit of the 
Third Order of St. Dominic. For three years she never spoke 
to any one but God and her confessor. During her prolonged 
fast her only food was Holy Communion. Our Savior appear- 
ing to her on one occasion offered her a crown of thorns and 
another of roses, bidding her choose; she eagerly took the 
crown i o A and forcibly pressed it upon her head. She 

e . 


Wednesday after the Second Sunday after Easter; TEE 
SOLEMNITY OF ST. JOSEPH, Spouse of the Blessed Virgin Mary, 
Patron of the Universal Church, Confessor: This feast became 
obligatory on the Universal Church after the occupation of 
Rome by the troops of Victor Emmanuel II. The Pope pro- 
claimed St. Joseph Patron of the oppressed Household of the 
Faith, and entrusted to him the defence of the Catholic 
Church. By virtue of his espousals to Mary he became the 
representative of the Eternal Father in the Holy Family of 
Nazareth; he still continues to exercise his fatherly care over 
the Catholic Church, and extension and continuation of the 
family life of Bethlehem and Nazareth. f 


At first the feast of the Patronage of St. Joseph was 2p- 
pointed for the Third Sunday after Easter, but when, in the 
liturgical reform of Pius X, it was desired to restore to the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


eckson, actio es 


Ww 


Ku 3 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1691 


Sunday Offices their precedence over those of the saints, the 
feast of St. Joseph had also to give way and was anticipated 
on the preceding Wednesday. 

To compensate for this is was raised to the rank of a feast 
of the first class with an Octave. 

In her Liturgy the Church atiributes to St. Joseph a special 
power of intercession on behalf of the dying. This most holy 
Patriarch was assisted in his own agony by Jesus and Mary, 
in whose arms he gave up his soul to God, more by the force 
of love than by that of suffering. 


Feasts of Map 


May 1. Sts. Philip and James, Apostles: In the Church of 
the Twelve Apostles in Rome there were some relics of the 
apostles Philip and James the Just or Less. Because of 
the consecration of the Church of the Holy Apostles on May 1, 
and the relics of St. James preserved in this Church, the feast 
of James the Less was joined with that of St. Philip and cele- 
brated on this day. The stational mass is said here on all 
Fridays in ember week and on Easter Thursday. The apostle 
St. Philip was one of the first chosen disciples of Christ. He 
preached the Gospel in Eastern Europe, and in Phrygia, and 
in the end suffered death by crucifixion. St. James governed 
the Church of Jerusalem for nearly thirty years, until about 
A.D. 62, when he was stoned to death by the Jews. 


May 2. St. Athanasius, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of the 
Church: St. Athanasius, Doctor of the Church and Patriarch 
of Alexandria, one of the most renowned of the Fathers of the 
Church, was the heroic and successful defender of Catholic 
doctrine against Arius. After many sufferings in the cause of 
God’s Church, he died May 2, 373. 

While living in Rome during his exile he described to the 
Romans the wonderful life of Antony and Pachomius in Egypt, 
sowing the seed of monasticism in Rome. He taught with great 
power the independence of the Church from civil authority. 


May 3. The Finding of the Holy Cross: The Cross on which 
Our Blessed Lord suffered for us was, following Jewish usage, 
buried on Mount Calvary after the Crucifixion. The precise 
spot was revealed in a vision to the Empress Helena, mother of 
Constantine, the first Christian Emperor. 


This date commemorates the recovery of the True Cross 
in the reign of the Emperor Heraclius and its delivery by him 
about the year 629 into the hands of the Patriarch Zacharias 
of Jerusalem, from which city it had been carried away some 
years previously by the Persians with the object of transporting 
it to their own country. 


God has been pleased to give so much power to the Cross 
that at its sign alone the demons fly; by it the priest blesses 
the faithful, the devout receive abundant graces. The early 
Christians had so much devotion to it that, according to the 
ancient Fathers, they never began any action without first 
making the sign of the cross upon themselves, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1692 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


In the Middle Ages no public deed, inscription, law etc., was 
begun to be written without first tracing upon it the sign of 
the cross. This sign was accepted as the signature of the 


uneducated; it often preceded that of ecclesiastics, and in many . 


country districts even the dough and the bread were marked 
with a cross before they were baked. " 


Sts. Alexander, Eventius, Theodulus, and Juve- 
nal, Martyrs: St. Alexander, Pope, was martyred, A.D. 119, in 
the tenth year of his pontificate. With him suffered Sts. 
Eventius and Theodulus, St. Juvenal, (a.n. 367) , also commemo- 
rated on this day, was a holy bishop in Central Italy, 


Mav 4. St. Monica, Widow: St. Monica, born in Africa, 
married a pagan whom she converted. As described in the 
ninth book of his Confessions, the beautiful figure of the 
mother of St. Augustine will continue to live in the Church as 
one of the finest examples of a Christian mother. Night and 
day she prayed for her son; he tells us that she “shed for him 
more tears than other mothers shed over a coffin.” God heard 
her prayers after twenty years and gave to her son, under 
the influence of St. Ambrose, the grace of conversion, She 
died at Ostia in 387, after God had granted to her and to 
Augustine a marvelous ecstasy. 


The body of St. Monica remained at Ostia until the year 
1162, when a certain Walter Prior, of the Canons Regular of 
Aroasia, in Belgium, removed the body secretly from its 
tomb and carried it off to his own monastery. The celebra- 
tion of her feast on the 4th of May spread from this monastery 
through Belgium, Germany and France and thus came into 
general liturgical use. 


Max 5. St. Pius V, Pope, Confessor: Coming from a family 
in poor circumstances, a Dominican friar from his fifteenth 
year, this great Pope as a simple Religious, as bishop, and as 
cardinal was famous for his intrepid defence of the Faith and 
discipline of the Church, and for the spotless purity of his 
life. The secret of his power lay in seeking the glory of God 
alone, and in his constant attention to prayer. By this latter 
means he overcame the insolence of the Turks and sanctified 
the people entrusted to his care. His name adorns the front 
page of the Roman Missal and Breviary, because it was by his 
authority that the revision of the liturgical books was brought 
to a conclusion. Since his time the Holy See and the entire 
hierarchy have followed definitely the road of that salutary 
revival of the ecclesiastical spirit which was marked out by 
the Council of Trent.. He died in 1572. 


May 6. St. John before the Latin Gate: Besides the solemn 
feast two days after Christmas, the Church commemorates 
the attempt to put St. John to death in a caldron of boiling 
oil outside the Latin Gate. The saint came from it unhurt, 
and even more vigorous than before. A church now marks the 
site which a late tradition assigns to this event. This feast 
celebrates the martyrdom of the evangelist who, according 
to the prophecy of the Savior, was also, like his brother, to 


http://ccwatershed.org 


b digni. dium 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1693 


drink of tne chalice of the Passion, in order that he might 
have the right to one of the highest thrones in the Messianic 
kingdom, which his mother had begged for him. . 


May 7. St. Stanislaus, Bishop, Martyr: St. Stanislaus, a 
Polish martyr, was Bishop of Cracow. King Boleslaw II was 
outraging the whole kingdom by his acts of lust and cruelty. 
St. Stanislaus, finding all remonstrances useless, excommuni- 
cated him. By order of the king he was cut in pieces at the 
foot of the altar while celebrating High Mass on the feast of 
the Apparition of St. Michael in. the oratory of the Holy 
Archangel on the outskirts of Cracow. As, however, that day 
has been dedicated from the early Middle Ages to St, Michael, 
when the feast of the martyred bishop was introduced into the 
Calendar of the Universal Church by Clement VIII, it was 
kept in anticipation on the eve of his death. BE 


May 8. The Apparition of St. Michael the Archangel: 
There are several feasts of St, Michael in the Liturgy. Very 
&nclent is the commemoration of the dedication of the cele- 
brated Lombard: sanctuary on Sant'Angelo on Monte Gargano 
in Apulia, near the ancient Sipontum. There is a tradition 
that St. Michael appeared on this mountain and requested 


^w that a church be erected to him and all the angels. 


In the Old and the New Testament St. Michael, in the 
struggle against the Evil One, is always depicted as the in- 
vincible champion of God. The mystery of iniquity which, 
according to St. Paul, shall be boldly revealed in the last ages 
of the world and which has already begun its work of prever- 
Sion, meets at present with an obstacle which hinders its full 
development. . ‘This obstacle is usually said to be the protection 
of St. Michael, St. Micbael is appointed by God himself to be 
the protector and defender of the Church. After the protective 
duty conferred on St. Joseph, there is no work on earth of 
such great importance and sublimity as that entrusted to 


St. Michael. 


Mav 9. St. Gregory Nazianzen, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor 
of the Church: St. Gregory of Nazianzen, one of the Fathers of 
the Greek Church, was born in Asia Minor; he was made a 
bishop and afterward Patriarch of Constantinople. He la- 
bored with wonderful success against the Arians. His success 
drew on him the hatred of the enemies of the Faith. Finally, 
he resigned his See and retired to his native town, where he 
died in 390. As a champion of the Faith he was so well 
equipped, So strenuous, and so exact that he is called St. 
Gregory the Theologian. His firmness restored the Faith of 
the Council of Nicea to Constantinople; he was, however, & 
man of gentle spirit and eminently poetic mind. Renouncing 
his bishopric he set his heart on the contemplative life and 
monastic discipline. 


MAY 10. St. Antoninus, Bishop, Confessor: St, Antoninus 
entered the Dominican Order in his sixteenth year. In 1446 
he was compelled to accept the archbishopric of Florence. 
When the false: Renaissance was beginning to give a tone of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1694 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


classical paganism to society he set an example of fervent 
pastoral zeal, joined with the love of study and of the most 
austere virtues of the cloister. He died in 1459. 


Sts. Gordian and Epimachus, Martyrs: Under Pope 
Adrian I the bodies of these two martyrs were placed in the 
same tomb. Gordian was a Roman judge converted by a holy 
priest who was brought before him for trial under Julian the 
Apostate. St. Epimachus was an Alexandrian martyr who at 
first had a separate mass in the Liturgy. 


. May 12. Sts. Nereus, Achilleus, Domitilla, and Pancras, 
Martyrs: Sts. Nereus and Achilleus were servants of St. Flavia 
Domitila. She was the wife of the consul Flavius Clemens, 
cousin of the Emperor Domitian. She died in exile on the 
island of Pandataria. Her granddaughter, likewise Domitilla, 
also died in exile on the island of Pontia. The virgin whose 
feast is: celebrated to-day is the secon Domitilla. 

The fourteen-year-old Pancras suffered martyrdom prob- 
ably in the reign of Diocletian, and was buried by the matron 
Ottavilla in a property belonging to her on the Via Aurelia, 
where the basilica dedicated to him still stands. There the 
station is celebrated on Low Sunday, when the neophytes, 
newly born in ihe Spirit, used to put off their white. bap- 
tismal garments. In the Middle Ages it was the custom that 
the most solemn oaths should be taken at the tomb of 
the martyr Pancras, as though the simple innocence of a 
childhood consecrated by the blood of martyrdom would:ensure 
@ Safer guarantee of their genuineness. The Romans vener- 
ated him with great fervor. 


May 13. St. Robert Bellarmine, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor 
of the Church: St. Robert Bellarmine, of whom Pope Clement 
VIIIsaid: “The Church of God had not his equal in learning," 
was born in 1542 at Montepulciano and died in 1621. He 
entered: the Society of Jesus, was made a Cardinal and dis- 
tinguished himself by his teaching, preaching, writing and 
defense of the rights of the Church. During St. Aloysius’ 
last years, St. Robert was his spiritual director. He was beati- 
fied in 1923, canonized and declared a Doctor of the Church 
in 1931. He is the patron of catechetical instruction, and 
members of the Confraternity of Christian Doctrine may gain 
a plenary indulgence on his feast day under the usual 
conditions. ] . 


May 14. St. Boniface, Martyr: St. Bonitace, a Roman 
martyr, suffered at Tarsus, the capital of Cilicia, at the be- 
ginning of the Fourth Century. He had gone thither, as a 
penance for the sins of his past life, to recover relics of the 
saints. After his martyrdom his body was taken back to 
Rome and enshrined in a church that was erected in his honor. 


MaY 15. St. John Baptist de la Salle, Confessor: St. John 
Baptist de la Salle was canonized by Leo XIII, who also ex- 
tended the observance of his feast to the Universal Church. 
His place in ecclesiastical history is chiefly important from 
the social point of view. since at least two centuries before 


http://ccwatershed.org 


) 
| 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1695 


world changes rendered necessary the education of the masses, 
and before technical schools had gained for themselves the 
all-important place in the training of the. young which had 
up till then been held exclusively by classical teaching, God 
gave him an intuition of this need as though by a prophetic 
vision. St: John Baptist de la Salle, answering the divine 
call, resigned his honorable position as a canon of Rheims, 
and, overcoming much opposition and many difficulties, 
founded the Society of the Brothers of Christian Schools, 
which still is productive of so much good throughout the 
Church. He died at Rouen on Good Friday, April 7, 1719, at 
the age of 68. 


May 16. St. Ubaldus, Bishop, Confessor: St. Ubaldus, 
Bishop of Gubbio in Central Italy, died at his post in 1160, 
after great devotion to his flock and with such a reputation 
for sanctity that he was canonized in less than thirty years 
after his death. He is remembered for his great power over 
the evil spirits. 


May 17..St. Paschal Baylon, Confessor: St. Paschal Bay- 


` lon, was a simple lay brother of the Franciscan Order, and, 


“By preference, occupied himself with the roughest and most 
i le tasks. He was distinguished by an ardent. love and 
deyotion to the Blessed Sacrament. He died in. the odor. of 
sanctity; May 15, 1592. Even after death his body moved and 
his eyes opened in an act of adoration when the priest raised 
up the sacred host at the elevation in the Mass. Pope Leo 
ZI declared him protector of all Eucharistic Congresses and 
works.. ` . 


May 18. St. Venantius, Martyr: St. Venantius, at the age 
of fifteen, was seized as a Christian, and was beheaded with 
his..converts by order of Emperor Decius in 250. Clement X, 
who had a particular devotion to this holy youth, ordered his 
feast to be kept throughout the Church. 


Mav 19. St. Peter Celestine, Pope, Confessor: St. Peter 
Celestine was the founder of the Celestine Order. He was 
living in à mountain solitude when he was called to Rome by 
his election to the Pontificate. He was accused of excessive 
simplicity ià public affairs, nor did he deny the truth of this 
accusation. Other Popes, such.as Sts. Martin and Benedict 
IX had resigned the Papacy; the Thirteenth Century canon- 
ists nevertheless, disputed whether it was lawful for the 
Supreme Pontiff ever to renounce his position, Celestine V 
decided the question according to primitive Roman tradi- 
tions, and laid aside the papal robes to return to his former 
monastic life. Both during his pontificate and after his 
humble abdication, he worked many miracles. He died May 
19, 1296. : 


St. Pudentiana, Virgin: St. Pudentiana, a Roman 
virgin, was the daughter of the Senator Pudens, who had been 
converted by Sts. Peter and Paul. Pudentiana and her sister, 
Bt. Praxedes, passed their lives in good works, 

“May 20. St. Bernardine of Siena, Confessor: St. Bernar- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1696 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OP SAINTS 


dine of Siena in Italy was a Franciscan friar, who devoted 
his life to the saving of souls. He it was who started the 
devotion to the Holy Name of Jesus, St. Bernardine died 
May 20, 1444. 


May 25. St. Gregory VII, Pope, Confessor: St. Gregory 
VII was one of the most famous of the successors.of St. Peter. 
He was born at the foot of the Capitol, near the deaconry of 
St. Mary in Portico, which he caused to be restored after he 
had become Pope, reconsecrating the high altar. In his early 
pu Hildebrand was professed in the Order of St. Benedict 

the little monastery of St. Mary on the Aventine, where 
the Priory of the Knights of Malta now stands. He was elected 
Pope in 1073, and his conflicts with Henry IV, Emperor of 
Germany, have made his name immortal throughout the 
whole Christian world. On May 25, 1085, in the twelfth year 
of his pontificate, Gregory entered into his rest. He died in 
exile at Salerno, where his body is buried in the Cathedral. 


St. Urban I, Pope, Martyr: St. Urban, who suc- 
ceeded St. Calixtus in the year 223, was Pope for seven years. 
He suffered martyrdom under Emperor Alexander Severus. 


. May 26. St. Philip Neri, Confessor: This holy priest who 
died in 1591, exercised the apostolic ministry at Rome for 
about fifty years, and in the midst of a frivolous and corrupt 
society became the adviser of Popes, of Cardinals and of.some 
of the most distinguished persons of his time. Until recent 
years his feast was kept in Rome as a holy day of obligation 
and the Pope himself used to go in state to celebrate Mass at 
his tomb in St. Mary in Vallicella. He instituted the Con- 
gregation of the Priests of the Oratory; he desired to reawaken 
the religious spirit in Christian society through the frequent- 
ing of the holy sacraments and through catechetical instruc- 
on. 


Stern and severe towards himself he was full of gentleness 
towards others and even humorous when ihe occasion re- 
quired it. St. Philip was able to raise the dead to life, to hear 
their confession, to converse with them, and then, at their re- 
quest to open to them once more the gates of eternity by the 
sign of the cross. He refused all ecclesiastical honors, even 
the cardinalate. He was so filled with love at Holy Mass, that 
he used to spend three hours in offering the Holy Sacrifice. 


St. Eleutherius, Pope, Martyr: St. Eleutherius 
succeeded St. Soter in the pontificate in 176, and governed the 
Church for fifteen years. He died a martyr, 192. 


Mav 27. St. Bede, Confessor, Doctor of the Church: St. 
Bede, the illustrious ornament of the Anglo-Saxon Church 
and the first English historian, is universally known as “Ven- 
erable Bede.” He was declared a Doctor of the Church by 
Pope Leo XIII. He trained six hundred scholars, who were 
attached to him by his piety, learning, and sweet disposition. 
He left beautiful lives of Anglo-Saxon saints, and his com- 
mentaries on the Scriptures are stillin use by the Church. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1697 


He died May 26, 735. Historians relate of him that he passed 
no time in idleness and never ceased to study; he always read, 
always wrote, always thought, and always prayed, 


. St. John I, Pope, Martyr: St. John I was Pope 
during the reign of Theodoric, the Arian king of the Goths, 
Who cast him into a dungeon at Ravenna, where he died from 
his sufferings, May 27, 526. His body was carried to Rome 
and buried under the porch at St. Peter's. : 


Mav 28. St. Augustine of Canterbury, Bishop Confessor: 

St. Augustine was a Roman monk, and was sent by Pope 
Gregory the Great with forty companions to England in order 
to convert that land to the Faith. The result far surpassed the 
expectations of the Pope, for God set his seal on the preaching 
of St. Augustine by so great a number of miracles that the 
age of the apostles seemed to have come again. Ethelbert, the 
King of Kent, together with the chief persons of his court, 
Was the first to receive Baptism from the hands of the saint, 
who gave bodily health to the sick as well as salvation to 
their souls. 
; By command of St. Gregory, Augustine was consecrated the 
first Bishop of the English by Virgilius of Arles. Returning 
to England, he consecrated bishops for other Sees and estab- 
lished his own See, as Primate, at Canterbury, where he also 
built a monastery. He died on May 26, 609, and was at once 
venerated as a saint. This feast was placed on the Calender 
by Leo XIII. 


Mav 29. St. Mary Magdalen dei Pazzi, Virgin: St. Mary 
Magdalen dei Pazzi was born in 1566. The charity that burned 
in her heart led her to enter a Carmelite convent at the age 
of eighteen. Among the special gifts for which St. Mary 
Magdalen is celebrated, is the sweet perfume which to this 
day is given out by the pure and incorrupt remains of this holy 
virgin. Many of the revelations granted to this saint are also 
famous, such as one concerning the immense glory attained 
by St. Aloysius Gonzaga in heaven. She died May 25, 1607. 


Mav 30. St. Felix I, Pope, Martyr: Pope St. Felix, in the 
sixth year of his pontificate, received the martyr's crown un- 
der Emperor Aurelian, 274. It was St. Felix who commanded 
Masses to be celebrated over the tombs of martyrs in remem- 
brance of which the relics of martyrs are still placed in the 
altar stone. 


May 31. St. Angela Merici, Virgin: The feast of the 
foundress of the Ursulines under the rule of the Third Order 
of St. Francis was inserted in the Calendar of the Universal 
Church by Pius IX in 1861. The devout pilgrimages of St. 
Angela to the Holy Land and to Rome recall, in a manner, 
those made by St. Bridget of Sweden some two centuries 
earlier. She showed the same faith and enjoyed equal respect 
with the Popes, so much so that. Clement VII would not 
allow her to leave the Eternal City. . After having brought to- 
gether à band of holy women, who devoted themselves to the 
Christian education of girls, St. Angela passed away from this 
life, full of merits, on January 27, 1540. : 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1698 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OP SAINTS 


Mav 31. St. Petronilla, Virgin: St. Petronilla was long 
venerated as the daughter of St. Peter; recent study has 
shown that she belonged to the Roman family of the Aurelii. 
The mistake arose from misunderstanding an inscription. On 
her tomb the Pope and the Roman Church formed by oath 
a spiritual relationship with France, which thus became the 
eldest daughter of the Church. 


Friday after the Octave of Corpus Christi; FEAST OF THE 
SacRED HEART OF JESUS: 


The origin of this feast is similar to that of the Blessed 
Sacrament. The symbolism surrounding the wound in the 
side of Jesus made by the lance of Longinus, from which 
flowed blood and water, was already familiar to the early 
Fathers of the Church. There are wonderful pages in the 
writings of St. Augustine and St. John Crysostom about the 
Church which, radiant with youth, springs from the side of 
the new Adam asleep upon the cross, as well as about the 
divine sacraments which flowed from the loving Heart of 
the Redeemer. 


This tradition of the Fathers was preserved and developed 
by the Benedictine school of piety; so that when, finally, in 
the Twelfth Century, St. Bernard directed the mystical de- 
votion of his monks of Clairvaux towards a special cultus of 
the human nature of the Savior, the devotion to the Sacred 
Heart after the manner now paid to it by the Liturgy may be 
said to have come into being. From simply meditating on 
the wounds of Jesus, the Benedictine mystics had developed 
@ special devotion to that in His side, and entering through 
the opening made by the lance of Longinus, had penetrated 
to his very Heart wounded by the lance of love. 


The feast of the Sacred Heart was given approbation by 
Clement XIII in the year 1765. In 1856 at the urgent request 
of the French Bishops, Pope Pius IX extended the feast to the 
Universal Church. On June 11, 1899, by order of Pope Leo 
XIII and with the formula prescribed by him, all mankind 
was solemly consecrated to the Sacred Heart. Popes Pius X 
and Pius XI were authors of further acts of approval and 
finally, on January 29, 1929, the latter Pontiff approved and 
ordered for use in the Universal Church the proper Office 
and Mass for the feast and its octave as set forth in the de- 
cree of the Sacred Congregation of Rites of the same date. 


Feasts of June 


June 2. Sts. Marcellinus, Peter, and Erasmus, Martyrs: 
Sts. Peter and Marcellinus, the latter a priest, suffered mar- 
trydom under Diocletian. St. Erasmus, a bishop in the south 
of Italy, also suffered martyrdom in the same persecution. 


JUNE 4. St. Francis Caracciolo, Confessor: St. Francis 
Caracciolo, born in the kingdom of Naples, was one of the 
founders of the Order of Clerks Regular, Who in turn watched 
in perpetual adoration before the Blessed Sacrament. 
Short life of forty years was profitable in the sight of God; 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1699 


he edified by his holy life, not only Naples and Rome, but 
also distant Spain. He died on June 4, 1608, and was canon- 
ized by Pope Pius VII. 


June 5. St. Boniface, Bishop, Martyr: St. Boniface was a 
native of Devonshire, England. His first attempt to convert 
pagans having failed, he went to Rome where he received the 
Pope's blessing on his mission, and then set forth with the 
papal authority to preach to the German tribes. He thus 
became the apostle and first archbishop of the Germans. 
While engaged in his earnest work he, with other Christians, 
suffered martyrdom, on June 5, 755. Pius IX extended the 
Office of St. Boniface to the whole Church. 


Jone 6. St. Norbert, Bishop, Confessor: St. Norbert, arch- 
bishop of Magdeburg, in North Germany, was the founder of 
the Canons Regular or Premonstratensians, as they were 
called. The doctrine of the Real Presence having been ques- 
tioned by Tanchelin of Antwerp, our saint, who was distin- 
guished for his devotion to the Blessed Sacrament, reclaimed 
many who had fallen away, and rekindled: the love of Our 
Lord in the Blessed Eucharist. His order takes its name from 
Prémontré where it was founded. The chief characteristic 
of the mission of St. Norbert was his eloquent preaching of the 
word of God. This is an entirely apostolic mission which is 
not always appreciated as much as it should be. The preach- 
ing of the Gospel is indeed à most necessary thing, for no man 
can believe the Word of God and be saved except there be an 
apostle to preach it to him. He died in 1134, worn out with 


JUNE 9. Sts. Primus and Felician, Martyrs: These two mar- 
tyrs were brothers who gave their lives for the Faith, June 9, 
under Diocletian. Hundreds of spectators who witnessed their 
martyrdom proclaimed themselves Christians and likewise 
suffered for the Faith. Their bodies were the first to be 
brought into Rome from the cemeteries outside the walls. 


June 10. St. Margaret, Queen of Scotland, Widow: St. 
Margaret was the granddaughter of an English king. In 
1070 she married Malcolm III of Scotland, and reigned as 
queen of that country for twenty-three years. She gave 
bountifully to the poor and saw that the laws of God and His 
Church were observed throughout her realm. Pope Innocent 
XII appointed June 10 for the observance of her feast. She 
was the guardian angel of her people, on account of which 
Clement X proclaimed her the patron of Scotland. She died 
in 1093. - 


JUNE 11. St. Barnabas, Apostle: St. Barnabas, who was 
originally known as Joseph, a rich levite, was a native of 
Cyprus. According to The Acts of the Apostles, he "having 
land, sold it, and brought the price, and laid it at the feet 
of the apostles.” In company with St. Paul they journeyed 
to the cities of Asia Minor and the people were amazed at 
their preaching. St. Paul constantly gives him the title of 
apostle, which has therefore been ascribed to him in the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1700 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


Liturgy. Persecuted by the Jews he was stoned to death in 
the island of Cyprus. His name is mentioned in the Canon 
of the Mass immediately after that of St. Matthias. 


Jung, 12. St. John of St. Facundus, Confessor: St, John 
was born at St. Facundus in Spain, and belonged to the Augus- 
tinian Order. He was distinguished for his devotion during 
boly Mass; he loved peace-making and brought an end to & 
HE on among the factions in Salamanca. He died June 


Sts. Basilides, Cyrinus, Nabor, and Nazarius, 
Martyrs: Sts. Basilides, Cyrinus, Nabor, and Nazarius were 
Christian soldiers in the army of Maxentius. They were be- 
headed by order of Aurelius, prefect of Rome. 


June 13. St. Anthony of Padua, Confessor: St. Anthony of 
Padua, of the Order of St. Francis, was called the “Hammer 02 ; 
Heretics.” For nine years he labored in France, Italy, and ; 
Sicily. Men heard his voice, saw his miracles, and their hearts ; 
were turned to God. Nothing is lacking to the glory of St, 
Anthony; he had a great desire for martyrdom, and on that 
account he entered the Franciscan Order and set sail for 
Mauretania. He was an apostle, and the fame of his fervent 
preaching filled Italy and Rome, where he proclaimed the 
Word of God in 1327. Both during his lifetime and after his 
death in 1331, St. Anthony became renowned as a worker of 
miracles, and there are few cities which do not possess a 
church or an altar dedicated to him. 


June 14. St. Basil, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of the Church: 
St. Basil the Great was Archbishop of Cesarea in the Asiatic 
Province of Cappadocia. His solid and eloquent words silenced 
the Arian heretics who were persecuting the Church, and he 
restored the spirit of discipline and fervor. He was one of 
the most celebrated Fathers of the Eastern Church. He is 
the author of a monastic rule from which St. Benedict derived 
many points, and which is still observed by the monks of the 
East. During his lifetime he was called a vessel of election 
by St. Ephrem. He died January 1, 379. 


Jone 15. Sts. Vitus, Modestus and Crescentia, Martyrs: 
St. Vitus was a martyr who is spoken of in the Martyrology of 
St. Jerome as being a native of Lucania, or of Sicily, and 
whose veneration was very widely diffused in Italy during the 
Lombard period. The Mass was originally of St. Vitus only, 
but later there were associated with him the martyrs Modestus 
and Crescentia; the former, according to the Acta, being his 
teacher, the latter his nurse. St. Vitus was delivered by his 
father to be scourged because he had been baptized; his judge 
was struck blind but healed by his prayers. His teacher and 
nurse then took him to foreign parts whence he was sum- 
moned by Diocletian to deliver his son tormented by the devil. 
When St. Vitus had done this he was ordered to worship false 
gods; upon his refusal, together with Modestus and Crescentia, 
he was plunged into a caldron of molten lead and flaming 
resin, They died in 303. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


` 


| 


` 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1701 


June 18. St. Ephrem the Syrian, Deacon, Confessor and 
Doctor of the Church: St. Ephrem born at Nisibis in Meso- 
potamia of a pagan father, was cast out of his home and lived 
as a hermit in the desert. He never became a priest but was 
deacon of the Church of Edessa. From early times, because 
of his opposition to the Arians, he had been famed as a teacher 
of the Universal Church; not only the ‘Syrians, but the 
Byzantines, the Slavs, the Armenians, and the Copts had in- 
corporated in their liturgical books the melodious composi- 
tions of the celebrated Deacon of Edessa, who was called in 
consequence by the Eastern Church the “Lyre of the Holy 
Spirit.” He died at Edessa in 379. In 1918, the year in which 
the Centenary of St. Jerome was being kept, Pope Benedict 
XV compared these two heroic monks of the East. On Oc- 
tober 5, 1920, this same Pope proclaimed St. Ephrem a Doctor 
o: tna GU He is the only Deacon honored with the title 
of Doctor. 


à Sts. Mark and Marcellianus, Martyrs: Sts. Mark 
and Marcellianus were twin brothers, of an illustrious family 
in Rome. 'They gave their lives for Christ in 286, under the 
persecutions of Diocletian, after suffering cruel torture. Ac- 
cording to the Acta of St. Sebastian, which do not, however, 
date from primitive times, Mark and Marcellianus, after 
having fearlessly confessed the Christian Falth in the midst 
of torments, were on the point of denying it, being overcome 
by the tears of their parents who came to visit them in prison. 
Thus we see how great a danger to the souls of the Religious is 
to be found in unrestrained family affection, as St. Philip Neri 
well observes in reference especially to these two martyrs. 


JUNE19..St. Juliana Falconieri, Virgin: St. Juliana Fal- 
conieri, born in Florence in 1270, niece of St. Alexis Falcon- 
leri, even as a child showed such sanctity that her holy uncle 
told her mother that she-had given birth to an angel To 
hear sin spoken of made her tremble. At the age of fifteen 
she consecrated her virginity to God. She founded the Order 
of the Mantelette (wearers of a short cloak or mantle); she 
was then-asked by St. Philip Beniti to take charge of the 
whole order of the Servites and thus may be regarded as a 
second foundress of this Community devoted to tbe Sorrows 
of the Blessed Virgin. Toward the end of her life, on account 
of constant sickness, it was not possible for her to receive the 
Blessed Sacrament; she asked that it might be held near her 
heart. When this was done the sacred host miraculously pene- 
trated her breast. She died on June 19, 1340. 


In olden times the pagans placed in the mouth of the dead 
a piece of money as payment to the boatman Charon. In the 
Fourth Century it was. already an ancient tradition of the 
Roman Church to comfort the last moments of the faithful 
by administration of the Eucharist; the Viaticum also was 
sometimes placed on the breast of the dead person. This 
custom which testified to the robust faith of that early age 
in the immortality of the soul and final resurrection was after- 
wards modified by the Church, decreeing that Communion 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1702 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


after Confession and Exireme Unction should suffice as 
Viaticum. 


JUNE 19. Sts. Gervase and Protase, Martyrs: Sis. Gervase 
&nd Protase, said to be twins, were called by St. Ambrose 
the proto-martyrs of Milan. At the close of the Fourth Cen- 
tury he discovered their relics and had them suitably en- 
shrined. Their names are included in the Litany of the Saints. 


JUNE 20. St. Silverius, Pope, Martyr: This Pope was a son 
of Pope Hormisdas who had been married before receiving 
Holy Orders. He fell a victim to the brutal tyranny of Belis- 
arius. Accused of favoring the Goths he was stripped of the 
papal insignia and handed over to some sub-deacons who 
clothed him in the monastic habit. It was then announced 
that Silverius had become a monk.. The Emperor Justinian 
restored him, but Belisarius was once more able to exile him 
to the island of Palmaria, where he succumbed to hardships 
and want in 538. God glorified him by many miracles. 


JUNE 21..St. Aloysius Gonzaga, Confessor: This saint was 
like a white and fragrant lily in his virgin purity, trans- 
planted by God from the luxurious and sensual Court of 
Madrid to the chosen garden of St. Ignatius of Loyola at 
Rome. The whole life of Aloysius breathes forth sanctity 
and purity; his Baptism, which was administered at the very 
moment of his birth, his first Communion at the hands of St. 
Charles Borromeo; his reception into the Society of Jesus by 
Claudio Acquaviva, the spiritual direction given to him at 
the Collegio Romano by St. Robert Bellarmine; his severe 
penances, and, lastly, his holy death as a victim of charity in 
the service of the plague-stricken sufferers in the Hospital of 
the Consolazione at Rome. He died on the octave-day of 
Corpus Christi, 1591, at the age of twenty-three years, Ben- 
edict XIII declared. him the patron of young people. 


JuNE 22. St. Paulinus, Bishop, Confessor: St. Paulinus was 
Bishop of Nola in Southern Italy. So great was his charity 
that he sold himself into slavery in order to ransom tne son 
of a poor widow, who had been carried off by the Vandals of 
Africa. He was afterward set free, and returned. to Nola, 
where he died in 431. Otho III brought his body from Bene- 
ventum to the little island in the Tiber near the Trastevere. 
Pius X had them carried back in triumph to his episcopal 
city at Nola, and ordered a new Mass in his honor to be 
inserted in the Missal and his feast raised to a double in the 
Universal Church, His figure is one of the most attractive 
of ancient times. Without leaving his monastic retreat he 
exerted great influence on his times; he was not a man of 
action, but of prayer, given to solitude and a lover of poetry 
and fine arts. 


JUNE 23. Vigil of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist: 
In Rome the devotion to St. John centers around the Lateran 
Basilica where Pope Hilary had erected two oratories, one in 
honor of St. John the Evangelist and the other in honor of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1703 


St. John the Baptist, These two oratories became so famous 
that they gave ihe name of St. John to the Lateran Basilica 
itself. 


The greatness of St. John the Baptist consists entirely in 
his mission of preparing the way for Jesus Christ. Therefore 
he did not live for himself, but for Christ and for His greater 
glory. ‘This is genuine humility, the foundation of all true 
greatness before God. 


June 24. The Nativity of St. John the Baptist: The day 
of the death of other saints is kept as their feast, and in the 
case of St. John the Baptist the day of his birth is celebrated, 
as having taken place amidst the outpouring of the gifts of 
ihe Paraclete. 'The feast is celebrated with great liturgical 
splendor, the stational Mass was celebrated in the Basilica of 
the Saviour. This grandeur of early devotion to the Baptist 
need cause no one to wonder, if we realize the eminent position 
which St. John holds in the history of the Incarnation. His 
seal of canonization is seen in the eulogy addressed to him 
by the Word of God Himself made man, when He pointed 
him out to the people as the greatest among all the prophets, 
and among all those born of woman, the new Elias, the burn- 
ing and shining light. 

Many churches and oratories were dedicated to him; at 
one time three Masses were celebrated in his honor. When 
Pope Benedict XIV examined the question of the precedence 
over St. Joseph given to St. John in the Litany of the Saints, 
it was not considered opportune to decide how the passage in 
the Gospel (Matth. 11, 11) “among those born of women, there 
hath not arisen a greater than John the Baptist,” was to be 
understood. Now that devotion to St. Joseph has thrown so 
much light on his person, it is clear that the primacy accorded 
to St. John is to be understood of his prophetic and Messianic 
mission. He surpassed in dignity and in sanctity all the 
patriarchs, prophets and saints who announce and prepare 
the way for the New Testament. St. Joseph belongs to another 
period. He enters into the divine plan, not as prophet, but as 
part of the plan of the Incarnation itself. He introduces and 
presents Jesus with all honor to the world as the heir of the 
Messianic promises.’ Mary and Joseph have transcendent 
dignity; this in no way detracts from the glory of St. John 
whose praise is sung in the liturgical hymns. Our musical 
scale took its names (Do, re, mi) from the ascending tones of 
the Vesper hymn of St. John. 


JUNE 25. St. William, Abbot: The feast of the founder of 
the Solitaries of Monte Vergine was inserted in the Calendar 
of the Universal Church by Leo XIII. This monastic Congre- 
gation was widely diffused at one time in the South of Italy, 
but having greatly decreased in numbers it was amalgamated 
in the second half of the Nineteenth Century, -with the Bene- 
dictines of Subiaco. 

St. William, who died in 1142, was noted for the austerity 
of his life and for his great gentleness towards others. His 
body rests now on the summit of the Parthenius, in the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1704 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


Basilica of Our Lady which he built, and where every year 
many thousands aay pilgrims assemble to do honor to the 
Blessed Virgin. 


JUNE 26. Sts, John and Paul, Martyrs: Sts. John and Paul 
were both Christian officers in the army under Julian the 
Apostate. They suffered martyrdom in their own house, on 
the Celian Hill They spent ten days allowed them to delib- 
erate about renouncing their devotion to Christ in distributing 
all their goods to the poor. The fact that, unlike other martyrs 
who were buried outside the walls, they had their place of 
burial in the very heart of the Eternal City, was looked upon 
by the early Christians as a special honor granted to them 
and to Rome by Divine Providence. Archeological discoveries 
have fully confirmed the truth of the Acts of their martyrdom, 
Their dwelling-house, the place of their execution, the graves, 
and important paintings have been brought to light. The 
two brothers when on earth possessed one home and one 
Faith, and now in heaven possess the same immortal crown. 


JUNE 28, St. Irenaeus, Bishop, Martyr: St. Irenæus, born at 
Smyrna in Asia Minor, was a pupil of the Martyr St. Polycarp, 
Bishop of that city, and himself a favorite disciple of St. John 
the Evangelist. Later he became Bishop of Lyons in Gaul, 
where, with many other Christians, he was put to death for 
ihe Faith, 202. In his writings, many of which are still extant, 
St. Irenæus bears eloguent testimony to the primary in the 
Church of St. Peter's See. His words are memorable: “It is 
necessary that the whole Church—that is to say, all the faith- 
ful scattered throughout the world—be in agreement with 
this Church by reason of her primacy for the Apostlic tradi- 
tion was ever preserved in her." 


Vigil of the Feast of Sts. Peter and Paul: On 
this vigil in tho Divine Office, the last lesson with the homily 
on the Gospel was sung by the Pope himself. 

At one time this vigil was kept with equal solemnity in the 
Basilicas of St. Peter and of St. Paul. Later the celebration 
at St. Paul’s became monastic; the people attended the Mass 
at St. Peter’s. 


June 29. Sts. Peter and Paul, Apostles: On June 29, 
A.D. 67, St. Peter was crucified, head downward, by order of 
Nero, on & hill overlooking the Vatican. On the same day, 
St. Paul was beheaded outside one of the gates of Rome. The 
Romans celebrated this feast with splendor equal to, if not 
surpassing, that of Easter. 


There are two stations, the one at St. Peter's, the other at 
St. Paul's, but in both Masses the Collects are common to 
the two apostles indissolubly united in a single prayer. It 
is just because of this ancient feeling which is common not 
only to the Romans, but to all the Fathers, that the two 
Founders of the Roman Church can never be divided. Tradi- 
tion has preserved the memory of the places in which St. 
Peter and St. Paul dwelt. It is certain the chair of St. Peter 
$nd the chains of St. Paul were carefully guarded. Ths 


http://ccwatershed.org 


( 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1705 


Vatican Basilica is erected over the burial place of St. Peter; 
the Ostian Basilica, St. Paul’s-Outside-the-Walls, honors the 
Apostle of the Gentiles. . 


JUNE 30. Commemoration of St. Paul the Apostle: As 
June 29 is mainly devoted to the honoring of St. Peter, this 
day is assigned as the special feast of St. Paul. The Mass of 
to-day according to ancient Roman traditions was that of 
the second station of yesterday. As Peter still lives and gov- 
erns through his successors, so does Paul continue to preach 
the Gospel every day throughout the world by means of his 
writings which the Church reads almost invariably at Holy 
Mass. The Acts and the Epistles tell us enough about the 
life of Paul to give us a rule and model of what a truly pastoral 
and apostolic life should be. On this model, under the rule of 
St. Benedict for more than fourteen hundred years, the dis- 
ciples of the Patriarch of Monte Cassino have lived in a 
monastery in the shadow of the Basilica, and carried on the 
Divine Office, 


Feasts of Julp 


Jory 1. The Most Precious Blood of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ: The Missal gives to-day the Octave of St. John 
the Baptist, which, however, only appears in the Roman 
Calendar during the late Middle Ages. In the liturgical re- 
form of Pius X this day was chosen for the feast of the Most 
Precious Blood, which had already been fixed under Pius IX 
for the first Sunday. in July. Pius IX instituted this feast in 
thanksgiving for the deliverance of the Apostolic See from the 
violent revolutionaries who had expelled the Pope to Geta. 
In 1849, with the assistance of the French army, they were 
vanquished and the pope was able to return to Rome. 

The meaning of this festival is closely akin to that of the 
Sacred Heart. The Precious Blood is the price of universal 
redemption, which love would not have to be anything less 
than itself. There is a very close connection between the 
Heart and the Blood not only because, according to St. John, 
after the death of Jesus, blood and water flowed from His 
wounded Heart, but because the first chalice in which that 
divine Blood was consecrated and vivified was precisely the 
Heart of the incarnate Word. mu 

The apostle of this special devotion was the Blessed Gaspare 
del Bufalo, founder of the congregation of the Most Precious 
Blood. : 

.The Mass is of quite recent composition. In the ancient 
Roman rite the Mass of Passion Sunday Was especially in- 
tended to recall to the remembrance of the faithful the in- 
finite value of the Blood of Jesus Christ. 

. JULY 2, The Visitation of Our Blessed Lady: Ember. Fri- 
day in Advent was the original date for this feast. The cele- 
bration by the Greeks on July 2 of the placing of the robe of 
the Blessed Virgin in the Basilica of Blacherne (a.D. 469) 
became in the Latin church the commemoration of the visit 
of Mary to the home of Zarchary and Elizabeth. It was kept 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1706 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


by the Franciscans as early as 1263; the Council of Basel 
(1431) made it a holy day of obligation. 

In honor of this mystery, St. Francis de Sales instituted the 
order of the nuns of the Visitation. The original design of 
this kindly saint was that the nuns should imitate the Blessed 
Virgin in her charitable assistance in the house of her cousin, 
who, though well advanced in years, was miraculously about 
to become a mother. Providence, however, thought fit to 
alter the plan while still in the hands of the designer, so that 
the latter was accustomed jestingly to say that he had made 
something which he had never intended to make, whereas he 
could not make that which he would in reality have wished 
to have made. 


l Sts. Processus and Martinian, Martyrs: Sts. Pro- 
cessus and Martinian were the keepers of the Mamertine 
prison, during the imprisonment of Sts. Peter and Paul, by 
whom they were converted. Like them they suffered martyr- 
dom under Emperor Nero. Their relics now repose in St, 
Peter's; during the Vatican Council the papal throne occupied 
by Pius IX stood at the tomb of these two gaolers of the 
Princes of the Apostles. 


Juiv 3. St. Leo II, Pope, Confessor: This feast was origin- 
ally the second commemoration of St. Leo the Great, who 
was the object of very marked devotion in the Middle Ages. 
It was celebrated on the anniversary of the removal of his 
body from the porch to the interior of St. Peter's. Later it 
became the feast of Pope Leo II who approved the acts of the 
Sixth Ecumenical Council which condemned the heresy of 
those who asserted that Christ had only one will. In his brief 
pontificate he gave an example of earnest preaching and devo- 
tion to the poor. He died in 683. 


JuLY 4. Of the Octave of the Apostles, Sts. Peter. and 
Paul: Although during the Middle Ages, in a great number 
of churches, the anniversary of the ordination of St. Martin 
of Tours and of the dedication of his famous basilica was 
kept on this date, yet Christian Rome continued to celebrate 
the Octave of her great Apostles Peter and Paul . 


JULY 5. St. Anthony Mary Zaccaria, Confessor: This fam- 
ous Lombard preacher was one of that band of saints whom 
the Lord, in the Sixteenth Century, sent to carry out in Italy 
that ecclesiastical. reform which had indeed been long desired, 
but which the Canons of the Council of Trent alone could not 
effect. It was necessary that they should be put into practice 
with heroic zeal, and this could be done only by a saint. He 
founded the order of Regular Clerks who from the Church of 
St. Barnabas near which they lived are called “Barnabites.” 
They gave much assistance to St. Charles Borromeo in his 
Work of reform. Anthony died at the age of 36, July 5, 1539, 
&nd was canonized by Pope Leo XIII. 


Jury 6. Octave-Day of the Holy Apostles, Sts. Peter and 
Paul: To-day Christian Rome brings the Octave of her great 
apostles to an end. The importance, however, of these grand 


http://ccwatershed.org 


i 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1707 


figures was such that, in the Middle Ages, their natalis (birth- 
day) formed as it were the center of a special liturgical cycle. 

Protestants have tried to set Paul above Peter, by attribut- 
ing to the former, rather even than to Christ himself, the 
foundation of the Church. Catholic theology and the Cath- 
Olic catechism suffice to protect the faithful from falling into 
such heresies as these. Christ founded the Church on Peter, 
but He disposed that among the apostles Paul should be the 
chief propagator of the Gospel, and the most important inter- 
preter of divine revelation. 


JULY 7. Sts. Cyril and Methodius, Bishops, Confessors: 
These two celebrated apostles of the East are bound by more 
than one tie to the history of Papal Rome. The Slav nations 
are indebted to Cyril and Methodius for their civilization, 
their faith, and their original communion with the See of 
Peter. To this day the Slav pilgrim who visits Rome and 
kneels at the sepulchre of the Prince of the Apostles sees upon 
that tomb a painting representing the Savior between St. 
Peter and St. Paul. That venerated ikon, on which is traced 
an inscription in the Slavonic tongue, is said to have been 
placed there by Sts. Cyril and Methodius as a mark of their 
homage and devotion to the Apostolic See. 

They were consecrated bishops by Pope Adrian II. They 
invented & writing for the language of the Slav; translated 
the Scriptures and made use of this language in the Liturgy. 
Cyril, worn out by the mission, returned to Rome and pre- 
pared a tomb for himself in the shadow of St. Clement’s. 
He died in 869 at the age of 42, Methodius died in 885. 


JULY 8. St. Elizabeth, Queen of Portugal, Widow: St. Eliz- 
abeth, Queen of Portugal, was born in 1271 and died July 4, 
1336. She was distinguished for her devotion to the poor and 
her heroic acts of charity. Her special grace was that of 
making peace. The joy caused at the Aragonese Court by the 
birth of Elizabeth brought about the reconciliation of her 
father and her grandfather; death surprised the good queen 
whilst on a journey which she had undertaken for the pur- 
pose of procuring peace between her son and her son-in-law. 


JuLY 10. The Seven Holy Brothers, Martyrs, with St. 
Rufina and Secunda, Virgins: Felicitas and her seven sons 
were put to death for the Faith, about the year 162, under 
Marcus Aurelius. The sons preceded their mother to heaven; 
she followed them four months afterwards. In order to 
strike terror into the hearts of the Christians the death 
sentences were not all carried out in the same place, for 
Januarius was beaten to death with leaden scourges and 
was buried in the Cemetery of Pretextatus, Felix and Philip 
died under the whip and received burial in that of Priscilla, 
Silanus was thrown from a precipice and was interred with 
his mother in the Cemetery of Maximus, Alexander, Vitalis 
and Martial were beheaded and were given the honor of 
sepulture in the Cemetery of the Giordani. 

Under the Emperors Valerian and Gallienus, a hundred 
years later, two sisters Rufina and Secunda, rather than lose 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1708 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OP SAINTS 


their consecrated virginity accepted martyrdom. The forest 
in which they were put to death, hitherto called the dark 
Wood, soon was called the bright wood in their honor. 


JULY 11. St. Pius I, Pope, Martyr: St. Pius I, a great Pope 
of the Second Century, is said by tradition to have established 
.& baptistery in the house of the Pudenti, or de Pastore, His 
brother is the author of the Shepherd of Hermas which has 
been styled “a vast examination of the conscience of the 
Roman Church at the end of the first half of the Second 
Century." To St. Pius is attributed the fixation of the feast 
of the Resurrection on Sunday, which day then became the 
central Sunday of the year. He was buried in the Vatican. 


Jury 12. St. John Gualbert, Abbot: Born at Florence at 
the end of the Tenth Century, John Gualbert was trained in 
the school of St. Benedict. Raised to the papacy he exalted 
that office and the position of the hierarchy which had been 
degraded by the imperial power. He stamped out simony and 
brought back order and peace to the land of Tuscany. At 
Valombrosa he founded à monastery, whence came many 
‘saints and which still flourishes. On one occasion meeting the 
murderer of his brother, he pardoned him in the name of the 
‘Redeemer. For this act he received a singular recognition 
from Our Crucified Lord. He died on July 12, 1073, and was 
canonized in 1193. 


Sts. Nabor and Felix, Martyrs: Sts. Nabor and 
Felix suffered martyrdom at Milan under Maximian Herculeus, 
&bout the year 304. St. Ambrose honored their memory and 
Trom Polan devotion to them spread throughout the Universal 
Church. 


JuLY 13. St. Anacletus, Pope, Martyr: According to the 
list of Popes furnished us by St. Irenzus, Anacletus is prob- 
ably the same person as Cletus, the successor of Linus and 
the predecessor of Clement on the papal throne. Some say 
that he was banished from Rome and returned to rule the 
Holy See a second time. He. completed the tomb of St. 
Peter at the Vatican, near which he was himself interred. 
"To him is assigned the decree that bishops should be conse- 
‘crated by three bishops at least; that clerics should be pub- 
licly ordained by their own bishop and that they all should 
receive Holy Communion after the consecration in the mass of 
ordination. He was martyred under the Emperor Trajan. 


Jury 14. St. Bonaventure, Confessor, Bishop, Doctor of the 
‘Church: Born in Tuscany in 1221, Giovanni Fidanza, in con- 
sequence of a miraculous cure; entered the Franciscan Order. 
‘While still young, he became minister general; guided by his 
‘wise and prudent spirit, the Franciscan Order was saved 
from the schism which was about to divide the rigorous 
from the mild. He was closely united to St. Thomas Aquinas; 
both taught at the University of Paris at the same time. St. 
Bonaventure was created Cardinal and Bishop of Albano in 
1273 by Gregory X; he died on July 15 in the following year 
at Lyons whilst the Ecumenical Council was being held in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 170% 


that city. The Pope and the entire Council took part in his. 
funeral; every priest in the world said Mass for his soul. 

St. Bonaventure is a true example of the ascetic Franciscan 
School, which has spread among the people a fervent devo- 
tion to the most sacred human nature of the Redeemer. When. 
he writes on the Passion of Our Lord or speaks in praise of 
the Blessed Virgin, his language grows eloquent and a sera- 
phic ardor glows in his words. 

Sixtus IV, when he canonized St. Bonaventure in 1482, 
ordered that the celebration of his feast in the Basilica of 
the Holy Apostles should be considered as a solemnity of the- 
Sacred Apostolic Palace. In later years a church and a 
monastery were dedicated to this saint on the Palatine. 


JULY 15. St. Henry, Emperor, Confessor: The name of St. 
Henry, Emperor of Germany, born in 972, is held in veneration. 
by all. He spread Christianity and advanced piety and religion 
among his subjects. He died in 1024. He defended the Church 
and the Holy See. He came down repeatedly into Italy in 
order to defend the rightful Pontiff against opposing factions. 
Detained at Monte Cassino by illness he was miraculously 
cured through the intercession of St. Benedict. -He asked to 
be accepted as a monk in the Abbey of St. Vanne at Verdun; 
the abbot commanded him in the name of religious obedience: 
to re-ascend the throne. He spent a great part of his treasure 
in founding episcopal sees, enriching churches, and endow- 
ing monasteries. On one occasion he sent his imperial in- 
signia to the Abbey of Cluny in order that they should be 
offered up to the Redeemer. St. Henry died on July 13, 1024, 
and was canonized by Pope Eugenius III in 1145. 


JuLY 16. Our Blessed Lady of Mount Carmel: To-day the: 
whole Latin Church joins with the Friars of tlie Blessed Vir- 
gin of Mount Carmel in celebrating the munificence of the: 
Mother of God towards this Order which is dedicated to her. 
The origin.of this illustrious brotherhood which has given 
so many saints to the Church, is well known. A little while 
before the year 1185, a priest of Calabria having had a rev- 
elation of the prophet Elias; ascended Mount Carmel, and 
began to restore one of the four ancient monasteries which 
he found there, and of which only the foundations remained. 

The new institution prospered, and although the. latest 
comer, it was able to graft itself successfully upon the great 
tradition, already centuries old, of the monastic life which 
Oriental cenobites and Benedictine monks had led on Mount 
Carmel. Albert, Patriarch of Jerusalem, gave certain rules 
of conduct to those hermits who were living at that time under 
their superior Brocardo, rules which subsequently were ap- 
proved, together with the new foundation, by Honorius III 
and Gregory IX. i 

In the Thirteenth Century Innocent IV approved the rule 
under the generalship of Simon Stock. On July 16, 1251, the 
Carmelite habit was placed in his hands by the Blessed Virgin. 
It was blessed by the Pope and many privileges attached to it, 
not only for members of the Order, but for ail those who enter 
the Confraternity of Our Lady of Mount Carmel and wear 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1710 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


the scapular. The Feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmel was 
inserted into the Calendar under Benedict XIII in 1726. 


JULY 17. St. Alexius, Confessor: St. Alexius was the only 
son of a wealthy Roman noble, For Christ's sake he left his 
home and, poor and unknown, devoted his life to God's service. 
He died early in the Fifth Century. His memory is venerated 
in many lands. 


JULY 18. St. Camillus of Lellis, Confessor: St. Camillus 
of Lellis was born in 1550 of a noble family. He tried twice 
to enter the Capuchin Order, but each time had to leave on 
account of a sore on his leg. He then spent his life in min- 
istering to the sick in the hospitals of St. Giacomo degli 
Incurabili, and of the Santo Spirito.. He instituted a congre- 
gation of regular Clerics, devoted to the.care of the sick, 
St. Philip. Neri who at one time was his confessor, saw in @ 
vision that the angels themselves inspired the Religious in- 
stituted by him with the words best suited to comfort the 
dying. Leo XIII appointed him the celestial patron of those 
who are at the point of death; his name is in the Litany of 
the Dying. He died at Rome, July 14, 1614. 


St. Symphorosa and Her Children, Martyrs: Sym- 
phorosa and her sons were martyred under Hadrian in the 
year 120. The mother was drowned on this day in the River 
Anio, whilst her sons had already won the crown of martyr- 
dom on June 27; Crescens had been stabbed in the throat, 
Julian in the breast, Nemesius in the heart, Primitivus in the 
stomach; Justin had received his death-wound in the back, 
Stacteus in the side, and Eugenius had been actually cleft in 
two. The bodies of the Tiburtine martyrs were brought to 
Rome by Stephen III, and were placed in. the deaconry 
church of St. Michael, 


JULY 19. St. Vincent de Paul, Confessor: St. Vincent de 
Paul founder of the Congregation of the Priests of the 
Mission (Lazarists), and the Society of the Sisters of Charity, 
while a young priest was held as a slave in Africa where he 
had been sold by pirates. On his return to France he became 
a parish priest. For a time he took the place of a galley 
slave. His parish was a country parish; his experience led 
him to found the Priests of the Mission, bound by special vow 
to undertake this special work. At one time he was entrusted 
by St. Francis de Sales with the spiritual. direction of the 
nuns of the Visitation. Assisted by Louise de Marillac he 
founded the Sisters of Charity. 


The authority exercised by St. Vincent was immense, and 
was undisputed throughout the kingdom. He was a member 
of the king’s Privy Council, and thus had control over the 
appointments to the episcopal sees and to the richest benefices 
of the Church of France. Yet Vincent, meek and humble of 
heart, ascended the magnificent stairs of the palace and took 
part in the royal councils with the same evangelical simplicity, 
and clothed in the same poor:and shabby garments in which 
he traversed the streets of Paris rescuing abandoned waifs 
and strays and succoring the helpless sick and suffering. He 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1711 


died in 1660 at St, Lazarus, the motherhouse of his Congre- 
gation: Leo XIII declared him the patron of all charitable 
associations. : f E j 


JULY 20. St. Jerome Emiliani, Confessor: In the Sixteenth 
Century God raised up a number of saints who by prayer, 
teaching and good works combated the influence of the pagan 
Renaissance. - Among these was St. Jerome Emiliani, who 
spent himself in the care of orphans and the poor. He insti- 
tuted homes for orphan children, and founded. the Congre- 
gation whose object was to educate orphans. They are called 
the Somaschi, from Somascha, the little Italian town in which 
they were first established. He died on February 8, 1537, from 
the plague which he contracted while burying the dead. 


It was related that St. Charles Borromeo, when going sev- 
eral years afterwards to make a pastoral visitation at So- 
mascha, became aware of the presence of the relics of a saint 
through the sweet perfume which emanated from his tomb. 
Asking for a thurible, St. Charles offered incense on the sep- 
ulchre, béing thus the first to render public veneration to the 
saint. g 

` St. Margaret, Virgin, Martyr: St. Margaret, called 
by the Greeks, Marina, was:martyred at Antioch in Pisidia 
under Emperor Diocletian at the end of the Third Century. 
Devotion to her- -became very popular in Rome during the 
Middle Ages, and many chapels and churches were dedicated 
to her. She is invoked, especially, by those who are about to 
become mothers. 

JULY 21. St. Praxedes, Virgin: St. Praxedes was a sister of 
St. Pudentiana, whose feast is celebrated on May 19th. She 
was the daughter of the Roman Senator Pudens, and after 
consecrating her virginity to God, she gave up all her wealth 
to the poor. . 7 

Pope Paschal I transferred the bodies of many saints from 
the catacombs and placed their relics in the Church of St. 
Praxedes; an inscription states tha* 2,300 bodies of saints 
repose in the crypt under the apse of the Church. 


Juri 22. St. Mary Magdalen, Penitent: The Latin writers, 
beginning: with Tertullian, have generally and with great 
probability identified Mary of Magdala as the sister of Lazarus, 
and as the sinner who anointed the feet of Jesus. The- Greeks, 
on the other hand, distinguished three Marys. 


Her brother Lazarus, died in the island of Cyprus. His 
body was brought to Constantinople by the Emperor Leo VI 
and laid in the Lazarion, (899). The body of Mary, his sister, 
who, according to a tradition dating from the Sixth Century, 
had been buried at Ephesus, was soon brought and laid 
beside him in the new sepulchral basilica of Byzantium. 'The 
Greeks give to her the title of “like unto an apostle” because 
she first announced to the world and: to the apostles them- 
selves the. resurrection of the Lord. For this reason the Credo 
is said in the Mass today, as in Masses of the apostles. 


The scene of the conversion of Mary of Magdala is perhaps 
one of the incidents in the Gospel which best reveal the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


17312 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


gentleness of the heart of the Redeemer. To Mary much is 
forgiven, because she loved much; this is the remedy for sin- 
ners; this is the spirit which sustains the Church: Militant, 
wherein we may indeed see many sins caused by human 
frailty, but in which there may be found also a great love 
ready to pardon all. ` 


Jury 23. St. Apollinaris, Bishop, Martyr: St. Apollinaris 
was the disciple of St, Peter, who preached the Gospel at 
Ravenna. The importance of the See of Ravena in the Sixth 
Century brought about an attempt to exalt that See unduly. 
On this account we have in the Mass today the voice of St. 
Peter recommending the pastors of the Church to avoid the 
spirit of domination and pride, and the words of the Gospel 
teaching the lesson of humility. St. Apollinaris after a cruel 
Scourging and exile was martyred at Ravenna in 79 ap. The 
great cathedral of that city is dedicated to him. 


St. Liborius, Bishop, Confessor: St. Liborius was 
the fourth bishop of Le Mans, France. He was renowned for 
the miracles which he wrought on behalf of those suffering 
from stone; his name was added to the Calendar by Pope 
Clement XI, who suffered with this dangerous malady and 
was cured by the intercesion of the saint. He died about the 
year . : 


.JuLY 24. Vigil of St. James, Apostle: This vigil was cele- 
brated from the earliest times. It is recorded in the Martyr- 
ology of St. Jerome. : 

St. Christina, Virgin, Martyr: St. Christina, a Tus- 
can virgin, who when ten years old had taken and destroyed 
the silver idols in her father’s house, was in consequence tied 
to a post and pierced with arrows. Her tomb was discovered 
in 1880; an examination of her relics showed that she was 
RECEN more than fourteen years of age at the time of her 

eath. i 


On this day the Greeks celebrate another St. Christina, mar- 
tyr of Tyre. The Greeks salute her as a “stainless bride 
wounded by arrows.” 


JULY 25. St. James the Greater, Apostle: St. James was the 
brother of John, and the first of the Apostolic College to suffer 
martyrdom. He was beheaded by Herod Agrippa about the 
year 43. He was one of the intimate friends of Our Savior: he 
witnessed the Transfiguration and the agony in the Garden 
of Olives. Christ foretold his martyrdom on the occasion when 
the mother of James and John asked for her two sons that 
they be seated one at his right hand and one at his left in His 
Kingdom, James preached the Gospel in Judea and Samaria 
and even in distant Spain. 


In the Sixth Century the tomb of the two apostles of the 
name of James was still being venerated at Jerusalem. But 
in the Ninth Century we find that the relics of St. James the 
Great were already the object of great devotion at Santiago de 
Compostella, whither they must have been carried after the 
Arabs had taken possession of the.Holy City.. Throughout the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1718 


Middle Ages, the pilgrimage to Galicia to ihe tomb of St. 
James was one of the most popular of all, and wholly worthy 
of the special place which St. James occupied.beside Our 
Blessed Lord. ` 


St. Christopher, Martyr: St. Christcpher, a native 
Of Chanaan, was martyred at Lycia in the Third Century. 
He was greatly venerated in the Eást. His name, Which sig- 
nifies "one who carries Christ," won for him great veneration 
even in the city of Rome. Many statues of St. Christopher 
Were placed at the entrance to cathedrals. He is the patron 
of travelers and is invoked in storms, tempest and plagues. 
TUE medal of St. Christopher is frequently attached to motor 
vehicles. : : 


: JULY 26. St. Ann, Mother of Our Blessed Lady: The privi- 
leges and graces with which God had surrounded the Immacu- 
late Conception of His Blessed Mother Mary were reflected 
upon her happy parents, Joachim and Ann. We find, there- 
fore, that in the Sixth Century Justinian built & church at 
Constantinople in honor of St. Ann. i 

Devotion to the grandparents of the divine Redeemer spread 
almost everywhere in the East. The Syrians venerated St. Ann 
under the name of Dina on July 25; other eastern Churches 
placed her feast on another date. Pope Leo III placed pic- 
iures of Joachim and Ann in the Church of St. Mary Major. 
Gregory XIII in 1584 inserted the feast of St. Ann in the 
Roman Missal. 

At Rome in the patriarchal basilica of St. Paul the precíous 
relic of the arm of St. Ann was venerated even in the days of 
St. Bridget of Sweden, who obtained a very small portion of it 
as a gift. St. Ann then appeared to her and showed her how 
to venerate and take care of the sacred relics. Leo XIII and 
Benedict XV have given. several fragments of this arm of 
St. Ann to clebrated sanctuaries dedicated to her in Canada 
and in Normandy, where God has been pleased to honor them 
by performing various miracles. JM 

Her feast was extended to the Universal Church by Pope 
Leo XIII in 1879. Pope Benedict XV visited her chapel out- 
side the Vatican; this was the first time after 1870 that a Pope 
left the Vatican. 


Juv 27. St. Pantaleon, Martyr: St. Pantaleon was a physi- 
sian of Nicomedia. His name signifies in the Greek "many 
shall obtain mercy"; it was given him by Christ with this 
promise. During his martyrdom Our Lord appeared to him 
as he was tortured on the rack and burned with flaming 
torches. He is the principal patron (after St. Luke) of the 
medical profession. His blood liquifies on his feast day in 
the phial in which it is preserved at Ravello near Amalfi, 


JULY 28. Sts. Nazarius, Celsus, Victor I, and Innocent I, 
Martyrs: St. Nazarius was baptized by Pope Linus at Rome; 
in his turn: he baptized the youthful Celsus. They were both 
beheaded at Milan about the year 368. Their bodies, buried 
in a garden outside the city, were found by St. Ambrose. in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


17314 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


395. The body of St, Nazarius appeared as if it had just been 
beheaded. It was placed by St. Ambrose in the Basilica 
Romana. The body of the boy Celsus was found in another 
part of the garden, but was not removed. However, a basilica 
was later built in his honor. 


Pope St. Victor, the thirteenth in order from St. Peter, is 
famous in the history of the Church of the first three centuries 
for his encyclicals addressed to all the churches, in which he 
appointed synods with a view to coming to an agreement 
concerning the date of the celebration of Easter. Even the 
bishops of the most remote dioceses of Asia Minor obeyed the 
Pope's order and sent their votes to- Rome, but as these were 
not in accordance with the Roman view, it very nearly caused 
a schism, He succeeded in settling the controversy about the 
date of Easter, and is said to have decided that in case of 
necessity Baptism might be given with natural water. He was 
ihe first ecclesiastical writer to write in Latin. 


St. Innocent I, Pope, Confessor (402-417), took a vigorous 
part in the defence of St. John Chrysostom; upheld the rights 
of the Holy See and wrote a letter on liturgical questions 
which remains a notable document to this day. 


JULY 29. St. Martha, Virgin: St. Martha accompanied her 
sister St. Mary Magdalen and her brother St. Lazarus into 
Gaul, where she closed her holy life. Her sacred relics are 
venerated at Tarascon, in Provence. 


The ways by which God leads men’s souls are very varied; 
one way may be more perfect than another, but each soul 
must sanctify itself in its own fashion. Grace does not do 
violence to nature, but perfects it; thus, although St. John 
tells us that Jesus loved Martha, Mary, and Lazarus, each of 
the sisters always retains her own individual character in the 
Gospel narrative. Mary feels more deeply, and, therefore, 
though she is habitually more recollected, yet she is also a 
woman of an eager and pleasing disposition, more courageous 
in her actions. 


The virtues of Martha, the elder sister of Lazarus, on the 
other hand, are more commonplace and less exceptional. 
She is a good housekeeper, diligent, affectionate, and for- 
bearing in undertaking the additional labor which Mary’s 
different nature puts upon her. In discharging her daily 
duties she looks at life chiefly from the practical side. The 
Savior lovés her much, because, though Mary is eager to re- 
ceive spiritual food from him, Martha, on the contrary, shows 
a mother’s tender care both for Him and for His disciples, 
who were always received as members of the family in her 
home at Bethany. 


Sts. Felix II, Simplicius, Faustinus, and Beatrice, 
Martyrs: The martyr-Pope St. Felix II governed the Church 
during the exile of Pope Liberius, in the middle of the Fourth 
Century. Simplicius and Faustinus were drowned in the 
Tiber, probably in 303, when the great persecution under 
Diocletian was at its height. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1715 


Beatrice, their sister, with the aid of the priest Priscus, re- 
covered their bodies in order to give them burial; for which 
Offence she was strangled in prison. 


In the Fourth Century & basilica was built at the side of the 
Sepulchre of the two brothers and their sister. 


JuLv 30. Sts. Abdon and Sennen, Martyrs: Sis. Abdon and 
Sennen were Persians who, coming to Rome in the Third 
Century, courageously confessed the faith of Christ and were 
put to death in the persecution of Decius in 250. 


JULY 31. St. Ignatius of Loyola, Confessor: St. Ignatius, 
founder of the Society of Jesus, was born at Loyola in Spain, 
in the year 1491. He served his king as a soldier till his thir- 
tieth year. Convalescing from a severe wound received at the 
Siege of Pampeluna, he was given, in the absence of other 
books, the Lives of Jesus Christ and of the Saints. It dawned 
on his chivalric nature that the Church has need of her army 
to defend under the sovereign Pontiff the interest of God 
against heresy and all evil. On his recovery he ascended 
Montserrat and in the Benedictine Abbey. there he laid down 
his sword at the feet of the Blessed Virgin. He learned here to 
love the Psalms and canticles of the Divine Office which he was 
later to recommend to the faithful; he desired that those who 
were to make his Spiritual Exercises should choose a dwelling 
whence they could easily go to the Offices of Matins and 
Vespers as well as to Mass. Among the Benedictines of St. 
Pauls in Rome, Ignatius pronounced his vows and was reg- 
ularly elected the first general of his new Society. 


The name of Loyola and the Society founded by him are 
synonymous with the highest degree of Catholic life and 
activity, so that the enemies of the Church, whilst they may 
show toleration for other religious Orders, keep up an un- 
dying hatred for that of St. Ignatius, in which they justly 
recognize the most efficient and invincible army which Provi- 
dence has placed under the immediate command of the Vicar 
of Christ.. 

Ignatius and his companions, by means of the Spiritual 
Exercises tried to raise the clergy to a higher realization of 
their own dignity and mission. Their zeal for the Liturgy led 
them to restore the churches to their former cleanliness, dig- 
nity, and magnificence. Drawn by these exterior attractions, 
the faithful were the more easily induced to frequent the Sac- 
raments and the Offices of the Church. From the very begin- 
ning they undertook works of education and missionary labors. 

With the sweet name of Jesus on his lips and in his heart, 
St. Ignatius gave his soul to God on July 31, 1556. His body 
is preserved in Rome in the magnificent church built by 
Cardinal Alessandro Farnese and dedicated to his memory. 


Feasts of August 


Avs. 1. St. Peter's Chains: The chains with which St. Peter 
the Apostle was fettered from time to time have always been 
the object of veneration among the faithful. They are pre- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1716 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


served in a basilica in Rome, which is called Saint Peter 
ad Vincula (in chains). The anniversary of the dedication of 
this church falls on August 1st. The chains of the Apostle 
Paul are preserved in the Basilica of St. Paul. The*reverence 
shown to the chains of the two apostles must have been very 
widely spread in olden times from the moment when Justinian 
I asked the Pope for “a portion of the chains of the holy 
apostles, if ib were possible" and St. Gregory the Great relates 
that in his day the faithful were eagerly desirous of the favor 
of possessing af least a small quantity of the filings of St. 
Pauls chains. The chains of St. Peter are in two portions, 
one having eleven links, shaped so as to hold the hands, and 
the other twenty-three links, at the end of which are two 
half circles to hold the neck. Only four links are preserved of 
the chains which bound St. Paul. 


Aus. 1. The Holy Machabees, Martyrs: The Seven Macha- 
bees, brothers, and other Jews, suffered martyrdom for their 
faith in the second century before Christ, under the tyrant 
Antiochus Epiphanes, the impious king of Syria. They are 
the only martyrs who suffered before Christ that are honored 
with a feast of universal observance. Their relics were placed 
in the church of St, Peter's Chains beneath the new altar 
on August Ist. 


Avsc. 2. St. Alphonsus Mary de Liguori, Bishop, Confessor, 
Doctor of the Church: St. Alphonsus was born of noble parents 
near Naples, Italy, in 1696, and died in 1787. In the midst of 
many evils he appeared with a three-fold mission as Doctor, 
Bishop, and founder of à new religious Order. As Doctor he 
became the great teacher of Moral Theology; he found the 
middle way between the two extremes of the lax and the over- 
rigorous, and by his ascetic writings he spread amongst the 
people Catholic piety, devotion to Our Lady, to Jesus in the 
Blessed Sacrament, to the Passion, and defended the supreme 
rights of the Church and of the Pope. 

As apostle and bishop St. Alphonsus sought to imitate Our 
Divine Redeemer in His evangelizing journeys through the 
villages of Galilee and Judea. Hence he founded his own 
society of missionaries whom he destined to labor among the 
poor peasants and mountaineers rather than the inhabitants 
of the towns. 

As founder of a new Order, the saint has the merit of having 
adapted the scope of his work to the needs of the time, and of 
having brought it to completion in spite of innumerable 
difficulties. Although approved by the Pope, the King of 
Naples refused to permit the new Order to establish itself. St. 
Alphonsus himself was excluded from the houses of his own 
Order in the Kingdom of Naples. This schism existed until 
his death. After his death the whole scene changes; the re- 
jected founder is raised to the altars, and his Congregation ex- 
tends its boundaries beyond the confines of Italy and of 
Europe. ` 

He was devoted in a special manner to the Holy Eucharist, 
and left a beautiful little book entitled Visits to the Blessed 
Sacrament. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1717 


Auc. 2. St. Stephen I, Pope, Martyr: St. Stephen, by 
birth a Roman, was made Pope on May 3, 253, and governed 
the Church for three years. He decided the question of the 
validity of Baptism when administered by heretics, ordering 
that the tradition should be preserved according to which it 
was sufficient that they receive confirmation. He was mur- 
dered by the Emperor's soldiers while seated in his episcopal 
chair in the catacombs, during the celebration of Mass, Au- 
gust 2, 257. 


Aus. 3. The Finding of the Body of St. Stephen, the First 
Martyr: The body of St. Stephen, the first martyr, with those 
of some other saints, was discovered near Jerusalem in the 
year 415. Later the body of the saint was taken to Constan- 
tinople and finally to Rome, where it now lies beside that 
of St. Lawrence. The many miracles that occurred on the 
finding of St. Stephen’s body let to the institution of this 
festival, besides that of December 26th. A tradition states 
that Gamaliel, the teacher of St. Paul, had buried the body of 
St. Stephen at his country house; Nicodemus and Abibas, son 
of Gamaliel, and Gamaliel himself, were also buried there. 


Aus. 4. St. Dominic, Confessor: St. Dominic, the founder 
of the Order of Friars Preachers, was born in Spain in 1170, 
and died at Bologna, Italy, in 1221. In 1208 while the saint 
was at prayer Our Lady appeared to him, gave him the 
Rosary, and bade him go forth and preach. Beads in hand, 
he led the Catholic troops against the Albigensians and 
crushed that heresy. Countless souls were brought to grace by 
his words. His parents attributed his birth to the prayers of 
the holy Benedictine Abbot, Dominic of Silos; his mother saw 
in a vision her child in the shape of a little dog, holding a torch 
in his mouth. He became the great defender of Catholic Doc- 
trine, and the opponent of heresies. 


Ava. 5. The Dedication of the Church of Our Lady-of-the- 
Snow: Tradition tells us that during the pontificate of Pope 
Liberius, in the Fourth Century, in the heat of August, the 
plan of the church of St. Mary Major was traced out in a 
miraculous fall of snow. For this reason that basilica is 
known as St. Mary-of-the-Snow, and the name is also given 
to the feast of its dedication. The stations at Christmas are 
held in this Church because some relics of the Crib of Bethle- 
hem are preserved there. The Pope was also accustomed to 
officiate there on the first Sunday in Advent, at the beginning 
of the ecclesiastical year. 


Ava: 6. The Transfiguration of Our Lord Jesus Christ: 
This festival was originally commemorated on the Vigil of 
Ember Saturday in Lent. With the decline of liturgical un- 
derstanding a special festival was instituted in its honor in 
order to arouse popular devotion to this mystery. It is now 
the patronal feast of the Lateran Basilica, and of all churches 
under the title of St. Savior. 


Sts. Sixtus, Felicissimus, and Agapitus, Martyrs: 
Pope St. Sixtus lI, mentioned in the Canon of the Mass, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1718 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


was the first martyr actually put to death in the catacombs 
themselves. Under the Emperor Valerian (258) he was be- 
headed on his throne just as he finished Mass: His four 
deacons were put to death with him, and two others, Felicissi- 
mus and Agapitus, were decapitated the same day while St, 
Lawrence, the archdeacon, was put. to death three days later. 


Auc. 7. St. Cajetan, Confessor: St. Cajetan was born in 1480 
in Lombardy, of pious and noble parents. From childhood he 
was known as a saint and in later years as “a hunter of souls.” 
Even before St. Ignatius he undertook to establish a body of 
Clerks Regular following the apostolic life. Together with 
Pietro Carafa, afterwards Pope Paul IV, he took the austere 
vow of entrusting himself entirely to Divine Providence and 
living solely on any alms which might be voluntarily given 
by the faithful. 


Christian Rome venerate$ him as one of her most distin- 
guished citizens. He took a notable part in the refcrm of the 
Breviary under Clement VII. When celebrating Mass in St. 
Mary's Major at the crib of Our Lord, he merited the grace 
of holding the divine Infant in his arms. Worn out with 
toil and sickness he went to his reward in 1547. 


St. Donatus, Bishop anà Martyr: St. Donatus, 
Bishop of Arezzo in Tuscany, suffered martyrdom under Em- 
peror Julian the Apostate, in 361. He was illustrious for his 
sanctity and for his gift of working miracles. The Church has 
always remembered him with the highest veneration. 


Auc. 8. Sts. Cyriacus, Largus, and Smaragdus, Martyrs: 
St. Cyriacus was a holy deacon of Rome under Popes Marcelli- 
nus and Marcellus. With Largus, Smaragdus, and about 
twenty others he was crowned with martyrdom in 303, in the 
persecution of Diocletian. The occasion of the translation 
of their remains many years later to a church dedicated to 
them led to the institution of a festival in their memory. 
St. Cyriacus is invoked for diseases of the eye, and against 
diabolical possessions. 


Aus. 9. St. John Mary Vianney, Confessor: St. John Mary 
Vianney was born at Dardily, France, in 1786. He was a 
farm-hand until his nineteenth year, when he began his 
studies for the priesthood. His talents were poor, and his 
progress slow. He was ordained at Grenoble in 1815; he 
became parish priest of Ars in 1818. That little town was 
the scene of his marvelous labors until his holy death, August 
4, 1859. He was canonized May 31, 1925, by Pope Pius XI. 
For forty years his food and sleep were insufficient to sustain 
human life; during the last ten years of his life he spent from 
sixteen to eighteen hours a day in the confessional, En- 
lightened by God, he could read hearts and soften the most 
hardened sinner. He healed the sick and cast out devils; like 
his Master he was openly persecuted, calumniated and hated 
by wicked men. His little parish attracted thousands of people. 
Towards the end of his life 158,000 people visited Ars in a 
single year. He founded an orphanage for girls, trusting its 
support to Divine Providence. He had the gift of prophecy, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


jo m 


cc 


Gai mcum 


ACCOUNTS CF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1719 


and told many souls what the future held 1n store for them. 
He is in a special manner tbe model for all parish priests. 


Auc. 9. The Vigil of St. Lawrence: The vigil of St. Law- 
rence has been observed in the Church certainly since the 
Fourth Century. The ancient vigils consisted of a fixed 
number of scriptural Lessons alternated with responsorial 
Psalms and episcopal Collects. When day began to break, the 
Holy Sacrifice was offered and the fast came to an end. 

St. Romanus, Martyr: St. Romanus was a Roman 
Soldier. He was converted to the Christian faith by the preach- 
ing of St. Lawrence, and was beheaded the day preceding that 
of the saints martyrdom. 

Aus. 10. St. Lawrence, Martyr: After the feast of Sts. Peter 
and Paul this is the greatest festival in the ancient Roman 
Liturgy. The terrible martyrdom endured by the famous 
archdeacon deeply impressed the generations that came im- 
mediately after him, for whom Lawrence became at Rome that 
which Stephen had been at Jerusalem. 


In order to save from confiscation some property of the 
Church that had been intrusted to Lawrence, he sold it and 
gave the proceeds to the poor. As the enemies of the Church 
believed he had concealed the treasures and hoped to make him 
reveal their hiding-place, he was roasted alive on a gridiron, 
After an agony of hours he expired with a prayer on his lips 
for the conversion of the heathens. 


His ashes were placed in peace by the priest Justin in the 
cemetery of Cyriacus. Constantine erected a basilica on the 
spot, which has since been rebuilt several times. The gridiron 
is still preserved in the old Church of San Lorenzo in Lucina. 


Aug. 11. Sts. Tiburtius and Susanna, Martyrs: St. Tiburtius, 
a, subdeacon, son of the prefect of Rome, being accused of pro- 
fessing the Christian religion, was beheaded, 286, outside the 
walls of Rome. Nine years later St. Susanna, a holy virgin, 
after many torments laid down her life for Christ. 


Aus. 12. St. Clare, Virgin: St. Clare, born at Assisi in Umbria, 
was the first of the holy virgins whom St. Francis, conse- 
crating to God, bound to Christlike poverty. On a visit to 
St. Francis, she expressed to him her desire to become a Spouse 
of Christ. To St. Francis had been given a little chapel called 
the Portiuncula by the Benedictine abbot of Monte Subasio. 
St. Francis gave to Clare the rule of St. Benedict to follow, 
as he desired to graft his new foundation on to the old Order, 
so as to give it a canonical basis, one already recognized by 
Holy Church. St. Francis determined that Clare should not 
imitate the rich convents of Benedictines then in Umbria, but 
should go back to the early traditions of Benedictine poverty; 
thus it was that Pope Gregory IX was able to write to them 
before they had a rule of their own: “Now you are worthy 
daughters of the blessed Benedict.” Her sister Agnes and 
other women soon joined her; they walked barefooted, slept on 
the ground, observed perpetual abstinence, and made poverty 
the basis of their lives. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1720 ACCOUNTS OP FEASTS AND LIVES OP SAINTS 


St. Clare teaches us to have great devotion to the Holy 
Eucharist. In the midst of her extreme poverty she caused the 
Blessed Sacrament to be kept in a silver case placed in an ivory 
pyx. One day when the Sarcens attacked the Convent of San 
Damiano, Clare herself held up the pyx containing the Blessed 
Sacrament like a shield between the nuns and the fury of 
the infidels. The enemy turned and fied. 


St. Clare passed to her heavenly reward, August 11, 1253, 
and was canonized by Pope Alexander IV, two years later, 


Ava. 13. Sts. Hippolytus and Cassian, Martyrs: St. Hippoly- 
tus is one of the.saints associated with St. Lawrence, who bap- 
tized him, and whom he followed to martyrdom in 258. 

St. Cassian was a schoolmaster, and the official who sen- 
tenced him to death for being a Christian had him murdered 
by his own pupils. 


Avc. 14. The Vigil of the Feast of the Assumption of Our 
Blessed Lady. As early as the Seventh Century the prepara- 
tion, by a solemn fast, for keeping devoutly the great festival 
of the Assumption, is described as a custom of great antiquity. 
In many parts of the Church the strict fast enjoined lasted 
over several days. The Mass celebrated on this day is of 
Our Blessed Lady, on account of its being that of a vigil, and 
is sald in purple vestments, and the hymn Gloria in excelsis 
s omitted. 


St. Eusebius, Confessor: St. Eusebius was a Roman 
priest distinguished for his zeal in the cause of orthodoxy. 
He lived in the Fourth Century of our era. He appears to have 
died in prison. The universal veneration in which he was 
held led to his immediate canonization. 


Ave. 15. The Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary: 
Among the feasts of the Blessed Virgin that of the dormitio 
sanctæ Mariœ, or of her bodily assumption into heaven, was 
Írom very early times the most solemn and the most widely 
observed. In the time of Pope Sergius I a solemn procession 
proceeded to St. Mary Major, where Mass was celebrated. It 
was customary to carry images of the Savior and of His 
Blessed Mother in this procession; outside of Rome a similar 
ceremony was observed. 


It should, however, be borne in mind that though the divinc 
maternity of the Blessed Virgin Mary may be regarded as the 
immediate reason of her Assumption into heaven, yet the first 
and formal reason of this privilege is to be sought in her Im- 
maculate Conception. It is true, indeed, that the dignity of 
the Mother of the Incarnate Word was the primary reason for 
which God preserved the Immaculate Conception of Mary 
from all stain of original sin—and in this sense the Gregorian 
Sacramentary rightly attributes the reason of the bodily resur- 
rection of the Blessed Virgin to her prerogative as Mother of 
the Word—but in order to express this truth with perfect ac- 
curacy, it is necessary to say that the formal reason for the 
preservation of her body from corruption was precisely her 
immunity from all stain of original sin. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1721 


The consecrated formulas of the Roman Liturgy have not 
any difficulty in expressing and in reconciling the fact of the 
death of the Blessed Virgin with her bodily resurrection, due 
to her exalted dignity. 3 

The end of that transitory state in which the pilgrim soul 
finds itself on earth is called by us death, but it does not 
necessarily imply any idea of pain or abasement in the case 

| of the Immaculate Mother of God. The state of separation 


of soul and body with all its consequences, such as bodily cor- 
ruption, long and violent separation of form from matter, etc., 
had no power over the Mother of God. 

1 The authority of the Roman Liturgy concerning the possi- 

i bility of dogmatic definition of the Assumption of the Blessed 
Virgin is paramount, for it reflects the teaching and authority 
of the supreme Pontiff. Now that Catholic devotion antici- 
pates the day when the infallible Teacher of Truth will place 
this last gem in the diadem which adorns Our Lady in heaven, 
theologians will be able to draw largely on that fount of Catho- 
lic tradition which is contained in the Liturgy, especially that 
of Rome. 

| Auc. 16. St. Joachim, Father of the Blessed Virgin Mary, 
Confessor: The excellence of a fruit is always a sign of the 

? quality of the tree which bore it. In the case of St. Joachim, 

UE the Immaculate Conception of Mary reflects a splendid glory 

] on the chaste union of her parents. : 

The Gospels speak of a sister of Our Lady who accom- 
panied her even to the foot of the cross. According to some 
authorities she too was a daughter of Anna and of Joachim. 

His feast was first introduced into the Breviary by Julius 

II, who fixed the date of March 20. Leo XIII (Joachim Pecci) 
raised it to a double of the second class. In the reform of the. 
* Breviary, carried out by Pius X, August 16th was the date 
3 fixed. ; 
f The close relationship which existed between the Savior and 
$ St. Joachim confers on the latter of great dignity, raising 
$ him above other saints, so that the honor paid to him is re- 
flected upon Christ Himself in a special manner and upon His 
Immaculate Mother. They. loved him and honored him in 
this world above all others. Their love is like a precious gem 
which adorns the crown of the holy Patriarch in heaven. 


Aus. 17. St. Hyacinth, Confessor: St. Hyacinth, the glorious 
apostle of Poland and Russia, was admitted into the Order 
of Friars Preachers by St. Dominic himself. By his example 
of holy living and by the power of his preaching, multitudes 
were converted, churches and: convents were built, and 120,000 
pagans and infidels were baptized by his hands. He died at 
Cracow A.D. 1257, on the feast of the Assumption. 


Aug. 18. Of the Octave of the Assumption: The doctrine 
of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary has not been 
' defined as a dogma of faith; however, it is accepted univer- 
sally in the Church. Benedict XIV declared that no one is 
permitted to doubt its truth. The solemnity attached to its 

feast makes it part of the ordinary belief of the faithful, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1722 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


AUG. 18. St. Agapitus, Martyr: The Roman Martyrology 
commemorates to-day Agapitus who, at the age of fifteen, was 
put to death with a sword at Preneste in Italy. His tomb 
has recently been found with the inscription “Agapitus, pray 
for me.” His body was transferred to Corneto in 1431. 


Ava. 19. St. John Eudes, Confessor: St. John Eudes was born 
at Ri, France, November 14, 1601; he made brilliant studies at 
Cen; became an Oratorian and a priest; founded, in 1641, tbe 
Congregation of Our Lady of Refuge (Good Shepherd Nuns) ; 
left the Oratory and founded, in 1643, the Society of Jesus 
and Mary (Eudists) for the education of priests and for mis- 
Sionary work; instituted the feasts of the Hearts of Jesus and 
wb wrote a number of ascetical books; died at Cen, August 

, 1680. : 

He was noted as a preacher and for his great love of God. 
He made a special vow always to do what was most pleasing 
to God. In the confessional all the fire of his pulpit oratory 
disappeared and he was as gentle as a lamb. 

Aue. 20. St. Bernard, Abbot, Doctor: St. Bernard, Abbot of 
Clairvaux, was born in Burgundy, in 1091. He was at once 
a reformer of the monastic life, a preacher of the Crusade, 
a Doctor of the Universal Church, a worker of miracles, à 
peace-maker between kings, princes and peoples, the oracle of 
Popes, and the champion of the Roman See against schisms 
and heresies. The mortal frame of the saint, consumed by 
penance and by sickness, could scarcely contain his soul on 
fire for tne glory of God. 'This fire communicated itself to 
those around him; his secretaries had difficulty in recording 
the numerous miraculous cures which he worked by the 
touch of his hand, or simply by a blessing. On a visit to 
Italy he installed at the ancient Abbey ad aquas Salvias, as 


first abbot, Bernardo Pisano, who became Pope Eugenius III. . 


He died at Clairvaux, August 20, 1153, and was buried at the 
foot of the Blessed Virgin's altar. Pius VIII declared him a 
Doctor of the Church. 


Auc. 21. St. Jane Frances, Widow: St. Jane Frances Fre- 
miot was born in France and was married to Baron de Chan- 
tal She made her house the model of a Christian home. On 
the death of ber husband, with the assistance of St. Francis 
de Sales, she founded the Order of the Visitation, of which she 
became the first superior. 

Avs. 22. Immaculate Heart of Mary: Devotion to Mary's 
Heart always flourished in the Church, but its first official ap- 
proval did not come till the beginning of the 19th century when 
Pius VI approved, for certain religious organizations, a Feast 
for the Most Pure Heart of Mary. The devotion was approved 
for the universal Church when Pius XII dedicated all mankind 
to the Heart of Mary in December, 1942, following this by the 
Aun 5s the vul Feast of E pic gini Heart t the 

. V. M. Sts. Timothy, Hippolytus and Symphorian, Mar- 
tyrs: St. Timothy ot AROE was martyred Ra Rome 'in the 
Fourth Century. He was buried in a special grave in the 
gardens of Theona, not far from the cemetery of St. Paul 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1723 


"This was a recognition of the fact that he bore the.same name 
as the great disciple of St. Paul. 


St. Hippolytus (not the rival of Pope Callixtus) was a martyr 
of Porto. His history is wrapped in obscurity. 

St. Sympliorian is a celebrated martyr of Autun, beheaded 
under the reign of Aurelian about 180. When he was being 
led to martyrdom his pious mother called to him: “My son, 
my son, look up to heaven and behold Him Who reigns there. 
You are not being led to death, but to a better life.” 


Ava. 23. St. Philip Benizi, Confessor: St. Philip Benizi was 
born in Florence on the feast of the Assumption in 1233. He 
was one of the first to profess the religious life as a Servite, 
and in time became general of the Order. With his brethren 
he preached in many countries of Europe, and journeyed even 
into western Asia to spread the Christian faith. In his hu- 
mility he refused honors, and even the Papacy, which was 
offered him by the cardinals assembled in conclave. He en- 
tered into the glory of heaven in the year 1285. 


It is said that when he was dying he repeatedly asked for 
his book, and when the infirmarian did not understand his 
meaning the saint made signs that he wanted his crucifix, 
7 which was the book in which he was accustomed to meditate. 


$ The Vigil of St. Bartholomew, Apostle: Like the 
* other Apostles, the holy Nathanæl or Bartholomew, a true 
{ Israelite, sincere and without guile, as Our Savior Himself 
$ testified, was honored with a vigil which was already noted in 
Athe Martyrology of St. Jerome. 


ý The Mass is that of December 20, but at Rome the Office 
“of to-day was not introduced until much later. 


f Auc. 24. St. Bartholomew, Apostle: In the Gospel of St. 
John, Bartholomew is not mentioned among the Apostles, but 
it is stated that Philip and Nathanael came to Jesus, and that 
Jesus said of Nathanael, “the Israelite in whom was no guile.” 
In the list of the apostles in the other Gospels, Nathanael is 
not mentioned, but after Philip is placed Bartholomew. 


The Redeemer chose all the apostles at once, and formed 
them from the beginning into a hierarchial group with St. 
Peter at their head, in order to show us that the rightful 
priesthood instituted by Christ is that which is derived in un- 
broken sUccession from the twelve apostles chosen by Our 
Savior, and being in communion with the See of Peter, is also 
in communion with the entire Catholic episcopate. 

Bartholomew is said to have preached the faith over a great 
part of Asia and suffered martyrdom in Armenia, where he 
was flayed alive. His body was transferred many times, and 
is now believed to repose in the Church of St. Bartholomew on 
an island in the Tiber. 


Aue. 25. St. Louis, King, Confessor: To-day ‘we commemo- 
rate a king who was a faithful disciple of Christ Crucified, and 
whose life bears witness to the truth that virtue is not always 
rewarded in this world. Louis was inspired by his zeal for. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1724 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


the Faith to attempt the reconquest of the Holy Places sanc- 
tified by the blood of the Redeemer, but instead of triumph 
and victory, he only met with defeat and captivity, and when 
he was at last ransomed by his people, he brought back to 
Paris as a symbolic trophy of his campaigns the crown of 
thorns once worn by Our Savior. ` . 

He died of plague under the walls of Tunis, to which city 
he was about to lay siege, on August 25, 1270. Christian 
Rome dedicated a celebrated church.to him, not far from the 
Stadium Domitiani. 

The custom of genuflecting at the words in the Credo, et 
homo factus est, and of making profound reverence:at the 
passage in the Gospels recording the death of Jesus was 
introduced by this pious king in his own chapel; they are now 
part of the ordinary ceremonial. 

Auc. 26. St. Zephyrinus, Pope, Martyr: St. Zephyrinus, a 
Pope of the Third Century, after a lengthy reign in the course 
of which he earned the title of martyr by his suffering, died 
& holy death. He'is said to have forbidden the use of wooden 
chalices in the celebration of the Mass, and to have-prescribed 
that all the faithful should receive Communion cn Easter 
Day. He defended the Church against heresies and especially 
of those who denied the Trinity. 


Auc. 27. St. Joseph Calasanctius, Confessor: St. Joseph Cal- 
asanctius was born in Aragon in 1556. Having become 2 
priest it was revealed to him that he should teach the chil- 
dren of the poor. He founded the Order of the Poor Clerks 
Regular of the Pious Schools of the Mother of God. He was 
ever a devout pilgrim at the shrines of the martyrs, and daily; 
visited the seven Churches of Rome, where he lived for fifty 
years. He died August 25, 1648. - 

Auc. 28. St. Augustine, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of the 
Church: St. Augustine was born at Tagaste, Africa, in 354. 
In his early life he abandoned the pious teaching of his 
mother and fell into grievous sins. Finally at Milan he was 
converted by the example and words of St. Ambrose and bap- 
tized in 387. His mother, St. Monica, died seven months 
later when, with her son, she was about to return to Africa. 
St. Augustine remembered her always in his prayers and 
offered the Holy Mass for her soul. He was made bishop of 
Hippo in 395, and established a common life for his clergy. 
The rule of St. Augustine is drawn from his 211th epistle 
whicb he wrote for nuns and which later was adapted for the 
men. He is one of the few saints who was appreciated even 
during his lifetime; his contemporaries recognized his sanctity 
and his learning. No conncil was held at that time in Africa 
of which the Bishop of the small city of Hippo was not the 
leading spirit. He died in 430. His body was saved by African 
bishops from the profanation of the Vandals. It was taken 
first to Sardinia, and then to Pavia, where it is still pre- 
served in Ciel d'Oro. 


St. Hermes, Martyr: St, Hermes, a prefect of Rome, 
suffered under Emperor Hadrian, about 132, in the time of 
Pope Telesphorus. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1725 


Auc. 29. The Beheading of St. John the Baptist: Besides 
the chief feast of St. John the Baptist, that of his nativity, the 
Church commemorates on the twenty-ninth of. August, his 
glorious death and birth into heaven, Ever since the Fourth 
Century in Africa, in the East, in Syria, and in many places 
all over the World, the beheading of St. John the Baptist has 
been commemorated on August 29th. When in 362, pagans 
violated the tomb and burned his remains, some parts were 
saved by monks, and taken to St. Athanasius at Alexandria. 
The head is said to have been preserved at Jerusalem, and 
may later have been brought to Rome. 


The Gospel of the Mass recounts his martyrdom. He died 
because his sanctity as precursor of Christ was intolerable to 
the immoral Herodias. He anticipated in his death the hum- 
iliations of Calvary, but he was rewarded by having his 
praises spoken by the Savior Himself, even if Jesus and his 
disciples did not actually assist at his funeral, as some legends 
maintain. 

St. Sabina, Martyr: St. Sabina, à Roman widow 
of high birth, suffered martyrdom under Emperor Hadrian, 
early in the Second Century, and was buried in the same 
grave with St. Seraphia, her maid-servant, who had instructed 
her in the Faith. 


Ava. 30. St. Rose of Lima, Virgin: St. Rose, the first canon- 
ized saint of the New World, was born at Lima in 1586. She 
received the name of Isabella in Baptism, but one day her 
mother saw a beautiful rose drooping over the baby's cradle, 
and ever afterwards called her Rose. She was an obedient 
child; her mortifications were most severe. She prayed, 
worked, and wept for the conversion of sinners; she excelled 
in her love for holy purity. She lived a life of simplicity and 
prayer in a small hut in a corner of her father’s garden; 
the birds would visit her and sing with her the praises of 
God. The Savior frequently appeared to her. Her devotion 
to the Passion of Our Lord was remarkable as were her own 
sufferings. Her bed was strewn with glass shards, with nails 
and thorns; she wore chafing hair-cloth; her head was 
crowned with painful thorns skillfully concealed by roses. 
She died August 26, 1617. Her Office was written by the 
eminent Cardinal Bona. 


Sts. Felix and Adauctus, Martyrs: St. Felix suf- 
fered martyrdom in the year 303, and was joined by Adauctus, 
who shared his martyr crown. A painting of the Sixth Cen- 
tury depicts both of them with the priestly tonsure. Felix is 
an old man, but Adauctus stands on the right hand side, 
although he is young and beardless. 


Auc. 31. St. Raymond Nonnatus, Confessor: The mother of 
this heroic Spanish saint, did not live for him to know and 
love. He asked the Blessed Virgin to take him as her special 
son. She revealed to him that he should devote himself to 
the ransoming of captives. He then founded the Order of 
Our Lady of Mercy for this purpose. He even gave himself 
up as a hostage to the Mohammedans for their sake. He was 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1726 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


made 2 Cardinal after his rescue, bui died shortly after 
in 1240. 


Feasts of September 


Sepr. 1. St. Giles, Abbot: St. Giles, an Athenien, lived prob- 
ably in the second half of the Seventh Century, and founded 
a celebrated monastery in the diocese of Nimes. St. Urban 
made his feast common to the Universal Church. His feast 
was kept at Rome with great solemnity with fireworks, music, 
races through the streets, etc. He is invoked for the cure of 
epilepsy and other diseases, The abbey erected in his honor 
was a magnificent structure and center of pilgrimage during 
the middle ages. 


The Holy Twelve Brothers, Martyrs: The Holy 
Twelve Brothers, natives of Africa, suffered at Beneventum in 
Southern Italy, under Emperor Valerian, A.D. 258. 


SEPT. 2. St. Stephen, King of Hungary, Confessor: St. 
Stephen, King of Hungary, introduced Christianity into his 
native land. Pope Sylvester II gave him the privilege of 
having a cross carried before him like an archbishop. He did 
all that an apostle could do for his country. By his example 
and his influence he induced the nobles and the people to 
embrace the Catholic Faith; he gave Christian legislation to 
the kingdom; he founded and endowed episcopal sees, built 
monasteries and established charitable institutions, not only 
in dT but even in Constantinople, Jerusalem, Ravenna 
and Rome. 


St. Stephen, seven years before his death, saw his young 
and most innocent son Emerich, an angel of purity and holi- 
ness, whom God glorified by many miracles, precede him on 
the way to heaven. He followed him to the tomb on August 
15, 1034, but Innocent XI appointed his feast to be kept on 
September 2, in memory of the victory which the Christian 
army won over the Turks at Budapest on this day. 


SEPT. 5. St. Lawrence Justinian, Bishop, Confessor: St. 
Lawrence Justinian was the first Patriarch of his native city, 
Venice. Renouncing the prospect of a noble marriage, he 
entered the Canons of St. George in Alga. All his revenues 
were spent on the poor and the building of new monasteries. 
God made it known that the safety of the glorious Venetian 
State was due, not to the diplomatic skill of her doges, or 
her formidable galleys, but to the holiness and merits of her 
bishop. He was a true fore-runner of the ecclesiastical reform 
Jater carried out by the Councilof Trent. He died on January 
8, 1455, a model of humility and pastoral zeal. Innocent XII 
fixed his feast on this day, the anniversary of his episcopal 
consecration. 


SEPT. 8. The Nativity of Blessed Virgin Mary: This fes- 
tival originated in the East where it is mentioned very early. 
At Rome it was not observed before the reign of Pope Sergius 
I. As Eve, our first mother, arose from the side of Adam, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


| 
| 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1727 


dazzling with life and innocence, so Mary came forth, bright 
and immaculate from the heart of the eternal Word, Who, by 
the co-operation of the Holy Spirit, as the Liturgy teaches us, 
Was pleased to form that body and soul which were to be, one 
day, his tabernacle and altar. This is the sublime meaning 
of the feast of the Birthday of the Blessed Virgin Mary. It is 
the dawn foretelling the day which already breaks behind the 
eternal hills, the mystic rod which rises from the venerable 
root of Jesse; the stream which springs from Paradise; it is 
the symbolical fleece which is stretched on our dry earth to 
catch the miraculous dew. This is the new Eve, that is to 
say, the life and the Mother of all the living, who is born today 
tor i is to whom the first Eve became the mother of sin and 
eath, 


Sept. 8, St. Hadrian, Martyr: St. Hadrian was an officer in 
the Roman army; from persecuting Christians he was so 
moved by their constancy that he embraced the Faith and 
suffered martyrdom toward the end of the Third Century. 

SEPT 9. St. Gorgonius, Martyr: The body of this martyr 
was interred in the cemetery on the Via Labicana, and Pope 
Damasus adorned his tomb with the following inscription: 
“This sepulchre hollowed out of the hill-side contains the 
body of the martyr Gorgonius, who thus watches before the 
altar of Christ. Whosoever comes to seek the tombs of the 
saints in this place will find that other blessed ones rest here, 
who were led to heaven by the same faith.” 


SEPT. 10. St. Nicholas of Tolentino, Confessor: St. Nich- 
olas of Tolentino, in central Italy, received his name because 
he was born after his parents had made a pilgrimage to the 
tomb of St. Nicholas of Bari. He is one of the glories of the 
Hermits of St. Augustine. His life is remarkable because of 
the great devotion which he showed to the mystery of the 
Christ. He had impressed upon his body the stigmata of 
Christ. He is represented holding a lily, because he was always 
a model of innocence and purity. His feast dates from the 
time of Sixtus V. . 


Sert, 11. Sts. Protus and Hyacinth, Martyrs: These holy 
martyrs, scourged and beheaded, during the persecutions of 
the Third Century, were commemorated by Pope Damasus 
with the following inscription: “The kingdom of heaven holds 
thee, O Protus, and thither dost thou follow him, O valiant 
Hyacinth, robed in the purple of thy blood. They were 
brothers and were unconquered in spirit. Protus first won his 
crown, but Hyacinth equally deserved the palm.” 


Sept. 12. The Most Holy Name of Mary: This feast orig- 
inally instituted by Innocent XI in memory of the great vic- 
tory won over the Turks before the wails of Vienna (Septem- 
ber 13, 1683), was fixed for this date under Pope Pius X. 
Innocent XII had ordered that it should be kept on the Sunday 
within the Octave of the Nativity of Our Lady. 


‘Whatever interpretation of the name of Mary we may 
accept, whether it means bitterness, the lady of the sea, or 
beloved of God, it is still the name of our Mother in heaven, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1728 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


the name which was first on the lips of the divine Child, the 
name which after that of Jesus holds all our hope of salva- 
tion. Many saints, especially St. Bernard and.St. Gabriele 
dell’ Addolorata, recognize in the most sweet name of Mary 
the virtues and prerogatives which the Doctors of the Church 
find in the name of the Savior, such as light, strength, sweet- 
ness and protection. Therefore the devout Christian desires 
above all things to pronounce the holy names of Jesus and 
Mary with his last breath before going forth to behold their 
countenances. 

Pius X granted great indulgences to those who should make 
use of this pious invocation. 


Serr. 14. The Exaltation of the Holy Cross: In ancient 
times, under the name of “the Exaltation," the finding of the 
Holy Cross was celebrated on September 14th in the West, 
as is still done in the East. But when in the Eighth Century 
the feast of May 3 was instituted, that of September 14th 
was retained as one of thanksgiving for the recovery, a hun- 
dred years earlier, by the Great Emperor Heraclius, of the 
inestimable relic, from the infidel Chosroes, King of Persia, 
who had possessed himself of the holy relic when pillaging the 
city and churches of Jerusalem. In the East the finding of 
the Holy Cross by Helena, the mother of Constantine, was 
celebrated with great splendor. Particles of the true Cross, 
were, in time, brought from Jerusalem to many other churches 
in the East and in the West. These churches sought to 
imitate the solemn ceremonies in use at Jerusalem in order to 
do homage to the Holy Cross, the triumphant standard of our 
salvation. 


Serr. 15. The Seven Dolors of the Blessed Virgin Mary: 
Popular devotion to the Sorrows of Our Blessed Lady, whom 
Holy Church invokes as Queen of Martyrs, led, in the Middle 
Ages, to the institution of several local festivals, such as that, 
still kept in some places, of Our Lady's Compassion. 'The 
devotion was fostered by the Holy Founders of the Servite 
Order who seem to have been the first to distinguish and 
enumerate the Seven Dolors. It has been raised by Pius X 
to the rank of a double of the second class. 


St. Nicomedes, Martyr: St. Nicomedes, a Roman 
priest, was scourged to death in the persecution under Do- 
mitian, in the life-time of St. John the Evangelist. He suf- 
fered about the year 90, 


Sept. 16. Sts. Cornelius and Cyprian, Bishops, Martyrs: St. 
Cornelius succeeded St. Fabian as Pope in 251. He behaved 
with zeal and piety in his pastoral charge and adhered to his 
duty with courage and steadfastness. The holy Pope suf- 
fered martyrdom, September 14, 252. 

St. Cyprian, Archbishop of Carthage and Primate of Africa, 
laid down his life for Christ, September 14, 258, six years 
later, to the day, after his friend St. Cornelius. St. Cyprian 
is one of the most famous of the earlier Fathers of the Church. 


Sts. Euphemia, Lucy, and Geminianus, Martyrs: 
St. Euphemia, a virgin of Chalcedon, suffered in the per- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OP FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1729 


Secution continued by the successors of Diocletian, about the 
year 307. The Council of Chalcedon was held in her sepul- 
chral church. St. Lucy and St, Geminianus, two other mar- 
tyrs who suffered in the same persecution, are commemorated 
with St. Euphemia. 


Sept. 17. The Impression of the Stigmata of St. Francis: 
While St. Francis of Assisi, in September, 1224, was rapt in 
meditation on Mount Alvernia, Almighty God as a mark of 
His special favor deigned to impress on his hands, feet, and 
side the likeness of the sacred wounds of Christ. Until the 
day of the saint's death blood flowed from these wounds at 
intervals. Pope Sixtus V ordered this feast to be observed 
by the whole Church. Clement VIII suppressed it, because 
the Church only dedicates special solemnities to the myster- 
ies of our redemption; particular favors granted to the saints 
by God directly concern their individual sanctification, and 
are commemorated when the life of each saint is read in the 
Breviary on the day of his feast. The feast was restored, 
however, by Paul V, and raised to a rank of a double by 
Clement XIV. Its observance is a privilege overstepping the 
ordinary rules of the Liturgy, extended in honor of St. Francis 
and not only rare, but also unique. Christ was pleased to 
imprint upon his new apostle, the herald of the Great King, 
this stigmata as His final seal, changing him to His own 
image and likeness and uniting him to Himself on the rood 
of the Cross, 


Sept. 18. St. Joseph of Cupertino, Confessor: St. Joseph of 
Cupertino, a Franciscan friar in Italy, was born June 17, 
1603. "The feast of this glorious Son of the Seraph of Assisi 
was made universal throughout the Church by a Pope of the 
same Order, Clement XIV. He is famous for his evangelical 
simplicity and for his ecstasies. The whole of the Mass 
assigned to him brings out the mystical side of his sanctity. 
He worked many miracles, and died a happy death at Orsino 
on September 18, 1663, as he himself has predicted. 


Sert. 19. St. Januarius and Companions, Martyrs: During 
the persecution under Diocletian St. Januarius, patron of 
the city of Naples and bishop of Beneventum, was beheaded 
with his deacons and some others. In the great church at 
Naples are preserved some of the blood of St. Januarius in 
two glass phials, and also his head. The blood is congealed, 
but every year up to the present it liquefies when placed near 
the martyr’s head. This miracle has been verified both by 
scientists and by many pious and learned persons. Cardinal 
Schuster, now Archbishop of Milan, was able to observe it 
closely and, like others who have studied it, was obliged to 
confess that there seems to be no possible natural explanation 
of this event. It may be that in this manner God is pleased 
to show to the people of Naples that the blood of their great 
Patron is still active and powerful in the sight, of the Lord, 
oe be Sod there is no past, but all is present and living in 
His sight. 


Sept. 20. St. Eustace and Companions, Martyrs: St. Eusta- 
chius, or Eustace, an officer of the Roman army under Em- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1730 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


peror Trajan, was burned at the stake for the Faith, with his 
wife and children, during the reign of Emperor Hadrian. We 
pray to him to preserve us from fire, eternal or temporal. In 
art he is depicted with a stag and hunting equipment. 

Sept. 20. Vigil of St. Matthew, Apostle: In accordance with 
her usual custom the Church appoints a vigil to the feast of 
the holy apostle, Matthew. It has been kept in the Church 
from ancient time and is mentioned in the Martyrology of St. 
Jerome, 

SEPT. 21. St. Matthew, Apostle, Evangelist: St. Matthew 
was & Galilean by birth. In the Gospel he humbly relates 
the story of his own conversion. To the glory of an apostle 
he adds that of an evangelist. He wrote his Gospel in Aramaic, 
and it was afterwards translated into Greek. The Aramaic 
text has perished. This Gospel is a divinely inspired work 
included in Sacred Scripture. He gives the line of ancestors 
from whom Jesus descended as a man, and on this account is 
represented by the animal with a human face in the sym- 
bolical vision of Ezekiel. Little is known of his life; the 
Fathers in general say that he died in Persia. St. Paulinus of 
Nola asserts that he died amongst the Parthians. When his 
remains were discovered at Velia and brought to the Cathe- 
dral of Salerno, Pope Gregory VII began his journey there, 
but mea on the way, and was buried near the tomb of St. 

atthew. 


Serr. 22. St. Thomas of Villanova, Bishop, Confessor: St. 
Thomas of Villanova, Archbishop of Valencia, Spain, was a 
Religious of the Order of St. Augustine. He was distinguished 
by his perfect humility and his charity to the poor, to whom 
he gave all he possessed. When he died the very bed on 
which he lay no longer belonged to him. He had given it a 
few days before to a poor man, who in his turn allowed him 
to keep it for the short time that it would still be of use to 
him. He died September 8, 1555. 

St. Maurice and Companions, Martyrs: St. Maurice 
was an offcer of the Theban legion, a body of about 6000 men. 
These soldiers were Christians and loyal to their emperor and 
to God. They refused to sacrifice to the heathen gods and 
were put to the sword, in 286, by Maximian, the colleague of 
Diocletian, unresistingly giving their lives for the Faith. 

Sept. 23. St. Linus, Pope, Martyr: St. Linus, the immediate 
Successor of St. Peter, ruled the Church for about twelve 
years. In the year 79 he suffered martyrdom, and was buried 
alongside the Prince of Apostles, His name is in the Canon 
of the Mass. 

St. Thecla, Virgin, Martyr: 'The virgin St. 'Thecla 
was converted by St. Paul while preaching at Iconium. She 
left a luxurious home and followed the apostle in his later 
journeys. She suffered many tortures for the Faith but fin- 
ally passed her life in solitude in Isauria, and there died a 
holy death, 

SEPT 24. Our Lady of Ransom: The Order of Our Lady of 
Ransom was founded in the Thirteenth Century by St. Peter 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1731 


Nolasco (Jan. 31) and St. Raymond of Pennafort (Jan. 23), 
aided by King James of Aragon. The object of the Order was 
to redeem Christians held in slavery by the Mohammedans. 
Pope Gregory IX instituted the feast of Our Lady of Ransom 
and afterwards it was extended by Pope Innocent XII to the 
Universal Church. 


SzPr. 26. Sts. Cyprian and Justina, Martyrs: St. Cyprian 
was converted to the Christian Faith by the holy virgin St. 
Justine, and with her suffered martyrdom, They were both 
beheaded in the year 304 at Nicomedia, the residence of Em- 
peror Diocletian. 


Devotion to Sts. Cyprian and Justina was introduced into 
Rome during the Middle Ages, when tradition asserted that 
their relics were preserved near the Lateran Basilica. 


SEPT. 27. Sts, Cosmas and Damian, Martyrs: Sts. Cosmas 
and Damian, twin brothers, distinguished themselves as 


$ physicians. They gave their lives for the Faith at Cyrus in 


Syria where they were buried. Besides using their skill for 
the healing of diseases they sought to spread the Faith in 
Christ. After many tortures they died about the year 285 in 
the persecution under Diocletian. The fame of their miracles 


1 spread over the whole world; many churches were erected in 
3* their honor at Rome and elsewhere. Their names are men- 


tioned in the Canon of ihe Mass and in the Litany of the 
Saints. 


SEPT. 28. St. Wenceslaus, Martyr: St. Wenceslaus, duke of 
Bohemia, ruled that country during its period of conversion 
to Christianity. His devotion to the Holy Eucharist is men- 
tioned by St. Alphonsus in his book, Visits to ihe Blessed 


» Sacrament. 


Wenceslaus was in the habit of sowing and reaping with 
his own hands the wheat from which the hosts were to be 
made, and he used to rise in the night even during the coldest 
seasons to visit the Blessed Sacrament. His virtue was the 
cause of his death, for it aroused the antagonism of his evil- 
minded mother and brother, who caused him to be assassin- 
ated September 28, 938. . 


Sept, 29. The Dedication of St. Michael the Archangel: 
This is the original feast of the leader of the heavenly armies, 
St. Michael. The captain of the heavenly armies, the angel 
named in the Caon of the Mass, held from early times the 
first place in the Liturgy among the other angels; wherefore 
many churches dedicated to St. Michael in the Middle Ages 
were simply known as churches “of the holy angel.” St. 
Michael, whose name signifies “who is like unto God” cast the 
evil spirit out of heaven, and overcame Satan in the struggle 
for possession of the body of Moses. God has intrusted our 
defense, in the combat with the devil, to the angels. The 
reason of this is easily understood. The devil is a spirit who 
has lost none of the powers inherent to his nature. In order, 
therefore, that the struggle should not be unequal, God has 
placed at our side defenders of the same nature as Lucifer, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


17322 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


that is to say pure spirits, who are, however, greater and more 
powerful than he is. 

SEPT, 30. St. Jerome, Confessor, Doctor of the Church: St. 
Jerome was born in Dalmatia in 329. Even during his life he 
Was renowned as a Doctor and Interpreter of Holy Scripture. 
He defended Catholic teaching against many heresies; his 
chief aim was to be a perfect monk and before he would con- 
sent to be raised to the priesthood he exacted a promise from 
Paulinus, Bishop of Antioch, that this new dignity should in 
no wise interfere with his monastic vocation. To him we 
owe the translation of the Holy Scriptures, the introduction 
of the alleluiatic chant into the Sunday Mass, the spread of 
monastic life among the aristocracy, and lastly the daily re- 
cital of the Divine Office. After important services to the 
Pope of his time, St. Jerome retired to Bethlehem, where he 
died September 30, 420. 


Feasts of October 


Oc. 1. St. Remigius, Bishop, Confessor: St. Remigius, who 
for seventy-four years was Bishop of Rheims, in France, con- 
verted and baptized King Clovis, and thus brought Christianity 
to the Franks. He was celebrated for his doctrine and for 
his miraculous powers, as well as for his holiness. His hom- 
ilies have been lost, but four of his letters are extant, as well 
as some verses written by him and intended to be engraved 
on a uode, and also his last testament. He died on January 
13, 533. 


Ocr. 2. Feast of the Holy Guardian Angels: In the prayer 
for the feast of St. Michael (September 29) we ask that the 
Holy Angels may fulfill the special office entrusted to them of 
watching faithfully over us upon earth. This feast included 
together with St. Michael the whole of the heavenly court. 
A distinct feast of the Guardian Angels originated only at a 
later date. The Spaniards observed it in the Sixteenth Cen- 
tury and Paul V (September 27, 1608) declared the feast of the 
Guardian Angels, a feast of the whole Church, and ordered 
that it should be kept on the first vacant date after the feast 
of St. Michael. Clement X (1670) assigned it to October 2nd, 
Leo XIII raised it to the rank of a greater double. 

The guardianship of the faithful is given by God into the 
hands of tne angels, not only for the sake of the unity and 
harmony which bind together the orders of creation, but also 
on account of the duty owed by the angels to Christ. It is 
from Christ that they receive their glory, therefore out of 
gratitude to Him who is caput hominum et angelorum (the 

ead of men and angels) these blessed spirits watch over the 
Church, the chosen Bride of the Savior, and over the faithful 
who are the members of His Mystical Body. 

Oc. 3. St. Teresa of the Child Jesus (Little Flower): Mary 
Frances Teresa Martin was born of saintly parents at Alen- 
con (Orne) on January 2, 1873. She was educated by the 
Benedictine Nuns at Lisieux. After her ninth year she tried to 
enter the Carmelites, and put her case before the Bishop of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1733 


Bayeux and Pope Leo XIII, whom she visited. At the age 
of fifteen she was allowed to enter the Carmel at Lisieux 
(April 9, 1888). She died at the age of twenty-four. There 
was nothing extraordinary about her religious life; she was 
perfect in her simplicity, humility, charity, her love of God and 
her trust in Him. She offered herself as a victim to the “mer- 
ciful love of the good God." She was just a little child in the 
arms of Jesus. Her way of sanctity was a little way; Pius XI 
said: “we wish that St, Teresa’s secret of sanctity should be 
made known to every one of our children. We have set her 
before the children of the Church as a striking and most 
precious example.” Countless miracles have been wrought 
through her intercession. On her death bed she said: “I do 
not intend to remain idle in heaven. My longing is to labor 
even there for the Church and souls. Our Lord will work won- 
ders for me that will infinitely surpass my boundless desire 
After my death I shall let fall a shower of roses, She was 
canonized May 17, 1925. 


Oct. 4. St. Francis of Assisi, Confessor: St. Francis of Assisi, 
born in 1182, was the founder of the Order of Friars Minor. 
Chosen by God to be a living manifestation to the world of 
Christ’s poor and suffering life on earth, he was early inspired 
with a burning love of poverty and humiliation. Divine desire 
burned in him so mightily as to kindle a like desire in other 
hearts. Many joined him, and were constituted by Pope 
Innocent III into a Religious Order. 


He lived at.the time when the feudal system was disap- 
pearing, and Christian democracy was dawning. St. Francis 
undertook to teach to this generation a spiritual language 
suited to its new aspirations. He led the people to devotion 
towards the sacred humanity and the person of the Redeemer, 
& devotion which has continued to increase. He set the 
example for clergy and people of detachment from worldly 
wealth and worldly honors. His reform was carried out not 
by rebellion, but in accord with the head of the Church. It 
was the papal authority, which from the first directed that 
overwhelming current of new life and evangelical mysticism 
loosed by the saint, and incorporated it in the service of the 
Church. ; 

Francis died at sunset on Saturday, October 3, 1226, at 
Assisi, his birthplace. Gregory IX, his friend and director 
during life, raised him to the altars three years later, and 
built the Marvelous church of Assisi over his tomb. 


Ocr. 5. St. Placidus and Companions, Martyrs: St. Placidus, 
together With St. Maurus were committed to the care of St. 
Benedict, When both were very young. Their parents were 
friendly to the holy patriarch, who like them belonged to the 
nobility. St. Benedict had great love for these two early 
companions, On one occasion while drawing water from the 
Jake of Subiaco, as St. Gregory relates, Placidus fell in and 
the waves carried him far from the shore. At the command 
of Benedict, Maurus hastened to the rescue and only after 
he had safely brought the young Placidus to the shore did he 
note that he had walked upon the waters. Little jis known 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1734 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


of the life of St. Placidus. Since the Tenth Century he has 
been venerated as a saint in the Benedictine Order, 

Ocr. 6. St. Bruno, Confessor: St. Bruno of Cologne, after 
brilliant studies at Paris, was made a canon of Rheims cathe- 
dral. Feeling himself.called to a life of retirement and pen- 
ance he betook himself with six companions to a solitude 
called the Chartreuse and there laid the foundations of the 
Carthusian Order. In the end he left Chartreuse for a most 
desolate place where he passed the rest of his life in a cave. 
He died October 6, 1101. 


Ocr. 7. The Most Holy Rosary of the Blessed Virgin Mary: 
October 7 is the anniversary of the glorious victory won in 
1571 by the Christian forces over the Turkish fleet at Lepanto. 
This triumph of the Cross over the Crescent was universally 
attributed to the powerful intercession of the Mother of God, 
whom Pope Pius V fervently invoked with her Rosary in 
his hand, and to whom the prayers of all Christendom were 
addressed. Two years after this great favor had been obtained, 
Gregory XIII instituted an annual feast of thanksgiving to 
be celebrated on the First Sunday of October in all churehes 
where an altar in honor of the Blessed Virgin of the Rosary 
had been erected. From being a local festival this celebra- 
tion gradually spread and became general, until Leo XIII 
raised it to the rank of a double of the second class for the 
whole Church. 

The devotion of the Rosary of the Blessed Virgin Mary 
dates at least from the Twelfth Century. The glory of having 
spread this form of prayer with such extraordinary success 
is certainly due to the Dominican Order, and, owing to their 
zeal, the Rosary soon became the most popular devotion 
throughout the Christian world. 

The Holy Rosary as it is now recited, and enriched with 
great indulgences, represents, after the Divine Office, what 
may be described as a popular Breviary of the Gospel. By 
meditating on the appropriate mysteries, it may be adapted to 
the Liturgical Cycle, and because it unites vocal with mental 
prayer the Rosary is regarded as the most beautiful and 
approved devotion of the Latin Church. 

St. Mark, Pope, Confessor: St. Mark, a Roman 
priest, was the right hand of Pope St. Sylvester, during the 
latter’s pontificate, and finally succeeded him. St. Mark’s 
term as Pope lasted only eight months, for he was called to 
his eternal reward in the year 336. Pope Damasus records 
of him that his life was blameless and full of love of God. He 
cared little for honors and despised earthly things, for his 
inmost heart was attached to virtue alone. He was the 
champion of justice and a perfect lover of Christ. 


Sts. Sergius, Bacchus, Marcellus, and Apuleius, 
Martyrs: Sts. Sergius and Bacchus were at one time officers 
in the imperial army. After many tortures they were put 
to death for being Christians. The date of their martyrdom, 
which took place in the Third Century, is uncertain. Together 
with them are honored two Roman martyrs, Marcellus and 
Apuleius, probably their contemporaries. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1735 


Ocr. 8. St. Bridget, Widow: St. Bridget (or Birgitta) of 
Sweden, on the death of Prince Ulfo, her husband, embraced 
a life of prayer and penance. Favored by Almighty God with 
wonderful visions and revelations, she founded the Religious 
Order of the Most Holy Savior. With her daughter St. Cath- 
erine, she Made numerous pilgrimages to various sanctuaries 
in Italy and in Palestine. The secrets of heaven were mani- 
fested to her in many revelations which are referred to in 
the Collect of the Mass. She exerted her influence in the 
cause of the Church’s reform in the courts, episcopal palaces, 
the abbeys and even at the Holy See. She died at Rome, July 
2, 1373. Her relics were brought back to Sweden by her 
gaughter a year later. She was canonized by Boniface IX, 

1. 


Ocr. 9, Sts. Dionysius, Rusticus and Eleutherius, Martyrs: 
Ever since the Seventh Century Rusticus and Eleutherius have 
been associated with St. Dionysius (or Denis). The veneration 
of St. Dionysius at Paris goes back to an earlier period. St. 
Qregory of Tours frequently mentions the Basilica of St. 
Denis built at the suggestion of St. Genevieve. The saint 
martyred at Paris is to be distinguished from the Areopagite 
converted by St. Paul, whose veneration has ever been famous 
among the Greeks, and from the pseudo-Dionysius, a Syrian of 
the Fifth or Sixth century. 


Ocr. 10. St. Francis Borgia, Confessor: St. Francis Borgia, 
one of the most honored nobles of Spain, cut himself off from 
the chance of dignity or preferment, and entered the Society 
of Jesus, of which later he became the General. Conspicuous 
Jor TA holiness of his life, he ended his days in Rome, October 

z 2. 


Oct. 11. The Maternity of the Blessed Virgin Mary: In the 
first ages of the Church the day sacred to our Blessed Lady, 
under her great title of Mother of God, was January 1. Evi- 
dent traces of this devotion remain in the liturgy proper to the 
feast of the Circumcision, which is now kept on that day. 
Many churches having petitioned for a special festival in 
honor of Our Lady's divine maternity, a day, usually in the 
month of October, was granted by the Holy See for its cele- 
bration. By a decree of the Sacred Congregation of Rites, 
April 24, 1914, the eleventh of October was assigned. Pius 
IX raised it to a double of the second class and extended it to 
the Universal Church. 


All Catholics believe that Mary is the Mother of God, This 
does not mean that she is not a creature of God, nor that God 
did not exist before she was created. It means that He who 
was her Son was & Divine Person. In Christ there are two 
natures: the nature of God and the nature of man; but in 
Him there is only one Person, à Divine Person, the Second 
Person of the Blessed Trinity. Hence all that may be pre- 
dicated of either nature may with propriety be said of the 
Savior in the concrete form, without distinguishing the two 
natures, So we may say that God was born of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary. We then refer to the Person of the Son of God, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1736 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


Who is both God and Man. Christ, Who is God, was born 
according to His human nature of the Blessed Virgin. She 
is, therefore, truly the Mother of God, 


Ocr. 13. St. Edward, King, Confessor: St, Edward, called 
the Confessor, the last but one of the Anglo-Saxon kings of 
England, reigned holily and happily for twenty-four years. On 
the throne he rivalled the saints by his untiring practice of 
austere virtue; his reign was one of almost unbroken peace; 
the country grew prosperous, ruined churches rose under his 
hand, the weak lived secure, and for long ages after, man 
spoke of the laws of “good King Edward.” He died January 
5, 1066, The Saint’s body reposes in the shrine in Westminster 
Abbey, behind what used to be the High Altar. 

Oct. 14. St. Callistus, Pope, Martyr: Pope St. Callistus suc- 
ceeded St. Zephyrinus. The institution of the ember-day 
fasts is ascribed to him. He suffered martyrdom under Em- 
peror Alexander Severus, October 14, 223. He was a staunch 
defender of the unity of the Divine Essence. He offered abso- 
lution to even the greatest sinner who should have performed 
the canonical penances. 


Oc1. 15. St. Teresa, Virgin: St. Teresa, the foundress of the 
Discalced Carmelites, was born at Avila in Spain, 1515. She 
was called to reform her Order, favored with distinct com- 
mands from Our Lord, and her heart was pierced with divine 
love; but dreading delusion she acted only under obedience to 
her confessors, which made her strong and safe. Her heavenly 
Spouse called her to Himself, October 4, 1582. By the altera- 
tion of the calendar, then taking place, the next day was 
reckoned the fifteenth of the month, and in due course was 
assigned for the keeping of the feast. In the Collect we have 
the only example in the whole of Liturgy of a reference to a 
woman entrusted with the office of teaching and feeding the 
faithful. 

Ocr. 16. St. Hedwig, Widow: St. Hedwig, of royal origin, on 
the death of her husband, Duke Henry of Poland, retired 
into a Cistercian monastery, where she lived under obedience 
to one of her daughters, who was abbess of the monastery, 
growing day by day in holiness till Almighty God called 
her to Himself, October 14, 1243. St. Hedwig fasted and 
prayed and took the discipline; she heard several Masses daily 
and distributed alms with great generosity, She was canon- 
ized twenty years later by Pope Clement IV. 


Ocr. 17. St. Margaret Mary Alacoque, Virgin: Margaret 
Mary Alacoque was born at Verosvres in the diocese of Autun 
in 1647. When only three years old she already had the great- 
est fear of the smallest sin. Indeed, the very word "sin" 
frightened her exceedingly. And before she was quite four 
years of age, without anyone suggesting them to her, she 
clearly pronounced the words, *O my God, I consecrate my 
purity to Thee, for my whole life: I vow to Thee perpetual 
chastity.” Even as a mere tot she loved Jesus and Mary above 
ali things; and as soon as she had learned to say the rosary, 
She recited it every day. Some time after she had made her 


http://ccwatershed.org 


P 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OP SAINTS 1787 


First Holy Communion, God sent her a grievous sickness that 
lasted four years. Then Margaret had recourse to Our Lady. 
She promised that if that dear Mother would cure her she 
Would become a Sister. Scarcely had she uttered the words, 
when she was cured. After some hesitation she entered the 
Order of the Visitation of Paray-le-Monial at the age of 
iwenty-three. The Sacred Heart of Jesus manifested itself to 
her several times; through her He willed to make this devotion 
known to the world. She died October 7, 1690. She was canon- 
ized by Pope Benedict XV on Ascension Thursday, May 13, 
1920. Pius XI extended her feast to the whole Church on 
June 28, 1929. 


Ocr. 18. St. Luke the Evangelist: St. Luke, a native of 
Antioch, was converted by St. Paul, and accompanied him on 
many of his journeys. St. Luke is best known as the historian 
of the New Testament. He gathered information from the 
lips of the apostles and wrote, as he tells, all things in order. 
The Acts of the Apostles were written as a sequel to his Gospel. 
He died the death of a martyr, anc was buried at Thebes in 
Beotia. His relics were brought to Constantinople in 357. 


Oct. 19. St. Peter of Alcantara, Confessor: Peter Caravito, 
or Peter of Alcantara, as he is called from the city of his birth, 
died on October 18, 1562, and his feast was introduced into the 
Missal by Clement X. This saint is distinguished by three 
characteristics. The first is the incredible.severity of. the 
mortification by which, like St. Paul, he sought to fill up that 
which was wanting in the Passion of Christ, for the good of 
the Church. The spirit of the Franciscan Reform, initiated 
in the new so-called province of St. Joseph by his endeavors, is 
one of great penance and extreme poverty. 


The second characteristic of St. Peter of Alcantara is the 
abundance of mystical gifts and the grace of sublime contem- 
plation received by him in reward for his austerities. 


. Thirdly, St. Peter is distinguished by the active part he 
took in the reform of the Carmelite Order initiated by St. 
Teresa. He was the first to examine and approve of the spirit 
of this reform. 


.St. Teresa, for her part, declared that she had never asked 
anything of the Lord through the merits of Brother Peter 
which she had not obtained. 


Ocr. 20. St. John Cantius, Confessor: St. John was born at 
Kenty in the diocese of Cracow. He was a parish priest and 
missionary, but, above all, he is remarkable for having ful- 
filled during many years the duties of a professor at the Uni- 
versity of Cracow. There may be many who hold that the 
position of a teacher at a university, who is apt to be enam- 
oured of his own learning, is scarcely suited to the practice of 
Christian perfection. John of Kenty has-dispelled this ilu- 
sion, and has proved that the example of a holy life lends 
authority to a master’s teaching far more than would self- 
sufficiency. He was marked during his life-time by a great 
generosity towards the poor, and, after his death, God dis- 
tinguished him by a number of miracles. He died on Christ- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1738 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


mas Eve, 1473, and was canonized by Pope Clement XIII in 
1767. He is invoked in cases of ulcers, fever, and consump- 
tion; he is one of the patrons of Poland. 


Ocr. 21. St. Hilarion, Abbot: St. Hilarion, a Palestinian sol- 
itary, passed a life of self-denial and mortification in the 
wildernesses of Egypt and the Holy Land. His biography was 
written by St. Jerome. His last words were: “Go forth, O 
my soul, what do you fear? You have served Christ for seventy 
years, do you now fear death?” In the East he was the first 
to be venerated as a saint other than a martyr. He died at 
the age of eighty in 371. 


Sts. Ursula.and Companions, Virgin-Martyrs: St. 
Ursula, a native of England, sought an asylum in Gaul, when 
her country was harassed by the Saxons. She found an abid- 
ing-place in Germany but was set upon by a horde of Huns, 
and with her companions gave her life in the year 453 in de- 
fense of her faith and chastity. 5 


Oct. 24. St. Raphael, Archangel: In the Book of Tobias, in 
the Old Testament, we read of the ministry of the holy arch- 
angel St. Raphael, protector and guardian of the sick. 'The 
Eastern Churches observed a feast in his honor since the year 
1000. It is now universally celebrated throughout the Church. 
His name signifies “The healing of God"; he is one of the 
seven blessed spirits who always stand before the throne of 
God. He isidentified by many Fathers of the Church with the 
angel ne stirred the Pool of Bethsaida as related in the 
Gospel. 


Oct. 25. Sts. Chrysanthus and Daria, Martyrs: St. Chrys- 
anthus came with his wife St. Daria from the East to Rome, 
some time in the Third Century. They were accused of being 
Christians, and after suffering many torments their lives were 
closed by a glorious martyrdom in one of the persecutions, 
probably in that of Valerian, about the year 237. Of them the 
Byzantine Liturgy says: “Chrysanthus and Daria live in 
heaven, though they are dead, having been buried alive in one 
grave. The inseparable pair were entombed on March 19." 


Ocr. 26. St. Evaristus, Pope, Martyr: Pope St. Evaristus, who 
succeeded St. Anacletus as Pope, governed the Church during 
nine years. He divided the various ecclesiastical regions of 
Rome among the titular presbyters and ordered that seven 
deacons should surround the Pope when he preached. He was 
put to death for the Faith in the year 112. 


Ocr. 27. Vigil of the Apostles Sts. Simon and Jude: Antici- 
pation is & sign of solicitude and zeal, and therefore the 
Church, because she is full of love, anticipates the liturgical 
Solemnities in her prayers. A typical example of this zeal is 
found in the lives of some of the early saints like St. Nicholas 
of Myra and the Patriarch St. Benedict, of whom we are told 
that in their prayer they even anticipated the liturgical night 
vigils. The vigil of Sts. Simon and Jude, Apostles, is men- 
tioned in the Martyrology of St. Jerome. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1739 


Ocr. 28. The Holy Apostles Simon and Jude: St. Simon was 
a Chananean, and was known among the apostles as “the 
Zealot.” Before Christ called him to be an aposile, Simon 
belonged to the patriotic party known as Zealots, who, im- 
patient of foreign rule, prepared for a war of independence. 
This circumstance was not forgotten, and even after he had 
become a disciple of the Lord, he was still known by the 
appellation of the Zealot. He suffered martyrdom in Persia, 
according to tradition. 

St. Jude is the brother of James the Less, first bishop of 
Jerusalem, and therefore a cousin of Our Savior. The New 
Testament includes a short letter written by St. Jude, who is 
daily commemorated in the Roman Canon of the Mass under 
the name of Thaddeus. It is believed that the relics of these 
two apostles are in St. Peter’s in Rome. Tradition says that 
he preached in Mesopotamia, where he died for the Faith. He 
is the patron of difficult cases. ` 


Oct. 31. The Vigil of All Saints: The preparing by a solemn 
vigil for the celebration of All Saints’ Day, probably dates 
from the Eighth Century, when November 1 was fixed for the 
celebration of the feast. The fast on this vigil is of universal 
observance. As on other vigils Holy Mass is celebrated in 
purple vestments, and the liturgy throughout is of a peniten- 
tial character. 


Last Sunday in October. Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ, 
King, This feast was instituted by Pope Pius XI at the 
close of the Holy Year, 1925. The purpose of the Holy Father 
was to bring home to all mankind the fact that Christ is King 
not merely over individuals, but over families and societies, 
over states and nations, over rulers and tribunals as well The 
duty of Catholics is to hasten the return of the world to His 
authority by their prayers, their influence and their actions. 
They are réminded that they must courageously fight under 
His royal banner, with the weapons of the spirit, for the rights 
of God and of His Church. 

The last Sunday of October was chosen for the feast, the 
Sunday preceding All Saints, because during this month the 
liturgical year draws to its close and thus the mysteries of 
Jesus Christ are fittingly completed and crowned by the 
liturgical festival of Christ, the King. On the same day also 
will annually take place the consecration of mankind to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus. 

Christ is proclaimed King of all mankind both in the Old 
and the New Testament. David, Isaias, Daniel and Zacharias 
in pleinest terms predicted the kingship or the kingdom of the 
future Messias. At the coming of Christ the Angel Gabriel 
announced that “of His Kingdom there shall be no end." The 
Savior Himself declared His kingship before Pilate. But His 
kingdom, though in this world, was not to be of this world. 
As man He is Lord over all kings and over all human posses- 
sions; Yet He is ^King of kings and Lord of lords," and on 
the last day He will present Himself together with His king- 
dom to His Father, when all His enemies shall have been put 
under His feet. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1740 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


Devotion to Christ as King is not new, but the Church has 
given to it a great liturgical solemnity in the present feast, 


Feasts of Movember 


Nov. 1. The Feast of All Saints: The custom of keeping holy 
one day in the year as the festival of all God's saints, whether 
commemorated in the Liturgy or not, dates back to at least 
the beginning of the Fifth Century. In ancient times it was 
usually called the feast of All Holy Martyrs. The day of its 
celebration varied; and in the East, even now, All Saints is 
in most places a movable feast. Pope St. Boniface IV, when 
dedicating the Roman Pantheon as the Church of Our Blessed 
Lady and All Holy Martyrs, appointed November 1 for the 
chief annual festival in the sacred building. Gregory III built 
an oratory at St. Peter’s in honor of all the saints, confessors 
as well as martyrs, who had died in all parts of the world. 
Gregory IV chose November 1 as the Feast of All Saints. The 
Octave was added by Sixtus IV. 


Nov. 2. The Commemoration of All the Faithful Departed: 
Should November 2 fall on Sunday, the commemoration of 
All Souls is transferred to the following Monday. Pope Ben- 
edict XV granted priests permission to offer three Masses on 
all Souls’ Day. One of these Masses the celebrant may say 
according to his own intention; one must be offered for all the 
faitntul departed and the third for the intention of the Holy 

ather. 

The Church with her usual sublime economy preserved all 
that was innocent, tender and inspired in the funeral rites of 
classic antiquity. She purified and spiritualized them, hand- 
ing them on to the new generations of the Middle Ages trans- 
figured by a new thought which gave a sense òf joy and life 
to the Liturgy of the departed, the thought that, they would 
rise once more like the risen Redeemer. 

"Therefore all that was dismal or frightening disappeared. 
There were no more emblems of death, skulls or cross-bones 
traced upon the draperies; all spoke instead of peace’ and 
serene hope. . 

The ancient Roman cemeteries, then, were not merely 
graveyards, they were country houses with baths and gardens 
adjoining them, where even the Popes themselves often resided. 


The memento of the dead in the Mass is common to all 
Liturgles since the Third Century. In the Eighth Century 
we find among the customs of the monastery of Fulda that of 
celebrating each month a commemoration of the faithful de- 
parted. With a special Office and special prayers. To pass 
from a monthly celebration to an annual one was easy, and 
thus we find that towards the Tenth Century, especially in 
Benedictine monasteries, the custom prevailed of commem- 
orating every year the benefactors and friends of the house 
who had been taken from this world. St. Odilo, Abbot of 
Cluny, is generally recognized as having been responsible for 
the universal adoption of this custom, already in use in many 
churches (998). 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1741 


Nov. 3. Of the Octave of Alf Saints: The Mass is as on the 
feast, with the additional prayer of the Holy Ghost, and either 
that for the Church or that for the Pope. 


Nov. 4. St, Charles Borromeo, Bishop, Confessor: About 
fifty years after the Protestant heresy began, Our Lord raised 
up a mere youth to renew the face of His Church. The life- 
Work of St. Charles may be divided into two periods, first, the 
activities he discharged beside his uncle Pius IV which em- 
braced not only Rome but the Universal Church. Secondly, 
the pastoral office which he filled at Milan, as the Bishop and 
Apostle of that diocese. He may be said to have directed from 
Rome the last phase of the Council of Trent. 


-The zeal displayed by St. Charles in fulfilling his pastoral 
duties is almost incredible. His field of action as Archbishop 
of Milan and Legate of the Holy See was very extensive. Yet 
ihere was no deserted Alpine village which was not included 
in his pastoral visitation. His biographers tell us that in 
three weeks he consecrated no less than fifteen churches. He 
established à seminary, whose rules have been the basis of 
erred regulations since that time. He died November 

" h 


Sts. Vitalis and Agricola, Martyrs: St. Vitalis, the 
Servant of St. Agricola, by his courage in bearing the most 
atrocious tortures for the Faith, encouraged his master to die 
bravely with him for Christ. They suffered at Bologna in 
Italy about the year 300. 


Nov. 5, 6, 7. Of the Octave of All Saints: The Mass is as on 
the feast, with the additional prayer of the Holy Ghost, and 
either that for the Church or that for the Pope. 


Nov. 8. The Octave-day of All Saints: That this Octave 
dates only from the time of the Renaissance can be deduced 
from the fact that there is no special Mass for it in the Missal, 
and that the Roman Sacramentaries only mark to-day as the 
feast of the Crowned Saints. It is well to repeat, on account of 
the modern tendency to multiply octaves, that originally the 
celebration of the Octave was a characteristic of the Paschal 
solemnity. 


The Holy Four Crowned Martyrs: In the persecution 
under Diocletian, Sts. Severus, Severianus, Carpophorus, and 
Victorinus, four brothers, were cruelly tortured until they 
expired in the hands of their tormentors. They were at first 
known simply as four Christians who had won the crown of 
martyrdom and continued to be so styled even after their 
names were learned. 


Nov. 9. Dedication of the Basilica of Our Saviour: As the 
anniversary of the dedication of a cathedral is kept as a 
solemn festival in all the churches of a diocese, so the dedica- 
tion of the Church of St. John Lateran, the cathedral of the 
Supreme Pontiff, is everywhere celebrated. The first mention 
of the Lateran in ecclesiastical history is that of Optatus of 
Milevis who relates that a Council against the Donatists wag 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1742 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


held within its walls. About this time Constantine gave to 
the Church of Rome the ancient Palace of the Laterani, part of 
the dowry of his wife, Fausta. 

From that time onwards the Lateran became the ordinary 
residence of the Popes, and may be regarded as a memorial 
of that long series of holy Pontiffs who inhabited it during the 
course of nearly ten centuries. Those walls, now nearly two 
thousand years old, have seen many important events in his- 
tory and have figured in poetry and in art, whilst they sheltered 
a dynasty of Pontiffs who ruled longer than any dynasty of 
kings. Here, at the suggestion of Pope Sylvester, Constantine 
the Great transformed or constructed the first basilica dedi- 
cated to the Saviour at Rome. In the Twelfth Century, on 
account of the baptistery, it was dedicated to St. John the 
Baptist and began to be called St. John Lateran. In the 
early Middle Ages the Pope officiated, not at one church only, 
but in all the basilicas and titles within and without the city. 
On great solemnities and for ordinations and coronations, he 
officiated at St. Peter’s. When the observance of the stations 
declined, the Lateran was ranked as the Papal residence, and 
the basilica was looked upon as a cathedral with regard to the 
other titular churches of the city. 

As papal cathedral and mother of all the churches, the 
Basilica of the Saviour has been clothed with the dignity of a 
symbol of the Pontifical authority in the eyes of the Catholic 
world. The Liturgy has also concentrated in her ritual this 
belief held by the household of the faith, and Pius X raised 
the feast which we celebrate to-day to the same rank of a 
double of the second class for the entire Latin Church, as is 
held by the great feasts of the religious year. 

In this basilica and the Latern Palace five ecumenical coun- 
cils were held, besides twenty synods. The basilica, after its 
destruction, was rebuilt by Benedict XIII and consecrated on 
November 9, 1726. Since that time the feast has been kept in 
the Universal Church, 

The dedication of a church is an important liturgical event. 
It is not the same thing to pray in private, or to pray in the 
sacred sanctuary and to take part in the rites of Catholic 
Liturgy. By reason of its consecration the Church is the 
throne of God’s mercy, the place chosen by Him, and where 
He chiefly condescends to work our salvation. Here we know 
He listens to our prayers; here Jesus is pleased to receive 
from the assembly of believers that solemn, public, and united 
adoration which is due to Him. 

St. Theodore, Martyr: St. Theodore was a soldier 
martyr, and suffered death at Amasea in Asia Minor in 306. 
After being tortured by having his flesh torn by iron hooks, 
he was burned. During his martyrdom he sang the verse of 
the Psalm: “I will bless the Lord at all times.” At an early 
date a round church was built in his honor at Rome; pious 
‘women still carry their sick children thither in order to invoke 
the help of the great martyr. 

Nov. 10. St. Andrew Avellino, Confessor: This celebrated 
Neapolitan missionary, because he was very handsome, had to 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OP SAINTS 1743 


resist various attempts at seduction, He became a priest 
and practiced Canon Law; having uttered a slight untruth in 
court he read a short time afterwards: “The mouth that 
utters untruth kills the soul" He was so moved by this 
Scripture that he renounced his career and entered, at the age 
of thirty-six, the Theatines, receiving the name of Andrew. 
He was at one time spiritual director of the seminary of 
Piacenza, where he is still venerated. His patronage is in- 
voked by the faithful against apoplectic seizures and sudden 
death. He died of an attack of apoplexy as he was standing 
at the foot of the altar, repeating the words, Introibo ad 
altare Dei (1590). 


Sts. Tryphon, Respicius, and Nympha, Martyrs: 
St. Tryphon and St. Respicius, his convert, after most cruel 
torments, were brutally scourged and then beheaded under 
Decius, in 252. St. Nympha, a virgin of Palermo, in Sicily, is 
honored on the same day, but the date of her martyrdom is 
uncertain, 


Nov. 11. St. Martin, Bishop, Confessor: At a time when 
liturgical honors were reserved almost exclusively to martyrs 
only, the Apostle of Gaul was the object, at a very early period, 
of the veneration afterwards extended to all Confessors. St. 
Martin died at Candes towards the end of the year 396 or the 
beginning of 397, after a life marked by many miracles, and by 
the apostolic zeal in which he labored to root out paganism 
in his diocese and to establish in it the ideals of the monastic 
life. His asceticism and his simple habits did not find favor 
with his brother bishops, or even with his own clergy whilst 
he lived, but in 397, immediately after his death, his biog- 
raphy, written by Sulpicius Severus, entirely rehabilitated his 
memory. This little book became a kind of gospel of the 
monastic life. 


Martin was born in Sabaria (now in Hungary); his father, 
a Roman general, brought him up as a pagan and destined him 
for the life of a soldier. He was drawn to Christianity, despite 
his pagan surroundings. One day, having no money, he gave 
half his cloak to a poor beggar; that night he saw Our Lord 
in a vision wrapped in ope-half of his cloak and surrounded by 
choirs of angels to whom He said: “Martin, yet a catechumen, 
hath clothed Me with this garment.” His biographer says: 
“He never thought unkindly of another, and never returned 
evil for evil" His shrine was as much visited during the 
Middle Ages as Lourdes is now. ‘Thousands of churches have 
been dedicated to him. St. Benedict dedicated the first 
church of his Order on Monte Cassino to his honor and desired 
to yield up his soul before the altar of St. Martin. 


St. Mennas, Martyr: St. Mennas, an Egyptian, a 
soldier in the Roman army, was beheaded in Phrygia, a 
province of Asia Minor, in 304, for refusing to renounce his 
faith in Christ. At one time his fame eclipsed that of St. 
Martin at Rome. Many miracles occurred at his tomb; me- 
mentos, little phials made of earthenware, with the image of 
the saint between two kneeling camels and the inscription “the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1744 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


blessing of St. Mennas," are found in almost all the museums: 
in Europe. After the Eighth Century popular devotion to 


him declined. 


Nov. 12. St. Martin, Pope, Martyr: Pope St. Martin I suffered. 


greatly in defence of the Faith. By his zeal and energy he 
incurred the hatred of the Monothelites, heretics who denied 
that Christ had any human will So great was their influ- 
ence that, after the plot to murder the Pope was frustrated by 
Divine Providence, the holy man was dragged to prison. From 
there he was banished to the Crimea, where he died in 655. 
Although a Roman Pontiff, his feast is kept in the Greek 
Orthodox Church and in their Liturgy he is saluted as “The 
infallible and holy exponent of the divine dogmas.” His 
body was brought to Rome and buried in the Church of St. 
Sylvester. 

Nov. 13. St. Didacus, Confessor: St. Didacus, born in Spain, 
was a holy lay-brother of the Order of St. Francis. He led a 


life perfect in the observance of the vows of poverty, chastity,. 


and obedience. He died in the odor of sanctity in 1463; and 
Was canonized a hundred years later by St. Pius V. 


Nov. 14. St. Josaphat, Bishop, Martyr: St. Josaphat was a 
monk of the Order of St. Basil, and afterward Archbishop of 
Polotsk, in Poland. His labors for the union of the Ruthenian 
Church with that of Rome are almost incredible. After a 
youth of singular innocence mortified by voluntary penance, 
Josaphat, remembering the powerful support lent to the or- 


thodox cause by the monsstic orders, entered religion, and. 


with the help of Velamin Rutski, devoted himself to the re- 
storation of the rule of St. Basil. 
As Superior of & monastery the saint had succeeded in keep- 


ing his disciples free from any schismatic taint: so, too, as. 


metropolitan he devoted himself to the conquest of error with 
ardent and enlightened charity. He gave to all the example 


of a holy life, and labored for souls by preaching, by teaching 


the catechism, and by the distribution of controversial works. 


As a result of his zeal many schismatics were reconciled to. 


the Catholie Church. His opponents at last resolved to take 
his life, and he suffered martyrdom at their hands with great 
courage and serenity at the age of forty-three years. 


In 1642, Urban VIII placed his name in the ranks of the 
Blessed, and Pius IX, on June 29, 1867, on the occasion of the 
centenary of the Princes of the Apostles, canonized the zealous 
champion of the Primacy of the Roman Church. The Ruth- 
enians celebrate his feast on September 16. 


Nov. 15. St. Albert the Great, Bishop, Confessor and Doctor: 


of the Church: St. Albert, philosopher, theologian, scientist, 


and most learned man of his time, was born about 1206 and. 


died at Cologne in 1280. He entered the Order of Preachers 


and had as a pupil St. Thomas Aquinas. His scientific activity: 
embraced: astronomy, cosmography, meteorology, climatology,. 


physics, mechanics, architecture, zoology, botany, agriculture, 


navigation and the textile arts, and, besides, he compiled an. 


encyclopedia of the learning of his day. In 1260 he was con- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


^. 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1746 


secrated Bishop of Regensburg, but resigned after two years. 
e is known in the Schools as the “Universal Doctor" He 
Was beatified in 1622, canonized and declared a Doctor of the 
Church on January 9, 1932. 2009 
Nov. 18. St. Gertrude, Virgin, Abbess: St. Gértrude was born 
in Eisleben in Upper Saxony, 1256. At the age of five she 
Was &n oblate in the Benedictine Convent at Rodalsdorf, over 
which convent she ruled for forty years as Abbess. The Roman 
Breviary states that she died in 1334 “consumed rather by 
the ardor of her love than by disease.” At the age of twenty- 
five she was favored with celestial visions, and towards the 
end of her life she received the stigmata. At God’s command 
she recorded her revelations in her wonderful book called 
Communications and Sentiments of Love. The mission of 
this celebrated Benedictine nun in the Thirteenth Century 
was very similar to that of Margaret Mary Alacoque, which 
indeed she recognized ‘and foretold in a prophetic showing. 
Her mystical life was lived in the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus; 
she is pictured with a flaming heart in her hand. When she 
spoke of Christ and the mysteries of His adorable life, her 
words were sweeter than honey and the honey-comb; her 
spirit was ever serene and radiant. Jesus revealed to her His 
Heart as a mystery of grace and love, rather than as.an abyss 
of sorrow. She was not called to the special vocation of victim 
for the sins of the world as was St. Margaret Mary Alacoque. 


A member of an order which for more than seven centuries 
had been the heir of patristic tradition and in which the 
Liturgy was almost exclusively the source of spiritual life, 
Gertrude conceived devotion to the Sacred Heart not as a 
separate devotion, but as a deeper intelligence of the great 
all-embracing mystery of Christ living again in the Church 
by means of the Catholic Liturgy. 


On one occasion while listening to the beating of the Heart 
of Jesus, she asked St. John the Evangelist why he had not 
made known in his Gospel the treasures of light and mercy 
revealed to him during his mystic repose on the Saviour's 
Heart at the Last Supper. John replied that this new and 
touching revelation would be made later when the world had 
reached the depths of malice, and that in order to rescue it 
God would employ the last resources of His invincible love. 


Nov. 17. St. Gregory Thaumaturgus, Bishop, Confessor: 
Gregory was born at Neocesarea in Pontus about the year 
213, and in his early youth was a disciple of Origen, whom he 
praised in an enthusiastic panegyric. Having been made 
bishop of his native city, he converted it from idolatry to the 
true Faith, working a number of miracles, on account of which 
he received the title of wonder worker. He died during the 
reign of.Aurelian between 270 and 275, end the whole of 
Pontus, according to St. Basil, venerated his memory with the 
greatest devotion as that of a teacher of the Faith. 


Nov. 18. The Dedication of the Basilicas of St. Peter and 
St. Paul; The two basilicas of the apostles were held in great 
veneration from the earliest times. The priest Caius, declared 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1746 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


against the heretics: “I can show you the trophies of the 
Apostles; for if you will go to the Vatican on the Ostian Way 
you will find the trophies of those who founded this Church.” 
Acceding to the request of Pope Sylvester, Constaritine under- 
took to make the sanctuaries at the tombs of these apostles 
correspond externally with their importance in the eyes of 
the whole Christian world. He erected the ancient Basilica of 
St. Peter on the Vatican and that of St. Paul outside the wails. 
On November 9, the Dedication of the Basilica of the Saviour 
at Rome; on Novemher 18 that of the Basilicas of the Apostles 
is celebrated. The reason for determining November 18 is 
unknown. It would appear as though these dedications oc- 
curring within a few days of each other had been fixed by 
some conventional arrangement. 

'The present St, Peter's is on the site of the ancient church, 
marking the spot where St. Peter was martyred and buried. 
It was built in the Sixteenth Century when Pope Julius If and 
Leo X engaged Bramante and Michael Angelo to construct 
what is now the most vast and the richest church in the world. 
Te pey Church was consecrated by Urban VIII on November 

In 1823 the Basilica of St. Paul was almost wholly destroyed 
by fire, which spared only that part of the Church where the 
altar of the Apostle stands under the triumphant arch of Leo 
the Great. It was rebuilt by the efforts of successive Popes 
and reconsecrated by Pius IX on December 10, 1854. 

So by the wonderful dispensation of Providence it came to 
pass that the Catholic Church celebrates annually the dedi- 
cation of the four patriarchal basilicas at Rome: that of the 
Savior, of St. Peter, St. Paul and St. Mary Major. As each 
diocese commemorates the enceenia of its own cathedral, so the 
whole Catholic world celebrates annually the dedication of 
the fourfold Papal cathedral, and this festival is symbolical 
of the fact that in spite of the limits established to each dio- 
cese the Church of Christ is one, and is founded on Peter, who 
continues to feed his lambs from the seven hills, and to rule 
over the flock of Christ throughout the earth. 


Nov. 19. St. Elizabeth, Queen of Hungary, Widow: Elizabeth, 
“fragrant rose of charity,” daughter of Andrew, King of 
Hungary, and wife of Louis IV, landgrave of Thuringia, even 
before she could read was seen to cast herself before the altar, 
open a book of Psalms, fold her hands in prayer, and kiss the 
ground in token of humility. Prayer was everything to Eliza- 
zeth. Her husband was also a, man of piety. They had three 
children, Herman, Sophia and Gertrude. Her greatest de- 
votion was for the poor and the sick; she even brought lepers 
into her home to care for them, At her husband’s death she 
entered the Order of the Penitents of St. Francis, Her brother- 
in-law then expelled her with her children, and she went forth 
poor, unable to find shelter for herself and her children. She 
died in 1231; the miracles obtained through her intercession 
brought about her canonization in 1235. 


St. Pontianus, Pope, Martyr: St. Pontianus was 
Pope from the year 230 to 235, during the reign of Alexander 


http://ccwatershed.org 


i 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1747 


Severus. The emperor's successor, Maximinus, a cruel tyrant, 
banished the Pope, who died from the hardships of his exile, 

Noy, 20. St. Felix of Valois, Confessor: St. Felix of Valois, 
of the royal family of France, was inspired with the desire of 
founding an Order for the redemption of Christian captives. 
He moved St. John of Matha, then a youth, to join him, and 
together they founded the Order of the Most Holy Trinity. 
After a life of great sanctity St. Felix died in 1213. 


Nov. 21. The Presentation of the Blessed Virgin Mary: 
Just as we celebrate the birth of Jesus, the feast of His Holy 
Name and His presentation in the Temple, so too the Church 
solemnizes the nativity of the Blessed Virgin, the feast of 
her holy name and her presentation in the Temple. The tra- 
dition that Mary when three years old was presented by her 
parents in the Temple in order to be brought up in the shadow 
of the tabernacle is first found in the apocryphal Gospels. It 
agrees, however, so completely with the sentiment of Catholic 
devotion concerning that part of the immaculate life of Mary 
not mentioned in the Gospel, that it found favor with Cath- 
olics too. It was celebrated in the East as early as the Sixth 
Century. It was introduced in the West by the agency of 
Philippe de Maizieres, envoy of the King of Cyprus to the 
papal Court of Avignon. He described the festival as cele- 
brated in the East in such glowing colors that Gregory XI 
introduced it into the Calendar of the Curia. 


Mary was brought by her parents to the Temple at Jeru- 
Salem in order that the Rod of Jesse from whence the Flower of 
Nazareth would blossom should be preserved from all danger 
in the shadow of the sanctuary. This should be a lesson to 
all, but especially to parents who cannot guard the innocence 
of their children more surely than by accustoming them from 
an early age to prayer and to frequent reception of the sacra- 
ments. 


Nov. 22. St. Cecilia, Virgin, Martyr: Born of an illustrious 
family, Cecilia as a child consecrated her virginity to God. 
Forced to marry a young pagan, Valerian, she said to him: 
“I am placed under the guardianship of an angel who protects 
my vitginity; therefore do not attempt anything which may 
bring down on thee God’s anger.” Valerian asked to see the 
angel, saying that if he should see him he would believe in 
Jesus Christ. Cecilia told him that he must first be baptized 
and sent him to Pope Urban, who baptized him. Valerian then 
saw near Cecilia a brilliant angel. The brother of Valerian 
had a similar vision when, having been instructed by Cecilia, 
he too was baptized. Valerian and Tiburtious his brother were 
both martyred a short time later. Cecilia was then arrested 
and put to death about the year 230. In 1599 her body was 
discovered in the catacombs by Cardinal Sfoudrati with the 
head lying partly severed, just as at the time of her death. 
Her body now lies in the Church in Trastevere where the nuns 
of the Order of St. Benedict are its guardians. Cecilia is the 
patroness of musicians, because when musical instruments 
sounded she sang to God in her heart. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1748 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


Nov. 23. St. Clement, Pope, Martyr: St. Clement, styled by 
St. Paul in his letter to the Philippians (iv, 3) as his “fellow- 
laborer,” succeeded St. Cletus as Pope in the year, 90. He is 
named third in the Canon of the Mass, after the apostles. 
There is no serious reason for doubting his martyrdom, al- 
though the account of it is apocryphal. That the Clement 
mentioned by St. Paul is the same as the pope and martyr, 
commemorated to-day, is denied by many. His church in 
Rome is an example of the Roman basilica of an early time. 
His Acts state that he was buried at Chersonesus in Crimea. 
When the Apostles of the Slavs, Cyril and Methodius, went to 
Rome to give an account.of their mission to Adrian I they 
brought with them as a gift to the Pope the relics of St. 
Clement discovered by them at Chersonesus, 

St. Felicitas, Martyr: St. Felicitas, the mother of 
the Seven Holy Martyrs, shortly after they died was called to 
give her life for Christ. She was beheaded, November 23, 150. 
Her remains rested in the Cemetery of Maximus with those of 
Silanus, the youngest of her sons. Subsequently the bones of 
this saint were placed in the title of Susanna where they still 
repose. ` 


Nov. 24. St. John of the Cross, Confessor, Doctor: Pope 
Clement XII desiring to honor the Mystical Doctor of Carmel, 
famous for the help he gave to St. Teresa in the reform ‘of 
her Order and for his mystical writings, in which he taught 
the science of the saints for the good of souls, introduced his 
feast into the Calendar. Pius XI (November 24, 1926) pro- 
claimed him a Doctor of the Church. His life was filled 
with difficulties and embittered by anxiety, fatigue, perse- 
cution, and painful illnesses. "When Jesus asked him one day 
what reward he desired for the labors he had sustained, John 
replied: “Lord, to suffer and be humiliated for Thee.” He 
asked God not to let him pass a day without suffering and to 
permit him to die where he would be unknown to all, He 
passed to a better life on December 14, 1591. 


St. Chrysogonus, Martyr: St, Chrysogonus, a Ro- 
man, was martyred under Emperor Diocletian. His name is 
mentioned in the Canon of the Mass. From the Fourth Cen- 
tury 2 basilica was dedicated to him at Rome in Trastevere. 


Nov. 25. St. Catharine, Virgin, Martyr: The legend of St. 
Catharine is unsupported by solid historical authority. De- 
votion to her began in the West about the Eleventh Century 
and was widely spread by the Crusaders. We have still much 
to learn about the personality of St. Catharine, but although 
the particulars of her life are uncertain, God has been pleased 
to glorify his saint on Mount Sinai, where her tomb is still 
venerated by pilgrims. 


St. Gertrude, who from childhood had had a great devotion 
to St. Catharine, once asked of Our Lord to be allowed to see 
the heavenly glory of her patron. Her prayer was beard, and 
She beheld the virgin of Alexandria on a golden throne sur- 
rounded by the sages whom she had led to a knowledge of the 
faith, and who formed her brightest crown in heaven. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1749 


Nov. 26. St. Sylvester, Abbot: The feast of this holy Abbot 
of Monte Fano near Fabriano was introduced into the Cal- 
endar by Leo XIII, who in doing so paid him the honor ren- 
dered by the Church to the founders of Religious Orders. 

In the Thirteenth Century, when many Benedictine mon- 
asteries in Italy had lost much of their former holiness and 
learning, St. Sylvester succeeded in infusing new vitality into 
the ancient Order, by founding a monastic family which by 
the blessing of God transformed several Religious houses, and 
was distinguished by the sanctity of its members. His Order 
is called the Silvestrines; it numbered twenty-five houses in 
Italy when its founder died in 1267 at the age of ninety. 


St. Peter of Alexandria, Bishop, Martyr: St. Peter 
was the last martyr to suffer at Alexandria under the perse- 
cution of Diocletian (311) and therefore the Greeks give him 
the honorable title of “the seal and limit of the persecution.” 
He was an admirable example of a bishop. 


Nov. 29. Vigil of St. Andrew, Apostle: The day preceding 
a festival is styled a vigil (from the Latin word signifying a 
night-watch) because in primitive ages the faithful passed in 
prayer in the church the greater part of the evening and night 
preceding a festival. Nor did they break their fast until after 

e holy sacrifice of the Mass had been offered, and Com- 
munion given in the course of the vigil, Hence the greater 
vigils are still observed as fast-days; and the Mass of a vigil 
has a specially penitential character. Purple vestments are 
worn by the priest; the Gloria in excelsis is not said. 


St. Saturninus, Martyr: St. Saturninus, martyr, 
suffered at Rome in the last great persecution under Emperor 
Diocletian, 304. 

Nov. 30. St. Andrew, Apostle: St. Andrew, the elder brother 
of St. Peter, and, like him, a fisherman of the lake of Galilee, 
on hearing St. John the Baptist proclaim that Jesus was the 
Lamb of God, was moved to follow Our Lord, who chose him 
to be one of the twelve apostles. It is believed that after the 
Resurrection St, Andrew labored in spreading the Gospel in 
Eastern Europe, and.made many converts. At the last he was 
crucified in Patras in the Greek manner, In 357 his re- 
mains, together with those of St. Luke, were solemnly trans- 
lated to the Church of the Apostles in Constantinople. His 
head is venerated at St. Peter’s in Rome. In 1210 his body 
had been moved to the Cathedral at Amalfi in the Kingdom of 
Naples. His feast is important not only on account of the 
position it holds in the Missal (at the beginning of the Proper 
of the Saints) but more especially on account of the antiphons 
"d me Dne Office and the passages from Holy Scripture read 

e Mass. 


Feasts of December 


Dec. 2. St. Bibiana, Virgin, Martyr: St. Bibiana, a Roman 
virgin, was scourged to death (363) in the persecution of 
Julian the Apostate. Before her death her father, mother, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1750 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


and only sister, had given their lives for Christ. One of the 
most ancient churches in Rome bears her name, and is said 
to have been built on the site of her house, 


Dec. 3. St. Francis Xavier, Confessor: St. Francis Xavier, 
the great Jesuit missionary, was the apostle of the East In- 
dies, and the first to preach the faith of Christ in Japan. He 
baptized hundreds of thousands of pagans, For the love of 
Jesus and out of a “longing love to help Christ’s poor,” he 
traveled, barefoot, to the most distant parts, preached the 
Gospel in more than a hundred kingdoms, and islands, 
brought kings and nations into the fold of the Church. And 
then this noble-hearted missionary, this saint mighty in word 
and work, gave his great soul to his Master, December 2, 
1552, 


Dec, 4. St. Peter Chrysologus, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of 
the Church: St. Peter, Archbishop of Ravenna in Italy, who 
died about the year 450, won the title of Chrysologus, “golden 
worded,” not only for his eloquence, but because his words 
were good, true, and of priceless worth. God’s choice of St. 
Peter as a bishop, which was made known in a vision to Pope 
Sixtus XII, is alluded to in the prayer of the Mass. 


St. Barbara, Virgin, Martyr: St. Barbara, also com- 
memorated to-day, was a virgin martyr, who suffered for 
Christ probably in Egypt, during the reign of Galerius, about 
the year 306. The details of her holy life are unknown; but 
she has been held in veneration throughout the Church from 
the date of her martyrdom, s 


Dec. 5. St. Sabbas, Abbot: St. Sabbas, a monk in Palestine, 
was famous for his charity to those in need, for his true Catn- 
olic zeal, and for his austere life. There is a church in Rome 
dedicated to him. Over ninety years of age, he died in 531. 


Dec. 6. St. Nicholas, Bishop, Confessor: St. Nicholas, Arch- 
bishop of Myra in Asia Minor, from the childlike innocence 
of his own life and his devout care for the young, is looked 
upon as the patron of children. He died in the middle of 
the Fourth Century, and seven hundred years later his holy 
relics were translated to Bari in Italy. Because of the power 
he exercised over flames, we pray that through his intercession 
we may be preserved from the flames of hell. He is remem- 
bered for the money which he threw in a window that three 
young girls might have a dowry for their marriage. Because 
of this gift his name has become associated with giving 
and children thank Santa Claus (or St. Nicholas) for their 
presents at Christmastime. 


Dec. 7. St. Ambrose, Bishop, Confessor, Doctor of the 
Church: St. Ambrose, a doctor or teacher of the Church, was 
Archbishop of Milan from a.D. 374 to his death in 397. By 
his steadfastness he deserved well of God's people. Gentle- 
ness, meekness, humility, and obedience made him yield to 
every one in indifferent matters, but in those of duty he Was 
infiexible. His writings have contributed many hymns and 
lections to the Roman Breviary. St. Ambrose died April 3, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1751 


397; but the fourth of April falling as a rule in Lent, the 
Seventh of December, anniversary of his consecration as 
bishop, was assigned for his festival. 


Dec, 7. Vigil of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary: To add to the solemnity of the feast of the 
Immaculate Conception of Our Blessed Lady, Pope Leo XIII 
in 1879 extended this vigil to the Universal Church. 


. Dec, 8. The Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary: The feast of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary was instituted to solemnize the exalted dignity 
bestowed upon her through a special grace of God, and in be- 
half of the merits of Christ—a dignity and choice that pre- 
Served her from the least stain of original sin. : 


We must look to the Orient for the first indications of this 
feast. In the Eastern Church it was observed as early as the 
Seventh Century, and in the Western Church it became 
known in the Ninth Century. Pope Sixtus IV introduced it 
(1476) into the Roman Church; Pope Gregory XV gave to it 
(1622) the title, “Conceptio B.V.M. Immaculate’; Innocent 
XII raised it (1693) to a feast of the second class with an 
octave; Clement XI declared it (1708) a universal holyday; 
Pius IX gave it (1863) new Breviary hours and a new Mass; 
Leo XIII raised it (1879) to a feast of the first class with a 
vigil. The choice of December 8 was determined and ap- 
proved solely in accordance with its tradition. The First 
Plenary Council of Baltimore, held in 1846, chose the Blessed 
Virgin Mary in her Immaculate Conception as the principal 
patron of the United States. 

The feast of the Immaculate Conception is not to be con- 
fused with that of the conception of Christ (feast of the An- 
nunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary); it is the commem- 
oration of the day on which Mary was created by God, and 
that in the state of grace; whereas. all other human beings 
come into this world stained with original sin. This idea of 
the feast was vigorously debated by theologians till far into 
ihe Middle Ages, but was clarified more and more under the 
authority of the popes, so that the dogma, announced by 
Pope Pius IX on December 8, 1854, as divinely revealed, had 
already been universally accepted as such in the Seventeenth 
Century. 


Dec. 10. St. Melchiades, Pope, Martyr: Pope St. Melchiades 
ruled the Church at the close of the era of persecution. St. 
Augustine styled him “a true son of peace and a true father of 
Christians," He died January 10, 314, having sat as Pope 
two years, six months, and eight days. In some calendars he 
is called à martyr, doubtless on account of his sufferings in 
times of persecution. 

Dec, 11. St. Damasus, Pope, Confessor: St. Damasus, by 
birth a Spaniard, governed the Church from 366 to 384, “The 
ancients,” according to Alban Butler, “particularly commend 
his constancy in maintaining the purity of our holy faith, the 
innocence of his manners, his Christian humility, his com- 
passion for the poor, his piety in adorning holy places, espe- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1752 ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 


cially the tombs of the martyrs, and his singular learning.” 
Much of our knowledge about the martyrs is derived from the 
inscriptions which he composed in their praise., He estab- 
lished rules for the liturgical singing of the Psalms and decreed 
that the Gloria Patri should be said at the end of each Psalm. 
At his command St. Jerome translated the New Testament 
into Latin. This Pope also confirmed the second ecumenical 
council, held at Constantinople. 


Dec. 13. St. Lucy, Virgin, Martyr: St. Lucy, a native of 
Syracuse, Sicily, consecrated herself to God from her child- 
hood. Her mother did not know of her vow and wished her 
to marry a young pagan. At the tomb of St. Agatha, she 
prayed for the cure of her mother from a serious disease, 
When this prayer was granted she informed her mother of 
her vow, to which her mother then consented. When the 
young pagan saw her distributing her goods among the poor, 
his anger knew no bounds. He accused her before Paschasius, 
the governor, of being a Christian. She was brought before a 
judge who commanded her to be exposed to temptation in an 
evil house. But God watched over her and made her abso- 
lutely immovable so that no number of guards could carry 
her to that place. In a similar way He preserved her from 
the pains of fire and other dreadful torments. Finally she 
died in prison of wounds she had received (304). Her name 
is in the Canon of the Mass. 


Dec. 15. Octave Day of the Immaculate Conception: On 
the feast of the Immaculate Conception we welcome the dawn 
of the day as the herald of the ardently desired coming of the 
Sun of Justice i.e., of the birth of Our Savior, to which Mary's 
feast is a beautiful preparatory festival. Hence the feast 
fits admirably into the time of Advent. The stronger our 
longing for the divine child, the more rapturous is our joy 
in the Mother of God. The All-holy could not but be born 
of a most pure virgin. “I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and 
my soul shall be joyful in my God"—thus the Church has 
Mary pray. The Epistle depicts God's wisdom, to which Mary 
most nearly approaches: “He that shall find me shall find 
Hfe, and shall have salvation from the Lord.” May we not 
say this of our Blessed Lady “whose name is Mary," and to 
whom the angel said, “Hail, Mary, full of grace; the Lord is 
with thee; blessed art thou among women"? The Church 
brings the Mass to a beautiful close: “May the sacraments 
which we have received, O Lord our God, repair in us the 
wounds of that sin from which Thou didst in a singular man- 
ner preserve the Immaculate Conception of Blessed Mary.” 


Dec. 16. St. Eusebius, Bishop, Martyr: St. Eusebius, Bishop 
of Vercelli, in northern Italy, battled for the Church in the 
evil days of the Arian heresy, Having for six years and more 
endured imprisonment and exile, on his death in A.D. 371 he 
was honored as a saint and a martyr, 


Dec. 21. St. Thomas, Apostle: St. Thomas, called Didymus, 
that is “the twin," was probably a Galilean of lowly condition 
and a fisherman. He was chosen to be one of the apostles in 


http://ccwatershed.org 


ACCOUNTS OF FEASTS AND LIVES OF SAINTS 1753 


ihe year 31, as can be determined from the mention of his 
name in the catalogue of the apostles in St. Matthew. He is 
reputed to have been slow of understanding and little ac- 
quainted with secular learning. When Jesus was about to 
go to the neighborhood of Jerusalem in order to raise Lazarus 
from the dead the other apostles tried to dissuade Him, lest 
1 the Jews stone Him. But in his enthusiastic love St. Thomas 
exclaimed, “Let us also go, that we may die with Him!" 
Again, it was at the Last Supper that the Saviour said: 
“And whither I go you know, and the way you know.” To 
this St. Thomas, burning with an ardent desire to follow the 
Master said, “Lord, we know not whither Thou goest; and 
how can we know the way?” To which Our Lord replied 
with the beautiful words, “I am the way, and the truth, and 
a the life. No man cometh to the Father but by Me.” In the 
l Gospel for to-day the response of Jesus to the doubt which 


Thomas had expressed concerning his resurrection is related, 
with the answer of Thomas, “My Lord and my God.” 

St. Thomas is said to have planted the standard of the cross 
among the Medes, Persians, and neighboring nations. He is 
called the Apostle of India. He is said to have been slain for 
the faith at Calamina in India; and there is a legend to the 
effect that he was executed by the sword or by a lance. 


http://ccwatershed.org - 


Descriptions of Spmbolic Representations 


Frontispiece—Tue CRUCIFIXION. A picture of the cruci- 
fixion is most appropriate as a frontispiece for a missal. 
The Holy Sacrifice of the Mass is the continuation of 
Calvary. It is the same sacrifice but offered on our altars 
now in an unbloody manner. The altar bread is changed 
into the Body and the wine into the Blood of Christ glori- 
fied and reigning in heaven. 


Page 102 (Picture)—-Tue Root or Jesse. Isaias foretold 
the lineage of the Messias. The picture for Advent illus- 
trates his prophecy: “And there shall come forth a rod 
out of the root of Jesse, and a flower shall rise up out of his 
root, and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him: the 
spirit of wisdom, and of understanding, the spirit of counsel 
and of fortitude, the spirit of knowledge, and of godliness.” 
(Mary is the sweet stem which bore that Rose Christ). The 
root of Jesse was a familiar subject of the artists of the 
early church. 


Page 186 (Picture) —THE NATIVITY or Our Lon». This 
picture illustrates the Gospel of the first Mass of Christmas. 
The shepherds were out on the hills of Bethlehem watching 
their flocks: when suddenly a bright Angel stood before 
them and announced the birth of the promised Redeemer. 
“And this shall be a sign unto you: you shall find the infant 
wrapped in swaddling clothes, and laid in a manger.” They 
went down and saw the word fulfilled. Bowing down they 
adored their God. A star announced the good news to the 
Wise Men and to the world. 


Page 167 (Headpiece)—Tur Hoty Name or Jesus. “In the 
name of Jesus let every knee bow, of those that are in 
heaven, on earth and under the earth".. The Holy Name of 
Jesus is formed in Greek by the letters IHCOYC (Jesous) 
here shortened to IHC. 'The rays which encircle the mono- 
gram signify the glory of that Holy Name. The angels 
represent the eternal adoration and homage of the Church 
triumphant in heaven. The flaming torches stand for the 
ardor and love burning for that Name in the hearts of those 
who belong to the Church Militant on earth. Our Lord 
was called Jesus from the day of His circumcision. This, too, 
was the occasion of the first shedding of His blood for us; 
it is brought to mind by the drops of blood dripping from 
the symbolic monogram. 


Page 201 (Tailpiece)—PRavEeR. A smoking thurible or 
censer is a symbol of prayer. The Psalmist of the Ol¢ 


1755 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1756 DESCRIPTIONS OF 


Testament recommends that we pray always. St. Paul does 
the same in one of his Epistles. And the prayer of the 
Sixth Sunday after the Epiphany has this phrase: “ut sem- 
per rationabilia meditantes" suggesting that we always keep 
our minds fixed on those things which are pleasing to God. 
As smoke ascends so ought our prayers rise up to the beau- 
tiful throne of God filling our own souls with the sweet 
odour of sanctity. 


Page 202 (Headpiece)—“I AM THE RESURRECTION.” The 
empty crib, at the left, marks the close of the joyful Christ- 
mas cycle. The altar, at the right, attracts our attention 
towards the drama of suffering and crucifixion to be re- 
presented on Good Friday. The nails and crown of sharp 
thorns tell the story of Christ’s bitterest hours. We are 
approaching the holy cycle of the liturgical year—the period 
of penance and self-denial. Sincere sympathy with Christ’s 
Passion and Death constrains us to share His sufferings by 
personal mortification—the daily food of strong Christian 
souls. Christ suffered and died only to rise all glorious. “I 
am the resurrection and the life.” The cross and the wind- 
ing sheet silhouetted against the sky keep the memory of 
Calvary alive, The phoenix rising from the flames more 
glorious than before its descent into the fire is an apt figure 
of Christ's resurrection and glorified body. ‘It behooves us, 
also, to suffer and so to enter into glory.” 


Page 215 (Headpiece)—“By THE DISOBEDIENCE OF ONE 
Man.” The symbolic picture for Ash-Wednesday, illustrates 
the words of St. Paul: “By the disobedience of one man 
(Adam) all men are made sinners; but by the obedience of 
one man (Christ the Redeemer) all men are made just.” 
The illustration appropriately recalls the scene at the gate 
of Paradise where an Angel of God and a flaming sword 
stood against Adam and Eve's return. They had disobeyed 
God and were expelled. The wages of their sin was an- 
nounced to them: “Dust thou art and unto dust thou shalt 
return.” .The skull and ashes are opposite the portal of 
Eden. Christ bore the scourging for sin and by His death 
upon the cross merited the palm of victory for the children 
of Adam. 


Page 359 (Headpiece)—“O Brest TREE.” The Divine Office 
of Passion Sunday is filled with allusions to the wood of 
the Cross. The Vesper hymn invites us to sing the praises 
of the “Blest Tree, whose happy branches bore the wealth 
that died the world to restore." The symbol is designed to 
portray the contradiction of the mystery of the “Blest Tree” 
against that tree which bore the forbidden fruit—and the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATIONS 1757 


tempter. It illustrates the second and third verses of the 
Church’s morning song. Christ the Redeemer had designed 
to defeat the Tempter with his own weapon: He “noted 
then this Wood, the ruin of the ancient wood to quell... . 
And the multiform deceiver’s art by art would overthrow.” 
The fruit of the tree led us away from God: the “Faithful 
Cross! . . . one and only noble Tree" led us back again to 
God. 


Page 388 (Headpiece)—Patm Sunpay. On Palm Sunday 
the curtain is raised for the drama of Calvary to be re- 
presented in every sanctuary of the Catholic Church. Al- 
though the Church is in mourning, sorrowful nigh to death, 
she holds in her hand the palm of victory. She ponders the 
treachery of Christ's enemies, the agony in Gethsemani, the 
Betrayal and the Last Words of her Beloved. But not for 
a moment does she forget the third day—Easter morn when 
her sorrow will be turned into joy. Hence the cross is 
draped with the winding sheet. “He is not here. Go and 
tell His disciples that He is risen from the tomb." ‘The 
monogram fixed to the cross is an ancient symbol of Christ 
formed by the first two letters X P (corresponding to our 
English alphabet. letters C(h) E of the Greek name Christ 
XPICT O C (Christos). The palm branches have a sig- 
nificance we ought not easily forget. 'The Church. gives 
everyone a branch of palm. We hold it in our hand during 
the singing of the Passion, and pledge our fidelity to Christ. 
We would rather die than betray Him Who died for us. 


Page 446 (Picture)—-TuHe Last SuPPER. The Apostles are 
amazed at the great mystery of Christ's love. "And taking 
bread, he gave thanks and broke; and gave to them, saying: 
“This is my body, which is given for you. Do this for a 
commemoration of me." (Lk. 22, 19). Every Holy Thurs- 
day is another anniversary of the event which transformed 
this cold earth of ours into a better land of pilgrimage. 


Page 447 (Headpiece)—Tue Great Love-Feast oF CHRIST. 
In the Liturgy of Maundy Thursday, the Church relives the 
great love feast with Christ. On this solemn occasion Christ 
revealed the infinite love of His heart. “With desire, I have 
desired to eat this pasch with you before I die." He ful- 
filled the ancient law of the synagogue by celebrating the 
passover, then He instituted the Sacrament of Love—the 
Holy Eucharist. All this was done under the shadow of the 
cross. The faithful are symbolized by doves. How signifi- 
cant when we recall the words of Christ: “Be ye simple ag 
doves.” The sheaf of wheat and cluster of grapes is a pop- 
ular symbol for the Holy Eucharist. But án ancient symbol 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1758 DESCRIPTIONS OF 


—the fish and basket of bread has a wealth of meaning few 
of us realize. The basket of bread obviously reminds us of 
the miracle of the five loaves in the desert which fore- 
shadowed the institution of the Holy Eucharist. In the 
Greek language, I X T H U C (Ichthus) means fish and 
every letter of the word recalled to the minds of the early 
Christians the mystery of the Incarnate Word and His work 
of Redemption. 

Jesus Christ, of God the Son, Savior. 

Iesous Christos, Theou uios, Soter- ` 


Page 469 (Headpiece)—“My PrEoPLE, WHat Have I DONE 
TO THEE!” Christ reproaches. us in the liturgy of Good Friday 
for treating Him with such little sympathy and love. 

The instruments of His death graphically portray what 
He suffered for love of us. 'They recall the prophetic words 
of Isaias describing the death of Christ: “Despised and. the 
most abject of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with 
infirmity: and his look was as it were hidden and despised, 
whereupon we esteemed him not.” (Is. 53, 3). 


Page 537 (Tailpiece) —“Prace Be WITH You.” ‘The lamb 
with cross and banner, bearing “pax’’—peace—emblazoned 
on it, fittingly conveys the thought of the sequence of Easter 
Sunday. : 

"To the Paschal Victim, hymns of praise, 
Come, ye Christians, joyous raise! 

Lamb unstained, unmeasured price hath paid, 
Ransom for the sheep that strayed." 

Not only did the Lamb of God restore man to peace with 
God, but He also opened the flood gates of grace. 


Page 538 (Picture)—‘Hart, THov KING or VICTORY.” St. 
Paul wrote that if Christ is not risen from the dead our faith 
is vain and our preaching and hope a fable. But there need 
not be any fear of that because Christ had even His enemies’ 
servants te testify to the resurrection. The terror stricken 
soldiers fan back into the city and shouted over their shoul- 
ders that Christ had risen from the tomb, They had to be 
bribed into silence by the Chief Priests and Scribes. The 
holy women visited the empty tomb and were convinced: 
“We know that Christ indeed has risen from the grave. 
Hail, thou King of Victory, have mercy, Lord, and save.” 
(Sequence). 


Page 583 (Tailpiece)—-THe Victory oF Curist. This little 
symbol illustrates the ancient liturgical acclamation with 
which the early Christians proclaimed the victory of Christ 
over sin, the devil and death. Christ reigns in the hearts 


http://ccwatershed.org 


(ets VA 


SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATIONS 1759 


of the faithful, He conquers the devil and his forces, He 
commands the powers of life and death. The I and X in 
the monogram are the Greek initial letters for His name— 
JESOUS CHRISTOS. The palm announces His absolute 
victory. It is very appropriate for the eve of the Ascension 
which is the liturgical feast that re-presents Christ’s tri- 
umphal entry into Heaven. i 


Page 584 (Picture)— THE ASCENSION OF Our Lorp. The 
artist has given us a literal interpretation of the Introit of 
the Mass. “Ye men of Galilee, why wonder you, looking up 
to heaven? Alleluia He shall so come as you have seen 
Him going up into heaven, alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.” 


Page 597 (Picture)—Drscent OF THE Hoty GHosr. After 
the Ascension, the Blessed Mother and the Apostles went on 
a retreat in the Cenacle to prepare for the coming of the 
Paraclete. Christ had promised to send Him. He would 
open the minds of the Apostles to the truths He Himself 
had taught them. The Holy Ghost came with a roaring 
wind and appeared in twelve fiery flames over each of the 
twelve. He confirmed their faith, took away all fear, gave 
them the gift of tongues to go out and preach to all nations. 


Page 625 (Tailpiece) —THE Seven Girts. The Holy Ghost 
began His reign on earth with fire. He descended upon the 
Apostles in the upper-room in the form of fiery tongues. 
“He has all the power of the glorious Godhead.” And with 
what great power His presence was felt on that first Pente- 
cost morning. One is constrained to associate with this 
event the words of Christ “I have come to cast fire upon the 
earth".—During the octave of Pentecost the Church in her 
liturgy prays for the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost. The 
symbolism of the seven burning lamps at the end of the 
octave is a summary of this mighty prayer. 


Page 626 (Headpiece)—Trinity SUNDAY. In this illustra- 
tion, the artist utilizes an ancient symbol of the Holy Trinity. 
This profound mystery of three Divine Persons in one God 
can hardly be bettér symbolized than by a triangle whose 
Sides are all equal. The three equal lines form one perfect 
triangle. We profess belief in “one God, one Lord, not in the 
Singleness of one Person, but in the Trinity of one sub- 
stance” (Preface of the Mass). The artist has enclosed the 
triangle in a circle, a symbol of eternity. The triple sanctus 
and adoring Seraphim incessantly proclaim that our God is 
thrice holy, worthy of all honor and glory. : 


Page 633 (Tailpiece)—BLESSED BE THE HOLY TRINITY. 
There is one outstanding Mystery of our Faith—The Holy 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1760 DESCRIPTIONS OF 


Trinity—which simply overwhelms the human mind. In 
the strength of our faith in It, we shall be protected from 
all adversities. And what do we believe? ‘That there are 
three Persons in One God. The ancient symbol of this 
faith is brief and most concise, Three equal circles stand 
for the Three equal Persons, intertwined to show the in- 
timate relation between Them and enclosed in one greater 
circle to suggest the substantial unity. A perfect illustra- 
tion of the words of the Introit of the Feast—“Blessed be 
the Holy Trinity and undivided unity.” 


Page 634 (Picture) —THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR. This 
picture is an-excerpt from one of Raphael Santi’s greatest 
frescoes in the Vatican, It illustrates the history of the doc- 
irine of the Holy Eucharist by gathering around the Sacra- 
ment of the Altar the representative Doctors of the early 
Church who taught the great mystery of faith. Christ is 
the center of the Church Triumphant in heaven, militant 
on earth and suffering in purgatory. We are in the reign 
of the Holy Spirit. He appears in the picture as the link 
between heaven and earth. 


Page 644 (Picture)—THe Sacrep HEART OF JESUS. When 
we look at this picture of the Sacred Heart of Jesus and 
read the Introit of the Mass, we wonder what profound 
secrets were revealed to the Beloved Disciple, St. John, when 
he rested upon our Blessed Lord’s breast at the Last Supper. 
Our Lord surely revealed some of them to St. Margaret Mary 
Alacoque. The chalice and host—Sacrament and Sacrifice 
of His Love—are very significant because through the Mass 
and Holy Communion “the thoughts of His Heart are. to 
all generations” as we read in the Introit. The spear and 
ladder, the pillar, the crown of thorns and nails recall the 
bitter hours of Christ’s sacrifice on Calvary. But the two 
palms announce His victory over death and sin. 


“Oh shame! to turn to evil deeds, 

That rend His loving heart in twain. 

In virtue's ways march bravely on, 

While burning hearts our love proclaim.” 
(Vesper Hymn of the Feast) 


Page 753 (Headpiece)—Tae Asperces ME. The antiphon, 
sung at the ceremony of the "Asperges" petitions God to 
cleanse us in the waters of grace. This is represented by the 
extended hands of God shedding a dew of benediction upon 
the faithful, which He effects through the ministration of 
His priests. This is a sacramental of the Church; it cleanses 
from venial sin all who assist at it with contrite hearts, and 
thus prepares them better for the Holy Sacrifice. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATIONS 1761 


Page 775 (Tailpiece)—O PRAISE YE THE Lord. Every pre- 
face is à hymn of thanksgiving and praise. It is the solemn 
introduction to the Canon of the Mass. The symbol of 
a harp is very significant at this point. ‘The priest bids 
the faithful to lift up their hearts—sursum corda. David 
of the Old Law too, took up his harp and called upon all 
nations to praise the one true God of Israel. 


Page 776 (Picture)—Tzmxr ETERNAL SACRIFICE. Jesus Christ, 
since His ascension into heaven, stands glorious before His 
eternal Father bearing on His Body the wounds which 
mark Him victim of the Eternal Sacrifice. The Sacrifice of 
Calvary continues in heaven. And in every mass this Eternal 
Sacrifice is presented in time; God the Father again accepts 
the atonement, thanksgiving, petition and adoration of Jesus, 


Page 777 (Headpiece)—Tue Savrour’s Fountains. ‘The 
Sacrifice of the Mass is the center of the Liturgy. Christ 
died on the cross for the salvation of the world. The head- 
piece works out this dogma in a symbolió manner. The 
monogram on the cross stands for Christ, Who is the bégin- 
ning and end of all—Creator and Judge. Stags are familiar 
figures in the Church’s symbolism. They always represent 
the faithful.. Here they are drinking from the streams 
which flow from the foot of the cross. . Calvary is the orig- 
inal source of the waters of salvation and sanctifying grace, 
and through the Mass these waters continue to flow. We 
see the words of Isaias fulfilled: -“You shall draw waters 
with joy out of the Saviour’s fountains.” (Isaias 12, 3). 


. Page 797 (Tailpiece)—I Aw THE ViNE, You THE BRANCHES. 
Christ called Himself the vine of which the faithful are 
the branches. By grace we grow more like to Christ, more 
intimate with Him; we become with the first reception of 
grace at Baptism members of His Mystical Body. The artist 
has surrounded the vine with three equal circles—a trefoil 
suggesting another profound doctrine—the relation of the 
Mystical Body to the Blessed Trinity. The faithful with 
Christ are. the beloved sons of the Father; the Holy Ghost 
is the bond of love between that same Father and us the 
members of Christ. 


Page 818 (Tailpiece)—O PRAISE YE tHe Lorp. See ex- 
planation above. 


Page 850 (Picture)—-Tue IMMACULATE CONCEPTION. St. 
John the Evangelist saw a great sign in heaven: “A woman 
clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and on 
her head a crown of twelve stars" (Apoc. 12, 1). "The 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1762 DESCRIPTIONS OF 


church uses this passage from the Apocalypse to describe 
the Mother of God. She was exempted from the law of 
inheritance according to which all men are born with the 
stain of original sin, because she was to be the Mother of 
God. She is, too, the chosen daughter of the Father, and 
the Spouse of the Holy Ghost. The symbol of the Holy 
Spirit hovering over the Immaculate Mother is therefore 
very significant. Mary, too, is the beloved daughter who 
“feedeth among the lilies.” (Canticle of Canticles.) 


Page 900 (Headpiece)—THe LIGHT OF THE WonLp. The 
lighted candle is a traditional symbol of our Blessed Lord, 
Who called Himself “the Light of the world." The candle 
flame dispels darkness. Christ dispels the darkness of sin by 
His grace, the darkness of ignorance by His message of 
eternal truth. Candle flame gives warmth, Christ ignites 
souls with love. “I am come to cast fire upon earth.” The 
lighted candle is & most appropriate symbol for the feast 
of Purification which portrays Christ in its liturgy as "the 
light to enlighten the nations, the Glory of His people 
Israel" 


Page 945 (Tailpiece)—Tue Just Man Swart FLOURISH, 
The opening words of today’s Introit are translated into a 
graphic symbol. “The just man shall flourish like a palm 
tree ... planted in the house of the Lord.” (Ps. 91, 13-14.) 
The monogram is surrounded by a halo significant of the 
eternal bliss which St. Joseph is now enjoying in heaven. 
Once a Pharaoh told his people to go to Joseph. The Church 
today makes those words her own. 

(The comparison is Oriental. There is hardly a more 
beautiful picture in the Orient than a healthy green palm 
tree standing beside a running stream.) 


Page 946 (Picture)—Sr. JoserH. The picture illustrates 
the exalted dignity of St. Joseph as foster father of the Son 
of God. And the Gospel of the Mass says: “Jesus Himself 
was beginning about the age of thirty years: being (as it was 
supposed) the son of Joseph." (Lk. 3, 23). The two scenes 
from Joseph’s life portray him as the dutiful father of Jesus. 
St. Joseph is always represented with a lily in his hand 
because he was "the chaste guardian of the Virgin." 
(Litany). 


Page 954 (Picture)—THE AmwNuNcIATION. The lily, sym- 
bolic of Mary's spotless cbastity, is the choicest flower in 
God's garden. It was to this pure maiden that the Arch- 
angel Gabriel brought the message of God: "Hail Mary, full 
of grace, the Lord is with thee . . . the Holy Ghost shall 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATIONS 1768 


come upon thee. . . . The Holy which shall be born of thee 
shall be called the Son of God." (Lk. 1, 35). 


Page 1064 (Headpiece)—BEHOLD THE LAMB oF Gop. The 
artist has summarized what we know of St. John the Baptist. 
He was chosen to prepare the way for Christ's coming. He 
announced the lamb of God. “Behold the Lamb of God, 
behold Him, who taketh away the sins of the world" (Jn. 
1, 29). Like a morning star John preceded the rising sun— 
Symbol of the Light of the world. Mary was conceived 
without original sin; the Precursor was born without original 
sin. The lily reminds us of tbis privilege, which John pre- 
served by his austere life in the desert clothed in a hair 
shirt and content with locusts and wild honey. Upon the 
fulness of time Christ came to be baptized. John raised the 
Shell of water over Christ's brow and a voice came out of a 
cloud: “This is My Beloved Son ... hear ye Him." After 
that St. John’s mission was fulfilled. He died a martyr by 
the executioner's sword. 


Page 1077 (Headpiece)—Szs. PETER AND PauL. The church 
for centuries has used symbols to tell the lives of her Saints. 
In keeping with this tradition the symbolic picture sum- 
marizes the respective missions of Sts. Peter and Paul. Our 
Lord appointed Peter to be His Vicar on earth. He gave 
him the keys of the kingdom of God on earth, and com- 
missioned him to “feed My lambs and My sheep.” ‘The 
chair is a symbol of Peter as Pope and Vicar of Christ.. St. 
Peter finally proved his great love for his Master by cruci- 
fixion with his head towards the ground. St. Paul was be- 
headed on the same day. That is why the sword is placed 
against the inverted cross. St. Paul was a missionary who 
suffered the hardships of the sea, even shipwreck. "The 
quill and papyrus bear testimony to his titles Vessel of 
Election and Doctor of the Gentiles. 


. Page 1158 (Picture)—-Twe ASSUMPTION OF Our Lapy. It is 
the common belief of the faithful that Our Blessed Lady 
was taken up into heaven before her body was allowed to 
corrupt in the tomb. Our Lord's Ascension was witnessed 
by men and angels; Our Lady's Assumption only by angels. 
The picture can only suggest the beatitude and glory of that 
Scene. The branches of roses and pot of lilies are a beau- 
tiful tribute to the Queen of Martyrs and of Virgins. 


Page 1186 (Headpiece)—Tue Nativiry OF Our Lapy. Mary 
derives her greatest glory from the vocation to be the Mother 
of God. Mary was destined to this office from her nativity. 
Our Lady’s. birth therefore is aptly symbolized by a crescent 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1764 DESCRIPTIONS OF 


moon which receives its light from the sun. “Who is she 
that cometh forth as the morning rising, fair as the moon, 
bright as the sun" (Cant. 6, 9). Mary was conceived with- 
out the stain of original sin. From her conception there 
was enmity between her and Satan, “I will put enmity 
between thee and the woman and thy seed and her seed. 
She shall crush thy head and thou shalt lie in wait for her 
heel" That was the first promise of a Redeemer. Mary's 
soul is an enclosed garden where lilies of the greatest pur- 
ity flourish. “Thou are all fair, O my love, and there is not 
a spot in thee" (Cant. 4, 7). 


Page 1198 (Headpiece)—Tuv SOUL a SWORD SHALL PIERCE. 
We are accustomed to see the Mother of Sorrows—seven 
Swords piercing her tender beart. But Mary knew only one 
sorrow, all others are nothing in comparison. “Through 
her heart, His sorrow sharing, all His bitter anguish bear- 
ing, now at length the sword had passed" (Hymn for 
Vespers). Simeon in the temple had foretold her martyr- 
dom: “And thy soul a sword shall pierce, that out of many 
hearts, thoughts may be revealed” (Lk, 2, 35). The garland 
of roses and thorns reminds us of the bitter anguish that 
pierced the heart of Mary—the Rosa mystica. 


Page 1256 (Picture)—Jesus Curist, Kine. We find an 
appreciation of this picture in the Gradual of the Mass: 
“He shall rule from sea to sea, and from the river to the 
ends of the earth. All kings. shall adore Him, all nations 
shall serve Him.” Christ the King, therefore, holds the 
globe in His palm and in his right hand the cross which is 
now His scepter and the emblem of His universal dominion. 
Now He wears a crown not of thorns but of glory. Attend- 
ing angels carry the nails and crown of thorns—symbols of 
the sacrifice which won for Him His universal Kingship. 
Christ is robed in the garments of a priest because He is 
always the Eternal High Priest, 


Page 1263 (Tailpiece) —THE Crown or Justice. There is 
a crown awaiting the faithful servant of God in heaven. 
This is a familiar phrase among Catholics. ‘The symbol 
illustrates our faith. The palm of victory, too, is familiar. 
The meaning of the stars is clear. They shine only in the 
heavens, But the' full meaning of this symbol is found in 
the words of St. Paul: “I have fought a good fight, I have 
finished my course, I have kept the faith. As to the rest, 
there is laid up for me a crown of justice, which the Lord 
the just judge will render to me in that day" (2 Tim. 4, 7). 


Page 1264 (Picture)—-Tue SAINTS IN GLORY. The illustra- 
tion is taken from. a painting of Albrecht Dürer. It shows 


http://ccwatershed.org 


SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATIONS 1765 


the Saints in glory. God the Father, His Beloved Son and 
the Holy Spirit symbolized by the dove, are surrounded by 
& chorus of Angels. Virgins and Virgin Martyrs, representing 
those privileged souls who follow the Lamb singing a hymn 
Of praise that only Virgins can sing, occupy the left side of 
the middle tier. John the Baptist and Precursor, the Patri- 
archs and Prophets and Saints of the Old Testament are 
grouped together on the right side of the same tier. Saints 
of the New Dispensation who lived after Christ’s coming and 
from every walk of life are grouped in the third tier. They 
are looking up to Christ their Redeemer and beloved Master 
whom they have served so faithfully on earth. 


Page 1269 (Headpiece)—CoMMEMORATION OF ALL SOULS. 
There is only one source of salvation—the Sacrifice of Cal- 
vary. Behold then the "Lamb of God Who takest away the 
sins of the world.” Out of the depths of Purgatory the 
souls cry to Christ the Lamb slain yet eternally living—the 
beginning and end of salvation represented by the symbols 
Alpha, the first letter and the symbol Omega, the last letter 
of the Greek alphabet (Apoc. 22, 13). 


Page 1270 (Picture)—Forcer Me Nor AT THE DAILY SACRI- 
FICE. The artist has designed a symbolic picture to teach 
the universal efficacy of the Mass. At every Mass the 
heavens are opened not only to pour down benediction upon 
our earth, but to receive the march of souls liberated from 
Purgatory. This is happening all over the world “from tht 
rising of the sun to the going down” (Malachias 1, 11). All 
the poor souls are being saved in the name of Jesus which 
means savior. That is the meaning of the anchor and the 
monogram. The two globes portray the fulfillment of 
Malachias’ prophecy. The Father and the Holy Spirit co- 
operate in the daily Mass, which fact explains the hand 
from the clouds and the dove in the picture. In the center 
of the glory of heaven, the Lamb of God, slain but still 
living and standing upon the book whose seals He alone 
can loose, is surrounded by the choirs of Angels and Saints. 
The beautiful peacocks are used as a symbol of Christ’s 
divinity and immortality. Alpha and Omega, the initial and 
final letters of the Greek alphabet call to mind the truth 
in which we all sincerely trust—Christ is the beginning and 
final end of our salvation. 


Page 1298 (Tailpiece) —Tnr Securiry or OUR Farru. The 
meaning of the anchor in the church's symbolism is readily 
understood, It is the symbol of faith. Frequently the fish 
is used as a symbol of the faithful. The combination of the 
anchor and the fishes signifies the security of our faith. We 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1766 DESCRIPTIONS OF 


are anchored to Christ through faith. Faith is vision for 
the soul. The vision of eternal realities albeit in a dark 
manner and through a cloud. Therefore the rising sun in 
the background. The saints realized the security which 
faith gives a sincere soul. 


Page 1398 (Picture) —-THE MEDIATRIX OF ALL GRACES. The 
Blessed Virgin Mary is shown in her place in the mystic 
Body of Christ. Her title “Gate of Heaven” tells us her 
work as Mediatrix of All Graces. She stands at the portals 
of heaven clothed with the sun and the stars in her crown. 
She is Queen of Heaven (signified by the. monogram and 
crown). The four angels on the panels bear her titles. 
The mystic rose: she suffered; she was the sorrowful Mother. 
The Symbolic Lily (fleur-de-lis): she was free from all sin. 
The Morning Star: her glory in her Divine Child. The 
Star of the Sea: our guide o’er life’s tempestuous way. Her 
attitude is that of the orantes, as pictured in the catacombs; 
this is the position of prayer, like to that of the priest dur- 
ing the Canon of the Mass. The prayer of the church unites 
with her prayer. The dove resting on a pillar (right) de- 
velops the thought that Mary prays for all the faithful; the 
dove on the broken branch (left) proclaims the intention of 
Our Lady’s prayer—that all may enter Paradise. Cardinal 
Mercier’s favorite salutation for the Virgin was Mediatrix 
of All Graces. 


Page 1610 (Picture)—STs. Isaac JOGUES AND COMPANIONS. 
The eight Jesuit martyrs of North America are now enjoying 
the beatitude of heaven. They are close to Jesus whom they 
have loved and served even unto martyrdom. 'The name of 
Jesus sheds some of its glory upon these valiant men. Two 
angels with palms proclaim the victory of their fidelity. 

Standing, from left to right are: St. Gabriel Lalemant, 
St. René Goupil, St. Isaac Jogues, St. John Lalande, St. 
John de Brebeuf. Front row, kneeling, left to right: St. 
John Garnier, St. Anthony Daniel, St. Noel Chabanel. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Glossary of Liturgical Terms 


Abbot, the superior or head of 
a monastery for men. He is 
constituted as a blessed per- 
son by the ceremonial bless- 
ing given by the bishop; he 
uses Mitre and crozier and 
other episcopal insignia. 

Ablution, from the Latin word 
ablutio meaning washing. 
Term applied to the purify- 
ing of the priest’s fingers 
after the Communion in the 
Mass. 

Abstinence Days, when meat is 
not permitted. All Fridays 
of the year. 

Acolyte, highest of the Minor 
Orders. Office is to light can- 
dles and serve wine and 
water at Mass. Servers at the 
altar are generally called 
acolytes. 

Acta of St. Marcellus, a record 
(unauthentic) of the pro- 
ceedings of tbe trial and 
death of the Martyr St. Mar- 
cellus. Such records were 
usually made by notaries, 
di additions some- 
times were made by later 
hands. 

.Ad duas lauros on the Via Labi- 
cana, at the two laurels on 
the road to Labicum, a littie 
town between Tusculum and 
Praeneste; now called Co- 
lonna. 

Ad lunam, Church ad Lunam 
“at the place of the moon.” 
Why so called is not known. 

Advent, the Coming of Christ 
in grace.” The penitential 
season preparatory for His 
coming at Christmas. $ 

Agape, & feast of Charity in 
the primitive church at 
which contributions were 
made. Originally observed 
in remembrance of the Last 
Supper of Our Lord. 

Agnus Dei, triple prayer in the 
Mass, immediately preceding 
the Communion Prayers; oc- 
curs at the end of Litanies. 

Alb, a vestment of white linen 
reaching to the feet, worn 
at Mass. Symbolical of inno- 
cence of life, and of hope for 
eternity, 


Alleluia, 2. Hebrew word mean- 
ing “Praise the Lord.” Used 
in the Liturgy during joyful 
seasons. It is sung by angels 
in Heaven. (Apoc. 19, 1.) 

Amen, à Hebrew word meaning 
“so be it." Expresses assent 
to the prayer it follows. 

Amice, a rectangular piece of 
fine linen which the priest 
wears upon his shoulders 
during Mass. Helmet of sal- 
vation, protection against 
satan. . 

Antependium, from the Latin 
ante—before, pendium— 
hanging. A rich fabric hang- 
ing in front of the altar and 
varying with the color of the 
season. 

Antiphon, a verse or part of a 
verse sung or said before and 
after each psalm or division 
in the Divine Office. Varies 
with each feast and season. 

Antiphonary, a book containing 
the Chants for the Mass and 
Office; used by the chanters. 

Apostle, one of the twelve men 
chosen personally by Jesus 
to continue His work, and 
given a special mission. 

Apostoleion, Greek name for 
Church of the Twelve Apos- 
tles; one of the famous re- 
ligious edifices of Rome; 
completed in 564. 

Arch-basilica—a Major Basilica, 
Title of distinction given to 
certain churches by the 
Pope. Cfr. Basilica. 

Archipresbyteratus, Basilica “in 
Archipresbyteratw" was ded- 
icated to . Apollinaris, 
archpriest and patron Saint 
of Ravenna. 

Area Vindiciani, the fleld (per- 
haps the burying ground) of 
Vindicianus, in the village of 
Vindena (Terni). 

Asperges, a verse from Psalm 
50, recited by the priest while 
sprinkling the congregation 
with holy water before the 
Mass for the people on Sun- 
days. The entire ceremony 
is called the Asperges. 

Augustus lector de Belabru, Means 


1767 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1768 


Augustus reader, from the 
Marshes. 

Aula, a spacious room or hall. 

Aventine, one of seven hills 
upon which the ancient city 
of Rome was built. 

Baptistery, generally a building 
—baptistry, a section of 
church set aside for the 
baptismal font. À 

Basilica, from Greek basilike—a 
palace or royal building. A 
style of church architecture. 
Title of distinction given to 
some churches by the Pope. 

Basilica in aedibus sessoriis, orig- 
inally one of the halls of the 
Sessorian Palace. St. Helena, 
mother of Constantine the 
Great, adapted it as a church. 
to receive the relics of the 
true cross Which she brought 
from Jerusalem. Hence the 
names Basilica  Heleniana 
and Sancta Hierusalem (Je- 
rusalem). 

Basilica in exsquiliis, the Basilica 
on the Esquiline Hill, Rome. 

Basilica Salvatoris, "Basilica of 
our Blessed Savior’’ title 
given to St. John Lateran by 
Pope St. Sylvester. Other 
titles: Lateran Basilica, Ba- 
silica of Constantine. 

Biretta, originally an Italian 
term for an official ecclesias- 
tical cap worn by Western 
clergy. Varies in color ac- 
cording to grades of dignity. 

Burse, a square case for the 
corporal, made of the same 
material and color as the 
vestments. : 

Calvary, hill outside wall of 
Jerusalem; scene of Christ's 
crucifixion, 

Campus Martius, place of assem- 
bly for the ancient Roman 
people, near the Tiber. 

Canopy, à rectangular frame- 
work of rich cloth supported 
by poles and carried over 
the Blessed Sacrament in 
processions. Italians call it 
the baldacchino. 

Canon, the fixed and unchang- 
ing part of the Mass, between 
the Sanctus and the Pater 
Noster. 

Canticle, hymn taken from Holy 
Scripture, arranged for 
chanting and so used in Di- 
vine Service. F 

Carcere, St. Nicholas in, “St 


GLOSSARY OF LITURGICAL TERMS 


Nicholas by the Prison;" oc- 
cupies the site of pagan 
temples used as prisons un- 
der the Byzantine rule 
(about 550 A. D.). 

Catechumen, A person not bap- 
tized but taking instructions 
for Baptism. 

Caterina dei Funari, St. Cath- 
erine's of the rope-makers; a 
church still situated on the 
piazza dei Mattei, Rome, 

Centurion, à military Officer who 
commanded a hundred sol- 
diers in the Roman army. 

Chalice, à vessel of precious 
metal in the form of & cup 
having & stem with a knob 
and a base, consecrated by à 
bishop, to contain the Prec- 
ious Blood at Mass. 

Chalice Veil, a cloth which 
covers the chalice until the 
offertory, and after the 
Communion. It is made of 
the same material and color 
as the vestments. 

Chasuble, the outer, chief vest~ 
ment which the priest wears 
at ; & symbol of protec- 
tion, a "little house." 

Chrism, oil mixed with balm 
used in Baptism, Confirma- 
tion, Holy Orders and other 
Consecrations. 

Ciborium, à vessel of precious 
metal for containing the 
consecrated Hosts. Similar 
to the Chalice, but having a 
cover surmounted by a cross. 

Cincture, a cord of linen worn 
about the waist to confine 
the Alb. Symbol of faith 
and chastity. 

Coelian, one of seven hills upon 
which the ancient city of 
Rome was founded. 


Collect, from Latin collecta—a 
gathering of people. In early 
Christian times the faithful 
met at an appointed church 
to pray before forming the 
procession to 2 Basilica in 
Rome where the statlonal 
Mass was offered. The Bishop 
present, summed up the pe- 
titions and sentiments of 
the people in a short prayer 
which came to be called the 
“Collect.” 

Commemoration, the act of call- 
ing to remembrance. When 
two feasts of unequal rank 
fall on the same day c čom- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GLOSSARY OF LITURGICAL TERMS 


memoration of the feast of 

rank is Made in the 
Office and Mass. 

Common, Masses and Prayers 
in honor of & particular kind 
or class of Saints, as Martyrs, 
Confessors, Virgins, etc. 
Common of Saints. 

Communicantes, opening word of 
a prayer in the Canon of the 
Mass asking God to remem- 
ber the merits and hear the 
prayers of the Blessed Virgin 
and the Saints for our help. 

Communion, vestige of a chant 
formerly rendered while Holy 
Communion was being dis- 
tributed to the faithful. 

Confessor, one who suffered for 
the faith or:who practised 
virtue in a heroic degree. - 

Confiteor, "I confess to Al- 
mighty God, etc.” The act 
of contrition seid at the foot 
of the altar before Mass. 
Dates back to 13th century. 

Consecration, the words of the 

.priest which change the 
bread and wine into the 
Body and.Blood of our Lord; 
the part of the Mass in which 
these words are said. 

Cope, an ample vestment, vary- 
ing in color, and reaching to 
the feet, with a hood hang- 
ing from the shoulders. Worn 
in most Solemn Ceremonies, 
but not at Mass. Formerly a, 
protection against rain, in 
outdoor processions. 

Corporal, a square linen cloth 
upon which the chalice and 
the consecrated Host are 
placed during Mass. 

Corpus Christi, Latin for “Body 
of Christ.” A feast in honor 
of the Blessed Sacrament. 

Credence, à small table to right 
of Altar, upon which are 
placed the cruets, basin, fin- 
ger-towel and other requi- 
sites for Mass and other cere- 
monles. 

Creed, the public and solemn 
profession of Falth said or 
gung beforé the Offertory of 
the Mass, The Nicene Creed 
is used in the Mass; the 
Creed is omitted in some 
Masses. 

Cruets, small vessels of glass or 
metal for the wine and water 
used in Holy Mass. - 

Cubicula, the burial chambers 
in the ancient catacombs. 


1769 


Cultus, a Latin word meaning 
“worship or veneration. 

Dalmatic, the distinctive vest- 
ment of the Deacon at High 
Mass. 

Deacon, the second of the Ma- 
Jor Orders. He may baptize, 
preach and distribute Holy 
Communion. At High Mass 
the deacon sings the Gospel 
and assists the priest. 

Deaconry, office of deacon or 
Geaconess; house for use of 
deacons or deaconesses. 
Group of Deacons collec- 
tively. . 

Doctor, oné singled out for his 
defense or exposition of the 
teachings of the Church. 

Dominica in .albis from the 
phrase “in albis depositis" 
referring to the ceremony of 
laying aside the white bap- 
tismal robe which the neo- 
phytes (recently baptized) 
Wore during the week fol- 
lowing Easter Sunday. 

Domus, house or. home. wa 

Double, term to specify „the 
rank of a feast. Determines 
the number of commemora- 
tions permitted in Mass. On 
2 Double, the Antiphons in 
the Office are intoned in 
their entirety. E 

Double Major, designation of 
the rank of a feast. See Study 
' Plan, page 50. 

Double Minor, designation of 
the rank of ' a feast. See 
Study Plan, page 50. 

Doxology, a formula: of praise 
to the Blessed Trinity as: 
Eid be to the Father, 
ete?” > E 

Elevation, raising of the Host 
and Chalice after Consecra- 
tion for the adoration of the 
faithful, . 

Ember Days, the Wednesday, 
Friday and Saturday follow- 
ing the first Sunday in Lent, 
Whitsunday, the Exaltation 
of the Cross, and the third 
Sunday in Advent. They are 
days of fasting and prayer 
to ask for God's blessing on 
the ordination of the clergy, 
held during these seasons. 

Epiphany, Greek for “‘manifes- 
tation." Feast observed on 
January sixth to commemo- 
rate the finding of our 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1770 


Blessed Lord by the Magi in 
the stable at Bethlehem. 

Epistle, the selection of Holy 
Scriptures, read between the 
Collect, or Prayer and the 
Gospel of the Mass, 

Esquiline, one of the seven hills 
upon which the ancient city 
of Rome was founded. 

Eucharistia Lucernaris, à vestige 
of the Jewish practice of 
lighting a lamp on the eve- 
ning of the Sabbath and in- 
corporated into the early 
Christian Liturgy. Note the 
incident in the Acts of the 
Apostles 20, 8, when St, Paul 
gathered the faithful to- 
gether towards the end of 
the day in some wealthy per- 
son’s house, where, having 
lighted the ritual lamp, they 
preached, prayed and cele- 
brated the eucharistic agape. 

Exorcist, one of the Minor Or- 
ders. Formerly charged with 
the office of expelling the 
devil. 

Feria, a week day to which no 
feast or vigil of a feast is 
assigned. 

Forum olitorium, ancient vege- 
table market of Rome. 

Girdle, see cincture. 

Gloria, the Church’s greatest 
hymn of praise. The first 
‘words are from the hymn 
the Angels sang on the night 
of Our Divine Saviour's 
birth 


Gospel, Latin evangelium 
means “good news.” The se- 
lection from the Holy Gos- 
pels read in Mass. 

Golgotha, a Hebrew word mean- 
ing “skull.” Name for Mount 
Calvary scene of Christ's 
death. 

Gradual, select verses of Scrip- 
ture said or sung after the 
Epistle at Mass. 

Hosanna, Hebrew word from 
Psalm 118, meaning “God 
save him." The acclamation. 
of joy with which the Jews 
met our Lord as he entered 
Jerusalem on Palm Sunday. 

Host, the unleavened bread 
which is offered.and conse- 
crated at Mass. Christ pres- 
ent under the appearance of 
bread after the Consecration. 

Hyssop, an aromatic plant. 
Used by Jewish High Priest 


GLOSSARY OF LITURGICAL TERMS 


as an aspergile in certain 
religious ceremonies. 

In aperitione aurium, “the open- 
ing of the ears.” Refers to 
the miracle Christ worked 
upon the deaf man. The 
ceremonies of the Wednes- 
day after the fourth Sun- 
day in Lent were called in 
aperitione aurium. 

In Caelio monte, “on the Coe- 
lian Hill" one of the seven 
hills of ancient Rome. 

In hoc signo vinces, “in this sign. 
conquer," ` 

In Macello Liviae, near the 
meat-market of Livia. 

In piscibus, close to tbe old 
fish-market within the an- 
cient Portico of Octavia. 

Incense, a mixture of spices and 
gums burned to give off a 
sweet odor during ceremo- 
nies of the Church. Symbolic 
of prayer ascending to the 
throne of God. 

Introit, from the Latin introit 
-—“he enters.” In the early 
Church the Introit, usually 
a selection from Holy Scrip- 
ture, was chanted while the 
priest and his attendants 
Were going in procession to 
the altar; it is the first part 
of Mass read from the Missal 
by the priest at the altar. 

Kyrie eleison, “Lord have mercy 
upon us;” the original Greek, 
stil retained in the Mass 
and in Litanies. 

Lateran, Basilica of St. John; 
scene of five General Coun- 
cils; cathedral church of 

Rome. 

Lavabo, from the Latin lavabo 
—"T will wash.” The wash- 
ing of the priest’s hands be- 
fore the Secret and Preface 
in the Mass is called the 
Lavabo, from the first word 
of Psaim 25 which he says. 

Lectionary, a collection of read- 
ings from the Scriptures, the 
writings of the Fathers, or 
the lives of the Saints, used 
in public and in private ser- 
vices, Known among Greek 
Liturgical books as the An- 
agnosis. i 

Lent, the forty days fast before 
Easter, beginning on Ash 
Wednesday, 


Sundays ex- 
cluded. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GLOSSARY OF LITURGICAL TERMS 


Lesson, the name given to the 
extracts from the Scriptures 
read after the Collect of the 
Mass. 

Levite, a deacon in the early 
church. In the Old Testa- 
ment, one of the priestly 
tribe of Levi. 

Limbo, where the Souls of un- 
baptized infants spend their 
eternity of natural happiness 
without seeing God. Souls 
of saints who died before 
Christ were detained in 
„Limbo until the Ascension. 

Liturgy, from the Greek leiton 
— public, ergon — work or 
service. The official public 
worship of the Church. 

Lucernate, see Eucharistia Lu- 
cernaris. 

Lucernarium, 
Lucernaris. 

Lucina, St. Lawrence in, Church 
of ancient origin. Thought 
to have been the house of 
a Christian lady Lucina. 

Magi, the Wise Men who came 
from the East to worship the 
Infant Jesus at Bethlehem. 
An ancient tradition classes 
them as kings and puts their 
number at three. The origin 
of this tradition, and the 
names Gaspar, Melchior and 
Baltassar, are hard to estab- 
lish. : 

Magnificat, Canticle of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary, sung at 
Vespers. (Luke I, 46-55.) 

Maniple, Vestment worn on the 
left arm of the priest at 
Mass. Not worn by any one 
not in the order of the sub- 
deacon. Signifies labor and 
the fruit thereof. 

Martyres, St. Mary ad, the Pan- 
theon, ancient Roman 
temple built in 27 B. c.; con- 
verted into a Christian 
church in 610 by Pope St. 
Boniface IV and dedicated to 
All Saints. 

Martyrology, catalogue of Mar- 
tyrs and Saints. arranged in 
a calendar according to date 
of feasts. Originated in the 
early Church, 

Maundy Thursday, Thursday in 
Holy Week. The day on 
which Our Lord instituted 
the Holy Eucharist. 

Mass, from the words of dis- 
missal at the end of the 


see Eucharistia 


1771 


Mass: Ite missa est—"go the 
Mass is finished." 

Menology, calendar containing 
the names and short. 
Sketches of the Lives of the 
Saints. . 

Mense Decembri, in the month 
of December. : 

Missal, a ltturgical book con- 
taining the Ordinary and. 
Proper parts of the Mass. 

Mithras, à pagan divinity, mid- 
way between God and man, 
sun-god, a divinity of fidel- 
ity, manliness and bravery 
who floats midway between 
upper heaven and the earth, 
and who protects man. His 
cult was introduced into 
Rome after the Roman in- 
vasion of Asia Minor (346- 
395 A. D.). 

Mitre, head dress worn by Bis- 
hops, Abbots, and some 
others. 

Natalis, the day of death mark- 
ing one’s entrance into 
heaven or “birthday” (na- 
talitia) among the Saints. 
The actual nativity or 
earthly birth is celebrated 
only of the Blessed Virgin, 

: Bt. John the Baptist, and 
St. Mary Magdalen. 

Neophyte, one recently ad- 
mitted to the Church by 
the Sacrament of Baptism. 
A convert, not long in the 
Church, 

Oblation, the act of offering, in. 
4 sacrifice. The object of- 
fered also called an obla- 
tion. 

Octave, the continuous celebra- 
tion of a feast for eight days. 

Offertory, the offering of the 
bread and wine in the Mass, 
after the Gospel. 

Offertory, verse of & Psalm or 
excerpt from Holy Scripture, 
Said by the priest before the 
offering, or sung by the choir 
during the offering of the 
bread and wine. 

Oration, from Latin oratio— 
meaning a prayer, 

Oratory, small chapel or room 
for prayer or private devo- 
tions. ; 

Ordinary, that part of the mis- 
$81 which contains the un- 
changing parts of the Mass. 

Ordines Romani, early Roman 
ritual prescribing appropri- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1772 GLOSSARY OF LITURGICAL TERMS 


ate chants and lessons for, 
and the order of various 
liturgical ceremonies. 

Pall, a square, pocket shaped 
piece of linen with a card- 
board inserted in order to 
stiffen it. It is placed over 
the chalice to prevent dust or 
‘other matter from falling 
into it. ' 

Pallacinis, St. Mark in; rich and 
beautiful Church of St. 
Mark behind the Venetian 
Palace, Rome. Dates from the 
fourth century. " 

Palm, the emblem of martyr- 
dom and in general of heav- 
enly reward. . 

Pammachius, Title of, Church of 
Sts. John and Paul originally 
the house of these two Saints 
and scene of their martyr- 
dom. St. Pammachius 
wealthy senator and friend 
of St. Jerome, had the old 
building filled in and built 
another church over it. This 
last is known as the Titulus 
Pammachii or Title of St. 
Pammachius. 

Panisperna, St. Lawrence in, curi- 
ous name probably derived 
from Perpenna Quadratus, 
&n officer of Constantine, of 
whom an inscribed tablet 
was found in the nearby 
garden, : 

Paraclete, Latin paraclitus— 
consoler. Title of the great 
Consoler the Holy Spirit. 

Parousia, the last coming of 
Christ to Judge all men. 

Paschal Time, that portion of 
the liturgical year which ex- 
tends from Easter Sunday to 
the Octave of Pentecost- 
Trinity Sunday. s 

Passion-tide, the time between 
Passion Sunday and Holy 
Saturday. 

Pastor Ecclesiae, another title 
for St. Peters, Rome; the 
sheepfold of the Roman 
flock. Pastor means shepherd 
— St. Peter was the first 
shepherd of Christ's flock— 
the faithful. 

Paten, à plate of gold or:silver 
on which the large altar 
-bread for consecration rests 
until the Offertory. After the 
Pater Noster the consecrated 
host is upon the paten until 


the Domine, non sum dig- 
nus. 

Pater Noster, opening words of 
the Our Father, or Lord’s 
Prayer, said or sung at the 
end of the canon, just be- 
fort the consecrated host is 
put upon the paten. 

Pax, Latin word meaning 
"Peace." Name for ceremony 

‘in High Mass called “Kiss 
‘of Peace,” 

Pentecost, the Sunday which 
marks the 50th day after 
Easter. A feast of the Church 
commemorating the Descent 
of the Holy Ghost upon the 
Apostles in the form of fiery 
tongues. 

Pons Senatorum, possibly the 
bridge over which Senators 
passed one by one to deposit 
their votes. i 

Pontifical, relating to Bishops; 
a book containing the ritual 
of Episcopal ceremonies, 
Called in Latin Liber Pon- 
tificalis. 

Postcommunion, a prayer said 
immediately after the Com- 
munion, in thanksgiving. Tt 
invariably begs of God some 
grace or favor. ` 

Praeconium, officially heralded 

e 


praise. 

Preface, the prayer which in- 
troduces the Canon of the 
Mass, and which terminates 
with the Sanctus. 

Presbyter, Greek word for 
priest. A 
Prope Martyribus, title of St. 

Sylvester who was “nearly 
one of the martyrs." One of 
the first venerated as a saint 
who had not died as a 

martyr. . 

Proper, the changing parts in 
the Mass which. are assigned 
to a particular Sunday or 
of to is the Greek 

Proto-martyr, proto is the Gree 
for "the first," St. Stephen 
was the first Martyr of the 
Christian: Church. 

Prototype, an original or model 
after which something is 
copied. . 

Psalm, a sacred song or hymn 
composed on a divine or 
sacred theme, haviug.for its 
Object the praise or adora- 
tion of God, thanksgiving or 
petition, Strictly, one of the 


http://ccwatershed.org 


teh. 


GLOSSARY OF LITURGICAL TERMS 


150 inspired songs of the 
Psalter or Old Testament 
Book of Psalms. 

Pudentiana, Church of St. Pu- 
dentiana was originally the 
senatorial palace of Pudens, 
where St. Peter lived and 
exercised his sacred office for 
Several years. Hence at one 
time this church was popu- 
larly known as the “Cradle 
of the Western Church." 
Pope St. Pius I in 145, con- 
verted it into an oratory 
known as the Titulus Pas- 
toris in memory of the Pope's 
brother Hermas, author of 
the book “Pastor Hermas." 

Purificator, à linen cloth used 
for wiping the chalice, the 
fingers and lips of the cele- 
brant after Communion. 

Quadragesima, Lent; fortieth 
day before Easter. Days 
within this period are said 
to be in Quadragesima, e.g., 
Dret Sunday in Quadrage- 


ma. 

Quinquagesima, the Sunday be- 
fore the be g of Lent; 
marks the fiftieth day be- 
fore Easter. 

Reader, the second minor or- 
der, ranking below Exorcist; 
called in Latin, lector, 

Regio, Latin for vicinity or 
neighborhood; & district. 

Regio ad Montes, 1n the vicinity 
Of the Viminal Hill. 

Repository, 2 tabernacle. Altar 
of repose for Sacred Host 
cue hours of Holy Thurs- 

y. 

Rogation Days, on which solemn 
penitential processions are 
held—three days preceding 
Ascension. Originated in 
sixth century, France, dur- 
ing public calamities. Roga- 
tion Mass points to efficacy 
of prayer. 

Rubrics, directions for the pro- 
cedure of ceremonies. Found 
in all liturgical books; called 
rubrics because printed in 
red. 

Sancta Maria domnae Rosae, orig- 
inal name of Santa Caterina 
dei Funari, “St. Catherine’s 
of the Rope-makers.” Named 
after the foundress of the 
Church—lady Rose who lived 
1n the 10th century. 

Sanctus, 8t end of Preface; 


1773 


words of the Seraphim: 
“Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord 
God," etc. and the shouts 
of triumph upon Christ's 
entry into Jerusalem, “Ho- 
sanna," etc. 

Schola Cantorum, à select body 
of chanters. 

Scrutinies, in Lent examinations 
of catechumens who were to 
receive Baptism on Easter. 

Secret, oratio super oblata se- 
creta—“secret prayer over 
the offerings; this prayer is 
said silently by the priest. 
The Latin phrase might be 
rendered—“prayer over the 
concealed offerings” (con- 
cealed from the eyes of the 
unbaptized) having refer- 
ence to the practice of al- 
lowing only the falthful to 
attend the rest of the Mass 
from the Offertory. Allcate- 
chumens were dismissed 
after the Credo. In the early 
church only the baptized 
were permitted to remain 
for the entire Mass. 


` Semi-double, designation of the 
rank 


of a feast. See Study 
Pian, page 50. 

Septuagesima, third Sunday be- 
fore the beg of Lent, 
within the period of seventy 
days before Easter. 

Sequence, measured verse or 
prose set to simple chant 
melodies following the Grad- 
ual of the Mass. Five remain 
in our Liturgical year. 

Sexagesima, the Sunday which 
occurs about sixty days be- 
fore Easter. Sezagesima— 
“sixtieth.” 

Simple, the lowest in rank in 
the designation of feasts. 
See Study Plan, page 50. 

Speciosa, splendid, beautiful. 
Basilica of St. Lawrence in 
Panisperna called the Speci- 
osa by Gregory II because of 
its splendor and majesty. 

Station or statio; Church to 
which Christians went in 
procession to join in the 
Mass. celebrated by the bis- 
hop. Daily custom during 
seasons of Advent and Lent. 

Stole, originally a sort of cloak, 
now & long narrow band 
worn around the neck and 
crossed on the breast. Made 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1774 


of same material and color 
as corresponding vestments. 

‘Sub-deacon, the lowest of Ma- 
jor Orders. He serves the 
deacon at the altar, and 
sings the Epistle. 

Synaxis, a term used in the 
Eastern church to signify an 
Assembly for Worship. 

‘Tabernacle, from Latin taber- 
naculum—a tent. Receptacle 
on center of altar for reserva- 
tion of Blessed Sacrament; 
it should be lined with silk 
and covered with a veil. 

"Templum Romuli, ancient 
temple of Romulus the leg- 
endary founder and first 
king of Rome. He was deified 
by the pagan Romans. 

"Templum sacrae urbis, temple of 
the sacred city of pagan 
Rome where the archives of 
tbe Censor, municipal plans 
and the registration lists 

. were probably kept. 

Tenebrae, Latin for “darkness.” 
The public recitation of 
Matins and Lauds of the Di- 
vine Office on the evenings 
of Wednesday, Thursday and 
Friday, in Holy Week. 

‘Thurible, vessel in which in- 
cense is burned; used in 
solemn ceremonies of the 
Church. 

‘Titular, bearing a name or title 
related to or arising from & 
sacred person: or thing. 

"Titulus, an.honorable appella- 
tion or designation; used to 
denote the Saint or mystery 
to which a Church is dedi- 
cated, or the right of 2 

‘Church or its reason for 
existing; also form of sup- 
port to which an ecclesiastic 
is ordained. 

Titulus Balbinae, the Church of 
St. Balbina founded by the 
matron Balbina who con- 
verted her own palace into 

'& church. Originally the 
title commemorated this 
matron’s charity. 

"Fitulus Caeciliae, Church dedi- 
cated to St. Cecilia, situated 
across the Tiber river from 
St. Peter's. 

"Titulus Equitii, “Church of 
Equitius,” a priest on whose 
Property St. Martin’s ad 
montes (on the Esquiline 
Hill) was built. 


GLOSSARY OF LITURGICAL TERMS 


Titulus Caii, the Church of St. 
Susanna bore this title after 
Pope St. Caius who per- 
formed the dedication. 

Titulus Marcelli, one of the old- 
est parishes of Rome; dates 
from 308 when Pope St. Mar- 
cellus opened an oratory in 
the house of the devout lady 
Lucina. -` 

Titulus sancti Pudentis, see Pu- 
dentiana. 

Tonsure, the crown formed by 
shaving the upper part of 
the head; distinctive mark 
of clerics and religious. Also, 
the ceremony of cutting the 
hair by which a bishop ad- 
mits a candidate to the 
clerical state. 

Tract, verses from the Psalms, 
sung instead of the Gradual 
in the ferial Masses from 
Septuagesima to Easter. 

Transpontina, St. Mary in, an- 
cient church of St. Mary 
across the river Tiber from 
the principal part of the 
city, not far from the bridge, 
on the same side as St. 
Peter's. It stood close to the 
Castel St. Angelo. Demol- 
ished by Pope Pius IV in 
1514. 

Trastevere, St. Mary in, St. Mary’s 
“across the Tiber River” is 
one of the most venerable of 
all Christian Churches. All 
the region west of the Tiber 
is called Trastevere. 

Trisagion, threefold praise of 
God, “Holy God, Strong God, 
Immortal God,” recited and 
sung in Greek and Latin 
during the adoration of the 
Cross on Good Friday. 

Tunic, outer vestment worn by 
the Subdeacon and Deacon 
at High Mass. A dalmatic, 
also the ordinary dress of 
certain religious orders, cor- 
responding to the cassock, 

Velabro, St. George in, “St. 
George in the Marshes.” 
Velabrum name of a marsh 
caused by floods of the Tiber 
before its confining walls 
were built. 

Versicle, an abbreviated Verse. 
Usually followed by a Re- 
sponse. 

Vespers, one of the divisions of 
the Divine Office; evensong, 
the “hour of the lamns.” 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GLOSSARY OF LITURGICAL TERMS 


Via Appia, St. Paul walked 
down the Appian way_when 
he was led prisoner to Rome. 
Houses of the wealthy Ro- 
mans stood along this way 
during the days of the Cae- 
sars. Church of Pope St. 
Sixtus II, once so rich in 
holy memories, is now bare 
and forlorn. Its ancient name 
was Titulus Tigridae after 
the name of a Roman Lady 
upon whose property the 
church was built. 

Via Lata, “the broad way.” One 
of the many ancient Roman 
roads. 

Via Ostiensis, Roman road—Os- 
tian way; the road leading 
to Ostia where the Tiber 
flows into the sea. 

Via Salaria, the catacomb of 
St. Priscilla on the Via Sa- 
laria Nova; most ancient and 
important of all early Chris- 
tian cemeteries. Pope St. 
Sylvester erected a small 
basilica over it and had 
many bodies of Saints trans- 
ferred into it from cata- 
combs below. 


1775 


Vidi Aquam, Antiphon substi- 
tuted, during  Eastertide, 
for the “Asperges.” 

Vigil, watching; the eve of a 
festival. 

Vigiles, ancient Roman mill- 
tary guardsmen, 

Viminal, one of the seven hills 
upon which the ancient city 
of Rome was founded. 

Vinculis, St. Peter in, Church of 
St. Peter in Chains. Built in 
442 by Eudoxia Licinia, wife 
of Valentinian III She 
placed here the chain with 
which St. Peter had been 
bound in prison at Rome. 


Votive, à, Mass other than that 
of the day; in honor of some 
mystery or Saint. 

Wednesday "in Mediana," has 
reference to the examina- 
tions held in the middle of 
Lent for the catechumens 
preparing for Baptism. The 
ceremony is called in aperi- 
tione aurium, “the opening 
of the ears.” 

Whitsunday, same as Pentecost. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


The Calendar 


The following abbreviations have been made use of in the 
calendar of this Missal: 


Ab., Abbot. Ev., Evangelist. d. 1. cl., , Double of 

AP., , Apostle. M., Martyr. the First Class. 
APP., Apostles. Mm., Martyrs. d. 2. cl., rat abie of 

Archd., Archdiocese. P., Pope. . ,,Becond Class. 

B., Bishop. Pp., Popes. ; Double Major 

Bb. Bishops. V., Virgin. : ám Double. 

C., Confessor. Vv., Virgins. 8., Simple, 

D., Doctor of the W., Widow. sd., Seit double. 
Church. Dioc., Diocese. Oct., Octave. 


Feasts proper to the United States are indicated in the fol- 
lowing Caléndar thus: (U. S.—St. N. N.) We insert them for 
the convenience of the SEIS in our couniry. They can 
readily find these Masses proper to the various dioceses in 
which they live. 


JANUARY 


1. THE CIRCUMCISION OF OUR LORD, and Octave of 
the Nativity, d. 2. cl. 

Sunday between Circumcision and Epiphany. ‘THE Most 
Hory NAME or Jesus, d. 2. cl. (Celebrated on Jan. 2 
if no Sunday occur.) 

. Octave of St. Stephen, Protomartyr, s. ` 

. Octave of St. John, Apos. and Evang., S. 

` Octave of Holy Innocents, Mm. s. 

Vigil of Epiphany, sd.—St. Telesphorus, P. M. 

THE EPIPHANY OF OUR Lorp, d. i. cl. with priv. Oct. of 
the second order. 

Sunday within the Octave of Epiphany, The Holy 
Family, Jesus, Mary and Joseph, dm. 

7. Of the Octave. sd. 

8. Of the Octave. sd. 

9. Of the Octave. sd. 

10. Of the Octave. sd. 

11. Of the Octave. sd.—St. Hyginus, P. M. 

12. Of the Octave. sd. 

13. Octave of the Epiphany. dm. 

14. St. Hilary, B. C. D. d.—St. Felix, Priest and M. 

15. St. Paul the First Hermit, C. d.—St. Maurus, Ab. 

16. St. Marcellus, I, P. M. sd. 

17. St. Antony, Ab. d. 

18. St. Peter's Chair at Rome, dm.—St. Paul and St. Prisca, 

V. M. 
19. Sts. Marius and Comp. Mm. s.—St. Canute, ‘King, M— 
(U. S. Dioc. Brooklyn—The Holy Family). 
20. Sts. Fabian P., and Sebastian, Mm. d. 
21. St. Agnes, V. M. d. 


OMRON 


1777 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1778 THE CALENDAR 


22. 
23. 


24. 
25. 
26. 
21. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 


Suey br 


28. 


Sts. Vincent and Anastasius, Mm. sd. 

St. Raymund de Pennafort, C.sd—St. Emerentiana, 
V. M. 

St. Timothy, B. M. d. 

The Conversion of St. Paul, Ap. dm.—St. Peter, Ap. 

St. Polycarp, B. M. d. : 

St. John Chrysostom, B. C. D. d. 

St. Peter Nolasco, C. d—St. Agnes, V. M. (1) secundo. s. 

St. Francis de Sales, B. C. D. d. f 

St. Martina, V. M. sd. 

St. John Bosco, C. d. 


FEBRUARY 


St. Ignatius, B. M. d.—(U. S.—St. Brigid, V.) 

THE PURIFICATION OF Our Lapy. d. 2. cl. 

St. Blaise, B. M. s. 

St. Andrew Corsini, B. C. d. 

St. Agatha, V. M. d—(U. S. Archd. Baltimore, Dioc, Los 
Angeles—St. Philip of Jesus, M.) 

St. Titus, B. C. d.—St. Dorothy, V. M. 

St. Romuald, Ab. d. 

St. John of Matha, C. d. 

St. Cyril of Alexandria, B. C. Dd.—St. Apollonia, V. M. 

St. Scholostica, V. d. 

Our Lady of Lourdes, dm. 

The Holy Seven Founders of the Servite Order, Con- 
fessors, d. 


St. Valentine, Priest and M. s. 
Sts. Faustinus and Jovita, Mm. s. 


. St. Simeon, B. M. s. 


. St. Peter's Chair at Antioch, dm.—St. Paul, Ap. 
. St. Peter Damian, B. C. D. d.—Vigil of St. Matthias. 
. Gr. MATTHIAS, Ap. d. 2. cl. 


St. Gabriel of Our Lady of Sorrows, C., d. 


(In leap-year the feast of St. Matthias is kept on Feb. 25; 
and any feasts that may follow to the end of the month are 
each postponed one day.) 


1. 
2. 


MARCH 


http://ccwatershed.org 


d, 


THE CALENDAR 1779 


ist. Casimir, C. sd.—St. Lucius L, P. M. 


j. Sts. Perpetua and Felicitas, Mm. d. 
fi, St. Thomas Aquinas, C, D. d. 

f 8. St. John of God, C. d. 

9. St. Frances of Rome, W. d. 


f 10. The Holy Forty Martyrs, sd. 


12. St. Gregory the Great, P. C. D. d. 


17. St. Patrick, B. C. d. 
18. St. Cyril of Jerusalem, B. C. D. d. 
19. Sr. Joserm, Srouse or Our Lapy, C. d. 1 cl. 


21. St. Benedict, Ab. dm. 
22. St. Isidore, the Farmer, C. dm. 


24. St. Gabriel the Archangel, dm. 
25. THE ANNUNCIATION, B. V. M. d. 1 cl, 


27. St. John Damascene, C. D. d. 
28. St. John Capistran, C. sd. 


Friday after Passion Sunday. The Seven. Dolors of our 
Lady. dm. i 


APRIL 


St. Francis of Paula, C. d. 
St. Isidore, B. C. D. d. 


St. Vincent Ferrer, C. d.—(U. S. Dioc. Portland—Blessed 
Juliana of Cornillon, V.) 


11. St. Leo the Great, P. C. D. d. 
13. St. Hermenegild, M. sd. 


14. St. Justin, M. d.—Sts. Tiburtius, Valerian and Maxi- 
mus, Mm. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1780 THE CALENDAR | 


x 
\ 
l7. St. Anicetus, P. M. S. . 1 


21. St. Anselm, B. C. D. d. ` 


22. Sts. Soter and Cajus, Pp. Mm. sd. 

23. St. George, M. sd. 

24. St. Fidelis of Sigmaringen, M. d. 

25. ST. Mark THE EVANGELIST. d. 2 cl. 

26. Sts. Cletus and Marcellinus, Pp. Mm. sd.—(U. S.—Our 
Lady of Good Counsel). 

27. St. Peter Canisius, C. D. d.—(U. S. Archd. Baltimore, 
San Francisco, Diocese Los Angeles—St. Thuribius of 
Mogrovejo, B. C.). 

28. St. Paul of the Cross, e d.—St. Vitalis, M. 

29. St. Peter, M. d. 

30. St. Catharine of Siena, v. d. 

Wednesday before the Third Sunday after Easter. THE 
SOLEMNITY OF Sr. JOSEPH, SPOUSE OF Our Lapy AND PA- 
TRON OF THE UNIVERSAL CHURCH, C. d. 1 cl. with common 
Octave. 

Wednesday before the Fourth Sunday ajter Easter. Oc- 
tave of the Solemnity of St. Joseph, dm. 


MAY 


Sts. PHILIP AND JAMES, App. d. 2 cl. 

St. Athanasius, B. C. D. d. 

THE FINDING OF THE HoLy Cross. d. 2 cl.—St. Alexander 
I, P. and Comp., Mm. 

St. Monica, W. d. 

St. Pius V, P. C. d. 

St. John, Ap., before the Latin Gate. dm. 

St. Stanislaus, B. M. d. 

The Apparition of St. Michael the Archangel, dm. 

St. Gregory Nazianzen, B. C. D. d. 

10. $t. Antoninus, B. C. d.—Sts. Gordian and Epimachus, 

Mm. 


OHNA wh 


12. Sts. Nereus and Others, Mm. sd. 

13. St. Robert Bellarmine, B. C. D. d. 

14. St. Boniface, M. s. 

15. St. John Baptist de la Salle, C. d. 

16. St. Ubaldus, B. C. sd.—(U. S.—St. John Nepomucene, 
M.—St. Brendan, Ab.). 

17. St. Paschal Baylon, C. d. 

18. St. Venantius, M. d. 

19. St. Peter Celestine, P. C. d—St. Pudentiana, V. 

20. St. Bernardine of Siena, C. sd. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
21. 
28. 
29. 
30. 


31. 


THE CALENDAR 1781 


(U. S.—St, Rita of Cassia, W.). 
(U. S. Dioc, Los Angeles—St. John Baptist de Rossi, C.). 


St. Gregory VII, P. C. d—St. Urban I, P. M. 

St. Philip Neri, C. d-—-St. Eleutherius, P. M 

St. Bede, C, D. d.—$t. John I, P. M. 

St. Augustine of Centerbury, B. C. d. 

St. Mary Magdalen de Pazzi, V. sd. 

St. Felix I, P. M. s—(U. S. Dioc. San Antonio—St. 
Ferdinand, King, C.). 

FEAST OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN Mary, QUEEN, d. 2 cl. - St. 
Petronilla, V 


Friday after the Octave-day of Corpus Christi. Tug Most 
Sacrep Heart or JESUS, d. 1 cl. 


1. 


St. Angela Merici, V d. 
Sts. Marcellinus, B., Peter, and Erasmus, Mm. s. 


St. Francis Caracciolo, C. d. 
St. Boniface, B. M. d. 
St. Norbert, B. C. d. 


Sts. Primus and Felician, Mm. s.—(U. S.—St. Columba, 
Ab.). 
St. Margaret, Queen, W. sd. 


. St. Barnabas, Ap. dm. 
. St. John of St. Facundus, C. d—Sts. Basilides and 


Others, Mm. 
St. Anthony of Padua, C. D. d. 
St. Basil the Great, B. C. D. d. 
St. Vitus and Others, Mm. s. 


. (U. S. Dioc. Kansas City—St. John Francis Regis, C.). 


St. Ephrem, Deacon, C. D. d.—Sts. Mark, Marcellian, 
Mm. 

St. Juliana Falconieri, V. d—Sts. Gervase and Protase, 
Mm. 

St. Silverius, P. M. s. 


. St. Aloysius, C. d. 
. St. Paulinus, B. C. d. 
. Vigil of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist. 


THe NarivirY or ST. JOHN THE Baptist, d. 1 cl. with 
Common Octave. 

St. William, Ab. d.—Commemoration of the Octave of 
St. John the Baptist. 


. Sts. John and Paul Mm. d.—Commemoration of the 


Octave of St. John the Baptist. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1782 THE CALENDAR 


27. Of the Octave of St. John the Baptist, sd.—(U. S, Dioc. 

Concordia—Our Lady of Perpetual Succor). 

28. St. Ireneus, B. M. d—Octave of St. John the Baptist, 
and Vigil of Sts. Peter and Paul. 

29. STs. PETER AND PAUL, App., d. 1 cl. with common Octave. 

30. Commemoration of St. Paul, Ap., dm.—Commemoration 
of St. Peter the Apostle, and of the Octave of St. 
John the Baptist. 


JULY 


1. Tue Most Precious BLoop, d. 1 cl—Commemoration of 
the Octave-day of St. John. 

2. THE VISITATION OF OUR Lapy. d. 2 cl.—Sts. Processus and 
Martinian, Mm. 

3. St. Leo Ii, P. C. sd.—Commemoration of the Octave of 
Sts. Peter and Paul—(U. S. Dioc. Brooklyn, Los 
Angeles—Commemoration of All Holy Popes). 

4. Of the Octave, sd. 

5. St. Antony Mary Zaccaria, C. d.—Commemoration of 
the Octave. 

6. Octave of Sts. Peter and Paul, App. dm. 

7. Sts. Cyril and Methodius, Bb. Cc. d. 

8. St. Elizabeth, Queen, W. sd. 


10. The Holy Seven Brothers and Others, Mm. sd. 

11. St. Pius I, P. M. s. 

12. St. John Gualbert, Ab. d—Sts, Nabor, Felix, Mm. 

13. St. Anacletus, P. M. sd. 

14. St. Bonaventure, B. C. D. d. 

15. St. Henry, Emperor, C. sd. 

16. Our Lady of Mount Carmel, dm. 

17. St. Alexius, C. sd. 

18. St. Camillus de Lellis, C. d.——St. Symphorosa and her 
seven Sons, Mm. 

19. St. Vincent de Paul, C. d. 

20. St. Jerome Emilian, C. d.—St. Margaret, V. M. 

21. St. Praxedes, V. s. . 

22. St. Mary Magdalen, Penitent. d. 

23. St. Apollinaris, B. M. d—St. Liborius, B. C. 

24. Vigil of St. James.—St. Christina, V. M.—(U. S. Archd. 
Baltimore, San Francisco, Dioc. Monterey-Los An- 
geles—St. Francis Solano, C.). 

25. St, JAMES THE APOSTLE, d. 2 cl—6St. Christopher, M. 

26. Sr. ANNE, MoTHER or Our LADY, d. 2 cl. 

2". St. Pantaleon, M. s. 

28. St. Nazarius and Others, Mm. sd. . 

29. St. Martha, V. sd.—St. Felix and Others, Mm. 

30. Sts. Abdon and Sennen, Mm. s. 

31. St. Ignatius, C. dm. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


$7 oa 


p 


. 


Cor Aaa N 


THE CALENDAR 1783 


AUGUST 


St. Peter's Chains, dm.—Commemoration St. Paul, Ap.— 
Holy Machabees, Mm. 

St. Alphonse Mary de Liguori, B. C. D. d.—St. Stephen 
I, P. M. 

The Finding of St. Stephen, Protomartyr, sd. 

St. Dominic, C. dm. 

Dedication of Our Lady of the Snow, dm. 

THE TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR Lorp, d. 2 c1—8St. syns 
II, P. and Others, Mm. 

St. Cajetan, C. d—St. Donatus, B. M. 


. Sts. Cyriacus, Largus, Smaragdus, Mm. sd. 
. St. John Mary Vianney, C. d.—Vigil of St. Lawrence— 


St. Romanus, M—(U. S. Archd. San NE 1 Dioc. 
Los Angeles). i 


. Sr. LAWRENCE, M. d. 2 cl. with simple Octave. 
. Sts. Tiburtius and Susanna, V., Mm. 5.—(U. S.—-8t. Phil- 


omena, V. M.—St. Emigdius, B. M.). 


. St. Clare, V. d. 
. Sts. Hippolytus and Cassian, Mm. s. 


Vigil of the Assumption of B. V. M.—Comm. of St. 
Eusebius, C. 

THE ASSUMPTION OF OUR LADY, d. 1 cl. with com- 
mon Octave. 


> ST. JOACHIM, FATHER OF Our Lapy, C. d. 2 cl. 
. St. Hyacinth, C. d.—Oct. of the Assumption and Octave- 


day of St. Lawrence. 


. Oct. of the Assumption, sd.—St. Agapitus, M. —(U. S. 


Dioc. Helena—St. Helena, Empress, W.). 


. St. John Eudes, C. d—Of the Octave of the Assump- 


tion, sd. 


. St. Bernard, Ab. C. D. d.—Of Octave of the Assumption. 
. St. Jane Frances de Chantal, W. d.—Of Octave of the 


Assumption. 


. IMMACULATE HEART OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN Mary, d. 2 cl. 


—St. Timothy and Comp. Mm. 


. St. Philip Benizi, C. d. Vigil. 


Sr. BARTHOLOMEW, APOSTLE, d. 2 cl. 


. St. Louis, King, C. sd. 
. St. Zephyrinus, P. M. s. 


St. Joseph Calasanctius, C, d. 


. St. Augustine, B. C. D. d—st. Hermes, M. 

. Beheading of St. John the Baptist, dm.—St. Sabina, M. 
. St. Rose of Lima, V. d.—Sts. Felix and Adauctus, Mm. 
. St. Raymund Nonnatus, C. d. 


SEPTEMBER 


St. Giles, Ab. s. The Holy Twelve Brothers, Mm.— 
(U. &, Dioc. Los Angeles—St. Bibiana, V. M.). 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1784 THE CALENDAR 


. Gt. Stephen, King, C. sd. 
. St. Pius X, P.C. d. 


2 
3. 
4, 
5. St. Lawrence Justinian, B. C. sd. 
6 
7 
8 


. (U. S. Dioc. St. Cloud—St. Cloud, C). 
. THe Nativiry or Our Lany, d. 2 cl. with simple Oct.— 
St. Hadrian, M. 
9. St. Gorgonius, M. s.—(U. S.—St. Peter Claver, C. d.— 
Comm. of St. Gorgonius). 
10. St. Nicholas of Tolentino, C. d. 
11. Sts. Protus and Hyacinth, Mm. s. 
12. The Most Holy Name of Mary, dm. 


14. The Exaltation of the Holy Cross, dm. 

15. Tur SEVEN Dotors or Our Lapy, d. 2 cl.—St. Nicomedes, 
M. š 

16. Sts. Cornelius, P. and Cyprian, B. Mm. sd.—St. 
Euphemia and Comp. Mm. 

17, The Stigmata of St. Francis, d. 

18. St. Joseph of Cupertino, C. d. 

19. St. Januarius and Comp., Mm. d. 

20. St. Eustace and Others, Mm. d.—Vigil of St. Matthew. 

21. Sr. MarrHEW, Ap., Ev. d. 2 cl. 

22, St. Thomas of Villanova, B. C. d.—St. Mauritius and 
Comp., Mm. 

23. St. Linus, P. M. sd.—St. Thecla, V. M. 

24. Our Lady of -Ransom, dm. 


26. Sts. Cyprian and Justina, Mm. s.—(U. S.—Srs, Isaac 
JOGUES, JOHN DE BREBEUF AND Cowr., Mm. d. 2 cl— 
Comm. of Sts. Cyprian and Justin, Mm.). 

2". Sts. Cosmas and Damian, Mm. sd. 

28. St. Wenceslaus, M. sd. 

29. THE DEDICATION or Sr. MICHAEL, d. 1 cl 

30. St. Jerome, Priest, C. D. d. 


OCTOBER 


St. Remigius, B. C. s. 

The Holy Guardian Angels, dm. 

St. Teresa of the Infant Jesus, d. 

St. Francis of Assisi, C. dm. 

St. Placidus and Comp., Mm. s. 

St. Bruno, C. d. 

Tue Most Hoty Rosary or Our Lady, d. 2 cl—8t. 
Mark, P. C.—St. Sergius and Comp., Mm. 

St. Bridget, W. d. 

St. John Leonard, C. d. St. Denis, B. and Others, Mm. sd. 

St. Francis Borgia, C. sd. 


ger 


e nem 


ia 
pe 


http://ccwatershed.org 


THE CALENDAR 1785 
li. THE MATERNITY OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN, d. 2 cl. 


13. St. Edward, King, C. sd. 

14, St. Callistus I, P. M. d. 

15. St. Teresa, V. d. 

16. St. Hedwig, W. sd. 

17. St. Margaret Mary Alacoque, V. d. 

18. Sr. Luxe THE EVANGELIST, d. 2 cl. 

19. St. Peter of Alcantara, C. d. 

20. St. John Cantius, C. d. 

21. St. Hilarion, Ab. s.—St: Ursula and Comp., Vv. Mm.— 
(U. S. Dioc. Portland—St. Ursula and Compailons; 
V. M) 


24. St. Raphael the Archangel, dm. 

25. Sts. Chrysanthus and Daria, Mm. s. 

26. St. Evaristus, P. M. s. 

27. Vigil of Sts. Simon and Jude. 

28. Srs. SIMON AND JUDE, APOSTLES, d. 2 cl. 

31. Vigil of All Saints. 

Last Sunday in October, Feast or Our LORD JESUS SES, 


Kine, d. 1 cl. 
NOVEMBER 
f ALL SAINTS, d. 1 cl. with common ‘Octave. 
. All Souls, d. 


Of the Octave of All Saints, sd.  - 

St. Charles, B. C. d.—Sts. Vitalis and Agricola, Mm. 

Of the Octave, sd.—(U. S.—Feast of the Holy Relics). 

Of the Octave, sd. 

Of the Octave, sd.—(U. S.—St. Leonard, Ab.). 

Octave of All Saints, dm.—The Four Crowned Martyrs. 

THE DEDICATION OF ARCHBASILICA OF Our Savior, d. 
2 cl—St. Theodore, M. 

St. Andrew Avellino, C. d—St. Tryphon and Comp., 
Mm. 


OO AHO RO NP 


= 
e 


11. St. Martin, B. C. d.—St. Mennas, M. 

12. St. Martin I, P. M. sd. 

13. St. Didacus, C. sd. 

14. St. Josaphat, B. M. d. 

15. St. Albert the Great, B. C. D. d. 

16. St. Gertrude, V. d. 

17. St. Gregory Thaumaturgus, B. C. sd. 

18. The Dedication of the Basilicas of Sts. Peter and Paul, 


dm. 
19. St. Elizabeth, W. d—St. Pontianus, P. M. 
20. St. Felix of Valois, C. d. : 
21. The Presentation of our Lady, dm. - 
22. St. Cecilia, V. M. d. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1786 THE CALENDAR 


23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
21. 


28. 
29. 
30. 


30. 
31. 


St. Clement I, P. M. d.—St. Felicitas, M. 

St. John of the Cross, C. d—St. Chrysogonus, M. 

St. Catharine, V. M. d. 

St. Sylvester, Ab. d—St. Peter Alexandrini, B. M. 

(U. S. Dioc. Brooklyn—Our Lady of the Miraculous 
Medal—St. Virgilius B. C). 


Vigil of St. Andrew.—St. Saturninus, M. 
Sr. ANDREW THE APOSTLE, d. 2 cl. 


DECEMBER 


St. Bibiana, V. M. sd. 
St. Francis Xavier, C. dm. 


. St. Peter Chrysologus, B. C. D. d.—St. Barbara, V. M. 


Comm. of St. Sabbas, Ab. 


. St. Nicholas, B. C. d. 


St. Ambrose, B. C. D. d.—Comm. of the Vigil. 
THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION OF OUR LADY, 
d. 1 cl. with common Octave. 


. Of the Octave, sd. 


Of the Octave, sd.—St. Melchiades, P. M. 


. St. Damasus I, P. C. sd.—Comm. of the Oct. 

. Of the Octave, sd.—(U. S.—Our Lady of Guadalupe). 
. St. Lucy, V. M. d—Comm. of the Oct. 

. Of the Octave, sd. 

. Octave of the Immaculate Conception, dm. 

. St. Eusebius, B. M. sd. 


. Vigil of St. Thomas. 
. St. THOMAS THE APOSTLE, d. 2 cl. 
. St. Frances Xavier Cabrini, V. d. 2 cl. 


| Vigil of the Nativity of our Lord (privileged). 
. NATIVITY OF OUR LORD, d. 1 cl. privil. Oct. III. 


order. Comm. St. Anastasia, M. (2nd Mass). 


. Sr. STEPHEN, Proromartyr, d. 2 cl with simple Oct.— 


Comm. of Oct. of Nativity. 


. Sr. JOHN THE EvaNGELIST, d. 2 cl with Simple Oct. 


Comm. of Oct. of Nativity. 


. Hoty Innocents, Mm. d. 2 cl. with simple Octave. 


Commemoration of Octave of the Nativity. 


. St. Thomas of Canterbury, B. M. d—Commemoration 


of Octave of the Nativity. 

Of the Octave of the Nativity, sd. 

St. Sylvester I, P. C..d—Commemoration of Octave 
of the Nativity. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


General Devotions 


Morning Prayers 


t LOVE them that love Me: And they that in the morning 
early watch for Me, shall find Me.”—Prov. viii. 17. 

“Give ear, O Lord, to my words. 

“Harken to the voice of my prayer, O my King and mv 
God. 

*For to Thee will I pray; O Lord, in the morning Thou 
Shalt hear my voice. ` 

"In the morning I will stand before Thee, and will look 
up to Thee. 

“I wil come into Thy house: in the multitude of Thy 
mercy."—Ps. 5. 

“O come; let us praise the Lord with joy: let us joyfully 
sing to God our Saviour: 

"Let us.come into His presence with thanksgiving, and 
rejoice before Him with psalms. 

*O come, let us prostrate ourselves before God, and adore 
Him; let us implore the Lord Who made us; for He is the 
Lord our God; and we are His people, and the sheep of His 
pasture."—Ps. 94. 

“The Lord is good to them that hope in Him; to the soul 
that seeketh Him."—Lam. 3, 23. 

*O Lord, have mercy on us; for we have waited for Thee; 
be Thou our arm in the morning, and our salvation in the 
time of trouble.”—Is. 23, 2. 


Morning Hymn of Sot. Ambrose 


ow that the star of light has risen, 
Let us to God most humbly pray, 
To save us from all hurtful things 
In. all our actions of the day. 


To bridle and restrain our tongue, 
That wordy war may not resound, 
To cover and protect our sight, 

From dangerous follies all around. 


To drive iniquity away, 

And purify our inmost soul, 

And by spare use of meat and drink 
Our rebel passions to control, 


1787 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1788 GENERAL DEVOTION» 


That, when the day has sped away, 
And He again the night shall bring, 
We may, through holy abstinence, 
With purity His glory sing. 


To God the Father, glory be, 

And also to His only Son, 

With the Great Spirit Paraclete, 

Now and while endless ages run. Amen. 
(Translation of Jam lucis orto sidere by Bishop Bagshawe). 


N THE name of the Father, Hi and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost. Amen. 


Place yourself in the presence of God, and humbly adore Him, 


ost holy and adorable Trinity, one God in three Per- 
@M sons, I believe that Thou art here present; I adore 
Thee with the deepest humility, and render to Thee, with 
my whole heart, the homage which is due to Thy sovereign 


majesty. 
An Act of Faith 

my God! I firmly believe that Thou art one God in 

three divine Persons,.the Father, the Son, and the 
Holy Ghost; I believe that. the divine Son became man, and 
died for our sins, and that He will come to judge the living 
and the dead. I believe these and all the truths which the 
holy Catholic Church teaches, because Thou hast revealed 
them, Who canst neither deceive nor be deceived. 


An Act of Hope 
my God! relying on Thy infinite goodness and prom- 
O ises, I hope to obtain pardon of my sins, the help of 
Thy grace and life everlasting, through the merits of Jesus 
Christ, my Lord and Redeemer. 


An Act of Charity 
my God! I love Thee above all things, with my whole 
O heart and soul, because Thou art all good and worthy 
of all love. I love my neighbor as myself for love of Thee. 
I forgive all who have injured me and ask pardon of all 
whom I have injured. 


An Act of Contrition 
my God! I am heartily sorry for having offended 
O Thee, and I detest all my sins, because I dread the loss 
of heaven and the pains of hell, but most of all because they 
offend Thee, my God, Who art all good, and deserving of 
all my love. I firmly resolve, with the help of Thy grace, to 
is my sins, to do penance, and to amend my life. 
en. 


Thank God for all favors and offer yourself to Him. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1789 


my God, I most humbly thank Thee for all the favors 

"Thou hast bestowed upon me. I give Thee thanks 
with all my heart that Thou hast created me after Thine 
own image and likeness, that Thou hast redeemed me by 
the Precious Blood of Thy dear Son, and that Thou hast 
preserved me and brought me safe to the beginning of an- 
other day. I offer to Thee, O Lord, my whole being, and 
in particular all my thoughts, words, actions, and sufferings 
of this day. I consecrate them all to the glory of Thy name, 
beseeching Thee that through the infinite merits of Jesus 
Christ, my Saviour, they may all find acceptance in ‘Thy 
sight. May Thy divine love animate them, and may they all 
tend to Thy greater glory. 

Resolve to avoid sin and to practise virtue 


DORABLE Jesus, my Saviour and master, model of all 
JH. perfection, I resolve and will endeavor this day to 
imitate Thy example; to be, like Thee, mild, humble, chaste, 
zealous, charitable, and resigned. I will redouble my efforts 
that I may not fall this day into any of those sins which I 
have heretofore committed (here name any besetting sin), 
and which I sincerely desire to forsake. I have the inten- 
tion to gain all the indulgences I can in favor of the poor 
souls in purgatory. 

Ask God for the necessary graces : 

my God, Thou knowest my weakness, and that I am 

unable to do anything good without Thee; deny me 
not, O God, the help of Thy grace; proportion it to my 
necessities, give me strength to avoid anything. evil which 
Thou forbiddest, and to. practise the good which Thou hast 
commanded, and enable me to bear patiently all the trials 
which it may please Thee to send me. 


The Lord's Praper 


or Father, Who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name: 
Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, as it 
is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread: and forgive 
us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against 
us. And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from 


evil. Amen. 
The Bail Mary 
AIL, Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with thee; blessed 
art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit oi 
Thy womb, Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us 
sinners, now and at the hour of our death. Amen. 
The Apostles’ Creed 


BELIEVE in God, the Father almighty, Creator of heaven 
and earth; and in Jesus Christ, His only Son, Our Lord: 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1790 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the. Virgin 
Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died, and 
was buried. He descended into hell; the third day He rose 
again from the dead; He ascended into heaven, sitteth at 
the right hand of God, the Father almighty; from. thence 
He shall come to judge the living and the dead. I believe 
in the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the commun- 
ion of saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the 
body, and the life everlasting. Amen. 


Chening Prapers 


EHOLD now, bless ye the Lord; all ye servants of the 
Lord. 
“Ye that stand in the house of the Lord: in the courts 
of the house of our God. 
“Lift up your hands by night to the holy places: and bless 
ye the Lord. 
“May the Lord bless Thee out of Sion: Who hath made 
heaven and earth" (Ps. 133). 


E THAT dwelleth in the aid of the Most High: shall 
abide under the protection of the God of heaven. 

“He shall say to the Lord, Thou art my protector, and my 
refuge: my God, in Him will I trust. 

“For He hath delivered me from the snare of the hunters: 
and from the sharp word. 

“He will overshadow thee with His shoulders: and under 
His wings thou shalt trust. 

“His truth shall compass thee with a shield: thou shalt 
not be afraid of the terror of the night. 

“For He hath given His angels charge over thee: to keep 
tnes in all thy ways” (Ps. 90). ` 


N THEE, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be 
confounded; deliver me in Thy justice. 
“Bow down Thine ear to me; make haste to deliver me. 
“Be Thou unto me a God, a protector, and a house of 
refuge: to save me. 
“Into Thy hands I commend my spirit: Thou hast re- 
deemed me, O Lord, God of truth" (Ps. 30). 
“ AVE mercy on me: and hear my prayer. 
“Tord, Thou hast set upon us the light of Thy 
*ountenance: Thou hast put gladness in my heart. 
“In peace in the selfsame I will sleep and I will rest. 
i a. Thou, O Lord, singularly hast settled me in hope” 
Ps. 4 


Wesper Hpmu of St. ‘Ambrowe 


ow that the daylight dies away, 
By all Thy grace and love, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1791 


"Thee, Maker of the world, we pray 
To watch our bed above. 

Let dreams depart and phantoms fly, 
The offspring of the night; — 

Keep us, like shrines, beneath Thine eye, 
Pure in.our foes’ despite. 


This grace on Thy redeemed confer, 
Father, co-equal Son, 

And Holy Ghost, the Comforter, 
Eternal Three in One. Amen. 


-~ (Translation of Te lucis ante terminum by Cardinal Newman). 


N THE name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost. Amen. 


OME, O Holy Ghost, fill the hearts of Thy faithful, and 
kindle in them the fire of Thy love. 


Place Yourself in the Presence of God and Humbly Adore Him 


O MY God, I present myself before Thee at the end of 
another day, to offer Thee. anew the homage of my 
heart. I humbly adore Thee, my Creator, my Redeemer, and 
my Judge! I believe in Thee, because Thou art Truth it- 
self; I hope in Thee, because Thou art faithful to Thy 
promises; I love Thee with my whole heart, because Thou 
are infinitely worthy of being loved; and for Thy sake I 
love my neighbor as myself. 


Return Thanks to God for All His Mercies 


NABLE me, O my God, to return Thee thanks as I ought 

for all Thine inestimable blessings and favors. ‘Thou 
hast thought of me and loved me from all eternity; Thou 
hast formed me out of nothing; Thou hast delivered up 
Thy beloved Son to the ignominious death of the cross for 
my redemption; Thou hast made me a member of Thy holy 
Church; Thou hast preserved me from falling into the abyss 
of eternal misery, when my sins had provoked Thee to 
punish me; Thou hast graciously continued to spare me, 
even though I have not ceased to offend Thee. What return, 
O my God, can I make for Thy innumerable blessings, and 
particularly for the favors of this day? O all ye saints and 
angels, unite with me in praising the God of mercies, Who 
is so bountiful to so unworthy a creature. 


Say the Our Father, Hail Mary, Apostles’ Creed, Glory 
and Confiteor 


Pray for the Church of Christ 


Gop, hear my prayers on behalf of our Holy Father 
Pope N., our bishops, our clergy, and for all that are 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1792 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


in authority over us. Bless, I beseech Thee, the whole Cath- 
olic Church, and convert all heretics and unbelievers, 


Pray for the Living and jor the Faithful Departed 


our down Thy blessings, O Lord, upon all my relations, 

friends, and benefactors: and upon my enemies, if I 
have any. Help the poor and sick, and those who are in 
their last agony. O God of mercy and goodness, have com- 
passion on the souls of the faithful in purgatory; put an 
end to their sufferings, and grant to them eternal light, rest, 
and happiness, Amen. 


Commend Yourself to God, to the Blessed Virgin, 
and the Saints 
LESS, O Lord, the repose I am about to take, that, my 
bodily strength being renewed, I may be the better 
enabled to serve Thee. 


LESSED Virgin Mary, Mother of mercy, pray for me, 

that I may be preserved this night from all evil, 
whether of body or of soul. O glorious St. Joseph, and all 
ye saints and angels of paradise, especially my guardian 
angel and my chosen patron, watch over me.. I commend 
myself to your protection now and always. Amen. 


~ oxy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts: the earth is full of 
Thy glory. Glory be to the Father, glory be to the 

Son, glory be to the Holy Ghost. Amen. 

Into Thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit. 

Y. Keep us, O Lord, as the apple of Thy eye. 

W. Hide us under the shadow of Thy wings. 

¥. Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us. 

Bí. As we have put our trust in Thee. 

¥. O Lord, hear my prayer, 

Hf. And let my cry come unto. Thee, 


Let us pray 


1s1t, we beseech Thee, O Lord, this habitation, and 
-drive far from it all snares of the enemy. Let Thy 
holy angels dwell herein to keep us in peace: and may Thy 
blessing be upon us always. Through Our Lord Jesus Christ 
Thy Son, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee, in the unity of 
the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end. W. Amen. 
y. O Lord, hear my prayer. 
W. And let my cry come unto Thee. 
Y. Let us bless the Lord. 
H'. Thanks be to God. 


ay the almighty and merciful Lord, the Father, the 
Son, and the Holy Ghost, bless and protect us. 
B. Amen. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


a i NR 


\ 
N 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1798 


Pevotions for Confession 
Before Confession 


EFLECT that this confession may be the last of your 

life. Therefore, prepare yourself for it as if you were 
lying sick upon your deathbed, and already at the brink 
of the grave. Ask God to give you the grace to make a 
good examination of conscience, the light to see your sins 
clearly, and the strength to make a sincere confession and to 
amend your life, ' . 


Praper pu A 


ost merciful God, Father in heaven, relying on Th 

goodness and mercy, I corae to Thee with filial con- 
fidence to confess my sins and to implore Thy forgiveness. 
Thou wilt not despise a contrite and humble heart. Bless 
me and receive me again into Thy favor; I acknowledge 
that I have been most ungrateful to Thee, but I sincerely 
repent and detest the wrong I lave done, and I desire hence- 
forth to walk in the way of perfection, in accordance with 
Thy holy will. f 

O Jesus, my Saviour, my good Shepherd, I have strayed 
far from the path that Thou hast marked out for me; I did 
not follow in Thy footsteps; I wandered into forbidden 
places. Repentant. and sorrowful, I beg to be admitted 
again into the fold of Thy faithful followers. I want to 
confess my sins with perfect: sincerity, as if I were at the 
point of death. My Jesus, I look to Thee with confidence 
for the grace to examine my conscience well. 

O Holy Spirit, come in Thy mercy; enlighten my mind 
and strengthen my will that I may know my sins, humbly 
confess them, and sincerély amend my life. 

“Mary, my mother, immaculate spouse of the Holy Ghost, 
refuge of sinners, assist me in Thy intercession. 

Holy angels and saints of God, pray for me. Amen. 


Examination of Conscience 


Begin by examining yourself on your last confession: 
Whether a grievous sin was forgotten through want of proper 
examination, or concealed or disguised through. shame. 
Whether you confessed without a true sorrow and a firm 
purpose of amendment. Whether you have repaired evil done 
to your neighbor. Whether the penance was performed with- 
out voluntary distractions, Whether you have neglected your 
confessor's counsel, and fallen at once into habitual sins. 


Then examine yourself on the ten commandments; the 
commandments of the Church; the seven. capital sins; the 
duties of your state of life and your ruling passion. Calmly 
recall the different occasions of sin which have fallen in your 
way, or to which your state and condition in life expose you; 
the places you have frequented. The persons with whom you 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1794 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


have associated. Do not neglect to consider the circumstances 
which alter the grievousness of the sin, nor the various ways 
in which we become accessory to the sins of others. 


The Ten Commandments of God 
1: am the Lord thy God, Who brought thee out of the 


land of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage. Thou ; 


shalt not have strange gods before Me. Thou shalt not 
make to thyself a graven thing, nor the likeness of any 
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor 
of those things that are in the waters under the earth. 
Thou shalt not adore them, not serve them. 

2. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in 
vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that shall 
take the name of the Lord his God in vain. 

3. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. 

4. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thou mayest 
be long-lived upon the land which the Lord thy God will 
give thee. 

5. Thou shalt not kill. 

6. Thou shalt not commit adultery. 

"i. Thou shalt not steal. 

8. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor. 

9. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife. 

10. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's goods. 


The Six Commandments of the Church 


1. O HEAR Mass on Sundays and holy-days of obligation. 
2. To fast and abstain on the days appointed. 

3. To confess at least once a year. 

4. To receive Holy Eucharist during the Easter-time. 

5. To contribute to the support of our pastors. 

6. Not to marry persons who are not Catholics, or who 
are related to us within the third degree of kindred, nor 
privately without witnesses, nor to solemnize marriage at 
forbidden times. 


The Seben Beadly Sins and the Opposite Wirtues 


1. Pride ........................... Humility 
2. Covetousness ................... Liberality 
3. Lust ......... eee eee eee ee eeeeeeee Chastity 
4. Anger .......... eese Tm ... Meekness 
5. Gluttony .......... esta CES UN RR Temperance 
6. Envy .....eeeteeoeoenottn Brotherly love 
7. Sloth ..... bis Cea die neces eO... Diligence 


The Four Sins which Crp to Heaven for Vengeance 


1. Wilful murder. 2. The sin of Sodom. 3. Oppression of 
the poor. 4, Defrauding the laborer of his wages. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1795 


Mine Ways of Being Sittessorp to Another's Sin 


1.. By counsel, 2. By command. 3. By consent. 4. By 
Provocation. 5. By praise or flattery. 6. By concealment. 
T. By partaking. 8. By silence. 9. By defense of the ill done. 


The Heben Spiritual Works of Merep 


1. To admonish sinners. 2. To instruct the ignorant. 3. 
To counsel the doubtful. 4. To comfort the sorrowful. 5. 
To bear wrongs patiently. 6. To forgive all injuries. 7. To 
pray for the living and the dead. 


The Heben Corporal Works of Merep 


1. To feed the hungry. 2. To give drink to the thirsty. 
3. To clothe the naked. 4. To visit and ransom the cap- 
tives. 5. To harbor the harborless. 6. To visit the sick. 
7. To bury the dead. 


Preliminary Examination 


HEN did you make your last confession? Did you 
take sufficient pains to awaken contrition? 
Did you omit to confess a mortal sin either intentionally 
or through forgetfulness? 
Did you intentionally neglect to say the penance which 
was imposed on you, or were you so careless as to forget it? 
Have you carried out the resolutions you made at your 
last confession or have you paid no heed at all to them? . 


Examination on the Ten Commandments of Gor 


1. ave you doubted in matters of faith? Murmured 
against God at your adversity or at the prosperity 
of others? Despaired of His mercy? 

Have you believed in fortune-tellers or consulted them? 

Have you gone to places of worship belonging to other 
denominations? 

Have you recommended yourself daily to God? Neglected 
your morning or night prayers? Omitted religious duties or 
practices through motives of human respect? 

Have you read books, papers, and periodicals of anti- 
Catholic or atheistic tendency? Made use of superstitious 
practices? Spoken with levity or irreverence of priests, Re- 
ligious, or sacred objects? 

2. Have you taken the name of God in vain? Profaned 
anything relating to religion? 

Have you sworn falsely, rashly, or in slight and trivial 
matters? Cursed yourself or others, or any creature? 
Angered others so as to make them swear, or blaspheme 
God? 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1796 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


3. Have you kept holy the Lord's Day, and all other 
days commanded to be kept holy? Bought or sold things 
not of necessity on that day? Done or commanded some 
servile work not of necessity? Missed Mass or been wilfully 
distracted during Mass? ‘Talked, gazed, or laughed in the 
church? 


4. Have you honored your parents, superiors, and masters, 
according to your just duty?  Deceived them?  Disobeyed 
them? Have you failed in due reverence to aged persons? 


5. Have you procured, desired, or hastened the death of 
any one? Borne hatred? Oppressed any one? Desired re- 
venge? Not forgiven injuries? Refused to speak to others? 
Used provoking language? Injured others? Caused enmity 
between others? i : 


6 and 9. Have. you been guilty of lascivious dressing? 
Been in lewd company? Read immodest books? Been guilty 
of unchaste songs, discourses, words, or actions?  Wilfully 
entertained impure thoughts or desires? 


7. Have you been guilty of stealing, or of deceit in buy- 
ing, or selling, in regard to wares, prices, weights, or meas- 
ures? Have you wilfuly damaged another man's goods, or 
negligently spoiled them? 


8. Have you borne false witness? Called injurious names? 
Disclosed another's sins? Flattered others? Judged rashly? 


10. Have you coveted unjustly anything that belongs to 
another? : : , 


Examination on the Precepts of the Church 


AVE you gone to confession at least once a year? Re- 
ceived holy communion during Easter-time? 


Have you violated the fasts of the Church, or eaten flesh- 
meat on prohibited days? , 


Have you sinned against any other commandment of the 
Church? . 


Examine yourself also in regard to the seven capital sins 
and the nine ways of being accessory to another's sin. 


After the Examination 


Having discovered the sins of which yow have been guilty, 
together with their number, enormity, Or such circumstances 
as may change their nature, you should endeavor to excite 
in yourself a heartfelt sorrow for having committed them, and 
a sincere detestation of them. This being the most essential 
of all the dispositions requisite for a good confession, with 
what humility, fervor, and perseverance should you not impor- 
nae Him Who holds the hearts of men in His hands to grant 
it to you 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1797 


E: ,., Aw Act of Contrition 
Recite very attentively one of the following acts: 


I 


TERNAL Father! I am heartily sorry for having offended 
‘Thee, and I detest all my sins, because I dread the 
loss of heaven and the pains of hell, but most of all because 
they displease Thee, my God, Who art all-good and deserv- 
ing of all my love. I firmly resolve, with the help of Thy 
grace, to confess my sins, to do penance, and to amend my 
life. 
X 
Mv God, I am truly sorry that I have sinned, because 
Thou art infinitely good and sin displeases Thee, 1 
promise not to offend Thee again. I love Thee above all 
things with my whole heart and soul, and I will.endeavor to 
please 'Thee in everything. . 
III 


cop! infinitely worthy of all love, my creator, my 

saviour, my benefactor, why did I ever offend Thee? 
Lord, have mercy on me. How ungrateful I have been to 
Thee, Who art infinitely good! Father, forgive me. I love 
Thee, my God, with my whole heart and above all things; 
I hate sin because it is offensive to Thy goodness. I am 
truly sorry for having offended 'Thee, and with Thy help 
I will shun the occasions of sin and seek to please Thee in 
all things. 

Iuhocations 


mary, conceived without sin, pray for us who have 
recourse to thee! 

Indulgence of 300 days; Plenary, under usual conditions if re- 
cited daily for an entire month. S. C. Indulg., Mar. 15, 1884; 
S. Pen. Ap., Apr. 15, 1932. 

N THY conception, O Virgin Mary, thou wast immaculate! 
Pray for us to the Father, Whose Son Jesus, conceived 
in thy womb by the Holy Ghost, thou didst bring forth! 

Indulgence of 300 days; S. C. Indulg., Nov. 21, 1793; S. Pen. Ap., 
Apr. 24, 1933. 

OLY Virgin, Mary immaculate, Mother of God and our 
Mother, speak thou for us to the Heart of Jesus, Who 
is thy Son and our Brother! 


[en the confessional with the same recollectedness 

and reverence as would fill your heart if Christ our 
rd were seated there in person ready to hear your con- 
fession. The priest is really the representative of Christ. . 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1798 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


When you kneel down say: Bless me, Father, for I have 
sinned, and then begin the Confiteor, proceeding as far as 
Through my fault, ete. 


The Confiteor 


conress to almighty God, to blessed Mary, ever a virgin, 
T io blessed Michael the archangel, to blessed John the 
Baptist, to the holy apostles Peter and Paul, and to all the 
saints, that I have sinned exceedingly in thought, word, and 
deed, through my fault, through my fault, through. my most 
grievous fault. . .. s s : 

Then tell when you made your last confession and begin the 
avowal of your sins. Confess all your sins with a contrite and 
humble heart, and conclude thus: 

For these and all the sins of my past. life, especially my 
sins of (naming some grievous sin), I am heartily sorry, beg 
pardon of God, and absolution of you, my Father (then 
finish the Confiteor). . . . Therefore, I beseech the blessed 
Mary, ever a virgin, blessed Michael the archangel, blessed 
John the Baptist, the holy apostles Peter and Paul, and all 
the saints, to pray to the Lord our God for me. 


Listen then with humility and docility to the instruction of 
your confessor, and during this time avoid all recurrence as to 
the confession itself; remembering that sins forgotten after a 
serious examination are really comprised in the absolution. 
Accept with submission the penance imposed, and if any ob- 
stacle that you foresee will prevent your accomplishing it, 
state this respectfully. 


While the priest pronounces the words of absolution, en- 
deavor to excite an act of perfect contrition. Should your 
spiritual Father deem it proper to defer absolution, acknowl- 
edge your unworthiness, and do not murmur. Leave the con- 
fessional resolved to use every effort, by an amendment of 
life and sincere repentance, to obtain God’s pardon, which His 
minister will ratify. 


Thanksgiving after Confession 


TERNAL Father! I thank Thee, I bless Thee, for Thy 

goodness and mercy. Thou hast had compassion on 
me, although in my folly I had wandered far away from 
Thee and offended Thee most grievously. With fatherly 
love Thou hast received me anew after so many relapses 
into sin and forgiven me my offenses through the holy sac- 
rament of Penance. Blessed forever, O my God, be Thy 
loving-kindness, Thy infinite mercy! Never again will I 
grieve Thee by ingratitude, by disobedience to Thy holy will, 
All that I am, all that I have, all that I do shall be conse- 
crated to Thy service and Thy glory. 


“Sacred Heart of Jesus, I trust in Thee.” 
Indulgence of 300 days—Pius X, June 27, 1908. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1799 


Devotions in Preparation for and Thanksgiving 
Atter Mass and Communion 
Offering fo Be Made at the Begimning of Mass 


TERNAL Father, I unite myself with the intentions and 
affections of our Lady of Sorrows on Calvary, and 
I offer Thee the sacrifice which Thy beloved Son Jesus 
made of Himself on the Cross, and now renews on this 
holy altar: 1. To adore Thee and give Thee the honor 
which is due to Thee, confessing ‘Thy supreme dominion 
over all things, and the absolute dependence of everything 
upon Thee, Who art our one and last end. 2. To thank 
Thee for innumerable benefits received. 3. To appease 
Thy justice, irritated against us by so many sins, and to 
make satisfaction for them. 4. To implore grace and 
mercy for myself, for . . . , for all afflicted and sorrowing, 
for poor sinners, for all the world, and for the holy souls 
in purgatory. 
Offering of Masses for the Dying 
Y GOD, I offer Thee all the Masses which are being 
celebrated today throughout the whole world, for 
sinners who are in their agony and who are to die this 


day. May the Precious Blood of Jesus, their ene 
obtain mercy for them. 


Preparation 


Indulgence of five years; for saying the following Antiphon, 
Psalms, Versicles and. Prayers, Plenary, under usual conditions if 
recited. daily for an entire month. S. Pen. Ap., Oct. 3, 1936. 


Antiphon. 


EMEMBER not, O Lord, our offences, nor those of our 
parents; neither take Thou vengeance of our sins. 


Ps. 83. 


ow lovely are Thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts: my 
soul longeth and fainteth for the courts of the Lord. 
My heart and my flesh have rejoiced in the living God. 
For the sparrow hath found her a house, and the turtle 
a nest for herself, where she may lay her young: 
Even Thine altars, O Lord of hosts: my king and my 
‘God, 
Blessed are they ‘that dwell in Thy house, O Lord: they 
shall praise Thee for ever and ever. 
Blessed is the man whose help is in Thee: in his heart 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1800 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


he hath disposed to ascend by steps, in the vale of tears, 
in the place which he hath set. s 

For the lawgiver shall-give a blessing: they shall go 
from strength to strength: the God of gods shall be seen 
in Sion. 

O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O God 
of Jacob. 

Behold, O.God, our protector: and look upon the face 
of Thy Christ. - 

For one day in Thy.courís: is better than a thousand. 

I had rather be despised in. the house of my God, than 
to dwell in the tents of sinners. 

For God loveth mercy and truth: the Lord wil give 
grace and glory. 

He wil not withhold good things from them that walk 
in innocence: O Lord of hosts, blessed is the. man that 
hopeth in Thee. 

Glory be to the Father, etc. 


Ps. 84. 


Hou hast blessed Thy land, O Lord: Thou hast 
n turned away the captivity of Jacob. 

Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of Thy people: Thou 
hast covered all their sins. 

Thou hast softened all Thine anger: Thou hast turned 
away from the wratk. of Thine indignation. 

Convert us, O God, our Saviour: and turn away Thine 
anger from us. 

Wilt Thou be angry with us for ever: or wilt. Thou 
stretch out Thy wrath from generation to generation? 

Thou shalt turn again, O God, and quicken us: and 
Thy people shall rejoice in Thee. 

Show us Thy mercy, O Lord: and grant us Thy sal- 
vation. 

I will harken what the Lord God shall say within me: 
for He will speak peace unto His people. 

And unto His saints: and unto them that are con- 
verted in heart. 

Surely His salvation is nigh unto them that fear Him: 
that glory may dwell in our land. 

Mercy and truth have met together: justice and peace 
have kissed each other. - 

Truth is sprung out of the earth: and justice Hath 
looked down írom heaven. 

For the Lord shall give goodness: and our earth shall 
yield her fruit. 

Justice shall walk before Him: and shall set His steps 
in the way. ; 

Glory be to the Father, ete, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1801 


Ps. 85.: i 

NcLrNE Thine ear, O Lord, and hear me: for I am 
I needy and poor. 

Preserve my soul, for I am holy: O my God, save Thy 
servant, that trusteth in Thee. 

Have mercy upon me, O Lord: for unto Thee have I 
cried all the day. Give joy to the soul of Thy servant, 
for unto Thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my soul. 

For Thou, O Lord, art sweet and mild: and plenteous 
in mercy unto all that call upon Thee. 

Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer: and attend to the 
voice of my petition. 

I have called upon Thee in the day of my trouble: for 
Thou hast heard me, 

Among the gods there is none like unto Thee, O Lord; 
and there is none that can do works like unto Thy works. 

All the nations whom Thou hast made shall come and 
worship before Thee, O Lord, and shall glorify Thy name. 

"For Thou art great, and dost wondrous things: Thou 
art God alone. 

Lead me, O Lord, in Thy way, and YI will walk in Thy 
truth: let my heart rejoice that it may fear Thy name. 

I will praise Thee, O Lord my God, with my whole 
heart: and I will glorify Thy name for ever. 

For great is Thy mercy toward me: and Thou hast 
delivered my soul out of the lower hell. 

O God, the wicked are risen up against me: and the 
assembly of the mighty have sought after my soul: and 
they have not set Thee before their eyes. 

And Thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion and 
merciful: long-suffering, and of much mercy and true. 

O look upon me, and have mercy on me: give Thy 
strength unto Thy servant, and save the son. of Thine 
handmaid. 

Show me a token for good: that they who hate me 
may see, and be confounded: because Thou, O Lord, hast 
helped me, and hast comforted. me. 

Glory be to the Father, etc. 


Ps. 115. 


BELIEVED, and therefore did I speak: but I was 
humbled. exceedingly. I said in mine excess: Al men 
are liars. 
What shall I render unto the Lord: for all the things 
that He- hath rendered unto me? 
-I will. take the chalice of salvation: and call upon the 
name of the Lord. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1802 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the presence of 
all His people: precious in the sight of the Lord is the 
death of His saints. 

O Lord, I am Thy servant: I am Thy servant, and the 
son of Thine handmaid. 

Thou hast broken my bonds in sunder; I will offer unto 
Thee the sacrifice of praise, and will call upon the name 
of the Lord. 

I wil pay my vows unto the Lord in the sight of all 
His people: in the courts of the house of the Lord, in 
the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. 

Glory be to the Father, etc. 


Ps. 129. 


ut of the depths I have cried to Thee, O Lord: Lord, 
hear my voice. 
D Thy ears be attentive to the voice of my supplica- 
tion. 
If Thou, O Lord, wilt mark iniquities: Lord, who shall 
stànd it? 
For with 'Thee there is merciful forgiveness: and by 
reason of Thy law I have waited for Thee, O Lord. 
My soul hath relied on His word: my soul hath hoped 
in the Lord. 
From the morning-watch even until night: Jet Israel 
hope in the Lord. 
Because with the Lord there is mercy: and with Him 
plentiful redemption. 
And He shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities. 
Glory be to the Father, etc. 


Antiphon. 


EMEMBER not, O Lord, our offences, nor those of our 

parents; neither take Thou vengeance of our sins: 
Spare us, good Lord, spare Thy people whom Thou hast 
redeemed with Thy Precious Blood, and be not angry 
with us forever. 

Lord, have mercy. Christ, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. 
Our Father. Y. And lead us not into temptation. W. But 
deliver us from evil, Y. I said: O Lord, be Thou merciful 
unto me. W. Heal my soul, for I have sinned against Thee. 
y. Turn to us, O Lord, for a little space. W. And be 
entreated in favor of Thy servants. Y. Let Thy mercy, O 
Lord, be upon us. W. As we have hoped in Thee, y. Let 
Thy priests be clothed with justice, BY. And let Thy saints 
rejoice. Y. From my hidden sins cleanse me, O Lord. BY. And 
from those of others spare Thy servants. V. O Lord, hear 
my prayer. A. And let my cry come unto Thee. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1802 


Let us pray 


ost merciful God, incline Thine ears to our prayers, 

and with the grace of the Holy Ghost enlighten 

our hearts, that we may worthily take part in Thy ser- 
vice, and love Thee with an everlasting love. 


| cop, before Whom all hearts are. open. to Whom 

all desires are known, and from Whom no secret 

is hidden: purify the thoughts of our hearts by the in- 

pouring of the Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love 
Thee, and worthily magnify Thy holy name. 


*NFLAME, O Lord, our reins and our heart with the 
fire of the Holy Ghost, that we may serve Thee with 
& chaste body and please Thee with a clean heart. 


ORD, we beseech Thee, that the Paraclete Who pro- 

ceedeth from Thee may enlighten our minds and 
lead us into all truth, even as Thy Son hath promised 
unto us. 


END down upon us, we implore Thee, O Lord, the 
Holy Ghost in His might, that He may cleanse us 
rom all evil and defend us from all adversities, 


cop, Who hast taught the hearts of the faithful by 

the light of the Holy Ghost, grant that, by the 
gift of the same Spirit, we may always be truly wise and 
ever rejoice in His holy consolations. 


Istr and cleanse our consciences, we beseech Thee, 

O Lord, that when Thy Son, Our Lord Jesus Christ, 

shall come, He may find within us a dwelling-place made 

ready for Him; Who liveth and reigneth with Thee, in the 

unity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end. 
Amen. 

For the recital of the following prayer of St. Thomas Aquinas 
an indulgence of 3 years is granted, and a Plenary indulgence 
under the usual conditions may be gained if it is said daily for 
an entire month. i 

The prayers of St. Ambrose for each dày of the week, the prayer 
to the Blessed Virgin and the prayer to St. Joseph (following 
the prayer of St. Thomas Aquinas) are each subject to an in- 
dulgence of 3 years whenever recited. S. C. Indulg., Dec. 20, 1884, 
Feb. 17, 1883 and Feb. 4, 1877; S. Pen. Ap., Oct. 3, 1936. 


Praper of St. Thomas Aquinas 


LMiIcuty, everlasting God, look down in mercy upon 
me, Thy servant, who now again draw near to the 
most holy sacrament of Thine only-begotten Son, Our Lord 
Jesus Christ. I approach as one who is sick, to the 
physician of life; as one unclean, to the fountain of mercy; 
as one blind, to the light of eternal brightness; as one poor 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1804 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


and needy, to the Lord of heaven and earth. I implore 
Thee, therefore, out of the abundance of Thy boundless 
mercy, that Thou wouldst vouchsafe to heal my sickness, to 
wash away my defilement, to give sight to my eyes, to enrich 
my poverty, and to clothe my nakedness; that I may re. 
ceive the bread of angels, the King of kings, the Lord of 
lords, with such reverence and hümility, such contrition and 
devotion, such purity and faith, such purpose and inten- 
tion, as may tend to the salvation of my soul. 

Grant to me, I beseech 'Ihee, not only to receive the 
sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord, but to profit 
by its substance and virtue. O God most merciful, grant me 
the grace to receive the body of Thine only-begotten Son, 
Jesus Christ, Our Lord, which He took of the Virgin Mary, 
in such wise, that I may be found worthy to be incorporated 
into His mystical body, and for evermore to be numbered 
among His members. 

O Father, most loving, I am about to welcome into my 
heart Thine own beloved Son, hidden under His sacramental 
veil: may it, in Thy great goodness, be mine, in the end, for 
all eternity face to face to gaze upon Him: 

Who with Thee liveth and reigneth, in the unity of the 
Holy Ghost, God, world without end. Amen. 


Prapers of St. Ambrose 


Gracious Lord Jesus Christ, though I, who am. a sinner, 
in nowise presume on any merits of my own, and put 

all my trust in Thy goodness and mercy, yet do I fear and 
tremble in drawing near to the Table on which is spread 
Thy banquet of all delights. Many a sin has sullied me in 
body and in soul because I did not restrain my thoughts nor 
guard my lips: nevertheless it is to Thee, O God of majesty 
and love, that I turn in my extremity, for Thou art the 
fount of mercy; to Thee, as quickly as I may, I speed: for 
Thou alone canst heal me; I take refuge under Thy pro- 
tection. I dare not face ‘Thee as my judge, but I cleave to 
Thee as my saviour. Thy mercy is above all Thy works.. 

Though I fear, because of my sins, yet I trust in Thee 
on account of Thy mercy. "Turn, then, those pitiful eyes 
of Thine upon me, O Jesus Christ, our everlasting king 
and Lord, Who art God and man, and Who for man wast 
crucified. Have mercy upon me, full of misery and of sin 
though I be, upon me, whose only hope is in Thee, because 
of Thy loving-kindness. 

Hail! Thou saving victim, offered up. for me and for 
all mankind upon the gibbet of the cross! 

Hail! thou glorious and most Precious Blood, that flow- 
est from the wounds of Jesus Christ, my crucified Lord; 
to wash away the sins of all the world! 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1805 


Forget not, O Lord, that I am one of those whom Thou 
hast created, and with Thine own blood hast redeemed. 

I repent me of my sins: I will strive to amend my ways. 

O' most merciful Father, put far from me all my in- 
iquities and all my offences; so that, by Thee made whole 
in body and in soul, I may be accounted worthy to ap- 
proach the Holy of holies. 

Grant, in fine, that the holy foretaste of Thy body and 
blood, which thou vouchsafest to me, a poor sinner, may 
be & pledge of the full remission of my sins and of the 
washing away for evermore of all my guilt. - 

From my mind may it chase away every sinful thought: 
in my will may it foster all holy desires: may it spur me 
on to the doing of works well-pleasing to Thee; and may 
it be to me, of body and of soul, à very sure protection and 
defence against the craft of all my enemies.: Amen. 


Sundap 

creat High Priest, our true Pontiff, Jesus Christ, 
` Who didst offer Thyself to God the Father a pure and 
spotless victim upon the altar of the cross for us miserable 
sinners, and didst give us Thy flesh to be our meat and Thy 
blood to be our drink, and didst ordain this mystery in 
the might of Thy holy spirit, saying: “Do this for the com- 
memoration of Me:” I pray Thee, by the same Thy blood, 
the great price of our salvation; I pray Thee, by that won- 
derful and unspeakable love wherewith Thou didst. deign so 
to love us, Thy unworthy creatures, as to wash us from 
our sins in Thine own blood: teach me, by Thy holy spirit, 
to approach so great a mystery with such reverence and 
devotion as are meet and right. Make me, by Thy grace, 
always so to believe and understand, to conceive and firmly 
to hold, to think and to speak, of this same deep mystery, as 

shall please Thee and be good for my soul. z 
Let Thy good spirit enter my heart, and there without the 
sound of words speak all truth. For Thy mysteries are ex- 
ceeding deep and covered with a sacred veil. For Thy great 
mercy's sake, grant me to approach Thy holy mysteries with 
a clean heart and a pure mind. Free my heart from all 
wrong and sinful, from all vain and hurtful thoughts. Guard 
me round about with the loving and watchful care of Thy 
holy angels: and before their most sure defence may the 
enemies of all good, flee in confusion. For the sake of this 
aread mystery and by the ministering hand of the holy angel 
of the sacrifice, do Thou, O Lord, preserve me and all Thy 
servants from that obstinacy of spirit wherein lies pride 
and vain-glory, envy and blasphemy, uncleanness and 
wrong-doing, doubt and mistrust. Let them be confounded 
aan persecute us. Let them perish that are bent upon our 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1806 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Monday 


ing of virgins and lover of chastity and innocence, ex- 

tinguish in my frame, by the dew of Thy heavenly 
grace, all flames of unlawful passion, that. I may thus for 
evermore abide before Thee in innocency of body and of 
soul. Mortify in my members the sting of the flesh, and 
repress in me every dangerous emotion. Together with all 
other virtues (each Thine own gift and, in sooth, well- 
pleasing to Thee), clothe me with true and abiding purity, 
that, unsullied in body and clean in heart, I may this day 
offer unto Thee the sacrifice of praise. 

Yet, how measurelessly deep should not be the contrition 
of heart, how unceasing the flow of tears, how exceeding the 
reverence and holy fear, how pure the body, how blameless 
the soul,.of;him who offers up a sacrifice that is of heaven 
and not of earth! Verily, in it, O Christ, is Thy flesh eaten 
‘of men; verily, in it do they drink of Thy blood. In it is 
the lowliness of earth lifted up, to be made one with the 
majesty of heaven. Thy holy angels, O God, stand indeed 
round about Thine altar; but it is Thou Thyself Who here, 
in wondrous and unutterable wise, art at once both priest 
and victim. 


Tuesday 


HO can worthily be present at this sacrifice unless 
Thou, O God, makest him worthy? I know, O Lord, 
yea, truly do I know, and this do confess to Thy loving- 
kindness, that I am unworthy to approach so great a 
mystery, by reason of my numberless sins and negligences; 
but I know, and truly with all my heart do I believe, and 
with my mouth confess, that Thou canst make me worthy— 
‘Thou Who alone canst make that clean which was born 
unclean—Thou Who alone canst make sinners to be just 
and holy. By this Thine almighty power I beseéch .Thee, O 
my God, to grant that I, a sinner, may assist at this sacri- 
fice with holy fear, with purity of heart, with tears of con- 
trition, with spiritual gladness and heavenly joy. May my 
soul feel the sweetness of Thy blessed presence, and be com- 
forted by the thought that round about me Thy holy angels 
keep untiring watch. 


Wednesday 


INDFUL, O Lord, of Thy worshipful passion, I approach 

Thine altar, sinner though I am, to join in offering 
unto Thee that sacrifice which Thou hast instituted and 
commanded to be offered in remembrance of Thee for our 
well-being. Receive it, I beseech Thee, O God most high, 
for Thy holy Church, and for the people whom Thou hast 
purchased with Thine own blood, In Thy mercy look down 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1807 


with pity upon us all Be pleased, O Lord, to have regard 
unto the sorrows of nations, the troubles of the poor, the 
gfoanings of those in bondage, the desolation of orphans, the 
weariness of wayiarers, the helplessness of the sick, the 
Struggles of the dying, the failing strength of the aged, the 
trials.and.ambitious hopes of young men, the high desires of 
maidens, and the grief of widows. 


Thursday u 


Hou, O Lord, hast mercy upon all, and hatest nothing 

that Thou hast made. Remember how frail our nature 
is, and that Thou art our Father and our God. Be not 
angry with us for ever, and shut not up Thy tender mercies 
in displeasure. It is not with any hope in any righteous- 
ness of our own that we lay our prayers before Thee, but 
with filial trust. in the multitude of Thy tender mercies. 
Take away from us, O Lord, our iniquities, and mercifully 
kindle in us the fire of Thy holy spirit. Take away from 
us our hearts of stone and fashion within us hearts of 
flesh, hearts to love Thee, to long for Thee, to delight in 
Thee, to be submissive to Thee—hearts whose only happi- 
ness shall be in Thee. We beseech Thee, O Lord, to look 
down with favor upon Thy people while they pay their 
vows to Thy most holy name; and that the desire of none 
may be in vain, and the petitions of none unfulfilled, do 
Thou inspire our prayers, that they may be such as Thou 
delightest to hear and answer. 


Friday 


LORD, Who art our all-holy Father, we plead to Thee 
O especially on behalf of the souls of the faithful de- 
parted. May this great sacrament of Thy love be to them 
health and salvation, refreshment and joy. My Lord and 
my God, may it be their happiness this very day to be ad- 
mitted to Thy heavenly banquet. May they for evermore 
feast on Thee, the living bread that came down from 
beaven, and gave life to the world; may they partake with 
‘us of. Thy holy and blessed flesh—the fiesh of the Lamb 
without spot, Who taketh away the sins of the world—the 
very flesh which, being conceived of the Holy Ghost, Thou, 
in the hallowed womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary, didst 
make Thine own; may they drink of that loving stream 
which the soldier’s. spear drew out of Thy. sacred side, that 
they may be thereby strengthened and quickened, rested and 
comforted, and may sing with joy Thy praise and glory, 

Vouchsafe, O Lord, in Thy mercy, to impart to the bread, 
which is about to be offered unto Thee, the fulness of Thy. 
blessing and the consecration of Thy Godhead. Let there 
come down thereon the invisible and ineffable majesty of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1808 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Thine holy spirit, as of old time He came down upon the 
sacrifices of. our fathers. May His might change our obla- 
tion into Thy body and blood, and teach me, unworthy com- 
municant that I am, to participate in the celebration of 
these sacred mysteries with purity of heart, with tearful 
devotion, with reverence and with awe. Do Thou, O heay- 
enly Father, graciously receive the sacrifice we offer for the 
salvation of Thy children, the living and the dead, through 
Jesus Christ, Thine only Son Our Lord, 


Saturday 


^ ENTREAT Thee, O Lord, by this most holy mystery of 

. Thy. body and blood—our daily meat and drink in Thy 
Church—whereby we come to have part in the one most 
high. Godhead; do Thou endow me with Thy holy virtues, 
that, therewith adorned, I may with a good conscience ap- 
proach Thine altar, and that this heavenly sacrament may 
thus be unto me salvation and life; for Thou hast said with 
Thine own holy and blessed mouth: “The bread which I 
will give is My flesh, for the life of the world. I am the 
living bread which came down from heaven. If any man 
eat of this bread he shall live for ever.” O bread of sweet- 
ness, cure the palate of my heart that I may taste and 
see how sweet is Thy love. Heal all my ills, that hence- 
forth I may find sweetness in nothing out of Thee. O 
most pure and most delicious bread that art able to satisfy 
the taste of every man; day by day Thou comfortest us, 
nor dost Thou ever fail us. May my heart ever be nour- 
ished by Thee and may the sweet savor of Thee penetrate 
the innermost depth of my being. The angels feed on 
Thee to their full content: suffer man, on his journey 
through this vale of tears, to feed on Thee to the best 
of his ability, lest, unrefreshed by this one Viaticum, he 
faint by the way. 


O Thou holy. bread, Thou living bread, Thou pure 
bread, that, coming down from heaven, dost give life to the 
world, enter into my heart and wash away every stain both 
of flesh and of spirit. Choose my heart for Thy dwelling- 
place; heal me and cleanse me within: and without; be 
Thou my sure defence; be Thou to me an abiding help for 
soul and hody; scatter the crafty enemies that lie in wait to 
ruin me; may they flee from the dread presence of Thy 
Majesty. As for me, safeguarded by Thee in soul and in 
body, may I never swerve from the right road, but surely 
reach Thy kingdom, where—not in dim mysteries, as in 
this dark world of ours, but—face to face we shall look 
upon Thee. 'There wilt Thou satisfy me with Thyself and 
fill me with such sweetness that I shall neither hunger nor 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1809 


thirst for evermore: Who with God the Father and the 
Holy Ghost livest and reignest world without end. Amen. : 


Praper to the Blessed Wirgin 

O most blessed Virgin Mary, mother most loving anf 

most merciful, I, a miserable and unworthy sinner 
come before thee, with the heartfelt prayer, that of thy 
loving-kindhess thou wouldst vouchsafe graciously to be 
near me and all who throughout the whole Church are to 
receive the body and blood of thy Son this day, even as 
thou wert near thy.most dear Son as He hung.bleeding on 
the cross, that, aided by thy gracious help, we may worthily 
offer up a pure and acceptable sacrifice. in the sight of the 
holy and undivided Trinity. Amen. 


Praper to St. Joseph . 
Appy wast thou, O blessed Joseph, to whom it was 
given not only to see and to hear that God whom 
many kings desired to see, and saw not, to hear, and heard 
not; but also to bear Him in thine arms, to embrace Him, 
to clothe Him, and to guard and defend Him. 
Y. Pray for us, O blessed Joseph. W. That we may be 
made worthy of the promises of Christ. 


Let us pray 

cop, Who hast given unto us a royal priesthood, vouch- 

safe, we beseech 'Thee, that as blessed Joseph was 
found worthy to touch with his hands, and to bear in his 
arms, Thine only-begotten Son, born of the Virgin Mary, 
so may we be made fit, by cleanness of heart and blame- 
lessness of life, to minister at Thy holy altar; may we this 
day with reverent devotion partake of the sacred body and 
blood of 'Thine only-bégotten Son, and may we in the 
world to come be accounted worthy of receiving an ever- 
lesting reward; through the same Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Thanksgiving 
Indulgence of five years, Jor saying the following Antiphon 
Canticle, Psalm, Versicles, and Prayers. Plenary under usua 
condicions if recited daily jor an entire month. S. Pen. Ap., Oct, 
Antiphon. 
ET us now sing the — of the three children which 
the saints sang of old time in the fiery furnace, giving 


praise to the Lord. 
The Benedicite 


LL ye works of the Lord, bless the Lord: praise and 
exalt Him above all for ever. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1810 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


O ye angels of the Lord, bless the Lord: bless the Lord, 
O ye heavens. 

O all ye waters that are above the heavens, bless the 
Lord: bless the Lord, O all ye powers of the Lord. 

O ye sun and moon, bless the Lord: bless the Lord, o ye 
stars of heaven. 

O all ye showers and dew, bless ye the Lord: bless the 
Lord, O all ye spirits of God. 

O ye fire and heat, bless the Lord: bless the Lord, O ye 
winter and summer. 

© ye dews and hoarfrost, bless the Lord; bless the Lord, 
O ye frost and cold. 

O ye ice and snow, bless the Lord: bless the Lord, O ye 
nights and days. 

O ye light and darkness, bless the Lord; bless the Lord, 
O ye lightnings and clouds. 

O let the earth bless the Lord; let it praise and exalt Him 
above all for ever. 

O ye mountains and hills, bless the Lord: bless the Lord, 
O all ye things that spring up in the earth. 

O ye fountains, bless the.Lord: bless the Lord, O ye seas 
and rivers. 

O ye whales, and all that move in the water, bless the 
Lord: bless the Lord, O all ye fowls of the air. 

O all ye beasts and cattle, bless the Lord: bless the Lord, 
O ye sons of men. 

O let Israel bless the Lord; let them praise and exalt Him 
above all for ever. 

O ye priests of the Lord, bless the Lord; bless the Lord, O 
ye servants of the Lord. 

O ye spirits and souls of the just, bless the Lord: bless the 
Lord, O ye holy and humble of heart. 

O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the Lord: praise 
and exalt Him above all for ever. . 

Let us bless the Father, and the Son, with the Holy 
Ghost: let us praise and exalt Him above all for ever. 

Blessed art Thou, O Lord, in the firmament of heaven: 
worthy to be praised and glorified, and exalted above all 
for ever. 


Ps. 150. 


RAISE ye the Lord in His holy places: praise Him in 
the firmament of His power. 
Praise Him for His mighty acis: praise Him according 
to the multitude of His greatness. 
Praise Him with sound of trumpet: praise Him with 
psaltery and harp. 
Praise Him with timbrel and choir: praise Him with 
strings and organs. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


eM rae” 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1811 


Praise Him on high sounding cymbals: praise Him on 
Cymbals of joy: let every spirit praise the Lord. 
Glory be to the Father, etc. 
The Antiphon is repeated. 
Lord, have mercy 0n us. Christ, have mercy on us. Lord, 
have mercy on us. 
Our Father. 
And lead us not into temptation. 
. But deliver us from evil. 
May all Thy works praise Thee, O Lord. 
. And may Thy saints for ever bless Thee. 
The saints shall rejoice in glory. 
. They shall sing for joy upon their beds of rest. 
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us. 
. But unto Thy name give glory. 
O Lord, hear my prayer. 
. And let my cry come unto Thee. 


SUSANA SU SER 


Let us pray 


cop, Who didst enable the three holy youths to pass 

unscathed through the fiery furnace: grant that we 
Thy children may not be consumed by the flames of vice. 
. Prevent, we beseech Thee, O Lord, our actions by Thy 
holy inspirations, and carry them on by Fhy gracious assis- 
tance: that every prayer and work of ours may begin always 
from Thee and through Thee be happily ended. 

Grant unto us, we beseech Thee, O Lord, the grace to 
quench within ourselves the fire of evil desires; even as 
Thou didst endow blessed Lawrence with strength to tri- 
umph over the flames that tortured him. Through Christ 
our Lord. Amen, E 


Praper of Ht. Thomas Aquinas 


Give thanks to Thee, O Lord, most holy, Father al- 

mighty, eternal God, that Thou hast vouchsafed, for 
no merit of mine own, but out of Thy pure mercy, to ap- 
pease the hunger of my soul with the precious body and 
blood of Thy Son, Our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Humbly I implore Thee, let not this holy communion be 
to me an increase of guilt unto my punishment, but an 
availing plea unto pardon and salvation. Let it be to me 
the armor of faith and the shield of good will. May it 
root out from my heart all vice; may it utterly subdue my 
evil passions and all my unruly desires. May it perfect me 
in charity and patience; in humility and obedience; and in 
all other virtues. May it be my sure defence against the 
snares laid for me by my enemies, visible and invisible. 
May it restrain and quiet all my evil impulses, and make 
me ever cleave to Thee Who art the one true God. May J 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1812 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


owe to it a happy ending of my life. And do Thou, O 
heavenly Father, vouchsafe one day to call me, a sinner, to 
that ineffable banquet, where Thou, together with Thy Son 
and the Holy Ghost, art to Thy saints true and unfailing 
light, fulness of content, joy for evermore, gladness without 
alloy, consummate and everlasting happiness. 

Through the same Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Indulgence 3 years; Plenary, under usual conditions, 1f recited 
daily for one entire month. S. Pen. Ap., Nov. 22, 1934. 


Praper of $t. Bonaventure 


sweetest Lord Jesus Christ, I implore Thee, pierce 

the very marrow of my soul with the delightful, 
health-giving dart of Thy love, with true, tranquil, holy, 
apostolic charity, so that my whole soul may ever languish 
and faint for love of Thee and for desire of Thee alone. 

May it long and pine for Thy courts; may it. ever desire 
to be dissolved and to be with Thee. Grant that my soul 
may hunger for Thee, Who art the bread of angels, the 
comforting nourishment of all holy souls, our daily and 
most delectable bread, our supersubstantial bread, in which 
is found every sweet delight. May my heart ever hunger 
for: Thee, on whom the angels lovingly gaze; may it feed 
on Thee;.and may the innermost depths of. my being be 
filled with the sweetness which comes from having tasted 
Thee. May my soul ever thirst for Thee, Who art the 
source of life, the fount of wisdom and. knowledge, the 
brightness of everlasting light, the flood of all true happi- 
ness, the riches of the house of Gad. 

May I at all times think of 'Thee; may I ever seek Thee 
and ever find Thee; may I always follow thee and reach 
Thee; may Thy holy name be in my heart and on my 
lips; and to Thy praise and glory may every work of mine 
be done. 

Humble and disereet, loving and happy, ever ready and 
cheerful in Thy service, may I persevere, by Thy grace, even 
unto the end. 

Be Thou alone and ‘evermore my hope; be Thou all my 
trust; be Thou my wealth, my delight, my joy, my consola- 
tion, my rest, my endless peace. Be Thou to me as 2 goodly 
taste, as a pleasant perfume, as a soothing sweetness. Be 
Thou my food and my refreshment; my refuge and my help; 
my wisdom; my portion, mine own possession and my 
treasure. In Thee, O Lord, may my mind and my heart 
remain fixed and firm, and rooted immovably for ever- 
more. Amen. 


Indulgence 3 1.4 C. Indulg., Dec. 20, 1884; S. Pen. Ap, 
Nov. 16, 1917 and. Oct. 3, 1936. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


for an entire month, 
March, 12, 1936. 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Adore Te 7Betote 
Hymn of Si. Thomas Aquinas 


copHeAD hid, devoutly I adore Thee, 

Who truly art within the forms before me; 
To Thee my heart I bow with bended knee, 
As failing quite in contemplating Thee. 
Sight, touch, and taste in Thee are each deceived; 
The ear alone most safely is believed: 
I believe all the Son of God has spoken, 
Than Truth's own word there is no truer token. 


God only on the cross lay hid from view; 

But here lies hid at once the manhood too: 
And I, in both professing my belief, 

Make the same prayer as the repentant thief. 


Thy wounds, as Thomas saw, I do not see: 
Yet ‘Thee confess my Lord and God to be: 
Make me believe ‘Thee ever more and more; 
In Thee my hope, in Thee my love to store. 


O Thou memorial of Our Lord's own dying! 

O living bread, to mortals life supplying! 

Make ‘Thou my soul henceforth on Thee to live: 
Ever a taste of heavenly sweetness give. 


'O loving Pelican! O Jesu Lord! 

Unclean I am, but clean I am in Thy blood . 
Of which a single drop, for sinners spilt, 

Can purge the entire world from all its guilt. 
Jesu! Whom for the present veil'd I see, 
"What I so thirst for, oh, vouchsafe to me: 
That I may see Thy countenance unfolding, 
And may be blest Thy glory in beholding. 


1813 


Indulgence 3 years; Plenary, under usual conditions if recited 
. C. Indulg., June 15, 1895; S. Pen. AP., 


Offering ands Prayer of St. Sgnatíus Lopola (“Suscipe”) 


AKE, O Lord, and receive all my liberty, my memory, 
my understanding, and my whole will Thou hast 


http://ccwatershed.org 


given me all that I am and all that I possess: I surrender 
it all to Thee that ‘Thou mayest dispose of it according to 
Thy will Give me only Thy love and Thy grace; with 
these I will be rich enough, and will have no more to desire, 

Indulgence 3 years; Plenary, under usual conditions 1f recited 


gaily Jor an an entire month, S. C. Indulg., May 26, 1883; S. Pen. Ap., 
ec. 


1814 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Anima Christi 


oun of Christ, be my sanctification. 
Body of Christ, be my salvation. 
Blood of Christ, fill'all my veins. 
Water of Christ's side, wash out my stains, 
Passion of Christ, my comfort be. 
O good Jesu, listen to me. 
In Thy wounds I fain would hide, 
Ne'er to be parted from Thy side. 
Guard me should the foe assail me. 
Call me when my life shall fail me. 
Bid me come to Thee above, 
With Thy saints to sing Thy love 
World without end. Amen. 
Indulgence 300 days; 7 years if said after Holy Communion; 


Plenary, if recited daily for one entire month. S. C. Indulg., 
Jan. 9, 1854. 


Indulgence 10 years, if this prayer is piously recited before an 
image or picture of Christ crucified, Plenary, if said after having 
confessed and received holy communion, and adding a prayer 
"n the intentions of the Holy Father. —8$. C. Indulg., July 31, 

858; S. Pen. Ap., Feb. 2, 1934. 


Praper to Jesus Crucified 


ook down upon me, good and gentle Jesus, while 
before Thy face I humbly kneel, and with burning 
, soul pray and beseech Thee to fix deep in 
my heart lively sentiments of faith, hope, 
and charity, true contrition for my sins, 
and a firm purpose of amendment; and 
while I contemplate with great love and 
tender pity Thy five wounds, pondering 
over them within me, and calling to mind 
the words which David Thy prophet said 
of Thee, my Jesus: “They have pierced My 
hands and My feet; they have numbered all 
My bones” (Ps. xri. 17, 18). 


our Father, Hail Mary, Glory, for the intentions of the Pope. 
Another Form of Devotions for Holy Communion 
Before Communion 


An Act of Faith and Adoration 


Y tord Jesus Christ, I believe that Thou art truly 
present in the Blessed Sacrament. I believe that in 
holy communion I shall receive Thy sacred body and Thy 
Precious Blood. My faith in Thy real presence in the Holy 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1 — 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1815 


Eucharist is firmly founded on Thy word, O eternal Truth. 
My Saviour and my God, with the angels who surround Thy 
altar-throne, I bow down in humble adoration before Thy 
majesty. 

An Act of Hope 


Esus, my God, Who in this wonderful sacrament hast left 
j us a memorial of Thy passion and a pledge of future 
glory, I hope in Thee because Thou art infinitely good, al- 
mighty, and faithful to Thy promises. Through the merits 
of Thy Precious Blood I hope to obtain the pardon of my 
sins, the grace of final perseverance, and the everlasting 
happiness of heaven. 

“In the shadow of Thy wings will I hope, until iniquity 
pass away." (Ps. 56, 2.) 

"Let Thy mercy come upon me, O Lord; Thy salvation, 
according to Thy word.” (Ps. 118, 41.) 


An Act of Love and Desire 


my Jesus, I love Thee because Thou art infinitely good. 
O Thou knowest well that I love Thee, but I do not love 
Thee enough. Oh, make me to love Thee more! O Love 
which burnest always and never failest, my God, Thou Who. 
art charity itself, come, and kindle in my heart that divine 
fire which consumes the saints and transforms them into 
Thee, Eucharistic Heart of my Jesus, Whose blood is the 
life of my soul, may it be no longer I that live, but do Thou 
alone live in me, i . p 


An Act of Contrition 


Y LORD and my God, I detest all the sins of my life. 

I am truly sorry that I have offended Thee, because 
Thou art infinitely good. I firmly resolve, by the help of 
Thy grace, never to offend Thee again, and carefully to 
avoid the occasions of sin. “Have mercy on me, O God, ac- 
cording to Thy great mercy." (Ps. 50,3) “A contrite and 
humble heart, O God, Thou dost not despise.” (Ps. 51, 19.) 


An Act of Humility 


LORD of glory, O God of infinite sanctity, who am I 

that Thou shouldst deign to come to me!” “The 
heavens are not pure in Thy sight,” and wilt Thou dwell in 
my heart? “Lord, I am not worthy that Thou shouldst 
enter under my roof.” The consciousness of my unworthi- 
ness wouli prompt me to exclaim, “Depart from me, O 
Lord, for I am a sinner,” but Thy pressing invitation to 
approach Thy holy table encourages me, and dispels all my 
fears. “Here I am, for Thou. didst call me.” Come, then, 
O Jesus, take possession of a heart that wishes to belong 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1816 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


to.Thee. “Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a 
right spirit within me." (Ps. 50, 12.) “Have mercy on me, 
O God, and according to the multitude of Thy tender mercies 
blot out my iniquity.” (Ps. 50, 3.) 


Domine Mon Sum 3Bignus 


orp, I am not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under 
my roof; but only say the word, and my soul shall be 
healed. 


ay the body of Our Lord Jesus Christ keep my soul 
; unto life everlasting. .Amen. 


: After, Communion 
Welcome 


Acts of Faith, Adoration, Hope, Lobe, Consecration, l 
Reparation and Thanksgibing 


te ow, therefore, your King is here, Whom you have 
` chosen and desired.” (1 Kings 12.) 


Esus! Jesus! Jesus! 

-Thou hast come to me in the Sacrament of Thy love. 
Thou hast been pleased to make my poor heart Thy sanc- 
tuary. 

Welcome, Jesus, welcome! Thou art the God of my heart, 
and the God that is my portion for ever. I praise Thee and 
bless Thee for Thy goodness and mercy. "Let all Thy works, 
O Lord, praise Thee; and let Thy saints bless Thee.” (Ps. 
144, 10.) 


Faith and Adoration — 
) ECEIVE, O Lord, my most profound homage in union 

LX, with that of the angels and the saints. I bow down 

before Thee, and with all the powers of my soul I. adore 
Thee.. Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. 

“I see not with mine eyes Thy wounds, as Thomas saw, 
Yet own Thee for my God with equal love and awe; 
Oh, grant me, that my faith may ever firmer be, 

That all my hope and love may still repose in Thee.” 
—Annus Sanctus. 

Esus, light of the world, I believe in Thee, because Thou 

art truth itself, but do Thou increase and invigorate my 
aith that it may be productive of great things to Thy glory. 
Grant that I may do all things to please Thee. 


“Quid hoc ad ceternitatem?” All day long, in every vary- 
ing circumstance, may my watchword be: “How does this 
took in the light of eternity?” i 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1817 


HOU Who of old didst love Thy hand to lay 
On the dull, vacant eyes that craved for light, 
Behold 1 come to Thee, and, crying, pray: 
O Christ, O Son of David, give me sight!" 
“A faith scarce clouded by the mists of earth, 
A faith that pierceth heaven I ask of Thee, 
Faith to prize all things by their lasting worth: 
Thou canst, Thou wilt—O Lord, that I may see!" 
. -—Before the Most Holy, by Mother mary Loyola. 
How, O Lord, Thy ways to me, and teach me Thy 
paths.” (Ps. 24, 4) No one knows better than I 
how blind and weak I am, but I wish to know, I wish to see, 
what Thou desirest of me, and I will try with all my heart, 
regardless of all obstacles, to accomplish it."—Ibid. 

May the holy faith which ever illumines my mind shine 
forth in all my actions before the world to the glory of 
Thy name. 

ope 


ESUS, I hope in Thee, I put all my trust in Thee, because 

Thou art full of compassion and mercy. “Thou art my 
Father; my God, and the support of my salvation.” (Ps. 
88, 27.) - 

“To Thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my soul: In Thee, O 
God, I put my trust.” (Ps. 24, 1, 2.) 

Strengthen my hope, O Lord, and vouchsafe in Thy mercy 
that, fighting and conquering self on earth, I may one day 
rejoice. triumphantly with Thee in heaven. 

JESUS, lying here concealed before mine eye, 
I pray Thou grant me that for which I ceaseless sigh, 
To see the vision clear of Thine unveiled face, 
Blest with the glories bright that fill Thy dwelling-place.” 
—Annus Sanctus. 
Lobe 


ESUS, I love Thee, because Thou art infinitely good. I 
love Thee because Thou hast redeemed me by Thy 
Precious Blood; I love Thee and thank Thee because Thou 
hast given Thyself to me in the Sacrament of Thy love. 
Oh, grant that I may love Thee ever more and more. 
Thou art the Lamb of God, the. Lamb without spot, that 
takest away the sins of the world. Take away from me 
whatever is hurtful to me and displeasing to Thee, and give 
me What Thou knowest to be pleasing to Thee and profitable 
to me, 


May the sweet flame of Thy love consume my soul, so 
that ! may die to the world jor love of Thee, Who hast 
vouchsafed to die upon the cross for love of me. 


Y cop, my only good, Thou art all mine: Grant that I 
may be all Thine. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1818 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Consecration 


Y LOVING Jesus, out of the grateful love I bear Thee, 
and to make reparation for my unfaithfulness to 
grace, I give Thee my heart, and I consecrate myself wholly 
to Thee; and with Thy help I purpose never to sin again. 
Dear Lord, I could never vie with Thee in generosity, but 
I love Thee; deign to accept my poor heart, and, though it 
is worth nothing, yet it may become something by Thy 
grace. Since it loves Thee, do Thou make it good and take 
it into Thy custody. 
Praper 
LORD Jesus, do Thou henceforth alone live within me. 
May the tongue whereon Thou hast rested never move 
to utter words other than such as would proceed from Thy 
meek and humble Heart. May the thoughts of my heart be 
in unison with Thine. May that mind which is in Thee 
be likewise in me. May I be consumed with the same de- 
sires; may I be one heart, one soul with Thee, O Jesus, 
Wnhom I bear within me. And let this union of my heart 
with Thine shed its influence over my whole life and con- 
duct at all times and in all events, that so I may be able 
to draw other hearts to love Thee, and to devote themselves 
to Thy interests. This is the desire, O my Jesus, with which 
Thou dost inspire me— that Thy sweet name may be hal- 
lowed, that Thy kingdom may come, and extend, and 
triumph over all hearts and nations, and that Thy will, 
which is ever one with Thy Father's, may be perfectly ac~ 
complished. Amen, Amen. 
, -—The Voice of the Sacred Heart. 


Oblation 


SOVEREIGN and true leader, O Christ, my king, I kneel 

before Thee here like a vassal in the old feudal times 
to take my oath of fealty, I place my joined hands within 
Thy wounded hands and promise Thee inviolable loyalty. 
I dedicate to Thee all the powers of my soul, all the senses 
of my body, all the affections of my heart. 

AKE, O Lord, all my liberty. Receive my memory, my 

understanding, and my whole wil. All that I am, all 
that I have, Thou hast given me, and I restore it all to 
Thee, to be disposed of according to Thy good pleasure. 
Give me only Thy love and Thy grace; with these I am 
rich enough, and I desire nothing more. 


Thanksgiving 
«f WILL extol Thee, O God, my king, and I will bless 
Thy name forever; yea, forever and ever." (Ps. 144, 1.) 


1Oblation and Thanksgiving, adapted from Confession 
and Communion, by Mother Mary Loyola. ` 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1819 


O ye angels, archangels, thrones and dominations, prin- 
cipalities and powers, virtues of heaven, cherubim and sera- 
phim, adore our God for me; thank Him, and love Him with 
me. Patriarchs and prophets, apostles, all ye martyrs of 
Christ, holy confessors, virgins of the Lord, and all ye 
saints, adore Him, thank Him, love Him with me. 


ornHER of God, adore thy Son for me, thank Him, and 
love Him, for me. : 
Oh, give thankş to the Lord because He is good, because 
His mercy endureth forever. 
Eternal Father, look upon the face of Thy Christ. 
Through Him and with Him and in Him be to Thee in the 
unity of the Holy Spirit all honor and glory. 


Anima Christi 


oUL of Christ, be my sanctification, 
Body of Christ, be my salvation. 
Blood of Christ, fill all my veins. 
Water of Christ's side, wash out my stains. 
Passion of Christ, my comfort be. 
O good Jesu, listen to me. 
In Thy wounds I fain would hide, 
Ne’er to be parted from Thy side. 
Guard me should the foe assail me. 
Call me when my life shall fail me. 
Bid me come to Thee above, 
With Thy saints to sing Thy love 
World without end. Amen. 
—Cardinal Newman’s translation. 


Indulgences: 300 days, each time. Seven years, if said 
pod communion. Plenary, once a momth.—Pius IX, Jan. 9, 


Ejaculations 


UCHARISTIC Heart of Jesus, 
have mercy on us! 
Indulgence: 300 days, each time.—Pius X, Dec. 26, 1907. 


1vINE Heart of Jesus, convert sinners, save the dying, 
set free the holy souls in purgatory. 


Indulgence: 300 days, cach time.—Pius X, Nov. 6, 1906. 
Now say the prayer to Jesus Crucified, page 1814. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1820 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Litanies 
Litany of the Name of Jesus 


orp, have mercy on us. 
Christ, have mercy on 
Lord, have mercy on us. 
Jesus, hear us. 
Jesus, graciously hear us. 
God the Father of heaven, ` 
God the Son, Redeemer of 
the world, 
God, the Holy Ghost, 
Holy Trinity, one God, 
Jesus, Son of the living God, 
Jesus, splendor of the 
Father, 
Jesus, brightness of eternal 
light, 
Jesus, king of glory, 
Jesus, sun of justice, 
Jesus, son of the Virgin 
Mary, 
Jesus, most amiable, 
Jesus, most admirable, 
Jesus, mighty God, 
Jesus, father of the world to 
come, 
Jesus, angel of great counsel, 
Jesus, most powerful, 
Jesus, most patient, 
Jesus, most obedient, . 
Jesus, meek and humble of 
heart, 
Jesus, lover of chastity, 
Jesus, lover of us, 
Jesus, God of peace, 
Jesus, author of life, 
Jesus, example of virtues, 
Jesus, zealous lover of souls, 
Jesus, our God, 
Jesus, our refuge, 
Jesus, father of the poor, 
Jesus, treasure of the 
faithful, 
Jesus, good shepherd, 


i Have mercy on us. 
2 Jesus, deliver us. 


Jesus, true light, 


Jesus, eternal wisdom, 


Jesus, infinite goodness, 

Jesus, our way and our life, 

Jesus, joy of angels, 

Jesus, king of patriarchs, ` 

Jesus, master of apostles, 

Jesus, teacher of evangelists, 

Jesus, strength of martyrs, 

Jesus, light of confessors, 

Jesus, purity of virgins, 

Jesus, crown of all saints, 

Be merciful, spare us, O 
Jesus. 

Be merciful, graciously hear 
us, O Jesus. 

From all evil? 

From all sin, 

From Thy wrath, 

From the snares of the 
devil, 

From the spirit of 
fornication, 

From everlasting death, 

From the neglect of Thy 
inspirations, 

Through the mystery of Thy 
holy incarnation, 

‘Through Thy nativity, 

Through Thine infancy, 

‘Through Thy most divine 
life, 

Through Thy labors, 

Through Thine agony and 
passion, 

‘Through Thy cross and 
dereliction, 

‘Through Thy sufferings, 

Through Thy death and 
burial, 

‘Through Thy resurrection, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1821 

Through Thine Ascension, 

Through Thy institution of 
the most holy Eucharist, 


Lamb of God, Who takest away the sins of the world, spare 
us, O Jesus. 

Lamb of God, etc., graciously hear us, O Jesus. 

Lamb of God, etc.. ” have mercy on us, O Jesus, 

Jesus, hear us. Jesus, graciously hear us. 


Through Thy joys, 
Through Thy glory, 


Let us pray 
LORD, Jesus Christ, Who hast said: Ask, and ye shall 
receive; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you; grant, we beseech Thee, to us who ask the 
gift of Thy most divine love, that we may ever love Thee 
with all our hearts, and in all our words and actions, and 
never cease praising 'Thee. 

Give us, O Lord, & perpetual fear and love of Thy holy 
name; for Thou never failest to govern those whom Thou 
dost solidly establish in Thy love. Who livest and reignest, 
world without end. Amen. 


Indulgence of seven years; Plenary, under usual conditions ty 
recited daily for an entire month. S. Pen. Ap., Jan. 2, 1933. 


Litanp of the Sacred Heart of Jesus 


orp have mercy on us. 
Christ, have mercy on 
us. 
Lord, have mercy on us. 
Christ, hear us. 
Christ, graciously hear us. 
God the Father of heaven, 
have mercy on us. 
God the Son, Redeemer of 
the world, have mercy on 


us, z 
God the Holy Ghost, have 
mercy On us. i 
Holy Trinity, one God, have 
mercy On us. 


Heart of Jesus, Son of the . 


Eternal Father, 

Heart of Jesus, formed in 
the womb of the Virgin 
Mother by the Holy Ghost, 

Heart of Jesus, united sub- 
1 Have Mercy on us. 


stantially with the Word 
of God, 

Heart of Jesus, of infinite 
majesty, 


Heart of Jesus, holy temple 


of God, 

Heart of Jesus, tabernacle of 
the Most High. 

Heart of Jesus, house of 
God and gate of heaven, 

Heart of Jesus, glowing fur- 
nace of charity, 

Heart of Jesus, vessel of jus- 
-tice and love, 

Heart of Jesus, full of good- 
ness and love, 

Heart of Jesus, abyss of all 
virtues, 

Heart of Jesus, most worthy 
of all praise, | 

Heart of Jesus, king and 
center of all hearts, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1822 


Heart of Jesus, in whom are 
al the treasures of wis- 
dom and knowledge, 

Heart of Jesus, in whom 
dwelleth all the fullness of 
the divinity, 

Heart of Jesus, in whom the 
Father is well pleased, 

Heart of Jesus, of whose 
fullness we have all re- 
ceived, . 

Heart of Jesus, desire of the 
eternal hills, 

Heart of Jesus, patient and 

. rich in mercy, 

Heart of Jesus, rich to all 
who invoke Thee, 

Heart of Jesus, fount of life 
and holiness, 

Heart of Jesus, propitiation 
for our sins, 

Heart of Jesus, loaded down 
with opprobrium, 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Heart of Jesus, bruised for 
our offenses, 

Heart of Jesus, made obedi- 
ent unto death, 

Heart of Jesus, pierced with 
a lance, 

Heart of Jesus, source of all 
consolation, 

Heart of Jesus, our life and 
resurrection, 

Heart of Jesus, our peace 
and reconciliation, 

Heart of Jesus, victim for 
our sin, 

Heart of Jesus, salvation of 
those who hope in Thee, 
Heart of Jesus, hope of those 

who die in Thee, 
Heart of Jesus, delight of all 
saints, 


Lamb of God, Who takest away ihe sins of the world, spare 


us, O Lord. 


Lamb of God, etc. graciously hear us, O Lord. 
Lamb of God, etc., have mercy on us. 

XY. Jesus, meek and humble of Heart, 

ly. Make our hearts like to Thine. 


Let us pray 


LMIGHTY and everlasting God, graciously regard the 
Heart of Thy well-beloved Son and the acts of praise 


and satisfaction which He renders Thee on behalf of us 
sinners; and through their merit, grant pardon to us who 
implore Thy mercy, in the name of Thy Son Jesus Christ, 
Who liveth and reigneth with Thee in the unity of the Holy 
Spirit, God, world without end. Amen. 


Indulgence, 7 years; Plenary, under usual conditions if recited 
daily for an entire month. S. Pen. Ap., Mar. 10, 1933. 


Litany of tbe Blessed Virgin Mary 


orp, have mercy on us. 
Christ, have mercy on 
us. 
Lord, have mercy on us. 


Christ, hear us. 

Christ, graciously hear us. . 

God the Father of heaven, 
have mercy on us. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


God the Son, Redeemer of 
the world, have mercy on 
us. 


God, the Holy Ghost, have. 


mercy on us. 
Holy Trinity, one God, have 
. mercy on us. 
Holy Mary, 
Holy Mother of God, 
Holy Virgin of virgins, 
Mother of Christ, 
Mother of divine grace, 
Mother most pure, 
Mother most chaste, - 
Mother inviolate, 
Mother undefiled, 
Mother most amiable, 
Mother most admirable, 
Mother of good counsel, 
Mother of our Creator, 

. Mother of our Saviour, 
Virgin most prudent, 
Virgin most venerable, 
Virgin most renowned, 
Virgin most powerful, 
Virgin most merciful, 
Virgin most faithrul, 
Mirror of justice, 

Seat of wisdom, 


1823 


- Cause of our joy, 


Spiritual vessel, 

Vessel of honor, 

Singular vessel of devotion, 
Mystical Rose, 

Tower of David, 

Tower of ivory, 

House of gold, 

Ark of the covenant, 


.. Gate of heaven, 


Morning star, 
Health of the sick, 
Refuge of sinners, 


Comforter of the afflicted, 


Help of Christians, 

Queen of angels, 

Queen of patriarchs, 

Queen of prophets, 

Queen of apostles, 

Queen of martyrs, 

Queen of confessors, 

Queen of virgins, 

Queen of all saints, 

Queen conceived without 


original sin. 
Queen assumed into Heaven, 


Queen of the most holy 
Rosary, 
Queen of peace. 


Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world, spare 


us, O Lord. 


Lamb of God, Who takest away the sins of the world, gra. 


ciously hear us, O Lord. 


Lamb of God, Who takest away the sins of the world, have 


mercy on us. 
Christ, hear us. 


Christ, graciously hear us. 


X. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God, W. That we may be 
made worthy of the promises of Christ. 
Let us pray 


rant unto us, Thy servants, we beseech Thee, O Lord 
God, at all times, to enjoy health of soul and health 


of body; and by the glorious intercession of blessed Mary, 
ever a virgin, when freed from the sorrows of this present 
life, to enter into that joy which hath no end. Through 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Indulgence seven years; Plenary, under usual conditions if 
recited daily for an entire month. S. Pen. AP, Mar. 28, 1933. 


1 Pray for us. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1824 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


The Memorare 

EMEMBER, O most gracious Virgin Mary! that never 
was it known that any one who fled to thy protec- 
tion; implored thy help, and sought thy intercession, was left 
unaided. Inspired with this confidence, I fly unto thee, 
O Virgin of virgins, my Mother! To thee I come, before 
thee I stand, sinful and sorrowful. O Mother of the Word 
Incarnate! despise not my petitions, but, in thy mercy, hear 

and answer me. Amen. 

Indulgence 3 years; Plenary, under usual conditions if recited 
daily for one entire month.—S. C. Indulg., Aug. 5, 1851; S. Ap. 
Pen., Nov, 21, 1936. ` Ca 

Sub Tuum Praesidium ao 


rr FLY to thy patronage, O holy Mother of God! despise 
not our petitions in our necessities, but deliver us 
from all dangérs, O ever glorious and blessed Virgin. , 
Indulgence 5 years; Plenary, under usual conditions if recited 
daily for one entire month,—S. C. Indulg., April 5, 1876; S. Ap. 
Pen., Dec. 12, 1935. 


Dedication to tbe Blessed Virgin Mary 
Y QUEEN! my Mother! I give myself entirely to thee; 
and to show my devotion to thee, I consecrate to thee 
this day my eyes, my ears, my mouth, my heart, my whole 
being, without reserve. Wherefore, good Mother, as I am 
thine own, keep me, guard me, as thy property and posses- 
sion, 
Indulgence 500 days; Plenary, under usual conditions if re- 
cited daily for one entire month. —S. C. Indulg., Aug. 5, 1851; 
S. Ap. Pen., Nov, 21, 1926. . : 


Ejaculationg 


Sweet Heart of Mary, be my salvation! 

Indulgence 300 days; Plenary, under usual conditions, if re- 
cited daily for one entire month.—S. C. Indulg., Sept. 30, 1852. 

My Mother, preserve me this day from mortal sin. 

Indulgence 300 days.—Benedict XV., Jan. 13, 1917. 

Mother of love, of sorrow, and of mercy, pray for us. 

Indulgence 300 days.—S. C. Indulg., May 30, 1908. 

Holy Mary, deliver us from the pains of hell. 

Indulgence 300 days.—Holy Office, Jan. 22, 1914; S. Ap. Pen., 
March, 28, 1933. 

My Mother, my trust. 

Indulgence 300 days. —Benedict XV., Jan. 3, 1917. 

Mary, Virgin Mother of God, pray to Jesus for me. 

Indulgence 300 days. Plenary, under usual conditions, if re- 
cited daily for one entire month.—8S. Ap. Pen., April 7, 1921 and 
March, 28, 1933. 

In thy Conception, O Virgin Mary, thou wast immaculate; 
pray for us to the Father, whose Son Jesus Christ conceived 
of the Holy Ghost thou didst bring forth. 

Indulgence 300 days.—S. C. Indulg., Nov. 21, 1793; S. Ap. Pen., 
April 24, 1933. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1825 


To thee, O Virgin Mother, who wast never defiled with the 
slightest stain of original or actual sin, I commend and 
entrust the purity of my heart. l 

Indulgence 300 days.—S. C. Prop. of the Faith, Nov. 26, 1854; 
S. Ap. Pen., May 9, 1932. : 

5O Mary, conceived without sin, pray for us who have 


recourse to thee: í - 
Indulgence 300 days. Plenary, under usual conditions, if re- 
cited daily for one entire month.—S. C. Indulg., March 15, 1884; 
S. Ap. Pen., April 15, 1932. 
Litany of St. Joseph 
orp, have mercy on us. Diligent protector of Christ, 
Christ, have mercy on Head of the Holy Family, 


us. Joseph most just, 
Lord, have mercy on us. Joseph most chaste, 
Christ, hear us. Joseph most prudent, 
Christ, graciously hear us. Joseph most strong, 


God the Father of heaven; Joseph most obedient, 
God the Son, Redeemer of Joseph most faithful, 


the world, Mirror of patience, 
God the Holy Ghost, Lover of poverty, 
Holy Trinity, one God, Model of artisans, 
Holy Mary, Glory to home life, 
St. Joseph, . Guardian of virgins, 
illustrious scion of David, Pillar of families, 
Light of patriarchs, Solace of the afflicted, 
Spouse of the Mother of Hope of the sick, 

God, Patron of the dying, 
Chaste guardian. of the  'Terror of demons, 

Virgin, Protector of Holy Church. 
Foster-father of the Son of 

God, : 


Lamb of God, etc. 
Y. He made him the Lord of His household. 
W. And prince over all His possessions. 


Let us pray 
cop, Who in Thy ineffable providence didst vouchsafe 
to choose blessed Joseph to be the spouse of Thy most 
holy Mother; grant, we beseech Thee, that we may have for 
our advocate in heaven him whom we venerate as our pro- 
tector on earth: Who livest and reignest world without end. 
Amen. $ 
Indulgence of 5 years; Plenary, under usual conditions, if re- 
cited daily for an entire month.—S. Pen. Ap., Mar. 21, 1935. 
St. Joseph, reputed father of Our Lord Jesus Christ and 
true spouse of Mary, ever Virgin, pray for us. — 
Indulgence 300 days, once a daj.—Leo XIII, Maj .15, 1891. 


1 Have mercy on us. 
?Pray for us. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1826 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Praper to Ht. Yoseph, Patron of the Universal C Durch 


most powerful patriarch, St. Joseph, patron of that 

universal Church which has always invoked thee in 
anxieties and tribulations; from the lofty seat of thy glory 
lovingly regard the Catholic world. Let it move thy paternal 
heart to see the mystical spouse of Christ and His vicar 
weakened by sorrow and persecuted by powerful enemies. 
‘We beseech thee, by the most bitter suffering thou didst 
experience on earth, to wipe away in mercy the tears of 
the revered pontiff, to defend and liberate him, and to 
intercede with the Giver of peace and charity, that every 
hostile power being overcome and every error being de- 
stroyed, the whole Church may serve the God of all bless- 
ings in perfect liberty. Amen. 


Litany of the Saints 


Same as for the Forty Hours’ Devotion, page 1536. (Indulgence, 
5 years; Plenary, under usual conditions if recited daily for an 
entire month. S. Pen. Ap., July 10, 1935.) 


Praper for the Church and for tbe Civil Authorities 
(Composed by Archbishop Carroll) 


E PRAY Thee, O almighty and eternal God! Who 
through Jesus Christ hast revealed Thy glory to all 
nations, to preserve the works of Thy mercy, that Thy 
Church, being. spread through the whole world, may con- 
tinue with unchanging faith in the confession of Thy name. 
We pray Thee, Who alone art good and holy, to endow 
with heavenly knowledge, sincere zeal, and sanctity of life, 
our chief bishop, N.N., the vicar of Our Lord Jesus Christ, 
in the government of His Church; our own bishop, N.N., (or, 
if he be not consecrated, our bishop-elect) ; all other bishops, 
prelates, and pastors of the Church; and especially those 
who are appointed to exercise among us the functions of 
the holy ministry, and conduct Thy people into the ways 
of salvation. : 

We pray Thee, O God of might, wisdom, end justice! 
through Whom authority is rightly administered, laws are 
enacted, and judgment decreed, assist with Thy holy spirit 
of counsel and fortitude the President of the United States, 
that his administration may be conducted in righteousness, 
and be eminently useful to Thy people over whom he pre- 
sides; by encouraging due respect for virtue and religion; by 
@ faithful execution of the laws in justice and mercy; and 
by restraining vice and immorality. Let the light of Thy 
divine wisdom direct the deliberations of Congress, and 
shine forth in all the proceedings and laws framed for our 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1827 


rule and government, so that they may tend to the preserva- 
tion of peace, the promotion of national happiness, the in- 
crease of industry, sobriety, and useful knowledge; and may 
perpetuate to us the blessing of equal liberty. 

We pray for his Excellency, the Governor of this State, 
for the members of the Assembly, for all judges, magistrates, 
and other officers who are appointed to guard our political 
welfare, that they may be enabled, by Thy powerful protec- 
tion, to discharge the duties of their respective stations with 
honesty and ability. 

We recommend likewise to Thy unbounded mercy all our 
brethren and fellow-citizens throughout the United States, 
that théy may be blessed in the knowledge and sanctified iu 
the observance of Thy most holy law; that they may, be 
preserved in union, and in that peace which the world can 
not give; and after enjoying the blessings of this life, be 
admitted to those which are eternal. 

Finally, we pray to Thee, O Lord of mercy, to remember 
the souls of Thy servants departed who are gone before us 
with the sign of faith, and repose in the sleep of peace; 
the souls of our parents, relatives, and friends; of those 
who, when living, were members of this congregation, and 
particularly of such as are lately deceased; of all bene- 
factors who, by their donations or legacies to this church, 
witnessed their zeal for the decency of divine worship and 
proved their claim to our grateful and charitable remem- 
brance. To these, O Lord, and to all that rest in Christ, 
grant, we beseech Thee, a place of refreshment, light, and 
everlasting peace, through the same Jesus Christ, Our Lord 
and Saviour. Amen. 


Act of Consecration to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 


Issued on October 17, 1925 by His Holiness Pope Pius XI, for 
the annual consecration of the human race to the Sacred 
Heart on the feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ, King, the last 
Sunday of October. 

ost sweet Jesus, Redeemer of the human race, look 

down upon us, humbly prostrate before Thy altar. 
We are Thine and Thine we wish to be; but to be more 
surely united with Thee, behold each one of us freely con- 
secrates himself to-day to Thy most Sacred Heart. Many, 
indeed, have néver known Thee; many, too, despising Thy 
precepts, have rejected Thee. Have mercy on them all, 
most merciful Jesus, and draw them to Thy Sacred Heart. 
Be Thou King, O Lord, not only of the faithful who have 
never forsaken Thee, but also of the prodigal children who 
have abandoned Thee; grant that they may quickly re- 
turn to their Father’s house, lest they die of wretchedness 
and hunger. Be Thou King of all those who are still in- 
volved in the darkness of idolatry or of Islamism, and re- 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1828 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


fuse not to draw them all into the light and kingdom of 
God. Turn Thine eyes of mercy toward the children of 
that race, once thy chosen people. Of old they caHed 
down upon themselves the blood of the Saviour; may it 
now descend upon them a laver of redemption and of 
life, Grant, O Lord, to Thy Church assurance of free. 
dom and immunity from harm; give peace and order to 
all nations, and make the earth resound from pole to 
pole with one cry: Praise to the divine Heart that wrought 
our salvation; to it be glory and honor forever. Amen. 
Indulgences: 5 years; Plenary, once a month if recited, daily, 
under the usual conditions. On the feast of Christ the King, 


same indulgences, under same conditions, for all who take part 
in this Act of Dedication.—Pius XI, July 16, 1926; Feb. 15, 1927. 
Sacred Heart of Jesus, Thy Kingdom come! 
Indulgence: 300 days, each time.—Pius X, July 6, 1906. 
Sacred. Heart of Jesus, I trust in Thee. - 
Indulgences: 300 days, each time. Plenary once à month, 
under the usual conditions, for all who recite it daily during 
the month.—Pius X, May 27, 1905. 


Act of Reparation to the Sacred Heart of Jesus - 

Published with the Encyclical Miserentissimus Redemptor, 
May 8, 1928, by His Holiness Pope Pius XI, and ordered to be 
solemnly recited each year on the feast of the Sacred Heart. 
indulgence five years; Plenary under usual conditions, if recited 
daily for an entire month. S. Pen. Ap., March 18, 1932. 

Q SWEET Jesus, Whose overflowing charity for men is 

J requited by so much forgetfulness, negligence and 
contempt, behold us prostrate before Thy altar eager to 
repair by a special act of homage the cruel indifference 
and injuries to which Thy loving Heart is everywhere 
subject. 

Mindful alas! that we ourselves have had a share in 
such great indignities, which we now deplore from the 
depths of our hearts, we humbly ask Thy pardon and de- 
clare our. readiness to atone by voluntary expiation not 
only for our own personal offences, but also for the sins 
of those, who, straying far from the path of salvation, 
refuse in their ‘obstinate infidelity to follow Thee, their 
Shepherd and Leader, or, renouncing the vows of their 
baptism, have cast off the sweet yoke of Thy law. 

"We are now resolved to expiate each and every deplor- 
able outrage committed against Thee; we are determined 
to make amends for the manifold offences against Chris- 
tian modesty in unbecoming dress and behavior, for all the 
foul seductions laid to ensnare the feet of the innocent, 
for the frequent violation of Sundays and holy-days, and 
the shocking blasphemies uttered against Thee and Thy 
saints. We wish also to make amends for the insults to 
which Thy Vicar on earth and Thy priests are subjected, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1829 


for the profanation, by conscious neglect or terrible acts 
of sacrilege, of the very Sacrament of Thy divine love; and 
lastly for the public crimes of nations who resist the rights 
and the teaching authority of the Church which Thou 
hast founded. : : 

Would, O divine Jesus, we were ablé to wash away such 
abominations with our blood. We now offer, in reparation 
for these violations of Thy divine honor, the, satisfac- 
tion Thou didst once make to Thy eternal Father on the 
cross and which Thou dost continue to renew daily on our 
altars; we offer it in union with the acts of atonement of 
Thy Virgin Mother and all the saints and of the pious 
faithful on earth; and we sincerely promise to make recom- 
pense, as far as we can, with the help of Thy grace, for all 
neglect of Thy great love and for the sins we and others 
have committed in the past. Henceforth we will live a life 
of unwavering faith, of. purity of conduct, of perfect ob- 
Sservance of the precepts of the Gospel and especially that 
of charity. We promise to the best of our power to prevent 
others from offending Thee and to bring as many as pose 
sible to follow Thee. . CES 

O loving Jesus, through the intercession of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary our model in reparation, deign to receive the 
voluntary offering we make of this act of expiation; and by 
tbe crowning gift of perseverance keep us faithful unto death 
in our duty and the allegiance we owe to Thee, so that we 
may all one day come to that happy home, where Thou with 
the Father and the Holy Ghost livest and reignest God, 
world without end. ‘Amen, 


The Mysteries of the Holp Rosarp 


The Fruit of Each Mystery 

Indulgences: I. To those as often as they recite a third part 
of the Rosary five years and five times forty days (S. C. Indulg. 
Aug. 20, 1899).. II. If one recite at least a third part of the 
Rosary together with others, publicly or privately ten years 
and ten times forty days once a day. A Plenary indulgence on 
the. last Sunday of each month if one has performed this 
exercise on at least three days of each preceding week during 
the month and has confessed, received Holy Communion, and 
visited some church or aoro oratory (S. C. Indulg. Aug. 20, 
1899). III. To those w during October recite a third part 
of ihe Rosáry privately or publicly: Seven years and seven 
times forty days on each day. Plenary mawgenoe 1/ they have 
performed this exercise om the Feast of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary of the Rosary and during the entire octave thereof and 
if they have also confessed, received Holy Communion at any 
time during the octave and visited any church or public ora- 
tory: Plenary indulgence if they have performed the same er- 
ercise for ten days after the octave of the Holy Rosary, and 
have confessed, received Holy Communion and visited any 
church or public oratory. (S. C. Indulg. Aug. 29, 1899). IV. 
To those who recite a third part of the Rosary before the 
Most Holy Eucharist publicly exposed or even reserved im the 
tabernacle as often as they do so; Plenary indulgence if they 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1830 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


have also confessed and approached the Holy Table (Brief, 
Sept. 4, 1927). Note: If by reason of manual labor or other 
just cause one is prevented from holding the Rosary beads in 
the hands, the indulgences may be gained provided one has 
the beads about him. (S. Ap. Penit. Nov. 9, 1933). 


Sfoptul Mypsteries—Spirit of Holp Jop 


1. Annunciation ....... «ee. Humility. 

2. Visitation...............-. Fraternal charity. 
3. Nativity ............. ....Spirit of poverty. 
4. Presentation ........... . Obedience; purity. 
5. 


Jesus with the Doctors....Love of Jesus and devotedness 
; to the duties of our state of 
life. 
Sorrowful Mypsteries—Dpivit of Compassion, 
Contrition and Reparation. 
1. Agony ..cseveccccccee ....Fervor in prayer. 
2. Scourging ..... .......... Penance, and especially mor- 
: tification of the senses. 
3. Crowning with Thorns....Moral courage. 
4 
5 


. Carriage of the Cross.....Patience. 
. Crucifixion ..............Self-sacrifice for God and for 
Ro our neighbor; forgiveness of 
injuries. 


Glorious Mypsteries—Spirit of Adoration and Faith 
1. Resurrection ............Faith. 
2. Ascension ...... eere. ÉHOpe. 
3. Descent of the Holy Ghost.Love and zeal for souls. 
4. Assumption .............Filial devotion to Mary. 
5. Coronation of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary ....... e. e e Perseverance. 


Stations of the Cross 


I. A plenary indulgence each time. 

II. Additional plenary indulgence if one receives Holy Com- 
munion the same day; or if after making Stations ten times, 
one receives within a month. 

III. Ten years and ten quarantines for each Station, when 
for a reasonable cause one cannot complete the series. 

These indulgences are extended also to the sick, travelers 
at sea, prisoners, those living where there is no. Catholic 
church, and all -others who, jor some acceptable reason, are 
unable to make the Stations, provided that, with contrition of 
heart and sincere devotion, they recite twenty times the Our 
Father, the Hail Mary, and the Glory be (that is, once for 
each Station, five times in honor of the Five Wounds of our 
Lord, and once for the intentions of our Holy Father the 
Pope) and that they hdld in their hands a crucifiz blessed by 
one who has the faculty to do so. Those who for good reason 
cannot recite the above prayers for the gaining of the plenary 
indulgence, can gain a partial indulgence of ten years and ten 
times forty days for each time they recite the Our Father, the 
Hail Mary, and the Glory be. 

lf anyone because of illness cannot do more than kiss, or 
gaze devoutly upon a crucifis blessed for this purpose and. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Am 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1831 


held by a priest or other person, and recite some short prayer 
or ejaculation in honor of the passion and death of our Lord; 
and even if such a one is unable to recite any prayer, the 
plenary indulgence can be gained. 

(S. Ap. Penit. Mar. 25, 1931; Oct. 20, 1931). 


FIRST STATION 


Jesus is Condemned to Death 
Y. We adore Thee, O Christ, and we bless Thee. 
R. Because by Thy holy cross Thou hast redeemed the 
world! © 
(Say the above y. and NH. before every station.) ` 
HE Roman governor, Pontius Pilate, pronounced the 
sentence of death upon Thee, O Jesus. Be Thou a 
gracious Judge to me when my last hour comes, and do not 
Sentence me to eternal death. 
. Say after every station: 
Our Father, etc.; Hail Mary, etc. 
X. Lord Jesus, crucified: 
BY. Have mercy on us! . 
Y. May the souls of the faithful departed through the 
mercy of God rest in peace. 
"B. Amen. 
i SECOND STATION 
. Jesus Carries His Cross 
Y JESUS, Thou patiently acceptest the cross upon Thy 
torn and wounded shoulders. Give me the grace to 
bear patiently the heavy burdens of this life. Strengthen 
and comfort me in all my sorrows and sufferings. Our 
Father; Hail Mary; etc. 
THIRD STATION 
Jesus Falls the First Time Beneath the Cross 
EAR Lord, Thou hast fallen to the ground under Thy 
cross. The. weight of my sins has pressed Thee down. 
I detest them with my whole heart. Give me the grace to 
see sin as the worst of evils, to hate it and to flee from it. 
Our Father; Hail Mary; etc. 
FOURTH STATION 
Jesus Meets His Afflicted Mother 
` OWED beneath the cross, bleeding and torn, now Thou 
meetest Thy grief-stricken Mother, O beloved Jesus. 
I too, wil! look upon Thy bitter pains and death with a 
Stricken heart. I beg Thy sorrowful Mother to pray for me 
in life and in death. Our Father; Hail Mary; etc, 
FIFTH STATION 


Simon of Cyrene Helps Jesus to Carry the Cross 
gi bore with Thee, my Redeemer, part of the weight 
of Thy heavy cross. I also, will walk with Thee on this 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1832 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Way of the Cross, and accept suffering in union with the 
divine will, that thus I may be truly Thy child. Our Father; 
Hail Mary; etc. . 
SIXTH STATION 
Veronica Wipes the Face of Jesus 

ERONICA pitied Thee, O sweetest Jesus, and with a cloth 

wiped away the blood and sweat that stained Thy 
face. Thou didst stamp upon the cloth the likeness of Thy 
wounded face. Print deep in my soul the memory of Thy 
bitter pains, that I may never offend Thee. My Jesus, I 
love Thee. Our Father; Hail Mary; etc. . : 


SEVENTH STATION: 


Jesus Falls the Second Time 
JESUS, a Second time Thou hast fallen beneath the 
O cross! My sins, my bad habits, have made it heavy 
to Thee. Let me not fall back into them. Help me to 
amend my life. Our Father; Hail Mary; etc. 


EIGHTH STATION 


The Daughters of Jerusalem Weep over Jesus 

EAREST Lord, Thou speakest to the weeping women who 
D pitied Thee, saying: “Weep not over me, but weep 
or yourselves and for your children." ‘Thou seest the com- 
ing destruction of Jerusalem. I will heed Thy warning, and 
weep for my sins, that they may not destroy me. My Jesus, 
mercy! Our Father; Hail Mary; etc. 

NINTH STATION 


Jesus Falls the Third Time PEE i 
O DEAREST Jesus, utterly exhausted, Thou fallest under the 
cross the third time. The hardness and impenitence 
of men have crashed Thee to the ground. Grant that I 
may always cooperate with grace, and readily follow pious 
instructions. Thy will be done. Our Father; Hail Mary; 
etc. ‘ bg 
TENTH STATION 
Jesus is Stripped of His Garments 
Hou wert stripped of Thy garments, O Thou Most Holy 
One, to atone for our sins of impurity. I firmly re- 
Solve to keep my heart clothed in purity, all my. thoughts 
and actions chaste. Our Father; Hail Mary; etc. 
ELEVENTH STATION 
Jesus is Nailed to the Cross 
v JESUS, they nailed Thee upon the cross. How great 
was that agony, and Thou didst bear it for me! Al 
my life I wil thank Thee for it. I will remember Thy 
pain when sinful desires attack me. Our Father; Hail 
Mary; etc. i 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 1832 


TWELFTH STATION 
Jesus Dies om the Cross 


ELOvEp Jesus, Thou wert raised upon the cross and 

didst die upon it. May Thy death bring me to 
eternal life. I believe in Thee, I hope in Thee, I love 
Thee above all things. Our Father; Hail Mary; etc. 


THIRTEENTH STATION 
Jesus is Taken Down from the Cross 


Hou wert taken down from the cross, my Redeemer, 

and laid upon Thy Mother’s breast. In holy com- 
munion I receive Thee within my breast. Give me the 
grace always to receive Thee worthily. Grant that through 
the intercession of Thy Sorrowful Mother, I may live a holy 
life and die a happy death. Our Father; Hail Mary; etc. 


FOURTEENTH STATION 
Jesus is Laid in the Sepulcher 


FTER Thy death, O my blessed Lord, Thy body was 

placed within the tomb. But Thou didst rise again 
the third day. I implore Thee, by Thy resurrection, make 
me rise glorious with Thee at the Last Day to be forever 
united with Thee in heaven, to love Thee and to bless Thee 
with the angels and the saints throughout eternity. Our 
Father; Hail Mary; etc. 


Concluding Prayer 


ow, O good Jesus, I thank Thee for all the graces 
which Thou hast given me in making this. Way of the 
Cross. Let not Thy bitter agony and death be fruitless in 
my soul, but may they make me wholly Thine. Amen. 
Our Father; Hail Mary; Glory he, etc., for the intention 
of the Holy Father. 


Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament 


Prapers at Benediction 
I 


Jesus, Who art about to give Thy benediction to me, 

and to all who are here present, I humbly beseech 
Thee that it may impart to each and all of us the special 
graces we need. Yet more than this I ask. Let Thy bless- 
ing go forth far and wide. Let it be felt in the souls of the 
afflicted who can not come here to receive it at Thy feet. 
Let the weak and tempted feel its power wherever they may 
be. Let poor sinners feel its influence, arousing them to 
come to Thee. Grant to me, O Lord, and to all here present, 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1834 GENERAL DEVOTIONS 

a sirong personal love of Thee, a lively horror of sin, a 
higher esteem of grace, great zeal for Thy honor and glory, 
for the interests of Thy sacred Heart, for our own sanctifica- 


tion, and for the salvation of souls. Amen. 
€ Salutaris Hostia 


SAVING Victim opening 


O 


wide 

The gate of heav’n to man 
below! 

Our foes press on from every 
Side; 

Thine aid supply, Thy strength 
bestow. 

To Thy great name be endless 
praise, 

Immortal Godhead, One in 
Three; 

Oh, grant us endless length 
of days. 


In our true native land with 
Thee. Amen. 


O SALUTARIS Hostia, 
Que coli pandis ostium. 
Bella premumt hostilia; 
Da robur fer auxilium. 
Uni trinoque Domino, 
Sit sempiterna gloria: 
Qui vitam sine termino, 


Nobis donet in patria. 
Amen. 


Indulgence of five years; Plenary, under usual conditions if re- 
cited daily for an entire month. S. Pen. Ap., June 4, 1934. 


Tantum € rgo Sacramentum 


own in adoration fall- 
ing, g 
Lo! the sacred host we hail! 
Lo! oer ancient forms de- 
parting, 
Newer rites of grace prevail; 
Faith for all defects supply- 
ing, 
Where the feeble senses fail. 


To the everlasting Father, 
And the Son Who reigns on 
high, . 
With the Holy Ghost pro- 
ceeding 
Forth from each eternally, 
Be salvation, honor, blessing, 
Might, and endless majesty. 
Amen. 
F. Thou didst give them 
bread from heaven. W. Con- 
taining in itself all sweetness. 


ANTUM ergo sacramene- 
, 
Veneremur cernui; 
Et antiquum documentum 


Novo cedat ritui; 
Prestet fides supplementum 


Sensuum defectui. 


Genitori, Genitoque, 
Laus et jubilatio; 


Salus, honor, virtus quoque 


Sit et benedictio: 
Procedenti ab utroque 
Compar sit laudatio. 
Amen. 
y. Panem de coelo præ- 
stitisti eis. BY. Omne delec- 
tamentum in se habentem. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


1835 


Prayer 


EUS, qui nobis sub sac- 
D ramento mirabili, pas- 
sionis tue memoriam reli- 
quisti: tribue, quesumus, ita 
nos corporis et sanguinis tui 
sacra mysteria venerari, ut 
redemptionis tuz fructum in 
nobis jugiter sentiamus. Qui 
vivis. Amen. ` 


cop, Who in this wonder- 

ful sacrament, hast left 
us a memorial of Thy passion; 
grant us, we beseech Thee, so 
to venerate the sacred mys- 
teries of Thy body and blood, 
that we may ever feel within 
us the fruit of Thy redemp- 
tion. Who livest. Amen. 


The celebrant blesses the people, silently making over them 
the sign of the cross with the monstrance in which the sacred 


host is enshrined. 


Sanctissimum Sacra- 


Adyoremus in Aeternum 
DOREMUS in e#eternum * 


Et us adore for ever the 
Most Holy Sacrament. 


Laudate 


mentum, 
AUDATE Dominum omnes 
gentes; laudate eum 
omnes populi. 

Quoniam confirmata est 
super nos misericordia ejus: 
et veritas Domini manet in 
seternum. 

Gloria Patri, et Filio, et 
Spiritui Sancto. 


Sicut erat in principio, et 
nunc, et semper, et in secula 
seculorum. Amen. 

Adoremus in ZEternum 
Sanctissimum Sacramentum. 


An Act of Reparation 
LESSED be God. 
Blessed be His holy name. 


Blessed be Jesus Christ, true Go 
Blessed be the name of Jesus. 


RAISE the Lord, all ye na- 
tions: praise Him, all ye 
people, 

Because His mercy is con- 
firmed upon us: and the truth 
of the Lord remaineth for 
ever, l 

Glory be to the Father, and 
to the Son, and to the Holy 
Ghost. . 

As it was in the beginning, 
is now, and ever shall be, 
world without end. Amen. 

Let us adore for ever the 
Most Holy Sacrament. 


for Profane Language 


d and true man. 


Blessed be His most Sacred Heart. 

Blessed be Jesus in the Most Holy Sacrament of the altar. 
Blessed be the great Mother of God, Mary most holy. 
Blessed be her holy and Immaculate Conception. 

Blessed be her glorious Assumption. 

Blessed be the name of Mary, virgin and mother. 

Blessed be St. Joseph, her most chaste spouse. 

Blessed be God in His angels and in His saints. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1836 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Te Beum Laudamus 


E Praise Thee, O God; 
we acknowledge Thee 
to be the Lord. 

Thee, tbe Father everlast- 
ing, all the earth doth wor- 
Ship. 

To Thee all the angels, to 
Thee the heavens, and all the 
powers, ; 

To Thee the cherubim and 
seraphim cry out unceasingly: 

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God 
of hosts. 

Full are the heavens .and 
the earth of the majesty. of 
Thy glory. 

Thee, the glorious choir of 
the apostles, 

“Thee, the admirable com- 
pany of the prophets, 

Thee, the white-robed army 
of the martyrs doth praise. 

Thee, the holy Church 
throughout the world doth 
confess, 

The Father of infinite maj- 
esty. ` 

Thine adorable, 
only Son. i 

And the Holy. Ghost the 
Paraclete. 

Thou, O Christ, art the 
King of glory. 

Thou art the everlasting 
Son of the Father. 

Thou, having taken upon 
Thee to deliver man, didst 
not disdain the Virgin's womb. 

Thou, having overcome the 
sting of deàth, hast opened to 
believers the kingdom of 
heaven. 

Thou sittest at the right 
hand of God, in the glory of 
the Father. 

Thou, we believe, art the 
Judge to come. 


true, and 


E nEUM laudamus: te 
Dominum confitemur. 


Te æternum Patrem, omnis 
terra veneratur, 


Tibi omnes angeli, tibi celi, 
et universe potestates: 


Tibi cherubim et seraphim, 
incessabili voce proclamant: 

Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, 
Dominus Deus Sabaoth. 

Pleni sunt ecl et terra, 
majestatis glorie tus. 


Te gloriosus apostolorum 
chorus. 

Te prophetarum laudabilis 
numerus. 

Te martyrum candidatus 
laudat exercitus. 

Te per orbem terrarum 
sancta confitetur Ecclesia. 


Patrem immense majesta- 
tis. 

Venerandum tuum verum 
et unicum Filium. 

Sanctum quoque Paraclit- 
um Spiritum. 

Tu Rex glorie, Christe. 


Tu Patris sempiternus es 
Filius. 

Tu ad liberandum suscer- 
turus hominem non horruisti 
Virginis: ütérum. : 

Tu, devicto mortis aculeo, 
aperuisti credentibus regna 
celorum, 


Tu ad dexteram Dei sedes, 
in gloria Patris. 


Judex Crederis esse ven- 
turis. 


All kneel while the following verse is being sung. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


Te vergo quesum 
famulis subveni, quos pre- 
tioso sanguine’ redemisti. 


ZEterna fac cum sanctis 
tuis, in gloria numerari. 


Salvum fac populum tu- 
um Domine, et benedic here- 
ditati tue. i 

Et rege eos: et extolle illos 
usque in eternum. 

Per singulos dies benedici- 
1nus te. 

Et laudamus nomen tuum 
.n seculum, et in seculum 
seculi. 

Dignare Domine die isto 
sine peccato nos custodire. 

Miserere nostri, Domine, 
miserere nostri. 

Fiat misericordia tua Do- 
mine super nos, quemadmo- 
dum speravimus in te. 

In te Domine speravi: non 
confundar in seternum. 


, tuis . 


1837 


We beseech: Thee, therefore, 
to help Thy servants whom 
‘Thou hast redeemed with Thy 
precious blood. . 

Make them to be numbered 
with Thy.saints in glory ever- 
lasting. 

O Lord, save Thy people, 
and bless Thine inheritance. 


And govern them, and exalt 
them for ever. 
Day by day, we bless Thee. 


And we praise Thy name 
for ever; yea, for ever and for 
ever. 

Vouchsafe, O Lord, this day, 
to keep us without sin. 

Have mercy on us, Lord; 
have mercy on us. 

Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be 
upon us; as we have hoped in 
‘Thee. 

In Thee, O Lord, have I 
hoped: let me never be con- 
founded. 


On occasions of solemn thanksgiving. the following- 
prayers are added. 


y. ENEDICTUS eS Do- 
] mine Deus patrum 
nostrorum. ‘ 


. BH. Et laudabilis, et. glori- 
osus in ssecula. 

JV. Benedicamus Patrem, 
et Filium, cum Sancto Spir- 
itu. 

RY. Loudemus, et superex- 
altemus eum in secula. 

Y. Benedictus es Domine 
in firmamento celi, 


W. Et laudabilis, et glori- 


osus, et superexaltatus in 
Y. Benedic anima mea 
Domino. 


RY. Et noli oblivisci omnes 
retributiones ejus. 


y. LESSED art Thou, O 
Lord, the God of our 
fathers. 

H. And worthy to be 
praised, and. glorified for ever. 

y. Let us bless the Father, 
and the Son, with the Holy 
Ghost. 

W. Let us praise and mag- 
nify Him for ever. _ 

Yy. Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord, in the firmament of 
heaven. 

RY. And worthy | to be 
praised, and glorified, and ex- 
alted for ever. 

¥. Bless the Lord, O my 
soul. 

R. And forget not all His 
benefits. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1838 
y. O Lord, hear my prayer. 


K. And let my cry come 
unto Thee. 3 
V. The Lord be with you. 
W. And with thy:spirit. 


GENERAL DEVOTIONS 


: Y. Domine, 
tionem meam. 
BR. Et clamor meus ad te 
veniat. 
¥. Dominus vobiscum. 
RY. Et cum spiritu tuv. 


exaudi ora- 


Let us pray 


cop, Whose. mercies are 

without number, and the 
treasure of Whose goodness is 
infinite; we render. thanks to 
Thy most precious majesty for 
the gifts Thou hast bestowed 
upon us: evermore beseeching 
Thy clemency that as. Thou 
grantest the petitions of those 
who seek Thee, Thou wilt 
never forsake them, but wilt 
prepare them for the rewards 
to come. . ; 

O God, Who hast taught the 
hearts of the faithful by the 
light of the Holy Spirit: grant 
that by the gift of the same 
Spirit, we may be always truly 
wise, and ever rejoice in His 
consolation. . f 

O God, Who sufferest none 
that hope in Thee to be over- 
much afflicted, but dost lend 
a gracious ear unto their 
prayers; we render Thee 
thanks for having heard our 
supplications and promises; 
and we most humbly beseech 
Thee, that we may evermore 
be protected from all adversi- 
ties. Through Jesus Christ, 
Thy Son, our Lord, Who liveth 
and reigneth with 'Thee, in 
the unity of the Holy Spirit, 
God, world without end. 
Amen. 


EUS, cujus misericordie 

non est numerus, et 
bonitatis infinitus est the- 
saurus: piissime | majestati 
tuse pro collatis donis gra- 
tias agimus, tuam semper 
clementiam . exorantes; ut 
qui petentibus postulata. con- 
cedis, eosdem non deserens, 
ad premia futura disponas. 


Deus, qui corda fidelium 
Sancti Spiritus illustratione 
docuisti: da nobis in eodem 
Spiritu recta sapere, et de 
ejus semper consolatione 
gaudere. 


Deus, qui neminem in te 
sperantem nimium affligi 
permittis, sed pium precibus 
prestas auditum: pro postu- 
lationibus nostris, votisque 
Susceptis gratias agimus; te 
piissime deprecantes, ut a 
cunctis semper muniamur 
adversis. Per Dominum no- 
strum Jesum Christum Fili- 
um tuum, qui tecum vivit et 
regnat in unitate Spiritus 
Sancti Deus, per omnia sæ- 
cula seculorum. Amen. 


“ EGI gutem. seculorum. immortali, invisibili, soli Deo; 
honor et gloria in secula seculorum. Amen." 


ow to the king of ages, 


God, be honor and glory forever and ever. 


(1 Tim. 1, 17). 


immortal, invisible, the only 
Amen” 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Y 

Our Lord 
Septuagesima 
Sunday 


25 Jan. 
13 Feb. 
5 Feb. 
21 Jan. 


10 Feb. 
I Feb. 
14 Feb. 
6 Feb. 


29 Jan. 
17 Feb. 
2 Feb. 
25 Jan. 


14 Feb. 
29 Jan. 
18 Feb. 
10 Feb. 


26 Jan. 
14 Feb. 

6 Feb. 
22 Jan. 


11 Feb. 
2 Feb. 
25 Jan. 
7 Feb. 


30 Jan. 
i8 Feb. 
10 Feb, 
26 Jan. 


1976 i5 Feb. 
1977 6 Feb. 
1978 22 Jon. 


Table of Movable Feasts 


Ash 


I] Feb. 


N 
= 
a 
Q 


22 Feb. 


N 
-n 
o 

o 


27 Feb. 
18 Feb. 
3 Mar. 
23 Feb. 


15 Feb. 
6 Mar. 
19 Feb. 
ll Feb. 


2 Mar. 
15 Feb. 
7 Mar. 
27 Feb. 


I2 Feb. 
3 Mar. 
23 Feb. 
8 Feb. 


28 Feb. 
19 Feb. 
M Feb. 
24 Feb. 


16 Feb. 
7 Mar: 
27 Feb. 
12 Feb. 


3 Mar. 
23 Feb. 
8 Feb. 


Wednesday 


. 22 May 
. 14 May 24 May 
. 27 May 6 June 


Ascension 
Thursday 
Pentecost 


Sunday 


6 May 16 May 


. 26 May 5 June 
. 18 May 28 May 


3 May 13 May 


| June 


1? May 29 May 


. 10 May 20 May 
. 30 May 9 June 
. I5 May 25 May 


7 May 17 May 


. 26 May 5 June 
. |! May 21 May 
- 31 May 10 June 
. 23 May 2 June 


7 May 17 May 


. 27 May 6 June 
. 19 May 29 May 


4 May |4 May 


r. 23 May 2 June 
. 15 Moy 25 May 


7 May 17 May 


. 20 May 30 May 


. I1 May 21 May 
. 31 May 10 June 
. 28 May 2 June 

. 8 Moy 18 May 


. 27 May 6 June 
. 19 May 29 May 


4 May 14 May 
1839 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Corpus 
Christi 

First Sunday 
of Advent 


27 May 28 Nov.. 
16 June 27 Nov. 
8 lune 3 Dec. 
24 May 2 Dec. 


12 June 
4 June 
17 June 
9 June 


29 Nov. 
28 Nov. 
27: Nov. 


31 May 
20 June | Dec. 
5 June 30 Nov. 
28 May 29 Nov. 


2 Dec. 


16 June 

| June 
21 June 
13 June 


27 Nov. 
3 Dec. 
2 Dec. 
! Dec. 


28 May 
17 June 
9 June 
25 May 


29 Nov. 
28 Nov. 
27 Nov. 

3 Dec. 


13 June 
5 June 
28 May 
10 June 


| Dec. 
30 Nov. 
29 Nov. 
28 Nov. 


3 Dec. 
2 Dec. 
| Dec. 
30 Nov. 


1 June 
21 June 
13 June 
29 May 


17 June 28 Nov. 
9 June 27 Nov. 
25 May 3 Dec. 


30 Nov.. 


after Pent. 


w Sundays 


Holp Days of Obligation 
On which the Faithful are Bound to Hear Mass and 
to Abstain from servile work 


‘I: HOLY DAYS OF OBLIGATION IN 


THE UNITED STATES 

All Sundays of the year. Nov. 1. All Saints. 
Jan. 1. The Circumcision. . Dec. 8. The Immaculate 
Ascension Day. . . Conception. 
Aug. 15. The Assumption. Dec. 25. Christmas Day. 

II. HOLY DAYS OF OBLIGATION IN CANADA . .. 
All Sundays of the year. Nov. 1. All Saints. 
Jan. 1. The Circumcision: Dec. 8. The Inmaculate 
Jan. 6. The Epiphany Conception. 
Ascension Day. Dec. 25. Christmas Day. 


The Church Law of Abstinence and fast! 


1. The Law of Abstinence forbids the use of flesh meat and the juice 
thereof (soup, etc.). Eggs, cheese, butter and seasonings of food are 
permitted. The Law of Fasting forbids more than one full meal a day, 
but does not forbid a small amount of food in the morning and in the 
evening. 

2. All Catholics seven years old and over are obliged to abstain. All 
Catholics from the completion of their twenty-first tothe beginning of 
their sixtieth year, unless lawfully excused, are bound to fast. 

3. Abstinence is prescribed every Friday, unless a holyday falls 
thereon. Fasting and abstinence are prescribed in the United States 
on the Fridays of Lent, Holy Saturday forenoon (on all other daysof Lent 
except Sundays fasting is prescribed and meat is allowed once a day) 
the Ember days, viz: the Wednesday, Friday and Saturday following 
the first Sunday of Lent, Pentecost or Whitsunday, the 14th of Septem- 
ber, and the third Sunday of Advent; the vigils of Pentecost, All Saints’, 
Immaculate Conception and Christmas. Thereis no fast or abstinence 
if a vigil falls on a Sunday. Whenever meat is permitted, fish may be 
taken at the same meal. A dispensation is granted to the laboring 
classes and their families on all days of fast and abstinence except 
Fridays, Ash Wednesday, Wednesday in Holy Week, Holy Saturday 
forenoon and the vigil of Christmas. When any member of such a family 
lawfully uses.this privilege all the other members may avail them- 
selves of it also; but those who fast may not eat meat more than once 
a day. 


‘In general the Faithful should pay close attention to the Lenten 
regulations read out each year so as to learn the modifications made 


for their particular di . 
or their particular diocese 1840 


http://ccwatershed.org 


General Contents 


Page 
Editors’ Preface .........ssecssoseasseecoeosvoseeses 5 
Inirodüctlon ,5.. en yn ar eve ERE TT F ER EEE CS 8 
A Meed of Praise........ eee eee e ss. 4A 
Read Mass with the Priest........ Sovensiaevssesednee. 40 
The Ordinary and Proper Parts of the Mass.......... "3 
Proper of the Season.................eeeeese SOOO... 108 
Ordinary of the Mass........... essel eene . 753 
Prefaces of the Mass........ssseresuanpecsesses ..... 798 
Additional Prayers......... 2... cece ccc cece nce eccucee . 820 
Proper of ihe Saints........... ccc cece eee cca c eee . 830 
Common of the Saints.............. ES eO. 1299 
Votive Masses....... Pm TEES .... 1410 
Oécasional Prayers .........esssesesessssesossessess 1494 
Masses for the Dead.......... ARENES "—— 1501 
Various Prayers for the Dead................ ........ 1510 
Forty Hours’ Devotion.............. — MR 1535 
Masses for Religious Orders........i.ccvecsccecceees 1546 
Masses Proper to the United States........:.......... 1576 
The Ecclesiastical Year and Sacred Liturgy........... 1622 
Short Accounts of Certain Feasts and Lives of Saints.. 1675 
Descriptions of Symbolic Representations.......... ... 1755 
Glossary of Liturgical Terms................- eee ee 1787 
Universal Calendar ............cc eee ccceceeneeee wees ITT 
General Devotions ` ................. eese Sea are 1787 
Table of Movable Feasts.........-.. celere :1839 
Holy Days of Obligation.......... e nnn ss. 1840 


Church Law of Abstinence and Fast.................. 1840 
Index of Masses and Prayers............. eee eee... 1842 


124] 


http://ccwatershed.org 


Index of Masses and Prayers 


Proper of the Season 
Advent, First Sunday.. 103 Third Sunday ...... 294 
Advent, Second Sunday 106 Days of Third Week. 298 
Advent, Third Sunday. 110 Fourth Sunday .... 326 
Emper Days, ...113, 117,120 Days of Fourth Week 331 
Advent, Fourth Sunday 130 Passion Sunday ...... 359 
Christmas Eve ....... 133 Days in Passion Week 363 
Christmas Day ....... 187 Palm Sunday ........ 388 
Midnight Mass ....... 137 Holy Week, Monday .. 415 
Daybreak Mass ...... 140 Tuesday ........ eO. 418 
The Third Mass ...... 143 Wednesday ......... 431 
Sunday Within Octave Maundy or Holy Thurs- -. . 
of Christmas ...... 160 dày 6e] vv 447 
Octave of Christmas.. 163 Good Friday ......... 469 
The Circumcision .... 167 Holy Saturday ........ 493 
Sunday between The Easter Sunday ....... 539 
Circumcision and Days in Week ...... 542 
The Epiphany; Most Low Sunday .......... 563 
Holy Name of Jesus. 169 Easter, Second Sunday 
Vigil of The Epiphany 174 after ........... ee. 567 
Epiphany, The ....... 175 Third Sunday after.. 569 
Sunday Within Octave Fourth Sunday: after 572 
of Tne Epiphany 182 Fifth Sunday after.. 575 
The Holy Family... 178 Rogation Days ....... 578 
Octave of Epiphany... 184 Ascension Eve ....... 582 
Epiphany, Second Sun- Ascension Day ....... 585 
day after .......... 186 Sunday Within Octave:. 
'Third Sunday after. 189 of Ascension ....... .588 
Fourth Sunday after. 193 Whitsun Eve ......... 591 
Fifth Sunday after.. 195 Whitsunday .......... 598 
Sixth Sunday after. 198 Whitsun Week ...... . 602 
Septuagesima Sunday.. 202 ‘Trinity Sunday ....... 626 
Sexagesima Sunday... 206 First Sunday after Pen- 
Quinquagesima Sunday 211 tecosb. 1... Liceo 630 
Ash Wednesday ...... 215 Corpus Christi ....... 635 
Thursday after Ash Sunday within Octave 
Wednesday ......... 222 of Corpus Christi ... 641 
Friday after Ash Feast of the Sacred 
Wednesday ......... 226 Heart inc eines weal 645 
Saturday after Ash Sundays after Pente- 
Wednesday ......... 230 €0Sb lle cioesess 649-752 
Lent, First Sunday ... 233 September Ember Days 699 
Days of first Week. 238 Last Sunday after Pen- 
Ember Days ....... 245 tecost ............ e 736 
Second Sunday ..... 264 Supplementary Sundays 
Days of Second Week 268 after Pentecost ..... 740 
1842 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INDEX 1843 
Proper of the Saints 
Feasts of Our Lord 
Ascension of Our Lord 585 Most Precious Blood of 
Eye 222a bie see sees 582 Our Lord ........... 1083 
Basilica Our Saviour, Nativity, The ....... . 137 
Dedication ......... 1282 Vigil of 4... reves 133 
Circumcision, The..... 167 Octave of .......... 163 
Corpus Christi......... 635 Our Lord Jesus Christ, 
Epiphany, The ........ 175 King ...1.... snis 1257 
Vigil of ............ 174 Pentecost ............ 598 
Octave Day ........ 184 Vigil of ............ 591 
Exaltation of Holy Precious Blood, Most, : 
CROSS: i26 erue 1195 of Our Lord........ 1083 
Finding of the Holy Resurrection of Our 
Cross .............. 1008 Lord ............... 539 
Holy Family, The..178,1577 Sacred Heart of Jesus. 645 
Holy Name of Jesus, Transfiguration of Our 
MOS A —— 169 Lord lvi eu ns 1141 
Jesus Christ, King.... 1257 "Trinity, Most Holy.... 626 
Feasts of the Blessed Virgin Mary 
Annunciation of B.V.M. 955 Most Holy Rosary of 
Apparition Our Lady B.V.M. .....-... eee. 1225 


Lourdes ............ 916 
Assumption of B.V.M.. 1159 
Vigil of ............ 1156 
Octave Day ........ 1168 
Candlemas Day ..... . 900 
Compassion of Our 
Lady ..22 cre 1555 


Dedication of Church 
Our Lady of Snows. 1141 
Immaculate Conception 9851 
Vigil of 847; Octave of 859 
Immaculate Heart of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary.. 1168 
Immaculate Heart of 
Mary, Refugeof Sinners 1546 
Joys of Our Lady.... 1555 
Maternity of B.V.M.... 1233 
MostHolyNameofMary 1193 


Nativity of B.V.M..... 1186 
Our Lady of Good Coun- 

sel .......... PR 1583 
Our Lady of Guadalupe 1576 
Our Lady of Miracu- 

lous Medal ......... 1618 
Our Lady Mt. Carmel. 1106 
Our Lady Perpetual 


Suecor oes osc 9 vs 1598 
Our Lady of Ransom.. 1210 
Our Lady of Snows... 1141 
Our Lady of the Way.. 1556 


Presentation of B.V.M. 1292 


Purification of B.V.M.. 900 
Rosary, Most Holy..... 1225 
Seven Dolors of 

BUM. 222: 966-1198 


Visitation of the B.V.M. 1087 


Feasts of the Saints 


Abdon and Sennen, 
Mm. 


Achilleus, Nereus, Do- 
mitilla and Pancras, 
Mm, ............... 1017 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1844 
Adauctus and Felix, 

Mm. .....ceeceeeeee 1182 
Agapitus, M. ......... 1166 
Agapitus, Xystus and 

Felicissimus, Mm. .. 1141 
Agatha, V. M......... 909 
Agnes, V, M.......... 880 

Secundo ............ 891 
Agricola and. Vitalis, 

MID. «uacua erresu 1280 
Albert the Great, B. C. 1289 
Alexius, C. ........... 1109 
All Saints ............ 1265 

Vigil of ............ 1261 

Octave of ........... 1281 
All Souls’ Day ........ 1269 
Aloysius, C. .......... 1055 
Alphonsus Liguori, B. 

QV DC kereis eee. 1136 
Ambrose, B., ©., D..... 845 


Anacletus, P., M.. ..... 1105 
Anastasia, M. ........ 882 
Andrew, Ap. .......... 835 

Vigil of ............ 830 
Andrew Avellino, C.... 1283 
Andrew Corsini, B. C. 909 
Anicetus, P. M....... 984 
Angela Merici, V...1031, 1561 
Anne, Mother of the 

B.V.M. oniran eens 
Anselm, B., C., D...... k 
Anthony of Padua, C; D. 1046 


1016 

Antony, Ab. ......... 
Antony Mary Zaccaria, 
eccsososeecessée 1093 
Apollinaris, B. M...... 1119 
Apollonia, V., M...... . 914 
Apparition St. Michael 1016 

Apuleius and Others, 

Mm. 
Athanasius, B. C...... 
Augustine, B.. C., D.... 1177 
Augustine of Canter- 

bury, B. ........... 1629 
Bacchus and Others, 

Mm. ...........es. s 1225 
Barbara, V., M......... 841 
Barnabas, Ap. ........ 1041 


INDEX 


Bartholomew, Ap. .... 1169 
Vigil of ............ 1169 


^ Basil, Bọ, C., D......... 1047 


Basilideo, Cyrinus, Na- 
bor and Nazarius, 


MIL. eterne wes 1044 
Beatrice, Felix, Simpli- 

cius and Faustinus, .. 

MU ee ES ses . 1129 
Bede, C., D............ 1628 
Benedict, Ab ......... 950 
Bernadette, (Marie) 

Soubirods .......... 924 
Bernard, Ab., D........ 1167 
Bernardine of Siena, C. 1024 
Bibiana, V., M...... 838, 1609 
Blaíse, B., M. —À 909 
Bonaventure, C., B., D. 1105 
Boniface, B., M........ 1036 
Boniface, M. ......... 1021 


Brendan, Ab. ......... 1587 
Brigid, V. ............ 1577 
Bridget, W. ........... 1230 
Bruno, C. ............ 11224 
Caius and Soter, P» : 


Mm. eese 985 
Cajetan, C. ........... 1145 
Callistus, P., M........ 1236 
Camillus of Tellis, e... 1109 
Canute, K., M......... 873 
Cassian and Hyppoly- 

tus, Mm. ........... 1155 
Casimir, C. ........... 936 
Catharine, V., M....... 1297 
Catharine Flisca, W.... 1580 
Catherine of Siena, V.. 996 
Cecelia, V., M..... .... 1292 
Celsus, Nazarius, Victor 

I and Innocent...... 1127 
Charles Borromeo, B. C. 1280 
Christina, V., M....... 1123 
Christopher, M. ....... 1123 
B dia &nd Daria, 

Rd siehst ue 2e. 1250 
ORE M. ...... 1296 
Clare, V. ...ieeessrese 1155 
Clement, P., M........ ~ 1293 
Cletus and Marcellinus, |: 

Pp. Mm. .......... . 990 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INDEX 


Cloud, Ab. ........... 1609 
Columba, Ab. ......... 1595 
Cornelius and Cyprian, 

Bb., Mm. 
Cosmas and Damian, 

Mm. ...ccececcecece 1210 
Crescentia, Modestus 

and Vitus, Mm......- 
Cyprian and Cornelius, 

Bb., Mm. ........... 1199 
Cyprian and Justina, 
Cyriacus, Largus and 

Smaragdus, Mm. .... 1146 
Cyril and Methodius, 

Bb. Cc. ........:... 1100 
Cyril of Alexandria, B., 

C. 914 


944 


1049 


Cyril of Jerusalem, B. 
Cyrinus, Basilides, Na- 
bor and Nazarius, 
Mm. ............... 1044 
Damasus, P., M........ 855 
Damian and Cosmas, 

Mm. ............... 1210 
Daria and Chrysan- 

thus, Mm. ......... 1250 
Didacus, C. ........... 1287 
Dionysius and Others, 

-Mm. ....... sesso e 1230f 
Dominic, C. .......... 1140 
Domitilla, Nereus, 

Achilleus and Pan- 

cras, Mm, .......... 1017 
Donatus, B. M........ 1145 
Dorothy, V; M........ 913 
Edward, C. ........... 1236 
Eleutherius, ‘P., M...... 1626 
Eleutherius and Others, 

Mm. ......- 5... 1230f 
Elizabeth of Portugal, 

W. ...... tnn. 1101 
Elizabeth of Hungary, 

W. wcccccccccseseves 1291 
Emerentiana, V., ML... 883 
Emigdius, B. M....... 1603 
Ephrem, C., D......... 1052 


Erasmus, Marcellinus 
‘and Peter, Mm...... 
Euphemia, Lucy and 
Geminianus, Mm. ... 
Eusebius, B., M........ 
Eusebius, C. .......... 
Eustace and Compan., 
Evaristus, P., M....... 
Fabian and Sebastian, 
Faustinus and Jovita, 
Faustinus, Felix, Sim- 
plicius and Beatrice, 
Mm. 


Felicissimus, Xystus 

and Agapitus, Mm... 
Felicitas, M. ......... 
Felicitas (and Per- 

petua), Mm. ........ 
Felix I, P..... —— 
Felix of Valois, C...... 
Felix and Adauctus, 

Mim. .2::.22 2 exarus 
Felix and Nabor, Mm.. * 
Felix, Simplicius, Faus- 

tinus and Beatrice, 
Ferdinand, C. ......... 
Fidelis of Sigmaringen, 


Po — à m 
Francis Assisi, C....... 
Stigmata ......... és 


Prancis Borgia, C...... 
Francis Caracciolo, C.. 
Francis de Sales, B., C. 
893, 

Francis of Paula, C.... 
Frances of Rome, W... 
Francis Solano, C...... 
Francis Xaxier, C...... 
Gabriel, Archangel ... 
Gabriel of Our Lady of 
Sorrows, C. ......-. 
George, M. .........-. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1846 


Geminianus, Lucy and 

Euphemia, Mm. 
Gertrude, V., Ab....... 
Gervase and Protase, 
Giles, Ab, ............ 
Gorgonius, M. 
Gregory VH, P......... 
Gregory of Nazianzen, 


s... 
e cesse 


oT e 
Gregory Thaumaturgus, 
B., C. 
Guardian Angels, Holy 


eecttoto tnn 


Hadrian, M, .......... 
Hedwig, W....... eee 
Helena, W. .......... 
Henry, Oy ssssiscosass 
Hermenegild, M. ..... 
Hilary, B, O.......... 
Hippolytus, Timothy 


and Symphorian, 
Holy Forty Martyrs.... 
Holy Four Crowned 
Martyrs ............ 
Holy Guardian Angels. 
Holy Innocents ....... 
Octave ............. 
Holy Machabees, Mm.. 
Holy Seven Brothers, 
Holy Seven Founders of 
Servites ............ 


INDEX 


1199 
1290 


1054 
1184 
1188 
1025 


1016 


` 942 


1290 
1217 
1186 
1238 


.1606 


1105 
979 
862 


1168 
940 


1281 
1217 
153 
174 
1133 


1101 
919 


Holy Twelve Brothers, 


Mm. 
Hyacinth, c. 
Hyacinth and Protus, 

Mm RUM 


DIDI 


Hyginus, P., M......... 

Hyppolytus and Cas- 
sian, Mm. 

Ignatius, B. M......... 

Ignatius Loyola, C..... 

Innocent I, Nazarius, 
Celsus and Victor, 
Mm. 


Jrengus, B., M......... 


1184 
1164 


1192 
862 


1155 
897 
1132 


1127 
1069 


Isaac Jogues and Comp. 
Isidore, B.,.C., D......; 
James, Ap. «ense 
Vigil of ........... 
James and Philip, App. 
Jane Frances, W..... n 
Jane Frances de Chan- 
Januarius and Comp., 
Mm. 
Jerome, C. D......... 
Jerome, Emilian, C.... 
John, Ap., Ev.......... 
Octave ..... ee rn 
John I, P............. 
John and Paul, Mm.... 
John the Baptist, Na- 
tivity of ........... 
Vigil of ..... Reses 
. Beheading .......... 
John Baptist de la 
Salle, C. 
John Baptist de Rossi, 


DID 


e e*ccteoccccccccoos 


John Bosco, C......... 
John Cantius, C....... 
John Capistian, C..... 
John Chrysostom, B., C. 
John of Cross, C., D. .. 
John Damascene, C., D 
John Eudes, C. ..1166, 
John of Facundus, C. . 
John Francis Regis... 
John Leonard, C. 
John Nepomucene, M.. 
John of God, C. ..... 
John Gualbert, Ab. ... 
John of Matha, C. ... 
Joachim, C. ......... 
Josaphat, B. M. 
Joseph, Spouse of. 
B.V.M, C. 
. Solemnity OF ....e 
Octave of ........-- 
Joseph Calasanctius, C. 
Joseph of Cupertino, C. 
Jovita (and Faustinus), 
Mm. 


i 


http://ccwatershed.org 


INDEX 


Jude and Simon, App.. 1253 
Vigil of 1251 
Juliana Falconieri, V... 1054 


Juliana of Cornillon, V. 1582 


Julie Billiart, V..... ... 1554 
Justin, M. ...... sssi 979 
Justina and hia 
Mm. e senses . 1210 
Lawrence, M. ......... 1151 
Octave Day ........ 1164 


Lawrence Justin. B., C. 1185 

Largus, Cyriacus and 
Smaragdus, Mm. .... 1146 

Leo the Great, P., C., D. 975 


Léo IL P. .... eee 1091 
Leonard, Ab. ......... 1618 
Liborius, B., C......... 1119 
Linus, P., M........... 1209 
Louis, C. ............. 1172 
Louise de Marillac, W... 1565 
Lucia Filippini, V......1555a 


Lucius, P., M.......... 936 
Lucy, V., M............ 857 
Lucy, Euphemia and 

Geminianus, Mm. .. 1199 
Luke, Ev. ............ 1241 
Madeleine, Sophie 

Barat, V. ........ ... 1558 
Marcellianus and Mark, 

Mm. ........ (o. 1052 
Marcellinus and Cletus, 

Pp. Mm. ........... 990 
Marcellinus, Peter and 
' Erasmus, Mm. ...... 1032 
Marcellus, P., M....... 867 
Marcellus and Others, 

Mm. ....... er. 1225 
Margaret, M. ......... 1112 
Margaret Mary Alaco- 

que, V. ......eeeeese 1239 
Margaret of Scotland, 

W. océstereiz cure veis 1041 
Marie ` Bernadette Sou- 

birous, V. .......... 924 
Marius and Comp...... 873 
Mark, EV. ............ 987 
Mark, P. ............. 1225 
Mark and Marcellianus 

Mm. ....... TEPPER 1052 


Martha, V. .......... 
Martinian and Proces- 
Sus, Mm, ........... 


Martin, B., C.......... 
Martin, P. M.......... 
Martina, V., M........ 
Mary Clotilde Angela 
and Comp, Mm..... 
Mary Magdalen. ....... 
Mary. Magdalen de 
Pazz V.ou..llérexems 
Mary Magdalen, "Bl. T 
and Comp., Mm..... 
Matthias; Ap. ......... 
Vigil Of vccccctvaess 
Matthew, Ap. 
Vigil Of: esssescasce 
Maurice and Compan., 


MM. ieoseseestasee ‘ 
Maurus, Ab. ...... — 
Maximus, Tiburtius, 


Valerian, Mm. ...... 
Melchiades, P., M...... 
Mennas, M. ........... 
Methodius and Cyril, 

Bb. O6. .......eeee 
Michael, Arch., Appar- 

ition. Of 1:5... 

Dedication 


Modestus, Vitus and: 


Crescentia, Mm. 
Monica, W. 
Nabor, Basilides, ' Cyri- 

nus and Nazarius, 

Mm. 2.2 cts 
Nabor and Felix, Mm... 
Nazarius, Basilidis, 

Cyrinus, and Nabor, 

Mm. 2r omne 
Nazarius, Celsus, Victor 

I and Innocent I, 
Nereus, Achilleus, ` Do- 

mitila, and Pancras, 


MIB. eiue ws 
Nicholas, B., C......... 
Nicholas of ‘Tolentine, 

Üi sige ve eee Te 


Nicomedes, M. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1947 
1129 


1087 
1284 
1286 

893 


1574 
1117 


1031 
1564 
929 
929 
1206 
1205 


120€ 
863 


979 
855 
1284 
1100 


1016 
1213 


1049 
1013 


1044 
1104 


1044 


1127 


1017 


842 


1192 
1198 


1848 


Norbert, B. C......... 
Nympha and Others, 

Mm. 2Gavceercer ta 
Pancras, Nereus, Achil- 

leus and Domitilla, 
Pantaleon, M. 
Paschal Baylon, ‘C. wird 
Patrick, B. C.......... 
Paul the Apostle...... 

Conversion of ...... 
Paul, First Hermit. .... 
Paul of the Cross, C... 
Paul and John, Mms: 
Paulinus, B., .C........ 


Peter and Paul, App... 
Vigil of ............ 
Octave of 


Peter, Chair of St., at 
Rome .............. 
At Antioch ......... 

Peter’s Chains ........ 

Peter Canisius, C., D... 

Peter Celestine, P., C... 

Peter OI dala B., 
[o 

Peter Claver, C........ 

Peter Damian, B, C., D. 

Peter, Marcellinus and 
Erasmus, Mm. ...... 

Peter Nolasco, C. ..... 

Peter of Alcantara, C.. 

Peter of Alexandria, B. 

Peter of Verona, M. ... 

Petronilla, V. ......... 

Philip and James, App. 

Philip Benizi, C....... 


Philip of Jesus, M..... 
Philomena, V., M...... 
Pius V, P. ........... 
Pius V, P., M.......... 
Placidus and. Compan, 
Polycarp, B., M........ 


INDEX 


1039 
1283 


1017 
1127 
1023 
944 
1080 
884 
863 
991 
1067 
1058 


937 
1077 
1074 
1097 
1291 


868 
929 
1133 
991 
1024 


841 
1188 
929 


1032 
891 
1244 


1297 

996 
1031 
1000 
1169 
1026 
1578 
1606 
1013 
1104 


1224 
890 


Pontianus, P., M....... 
Popes, Commem. of All 

Holy ....... eere 
Praxedes, V. ........- 


1291 


1601 
1116 


o and FRAGM $ 


Rro V. 5 en 
Processus and Martin- 
ian, Mm. .........- 
Protase and Gervase, 
Protus and Hyacinth, 
Mm. 
Pudentiana, V. ....... 
Raymund Nonnatus, C. 
Raymund of Pennafort, 
C. 
Remigius, B., C........ 
Respicius and Others, 
Rita of Cascia, W...... 
Robert Bellarmine, B., 
| ee eee eal sins 
Romuald, Ab. ...cceees 
Rose, V. .......- eee 
Rufina and Secunda, 
Vv. Mm. ..........- 
Rusticus and Others, 
Mm. 


Sabbas, Ab. —— n 
Sabina, M, ........... 
Scholastica, V. ........ 
Sebastian, M. ......... 
Secunda and Rufina, 
Vv. Mm, . 
Sennen and Abdon, 
Sergius and Others, 
Silverius, P, M........ 
Simeon, B. M......... 
Simon and Jude, App.. 
Vigil of ............ 
Simplicius, Felix, Faus- 
iinius and Beatrice, 
Smaragdus, RE and ` 
Cyriacus, Mm 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1039 
868 


1087 
1054 


1192 
1024 
1183 


883 
1217 


1283 
1588 


1019 
913. 
1182 


1101 


1230f 
842 
1179 
915 
8T 


1101 
1130 
1225 
1055 

929 
1253 
1251 
1129 


1146 


INDEX 


Soter and Caius,Pp.,Mm. 985 
Stanislaus, B. ........ 1015 
Stephen, First Martyr.. 146 
Octave .......... .. 173 
Finding of Body of.. 1139 
Stephen, I. P........ .. 1136 
Stephen, King, C. 1184 
Susanna and Tibertius, 
Vv, Mm. Lll 
Sylvester, Ab. ........ 
Sylvester, P. .......... 
Symphorian, Timothy 
and Hippolytus, Mm. 
Symphorosa and Her 
Children, Mm. 
Telesphorus, M. ....... 
Teresa, V. 
‘Teresa of Infant Jesus, 
Thecla, V. M......... 
'Theodore, M. ......... 
"Ihomas, Ap. 
Vigil of ............ 
Thomas, B, M......... 157 
Thomas Aquinas, C., D. 938 
Thomas of Villanova, C. 1208 
Thuribius of Mogrovejo, 

B., C. 
Tiburtius and Susanna, 
Vv., Mm. .......... 
Tiburtius, Valerian, 

Maximus, Mm, ..... 


1154 
1297 
163 


1168 


1109 
174 
MÀ . 1238 
1220 
1209 
1282 
859 
859 


E 1586 


1154 
979 


1849 


Timothy, B., M........ 
Timothy, Hippolytus 
and Symphorian, 
Mm, ........ e. 1168 
Titus B, O.......... 913 
Tryphon and Others, 
Mm. ......... e... 1283 
Ubaldus, B. .......... 1022 
Urban I, P. .......... 1025 
Ursula and Comp., Vv., 
Mm, ...........1572, 1615 


884 


Valentine M. ........ 922 
Valerian, Tiburtiüs, 
Maximus, Mm. ..... 979 


Venantius, M. ........ 1023 
Victor I, Nazarius, Cel- 

sus and Innocent I.. 1127 
Vincent de Paul,C..1112,1567 
Vincent Ferrer, C...... 975 
Vincent and Anastasius, 
Virgilius, B, C......... 
Vitalis, M., .......... 
Vitalis and Agricola, 
Vitus, Modestus and 

Crescentia, Mm. .... 
Wenceslaus, M. 1212 
William, Ab. .......... 1067 
Xystus, Felicissimus — 

and Agapitus, Mm... 1141 
Zephyrinus, P. .,...,, 1175 


882 
1621 
991 


1280 
1049 


‘Common of Saints 


Vigil of Apostle........ 1299 
Martyr Bishop ..1302d, 1306 
Supreme Pontiff ...... 1302 
Martyr, not a : 

Bishop .........1309, 1312 
Two or more 

Martyrs ...1316, 1321, 1325 
Martyr in Paschal-time 1328 
Two or more Martyrs in 

Paschal-time ....... 1333 
Confessor Bishop..1337, 1341 
Doctor of Church ..... 1344 
Confessor not a 

Bishop .........1349, 1352 
Abbot ....... eesse... 1356 
Virgin Martyr ...1359, 1363 


Two or more Virgin- 

Martyrs ............ 1368 
Virgin not a 

Martyr .........13770, 1373. 
Holy Woman Martyr 

not a Virgin........ 1378 
Holy Women Martyrs, 

not Virgins ......... 1382 
Holy Women neither . 


Virgin nor Martyr. .. 1383 
Anniversary of Dedica- 
tion ......... eee . 1388 


Common of Blessed 
Virgin Mary ........ 
Masses of Blessed Vir- 
gin on Saturday..... 1399 


1394 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1850 


Our Lord Jesus Christ, 
Most High and Eter- 
nal Priest 

Most Holy Trinity .... 

Holy Angels 

St. Joseph 

Holy Apostles Peter ‘and 
Paul 


Holy Ghost ........... 
Most Blessed Sacra- 

ment 
Passion of Our Lord... 
Blessed Virgin ........ 
Election of a Pope.... 
Consecration of a 

Bishop ...... —— 


INDEX 


Wotibe Masses - 


1410 
1414 
1417 
1420 


1421 


1425 
1429 


1442 


Anniversary of Election 
and Consecration of a 
Bishop. 

Nuptial Mass 

Propagation of Faith.. 

Against the Heathen.. 

For Healing of Schism 

In Time of War...... 

To Beg for Peace..... 

In Time of Pestilence. 

For Remission of Sins. 

For Pilgrims and Trav- 


elers ...... eee e ee ces 
For the Sick.......... 
For a Happy Death... 
For any Need........ f 


Thanksgiving seseevese 


Gccasional Prayers 


For the Intercession of 


To Beg for Fine 


the Saints .......... “1495 Weather ....... Mn 
In Time of Trouble or For Forgiveness of Sin 
Distress ............ 1496 For Friends .......... 
To Beg for Rain....... 1497 For Our Enemies ..... 
Masses for the Bead 
Common or Daily Mass Third, Seventh, or 
for Dead ovt xe 1501 Thirteenth Day .... 
Day of Death or Burial 1518 Anniversary of Death 
or Burial esses d eas 
General Devotions 

Act of Consecration to Anima Christi ....... 
Sacred Heart ....... 1827 Antiphon. Remember 
Acts: Faith ...... 1788, 1814 Not, O Lord ....... 
Hope .......... 1788, 1815 Let Us Now Sing... 
Charity .:.......... 1788 Apostles’ Creed, The.. 

Contrition 1788, 1797, 1814 Benediction of the 
Love and Desire .... 1815 Blessed Sacrament... 
Eumility .......... 1818 Blessed Be God ...... 

Adoro Te Devote ..... 1813 Blessed Sacrament, 
Ambrose, St., Benediction of the.. 
Morning Hymn of.. 1787 Blessed Virgin, Litany. 
Vesper Hymn of.... 1790 of the ........ TET 
Prayers of ......... 1804 Prayer to .......... 
Anima Christi ....... 1814 Benedicite, The ..... 3 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1468 
1471 
1475 


1479 
1483 
1487 
1490 
1493 


1497 
1498 
1499 
1500 


1528 
1531 


1819 


1802 
1809 
1789 


1833 
1835 
1833 
1822 


1809 
1809 


Bonaventure, St., 
Prayer of .........- 
Charity, Act of ....... 
Chureh and Civil Au- 
thorities, Prayer for. 
Civil Authorities, 
Prayer for ......... 
Commandments of God 
Of the Church...... 
Examination on .... 
Communion, 
Preparation for .... 
Thanksgiving After 
—MÁÓ— 1799, 
Confession, Devotions 
Before 
Confiteor, The 
Consecration to Sacred 
Heart 
Conscience, Examina- 
tion of 
Contrition, Act of € 
Act of ........... os 
Divine Praises ....... 
Domine Non Sum 
Dignus 
Dying, Offering of 
Masses for ......... 
Evening Prayers ..... 
Examination of Con- 
science 


Act of 
Four Sins Which Ciy 
to Heaven ...... es 
Hail Mary, The ...... 

Holy Communion, 
Devotions Before ... 
Devotions After ... 

Holy Name, Litany of 
the ..lllelereee on 

Hope, Act of ......... 
Act of ............. 

How Lovely Are Thy 
Tabernacles (Psalm) 

I Believed (Psalm)... 

Ignatius, St., Offering 
and Prayer of 


INDEX 


1812 
1788 


1826 
1826 
1794 
1794 
1795 
1799 
1816 


1793 
1798 


1827 
1793 
1788 
1797 
1835 
1816 


1799 
1790 


1793 
1788 


1814 


1794 
1789 


1814 
1816 


1820 
1788 
1815 


1799 
1801 


1813 


meline Thine Ear 
(Psalm) ............ 

Jesus Crucified, Prayer 
TO s veia i xoc 

Joseph, St., Litany of.. 


Prayer to — 1809, 
Let Us Now Sing 

(Antiphon) ........ 
Litany of the 

Holy Name of Jesus. 

Sacred Heart ..... " 

Blessed Virgin ..... 

St. Joseph ...... eee 


Lord’s Prayer, The ... 
Love and Desire, 


Act of .:.. 2: 2x 9e 
Morning Hymn of St. 
Ambrose ...... iene 


Morning Prayers ..... 
Mysteries of the 
Rosary 
Nine Ways of Being Ac- 
cessory to Another’s 
Sin 
Offering of Masses. for 
Dying 
O Salutaris Hostia ... 
Out of the Depths 


(Psalm) ......... as 
Praise Ye the Lord 

(Psalm) ........... 
Psalm, 


83, How Lovely Are 
Thy Tabernacles.. 
84, Thou Hast 
Blessed Thy Land. 
85, Incline Thine 
Ear, O Lord...... 
115, I Believed, and 
Therefore Did I 
Speak ........... 
129, Out of the 
Depths 
150, Praise Ye the 
Lord .....4.5.... 
Remember Not, O Lord 
(Antiphon) ........ 
Reparation to Sacred 
Heart. Act of 


http://ccwatershed.org 


1852 


Rosary, Mysteries of the 1829 
Sacred Heart, Act of 

Consecration to .... 1827 

Act of Reparation to 1828 
Sacred Heart, Litany of 

ji ep . 1821 
Seven Corporal Works 

of Mercy .......... 1795 
Seven Deadly Sins, The 1794 
Seven Spiritual Works 

of Mercy .......... 1795 
Stations of the Cross.. 1830 
“Suscipe” 1813 


INDEX 


Tantum Ergo ...... +. 1834 
Te Deum Laudamus... 1835 


Thomas Aquinas, St. 
Prayer of .......... 1803 
Prayer of .......... 1811 


Hymn, Adoro Te ... 1813 
Thanksgiving After 
Confession 
Thou Hast Blessed ‘Thy 
Land (Psalm) ..... 1800 
Vesper Hymn of St. 
Ambrose ........... 179C 


erect n 


Appendix 


Feasts of the Blessed Virgin füarp 


Queenship of the Blessed Virgin Mary.....:... 1298g 


Feasts of the Saints 


Isidore the Farmer, C "— 
Frances Xavier Cabrini, V. 
Pius X, PC. 


http://ccwatershed.org 


